 
 
 
Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
for the year ended March 2021 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Performance Audit on 
Exemptions to Charitable Trusts and Institutions 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Union Government 
Department of Revenue - Direct Taxes 
Report No. 12 of 2022 
 
Laid on the table of Lok Sabha/Rajya Sabha on ___________ 
 

 
  

 
Index of Contents 
Contents 
 Preface  i 
 Executive Summary  iii-ix 
 Summary of Recommendations  xi-xvi 
Chapter 1  Introduction 1-8 
Chapter 2 Audit Approach 9-14 
Chapter 3  Status of Action Taken Notes (ATN) of the Ministry 
on earlier CAG’s Audit Reports and Public Accounts 
Committee (PAC) recommendations 
15-23 
Chapter 4 Statistical Analysis of Population and Audit Sample  25-51 
Chapter 5 Systemic deficiencies/effectiveness of provisions 
relating to the Trusts/Institutions 
53-104 
Chapter 6  Compliance with existing provisions of Act/Rules/ 
Circulars in making assessments 
105-136 
Chapter 7  Internal Audit, Monitoring and Review of Trusts/ 
Institutions 
137-175 
 Appendices 177-208 
 Abbreviation 209-210 
 

 
 

i
 
Preface 
This Report for the year ended March 2021 has been prepared for submission to the 
President under Article 151 of the Constitution of India. 
The Report contains significant results of the Performance Audit of Assessments of 
Charitable Trusts and Institutions completed by the Income Tax Department, 
Department of Revenue of the Union Government during the financial years 2014-15 
to 2018-19.   
The instances mentioned in this Report are those, which came to notice in the course 
of audit conducted from January to March 2020 and September to October 2020 and 
Supplementary field audit and a follow-up field audit, which continued till 
January 2022.   
The audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards issued by 
the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.  

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
iii 
Executive Summary 
The Income Tax Act, 1961 (the Act) provides for tax exemptions to various entities, 
including Government funded entities, engaged in objects which are charitable in 
nature, in order to encourage and fulfil social objectives, in areas such as charity, 
religion, medical, education etc.  These entities receive donations, voluntary 
contributions and have other incomes from activities which are charitable in nature. 
The receipts of such entities are required to be applied for the objects for which these 
Trusts and Institutions have been set up. The Income Tax Department (ITD) has the 
responsibility of ensuring that incomes of genuine and eligible Trusts and Institutions 
only are exempted from levy of income tax and that they pay the correct amount of 
tax. 
Audit conducted a Performance Audit on Exemptions granted by the Income Tax 
Department to Charitable Trusts and Institutions, with the objectives of examining:  
i. whether the CBDT ensures in an effective manner that the Char
 itable Trusts
and Institutions, which are availing the benefits under Sections 10(23C), 11,
12, 13, 80G(5) of the Income Tax Act, complied with the prescribed
procedures regarding registration/approval and ensures monitoring
thereafter;
ii. whether the ITD is efficient in granting the exemptions to the 
 Charitable
Trusts and Institutions under the above provisions of the Act and such
e
xemptions are given to the eligible entities accurately and in a timely
manner; and
iii. whether the existing provisions in the Act/Rules/CBDT Instructions  relating to
Assessments of the Charitable Trusts/Institutions are sufficient or are there
any lacuna/ambiguity/inconsistency.
The Performance Audit covered the assessment of the charitable or religious Trusts 
or Institutions relating to the AYs 2014-15 to 2017-18. The Pr. DGIT(Systems) 
provided assessee-wise data containing 6,89,011 cases, pertaining to ITRs processed 
/assessed/rectified during FY 2014-15 to FY 2018-19 with respect to Charitable Trusts 
and Institutions. The data received from the Pr. DGIT (Systems) was analysed and 
based on audit parameters a sample of 6,390 cases was drawn as audit universe for 
scrutiny by different field offices under our audit jurisdiction. However, due to the 
prevailing situation, arising out of the Covid-19 pandemic, the audit sample was 
reduced to 5,798 cases. Further, in respect of any assessee whose assessment for a 
particular Assessment Year was selected in the audit sample and where Audit found 
a deficiency or non-compliance, Audit selected all remaining assessments also 
between AYs 2014-15 to 2017-18 for this Performance Audit.  Accordingly, 1,028 
additional assessment cases were selected for this Audit. 
 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
iv 
Apart from the above audit sample, in order to examine summary cases, 200 high 
value summary cases in respect of PANs which were not part of the original sample 
including additional cases, were also selected for audit. Thus, the total audit sample 
for the PA was 7,026 cases, out of which the Department produced records of 6,260 
cases and 766 cases were not produced to Audit. 
An Entry Conference was held with the ITD/CBDT on 23rd December 2019. Field audit 
was conducted during January to March 2020 and September to October 2020. 
Supplementary field audit including the top 200 assessees, the top 200 summary 
cases and a follow-up field audit verification of cases highlighted in the Report 
No. 9 of 2019 (Direct Taxes) continued till January 2022.  An Exit Conference on the 
Performance Audit was held with the CBDT on 4
th March 2022. 
During this Performance Audit, Audit checked 6,260 assessment records and noticed 
1,580 errors, related to various systemic and compliance issues having tax effect of 
` 1,983.34 crore.   
Further, Audit also reviewed the action taken by the ITD through its Action Taken 
Note (ATN) relating to earlier PA findings in Report No. 20 of 2013 and Chapter VI of 
the Compliance Audit Report No. 9 of 2019 (Direct Taxes) and the recommendations 
of the Public Accounts Committee (PAC).  
A summary of the main audit findings is given below: 
• Audit noticed that certain irregularities relating to interna
 l audit of the
registration process, ineffective monitoring of accumulation of income and its
utilization, ineffective monitoring of receipts and utilization of foreign
contribution, the inadequacy of survey of educational Trusts, absence of
provision for disclosure of TDS in the audit report, etc. which were highlighted
i
n the earlier Performance Audit Report No. 20 of 2013 and some of the
specific recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee (PAC) against
such irregularities were not satisfactorily addressed by the ITD.
(Paragraph 3.2) 
• Audit noticed an increasing trend in number of Trusts/Institutions 
 claiming
exemptions from AYs 2014-15 to 2016-17; however, the number of
Trusts/Institutions claiming exemptions for AY 2017-18 slightly decreased.
(Paragraph 4.1.1) 
• Analysis of data of 6.89 lakh cases pertaining to ITRs for
  AY 2014-15 to
A
Y 2017-18 revealed that the ITD scrutinized only 0.25 lakh (3.7 per cent) of
the total cases while 6.30 lakh (91.4 per cent) cases were processed under
summary manner in an automated environment. However, Audit noted
certain deficiencies in the ITD system which led to incorrec t claims of
exemption along with the possibility of revenue leakage such as:

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
v 
/head2right Due to wrong input of data required for selection criteria in CASS,  
several cases were incorrectly selected for scrutiny by the ITD system. 
/head2right There is an absence of adequate checks and validations to matc h the 
registrations/approvals data provided in the ITR Form-7 with the ITD 
systems database before allowing exemptions in case the returns were 
processed in summary manner. In 42 assessment cases, exemption was 
allowed although assessees did not mention their registration details 
under Section 12A/10(23C) of the Act in the ITR Form-7. In 10 
assessment cases, the assessees claimed exemptions for years together 
prior to its registration or having no registration under the Act, and the 
same was allowed by the Department in the summary assessment.  
/head2right Analysis of data of 6.89 lakh cases provided by the Pr.DGIT (
 Systems) 
revealed that exemption was allowed in 0.21 lakh cases although 
registration under Section 12AA was not available. In case of foreign 
contribution, Audit noticed that in 347 cases, foreign contribution was 
received by the assessee though the registration details under FCRA 
were not available. Thus, field validations in the above related field were 
not available in the ITR Form-7. 
(Paragraph 4.1.3, 5.3.1, 5.3.2, 5.3.4.1 and 5.3.4.2) 
• Out of 6.89 lakh cases processed/assessed/ rectified by th
 e ITD during the
FY 2014-15 to FY 2018-19, in 5.12 lakh cases (74.3 per cent) the income
returned was ` zero.
(Paragraph 4.1.6) 
• Analysis of 580 high value exemption cases (having gross income  of ` 50 crore
or above) revealed that 186 cases, which pertained to government entities,
were granted 50.8 per cent of total exemptions (` 1.31 lakh crore) whereas
the remaining 394 cases, which pertained to private entities, were granted
49.2 per cent of total exemptions.
(Paragraph 4.3.6.2) 
• An analysis of data of the top 200 audit sampled cases (involv
 ing 169
Trusts/Institutions) where gross income for each case was ` 167.9 crore or
above, revealed that out of the 169 Trusts/Institutions, 101 Trusts/
Institutions were Government entities while 66 were private entities (records
of two entities were not produced to audit). Activity-wise analysis of data
revealed that in case of Government entities, the top 30 entities (29 per cent)
were engaged in other activities (like pension and gratuity fund, welfare
board etc.) whereas in case of the top private entities, 28 entities (42 per cent)
were engaged in educational activities.
(Paragraph 4.3.8.1) 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
vi 
• Audit observed that there is no clarity on allowing deduction unde r Section
8
0G for donations out of CSR fund. As a significant amount is spent by the
companies toward CSR activities through the Trusts claiming exemptions
under Section 80G, it requires urgent attention of the Department to bring
clarity to the issue to ensure that the provisions are interpreted uniformly by
the AOs and to minimise the possibility of litigation.
(Paragraph 5.1.2.3) 
• The IT Act has no clarity regarding allowance of various expense
 s under the
head “administrative and establishment expenses” for the purpose of
determining application of income. Since administrative and establishment
expenses could be of various categories, some part of which may be directly
attributable for generation of income while some part may be towards
charitable and religious purpose, the ITD needs to bring more clarity in the
Act for this purpose.
(Paragraph 5.1.2.6) 
• The IT Act has no provision to restrict donations by a Trust to a
 nother Trust
out of current years’ income. Therefore, certain Trusts/Institutions are taking
undue benefits by availing of the permissible accumulation of 15 per cent out
of the current year’s income and then transferring the rest of the income to
others trusts, and thereby making a chain of multiple donations. Audit
noticed in four assessment cases that the Trusts/Institutions, which had
received donations of ` 203.29 crore, had transferred ` 164.81 crore to other
Trusts/Institutions by way of donations after claiming deduction of
15 per cent as accumulation. The recipient Trusts/Institutions also transferred
the amounts to other trusts after claiming accumulation of 15 per cent. This
chain of donation resulted in denial of charity to the beneficiaries and helped
in accumulation in the hands of Trusts/Institutions.
(Paragraph 5.1.2.7) 
• There was no parameter to verify the identity of the donors for 
 detection of
anonymous donation. Audit noticed six assessment cases where the
department did not verify genuineness of the donors and therefore, did not
tax the anonymous donation(s) as per provisions of the Act. The Ministry has
since addressed this issue through the Finance Act 2020.
(Paragraph 5.1.2.10) 
• The ITD did not produce registration/approval records of 194 cases
(45 per cent) out of 425 cases registered/approved for exemptions during the
FY 2014-15 to 2018-19. Further, Audit noticed deficiencies in following the
prescribed procedure(s) relating to registration/approval such as delay in
grant of registration/approval, irregular grant of registration, grant of

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
vii 
registration/approval without submission of prescribed documents, grant of 
registration without verification etc. 
(Paragraph 5.2.1, 5.2.2, 5.2.3, 5.2.4 and 5.2.5) 
• Audit noticed deficiencies in the Audit Report in Form 10B applicabl e to
charitable Trusts/Institutions such as absence of details of break-up of receipt
under different heads, details of corpus donation, deemed application of
income etc. which impacted the quality of assessment, incorrect claim made
by the assessee and loss of revenue.
(Paragraph 5.3.6) 
• Audit observed that the ITD allowed accumulation in 66 assessment 
 cases in
c
ontravention to the provisions stipulated under Section 11(2) of the Act.
(Paragraph 6.3) 
• Audit noticed 22 assessment cases where the assessees utili sed their income
or property for the benefit of persons specified under Section 13(3) (i.e.,
related parties), but the ITD did not levy tax on such amount of income or
property utilised for the benefit of the specified persons.
(Paragraph 6.4) 
•  Audit observed non-compliance of various provisions of the Income Ta x Act
in the assessment orders, which culminated in irregular allowance of double
benefits to the assessees. In eight assessment cases, depreciation on assets
was allowed as application of income, even though the relevant capital
expenditure to acquire such assets had already been treated as application of
income.  In 11 assessment cases, the AO had allowed claims, pertaining to
application of income incurred from the corpus fund, or other specific
purpose funds.
(Paragraph 6.5.1 and 6.5.2) 
• In 65 assessment cases, the AO while finalizing the assess
 ment adopted
i
ncorrect figures, computed short demand, charged tax at a lower rate than
the prescribed rate, levied interest/surcharge incorrectly, or granted excess
interest on refund etc.
(Paragraph 6.8) 
• The ITD has not allocated specific codes to different charitable
  activities linked
with Section 11 and sub-Sections of 10(23C) under which exemption is being
claimed. Further, the data relating to exemption claimed by the
Government/Private Trust under different Sections were not being captured
in ITR Form 7.
 The ITD needs to ensure activity wise monitoring of these private
charitable entities, to mitigate the risk of ineligible claims.
(Paragraph 7.1.1) 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
viii 
• Although the PAC in its 104th Report (16th Lok Sabha) had recommended that
the process of registration/approval of the Charitable Trusts/Institutions
should be brought under the purview of Internal Audit of the ITD, it was not
until FY 2019-20 that the Internal Audit commenced in respect of the
registration applications processed. Moreover, Audit noticed that the
instructions issued with regard to Internal Audit of registration process was
not uniformly implemented in all the states. Audit further noted that the
circular issued by the ITD regarding Internal Audit is applicable to registration
granted under Section 12AA only but does not cover cases approved under
Section 10(23C) and 80G(5).
(Paragraph 7.1.3 and 7.1.4) 
• Audit noticed that very few surveys were conducted by the Depar
 tment in
comparison to the number of assessees claiming exemption under the Act to
m
onitor the activities of the Trusts/Institutions. Further, in spite of specific
recommendation of the PAC that survey of all educational trusts be
conducted in a time-bound manner, Audit observed that the ITD conducted
s
urveys of only 0.3 per cent of the total 2,686 educational trusts (2,105
assessees) included in the audit sample during 2014-15 to 2018-19. Further,
no survey was conducted in respect of 46 high value educational trusts
(having receipt of ` 200 crore or more) during the aforesaid period.
(Paragraph 7.1.5) 
• There was inconsistency in allowing exemption to Trusts/Instituti ons having
activities not charitable in nature. Audit observed in 10 assessment cases
where the AO assessed that the activities of the Trusts were not charitable in
nature for one or more AYs but took no action to review exemptions for the
other AYs although the objects of the trust were similar during the respective
AYs which resulted in irregular grant of exemptions.
(Paragraph 7.1.6) 
• Audit observed in eight cases that the status of the Trusts/Ins
 titutions was
not reviewed by the competent authority as per provisions of Section 12AA(3)
and 12AA(4), although the AO had denied the exemption under Section 11 of
the Act for either holding that the activities of trusts were not genuine or the
properties or income of the trusts were continuously utilised by the trust for
the benefit of related persons.
(Paragraph 7.1.7) 
• Audit noticed that due to lack of monitoring of the activities 
 of Trusts/
Institutions engaged in scientific research, there were bogus claims of
exemption by the trusts as well as issue of bogus certificates under Section
35(1)(ii) to the donors.
(Paragraph 7.1.9) 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
ix 
•  Audit noticed deficiencies of the ITD in effective monitoring of  accumulation
and its utilizations by Trusts/Institutions in the manner laid down in the Act.
In 32 assessment cases, the Department did not effectively monitor utilization
of past accumulated income as provided in Section 11(2). Further, there is no
provision in the Act for declaration of the purpose/period of accumulati
on
und
er Section 10(23C).
(Paragraph 7.1.11 and 7.1.12) 
• Audit observed that the ITD has no mechanism to verify receipt and utilization
of foreign contribution shown in the ITR Form-7 and that disclosed with
Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) under the FCRA Act. Although the PAC had
m
ade specific recommendation that the ITD should formulate a data sharing
mechanism with the MHA to keep a track of foreign contribution received and
its application, the ITD has yet to take any action on the issue. The deficiency
resulted in incorrect claim of exemption on foreign contribution in 35 cases.
(Paragraph 7.1.13) 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
xi 
Summary of Recommendations 
Audit recommends that: 
• The ITD may consider granting registration to educat ional Trusts/ Institutions
under Section 12AA on the condition that, separate accounts have to be
maintained for educational and non-educational activities and educational
activities are to be dealt with as per the provisions of Section 10(23C). Further,
the CBDT may consider the option of getting a separate ITR filed by the
Assessee Trusts/ Institutions for educational activities and non-educational
activities.
(Paragraph 5.1.1) 
• The purpose of having two sets of overlapping Section
 s, especially with
respect to educational and medical purposes, one under ‘not for profit
category’ (which involves higher restrictions) under Section 10(23C) and
another ‘the charitable category’ (with fewer restrictions) under Section 11 is
not clear to Audit. Logically, most entities with a choice would not opt for the
restriction, not for profit category.
 In general, the stipulations under various
sub-Sections of Section 10(23C), requiring that institutions exist solely for
philanthropic purposes and not for the purposes of profit, are more onerous
than those under Section 11, which merely restrict accumulation of annual
income beyond 15 per cent and have no specific “not for profit” purpose;
however, the provisions for exemption of income under both categories are
virtually identical.
Department of Revenue may consider reviewing these stipulations in the Act
under various categories in the light of clear Governmental policy
determination in terms of which charitable objectives merit exemption of
income with a requirement of “solely philanthropic purposes and not for the
purpose of profit” and which charitable objectives merit income exemption
without such a requirement.
(Paragraph 5.1.1) 
• The ITD may issue a Standard Operating Procedure/ins
 tructions/ guidelines
for examining the valuation aspects of transactions with related parties and
devise a clear mechanism to justify the ‘reasonableness’ and ‘adequacy’ of the
transactions held with the related party of the trust so that the Assessing
Officer may satisfy himself as to the reasonableness and adequacy of the
transactions during the Assessment proceedings; and levy tax on amount of
Income or property utilized for the benefit of the related parties in excess of
the amount assessed as reasonable and adequate.
(Paragraph 5.1.2.1) 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
xii 
• CBDT needs to consider bringing an amendment or issu ing binding
clarification as to whether donations to trusts, including in-house/corporate
trusts, out of CSR expenditure by specified companies covered by Section 135
of the Companies Act, 2013 is eligible for deduction under section 80G or not.
Such an amendment or binding clarification is necessary to ensure that the
provisions are interpreted uniformly by the Assessing Officers across all
assessment charges and also to minimize the possibility of litigation.
(Paragraph 5.1.2.3) 
• The ITD may consider bringing in new provisions in the
  Act, so as to ensure
that specific purpose donation, if not utilized for the specified purpose (like
mere transferring such donation later on to other organizations etc.) should
attract denial of exemptions and be treated as income in the year in which it
is detected.
(Paragraph 5.1.2.4) 
• The ITD may issue suitable instructions/clarificatio ns to deal with consistent
treatment of administrative and establishment expenses for the purpose of
application of income.
(Paragraph 5.1.2.6) 
• The ITD may consider bringing in a new provision in th
 e Act to stipulate that
voluntary contributions received from other Trusts/Institutions out of current
year’s income shall not be eligible for the permissible accumulation at the rate
of 15 per cent in the hands of such recipient trust or institution.
(Paragraph 5.1.2.7) 
• The ITD may consider bringing in a new provision in t
 he Act for taxing any long
pending liability received in the guise of loan as voluntary contribution on
cessation of liability, similar to provisions of Section 41(1) of the Act.
 (Paragraph 5.1.2.8) 
• The ITD may evolve a suitable mechanism by issuing a 
 Standard Operating
Procedure for Assessing Officers for carrying out physical inspection of the
activities of the trust in cases where there had been consistent and increased
accumulation to ensure that trusts are allowed accumulations consistently
only in exceptional cases.
(Paragraph 5.1.2.9) 
• The ITD may stipulate specific parameters (apart from
  the donor’s name and
address) such as PAN etc., which must be disclosed by assessee to establish
the identity of donors. Further, disclosure of PAN of the donor should be made
mandatory above a threshold limit of donation to be decided by the ITD. IT
D
m
ay also consider introducing a new Schedule in the ITR to capture the donors’

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
xiii 
details in order to strengthen the assessment procedure to mitigate the risk 
of money laundering and prevent leakage of revenue. 
 (Paragraph 5.1.2.10) 
• The ITD may ensure that the timeline prescribed in t he Act for granting
approval to the Trusts/Institutions may be adhered to by the CIT(E).
(Paragraph 5.2.2) 
• The ITD may ensure that due procedure is followed by the CIT(E) while
granting registration/approval to the Trusts/Institutions.
 (Paragraph 5.2.4) 
• The ITD may ensure that field enquiry about the exis tence and genuineness of
the activities of the Trust/Institution may be conducted and a report thereof
with necessary documentation may be kept on record while granting
registration.
(Paragraph 5.2.5) 
• The ITD may review the cases for taking remedial actio
 n where exemptions
were granted to the assessees, where there was no dissolution clause in the
trust deed, or the dissolution clause is not in conformity with the stipulated
provisions.  Further, the ITD also need to evolve a system to ensure that no
registration is granted to exempt entities in the absence of an appropriate
dissolution clause.
(Paragraph 5.2.6) 
• The ITD may take steps to strengthen the IT system s o that input of data
should commensurate with the selection criteria for proper identification of
cases to be scrutinised.
The ITD should consider expanding the data elements captured in ITR 7, if need
be, restricted based on a gross income or exempted income threshold to be
determined by the ITD.  This will enable capturing of relevant data enabling a
better and more risk-based approach to CASS selection without
inconveniencing smaller trusts/entities.
(Paragraph 5.3.1) 
• The ITD may
(
a) consolidate registration data of all the Trusts/ Ins titutions registered
under Section 12AA/80G/10(23C) of the Act digitally and match it with the
data filled in ITRs to verify genuineness of registration while processing of
ITRs through CPC; and

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
xiv 
(b) suitably modify the second proviso to Section 12A(2)  to enable the  AO to
re-open such cases where assessee has claimed irregular exemption under
Section 11 or 12 without having a valid registration.
(Paragraph 5.3.2) 
• The ITD may capture data/information relating to cont ributor/donor in Form
ITR-7 as has been done in respect of Section 80G (5) to bring transparency and
accountability for the funds contributed/donated.
(Paragraph 5.3.5) 
• The ITD may consider modifying Form 10B incorporatin
 g:
(a) details of receipt under different heads and income derived from
property wholly held by trust.
(b) detailed information on receipt of corpus donations,  its utilisation and
claim of expenditure from corpus donation
(c) detailed information on the claim of deemed applicat ion of income
availed in a previous year which has to be reduced from the amount of
application of income in the year of actual receipt
(d) the details of utilisation out of past accumulation  in the return of
income is certified by the Auditor.
to enable the Assessing Officer to verify the correctness of the claim made by 
the assessee. 
(Paragraph 5.3.6.1, 5.3.6.2, 5.3.6.3 and 7.1.11) 
• The ITD may strengthen its assessment procedure for Trusts/Institutions to
ensure correct computation of income and its application, and avoidance of
double benefit to the trusts as per the existing provisions of the Act.
(Paragraphs 6.2.1, 6.2.2, 6.5.1 and 6.5.2) 
• The ITD may strengthen its assessment procedure for 
 Trusts/Institutions to
ensure that no exemption is granted when income or property of the trust is
utilised for the benefit of persons having substantial interest.
(Paragraph 6.4) 
• The ITD may ensure that the CPC-ITR System automatica
 lly levies penalty for
delay in filing of return at the time of processing of ITRs itself.
(Paragraph 6.9) 
• The ITD may allocate separate codes to different clas sification of activities of
Trusts/Institutions, linking them with Section 11 and sub-Sections of 10(23C)
of the Act, for identification of Government and private entities, for better

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
xv 
monitoring, improved vigilance in regard to private charitable entities and 
effective evaluation of risk for scrutiny selection.   
ITD’s Computer Aided Scrutiny Selection (CASS) may be refined to reflect the 
lower risk for Government entities and reduce the probability of selection for 
scrutiny, other things being equal. This is important because ITD resources for 
scrutiny are limited and should be better deployed to higher risk cases in 
private sector. 
(Paragraph 7.1.1) 
• The ITD may issue instructions to bring the cases app
 roved under Section
10(23C) and 80G(5) of the Act under the purview of internal audit of the
Department.
(Paragraph 7.1.4) 
• The ITD may
(
a) capture data in the CPC-ITR/ITBA system, to ascerta in the nature and
activity of the concerned trusts through granular business codes and other
means; and
(b) enhance the quantum of surveys being undertaken in r espect of private
educational Trusts/Institutions, particularly the high value exemption
cases, so as to ensure more effective monitoring and minimize the
possibility of ineligible claims, as desired by the PAC.
(Paragraph 7.1.5) 
• The ITD may examine wherein, in any assessment year t he Department denied
exemption to a Trust/Institution considering the activities as non-charitable,
the earlier years’ assessments may be re-opened to ensure that undue benefit
was not taken by such Trusts/Institutions.
(Paragraph 7.1.6) 
• The ITD may consider issuing Standard Operating Proce dure/Guidelines
ensuring the genuineness of the activities of Trusts/Institutions before grant
of registration/ accord of approval.
(Paragraph 7.1.8) 
• The ITD may consider certification of research activ
 ity of a Trust/Institution by
specialised authority at the time of granting approval under Section 35(1)(ii)
in line with Section 35(2AA) and 35(2AB).
(Paragraph 7.1.9) 
• The ITD may devise a monitoring mechanism (in additio n to scrutiny
assessment) to ensure that the entities which are availing the benefits under

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
xvi 
Sections 10(23C), 11, 12, 13, 80G(5) of the IT Act, are working towards 
achieving the objectives for which they are formed. 
(Paragraph 7.1.10) 
• The ITD system may be suitably modified to maintain a schedule of year-wise
accumulation and utilisation by automatic capture of data so that any
unspent amount after specified period may be taxed accordingly.
(Paragraph 7.1.11) 
• Form 10BB may be modified so as to monitor amounts a
 ccumulated by the
Trusts/Institutions registered under Section 10(23C) (iv to via).  Further, ITD
m
ay consider specific declaration to be made by the assessee similar to Form
10, as per which statement to be furnished to the AO/prescribed authority
under Section 11(2), intimating the purpose/ period of accumulation, by
Trusts/Institutions registered under Section 10(23C) (iv to via), opting for
accumulation of income for future application.  Further, CPC-ITR/ITBA system
may also be suitably modified to maintain a schedule of year-wise
accumulation and utilisation by automatic capture of data so that any
unspent amount after specified period may be taxed accordingly.
(Paragraph 7.1.12) 
• The ITD may
(
a) evolve an automated IT-based mechanism to cross-veri fy the foreign receipt
available with MHA, with that in the ITR.  The ITD may also consider bringing
in new provisions in the Act, so as to treat foreign contribution received,
utilized, donated or invested by Trusts/Institutions in violation of the FCRA Act
2010 as income not to be exempt under Section 11 and 10(23C).
(b) put checks and validation in place in the ITD system
 s to restrict the user to
provide inconsistent information/data within same/different Forms while
filing ITR.
(c) explore the feasibility of utilisation of relevant i
 nformation/data available
with the other Government Department/body which may plug-in leakage of
revenue to the exchequer while processing ITRs in an automated environment.
(Paragraph 7.1.13) 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
1 
Chapter 1: Introduction 
1.1 Introduction 
Charitable organisations/institutions have played a significant role in sharing 
government responsibility towards providing various services to the 
underprivileged people, development and welfare of the country through 
various charitable activities and running non-profitable organisation/ 
institutions. Such organisations mainly depend upon donations, grants, fees etc. 
received from corporate houses, governments, voluntary contributions and 
foreign contributions etc. These organisations/institutions are to be registered 
under various enactments viz. Societies Registration Act, 1860; the Religious 
Endowments Act of 1863; the Indian Trusts Act of 1882; and the Charitable 
Endowments Act of 1890 etc. to obtain legal status and protect their interests 
and assets. Apart from voluntary organisations/institutions, some corporate 
houses and other entities also form companies under Section 25 of the 
Companies Act
1 for the purpose of promoting commerce, art, charity and 
religion etc. These companies are formed for philanthropic purposes only, and 
the payment of dividend is prohibited.  
The Indian Constitution also guarantees a distinct legal space to such institutions 
through Article 19(1)(c) of the Constitution, relating to the right to form 
associations or unions. Charity and Charitable organizations are included in the 
Concurrent List or List-III (Seventh Schedule), Item 28, of the Constitution of 
India, which means that both the Central and the State Governments are 
competent to legislate on this subject. 
Apart from the above legislations, the Income Tax Act 1961 is also applicable to 
charitable institutions, while in the case of foreign contributions received by 
these charitable institutions, the Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act, 2010 will 
be applicable. 
The Income Tax had been introduced in 1860, and in 1922, and 50 per cent tax 
exemption was granted to individuals on donations for charitable purposes. The 
Income Tax Act, 1961 (the Act) further broadened the definition of charitable 
purposes. Section 2(15) of the Act defines the expression “charitable purpose”. 
The Act provides for tax exemptions to various entities, including Government 
funded entities, engaged in objects which are charitable in nature, in order to 
encourage and fulfil social objectives in areas such as education, medical, relief 
of the poor, religion etc. subject to compliance of certain provisions enshrined 
in Section 10(23C), Section 11, Section 12, Section 13 etc. of the Act. These 
1 Section 25 has the provision for charitable and other c ompanies under the Companies Act, 1956. Section 8 is the 
corresponding provision under the Companies Act, 2013. 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
2 
entities receive donations, voluntary contributions and have other incomes from 
activities which are charitable in nature. The receipts of such entities are 
required to be applied for the objects for which these trusts and institutions have 
been set up. The Income Tax Department (ITD) has the responsibility of ensuring 
that incomes of genuine and eligible trusts and institutions are exempted from 
levy of income tax, and that they pay the correct amount of tax. 
1.2 Legal Framework 
1.2.1  Legal provisions relating to the Assessment Process for Income Tax 
Returns (ITRs) in the Income Tax Department are given in Appendix 1.1. 
1.2.2 The specific provisions of the Act, relating to registration/ approval/ 
notification, assessment of the Charitable Trusts/Institutions and exemptions to 
Charitable Trusts/Institutions under Sections 10(23C)(iiiab) to (via), 11 and 12 
are discussed in the succeeding paragraphs. It is clarified that the phrases 
“Charitable” and “Not for profit” are not identical. The medical/educational 
institutions existing solely for philanthropic purposes and not for the purposes 
of profit are covered under Sections 10(23C)(iiiab) to (iiiae); and 10(23C)(vi) 
and (via).  
1.2.2.1 Definition of ‘Charitable Purpose’ under Section 2(15) 
Section 2(15) of the Act provides a definition of ‘charitable purpose’ which 
includes (i) relief of the poor (ii) education (iii) yoga (iv) medical relief (v) 
preservation of environment (including watersheds, forests and wildlife) (vii) 
preservation of monuments or places or objects of artistic or historic interest 
and (viii) the advancement of any other object of general public utility. The 
Section further provides that advancement of any other object of general public 
utility shall not be a charitable purpose, if it involves the carrying on of any 
activity in the nature of trade, commerce or business, or any activity of rendering 
any service in relation to any trade, commerce or business, for a cess or fee or 
any other consideration, irrespective of the nature of use or application, or 
retention of the income from such activity and the aggregate receipts from such 
activity or activities during the previous year, exceed ` 25 lakh (20 per cent with 
effect from 01.04.2016 of the total receipts) from such activity or activities. 
Further, an entity with such activity will be treated as ‘non-exempt’ entity for 
the relevant previous year, as per Section 13(8).  
1.2.2.2 Provisions relating to Charitable Trusts/Institutions covered under 
Sections 11 and 12 
(a) Grant of exemptions under Section 11 and 12
Section 11(1) of the Act deals with exemption available to all charitable and 
religious organisations for income derived from property held for charitable or 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
3 
religious purposes to the extent such income is applied for charitable or religious 
purpose in India and where any such income is accumulated or set apart for 
application to such purposes in India to the extent to which the income so 
accumulated or set apart is not in excess of 15 per cent of the income from such 
property. 
Section 11(2) provides that if in the previous year, income applied to charitable 
or religious purposes in India falls short of 85 per cent of the income derived 
during that year, the trust can opt for accumulation of the not applied portion 
of the income, to be spent for specified purpose(s) in the next five years. Such 
accumulation is required to be furnished to the Assessing officer in Form 10
2 
before the due date3 prescribed in Section 139(1)4 for furnishing the return of 
income. 
Section 11(5) provides that the accumulated funds shall be invested in the 
specified modes such as saving certificates issued under the small saving 
schemes, deposit in the post office, scheduled bank, units of the Unit Trust of 
India, deposits in public sector companies etc. 
Further, Section 12 provides for exemption of income of trusts or institutions 
from contributions which shall, for the purposes of Section 11, deemed to be 
income derived from the property held under trust wholly for charitable or 
religious purposes and provisions of Section 11 and Section 13 shall apply 
accordingly.  
Thus, to summarise, under Section 11, there is no requirement for institutions 
existing solely for philanthropic purpose or not for profit, but only a restriction 
that accumulation of income cannot exceed 15 per cent. 
The conditions for applicability of Section 11 and 12, given in Section 12A, are 
summarised as under: 
(i) Charitable Trusts/Institutions are required to make an application in
Form 10A in the prescribed manner to the Pr. CIT/CIT before 1
st day of July 1973
or before the expiry of one year from the date of its creation or the
establishment of the Institution whichever is later, for registration under Section
12AA.
(ii) Where the total income of a trust or institution as computed without
giving effect to the provision of Section 11 and 12 exceeds the maximum amount 
which is not chargeable to Income Tax in any previous year, the accounts of the 
2 Statement to be furnished to the Assessing officer un der Section 11(2) of the Act. 
3 The due dates for filing of ITR for the AYs 2014-15, 2015-16, 2 016-17 and 2017-18 were 30 September 2014, 30 
September 2015, 17 October 2016 and 07 November 2017 respectively. 
4 Section 139(1) of the Act provides that a person other than  a company if his total income or the total income of 
any other person in respect of which he is assessable under this Act during the previous year exceeded the 
maximum amount which is not chargeable to income tax shall, on or before the due date, furnish a return of 
income.  

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
4 
trust or institution for that year are to be audited by a Chartered Accountant, 
and the Audit report in Form 10B is required to be filed before the due date. 
(iii) With effect from 01.04.2018, entities in receipt of income have to furnish
the return of income for the previous year in accordance with the provisions of 
Section 139(4A), within the time allowed under Section 139(1).  
(b) Registration of Trust/Institution
Section 12AA of the Act provides that the Pr. CIT/CIT, on receipt of application 
for registration of a Trust/Institution, shall call for such documents or 
information as he thinks necessary and may also make such inquiries as he may 
deem necessary, in order to satisfy himself about the genuineness of activities 
of the organization. After satisfying himself about the objects of the trust or 
institution and the genuineness of its activities, he shall pass an order in writing 
registering the trust or institution. 
The Section further provides that if the activities of Trust/Institution are not 
genuine or are not being carried out in accordance with the objects of the 
Trust/Institution or the activities are being carried out in a manner that the 
provisions of Sections 11 and 12 of the Act do not apply to exclude either whole 
or any part of the income of such Trust/Institution, Pr. CIT/CIT may, by an order 
in writing, cancel the registration of such trust or institution. 
The procedure to be followed by the Department while granting 
registration/approval to entities for availing the benefit of exemption under 
different provisions of the Act is shown in the flow Chart 1.1 below.  
Chart 1.1: Registration/Approval procedure 
There is no bar on any Trust/Institution from getting registered under Section 
12AA and approval under Section 10(23C), whose activities are charitable or 
religious in nature. Further, registration/approval, once granted, was per petual 


Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
5 
prior to 1 June 20205, and could be cancelled only when the approving authority 
was satisfied that the activities of the Trusts/Institutions were not genuine or 
not being carried out in accordance with its objects. Once the objects of the 
Trusts/Institutions are established as charitable or religious, income of these 
entities from the property held by it shall be eligible for exemption , under 
different provisions of the Act. 
(c) Circumstances under which the benefit of exemptio n would not be
available under Section 11
Section 13 of the Act specifies the circumstances under which the benefit under 
Section 11 would not be available to an organization - (i) if the income is not 
applied for the benefit of the public; (ii) if the income is applied for the benefit 
of any particular religious community or caste; (iii) if the income or property is 
applied/used for the benefit of the specified person such as the founders, 
trustee, manager, chief functionary, major donors, and relatives of the founders 
or persons who have a substantial interest in the organization; and (iv) if the 
funds are invested in modes other than those specified in Section 11(5). 
1.2.2.3 Provisions relating to special entities covered under Section 10(23C) 
Apart from the Charitable Trusts/Institutions mentioned in para 1.2.2.2 above, 
there are certain educational, medical and religious institutions which are 
exempt under Section 10(23C) subject to fulfilment of certain conditions. The 
provisions of the Act relating to such special organizations are discussed in 
succeeding paragraphs: 
(a) Organization funded by Government
U
niversity/Educational institutions and Hospital/Medical institutions, existing 
solely for educational/philanthropic purposes and not for the purposes of profit 
which are wholly or substantially6 financed by the Government, are exempt from 
tax under Section 10(23C)(iiiab) and 10(23C)(iiiac) respectively. Such 
organizations are not required to obtain approval from Pr. CIT/CIT for availing of 
exemption. Filing of Income Tax Return is mandatory
7 for such organisations 
from AY 2016-17 onwards for claim of exemption. During the PA, Audit noticed 
that Government institutions like Indian Institute of Science Education and 
Research (IISER), Mohali, National Institute of Technology (NIT), Durgapur, 
Indian Institute of Management (IIM)8, Bengaluru etc. have claimed exemption 
under Section 10(23C)(iiiab) and Sanjay Gandhi Postgraduate Institute of 
5 Re-registration and re-approval process was inserted u nder Section 12AB and Section 10(23C) respectively by the 
Finance Act 2020 with effect from 1 June 2020. 
6 Rule 2BBB of the IT Rules provides that an entity, shall be con sidered as being substantially financed by the 
Government, if the Government grant exceeds 50 per cent  of the total receipts including any voluntary 
contributions of such entity, during the relevant previous year. 
7 Inserted with effect from 1.4.2016 (Finance Act, 2015) 
8 IIM claimed exemptions in AY 2014-15 under Section 10(23C)(iiia b) and in subsequent AYs under Section 11. 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
6 
Medical Sciences, Lucknow, Hassan Institute Of Medical Sciences, Hassan, 
Karnataka etc. have claimed exemption under Section 10(23C)(iiiac) of the Act. 
(b) Organization having annual receipt not exceeding `  one crore
University/Educational institutions and Hospital/Medical institutions, existing 
solely for educational/philanthropic purposes and not for the purposes of profit, 
are exempt from tax under Section 10(23C)(iiiad) and 10(23C)(iiiae) of the Act 
respectively, if the annual income does not exceeds ` one crore. Such 
organizations are not required to obtain approval from Pr. CIT/CIT for availing of 
exemption. Filing of Income Tax Return is mandatory for such organisations for 
claim of exemption. 
(c) Other specified organizations
T
he provisions of Section 10(23C)(iv) to 10(23C)(via) deal with other educational, 
medical institutions, funds and charitable and religious institutions which are 
exempt subject to fulfilment of certain conditions. Such specified organizations 
are: 
(i) Section 10(23C)(iv): Any fund or institution established for
c
haritable purposes which may be approved by the prescribed authority, 
having importance throughout India or any State or States can claim 
exemption under this Section. During the Performance Audit, Audit 
noticed that funds/ institutions like Punjab Building and Other 
Construction Workers Welfare Board, West Bengal State Health & Family 
Welfare Samity etc. have claimed exemption under this Section. 
(ii) Section 10(23C)(v): Any trust or institution wholly for public
religious purpose or public religious and charitable purpose is eligible to 
claim exemption and which may be approved by the prescribed authority.
 
During the Performance Audit, Audit noticed that institutions like 
Ramkrishna Math, Shree Siddhivinayak Ganpati Temple Trust, Mumbai, 
The Assembly of God Church etc. have claimed exemption under this 
Section. 
(iii) Section 10(23C)(vi): University or educational institution existing
solely for educational purpose and not for the purposes of profit other 
than those mentioned in sub-clause (iiiab) or (iiiad) and which may be 
approved by the prescribed authority can claim exemption under this 
Section. During the Performance Audit, Audit noticed that institutions like 
MP Birla Institute of Management, Kolkata, Delhi Public School, 
Bhubaneswar, National Law Institute University, Gwalior etc.
 have claimed 
exemption under this Section. 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
7 
(iv) Section 10(23C)(via): Hospital or medical institution existing
solely for philanthropic purpose and not for the purposes of profit and 
which may be approved by the prescribed authority. During the 
Performance Audit, Audit noticed that institutions like Indian Red Cross 
Society, Mumbai, The Gujarat Research & Medical Institute, Ahmedabad 
etc.
 have claimed exemption under this Section. 
The conditions for grant of exemption to the organizations mentioned in 
Sections 10(23C)(vi) to 10(23C)(via) are: 
(a) Such organizations are required to apply in Form No. 56D to the
Pr. CIT/CIT for grant of approval in order to claim of exemption. 
(b) The Pr. CIT/CIT, on receipt of application, shall call for such
documents or information as he thinks necessary and may also make 
such inquiries as he may deem necessary, in order to satisfy himself 
about the genuineness of activities of the organization. After satisfying 
himself about the objects and the genuineness of its activities, he shall 
pass an order in writing within 12 months granting approval to the 
institution or fund.  
(c) The income of such organizations shall not be used for any private
benefit. 
(d) Filing of Income Tax Return in ITR-7 and the Audit report in Form
10BB are mandatory for claim of exemption. 
(e) The exemption is available subject to the condition of 85 per cent
application of income for its objects and it can opt for accumulation of 
the unapplied portion of the income, to be spent within a maximum 
period of five years. 
(f) The accumulated funds have to be invested in the modes
specified under Section 11(5). 
1.2.2.4 Deduction in respect of donations to certain funds, charitable 
Trusts/Institutions etc. 
The amount donated towards charitable Trusts/Institutions attracts deduction 
under Section 80G of the Act. Section 80G(5) contains pre-conditions which must 
be satisfied cumulatively, before the donation to the trust or institution becomes 
tax deductible in the hands of a donor. These conditions are summarized as 
under: 
(i) The income of the Trusts/Institutions would not be includable in total
income by virtue of provisions contained in Sections 11, 12 or Section
10(23C).

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
8 
(ii) The income of the Trusts/Institutions is applied wholly for charitable
purpose. Charitable purpose does not include religious purpose
[Explanation 3 below Section 80G]. However, Section 80G(5B) permits
application up to five per cent of the income of a year towards religious
purposes in cases the Trusts/Institutions engaged in religious activities.
(iii) The Trusts/Institutions are not for the benefit of any particular religious
community or caste;
(iv) The Trusts/Institutions maintain regular books of account regarding its
receipts and expenditure; and
(v) The Trusts/Institutions are approved by the Pr. CIT/CIT in this behalf.

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
9 
Chapter 2: Audit Approach 
This chapter discusses the reasons for selection of this topic, the objectives of 
this Performance Audit, the Audit methodology and associated aspects. 
2.1 Why we chose this topic 
The grounds for selecting this topic for performance audit were: 
/head2right As per the Receipt Budgets forming part of the Annual Budget  of the 
Government of India, the total amount of exemption applied by the 
Charitable Trusts/Institutions has increased from ` 2.25 lakh crore in 
FY 2014-15 to ` 3.34 lakh crore in FY 2017-18, showing an increase of 
48 per cent. The details of how this amount was arrived at are not available 
in the Budget, nor could they be traced from records produced to Audit. 
/head2right A Performance Audit on “Exemptions to the Charitable Trusts and 
I
nstitutions” conducted and included in the C&AG’s Report No. 20 of 2013 
had highlighted various lapses such as irregularities in the process of 
registration of Charitable Trusts/Institutions, irregular exemption to trusts 
which were not charitable in nature, non-monitoring of accumulations of 
income of trusts and non-monitoring of Foreign contribution received by 
trusts, Non-taxation of short application of income/accumulations after 
specified period, etc. The Public Accounts Committee (PAC), in its 104
th 
Report, on the Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations of the Committee contained in its 27th 
Report (16th Lok Sabha), had, inter alia expressed its concern over the 
serious nature of the violations and failure of the ITD to monitor whether 
the trusts were fulfilling the objectives under which they had been 
established. The Committee, in its report, also desired that the office of 
the Comptroller & Auditor General of India submit a report on the 
violations by Public Charitable trusts and make recommendations on how 
to remedy the gaps and prevent such recurrences in future.  
/head2right We also conducted a limited follow-up test-check of assess
 ments of the 
charitable trusts and institutions and the audit findings thereon were 
included in the CAG’s Audit Report No. 9 of 2019.  
/head2right This present audit also aimed to ascertain whether deficienc
 ies highlighted 
in the earlier Performance Audit, and in the limited follow-up test-check of 
assessments of the charitable Trusts/Institutions, had since been 
addressed by the ITD. 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
10 
2.2 Audit objectives  
This Performance Audit aimed to focus on:  
(i) 
 Whether the CBDT ensures in an effective manner that the Charitable 
trusts and Institutions, which are availing the benefits under Sections 
10(23C), 11, 12, 13, 80G(5) of the Income Tax Act, complied with the 
prescribed procedures regarding registration/approval and ensures 
monitoring thereafter;  
(ii)  Whether the ITD is efficient in granting the exemptions to the Charitable 
trusts and Institutions under the above provisions of the Act and such 
exemptions are given to the eligible entities accurately and in a timely 
manner; and 
(iii)  Whether the existing provisions in the Act/Rules/CBDT Instructions 
relating to Assessments of the Charitable Trusts/Institutions are sufficient 
or are there any lacuna/ambiguity/inconsistency. 
2.3 Audit scope and coverage  
From the assessee-wise data in respect of the Charitable Trusts/Institutions, 
containing 6,89,011 cases provided by the Pr. DGIT(Systems), initially a total of 
6,390 cases falling under 47 Pr. CsIT/CsIT relating to scrutiny/rectification, under 
our audit jurisdiction, were selected as the audit sample for this performance 
audit. However, due to the prevailing situation arising out of the Covid-19 
pandemic, the audit sample was reduced to 5,798 cases involving exemptions 
granted of ` 1.66 lakh crore 
9. The sample cases included the 200 top assessees 
involving exemptions granted of ` 1.07 lakh crore. Further, in respect of any 
assessee whose assessment for a particular Assessment Year was selected in the 
audit sample and where we found a deficiency or non-compliance, Audit 
selected all remaining assessments also between AYs 2014-15 to 2017-18 for this 
performance audit. Accordingly, 1,028 additional assessment cases were 
selected for this audit. Thus, the total audit sample covered 6,826 assessments.  
Apart from the above audit sample, in order to examine summary assessment 
cases, 200 high value summary assessment cases (gross income more than  
` 125 crore)  in respect of PANs which were not part of the initial sample 
including additional cases, were also selected for audit. Thus, the total audit 
sample for the Performance Audit came to 7,026 cases. The details of the audit 
sample are tabulated in Table 2.1 below: 
 
 
                                                           
9 Source: Data received from Pr. DGIT(Systems) 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
11 
Table 2.1: State wise distribution of selected Audit Sample 
S. 
No. 
Name of the State(s) Audit sample 
Initial 
cases 
Revised 
cases 
Additional 
cases 
Top 200 
Summary 
cases 
Total 
1 2 3 4 2+3+4 
1. Andhra Pradesh and 
T
elangana  401 401 0 4 405 
2. Bihar 91 62 0 1 63 
3. Delhi 622 622 66 45 733 
4. Gujarat 614 507 50 9 566 
5. Jharkhand 66 66 1 1 68 
6. Karnataka and Goa 571 441 182 27 650 
7. Kerala 272 272 24 8 304 
8. Madhya Pradesh and 
Chhattisgarh 251 236 201 2 439 
9. Maharashtra 1,412 1,412 93 30 1535 
10. North Eastern States 49 38 0 1 39 
11. Odisha 98 98 34 3 135 
12. Punjab, Haryana, Himachal 
Pradesh and Jammu & 
Kashmir 
345 315 200 16 531 
13.Rajasthan 304 304 97 5 406 
14. Tamil Nadu 549 515 42 23 580 
15. Uttar Pradesh and 
U
ttarakhand  402 202 0 21 223 
16. West Bengal 343 307 38 4 349 
17. Total 6,390 5,798 1,028 200 7,026 
In terms of number of cases in the initial audit sample, Maharashtra was the 
highest with 1,505 cases followed by Delhi at 688 cases. In terms of number of 
cases in the top 200 summary assessment cases, Delhi was the highest with 45 
cases; out of these 45 cases, 24 were Government entities having total gross 
income of 
` 8,027.1 crore, and 21 were Private entities having total gross income 
of ` 4,812.3 crore. 
2.4 Audit methodology 
(i) An Entry Conference was held with the ITD/CBDT on 23rd December
2019, wherein the audit objectives, scope of audit and main focus areas
of the performance audit, were explained to the ITD.
(ii) In the course of the performance audit, data regarding registra
 tion/
approval, withdrawal of registration of Trusts/Institutions engaged in
charitable and religious activities, was collected for scrutiny of the
processes followed under Sections 12AA, 10(23C) and 80G(5)(vi) of the
Act.

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
12 
(iii) The data was captured in audit checklists (generic and specifi c) from the
assessment and other records pertaining to the approved samples, so as
to examine the nature and extent of compliance with general provisions
of the Act, relevant circulars of CBDT etc.
(iv) Key documents were collected from the records provided by the ITD .
These included assessment orders, including computation sheets
(ITNS-150); AST screenshots of Income Tax Computation Sheets; notices
issued to assessees; assessees’ submissions; Income Tax Returns (ITRs),
including details in the schedules, balance sheets, income and
expenditure accounts, audit reports and other relevant records. Audit
examined those documents, and also analysed the data captured in the
generic and specific checklists during the course of the performance
audit. Systemic and compliance issues, emanating as a result of such
audit examination and analysis, were conveyed to the respective units
(ward/circle/commissionerates) of ITD for their comments. Replies,
wherever received, have suitably been incorporated in the report.
(v) Audit also reviewed action taken by the ITD on the recommendati
 ons of
the previous Performance Audit (PA) Report No. 20 of 2013 and Chapter
VI of Compliance Audit Report No. 9 of 2019 and also on the
recommendations made thereafter by the PAC on PA Report No. 20 of
2013 and action taken by the Ministry thereon, in its 27
th Report and
1
04 th Report presented in Parliament in December 2015 and in FY
2018-19 respectively.
(vi) The draft Performance Audit was issued to the Ministry in December
2
021. Partial replies were received in February and March 2022. An exit
conference was held with the Ministry on 4th March 2022.
2.5 Non-production of records to Audit
Out of 7,026 sampled cases, the Department produced assessment records of 
6,260 cases, and 766 cases were not produced to audit. Further, in respect of 
the sample cases, which were processed summarily or rectified in the ITD 
System, the Department provided incomplete information in a number of cases. 
In its reply, the ITO (Exemptions) Ward - 3, Bengaluru stated that where the 
rectification proceedings under Section 154/155 had been filed by the respective 
assessees before the CPC-ITR, were directly processed by the CPC-ITR and this 
office had no access to even the orders passed by them, in general. The AO 
further stated that still the screen shots of the cases to the extent available in 
AST/ITBA module had been made available to Audit. This issue was brought to 
the notice of the CBDT in March 2020 with a request to make available the 
selected processed/rectified cases to the Jurisdictional Assessing Officer.  

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
13 
Non-production of assessment records was 10.9 per cent, details of which are 
given in Table 2.2 below: 
Table 2.2: Details of non-production of assessment records 
Name of the State Audit 
sample 
Cases 
audited 
Cases not produced 
In number in per cent 
Andhra Pradesh, Telangana and Odisha 540 424 116 21.5 
Delhi, Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh 1,172 1,108 64 5.5 
Gujarat and Rajasthan 972 859 113 11.6 
Karnataka & Goa 650 557 93 14.3 
Maharashtra 1,535 1,320 215 14.0 
Punjab, Haryana, Jammu, Himachal 
Pradesh 531 522 9 1.7 
Tamil Nadu and Kerala 884 792 92 10.4 
Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Bihar and 
Jharkhand 354 350 4 1.1 
West Bengal & North Eastern States 388 328 60 15.5 
Total 7,026 6,260 766 10.9  
It is seen from the above Table 2.2 that out of 766 cases not produced, 
Maharashtra has the highest number of non-production of cases (215 cases) 
followed by Andhra Pradesh, Telangana and Odisha (116 cases); however, in 
terms of percentage of non-production, Andhra Pradesh, Telangana and Odisha 
(21.5 per cent) were the highest followed by West Bengal and North Eastern 
States (15.5 per cent).  
Further, non-production of assessment records included 17 cases (eight Scrutiny 
cases and nine Rectification cases) of the top 200 Trusts/Institutions having gross 
income ` 167.9 crore and above (involving exemption of ` 6,102.4 crore), 
selected from the data furnished by the ITD as detailed in Appendix-2.1 . The 
main reasons for non-production of records as stated by the Department were 
limited attendance of key ITD officials in office due to the prevailing pandemic 
situation, restructuring of the Department, some records not readily traceable 
etc. Further, the Department could not produce records of 194 cases related to 
registration/approval out of 425 cases registered/approved after 2014
10.  
Non-production of records of registrations/approvals and incomplete 
production of summary/rectification cases were major constraints for the Audit 
to ascertain the due compliance of procedure laid down for registration and 
granting exemptions. 
10 Refer para 5.2.1 of this PA report. 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
14 
2.6 Acknowledgement 
We acknowledge the co-operation of the Department in providing the necessary 
records/information and facilitating the conduct of this Performance Audit, 
despite the constraints faced due to COVID-19 pandemic. 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
15 
Chapter 3: Status of Action Taken Notes (ATN) of the Ministry on 
earlier CAG’s Audit Reports and Public Accounts Committee (PAC) 
recommendations  
Audit had conducted a Performance Audit on Exemptions to Charitable Trusts 
and Institutions in the year 2012 and included the findings in the Comptroller 
and Auditor General of India’s Audit Report No. 20 of 2013 which was laid in 
Parliament in December 2013.  
The main objective of the earlier Performance Audit was to seek assurance that 
registrations are given to trusts involved in charitable activities only, and 
exemptions are allowed to eligible Trusts. The study also sought assurance that 
proper monitoring mechanism exists for utilisation of accumulations and 
identifying inadequacies in the provisions of the Act relating to exemptions.  
The Report highlighted certain lapses such as (a) grant of approval/registration 
without adequate documents; (b) non-inclusion of dissolution clause in the Trust 
Deed; (c) Irregular exemption to trusts which were not charitable in nature;  
(d) Delay in granting registration/ approval/notification; (e) irregular exemptions 
to trusts creating huge surpluses consistently; (f) irregular exemption of 
anonymous donations/ voluntary contributions; (g) non-monitoring of 
accumulations of income of trusts; (h) Irregular exemption for investment not 
made in specified mode; (i) non-monitoring of foreign contribution received by 
trusts etc.  
The Public Accounts Committee (PAC) examined the report as well as the action 
taken by the ITD and included their observations/ recommendations in its 27 
th  
Report (16 th  Lok Sabha) which was presented in Parliament in December 2015. 
Thereafter, the Committee (2018-19), presented its 104 th Report (16 th  Lok 
Sabha) on the Action Taken by the Government on observations/ 
recommendations of the Committee contained in its 27 
th  Report (16 th  Lok Sabha) 
to the Parliament in July 2018. 
In this chapter, Audit attempted to review action taken by the Ministry on the 
recommendations of the PAC based on the audit findings/ recommendations 
contained in the Performance Audit Report No. 20 of 2013. The 
recommendations of the PAC as well as Audit and the status of action taken by 
the Ministry thereon are as follows:  
 
 
 
 
 
 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
16 
3.1 Actions taken by the Ministry on the recommendations of the PAC 
3.1.1  Actions taken relating to procedural issues relating to registration and 
ineffective monitoring of accumulation 
With regard to procedural issues relating to registration and ineffective 
monitoring of accumulation, the Ministry submitted11 before the PAC that 
proposed restructuring of the Exemption Directorate would result in 
specialization on exemption matters with better control as well as monitoring 
and the introduction of web based interactive platform for applying for 
registration would make the whole registration/approval/notification process 
faster, smoother and transparent. In response, the PAC desired that the Ministry 
should undertake these proposed measures expeditiously. The PAC further 
recommended
12 that the Ministry may bring suitable amendment to the Act or 
evolve a suitable mechanism to ensure that firstly, trusts are allowed 
accumulations consistently only as exceptions and secondly, the accumulated 
income is applied for objectives of the Trusts/Institutions within a specified time 
frame. 
Audit noted that the Ministry has taken the following remedial measures relating 
to procedural issues relating to registration and ineffective monitoring of 
accumulation: 
(a) The Ministry through restructuring, created a separate ‘
 Exemption wing’
in ITD for dealing exclusively with issues relating to exemptions to
c
haritable Trusts/Institutions from November 2014 which is headed by a
Chief Commissioner of Income Tax (Exemption) and has 14 Commissioners
of Income Tax (Exemption) under him. They will be in charge of
registration; verification and building the data bank. They will also be in
charge of the entire administration which is required to implement these
provisions relating to the exemption available to the Charitable
Organisations.
(b) Online Registration/approval through ITBA system has been in
 troduced
under Sections 12AA and 80G(5) in July 2016 and 10(23C)(iv), (v), (vi) and
(
via) in September 2016.
(c) e-filing of Income Tax Returns and Audit Reports by Trusts/Instit utions
having taxable income above the exemption limit was mandatory from AY
2013-14 onwards.
(d) Disclosure of year-wise details of accumulations, their utilis ation and
investments, through appropriate columns in ITR-7 had been introduced
from AY 2013-14 onwards.
11 Para 6, Part II of 27 th Report (16th Lok Sabha)  
12 Para 10 (ii) of 27 th Report (16th Lok Sabha) 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
17 
3.1.2  Actions taken by the Ministry relating to compliance issues 
Audit noted that the Ministry has taken the following remedial measures 
considering the recommendations made by Audit 13  with reference to 
assessment of charitable trusts and institutions; and inconsistencies in the Act, 
through amendments in the Finance Act (No.2), 2014, the Finance Act, 2016 and 
the Finance Act, 2017 in respect of exemptions allowed to charitable trusts and 
institutions: 
(i)  Clarification of the phrase ‘Substantially financed’ under Section 
10(23C) 
Under clause of (iiiab) and (iiiac) of Section 10(23C), educational and medical 
institutions are exempt from tax if such institutions are wholly and substantially 
financed by the Government. However, the word “substantially financed” was 
not defined in the Act.  
After being pointed out by Audit, Section 10(23C) of the Act was amended vide 
Finance (No.2) Act, 2014 by inserting an Explanation below Section 10 (23C). Rule 
2BBB was inserted in the Income-Tax Rules vide Notification No. 79 /2014 dated 
12th December 2014 to prescribe such percentage to be 50 per cent . 
(ii)  Treatment of claims of depreciation by Trusts/Institutions 
Charitable Trusts/Institutions were availing deductions on capital expenditure 
and at the same time, they were availing depreciation on fixed assets. This 
amounted to a kind of double benefit.  
After being pointed out by Audit, the Income-Tax Act was amended vide Finance 
(No.2) Act, 2014 to provide that under Section 11 and Section 10(23C), income 
for the purpose of application shall be determined without any deduction or 
allowance by way of depreciation or otherwise in respect of any asset, 
acquisition of which has been claimed as application of income under these 
Sections in the same or any other previous year. This amendment is effective 
from 1st April, 2015. 
(iii)  Treatment of receipts of dividend  by Trusts/Institutions 
Charitable Trusts/Institutions were claiming exemption on dividend income on 
shares and mutual funds under Sections 10(34) and 10(35) though such dividend 
was not applied for charitable purposes.  
Section 11 of the Income-Tax Act was amended vide Finance (No.2) Act, 2014 to 
provide that where a trust or an institution has been granted registration 
for 
purposes of availing exemption  under Section 11, and the registration is in force 
for a previous year, then such trust or institution cannot claim any exemption 
                                                           
13  Report No. 20 of 2013 – Exemptions to Charitable Trusts and Institutions 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
18 
under any provision of Section 10 [other than that relating to exemption of 
agricultural income and income exempt under Section 10(23C)]. Similarly, 
entities which have been approved for claiming benefit of exemption under 
Section 10(23C) would not be entitled to claim any benefit of exemption under 
other provisions of Section 10 (except the exemption in respect of agricultural 
income). 
(iv)  Cancellation of registration under Section 12AA 
Section 12AA(3) and 12AA(4) of the Act was amended by the Finance (No.2) Act, 
2014 which provides that if the activities of Trusts/Institutions are not genuine 
or the activities are not being carried out in accordance with the objects of the 
Trusts/Institutions or the activities are being carried out in a manner that the 
provisions of Sections 11 and 12 of the Act do not apply to exclude either whole 
or any part of the income of such Trusts/Institutions due to operation of Section 
13(1), then the competent authority i.e. the Pr. Commissioner or the 
Commissioner may by an order in writing cancel the registration of such trust or 
institution provided that no order under this sub-Section shall be passed unless 
such trust or institution has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard. 
(v)  Special provisions relating to tax on ‘Accreted income’ of certain Trusts 
and Institutions 
 
The Finance Act, 2016 had introduced a new Chapter XII-EB containing Sections 
115TD to 115TF titled ‘Special provisions relating to tax on accreted income of 
certain Trusts and Institutions’. It provides that where a Trust or Institution 
ceases to be a charitable organization by way of its conversion into any form 
which is not charitable or merges with a non-charitable entity, or transfers its 
assets to any trust which is non-charitable or does not transfer it to another 
charitable trust within a period of one year from dissolution, then the amount of 
net assets based on fair market value as on the date of such conversion or merger 
or dissolution which represents the income accreted to the trust over period of 
time shall be charged to additional income-tax at the Maximum Marginal Rate 14 . 
(vi)  Widening of survey under Section 133A to cover Charitable Trusts 
Survey under 133A of the IT Act is an important tool with the ITD for detecting 
and preventing tax evasion. The ambit of survey operations, under Section 133A 
of the Income Tax Act, was widened to cover Charitable Trusts, vide Finance Act, 
2017, to enable the Income Tax Authorities to conduct Surveys at premises 
where an activity for charitable purpose was being carried out. 
 
                                                           
14  The maximum marginal rate (MMR) is the rate of income tax applicable in relation to the highest slab of income 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
19 
(vii) Provision to deduct tax at source in case of trusts
Audit noticed that there was no enabling provision in the Act, similar to the 
Section 40(a)(ia), to disallow expenses on which TDS should have been deducted 
but has not been deducted by trusts or after deduction, has not been paid on or 
before the due date of furnishing of return of income. 
Section 11 and Section 10(23C) of the Income-Tax Act was amended vide Finance 
Act, 2018 to provide that if any payment on which tax is required to be deducted 
but has not been deducted or tax has been deducted but not paid within the due 
date of filing of return of income, then such amount shall not be considered as 
application of income. 
(viii) Set-off of the deficit of earlier years with the current year’s income
Audit had pointed out inconsistencies in allowance of carry forward of deficit in 
case of exempt entities and recommended that the Ministry may take a decision, 
in principle, whether deficit of earlier years in case of a trust was to be allowed 
or not to bring in uniformity.  
Section 11 and Section 10(23C) was amended vide the Finance Act, 2021 to 
clarify that the calculation of income required to be applied or accumulated 
during the previous year shall be made without any set off or deduction or 
allowance of any excess application of any of the years preceding the previous 
year. 
(ix) Absence of clarity in the Act regarding repayment of borrowed funds
Audit had pointed out inconsistencies in allowance of repayment of loans in 
cases of exempted entities and recommended that the Ministry may bring 
suitable amendment in the Act to bring a uniformity in allowance of repayment 
of loans.  
Section 11 and Section 10(23C) was amended vide by the Finance Act, 2021 to 
clarify that application for charitable or religious purposes from any loan or 
borrowing, shall not be treated as application of income for charitable or 
religious purposes 
(x) No monitoring system in respect of donations under Section 80G
Audit had pointed out that there was no internal mechanism within ITD to have 
control over the receipts issued by the entity having registration under 
Section 80G. 
The Finance Act, 2020 with effect from 01.04.2021 had introduced a provision in 
this regard, which states that claim of the assessee for a deduction in respect of 
any donations made to an institution or fund to which the provision of Section 
80G(5) apply, in the return of income for any assessment year filed by him, shall 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
20 
be allowed on the basis of information relating to the said donation furnished by 
the institution or fund to the prescribed Income Tax authority or the person 
authorized by such authority, subject to verification in accordance with the risk 
management strategy formulated by the Board from time to time. 
3.2 Deficiencies pointed out in CAG’s Report No. 20 of 2013 that have not 
been satisfactorily addressed 
Audit noticed that the following deficiencies had been pointed out in our earlier 
performance Audit Report No. 20 of 2013; however, these were not 
satisfactorily addressed by the ITD. These deficiencies have been discussed in 
detail in the succeeding Chapter 5 and Chapter 7. 
(i) Internal Audit of the Registration process
T
he PAC recommended15 that the process of registration/approval of the
Charitable Trusts/Institutions should be brought under the purview of Internal
Audit of the Department.
Audit noted during the Performance Audit that the ITD has not addressed the 
issue which has been illustrated in paras 7.1.3 and 7.1.4. 
(ii) Ineffective monitoring of accumulation of income and  its utilisation
The PAC recommended16 bringing suitable amendment to the Act or evolving a
suitable mechanism to ensure that accumulated income is applied for the
objectives of the Trusts/Institutions within a specified time frame. The Ministry
should perform strict monitoring of Form 10 invariably in all the cases to cover
all assessments.
Audit noted during the Performance Audit that the ITD has not addressed the 
issue which has been illustrated in paras 7.1.11 and 7.1.12. 
(iii) Ineffective monitoring of receipts of foreign contribution and their
utilisation
The PAC recommended
17 that the Department should formulate the data 
sharing mechanism with the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) to keep a track of 
foreign contributions (FCs) received and their utilisation for the declared 
purpose. It was also recommended that a mechanism may also be developed 
particularly to monitor application of foreign contributions received and a clear 
set of guidelines in this regard be issued to all the AOs. Audit observed that 
desired mechanism to monitor the foreign contributions has yet to be 
established.  
15 Para 7, Part II of 27th Report (16th Lok Sabha) 
16 Para 10(ii) & (iii), Part II of 27th Report (16th Lok Sabha) 
17 Para 15, Part II of 27th Report (16th Lok Sabha) 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
21 
Audit noted during the Performance Audit that the ITD has not addressed the 
issue which has been illustrated in para 7.1.13. 
(iv) Inadequacy of survey of educational trusts
The PAC desired18 that a survey of all the educational trusts be conducted in a 
time bound manner so as to verify whether they were misusing the provisions 
of 'Charitable Trusts' in the Income Tax Act considering the huge surpluses 
generated and accumulated by most of these trusts.  
Audit noted during the Performance Audit that the ITD has not addressed the 
issue which has been illustrated in para 7.1.5. 
(v) Absence of provision for disclosure of TDS in Audit Report
Audit had pointed out that audit reports in Forms 10B or 10BB had no disclosure 
with regard to TDS deducted/deductible by the trusts and the PAC 
recommended
19 to the Ministry that appropriate provisions may be made for 
inclusion of such information in the Audit Reports of trusts since it would be an 
effective tool for greater transparency during assessment procedures. 
However, Audit noticed that no provision has been made for inclusion of such 
information in the Audit Reports in Form 10B/10BB of trusts as pointed out by 
Audit. 
3.3 Status of action taken by the Department and Audit comments thereon 
in respect of follow-up audit of ‘Exemptions to Charitable Trusts and 
Institutions’ included in Chapter VI of the Compliance Audit Report No. 
9 of 2019 (Direct Taxes) 
In pursuance to C&AG’s Audit Report No. 20 of 2013 (Exemptions to Charitable 
Trusts and Institutions), the PAC inter alia expressed their concern over the 
serious nature of all the violations and failure of the ITD to monitor whether the 
trusts were fulfilling the objectives under which they have been established and 
also that public charitable trusts were being used to run business for profit. 
Further, the committee desired the office of the Comptroller & Auditor General 
of India to submit a report on the violations of the Public Charitable Trusts and 
make recommendations on how to remedy the gaps and prevent such 
recurrences in future. Therefore, C & AG decided to conduct a PA on Exemptions 
to Charitable Trusts and Institutions and accordingly data was sought for from 
the Department. Meanwhile, a limited follow up Audit of ‘Exemptions to 
Charitable Trusts and Institutions’ was carried out and results of the same were 
included in Chapter VI of the Compliance Audit Report No. 9 of 2019 (Direct 
Taxes). 
18 Para 9, Part II of 27th Report (16th Lok Sabha) 
19 Para 18 Part II of 27th Report (16th Lok Sabha) 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
22 
During the current PA, Audit also verified action taken by the Department in 
respect of 42 cases (involving 34 assessees) included in the above Report No. 9 
of 2019, pertaining to CIT(E), Mumbai and CIT(E), Pune Charges.  
The summary of status of action taken by the Department is categorized as 
follows: 
(i) Cases where the audit observations were accepted by the Ministry
The Ministry has partially accepted audit observations in three cases and no 
further comments were offered to the Ministry in view of the reply. Details of 
the audit observation, reply of the Ministry and Audit comments thereon are 
given in Appendix  3.1. 
(ii) Cases where the audit observations were not accepted by the Ministry
The Ministry did not accept the audit observations in 16 cases. Out of these 
cases: 
(a) In one case, no further comments was offered to the Ministry in
  view of
the reply, mentioned in Appendix  3.2; and
(
b) In the remaining 15 cases, Audit did not accept the replies of the Ministry
and requested to reconsider their replies/ to furnish further relevant
documents to support Ministry’s contention. Details of the audit
observation, reply of the Ministry and Audit comments thereon are given
in the Appendix  3.3.
(iii) Cases where no reply was furnished by the Ministry but the
Department had taken/initiated remedial action or not accepted the
audit observations.
The Ministry did not furnish replies to the audit observations in respect of 19 
cases. However, it was noticed in the local field audit verification that the 
Department had either not accepted the audit observations or initiated/taken 
remedial action. Details of the audit observation, reply of the Ministry and Audit 
comments thereon are given in Appendix  3.4
.  
(iv) Cases where no reply was furnished by the Ministry and no action
taken/initiated by the Department.
The Ministry did not furnish any reply and also no remedial action was 
initiated/taken by the Department in four cases. The gist of audit observations, 
current status of the cases are tabulated below: 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
23 
Table: 3.1: Cases where no reply was furnished by the Ministry and no action taken/initiated by the 
Department. 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Assessee 
AY Para no. of 
Report 
No. 9 of 
2019 
Gist of the audit 
observation 
Tax 
Effect 
(` in 
crore) 
Action taken by the ITD 
1. T 2 Trust 2009-10 6.5 ITD denied 
exemptions 
under Section 
11, but allowed 
deductions for 
expenditure 
3.62 Reply was awaited from 
the Ministry. 
Audit noticed from field 
verification that no 
remedial action was 
initiated/taken by the 
Department. 
2. N5 Trust 2013-14 
& 
2014-15 
6.5 ITD denied 
exemptions 
under Section 
11, but allowed 
deductions for 
expenditure 
0.95 Reply was awaited from the 
Ministry. 
Audit noticed from field 
verification that no 
remedial action was 
initiated/taken by the 
Department. 
3. T2 Trust 2014-15 6.5 ITD denied 
exemptions 
under Section 
11, but allowed 
deductions for 
expenditure 
0.37 Reply was awaited from 
the Ministry. 
Audit noticed from field 
verification that no 
remedial action was 
initiated/taken by the 
Department. 
4. T3 Trust 2014-15 6.5 ITD denied 
exemptions 
under Section 
11, but allowed 
deductions for 
expenditure 
0.34 Reply was awaited from the 
Ministry. 
Audit noticed from field 
verification that no 
remedial action was 
initiated/taken by the 
Department. 
As the time limit for issuing notice under Section 148 has been revised by 
amending provisions20 of Section 149, there is likelihood of action on these cases 
become time barred. Therefore, the Ministry/CBDT is requested to initiate 
action after verification of the facts, on priority and intimate the same to Audit. 
Further, the Ministry/CBDT may also take suitable steps for avoiding recurrence 
of such anomalies in future, as pointed-out by Audit. 
20 Finance Act 2021 w.e.f. 01.04.2021 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
25 
Chapter 4: Statistical Analysis of Population and Audit Sample 
This chapter discusses the profile of the total population of charitable 
Trusts/Institutions, registration/approval granted to Trusts/Institutions and the 
profile of the audit sample. 
4.1 Profile of total population of charitable Trusts/Institutions 
The Performance Audit covers assessments of the charitable or religious 
Trusts/Institutions relating to assessment year (AY) 2014-15 to AY 2017-18, 
processed, assessed and rectified during FY 2014-15 to FY 2018-19. 
The Pr. DGIT(Systems) provided assessee-wise data in respect of the Charitable 
Trusts and Institutions, containing 6,89,011 cases pertaining to Income Tax 
Returns (ITRs) processed/assessed/rectified for AY 2014-15 to AY 2017-18 during 
FY 2014-15 to FY 2018-19. Out of 6,89,011 cases received from the 
Pr. DGIT(Systems) falling under 319 Pr. CsIT/CsIT, 6,29,905 were summary 
assessment cases, 25,214 cases were of scrutiny cases and the remaining 33,892 
cases were relating to rectification/re-assessment/appellate orders. The data 
provided by Pr. DGIT (Systems) was analysed and the results are summarized in 
the succeeding paragraphs. 
4.1.1 State-wise distribution of Trusts/Institutions claiming exemption 
With a view to ascertaining state-wise distribution of Trusts/Institutions which 
claimed exemption from AY 2014-15 to AY 2017-18, Audit analysed the data of 
6,89,011 cases provided by the Pr. DGIT(System) and the result is shown in 
Appendix 4.1. Audit analysis revealed that there was an increasing trend in 
number of Trusts/Institutions claiming exemptions from AYs 2014-15 to 
2016-17; however, the number of Trusts/Institutions claiming exemptions 
decreased slightly for AY 2017-18. Further,
 Maharashtra had the highest number 
of Trusts/Institutions claiming exemptions from AY 2014-15 to AY 2017-18 at 
16.7 per cent of total cases followed by Gujarat at 14.2 per cent and Tamil Nadu 
at 10.8 per cent. The State-wise distribution of Trusts/Institutions which claimed 
exemption from AY 2014-15 to AY 2017-18 is depicted in Chart 4.1 below: 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
26 
4
.1.2 Number of Income Tax Returns filed by the Charitable Trusts/ 
Institutions from AY 2014-15 to AY 2017-18 
With a view to ascertain number of Income Tax Returns (ITRs) filed by the 
Trusts/Institutions for the AY 2014-15 to AY 2017-18, audit analysed the data of 
6,89,011 cases provided by the Pr. DGIT(Systems) and the result thereof is 
depicted in Table 4.1 below: 
Table 4.1: Returns filed by the Trusts/Institutions between AY 2014-15 to AY 2017-18 
Population 
(Total 
returns) 
Number of 
Trusts/ 
Institutions 
during the 
period 
Number of returns filed by the Trusts/ Institutions between 
AY 2014-15 to AY 2017-18 
One 
(in per cent) 
Two 
(in per cent) 
Three 
(in per cent) 
Four 
(in per cent) 
6,89,011 2,43,772 40,740 (16.7) 52,234 
(21.4) 
59,393 
(24.4) 
91,405 
(37.5) 
It was seen from the above Table 4.1 that there were only 37.5 per cent 
Trusts/Institutions where ITRs were received by the Department for all four AYs 
i.e. AYs 2014-15 to 2017-18 during the period of Audit.
4.1.3 Type of Assessments in total population and Audit sample21 
From the data received from the Pr. DGIT(Systems), a total of 7,026 cases falling 
under 51 Pr. CsIT/CsIT comprising of 3,271 scrutiny cases, 3,255 cases of 
rectification/re-assessment/appellate orders etc. and 500 summary cases were 
selected as the Audit sample for this Performance Audit. Of these, 6,260 cases 
21 Audit sample has been discussed in details in Chapter 2 of this PA Report. 
115244
97900
74312
54553
49963
46262
41984
36878
35502
25546
18074
16832
13728
11657
9304
8132
8114
7502
4255
4140
3783
3074
2272
0
20000
40000
60000
80000
100000
120000
140000
Number of cases
Chart 4.1: State-wise distribution of Trust/Institution claiming exemptions from AY 
2014-15 toAY 2017-18

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
27 
were produced by the ITD whereas records related to 766 cases were not 
produced to audit. The type of assessments in the total population and Audit 
sample are given in Table 4.2 below: 
Table 4.2: Type of assessments in total population and Audit sample 
Type of 
Assessment 
(Scrutiny/Sum
mary /Others) 
Data furnished by Pr. 
DGIT (System) 
Audit Sample Produced to Audit 
No. of 
Cases 
Percentage No. of 
Cases 
Percentage No. of 
Cases 
Percentage 
Scrutiny 25,214 3.7 3,271 46.6 3,081 49.2 
Summary 6,29,905 91.4 500 7.1 495 7.9 
Others22 33,892 4.9 3,255 46.3 2,684 42.9 
Total 6,89,011 100.0 7,026 100.0 6,260 100.0 
Thus, out of 6,89,011 cases pertaining to ITRs for AY 2014-15 to AY 2017-18, 
3.7 per cent cases were scrutiny cases and 96.3 per cent cases were other than 
scrutiny cases which were processed/rectified/ revised etc. during FY 2014-15 to 
FY 2018-19. Out of 6,260 audited cases, we covered 49.2 per cent of scrutiny 
assessment and 50.8 per cent of other than scrutiny assessment cases. 
4.1.4 Assessment Year wise exemption claimed  
Audit analysed the data provided by the Pr. DGIT(Systems) to get assessment 
year wise break-up of exemption claimed under Sections 10 and 11 of the Act 
which is summarized in Table 4.3 given below: 
Table 4.3: Assessment Year wise break-up of exemption from AY 2014-15 to AY 2017-18 
AY Exemption claimed 
under Section 10 
Exemption claimed 
under Section 11 
Total exemptions for the 
year 
No. of 
Cases 
Exemption 
(` in crore) 
No. of 
Cases 
Exemption 
(` in crore) 
Total Cases Total 
Exemption 
(` in crore) 
2014-15 11,621 49,383 1,35,862 2,16,918 1,47,483 2,66,301 
2015-16 15,178 1,38,709 1,49,693 2,58,130 1,64,871 3,96,839 
2016-17 20,786 1,56,902 1,68,766 2,53,494 1,89,552 4,10,396 
2017-18 22,193 2,01,069 1,64,912 4,88,823 1,87,105 6,89,892 
Total 69,778 5,46,063 6,19,233 12,17,365 6,89,011 17,63,428 
It can be seen from the above Table 4.3 that there is an increasing trend of 
exemption claimed from AY 2014-15 to 2017-18. In comparison to the previous 
AY, during AY 2017-18, number of cases where exemption under Section 11 were 
claimed had decreased by 2.3 per cent whereas exemptions had increased by 
92.8 per cent. Further, the amount of exemption claimed under Section 10 has 
increased steadily. One possible reason for such increase was that institutions 
which were substantially financed by the Government and claiming exemption 
under Sections 10(23C)(iiiab) and 10(23C)(iiiac) of the Act had to be mandatorily 
22 Others include rectification cases, Revision cases, or der giving effects to appellate orders etc. 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
28 
file return of income from AY 2016-17 onwards for claim of exemption as 
discussed in Para 1.2.2.2(a). 
4.1.5 Number of Summary and Scrutiny cases 
On the basis of types of assessment under different provisions of the Act, Audit 
analysed the total population to identify the nature of assessment in respect of 
Trusts/Institutions. Analysis depicted in Appendix  4.2  shows that ITRs in respect 
of Trusts/Institutions were processed summarily under Section 143(1) for the 
period AYs 2014-15 to 2017-18 ranged from 87.2 per cent  to 96.0 per cent . The 
number of scrutiny assessments increased from 0.7 per cent  to 9.1 per cent  
during AY 2014-15 to AY 2016-17. It is further seen that the average per cent  of 
selection of cases of Trusts/Institutions for scrutiny, which claimed exemptions 
during AY 2014-15 to 2016-17, was 3.7 per cent . 
Assessment-wise break-up of total population of Trusts/Institutions claiming 
exemptions from AY 2014-15 to AY 2017-18 is shown in the Chart 4.2 below:  
 
It can be seen from the chart 4.2 above that during the period, 91 per cent  cases 
were processed summarily and only 4 per cent  cases were selected for scrutiny 
assessment and the other 5 per cent  cases were of rectification, revision and 
cases of order giving effect to appellate orders. 
4.1.6 Returned and Assessed Income  
With a view to analyse the income disclosed by the assessee and income 
assessed by the Department, Audit analysed the total population based on the 
returned and assessed income of the Trusts/Institutions. Details of the analysis 
are shown in Appendix  4.3 . Audit analysis revealed that out of total 6.89 lakh 
cases 
 processed/assessed/ rectified  during the FY 2014-15 to FY 2018-19, the 
returned income was ` zero in 5,11,951 cases (74.3 per cent  of total cases) 
whereas the assessed income was ` zero in 4,33,620 cases (62.9 per cent  of total 
cases). Number of cases selected for scrutiny for all the four AYs i.e., AY 2014-15 
to AY 2017-18, was the highest (22,376 cases) for cases with returned income of 
629,905(91%) 
25,214(4%) 
33,892(5%) 
Chart 4.2: Break-up of total population on the basis of types of 
assessment 
Summary Cases Scrutiny cases Others 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
29 
` zero followed by cases with returned income more than ` zero and upto  
` 50 lakh (2,717 cases) followed by case with returned income of more than  
` one crore (201 cases).  
4.1.7 Exemptions claimed but registration status under Section 12AA not 
available 
The Charitable Trusts/Institutions are required to obtain registration under 
Section 12AA for claiming exemptions under Section 11. 
From the data provided by the Pr. DGIT (Systems), pertaining to Income Tax 
Returns (ITRs) processed/assessed/rectified for AY 2014-15 to AY 2017-18 during 
the FY 2014-15 to FY 2018-19, Audit found that in 21,381 cases exemption were 
claimed under Section 11; however, registration under Section 12AA was not 
available. State-wise details are summarised in Table 4.4 given below: 
Table 4.4: Trusts not registered under Section 12AA but claimed exemptions 
State Number 
of cases 
Exemption under Section 11  
(` in crore) 
Andhra Pradesh and Telangana 1,177 1,045.3 
Bihar 955 256.4 
Chandigarh 299 1,651.8 
Chhattisgarh 125 113.9 
Delhi 1,345 4,245.1 
Goa 64 12.6 
Gujarat 3,325 1,119.8 
Haryana 583 298.3 
Himachal Pradesh 137 64.7 
Jammu and Kashmir 54 37.4 
Jharkhand 307 108.3 
Karnataka 1,094 1,082.7 
Kerala 362 511.1 
Madhya Pradesh 773 1,595.1 
Maharashtra 3,745 2,500.8 
North Eastern States 82 8.4 
Odisha 276 352.0 
Punjab 335 252.6 
Rajasthan 1,307 605.1 
Tamil Nadu and Puducherry 1,940 807.2 
Uttar Pradesh 2,117 1,812.7 
Uttarakhand 298 71.1 
West Bengal 681 228.3 
Total 21,381 18,780.7 
It is seen from Table 4.4 above that incorrect allowance of exemption was the 
highest in Delhi charge followed by Maharashtra charge.  

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
30 
4.1.8 Foreign contribution received but registration status not available 
The Charitable Trusts/Institutions are required to obtain registration under 
Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act, 2010, for receiving foreign contribution. 
From the data provided by the Pr. DGIT(Systems) pertaining to Income Tax 
Returns (ITRs) processed/assessed/rectified for AY 2014-15 to AY 2017-18 during 
the FY 2014-15 to FY 2018-19, Audit found that in 347 cases, where foreign 
contributions were received, registration under FCRA was not available. 
State-wise details are summarized in Table 4.5, given below: 
Table 4.5: State-wise cases where foreign contribution received but not registered under 
FCRA 
State Number 
of cases 
Amount of foreign 
contribution received 
(` in crore) 
Exemptions 
claimed 
(` in crore) 
Andhra Pradesh and Telangana 63 33.8 62.5 
Delhi 1 0.1 0.9 
Goa 5 0.3 1.7 
Gujarat 1 0.1 0.2 
Himachal Pradesh 3 2.3 5.5 
Karnataka 104 73.8 165.0 
Kerala 53 31.3 107.5 
Maharashtra 48 22.8 122.6 
Odisha 1 0.3 0.5 
Tamil Nadu and Puducherry 61 19.8 64.3 
Uttar Pradesh 3 0.6 3.0 
West Bengal 4 2.4 2.2 
Total 347 187.4 535.8 
It is seen from Table 4.5 above that Karnataka had the highest receipt of foreign 
contribution without registration under FCRA Act 2010 followed by Andhra 
Pradesh and Telangana. 
4.1.9 Invalid date of registration/approval 
Charitable Trusts/Institutions are required to obtain registration under Section 
12AA for claiming exemptions under Section 11 and approval under Section 80G 
for receiving donation.  
From the data provided by the Pr. DGIT (Systems), Audit observed that in 10 
cases, the date of registration under Section 12AA and approval under Section 
80G were incorrect dates (future dates). The details are given in Table 4.6 below: 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
31 
Table 4.6: Invalid date of registration/approval 
CIT Encrypted PAN AY Date of 
registration 
under Section 
12A /12AA 
Date of 
Approval 
under 
Section 80G 
CIT (Exemptions), Pune 118614718262 2016 16-04-2088 - 
CIT (Exemptions), Mumbai 3847464966 2014 20-03-2044 - 
CIT (Exemptions), Mumbai 69658229  
736 2016 17-12-2090 - 
CIT (Exemptions), Bhopal 6697882038 2016 30-07-2501 - 
CIT (Exemptions), Jaipur 1121990705 2016 28-12-2077 - 
CIT (Exemptions), Pune 794562645777 2014 17-10-2075 - 
CIT (Exemptions), Chennai 549512250 2016 11-08-2021 - 
CIT (Exemptions), Kolkata 512123131334 2014 - 28-08-2099 
CIT(Exemptions), 
Ahmedabad 21201448184 2016 - 31-03-2025 
CIT (Exemptions), Mumbai 827762293 2017 - 26-03-2099 
Above cases indicate that appropriate field validation was not available in the 
ITR Form-7 in respect of the above fields.  
4.2 Profile of registration granted to Trusts/Institutions 
Audit analysed the data received from CsIT (Exemptions) relating to registration 
granted by the ITD, to the Charitable Trusts/Institutions, post restructuring and 
creation of designated CIT (Exemptions) in November 2014 
23  i.e. registration 
granted from FY 2014-15 to FY 2017-18.  
4.2.1  Grant of registrations/approvals  
The data made available by CsIT(E) relating to registration/ approval of the 
Charitable Trusts/Institutions under Section 12AA during financial years (FYs) 
2014-15 to 2017-18 was analysed.  
Chart 4.3 below depicts the number of receipt of applications and grant of 
registration during FY 2014-15 to FY 2017-18.  
                                                           
23  Prior to creation of designated CIT (Exemptions), registration to the Charitable Trusts/Institutions were given by 
jurisdictional CsIT. 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
32 
 
It was seen from the above chart that there was an increasing trend in receipt of 
applications, as well as grant of registration/approval. The receipt of applications 
increased from 6,046 in FY 2014-15 to 13,797 in FY 2017-18 registering an 
increase of 128.2 per cent  over the period of four FYs, whereas, the number of 
registration/approvals granted during the same period increased from 3,326 in 
FY 2014-15 to 8,530 in FY 2017-18 registering an increase of 156.5 per cent , 
though the number of application and registration/ approval (14,725 and 988 
respectively) were slightly higher in FY 2016-17. 
4.3 Profile of cases falling within the audit sample 
Audit analysed sampled cases in respect of region and type of assessment and 
audited cases in respect of region, gross total income, returned income, assessed 
income, exemptions granted, nature of activities, types of entities (Government 
entity or private entity). These are given in the succeeding paragraphs: 
4.3.1 Region and type of assessment-wise breakup of audit sample  
Audit analysis of samples of 7,026 cases depicted in Appendix  4.4 showed that 
out of 7,026 sampled cases, 3,271 cases (46.6 per cent ) were of scrutiny 
assessment whereas 518 cases (7.4 per cent ) were of summary assessment and 
remaining 3,237 cases (46.1 per cent ) were of rectification, revision and cases of 
order giving effect to appellate orders.  
 
 
0
2000 
4000 
6000 
8000 
10000 
12000 
14000 
16000 
2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 6046 
11298 
14725 
13797 
3326 
7624 
9881 
8530 
Application Received and registration Granted 
Financial Year 
Chart 4.3: Application Received vis-à-vis registration granted under 
Section 12AA 
Applications Received Approval Granted 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
33 
4.3.2 Region-wise exemptions granted in respect of audited cases 
With a view to quantifying the state/region wise break-up of total exemptions 
granted, Audit analysed the data made available by the ITD as well as data 
collected during field audit. Table 4.7 below depicts the State/region wise break-
up of total exemptions granted of ` 1.68 lakh crore in respect of 6,064 audited 
cases relating to 47 Pr. CsIT /CsIT, covered during the PA: 
Table 4.7: State wise break-up of total exemptions granted in respect of audited cases 
Name of the 
state 
Number of 
Pr. CIT/CIT 
Audited cases Exemptions granted 
Number Percentage 
of audited 
cases 
Amount 
(` in crore) 
Percentage 
of total 
exemption 
Andhra Pradesh, 
Telangana and 
Odisha 
4 417 6.9 13,225.4 7.9 
Bihar and 
Jharkhand 1 126 2.1 12,931.7 7.7 
Delhi 5 688 11.3 30,695.8 18.3 
Gujarat 4 497 8.2 9,001.8 5.4 
Karnataka & Goa 6 530 8.7 9,933.1 5.9 
Kerala 1 285 4.7 2,826.9 1.7 
Madhya Pradesh 
and Chhattisgarh 1 373 6.2 9,840.8 5.9 
Maharashtra 9 1,290 21.3 25,102.3 15.0 
Punjab, Haryana, 
Jammu, Himachal 
Pradesh 
4 506 8.3 8,914.8 5.3 
Rajasthan 2 348 5.7 6,150.9 3.7 
Tamil Nadu 4 478 7.9 15,486.7 9.2 
Uttar Pradesh 
and Uttarakhand 2 202 3.3 11,067.7 6.6 
West Bengal & 
NER States 4 324 5.3 12,460.0 7.4 
Total 47 6,064 100.0 1,67,637.8 100.0 
It was seen from the Table 4.7 above that out of 6,064 audited cases, 
Maharashtra had the highest number of cases (21.3 per cent) followed by Delhi 
(11.3 per cent) but in terms of quantum of exemptions granted, Delhi was the 
highest (18.3 per cent) followed by Maharashtra (15.0 per cent).  
4.3.3 Assessment Year wise exemptions granted in respect of audited cases 
With a view to quantifying the Section wise and assessment year wise break-up 
of exemption granted in respect of audited cases, Audit analysed the data made 
available by the ITD as well as data collected in field audit. Table 4.8 below 
depicts the Section wise break-up of total exemptions granted of ` 1.68 lakh 
crore in respect of 6,064 audited cases: 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
34 
Table 4.8: Assessment year wise exemptions in respect of 6,064 audited cases 
AY Type of 
assessment 
Exemption granted 
under Section 11 
Exemption Granted 
under Section 
10(23C)(iiiab) to (via) 
Exemptions granted 
under other 
sub-Sections24 of 
Section 10 
Total 
No. of 
Cases 
Exemption 
(` in Crore) 
No. of 
Cases 
Exemption 
(` in Crore) 
No. of 
Cases 
Exemption 
(` in Crore) 
No. of 
Cases 
Exemption 
(` in Crore) 
2014-15 
Scrutiny 90 3384.4 13 1,212.9 5 2.2 108 4,599.5 
Summary 66 2,429.5 13 131.8 1 1.6 80 2,562.9 
Others# 833 14,192.3 184 5,335.6 51 3,090.7 1,068 22,618.5 
Total 989 20,006.1 210 6,680.3 57 3,094.6 1,256 29,780.9 
2015-16 
Scrutiny 599 22,484.5 123 4,161.7 32 3,174.6 754 29,820.8 
Summary 82 1,083.2 17 76.1 1 0.0 100 1,159.3 
Others# 587 11,929.7 109 1,194.5 18 491.7 714 13,615.9 
Total 1,268 35,497.4 249 5,432.3 51 3,666.3 1,568 44,596.1 
2016-17 
Scrutiny 1,590 61,606.1 466 16,499.8 63 4,121.9 2,119 82,227.7 
Summary 33 34.6 6 52.5 0 0.0 39 87.1 
Others# 524 2,389.2 156 3,075.1 22 1332.7 702 6,797.1 
Total 2,147 64,029.9 628 19,627.4 85 5,454.6 2,860 89,111.9 
2017-18 
Scrutiny 73 838.5 23 1,737.5 4 0.0 100 2,576.0 
Summary 60 1,197.0 19 43.4 1 1.6 80 1,242.0 
Others# 165 313.5 30 10.52 5 6.3 200 330.3 
Total 298 2,349.0 72 1,791.4 10 7.9 380 4,148.3 
 Total 4,702 1,21,882.4 1,159 33,531.4 203 12,223.4 6,064 1,67,637.2 
# Others include Rectification cases, Revision cases and cases of Order giving effect to Appellate orders.
It can be seen from Table 4.8 that out of 6,064 audited cases, 4,702 Trusts/ 
Institutions (77.5 per cent) were granted exemptions under Section 11 of the Act 
whereas 1,159 Trusts/Institutions (19.1 per cent) were granted exemption under 
Section 10(23C) (iiiab) to (via) of the Act. Further, out of the total exemptions of 
` 1.68 lakh crore during the period from AY 2014-15 to 2017-18, ` 1.22 lakh 
crore (72.7 per cent) was granted under Section 11 and ` 0.34 lakh crore 
(20.0 per cent) was granted under Section 10(23C) (iiiab) to (via) of the Act. 
Thus, the majority of the Trusts/Institutions prefer to claim exemption under 
Section 11. 
4.3.4 Gross Total income of the audited cases 
Audit analysed the Gross Total Income of the trust/institutions (audited cases) 
from data made available by the ITD as well as data collected by Audit in the 
audit checklist during field audit and the result is given in Table 4.9 below: 
24 Sub-Sections 22B, 23A, 23B, 23D and 25 of Section 10, relating to News age ncies, professional bodies, institutions 
for development of khadi and village industries, Mutual Funds notified by SEBI, approved pension and gratuity 
fund, notified board or trusts respectively. 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
35 
Table 4.9 Distribution of audited cases on the basis of Gross Income 
AY No. of 
Audited 
Cases 
Gross income vis-à-vis Number of cases 
Upto 
` 10 
crore 
More than 
` 10 Cr and 
upto 
` 50 crore 
More than 
` 50 Cr and 
upto 
` 100 crore 
More than 
 ` 100 Cr 
and upto 
` 500 crore 
More than 
` 500 crore 
Data not 
available 
2014-15 1,256 773 71 33 12 6 361 
2015-16 1,568 948 212 70 53 17 268 
2016-17 2,860 1,954 388 127 88 22 281 
2017-18 380 228 37 10 9 1 95 
Total 6,064 3,903 708 240 162 46 1,005 
It can be seen from Table 4.9 above that out of 6,064 total audited cases, the 
gross income is ‘` 10 Crore or less’ in 3,903 cases (64.4 per cent). Further, in 
1,005 cases (16.6 per cent) the gross income of the Trusts/Institutions was not 
available since the cases were pertaining to summary or rectification cases, 
which were processed summarily or rectified in the ITD System and the record 
for which were not furnished to Audit. 
4.3.5 Returned and Assessed Income of the Trusts/Institutions (audited 
cases) 
Audit analysed the data made available by the ITD as well as data collected by 
Audit in the audit checklist during field audit, regarding the returned income and 
the assessed Income of the Trusts/Institutions in respect of audited cases. The 
result is given in Table 4.10 below: 
Table 4.10: Returned income and Assessed income wise distribution of Audited cases 
AY Total 
audited 
cases 
Returned Income Assessed Income 
` Zero or 
less than 
` zero 
` 1 and 
upto 
` 50 lakh 
More 
than ` 50 
lakh and 
upto 
` 1 crore 
More 
than 
` 1 
crore 
` Zero 
or less 
than 
` zero 
` 1 and 
upto 
` 50 lakh 
More 
than ` 50 
lakh and 
upto 
` 1 crore 
More 
than 
` 1 
crore 
2014-15 1,256 1,103 139 5 9 1,055 144 13 44 
2015-16 1,568 1,441 110 5 12 1,263 151 25 129 
2016-17 2,860 2,664 163 11 22 2,220 232 52 356 
2017-18 380 313 57 6 4 288 62 7 23 
 Total 6,064 5,521 469 27 47 4,826 589 97 552 
It is seen from Table 4.10 that out of the 6,064 audited cases, the returned 
income is ‘
` zero or less than ` zero’ in 5,521 cases (91.0 per cent of total cases) 
whereas the assessed income is ‘` zero or less than ` zero’ in 4,826 cases 
(79.6 per cent of total cases).  

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
36 
4.3.6 Categorization of Trusts/Institutions on the basis of their activities and 
their types, whether Government entity or private entity 
4.3.6.1 Categorization of Trusts/Institutions on the basis of activities 
Section 2(15) of the Act defines the term ‘Charitable Purpose’ which includes 
seven types of activities undertaken by Trusts/Institutions viz. (i) relief of the 
poor (ii) education (iii) yoga (iv) medical relief (v) preservation of environment 
(including water-sheds, forests and wildlife) (vi) preservation of 
monuments/places/ objects of artistic or historic interest and (vii) the 
advancement of any other object of general public utility. Trusts/Institutions 
wholly for charitable or religious purposes can avail exemption of income to the 
extent such income is applied in India under Section 11 of the Act. Further, 
universities, educational and medical institutions which are wholly or 
substantially financed by the Government and certain private religious, 
educational and medical institutions can also avail exemption under various
 
provisions under Section 10(23C)(iiiab) to (via) subject to fulfilment of certain 
conditions. 
Audit collected and analysed data in respect of 5,693 cases of audited sample, 
where activity related information was available in the assessment records. 
Audit could not gather activities of the Trusts/Institutions from the available 
records in the remaining 293 cases of the audited sample. Activity wise break-
up of total exemptions granted of ` 1.63 lakh crore in respect of 5,693 sample 
cases, prepared on the basis of data furnished by the ITD as well as the data 
collected by Audit, is summarised in Table 4.11 below: 
Table 4.11: Activity wise break-up of total exemptions in respect of sample cases 
Nature of 
Activity 
Number of 
sample 
cases 
engaged in 
the activity 
Percentage 
of total 
sample 
cases 
Total amount of 
exemptions granted 
to cases engaged in 
the activity 
(` in crore) 
Percentage of total 
amount of 
exemptions granted 
to cases engaged in 
the activity 
Education 2,686 47.2 57,175.5 35.1 
Medical Relief 428 7.5 22,478.7 13.8 
Relief of the Poor 629 11.0 7,618.7 4.6 
Environment 38 0.7 1,425.8 0.9 
Religious 312 5.5 4,070.6 2.5 
Others 1,600 28.1 70,210.1 43.1 
Total 5,693 100.00 1,62,979.4 100.00 
From the above Table 4.11, it is noticed that 47.2 per cent cases of 5,693 audited 
sample were engaged in educational activities against which 35.1 per cent of 
total exemptions was granted, followed by 28.1 per cent engaged in other25 
25 Others’ include entities with activities v iz. General public utility, Preservation of Environment, Preservation of 
Monuments, Yoga,; and entities with more than one activity 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
37 
activities against which 43.1 per cent of total exemptions was granted and 
remaining cases were engaged in medical relief, relief of the poor, environment, 
religious activities etc.  
4.3.6.2 Categorization of Trusts/Institutions on the basis of their types 
whether Government entity or private entity 
Exemptions are granted to Government as well as private entities under various 
provisions of the Act. We collected and analysed information in respect of 580 
high value exemption cases (having gross income of ` 50 crore or above) from 
the audited cases, with a view to quantify activity wise break-up of exemptions 
granted to Government and private entities. The result is summarised in Table 
4.12 below:  
Table 4.12 Activity wise break-up of exemption granted to Government and private entity in respect of 
high value cases (gross income of ` 50 crore or above) 
Nature of 
Activity 
Number of cases 
engaged in the 
activity 
Percentage of 
Total cases 
Total amount of exemption 
granted to cases engaged in 
the activity (` in crore) 
Percentage of total 
amount of 
exemption 
granted engaged 
in the activity 
Govt. Pvt. Total Govt. Pvt. Total Govt. Pvt. Total Govt. Pvt. Total 
Education 67 217 284 11.6 37.4 49.0 19,474.3 25,524.5 44,998.8 14.8 19.4 34.3 
Medical 
Relief 18 44 62 3.1 7.6 10.7 10,751.4 5,873.8 16,625.2 8.2 4.5 12.7 
Relief of the 
Poor 10 28 38 1.7 4.8 6.6 572.3 4,790.5 5,362.8 0.4 3.6 4.1 
Environment 7 3 10 1.2 0.5 1.7 916.7 375.8 1,292.6 0.7 0.3 1.0 
Religious 1 19 20 0.2 3.3 3.4 66.5 2,695.4 2,761.9 0.1 2.1 2.1 
Others 83 83 166 14.3 14.3 28.6 34,926.6 25,307.2 60,233.8 26.6 19.3 45.9 
Grand 
Total 
186 394 580 32.1 67.9 100.0 66,707.8 64,567.2 1,31,275.1 50.8 49.2 100.0 
It is seen from the above Table 4.12 that 32.1 per cent of the high value cases 
pertained to Government entities, against which 50.8 per cent of total 
exemptions (` 1,31,275.1 crore) were granted, whereas 67.9 per cent of high 
value cases pertained to private entities, against which 49.2 per cent of total 
exemptions were granted.  
4.3.7  Analysis of top exemptions cases selected in the Audit Sample 
4.3.7.1  Analysis of High value exemption cases with gross income above 
` 50 crore 
Audit identified 649 high value cases from the audit sample, where gross income 
of each case was above ` 50 crore, for detailed examination. Of these 
assessment cases, records of 580 cases were produced to Audit by the AOs. The 
details regarding types of the Trusts/Institutions (Government or Private), types 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
38 
of assessment completed and exemptions granted are summarized in Table 4.13 
below: 
Table 4.13: Details of 580 audited high value cases 
Types of the 
trust / 
institution 
Scrutiny Assessment Other than Scrutiny 
Assessment 
Total 
No. of 
Cases 
Exemption 
(` in Crore) 
No. of 
Cases 
Exemption 
(` in Crore) 
No. of 
Cases 
Exemption 
(` in Crore) 
Government 131 47,418.3 55 19,289.5 186 66,707.8 
Private 279 49,745.1 115 14,822.0 394 64,567.2 
Total 410 97,163.4 170 34,111.5 580 1,31,275.0 
Audit noticed that out of 580 high value cases, 186 Trusts/Institutions  
(32.1 per cent ) were Government entities wherein exemption of  
` 66,707.8 crore was granted and the remaining 394 Trusts/Institutions  
(67.9 per cent ) were private entities wherein exemptions of ` 64,567.2 crore was 
granted. Audit further noticed that in respect of 410 cases (70.7 per cent ), 
scrutiny assessments were completed and the remaining cases were processed 
summarily.  
4.3.7.2 Analysis of Top 200 exemption cases with gross income of 
` 167.9 
crore and above 
Audit identified the top 200 cases of Trusts/Institutions from the audit sample, 
where in gross income of each case was ` 167.9 crore or above. Out of these 200 
assessment cases, records of 183 cases were produced and 17 cases (Appendix- 2.1 ) 
were not produced to audit. Audit analyzed the data in respect of these 183 cases 
from data furnished by the Pr. DGIT (Systems). Audit also analyzed the data in 
respect of these cases, captured in the audit checklist during field audit from the 
assessment records. The result is summarized in Table 4.14 below: 
Table 4.14: Details of 183 audited cases of ‘Top 200’ assessees 
Types of 
the Trust/ 
Institution 
Scrutiny Assessment Other 26  than Scrutiny 
Assessment 
Total 
number 
of Cases  
Exemption 
(` in 
Crore) No. of 
Cases 
Exemption  
(` in Crore) 
 No. of 
Cases 
Exemption 
(` in Crore) 
Government  65 42,600.4 30 16,413.1 95 59,013.5 
Private  69 34,418.3 19 7,828.1 88 42,246.4 
Total 134 77,018.7 49 24,241.2 183 1,01,259.9 
Audit noticed that out of the top 183 audited cases, 95 Trusts/Institutions  
(51.9 per cent ) were Government entities wherein exemption of  
` 59,013.5 crore was granted and the remaining 88 Trusts/Institutions  
(48.1 per cent ) were private entities wherein exemption of ` 42,246.4 crore was 
                                                           
26  Other included Summary cases and rectification cases 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
39 
granted.  Audit further noticed that in respect of 134 cases (73.2 per cent ), 
scrutiny assessments were completed and the remaining cases were processed 
summarily.  
During this Performance Audit, 54 paras having money value of ` 1,225.20 crore 
were noticed in respect of these 580 high value cases relating to systemic and 
compliance issues viz.  Incorrect computation of income and its application, 
ineffective monitoring of accumulation and its utilisation, ineffective monitoring 
of foreign contribution and its utilisation,
 irregular allowance of exemption on 
corpus donation etc. which are discussed in the succeeding chapters. 
4.3.8 Profiling of top Trusts/Institutions 
With a view to profiling top Trusts/Institutions, Audit selected top 200 cases 
involving 169 Trusts/Institutions from the audit sample where in gross income 
for each case was 
` 167.9 crore or above. Audit collected data from assessment 
records in respect of 167 Trusts/Institutions for FYs 2014-15, 2015-16 and 
2016-17 relating to nature of activity, nature of receipt, exemptions granted etc., 
while records of two assessees were not furnished to Audit. The details of 167 
assessees are given in the succeeding paragraphs: 
4.3.8.1 Type of entity and nature of activity 
Audit noticed that out of 167 top assessees, 101 were Government entities and 
the remaining 66 assessees were private entities. The activity wise break-up of 
101 Government entities is depicted in the Chart 4.4 below: 
Chart 4.4 Activity-wise details of 101 top Government entities 
 
It can be seen from the above Chart 4.4 that 29 per cent  of the top 101 
Government entities were engaged in ‘other activities’ (viz. pension and gratuity 
fund, welfare board etc.) and 28 per cent entities in educational activities. 
 
Education , 28, 28%
Medical, 9, 9%
Relief to Poor, 9, 9%
Environment, 4, 4%
General Public Utility, 
18, 18%
Research, 3, 3%
Other, 30, 29%

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
40 
The activity wise break-up of 66 private entities is depicted in Chart 4.5 below: 
Chart 4.5 Activity-wise details of 66 private entities 
I
t can be seen from the above Chart 4.5 that 42 per cent of the top 66 private 
entities were engaged in educational activities followed by 20 per cent in medical 
relief. 
4.3.8.2 Exemptions granted to Government and Private entities 
Audit collected data on exemptions granted during FYs 2014-15, 2015-16 and 
2016-17 in respect of 167 top entities and the data is summarized in Table 4.15 
below: 
Table 4.15: Financial year wise break-up of exemption granted to Government and private entity 
Financial 
Year 
Government Private Total Data not 
available 
with Audit 
No of 
entities 
Exemption 
(` in crore) 
No of 
entities 
Exemption 
(` in crore) 
No of 
entities 
Exemption 
(` in crore) 
No of 
entities 
2014-15 75 37,763.39 52 18,657.97 127 56,421.36 40 
2015-16 82 46,766.12 55 18,458.02 137 65,224.14 30 
2016-17 84 47,662.64 53 21,377.70 137 69,040.35 30 
It can be seen from the above Table 4.15 that exemption granted to Government 
entities had increased from ` 37,763.4 crore to ` 47,662.6 crore during 
FY 2014-15 to 2016-17, whereas exemptions granted to private entities had 
increased from ` 18,658.0 crore to ` 21,377.7 crore during the same period. 
Education , 
28, 42%
Medical Relief, 
13, 20%
General Public Utility, 
6, 9%
Other, 10, 15%
Religious, 7, 11% Relief to Poor, 2, 3%

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
41 
4.3.8.3  Nature of receipt of Government entities 
Audit analysed information regarding the nature of receipt of 101 Government 
entities during FYs 2014-15 to 2016-17, which is summarized in Table 4.16 
below: 
Table 4.16: Financial year wise break-up of receipt of Government entity 
Financial 
Year 
No of 
Cases 
Grants from 
Government  
(` in crore) 
Receipt from Activity 
(` in crore) 
Other Receipts 27  Total 
Receipt 
(` in 
crore) 
Data not 
available 
with Audit 
Amount 
(` in 
crore) 
Percentage 
of Total 
Receipt 
during the 
year 
Amount 
(` in 
crore) 
Percenta 
ge of 
Total 
Receipt 
of the 
year 
Amount 
(` in 
crore) 
Percen-
tage of 
Total 
Receipt 
during 
the year 
No of 
cases 
2014-15 83 16,857.4 34.59 10,494.9 21.5 21,379.5 43.9 48,731.8 18 
2015-16 93 24,563.7 37.69 11,315.6 17.4 29,291.1 45.0 65,170.4 8 
2016-17 93 29,528.4 43.76 11,330.6 16.8 26,626.3 39.4 67,485.3 8 
It can be seen from the above Table 4.16 that the grant from Government to 
these entities had increased from ` 16,857.4  crore (34.6 per cent ) to ` 29,528.4  
crore (43.8 per cent ) during FY 2014-15 to FY 2016-17 whereas the receipt from 
activity had increased marginally from ` 10,494.9  crore (21.5 per cent ) to 
` 11,330.6  crore (16.8 per cent ) during the same period. 
4.3.8.4  Nature of receipt of Private entities 
Audit analysed information in respect of 66 private entities in respect of nature 
of receipt during FYs 2014-15 to 2016-17 which is summarized in Table 4.17 
below: 
Table 4.17: Financial year wise break-up of receipt of Private entity 
Financial 
Year 
No of 
Cases 
Grant from Govt. (` 
in crore) 
Receipt from Activity 
(` in crore) 
Other Receipt 28  Total for 
the year 
(` in 
crore) 
Data not 
available 
with 
Audit 
Amount 
(` in 
crore) 
Percentage 
of Total 
Receipt 
during the 
year 
Amount 
(` in 
crore) 
Percentage 
of total 
Receipt of 
the year 
Amount 
(` in 
crore) 
Percentage 
of total 
Receipt 
during the 
year 
No of 
cases 
2014-15 63 66.2 0.3 9,880.4 42.4 13,365.3 57.3 23,312.0 3 
2015-16 63 54.0 0.2 10,767.7 42.8 14,354.6 57.0 25,176.3 3 
2016-17 62 243.9 1.0 13,041.2 52.7 11,455.2 46.3 24,740.2 4 
                                                           
27  Other Receipts include other grant, foreign contribution, Donation (domestic), income from investment and 
miscellaneous income 
28  Other Receipt includes other grant, foreign contribution, Donation (domestic), income from investment and 
miscellaneous income 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
42 
It is seen in the above Table 4.17 that Government grant to private entities was 
0.3  per cent, 0. 2 per cent and 1.0  per cent  of total receipt for FY 2014-15, 2015-16 
and 2016-17 respectively. However, the receipt from activity was 42.4  per cent, 
42.8  per cent and 52.7  per cent  and other receipts was 57.3  per cent, 57.0  per 
cent and 46.3  per cent  of total receipts for the FY 2014-15, 2015-16 and 2016-17 
respectively.  
4.3.8.5     Receipt of foreign contribution 
Audit analysed the collected data in connection with the receipt of Foreign 
Contribution in respect of Government and Private Entities, the result of which 
is given in Table 4.18 below:  
Table 4.18: Financial year wise break-up of receipt of Foreign Contributions (FCs) 
Financial 
Year 
Government 
Entity 
Private Entity Total  Foreign 
contribution 
Not received 
Data not 
available 
with Audit 
No. 
of 
cases 
Amount  
 (` in 
crore) 
No. of 
cases 
Amount  
(` in 
crore) 
No. of 
cases 
Amount  
(` in 
crore) 
No. of cases No. of 
cases 
2014-15 2 174.1 13 565.0 15 739.0 141 11 
2015-16 1 179.6 12 488.9 13 668.5 154 0 
2016-17 1 2.0 14 371.7 15 373.7 152 0 
It can be seen from the above Table 4.18 that out of the total 43 assessment 
cases, where Foreign Contribution (FCs) was received from the FY 2014-15 to 
2016-17, only four assessment cases with FCs of ` 355.7 crore were relating to 
Government entities whereas 39 assessment cases with FCs of ` 1425.6 crore 
were relating to Private entities.  
4.3.8.6 Receipt of corpus donation 
Audit analysed the collected data in connection with the receipt of Corpus 
Donation in respect of Govt. and Private Entities and result of which is given in 
Table 4.19 below:  
Table 4.19: Financial year wise break-up of receipt of Corpus donation 
Financial 
Year 
Government Entity Private Entity Total for the Year Corpus 
Donation 
Not 
received 
No. of 
entities 
Corpus 
donation 
(` in crore) 
No. of 
entities 
Corpus 
donation 
 (` in crore) 
No. of 
entities 
Corpus 
donation  
(` in crore) 
No. of 
entities 
2014-15 8 563.1 21 1,011.6 29 1,574.7 138 
2015-16 9 579.4 22 1,004.0 31 1,583.3 136 
2016-17 12 8918.6 20 1,244.4 32 10,163.0 135 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
43 
It can be seen from the above Table 4.19 that out o f the above 92 assessment 
cases where corpus donation was received from FY 20 14-15 to 2016-17, 29 
assessment cases with corpus donation of ` 10,061.1 crore were relating to 
Government entities whereas 63 assessment cases wit h corpus donation  of 
` 3,259.9 crore were relating to Private Entities. 
4.3.9 Profiling of top Trusts/Institutions not sele cted for scrutiny 
Audit collected data from assessment records in res pect of 196 non-scrutiny 
assessment cases involving 159 Trusts/Institutions relating to nature of activity, 
exemptions details, types of trusts etc., while rec ords in respect of four cases 
were not furnished to Audit. The analysis of data r eceived from Pr. DGIT 
(Systems) and data collected from assessment record, in respect of 196 cases is 
given in succeeding paragraphs: 
4.3.9.1  Types of entity and Nature of activity 
Audit noticed that out of the 159 top assessees, 70  were government entities 
and the remaining 89 assessees were private entities. The activity wise break-up 
of Government and private entities are shown in Table 4.20 below: 
Table 4.20: Activity wise break up of Government and Private entities 
Nature of Activity 
No. of 
Government 
entities 
No. of Private 
entities 
Total  
no. of entities 
Education 20 50 70 
Medical Relief 10 14 24 
Relief of the poor 2 8 10 
Religious 1 6 7 
General Public Utility 34 10 44 
Environment 3 0 3 
Political Party 0 1 1 
Total 70 89 159 
Chart 4.6 below depicts activity wise break-up of G overnment and Private 
entities.  

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
44 
I
t can be seen from the above that majority of Government entities 
(48.6 per cent) were engaged in general public utility whereas majority of Private 
entities (56.2 per cent) were engaged in educational activities. 
4.3.9.2 Government and Private entity wise Gross Income, Returned Income 
and Assessed Income 
Audit analysed data of gross income, returned income and assessed income, in 
respect of these Government and Private Entities and the result is given in Table 
4.21 below:  
Table 4.21: Government and Private entity activity wise Gross Income 
Nature of 
activity 
Nature of 
Trusts/ 
Institutions
Number 
of cases
Gross 
Income 
(` in crore) 
Returned 
Income 
(` in crore) 
Assessed 
Income 
 (` in crore) 
Education 
Government 26 6,744.9 690.3 2,711.1 
Private 62 14,589.3 694.0 1,259.8 
Medical Relief 
Government 13 4,636.7 0.0 4.5 
Private 15 3,709.1 0.0 191.8 
Relief of the 
Poor 
Government 2 974.0 0.0 0.0 
Private 9 2,030.6 0.0 0.0 
Religious 
Government 1 181.5 0.0 181.5 
Private 6 4,067.5 0.0 0.0 
50
14
8 6
10
0 1
20
10
2 1
34
3
0
0
1
3
25
38
50
63
Education Medical Relief Relief of the
poor
Religious General Public
Utility
Environment Others
Number of Entities
Nature of Activity
Chart 4.6: Types of Entity and Nature of Activity
Private Government

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
45 
Table 4.21: Government and Private entity activity wise Gross Income 
Nature of 
activity 
Nature of 
Trusts/ 
Institutions
Number 
of cases
Gross 
Income 
(` in crore) 
Returned 
Income 
(` in crore) 
Assessed 
Income 
 (` in crore) 
General Public 
Utility 
Government 45 39,343.1 2,488.6 4,593.6 
Private 11 2,985.6 1.1 331.3 
Environment 
Government 4 1,058.1 0.0 0.0 
Private 0 0.0 0.0 0.0 
Political Party 
Government 2 1,643.9 0.0 5.9 
Private 0 0.0 0.0 0.0 
TOTAL 196 81,964.4 3,874.0 9,279.4 
It can be seen from the above Table 4.21 that though the number of cases of 
private entities (105 cases) were more than number of cases of Government 
entities (91 cases), gross income in case of the Government entities 
(` 52,938.4 crore) was more than that of private entities (` 29,026.0 crore). 
However, the returned income and assessed income in respect of cases of 
private entities were more than that of Government entities.  
4.3.9.3 Receipt of foreign contribution 
Audit analysed the data in connection with receipt of foreign contribution in 
respect of Government and private entities, and the result is given in Table 4.22 
below:  
Table 4.22: Government and Private entity and activity wise Foreign Contribution 
Nature of 
activity 
Nature of 
Trusts/ 
Institutions 
Cases where 
entities received 
Foreign 
Contribution 
 Foreign 
Contribution 
(` in crore) 
Cases where 
entities did 
not receive 
Foreign 
Contribution 
Total 
no. of 
cases 
Number 
of cases 
(In per 
cent)
Education 
Government 5 19.2 5.8 21 26 
Private 12 19.4 195.2 50 62 
Medical Relief 
Government 2 15.4 3.6 11 13 
Private 2 13.3 64.9 13 15 
Relief of the 
poor 
Government 0 0.0 0.0 2 2 
Private 5 55.6 809.2 4 9 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
46 
Table 4.22: Government and Private entity and activity wise Foreign Contribution  
Nature of 
activity  
Nature of 
Trusts/ 
Institutions  
Cases where 
entities received 
Foreign 
Contribution  
 Foreign 
Contribution 
(` in crore) 
Cases where 
entities did 
not receive 
Foreign 
Contribution  
Total 
no. of 
cases  
Number 
of cases  
(In per 
cent) 
Religious  
Government  0 0.0  0.0  1 1 
Private  3 50.0  833.1  3 6 
General Public 
Utility  
Government  0 0.0  0.0  45  45  
Private  1 9.1  47.2  10  11  
Environment  
Government  0 0.0  0.0  4 4 
Private  0 0.0  0.0  0 0 
Political Party  
Government  0 0.0  0.0  0 0 
Private  0 0.0  0.0  2 2 
Total 30  15.3  1,959.00  166  196  
It can be seen from the above Table 4.22 that the Government entities had 
received foreign contribution of ` 9.5 crore whereas Private entities had 
received foreign contribution of ` 1,949.5 crore during the same period. 
4.3.9.4  Receipt of corpus donation 
Audit analysed the data in connection with the receipt of Corpus Donation in 
respect of government and private entities and result is given in Table 4.23 
below: 
Table 4.23: Government and Private entity and activity wise Corpus Donation  
Nature of 
activity  
Nature of 
Trusts/ 
Institutions  
Entities received 
Corpus Donation  
Corpus 
Donation  
(` in crore) 
No. of cases 
not 
receiving 
Corpus 
Donation  
Total no. of 
cases  
Number 
of cases  
In 
percent  
Education  
Government  2 7.7  41.9  24  26  
Private  10  16.1  196.7  52  62  
Medical Relief  
Government  1 7.7  218.0  12  13  
Private  2 13.3  126.7  13  15  
Relief of the 
poor 
 
Government  0 0.0  0.0  2 2 
Private  3 33.3  25.2  6 9 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
47 
Table 4.23: Government and Private entity and activity wise Corpus Donation  
Nature of 
activity  
Nature of 
Trusts/ 
Institutions  
Entities received 
Corpus Donation  
Corpus 
Donation  
(` in crore) 
No. of cases 
not 
receiving 
Corpus 
Donation  
Total no. of 
cases  
Number 
of cases  
In 
percent  
Religious  
Government  0 0.0  0.0  1 1 
Private  0 0.0  0.0  6 6 
General Public 
Utility  
Government  4 8.9  2,012.9  41  45  
Private  0 0.0  0.0  11  11  
Environment  
Government  0 0.0  0.0  4 4 
Private  0 0.0  0.0  0 0 
Political Party  
Government  0 0.0  0.0  0 0 
Private  0 0.0  0.0  2 2 
Total 22  11.2  2,621.5  174  196  
It can be seen from the above that the Government entities had received corpus 
donation of ` 2,012 crore (76 per cent  of total corpus donation) who were 
involved in general public utility activity. 
4.3.9.5 Exemptions granted to Government and Private Entities 
Audit analysed the data in connection with the activity-wise exemptions granted 
to the government and private entities under different Sections of the Act, and 
result is given in Table 4.24 below:  
Table 4.24: Activity wise exemptions granted to Government and Private entities  
Nature of 
Activity  
Nature of 
Trusts/ 
Institutions  
Exemptions 
granted under 
sub-Sections# of 
Section 10  
Exemptions 
granted under 
Section 11  
Exemptions 
granted under 
both sub-
Sections# of 
Section 10 and 
under 
Section 11  
Number 
of cases 
where 
data was 
not 
available 
with 
Audit  
No. of 
entity  
Amount 
(` in 
crore) 
No. 
of 
entity  
Amount 
(` in 
crore)  
No. of 
entity  
Amount  
(` in 
crore)  
Education  
Government  7  1,547.9  11  2,526.8  1  315.9  2 
Private  11  3,543.2  31  4,880.6  4  998.6  4 
Medical 
Relief  
Government  2  904.6  7  2,835.6  -  -  1 
Private  3  619.9  7  1,046.6  -  -  4 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
48 
Table 4.24: Activity wise exemptions granted to Government and Private entities 
Nature of 
Activity 
Nature of 
Trusts/ 
Institutions 
Exemptions 
granted under 
sub-Sections# of 
Section 10 
Exemptions 
granted under 
Section 11 
Exemptions 
granted under 
both sub-
Sections# of 
Section 10 and 
under 
Section 11 
Number 
of cases 
where 
data was 
not 
available 
with 
Audit 
No. of 
entity 
Amount 
(` in 
crore)
No. 
of 
entity 
Amount 
(` in 
crore) 
No. of 
entity 
Amount 
(` in 
crore) 
Relief of 
the Poor 
Government - - - - - - - 
Private - - 8 1,453.1 - - 1 
Religious 
Government 1 181.5 - - - - - 
Private 2 1,633.3 3 2,294.1 - - 1 
General 
Public 
Utility
 
Government 6 8,000.0 19 9,917.0 2 1,517.5 4  
Private 3 481.1 3 350.4 1 157.7 - 
Environm
ent 
Government - - 2 354.9 - - 1 
Private - - - - - - - 
Political 
Party
Government
 - - - - - - - 
Private - - 2 16,38.1 - - - 
Total 35 16,911.5 93 27,297.2 8 2,989.7 18 
#10(21), 10(23C)(iiiab) to (iiiad), 10(23C)(iv), 10(23C)(v), 10(23C)(vi), 10(23C)(via) 10(23D), 10(23FB), 10(25), 10(46)  
It can be seen from Table 4.24 above that the total exemptions of 
` 15,634.3 crore was granted in 39 cases relating to Government entities under 
Section 11 whereas exemptions of ` 11,662.9 crore was granted in 54 cases 
relating to Private entities in respect of top summary cases. 
4.3.9.6 Risk Analysis in summarily processed cases 
The Pr. DGIT(Systems) provided assessee-wise data of 6,89,01 1 cases in respect 
of the Charitable Trusts and Institutions pertaining to Income Tax Returns (ITRs) 
processed/assessed/rectified for AY 2014-15 to AY 2017-18 during the FY 
2014-15 to FY 2018-19. This data was analysed in respect of type of assessment, 
exemptions claimed and foreign contribution received and noticed that out of 
6.89 lakh cases, 6.30 lakh cases (91.4 per cent) were processed in summary 
manner whereas the ITD had completed scrutiny assessment in respect of 
0.25 lakh cases (3.7 per cent) and remaining 0.34 lakh cases (4.9 per cent) were 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
49 
relating to rectification/ re-assessment/appellate orders as shown in 
Appendix 4.5. 
Audit further analysed details of total number of cases and exemptions claimed 
and foreign contribution. The following Chart 4.7 depicts assessment, 
exemptions, foreign contribution wise distribution of total population: 
# Others include rectification cases, revision cases and cases of order giving effect to Appellate orders.
I
t can be further seen that out of total exemptions of ` 17,63,427.9 crore claimed 
by the Trusts/Institutions during aforesaid period, 73 per cent  (` 12,88,501.6 
crore) of exemptions was processed in summary manner whereas 20 per cent 
(` 3,60,724.2 crore) of exemptions were scrutinized by the Department and out 
of total foreign contribution of ` 36,899.6 crore received by the Trusts/ 
Institutions during the period, 76 per cent (` 28,081.5 crore) of foreign 
contributions was processed in summary manner whereas only 19 per cent  
(` 6,978.4 crore) of foreign contributions were scrutinized by the Department.  
Assessment year wise break-up of total cases based on type of assessment, 
exemptions claimed is given in Table 4.25 below: 
Table 4.25: Break-up of total population on the basis of AY, Assessment Type, Claim of Exemptions 
Assessment 
Type AY 2014 2015 2016 2017 TOTAL 
Summary 
cases 
No. of cases 1,34,450 1,50,534 1,65,214 1,79,707 6,29,905 
Percentage of total 
cases of the year 91.2 91.3 87.2 96.0 91.4 
Exemptions 
(` in crore) 2,09,377.6 2,35,646.0 1,55,245.7 6,88,232.2 12,88,501.6 
0
200000
400000
600000
800000
1000000
1200000
1400000
1600000
1800000
Total Summary Others# Scrutiny
6,89,011
6,29,905
33,892
25,214
₹ 17,63,427.9 crore
₹ 12,88,501.6 crore
₹ 1,14,202.1 crore
₹ 3,60,724.2 crore
₹ 36,899.6 crore 
₹ 28,081.5 crore
₹ 1,847.2 crore
₹ 6,970.9 crore
Chart 4.7: Assessment, Exemptions and Foreign Contribution wise total 
population 
No. of Cases Exemptions Foreign Contribution

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
50 
Table 4.25: Break-up of total population on the basis of AY, Assessment Type, Claim of Exemptions 
Assessment 
Type AY 2014 2015 2016 2017 TOTAL 
Percentage of total 
exemptions for the 
year 
78.6 59.4 37.8 99.8 73.1 
Scrutiny 
cases 
No. of cases 1,000 7,071 17,143 ^^ 25,214 
Percentage of total 
cases of the year 0.7 4.3 9.0 NA 3.7 
Exemptions 
(` in crore) 7,381.7 1,24,275.6 2,29,066.9 0.0 3,60,724.2 
Percentage of total 
exemptions for the 
year 
2.8 31.3 55.8 0.0 20.5 
Other cases@ 
No. of cases 12,033 7,266 7,195 7,398 33,892 
Percentage of total 
cases of the year 8.2 4.4 3.8 4.0 4.9 
Exemptions 
(` in crore) 49,541.8 36,917.3 26,083.1 1,660.0 1,14,202.1 
Percentage of total 
exemptions for the 
year 
18.6 9.3 6.4 0.2 6.5 
Total 
No. of cases 1,47,483 1,64,871 1,89,552 1,87,105 6,89,011 
Exemptions 
(` in crore) 2,66,300.0 3,96,838.9 4,10,395.6 6,89,892.2 17,63,427.9 
^^ Data of scrutiny assessment cases for AY 2017-18 was not available during the period of audit. 
@  Others include rectification cases, revision cases and cases of Order giving effect to Appellate orders. 
It can be seen from the above Table 4.25 that the number of cases of the 
Trusts/Institutions increased from 1.47 lakh to 1.87 lakh during AYs 2014-15 to 
2017-18 whereas total amount of exemptions claimed by these 
Trusts/Institutions during the same period increased from ` 2,66,300.0 crore to 
` 6,89,892.2 crore. Under summary assessment, there was an increase in the 
number of cases from 1.35 lakh to 1.65 lakh during the AY 2014-15 to 2016-17; 
however, the amount of exemptions claimed by the Trusts/Institutions 
decreased in respect of these cases from 
` 2,09,377.6 crore to ` 1,55,245.7 crore 
during this period. Further, under scrutiny assessment, there was an increase in 
number of cases from 0.01
 lakh to 0.17 lakh and the total amount of exemptions 
claimed by the Trusts/Institutions in respect of these cases increased from 
` 7,381.7 crore to ` 2,29,066.9 crore during the AY 2014-15 to 2016-17. Data on 
scrutiny assessment for AY 2017-18 was not available during the audit period. 
As a significant number of cases relating to the Trusts/Institutions are processed 
under summary manner in an automated environment, it is desirable that ITD 
systems are streamlined and robust enough so as to minimize the possibility of 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
51 
leakage of revenue and also to facilitate seamless services to the users. However, 
during examination of top summary cases, Audit came across number of issues 
relating to ITD systems along with other issues, which are discussed in the 
succeeding chapters. 
4.4 Conclusion 
Audit noticed that there was an increasing trend in number of Trusts/Institutions 
claiming exemptions from AYs 2014-15 to 2016-17, however number of 
Trusts/Institutions claiming exemptions slightly decreased for AY 2017-18.  
Audit further noticed that out of 6,89,011 cases pertaining to ITRs for AY 2014-15 
to AY 2017-18, 3.7 per cent  cases were assessed under scrutiny and 96.3 per cent  
cases were of other than scrutiny which were processed/rectified/ revised etc 
during FY 2014-15 to FY 2018-19.  
Audit noticed number of applications relating to registration/ approval of the 
Charitable Trusts/Institutions under Section 12AA registered an increase of 
128.2 per cent  during FY 2014-15 to FY 2017-18 whereas the number of 
registrations/ approvals granted during the same period registered an increase 
of 156.5 per cent .  
  

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
53 
Chapter 5: Systemic deficiencies/ effectiveness of provisions 
relating to the Trusts/Institutions  
In this Chapter, Audit attempted to ascertain whether there are 
lacunae/ambiguities/inconsistencies in the Act/ Rules/Circular relating to 
assessments of the Charitable Trusts/Institutions. Audit also attempted to 
ascertain the procedural and systemic deficiencies relating to registration of the 
Charitable Trusts/Institutions and deficiencies in IT systems. Results of 
examination by Audit of registration/assessment records/ information are 
discussed in the succeeding paragraphs. 
5.1  Systemic deficiencies viz. lacunae/ ambiguity /inconsistency in the Act 
/Rules /Circulars 
The Income Tax Act, 1961 (the Act) provides for exemption to Charitable 
Trusts/Institutions in accordance with the provisions of the Act and subject to 
certain conditions to be fulfilled by the Trusts/Institutions. Audit noted certain 
loopholes remaining 
 in the Act/Rules/Circulars in the form of ambiguity or lack 
of clarity in the provisions which may be misused causing loss of revenue. Audit 
has identified certain systemic issues/ambiguity in the Act/inconsistency in 
allowing exemption in 65 cases 29  as given in Table 5.1 below and discussed in 
the succeeding paragraphs of this Chapter.  
Table No. 5.1: Observations relating to systemic deficiencies in granting the benefits to 
the Charitable Trusts and Institutions under provisions the Act 
Sl. 
No.  
Nature of observation No of cases 
1 Lacunae in the Act with regard to educational Trusts/Institutions - 
2 Absence of Standard Operating Procedure/instructions / guidelines for 
examining the valuation aspects of transaction with related party - 
3 Provision for disallowing set-off of deficit of earlier year with current 
year income 5 
4 Absence of clarity in the provisions for deduction under Section 80G to 
corporates for amounts spent towards Corporate Social Responsibility 32 
5 Absence of provision regarding utilisation of specific purpose donation 
treated as corpus 1 
6 Provision regarding utilisation and repayment of borrowed fund 9 
7 Inconsistency in assessment while treating administrative and other 
expenses 1 
8 Absence of provision to restrict donations by a Trust to another Trust 
out of current years’ income 4 
9 Absence of provisions to consider long pending liability as income of 
the trust 1 
10 Absence of provisions in the Act regarding accumulation of fund 6 
                                                           
29  Involving revenue impact of ` 491.47 crore 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
54 
Table No. 5.1: Observations relating to systemic deficiencies in granting the benefits to 
the Charitable Trusts and Institutions under provisions the Act 
Sl. 
No. 
Nature of observation No of cases 
11 Absence of requirement to verify identity of the donors for detection 
of anonymous donation 6 
Total 65 
5.1.1 Lacunae in the Act with regard to educational Trusts/Institutions 
Providing affordable education to future generation is one of the important 
duties of a welfare state. In the ‘National Policy on Education (NPE) 1986, 
modified in the year 1992’, Government of India, stated30 that the 
commercialisation of technical and professional education would be curbed and 
an alternative system would be devised to involve private and voluntary effort 
in the sector of education, in conformity with accepted norms and goals. The 
NPE 1986/92 was replaced with ‘National Education Policy, 2020
31’, which 
stipulates32 that multiple mechanisms with checks and balances would combat 
and stop the commercialization of higher education and this will be a key priority 
of the regulatory system. The policy provides that all education institutions will 
be held to similar standards of audit and disclosure as a ‘not for profit’ entity and 
surpluses, if any, will be reinvested in the educational sector. It has also been 
mentioned
33 that the current regulatory regime has not been able to curb the 
commercialization and economic exploitation of parents by many ‘for-profit’ 
private schools. 
Private educational institutions having objects of both education and other limbs 
of charity as defined under Section 2(15), can claim exemption under Section 11 
after getting registration under Section 12AA. Low income (where annual 
income does not exceeds ` one crore
34) private educational institutions ‘existing 
solely for educational purposes and not for the purposes of profit’ can claim 
exemption under Section 10(23C)(iiiad). Private educational institutions, having 
no income limit, which are ‘existing solely for educational purposes and not for 
the purposes of profit’, can claim exemption under Section 10(23C)(vi) provided 
that prior approval from Pr.CIT/CIT has been obtained.  
Analysis of the provisions of Section 10 and 11 revealed that the conditions and 
requirements
 for educational institutions to claim exemption under Section 
10(23C) and 11 are almost similar but the educational institutions claiming 
exemption under Section 11 should be merely for ‘charitable purpose’ as defined 
30 Para 6.20 of National Policy on Education 1986, modified in 1992’  
31 Issued by the Ministry of Human Resource Development, Go vernment of India 
32 Para 18.12 of ‘National Education Policy, 2020’ 
33 Para 8.3 of ‘National Education Policy, 2020’ 
34 ` five crore as amended by Finance Act 2021 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
55 
under Section 2(15) whereas the educational institutions claiming exemption 
under Section 10(23C) should be ‘solely for educational purposes and not for the 
purposes of profit’. The Apex Court while adjudicating the issue of fee structure 
and other issues of private educational activities in the case of P.A. Inamdar & 
Others vs. State of Maharashtra & Others [2005], had advised the institutions to 
make a provision for reasonable surplus which should ordinarily vary from six 
per cent  to 15 per cent  for utilisation in the expansion of the system and 
development of education. The institutions were also advised to refrain from 
profiteering and accepting capitation fees.  
Further, the CBDT vide Circular No.14 of 2015 dated 17.08.2015 clarified the ‘Not 
for profit’ issue of the educational trusts covered under Section 10(23C)(vi) 
which inter-alia prescribes that – 
a) mere generation of surplus from year to year cannot be a basis for rejection 
of application under Section 10(23C)(vi) on the ground that it amounts to an 
activity of the nature of profit making, if such surplus is used for educational 
purposes. The surplus should be used ‘wholly and exclusively to the object for 
which it is established’.  
b) collection of small fees from students by way of application fee, examination 
fee, fee for issuing transfer certificate, subscription for library etc. cannot be 
termed as profit making activity. But these should not exceed the prescribed fees 
fixed by the State or Central Government and the institutions are barred from 
taking Capitation fee, directly or indirectly, in any form. 
From the comparative study of the provisions of Section 11 and Section 
10(23C)(vi), Audit noticed that there are additional restrictions for private 
educational institutions 
 covered under Section 10(23C)(vi) Such restrictions are 
given in Table 5.2 below: 
Table 5.2: Restriction imposed on Educational Trusts/Institutions covered under Section 
10(23C)(vi) 
Sl. 
No. 
Point of 
difference 
Educational Trusts 
under Section 11 
Educational Trusts under Section 
10(23C)(vi) 
1 Activity Apart from educational 
activity, the entity can 
engage itself into any 
charitable activity as per 
the Section 2(15) the Act 
The entity cannot involve any other 
activity apart from education. The 
soleness/ exclusiveness condition was 
imposed to make institutions focus more 
on educational activities. 
2 ‘Not for 
profit’ motive 
No such condition was 
imposed under Section 
11 
 ‘Not for profit’ condition was imposed. 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
56 
Table 5.2: Restriction imposed on Educational Trusts/Institutions covered under Section 
10(23C)(vi) 
Sl. 
No. 
Point of 
difference 
Educational Trusts 
under Section 11 
Educational Trusts under Section 
10(23C)(vi) 
3 Deemed 
application35 
of income 
The concept of deemed 
application is available 
as per explanation 2 to 
Section 11 
No benefit of deemed application is 
available. This was to ensure maximum 
utilisation of resources of the current 
year for education purposes. 
4 Capital Gain Exemption on Capital 
gain is available if net 
consideration is 
reinvested in another 
capital asset 
No such exemption on reinvestment is 
available. This was to ensure maximum 
utilisation of resources for education 
5 Corpus 
Donation 
Corpus Donation is not 
part of the income and 
thus exempted from the 
purview of application. 
No such exemption is available on corpus 
donation prior to 1.4.2020
36. This was to 
ensure maximum utilisation of resource 
for education and also to ensure that 
capitation fee was not charged from 
students for creating Corpus fund. 
6 Utilisation of 
Accumulation 
Accumulation can be 
utilized for any object i.e. 
for educational activity 
as well for other 
activities as mentioned 
in the Memorandum/By-
law of the 
Trusts/Institutions 
No such option is available. The 
Trusts/Institutions has to apply it only for 
educational activity. 
7 Unspent 
Accumulation 
Unspent accumulation is 
taxable in the 6
th year of 
accumulation. 
Exemption is lost if unspent accumulation 
is not utilized within maximum period of 
5 years.  
Thus, it can be seen from the above table that there are some specific 
restrictions for private educational institutions covered under Section 
10(23C)(vi) with the intent of checking the profit motive and safeguard of the 
interest of students. But educational Trusts/Institutions registered under 
Section 12AA and claiming exemption under Section 11 are not covered by such 
restrictions.  
Audit, however, noticed that there is no restriction in the Act for educational 
Trusts/Institutions from getting registered under Section 12AA and claim 
exemption under Section 11, if the entity has the objectives of both education 
and other limbs of charity as defined under Section 2(15). As a result, most of 
the private educational Trusts/Institutions get themselves registered under 
35 Deemed Application- If in the previous year the trust is not able to utilize 85 per cent  of its income due to the fact 
that such income has not been received or for any other reason, then the organization has an option to apply the 
income in the year of receipt or in the year, immediately following the year of receipt. 
36 The Finance Act, 2020 however clarified that corpus donat ion is also exempted from taxation under Section 
10(23C)(iv) to (via). 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
57 
Section 12AA (as shown in Table 5.3 below). Since there is no condition in the 
Act requiring a certain amount of work to be done in each area of activity, the 
Registering authorities have to allow such application for registration. 
With a view to ascertaining the number of high value (having gross income of 
` 50 crore or above) private educational Trusts/Institutions, which claimed 
exemption under Section 11 and 10(23C)(vi), Audit collected and analysed 
available data in respect of audited cases; and details are summarized in Table 
5.3 below: 
Table 5.3: Exemption granted to high value private educational Trusts/Institutions under 
Section 11 and 10(23C)(vi) 
High Value Private Educational 
Trust/ Institution claimed 
Exemption 
Total Cases Exemption Granted 
Number Percentage of 
total cases 
Amount 
(` in crore) 
Percentage 
of total 
exemption 
Section 11 153 78.46 15,944.64 70.89 
Section 10(23C)(vi) 42 21.54 6,547.42 29.11 
Total 195 100.00 22,492.06 100.00 
It can be seen from the above Table 5.3 that out of 195 high value private 
educational Trusts/Institutions, 153 cases (78.46 per cent) claimed exemption 
under Section 11 and the remaining 42 cases (21.54 per cent) claimed exemption 
under Section 10(23C)(vi). Further, out of total exemption granted of 
` 22,492.06 crore, ` 15,944.64 crore (70.89 per cent) pertained to exemption 
claimed under Section 11 and the remaining ` 6,547.42 crore (29.11 per cent) 
pertained to exemption claimed under Section 10(23C)(vi). 
Audit further analysed the Top 10 assessment cases in terms of gross income 
pertaining to private educational Trusts/Institutions, which claimed exemption 
under Section 11. Details are given in Table 5.4 below: 
Table 5.4: Gross income vis-à-vis exemption granted to Top 10 case of private educational 
Trusts/Institutions in terms of gross income which claimed exemption under Section 11 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of Assessee AY Gross Income 
(` in Crore) 
Exemption 
Granted under 
Section 11 
(` in Crore) 
1 K 1 Institute 2016-17 698.40 698.40 
2 S10 Trust 2015-16 684.79 684.79 
3 N8 Trust 2016-17 626.22 626.22 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
58 
Table 5.4: Gross income vis-à-vis exemption granted to Top 10 case of private educational 
Trusts/Institutions in terms of gross income which claimed exemption under Section 11 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of Assessee AY Gross Income 
(` in Crore) 
Exemption 
Granted under 
Section 11 
(` in Crore) 
4 S9 Committee 2015-16 604.41 604.41 
5 S9 Committee 2016-17 451.79 451.79 
6 V1 Foundation 2016-17 332.08 332.08 
7 V1 Foundation 2014-15 286.23 286.23 
8 T4 Institute 2016-17 270.79 270.79 
9 V2 Sangha 2015-16 258.80 242.01 
10 H1 Foundation 2016-17 249.90 233.75 
Total 4,463.41 4,430.47 
It can be seen from the above table that out of total gross income of 
` 4,463.41 crore, total exemption granted to Top 10 cases under Section 11 of 
` 4,430.47 crore pertained to seven private educational Trusts/Institutions. 
Further, in terms of gross income as well as exemption granted, K1 Institute 
(Refer para 6.10.3) was the highest and two assessees namely S9 Committee 
(Refer para 6.10.2) and V1 Foundation, were in the list of top cases in terms of 
gross income for two assessment years. 
Since there is no restriction regarding the profit motive under Section 11 of the 
Act as stipulated in Section 10(23C)(vi), most of the private educational 
Trusts/Institutions are claiming exemptions under Section 11. Further, it is 
pertinent to mention that as per the ‘National Education Policy 2020’, all 
educational institutions should be ‘Not for Profit’. However, provisions of the 
Income Tax Act are not fully in consonance with the intent of the Policy makers 
in the educational sector. Audit noted that Education is the subject matter of the 
Concurrent List. Efforts are required to be made by the concerned Ministries/ 
Departments of Government of India and the State Governments to arrive at a 
common strategy to ensure that the stated objective of the Union and State 
Governments to provide affordable quality education to all, is met 
Reply of the Ministry was awaited (February 2022). 
5.1.2 Inadequacy and ineffectiveness of certain provisions relating to Trusts/ 
Institutions 
The Act, read with various circulars and instructions issued by the CBDT, 
provided the conditions of admissibility of expenditure, deductions to be 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
59 
followed by the assessee. The Assessing Officers were expected to verify the 
compliance thereto during assessment proceedings. During the PA, Audit came 
across absence/inadequacy of certain provisions in the Act which allowed the 
Trusts/Institutions to take undue benefit and also affected the quality of 
assessment. The cases relating to deficiencies/loopholes are discussed in 
succeeding paragraphs: 
5.1.2.1 Absence of Standard Operating Procedure/instructions / guidelines 
for examining the valuation aspects of transaction with related party 
Section 13(1)(c) of the Act specifies that if the income or property of a trust or 
an institution is applied/used for the benefit of the related person(s) specified in 
Section 13(3) who may be the founders, trustee, manager, chief functionary, 
major donors, relatives of the founders or persons who have a substantial 
interest in the organization, the benefit of exemption under Section 11 would 
not be available to such Trusts/Institutions. Section 13(2) specifies the following 
benefits which would result in attraction of Section 13(1)(c), if made available to 
related person(s): 
(a)  if any part of the income/property is lent without adequate security; 
(b)  if any land/building or other property is made available 
 for the use 
without charging adequate rent or other compensation; 
(c)  if any amount is paid by way of salary/ allowance or otherwise out of the 
resources of the Trusts/Institutions for services rendered by the related party to 
such Trusts/Institutions and the amount so paid is in excess of what may be 
reasonably paid for such services; 
(d)  if the services of the Trusts/Institutions are made available without 
adequate remuneration or other compensation; 
(e)  purchase of share/security or other property for consideration which is 
more than adequate; 
(f)  sale of share/security or other property for consideration which is less 
than adequate; 
Although violation of provisions mentioned above would result in forfeiture of 
exemption of Trusts/Institutions, Audit noticed that there was no Standard 
Operating Procedure /instructions /guidelines for the purpose of determining/ 
examining the valuation aspect of the terms ‘adequate’ and ‘reasonable’ as 
referred to in Section 13(2) in case of transaction with related parties.  
Audit noticed that the payment of salary, bonus, commission or remuneration, 
interest and share of profit given to partners of Firm (who are in turn, related 
parties) are covered by Section 40(b) as well as Partnership Deed as per the 
provision of 184(1)(i) of the Act in case of Partnership Firms; however, these 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
60 
provisions are not applicable to Trusts/Institution s. Audit further noticed that 
the provision of Section 40A(2) of the Act regarding payments made to relatives 
as well as associates and the Transfer Pricing 37  provision under Section 92BA of 
the Act wherein the Arm’s Length Price (ALP) 38  is determined to obtain the fair 
market value of transactions with related parties w ithin India, defined as 
‘Specified Domestic Transaction’ (SDT), are also no t applicable to Trusts/ 
Institutions. During the Performance Audit, audit e xamined Income Tax Return 
Form ITR-7 applicable to Trusts/Institutions and no ted that Charitable Trusts/ 
Institutions are not liable for audit under Section  92E 39  and are not required to 
submit an audit report in Form-3CEB 40 , in case the entity has entered into any 
‘Specified Domestic Transaction’ (SDT). 
Audit observed that in the absence of 
 Standard Operating Procedure/ 
instructions / guidelines for determining/examining  the valuation aspects of 
transactions with related parties, the Assessing Of ficers do not have any 
systemic mechanism available for determining ‘adequacy’ and ‘reasonableness’ 
of transaction made with related parties, as referred to in Section 13(2).  
Audit further observed that in certain cases, altho ugh the assessee had utilised 
their income or property for the benefit of person specified in Section 13(3) 41 , 
the AOs did not levy tax on such amount of income o r property utilised for the 
benefit of the related persons. Issues relating to diversion of income and 
properties of the Trusts/Institutions to the related parties have been highlighted 
in para 6.4 of Chapter 6. 
Reply of the Ministry was awaited (February 2022). 
5.1.2.2 Provision for disallowing set-off of defici t of earlier year with current 
year income 
There was no provision in the Act, to disallow carr y forward of the excess 
expenditure over income that was derived from prope rty held for charitable or 
religious purposes to the subsequent assessment yea r. However, the Ministry 
has addressed this issue through the Finance Act 2021, by inserting explanation 
5 to the Section 11(1) with effect from 01.04.2022. 
                                                           
37  Transfer pricing can be defined as the value which  is attached to the goods or services transferred between related 
parties. 
38  “Arm’s length price” means a price which is applie d or proposed to be applied in a transaction betwee n persons 
other than associated enterprises, in uncontrolled conditions. 
39  Section 92E of the Act provides that every person who has entered into an international transaction o r specified 
domestic transaction during a previous year shall o btain a report from an accountant and furnish such report on 
or before the specified date in the prescribed form  duly signed and verified in the prescribed manner by such 
accountant and setting forth such particulars as may be prescribed. 
40  Form 3CEB is report from an accountant to be furni shed under Section 92E relating to international transaction(s) 
and specified domestic transaction(s). 
41  The person specified in Section 13(3) are the auth or of the trust or founder of the institution; any person who has 
made a substantial contribution to the trust or ins titution of amount exceeding ` 50,000; where such author, 
founder or person is a HUF; any trustee of the trus t or manager; any relative of any such author, foun der, 
substantial contributor, member, trustee or manager. 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
61 
Audit noticed five cases42 relating to AY 2016-17 involving tax effect of 
` 3.77 crore where Trusts/ Institutions were allowed to set-off of deficit of earlier 
financial year with the income of current financial year. Two cases are illustrated 
below: 
(i) In West Bengal, CIT(E) Kolkata, a private trust engaged in educational
activity filed return of income for AY 2016-17 at ` ‘Nil’ income. The case
was selected in the PA sample as ‘High Value’ case since the gross receipt
of the trust was ` 52.36 crore. The scrutiny assessment was completed at
an income of ` ‘Nil’ in December 2018. Audit noticed that the trust was
allowed ‘Excess application of income’ of ` 7.28 crore made during AY
2014-2015 as ‘Application of income’, during the scrutiny assessment for
AY 2016-17. Such carry forward of ‘Excess application of money’, from the
earlier year, resulted in assessed income of ` ‘Nil’ for the AY 2016-17. In
the absence of any specific provision in the Act, allowing the assessee to
carry forward ‘Excess application of income’, was irregular involving tax
effect of ` 2.17 crore. The DCIT (E), Circle – 1(1), Kolkata initiated action by
issuing notice under Section 148 to the assessee in March 2021. Further
details of action taken were awaited (February 2022).
(ii) In Maharashtra, under CIT(E), Mumbai charge, a private trust engaged in
educational activity, filed return of income for AY 2016-17 at ` ‘Nil’ income.
The scrutiny assessment was completed in December 2018, assessing loss
of ` 3.32 crore. The provisions of Section 11 of the Act allowed exemption
in respect of income derived from the property of the trust to the extent
it is applied towards objectives of the charitable trust and there is no
provision under Section 11 which provides for carry forward of losses. As
such, the determination of loss to the extent of `3.32 crore was not in
order. The mistake resulted in irregular assessment of loss, involving
potential tax effect of ` 1.13 crore.
Audit noted that the assesse had filed return of income after th e due date
of filing of return of income under Section 139(1) of the Act. Hence, the
determined loss was itself not in order in view of the provisions of Section
80 of the Act.
Thus, despite having no specific provision in the Act, the AOs are allowing set-
off of deficit of earlier year with current year’s income which was irregular. 
The issue of absence of provision disallowing set-off of deficit of earlier year with 
the income of current year, had also been pointed out in CAG’s earlier Audit 
Report No. 20 of 2013. In reply, the Ministry had submitted
43 to the PAC that the 
42 Maharashtra -3, Rajasthan -1 and West Bengal -1. 
43 Para 33 of 104th report (16th Lok Sabha) of July 2018 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
62 
provisions of law are based on utilisation of income towards charitable purposes. 
Therefore, no provision for treatment of deficit ha s been provided. However, 
Audit observed that the AOs were allowing set-off o f deficit of earlier year with 
the income of current year, in the absence of clarity. 
Reply of the Ministry was awaited (February 2022). 
5.1.2.3 
 Absence of clarity in the provisions for deduction under Section 80G 
to corporates for amounts spent towards Corporate S ocial 
Responsibility 
Under Section 135 of the Companies Act 2013 44, certain specified companies are 
required to spend at least two per cent  of the average profits of the immediately 
preceding three financial years on activities relat ing to Corporate Social 
Responsibility. The provision has been brought to s hare the burden of the 
Government in providing social services. The expenses are treated as application 
of income not allowable as deduction for computing taxable income of the 
assessee as it would result in subsidizing of aroun d one-third of such expenses 
by the Government by way of tax expenditure 45. Considering this, corresponding 
provisions for disallowance of such expenses under Section 46 37 was 
introduced 47 from 1 April 2015 but no such amendment was brought  under 
Section 80G.  
Audit noted that the Ministry of Corporate Affairs ('MCA') has clarified through 
General circular no. 01/2016 dated January 12, 2016  on the question of “What 
tax benefits can be availed under CSR?”, that “no s pecific tax exemptions have 
been extended to CSR expenditure per se. The Financ e Act, 2014 also clarifies 
that expenditure on CSR does not form part of busin ess expenditure. While no 
specific tax exemptions have been extended to expen diture incurred on CSR, 
spending on several activities like Prime Minister' s Relief Fund, scientific 
research, rural development projects, skill develop ment projects, agriculture 
extension projects etc., which find place in Schedule VII of the Companies Act 
48 , 
already enjoys exemptions under different sections of the Income-tax Act, 
1961.”  
                                                           
44  Section 135 of the Companies Act, 2013 provides tha t certain  specified companies shall spend in every financial 
year, at least two per cent  of the average net profits of the company made during the three immediately preceding 
financial years or where the company has not completed the period of three financial years since its incorporation, 
during such immediately preceding financial years, in pursuance of its Corporate Social Responsibility  Policy. 
Further, if a company is in default in complying with the provisions of sub-section (5) or sub-section (6) of Section 
135 of the Companies Act, the company shall be liable to a penalty. 
45  Para 13 of Circular 1 of 2015 issued by CBDT issue d on 21 January 2015 
46  Explanation 2 to the Section 37(1) provides that any expenditure incurred by an assessee on the activities relating 
to Corporate Social Responsibility referred to in section 135 of the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013) shall not be 
deemed to be an expenditure incurred by the assessee for the purposes of the business or profession.  
47  Explanation 2 to Section 37 (1)  inserted vide Finance Act 2014 w.e.f. AY 2015-16 
48  Schedule vii of the Companies Act specifies activi ties which may be included by companies in their corporate social 
responsibility policies 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
63 
Thus, this clarification issued by the Ministry of Corporate Affairs supports the 
view that deduction under section 80G is allowable on such contributions and 
deduction under section 80G cannot be denied on the basis of statutory 
obligation.  
From the comparative study to the provisions of the Companies Act, 2013 and 
the Income Tax Act, 1961, Audit noted that CSR expenditure under the 
Companies Act is mandatory for the specified companies; under the Income Tax 
Act donations/contributions to Trusts/Institutions including donations depicted 
as CSR expenditure of the companies is voluntary.  
Audit further noted that the expenditure incurred on CSR is not an allowable 
expenditure under Section 37 of the IT Act, whereas Section 80G, specifically 
mentions two instances viz. contributions towards Swacha Bharat Kosh and 
Clean Ganga Fund, where CSR expenditure is not allowable as deduction under 
section 80G. 
However, Audit noted that other than Swacha Bharat Kosh and Clean Ganga 
Fund, the Act is silent on contribution/donation out of CSR expenditure to Trusts 
especially In-house Trusts, funds, foundation etc. Audit observed instances 
where corporate entities carried out a major part of their CSR activities through 
their in-house foundations/trusts and claimed benefit of deduction under 
Section 80G. As expenditure towards CSR activities are not tax deductible under 
section 37 of the Act, in-house foundations/trusts were used as a mechanism for 
claiming 80G deduction having significant revenue implications. 
Further Audit noted that at the different appellate levels viz. CIT (Appeals)/DRP 
Bengaluru, ITAT Bengaluru in the case of Goldman Sachs Services Pvt. Ltd
49 has 
taken different stands with regard to allowing deduction under section 80G on 
donations out of CSR funds. 
In Maharashtra, Audit noticed in eight assessment cases that four Trusts/ 
Institutions received donation of ` 1,653.70 crore for incurring CSR expenses on 
behalf of their corporates and issued certificates under Section 80G to enable 
them to claim deduction while computing taxable income. The allowance of 
deduction under Section 80G for computing taxable income had revenue impact 
of ` 284.06 crore. Audit further noted that in Maharashtra, in other 10 cases, 
assessees had incurred expenses of ` 64.09 crore and claimed deduction of 
` 32.02 crore under Section 80G, which were disallowed by the ITD. Three cases 
are illustrated below: 
(i) In Maharashtra, CIT(E) Mumbai charge, a private trust engaged in multiple
charitable activities filed return of income for AY 2016-17 at ` ‘Nil’ income.
The receipt of the trust was ` 611.70 crore during the year. The scrutiny
49 IT(TP)A No. 2355/Bang/2019 – M/s. Goldman Sachs Services vs. JCIT  

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
64 
assessment was completed in December 2018 at an income of ` ‘Nil’. 
Audit observed that the assessee trust received donation amounting to  
` 611.65 crore during the year. This included donation of ` 584.36 crore 
received from ‘A’ Ltd. towards CSR expenses. Audit noticed that the 
assessee was also registered under Section 80G. This made the donors 
eligible to claim 50 per cent  of the donation as deduction under Section 
80G while computing tax liability. This had an effect of subsidising such 
expense by the Government to the same extent of reduction in tax liability 
of the company. Similarly, the assessee in AY 2015-16 received donation 
of ` 752.91 crore comprising donation of ` 729.17 crore received from ‘A’ 
Ltd. towards CSR activities. The absence of enabling provision to disallow 
the deduction under Section 80G to donor unlike to provisions brought in 
Section 37 had revenue impact of ` 225.49 crore for both AYs.  
(ii) In Maharashtra, CIT(E) Mumbai charge, a private trust engaged in multiple 
charitable activities filed return of income for AYs 2015-16 and AY 2016-17 
at ` ‘Nil’ income. The cases were selected in the sample as ‘High Value’ 
cases since the gross receipts of the assessee were ` 66.08 crore and  
` 55.89 crore for AY 2015-16 and AY 2016-17 respectively. The scrutiny 
assessments for AYs 2015-16 and AY 2016-17 were completed at an 
income of ` ‘Nil’ in December 2017 and December 2018 respectively. Audit 
observed that the assessee trust was created as a Corporate Social 
Responsibility arm of ‘B’ Ltd. and received donations of ` 63.59 crore and 
` 51.38 crore in the AY 2015-16 and AY 2016-17 respectively for CSR 
activities from the related corporate group concerns. The assessee is a 
trust registered under Section 80G enabling the donors to claim deduction 
of 50 per cent  of such donation. The absence of enabling provision to 
disallow the deduction under Section 80G to the donors, unlike the 
provision of Section 37, had aggregate revenue impact of ` 19.70 crore for 
both the AYs. 
 In AY 2015-16, the DCIT (E), Circle – 1, Mumbai shared the information 
regarding claim of deduction under Section 80G with the jurisdictional 
assessing officers of the donor companies, namely ‘B’ Ltd., ‘C’ Ltd, ‘D’ Ltd 
and ‘E’ Ltd, with the remark that the deduction under Section 80G was not 
an allowable deduction, as it was given under CSR. However, no such 
action was initiated by the AO in AY 2016-17.  
(iii) In Maharashtra, under CIT(E), Mumbai charge, a private trust engaged in 
multiple charitable activities filed return of income for AY 2016-17 at ` ‘Nil’ 
income. The receipt of the trust was ` 74.55 crore during the year and 
selected in the PA sample as ‘High Value’ case. The scrutiny assessment 
was completed in December 2018, assessing income at ` ‘Nil’. Further, 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
65 
returns of income of AY 2015-16 and 2017-18 were filed in September 
2015 and in October 2017 and the same were processed summarily, 
accepting the returned income at ` ‘Nil’. Audit observed that the assessee 
trust received donations amounting to ` 73.53 crore in AY 2016-17, 
` 13.87 crore in AY 2015- 16 and ` 136.85 crore in AY 2017-18 for CSR 
activities from the related corporate group namely ‘F’ Ltd. From the 
records of AY 2016-17, it was seen that the assessee, in lieu of this 
donation, granted receipt, mentioning the deduction available under 
Section 80G, to the donor, for their donation. The assessee is a trust 
registered under Section 80G of the Act, enabling the donors to claim 
deduction of fifty per cent  of such donation. The absence of an enabling 
provision to disallow the deduction under Section 80G to the donors, 
unlike the provision of Section 37 of the Act, had aggregate revenue impact 
of ` 38.76 crore. 
 In reply, the DCIT (E), Circle–1, Mumbai stated that the relevant 
information has been passed on to the concerned assessing officer of the 
corporate donors, for further necessary action.  
Besides, during regular compliance audit in Maharashtra charge, Audit noticed 
in 24 assessment cases that the specified companies incurred expenditure to the 
extent of ` 329.07 crore towards CSR and were allowed deduction of  
` 142.82 crore under Section 80G having revenue impact of ` 49.05 crore.  
The Income Tax Department 50  replied (August 2019) that provisions of Section 
37 do not restrict the deduction allowed under Section 80G.  
Audit noted that in reply to an audit observation illustrated at sl. no.(ii) above, 
the Assessing Officer shared the information with the assessing officers of the 
donor companies stating that the deduction under Section 80G was not an 
allowable deduction, as it was given under CSR, whereas in other cases the 
Assessing Officers replied that provisions of Section 37 do not restrict the 
deduction allowed under Section 80G. 
Thus it could be seen from the above that there is no clarity on allowing 
deduction under section 80G for donations out of CSR fund. As a significant 
amount 
51  is spent by the companies toward CSR activities it requires urgent 
attention of the Department.  
Reply of the Ministry was awaited (February 2022). 
                                                           
50  DCIT Circle - 6(2)(1), DCIT Circle - 6(2)(2), DCIT Circle - 8 (3)(1), DCIT (LTU) – 1, Mumbai, ACIT Circle – 2, Pune & DCIT 
– Circle – 1(2)(2) 
51  As per the 5 th  Annual report of MCA, the specified companies had spent ` 10,066 crore and ` 14,503 crore during 
FY 2014-15 and FY 2015-16 respectively towards CSR expenditure 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
66 
5.1.2.4 Absence of provision regarding utilisation of specific purpose 
donation treated as corpus 
As per Section 11(1)(d), any voluntary contributions received by a 
Trusts/Institutions, with a specific direction that they shall form part of the 
corpus, shall not be included in the total income of the Trusts/Institutions. 
However, there is no specific provision in the Act to treat the specific purpose 
donations as income, if the Trusts/Institutions later pass it on to other 
organizations without utilising them for the specific purpose for which they are 
received. In the absence of such a provision, the corpus of the trust is susceptible 
to misuse. One such case is discussed. 
In West Bengal, CIT(E) Kolkata charge, a private trust, engaged in the activity of 
‘Medical Relief’ filed return of income at ` ‘Nil’ income and the scrutiny 
assessment was completed in October 2018 accepting the ` ‘Nil’ income. Audit 
observed that the assessee was allowed exemption in AY 2016-17 amounting to 
` 1.45 crore under Section 11(1)(d). The assessee received this sum towards 
corpus donation. Audit further noticed that during the year, the balance of the 
corpus fund of the assessee of ` 3.29 crore had got reduced by ` 1.76 crore, 
with no corresponding increase in assets or application of fund. In response to 
the audit observation, the ITO Ward (E) – 1(4), Kolkata explained that the 
assessee had donated the fund to other entities for different purposes such as 
doctors’ remuneration, maintenance of hospital etc. Audit, however, did not find 
any mention of this in the relevant donation payment order. 
In reply, the ITO Ward (E) – 1(4), Kolkata stated (October 2020) that there is no 
provision in the Act to tax the corpus donation if it is not utilized as per direction 
of the donor. Audit however noted that this resulted in allowance of irregular 
exemption with a tax effect of ` 0.48 crore. 
The Ministry has accepted (March 2022) the audit observation and remedial 
action has been taken by passing order under Section 263/143(3) in 
September 2021. 
5.1.2.5  Provision regarding utilisation and repayment of borrowed fund 
CBDT, vide their circular No. 100 of 24.1.1973, clarified that the repayment of 
loan originally taken to fulfil one of the objects of the trust will amount to an 
application of income for charitable and religious purposes. This circular 
remained silent on treating the acceptance of loan as income. However, the 
Ministry has addressed this issue through the Finance Act 2021, by inserting 
explanation 4(ii) to the Section 11(1) with effect from 01.04.2022. 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
67 
Audit noticed nine assessment cases 52  relating to AYs 2014-15 to 2016-17 
involving tax effect of ` 38.68 crore where the assessees were allowed dual 
benefit in either of the two ways - (a) by treating the capital expenditure met 
from the borrowed funds as application of income, and subsequently, by 
allowing repayment of loan against the same borrowed funds, also as application 
or (b) by treating repayment of loan as application of income without treating 
the loan as income/receipt. Four cases of three assessees are illustrated below: 
(i)  In Odisha, CIT (Exemption) Hyderabad Charge, a private trust engaged in 
educational activity, filed return of income for AY 2015-16 at ` ‘Nil’ income. 
The scrutiny assessment was completed determining ` ‘Nil’  income in 
December 2017. Audit noticed that the assessee expended ` 119.58 crore 
towards acquisition of fixed assets. Audit further noticed from the balance 
sheet that the assessee availed bank loans of ` 133.77 crore during the 
financial year for acquiring the building and equipment. As cost of fixed 
assets acquired through borrowed funds does not qualify for exemption 
under Section 11, the claim of the same was to be disallowed. The omission 
resulted in excess refund of tax and interest of ` 6.72 crore.  
 The Ministry has accepted (March 2022) the audit observation and 
remedial action has been initiated by issuing notice under Section 148 in 
June 2021. 
(ii)  In Himachal Pradesh, CIT(E) Chandigarh charge, a private trust engaged in 
educational activity, filed return of income for AYs 2014-15 and 2015-16 at 
` ‘Nil’ income. The return of AY 2014-15 was rectified in March 2018 at 
` ‘Nil’ income and the scrutiny assessment for AY 2015-16 was completed 
in November 2017 at ` ‘Nil’ income. Audit noticed that during AY 2014-15 
and AY 2015-16, the assessee society had incurred expenditure of ` 5.99 
crore against the income of ` 8.13 crore. However, as per audit report in 
Form 10BB, the assessee society had claimed expenditure of ` 8.13 crore, 
which was inclusive of repayment of secured loans. Amount utilised for 
repayment of secured loans was not to be allowed as application towards 
the aims and objects of the assessee society as the assessee had not 
treated the loan as income on its receipt. Thus, the society had not applied 
or accumulated its income to the extent of 85 per cent  and there was a 
shortfall of ` 0.92 crore in application of income, which was required to be 
brought to tax. This resulted in under-assessment of income to the same 
extent involving tax effect of ` 0.37 crore. 
                                                           
52  Himachal Pradesh -2, Maharashtra -1, Odisha -3, Tamil Nadu -1 and West Bengal -2 
 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
68 
 The Ministry has accepted (March 2022) the audit observation and 
initiated remedial action by issuing notice under Section 148 in 
March 2021. 
(iii) In West Bengal, under CIT(E) Kolkata charge, a private trust engaged in 
educational activity, filed return of income for AY 2014-15 at ` ‘Nil’ income. 
The gross receipt of the trust during the year was ` 167.93 crore.  The 
return was summarily processed and further rectified under Section 154 in 
September 2016 at ` ‘Nil’ income.  Audit noticed that the assessee utilized 
borrowed funds of ` 80.50 crore for meeting capital expenditure and 
claimed it as application of income. Since repayment of loan is treated as 
application of income in view of the CBDT’s circular dated 24.01.1973, 
utilisation of borrowed fund for meeting capital expenditure should not be 
treated as application of income, as this would result in double benefit to 
the assessee. This resulted in irregular allowance of Capital Expenditure of 
` 80.50 crore as application of income, resulting in under-assessment of 
income of an identical amount, having tax effect of ` 27.34 crore.  
 The Ministry has accepted (March 2022) the audit observation and 
initiated remedial action by issuing notice under Section 148 of the IT Act 
in March 2021. 
The issue of absence of clarity  in provision regarding utilisation of borrowed fund 
had also been pointed out in the CAG’s earlier Audit Report No. 20 of 2013, and 
the Ministry,  in reply 53  had stated that loan originally taken has to be taken as 
income/ receipt before application is claimed against it. The Ministry further 
stated that the Board's instruction  vide circular No. 100 of 24.01.1973 has 
clarified the allowability of repayment in respect of the loan taken and there was 
no doubt that the same had to be shown as receipt before claiming application.  
Thus, due to absence of clarity in the Act regarding treatment of receipt and 
utilisation of borrowed fund, the assessees were allowed dual benefit by treating 
the capital expenditure met from the borrowed funds as application of income, 
and subsequently, by allowing repayment of loan against the same borrowed 
funds also as application. 
5.1.2.6 Inconsistency in assessment while treating administrative and other 
expenses 
Section 11(1)(a) provides that income derived from property held by the trust 
wholly for charitable or religious purposes will not be treated as income, to the 
extent to which such income is applied to such purposes in India.  
                                                           
53  Para 33 of 104 th  Report (16 th  Lok Sabha) of July 2018 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
69 
Hence, income which is not applied to charitable purposes is to be deducted for 
arriving at exempted income. 
In West Bengal, CIT(E) Kolkata charge, a private trust engaged in the activity of 
‘Medical Relief’ filed return of income for AY 2016-17 at ` ‘Nil’ income. The case 
was selected in the PA sample as ‘Top 200’ case, since gross receipt of the trust 
was ` 197.05 crore. The scrutiny assessment for AY 2016-17 was completed in 
December 2018 at ` ‘Nil’ income. Further, the returns of income for AYs 2014-15, 
2015-16 and 2017-18 filed at ` ‘Nil’ income and the scrutiny assessment were 
completed in December 2016, December 2017 and December 2019 respectively 
at ` ‘Nil’ income. Audit made a comparative study of the assessment orders for 
the AY 2014-15 to AY 2017-18, and noticed that a particular expenditure, under 
the head of ‘Administrative and establishment/other expenses’, had been 
treated as ‘application of income’, whereas in another AY, the same expenditure, 
having the same character, had not been treated as ‘application’. Audit noticed 
such inconsistencies in treating administrative and establishment expenses as 
application of income, in respect of 23 different kinds of expenditure, under the 
head ‘Administrative and other expenses’, during these four AYs. Audit 
examination of the assessment order for the AY 2015-16 revealed that the 
assessee did not contest such disallowance of ‘Administrative and establishment 
expenses’. Audit further noticed that the percentages of disallowance of 
administrative expenditure, towards application of income, were found to vary 
widely, from 100 per cent  to 4.18 per cent , for the AY 2014-15 to AY 2017-18. 
Audit noted that neither had any justification been offered nor had any 
instruction/circular of the CBDT been quoted in the assessment order for 
offering such differential treatment. 
In reply, the DCIT (E), Circle - 1, Kolkata stated (September 2020) that it had also 
noted such inconsistency in treating ‘Administrative and establishment/ other 
expenses’ as pointed out by audit. Later, in October 2020, the DCIT (E), Circle – 
1, Kolkata stated that while determining net income available for application, 
establishment and administrative expense had to be deducted from the total 
income to arrive at the net income. The reply of the Department is not tenable 
since administrative and establishment expenses could be of various categories 
and some part of which may be directly attributable for generation of income 
and some part may be towards charitable and religious purpose. 
Thus, due to lack of clarity in provisions of the Act regarding allowance of various 
expenses under the head administrative and establishment expenses for the 
purpose of determining application of income, differential treatment of such 
expenses was noted. Thus, this issue needs to be clarified so as to bring 
consistency in the treatment of the administrative and establishment expenses 
as application of income at the time of the assessment. 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
70 
The Ministry while accepting (March 2022) the audit observation stated that 
remedial action has been initiated by issuing notice under Section 148 in 
March 2021 for AY 2014-15, 2015-16 and 2017-18. For AY 2016-17, order under 
Section 263/143(3) has been passed in March 2021. 
5.1.2.7 Absence of provision to restrict donations by a Trust to another Trust 
out of current years’ income 
The provisions of Section 11 of the Income-Tax Act provide for exemption to 
trusts or institutions in respect of income derived from property held under trust 
wholly for charitable or religious purposes. The primary condition for grant of 
exemption is that the income derived from property held under trust should be 
applied for charitable purposes, and where such income cannot be applied 
during the previous year, it has to be accumulated in the modes prescribed and 
applied for such purposes in accordance with various conditions provided in the 
Section. Such accumulation is treated as deemed application of income. 
Provisions of the Act
54 prohibit donations of accumulated amounts to another 
trust or institution. However, currently there is no restriction on transfer of 
payments to other trusts out of current years’ income. Owing to this, there is 
likelihood of deemed application of 15 per cent being claimed by multiple trusts 
on the same fund. The Trust which received donation from assessee Trust could 
again pass the sum so received to other trusts and each Trust could claim 
15 per cent as deemed application. 
In Maharashtra, Audit noticed in four assessment cases that the Trusts/ 
Institutions received donations of 
` 203.29 crore. Of this, an amount of 
` 164.81 crore was transferred to another trust or institution by way of 
donations after claiming deduction of 15 per cent as deemed application. The 
recipient Trusts/ Institutions also transferred these amounts to another trust 
after claiming deemed application of 15 per cent. Two cases are illustrated 
below: 
(i) In CIT(E) Mumbai charge, a private trust engaged in multiple charitable
activities filed return of income for AY 2016-17 at ` ‘Nil’ income. The
receipt of the trust was ` 74.55 crore during the year, and this selected in
the PA sample as ‘High Value’ case. The scrutiny assessment was
completed in December 2018, assessing income at ` ‘Nil’. Audit noticed
that the assessee had received donation of ` 74.55 crore and claimed
` 47.43 crore as application towards object of the trust during the year.
Audit further observed that the application amount of ` 47.43 crore
included donations of ` 46.28 crore to another trust. Thus, the assessee
trust was virtually not doing any charitable work by itself and was donating
54 Explanation 2 to the Section 11(1) and Explanation to sub S ection (2) of Section 11 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
71 
to other trusts. Apart from this, the other trusts to whom assessee had 
donated would also claim 15 per cent as deemed application. This fact was 
test checked on a sample basis. In respect of two trusts, ‘G’ Foundation 
and ‘H’ Foundation, Audit noticed that they had claimed 15 per cent of 
total receipts as deemed application of income for AY 2016-17. The trust, 
‘G’ Foundation, again donated ` 10.72 crore to other trusts. As a result, 
each trust was claiming 15 per cent as deemed application by adopting this 
modus operandi and ultimately very little amount could be left at the end 
for actual application to charity work. 
(ii) In Maharashtra, under CIT(E), Mumbai charge, a private trust engaged in
multiple charitable activities filed returns of income for AYs 2015-16 and
AY 2016-17 at ` ‘Nil’ income. The cases were selected in the audit sample
as ‘High Value’ cases since the gross receipt of assessee were ` 66.08 crore
and ` 55.89 crore for AY 2015-16 and AY 2016-17 respectively. The
assessments were completed in December 2017 for AY 2015-16 and in
December 2018 for AY 2016-17, assessing income at ` ‘Nil’. Audit observed
that the assessee had received donation of ` 69.18 crore in AY 2015-16
and ` 55.89 crore in AY 2016-17, from ‘B’ Ltd and group companies and
claimed ` 68.86 crore and ` 55.00 crore, respectively, as application
towards object of the trust. Audit further observed that of the above
amounts, claimed to have been utilised towards object of the trust, the
assessee had given donations/ grants of ` 65.75 crore and ` 51.02 crore,
respectively, to 15 different trusts engaged in the activity of education and
other charitable works such as relief of the poor, medical relief etc. Thus,
it can be observed that the assessee trust was not doing any significant
charitable work by itself and was donating to other trusts. Apart from the
above, the other trusts to whom the assessee had donated could also have
claimed 15 per cent as deemed application.
In reply, the DCIT (E), Circle – 1, Mumbai (March 21), while not accepting
the observation, stated that there is no ban on transfer of payments to
other trusts out of current year income. There is no provision in the Act
which prohibits a trust from such transfer. The reply of the Department is
not acceptable, as the exemption is allowed for application of income of
the trust towards charity. Mere transfer of amount from one trust to
another trust without actual application defeats the very purpose of
allowing exemption to trust.
Thus, due to absence of specific provision, Trusts/Institutions were taking undue 
benefits through availing of the permissible accumulation of 15 per cent out of 
current year’s income by making a chain of multiple donations routed through a 
string of Charitable/Religious Institutions. This resulted in denial of charity to the 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
72 
beneficiaries and helps only in accumulation in the hands of Trusts/Institutions, 
which was not consistent with the intent of the Legislature.  
Reply of the Ministry was awaited (February 2022). 
5.1.2.8 Absence of provisions to consider long pending liability as income of 
the trust 
Section 12(1) provides that any voluntary contributions received by a charitable 
trust (except corpus donation) shall for the purposes of Section 11 be deemed 
to be income derived from the property held under trust. The Act does not 
provide inclusion of any income which was received by charitable trust in the 
guise of loan and subsequently the lenders have never demanded repayment of 
the loan from the trust. In such a case, even though the trust is an ultimate 
beneficiary from such loan but due to absence of enabling provisions to include 
such loan as voluntary contribution in the income of assessee, the income 
remained out of the ambit of total income of the trust. Such income would also 
be susceptible to misuse at the time of dissolution in determining the value of 
net assets. 
Audit noted that in Maharashtra, CIT(E) Mumbai charge, a private trust engaged 
in the activity of ‘Relief of the Poor’ filed return of income  for AY 2016-17 at 
` ‘Nil’ income. The assessee was selected as ‘High value’ case in the audit sample 
since the  gross receipt of the trust was ` 101.21 crore. The scrutiny assessment 
was completed in December 2018, assessing income at ` ‘Nil’. Audit noticed that 
the assessee had been consistently receiving unsecured interest free loans 
aggregating ` 417.00 crore since FY 2010-11 from a Mumbai based trust ‘I’. In 
the notes to accounts, the Tax auditor had made a remark that the trust had not 
paid the amounts on the due date and the lender had not demanded the 
amounts due. This indicated that the entire loan received as on 31 March 2016 
was evidently not a liability of the assessee, as it was never repaid by the 
assessee nor demanded by the lender. Hence, the entire outstanding loan was 
required to be treated as voluntary contribution under Section 12(1) and should 
have been included in the total income of the assessee. However, absence of a 
specific enabling provision under the Act, such as Section 41(1)55  for normal 
assessee, to include such income in the total income of the trust resulted in 
under-assessment of income of ` 327.00 crore (excluding loan of ` 90.00 crore 
received in the current year) involving revenue impact of ` 113.17 crore.  
Reply of the Ministry was awaited (February 2022). 
                                                           
55  Section 41(1) provides for taxing any amount benefit which was obtained by a person with respect to any loss, 
expenditure or trading liability incurred in any earlier Assessment Years 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
73 
5.1.2.9 Absence of provisions in the Act regarding accumulation of fund 
As per Section 11 of the Act, if the application of funds is less than 85 per cent of 
the total income, the Trusts/Institutions, in order to get exemption can 
accumulate funds for five years after filing Form 10 stating the purpose for which 
the income is being accumulated or set apart, and the period for such 
accumulation. However, the Act does not prescribe the limits of accumulation of 
funds. It was judicially held that56 carry forward of income up to 85 per cent 
under Section 11(2) should not be adopted on a routine basis, and if done, then 
the very purpose of Trust will be defeated. In fact, Section 11(2) providing for 
carry over up to 85 per cent is an exception and if it is done from year to year, 
the genuineness of the activities of the trust itself needs examination. 
The issue that the Act does not prescribe the limit of accumulation of funds and 
the trusts, without doing any charitable activity, are availing exemption by 
accumulating the maximum funds consistently year by year was also pointed out 
in the CAG’s earlier Audit Report No. 20 of 2013, and the Public Accounts 
Committee, recommended
57 that the Assessing Officer may carry out physical 
inspection of the activities of the Trust in cases where there was consistent and 
increased accumulation of income and the Ministry may bring a suitable 
amendment to the Act or evolve a suitable mechanism to ensure that first trusts 
are allowed accumulations consistently only as exceptions and secondly, the 
accumulated income is applied for the objectives of the Trusts/Institutions 
within a specified time frame. 
Audit noticed in six assessment cases
58 involving exemption of `23.74 crore that 
the trusts were availing exemption by accumulating the maximum funds 
persistently. Three cases are illustrated below: 
(i) In Maharashtra, CIT(E) Pune charge, a private trust engaged in the activity
of ‘General Public Utility’, filed return of income for AYs 2014-15 and AY
2015-16 at ` ‘Nil’ income which were processed under summary manner
at ` ‘Nil’ income and further rectified in March 2019 determining income
` ‘Nil’ for both the AYs. Audit noticed that the gross income of the assessee
were ` 1.02 crore and ` 1.16 crore for AY 2014-15 and AY 2015-16
respectively against which the assessee did not apply any amount for its
objects. The assessee, after setting apart 15 per cent, had accumulated
almost 85 per cent of the gross receipt under Section 11(2) in both the AYs.
ITO (E) Ward-1, Pune replied (February 2021) that the au dit objection was
not acceptable as the assessee had utilised the accumulated amount of AY
2014-15 and 2015-16 during AY 2019-20 and 2020-21 i.e. within five
56 CIT vs Sree Seetharama Anjaneya Veda Kendra [2008] 174 Taxm an 523 (Ker.) 
57 Para 23 of 104th Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) 
58 Delhi -2, Maharashtra -2 and Odisha -2 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
74 
succeeding years as per the provision of the Act. Further, remedial action 
regarding taxation of unutilized accumulated amount of ` 58.10 lakh 
pertaining to AY 2013-14 which was required to be taxed in AY 2019-20 
was proposed under Section 148. 
 The reply of the Department is not tenable as it is not specific to the Audit 
observation. AO in its reply merely provided the details of utilisation of 
accumulated amount within the stipulated five years, though the Audit 
observation was regarding non-utilisation of any amount out of the gross 
income of the assessee for AY 2014-15 and AY 2015-16 during the relevant 
previous years. The assessee, after setting apart 15 per cent , had 
accumulated the remaining 85 per cent  of the gross receipt without any 
utilisation towards its objects. Further, only after pointing out by Audit, AO 
had proposed remedial action regarding taxation of unutilized 
accumulated amount of ` 58.10 lakh pertaining to AY 2013-14 under 
Section 148 for taxation in AY 2019-20. Thus, allowance of accumulation 
upto maximum permissible limit of 85 per cent without any utilisation 
towards objects of the trusts and non-monitoring of its utilisation within 
stipulated period defeats the very purpose of charitable activities to 
beneficiaries.  
(ii) In Delhi, CIT(E) Delhi charge, a private trust engaged in the activity of 
‘General Public Utility’, filed return of income for AY 2016-17 at ` ‘Nil’ 
income. The scrutiny assessment was completed in December 2018 by 
accepting the returned income at ` ‘Nil’. Audit noticed that the gross 
income of the assessee was ` 0.82 crore against which the assessee did 
not apply any amount for its objects. The assessee, after setting apart  
15 per cent , had accumulated the remaining 85 per cent  of the gross 
receipt under Section 11(2).  
(iii) In Delhi, CIT(E) Delhi charge, a private trust engaged in educational activity, 
filed return of income for AY 2016-17 at ` ‘Nil’ income. The scrutiny 
assessment was completed in December 2018 by accepting the returned 
income at ` ‘Nil’. Audit noticed that the gross income of the assessee was 
at ` 3.27 crore (excluding an amount of ` 5,212 which was not received 
during the year) against which the assessee did not apply any amount for 
its objects. The assessee, after setting apart 15 per cent , had accumulated 
the remaining 85 per cent  of the gross receipt under Section 11(2).  
Thus, Audit observed that certain assessees did not carry out any charitable 
activity during the year and were taking undue benefit by accumulating 
persistently the maximum permissible amount under the Act. This resulted in 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
75 
denial of charity to the beneficiary which is contrary to the intention of the 
Legislature.  
Reply of the Ministry was awaited (February 2022). 
5.1.2.10 Absence of requirement to verify identity of the donors for 
detection of anonymous donation 
Section 115BBC(1) provides for taxation of anonymous donations in certain 
cases. Further, Section 115BBC(3) defines ‘Anonymous donation’ as a ‘Voluntary 
contribution’ referred to in Section 2(24)(iia), where a person receiving such 
contribution, does not maintain a record of the identity of the donors indicating 
their name, address and ‘other records as prescribed’.  
Audit noticed six assessment cases
59 involving tax effect of ` 2.26 crore where 
the Department did not verify genuineness of the donors and tax the anonymous 
donation(s) as per provisions of the Act. One case is illustrated below: 
(i) In West Bengal, CIT(E) Kolkata charge, a private trust engaged in the
educational activity, filed return of income for AY 2016-17 at ` ‘Nil’ income.
The scrutiny assessment was completed in December 2018 at an income
of ` 0.02 crore. Audit noticed that the trust had received donations
amounting to ` 1.38 crore, for which it had not mentioned the names and
addresses of the donors. Omission to bring this anonymous donation
under the tax net resulted in non-levy of tax, amounting to ` 0.63 crore
under Section 115BBC(3).
The Ministry has accepted (March 2022) the audit observation and
remedial action has been initiated by issuing notice under Section 148 in
March 2021.
Thus, Audit noticed that barring name and address, the Act does not specify any 
other information viz. PAN, other documents etc., to verify identity of the 
donors, which could be checked by the Assessing Officers, for establishing the 
donor’s identity during assessment. 
5.2 Procedural issues relating to grant of Registration/Approval 
5.2.1 Prior to creation of designated CIT (Exemption) charges in November 
2014, registration/approval was accorded by the jurisdictional CITs and records 
were maintained in the respective jurisdictional charges. Audit sought the 
data/records related to registration/approval of sample cases for the period of 
FY 2014-15 to 2018-19 from the Department to verify whether the prescribed 
procedures were being followed before according registration/approval.  
59 Maharashtra -2, Punjab -1 and West Bengal -3 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
76 
Details of cases furnished by the Department to the Audit are summarised in 
Table 5.5 below: 
Table 5.5: State-wise details of Registration/Approval granted for the period of FY 2014-15 
to 2018-19 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the State Cases Registered  Cases 
Produced 
Cases not 
Produced 
1 Andhra Pradesh & Telangana 33 19 14 
2 Odisha 12 0 12 
3 Maharashtra 104 71 33 
4 Karnataka & Goa 15 8 7 
5 West Bengal and NER 34 4 30 
6 Uttar Pradesh & Uttarakhand 28 60  0 28 
7 Bihar 4 61  0 4 
8 Jharkhand 0 0 0 
9 Gujarat 12 1 11 
10 Rajasthan 33 25 8 
11 Tamil Nadu 40 40 0 
12 Kerala 20 20 0 
13 Punjab, Himachal Pradesh, 
Haryana, Jammu 
36 27 9 
14 Delhi 28 0 28 
15 Madhya Pradesh & Chhattisgarh 26 15 11 
Total 425 230 195 
Out of the 425 cases, the ITD did not produce records relating to 194 cases  
(45.6 per cent ) which included eight cases pertaining to the audit sample of ‘top 
200 assessees’. Data/records were not furnished in five States 62  by the 
Department. In respect of Odisha State, though the data relating to 
registration/approval of cases was provided but the relevant records were not 
produced to Audit.  
In Delhi, CIT (Exemption), Delhi charge replied that no such list was maintained. 
In Uttar Pradesh, the CIT (E), Lucknow charge replied that no manual records 
were being maintained. In Karnataka, CIT (E), Bengaluru charge replied that the 
registration records prior to FY 2015-16 had been weeded out. In West Bengal, 
CIT (E), Kolkata charge stated that grant of approval of registrations was outside 
the purview of Audit. In Gujarat, CIT (E), Ahmedabad charge stated that due to 
shifting to the new premises and paucity of space therein, requisitioned folders 
pertaining to FY 2016-17 could not be traced out since they were very old. 
Thus, where no records or very few records were produced, Audit could not 
verify whether all conditions viz.  the procedure followed for filing the 
applications; the time taken in disposal of applications; whether proper enquiry 
                                                           
60  As per Pr. DGIT (Systems) data 
61  As per Pr. DGIT (Systems) data 
62  Delhi, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Bihar and Jharkhand 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
77 
had been made regarding existence of the Trusts/Institutions and genuineness 
of their activities or whether the assessees were given opportunity in cases 
where registrations/approvals were refused; were complied with regard to 
registration/approval of the Trusts/Institutions. 
In a test check of registration/approval records of 230 cases where records were 
produced, Audit noticed deficiencies in 120 cases such as delay in grant of 
registration/ approval, irregular grant of registration, grant of 
registration/approval without submission of prescribed documents, grant of 
registration without verification, non-inclusion of dissolution clause in trust deed 
and procedural lapses in approval under Section 80G, etc. Table 5.6 gives an 
overview of the audit findings on issues related to grant of registration/approval: 
Table 5.6: Observations on Procedural issues relating to grant of registration/Approval 
Sl. No. Nature of observation No. of cases 
1 Delay in grant of Registration/Approval 4 
2 Irregular grant of Registration 1 
3 Grant of Registration/Approval without submission of prescribed 
documents 48 
4 Grant of Registration without verification 15 
5 Grant of Approval to Trusts/Institutions whose instruments have 
no dissolution clause or inadequate dissolution clause 42 
6 Procedural lapses in approval under Section 80G  10 
Total 120 
Detailed audit findings in this regard are discussed in the succeeding paragraphs.  
5.2.2 Delay in grant of Registration/Approval 
Section 12AA of the Act and Rule 11AA(6) of the Income Tax Rules provides 
 that 
the competent authority shall, on receipt of application for registration/ approval 
under Section 12AA and Section 80G(5)(vi), pass an order, granting or refusing 
registration before the expiry of six months from the end of the month in which 
the application was made. CBDT vide their instruction No. 16 of 2015 had 
directed all the CsIT(E) to adhere to the time limit for registration process and 
the CCIT(E) to monitor adherence to the prescribed time limit and initiate 
suitable administrative action in case of laxity.  
In Maharashtra, CIT(E) Pune charge, Audit noticed in the four registration cases 
that the Department had not granted approval within prescribed period of  
six months and there was delay ranging from one day to 75 days in granting 
approval under Section 80G(5)(vi). This issue also featured in the earlier 
Performance Audit Report No. 20 of 2013. In response, the Ministry had stated 
63  
that registration/approval would be granted using online system through the 
launch of ‘Exemption Module’ of the new Income Tax Business Application 
                                                           
63  Para 10 of 104 th  Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
78 
(ITBA). However, Audit noted the delay in granting approval has continued to 
occur.  
Reply of the Ministry was awaited (February 2022). 
5.2.3 Irregular grant of Registration 
Section 12AA provides for the procedure to be followed for grant of registration 
to a trust or institution. Under Section 12AA, the Commissioner is required to call 
for documents and information and hold enquiries regarding the genuineness of 
the trust or institution. After his satisfaction about the charitable or religious 
nature of the objects and genuineness of the activities of the trusts or institution, 
he shall pass an order in writing either granting or refusing registration. Further, 
the Commissioner may accord approval
64 to any gratuity fund which, in his 
opinion, complies with the requirement of the condition provided65 and may at 
any time withdraw such approval if, in his opinion the circumstances of the fund 
ceased to warrant the continuance of the approval.  
In Andhra Pradesh, CIT(E) Tirupati charge, during verification of registration 
records of an assessee, dealing in pension and gratuity fund, a private trust 
selected as ‘Top 200’ case in the PA sample having gross receipt of ` 610.91 crore 
for AY 2016-17, Audit noticed that registration was granted under Section 12AA 
instead of approval of pension and gratuity trust under the Fourth Schedule of 
the Act  
The DCIT(E), Vijayawada, replied (June 2020) that the assessee was granted a 
valid registration under Section 12A by the CIT(E), therefore, the exemption 
cannot be denied.  
The reply is not tenable as the conditions/objectives stipulated for registration 
under 12A are not relevant to the gratuity trust as the approval for pension and 
gratuity fund should be accorded according to the Fourth Schedule of the Act.  
Reply of the Ministry was awaited (February 2022) 
5.2.4  Grant of Registration/Approval without submission of prescribed 
documents 
The Trusts/Institutions seeking registration/approval under Section 12AA/ 
80G(5)(vi)/10(23C) shall submit application in the prescribed form
66  along with 
documents to the approving authority. The concerned authority shall after 
making proper enquiry and satisfying himself about the objects and genuineness 
of the activities of the Trusts/Institutions, grant registration/ approval.  
64 under Rule 2 of Part ‘C’ of the fourth schedule of the Incom e Tax Act 
65 under Rule 3 of Part ‘C’ of the fourth schedule of the Incom e Tax Act 
66 Form 10A under Rule 17A and Form 56 & Form 56D under Rule 2C a nd rule 2CA 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
79 
In Maharashtra, CIT(E) Pune Charge, Audit noticed in 48 cases that the 
prescribed documents such as Form 10A, Form 10G, copies of annual accounts, 
Trust Deed, etc. were not available on record in the relevant files produced to 
Audit. Six such cases are given in Table 5.7 below: 
Table 5.7: Details of cases where documents were not available 
Sl. 
No. 
Assessee Activity Registration/ 
approval 
under Section 
Date of 
registration
/ approval 
Documents not 
available 
AY Gross 
income 
(` in 
crore) 
1 A 3 Sangh Others 12AA  17.08.2016 Form 10A, copies 
of Accounts, Trust 
deed 
2014-15 0.34 
2 S11 Institute * 12AA  19.06.2017 Form 10A, copies 
of Accounts, Trust 
deed 
2016 -17 3.17 
3 S3 Mandal * 12AA  05.01.2017 Form 10A, Audited 
Accounts, Trust 
deed 
2015-16  0.39 
4 U1 Sanstha Education 80G(5)(vi) 29.09.2015 Form 10G, copies 
of Accounts, Copy 
of registration 
under Section 
12AA/ 10(23C) 
2014-15 1.82 
5 K2 Institute Education 80G(5)(vi) 08.05.2017 Form 10G, copies 
of Accounts, Copy 
of registration 
under Section 
12AA/ 10(23C) 
2016 -17 83.69 
6 N3 Institute Others 80G(5)(vi) 07.09.2016 Form 10G, copies 
of Accounts, Copy 
of registration 
under Section 
12AA/ 10(23C) 
2016 -17 8.40 
* Details could not be verified by Audit 
Three cases are illustrated below: 
(i) In Maharashtra, CIT (E) Pune charge, in the case of a trust, engaged in
educational activity having gross income of ` 83.69 crore in AY 2016-17,
the approval was granted in May 2017 under Section 80G(5)(vi). Audit
observed that the requisite documents viz. Form 10G, copies of accounts
and copy of registration under Section 12AA/10(23C) were not placed on
record.
(ii) In Maharashtra, CIT (E) Pune charge, in the case of a trust, e ngaged in
educational activity having gross income of ` 3.17 crore in AY 2016-17, the
registration was granted in June 2017 under Section 12AA(1)(b)(i). Audit
observed that the requisite documents viz. Form 10A, Trust deed and
copies of accounts were not placed on record.
(iii) In Maharashtra, CIT (E) Pune charge, Audit noticed in the case of  a trust,
engaged in educational activity having gross income of ` 1.82 crore in AY
2014-15 that approval was granted in September 2015 under Section

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
80 
80G(5)(vi) read with Rule 11AA. The requisite documents viz.  Form 10G, 
copies of accounts, copy of registration under Section 12AA/ 10(23C) for 
the said approval were not available on record. 
Thus, registration/ approval under Section 12AA/80G(5)(vi) in certain cases 
seem to have been granted by the Department without following its own 
prescribed set of documents, as relevant documents were not found available 
on records produced to Audit. 
Reply of the Ministry was awaited (February 2022). 
5.2.5  Grant of Registration without verification 
A trust has to register itself with the concerned authority for claiming 
exemptions under Section 11 of the Act. As per Section 12AA, the approving 
authority is required to call for documents and information from the assessee 
and hold enquiries regarding the genuineness of the trust. Para 2.8 (Point no. iii) 
of Chapter 5 of the Manual of Office Procedure (MOP), Volume II (Technical) of 
the ITD also prescribes 
 verification of actual existence of the entity before grant 
of registration. Such verification should be made either by sending a letter 
seeking its compliance or by local enquiry. After the approving authority is 
satisfied about the charitable or religious nature of the objects and genuineness 
of the activities of the trust, he/she shall pass an order in writing either granting 
or refusing registration. 
Audit noticed that in 15 cases 
67  registrations were granted either without field 
enquiry/verification report or field enquiry was stated to be carried out but no 
such reports were available on records. One case is illustrated below: 
In Maharashtra, CIT (E) Pune charge, a private trust was granted registration 
under Section 12AA(1)(b)(i) of the Act in July 2015. Audit noticed that though 
the enquiry for verification of existence and genuineness of activities was carried 
out by the ITO (E), Aurangabad and stated to be submitted his report to the JCIT 
(E), Aurangabad, the said report was not placed on record. 
Thus, in the absence of the relevant documents, Audit could not ascertain as to 
how the Approving Authority, before granting the registration under Section 
12AA, satisfied itself about the existence and genuineness of the activities of the 
Trust. 
Reply of the Ministry was awaited (February 2022). 
                                                           
67  Andhra Pradesh and Telangana – 6; Maharashtra – 9 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
81 
5.2.6 Grant of Approval to Trusts/Institutions whose instruments have no 
dissolution clause or inadequate dissolution clause 
A charitable trust may voluntarily wind up its activities and dissolve or may also 
merge with any other non-charitable institution, or may convert into a non-
charitable organisation. In such cases, there was no clarity in the law as to how 
the assets of such charitable institution shall be charged to tax.  
The issue of non-inclusion of dissolution clause in the Trust Deed had also 
featured in the earlier Performance Audit Report No. 20 of 2013. The Ministry, 
in its submission to the PAC 68 , had stated that the audit observation was 
circulated amongst concerned officers, for compliance.  
The PAC (2015-16) viewed that in order to ensure that in case of dissolution of a 
trust, its net assets are utilized for the purpose for which the trust was originally 
founded and not benefit the founders of the trust or his/her family Member 
relatives etc. the Ministry should henceforth insist on inclusion of 'Dissolution 
Clause' in the Trust Deed compulsorily while registering trusts under  
Section 12 AA uniformly. The Ministry may also consider incorporating suitable 
provisions in the Income Tax Act, 1961 so as to ensure the same. 
In pursuance to this, Section 115TD 
69  was inserted in the Act, which provides for 
levy of additional income tax in case of conversion into, or merger with, any form 
which is not eligible for grant of registration under Section 12AA or on transfer 
of assets of a charitable Trust/Institution on its dissolution to a non-charitable 
Trust/Institution. Further, Para 2.7(viii) of Chapter 5 of the MOP (Volume-II) of 
the ITD, inter alia , provides that in case of dissolution of a trust, its net assets, 
after meeting all its liabilities, should not revert to its founder members, 
directors, donors etc., but shall be used for its objects. Para 2.8(ii) provides that 
the instrument of creation should be perused, to find out any violations of the 
conditions mentioned in para 2.7 (supra).  
It is, thus, imperative on the part of the ITD to ensure the presence of the 
prescribed dissolution clause in the deed/memorandum of association/other 
instruments of creation, before grant of approval/registration. 
Audit noticed that in 42 cases 
70  there was no dissolution clause in the 
instrument of creation of the trust, or the dissolution clause was not framed in 
terms of the instructions contained in the MOP. The deficiencies noticed in 
respect of three cases are illustrated below:  
                                                           
68  Para 4 of Part II of 27th Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) 
69  inserted by the Finance Act, 2016 with effect from 1st June 2016 
70  Kerala - 2, Maharashtra - 9, Odisha - 1, Punjab - 2, Tamil Nadu - 3 and West Bengal – 25. 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
82 
(i) In Maharashtra, CIT(E) Pune charge, Audit observed in respect of  a trust
engaged in educational activities the registration was granted in August
2017 under Section 12AA(1)(b)(i). Audit examination revealed that there
was no dissolution clause in the trust deeds. Also, the trust deed did not
contain a clause regarding merger or conversion of trust and its
application/use of net assets after meeting all its liabilities. Further, no
resolution and affidavit regarding dissolution were found to be obtained
from the trustees. This showed that the registration was granted to the
trust without proper verification of the trust deed.
(ii) In Tamilnadu, CIT(E) Chennai charge, the assessee, a private trus t engaged
in educational activity, and selected in the PA sample as ‘High Value’ case
having gross receipt of ` 85.37 crore for AY 2016-17, was registered under
Section 12AA. In the trust deed, regarding the procedure of dissolution, it
was stated that ‘if for any reason, this trust fails, the trust properties and
funds shall revert to the founders and be dealt with as this estate in
accordance with intestate or testamentary, successions as the case may
be, to their estate’. The total corpus including the accumulated surplus of
the trust as on 31.03.2016 was ` 11.92 crore. Thus, the dissolution clause
in trust deed was not in conformity with para 2.7(viii) of Chapter 5 of the
MOP and the trust was granted registration without proper verification of
trust deed by the Department.
(iii) In Kerala, Pr. CIT(E) Kochi charge, a private trust engaged in educational
activity, was selected in the PA sample as ‘High Value’ case since the gross
receipt of ` 53.82 crore for AY 2016-17. Audit noted from the trust deed
that a clause had been included to the effect that ‘the dissolution shall be
dealt with by the approval of the Settlers, with the consent of the Patron.
Thus, the dissolution clause in the trust deed was not in conformity with
para 2.7(viii) of Chapter 5 of the MOP and the trust was granted
registration without proper verification of trust deed. Audit further noted
that the total corpus fund as on 31.03.2016 was ` 93.39 crore.
The DCIT (E), Trivandrum replied (March 2020) that the re gistration was
granted by the CIT (Exemption) after verification of the objective of the
trust and the AO could not deny the exemption under Section 11 on the
basis of a clause upon which the registration was granted by a superior
authority.
The reply of the Department is not acceptable since inclusion of the
prescribed dissolution clause in the deed/memorandum of association/
other instruments of creation, before grant of approval/registration was
not ensured by the CIT (Exemption). Further, the AO should have brought

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
83 
to the notice of CIT(E) the shortcomings noticed in the requisite dissolution 
clause. 
Audit noted that instances of the irregularity regarding non-incl usion of 
dissolution clause in the trust deed or dissolution clause not in conformity 
with the manual of office procedure of the Department have continued to 
occur and the concerned Trust/Institution continued to receive the benefit 
of exemptions every year. 
Reply of the Ministry was awaited (February 2022). 
5
.2.7 Procedural lapse in approval under Section 80G 
As per Rule 11AA of the Income Tax Rules, 1962 (the Rules), application for 
approval of any institutions or funds under Section 80G(5)(vi) shall be submitted 
in Form No. 10G and accompanied by the following documents, namely 
(i) Copy of registration granted under Section 12AA or copy of notifica tion
issued under Section 10(23) or 10(23C);
(ii) Notes on activities of institution or fund since its inception or during the
last three years, whichever is less; and
(iii) Copies of accounts of the institution or fund since its inception or during
the last three years, whichever is less.
In Rajasthan, CIT(E) Jaipur charge, in 10 cases the application for registration 
under Section 12A and for approval under Section 80(G)(5)(vi) were filed on 
same date. Audit observed that the Department granted registration and 
approval on the same date. Thus, the procedure laid down in Rule 11AA for 
approval under Section 80(G) was not adhered to.  
The ITO (HQr), O/o the CIT (E), Jaipur stated that although Rule 11AA requires 
the above-mentioned documents yet in the interest of expeditious disposal of 
applications, the sanctioning authority may condone the deficiency in case of 
simultaneous applications because the approval under Section 80G(5)(vi) would 
in any case be conditional upon the grant of registration under Section 12A. 
Further, it was also mentioned that the simultaneous processing of Form 10A 
and 10G ensure a closer examination of the applicant and also save time both of 
the Department and the applicant.  
The reply is not tenable as AO did not strictly follow the prescribed procedure 
under Rule 11AA for the granting the approval under Section 80G. Further, there 
is no provision in the Act to condone the deficiency in case of documents needed 
to be provided as per Rule 11AA.  
Reply of the Ministry was awaited (February 2022). 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
84 
5.3 Issues relating to ITD systems 
Audit noted certain deficiencies relating to ITD systems such as lack of adequate 
validation and checks to match the data/information relating to 
registrations/approvals of the Trusts/Institutions while returns were processed 
in summary manner and absence of necessary information in the Auditor’s 
Report in 91 cases as summarised in Table 5.8 below: 
Table No. 5.8: Observations relating to ITD systems 
Sl. 
No. 
Nature of observation No of 
cases 
Tax effect 
1 Issues relating to selection criteria under Computer Aided 
Scrutiny Selection (CASS) 17 - 
2 Non verification of the registration details during processing 
of Return of Income 52 - 
3 Issues relating to processing of ITRs in the IT system 12 - 
4 Exemptions claimed but registration status under Section 
12AA not available - - 
5 Foreign contribution received but registration status not 
available - - 
6 Invalid date of registration/approval - - 
7 Important information not currently captured in Return of 
income (ITR-7) - - 
8 Information on Income of the Trusts/Institutions in Audit 
Report - - 
9 Corpus donations with specific purpose 7 - 
10 Allowance of deemed application in the subsequent 
assessment year 
3 2.53 
Total 91 2.53 
5.3.1 Issues relating to selection criteria under Computer Aided Scrutiny 
Selection (CASS) 
Every year, cases are being selected for scrutiny under Computer Aided Scrutiny 
Selection (CASS) on the basis of certain selection criteria. A list of such cases is 
intimated by the Principal Director General of Income Tax (Systems) to the 
jurisdictional authorities concerned for further scrutiny assessment process.  
In Karnataka, Audit noticed from the selection criteria under CASS for the 
AY 2015-16 and AY 2016-17 that out of the 571 sample cases selected, 37 cases 
were selected applying the criteria Form 10/10B ‘not filed’ or ‘filed after due 
date’. Audit further observed that the due date of filing of Form 10/10B was 
extended. Audit examination revealed that out of these 37 cases, the assessees 
had filed the said Forms within the due date of filing of return in 17 cases
71 
(45.94 per cent). Further, out of the 17 cases, no addition to income returned 
71 three cases in AY 2015-16 and 14 in AY 2016-17 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
85 
was made in respect of 16 cases (94 per cent ). The error was occurred due to not 
capturing the revised due date of filing of return by the IT system which 
adversely affected the efficacy of the selection criteria.  
Audit noted that due to incorrect capture of data required for selection criteria 
in CASS, several of cases were incorrectly selected for scrutiny by ITD system.  
Thus, to that extent, there is a risk of corresponding potential cases escaping 
selection of scrutiny assessment, due to the constraint of human resources 
available for scrutiny assessment. 
Reply of the Ministry was awaited (February 2022). 
5.3.2 Non verification of the registration details during processing of Return 
of Income 
Section 12A of the Act makes it mandatory for charitable trusts to get 
themselves registered for claiming exemptions under Section 11. The 
exemptions shall apply in relation to the income of a trust or institution from the 
assessment year (AY) immediately following the financial year in which the 
application is made by the trust or to any AY for which the proceedings are 
pending before the Assessing Officer (AO) as on the date of such registration. 
Further, the second proviso to Section 12A(2) applicable from 01.10.2014 
provides that no action under Section 147 shall be taken by the AO for any 
preceding AY, only for non-registration of such trusts or institutions for the said 
AY.  
Similarly, the first proviso of Section 10(23C) makes it mandatory for the fund or 
trust or institution or university or other educational institution or hospital or 
other medical institution referred to in sub-clause (iv) or sub-clause (v) or sub-
clause (vi) or sub-clause (via), under the respective sub-clauses, to get 
themselves registered for claiming exemptions under Section 10(23C). 
Audit noticed in 42 assessment cases 
72  that although the assessees did not 
mention their registration details under Section 12A/10(23C) of the Act in return 
of income, exemption of ` 44.82 crore was allowed during returns processed 
summarily, in contravention of the aforesaid provisions of the Act. Since the 
Registration particulars were not available in the ITRs filed, Audit could not verify 
the applicability of exemptions in these cases. 
Audit further noticed in 10 assessment cases 
73  involving tax effect of ` 2.94 crore 
where the assessees claimed exemptions for the years together prior to its 
registration or having no registration under the Act and the same was allowed 
by the Department.  
                                                           
72  Gujarat – 2, Maharashtra - 25, Punjab – 3, Karnataka-11 and Tamil Nadu - 1 
73  Andhra Pradesh - 2, Bihar - 1, Jharkhand - 1, Maharashtra -3 and Tamil Nadu - 3 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
86 
Three cases are illustrated below: 
(i) In CIT(E), Chandigarh charge, a private trust engaged in the activity of ‘relief
of the poor’ (as per return of income), filed return of income for AYs 2014-15
and 2015-16 at ` ‘Nil’ income. The returns were processed summarily after
allowing exemption for ` 14.29 crore (` 6.97 crore for A.Y 2014-15 and
` 7.32 crore for AY 2015-16). Audit noticed that although the activity of the
trust is ‘Relief of the poor’ as per return of income, it claimed exemption
under Section 10(23C)(vi)74. Audit further noticed that the assessee had
not obtained approval under Section 10(23C)(vi) as per the return of
income and hence not eligible for exemption; however, the ITD system
irregularly allowed exemption to the extent of `14.29 crore. This had a tax
effect of ` 5.80 crore for both the AYs.
The Ministry has accepted (March 2022) the audit observation a nd
initiated remedial action by issuing notice under Section 148 in
March 2021.
(ii) In Maharashtra, CIT(E) Pune charge, a private trust engaged in the activity
of ‘Relief of the poor’ applied for registration under Section 12A in
November 2015 and the same was granted in March 2016. It was seen from
assessment records of AY 2015-16 that the assessee claimed exemption for
AY 2009-10 to 2014-15 without having valid registration under Section
12AA. In all these years, the returns of income were processed summarily
and the exemption was allowed. The aggregate exemption allowed during
the AY 2009-10 to AY 2014-15 worked out to ` 5.83 crore involving revenue
loss of ` 1.48 crore.
Reply of the Ministry was awaited (February 2022).
(iii) In Andhra Pradesh, CIT(E) Hyderabad charge, a private trust enga ged in
educational activity, applied for registration under Section 12AA of the Act
in December 2014. The CIT(E), Hyderabad rejected the application for
registration in September 2015. On appeal by the assessee, CIT(E) granted
registration in July 2017 with retrospective effect. Audit observed that the
assessee meanwhile claimed ` 1.98 crore and  ` 9.64 crore as exemption
for AY 2015-16 and AY 2016-17 respectively and the same were allowed
under summary process without duly verifying the entitlement in respect
of claim of exemption during the processing of returns.
Reply of the Ministry was awaited (February 2022)
74 Only university or educational institution existing sol ely for educational purpose and not for the purposes of profit 
can claim exemption 10(23C)(vi) for which approval of CIT is necessary. 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
87
 
It is evident from the above that though the Act makes it mandatory for 
Trust
s/Institutions to get themselves registered under Section 12AA/ sub-clause 
(iv) to (via) of Section 10(23C) for claiming exemptions, the ITD system allowed
exemptions without having the necessary details. Thus, it appears that the ITD 
system did not have checks and validations to match the data/information 
relating to registrations/approvals of the Trusts/Institutions provided in the 
return of income with ITD-ITR systems database before allowing exemptions 
where the returns were processed in summary manner. Since out of 6,89,011 
cases pertaining to ITRs for AY 2014-15 to AY 2017-18 relating to 
Trusts/Institutions, 6,29,905 cases (91.0 per cent) were processed under 
summary manner, and the Act prohibits reopening of the cases of earlier 
assessment years’ only for the reasons of non-registration of Trusts/ Institutions, 
the possibility of revenue leakage in these summarily processed cases could not 
be ruled out. 
Reply of the Ministry was awaited (February 2022) 
5.3.3  Issues relating to processing of ITRs in the ITD System 
Section 143(1) relating to processing of ITRs made under Section 139 provides 
that no intimation under Section 143(1) shall be sent after the expiry of one year 
from the end of the FY in which the return is made.  
In Delhi charge, Audit noticed that in 12 cases out of 47 cases, processing of ITRs 
under Section 143(1) were still in progress (December 2021), as per the ITD 
system. Details of cases are given below in Table 5.9: 
Table 5.9: Summary cases under process 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the Assessee AY Gross 
Income 
(` in crore) 
Date of filing of 
ITR 
Current 
Processing 
Status of ITR 
1. B 3 Party 2015- 16 970.3 31.10.2015 In progress 
2.  J2 University 2016-17 525.0 17.10.2016 In progress 
3. 
I1 Institution 
2014-
15  136.5 26.09.2014 In progress 
4. 2016-17 276.5 17.10.2016 In progress 
5. A2 Institute 2014- 15  135.7 29.09.2014 In progress 
6. C 1 Society 2014-15 147.6 30.09.2014 In progress 
7. L1 Trust 2014- 15  150.6 20.11.2014 In progress 
8. 
 D1 Society 
2014-15 128.5 18.09.2014 In progress 
9. 2015-16 151.8 31.03.2017 In progress 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
88 
Table 5.9: Summary cases under process 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the Assessee AY Gross 
Income 
(` in crore) 
Date of filing of 
ITR 
Current 
Processing 
Status of ITR 
10.  B2 Foundation 2016-17 153.4 28.09.2016 In progress 
11.  M2 Sansthan 2014-15 182.5 25.09.2014 In progress 
12.  F1 Trust 2016-17 183.2 08.10.2016 In progress 
The Department stated in the case of ‘A2’ Institute for the AY 2014-15, that 
the return of the assessee filed in September 2014 was treated as defective 
by the CPC and a “defective” communication was sent to the assessee in 
November 2015. Further, a reminder was again sent to the assessee in 
February 2016. Return filed by the assessee in March 2016 was taken up for 
processing by the CPC and the ITR was processed in March 2016 determining a 
refund of 
` 35.56 lakh.  
It is evident that the return in respect of ‘A2’ Institute for the AY 2014-15 was 
already processed through the ITD systems. However, it was still showing ‘In 
progress’ in the ITD system. Thus, the system was evidently not updating the 
current status of the ITR.  
In the remaining cases, Audit could not ascertain whether these cases had been 
processed, as status of ITRs in the ITD systems were still showing ‘In progress’. 
The reasons for showing status of ITR ‘In progress’ in the ITD systems were not 
known to Audit. Details of further action taken by the ITD on these ITRs were 
also not reflected in the systems, for which corrective measures were required 
to be taken. Also, the possibility of revenue loss to the exchequer could not be 
ruled out if appropriate action in the remaining cases has not been taken 
Reply of the Ministry was awaited (February 2022). 
5.3.4 Issues relating to absence of data validation in the data furnished by 
the Pr. DGIT (Systems) 
The Pr. DGIT(Systems) provided assessee-wise data in respect of the Charitable 
trusts and institutions, containing 6,89,011 cases pertaining to Income Tax 
Returns (ITRs) processed/assessed/rectified for AY 2014-15 to AY 2017-18 during 
the FY 2014-15 to FY 2018-19. On analysis of the said data, Audit noted the 
following:  
5.3.4.1 Exemptions claimed but registration status under Section 12AA not 
available 
Charitable Trusts/Institutions are required to obtain registration under Section 
12AA for claiming exemptions under Section 11. 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
89 
Audit found through data analysis that in 21,381 cases exemptions were claimed 
under Section 11; however, registration under Section 12AA was not available 
(refer Table 4.4 of Chapter 4).  
Thus, it showed that validation of the above related fields in the ITR Form-7 was 
not adequate.  
Reply of the Ministry was awaited (February 2022). 
5.3.4.2 Foreign contribution received but registration status not available 
Charitable Trusts/Institutions are required to obtain registration under the 
Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act, 2010, for receiving foreign contribution. 
Audit found through data analysis that in 347 cases, where foreign contributions 
were received; registration under FCRA was not available (refer Table 4.5 of 
Chapter 4). 
Thus, it showed that validation in the above related fields in ITR Form-7 was not 
adequate.  
Reply of the Ministry was awaited (February 2022). 
5.3.4.3 Invalid date of registration/approval  
Charitable Trusts/Institutions are required to obtain registration under Section 
12AA for claiming exemptions under Section 11 and approval under Section 80G 
for receiving donation.  
Audit observed through data analysis that in 10 cases, dates of registration under 
Section 12AA and approval under Section 80G were entered incorrectly (future 
dates) (refer Table 4.6 of Chapter 4).  
Thus, it showed that validation in the above related fields in ITR Form-7 was not 
adequate.  
Reply of the Ministry was awaited (February 2022). 
5.3.5 Important information not currently captured in Return of income (ITR-7) 
Charitable trusts claiming exemption under Section 11(1) are required to file 
Income Tax Returns in Form ITR-7, supported by Audit Report in Form 10B and 
where there is a claim for accumulation of income or deemed application, Form 
10 or Form 9A respectively has to be filed.  
Audit noticed that though the Department has revised 
75  ITR 7 incorporating 
schedules relating to Income and Expenditure Account and Receipt and Payment 
Account etc., some information/data are still to be captured in ITR-7 which are 
discussed below: 
                                                           
75  From AY 2019-20 onwards 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
90 
(a)  Although the nature of activity was already incorporated as mandatory 
field in ITR –7 w.e.f. AY 2019-20, the ITD has not allocated separate codes to 
different charitable activities as defined in Section 2(15) and Section 
10(23C)(iiiab) to 10(23C)(via)  of the Act, for effective monitoring (Refer para 
7.1.1). 
(b)  ITR-7 does not contain the details of Balance Sheet along with Schedule 
of assets and liabilities. The return also does not classify the assets which have 
been treated as application of income in the past and those which have not been 
treated as application, and eligible for depreciation allowance in view of Section 
11(6) 
76 . Instances were noticed that Trusts/Institutions had claimed 
depreciation on the assets, which had already been treated as application of 
income due to non-availability of the relevant information. Hence, two separate 
fixed asset schedules become a necessity (Refer para 6.5.1). 
(c)  There is no column/schedule in ITR – 7 to monitor the year-wise receipt 
and utilisation of corpus donation as the treatment for application of income are 
different for corpus and non-corpus donation. Corpus donation is exempt from 
application of income as per provision of Section 11(1)(d) whereas non corpus 
donation is to be applied for charitable purpose as per Section 11(1). Further, it 
is difficult to identify the year wise closing balance of corpus donation as the 
relevant information is not captured in ITR-7. Audit found cases where the ITD 
allowed exemption treating the voluntary contribution as corpus without 
ensuring that there was a specific direction of the donors (Refer para 6.6). 
(d) The Department is capturing details regarding voluntary contribution as 
per schedule VC (Voluntary Contribution) of Form ITR-7 viz.  local contribution 
through corpus fund donation, Grants received from Government, Grants 
received from Companies under Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR), Other 
specific grants, Other Donations and voluntary contribution; and foreign 
contribution through corpus fund donation and other than corpus fund 
donation. But details of major contributors/donors are not being captured in 
Form ITR-7 presently. 
The details of major contributors/donors (above a threshold to be specified by 
ITD), may also be captured in Form ITR-7, so as to prevent the inclusion of un-
accounted money/ deviation of funds and to stop claiming of inadmissible 
exemptions, as has been done 
77  by the CBDT in respect of Section 80G (5) for 
verifying the correctness/genuineness of claim of the donors based on 
information received from the donee.  
                                                           
76  Section 11(6) of the IT Act provides that depreciation shall not be allowed while computing income subject to 
application against those assets which have been treated as application in earlier years. 
77  Finance Act 2020, w.e.f. 01.04.2021 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
91 
This information will also enable the AO to verify the genuineness of the 
contributors/donors, while finalizing assessments.  
Thus, it could be seen that in certain cases, the Trusts/Institutions are taking 
undue advantage for want of requisite information with the ITD. If the relevant 
information/data viz. details of balance sheet, details of receipt and utilisation 
of corpus donation, details of donors etc. is made available with the ITD, many 
of these issues could be resolved at the time of processing of the return itself or 
at the time of the scrutiny assessment. Thus, capturing these details/ 
information in the ITR-7 would enhance the quality of the assessment and bring 
transparency in allowance of exemptions. Also, it will help in selection of 
potential high-risk cases for scrutiny through Computer Aided Scrutiny Selection 
(CASS). 
Reply of the Ministry was awaited (February 2022). 
5.3.6 Important information not currently captured in the Auditor’s Report 
Charitable trusts claiming exemption under Section 11(1) are required to file 
Income Tax Returns in Form ITR-7, supported by Audit Report in Form 10B. The 
Audit Report prescribed under Rule 17B requires the Accountant to give his 
opinion whether to the best of his information, the accounts give a true and fair 
view. Besides, the Auditor has to provide some prescribed information in the 
Audit Report. The principal aim of this Audit Report is to enable the Assessing 
Officer to satisfy himself about the genuineness of the claim for exemption 
under Section of the Act and also whether the institution has complied with the 
requirements prescribed by the statute. 
Audit is of the opinion that some additional information/data is required to be 
provided in the Audit Report so as to enable AOs to check the veracity of the 
assessee’s claim during assessment which are discussed in the succeeding 
paragraphs. 
5.3.6.1 Information on Income of the Trusts/Institutions in Audit Report 
Section 11 of the Act provides exemption for income derived from property held 
under a Trust wholly for charitable or religious purposes to the extent such 
income is applied for charitable or religious purpose in India. 
Income of the Charitable Trusts/Institutions broadly includes income from 
activity, income from house property, income from incidental business activity, 
capital gains, interest on security, income referred under Section 10 except 
agricultural income etc. apart from voluntary contributions. 
Audit noted that Audit report in Form 10B does not contain details of receipt 
under different heads of the Trusts/Institutions during the previous year and 
whether the property from which income is derived is wholly held by the Trust. 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
92 
In the absence of the above information, Audit could not ascertain the 
correctness of receipt declared by the assessee Trusts/Institutions in ITR-7, 
especially business income of Trust/Institution which is incidental to the 
attainment of the objectives of the trust, receipt of anonymous donation and 
receipt of foreign contribution, particularly the cases which were processed 
summarily. 
Reply of the Ministry was awaited (February 2022). 
5.3.6.2 Corpus donations with specific purpose 
Section 11(1)(d) provides for exemption of income in the form of voluntary 
contributions made to the Trusts/Institutions with a specific direction that they 
shall form part of the corpus of a trust or institution. 
Audit noticed that the claim of exemption on account of corpus donation is not 
supported or certified by the Auditor in the existing Form 10B. Further, any 
expenditure incurred out of Corpus donations should be excluded from the 
application of income, which is also not covered in the Auditor’s Report. 
Audit collected information on 5,985 audited sample cases to ascertain the 
number of Trusts/Institutions which had received donation with specific 
direction. Audit observed that 906 (15.14 per cent ) Trusts/Institutions had 
received donation with specific direction. Out of the 906 sample cases test 
checked, Audit noticed irregularities in 21 assessment cases involving tax effect 
of ` 134.14 crore regarding receipt and utilisation of corpus donation e.g. 
exemption was irregularly allowed on corpus donation (Refer Para 6.6 of Chapter 
6), expenditure from corpus/earmarked funds was irregularly treated as 
application of income (Refer Para 6.5.2 of Chapter 6), corpus donation was not 
utilized as per specific direction of the donor etc. (Refer Para 5.1.2.4 of 
Chapter 5).  
In Karnataka, CIT(E) Bengaluru charge, in seven assessment cases, Audit could 
not ascertain whether the provisions of Section 11(1)(d) were complied with in 
respect of claims of ` 4.37 crore, as the claims were not certified by the Auditor 
in the existing Form 10B of the Income Tax Rules, 1962.   
Audit could not ascertain the action taken by the concerned AO while concluding 
the assessments. Details of exemptions claimed and allowed in these cases could 
not be verified by Audit. 
Reply of the Ministry was awaited (February 2022). 
5.3.6.3 Allowance of deemed application in the subsequent assessment year 
As per clause 2 of Explanation to Section 11(1), if in the previous year, a Trust is 
not able to utilize 85 per cent  of its income in case such income has not been 
received in the previous year or for any other reason, then the trust has an 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
93 
option to apply such income in the year of receipt or in the year, immediately 
following the year of accrual of income.  
For this purpose, the Trust has to furnish Form 9A before expiry of the time 
allowed under Section 139(1) for furnishing the return of income of the relevant 
assessment year. 
Form 9A provides information of amount of income deemed to have been 
applied to charitable purposes during the previous year. However, the Auditor’s 
Report in Form 10B does not provide details of claim of deemed application of 
income availed in the previous year which has to be reduced from the amount 
of application of income in the year of actual receipt. Such details in the Audit 
Reports would enable the AOs to compute the income correctly. 
In Karnataka, Audit noticed three assessment cases of one assessee, where the 
AO did not adjust the deemed application of income claimed in an assessment 
year against the income applied in the subsequent assessment year resulting in 
short computation of income of ` 6.04 crore having tax effect of ` 2.53 crore. 
One case is illustrated below: 
(i) In Karnataka, CIT(E) Bengaluru charge, a Trust engaged in educational
activity, filed return of income for AY 2015-16 at ` ‘Nil’ income. The scrutiny
assessment was completed at an income of ` ‘Nil’ after allowing exemption
under Section 11 of ` 16.38 crore in October 2017. Audit noticed that the
assessee trust had claimed deemed application of income amounting to
` 1.29 crore which is stated to be adjusted against the Department of
Science and Technology Grant for the financial year 2015-16. Scrutiny of
records of the assessment year 2014-15 revealed that the trust had
claimed deemed application of income of ` 3.25 crore which was required
to be adjusted during AY 2015-16. However, no such amount was adjusted
during AY 2015-16 resulting in short computation of income by ` 3.20 crore
with a consequent short levy of tax of ` 1.40 crore including applicable
interest.
The Ministry while not accepting the audit observation stated (March 2022) that 
as per the detailed statement of computation of income furnished by the 
assessee, in response to the notice issued under Section 154 subsequent to the 
audit objection, the amount of ` 3.25 crore carried forward from the AY 2014-15 
had been included by the assessee in its total income for the AY 2015-16 which 
was declared at ` 17.75 crore.  
Ministry’s reply is being verified by the Field Audit office. 
5.4 Conclusion 
Audit noticed that there is no restriction in the Act for educational 
Trusts/Institutions from getting registered under Section 12AA and claim 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
94 
exemption under Section 11, if the entity has objectives of both education and 
other limbs of charity as defined under Section 2(15). As a result, most of the 
private educational Trusts/Institutions get themselves registered under 
Section 12AA 
The allowance of deduction towards CSR expenses under Section 80G would 
affect the Government’s intent of sharing burden by corporate entities for 
welfare state. There is lack of clarity in the provision relating to prohibition of 
any claims of application made out of corpus donation/specific purpose funds. 
The assessees were allowed dual benefit by treating the capital expenditure met 
from the borrowed funds as application, and subsequently, by allowing 
repayment of loan against the same borrowed funds as application. There was 
inconsistency in treatment of administrative expenses. Audit also noticed lack of 
provisions to discourage the circulation of trust funds amongst various trusts 
without having actual application of income on the stated objectives of the 
Trusts/Institutions. 
Due to lack of provisions to discourage accumulation by the Trusts/Institutions, 
Audit noticed that the Trusts/ Institutions were consistently accumulating 
receipts upto the maximum permissible amount under the Act without carrying 
out any charitable activity.  In the test checked cases, there was a delay ranging 
from one day to 75 days in granting approval under Section 80G(5)(vi). 
Audit noted that in certain cases, registration/ approval was granted under 
Section 12AA/ 80G(5)(vi) without following the prescribed procedure, and 
registration under Section 12AA was granted without making field enquiry about 
the existence and genuineness of the activities of the trust. Instances of 
irregularity regarding non-inclusion of dissolution clause in the trust deed or 
dissolution clause in conformity with the Manual of Office Procedure of the 
Department have continued to occur. 
ITD system did not have adequate checks and validations to match the 
data/information relating to registrations/approvals of the Trusts/Institutions 
while returns were processed in summary manner. The Department is not 
capturing the details of contributor/donor to prevent the inclusion of un-
accounted money/ deviation of funds from one head to another head and to 
stop claiming of inadmissible exemptions, as has been done by the CBDT in 
respect of Section 80G (5) for verifying the correctness/genuineness of claim of 
the donors based on information received from donee. 
In the absence of any specific provision in the IT Act to disallow exemption in 
case of diversion of funds given for a particular purpose, specified by a donor to 
other activities/ purpose, exemptions are either allowed or not being restricted 
having the risk of loss of revenue to the exchequer. 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
95 
5.5 Summary of Recommendations 
Audit recommends that: 
(i) The ITD may consider: granting registration to educa tional Trusts/
Institutions under Section 12AA on the condition that separate accounts have 
to be maintained for educational and non-educational activities and 
educational activities are to be dealt with as per the provisions of Section 
10(23C). Further, the CBDT may consider the option of getting a separate ITR 
filed by the Assessee Trusts/ Institutions for educational activities and non-
educational activities. 
(Paragraph 5.1.1) 
(ii) The purpose of having two sets of overlapping sectio
 ns, especially with
respect to educational and medical purposes, one under ‘not for profit 
category’ (which involves higher restrictions) under Section 10(23C) and 
another ‘the charitable category’ (with fewer restrictions) under Section 11 is 
not clear to Audit. Logically, most entities with a choice would not opt for the 
restriction, not for profit category.
 In general, the stipulations under various 
sub-sections of Section 10(23C), requiring that institutions exist solely for 
philanthropic purposes and not for the purposes of profit, are more onerous 
than those under Section 11, which merely restrict accumulation of annual 
income beyond 15 per cent and have no specific “not for profit” purpose; 
however, the provisions for exemption of income under both categories are 
virtually identical. 
Department of Revenue may consider reviewing these stipulations in the Act 
under various categories in the light of clear Governmental policy 
determination in terms of which charitable objectives merit exemption of 
income with a requirement of “solely philanthropic purposes and not for the 
purpose of profit” and which charitable objectives merit income exemption 
without such a requirement. 
(Paragraph 5.1.1) 
The CBDT stated that a charitable institution may be carrying out more than one 
category of charitable activities. For example, a charitable institution may be 
registered for educational as well as medical purposes. Activity wise monitoring 
would mean that such trusts or institutions would have to maintain separate 
books of account for such segments. Presently, the law does not have any such 
requirement. Bringing such a requirement will add additional compliance 
burden on the charitable trusts or institutions which is not desirable. 
Further, many expenses such as administrative expenses are common expenses 
and it may not be possible to allocate them to closely inter-linked segments. 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
96 
Also, the difference between two regimes is proposed to be eliminated by 
various proposals contained in the Finance Bill, 2022. After enactment both the 
regimes would operate on equal footing. 
Audit has noted from the reply of the CBDT that various proposals have been 
made by the CBDT in the current Finance Bill 2022. Audit will await the final 
outcome of the proposal approved and implemented by the CBDT. However, the 
CBDT may enact the provisions of the Act in such a way that educational 
Trusts/Institutions may not take undue benefit of the provisions of Act.  
(iii) The ITD may issue a Standard Operating Procedure/instructions/
guidelines for examining the valuation aspects of transactions with related 
parties and devise a clear mechanism to justify the ‘reasonableness’ and 
‘adequacy’ of the transactions held with the related party of the trust so that 
the Assessing Officer may satisfy himself as to the reasonableness and 
adequacy of the transactions during the Assessment proceedings; and levy tax 
on amount of Income or property utilized for the benefit of the related parties 
in excess of the amount assessed as reasonable and adequate.  
(Paragraph 5.1.2.1) 
(iv) CBDT needs to consider bringing an amendment or issuing binding
clarification as to whether donations to trusts, including in-house/corporate
trusts, out of CSR expenditure by specified companies covered by Section 135
of the Companies Act, 2013 is eligible for deduction under section 80G or not.
Such an amendment or binding clarification is necessary to ensure that the
provisions are interpreted uniformly by the Assessing Officers across all
assessment charges and also to minimize the possibility of litigation.
(Paragraph 5.1.2.3) 
The CBDT stated that Corporate Social Responsibility contribution is in the 
nature of application of income and hence cannot be allowed as expenditure. A 
specific amendment to this effect was brought in Section 37 of the Income Tax 
Act vide Finance (No.2) Act, 2014. The eligibility of entities listed in Section 80G 
of the Income Tax Act prior to this amendment was not withdrawn as it is subject 
to conditions specified in the said Section. However, for the eligibility of 
donation to Swachh Bharat Kosh, and Clean Ganga Fund set up by the Central 
Government, which was introduced in Section 80G subsequent to amendment 
of Section 37 with regard to corporate social responsibility, a condition was 
stipulated that only those donations to these two funds will qualify for deduction 
under Section 80G of the Income-Tax Act which is not spent by the assessee in 
pursuance of corporate social responsibility under sub-Section (5) of Section 135 
of the Companies Act, 2013. 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
97 
Audit noted that the reply of the CBDT has only mentioned two schemes/ 
programmes of the Government of India, whereas Audit had observed that 
undue benefit is being taken by the corporates by spending the amount towards 
CSR through their own trust(s). It has a peculiar implication in that expenses on 
CSR incurred directly are not allowable as deduction, but CSR expenses through 
an in-house or other Charitable Trust would be allowable as deduction. This 
would likely defeat the very purpose of the intention of the Legislature. The CBDT 
may reconsider the Audit recommendation.  
(v) The ITD may consider bringing in new provisions in the Act, so as to 
ensure that specific purpose donation, if not utilized for the specified purpose 
(like mere transferring such donation later on to other organizations etc.) 
should attract denial of exemptions and be treated as income in the year in 
which it is detected. 
(Paragraph 5.1.2.4) 
The CBDT stated that a trust or institution is not allowed to donate to other 
trusts or institutions towards corpus as per the provisions of Explanation 2 to 
sub-Section (1) of Section 11 and 12th proviso to clause (23C) of Section 10. 
Further, as per 14th proviso to clause (23C) of Section 10 and Explanation to sub-
Section (2) of Section 11, no donation to other trusts and institutions can be 
made by a trust or institution out of its accumulated income. 
Further sub-Section (2) of Section 11 of the Income-tax Act provides, that where 
85 per cent  of income of trust or institution is not applied but is accumulated, 
such income shall not be included in the total income of the previous year of the 
person in receipt of the income subject to certain conditions.  
Similarly, sub-Section (3) of Section 11 of the Income Tax Act provides for the 
specific previous year in which the accumulated income will be subjected to tax 
in case of different types of violations which include the income being applied to 
purposes other than charitable and religious purposes which have been 
specified as per the requirement of sub-Section (2) of Section 11, or when the 
income is credited or paid to any other trust or institution registered under 
12AA/12AB or to any trust of institution referred under sub-clause (iv), (v), (vi), 
(via) of clause (23C) of Section 10. 
Vide Finance Bill, 2022 similar provisions have also been proposed to be 
introduced in clause (23C) of Section 10 by way of insertion of Explanation 3 and 
Explanation 4 to the third proviso of clause (23C) of Section 10.  
Reply of the CBDT is not tenable as the Provisions of Explanation 2 to sub-Section 
(1) of Section 11 and 12 
th  proviso to clause (23C) of Section 10 provide that corpus 
donation given to another charitable trust out of current year’s income should 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
98 
not be allowed as application of income. Further, 14th  proviso to clause (23C) of 
Section 10 and Explanation to sub-Section (2) of Section 11 provide that amount 
donated to other trusts out of accumulation shall not be treated as application 
of income.  
Audit noted that no such restriction has been imposed under the Act in respect 
of donation given to another charitable trust out of corpus donation which is 
exempted under Section 11(1)(d) of the Act. Further, as the corpus donation is 
not a part of income and there is no time limit for its utilisation, it is very difficult 
to monitor the same in absence of any specific provision in the Act. 
 
The Finance Bill 2022 is also silent on this issue. The CBDT may reconsider its reply 
to the audit recommendation.  
(vi) The ITD may issue suitable instructions/clarifications to deal with 
consistent treatment of administrative and establishment expenses for the 
purpose of application of income. 
(Paragraph 5.1.2.6) 
In reply, the CBDT stated that 
 adequate provisions are there in Sections 11, 12 
and 13 of the Act. Further, the allowability of any expenses depends on the facts 
of the case. 
Reply of the Department is not tenable as the Act has no clarity regarding 
determination of net income available for application. Since establishment and 
administrative expense could be of various categories and some part of which 
may be directly attributable for generation of income and some part of may be 
towards charitable and religious purpose. the CBDT needs to ensure consistent 
approach by the AOs while allowing administrative and establishment expenses 
as application of income. In the view of the above, the CBDT may reconsider its 
reply.  
(vii) The ITD may consider bringing in a new provision in the Act to stipulate 
that voluntary contributions received from other Trusts/Institutions out of 
current year’s income shall not be eligible for the permissible accumulation at 
the rate of 15 per cent in the hands of such recipient trust or institution. 
(Paragraph 5.1.2.7) 
The CBDT stated that explanation 2 of sub-Section (1) of Section 11 already 
provides that any amount credited or paid by a trust or institution to any other 
trust or institution registered under Section 12AA or 12AB or trust of institution 
referred to under sub-clause (iv), (v), (vi) or (via) of clause (23C) of Section 10 
being contribution with a specific direction to form part of corpus shall not be 
treated as application of income. Explanation to sub-Section (2) of Section 11 
provides that no donation to other trusts and institutions can be made by a trust 
or institution out of its accumulated income. 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
99 
Similar provisions are also available under the 12th proviso and 14th proviso to 
clause (23C) of Section 10. 
The specific suggestion for legislative amendment however, was discussed 
during the 2022 budgetary exercise and was not found to be acceptable. 
Reply of the Department is not tenable as the Act stipulates no restriction on 
transfer of general donation to other Trusts out of current years’ income. As a 
result, an organization is considered as a charitable organization even if the 
entire donation is given to another trust/institution after availing of the 
permissible accumulation of 15 per cent. 
Audit is of the view that mere transfer of amount from one trust to another trust, 
especially through a chain of trusts after 15 per cent permissible accumulation 
at each stage without actual application defeats the very purpose of allowing 
exemption. To mitigate the risk of bogus application for charitable purposes in 
such cascading transactions, the CBDT may consider bringing in a specific 
provision to restrict the recipient Trusts/ Institutions in case no charitable 
activity was undertaken by these Trusts/ Institutions during the year. Further, 
15 per cent accumulation may not be allowed to the recipient trusts in such cases. 
(viii) The ITD may consider bringing in a new provision in the Act for taxing
any long pending liability received in the guise of loan as voluntary 
contribution on cessation of liability, similar to provisions of Section 41(1) of 
the Act. 
(Paragraph 5.1.2.8) 
The CBDT stated that application of income is allowed to the trust or institution 
in the year when such sum is actually paid. Finance Bill, 2022 has proposed to 
insert Explanation in Section 11 and Explanation 3 in clause (23C) of Section 10 
to clarify that any sum payable by any trust or institution (registered/approved 
under Section 12AA/AB or as referred to in clauses (iv), (v), (vi), (via) of clause 
(23C) of Section 10) shall be considered as application of income in the previous 
year in which such sum is actually paid by it irrespective of the previous year in 
which the liability to pay such sum was incurred by such trust according to the 
method of accounting regularly employed by it. 
Hence, since application of income is allowed on the basis of actual payments, 
provisions similar to sub-clause (1) of Section 41 are not required in case of 
charitable Trusts/Institutions registered/approved under Section 12AA/AB or as 
referred to in clauses (iv), (v), (vi), (via) of clause (23C) of Section 10. 
Reply of the CBDT is not tenable as the CBDT’s response is on allowing liability on 
actual payment basis. However, Audit contention was that any amount which 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
100 
was received by charitable trust in the guise of loan and subsequently the lenders 
have never demanded the repayment of loan from the trust, may be treated as 
income of the Trusts/Institutions and taxed accordingly. The CBDT may 
reconsider its reply to the audit recommendation. 
(ix) The ITD may evolve a suitable mechanism by issuing a Standard 
Operating Procedure for Assessing Officer 
s for carrying out physical inspection 
of the activities of the trust in cases where there had been consistent and 
increased accumulation to ensure that trusts are allowed accumulations 
consistently only in exceptional cases. 
(Paragraph 5.1.2.9) 
In reply, the CBDT stated that the Department has introduced the Faceless 
Assessment Scheme, 2019, incorporated in Section 144B of the IT Act to provide 
that all the assessment proceedings, including the scrutiny assessments of cases 
related to Trusts/Institutions, are conducted electronically in a faceless manner, 
through team-based assessment. The Finance Bill, 2022 has also proposed 
amendment in Section 144B for hearing through Video Conferencing if 
requested by an assessee.  
Further, 
 the e-Verification Scheme, 2021 has also been notified in December 
2021 which provides for collection, verification and processing of the 
information available with Revenue from various sources, to be passed on to the 
Assessing Officer for incorporation in ongoing scrutiny proceedings or for re-
assessment proceedings under the Act.  
Reply of the CBDT is not in line with the Audit recommendation as the CBDT has 
not given any specific reply to the recommendation on keeping watch on the 
Trusts which are not doing any charitable activity but are availing exemption by 
accumulating the maximum funds persistently year by year.  
Further, the PAC in its 104 
th  Report at Para 23 (Sixteenth Lok Sabha Report) had 
also asked the Ministry to bring a suitable amendment to the Act or evolve a 
suitable mechanism to ensure that firstly trusts are allowed accumulations 
consistently only as exceptions; and secondly, the accumulated income is applied 
for the objectives of the Trusts/Institutions within a specified time frame. Audit 
noted that the issues raised by the PAC have not been addressed satisfactorily. 
Since the Act does not prescribe any ceiling for accumulation of funds and more 
than 96 per cent of ITRs are processed in a summary manner, the CBDT may 
explore the feasibility of developing a mechanism under Faceless Assessment 
regime for ensuring that Trusts/Institutions are allowed accumulations 
persistently only in exceptional cases.  
The CBDT may therefore reconsider its reply. 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
101 
(x) The ITD may stipulate specific parameters (apart from the donor’s 
name and address) such as PAN etc., which must be disclosed by assessee to 
establish the identity of donors. Further, disclosure of PAN of the donor should 
be made mandatory above a threshold limit of donation to be decided by the 
ITD. ITD may also consider introducing a new Schedule in the ITR to capture 
the donors’ details in order to strengthen the assessment procedure to 
mitigate the risk of money laundering and prevent leakage of revenue. 
(Paragraph 5.1.2.10) 
The CBDT stated that vide Finance Act, 2020, provisions are inserted for filing of 
statement of donation by donee to cross-check claim of donation by donor. 
These provisions are effective from 01.04.2021. 
As per the provisions inserted in Section 80G(2)(viii), 80G(2)(ix) and Section 
35(1A) vide Finance Act, 2020, w.e.f. 01.04.2021, deduction under Section 
80G(2)(a)(iv)/Section 35 to a donor shall be allowed only if a statement is 
furnished by the donee who shall be required to furnish a statement in respect 
of donations received and in the event of failure to do so, fee and penalty shall 
be levied. 
Statement of particulars under clause (viii) and clause (ix) of sub-Section (5) of 
Section 80G or under sub-Section (1A) of Section 35 is to be furnished by the 
donee as per Rule 18AB of the Income Tax Rules, 1962 in Form No. 10BD. Form 
No. 10BD consists of the unique identification number of the donors which can 
be PAN or Aadhar No. If neither is available, then any one of the taxpayer 
identification number of the country where the person resides, passport 
number, Elector’s photo identity number, driving license number, ration card 
number, needs to be provided. 
The CBDT may ensure to tax the anonymous donations received by the 
Trusts/Institutions, in case the genuineness of such donor is not established. 
(xi)  The ITD may ensure that the timeline prescribed in the Act for granting 
approval to the Trusts/Institutions may be adhered to by the CIT(E). 
(Paragraph 5.2.2) 
(xii) 
 The ITD may ensure that due procedure is followed by the CIT(E) while 
granting registration/approval to the Trusts/Institutions.  
 (Paragraph 5.2.4)  
(xiii)  The ITD may ensure that field enquiry about the existence and 
genuineness of the activities of the Trust/Institution may be conducted and a 
report thereof with necessary documentation may be kept on record while 
granting registration. 
(Paragraph 5.2.5) 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
102 
In reply to recommendations mentioned at Paragraph(s) 5.2.2, 5.2.4 and 5.2.5 
above, the CBDT, in reply stated that the Finance Act, 2020, inter alia, amended 
several provisions relating to approval/registration/notification of entities 
referred to in Sections 12AA, 10(23C) and 80G of the Income Tax Act. It was 
provided that such entities seeking registration/approval for exemptions/ 
deductions under the said Sections shall be granted approval for a period not 
exceeding five years at a time. The new process of registration will also be 
applicable to entities that are already approved under the said Sections, which 
will be required to apply for re-registration or approvals. It was also provided 
that new entities seeking exemption but which have not commenced activities 
may be granted provisional registration/approval for a period of 3 years. 
Further, Finance Bill, 2022 has also proposed amendments in Section 12AB and 
Section 10(23C) to provide that where registration/approval or provisional 
registration/approval to a Trust/Institution has been granted and subsequently, 
the Pr.CIT/CIT has noticed occurrence of one or more specified violation, as 
prescribed, the registration/approval or the provisional registration/approval 
granted to the Trust/Institution may be cancelled after providing a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard.  
Audit has noted from the reply of the CBDT that various proposals have been 
made by the CBDT regarding re-registration or approval of Trusts/Institutions 
which are yet to be completed, since the last date for furnishing the application 
for re-registration is 31.03.2022. Several proposals regarding cancellation of 
registration/approval have also been made in the current Finance Bill 2022. Audit 
will await the final outcome of the re-registration process as well proposed 
approval and implementation of Finance Bill 2022. However, the CBDT has to 
ensure that due procedure is followed while granting registration/approval to 
the Trusts/Institutions. 
(xiv) The ITD may review the cases for taking remedial action where
exemptions were granted to the assessees, where there was no dissolution 
clause in the trust deed, or the dissolution clause is not in conformity with the 
stipulated provisions. Further, the ITD also need to evolve a system to ensure 
that no registration is granted to exempt entities in the absence of an 
appropriate dissolution clause. 
(Paragraph 5.2.6) 
(xv) The ITD may take steps to strengthen the IT system so that input of data
should commensurate with the selection criteria for proper identification of 
cases to be scrutinised. 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
103 
The ITD should consider expanding the data elements captured in ITR 7, if need 
be, restricted based on a gross income or exempted income threshold to be 
determined by the ITD. This will enable capturing of relevant data enabling a 
better and more risk-based approach to CASS selection without 
inconveniencing smaller trusts/entities. 
(Paragraph 5.3.1) 
(xvi) The ITD may -
(a) consolidate registration data of all the Trusts/ Institutions registered
under Section 12AA/80G/10(23C) of the Act digitally and match it with the data 
filled in ITRs to verify genuineness of registration while processing of ITRs 
through CPC; and  
(b) suitably modify the second proviso to Section 12A(2) to enable AO to
re-open such cases where assessee has claimed irregular exemption under 
Section 11 or 12 without having a valid registration. 
(Paragraph 5.3.2) 
In reply, the CBDT stated that the Finance Act, 2020, inter alia, amended several 
provisions relating to approval/registration/notification of certain entities 
referred to in Sections 10(23C), 12AA, 35 and 80G of the Income Tax Act. It was 
provided that such entities seeking approval/registration/ notification for 
exemptions/deductions under the said Sections shall be granted approval for a 
period not exceeding five years at a time. The new process of registration will 
also be applicable to entities that are already approved under the said Sections, 
which will be required to apply for re-registration or approvals. It was also 
provided that new entities seeking exemption but which have not commenced 
activities may be granted provisional registration for a period of 3 years. 
Accordingly, vide Notification No. 19 of 2021 dated 26.03.2021, the new 
procedure for the registration/approval/notification of the exempt entities 
covered under the above-mentioned Sections has been notified. 
The new forms capture comprehensive information electronically which may be 
mapped to the information provided in ITR-7. The last date for furnishing the 
application for re-registration is 31.03.2022. Once the re-registration process is 
complete, the database of the charitable institutions will be undated. So far, CPC 
was not in a position to verify the registration details of the charitable institution 
at the time of processing the return since the data base of the trusts and 
institutions was not complete. With the completion of the re-registration 
process, CPC would be in a position to verify the registration details of the 
charitable institutions at the time of processing of the return. 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
104 
Once the re-registration date base is complete, no trust or institution will be able 
to claim the exemption without having valid re-registration. Therefore, there is 
no need to have such an amendment. Exemption to such charitable institutions 
can be denied under the existing provisions of Section 12AB. 
The CBDT may ensure that adequate controls are incorporated in the ITD 
systems, namely the CPC, for verifying the registration details of the charitable 
Trusts/ Institutions at the time of processing of the return so that undue benefits 
are not allowed.  
(xvii) The ITD may capture data/information relating to contributor/donor in 
Form ITR-7 as has been done in respect of Section 80G (5) to bring transparency 
and accountability for the funds contributed/donated.  
(Paragraph 5.3.5) 
The CBDT stated that the recommendation would be examined while notifying 
ITR-7. 
(xviii) ITD may consider modifying Form 10B incorporating:  
(a) 
 details of receipt under different heads and income derived from 
property wholly held by trust. 
(b)  detailed information on receipt of corpus donations, its utilisation 
and claim of expenditure from corpus donation 
(c)  detailed information on the claim of deemed application of income 
availed in the previous year which has to be reduced from the 
amount of application of income in the year of actual receipt to 
enable the Assessing Officer to verify the correctness of the claim 
made by the assessee. 
 (Paragraphs 5.3.6.1, 5.3.6.2 and 5.3.6.3) 
In reply the CBDT stated that in the draft Form 10B, which was circulated for 
public comments in 2019, specific details of business activities carried out by the 
trust including the nature of business, balance sheet, profit and loss account, 
amount of profit and loss, details of accounting policies in preparation of 
accounts, deemed income under sub-Section (1B) of Section 11 etc. were 
sought. However, due to COVID-19 pandemic the form could not be notified and 
shall be done in due course. Further, in respect of corpus donation, the CBDT 
stated that suitable amendments to Form No. 10B will be examined while 
finalisation of the same. 
Audit will await the final outcome of the efforts being made by the CBDT. 
  

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
105 
Chapter 6: Compliance with existing provisions of Ac t/Rules/ 
Circulars in making assessments  
Exemptions are granted to charitable Trusts/Institu tions under Sections 10(21), 
10(23C) and 11 subject to fulfilment of various con ditions specified under the 
Act. In order to ensure that the conditions specifi ed for exemption are satisfied 
during assessment, the assessing officer is required to carry out due diligence in 
application of provisions of the Act, Rules framed thereunder, 
circulars/instructions issued by the CBDT from time to time and relevant judicial 
decisions. During this performance audit, Audit exa mined whether the 
Department had complied with all the provisions of the Act/ Rules/circulars in 
completing the test checked assessments.  
Audit noticed mistakes in 950 assessment cases invo lving tax effect of  
` 1,173.92 crore viz.  irregular exemptions to trusts and institutions, i ncorrect 
computation of income, incorrect computation of app lication of income, 
irregular allowance of accumulation, irregular allowance of exemption on corpus 
donation, incorrect levy of tax/surcharge/interest,  etc. Details of Audit 
observations noticed are tabulated below: 
Table 6.1: Category-wise Audit observations 
Sl. 
No. 
Nature of observation No of 
cases 
Tax effect  
(` in crore) 
1 Irregular allowance of exemption under Section 10 (23C)(iiiad) 7 2.36 
2 Irregular allowance of exemption when the Trusts/In stitutions are 
not substantially financed by the Government 10 46.71 
3 Incorrect computation of income 31 496.66 
4 Incorrect computation of application of income 27 42.38 
5 Irregular allowance of accumulation 66 68.14 
6 Allowance of exemption although income or property of the trust 
was utilized for the benefit of persons having substantial interest 22 33.07 
7 Irregular allowance of depreciation on assets who se acquisition 
had already been claimed as application of income 8 13.78 
8 Irregular allowance of expenditure from corpus/earmarked funds 
as application of income 11 81.58 
9 Irregular allowance of exemption on corpus donati on 9 52.08 
10 Grant of exemption to trusts, although activities were not 
charitable in nature 9 189.07 
11 Incorrect levy of tax/surcharge/interest 65 103. 11 
12 Non levy of penalty 651 1.68 
13 Other deficiencies noticed in assessment 34 43.3 0 
 Total 950 1,173.92 
 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
106 
6.1 Irregular allowance of exemptions 
Exemptions are granted to Charitable Trusts/Institutions under Sections 10(23C) 
and 11 subject to fulfilment of various conditions specified under the Act. Audit 
noticed cases where the eligibility of Trusts/Institutions was not verified during 
assessment, which resulted in irregular allowance of exemptions. The cases are 
discussed in detail in the succeeding paragraphs. 
6.1.1 Irregular allowance of exemption under Section 10(23C)(iiiad) 
Section 10(23C)(iiiad)
78 provides exemption to any university or other 
e
ducational institution existing solely for educational purposes and not for 
purposes of profit if the aggregate annual receipts of such university or 
educational institution do not exceed the amount of annual receipt of ` one 
crore. 
Audit noticed in seven assessment cases79 involving tax effect of ` 2.36 crore 
that exemption was irregularly allowed even though the aggregate annual 
receipts of these universities or educational institutions exceeded ` one crore. 
One case is illustrated bellow: 
(i) In Punjab, CIT(E) Chandigarh charge, a private trust engaged in educational
activity, filed return of income for AY 2016-17 and 2017-18 at ` ‘Nil’ income
for both the years. The scrutiny assessment for AY 2016-17 was completed
in December 2018 at ` ‘Nil’ income and the return of income (ITR) for AY
2017-18 was processed summarily at ` ‘Nil’ income. Audit noticed that the
assessee was allowed exemption of ` 2.29 crore (` 1.12 crore in AY
2016-17 and ` 1.17 crore in AY 2017-18) under Section 10(23C)(iiiad).
Since the gross receipt of the assessee trust exceeded the prescribed limit
of ` one crore, approval of the Pr. CIT/CIT was required under Section
10(23C)(vi), but the same was not obtained by the assessee. This had
resulted in irregular exemption of ` 2.29 crore, involving tax effect of
` 1.17 crore.
The Ministry has accepted (March 2022) the Audit observat ion and
remedial action has been initiated by issuing notice under Section 148 in
March 2021.
6.1.2 Irregular allowance of exemption when the Trusts/Institutions not 
substantially financed by the Government 
As per Section 10(23C)(iiiab) of the Act, any income of any university or other 
educational institution existing solely for educational purposes and not for the 
purposes of profit, and which is wholly or substantially financed by the 
78 University/educational institutions existing solely for  educational purposes and not for the purposes of profit are 
exempt from tax 
79 Andhra Pradesh -2, Punjab -2 and Rajasthan -3 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
107 
Government, shall not be included in computing the total income of a previous 
year. 
Rule 2BBB of the Income Tax Rules, 1962 (the Rules) further provides that for 
the purposes of the Section 10(23C)(iiiab), an entity shall be considered as being 
substantially financed by the Government, if the Government grant exceeds 
50 per cent  of the total receipts including any voluntary contributions, of such 
entity, during the relevant previous year. 
Audit noticed in 10 assessment cases 80  involving tax effect of  ` 46.71 crore that 
exemption was irregularly allowed to universities or educational institutions 
which were not substantially financed by the Government. Two cases are 
illustrated below: 
(i)  In Punjab, CIT(E) Chandigarh charge, a private society engaged in 
educational activity, filed return of income for AY 2015-16 and 2016-17 at 
` ‘Nil’ income for both the AYs. The ITR for AY 2015-16 was processed 
summarily at ` ‘Nil’ income and scrutiny assessment for AY 2016-17 was 
completed in December 2018 at ` ‘Nil’ income. Audit noticed that for the 
AY 2015-16 and AY 2016-17,  exemptions were allowed under Section 
10(23C)(iiiab) even though the assessee was not substantially financed by 
Government. The grant received was ` 19.35 crore against gross receipt 
of ` 41.35 crore in both the AYs, which was less than the stipulated  
50 per cent  as per provision ibid . This resulted in irregular allowance of 
exemption of ` 5.57 crore, involving tax effect of ` 2.77 crore in both the 
AYs. 
 The Ministry has accepted (March 2022) the Audit observation and 
remedial action has been initiated by issuing notice under Section 148 in 
March 2021. 
(ii)  In Rajasthan, under CIT(E) Jaipur charge, a government entity engaged in 
educational activity, and selected in PA sample as ‘high value case 81 ’, filed 
return of income for AY 2016-17 at  ` ‘Nil’ income. The scrutiny assessment 
was completed in December 2018 at ` ‘Nil’ income, after allowing 
exemption of ` 58.55 crore. Audit noticed that the total receipt of the 
institution was ` 60.09 crore, including Government grant of ` 1.38 crore. 
Since the Government grant was only 2.29 per cent  of total receipt, it 
cannot be categorised as wholly or substantially financed by the 
Government. Thus, allowance of exemption of ` 58.55 crore under Section 
10(23C)(iiiab) was irregular. This resulted in short levy of tax of  
` 13.02 crore.  
                                                           
80  Gujarat - 1, Punjab - 5 and Rajasthan - 4 
81  Gross receipt of ` 50 crore or above 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
108 
The Ministry has accepted (March 2022) the Audit observation and remedial 
action has been initiated by issuing notice under Section 148 in March 2021. 
Thus, Audit noticed that in spite of specific provisions under Section 
10(23C)(iiiab) of the Act, eligibility of Trusts/Institutions for exemption were not 
verified by the AOs in certain cases during assessment, resulting in revenue 
leakage. 
6.2 Incorrect computation of income and its application  
Under the provisions of the Income Tax Act, 1961, the assessing officer is 
required to make a correct assessment of the total income of the assessee and 
determine the correct sum payable by him or refundable to him on the basis of 
such assessment. Further, Section 11(1)(a) provides that the income derived 
from the property held under trust wholly for charitable or religious purposes, 
shall not be included in total income, to the extent it was applied to charitable 
purpose in India; and where any such income is accumulated or set apart for 
application to such purpose in India to the extent to which the income so 
accumulated or set apart is not in excess of 15 per cent of the income from such 
property. Audit noticed in 60 cases that the AOs, while finalizing the 
assessments, did not compute the income or application of income correctly, 
which are illustrated in the succeeding paragraphs: 
6.2.1 Incorrect computation of income 
Audit noticed errors in 31 assessment cases 
82  involving tax effect of  
` 496.66 crore while determining income from the property held by the trusts 
due to non-consideration of various receipts of the trusts as income, mistakes in 
giving appeal effect etc. Seven cases are illustrated below: 
(i)  In West Bengal, CIT(E) Kolkata charge, a Government society engaged in 
medical relief and selected in the audit sample as ‘Top 200’ case, filed 
return of income for AY 2016-17 at ` ‘Nil’ income and scrutiny assessment 
was completed in October 2018 at ` ‘Nil’ income. Audit noticed that in the 
assessment order, gross receipt of the institution was considered at  
` 1,485.54 crore. However, scrutiny of the return of income and Form 
10BB showed that the gross receipt of the assessee, for the period under 
consideration, was ` 2,525.04 crore. Thus, there was short consideration 
of gross receipt of ` 1,039.50 crore, having tax effect of ` 359.75 crore. 
 The Ministry has accepted (March 2022) the audit observation and 
remedial action has been taken under Section 154/143(3) in March 2021. 
                                                           
82  Gujarat-2, Karnataka-2, Kerala -1, Maharashtra -10, Punjab -6, Tamil Nadu -5, Uttar Pradesh -1 and West Bengal-4 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
109 
(ii) In Gujarat, CIT (E), Ahmedabad charge, a Government entity engaged in
the activity of General Public Utility, filed return of income for AY 2015-16
at ` ‘Nil’ income. The gross receipt during the year was ` 481.18 crore and
the case was selected in the PA sample as ‘Top 200’ case. The scrutiny
assessment was completed in October 2018 at ` 733.88 crore. The
assessee filed an appeal against the scrutiny assessment and appeal effect
was given in March 2019 as per CIT(A)’s order of December 2018. Audit
observed that while giving effect to the appeal order the AO incorrectly
determined loss of ` 155.03 crore instead of income of the same amount
which resulted in short levy of tax of ` 53.67 crore.
The Ministry has accepted (March 2022) the audit observation and
remedial action has been taken by passing order under Section 154 in
February 2021.
(iii) In Maharashtra under CIT(E) Mumbai charge, a private trust established as
a Corporate Social Responsibility arm of ‘B’ Ltd and engaged in multiple
charitable activities, filed return of income for AY 2015-16 at ` ‘Nil’ income.
The case was selected in the PA sample as ‘high value’ case since gross
receipt of the trust was ` 55.89 crore. The scrutiny assessment was
completed in December 2017, assessing income at ` ‘Nil’. It was noticed
from the ‘Notes on Accounts’ for the year ended 31st March 2015 that the
assessee had applied for FCRA registration which was pending but the
assessee accepted the foreign contribution, amounting to ` 63.22 crore
during the year which was kept in an Escrow Account. Audit noted that
there was a disclosure in the ‘Notes on Accounts’ that if the trust failed to
obtain the FCRA registration, the said amount shall be refunded to the
respective contributors.
As per Section 11(1) and 11(2) of the FCRA Act 2010, no person shall accept
a foreign contribution unless it obtains a certificate of registration from
the Central Government and if accepts any foreign contribution before its
registration, it has to take prior permission from the Central Government.
Audit however noticed that the assessee neither had necessary
registration under the FCRA Act, 2010 nor obtained the prior permission
of the Central Government before receiving the Foreign Contribution.
Audit further noticed that in the subsequent year (i.e., AY 2016-17), the
assessee obtained the FCRA registration in September 2015. Out of the
foreign contribution of ` 63.22 crore kept in the Escrow account in the
earlier year, the assessee transferred ` 47.76 crore to its FCRA account,
and invested the remaining amount in Fixed Deposits. As per the
provisions of Section 11 of the IT Act, the contribution, being a voluntary
contribution, was required to be treated as income of the trust. Omission

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
110 
to do so resulted in under-assessment of income of ` 63.22 crore involving 
short levy of tax of ` 21.39 crore.  
Reply of the Ministry was awaited (February 2022). 
(iv)  In West Bengal, CIT(E) Kolkata charge, a private trust engaged in the 
activity of ‘Medical Relief’, filed return of income for AY 2016-17 at ` ‘Nil’ 
income. The case was selected in the PA sample as ‘Top 200’ case since 
gross receipt of the trust was ` 197.05 crore. The scrutiny assessment was 
completed in December 2018 at ` ‘Nil’ income (deficit of ` 41.47 crore). 
Audit noticed the following irregularities which resulted in aggregate tax 
impact of ` 3.37 crore: 
 (a) In the computation of taxable income, the Assessing Officer had 
deducted ‘Apportioned patient care fund’ of ` 5.18 crore, treated as 
income by the assessee in its Income & Expenditure A/c’, without 
corresponding deduction of the expenditure incurred against such 
income. This resulted in irregular increase in ‘Deficit’ of ` 5.18 crore 
involving tax impact of ` 1.77 crore. 
 (b) ‘Work in progress (WIP)’ amounting to ` 1.96 crore, had been added 
to the ‘Total of expenditure as per the Income & Expenditure A/c’, 
while computing ‘deficit’ of ` 41.47 crore. Audit scrutiny revealed 
that there was a discrepancy in the closing balance of WIP for AY 
2015-16 and opening balance of the WIP for AY 2016-17. The ‘WIP’ 
for AY 2016-17 was to be ` (-) 2.51 crore, instead of ` 1.96 crore as 
claimed by the assessee. This resulted in irregular increase in ‘Deficit’ 
of ` 4.47 crore while computing the income. The omission resulted 
in over determination of deficit of ` 4.47 crore involving tax impact 
of ` 1.53 crore. 
 (c) The interest income of ` 27.31 lakh on ‘Earmarked fund’ was not 
treated as receipt while computing the income which involves tax 
impact of ` 6.64 lakh.  
 The Ministry has accepted (March 2022) the audit observation and 
remedial action has been taken by passing order under Section 263/143(3) 
in December 2021. 
(v) In Uttar Pradesh, under CIT (E) Lucknow charge, a private trust engaged in 
educational activity, filed return of income for AY 2015-16 at ` ‘Nil’ income. 
The case was selected in the PA sample as ‘high value’ case since gross 
receipt of the trust was ` 99.69 crore. The scrutiny assessment, was 
completed under Section 143(3) read with Section 263, in December 2018, 
at income of ` 25.11 crore, after adding ` 9.83 crore spent on acquisition 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
111 
of land for ‘‘J’ University’, which was neither a part of the assessee’s trust, 
nor was the expenditure made on any activity to meet the aims and 
objectives of the assessee’s trust. Audit noticed that the AO, out of the 
total fixed asset purchased for ‘‘J’ University’ for ` 42.76 crore, made 
partial disallowance of ` 9.83 crore and allowed ` 32.93 crore, which 
should also have been disallowed and added back to the income of the 
assessee. This resulted in short computation of income of ` 32.93 crore 
having tax effect of ` 16.23 crore. 
The Ministry has accepted (March 2022) the audit observation a nd 
remedial action has been initiated by issuing notice under Section 154 in 
December 2021. 
(vi) In Maharashtra, CIT(E) Mumbai charge, a Local Authority created by
Government of Maharashtra and engaged in the activity of ‘Relief of the
Poor’ filed return of income for AY 2016-17 at ` ‘Nil’ income. The case was
selected in the PA sample as ‘Top 200’ case since gross receipt of the trust
was ` 180.37 crore. The scrutiny assessment was completed in December
2018, assessing income at ` 492.25 crore, after denying exemption under
Section 11 of the Act. Audit scrutiny of balance sheet revealed that the
assessee transferred an amount of ` 23.04 crore to a Fund, pertaining to
deposit forfeited/lapsed. Audit observed from the notes to accounts that
these deposits represent unclaimed deposit for more than three years
which had been considered as ‘lapsed’ and directly transferred to a reserve
fund. As this amount represents income of the assessee, it was required to
be brought to tax. The omission to do so resulted in under-assessment of
income of ` 23.04 crore, involving short levy of tax of ` 8.0 crore.
Reply of the Ministry was awaited (February 2022).
(vii) In Maharashtra, CIT(E), Mumbai charge, a private trust engaged in the
activity of ‘Relief of the Poor’ filed return of income for AY 2016-17 at ` ‘Nil’
income. The assessee was selected as ‘High value’ case in the audit sample
since the gross receipt of the trust was ` 101.21 crore. The scrutiny
assessment was completed in December 2018, assessing income at ` ‘Nil’.
The trust has been established for the upliftment and well-being of the
people residing under the umbrella of an institution, by providing them
more spacious ownership flats with modern amenities in a better
environment. Audit observed that the AO, while finalising the assessment
did not allow deficit of ` 140.63 crore to be carried forward to the assessee
as the deficit was met from the corpus donation (` 101.21 crore) and loan
(` 90 crore). AO also concluded that the corpus donation and loan were in
the nature of voluntary contributions and were to be applied towards the

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
112 
object for claim of exemption. The corpus donation and loan being 
voluntary contribution should have been treated as income, which was not 
done by the AO. Omission of not computing total income at ` 50.58 crore, 
in accordance with the findings of assessment by the AO resulted in non 
levy of tax of ` 17.48 crore. 
Reply of the Ministry was awaited (February 2022). 
T
hus, Audit noticed that in certain cases, while finalization of assessment, the 
Department did not consider various receipts of the trusts as income from the 
property held by the trusts which resulted in incorrect computation of income 
and short levy of tax. 
6.2.2 Incorrect computation of application of income 
Audit noticed 27 assessment cases83 involving tax effect of ` 42.38 crore where 
the AOs, while finalizing the assessment, had treated inadmissible expenses as 
application of income for charitable or religious purpose. Those inadmissible 
expenses inter alia included allowance of deemed application without filing 
Form 9A, allowance of standard deduction under Section 24(a) on house 
property income, acceptance of various provisions and expenditure like Income 
Tax, TDS etc., as application of income. Five cases are illustrated below: 
(i) In Tamil Nadu, CIT(E) Chennai charge, a private trust engaged in
educational activity, filed return of income for AY 2017-18 at ` ‘Nil’ income.
The gross receipt of the trust was ` 55.17 crore and the assessment was
completed in December 2019 at ` ‘Nil’ income. Audit noticed that the
assessee had claimed deemed application of ` 24.79 crore during the
previous year under clause (2) of Explanation (1) to Section 11(1).
However, the assessee did not file the requisite Form 9A as envisaged in
Rule 17 of IT Rules. Thus, claim of deemed application of ` 24.79 crore was
not admissible with consequential tax effect of ` 12.13 crore including
interest.
The Ministry has accepted (March 2022) the audit observation and
remedial action has been initiated by issuing notice under Section 148 in
March 2021.
(ii) In Karnataka, CIT(E) Bengaluru charge, a Government society e ngaged in
the activity of ‘General Public Utility’ filed return of income for AY 2015-16
at ` ‘Nil’ income. The case was selected in the PA sample as ‘High value’
case since gross receipt of the trust was ` 81.69 crore. The scrutiny
83 Andhra Pradesh -1, Karnataka -2, Kerala -1, Maharashtra -10, Odisha -1, Punjab -2, Rajasthan -3, Tamil Nadu -2 and 
West Bengal – 5. 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
113 
assessment was completed in September 2017 and income determined at  
` 71.30 crore after disallowing exemption under Section 11. Audit noticed 
that project grants of ` 8.59 crore were diverted towards operational 
expenditure and the same was debited to the Income and Expenditure 
account and claimed as expenditure, which was allowed. The mistake 
resulted in short computation of income of ` 8.59 crore with a tax effect 
of ` 4.12 crore.  
 The Ministry has accepted (March 2022) the audit observation and 
initiated remedial action by issuing notice under Section 154 in  
January 2021. 
(iii)  In Karnataka, CIT (E) Bengaluru charge, a private trust engaged in the 
activity of ‘Education’ filed return of income for AY 2015-16 at ` ‘Nil’ 
income. The case was selected in the PA sample as ‘Top 200’ case since 
gross receipt of the trust was ` 258.81 crore. The scrutiny assessment was 
completed in December 2017 by assessing income at ` 16.80 crore after 
denying exemption under Section 11. Audit noticed that while computing 
the income, depreciation at ` 6.64 crore was allowed twice resulting in 
short computation of income by ` 6.64 crore with a consequent short levy 
of tax including interest at ` 3.27 crore.  
 The Ministry has accepted (March 2022) the audit observation and 
remedial action has been taken by passing order under Section 154 in 
February 2021. 
(iv)  In West Bengal, CIT(E) Kolkata charge, a private trust engaged in the 
activity of ‘Medical Relief’ filed return of income for AY 2016-17 at ` ‘Nil’ 
income. The case was selected in the PA sample as ‘Top 200’ case since 
gross receipt of the trust was ` 197.05 crore. The scrutiny assessment was 
completed in December 2018 at ` ‘Nil’ income. Audit noticed that the 
‘Provision of doubtful debt’ of ` 37.40 lakh, had been treated as 
‘application of income’ during assessment, by the AO, although the Act 
requires that only the actual expenditure incurred during the year can be 
treated as application and a mere provision cannot be allowed as 
application. The same view has also been expressed by the Apex Court 84 . 
This resulted in short levy of tax of ` 9.75 lakh. 
 The Ministry has accepted (March 2022) the audit observation and 
remedial action has been taken by passing order under Section 263/143(3) 
of the Act in December 2021. 
                                                           
84  Nachimuthu Industrial Association v/s CIT, reported in 235 ITR 190 [1999] 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
114 
(v) In Maharashtra, under CIT(E) Mumbai charge, a Government society 
engaged in the activity of ‘Medical Relief’ filed return of income for AY 
2015-16 at ` ‘Nil’ income. The case was selected in the PA sample as ‘Top 
200’ case since gross receipt of the assessee was ` 860.94 crore. The 
scrutiny assessment of the trust was completed in October 2017, assessing 
income at ` ‘Nil’ income (deficit of ` 49.96 crore). Audit scrutiny of 
computation of income revealed that the assessee had claimed ` 88.00 
crore towards grants in transit by exercising option as per clause 2 of 
explanation 1 to Section 11(1) of the Act which provides that such option 
should be exercised before the due date of filing of return of income. Since 
the assessee failed to file the return of income within due date, the option 
exercised was not allowable. However, the Department allowed the claim 
as per the returned income. The mistake resulted in under-assessment of 
income of ` 38.03 crore, with consequent short levy of tax ` 12.91 crore.  
 Reply of the Ministry was awaited (February 2022). 
Thus, Audit observed that in certain cases, the AOs while finalising assessments 
had allowed inadmissible expenses as application of income for charitable or 
religious purpose, which resulted in undue benefit to the assessees. 
6.3 Irregular Allowance of Accumulation 
Section 11(2) of the Act provides that if in the previous year, income applied to 
charitable or religious purposes in India falls short of 85 per cent  of the income 
derived during that year from the property held under a Trust, the trust can opt 
for accumulation of the unapplied portion of the income, to be spent for 
specified purpose(s) in the next five years, provided the assessee furnishes a 
statement in Form 10, on or before the due date of furnishing the return of 
income, stating the purpose for which the income is being accumulated. Further, 
the income accumulated under Section 11(2) shall have to be invested in the 
modes specified under Section 11(5) in order to avail exemption. 
Therefore, the purpose of accumulation should be specific and the accumulation 
should be for the objects of the Trust. The Hon’ble Madras High Court 
85  had held 
that the purpose had to be specific and cannot be general in nature. 
Audit noticed 66 assessment cases 86  involving tax effect of ` 68.14 crore where 
the AOs had allowed accumulation under Section 11(2) even though there was 
insufficient fund for accumulation, the purpose of accumulation was general in 
nature without mentioning the specific purpose, the assessee failed to furnish 
                                                           
85  CIT vs. M. Ct. Muthaiah Chettiar Family Trust (2000) reported in 245 ITR 400 
86  Chhattisgarh -2, Delhi -2, Gujarat -1, Himachal Pradesh -2, Jammu -1, Karnataka -9, Madhya Pradesh -12, 
Maharashtra -25, Punjab -5, Tamil Nadu -3, Uttarakhand -1 and West Bengal -3. 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
115 
Form 10 before the due date specified under Section 139(1) or the accumulation 
was not invested in the specified mode. Five cases are illustrated below: 
(i) In Karnataka, CIT(E), Bengaluru Charge, scrutiny assessment of a private
trust engaged in the activity of ‘General Public Utility’ filed return of
income for AY 2016-17 at ` ‘Nil’ income. The scrutiny assessment was
completed in December 2018 at ` ‘Nil’ after allowing exemption of
` 10.34 crore under Section 11. Audit noticed that the assessee had
accumulated an amount of ` 7.96 crore and the purpose for accumulation
was mentioned as ‘Set apart for accumulation’. Since the purpose does not
fulfil the conditions laid down in Section 11(2), the same should have been
disallowed and brought to tax. The tax effect on this account works out to
` 3.50 crore. The DCIT (E), Circle 1, Bengaluru stated (September 2020)
that the objections would be looked into for necessary remedial action.
Reply of the Ministry was awaited (February 2022).
(ii) In Maharashtra, CIT(E), Mumbai charge, a private corporate trust engaged
in educational activity, filed return of income for AYs 2016-17 & 2015-16
at ` ‘Nil’ income. The scrutiny assessment for the AYs 2016-17 & 2015-16
was completed in December 2018 and December 2017 respectively,
assessing income at ` ‘Nil’ after allowing accumulation under Section 11(2)
for ` 9.64 crore and ` 4.91 crore respectively. Audit scrutiny revealed that
the assessee had filed Form 10 for both the years in December 2017.
Further, it was also noticed that the assessee had not filed Form 10 for AY
2014-15 but claimed accumulation of ` 70.18 lakh under Section 11(2). As
the assessee had failed to file Form 10 within the stipulated period, the
accumulation under Section 11(2) was not to be allowed. This resulted in
under-assessment of income of ` 15.24 crore involving tax effect of
` 5.16 crore for AY 2014-15 to AY 2016-17.
The DCIT (E), Circle 1, Mumbai accepted (March 2021) the a udit
observations for AY 2015-16 and 2016-17 and proposed for remedial
action under Section 263. For AY 2014-15, the Department had not
accepted the audit observation stating the reason that no accumulation
was claimed by the assessee for the relevant AY.
The reply for AY 2014-15 was not tenable as the assessee had claimed
accumulation of ` 70.18 lakh under Section 11(2).
Reply of the Ministry was awaited (February 2022).
(iii) In Madhya Pradesh, under CIT(E) Bhopal charge, a private trust engaged in
‘Medical Relief’, filed original return of income for AY 2014-15 at ` ‘Nil’
income. The case was selected in the PA sample as ‘High Value’ case since

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
116 
the gross receipt of the assessee was ` 59.78 crore. The rectification order 
was passed in January 2017, assessing the income as ` ‘Nil’. Audit noticed 
that the assessee claimed an amount of ` 1.10 crore was accumulated for 
application for the next five years, but did not file Form 10 electronically/ 
manually. However, the accumulated amount of ` 1.10 crore was not 
added to the total income of the assessee. This resulted in short levy of tax 
of ` 42.94 lakh. 
The Ministry, while not accepting the audit observation, state d (March 
2022) that the assessee has not claimed any exemption under Section 
11(2) of the IT Act and Form 10 is not applicable in this case. The assessee 
has not claimed any amount in Schedule I of ITR for accumulation of 
income under Section 11(2) of the Act. However, the assessee has claimed 
the amount of ` 1.09 crore under clause 2 of explanation of Section 11(1) 
of the Act. 
Reply of the Ministry is being verified by the Field Audit of fice. 
(iv) In West Bengal, under CIT-(E), Kolkata charge, a Government society
engaged in ‘Research’ activity, filed original return of income for AY
2016-17 at ` ‘Nil’ income. The case was selected in the PA sample as ‘Top
200’ case since the gross receipt of the assessee was ` 172.61 crore. The
scrutiny assessment was completed at ` ‘Nil’ income in November 2018 at
` ‘Nil’ income. Audit noticed that the assessee had claimed and was
allowed exemption under Section 10(21). Further, Audit noticed that the
assessee was allowed statutory accumulation of 15 per cent of income
under Section 11(1) of the Act, in the assessment order, even though the
assessee was registered under Section 35(1)(ii) and not registered under
Section 12/12AA. Such irregular accumulation of income, amounting to
` 21.00 crore, had a tax effect of ` 9.59 crore.
The Ministry has accepted (March 2022) the audit observation and
remedial action has been initiated by passing order under Section 263 in
March 2021.
(v) In Tamil Nadu, CIT(E), Chennai charge, a private trust engaged in
educational activity, filed return of income for AY 2016-17 at ` ‘Nil’ income.
The case was selected in the PA sample as ‘high value’ case since the gross
receipt of the trust was `  50.03 crore. The scrutiny assessment was
completed in November 2018 at ` ‘Nil’ income. Audit noticed that the total
receipts were ` 50.03 crore and the total application of income was
` 70.04 crore during FY 2015-16. As the entire receipts was treated as
applied, the assessee was not eligible for any accumulation. However, the
assessee was allowed to accumulate ` 7.50 crore, being 15 per cent of total

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
117 
receipts of ` 50.03 crore. This resulted in irregular accumulation of 
` 7.50 crore. 
The Ministry has accepted (March 2022) the audit observation a nd 
remedial action has been initiated by issuing notice under Section 148 in 
March 2021. 
Thus, Audit observed that in certain cases, the ITD had allowed accumulation in 
contravention of provisions stipulated under Section 11(2) of the Act. 
6.4 Allowance of exemption although income or property of the trust was 
utilised for the benefit of persons having substantial interest 
Section 13 provides that exemption to charitable Trusts/Institutions under 
Section 11 and Section 12 would not be available if any income or property of 
the trust is applied, directly or indirectly, for the benefit of person87 specified in 
Section 13(3). Further, when a trust makes any payment or provide any services 
to specified persons then it has to disclose the details in the Audit Report in Form 
10B whether any part of the income or property of the Trusts/Institutions was 
lent, or continues to be lent, in the previous year to a specified person. 
Audit noticed 22 assessment cases88 involving tax effect of ` 33.07 crore where 
t
he assessees had utilised their income or property for the benefit of persons 
specified under Section 13(3) but the Department did not levy tax on such 
amount of income or property utilised for the benefit of the specified persons. 
Six cases are illustrated below: 
(i) In Kerala, Pr. CIT(E), Kochi Charge, a Government body engaged in the
activity of ‘General Public Utility’ filed original return of income for AY
2017-18 at ` ‘Nil’ income. The scrutiny assessment was completed in
November 2019 at ` ‘Nil’ income. Audit noticed that the assessee availed
Bank Overdraft (OD) of ` 215.00 crore and the same was given as loan to
Government of Kerala. Against this, the assessee received ` 6.10 crore
towards interest on loan and paid ` 8.26 crore towards interest on OD with
Bank. As such, the Trust had incurred an extra expenditure of ` 2.16 crore
(` 8.26 crore – ` 6.10 crore), which was allowed as application of income.
Since the assessee utilized its fund for the benefit of its founder, allowance
of ` 2.16 crore as application was not in order as per the provisions of
Section 13(3). This resulted in short-levy of tax of ` 98.65 lakh.
The DCIT(E) Circle, Trivandrum replied (March 2020) that the  fund was
transferred as per Government directions and returned with one per cent
87 The person specified in Section 13(3) are the author of th e trust or founder of the institution; any person who has 
made a substantial contribution to the trust or institution of amount exceeding ` 50,000; where such author, 
founder or person is a HUF; any trustee of the trust or manager; any relative of any such author, founder, 
substantial contributor, member, trustee or manager. 
88 Himachal Pradesh -1, Karnataka -2, Kerala -1, Maharashtra -9, Punjab -6 and Tamil Nadu -3. 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
118 
additional interest. The reply is not tenable as the fund was utilized for the 
benefit of the founder and not for the intended beneficiaries of the Trust. 
Hence, the extra interest expenditure incurred cannot be treated as 
application of income.  
 The Ministry has accepted (March 2022) the audit observation and 
remedial action has been initiated by issuing notice under Section 148 in 
March 2021. 
(ii)  In Punjab, CIT(E) Chandigarh a private society engaged in the activity of 
‘General Public Utility’, filed return of income for AY 2016-17 at ` ‘Nil’ 
income and the scrutiny assessment was completed in December 2018 at 
a total income of ` ‘Nil’. Audit noticed that although the assessee had 
disbursed interest free loan of ` 1.11 crore to related parties such as 
President and Treasurer of the organization, no disallowance was made in 
this respect in the assessment. This resulted in short levy of tax of  
` 50.12 lakh. The AC/DCIT(E), Circle, Chandigarh replied (January 2020) 
that audit objection had been considered and action as per provisions of 
the Income Tax Act would be taken. 
Reply of the Ministry was awaited (February 2022). 
(iii)  In Maharashtra, CIT(E) Mumbai charge, a private entity engaged in 
educational activity, filed return of income for AY 2015-16 at ` ‘Nil’ income. 
The gross receipt of the assessee was  ` 114.24 crore and selected as ‘High 
value’ case in the PA sample. The scrutiny assessment was completed in 
October 2017, assessing income at ` ‘Nil’. Audit noticed that during the 
year, the assessee had purchased a New Flat and Garage from ‘K’ Ltd., for 
consideration of ` 10.00 crore, in a Co-operative Housing Society. Audit 
observed that one of the Members of Board of Governance of the entity, 
was the chairman and Managing Director of ‘K’ Ltd. The Act provides that 
no property or income of the trust shall be utilised for the benefit of person 
referred to Section 13(3) of the Act. However, there are no records such 
as Sale deed Agreement and NOC of the Co-operative Housing Society, 
allowing the assessee to utilise the Flat as Office premises. As the trust 
income was utilised for the benefit of related person referred to Section 
13(3) of the Act, deduction under Section 11 was not allowable to the 
assessee.  
Reply of the Ministry was awaited (February 2022). 
(iv) In Karnataka, under CIT(E) Bengaluru Charge, a private trust, engaged in 
educational activity, filed return of income for AY 2016-17 at ` ‘Nil’ income. 
The gross receipt of the assessee was ` 115.23 crore and this was selected 
as ‘High value’ case in the PA sample. The scrutiny assessment was 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
119 
completed in December 2018, accepting the income returned at ` ‘Nil’. It 
was noticed that during the year, the assessee paid ` 1.25 crore to M/s ‘L’ 
Pvt. Ltd. towards professional charges for running & maintenance of ‘M’ 
School; and ` 4.28 crore to M/s ‘N’ for value added course, conducted for 
various institutions of ‘O’ group. Audit noticed that there was substantial 
interest in the above concerns, by the family of the President of ‘O’ group 
and therefore the transactions of the Trust with the related concerns 
would have to be at arm’s length. However, the transactions were not at 
arm’s length, in terms of Hyderabad Tribunal judgement 89 , as determined 
by the assessing officer, in the scrutiny assessment for AY 2017-18. Thus, 
undue benefit was passed on to specified persons and the exemption 
allowed in AY 2016-17 should have been withdrawn. This resulted in short 
computation of income of ` 33.90 crore with a consequent short levy of 
tax of ` 15.60 crore. The JCIT(E), Circle 1, Bengaluru replied (September 
2018) that the matter would be looked into. 
Reply of the Ministry was awaited (February 2022). 
(v)  In Maharashtra, CIT(E) Mumbai charge, a private trust engaged in the 
educational activity, filed return of income for AYs 2014-15 and 2015-16 at 
` ‘Nil’ income. The gross receipt of the assessee was ` 79.82 crore for AY 
2015-16 and selected as ‘High value’ case in the PA sample. The scrutiny 
assessment was completed for AY 2014-15, in December 2016, followed 
by rectification in April 2018, determining income at ` ‘Nil’ and for AY 
2015-16, in December 2017, assessing income at ` ‘Nil’. Audit observed 
that the Department during assessment had disallowed deduction under 
Section 11 for rented property, to the related party, for violation of 
provisions of Section 13 of the Act and computed notional income from 
house property, of ` 60.20 lakh in AY 2015-16, and ` 54.73 lakh in AY 
2014-15.  Audit scrutiny of the computation of total income revealed that 
the Department considered this income as income of trust property, 
eligible for deduction under Section 11 of the Act and adjusted same 
against the expenses applied towards the objective of the trust, instead of 
treating this income for taxation separately, in view of the provisions of 
Section 13(1) 90  of the Act. The omission resulted in under-assessment of 
income of ` 60.20 lakh, in AY 2015-16, and ` 54.73 lakh, in AY 2014-15, 
involving short levy of tax, aggregating to ` 35.52 lakh.  
                                                           
89  in the case of M/s NTR Memorial Trust in ITA No. 461 & 462/Hyd/2010 dated 18.3.2011 wherein it was held that 
the profit percentage to the extent of eight per cent  is reasonable and not excessive. 
90  Section 13(1) of the Act, provides that exemption to charitable trusts or institutions under Section 11 or 12 would 
not be available, if any income or property of the trust is applied, directly or indirectly, for the benefit of any 
specified person referred to in Section 13(3). The person specified in Section 13(3) are the author of the trust or 
founder of the institution; any person who has made a substantial contribution to the trust or institution of amount 
exceeding ` 50,000; where such author, founder or person is a HUF; any trustee of the trust or manager; any 
relative of any such author, founder, substantial contributor, member, trustee or manager. 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
120 
 Reply of the Ministry was awaited (February 2022). 
 (vi) In Maharashtra, Pr. CIT(E), Pune Charge, a private trust engaged in 
educational activity, having gross receipt of ` 424.75 crore, filed its return 
of income for AY 2016-17 at ` ‘Nil’ income. The case was initially processed 
in summary manner and subsequently, selected for scrutiny and 
assessment was completed in December 2018 under Section 143(3), by 
accepting the returned income at ‘Nil’. Audit noticed that as per schedule-
15 (Establishment Expenses) to Income and Expenditure Account, the 
Assessee trust had shown expenses of ` 144.79 crore and ` 75.77 crore 
towards rent and infrastructure development fees respectively to ‘P’ 
University and subsequently these amounts were knocked off by reducing 
the same amount from the respective sub-heads. Thus, the amounts were 
adjusted in the same year and not debited in the expenditure side. Audit 
further noticed that there was no mention either in the scrutiny 
assessment order or in the audit report in Form 10B about the said 
transaction made by the assessee with the related party. Audit could not 
ascertain reasons for knocking off and nature of transactions involved in it. 
Thus, undue benefit to related parties through this transaction could not 
be ruled out. 
 In reply (January 2022), DCIT (E) Circle Pune while not accepting the 
observation, stated that in Form 10B the assessee reflected the transaction 
with the related party, 'Q'. However, in respect of transaction between ‘P’ 
University and ‘R’ Society, both being two constituents of the assessee 
trust, these transactions were only notional entries and, therefore, 
knocked off while consolidating the Annual Accounts of the assessee Trust. 
 The reply of the Department was not tenable as the reply was silent about 
the purpose of such accounting treatment. If at all, both the units were the 
constituents of the assessee trust, the purpose of charging rent and 
infrastructure development fees by one constituent from another 
constituent of the assessee trust could not be ascertained.  
Reply of the Ministry was awaited (February 2022). 
Thus, Audit observed that in certain cases, although the assessee had utilised 
their income or property for the benefit of person specified in Section 13(3) 91 , 
the Department did not levy tax on such amount of income or property utilised 
for the benefit of the related persons. 
                                                           
91  The person specified in Section 13(3) are the author of the trust or founder of the institution; any person who has 
made a substantial contribution to the trust or institution of amount exceeding ` 50,000; where such author, 
founder or person is a HUF; any trustee of the trust or manager; any relative of any such author, founder, 
substantial contributor, member, trustee or manager. 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
121 
6.5 Irregular allowance of double benefits to Trusts 
Audit observed instances of non-compliance of various provisions of the Income 
Tax Act in the assessment orders, culminating in irregular allowance of double 
benefits to the assessees. These cases are illustrated below: 
6.5.1 Irregular allowance of depreciation on assets whose acquisition had 
already been claimed as application of income 
Section 11(6) and explanation to proviso92 inserted after the 17th proviso to 
clause (23C) of Section 10, stipulates that where any income is required to be 
applied or accumulated, then, for such purpose, the income shall be determined 
without any deduction or allowance by way of depreciation or otherwise in 
respect of any asset, acquisition of which has been claimed as an application of 
income under this clause in the same or any other previous year.  
Audit noticed eight assessment cases
93 involving tax effect of ` 13.78 crore 
where depreciation on assets had been allowed as application of income, even 
though the relevant capital expenditure to acquire such assets had already been 
treated as application of income, resulting in double benefit to the assessee. Two 
cases are illustrated below: 
(i) In Tamil Nadu, CIT(E), Chennai charge, a private trust engaged in
educational activity, filed return of income for AY 2016-17 at ` ‘Nil’ income.
The scrutiny assessment was completed in October 2018 accepting ` ‘Nil’
income as returned by the assessee after allowing exemption of
` 41.79 crore under Section 10(23C). Audit noticed that depreciation of
` 4.52 crore was allowed as application of income which resulted in double
deduction of expenditure. This resulted in non-levy of tax of ` 1.56 crore
including applicable interest.
The Ministry has accepted (March 2022) the audit observation and
remedial action has been completed by passing order under Section 154
in March 2020.
(ii) In Punjab, CIT(E) Chandigarh charge, a Government society engaged in
educational activity, filed return of income for AY 2017-18 at ` ‘Nil’ income
and the scrutiny assessment was completed in October 2019 at ` ‘Nil’
income. Audit noticed that the assessee claimed depreciation of ` 9.81
crore as application of income which was allowed in assessment. This
resulted in double deduction of expenditure as well as non-levy of tax of
` 4.57 crore including applicable interest.
92 as inserted by the Finance (No. 2) Act, 2014 effective fro m 1.4.2015 
93 Gujarat -1, Himachal Pradesh -2, Punjab -2, Tamil Nadu -1 and West Bengal -2 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
122 
 The Ministry has accepted (March 2022) the audit observation and 
initiated remedial action by issuing notice under Section 148 in 
March 2021. 
Thus, Audit observed that in certain cases, depreciation on assets had been 
allowed as application of income, even though the relevant capital expenditure 
to acquire such assets had already been treated as application of income 
resulting in double benefit to the assessee. 
6.5.2  Irregular allowance of expenditure from corpus/earmarked funds as 
application of income 
Section 11(1)(d) of the Income Tax Act, 1961, relates to income in the form of 
voluntary contributions made with a specific direction that they shall form part 
of the corpus of the trust or institution.  
Audit noticed 11 assessment cases 
94  involving tax effect of ` 81.58 crore where 
the AO had allowed claims, pertaining to application of income incurred from 
the corpus fund, or other specific purpose funds, resulting in double benefit to 
the assessee. One case is illustrated below: 
(i)  In West Bengal, CIT(E), Kolkata charge, a private trust engaged in the 
activity of ‘Medial Relief’ filed return of income for AY 2014-15, AY 
2015-16, AY 2016-17 and AY 2017-18 at ` ‘Nil’ income. The case for AY 
2016-17 was selected in the PA sample as ‘Top 200’ case since gross 
receipt of the trust was ` 197.05 crore. The scrutiny assessments for AY 
2014-15, AY 2015-16, AY 2016-17 and AY 2017-18 were completed in 
December 2016, December 2017,  December 2018 and December 2019 
respectively at ` ‘Nil’ income. Audit noticed from the assessment records 
of AY 2014-15 to AY 2017-18 that expenditure on addition of fixed assets 
and work in progress for certain projects, had been treated as application 
of income, although such expenditure had been incurred out of the 
voluntary contributions received in the ‘Earmarked funds’ for those 
projects and not treated as income of that assessment year. Such irregular 
treatment of expenditure, amounting to ` 145.55 crore 95 , from earmarked 
funds, as application of income, had a tax effect of ` 62.32 crore 96 . 
 The Ministry has accepted (March 2022) the audit observation and 
initiated remedial action by issuing notice(s) under Section 148 for AYs 
2014-15, 2015-16 and 2017-18 in March 2021. For AY 2016-17, remedial 
action has been taken by passing order under Section 263/143(3) in 
December 2021. 
                                                           
94  Jammu -3 and West Bengal -8 
95  ` 15.44 crore for AY 2014-15; ` 38.92 crore for AY 2015-16; ` 51.86 crore for AY 2016-17; ` 39.33 crore for AY 
2017-18 
96  ` 5.92 crore for AY 2014-15, ` 16.34 crore for AY 2015-16,  ` 22.61 crore for AY 2016-17 and ` 17.45 crore for AY 
2017-18 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
123 
Thus, Audit observed that in certain cases, the AOs had allowed claims, 
pertaining to application of income incurred from the corpus fund, or other 
specific purpose funds resulting in double benefit to the assessee. 
6.6 Irregular allowance of exemption on corpus donation 
Section 11(1)(d) provides that voluntary contributions made with a specific 
direction that they shall form part of the corpus of the trust or institution, will 
not be included in the income of the Trust. Therefore, no voluntary contribution 
can be treated as corpus without any specific direction by the donor.  
Audit noticed nine assessment cases 97  involving tax effect of ` 52.08 crore where 
the Department allowed exemption under Section 11(1)(d) treating the 
voluntary contributions as corpus, without ensuring that there was a specific 
direction of the donors. Two cases are illustrated below: 
(i)  In Gujarat, CIT(E) Ahmedabad charge, a private trust engaged in 
educational activity, filed return of income for AY 2015-16 at ` ‘Nil’ 
income. The case was selected as ‘High value ’ case since the gross receipt 
of the trust was ` 58.14 crore. The scrutiny assessment was completed in 
September 2017 at ` ‘Nil’ income. Audit noticed that the assessee 
declared corpus receipt of ` 32.55 crore but did not furnish any evidence 
regarding any specific direction by the donor or any source of donation, 
although the Department asked the assessee to furnish the same. In the 
absence of such direction, the amount was required to treated as income 
for the year under Section 11(1)(a) by the Assessing Officer but the same 
was not done. The omission resulted in under-assessment of income of 
` 27.67 crore (85 per cent  of ` 32.55 crore) with consequent non-levy of 
tax of ` 9.40 crore.  
 The Ministry has accepted (March 2022) the audit observation and 
initiated remedial action by issuing notice under Section 143(3) read with 
section 263 of the IT Act in March 2021. 
(ii)  In West Bengal, CIT(E) Kolkata charge, a Government society engaged in 
the activity of ‘Preservation of Environment’, filed return of income for AY 
2016-17 at ` ‘Nil’ income.  The case was selected as ‘Top 200 ’ case in the 
sample since the gross receipt of the trust was ` 207.59 crore. The scrutiny 
assessment was completed in December 2018 at ` ‘Nil’ income. Audit 
noticed that the assessee had accumulated unspent income of ` 84.08 
crore as corpus fund, and claimed exemption thereon, under Section 
11(1)(d) of the Act. The assessee had accumulated this corpus fund out of 
the ` 287.18 crore received from the Central/State Governments, for 
                                                           
97  Gujarat -1, Maharashtra -3, Odisha -2, Rajasthan -2 and West Bengal -1. 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
124 
'meeting obligatory eligible expenses, including committed liabilities'. 
Being specific in nature, such grants should be treated as legal obligations 
and not voluntary contributions and should be utilized only as per the 
directions of the sanctioning authority. The assessee had stated that the 
grants were kept as part of the capital of the project, which was to be 
withdrawn only for earmarked schemes. However, there was no direction 
in the sanction letters to keep the unutilized fund as corpus of the 
assessee, in absence of which, exemption on ` 84.08 crore allowed to the 
assessee, under Section 11(1)(d), was not admissible. This resulted in 
under-assessment of income by ` 84.08 crore, involving tax effect of tax 
of ` 38.12 crore including interest. 
The Ministry has accepted (March 2022) the audit observation and 
initiated remedial action by issuing notice under Section 148 of the IT Act 
in March 2021. 
Thus, Audit observed that in certain cases, the Department allowed exemption 
under Section 11(1)(d) treating the voluntary contributions as corpus without 
ensuring that there was a specific direction of the donors in contravention of the 
provisions of the Act. 
6.7 Grant of exemption to trusts, although activities were not charitable in 
nature 
The Act provides exemption to charitable Trusts/Institutions in respect of 
income applied towards their objectives. However, any activity of advancement 
of any other object of general public utility which involves the carrying on of any 
activity in the nature of trade, commerce or business or any activity of rendering 
any service for a cess or fee or any other consideration where the aggregate 
receipts from such activity exceeds rupees twenty five lakh (20 per cent of total 
receipt with effect from 01.04.2016), shall not be treated as charitable purpose, 
irrespective of the nature of use or application, or retention, of the income from 
such activity.  
In Maharashtra, Audit noticed in nine assessment cases that the Department 
allowed exemption of ` 549.15 crore under Section 11 involving tax effect of 
` 189.07 crore even though the objectives or activities of the trusts were not 
charitable in nature. Six cases of two assessees are illustrated below: 
(i) In CIT(E) Mumbai charge, a private trust engaged in the activity of ‘General
Public Utility’ filed return of income for AYs 2014-15, 2015-16 and 2016-17
at ` ‘Nil’ income. The scrutiny assessments were completed in December
2016, December 2017 and December 2018 at an income of ` 5.26 crore,
` 1.64 crore and ` ‘Nil’ respectively allowing aggregated exemption of
` 32.40 crore (` 11.26 crore for AY 2014-15, ` 9.42 crore for AY 2015-16

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
125 
and ` 11.72 crore for AY 2016-17) under Section 11. The scrutiny 
assessment of AY 2014-15 was further rectified under Section 154 in 
December 2016 revising income at ` ‘Nil’. Audit noticed that the objective 
of the assessee trust was to organise International Textile Machinery 
Exhibitions on the latest development of technology in the field of textile 
machinery. Audit observed that for the purpose of exhibition, the assessee 
had taken advances of ` 45.02 crore from the exhibitors for ‘an Exhibition’ 
and offered this income as business income and claimed the benefit of 
Section 11(4A) 98  which was allowed by the Department. The claim of 
assessee was not in order, as Section 11(4A) applies only when the 
business of the trust is incidental to the attainment of the objectives of the 
trust. Thus, conducting exhibition was not incidental to the objectives of 
the assessee but was the main objective of the assessee, which suggested 
that the sole activity of the assessee was rendering service for a cess or fee 
or any other consideration. In view of the provisions of Section 2(15), the 
activity of the assessee was not charitable in nature and hence the 
assessee was not eligible for exemption under Section 11. The omission to 
do so resulted in under-assessment of income of ` 23.79 crore for AY 
2014-15 to AY 2016-17 involving short levy of tax of ` 8.14 crore.  
 The DCIT(E) Circle-1(1), Mumbai accepted (September 2021) the audit 
observation and initiated remedial action under Section 147 for AY 
2014-15 and under Section 263 for AY 2015-16 and AY 2016-17. 
(ii)  In Maharashtra, under CIT(E) Mumbai charge, , a private entity engaged in 
educational activity, filed return of income for AYs 2014-15, 2015-16 and 
AY 2016-17 at ` ‘Nil’ income. The cases for AYs 2015-16 and 2016-17 were 
selected in the PA sample as ‘High Value’ cases since the gross receipt 
during the years were ` 114.24 crore and ` 134.63 crore respectively. The 
scrutiny assessments were completed in November 2016, October 2017 
and October 2018, for AY 2014-15 to AY 2016-17, respectively, assessing 
income at ` 3.16 crore for AY 2014-15 and ` ‘Nil’ for AYs 2015-16 & 2016-17. 
Audit noticed that the Institution was said to be engaged in the activities 
for the promotion of training, research, professionalism and skill formation 
at all levels of the construction and other allied industries. Its activity also 
included undertaking consultancy, as well as setting up consultancy 
centres, to conduct research, training, organize conference, seminars etc. 
Audit also noticed that the assessee conducts programmes for the 
Management of Family-Owned Construction Business and service training 
programmes, either at entity’s campus, or off campus, which were 
                                                           
98  Section 11(4A) provided that shall exemption under Section 11 not apply in relation to any income of a trust or an 
institution, being profits and gains of business, unless the business is incidental to the attainment of the objectives 
of the trust or institution, and separate books of account are maintained by such trust or institution in respect of 
such business. 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
126 
designed as per requirement of the customers for the executive class and 
charged fees for these services. 
It was observed that the assessee was not imparting any formal e ducation, 
but was acting as service provider/trainer in the field of excelling the 
professional skills of the professionals involved in the field of construction 
and allied services. As such, the activities of the assessee could not be 
categorised solely as educational. The assessee was mere a service 
provider and functioning for profit motive. Audit noted that it was evident 
from the records viz., Income and Expenditure account and assessment 
orders of AYs 2013-14 to 2016-17, wherein the assessee was generating 
surplus continuously to the extent of 67 per cent of its total income every 
year, which showed charging of significant fees for the services provided 
during these years. 
Audit also noticed that the Directorate General of Central Ex cise 
Intelligence (DGCEI), Pune conducted investigation towards non-payment 
of Service Tax under the Category of ‘commercial training or coaching 
centre’ which was confirmed by the Pr. Commissioner of Service Tax II vide 
order dated 30.07.2015, against which the assessee went in appeal in the 
Customs Excise Service Tax Appellate Tribunal, West Zonal Bench, 
Mumbai. Audit found that the Tribunal has disposed-off the above case in 
October 2017 in favour of Commissioner of Service Tax holding that the 
assessee’s activities fall under the category of ‘commercial training or 
coaching’ and not under the category of vocational training institutions or 
institutes providing education in the field of sports, Pre-School and those 
institutes or establishment which issues any certificate or diploma or 
degree or any educational qualification recognised by law for the time 
being in force.’ In view of the above findings of the Tribunal and provisions 
of Section 2(15) of the Act, the activities of assessee cannot be held as 
‘charitable’, as envisaged in the Act. As such, exemption under Section 11, 
allowed to assessee, was not in order. The omission resulted in under-
assessment of income of ` 218.95 crore involving tax effect of 
` 74.91 crore, for AY 2014-15 to 2016-17. 
It is pertinent to mention here that the Department had taken the same 
view in the case of a private trust engaged in educational activity, in AY 
2016-17, wherein the exemption under Section 11 had been disallowed, 
holding that as per CBDT’s circular no. 11 of 2008 dated 19.12.2008, 
activity of training and conducting examination is an activity of 
advancement of general public utility and as per the proviso of Section 
2(15), such entities are not eligible for exemption under Section 11 or 
10(23C) of the Act. 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
127 
Thus, it was evident from the above that in certain cases, even though the 
objectives or activities of the trusts were not charitable in nature, the ITD 
irregularly granted exemption to Trusts/Institutions in contravention to the 
provision of the Act. 
Reply of the Ministry was awaited (February 2022). 
6.8 Incorrect levy of tax/surcharge/interest 
Under the provisions of the Act, the assessing officer is required to make a 
correct assessment of the total income of the assessee and determine the 
correct sum payable by him or refundable to him on the basis of such 
assessment.  
Audit noticed 65 assessment cases 
99  involving tax effect of ` 103.11 crore where 
the AO while finalizing the assessment had mistakenly adopted figures, 
computed short demand, charged tax at a lower rate than the prescribed rate, 
short levy of interest/surcharge, excess grant of interest on refund etc. 
Four cases are illustrated below: 
(i)   In Uttar Pradesh, CIT(E) Lucknow charge, a private trust engaged in 
educational activity, filed return of income for AY 2016-17 at ` ‘Nil’ income. 
The scrutiny assessment was completed in October 2018 at an income of 
` 5.20 crore under the head Income from “Profit and Gains from business 
and profession” denying exemption under Section 11. Audit noticed that 
the AO, while computing tax in ITNS-150, had taken income at ` ‘Nil’ 
instead of ` 5.20 crore. This resulted in short levy of tax of ` 2.36 crore 
including applicable interest.  
 The Ministry has accepted (March 2022) the audit observation and 
remedial action has been initiated by issuing notice under Section 154 in 
December 2021.  
(ii) In Maharashtra, CIT(E), Mumbai charge,  a private society engaged in the 
activity of ‘General Public Utility’, filed return of income for 2016-17 at 
` ‘Nil’ income. The scrutiny assessment was completed in December 2018 
at an income of ` 36.02 crore denying exemption under Section 11. Audit 
noticed from the tax computation sheet that the Department computed 
tax at ` ‘Nil’ instead of ` 14.27 crore. This has resulted in short levy of tax 
of ` 15.07 crore including interest.  
Reply of the Ministry was awaited (February 2022). 
                                                           
99  Delhi-3, Gujarat-5, Himachal Pradesh-1, Jammu-1, Karnataka-6, Maharashtra-11, Odisha-4, Punjab-13, Rajasthan-
8, Tamil Nadu-3 and Uttar Pradesh-10  

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
128 
(iii)  In Karnataka, CIT(E) Bengaluru Charge, a Government corporate trust 
engaged in the activity of ‘Relief of the poor’, filed return of income for AY 
2014-15 at ` 1.91 crore. The case was selected as ‘High value’ case in the 
PA sample since the gross receipt of the trust was ` 58.38 crore. The 
scrutiny assessment was completed in December 2016 and the income 
was determined at ` ‘Nil’. The scrutiny order was further rectified under 
Section 154 in May 2017 and the income remained at ` ‘Nil’. Audit noticed 
that the assessee had returned business income at ` 1.91 crore, which was 
taxable. However, in scrutiny assessment and the rectification order, the 
same was omitted and a refund of ` 1.05 crore was determined. Failure to 
assess the income returned, resulted in short levy of tax/excess refund of 
` 65.74 lakh.  
 The Ministry has accepted (March 2022) the audit observation and 
remedial action has been taken by passing order under Section 154 of the 
IT Act in February 2021. 
(iv)  In Maharashtra, Pr. CIT(E), Pune Charge, a private trust engaged in 
educational activity, having gross receipt of ` 305.38 crore, filed return of 
income for AY 2017-18 at `  ‘Nil’ income. The case was initially processed 
in summary manner and subsequently, selected for scrutiny and 
assessment was completed in December 2018 under Section 143(3) 
determining income of ` 247.00 crore. 
 Audit noticed that AO, while finalizing the assessment, levied tax at the 
normal rate i.e. 30 per cent  on additions made under Section 68 100  and 
Section 69 101  of ` 152.95 crore instead of 60 per cent  as stipulated under 
Section 115BBE 102  of the Act. Further, it was noticed that interest under 
Section 234A for belated filing of return was not levied by the AO. These 
resulted in short levy of tax of ` 69.56 crore, including interest under 
Section 234A.  
 Reply of the Ministry was awaited (February 2022). 
                                                           
100  As per Section 68, where any sum is found credited in the books of an assessee and the assessee offers no 
explanation about the nature and source thereof or the explanation offered by him is not, in the opinion of the 
Assessing Officer, satisfactory, the sum so credited may be charged to income- tax as the income of the assessee 
of that previous year. 
101  As per Section 69 where in the financial year the assessee has made investments which are not recorded in the 
books of account, and the assessee offers no explanation about the nature and source of the investments or the 
explanation offered by him is not, in the opinion of the Assessing Officer, satisfactory, the value of the investments 
may be deemed to be the income of the assessee of such financial year 
102  As per Section 115 BBE of the Act, with effect from AY 2017-18, where the total income of an assessee includes any 
income referred to in Section 68 or 69, the tax shall be calculated at the special rate of 60 per cent  and surcharge 
at the rate of 25 per cent . 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
129 
Thus, Audit observed that in certain cases, at the time of finalization of 
assessment, the assessing officers had mistakenly adopted figures, computed 
short demand, charged tax at a lower rate than the prescribed rate, short levy 
of interest and surcharge, excess grant of interest on refund etc. which resulted 
in short levy of tax.  
6.9 Non-levy of penalty 
Section 139(4A) provides that every person who is in receipt of income derived 
from property held under trust or other legal obligation wholly for or charitable 
purposes or religious purposes, or in part only for such purposes; or income by 
way of voluntary contribution on behalf of such trust or institution for which he 
is taxable, must file a return of income, if such income (computed before 
allowing any exemption under Sections 11 and 12) exceeds the maximum 
amount not chargeable to income tax. Section 139(4C) provides for compulsorily 
filing of return by the institutions, if income (before giving effect to the 
provisions of Section 10) exceeds the maximum amount not chargeable to 
income tax. Further, Section 272A(2)(e) of the Act, provides that if any person 
fails to furnish the return of income which he is required to furnish under sub-
Section (4A) or (4C) of Section 139 or to furnish it within the time allowed and in 
the manner required under those sub-Sections, he shall pay, by way of penalty, 
a sum of one hundred rupees for every day during which the failure continues. 
Audit noticed 651 assessment cases103 involving tax effect of ` 1.68 crore, 
where, despite delays in filing of return of income by the Trusts/Institutions, no 
penalty was levied/proceedings initiated by the Department. The State wise 
break-up of 651 cases is summarized in Table 6.2 below: 
Table 6.2 Non-levy of penalty for delay in filing of Return 
Sl. No. Name of State Period of delay vis-à-vis no. of cases 
Upto 
three 
month 
More than 
three months 
and upto six 
months 
More than six 
months and 
upto one year 
More 
than one 
year and 
upto two 
years 
More 
than 
two 
years 
Total 
1 Andhra Pradesh 13 19 20 16 3 71 
2 Chhattisgarh 1 8 4 1 0 14 
3 Delhi 2 7 2 4 0 15 
4 Haryana 1 2 1 1 0 5 
5 
Himachal 
Pradesh 1 1 0 0 0 2 
6 Jammu 0 2 1 1 0 4 
7 Karnataka 20 47 15 36 1 119 
103 Andhra Pradesh -71, Chhattisgarh -14, Delhi -15, Haryana -5, Him achal Pradesh -2, Jammu -4, Karnataka -119, 
Madhya Pradesh -117, Maharashtra - 187, Punjab -91 and Rajasthan -26. 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
130 
Table 6.2 Non-levy of penalty for delay in filing of Return 
Sl. No. Name of State Period of delay vis-à-vis no. of cases 
Upto 
three 
month 
More than 
three months 
and upto six 
months 
More than six 
months and 
upto one year 
More 
than one 
year and 
upto two 
years 
More 
than 
two 
years 
Total 
8 Madhya 
Pradesh 32 46 18 21 0 117 
9 Maharashtra 37 85 33 31 1 187 
10 Punjab 25 32 7 11 16 91 
11 Rajasthan 4 12 4 6 0 26 
Total: 136 261 105 128 21 651 
The replies furnished by the ITD to Audit varied widely in different assessment 
charges, as mentioned below: 
a. In Madhya Pradesh, ITO (E), Bhopal did not accept the audit observation
a
nd replied (March 2020) that the objection of audit was subject matter of
verification of jurisdiction of CPC/AO, as returns are filed online by
assessees and processed by the CPC before being selected for scrutiny
assessment. However, ITO (E), Jabalpur replied (July 2020) that the cases
were being referred to the JCIT(E), Raipur for taking appropriate action
wherever applicable. The ITO(E), Gwalior, ITO(E) Indore and Ujjain replied
in March 2020 and September 2020 respectively, that
 the matter would
be looked into.
b. In Andhra Pradesh, ITO (E), Ward 1, Sangareddy stated (September 2020)
that the audit observation was acceptable and necessary action would be
initiated. The ACIT (E), circle, Vijaywada stated (August 2020) that all the
cases were processed in CPC, Bengaluru and due to unknown technical
glitches, penalty was not imposed by CPC.
c. In Maharashtra, the ITO (E), Ward 1(3), Mumbai stated (September 2020)
that penalty under Section 272A(2)(e) is not a mandatory provision; the
Addl. CIT/JCIT in his wisdom decides imposition of penalty after
considering the facts and circumstances of case.
The reply of the Department is not acceptable as Section 139(4A) and (4C)
are specific Sections applicable to charitable Trusts/Institutions whic
h
m
andates filing return of income within due date under Section 139(1) and
S
ection 272A(2)(e) provides that ‘the penalty shall be levied’ makes it
amply clear that it is a mandatory provision and not a discretionary
provision.
Reply of the Ministry was awaited (February 2022). 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
131 
6.10 Other deficiencies noticed in assessment 
Audit noticed 34 assessment cases 
104  involving tax effect of ` 43.30 crore, where 
the AO did not comply with the provisions of the Act such as income from 
business not computed and taxed separately, grant of exemption for capitation 
fee/development fee collected, allowance of application made of past 
accumulation, non-investment of trusts fund in specified mode etc.  
Three issues relating to non-compliance are illustrated below: 
6.10.1 Irregular allowance of exemption under Section 10(23C)(via) 
Section 10(23C)(via) provides that income of any hospital or other institution for 
the reception and treatment of persons suffering from illness or mental 
defectiveness or for the reception and treatment of persons during 
convalescence or of persons requiring medical attention or rehabilitation, 
existing solely for philanthropic purposes and not for the purposes of profit, and 
which may be approved by the prescribed authority, shall not be included in 
computing the total income of a previous year. 
In Rajasthan, CIT(E), Jaipur charge, a private trust engaged in the activity of 
‘Relief of the poor’, filed return of income for AYs 2016-17 and 2017-18 at `  ‘Nil’ 
income. The scrutiny assessments for the AY 2016-17 and AY 2017-18 were 
completed in November 2018 and December 2019 respectively at `  ‘Nil’ income 
for both the years after allowing exemption under Section 10(23C)(via). Audit 
observed that the Trust was engaged in the activities of running of hospital and 
two educational institutions namely (i) ‘S’ Nursing School and (ii) ‘T’ College of 
Nursing. Thus, the Trust was not existing solely for the purposes covered under 
Section 10(23C)(via), and hence, was not eligible for exemption. This resulted in 
irregular allowance of exemption involving tax effect of ` 0 .92 crore and  
` 1.76 crore for the AY 2016-17 and AY 2017-18 respectively.  
The Ministry has accepted (March 2022) the audit observation and remedial 
action has been initiated by issuing notice under Section 148 in March 2021. 
6.10.2 Incorrect allowance of Exemption 
Section 11(4A) of the Act provides that sub-Section (1) or sub-Section (2) or sub-
Section (3) or sub-Section (3A) of Section 11 shall not apply in relation to any 
income of a trust or an institution, being profits and gains of business, unless the 
business is incidental to the attainment of the objectives of the trust or, as the 
case may be, institution, and separate books of account are maintained by such 
trust or institution in respect of such business. 
                                                           
104  Andhra Pradesh -1, Jharkhand -2, Delhi -1, Gujarat -4, Himachal Pradesh -1, Jammu -6, Karnataka -3,  
Maharashtra -2, Odisha -2, Punjab -4, Rajasthan -4, Uttar Pradesh-1 and West Bengal -3. 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
132 
In Andhra Pradesh, in CIT(E) Hyderabad Charge, a private entity, filed return of 
income for AY 2016-17 at ` ‘Nil’ income and scrutiny assessment was completed 
in December 2018 determining ` ‘Nil’ income. The assessee is engaged in the 
activity of running educational institutions and registered under Section 12AA of 
the Act. The gross receipt of the trust during the year was ` 196.94 crore and 
this was selected as ‘Top 200’ case in the sample for the PA. Audit observed that 
the assessee had earned a profit of  ` 8.94 crore, through the activities of 
purchase and sale of books and providing transport facilities to students of the 
institution as well as also to the students of another trust, namely ‘N8’ 
Educational Trust. According to the aforesaid provision of the Act, profits and 
gains of the business, incidental to the attainment of the objectives of the trust, 
shall only be eligible for exemption, under the category of charity. However, in 
the instant case, the assessee earned profit by extending these services to 
‘N8’ Educational Trust. As such, the profit earned on the above services to ‘N8’ 
Educational Trust was not solely incidental to the objectives of the institution 
and should have been disallowed, treating it as business income not incidental 
to the objective of the institution. The omission resulted in under-assessment of 
income to that extent, with consequential short demand of ` 4.11 crore. 
Reply of the Ministry was awaited (February 2022). 
6.10.3 Irregular allowance of exemption on Development fee 
Section 11(1)(d) of the Act provides that income in the form of voluntary 
contributions made with specific direction shall only form part of the corpus of 
the trust or institutions and the same shall not be included in the total income 
of the previous year of the trust in receipt of the income. Development fees, 
collected by educational institutions from their students are compulsory charges 
in the nature of fee, for studying and continuing studies in the institutions. 
Therefore, they cannot be classified as capital in nature for specific purpose or 
part of the Corpus fund. 
In Odisha, under CIT(E) Hyderabad Charge, a private trust, filed return of income 
for AY 2016-17 at ` ‘Nil’ income and scrutiny assessment was completed in 
December 2018 at ` ‘Nil’ income. The assessee is engaged in the activity of 
running educational institutions and registered under Section 12AA of the Act. 
The gross receipt of the trust during the year was ` 628.20 crore and this was 
selected as ‘Top 200’ in the sample for the PA. Audit noticed that though 
‘Development fee’ of ` 69.58 crore was collected by the assessee from the 
students, the same was not shown as income. Further, the claim of ‘Corpus 
donation’ of ` 70.20 crore was accepted as such, though no documents were 
produced by the assessee to show that the above donations were specifically 
authorized for the ‘Corpus Fund’ and claim of ` 2.52 crore towards ‘Capital 
expenditure (fixed assets)’ was allowed, though the same were acquired through 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
133 
bank loans. This resulted in short levy/excess refund of tax of ` 12.25 crore 
including interest. 
The Ministry has accepted (March 2022) the audit observation and remedial 
action has been initiated by issuing notice under Section 148 in March 2021. 
6.11 Conclusion 
Audit noticed deficiencies in the assessment and noted instances of irregular 
grants of exemption under different provisions of the Act, incorrect computation 
of income and its application. There were instances of irregular allowance of 
accumulation, allowance of exemption although income or property of the trust 
was utilised for the benefit of persons having substantial interest and irregular 
grants of double benefit of exemption on the same amount due to allowance of 
depreciation on assets whose acquisition had already been claimed as 
application of income and allowance of expenditure from corpus/earmarked 
funds as application of income. Further, there were cases of incorrect 
computation of income and tax/surcharge/interest and non-levy of penalty for 
late filing of ITR. 
6.12 Summary of Recommendations 
Au
dit recommends that: 
(i) ITD may strengthen its assessment procedure for Trusts/Institutions to
ensure correct computation of income and its application, and
avoidance of double benefit to the trusts as per the existing provisions
of the Act.
(Paragraphs 6.2.1, 6.2.2, 6.5.1 and 6.5.2) 
In reply, the CBDT stated that the earlier system of computation of income of 
the assesses after verifying with old records has been now revamped with a new 
application for assessment functions called 'Income Tax Business Application' 
(ITBA) in which the AO is required to follow a more detailed and comprehensive 
approach while making addition/disallowance to compute taxable income and 
as a result of these systemic developments, computation errors can be avoided. 
Further, the Department has introduced the Faceless Assessment Scheme, 2019, 
presently incorporated in Section 144B of the IT Act to provide that all the 
assessment proceedings, including the scrutiny assessments of cases related to 
Trusts/Institutions, are conducted electronically in a faceless manner, through 
team-based assessment wherein specialised units such as Assessment Units, 
Verification Units, Technical Units and Review Units have been put in place for 
optimum utilization of the resources. Under this team-based assessment 
procedure, the Assessment Unit can request verification by the Verification Unit 
and seek technical assistance from the Technical Unit in order to prepare a 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
134 
speaking order to facilitate an error-free assessment order. Finance Bill, 2022 
has also proposed amendment in the Section 144B for hearing through Video 
Conferencing if requested by an assessee which will result in seamless and 
efficient implementation of Faceless Assessment.  
Reply of the CBDT is not tenable as Audit noticed errors in computation of income 
and tax in the assessment orders passed through the ITBA system. Audit will 
await the final outcome of the efforts made by the CBDT to streamline the 
assessment procedure through Faceless Assessment Scheme, 2019 and its 
proposed amendments in Finance Bill, 2022. 
(ii) ITD may strengthen its assessment procedure for Trusts/Institutions to
ensure that no exemption is granted when income or property of the
trust is utilised for the benefit of persons having substantial interest.
(Paragraph 6.4) 
In reply, the CBDT stated that the earlier system of computation of income of 
the assesses after verifying with old records was prone to errors and has been 
now revamped with a new application for assessment functions called 'Income 
Tax Business Application' (ITBA) in which the AO is required to follow a more 
detailed and comprehensive approach while making addition/disallowance to 
compute taxable income and as a result of these systemic developments, 
computation errors can be avoided. 
The E-assessment Scheme, 2019 was amended and renamed as Faceless 
Assessment Scheme, 2019, which is presently incorporated in Section 144B of 
the IT Act, provides that all the assessment proceedings, including the scrutiny 
assessments of cases related to Trusts/Institutions, are conducted electronically 
in a faceless manner, through team-based assessment. Specialised units such as 
Assessment Units, Verification Units, Technical Units and Review Units have 
been put in place for optimum utilization of the resources through economies of 
scale and functional specialization. Under this team-based assessment 
procedure, the Assessment Unit can request verification by the Verification Unit 
and seek technical assistance from the Technical Unit in order to prepare a 
speaking order to facilitate an error-free assessment order. Vide the Finance Bill, 
2022, the procedure has been proposed to be amended to provide for hearing 
through Video Conferencing when requested by an assessee. 
Further, Finance Bill, 2022 has proposed a new Section 115BBI in the IT Act to 
provide that trusts where income or property of a Trust/Institution, 
registered/approved under Section 12AA/10(23C), is utilised for the benefit of 
persons having substantial interest, as specified under Section 13, such 
unreasonable benefit shall be deemed to be the income of such person of the 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
135 
previous year in which it is so applied and shall be taxable at the rate of  
30 per cent.  
Finance Bill, 2022 has also proposed a new Section 271AAE in the IT Act to 
provide that in case of violation of provision of Section 115BBI mentioned above, 
the AO may levy penalty of: 
(a) a sum equal to the aggregate amount of income applied, directly or 
indirectly, for the benefit of persons having substantial interest, where the 
violation is noticed for the first time during any previous year; and 
(b) a sum equal to two hundred per cent  of the aggregate amount of income 
applied, directly or indirectly, for the benefit of persons having substantial 
interest, where violation is noticed again in any subsequent previous year. 
The above proposed provisions aim to provide a deterrence as well as provide 
clarity and certainty in the manner of taxation in the scenario when 
unreasonable benefit is passed on by a trust or institution which is exempt under 
the Income-tax Act to a person having substantial interest. 
Audit has noted from the reply of the CBDT that various proposals have been 
made by the CBDT in the current Finance Bill 2022. Audit will await the final 
outcome of the proposal approved and implemented by the CBDT. However, the 
CBDT has to ensure that no income or property of the Trust/Institution is utilized 
for the benefit of persons having substantial interest. 
(iii) ITD may ensure that the CPC-ITR System automatically levies penalty 
for delay in filing of return at the time of processing of ITRs itself. 
(Paragraph 6.9) 
In reply, the CBDT stated that in order to ensure that return is filed within the 
due date. Finance Act, 2017 inserted Section 234F in the Income-tax Act, 1961 
(the Income-tax Act) to provide for a levy of a fee in case of delayed furnishing 
of return of income. The said Section has subsequently been amended vide 
Finance Act, 2021 to provide that a late fee of 
` 5000/- is to levied for a delayed 
filing of return of income. It may be noted that such late fee is levied at the time 
of submission of the return and hence is levied even before the return is 
processed. 
As regards the penalty under clause (e) of sub-Section (2) of Section 272A, 
regarding penalty for failure to furnish the return of income under sub-Section 
(4A) or sub-Section (4C) of Section 139 within the permitted time, it may be 
noted that the said penalty can only be imposed after giving an opportunity to 
be heard to the assesse, as the processing of return is an automated process, it 
is not feasible to be impose the said penalty at the time of filing of the return of 
income. 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
136 
Further Section 273B provides that no penalty under, inter-alia, sub-Section (2) 
of Section 272A shall be imposable if the assessee proves there was a reasonable 
cause for the failure. 
As the processing of return by the Centralised Processing Centre is an automated 
process, it will not be possible for the assesse to prove a reasonable cause of 
failure at the time of processing of ITR. This is also in line with the principle of 
natural justice that show cause notice is given before imposition of penalty. 
Moreover, as per the provisions of clause (ba) of sub-Section (1) of Section 12A 
of the Income-Tax Act, the exemption under Sections 11 and 12 is denied if the 
ITR is not filed by the trust or institution within time. Similar provisions have 
been proposed vide Finance Bill, 2022 for the trusts or institutions approved 
under sub clauses (iv), (v), (vi), (via) of clause (23C) of Section 10 by way of 
insertion of 20th proviso to the said clause. 
Audit does not deny that the assessee should be given natural justice by providing 
an opportunity to be heard and to prove a reasonable cause of failure. Audit’s 
intention is that penalty proceedings may be initiated automatically through ITD 
system subsequent to processing of ITR and notice in this regard may be issued 
to the assessee through the system itself. 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
137 
Chapter 7: Internal Audit, Monitoring and Review of Trusts/ 
Institutions 
Audit attempted to examine as to how effectively ITD was monitoring the 
activities of Trusts/Institutions for which registrations/approvals were granted 
and exemptions were allowed, filing of ITRs by the Trusts/Institutions, 
accumulation of Income and its utilisation, receipt and utilisation of foreign 
contribution etc. Audit also attempted to examine the conduct of Internal Audit 
of the registration process and the assessment. 
7.1 Audit noticed absence of Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) or 
Guidelines for verification of genuineness of activities of 
Trusts/Institutions, inconsistency in allowing exemptions to 
Trusts/Institutions, non-initiation of appropriate action against non-
filers, inadequate number of surveys conducted, in-effective system to 
monitor accumulation and its utilisation etc. Audit also noticed non-
implementation of uniform Internal Audit of Registration process across 
all States/charges. Table 7.1 below gives an overview of the audit 
findings:  
Table 7.1: Issues relating to internal audit, monitoring and review of Trusts/Institutions 
Sl. 
No. 
Issues in brief No. of 
cases 
Tax effect 
(` in crore) 
1 Lack of provision of distinct business codes in ITR for 
capturing activity of Trusts/Institutions with distinction 
between Government and Private entity 
- - 
2 Maintenance of database and action against non-filers 261 - 
3 Deficiencies in Internal Audit of the Registration Process - - 
4 Ambiguity in Board’s Instruction regarding Internal Audit of 
cases registered under Section 10(23C) and 80G - - 
5 Inadequacy of survey in monitoring the activities of the 
Trusts/Institutions - - 
6 Inconsistency in allowing exemption to Trusts/Institutions 
having activity not charitable in nature 10 42.44 
7 Review of charitable status of Trusts/Institutions whose 
activity either held not genuine or the property was utilized 
for the benefit of related parties 
8 9.73 
8 Lack of Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) or Guidelines for 
verification for genuineness of activity of Trusts/Institutions - - 
9 Monitoring of activities of Trusts/Institutions engaged in 
scientific research activities 1 - 
10 Absence of feedback/monitoring mechanism to monitor the 
activities of the Trusts/Institutions - - 
11 Monitoring of accumulation of Income and its utilisation 
under Section 11(2) 32 60.94 
12 Provisions for declaration of the purpose of Accumulation 
under Section 10(23C) 4 2.99 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
138 
Table 7.1: Issues relating to internal audit, monitoring and review of Trusts/Institutions 
Sl. 
No. 
Issues in brief No. of 
cases 
Tax effect 
(` in crore) 
13 Absence of mechanism to verify receipt and utilisation of 
foreign contribution 35 182.10 
14 Inadequate monitoring of receipts issued by the entity 
having registration under Section 80G 3 8.26 
15 Issues requiring strengthening of monitoring by the Income 
Tax Department - - 
Total 354 306.46 
7.1.1  Lack of provision of distinct business codes in ITR for capturing activity 
of Trusts/Institutions with distinction between Government and 
Private entity  
Section 2(15) of the Act defines the term ‘Charitable Purpose’ which includes 
seven types of activities undertaken by Trusts/ Institutions viz. (i) relief of the 
poor (ii) education (iii) yoga (iv) medical relief (v) preservation of environment 
(including water-sheds, forests and wildlife) (vi) preservation of monuments/ 
places/ objects of artistic or historic interest and (vii) the advancement of any 
other object of general public utility. Trusts/institutions wholly for charitable or 
religious purposes can avail exemption of income to the extent such income is 
applied in India under Section 11 of the Act. Further, universities, educational 
and medical institutions which are wholly or substantially financed by the 
Government and certain private religious, educational and medical institutions 
can also avail exemption under various provisions under Section 10(23C)(iiiab) 
to 10(23C)(via) subject to fulfilment of certain conditions. 
Audit noticed that while the Act has specified several activities as ‘charitable’ 
under which both the Government and the private Trusts/Institutions can claim 
exemption under various provisions of the Act, ITD has not allocated specific 
codes to different charitable activities linked to Section 11 and sub-Sections of 
10(23C) under which exemption is being claimed by the Trusts/Institutions. Also, 
data relating to exemption claimed by the Government/private trust under 
different Sections was not capturing in the present system through ITR Form 7.  
With a view to identifying the activity wise and Government/Private trust wise 
break-up of total exemption granted (which was not fully available in the data 
provided by ITD), Audit collected and analysed data in respect of 5,693 out of 
5,798 sample cases, excluding additional cases, where activity related 
information was available in the assessment records. The activity wise break-up 
of total exemption granted of ` 1.63 lakh crore in respect of 5,693 sample cases 
prepared on the basis of data furnished by the ITD as well as the data collected 
by Audit, is summarised in Table 7.2 below: 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
139 
Table 7.2 Activity wise break-up of total exemption of ` 1.63 lakh crore 
Nature of Activity Number of 
sample cases 
engaged in 
the activity 
Percentage 
of Total 
sample 
cases 
Total amount of 
exemption 
granted to cases 
engaged in the 
activity  
(` in crore ) 
Percentage of 
total amount of 
exemption 
granted to cases 
engaged in the 
activity 
Education 2,686 47.2 57,175.5 35.1 
Medical Relief 428 7.5 22,478.7 13.8 
Relief of the Poor 629 11.0 7,618.7 4.6 
Environment 38 0.7 1,425.8 0.9 
Religious 312 5.5 4,070.6 2.5 
Others 1,600 28.1 70,210.1 43.1 
Total 5,693 100.00 1,62,979.4 100.00 
Audit found that 47.2 per cent  of 5,693 sampled cases were engaged in 
educational activities against which 35.1 per cent  of total amount of exemption 
(` 1.63 lakh crore) was granted, followed by 28.1 per cent  engaged in other 105  
activities in respect of which 43.1 per cent  of total amount of exemption was 
granted and the remaining cases were engaged in medical relief, relief of the 
poor, environment, religious etc.  
Since exemption is granted to Government as well as private entity under 
various provisions under the Act, Audit also collected information in respect of 
553 high value exemption cases (having gross income of ` 50 crore or above) 
with a view to quantify the activity wise break-up of exemption granted to 
Government as well as private entity. The data in respect of 553 high value 
sample cases, prepared on the basis of data furnished by the ITD as well as the 
data collected by audit is depicted in Table 7.3 below: 
Table 7.3 Activity wise break-up of exemption granted to Government and private entity in respect of high value cases 
(gross income of ` 50 crore or above) 
Nature of 
Activity 
Number of cases 
engaged in the 
activity 
Percentage of total 
cases 
Total amount of exemption 
granted to cases engaged in the 
activity (` in crore ) 
Percentage of total 
amount of exemption 
granted engaged in 
the activity 
Govt. Pvt. Total Govt. Pvt. Total Govt. Pvt. Total Govt. Pvt. Total 
Education  65 197 262 11.8 35.6 47.4 19,254.9 22,491.7 41,746.6 15.2 17.8 33.0 
Medical Relief  18 42 60 3.3 7.6 10.8 10,751.4 5,679.0 16,430.4 8.5 4.5 13.0 
Relief of the 
Poor 10 28 38 1.8 5.1 6.9 572.3 4,790.5 5,362.8 0.5 3.8 4.2 
Environment  7 3 10 1.3 0.5 1.8 916.7 375.8 1,292.6 0.7 0.3 1.0 
Religious  1 19 20 0.2 3.4 3.6 66.5 2,695.5 2,761.9 0.1 2.1 2.2 
Others  82 81 163 14.8 14.6 29.5 33,920.3 25,050.1 58,970.4 26.8 19.8 46.6 
Grand Total 183 370 553 33.1 66.9 100.0 65,482.1 61,082.6 1,26,564.7 51.7 48.3 100.0 
                                                           
105  Others’ include entities with activities viz . General public utility, Preservation of Environment, Preservation of 
Monuments, Yoga,; and entities with more than one activity 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
140 
It would be seen that 33.1 per cent of the high value cases pertained to 
Government entities, against which 51.7 per cent of total exemptions 
(` 1,26,564.7 crore) were granted, whereas 66.9 per cent of high value cases 
pertained to private entities, against which 48.3 per cent of total exemptions 
were granted.  
Out of these 553 high value exemption cases, 262 Trusts/Institutions 
(197 private entity and 65 Government entity) were engaged in educational 
activity. Further, Audit noticed that the Government charitable entities availing 
exemption were authorities/bodies/institutes established by any law made by 
Legislature or notified by the Government, through which the Government 
primarily discharge its social responsibilities. These entities were largely 
controlled and substantially financed by the Government. In Audit’s opinion, 
putting efforts and manpower for scrutiny assessment of Government’s 
Trusts/Institutions were not as effective, since the entities were in relatively low-
risk areas in terms of Income Tax exemption perspective. However, two-thirds 
(66.9 per cent) of the high value cases pertained to private charitable entities, 
which were availing almost half (48.3 per cent) of the total exemption granted 
(` 1.3 lakh crore) for different activities, under various provisions of the Act.  
Sections 10(23C)(iiiab) to (iiiae), (vi) and (via) deals with exemptions to 
institutions for a specific purpose like University/Educational institution/ 
Hospital/ Medical institutions established solely for educational purposes/ 
imparting medical services and not for profit. Section 10(23C)(iv) deals with any 
other fund or institution whose objects are of importance throughout India or 
throughout the State(s). Section 10(23C)(v) deals with any trust (including any 
other legal obligation) or institution wholly for public religious purposes or 
wholly for public religious and charitable purposes. Section 11 and 12 deals with 
exemption of income to Trusts/Institutions from property held for charitable and 
religious purposes and contributions.  
Analysis of the provisions in Sections 10(23C)(iiiab) to (via) and Sections 11 and 
12 revealed that these Sections have similar conditions and requirements like 
grant of exemption after getting approval/registration with the Pr. CIT/CIT 
{except for
 University/Educational institutions and Hospital/ Medical institutions 
which are wholly or substantially financed by the Government or having annual 
receipt not exceeding ` one crore, which are covered in Sections 10(23C)(iiiab) 
to (iiiae)}, minimum application of 85 per cent of total receipt, retention of 
income up to 15 per cent of total receipt without any condition, accumulation of 
short applied income for future application, investment of fund in specified 
mode, filing of return of income and audit of accounts for claiming the 
exemption.  

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
141 
Thus, Trusts/Institutions claiming exemption under Sections 11 and 12 of the Act 
may also be eligible to claim exemption under Sections 10(23C)(iiiab) to (via) 
subject to fulfilment of the conditions prescribed in the Act. Hence, there is a 
need to ensure activity wise monitoring of these private charitable entities, to 
mitigate the risk of ineligible claims, being processed and allowed. Presently, the 
ITD does not have any mechanism for monitoring the same. 
Reply of the Ministry was awaited (February 2022). 
7.1.2 Maintenance of database and action against non-filers 
In order to have a proper mechanism to watch the activities of the Trusts/ 
Institutions granted registration under various provisions of the Act, it should be 
ensured that all Trusts/Institutions are filing their return of income, and the 
fund/property at their disposal are applied towards the objects. A complete 
database of such assessees vis-à-vis identification of non-filers or stop filers plays 
an important role in this regard.  
Section 139(4A) and (4C) make it mandatory for every Trust/Institution etc. to 
file its return of income, if the total income exceeds the taxable limit. Section 
12A was amended
106 to provide that all organization registered under that 
Section have to file return of income under Section 139(4A); otherwise, non-
filing of return could be treated as a reason for cancellation of registration. 
During the Performance Audit, Audit attempted to ascertain the non-filers in 
respect of 6,064 sample cases test checked during AY 2014-15 to AY 2017-18 and 
noticed 261 assessment cases of non-filing of return of income by the Charitable 
Trusts/Institutions. The State-wise details of non-filers are summarized in 
Table 7.4 below: 
Table 7.4: State-wise Details of Non-filers 
Sl. No. Name of the State Assessment Year wise No. of Non-filers Total 
2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 
1 Andhra Pradesh 36 14 2 5 57 
2 Assam 1 0 0 0 1 
3 Bihar 2 2 0 1 5 
4 Chhattisgarh 1 1 0 0 2 
5 Gujarat 12 7 1 4 24 
6 Karnataka 9 4 0 0 13 
7 Kerala 36 31 4 4 75 
8 Madhya Pradesh 8 5 1 1 15 
9 Maharashtra 10 4 1 2 17 
10 Odisha 4 0 2 3 9 
11 Punjab 6 3 0 0 9 
106 Clause (ba) inserted under Section 12A(1) by the Finance Act, 2017 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
142 
Table 7.4: State-wise Details of Non-filers 
Sl. No. Name of the State Assessment Year wise No. of Non-filers Total 
2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 
12 Rajasthan 15 6 4 5 30 
13 Tamilnadu 3 1 0 0 4 
Total: 143 78 15 25 261 
The Department stated in three assessment cases107 that there was no taxable 
income; hence, assessees were not required to file ITRs; in four assessment 
cases108 ITO (E) Ward-(4) Hyderabad issued notice under Section 142(1) and in 
five cases109, ITD replied that necessary action would be taken. The ITO (E) Ward-
1, Jaipur stated that there was no mechanism available in the system to find out 
the reasons for non-filing of ITR and in four assessment cases
110, the assessees 
were not reflected in the NMS111 cases. In the remaining cases, Audit could not 
ascertain the reasons for non-filing of ITRs.  
Thus, despite having a system for monitoring of non-filers, the Department did 
not initiate appropriate action in the majority of the cases. Further, in four cases, 
the ITD system could not detect non-filers. Reasons for not issuing notices in 
cases of non-filers needs to be examined by ITD. 
Reply of the Ministry was awaited (February 2022). 
7.1.3  Deficiencies in Internal Audit of the Registration Process 
The PAC, in para 14 of its 104
th Report (16th Lok Sabha), had recommended that 
the process of registration/approval of the Charitable Trusts/Institutions should 
be brought under the purview of Internal Audit of the Department in view of the 
irregularities pointed out by Audit in Audit Report No. 20 of 2013.  
Accordingly, Internal Audit commenced112 for the first time in FY 2019-20, in 
respect of the registration applications processed (i.e. approved/rejected) 
during FY 2018-19. 
The target of auditable cases for the first year was fixed at 
a minimum of 50 cases for each CIT(E). Thereafter, ADG (Audit & Inspections) 
was to circulate the target by 31st March, for the subsequent years, if there 
was any change in the target. 
Audit noticed in nine states113 that internal audit of registration process had 
commenced. In Maharashtra, CIT(E) Pune charge, internal audit of cases 
registered under Section 12AA was carried out during the FY 2019-20. However, 
no internal audit had been conducted in CIT(E) Mumbai charge. Information 
107 ITO Jaipur (E) charge -1 (AY 2015-16) and ITO Kota (E) char ge - 2 (AY 2014-15 and AY 2015-16) 
108 Hyderabad - 4 
109 ITO (E) Ward Ajmer charge - 3 and ITO(E) Ward(3) Hyderab ad charge - 2 
110 ITO(E) Ward Kota 
111 Non filer Monitoring System (NMS) 
112 vide CBDT’s Instruction No. 06 of 2017 modified on 14.12.2018 
113 Delhi, Punjab, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir , Maharashtra, Bihar, Jharkhand and West Bengal 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
143 
regarding internal audit of registration process was not furnished in five 
states114.  
It is evident from above that the instructions issued for the Internal Audit of 
registration process were not implemented uniformly in all the States/ charges 
for which ITD needs to review the system in place for reiterating instructions for 
effective compliance in future, as recommended by the PAC
115. 
Reply of the Ministry was awaited (February 2022). 
7.1.4  Ambiguity in Board’s Instruction regarding Internal Audit of cases 
registered under Section 10(23C) and 80G(5) 
The CBDT vide partial modification of Instruction No. 06 of 2017 dated 
14.12.2018 has introduced a mechanism to conduct internal audit of process of 
registration of Charitable Trusts/ Institutions granted by CsIT(E).  
Audit noticed that the checklist circulated with the aforesaid instruction covered 
only registration granted under Section 12AA. However, the CsIT(E) not only 
grant registration under Section 12AA but also accord approval under various 
sub-Section of Section 10(23C)/80G(5) of the Act.  
Audit noticed that in CIT(E), Pune charge, although the Internal Audit of 
registration process was conducted in 50 cases as per the Board’s instruction, 
none of the cases approved under Sections 10(23C) and 80G(5) was selected for 
Internal Audit. Further, the checklist circulated by the Board is required to be 
made comprehensive to cover cases of registration/approval granted viz. under 
Section 12AA, 10(23C) and 80G(5) also. 
Thus, due to ambiguity in the instructions for conducting the Internal Audit of 
process of approval granted under Sections 10(23C) and 80G(5) of the Act, audit 
noted that internal audit of cases approved under Section 10(23C) and 80G(5) 
were not taken up.  
Reply of the Ministry was awaited (February 2022). 
7.1.5 Inadequacy of survey in monitoring the activities of the Trusts/ 
Institutions 
Section 133A of the Act empowers the ITD to conduct surveys to gather 
information relating to the financial transactions of assessees
 and obtain a 
detailed understanding of their financial position. The PAC, in its Report116 
recommended that survey of all educational trusts be conducted in a time-
bound manner, to verify whether they were not misusing the provisions of 
114 Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand an d Gujarat 
115 Para 14 of 104th Report (16th Lok Sabha) 
116 Para 9 of 27thReport (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
144 
'Charitable Trusts' of the Act. Accordingly, the ambit of survey operations, under 
Section 133A, was widened to cover Charitable Trusts, vide Finance Act, 2017 117 , 
to enable the Income Tax Authorities to conduct surveys at premises where an 
activity for charitable purpose was being carried out. 
With a view to assessing the effectiveness of survey operations in respect of 
charitable Trusts/Institutions, Audit sought information relating to action taken 
by the Department based on survey and additional income disclosed thereof in 
respect of 75 survey cases in seven States. State-wise break up of the 75 cases 
mentioned above is given in Table 7.5: 
Table 7.5: State-wise details of 75 cases surveyed  
Sl. No. Name of the 
State  
Activity wise breakup of survey conducted Total 
Education Medical 
Relief 
Relief of 
the poor 
Religious Others 
1 Assam 0 1 0 0 1 2 
2 Karnataka 6 0 0 1 8 15 
3 Kerala 2 0 0 0 0 2 
4 Maharashtra 19 0 1 6 10 36 
5 Bihar 0 0 0 0 1 1 
6 Tamil Nadu 0 1 0 0 1 2 
7 West Bengal 10 0 0 0 7 17 
Total 37 2 1 7 28 75 
An analysis of action taken by the Department based on survey in respect of 
these 75 cases revealed the following: 
a.  Registration was cancelled in four cases and additional income of 
` 132.81 crore was disclosed in 30 cases (including three cases where 
registration was cancelled).  
b.   24 cases (including 18 educational trusts) were transferred to the 
concerned jurisdictional Central Circles for further assessment, since there were 
impounded materials during the course of survey.  
c.  In eight cases, no additional income was disclosed and, in one case the 
assessment is still pending.  
d.  The Department did not furnish the details in respect of 11 cases.  
Further, out of 75 cases surveyed, 37 cases related to educational trusts, 
wherein registration was cancelled in two cases and additional income of 
` 48.49 crore was disclosed in 14 cases.  
                                                           
117  As per the modification of provisions of Section 133A, the Income tax authorities may enter the premises where 
an activity for charitable purpose is carried on and may Inspect books of account and other documents, verify cash, 
stock or other valuable articles or thing and call upon the trustee, employee or other person to furnish information 
as regards any matter, which may be useful for or relevant to any proceedings under the Income Tax Act, 1961 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
145 
Audit observed that out of 5,986 audited cases comprising 4,627 assessees, 
survey was conducted only in 13 cases (0.3 per cent ) by the Department. As, 
survey could be an effective tool to assess the actual financial position and 
detect bogus claim of exemption, the number of surveys conducted by the 
Department was inadequate in Audit’s opinion. 
Since the ITD does not maintain any activity-wise database of Trusts/ 
Institutions, Audit collected and analysed the available data and observed that 
the audit sample included 2,686 cases (2105 assessees) wherein ‘Education’ was 
the core activity of the Trusts/ Institutions. Of these, only eight (0.3  per cent ) 
surveys were conducted during 2014-15 to 2018-19 by the ITD. 
 Audit further 
noticed that no survey was conducted in respect of 46 high value educational 
trusts (having receipt of ` 200 crore or more) during the aforesaid period. In two 
States 118 , the Department did not produce the relevant information.  
Since a significant number of private charitable entities are engaged in 
educational activities as pointed out in para 7.1.1 (Table 7.3), the Department 
needs to identify and survey those cases, particularly the high value exemption 
cases, as recommended by the PAC 119 , for effective monitoring, allowance of 
exemption to eligible assessees only and minimising the possibility of ineligible 
claims.  
Reply of the Ministry was awaited (February 2022). 
7.1.6  Inconsistency in allowing exemption to Trusts/Institutions having 
activity not charitable in nature  
Section 2(15) of the Act provides definition of ‘charitable purpose’ which 
includes (i) relief of the poor (ii) education (iii) yoga (iv) medical relief (v) 
preservation of environment (including watersheds, forests and wildlife) (vii) 
preservation of monuments or places or objects of artistic or historic interest 
and (viii) the advancement of any other object of general public utility. The 
Section further provides that advancement of any other object of general public 
utility shall not be a charitable purpose, if it involves the carrying on of any 
activity in the nature of trade, commerce or business, or any activity of rendering 
any service in relation to any trade, commerce or business, for a cess or fee or 
any other consideration, irrespective of the nature of use or application, or 
retention of the income from such activity and the aggregate receipts from such 
activity or activities during the previous year exceed ` 25 lakh (20 per cent with 
effect from 1.4.2016 of the total receipts) from such activity or activities.  
                                                           
118  Uttar Pradesh and Uttarakhand 
119  Para 9 of 27 th Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
146 
Audit observed in 10 assessment cases120 where the AO had assessed that the 
activities of the trusts were not charitable in nature for one or more AYs but no 
action had been taken to review exemptions for the other AYs although the 
objects of the trust were similar during the respective AYs which resulted in 
irregular grant of exemption involving tax effect of ` 42.44 crore. Two cases are 
illustrated below: 
(i) In Karnataka, CIT(E) Bengaluru charge, a private trust engaged  in the
activity of ‘Relief of the Poor’, filed return of income at ` ‘Nil’ income. The
scrutiny assessment was completed in December 2016 at an income of
` 2.87 crore. Audit noticed from the assessment records of AY 2016-17
that the AO had denied exemption under Section 11 stating that the
activities of the assessee could not be considered as charitable within the
meaning of Section 2(15). However, the claim of exemption under Section
11 for AY 2014-15 was not denied even though the activities of the
assessee were similar. This resulted in short computation of income of
` 5.71 crore for AY 2014-15 involving tax effect of ` 1.29 crore.
Reply of the Ministry was awaited (February 2022).
(ii) In Chhattisgarh, CIT(E) Bhopal charge, Chhattisgarh a private soci ety
engaged in the object of ‘General Public Utility’, filed return of income for
AY 2015-16 at an income of ` 0.49 crore, which was processed under
summary manner in January 2017 and rectified under Section 154 in
December 2018 at the same income. Audit noticed that the AO had denied
exemption under Section 11 in AY 2016-17 and AY 2017-18 stating that the
activities of the assessee cannot be considered as charitable within the
meaning of Section 2(15). However, the claim of exemption for AY 2015-16
was not denied even though activities of the assessee were similar during
the relevant previous year 2014-15. This resulted in short computation of
income of ` 10.42 crore for AY 2015-16 involving tax effect of ` 3.81 crore.
The Ministry has accepted (March 2022) the audit observation a nd
initiated remedial action by issuing notice under Section 148 in
March 2021.
7.1.7 Review of charitable status of entity where activity either held not 
genuine or the property was utilized for the benefit of related parties 
Section 12AA(3) and Section 12AA(4) of the Act provide that if the activities of 
Trusts/Institutions are not genuine or are not being carried out in accordance 
with the objects of the Trusts/Institutions or the activities are being carried out 
120 Chhattisgarh -2 and Karnataka - 8 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
147 
in a manner that the provisions of Sections 11 and 12 do not apply to exclude 
either whole or any part of the income of such Trusts/Institutions due to 
operation of Section 13(1) then, the competent authority may by an order in 
writing cancel the registration of such trust or institution. Section 13(1)(c) of the 
Act provide that if the income or property of the Trusts/Institutions is 
applied/used for the benefit of the specified person121, exemption under Section 
11 will be lost. 
Audit noticed in eight cases122  involving tax effect of ` 9.73 crore where the AO 
denied the exemption under Section 11 of the Act either holding that the 
activities of trusts were not genuine or the properties or income of the trusts 
were continuously utilised by the trust for the benefit of related persons referred 
to Section 13(3). However, the charitable status of the Trusts/Institutions was 
not reviewed by the competent authority. Two cases are illustrated below: 
(i) In Maharashtra, CIT(E) Mumbai charge, a private trust engaged  in the
activity of ‘Medical Relief’, filed return of income for AY 2016-17 at ` ‘Nil’
income. The scrutiny assessment was completed assessing income of
` 4.01 crore in December 2018 after denying the exemption under Section
11 for violation of provisions of Section 13(1). Audit noticed from the
assessment records of AY 2013-14 onwards that the Department was
continuously denying exemption under Section 11 to the assessee,
invoking the provisions of Section 13(1) read with Section 11. Though the
Department continuously disallowed the deduction in respect of income
derived from property of trust used for the benefit of the related parties
as specified under Section 13(3), the assessee continued to flout the
provisions governing the exemption and allowed the property of trust
being used by the related party. Further, Audit also noticed that the AOs
themselves during assessment orders held that the activity of the trust was
not genuine. Therefore, the continuation of registration under Section
12AA granted to the assessee needed to be reviewed in light of the
provisions of Section 12AA(3) and 12AA(4).
The ITO(Exemption) ward 1(2) Mumbai replied that the audit observa tion
was acceptable and proposal for cancellation of registration was made to
CIT(E), Mumbai in March 2021.
(ii) In Maharashtra CIT(E), Mumbai charge, a private trust engaged in
educational activity, filed return of income for AY 2015-16 at ` ‘Nil’ income.
The case was selected in PA sample as ‘High value’ case since the gross
receipt of the trust was ` 79.82 crore. The scrutiny assessment was
121 founders, trustee, manager, chief functionary, major don ors, relatives of the founders or persons who have 
substantial interest in the organization 
122 Jharkhand - 1, Maharashtra - 2, Punjab – 3 and Tamil Nad u - 2. 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
148 
completed in December 2017 assessing income at ‘Nil’ after allowing 
deduction of `11.21 crore under Section 11(1)(a) of the Act. Audit noticed 
that the assessee had rented part of trust property for the benefit of 
related party as specified in Section 13(3) of the Act, namely M/s ‘J’ Pvt 
Ltd, free of cost. On the basis of this information in the earlier assessment 
years AY 2009-10 to 2014-15, the Department disallowed deduction under 
Section 11 on violation of provisions of Section 13 of the Act. During the 
current year also, the assessing officer, after discussion, denied the 
submission of the assessee and computed notional income from house 
property of ` 0.60 crore. 
Thus, from the above it was seen that even though the Department  had 
continuously disallowed the deduction in respect of income derived from 
property of trust used, for the benefit of the related parties, as specified 
under Section 13(3) of the Act, the assessee continued to flout the 
provisions governing the exemption and allowed the property of trust to 
be used by the related party. Therefore, continuation of registration under 
Section 12AA of the IT Act granted to the assessee needed to be examined 
in light of the amended provisions of Section 12AA (4) of the Act. 
Reply of the Ministry was awaited (February 2022). 
7.1.8 Lack of Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) or Guidelines for 
verification for genuineness of activity of Trusts/Institutions 
Any Charitable Trust/Institution has to mandatorily register with PCIT/CIT (E) for 
claiming exemption under different Sections viz. 11 and 10(23C)(iv) to (via) of 
the Act. The Pr. CIT/CIT, before granting registration/approval to a trust, has to 
satisfy himself about the genuineness of the activities of the organisation by 
calling for information/documents and making enquiries.  
Audit noticed in 18 cases mentioned at paras 7.1.6 and 7.1.7 where the AO 
denied the exemption after finding the activity of the organisation to be not 
genuine or income of the trusts are utilised for the benefit of related persons 
referred to in Section 13(3)/ not charitable in nature. Audit observed that though 
there was a provision for verification of actual existence of the Trusts/ 
Institutions by sending a letter for compliance or by local enquiry, no such 
systemic mechanism was put in place to ensure genuineness of the activity of 
the organisation after granting registration/approval to a trust. The PAC vide 
para no. 23 of 27
th Report (16th Lok Sabha) had also stated that the Ministry 
should seriously ponder and look into the whole issue afresh with a view to 
devising a procedure for proper and systemic evaluation of charitable 
trusts/institutions so that those trusts which are not discharging their functions 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
149 
in consonance with the objectives under which they have been established, do 
not escape any tax liability. 
Despite the PAC’s recommendation for devising a procedure for proper and 
systemic evaluation of charitable trusts/institutions, the Department did not 
issue any such SOP/guidelines for assessing the genuineness of activity of the 
Trusts/Institutions. 
Reply of the Ministry was awaited (February 2022) 
7.1.9  Monitoring of activities of Trust/Institution engaged in scientific 
research activities 
Section 35(1)(ii) prescribes a weighted deduction at the rate of 175 per cent to a 
donor for any sum paid to an approved research association. Section 11 also 
provides exemption to such research associations if they are registered under 
Section 12AA of the Act.  
In Maharashtra, CIT(E) Mumbai charge, Audit observed that a private entity, for 
AY 2016-17 was registered under Section 12AA. During AY 2015-16, Audit noted 
that the Department started denying the exemption under Section 11 and 
eventually cancelled the registration under Section 12A vide order dated 
05.02.2019 after finding that the assessee was not carrying out any research 
activity and had issued bogus certificate under Section 35(1)(ii) to the donors. 
Audit noted that the CIT (E) Kolkata had come across (November 2015) eight
123 
scientific research associations which were involved in ‘money laundering 
through receipt of bogus donation and repayment in cash’ and requested to take 
appropriate action in these cases to stop the misuse of the provisions and bogus 
donation. Further, Audit noted that the CBDT, in taking cognizance of the 
references received from field authorities had informed (December 2018) all the 
PCsIT/DGsIT regarding bogus donation racket under Section 35(1)(ii) and 
directed that while handling investigations/enquiries in these cases, the 
concerned AO should examine the specific transactions related to the sum 
donated and cash trail be clearly identified.  
As per data available on ITD’s website
124, there are 2,208 assessees upto March 
2020 which are notified as research association under Section 35(1)(ii) & (iii) by 
the CBDT.  
Audit sought details of Trusts/Institutions registered under Section 35(1)(ii), 
non-filers of such research association, filing of audit reports etc. in Maharashtra 
Charge being the State with the highest collection of income tax and also with 
123 S14 School, H2 Foundation, M9 Institute, B4 Society, V3 Foundation, S15 Trust, H3 Trust and R2 Trust 
124 https://www.incometaxindia.gov.in/Pages/utilities/Notified-Sc ientific-Research.aspx 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
150 
the significant number of Trusts/Institutions. However, the Department did not 
provide the information to Audit. Audit, therefore, could not ascertain whether 
the action was taken in this regard in respect of Maharashtra charge. In West 
Bengal charge, in the case of three Trusts/ Institutions125, appropriate action was 
taken by the Department. However, details of action taken in respect of donors 
was not known to Audit.  
Thus, considering the gravity of the issue, the ITD may explore the feasibility of 
certification of research activity by a specialised authority as checks and balances 
to ensure that the institutions are carrying out research activity and issuing 
genuine certificate enabling them for claiming deduction as was done in the case 
of Section 35(2AA) by the head of a National Laboratory or a University or the 
Indian Institute of Technology or the Principal Scientific Advisor to the 
Government of India and Section 35(2AB) by the Department of Scientific and 
Industrial Research (DSIR). 
Reply of the Ministry was awaited (February 2022). 
7.1.10  Absence of feedback/ monitoring mechanism to monitor the 
activities of the Trusts/Institutions 
The PAC, in its Report,
126  observed that no efforts have been made by the ITD to 
monitor whether the Trusts have been fulfilling the objectives under which they 
have been established and also for ensuring that there was no abuse of the 
concessions which were enjoyed by such Trusts. 
Audit attempted to ascertain whether the ITD/CBDT had devised any mechanism 
to monitor the extent to which charitable Trusts/Institutions have been fulfilling 
their objectives in the area of charity, religion, medical and education etc. for 
which exemptions are being provided under different Section of the Act. 
In Delhi, no reply was furnished by the CIT (E), Delhi in this regard. However, in 
Bihar, Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan, the DCIT (E), Patna, ITO (HQ), O/o the CIT 
(E), Bhopal and ITO (HQ), CIT(E), Jaipur charges, respectively stated that no such 
specific mechanism was available with the Assessing Officer. The ITO (HQ), 
CIT(E), Jaipur charge also stated that on the basis of different inputs viz. 
Computer Aided Scrutiny Selection (CASS) parameters, Tax Evasion Petitions 
(TEP), actionable information from other agencies, Trusts/ Institutions are 
scrutinized as per provision of the Income Tax Act, 1961.  
Reply of the Ministry was awaited (February 2022). 
125 S14 School, H2 Foundation and M9 Institute 
126 Para 39 of 104th Report (16th Lok Sabha) 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
151 
7.1.11 Monitoring of accumulation of Income and its utilisation under Section 
11(2) 
Section 11(2) provides that if in the previous year, income applied to charitable 
or religious purposes in India falls short of 85 per cent  of the income derived 
during that year from the property held under trust, the trust can opt for 
accumulation (in Form 10) of the unapplied portion of the income, to be spent 
for specified purpose(s) in the next five years, subject to fulfilment of certain 
conditions. Further, Section 11(3) provides that the accumulated amount under 
Section 11(2) will be the deemed income of the previous year if it is applied to 
purposes other than charitable or religious purposes, or ceases to be 
accumulated or set apart for application, or ceases to remain invested or 
deposited in any of the modes specified in Section 11(5), or is not utilised for the 
purpose for which it is so accumulated or set apart during the period not 
exceeding five years or in the year immediately following the expiry thereof.  
During the Performance Audit, Audit collected information to ascertain the 
number of Trusts/Institutions which opted for accumulation vis-a-vis  amount 
accumulated and noticed that out of 5,985 sample cases test checked, 846 
(14.85 per cent ) Trusts/Institutions opted for accumulation under Section 11(2) 
or 3rd proviso to Section 10(23C) of the Act, to be spent for specified purpose(s) 
in the next five years and the total amount accumulated was ` 4,997.54 crore 
during the AY 2014-15 to AY 2017-18. However, Audit noticed deficiencies in 
monitoring of utilisation of the accumulation, as discussed in detail in the 
succeeding paragraph. 
Audit observed that there was no effective system to monitor past 
accumulations, their utilisation and levying tax on the amount if they are applied 
for purposes other than charitable/religious purposes, or cease to be 
accumulated, or ceased to remain invested in the specified modes, or are not 
utilised for the purpose for which they have been so accumulated. The Audit 
Report in Form 10B, filed as per rule 17B of the Income Tax Rules, 1962, does 
not contain adequate certification by the Auditor to this effect. Though Form 
10B contains some qualifications about utilisation of past accumulation, it does 
not clearly certify the amount claimed by the assessee in its return of income 
127  
about utilisation of past accumulation. Form 10B does not reflect whether the 
amount of utilisation or part thereof has been routed through the Income and 
Expenditure Account. 
Audit noticed 32 assessment cases,
128  involving revenue impact of ` 60.94 crore, 
where the Department did not effectively monitor utilisation of past 
                                                           
127  ‘Schedule-I’ of ITR-7 
128  Delhi - 1, Gujarat -1, Haryana -1, Karnataka -3, Madhya Pradesh -4, Maharashtra - 12, Punjab -5, Tamil Nadu -1, 
Uttar Pradesh -2 and West Bengal -2 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
152 
accumulated income in the manner laid down in the Act. Eight cases are 
illustrated below: 
(i)  In Uttar Pradesh, CIT (E) Lucknow charge, a Government society engaged 
in the activity of ‘General Public Utility’ filed return of income for AY 
2016-17 at ` ‘Nil’ income. The scrutiny assessment was completed in 
March 2018 at an income of ` 838.55 crore by holding its objects as non-
charitable in accordance with amendment in Section 2(15) and taxed 
accordingly. Audit noticed that assessee had an accumulated amount of 
` 29.93 crore in FY 2009-10. This amount was required to be spent on 
charitable purpose by 31.03.2015. Thus, the accumulated amount of 
` 29.93 crore should have been treated as income of the assessee for AY 
2016-17. Omission to do so resulted in under-assessment of income of 
` 29.93 crore involving short levy of tax of ` 12.72 crore including interest.  
 The Ministry has accepted (March 2022) the audit observation and 
remedial action has been initiated by issuing notice under Section 148 in 
March 2021. 
(ii)  In West Bengal, CIT(E) Kolkata charge, a private trust engaged in multiple 
charitable activity, filed the return of income for AY 2016-17 at 
` 6.86 crore. The scrutiny assessment was completed in April 2018 at the 
same income. Audit noticed that the assessee had accumulated 
` 12.10 crore for specified purpose under Section 11(2), during AY 2010-
11, and this amount was required to be utilized within five years from the 
year of accumulation. The assessee, however, utilised only ` 1.36 crore 
within five years (from AY 2011-12 to AY 2015-16), and offered only 
` 6.86 crore for taxation, instead of the unutilized amount of ` 10.74 crore. 
The Department during assessment also did not monitor the past 
accumulation and its utilisation. This resulted in an under-assessment of 
income of ` 3.89 crore, involving undercharge of tax ` 1.68 crore. 
 The Ministry has accepted (March 2022) the audit observation and 
remedial action has been initiated by passing order under Section 263 in 
March 2021. 
(iii) In Karnataka, CIT(E) Bengaluru charge, a private trust, engaged in the 
activity of ‘Medical relief’, filed return of income for AY 2016-17 at ` ‘Nil’ 
income. The scrutiny assessment was completed in December 2018 
accepting returned income of ` ‘Nil’ after allowing exemption under 
Section 11 of ` 10.41 crore. Audit noticed that the assessee had utilised  
` 3.00 crore being the amount accumulated/set apart during the financial 
year relevant to the AY 2011-12 towards revenue expenditure of the Trust. 
It was, however, noticed that the amount accumulated in AY 2011-12 was 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
153 
stated to be towards ‘construction of hospital’. As the accumulated 
amount was not applied towards the purpose specified, as provided in the 
Section 11(3) ibid, the same should have been brought to tax. This resulted 
in a short levy of tax of ` 1.35 crore. 
The Ministry, while not accepting the audit observation, state d (March 
2022) that as per the statement of total income for AY 2016-17, the 
assessee had reduced the ‘amount utilised out of funds accumulated/set 
apart for the AY 2011-12’ amounting to `2.72 crore from the total revenue 
expenditure of the AY 2016-17. Further, the entire capital expenditure 
amounting to `27.97 lakh incurred during the FY 2015-16 was from the 
funds accumulated/set apart for the AY 2011-12. Thus, the AO observed 
that utilisation of ` 3.00 crore during FY 2015-16 out of the funds 
accumulated for the AY 2011-12 was not claimed by the assessee as 
application of income for AY 2016-17. 
Ministry’s reply is being verified by the Field Audit off ice. 
(iv) In Uttar Pradesh, under the CIT (E) Lucknow charge, a Government society,
engaged in the activity of ‘General Public Utility’, filed return of income for
AY 2015-16 at ‘Nil’ income. The case was selected in the PA sample as ‘Top
200’ case having gross receipt of the assessee during the year was
` 1272.21 crore. The scrutiny assessment was completed in March 2017
at ` 918.63 crore after an addition of ` 885.93 crore in different heads
under normal provisions and not as Trust in accordance with amendment
in Section 2(15) holding its objects non-charitable in nature. Audit noticed
that the assessee had an accumulated amount of ` 5.53 crore in the
FY 2008-09. This amount was required to be spent on charitable purpose
by 31.03.2014. As the activity of the assessee was held by the AO as non-
charitable, the accumulated amount should have been treated as Income
of the assessee, in view of the provisions of Section 11(3)(a), but the same
was not done. This resulted in short computation of income of ` 5.53 crore
and consequent short charge of tax of ` 2.33 crore including applicable
interest.
The Ministry has accepted (March 2022) the audit observation a nd
remedial action has been initiated by issuing notice under Section 148 in
March 2021.
(v) In Maharashtra, under CIT(E) Mumbai charge, a private entit y engaged in
educational activity, filed return of income for AYs 2015-16 and AY 2016-17
at ` ‘Nil’ income. The cases for AYs 2015-16 and 2016-17 were selected in
the PA sample as ‘High Value’ case since the gross receipt during the years
were ` 114.24 crore and ` 134.63 crore respectively. The scrutiny

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
154 
assessments were completed in October 2017 and October 2018, 
respectively, assessing income at ` ‘Nil’ for AYs 2015-16 and 2016-17. Audit 
noticed that the assessee had granted advance of ` 1.30 crore as on March 
2016 to a charitable trust ‘U’ and had paid ` 20.67 crore to a trust ‘V’ 
towards purchase of building during the AY 2015-16. The assessee claimed 
these amounts as application of Income accumulated under Section 11(2) 
of the Act. As per the aforesaid provisions, the amount paid to trusts, out 
of accumulated income of earlier years, was not to be allowed as 
application of income for the charitable purposes and, therefore, brought 
to tax. The omission resulted in under-assessment of income of  
` 21.97 crore involving short levy of tax of ` 7.47 crore for the above AYs.  
Reply of the Ministry was awaited (February 2022). 
(vi)  In Punjab, under CIT(E) Chandigarh charge, a Government society engaged 
in the activity of ‘General Public utility’, and selected in the PA sample as 
‘Top 200 case’ having gross receipt of ` 244.65 crore, filed return of income 
for AY 2015-16 declaring ` ‘Nil’ income, which was processed summarily 
and subsequently rectified at ` ‘Nil’ income. Audit noticed that the 
unutilized past accumulation of ` 6.58 crore, was not treated as income in 
AY 2015-16 after a lapse of five years. This resulted in under-assessment 
of income of ` 6.58 crore, involving short levy of tax of ` 3.98 crore 
including interest.  
 The Ministry has accepted (March 2022) the audit observation and 
remedial action has been initiated by issuing notice under Section 148 in 
March 2021. 
(vii)  In Maharashtra, CIT(E), Mumbai charge, a private trust engaged in activity 
of ‘General Public Utility’, filed return of income for AYs 2014-15, 2015-16 
and 2016-17 at ` ‘Nil’ income. The scrutiny assessments were completed 
in December 2016, December 2017 and December 2018 determining 
income of ` 5.26 crore, ` 1.64 crore and ` ‘Nil’ respectively. The scrutiny 
assessment of AY 2014-15 was further rectified under Section 154 in 
December 2016 revising income at ` ‘Nil’.  Audit scrutiny revealed that the 
assessee had given an advance of ` 6.01 crore for ‘Sanand Land’ in earlier 
years and treated it as application of income under Section 11(2). Against 
this advance, the assessee received aggregate refund of ` 4.25 crore 
including ` 0.30 crore of AY 2016-17 till 31.03.2016 leaving balance of 
` 1.76 crore to be recovered. Audit noticed that the Department allowed 
accumulation of the refund of ` 0.30 crore as deemed application under 
Section 11(2) again in the current year. Similarly, in AY 2014-15 and AY 
2015-16, the assessee received refund of advance to the extent of ` 3.95 
crore and ` 4.37 crore respectively against the property ‘Sanand Land’ and 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
155 
‘Gift City Land’ which was again allowed to accumulate under Section 11(2) 
in both the years. The provisions of Section 11(2) of the Act allowed 
accumulation of any income of a financial year only once for the specific 
purposes. Once it is not applied within the stipulated period and for the 
specified purpose, it is not open to the assessee to claim accumulation of 
the same income on recurring basis on expiry of the stipulated period. The 
allowance of repeated accumulation of same amounts resulted in under-
assessment of income of ` 10.38 crore involving tax effect of ` 3.50 crore 
for the above AYs.  
Reply of the Ministry was awaited (February 2022). 
(viii)  In Maharashtra, CIT(E), Pune Charge, a private trust involved in educational 
activity, having gross receipt of ` 424.75 crore, filed its return of income 
for AY 2016-17 in October 2016 declaring income at ` Nil. The return was 
initially processed in summary manner and subsequently selected for 
scrutiny and assessment was completed under Section 143(3) in December 
2018 accepting the returned income. Audit noticed that in the Form 10 
filed by the assessee, no accumulated fund was available to the assessee 
prior to AY 2011-12 for utilisation. Audit further noticed from the 
‘statement of accumulated fund & utilisation’ submitted by the assessee 
that the assessee had claimed inter alia  utilisation of accumulated fund of 
` 301.90 crore pertaining to AY 2008-09 to 2010-11 during the previous 
year relevant to AY 2016-17 and the same was accepted by the AO. The AO 
while allowing the claim of the assessee did not take into consideration the 
information available in Form 10. Without prejudice to this, the allowance 
of accumulated fund pertaining to AY 2008-09 to 2010-11 by the AO was 
in contravention to the provision ibid . 
 In the reply (January 2022), while not accepting the objection, the 
Department stated that during course of scrutiny the accumulation of 
utilisation was duly verified and it provided a snapshot of utilisation of 
accumulation for AY 2006-07 to 2016-17. 
 The reply of the Department is not acceptable. Further scrutiny of the un-
utilized amount (Closing Balance as on 31.03.2016) of respective funds viz., 
Land Building and other asset fund, Land and Land Development, campus 
development, building equipment fund and research fund mentioned in 
the Balance Sheet vis-à-vis assessee's 'statement of accumulation & 
utilisation of funds' was done. An excess un-utilized amount of ` 1279.36 
crore was lying with the assessee. This indicates that the amount 
accumulated for the dedicated fund had not been utilized within the 
stipulated time and statement submitted could not be relied upon and 
needs further scrutiny. The Department is requested to verify the same. 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
156 
Reply of the Ministry was awaited (February 2022). 
It is evident from above that in certain cases, the assessee had availed 
exemptions; however, the accumulated income was not utilised either within 
the stipulated time or for the specific purpose. Thus, the monitoring mechanism 
of past accumulation of Income and its utilisation under Section 11(2) is still 
required to be made more effective.  
The issue of ineffective monitoring of accumulations, and their utilisation, had 
also been pointed out in CAG’s earlier Audit Report No. 20 of 2013. The PAC had 
recommended that the Department to evolve a suitable mechanism to ensure 
that accumulated income is applied for the objectives of the Trusts/Institutions 
within a specified time frame and asked the Department to perform strict 
monitoring of Form 10 invariably to cover all assessments. In reply, the Ministry 
had stated that the ITD was in the process of making the e-filing of Returns by 
all assessees mandatory. Once this is achieved, the necessary database will be 
created in the system to address such issues. However, Audit observed that the 
issue has still not been resolved even after making the e-filing mandatory for all 
Trusts/Institutions and as a result, certain Trusts/Institutions are taking undue 
benefit. 
Reply of the Ministry was awaited (February 2022). 
7.1.12 Provisions for declaration of the purpose of Accumulation under 
Section 10(23C) 
As per proviso of Section 10(23C) of the Act, fund or trust or institution, or any 
university, or other educational institution, or any hospital, or other medical 
institution, registered under clause (iv), (v), (vi) and (via) of Section 10(23C), may 
apply its income, or accumulate it for application, wholly and exclusively to the 
objects for which it is established, and, in a case where more than 15 per cent  of 
its income is accumulated on or after the first day of April 2002, the period of 
the accumulation of the amount, exceeding 15 per cent  of its income, shall, in 
no case, exceed five years, vide 3rd proviso to Section 10(23C). 
Audit observed that there is no provision in the Act for declaration of the 
purpose of accumulation under Section 10(23C). No Statement (similar to Form 
10, as mentioned in para 5.4.2) has been prescribed in the Act or Rules for being 
furnished to the Assessing Officer, intimating the purpose/period of 
accumulation. Further, there is no mechanism to monitor the past accumulation, 
its utilisation and levying tax on the amount remaining unutilised after five years 
either through an appropriate column in the return of income, or through the 
modality of the Audit Report (Form 10BB). Audit further noticed that in case of 
accumulation of the current year, no procedure is prescribed to treat the 
shortfall in the current year application, as taxable income. In the absence of 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
157 
such a procedure, the Department is treating the deficit of the current year 
application, as accumulation, by default even though the same has not been 
claimed by the assessee in the requisite Form 10BB. 
Audit noticed four assessment cases129 involving revenue impact of ` 2.99 crore 
where the Department did not bring the unspent accumulated income to tax 
after expiry of prescribed period; and treated the shortfall in current year 
application, as accumulation under Section 10(23C). Two cases are illustrated 
below: 
(i) In Tamil Nadu, CIT(E) Chennai charge, a private trust engaged in
educational activity, filed return of income for AY 2017-18 at ` ‘Nil’ income
and the scrutiny assessment was completed accepting returned income of
` ‘Nil’ in December 2019. Audit noticed that the accumulation pertaining
to AY 2011-12 amounting ` 3.46 crore remained unspent up to AY
2016-17. The unspent accumulation was not brought to tax in AY 2017-18.
This has resulted in non-levy of tax of ` 1.67 crore including applicable
interest.
The Ministry has accepted (March 2022) the audit observation a nd
remedial action has been initiated by issuing notice under Section 148 in
March 2021.
(ii) In West Bengal, CIT(E) Kolkata charge, a society engaged in educational
activity, filed return of income for AY 2016-17 at ` ‘Nil’ income. The
scrutiny assessment was completed in November 2018 followed by
rectification under Section 154 in March 2020 at ` ‘Nil’ income. Audit
observed that the AO had allowed accumulation of income of ` 2.97 crore
under the 3rd proviso to Section 10(23C), to be applied in the next five
years; however, no such accumulation had been claimed by the assessee
through the audit certificate (Form 10BB). Since the assessee had not
claimed the accumulation, the same should not have been considered as
exempt, and should have been considered as taxable income for the
period. This resulted in under-assessment of income of ` 2.97 crore
involving under-charge of tax of ` 1.32 crore.
The Ministry has accepted (March 2022) the audit observation and
remedial action has been initiated by passing order under Section 263 in
March 2021.
Thus, in the absence of a specific provision, there was no mechanism for 
monitoring accumulation of income and its utilisation under Section 10(23C) and 
in certain cases, the AOs were treating the shortfall in current year application, 
129 Tamil Nadu -3 and West Bengal -1 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
158 
as accumulation, suo-moto, even though the same had not been claimed by the 
assessee. 
7.1.13 Absence of mechanism to verify receipt and utilisation of foreign 
contribution 
Non-Government Organizations (NGOs)/ Trusts are allowed to receive Foreign 
Contributions (FCs) in accordance with the provisions laid down in the Foreign 
Contribution (Regulation) Act (FCRA) 1976, amended by FCRA 2010.  
The Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) monitors receipts of FC and publishes it on 
its official website, showing year-wise/State-wise details of Associations/ Trusts 
that received FC above ` one crore. FCRA envisages registration of recipient of 
FCs with MHA. FCRA also stipulates maintenance of separate account in a 
designated bank for the FCs received and the purpose of its receipt in the 
accounts. The returns are to be submitted annually to MHA. 
Section 7 of Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act, 2010 read with Rule 24 of 
Foreign Contribution (Regulation), Rules, 2011 provides that before any foreign 
funds received by a registered association are passed on to any person/ 
association in India, the transferor has to ensure that the recipient is
 also 
registered under FCRA 2010 and has not been prohibited under the Act. Rule 4 
of FCRA (Rules) also provides that foreign contribution cannot be invested in 
speculative mode including mutual funds and shares. 
The issue of ineffective monitoring of foreign contribution, and their utilisation, 
was also pointed out in CAG’s earlier Audit Report No. 20 of 2013. The PAC, in 
its Report
130 had recommended in July 2018 that the ITD/CBDT should formulate 
a data sharing mechanism with the MHA to keep a track of FCs received and their 
application for the purposes for which they have been received. The Committee 
also recommended developing a mechanism to monitor application of foreign 
contributions received and issuing a clear set of guidelines in this regard to all 
Assessing Officers. In reply, the ITD stated that CBDT will initiate discussion with 
MHA for sharing of data related to foreign contributions received. The data 
sharing mechanism will be streamlined after considering the learning of data 
matching results. Audit, however, observed that the ITD has still not formulated 
a data sharing mechanism with the MHA to keep track of Foreign Contributions 
(FCs) received and their utilisation for the declared purpose. 
7.1.13.1
  Audit noticed 35 assessment cases131 where the Trusts/Institutions 
received Foreign Contributions without having registration under FCRA, 
mismatch of figures of foreign contribution shown in ITR and that disclosed with 
MHA, donation of foreign contribution by recipient trust to other trusts which 
130 Para 28 of 104th Report (16th Lok Sabha) 
131 Delhi -12, Jharkhand -1, Kerala -3, Maharashtra -7, Punjab - 11 and Uttar Pradesh -1. 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
159 
was not registered under FCRA, 2010 or investment in foreign contribution in 
speculative mode. In all the cases, the Department had allowed exemption on 
such foreign contribution involving tax effect of ` 182.10 crore.  
Eight cases are illustrated below: 
(i) In Delhi, CIT(E) Delhi charge, a private trust, engaged in t he activity of
medical relief, filed return of income for AY 2014-15 at ` ‘Nil’ income. The
gross receipt of the trust was ` 197.21 crore and it was selected in the PA
sample as ‘Top 200’ case. The scrutiny assessment was completed in
December 2016 determining income at ` ‘Nil’. Audit noticed from the
Form FC-6 relating to account of foreign contribution submitted by the
assessee to the MHA, that the assessee had received foreign contribution
of ` 196.67 crore during the year; however only ` 18.67 crore was shown
as foreign contribution in the ITR. This resulted in under reporting of
foreign contribution and consequent under-assessment of income of
` 178.00 crore involving tax effect of ` 61.56 crore including interest.
Reply of the Ministry was awaited (February 2022).
(ii) In Delhi, CIT(E) Delhi charge, a Private Trust, engaged in t he activity of
medical relief, filed return of income for AY 2015-16 at ` ‘Nil’ income and
the scrutiny assessment was completed in September 2017 determining
` ‘Nil’ income. Audit noticed that the assessee had received foreign
contribution of ` 35.43 crore for the purpose of education, but most of the
amount was spent on medical relief. Thus, the amount which was spent
for the purpose other than purpose for which foreign contribution was
received should have been disallowed. This omission resulted in under-
assessment of income by ` 30.41 crore involving short levy of tax of
` 13.41 crore.
In reply, the ACIT(Exemption) Circle 2(1), Delhi stated that receipt and
utilisation of foreign contribution is monitored by the FCRA wing under
Ministry of Home Affairs. The trust is registered under Section 11 and as
long as the assessee is utilising the funds received towards its object for
which it was formed, there is no provision in the Act to disallow the
expenses treating it as not a proper application of income.
The reply was not tenable since Section 8(1)(a) of the FCRA A ct, 2010
stipulates that every person who is registered and granted a certificate or
given prior permission under the Act and receives any foreign contribution,
shall utilise such contribution for the purposes for which the contribution
has been received. Thus, the assessee violated the provisions of the FCRA
Act, 2010 but was allowed exemption on such foreign contribution,
although not utilized for the declared purposes.

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
160 
Reply of the Ministry was awaited (February 2022). 
(iii)  In Jharkhand, CIT(E) Patna charge, a private religious trust, filed return of 
income for AY 2016-17 at ` ‘Nil’ income. The scrutiny assessment was 
completed in December 2018 at ` 1.20 crore. Audit noticed that the 
assessee utilized its funds (foreign contribution and domestic funds) 
through a single bank account and invested foreign contribution to the 
amount of ` 3.47 crore in mutual funds which was speculative in nature in 
contravention of FCRA Rules. In the assessment order, the AO had 
accepted that the fund was not deposited in the specified mode but no 
action was taken by the AO. This omission resulted in short levy of tax of 
` 1.63 crore.  
 The Ministry has accepted (March 2022) the audit observation and 
remedial action has been taken by issuing order under Section 263 in 
March 2021. 
(iv)  In Maharashtra, CIT(E) Pune charge, a private trust engaged in multiple 
charitable activities filed return of income for AY 2016-17 at ` ‘Nil’ income 
which was summarily processed in March 2018 followed by rectification 
under Section 154 in March 2019 determining income at ` ‘Nil’. Audit 
noticed that the assessee had received ` 22 lakh from a foreign country 
without having valid registration under FCRA. Similarly, the assessee had 
also received ` 5 lakh in FY 2014-15. Since the amount was received 
without valid registration, the same should have been assessed as 
unauthorised receipt of foreign contribution involving tax effect of  
` 5.3 lakh.  
Reply of the Ministry was awaited (February 2022). 
(v) In Delhi, in CIT(E) Delhi charge, a private trust, filed return of income for 
AY 2015-16 at ` ‘Nil’ income. The scrutiny assessment was completed in 
November 2018 at a total income of ` ‘Nil’. Audit noted that as per the 
Schedule VC of the ITR-7 filed by the assessee, total foreign contribution 
received by the assessee during the year was ` ‘Nil’. However, as per Form 
FC-6132  as declared to MHA, the amount of Foreign Contribution was 
shown as ` 79.23 crore. Thus ` 79.23 crore received as foreign 
contribution was not treated as income of the assessee during the year. 
This resulted in under-assessment of income by ` 79.23 crore involving tax 
effect of ` 35.00 crore including interest.  
Reply of the Ministry was awaited (February 2022). 
                                                           
132   A form required to be maintained under FCRA Act  

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
161 
(vi) In Maharashtra, in CIT(E) Mumbai charge, a private trust, filed return of
income for AY 2017-18 at ` ‘Nil’ income. The scrutiny assessment was
completed in December 2019 at a total income of ` ‘Nil’. Audit noticed
from the Income and Expenditure Account that the assessee had received
foreign donation of ` 58.15 crore during the year and submitted the details
of foreign donation in Form FC-4133. Audit observed that the assessee in
Form FC-4 declared receiving of foreign donation to the extent of ` 47.67
crore only, which was certified by the tax auditor. The assessee could not
explain the source and genuineness of foreign donation shown in the
Income and Expenditure Account to the extent of ` 10.48 crore. This
unexplained foreign contribution was required to be treated as
anonymous donation under Section 115BBC(3) and added back to total
income of the assessee. The omission resulted in under-assessment of
income to the extent of ` 10.54 crore with short levy of tax of ` 10.77 crore
including applicable interest.
Reply of the Ministry was awaited (February 2022).
(vii) In Delhi, CIT(E) Charge, a private trust engaged in religious activity, having
gross receipt of ` 205.66 crore, filed its return of income for AY 2015-16 at
` ‘Nil’. The assessment was completed in summary manner in April 2016
at ` ‘Nil’. Audit noticed that the assessee had mentioned receipt of foreign
contribution of ` 38.32 crore under other details in the ITR. However, in
the schedule-VC (Voluntary Contribution) of the ITR, the assessee had
shown only ` 11.21 crore as Foreign Contribution under corpus fund
donation. Thus, the difference of ` 27.12 crore was to be included as
income and offered to tax. However, the same was not included in its
income by the assessee. Further, while processing the return under
summary manner through the ITD systems, the difference amount of
` 27.12 crore was also not considered as income of the assessee. The
omission resulted in under-assessment of income of ` 27.12 crore
involving tax effect of ` 10.39 crore including interest.
Reply of the Ministry was awaited (February 2022).
(viii) In Delhi, CIT(E) Charge, assessment of a private trust, involved in
educational activity, having gross receipt of ` 160.43 crore, for AY 2016-17
was processed in summary manner in May 2017 at income of ` Nil. Audit
noticed that the assessee had shown ` 10.14 crore as foreign contribution
as per Schedule VC of the ITR. The same was accepted in the summary
processing through ITD systems. However, it was noticed from Form FC-4
under Rule-17(1) as declared by the assessee to the Ministry of Home
133 A form required to be maintained under FCRA Act w.e.f. Ja nuary 2016 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
162 
Affairs (MHA), the amount of foreign contribution received for the relevant 
AY was shown as ` 27.69 crore. Thus, there was short declaration of the 
foreign contribution in the ITR by the assessee which resulted in under 
assessment of income of ` 17.55 crore involving tax effect of ` 6.78 crore.  
Reply of the Ministry was awaited (February 2022) 
7.1.13.2  Audit further noted that in eight of total of 35 assessment cases, 
mismatch of figures of foreign contribution shown in ITRs and those disclosed 
with MHA was noticed, as shown in Table 7.6 below: 
Table  7.6: Mismatch  in  Foreign  Contribution  received  by  Trusts/ Institutions  
Sl. 
No. 
Assessee  CIT  Charge  AY Foreign  contribution  received  during  the  
year (` in crore) 
Under  Other  
Details in Part 
A of ITR-7 
In  
Schedule 
VC to ITR 7 
Disclosed  in  
the return 
filed to MHA  
1 S2 Trust  CIT (E) Delhi  2015-16  38.32  11.21  Not  available  
with Audit  
2 I2 Foundation  CIT  (E)  Delhi  2016 -17   10.14  10.14  27.69  
3 I2 Foundation  CIT  (E)  Delhi  2015 -16  11.53  11.53  11.6  
4  J2 University  CIT (E) Delhi  2014-15  0.1  0 Not 
applicable  
5  T5 Institute  CIT (E) Delhi  2015-16  0.67  0 Not  
applicable  
6 M3 Church  CIT (E) Kochi  2016-17  4.25  4.1  Not  available  
with  Audit  
7 S8 Institute  CIT (E) Kochi  2014-15  1.96  0 Not  available  
with Audit  
8 R1 Institute  CIT (E) Kochi  2014-15  1.67  0 Not  available  
with Audit  
In all the cases, the Department had allowed exemption on such foreign 
contribution based on information provided by the assessee in the schedule VC 
(Voluntary Contribution) of the Form ITR-7.  
Audit noticed that while processing ITRs, the ITD systems could not detect the 
difference in the amount relating to foreign contribution received, mentioned 
under ‘other details in Part A of Form ITR-7’ and in schedule VC (Voluntary 
Contribution) to ITR-7. This indicated inadequate checks and validation in the 
ITD systems for the aforesaid fields in Form ITR-7. As a majority of cases are 
processed in summary manner only, in the absence of relevant checks and 
validation in the ITD systems, risk of leakage of revenue to the exchequer cannot 
be ruled out.  

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
163 
Thus, due to absence of data sharing mechanism with MHA, deficiency in 
monitoring of receipt of foreign contribution and its utilisation by the ITD still 
persists, despite PAC’s recommendation in its Report in July 2018 and assurance 
given by the ITD in its response to PAC’s recommendation. 
Reply of the Ministry was awaited (February 2022) 
7.1.14 Inadequate monitoring of receipts issued by the entity having 
registration under Section 80G  
Section 80G provides deduction in computing the total income of a person in 
respect of donation made to certain funds and charitable institutions. The 
Trusts/Institutions, therefore, take advantage of this provision and get 
themselves registered under this provision to attract the potential donors. The 
Act also provides that it is necessary to produce adequate proof of payment to 
claim deduction under Section 80G. 
In CAG’s Report No. 20 of 2013, it was pointed out that there was no internal 
mechanism within ITD to exercise control over the receipts issued by the entity 
having registration under Section 80G. In reply, the ITD submitted before the 
PAC that the Department had introduced e-filed return ITR-7 for charitable 
entities and the return captures information of donations received by the entity. 
On the other hand, a donor also e-filed return of income which captures details 
of PAN of a donee and the amount of 80G donation. Thus, by capturing the data 
furnished by the donor and the donee, a mechanism had been put in place for 
detecting gross mismatch between donation received and donation given. Audit, 
however, noticed three cases in respect of one assessee where there was a 
mismatch of amount of donation as disclosed by the donor and the donee which 
is illustrated below:  
(i)  In Punjab, CIT(E) Chandigarh charge, a private trust engaged in multiple 
charitable activity, for the AYs 2015-16, 2016-17 and 2017-18 received a 
sum of ` 17.14 crore (2015-18) as corpus donation from related party. 
Cross verification of records of the related party revealed that the related 
party claimed exemption under Section 80G, but neither the assessee trust 
credited this amount in its income and expenditure accounts nor was it 
applied for charitable purposes. The ITD did not cross check the donation 
received by the entity, even when the record was available in the 
assessment file. As the Trust had not applied the donation for charitable 
purpose, the donation was required to be added back in the taxable 
income. This resulted in under- assessment of ` 17.14 crore, involving tax 
effect of ` 8.26 crore.  
 The Ministry has accepted (March 2022) the audit observation and initiated 
remedial action by issuing notice under Section 148 in March 2021. 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
164 
Audit noted that the issue has since been addressed by the Ministry by 
inserting explanation 2A below Section 80G(5E) with effect from 
01.04.2021. 
7.2 Issues requiring strengthening of monitoring by the Income Tax 
Department 
During the Performance Audit, Audit noticed the following issues which require 
strengthening the monitoring mechanism in the ITD in respect of the Charitable 
Trusts/ Institutions: 
(i) Deficiency in ITR Form-7 and Audit Report in Form 10B for effective
monitoring of exemption claimed by Trusts/Institutions
Audit noted certain deficiencies in Income Tax Return Form ITR-7 and Audit 
Report in Form 10B for effective monitoring of exemption claimed by 
Trusts/Institutions. ITR-7 does not contain activity wise separate business code 
for Government and private entities, details of Balance Sheet, Schedules of 
assets and liabilities, year-wise receipt and utilisation of corpus donation, details 
of contributors/donor etc. Similarly, the Audit Report in Form 10B does not 
contain certification by the Auditor of details of receipt under different heads, 
information on receipt and utilisation of corpus donation, deemed application 
of income,
 disclosure of TDS deducted/deductible etc. In the absence of such 
information, Audit noted that quality of assessment has been impacted as 
incorrect claims made by the assessees were allowed leading to loss of revenue 
to the exchequer etc. as discussed in para 5.3.5, 5.3.6 and 7.1.1 of this report. 
(ii) Lack of effective monitoring of accumulation of income and its utilisation
Audit noticed that there is lack of effective monitoring of accumulation and its 
utilisations by Trusts/Institutions in the manner laid down in the Act. Although, 
the PAC had recommended bringing amendment to the Act or evolving a 
mechanism to ensure that accumulated income is applied for objectives of the 
Trusts/Institutions within a specified time frame, the Department is yet to 
develop a suitable mechanism in this regard. Audit also noted deficiency in Audit 
Report in Form 10B and 10BB submitted by the Trusts/Institutions claiming 
exemptions under Section 11(2) and 10(23C) respectively to monitor the past 
accumulation, its utilisation and levying tax on the amount remaining unutilised 
after five years. The deficiency in monitoring of accumulation and its utilisation 
has been duly discussed in paras 7.1.11 and 7.1.12 of this report. 
(iii) Ineffective monitoring of receipts of foreign contribution and their
utilisation
The PAC had recommended that the Department should formulate a data 
sharing mechanism with the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) to keep a track of 
foreign contributions (FCs) received by Trusts/Institutions and their utilisation 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
165 
for the declared purpose. The PAC also recommended that a clear set of 
guidelines in this regard be issued to all the AOs. Audit observed that the ITD is  
yet to establish the desired mechanism to keep a track of Foreign Contributions 
(FCs) received and their utilisation for the declared purpose by the 
Trusts/Institutions. Audit noticed cases where there was a mismatch of figures 
of foreign contributions shown in ITR and those disclosed with MHA as well as 
violation of provisions of FCRA, 2010 by Trusts/Institutions. Audit findings in 
respect of ineffective monitoring mechanism of receipts and utilisation of 
foreign contribution have been discussed in detail in para 7.1.13 of this report. 
(iv)  Inadequacy of survey in monitoring the activities of the Charitable 
Trusts/ Institutions 
Audit noticed  that survey could be an effective tool to monitor the activities, 
assess the actual financial position and detect bogus claim of exemptions of the 
Charitable Trusts/Institutions. However, Audit noted that number of surveys 
conducted by the Department was inadequate, considering large number of 
assessees claiming exemption. In spite of specific recommendation of the PAC 
that survey of all educational trusts be conducted, in a time-bound manner, 
Audit observed that the ITD conducted very few surveys during 2014-15 to 
2018-19 in respect of educational trusts included in the audit sample. Further, 
no survey was conducted in respect of high value (having receipt of ` 200 crore 
or more) educational trusts during the aforesaid period. The deficiency has been 
brought out in para 7.1.5 of this report. 
(v)  Internal Audit of the Registration/approval process   
Despite specific recommendation of the PAC that the process of 
registration/approval of the Charitable Trusts/Institutions should be brought 
under the purview of Internal Audit of the Department to minimize the 
irregularities, audit noted that the cases approved under Section 10(23C) and 
80G were yet to be brought under the purview of the Internal Audit of the 
Department. This would result in weak monitoring of the approval processes 
under the said Sections of the Act. Audit further noted that though the Internal 
Audit of registration cases under Section 12AA commenced for the first time in 
FY 2019-20, it has not been uniformly implemented in all the States/charges, as 
highlighted in paras 7.1.3 and 7.1.4 of this report. 
(vi)  Donations by a Trust to another Trust out of current years’ income 
Audit observed that Trusts/Institutions are in certain cases taking undue benefits 
through availing of the permissible accumulation of 15 per cent  out of current 
year’s income by making a chain of multiple donations routed through a 
series/string of Charitable/Religious Institutions. This resulted in denial of charity 
to the beneficiaries and helped in accumulation in the hands of 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
166 
Trusts/Institutions. The ITD has no mechanism to monitor such donation(s) to 
other trusts. The misuse of the provision thus warranted further examination by 
the ITD. Audit findings in this respect has been brought out in para 5.1.2.7. 
(vii) Absence of monitoring of activities of Trust/Institution engaged in
scientific research
Audit noticed that there is lack of monitoring of the ITD of the activities of 
Trust/Institution engaged in scientific research. Certification of genuineness of 
activity by any specialised authority to the effect that the Trusts/Institutions are 
carrying out scientific research activities is not necessary for claiming exemption 
under the Act. This resulted in instances of bogus claim of exemption by the 
Trusts as well as issue of bogus certificate under Section 35(1)(ii) to the donors.
 
The deficiency has been brought out in para 7.1.9 of this report. 
All the issues mentioned above indicate that due importance is required to be 
given to the Charitable Trusts/ Institutions by the CBDT. The Department needs 
to streamline the systems and strengthen its monitoring mechanism to mitigate 
the risk of ineligible claims being allowed and to ensure that income of only 
genuine Charitable Trusts/Institutions is exempted from the levy of income tax 
as per the intent of the Law and ineligible amounts are brought to tax.  
7.3 Conclusion 
The ITD has not allocated separate codes to different charitable activities, linking 
them with Section 11 and sub-Sections of Section 10(23C) of the Act, for 
identification of Government and private entities, for better monitoring, 
improved vigilance with regard to private charitable entities and effective 
evaluation of risks for scrutiny selection. Despite having non-filers monitoring 
system, the Department did not initiate appropriate action in the majority of 
cases. Internal Audit of registration process could not be implemented 
effectively. The number of surveys conducted by the Department was 
inadequate. 
The Department may consider making necessary provision in line with Section 
35(2AA) & 35(2AB) with regard to certification of claims under Section 35(1)(ii). 
There was lack of an effective feedback mechanism to monitor the activities of 
the Trusts/Institutions. Audit noticed deficiencies in the monitoring of utilisation 
of past accumulation as well receipt of foreign contribution received by the 
Trusts/Institutions. 
Audit noticed that the ITD systems, while processing ITR, could not detect 
mismatch in the amount relating to foreign contribution received by the 
asseessee mentioned: under ‘other details in Part A of Form ITR-7’ and in 
schedule VC (Voluntary Contribution) to ITR-7. Further, there is no mechanism 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
167 
in place to cross verify the amount relating to foreign contribution received, as 
provided by the assessee in the ITR with the information available with MHA.  
Some of the irregularities viz. ineffective monitoring of accumulation and its 
utilisation, ineffective monitoring of foreign contribution and its utilisation, 
inadequacy of survey, etc. pointed out in CAG’s Audit Report No. 20 of 2013 still 
persist. 
The CBDT needs to review not only those cases pointed out by Audit but also  
the other Trust cases without exception.  
7.4 Summary of Recommendations 
Audit recommends that: 
(i)  The ITD may allocate separate codes to different classification of 
activities of Trusts/Institutions, linking them with Section 11 and sub-Sections 
of 10(23C) of the Act, for identification of Government and private entities, for 
better monitoring, improved vigilance in regard to private charitable entities 
and effective evaluation of risk for scrutiny selection.  
ITD’s Computer Aided Scrutiny Selection (CASS) may be refined to 
reflect the lower risk for Government entities and reduce the probability of 
selection for scrutiny, other things being equal. This is important because ITD 
resources for scrutiny are limited and should be better deployed to higher risk 
cases in private sector. 
(Paragraph 7.1.1) 
In reply, the CBDT stated that it may be noted that ITR-7 already captures the 
Section code under which the entity claiming exemption has been 
approved/registered. Further, it also captures the nature of expenditure which 
has been undertaken on the objects of the Trusts/ Institutions. 
The selection of different cases under CASS is based on the risk assessment 
framework. The risk assessment framework identifies different types of risks 
which may result in violation of different provisions of the Income-tax Act. Such 
violations may take place in case of charitable institutions which are government 
entities as well as non-government entities. Therefore, it would not be 
appropriate to discriminate between government owned and other charitable 
institutions while running the CASS framework on the charitable institutions. 
The reply of the CBDT is not tenable as the Audit contention was on allocation of 
separate codes to different activities of Trusts/Institutions instead of Section 
code under which the entity claiming exemptions and further, separate codes for 
Government and private entities, for better monitoring, improved vigilance in 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
168 
regard to private charitable entities and effective assessment of risk for scrutiny 
selection  
The Government charitable entities are controlled and substantially financed by 
the Government and thus are likely to be in low-risk areas in terms of Income Tax 
exemption perspective excluding cases where the AO has deemed them to be 
non-charitable in nature. Therefore, putting efforts and manpower for scrutiny 
assessment of Government’s Trusts/Institutions in a large number of cases may 
not be as effective as scrutiny assessment of similarly placed private entities. In 
view of the above, the CBDT may reconsider its position. 
(ii)  The ITD may issue instructions to bring the cases approved under 
Section 10(23C) and 80G(5) of the Act under the purview of internal audit of 
the Department. 
(Paragraph 7.1.4) 
In reply, the CBDT stated that post scrutiny assessment, cases for internal audit 
are identified through risk-based analysis and any exemption/deduction claimed 
by an entity is given due weightage. Therefore, entities availing exemption under 
Section 10(23C) or 80G (5) of the Act are taken up for Internal Audit in the 
existing system and no further action is proposed. 
Reply of the CBDT is not in line with the Audit recommendation as the CBDT has 
not responded to the recommendation on bringing the process of approval of 
cases approved under Section 10(23C) and 80G(5) of the Act under the purview 
of internal audit of the Department. The CBDT may reconsider its reply. 
 (iii)  The ITD may:  
(a) 
 capture data in the CPC-ITR/ITBA system, to ascertain the nature and 
activity of the concerned trusts through granular business codes and 
other means; and  
(b)  enhance the quantum of surveys being undertaken in respect of private 
educational Trusts/Institutions, particularly the high value exemption 
cases, so as to ensure more effective monitoring and minimize the  
possibility of ineligible claims, as desired by the PAC. 
(Paragraph 7.1.5) 
In reply, the CBDT stated that ITR-7 already captures specific areas of activity of 
Trusts/Institutions. Survey action under Section 133A of the IT Act is one of the 
enforcement tools available with the Department which is used as a mechanism 
to detect tax evasion in different sectors of business. Being one of the 
enforcement tools, survey is sparingly used for creating necessary deterrence 
and an atmosphere of voluntary compliance. Further, survey actions are carried 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
169 
out only in cases, where credible information related to tax evasion is available 
with the Department.  
The reply of the CBDT is not tenable as the Audit contention was on allocation of 
separate business codes to different activities of Trusts/Institutions for 
identification of Government and Private entities, for better monitoring and 
improved vigilance in regard to Private educational Trusts/Institutions. Further, 
the CBDT may also examine the specific recommendations of the PAC for 
monitoring of activities of Private educational Trusts/Institutions included in Para 
9 of the PAC’s 27th Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha). In view of the above, the CBDT 
may reconsider its reply. 
(iv) The ITD may examine wherein, in any assessment year the Department
denied exemption to a Trust/Institution considering the activities as non-
charitable, the earlier years’ assessments may be re-opened to ensure that 
undue benefit was not taken by such Trusts/Institutions.  
(Paragraph 7.1.6) 
(v) The ITD may consider issuing Standard Operating Procedure/Guidelines
ensuring the genuineness of the activities of Trusts/Institutions before grant 
of registration/ accord of approval. 
(Paragraph 7.1.8) 
In reply, the CBDT stated that the Finance Act, 2020, inter alia, amended several 
provisions relating to approval/registration/notification of entities referred to in 
Sections 12AA, 10(23C) and 80G of the Income Tax Act. It was provided that such 
entities seeking registration/approval for exemptions/deductions under the said 
Sections shall be granted approval for a period not exceeding five years at a time. 
The new process of registration will also be applicable to entities that are already 
approved under the said Sections, which will be required to apply for 
re-registration or approvals. It was also provided that new entities seeking 
exemption but which have not commenced activities may be granted provisional 
registration/approval for a period of 3 years. 
Further, Finance Bill, 2022 has also proposed amendments in Section 12AB and 
Section 10(23C) to provide that where registration/approval or provisional 
registration/approval to a Trust/Institution has been granted and subsequently, 
the Pr.CIT/CIT has noticed occurrence of one or more specified violation, as 
prescribed, the registration/approval or the provisional registration/approval 
granted to the Trust/Institution may be cancelled after providing a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard.  
Audit has noted from the reply of the CBDT that various proposals have been 
made by the CBDT regarding verification of genuineness of activities of 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
170 
Trusts/Institutions through re-registration and provisional registration which is 
yet to be completed. Several proposals regarding cancellation of registration/ 
approval have also been made in the current Finance Bill 2022. Audit will await 
the final outcome of the re-registration process as well proposed approval and 
implementation of Finance Bill 2022. However, the CBDT has to ensure that 
genuineness of activity of the Trusts/Institutions are verified before grant of 
registration/approval. 
(vi) The ITD may consider certification of research activity of a
Trust/Institution by specialised authority at the time of granting approval 
under Section 35(1)(ii) in line with Section 35(2AA) and 35(2AB). 
(Paragraph 7.1.9) 
In reply, the CBDT stated that the Finance Act, 2020, inter alia, amended several 
provisions relating to approval/registration/notification of certain entities 
referred to in Sections 10(23C), 12AA, 35 and 80G of the Income Tax Act. 
Vide Notification No.19 of 2021 dated 26.03.2021, the new procedure for the 
registration/approval/notification of the exempt entities covered under the 
above-mentioned Sections has been notified. 
The new process of registration, inter-alia requires all the entities which are 
already approved under Section 35 of the Income Tax Act to apply for re-
registration. The last date for furnishing the application for re-registration is 
31.03.2022. Once the re-registration process is complete, the database of the 
charitable institutions will be updated. At the time of applying for re-registration, 
the entity seeking approval under Section 35 in addition to providing 
comprehensive details about the research activities and facilities in Form 3CF, is 
also required to attach documentary evidence providing a note on the research 
activities undertaken by the applicant as well as other supporting documents 
evidencing its creation/incorporation of establishment. 
Further, the second proviso to Section 35(1) provides that the Central 
Government may, before granting approval under, inter-alia, clause (ii) of sub-
Section (1) of Section 35, may call for documents or information from the 
research association, university, college or other institution to verify the 
genuineness of the activities of the said entities. Hence, the Income-tax Act 
already provides power to ascertain the genuineness of the activities undertaken 
by entities seeking approval under the Income Tax Act. 
Further, as an additional check and balance under the new process of 
registration, a statement of donation in Form 10BD is required to be filed by 
donee approved under, inter-alia, Section 35 of the Income Tax Act and 
certificate of donation is required to be provided to donor in Form 10BE. This 
has been done to ensure that there is a one-to-one matching between what is 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
171 
received by the entity approved under Section 35 and what is claimed as 
deduction by the assessee. This mechanism has been introduced to ensure that 
the claim of the assessee is certified by the entity receiving any amount from the 
said assessee. 
Audit will review the effectiveness of these provisions in ensuring and verifying 
genuineness of research activities in future audits. 
(vii) The ITD may devise a monitoring mechanism (in addition to scrutiny
assessment) to ensure that the entities which are availing the benefits under 
Sections 10(23C), 11, 12, 13, 80G(5) of the IT Act, are working towards 
achieving the objectives for which they are formed. 
(Paragraph 7.1.10) 
In reply, the CBDT stated that the Department has introduced the process of 
registration/re-registration of the Trusts/Institutions with effect from 
01.04.2021 under which new entities which have not commenced activities may 
be granted provisional registration/approval for a period of three years and after 
that registration/approval is granted for five years. Before grant of 
registration/approval, provision has already been in the IT Act regarding 
verification and satisfaction of the competent authority about the genuineness 
of activities of the Trust/Institutions of registration/accord of approval.  
Further, Finance Bill, 2022 has also proposed amendments in Section 12AB and 
Section 10(23C) to provide that where registration/approval or provisional 
registration/approval has been granted and subsequently, the competent 
authority has noticed occurrence of one or more specified violation, as 
prescribed, the registration/approval or the provisional registration/approval 
granted to the Trust/Institution may be cancelled.  
Hence, the above amendments shall ensure that the entities which are availing 
the benefits under Sections 11/10(23C) of the Income-tax Act, are working 
towards achieving the objectives for which they are formed. 
Audit has noted from the reply of the CBDT that various proposals have been 
made by the CBDT regarding verification of genuineness of activities of 
Trusts/Institutions through re-registration and provisional registration which is 
yet to be completed since the last date for furnishing the application for 
re-registration is 31.03.2022. Several proposals regarding cancellation of 
registration/approval have also been made in the current Finance Bill 2022.  
Audit will await the final outcome of the re-registration process as well proposed 
approval and implementation of Finance Bill 2022. However, the CBDT may 
strengthen the existing systems in place to make verification and monitoring 
processes robust to ensure that at the time of registration and re-registration, 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
172 
only trusts/ institutions which are carrying out genuine charitable activities and 
working towards the objectives for which they are formed, are allowed benefits 
of Sections 10(23C), 11, 12, 13, 80G(5) of the IT Act.  
(viii) Form 10B may be modified to ensure that the amount of utilisation out
of past accumulation in the return of income is certified by the Auditor. 
Further, ITD system may also be suitably modified to maintain a schedule of 
year-wise accumulation and utilisation by automatic capture of data so that 
any unspent amount after specified period may be taxed accordingly. 
(Paragraph 7.1.11) 
The CBDT stated that in this regard, the draft revised Form 10B was circulated 
for public comments in 2019; however, due to the ongoing Covid-19 pandemic, 
in order to prevent the increase of additional compliance burden, the revised 
Form 10B has not been notified. The said form shall be modified and notified in 
due course and above issue shall be examined therein. 
Audit will await the final outcome of the efforts made by the CBDT to streamline 
the monitoring mechanism.  
(ix) Form 10BB may be modified so as to monitor amounts accumulated by
the Trusts/Institutions registered under Section 10(23C) (iv to via). Further, ITD 
may consider specific declaration to be made by the assessee similar to Form 
10, as per which statement to be furnished to the AO/prescribed authority 
under Section 11(2), intimating the purpose/ period of accumulation, by 
Trusts/Institutions registered under Section 10(23C) (iv to via), opting for 
accumulation of income for future application. Further, CPC-ITR/ITBA system 
may also be suitably modified to maintain a schedule of year-wise 
accumulation and utilisation by automatic capture of data so that any unspent 
amount after specified period may be taxed accordingly. 
(Paragraph 7.1.12) 
The CBDT stated that the Finance Bill, 2022 has proposed several amendments 
to, inter-alia, provisions pertaining to trusts and institutions referred under sub-
clause (iv) or (v) or (vi) and (via) of clause (23C) of Section 10 and those registered 
under Section 12AA/12AB, so as to align the provisions of both the regimes 
governing exemption provided to the said trust and institutions under the 
relevant Sections. 
Finance Bill, 2022 has specifically proposed to insert Explanation 3 to the third 
proviso to clause (23C) of Section 10 of the Income-tax Act to provide that for 
the purposes of determining the amount of application under this proviso, 
where eighty five per cent of the income referred to in clause (a) of the third 
proviso of the said clause, is not applied, wholly and exclusively to the objects 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
173 
for which the trust or institution under the clause (23C) of Section 10 of the 
Income Tax Act is established, during the previous year but is accumulated or set 
apart, either in whole or in part, for application to such objects, such income so 
accumulated or set apart shall not be included in the total income of the 
previous year of the person in receipt of the income, provided the following 
conditions are complied with, namely:- 
(a)  such person furnishes a statement in the prescribed form and in the 
prescribed manner to the Assessing Officer, stating the purpose for which the 
income is being accumulated or set apart and the period for which the income 
is to be accumulated or set apart, which shall in no case exceed five years. 
(b)  the money so accumulated or set apart is invested or deposited in the 
forms or modes specified in sub-Section (5) of Section 11; and  
(c)  the statement referred to in clause (a) of Explanation 3 to the third 
proviso to clause (23C) of Section 10 is furnished on or before the due date 
specified under sub-Section (1) of Section 139 for furnishing the return of 
income for the previous year. 
Thus, the requisite amendments have been proposed to be made to the Income 
Tax Act to capture the details of the purpose of accumulation for the trusts or 
institutions referred under sub-clause (iv) or (v) or (vi) and (via) of clause (23C) 
of Section 10. 
The details of the accumulated income and its application (year wise) are 
captured in Schedule-I of ITR-7. 
The specific details of accumulated income and report on the satisfaction of 
different conditions under sub-Section (2) of Section 11 have been proposed to 
be sought from the auditor in draft revised Form 10B, which was circulated for 
public comments in 2019. However, due to COVID-19 pandemic the form could 
not be notified, but shall be done in due course.  
Audit will await the final outcome of the efforts made by the CBDT to streamline 
the monitoring mechanism. 
(x)  The ITD may 
  
a.  evolve an automated IT-based mechanism to cross-verify the foreign 
receipt available with MHA, with that in the ITR. The ITD may also consider 
bringing in new provisions in the Act, so as to treat foreign contribution 
received, utilized, donated or invested by Trusts/Institutions in violation of the 
FCRA Act 2010 as income not to be exempt under Section 11 and 10(23C). 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
174 
b. put checks and validation in place in the ITD systems to restrict the user
to provide inconsistent information/data within same/different Forms while 
filing ITR. 
c. explore the feasibility of utilisation of relevant information/data
available with the other Government Department/body which may plug-in 
leakage of revenue to the exchequer while processing ITRs in an automated 
environment. 
(Paragraph 7.1.13) 
The CBDT stated that the current ITR-7 already captures details pertaining to 
registration under FCRA, 2010 and the amount of foreign contributions received 
by the charitable Trusts/Institutions. The current provisions of Section 12A and 
fifteenth proviso to clause (23C) of Section 10 already provide that a 
Trusts/Institutions seeking exemption under the respective Sections are also 
required to comply with the requirements of any other law for the time being in 
force. Hence, under the current provisions of the Income-tax Act any mis-
utilisation of foreign contributions in violation of FCRA Act, 2010 can be a ground 
for cancellation of registration/approval of the charitable Trusts/Institutions and 
exemption under the respective provisions.  
Section 12AB of the Income Tax Act, 1961 provides for cancellation of their 
registration, i.e. deregistration, if the activities of such trust or institution are not 
genuine or are not being carried out in accordance with the objects of the trust 
or institution, as the case may be. 
If any violation being done by a trust is detected by the Investigation Directorate 
of the Income-tax Department, which is in contravention to the provisions of the 
Income Tax Act, 1961, such information is passed on by the Investigation 
Directorate to the assessment charge for taking necessary action for cancellation 
of registration of such trust. 
Further, on detection of violation of other laws during the course of its 
investigation, the Income Tax Department (ITD) shares with the relevant LEAs, 
the necessary information for appropriate action by these agencies under their 
respective laws. 
Reply of the CBDT is not in line with the Audit recommendation as the CBDT has 
not responded to the issue of utilisation of information/data available with the 
Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) or the other Government Department/body and 
putting automated validation checks in the ITD systems for detecting 
inconsistent information in same/different Forms in the ITRs filed by the assessee 
Trust/ Institution. The response of CBDT is largely restricted to checks carried out 
for scrutiny assessment, investigation etc., whereas Audit’s recommendation 
was for automated cross checking and utilization of data within various forms of 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
175 
the 
ITRs filed and with the MHA FCRA database, which would be applicable for 
all assessments (including summary assessments)
.  
The CBDT may also ensure timely sharing of information/ details with the other Law 
Enforcement Agencies for taking appropriate action under their respective laws.  
Further, the CBDT may also examine its response given to the PAC’s 
recommendation included in the PAC’s Report No 104 July 2018, while initiating 
the remedial action. 
New Delhi (Monika Verma) 
Dated: Director General (Direct 
Taxes-I) 
Countersigned 
New Delhi (Girish Chandra Murmu) 
Dated: Comptroller and Auditor General of India 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
176 
Appendices 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
177 
Appendix 1.1 
(Refer Para no. 1.2.1) 
Assessment Process 
(a) Return of income:
Section 139(4A) provides that every person who is in receipt of income derived 
from property held under trust or other legal obligation wholly for or charitable 
purposes or religious purposes, or in part only for such purposes; or income by 
way of voluntary contribution on behalf of such trust or institution for which he 
is taxable, must file a return of income, if such income (computed before 
allowing any exemption under Sections 11 and 12) exceeds the maximum 
amount not chargeable to income tax. Section 139(4C) provides for compulsory 
filing of return by the institutions, if income (before giving effect to the 
provisions of Section 10) exceeds the maximum amount not chargeable to 
income tax. 
(b) Summary processing {Section 143(1), 143(1A), 143(1B)}
In summary assessment, ITRs are checked for arithmetical accuracy, internal 
consistency etc. During processing of ITRs, information provided by the assessee 
are cross checked with the information available in the ITD systems vide Form 
26AS, Annual Information Report (AIR), tax credits in Online Tax Accounting 
System (OLTAS), previous processed returns etc. and necessary adjustments, if 
required are made by the system itself without calling for records and 
information from the assessee. Thus, summary processing is non-intrusive in 
nature. However, if the systems detect any mismatch of information, the 
assessee is intimated through a system-generated communication and 
subsequently assessee makes its submission through the system only. After 
processing, if there is any demand due from the assessee, it is intimated through 
system generated demand notices. In case of excess payment of tax, refunds are 
issued through the Refund Banker Scheme, except in some exceptional cases 
wherein refund is allowed in manual mode. 
The Centralized Processing Centre – Income Tax Return (CPC-ITR), Bengaluru was 
meant for processing of electronically filed ITRs in an automated environment. 
Further, in order to bring all the business processes of the Department in 
automated environment and to provide all the services to the end-users through 
a ‘Single Window Interface/departmental portal’, the Department introduced a 
new application named Income Tax Business Application (ITBA) in year 2018. 
Post introduction of ITBA, the CPC-ITR application was integrated with this new 
application through interface and continued to be used for processing of ITRs 
along-with other additional functionalities such as computation of tax for 
scrutiny assessment/rectification etc. 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
178 
(c)  Scrutiny Assessment 
The Income Tax Returns filed by the assessee are selected for detailed scrutiny 
through Computer Aided Scrutiny Selection (CASS). Some cases are also selected 
manually by the Assessing Officer as per CBDT guidelines. The Act provides for 
two types of regular scrutiny assessments: (a) Assessment under Section 143(3) 
which is framed after affording opportunity to the assessee and taking all 
relevant facts and responses of the assessee on record. (b) Assessment under 
Section 144 (Best Judgment Assessment) is framed when, despite notices, the 
assessee does not respond and forgoes the opportunities to file a response. In 
addition to the above, scrutiny block assessments are conducted in cases of 
search cases (Section 153A/153C). 
In scrutiny assessment, the Assessing Officer (AO) retrieves all records and 
information related to the assessee available with the ITD and additionally calls 
for record and Information from the assessee to satisfy himself that no income 
has been unaccounted and tax has been computed correctly. The Act prescribes 
time lines for issue of notices and completion of assessment proceedings. The 
AO finalises the assessment proceedings. 
(d)  Rectification of mistake 
After processing of ITRs, if any mistake is noticed by the Department the 
processed order is rectified suo-moto  and in case, if a request is made by the 
assessee, the same is rectified by passing order under Section 154 through CPC-
ITR, Bengaluru except in some exceptional cases where rectification order is 
passed by the jurisdictional AO. 
(e)  Income escaping assessment 
If the AO has reason to believe that any income chargeable to tax has escaped 
assessment for any assessment year, he may assess or reassess such income and 
also any other income chargeable to tax which comes to his notice subsequently 
in the course of the reassessment subject to the provisions of the Act 
(Section 147). 
(f)  Revision of orders 
The CIT/PCIT may direct the AO to enhance or modify an assessment, or to 
cancel an assessment and to do a fresh assessment, under Section 263/264 if he 
considers any order passed by the AO is erroneous, subject to provisions of the 
Act. 
(g)  Appeal Process  
An aggrieved assessee can appeal to the Commissioner of Income Tax (Appeals) 
against the order of an AO, who shall comply with the directions given in the 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
179 
appellate order. Further, appeal is also permitted to be made on questions of 
fact and law to the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal against the orders passed by 
appellate authorities. An appeal can be preferred to the High Court under 
Section 260A if any issue has not been considered or wrongly considered by the 
Appellate Tribunal and also to the Supreme Court under Section 261 in any case 
which the High Court certifies to be a fit one for appeal thereto. 
(h)  Penalty 
In order to ensure compliance of the provisions of the Act and to have a 
deterrent effect for violations, the Act provides for exhaustive procedures for 
the imposition of penalty. Section 272A(2)(e) of the Act, provides that if any 
person fails to furnish the return of income which he is required to furnish under 
sub-Section (4A) or (4C) of Section 139 or to furnish it within the time allowed 
and in the manner required under those sub-Sections, he shall pay, by way of 
penalty, a sum of one hundred rupees for every day during which the failure 
continues. 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
180 
Appendix 2.1 
(Refer Para no. 2.5 and 4.3.7.2) 
Non-Production of Top 200 cases of Audit Sample  
Sl. 
No. 
OFFICE CIT Name AY Gross 
Receipt 
(` in crore ) 
Section 
under 
which 
assessed 
Exemption 
granted  
(` in crore ) 
1 MUMBAI Pr. CIT (Central )-1 
Mumbai 
2015-16  374.38  143(3) 335.08  
2 MUMBAI CIT (Exemption) 
Mumbai 
2014-15  194.56  154 194.56  
3 CHANDIGARH CIT (Exemption) 
Chandigarh 
2015-16  242.79  143(3) 238.18  
4 BHUBANESWAR  CIT (Exemption) 
Hyderabad 
2016-17  166.04  154 166.04  
5 BHUBANESWAR  Pr. CIT -1 
Bhubaneswar 
2016-17 
 203.24  143(3) 203.24  
6 AHMEDABAD CIT (Exemption) 
Ahmedabad 
2016-17  735.25  154 735.25  
7 MUMBAI CIT (Exemption) 
Pune 
2015-16  174.44  143(3) 174.44  
8 MUMBAI CIT (Exemption) 
Pune 
2016-17  350.61  143(3) 350.60  
9 BANGALORE CIT (Exemption) 
Bengaluru 
2016-17  278.61  154 0.00  
10 HYDERABAD CIT (Exemption) 
Hyderabad 
2016-17  199.86  154 0.00  
11 MUMBAI Pr. CIT (Central)-3, 
Mumbai 
2015-16  2,174.51  143(3) 1,358.64  
12 MUMBAI Pr. CIT (Central)-3, 
Mumbai 
2016-17  3,824.81  143(3) 840.01  
13 MUMBAI CIT (Exemption) 
Mumbai 
2015-16  630.68  154 630.68  
14 MUMBAI Pr. CIT-21 Mumbai 2016-17  158.60  143(3) 158.60  
15 BANGALORE CIT (Exemption) 
Bengaluru 
2016-17  264.36  154 0.00  
16 HYDERABAD CIT (Exemption) 
Hyderabad 
2014-15  524.55  154 515.49  
17 JAIPUR CIT (Exemption) 
Jaipur 
2014-15  201.58  154 201.58  
 
 
 
  

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
181 
Appendix 3.1 
{Refer Para no 3.3(i)} 
Status of action taken by the Department and Audit comments thereon in respect of follow-up 
audit of ‘Exemptions to Charitable Trusts and Institutions’ included in Chapter VI of the 
Compliance Audit Report No. 9 of 2019 (Direct Taxes)   
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Assessee 
AY Para no. of 
Report No. 
9 of 2019 
Gist of the audit 
observation 
Tax 
effect 
(` in 
crore) 
Action taken by the ITD and 
Audit comments thereon 
(i)  Cases where the audit observations were accepted by the Mi nistry  
1. O 1 Foundation 2014-15 6.3 Income/ property of 
institutions were 
diverted to related 
group trust in 
contravention of 
provision of Section 
13(1)(c)(ii). 
24.61 Partially accepted by the 
Ministry and remedial 
action was taken under 
Section 143(3) read with 
Section 263 in December 
2019. No further comments 
offered to the Ministry. 
2.  P3 Hospital 
 
2014-15 6.8 Voluntary contribution 
including foreign 
currency donation was 
considered as corpus 
fund without specific 
direction of donor. 
13.17 Partially accepted by the 
Ministry and remedial 
action was taken under 
Section 143(3) read with 
Section 263 in December 
2019. No further comments 
offered to the Ministry. 
3. S1 Sangh 2012-13 
to  
2014-15 
6.9.2 The trust had not been 
applying income for 
charity and rather 
accumulating it by 
misusing the provision 
of accumulation. 
- Partially accepted by the 
Ministry and remedial 
action was taken under 
Section 263 in December 
2019. No further comments 
offered to the Ministry. 
 
  

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
182 
Appendix 3.2 
{Refer Para no 3.3(ii)(a)} 
Status of action taken by the Department and Audit comments thereon in respect of follow-
up audit of ‘Exemptions to Charitable Trusts and Institutions’ included in Chapter VI of the 
Compliance Audit Report No. 9 of 2019 (Direct Taxes)   
(ii)    Cases where the audit observations were not accepted by the Ministry  
(a)  Case where audit observation was not accepted by the Ministry and Audit offered no 
further comments to the Ministry  
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Assessee 
AY Para no. 
of Report 
No. 9 of 
2019 
Gist of the audit 
observation 
Tax 
effect 
(` in 
crore) 
Action taken by the ITD and 
Audit comments thereon 
1. P 2 Foundation 2012-13 6.6.1 The assessee 
invested in shares of 
its group of 
companies, which is 
a prohibited mode 
under Section 
13(1)(d)(iii) read 
with Section 11(5). 
- The Ministry did not accept 
the audit observation. 
No further comments 
offered to the Ministry. 
However, the Ministry need 
to review the continuity of 
exemption provisions for 
investment by such trusts 
prior to 1.6.1973.  
 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
183 
Appendix 3.3 
{Refer Para no 3.3(ii)(b)} 
Status of action taken by the Department and Audit comments thereon in respect of follow-up 
audit of ‘Exemptions to Charitable Trusts and Institutions’ included in Chapter VI of the 
Compliance Audit Report No. 9 of 2019 (Direct Taxes) 
(b)  Cases where audit observations were not accepted by the Ministry and Audit did not accept 
the replies of the Ministry  
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Assessee 
AY Para no. of 
Report No. 
9 of 2019 
Gist of the audit 
observation 
Tax 
effect 
(` in 
crore) 
Action taken by the ITD and 
Audit comments thereon 
1. M 7 Association 2014-15 6.9.1 ITD cancelled the 
registration of the 
trust but audit 
could not ascertain 
whether the 
Department taxed 
the accumulation 
on cancellation of 
registration. 
- The Ministry did not accept the 
audit observation. 
The reply of the Ministry was not 
tenable as per the provisions of 
Section 11(3) of the Income Tax 
Act, which stipulates that the 
accumulated income under 
Section 11(2) shall be deemed to 
the income of such person of the 
previous year in which it is 
applied for the purpose other 
than charitable or religious 
purposes. 
In view of the above, the 
Ministry was asked to reconsider 
its reply. Further reply was 
awaited. 
From field verification, Audit 
noticed that no further action 
was initiated by the Department 
(March 2022). 
2. M8 Authority 2014-15 
 
6.9.1 ITD cancelled the 
registration of the 
trust but audit 
could not ascertain 
whether the 
Department taxed 
the accumulation 
on cancellation of 
registration. 
- The Ministry did not accept the 
audit observation. 
The Ministry was asked to 
furnish the copy of Ministry’s 
decision for accepting the High 
Court’s decision in support of its 
reply, which was awaited. 
However, from field verification, 
Audit noticed from the 
Assessment order of AY 2016-17 
that the assessment was 
completed by disallowing 
exemptions and assessing 
income as business income in 
December 2018. Also, it was 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
184 
(b)  Cases where audit observations were not accepted by the Ministry and Audit did not accept 
the replies of the Ministry  
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Assessee 
AY Para no. of 
Report No. 
9 of 2019 
Gist of the audit 
observation 
Tax 
effect 
(` in 
crore) 
Action taken by the ITD and 
Audit comments thereon 
mentioned in the assessment 
order that if deduction under 
Section 11 was allowed to the 
assessee in appeal, the 
exemptions will be allowed as 
per provisions of the Act. 
3. S6 Authority 
 
2014-15 6.9.1 ITD cancelled the 
registration of the 
trust but audit 
could not ascertain 
whether the 
Department taxed 
the accumulation 
on cancellation of 
registration. 
- The Ministry did not accept the 
audit observation stating that 
registration of the trust has been 
cancelled after invoking the 
proviso to Section 2(15) vide 
order dated 27.03.2014. The 
assessee has filed an appeal 
before ITAT against the said 
order, which is pending for 
disposal. Exemption under 
Section 11 has been denied to 
the assessee from AY 2009-10 
onwards. 
The Ministry was requested to 
furnish reply in respect of 
taxation of income accumulated 
or set apart under Section 11(2) 
for future application on 
charitable purpose as per 
provision of Section 11(3), which 
was awaited.  
However, from field verification, 
Audit noticed from the 
Assessment order of AY 2016-17 
that the assessment was 
completed by disallowing 
exemptions and assessing 
income as business income in 
December 2018. Also, it was 
mentioned in the assessment 
order that if deduction under 
Section 11 was allowed to the 
assessee in appeal, the 
exemptions will be allowed as 
per provisions of the Act. 
4. M5 Corporation 
 
2014-15 6.9.1 The Department 
has held the 
- The Ministry did not accept the 
audit observation stating that 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
185 
(b)  Cases where audit observations were not accepted by the Ministry and Audit did not accept 
the replies of the Ministry  
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Assessee 
AY Para no. of 
Report No. 
9 of 2019 
Gist of the audit 
observation 
Tax 
effect 
(` in 
crore) 
Action taken by the ITD and 
Audit comments thereon 
activities of the 
trust as non-
charitable for the 
purpose of the Act, 
but the registration 
under Section 12A 
of these Trusts had 
not been cancelled. 
Hon'ble Bombay High Court, vide 
its decision in case of Goa 
Industrial Development 
Corporation vs. CIT has held that 
merely because the activities of 
the appellant were covered 
under the proviso to Section 
2(15), that by itself would not 
render activities of the appellant 
as non-genuine activities so as to 
entitle commissioner to exercise 
power under Section 12AA(3) to 
cancel registration. Hence, the 
cancellation was not justified.  
However, from field verification, 
Audit noticed that in respect of 
AY 2014-15, Hon'ble ITAT has 
dismissed the revenue appeal 
vide order dated 21.05.2021. 
Further, from the Assessment 
order of AY 2016-17 Audit 
noticed that the assessment was 
completed by disallowing 
exemptions and assessing 
income as business income in 
December 2018. Also, it was 
mentioned in the assessment 
order that if deduction under 
Section 11 was allowed to the 
assessee in appeal, the 
exemptions will be allowed as 
per provisions of the Act. The 
reply of the Ministry was 
awaited.  
5. M 6 Authority 
 
2014-15 6.9.1 The Department 
has held the 
activities of the 
Trust as non-
charitable for the 
purpose of the Act, 
but the registration 
under Section 12A 
- The Ministry did not accept the 
audit observation stating that 
Hon'ble Bombay High Court, vide 
its decision in case of Goa 
Industrial Development 
Corporation vs. CIT has held that 
merely because the activities of 
the appellant were covered 
under the proviso to Section 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
186 
(b)  Cases where audit observations were not accepted by the Ministry and Audit did not accept 
the replies of the Ministry  
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Assessee 
AY Para no. of 
Report No. 
9 of 2019 
Gist of the audit 
observation 
Tax 
effect 
(` in 
crore) 
Action taken by the ITD and 
Audit comments thereon 
of these Trusts had 
not been cancelled. 
2(15), that by itself would not 
render activities of the appellant 
as non-genuine activities so as to 
entitle commissioner to exercise 
power under Section 12AA(3) to 
cancel registration. Hence, the 
cancellation was not justified.  
However, from field verification, 
Audit noticed that for AY 2014-
15, the Hon'ble ITAT has allowed 
the assessee appeal vide order 
dated 23.11.2020. Further, from 
the Assessment order of AY 
2016-17 Audit noticed that the 
assessment was completed by 
disallowing exemptions and 
assessing income as business 
income in December 2018. Also, 
it was mentioned in the 
assessment order that if 
deduction under Section 11 was 
allowed to the assessee in 
appeal, the exemptions will be 
allowed as per provisions of the 
Act. The reply of the Ministry was 
awaited.  
6. M4 Corporation 
 
2014-15 6.9.1 The Department 
has held the 
activities of the 
Trust as non-
charitable for the 
purpose of the Act, 
but the registration 
under Section 12A 
of these Trusts had 
not been cancelled. 
- The Ministry did not accept the 
audit observation stating that 
Hon'ble Bombay High Court, vide 
its decision dated 20.01.2020, 
has held that where no findings 
had been recorded by Director 
that activities of assessee Trust 
were not genuine or that 
activities were not being carried 
out in accordance with objects of 
Trust, while cancelling the 
registration granted to assessee 
Trust on ground that it was 
directly hit by proviso to Section 
2(15). Hence, the cancellation 
was not justified.  

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
187 
(b)  Cases where audit observations were not accepted by the Ministry and Audit did not accept 
the replies of the Ministry  
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Assessee 
AY Para no. of 
Report No. 
9 of 2019 
Gist of the audit 
observation 
Tax 
effect 
(` in 
crore) 
Action taken by the ITD and 
Audit comments thereon 
However, from field verification, 
Audit noticed from the 
Assessment order of AY 2016-17 
that the assessment was 
completed by disallowing 
exemptions and assessing 
income as business income in 
December 2018.  
The reply of the Ministry was 
awaited. 
7. N 7 Trust 
 
2014-15 6.9.1 The Department 
has held the 
activities of the 
Trust as non-
charitable for the 
purpose of the Act, 
but the registration 
under Section 12A 
of these Trusts had 
not been cancelled. 
- The Ministry did not accept the 
audit observation stating that 
Hon'ble Bombay High Court, vide 
its decision dated 20.01.2020, 
has held that where no findings 
had been recorded by Director 
that activities of assessee Trust 
were not genuine or that 
activities were not being carried 
out in accordance with objects of 
Trust, while cancelling the 
registration granted to assessee 
Trust on ground that it was 
directly hit by proviso to Section 
2(15). Hence, the cancellation 
was not justified.  
However, from field verification, 
Audit noticed that for AY 2014-
15, the Hon'ble ITAT has allowed 
the assessee appeal in respect of 
exemptions vide order dated 
11.01.2021. Further, from the 
Assessment order of AY 2016-17 
Audit noticed that the 
assessment was completed by 
disallowing exemptions and 
assessing income as business 
income in November 2018. The 
AO also mentioned in the 
assessment order that in the 
earlier years, the income of the 
assessee had been treated to be 
not charitable and exemption 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
188 
(b)  Cases where audit observations were not accepted by the Ministry and Audit did not accept 
the replies of the Ministry  
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Assessee 
AY Para no. of 
Report No. 
9 of 2019 
Gist of the audit 
observation 
Tax 
effect 
(` in 
crore) 
Action taken by the ITD and 
Audit comments thereon 
under Section 11 had been 
denied for which the assessee 
was in appeal.  
The reply of the Ministry was 
awaited. 
8. N5 Fund 
 
2014-15 6.9.1 The Department 
has held the 
activities of the 
Trust as non-
charitable for the 
purpose of the Act, 
but the registration 
under Section 12A 
of these Trusts had 
not been cancelled. 
- The Ministry did not accept the 
audit observation stating that 
Hon'ble Bombay High Court, vide 
its decision in case of Goa 
Industrial Development 
Corporation vs. CIT has held that 
merely because the activities of 
the appellant were covered 
under the proviso to Section 
2(15), that by itself would not 
render activities of the appellant 
as non-genuine activities so as to 
entitle commissioner to exercise 
power under Section 12AA(3) to 
cancel registration. Hence, the 
cancellation was not justified.  
However, from field verification, 
Audit noticed that for AY 2014-
15, the appeal of the assessee is 
pending before CIT (Appeals). 
Further, Audit noticed from the 
Assessment order of AY 2016-17 
that the assessment was 
completed by disallowing 
exemptions and assessing 
income as business income in 
December 2018. Also, it was 
mentioned in the assessment 
order that if deduction under 
Section 11 was allowed to the 
assessee in appeal, the 
exemptions will be allowed as 
per provisions of the Act. The 
reply of the Ministry was 
awaited.  
9. T 8 Fund 
 
2014-15 6.9.1 The Department 
has held the 
activities of the 
- The Ministry did not accept the 
audit observation stating that 
Hon'ble Bombay High Court, vide 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
189 
(b)  Cases where audit observations were not accepted by the Ministry and Audit did not accept 
the replies of the Ministry  
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Assessee 
AY Para no. of 
Report No. 
9 of 2019 
Gist of the audit 
observation 
Tax 
effect 
(` in 
crore) 
Action taken by the ITD and 
Audit comments thereon 
Trust as non-
charitable for the 
purpose of the Act, 
but the registration 
under Section 12A 
of these Trusts had 
not been cancelled. 
its decision dated 20.01.2020, 
has held that where no findings 
had been recorded by Director 
that activities of assessee Trust 
were not genuine or that 
activities were not being carried 
out in accordance with objects of 
Trust, while cancelling the 
registration granted to assessee 
Trust on ground that it was 
directly hit by proviso to Section 
2(15). Hence, the cancellation 
was not justified.  
However, from field verification, 
Audit noticed that for AY 2014-
15, the appeal of the assessee is 
pending before CIT (Appeals). 
Further, Audit noticed from the 
Assessment order of AY 2016-17 
that the assessment was 
completed by disallowing 
exemptions and assessing 
income as business income in 
December 2018.  
The reply of the Ministry was 
awaited. 
10. S7 Society 
 
2014-15 6.9.1 The Department 
has held the 
activities of the 
Trust as non-
charitable for the 
purpose of the Act, 
but the registration 
under Section 12A 
of these Trusts had 
not been cancelled. 
- The Ministry did not accept the 
audit observation stating that 
Hon'ble Bombay High Court, vide 
its decision dated 20.01.2020, 
has held that where no findings 
had been recorded by Director 
that activities of assessee Trust 
were not genuine or that 
activities were not being carried 
out in accordance with objects of 
Trust, while cancelling the 
registration granted to assessee 
Trust on ground that it was 
directly hit by proviso to Section 
2(15). Hence, the cancellation 
was not justified.  

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
190 
(b)  Cases where audit observations were not accepted by the Ministry and Audit did not accept 
the replies of the Ministry  
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Assessee 
AY Para no. of 
Report No. 
9 of 2019 
Gist of the audit 
observation 
Tax 
effect 
(` in 
crore) 
Action taken by the ITD and 
Audit comments thereon 
However, from field verification, 
Audit noticed that for the AY 
2014-15 appeal of the assessee is 
pending before CIT (Appeals). 
Further, Audit noticed from the 
Assessment order of AY 2016-17 
that the assessment was 
completed by disallowing 
exemptions and assessing 
income as business income in 
December 2018. Also, it was 
mentioned in the assessment 
order that if the assessee 
succeeds in appeal, the income 
was to be computed under 
Section 11.  
The reply of the Ministry was 
awaited. 
 
11. N2 Institution 
 
2014-15 6.9.1 The Department 
has held the 
activities of the 
Trust as non-
charitable for the 
purpose of the Act, 
but the registration 
under Section 12A 
of these Trusts had 
not been cancelled. 
- The Ministry did not accept the 
audit observation stating that 
Hon'ble Bombay High Court, vide 
its decision dated 20.01.2020, 
has held that where no findings 
had been recorded by Director 
that activities of assessee Trust 
were not genuine or that 
activities were not being carried 
out in accordance with objects of 
Trust, while cancelling the 
registration granted to assessee 
Trust on ground that it was 
directly hit by proviso to Section 
2(15). Hence, the cancellation 
was not justified.  
However, from field verification, 
Audit noticed that for AY 2014-
15, the Hon'ble ITAT has allowed 
the assessee’s appeal and 
remitted back issue to the CIT 
(Appeal) vide order dated 
02.08.2019. Further, Audit 
noticed from the Assessment 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
191 
(b)  Cases where audit observations were not accepted by the Ministry and Audit did not accept 
the replies of the Ministry  
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Assessee 
AY Para no. of 
Report No. 
9 of 2019 
Gist of the audit 
observation 
Tax 
effect 
(` in 
crore) 
Action taken by the ITD and 
Audit comments thereon 
order of AY 2016-17 that the 
assessment was completed by 
disallowing exemptions and 
assessing income as business 
income in December 2018. Also, 
it was mentioned in the 
assessment order that if 
deduction under Section 11 was 
allowed to the assessee in 
appeal, the exemptions will be 
allowed as per provisions of the 
Act. The reply of the Ministry was 
awaited. 
12. N4 Corporation 
 
2014-15 6.9.1 The Department 
has held the 
activities of the 
Trust as non-
charitable for the 
purpose of the Act, 
but the registration 
under Section 12A 
of these Trusts had 
not been cancelled. 
- The Ministry did not accept the 
audit observation stating that 
Hon'ble Bombay High Court, vide 
its decision dated 20.01.2020, 
has held that where no findings 
had been recorded by Director 
that activities of assessee Trust 
were not genuine or that 
activities were not being carried 
out in accordance with objects of 
Trust, while cancelling the 
registration granted to assessee 
Trust on ground that it was 
directly hit by proviso to Section 
2(15). Hence, the cancellation 
was not justified.  
However, from field verification, 
Audit noticed that for AY 2014-
15, assessee’s appeal in pending 
before CIT (Appeals). Further, 
from the Assessment order of AY 
2016-17 Audit noticed that the 
assessment was completed by 
disallowing exemptions and 
assessing income as business 
income in November 2018.  
The reply of the Ministry was 
awaited. 
13. T6 Trust 
 
2014-15 6.9.1 The Department 
has held the 
- The Ministry did not accept the 
audit observation stating that 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
192 
(b)  Cases where audit observations were not accepted by the Ministry and Audit did not accept 
the replies of the Ministry  
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Assessee 
AY Para no. of 
Report No. 
9 of 2019 
Gist of the audit 
observation 
Tax 
effect 
(` in 
crore) 
Action taken by the ITD and 
Audit comments thereon 
activities of the 
Trust as non-
charitable for the 
purpose of the Act, 
but the registration 
under Section 12A 
of these Trusts had 
not been cancelled. 
Hon'ble Bombay High Court, vide 
its decision dated 20.01.2020, 
has held that where no findings 
had been recorded by Director 
that activities of assessee Trust 
were not genuine or that 
activities were not being carried 
out in accordance with objects of 
Trust, while cancelling the 
registration granted to assessee 
Trust on ground that it was 
directly hit by proviso to Section 
2(15). Hence, the cancellation 
was not justified.  
However, from field verification, 
Audit noticed that for AY 2014-
15, Hon'ble ITAT has dismissed 
revenue appeal vide order dated 
04.11.2020. Further, from the 
Assessment order of AY 2016-17 
Audit noticed that the 
assessment was completed by 
disallowing exemptions and 
assessing income as business 
income in November 2018.  
The reply of the Ministry was 
awaited. 
14. N1 Institution 
 
2014-15 6.9.1 The Department 
has held the 
activities of the 
Trust as non-
charitable for the 
purpose of the Act, 
but the registration 
under Section 12A 
of these Trusts had 
not been cancelled. 
- The Ministry did not accept the 
audit observation stating that 
Hon'ble Bombay High Court, vide 
its decision dated 20.01.2020, 
has held that where no findings 
had been recorded by Director 
that activities of assessee Trust 
were not genuine or that 
activities were not being carried 
out in accordance with objects of 
Trust, while cancelling the 
registration granted to assessee 
Trust on ground that it was 
directly hit by proviso to Section 
2(15). Hence, the cancellation 
was not justified.  

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
193 
(b)  Cases where audit observations were not accepted by the Ministry and Audit did not accept 
the replies of the Ministry  
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Assessee 
AY Para no. of 
Report No. 
9 of 2019 
Gist of the audit 
observation 
Tax 
effect 
(` in 
crore) 
Action taken by the ITD and 
Audit comments thereon 
However, from field verification, 
Audit noticed that for AY 2014-
15 the Hon'ble ITAT allowed the 
assessee appeal vide order dated 
03.03.2021. Further, from the 
Assessment order of AY 2016-17 
that the assessment was 
completed by disallowing 
exemptions and assessing 
income as business income in 
December 2018.  
The reply of the Ministry was 
awaited. 
15. M 1 Board 
 
2014-15 6.9.1 The Department 
has held the 
activities of the 
Trust as non-
charitable for the 
purpose of the Act, 
but the registration 
under Section 12A 
of these Trusts had 
not been cancelled. 
- The Ministry did not accept the 
audit observation stating that 
Hon'ble Bombay High Court, vide 
its decision in case of Goa 
Industrial Development 
Corporation vs. CIT has held that 
merely because the activities of 
the appellant were covered 
under the proviso to Section 
2(15), that by itself would not 
render activities of the appellant 
as non-genuine activities so as to 
entitle commissioner to exercise 
power under Section 12AA(3) to 
cancel registration. Hence, the 
cancellation was not justified.  
However, from field verification, 
Audit noticed that for AY 2014-
15, assessee’s appeal is pending 
with CIT(A).from the Assessment 
order of AY 2016-17 that the 
assessment was completed by 
disallowing exemptions and 
assessing income as business 
income in November 2018. Also, 
it was mentioned in the 
assessment order that if 
deduction under Section 11 was 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
194 
(b)  Cases where audit observations were not accepted by the Ministry and Audit did not accept 
the replies of the Ministry  
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Assessee 
AY Para no. of 
Report No. 
9 of 2019 
Gist of the audit 
observation 
Tax 
effect 
(` in 
crore) 
Action taken by the ITD and 
Audit comments thereon 
allowed to the assessee in 
appeal, the exemptions will be 
allowed as per provisions of the 
Act. The reply of the Ministry was 
awaited. 
 
  

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
195 
Appendix 3.4 
{Refer Para no 3.3. (iii)} 
Status of action taken by the Department and Audit comments thereon in respect of follow-
up audit of ‘Exemptions to Charitable Trusts and Institutions’ included in Chapter VI of the 
Compliance Audit Report No. 9 of 2019 (Direct Taxes)   
iii) Cases where no reply was furnished by the Ministry 
Cases where the Ministry had not furnished any reply but the Department had taken/initiated 
remedial action or not accepted the audit observations.  
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Assessee  
AY  Para no. of 
Report No. 
9 of 2019  
Gist of the audit 
observation  
Tax effect  
(` in 
crore) 
Action taken by the ITD and 
Audit comments thereon  
1. S 13  Society 
 
2015-16 6.3.1 The assessee donated 
` 80.00 crore to 
related party which 
was treated as 
application of income 
in contravention of 
provision of Section 
13(1)(c)(ii). 
27.19 Reply was awaited from the 
Ministry.  
However, Audit noticed 
from field verification that 
CIT (E) Pune, while not 
accepting the audit 
observation, stated 
(September 2021) that 
assessee had not violated 
either 12 
th  proviso of 
Section 10(23C)(vi) or 
provisions of Section 11(3) 
of IT Act as the donation of 
` 80 crore had been made 
to Symbiosis Foundation, 
Indore (and not Symbiosis, 
Pune) and it was made out 
of revenue income earned 
by assessee trust during the 
year and not out of 
accumulated income of 
earlier years. Further, 
provisions of Section 13(3) 
gets attracted only when 
any benefit is ensured to 
the persons referred to in 
Section 13(3) of the Act.  
Since, no documentary 
evidence about treatment 
of said donation in books of 
Symbiosis Foundation, 
Indore and details of its 
Trustees/settlors had been 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
196 
iii) Cases where no reply was furnished by the Ministry 
Cases where the Ministry had not furnished any reply but the Department had taken/initiated 
remedial action or not accepted the audit observations.  
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Assessee  
AY  Para no. of 
Report No. 
9 of 2019  
Gist of the audit 
observation  
Tax effect  
(` in 
crore) 
Action taken by the ITD and 
Audit comments thereon  
provided, therefore, Audit 
could not verify 
Department’s contention.  
2. S12  Trust 
 
2015-16 6.3 The assessee diverted 
income of the 
property to the 
related trust/ 
institution which was 
considered as 
application of income 
8.61 Reply was awaited from the 
Ministry.  
However, Audit noticed 
from field verification that 
CIT (E) Pune, while not 
accepting audit objection 
stated (September 2021) 
that the claim that the 
addition to fixed assets on 
account of gifts/donation of 
` 25.34 crore has been 
claimed as application 
towards objects of the 
trusts out of accumulated 
income was factually 
incorrect. The statement 
and application of income 
towards objects of trusts 
clearly showed that the 
amount had been 
reduced/deducted from 
head of investment in 
Capital assets out of current 
income expenditure. 
The reply was not tenable 
as Audit contended that the 
assessee had gifted the 
properties as donation to 
another Trust and was 
making the adjustments 
towards the accumulated 
funds showing the 
expenditure in the current 
year under the Investments 
in capital assets. The 
breakup of the capital 
expenditure in the 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
197 
iii) Cases where no reply was furnished by the Ministry 
Cases where the Ministry had not furnished any reply but the Department had taken/initiated 
remedial action or not accepted the audit observations.  
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Assessee  
AY  Para no. of 
Report No. 
9 of 2019  
Gist of the audit 
observation  
Tax effect  
(` in 
crore) 
Action taken by the ITD and 
Audit comments thereon  
computation of income 
shows that the additions to 
fixed assets Land and 
Building (other immovable 
properties) were inclusive 
of the value of the gifted 
property which was being 
adjusted against the old 
accumulation of funds 
under the respective 
earmarked funds of Land 
fund and Campus Building 
fund.  
3. P1 Authority 
 
2013-14 6.4 Exemptions was 
allowed to the 
assessee although 
activities were not 
charitable in nature in 
accordance with 
Section 2(15). 
 
 
5.01 Reply was awaited from the 
Ministry.  
However, Audit noticed 
from field verification that 
the CIT (Exemptions), Pune 
while not accepting audit 
objection stated 
(September'2021) that the 
Assessee authority is State 
Government run body 
under Article 243W of the 
constitution with a 
mandate to create PIMPRI 
CHINCHWAD new town 
with objectives of 
developing urban housing 
and infrastructure, 
regulating land use and 
constructions, providing 
leasehold plots for housing 
to citizens. These objects 
cannot be termed as 
'activity in nature of trade, 
commerce or activity of 
rendering any service in 
relation to any trade, 
commerce or business. 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
198 
iii) Cases where no reply was furnished by the Ministry 
Cases where the Ministry had not furnished any reply but the Department had taken/initiated 
remedial action or not accepted the audit observations.  
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Assessee  
AY  Para no. of 
Report No. 
9 of 2019  
Gist of the audit 
observation  
Tax effect  
(` in 
crore) 
Action taken by the ITD and 
Audit comments thereon  
4. I3 Foundation 
 
2014-15 
and 
2015-16 
6.4 Exemption was 
granted to the 
assessee although the 
activities of the 
Trust/Institution was 
not charitable in 
nature 
7.22 Reply was awaited from the 
Ministry.  
However, Audit noticed 
from field verification that 
CIT (E) Mumbai, while not 
accepting the audit 
observation, stated 
(December 2021) that the 
main object of the trust 
included relief of the poor, 
medical relief, education 
and other objects of general 
public utility including to 
uphold and promote the 
socio-economic welfare of 
the under-privileged 
Section of the society 
through education, free 
food among children etc. 
This clearly shows that 
supply of mid-day meals is 
in line with the objects of 
the Trusts.  
5. T 7 Trust 
 
2009-10 6.5 ITD denied 
exemptions under 
Section 11, but 
allowed deductions 
for expenditure 
4.16 Reply was awaited from the 
Ministry.  
However, Audit noticed 
from field verification that 
CIT (E) Mumbai stated in 
July 2019 that the 
conclusion of Audit on the 
fact narrated in objection 
and tax effect were not 
acceptable, but there was 
certainly lack of verification 
on the part of AO. 
Therefore, remedial action 
under Section 263 was 
initiated by passing order 
dated 31.03.2019, directing 
the AO to verify various 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
199 
iii) Cases where no reply was furnished by the Ministry 
Cases where the Ministry had not furnished any reply but the Department had taken/initiated 
remedial action or not accepted the audit observations.  
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Assessee  
AY  Para no. of 
Report No. 
9 of 2019  
Gist of the audit 
observation  
Tax effect  
(` in 
crore) 
Action taken by the ITD and 
Audit comments thereon  
issue including the issues 
raised by Audit. 
6. S5 Trust 
 
2014-15 6.5 ITD denied 
exemptions under 
Section 11, but 
allowed deductions 
for expenditure 
31.24 Reply was awaited from the 
Ministry. However, Audit 
noticed from field 
verification that remedial 
action was taken under 
Section 263 of the Act by 
restricting expenditure 
towards administrative 
expenses only. 
7. T 6 Trust 
 
2009-10 
 
6.5 ITD denied 
exemptions under 
Section 11, but 
allowed deductions 
for expenditure 
10.85 Reply was awaited from the 
Ministry. 
However, Audit noticed 
from field verification, 
while not accepting the 
audit observation the DCIT 
(E)(HQ)(Judl.) Mumbai, 
stated (February 2020) that 
the expenses related to 
earning of income were 
required to be allowed. 
Further the CIT (Appeals) 
has allowed the exemptions 
to the assessee.  
8. T6 Trust 
 
2014-15 
 
6.5 24.07 
9. A 1 Foundation 
 
2014-15 6.5 ITD denied 
exemptions under 
Section 11, but 
allowed deductions 
for expenditure 
0.68 Reply was awaited from the 
Ministry.  
However, Audit noticed 
from field verification that 
CIT (E) Mumbai, while not 
accepting the audit 
observation, stated 
(February 2019) that the AO 
has denied the exemption 
of the assessee and treated 
the assessee's income as a 
business income and it has 
rightly been allowed the 
legitimate expenses. 
Hence, the assessee trust, 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
200 
iii) Cases where no reply was furnished by the Ministry 
Cases where the Ministry had not furnished any reply but the Department had taken/initiated 
remedial action or not accepted the audit observations.  
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Assessee  
AY  Para no. of 
Report No. 
9 of 2019  
Gist of the audit 
observation  
Tax effect  
(` in 
crore) 
Action taken by the ITD and 
Audit comments thereon  
being treated as business 
entity become eligible for 
deduction of expenditure 
towards taxes paid to local 
authority' and 
'miscellaneous expenses 
and others' as per 
provisions of income tax. 
The reply was not tenable 
as exemption was not given 
as activities were assessed 
as business activity; 
therefore, to compute 
business income, related 
expenses shall only be 
allowable as provided in 
Chapter IV of the Act.  
10 S5 Trust 
 
2013-14 6.5 ITD denied 
exemptions under 
Section 11, but 
allowed deductions 
for expenditure 
31.12 Reply was awaited from the 
Ministry. However, Audit 
noticed from field 
verification that remedial 
action was taken under 
Section 154 of the Act in 
July 2018. 
11. B 1 Bourse 
 
2013-14 6.5 ITD denied 
exemptions under 
Section 11, but 
allowed deductions 
for expenditure 
0.60 Reply was awaited from the 
Ministry. However, Audit 
noticed from field 
verification that remedial 
action was taken under 
Section 154 of the Act in 
April 2019. 
12. J1 Trust 
 
2009-10 
to 2014-
15 
6.6.1 The assessee invested 
in shares of its group 
of companies, which 
is a prohibited mode 
under Section 
13(1)(d)(iii) read with 
Section 11(5). 
However, the 
registration of the 
- Reply was awaited from the 
Ministry. However, from 
field verification, Audit 
noticed that the 
Registration of the assessee 
was cancelled by PCIT 17, 
Mumbai vide order dated 
31 October, 2019 with 
immediate effect. 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
201 
iii) Cases where no reply was furnished by the Ministry 
Cases where the Ministry had not furnished any reply but the Department had taken/initiated 
remedial action or not accepted the audit observations.  
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Assessee  
AY  Para no. of 
Report No. 
9 of 2019  
Gist of the audit 
observation  
Tax effect  
(` in 
crore) 
Action taken by the ITD and 
Audit comments thereon  
trusts was not 
reviewed. 
 
13. N6 Trust 
 
2009-10 
to 2014-
15 
6.6.1 The assessee invested 
in shares of its group 
of companies, which 
was a prohibited 
mode under Section 
13(1)(d)(iii) read with 
Section 11(5). 
However, the 
registration of the 
Trusts was not 
reviewed. 
- Reply was awaited from the 
Ministry. However, from 
field verification, Audit 
noticed that the 
Registration of the assessee 
was cancelled by PCIT 17, 
Mumbai vide order dated 
31 October, 2019 with 
immediate effect. 
 
14. T3 Trust 2009-10 
to 2014-
15 
6.6.1 The assessee invested 
in shares of its group 
of companies, which 
is a prohibited mode 
under Section 
13(1)(d)(iii) read with 
Section 11(5). 
However, the 
registration of the 
Trusts was not 
reviewed. 
- Reply was awaited from the 
Ministry. However, from 
field verification, Audit 
noticed that the 
Registration of the assessee 
was cancelled by PCIT 17, 
Mumbai vide order dated 
31 October, 2019 with 
immediate effect. 
 
15. T 2 Trust 
 
2009-10 
to 2014-
15 
6.6.1 The assessee invested 
in shares of its group 
of companies, which 
was a prohibited 
mode under Section 
13(1)(d)(iii) read with 
Section 11(5). 
However, the 
registration of the 
Trusts was not 
reviewed. 
- Reply was awaited from the 
Ministry. However, from 
field verification, Audit 
noticed that the 
Registration of the assessee 
was cancelled by PCIT 17, 
Mumbai vide order dated 
31 October, 2019 with 
immediate effect. 
 
16. S5 Trust 
 
2009-10 
& 2011-
12 to 
2014-15 
6.6.2 The assessee hold 
investment in modes 
other than those 
prescribed under 
- Reply was awaited from the 
Ministry. However, Audit 
noticed from field 
verification that remedial 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
202 
iii) Cases where no reply was furnished by the Ministry 
Cases where the Ministry had not furnished any reply but the Department had taken/initiated 
remedial action or not accepted the audit observations.  
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Assessee  
AY  Para no. of 
Report No. 
9 of 2019  
Gist of the audit 
observation  
Tax effect  
(` in 
crore) 
Action taken by the ITD and 
Audit comments thereon  
Section 11(5) but 
there was nothing on 
record to show that 
the investments were 
made from corpus 
/income of the Trusts 
as on 1.6.1973 or 
before. 
action was taken under 
Section 263 of the Act for 
the AY 2014-15. 
17. S4 Trust 
 
2009-10 
to 2014-
15 
6.6.2 The assessee hold 
investment in modes 
other than those 
prescribed under 
Section 11(5) but 
there was nothing on 
record to show that 
the investments were 
made from corpus 
/income of the trusts 
as on 1.6.1973 or 
before. 
- Reply was awaited from the 
Ministry. 
However, Audit noticed 
from field verification that 
remedial action was taken 
under Section 263 of the 
Act for the AY 2014-15. 
18. T7 Trust 
 
2009-10 
& 2011-
12 to 
2014-15 
6.6.2 The assessee hold 
investment in modes 
other than those 
prescribed under 
Section 11(5) but 
there was nothing on 
record to show that 
the investments were 
made from corpus 
/income of the Trusts 
as on 1.6.1973 or 
before. 
- Reply was awaited from the 
Ministry.  
However, Audit noticed 
from field verification that 
DCIT (E) 2(1), Mumbai has 
taken remedial action for 
AY 2014-15 by passing 
order under 143(3) read 
with Section 263 in 
December 2019.  
Further, for AY 2013-14 
remedial action initiated by 
issuing notice under Section 
148 on 17.03.2020. 
19. T 1 Trust 
  
2009-10 
to 2014-
15 
6.7 The exemption 
granted based on the 
order of CBDT dated 
10 November 2015 
was irregular as the 
reversal of earlier 
- Reply was awaited from the 
Ministry.  
However, Audit noticed 
from field verification, 
while not accepting the 
audit observation the Addl. 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
203 
iii) Cases where no reply was furnished by the Ministry 
Cases where the Ministry had not furnished any reply but the Department had taken/initiated 
remedial action or not accepted the audit observations.  
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Assessee  
AY  Para no. of 
Report No. 
9 of 2019  
Gist of the audit 
observation  
Tax effect  
(` in 
crore) 
Action taken by the ITD and 
Audit comments thereon  
rejected order was 
erroneous since the 
Board has no power 
to review its own 
earlier rejected order. 
Further, after the 
CBDT passed the 
order, the approach 
adopted by the AO in 
granting exemption 
for different AYs was 
not consistent as AO 
granted exemption by 
passing order under 
Section 143(3) read 
with Section 147 in 
March 2016 for AY 
2009-10 and under 
Section 154 in 
December 2015 for 
AY 2011-12 and AY 
2012-13.  
CIT (E) Range-2, Mumbai, 
stated (March 2020) that 
the foreign remittance 
were approved by the CBDT 
order dated 10.11.2015 
even for the previous year 
with effect from AY 2009-10 
onwards. 
 
 
 
  

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
204 
Appendix 4.1 
(Refer Para no 4.1.1) 
State wise distribution of Trusts/Institutions claiming exemption 
 
  
State-wise distribution of Trust/Institution claimed exemption from AY 2014-15 to AY 2017-18 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the State  No. of cases (Assessment Year wise) Percentage 
of Total 
population  
2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 Total 
cases 
1 Andhra Pradesh & Telangana 7,034 8,562 10,052 9,854 35,502 5 
2 Bihar 3,351 3,152 3,844 3,381 13,728 2 
3 Chandigarh 1,662 2,049 2,156 2,247 8,114 1 
4 Chhattisgarh 960 984 1,132 1,179 4,255 1 
5 Delhi 12,479 13,135 14,441 14,498 54,553 8 
6 Goa 671 706 842 855 3,074 0 
7 Gujarat 22,813 23,576 26,255 25,256 97,900 14 
8 Haryana 3,078 3,964 4,911 4,879 16,832 2 
9 Himachal Pradesh 793 902 1,053 1,035 3,783 1 
10 Jammu and Kashmir 413 553 653 653 2,272 0 
11 Jharkhand 1,833 1,806 1,977 1,886 7,502 1 
12 Karnataka 10,256 10,978 12,429 12,599 46,262 7 
13 Kerala 5,480 6,060 6,888 7,118 25,546 4 
14 Madhya Pradesh 3,582 4,277 5,128 5,087 18,074 3 
15 Maharashtra 24,310 27,382 31,654 31,898 1,15,244 17 
16 North Eastern States 748 969 1,279 1,144 4,140 1 
17 Odisha 2,059 2,227 2,549 2,469 9,304 1 
18 Punjab 2,211 2,894 3,335 3,217 11,657 2 
19 Rajasthan 7,304 9,023 10,453 10,098 36,878 5 
20 Tamil Nadu & Puducherry 15,025 17,681 20,867 20,739 74,312 11 
21 Uttar Pradesh 10,267 11,672 14,084 13,940 49,963 7 
22 Uttarakhand 1,758 1,885 2,280 2,209 8,132 1 
23 West Bengal 9,396 10,434 11,290 10,864 41,984 6 
Total 1,47,483 1,64,871 1,89,552 1,87,105 6,89,011 100 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
205 
Appendix 4.2 
(Refer Para no 4.1.5) 
Number of Summary and Scrutiny cases  
 Break-up of total population on the basis of types of assessment 
AY Total 
Cases 
Summary Cases Scrutiny cases Others @ 
No. of 
cases 
Percentage 
of total 
cases of the 
year 
No. of 
cases 
Percentage 
of total 
cases of the 
year 
No. of 
cases 
Percentage 
of total 
cases of 
the year 
2014-15 1,47,483 1,34,450 91.2 1,000 0.7 12,033 8.1 
2015-16 1,64,871 1,50,534 91.3 7,071 4.3 7,266 4.4 
2016-17 1,89,552 1,65,214 87.2 17,143 9.1 7,195 3.7 
2017-18 1,87,105 1,79,707 96.0 # NA 7,398 4.0 
Total 6,89,011 6,29,905 91.4 25,214 3.7 33,892 4.9 
# Data of Scrutiny assessment cases for AY 2017 -18 was not available during the period of audit.  
@ Others include Rectification cases, Revision cases and cases of Order giving effect to Appellate orders. 
 
  

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
206 
Appendix 4.3 
(Refer Para no 4.1.6) 
Returned and Assessed Income  
 Distribution of total population on the basis of returned income and assessed income 
AY 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 Total 
Returned 
Income 
Less than  
` zero 
Scrutiny 1 0 0 0 1 
Summary 334 0 0 0 334 
Others # 37 0 0 0 37 
Total 372 0 0 0 372 
Equal to  
` zero 
Scrutiny 712 5,826 15,838 0 22,376 
Summary 98,770 1,11,324 1,20,672 1,39,840 4,70,606 
Others # 8,429 4,607 4,927 1,006 18,969 
Total 1,07,911 1,21,757 1,41,437 1,40,846 5,11,951 
More than  
` zero and 
upto  
` 50 lakh 
Scrutiny 283 1,031 1,403 0 2,717 
Summary 35,256 39,120 44,457 39,289 1,58,122 
Others # 3,516 2,556 2,100 6,377 14,549 
Total 39,055 42,707 47,960 45,666 1,75,388 
More than 
 ` 50 lakh 
and upto  
` one crore 
Scrutiny 6 73 29 0 108 
Summary 55 42 44 202 343 
Others # 18 25 14 10 67 
Total 79 140 87 212 518 
More than  
` one crore 
Scrutiny 11 172 18 0 201 
Summary 35 48 41 376 500 
Others # 20 47 9 5 81 
Total 66 267 68 381 782 
Assessed 
Income 
Less than  
` zero 
Scrutiny 0 0 0 0 0 
Summary 0 0 0 0 0 
Others # 20 0 0 0 20 
Total 20 0 0 0 20 
 Equal to  
` zero 
Scrutiny 715 5,828 13,989 0 20,532 
Summary 80,140 96,793 1,02,462 1,18,260 3,97,655 
others # 8,020 4,141 2,413 859 15,433 
Total 88,875 1,06,762 1,18,864 1,19,119 4,33,620 
More than  
` zero and 
upto 
` 50 lakh 
Scrutiny 281 1,026 2,571 0 3,878 
Summary 52,445 52,451 60,838 54,692 2,20,426 
Others # 3,860 2,859 3,692 6,484 16,895 
Total 56,586 56,336 67,101 61,176 2,41,199 
More than  
` 50 lakh 
and upto  
` one crore 
Scrutiny 6 73 292 0 371 
Summary 899 560 890 2170 4,519 
others # 57 92 400 23 572 
Total 962 725 1582 2193 5462 
More than  
` one crore 
Scrutiny 11 175 436 0 622 
Summary 966 730 1,024 4585 7305 
Others # 63 143 545 32 783 
Total 1,040 1,048 2,005 4,617 8,710 
Total Cases 1,47,483 1,64,871 1,89,552 1,87,105 6,89,011 
# Others include Rectification cases, Revision cases and cases of Order giving effect to Appellate orders. 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
207 
Appendix 4.4 
(Refer Para no 4.3.1) 
Region and type of assessment-wise breakup of audit sample  
 Region-wise breakup of audit sample on the basis of type of assessment 
Name of the State Total number of Assessment cases 
Scrutiny Summary Others Total 
Andhra Pradesh, Telangana 228 4 173 405 
Bihar 44  1 18 63 
Delhi 338 67  328 733 
Gujarat 155 40  371 566 
Jharkhand 46  2 20 68 
Karnataka and Goa 293 93  264 650 
Kerala 171 22  111 304 
Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh 144 62  233 439 
Maharashtra 746  51  731  1528 
North Eastern States 23  1 15 39 
Odisha 65  21  49 135 
Punjab, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, 
Jammu and Kashmir 237 58  236 531 
Rajasthan 174 31  201 406 
Tamil Nadu 269 33  278 580 
Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand   150  21  52  223 
West Bengal 188  11  150 349 
Total 3,271 518 3,237 7,026 
 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
208 
Appendix 4.5 
(Refer Para no 4.3.9.6) 
Risk Analysis in summarily processed cases  
Assessment Type and Exemptions and Foreign Contribution wise distribution of total 
population  
Type of 
Assessment 
(Scrutiny/ 
Summary/ Others) 
Total Population Exemptions Claimed Foreign 
Contribution 
Received 
No. of 
Cases 
In  per 
cent  
Amount  
(` in crore) 
In  per 
cent  
Amount  
(` in 
crore) 
In  per 
cent  
Scrutiny 25,214 3.7 3,60,724.2 20.4 6,970.9 19 
Summary 6,29,905 91.4 12,88,501.6 73.1 28,081.5 76 
Others 134  33,892 4.9 1,14,202.1 6.5 1,847.2 5 
Total 6,89,011 100 17,63,427.9 100 36,899.6 100 
 
  
                                                           
134  Others include Rectification cases, Revision cases and cases of Order giving effect to Appellate orders. 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
209 
Abbreviations 
S. No.  Abbreviation  Description  
1.   Act Income Tax Act, 1961 
2.   ACIT (E) Assistant Commissioner of Income Tax (Exemption)  
3.   ADG (Audit & 
Inspections) 
 
Additional Director General (Audit & Inspections) 
4.   AIR Annual Information Report 
5.   ALP Arm’s Length Price 
6.   AO Assessing Officer 
7.   AOP Association of Person 
8.   AST Assessment Information System 
9.   AY Assessment Year 
10.   CASS Computer Aided Scrutiny Selection 
11.   CBDT Central Board of Direct Taxes 
12.   CCIT (E) Chief Commissioner of Income Tax (Exemption) 
13.   CIT (A) Commissioner of Income Tax (Appeal) 
14.   CIT(E) Commissioner of Income Tax (Exemption) 
15.   CSR Corporate Social Responsibility 
16.   CT Corporate Tax 
17.   Pr. DGIT 
(Systems) 
Principal Director General of Income Tax (Systems) 
18.   DCIT (E) Deputy Commissioner of Income Tax (E) 
19.   DRP Dispute Resolution Panel 
20.   DSIR Department of Scientific and Industrial Research 
21.   FCs Foreign Contribution 
22.   FCRA Foreign Contribution Regulation Act 
23.   FY Financial Year 
24.   IT Income Tax 
25.   ITAT Income Tax Appellate Tribunal 
26.   ITBA Income Tax Business Application 
27.   ITD Income Tax Department 
28.   ITO Income Tax Officer 
29.   ITO (E) Income Tax Officer (Exemption) 
30.   ITR/Return Income Tax Return 
31.   JCIT (E) Joint Commissioner of Income Tax (Exemption) 
32.   MAT Minimum Alternate Tax 
33.   MCA Ministry of Corporate Affairs 
34.   MHA Ministry of Home Affairs 
35.   MOP Manual of Officer Order 
36.   NEP National Education Policy  
37.   NMS Non-filer Monitoring System 
38.   NPE National Policy on Education  
39.   OLTAS Online Tax Accounting System 
40.   PA Performance Audit 
41.   PAC Public Account Committee 

Report No. 12 of 2022 (Performance Audit)  
210 
S. No.  Abbreviation  Description  
42.   PAN Permanent Account Number 
43.   Pr. CIT (E) Principal Commissioner of Income Tax (Exemption) 
44.   Pr. CCIT Principal Chief Commissioner of Income Tax 
45.   Rules Income Tax Rules, 1962 
46.   RWS Read with Section  
47.   SDT Specified Domestic Transaction 
48.   SOP Standard Operating Procedure 
49.   TCS Tax Collected at Source 
50.   TDS Tax Deducted at Source 
51.   TEP Tax Evasion Petitions  
52.   TP Transfer Pricing  
53.   TPO Transfer Pricing Office 
54.   WIP Work in Progress 
 
 