  
 
 
 
Report of the  
Comptroller and Auditor General of India  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Performance Audit  
on 
Direct Benefit Transfer  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government of Haryana 
Report No. 2 of the year 2022 
 
 
 
 

 
 

i 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 Paragraphs  Page(s)  
Preface  v 
Executive Summary  vii-x 
Chapter 1 
Overview 
Introduction 1.1 1-2 
Various Process of Direct Benefit Transfer 1.2 3 
Organisational set up 1.3 3-4 
Status of Direct Benefit Transfer in the State 1.4 4-6 
Selection of Schemes 1.5 6-7 
Process adopted in Social Justice and Empowerment 
Department for disbursement of benefits 1.6 7-10 
Audit objectives 1.7 10 
Audit Scope 1.8 10 
Audit Criteria 1.9 10-11 
Audit methodology 1.10 11 
Audit Findings 1.11 11 
Acknowledgement 1.12 11 
Chapter 2 
Re-engineering Process for implementation of Direct Benefit Transfer 
Non-preparation of documentation for IT system 2.1 13-14 
Delay in disbursement of pension benefits 2.2 15-16 
Delay in passing intended benefits due to late enrolment of 
beneficiaries 2.3 16-18 
Delay in enrolment of beneficiaries violated the Ri ght to 
Service Act provisions 2.4 18-19 
Non-adherence to specific timelines for disbursemen t of 
social security pensions 2.5 19 
Transfer of Pension to the dead beneficiaries account 2.6 20-23 
Non-updation of beneficiaries’ income in the pensio n 
database 2.7 23 
Deficiency in digitization of master database of 
beneficiaries 2.8 24-25 
Pension disbursed to multiple beneficiaries on same  
Aadhaar Number 2.9 25-27 
Undue benefit by providing benefits simultaneously under 
two schemes 2.10 27 
Transfer of beneficiaries Pension to other persons’  bank 
accounts under social security schemes 2.11 28 

Performance Audit on Direct Benefit Transfer 
ii 
 Paragraphs  Page(s)  
Payment to ineligible beneficiaries 2.12 28-29 
Disbursement of social security pension to retired 
Government employees and family pensioner 2.13 29-30 
Disbursement of social security pension to untracea ble 
beneficiaries 2.14 30-31 
Porting of incomplete legacy data 2.15 31-33 
Absence of IT Security Policy 2.16 34 
Lack of training to users/staff 2.17 34 
No business continuity planning and disaster recove ry 
planning 2.18 34 
Weak access control 2.19 34-35 
Missing audit trails in IT system 2.20 35 
Approval of beneficiaries in bulk in a single day 2.21 35-36 
Irregular payment of commission to banks and post office 2.22 36 
Non-updation of Savings data on State DBT Portal 2.23 37 
Non-conducting of Social Audit of Schemes under NSAP 2.24 37 
Conclusion 2.25 37 
Recommendations 2.26 38 
Chapter 3 
Infrastructure, organisation and management of Direct Benefit Transfer 
Non-implementation of DBT on all schemes of all 
departments 3.1 39-40 
Non-conducting of quarterly meeting of Advisory Board 3.2 40 
Non-sharing of data of DBT schemes at State DBT Portal 3.3 40-42 
Non-incorporating of best practices 3.4 42 
Non-compliance of the Instruction regarding transfe r of 
funds 3.5 42-43 
Conclusion 3.6 43 
Recommendations 3.7 43-44 
Chapter 4 
Conclusions 
Conclusions  45-46 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Table of Contents 
iii 
APPENDICES 
Annexure Particulars Reference to 
  Paragraph Page (s) 
I Payment status fields 2.2 (A) 47-48 
II Time taken for transactions 2.2 (B) 49 
III Delay in passing intended benefits due to 
late enrolment of beneficiaries 2.3 50 
IV Pension disbursed to multiple 
beneficiaries on    same Aadhaar Number 2.9 51 
 GLOSSARY  53-54 
 

v 
PREFACE 
This report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India has been prepared 
for submission to the Governor of Haryana under Art icle 151(2) of the 
Constitution of India for being laid before the Leg islature. The report has been 
prepared in accordance with the Performance Auditin g Guidelines, 2014 and 
Regulations on Audit and Accounts, 2020 of the Comp troller and Auditor 
General of India. 
The report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India contains the results 
of Performance Audit of Direct Benefit Transfer (DB T) covering constitution 
and functioning of DBT Cell by the Government of Ha ryana and Pension 
schemes  implemented by Social Justice and Empowerment Department during 
April 2017 to July 2020. 
The audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards issued 
by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.  
Audit acknowledges the cooperation received from th e DBT Cell and Social 
Justice and Empowerment Department, Haryana at each  stage of the audit 
process. 

Executive Summary 
  

vii 
Executive Summary 
Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) is a major reform ini tiative of the Government 
to ensure better and timely delivery of benefits from Government to the people. 
This marks a paradigm-shift in the process of deliv ering benefits like wage 
payments, fuel subsidies, food grain subsidies, etc . directly into the bank 
accounts of the beneficiaries, removing leakages an d enhancing financial 
inclusion. 
DBT was initiated by the erstwhile Planning Commiss ion (January 2013) and 
later transferred to Department of Expenditure (Jul y 2013). DBT Mission was 
brought under Cabinet Secretariat in September 2015 . State DBT Portal was 
launched in September 2017. The concept and scope of DBT has been evolving 
over the years. 
Direct Benefit Transfer stipulates that transfer of  benefits should be done 
directly to beneficiaries under various Government Schemes and Programmes 
using Information and Communication Technology (ICT ). Necessary process 
reengineering to minimize intermediary levels and to reduce delay in payments 
to intended beneficiaries with the objective of min imizing pilferage and 
duplication should be done for all Government Schemes and Programmes. The 
process for implementation of DBT as prescribed should be adopted.  
In Haryana, as per DBT Mission guidelines, a DBT ce ll under Finance 
Department was constituted in June 2016 and a State  DBT Portal was created 
in September 2017 to aggregate benefit transfer inf ormation and the activities 
for the State DBT Cell through an electronic platfo rm. This is integrated with 
the DBT Bharat Portal. 
The Departments are implementing DBT on applicable State and Centrally 
sponsored schemes. If any, new DBT scheme is identi fied by the Department, 
it is uploaded by DBT cell on the State DBT portal on the request of 
Department. The concerned Departments classify/iden tify the DBT applicable 
schemes and identified schemes are uploaded on the state DBT portal by DBT 
Cell. 
Performance Audit on the DBT was conducted to asses s whether necessary 
process reengineering was done for implementation o f DBT so as to minimize 
intermediary levels, reduce delay in payments to in tended beneficiaries, 
pilferage and duplication; and whether the infrastr ucture, organization and 
management of DBT was adequate and effective. 
The Performance Audit was conducted during March 20 20 to July 2021 
covering the period from 01 April 2017 to 31 July 2020. The audit covered DBT 
Cell and Social Justice and Empowerment Department of the State Government. 

Performance Audit on Direct Benefit Transfer 
viii 
Validation of findings noticed on analysis of data was carried out in the selected 
sample of six districts of Haryana. 
Significant Audit Findings  
There was delay in enrolment of beneficiaries in th e scheme ranging between 
one day to 963 days resulting in violation of the provisions of Haryana Right to 
Service (RTS) Act, 2014 and objectives of the schem es to serve as income 
support schemes to beneficiaries was compromised.  
(Paragraph 2.4) 
The department failed to identify dead beneficiaries in time resulting in Pension 
of ` 98.96 crore being transferred to the dead benefici aries account under 
various social security schemes.  
(Paragraph 2.6.1 ) 
To ensure the payment of pension to targeted benefi ciaries, the process of 
linking beneficiary accounts with Aadhaar numbers w as not being done 
effectively due to incomplete and incorrect digitalization of legacy data.  
(Paragraphs 2.8 and 2.9) 
Disbursement monitoring mechanism was absent leadin g to disbursement of 
multiple pension payments or double payments to sam e beneficiaries in two 
schemes viz. Old Age Samman Allowance and Ladli Soc ial Security 
Allowance. District Social Welfare Officer’s (DSWOs) were unable to identify 
beneficiaries, verify their eligibility status and ensure that pensions are being 
disbursed to the correct beneficiaries.  
(Paragraph 2.10) 
Pension of ` 54.54 crore was transferred to different bank acco unts instead of 
correct beneficiaries account in two schemes viz. Old Age Samman Allowance 
and Widow and Destitute Pension  
(Paragraph 2.11) 
The benefit of social security pension schemes was disbursed to retired 
Government employees also which was against the rules of the schemes. 
(Paragraph 2.13) 
Pension amounting to ` 64.13 crore was transferred to 0.38 lakh beneficia ries 
whose status had been shown as untraceable by the banks. 
(Paragraph 2.14) 

Executive Summary 
ix 
The audit trails related to 5.56 lakh beneficiaries was missing in the data dump. 
In absence of audit trails it could not be ascertai ned when and from which IP 
address and by whom they were enrolled. Besides there was gap in beneficiary 
ID sequence and missing records of beneficiaries in master database. 
(Paragraphs 2.15.3 and 2.20) 
Identification of DBT applicable schemes in 28 departments was not done.   
(Paragraph 3.1) 
The data regarding schemes, amount transferred through DBT and saving after 
implementation of DBT depicted on the DBT Portal wa s not complete since 
Agriculture department did not provide any informat ion and had also not 
uploaded the DBT data including savings on the state DBT Portal. 
(Paragraph 3.3) 
Recommendations 
 To ensure transfer of payment to correct beneficiar ies’ accounts, the 
Government may evolve proper systems for authentica tion of Aadhaar  
numbers of legacy beneficiaries with Aadhaar portal.  
 The Government/Department may carry out a comprehensive review of 
the beneficiaries’ data including legacy data to ensure its completeness, 
authenticity and correctness. 
 The Government/Department may put in place a robust  system for 
scrutiny of applications, validation and verificati on process of 
beneficiaries and transfer of benefit in correct ac count. Access to state 
pensioner database should be obtained and before en rolment of 
beneficiaries cross verification should be carried out. 
 Distribution of pension to deceased persons should be avoided by 
linking the software with various agencies and not only from data of 
Registrar General of India. System of disseminating  information like 
payment of financial assistance to the beneficiaries through SMS should 
be considered. 
 The Government may consider evolving real time moni toring 
mechanism for effective decision making and supervi sion. This would 
assist in assessing the undisbursed amount of pensi on in respect of  
untraceable beneficiaries and discontinuance of pension of unauthorized 
beneficiaries. and to revert back the amount in the se cases in the 
Department’s account and evolve Information System for regular SMS 
notifications to the beneficiaries. 

Performance Audit on Direct Benefit Transfer 
x 
 The Department may put in place a mechanism to ensure preparation of 
required documents (User Requirement Specifications , System 
Requirement Specifications, Detailed Design Document, etc.) whenever 
development of new system is taken up. 
 The State Government may evolve proper systems for identification and 
on boarding of all DBT applicable schemes on DBT portal, beneficiaries 
and saving earned after implementation of DBT. 
 The State Government may take strenuous efforts for effecting recovery 
of inadmissible payment of assistance besides fixin g responsibility for 
inaction by the authorities concerned. 
 DBT Cell may ensure that meeting of advisory board is conducted 
periodically as envisaged in the guidelines. 

Chapter 1  
Overview 
  

1 
Chapter 1 
Overview 
1.1 Introduction 
1.1.1 Direct Benefit Transfer 
Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) is a major reform ini tiative by the Government 
of India (GoI) to ensure better and timely delivery of benefits from Government 
to the people. This marks a paradigm shift in the p rocess of delivering benefits 
like wage payments, fuel subsidies, food grain subs idies directly into the bank 
accounts of the beneficiaries, removing leakages an d enhancing financial 
inclusion i.e. extension of financial services to t he unbanked areas and 
providing universal access to banking services across the country. 
As a step in technology enablement, all benefits transferred, in cash or in-kind, 
are captured and adequately represented as part of an aggregation web-interface. 
DBT Bharat portal (https://dbtbharat.gov.in) has be en conceptualized and 
developed as a national aggregator for all information in the country. 
1.1.2 Vision of Direct Benefit Transfer 
DBT vision includes a governance regime which ensur es a simple and user-
friendly Government to People interface and directl y delivers entitlements to 
eligible individuals and households in a fair, tran sparent, efficient and reliable 
manner. Besides, it was a major reform initiative b y Government in various 
Social Welfare Beneficiary Schemes. 
DBT proposes to ensure 
• Accurate targeting 
• De-duplication 
• Reduction of Fraud and corruption 
• Process Re-engineering of Schemes for flow of information and funds 
• Greater accountability 
• Elimination of waste in subsidy 
1.1.3 Provisions of General Financial Rules, 2017 
Rule 87 of General Financial Rules, 2017 stipulates that 
(1) Transfer of benefits should be done directly to  beneficiaries under various 
Government Schemes and Programmes using Information and Communication 
Technology (ICT). Necessary process reengineering t o minimize intermediary 

Performance Audit on Direct Benefit Transfer 
2 
levels and to reduce delay in payments to intended beneficiaries with the 
objective of minimizing pilferage and duplication s hould be done for all 
Government Schemes and Programmes. The process for implementation of 
DBT as prescribed should be adopted. 
(2) DBT should include transfer of in-kind benefits
 a nd cash transfers to 
beneficiaries as well as transfers/honorariums give n to various enablers of 
government schemes like community workers, etc. for  successful 
implementation of the schemes. 
(3) Transfer of cash benefits from Ministries/Departments should be done: 
a)  directly to beneficiaries from Ministries/Departments;  
b)  through State Treasury Account; or  
c)  through any Implementing Agency as appointed by Cen tre/State 
Governments. 
1.1.4 Pre-requisites of DBT 
The principal objective of DBT is to facilitate dir ect processing and credit of 
payments to the legitimate beneficiary in right acc ount and in right time i.e. 
without delay. 
The pre-requisites of DBT are: 
• Digitization of database of beneficiaries; 
• Opening of bank accounts of beneficiaries; and 
• Aadhaar enrolment. 
1.1.5 Identification of DBT Schemes 
A scheme will be a DBT Scheme if:  
• individuals or household can be identified as benef iciaries under the 
scheme; 
• benefits transferred to identified beneficiaries viz. cash or in kind; and 
• the scheme is funded from Consolidated Fund of Indi a or Consolidated 
Fund of the State. 
 
 
 
 

Chapter 1 Overview 
3 
1.2 Various Process of Direct Benefit Transfer  
Under DBT, various schemes in the categories of Cas h and in-kind are being 
covered 1  according to ‘Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) f or DBT 
payments’ issued by GoI. Following process is to be followed by implementing 
agencies through Public Financial Management System  (PFMS) or other 
payment systems:  
I.  Beneficiary identification and enrolment in Ministr y’s DBT scheme 
Management Software; 
II.  Beneficiary validation/registration on PFMS (or any  other system), 
including first time validation of bank account details; 
III.  Generation of payment file instructions; and 
IV.  Processing of payment file and payment to beneficiary. 
Source: DBT Flyer 
1.3 Organisational setup  
The Department of Social Justice and Empowerment (S JE), Haryana is 
entrusted with the welfare, social justice and empo werment of disadvantaged 
and marginalized section of the society. The respon sibility of implementation 
of social welfare schemes in the State is vested wi th the Department. The 
implementation of the selected schemes and beneficiary approval is carried out 
by District Social Welfare Officers (DSWOs) in the department. 
                                                           
1 E.g. Cash : PAHAL (Direct Benefit Transfer for LPG), Mahatma Gandhi National 
Rural Employment Guarantee Act, National Social Ass istance Programme. In-kind : 
Public Distribution System. Other Transfers : ASHA workers under National Health 
Mission, Aanganwadi  workers under Integrated Child Development Services, teachers 
in Aided School and Sanitation staff in Urban Local Bodies. 


Performance Audit on Direct Benefit Transfer 
4 
For a coordinated effort between the Centre and State to enable: faster decision-
making, eliminate duplication of efforts and smooth en out differences i.e. 
fostering an easier transition of schemes on to DBT, GoI asked States to set up 
DBT Cells. These DBT Cells in the States are expect ed to be a one-stop point 
for coordinating all efforts for bringing and implementing schemes on to DBT. 
Therefore, a State DBT cell was constituted on 13 J une 2016 under Finance 
Department of Haryana as a nodal point for all the activities and matters related 
to DBT operations in the State. The State DBT cell is responsible for primarily 
working towards coordinating the implementation of DBT in various schemes 
which is administered by the Finance Department. The Cell acts as a nodal point 
for all the activities and matters related to DBT operations in the State. 
1.4 Status of Direct Benefit Transfer in the State 
As a Major reform initiative, Government of Haryana introduced various Social 
Welfare Beneficiary Schemes in the different depart ments in the State. At 
present 135 DBT applicable schemes of 25 department s are on boarded on the 
State DBT portal. Year-wise number of beneficiaries , schemes and amount 
transferred to beneficiaries’ accounts 2 is depicted in the following chart: 
Chart 1: Year wise Beneficiaries, Funds transferred  and Number of 
schemes 
 
The above chart shows that the total amount transfe rred to beneficiaries 
accounts during the years 2017-18 to 2020-21 was ₹ 37,736 crore. The number 
of beneficiaries had increased to 143.83 lakh in 20 18-19 as compared to 
90.18 lakh in 2017-18. The increase was mainly due to  ‘Livestock Health and 
Disease Control’ scheme (16.63 lakh beneficiaries),  Mid-day meal scheme 
(14.92 lakh beneficiaries)and Samagra Shiksha (9.44  lakh beneficiaries) 
Thereafter, it decreased to 129.43 lakh in 2020-21 mainly due to decrease in  
 
                                                           
2 A single person enrolled in multiple schemes is a separate beneficiary under each 
scheme. 


Chapter 1 Overview 
5 
number of beneficiaries in eight schemes in 2019-20  and further decrease in 
four schemes 3 in 2020-21. 
• In order to aggregate benefit transfer information and the activities for 
the State DBT Cell through an electronic platform, a State DBT Portal 
was created in September 2017 which is integrated with the DBT Bharat 
Portal. Main features of State DBT portal are: 
 aggregated Dashboard of DBT Schemes; 
 scheme wise or location wise Reports; 
 Progress Monitoring System for DBT applicable schem e/service; 
and  
 DBT Scheme Code Management.  
• As per Protocol Document for DBT in states, DBT Cell coordinates with 
all Departments in compiling a list of schemes and programs to which 
DBT is applicable.  
• The identification of DBT applicable State and Cent rally Sponsored 
Schemes is done by the concerned Departments implem enting the 
schemes. Identified schemes are uploaded on the sta te DBT portal by 
DBT Cell on the request of concerned department.  T he process of 
uploading the scheme on DBT Portal is described below: 
 The concerned Department fills up the prescribed pr oforma for 
uploading the scheme on the State DBT portal and su bmits to the 
DBT cell which is done in physical form and then in corporated 
through data entry. 
 The DBT cell uploads the information provided by the Department 
on the DBT portal to generate a unique code for the  scheme (State 
scheme or Centrally Sponsored Scheme on sharing basis). 
 After the unique code is generated, rest of informa tion in the 
proforma is uploaded on the State DBT portal by the DBT Cell. 
 The scheme is now visible to the respective Departm ents on the 
State DBT portal for further updation.  
 The Departmental user is created for each departmen t and user id 
and password are assigned for accessing the scheme uploaded on 
the State DBT portal.  
                                                           
3 Two schemes of elementary education and one each fo r Rural Development and 
Women and Child Development. 

Performance Audit on Direct Benefit Transfer 
6 
 The Departmental user further creates scheme Owner (s) by 
creating User id  and Password  and assign the scheme(s) to the 
scheme Owner for updating the data on the State DBT portal. 
• The DBT Scheme Code 4  is generated on all India basis and is a 
randomly generated five digit code unique to each D BT scheme for 
identification of DBT transactions with a purpose of distinguishing DBT 
applicable component/scheme during financial transa ctions and for 
reporting of data on the DBT Bharat portal. 
• DBT Cell monitors the DBT scheme code process, gene rates the 
scheme-wise/location-wise report with the objective  to integrate with 
DBT Bharat Portal and progress made by Departments with regards to 
the DBT on-boarding process viz. (i) Beneficiary da tabase digitization, 
(ii) Seeding of beneficiary database with validated  Aadhaar number, 
(iii) Transfer of benefit – for cash: using electro nic means, and for 
in-kind: upon beneficiary authentication from Aadha ar Central 
Identities Data Repository (CIDR).  
1.5 Selection of Schemes 
The total transfer made by the State through DBT during the year 2019-20 was  
₹ 9,081.69 crore. Out of this, an amount of ₹ 6,455.07 crore (71 per cent ) was 
transferred by SJE . Of the 14 schemes through which funds have been 
transferred by SJE, maximum benefit (94 per cent ) was transferred through 
three schemes viz. (i) Old Age Pension Scheme (OAP) , (ii) The Haryana 
Pension to Widows and Destitute Women Scheme and (i ii) The Haryana 
Disabled Persons Pension Schemes. Accordingly, thes e three schemes were 
selected for audit. 
The three schemes as detailed below are aimed at pr oviding Social Security to 
the respective class of persons who are unable to s ustain themselves with their 
own resources and are in need of financial assistance: 
(i)  The Haryana Government implemented the OAP scheme with effect 
from 01 November 1966. The State Government further  enhanced 
the scheme and introduced “Old Age Pension Scheme-1 991”, now 
renamed as “Old Age Samman Allowance Scheme”. The s cheme 
was implemented from 01 July 1991.  
                                                           
4 The codification structure is - Scheme Code starti ng with (A) – Central Sector Schemes 
- Scheme Code starting with (B) – Centrally Sponsor ed Schemes - Scheme Code 
starting with (C) – State / UT Schemes - Scheme Cod e starting with (D) – District 
Schemes - Scheme Code starting with (E) – State / U T CSS. The balance four 
characters of scheme code will have values between 0-9 and A to Z. 

Chapter 1 Overview 
7 
(ii)  The Haryana Pension to Widows and Destitute Women Scheme was 
introduced in the year 1980-81.  
(iii)  The Haryana Disabled (Divyang) Persons Pension Sche mes was 
introduced in the year 1981-82. The aim of the scheme is to provide 
social security to Disabled persons. 
The details of the expenditure by the SJE departmen t and the three selected 
schemes are given in Table 1.1: 
Table 1.1: Details of expenditure incurred by the Department  
Name of Scheme No. of 
Beneficiaries  
Amount 
(₹ in crore)  
Percentage 
of selected 
scheme’s 
expenditure 
over the 
total 
expenditure 
incurred by 
department  
No. of 
Beneficiaries  
Amount 
(₹ in crore)  
Percentage 
of selected 
scheme’s 
expenditur 
e over the 
total 
expenditur 
e incurred 
by 
department  
No. of 
Beneficiaries  
Amount 
(₹ in crore)  
Percentage 
of selected 
scheme’s 
expenditure 
over the 
total 
expenditure 
incurred by 
department  
2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 
Total expenditure 
incurred by 
department on all 
the schemes( ₹ in 
crore)  
5,714.31  6,455.07  7,701.49  
Expenditure incurred under selected schemes 5 
Old Age Samman 
Allowance 
16,83,942  3,490.19  94%  17,67,874  
 
4,001.95  93.41%  17,85,815  4,616.93  93.26%  
Pension to Widow 
and Destitute 
Women 
7,19,523  1,525.93  7,39,399  
 
1,624.41  7,60,328  2,098.46  
The Haryana 
Divyang Person 
Pension Scheme  
1,67,238  351.50  1,75,129  403.40  1,76,865  467.07  
Total 25,70,703  5,367.62   26,82,402 6,029.76   27,23,008  7,182.46   
However, as per budget document, the expenditure under selected schemes are 
₹ 5,372.39 crore, ₹ 6,128.29 crore and ₹ 7,156.57 crore during 2018-19, 2019-20 
and 2020-21 respectively. The reasons for this difference in expenditure as per 
budget document and DBT portal is awaited from the department. 
1.6 Process adopted in Social Justice and Empowerme nt Department 
for disbursement of benefits 
The steps involved in beneficiary identification, e nrolment and payment to 
beneficiaries in SJE is as follows:  
                                                           
5       Including benefit of ` 841.09 crore during 2018-19, ` 1,011.02 crore during 2019-20 and 
` 1,120.21 crore during 2020-21 for Below Poverty Li ne (BPL) beneficiaries under 
National Social Assistance Program Scheme. 

Performance Audit on Direct Benefit Transfer 
8 
 
with  
scanned  
receipt 

Chapter 1 Overview 
9 
The department adopted PFMS system for payment to beneficiaries in October, 


Performance Audit on Direct Benefit Transfer 
10 
2020.After that digitally signed (Extensible Markup  Language) XML files are 
being placed in the SFTP (Secure File Transfer Protocol) area on PFMS server. 
PFMS system picks the file and sends the acknowledg ment status to National 
Payments Corporation of India (NPCI) for further crediting the pension amount 
into the beneficiaries’ account. After crediting, r esponse files are again placed 
in SFTP area. 
1.7 Audit objectives 
The Performance Audit has been undertaken to ascertain: 
(i)  Whether necessary process re-engineering was done for implementation 
of DBT so as to minimize: 
a)  intermediary levels; 
b)  delay in payments to intended beneficiaries; and  
c)  pilferage and duplication. 
(ii) Whether the infrastructure, organization and m anagement of DBT was 
adequate and effective. 
1.8 Audit Scope 
The scope of this performance audit is limited to t he three social security 
pension schemes namely, (i) Old Age Samman Allowanc e (ii) Pension to 
Widow and Destitute Women and (iii) The Haryana Div yang Person Pension 
Scheme. Total expenditure incurred was taken as a size measure for the purpose 
of sampling.  
Audit examined the efficacy of the system through data analysis and records of 
DBT Cell and Social Justice and Empowerment Department. The results of data 
analysis were validated in selected six districts v iz. Ambala, Kaithal, Karnal, 
Kurukshetra, Panchkula and Yamunanagar. 
In absence of system design documentation, the exis tence of IT controls could 
not be validated. 
1.9 Audit Criteria 
The audit criteria for the performance audit were derived from: 
• Documents, circulars, orders, instructions and noti fication issued by 
DBT Mission, Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Rural Development and 
State Government.  
• Standard Operating Procedures, Handbook on DBT and Guidelines for 
State DBT Cell issued by DBT Mission.  

Chapter 1 Overview 
11 
• Guidelines of Schemes on process of identification and authentication 
of beneficiaries and payments. 
• Instructions regarding maintenance of database, gen eration of various 
reports and IT controls. 
1.10 Audit methodology 
An entry conference was held in December 2020 with the officers of the DBT 
Cell and Social Justice and Empowerment Department wherein audit objectives, 
audit criteria, scope of audit were discussed. 
The Performance audit focused on examining the impl ementation of DBT for 
selected schemes through data analysis and examination of records of DBT Cell 
and Social Justice and Empowerment Department. The audit observations were 
validated in field offices of selected districts. 
The draft Performance audit report covered the period April 2017 to July 2020 
and forwarded to the Government on 28 September 202 1. An exit conference 
was held on 03 December 2021 with the Additional Chief Secretary (Finance), 
Principal Secretary, Social Justice and Empowerment ; Director, Social Justice 
and Empowerment; Secretary Finance, Deputy Director and other officers. The 
views of the Department/Government have been incorp orated in the 
Performance Audit report and replies thereon of the DBT Cell and Social Justice 
and Empowerment during exit conference have also be en incorporated in the 
Performance Audit report. 
1.11 Audit Findings 
The audit findings are contained in Chapters 2 and 3 of this Report. Audit 
findings, conclusions and recommendations relating to each of the two audit 
objectives have been reported in two distinct chapt ers to facilitate easy 
comprehension and follow up. The findings are based  on the data and records 
furnished by the DBT Cell and Social Justice and Empowerment Department. 
1.12 Acknowledgement 
Audit acknowledges the co-operation and assistance extended by the officials 
of the DBT Cell, Social Justice and Empowerment Dep artment and its field 
offices at various stages during conduct of the performance audit.  

Chapter 2  
Re-engineering Process for implementation  
of Direct Benefit Transfer 
  

13 
Chapter 2 
Re-engineering Process for implementation of Direct Benefit Transfer 
2.1 Non-preparation of documentation for IT system 
DBT is a major reform initiative to re-engineer the  existing cumbersome 
delivery processes using modern ICT. Technology is a critical component 
required to enable DBT in any scheme or program.  
The schemes were in operation under manual mode. Fo r adoption of the DBT 
framework including re-engineering of process and maintenance of audit trail it 
was important to follow a systematic approach for s ystem development. This 
would require a consultative process for gathering user requirement, translating 
it into system requirement and design; and document ing the same for 
knowledge transfer and business continuity. 
Audit carried out data analysis  on beneficiaries’ data for the period from 
2017-18 to 2019-20 (extended up to July 2020) obtai ned from Social Justice 
and Empowerment Department using Microsoft Structur ed Query Language 
(MS SQL) and Computer Assisted Audit Techniques lik e, Tableau and 
Interactive Data Extraction and Analysis (IDEA).  
Validation of the results of data analysis was done in the field offices i.e. in six 
District Social Welfare Offices viz. Ambala, Kaitha l, Karnal, Kurukshetra, 
Panchkula and Yamunanagar with the available record s. Using statistical 
sampling method, five per cent of cases were randomly selected for validation 
within each selected district offices. 
The work of development of application for computerisation of disbursement of 
benefits under benefit schemes of Department of Soc ial Justice and 
Empowerment was done through M/s National Informatics Centre (NIC). Audit 
observed that NIC did not prepare any User requirem ent specification (URS)/ 
System requirement specification (SRS) before takin g up the development of 
the application. 
When systems are developed in the absence of full documentation, it would not 
only make it difficult to maintain system in the longer term, but it would not be 
possible to review the system for deriving assurance that it works as intended. 
Due to non-preparation of SRS, Audit could not assure itself, about mapping of 
complete business rules in the application and adeq uate system controls. 
Deficiencies like enrolment of deceased pensioners,  payment of pension to 
deceased pensioners, enrolment of underage persons for Old Age Pension 
Scheme, same person enrolled under multiple schemes , multiple persons 
enrolled under single Aadhaar ID, Transfer of benefit to account of person other 
than the beneficiary were observed during audit (di scussed in subsequent 
paragraphs) which indicate  weak systemic control. 

Performance Audit on Direct Benefit Transfer 
14 
As the SRS/URS was not prepared, the efficacy of the DBT system was checked 
through targeted audit queries designed in line wit h audit objectives and data 
analysis. The analysis and verification was focused  to identify whether the 
objectives of process re-engineering, duplication, accurate targeting and 
management of DBT were achieved. The findings of the analysis are discussed 
in detail in the chapters. 
The financial implication of the shortcomings as an alysed from the data 
provided by the Department was 
` 237.31 crore as detailed in Table 2.1 below: 
Table 2.1: Details of financial implication of shortcomings 
(`` ``    in crore) 
Para Ref. Category/Sub Category Old Age 
Samman 
Allowance  
Pension 
to 
Widow 
and 
Destitute 
Women 
Haryana 
Divyang 
Person 
Pension 
Scheme 
Impact in 
money 
Value with 
respect of 
payment to 
ineligible 
beneficiaries  
2.6.1 Transfer of Pension to the 
dead beneficiaries account 
under different social security 
schemes 
80.12  
 
13.76  
 
3.66  
 
97.54  
 
2.6.3 Transfer of Social Security 
Pension to the dead 
beneficiaries’ treated as 
normal pension account 
1.63  
 
0.56  
 
0.14  
 
  2.33  
2.9 Pension disbursed to multiple 
beneficiaries on same aadhaar 
Number 
6.61  2.08  0.46    9.15  
2.10 Undue benefit by providing 
benefits simultaneously under 
two schemes 
0.21  
 
- - 0.21  
2.11 Transfer of beneficiaries 
Pension to other persons’ 
bank accounts  
36.95  17.53  - 54.48  
2.12 Payment to ineligible 
beneficiaries (transfer to 
beneficiaries before attaining 
the age of 60 years) 
0.94  - - 0.94  
2.13 Disbursement of social 
security pension to retired 
Government employees and 
family pensioner 
5.96   2.27 0.30  
 
8.53  
2.14 Disbursement of social 
security pension to 
untraceable beneficiaries 
46.38  13.91  3.84  64.13  
  Total       237.31  
The issues/observations of IT application developme nt without documentation 
and instances of irregular payment should be investigated and appropriate action 
should be taken. 
 
 

Chapter 2 Re-engineering Process for implementation of Direct Benefit Transfer 
15 
2.2 Delay in disbursement of pension benefits  
DBT was to ensure a better and timely delivery of b enefits to the people by 
speeding up payments and enhancing financial inclus ion 1 . According to 
authority letter issued by the department to the di sbursing banks/post offices, 
pension amount should be credited in beneficiaries’ account on the date of issue 
of the authority letter. However, considering stand ing operating procedure for 
DBT payment the maximum total time for receiving pa yment response 
(success/failure) is T+4working days, where T is the day of the transaction when 
the payment file is received with authorisation to process payment by system 
for DBT and T 4 represents the maximum permissible time for submiss ion of 
response file after process of payment (success/fai lure) to the originator of 
payment file. 
Audit observed that: 
(A) Payment status fields 
On analysis of data of beneficiaries provided by th e department for the period 
between April 2017 and July 2020, it was noticed th at pension of 
₹ 19,803.12 crore (10,47,65,864 transactions) was transferred during the period 
to beneficiaries’ account under social security sch emes. In this database status 
of each transaction from destination bank was captured under the field ‘payment 
status’. Seven types of values were captured under the field ‘payment status’ 
viz. ‘Success’, ‘other’, ‘credit success’, ‘A/c Frozen’, ‘A/c Dormant’, ‘A/c does 
not exist’, ‘A/c Closure’ and ‘Response not received’.  
Audit analysis revealed that: 
 Out of ₹ 19,803.12 crore, only ₹ 16,695.71 crore 
(8,74,52,031 transactions) was successfully transfe rred to the 
beneficiaries’ accounts (Annexure -I).  
 Transaction status of ₹ 3,025.61 crore (1,68,80,027 transactions) has not 
been updated in database by the department. Disburs ing agencies were 
required to upload the response on SJE pension portal. However, it was 
neither uploaded on portal nor monitored by the department. 
 Pension of ₹ 81.80 crore (4,33,806 transactions) has not been transferred 
to the beneficiaries’ account due to multiple reaso ns i.e. A/c frozen, 
A/c dormant, A/c does not exist, A/c closure and other.  Further, it could 
not be ensured whether this amount was received back by the department 
or lying with disbursing banks/post offices. 
                                                           
1 Financial inclusion means that department has acce ss to useful services that meet their 
needs – transactions, payments and savings. – deliv ered in a responsible and 
sustainable way. 

Performance Audit on Direct Benefit Transfer 
16 
 There were transactions of ₹ 10.86 crore (58,872 transactions) where the 
status of credit/payment into beneficiaries’ accounts was depicted under 
the head ‘other’ in the database. The current status of these transactions 
could not be ensured due to lack of reconciliation.  The Department 
should take remedial action by reconciling to actual status of credit.  
 
The department mentions in the monthly authority letter issued to the disbursing 
banks/post offices to credit the amount in benefici aries’ accounts on the same 
day of issue of authority letter and return the und isbursed amount to the 
department along with its details. No such exercise was done by the disbursing 
banks/post offices nor was this pursued by the department. It was also pertinent 
to mention that the department did not sign any Memorandum of Understanding 
with disbursing banks/post offices. 
(B) Time taken for transactions 
Pension of 
` 7,852.23 crore was transferred in 4,22,06,476 tran sactions 
(Annexure-II) after maximum permissible time for submission of response file 
after process of payment (success/failure) to the o riginator of payment file i.e. 
after four days from authority letter to the banks/ disbursing agency. The delay 
ranged between one day (i.e. day after T+4) to 444 days.  
The delay in disbursement of benefit to the beneficiaries defeated the principal 
objective of DBT, while the lack of timely reconcil iation and non enforcement 
of instructions for crediting the amount will have to be remedied for the system 
to work as intended. 
2.3 Delay in passing intended benefits due to late enrolment of 
beneficiaries  
Article 41 of the Constitution of India directs the  State to provide public 
assistance to its citizens in the case of unemploym ent, old age, sickness and 
disablement as well as in other cases of undeserved want, within the limit of the 
State’s economic capacity and development. Social security, invalid and old age 
pensions figure as Items 23 and 24 of the 7 th  Schedule of the Constitution of 
India in the Concurrent List. It is in compliance of these guiding principles that 


Chapter 2 Re-engineering Process for implementation of Direct Benefit Transfer 
17 
the GoI introduced National Social Assistance Progr amme (NSAP) under the 
Ministry of Rural Development on Independence Day, 1995 as a fully funded 
Centrally Sponsored Scheme. 
The NSAP at present includes five 
2 sub-schemes as its components which 
includes the following three: (a)  Indira Gandhi National Old Age Pension 
Scheme (IGNOAPS) (b)  Indira Gandhi National Widow Pension Scheme 
(IGNWPS) (c)  Indira Gandhi National Disability Pension Scheme (IGNDPS). 
Guidelines issued in respect of NSAP in October 2014 by the Ministry of Rural 
Development states that: 
(i) The States may ensure the deserving person's el igibility should be 
proactively identified by reaching out to their hou seholds. However, if 
an eligible person’s name does not figure in the Be low Poverty Line 
(BPL) list, he/she should not be left out from the eligible beneficiaries 
list. 
(ii)  The assistance under the sub-schemes of NSAP is applicable for persons 
belonging to BPL category.  
(iii) The eligible age for IGNOAPS is 60 years.  
(iv) Field level workers/officials should be entrus ted with the task of 
identifying beneficiaries and getting the forms fil led up. Also support 
should be provided to get the requisite certificate s from the authorities 
concerned.   
(v) For the identification of new beneficiaries of BPL, Gram 
Panchayats/Municipalities should be given the centr al role. Elected 
heads and representatives should be sensitized on t he criteria and 
processes of NSAP.  
(vi) Also as per the directions of the Hon’ble Supr eme Court of India in Writ 
Petition (Civil) number 196 of 2001, the deserving person's eligibility 
should be identified and included in the beneficiaries list.  
(vii) While individuals can file applications, it i s incumbent on the authorized 
officials to reach out to potential beneficiaries o n an ‘out today’ 
approach and get the application forms filled up an d provide assistance 
to get the relevant records. Field level workers / officials should be 
entrusted with the task of identifying beneficiaries and getting the forms 
                                                           
2 (i) Indira Gandhi National Old Age Pension Scheme (IGNOAPS) (ii) Indira Gandhi 
National Widow Pension Scheme (IGNWPS) (iii) Indira  Gandhi National Disability 
Pension Scheme (IGNDPS) (iv) National Family Benefi t Scheme(NFBS) and 
(v) Annapurna Scheme. The benefit provided by the selected schemes of State to BPL 
beneficiaries includes the benefits provided under NSAP.   

Performance Audit on Direct Benefit Transfer 
18 
filled up. Also support should be provided to get the requisite certificates 
from the authorities concerned. 
Audit noticed that 78,567 3(district wise details given in Annexure-III) BPL 
beneficiaries were registered in scheme management system after attaining age 
of 60 years. The range of delay in enrolment of the se BPL beneficiaries was 
between one year to 20 years as shown below : 
Table 2.2: Details of range of delay in enrolment of beneficiaries 
Delay range in years(after 60 years) Number of beneficiaries 
0-5 61,987 
6-10 12,969 
11-20 3,288 
Grand Total 78,244 
In the Old Age Samman Allowance scheme, audit observed that 78,244 (out of 
which 75,214 are shown as normal 4 in status as on date) BPL beneficiaries were 
registered with delays ranging between one year to 20 years, whereas these 
beneficiaries should have been proactively identifi ed by the department when 
beneficiary attained the age of 60 as required unde r the guidelines. The 
beneficiaries should be identified by reaching out to their households by the 
department. 
There were 22,206 BPL beneficiaries in six selected  districts who were given 
benefit with delay as per results of data analysis.  The findings of data analysis 
was cross checked with 541 
5 cases (0-5 years : 426, 6-10 years: 91, 11-20 years: 
21 cases, three cases for more than 20 years)  in t he six selected offices of 
DSWOs. The verification confirmed the results of data analysis in respect of all 
541 cases. Besides, no household survey was done by any of the six DSWOs. 
Reply from Social Justice and Empowerment Departmen t was awaited 
(December 2021).  
2.4 Delay in enrolment of beneficiaries violated th e Right to Service Act 
provisions 
The Haryana Right to Service Act (RTS Act), 2014 provides for the delivery of 
service to eligible person within the notified time limits for the pension schemes 
of the Social Justice and Empowerment Department.  Under RTS Act, the time 
period for providing services has been revised (November 2016) from 120 days 
to 60 days from the date of application. 
                                                           
3 Apart from 78,244 mentioned in table , delay of 21-40 years in passing intended 
benefits to 323 beneficiaries (for periods beyond t he inception of scheme) was also 
noticed.  
4 Any person eligible to receive benefit under a sch eme as on that date as per the 
database. 
5 Ambala-100, Kaithal-100, Karnal-100, Kurukshetra-10 0, Panchkula-41 and 
 Yamunanagar-100 

Chapter 2 Re-engineering Process for implementation of Direct Benefit Transfer 
19 
Audit noticed that 2,84,471 beneficiaries were regi stered in scheme 
management system after the time limit prescribed in the Haryana RTS Act i.e. 
beyond 60 days. The range of delay in enrolment of beneficiaries was between 
one day to 963 days in the selected schemes viz. Old Age Samman Allowance, 
Pension to Widow, Destitute Women and Haryana Divyang Person Pension. 
As per results of data analysis, there were 80,434 beneficiaries in six selected 
districts who were enrolled with delays. The result s were cross verified with 
600 6 (delay ranging between: one day to 609 days) selec ted cases in the six 
selected offices of DSWOs. The validation confirmed  the results of data 
analysis for all the 600 cases. The DSWOs confirmed  the findings in their 
response. 
Reply from Social Justice and Empowerment Departmen t was awaited 
(December 2021). 
2.5 Non-adherence to specific timelines for disburs ement of social 
security pensions 
Social security pension schemes are in the nature o f income support schemes 
and every beneficiary under the scheme is entitled to receive pension on a 
monthly basis. As per the directions of the Hon’b1e Supreme Court of India in 
Writ Petition (W.P.)number 196 of 2001, the State Governments were directed 
to make the payment in respect of IGNOAP to BPL beneficiaries by 7 th  of each 
month. 
Audit noticed on analysis of data of beneficiaries that there was delay in issuing 
pension payment authority to disbursing agencies. T he delay ranged between 
two and 262 days (calculated from 10 
th 7 of each of the month).  It was also 
noticed that pension payment was not being done regularly in the said timeline 
under all the schemes including IGNOAP to BPL benef iciaries which was in 
violation of the directions of Hon’b1e Supreme Court decision.  
Non-ensuring of timelines stipulated for making pay ment of benefits would 
result in hardships to vulnerable section of societ y. Besides, the department 
instructs disbursing banks/post offices in the mont hly authority letter to credit 
the amount in beneficiaries’ accounts on the same day of issue of authority letter 
and return the undisbursed amount to department along with details. 
 
 
 
                                                           
6 Ambala-100, Kaithal-100, Karnal-100, Kurukshetra-100, Panchkula-100 and 
               Yamunanagar-100  
7 Three days considered for processing at Department level. 

Performance Audit on Direct Benefit Transfer 
20 
2.6 Transfer of Pension to the dead beneficiaries a ccount 
As per rule 9 (ii) of ‘Old Age Allowance Scheme 200 5’, Scheme Rules, 2005 
applicable with effect from 29 November 2005 vide H aryana Government 
notification dated 20 September 2006, allowance sha ll cease to be payable on 
the death of a beneficiary and if the beneficiary dies before receiving allowance 
for a particular period, the same shall lapse.  
Further, as per the Govt. notification No. 459-SW(4)-2011 dated 10 June 2011, 
in case there is no withdrawal from the bank account for a continuous period of 
60 days, such bank account will be rendered “inoper ative” for the purpose of 
this Scheme by the Bank with no further credit of b enefits under this Scheme 
into it. Such “inoperative” bank accounts will be r eported by the Bank to the 
Department. In case the beneficiary applies for re-operationalization of the bank 
account within the next 90 days with justifiable re ason, the bank account may 
be re-operationalized with the permission of the Di rector. If not, the bank 
account will be rendered “dead” for the purpose of this Scheme and the benefits 
credited into the bank account after the last withdrawal would be remitted back 
by the Bank to the Department with accrued interest.  
The department instructs disbursing banks/post offices in the monthly authority 
letter to credit the amount in beneficiaries’ accounts on the same day of issue of 
authority letter and return the undisbursed amount to department along with its 
details. Department also stated that data of death cases was being fetched from 
Registrar General of India (RGI) portal and decease d beneficiaries were being 
identified by matching aadhaar number.  
Analysis of data revealed the following: 
2.6.1 Transfer of Pension to the dead beneficiaries  account under different 
social security schemes 
Pension amounting to ₹ 98.96 8 crore was transferred to 91,436 number of dead 
beneficiaries’ account under selected schemes for p eriod ranging from one 
month to 40 months as detailed below:   
Table 2.3: Details of pension transferred to dead beneficiaries 
Name of Scheme Number of 
beneficiaries 
Total amount transferred  
(₹in crore) 
Old Age Samman Allowance 74,893 81.29 
Pension to Widow and Destitute Women 12,990 13.97 
Haryana Divyang Person Pension Scheme 3,553 3.70 
Total 91,436 98.96 
Data analysis revealed that there were 25,861 benef iciaries in the six selected 
districts where pension was transferred in the acco unts after their demise. This 
                                                           
8  Includes `1.42 crore for 2580 beneficiaries discussed in Para 2.9 and 2.11 to 2.14.  

Chapter 2 Re-engineering Process for implementation of Direct Benefit Transfer 
21 
was cross-verified with 569 9selected cases at the six selected offices of DSWOs. 
The validation exercise confirmed the results of data analysis. In 50 cases (seven 
Kaithal, six Panchkula and 37 in Yamunanagar) an am ount of  
` 9.04 lakh was recovered. In the remaining 519 cases, the concerned DSWOs 
have taken up the issue with the concerned banks an d requested for transfer of 
the pension amount back to the department’s account as confirmed by DSWOs 
in their response.  
Disbursement of pension to beneficiaries already id entified as deceased 
indicated that neither suitable controls/checks were put in the system to restrict 
these transactions nor the payments were monitored by the appropriate 
authorities. Department is also not using any Business Intelligence or reports to 
monitor the gaps identified by audit during data analysis. 
Reply from Social Justice and Empowerment Departmen t was awaited 
(December 2021).   
2.6.2 Payment to beneficiaries enrolled after their  death  
During scrutiny, it was observed that 1,092 beneficiaries 
10  were enrolled under 
selected schemes after their death. 
The pension of 
₹ 23.27 lakh was transferred to 241 beneficiaries (o ut of 1,092 
beneficiaries as seen from the data furnished) whos e enrolment as beneficiary 
was done after their death under the selected schemes. 
It is pertinent to mention that the status of these  beneficiaries is also shown as 
‘dead’ in database even as on date (July 2020).This  indicated inadequate 
monitoring and system controls. 
In six selected districts, there were 78 beneficiaries enrolled after their death (as 
per results of data analysis) where pension was transferred to the accounts. This 
was validated in seven 
11  selected cases at the six selected offices of DSWOs. In 
three cases (one case in Kaithal and two in Yamunan agar) an amount of  
₹ 0.21 lakh has been recovered. In the remaining fou r cases, the concerned 
DSWOs have stated to have taken up the issue with t he concerned banks and 
requested for transfer of the pension amount back to the department’s account.  
Reply from Social Justice and Empowerment Departmen t was awaited 
(December 2021).   
                                                           
9 Ambala-100, Kaithal-100, Karnal-100, Kurukshetra-10 0, Panchkula-69 and 
               Yamunanagar-100  
10  Old Age Samman Allowance-828 beneficiaries, Pensio n to Widow and Destitute 
Women-167 beneficiaries and Haryana Divyang Person Pension Scheme-97 
beneficiaries. 
11  Ambala-1, Kaithal-1, Karnal-1, Kurukshetra-1, Panch kula-1 and 
               Yamunanagar-2 

Performance Audit on Direct Benefit Transfer 
22 
2.6.3 Transfer of Social Security Pension to the de ad beneficiaries’ treated 
as normal pension account 
Pension amounting to ₹ 2.34 12  crore was transferred to 618 beneficiaries’ 
account under three schemes after their death till date (July 2020) as detailed 
below: 
Table 2.4: Details of pension transferred to beneficiaries after death under three schemes  
Pension Type Number of 
Beneficiaries 
Pension Amount transferred  
(in ₹) 
Old Age Samman Allowance 419 1,63,59,650 
Widow Pension 159 56,37,600 
Disability Pension 40 14,39,650 
Total  618 2,34,36,900 
Further, the above accounts were shown as normal be neficiaries i.e. eligible 
beneficiaries for pension disbursement even as on date (July 2020). 
As per results of data analysis, there were 188 ben eficiaries in six selected 
districts in which pension was transferred to dead beneficiaries treated as 
normal. This was further validated through cross ve rification of 10 13  cases in 
six selected offices of DSWOs. Out of the 10 cases, in one case (Karnal district) 
an amount of ₹ 0.34 lakh was recovered and in another case DSWO (Panchkula) 
stated that verification of beneficiary is under process. In the remaining 8 cases, 
DSWOs of Ambala, Kurukshetra, Kaithal, and Yamunana gar stated that 
deficiency occurred during the aadhaar validation p rocess due to linking of 
wrong aadhaar numbers and thus these beneficiaries were declared as dead. 
However, after physically appearing of these benefi ciaries previously declared 
dead and production of their aadhaar card, pension of these beneficiaries was 
re-started.  
Reply from Social Justice and Empowerment Departmen t was awaited 
(December 2021). 
The reply indicates that procedure prescribed by Un ique Identification 
Authority of India (UIDAI) for seeding of Aadhaar w as not followed. As 
Aadhaar seeding is supposed to be error-free, keyin g in of wrong Aadhaar 
numbers at the time of enrolment/migration of legacy data and rectification after 
their physically appearing casts doubts on the inte grity of data as well as the 
process adopted. Department needs to investigate and fix responsibility. 
During exit conference, Department of SJE stated th at this problem is being 
faced in the case of legacy data. However, while pr ocessing new data 
department is ensuring this would not happen. Data on RGI portal is not 
available on real time basis. However, the department comes to know the detail 
                                                           
12   Includes  ` 0.01 crore for 12 beneficiaries discussed in Para 2.9, 2.11 and 2.14.  
13  Ambala-3, Kaithal-2, Karnal-1, Kurukshetra-2, Panch kula-1 and 
              Yamunanagar-1 

Chapter 2 Re-engineering Process for implementation of Direct Benefit Transfer 
23 
of dead beneficiaries after lapse of three to four months. In this period pension 
continues to be released to these dead beneficiaries. 
2.7 Non-updation of beneficiaries’ income in the pe nsion database 
As per Haryana Government Notification, issued on 22 March 2012, maximum 
income limit for availing social security pension w as increased from ₹ 50,000 
per annum to ₹ 2,00,000 per annum. The person was eligible for th e grant of 
Old Age Samman Allowance, if: 
(i) the person was of age 60 years or more;  
(ii) the person is domiciled and is a resident of H aryana State; and  
(iii) his/her income from all sources together with  that of his/her spouse does 
not exceed 
₹ 2,00,000 per annum.  
Similarly, a woman of age 18 years and above was eligible for grant of Widow 
and Destitute Women pension under the Scheme if her  own income from all 
sources was below ₹ 2,00,000 per annum. 
Audit noticed that income field for 34,07,826 beneficiaries out of total number 
of 34,84,872 beneficiaries was left blank in two schemes i.e. Old Age Samman 
Allowance and Widow and Destitute Women Pension Sch eme. Neither any 
mechanism was evolved to verify the annual income o f the beneficiary at the 
time of enrolment nor periodic review of income of beneficiaries done to ensure 
the eligibility. 
Thus, validation process of beneficiaries was largely non-existent. Further, non-
capturing of income in the database resulted in incomplete and unreliable data. 
During exit conference, the department stated that updation of income in 
pension database is being done in phased manner inv olving the platform using 
Parivar Pehchan Patra 
14  functionality. It was also suggested on behalf of State 
Government that verified income of beneficiaries ma y be updated in database. 
Also ACS (Finance) suggested that in the income field, department should shift 
from self-declaration mode to verified income mode. 
 
 
                                                           
14  Parivar Pehchan Patra (PPP) aims to build a compreh ensive, reliable and accurate 
database of families residing in the State which ca n be further utilized by various line 
departments for welfare scheme delivery across the State. It shall contain details such 
as the family’s structure, its residential details,  social and economic details of each 
member of the family. A unique 8-digit ID is issued  to each family registered in the 
PPP database. This ID can be used by the family mem bers to apply for any 
services/schemes of the State linked to PPP.  

Performance Audit on Direct Benefit Transfer 
24 
2.8 Deficiency in digitization of master database o f beneficiaries  
Analysis of data of beneficiaries revealed that aadhaar number, which is unique for 
each person, for 1,15,329 beneficiaries was changed during the period April 2017 
to July 2020 in which 1,01,980 beneficiaries are still getting pension as normal and 
the remaining 13,349 beneficiaries’ status have bee n updated to Died/Aadhaar 
Disputed/Cancelled/Duplicate/Ineligible/Suspended or Untraceable. 
As per Section 7 of the Aadhaar (Targeted delivery of Financial and other 
subsidies, benefits and services) Act, 2016, Aadhaa r is used as means of 
authentication for availing services, benefits and subsidies.  
The selected schemes namely (i) Old Age Pension Sch eme, (ii) Pension to 
Widows and Destitute Women Pension Scheme and (iii)  Disabled Persons 
Pension Scheme were in operation since 1964, 1980-8 1 and 1981-82 
respectively. However, DBT was implemented by the D epartment from 
February 2015 while use and possession of Aadhaar was made mandatory with 
effect from 23 March 2017 for transfer of benefit through DBT in Haryana.  
The Department entered Aadhaar numbers without ensu ring correctness and 
there was no validation of the numbers entered with  the Aadhaar database. 
Whenever beneficiary approached for correction in t he Aadhaar number the 
same was corrected in the database. 
Further, the change of Aadhaar was not reflected in  the audit trail for 1,045 
beneficiaries out of 1,15,329. In the absence of au dit trail in respect of these 
beneficiaries, it could not be ascertained when or by which user of IP address 
these missing beneficiaries were enrolled from. Missing of audit trail is a serious 
issue and indicates that system is not tamper proof  and creates doubt about the 
integrity of system. Missing of audit trail needs t o be investigated and 
responsibility fixed.  
The change of aadhaar number after enrolment of ben eficiary and absence of 
audit trail indicates that validation/verification checks were not applied to 
authenticate beneficiaries with aadhaar at the time  of enrolment. Thus, due to 
lack of verification checks, application is vulnerable to amendments to data that 
could lead to erroneous payments, wrong postings of transactions and ultimately 
qualified accounts.  
In the selected districts it was observed during da ta analysis that Aadhaar of 
23,772 beneficiaries were changed. This was cross verified with 499 
15  selected 
cases at the six selected offices of DSWOs. The DSW Os stated that action in 
these cases would be taken after verification.  
                                                           
15  Ambala-83, Kaithal-100, Karnal-100, Kurukshetra-100 , Panchkula-16 and 
               Yamunanagar-100  

Chapter 2 Re-engineering Process for implementation of Direct Benefit Transfer 
25 
Audit revealed that the provision for the change of  Aadhaar has also been 
provided at the social justice portal. The departme nt should ensure where due 
to circumstances the Aadhaar number is required to be changed, it should be 
supported by stringent process and an audit trail. 
2.9 Pension disbursed to multiple beneficiaries on same Aadhaar 
Number 
As per Haryana Government Notifications No.203-SW(4)-2011 dated 19 April 
2011 and 878-SW(4)-201 dated 5 September 2017, a pe rson can avail the 
benefit of at most one pension/allowance, even if e ligible under more than one 
social security schemes listed below: 
(i) Old Age Samman Allowance Scheme. 
(ii) The Haryana Pension to Widows and Destitute Wo men 
 Scheme. 
(iii) The Haryana Divyang Pension Scheme. 
(iv) Dwarf Allowance Scheme. 
(v) Eunuch Allowance Scheme. 
(vi) Financial Assistance to Kashmiri Migrant Famil ies. 
Further, as per Haryana Government Notification No.  459-SW (4)-2011 dated 
10 June 2011, if a person is detected to have more than one bank account under 
the Electronic Benefits Transfer (EBT) Scheme, all his bank accounts would be 
terminated. He would become ineligible to receive b enefits under any Social 
Security Scheme of the State in future. Any benefits received under the Scheme 
by suppressing true information or making wrong claim would be recovered as 
arrears of land revenue with 12 per cent interest per annum. 
Audit noticed that pension of 
₹ 16.17 crore was transferred to 25,134 
beneficiaries’ with 12,314 Aadhaar IDs between April and October 2017 under 
Old Age Samman Allowance, Haryana Pension to Widows  and Destitute 
Women and Haryana Divyang Pension schemes. In this regard, Audit observed 
that Pension of ₹ 9.32 16  crore was disbursed to 14,641 beneficiaries (out o f 
25,134) though the status being updated as non-exis ting, cancelled, died, 
duplicate, untraceable, ineligible, etc. between the period from April to October 
2017 and subsequently stopped after October 2017. T he following significant 
issues were observed in the disbursement of ` 9.32 crore made: 
                                                           
16   It includes 274 beneficiaries to whom unauthorised pension of ` 0.17 crore was 
 transferred as pointed out in Para 2.10, 2.11, 2.1 3 and 2.14 . 

Performance Audit on Direct Benefit Transfer 
26 
(A) Pension was disbursed to two or more beneficiar ies under same or 
different schemes with same Aadhaar ID and different beneficiary 
pension IDs  (Annexure-IV).  
(B) Department disbursed pension to 56 beneficiarie s under above 
mentioned three schemes without 17  any Aadhaar.    
(C) 6,593 beneficiary pension IDs were generated us ing 3,265 Aadhaar IDs 
(out of 12,314 Aadhaar IDs) and amount of ₹ 3.94 crore transferred to 
these beneficiaries.  Out of these 6,593 beneficiar y pension IDs, status 
of 3,328 pension IDs were updated as dead and remai ning 3,265 
beneficiary pension IDs were still getting pension.  This resulted into 
disbursement of unauthorised pension of ₹ 1.96 crore to 3,328 
beneficiaries whose status was declared as dead in database.   
(D) Pension amounting to ₹ 1.98 crore (during April to October 2017) was 
transferred to 3,052 beneficiaries pension IDs whic h were generated 
using 1,524 Aadhaar IDs. In these cases, beneficiar y name and father’s 
name were same for two or more beneficiaries with same Aadhaar. The 
risk of single beneficiary getting multiple benefits could not be ruled out 
in Audit. 
(E) Pension of ₹ 4.51 lakh was transferred to 68 beneficiaries pens ion IDs 
(pension IDs were generated using 34 Aadhaar IDs) where Aadhaar and 
bank account number were same for two different ben eficiary pension 
IDs. 
Department may consider having a Business Intellige nce report highlighting 
such discrepancies and also develop IT controls to rule out these 
inconsistencies. 
After October 2017, one or more accounts having same Aadhaar ID was closed 
by stating status as dead and status of other account as normal i.e. pension being 
disbursed till date. This implies that Aadhaar has not been used for uniqueness 
of beneficiary identity, controls do not exist to i nhibit duplicity in IDs and 
verification process was compromised. 
It was observed during data analysis, that there were 6,501 cases (beneficiaries) 
in six selected districts in which pension was disbursed to multiple beneficiaries 
with same Aadhaar. This was cross checked with 330 
18  cases at the six selected 
offices of DSWOs. All DSWOs stated that action in these cases would be taken 
after verification . 
                                                           
17  The Aadhaar number mentioned against each was 9999-9999-9999  
18  Ambala-29, Kaithal-80, Karnal-83, Kurukshetra-65, P anchkula-4 and 
Yamunanagar-69  

Chapter 2 Re-engineering Process for implementation of Direct Benefit Transfer 
27 
In view of the observations above, it could be seen that the input controls were 
weak resulting in incomplete, unauthorized/irrelevant and duplicate data entries 
in the pension database. Further, due to lack of do cumentation, the systemic 
controls envisaged by department were not available . Besides, 
deficiencies/discrepancies noted during audit showe d that systematic controls 
were mostly absent. 
Reply from Social Justice and Empowerment Departmen t was awaited 
(December 2021). 
2.10 Undue benefit by providing benefits simultaneo usly under two 
schemes 
As per Haryana Government notification No.878-SW(4) -201dated 
05 September 2017 (in reference to Notification No. 203-SW(4)-2011 dated 19 
April 2011), the beneficiaries of OId Age Samman Al lowance Scheme cannot 
avail the benefit of Ladli Social Security Allowance Scheme simultaneously, as 
the benefit of Ladli Social Security Allowance Sche me is applicable up to the 
age of 60 years and that of OId Age Samman Allowance Scheme after 60 years. 
Analysis of data of beneficiaries revealed that pen sion of ₹ 42.81 lakh was 
transferred to 298 beneficiaries’ under Old Age Sam man Allowance and Ladli 
Social Security Allowance schemes simultaneously. This resulted in unjustified 
payment of ₹ 21.41 19  lakh to 298 beneficiaries.  
Audit also observed that for this purpose, new bene ficiary IDs were assigned 
for other scheme by modifying beneficiary’s account number, name or father’s 
name but the Aadhaar number remained same. 
In the selected districts, data analysis revealed t hat pension was transferred 
simultaneously under two schemes to 179 beneficiaries. This was cross-verified 
in nine 
20 test checked cases at the six selected offices of D SWOs. The 
verification confirmed the results of data analysis. In one case in Kaithal district 
an amount of ₹ 0.52 lakh has been recovered. In the remaining 8 cases, DSWOs 
Ambala, Karnal, Kurukshetra and Yamunanagar intimated that recovery notices 
have been issued.  
Reply from Social Justice and Empowerment Departmen t was awaited 
(December 2021).  
 
                                                           
19   It includes 2 beneficiaries to whom unauthorised pe nsion of ` 0.16 lakh was 
 transferred as pointed out in Para 2.11 and 2.14.  
20  Ambala-2, Kaithal-1, Karnal-1, Kurukshetra-2, Panchkula-0 and Yamunanagar-3 

Performance Audit on Direct Benefit Transfer 
28 
2.11 Transfer of beneficiaries Pension to other per sons’ bank accounts 
under social security schemes  
Rule 87 of the General Financial Rules, 2017 stipulates that transfer of benefits 
should be done directly to beneficiaries under various Government Schemes and 
Programmes using ICT. Necessary process re-engineer ing to minimise 
intermediary levels and to reduce delay in payments  to intended beneficiaries 
with the objective of minimising pilferage and dupl ication should be done for 
all Government Schemes and Programmes. 
Analysis of beneficiary data revealed that pension of 
₹ 54.54 21  crore for 9,305 
beneficiaries (during April 2017 to July 2020) was transferred to bank account 
with different names in Old Age Samman Allowance and Widow and Destitute 
Pension as detailed below: 
Table 2.5: Details of pension transferred to other persons’ bank accounts 
Pension  No. of Beneficiaries Amount transferred during  
April 2017 to July 2020 (in ₹) 
Old Age Samman Allowance 6,317 37,00,10,000 
Widow and Destitute pension 2,988 17,53,81,400 
Total  9,305 54,53,91,400 
It is pertinent to mention that mobile number, bank  account number and 
Aadhaar number have also not been linked to the correct beneficiaries.  
This involves risk of embezzlement, and Department should investigate such 
cases and fix responsibility of the concerned officials.  
2.12 Payment to ineligible beneficiaries  
As per notification No. 458A-SW(4)-2011 dated 10 Ju ne 2011, a person is 
eligible for the grant of Old Age Samman Allowance, if,(i) the person is of age 
60 years or more; and(ii) the person is domiciled and resident of Haryana State. 
Also as per Haryana Government , Social Justice and Empowerment Department 
notification No. 459-SW(4)-2011 dated 10 June 2011,  any benefits received 
under the Scheme by suppressing true information or  making wrong claim 
would be recovered as arrears of land revenue with 12 per cent  interest per 
annum. 
Analysis of data revealed that 1,860 beneficiaries were enrolled under Old Age 
Samman Allowance scheme before attaining the eligibility age of 60 years and 
total pension amounting to 
₹ 94.25 22  lakh was transferred to these beneficiaries.  
                                                           
21   It includes 37 beneficiaries to whom unauthorised p ension of ` 0.06 crore was 
 transferred as pointed out in Para 2.12 to 2.14.  
22   It includes 2 beneficiaries to whom unauthorised pe nsion of ` 0.05 lakh was 
 transferred as pointed out in Para 2.14.  

Chapter 2 Re-engineering Process for implementation of Direct Benefit Transfer 
29 
This shows that desirable input controls at the time of enrolment i.e. validation 
and verification of the beneficiaries was inadequate and ineligible beneficiaries 
were getting enrolled. 
Validation of 500 
23  cases at the six selected district offices of DSWOs was done. 
The validation confirmed the results of data analys is. In respect to 58 cases of 
Karnal district, recovery process was initiated and  ₹ 1.51 lakh in 22 cases 
recovered. In the remaining 442 cases, DSWOs Ambala, Kurukshetra, Kaithal, 
Panchkula and Yamunanagar stated that action would be taken after 
verification. 
Reply from Social Justice and Empowerment Departmen t was awaited 
(December 2021).  
2.13 Disbursement of social security pension to ret ired Government 
employees and family pensioner 
As per notification No. 458A-SW(4)-2011 dated 10 Ju ne 2011 and No. 308-
SW(4)-2012 dated 22 March 2012, a person is not eli gible for the grant of Old 
Age Samman Allowance, in case, the person is receiv ing pension from any 
Government or Local/Statutory Body or any organization substantially financed 
by any Government or Local/Statutory Body. 
Also, a woman otherwise eligible for Haryana pension to widows and Destitute 
Women Scheme is ineligible in case she is employed by any Government or by 
any Local/Statutory Body or any organization substa ntially financed by any 
Government or Local/Statutory Body or who is drawin g pensioner family 
pension therefrom as per notification No. 458B-SW(4 )-2011 dated 
10 June 2011. 
It is pertinent to mention here that in the case of  Haryana Divyang Pension 
Scheme, the eligibility criteria was for income to be less than minimum wages 
of unskilled labour. 
Analysis of data of beneficiaries and data of pensioners (up to December 2018) 
from e-pension module of Integrated Financial Manag ement System (IFMS) 
gathered from Office of the Director General, Treas uries and Accounts, 
Haryana and Centralized Pension Processing Cell (CPCC) SBI, Panchkula for 
the period April 2017 to July 2020 revealed that 1, 475 beneficiaries enrolled 
under these three selected schemes viz. Old Age Sam man Allowance scheme, 
Haryana Pension to Widows and Destitute Women Schem e and Haryana 
Divyang Pension scheme were retired employees of Government of Haryana or 
were family pensioners. Disbursement of social secu rity pensions to these 
beneficiaries was violation of above-mentioned gove rnment instructions. 
                                                           
23  Ambala-100, Kaithal-73, Karnal-100, Kurukshetra-100 , Panchkula-29 and 
               Yamunanagar-98  

Performance Audit on Direct Benefit Transfer 
30 
Further, it was observed that ₹ 8.60 24  crore was disbursed to these unauthorised 
persons, which was recoverable with interest. 
Audit is of the opinion that if similar type of dat a from other agencies and 
department i.e. Central Government, Government Comp any, Boards, 
autonomous bodies, etc. were to be subjected to Bus iness Intelligence, the 
numbers are likely to be higher. 
Data analysis revealed that there were 485 cases in six selected districts in which 
pension was transferred to retired government employees and family pensioners 
This was validated in 26 
25 selected cases at the six selected offices of DSWOs . 
The validation confirmed the results of data analys is. In five cases of Kaithal 
district an amount of ₹ 6.11 lakh had been recovered (One case from select ed 
sample and four in other cases). In the remaining 2 5 cases, DSWOs Ambala, 
Kurukshetra, Karnal, Kaithal, Panchkula and Yamunanagar intimated that after 
verification, pension has been stopped and recovery notices have been issued. 
Reply from Social Justice and Empowerment Departmen t was awaited 
(December 2021).  
During exit conference, the department accepted the  issue and stated that 
recovery would be made as well as demonstrative act ion would be  
considered. 
2.14 Disbursement of social security pension to unt raceable beneficiaries 
As per Government notification No. 459-SW(4)-2011 d ated 10 June 2011, in 
case there is no withdrawal from the bank account for a continuous period of 60 
days, such bank account will be rendered “inoperati ve” for the purpose of this 
Scheme by the Bank with no further credit of benefi ts under this Scheme into 
it. Such “inoperative” bank accounts will be report ed by the Bank to the 
Department. In case the beneficiary applies for re-operationalization of the bank 
account within the next 90 days with justifiable re ason, the bank account may 
be re-operationalized with the permission of the Di rector. If not, the bank 
account will be rendered “dead” for the purpose of this Scheme and the benefits 
credited into the bank account after the last withdrawal would be remitted back 
to the Department with accrued interest by the Bank.  
It was seen that pension amounting to ₹ 64.13 crore was transferred to 38,060 
beneficiaries under three schemes viz. Old Age Samman Allowance, Pension to 
Widow, Destitute Women and Haryana Divyang Person P ension though the 
status was updated to ‘untraceable’ by the banks and these beneficiaries had not 
withdrawn the pension amount from their bank accoun ts even after continuous 
                                                           
24   It includes 36 beneficiaries to whom unauthorised p ension of ` 0.07 crore was 
 transferred as pointed out in Para 2.14.  
25  Ambala-5, Kaithal-5, Karnal-6, Kurukshetra-4, Panchkula-1 and Yamunanagar-5 

Chapter 2 Re-engineering Process for implementation of Direct Benefit Transfer 
31 
90 days of the payment. Further, this amount pertai ns to only 18 pension 
disbursing banks/post offices (out of 63 pension disbursing banks/post offices). 
Audit noticed that remaining 45 pension disbursing banks/post offices did not 
carry out any activity related to identification an d declaring any beneficiary as 
‘untraceable’. Further, the activity relating to de claring any beneficiary as 
‘untraceable’ by pension disbursing banks/post offices was also not being done 
regularly.  
In 18 pension disbursing banks/post offices, ICICI bank and United Bank of 
India took action only once i.e. in January 2020. T here was also delay in 
declaring an account ‘inoperative’ which ranged from 124 to 7,389 days.  
As per authority letter, details of undisbursed amo unt were to be submitted by 
disbursing banks/post offices every month. However, no such exercise was done 
and Department had also not signed any Memorandum o f Undertaking or 
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with these disbur sing banks/post 
offices to ensure compliance.   
Reply from Social Justice and Empowerment Departmen t was awaited 
(December 2021).  
During exit conference, the department stated that 
₹ 228 crore have been 
recovered from banks. However, the details of benef iciaries from whom the 
amount has been recovered was not mentioned.  
2.15 Porting of incomplete legacy data 
A legacy database is an old record that is inherited from the legacy records and 
also form a base for departmental decisions. The work of digitisation of legacy 
records was an important aspect to embed control over duplicate records and it 
should be ensured that the complete and correct information was captured in the 
system as the same would be used over a long period  of time for disbursement 
of benefits to the intended beneficiaries.  
In the absence of assurance about correct porting of legacy data audit could not 
ensure total recovery of old record. However, audit  observed the following 
discrepancies: 
2.15.1 Non porting of enrolment date in legacy data  
Analysis of data of beneficiaries revealed that dat a of 21,99,374 beneficiaries 
ported was incomplete. The important mandatory field i.e. ‘Enrolment date’ was 
shown as ‘Null’ in the database for the legacy data  that was digitized from the 
old legacy records. The entry/enrolment date is an important parameter to know 
when the beneficiary got enrolled for availing the benefit.  
 

Performance Audit on Direct Benefit Transfer 
32 
2.15.2 Incorrect age in legacy data 
The selected three schemes are Centrally Sponsored Schemes and the 
expenditure incurred on these schemes by the State is reimbursed from the 
Central Government. The Central Government reimburs es this expenditure in 
biannual instalments (twice an year). The eligibili ty criteria and the scale of 
assistance under the sub-schemes of NSAP are as follows:- 
• Indira Gandhi National Old Age Pension Scheme (IGNO APS): The 
eligible age for IGNOAPS is 60 years. The pension i s 
` 200 p.m. for 
persons between 60 years and 79 years. For persons who are 80 years 
and above the pension is ` 500 per month. 
• Indira Gandhi National Widow Pension Scheme (IGNWPS ): The 
eligible age is 40 years and the pension is ` 300 per month. After 
attaining the age of 80 years, the beneficiary would get ` 500 per month. 
• Indira Gandhi National Disability Pension Scheme (I GNDPS): The 
eligible age for the pensioner is 18 years and abov e and the disability 
level has to be 80 per cent . The amount is ` 300 per month and after 
attaining the age of 80 years, the beneficiary will  get ` 500 per month. 
Dwarfs would also be an eligible category for this pension. 
In addition to the Central Government share, the St ate Government deliver the 
benefit to the beneficiary by providing its share. As the State Government is not 
aware about the age of its beneficiary, then the de mand for reimbursement of 
the amount from Centre Government would also be def ective which is loss to 
the State Government.  
A person is eligible for the grant of Old Age Samma n Allowance if the person 
is of age 60 years or more. Similarly, a person or women in the age group of 18 
years and above shall be eligible for grant of Divyang pension and Widows and 
Destitute Women Pension Scheme. 
Scrutiny of data for the selected schemes showed that the important mandatory 
fields like Date of Birth and Age was ‘Null’ or inc orrectly entered (like 0 or 
more than 120 years up-to 2,068 years) in 15,646 ca ses. Out of 15,646 
beneficiaries, 3145 beneficiaries were related to o ld age pension enrolment 
wherein data in age field were entered incorrectly (less than 60 years or more 
than 120 years) and age field of balance 12,501 ben eficiaries in respect of 
Divyang pension and Widows and Destitute Women Pens ion Scheme were 
updated as ‘Null’ in database.  
If age captured was as less than 60 years then the person was not eligible for 
enrolment in the Old Age Samman Allowance and if it  was captured as more 
than 120 years then the same is subject of investig ation, but no 
correction/checking in these cases have been made by the department even after 

Chapter 2 Re-engineering Process for implementation of Direct Benefit Transfer 
33 
lapse of 39 months of complete digitization. The incorrect entry in the Age field 
would continuously lead to the incorrect reimbursem ent from the Central 
Government in respect of NSAP scheme. 
2.15.3 Missing records of beneficiaries from master  database 
It was revealed in analysis of beneficiary data that audit trail for 327 beneficiary 
IDs were present in data dump but no records relate d to these IDs existed in 
master data table (Beneficiary table). Hence, infor mation about these 
beneficiaries such as name, father's name, DOB, address, bank account number, 
etc. as well as payment made to them, if any, could  not be ascertained as 
depicted below: 
Table 2.6: Details of missing records of beneficiaries 
No. of 
beneficiary 
IDs 
Details in audit trails Remarks 
186 Two entries against each ID in audit 
trails, one for insertion and other for 
deletion 
No records of beneficiaries found 
in master database for these IDs. 
16 Only one entry against each ID in audit 
trails i.e. for deletion of record 
No records of beneficiaries found 
in master database for these IDs. 
125 One entry against each ID in audit trails, 
entry is for insertion of record 
No records of beneficiaries found 
in master database for these IDs. 
Information of beneficiary and 
payment made to them could not be 
ascertained. 
327 Total Beneficiary IDs 
In the absence of audit trails, unauthorised changes in the database could not be 
ruled out. This could lead to erroneous payments.  
2.15.4 Gaps in beneficiary ID sequence in master da tabase 
Gaps were observed in sequence of allotted beneficiary IDs e.g. beneficiary IDs 
from 3,871 to 3,934; 8,472 to 9,990; 4,38,109 to 4,39,430 did not exist in master 
database, however, beneficiary IDs before and after these gaps were allotted to 
other beneficiaries.  In multiple cases, gap of 1 o r 2 IDs was also found in the 
beneficiary IDs. 
Further, significant gaps were also detected in ben eficiary IDs. Absence in 
sequence from beneficiary ID 35,48,907 to 50,00,000  (absence of 14,51,094 
IDs), 25,83,454 to 26,55,133 (absence of 71,680 IDs ) and 33,50,818 to 
33,77,769 (absence of 26,952 IDs) was observed.   
In the absence of information and system documentation, audit could not derive 
the requisite assurance that this gap arose in the normal course of porting of 
legacy data. 
 

Performance Audit on Direct Benefit Transfer 
34 
2.16 Absence of IT Security Policy 
Any good IT system should have specifically laid do wn IT security policy 
indicating minimum standards and compliance require ments for specific areas 
like assets classification, data security, personal  security, physical, logical and 
environmental security, communications security, le gal, regulatory and 
contractual requirements, business continuity planning, security awareness and 
training, security breach detection and reporting r equirements, violation of 
enforcement provisions, etc. 
As per the Best practices and Guidelines to States on Data security, Privacy, 
Confidentiality and Protection issued by Ministry o f Electronics and 
Information Technology, State is required to conduc t security posture 
assessment to determine appropriate risk levels and  maintenance requirements 
of its assets and frame State’s security policy accordingly. 
Audit observed that Department did not have any doc umented IT security 
policy. Documents of review policy, periodic reviews’ minutes of meeting, etc., 
was not found on records. 
2.17 Lack of training to users/staff 
Staff training and development are closely linked to staff resource planning. 
Audit observed that no training was provided to staff at the time of roll out and 
no periodical trainings were conducted.  
2.18 No business continuity planning and disaster r ecovery planning 
The objective of having a Business Continuity and Disaster Recovery Plan and 
associated controls is to ensure that in the event of an interruption or disaster 
leading to temporary or permanent loss of computer facilities, the organisation 
can still accomplish its mission and it would not l ose the capability to process, 
retrieve and protect information maintained. 
Continuity and disaster recovery plans should be do cumented, periodically 
tested and updated as necessary. Back-up should be cycled through a number of 
generations by, for example, using daily, weekly, m onthly and quarterly tapes. 
Backup should be stored, together with a copy of the disaster recovery plan and 
system documentation, in a fire-safe off-site. 
No record showing compliance to the above requireme nt was furnished by the 
Social justice and Empowerment Department.  
2.19 Weak access control 
Guidelines for Assessment of Effectiveness of Security Controls (January 2010) 
published by GoI emphasizes use of quality authentication secret word or phrase 
(password). The guidelines for assessment of effect iveness in the security 
controls defined in the guideline are recommended f or use in information 
systems for e-Governance. As per these guidelines the minimum and maximum 
password age should be one day and 30 days (typical ly) respectively. These 

Chapter 2 Re-engineering Process for implementation of Direct Benefit Transfer 
35 
guidelines recommend imposing password complexities , password change on 
first use and after specific periods, restrictions on re-use of passwords, etc.  
It was observed that no password policy, as per gui delines was formulated by 
the department.  
Reply from Social Justice and Empowerment Departmen t was awaited 
(December 2021). However, DSWOs Karnal, Kaithal, and Yamunanagar stated 
that the observation was noted for future compliance. 
2.20 Missing audit trails in IT system 
Audit trail is a series of records either in hard c opy or in electronic format that 
provide a chronological record of user activity and other events. It demonstrates 
how a specific transaction was initiated, processed  and summarised and is 
necessary to track the history of transactions, sys tem shortcomings, erroneous 
transactions, changes/ modifications in data, etc. The system should be capable 
of recording logs of different events with date and time of each event occurring 
during the business process. 
Analysis of data of beneficiaries revealed that aud it trails related to 5,55,807 
(out of 40,07,597 beneficiaries IDs)beneficiary IDs  was not present in data 
provided. In the absence of audit trail it could no t be ascertained when or by 
which user of department and from which IP address these beneficiaries were 
enrolled.  
Further, 1,183 gaps (in beneficiary ID sequence) were detected in audit trails in 
which 38,033 items/entries/transactions were missin g. Due to inadequate 
controls, application is vulnerable to unauthorised  amendments to 
programs/data. Also it could lead to erroneous paym ents, misleading reports, 
wrong postings of transactions and ultimately qualified accounts.  
During exit conference, the matter was discussed and it was opined that it needs 
to be examined by the Department. 
2.21 Approval of beneficiaries in bulk in a single day 
As per the system prescribed on the e-disha portal,  applicants collect the 
application form SARAL portal/department website, e tc. and the filled forms 
are signed/verified by the Sarpanch/Municipal Counc illor/Gazetted Officer 
along with required supporting documents. Thereafte r, applicants’ details and 
scanned copy of application form are to be uploaded  on SARAL portal by 
Antyodaya/Common Service Center operators (CSC)/onl ine mode by 
applicants itself and after receiving the applicati on in ‘view mode’ by DSWO 
office, the application is marked for verification.  Applicant has to visit block 
level office (DSWO) for physical verification with application form and 
supporting documents. After verification, DSWO approves the application and 

Performance Audit on Direct Benefit Transfer 
36 
assigns pension ID to applicants. Data of approved beneficiaries is recorded in 
pension portal through Web enabled API (Application programming Interface). 
Pension disbursement is initiated with next upcoming regular pension.  
Analysis of data of beneficiaries revealed that in Faridabad district, 3,135 
beneficiaries were approved by the DSWO in a single day (11 February 2020). 
Similarly 1,206, 1,035, 1,297, 1,147 beneficiary ca ses were approved by the 
respective DSWOs Palwal, Sirsa, Sonepat and Jind districts in a single day. The 
above approvals are assessed as area of concern. 
During exit conference, the Department was of the o pinion that reasons for 
approval in bulk in a single day may be enquired from concerned DSWOs. 
2.22 Irregular payment of commission to banks and p ost office 
As per office Memorandum F. No. 32 (07) / PF-II 201 1 (Vol. II) Ministry of 
Finance Department of Expenditure (PF-II Division) dated 26 February 2016, 
all DBT transactions should be routed through the N ational Payment 
Corporation of India (NPCI). A transaction cost of ₹ 0.50 would be payable for 
each transaction to be shared between the sponsor b anks, destination entities 
and NPCI in accordance with the extant NPCI Circula r. Further, vide office 
Memorandum No. F. No. 32 (07) / PF-II 2011 Vol. II dated 01 June 2016 it was 
clarified that with regard to the charges for trans actions pertaining to the State 
DBT Schemes, transaction charges as per the extant NPCI circular will be 
applicable, for which the NPCI may approach the respective State Governments 
for settlement of its claims for all DBT transactio ns for 2015-16, which were 
not routed through NPCI, transaction charges shall be payable at the extent 
NPCI rate only to claimant sponsor banks. After 31 March 2016, DBT/DBTL 
transactions not routed through NPCI will not be en titled to either transaction 
charges or cash out incentives. 
Audit noticed that Department transferred benefits under various pension 
schemes under DBT through Banks and Post Office. As per instructions issued 
by GoI, Ministry of Finance Department of Expenditu re all the payment under 
DBT should be routed through NPCI and for this ` 0.50 was payable for each 
transaction, which was to be shared between the spo nsor bank destination 
entities and NPCI. Further, it was also instructed that DBT transactions which 
were not routed through NPCI after 31March 2016 wou ld not be entitled for 
either transaction charges or cash out incentives.  
The department paid ₹ 38.05 crore during the period between April 2016 a nd 
July 2020 to the Banks and Post Offices as commissi on transferred under the 
schemes, which was in violation of GoI instructions  as all the respective DBT 
payments were made without involving NPCI and thus was irregular. Further, 
no MoU signed between banks/Post Offices and Depart ment was found on 
records. 

Chapter 2 Re-engineering Process for implementation of Direct Benefit Transfer 
37 
2.23 Non-updation of Savings data on State DBT Port al  
As per Guidelines/Methodology “for assessing benefi ts due to Aadhaar based 
DBT” issued by the DBT Mission, GoI which envisages  that ‘Data on saving 
should be reported on monthly basis to DBT Mission/ State DBT Cell. If any, 
Ministry/Department proposes to deviate from the periodicity, they should refer 
the matter to the DBT Mission/State DBT Cell. 
Audit noticed that Social Justice and Empowerment D epartment assessed 
saving amounting to 
`201.33 crore during the year 2015-16. While scrutinizing 
the record of DBT Cell, it was noticed that data of  saving in respect of DBT 
schemes for the years 2016-17to 2020-21 was not upl oaded on the State DBT 
cell. This was in violation of above said guidelines.   
2.24 Non-conducting of Social Audit of Schemes unde r NSAP 
NSAP guidelines stipulate that social audit of all the schemes should be 
conducted at least once in every six months by Gram  Sabha/Ward Committee 
and that for each social audit, the Gram Sabha/Ward  Committee has to elect a 
Social Audit Committee comprising at least two beneficiaries from each of the 
schemes under NSAP, of which one shall be a woman. It should be ensured that 
beneficiaries from SCs, STs and Minorities also are  represented in the Social 
Audit Committee. 
Scrutiny of records of the department revealed that no such audit was conducted.  
2.25 Conclusion 
 
Audit observed deficiencies like enrolment and paym ent to ineligible 
beneficiaries (deceased, underage or enrolled in ot her schemes), multiple 
beneficiaries enrolled under same Aadhaar id or without Aadhaar id, transfer of 
benefit to account other than beneficiaries account . This indicated not only 
inadequate controls but lack of effective verificat ion and monitoring by the 
concerned authorities.   
There were instances of missing audit trails, beneficiary data and pension being 
disbursed to untraceable beneficiaries questioning the integrity of the data in the 
application.  
Planning and implementation of the IT system was deficient and assurance that 
the system met its objectives could not be derived in audit due to absence of 
complete documentation. Analysis of data showed non -compliance to various 
rules and procedures as detailed in the findings, i ndicating the system is not 
adequate to meet its objectives in its present form  and is unable to mitigate the 
risk of duplication and erroneous payments. 

Performance Audit on Direct Benefit Transfer 
38 
2.26 Recommendations 
• To ensure transfer of payment to correct beneficiar ies’ accounts, the 
Government may evolve proper systems for authentica tion of Aadhaar 
numbers of legacy beneficiaries with Aadhaar portal.  
• The Government/Department may carry out a comprehensive review of 
the beneficiaries’ data including legacy data to ensure its completeness, 
authenticity and correctness. 
• The Government/Department may put in place a robust  system for 
scrutiny of applications, validation and verificati on process of 
beneficiaries and transfer of benefit in correct ac count. Access to state 
pensioner database should be obtained and before en rolment of 
beneficiaries cross verification should be carried out. 
• Distribution of pension to deceased persons should be avoided by 
linking the software with various agencies and not only from data of 
Registrar General of India. System of disseminating  information like 
payment of financial assistance to the beneficiaries through SMS should 
be considered. 
• The Government may consider evolving real time moni toring 
mechanism for effective decision making and supervi sion. This would 
assist in assessing the undisbursed amount of pensi on in respect of  
untraceable beneficiaries and discontinuance of pension of unauthorized 
beneficiaries. and to revert back the amount in the se cases in the 
Department’s account and evolve Information System for regular SMS 
notifications to the beneficiaries. 
• The State Government may evolve proper systems for identification and 
on boarding of all DBT applicable schemes, benefici aries and saving 
earned after implementation of DBT. 
• The State Government may devise mechanism to enable  enrolment of 
eligible beneficiaries immediately after attaining the age i.e. 60 years 
and suitable business re-engineering process should be put in place.  
• The State Government may take strenuous efforts for effecting recovery 
of inadmissible payment of assistance besides fixin g responsibility for 
inaction by the authorities concerned. 
• The Department may put in place a mechanism to ensure preparation of 
required documents (User Requirement Specifications , System 
Requirement Specifications, etc.) whenever development or updation of 
any IT system is taken up. Audit of functional requirement of IT system 
may also be done periodically. 

Chapter 3  
Infrastructure, organisation and  
management of Direct Benefit Transfer  

39 
Chapter 3 
Infrastructure, organisation and management of Direct Benefit Transfer 
3.1 Non-implementation of DBT on all schemes of all  departments 
The State DBT cell shall primarily work towards coo rdinating the 
implementation of DBT in various schemes. The Cell shall act as a nodal point 
for all the activities and matters related to DBT operations in the State. As DBT 
operates in an environment that involves multiple s takeholders, the Cell shall 
be responsible for liaisoning with all such stakeho lders for the seamless 
transitioning of schemes to DBT. The State Level Ce ll, as a part of the 
decentralized DBT architecture, will contribute tow ards achieving effective 
delivery of government benefits in the country by: 
• Coordinating with Centre/Ministries and disseminating the directives to 
the respective departments in States. 
• Developing scheme/department-specific ICT applicati ons to capture 
data pertaining to DBT more effectively. 
• Closely monitoring and evaluating the progress of v arious departments 
on DBT related indicators vis-a-vis expected outcomes. 
• Incorporating best practices and international experiences to enhance the 
effectiveness of benefits delivery. 
• Partnering with multi-lateral agencies and consulting firms to piggyback 
on their technological and industry knowledge. 
Further, GoI issued directions in 2017-18 regarding  identification and on-
boarding of State Sector/UT Schemes on State DBT Po rtal in lines of Central 
Sector (CS)/Centrally Sponsored Schemes (CSS) in a time-bound manner. 
The DBT Cell was constituted on 13 June 2016 in Har yana State and it 
coordinates with DBT implementing departments for t he implementation of 
DBT in various Centrally and State sponsored scheme s. As per process of 
identification of new scheme, the department being implementing agency 
identifies the new DBT scheme which is uploaded by the DBT cell on State 
DBT portal on the request of concerned department.   
During scrutiny of records of DBT cell, audit noticed that the data pertaining to 
25 Departments having 135 schemes were uploaded by the implementing 
departments. However, audit observed that out of 53  departments existing in 
Haryana State, the identification of DBT schemes in remaining departments was 
still pending (July 2021).  

Performance Audit on Direct Benefit Transfer 
40 
During exit conference, DBT Cell stated that that continuous following up with 
the departments is being done for identification of schemes.  
3.2 Non-conducting of quarterly meeting of Advisory  Board  
As per Haryana Government Notification dated 16 Sep tember 2016, for 
ensuring a smooth roll-out of direct cash transfers  in an orderly and timely 
manner an Advisory Board of DBT cell in accordance with the guidelines of 
GoI was constituted. The terms of reference of Board were as under: 
• To hold review meetings on quarterly basis, to ensu re that the timeline 
for transition of all schemes to DBT mode is adhered to; 
• Introduction of novel ideas which can help in deliv ering benefits in a 
more effective way; 
• Review of rate of Aadhaar seeding in Bank accounts in respect of each 
scheme of each Department; 
• Review of digitization of data; 
• Streamlining of data base and ultimately its connec tivity with DBT 
portal; and 
• The receipt of saving accruing on account of DBT in itiative back to 
State. 
A protocol document for State DBT was issued (June 2017) to enable adoption 
and understanding of the DBT process within each De partment so as to ensure 
that DBT framework was adopted in implementation of schemes.   
Audit noticed during scrutiny of record that first meeting of advisory board was 
held on 30 June 2017 and no further meeting was con ducted. The Advisory 
Board had significant role in introducing novel way  of delivering benefits in 
more efficient way, providing long term, wider and strategic inputs to the 
executive body of the DBT Cell. However, only one meeting of the Board was 
conducted since its formation. This indicated that the Board was not functioning 
as envisaged. 
The department replied (July 2021) that due to Covi d Pandemic the meetings 
could not be held in time. The reply of the department is not accepted as Covid 
Pandemic started during March 2020 only but no quar terly meetings were 
conducted since June 2017. 
3.3 Non-sharing of data of DBT schemes at State DBT  Portal  
(A) DBT is a major reform initiative of the GoI to ensu re better and timely 
delivery of benefits from Government to the people.  DBT is a significant 
governance reform to ensure greater transparency an d accountability in public 
service delivery through effective use of technology. 

Chapter 3: Infrastructure, organization and management of Direct Benefit Transfer 
41 
During scrutiny of records of the DBT cell for the period April 2017 to July 
2020, it was claimed that ₹ 1,182.18 crore has been saved in the seven 1 out of 
25 departments by implementing the DBT during the financial year 2014-15 to 
2018-19. However, departments of Higher Education, Technical Education, 
Social Justice & Empowerment and Secondary Educatio n had not worked out 
the savings during the years 2016-17 to 2018-19. Si milarly, savings for the 
period 2015-16 to 2017-18 have not been worked out by Rural Development 
department.  It was also seen that 18 out of 25 departments had not worked out 
the savings data from 2014-15 onwards. Further, scheme wise savings are not 
reflected on the DBT Portal and DBT cell has no met hodology to verify 
authenticity of the savings info rmation uploaded by the respective departments.  
It is pertinent to mention here that department of Agriculture and Farmers 
Welfare distributed/disbursed ₹ 382.78 crore during the years 2017-18 to  
2019-20 in 11 schemes wherein these were on-boarded  on DBT portal. Out of 
₹ 382.78 crore, only ₹ 1.21 crore in one scheme (2019-20) was disbursed 
through DBT. Remaining ₹ 381.57 crore was disbursed under 10 schemes 
during the years 2017-18 to 2019-20 without implementing them as DBT, which 
was in contravention of the above said guidelines issued by the GoI. 
While accepting the audit observations, DBT Cell re plied (July 2021) that for 
calculation and reporting of saving/benefits on monthly basis instructions have 
been issued to the departments. The departments hav e adopted different 
methods for calculating savings. DBT Cell also stat ed that Agriculture 
department uploaded/enrolled eleven schemes on the State DBT portal but did 
not provide any information and also did not upload  the data on the state DBT 
Portal in spite of lot of communication. 
(B) As per Haryana Government notification No. TA-HR (D MC)/2020/1768 
dated 6 February 2020 introduced a new scheme named  “Mukhya Mantri 
Parivar Samridhi Yajna (MMPSY)”. Finance Department , Government of 
Haryana was the Nodal Authority for the implementation of this scheme in the 
State. Audit observed that the scheme in question w as not on boarded till 
January 2021. However, DBT Cell did not pursue the matter with DBT mission, 
GoI for framing of guidelines in this regard. It indicates that a robust framework 
for seeking and on boarding new schemes on DBT Port al was not put in place. 
DBT Cell failed to coordinate with all Departments in compiling a list of 
schemes and programs, including conduct of secondar y research to ensure 
comprehensive listing.   
While accepting the fact DBT cell stated (July 2021 ) that information was 
sought from Department of Economic & Statistical Analysis, Haryana regarding 
                                                           
1 Elementary Education, Secondary Education, Higher Education, Technical Education, 
Social Justice and Empowerment, Food, Civil Supplie s and Consumer Affairs and 
Rural Development. 

Performance Audit on Direct Benefit Transfer 
42 
schemes, at that time, the scheme in question, was not in existence.  Now the 
scheme has been on-boarded on the State DBT portal and the data for Financial 
Year 2020-21 uploaded. 
3.4 Non-incorporating of best practices 
As per objective of State DBT Cell guidelines issued by DBT Mission, Cabinet 
Secretariat, DBT cell will contribute towards achie ving effective delivery of 
Government benefits in the country by: 
• Developing scheme/department–specific ICT applicati ons to capture 
data pertaining to DBT more effectively; 
• Incorporating best practices and international experience to enhance the 
effectiveness of benefits delivery; and 
• Partnering with multi-lateral agencies and consulting firms to piggyback 
on their technological and industry knowledge. 
It was seen in Audit that the officers of DBT cell attended only one workshop 
(March 2017) at the Unique Identification Authority  of India  ( UIDAI) at 
Chandigarh during the period of audit i.e. from 201 7-18 to July 2020. It was 
also noticed that no centralized specific ICT appli cation was adopted by DBT 
cell. The DBT cell failed to coordinate with all Departments in compiling a list 
of all schemes and programs and different departmen ts adopted different 
methods of implementation of DBT to deliver the ben efit to ultimate 
beneficiaries. It was further noticed that no partn ership with multi-lateral 
agencies and consulting firms to make use of their technological and industry 
knowledge have been made by DBT Cell. 
During exit conference, it was stated that Haryana has been ranked first in India 
in implementation of DBT during 2019-20.  
3.5 Non-compliance of the Instruction regarding tra nsfer of funds  
As per the DBT Mission Cabinet Secretariat Guidelin es for State all DBT 
transactions are to be routed through NPCI. While A adhaar linked DBT 
transactions will be routed through Aadhaar Payment  Bridge System (APBS), 
non-Aadhaar transactions will be routed through National Automated Clearing 
House (NACH). NPCI is an umbrella organisation for all retail payments system 
in India. It was set up with the guidance and suppo rt of the Reserve Bank of 
India (RBI) and Indian Banks' Association (IBA). NP CI offers a range of 
services like National Financial Switch (NFS), Aadh aar Payment Bridge 
System (APBS), Cheque Clearing, Immediate Payments Service (IMPS), 
National Automated Clearing House (NACH), Electroni c Benefit Transfer, 
RuPay cards, etc.  

Chapter 3: Infrastructure, organization and management of Direct Benefit Transfer 
43 
During scrutiny of record of DBT Cell, it was noticed that instructions in respect 
of transfer of funds was issued to all the Administ rative Secretaries and 
departments of Government of Haryana mentioning, th e funds to be routed 
through NPCI and in Aadhaar linked bank accounts. If in any case, funds are to 
be transferred through other's account instead of directly to beneficiary (like in 
the case of institutions), the permission for the s ame may be taken by the 
concerned Department from the concerned Ministry/Go I or from the Finance 
Department, Government of Haryana as the case may b e and the same may be 
ensured by the Treasury Officer that necessary perm ission in such cases has 
been obtained by the Departments. Further, if the f unds are not credited to 
beneficiaries after three attempts, then the undisb ursed funds may be 
immediately deposited in the receipt head of concerned Department. To rule out 
the possibility of wrong payment and deviation from  the Aadhaar Act, the 
expenditure under the schemes drawn from the treasu ry and disbursed through 
NPCI must tally and should be reflected on Haryana State DBT portal on 
monthly basis. 
Audit observed that funds were not routed through NPCI and in Aadhaar linked 
bank accounts in all the schemes in Haryana State a nd no monitoring process 
was being adopted by State DBT Cell for authenticat ion of fund flow towards 
the beneficiaries in the respective departments. This was in contravention to the 
above mentioned instructions of the Government. 
During exit conference, it was stated by the DBT Ce ll that the departments 
upload the expenditure on the State DBT portal in the form of Electronic mode 
in a single column which consists of APB, NEFT, RTG S and AEPS. There is 
no provision on the State DBT portal for bifurcatio n of funds transferred 
through NPCI as the formats of the State DBT Portal has been devised by DBT 
Mission, GoI. The officials of State Government sug gested that the Aadhaar 
based payments routed through NPCI can be obtained through Treasury based 
IT applications. 
3.6 Conclusion 
DBT was not implemented across all departments and schemes. After 
establishment of DBT cell only one meeting (on 30 J une 2017) of advisory 
board was held and no further meeting was conducted . DBT Cell failed to 
coordinate with all Departments in compiling a list  of schemes and programs, 
including conduct of secondary research to ensure comprehensive listing. DBT 
cell could not get the holistic picture of saving, in the absence of specific 
guidelines. 
3.7 Recommendations 
• The State Government may evolve proper mechanism, for identification 
and on boarding of all DBT applicable schemes on DBT portal. 

Performance Audit on Direct Benefit Transfer 
44 
• DBT Cell may ensure that meeting of advisory board is conducted 
periodically as envisaged in the guidelines. 
• ICT system should be upgraded and linked with PFMS so that all the 
relevant information can be extracted through this system. At present, 
only a few datasets are available with respect to the legacy data. 

Chapter 4  
Conclusions 
  

45 
Chapter 4 
Conclusions 
(A)  Regarding Social Justice and Empowerment Department , Audit 
observed that neither Department nor NIC prepared o r ensured preparation of 
any System Design Documentation for the application . As a result, there is no 
assurance regarding mapping of business rules corre ctly in the IT system and 
various deficiencies were noticed like Enrolment an d payment of pension to 
dead pensioners, enrolment of persons below 60 year s of age enrolled for Old 
Age Pension Scheme, same person enrolled under mult iple schemes, multiple 
persons enrolled under single Aadhaar ID, transfer of benefit to account of 
person other than the beneficiary .This indicated that not only absence of suitable 
and adequate controls but also lack of proper verif ication and monitoring by the 
concerned authorities.   
The integrity of the data remained doubtful as miss ing of audit trails and 
beneficiaries’ data was observed.  
Due to lack of controls to track the flow of fund, pension amount related to the 
untraceable beneficiaries were not remitted back to department.  
Irregular payments of commission were made to Banks/ Post Offices in lieu of 
DBT disbursement. No Memorandum of Understanding si gned between 
banks/Post Offices and Department formalising the conditions of commission.  
Lack of password policy rendered the system vulnerable to unauthorised access. 
Business continuity plan to take care of IT assets in case of disasters was not 
developed. 
After on-boarding of the system, Business Intelligence has not been used to for 
identification of deviant transactions/ lacunae in the system.  
Audit observed that planning and implementation of the IT system was 
deficient, data analysis showed non-compliance to various rules and procedures 
as detailed in the findings, which leads to the con clusion that the system is not 
adequate to meet its objectives in its present form.  
Audit could not assure itself that the system has a dequate controls to prevent 
unauthorised operation or restrict prohibited transactions. Further, audit analysis 
indicated deficient verification and monitoring. 
(B)  Regarding DBT Cell, audit observed that DBT wa s not implemented 
across all departments and schemes. After establish ment of DBT cell only one 
meeting (on 30 June 2017) of advisory board was hel d and no further meeting 
was conducted.DBT Cell failed to coordinate with all Departments in compiling 
a list of schemes and programs, including conduct o f secondary research to 

Performance Audit on Direct Benefit Transfer 
46 
ensure comprehensive listing. DBT cell could not get the complete picture of 
saving, in the absence of specific guidelines, after implementation of DBT in 
the state.  
The above points have been referred (September 2021) to Principal Secretary to 
Government of Haryana, Social Justice and Empowerment Department and 
Additional Chief Secretary to Government of Haryana, Finance and Planning 
Department for comments and replies. Response from the Government was 
awaited (December 2021). 
 
 
 
Chandigarh 
Dated: 
(VISHAL BANSAL) 
Principal Accountant General (Audit), Haryana 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Countersigned 
 
 
New Delhi 
Dated: 
 
(GIRISH CHANDRA MURMU) 
Comp
troller and Auditor General of India 
 

Appendices 
  

47  
Annexure I 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.2 (A); page 15) 
Payment status fields  
Scheme and Year wise Status of pension amount transferred from March 2017 to July 2020 
Year 
Response 
Type 
Old Age 
Samman 
Allowance 
Widow 
Pension 
Disability 
Pension 
Financial 
Assistance to 
Destitute 
Children 
Financial 
Assistance to 
Kashmiri 
Migrants 
Financial 
Assistance to 
Male and 
Transgender 
Acid Attack 
Victim 
Financial 
Assistance to 
Non School 
Going 
Disabled 
Children 
Allowance 
to Dwarf 
Allowance 
to Eunuch 
Financial 
Assistance to 
Women and 
Girl Acid 
Attack 
Victim 
Ladli Social 
Security 
Allowance 
2017 NULL 3289992600 1496322600 326075400 183611700 6000   11590400 54400 47600   74533200 
A/C Closure 67398400 11941400 3654000 843300     160800       832600 
A/C does 
not exist 3335200 1204800 224800 557800     38400       95600 
A/C 
Dormant 19183400 5766200 1363800 1494500     52000       307400 
A/C Frozen 19589600 3485000 984200 472300     52200       129400 
Other 20459200 8799400 1970000 1195700     66600       603000 
Success 18195141600 7973642200 1825952200 1090350400 85000   62683200 347200 273200   378837000 
2018 NULL 4679968700 2151726100 466318600 325006700 0   19904400 60400 94000   109603200 
A/C Closure 100827800 18818600 5852400 1918400     294600       1250000 
A/C does 
not exist 21767000 6502400 1747600 3106300     216800   7200   552000 
A/C 
Dormant 445400 149400 20800 26800     6000       3600 
A/C Frozen 40559600 7319600 1934000 1386200     117200       317800 
Other 16436400 4900800 1245000 1547700     153600       555600 
Success 28848591000 12723433200 2934486000 2039661000 10900 0   125266200 571200 477200   642224200 
2019 NULL 5957530588 2714721199 596799500 458861700     29780800 76000 106000 130000 150754000 
A/C Closure 104361400 19750000 6150000 2278100     333200       1204000 

 Appendices 
48 
Scheme and Year wise Status of pension amount transferred from March 2017 to July 2020 
Year 
Response 
Type 
Old Age 
Samman 
Allowance 
Widow 
Pension 
Disability 
Pension 
Financial 
Assistance to 
Destitute 
Children 
Financial 
Assistance to 
Kashmiri 
Migrants 
Financial 
Assistance to 
Male and 
Transgender 
Acid Attack 
Victim 
Financial 
Assistance to 
Non School 
Going 
Disabled 
Children 
Allowance 
to Dwarf 
Allowance 
to Eunuch 
Financial 
Assistance to 
Women and 
Girl Acid 
Attack 
Victim 
Ladli Social 
Security 
Allowance 
A/C does 
not exist 19987000 5016000 1430000 2465100     221200       660000 
A/C 
Dormant 614000 96000 36000 48400     18200       4000 
A/C Frozen 33060000 5708000 1344000 965800     47600       338000 
Other 20545000 5282000 1568000 1612600     193200       536000 
Success 32344770874 14195045598 3318629000 2481648400 10800 0 9000 164208800 706000 632000 326000 772876000 
2020 NULL 4322379680 1950171125 430153875 365663700     24839100 85500 67500 144000 118911500 
A/C Closure 74199375 14539500 4545000 2284200     206250       812250 
A/C does 
not exist 10991250 1770750 688500 1408050     44550       238500 
A/C 
Dormant 540000 101250 33750 9450               
A/C Frozen 23203125 6358500 1158750 1495800     42900       265500 
Other 14573375 3523500 873000 1534950     112200       315000 
Success 22426686860 9605746625 2274210625 1848510450 63000 70875 126914700 501750 425250 241875 552622500 
Total 120677138427 52941841747 12209448800 8819965500 371000 79875 567565100 2402450 2129950 841875 2809381850 
Grand Total 198031166574 
 
 
 

Performance Audit on Direct Benefit Transfer  
49 
Annexure II 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.2 (B); page 16) 
Time taken for transactions  
Delay Range Wise Number of Transactions along with Pension Amount  
Year Delay in No. of days Number of Transactions Pension amount 
2017 5-10 90,00,514 14,61,34,60,200 
11-30 18,92,978 3,00,99,83,300 
31-90 12,785 2,02,16,900 
91-365 5,887 92,76,700 
366-500 25 43,000 
2018 5-10 1,14,11,576 20,87,27,84,100 
11-30 31,74,540 5,75,66,54,100 
31-90 24 42,500 
366-500 81,702 14,60,16,000 
2019 5-10 1,04,39,900 20,75,33,00,068 
11-30 19,64,387 3,87,21,76,199 
31-90 3,542 69,68,800 
91-365 1,919 37,03,900 
2020 5-10 37,59,780 8,43,16,77,344 
11-30 4,42,105 99,28,57,074 
31-90 11,560 2,58,49,650 
91-365 3,252 73,07,550 
Grand Total 4,22,06,476 78,52,23,17,385 
 
 

 Appendices 
50 
Annexure III 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.3; page 18) 
Delay in passing intended benefits due to late enrolment of beneficiaries  
Details of range of delay in enrolment of BPL beneficiaries 
  
Delay Range in Years wise number of 
enrolments   
District Name 1-5 6-10 11-20 21-40 Total 
FARIDABAD 4,777 1525 507 34 6,843 
SONIPAT 4,801 1289 242 15 6,347 
KARNAL 3,889 1102 307 25 5,323 
HISAR 4,474 601 155 16 5,246 
PALWAL 3,850 856 204 17 4,927 
YAMUNANAGAR 3,627 824 207 25 4,683 
JIND 3,550 641 187 12 4,390 
KAITHAL 3,138 648 216 23 4,025 
AMBALA 3,058 581 150 19 3,808 
MAHINDERGARH 3,096 494 70 5 3,665 
PANIPAT 2,834 597 164 20 3,615 
KURUKSHETRA 2,881 530 122 11 3,544 
SIRSA 2,919 481 107 13 3,520 
FATEHABAD 2,757 513 141 11 3,422 
REWARI 2,418 326 49 12 2,805 
ROHTAK 2,046 419 90 11 2,566 
BHIWANI 2,055 325 66 9 2,455 
JHAJJAR 1,671 294 64 19 2,048 
GURUGRAM 1,344 352 73 13 1,782 
MEWAT 1,080 296 69 4 1,449 
CHARKHI DADRI 1,070 166 41 4 1,281 
PANCHKULA 652 109 57 5 823 
Grand Total     78,567 
 

Performance Audit on Direct Benefit Transfer  
51 
Annexure IV 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.9; page 26) 
Pension disbursed to multiple beneficiaries on    same Aadhaar Number  
Pension Type Number of Beneficiaries Amount Transferred 
Old Age Samman Allowance 16,917 10,89,93,600 
Widow Pension 6,766 4,32,88,000 
Disability Pension 1,451 94,67,200 
Grand Total 25,134 16,17,48,800 
 
 
 
 
 

Glossary 

Glossary 
53 
Glossary of Abbreviations 
APBS Aadhaar Payment Bridge System 
BDPO  Block Development and Panchayat Officer  
BPL  Below Poverty Line  
CBS  Core Banking Solution  
CIDR  Central Identity Data Repository  
CS  Central Sector Scheme  
CPSMS 
CPCC 
 
Central Plan Scheme Monitoring System 
Centralised Pension Processing Cell 
CSC  Common Service Centre  
CSS  Centrally Sponsored Schemes  
DBT  Direct Benefit Transfer  
DSWO  District Social Welfare Officer  
e- Governance  Electronic Governance  
EBT  Electronic Benefit Transfer  
e-Disha  EPS  Electronic District Haryana   
Electronic Payment Summary 
GoI Government of India 
ICT  Information and Communication Technology  
IDEA Interactive Data Extraction and analysis 
IGNDPS Indira Gandhi National Disability Pension Sc heme 
IGNOAPS Indira Gandhi National Old Age Pension Sche me 
IGNWPS Indira Gandhi National Widow Pension Scheme 
IMPS Immediate Payment Service 
MC Municipal Councillor 
MMPSY Mukhya Mantri Parivar Samridhi Yojna 
MoU Memorandum of Understanding 
NACH National Automated Clearing House 
NIC National Informatics Centre 
NPCI 
NSAP 
National Payments Corporation of India 
National Social Assistance Programme 

Performance Audit on Direct Benefit Transfer 
54 
PFMS Public Financial Management System 
RBI  Reserve Bank of India  
RGI Registrar General of India 
RTS Right to Service 
SARAL 
 
SFTP 
Simple, All Inclusive, Real Time, Action Oriented, Long 
lasting  
Secure File Transfer Protocol 
SJE Social Justice and Empowerment 
SOP Standard Operating Procedure 
SRS System Requirement Specification 
UIDAI 
URS 
WP 
XML 
Unique Identification Authority of India 
User Requirement Specification 
Writ Petition 
Extensible Markup Language 
 