 
 
 
Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
 
 
on 
 
 
 
Wildlife Conservation and Sustainable 
Management of Wildlife Habitats in 
Madhya Pradesh 
for the year ended 31 March 2019 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government of Madhya Pradesh 
Report No. 1 of the year 2022 
(Performance Audit) 

i 
Table of  Contents 
 Page 
Number 
Preface v 
Executive Summary vii 
Chapter 1 
Introduction 
1.1 Introduction 1 
1.2 Organisational set-up 3 
1.3 Financial Arrangements for Wildlife Conservation and Habitat 
Management 
3 
1.4 Audit Objectives 4 
1.5 Scope of Audit and Methodology 4 
1.6 Audit Criteria 6 
1.7 Previous audit 6 
1.8 Acknowledgement 6 
Chapter 2 
Planning for Conservation and Protection of Wildlife  
and Management of Habitats 
2.1 Why are Plans important? 7 
2.2 Availability of Plans 10 
2.2.1 Tiger Conservation Plan 11 
2.2.2 Management Plans 13 
2.2.3 Zonal Master Plans 14 
2.2.4 Elements covered in Plans 17 
2.3 Research 17 
2.4 Funding conservation 20 
2.4.1 Centrally Sponsored Scheme 21 
2.4.2 Annual Plan of Operations 22 
2.4.3 Utilisation of funds for protection of biodiversity and wildlife in 
Protected Areas concerned in cases of land diversion 
22 

Report on Wildlife Conservation and Sustainable Management of Wildlife Habitats in Madhya Pradesh 
 
 
 
ii 
2.5 Recommendations 23 
Chapter 3 
Conservation and Protection of Wildlife 
3.1 Mortality of Wildlife 27 
3.1.1 Incidence   27 
3.2 Investigation and action on wildlife offences 30 
3.2.1 Registration, Investigation and Disposal of Offence Cases 30 
3.2.2 Forensic Investigations 31 
3.3 Mitigating safety measures   32 
3.3.1 Retrofitting measures against linear infrastructure 32 
3.3.1.1 Electrocution 32 
3.3.1.2 Road kills 33 
3.3.1.3 Railway lines 33 
3.4 Administrative measures for tiger conservation 34 
3.4.1 Establishment of Special Tiger Protection Force 34 
3.4.2 State Level Tiger Strike Force 35 
3.5 Resourcing conservation 35 
3.5.1 Equipment 35 
3.5.2 Manpower 36 
3.5.2.1 Availability 36 
3.5.2.2 Training 37 
3.5.3 Patrolling Camps 38 
3.6 Other Issues on Conservation   40 
3.6.1 Human-Wildlife Conflict 40 
3.6.2 Genetic swamping in wild species 41 
3.6.3 Translocation of Wildlife 42 
3.6.4 Ecotourism 44 
3.6.4.1 Regulation of tourist vehicle in Tiger Reserves 44 

Table of Contents 
 
iii 
3.6.5 Disease Control 45 
3.6.5.1 Disease surveillance 46 
3.6.5.2 Action against the threat of Canine Distemper Virus 46 
3.7 Recommendations 47 
Chapter 4 
Management and Consolidation of Wildlife Habitats 
4.1 Augmentation of Protected Areas and Tiger Reserves 50 
4.2 Notification of Critical Wildlife Habitat 51 
4.3 Notification of Protected Areas and re-settlement 51 
4.4 Demarcation of boundaries 52 
4.5 Management of water bodies 52 
4.6 Forest fires 54 
4.7 Meadow Development and Eradication of Invasive Alie n 
Species 
55 
4.8 Anthropogenic activities 56 
4.8.1 Regulation of Commercial activities in and around T iger 
Reserves 
56 
4.8.2 Anthropogenic Activities in Wildlife Habitats 57 
4.8.2.1 Encroachments 57 
4.8.2.2 Illegal mining in Son Gharial Wildlife Sanctuary 58 
4.8.3 Illegal felling and removal of timber and fuel wood from forests 59 
4.9 Impact of major projects on wildlife habitats 61 
4.9.1 Impacts of other major projects on wildlife habitats 63 
4.10 Recommendations 64 
4.11 Conclusion 64 
 Appendices 67 
 

v 
PREFACE 
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India for the year ending 
31st March 2019 has been prepared for submission to the  Governor of Madhya 
Pradesh under Article 151 of the Constitution of In dia, for being laid before the 
Legislature of the State. 
The Report contains significant results of Performa nce Audit of ‘Wildlife 
Conservation and Sustainable Management of Wildlife  Habitats in Madhya 
Pradesh’, covering the period 2014-15 to 2018-19.  
The instances mentioned in this Report are among those which came to notice in the 
course of test audit.   
The audit has been conducted in conformity with the  Auditing Standards 
issued by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
 

Executive Summary 
Home to a phenomenal number of flora and fauna, man y of them endemic and quite a few 
endangered, the forests and wildlife of Madhya Prad esh are treasures of the State. Known for 
its Tigers, the State has the largest 1 number of Tigers; three of the four 2  best managed Tiger 
Reserves in the country also belong to the State. M adhya Pradesh also boasts of the highest 
Leopard numbers in the country.  
For any forest and their resident wildlife to flour ish, the forest management needs to 
concentrate on two essential areas, namely, protection and conservation of wildlife per se and 
maintaining their habitats in a pristine and consol idated form. This Report on the “Wildlife 
Conservation and Sustainable Management of Wildlife Habitats in Madhya Pradesh” seeks to 
draw an assurance that the forests and their wildli fe were being cared for and maintained by 
the Forest Department of the State, which is their custodian.  
First and foremost, the number of Tigers increased over the period 2014-18. However, for the 
state of affairs to continue, foresighted, comprehe nsive and timely planning is of utmost 
importance. Our audit showed that most of the Protected Areas (like Tiger Reserves, National 
Parks and Wildlife Sanctuaries) sampled in audit di d not enjoy the stipulated benefit of long-
term Plans, viz. Management Plans (for National Par ks and Wildlife Sanctuaries) and Tiger 
Conservation Plans (for Tiger Reserves). While the number of Tigers rose in spite of the 
absence of such Plans, issues relating to increasin g density of the Tiger population and 
consequent effects, like territorial fights and dea ths, possible inbreeding, genetic weaknesses 
and diseases, will prove to be more and more diffic ult to handle and control in the absence of 
the Plans. No coherent approach -- State-wide or si te-specific -- was evident towards 
controlling poaching and conserving the habitats, n ot only for the Tigers but for all wild 
animals, big and small.  Even where the hot-spots o f poaching and illegal wildlife trade in 
specific Districts and along the interstate borders  were identified, no coherent Plan was 
developed. 
Zonal Master Plans are required to be prepared afte r the final notification of Eco-Sensitive 
Zones around the Protected Areas. These Master Plan s contain provisions for activities to be 
allowed, regulated and prohibited for the management of the eco-fragile areas identified in the 
notifications. Our audit found that though notifications by the Government of India added 9,437 
square kilometer of Eco-Sensitive Zones around the Protected Areas, the State Government did 
not prepare any Zonal Master Plans to regulate and prohibit activities in these Eco-Sensitive 
Zones. 
In order to feed the Department with suitable and timely inputs in such fast-changing times, it 
is essential to co-opt individual researchers and i nstitutions to provide scientific data that can 
underpin conservation efforts. The Tiger Conservati on Plans and Management Plans identify 
and declare the research topics of interest. However, in the absence of appropriate Plans by the 
Department, such research topics were not identifie d for most of the sites. Even when 
Management Plans were prepared, the identified topics were rarely taken up for research. And 
                                                           
1  Status of Tigers Co-predators and Prey in India ( 2018) by National Tiger Conservation Authority. 
2  4 th cycle of Management Effectiveness Evaluation of Tiger Reserves in 2018 by MoEFCC. 

Report on Wildlife Conservation and Sustainable Management of Wildlife Habitats in Madhya Pradesh 
viii 
even where topics other than identified topics were  allowed to be taken up for research by 
independent researchers, such research reports were  not available with the Department. The 
Department was therefore left with no reliable feedback which could serve as critical inputs for 
their future plans to protect and conserve the forests. 
Moreover, common issues which cause deaths, like el ectrocution, road kills, accidents along 
the railway tracks and snares, though well-known to the Department, were not adequately acted 
upon to minimise the mortality. In the same vein, e specially fragile habitats, like the Son-
Gharial Wildlife Sanctuary, home to the endangered Gharial were not supported by site-
specific action.  
To preserve, protect and consolidate the wildlife habitats, it is essential both to formally notify 
the areas covered under the Protected Areas, as wel l as co-ordinate with the Revenue 
Department, to ensure that the borders are kept inviolate and free from encroachment for which 
it is necessary to relocate the existing villages t herein and their inhabitants to suitable places 
outside, after getting their consent and paying app ropriate compensation. We noticed 
significant deficiencies in this aspect. Moreover, instances of Human-Wildlife Conflicts 
showed an increasing trend (by 73 per cent) over the period of audit. Currently, comprehensive 
efforts to keep the habitats inviolate did not exis t at all the sites and where in place were not 
adequate.   
An important part of habitat management is to preve nt the genetic swamping of wild species 
and maintain the genetic purity of the fauna by allowing dispersal of the young and mixing of 
different sub-sets of wildlife population. This is usually ensured through the building of 
Wildlife Corridors. In a State like Madhya Pradesh where many Protected Areas are contiguous 
with Protected Areas of neighboring States, creatio n and maintenance of such intra and inter-
state Wildlife Corridors need planning, co-ordinati on and concerted efforts. During audit, we 
were not able to draw an assurance that such efforts were made.   
The Special Tiger Protection Force was not formed. We noted that the assessment of 
requirement for equipment like arms, wireless sets,  and metal detectors was inadequate in the 
sampled Divisions.  During joint physical verificat ion of Patrolling Camps along with Forest 
Department officials, we surveyed the infrastructur e, as well as adequacy of welfare of the 
front- line staff stationed in the camps. While the  Camps were generally in good shape, delay 
in receiving salary and ration allowances, lack of elementary but essential items like mosquito 
nets and water bottles, lack of proper toilet facilities, etc. were seen as some of the main issues 
affecting their level of satisfaction.   
Prevention and control of diseases around the Prote cted Areas did not appear to have been 
adequately monitored by the Department, cattle, dogs and cats around the Protected Areas were 
not vaccinated and veterinary support was inadequate in many Protected Areas. 
Prompt action and timely decisions are keys to succ essful completion of any investigation. 
During the period of our audit, we noticed that three-fourth of forest offence cases were either 
compounded or submitted to courts i.e. taken to the ir logical end. Coupled with the fact that 
there was reduction of new cases being registered, the numbers gave an overall impression that 

Executive Summary 
ix 
investigation of forest offence cases in these Protected Areas were largely at satisfactory level. 
However, in about 20 per cent cases, decisions were pending for some time.  
In order to maintain the inviolate nature of Protected Areas, it is imperative that constructions 
do not disturb the habitat particularly in the Core Areas. The Ken-Betwa River Linking Project 
was approved by both the State Board for Wild Life and National Board for Wild Life, even as 
its adverse impact on the Core Area of the Panna Tiger Reserve was acknowledged by PCCF/ 
Wildlife. Other instances of major constructions were also noticed during the audit period, with 
at least three of these affecting the inviolate Core Areas.  
We also noticed the successes of the Department in translocating and rehabilitating wildlife 
within the State. Notable being translocation of Ti gers to Nauradehi Wildlife Sanctuary and 
Sanjay Tiger Reserve and Chital to other Protected Areas. The most significant achievement 
was the rehabilitation of the Tigers in an empty Panna Tiger Reserve in 2009, which boasts of 
25 healthy adults in 2018.  
We concluded that while there is much that is happening in the forests of Madhya Pradesh that 
is good, lack of plans and absence of any research that must feed into such plans, constitute a 
critical lacuna. The risks are currently latent, can impact the sustainability say when the Tiger 
population density goes beyond 10 per 100 square ki lometer, then without good Wildlife 
Corridors connecting the Protected Areas, the increasing number of Tigers can lead to various 
inter-connected and cascading risks such as deaths due to territorial fights, diseases from 
inbreeding. These can raise the risk that the current vibrant population may sicken and plummet 
in the coming few years. It is hoped that necessary  remedial action will be taken by the 
Department in time. Our recommendations are geared to aid the Department to take necessary 
remedial action in time so that flora and fauna of the State continue to flourish. 
Recommendations: 
I. Policies and Planning 
• The Forest Department may support preparation of Ti ger Conservation Plans/ 
Management Plans through dedicated team, and a laid  down process along with 
comprehensive Guidelines for preparation of Managem ent Plans may also be 
prescribed;   
(Recommendation 1) 
• The State Government may ensure preparation and approval of Zonal Master Plans in a 
time-bound manner and ensure monitoring of activiti es included therein in an effective 
manner;  
(Recommendation 2) 
• The Department may establish institutional tie-ups to cause research in areas identified 
in the Tiger Conservation Plans/Management Plans;  
(Recommendation 3) 
 

Report on Wildlife Conservation and Sustainable Management of Wildlife Habitats in Madhya Pradesh 
x 
• The State Government may speed up the process of es tablishment of Special Tiger 
Protection Force; 
(Recommendation 6) 
• The Department may ensure that a site specific Human-Wildlife Conflict Mitigation Plan 
is prepared and implemented for each Tiger Reserve/ National Park/ Wildlife Sanctuary;  
(Recommendation 8) 
II. Financial Management 
• The Department may put in place a monitoring tool that tracks allocation and utilisation 
of funds on each activity identified in the Tiger Conservation Plans/ Management Plans; 
(Recommendation 4) 
• The State Government may remove bottlenecks in fund ing for activities relating to 
welfare activities for frontline staff;  
(Recommendation 11) 
III. Human Resources and Other Resources 
• The Department may rationalize the sanction and dep loyment of human resource and 
other resources by laying down suitable norms and scales;  
(Recommendation 7) 
• PCCF/ Wildlife may ensure implementation of disease  control and surveillance 
programmes by providing adequate staff, training and infrastructure; 
(Recommendation 9) 
IV. Implementation of Conservation 
• The Department may identify the causative factor for high incidenc e of poaching and 
deaths and the hot spots to adopt site specific protection measures; 
(Recommendation 5) 
• The Department may ensure that the activities and i nfrastructure related with tourism 
are rationalized so as to not disturb the well-being of wild animal and the habitats; 
(Recommendation 10) 
• The State Government may complete the processes of demarcating boundaries of 
Protected Areas and Tiger Reserves by using digital and cadastral maps; 
(Recommendation 12) 
• The control of illegal mining in Son-Gharial Wildlife Sanctuary may be strengthened by 
speeding up the investigations of registered cases; 
(Recommendation 13) 

Executive Summary 
xi 
• The State Government may ensure that all adverse impacts on Ken-Betwa River Linking
Project as well as other infrastructure development projects on the wildlife and their
habitats are adequately mitigated.  Further, the State Government may consider forming
an expert committee to specifically monitor the adequacy and timeliness of mitigation
measures.
(Recommendation 14) 

Chapter 1 
 
Introduction 
 
1.1 Introduction  
Wildlife consists of all uncultivated flora and undomesticated fauna. Every species has the right 
to live and every threatened species must be protec ted to prevent its extinction. Wildlife 
conservation is not just a strategy aimed at protec tion of rare, threatened and endemic 
biodiversity but is a well-recognized means of achieving ecological security, human well-being 
and sustainable development of any country.  
The Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972 recognises the overarching goals of wildlife protection and 
empowers1 the State Government to notify an area of signific ance as a Protected Area, i.e., 
Sanctuary and National Park respectively. Core area s of Tiger Reserves are considered 
inviolate prohibiting activities such as grazing et c. National Parks and Wildlife Sanctuaries 
allow some activities with restrictions and under the regulation of the Chief Wild Life Warden.  
Box 1.1: Forest cover in Madhya Pradesh 
Madhya Pradesh, the second largest State in India covers an area of 3.1 lakh sq. km., which is 
9.4 per cent  of the total 
geographic area of the country. 
The State, with forest cover 2 of 
77,482.49 sq. km.3 covers around 
25.1 per cent of its geographical 
area.  
The Forests fall under 21 forest 
types categorised under five 4 
forest type groups. Very Dense 
Forest comprises of 6,676.02 
sq.km. ( Chart-1.1). Increase in 
forest cover in the State during 
2017-19 was 68 sq.km. 
(0.09 per cent ), lower than the 
national average of 0.56 per cent 
during the same period. 
                                                           
1  Under Sections 18 and 35 of the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972, the State Government can declare an area 
of significance as Protected Areas, i.e., Sanctuary and National Park respectively. Further, the notifications 
for Tiger Reserves are issued by the State Governme nt under Section 38(V) of the Wildlife (Protection)  
Act, 1972. There are also provisions for notificati on of Conservation Reserves and Community Reserves 
under Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972. However, these have not been notified in Madhya Pradesh. 
2  All land more than one hectare in area, with a tr ee canopy density of more than 10 per cent irrespective of 
ownership and legal status. Such land may not necessarily be a recorded forest area.   
3  As per India State of Forest Report 2019. 
4       Tropical Moist Deciduous Forest, Littoral an d Swamp Forest, Tropical Dry Deciduous Forest, Trop ical 
Thorn Forest and Sub-Tropical Broad-Level Hill Forest.  
 
Tigress with Cubs in Pench River in Pench Tiger Reserve, Seoni  
(Source: Field Director, Pench Tiger Reserve) 


Report on Wildlife Conservation and Sustainable Management of Wildlife Habitats in Madhya Pradesh 
2 
Chart-1.1: Forest Cover of Madhya Pradesh 
 
(VDF-Very Dense Forest, MDF-Moderately Dense Forest, OF-Open Forest) 
Source: India State of Forest Report, 2019, Forest Survey of India. 
The State has 52 Districts, of which 21 are tribal districts. Balaghat and Sheopur Districts have 
forest cover of more than 50 per cent  of their geographical area. Four districts—Dindori , 
Mandla, Sidhi and Umaria—have forest cover in exces s of 40 per cent of their geographical 
area. These six districts have one National Park 5 and three Tiger Reserves 6 between them. 
Major part of Kanha-Pench Corridor in the State is in Balaghat District. The State harbours 
rich biodiversity of flora and fauna7. 
The State Government has notified 11 National Parks  and 24 Wildlife Sanctuaries till date. 
Total notified Protected Area in Madhya Pradesh is over 11,393 sq. km, out of which 4,773.638 
sq. km. is notified as Critical Tiger Habitat (Core  Zone of Tiger Reserve). Additionally, areas 
within two sq. km. of the periphery of National Par ks and Wildlife Sanctuaries and in case of 
Tiger Reserves, entire area of Buffer Zone of Tiger  Reserves, are notified as Eco-Sensitive 
Zones to act as shock absorbers. 30 Eco-Sensitive Z ones with an area of over 9,437 sq. km. 
have been notified so far. 
                                                           
5  Kuno National Park. 
6  Bandhavgarh, Kanha and Sanjay Tiger Reserves. 
7  Madhya Pradesh harbours more than 45 species of m ammalian fauna which is about 10 per cent of India's 
wild mammals. The carnivore guild in Madhya Pradesh  consists of Tiger, Leopard, Sloth-bear, Dhole, 
Striped Hyena, Jackal, Wolf, Jungle Cat, Wild Cat, Rusty-Spotted Cat, Smooth Coated Otter, Indian Grey  
Mongoose, Ruddy Mongoose, Common Palm Civet and Ori ental Civet. The ungulate guild is mainly 
comprised of Gaur, Nilgai, Sambar, Chital, Barking Deer, Blackbuck, four horned Antelope, Chinkara, 
Mouse Deer and hard ground Barasingha. 
Floristic composition includes Overwoods: Teak, Saj a, Mahua, Tendu, Bija, Tinsa, Semal, Haldu, etc.; 
Underwoods: Aonla, Amaltas, Kumbhi, etc,; Shrubs; B ekal, Karonda, Jhau, etc; Grasses: Mauritian grass 
(Apluda Mutica), East Indian Crabgrass (Digitaria S etigera), Black Speargrass (Heteropogon Contortus),  
Japanese Lovegrass (Eragrostis tenella), Kangaroo grass (Themeda Quadrivalvis), Green Foxtail ( Setaria 
Glauca), etc.; and climbers such as Chilati, Mahulbel and Palasbel.  


Chapter 1: Introduction 
 
3 
Ranging Tiger in Panna Tiger Reserve  
(Source: Photo captured during field visit by Audit Team) 
 
1.2 Organisational set-up 
Forest Department, Madhya Pradesh is headed by the Additional Chief Secretary/ Principal 
Secretary, Forests at the Government level. Chart-1.2 gives the details of the organisational 
structure. The field formations are headed by the F ield Directors in Tiger Reserves, Directors 
in National Parks and Divisional Forest Offices in Wildlife Sanctuaries.  
Chart-1.2: Organisational Structure of Wildlife wing of Forest Department 
 
Field Director 
(Management of Tiger Reserves) 
Director 
(Management of National Parks 
under Wildlife Division) 
Divisional Forest Officer 
(Management of Wildlife 
Sanctuaries under the Division) 
• Deputy Director       (Assists 
Field Director) 
• Assistant Director 
(Management of Sub Division) 
• Range Officer (Range Level) 
• Deputy Ranger (Circle Level) 
• Beat Guard (Beat Level) 
• Assistant Director 
(Management of Sub 
Division) 
• Range Officer (Range Level) 
• Deputy Ranger (Circle Level) 
• Beat Guard (Beat Level) 
 
• Sub Divisional Officer 
(Management of Sub 
Division) 
• Range Officer (Range Level) 
• Deputy Ranger (Circle Level) 
• Beat Guard (Beat Level) 
 
 
1.3 Financial Arrangements for Wildlife Conservatio n and Habitat Management  
Funds for conservation and protection of wildlife a nd management of wildlife habitats are 
sourced through the State Budget, Development Fund in the Tiger Reserves/ National Parks 
Additional Chief Secretary Head of the Department at Government Level 
Principal Chief Conservator 
of Forests (Head of Forest 
Force) 
Head of Department at Department Level 
 
Principal Chief Conservator 
of Forest (Wildlife) 
 
Chief Wild Life Warden, Madhya Pradesh 
(Responsible for Management of Wildlife in the State) 
 
 Management of Wildlife in the State 

Report on Wildlife Conservation and Sustainable Management of Wildlife Habitats in Madhya Pradesh 
4 
and the Compensatory Afforestation Fund8. State Budget includes State Funds9 as well as funds 
received under a Centrally Sponsored Scheme ‘Integr ated Development of Wildlife and 
Habitat/ Project Tiger’.  
During the audit period 2014-15 to 2018-19, a sum o f ` 633.32 crore was spent under the 
Centrally Sponsored Scheme and ` 1,265.92 crore under the four State Schemes, as detailed in 
Appendix 1.1. While ` 198.10 crore was spent against receipts under the Development Fund, 
an amount of ` 163.23 crore was spent under the Compensatory Affor estation Fund during 
2014-15 to 2018-19. 
1.4 Audit Objectives  
The Performance Audit was conducted to assess whether: 
• Measures for conservation and protection of wildlif e were adequately planned and 
implemented, 
• Wildlife habitats were developed and managed for su fficient forest cover and 
consolidation of habitats, and sustainable habitat management. 
1.5 Scope of Audit and Methodology  
In Madhya Pradesh, 11 10 National Parks and 24 11 Wildlife Sanctuaries have been notified. In 
addition, there are six Tiger Reserves, viz Kanha, Bandhavgarh, Pench, Panna, Satpura and 
Sanjay Tiger Reserve. Further, one Forest Division, viz Kanha Tiger Reserve (Buffer Zone) is 
the notified buffer area 12 of Kanha Tiger Reserve. These are managed by 22 Ad ministrative 
Units as shown in Appendix 1.2. 
We reviewed records of 14 Units, covering Office of  the Principal Chief Conservator of 
Forests/ Wildlife (henceforth mentioned as PCCF/ Wildlife) and 1313 Divisions for the period 
2014-15 to 2018-19 (henceforth mentioned as 2014-19). Since the statistics of a forest offence 
data is maintained calendar year- wise by the Fores t Department, hence those were reviewed 
for the period 2014 to 2018 (henceforth mentioned a s 2014-18). The Divisions were selected 
on the basis of Stratified Random Sampling method. 100 per cent Divisions of Tiger Reserve 
and National Parks were selected whereas three Divisions managing Wildlife Sanctuaries were 
                                                           
8  Funds collected from user agencies in cases of di version of forest land for non-forestry purposes under the 
provisions of Forest Conservation Act, 1980. 
9  Funds under schemes: ‘National Park’, ‘Compensati on for human casualties by wild animals’, 
‘Compensation for relocation of villages’, and ‘Wildlife management outside Protected Areas’.  
10  Bandhvagarh, Dinosaur Fossile, Ghughwa Fossile, K anha, Kuno, Panna, Pench, Sanjay, Satpura, Madhav 
and Van Vihar. 
11  Bagdara, Bori, Chambal, Gandhi Sagar, Gangau, Kar era, Ken Gharial, Kheoni, Narsinghgarh, Nauradehi, 
Orchha, Pachmari, Panpatha, Pench Mowgli, Phen, Ral amandal, Ratapani, Sailana, Sanjay Dubri, 
Sardarpur, Singhori, Son Chidiya, Son Gharial and Virangana Durgavati. 
12  Buffer area notified under Section 38 (V) of Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972, consists of the area peripheral 
to Critical Tiger Habitat of Tiger Reserve where a lesser degree of habitat protection is required to ensure 
the integrity of the Critical Tiger Habitat. 
13  Tiger Reserves: Bandhavgarh (Umaria), Kanha (Core  and Buffer) (Mandla), Panna (Panna), Pench (Seoni), 
Sanjay (Sidhi) and Satpura (Hoshangabad); National Park Divisions: Kuno, Madhav and Van Vihar; 
Divisions; Dewas, Nauradehi and Obedullaganj. 

Chapter 1: Introduction 
 
5 
selected on random basis. The sampled Divisions man age a total of six 14 Tiger Reserves 
(including six National Parks and six Wildlife Sanc tuaries in these Tiger Reserves), three 15 
National Parks and other nine 16 Wildlife sanctuaries. Thus, we covered a total of 24 National 
Parks and Wildlife Sanctuaries in audit. Division w ise coverage of Tiger Reserves and 
Protected Areas is shown in Appendix 1.3.  
We held an Entry Conference with the Additional Chi ef Secretary, Forest Department on 
11 December 2019 to discuss about the audit objecti ves, coverage, sample size and audit 
methodology. An Exit Conference was held with the P rincipal Secretary, Forest Department 
on 1 July 2021 to discuss audit observations and se ek Government views thereon. The State 
Government in its replies (July and September 2021) generally accepted the audit observations 
and provided an assurance that speedy and appropriate remedial action was under progress. 
Map-1.1: Map showing Tiger Reserve, National Park and Wildlife Sanctuary Divisions  
in Madhya Pradesh 
 
 
We conducted interviews of staff engaged in patroll ing work during joint inspection, for 
obtaining responses regarding medical facilities, provision of protective equipment, timeliness 
in payment of wages, etc. We also consulted researc h papers on topics related to wildlife and 
habitat management. 
                                                           
14  Bandhavgarh Tiger Reserve (Bandhavgarh National Par k and Panpatha Wildlife Sanctuary), Kanha Tiger 
Reserve (Kanha National Park), Panna Tiger Reserve (Panna National Park and Gangau Wildlife 
Sanctuary), Pench Tiger Reserve (Pench National Par k and Pench Mowgli Wildlife Sanctuary), Sanjay 
Tiger Reserve (Sanjay National Park and Sanjay Dubr i Wildlife Sanctuary) and Satpura Tiger Reserve 
(Satpura National Park and Bori and Pachmari Wildlife Santuries). 
15  Kuno National Park, Madhav National Park and Van Vihar National Park. 
16  Bagdara (Sidhi), Karera (Shivpuri), Ken Gharial ( Panna), Kheoni (Dewas), Nauradehi (Sagar), Phen 
(Mandla), Ratapani and Singhori (Obedullaganj) and Son Gharial (Sidhi). 


Report on Wildlife Conservation and Sustainable Management of Wildlife Habitats in Madhya Pradesh 
6 
1.6 Audit Criteria  
We used the following as sources of audit criteria for this Performance Audit: 
• Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972; 
• Indian Forest Act, 1927; 
• Compensatory Afforestation Fund Act, 2016; 
• 2nd National Wildlife Action Plan 2002-16; 
• Management Plans and Tiger Conservation Plans;  
• Guidelines issued by Ministry of Environment, Fores t and Climate Change, Wildlife 
Institute of India and National Tiger Conservation Authority; 
• Government of Madhya Pradesh, Chief Wild Life Warden’s orders; and 
• Study reports on Wildlife management issues. 
1.7 Previous audit 
A Performance Audit on ‘Working of Tiger Reserves, National Parks and Sanctuaries’ was 
conducted in 2013-14 with the main objectives being  to assess the performance of the 
Department on planning for conservation and protection of wildlife, measures for conservation 
of wildlife and its habitats, protection of wildlif e and its habitat, and initiatives for eco-
development of local inhabitants. The Performance A udit featured in the Audit Report No. 1 
of the Year 2015.  
This Report is under the examination of the Public Accounts Committee. Only one sub-
paragraph had been discussed in the Public Accounts  Committee; however, Action Taken 
Report had not been received (July 2021).  During c urrent audit, we found that many of the 
deficiencies pointed out in the Report of 2015 still persist, as spelt out in succeeding Chapters. 
1.8 Acknowledgement  
The Office of the Accountant General (Audit-II), Ma dhya Pradesh, Bhopal acknowledges the 
co-operation and assistance extended by the staff a nd officers of the Forest Department, 
Government of Madhya Pradesh during the course of conduct of performance audit. 

  
 
Chapter 2 
 
Planning for Conservation and Protection of Wildlife  
and Management of Habitats 
Summary 
Timely, comprehensive and strategic planning whether annual or long-term (10 years), lies at 
the heart of effective management of Protected Area s. The long-term plans, i.e. the Tiger 
Conservation Plans and Management Plans, focus on g eneral as well as site-specific issues 
which take a longer span of time to show their impa ct. The long-term Plan also helps in not 
losing focus of the important issues, even when inc umbent forest officials get changed in the 
interim. Three out of six Tiger Reserves, one out o f three National Parks and six out of 10 
Wildlife Sanctuaries that were audited did not have  Tiger Conservation Plans/ Management 
Plans. 
The long-term Plans are broken down into more granu lar Annual Plan of Operations, which 
deal with smaller issues needing immediate attentio n. While Annual Plan of Operations was 
prepared, we found in certain instances where the A nnual Plans did not bear co-relation with 
activities included in long term Plans. 
Research activities are a very important and scient ific source of baseline inputs for plans. 
However, the Tiger Conservation Plans/ Management P lans which identify the topics of 
interest were not freely available in the public do main. We also noticed that there were no 
institutional tie ups with reputed institutes or re searchers to conduct research in a time bound 
manner. Out of 206 themes proposed to be taken up f or research in the long term plans, only 
two were actually selected by researchers. Another 74 topics outside of those mentioned in the 
plans were proposed by independent researchers and allowed by the Department. However, 
only nine reports out of these 74 topics taken up were available with the Department.   
 
2.1 Why are Plans important? 
Conservation of Wildlife and their habitats involve  multiple authorities as well as locals over 
a long time-frame. This makes long-term planning an  important tool in the conservation of 
endangered species in the Protected Areas. Converse ly, absence of long-term plans impinges 
adversely on conservation. 
 
Box 2.1: Conservation of endangered species requires long-term plans 
The Protected Areas of Madhya Pradesh which were se lected by audit are home to some 
endangered species as detailed in Table 2.1.  
  

Report on Wildlife Conservation and Sustainable Management of Wildlife Habitats in Madhya Pradesh 
 
8 
Table 2.1: Conservation of Endangered Species 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Protected 
Area 
Endangered 
species Status of conservation efforts  
1 Son Gharial 
Wildlife 
Sanctuary 
Gharial  Son River in Sanjay Tiger Reserve is the habitat to  
various species of aquatic animals, including the 
Gharial. Accordingly, the State Government 
notified the Son Gharial Wildlife Sanctuary for 
crocodile and aquatic conservation. A census 
conducted in 2008 enumerated the total population 
of Gharial in the Son Gharial Wildlife Sanctuary at 
224, which by February 2019 had come down to 45.  
According to the findings of a survey conducted by 
the Department in 2019, the decreasing population 
of Gharial was mainly attributable to inadequate 
male population of Gharial; illegal quarrying and 
fishing on the banks of the river which led to habitat 
decimation and biotic pressure on the nesting sites  
of Gharials and Mugger; and a lack of trust between 
the local community and the Department.  
The Management did not fill the deficiency of male 
Gharial.  The Field Director assured us that effort s 
are being made to reduce the biotic pressure which 
was not however supported by the survey reports 
which showed declining numbers. 
2 Kuno 
National Park 
Rusty-spotted 
Cat 
The Rusty-spotted Cat is listed as a Schedule-I 
species under the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972 of 
India and is classified as ‘Vulnerable’ by the 
International Union for Conservation of Nature Red 
List (2008). Photographic record of Rusty-spotted 
Cat was captured in December 2012. The National 
Park did not develop a long-term plan for its 
conservation. The Director assured us that a 
conservation plan would be incorporated in the 
upcoming Management Plan. 
3 Kuno 
National Park 
Asiatic Lion  At present Gir National Park is a single habitat of  
Asiatic Lions in the world. The data collected by 
the Wildlife Biologists highlighted the necessity of 
a second natural habitat for its long-term 
conservation. In order to prepare ground for 
relocation of Asiatic Lions to Kuno, the State 
Government rehabilitated about 1,545 families of 
24 revenue villages living inside Kuno outside the 
National Park. In the meanwhile, Hon’ble Supreme 
Court directed Ministry of Environment, Forest and 

Chapter 2: Planning for Conservation and Protection of Wildlife and Management of Habitats 
9 
Sl. 
No. 
Protected 
Area 
Endangered 
species Status of conservation efforts  
Climate Change in April 2013 to constitute an 
Expert Committee to fast track reintroduction of 
Asiatic Lion in Kuno National Park. Six meetings 
of the Committee were convened up to February 
2019, but the re-introduction process of Asiatic 
Lion to Kuno National Park could not be 
undertaken. The Director stated (September 2019) 
that the matter is being addressed at Government 
level for resolution. 
4 Bandhavgarh 
Tiger 
Reserve 
Smooth-coated 
Otter 
Smooth-coated Otter is listed as ‘Vulnerable’ in the 
International Union for Conservation of Nature Red 
List of threatened species and is legally protected in 
India under Schedule II of the Wildlife (Protection) 
Act, 1972. The species was previously unreported 
in Bandhavgarh Tiger Reserve. One Smooth 
coated-Otter was recorded in a camera trap in 
February 2016 in the Buffer zone of the Tiger 
Reserve. A report suggested a comprehensive study 
of the distribution patterns of the Smooth-coated 
Otter. However, the Management did not conduct 
the study. The Field Director stated (October 2020) 
that the sighting mentioned in the report was only a 
coincidence.   
5 Pench Tiger 
Reserve 
Barasingha Barasinghas had a historic presence in Pench Tiger 
Reserve, but there are none at present. Connected to 
Pench through a corridor, is the Kanha Tiger 
Reserve, where they are in abundance. However, 
the Pench Tiger Reserve did not prepare any plan to 
re-introduce Barasinghas. The Field Director stated 
(September 2019) that the process would be 
initiated after consultation with experts. 
6 Karera 
Wildlife 
Sanctuary 
Great Indian 
Bustard  
The Great Indian Bustard is a critically endangered 
bird with less than 150 left in India/world (survey  
conducted by Wild Life Institute of India in 
2017-18). 
The Management Plan of Karera Wildlife 
Sanctuary for the period 2008-18 acknowledged 
that excessive biotic pressure and excessive 
population of black buck destroyed the eggs of 
Great Indian Bustard leading to its local extinction. 
In the prescriptive list in the Plan was (i) develop an 
area of 45.33 square kilometre of original natural 

Report on Wildlife Conservation and Sustainable Management of Wildlife Habitats in Madhya Pradesh 
 
10 
Sl. 
No. 
Protected 
Area 
Endangered 
species Status of conservation efforts  
habitat of the Great Indian Bustard as core area; (ii) 
55.55 square kilometre Government revenue land 
should be transferred in favour of Forest 
Department; and (iii) reintroduction of Great Indian 
Bustard and promote eco-tourism. However, the 
proposal for transfer of land was not sent to the 
Revenue Department. The prescriptions of the 
Management Plan were not undertaken. Director 
stated (December 2019) that Great Indian Bustard 
had not been seen in the Wildlife Sanctuary since 
1994 and that de-notification process is in progress 
at Government level.  
The State Government agreed (September 2021) to the observation.  
2.2 Availability of Plans 
Each Protected Area 17 and Tiger Reserve should have its own plan based o n scientific and 
ecological data. The Tiger Conservation Plan in each Tiger Reserve, approved by the National 
Tiger Conservation Authority, is also a legal requirement under the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 
1972. In addition, the Eco-Sensitive Zones, i.e. no tified peripheral areas that fall within two 
kilometre of protected areas, and in the case of Ti ger Reserves up to the entire Buffer area of 
the Tiger Reserve, must have a Zonal Master Plan . The Annual Plan of Operations—which 
form the basis for demand of funds from the Governm ent of India and on which there is high 
compliance—are prepared on the basis of the Tiger C onservation Plans and the Management 
Plans. Table 2.2 below summarises the requirements of planning: 
Table 2.2: Planning Requirements 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Plan 
For Periodicity 
(years) 
Approving 
Authority 
Provisions 
1 Tiger 
Conservation 
Plan 
Tiger Reserves 10 National T iger 
Conservation 
Authority 
Section 38(V) of Wildlife 
(Protection) Act, 1972 
2 Management 
Plan 
Wildlife 
Sanctuaries and 
National Parks 
10 Principal C hief 
Conservator of 
Forest/ Wildlife 
Section 33 of Wildlife 
(Protection) Act, 1972 
3 Zonal Master 
Plan 
Eco-Sensitive Zone --- State Government Notifications of Eco-
Sensitive Zones by Ministry 
of Environment, F orest and 
Climate Change. 
4 Annual Plan 
of Operations 
Demand of funds 
from Government 
of India 
One year Ministry of 
Environment, Forest 
and Climate Change. 
Guidelines on ‘Centrally 
Sponsored Schemes’ 
                                                           
17  As provisioned in 2nd National Wildlife Action Plan, 2002-16. 

Chapter 2: Planning for Conservation and Protection of Wildlife and Management of Habitats 
11 
The Tiger Conservation Plans and Management Plans are required to be prepared and approved 
before the expiry of previous plan period. The task is assigned to the respective Protected Area 
managers. Components of the Plans are in Table 2.3: 
Table 2.3: Components of Plan 
Components 
Visions, Goals, Objectives and Problems, Management Strategy, Research Monitoring and 
Training, Tiger population and habitat assessment, Protection and intelligence gathering, 
Eco-tourism and Interpretation, Organisation, Administration and Budget, Monitoring and 
Evaluation.   
2.2.1 Tiger Conservation Plan 
Separate Tiger Conservation Plans are to be prepared on the basis of guidelines18 for the Core 
and Buffer Areas. The Core Area is required to be inviolate, while the Buffer Area, peripheral 
to the Core, is aimed to promote co-existence between wildlife and human activity. The status 
of the approved Plans in the six Tiger Reserves during the audit period 2014-19 is at Table 2.4. 
Out of six Tiger Reserves, three had approved Tiger  Conservation Plans during the audit 
period.  
Table 2.4: Status of Approved Plans 
Sl. 
No. 
Tiger  
Reserve 
Date of 
Notification 
Period of approved 
Tiger Conservation Plan Remarks 
1 Kanha (Core) December 
2007 2011-12 to 2020-21 Available 
Kanha (Buffer) October 2010 2011-12 to 2020-21 Available 
2 
Panna (Core) December 
2007 
Nil 
1st Tiger Conservation Plan since 
notification of Panna (Core) 12 years 
back, was sent to National Tiger 
Conservation Authority for approval 
in June 2019. Yet to be approved as 
of March 2021. 
Panna (Buffer) July 2014 Tiger Conservation Plan for Buffer 
Zone sent in March 2021. 
3 
Pench (Core) December 
2007 2008-09 to 2017-18 No Tiger Conservation Plan 
prepared for 2018-19 onwards. 
Pench (Buffer) October 2010 2015-16 to 2024-25 
 
Available. 1 st Tiger Conservation 
Plan since notification of Pench 
(Buffer) in 2010, approved in 2015-
16. 
4 
Sanjay (Core) February 2011 
Nil 
1st Tiger Conservation Plan since 
notification of Sanjay (Core) in 
February 2011 and Sanjay (Buffer) 
in May 2014, sent to National Tiger 
Conservation Authority for approval 
in November 2019. Reported as 
approved as of September 2020. 
Sanjay (Buffer) May 2014 
                                                           
18  Technical document: NTCA/01/07, a supplementary gui deline was also issued by the National Tiger 
Conservation Authority in April 2014. 
 

Report on Wildlife Conservation and Sustainable Management of Wildlife Habitats in Madhya Pradesh 
 
12 
Sl. 
No. 
Tiger  
Reserve 
Date of 
Notification 
Period of approved 
Tiger Conservation Plan Remarks 
5 
Satpura (Core) December 
2007 2015-16 to 2024-25 Available 
Satpura 
(Buffer) January 2011 2015-16 to 2024-25 Available 
6 
Bandhavgarh 
(Core) 
December 
2007 
Nil 
1st Tiger Conservation Plan since 
notification of Core and buffer in 
December 2007 and October 2010 
respectively, sent to National Tiger 
Conservation Authority in 2015. Yet 
to be approved by National Tiger 
Conservation Authority as of August 
2020. 
Bandhavgarh 
(Buffer) October 2010 
(Source: Forest Department) 
Thus, activities taken up in the Divisions without the plans were ad-hoc in nature, i.e. they were 
not supported by long-term scientific planning, timeline for completion and properly identified 
targets. During Exit Conference, the Principal Chie f Conservator of Forests /Wildlife assured 
us (July 2021) that the Department was reviewing the preparation of Plans, including fixing of 
timelines for preparation. He also informed that th ree Tiger Conservation Plans, viz. for 
Bandhavgarh Tiger Reserve, Panna Tiger Reserve and Sanjay Tiger Reserve, were under 
preparation. 
Box 2.2: Importance of Tiger Conservation Plans: Bandhavgarh Tiger Reserve 
The Bandhavgarh Tiger Reserve covers an area of 1,5 36.938 square kilometer and has a tiger 
population of 104 (Status of Tiger Report, 2018). A 65 per cent increase in Tiger population in 
Bandhavgarh Tiger Reserve during the period 2014-18  makes it one of the success stories in 
Tiger conservation. However, we noted that Bandhavgarh also registered 12 cases of deaths of 
Tigers due to territorial fights/cannibalism. 50 per cent of the total cases of Human-Wildlife 
Conflict in the State occurred in Bandhavgarh. In t he absence of a Tiger Conservation Plan, 
measures to assess the spatial distribution of increasing density of tiger population to mitigate 
territorial fights, as well as mitigation measures, such as construction of chain-link fencing and 
watch tower, patrolling, etc., did not get the requisite focus.  
Earlier, there was no wild elephant in the forests of Bandhavgarh Tiger Reserve. However, 
since 2018, few wild elephants have entered the Reserve and now reside there. These elephants 
damage agriculture crops in local villages and have even damaged Patrolling Camps.  
The Bandhavgarh Management organised training progr ammes to sensitize field staff and 
villagers towards this new development. However, me asures for improved corridor 
connectivity for elephants in the Tiger Reserve or formulation of management guidelines for 
viability of transient elephant population were not planned. 
The Field Director, Bandhavgarh Tiger Reserve stated (October 2020) that efforts were being 
made to receive funds through Project Elephant for management of wild elephants. But in the 
absence of a Plan, these measures could not be prioritized. 
 

Chapter 2: Planning for Conservation and Protection of Wildlife and Management of Habitats 
13 
2.2.2 Management Plans  
In six19 out of the 13 National Parks and Wildlife Sanctuar ies, the Management Plans were in 
place. In six, no plans were prepared after the expiry of the existing plans during the period of 
audit. The Gangau Wildlife Sanctuary did not have a ny plan during the entire period of audit. 
Table 2.5 details the status of approved Plans in the audited units: 
Table 2.5: Status of Management Plans in audited units 
Sl. 
No. National Parks/ Sanctuaries Period of plan Remarks  
1 Phen Wildlife Sanctuary 2011-12 to 2020-21 Available 
2 Ken Gharial Wildlife 
Sanctuary 
2007-08 to 2016-17 No plan for two years from 2017-18 
after expiry of past plan. 
3 Gangau Wildlife Sanctuary No plan after expiry of 
past plan: 2006-12 
No Plan since 2012-13. 
4 Bagdara Wildlife Sanctuary 2017-18 to 2026-27 No Management Plan for majority of 
audit period, i.e. 2014-15 to 2016-17.  
5 Son Gharial Wildlife 
Sanctuary 
2008-09 to 2018-19 Available 
6 Madhav National Park 2007-08 to 2016-17 No Management Plan for two years 
from 2017-18 to 2018-19 after expiry of 
past plan. 
7 Karera Wildlife Sanctuary 2008-09 to 2017-18 No Management Plan for one year  
(2018-19) after expiry of past plan. 
8 Kuno National Park 2010-11 to 2019-20 Available 
9 Van Vihar National Park 2012-13 to 2021-22 Available 
10 Nauradehi Wildlife Sanctuary 2007-08 to 2016-17 No plan for two years from 2017-18 
after expiry of past plan. 
11 Ratapani Wildlife Sanctuary 2008-09 to 2017-18 No Management Plan for one year 
(2018-19) after expiry of past plan. 
12 Singhori Wildlife Sanctuary 2012-13 to 2021-22 Available 
13 Kheoni Wildlife Sanctuary  2007-08 to 2019-20 Available 
(Source: Forest Department) 
The PCCF/ Wildlife assured us (August 2019) that re port would be sought from the field 
officers and reasons for delay would be examined. 
We noted that there was no institutional mechanism to ensure that Plans are prepared in time. 
There was no dedicated staff for this work, nor wer e any timelines prescribed for the work. 
While the Divisions were already struggling with sh ortage of staff at different levels, the 
shortage being 41 per cent at the level of Range Officers and 52 per cent at the level of Deputy 
Range Officers (refer to Paragraph 3.5.2.1) making it further difficult for them to spare time 
for preparation of Tiger Conservation Plan/ Management Plan. 
Box 2.3: Importance of dedicated staff 
The Territorial Divisions which administer forest a reas (other than Protected Areas) prepare 
Working Plans for a period of ten years for silvicu lture operations, i.e. for growing and 
cultivation of trees. These Working Plans form the basis for approval for felling from the 
Government of India. We noted that each Circle has a dedicated team headed by the PCCF/ 
                                                           
19  Kheoni Wildlife Sanctuary, Kuno National Park, Ph en Wildlife Sanctuary, Singhori Wildlife Sanctuary,  
Son Gharial Wildlife Sanctuary and Van Vihar National Park.  

Report on Wildlife Conservation and Sustainable Management of Wildlife Habitats in Madhya Pradesh 
 
14 
Working Plan at the State level, for preparation of  such Working Plans. This ensures timely 
preparation of Plans. 
 
2.2.3 Zonal Master Plans  
As per the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 20, the area around the Protected Areas should 
be identified and declared as ecologically fragile. These areas are to be notified by Government 
of India, on the basis of proposals from State Gove rnment21, as Eco-Sensitive Zones. These 
areas would also act as transition zones from areas of high protection to areas involving lesser 
protection. Based on the proposal/draft notificatio n sent by the respective States, such areas 
that fall within two kilometers around the National  Park and Wildlife Sanctuaries, as well the 
entire Buffer Area of the Tiger Reserves, are to be notified by the Government of India as Eco-
Sensitive Zones. 
We found that the State Government had identified a  total of 35 Eco-Sensitive Zones in 
Madhya Pradesh, against which 30 were notified, adding an area of 9,437.53 square kilometer 
of Eco-Sensitive Zones between December 2016 and March 2021. Out of the 30 notified Eco-
Sensitive Zones, 23 had not yet prepared Zonal Master Plan within the stipulated period of two 
years.   
In the 24 Protected Areas sampled in audit, a total  of 6,967.15 square kilometer were notified 
and Eco-Sensitive Zones in respect of 2122 Protected Areas had been issued. Four23 out of these 
Eco-Sensitive Zones were notified recently between November 2019 and March 2021. We 
noted that the areas identified as Eco-Sensitive Zones were mainly the Buffer Areas around the 
Tiger Reserves. For Panna Tiger Reserve, Kuno National Park and Gangau Wildlife Sanctuary, 
even preliminary notifications have not been issued (January 2021).  
In respect of the Eco-Sensitive Zones, the State Government has to prepare and approve a Zonal 
Master Plan24 within a period of two years from the date of publication of final notification, in 
consultation with local people. The Zonal Master Pl ans involve multiple authorities, such as 
                                                           
20  As per Paragraph III (6) of 2 nd National Wildlife Action Plan (2002-16) under the power conferred on the 
Central Government by sub-section (1) clause (v) and clause (xiv) of sub-section (2) and sub-section (3) of 
section 3 of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 (29 of 1986), read with sub-section (3) of rule 5 of the 
Environment (Protection) Rules, 1986. The Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change had 
issued directions in this regard in February 2011 and September 2014.  
21  As per Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climat e Change Guidelines for declaration of Eco-Sensitiv e 
Zones (February 2011), a committee comprising of Chief Wild Life Warden, an ecologist, and one official 
each from Local Self Government and Revenue Departments would suggest the extent of the Eco-Sensitive 
Zone area for the Protected Areas, the requirements  of such area to act as a shock absorber, best meth od 
for management of the zone and broad-based thematic  activities to be included in the Master Plan for t he 
area. The Chief Wild Life Warden will group these a ctivities into the categories of prohibited, restri cted 
and permissible activities and send the final propo sal to Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate 
Change for further processing and notification.  
22  Bagdara, Bandhavgarh, Bori, Kanha, Karera, Ken Gh arial, Kheoni, Madhav, Nauradehi, Pachmari, 
Panpatha, Pench and Pench Mowgli, Phen, Ratapani, Singhori, Sanjay, Sanjay Dubri, Satpura, Son Gharial 
and Van Vihar, 
23         Pench and Kanha National Parks, Pench Mowgli and Phen Wildlife Sanctuaries. 
24  The Zonal Master Plans shall provide for restorat ion of denuded areas, conservation of existing wate r 
bodies, management of catchment areas, ground water  management, soil and moisture conservation and 
regulation of development in Eco-Sensitive Zones, so as to ensure eco-friendly development for livelihood 
security of local communities.  

Chapter 2: Planning for Conservation and Protection of Wildlife and Management of Habitats 
15 
State Departments of Environment, Forest and Wildli fe, Agriculture, Revenue, Urban 
Development, Tourism, Panchayati Raj and Public Wor ks Department. Hence, it is a time-
consuming work. No Zonal Master Plans were prepared in respect of 21 notified Eco-Sensitive 
Zones in selected divisions and 17 out of these 21 Zonal Master Plans are overdue by more 
than two years beyond their stipulated period.  
Due to these lapses, the prohibition and regulation  of activities which were envisaged in the 
notification of Eco-Sensitive Zones could not be implemented. 
During the Exit Conference, the PCCF/ Wildlife stat ed (July 2021) that draft notifications of 
Eco-Sensitive Zones are under submission to Government of India for approval and the Zonal 
Master Plans for notified Eco-Sensitive Zones are in advanced stages of preparation. These are 
expected to be approved by the State Government within the next four to five months. 
Consequence of the delays is that prohibition/ regulation of various activities in Eco-Sensitive 
Zones could not be done and conservation activities could not be properly implemented. 
Box 2.4: Case for planning: Inter-state co-ordination 
The Pench, Kanha and Sanjay Tiger Reserves, the Kun o National Park and the Bagdara 
Wildlife Sanctuary variously share common boundarie s with Maharashtra, Chhattisgarh, 
Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh. Security Plans of the Pench and Kanha Tiger Reserves recognized 
the threats from criminals of adjoining States and factored in suitable counter-measures, such 
as joint patrolling, intelligence sharing, monitori ng of public places and markets near the 
borders, etc. The eastern boundary of Kanha Core Ti ger Reserve is not surrounded by the 
Buffer Zone as it lies in Kawardha District of Chhattisgarh State. As per the Tiger Conservation 
Plan of Kanha Tiger Reserve, the Park Management an d Kawardha Division would jointly 
patrol and share information for better co-ordination for this purpose, for which yearly rosters 
were also prepared.  
These measures were absent in Bagdara Wildlife Sanc tuary despite the fact that areas in 
adjoining State of Uttar Pradesh were noted to be sensitive to poaching and grazing. The joint 
patrols were also absent in Sanjay Tiger Reserve an d in Kuno National Park. The Tiger 
Conservation Plan of Pench Tiger Reserve envisaged periodical joint monitoring of markets 
and other public places and monitoring of persons engaged in illegal activities in nearby areas 
of Maharashtra. An institutional mechanism for the same was however missing.   
The State Government agreed (September 2021) to the observation.  
Management of Corridors 
Connecting habitats, apart from facilitating animal movements, also act as refuge for spill-over 
populations from the Core Areas.  An indicative pla n for management of corridors may be 
prepared along with the Tiger Conservation Plan, wh ich is to be implemented by the Chief 
Wild Life Warden. 
The number of Tigers in Madhya Pradesh increased from 308 to 526, i.e. 71 per cent, between 
2014 and 2018, which was the highest from any State  in the country. Thus, there was greater 
need for safe dispersal of Tigers and wildlife in new areas. 

Report on Wildlife Conservation and Sustainable Management of Wildlife Habitats in Madhya Pradesh 
 
16 
The National Tiger Conservation Authority and the Wildlife Institute of India identified Tiger 
Corridors in 2014 between Protected Areas of Madhya Pradesh on one hand and Chhattisgarh, 
Maharashtra and Rajasthan on the other, for maintaining genetic diversity and provide dispersal 
for young Tigers. Seven of them are related with the audited Divisions, as shown in Table 2.6 
below: 
Table 2.6:  Wildlife Corridors in the State as per Wildlife Institute of India 
Sl. No. Corridor Protected areas States involved 
1 Kanha-Pench Kanha Tiger Reserve-Pench Tiger Reserve Madhya Pradesh 
2 Kanha - Navegaon-
Nagzira-Tadoba-
Indravati 
Kanha Tiger Reserve, Bhoramdev Wildlife 
Sanctuary, Navegaon-Nagzira Tiger Reserve, 
Tadoba-Andhari Tiger Reserve and Indravati 
Tiger Reserve 
Madhya Pradesh, 
Chhattisgarh, Maharashtra 
and Andhra Pradesh (now 
Telangana) 
3 Kanha-
Achanakmar 
Kanha Tiger Reserve, Phen Wildlife Sanctuary, 
Achanakmar Tiger Reserve, Bhoramdev 
Wildlife Sanctuary 
Madhya Pradesh and 
Chhattisgarh 
4 Pench- Satpura-
Melghat 
Pench Tiger Reserve,  Satpura Tiger Reserve, 
Melghat Tiger Reserve 
Madhya Pradesh and 
Maharashtra 
5 Ranthambore-
Kuno-Madhav 
Ranthambore Tiger Reserve, Kuno National 
Park, Madhav National Park 
Madhya Pradesh and 
Rajasthan 
6 Bandhavgarh-
Sanjay-Dubri-Guru 
Ghasidas 
Bandhavgarh Tiger Reserve, Sanjay Tiger 
Reserve, Guru Ghasidas National Park 
Madhya Pradesh and 
Chhattisgarh 
7 Bandhavgarh-
Achanakmar 
Bandhavgarh Tiger Reserve, Achanakmar Tiger 
Reserve 
Madhya Pradesh and 
Chhattisgarh 
(Source: Tiger Corridor Report by Wildlife Institute of India, 2014) 
40 out of the 80 Tiger death cases in selected divi sions during 2014-18, constituting 50 per 
cent of the total were due to infighting and cannibalism, as mentioned in Paragraph 3.1.1. It is 
highly likely that the deaths were due to decreased opportunity available for movement of spill-
over populations from the Core Areas. Sufficiently and adequately managed corridors are of 
utmost importance for gene flow and further increase in population of wild animals in the State. 
Significance of all these corridors in wildlife con servation and management efforts of the 
Forest Department are given in Appendix 2.1. 
In reply, the Field Directors of Bandhavgarh, Pench  and Satpura Tiger Reserves stated that 
management of corridors was being done by respectiv e Territorial Divisions. The Field 
Director, Pench Tiger Reserve further stated that t he Indicative Plan for Corridors have not 
been approved by the National Tiger Conservation Authority. The Field Director, Kanha Tiger 
Reserve stated that funds had been provided to Terr itorial Divisions during 2019-20 for 
undertaking conservation works while the Field Director, Sanjay Tiger Reserve stated that plan 
would be prepared and implemented as per directions  of PCCF/ Wildlife. The Director, 
Madhav National Park stated that a plan for 10 years period was sent (May 2005) to the PCCF/ 
Wildlife, which was not approved.  
These important corridors in the State were being m anaged by the respective Territorial 
Divisions with the predominant objective of silviculture25 operations. We did not find evidence 
                                                           
25  The growing and cultivation of trees. 

Chapter 2: Planning for Conservation and Protection of Wildlife and Management of Habitats 
17 
of close co-ordination of Tiger Reserves with the T erritorial Divisions on implementation of 
the indicative plans. 
The State Government agreed (September 2021) to the observation. 
2.2.4 Elements covered in Plans 
There is no standard format for preparing the Management Plans for Protected Areas approved 
by Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Chan ge.  However, a format was devised by 
Shri V.B. Sawarkar of the Wildlife Institute of Ind ia in the year 2002, which took into 
consideration all possible elements of a comprehens ive Management Plan. While it has no 
statutory authority regarding its compliance and is  merely advisory in nature, many Protected 
Areas across the country follow it.  States like Ka rnataka, with very high Tiger and Elephant 
population and rich presence of flora and fauna, fo llow it to a large extent. However, barring 
few outliers, like Nauradehi Wildlife Division, no other Protected Areas in Madhya Pradesh 
follow the Sawarkar Guidelines to prepare their Management Plans.  
We noted that the Management Plans did not comprehe nsively cover all aspects of planning 
(Appendix 2.2). Main themes that did not find mention in the Plans are at Table 2.7: 
Table 2.7: Themes of planning not covered in Manage ment Plans 
Sl. No. Themes Name of Protected Area  
1 Research areas were not identified Ratapani Wildlife Sanctuary, Kuno National Park and  
Madhav National Park. 
2 Budget requirements were not assessed Ratapani Wildlife Sanctuary, Kuno National Park 
3 Detailed plans for patrolling and their 
monitoring was not prescribed 
Ratapani Wildlife Sanctuary, Kuno National Park, 
Nauradehi Wildlife Sanctuary and Karera Wildlife 
Sanctuary. 
4 Management of existing Tiger corridors 
with other adjoining Protected Areas were 
not planned. 
Madhav National Park and Nauradehi Wildlife 
Sanctuary. 
5 Possible impact of climate change on 
ecosystem and biodiversity not discussed 
Not discussed in any of the Management Plans of 
audited Protected Areas 
6 Measures to reduce possibility of genetic 
swamping 
Not discussed in any of the Management Plans of 
audited Protected Areas 
2.3 Research  
The Management Plans and Tiger Conservation Plans c onstitute tools to review the baseline 
data to assess the impact of conservation efforts.  
Box 2.5: Research findings with reference to plan 
A study in 2019 in Son Gharial Wildlife Sanctuary h ighlighted problems in conservation of 
Gharials (such as inadequate population of male Gharials). The findings and suggestions of the 
Study Report were included in the Management Plan o f the Sanctuary for the period 2020-21 
to 2029-30. 
Research activities are a source of such data and f orm an important part of the plans. Applied 
research helps to overcome specific management problems in Protected Areas26.  
                                                           
26  Parameter VI of 2 nd National Wildlife Action Plan, 2002-16. 

Report on Wildlife Conservation and Sustainable Management of Wildlife Habitats in Madhya Pradesh 
 
18 
Even when research topics are identified in the Pla ns, our audit showed that there was no 
institutional mechanism to cause such research to b e conducted. We did not find on record 
institutional tie-ups with reputed institutes or re searchers for conducting research in a time-
bound manner. Research activities are allowed to be  funded by the Development Fund (entry 
charges receipts) but we found that it was used only in Pench Tiger Reserve (refer Box 2.7). In 
addition, Managements can place demands for fund fo r research in the Annual Plan of 
Operations. Only the three Tiger Reserves at Panna,  Sanjay and Kanha sanctioned funds 
(` 1.12 crore) in 2014-15 and 2017-18 for research. The funds released were not used, resulting 
in savings of 96.6 per cent in Kanha and 100 per cent savings in the other two Tiger Reserves.  
Box 2.6: Critical research not taken up 
One of the areas of research in Tiger Conservation Plan of Kanha Tiger Reserve 2011-21 was 
on poaching: modus operandi, magnitude, crime intelligence and networking. The  research 
was not taken up. Poaching continues to be a major challenge with 102 cases of poaching and 
seizure of Tigers and Leopards in the State during 2014-18. Paragraph 3.1.1 in this Report 
refers to poaching. 
We noted that Management Plans and Tiger Conservation Plans are not made freely available 
to public (although not classified information) thr ough a formal notification or through their 
websites. As a result, only those who would be in touch with the Department and very closely 
monitoring the preparation of these Plans would get  to know the topics proposed for research 
in them. Out of 178 themes proposed in three 27 Tiger Conservation Plans and 28 in 
Management Plan of two28 Protected Areas, researches only in two topics were selected by that 
too only in Pench Tiger Reserve.  
The alternative stream of research is through resea rchers who contact the Management for 
requisite permissions to conduct research in areas identified by the researchers themselves. 
Such requests are often permitted by the PCCF/ Wild life under condition that the findings of 
the research (interim and final reports) should be shared with the Forest Department.  74 such 
topics were proposed independently by researchers a nd permitted to be taken up by the 
Department. But these permissions did not contain a ny time-line for completing the research. 
The Department also had no mechanism to track the status of the research or to ensure that the 
research findings were indeed shared.  
Box 2.7: Status of Research Planned 
Case Study 1: Pench Tiger Reserve 
A total of 54 research topics were included in the Tiger Conservation Plan for Pench Core: 
2008-2018, on three broad areas, viz., values relat ing to Protected Areas (34 topics), study of 
wetland (Totladoh Reservoir: three topics) and biotic pressures on Protected Areas (17 topics). 
                                                           
27  Kanha, Pench and Satpura 
28  Bagdara Wildlife Sanctuary and Kheoni Wildlife Sa nctuary 

Chapter 2: Planning for Conservation and Protection of Wildlife and Management of Habitats 
19 
The Field Director entered into two agreements (2016) with Government agencies for research 
on two 29 of the 54 topics proposed in the Plan. Although ` 7.20 lakh was released from 
Development fund for the research, we did not find the reports against the research on record.  
Another 14 topics were taken up for research during  2014-19 by individual researchers based 
on their own proposals, i.e. outside of the list of 54 activities proposed by the Department. Save 
two30 reports, we did not find any of the reports, eithe r interim or final, on record, as of 
September 2019. 
The Field Director, Pench Tiger Reserve stated (Sep tember 2019) that research on poaching, 
fire, eco-tourism and wildlife diseases had been planned and that two other research activities 
on Wetland and Biotic pressure are also proposed. He further stated that research work would 
be done in future. However, we did not find such plan on record. 
Case Study 2: Kanha and Satpura Tiger Reserves 
Similarly, a total of 124 topics were included in t he Tiger Conservation Plans of Kanha and 
Satpura Tiger Reserves. The Tiger Reserves did not cause the research to be conducted but 
individual researchers took nine topics for researc h during 2014-19, besides 51 other topics 
outside the 124 topics identified in the Plans. Only nine of those 60 researchers submitted their 
final reports to the Department, while none of the others submitted even their interim reports 
to Kanha and Satpura Tiger Reserves till January 2020 and September 2020 respectively.    
The other three Tiger Reserves (Bandhavgarh, Sanjay  and Panna) did not prepare their Tiger 
Conservation Plans during the audit period.  
We noted that the Management Plans of six Protected Areas31 had not envisaged any research 
activity. The Management Plan of Kheoni Wildlife Sa nctuary identified a total of 11 research 
activities. The Divisional Forest Officer stated (S eptember 2020) that these could not be 
implemented due to lack of funds. We were not provi ded evidence to show that these funds 
were demanded. Similarly, Field Director, Sanjay Ti ger Reserve had not planned or taken up 
study of any of the 17 topics proposed in the approved Management Plan (2017-27) in Bagdara 
Wildlife Sanctuary, the Field Director stated (Nove mber 2019) that the Management Plan 
(2017-18 to 2026-27) was new and the proposed activities would be taken up in future.  
On  the  other  hand,  we  found  nine32  research  activities  conducted  by  researchers  in  four 
                                                           
29  (i) Study on human-wildlife conflict due to crop ra iding in the areas enclosing Pench Tiger Reserve an d 
suggesting mitigation measures (ii) Studies on lant ana toxicity in small wild herbivores of Pench Tige r 
Reserve. 
30  ‘ Phase-IV monitoring of prey of Tigers’ and ‘Inter birth interval and litter size of free ranging Bengal Tiger 
in dry deciduous tropical forest of India’. 
31  Karera Wildlife Sanctuary, Kuno National Park, Ma dhav National Parks, Nauradehi Wildlife Sanctuary, 
Ratapani Wildlife Sanctuary and Singhori Wildlife Sanctuary. 
32  True Bugs from Nauradehi Wildlife Sanctuary, Pred ator encounter between orb-weaver spiders of genus 
Neoscona Simon and some Odonates, Case study from N auradehi Wildlife Sanctuary and Preliminary 
investigation on Spider fauna, “Ecological Status o f Ratapani Wildlife Sanctuary”  Raisen, Analysis of  
Potential Outcome-based Indicators for assessing the Biodiversity status of Managed Forests: A case study 
of Delawari Range, Ratapani Wildlife Sanctuary, Hem iptera fauna of Ratapani Wildlife Sanctuary, A 
Policy Framework for Connectivity Conservation and Smart Green Linear Infrastructure Development in 
the Central Indian and Eastern Ghats Tiger Landscape, A Potential site for Vulture in Bundelkhand Region, 
Estimating Leopard abundance in Kuno National Park. 

Report on Wildlife Conservation and Sustainable Management of Wildlife Habitats in Madhya Pradesh 
 
20 
Divisions33 in open platforms and in websites, but they remained unknown to the Managers.  
The State Government agreed (September 2021) to the observation.  
Box 2.8: Critical research area unaddressed: Sanjay Tiger Reserve 
324 Chitals were translocated to Sanjay Tiger Reserve during 2014-19 for increasing prey base 
in it. Observing the low breeding rate of reintrodu ced Chital in the Tiger Reserve, the Field 
Director sent a proposal for research in December 2016 to Chief Wild Life Warden to identify 
the reasons. This research was not conducted as of November 2019.  
The PCCF/ Wildlife stated (July 2019) that Chital w ill take time to acclimatise in the new 
habitat and there was no problem which needed study. However, the Monitoring Effectiveness 
Evaluation Report, 2019 by National Tiger Conservation Authority stressed the need for review 
of Chital breeding by technical institute.  
Inadequate focus on research that could feed into t he planning of conservation efforts, was a 
challenge that deserves attention of the Government . As a result, timely course-corrections 
through management interventions could not be adopt ed and the conservation endeavours 
undertaken could not be revisited in the light of possible research findings.  
The State Government agreed (September 2021) to the observation. 
2.4 Funding conservation  
Protected Areas receive funds under Centrally Sponsored Scheme (CSS) from the Ministry of 
Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Government of India against requests for grants 
from the State Government. The State Government als o provide budget under Schemes such 
as National Park, Compensation for Human Casualty b y Wild Animals, Compensation for 
Relocation of Villages, and Wildlife Management outside Protected Areas. Further, funds were 
also sanctioned under Development Fund and the Compensatory Afforestation Fund. 
During the period 2014-19, a sum of ` 633.32 crore was spent under the Centrally Sponsored 
Scheme and ` 1,265.92 crore under the four State Schemes in the State, as shown in Table 2.8 
below:  
Table 2.8: Expenditure under Central and State Schemes 
(`` `` in crore) 
Sl. No. Name of the Scheme Expenditure 
1 Centrally Sponsored Scheme 633.32 
2 State Schemes  
1 National Park 483.37 
2 Compensation for Human Casualties by Wild Animals 50.01 
3 Compensation for Relocation of Villages 642.47 
4 Wildlife Management outside Protected Areas 90.07 
Total 1265.92 
(Source: Appropriation Accounts) 
                                                           
33      Kuno National Park, Madhav National Park, Nau radehi Wildlife Sanctuary and Obedullaganj Division. 

Chapter 2: Planning for Conservation and Protection of Wildlife and Management of Habitats 
21 
2.4.1 Centrally Sponsored Scheme  
Status of sanction and expenditure during 2014-19 u nder the Centrally Sponsored Scheme in 
selected Tiger Reserves and Protected Areas is given in Table 2.9 below: 
Table 2.9: Sanctioned amount, expenditure and savings under the Centrally Sponsored Scheme 
(`` `` in crore) 
Year Sanctioned 
Amount Month of Sanction Deducted 
Amount34 
Net 
sanctioned 
Amount 
Expenditure Saving 
(5-6) 
Percentage 
of Saving 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
2014-15 68.86 May-Nov 2014 1.85 67.00 61.04 5.96 8.90 
2015-16 33.33 June – Sep 2015 0.58 32.75 30.31 2.44 7.24 
2016-17 280.95 June – Sep  2016 1.46 279.49 194.79 84.70 30.30 
2017-18 246.57 May - Sep 2017 16.53 230.04 221.65 8.39 3.65 
2018-19 125.58 Jul 2018 - Jan 2019 12.40 113.18 98.09 15.09 13.33 
Total 755.29  32.82 722.46 605.88 116.59 16.14 
(Source: Forest Department) 
• A sum of ` 116.59 crore (16.1 per cent ) remained unspent against net sanction of 
` 722.46 crore. This led to deduction of ` 32.82 crore from the sanctions for the following 
year. Savings remained under 14 per cent except in 2016-17 mainly because ` 75.50 crore 
received for relocation of villages for Sanjay Tiger Reserve, could not be utilized; 
• We checked activity-wise expenditure and found that  out of a total of 2,258 activities 
undertaken in the sampled six Tiger Reserves and 13 Protected Areas during 2014-19, there 
was 50 to 100 per cent savings in 387 activities, such as cause-way constr uction, dyke 
construction, research activities, wireless mainten ance, procurement of vaccines, health 
camps, check-dam constructions, meadow development etc.;  
• During the period 2014-19, only ` 755.29 crore was sanctioned by Ministry of 
Environment, Forest and Climate Change from Central ly Sponsored Scheme against the 
demand of ` 947.81 crore in Annual Plan of Operations of six Ti ger Reserves and 
13 Protected Areas. Thus, there was a shortfall of ` 192.52 crore against the demands by 
the Divisions.   
The Managers of these Tiger Reserves/ Protected Areas largely attributed the savings to delay 
in sanction of the funds by Government of India dur ing the year and restrictions imposed by 
the Government on payments for certain activities.  
Reply is not acceptable as the funds were normally received by September every year (in 32 
out of 35 sanctions during 2014-19). Further, the r estrictions on spending imposed by the 
Finance Department of the State Government in the last quarter of the year, do not apply to the 
Central Schemes. 
The State Government agreed (September 2021) to the observation.   
                                                           
34  Deducted amount is unspent amount of previous yea r which was not revalidated for succeeding year. 

Report on Wildlife Conservation and Sustainable Management of Wildlife Habitats in Madhya Pradesh 
 
22 
2.4.2 Annual Plan of Operations  
We noted that Annual Plan of Operations for all the  sampled Divisions were submitted to the 
Government of India. However, the funds were not demanded for some activities in the Annual 
Plan of Operations for the period of 2014-19 although included in the Tiger Conservation Plan 
and Management Plans. For instance, in Kanha Tiger Reserve, funds were not demanded for 
Amelioration of Meadows and Eco-development works, though these were included in the 
Tiger Conservation Plan (2011-21). Similar instances of exclusion of activities from the Annual 
Plan of Operations although included in the Managem ent Plans, were found in Bagdara 
Wildlife Sanctuary, Nauradehi Wildlife Sanctuary and Madhav National Park. 
The Department had other sources, such as Developme nt Funds, Compensatory Afforestation 
Fund and State Budget, from which it could feed the activities which had not received sanctions 
under the Centrally Sponsored Scheme. But there was no mechanism to ensure that operations 
(included in the Tiger Conservation Plan/Management  Plan) which did not receive sanctions 
under the Centrally Sponsored Scheme, were funded t hrough other sources. As a result, the 
Department could not assure that Tiger Reserves/ Protected Areas were managed according to 
the prescriptions in the Tiger Conservation Plan/ M anagement Plan. The State Government 
agreed (September 2021) to the observation.   
Box 2.9: Management of Feral Cattle in Kuno National Park 
One of the problems faced in the Kuno National Park  was of herds of feral cattle left behind 
by the villagers of relocated villages, which began to feed themselves on grasslands leading to 
increase in thorn bushes and weeds. To overcome thi s situation, the Management Plan 
prescribed measures such as fencing of the yarding sites of the feral cattle. 
However, the Management did not demand funds for the activities. We also noted that the Kuno 
National Park is a selected site for introduction o f Lion and African Cheetah. The problem of 
over-grazing could lead to paucity of food for herb ivores which will impact the population of 
their predators.  
The Divisional Forest Officer, Kuno National Park a ssured (September 2019) that the 
prescriptions of Management Plan on feral cattle would be implemented. 
2.4.3 Utilisation of funds for protection of biodiv ersity and wildlife in Protected Areas 
concerned in cases of land diversion  
In addition to funds under Centrally Sponsored Sche me and State schemes, the Department 
spent ` 198.10 crore against receipts under the Developmen t Fund (Entry Fee) and 
` 163.23 crore under the Compensatory Afforestation Fund during 2014-19. 
As per the Hon’ble Supreme Court orders in October 200235 and Sub Section 3 (IV) of Section 4 
of Compensatory Afforestation Fund Act, 2016, money re coverable from user agencies shall 
be credited into the Compensatory Afforestation Fun d of a State for undertaking activities 
relating to the protection of biodiversity and wildlife in cases of diversion of forest land under 
                                                           
35  Order dated 30 October 2002 in IA No. 566 in WP(C) No. 202/1995. 

Chapter 2: Planning for Conservation and Protection of Wildlife and Management of Habitats 
23 
Protected Areas. Five per cent of the project cost was to be charged for undertak ing activities 
related to protection of biodiversity and wildlife.  
However, based on a proposal (December 2017) of the  PCCF/ Wildlife, the State Wildlife 
Board decided (December 2017) that due to delays in  processing of funds, the money would 
be deposited in the accounts of Madhya Pradesh Tige r Foundation Society 36, instead of 
depositing it in the Compensatory Afforestation Fun d. The Society is, however outside the 
audit purview of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
We noted that ` 32.92 crore received in nine Divisions 37 between December 2017 and 
December 2018 was deposited in the Madhya Pradesh T iger Foundation Society accounts. 
PCCF/ Wildlife did not produced to us records relat ing to sanctions of the funds and 
expenditure and hence, we could not ascertain wheth er the funds were utilised for intended 
purposes only. 
In reply, the State Government stated (July 2021) t hat the levy of a maximum five per cent 
amount was additional to that being deposited in th e Compensatory Afforestation Fund. The 
reply is in contravention to the orders of Hon’ble Supreme Court and provisions of 
Compensatory Afforestation Fund Act on depositing s uch money into the Compensatory 
Afforestation Fund.   
2.5 Recommendations  
In view of the findings above, we recommend the following: 
1. The Forest Department may support preparation of Ti ger Conservation Plans/ 
Management Plans through dedicated team, and a laid  down process along with 
comprehensive Guidelines for preparation of Managem ent Plans may also be 
prescribed;   
2. The State Government may ensure preparation and approval of Zonal Master Plans in 
a time-bound manner and ensure monitoring of activi ties included therein in an 
effective manner;  
3. The Department may establish institutional tie-ups to cause research in areas identified 
in the Tiger Conservation Plans/ Management Plans; 
4. The Department may put in place a monitoring tool t hat tracks allocation and 
utilisation of funds on each activity identified in  the Tiger Conservation Plans/ 
Management Plans. 
                                                           
36  A society working under Madhya Pradesh Forest Dep artment for conservation of Tigers. 
37  Bandhavgarh Tiger Reserve, Pench Tiger Reserve, S anjay Tiger Reserve, Satpura Tiger Reserve, Dewas 
Division, Madhav National Park, Nauradehi Division, Damoh Division and Obedullaganj Division.   

 
 
Chapter 3 
Conservation and Protection of Wildlife 
Summary 
We found that the number of Tigers increased by 71 per cent to reach 526 in the 2018 Tiger 
census, which was the highest in any State in the c ountry. However, there were mixed results 
in conservation of other endangered species due to inadequacies in planning for translocation 
and monitoring. Increasing Human-Wildlife Conflict has caused destruction of wildlife and 
generated animosity against wild animals and Protec ted Areas. The ground situation showed 
increasing trend in cases of Human-Wildlife Conflic ts due to lack of prescribing and 
implementing site-specific measures to minimise the  conflicts. Translocation is a wildlife 
conservation measure which require the capture, tra nsport and release of a species from one 
location to another. Our audit found that in the ca se of inter-state translocation of two Tigers 
to Satkosia Tiger Reserve in Odisha, protection measures at the new site was not ensured before 
translocation. This resulted in loss of one Tiger a nd the other Tiger also could not adopt to 
conditions at the new site. However, the Department  has been successful in translocation of 
Tigers in Sanjay Tiger Reserve, Panna Tiger Reserve and Nauradehi Wildlife Sanctuary.  
The Special Tiger Protection Force in three selected Tiger Reserves (Bandhavgarh, Kanha and 
Pench) was not established by the State Government despite being stipulated in the tripartite 
agreement (2009-2010) between the National Tiger Co nservation Authority, the Government 
of Madhya Pradesh and the Forest Department. The processes of assessments and distribution 
of Arms and Wireless sets were deficient and Metal Detectors were not used in routine 
patrolling. 
The security threats to wildlife include poaching, encroachments, electrocution, poisoning, 
snare, accidents on roads and railway lines, etc. 115 Tiger deaths and 209 Leopard deaths were 
reported between 2014 and 2018 due to various reaso ns38. Poaching and seizures contributed 
to 19 per cent of the total Tiger and Leopard deaths in the sampl ed divisions during 2014 to 
2018. Causative factors on poaching specially the high incidence in Balaghat district, were not 
analysed to aid a suitable plan for its reduction. Retrofitting measures against linear 
infrastructure, like roads and railway lines was also not found to be adequate.  
The Forest Departmental officials have been vested with power to register forest offence cases, 
investigate and take legal action. We noted a reduction in pending forest offence cases, as well 
as new registered cases, aided by welcome progress in investigation. However, about 
20 per cent of total investigated cases were still pending aft er investigation for compounding 
or to be taken to Court.   
Eco-tourism provides an opportunity to link a Prote cted Area to a wider population and helps 
in building support for conservation. However, it w as evident that excessive tourism was 
affecting the stress levels of wildlife in Tiger Re serves due to violation of National Tiger 
Conservation Authority’s directions in this regard.    
                                                           
38 Territorial fights, Electrocution, Poisoning, Dise ase, Accidents, Snare, etc. 

Report on Wildlife Conservation and Sustainable Management of Wildlife Habitats in Madhya Pradesh 
 
26 
Disease control is also essential for timely action  to prevent disease outbreaks and control 
large-scale mortality. Cattle are the major source of such diseases, followed by dogs. We noted 
that the Forest Department has not established an e ffective co-ordination mechanism with 
Animal Husbandry and Dairy Department to obtain dat a of total cattle to be vaccinated in 
villages around the Protected Areas. In the absence  of data on available cattle, we could not 
draw assurance on their vaccination in Protected Ar eas. There was no staff to carry out 
immunisation of cattle and dogs in and around the N ational Parks and Wildlife Sanctuaries, 
and survey of the parasitic and infectious diseases periodically. We noted that except in Panna 
Tiger Reserve, immunisation of dogs and cats were n ot done against the threat of Canine 
Distemper Virus.   
Wildlife conservation encompasses myriad activities.   
This Chapter has been segregated into six parts to cover major activities involving mortality of 
wildlife; investigation and action on wildlife offe nces; mitigating safety measures; 
administrative measures for tiger conservation; res ourcing conservation; and other issues 
affecting conservation efforts.   
Box 3.1: Status of Tiger conservation 
Being at the top of the food chain, a viable popula tion of Tigers also ensure viable populations of 
co-predators, prey and forest, thereby ensuring the ecological viability of the entire area or habitat39.  
With a Tiger population of 308 in 2014, Madhya Prad esh slumped from the top spot in the 
country in 2006 to third in 2014. However, in 2018,  the number of Tigers increased by 
71 per cent to reach 526 which was the highest for a State in the country. The highest increase 
was noted in Bandhavgarh Tiger Reserve where the number of Tigers rose to 104 in 2018 from 
63 (65 per cent increase) in 2014, this to be followed by Satpura (54 per cent increase) and 
Panna (47 per cent increase) Tiger Reserves.  
The Panna Tiger Reserve is situated in the northern -most area of Central India. By the year 
2009, the entire population of the Tigers was eliminated from Panna Tiger Reserve. The Tiger 
reintroduction programme was started in November 20 09 and as per the 2018 Tiger Census, 
the Tiger Reserve was filled with 25 adult Tigers, making it a success story. 
The National Tiger Conservation Authority conducted audit of 50 Tiger Reserves in the country 
under the framework of Management Effectiveness Eva luation in 2018 under various criteria 
of framework elements: context, planning, inputs, process, outputs and outcomes. Three Tiger 
Reserves in Madhya Pradesh, i.e., Pench, Kanha and Satpura, obtained Management 
Effectiveness Evaluation score between 93.75 and 90.63 per cent and were ranked among the 
top four Tiger Reserves in the country. 
But we noted that neither Bandhavgarh nor Panna Tig er Reserves had a Tiger Conservation 
Plan since December 2007. So, while currently the i ncreasing number of tigers showed the 
existence of a healthy forest, the future of these Protected Areas depend on strategic planning 
on critical areas such as the ideal number of Tiger s that limited space can optimally sustain, 
                                                           
39  Para 7.3.2 of Comprehensive Guidelines on Tiger C onservation and Tourism, issued by National Tiger 
Conservation Authority, October 2012. 

Chapter 3: Conservation and Protection of Wildlife  
27 
and how they would cope with continuously increasin g tiger densities within their non-
expanding jurisdictions, and consequent territorial  fights, prey scarcity, possible inbreeding 
being some key areas. 
3.1 Mortality of Wildlife 
Poaching and illegal trade in wild animals has emer ged as one of the most serious threats to 
wildlife in the country.   
 
Electrocuted Tiger in Kanha (Buffer) Tiger Reserve 
(October 2016) 
Tiger died due to drowning in Pench Tiger Reserve 
(January 2016) 
 
3.1.1 Incidence 
Tiger mortality 
During the period 2014-1840, a total of 115 Tiger death cases were reported in the State. Out of 
the audited 13 Divisions, 80 Tiger death cases were  reported in seven Divisions, constituting 
70 per cent of the total cases in the State, as shown in Table 3.1 below: 
Table 3.1: Reported cases of Tiger deaths during 2014 to 2018 
Sl. 
No. 
Division Poaching/ 
seizure41 
Territorial 
Fights42 
Diseases Others43 Total 
cases 
1 Bandhavgarh Tiger Reserve 5 12 3 5 25 
2 Kanha Tiger Reserve 4 21 1 4 30 
3 Pench Tiger Reserve 3 5 1 3 12 
4 Panna Tiger Reserve 1 1 0 3 5 
5 Three other Divisions44 3 1 1 3 8 
 Total 16 40 6 18 80 
(Source: Forest Department) 
Thus, Kanha and Bandhavgarh Tiger Reserves had the highest Tiger mortality during 2014 to 
2018, constituting nearly 70 per cent of the total Tiger deaths in these seven Divisions. Within 
that, Kanha and Bandhavgarh Tiger Reserves had 70 per cent and 48 per cent mortality due to 
territorial fights during 2014 to 2018. Thus, territorial fights constitute the main challenge with 
regard to tiger mortality. A Research45 paper published in ‘Journal of Recent Sciences, 2015’, 
                                                           
40  The data is captured annually (January to December), hence 2019 figure are not included in this Chapter. 
41  Seizure of dead remains of a wild animal in posse ssion of any person or in a place. 
42 Territorial fights/ cannibalism. 
43 Others include death of orphan cubs, natural death s, train accident, drowning and old age cases. 
44  Obedullaganj Division, Sanjay Tiger Reserve and S atpura Tiger Reserve.  
45  ‘Causes and Consequences of Tiger Mortality in Co rbett Tiger Reserve’ by Sanjeev Kumar. 


Report on Wildlife Conservation and Sustainable Management of Wildlife Habitats in Madhya Pradesh 
 
28 
identified depletion of food leading to struggle wi thin same species, as a causative factor for 
territorial fights. Fighting cases are observed in the mating season too, between November and 
February. We also noted that during 2014 to 2018, 1 3 out of 33 cases of territorial fights and 
cannibalism occurred in Bandhavgarh and Kanha Tiger  Reserves between months of 
November to February constituting 39 per cent of total cases.  Higher numbers of territorial 
fights in Kanha and Bandhavgarh Tiger Reserves coul d also be attributed to the high 
concentration of prey base in some pockets where food and water are available.  
Box 3.2: Use of M-STrIPES 
M-STrIPES46 system is a tool for data-collection developed by the National Tiger Conservation 
Authority. M-STrIPES produces reports and maps synt hesizing information on illegal 
activities, wildlife crime, protection efforts and ecological status at desired temporal and spatial 
scales. Maps generated through this system are sent  to the PCCF/ Wildlife on monthly basis 
by all the Tiger Reserves. 
We examined these maps in the selected Tiger Reserv es. An illustrative example of 
Bandhavgarh Tiger Reserve is reproduced below, wher e the pink and green dots show the 
sightings of carnivores and herbivores respectively: 
Map 3.1: Location of Carnivore and Herbivores sightings in Bandhavgarh Tiger Reserve 
   
Carnivores sighting report map (November 2019) Herbivores sighting report map (November 2019) 
(Source: Bandhavgarh Tiger Reserve) 
We noted from the Reports that the carnivores and herbivores sightings repeatedly occurred in 
the same pockets only, possibly due to lack of suitable habitat, food and forage in other areas. 
Such concentration of wildlife at specific spots ca n lead to both territorial fights, as well as 
allow poachers to make easy kills. It may be recall ed that 12 Tigers had died in Bandhavgarh 
Tiger Reserve due to territorial fights and five on account of poaching/ seizure (refer to Table 
3.1 in Paragraph 3.1.1) during 2014 to 2018. Howeve r, there was nothing on record to show 
that the inputs from M-STrIPES as above were used for such analysis. 
In reply, the PCCF/ Wildlife stated (July 2020) tha t prey concentration is found along the 
forests in plains, grasslands and riparian areas, a nd hence the Tiger density is higher in these 
                                                           
46  Monitoring system for Tigers- intensive protectio n and ecological status, a mobile application based  
monitoring system developed by National Tiger Conse rvation Authority presently used in Tiger Reserves 
only. 


Chapter 3: Conservation and Protection of Wildlife  
29 
areas. Lesser use of certain areas by Tigers is thu s not a consequence of lack of management 
interventions.  
However, there was nothing on record to show that the Department had used M-STrIPES data 
for fine tuning its interventions.  
In reply, the Government stated in July 2021 that s ince there has been 71 per cent increase in 
Tiger population in the State, the territorial figh ts are normal behavior in Tiger ecology. 
70 per cent of deaths of Tiger in the above seven Divisions was due to 75 per cent population 
of Tigers being in those Divisions. The State Gover nment did not provide the studies on the 
causative factors or its plans to reduce the incidence of territorial fights. 
Leopard mortality 
A total of 209 Leopard deaths had been reported in the State between 2014 and 2018. Out of 
the 13 audited Divisions, 49 Leopards had died in nine Divisions, constituting over 23 per cent 
of the total cases in the State during 2014 to 2018.  Details are shown in Table 3.2 below: 
Table 3.2: Reported cases of Leopard deaths during 2014 to 2018 
Sl. 
No. Division Poaching/ 
Seizure47 
Fight with 
Tiger/ Others 
Road and Train 
Accidents Others48 Total 
1 Bandhavgarh Tiger Reserve 2 3 0 3 8 
2 Kanha Tiger Reserve 2 2 1 3 8 
3 Obedullaganj Division 0 0 4 4 8 
4 Panna Tiger Reserve 0 1 0 3 4 
5 Pench Tiger Reserve 1 4 0 3 8 
6 Sanjay Tiger Reserve 0 0 1 3 4 
7 Satpura Tiger Reserve 2 2 1 2 7 
8 Two other Divisions49 1 0 0 1 2 
 Total 8 12 7 22 49 
(Source: Forest Department) 
Our audit also pointed out deficiencies in reportin g. For instance, two cases of the death of 
Leopards in April 2016 and April 2017 in Madhav Nat ional Park were not informed to the 
PCCF/ Wildlife. In case of the incident in April 20 16, the post-mortem suggested death by 
hemorrhagic shock and on the recommendation of the doctor, biological samples were sent to 
Forensic Science Laboratory, Gwalior and Wildlife F orensic and Health Centre, Jabalpur for 
examination. However, the case was disposed off by the Director, Madhav National Park 
assigning the reasons as natural death in September 2016, even without receiving the Forensic 
Reports. The Director stated (December 2019) that t he cases would be reported to the PCCF/ 
Wildlife and forensic reports would be obtained and decision would be taken accordingly.  
Poaching was a major cause for fatalities, contributing 24 out of the total 129 Tiger and Leopard 
death (19 per cent) in the 13 audited Divisions during 2014 to 2018. Further details are shown 
in Table 3.3.  
 
                                                           
47  Including ‘Electrocutions’.  
48 ‘Others’ include death due to sickness, drowning, natural reasons and unknown causes. 
49  Madhav National Park and Van Vihar National Park 

Report on Wildlife Conservation and Sustainable Management of Wildlife Habitats in Madhya Pradesh 
 
30 
Table 3.3: Reported Poaching and Seizure cases of Tiger and Leopard 
Poaching cases Tiger Leopard 
Poaching/ Seizure Poaching/ Seizure 
In the State 35 67 
In selected units 16 8 
Per Cent in Selected units 46 12 
(Source: Forest Department) 
The State Government accepted (September 2021) the observation.   
3.2 Investigation and action on wildlife offences  
Various offences, like poaching, illegal mining, il legal felling and removal of tree, 
encroachment, causing fire, etc. are defined in the  Indian Forest Act, 1927 and Wildlife 
(Protection) Act, 1972. Forest Officers are vested with powers of registration and investigation 
of offence, as well as powers to compound50 offences under these Acts.  
3.2.1 Registration, Investigation and Disposal of O ffence Cases 
Year wise status of cases registered, investigated and compounded in audited Divisions are 
given in Table 3.4. 
Table 3.4: Status of registered, investigated and compounded cases 
Year Opening 
Balance 
Cases 
Registered  Total Cases 
Investigated  
Pending 
Investigations 
Cases 
Compounded   
Cases submitted 
to Courts 
2014  6137 5286 11423 4274 7149 4506 281 
2015 8128 4852 12980 5426 7554 6038 311 
2016 7261 4932 12193 8426 3767 6516 624 
2017 5266 5327 10593 5845 4748 2272 337 
2018 4419 4050 8469 5070 3399 1919 323 
Total  24447  29041  21251 1876 
(Source: Forest Department) 
We noted that an average of 4,889 cases of offences  were registered in 12 51 out of 13 audited 
Divisions annually during 2014 to 2018. In 12 out of 13 audited Divisions, the registered cases 
reduced by 23 per cent while cases investigated increased by 19 per cent during 2014 to 2018, 
with a high of 8,426 in 2016. As a result, pendency  of cases came down significantly by 
55 per cent— from a high of 7,554 in 2015 to a low of 3,399 in 2018. All these numbers showed 
welcome progress in investigation, and a possible reduction in offences committed as well. We 
further noted that in monitoring reports, the closi ng balance from the previous years were 
changed while showing opening balances in succeedin g years in all Divisions without 
assigning any reasons. 
Against 29,041 cases investigated in these Division s, 21,251 (73 per cent) were compounded 
and another 1,876 cases were submitted to Courts. Thus, the remaining 5,914 cases, accounting 
for 1/5th of the cases, were awaiting action (compounding or  initiating legal proceeding) after 
investigation at the Divisional level. Reasons for delays were not found on record. We also 
noted that the Department was hamstrung by lack of personnel at various levels (details at para 
3.5.2.1) which too could hamper speedy action.   
                                                           
50  Establish a compromise on the request of offender  after levy of fine in lieu of offence. 
51  No case registered in Van Vihar National Park. 

Chapter 3: Conservation and Protection of Wildlife  
31 
The State Government agreed (September 2021) to the observation.   
Box 3.3: Illegal trade of Pangolin and Turtle 
There were a total of 16 cases of seizure of Pangolins and 21 cases of seizure of Turtles reported 
in the State during 2014 to 2018. Balaghat district  was the prime hotspot of poaching, 
accounting for 50 per cent of cases involving Pangolins and 29 per cent of cases of seizure of 
Turtles. Given the fact that Balaghat district is one of the only two districts in the State to have 
over 50 per cent of its geographical area under forest cover, and a lso has a significant part of 
the Tropical Dry Deciduous Forest Type Group within  its boundaries, it is of critical 
importance to ensure adequate action by the Forest Department to safeguard the flora and fauna 
in this district. However, the Department did not analyse the reasons for the high crime rate in 
Balaghat district. No research was caused on this issue either. 
During 2014-18, 37 cases relating to Pangolin and Turtle trade were registered in 16 Divisions, 
of which 26 were pending in Courts and 10 were pend ing investigation with the Department 
while one has been disposed off. Six out of 36 which were pending since 2014-16. 
Indian Pangolin Indian Tent Turtle 
(Photo: Sanjay Shukla) (Photo: Abhinandan Shukla) 
3.2.2 Forensic Investigations 
Forensic investigation is important to identify the  species of the sample collected from the 
scene of crime. Post-mortem is required to be condu cted and sample of visceral content and 
tissue sent to a reputed laboratory for forensic an alysis. For the specific requirements of 
deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) profiling52 and histopathology53 tests, the tissue samples are sent 
to the Wildlife Institute of India or any recognized institute.  
There are five forensic laboratories in the State. We had earlier reported54 delay in finalization 
of reports in Forensic Laboratories in Madhya Prade sh. Inadequate modernization of the 
                                                           
52  Test is required to identify the species for appl ying suitable provisions of forest laws. The result of the test 
decides whether the species is a wild animal or not  and also whether it is listed under the Schedules of 
Wildlife (Protection) Act 1972. 
53  Histopathology test is to diagnose and study the di seases of tissues for detection of causes of death or 
illness. 
54  Paragraph 2.2.13.1 of the Audit Report on General a nd Social Sectors of the State of Madhya Pradesh fo r 
the year ended 31 March 2016. 


Report on Wildlife Conservation and Sustainable Management of Wildlife Habitats in Madhya Pradesh 
 
32 
laboratories and shortage of manpower were the prim ary reasons behind the delays. Delays 
appear to persist as in the case below, where the report was delayed by more than three years. 
Box 3.4: Inadequate monitoring of forensic investigations 
Samples on 243 cases were sent by 19 Divisions 55 (between 2000 and 2017) to the Centre for 
Cellular and Molecular Biology, Hyderabad for DNA a nalysis to identify the species. While 
183 reports were collected, reports on the remaining 60 cases pertaining to the period between 
August 2007 and November 2015 were not received up to March 2017. These were finally 
received by the PCCF/ Wildlife in April 2017. But t he reports remained with the PCCF/ 
Wildlife; they were sent to the respective Divisions in June 2019 at the instance of Audit.  
The State Government agreed (September 2021) to the observation.   
3.3 Mitigating safety measures 
3.3.1 Retrofitting measures against linear infrastr ucture 
Within many Protected Areas, roads, railway line an d transmission lines cut across the 
landscape, fragment wildlife habitat and often result in mortality of animals, thus, endangering 
many of the species that have already been severely  affected by development. We examined 
electricity, road and rail infrastructure projects in this context. 
3.3.1.1 Electrocution 
Out of 115 reported deaths of Tigers in the State d uring 2014-18, 16 were through 
electrocution, making it the second biggest cause o f deaths after territorial fights. Similarly, 
out of 209 deaths of Leopards, 21 were killed durin g the same period by electrocution. This 
problem was supposed to be addressed by insulation of open electric lines or by installing Earth 
Leakage Circuit Breakers in sensitive forest areas.  
We noted that the Divisions could not make signific ant achievements on these measures. A 
total of 1,089.6 kilometer of electric lines passed  through Tiger Reserves/ Protected Areas in 
eight56 of the audited Divisions. Besides the above, 28 el ectric lines also passed through the 
Nauradehi Division, for which the length was not on record. But only 3.6 kilometer of electric 
line (out of 1,089.6 kilometer) was insulated durin g 2013-19, that too only in Pench Tiger 
Reserve. Installation of Earth Leakage Circuit Breakers was also not done in these lines. As a 
result, electrocution remains a significant threat to wildlife in the Protected Areas in the State. 
One of the reasons for poor implementation was lack of funds. We noted that Chief Wild Life 
Warden did not receive funds demanded (August 2013) amounting to ` 139.26 crore from the 
National Tiger Conservation Authority for insulatio n of 807.50 kilometer of electric line 
passing through 12 Forest Divisions. Alternate sources of funding this activity was not however 
explored.  
                                                           
55  Balaghat (South), Bandhavgarh Tiger Reserve, Betul, Bhopal, Burhanpur, Chhindwara (East), Chhindwara 
(South), Damoh, Guna, Gwalior, Hoshangabad, Panna, Rewa, Sagar, Sehore, Sheopur, Sidhi, Seoni (South) 
and Seoni (North). 
56 Bandhavgarh Tiger Reserve, Kanha Core and Buffer T iger Reserves, Panna Tiger Reserve, Pench Tiger 
Reserve, Sanjay Tiger Reserve, Satpura Tiger Reserve and Madhav National Park. 

Chapter 3: Conservation and Protection of Wildlife  
33 
3.3.1.2  Road kills  
A total of 339 animals reportedly died in road kills in nine57 out of 13 audited Divisions during 
2014-18. The Hon’ble Supreme Court in its order58 on 1 March 2013, instructed States to install 
certain measures, such as speed breakers, to limit speed to 20 kilometer/ hour and ban night 
traffic in Protected Areas. The Wildlife Institute of India’s Guidelines (October 2016) 
prescribed construction of underpasses according to the width of the road.  
Box 3.5: Mitigation measure adopted in Kanha Tiger Reserve 
We noted that in State Highway-26 passing through K anha Tiger Reserve, measures such as 
speed limit, speed breakers and night traffic ban have been implemented. The time of entry and 
exit are noted at the barrier and the time differen ce thereon, provided the data for monitoring 
speed control.   
In none of the other Tiger Reserves/ Protected Area s, the night traffic was banned or speed 
limit imposed. Inadequacies noticed in retrofitting measures in the road passing through Tiger 
Reserves/ Protected Areas are detailed in Appendix 3.1.  
Box 3.6: Road mitigation measures adopted in National Highway-7 
Wildlife clearance of the project in April 2018 inc luded 4.493 hectare land of Pench Mowgli 
Wildlife Sanctuary and 3.744 kilometer road. The sa nction included conditions such as 
construction of 14 underpasses etc. However, there was no provision of night traffic and speed 
limit or for sound barriers. Snake-specific mitigat ion measures were also not provisioned 
despite threat to snakes highlighted in a research report59. 
The State Government agreed (September 2021) to the observation.  
3.3.1.3 Railway lines  
Railway lines pass through two of the audited Divis ions, i.e. Sanjay Tiger Reserve and 
Obedullaganj Division. Out of the total 48 registered wildlife death cases in these Divisions, a 
total of 28 cases (58 per cent ) occurred due to train accidents. The PCCF/ Wildli fe had 
instructed all Field Directors and Regional Chief C onservators of Forest in May 2017 to map 
and geo-tag the locations in which wild animals had died in train accidents and to identify the 
length in which any type of barricade, underpasses/  overpasses were to be constructed. 
However, we were not provided with records to show that this activity was undertaken. We 
examined the mitigation measures in respect of two railway lines, results of which are detailed 
in Table 3.5. 
 
 
 
                                                           
57  Bandhavgarh Tiger Reserve, Kanha Core, Kanha Buffer , Madhav National Park, Nauradehi Division, 
Obedullaganj Division, Panna Tiger Reserve, Pench Tiger Reserve and Satpura Tiger Reserve.  
58  IA No. 2062-63 in WP(C) No 202/ 1995 
59  ‘ Spatial pattern and factors influencing the mortali ty of snakes on the National Highway-7 along Pench 
Tiger Reserve’, A. Pragatheesh and Asha Rajvanshi, Wildlife Institute of India, 2013. 

Report on Wildlife Conservation and Sustainable Management of Wildlife Habitats in Madhya Pradesh 
 
34 
Table 3.5: Deficiencies in implementing mitigation measures on Railway lines 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
Protected Area/ 
Tiger Reserve 
Length of 
Rail line (in 
Kilometre) 
Reported mortality  
(2014 to 2018) Deficiency 
1 Ratapani 
Wildlife 
Sanctuary 
41.420 Four Leopards and four 
Wild Boar. Further three 
Tigers also died in 
Railway line near to the 
Ratapani Wildlife 
Sanctuary. 
Speed restriction of 40 kilometer per hour  
imposed by National Board for Wild Life. 
However, Forest Department revoked the speed 
restriction on the request of Additional General  
Manager, West Central Railway. 
2 Sanjay Tiger 
Reserve 
27.500 20 wild animals, such as 
Chital, Chinkara, Wild 
Boar, Hyena and Bear. 
• Site for underpasses had not been identified, 
sites selected for chain-link fencing was also not 
intimated to the Chief Engineer (Works), West 
Central Railway.  
• The C ommittee for monitoring of safety 
measures was not constituted by the PCCF/  
Wildlife. 
(Source: Forest Department) 
The State Government agreed (September 2021) to the observation.   
3.4 Administrative measures for tiger conservation 
3.4.1 Establishment of Special Tiger Protection For ce  
Three60 Tiger Reserves of Madhya Pradesh were selected by the National Tiger Conservation 
Authority for raising, arming and deploying the Spe cial Tiger Protection Forces. A tripartite 
agreement was signed between the National Tiger Con servation Authority, the State 
Government and Field Directors of these three Tiger  Reserves in 2009-10. Besides the quick 
response, the Force was also expected to have a deterrent impact on poaching. 
However, the Special Tiger Protection Force was not established in any of the three designated 
Tiger Reserves. The PCCF/ Wildlife stated (June 201 9) that the request for sanction of new 
posts and provision for budget for the Special Tiger Protection Force staff is pending with the 
State Government. We noted that the PCCF/ Wildlife had sent the proposal to the State 
Government for creation of Special Tiger Protection  Force only in February 2018, i.e. after 
eight years of signing the Memorandum of Understand ing with the National Tiger 
Conservation Authority. Only issue was funding. 
Box 3.7: Issues of territorial jurisdiction 
Out of the 115 Tiger death cases during 2014 to 201 8, 79 cases were reported in Protected 
Areas, 29 in Territorial Divisions and seven in the area under management of Madhya Pradesh 
State Forest Development Corporation. In January 20 18, PCCF/ Wildlife suggested to 
Managing Director, Madhya Pradesh State Forest Deve lopment Corporation to transfer 
wildlife dominated areas from Madhya Pradesh State Forest Development Corporation to 
Territorial Forest Divisions. Actions taken by the Managing Director on the suggestion of 
PCCF/ Wildlife in this matter were not available on  records. Further, four Tigers died (three 
cases of Poaching/ seizure and one death case) in the areas under Madhya Pradesh State Forest 
                                                           
60  Bandhavgarh, Kanha and Pench. 

Chapter 3: Conservation and Protection of Wildlife  
35 
Development Corporation (Barghat Project, Mohgaon P roject, Lamta Project and Kundam 
Project) in 2018 only. 
The State Government agreed (September 2021) to the observation.   
3.4.2 State Level Tiger Strike Force 
There is a State Level Tiger Strike Force, as well as five Regional Tiger Strike Forces, in 
operation in the State.   
During 2014-18, the State Level Tiger Strike Force registered 27 cases of wildlife offences, of 
which a total of 23 cases filed by the State Level Tiger Strike Force were pending in Courts (as 
on October 2019). Two cases from 2015 and 2018 were being investigated by the Department 
while in respect of two remaining cases, the penalties have been awarded.  
The pendency of Court cases called for administrati ve action. But the Legal Cell was not 
established since inception of State Level Tiger St rike Force and the posts of Prosecution 
Officers requested in 2017-18 by the PCCF/ Wildlife were also not sanctioned as of September 
2020. 
The PCCF/ Wildlife stated in July 2020 that Government of India has been requested to declare 
the PCCF/ Wildlife as a law enforcement agency and a proposal had also been sent to the State 
Government for establishment of a separate Legal Cell, both of which were pending. 
3.5 Resourcing conservation 
3.5.1 Equipment 
Wireless sets 
In deep forest areas, mobile phone networks are oft en not available, especially in inviolate 
Protected Areas, and thus, availability of wireless  network becomes important. Wireless sets 
are also the means of broadcast as one message could be sent simultaneously to all concerned. 
Five61 out of the 13 audited Divisions had not assessed the requirement of wireless sets. These 
Divisions had 698 active wireless sets; another 182 sets were unusable.  
In the other eight62 Divisions, requirement was assessed at 2,012 wireless sets. However, only 
1,249 usable wireless sets were available and anoth er 793 sets were beyond repair. These 
unserviceable wireless sets were not replaced.  
Arms 
The 2nd National Wildlife Action Plan (2002-2016) recommen ded that the Forest Department 
officials must have a status at par with the State Police in the carriage and use of weapons in 
self-defence and in protecting wildlife and their h abitat. The State Government therefore 
provided Arms to the Forest Department, but only for purpose of the self-defence. Deficiencies 
noticed in the 13 sampled Divisions are as following: 
                                                           
61  Dewas Division, Kanha Buffer Tiger Reserve, Obedullaganj Division, Sanjay Tiger Reserve and Van Vihar 
National Park. 
62 Bandhavgarh Tiger Reserve, Kanha Tiger Reserve (Co re), Kuno National Park, Nauradehi Division, Panna 
Tiger Reserve, Pench Tiger Reserve, Satpura Tiger Reserve and Madhav National Park.  

Report on Wildlife Conservation and Sustainable Management of Wildlife Habitats in Madhya Pradesh 
 
36 
• In eight 63 Divisions, assessment of Arms was not made but a t otal of 334 Arms were 
available; 
• In Kanha Tiger Reserve, the requirement of 65 Arms was arrived at by calculating five 
Arms per Range for 13 Ranges. Available Arms in the Division was 76; 
• Three Divisions64 assessed the requirement of Arms as 67. However, t hese Divisions had 
107 Arms, which were more than the assessment. 
Further, we noted that the Obedullaganj Division ha d more availability of Arms (83) than all 
the Tiger Reserves. Thus, it could not be confirmed  whether the supplies of guns to the 
Divisions was based on rational assessment of need. 
In the 13 audited Divisions, available Arms were ke pt at the Division Office or Range Office 
or Forest Posts or at Strong Rooms of the Police Department. It was not clear how the prompt 
supply of Arms could be ensured during the times of  immediate requirements in the field. 
Further, as mentioned in Paragraph 3.5.3, Arms were available only in seven per cent inspected 
Patrolling Camps, that too in Sanjay Tiger Reserve,  Kuno National Park and Obedullaganj 
Divisions only. This indicated that the distribution of arms need a relook. 
Metal detectors  
As per the Guidelines of National Tiger Conservatio n Authority, use of Deep Search Metal 
Detectors are to be encouraged in protected areas t o detect metal leg traps and snares. During 
2014-18, four Tigers were poached in the three audited Divisions65 through use of snares. 
34 Metal Detectors were available in five Tiger Res erves66 while these were not available in 
Sanjay Tiger Reserve. In Pench Tiger Reserve, the M etal Detectors were used in cases of 
wildlife deaths for searching bullets and other met al. Only Panna Tiger Reserve used six 
available Metal Detectors for detection of traps and snares in peripheral areas.  
3.5.2 Manpower  
 
3.5.2.1 Availability 
Adequacy of manpower is vital for wildlife conserva tion and protection. However, we noted 
more than 20 per cent shortage in manpower in eight out of the 13 audite d Divisions. The 
maximum shortage was 52 per cent in the post of Deputy Ranger while it was 16 per cent in 
the post of Forest Guards. Shortage of 41 per cent in the post of Range Officer was also noticed, 
which is the top supervisory post at Range level. Further details are at Appendix 3.2.
 
Further, the Department had not fixed criterion of area for watch and ward of a Beat by Forest 
Guards67. On an average, one Forest Guard was sanctioned for 9.09 square kilometer. We noted 
that there was no standard norm for working out the  sanctioned posts and the allotted area for 
                                                           
63 Bandhavgarh Tiger Reserve, Kanha (Buffer) Tiger Re serve, Kheoni Wildlife Sanctuary, Madhav National 
Park, Panna Tiger Reserve, Pench Tiger Reserve, Nauradehi Division and Obedullaganj Division. 
64  Kuno National Park, Sanjay Tiger Reserve and Satpura Tiger Reserve. 
65  Bandhavgarh Tiger Reserve, Kanha Tiger Reserve an d Panna Tiger Reserve. 
66  Bandhavgarh (five), Kanha Core (two), Kanha Buffe r (six), Panna (six), Pench (seven) and Satpura (eight). 
67 Also known as Beat Guard. 

Chapter 3: Conservation and Protection of Wildlife  
37 
patrolling ranged from 0.10 square kilometer in Van  Vihar National Park to 18.14 square 
kilometer in Sanjay Tiger Reserve. Division-wise de tails are given in Appendix 3.3. Due to 
shortage of Forest Guards against sanctioned posts, average area of watch and ward under them 
had increased by 17 per cent in the 13 audited Divisions. The range varied from  0.11 square 
kilometer in Van Vihar National Park to 19.48 squar e kilometer in Sanjay Tiger Reserve. On 
an average, a guard was posted for 10.68 square kilometers. The Kuno National Park even had 
more working Forest Guards per square kilometer than the Tiger Reserves except Kanha Tiger 
Reserve (Core), Pench Tiger Reserve and Bandhavgarh  Tiger Reserve. This indicated that 
sanctioned as well as working strength in these Tiger Reserves were not rational.  
In reply, the Government stated (July 2021) that promotion of staff was under consideration of 
Hon’ble Supreme Court. As all posts of Deputy Range r and one third of Range Officers are 
filled by promotions, there are vacancies in these posts. The Van Vihar National Park is a Zoo 
as well as a Rescue Centre, hence manpower posting seem high there. The Kuno National Park 
has been traditionally affected with dacoit problem s and poaching, and Lions were also to be 
introduced in this Protected Area. Hence, high staff density was necessary there. However, the 
reply was silent about filling up of posts which are vacant under direct recruitment quota such 
as Range Officers and Forest Guards. It was also si lent about variation in number of Forest 
Guards per square kilometer between various Divisions. 
3.5.2.2 Training 
An essential component in ensuring optimum conservation efforts is the availability of trained 
manpower. The 2nd National Wildlife Action Plan (2002-2016) proposed the establishment of a 
Wildlife Training Center for frontline staff in each State.   
Training of Forest Service Officers 
With a view to developing a pool of professionals w ith requisite ability to manage Protected 
Areas, a post graduate diploma course in advanced w ildlife management is periodically 
organised by the Wildlife Institute of India, Dehra dun. The course is meant for in-service 
Indian Forest Service and State Forest Service offi cers of the rank of Deputy Conservator of 
Forests/ Assistant Conservator of Forests and equiv alent. Similarly, the Wildlife Institute of 
India, Dehradun also runs a Certificate Course for in-service Range Officer/ Deputy Ranger. 
We noticed that out of 55 Indian Forest Service/ St ate Forest Service Officers posted in the 
13 audited Divisions, only 10 had completed the cou rse from the Wildlife Institute of India. 
The Divisions informed us that only the Field Direc tors of Pench and Sanjay Tiger Reserves 
were trained in the Wildlife Institute of India, Dehradun. Only seven out of 90 Range Officers 
in four Divisions had the Wildlife Institute of India Certificates.  
Training to frontline staff 
As per the 2
nd National Wildlife Action Plan (2002-2016), each St ate should establish a 
Wildlife Training Centre for frontline staff. Bio-diversity Training Centre, Tala, Umaria came 
into existence in 1980 which runs 15 modules relati ng to protection, as well as Wildlife and 
Bio-diversity conservation. 

Report on Wildlife Conservation and Sustainable Management of Wildlife Habitats in Madhya Pradesh 
 
38 
We noted that the Game Guard training and orientati on courses for Forest Guards in the 
Training Centre were stopped since 2003 due to the constraint of time and personnel (trainer) 
in imparting training to Game Guards (Forest Guards) who form the frontline staff in wildlife 
conservation. 
The Field Directors/ Directors of audited Divisions  stated that workshops and seminars on 
various topics, such as forensics and collection of  samples, human wildlife conflict, etc. have 
been organised. However, the assertion was not supported by adequate documents. 
The State Government agreed (September 2021) to the observation.  
3.5.3 Patrolling Camps 
Strategically located forest camps and intensive pa trolling by the ever-vigilant staff help in 
increasing wildlife population by keeping intrusion and encroachment under control.  
In 1268 out of 13 audited Divisions, a total of 915 Patrolling Camps were operational; in Sanjay 
Tiger Reserve, 39 Patrolling Camps were inoperative  due to paucity of manpower. We 
conducted Joint Inspections of 121 Patrolling Camps, out of which 103 were in Tiger Reserves 
and rest 18 were in National Parks and Wildlife Sanctuaries. Our findings are given below: 
• Out of 103 Patrolling Camps in Tiger Reserves, 99 maintained registers and field forms 
required to record daily activities of patrolling a nd various events. Four 69 Patrolling 
Camps did not maintain the records; 
• Two70 out of four inspected Patrolling Camps of Madhav N ational Park were inactive 
at nights because the Camps did not have basic amenities, such as bed, light and water. 
We noted that there was more than 90 per cent savings in two activities, construction 
of hand pumps for Patrolling Camps, and repair and maintenance of Patrolling Camps 
for safe residing. Karera Patrolling Camp was constructed in the Forest Colony instead 
of Wildlife Sanctuary and staff was not deployed in the Camp; 
• Four71 out of 20 inspected Patrolling Camps in Pench Tige r Reserve were huts which 
did not provide adequate security to the camp staff  from rain and heat. We noted that 
demand was made for construction of 12 other Patrol ling Camps during the period of 
audit, but these four Patrolling Camps were not included in this demand. The Dewalpani 
Patrolling Camp in Nauradehi Division was built in 2017-18. During joint inspection 
(October 2019) we noticed that there were no window s and doors in the building and 
tiles were not laid. Although the payments had been  effected for these items of work 
indicating possible misappropriation.   
  
                                                           
68         Except Van Vihar National Park. 
69  Bicchi in Sanjay Tiger Reserve; and Palha, Gabdig hat and Jodatalab in Bandhavgarh Tiger Reserve.  
70 Futibawadi and Gatway Patrolling Camps. 
71  Chhindewani, Moyakatta, Mahuadan and Nalyer. 

Chapter 3: Conservation and Protection of Wildlife  
39 
  
Newly constructed Ghatpendri Patrolling Camp, 
Pench Tiger Reserve , Seoni (August 2019) 
Chhindewani Patrolling Camp run in small 
earthen structure, Pench Tiger Reserve  
(August 2019) 
  
Dewalpani Camp in Nauradehi Wildlife Sanctuary 
(October 2019) 
Kartoli Patrolling Camp in Obedullaganj Division 
(December 2019) 
(Photographs taken by Audit Party during joint inspections of Patrolling Camps with Forest Department 
officials between August 2019 and December 2019) 
• Frontline staff are to be provided kerosene, medicine, field kit, mosquito net, torch etc. 
We conducted a survey of Beat Guards who are in charge of Patrolling Camps, through 
a pre-set questionnaire, the results of which are at Appendix 3.4. Seven per cent Camps 
had Arms, 81 per cent  Camps had tiger tracer. Thus, Arms were available in few 
Patrolling Camps, compromising the ability of the p ersonnel to act in self-defense. 
Toilet facility was available in 68 per cent  Patrolling Camps only. We noted that 
Medicine Kit was available in the Camps in Tiger Re serves only. In other Protected 
Areas, fund was not made available for the same. Fu rther, there was a demand of 
` 25,000 in Kuno National Park in 2014-15 for Medicin e Kits, but the fund was not 
provided.  
• One or two daily wage labourers are engaged in Camps with Beat Guards. They stay in 
the Camps and also patrol. They are paid monthly an d are provided with ration 
allowance, water bottles and mosquito nets and heal th checkups are conducted 
periodically. They also have provisions for weekly off and prizes for good work done. 
We sought responses from 119 labourers posted in the Patrolling Camps of 1272 out of 
13 audited Divisions with regard to their satisfaction level. 31 per cent labourers spoke 
of delays in payment of wages, perticularly in Kanh a Buffer, Bandhavgarh and Panna 
Tiger Reserves. Health checkup facility was availab le to 69 per cent labourers overall 
                                                           
72          Except Van Vihar National Park. 


Report on Wildlife Conservation and Sustainable Management of Wildlife Habitats in Madhya Pradesh 
 
40 
but was not available to the labourers of two Natio nal Parks 73 and  three 74 Wildlife 
Sanctuary Divisions. In four National Park/ Wildlif e Sanctuary Divisions 75, water 
bottles were not provided and in Obedullaganj Division and Kheoni Wildlife Sanctuary, 
mosquito nets were not provided. In Kanha Tiger Res erve, there was savings of 
89 per cent against sanction of ` 3.66 lakh for medical camp. In Pench Tiger Reserve , 
` 0.50 lakh sanctioned for water bottles was not utilized. 
• All Tiger Reserves provided76 ration allowences to Camp labourers except Sanjay and 
Satpura Tiger Reserves. Weekly off was also given t o 81 per cent  labourers in 
12 audited Divisions.  The summary of the responses is shown in Appendix 3.5. 
The State Government agreed to the observation (Sep tember 2021). Regarding delays in 
payment of wages to labourers, the Principal Secretary stated during the Exit Conference, that 
this issue would be examined to bring in improvement in the situation. 
3.6 Other Issues on Conservation   
3.6.1 Human-Wildlife Conflict 
Wild animals are adversely affected by human activi ties by way of loss of habitat due to 
conversion of forest land for non-forestry purposes .  On the other hand, people residing close 
to wild animals habitats also suffer from economic loss due to crop raiding by wild animals, 
cattle depredation, attacks of carnivores on human beings and transmission of diseases from 
wild animals77. As a result, Human-Wildlife conflict occurs and slowly increases over time. 
Tiger Conservation Plans of three Tiger Reserves — Pench, Kanha and Satpura — broadly 
identify the reasons for Human-Wildlife Conflict. O f these two 78 also identify the actions 79 
prescribed in case of an event of conflict. The Bandhavgarh, Panna and Sanjay Tiger Reserves 
did not have any approved Tiger Conservation Plans (also referred in Paragraph 2.2.1). 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
73  Kuno National Park and Madhav National Park Division. 
74  Dewas (General) Division, Nauradehi Division and Obedullaganj Division. 
75  Dewas (General) Division (Kheoni Wildlife Sanctua ry), Madhav National Park, Nauradehi Wildlife 
Sanctuary and Obedullaganj Division. 
76 Clause (c) of sub-Section (1) of section 38-O of t he Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972 as amendmend by the 
Gazette of India (July 2014) ration allowance to be provided to Beat Guards as well as Camp labourers. 
77  Paragraph 5.5 of Tiger Conservation Plan (Core), Pench Tiger Reserve. 
78          Kanha and Satpura Tiger Reserves. 
79  The Management consoles the family, makes the pres cribed ex-gratia payment at the earliest and mollifies 
the anti-park anger/ protests of the villagers at t he same time. The Management also attempts to sprea d 
awareness about the inviolability of the boundaries  through public announcements and distribution of 
pamphlets in the villages, so that such instances of the human-wildlife conflicts may be kept at a minimum. 

Chapter 3: Conservation and Protection of Wildlife  
41 
Details of the compensation for cattle depredation/  injury and death/ injury of human beings 
due to attacks by carnivores are shown in Appendix 3.6. The Managements of 11 Divisions80 
paid compensation of ` 15.44 crore for 17,466 
cases of cattle injury/ predation and ` 1.66 crore 
for 1,156 cases of injury and death of human 
beings due to carnivore attacks in five years 
during 2014-19. There was no case of Human-
Wildlife Conflict in Madhav and Van Vihar 
National Parks. The total reported cases of 
Human-Wildlife conflicts had increased by 
73 per cent during 2014-19.  
Areas specifically prone to Human-Wildlife 
Conflict were not identified by the Managements of sampled Divisions, except Kanha Tiger 
Reserve, for prescribing and implementing site spec ific measures to minimise the conflicts. 
The Field Director, Kanha Tiger Reserve stated that four ranges of the Tiger Reserve had been 
identified as hot spots for Human-Wildlife Conflict cases. 
In reply, the Government stated (July 2021) that du e to increase in population of wildlife and 
habitats in corridors, instances of death and injur y to cattle had increased. Further, operations 
of regional rescue squads and awareness programmes in areas near the Protected Areas, have 
strengthened control over Human-Wildlife Conflict. However, the data shows continued 
increase of Human-Wildlife Conflicts over the year.  
Crop raiding 
Herbivores raid farms close to forests and destroy crops, developing animosity about wildlife 
among the residents. Cases of crop raiding are deal t with by Revenue Department as per the 
State Government notification of January 2014. 
We found that the Divisions did not maintain data o n crop raiding despite the fact that such 
events necessitate payment of compensation by the R evenue Department on the basis of joint 
inspection with field staff of Forest Department.  
3.6.2 Genetic swamping in wild species 
As per the 2nd National Wildlife Action Plan (2002-2016), alteration of genetic purity of certain 
wild species through inbreeding with domesticated o r feral counterparts is yet another grave 
impending threat, seriously jeopardising the geneti c purity of species like the Wild Buffalo, 
Wild Pig and Jungle Fowl. The 2 nd National Wildlife Action Plan sought to take immedi ate 
steps for preventing the entry of domestic and fera l species that may lead to genetic 
swamping81.  
Entry of domestic and feral species into wildlife h abitats are to be controlled by construction 
of cattle-proof walls and trenches and patrolling in peripheral areas. However, available Tiger 
                                                           
80  Bandhavgarh Tiger Reserve, Dewas Division (Kheoni  Wildlife Sanctuary), Kanha Tiger Reserve (Core), 
Kanha Tiger Reserve (Buffer), Kuno National Park, P anna Tiger Reserve, Nauradehi Wildlife Sanctuary, 
Pench Tiger Reserve, Obedullaganj Division, Sanjay Tiger Reserve and Satpura Tiger Reserve.  
81  Local genotypes replaced by hybrids. 
 
A Photograph depicting cattle predation  
(Source: Bandhavgarh Tiger Reserve) 


Report on Wildlife Conservation and Sustainable Management of Wildlife Habitats in Madhya Pradesh 
 
42 
Conservation Plans/ Management Plans of sampled Div isions did not address the issue of 
genetic swamping. We noted that National Tiger Conservation Authority’s Report on Status of 
Tigers, Co-predators and Prey in India, 2018 highli ghted high sightings of domestic dogs and 
livestocks in all six Tiger Reserves of the State. The Managements of the Tiger Reserves/ 
Protected Areas concerned had also not identified species vulnerable to genetic swamping. 
The State Government agreed (September 2021) to the observation.  
3.6.3 Translocation of Wildlife 
Translocation is the capture, transport and release of a species from one location to another. As 
per Section 12 (bb) of the Wildlife (Protection) Ac t, 1972, the Chief Wild Life Warden may 
grant permit for translocation of any wild animal to an alternative suitable habitat. Further, the 
National Tiger Conservation Authority’s Standard Op erating Procedure 82 specifies that 
adequacy of field protection and prey base should b e ascertained at new site prior to 
translocation. Thus, suitability of new site was the prime consideration before granting permit 
for translocation. Our findings on translocation of wildlife in the State in sampled divisions are 
as below: 
• In Sanjay Tiger Reserve, permission for translocati on of three species, i.e. Tiger, 
Leopard and Chital to the Tiger Reserve was granted  by the Chief Wild Life Warden 
during 2014-19. Six Tigers from Panna, Pench, Bandh avgarh and Kanha Tiger 
Reserves, 324 Chitals from Bandhavgarh Tiger Reserve and two Leopards from Satna 
(General) Division and Kanha Tiger Reserve were tra nslocated into Sanjay Tiger 
Reserve. As per current status provided by the Fiel d Director, two Tigers died due to 
infighting and sickness while Chital and Leopard were ranging in the Tiger Reserve; 
• The Simlipal and Satkosia Tiger Reserves in Odisha represent a lineage that produces 
Melanistic83 Tigers and is likely to be of a unique gene pool in this landscape.  There is 
a need to maintain the genetic integrity of this landscape by refraining from relocating 
tigers from other areas of Central India into this cluster84. 
National Tiger Conservation Authority approved (Dec ember 2016) reintroduction of 
Tigers in Satkosia Tiger Reserve under condition of  assuring protection and prey base 
at the new site. Six Tigers were to be relocated in the process. One male and one female 
Tiger were translocated in June 2018 from Kanha Tig er Reserve and Bandhavgarh 
Tiger Reserve respectively. The male Tiger reportedly died of injuries caused by snare 
on November 2018. Translocation process of another four Tigers was not undertaken. 
Further, the Tigress was brought back and kept in an enclosure in Kanha Tiger Reserve 
(March 2021).  
                                                           
82  Standard Operating Procedure for Active Managemen t Towards Rehabilitation of Tigers from Source 
Areas at the Landscape Level, National Tiger Conservation Authority, New Delhi. 
83  A rare gene pool on which the black stripes of the Tigers are more prominent.  
84  Standard Operating Procedure for Active Managemen t Towards Rehabilitation of Tigers from Source 
Areas at the Landscape Level, issued by National Tiger Conservation Authority. 

Chapter 3: Conservation and Protection of Wildlife  
43 
Thus, translocation of two Tigers to Satkosia Tiger Reserve was against the provisions 
of the Standard Operating Procedure of the National Tiger Conservation Authority and 
also protection measures at new site was not assured.  
In reply, the Government stated (July 2021) that translocation of two tigers to Satkosia 
was done as per the Standard Operating Procedure of  National Tiger Conservation 
Authority and protection and conservation of tigers  were the responsibility of Odisha 
State. However, the Standard Operating Procedure su ggested not to relocate tigers to 
Satkosia Tiger Reserve from other areas of Central India. Further, the PCCF/ Wildlife 
did not assure protection measures at Satkosia Tige r Reserve as required under the 
Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972 and provisions of the Standard Operating Procedure of 
the National Tiger Conservation Authority. 
• Between January 2015 and January 2017, 33 Barasingh as were translocated from 
Kanha Tiger Reserve to Satpura Tiger Reserve and kept in an enclosure with a view to 
provide the animal an alternative home. After their  population increased, 
72 Barasinghas were reported in the Tiger Reserve a s on January 2019, out of which 
51 had been released in wild (January 2019). Howeve r, regular monitoring of the 
released Barasinghas was not done after March 2020. We further noted that prior to the 
translocation, availability of sufficient swamps in  the Tiger Reserve required for their 
food was not analysed.  
The Field Director, Satpura Tiger Reserve stated (S eptember 2020) that in future, 
regular monitoring of the released animals would be  incorporated in the protocol 
prepared for translocation. However, the reply was silent about the immediate measures 
to be taken by the Field Director on monitoring of the Barasinghas released in the wild. 
Without adequate monitoring of the Barasinghas released in the wild, success or failure 
of the translocation process can not be assessed. Further, the Department did not inform 
whether a new protocol has been prepared or not.  
We also noted the successes in translocation in State detailed in Box 3.8 below: 
Box 3.8: Successful translocations   
• A five-month old female Tiger cub was rescued after  her mother died in Bandhavgarh 
Tiger Reserve in August 2014.  Later, she was translocated to Sanjay Tiger Reserve in 
March 2016. In October 2016, she was released in the wild. She delivered her first litter 
of three cubs in June 2017 and the second litter of  four cubs in March 2019. All three 
cubs of the first litter have grown up as adults an d have established their own territory 
in the forests of Sanjay Tiger Reserve. 
            Thus, an orphan cub was translocated, looked after and raised as captive animal inside 
an enclosure, released in the wild as an adult and had extended the population of the 
endangered species, setting up a good example of conservation through translocation. 

Report on Wildlife Conservation and Sustainable Management of Wildlife Habitats in Madhya Pradesh 
 
44 
 
Chital and Tiger enclosures in Dubri Range Tigress with a cub in her Den 
(Photo: Audit Party during field visit) (Photo: Range Officer, Dubri Wildlife Sanctuary) 
• Similarly, one Tiger and one Tigress were introduce d in April 2018 in the Nauradehi 
Wildlife Sanctuary under the approval (March 2018) of the Chief Wild Life Warden, 
Madhya Pradesh. These Tigers were earlier kept in G horela enclosure in Kanha Tiger 
Reserve and translocated to the Nauradehi Wildlife Sanctuary. This Tigress has also 
delivered three cubs in May 2019 in the Wildlife Sanctuary.  
• The entire population of Tigers was eliminated from Panna Tiger Reserve by 2009 (Box 
3.1). The task of reintroduction of Tigers was undertaken in November 2009 and as per 
2018 Tiger Census, the Tiger Reserve was filled with 25 adult Tigers. 
3.6.4 Eco-tourism 
Eco-tourism is ‘responsible travel to natural areas that conserves the environment and improves 
the well–being of the local people’. It allows a scope to link a Protected Are a to a wider 
constituency and build support for conservation, while raising awareness in the public at large85 
about the worth and fragility of ecosystems. 
3.6.4.1 Regulation of tourist vehicle in Tiger Reserves 
For Tiger conservation, non-consumptive86, regulated, low impact tourism could be permitted 
within core or critical Tiger habitat. The Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972, specifically provides 
for laying down normative standards for tourism act ivities in Tiger Reserves for due 
compliance. 
Accordingly, the vehicle carrying capacity of the T iger Reserves was approved 
(September 2015) by the National Tiger Conservation  Authority, which continued to be 
applicable up to 2017-18. In May 2018, PCCF/ Wildli fe increased the carrying capacity as 
shown in Table 3.6.   
 
 
 
                                                           
85  Para 11.2 of Tiger Conservation Plan, Pench Tiger  Reserve.  
86  Use of forest resources from any forest area that is returned to the forest area from which it was withdrawn, 
at or near the point from which it was withdrawn, without substantial diminution in quantity or quality. 


Chapter 3: Conservation and Protection of Wildlife  
45 
Table 3.6: Carrying Capacity of Tiger Reserves as approved in September 2015 and Committee suggested 
in October 2018 
S N Tiger Reserve Carrying Capacity 
September 2015 October 2018 Per cent increase 
1 Kanha Tiger Reserve 140 178 27 
2 Pench Tiger Reserve 88 99 13 
3 Bandhavgarh Tiger Reserve 111 147 32 
4 Panna Tiger Reserve 70 85 21 
5 Satpura Tiger Reserve 24 140 483 
6 Sanjay Tiger Reserve -- 80 -- 
(Source: PCCF/ Wildlife) 
We noted that the National Tiger Conservation Autho rity rejected (October 2018) the revised 
carrying capacity and directed that the vehicles ma y be allowed to enter as per the carrying 
capacity fixed earlier. However, the Department continued to allow entry of vehicles as per the 
increased capacity since October 2018. The PCCF/ Wi ldlife cited problem in roll back of 
booked tickets in online system. 
During 2014-19, the tourists footfall in the six Ti ger Reserves in a tourism year 87 increased 
from 6.65 lakh to 9.80 lakh (47 per cent). A study 88 conducted in Kanha and Bandhavgarh 
Tiger Reserves showed that wildlife tourism cause d istinct physiological stress in Tigers in 
Protected Areas. It also established a positive co- relation between anthropogenic disturbance 
and physiological stress levels as assessed in Faec al Glucocorticoid 89 Metabolite (fGCM) 90 
concentrations of individual Tigers.  The Study Rep ort recommended strict regulation of 
vehicular traffic and number of tourist vehicles, s hifting of artificial waterholes away from 
tourist roads and reducing other anthropogenic dist urbance, including relocation of villages 
from the Core area of a Tiger Reserve. 
PCCF/ Wildlife did not take cognizance of this study report to reverse the decision to increase 
the carrying capacity and instead cited problems in roll-back of booked tickets in online system.   
The State Government agreed (September 2021) to the observation.  
3.6.5 Disease Control 
As per the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972, the Chi ef Wild Life Warden is to take prescribed 
measures for immunisation against communicable dise ases of the live-stock kept in or within 
five kilometer of a Wildlife Sanctuary and National Park91. Disease control is also essential for 
timely action to prevent disease outbreaks and control large-scale mortality92. 
 
                                                           
87  Between July to June. 
88  Abhinav Tyagi and others , 2019, Physiological stress responses of Tigers due to anthropogenic disturbance 
especially tourism in two central Indian Tiger rese rves, Laboratory for the Conservation of Endangered  
species, Council for Scientific and Industrial Rese arch—Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology, 
Hyderabad, co-funded by Department of Science and Technology, Government of India. 
89  Glucocorticoids are essential steroid hormones secreted from the adrenal gland in response to stress.  
90  Analysis provides a non-invasive method for study ing the physiological response of wildlife to a variety of 
stressors and is a ground-breaking monitoring technique in wildlife management and conservation. 
91  Section 33A read with 35(8) of Wildlife (Protecti on) Act, 1972. 
92   Para 12.2 of the Tiger Conservation Plan (Core) of Pench Tiger Reserve. 

Report on Wildlife Conservation and Sustainable Management of Wildlife Habitats in Madhya Pradesh 
 
46 
3.6.5.1 Disease surveillance 
For maintenance of health of wild animals, it is es sential to monitor and survey the parasitic 
and infectious diseases periodically for timely action to prevent the spread of disease. 
In three 93 out of audited 13 Divisions, there was no sanction ed post of Veterinary Doctor 
whereas in Kuno National Park, though sanctioned, t he post was lying vacant since February 
2016. We noted that no action was on record for fil ling up the vacancy. There was no 
sanctioned post of veterinary assistant except in K anha Tiger Reserve. Training to frontline 
field staff (Forest Guard, Forester and Range Offic er) in basic health monitoring of diseased/ 
injured wild animals was also inadequate. Even the training calendar was not prepared. 
Veterinary dispensary or hospital with well-equipped laboratory was not established in any of 
the Tiger Reserves/ Protected Areas. These issues h ad also been highlighted in CAG’s Audit 
Report 2013-1494. However, these were still not available in the audited Divisions.  
Domestic cattle, which may transmit the disease amo ng wild fauna, are required to be 
vaccinated to prevent the occurrence of foot-and-mouth disease, black quarter and hemorrhagic 
septicemia. We noted that the Forest Department has not established an effective co-ordination 
mechanism with Animal Husbandry and Dairy Department, Madhya Pradesh to obtain the data 
of total cattle to be vaccinated in villages in and  around the Protected Areas during the period 
of audit. This data was not even available with the  audited Divisions, except in Bandhavgarh 
and Kanha Tiger Reserves. 
Prophylactic immunisation of cattle in villages in and around the Tiger Reserves was done in 
six95 Tiger Reserves as well as Madhav and Kuno National Parks, with the help of the Animal 
Husbandry and Dairy Department and Non-Government O rganisations. However, we could 
not draw assurance on vaccination of all the cattle  in the absence of data of total available 
cattle. Cattle immunisation was not done in five 96 Protected Areas. In Kanha Tiger Reserve 
also, vaccination of only around 40 per cent  of available cattle was done, whereas in 
Bandhavgarh Tiger Reserve, vaccination was done onl y in five villages in 2015-16 against 
162 villages identified. 
Thus, disease surveillance was affected by inadequa te co-ordination with Animal Husbandry 
and Dairy Department as well as health infrastructure especially lack of veterinary staff.  
The State Government agreed (September 2021) to the observation.    
3.6.5.2 Action against the threat of Canine Distemper Virus 
Dogs are a threat to both ungulates (which they hun t) and to carnivores, since they carry 
infectious diseases, like rabies, parvovirus, and distemper97. The National Tiger Conservation 
Authority directed in June 2013 that vaccination of  stray cattle, cats and dogs living around 
Tiger Reserves should be done on regular basis. It further directed in January 2014 that during 
                                                           
93  Obedullaganj, Nauradehi and Dewas. 
94  Para reference 2.1.9.2 of Performance Audit on “W orking of Tiger Reserves, National Parks and 
Sanctuaries” of Report No. 1 of 2015. 
95  Bandhavgarh, Kanha, Panna, Pench, Sanjay and Satp ura. 
96  Kheoni Wildlife Sanctuary, Nauradehi Wildlife Sanc tuary, Ratapani Wildlife Sanctuary, Singhori Wildlife 
Sanctuary and Van Vihar National Park. 
97  National Tiger Conservation Authority, 2018, Repo rt on status of Tigers, Co-predators and Prey in India. 

Chapter 3: Conservation and Protection of Wildlife  
47 
post mortem, blood/ tissue samples from carnivores should be sent to designated institutes for 
testing for Canine Distemper Virus. 
We noted that except in Panna Tiger Reserve, dogs and cats were not immunised against Canine 
Distemper Virus. Sample of tissues of tigers which died due to unknown diseases were not sent 
to the designated institutes for Canine Distemper V irus diagnosis, except in Panna Tiger 
Reserve where as per the test reports, one tiger an d two leopards had died due to Canine 
Distemper Virus during 2014-18.   
The PCCF/ Wildlife stated (August 2019) that as no case of Canine Distemper Virus was 
detected, action relating to Canine Distemper Virus  was not done. However, the reply was 
incorrect as three Canine Distemper Virus cases had  been detected (August 2015, November 
2015 and December 2016) by Indian Veterinary Resear ch Institute from samples of Panna 
Tiger Reserve.  
The State Government agreed to the observation (September 2021). 
3.7 Recommendations  
5. The Department may identify the causative factor fo r high incidence of poaching and 
deaths and the hot spots to adopt site specific protection measures; 
6. The State Government may speed up the process of es tablishment of Special Tiger 
Protection Force; 
7. The Department may rationalize the sanction and dep loyment of human resource and 
other resources by laying down suitable norms and scales;  
8. The Department may ensure that a site specific Huma n-Wildlife Conflict Mitigation 
Plan is prepared and implemented for each Tiger Res erve/ National Park/ Wildlife 
Sanctuary;  
9. PCCF/ Wildlife may ensure implementation of disease  control and surveillance 
programmes by providing adequate staff, training and infrastructure; 
10. The Department may ensure that the activities and i nfrastructure related with tourism 
are rationalized so as to not disturb the well-being of wild animal and the habitats; 
11. The State Government may remove bottlenecks in fund ing for activities relating to 
welfare activities for frontline staff.  

 
 
Chapter 4 
 
Management and Consolidation of Wildlife Habitats 
 
Summary 
The 2nd National Wildlife Action Plan (2002-2016) emphasised the need for efforts to increase 
the extent of Protected Areas as a strategy for the  protection of wildlife and biodiversity. We 
found that the process of notification of 645.84 sq uare kilometer of land as Protected Areas 
could not be completed and almost 1,583.772 square kilometer could not be added to the area 
of Tiger Reserves in the State due to procedural and decision making delays. 
The State Government had issued instructions to reconcile the Forest-Revenue boundary using 
Global Navigation Satellite System readings of boundary pillars, forest boundary map digitised 
by Forest Department, and cadastral maps digitised by Revenue Department. Our audit found 
that neither the reconciliation of Forest-Revenue boundary through digital maps and cadastral 
maps was done, nor adequate boundary survey was car ried out in any of the 13 audited 
Divisions. 
Lantana, Sida, Parthenium, Casia tora and Van Tulsi  are the prominent invasive alien plant 
species found in the wildlife habitats in Madhya Pradesh. We found that only around 50 per cent 
of the planned work regarding their eradication could be executed by the Department. 
For suitable management of water bodies, regular mo nitoring of availability of water in the 
water bodies is necessary. We did not notice any evidence of such an activity in the Divisions. 
Moreover, deficiencies like adverse impact of the change in water course in National Parks and 
Wildlife Sanctuaries, were not addressed for appropriate remedial action. Inadequacies in Fire 
Plans were noticed in Madhav National Park, Nauradehi Wildlife Sanctuary and Obedullaganj 
Division and adequate firefighting equipment was no t available in audited divisions except 
Sanjay Tiger Reserve.  
Anthropogenic activities, like expansion of farmlan ds, human habitats and illegal mining, are 
the prime threats responsible for deterioration and  fragmentation of wildlife habitats. We 
noticed that regulation of commercial activities, t raffic control and waste management in and 
around the Tiger Reserves was not adequate, leading  to hindrance to wildlife movements and 
further fragmentation of wildlife habitats. An area  of 6,942.906 hectare was reported to be 
under encroachment in eight out of 13 audited Divis ions, out of which only the Divisional 
Forest Office, Obedullaganj reported eviction in 279.989 hectare of forest land during 2014-19. 
We noted with satisfaction that cases of illegal fe lling of trees had gradually reduced from 
4,303 to 3,307 in 12 out of 13 audited Divisions. C ases of illegal felling increased in five 
Divisions while it decreased in seven other Divisions. 
Relocation of villages in core segments of Protected Areas was delayed due to lack of adequate 
co-ordination between officers of Revenue and Fores t Departments, pendency in payment of 
compensation, reoccupation of land, absence of cons ensus between management and public 
representatives, and delays in notifying relocated villages as forest land. 
Habitat is a place where species live and includes resources required to foster self-sustaining 
population. Threats to habitat arise from various factors like: 

Report on Wildlife Conservation and Sustainable Management of Wildlife Habitats in Madhya Pradesh 
50 
• Forest Fires; 
• Encroachment; 
• Fragmentation of Forests; 
• Invasive Alien Species.   
The following paragraphs discuss our findings on ma nagement and consolidation of wildlife 
habitats in Madhya Pradesh.  
4.1 Augmentation of Protected Areas and Tiger Reser ves 
The 2nd National Wildlife Action Plan (2002-2016) emphasised the need for efforts to increase 
the extent of Protected Areas as a strategy for the  protection of wildlife and biodiversity. To 
maintain viable population of 80-100 tigers, an inv iolate space of 800-1,200 square kilometer 
is required. 
No new National Park or Wildlife Sanctuary had been notified in the State after January 2011 
other than the re-notification of Kuno Wildlife Sanctuary as a National Park in October 2018. 
We also noted four instances where the State Govern ment did not seize the opportunity of 
augmenting the areas. One such instance is in Box 4.1 
Box 4.1: Protected Areas under Indira Sagar Project 
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change granted forest clearance in October 1987 
to Narmada Sagar Project, also known as Indira Sagar Project. The proposal for notification of 
five Protected Areas comprising of 696.91 square kilometer area was submitted (May 2005) to 
the State Government which was rejected on the grou nd that a large area is involved and this 
will restrict activities, such as fishing, tourism and agriculture, in that area and cause hardship 
to local people. The PCCF/ Wildlife again sent (December 2007) a proposal for constitution of 
Omkareshwar National Park (246.44 square kilometer) , two Wildlife Sanctuaries (Singaji 
Wildlife Sanctuary for 177.11 square kilometer and Mandhata Wildlife Sanctuary for 68.75 
square kilometer) and two Conservation Reserves (Na rmada CR-1, 134.53 square kilometer 
and Narmada CR-2, 19.01 square kilometer) comprising a total area of 645.84 square kilometer 
to Government of Madhya Pradesh. There has been no progress in the matter since then.  
The hindrances projected such as restriction on fishing, tourism, etc. were not causes for delay 
in the notifying Protected Areas, as these activities could easily be regulated by the concerned 
department.   
The other three such cases of missed opportunities were in respect of adding:  
• 227.55 square kilometer of inviolate Critical Tiger  Habitat in Pench Tiger Reserve 
(Core), as envisaged in the Tiger Conservation Plan, even after more than 10 year since 
its approval in 2008-09; 
• 1,244.518 square kilometer (763.812 square kilometer as Core Area and 480.706 square 
kilometer as Buffer) of proposed Ratapani Tiger Res erve after grant of in-principle 
approval by National Tiger Conservation Authority (August 2008); and  
• 111.704 square kilometer area of Phen Wildlife Sanc tuary as Tiger Reserve for which 
the PCCF/ Wildlife had sent a proposal for notification in March 2017.  

Chapter 4: Management and Consolidation of Wildlife Habitats 
51 
The recurrent problem was delays in decision-making  process at Division and Government 
levels. The details are given in Appendix 4.1. In the absence of notification under Wildlife 
(Protection) Act, 1972, various offences such as po aching, expansion of developmental 
activities could not be countered/ acted upon as per legal framework. 
The State Government admitted the delays (July 2021). 
4.2 Notification of Critical Wildlife Habitat 
A Guideline published (2014) by Ministry of Tribal Affairs, Government of India for 
notification of Critical Wildlife Habitat, envisages the creation of inviolate spaces, i.e. Critical 
Wildlife Habitat within the National Parks and Wild life Sanctuaries under Section 2(b) of 
Forest Rights Act, 2006. Three98 National Parks and 1099 Wildlife Sanctuaries which were not 
a part of any notified Critical Tiger Habitat were to be considered for notifying as Critical 
Wildlife Habitat in nine out of the 13 audited Divi sions. However, the State Government did 
not notify any National Park/Wildlife Sanctuary as a Critical Wildlife Habitat. The Kanha Tiger 
Reserve submitted the proposal to notify Phen Wildlife Sanctuary as Critical Wildlife Habitat. 
Proposals for Nauradehi Wildlife Sanctuary and Madh av National Park could not be sent due 
to pending relocation of villages. No reason was assigned by other Divisions for the lapse. 
Thus, mandatory requirement under Forest Rights Act , 2006 for keeping the National Park/ 
Wildlife Sanctuaries inviolate for wildlife conservation was not fulfilled. 
The State Government agreed to the observation (September 2021). 
4.3 Notification of Protected Areas and re-settleme nt  
The 2 nd National Wildlife Action Plan (2002-16), envisages  relocation and rehabilitation of 
villages on a voluntary basis or by persuasion from high conservation value and core segments 
of Protected Areas.    
The State Government notifies declaration of intent  to constitute any area as a Wildlife 
Sanctuary or National Park under Section 18 and 35 respectively of Wildlife (Protection) Act, 
1972. The State Government had laid down the process of relocation of villages from Protected 
Areas, including Tiger Reserves, in 2008. After this, the Collectors of the areas concerned need 
to settle claims within two years of the notificati on of aforesaid declaration. After all claims 
have been received and settled by the Collectors, final notification of the Wildlife Sanctuary or 
National Park, specifying limits of the area, is is sued by the State Government under Section 
26 (A) and 35 (4) of Wildlife (Protection) Act, 197 2 respectively. Further, the evacuated 
revenue villages were required to be notified as fo rest land as per provisions of the Indian 
Forest Act, 1927. 
In the 13 audited Divisions, intention to constitut e nine National Parks and 15 Wildlife 
Sanctuaries under Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972 was notified between 1956 and 2018. Final 
notification was required to be issued under Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972 after settlement of 
claims. The final notifications were issued (betwee n August 1998 and September 2006) only 
                                                           
98  Madhav, Kuno and Van Vihar.  
99  Bagdara, Gangau, Karera, Kheoni, Ken Gharial, Phen, Nauradehi, Singhori, Ratapani and Son Gharial. 

Report on Wildlife Conservation and Sustainable Management of Wildlife Habitats in Madhya Pradesh 
52 
for Pench National Park, Mowgli Wildlife Sanctuary and Kheoni Wildlife Sanctuary. In the 
remaining 21 selected Protected Areas, the final notifications were pending for varying periods 
from one to 44 years as on 2019. 
97 revenue and 37 forest villages were proposed for  relocation from eight 100 National Parks. 
Also, a total of  69 revenue villages and 29 forest villages were proposed to be relocated from 
nine101 Wildlife Sancturies.  Relocation of five revenue a nd two forest villages were planned 
from Buffer Zones of three Tiger Reserve 102. Out of the above, 171 revenue and 68 forest 
villages, only 111 revenue and 63 forest villages h ad been relocated up to May 2019. Details 
are shown in Appendix 4.2.  We noted delays in finalisation of relocation process due to lack 
of adequate co-ordination between officers of Reven ue and Forest Departments, pendency in 
payment of compensation to affected villegers, reoc cupation of land, absence of consensus 
between management and public representatives, and not notifying relocated villages as forest 
land in six Divisions103. 
The State Government agreed (September 2021) to the observation. 
4.4 Demarcation of boundaries     
Well-demarcated boundaries are important precursors  to protect, consolidate and properly 
manage Protected Areas. Towards that purpose, State  Government issued (June 2017) 
instruction to superimpose Global Navigation Satellite System readings of boundary pillars, with 
forest boundary maps digitised by the Forest Depart ment, and cadastral maps digitised by the 
Revenue Department, to reconcile the Forest-Revenue  boundary. In case they match, 
five per cent boundary pillars were to be jointly inspected for confirmation. Data sheets thus 
finalised were to be digitally signed by the Collectors and the Divisional Forest Officers and to 
be published in websites of both the Departments. I n case of disagreements between the 
Divisional Forest Officer and Collector, a committe e presided by the Commissioner of the 
Revenue Division would take the final decision in this regard. 
We noted that neither the reconciliation of Forest-Revenue boundary through digital maps and 
cadastral maps was done, nor boundary survey carrie d out in any of the 13 audited Divisions. 
No reasons were assigned for this lapse by the Fiel d Directors/ Directors/ Divisional Forest 
Officers of the audited Divisions, except by two Divisions104 where it was stated that the orders 
had not been received.  
The State Government agreed (September 2021) to the observation.  
4.5 Management of water bodies 
The Protected Area managers are responsible for per iodic assessment of the contribution of 
Protected Areas towards augmenting water resources of the region. Restoration and 
enhancement of water sources are to be done in all terrestrial Protected Areas. Listing of 
streams and rivers in these terrestrial Protected A reas, with estimates of flow and seasonal 
                                                           
100  Bandhavagarh, Kanha, Kuno, Madhav, Panna, Pench, Sanjay and Satpura. 
101  Bori, Gangau, Kheoni, Nauradehi, Pachmarhi, Panpa tha, Phen, Ratapani and Sanjay Dubri. 
102  Kanha, Panna and Satpura Tiger Reserves. 
103  Bandhavgarh, Nauradehi, Sanjay, Obedullaganj, Pan na and Satpura. 
104  Madhav National Park and Sanjay Tiger Reserve. 

Chapter 4: Management and Consolidation of Wildlife Habitats 
53 
duration must also be done. They should measure the lean season flow of water from Protected 
Areas, and illustrate how wildlife conservation through natural regeneration in catchment areas 
of water bodies and reservoirs can reduce siltation, and regulate year-round water flow105. 
In the 13 audited Divisions, there were 2,791 water bodies. A total of 393 artificial water bodies 
were constructed in eight106 Protected Areas during 2014-19. List of streams and rivers in these 
Protected Areas was available in the Tiger Conserva tion Plans and Management Plans, but 
estimates of flow and seasonal duration were not recorded. There was no evidence that regular 
monitoring of the availability of water in these water bodies was done at Division level. Further, 
deficiencies like adverse impact of change in water  course in National Parks and Wildlife 
Sanctuaries are detailed in Appendix 4.3.  
Box 4.2: Changing water course to Sakhya Sagar Lake  
Most of the sewage from the Shivpuri town flows in to the Jadhav Sagar Tank which acts as a 
settling tank and the decant, then overflows into t he Sakhya Sagar lake in Madhav National 
Park which is home to Crocodiles and a variety of f ishes, and also attracts many migratory 
birds.  
Jadhav Sagar Lake, Sakhya Sagar Lake and Madhav Sag ar Lake are connected through a 
stream in a series in the same order. According to a proposal for construction of a new Sewage 
Treatment Plant at Jadhav Sagar Lake, the effluent from this Plant was to be discharged in 
Barhi River.    
Thus, after start of the functioning of the Sewage Treatment Plant, water from the Jadhav Sagar 
will no longer be flowing to the Sakhya Sagar and w ill affect the water level of the lake 
specially in summer, as Jadhav Sagar was the main s ource of water for the Sakhya Sagar. We 
noted that the Department had also not analysed the impact of change in water course to Sakhya 
Sagar due to the Sewage Treatment Plant. The Minist ry of Environment, Forest and Climate 
Change, Government of India had granted first phase  forest clearance to the Project in April 
2018. 
Further, as per the Management Plan of Madhav Natio nal Park, the nullah carrying all waste 
of Shivpuri town drains into Sakhya Sagar, leading to slow eutrophication.  
  
Nullah leading to Sakhya Sagar Lake  
(Photo: Audit Party) 
                                                           
105  2 nd National Wildlife Action Plan (2002-16). 
106  Kanha Tiger Reserve (Core), Kanha Tiger Reserve ( Buffer), Kuno Wildlife Sanctuary, Madhav National 
Park, Obedullaganj, Panna Tiger Reserve, Sanjay Tiger Reserve and Satpura Tiger Reserve. 


Report on Wildlife Conservation and Sustainable Management of Wildlife Habitats in Madhya Pradesh 
54 
Neither the Director nor the Committee for monitoring the Eco-Sensitive Zone took any action 
to divert this waste water influx to the Sakhya Sag ar, which was hazardous to the wildlife of 
the National Park.  
We concluded that sustainable management of water bodies was not being done. 
The State Government agreed (September 2021) to the observation. 
4.6 Forest fires  
Forest fires have a deep, and often long-term effec t on forest and wildlife. Fires harm micro 
fauna and flora of the habitat and destroy the orga nic matter which contributes to the humus 
content of the substratum. Fires also destroy the eggs of a number of ground nesting birds and 
reptiles. They compel animal and bird population to  migrate randomly in various directions, 
which may disturb utilisation of a habitat in terms  of both space and time. Many seeds and 
several plant species are completely destroyed by f ire and their regeneration is affected 
adversely. 
The India State of the Forest Report, 2019 published by the Forest Survey of India, Dehradun 
categorised the forest cover area in Madhya Pradesh  under various classes, as shown in 
Table 4.1 below: 
Table 4.1: Forest cover area under various classes of fire proneness 
(Area in per cent) 
Extremely prone Very highly prone Highly prone Moderately prone Less prone 
0.14 3.79 11.87 19.36 64.84 
 
Map showing fire prone area in Madhya Pradesh 
 
(Source: India State of Forest Report, 2019) 
We noted that most of the Protected Areas are situated under fire-prone classes.  
An area of 8,636 hectares of forest was affected by fire in 1,737 cases, during 2014-18 in 12 out 
of the 13 audited Divisions. But its impact on the habitat was not analysed by the Management 
of these Tiger Reserves/ Protected Areas. 
In the 13 audited Divisions, fire control activitie s, such as fire-line cleaning and burning in 
1,15,189.36 kilometer of fire-lines was done during 2014-19. We noted that Madhav National 
Park, Nauradehi Wildlife Sanctuary and Obedullaganj  Division did not prepare Fire Plans. In 
Nauradehi Wildlife Sanctuary, only 30 per cent  of the fund sanctioned for wages of 

Chapter 4: Management and Consolidation of Wildlife Habitats 
55 
firewatchers in 2018-19 was spent and during the same year, the highest area of 394.50 hectares 
was affected by fire in the very same Wildlife Sanctuary.  
Meetings/ training were held to sensitise local peo ple in Kanha (Core and Buffer), 
Bandhavgarh, Pench, Panna and Satpura Tiger Reserves. In the rest of the Divisions, meetings/ 
training were not held.   
The National Action Plan on Forest Fire suggests th at fire fighters should be provided with 
adequate fire-fighting equipment, including leaf li tter blowers and protective clothing. These 
equipment were not available in audited units, exce pt in Sanjay Tiger Reserve, where fire-
fighting kit and air blower had been used. 
The Managers of 12 out of 13 audited Divisions, use d only fire-beaters
107 for fire control. In 
Kuno National Park, requirement of 500 fire-beaters  was assessed, but only 265 fire-beaters 
were procured. Fire-beaters can put out fire in open areas only within its limited reach. 
The State Government agreed (September 2021) to the observation. 
4.7 Meadow Development and Eradication of Invasive Alien Species 
Lantana, Sida, Parthenium, Casia tora and Van Tulsi  are the more prominent invasive alien 
plant species found in the wildlife habitats in Madhya Pradesh. However, on site specific basis, 
Lantana was also considered as suitable for hunting, resti ng and breeding ground for Tigers 
and their co-predators. Habitat improvement activit ies include meadow development, weed/ 
lantana eradication and mopping. Regular mopping ensures that weeds do not regenerate in the 
same area from where it was removed. Progress of ha bitat improvement activities in Tiger 
Reserves and Protected Areas in 13 audited Division s during 2014-19 is shown in Table 4.2 
below:  
Table 4.2: Habitat improvement activities in Tiger Reserves, National Parks/ Wildlife Sanctuaries  
during 2014-19 
 (Area in Hectares and amount in `` `` crore) 
Sl. 
No. Activity 
No. of Tiger 
Reserves/ 
Protected Areas 
Demanded in Annual 
Plan of Operation 
Work Sanctioned by 
Government of India Executed work 
Area Amount Area Amount Area Amount 
1 Meadow 
Development 
12108 5,388.30 5.26 2,696.55 2.58 2,460.30 
(46 per cent) 
2.05 
2 Weed/ Lantana 
Eradication 
15109 37,576.10 14.34 22,648.50 7.38 19,573.50 
(52 per cent) 
6.49 
3 Weed/ Lantana 
Mopping 
6110 13,481.00 2.35 7,691.00 0.96 4,638.00 
(34 per cent) 
0.50 
                                                           
107  Fire-beater is a tool made out of a handle and ru bber beater.  
108  Bandhavgarh Tiger Reserve, Kanha (Buffer) Tiger R eserve, Kanha (Core) Tiger Reserve, Pench Tiger 
Reserve, Sanjay Tiger Reserve, Satpura Tiger Reserv e, Van Vihar National Park, Karera Wildlife 
Sanctuary, Bagdara Wildlife Sanctuary, Ratapani Wildlife Sanctuary, Son Gharial Wildlife Sanctuary and  
Kheoni Wildlife Sanctuary.  
109  Bagdara Wildlife Sanctuary, Bandhavgarh Tiger Res erve,  Gangau Wildlife Sanctuary, Kanha (Core) Tiger 
Reserve, Madhav National Park, Kuno National Park, Nauradehi Wildlife Sanctuary, Panna Tiger Reserve, 
Pench Tiger Reserve, Phen Wildlife Sanctuary, Ratap ani Wildlife Sanctuary, Sanjay Tiger Reserve, 
Satpura Tiger Reserve, Singhori Wildlife Sanctuary and Van Vihar National Park. 
110  Kanha (Buffer) Tiger Reserve, Kanha (Core) Tiger Reserve, Madhav National Park, Panna Tiger Reserve, 
Pench Tiger Reserve and Van Vihar National Park. 

Report on Wildlife Conservation and Sustainable Management of Wildlife Habitats in Madhya Pradesh 
56 
Thus, the work executed was around 50 per cent  of that planned, mainly due to cut of 
50 per cent funds by Government of India (although ` 1.88 crore of sanctioned funds remained 
unspent). 
Further, seven 111 Tiger Reserves/ National Parks/ Wildlife Sanctuarie s, from which 5,620.00 
hectares of weed/ lantana was eradicated in previou s years (during 2014-15 to 2017-18) did 
not demand fund for mopping in succeeding years. 
The State Government agreed (September 2021) to the observation.  
4.8 Anthropogenic activities  
Anthropogenic activities, like expansion of farmlan ds, human habitats and illegal mining, are 
the prime threats responsible for deterioration and fragmentation of wildlife habitats. 
4.8.1 Regulation of Commercial activities in and ar ound Tiger Reserves 
Mushrooming of commercial activity induced infrastructure, such as buildings, hotels, resorts, 
fencings, etc. lead to dumping of waste around the Tiger Reserves, causing disruption to free 
wildlife movement and leading to fragmentations of wildlife habitats. These commercial 
activities mostly take place in Buffer Zones of Tiger Reserves. 
A Local Advisory Committee was constituted for each Tiger Reserve by the State Government, 
headed by the Divisional Commissioner and the Field Director as Member Secretary to review 
tourism strategy and ensure site-specific norms on buildings and infrastructure in areas inside 
and close to the Tiger Reserves, keeping in view the corridor value and ecological aesthetics112. 
At least half-yearly meetings of the Local Advisory Committee were to be held. The deficiencies 
noticed during the audit are shown in brief in Table 4.3 and detailed in Appendix 4.4. 
Table 4.3: Deficiencies in working of Local Advisory Committee 
Sl. No. Tiger Reserve Deficiencies   
1 Bandhavgarh 
Tiger Reserve 
• The Local Advisory Committee held only five meeting s during 2014-19 instead of 
the minimum 10 meetings required. 
• Night traffic in Tala-Dhamokhar Road, though prohibited, was also not controlled.  
• The Local Advisory Committee did not review the tou rism strategy or site specific 
norms on buildings.   
2 Pench Tiger 
Reserve 
• Only two meetings of the Local Advisory Committee w ere held in Pench Tiger 
Reserve instead of the minimum 10 required. 
• The Local Advisory Committee did not monitor implementation of its decisions, like 
tourist activity around the Tiger Reserve, type of construction, details of employed 
persons, etc. 
• It did not advise the State Government in any of the matters as was mandated. 
3 Panna Tiger 
Reserve 
• Only three meetings of the Local Advisory Committee  were held during 2014-19 
against the envisaged minimum 10 meetings. 
• No action was taken by the Local Advisory Committee  to resolve the problem of 
dumping the waste in areas inside the Panna Tiger Reserve by the Panna Municipality. 
4 Kanha Tiger 
Reserve 
• Only six meetings of the Local Advisory Committee w ere held during 2014-19 as 
against the minimum of 10 meetings required. 
                                                           
111  Bandhavgarh Tiger Reserve, Phen Wildlife Sanctuar y, Madhav National Park, Nauradehi Wildlife 
Sanctuary, Ratapani Wildlife Sanctuary, Sanjay Tiger Reserve and Singhori Wildlife Sanctuary. 
112  Para 2.1.8 of Guidelines for Developing State Tou rism Strategy for Tiger Reserves, by National Tiger  
Conservation Authority, October 2012. 

Chapter 4: Management and Consolidation of Wildlife Habitats 
57 
• No follow-up by Local Advisory Committee of its own  decisions on removal of the 
fencing from hotels/ resorts/ buildings and other c ommercial infrastructures, as well 
as on undertaking scientific study of impacts of tourism on wildlife of Core and Buffer 
Areas. 
5 Satpura Tiger 
Reserve 
• Compliance reports to the meetings had not been rec eived in the office of the Field 
Director from members of other Departments, indicat ing poor monitoring by the 
committee of the commercial activities in and around the Tiger Reserve. 
• Lack of management of waste generated by the hotels / restaurants in and around the 
Tiger Reserve. 
• New infrastructures which came, or are coming up ar ound the Reserve were not 
mandated to obtain clearance from the Local Advisory Committee. 
• No action was taken regarding solid waste managemen t in tourism areas of Churna 
and Madhai. 
(Source: Forest Department) 
Thus, regulation of commercial activities, traffic and waste management in and around the 
Tiger Reserve was not adequate, leading to hindrance to wildlife movement and fragmentation 
of wildlife habitats. 
The State Government agreed (September 2021) to the observation.  
4.8.2 Anthropogenic Activities in Wildlife Habitats  
Section 35 (6) of the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 19 72 provides that no person shall destroy or 
damage or divert the habitat of any wild animal by any act except under, and in accordance 
with, a permit granted by the Chief Wild Life Warde n. Section 34 A (1) of the same Act 
empowers a forest officer, not less than the rank o f Assistant Conservator of Forests, to eject 
encroachers from un-authorised possessions in National Parks or Wildlife Sanctuaries. 
4.8.2.1 Encroachments 
An area of 6,942.906 hectares was reported to be un der encroachment in eight 113 out of the 
13 audited Divisions as shown in Appendix 4.5. Out of the 13 Divisions, only the Divisional 
Forest Office, Obedullaganj reported eviction in 27 9.989 hectares of forest land during 
2014-19.  
The Field Directors of Kanha Tiger Reserve (Buffer), Pench Tiger Reserve and Satpura Tiger 
Reserve informed zero encroachment in their Divisio ns and the Field Director, Sanjay Tiger 
Reserve informed encroachment in 475.376 hectares under his jurisdiction. However, this data 
did not match with Tiger Conservation Plans, status  report on encroachments, etc., which 
showed encroachment in 6,279.20 hectares in these T iger Reserves. Discrepancies in data of 
encroachments in these Divisions as well as poor ma nagement of encroachments noticed in 
Nauradehi Wildlife Sanctuary and Madhav National Pa rk are shown in details in   
Appendix 4.6. 
The Field Director, Kanha Tiger Reserve (Core) also  reported ‘Nil’ encroachment in the 
Division. However, as per the Tiger Conservation Plan of Kanha Tiger Reserve, the total area 
of Kanha National Park is 940.00 square kilometer a nd 17 114 villages existed inside it. An 
                                                           
113  Bandhavgarh Tiger Reserve, Kheoni Wildlife Sanctu ary, Kuno National Park, Madhav National Park, 
Nauradehi Wildlife Sanctuary, Panna Tiger Reserve, Sanjay Tiger Reserve and Obedullaganj Division.  
114  Ajanpur, Benda, Bhilwani, Bithli, Chatarpur, Dhan iajhor, Jhapul, Janglikheda, Jholar, Kadla, Kariwah , 
Linga, Mukki, Patuwa, Ranwahi, Role and Sukdi.  

Report on Wildlife Conservation and Sustainable Management of Wildlife Habitats in Madhya Pradesh 
58 
inviolate area of 917.43 square kilometer was notif ied as Critical Tiger Habitat of the Kanha 
Tiger Reserve.  But 22.57 square kilometer area, which is not a part of the Critical Tiger Habitat 
of Kanha Tiger Reserve, has 17 villages within it. We superimposed digital boundary map of 
Kanha National Park of the Forest Department with G oogle Earth image, which showed land 
use changes from forests to agriculture and houses in an area of about 48.20 hectares village/ 
habitation inside the National Park boundary. The n ame of this village habitation is not even 
included in the list of 17 villages that are still a part of the Kanha National Park. Screenshots 
of Google Earth images can be seen below, as on February 2019:  
 
However, the Management was not aware of this encroachment in 48.20 hectares of land inside 
the Kanha Tiger Reserve. In reply, the PCCF/ Wildlife stated (January 2021) that on enquiry it 
was found to be an old (from prior to 1948) habitation in the area.  
The State Government stated (July 2021) that the area shown is part of village Bhuitola, which 
is not a part of the Critical Tiger Habitat. However, as mentioned above, the village is also not 
included in the list of 17 villages that are still located inside the Kanha National Park. Thus, 
the status of the village is ambiguous as to whethe r the village is situated inside the notified 
Core Area of the Tiger Reserve, or is inside the area of the National Park but outside the Core 
Area. 
4.8.2.2 Illegal mining in Son Gharial Wildlife Sanctuary 
The Son Gharial Wildlife Sanctuary, notified in 1981, is located across Sidhi, Singrauli, Satna 
and Shahdol Districts and is spread out over 209 ki lometers. It has a width of 200 meters on 
both river banks of Son, Gopad and Banas Rivers. Th e Wildlife Sanctuary supports many 
exotic species of aquatic flora and fauna, such as Indian Skimmer, Gharial, Mugger, Otter, 
Dolphin and Turtle, many of which are on the threat ened or endangered list of International 
Union for Conservation of Nature.  


Report on Wildlife Conservation and Sustainable Management of Wildlife Habitats in Madhya Pradesh 
60 
Act, 1972. Demand of fuel wood from forests causes resource degradation to the extent that 
collection exceeds sustainable yield 115. This also results in reduction of forest cover an d 
impacts adversely on biodiversity in the wildlife habitat. 
A study conducted by the Forest Survey of India bet ween September 2018 and June 2019 in 
31 States/ Union Territories revealed that Madhya P radesh was fourth in felling of fuel wood 
and highest in removal116of fodder, small timber and bamboo.  
We noted that cases of illegal felling of trees had gradually reduced from 4,303 to 3,307 in the 
12 out of 13 audited Divisions during the period of  2014 to 2018. Cases increased in five 117 
Divisions while they decreased in seven 118other Divisions. Details may be seen at Table 4.4 
below: 
Table 4.4: Year-wise and Division-wise reported cases of illegal tree felling and felled trees 
Sl. No. Division Number of cases of illegal felling of trees Total 
cases 
Total trees 
felled 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 
1 Kanha Tiger Reserve (Core) 54 65 33 29 21 202 773 
2 Panna Tiger Reserve 460 374 224 350 201 1609 6458 
3 Pench Tiger Reserve 407 386 335 281 218 1627 5670 
4 Sanjay Tiger Reserve 42 24 94 132 88 380 418 
5 Kuno National Park  64 63 24 15 32 198 1552 
6 Nauradehi Wildlife Sanctuary 1240 709 1180 998 919 5046 10059 
7 Madhav National Park 20 31 43 49 23 166 894 
8 Obedullaganj Division 649 630 581 841 671 3372 19681 
9 Bandhavgarh Tiger Reserve 250 371 372 719 270 1982 8471 
10 Satpura Tiger Reserve 219 216 168 48 10 661 2450 
11 Kanha Tiger Reserve (Buffer) 566 611 598 580 610 2965 7771 
12 Kheoni Wildlife Sanctuary (Dewas 
Division) 
332 286 272 271 244 1405 5388 
Total 4303 3766 3924 4313 3307 19613 69585 
(Source: Forest Department) 
The Nauradehi Wildlife Sanctuary, Obedullaganj Divi sion (Ratapani and Singhori Wildlife 
Sanctuaries), Kanha (Buffer), Kheoni Wildlife Sanctuary and Bandhavgarh Tiger Reserve were 
more prone to illegal felling, though the total number of cases had decreased during the period 
of review.  
In order to reduce dependency of the people from fuel wood from forests, Liquefied Petroleum 
Gas connections were distributed but only in Kanha, Panna, Pench and Satpura Tiger Reserves. 
Only Pench Tiger Reserve intimated that about 80 per cent of the beneficiaries were refilling 
the cylinder and in the remaining three Tiger Reser ves, survey for refilling was not done. 
Further, the Field Directors did not assess whether  dependency of the villagers on forest for 
                                                           
115  Fuelwood Consumption and Forest Degradation: A Ho usehold Model for Domestic Energy Substitution in 
Rural India, Rasmus Heltberg, Thomas Channing Arndt  and N Udaya Sekhar, Land Economics 
(May 2000). 
116  Chapter 10 of India State of Forest Report 2019. 
117  Bandhavgarh Tiger Reserve, Kanha Tiger Reserve (B uffer), Madhav National Park, Obedullaganj Division 
and Sanjay Tiger Reserve. 
118  Dewas Division, Kanha (Core) Tiger Reserve, Kuno Na tional Park, Nauradehi Wildlife Sanctuary, Pench 
Tiger Reserve, Panna Tiger Reserve and Satpura Tiger Reserve.  

Chapter 4: Management and Consolidation of Wildlife Habitats 
61 
fuel wood had reduced or not after distribution of Liquefied Petroleum Gas, for the purpose of 
future planning in this regard. 
The State Government stated (July 2021) that the da ta as shown in the Forest Survey of India 
study do not relate to the Protected Areas of Madhy a Pradesh. However, the reply was silent 
about the increasing trend of illegal felling cases  in the aforementioned Divisions and not 
assessing the impact of Liquefied Petroleum Gas distribution on fuel wood removal. 
4.9 Impact of major projects on wildlife habitats 
Major projects, such as dams, railways and roads, constitute predominant linear infrastructure. 
With plans to substantial expansion, they pose the greatest threat of harmful impact on wildlife. 
They also result in shrinking and fragmentation of wildlife habitat. Few such instances are 
discussed below: 
Box 4.3: Ken-Betwa Link Project 
The 2nd National Wildlife Action Plan (2002-16) envisages documentation and assessment of 
damage done by large projects and intrusions, such as dams, mines, roads, etc. One of the 
largest projects in rivers of Madhya Pradesh is Ken-Betwa Link Project.   
The Ken-Betwa Link Project was initiated by the Gov ernment of India (August 2005) to 
provide irrigation to more than five lakh hectares area, hydro power and drinking water to a 
large population in Bundelkhand region of Uttar Pra desh and Madhya Pradesh, requiring 
6,017.00 hectares of forest land, including 5,578.9 2 hectares of land of the Core and Buffer 
Zones of the Panna Tiger Reserve. The Project was c leared (September 2015) by the State 
Board for Wildlife. Clearance by the National Board  for Wildlife was under consideration in 
the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India (June 2019). 
Three main concerns were raised (September 2015) by the Field Director, Panna Tiger Reserve 
as the consequence of the Project on Panna Tiger Reserve, being:   
1. Direct destruction of about one-fourth of Critical Tiger Habitat of Panna Tiger Reserve 
to the tune of 58.03 square kilometer (10.07 per cent) and indirect loss of Critical Tiger 
Habitat area to the tune of 105.23 square kilometer (18.26 per cent);  
2. The Ken valley within the Core Zone of Panna Tiger Reserve constitutes a unique habitat 
for seven119 out of the nine vulture species found in India. In terms of breeding behavior, 
vultures nest on the sheer cliffs found along the Ken river within this Tiger Reserve. Due 
to fragmentation and loss of connectivity, about 50  per cent of the unique habitats of a 
highly endangered vulture species, including its nesting sites, will be lost; 
3. About 11 lakh trees will be removed and there will be stoppage and diversion of the 
monsoon flow of water in the Ken River;  
The Field Director also stated that the Project pro ponent had listed a number of measures to 
mitigate some of the losses and decision in this re gard may be taken with holistic view at the 
appropriate level. 
                                                           
119  Resident Vulture species; (1) Red-headed, (2) Whi te-backed, (3) Long-billed or Indian, (4) Egyptian,              
(5) Eurasian Griffon, (6) Himalayan Griffon, (7) Cinereous.  

Report on Wildlife Conservation and Sustainable Management of Wildlife Habitats in Madhya Pradesh 
62 
The PCCF/ Wildlife also agreed (September 2015) wit h the concerns raised by the Field 
Director, Panna Tiger Reserve and stated that loss of forest and prime habitat of Tiger and 
Vulture is inevitable. Further, National Tiger Conservation Authority has recommended to add 
additional satellite core area and with the conditi ons as per the recommendation of the State 
Wildlife Board. 
  
Vulture habitat in cliffs of Panna Tiger Reserve likely to be submerged after implementation of the 
Project  
(Photo taken by Audit Party during field visit) 
 
Ken River in Panna Tiger Reserve 
(Photo courtesy: NBWL Standing Committee Report, August 2016) 
A Report 120 published in ‘International Journal for Research i n Applied Science and 
Engineering Technology’ in June 2017 also concluded  that the likely submerged region will 
divide the Panna Tiger Reserve into two parts acros s the river, leading to loss of connectivity 
to the wildlife in the Tiger Reserve. 
  
                                                           
120        Rakesh Kumar, Himanshu Saluja, Assistant Professor, Amity School of Architecture and Planning, Amity 
University Gurgaon. 


Chapter 4: Management and Consolidation of Wildlife Habitats 
63 
Map showing Tiger Reserve boundaries and submerged area of KBLP 
 
(Source: International Journal for Research in Applied Science and Engineering Technology) 
The State Wildlife Board while recommending the Project (September 2015) mainly proposed 
following mitigation measures: 
1. Additional forest area may be added toward east of effected core area. 
2. Landscape Management Planning by Wildlife Institute  of India for strengthening of 
Wildlife Corridor. 
3. Study on mitigation on impact to Vulture habitat by Bombay Natural History Society. 
4. Ensuring ecological flow in Ken River below the dam. 
The PCCF/ Wildlife stated (June 2019) that mitigati on measures will be implemented and 
Wildlife will be increased as a result of increase in water level as well as increase in grasslands 
due to more open space on account of receding water from the reservoir.   
The State Government stated (July 2021) that after the Ken-Betwa Link Project was approved 
by the State Board for Wild Life and National Board  for Wild Life, the Government of India 
has granted in-principle approval to the Ken-Betwa Link Project after providing all mitigation 
measures to control the adverse impacts on wildlife habitat.   
GoI has approved the funding and implementation of Ken-Betwa Link Project 
(December 2021). Statedly, this project also compre hensively provides for environment 
management and safeguards. For this purpose a comprehensive landscape management plan is 
under finalisation by Wildlife Institute of India. 
The State Government may consider forming an expert  committee to specifically monitor the 
adequacy and timeliness of mitigation measures. 
4.9.1 Impact of other major projects on wildlife habitats 
The result of our examination of four other major P rojects which have been undertaken/ 
wildlife clearance accorded in Tiger Reserves are mentioned in Table 4.5 below: 
 
 


Report on Wildlife Conservation and Sustainable Management of Wildlife Habitats in Madhya Pradesh 
64 
Table 4.5: Major Projects in Tiger Reserves 
Sl. No. Division Activity Observation 
1 Pench Tiger 
Reserve 
Construction of 
Machagora Dam  
Due to the construction, the flow of water into the  Totladoh Dam 
in the Core zone of Tiger Reserve changed.  
Field Director had not made any assessment of impacts on wildlife 
habitat in construction of Machagora dam at upstream. 
2 Pench Tiger 
Reserve 
Road widening 
in National 
Highway-7 
Central Empowered Committee’s recommendation of div erting 
the NH-7 through Chhindwara was ignored, causing ir reparable 
damage, fragmentation and destruction to the wildlife habitat. 
3 Panna Tiger 
Reserve 
Diamond mining 
in Panna Tiger 
Reserve 
Mine Closure Plan was not submitted and critical ti ger habitat is 
being harmed by the water mixed with kimberlite rel eased from 
the mine. 
4 Satpura 
Tiger 
Reserve 
Construction of 
Sontalai-
Bagratawa 
Railway Line 
Monitoring committee was not formed as per directio ns of 
National Board for Wildlife and no progress reports  of execution 
of project sent by Field Director to Principal Chief Conservator of 
Forest/ Wildlife. Division was unaware about mitigation measures 
taken in the construction of the rail line. 
Details of the above are given in Appendix 4.7 . Thus, there was adverse impacts due to 
aforesaid developmental activities on these areas resulting into reduction and fragmentation of 
habitats and ecological area for the native wildlife species. 
The State Government agreed (September 2021) to the observation.  
4.10 Recommendations 
12. The State Government may complete the processes of demarcating boundaries of 
Protected Areas and Tiger Reserves by using digital and cadastral maps; 
13. The control of illegal mining in Son-Gharial Wildli fe Sanctuary may be strengthened 
by speeding up the investigations of registered cases; 
14. The State Government may ensure that all adverse impacts on Ken-Betwa River Linking 
Project as well as other infrastructure development  projects on the wildlife and their 
habitats are adequately mitigated.  Further, the St ate Government may consider 
forming an expert committee to specifically monitor  the adequacy and timeliness of 
mitigation measures. 
4.11 Conclusion 
We audited 13 out of 22 Divisions connected with Tiger Reserves, National Parks and Wildlife 
Sanctuaries for the period 2014-19 and found that c onservation suffered from gaps in long-
term perspective planning. Tiger Conservation Plans and Management Plans were not prepared 
and adequately supported by research.  
While the number of Tigers has increased from 308 t o 526 in the State during 2014-18, cases 
of death of Tiger and Leopard by poaching, electroc ution, snare and accidents near roads and 
railway tracks continued unabated. Adequate monitor ing like use of available technology 
through M-STrIPES, could have significantly improve d the Department’s capabilities even 
with limited resources. The Department was operatin g with significant shortage of personnel 

Chapter 4: Management and Consolidation of Wildlife Habitats 
65 
and lack of equipment like arms and wireless sets. Special Tiger Protection Force earmarked 
for protection of Tigers had also not been constituted.  
Forest offences in the sampled Divisions seemed to be processed within a reasonable span of 
time, with four-fifth of the cases during the audit period either been compounded or submitted 
to the Courts. However, one-fifth of these cases remained pending for significant periods, 
which needed to be speeded up. 
We noticed certain lacunae in protecting, consolidating and expanding the Protected Areas. 
Final notifications of Protected Areas were pending in many cases, process of relocation of 
villages and villagers were not completed, cases of Human-Wildlife Conflicts were increasing, 
spread of invasive alien plants could not be arrested and ecologically fragile eco-systems could 
not be adequately managed.   
Commendable achievement was made in translocation of wildlife to different Protected Areas 
within the State. Barring an unsuccessful attempt to translocate the Tigers to Odisha, all intra-
state translocations have largely succeeded.  
In India, Madhya Pradesh holds a special pride of place, being the State with the highest forest 
cover and a plethora of Wildlife. We encourage the Department to address the issues pointed 
out in this Report for sustainable conservation of wildlife in the forests of the State. 
Bhopal 
The 
(BIJIT KUMAR MUKHERJEE) 
Accountant General (Audit-II) 
Madhya Pradesh 
Countersigned 
New Delhi 
The 
(GIRISH CHANDRA MURMU) 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 

Appendix 1.1 
(Reference: Paragraph 1.3) 
Allotment and expenditure under Centrally Sponsored Scheme and State Schemes 
(`` `` in crore) 
Sl. 
No. Name of the Scheme Allotment Expenditure 
(+)Savings/ 
(-)Excess 
Amount Per cent 
1 2 3 4 5 6 
1 Centrally Sponsored Scheme 575.78 633.32 (-) 57.54 (-) 9.99 
State Schemes  
1 National Park 490.67 483.37 7.30 1.49 
2 Compensation for human casualties by wild animals 49.77 50.01 (-) 0.24 (-) 0.48 
3 Compensation for relocation of villages 685.05 642.47 42.59 6.22 
4 Wildlife management outside Protected areas 175.27 90.07 85.21 48.61 
Total 1400.77 1265.92 134.86 9.63 
(Source: Appropriation Accounts) 
  

Report on Wildlife Conservation and Sustainable Management of Wildlife Habitats in Madhya Pradesh 
68 
Appendix 1.2 
(Reference: Paragraph 1.5) 
Administrative Units for Management of Wildlife 
Sl. 
No. Name of Administrative Unit National Parks/ Sanctuaries under the Management 
Tiger Reserves 
1 Kanha Kanha National Park 
Phen Wildlife Sanctuary 
2 Bandhavgarh Bandhavgarh National Park  
Panpatha Wildlife Sanctuary 
3 Satpura Satpura National Park 
Pachmari Wildlife Sanctuary  
Bori Wildlife Sanctuary 
4 Panna Panna National Park 
Gangau Wildlife Sanctuary 
Ken Gharial Wildlife Sanctuary 
5 Pench Pench National Park 
Pench Mowgli Wildlife Sanctuary 
6 Sanjay Sanjay National Park 
Sanjay Dubri Wildlife Sanctuary 
Bagdara Wildlife Sanctuary 
Son Gharial Wildlife Sanctuary 
National Parks Under Wildlife Divisions 
7 Madhav National Park Madhav National Park 
Karera Wildlife Sanctuary 
8 Kuno National Park Kuno National Park 
9 Van Vihar National Park Van Vihar National Park  
Wildlife Sanctuaries Managed by Territorial Divisions 
10 Dindori Fossil National Park 
11 Dhar Dinosaur National Park 
Sardarpur Wildlife Sanctuary  
12 Ratlam Sailana Wildlife Sanctuary 
13 Gwalior Son Chidiya Wildlife Sanctuary 
14 Mandsaur Gandhi Sagar Wildlife Sanctuary 
15 Nauradehi Nauradehi Wildlife Sanctuary 
16 Morena Chambal Wildlife Sanctuary 
17 Tikamgarh Orchha Wildlife Sanctuary 
18 Damoh Virangana Durgavati Wildlife Sanctuary 
19 Rajgarh Narsinghgarh Wildlife Sanctuary 
20 Obedullaganj Ratapani Wildlife Sanctuary 
Singhori Wildlife Sanctuary 
21 Dewas Kheoni Wildlife Sanctuary 
22 Indore Ralamandal Wildlife Sanctuary  
(Source: Forest Department) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Appendices 
69 
Appendix 1.3 
(Reference: Paragraph 1.5) 
National Parks and Wildlife Sanctuaries under management of audited Divisions 
Sl. 
No. Division Tiger Reserve National Park Wildlife Sanctuary 
1 Kanha Tiger Reserve 
(Core) 
Kanha Tiger 
Reserve  Kanha National Park Phen Wildlife Sanctuary  
2 Kanha Tiger Reserve 
(Buffer) 
Kanha Tiger 
Reserve  -- -- 
3 Bandhavgarh Tiger 
Reserve 
Bandhavgarh Tiger 
Reserve 
Bandhavgarh 
National Park Panpatha Wildlife Sanctuary 
4 Pench Tiger Reserve Pench Tiger 
Reserve Pench National Park Pench Mowgli Wildlife 
Sanctuary 
5 Panna Tiger Reserve Panna Tiger 
Reserve Panna National Park Gangau and Ken Gharial 
Wildlife Sanctuaries 
6 Sanjay Tiger Reserve Sanjay Tiger 
Reserve Sanjay National Park 
Sanjay Dubri, Bagdara and 
Son Gharial Wildlife 
Sanctuaries 
7 Satpura Tiger 
Reserve 
Satpura Tiger 
Reserve Satpura National Park Bori and Pachmari Wildlife 
Sanctuaries 
8 Madhav National 
Park 
-- Madhav National 
Park Karera Wildlife Sanctuary 
9 Kuno Wildlife 
Division 
-- Kuno National Park -- 
10 Van Vihar National 
Park 
-- Van Vihar National 
Park -- 
11 Nauradehi Division -- -- Nauradehi Wildlife Sanctuary 
12 Obedullaganj 
Division 
-- -- Ratapani and Singhori 
Wildlife Sanctuaries 
13 Dewas (General) 
Division 
-- -- Kheoni Wildlife Sanctuary 
 
  

Report on Wildlife Conservation and Sustainable Management of Wildlife Habitats in Madhya Pradesh 
70 
Appendix 2.1  
(Reference: Paragraph 2.2.3) 
Status of management of various Corridors 
Sl. No. Status of management of various Corridors 
1 Kanha-Pench 
Kanha-Pench Corridor is one of the most important f orest corridors in India and facilitates tiger disp ersal 
between Kanha and Pench Tiger Reserves. The corrido r is an extensive tract of wildlife habitat coverin g 
an area of over 16,000 square kilometre all in Madh ya Pradesh. It also acts as a refuge for several ot her 
mammals such as wild dogs, sloth bear, leopard, ind ian wolf, hyena, jackal, sambar, gaur, chital etc. 
Without linkages from source population such as Kan ha, isolated populations face the risk of extinctio n 
due to poaching and loss in genetic vigor over generations.  
In this forest corridor there are several segments which are extremely narrow or patchy. These segment s 
are areas of concern, being areas with severely red uced connectivity with regard to animal presence an d 
movements. 
Kanha- Navegaon-Nagzira-Tadoba-Indravati 
This corridor is weakest at State junction of Madhy a Pradesh, Maharashtra and Chhattisgarh where the 
forest connectivity is in the form of fragmented pa tches but the landscape matrix is not entirely host ile to 
tiger movement and gene flow currently exists under prevailing Land Use Land Cover. 
Kanha-Achanakmar  
The Kanha-Achanakmar forest corridor is contiguous almost throughout. However, at several places it is  
extremely thin and degraded, and in between there a re several relatively good blocks. These can function 
as potential stepping-stones on the landscape between the Tiger Reserves. 
The corridor is a part of intact forest patch betwe en Kanha-Phen-Achanakmar, however the State 
Government uses it for  commercial forestry activities. It was important th at these activities do not 
undermine the functionalities of this habitat as a wildlife corridor. The PCCF/ Wildlife did not take 
adequate action to manage these areas under meta-population. 
The Field Director, Kanha Tiger Reserve stated that  the Kanha Management is perfectly aware of the 
philosophy of corridor connectivity and its conserv ation value and accordingly identified the aforesai d 
three ecological corridors. However, there is now a  lateral thinking among the higher-ups that as most  
areas along the corridors fall under the jurisdiction of forest divisions outside the Kanha Tiger Reserve, it 
would be appropriate to have these plans prepared at the headquarter level in order to overcome difficulties 
relating to the jurisdiction. The fact remains that  the Field Director neither initiated any steps to develop 
such corridors nor had he submitted any proposal to the higher authorities for its implementation.  
2 Pench-Satpura-Melghat  
The Pench-Satpura corridor should receive the same level of ‘safeguards’ against industrial use as do core 
areas of both tiger reserves. This corridor is bein g lost/ fragmented due to habitations and developme nt 
projects especially due to extension of coal mining blocks.  
Pench and Satpura Tiger Reserves in Central Indian Landscape are separated by an aerial distance of about 
150 kilometres. The Pench-Satpura wildlife corridor is a forested corridor that links the contiguous Pench 
Tiger Reserve and Satpura Tiger Reserve. The corridor is direct, almost perfectly aligned along the shortest 
distance between the reserves and for most parts, h eavily forested. The minimum width of the corridor 
identified by the Wildlife Institute of India is about three kilometer. There are evidences of resident tigers 
occupying the area. Leopard signs are available in most of the corridor area. The habitat in Pench- Satpura 
corridor has become fragmented at many places due t o many developmental activities like coal mining, 
roads and railways1. 
Indicative plan had been prepared for the managemen t of Pench-Satpura as well as for Kanha-Pench 
corridors in Pench Tiger Reserve. The Field Director, Pench Tiger Reserve stated that management of the 
corridors was being done by the respective Forest d ivisions as per the working plans/ management plan 
under which the jurisdiction of the area falls. The Field Director Satpura Tiger Reserve also reiterated this. 
                                                           
1  Indicative plan for Pench- Satpura corridor. 

Appendices 
71 
Sl. No. Status of management of various Corridors 
Replies indicated that management of corridor is no t being adequately done in the interest of wildlife  
conservation. 
3 Ranthambore-Kuno-Madhav 
Kuno National Park is connected to the Ranthambore National Park and Kailadevi Wildlife Sanctuary 
(both part of the Ranthambore Tiger Reserve) throug h good forest patches towards the north western 
boundary from across the river Chambal (Jhala et al .2008), is located in the Sheopur district. Two Tig ers 
viz. T-30 and T-38 dispersed from Ranthambore Tiger  Reserve and finally reached Kuno-Palpur 
Sanctuary2. Similarly, nine other tigers were found to be dis persed from Ranthambore Tiger Reserve and 
travelled in the district of Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh. It was further noted that wildlife 
corridors with Panna Tiger Reserve and Ranthambore Tiger Reserve although mentioned in the 
Management Plan of Madhav National Park, but were n ot analysed and planned for gene flow and 
dispersal of wildlife. 
The Director, Kuno National Park did not identify and prioritise degraded habitats outside Protected Area. 
No indicative plan for corridor amongst the other P rotected Areas within and outside the State was 
prepared to hold the relatively potential good tige r number as meta-population, despite ideally locate d 
close to the Ranthambore Tiger Reserve. According t o Management Plan 3 of Madhav National Park, the 
National Park is part of the landscape where tigers were the dominant species not very long ago. Some of 
the largest tigers in the world have been shot arou nd Shivpuri and Gwalior. The National Park is situa ted 
in the middle of the landscape that connects Panna Tiger Reserve and Ranthambore Tiger Reserve, both 
situated in the dry tropics. The Director, Madhav N ational Park stated that identification of corridor  was 
not done. Thus, not conducting of any identificatio n indicates failure of the Director to conceive any  
corridor plan in a holistic manner. 
4 Bandhavgarh-Sanjay-Dubri-Guru Ghasidas  
Sanjay-Dubri Tiger Reserve has five important exter nal corridors that connect the Tiger Reserve to oth er 
Protected Areas/ Forests as depicted in the followi ng picture. Out of the five corridors, three have b een 
delineated by the Wildlife Institute of India and t he fourth has been identified by the Working Plan o f 
Shahdol Division. The fifth corridor lies in the Singrauli district and is primarily used by the elephants. 
Corridor I - lies in North Shahdol Forest Division, between Panpatha Wildlife Sanctuary of Bandhavgarh  
and Dubri Wildlife Sanctury of Sanjay-Dubri Tiger R eserve. This corridor was frequently used by tigers  
and other wild animals to cross over from Bandhavgarh to Sanjay Dubri Tiger Reserve prior to the raising 
of the height of the Ban Sagar dam. In 2006, the he ight of the dam was increased thereby increasing th e 
level of the water in the river which makes it diff icult for the tigers and other wildlife to cross ov er to the 
other side thereby closing a channel for exchange o f gene pool. A large part of the area has been noti fied 
as buffer of the two Reserves. 
Corridor II - Connects the Panpatha Wildlife Sanctu ary of Bandhavgarh and Dubri Wildlife Sanctuary of 
Sanjay Tiger Reserve south of the first corridor. T his is actually a viable corridor, although there i s 
significant amount of fragmentation in this corridor due to presence of villages. There is evidence of tiger 
movement in the area as exemplified by cattle kills and other indirect signs, besides some direct sightings. 
Corridor III - Sanjay-Dubri Tiger Reserve shares a 53 kilometer long common boundary with Guru 
Ghasidas National Park, which was part of erstwhile Sanjay National Park. The tigers of the Tiger Reserve 
had been often seen crossing over and coming back in the recent past.  
Corridor IV - Connects Bandhavgarh Tiger Reserve wi th Guru Ghasidas National Park in Chhattisgarh 
through the Shahdol district and Koria and Manendragarh districts in Chhattisgarh.  
Corridor V - Wild Elephants from Chhattisgarh first came to the Reserve in October 2002. Since then, the 
movement of wild elephants was confined to the forests in Sidhi and Singrauli districts. These Elephants, 
as per the local information, come from Tamorpingla  Sanctuary which has a good population of wild 
elephants to Guru Ghasidas. From Guru Ghasidas, they enter the Mohan range of the core of Sanjay-Dubri 
Tiger Reserve, proceed to Sarai Range of Singrauli Forest Division where they stay for some time and 
                                                           
2  In an article published in the Cat News, a compon ent of the Species Survival Commission of the 
International Union for Conservation of Nature on t he trend of dispersal of tigers in the North-West 
India, 2015. 
3  Chapter 11 of the Management Plan of Madhav Natio nal Park. 

Report on Wildlife Conservation and Sustainable Management of Wildlife Habitats in Madhya Pradesh 
72 
Sl. No. Status of management of various Corridors 
then return back to Chhattisgarh via the same route. Due to fragmentation of corridors, two wild elephants 
were electrocuted4 in February 2015.  
  
The Field Director, Sanjay Tiger Reserve submitted a proposal to the PCCF/  Wildlife in August 2017 on 
study on Habitat improvement: Corridor connectivity  of elephants with objectives to study the resource s 
availability of elephants in Sanjay Tiger Reserve, to map the movement of elephants in Sanjay Tiger 
Reserve and suggest measures for improving corridor  connectivity, to formulate habitat improvement 
programme for elephants in Sanjay Tiger Reserve and  to develop a long term monitoring plan and 
formulate management guidelines for viability of transient elephant population. 
The context of this proposal was reporting of eleph ants in Madhya Pradesh in 2002, which entered from 
Guru Ghasidas National Park and reached Mohan Range in Sanjay Tiger Reserve. Elephants visited in the 
Tiger Reserve in 2002 to 2009 and 2013 and again in  2017. Number of visiting elephants were seven in 
February 2017. However, no further progress about t he study was available in records as well as work 
done to develop the corridor. The major threat to h abitat linkages in this landscape is fragmentation due 
to railway lines, roads mining activities and other  large-scale projects namely cement plants and ther mal 
power plants. The second potential threat is biotic pressures and poaching of prey-base and probably tigers. 
The importance of this linkage cannot be undermined  as towards the east, a large habitat still exists but 
can only be recolonised by tigers, if connectivity with Bandhavgarh remains intact.  
Bandhavgarh-Sanjay-Dubri-Guru Ghasidas corridor hol ds a promise for long term tiger conservation but 
only if this connectivity remains functional. The a bsence of any plan for the maintenance of the said five 
important corridors was not in accordance with the provisions for conservation and promotion of wildlife 
to secure their movement.  
The Field Director, Sanjay Tiger Reserve stated that the planning for corridor would be done in future with 
the direction of the PCCF/ Wildlife. Regarding the study on elephant corridor, the Field Director stat ed 
that approval for the proposal of Study is awaited (November 2019). 
5 Bandhavgarh-Achanakmar  
Bandhavgarh-Achanakmar corridor connects two very i mportant sub-landscapes, the Kanha-Pench 
population with Bandhavgarh-Sanjay-Dubri population s. However, the corridor passes through tiger 
hostile landscape since some communities living in the vicinity are known for their poaching tendencie s. 
The habitat through which the corridor passes is it self narrow ridge-top forest with high biotic press ures. 
Further, due to availability of coal in this landsc ape matrix there is ever present pressure from 
infrastructure development associated with coal min ing. This corridor requires serious attention for 
restoration in terms of ecology as well as socio-ec onomic inputs. Its source population is Bandhavgarh  
Tiger Reserve. 
However, even indicative plan for this corridor was  not approved. The Field Director stated that these  
areas are being maintained by respective territorial divisions as per provision of Working Plans.    
(Source: Forest Department) 
                                                           
4  At Baghwari village about six kilometer from Sidh i district headquarters when elephants strayed from  the 
herd, lost the direction and entered Sidhi district. 


Appendices 
73 
Appendix 2.2 
 (Reference: Paragraph 2.2.4) 
Shortcomings in preparation of Management Plan, impacts and good practices 
Sl. 
No. 
Protected 
Area Period Guidelines 
followed Shortcomings Impacts Good Practices 
1 Ratapani 
Wildlife 
Sanctuary 
2008-09 
to  
2017-18 
Not mentioned • Research activities not 
identified. 
• Management Zone planning 
not done.  
• Schedule of Operations for 
financial activities not 
prescribed. 
• Detailed plan for patrolling by 
officials and their monitoring 
by superiors were not 
prescribed. 
• Better understanding of nature and its 
functions to enable sustainable utilisation of 
its resources could not be developed, 
conservation status of species and habitats 
and the extent of impact of conservation 
endeavours undertaken could not be known.  
• Planning through separation of functions in 
different determinate areas of a Protected 
Area was not done. 
• Management actions under the plan could not 
be ordered in a series of annual tasks. 
• Security measures for wildlife and their 
habitats could not be optimised through the 
Planning process. 
• Management Plan 
prepared in Hindi for 
better understating of 
various level of work 
force. 
2 Bagadara 
Wildlife 
Sanctuary 
2017-18 
to 
2026-27 
A Guide for 
Planning 
Wildlife 
Management 
by Wildlife 
Institute of 
India 
• Mechanism for Coordination, 
joint patrolling and intelligence 
gathering with neighbouring 
state of Utter Pradesh not 
prescribed despite evident 
threats discussed in the 
Management Plan itself.  
• Anti-poaching prescription 
were rather sketchy as detailed 
plan for patrolling and 
inspections by officials and 
their monitoring was not 
prescribed. 
• Security measures for wildlife and their 
habitats could not be optimised through the 
Planning process. 
 
 
• Ecology and salient 
feature of various 
inhabiting wild animal of 
the Sanctuary given. 
• Schedule of Operations 
for financial activities 
prescribed. 
3 Kuno 
National 
Park 
2010-11 
to  
2019-20 
A Guide for 
Planning 
Wildlife 
Management by 
• Assessment of wildlife not 
given. 
• Research activities not 
identified.  
• Better understanding of nature and its 
functions to enable sustainable utilisation of 
its resources could not be developed and 
conservation status of species and habitats 
• Management Plan 
prepared in Hindi and 
summary of Plan is given 
in English. 

Report on Wildlife Conservation and Sustainable Management of Wildlife Habitats in Madhya Pradesh 
74 
Sl. 
No. 
Protected 
Area Period Guidelines 
followed Shortcomings Impacts Good Practices 
Wildlife 
Institute of 
India and 
Working Plan 
Code 
• Schedule of Operations for 
financial activities not 
prescribed. 
• Detailed plan for patrolling and 
inspections by officials and 
their monitoring was not 
prescribed. 
and the extent of impact of conservation 
endeavours undertaken could not be known. 
• Management actions under the plan could not 
be ordered in a series of annual tasks. 
• Security measures for wildlife and their 
habitats could not be optimised through the 
Planning process. 
 
• Alternative plan for Lion 
re-introduction in the 
Wildlife Sanctuary by 
establishment of breeding 
centres of genetically 
pure Lions brought from 
Zoos and rehabilitation of 
third/ fourth generation 
cubs in wild for Lion 
reintroduction in the 
National Park. 
4 Nauradehi 
Wildlife 
Sanctuary 
2007-08 
to  
2016-17 
A Guide for 
Planning 
Wildlife 
Management 
by Wildlife 
Institute of 
India 
• Tiger corridors were not 
analysed and mentioned despite 
evident corridor with Panna 
Tiger Reserve. 
• Number of villages shown in 
Management Plan was 69 while 
in a letter addressed to Chief 
Conservator of Forests, The 
Divisional Forest Officer stated 
that 74 villages are situated 
inside the Wildlife Sanctuary. 
Thus, there was discrepancy in 
significant base line data.  
• Issue of Wildlife Health and 
Insect attack discussed in 
‘Present Management’ chapter. 
However, mitigation plan was 
not prescribed in relevant 
chapter. 
• Mitigation measures for 
degradation of habitats due to 
human interference were also 
not prescribed despite presence 
of number of villages in and 
around the Wildlife Sanctuary. 
• Conservation activities for the tiger 
landscape could not be planned and 
implemented. 
• Inadequate village relocation plan. 
• Lack of conservation measures for wildlife 
health and planning against insect attack. 
• Security measures for wildlife and their 
habitats could not be optimised through the 
Planning process. 
----- 

Appendices 
75 
Sl. 
No. 
Protected 
Area Period Guidelines 
followed Shortcomings Impacts Good Practices 
• Detailed plan for patrolling and 
their monitoring was not 
prescribed. 
5 Madhav 
National 
Park 
2007-08 
to  
2016-17 
Not mentioned • Research activities not 
identified. 
• Existing Tiger corridor 
between Ranthambore was not 
delineated in the Management 
Plan. 
• Man-animal conflict not 
analysed and mitigation not 
planned. 
• Detailed plan for patrolling and 
their monitoring was not 
prescribed.  
• Better understanding of nature and its 
functions to enable sustainable utilisation of 
its resources was not developed and 
conservation status of species and habitats 
and the extent of impact of conservation 
endeavours undertaken could not be known. 
• Conservation activities for the tiger 
landscape could not be planned and 
implemented. 
• Security measures for wildlife and their 
habitats could not be optimised by the 
Planning process. 
• Schedule of operations 
for financial activities 
prescribed. 
• Biodiversity (Mammals, 
Reptiles, Snails, 
butterflies,  Amphibians 
etc.) of National Park was 
given. 
6 Karera 
Wildlife 
Sanctuary 
2008-09 
to  
2017-18 
Not mentioned • Detailed plan for patrolling and 
inspections by officials and 
their monitoring was not 
prescribed. 
• Government Revenue Land in 
11 villages which was to be 
developed as core habitat of 
Great Indian Bustard, stated to 
have been identified but not 
listed in the Management Plan. 
• Security measures for wildlife and their 
habitats could not be optimised through the 
Planning process. 
• Great Indian Bustard habitat could not be 
developed and plan for re-introduction of 
Great Indian Bustard could not be 
implemented.  
• Management Plan 
prepared in Hindi. 
• Name and estimated 
number of Migratory 
birds seen in Dihaila 
Wetland in the Sanctuary 
was mentioned. 
 
(Source: Forest Department) 
 
 
  

Report on Wildlife Conservation and Sustainable Management of Wildlife Habitats in Madhya Pradesh 
76 
Appendix 3.1 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.3.1.2) 
Deficiencies in retrofitting measures in road passing through Tiger Reserve/ Protected 
Areas 
Sl. No. 
Name of  
Tiger 
Reserve/ 
Protected 
Area 
Name of  
Major 
Roads 
Status  
of road 
Status of retrofitting measures 
Night  
traffic 
ban 
Speed- 
breakers Signage Speed  
limit 
Underpass/ 
Overpass 
Modification  
in Bridges,  
Culverts, etc. 
1 Pench Tiger 
Reserve 
National 
Highway-7 
(New 
National 
Highway -
44), 
Upgraded Not done Not done Done Not done Done Not  
Applicable 
State 
Highway -
54 
Existing Not  
Applicable 
Not  
Applicable 
Not  
Applicable 
Not  
Applicable 
Not  
Applicable 
Not done 
2 Panna Tiger 
Reserve 
National 
Highway - 
75 
Existing Not done Done Done Not done Not  
Applicable 
Not done 
State 
Highway -
45  
Existing Not  
Applicable 
Not  
Applicable 
Not  
Applicable 
Not  
Applicable 
Not  
Applicable 
Not done 
3 Sanjay Tiger 
Reserve 
Bastua to  
Barkadol 
Upgraded Not done Not done Not done Not done Not done Not  
Applicable 
Deomath to 
Kharbar 
Upgraded Not done Not done Not done Not done Not done Not  
Applicable 
Ramgarh to 
Baheradol  
Upgraded Not done Not done Not done Not done Not done Not  
Applicable 
Joori 
Runda  
to Bhadora  
Upgraded Not done Not done Not done Not done Not done Not  
Applicable 
4 Nauradehi 
Wildlife 
Sanctuary 
National 
Highway -
12 
Existing Not done Done Done Not done Not  
Applicable 
Not  
Applicable 
State 
Highway -
15 
Upgraded Not done Done Done Not done Not done Not  
Applicable 
5 Madhav 
National 
Park 
National 
Highway -3 
Upgraded Not done Done Done Not done Not done Not  
Applicable 
National 
Highway -
25 
Existing Not done Not done Not done Not done Not  
Applicable 
Not done 
6 Bandhavgarh 
Tiger 
Reserve 
Amarpatan- 
Shahpura 
Existing Not done Done Done Not done Not  
Applicable 
Not done 
Satna-
Maihar- 
Parasi  
Existing Not done Done Done Not done Not  
Applicable 
Not done 
Karkeli-
Manpur 
Existing Not done Done Done Not done Not  
Applicable 
Not done 
Amarpatan-
Tala- 
Shahpura 
Existing Not done Done Done Not done Not  
Applicable 
Not done 

Appendices 
77 
Sl. No. 
Name of  
Tiger 
Reserve/ 
Protected 
Area 
Name of  
Major 
Roads 
Status  
of road 
Status of retrofitting measures 
Night  
traffic 
ban 
Speed- 
breakers Signage Speed  
limit 
Underpass/ 
Overpass 
Modification  
in Bridges,  
Culverts, etc. 
Umariya –
Majholi 
Existing Not done Done Done Not done Not  
Applicable 
Not done 
Barahi-
Singrauli  
Existing Not done Done Done Not done Not  
Applicable 
Not done 
7 Satpura 
Tiger 
Reserve 
State 
Highway -
19 
Existing Not done Not done Done Not done Not  
Applicable 
Not done 
8 Kanha Tiger 
Reserve 
(Core) 
State 
Highway -
26 
Existing Done Done Done Done Not  
Applicable 
Not  
Applicable 
9 Kanha Tiger 
Reserve 
(Buffer) 
National 
Highway -
12A 
Existing Not  
Applicable 
Not  
Applicable 
Not  
Applicable 
Not  
Applicable 
Not  
Applicable 
Not done 
10 Ratapani 
Wildlife 
Sanctuary 
National 
Highway -
69 
Existing Not done Not done Done Not done Not  
Applicable 
Not done 
(Source: Forest Department) 
 
  

Report on Wildlife Conservation and Sustainable Management of Wildlife Habitats in Madhya Pradesh 
78 
Appendix 3.2  
(Reference: Paragraph 3.5.2.1) 
Status of sanctioned, working strength and shortage of field officials in audited divisions 
as on March 2019 
Name of unit  Range 
Officer 
Deputy 
Ranger Forester Forest 
Guard Total 
Kanha Tiger 
Reserve (core) 
Sanctioned 10 12 40 175 237 
Working 7 5 18 165 195 
Shortage per cent 30 58 55 6 18 
Van Vihar National 
Park 
Sanctioned 6 3 10 43 62 
Working 4 1 8 42 55 
Shortage per cent 33 67 20 2 11 
Kuno National Park Sanctioned 10 12 45 225 292 
Working 8 4 22 154 188 
Shortage per cent 20 67 51 32 36 
Obedullaganj 
Division 
Sanctioned 15 16 52 208 291 
Working 9 8 44 165 226 
Shortage per cent 40 50 15 21 22 
Panna Tiger 
Reserve 
Sanctioned 14 16 67 174 271 
Working 9 11 31 137 188 
Shortage per cent 36 31 54 21 31 
Sanjay Tiger 
Reserve 
Sanctioned 18 11 38 131 198 
Working 10 2 21 122 155 
Shortage per cent 44 82 45 7 22 
Nauradehi Wildlife 
Sanctuary 
Sanctioned 9 12 36 122 179 
Working 5 3 24 110 142 
Shortage per cent 44 75 33 10 21 
Pench Tiger Reserve Sanctioned 15 15 51 170 251 
Working 8 12 37 139 196 
Shortage per cent 47 20 27 18 22 
Satpura Tiger 
Reserve 
Sanctioned 19 25 81 235 360 
Working 10 14 53 190 267 
Shortage per cent 47 44 35 19 26 
Kheoni Wildlife 
Sanctuary 
Sanctioned 02 01 2 17 22 
Working 01 01 6 23 31 
Shortage per cent 50 00 00 00 00 
Kanha Tiger 
Reserve (Buffer) 
Sanctioned 6 12 21 67 106 
Working 5 3 10 64 82 
Shortage per cent 17 75 52 4 23 
Bandhavgarh Tiger 
Reserve  
Sanctioned 14 16 44 195 269 
Working 7 6 32 171 216 
Shortage per cent 29 63 25 12 20 
Madhav National 
Park 
Sanctioned 8 8 15 70 101 
Working 3 4 13 63 83 
Shortage per cent 63 50 13 10 18 
Total Sanctioned 146 159 502 1832 2639 
Total Working 86 76 319 1545 2026 
  Shortage 60 83 183 287 613 
  Per cent 41 52 36 16 23 
(Source: Forest Department) 
 
 
 
 
  

Appendices 
79 
Appendix 3.3 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.5.2.1) 
Division wise Sanctioned, Working Strength and Forest Guards per square kilometre  
Sl. 
No. Division 
Area 
(square 
kilometre) 
Strength Area per Forest Guard 
(square kilometre) 
Forest Guard per 
square kilometre   
Sanctioned Working Sanctioned 
Posts 
Working 
Posts Sanctioned Working 
1 Van Vihar National 
Park 
4.45 43 42 0.10 0.11 9.66 9.44 
2 Kuno National Park 1235.39 158 120 7.82 10.29 0.13 0.10 
3 Kanha Tiger 
Reserve (Core) 
1050.74 175 165 6.01 6.37 0.17 0.16 
4 Pench Tiger Reserve 1179.63 170 139 6.94 8.49 0.14 0.12 
5 Madhav National 
Park 
577.44 70 56 8.25 10.31 0.12 0.10 
6 Obedullaganj 
Division 
1797.91 208 165 8.64 10.90 0.12 0.09 
7 Nauradehi Division 1197.04 122 106 9.81 11.29 0.10 0.09 
8 Panna Tiger Reserve 1688.35 174 137 9.70 12.32 0.10 0.08 
9 Sanjay Tiger 
Reserve 
2376.46 131 122 18.14 19.48 0.06 0.05 
10 Bandhavgarh Tiger 
Reserve 
1536.94 195 171 7.88 8.99 0.13 0.11 
11 Satpura Tiger 
Reserve 
2133.30 235 190 9.08 11.23 0.11 0.09 
12 Kanha Tiger 
Reserve (Buffer) 
1134.31 67 64 16.93 17.72 0.06 0.06 
13 Kheoni Wildlife 
Sanctuary 
132.78 17 26 7.81 5.11 0.13 0.20 
Total 16044.73 1765 1503 9.09 10.68 0.11 0.09 
(Source: Forest Department) 
  

Report on Wildlife Conservation and Sustainable Management of Wildlife Habitats in Madhya Pradesh 
80 
Appendix 3.4 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.5.3) 
Statement showing status of availability of amenities in Patrolling Camps 
Sl. 
No. Division 
No of 
Camps 
visited 
Torch/ 
Battery Arms Tiger 
Tracer 
Measurement 
Tape 
First 
Aid 
Kit 
Toilet 
Facility 
1 Pench Tiger Reserve 20 19 0 15 18 19 14 
2 Sanjay Tiger Reserve 9 7 1 6 7 1 4 
3 Kanha Tiger Reserve 
(Core) 
14 12 0 14 11 14 14 
4 Panna Tiger Reserve 20 7 0 12 16 14 11 
5 Madhav National Park 4 2 0 3 2 0 3 
6 Nauradehi Division 4 2 0 3 2 0 3 
7 Kuno National Park 4 1 4 4 2 2 4 
8 Obedullaganj Division 4 2 4 3 3 0 0 
9 Bandhavgarh Tiger 
Reserve 
16 15 0 13 14 15 7 
10 Satpura Tiger Reserve 14 11 0 14 14 14 12 
11 Kanha Tiger Reserve 
(Buffer) 
10 8 0 10 9 9 9 
12 Kheoni Wildlife 
Sanctuary 
2 2 0 1 2 0 1 
Total 121 88 9 98 100 88 82 
Per cent  73 7 81 83 73 68 
 (Source: Responses of field staff during joint inspection of Patrolling Camps) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Appendices 
81 
Appendix 3.5 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.5.3) 
Statement showing responses of  Camp labourers on welfare measures 
Sl. 
No. Division No. of 
labourers 
Prize 
System 
Weekly 
Off 
Health 
Check 
up 
Delay in 
payment 
of wages 
Water 
bottle 
Mosquito 
net 
Ration 
Facility 
1 Kanha Tiger Reserve (Core) 14 3 13 12 5 7 10 12 
2 Panna Tiger Reserve 20 5 19 17 7 11 8 8 
3 Pench Tiger Reserve 20 7 19 18 0 19 19 19 
4 Sanjay Tiger Reserve 9 5 7 4 2 4 6 0 
5 Madhav National Park 3 0 1 0 0 0 1 Not Applicable 
6 Nauradehi Division 3 0 1 0 0 0 1 Not Applicable 
7 Kuno National Park 4 3 4 0 0 1 4 Not Applicable 
8 Obedullaganj Division 4 0 2 0 3 0 0 Not Applicable 
9 Bandhavgarh Tiger Reserve 16 8 15 12 8 10 15 9 
10 Satpura Tiger Reserve 14 7 13 9 1 11 12 0 
11 Kanha Tiger Reserve (Buffer) 10 4 2 10 10 4 1 1 
12 Kheoni Wildlife Sanctuary 
(Dewas General Division) 
2 0 0 0 1 0 0 Not Applicable 
Total 119 42 96 82 37 67 77 49 
Per cent  35 81 69 31 56 65 48 
(Source: Responses of field staff during joint inspection of Patrolling Camps) 
 
  

Report on Wildlife Conservation and Sustainable Management of Wildlife Habitats in Madhya Pradesh 
82 
Appendix 3.6 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.6.1) 
Compensation paid by Forest Department in Human-Wildlife Conflict cases during 
2014-19 
(`` `` in Crore) 
Sl. 
No. Year Number of Cattle 
injured/ predated 
Compensation 
paid 
Injury and death of 
villagers in wildlife attack 
Compensation 
paid 
1 2014-15 2237 1.74 254 0.28 
2 2015-16 3463 2.99 236 0.23 
3 2016-17 3546 3.59 227 0.33 
4 2017-18 4169 3.61 185 0.41 
5 2018-19 4051 3.51 254 0.41 
Total 17466 15.44 1156 1.66 
(Source: Forest Divisions) 
 
  

Appendices 
83 
Appendix 4.1  
(Reference: Paragraph 4.1) 
Deficiency and delays in augmentation of Protected Areas and Tiger Reserves 
Sl. 
No. 
Proposed Protected 
Area/ Tiger Reserve Deficiency and delays in augmentation of Protected Area and Tiger Reserve 
1 Notification of 
Protected Areas 
under Indira Sagar 
Project 
Forest clearance granted by Ministry of Environment , Forest and Climate Change to 
Narmada Sagar Project also known as Indira Sagar Pr oject approved in October 1987 
for diversion of 41,111.97 hectares of forest land in favour of Narmada Valley 
Development Authority. According to a condition that a committee constituted by the 
State Government for conservation and management of wildlife will decide necessary 
steps to be taken and draw up a plan which will be implemented at the cost of the 
project. The State Government constituted a Committ ee in January 1988 mainly 
comprising of the Chief Wild Life Warden, the Direc tor, Wildlife Institute of India 
and a nominated member of State Board for Wildlife for aforesaid purpose. 
Audit noted in office of the PCCF/ Wildlife that th e issue went through number of 
processes since. Narmada Valley Development Authority awarded consultancy to two 
agencies to study the impacts of the Project on wildlife, plants and suggest mitigation 
measures. They submitted their reports in 1994 and 1996 and stated that the area 
harboures 32 mammalian species and has an abundant herbivore population, they 
suggested creation of one National Park and two Wildlife Sanctuaries in the area.  
Narmada Valley Development Authority submitted a re vised proposal in November 
2002 and proposed 491.552 square kilometre area for  three Protected Areas. Another 
consultancy was given to State Forest Research Inst itute by Narmada Valley 
Development Authority in April 2004 which proposed constitution of one National 
Park, two Wildlife Sanctuaries and two Conservation  Reserves. The proposal for 
notification of five Protected Areas comprising of 696.91 square kilometre area was 
submitted (May 2005) to Cabinet which was rejected on the ground that the large area 
is involved and this will restrict activities such as fishing, tourism and agriculture in 
areas and cause hardship to local people. Chief Wil d Life Warden informed Audit in 
July 2019 that proposal for constitution of Omkareshwar National Park (246.44 square 
kilometre) and two Wildlife Sanctuaries (Singaji Wi ldlife Sanctuary 177.11 square 
kilometre and Mandhata Wildlife Sanctuary 68.75 squ are kilometre) and two 
Conservation Reserves (Narmada Conservation Reserve -1, 134.53 square kilometre 
and Narmada Conservation Reserve-2, 19.01 square kilometre) comprising a total area 
of 645.84 square kilometre has been sent (December 2007) to the State Government. 
There was no progress in the matter since. 
Thus, the condition of taking necessary steps for c onservation and management of 
wildlife, stipulated by Ministry of Environment, Fo rest and Climate Change in 
diversion of huge forest land for non-forestry purp oses in 1987, is still trapped in 
processes and could not be fulfilled by the State Government.  
2 Augmentation of 
Pench Tiger Reserve 
Size of core of Pench Tiger Reserve is only 411.30 square kilometre and buffer is only 
768.30 square kilometre. Efforts of the Department were not visible in records to 
increase the area of core and buffer of Pench Tiger  Reserve. Contiguous to the Pench 
Tiger Reserve of Madhya Pradesh is the Pench Tiger Reserve of Maharashtra. This 
provides another 257 square kilometre of inviolate habitat to tiger. It is obvious that 
the present legal boundary does not serve as ecolog ical boundary for many species of 
fauna. To and fro movement from the adjoining Pench  Tiger Reserve of Maharashtra 
and other forest areas is frequent. 
The Pench Tiger Reserves of Madhya Pradesh and Maha rashtra together afford 668 
square kilometre of inviolate space for tigers. In order to provide around 800-1000 
square kilometre of inviolate habitat, it is be nec essary to include 227.55 square 
kilometre of Rukhad and Ari Range towards the east of the Pench Mowgli Wildlife 
Sanctuary. This track is almost free from human influence and only one village Sakata 
with small number of family exist within this area. This forest is a part of Pench-Kanha 
corridor and therefore its inclusion as part of the  Critical Tiger Habitat in future will 

Report on Wildlife Conservation and Sustainable Management of Wildlife Habitats in Madhya Pradesh 
84 
Sl. 
No. 
Proposed Protected 
Area/ Tiger Reserve Deficiency and delays in augmentation of Protected Area and Tiger Reserve 
be great importance for tiger conservation. However, efforts of the Field Director were 
not visible to relocate Sakata village and augment the Core area for ensuring the long-
term viability of tiger in the area.  
The Field Director stated that discussions with the  villagers is under progress, action 
would be taken after obtaining their consent. Fact remains that even after more than 
10 years since approval of Tiger Conservation Plan in 2008-09 the village could not 
be relocated and the area could not be added to the Pench Tiger Reserve for leveraging 
tiger and wildlife conservation. 
3 Notification of 
Ratapani Wildlife 
Sanctuary as Tiger 
Reserve 
National Tiger Conservation Authority had granted ( August 2008) in-principle 
approval for notification of Ratapani Wildlife Sanc tuary and other adjoining area as 
Tiger Reserve. 530.67 square kilometre area was not ified as Ratapani Wildlife 
Sanctuary in 1976, area was further added in 1983 w ith a total notified area being 
689.46 square kilometre. However, the actual area o f the Wildlife Sanctuary was 
910.638 square kilometre. Thus, there is a differen ce of 221.178 square kilometre 
between notified and actual area of the Wildlife Sanctuary. 
In view of above anomaly, a proposal of notificatio n of 763.812 square kilometre as 
Core area and 480.706 square kilometre as buffer area for Ratapani Tiger Reserve was 
sent to the State Government in January 2012. Divisional Forest Officer, Obedullaganj 
stated (October 2019) that a revised proposal of 763.812 square kilometre as Core area 
and 480.706 square kilometre as buffer area (Total area of 1,244.518 square kilometre) 
of Ratapani Tiger Reserve was sent and the matter i s under consideration of the State 
Government. 
4 Notification of Phen 
Wildlife Sanctuary as 
Tiger Reserve 
Similarly, as per Management Plan for the period 20 11-12 to 2020-21 for the Phen 
Wildlife Sanctuary, the Kanha Management has proposed to declare it a Critical Tiger 
Habitat recognising its potential. Notified area of  the Wildlife Sanctuary is about 
111.704 square kilometre. As per this proposal, the  Chief Wild Life Warden has also 
listed this area for further action and notificatio n. One village falling in the Wildlife 
Sanctuary had already been relocated earlier for th e purpose of notifying the area as 
Critical Tiger Habitat. The PCCF/ Wildlife sent a proposal of notifying Phen Wildlife 
Sanctuary as Tiger Reserve in March 2017. In response, the State Government, Forest 
Department sought copies of earlier notifications f or Kanha National Park, Kanha 
Tiger Reserve Core and Buffer and Phen Wildlife San ctuary from the PCCF in April 
2017. The PCCF/ Wildlife wrote letters to the Field Director, Kanha Tiger Reserve in 
May 2017 and May 2019, the requisite documents were sent by the Field Director after 
two years in May 2019 only and the notification could not be made up to January 2020. 
This indicated lack of adequate attention towards augmentation of Tiger Reserves.  
The Field Director stated that the Management has b een making efforts for the past 
two years to declare the area around Phen Wildlife Sanctuary as its buffer zone along 
with the Wildlife Sanctuary as a Critical Tiger Hab itat of the Tiger Reserve. But in-
spite of so much effort and persuasion, villagers living around the Wildlife Sanctuary 
did not agree to the proposal of keeping their vill ages under buffer zone. Therefore, 
the Kanha Management has no option but to propose t he Phen Wildlife Sanctuary as 
a Critical Tiger Habitat without a buffer. Presently, the office is going ahead with this 
proposal to be sent to the higher office very soon. 
(Source: Forest Department) 
  

Appendices 
85 
Appendix 4.2  
(Reference: Paragraph 4.3) 
Status of relocation in audited divisions 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
Protected Area 
Proposed for relocation Relocation completed Remaining relocation 
Revenue 
Villages 
Forest 
Villages 
Revenue 
Villages 
Forest 
Villages 
Revenue 
Villages 
Forest 
Villages 
National Parks 
1 Panna 19 0 17 0 2 0 
2 Pench 8 0 8 0 0 0 
3 Kanha 2 33 2 33 0 0 
4 Sanjay  21 0 9 0 12 0 
5 Bandhavgarh 6 3 4 2 2 1 
6 Satpura 7 1 5 1 2 0 
7 Madhav 10 0 10 0 0 0 
8 Kuno 24 0 24 0 0 0 
9 Van Vihar  0 0 0 0 0 0 
Total 97 37 79 36 18 1 
Wildlife Sanctuaries 
10 Phen 0 1 0 1 0 0 
11 Gangau 2 0 2 0 0 0 
12 Sanjay Dubri 24 0 2 0 22 0 
13 Ratapani 6 3 2 0 4 3 
14 Singhori 0 0 0 0 0 0 
15 Nauradehi 12 1 9 1 3 0 
16 Bori 1 16 0 15 1 1 
17 Pachmarhi 16 7 11 7 5 0 
18 Kheoni  0 1 0 1 0 0 
19 Panpatha  8 0 1 0 7 0 
20 Son Gharial 0 0 0 0 0 0 
21 Karera 0 0 0 0 0 0 
22 Pench Mowgli  0 0 0 0 0 0 
23 Bagdara 0 0 0 0 0 0 
24 Ken Gharial 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Total 69 29 27 25 42 4 
25 Kanha Tiger 
Reserve Buffer 0 2 0 2 0 0 
26 Satpura Tiger 
Reserve Buffer 4 0 4 0 0 0 
27 Panna Tiger 
Reserve Buffer 1 0 1 0 0 0 
Total 5 2 5 2 0 0 
Grand Total 171 68 111 63 60 5 
(Source: PCCF/ Wildlife) 
  

Report on Wildlife Conservation and Sustainable Management of Wildlife Habitats in Madhya Pradesh 
86 
Appendix 4.3  
(Reference: Paragraph 4.5) 
Deficiencies in management of water bodies 
Sl. 
No. 
Protected 
Area Deficiency in management of water bodies 
1 Madhav 
National 
Park 
Impact of Change in water course to Sakhya Sagar lake due to construction of Sewage 
Treatment Plant 
As per the Management Plan of Madhav National Park, drainage system of Shivpuri city was 
planned in such a way that most of the sewage from the town flows in to the Jadhav Sagar 
tank which acts as a settling tank and the decant then overflows through a series of weirs into 
the Sakhya Sagar Lake (Chandpatha Lake). Jadhav Sagar is one of the main sources of water 
during the summer season. 
As per the comprehensive Environment Impact Assessm ent study on Reinforced Cement 
Concrete pipe line work for Sewage Treatment Plan facility, Shivpuri has three Lakes namely 
Jadhav Sagar Lake, Chandpatha Lake and Madhav Sagar Lake, which are connected through 
a stream in a series in the same order. The Jadhav Sagar Lake is in a deteriorated condition 
because of the ingression of sewerage through the nallas channelled into the lake. As per the 
project proposal, the effluent from this plant will  be suitable for drinking purpose for wild 
life and will be discharged in Barhi river through Ghasari Nala.  
Thus, after start of the functioning of Sewage Treatment Plant, water from the Jadhav Sagar 
will no longer be flowing to the Chandpatha Lake an d may be affecting water level of the 
lake specially in summer as this was the main sourc e of water for the Chandpatha lake. It 
was observed that the Environment Impact Assessment study has not considered this aspect 
and the department had also not analysed Impact of Change in water course to Sakhya Sagar 
due to Sewage Treatment Plan. Ministry of Environme nt, Forest and Climate Change has 
granted the first phase permission to the project i n April 2018. Construction of Sewage 
Treatment Plant was in progress (December 2019). 
Further, as per the paragraph 6.8.4 of Management Plan of Madhav National Park, the nullah 
carrying all waste of Shivpuri town drains into Sakhya Sagar (Chandpatha Lake), leading to 
slow eutrophication.  
Audit observed in Joint Inspection that the flow of hazardous Sewage water of Jadhav sagar 
lake through Karbala area was polluting the Chandpatha Lake. The status of water influx into 
the Chandpatha Lake is visible in pictures below: 
  
Nala leading to Chandpatha Lake  
(Source: Picture taken during Joint Inspection) 
Neither the Director nor the Committee for monitori ng Eco-Sensitive Zone took any action 
to divert the water influx to the Chandpatha Lake, which was hazardous to wildlife of the 
National Park. Not even a single meeting of the Mon itoring committee was held for any 
purpose, thus the committee under Eco-Sensitive Zone notification was evidently in defunct 
state. 
The Director stated that pipeline was being laid th rough old Shivpuri Jhansi road. The 
Sewage Treatment Plant is to be constructed outside  the National Park. After treatment of 
the sewage water, it would be released in Barhi riv er situated in the National Park and only 
rain water would reach in the Sankhya Sagar lake. The Department did not conduct any study 
about the scarcity of water in the lake as a result  of this. Fact remains that due to changing 


Appendices 
87 
Sl. 
No. 
Protected 
Area Deficiency in management of water bodies 
course of water flow through Sewage Treatment Plant project, main water source of Sankhya 
Sager lake will flow to down below in Barhi River i mpacting water source to the lake and 
aquatic habitat. 
2 Karera 
Wildlife 
Sanctuary 
Conservation of wetland in Karera Sanctuary 
As per Management Plan of the Wildlife Sanctuary for 2008-09 to 2017-18, Dihaila wetland 
in Karera Wildlife Sanctuary is a 493.93 hectare ar ea, comprising of revenue and private 
land, which was a great attraction of migratory birds such as Cormorants, Herons, Egret and 
Stork in winter season. 25 to 59 species of migrato ry birds were seen in winters during 
2000-01 to 2004-05. These birds stopped migrating t o the wetlands due to irrigation from 
the water, and cultivation of Rabi crop in the wetl and. The Management Plan prescribed 
acquisition of land and development for eco-tourism . However, the prescribed measures 
were not implemented. The Director stated that a pr oposal was sent to the Collector for 
acquisition of land in 1999, which was not approved.  
The Director stated that proposal for acquisition of land for wetland was sent to Addl. Chief 
Secretary, Forest in 1999 which was not approved. R eply indicated that affirmative action 
for habitat improvement in the wetland was not taken in this regard for more than 20 years. 
3 Nauradehi 
Wildlife 
Sanctuary 
Creation of watersheds in Nauradehi Wildlife Sanctuary 
Management Plan for Nauradehi Wildlife Sanctuary envisaged that no major marginal inputs 
in the form of large-scale habitat manipulations are needed, nor would they be allowed in the 
core zone. Small Jhiriyas, those which remain alive throughout the year shou ld be kept in 
good condition and cleaned to the desired extent. T he depth of water in open water bodies, 
tanks, stop dams, Jhiriyas etc. should be recorded in the first week of every  month, from 
January to June, which can be easily done by vertic ally fixing a pole at the deepest part of 
the pool.  
A track of water quality of open water holes should  be kept to ensure safety of the users, 
especially the field staff, from water borne diseas es. New artificial sources should be tried 
only after thorough examination of sub-strata of ca tchments, gradients, and soil profile. 
National Hydrological Institute, Sagar was doing water survey in the Wildlife Sanctuary.  In 
future, sites can also be taken up based upon their survey.  
The Divisional Forest Officer, Nauradehi Wildlife S anctuary informed Audit that only 
96 water bodies were in existence. However, it was noted that during 2010 and 2017, 
83 tanks, 498 percolation tanks, 13,358 cubic meter  check dams, and 11,335 running meter 
contour trenches were created in 35 watersheds for improvement in water level in the area, 
but permit from the Chief Wild Life Warden was not obtained. 
The 35 selected water sheds sights were not taken o n the basis of National Hydrological 
Institute, Sagar survey. The depth of water in open  water bodies, tanks, stop dams, Jhiriyas 
etc. was not recorded in the first week of every month from January to June. A track of water 
quality of open water holes, and the utility and quality of these water bodies was not ensured. 
Also, the impact due to creation of these water bodies in such a large extent was not assessed. 
Large scale habitat manipulations were not in conso nance with the provisions of 
Management Plan and Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972. 
The Divisional Forest Officer stated that work had been done on the guidelines given by the 
senior officers, and that, there were not any irregularity found in the work. The reply was not 
acceptable as the provisions of Management Plan was  not followed while carrying out the 
soil and moisture work. It could not be made sure t hat the water regime of the Wildlife 
Sanctuary improved through the work carried out in the Wildlife Sanctuary. 
(Source: Forest Department) 
 
  

Report on Wildlife Conservation and Sustainable Management of Wildlife Habitats in Madhya Pradesh 
88 
Appendix 4.4 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.8.1) 
Ambiguities in functioning of Local Advisory Committee and regulation of commercial 
activities around the Tiger Reserves 
Sl.  
No. Division Ambiguities noticed 
1  Bandhavgarh Tiger Reserve The State Government constituted Local Advisory Com mittee for the Tiger 
Reserves of the State in February 2013 under the Gu idelines. Nomination of the 
members of the Local Advisory Committee was done by  the State Government 
in September 2013. Commissioner, Shahdol was the Ch airman of the Local 
Advisory Committee while the Field Director, Bandha vgarh Tiger Reserve was 
the Member Secretory of the Committee. However, dur ing 2014-19, instead of 
holding 10 meetings at least, only five meetings vi z. 30 July 2014, 17 February 
2016, 26 May 2017, 30 September 2017 and 16 February 2018 were held.  
Local Advisory Committee mainly discussed and decided on issues such as park 
entry fee, current booking, development of tourism in buffer area with the help 
of local community, encroachment in Buffer area, no  objection for mining 
activities, Liquefied Petroleum Gas distribution, e mployment of local people in 
forestry/ eco-tourism/ development activities, nigh t traffic prohibition in 
Dhamokhar-Tala Road, establishment of solid waste management plant.   
However, decision taken by Local Advisory Committee  on LPG distribution out 
of tourism income in its 17 February 2016 meeting was neither implemented nor 
was reviewed in next Local Advisory Committee meeti ng. On 30 July 2014 
meeting, the Chairman instructed to send a proposal  for constitution of a 
Committee for eviction of encroachments in Tala vil lage. It was noticed that 
compliance to the decision was not done.  
Further, the Local Advisory Committee decided night traffic prohibition in Tala-
Dhamokhar Road, but was not implemented. The Local Advisory Committee not 
acted upon to; review the tourism strategy with res pect to the tiger reserve and 
make recommendations to the State Government, ensur e site specific norms on 
buildings, and infrastructures in areas inside and close to tiger reserves, advise 
local self-government and the State Government on i ssues relating to 
development of tourism in and around tiger reserves, monitor regularly activities 
of tour operators to ensure that they do not cause disturbance to animals while 
taking visitors into the tiger reserves, encourage tourism industry to augment 
employment opportunities for members of local commu nities. Thus, the 
objectives as envisaged in the Guidelines largely remained unachieved. 
The Field Director stated that the Local Advisory Committee decision on Liquid 
Petroleum Gas distribution from tourism income is b een implemented in the 
selected patrolling camps. The implementation is su bject to financial approval 
from the park development fund by a committee heade d by the PCCF (Head of 
Forest Force). Therefore, the implementation will b e done as per availability of 
funds.  Refilling of distributed Liquid Petroleum Gas cylinder is also being done 
regularly.  Further, heavy vehicular traffic has be en banned at night on Tala-
Dhamokhar Road. Local Advisory Committee has taken decision like increasing 
the numbers of tourist vehicles in the park to promote tourism industry which has 
given more employment opportunity for local communities. 
The reply was not acceptable because the constitution of a Committee for eviction 
of encroachments in Tala village not done, total night traffic in Tala-Dhamokhar 
Road not implemented. The management did not reply on the Local Advisory 
Committee not acted upon to; review the tourism strategy with respect to the tiger 
reserve and make recommendations to the State Government, ensure site specific 
norms on buildings, and infrastructures in areas inside and close to tiger reserves, 

Appendices 
89 
Sl.  
No. Division Ambiguities noticed 
advise local self-government and the State Governme nt on issues relating to 
development of tourism in and around tiger reserves. 
It was noticed from minutes of meeting of local area committee dated 31 October 
2019 that a proposal was discussed for establishment of solid waste management 
unit in Tala (tourist gate and facility area) and land had been identified. However, 
no objection certificate was to be obtained from Re venue Department as 
identified land was revenue land. Thus, there was no waste management unit was 
working in the Park indicating that the norms laid down were not fulfilled by the 
Department and the park could not be kept free form the waste.  
The Field Director stated that no objection certifi cate has been issued in Local 
Advisory Committee meeting January 2020 for land fo r a solid waste plant in 
Tala area. Thus, the solid waste management was not  working in the Tiger 
Reserve during 2014-19. 
2 Pench Tiger Reserve Tiger Conservation Plan of Pench Tiger Reserve allo wed activities which could 
be promoted, regulated or prohibited which included 26 items such as commercial 
mining, felling of trees, setting of saw mills and industries causing water, air, soil, 
noise pollution, establishment of hotels and resorts etc. Functioning of local area 
advisory committee formed by the State Government f or Pench Tiger Reserve 
was not adequate as only two meetings were conducted during 2014-19 as against 
the minimum 10. It did not monitor implementation o f its decisions. Local 
Advisory Committee did not monitor tourist activity  around the Tiger Reserve, 
ownership of hotel/ resort, type of construction, detail of employed persons. It did 
not advise the State Government in any of the matter as was mandated.  
However, the Field Director informed that no activi ty has been identified for 
regulation. It was stated that regulation on commercial activities was not possible 
due to lack of legal provision in this regard. 
3 Panna Tiger Reserve The Local Advisory Committee was also formed in Sep tember 2013. 
Maintenance of records of Meetings of Local Advisory Committee and details of 
proceedings were not available. No meeting was foun d to be held between 2013 
and 2017. However, three meetings were held after t he re-constitution of the 
committee in the year 2017. Thus, only three meetin gs were held against 
envisaged minimum 10.  
Minutes of the meeting held in December 2017 reveal ed that it was also advised 
to discuss the matter of dumping the waste in areas  in the Panna Tiger Reserve 
with the Panna Municipality. However, records pertaining to upcoming meetings 
of the committee showed that no action was taken to resolve these problems. The 
Field Director stated that Collector, Chattarpur has informed that treatment plant 
is being installed in Khajuraho. Thus, the matter of dumping of wastage by Panna 
Municipality remained unresolved.   
The PCCF/ Wildlife directed in June 2017 to all con cerned through Local 
Advisory Committee about the types of fencing to be  done in the vicinity of the 
Tiger Reserve and in the resorts, hotels and dhabas etc. However, no such steps 
were found to be taken in the proceeding of Local Advisory Committee meetings. 
Monitoring by Local Advisory Committee relating to environmental issues of all 
tourist facilities located in and around the Tiger Reserve, areas covered/ created, 
ownership, type of construction, details of number of employees/ people getting 
employment, etc. were not found in the related records. The records pertaining to 
investigation, regulation and compliance related to  air and noise pollution of 
powered tourist vehicles were also not available. T hus, compliance by Local 
Advisory Committee on the matter could not be verified. 
4 Kanha Tiger Reserve The Local Advisory Committee was formed in Septembe r 2013 and only six 
meetings were held during 2014-19 as against minimu m of 10, no meeting was 
held in 2018. In a meeting held in July 2015 the Lo cal Advisory Committee 
decided to remove the fencing from hotels/ resorts/  buildings and other 

Report on Wildlife Conservation and Sustainable Management of Wildlife Habitats in Madhya Pradesh 
90 
Sl.  
No. Division Ambiguities noticed 
commercial infrastructures. Further, in July 2013 i t was decided to undertake 
scientific study on impacts of tourism on wildlife of core as well as buffer area. 
However, no follow up of the decision was found to be taken in records.  
A research report published in 2015 highlighted that most of the hotels/ resorts of 
Khatia Gate of the Tiger Reserve are situated within half kilometre distance from 
the Banjar River restricts wildlife access to the r iver and has fragmented the 
critical wildlife corridor  between Kanha and the Pench Tiger Reserves 5. 
However, records did not show that the Local Adviso ry Committee did address 
this issue in its meetings.  
The Field Director stated that height of fencing fr om hotels/ resorts/ buildings 
and other commercial infrastructures have been reduced to one meter, a research 
by Wildlife Institute of India is under progress on  impacts of tourism activities 
on wildlife which include this issue. Regarding tourist infrastructure near Banjar 
river, the Field Director stated that new construction has been restricted and these 
infrastructures do not cause hindrance to wild anim al from going to river. 
However, records/ research findings were not produc ed in support of the reply 
and veracity of claim could not be verified. The re ply was silent about a smaller 
number of Local Advisory Committee meetings during 2014-19. 
5 Satpura Tiger Reserve Nine meetings of the Local Advisory Committee were held in Satpura Tiger 
Reserve, but compliance reports to the meeting had not been received from 
members of other departments. This indicated poor monitoring by the committee 
of the commercial activities in and around the Tige r Reserve. The Management 
did not take any action to ensure that the waste ge nerated by the hotels/ 
restaurants in and around the tiger reserve are rec ycled and/ or treated before 
discharge. New infrastructures which came/ coming u p around the reserve were 
not mandated to obtain clearance from the Local Advisory Committee and hence 
conformity to the proper norms of waste management, construction rules etc. was 
not ensured.  
Further, the Field Director coordinated with Special Area Development Authority 
and Pachmarhi Cantonment Board in June 2020 but it could not be ensured that 
all the solid waste, sewage is treated before it is  released into the surrounding 
environment in Pachmarhi area. Further, no action w as taken regarding 
infrastructure in other tourism areas of Churna and Madhai. 
(Source: Forest Department) 
 
 
 
  
                                                           
5  Kumar Sambhav Shrivastava. 

Appendices 
91 
Appendix 4.5  
(Reference: Paragraph 4.8.2.1) 
Status of encroachment as informed by audited Divisions 
Sl. No. Division/ Protected Area Encroachment (Hectares) 
1 Kanha Tiger Reserve (Core) 0 
2 Kanha Tiger Reserve (Buffer) 0 
3 Panna Tiger Reserve 1795.631 
4 Nauradehi Wildlife Sanctuary  467.121 
5 Kuno National Park 2486.45 
6 Madhav National Park 7.84 
7 Van Vihar National Park 0 
8 Obedullaganj Division 983.698 
9 Pench Tiger Reserve 0 
10 Sanjay Tiger Reserve 475.376 
11 Bandhavgarh Tiger Reserve 722.79 
12 Satpura Tiger Reserve 0 
13 Kheoni Wildlife Sanctuary 4.00 
Total 6942.906 
(Source: Forest Department) 
  

Report on Wildlife Conservation and Sustainable Management of Wildlife Habitats in Madhya Pradesh 
92 
Appendix 4.6  
(Reference: Paragraph 4.8.2.1) 
Discrepancy/ deficiency in cases of encroachments 
Sl.  
No. Division Discrepancy/ deficiency noticed 
1 Kanha 
(Buffer) 
Tiger 
Reserve 
The Field Director, Kanha (Buffer) informed encroachment cases as ‘nil’ and stated that all 
the encroachments had been evicted up to 2003-04. H owever, Audit noted that in March 
2017, the PCCF (Head of Forest Force) directed to e vict the encroachment in 3,413.210 
hectares forest land from (Buffer) Tiger Reserve. T hus, the management was not aware 
about the encroachments which undermined the process of its eviction.   
2 Pench 
Tiger 
Reserve 
As per the Tiger Conservation Plan of Buffer area of Pench Tiger Reserve, 660.80 hectares 
in 75 cases land was being used for non-forestry purposes. Detail regarding actual land use 
in these cases and current status thereto was not a vailable with the Managers. Further, 
18.988 hectares area was under encroachment in 62 c ases noticed prior to year 2000. Still 
the Field Director did not inform these cases as en croachments. The Field Director stated 
that these would be examined and action would be taken accordingly. Thus, due to evident 
unawareness about the cases, eviction plan could no t be planned and implemented by the 
Field Director. 
3 Sanjay 
Tiger 
Reserve 
The Field Director, Sanjay Tiger Reserve informed e ncroachments in 475.376 hectares 
forest land in 172 cases to the Chief Conservator o f Forests, Rewa in September 2019 and 
eviction was reported as ‘nil’. Records relating to  year wise encroachment cases were not 
maintained in Division, the Field Director earlier informed to the Chief Conservator of 
Forest, Rewa that as on March 2017, 622 encroachers  had encroached 854.08 hectares 
forest land. Thus, there was discrepancy in reporti ng of encroachment cases. Further, 
Action plan for eviction of encroachments and documents relating to any legal process was 
not found in records.  
The Field Director stated that notices had been iss ued to 622 encroachers for eviction of 
854.08 hectares land in Bagdara Wildlife Sanctuary,  directions would be issued in the 
matters to the officers for immediate disposal of cases as per departmental instructions. The 
delay in disposal of cases was attributed to shortage of staff. The fact remains that the actual 
position of encroachment cases is not available with Management, as different figures were 
reported to higher authorities and records were not maintained to monitor the cases. 
4 Satpura 
Tiger 
Reserve 
The Field Director, informed encroachment cases as ‘nil’. However, Audit noted that in 
March 2017, the PCCF directed to evict the encroachment in 1,332.126 hectares forest land 
from the Tiger Reserve. The Field Director stated t hat information would be sought and 
reconciliation would be done. Thus, the management was unaware about the 
encroachments which undermined the process of its eviction. 
5 Nauradehi  
Wildlife 
Sanctuary 
As per the Management Plan of the Wildlife Sanctuar y for 2007-08 to 2016-17, a total of 
334.34 hectares area was under encroachment in the Division, while a total of 467.121 
hectares of forest land was under encroachment in t he Division in 316 cases as on 
December 2018 after grant of forest rights in 59.18 6 hectares of forest land in 63 cases 
under Forest Rights Act, 2006. The new encroachment  of 191.945 hectare in the Wildlife 
Sanctuary after 2007-08 indicated serious deficienc ies towards habitat management. 
Records were not maintained by the Divisional Fores t Officer to show year-wise detail of 
encroachment cases. The Divisional Forest Officer s tated that action would be taken for 
eviction of the encroachments.  
6 Madhav 
National 
Park 
The Range Officer/ South noted in March 2019 that a  Cafeteria was being operated in 
compartment no. 54 of the National Park near Bhadaiya kund without the permission of the 
Park authority. No legal action for eviction or fil ing case was taken against the offender. 
The Director stated that no permission was granted by the Management and action has not 
been taken yet to register the case by the Range of ficer (South) as tendering process was 
done by the Sub Divisional Magistrate, Shivpuri on behalf of District Tourism Promotion 
Council, Shivpuri. Information regarding the construction is being obtained and legal action 
will be taken. Reply is not in consonance with the legal provision and the Management had 
failed to initiate action for eviction of the encroachment as well as other lawful proceedings. 
This Cafeteria is located on the bank of the Sankhy a Sagar Lake which may be hazardous 
to protection and conservation to aquatic wildlife in the Lake. 
(Source: Forest Department) 

Appendices 
93 
Appendix 4.7 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.9.1) 
Deficiency and adverse impacts of other major projects on wildlife habitats 
Sl. 
No. Project Deficiency and adverse impacts on wildlife habitats 
1 Machagora 
dam on 
upstream of 
Totladoh dam 
in Pench 
Tiger Reserve 
 
Construction of dams impacts biodiversity of upstre am and downstream as discussed 
below6: 
Upstream effects: Construction of a dam generally m eans that areas upstream of the 
dam are flooded and are permanently put under water . In some cases, attempts have 
been made to move large animals when the reservoir began to be filled, but when these 
animals cannot be offered new habitats, this only delay extinction for some time. 
Downstream effects: The habitats along the rivers are altered because the sediment and 
organic material that is normally carried along by the flowing water is held back by the 
dam and sinks to the bottom or is spread on the banks of the reservoir. Flow in the rapids 
and waterfalls decreases or completely disappears w hen water is diverted to power 
stations or for irrigation. Species that are associated with rapids, waterfalls or the humid 
microclimate that arises in their vicinity diminish in numbers or completely disappear. 
The local species richness decreases, but few speci es are eradicated from the river 
systems. 
In the course of the Pench river, a dam to provide irrigation to about 70,918 hectare of 
land in Chhindwara and Seoni districts before enter ing into the Pench Tiger Reserve 
was constructed on the Pench River. Due to this, th e flow of water into the Totladoh 
Dam in the Tiger Reserve changed. However, Project proponent did not sought 
permission under Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972 fo r the construction of Machagora 
dam.  
Assessment of impact was not conducted by the Pench  Tiger Reserve to address the 
direct and indirect issues aimed to map land use/ l and cover patterns, to assess spatial 
structure and configuration of landscape, structure and composition of vegetation types 
in landscape, spatial and ecological distribution o f major carnivore and herbivore 
species.  
The Field Director, Pench Tiger Reserve stated that the project proponents did not seek 
permission for assessment of impacts. Fact remains that the Field Director had not taken 
any suo-moto action against the construction of the  new dam and for assessment of 
impacts on wildlife due to the construction. As a r esult, adverse impact as highlighted 
in research papers could not be known. 
2 Road 
widening in 
National 
Highway-7 in 
Pench Tiger 
Reserve 
National Highway-7 constitutes eastern boundary of Pench Mowgli Wildlife Sanctuary 
which is a part of Pench Tiger Reserve and is a vit al part of Kanha-Pench corridor. 
There is a dense forest in eastern side of the road  up to Kanha Tiger Reserve. As per 
Tiger Conservation Plan of Pench Tiger Reserve, Nat ional Highway-7 always possess 
great risk of accident by high-speed vehicle. Two tigers, 55 Chitals, one wild boar, one 
blue bull and one Samber were killed in the acciden t on National Highway-7 during 
1995 to 2006. Existing Nagpur-Seoni National Highwa y-7 is already negatively 
impacting the wild fauna. The widening of the road and its associated ancillary activities 
would further jeopardise the wild fauna of Tiger Re serve in general and the tiger 
population in Kanha-Pench landscape in particular 7.  
A road widening project was undertaken by National Highway Authority of India 
including in the part of the road passing through P ench Tiger Reserve. Central 
Empowered Committee  of Honorable Supreme Court, in  the matter relating to forest 
and wildlife clearance to the diversion of forest l and for the project stated that the 
unanimous opinion of the wildlife experts, views/ o bservations of the standing 
                                                           
6  The effect of dams on biodiversity, Roland Jansso n, Department of Ecology and Environmental Science,  
Umea University, Sweden. 
7  Wildlife Institute of India letter in May 2009. 

Report on Wildlife Conservation and Sustainable Management of Wildlife Habitats in Madhya Pradesh 
94 
Sl. 
No. Project Deficiency and adverse impacts on wildlife habitats 
committee of the National Board for Wild Life, the Forest advisory committee and the 
Wildlife Institute of India, the Central Empowered Committee is of the considered view 
that the proposed widening and up-gradation of the National Highway-7 will cause 
irreparable damage, fragmentation and destruction t o one of the most important and 
critical wildlife habitat in the country. It will also destroy the connectivity between the 
Pench Tiger Reserve and the Kanha Tiger Reserve som ething so vital for the wildlife 
conservation in the country. It is one of the last,  perhaps the only, extensive track of 
wildlife habitat covering an area of 16,000 square kilometre. Such a habitat should be 
further consolidated and protected rather than be a llowed to be fragmented and 
destroyed. The ecological cost of the present proje ct is immense and no mitigation 
measures are adequate to compensate the same.   
It recommended that the use of forest land for the widening of the National Highway-7 
between Nagpur and Seoni, should not be permitted. The National Highway Authority 
of India should instead be directed to realign the National Highway-7 via Chhindwara. 
Simultaneously, the movement of vehicles on the exi sting portion of the National 
Highway-7 passing through the Pench Tiger Reserve and buffer zone should be strictly 
curbed.   
However, wildlife clearance was accorded by the PCC F/ Wildlife to the project in 
April 2018 in compliance to decision in eighth meet ing of State Board for Wild Life 
with mitigation measures for wildlife safety and re commendation of Central 
Empowered Committee of diverting the National Highway-7 through Chhindwara was 
ignored causing irreparable damage, fragmentation a nd destruction to the wildlife 
habitat.  
The Field Director, Pench Tiger Reserve stated that  the proposal of widening was 
forwarded looking into public anger and decision wa s taken by the State Government. 
Evidently, the process to grant permit to widen the  National Highway was initiated on 
the basis of public anger rather than in the interest of wildlife conservation.   
3 Diamond 
mining in 
Panna Tiger 
Reserve 
Diamond Mining Project of National Mineral Development Corporation was closed for 
certain legal issues. However, Hon’ble Supreme Cour t of India in its order in August 
2008 accorded permission to reopen the Diamond Mini ng Project and constituted a 
Monitoring Committee for the National Mineral Devel opment Corporation with the 
mandate for approval of the mine closure plan, pres cribing and monitoring of various 
safeguards for operation of the mines etc. The approval granted by the Hon’ble Supreme 
Court expired on September 2013, however, as the Na tional Mineral Development 
Corporation did not submit a coherent, time-bound mine closure plan. 
The Monitoring Committee in May 2015 directed Natio nal Mineral Development 
Corporation to remove all the exotic plants from the mine and surrounding area, within 
the next three months and place a compliance report  before the committee. Non-
compliance of such issue would be detrimental to th e tiger and the herbivores as 
suggested by the Monitoring Committee. However, it was observed that the National 
Mineral Development Corporation has not placed any compliance report in this regard.  
The water released from mining activity to the Kams an river/ nala creates a lot of 
problems to the wildlife as the water contains the kimberlite sand released from 
Diamond Mining Project. The Deputy Director, Panna Tiger Reserve expressed his 
concern in April 2019 over the negative impact of kimberlite and stated that the critical 
habitat is being harmed by the water mixed with kim berlite, response of National 
Mineral Development Corporation on this was awaited  as of November 2019.  Photo 
taken by the Audit party showing muddy water of Kamsan river/ nala due to kimberlite 
discharged by Diamond Mining Project.  

Appendices 
95 
Sl. 
No. Project Deficiency and adverse impacts on wildlife habitats 
 
The Field Director, Panna Tiger Reserve stated that  the State Government has made a 
communication with Government of India to seek dire ctions in this regard, reply was 
awaited as of November 2019. Fact remains that due to this indecisiveness, Diamond 
Mining Project is continuing to release influx which is harmful for the health of wildlife 
and habitat. 
4 Sontalai-
Bagratawa 
railway line in 
Satpura Tiger 
Reserve 
Chief Wild Life Warden granted wildlife clearance i n May 2018 for construction of 
Sontalai-Bagratawa broad-gauge railway line to Exec utive Engineer (Construction-1), 
Habibganj, Bhopal on the basis of recommendation ma de by National Board for Wild 
Life in its 48 th meeting. The PCCF/ Wildlife authorised, the Field Director, Satupra 
Tiger Reserve to ensure the execution of all the st ipulated conditions in this Wildlife 
clearance.  
The National Tiger Conservation Authority had recom mended the proposal subject to 
the strict adherence to the mitigation measures and  no existing drainage should be 
blocked due to the construction and various contrib uting factors to train hit deaths: 
ecological, technical and lack of awareness among d rivers, passengers and planners 
should be kept in mind during post project implementation. Considering the likelihood 
of animal movement in the area, at least 20 per cent  of the proposed railway track 
alignment passing through forest land should be und er mitigation measures 
(underpasses, fencing, etc.), installing cattle pro of barriers or reinforced fences, 
enhancing the visibility for train drivers along sensitive sections, joint team comprising 
of watchmen for forest and railway departments alon g with installation of light and 
sound barrier etc.  
It was also recommended that the Chief Wild Life Warden may constitute a monitoring 
committee comprising for forest officials of Satpur a Tiger Reserve, National Tiger 
Conservation Authority, Indian Railway and local NG O representatives to supervise 
the compliance of these conditions laid down by National Board for Wild Life. Records 
relating to these activities were not available on records and the same were also not 
provided in audit. 
The Field Director, Satpura Tiger Reserve stated th at in the construction of Sontalai-
Bagra Tawa railway line mitigation measures were im plemented by the user agency.  
The copy of project and completion report of the wo rk will be made available after 
obtaining it from the territorial Division. 
However, the monitoring committee was not formed as per directions of National Board 
for Wild Life and no progress reports of the execut ion of the project sent by the Field 
Director to the PCCF/ Wildlife. The Field Director did not ensure the execution of all 
the stipulated conditions in the Wildlife clearance.  
(Source: Forest Department) 
 
