 
 
Report of the  
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Performance Audit on 
Implementation of 74 
th  Constitutional Amendment Act in 
Madhya Pradesh 
for the year ended 31 March 2020 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government of Madhya Pradesh 
Report No. 3 of the year 2022 
 

i 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 Paragraph 
number 
Page 
number 
Preface  iii 
Executive Summary  v 
Chapter I 
Introduction 
74 th  Constitutional Amendment 1.1 1 
Trend of urbanisation in Madhya Pradesh 1.2 1 
Profile of Urban Local Bodies 1.3 1 
Organisation Structure of Urban Governance in Madhya Pradesh 1.4 2 
Audit Objectives 1.5 2 
Sources of Audit Criteria 1.6 3 
Audit Scope and Methodologies 1.7 3 
Acknowledgement 1.8 4 
Organisation of Audit Findings 1.9 4 
Chapter II  
Compliance to provisions of 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act  
Comparison of State level legislations with 74 th  Constitutional 
Amendment Act 
2.1 5 
Powers of the State Government over Urban Local Bodies 2.2 7 
Chapter III  
Empowerment of Urban Local Bodies and their functioning  
Actual status of devolution of functions 3.1 9 
Limited powers over manpower 3.2 14 
Staff position of Urban Local Bodies 3.2.1 14 
Institutional mechanism for empowerment of Urban Lo cal 
Bodies 
3.3 16 
State Election Commission 3.3.1 16 
Status of elections and formation of councils 3.3.2 16 
Ward and Mohalla Committees 3.3.3 18 
State Finance Commission 3.3.4 19 
Response of the State Government to State Finance C ommission 
recommendations 
3.3.4.1 20 
Property Tax Board 3.3.5 21 
Adoption of Accrual Based Accounting  3.3.6 21 
Chapter IV  
Financial Resources of Urban Local Bodies  
Sources of Revenue 4.1 23 
Own Revenue of Urban Local Bodies 4.1.1 24 
Utilisation of Education Cess 4.1.1.1 25 
Fiscal transfers to urban local bodies 4.1.2 25 
Central Finance Commission Grants 4.1.2.1 28 
Property Tax 4.1.3 29 
Solid Waste Management 4.1.4 33 
Other sources of revenue 4.1.5 34 
Expenditure on services 4.2 35 
Effectiveness of devolved functions 4.3 35 

ii  
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 Paragraph 
number 
Page 
number 
Chapter V  
Conclusion  - 39 
 
 
Appendices  
Appendix 
Number  
Title Page number 
1 Organisational Chart of ULBs 41 
2 List of Parastatals and their functions 42 
3 List of selected ULBs 44 
4 Meetings of the Corporation/ Council 45 
5 District Planning Committees  55 
6 Utilisation of Education Cess 57 
7 Short realisation of property tax 59 
8 Short collection of water user charges 60 
9 Levy on Mobile Towers 61 
10 Delay in approval of Budget 63 
11 Service Level Benchmark 65 
 
 
 

iii 
 
PREFACE 
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India for the year ending 
31 st March 2020 has been prepared for submission to the Governor of Madhya 
Pradesh under Article 151 of the Constitution of In dia, for being laid before the 
Legislature of the State. 
The Report contains significant results of Performa nce Audit of ‘Implementation 
of 74 
th  Constitutional Amendment Act in Madhya Pradesh’, c overing the period 
2015-16 to 2019-20.  
The instances mentioned in this Report are among th ose which came to notice in 
the course of test audit.   
The audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards issued by 
the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 

Executive Summary 

 

v 
Executive Summary 
The 74 th  Constitutional Amendment, which came into effect o n 1 June 1993, provided a 
clear mandate for democratic decentralization and s ought to create an institutional 
framework for ushering in democracy at the grass ro ot level through self-governing local 
bodies in urban areas of the country. It empowered Urban Local Bodies to perform 18 
functions listed in the 12 th  Schedule of the Constitution. 
Madhya Pradesh, the central state of the country, i s geographically the second largest 
State of the country, having a population of 7.27 c rore. Out of this population, 2.01 crore 
reside in urban areas. Urban Madhya Pradesh faces m ultiple challenges, namely, public 
health issues, poverty alleviation, waste managemen t, depletion of natural resources, etc . 
In this scenario, Urban Local Bodies have an import ant role to play, as most of these 
issues are handled best at the local level. 
In Madhya Pradesh, three tiers of Urban Local Bodie s are categorized on the basis of 
population in their jurisdiction. The aim of this A udit was to see whether the State 
Government had empowered the Urban Local Bodies thr ough the creation of a robust 
institutional framework, supported by transfer of functions, funds and functionaries. 
Sufficient and suitably trained Human Resource is critical for effective functioning of any 
institution. The Urban Local Bodies neither had the  powers to assess the staff 
requirement, nor to recruit the required permanent staff except on contractual basis as 
these powers were vested with the State Government.  The State Government assessed the 
requirement of staff based on population alone and without seeking the actual 
requirement from Urban Local Bodies. Majority of th e staff were appointed by State 
Government, and the powers to regulate their condit ions of services, discipline, as well as 
conduct are with the State Government. Further, Urb an Local Bodies were working with 
acute shortage of staff and were very much dependent on out-sourced staff. 
We observed that the task of delimitation has not b een entrusted to the State Election 
Commission and elections of Urban Local Bodies were not being held regularly, with 347 
Urban Local Bodies working under the administrator- ship of the State Government. 
Further, it was seen that Reservation and Rotation Policy of seats for the posts of Mayor/ 
President of Corporations/ Councils has not yet been fully established in the State. 
Adherence to business procedures and regular meetin gs of various committees is 
imperative for successful functioning of Urban Loca l Bodies. However, we noticed that 
meetings of Corporations/ Councils were not held as  per laid down norms. Advisory 
Committees were not constituted in 12 Urban Local B odies. On the other hand, Ward 
Committees and Mohalla Committees that are created to ensure community participation 
in local governance, were not constituted across th e majority of Urban Local Bodies. 
Further, due to absence of provision in the Madhya Pradesh Municipal Corporations Act, 
the Metropolitan Planning Committees were not const ituted in any city. Meetings of 
District Planning Committees were also not held reg ularly and consolidated District 
Development Plans for the District as a whole by co nsidering the matters of common 
interest were not prepared in any of the 25 Distric ts in which the 33 test-checked Urban 
Local Bodies were located.  
Timely constitution of State Finance Commission and  taking swift actions on its 
recommendations is critical towards strengthening t he financial position of Urban Local 
Bodies. Delay in constitution of State Finance Comm issions (third to fifth) and 
consequent delays in submission of their reports, a s well as delay in acceptance and 
implementation of recommendations relating to devol ution of funds have adversely 

Implementation of 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act in Madhya Pradesh  
vi 
affected the financial position of the Urban Local Bodies. We noticed that the devolution 
of funds is still being carried out as per the reco mmendations of the third State Finance 
Commission, even when the constitution of sixth State Finance Commission was due. 
We also noticed that the revenue raised by Urban Lo cal Bodies from own sources was 
low. We noticed significant amounts being due to th e Urban Local Bodies pertaining to 
Property Tax and Water Cess, which are two of their  biggest revenue sources. GIS 
Survey, which can have a substantial progressive im pact on Property Tax, too was 
conducted only in 123 Urban Local Bodies (30 per cent ). Further, it was noticed that none 
of the selected Urban Local Bodies had installed me ters for water connections and only 
fixed Water Charges were being levied which was not  sufficient to even pay for expenses 
on operation and maintenance of water supply. Arrea rs of Shop Rent also were 
recoverable from the leaseholders/ occupiers, which  further contributed to the worsening 
of financial position of the Urban Local Bodies.  
We noticed shortcomings in the budgeting procedure as well. There were large variations 
between Budget Estimates and actual income and expe nditure over several years, which 
indicated improper budget formulation. Instances of  budget being passed by the 
President-in-Council after 31 
st  March with delays ranging from four to 707 days, w ere 
also noticed. 

Chapter I 
Introduction 

 

Chapter I 
 
Introduction 
 
1.1  74 th  Constitutional Amendment 
In order to enable the Urban Local Bodies to perfor m effectively as vibrant democratic 
units of self-government, it was considered necessa ry that provisions relating to Urban 
Local Bodies are incorporated in the Constitution o f India through an amendment. Such 
an amendment was to put on a firmer footing, their relationship between the State 
Government with respect to the functions, resources  as well as for regular conduct of 
elections and providing adequate representation for  the weaker sections like Scheduled 
Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Women.  
The Constitution (Seventy Fourth Amendment) Act, 19 92, which came into effect on 
01 June 1993, provided a constitutional status to U rban Local Bodies in the country. 
Article 243W of the Constitutional Amendment Act au thorised the State Legislatures to 
enact laws to endow local bodies with powers and au thority as may be necessary to 
enable them to function as institutions of self-gov ernance and make provisions for 
devolution of powers and responsibilities. The Twel fth Schedule of the Constitution 
enumerates 18 specific functions to be devolved to Urban Local Bodies . 
1.2  Trend of urbanisation in Madhya Pradesh  
Madhya Pradesh, the central state of the country, i s geographically the second largest 
State of the country. It covers almost 9.38 per cent  of the area (3,08,252 sq. km.) and six 
per cent  (7.27 crore) of country’s total population. As per Census 2011, 2.01 crore (27.69 
per cent ) out of the total population resides in urban area s. During the period 2001-2011, 
the urban population in Madhya Pradesh increased by 41 lakh.  
Urban Madhya Pradesh faces multiple challenges, nam ely, public health issues, poverty 
alleviation, waste management, depletion of natural resources, etc. In this scenario, Urban 
Local Bodies have an important role to play, as mos t of these issues are handled best at 
the local level. 
1.3  Profile of Urban Local Bodies 
In Madhya Pradesh, three tiers of Urban Local Bodie s are categorised on the basis of 
population 1 in their jurisdiction. There are 407 2 Urban Local Bodies as shown in 
Table 1.1 below: 
                                                           
1 Population of 3,00,000 or more is Municipal Corpor ation (Nagar Nigam), population of 50,000 or 
more but less than 3,00,000 is Municipal Council (N agar Palika Parishad), and population of 20,000 or 
more but less than 50,000 is Nagar Parishad. 
2  Apart from these Urban Local Bodies, there are fi ve Cantonment Areas also. 

Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act in Madhya Pradesh 
2 
Table 1.1: Category-wise Urban Local Bodies in Madhya Pradesh State 
Types of Urban Local Body No. of Urban Local Bodies 
Nagar Nigam 16 
Nagar Palika Parishad 98 
Nagar Parishad 293 
Total 407 
(Source: As per information provided by the Urban Administration and Development Directorate) 
The Municipal Corporations (Nagar Nigam) are governed by the Madhya Pradesh 
Municipal Corporations Act, 1956 and other Urban Local Bodies (Nagar Palika Parishads 
and Nagar Parishads) are governed by the Madhya Pradesh Municipalities Act, 1961. 
Each Corporation/ municipal area has been divided into Wards, which are determined 
and notified by the State Government for the purpose of election of Councillors. All 
Urban Local Bodies have an elected body comprising Mayor/ President as head of the 
Urban Local Body and Councillors as members of the Council. 
1.4 Organisation Structure of Urban Governance in Madhya  Pradesh 
The Urban Development and Housing Department, headed by the Principal Secretary to 
the Government, is the Nodal Department for the governance of all Urban Local Bodies. 
The Urban Administration and Development Directorate function as an interface between 
the State Government and Urban Local Bodies, which functions directly under the Urban 
Development and Housing Department. The Urban Administration and Development 
Directorate is headed by a Commissioner who is assisted by nine Joint Directors
3 at 
Division level. The organisation structure with respect to functioning of Urban Local 
Bodies in the State is indicated in Appendix 1. 
In addition to Urban Local Bodies, the Urban Development and Housing Department has 
10 key Parastatal agencies/ other Departments that deliver or facilitate urban 
infrastructure and services, such as the 28 Nagar and Gram Nivesh, Capital Project 
Administration Bhopal, 19 State Institutes for Town Planning, 33 Divisions of Madhya 
Pradesh Housing and Infrastructure Development Board, Madhya Pradesh Rajya 
Karmchari Awas Nigam, Madhya Pradesh Public Works Department, Public Health 
Engineering Department, 50 District Urban Development Agency, Madhya Pradesh 
Urban Development Company, seven SMART City Companies and Madhya Pradesh 
State Industrial Development Corporation. The details of parastatals and their functions 
are given in Appendix 2. 
1.5 Audit Objectives 
The Performance Audit seeks to ascertain whether: 
 T he Urban Local Bodies have been empowered by the State Government to 
discharge their functions/ responsibilities effectively through creation of 
appropriately designed institutions/ institutional mechanisms and their function; 
 T he functions stated to have been devolved were effective on the ground; and 
 T he Urban Local Bodies have been empowered to access adequate resources, for 
discharge of functions stated to have been devolved to them. 
3 Bhopal, Gwalior, Indore, Jabalpur, Narmadapuram, Re wa, Sagar, Shahdol and Ujjain. 

Chapter 1 
3 
1.6 Sources of Audit Criteria 
The criteria for the Performance Audit were derived from the following sources: 
 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act, 1992; 
 Madhya Pradesh Municipal Corporation Act, 1956 and the Rules made thereunder; 
 Madhya Pradesh Municipalities Act, 1961 and the Rules made thereunder; 
 Madhya Pradesh Municipal Accounting Manual; 
 Reports of 13 th  and 14 th  Finance Commission; Reports of 1 st , 2nd , 3rd  and 4 th  State 
Finance Commissions; and 
 Instructions and circulars issued by the State Gove rnment and Directorate, Urban 
Administration and Development Department. 
1.7  Audit Scope and Methodology 
The Performance Audit covered the period of 2015-16  to 2019-20 (henceforth mentioned 
as 2015-20) through test-check of data collected fr om 33 Urban Local Bodies across all 
tiers for selected functions. These 33 Urban Local Bodies were chosen, by using Simple 
Random Sampling without Replacement method in the following way: 
 Four Nagar Nigams, i.e. 25 per cent  of 16 Nagar Nigams, including Bhopal Nagar 
Nigam being Municipality of State Capital;  
 12 Nagar Palika Parishads, i.e.  12.5 per cent  of 98 Nagar Palika  Parishads; and  
 17 Nagar Parishads, i.e.  6.25 per cent  of 269 4 Nagar Parishads of the State. 
Details may be seen in Appendix 3 . Further, at Apex level records of Commissioner, 
Urban Administration and Development Directorate an d Principal Secretary, Urban 
Development and Housing Department have also been t est-checked. Data from parastatal 
agencies has also been collected and used in the Au dit. Out of 18 functions identified in 
the 12 th  Schedule, following functions/ activities were sel ected for test-check in the 
Urban Local Bodies: 
i)  Water supply;  
ii)  Public Health and Sanitation; 
iii)  Solid Waste Management; 
iv)  Property Tax; and 
v)  Water User Charges.  
We conducted an Entry Conference on 16 December 202 0 with the Principal Secretary, 
Urban Development and Housing Department, in which the audit methodology, scope, 
objectives and criteria were shared. The audit meth odology involved online requisitions 
of information and short visit to units for collect ion of documents, analysis and responses 
to Audit queries. An Exit Conference was held on 25 October 2021.  
 
                                                           
4 Out of 299 Nagar Parishads, 30 newly constituted N agar Parishads (8 in 2016-17 and 22 in 2018-19) 
were not considered for this Audit. Out of the 30 n ewly constructed Nagar Parishads, notification of 
‘Bag’ as Nagar Parishad was declared null and void by the High Court. 

Implementation of 74 th Constitutional Amendment Act in Madhya Pradesh  
4 
1.8 Acknowledgement 
We acknowledge the cooperation and assistance exten ded by the Department, Municipal 
Corporations and Municipal Councils. However, chall enges we faced specifically with 
regard to production of records and information are  mentioned in the Report at 
appropriate places.  
1.9 Organisation of Audit Findings 
Our findings are organised as under: 
Chapter II – Compliance to provisions of 74 
th Constitutional Amendment Act; 
Chapter III – Empowerment of Urban Local Bodies and their functioning; 
Chapter IV – Financial resources of Urban Local Bodies; and 
Chapter V – Conclusion. 

Chapter II 
Compliance to provisions  
of 74th Constitutional 
Amendment Ac t 
  

 
 

Chapter II 
 
Compliance to provisions of 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act 
 
2.1  Comparison of State level legislations with 74 th  Constitutional 
Amendment Act 
The 74 th Constitutional Amendment Act, 1992 introduced certa in provisions relating to 
municipalities vide Articles 243Q to 243ZG. The pro visions existing in the Madhya 
Pradesh Municipal Corporation Act, 1956, Madhya Pradesh Municipalities Acts 1961 and 
Madhya Pradesh Zila Yojana Samiti Adhiniyam , 1995 corresponding to the Constitutional 
Amendment Act, 1992 provisions are as indicated in Table 2.1  below:- 
Table 2.1: Mapping of State level legislations with the provisions of 74 th Constitutional Amendment 
Act 
Provision of the 
Constitution of 
India 
Requirement as per provision of the 
Constitution of India 
Provision of State Act/ Acts 
Article 243Q  Constitution of Municipalities : It provides 
for constitution of three types of 
Municipalities, namely, a Nagar Panchayat 
for transitional area, a Municipal Council for 
a smaller urban area and a Municipal 
Corporation for a larger urban area. 
Section 5 of Madhya Pradesh 
Municipalities Act, 1961 
 
Section 7 of Madhya Pradesh 
Municipal Corporation Act, 1956  
Article 243R  Composition of Municipalities: All the 
seats in a Municipality shall be filled by 
direct elections and also by persons with 
special knowledge in municipal 
administration nominated by Government.  
The Legislature of a State, may by law, 
provide for representation to the 
Municipality, of the Members of Parliament 
and Legislative Assembly, whose 
constituencies lie within the municipal area 
and the Members of the Council of States 
and State Legislative Council, who are 
registered as electors within the city. 
Section 19 of Madhya Pradesh 
Municipalities Act, 1961 
 
Section 9 of Madhya Pradesh 
Municipal Corporation Act, 1956 
Article 243S  Constitution and composition of Wards 
Committee : This provides for constitution 
of Wards Committee in all municipalities 
with a population of 3 lakh or more. 
Section 48 (A) of Madhya Pradesh 
Municipal Corporation Act, 1956 
Section 72 (A) of Madhya Pradesh 
Municipalities Act, 1961 
Article 243T  Reservation of seats: The seats to be 
reserved for Scheduled Caste/ Scheduled 
Tribe, Women and Backward Classes for 
direct election. 
Section 29(A) of Madhya Pradesh 
Municipalities Act, 1961 
Section 11(A) of Madhya Pradesh 
Municipal Corporation Act, 1956 
Article 243U  Duration of Municipalities: The 
Municipality has a fixed tenure of 5 years 
from the date of its first meeting and re-
election is to be held within six months of 
end of tenure.  
Section 36 of Madhya Pradesh 
Municipalities Act, 1961 
Section 20 of Madhya Pradesh 
Municipal Corporation Act, 1956 
Article 243V  Disqualifications for membership: A Section 35 of Madhya Pradesh 

Implementation of 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act in Madhya Pradesh 
6 
Provision of the 
Constitution of 
India 
Requirement as per provision of the 
Constitution of India 
Provision of State Act/ Acts 
person shall be disqualified from being a 
member of a Municipality: 
• If he is so disqualified by or under any 
law for the time being in force for the 
purposes of elections of the Legislature of 
the State concerned, and 
• If he is so disqualified by or under any 
law made by the Legislature of the State.  
Municipalities Act, 1961 
 
Section 17 of Madhya Pradesh 
Municipal Corporation Act, 1956 
Article 243W Powers, authority and responsibilities of 
the Municipalities: All municipalities 
would be empowered with such powers as 
may be necessary to enable them to function 
as effective institutions of self-government. 
The State Government shall entrust them 
with such powers and authority as to enable 
them to carry out the responsibilities in 
relation to the 12 th  Schedule.  
Section 124 of Madhya Pradesh 
Municipalities Act, 1961 
 
Section 69 of Madhya Pradesh 
Municipal Corporation Act, 1956 
Article 243X  Power to impose taxes by the 
Municipalities and their funding: 
• Municipalities would be empowered to 
levy and collect the taxes, fees, duties, etc. 
• Grant-in-Aid would be given to the 
Municipalities from the State. 
• Constitution of funds for crediting and 
withdrawal of moneys by the Municipality. 
Section 129 of Madhya Pradesh 
Municipalities Act, 1961 
 
Section 133 of Madhya Pradesh 
Municipal Corporation Act, 1956 
Article 243Y read 
with Article 243I  
Finance Commission: State Government 
shall constitute a Finance Commission for: 
• Reviewing the financial position of 
the Municipalities and taking such steps that 
help in boosting the financial condition of 
the Municipal Bodies. 
• Distributing between the State and 
the Municipalities of the net proceeds of the 
taxes, fees, tolls and duties that are charged 
by the State Government. 
• Allotting the funds to the Municipal 
Bodies in the State from the Consolidated 
Fund of the State. 
Section 3 of Madhya Pradesh State 
Finance Commission Act, 1994 
Article 243Z  Audit of accounts of Municipalities : This 
provides provision for maintenance of 
accounts by the Municipalities and the 
auditing of such accounts.  
Section 121 of Madhya Pradesh 
Municipalities Act, 1961 
Section 125 to 131 of Madhya 
Pradesh Municipal Corporation Act, 
1956 
Article 243ZA read 
with Article 243K  
Elections to the Municipalities: The 
superintendence, direction and control of all 
procedures of election of the Municipalities 
shall be vested in the State Election 
Commission. 
Section 32 of Madhya Pradesh 
Municipalities Act, 1961 
Section 14 of Madhya Pradesh 
Municipal Corporation Act, 1956 

Chapter II 
7 
Provision of the 
Constitution of 
India 
Requirement as per provision of the 
Constitution of India 
Provision of State Act/ Acts 
Article 243ZD  Committee for District Planning:  
• Constitution of District Planning 
Committee at district level.  
• Composition of District Planning 
Committee.  
• Preparation of Draft Development Plan 
and forwarding to the Government.  
Section 3 of Madhya Pradesh Zila 
Yojana Samiti Adhiniyam , 1995 
Article 243ZE  Committee for Metropolitan Planning: 
Provision for constitution of Metropolitan 
Planning Committee in every Metropolitan 
area with a population of 10 lakhs or more. 
No provision has been made by State 
Government. 
(Source: Madhya Pradesh Municipal Corporation/ Madh ya Pradesh Municipalities Acts and Madhya 
Pradesh Zila Yojana Samiti Adhiniyam, 1995) 
Therefore, barring the constitution of the committe e for the Metropolitan Planning, the 
State Acts/ Rules have complied with all requiremen ts as envisaged in the 74 th  
Constitutional Amendment Act regarding inclusion of  codal provisions in the State Acts/ 
Rules. However, compliance to the constitutional pr ovisions by law does not guarantee 
effective decentralisation on ground unless followe d by effective implementation. We 
observed that the legal provisions were not backed by decisive actions, which goes 
against the spirit of the 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act. These shortages rela te to 
institutional mechanisms for empowerment of Urban L ocal Bodies, devolution of 
financial powers of Urban Local Bodies, manpower ma nagement, etc . as discussed in the 
subsequent chapters. 
2.2 Powers of the State Government over Urban Local  Bodies 
We observed that the State Government had overridin g powers over Urban Local Bodies, 
which was against the spirit of the Constitutional Amendment. A few provisions are 
indicated in Table 2.2 below:- 
Table 2.2: Statement showing the overriding powers of State Government over Urban Local 
Bodies 
Sl. 
No. 
Subject Provision 
1 Power to frame 
Rules 
The State Government may by notification in the Gaz ette, frame rules for the 
Madhya Pradesh Municipal Corporation/ Madhya Prades h Municipalities 
Acts after approval of the State Legislature (Secti on 433 of Madhya Pradesh 
Municipal Corporation Act and Section 355 of Madhya  Pradesh 
Municipalities Act). 
2 Power to cancel 
and suspend a 
resolution or 
decision taken by 
Urban Local 
Bodies 
The State Government may cancel a resolution or dec ision taken by Urban 
Local Bodies, if the State Government is of the opi nion that it is not legally 
passed or in excess of the power conferred by Madhy a Pradesh Municipal 
Corporation and Madhya Pradesh Municipalities Acts,  any other law or likely 
to lead to a breach of the peace or to cause injury  or annoyance to the public 
or to any class or body or persons or is likely to cause waste of or damage to 
Municipal funds in violation of directions issued b y Government (Section 421 
of Madhya Pradesh Municipal Corporation Act and Sec tion 323 of Madhya 
Pradesh Municipalities Act).  

Implementation of 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act in Madhya Pradesh 
8 
Sl. 
No. 
Subject Provision 
3 Power to dissolve 
Urban Local 
Bodies 
The State Government shall, by notification in the Gazette, dissolve the 
Urban Local Bodies, if Urban Local Bodies fail to p erform or default in the 
performance of any of the duties imposed on them, a fter giving reasonable 
opportunity. The State Government may appoint Admin istrators during the 
period of dissolution of Urban Local Bodies. (Secti ons 422 and 423 of 
Madhya Pradesh Municipal Corporation Act and Sectio ns 328 of Madhya 
Pradesh Municipalities Act). 
4 Sanction of laws 
by Government 
Section 427 of Madhya Pradesh Municipal Corporation  Act and Section 355 
of Madhya Pradesh Municipalities Act empower the Ur ban Local Bodies to 
make by-laws. However, the by-laws made by Urban Lo cal Bodies are not 
valid unless and until sanctioned by the Government  (Section 430 of Madhya 
Pradesh Municipal Corporation Act and Section 357 o f Madhya Pradesh 
Municipalities Act). 
5 Sanction to deposit 
and invest surplus 
funds 
Section 108 (3) of Madhya Pradesh Municipalities Ac t allows Municipal 
Council to deposit and invest surplus funds but onl y after prior sanction from 
the Government. 
6 Sanction to borrow 
money 
Section 102 of Madhya Pradesh Municipal Corporation  Act and Section 115 
of Madhya Pradesh Municipalities Act allow Municipa l Corporations and 
Municipal Councils to borrow money, but only after prior sanction from the 
Government. 
7 Lease/ sale of 
property 
Section 80 of Madhya Pradesh Municipal Corporation Act and 109 of 
Madhya Pradesh Municipalities Act allow the Municip al Corporations and 
Municipal Councils to lease or sell movable and imm ovable property 
belonging to them but with certain restrictions and  prior sanction of the 
Government. 
8 Withdrawal from 
Reserved Fund 
Rule 16 of Madhya Pradesh Municipalities (Account a nd Finance) Rule, 2018 
says that five per cent  of income of the Urban Local Bodies should be 
credited in Reserved Fund but prior permission has to be obtained from Urban 
Administration and Development Directorate for withdrawal from it. 
Some of these provisions may affect the functioning  of the Urban Local Bodies. 
Overriding powers of the State Government may be an  obstacle in democratic 
decentralisation to create an institutional framewo rk for ushering in democracy at the 
grass root level of the State.  

Chapter III 
Empowerment of Urban Local 
Bodies and their functioning 

 

Chapter III 
 
 Empowerment of Urban Local Bodies and their functioning 
 
Summary  
Out of total 407 Urban Local Bodies, only 60 have their City Government where elections 
were held between January 2017 and January 2018. Re maining 347 Urban Local Bodies 
were working under the administrator-ship of the St ate Government. Thus, the mandate of 
74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act to empower Urban Loca l Bodies with democratically 
elected Government is not getting fulfilled at init ial level itself. Out of 33 Urban Local 
Bodies sampled in audit, 32 did not hold meetings of the Councils as per laid down norms. 
Advisory Committees were not constituted in 12 Urba n Local Bodies. Ward Committees 
were constituted only in Gwalior and Jabalpur, and Mohalla Committees only in Jabalpur 
Nagar Nigam. This defeated the objective of facilit ating community participation in local 
governance as well as prioritization and monitoring  of development works. Metropolitan 
Planning Committees are not envisaged in the Madhya  Pradesh Municipal Corporation 
Act. Meetings of District Planning Committee were a lso not held regularly and 
consolidated District Development Plans for the Dis trict as a whole by considering local 
needs and matters of common interest were not prepa red in any of the 25 districts in 
which the 33 test-checked Urban Local Bodies were l ocated. Only Jabalpur Nagar Nigam 
had formed Municipal Accounts Committee. A total of  24,437 Audit Paras were pending 
in 30 out of selected 33 Urban Local Bodies. Out of  407 Urban Local Bodies, 341 have 
adopted Accrual Based Double Entry Accounting System. 
Delay in constitution of State Finance Commissions (Third to Fifth) and consequent delay 
in submission of their recommendation reports, as w ell as further delay in acceptance of 
recommendations and implementation/ devolution of f unds has adversely affected the 
financial position of the Urban Local Bodies. Devol ution of funds is being done as per 
Third State Finance Commission, even when the const itution of Sixth State Finance 
Commission was due. 
The Urban Local Bodies neither have the powers to a ssess the staff requirement nor to 
recruit the required permanent staff except on cont ractual basis. The State Government 
appoints Group A, B and C staff and the powers to r egulate their conditions of services, 
discipline, as well as conduct are also with the State Government.  
3.1  Actual status of devolution of functions  
The 74 th Constitutional Amendment Act sought to empower Urba n Local Bodies to 
perform functions and implement schemes in relation  to 18 subjects specified in the 
12 th  Schedule. Each State was expected to enact a legis lation to implement the 
amendment. Out of the 18 functions, eight each were  obligatory 5 and discretionary 6 and 
two were of dual nature for Urban Local Bodies.  
We observed ( Table 3.1 ) that out of 18 functions specified in the Schedul e, Urban Local 
Bodies were solely responsible for four functions, had no role in one function, had 10 
                                                           
5 The functions, which shall be done compulsorily by  the Urban Local Bodies. 
6 The functions which are not mandatory to be done b y the Urban Local Bodies. 

Implementation of 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act in Madhya Pradesh  
10 
functions which overlapped with State Government De partments/ Authorities and were 
mere implementing agencies in three functions.  
Table 3.1: Status of devolution of functions 
Sl. 
No. 
Functions 
Obligatory(O)/  
Discretionary (D) 
Activities Actual status of implementation 
Functions where Urban Local Bodies have full jurisdiction 
1. Fire services (O) 
 
Establishing and 
maintaining fire brigades 
Urban Local Bodies were wholly 
responsible for discharging these 
functions. All Urban Local Bodies 
except Indore and Malanpur (Bhind) 
were discharging service of fire 
brigades. In these cities, Police 
Department is discharging the 
function. 
Providing fire NOC/  
approval certificate in 
respect of high rise 
buildings 
Operation and 
Maintenance 
2. Burials and burial 
grounds; cremations, 
cremation grounds (O) 
Construction and O&M of 
crematoriums and burial 
grounds and electric 
crematoriums. 
Urban Local Bodies were wholly 
responsible for discharging these 
functions. 
3. Cattle pounds; 
prevention of cruelty to 
animals (O) 
Catching and keeping 
strays 
Urban Local Bodies were wholly 
responsible for discharging these 
functions. Sterilisation and anti-
rabies 
Ensuring animal safety 
4. Regulation of slaughter 
houses and tanneries (O) 
Ensuring quality of 
animals and meat 
Urban Local Bodies were wholly 
responsible for discharging these 
functions. Disposal of waste 
O&M of slaughter houses 
Functions with no role for Urban Local Bodies 
5. Planning for economic 
and social development 
(D) 
Program implementation 
for economic activities 
Urban Local Bodies have no role in 
these functions. 
Policies for social 
development 
Functions overlapping 
6. Urban planning, 
including town planning 
(D) 
Master Planning/ 
Development Plans/ Zonal 
Plans 
Master plans are prepared by the 
Nagar and Gram Nivesh, 
Directorate, Madhya Pradesh Urban 
Development and Housing 
Department Enforcing Master Planning 
regulations 
Enforcing building bye-
laws and licenses 
Urban Local Bodies were wholly 
responsible for discharging this 
function. 
Group Housing, 
Development of Industrial 
Areas 
Housing and Infrastructure 
Development Board, Urban Local 
Bodies, Special Area Development 
Authorities, District level 
Development Authorities (10 ha), 
Madhya Pradesh State Industrial 

Chapter III 
11 
Sl. 
No. 
Functions 
Obligatory(O)/  
Discretionary (D) 
Activities Actual status of implementation 
Development Authorities (MPSIDC, 
above 10 ha) Medium and Small-
Scale Industries Development 
Department (less than 20 ha) are 
discharging this function. 
7. Provision of urban 
amenities and facilities 
such as parks, gardens, 
playgrounds (D) 
Creation of parks and 
gardens 
Urban Local Bodies were responsible 
for discharging these functions. 
However, in Bhopal, the Capital 
Project Administration is also 
discharging this function. Under the 
SMART City Mission, parks are also 
been maintained by the SMART City 
Authority (functioning under Urban 
Administration Development 
Department) concerned. 
8. Public amenities 
including street lighting, 
parking lots, bus stops 
and public conveniences 
(O) 
Installation and 
maintenance of street 
lights 
Urban Local Bodies were wholly 
responsible for discharging these 
functions. 
Deciding and operating 
bus routes 
Urban Local Bodies and Nigrani 
Samiti, headed by the Collector 
concerned are discharging the 
function. 
Creation and maintenance 
of parking lots 
Urban Local Bodies are discharging 
this function but SMART Cities 
concerned are also maintaining 
parking lots in their jurisdiction. Creation and maintenance 
of public toilets 
9. Roads and bridges (O) Construction and 
maintenance of roads 
Urban Local Bodies were wholly 
responsible for discharging these 
functions, but Public Works 
Department and Capital Project 
Administration (in Bhopal) are also 
engaged in the function. 
Construction and 
maintenance of bridges, 
drains, flyovers and 
footpaths 
10. Water supply for 
domestic, industrial and 
commercial purposes 
(O) 
Distribution of water Urban Local Bodies were wholly 
responsible for discharging these 
functions, but in some areas other 
Government Departments/ PSUs, viz. 
MPSIDC, BHEL (in Bhopal) and 
NEPA Paper Mill (in Nepanagar), 
etc . were also discharging the 
function. 
Providing connections 
Operation & Maintenance 
(O&M) 
Collection of charges 
11. Public Health, 
Sanitation Conservancy 
and Solid Waste 
Management (O&D) 
Maintaining hospitals, 
dispensaries  
Department of Health and Family 
Welfare is discharging the function   
Immunisation/ 
Vaccination  
Registration of births and 
deaths  
Department of Health and Family 
Welfare and Urban Local Bodies 
both are discharging the function.   
Cleaning and disinfection 
of localities affected by 
infectious disease  
Urban Local Bodies were wholly 
responsible for discharging these 
three functions. 

Implementation of 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act in Madhya Pradesh  
12 
Sl. 
No. 
Functions 
Obligatory(O)/  
Discretionary (D) 
Activities Actual status of implementation 
Solid-waste management 
Control and supervision of 
public markets 
12. Urban forestry, 
protection of the 
environment and 
promotion of ecological 
aspects (D) 
Afforestation Forest department and Capital Project 
Administration (in Bhopal city) are 
discharging these functions.  Greenification 
Awareness drives 
Protection of the 
environment and 
promotion of ecological 
aspects 
Maintenance of natural 
resources like water 
bodies, etc.  
Urban Local Bodies, Water 
Resources Department and Narmada 
Valley Development Department are 
discharging this function. 
13. Promotion of cultural, 
educational and 
aesthetic aspects (O&D) 
Schools and education Education Department is discharging 
the function. 
Public space beautification Urban Local Bodies are discharging 
these functions. Fairs and festivals 
Cultural buildings  Urban Local Bodies, Culture 
Department and Archaeological 
Department are discharging these 
functions. 
Institutions 
Heritage 
14. Vital statistics including 
birth and death 
registration (O) 
Coordinating with 
hospitals/ crematoriums, 
etc.  for obtaining 
information 
Urban Local Bodies and Department 
of Health and Family Welfare are 
discharging these functions. 
Maintaining and updating 
database 
15. 
 
Regulation of land-use 
and construction of 
buildings (D) 
Regulating land use Revenue Department (Collector 
office) is discharging this function. 
Approving building plans/ 
high rises 
Urban Local Bodies, Nagar and Gram 
Nivesh are discharging this function. 
Demolishing illegal 
buildings 
Urban Local Bodies and Revenue 
Department are discharging this 
function. 
Urban Local Bodies as mere implementing agencies  
16. Safeguarding the 
interests of weaker 
sections of society, 
including the 
handicapped and 
mentally retarded (D) 
Identifying beneficiaries State Departments such as Social 
welfare, Tribal welfare, 
Empowerment of Differently abled 
and senior citizens and Parastatal 
such as District Urban Development 
Authorities (District Urban 
Development Agency) were 
responsible for these functions. 
Urban Local Bodies were only 
implementing agencies for central 
Providing tools/ benefits 
such as tricycles 
Housing programs 
Scholarships 
17. Slum improvement and 
upgradation (D) 
Identifying beneficiaries 
Affordable Housing 

Chapter III 
13 
Sl. 
No. 
Functions 
Obligatory(O)/  
Discretionary (D) 
Activities Actual status of implementation 
Upgradation and state government schemes. 
18. Urban poverty 
alleviation (D) 
Identifying beneficiaries Urban Local Bodies have minimum 
role in these functions. Livelihood and 
employment  
Street vendors 
   (Source: Information received from Urban Adminis tration and Development Directorate, Madhya 
Pradesh Municipal Corporation Act and Madhya Pradesh Municipalities Act) 
The empowerment of local self- governments can be f ully achieved by devolving all the 
functions. The advent of SMART Cities has further e roded the space of Urban Local 
Bodies.  
Role of SMART Cities  
Formation and Functioning of SMART Cities in Madhya Pradesh  
The Government of India introduced “100 SMART Citie s Mission" on 25 June 2015 
with the objective to promote cities that provide c ore infrastructure and give a decent 
quality of life to its citizens, a clean and sustai nable environment and application of 
‘SMART’ Solutions. In Madhya Pradesh, seven cities were selected to be developed as 
SMART Cities. The seven SMART Cities in Madhya Prad esh are Indore, Bhopal, 
Jabalpur, Gwalior, Ujjain, Sagar and Satna. The wor ks done by the SMART Cities 
under the mission guidelines are related to construction of roads, construction of houses, 
development and maintenance of Parks, renovation of  Heritage Sites, etc. Further, with 
the concept of Area Based Development, certain area s are allocated to the SMART 
Cities. For example, in Bhopal, the “North and Sout h TT Nagar” and in Indore, 
“Rajwada area” are being developed by SMART Cities.  The funds allotted to the 
SMART Cities is also very significant with Bhopal h aving an expenditure of `1,027.77 
crore, during the period 2016-21, and Indore having  an expenditure of `773.58 crore as 
on 31 March 2021.  
Functions of SMART Cities include promoting land us e, housing, road, water supply, 
solid waste management, creation of parks and devel oping open spaces, which were 
otherwise functions that have been devolved to the Urban Local Bodies in Madhya 
Pradesh. As shown above, SMART Cities are getting s ignificant funds for executing 
their functions, which could have otherwise been ut ilised by Urban Local Bodies 
concerned.  
Further, as per the SMART City Mission Guidelines, the functions and responsibilities 
of the SMART Cities also include determination and collection of the user charges, 
collection of taxes, surcharges, etc . as authorised by the Urban Local Bodies. These 
have the potential to further curtail the receipt of Urban Local Bodies. 
With the formation of SMART Cities, the scope and e xtent of work of Urban Local 
Bodies has further been reduced and there will also  be an impact on devolved funds of 
the Urban Local Bodies, further diminishing the alr eady stressed revenues of Urban 
Local Bodies.  

Implementation of 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act in Madhya Pradesh  
14 
3.2  Limited powers over manpower  
Urban Local Bodies are organised under different wings as shown in Table 3.2 : 
Table 3.2: Functional Organisations in Urban Local Bodies 
Sl. 
No. Name of wing/ section Functions 
1 General Administration General Administration, including meetings of counc il and 
committee. 
2 Water Works and Sewerage  Construction, Operation and maintenance  of Water S upply and 
Sewerage  network, etc. 
3 Public Works and 
Horticulture 
Construction, Operation and maintenance of roads, d rains, 
buildings, parks, play grounds and water supply.  
4 Revenue  Assessment and collection of various Taxes, Rent, A dvertisements 
and other property related activities. 
5 Finance and Accounts Preparation and maintenance of accounts, preparatio n of budget, 
etc. 
6 Electrical and Mechanical Street Lighting and maintenance of Heavy or Light Motor Vehicles, 
etc. 
7 Sanitation and Solid Waste 
Management  
Sanitation, Street sweeping, Solid Waste Management  and other 
public health related activities. 
8 Public Transport and Traffic 
Control 
Public Transport and Traffic Control, etc. 
9 Planning and Information 
Technology  
Town Planning activities such as issue of Building Licences, etc. 
10 Urban Poverty Alleviation  Implementation of Schemes relating to Social and Ec onomic 
Development. 
3.2.1 Staff position of Urban Local Bodies 
The assessment of manpower should be based on the f unctions undertaken by Urban 
Local Bodies with a view that majority of the functions which are service oriented have to 
be discharged within a reasonable time period. This  assessment could be done best by 
Urban Local Bodies themselves considering various c riteria such as the extent of 
geographical area to be covered, the extent and type of population, the number of existing 
properties, etc .  
We observed that Urban Local Bodies neither had the  powers to assess the staff 
requirement nor could recruit the required permanen t staff except on contractual basis. 
These powers are vested with the State Government. The State Government assesses the 
requirement of staff based on population alone, as discussed subsequently, and without 
seeking the actual requirement from Urban Local Bodies.  
Further, the State Government can effect transfers of officers between Urban Local 
Bodies. An appeal against any order of Urban Local Body imposing penalty on any 
officer or employee rests with the State Government . Staff of Group A, B and C were 
appointed by State Government, and the powers to re gulate their conditions of services, 
discipline, as well as conduct were with the State Government. 
The staff strength was not revised considering the increase in population. Chart 1  depicts 
position of top five and bottom five Urban Local Bo dies by the working strength per 

Chapter III 
15 
1,000 of projected population of 2020 7. In these Urban Local Bodies, acute gap between 
Sanctioned Strength and Working Strength can be see n. This is explanatory of the fact 
that there is acute shortfall of working strength in the Urban Local Bodies. 
 
(Source: Information provided by the Urban Local Bodies)  
Tier wise details of working strength of selected U rban Local Bodies showing sanctioned 
posts, person-in-position and vacancies are given in Chart 2 below: 
 
(Source: Information provided by the Urban Local Bodies) 
                                                           
7   Projected population of 2020 = Population of 201 1 X 123 per cent. In Madhya Pradesh, the population  
growth during 2001 to 2011 i.e. for 10 years was 25 .6 per cent , hence growth for nine years from 2011 
to 2020 is calculated as 23 per cent . 

Implementation of 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act in Madhya Pradesh  
16 
As seen from Chart 2  there are large number of vacancies  in the staff in Nagar Nigams 
(8,534), Nagar Palika Parishads (1,946) and Nagar Parishads (1,046) respectively.  
The Government replied (November 2021) that Municip al Corporations have full 
authority to recruit employees. The cadre structure  of Nagar Palika Parishad and Nagar 
Palika have been approved  by the State Government and the Government will app oint 
State level cadre posts, like Chief Municipal Offic ers, Sub-Engineers, etc . The 
Professional Examination Board has been authorized to recruit Class-III employees, while 
the recruitment of Class-II officers is being done through the Public Service Commission.  
However, the Department did not provide the orders related to recruitment of staff by 
Municipal Corporations. Also, the fact remains that  there are still huge vacancies in all 
the three tiers of Urban Local Bodies affecting smooth functioning of these Bodies. 
3.3 Institutional mechanism for empowerment of Urba n Local Bodies 
Table  3.1  detailed the status of devolution of 18 functions to Urban Local Bodies. The 
discharge of these functions can be effective only when appropriate institutions are 
established. 
Under the Madhya Pradesh Municipal Corporation and Madhya Pradesh Municipalities 
Acts, the Corporations and Municipalities consist o f elected Parshads/ Councillors, 
nominated Parshads/ Councillors, Members of Legisla tive Assembly, Members of 
Legislative Council, Members of Lok Sabha and Members of Rajya Sabha, who represent 
the constituencies falling in the municipal area. T he nominated members do not have 
voting power. A Mayor, i.e.  chairperson, is directly elected from the municipa l area and 
councillors are directly elected from the Wards. Th e Nagar Nigams, Nagar Palika 
Parishads and Nagar Parishads have various 
8 departments for discharging allotted 
functions. The Commissioner/ Chief Municipal Officer is the executive head of the Urban 
Local Body. 
This section discusses the effectiveness of such institutional mechanisms. 
3.3.1 State Election Commission 
The 2 nd  Administrative Reforms Commission recommended that  the task of delimitation 
and reservation of constituencies be entrusted to t he State Election Commission. This 
recommendation was accepted by the Government of India.  
The powers of the State Election Commission include  superintendence, direction and 
control of the preparation of electoral rolls for, and the conduct of, all elections to Urban 
Local Bodies.  
However, in Madhya Pradesh, the power of delimitati on of local government 
constituencies has been retained by the State Government.  
3.3.2 Status of elections and formation of councils  
Every Municipal Corporation/ Municipality, unless s ooner dissolved, shall continue for 
five years from the date appointed for its first me eting and no longer. Elections to Urban 
Local Bodies shall be completed before the expiry o f their duration. In case of 
dissolution, election shall be held within six mont hs from that date. Subject to the 
                                                           
8  Nagar Nigam, Nagar Palika Parishad and Nagar Pari shad have 10, seven and five departments   
respectively. Urban Local Bodies perform the devolv ed functions through different sections of Urban 
Local Bodies as their internal arrangements, which they call “Departments”. 

Chapter III 
17 
provisions of these Acts, the term of Mayor/ Presid ent and every Councillor shall be co-
terminus with the term of the Corporation/ the Council.  
Out of total 407 Urban Local Bodies, elections were  held in only 60 between January 
2017 and January 2018. The remaining 347 Urban Loca l Bodies, work under the 
administrator-ship of the State Government, with el ections due for periods ranging from 
one month to 49 months. The status of election in 3 47 Urban Local Bodies is detailed in 
Table 3.3  below: 
Table 3.3: Conduct of elections of Urban Local Bodies  
Sl. 
No. 
Previous Election held Election due but not 
conducted 
No. of 
New 
Urban 
Local 
Bodies 
due for 
election 
Total No. 
of Urban 
Local 
Bodies 
due for 
election 
Delay in 
election as 
of August 
2021  
(months) 
Months/ Year No. of 
Urban 
Local 
Bodies 
Year/ 
Months 
No. of 
Urban 
Local 
Bodies 
1 June 2012 1 Aug 2017 1 8 9 49 
2 Jan to Apr 2013 4 Feb to Jun 
2018 
4 6 10 41 
3 Aug to Sep 2013 2 Sep to Oct 
2018 
2 15 17 35 
4 Feb 2014 1 Jun 2019 1 0 1 27 
5 Aug 2014 2 Aug 2019 2 0 2 25 
6 Nov 2014 to  Jan 
2015 
287 Dec 2019 287 0 287 21 
7 Aug 2015 10 Sep 2020 10 0 10 11 
8 Dec 2015 8 Jan 2021 8 0 8 7 
9 July 2016 3 Aug 2021 3 0 3 1 
 Total 318  318 29 347  
(Source: Information provided by the Urban Administration and Development Directorate) 
Thus, provisions of the Act regarding holding of el ection before expiry of the stipulated 
period, were not adhered to. 
We observed that rotation in reservation for Mayor/  President among different categories 
such as SC, ST and Women were not followed by the S tate Government when elections 
were held in 2015-16.  
The Government replied (November 2021) that the con stitutional validity and propriety 
of the rotation process has been challenged in Cour t. The Department has appealed in the 
Supreme Court and action will be taken according to the decision of the Hon’ble Court.  
With regard to other institutional mechanisms, we found the following: 
• The Corporation/ Council is required to meet at lea st once in every two months for 
the transaction of its business. Further, Minutes of every meeting of the Corporation 
are required to be sent to the State Government or prescribed authority as well as a 
copy of the same shall be pasted on the notice boar d of the Corporation/ Council 
within seven/ ten days from the date of confirmation of the Minutes.  

Implementation of 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act in Madhya Pradesh  
18 
Details of meetings in 33 selected Urban Local Bodi es are given in Appendix 4 . 
During 2015-20, against the requirement of 1,011 me etings, 887 meetings were 
actually held. We also noted that nine 9 Urban Local Bodies had less than six 
instances of delay, the incidence of delay was in e xcess of 10 in 15 10  Urban Local 
Bodies. 
The Government replied (November 2021) that the upd ated position in these cases 
will be provided after due scrutiny of audit conclusions. 
 
• After the first meeting of the Council, the Speaker  shall constitute an Advisory 
Committee for every Department of the Council from amongst the elected 
Councillors which shall meet at least once in every two months. 
Out of 33 selected Urban Local Bodies, Advisory Com mittees in departments of 
12 11  Urban Local Bodies have not been constituted. Furt her, meetings of Advisory 
Committees were held in seven 12  Urban Local Bodies only. 
The Government accepted the facts (November 2021) a nd stated that Advisory 
Committees are to be mandatorily formed and updated  position will be provided 
after due scrutiny of audit conclusions.  
3.3.3 Formation and Functioning of various Committe es 
• Ward Committees, consisting of one or more wards, s hould be constituted for every 
Municipality having a population of three lakh or m ore within thirty days from the 
date of election of Speaker.   
• In every municipal area, which is notified by the S tate Government in this behalf, a 
Mohalla Committee is also to be constituted within three months from the date of 
notification. We observed that Ward Committees were  constituted only in Gwalior 
and Jabalpur and Mohalla Committee was constituted only in Jabalpur in the 
selected Urban Local Bodies. This defeated the obje ctive of facilitating community 
oversight in local governance and would adversely i mpact prioritisation of 
development works, monitoring of execution of works , utilisation and maintenance 
of assets created, etc . 
The Government replied (November 2021) that, direct ions are being issued 
according to provisions of Madhya Pradesh Municipal  Corporation Act, 1956. The 
same will be reviewed thereafter continuously. 
• A District Planning Committee is to be constituted in every District to consolidate 
the plans prepared by the Panchayats and the Munici palities in the District and to 
prepare a Draft Development Plan for the District a s a whole. These plans would 
cover spatial planning; sharing of water and other physical and natural resources; 
integrated development of infrastructure and environmental conservation and extent 
and type of available resources whether financial o r otherwise. The Development 
Plan, was to be integrated into the State Plan. Further, the meeting of the Committee 
shall be held at least once in every quarter of the  Financial Year. We observed that 
though District Planning Committees were constitute d, meetings of the committees 
                                                           
9      Anuppur, Balaghat, Bhainsdehi, Bichhiya, Chhatarpur, Gwalior, Kurawar, Laundi and Sendhwa. 
10   Badoni, Bhedaghat, Chhindwara, Hatpipliya, Ichhaw ar, Jabalpur, Jawad, Khategaon, Mandideep, Mau, 
Omkareshwar, Raisen, Raghogarh, Rajgarh, and Sultanpur. 
11    Badoni, Balaghat, Bichhia, Bhopal, Dongar Parasi a, Hatpipliya, Jawad, Kurawar, Raisen, Raghogarh, 
Sendhwa and Sultanpur. 
12  Chanderi, Chhatarpur, Chhindwara, Mau, Nepanagar, Satai and Seoni. 

Chapter III 
19 
were not held regularly and consolidated District D evelopment Plan for the District 
as a whole was not prepared in any of the 25 Distri cts in which the 33 test-checked 
Urban Local Bodies were located. There was shortfal l in the review meetings 
ranging from six to 20 meetings (30 per cent  to 100 per cent ), as detailed in  
Appendix 5 .  
The Government replied (November 2021) that earlier , preparation of District 
Development Plans was in vogue, but, it has stopped  now. Directions will be issued 
after discussion with the Planning, Economics and S tatistics Department  in this 
regard. 
• Every metropolitan area 13  will have a Metropolitan Planning Committee to pre pare 
its Development Plan. We observed that Metropolitan  Planning Committee was not 
constituted in any city due to absence of provision  in the Madhya Pradesh 
Municipal Corporation Act. Thus, comprehensive development of metropolitan area 
and matters of common interest between the local au thorities which includes 
mainly, coordinated spatial planning of the area, s haring of water, sharing of other 
physical and natural resources and the issue of int egrated development of 
infrastructure and environmental conservation are l ikely to be carried out in a sub 
optimal manner. 
The Government replied (November 2021) that the rev ised notification has been 
issued  in the case of Municipal Corporation, Bhopal. 
However, this will require an amendment in the Act so that it can be implemented in 
all the metropolitan areas. 
• A Municipal Accounts Committee must be constituted to consider the report of the 
auditor. Defects or irregularities pointed in audit  are to be remedied and a report 
sent to the State Government within a period of thr ee months from the date of 
receipt of the Audit Report. Except in Jabalpur, th e Municipal Account Committee 
was not formed in any of the selected Nagar Nigams. In all 24,437 Audit Paras were 
pending in 30 14 , out of selected 33 Urban Local Bodies relating to  period from 
1954-55 to 2019-20. 
The Government stated (November 2021) that a high l evel committee has been 
constituted at Government level to settle the pendi ng paragraphs of the Inspection 
Reports.  
3.3.4 State Finance Commission 
A State Finance Commission constituted every five y ears shall review the financial 
position of the Municipalities and make recommendations to the Governor.  
Accordingly, the Sixth State Finance Commission was due from 2019-20. However, as on 
date, recommendations of the Third State Finance Co mmission were being implemented. 
Recommendations of the Fourth State Finance Commiss ion were accepted by the 
Government in July 2017 but the Government decided to implement these 
recommendations with the interim Report of Fifth St ate Finance Commission. The delays 
in constitution of State Finance Commission and imp lementation of State Finance 
Commission recommendations are detailed in Table 3.4  below: 
                                                           
13     An area having a population of 10 lakh or more.  
14      Three Urban Local Bodies (Rajgarh, Raisen and Nepanagar) have not provided information.  

Implementation of 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act in Madhya Pradesh  
20 
Table 3.4: Delay in constitution of State Finance Commission and implementation of 
recommendations  
State 
Finance 
Commis-
sion  
To be 
constituted 
as per 
constitution  
To be 
constituted 
with 
reference to 
previous 
State 
Finance 
Commissions  
Actually 
constituted  
Delay in 
constitution  
(days) 
Date of 
sub-
mission of 
Recomm-
endations  
Acceptance 
by the 
Government  
Days 
taken for 
acceptance 
Period 
covered  
 
First By 31 st  May 
1994 
31/05/1994 25/02/1995  169 20/07/1996  13/02/1998 569 1996-01  
Second 1999-2000  24/02/2000 17/06/1999  No delay 22/07/2003  31/12/ 2003  159 2001-06  
Third 2004-05 16/06/2004 12/07/2005  390 31/10/2008  05/02/ 2010  460 2006-20  
Fourth 2009-10 11/07/2010 27/01/2012  564 30/01/2017  20/07/2017 170 N/A  
Fifth  2014-15 24/01/2017 20/03/2017  54 31/01/2018  Awaited N/A N/A  
Sixth 2019-20 Not constituted 
                     (Source: Finance Commission reports and notification of acceptance) 
The delay in constitution of State Finance Commissi ons and implementation of the State 
Finance Commission’s recommendations resulted in fu rther delay in devolution of funds 
to the Urban Local Bodies affecting the financial p osition of the Urban Local Bodies. 
Moreover, recommendations of the Fifth State Financ e Commission which were 
submitted in January 2018, have not been accepted b y the Government so far (November 
2021), even when the constitution of Sixth State Fi nance Commission was due. The 
impact thereof is discussed in paragraph 4.1.2 .  
3.3.4.1 Response of the State Government to State F inance Commission  
recommendations 
The State Government may accept the recommendations  of the State Finance 
Commission in totality or with modifications. We ob served that the State Government 
accepted few of the recommendations with modificati ons, and action was yet to be 
initiated on other recommendations. The important r ecommendations of Third and Fourth 
State Finance Commissions and their modifications with reference to transfer of funds are 
given in Table 3.5  below: 
Table 3.5: State Finance Commission wise important recommendations and their 
modifications 
State 
Finance 
Commission 
Recommendations Modifications 
First Devolution of 8.699 per cent of  Net Tax 
Revenue of the State to Urban Local 
Bodies. 
0.514 per cent  of Net Tax Revenue of the 
State is to be devolved from 1998-99. 
Second ₹8.5 crore is to be provided as general-
purpose grants to municipalities.  
The State Government did not accept this 
recommendation. 
Third Devolution of one per cent  of the Own Tax 
Revenue of the State after deducting 10 per 
State Government accepted the 
recommendation. 

Chapter III 
21 
State 
Finance 
Commission 
Recommendations Modifications 
cent  of expenditure on collection of tax and 
amount of assigned tax revenue 15  to Urban 
Local Bodies. 
Fourth Devolution of two per cent  Own Tax 
Revenue of the State after deducting 10 per 
cent  of expenditure on collection of tax and 
amount of assigned tax revenue to Urban 
Local Bodies.  
These recommendations were not 
considered immediately and were 
deferred until the submission of interim 
report of Fifth State Finance 
Commission. However, Own Tax 
Revenue was being devolved at the rate 
of one per cent, as per recommendation 
of Third State Finance Commission. 
(Source: Recommendations of State Finance Commissions Reports) 
The Government replied (November 2021) that at pres ent, the recommendations of the 
Third State Finance Commission have been approved by the State Government.  
3.3.5 Property Tax Board 
On the recommendations of 13 th  Finance Commission, a Property Tax Board (Board) was 
constituted (March 2011) in the State to assist the municipalities in levy and realisation of 
Property Tax. The Commissioner, Urban Administratio n and Development Directorate, 
Madhya Pradesh, is the President of the Board. 
The Board was required to evaluate at least five per cent cases of Property Tax, imposed 
in the State; monitor and evaluate that Property Tax imposed and realised by Urban Local 
Bodies, was as per norms; prepare an Annual Report of its activities during the year and 
publish a report in State Gazette and place it befo re the Legislature; and conduct training 
of staff related to Property Tax for capacity building.  
We noticed that none of the above activities were p erformed by the Board. Further, after 
its constitution (March 2011), the Board met only f ive 
16  times. After the fourth meeting 
(May 2014), its fifth meeting was held on 13 Septem ber 2019 with a gap of more than 
five years. 
Thus, constitution of Board was just a mere formali ty and no concrete work was done by 
the Board to assist/ guide the Urban Local Bodies i n raising their revenue realisation 
capabilities.  
The Government replied (November 2021) that the con stituted Board is being 
strengthened and accordingly, the Department has cr eated a Property Tax Tool last year 
in which there is an inbuilt self-buoyancy mechanis m. Property tax will be indexed as per 
the Collector Guidelines and consequently Property Tax will increase every year. 
3.3.6 Adoption of Accrual Based Accounting  
On the recommendation of 11 th  Finance Commission, the CAG of India had constitut ed a 
Task Force to recommend budget and accounting forma ts for Urban Local Bodies in 
India. The CAG Task Force in its report, inter alia , suggested adoption of accrual basis of 
accounting by Urban Local Bodies. The Government of  Madhya Pradesh introduced 
                                                           
15  The taxes which were imposed and collected by the Urban Local Bodies, i.e. Chungi (before 1976), 
Niryat kar (before 2013) and Yatri/ Tirthyatri kar (before 1995). 
 16   Meetings were held on 15/12/2011, 28/07/2012, 18/ 09/2012, 15/05/2014 and 13/09/2019.  

Implementation of 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act in Madhya Pradesh  
22 
Accrual Based Double Entry Accounting System with e ffect from 1 July, 2007 in all the 
Urban Local Bodies. Out of 407 Urban Local Bodies 3 41 have adopted Accrual Based 
Double Entry Accounting System as per Madhya Prades h Municipal Accounting Manual 
in a phased manner (Six Phases). 
The Government replied (November 2021) that it is t heir priority to implement the 
“Accrual Based Double Entry Accounting System” in a ll the Urban Local Bodies of the 
State. This work is being carried out in different phases and in the remaining Urban Local 
Bodies, it shall be completed soon. 
Recommendations:   
1.  The Government may consider entrusting the task of delimitation to the State 
Election Commission and ensure timely elections of the Urban Local Bodies .  
2.  Various Committee, like Advisory Committee, Ward Co mmittee and Mohalla 
Committee, may be constituted in the Urban Local Bo dies as per the Madhya 
Pradesh Municipal Corporations/  Madhya Pradesh Municipalities  Acts and they 
should be nurtured and encouraged to function effectively.  
3.  Government may avoid delays in constituting the Sta te Finance Commission and 
ensure prompt implementation of their recommendations.  
4.  Adequate powers over manpower resources should be d elegated to Urban Local 
Bodies in matters such as assessment and recruitment of required staff.  
 

Chapter IV 
Financial Resources of 
Urban Local Bodies 

 

Chapter IV 
 
 
Financial Resources of Urban Local Bodies 
Summary 
The share of Own Revenue ( `7,227.5 crore) in total financial resources (`36,999.9 crore) 
of the Urban Local Bodies is approximately 20 per cent . On the other hand, devolution of 
funds by the State Government to the Urban Local Bo dies during 2015-20 was short of 
the norms of the third State Finance Commission by `312.6 crore.  
The Urban Local Bodies prepared budget without asse ssing the actuals of VAT/ GST, 
resulting in short realisation of `1,465.8 crore.  
The average collection of Property Tax for the peri od 2015-20 was 60 per cent  of total 
demand. The collection declined from 69 to 45 per cent during the period 2017-20. An 
amount of `269.66 crore was outstanding for collection as on M arch 2020 in the selected 
Urban Local Bodies. GIS Survey was conducted only in 123 (30 per cent ) of Urban Local 
Bodies. Out of 12 selected Nagar Palika Parishads, only Raghogarh and Seoni and out of 
17 selected Nagar Parishads, only Sultanpur collected Service Charges in lieu of property 
taxes.  
Similarly, in the case of Water Charges of 33 selec ted Urban Local Bodies, during 
2016-20, collection has declined from 29 to 15 per cent . An amount of `375.40 crore of 
Water Charges was outstanding in selected Urban Loc al Bodies as on March 2020. 
Further, we noticed that none of the selected Urban  Local Bodies had installed meters for 
water connections and only fixed water charges were  being levied. Therefore, the 
collection of monthly Water Charges from the benefi ciaries was insufficient against the 
expenses incurred on Operation and Maintenance of w ater supply. Shop Rent amounting 
to `8.9 crore was also outstanding against leaseholders/ occupiers.  
In terms of effectiveness of devolved functions on ground, Urban Local Bodies were 
generally effective in achieving the coverage of to ilets and household level coverage of 
Solid Waste Management, but as far as other parameters are concerned, there were gaps.  
Sustainable Financing is paramount to ensure discha rge of any function. The devolved 
functions can be carried out effectively by Urban L ocal Bodies only when they are 
supported with sufficient financial resources. Such  financial resources could take the 
form of predictable fiscal transfers or access to own revenue streams that are buoyant and 
commensurate with the expenditure obligations, acco mpanied by appropriate expenditure 
powers. Predictable fiscal transfers to Urban Local  Bodies need to be ensured through a 
robust State Finance Commission mechanism and compl iance with State and Central 
Finance Commission recommendations. Access to own sources of revenue would include 
both the power to levy and collect from specific re venue streams. Expenditure powers 
refer to reasonable delegation limits that allow th e Urban Local Bodies to utilise their 
financial resources. 
4.1  Sources of Revenue  
The details of revenue of Urban Local Bodies in the  State during the period 2015-20 are 
indicated in Chart 3 and Table 4.1  below: 

Implementation of 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act in Madhya Pradesh  
24 
 
(Source: Information by Urban Administration and Development Directorate) 
Table 4.1: Details of revenues of Urban Local Bodies during the period 2015-20 
(₹ in crore) 
Year Own 
Revenue 
Assigned 
Revenue Grants Total 
Revenue 
Percentage of 
Own Revenue 
to Total 
Revenue 
Percentage of 
fiscal transfer 
to Total 
Revenue 
2015-16 1,121.4 2,946.4 1,959.4 6,027.2 18.6 32.5 
2016-17 1,400.2 3,013.2 2,569.6 6,981.0 20.0 36.8 
2017-18 1,624.4 3,378.0 2,964.6 7,967.1 20.4 37.2 
2018-19 1,653.4 3,813.7 2,941.2 8,408.3 19.6 34.0 
2019-20 1,428.1 3,295.1 2,890.3 7,613.5 18.8 37.9 
Total 7,227.5 16,446.4 13,325.1 36,999.1 19.4 36.0 
(Source: Information by Urban Administration and Development Directorate) 
The share of Own Revenue to total financial resourc es of the Urban Local Bodies is 
approximately 20 per cent . Thus, the Urban Local Bodies rely  largely on other revenue 
streams, which are not under their control. Moreove r, the share of own resources was 
falling over the period 2018-20. 
The Government replied (November 2021) that continu ous efforts are being made to 
increase own revenue by issuing instructions to the Urban Local Bodies.  
4.1.1 Own Revenue of Urban Local Bodies 
Urban Local Bodies do not have a large independent tax domain. The Property Tax on 
land and buildings is the mainstay of Urban Local B odies’ Own Revenue. The own 
non-tax revenue of Urban Local Bodies comprises Wat er Charges, rent from commercial 
establishments, trade licences, fee for sanction of plans/ mutations, etc . The share of Own 
Revenue to Total Revenue of Urban Local Bodies for the period 2015-20 in test-checked 
Urban Local Bodies ranged from six to 36 per cent  as shown in Table  4.2 below:  
 
 
 

Chapter IV  
25 
Table 4.2: Details of total own revenue against total financial resources for 2015-20 
(₹ in crore) 
Type of Urban 
Local Body 
Assigned 
Revenue 
Own 
Revenue 
Government 
Grants 
Other, 
if any 
Total 
financial 
resources 
Percentage 
of Own 
Revenue 
against 
financial 
resources 
Nagar Nigam 2,939.7 3,887.3 2,733.5 1101.5 10,661.9 36.5 
Nagar Palika 
Parishad 379.0 163.6 574.7 63.9 1,181.3 13.9 
Nagar Parishad 141.3 39.2 353.0 85.2 618.8 6.3 
(Source: Information provided by the Urban Local Bodies) 
It is evident from the above table that financial c ondition of the Nagar Palika Parishads 
and Nagar Parishads is highly critical and they are  totally dependent on the Government 
Grants. Even the Nagar Nigams are collecting only a round 36 per cent  of Total Revenue 
as their Own Revenue.   
The Government replied (November 2021) that continu ous efforts are being taken by all 
the Urban Local Bodies in the State to strengthen t he process of tax collection and there 
has been an increase in tax collection in recent ye ars. The Urban Local Bodies, where the 
pace of growth in tax collection is low, are being constantly reviewed. At present, 
schemes like e-nagarpalika , etc . are being implemented to make tax collection dynamic. 
4.1.1.1 Utilisation of Education Cess 
Urban Local Bodies are permitted to levy Education Cess at a rate of not more than five 
per cent  of the Annual Letting Value of those land/ buildin gs on which Property Tax was 
imposed. The revenue is to be used on maintenance, sanitation and for providing potable 
water facilities to Government Schools within the municipal area.  
During 2015-20, 31 17  Urban Local Bodies collected an amount of `101.38 crore, of 
which `71.88 crore, representing 71 per cent  of collection was utilised by 10 Urban Local 
Bodies and `29.51 crore remained un-utilised ( Appendix 6) . 
The Government replied (November 2021) that instructions will be issued to ensure basic 
facilities in all primary and secondary schools loc ated in urban areas and necessary 
provision will also be made in the budget. 
4.1.2 Fiscal transfers to Urban Local Bodies 
Funds were devolved to Urban Local Bodies through t ransfer by the Central and State 
Governments in the form of grants. Grants from Gove rnment, based on the 
recommendations of the State Finance Commission, account for 36 per cent  of revenue of 
Urban Local Bodies in the State during the period 2015-20. 
• Short release of divisible fund 
The Fourth State Finance Commission recommended dev olution at the rate of 
two per cent  from Divisible Fund 18  to the Urban Local Bodies, but the State Governmen t 
                                                           
17    Nagar Nigam Bhopal didn’t provide information wh ile Nagar Parishad Mau has no information 
regarding Education Cess. 

Implementation of 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act in Madhya Pradesh  
26 
decided to consider this recommendation with the in terim report of Fifth State Finance 
Commission. The Funds to be devolved and those actu ally devolved by the State 
Government are given in Table 4.3 below:  
Table 4.3: Details of short devolution of State Finance Commission Grant  
(₹ in crore) 
Year Own tax 
revenue of 
State during 
the previous 
year (based 
on account 
of previous 
year) 
Net tax 
Revenue 
after 
deducting 
10 per cent  
collection 
charges 
Amount 
of 
Assigned 
revenue of 
previous 
year 
Divisible 
fund of 
State ( net 
tax revenue 
less 
Assigned 
revenue) 
Funds to be 
devolved as per 
third SFC 
recommendation 
(One per cent  of 
divisible fund) 
Funds 
devolved 
to Urban 
Local 
Body by 
State 
Govern-
ment 
Short 
release 
2015-16 36,567.3 32,910.6 2,946.4 29,964.2 299.6 271.3 28.3 
2016-17 40,213.7 36,192.3 3,013.2 33,179.1 331.8 259.8 72.0 
2017-18 44,193.7 39,774.3 3,378.0 36,396.3 364.0 326.7 37.3 
2018-19 44,810.9 40,329.8 3,813.7 36,516.1 365.2 309.2 55.9 
2019-20 50,882.4 45,794.2 3,296.0 42,498.2 425.0 306.0 119.0 
Total 2,16,667.9 1,95,001.1 16,447.3 1,78,553.8 1,785.5 1,472.9 312.6 
                       (Source: State Finance Accounts and Urban Administration and Development Directorate) 
It can be seen from the above table that devolution  of funds by the State Government to 
the Urban Local Bodies was short by `312.6 crore as compared to the norms of the third 
State Finance Commission. On an average Urban Local  Bodies received around 
82 per cent  of the funds to be devolved during the period 2015-20. 
• Trend in growth of Assigned Revenue 
Assigned Revenue forms 44 per cent  of the total revenue of the Urban Local Bodies. 
These include Chungi  compensation, Niryat kar, Yatri kar and Tirthyatri  kar. The break-
up of year wise Assigned Revenue is shown in Table 4.4. 
Table 4.4: Break-up of the Assigned Revenue 
(₹ in crore) 
Particulars Year 
2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 
Chungi compensation 2,736.0 2,802.7 3,167.6 3,648.0 3,120.0 
Niryat kar 120.4 120.4 120.4 104.6 103.0 
Yatri kar 90.0 90.0 90.0 61.1 72.2 
Tirthyatri kar 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.8 
Total 2,946.4 3,013.2 3,378.0 3,813.7 3,296.0 
(Source: Urban Administration and Development Directorate) 
                                                                                                                                                                             
18     The net tax revenue of the State is arrived aft er deducting the share of state Government in Centr al 
taxes, 10  per cent  amount as a collection charges and assigned revenu e. The net tax revenue is known 
as divisible fund and it is distributed among the different departments to run their activities. 

Chapter IV  
27 
Subsequent to withdrawal of power of levy and colle ction of Chungi 19 , the third Finance 
Commission recommended that the Government of Madhy a Pradesh will collect the tax 
and make it available to Urban Local Bodies on popu lation basis as Assigned Revenue. 
Further, the Third State Finance Commission also an alysed the Chungi  compensation for 
the period from 1976 to 2007 and noticed gradual in crease at the rate of 15 per cent  each 
year compared to previous years.  
Assigned Revenue in total should also gradually inc rease in terms of Chungi  
compensation, but we noticed negative growth in ass igned revenue during the years 
2019-20, as depicted in Chart 4 below: 
 
(Source: Information received from Urban Administration and Development Directorate) 
It is evident that devolution of Assigned Revenue, during the period 2015-19 was almost 
in line with the funds released, while it was less devolved by `998.91 crore in 2019-20, 
which impacted working of the Urban Local Bodies. 
The Government replied (November 2021) that Assigne d Revenue is provided through 
the budgetary mechanism to the Department in propor tion to the taxes received by the 
State Government. Further, in the budget discussion  with the Finance Department every 
year, demands are placed to increase Assigned Revenue. 
• Short release of compensation on VAT/ GST 
Compensation at the rate of five per cent  from the collected Value Added Tax (VAT) is 
to be released to the Urban Local Bodies, after 15 per cent  cess leviable on Commercial 
Tax was abolished from March 2006 due to introducti on of VAT. Details of budget 
provision made by Urban Administration and Developm ent Directorate and amount 
released by Finance Department are as given in Table 4.6 below: 
 
 
 
                                                           
19   A duty levied on various goods entering a town or c ity. Government of Madhya Pradesh withdrew the 
Chungi  from Urban Local Bodies to avoid traffic congestion or unwanted delay in trade and business. 
 

Implementation of 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act in Madhya Pradesh  
28 
Table 4.6: Short release of compensation on VAT/ GST 
(₹ in crore) 
Year VAT/ GST  Compensation 20  Short 
Release Collection 
of previous 
years 
(VAT) 
Collection of 
previous years 
GST (GST= 
SGST+ IGST)  
Total 
Collection 
of VAT+ 
GST 
To be 
deman-
ded in 
current 
year 
Actually 
demanded by 
Urban Admin. 
and 
Development 
Directorate 
Actually 
released 
in 
current 
year 
2015-16 17,112.4  0.0  17,112.4  855.6  824.0  751.8  103.8  
2016-17 18,687.4  0.0  18,687.4  934.4  856.6  856.6  77.8  
2017-18 21,428.9  0.0  21,428.9  1,071.5  1,014.8  1,014.8  56.6  
2018-19 14,468.4  13,828.6  28,297.0  1,414.9  1,156.9  1,055.4  359.4  
2019-20 9,761.3  19,640.7  29,402.0  1,470.1  914.8  602.0  868.1  
Total 81,458.4  33,469.3  1,14,927.7  5,746.4  4,767.1  4,280.6  1,465.8  
(Source: Finance Accounts and information provided by the Urban Administration and Development 
Directorate)  
From the above table, it could be seen that budget has been prepared without assessing 
the actual recovery of VAT/ GST by the State Govern ment. This resulted in short release 
of `1,465.8 crore to the Urban Local Bodies. 
The Government replied (November 2021) that after e xamining the facts, the Finance 
Department would be asked to release the remaining amount. Further, it will be taken into 
consideration during preparation of budgets in future.  
4.1.2.1 Central Finance Commission Grants 
The Fourteenth Finance Commission recommended Basic  Grant and Performance Grant 
to Urban Local Bodies as a percentage of divisible pool 21  account.  
On the recommendation of Fourteenth Finance Commiss ion, the State Government fixed 
the following conditions for distribution of Perfor mance Grant among Urban Local 
Bodies: 
i)  The Municipality will have to submit audited accoun ts that relates to the year, not 
earlier than two years preceding the year, in which  the Municipality seeks to 
claim the Performance Grant. 
ii)  The Municipality will have to show an increase in i ts own revenue over the 
preceding year as reflected in the audited accounts. 
iii)  The Municipality must measure and publish the Servi ce Level Benchmarks to 
basic urban services each year for the period of th e award and make it publicly 
available. 
                                                           
20   Assuming compensation of GST as it was in VAT. 
21   The net tax revenue of the State is known as divi sible fund. The net tax revenue is arrived at after  
deducting the share of State Government in Central taxes, 10 per cent  amount as a collection charges 
and assigned revenue. 

Chapter IV  
29 
 
(Source: Information received from Urban Administration and Development Directorate) 
We observed that 298 Urban Local Bodies out of 378 in 2018-19 and 329 Urban Local 
Bodies out of 378 in 2019-20 were qualified for rec eiving Performance grant. However, 
Performance Grants for the aforesaid period, amount ing to `602.55 crore 22  was not 
received.  
The Government replied (November 2021) that Urban D evelopment and Housing 
Department has made correspondence with the Central  Government to release the 
Performance Grant amounting to 
`602.55 crores, but the said grant has not been rele ased 
yet by the Government of India. 
4.1.3 Property Tax 
The Urban Local Bodies were empowered to levy Prope rty Tax every year on all 
buildings or vacant lands or both situated within t heir jurisdiction. Every owner is to 
assess the Annual Letting Value of his land or buil ding and deposit the amount of 
Property Tax along with a return in this behalf, in  the prescribed form, on or before the 
date fixed by the Council on the basis of self-assessment.  
• Short Realisation of Property Tax  
We noticed in the test-checked 32 23  out of 33 Urban Local Bodies that the average 
collection of Property Tax for the period 2015-20 w as 60 per cent  of total demand and 
from 2017-18 it was on a declining trend ( Chart 6 ). A cumulative amount of `269.66 
crore of these selected Urban Local Bodies was outs tanding as on March 2020. Details 
are given in the Appendix 7 . 
                                                           
22    ₹602.55 crore ( ₹260.91 crore for 2018-19 and ₹341.64 crore for 2019-20). 
23    Data not provided by the Nagar Parishad Badoni ( Datia). 

Implementation of 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act in Madhya Pradesh  
30 
 
(Source: Information received from selected Urban Local Bodies) 
The Government replied (November 2021) that continu ous efforts are being taken to 
reduce the gap between demand and collection under Property Tax. There has been an 
increase in the collection of Property Tax in the r ecent years and such efforts will 
continue in future. 
• Service Charges 
The State and Central Government properties located in the vicinity of municipal area are 
exempted from payment of Property Tax and in lieu o f the Property Tax, service charges 
are levied at the rate of 33, 50 and 75 per cent  of the total Property Tax where no 
services, partial services and all services are bei ng provided by the Municipal 
Corporations/ Councils respectively. 
We noticed the following shortcomings in the collec tion of Service tax by the Urban 
Local Bodies: 
• Out of the four 
24  selected Nagar Nigams, only three 25  were collecting Service 
Charges; of these, two i.e.  Gwalior and Jabalpur Nagar Nigams started collecti on 
of Service Charges from the current year (2019-20).  During the period 2015-20 
Bhopal Nagar Nigam collected `26.59 crore (22.47 per cent ) against the demand 
of `118.34 crore. An amount of `91.74 crore was outstanding up to March 2020. 
Gwalior and Jabalpur Nagar Nigams were able to coll ect only `22.14 lakh against 
the demand of `6.74 crore for the year 2019-20 i.e.  3.28 per cent  of demand. 
• Out of 12 selected Nagar Palika Parishads, only two  Raghogarh and Seoni 
collected Service Charges; 
• Out of 17 selected Nagar Parishads, only Sultanpur collected Service Charges of 
`35,469 against the outstanding amount of `1.37 lakh for the period 2015-19.  
The Government replied (November 2021) that instruc tions, in this regard, have been 
issued to all the Urban Local Bodies in October 201 5. But due to administrative reasons, 
most of the Urban Local Bodies were not able to recover the service charges.  
                                                           
24    Bhopal, Chhindwara, Gwalior and Jabalpur Nagar N igams. 
25   Bhopal, Gwalior and Jabalpur Nagar Nigams. 

Chapter IV  
31 
• Revision of Property Tax 
Property Tax is levied at the rate not less than si x per cent  and not more than 10 per cent  
of the Annual Letting Value, as may be determined b y the Corporation for each Financial 
Year. 
 
(Source: Information provided by the Urban Local Bodies) 
Out of 33 test-checked Urban Local Bodies ( Chart 7 ), in 10, the last revision was prior to 
2010; 14 have revised it between 2010 and 2015; eig ht revised it between 2015 and 2020 
while one Urban Local Body 26  did not provide the information.  
The Government replied (November 2021) that amendments (September 2020) in the Act 
were made and the rules have also been amended (Sep tember 2020) accordingly. As per 
the amendment, minimum increase in property tax val ue of building or land shall be 
according to percentage increase in market value of  building or land determined under 
Collector guidelines, in the present year over the last year. These have been implemented 
from the year 2021-22.  
• Geographical Information System (GIS) survey for en hancing Property 
Tax     
The Third State Finance Commission recommended use of GIS survey in levy of 
Property Tax. 
We noticed that GIS survey was conducted (2013-20) in 123 Urban Local Bodies 
(30 per cent  of total Urban Local Bodies), which led to 26 per cent  to 1612 per cent  
increase over the collection of the previous years.  Property Tax collection has increased 
remarkably in most of the Urban Local Bodies from t he collection of the previous years. 
The remaining Urban Local Bodies are yet to use GIS survey. 
The Government replied (November 2021) that the GIS  Survey is being done for the 
Urban Local Bodies in five phases. Survey work in 1 52 Urban Local Bodies has been 
completed and work is in progress in the remaining Urban Local Bodies.  
 
                                                           
26   Nagar Palika Parishad Raisen had not provided dat a. 

Implementation of 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act in Madhya Pradesh  
32 
• Collection of Water Charges 
Test-check of Water Charges in 33 Urban Local Bodie s revealed that average collection 
for the period 2015-20 was 23 per cent of the amount billed and since 2017-18, this 
collection was on the decline ( Chart 8 ). During the period 2016-20, the collection 
declined from 29 to 15 per cent . An amount of `375.40 crore of these selected Urban 
Local Bodies was outstanding as on March 2020. Details are at Appendix 8 .  
 
(Source: Information provided by the selected Urban Local Bodies) 
We also noted that none of the selected Urban Local  Bodies had installed meters with the 
water connections.  
The Government accepted (November 2021) the facts a nd replied that new rules i.e.  
Madhya Pradesh Municipalities (user charges for wat er supply, sewerage and solid waste 
management services) Rules, 2020 have been published (September 2020) in this regard.  
Fourteenth Finance Commission recommended that the Urban Local Bodies should 
rationalise their Service Charges in a way that the y are able to at least recover the 
Operation and Maintenance costs from the beneficiaries. 
The water charges collected could meet the expenses  of only 21 to 31 per cent  of the 
expenses incurred by Urban Local Bodies on Operation and Maintenance of water supply 
(Table 4.7).  
Table 4.7: Statement showing demand and collection of Water User charges by Urban Local Bodies 
(`` `` in crore) 
(Source: Information provided by the Urban Local Bodies) 
Year 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 
Total demand 164.7 186.2 298.6 294.8 439.4 
Collection against Demand 43.0 54.4 81.2 78.6 64.0 
Total Outstanding Demand 121.7 131.8 217.5 216.2 375.4 
Expenses on Operation and 
Maintenance 
195.8 216.1 265.6 289.0 297.9 
Percentage of collection against 
expenses on O&M 
22.0 25.2 30.6 27.2 21.5 

Chapter IV  
33 
The Government replied (November 2021) that new rul es in this regard have been 
published (September 2020) and directions will be issued to implement these in all Urban 
Local Bodies.  
• Revision of Water Charges 
We noticed that the Urban Local Bodies were not rev ising water charges regularly. Out 
of 33 test-checked Urban Local Bodies, 31 had revis ed their water charges. Out of which 
six Urban Local Bodies last revised it prior to 201 0, 11 revised the charges during 
2010-15 and 14 other revised during 2015-20 ( Chart 9 ). While one Urban Local Body 27  
did not provide information and in Nagar Parishad K urawar, water supply network is 
under construction stage as it is newly constituted.  
 
(Source: Information provided by the Urban Local Bodies.) 
The Government replied (November 2021) that necessa ry instructions have been issued 
to fix the rates in proportion to the expenditure o n operation and maintenance and these 
will be implemented soon. 
4.1.4 Solid Waste Management 
According to Solid Waste Management Rules 2016, dom estic waste should be collected 
by the Urban Local Bodies and the Urban Local Bodie s have power to decide and levy 
user charges on Solid Waste Management. 
• Non-levy of user charges for Solid Waste Management  
Out of 33 Urban Local Bodies, 31 28  had incurred an expenditure of `297.35 crore on 
Solid Waste Management during the period 2015-20. O f these only two 29  Municipal 
Corporations have collected `4.00 crore as user charges for Solid Waste Manageme nt 
during 2016-20. The Nagar Palika Parishads and Naga r Parishads had not collected any 
user charges. Moreover, there was no collection prior to 2016-17. 
The Government replied (November 2021) that rules h ave been notified for 
determination of user charges for Solid Waste Manag ement on the basis of cost of 
services, so that cost of operation and maintenance can be recovered. 
                                                           
27   Data not provided by Nagar Palika Parishad Raisen . 
28  Data not provided by the Nagar Nigams Bhopal and G walior. 
29  Chhindwara  and Jabalpur.  

Implementation of 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act in Madhya Pradesh  
34 
4.1.5 Other sources of revenue  
Sub-Section 6 of the Section 132 of the Madhya Prad esh Municipal Corporation Act and 
Section 127 of the Madhya Pradesh Municipalities Ac t envisaged to explore other 
sources of revenue . We noticed that 31 Urban Local Bodies had collecte d `47.51 crore 
from other sources during 2015-20. Our findings on other sources are as detailed below:- 
• Levy on Outdoor Advertisement 
Out of 33 selected Urban Local Bodies, only four 30  levied tax on outdoor advertisement 
and collected `9.3 crore during 2015-20.  
The Government replied (November 2021) that adverti sements are being placed in the 
Urban Local Bodies according to the Madhya Pradesh Outdoor Media Advertisement 
Rules, 2017.  
• Levy on Mobile Tower 
Thirty one Urban Local Bodies collected `8.41 crore as levy on mobile towers. Out of 
1328 mobile towers installed in the vicinity of the  30 Urban Local Bodies, 241 mobile 
towers located under the jurisdiction of five Urban  Local Bodies 31 , were found to be 
unauthorised but no action for regularisation as we ll as levy of penalty was initiated by 
the Urban Local Bodies concerned. Further, licence period of 334 towers (22 Urban 
Local Bodies) had expired as of June 2021 for perio ds ranging from one to 148 months, 
but action for renewal was not initiated by the Urb an Local Bodies concerned as detailed 
in Appendix 9 . 
• Shop Rent 
In 30 32  out of 33 sampled Urban Local Bodies, shop rent am ounting to `8.9 crore was 
outstanding and was to be recovered ( Table 4.8) for the period 2015-20. Arrears of shop 
rent have increased since 2017-18. Out of these, si x 33  Urban Local Bodies are major 
defaulters having arrears more than 60 per cent .  
Table 4.8:  Details of outstanding Shop Rent 
(` in crore) 
Year 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 
Total Demand 9.5 9.0 11.1 12.4 14.3 
Total Collection 5.9 5.8 7.0 5.7 5.4 
Outstanding Balance at the year 
end 
3.6 3.2 4.1 6.7 8.9 
(Source: Information provided by the selected Urban Local Bodies) 
The Government replied (November 2021) that recover y is not regular due to shortage of 
staff. But action will be taken to recover the rent of the shops as per the rules. 
 
                                                           
30  Bhedaghat, Gwalior, Jabalpur and Seoni. 
31 Unauthorised mobile towers at Bhopal-169, Chhindwara-4, Gwalior-58, Badoni-7 and Mau-3. 
32    Bhopal and Gwalior had not provided the informat ion whereas Kurawar had realised only 27 per cent  
shop rent in the year 2018-19 and for the remaining years no information has been provided. 
33   Badoni (76  per cent), Jabalpur (60 per cent),  Mandideep (67 per cent), Manpur (60 per cent ),  
Laundi  (72  per cent) and Sultanpur  (86  per cent).  

Chapter IV  
35 
4.2  Expenditure on services 
Madhya Pradesh Municipalities Act, 1961 is not in c onsonance with the spirit of the 
74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act, as in the case of Na gar Palika and Nagar Parishads, 
Budget is to be sent to the State Government, indic ating the control of State Government 
on these Urban Local bodies.  
There was significant variation between Budget Esti mates and actual income and 
expenditure. On an average the actual income of the  Urban Local Bodies over estimates 
varied by 44 per cent  during 2015-20. Details are given in Table 4.9 . 
Table 4.9: Showing the details regarding preparation of unrealistic budget 
(`` `` in crore) 
Year 
Revenue Expenditure 
Estimate  Actual Difference 
Percent-
age of 
difference  
Estimate  Actual Difference 
Percent-
age of 
difference 
2015-16 5,267.2  2,039.1  3,228.1  38.7  5,383.4  2,021.6  3,361.8  37.6  
2016-17 5,280.8  2,621.8  2,659.0  49.6  5,371.8  2,312.9  3,058.9  43.1  
2017-18 5,861.4  2,871.7  2,989.7  49.0  5,890.9  2,423.3  3,469.3  41.1  
2018-19 7,451.0  3,262.4  4,188.7  43.8  7,314.6  3,678.6  3,655.1  50.3  
2019-20 8,698.3  3,247.4  5,450.8  37.3  8,587.1  3,412.4  5,177.9  39.7  
                     (Source: Information provided by the Urban Local Bodies) 
In 20 Urban Local Bodies, budget was approved by th e Council after 31 March each year 
with delays ranging from four to 707 days. Three Urban Local Bodies did not provide the 
approval dates of the Budget, as detailed in Appendix 10 . 
The Government replied (November 2021) that necessa ry instructions will be issued to 
the concerned so that the budget can be presented on actual basis and in time as well. 
4.3  Effectiveness of devolved functions 
Benchmarking is an important mechanism for introduc ing accountability in service 
delivery. Recognising its importance, Ministry of U rban Development, Government of 
India prescribed Service Level Benchmarks since 200 8 for performance management of 
basic services. Ministry of Urban Development had a lso issued Service Level 
Benchmarks Handbook prescribing the standardised fr amework for performance 
monitoring in respect of four basic municipal servi ces, viz ., Water Supply, Sewerage, 
Solid Waste Management and Storm Water Drainage. Se rvice Level Benchmark 
indicators include coverage of water supply connect ions, quality of water, cost recovery 
in water supply, coverage of toilets, coverage of s ewage network service, household 
coverage of solid waste management, segregation and  disposal of municipal solid wastes 
and coverage of storm water drainage network. 
In compliance to the recommendations of Fifteenth F inance Commission, the 
Government of Madhya Pradesh, Urban Development and Housing Department had fixed 
(December 2020) benchmarks for improving service delivery system.  
Handbook on Service Level Benchmarking developed by  the Ministry of Urban 
Development, also seeks to:  
(i)  Identify a minimum set of standard performance para meters for the water and 
sanitation sector that are commonly understood and used by all stakeholders across 
the country;  

Implementation of 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act in Madhya Pradesh  
36 
(ii)  Define a common minimum framework for monitoring an d reporting on these 
indicators; and  
(iii)  Set out guidelines on how to operationalize this framework in a phased manner. 
Urban Local Bodies are to generate performance repo rts on Service Level Benchmarks 
periodically and institutionalise systems for performance management.  
Out of the 28 parameters under four heads (Water Su pply, Sewerage, Solid Waste 
Management and Storm Water Drainage), we analysed 1 0 parameters under three heads 
of Water Supply, Sewerage and Solid Waste Managemen t, in the 33 Sampled Urban 
Local Bodies. The Service Level Benchmarks set for these parameters along with other 
details are indicated in Appendix 11 . 
• Water Supply:  
Thirty-two out of 33 Urban Local Bodies, were yet t o meet the target of achieving 
100 per cent  water connections. Only Nagar Parishad Jawad had p rovided connections to 
100 per cent  households. However, 23 Urban Local Bodies had pro vided connections to 
at least 70 per cent  of households. Further, 26 Urban Local Bodies were  still not able to 
provide 135 litre per capita per day of water, wher eas the goal of achieving 24 hours 
continuous water supply is also very distant. 21 Ur ban Local Bodies were providing less 
than even 100 litre per capita per day, with minimu m supply being 50 litre per capita per 
day in Nagar Parishad Satai. With regard to continu ous water supply, 24 Urban Local 
Bodies were able to provide water for maximum of on e hour only, with the minimum 
being reported as 16 minutes by Nagar Parishad Hatpipliya.  
The Government accepted the facts and replied (Nove mber 2021) that the target of 
100  per cent metering and 24 hours supply is yet to be achieved in case of water supply. 
Work is going on in this regard to achieve the target.  
• Sewerage:  
Coverage of toilets has increased considerably over  the period 2019-20, with 16 Urban 
Local Bodies indicating 100 per cent  coverage. However, coverage of sewage network is 
abysmal, with 26 Urban Local Bodies indicating nil coverage. Similarly, 26 Urban Local 
Bodies indicated nil capacity in sewerage treatment. 
The Government replied (November 2021) that in 49 c ities, a wide range of projects, like 
Sewage Treatment Plants, are either completed or ar e under progress. The Department is 
going forward with the concept of Faecal Sludge Treatment Plant as well.  
• Solid Waste Management:  
Household Level Coverage has improved considerably,  with 16 Urban Local Bodies 
indicating 100 per cent  coverage. Similarly, Collection Efficiency was als o reported as 
100 per cent  by nine Urban Local Bodies. Only six Urban Local B odies did not segregate 
solid waste and only two reported 100 per cent  segregation. 11 Urban Local Bodies 
reported up to 50 per cent  segregation.  
In this regard, specific reply was not offered by the Government. 
 
 

Chapter IV  
37 
Recommendations:  
1.  Devolution of funds to the Urban Local Bodies, as r ecommended by State Finance 
Commission, may be done in a timely manner so that Urban Local Bodies have 
adequate financial resources to carry out their developmental activities. 
2.  Monitoring of the realisation of revenue due to the  Urban Local Bodies should be 
strengthened so that receivable amounts are realised fully and in time.  
3.  Service Level Benchmarks for improving service deli very system under sewerage 
and solid waste management should be strictly adhered to. 

Chapter V 
Conclusion 

 

Chapter V 
Conclusion 
The 74 th  Amendment introduced Part IX A (the Municipalities ) in the Constitution 
containing Articles 243P to 243ZG. This amendment came into effect on 1 June 1993 and 
authorised the State Legislatures to enact laws to endow local bodies with powers and 
authority as may be necessary to enable them to fun ction as institutions of 
self-governance and make provisions for devolution of powers and responsibilities 
(Article 243W). The 12 th  Schedule lists out the 18 functions to be carried out by Urban 
Local Bodies. 
Each State had to enact a legislation to implement the 74 
th  Constitutional Amendment 
Act. The Urban Local Bodies in the State were gover ned by the Madhya Pradesh 
Municipal Corporation Act, 1956 and the Madhya Prad esh Municipalities Act, 1961. 
After enactment of the 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act, the State Government  had 
made some rules to comply with the provisions of 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act. 
These rules were, however, not supported by firm ac tion thus, defeating the spirit of the 
constitutional amendment specifically with referenc e to devolution of functions and 
creation of appropriate institutional mechanisms.  
Out of the 18 functions, Urban Local Bodies were so lely responsible for four functions, 
had no role in one function, had over-lapping roles  in 10 functions, and acted as mere 
implementing agencies in three functions.  
In case of Human Resources, most of the Urban Local  Bodies were found to be 
functioning with acute shortage of staff and were highly dependent on outsourced staff.  
The power of delimitation of wards, reservation of seats for the council and rotation 
policy of seats for the posts of Mayor/ President, Deputy-Mayor/ Vice-Presidents and 
wards were vested with the State Government.  
It was also seen that in many of the Urban Local Bo dies, elections were not held since 
long and hence, in the absence of elected local gov ernment, development of these Urban 
Local Bodies may be hampered. Besides, the mandate of 74 
th  Constitutional Amendment 
Act to empower the Urban Local Bodies was also getting violated.  
Advisory Committee, the Wards and Mohalla Committee s, Municipal Accounts 
Committee and the Metropolitan Planning Committee w ere not found constituted in case 
of some of the Urban Local Bodies. Though the Distr ict Planning Committees were 
constituted, meeting of the Committees were not being held regularly.  
As per the Constitutional provisions and the Acts, implementation of the 
recommendations of the sixth State Finance Commissi on was due from 2019-20. 
However, as on date, recommendations of the 3 rd  State Finance Commission were being 
implemented.  
The devolution of funds by the State Government to the Urban Local Bodies was short by 
up to 
₹312.6 crore, compared to the norms of the third State Finance Commission.  
The share of Own Revenue to Total Revenue of Urban Local Bodies for the period 
2015-20, in test-checked Urban Local Bodies was mea gre (Nagar Parishads 6.3 per cent , 
Nagar Palika Parishads 13.9 per cent  and Nagar Nigams 36.5 per cent).   
This shows that the financial condition of the Urba n Local Bodies was highly critical and 
they were totally dependent on the Government grant s. Instances of short realisation of 

Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act in Madhya Pradesh 
40 
various taxes/ charges in respect of Property tax, Service Charges and Water Charges 
were also observed.  
Urban Local Bodies were found to be generally effective in terms of achieving the 
coverage of sanitation and household level coverage of Solid Waste Management. But as 
far as other parameters were concerned, there were huge gaps.  
The indicators of Service Level Benchmarks, when seen in conjunction with the fact that 
Urban Local Bodies have not been able to collect the requisite charges appropriately and 
are not making adequate efforts to recover cost of services, show a dire situation of their 
financials which is adversely impacting the implementation of services. 
Bhopal  
The 
(BIJIT KUMAR MUKHERJEE)
 
Accountant General (Audit-II)  
Madhya Pradesh 
Countersigned 
New Delhi 
The 
(GIRISH CHANDRA MURMU) 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India
 
 

Appendices 

 

Appendix-1 
(Reference: Paragraph 1.4) 
Organisational Chart of Urban Local Bodies 
 
Principal Secretary, Urban Administration and Housing Department  
 
 
Commissioner, Directorate of Urban Administration and Development  
 
 
 Joint Directors (9 1) 
           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                      
1  Bhopal, Gwalior, Indore, Jabalpur, Narmadapuram, Rewa, Sagar, Shahdol and Ujjain.  
Municipal Corporation (16)  
(Nagar Nigam)  
 Municipal Council (98) 
(Nagar Palika Parishad)  
 Nagar Parishad (293) 
 
 
Mayor 
(Elected) 
Commissioner  President 
(Elected) 
Chief 
Municipal 
Officer 
 President 
(Elected) 
Chief 
Municipal 
Officer 

Implementation of 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act in Madhya Pradesh  
42 
Appendix-2  
(Reference: Paragraph 1.4) 
List of Parastatals and their functions 
Sl. No. Parastatals Functions 
1. Nagar and Gram Nivesh Formed in 1956 for preparation of development plans to 
establish the towns in organised and planned manner s; 
and to review such development plan at regular interval 
in terms of population of the town and prepare plan  for 
State Development Plan. 
2. Capital Project 
Administration  
After re-organisations of states, it was formed in 1956 
for planned and rapid development of Bhopal, the newly 
formed capital of the Madhya Pradesh. The Capital 
Project Administration develops different 
infrastructures, basic amenities, acts as a co-ordi nator 
for various works and for beautification and 
development of gardens, plantations, etc. 
3. State Institute for Town 
Planning 
It was formed under Gram and Nagar Nivesh Act, 1973. 
10 Development Authorities - Bhopal, Indore, Gwalior, 
Jabalpur, Ujjain, Dewas, Katni, Singrauli and 
Amarkantak; Six Special Area Development 
Authorities- Pachmarhi, Gwalior Counter Magnet, 
Khajuraho, Orchha, Maheshwar, Mandleshwar and 
Chitrakoot; and three Urban Local Bodies - Khajurah o, 
Dhanpuri and Grahakota are associate members of the  
institute. 
Primary objective of the institutes are: to assist and 
provide consultancy to Nagar and Gram Nivesh 
Department on subject matters of urban/ rural planning.  
4. Madhya Pradesh Housing 
and Infrastructure 
Development Board 
It was formed in 1972 as a corporate body under the  
Madhya Pradesh Griha Nirman Mandal Adhiniyam, 
1972. It was established to resolve the housing problems 
by way of development of land and constructing 
housing for various classes. 
5. Madhya Pradesh Rajya 
Karmchari Awas Nigam 
It was formed in 1988 under Madhya Pradesh Society 
Registration Act, 1973 to resolve the housing probl ems 
of staff of State Government and Co-operative Societies 
established by Government. 
6. Madhya Pradesh Public 
Works Department  
Public Works Department is the premier agency of 
Government of Madhya Pradesh engaged in Planning, 
Designing, Construction and Maintenance of 
Government assets like Roads, Bridges, Railway Over  
Bridges, Fly Overs and Buildings. 
The internal roads of the city which have not been 
handed over to the Municipal Corporation are being 
maintained by the Public Works Department. 
7. Public Health Engineering 
Department  
According to the provision of the National Rural 
Drinking Water Programme, the Madhya Pradesh 
Public Health Engineering Department is responsible to 
provide safe and pure drinking water in the rural area of 
the state. The Public Health Engineering Department  is 
also responsible to prepare, outline and co-ordinat e the 
activities of Water Augmentation Development 
Schemes of the entire state. The Public Health 

Appendices  
43 
Sl. No. Parastatals Functions 
Engineering Department is also responsible to opera te 
the water qualities testing laboratories.  
8. District Urban 
Development Authorities  
At the District level, District Urban Development 
Authorities work as a district level nodal agency f or 
implementation of various livelihood schemes financed 
by the Central and State Government as well as to 
provide assistance to people living below poverty line. 
9. Madhya Pradesh Urban 
Development Company 
It was formed in January 2015 and is responsible fo r 
preparation of Comprehensive Development Plan and 
execution of Externally Aided Projects. 
10. SMART City Companies The Government of India introduced “100 SMART 
Cities Mission" on 25 June 2015 with the objective to 
promote cities that will provide core infrastructur e and 
give a decent quality of life to its citizens, a cl ean and 
sustainable environment with the application of 
‘SMART’ Solutions. In Madhya Pradesh, seven cities 
i.e. Indore, Bhopal, Jabalpur, Gwalior, Ujjain, Sagar and 
Satna were selected. The works done by the SMART 
Cities under the mission guidelines are related to 
construction of roads, construction of houses, 
development and maintenance of  Parks, renovation o f 
Heritage Sites, etc. 
11. Madhya Pradesh State 
Industrial Development 
Corporation  
Madhya Pradesh State Industrial Development 
Corporation is responsible to develop land in indus trial 
areas and provide infrastructure facilities to the 
industries as a single window. 
 

Implementation of 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act in Madhya Pradesh  
44 
Appendix-3  
(Reference: Paragraph 1.7) 
List of selected Urban Local Bodies 
Sl. No. Name of Urban Local Body District Category 
1 Gwalior Gwalior Nagar Nigam 
2 Jabalpur Jabalpur Nagar Nigam 
3 Chhindwara Chhindwara Nagar Nigam 
4 Bhopal Bhopal Nagar Nigam 
5 Balaghat Balaghat Nagar Palika Parishad 
6 Chhatarpur Chhatarpur Nagar Palika Parishad 
7 Seoni Seoni Nagar Palika Parishad 
8 Anuppur Anuppur Nagar Palika Parishad 
9 Rajgarh Rajgarh Nagar Palika Parishad 
10 Chanderi Ashoknagar Nagar Palika Parishad 
11 Dongar Parasiya Chhindwara Nagar Palika Parishad 
12 Nepanagar Burhanpur Nagar Palika Parishad 
13 Raghogarh Guna Nagar Palika Parishad 
14 Mandideep Raisen Nagar Palika Parishad 
15 Raisen Raisen Nagar Palika Parishad 
16 Sendhwa Barwani Nagar Palika Parishad 
17 Bichhia Mandla Nagar Parishad 
18 Mau Bhind Nagar Parishad 
19 Kurawar Rajgarh Nagar Parishad 
20 Jawad Neemuch Nagar Parishad 
21 Hatpipliya Dewas Nagar Parishad 
22 Laundi Chhatarpur Nagar Parishad 
23 Omkareshwar Khandwa Nagar Parishad 
24 Bhainsdehi Betul Nagar Parishad 
25 Bhedaghat Jabalpur Nagar Parishad 
26 Ichhawar Sehore Nagar Parishad 
27 Manpur Indore Nagar Parishad 
28 Churhat Sidhi Nagar Parishad 
29 Khategaon Dewas Nagar Parishad 
30 Mandleshwar Khargone Nagar Parishad 
31 Satai Chhatarpur Nagar Parishad 
32 Sultanpur Raisen Nagar Parishad 
33 Badoni Datia Nagar Parishad 
 
 

Appendices  
45 
Appendix-4 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.3.2) 
Meetings of the Corporation/ Council 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
Urban Local 
Body 
Period of 
Corporation/ 
Council 
No. of Bi-
monthly 
meetings 
to be held 
during the 
period of 
Council 
Total No. 
of Bi-
monthly 
meetings 
held 
during the 
period of 
Council 
No. of 
instances 
at which 
delay in 
conduct of 
Bi-
monthly 
meetings 
occurred 
Details of meetings delayed by more 
than two months 
Date of 
first 
meeting 
Date of 
next 
meeting 
Delay  
(in days) 
1 Nagar 
Nigam, 
Bhopal 
20/02/2015 to            
19/02/2019 
24 33 6 23/03/2017 27/05/2017 5 
28/03/2018 04/06/2018 8 
01/08/2018 06/10/2018 6 
06/10/2018 28/12/2018 23 
28/02/2019 19/06/2019 51 
29/11/2019 01/02/2020 4 
2 Nagar 
Nigam, 
Chhindwara 
18/02/2015 to                     
17/02/2020 
30 18 12 21/05/2015 14/08/2015 25 
14/08/2015 29/12/2015 77 
11/01/2016 18/03/2016 7 
18/03/2016 17/06/2016 31 
04/08/2016 10/10/2016 7 
10/10/2016 16/12/2016 7 
20/03/2017 16/06/2017 28 
16/06/2017 26/08/2017 11 
26/08/2017 07/02/2018 105 
07/02/2018 25/08/2018 139 
25/08/2018 23/02/2019 122 
23/02/2019 28/08/2019 126 
3 Nagar 
Nigam, 
Gwalior 
10/01/2015 to 
05/06/2019 
26 74 1 06/10/2018 28/12/2018 23 
4 Nagar 
Nigam, 
Jabalpur 
19/02/2015 to 
19/02/2020 
30 35 11 10/06/2015 16/10/2015 68 
16/10/2015 05/01/2016 21 
21/03/2016 21/06/2016 32 
06/08/2016 28/11/2016 54 
07/04/2017 19/06/2017 13 
16/10/2017 29/12/2017 14 
29/12/2017 15/03/2018 16 
10/05/2018 08/08/2018 30 
03/10/2018 02/02/2019 62 

Implementation of 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act in Madhya Pradesh  
46 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
Urban Local 
Body 
Period of 
Corporation/ 
Council 
No. of Bi-
monthly 
meetings 
to be held 
during the 
period of 
Council 
Total No. 
of Bi-
monthly 
meetings 
held 
during the 
period of 
Council 
No. of 
instances 
at which 
delay in 
conduct of 
Bi-
monthly 
meetings 
occurred 
Details of meetings delayed by more 
than two months 
Date of 
first 
meeting 
Date of 
next 
meeting 
Delay  
(in days) 
27/02/2019 08/07/2019 71 
28/08/2019 27/01/2020 92 
5 Nagar Palika 
Parishad, 
Anuppur 
17/10/2013 to 
17/10/2018 
30 31 2 06/06/2017 27/03/2018 234 
27/04/2018 01/10/2018 97 
6 Nagar Palika 
Parishad, 
Balaghat 
12/01/2015 to 
11/01/2020 
30 59 4 30/12/2015 10/03/2016 11 
14/07/2017 22/09/2017 10 
04/10/2018 20/12/2018 17 
20/02/2019 30/05/2019 39 
7 Nagar Palika 
Parishad, 
Chanderi 
11/01/2015 to 
05/01/2020 
30 36 7 10/04/2015 20/07/2015 41 
01/09/2015 28/11/2015 28 
15/07/2016 21/02/2017 161 
21/02/2017 16/05/2017 24 
27/05/2017 27/11/2017 124 
18/01/2018 19/04/2018 31 
17/02/2019 07/06/2019 50 
8 Nagar Palika 
Parishad, 
Chhatarpur 
10/01/2015 to 
09/01/2020 
30 34 2 24/03/2015 16/06/2015 24 
21/04/2016 04/08/2016 45 
9 Nagar Palika 
Parishad, 
Dongar 
Parasia 
13/01/2015 to 
08/03/2019 
25 24 9 30/06/2015 22/09/2015 24 
22/09/2015 05/02/2016 76 
31/03/2016 08/06/2016 9 
27/06/2016 08/09/2016 13 
08/09/2016 02/12/2016 25 
02/12/2016 21/02/2017 21 
11/05/2017 12/10/2017 94 
20/04/2018 17/07/2018 28 
11/09/2018 07/01/2019 58 
10 Nagar Palika 
Parishad, 
Nepanagar 
06/08/2012 to 
12/08/2017 
30 13 5 21/05/2015 04/09/2015 46 
04/09/2015 15/12/2015 42 
15/12/2015 13/04/2016 60 
13/04/2016 27/08/2016 76 
26/09/2016 22/02/2017 89 
 4 30/10/2017 31/03/2018 92 

Appendices  
47 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
Urban Local 
Body 
Period of 
Corporation/ 
Council 
No. of Bi-
monthly 
meetings 
to be held 
during the 
period of 
Council 
Total No. 
of Bi-
monthly 
meetings 
held 
during the 
period of 
Council 
No. of 
instances 
at which 
delay in 
conduct of 
Bi-
monthly 
meetings 
occurred 
Details of meetings delayed by more 
than two months 
Date of 
first 
meeting 
Date of 
next 
meeting 
Delay  
(in days) 
08/09/2017 to 
continue 
15 31/03/2018 16/01/2019 231 
16/01/2019 02/08/2019 138 
02/08/2019 26/12/2019 86 
11 Nagar Palika 
Parishad, 
Raghogarh 
2015-16 to 
16/02/2018 
and 
16/02/2018 to 
till date 
30 20 14 08/03/2015 16/10/2015 14 
16/10/2015 01/02/2016 48 
01/02/2016 11/04/2016 10 
11/04/2016 05/07/2016 25 
03/09/2016 02/12/2016 30 
02/12/2016 15/03/2017 43 
15/03/2017 12/06/2017 29 
12/06/2017 20/10/2017 70 
20/10/2017 22/12/2017 3 
22/12/2017 11/06/2018 111 
11/06/2018 19/09/2018 40 
19/09/2018 23/01/2019 66 
08/03/2019 14/08/2019 99 
07/09/2019 03/03/2020 118 
12 Nagar Palika 
Parishad, 
Raisen 
07/01/2015 to 
06/01/2020 
30 23 11 18/03/2015 27/05/2015 10 
21/07/2015 01/10/2015 12 
01/06/2016 09/08/2016 9 
09/08/2016 07/11/2016 30 
07/11/2016 11/01/2017 5 
11/01/2017 21/03/2017 9 
21/03/2017 11/07/2017 52 
11/07/2017 13/10/2017 34 
28/09/2018 28/12/2018 31 
02/03/2019 30/05/2019 29 
30/05/2019 24/09/2019 57 
13 Nagar Palika 
Parishad, 
Rajgarh 
13/01/2015 to 
08/01/2020 
30 30 11 24/03/2015 06/08/2015 75 
06/08/2015 10/10/2015 5 
10/10/2015 18/12/2015 9 
26/05/2016 26/08/2016 32 

Implementation of 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act in Madhya Pradesh  
48 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
Urban Local 
Body 
Period of 
Corporation/ 
Council 
No. of Bi-
monthly 
meetings 
to be held 
during the 
period of 
Council 
Total No. 
of Bi-
monthly 
meetings 
held 
during the 
period of 
Council 
No. of 
instances 
at which 
delay in 
conduct of 
Bi-
monthly 
meetings 
occurred 
Details of meetings delayed by more 
than two months 
Date of 
first 
meeting 
Date of 
next 
meeting 
Delay  
(in days) 
22/10/2016 18/01/2017 28 
21/03/2017 10/06/2017 21 
23/06/2017 16/10/2017 55 
16/10/2017 01/03/2018 76 
01/03/2018 23/06/2018 54 
27/04/2019 19/07/2019 23 
19/07/2019 29/11/2019 73 
14 Nagar Palika 
Parishad, 
Sendhwa 
09/08/2012 to 
17/08/2017 
30 7 2 10/02/2015 11/01/2016 275 
11/01/2016 20/03/2017 374 
16/02/2018 to 
continue 
1 20/03/2017 16/04/2018 332 
15 Nagar Palika 
Parishad, 
Seoni 
16/01/2015 to 
16/01/2020 
30 32 8 22/01/2016 05/04/2016 14 
23/01/2017 28/03/2017 4 
28/03/2017 07/07/2017 41 
29/11/2017 16/03/2018 47 
03/10/2018 18/12/2018 16 
18/12/2018 31/05/2019 104 
31/05/2019 08/08/2019 9 
11/10/2019 18/12/2019 8 
16 Nagar Palika 
Parishad, 
Mandideep 
10/04/2015 to 
17/03/2020 
30 27 14 12/08/2015 11/01/2016 92 
11/01/2016 29/03/2016 18 
20/05/2016 31/08/2016 43 
31/08/2016 05/11/2016 6 
06/01/2017 27/03/2017 20 
28/03/2017 24/07/2017 58 
14/09/2017 25/11/2017 12 
12/01/2018 13/03/2018 1 
10/05/2018 06/08/2018 28 
28/09/2018 21/12/2018 24 
21/12/2018 22/02/2019 3 
22/02/2019 06/07/2019 74 
06/07/2019 21/10/2019 47 
21/10/2019 17/03/2020 88 

Appendices  
49 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
Urban Local 
Body 
Period of 
Corporation/ 
Council 
No. of Bi-
monthly 
meetings 
to be held 
during the 
period of 
Council 
Total No. 
of Bi-
monthly 
meetings 
held 
during the 
period of 
Council 
No. of 
instances 
at which 
delay in 
conduct of 
Bi-
monthly 
meetings 
occurred 
Details of meetings delayed by more 
than two months 
Date of 
first 
meeting 
Date of 
next 
meeting 
Delay  
(in days) 
17 Nagar 
Parishad, 
Badoni 
2015-16 to 
2019-20 
30 24 12 15/04/2015 02/09/2015 80 
13/10/2015 19/02/2016 69 
19/02/2016 20/05/2016 31 
08/06/2016 30/08/2016 23 
15/09/2016 04/01/2017 51 
09/03/2017 18/05/2017 10 
30/05/2017 01/10/2017 64 
11/10/2017 17/01/2018 38 
23/03/2018 28/06/2018 37 
28/06/2018 27/09/2018 31 
27/09/2018 04/10/2019 312 
04/10/2019 24/01/2020 52 
18 Nagar 
Parishad, 
Bhainsdehi 
 
 
15/01/2014 to 
30/01/2018 
24 29 4 15/07/2015 24/11/2015 72 
13/04/2016 01/07/2016 19 
03/01/2017 27/03/2017 23 
07/06/2017 19/09/2017 44 
19 Nagar 
Parishad, 
Bhedaghat 
03/02/2016 to 
02/02/2021 
30 29 12 23/02/2016 26/05/2016 33 
26/05/2016 02/08/2016 8 
09/09/2016 26/12/2016 48 
26/12/2016 05/05/2017 70 
05/05/2017 07/08/2017 34 
23/11/2017 16/05/2018 114 
01/06/2018 23/08/2018 23 
08/10/2018 29/12/2018 22 
27/02/2019 12/06/2019 45 
29/09/2019 30/03/2020 123 
30/03/2020 04/07/2020 36 
04/07/2020 05/11/2020 64 
20 Nagar 
Parishad, 
Bichhiya 
03/08/2012 to  
02/08/2017 
30 9 3 19/03/2015 24/07/2015 67 
24/07/2015 18/07/2016 300 
14/09/2016 01/03/2017 108 

Implementation of 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act in Madhya Pradesh  
50 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
Urban Local 
Body 
Period of 
Corporation/ 
Council 
No. of Bi-
monthly 
meetings 
to be held 
during the 
period of 
Council 
Total No. 
of Bi-
monthly 
meetings 
held 
during the 
period of 
Council 
No. of 
instances 
at which 
delay in 
conduct of 
Bi-
monthly 
meetings 
occurred 
Details of meetings delayed by more 
than two months 
Date of 
first 
meeting 
Date of 
next 
meeting 
Delay  
(in days) 
03/08/2017 to 
02/08/2022 
30 2 1 09/05/2017 30/12/2019 905 
21 Nagar 
Parishad, 
Churhat 
04/07/2013 to 
25/06/2018 
30 18 10 05/05/2015 21/07/2015 17 
21/07/2015 14/10/2015 25 
05/12/2015 03/03/2016 29 
29/04/2016 05/07/2016 7 
05/07/2016 23/11/2016 81 
23/11/2016 31/01/2017 9 
28/03/2017 10/08/2017 75 
24/08/2017 24/11/2017 32 
03/01/2018 20/03/2018 16 
20/03/2018 22/05/2018 3 
22 Nagar 
Parishad, 
Hatpipliya 
09/01/2015 to 
08/01/2020 
30 20 11 26/03/2015 08/06/2015 14 
30/06/2015 27/09/2015 29 
30/10/2015 09/03/2016 71 
29/06/2016 06/10/2016 39 
06/10/2016 09/03/2017 94 
27/04/2017 30/11/2017 157 
30/11/2017 19/02/2018 21 
19/02/2018 01/05/2018 11 
01/05/2018 07/09/2018 69 
29/09/2018 28/02/2019 92 
28/02/2019 08/07/2019 70 
23 Nagar 
Parishad, 
Ichhawar 
05/01/2015 to 
04/01/2020 
30 31 11 13/04/2015 03/08/2015 52 
03/08/2015 13/10/2015 11 
13/10/2015 26/03/2016 105 
29/04/2016 04/07/2016 6 
04/07/2016 06/01/2017 126 
25/01/2017 16/06/2017 82 
19/02/2018 24/04/2018 4 
24/04/2018 06/07/2018 13 
01/09/2018 28/12/2018 58 

Appendices  
51 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
Urban Local 
Body 
Period of 
Corporation/ 
Council 
No. of Bi-
monthly 
meetings 
to be held 
during the 
period of 
Council 
Total No. 
of Bi-
monthly 
meetings 
held 
during the 
period of 
Council 
No. of 
instances 
at which 
delay in 
conduct of 
Bi-
monthly 
meetings 
occurred 
Details of meetings delayed by more 
than two months 
Date of 
first 
meeting 
Date of 
next 
meeting 
Delay  
(in days) 
18/02/2019 14/06/2019 56 
14/06/2019 25/10/2019 73 
24 Nagar 
Parishad, 
Jawad 
12/01/2015 to 
05/01/2020 
30 17 13 25/02/2015 22/05/2015 26 
22/05/2015 03/09/2015 44 
03/12/2015 08/02/2016 7 
01/08/2016 05/11/2016 36 
05/11/2016 06/01/2017 2 
06/01/2017 20/03/2017 13 
22/04/2017 19/09/2017 90 
19/09/2017 22/12/2017 34 
22/12/2017 20/03/2018 28 
20/03/2018 08/06/2018 20 
08/06/2018 07/09/2018 31 
07/09/2018 31/01/2019 86 
01/03/2019 27/12/2019 241 
25 Nagar 
Parishad, 
Khategaon 
09/01/2015 to 
08/01/2020 
27 27 11 19/03/2015 06/06/2015 19 
05/11/2015 29/03/2016 85 
13/05/2016 21/09/2016 71 
21/09/2016 03/12/2016 13 
06/01/2017 30/03/2017 23 
19/04/2017 21/06/2017 3 
21/06/2017 13/09/2017 24 
27/12/2017 28/09/2018 215 
28/09/2018 20/02/2019 85 
06/03/2019 25/06/2019 51 
25/06/2019 06/11/2019 74 
26 Nagar 
Parishad, 
Kurawar 
12/01/2015 to 
11/01/2020 
30 20 5 23/06/2015 16/03/2016 207 
16/03/2016 24/05/2017 374 
21/12/2017 13/03/2018 22 
23/05/2018 30/07/2018 8 
03/10/2018 26/07/2019 236 

Implementation of 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act in Madhya Pradesh  
52 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
Urban Local 
Body 
Period of 
Corporation/ 
Council 
No. of Bi-
monthly 
meetings 
to be held 
during the 
period of 
Council 
Total No. 
of Bi-
monthly 
meetings 
held 
during the 
period of 
Council 
No. of 
instances 
at which 
delay in 
conduct of 
Bi-
monthly 
meetings 
occurred 
Details of meetings delayed by more 
than two months 
Date of 
first 
meeting 
Date of 
next 
meeting 
Delay  
(in days) 
27 Nagar 
Parishad, 
Laundi 
09/01/2015 to 
01/01/2020 
30 41 3 28/07/2015 04/01/2016 100 
27/06/2017 16/10/2017 51 
23/09/2019 16/12/2019 24 
28 Nagar 
Parishad, 
Mandleshwar 
14/09/2012 to 
17/08/2017  
30 23 5 16/06/2015 04/09/2015 20 
01/01/2016 26/03/2016 25 
04/08/2016 01/11/2016 29 
01/02/2017 22/04/2017 20 
22/04/2017 11/07/2017 20 
11/09/2017 to 
continue 
5 07/11/2017 05/02/2018 30 
05/02/2018 28/06/2018 83 
28/06/2018 04/01/2019 130 
27/02/2019 18/06/2019 51 
28/02/2020 22/06/2020 55 
29 Nagar 
Parishad, 
Manpur 
16/01/2015 to 
12/01/2020 
30 13 10 04/07/2015 11/09/2015 9 
11/09/2015 17/03/2016 128 
24/05/2016 16/08/2016 24 
13/12/2016 25/03/2017 42 
31/03/2017 04/09/2017 97 
04/09/2017 06/11/2017 3 
06/04/2018 07/07/2018 32 
05/09/2018 24/12/2018 50 
14/02/2019 03/06/2019 49 
03/06/2019 09/09/2019 38 
30 Nagar 
Parishad, 
Mau 
15/01/2015 to 
15/01/2020 
30 26 13 28/02/2015 11/05/2015 12 
11/05/2015 14/08/2015 35 
14/08/2015 21/01/2016 100 
21/01/2016 22/03/2016 1 
30/04/2016 13/07/2016 14 
28/11/2016 14/02/2017 18 
04/03/2017 12/05/2017 9 
21/06/2017 06/09/2017 17 
06/09/2017 12/12/2017 37 

Appendices  
53 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
Urban Local 
Body 
Period of 
Corporation/ 
Council 
No. of Bi-
monthly 
meetings 
to be held 
during the 
period of 
Council 
Total No. 
of Bi-
monthly 
meetings 
held 
during the 
period of 
Council 
No. of 
instances 
at which 
delay in 
conduct of 
Bi-
monthly 
meetings 
occurred 
Details of meetings delayed by more 
than two months 
Date of 
first 
meeting 
Date of 
next 
meeting 
Delay  
(in days) 
12/12/2017 22/02/2018 12 
20/04/2018 22/06/2018 3 
22/06/2018 24/08/2018 3 
10/09/2018 25/02/2019 108 
31 Nagar 
Parishad, 
Omkareshwar 
10/01/2013 to 
10/01/2018 
30 23 8 09/04/2015 15/06/2015 7 
14/07/2015 26/09/2015 14 
26/09/2015 30/12/2015 35 
30/12/2015 31/03/2016 32 
31/05/2016 28/01/2017 182 
28/01/2017 18/04/2017 20 
18/04/2017 18/08/2017 62 
18/08/2017 02/11/2017 16 
11/01/2018 to 
continue 
4 02/11/2017 07/03/2018 65 
03/10/2018 16/01/2019 45 
05/03/2019 03/07/2019 60 
03/07/2019 11/05/2020 253 
32 Nagar 
Parishad, 
Satai 
27/01/2015 to 
26/01/2020 
30 21 6 29/06/2015 13/11/2015 77 
11/04/2016 11/08/2016 62 
13/10/2017 16/01/2018 35 
18/09/2018 31/12/2018 44 
27/05/2019 20/08/2019 25 
20/08/2019 24/12/2019 66 
33 Nagar 
Parishad, 
Sultanpur 
07/01/2015 to 
06/01/2020 
30 18 12 21/01/2015 30/03/2015 8 
11/05/2015 01/10/2015 83 
01/10/2015 31/12/2015 31 
28/01/2016 13/06/2016 77 
22/09/2016 28/12/2016 37 
16/02/2017 11/05/2017 24 
14/06/2017 02/10/2017 50 
02/10/2017 18/12/2017 17 
18/12/2017 27/03/2018 39 
27/03/2018 15/06/2018 20 

Implementation of 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act in Madhya Pradesh  
54 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
Urban Local 
Body 
Period of 
Corporation/ 
Council 
No. of Bi-
monthly 
meetings 
to be held 
during the 
period of 
Council 
Total No. 
of Bi-
monthly 
meetings 
held 
during the 
period of 
Council 
No. of 
instances 
at which 
delay in 
conduct of 
Bi-
monthly 
meetings 
occurred 
Details of meetings delayed by more 
than two months 
Date of 
first 
meeting 
Date of 
next 
meeting 
Delay  
(in days) 
05/10/2018 31/12/2018 27 
20/02/2019 05/12/2019 228 
Total     1,011  887         
 

Appendices  
55 
Appendix-5  
(Reference: Paragraph 3.3.3)  
District Planning Committee  
Sl. 
No. 
Name of District  
(Urban Local Body) 
Whether the 
District 
Planning 
Committee  
was 
constituted? 
(Yes/ No) 
If yes, Whether 
the quarterly 
meetings of 
District Planning 
Committee were 
conducted? 
(Yes/ No) 
Details Status of Five year and 
Annual Development Plan 
of the district 
Whether the 
common interests 
of Panchayats 
and 
Municipalities 
were considered? 
(Yes/ No) 
Required 
no. of 
meetings to 
be 
conducted 
Actual no. 
of 
meetings 
conducted 
Short- 
fall 
1 Anuppur Yes Yes 20 8 12 Annual Plan  for two years No 
2 Datia (Badoni) Yes  Yes 20 11 9 Annual Plan  for five years  Yes 
3 Badwani (Sendhwa) Yes Yes 20 12 8 Annual Plan for three years  No 
4 Balaghat Yes Yes 20 9 11 Annual Plan for three years   No 
5 Betul (Bhainsdehi) Yes Yes 20 10 10 Annual Plan for three years No 
6 Bhopal Yes Yes 20 8 12 Annual Plan for five years  No 
7 Mandla (Bichhia) Yes Yes  20 6 14 Not provided Not provided 
8 Burhanpur Yes Yes 20 8 12 Annual Plan for three years No 
9 Ashoknagar (Chanderi) Yes  Yes 20 0 20 Annual Plan  for five years No 
10 Chhatarpur  (Chhatarpur, 
Laundi and Satai) 
Yes Yes 20 9 11 Annual Plan for three years No 
11 Chhindwara and Dongar 
Parasia 
Yes Yes 20 13 7 Annual Plan for three years No 
12 Sidhi (Churhat) Yes Yes 20 4 16 Annual Plan for four years  Yes 
13 Gwalior Yes  Yes 20 0 20 Annual Plan for five years No 
14 Sehore (Ichhawar)  Yes Yes 20 9 11 Not prepared No 
15 Indore (Manpur) Yes Yes 20 8 12 Annual Plan for four years No 

Implementation of 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act in Madhya Pradesh  
56 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of District  
(Urban Local Body) 
Whether the 
District 
Planning 
Committee  
was 
constituted? 
(Yes/ No) 
If yes, Whether 
the quarterly 
meetings of 
District Planning 
Committee were 
conducted? 
(Yes/ No) 
Details Status of Five year and 
Annual Development Plan 
of the district 
Whether the 
common interests 
of Panchayats 
and 
Municipalities 
were considered? 
(Yes/ No) 
Required 
no. of 
meetings to 
be 
conducted 
Actual no. 
of 
meetings 
conducted 
Short- 
fall 
16 Jabalpur (Jabalpur and 
Bhedaghat) 
Yes Yes 20 10 10 Annual Plan for four years Yes 
17 Khandwa (Omkareshwar) Yes Yes 20 8 12 Annual Plan for three years  No 
18 Khargone (Mandleshwar) Yes Yes 20 14 6 Annual Plan for three years  No 
19 Dewas (Khategaon and 
Hatpipliya) 
Yes Yes 20 7 13 Annual Plan for five years No 
20 Bhind (Mau) Yes Yes 20 5 15 Annual Plan for five years Yes 
21 Neemuch Yes Yes 20 7 13 Annual Plan for four years  No 
22 Guna (Raghogarh) Yes  No 20 0 20 Annual Plan for three years. No 
23 Raisen (Mandideep, Raisen and 
Sultanpur) 
Yes Yes 20 10 10 No Yes  
24 Rajgarh (Kurawar, Rajgarh) Yes No 20 0 20 No No 
25 Seoni Yes Yes 20 9 11 Not provided Not provided 
         
 

Appendices  
57 
Appendix-6 
   (Reference: Paragraph 4.1.1.1) 
 Utilisation of Education Cess 
  (₹ in lakh) 
Name of Urban 
Local Body 
Education Cess 
available in five 
years 
Expenditure 
incurred in five 
years from 
Education Cess 
Total amount 
remained 
unspent from 
Education Cess 
Nagar Nigam, 
Chhindwara 
359.13  359.41  -0.28  
Nagar Nigam, Gwalior 3,037.60  847.29  2,190.31  
Nagar Nigam, Jabalpur 5,925.97  5,925.97  0 
Total (Nagar Nigam) 9,322.70 7,132.67 2,190.03 
Nagar Palika Parishad,  
Anuppur 
0.14  0.03  0.11  
Nagar Palika Parishad, 
Balaghat 
188.62  0 188.62  
Nagar Palika, Chanderi 4.26  4.26  0 
Nagar Palika Parishad,  
Chhatarpur 
7.11  0 7.11  
Nagar Palika Parishad, 
Dongar Parasia 
18.06  0 18.06  
Nagar Palika Parishad, 
Mandideep 
188.76  25.66  163.10  
Nagar Palika Parishad, 
Nepanagar 
2.73  0 2.73  
Nagar Palika Parishad, 
Raghogarh 
133.59  13.74  119.85  
Nagar Palika Parishad, 
Raisen 
8.83  1.50  7.33  
Nagar Palika Parishad, 
Rajgarh 
10.45  0 10.45  
Nagar Palika Parishad, 
Sendhwa 
12.63  0 12.63  
Nagar Palika Parishad, 
Seoni 
192.91  6.17  186.74  
Total              (Nagar 
Palika Parishad) 
768.09 51.36 716.73 
Nagar Parishad, Badoni 0 0 0 
Nagar Parishad, 
Bhainsdehi 
9.97  0 9.97  
Nagar Parishad, 
Bhedaghat 
1.08  0 1.08  

Implementation of 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act in Madhya Pradesh  
58 
Name of Urban 
Local Body 
Education Cess 
available in five 
years 
Expenditure 
incurred in five 
years from 
Education Cess 
Total amount 
remained 
unspent from 
Education Cess 
Nagar Parishad, 
Bichhiya 
1.77  0 1.77  
Nagar Parishad, 
Churhat 
4.33  0 4.33  
Nagar Parishad, 
Hatpipliya 
0 0 0 
Nagar Parishad, 
Ichhawar  
3.43  3.50  -0.07  
Nagar Parishad, Jawad 1.03  0 1.03  
Nagar Parishad, 
Khategaon 
1.03  0 1.03  
Nagar Parishad, 
Kurawar  
11.59  0 11.59  
Nagar Parishad, 
Laundi 
0.11  0 0.11  
Nagar Parishad, 
Mandleshwar 
6.12  0 6.12  
Nagar Parishad, 
Manpur 
3.50 0 3.50  
Nagar Parishad, 
Omkareshwar 
3.19  0 3.19  
Nagar Parishad, 
Satai 
0.06  0 0.06  
Nagar Parishad, 
Sultanpur 
0.20  0 0.20  
Total                
(Nagar Parishad) 
47.41 3.50 43.91 
Total 10,138.20  7,187.53  2,950.67  
Total Amount  
(in Crore) 
101.38  71.88  29.51  
 

Appendices  
59 
Appendix-7 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.1.3) 
Short realisation of Property Tax 
  (₹ in crore) 
Year Nagar Nigam Nagar Palika Parishad 
  
Nagar Parishad 
Total 
Demand 
Total 
Collected 
Total 
Outstanding 
Total 
Demand 
Total 
Collected 
Total 
Outstanding 
Total 
Demand 
Total 
Collected 
Total 
Outstanding 
2015-16 298.32 169.54 128.78 19.20 9.47 9.72 3.95 1.02 2.93 
2016-17 378.34 248.65 129.69 20.36 20.25 9.30 4.61 3.75 0.89 
2017-18 407.94 289.05 118.88 23.94 11.44 12.49 4.25 1.23 3.02 
2018-19 427.98 284.25 143.73 23.59 10.51 13.08 4.19 1.26 2.93 
2019-20 458.86 208.28 250.57 28.13 12.28 15.85 4.31 1.06 3.25 
Cumulative Outstanding   269.66 
 
 

Implementation of 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act in Madhya Pradesh  
60 
Appendix-8 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.1.3) 
Short collection of Water User Charges 
                                                                                                                         (₹ in crore) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amount of Water Tax 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 
Total Demand  164.70 186.17 298.63 294.79 439.36 
Collection 42.98 54.36 81.16 78.62 63.96 
Outstanding 121.72 131.81 217.48 216.17 375.40 
Percentage of collection 26.10 29.20 27.18 26.67 14.56 

Appendices  
61 
Appendix-9 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.1.5) 
Levy on Mobile Towers 
                            (Amount in ₹) 
Name of Urban Local 
Body 
Unauthorised Authorised Due for 
renewal 
Total 
Amount 
Collected ( ₹) 
Installation Date 
Nagar Nigam, Bhopal 169 706 185 5,02,80,000 February 2004- 
January 2016 
Nagar Nigam,  
Chhindwara 
4 17 5 12,75,000 June 2015-  
January 2016 
Nagar Nigam, Gwalior 58 70 10 1,31,50,000 Not Provided 
Nagar Nigam,  Jabalpur 0 136 31 1,56,00,000 May 2015- 
September 2016 
Nagar Palika Parishad, 
Anuppur 
0 11 11 1,50,000 December 2005- 
May 2013 
Nagar Palika Parishad, 
Balaghat 
0 12 5 6,00,000 February 2015- 
 January 2016 
Nagar Palika Parishad, 
Chanderi 
0 5 0 2,50,000 Not Required 
Nagar Palika Parishad, 
Chhatarpur 
0 9 0 4,50,000 Not Required 
Nagar Palika Parishad, 
Dongar Parasia 
0 3 3 1,50,000 December 2015-
March 2016 
Nagar Palika Parishad, 
Mandideep 
0 5 1 7,00,000 December 2015 
Nagar Palika Parishad, 
Rajgarh 
0 4 0 1,50,000 Not Required 
Nagar Palika Parishad, 
Raghogarh 
0 11 10 50,000 June 2006-  
May 2009 
Nagar Palika Parishad, 
Raisen 
0 6 5 50,000 April 2010-  
March 2020 
Nagar Palika Parishad, 
Sendhwa 
0 18 17 2,20,000 February 2009-
August 2011 
Nagar Palika Parishad, 
Seoni 
0 16 16 3,60,000 December 2008- 
May 2014 
Nagar Parishad, Badoni 7 0 0 0 Not Provided 
Nagar Parishad, 
Bhainsdehi 
0 4 4 40,000 September 2006-
October 2009 
Nagar Parishad, 
Bhedaghat 
0 4 2 25,000  April 2007 
Nagar Parishad, 
Bichhia 
0 6 5 Not Provided April 2007-  
March 2010 
Nagar Parishad, 
Churhat 
0 9 7 1,65,000 January 2006-
December 2015 

Implementation of 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act in Madhya Pradesh  
62 
Name of Urban Local 
Body 
Unauthorised Authorised Due for 
renewal 
Total 
Amount 
Collected ( ₹) 
Installation Date 
Nagar Parishad, 
Ichhawar 
0 2 1 50,000 April 2015 
Nagar Parishad, Jawad 0 6 4 75,000 December 2006-
December 2015 
Nagar Parishad, 
Khategaon 
0 4 2 1,00,000 March 2006 
Nagar Parishad, 
Kurawar 
0 3 0 Not Available Not Available 
Nagar Parishad, Laundi 0 5 0 85,000 Not Required 
Nagar Parishad, 
Mandleshwar 
0 8 5 50,000 March 2008- 
July 2011 
Nagar Parishad, 
Manpur 
0 1 1 50,000 Not Required 
Nagar Parishad, Mau 3 1 0 25,000 Not Provided 
Nagar Parishad, Satai 0 1 0 25,000 Not Required 
Nagar Parishad, 
Sultanpur 
0 4 4 0 2005-2010 
 Total 241 1,087 334 8,41,25,000   
 
 
                                                                                                                      
                                      
 
 
 
 

Appendices  
63 
Appendix-10 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.2) 
Delay in approval of Budget 
Name of Urban Local Body Budget delayed year Budget passed by 
Council (31 March 
onward) 
Delay  
(in days) 
Nagar Palika Parishad, Mandideep 2015-16 10/6/2015 71 
Nagar Palika Parishad, Rajgarh 2016-17 13/6/2016 74 
2018-19 7/5/2018 37 
Nagar Parishad, Ichhawar Not available in the Parishad. 
Nagar Parishad, Kurawar  Not available in the Parishad. 
Nagar Parishad, Sultanpur Not available in the Parishad. 
Nagar Palika Parishad, Anuppur 2015-16 27/7/2015 118 
2016-17 6/6/2016 67 
2017-18 24/4/2017 24 
Nagar Parishad, Bhainsdehi 2015-16 5/6/2015 66 
2016-17 18/4/2016 18 
Nagar Palika Parishad, Chhatarpur 2015-16 7/9/2015 160 
2016-17 21/4/2016 21 
Nagar Parishad, Laundi 2016-17 19/5/2016 49 
2017-18 5/8/2017 127 
2018-19 15/7/2018 106 
2019-20 6/7/2019 97 
Nagar Parishad, Satai 2015-16 13/4/2015 13 
2019-20 17/6/2019 78 
Nagar Palika Parishad,  Dongar Parasia 2016-17 22/4/2016 22 
2017-18 18/4/2017 18 
2018-19 16/4/2018 16 
Nagar Parishad, Khategaon 2019-20 4/4/2019 4 
Nagar Parishad, Hatpipliya 2017-18 Not available in the Parishad. 
2018-19 5/4/2018 5 
2019-20 Not available in the Parishad. 
Nagar Parishad, Badoni 2015-16 Information not provided by the Urban 
Local Body. 
2016-17 20/5/2016 50 
2017-18 9/7/2017 100 
2018-19 Information not provided by the Urban 
Local Body. 
2019-20 Information not provided by the Urban 
Local Body. 
Nagar Parishad, Mau 2017-18 17/4/2017 17 

Implementation of 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act in Madhya Pradesh  
64 
Name of Urban Local Body Budget delayed year Budget passed by 
Council (31 March 
onward) 
Delay  
(in days) 
Nagar Parishad, Jawad 2018-19 13/4/2018 13 
Nagar Parishad, Mandleshwar 2015-16 8/4/2015 8 
2017-18 2/5/2017 32 
Nagar Parishad, Manpur 2016-17 20/5/2016 50 
2017-18 22/1/2018 297 
2019-20 6/8/2019 128 
Nagar Palika Parishad,  Nepanagar 2016-17 13/4/2016 13 
2019-20 2/8/2019 124 
Nagar Parishad, Omkareshwar 2015-16 14/7/2015 105 
2016-17 4/4/2016 4 
2017-18 22/9/2017 175 
Nagar Parishad, Bhedaghat 2016-17 5/5/2016 35 
2017-18 20/6/2017 81 
2018-19 15/2/2019 321 
2019-20 18/1/2020 293 
Nagar Parishad, Churhat 2015-16 25/6/2015 86 
2016-17 4/5/2016 34 
2017-18 8/3/2019 707 
2018-19 25/6/2019 451 
2019-20 25/6/2019 86 
Nagar Palika Parishad,  Seoni 2015-16 2/6/2015 63 
2016-17 8/6/2016 69 
2019-20 31/5/2019 61 
    
    
 
 
  
 

Appendices  
65 
Appendix-11  
(Reference: Paragraph 4.3) 
Service Level Benchmark 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
selected 
Urban Local   
Bodies 
Water Supply Sewerage Solid Waste Management 
Coverage of 
Water Supply 
Connections 
(Percentage) 
Per Capita 
Supply of 
Water 
(in Litre) 
Extent of 
Metering 
(Percentage) 
Continuity 
of Water 
Supplied 
(Hours) 
Coverage of 
Toilets 
(Percentage) 
Coverage of 
Sewerage 
Network 
(Percentage) 
Adequacy of 
Sewerage 
Treatment 
Capacity 
(Percentage) 
Household 
Level 
Coverage 
(Percentage) 
Efficiency in 
Collection of 
Solid Waste 
(Percentage) 
Extent of 
Segregation 
of SWM 
(Percentage) 
Tar- 
get 
Achieve-
ment 
Tar-
get 
Achieve-
ment 
Tar- 
get 
Achie-
vement  
Tar- 
get 
Achie-
vement  
Tar- 
get 
Achie-
vement  
Tar- 
get 
Achie-
vement  
Tar- 
get 
Achie-
vement  
Tar- 
get 
Achie-
vement  
Tar- 
get 
Achie-
vement  
Tar- 
get 
Achie-
vement 
1 Nagar Nigam, 
Bhopal 100 95 135 135 100 78 24 4 100 100 100 45 100 90 100 100 100 100 100 100 
2 Nagar Nigam, 
Chhindwara 100 91 135 135 100 65 24 1 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 85 100 100 
3 Nagar Nigam, 
Gwalior 100 61 135 125 20 4 4-6 1-2 93 75 80 70 90 80 100 90 100 95 30 97 
4 Nagar Nigam, 
Jabalpur 100 81 135 135 100 5 24 4 100 100 50 32 70 33 100 100 100 100 100 75 
5 
Nagar 
Parishad, 
Anuppur 
85 35 90 70 100 0 2 1 60 60 47 0 0 0 100 90 92 70 62 0 
6 
Nagar Palika 
Parishad, 
Balaghat 
80 57 100 100 10 10 3 1 100 100 0 0 0 0 100 100 100 100 75 75 
7 
Nagar Palika 
Parishad, 
Chanderi 
100 76 135 135 90 0 24 2 100 93 0 0 0 0 100 100 100 100 100 30 
8 
Nagar Palika 
Parishad,  
Chhatarpur 
90 80 70 70 0 0 4 2 100 100 0 0 0 0 100 100 100 90 100 80 
9 
Nagar Palika 
Parishad, 
Dongar 
Parasiya 
100 80 70 65 0 0 1 1 100 90 0 0 0 0 100 60 100 80 0 0 

Implementation of 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act in Madhya Pradesh  
66 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
selected 
Urban Local   
Bodies 
Water Supply Sewerage Solid Waste Management 
Coverage of 
Water Supply 
Connections 
(Percentage) 
Per Capita 
Supply of 
Water 
(in Litre) 
Extent of 
Metering 
(Percentage) 
Continuity 
of Water 
Supplied 
(Hours) 
Coverage of 
Toilets 
(Percentage) 
Coverage of 
Sewerage 
Network 
(Percentage) 
Adequacy of 
Sewerage 
Treatment 
Capacity 
(Percentage) 
Household 
Level 
Coverage 
(Percentage) 
Efficiency in 
Collection of 
Solid Waste 
(Percentage) 
Extent of 
Segregation 
of SWM 
(Percentage) 
Tar- 
get 
Achieve-
ment 
Tar-
get 
Achieve-
ment 
Tar- 
get 
Achie-
vement  
Tar- 
get 
Achie-
vement  
Tar- 
get 
Achie-
vement  
Tar- 
get 
Achie-
vement  
Tar- 
get 
Achie-
vement  
Tar- 
get 
Achie-
vement  
Tar- 
get 
Achie-
vement  
Tar- 
get 
Achie-
vement 
10 
Nagar Palika 
Parishad, 
Mandideep 
65 65 60 60 50 0 1 1 100 91 0 0 0 0 100 85 100 90 100 60 
11 
Nagar Palika 
Parishad, 
Nepanagar 
90 60 135 80 0 0 1 1 100 70 0 0 0 0 85 95 100 90 10 5 
12 
Nagar Palika 
Parishad, 
Raghogarh 
100 93 120 100 100 0 24 1 100 100 0 0 0 0 100 100 100 80 100 50 
13 
Nagar Palika 
Parishad, 
Raisen 
100 79 135 135 100 0 10 8 100 95 100 17 100 20 100 100 100 80 100 50 
14 
Nagar Palika 
Parishad, 
Rajgarh 
95 95 98 98 0 0  45 
min 
45 
 min 100 100 0 0 0 0 98 98 98 98 90 90 
15 
Nagar Palika 
Parishad, 
Sendhwa 
95 90 135 135 95 0 1 1 100 100 0 0 0 0 75 70 85 80 0 0 
16 
Nagar Palika 
Parishad, 
Seoni 
100 87 80 70 0 0 1 1 100 95 0 0 0 0 100 100 100 100 100 60 
17 
Nagar 
Parishad, 
Badoni 
100 90 135 100 100 0 24 1 100 100 0 0 0 0 100 80 100 80 100 50 
18 
Nagar 
Parishad, 
Bhainsdehi 
100 90 85 80 25 0 1 1 100 80 0 0 0 0 100 70 100 65 100 50 

Appendices  
67 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
selected 
Urban Local   
Bodies 
Water Supply Sewerage Solid Waste Management 
Coverage of 
Water Supply 
Connections 
(Percentage) 
Per Capita 
Supply of 
Water 
(in Litre) 
Extent of 
Metering 
(Percentage) 
Continuity 
of Water 
Supplied 
(Hours) 
Coverage of 
Toilets 
(Percentage) 
Coverage of 
Sewerage 
Network 
(Percentage) 
Adequacy of 
Sewerage 
Treatment 
Capacity 
(Percentage) 
Household 
Level 
Coverage 
(Percentage) 
Efficiency in 
Collection of 
Solid Waste 
(Percentage) 
Extent of 
Segregation 
of SWM 
(Percentage) 
Tar- 
get 
Achieve-
ment 
Tar-
get 
Achieve-
ment 
Tar- 
get 
Achie-
vement  
Tar- 
get 
Achie-
vement  
Tar- 
get 
Achie-
vement  
Tar- 
get 
Achie-
vement  
Tar- 
get 
Achie-
vement  
Tar- 
get 
Achie-
vement  
Tar- 
get 
Achie-
vement  
Tar- 
get 
Achie-
vement 
19 
Nagar 
Parishad, 
Bhedaghat 
70 70 70 70 0 0 4 4 100 80 0 0 0 0 100 100 0 0 0 0 
20 
Nagar 
Parishad, 
Bichhia 
100 90 90 80 0 0 1 1 100 70 0 0 0 0 100 95 100 90 100 70 
21 
Nagar 
Parishad, 
Churhat 
90 60 70 55 100 0 1 1 100 100 50 0 100 0 90 50 100 50 100 0 
22 
Nagar 
Parishad, 
Hatpipliya 
100 80 135 70 0 0 3 16 min 100 90 0 0 0 0 100 100 100 100 0 0 
23 
Nagar 
Parishad, 
Ichhawar 
100 80 80 75 0 0 1 1 100 80 0 0 0 0 100 80 100 90 100 80 
24 
Nagar 
Parishad, 
Jawad 
100 100 135 95 0 0 1 54 min 100 100 0 0 0 0 100 100 100 100 0 60 
25 
Nagar 
Parishad, 
Khategaon 
92 86 135 110 0 0 1 54 min 100 90 0 0 0 0 100 92 100 85 50 10 
26 
Nagar 
Parishad, 
Kurawar 
75 60 70 60 25 0 1 1 75 75 0 0 0 0 100 75 100 80 100 70 
27 
Nagar 
Parishad, 
Laundi 
80 50 75 75 0 0 1 1 100 95 0 0 0 0 100 100 100 100 100 90 

Implementation of 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act in Madhya Pradesh  
68 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
selected 
Urban Local   
Bodies 
Water Supply Sewerage Solid Waste Management 
Coverage of 
Water Supply 
Connections 
(Percentage) 
Per Capita 
Supply of 
Water 
(in Litre) 
Extent of 
Metering 
(Percentage) 
Continuity 
of Water 
Supplied 
(Hours) 
Coverage of 
Toilets 
(Percentage) 
Coverage of 
Sewerage 
Network 
(Percentage) 
Adequacy of 
Sewerage 
Treatment 
Capacity 
(Percentage) 
Household 
Level 
Coverage 
(Percentage) 
Efficiency in 
Collection of 
Solid Waste 
(Percentage) 
Extent of 
Segregation 
of SWM 
(Percentage) 
Tar- 
get 
Achieve-
ment 
Tar-
get 
Achieve-
ment 
Tar- 
get 
Achie-
vement  
Tar- 
get 
Achie-
vement  
Tar- 
get 
Achie-
vement  
Tar- 
get 
Achie-
vement  
Tar- 
get 
Achie-
vement  
Tar- 
get 
Achie-
vement  
Tar- 
get 
Achie-
vement  
Tar- 
get 
Achie-
vement 
28 
Nagar 
Parishad, 
Manpur 
100 90 95 70 0 0 1 1 100 100 0 0 0 0 100 100 100 95 0 10 
29 
Nagar 
Parishad, 
Mandleshwar  
100 95 130 70 100 0 40 min  45 min 100 100 100 0 100 0 100 90 100 75 100 25 
30 Nagar 
Parishad, Mau  100 90 70 60 100 0 24 2 100 100 0 0 0 0 100 70 100 60 100 10 
31 
Nagar 
Parishad, 
Omkaresh- 
war 
90 70 135 70 75 0 1 1 90 100 50 35 50 30 100 100 100 100 100 60 
32 
Nagar 
Parishad, 
Satai 
100 42 70 50 0 0 24 1 100 90 100 70 100 20 100 95 100 95 100 80 
33 
Nagar 
Parishad, 
Sultanpur 
100 90 135 135 0 0 4 4 100 100 0 0 0 0 100 100 100 85 0 50 
  Maximum 100 100 135 135 100 78 24 8 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 
  Minimum 65 35 60 50 0 0 40 min  16 min 60 60 0 0 0 0 75 50 0 0 0 0 
 