   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
  
 
 
 
 
Report of the  
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
on Performance Audit of  
Direct Benefit Transfer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Government of Rajasthan 
Report No. 5 of the year 2022 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Report of the  
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
on Performance Audit of  
Direct Benefit Transfer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government of Rajasthan 
Report No. 5 of the year 2022 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
https://cag.gov.in 
 
 
 
 
 

i 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
Table of Contents 
 
Reference to 
Paragraph Page 
Preface  iii 
Executive Summary  v 
Chapter I: Introduction 
DBT in the State 1.1 1 
Selection of Department and schemes 1.2 1 
Brief details of the selected schemes 1.2.1 3 
Audit scope, selection of districts and lower level units and 
Audit Methodology 
1.2.2 4 
Audit Objectives 1.3 6 
Audit Criteria  1.4 6 
RajSSP portal of Integrated Financial Management System  1.5 7 
DBT process in social security pensions 1.6 7 
Good Practices 1.7 10 
Action taken by State Government on interim audit 
recommendations 
1.8 11 
Acknowledgement 1.9 12 
Chapter II: Implementation of DBT in Social Security Pension Schemes 
Constitution of Committees for approval of sanctions      2.1 13 
Sanction of applications 2.2 14 
Sanction of Ekal Nari pension  2.3 15 
Sanction  of Old Age Pension  2.4 16 
System of physical verification of beneficiaries 2.5 18 
Post audit of auto-escalated applications  2.6 22 
Rates of pension paid to the beneficiaries  2.7 23 
Details of Bhamashah/Jan-Aadhaar/Aadhaar number 2.8 24 
Updating of data in cases of death of a beneficiary 2.9 25 
Systemic issues of RajSSP 2.10 26 
Chapter III: Infrastructure, Organization and Management of DBT in the 
State 
State DBT Portal and integration with DBT Bharat portal 3.1 35 
Constitution of Advisory Board 3.2 36 
Functioning of the State DBT cell  3.3 37 
Chapter IV: Delivery of benefits to the intended beneficiaries and the 
grievance redressal mechanism 
Timely payment of pension 4.1 41 
Payments of pension under CMOASPS and CMENSPS 4.2 44 
Procedure to address pension payment failure 4.3 45 
Grievance redressal cell  4.4 50 
Redressal of the grievances registered on RajSSP portal 4.5 50 
 

Table of content 
ii 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
 
List of Annexures 
Number Particulars Page 
A Statement showing details of selection of Districts, lower 
level units and beneficiaries 
55 
B Statement showing details of filters and tables used while 
analysis of Data Dump  
57 
C 
Screenshot of the table ‘SSP Payment Recovery’ of RajSSP 
containing absurd recovery reasons and details of weak input 
controls 
64 
D Statement showing details of the beneficiaries whose 
applications for pension under CMOASPS were rejected 
65 
E Statement showing details of payment of pension after 
death/marriage due to wrong annual verification 
66 
F Statement showing details of Auto -escalated cases pending 
Post-audit beyond 60 days 
68 
G Statement showing details of pensioners found ineligible in 
post-audit 
70 
H Statement showing Duplicate beneficiaries 75 
I Statement showing details of double payment to beneficiaries 76 
J Statement showing d etails of beneficiaries not having 
Aadhaar/ Jan-Aadhaar 
77 
K Screenshot of ‘Husband Divorce Issuing Authority’ table of 
RajSSP not showing required information 
89 
L Screenshot of grievance redressal table in RajSSP without 
description of the complaints  
90 
M Screenshot of Pensioner's Payment Register (OAP 7) of 
RajSSP erroneously showing payment of pension 
91 
N Screenshot showing Pension payments not having TV 
number 
92 
O Screenshots of OAP 7 and Service Guarantee reports of 
RajSSP showing mismatched information regarding payment 
of pension of the same beneficiary 
94 
P Statement showing details of beneficiaries whose pension 
arrears were not paid   
95 
Q Statement showing details of beneficiaries of CMWPS (now 
CMENSPS) whose pension was stopped 
107 
R Screenshot showing unattended complaints on RajSSP Portal 108 
 

iii 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
Preface 
This Report has been prepared for submission to the Governor of Rajasthan 
under Article 151 of the Constitution of India. 
Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) is a governance regime which ensures simple 
and user -friendly Government to People interface and delivers entitlements 
directly into the bank accounts of the beneficiaries removing leakages, reducing 
delays and enhancing financial inclusion.  
This Report covering the period April 2017 to July 2020 contains the results of 
performance audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ relating to two selected social 
security pension schemes. 
The performance audit  has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing 
Standards issued by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
 

v 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
Executive Summary 
Purpose to undertake this audit 
DBT is a major government reform initiative envisaging simpler and faster flow 
of funds to the right beneficiaries. With the outbreak of the COVID -19 
pandemic and the imposition of lockdown and social distancing norms, DBT 
emerged as a boon in providing succour and relief to people. This performance 
audit covered two schemes under the Social Justice and Empowerment 
Department i.e. Chief Min ister Old Age Samman Pension Scheme and Chief 
Minister Ekal Nari Samman Pension Scheme. Audit focused on coverage, 
identification of beneficiaries, efficiency and design of payment process. The 
objective of Audit was to assess and evaluate the State’s performance in 
implementation of DBT to minimize intermediary levels, delay in payments to 
intended beneficiaries and pilferage and duplication. 
Audit also checked whether the infrastructure, organization and management of 
DBT were adequate and effective and beneficiaries actually received the 
benefits.  
Further, analysis of the data dump of RajSSP1 was carried out to ensure whether 
the scheme data was reliable, accurate and complete, data of all beneficiaries 
was digitized, controls existed to prevent errors in beneficiary data and failed 
transactions were tracked, monitored and reconciled. 
Results in brief 
There were delays in sanction and payment of pensions due to which the 
beneficiaries were deprived of the scheme benefits for the delay period. 
Pensions were sanctioned to applicants who had not attained the minimum age 
of eligibility on the date of application whereas in certain cases applications of 
eligible applicants were rejected, indicating monitoring failures.  
Process of Physical verification was not found to be robust. The Department 
lacked a system to periodically review eligibility of beneficiaries to weed out 
ineligible cases and identify cases of erroneous physical verification. 
Mandatory post-audit of the auto-escalated applications was not conducted and 
recovery was pending in i nstances of payment of pension in  ineligible auto-
sanctioned applications. Double pensions were paid to beneficiaries who did not 
have unique IDs.  
Systemic issues of RajSSP  such as lack of multi -factor authentication, lack of 
updates to system requirement specifications and lack of implementation of 
 
1 RajSSP portal has been developed by NIC for SJED and is utilised by SJED for the 
implementation of social security pension schemes. 

Executive Summary 
vi 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
business continuity p lan / disaster recov ery plan were noticed, along with 
deficiencies in the input, processing and output controls. 
The State DBT portal did not contain important scheme details of the State DBT 
schemes such as number of beneficiaries in a scheme, amount transferred to the 
beneficiaries, month-wise/year-wise DBT transfers, savings due to DBT, etc.  
Significant pe ndency was noticed in the disposal of grievances/queries 
pertaining to CMOASPS and CMENSPS.  
Principal findings and recommendations of the Performance Audit 
The chapter wise audit findings that led to audit conclusions and 
recommendations are as follows. 
Chapter II: Implementation of DBT in Social Security Pension Schemes  
• Irregularities like dead beneficiaries being verified as ‘alive’, pension of 
beneficiaries who were alive stopped on being erroneously verified as 
‘dead’ and applicants found ineligible during verification being marked as 
‘verified’ for subsequent payments were found in the system of physical 
verification of beneficiaries.   
(Paragraph 2.5) 
• Cases of auto verification/sanction were not being post -audited by the 
sanctioning authorities and responsibility of the concerned officers was 
not being fixed in cases where auto verification/sanction led to wrongful 
payment of pension. 
(Paragraph 2.6) 
• Unique IDs were not linked to the Pension Payment Orders (PPOs) which 
led to duplication of beneficiaries and instances of double payment of 
pension. The Department failed to undertake focussed intervention in 
getting unique IDs for all the beneficiaries and linking their PPOs with 
these unique IDs. 
(Paragraph 2.8) 
• Information Tech nology related issues such as lack of multi -factor 
authentication, lack of updates to system requirement specifications and 
lack of implementation of business continuity plan / disaster recovery plan 
were noticed. 
(Paragraph 2.10) 
Recommendations: 
• Harmonise Pension Rules with Jan -Aadhaar as the information 
pertaining to eligibility of the beneficiaries is being fetched from Jan -
Aadhaar for all the social security pension schemes. 

Executive Summary 
vii 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
• Incorporate a feature in RajSSP  which highlights the cases involving 
modification of those beneficiary details in Jan -Aadhaar database which 
are relevant to the eligibility for pension schemes for further scrutiny by 
the Department.  
• Take steps to make the process of physical verificati on robust while 
ensuring accountability for the instances of erroneous verification and 
sanction.  
• Incorporate in the system of annual physical verification a comprehensive 
evaluation of the eligibility and validation of basic details such as bank 
account numbers of beneficiaries every year.  
• Implement the feature of automatic transfer of eligible beneficiaries from 
CMOASPS to CMENSPS on RajSSP  and also extend this facility to 
‘Separated’ and ‘Divorced’ beneficiaries in addition to ‘Widows’. An MIS 
report on RajSSP regarding beneficiaries of CMOASPS eligible for 
transfer to CMENSPS may be helpful to monitor any pendency in such 
transfers. 
• Ensure that Jan-Aadhaar IDs of the remaining beneficiaries are updated 
on RajSSP and all the PPOs are linked to the Jan-Aadhaar IDs in a time-
bound manner so that the RajSSP system is able to detect and prevent 
cases of duplicate beneficiaries and double payments. 
• Make efforts to plug the loopholes in the application controls of RajSSP 
to ensure data security, accuracy, validity and enhance the capability of 
RajSSP in efficient and effective implementation of the schemes. 
• A nodal officer may be nominated by the State Government to monitor and 
manage aspects such as validity, integrity and security of the data in the 
IT systems of the Department in a dedicated and focused manner. 
Chapter III: Infrastructure, Organization and Management of DBT in State 
• The State DBT Portal (Jan-Aadhaar portal) was not integrated with DBT 
Bharat portal. Important details of DBT schemes such as number of 
beneficiaries, amount of benefit transfer per beneficiary, month -
wise/year-wise DBT transfers, and savings due to DBT etc. were not 
available on the portal. It was also noticed that the limited scheme data 
available on the state DBT Portal was not updated in real time.  
(Paragraph 3.1) 
• State DBT cell was not involved in development of scheme/department -
specific ICT applications and the development of such applications was 
being handled by the concerned Departments.  Training/ 
seminar/workshop for capacity building of State officials have not been 
organized.  
(Paragraphs 3.2 and 3.3) 
Recommendations   
The State Government may:  

Executive Summary 
viii 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
• ensure the availability of scheme -wise information of all DBT schemes 
in the state on the State DBT portal and its proper linking with the DBT 
Bharat portal;  
• make provision of expert technical support to enable State DBT cell to 
effectively function as no dal point for DBT related matters of the state 
as envisaged. 
Chapter IV: Delivery of benefits to the intended beneficiaries and the 
grievance redressal mechanism 
• The payments of pension were made with significant delays as against the 
timeline prescribed by the Pension rules.  
(Paragraph 4.1) 
• Recoveries pertaining to excess/irregular pension payments were pending. 
(Paragraph 4.2) 
• Shortcomings were noticed in the procedure to address pension payment 
failures with no provision to inform beneficiaries about such failures and 
the beneficiaries being subjected to a protracted process with redundant 
steps for rectification of details. 
(Paragraph 4.3) 
• A dedicated body to deal with DBT related complaints and grievances of 
beneficiaries was not set up by DBT cell/ SJED. Significant pendency was 
noticed in the disposal of grievances/queries pertaining to CMOASPS and 
CMENSPS registered on RajSSP. 
(Paragraphs 4.4 and 4.5) 
Recommendations 
The State government may:  
• analyse the reasons for delayed payments and ensure pension payments 
are done within the timelines as prescribed by Pension rules; 
• provide the necessary information through means such as SMS  and 
facilitate the beneficiaries in cases of Pension payment failure; 
• take steps to streamline the procedure for rectification of beneficiary 
details such that the Jan -Aadhaar details, on being updated after due 
verification, are automatically approved for all the pension payments 
linked with Jan-Aadhaar;  
• constitute a dedicated Grievance Redressal Cell to provide speedy and 
effective resolution of complaints/grievances. 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Chapter – I 
Introduction  

1 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
Chapter I  
Introduction  
Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) is a major reform initiative of the Government 
of India to ensure better and timely delivery of benefits from Government to the 
people. This marks a paradigm shift in the process of delivering benefits like 
wage payments, fuel subsidies, food grain subsidies etc. directly into the bank 
accounts of the beneficiaries, removing leakages and enhancing financial 
inclusion2. DBT envisions  a governance regime which ensures a simple and 
user-friendly Government to People interface and directly delivers entitlements 
to eligible individuals and households in a fair, transparent, efficient and reliable 
manner.  
1.1 DBT in the State  
Rajasthan, being the largest state of the country in terms of area and having a 
large population, has its unique challenges in delivering government services to 
the residents living in far-flung areas. Hence, robust electronic mode of service 
delivery was needed, to do away with the deficiencies of physical delivery, so 
that the benefits of public welfare can be delivered at the door -step to the 
residents in a transparent and leak proof manner. In Rajasthan, different 
departments are running schemes for the electronic delivery of benefits and 
government services directly t o the beneficiaries. A State DBT cell in the 
Planning Department was established, under Bhamashah scheme, in 2016. 
The State Government launched Bhamashah scheme in 2008 for financial 
inclusion, which was restructured in 2014 and in 2017. Bhamashah Act 3 was 
passed for direct transfer of public welfare benefits and services by capturing 
the demographic information of individuals residing in the State and providing 
them with a unique ID linked with Aadhaar. Under the scheme, 164 social 
welfare schemes of the state were notified 4 for delivering benefits in cash and 
kind through Bhamashah platform. The Bhamashah Act was replaced by the 
Jan-Aadhaar Act 5 in 202 0.The role of the Bhamashah scheme (now Jan -
Aadhaar scheme) was to capture the demographic information of the 
beneficiaries such as gender, date of birth, name of family members, bank 
account details and to serve as a proof of identity.  
1.2 Selection of Department and schemes  
The selection of the Department was done on the basis of highest expenditure 
on DBT payments incurred in the State during the period 2017 -18 to 2019-20. 
The details are given in table 1 below: 
 
2  Guidelines for State DBT Cell by DBT Mission under Cabinet Secretariat. 
3  Rajasthan Bhamashah (Direct Transfer of Public Welfare Benefits and Delivery of Services) 
Act, 2017 
4  161 schemes vide notification dated 6th February 2017 and 03 schemes vide notification dated 
5thDecember 2017. 
5  Rajasthan Jan-Aadhaar Authority Act, 2020 

Chapter-I Introduction 
2 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
Table 1: DBT Expenditure incurred by various departments 
during 2017-18 to 2019-20  
(₹ in crore) 
S. No. Name of Department Cumulative DBT 
Expenditure 
1 Social Justice and Empowerment  18,753.57 
2 Medical, Health and Family Welfare 759.14 
3 Labour 713.89 
4 School Education and Language  606.13 
5 Skill, Employment and 
Entrepreneurship 
402.96 
6 Higher and Technical Education 20.53 
7 Information and Public Relation 0.06 
Source: DBT Bharat portal and information provided by the Departments  
Thus, the Social Justice and Empowerment Department (SJED) of the 
Government of Rajasthan (GoR) was selected for the Performance Audit (PA). 
SJED acts as the nodal department primarily focussing on  educational and 
socio-economic development. It implements the upliftment programmes for the 
Scheduled Caste, Scheduled Tribes, Economical Backward Classes, Other 
Backward Classes, Special Backward Classes, along with  welfare of specially 
abled, destitute and economically weaker children, women and aged citizens . 
The Department is entrusted with the following tasks: 
• Socio-economic development of the targeted groups of society. 
• Educational enhancement of targeted groups by way of scholarships and 
hostel facilities. 
• Schemes for social security to old, specially abled and widow/destitute 
etc. 
• Programs for rehabilitation of drug addicted persons, bootleggers, 
unclaimed women etc. 
Further, within SJED, the schemes with highest expenditure were as under: - 
Table 2: SJED schemes with highest expenditure  
(₹ in crore) 
S. 
No. 
Name of scheme Amount of DBT transfers in the scheme Total  
2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 
1 CM Old Age Samman 
Pension Scheme 
2,908.52 2,905.81 4,423.84 10,238.17 
2 CM Ekal Nari Samman 
Pension Scheme 
550.19 1,469.40 1,793.66 3,813.25 
3 CM Vishesh Yogyajan 
Samman Pension 
Scheme 
298.48 388.47 448.76 1,135.71 
Source: Information provided by SJED 

Chapter-I Introduction 
 
3 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
The two schemes6 with the highest expenditure under SJED i.e. Chief Minister 
Old Age Samman Pension Scheme (CMOASPS) and Chief Minister Ekal Nari 
Samman Pension Scheme (CMENSPS) were selected for the PA.  
The year -wise position of beneficiaries in these  two social securit y pension 
schemes in the State was as under: 
Table 3: Position of Beneficiaries  
S. No. Name of Scheme No. of Beneficiaries 
2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 
1 CMOASPS 31,59,187 36,99,340 42,56,407 44,39,776 
2 CMENSPS 13,60,484 14,48,304 15,56,442 15,79,061 
Source: Information provided by SJED 
1.2.1 Brief details of the selected Schemes 
CMOASPS and CMENSPS have been implemented by the SJED, Government 
of Rajasthan since 1974 to fulfill the mandate given to states under article 41 of 
the Constitution of India to provide public assistance to its citizens in case of 
destitution, old age, sickness and disablement7 etc. Both these pension schemes 
are now governed by the Rajasthan Social Security Old age, Widow, Separated 
and Divorced Pension Rules, 2013 (Pension Rules). 
(i) Chief Minister Old Age Samman Pension Scheme 
The scheme envisages payment of pension to residents of Rajasthan who have 
attained 58 (men)/ 55 (women) years of age with the following eligibility 
criteria: 
(a) They and their spouse do not have a regular source of income or 
(b) The annual income of applicant and his/ her spouse from all so urces is 
below ₹ 48000 per annum or 
(c) Is a member of a BPL or Antyodaya family or 
(d) Belongs to Sahariya/Kathodi/Kherwa caste or is a member of 
Astha8card holding family. 
Further, if the applicant himself/herself or husband or wife or son are serving in 
the Central Government, other State Government, State Government, State 
Undertaking, or are a pensioner of Central Government, other State 
 
6 The schemes were renamed from Chief Minister Old Age Pension Scheme (CMOAPS) and 
Chief Minister Widow Pension Scheme (CMWPS)  to CMOASPS and CMENSPS 
respectively vide letter date d 04-06-2013.  However, in data dump their names were still 
reflected as per the old nomenclature. 
7  https://ssp.rajasthan.gov.in/LoginContent/MidLogin.aspx  
8 Astha is a Government of Rajasthan scheme in which families with at least two members 
having more than 40 per cent  disability and annual family income below ₹1.20 lakh are 
provided benefits such as free medical treatment, ration etc. at par with BPL families.  

Chapter-I Introduction 
4 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
Government, State Government, State Undertaking, they will not be eligible to 
receive pension under this scheme. 
Under the scheme, a pension of ₹750 is paid for age below 75 years and ₹1000 
for age 75 years and above per month to eligible beneficiaries directly in their 
bank accounts. 
(ii) Chief Minister Ekal Nari Samman Pension Scheme 
The scheme envisages payment of pension to Widowed/ Separated/ Divorced 
women of 18 years and above who are residents of Rajasthan with the following 
eligibility criteria: 
(a) Is a member of a BPL or Antyodaya family or 
(b) Belongs to Sahariya/Kathodi/Kherwa caste or is a member of Astha card 
holding family or 
(c) HIV / AIDS positive and registered with State AIDS Control Society or 
(d) Do not have a regular source of her annual income or the income from 
all sources is below ₹48,000 per annum. 
Further, if the applicant herself or son are serving in the Central Government, 
other State Government, State Government, State Undertaking, or are a 
pensioner of Central Government, other State Government, State Government, 
State Und ertaking, they will not be eligible to receive pension under this 
scheme. 
Under the scheme, eligible beneficiaries get a monthly pension of ₹500 from 
age 18 years to less than 55, ₹ 750 from age 55 to less than 60, ₹1,000 from age 
60 to less than 75 and ₹ 1,500 for 75 years and above. 
1.2.2 Audit scope, Selection of Districts and lower-level units and Audit 
Methodology 
A. Audit Scope 
The period covered under the audit was from April 2017 to July 2020. The IT 
platform being used for DBT/in-cash transfer to the beneficiaries was examined. 
Additionally, Audit also focused on transfer of benefits to the beneficiaries to 
examine whether and to what extent beneficiaries actually received the benefits 
and the related issues in the scheme implementation such as del ays, grievance 
redressal, etc. 
B. Selection of Districts, lower-level units and Beneficiaries 
Keeping in view the spread of Covid -19, the field audits had been limited to 
Jaipur and the adjoining districts only. Therefore, six districts viz. Jaipur, Dausa, 
Tonk, Sikar, Ajmer and Alwar and two blocks from each of these six districts 
were selected. The details of selection of districts, lower -level units and 
beneficiaries for survey are given in Annexure -A. 
 

Chapter-I Introduction 
 
5 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
C. Audit Methodology 
Following activities were carried out as part of the PA: 
• Digital and Physical records, data and reports of SJED and Planning 
Department were examined. 
• Beneficiary survey of 240 beneficiaries for each scheme receiving pension 
in their bank accounts and 72 beneficiaries of both schemes receiv ing 
pension through Money Orders (total 552 beneficiaries). 
• Treasury level checks at the concerned treasuries of the selected Gram 
Panchayats and Wards. 
• Examination of information available in various reports of RajSSP portal 
through Login ID based access provided by the Department. 
• Joint physical verification of the State Data Center. 
In addition, d ata analysis of RajSSP data dump 9 (containing the information 
related to the two schemes) was also carried out. SJED provided (13 January 
2021) the data dump of the Social security pension schemes for the period April 
2017 to July 2020 being implemented by the department. 
The main objectives of data dump analysis were to assess whether:  
(i) The data provided is reliable, accurate and complete. 
(ii) Data of all beneficiaries was digitized; 
(iii) There is process/work flow for approval and modification of beneficiary 
data; 
(iv) The mandatory fields have been specified and filled in the database; 
(v) Separate authorities are prescribed for processing and approval of data 
as part of the IT System; 
(vi) Controls exist to prevent errors in beneficiary data; and 
(vii) Failed transactions are tracked, monitored and reconciled. 
The details of the checks carried out during data analysis of the data dump are 
provided in Annexure B. 
An Entry conference explaining the objectives, scope and methodology of the 
Performance Audit was held with officers/officials of SJED, State DBT Cell , 
DoITC10, National Informatics Centre (NIC), Directorate of Treasury and 
Accounts (DTA) and Jan-Aadhaar authority11 on 19 November 2020. A virtual 
meeting of the officers of the O/o Chief Technology Officer, Indian Audit and 
Accounts Department and Accoun tant General (Audit -I) Rajasthan with 
officers/officials of SJED and NIC was organized on 25 November 2020 to 
discuss the functioning of RajSSP portal including different aspects of the 
online process of pension sanctioning and payment. The draft report wa s 
 
9 A data dump is large amount of  data transferred between two systems . For example, 
a database can be  dumped to another network server, where it could be utilized by other 
software applications or analyzed by a person 
10  Department of Information Technology and Communication, GoR 
11 Under Directorate of Economics and Statistics, Planning Department, GoR  

Chapter-I Introduction 
6 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
forwarded to the State Government on 16 August 2021, replies to which was 
received on 31 August 2021. Subsequently, an Exit conference was held with 
the Secretary, SJED, and officers of NIC, State DBT cell, DTA and DoITC on 
03 September 2021 in which audit findings, replies of the government and audit 
recommendations were discussed. The responses of the State Government 
during and after the exit conference have been suitably incorporated in the 
relevant paragraphs.  
1.3 Audit Objectives 
The PA, covering the period April 2017 to July 2020, was carried out to 
ascertain: 
i. Whether necessary process re-engineering was done for implementation 
of DBT to minimize: 
• intermediary levels, 
• delay in payments to intended beneficiaries and 
• pilferage and duplication. 
ii. Whether the infrastructure, organization and management of DBT were 
adequate and effective 
iii. Whether beneficiaries actually received the benefits 
iv. Whether effective grievance redressal was ensured for prope r 
implementation of the schemes 
1.4 Audit Criteria 
The main source of audit criteria was derived from the following documents: 
i. Rajasthan Social Security Old age, Widow, Separated and Divorced 
Pension Rules 2013 
ii. Rajasthan Treasury Rules, 2012 
iii. General Financial and Accounting Rules (GoR) 
iv. Rajasthan E-Governance IT and ITES policy, 2015 
v. Rajasthan Jan-Aadhaar Authority Act 2020 
vi. Rajasthan Bhamashah (Direct Transfer of Public Welfare Benefits and 
Delivery of Services) Act, 2017 
vii. Rajasthan Bhamashah (Direct Transfer of Public Welfare Benefits and  
Delivery of Services) Rules, 2018 
viii. Documents, circulars, orders, instructions and notifications issued by 
Central Government and State Government 
ix. Standard Operating Procedure (SOP), Handbook on DBT and 
Guidelines for State DBT Cell issued by DBT Mission un der Cabinet 
Secretariat 
x. Instructions regarding maintenance of database, generation of various 
reports and IT controls  

Chapter-I Introduction 
 
7 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
1.5  RajSSP portal of Integrated Financial Management System 
RajSSP portal is the Social Security Pension Module of Integrated Financial 
Management System (IFMS) introduced in November 2011. Details of 
beneficiaries of various social security pension schemes being implemented by 
SJED are available on this portal. Sanctions for eligible applicants are issued by 
respective Sub Divisional Officers/ Block Development Officers (SDOs/BDOs) 
and submitted to respective Treasuries/Sub -Treasuries12 through RajSSP for 
pension disbursement. 
1.6 DBT process in social security pensions 
Procedure for application, verification, issuing of sanction, pension 
payment and appeal 
Previously the entire process from application and processing to the payment 
of the social security pensions in the state was offline. The Department 
undertook Business Process Re-engineering (BPR) over the years to bring the 
entire process online with the introduction of RajSSP, streamlined the process 
through measures such as leveraging Bhamashah/Jan -Aadhaar demographic 
data, introduction of single -DDO single-Treasury system, etc. and introduced 
DBT for direct payment of social security pensions into the bank accounts of 
the beneficiaries. The process of disbursement of social security pensions 
(including CMOASPS and CMENSPS) has been described below. 
Application process: Applicant can apply online13 through any e-Mitra kiosk/ 
or Single Sign On (SSO) ID on RajSSP portal in prescribed format providing 
Bhamashah/Jan-Aadhaar number and Aadhaar number. The personal/ 
demographic details of the applicants available in the Bhamashah/Jan-Aadhaar 
and Aadhaar database will be automatically populated in the pension 
application form after biometric/One Time Password (OTP) authentication. The 
application will then be forwarded to the concerned Verification Officer, online 
notice of which will be sent by SMS to  the registered mobile number of the 
applicant. 
Verification: On receiving the application form, the Verification Officer 
checks the details like date of birth, age, domicile, place of residency, source of 
income and other eligibility criteria provided by the applicant in the application. 
After checking and verifying the application form, the Verification Officer will 
send the verified application online to the sanctioning authority through the web 
portal with his recommendation. 
 
12 From 30 April 2020 Additional Director/Pension of SJED has been made the single Drawing 
and Disbursing Officer (DDO) and Jaipur rural treasury has been made the single treasury for 
all social security schemes of SJED . It means that bills of all the social security pensions of 
SJED, including CMOASPS and CMENSPS, are prepared by Additional Director 
(Pension)/SJED and all such bills are passed by Jaipur rural treasury. 
13 Vide Order dated 07.06.2017 

Chapter-I Introduction 
8 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
Sanction: After receiving the online application form, the Sanctioning Officer 
either accepts or rejects the application and in either case, the orders are given 
online through the portal and again the information is sent to the applicant by 
SMS on his registered mobile number. In case of acceptance of application, an 
online pension sanction order is issued by the sanctioning officer.  
Pension Payment Order: Online pension sanction order is to be treated as the 
pension payment order. On receipt of the online pension sanction order through 
RajSSP, the concerned Treasury officer/ Pension Payment officer functions as 
the DDO and initiates the process for payment of pension in the bank account 
of the beneficiary through IFMS.  
Appeal: Appeal against the order regarding the rejection of pension claim by 
the sanctioning authority can be made to the District Collector within two 
months. SJED would have the right to review the decision of the District 
Collector if it is considered necessary based on merit. 
This procedure has been illustrated through the work flow and process flow 
diagrams provided below.  
Chart 1  
Work Flow Diagram of CMOASPS and CMENSPS 
 
 


Chapter-I Introduction 
 
9 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
Chart 2 
 


Chapter-I Introduction 
10 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
The process of payment of social security pensions involving RajSSP portal, 
PayManager14 and Rajkosh15 modules is illustrated chart 3 below: 
Chart 3 
 
*TV Number-Treasury voucher number  
1.7 Good Practices 
During the audit, following good practices were noticed in the implementation 
of the pension schemes: 
i. When the beneficiary applies for these social security pensions, the 
required demographic information is fetched from Jan -Aadhaar database and 
therefore the beneficiary is not required to provide documents at the time of 
application. Thus, application process for these schemes has been made simpler 
and convenient. 
ii. Earlier the beneficiary had to physically approach the designated 
officials for the annual verification for proof of life to continue re ceiving the 
pension. Since December 2019, the beneficiaries of the pension schemes can 
get annual verification done through E -Mitra kiosks or any biometric/OTP 
authentication for Jan -Aadhaar linked schemes during the months of 
November/December which serves as annual verification for the year for these 
pension schemes. This facilitates the beneficiaries, especially the old or 
 
14 PayManager is a bill preparation module of IFMS. 
15 RajKosh (Online Treasury Accounting System) is an e-Governance initiative of Government 
of Rajasthan under Mission Mode Project category and is part of Integrated Financial 
Management System. Rajkosh facilitates the submission of Bills, Vouchers &Challans, 
effective Budget c ontrol, compilation of treasury a ccounts, preparation of reports, interface 
to external agencies and various MIS reports. 


Chapter-I Introduction 
 
11 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
widowed beneficiaries of these two schemes living in far flung areas of a 
geographically large state like Rajasthan. 
iii. Certain IT related good practices were also observed: 
• Session Time out: application control of automatic log out after 
30 minutes of idle time was in place for RajSSP, which increases the 
security of the application by reducing exposure to session-based attacks 
that steal or reuse users’ session identifiers16. 
• Password Change Policy: Users are required to change 
passwords within 90 days after which the password expires. 
• Rajasthan State Data Centre at Jaipur: Adequate security 
measures such as guards, CCTV cameras, two level registration process, 
RFID based authentication etc. were in place for preventing 
unauthorised physical access to the data centre. Counter measures 
against fire and other hazards such as fire alarm systems, gas (Novec) 
based firefighting systems, fir e extinguishers, lightening arresters etc. 
had also been put in place. 
1.8 Action taken by State Government on interim audit 
recommendations 
Based on the audit recommendations, the State Government took following 
corrective actions:   
(i) Limit on unsuccessful login attempts 
Audit observed that the user account of RajSSP  was not being locked out after 
five unsuccessful attempts as per para 6.6(D)(d) of IT Policy 2015 of GoR. In 
addition, the users did not receive any warning/message after unsuccessful login 
attempts. On the basis of audit recommendation, remedial action was taken by 
the State government and now the system does not allow more than three 
unsuccessful login attempts and appropriate message in case of unsuccessful 
login attempt is also displayed. These have been verified by Audit (September 
2021). 
(ii) Invalid/garbage/vague values in the RajSSP database 
Audit noticed invalid/garbage/vague values in various fields of RajSSP as 
detailed in Annexure C . In response, the State government standardised the 
entries of the relevant fields which have to be selected from drop down menu, 
thus avoiding absurd/invalid entries in those fields. 
 
16 As per ‘Open Web Application Security Project’ which is a non-profit foundation working 
towards improving software security. 

Chapter-I Introduction 
12 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
1.9 Acknowledgement 
Audit acknowledges the co -operation and assistance extended by the officials 
of the Social Justice and Empowerment Department, Planning Department, 
Finance Department, Department of Information Technology and 
Communication, National Informatics Centre and the selected Gram 
Panchayats, Wards and other offices at various stages during conduct of the 
performance audit.  
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Chapter – II 
Implementation of DBT in 
Social Security Pension 
Schemes 

13 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
Audit Findings 
Chapter II 
Implementation of Direct Benefit Transfer in Social Security 
Pension Schemes 
Audit Objective 1: Whether necessary process re -engineering was done for 
implementation of DBT to minimize intermediary levels, delay in payments to 
intended beneficiaries and pilferage and duplication 
2.1 Constitution of committees for approval of sanctions 
As per Rule 2 (sub rule vii - for rural areas and sub rule viii - for urban areas) of 
Pension Rules, committees are required to be constituted for sanction of 
applications as given in the Table 4 below: 
Table 4: Composition of Committee for approval of sanctions 
S. No. Area Designation Post 
1. Rural 
Sub-Division Officer (SDO)/ Sub -Division Magistrate 
(SDM) 
Chairman 
Concerned Block Development Officer (BDO) Member 
Pradhan/Deputy Pradhan/Member of concerned 
Panchayat Samiti 
Member 
2. Urban 
SDO/SDM Chairman 
Chief Executive Officer (CEO)/Commissioner/Executive 
Officer (EO) of concerned local body 
Member 
Mayor/Deputy Mayor /Chairman/Deputy Chairman/ 
President/Vice-president/Ward Member 
Member 
Further, these provisions were amended on 04.04.2013 and following were 
inserted below rules 2 (vii) and 2 (viii) ibid: 
•  Rural Areas: For sanction of applications, the minutes of sanctioning 
committee will be signed by the chairman and all the members. On receiving 
the approval, the BDOs will sign on the sanction order for applicants.  Records 
related to the sanctions of pension shall be maintained by BDO. 
• Urban Areas: For sanction of applications, the minutes of sanctioning 
committee will be signed by the chairman and all the members.  On receiving 
the approval, the SDOs will sign on the sanction order for applicants.  Records 
related to the sanction of pension shall be maintained by SDO. 
During review of records of 12 blocks 17 of the six selected districts 18, it was 
noticed that in nine blocks 19, the Pension Payment Orders (PPOs) were being 
 
17 SDO/SDM Ajmer, Alwar, Dausa, Sambhar, Sikar, Tonk and BDO Bansur, Dantaramgarh,  
Dudu, Kishangarh, Lalsot, Malpura,  
18 Ajmer, Alwar, Dausa, Jaipur, Sikar and Tonk. 
19 SDO Ajmer, Dausa, Sambhar, Sikar, Tonk and BDO Bansur, Dudu, Kishangarh, Lalsot,  

Chapter-II Implementation of DBT in Social Security Pension Schemes 
14 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
issued by the concerned BDOs/SDOs without the constitution of such 
committees. In the three remaining blocks 20, audit noticed that the committees 
had been constituted an d the concerned BDOs/SDOs were issuing PPOs with 
their signatures based on the approvals received from the committees. 
Audit is of the view that in  the absence of the committee, the procedure 
prescribed by the Pension rules to ensure necessary rigour in  the pension 
sanctioning process was compromised. 
The State Government accepted the facts and replied (August 2021) that the 
sanction process on RajSSP portal is completely online w.e.f. 02 October 2017. 
Currently, the applicant is compulsorily registered wit h Bhamashah/Jan -
Aadhaar.The Bhamashah/Jan -Aadhaar details, which are fetched from Jan -
Aadhaar database to RajSSP for processing applications, are duly verified and 
there is no relevance and utility of these committees and therefore suitable 
amendment would be proposed in the rules. This was reiterated by the State 
Government during the Exit Conference (September 2021). 
Audit is of the view that though the Government has proposed removing the  
committees, which have the participation of both government officials and 
people’s representatives, they could provide an additional layer of scrutiny 
before sanction of the pension. These committees may also be useful in 
monitoring the overall functioning  of pension verification and sanctioning 
processes. 
2.2 Sanction of applications 
According to the Rule 5(v) of Pension Rules, the verification of pension 
application is required to be completed within 30 days from the date of receipt 
of application.  Further, rule 5 (vii) ibid prescribes that the sanctioning authority 
has to complete t he sanction process within 15 days from the date of 
verification. Hence, every application is required to be disposed of within 45 
days of its receipt. The above rules were amended21 in July 2019 and provision 
for auto-escalation of application to the next stage was introduced in RajSSP if 
the concerned authorities failed to take necessary action within the prescribed 
time limit (30 and 15 days at verification and sanctioning stages respectively).  
During analysis of RajSSP data, it was noticed t hat during the audit period, 
6,11,794 (27.13 per cent ) out of total 22,54,725 applications received under 
CMOASPS and 1,00,365 (31.02 per cent ) out of total 3,23,578 applications 
received under CMENSPS were not sanctioned within 45 days as prescribed. In 
the 12 selected blocks, 27,768 cases (33.96 per cent) out of 81,773 sanctioned 
applications of the two selected schemes were delayed during the audit period. 
 
20 SDO Alwar, and BDO, Dantaramgarh and Malpura 
21 Effective from 01 July 2019 

Chapter-II Implementation of DBT in Social Security Pension Schemes 
 Schemes 
15 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
Audit also observed that 60,778 of these applications were delayed even after 
the provision for auto-escalation had been introduced in RajSSP. 
The State Government informed (September 2021) that now there is no 
pendency of applications beyond the prescribed time limits due to the feature of 
auto-verification and auto -sanction. This was verified by Audit  (September 
2021) on the basis of relevant RajSSP report 22. The State government further 
informed (September 2021) that feature of auto -approval based on data -based 
verification for sanctions would be implemented for which suitable amendment 
in the Pension rules is being proposed. Further progress in this regard is awaited 
(December 2021). 
2.3 Sanction of Ekal Nari pension  
As per Rule 4 of Pension Rules, Widowed/ Separated /Divorced women of age 
18 years and above, who are bonafide residents of Rajasthan and are residing in 
Rajasthan are eligible to get pension if they fulfil the conditions as described in 
pension rules. For above purpose “Separated” means: 
i. All legally separated  marriage women holding decree of marriage 
separation; 
ii. All legally separated women who hold court order; 
iii. All such women, whose cases were pending in courts since 5 year for 
want of marriage separation or substitution of marital rights and they 
hold court documents; 
iv. All such Muslim divorced women whose divorces are issued by the Kazi 
or Religious authority on the basis of self-affidavit and two independent 
witnesses. 
Analysis of RajSSP data dump of CMENSPS revealed that pension of 42,995 
women beneficiaries (557 -Divorced, 42,143 -Widow and 295 -Separated) was 
sanctioned under the scheme during the audit period. Scrutiny of the sanctioned 
cases revealed that in the field/column of “Husband Divorce Issuing Authority”, 
required information was not provided in 9,602 cases23 (22.33 per cent). 
Thus, audit could not ascertain whether pension to these beneficiaries was 
sanctioned on the basis of valid documents/certificates issued by competent 
authority as required under the rules. The possibility of pension payment in 
these cases in the absence o f prescribed documents or on the basis of invalid 
documents/certificates cannot be ruled out. One such case observed during field 
study is discussed below as Case Study 1. 
The State Government replied (August 2021) that all the details of the applicant, 
including the marital status, are fetched from the Jan -Aadhaar database on 
RajSSP portal at the time of online application for CMENSPS. Since the 
 
22 ‘District wise kiosk Pensioner application status’ report for the duration 01.08.2021 to 
15.09.2021. 
23 Field left blank in 2550 cases and numerical value/special character filled in 7052 cases  

Chapter-II Implementation of DBT in Social Security Pension Schemes 
16 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
information being fetched from Jan-Aadhaar has already been verified, there is 
no need to verify the information again.  
The reply of the Government is not acceptable as section 7(3) of Jan -Aadhaar 
Act 2020 specifies that Jan-Aadhaar card can be used as a proof of address and 
identity for receipt of public welfare benefit/services. Therefore, basic 
demographic details, including marital status, of the beneficiaries are fetched 
from the Jan -Aadhaar database at the time of application for social security 
pensions. However, it is the responsibility of the Department to ensure that other 
requirements for sanctioning of p ension, such as documents prescribed by 
Pension rules in support of the marital status, are fulfilled and the relevant 
information is provided on RajSSP. 
During the Exit Conference, the State Government (September 2021) accepted 
the recommendation that pension rules may be harmonised with Jan-Aadhaar as 
it is being utilised as a single source of truth for social security pension schemes. 
Further progress is awaited (December 2021). 
  Case Study 1 
During beneficiary survey of urban block of Tonk district (January 2021), it 
was noticed that pension was sanctioned to a divorced beneficiary (PPO No. 
RJ-S-05112457) under CMENSPS on the basis of a notarized Talaknama on 
₹100 stamp paper instead of certif icate issued by Kazi on the basis of two 
independent witnesses as required under the Pension Rules. The matter was 
further analyzed and it was found that pension in this case was being paid 
since July 2013. The case highlights the erroneous verification by  the 
concerned Municipal council as it failed to detect the lack of prescribed 
document. 
While accepting the facts, State Government replied (August 2021) that 
suitable action would be taken against erring officers/officials and the 
progress would be intimated. Further progress in this regard is awaited 
(December 2021). 
2.4  Sanction of Old Age Pension  
Rules 2 and 3 of Pension Rules provide the age eligibility criteria (Males of age 
of 58 years and above and females of age of 55 years and above) for social 
security pension under CMOASPS. Further, rule 5(iii) (e) ibid provides the 
process of determining date of birth in cases where only age is mentioned in the 
documents according to which, the date of birth of each pensioner will be 
determined by the verifying authority from the following documents in order of 
precedence given below:  
a) School Certificate  

Chapter-II Implementation of DBT in Social Security Pension Schemes 
 Schemes 
17 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
b) Birth register/Birth certificate maintained by Municipal Board/Nagar 
palika/Nagar nigam, Panchayat or 
c) Latest Voter List of Loksabha/ Vidhansabha/Urban Body, having the 
name of applicant or Age Certificate given by Sub -Divisional Officer or 
Tehsildar. 
d) Age certificate given by the Block Deputy Chief Medical and Health 
Officer for Rural Area and the Medical Jurist for the urban area. 
(i) Analysis of RajSSP data of CMOASPS revealed that during the audit 
period, in 818 24 cases out of the total 18,15,692 applications received during 
audit period and subsequently sanctioned, the pensioners had not attained the 
minimum age on the date of applic ation for the pension. It was further noticed 
that in 43 cases25 (5.26 per cent) cases out of these 818 cases, the applicants had 
not attained the minimum age even on the date of sanction.  
The State Government replied (August 2021) that at the time of application the 
details of the applicant are fetched from the Jan -Aadhaar portal on the basis of 
which eligibility/ineligibility of the applicant is displayed on RajSSP. The 
applications are rejected by the portal in case the eligibility criteria are not met. 
So the age of the applicant at the time of application was as per the eligibility 
criteria, however, the pensioner amended his age on Jan -Aadhaar portal after 
sanction of pension and the sanctioning authority modified the age accordingly.  
While the Depar tment did not provide details/information in support of the 
claim regarding subsequent modification of age by the beneficiaries after 
sanction of applications, cases involving modification of details relevant to 
eligibility should have been flagged by the RajSSP portal, with a relevant report 
for all such cases, for further examination by the Department. The modification 
of Jan-Aadhaar details require two levels of verifications (Chart 8 ) with the 
second level of verification being carried out by the same authorities functioning 
as sanctioning authorities for social security pensions. In the scenario where the 
applicants modified their age after sanction of Pension application, the failure 
of sanctioning authorities to examine these cases points to systemic weakness 
and lapses on their part. 
(ii) The lack of due diligence in verification/sanction also led to  eligible 
beneficiaries being denied due benefits. During scrutiny of records at Nagar 
Palika Jobner, Jaipur (October 2020), it was noticed that in five cases (details 
in Annexure D ), pension was not sanctioned due to the reason that the 
applicants had not attained the minimum required age as noted on the 
application by the Patwari. However, during scrutiny of the records, it was 
observed that these beneficiarie s had attained the minimum prescribed age as 
per the documents attached with the application.  
 
24 426 males and 392 females 
25 26 males and 17 females 

Chapter-II Implementation of DBT in Social Security Pension Schemes 
18 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
Thus, eligible beneficiaries were deprived of benefits of the pension as the 
documents provided by them were disregarded.  It is worth mentioning that in 
these cases, the verification was carried out by the Patwari instead of Executive 
officer in contravention of the rules. 
The State Government while accepting the facts intimated (August 2021) that 
suitable action would be taken against erring officers/officials and the progress 
would be intimated. The reply of the State government is silent about the 
verification being carried out by Patwari instead of Executive officer as 
prescribed by the Pension rules. 
2.5 System of physical verification of beneficiaries   
In order to establish the eligibility of the applicant for starting the pension and 
to verify the demographic information, Rule 5 (iii) of Pension Rules prescribes 
verification of pension applications before sanctioning of Pension. 
In addition, as per Rule 12 of Pension Rules, verification of the pensioners is 
required to be carried out every year for continuing the pension. If the pension 
is withheld for an eligible pensioner due to lack of physical verification, the 
concerned officer will be held responsib le. Further, in July 2019 26, facility for 
the beneficiaries to get annual verification done through One Time Password on 
mobile number registered with Aadhaar was added. The verification process 
was further modified 27 through which the beneficiaries could get their annual 
verification done through multiple procedures such as biometric authentication 
through E-Mitra Kiosk/Rajiv Gandhi Seva Kendra, authentication through 
biometrics or One Time Password while receiving the benefit of any other 
Government scheme linked with Jan -Aadhaar by the pensioner every year in 
month of November-December, etc. 
Audit observed certain irregularities in the system of physical verifications as 
follows: 
(i) Pension rules prescribe that the verification of the pension applications 
is to be done by Tehsildar in rural areas and Executive Officer/Commissioner 
in urban areas. However, audit observed that the verifications were actually 
being carried out by the Patwaris in rural areas and subordinate staff of 
Executive Officer/Commissioner in urban areas who provide the verification 
remarks after examining the beneficiary documents. These applications are then 
forwarded by the Tehsildar/Executive officer with their recommendation 
(eligible/ineligible) to the sanctioning authority. 
 
26 Vide order F09(05) (12-II) / SSPR/SJED/ 2014-15 / 7478-7598 dated 24 July 2019 
27 Vide notification F09(05)(12-II) / SSPR/SJED/ 2014-15 / 13679 dated 18 December 2019 

Chapter-II Implementation of DBT in Social Security Pension Schemes 
 Schemes 
19 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
The State Government accepted the fact (August 2021) of verifications being 
carried out by subordinate staff of the prescribed officials with the justification 
that the lower staff is well familiar with the people of the area. 
(ii) During field study and beneficiary sur vey, audit noticed that in 32 
cases28 pertaining to seven SDO/BDO offices and TO Alwar  (October 2020 to 
February 2021) the beneficiaries had already died but the department 
erroneously verified them as ‘alive’ in annual verification and continued to pay 
the pension. This resulted in undue payment of ₹ 6,25,250 in these cases. Further 
it was also seen that in 19 cases 29 out of these 32 cases, the beneficiary was 
declared as ‘alive’ consecutively for four years in six cases, three years in eight 
cases and for two years in five cases (Details given in Annexure E). 
The State Government accepted the facts and intimated (August 2021) that 
concerned SDO/BDO and TO have been asked to cancel the sanction and 
recover the excess amount paid along with interest, and that suitable action 
would be taken against erring officers/officials for erroneous annua l 
verification.  
The State government further informed (September 2021) that RajSSP has been 
linked with Pehchan30 through Jan-Aadhaar portal due to which the information 
regarding death of beneficiaries is now being received on RajSSP. Audit 
examination (September 2021) revealed that this feature is in test phase. 
(iii) During the review of records of SDO Alwar, five cases 31 were noticed 
(October 2020) wherein the beneficiaries had been declared dead on the basis 
of physical verification even when they were alive and their pensions had been 
stopped. SDO Alwar informed (October 2020) that the pension payments in 
these cases had been started. However, audit scr utiny of the information 
available on RajSSP revealed that arrears amounting to ₹ 18,000 had not been 
paid to these beneficiaries (August 2021). One similar case of SDO, Ajmer has 
been described in Case Study 2. 
The State Government accepted the facts and intimated (August 2021) that SDO 
Alwar has been asked to examine the matter and propose disciplinary action 
against the responsible officers/employees. The Government reply was silent 
about the payment of arrears to the beneficiaries. Further progress is a waited 
(December 2021). 
 
28 15 field study and 17 beneficiary survey 
29 8 field study and 11 beneficiary survey 
30 Civil Registration system of the Government of Rajasthan for facilitating the citizens of 
Rajasthan to register birth, death and marriage. 
31 PPO No. RJ-S-8707117, RJ-S-7822990, RJ-S-8639625, RJ-S-3465240, RJ-S-2958223 

Chapter-II Implementation of DBT in Social Security Pension Schemes 
20 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
Case study 2 
During review of records at SDO Ajmer, (October 2020) it was noticed that 
a CMOASPS beneficiary 32 was declared as dead during annual physical 
verification and his pension was stopped in April 2018. However, the 
pensioner was alive and made repeated requests for restoration of his pension 
which was finally restored by the Department in Nov 2020 with effect from 
April 2020. However, arrear of pension amounting to ₹11,500 for the period 
May 2018 to March 2020 was not paid to the beneficiary (July 2021). 
The State Government accepted the facts and intimated (August 2021) that 
the outstanding amount would be paid in August 2021. Audit verified 
(September 2021) that the arrear payment had been made in August 2021. 
(iv) During audit scrutiny of records at Nagar Parishad, Dausa, it was noticed 
that in 14 cases 33, the beneficiaries had been marked as ‘ ineligible’ by the 
verification authority during annual verification. However, the status of these 
beneficiaries on RajSSP r evealed (July 2021) that these pensioners have been 
marked as verified and regular pension was being paid to these beneficiaries 
disregarding the verification remarks. 
The State Government intimated (August 2021) that due to Covid -19, the 
timeline for verification of pensioners was initially extended to 31st March 2021 
and was later further extended till October 2021. 
The reply of the Government is not acceptable as these cases had been verified 
before the timeline for verification was extended due to which the status of these 
cases was displayed on RajSSP as verified. 
(v) During scrutiny of records of block Dantaramgarh, it was noticed 
(January 2021) that in the applications of two beneficiaries 34, the verification 
remarks by the Patwari were ‘Son in Government Job’. Therefore, as per rules, 
these applications were required to be rejected by the sanctioning authority. 
However, the sanctioning authority failed to take the verification remarks into 
account and pension was sanctioned in violation of norms due to which an 
amount of ₹ 35,500 was paid for the period May 2018 to July 2020.  
The State Government accepted the facts and intimated (August 2021) that 
BDO Dantaramgarh has been asked to recover the amount from the 
beneficiaries a long with interest and suitable action would be taken against 
erring officers/officials and the progress would be intimated. The State 
Government further informed (September 2021) that database of State 
 
32 PPO No. RJ-S-07223785 
33 PPO NO. RJ-S-09124340, 09124408, 09354188, 09529022, 09529173, 09617517, 
09617610, 09622848, 09921609, 09274761, 09275253, 08576211, 08576226 and 
09352817. 
34 PPO No. RJ-S-08350782, 08512471 

Chapter-II Implementation of DBT in Social Security Pension Schemes 
 Schemes 
21 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
Government employees has been linked with Jan-Aadhaar portal through which 
ineligible beneficiaries would be identified. However, reports/ information in 
support of this claim have not been provided to audit (December 2021). 
These instances point to the lack of necessary rigour in the system of physical 
verification of the beneficiaries being carried out by the Department. 
Further, the system of annual verification only provides a proof of the 
beneficiary being alive for continuation of pension. The Department lacks a 
mechanism for periodical review of beneficiaries to ascertain their eligibility as 
there may be certain cases where after the sanction of pension, the beneficiary 
may no longer qualify under the eligibility criteria of the schemes due to factors 
such as employment of beneficiaries’ son/spouse, in creased annual income, 
remarriage etc. In the absence of such a mechanism, the Department cannot 
ascertain whether the pension is being paid to eligible beneficiaries only. Two 
relevant instances noticed during the Audit are discussed below: 
(vi) During beneficiary survey at SDO, Dausa, Audit noticed that the son of 
a beneficiary 35 was employed with a Government of Rajasthan undertaking. 
Hence, the beneficiary was ineligible to get the pension as per the Pension 
Rules.  
The State Government accepted the facts and intimated (August 2021) that SDO 
Dausa has been asked to recover the amount along with interest from the 
beneficiary and suitable action would be taken against erring officers/officials. 
(vii) During beneficiary survey at SDO, Tonk (January 2021), it was noticed 
that a widow pensioner 36 re-married in December 2015. However, she 
continued to receive the widow pension for four years even after remarriage.  
The State Government accepted the facts and intimated (August 2021) that SDO 
Tonk has been asked to recover the amount along with inter est from the 
beneficiary and suitable action would be taken against erring officers/officials. 
In both these cases, annual verification failed to detect that the beneficiaries 
were no longer eligible to receive the pension. Since the beneficiary survey by 
Audit was carried out on a limited scale, wider occurrence of such instances 
across the state can not be ruled out. 
Periodical review of the eligibility of beneficiaries would help the Department 
in weeding out such cases where the beneficiaries are no lon ger eligible 
subsequent to the sanction of pension and would also enable the Department to 
identify cases of erroneous verification and sanction of pensions (as highlighted 
in the instances listed above). Additionally, this system may also enable the 
Department to get information regarding problems being faced by the 
 
35 PPO No. RJ-S-07596693 
36 PPO No. RJ-S-02439480 

Chapter-II Implementation of DBT in Social Security Pension Schemes 
22 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
beneficiaries like delays in payment (highlighted in para 4.1), stoppage of 
pension (highlighted in para 4.3), etc. and take prompt action to mitigate the 
issues being faced by the beneficiaries. 
2.6 Post audit of auto-escalated applications  
According to Rule 5 of chapter-IV of Pension Rules as amended on 2 July 2019, 
if an application was not disposed of by the verification/sanctioning authority 
within the stipulated time of 30/15 days respectively, it would be auto-escalated 
and forwarded to  the next stage in the pension process. Auto -sanctioned 
applications forwarded to the TO/STOs for payment are displayed to TO/STOs 
in a separate report of RajSSP. The sanctioning authority is granted 60 days for 
post audit of cases at the level of sanction ing authority in which pension was 
paid on the basis of auto verified/sanctioned applications. During post -audit, if 
any application which was auto sanctioned/verified is found to be 
wrong/irregular, responsibility of the official may be fixed and action m ay be 
initiated to recover the wrong/ irregular payments from such beneficiaries. 
Review of RajSSP reports37 provided by TO of SDO Sikar (December 2020) 
revealed that in 35 cases (10.26 per cent ) out of 341 auto -escalated cases,  
pensions were sanctioned automatically but post audit was not carried out 
within 60 days as prescribed in the rules. (Annexure F) 
The State Government accepted the facts and intimated (August 2021) that SDO 
Sikar has been asked to recover the amount along with interest from the 
beneficiaries found ineligible during post audit and suitable action would be 
taken against erring officers/officials. The State Government also informed that 
across Rajasthan, 10,046 auto-sanctioned cases were pending for post audit for 
which the District Collectors had been instructed. 
Further, scrutiny of RajSSP reports provided by TO of the selected blocks 
(October to December 2020) revealed that during post audit of automatically 
sanctioned cases, the department identified an amount of ₹ 4,00,500 pertaining 
to 178 cases38 (details in Annexure G) where pension was paid wrongly to the 
beneficiaries due to automatic verification and sanction and recovery was still 
pending. However , the department did not fix the responsibility for 
irregular/wrongful payment of pension to the ineligible applicants as required 
by the Pension rules. 
The State Government while accepting the facts intimated (August 2021) that 
the concerned sanctioning authorities have been asked to recover the excess 
amount along with interest from the ineligible beneficiaries. The State 
Government also informed (September 2021) that all the District collectors have 
 
37 ‘Status of auto verify or sanctioned application’ report of RajSSP 
38 SDO, Alwar (64), Dausa (10), Sambhar (7), Sikar (32), Tonk (5) and BDO, Bansur (20),  
Dantaramgarh (2), Kishangarh (11), Lalsot (27) 

Chapter-II Implementation of DBT in Social Security Pension Schemes 
 Schemes 
23 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
been instructed to ensure post -audit by sanctioning authorities within 60 days. 
Further progress is awaited (December 2021). 
2.7 Rates of pension paid to beneficiaries  
Rule 2(iv) of Pension Rules as amended on 28 February 2019 prescribed the 
rates of pension for different age categories as given below: 
Table 5: Rates of pension under CMOASPS and CMENSPS  
(Amount in ₹) 
S. No. Category of beneficiary 
(Age) 
CMOASPS  CMENSPS  
1 18 to 55 years - 500 
2 55 to 60 years 750 750 
3 60 to 74 years 750 1000 
4 75 years and above 1000 1500 
As can be seen from the table above, the comparative rates of pensions for the 
categories of ‘60 to 74 years’ and ‘75 years and above’ are lower in CMOASPS 
than CMENSPS. According to the Department order dated 21 May 2018, the 
eligible beneficiaries CMOASPS having marital status as ‘Widow’ would be 
automatically transferred to CMENSPS to receive pension at enhanced rates. 
Analysis of RajSSP data revealed that during the audit period, the marital status 
of 13,367 female beneficiaries (8,722 pertaining to age group ‘60-74 years’ and 
4,645 pertaining to the category of ‘75 years and above’ ) who were receiving 
pension under CMOASPS was shown as ‘Widow’.  However, the department 
did not transfer these beneficiaries to CMENSPS due to which these 
beneficiaries were receiving pension at lower rates.  
Further, data analysis also revealed that there were 491 female beneficiaries of 
CMOASPS with marital status as ‘separated’ and ‘divorced’  who could also 
have been transferred to CMENSPS like the beneficiaries with marital status 
‘widow’ to receive pension at enhanced rates. 
The State Government accepted the facts and intimated (August 2021) that 
necessary action is being taken to change the category of the beneficiaries. 
During the Exit Conference, the State government stated (September 2021) that 
necessary action would be taken in the cases of ‘Widow’ beneficiaries and that 
‘Separated’ and ‘Divorced’ beneficiaries would also be covered. The State 
Government further informed (September 2021) that the Department has 
written39 to NIC regarding transfer of ‘wi dow’ pensioners of CMOASPS to 
CMENSPS. However, the letter from SJED to NIC mentions the shifting of 
‘widow’ pensioners of CMOASPS to CMENSPS and does not cover the 
‘separated’ and ‘divorced’ beneficiaries of CMOASPS. Further progress in this 
regard is awaited (December 2021). 
 
39 Letter dated 13.09.2021 

Chapter-II Implementation of DBT in Social Security Pension Schemes 
24 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
2.8 Details of Bhamashah/Jan-Aadhaar/Aadhaar number 
According to Rule 5 (i ) of Pension Rules as amended on 7 June 2017, the 
applicants were required to provide Bhamashah number/enrolment number and 
Aadhaar number/enrolment number for availing the benefits of pension 
schemes. Amendment of rules on 10 June 2020 replaced Bhamashah 
number/enrolment number with Jan-Aadhaar number/ enrolment number. 
Analysis of RajSSP data revealed that during audit period, out of the 20,81,656 
applications sanctioned by the Department for CMOASPS and CMENSPS, 
1016 pension cases (0.05 per cent) were sanctioned in the absence of unique 
IDs. Further, in 513 out of these 1016 cases, the pension applications were 
processed and sanctioned during 7 June 2017 to 10 January 2018. All pension 
applications processed and sanctioned after 10 January 2018 had unique IDs. 
Audit scrutiny revealed that out of these 1016 cases, there were four cases in 
which two PPOs had been issued for the same beneficiary and thus these 
beneficiaries were receiving double pension. These beneficiaries had one PPO 
linked with unique ID and another PPO without unique ID. The details are given 
in Annexure H. 
Three such instances of double payment of pension due to absence of unique 
IDs noticed during the beneficiary survey are described in Case Study 3. 
Case study 3 
During beneficiary survey of pensioners receiving pension through Money Order 
at Gram Panchayat Roopangarh of Kishangarh Block (Ajmer), it was noticed  
(February 2021) that in three cases, double pension payment 40 amounting to 
₹1,89,000 had been made to the beneficiaries (Annexure I). These beneficiaries 
were receiving one pension in their bank account and the other pension through 
Money Order. Further scrutiny revealed that in these cases, the department had 
issued double PPOs to the beneficiaries, one PPO having Jan -Aadhaar/Aadhaar 
number and another PPO without Jan-Aadhaar/Aadhaar number.  
The State Government accepted the facts and intimated (August 2021) that the 
concerned BDO has been instructed to stop the du plicate payments being made 
through Money Orders and recover the amount paid along with interest from the 
concerned beneficiaries. The reply also stated that suitable action would be taken 
against erring officers/officials and the progress would be intimat ed. Further 
progress in this regard is awaited (December 2021). 
Thus, it is evident that if the Department had ensured mandatory linkage of all 
the PPOs with Jan-Aadhaar/Aadhaar, these cases could have been prevented.  
 
40 Calculated from April 2016 to July 2020 as the payment information in the pension payment 
report, OAP 7, of these beneficiaries was not available for the period before April 2016. Based 
on the sanction dates mentioned in the PPOs ( Annexure I ), there is a strong possibility of 
double pension payment to these beneficiaries even before April 2016. 

Chapter-II Implementation of DBT in Social Security Pension Schemes 
 Schemes 
25 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
Further, during scrutiny of RajSSP reports of the 12 selected blocks, it was 
noticed that out of the 2,66,119 beneficiaries receiving pensions under both the 
schemes, there were 607 cases where pension payments were being made even 
in the absence of Bhamashah/Jan -Aadhaar/Aadhaar numbers (details in 
Annexure J). 
Absence of unique IDs linked to the PPOs makes it difficult to prevent instances 
of duplication of beneficiaries and double payment of pension. Even though 
report41 regarding list of beneficiaries without Bhamashah/Aadhaar number is 
available on RajSSP, the Department failed to utilise the information to 
undertake focussed intervention so that these beneficiaries are assisted in getting 
the unique IDs on priority as well as linking all the PPOs with the unique IDs. 
The State Government accepted the facts and intimated (July 2021) that as per 
Section 7 of Aadhaar Act 2016, the Central/State Government cannot deny any 
service/benefit to a person due to lack of Aadhaar. The reply is not appropriate 
as Rule 5 of Pension rules 42clearly prescribes that the applicant has to 
mandatorily provide his Bhamashah/Jan-Aadhaar/Aadhaar number43 at the time 
of application in the absence of which the application would not  be accepted. 
Lack of such prescribed unique IDs has caused instances of double pension 
payments. The government further stated (August 2021) that in cases of double 
pension payments, concerned sanctioning authorities have been directed to 
recover the exce ss amount paid along with interest and suitable action would 
also be taken against the responsible officers/officials. 
During the Exit Conference, the State government informed (September 2021) 
that there were approximately 5 per cent beneficiaries whose unique IDs were 
not linked with their PPOs and that necessary action would be taken in this 
regard. The State Government further intimated (September 2021) that the 
Department is issuing directions to District collectors to ensure necessary action 
regarding beneficiaries without Jan-Aadhaar and beneficiaries availing double 
pensions during the annual physical verification.  
2.9 Updating of data in case of death of a beneficiary 
According to rule 9 (1) of Pension Rules, pension ends on the day of death of 
pensioner. Rule 13 ibid stipulated that in case of death of a beneficiary, 
Patwari/Gram Sevak/designated authority of local body or post office/Bank 
would send intimation to Pens ion sanctioning authority 44. On receipt of the 
intimation, the sanctioning authority would send the information regarding 
death to the DDO through RajSSP for stoppage of pension.  
 
41 “Block wise blank Bhamashah or Aadhaar number” report of RajSSP 
42 As amended on 07 June 2017 
43 Or the enrolment number of Bhamashah/Jan Aadhaar/Aadhaar 
44 Up to 10.06.2020, the report was required to be sent to the concerned T.Os/S.T.Os 

Chapter-II Implementation of DBT in Social Security Pension Schemes 
26 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
The analysis of RajSSP data revealed that in 2447 (67.88 per cent) out of 3605 
cases of recovery as on 13 January 2021, reason was mentioned as “Death”. 
Audit observed that in practice the Department stops pension only after the 
family members of the beneficiaries intimate the concerned sanctioning 
authority about death in writing along with death certificate or after the annual 
verification after which the Department initiates the recovery of excess payment 
from the bank account in which pension was being paid.  
Department informed (April 2021) that there is no mechanism to obtain  
information about death of pensioners from Registrar General of India/Local 
Bodies/Hospitals/Crematorium etc. and such pensions after the death of the 
beneficiary are stopped on getting such information during annual physical 
verification of pensioners or on being informed by pensioners’ relatives. 
While the mechanism envisaged by the Pension rules is non-functional, it is also 
pertinent to mention that Pension rules do not prescribe any time limit for the 
flow of information regarding the death of beneficiary from such institutions to 
the sanctioning authority and from the sanctioning authority to the DDO for 
stoppage of pension. Moreover, no mechanism has been prescribed for the flow 
of such information from the hospitals/crematoriums/ shamshans etc. to the 
sanctioning authority so that such information is made available to the 
Department in a regular and systematic manner. 
The State Government accepted the facts and intimated (August 2021) that 
RajSSP is being linked with Jan -Aadhaar and Pehchan portal in a manner that 
information regarding death of beneficiary is promptly updated on RajSSP and 
pension payments to such beneficiaries is stopped. The State government 
further informed (September 2021) that RajSSP has been linked with Pehchan 
through Jan-Aadhaar portal due to which the information regarding death of 
beneficiaries is now being received on RajSSP. Audit examination (September 
2021) revealed that the linking with RajSSP is in test phase. Further progress in 
this regard has not been intimated though asked for (December 2021). 
2.10 Systemic issues with RajSSP 
 
2.10.1 Multi-factor authentication  
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology vide circular no. 20(7)/2017-
CLES dated 11/4/2018 issued the best practices for safe and secure cyber 
environment for Chief Information Security Officers. One of the practices 
suggested to ensure cyber security was Multi -factor authentication (MFA). 
MFA ensures cyber security by requiring  a combination of two or more types 
of information from the user which can be a password or personal identification 
number (PIN) or a code sent to the user's smartphone, or fingerprint before 
whatever is being secured can be accessed.   

Chapter-II Implementation of DBT in Social Security Pension Schemes 
 Schemes 
27 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
Audit observed that in the entire process of the pension processing and payment 
through RajSSP, two-factor authentication (2FA) was being used only at the 
level of sanctioning authorities. It was found that in case of verification 
authorities and payment authorities (DDOs45), single factor authentication (only 
user ID and password) was being used. 
The State Government replied (August 2021) that the sanctioning of application 
is the most important stage in the entire process and 2FA is available at 
sanctioning stage. The State Government also stated that after the 
implementation of single DDO system 46 for centralised payment processing, 
2FA is no longer necessary. The State Government again emphasized 
(September 2021) lack of necessity for 2FA in view of the provisions for auto -
verification, auto-checking and auto-sanction in the proposed amended Pension 
rules. 
Implementation of multi factor authentication is an important measure from the 
point of view of cyber security and assumes increased importance in the current 
scenario where all the government systems are bein g brought online and the 
instances of cyber-attacks are on the rise. While MFA is crucial at all levels of 
pension processing, it becomes even more important at the stage of single DDO 
due to huge ramifications of any security loophole at this level.  
2.10.2 Sharing of passwords 
As per provisions of para 6.6 (B) (b) and (E) of IT Policy 2015 of GoR, unique 
user ID shall be provided to each employee so that they will be responsible for 
their work. During the audit, it was noticed that the authorities at all three levels 
i.e. verification, sanction and payment of pension, were sharing their RajSSP 
user ID/ Password with their subordinates for disposal of work related to 
processing of social security pensions in contravention of IT policy. This is also 
a violation of the Pension rules which prescribe specific authority for each stage 
of pension processing. 
The State Government replied (August 2021) that concerned officers are 
responsible for their RajSSP portal passwords and directions for not sharing 
passwords have been issued from time to time.   
2.10.3 Updates to Software Requirement Specification (SRS) 
SRS is a comprehensive description of the software/system based on a rigorous 
assessment of the different requirements associated with the software/system to 
be developed. I t contains the details regarding the development, operations, 
quality assurance and maintenance of the software and thus provides a 
 
45   Drawing and Disbursement Officers. For social security pensions of SJED, till March 2020  
DDOs were Treasury/Sub-Treasury officers. From April 2020, Additional Director, Pension 
(SJED) has been made the DDO. 
46   Since 30 April 2020 

Chapter-II Implementation of DBT in Social Security Pension Schemes 
28 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
structured framework of the software and its expected performance. As the 
technology landscape is dynamic and systemic modif ications may be 
necessitated due to changes in policies/laws/rules, periodic assessment of the 
requirements and performance of the software/system is needed based on which 
the SRS should be updated to carry out software/system modifications.  
During the audit, based on the information provided by the Department 
(October 2020), it was observed that the available SRS document of RajSSP 
was version 1.1  which was finalized in the year 2011. All the subsequent 
changes including many significant changes in pension processing and payment 
procedures to RajSSP had been carried without making changes to SRS. 
Carrying out such changes without updating the SRS also points towards lack 
of periodic and systematic assessment of evolving requirements, outdated 
features and systemic changes needed to keep up with the changes in technology 
and digital security environment. 
The State Government accepted (August 2021) the facts and stated that 
modifications to RajSSP are made from time to time depending upon the 
requirements. 
During the Exit Conference, the State government informed (September 2021) 
that SRS has been updated. A copy of the latest SRS has been provided to Audit 
(September 2021). 
While SRS has been updated after a period of ten years after being pointe d out 
by Audit, the State Government may consider making updates to SRS an 
integral part of the change management process of RajSSP to ensure proper 
documentation of the changes which may prove useful in identifying and 
addressing any problems arising out of changes/updates to the portal. 
2.10.4 Business Continuity Plan and Disaster Recovery Plan 
The ‘Guidelines for Technical and Financial support for State Data Centre’ 
issued by Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology required the states 
to establish a Disaster Recovery and Business continuity plan for State Data 
Centre (SDC). A Business Continuity Plan (BCP) outlines how a system would 
continue operating at a pre -defined accepted level in the event of a 
disaster/emergency situation and the s ubsequent resumption of normal 
functions of the system. It includes a Disaster Recovery Plan (DRP) which is 
designed to assist the organisation in the recovery of systems/data after a 
disruption/disaster. Existence of these plans is a reflection of prepare dness to 
threats faced by the organisation’s systems and data such as fire incident, floods, 
cyber-attack etc. 
During the physical verification of SDC, the Department informed that the BCP 
and DRP have been prepared for RajSSP and a Disaster Recovery data centre 
had been established in Jodhpur to take backup copies of the data. However, the 

Chapter-II Implementation of DBT in Social Security Pension Schemes 
 Schemes 
29 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
documents for these plans were not provided to audit though called for 
(December 2021). 
The State Government while accepting the facts replied (August 2021) that the 
BCP/DRP are currently not active and necessary action would be initiated soon. 
During the Exit Conference, the State government informed (September 2021) 
that BCP/DRP would be made active shortly. Further progress in this regard is 
awaited (December 2021). 
Lack of implementation of BCP/DRP makes the data of the beneficiaries and 
the systems being utilised for pension processing vulnerable to interruptions in 
services due to disasters. 
2.10.5 Application Controls of RajSSP 
Application controls are the measures inco rporated in the IT system to ensure 
that the data input, processing and output is complete, accurate and valid. 
Application controls include completeness and validity checks, input controls, 
balancing of processing totals, error reporting etc.  
a) Input Controls 
(i) In an application, designating certain data fields as mandatory is an 
important input control which ensures that the information essential for 
processing by the application is available in the system. For RajSSP, the SSO 
login user manual47of NIC provides that fields such as Annual Income, Religion, 
Pin code, Name, Father/Husband name  etc. are mandatory fields 48. These 
mandatory fields enable RajSSP to capture all those beneficiary data fields 
which are crucial for processing of pension applications in compliance with the 
Pension rules 2013. 
Analysis of RajSSP data dump revealed that out of the 20,99,362 applications 
received during the audit period which were subsequently sanctioned, ‘Annual 
Income’ field was left blank in 9,65,921 cases (46 .01 per cent) and ‘Pin Code 
‘field was left blank in 99,121 cases (4.72 per cent) even when both these fields 
were mandatory. This indicates that the system is unable to ensure that all the 
mandatory fields are captured. 
The Department accepted the facts a nd replied (September 2021) that the 
‘Annual Income’  field in RajSSP has been removed and now only a self -
declaration by the applicant is required and the ‘Pin code’ field is only needed 
for applicants receiving pension through Money Order. 
(ii) Out of 42,995 C MENSPS beneficiaries (557 -Divorced, 42,143 -
Widowed and 295 -Separated) whose pension was sanctioned during the audit 
 
47 Available at https://ssp.rajasthan.gov.in/LoginContent/MidLogin.aspx 
48 As these fields are marked with red asterisk indicative of compulsory information 

Chapter-II Implementation of DBT in Social Security Pension Schemes 
30 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
period, it was found that in the field “Husband Divorce Issuing Authority”,  
required information was not provided in 9,602 cases 49 (22.33 per cent ) as 
highlighted in paragraph 2.3. A screenshot of such cases is provided in 
Annexure K. 
This shows that the system allowed application, processing and sanction of such 
pension applications in the absence of the documents/information prescribed by 
the Pension rules. This field may be made mandatory for application of pensions 
under the scheme. 
The State Government replied ( August 2021) that details such as the marital 
status of the applicant are fetched from Jan-Aadhaar database at the time of 
application and as the Jan-Aadhaar information is verified, there is no need for 
re-verifying it. 
The reply of the Government is not acceptable as basic demographic details, 
including marital status, of the beneficiaries  are fetched from the Jan -Aadhaar 
database at the time of application for social security pensions. However, it is 
the responsibility of the Department to ensure that other requirements for 
sanctioning of pension, such as documents prescribed by Pension ru les in 
support of the marital status, are fulfilled and the relevant information is 
provided on RajSSP. 
(iii) The data analysis also revealed that out of 17,921 
complaints/queries/grievances filed by the beneficiaries during the audit period, 
in 575 cases (3.21 per cent ) the complaint/grievance was filed without 
description. A screenshot of such complaints is shown in Annexure L. 
Description may be made a mandatory field for filing of complaints such that 
the system does not allow filing of complaints/grievances without description 
as the absence of description makes it difficult for the Department to provide 
resolution or conduct an analysis of the trend and nature of the complaints being 
filed. 
The matter was pointed out to State Government (July 2021). The Stat e 
Government while accepting the facts intimated ( August 2021 ) that action 
would be taken to make description a mandatory field while filing of 
complaints/grievances/queries. 
These instances reveal that there is scope for strengthening input controls for 
ensuring that the information entered in the system is valid, accurate and 
complete. 
b) Processing Controls 
Processing controls provide an automated means to ensure processing of data 
entered in the system is complete, accurate, and authorized. Analysis of RajSSP 
 
49 Field left blank in 2550 cases and numerical value/special character filled in 7052 cases  

Chapter-II Implementation of DBT in Social Security Pension Schemes 
 Schemes 
31 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
data and reports provided instances where deficiencies of the processing 
controls were revealed as mentioned below: 
(i) The system should calculate the age of the beneficiary from the date of 
birth available in the system and prevent processing of applications where the 
beneficiary does not fulfil the age criterion. However, cases of pension 
applications bei ng processed and sanctioned even without the beneficiary 
attaining the minimum prescribed age were noticed as highlighted in paragraph 
2.4.  
(ii) Even when the system has the provision of auto -escalation of pension 
applications, the verification and sanctioning  of pension applications were 
delayed as highlighted in paragraph 2.2. 
Adequate and effective processing controls would facilitate the Department to 
easily detect, address and reduce the irregularities in the implementation of the 
schemes. 
c) Output Controls  
 Output controls ensure that the information provided by the system should be 
complete, valid and accurate. They also check that the information output from 
the system is the intended/claimed information and is substantiated by the other 
information available in the system. Following lacunae were observed in the 
Output controls of the system: 
(i) Analysis of RajSSP data revealed 2,73,653 cases pertaining to the audit 
period, where the payment information in the RajSSP payment report (OAP 7) 
did not contain TV n umbers meaning that the bills for payment in these cases 
were rejected. However, the payment report was erroneously showing that the 
pension had been paid in these cases. An illustrative case is shown in the 
screenshot in Annexure M. 
Therefore, the payment information provided by RajSSP was not accurate. The 
payment report of RajSSP shows the pension as being paid as soon as the bills 
are passed by the DDO. However, such bills may be rejected by e-Kuber50 due 
to various reasons such as wrong IFSC 51 in the e -Payment file. Therefore, 
payment report on RajSSP should be updated when the confirmation of 
successful/unsuccessful transactions is received from e-Kuber and not on 
passing of bills. 
The State Government replied (July 2021) that RajSSP did not have a pro per 
link with Rajkosh in the past due to which TV numbers were not available for 
some cases. At present TV numbers are being marked in all the pension 
payments.  
 
50 e-Kuber is the Core Banking Solution (CBS) of the Reserve Bank of India (RBI).   
51 Indian Financial System Code 

Chapter-II Implementation of DBT in Social Security Pension Schemes 
32 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
However, audit scrutiny (August 2021) revealed that even in July 2021, the 
pension payment report of RajSSP is show ed pensions being paid to 
beneficiaries in certain cases where TV numbers are not available (Annexure 
N). This confirms that the deficiency in the output control of RajSSP persists. 
Further, the reply is silent about the payment report being updated on the  
passing of bills rather than on confirmation of transaction received from e-
Kuber. 
The State Government later replied (August 2021) that payment is done in cases 
where TV number is shown and in the cases where TV number is not available, 
no payment has been done. 
The reply is not acceptable as test check (September 2021) of the payment 
report52 of a few beneficiaries revealed that pension payment was shown in 
cases where TV number was not available. 
(ii) Cases of mismatch of information between two different re ports of 
RajSSP were also noticed during the audit. For e .g. first payment dates in 
‘service guarantee report’  of RajSSP was different from payment date of the 
first payment of pension for the same cases as shown in the RajSSP payment 
report ‘OAP 7’. An illustrative case is shown in the screenshots as given in 
Annexure O. 
Further examination revealed that the information of  the ‘service guarantee 
report’ was shown in a manner so as to be compliant with the provisions of the 
Rajasthan Guaranteed delivery of public services Act whereas OAP-7 report of 
RajSSP showed the date of passing of bills for payment. The information 
provided in these reports was contradictory.  
The State Government replied (August 2021) that the date available on public 
service guarantee report regarding first payment is actually the due date of first 
payment of pension which is the first day of the month whereas actual payment 
of first pension is made on any day of the succeeding month. 
The reply is not acceptable as the Public Service Guarantee Report displays the 
information as the ‘First payment date’ . Further, based on the provisions of 
Rajasthan Guaranteed delivery of Public Services Act/Rules, the information in 
the Public Service Guarantee Report is required to be the date on which the 
service is provided to the beneficiary rather than the date on which the service 
becomes due. 
The above-mentioned cases reflect that the output information being provided 
by RajSSP was inaccurate in certain cases.  
 
52 OAP 7 of RajSSP 

Chapter-II Implementation of DBT in Social Security Pension Schemes 
 Schemes 
33 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
Summing up 
There were significant delays in sanction of pension applications during the audit 
period for which corrective action was taken by the State Government after being 
pointed out by audit. The Department sanctioned pension under CMENSPS 
without ensuring availability of prescribed documents/ certificates issued by 
competent authority. Pensions were sanctioned to applicants who ha d not 
attained the minimum age of eligibility on the date of application and in some 
cases even by the date of sanction of pension and in certain cases applications of 
eligible applicants were rejected , indicating monitoring failures . Irregularities 
were n oticed in the system of physical verification with verifications being 
carried out by subordinate staff of prescribed authorities, dead beneficiaries being 
verified as ‘alive’, pension of beneficiaries who were alive stopped on being 
erroneously verified as ‘dead’ and applicants found ineligible during verification 
being marked as verified for subsequent payments. Mandatory post -audit of the 
auto-escalated applications was not conducted and recovery was pending in 
instances of payment of pension to ineligib le auto-sanctioned applications. All 
the eligible widowed beneficiaries were not transferred to CMENSPS from 
CMOASPS to receive pension at higher rates and similar facility was not 
provided for ‘separated’ and ‘divorced’ beneficiaries. The prescribed mechanism 
for information flow in the event of death of beneficiary was non-functional and 
time limits for the flow of such information were also not prescribed. 
Systemic issues of RajSSP such as lack of multi-factor authentication, sharing of 
passwords, lack of updates to system requirement specifications and lack of 
implementation of Business Continuity Plan / Disaster Recovery plan were 
noticed. Deficiencies were found in the Input, Processing and Output controls of 
RajSSP. 
Recommendations: 
o Harmonise Pension Rules with Jan -Aadhaar as the information 
pertaining to eligibility of the beneficiaries is being fetched from Jan -
Aadhaar for all the social security pension schemes. 
o Incorporate a  feature in RajSSP which highlights the cases involving 
modification of those beneficiary details in Jan-Aadhaar database which 
are relevant to the eligibility for pension schemes for further scrutiny by 
the Department.  
o Take steps to make the process of physical verification robust while 
ensuring accountability for the instances of erroneous verification and 
sanction.  
o Incorporate in t he system of annual physical verification a 
comprehensive evaluation of the eligibility and validation of basic details 
such as bank account numbers of beneficiaries every year. 

Chapter-II Implementation of DBT in Social Security Pension Schemes 
34 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
o Implement the feature of automatic transfer of eligible beneficiaries from 
CMOASPS to CMENSPS on RajSSP and also extend this facility to 
‘Separated’ and ‘Divorced’ ben eficiaries in addition to ‘Widows’. An 
MIS report on RajSSP regarding beneficiaries of CMOASPS eligible for 
transfer to CMENSPS may be helpful to monitor any pendency in such 
transfers. 
o Ensure that Jan-Aadhaar IDs of the remaining beneficiaries are updated 
on RajSSP and all the PPOs are linked to the Jan-Aadhaar IDs in a time-
bound manner so that the RajSSP system is able to detect and prevent 
cases of duplicate beneficiaries and double payments. 
o Make efforts to plug the loopholes in the application controls of RajSSP 
to ensure data security, accuracy, validity and enhance the capability of 
RajSSP in efficient and effective implementation of the schemes. 
o A nodal officer may be nominated by the State Government t o monitor 
and manage aspects such as validity, integrity and security of the data in 
the IT systems of the Department in a dedicated and focused manner. 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter – III 
Infrastructure, Organization 
and Management of DBT in 
the State 

35 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
Chapter III 
Infrastructure, Organization and Management of DBT in the 
State 
Audit Objective 2: Whether the infrastructure, organization and 
management of DBT were adequate and effective 
DBT Mission, Cabinet Secretariat, New Delhi issued guidelines for 
establishment of State DBT cells. The State DBT cell shall primarily work 
towards co-ordinating the implementation of DBT in various schemes and act 
as a nodal point for all the activities and matters related to DBT operations in 
the State. Secretary, Cabinet Secretariat, New Delhi vide DO letter of even 
number dated 12th May 2016 requested all states & UTs to set up a “State DBT 
Cell” that would co-ordinate efforts for DBT on boarding exercise of the Central 
Schemes and to  provide an opportunity to the States to adopt the DBT 
framework in the State-run schemes as well. 
As informed (July 2020) by Planning (Institutional Finance) Departm ent, 
Government of Rajasthan, the State DBT Cell was constituted in the State under 
the Bhamashah Scheme and Secretary, Planning Department was nominated as 
Single Point of Contact (SPOC) for DBT in Oct 2016. 
3.1 State DBT Portal and integration with DBT Bharat portal 
As per Joint Secretary, Cabinet Secretariat, New Delhi letter No. D -
20011/02/2017-DBT (Cab) dated 11 May 2017 addressed to the states, the 
process of DBT on boarding entails digitization of beneficiaries’ database, 
Aadhaar seeding and preparation of scheme specific Management Information 
System (MIS). Priority items requiring immediate action included creation of 
State Portal on DBT Bharat portal 53, generation of scheme specific code, 
reporting savings from DBT implementation and key DBT initiatives at the state 
level. In order to achieve the said task, the State DBT cells require sufficient 
skill set and a coordination mechanism with various departments. 
Scrutiny of records of the state DBT cell revealed that the State DBT Portal was 
not created on DBT Bharat portal. However, the Planning department stated 
(July 2021) that Jan-Aadhaar platform (previously Bhamashah portal) is being 
used as the State DBT Portal for Rajasthan. Further, 164 schemes were notified 
under Bhamashah Act (replaced with Jan-Aadhaar Act). All these schemes are 
 
53 www.dbtbharat.gov.in 

Chapter-III Infrastructure, Organization and Management of DBT in the State 
36 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
being managed through the scheme portals operated by the respective 
Departments. On the Jan-Aadhaar portal, the information of only 59 schemes54 
out of these 164 schemes was available. 
It was noticed that Jan-Aadhaar portal of the state is not integrated with the DBT 
Bharat portal. Even though certain information regarding central schemes 
involving DBT pertaining to Rajasthan is being made available on the DBT 
Bharat portal, information regarding state DBT schemes is not available on the 
portal. Further, even on Jan -Aadhaar portal, important scheme -wise details of 
the state DBT schemes such as number of beneficiaries, amount of benefit 
transfer per beneficiary, month-wise/year-wise DBT transfers, and savings due 
to DBT etc. are not available. It was also noticed that the limited scheme data 
available on the state DBT Portal is not updated in real time. 
Regarding lack of real time scheme data on the portal, the Department informed 
(December 2020) that currently the data pertaining to different schemes is 
uploaded on the portal by Department of Information and Technology from time 
to time and efforts are being made by the cell for real time updating of data by 
the concerned departments.  
It is pertinent to note that s hortcomings in this regard have led to Rajasthan’s 
poor score in the indices of the DBT performance rankings55 of States/UTs such 
as ‘Portal compliance’, ‘Data Reporting’, ‘Savings reporting compliance’ and 
‘Savings expenditure ratio’ leading to Rajasthan being at the 18 th rank among 
36 states/UTs with a score of 57.5 out of 100.  
The State Government accepted the facts and replied (August 2021) that State 
DBT portal has been linked with DBT Bharat portal and the performance of 
Rajasthan in DBT performance rankings would improve when the data of DBT 
schemes would be provided on DBT Bharat portal. Regarding non -availability 
of real time and complete information of DBT schemes on State DBT Portal, 
the Government accepted the fact  and informed that efforts are being made in 
that direction. Further progress in this regard is awaited (December 2021). 
Unavailability of real time information of all the schemes on the State DBT 
portal limits the utility and relevance of the information available on the portal. 
3.2  Constitution of Advisory Board 
As per the guidelines issued for State DBT cell by DBT Mission, Cabinet 
Secretariat, New Delhi, an ‘Advisory Board’ may be constituted as a parallel 
body to the state-level DBT Cell. It shall comprise representatives from various 
 
54 As of 16 July 2021 
55 https://dbtbharat.gov.in/state/state-ranking 

Chapter-III Infrastructure, Organization and Management of DBT in the State 
37 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
enablers and stakeholders of DBT like all the government departments wh ich 
run schemes which fall under the purview of DBT, UIDAI, State Level Bankers' 
Committee (SLBC), IT Team, NIC, NPCI, Telecom Service Providers (TSPs ), 
etc. This Board may also include representation from multi-lateral agencies like 
World Bank, Asian Development Bank (ADB) etc. for bringing in their 
technical competence to the operation of state DBT cell. The main role of this 
body would be to provide holistic, well-rounded advisory and consulting inputs 
to the executive body of the state DBT cell. This body may meet once in a 
quarter or at any other regular interval, as deemed fit. 
Audit scrutiny revealed that Advisory Board as envisaged in the guidelines has 
not been constituted in the State.  
The State Government accepted the facts and replied (August 2021) that State 
DBT cell is functioning both as State DBT cell and the Advisory board and that 
the constitution of a separate State Advisory Board is i n progress. As per the 
information provided by the Department (October 2021), the DBT State 
Advisory Board has been constituted by the State Government under the 
chairmanship of the Chief Secretary and with the participation of State level 
Bankers Committe e, NIC, National Payments Corporation of India, TSPs, 
World Bank, ADB etc. 
3.3  Functioning of the State DBT cell 
As per Guidelines for State DBT Cell issued by DBT Mission, Cabinet 
Secretariat, New Delhi for State DBT cell, Principal Secretary 
(Planning/IT/Finance) or equivalent level officer can be nominated as the state 
DBT co-ordinator, who shall act as the nodal officer for DBT related matters of 
the State. In addition, an Implementation Support Layer in DBT Cell must be 
constituted consisti ng of three coordinators who will be responsible for 
Technical, Non-technical and Finance/Admin support to the Cell's operations 
and may be Director or Officer on Special Duty (OSD) rank personnel. 
Technical support coordinator was to provide IT support for implementing DBT 
in the different schemes and function as a research unit in developing 
scheme/department-specific ICT applications. Further, the responsibilities of 
the non-technical support included facilitating training and capacity building of 
state officials regarding DBT. 
The administrative setup of the State DBT cell is as follows: 

Chapter-III Infrastructure, Organization and Management of DBT in the State 
38 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
Chart 4 
 
During audit it was noticed (December 2020) that GoR informed the Secretary, 
Cabinet Secretariat, New Delhi (October 2016) that Secretary (Planning 
Department), Government of Rajasthan was nominated as Single Point of 
Contact (SPOC) for DBT related matters of the state. However, during scrutiny 
of records, it was noticed that Joint Secretary (Institutional Finance, Planning 
Department) was working as SPOC (Dece mber 2020). It was also noticed that 
State DBT cell is not involved in development of scheme/department -specific 
ICT applications and the development of such applications is being handled by 
the concerned Departments. Further, the scrutiny of records (Dece mber 2020) 
revealed that training /seminar/workshop for capacity building of State officials 
have not been organized. 
The State Government replied (August 2021) that Secretary, Planning 
department of the State is the State DBT co -ordinator and acts as the nodal 
officer for DBT related matters of the State. However, as per the records Joint 
Secretary (Institutional Finance, Planning Department) was working as SPOC 
for DBT related matters of the state. Regarding the lack of training/  
seminar/workshop, the Sta te Government replied (September 2021) that 
training programs for the relevant departments had been organised on 
10.04.2019, 19.09.2020 and 30.01.2020. The State Government further 
informed that a seminar/workshop with the relevant departments regarding 
DBT was organised on 15.09.2021 and a training program with all the 
departments has been scheduled from 27.09.2021 to 10.10.2021. 
However, scrutiny (September 2021) of the relevant records revealed that all 
these were review meetings where progress in the implementation of DBT was 
assessed and further directions were given. The fact remains that steps for 
capacity building of the officers/officials regarding DBT have not been taken 
by the State Government. 


Chapter-III Infrastructure, Organization and Management of DBT in the State 
39 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
Summing up 
Jan-Aadhaar platform, serving as the State DBT portal, lacks effective 
linking with the DBT Bharat portal and does not contain important scheme 
details of the State DBT schemes such as number of beneficiaries in a 
scheme, amount transferred to the beneficiaries, month-wise/year-wise DBT 
transfers, savings due to DBT, etc. leading to Rajasthan’s poor score in the 
DBT performance rankings. Advisory Board to provide holistic, well -
rounded advisory and consulting inputs to the executiv e body of the state 
DBT cell had not been constituted in the state. Training, workshop, seminar 
and capacity building programmes for the officials have not been organised.  
Recommendations 
The State Government may: 
• ensure the availability of scheme -wise information of all DBT 
schemes in the s tate on the State DBT portal and its proper linking 
with the DBT Bharat portal;  
• make provision of expert technical support to enable State DBT cell 
to effectively function as nodal point for DBT related matters of the 
state as envisaged. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Chapter – IV 
Delivery of benefits to the 
intended beneficiaries and 
the grievance redressal 
mechanism 

41 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
 
Chapter IV 
Delivery of benefits to the intended beneficiaries and the 
grievance redressal mechanism 
Audit Objective 3: Whether beneficiaries actually received the benefits 
4.1 Timely payment of pension  
As per rule 16(v) of Pension Rules as amended on 14 June 2013, regular 
payment of pension is to be made by Treasury Officer possibly in the first week 
of the month and first payment of pension would be made within four days of 
receipt of online sanction. 
Scrutiny of the RajSSP data revealed that out of 17,88,380 cases of first pension 
payment during the audit period, pension in 17,62,736 (98.56 per cent) cases 
was paid with a delay ranging between 1 to 726 days. Age analysis of the delay 
is provided in the table below and depicted in the chart:  
Table 6: Delay in First payment of pension 
(₹ in lakh) 
Delay in First Payment 
(Number of Days) 
Number of cases Amount 
1 6,429 40.99 
2 to 5 77,705 497.30 
6 to 30 9,90,550 6609.62 
31 to 60 5,58,995 3873.22 
61 to 90 85,468 583.33 
91 to 200 40,770 273.72 
201 to 400 2,768 18.00 
Above 401 51 0.35 
Total 17,62,736 11,896.53 
Source: Information derived from RajSSP data dump 
Chart 5 
 


Chapter-IV Delivery of benefits to the intended beneficiaries and the grievance redressal mechanism 
42 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
Analysis of RajSSP data further revealed that during audit period, out of total 
19,80,18,851 regular pension payment transactions, in 10,65,06,098 (53.79 per 
cent) cases, pension was paid with a delay56 ranging between 1 to 597 days. Age 
analysis of the delays is shown in the table below and depicted in the chart:  
Chart 6 
 
The overall year-wise position of delay in pension payments is as under:  
Table 7: Year wise Delay in Payments of Pension 
S. No. Year Delayed payments 
First Payment Regular Payment Total 
1 2017-2018 2,38,323 2,42,85,366 2,45,23,689 
2 2018-2019 5,90,440 2,42,83,995 2,48,74,435 
3 2019-2020 9,32,212 4,14,36,415 4,23,68,627 
4 2020-2021 (up to 
July 2020) 1,761 1,65,00322 1,65,02,083 
 Total 17,62,736 10,65,06,098 10,82,68,834 
Source: Information derived from RajSSP data dump 
The analysis of RajSSP report57 of the 14 selected treasuries revealed that during 
the audit period, pension of 78,17,623 beneficiaries pertaining to CMOASPS 
and CMENSPS was not paid on time.  
 
56 Calculated from the eighth day of the month when the pension is to be paid to the date of 
actual payment. 
57 Named ‘Bill Summary Date Wise’ 


Chapter-IV Delivery of benefits to the intended beneficiaries and the grievance redressal mechanism 
43 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
The details are given in the table below: 
Table 8:  Delay in Payment of Pension 
 
S. 
No. 
Name of Treasury/Sub 
Treasury 
Number of Bills and Beneficiaries 
Total Bills prepared Bills paid with delay Bills 
prepared 
with 
delay 
Number 
of Bills 
Number of 
Beneficiaries 
Number 
of Bills 
Number of 
Beneficiaries 
1 Sub Treasury, Bansur NA 152 NA -- 
2 Sub Treasury, Dantaramgarh 1,528 12,75,861 715 6,88,091 390 
3 Sub Treasury, Dudu  864 3,38,738 347 1,37,273 223 
4 Sub Treasury, Kishangarh 1,958 9,19,341 907 2,97,904 671 
5 Sub Treasury, Lalsot 1,233 11,68,794 919 7,66,461 668 
6 Sub Treasury, Malpura 1,179 9,42,294 512 3,04,381 373 
7 Sub Treasury, Mojmabad 1,564 6,27,673 862 3,07,044 526 
8 Sub Treasury, Roopangarh 1,114 4,12,906 635 2,28,001 478 
9 Sub Treasury, Sambhar  2,016 12,82,741 1,107 6,37,812 717 
10 Treasury, Ajmer 1,597 14,92,313 846 7,00,773 661 
11 Treasury, Alwar 1,583 13,00,687 598 4,69,183 395 
12 Treasury, Dausa 2,157 15,64,189 1,378 7,14,365 1,107 
13 Treasury, Sikar 1,879 26,89,619 1,136 17,94,423 738 
14 Treasury, Tonk 1,876 13,76,442 1077 7,71,912 810 
Total 20,548 1,53,91,598 11,191 78,17,623 7,757 
Source: ‘Bill Summary Date Wise’ report of RajSSP  
It can be seen that out of the 20,548 bills prepared in the selected treasuries/sub-
treasuries during the audit period, delayed payments were made in case of 
11,191 bills (54.46 per cent). Out of these bills with delayed payments, it was 
noticed that 7,757  bills (69.31 per cent) were prepared with delay and in the 
remaining cases the payment was delayed even after preparation/passing of the 
bills in time. 
The matter was pointed out to the State Government (August 2021). The State 
government replied (August 2021) that the timeline for payment is applicable 
in cases where all the beneficiary details are correct. The reply further stated 
that pension payment cannot be made for situations where all the details are not 
correct.  
The reply of the State Government is not acceptable as the Pension rules clearly 
prescribe the timeline for various stages such as application verification, 
sanction and payment. Any deficiencies are required to be rectified within these 
timelines. Further, any errors/ mismatch in beneficiary details do not justify the 
large delays noticed by audit both in number of cases and number of days. 

Chapter-IV Delivery of benefits to the intended beneficiaries and the grievance redressal mechanism 
44 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
During the Exit Conference, the State government informed (September 2021) 
that delays are also attributable to release of funds by the Finance Department 
keeping in view the position of the State regarding Ways and Means advances 
and mentioned that the implementation of the single -DDO and single-treasury 
system for social security pensions has put an end to delays pertaining to 
treasury/ sub-treasury offices . Audit appreciates the steps taken by the State 
Government on the issue of delayed pension payments and considers that more 
efforts are required to suitably address the issue. This becomes important 
considering the fact that the beneficiaries are denied due benefits for the delay 
period as there is no provision for compensation in the form of payment of 
interest for this period. 
4.2 Payments of pension under CMOASPS and CMENSPS 
According to para 2 of Annexure ‘A’ of Pension Rules, in the event of excess/ 
irregular/double payments to the beneficiary of the pension scheme, the entire 
amount of such payment will be recovered from the beneficiary with 18 per cent 
annual interest. 
The analysis of RajSSP data revealed  that out of 9,176 cases of 
excess/irregular/double payments amounting to ₹3.44 crore under the selected 
schemes, recovery was pending in 3,605 (39.29 per cent) cases involving an 
amount of ₹1.98 crore (57.56 per cent) as on 13 January 2021 which was 
required to be recovered along with interest as per the rules ibid. The year wise 
position of pending recovery is shown below:  
Table 9: Position of pending recovery in cases of excess/irregular 
payments 
(₹ in lakh) 
Year Total cases of 
excess/irregular 
payments 
Total 
recoverable 
amount 
Pending 
cases of 
recovery 
Pending amount 
to be recovered  
2015-16 410 10.57 35 1.42 
2016-17 777 35.94 150 5.59 
2017-18 941 35.46 504 16.23 
2018-19 1,087 59.02 693 26.83 
2019-20 1,398 90.58 1,227 77.45 
2020-21 
(As on 13.1.21) 
4,563 112.80 996 70.64 
Total 9,176 344.37 3,605 198.16 
Source: Information derived from RajSSP data dump 

Chapter-IV Delivery of benefits to the intended beneficiaries and the grievance redressal mechanism 
45 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
Details of reasons for recovery are given in the table below: 
Table 10: Details of reasons of recovery  
S. 
No. 
No. of 
cases 
Reasons for 
recovery as per 
RajSSP data 
Remarks 
1 2,447 Death Payment of pension even after death of beneficiary 
2 908 Absurd/Invalid 
information 
The reasons column has absurd/ invalid information 
such as special characters etc. 
3 65 Government Job Government job of self/wife/ husband/son etc. making 
the beneficiary ineligible. 
4 54 Double Payment Pension paid twice on same PPO. 
5 47 Duplicate Payment Two PPOs for same beneficiary. 
6 42 Age Difference Anomalies in the age provided by the beneficiary in 
the application. 
7 17 - No reasons provided in the data 
8 16 Audit Recovery Irregular payments identified by Audit. 
9 8 Auto sanction Wrongful payments in cases of auto -escalated 
applications. 
10 1 Out of State Pensioners migrated out of state. 
Total 3,605   
Source: Information derived from RajSSP data dump 
As shown in the table above, reasons for Excess/Irregular/Double payment were 
not provided in RajSSP in 17 cases and absurd values were provided in 908 
cases. Lack of availability of such reasons impedes the ability of the Department 
to analyse the issues causing such instances and take necessary action thereon. 
The State Government replied (August 2021) that provision of recovery is in 
place for excess payments arising out of various reasons such as pension 
payments even after the death of the beneficiary,  etc. The Government reply 
was silent about the pending recoveries and the action being taken in such cases 
as well as the lack of reasons or absurd reasons for recovery provided in RajSSP. 
During the Exit Conference, the State government stated (September 2021) that 
pending amount would be recovered and accountability would be fixed. Further 
progress in this regard is awaited (December 2021). 
4.3  Procedure to address pension payment failure 
For the social security pensions, the bills are passed by the Treasury officer on 
the RajKosh module which are subsequently processed on PayManager module 
for the generation of e -Payment files. As per rule 144(a) (2) of Rajasthan 
Treasury Rules 2012, Treasury and Sub Treasury will provide all e‐payment 
files to e‐Kuber, by debiting the respective expenditure heads58 of departments 
and crediting the head 8670‐113 (01), Electronic Payment Advices. System 
generated reference numbers will be provided to these t ransactions. As per 
circular59 dated 21.3.2018 issued by Finance department (GoR), e-Kuber will 
maintain basic validations for obtaining e-payment files through IFMS. If these 
 
58 e.g. Major head 2235 in case of social security pensions 
59 F.S(TH-75)/DTA/IFMS/e-kuber/21475-874 dated 21.3.2018 

Chapter-IV Delivery of benefits to the intended beneficiaries and the grievance redressal mechanism 
46 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
basic validations are not fulfilled by e -payment files, the complete e -Payment 
files are rejected and for such e-Payment files, no TV numbers are generated in 
the system. No report of such failed transactions (without TV numbers) is 
available on RajSSP. 
Partial bills/payment advices/tokens (an e-payment file may have more than one 
bill/token) cannot be rejected by e-Kuber and for such files, payment is done to 
beneficiaries with correct details and rejected for others. On execution of the 
transactions, e-Scroll containing the details of successful and failed transactions 
will be generated by e-Kuber and provided on PayManager module of IFMS to 
the Treasuries/Sub Treasury officer/DDOs. The treasury /Sub treasury officer 
will affix the paid mark with TV numb ers on the body of the bill/payment on 
receipt of the e -payment report/e -scroll. Information regarding such failed 
transactions (with TV numbers) is available on RajSSP in the form of ‘Payment 
return date wise’ report.  
Where pension payment to the beneficiary is being done through Money Order 
(MO), the bills are prepared by DDO for payment in the departmental account 
of the concerned head postmaster and a list of beneficiaries is sent to the head 
postmaster after passing the bills and payment in the departmental account. The 
disbursement of MO is made by the Head postmaster through Dakpal of the 
concerned area. In cases of non -disbursement of MO, a cheque of the amount 
not paid along with the list of relevant beneficiaries with reasons is sent back to 
the T O/STO concerned.  The undisbursed amount received from the head 
postmaster is deposited in the concerned budget head through challan. 
(i) The analysis of RajSSP data and scrutiny of the RajSSP  reports 
disclosed that during the audit period, out of total 20,13,94,050 transactions, the 
payment failed in 16,97,117 (0.84 per cent) transactions. The details are given 
below: 
Table 11: Year wise details of failed transactions  
(₹ in crore) 
S. 
No. 
Year Total 
Transactions 
Amount 
corresponding 
to total 
transactions 
Failed Transactions Amount 
corresponding 
to failed 
transactions 
With TV 
number 
Without 
TV 
number 
Total 
1 2017-18 5,33,72,434 2,984.02 3,72,621 44,699 4,17,320 24.52 
2 2018-19 5,70,37,699 3,847.01 3,64,934 20,909 3,85,843 27.94 
3 2019-20 6,69,28,276 5,463.66 5,86,394 1,11,977 6,98,371 58.95 
4 2020-21 
(up to 
July 
2020) 
2,40,55,641 1,969.41 99,515 96,068 1,95,583 16.90 
Total 20,13,94,050 14,264.10 14,23,464 2,73,653 16,97,117 
(0.84 per 
cent) 
128.31 
Source: Information derived from RajSSP data dump 

Chapter-IV Delivery of benefits to the intended beneficiaries and the grievance redressal mechanism 
47 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
Various reasons 60 for failure of transactions have been shown in the Chart 
below: 
Chart 7 
 
As can be seen, wrong bank account details were the most significant reason for 
failure of pension payments. 
(ii) During the field study, analysis of RajSSP report 61 of the 14 selected 
treasuries revealed that 1,02,338 transactions were reverted due to various 
reasons, out of which in 36,677 (35.78 per cent) cases involving ₹2.74 crore, it 
was due to wrong bank details. Treasury-wise position of the failed transactions 
is provided in the table below: 
Table 12: Details of reverted pension transactions 
(₹ in lakh) 
S. No. Name of Treasury/Sub-treasury Total number of 
reverted transactions 
Amount involved in reverted 
transactions 
1 TO Alwar 9,017 62.65 
2 STO Bansur (Alwar) 4,035 27.13 
3 TO Tonk 7,457 54.45 
4 STO Malpura (Tonk) 4,219 33.61 
5 TO Ajmer 7,625 52.55 
6 STO Kishangarh (Ajmer) 3,176 22.51 
7 STO Roopangarh (Ajmer) 2,289 16.53 
8 TO Sikar 19,381 126.08 
9 STO Dantaramgarh (Sikar) 12,502 91.03 
10 TO Dausa 10,615 82.65 
11 STO Lalsot (Dausa) 8,733 63.40 
12 STO Dudu (Jaipur) 1,763 13.17 
13 STO Sambhar (Jaipur) 7,349 50.41 
14 STO Mojmabad (Jaipur) 4,177 27.69 
Total 1,02,338 723.86 
Source: ‘Payment return date wise report’ of RajSSP  
 
60 ‘Other reasons’ - Account suspended, Name incorrect, Maximum account balance exceeded, 
out of station, Beneficiary name difference etc. 
61 “Payment return date wise” 


Chapter-IV Delivery of benefits to the intended beneficiaries and the grievance redressal mechanism 
48 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
During the audit of records of Treasury officer Dudu and Mojambad, it was 
noticed (November 2020) that there were 316 cases in which payment of 
pension was restarted between the period 01 August 2017 to 30 June 2019 but 
the payment of arrears of ₹ 22.50 lakh to the concerned beneficiaries was still 
pending. The details are provided in Annexure P. It is important to note here 
that records regarding pending arrear payment to beneficiaries are not being 
maintained in other selected treasuries. Further, no such report is available on 
RajSSP as well. 
(iii) During beneficiary survey, audit noticed that in 10 cases (1.81 per cent) 
where pension was being paid to the beneficiaries through Money order, the 
pension payment had stopped. For these beneficiaries, scrutiny of the 
information available on RajSSP  revealed that in seven cases, reasons for 
stopping the pension were not available and in three cases, reasons for pension 
stoppage were mentioned as ‘Wrong Bank Details’ even when pension in these 
cases was being paid through Money order. Details have bee n provided in 
Annexure Q. 
(iv) Further analysis revealed that in cases of failure of pension payment, 
mechanism to inform the beneficiary regarding the payment failure or its 
reasons is not there. When the pension is not paid, the beneficiary has to first 
approach the sanctioning authority or the treasury officer to get the information 
regarding the reason for the non-payment of pension. As shown in the cases of 
beneficiary survey above, in some cases, the specific/correct reasons are not 
available in the RajSSP  as well. In cases where beneficiary is informed of the 
specific error in beneficiary details such as bank account details, the beneficiary 
has to first get the details rectified in the Jan-Aadhaar database through e-Mitra 
kiosks followed by two levels of verification (process provided in the Chart 8 
below).  
Chart 8 
 


Chapter-IV Delivery of benefits to the intended beneficiaries and the grievance redressal mechanism 
49 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
Since the Jan-Aadhaar database and RajSSP are linked through an Application 
Programming Interface ( API), the rectified/updated Jan -Aadhaar details are 
available in RajSSP but the rectification/update is not automatically effected in 
RajSSP for resumption of pension payment and the beneficiary is required to 
get the updated Jan -Aadhaar information approved on RajSSP by the 
sanctioning authority. It is interesting to note that the second level of verification 
while updating Jan-Aadhaar details is carried out by the same officer who acts 
as the sanctioning authority for social security pensions of SJED. However, it 
was seen during the audit that RajSSP lacks report/MIS regardi ng the 
beneficiaries awaiting approval of updated Jan-Aadhaar details on RajSSP and 
therefore, the beneficiaries need to approach the sanctioning authority again 
who then approves the necessary update of the Jan -Aadhaar details in the 
RajSSP database. On r ectification of the details, the pension payment is 
restarted. 
This was corroborated by the replies from BDO Malpura, BDO Bansur, STO 
Mojamabad, STO Dudu, SDO Ajmer and SDO Sikar who informed that it is 
necessary for the beneficiary to approach the sanctioning authority for updating 
the bank account details. 
Thus, there is no provision in RajSSP for the beneficiary to be automatically 
notified through SMS or other means regarding pension payment failure and its 
reasons or for the Department to take steps to inform the beneficiary and make 
efforts for rectification of details. Neither the Jan-Aadhaar details, updated after 
two levels of verification, are automatically updated in RajSSP for payment of 
social security pensions to resume nor there is any report in RajSSP regarding 
pending approvals of updated and verified Jan -Aadhaar details of the 
beneficiaries. In the absence of such provisions, the burden of getting the 
required information regarding reasons for non -payment of pension and going 
through the pro tracted process to get the details rectified, lies entirely on  the 
beneficiary.  
During the exit conference, the State Government stated (September 2021) that 
currently the pensioner can update his bank details through Jan-Aadhaar which 
gets automatically updated on RajSSP within 24 hours and no approval on 
RajSSP is required for the same. This was verified by Audit (September 2021). 
However, the position regarding changes other than bank account details was 
not clarified. 
Regarding the 316 cases where arrear payments were to be made, the State 
Government stated (July 2021) that necessary action is being taken. Further 
progress in this regard has not been intimated though asked for ( December 
2021).  

Chapter-IV Delivery of benefits to the intended beneficiaries and the grievance redressal mechanism 
50 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
Audit Objective 4: Whether effect ive grievance redressal was ensured for 
proper implementation of the schemes 
 
4.4 Grievance redressal cell 
As per the Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) issued by Cabinet Secretariat 
(GoI), DBT cell is required to constitute a dedicated body to deal with 
complaints and grievances of beneficiaries in a fair and timely manner. It was 
envisaged that suitable grievance redressal mechanisms established at different 
layers would address grievances pertaining to various stakeholders in the 
system. No such provision for creation of grievance redressal cell was found in 
the Pension rules. 
Audit observed that dedicated body/cell for grievance redressal has neither been 
established by State DBT cell nor by the SJED. 
The State Government replied (August 2021) that  grievances are being 
registered and resolved through Sampark62 portal and call centre working in the 
department. 
The State Government further informed (September 2021) that complaints 
received on Sampark portal are required to be disposed within the prescribed 
time due to which a separate grievance redressal cell is not required. The 
government reply was silent regar ding the disposal of complaints received 
through offline mode. Audit is of the view that in addition to appropriate and 
timely disposal of beneficiary complaints/grievances/queries, the grievance 
redressal mechanism may also be utilised to address the problems/grievances of 
other stakeholders in the DBT process such as state officials, banks etc. Further, 
its creation would not only be helpful in bringing down the pending grievances, 
it would also be helpful to the department in analysis of the trend and nature of 
the complaints/grievances/queries to generate valuable insights for further 
refinement of scheme procedures 
4.5 Redressal of the grievances registered on RajSSP portal  
The grievances pertaining to CMOASPS and CMENSPS can be registered on 
the RajSSP portal by the beneficiaries/ applicants. However, timeline for 
resolution of the grievances/complaints pertaining to social security pensions 
has not been provided in the Pens ion rules, RajSSP system or even in the 
Rajasthan Guaranteed Delivery of Public Services (RGDPS) Act, 2011.  
 
62 Rajasthan Sampark, under the Department of IT and Communication, consists of a State 
level Call Center with integrated web portal for addressing queries and grievances of citizens 
of Rajasthan related to government services. 

Chapter-IV Delivery of benefits to the intended beneficiaries and the grievance redressal mechanism 
51 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
Administrative Reforms Department, GoR issued (12 thAugust 2014) a circular 
which prescribed a time limit of maximum 15 days for disposal of 
application/grievances by the concerned officer for the services not covered 
under RGDPS Act, 2011. In addition, a period of 7 days has been prescribed for 
forwarding of application/complaint/grievance to the concerned officer, in case 
the application/complaint/grievance is addressed to an authority other than the 
concerned officer. 
The year -wise position of complaints received on RajSSP during the audit 
period is as under:  
Table 13: Year wise position of complaints  
S. No. Year Complaints registered 
1 2017-2018 4,579 
2 2018-2019 5,695 
3 2019-2020 5,839 
4 2020-2021 (upto July 2020) 1,808 
Total 17,921 
Source: Information derived from RajSSP data dump 
The analysis of RajSSP data revealed that out of the 17,921 queries/ complaints 
registered during the audit period, 8,060 (44.98 per cent) queries/complaints 
remained unattended as on 13 January 2021 (as shown in the screenshot 
provided in Annexure R) and 4,746 were attended wi thin a period of 22 days 
from the filing of the complaint/grievance. The remaining 5,115 (28.54 per 
cent) complaints were resolved with a delay63 ranging from 1 to 1173 days. The 
age analysis of the delay in resolution of queries/complaints has been given in 
the table below: 
Table 14: Age Analysis of delay for resolution of Complaints/Queries 
S. No. Days Number of Complaints/Queries 
1 1-30 1247 
2 31-100 1300 
3 101-500                                  1982 
4 500 Above    586 
Total 5115 
Audit also observed that system to inform the beneficiary/applicant through 
means such as SMS regarding the registering of complaint or its subsequent 
processing on RajSSP was non-existent. 
 
63 Delay calculated after the lapse of 15+7 =22 days i.e. from 23 rd day of filing the 
complaint/grievance. 

Chapter-IV Delivery of benefits to the intended beneficiaries and the grievance redressal mechanism 
52 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
The State Government replied (August 2021) that since Sampark portal is a state 
level portal for all the Departments, complaints received on RajSSP portal are 
generally also received on Rajasthan Sampark portal. Therefore, grievances 
addressed on Rajasthan Sampark portal are automatically resolved on RajSSP 
portal. The reply further stated that time limit for grievance redressal is 
prescribed on Rajasthan Sampark portal but not in RajSSP.  
During the Exit Conference, the State government accepted (September  2021) 
the audit recommendation and stated that a link of Sampark portal may be given 
on RajSSP instead of a separate grievance registration facility to avoid 
duplication. Audit examination (September 2021) revealed that Pensioner 
complaint feature 64 on RajSSP redirects the pensioner to Rajasthan Sampark 
portal for lodging of complaint or its tracking. It is also pertinent to mention 
here that the beneficiary is informed regarding registration and resolution of the 
complaint through SMS for complaints regis tered on Sampark portal. Audit 
appreciates the efforts of the State Government in taking remedial action based 
on the recommendation of the Audit.The functioning of the modified grievance 
redressal mechanism would be verified in future audits. 
 
Summing up 
Pension payments including the first payment as well as the regular payments 
were not made within the timelines prescribed in the Pension rules. Recoveries 
for excess/irregular pension payments were pending. Shortcomings were noticed 
in the procedure to address pension payment failures with no provision to inform 
beneficiaries about such failures and the beneficiaries being subjected to a 
protracted process with redundant steps for rectification of details. 
A dedicated body/cell for grievance  redressal has neither been established by 
State DBT cell nor SJED for focussed and timely disposal of 
complaints/grievances/queries of the beneficiaries. Significant pendency was 
noticed in the disposal of grievances/queries pertaining to CMOASPS and 
CMENSPS registered on RajSSP. There was no system to inform the 
beneficiary/applicant regarding registering of complaint or its subsequent 
processing on RajSSP.  
 
64 RajSSP (https://ssp.rajasthan.gov.in/) -> Reports -> Pensioner Complaint 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Annexures  

Annexures 
55 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
Annexure A 
(Refer paragraph 1.2.2 B) 
 Statement showing details of selection of Districts, lower level units and 
beneficiaries  
(i) Districts: Keeping in view the spread of Covid -19, the field audits had been 
limited to Jaipur and the adjoining districts only. Therefore, six districts were selected 
for the field audits viz. Jaipur, Dausa, Tonk, Sikar, Ajmer and Alwar. 
(ii) Selection of Block and Gram Panchayat/Wards:  In order to gauge the 
implementation of the scheme and the effectiveness of DBT in reaching both urban and 
rural beneficiaries, in each district one Urban Block and one Rural Block, within which 
a Gram Panchayat and Ward respectively were selected. The sel ection of one 
Urban/Rural Block in each of the selected districts as well as one Ward/Gram Panchayat 
within those Urban/Rural blocks respectively was on the basis of highest combined total 
expenditure of both the schemes. Further, in addition to the above,  Treasury/Sub 
Treasury Offices of respective Block, Ward, Gram Panchayat were also audited during 
the field study. Details of selection of Districts, Blocks and Ward/Gram Panchayat are 
as under: 
S.No. District Block Urban/ 
Rural 
Gram 
Panchayat/ 
Ward 
Concerned Treasury 
Sub Treasury 
1 Ajmer Kishangarh Rural Rupangarh STO Kishangarh 
STO Roopangarh 
Ajmer Urban Ajmer TO Ajmer 
2 Alwar Bansur Rural Bansur STO Bansur 
Alwar Urban Ward 42 TO Alwar 
3 Dausa Lalsot Rural Didwana STO Lalsot 
Dausa Urban Dausa TO Dausa 
4 Jaipur Dudu Rural Narayana STO Dudu  
STO Mojmabad 
STO Sambhar 
Jobner Urban Ward 07 STO Sambhar 
5 Sikar Dantaramgarh Rural Danta STO Dantaramgarh 
Sikar Urban Ward 45 TO Sikar 
6 Tonk Malpura Rural Pachevar STO Malpura 
Tonk Urban Ward 19  TO Tonk 
Total 6 12  12 14 
 
(iii) Selection of beneficiaries for survey: Due to limitations imposed by Covid-19 
pandemic in administering the questionnaire to the individual beneficiaries, a figure of 
40 beneficiaries per district for each of the schemes was selected. The beneficiaries were 
selected on Simple Random Sampling without Replacement (SRSWOR) basis. 
Therefore, a total of 240 beneficiaries receiving pensions in their accounts were selected 
for each scheme. 

Annexures 
56 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
Regarding the parameters for selection of these beneficiaries, it is pertinent to mention 
that as per Census 2011, the ratio 65of rural to urban population was approximately 3:1. 
Therefore, out of these 40 beneficiaries selected in each district, 30 were selected  from 
rural areas and 10 were selected from urban areas i.e. 30 beneficiaries were randomly 
selected from each of the selected Gram Panchayat and 10 beneficiaries were randomly 
selected from each selected Ward for each scheme. 
In addition to the above 480 beneficiaries (240 beneficiaries per scheme) receiving 
pension in their bank accounts, 72 beneficiaries (CMOASPS:45, CMENSPS:27) 
belonging to the selected Gram Panchayats/Wards receiving pension through Money 
Orders (MO) were also selected to examine the p rocess of payment of pension through 
MO. 
  
 
65 As per Census 2011, 
  Total population of Rajasthan = 68,548,437 
  Rural population = 51,500,352 
  Urban population = 17,048,085 
 

Annexures 
57 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
Annexure B 
(Refer paragraph 1.2.2 C) 
Statement showing details of filters and tables used while  analysis of Data Dump  
S No. Name of table Working Details Remarks Subject of Para 
1.  1. SSP Payment 
Recovery 
2. SSP Pensioner 
Mst 
Joined by “App Id” 
Following Filter Applied 
“Social Scheme Id”-
1,3,13,14,17,18 
“Remaining Rcv Amt”-
above ‘0’ 
'SSP Payment Recovery' table is 
joined with ‘SSP Pensioner Mst’ 
table by App ID column. Then to 
get the data related to the selected 
schemes filter is used "Social 
Scheme ID” and 1 -cmwps,13-
cmwps-sc,14-cmwps-st,3-
cmoaps, 17 -cmoaps-sc ,18 -
cmoaps are selected. After that 
filter is used in column 
"Remaining Rcv Amt" to get the 
records in which remaining 
recoveries exist and all va lues 
more than '0' are selected. 
Payment of 
pension under 
CMOASPS and 
CMENSPS (Refer 
paragraph No. 4.2) 
2.  1.  SSP Pensioner 
Mst 
Calculated Diff in app 
date and Sanction date-45 
days 
 
Filter Applied 
 “App date”- 01.04.2017 
to 31.07.2020 
 “Social Scheme Id”-
1,3,13,14,17,18 
 “Sanction number.”-Not 
null 
“Diff in app date and 
Sanction date” is more 
than 45 days 
Filter is used in column ‘Social 
Scheme ID’   and 1 -cmwps, 13 -
cmwps-sc,14-cmwps-st,3-
cmoaps, 17 -cmoaps-sc ,18 -
cmoaps st are selected. After that 
filter is used in column ‘app date’ 
to get the records of the period 
01.04.2017 to 31.07.2020.  Then 
‘sanction no.’ is filtered to get all 
sanctioned applications. Then 
difference betw een app date and 
sanction date is calculated. And all 
those records are filtered where 
difference between app date and 
sanction date is more than 45 days. 
 
Sanction of 
applications 
(Refer paragraph 
No. 2.2) 
3.  1.  SSP Pensioner  
Mst 
Difference between DOB 
& App date calculated (in 
years) 
following filter Applied: 
 “Social Scheme”-3,17,18 
“Gender”-1,2 
“diff between dob-date  of 
App”- less than 55 & 58  
,“Sanction   no- Not null 
 “App date- 01.04.2017 to 
31.07.2020 
Difference between DOB & App 
date is calculated(in years). 
Then following filters are applied 
 Where “Social Scheme id” is 3 -
cmoaps,17-cmoaps-sc,18-
cmoaps-st and “Gender” is  
1Female) and “Sanction  no- is not 
null and “App date- 01.04.2017 to 
31.07.2020 and “diff between dob 
& date  of App”- less than 55 
selected (to get records of  those 
female  applicants whose 
application was accepted without 
attaining minimum age criteria) 
 
Further, where “Social Scheme id” 
is 3 -cmoaps,17-cmoaps-sc,18-
cmoaps-st and “Gender” is  
2(Male) and “Sanction   no- Not 
null and “App date- 01.04.2017 to 
31.07.2020 and “diff between dob 
& date  of App” - less than 58 (to 
get records of those male 
Sanction of Old 
Age Pension (Refer 
paragraph No. 2.4) 

Annexures 
58 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
S No. Name of table Working Details Remarks Subject of Para 
applicants whose pension was 
sanctioned without attaining age 
minimum age  criteria) 
4.  1.    SSP Pensioner  
Mst 
2. SSP Pensioner 
Certificate  Details 
Joined with “App Id” 
following filter Applied 
“Social Scheme”-1,13,14 
 
“Marital Status”1,2,3 
“Gender”-1(female) 
“Sanction date.” 
01.04.2017 to 31.07.2020 
“Husband divorce issuing 
Authority”- Null, 
numeric, special value 
“SSP pensioner Mst” table is 
joined with “SSP Pensioner 
Certificate Details” table by “App 
Id”. Following filters are applied 
where “Social Scheme id” is 1-
cmwps,13-cmwps-sc,14-cmwps-
st, and “Gender” is 1(female), 
marital status is 1 -divorce,2-
widowed and 3 - separated, 
“Sanction date.” 01.04.2017 to 
31.07.2020 and “Husband divorce 
issuing Authority” is either Null, 
Numeric or any special character. 
Sanction of Ekal 
Nari pension 
(Refer paragraph 
No. 2.3) 
 
 
 
 
5.  1.    SSP Pensioner  
Mst 
 
 
 
 
 
Age Calculated on  
31.07.2020 
 
following filter Applied: 
“Gender”- 1(female), 
 “Marital Status” 
1,2,3,(widow, divorced, 
separated) 
“Sanction   no.”- not null 
 
 “Stop date”-1.1.1900(by 
default ) where pension 
not stopped 
“Social Scheme  Id”-
(3,17,18) 
“Age Calculated on  
31.07.2020”-age above 
75, age between 60-74 
 
 
Age is calculated as on 31.07.2020 
using “dob column”. To get 
records of female beneficiaries 
who a re getting pension in 
CMOASPS having marital status 
widow, separated, divorced 
following filters is applied. 
Where “social scheme id” is 3 -
cmoaps, 17 -cmoaps-sc, 18 -
cmoaps-st and “Gender is 
1(Female)” and marital status is 1-
Divorced,2-Widow,3-Separtated 
and “sanction no” is not null and 
“stop date” is 1.1.1900(by default 
date where pension has not 
stopped). Further, to bifurcate 
female beneficiaries on the basis 
of age as on 31.07.2020, filter is 
applied and records having age 
above-75, and age between 60 -74 
are separated. 
Rates of pension 
paid to the 
beneficiaries 
(Refer paragraph 
No. 2.7) 
6.  1.SSP Pensioner  
query 
2.SSP Pensioner  
Mst 
 
Joined with App Id and 
Difference in Query date 
and solution date 
calculated than 
Filter Applied: 
 “Solution’- null 
“Description”- not null 
Difference in Query date 
and solution date- above 
“22”  
 “Query Date”- 
01.04.2017 to 31.07.2020 
“Social Scheme Id”- 
1,3,13,14,17,18 
SSP pensioner query table is 
joined with SSP Pensioner Mst by 
App id and following  filters were 
applied: 
Where “social scheme id” is 3 -
cmoaps,17-cmoaps-sc,18-
cmoaps-st. 1 -cmwps,13-cmwps 
sc,14-cmwps-st and “query date ” 
is 01.04.2017 to 31.07.2020. After 
that, 
1. To get records null queries 
“Description” filter is used 
where description is null. 
2. To get records where 
pensioner’s query not attended, 
filter is used where solution is 
null 
3. To get the number of days 
taken for attending the query, 
difference between query date 
and solution date is calculated. 
Grievance redressal 
cell (Refer 
paragraph No. 4.4) 

Annexures 
59 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
S No. Name of table Working Details Remarks Subject of Para 
And filter is applied to get 
records wh ere difference is 
more than 22 days. 
7.  1. SSP Pensioner  
Mst 
2. SSP Pension  
Payment 
3. SSP Bill  entry 
 
SSP Pensioner Mst Joined 
with SSP Pension 
payment by ”App Id” and 
SSP Pension Payment 
Joined with SSP Bill 
Entry by “Reference No.” 
 
Filter Applied  
“Social scheme id”-
1,3,13,14,17,18 
“payment month and 
payment year-04-2017 to 
07-2020 
Bill type-“2” (first 
payment) Difference in 
Sanction Date +4 and TV 
Date- above -‘1’ day 
“SSP pension payment” table is 
joined with “SSP Pensioner Mst” 
table by App Id and with “SSP Bill 
Entry” table by “Reference no.” 
following filters are applied: - 
Where “social scheme id” is 3 -
cmoaps,17-cmoaps-sc,18-
cmoaps-st. 1 -cmwps,13-cmwps 
sc,14-cmwps-st and payment  
month & payment year is from 4 -
2017 to 7 -2020 and Bill type is 
2(first payment). Further, 
difference between sanction 
date+4 days and TV date is 
calculated and all records where 
difference is more than 1 day are 
selected.  
Timely payment of 
pension 
(Refer paragraph 
No 4.1) 
8.  1.SSP Pensioner  
Mst 
2.SSP Pensioner  
Payment 
3. SSP Bill  entry 
SSP Pensioner Mst Joined 
with SSP Pension 
payment by ”App Id” and 
SSP Pension Payment 
Joined with SSP Bill 
Entry    by “Reference 
No.” 
Filter applied 
 
“TV No” –Null 
“Social scheme id”-
1,3,13,14,17,18 
“payment month and 
payment year-04-2017 to 
07-2020 
“SSP pension payment” table is 
joined with “SSP Pensioner Mst” 
table by App Id and with “SSP Bill 
Entry” table by “Reference no.” 
following filters are applied: 
Where “so cial scheme id” is 3 -
cmoaps,17-cmoaps-sc,18-
cmoaps-st. 1 -cmwps,13-cmwps 
sc,14-cmwps-st and payment 
month & payment year is from 4 -
2017 to 7 -2020 and “TV no.” is 
null. 
Procedure to 
address pension 
payment failure 
(Refer paragraph 
No 4.3) 
9.  1.SSP Pensioner  
Mst 
2.SSP Pensioner  
Payment 
3.SSP bill  entry 
 
SSP Pensioner Mst Joined 
with SSP Pension 
payment by ”App Id” 
and 
SSP Pension Payment 
Joined with SSP Bill 
Entry    by “Reference 
No.” 
filter applied 
“Social scheme id”-
1,3,13,14,17,18 
“Bill Type;-1” (regular 
payment) 
difference in “payment 
due date” and “TV 
date”(payment due date 
created as 7th of 
following month)-above 
‘1’ day 
“payment month and 
payment year-04-2017 to 
07-2020  
 
“SSP pension payment” table is 
joined with “SSP Pensioner Mst” 
table by App Id and with “SSP Bill 
Entry” table by “Reference no.” 
following filters are applied: 
Where “social scheme id” is 3 -
cmoaps,17-cmoaps-sc,18-
cmoaps-st. 1 -cmwps,13-cmwps 
sc,14-cmwps-st and payment 
month & payment year is from 4 -
2017 to 7 -2020 and Bill t ype is 
1(Regular payment). Further, 
payment due date calculated as 7 th 
day of the following month. And 
difference between payment due 
date and TV date is calculated and 
all records where difference is 
more than 1 day are selected.  
Timely payment of 
pension 
(Refer paragraph 
No 4.1) 

Annexures 
60 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
S No. Name of table Working Details Remarks Subject of Para 
10.  1.SSP Pensioner  
Mst 
2.SSP Pensioner  
Payment 
3.SSP Pension 
Returned 
SSP Pensioner Mst Joined 
with SSP Pension 
payment by ”App Id” 
And 
SSP Pension Payment 
Joined with SSP Pension 
Returned by “pay id.” 
filter applied 
“Social scheme id”-
1,3,13,14,17,18 
“Payment month & Year 
from 01.04.2017 to 
31.07.2020”  
“SSP pension payment” table is 
joined with “SSP Pensioner Mst” 
table by App Id and with “SSP 
Pension Returned” table by “Pay 
Id.” Then following filters are 
applied: Where “social scheme id” 
is 3 -cmoaps,17-cmoaps-sc,18-
cmoaps-st. 1 -cmwps,13-cmwps 
sc,14-cmwps-st and payment 
month & payment year is from 4 -
2017 to 7-2020. 
Procedure to 
address pension 
payment failure 
(Refer paragraph 
No 4.3) 
11.  1.SSP Other Doc 
Mst 
2.SSP Pensioners 
Mst 
Joined with “App Id” 
Following filter applied 
 
Uid no. – Null 
Janaadhar ID–Null 
Bhamashah No. – Null 
App id-1,3,13,14,17,18 
Application status-15 
Sanction date- 01.04.2017 
to 31.07.2020 
“SSP pensioner Mst” table is 
joined with “SSP Other Doc Mst” 
table by App Id and following 
filters are applied: - Where “social 
scheme id” is 3 -cmoaps,17-
cmoaps-sc,18-cmoaps-st, 1 -
cmwps,13-cmwps sc,14-cmwps-st 
and application status is 15 
(Regular pensioner) and UID is 
null, Janaadhar ID no. is null an d 
Bhamashah No. is null. 
Sanction date - 01.04.2017 to 
31.07.2020 
Details of 
Bhamashah/Jan-
Aadhaar/Aadhaar 
number (Refer 
paragraph No.  2.8) 
 
12.  1.SSP payment 
recovery 
2.SSP Pensioner 
Mst 
Joined by “App Id” 
Following Filter Applied 
“Social Scheme Id”-
1,3,13,14,17,18 
“Remaining Rcv Amt”-
above ‘0’ and filter 
“recovery reason” applied 
and numeric and number 
value selected.  
'SSP Payment Recovery' table is 
joined with ‘SSP Pensioner Mst’ 
by App ID column. Then to get the 
data related to the selected 
schemes, filter is used in column 
"Social Scheme ID" and 1 -
cmwps,13-cmwps-sc,14-cmwps-
st,3-cmoaps, 17 -cmoaps-sc ,18 -
cmoaps-ST are selected. After 
that, filter is applied in the column 
"Remaining Rcv Amt" to get the 
records in which remaining 
recovery exists and all values 
greater than '0' were selected and 
filter was applied on “recovery 
reason” applied to select records 
with numeric and number values. 
Application 
Controls of RajSSP 
(Refer paragraph 
No.  2.10.5) 
13.  1.SSP Pensioner 
query  
2.SSP Pensioner 
Mst 
SSP pensioner query  
table Joined with SSP 
pensioner Mst by App Id 
and 
Filter Applied: 
  
 “Query Date”- 
01.04.2017 to 31.07.2020 
“Social Scheme Id”- 
1,3,13,14,17,18 and in  
“Solution”-Absurd values 
selected. 
 
 
SSP pensioner query table is 
joined with SSP Pensioner Mst by 
App id and following filter are 
applied. 
Where “social scheme id” is 3 -
cmoaps,17-cmoaps-sc,18-
cmoaps-st. 1 -cmwps,13-cmwps 
sc,14-cmwps-st and “query date ” 
is 01.04.2017 to 31.07.2020. After 
that,to get records having absurd 
values “solution”  filter is used and 
absurd values selected. 
Application 
Controls of RajSSP 
(Refer paragraph 
No.  2.10.5) 

Annexures 
61 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
S No. Name of table Working Details Remarks Subject of Para 
14.  1.SSP Kiosk App 
Rec Verification 
 
2.SSP Pensioner 
Mst  
SSP Kiosk App Rec 
Verification  table Joined 
with SSP pensioner Mst 
by App Id and 
Filter Applied: 
  
 “app Date”- 01.04.2017 
to 31.07.2020 
“Social Scheme Id”- 
1,3,13,14,17,18 and in  
“Verify Remark”-Absurd 
values selected. 
SSP Kiosk App Rec table is joined 
with SSP Pensioner Mst by App id 
and following filters were  applied: 
Where “social scheme id” is 3 -
cmoaps,17-cmoaps-sc,18-
cmoaps-st. 1 -cmwps,13-cmwps 
sc,14-cmwps-st and “app date ” is 
01.04.2017 to 31.07.2020. After 
that, to get records having absurd 
values in “Verify Remark” 
column, filter was  used and 
absurd values were selected. 
Application 
Controls of RajSSP 
(Refer paragraph 
No.  2.10.5) 
15.  1.SSP Pensioner 
Certificate 
2.SSP Pensioner 
Mst 
SSP pensioner Certificate  
table Joined with SSP 
pensioner Mst by App Id 
and 
Filter Applied: 
  
 “app Date”- 01.04.2017 
to 31.07.2020 
“Social Scheme Id”- 
1,3,13,14,17,18 and in  
“Husband Divorce Issuing 
Authority ”, “Age issuing 
Authorty”-Absurd values 
selected. 
SSP pensioner Certificate table is 
joined with SSP Pensioner Mst by 
App id and following filter were  
applied: 
Where “social scheme id” is 3 -
cmoaps,17-cmoaps-sc,18-
cmoaps-st. 1 -cmwps,13-cmwps 
sc,14-cmwps-st and “app date ” is 
01.04.2017 to 31.07.2020.  After 
that, to get records absurd value 
“Husband Divorce Issuing 
Authority ”, “Age  issuing 
Authorty”- filter was  used and 
absurd values were selected. 
Application 
Controls of RajSSP 
(Refer paragraph 
No.  2.10.5) 
16.  1.SSP Pensioner 
Mst 
2.SSP Village Mst 
3.SSP Doc Mst 
1. SSP pensioner mst 
table Joined with SSP 
village Mst by village Id 
and 
Filter Applied: 
  
 “app Date”- 01.04.2017 
to 31.07.2020 
“Social Scheme Id”- 
1,3,13,14,17,18 “sanction 
no –not a null value”  and 
in  
“pincode”-null 
 
2. SSP pensioner mst 
table Joined with SSP Doc 
Mst by app Id and 
Filter Applied: 
  
 “app Date”- 01.04.2017 
to 31.07.2020 
“Social Scheme Id”- 
1,3,13,14,17,18 , 
“sanction no –not a null 
value” and  
“annual  income”-null 
SSP village Mst table is joined 
with SSP Pensioner Mst by 
Village id and following filters 
were applied. 
Where “social sc heme id” is 3 -
cmoaps, 17 -cmoaps-sc, 18 -
cmoaps-st. 1 -cmwps, 13 -cmwps 
sc, 14-cmwps-st and “app date” is 
01.04.2017 to 31.07.2020 and 
“Sanction No.” is not a null value 
and “Pincode” is null value. 
 
 
2. SSP Doc mst table was  joined 
with SSP Pensioner Mst by App id 
and following filters were  applied: 
Where “social scheme id” is 3 -
cmoaps,17-cmoaps-sc,18-
cmoaps-st. 1 -cmwps,13-cmwps 
sc,14-cmwps-st and “app date” is 
01.04.2017 to 31.07.2020 and 
“Sanction No.” is not a null value 
and “Annual income” is null value 
Application 
Controls of RajSSP 
(Refer paragraph 
No.  2.10.5 
17.  1. SSP 
Pensioner 
Mst 
2. SSP kiosk 
Token 
details 
SSP pensioner Mst table 
is joined with SSP Kiosk 
Token Details by app id. 
Calculated Diff in trans 
date of “SSP kiosk Token 
Details” and Sanction date 
 
SSP Pensioner Mst Table was 
joined with SSP Kiosk Token 
Details table by app id and in 
column ‘Social Scheme ID’    filter 
is used ( 1 -cmwps, 13 -cmwps-
sc,14-cmwps-st,3-cmoaps, 17 -
cmoaps-sc ,18 -cmoaps) to select 
Sanction of 
applications 
(Refer paragraph 
No. 2.2) 

Annexures 
62 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
S No. Name of table Working Details Remarks Subject of Para 
Filter Applied 
 “Trans date of SSP Kiosk 
Token details”- 
01.04.2017 to 31.07.2020 
 “Social Scheme Id”-
1,3,13,14,17,18 
 “Sanction number.”-Not 
null 
“Diff in trans date of ssp 
kiosk Token details and 
Sanction date” is more 
than 45 days 
the schemes. After that filter is 
used in column “Trans date of SSP 
Kiosk Token details” to get the 
records for the period 01.04.2017 
to 31.07.2020. Then ‘sanction No. 
is not a null value’ is filtered to get 
all sanctioned applications. Then 
difference between trans date of 
SSP kiosk Token Details an d 
sanction date is calculated and all 
those records were filtered where 
the difference between trans date 
and sanction date was more than 
45 days. 
 
Statement showing details of RajSSP reports used during audit 
 
S. No. Name of report Working Details Remarks Subject of Para 
1 Public service 
Guarantee report 
Reports pertaining to 
Selected Schemes 
obtained. Difference 
between Application date 
and sanction date 
calculated, there after 
records are filter where 
difference is more than 45 
Days 
 Sanction of applications 
(Refer paragraph No. 2.2) 
2 Post Audit Recovery 
Amt After Canceled 
Auto Sanctioned 
Reports obtained and 
records related to Selected 
Schemes filtered.  
 Post audit of auto -escalated applications 
(Refer paragraph No. 2.6) 
3 Bill summary TV 
date wise 
Reports obtained and 
Selected Schemes records   
where TV date is greater 
than 7 th of the 
corresponding month 
filtered. Further, filter 
where bill date is less than 
25th is applied to get 
records where delayed bill 
prepared. 
  Timely payment of pension 
(Refer paragraph No. 4.1) 
4 Payment Return Date 
Wise 
Reports obtained and 
Selected Schemes records 
filtered.  
 Procedure to address pension payment 
failure 
(Refer paragraph No. 4.3 
5 Status of auto verify 
or sanctioned 
application 
Reports analyzed   Post audit of auto -escalated applications 
(Refer paragraph No. 2.6) 
6 Block wise blank 
Bhamashah or 
Aadhaar number 
Reports obtained and 
Selected Schemes records 
where Bhamashah and 
Aadhar is not available   
filtered. 
 Details of Bhamashah/Jan-Aadhaar/Aadhaar 
number 
(Refer paragraph No. 2.8) 
7 OAP-7 and 
Sservice guarantee 
report’ 
Mismatch of information 
of first payment dates in 
two reports of RajSSP 
 Application Controls of RajSSP 
 (Refer paragraph No.  2.10.5) 

Annexures 
63 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
Statement showing details in analysis of Data Dump where significant findings not found 
S No. Name of table Working Details Remarks 
1. 1. Bhamashah Uid 
Marital Status 
2.   SSP Pensioner  
Mst 
Joined with App Id 
following filter Applied: “Gender” 
“Social Scheme Id”, “Marital Status”, “Stop 
date”, “Sanction   no.” 
Age Calculated on  31.07.2020 
No significant findings found 
2. 1. SSP Wrong 
village 
2.   SSP Pensioner  
Mst   
Joined with App Id 
following filter Applied: 
“Social Scheme Id”,-1,3,13,14,17,18 
App date-01.04.2017 to 31.07.2020 
No significant findings found 
3. 1.  SSP Change 
Scheme for 
Existing 
pensioner 
2.  SSP Pensioner  
Mst 
Joined with  “App  Id” 
Filter Applied: 
 “New Scheme”-1,3,13,14,17,18 
 “old  Scheme”-4,5,7,8,10,11 
No significant findings found 
4. 1.  SSP Pensioner  
Mst 
 
following filter Applied: 
“App date”,-01.04.2017 to 31.07.2020 
 “Social Scheme  Id “-1,3,13,14,17,18 
“ Sanction date”, 01.04.2017 to 31.07.2020 
“Is Seeded” 
“ApplicatiopStatus-15” 
 No significant findings found 
5. 1.SSP Pensioners 
Mst 
Calculated eligibility date as DOB +55 years 
and DOB+58 years and 
Calculated Diff in App date and eligibility Date 
Filter Applied – 
“Appdate”-01.04.2017 to 31.07.2020 
“Gender”- 1 and 2  
“Diff in App date and eligibility Date”- above 
121 days 
 
 
No significant findings found 
6. SSP payment following filter Applied: 
“value date”,- 01.04.2017 to 31.07.2020 
 
No significant findings found 
7. Ssp token request  
Id 
SSP pensioner 
mst 
SSP pensioner mst table joined with SSP token 
request id by app id. 
No significant findings found 
8. Ssp arear for paid 
amount.  
SSP pensioner 
Mst 
SSP arrear for paid amount table joined with 
SSP pensioner mst table by app id and Table 
analysed with Rajssp reports. 
No significant findings found 
9. Ssp total pension 
payment 
SSP pensioner 
Mst 
SSP total pension payment table joined with 
SSP treasury Mst by tressury id. 
No significant findings found 
10. Ssp kiosk token 
details 
SSP pensioner mst table joined with SSP kiosk 
token details table by app id. 
No significant findings found 
11. Payment After 
Death And 
Remarriage 
Reports analyzed. No significant findings found 
  

Annexures 
64 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
Annexure C 
(Refer paragraph 1.8 (ii)) 
Screenshot of the table ‘SSP Payment Recovery’ of RajSSP containing absurd recovery 
reasons 
 Stateme 
Details of Weak Input Controls 
 
Table name Column Name Occurrence of Invalid/vague 
values66  in Rows 
SSP Payment Recovery Recovery Reason 248/3,605 (6.88 Per cent) 
SSP Pensioner query Solution  1,007/17,921 (5.62 per cent) 
SSP Kiosk App Rec 
Verification 
Verifying Remarks 7,841/23,98,110 (0.33 Per cent) 
SSP Pensioner Certificate Age Issue Authority 2,878/81,178 (3.55 per cent) 
Husband divorce Issuing  6,238/81,178 (7.68 per cent) 
Source: Information derived from RajSSP data dump 
  
 
66 Invalid values like symbols, alphanumeric entries etc. 


Annexures 
65 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
Annexure D 
(Refer paragraph 2.4 (ii)) 
 
 Statement showing details of the beneficiaries whose applications for pension under 
CMOASPS were rejected (Block: Municipality, Jobner, Jaipur) 
 
S.No. Name of 
Beneficiary 
Certificates 
available in 
the records 
Age as on 
the date 
applications   
Date of 
Application 
Date of Birth 
as per Aadhaar 
or Janadhaar 
Age 
according 
to Aadhaar 
as on the 
date of 
applications 
1 Rajadevi/Ramniwas 
Prajapat 
Aadhaar, 
Bhamashah 
card, Ration 
card etc. 
54 Year 9 
Months 
16.10.2019 01.01.1960 59 Year 11 
Months 
2 Ikramuddin/ Gulab Aadhaar, 
Bhamashah 
card, Ration 
card etc. 
56 Year 9 
Months 
15.10.2019 01.01.1960 59 Year 11 
Months 
3 Kishan Lal Khatik/ 
Khema Ram Khatik 
Aadhaar, 
Bhamashah 
card, Ration 
card etc. 
57 Year 10 
Months 
13.11.2019 01.01.1961 58 Year 10 
Months 
4 Kamala Devi / 
Gopal Lal Dayma 
Aadhaar, 
Bhamashah 
card, Ration 
card etc. 
54 Years 5 
Months 
11.06.2020 01.01.1965 55 Year 5 
Months 
5 Meena Jain W/O 
Mahesh Jain 
Aadhaar, 
Bhamashah 
card, Ration 
card etc. 
51 Year 6 
Months 
25.07.2020 19.02.1965 55 Year 5 
Months 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Annexures 
66 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
Annexure E 
(Refer paragraph 2.5 (ii)) 
 Statement showing details of payment of pension after death/Marriage due to wrong 
annual verification 
(Amount in ₹) 
S.No. District Pension 
Sanctioning 
Authority 
Name of 
Pensioner 
Name of 
Scheme 
PPO No Date of 
Death 
Year of 
Annual 
verification 
showing 
Pensioner 
alive 
Amount paid 
after death of 
pensioner 
(Upto July 
2020) 
  Cases found during Scrutiny of Records 
1 Sikar SDO Sikar Abdul 
Sattar/Faizu 
Khan 
Chauhan 
CMOASPS                    RJ-S-
07297171 
30-03-2019 2019 10500 
2     Batul 
Bano/Yasin 
Bano 
CMENSPS                    RJ-S-
06767390 
07-08-2019 2019 15000 
3     Fakir 
Mohammad/
Kalu 
CMOASPS RJ-S-
02065258 
22-12-2018 2018 &2019 18000 
4     Gita 
Devi/Chhitar 
mal 
CMENSPS                    RJ-S-
05358620 
29-04-2018 2018 &2019 27000 
5     Keshardev/
Moti lal 
CMOASPS                    RJ-S-
05107301 
22-10-2018 2019 20500 
6     Lada/Kajod
mal 
CMENSPS                    RJ-S-
00033086 
14-02-2019 2019 17000 
7     Mena/Liladh
ar Bhargav 
CMENSPS                    RJ-S-
00207641 
03-04-2018 2018 &2019 13500 
8     Rameshwer/
Nathumal 
CMOASPS                    RJ-S-2-
01932803 
01-01-2019 2019 19000 
9     Sugni/Sagar
mal Chhipa 
CMENSPS                    RJ-S-
01316690 
16-06-2019 2019 18000 
10 Sikar BDO Danta 
Ramgarh 
Bhagirath/H
ari Singh 
CMOASPS                    RJ-S-
07824121 
unavailable 2017,2018&20
19 
22750 
11     BhanwarSin
gh/ Kishore 
Singh 
CMOASPS                    RJ-S-
07704100 
unavailable 2017,2018&20
19 
22750 
12     Lachha/Nola 
Ram 
CMOASPS                    RJ-S-
05141772 
unavailable 2017,2018&20
19 
31750 
13     Manbhari/Ki
sturMal 
CMENSPS                    RJ-S-
01912100 
unavailable 2017,2018&20
19 
54000 
14     Magna 
Ram/Ratan 
Ram 
CMOASPS                    RJ-S-
02755314 
unavailable 2017,2018&20
19 
31750 
15 Jaipur SDO 
Sambhar 
Santosh 
Devi/Ramaw
tar 
CMOASPS                    RJ-S-
04010895 
08-05-2019 2019 11250 
Total 332750 

Annexures 
67 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
  Cases found during Beneficiery survey  
S.No. District Pension 
Sanctioning 
Authority 
Name of 
Pensioner 
Name of 
Scheme 
PPO No Date of 
Death 
Year of Annual 
verification 
showing 
Pensioner alive 
Amount paid 
after death of 
pensioner 
(Upto July 
2020) 
1 Ajmer SDO Ajmer Ajij/Madari 
Khan 
CMOASPS RJ-S-
05177446 
24-08-2019 2019 1500 
2     Chhagni 
Bai/Mohan 
lal 
CMOASPS                    RJ-S-1-
04978252 
06-04-2019 2019 11250 
3 Ajmer BDO 
Kishangarh  
Birdi 
Chand/Prabh
uRam 
CMOASPS                    RJ-S-
03180098 
08-02-2016 2017,2018&20
19 
10500 
4            Sugni 
Devi/Hanum
an 
CMOASPS                    RJ-S-
05854671 
04 year ago 2017,2018&20
19 
13250 
5     Mangi Devi 
Kumawat/B
heru 
CMOASPS                    RJ-S-
07118656 
30-04-2015 2016,2017,201
8&2019 
14000 
6     Gulabi 
Devi/Naraya
n Nath 
CMOASPS                    RJ-S-
05333573 
01 year ago 2019 6000 
7     Norati 
Devi/Bhanw
ar Lal 
CMOASPS                    RJ-S-
05540620 
17-10-2019 2019 9000 
8     Suraj 
Karan/Chhit
ar 
CMOASPS                    RJ-S-
03113789 
24/02.2015 2016,2017,201
8&2019 
14000 
9 Alwar BDO Bansur Dhunda 
Devi/Prabhu
dayal saini 
CMOASPS                    RJ-S-
01071979 
28-08-2018 2018&2019 20000 
10     Rampratap/
Motu Ram 
CMOASPS                    RJ-S-
04505559 
26-01-2018 2018 &2019 26,250 
11     Prem 
Kanwar/Fate
h Singh 
CMENSPS                    RJ-S-
01050514 
02-10-2019 2019 9000 
12 Alwar TO Alwar Ramesh 
Chand/Girw
ar 
CMOASPS                    RJ-S-
08449692 
21-09-2019 2019 7500 
13 Dausa SDO Dausa Nusroo 
Khan/NajirK
han 
CMOASPS                    RJ-S-
01450869 
29-09-2016 2016,2017,201
8&2019 
23000 
14 Sikar SDO Sikar Dholi/Jaganr
am 
CMENSPS                    RJ-S-1-
04761225 
20-11-2017 2017,2018&20
19 
42,750 
15 Sikar BDO Danta 
Ramgarh 
Chunki Devi 
Kumawat/M
angla Ram 
CMENSPS                    RJ-S-
05729355 
06-04-2019 2019 22500 
16     Gulla 
Ram/Hira 
Ram raigar 
CMOASPS                    RJ-S-
04829759 
16-09-2016 2016,2017,201
8&2019 
39250 
17     Babu 
Khan/Didar 
bax 
CMOASPS                    RJ-S-1-
05141578 
18-01-2016 2016,2017,201
8&2019 
22750 
Total 292500 
Grand Total 625250 
  

Annexures 
68 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
Annexure F 
(Refer paragraph 2.6) 
 Statement showing details of Auto-escalated cases pending for post-audit 
beyond 60 days in Block Sikar (Urban) 
 
S.No. Name of 
Beneficiary 
PPO Number Name of 
Scheme 
Date of 
application 
Date of 
Sanction 
Current 
status 
1 Jamil RJ-S-
10980563 
CMOASPS 19-03-2020 19-04-
2020 
Regular 
pension 
2 Amina Bano RJ-S-
10984663 
CMOASPS 19-03-2020 19-04-
2020 
Regular 
pension 
3 Sajida begam RJ-S-
10924460 
CMENSPS 16-03-2020 19-04-
2020 
Regular 
pension 
4 Aslam/Aludin RJ-S-
10987426 
CMOASPS 19-03-2020 19-04-
2020 
Regular 
pension 
5 Rahim Chauhan RJ-S-
11015132 
CMOASPS 08-04-2020 24-05-
2020 
Regular 
pension 
6 Khatun RJ-S-
11013250 
CMOASPS 06-04-2020 22-05-
2020 
Regular 
pension 
7 Shanti Devi RJ-S-
11013466 
CMOASPS 06-04-2020 22-05-
2020 
Regular 
pension 
8 Mohammad 
Sattar 
Rj-S-
11010733 
CMOASPS 02-04-2020 18-05-
2020 
Regular 
pension 
9 Shamim RJ-S-
11672140 
CMOASPS 23-09-2020 28-10-
2020 
Regular 
pension 
10 Gulab RJ-S-
10988509 
CMOASPS 19-03-2020 19-04-
2020 
Regular 
pension 
11 Rashida Bano RJ-S-
10985159 
CMOASPS 07-03-2020 19-04-
2020 
Regular 
pension 
12 Shamim RJ-S-
10988147 
CMOASPS 19-03-2020 19-04-
2020 
Regular 
pension 
13 Jaibunisha Bhati RJ-S-
11015379 
CMOASPS 08-04-2020 24-05-
2020 
Regular 
pension 
14 Kamla Devi RJ-S-
10980946 
CMOASPS 18-03-2020 19-04-
2020 
Regular 
pension 
15 Santosh Mathur RJ-S-
10983313 
CMOASPS 18-03-2020 19-04-
2020 
Regular 
pension 
16 Santosh Devi RJ-S-
10986716 
CMOASPS 19-03-2020 19-04-
2020 
Regular 
pension 
17 Shushila Devi RJ-S-
10980915 
CMENSPS 18-03-2020 19-04-
2020 
Regular 
pension 
18 Bismilla RJ-S-
10983082 
CMOASPS 18-03-2020 19-04-
2020 
Regular 
pension 
19 Suresh Sharma RJ-S-
10983861 
CMOASPS 07-03-2020 19-04-
2020 
Regular 
pension 
20 Bajrang Lal Soni RJ-S-
11015522 
CMOASPS 15-04-2020 31-05-
2020 
Regular 
pension 
21 Premlata Soni RJ-S-
11015531 
CMOASPS 15-04-2020 31-05-
2020 
Regular 
pension 

Annexures 
69 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
S.No. Name of 
Beneficiary 
PPO Number Name of 
Scheme 
Date of 
application 
Date of 
Sanction 
Current 
status 
22 Pramod kumar RJ-S-
11009092 
CMOASPS 31-03-2020 16-05-
2020 
Regular 
pension 
23 Ashok RJ-S-
10987075 
CMOASPS 19-03-2020 19-04-
2020 
Regular 
pension 
24 Mamta  RJ-S-
10980878 
CMENSPS 18-03-2020 19-04-
2020 
Regular 
pension 
25 Jamuna Devi RJ-S-
10981097 
CMENSPS 18-03-2020 19-04-
2020 
Regular 
pension 
26 Kherunisha RJ-S-
10982399 
CMOASPS 18-03-2020 19-04-
2020 
Regular 
pension 
27 Chand Khan Rj-S-
10984405 
CMENSPS 19-03-2020 19-04-
2020 
Regular 
pension 
28 Devali Devi RJ-S-
10982816 
CMENSPS 18-03-2020 19-04-
2020 
Regular 
pension 
29 Santosh Devi RJ-S-
10993190 
CMENSPS 20-03-2020 30-04-
2020 
Regular 
pension 
30 Laxmi Devi RJ-S-
11661824 
CMOASPS 23-09-2020 28-10-
2020 
Regular 
pension 
31 Ramawtar Saini Rj-s-
11663562 
CMOASPS 23-09-2020 28-10-
2020 
Regular 
pension 
32 Laxmi  RJ-S-
11666071 
CMOASPS 23-09-2020 28-10-
2020 
Regular 
pension 
33 Kusum Bhargav Rj-S-
10986255 
CMOASPS 19-03-2020 19-04-
2020 
Regular 
pension 
34 Nur Jaha RJ-S-
11015129 
CMOASPS 08-04-2020 24-05-
2020 
Regular 
pension 
35 Rukhsana RJ-S-
11019069 
CMOASPS 15-04-2020 31-05-
2020 
Regular 
pension 
 
 
  

Annexures 
70 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
Annexure G 
(Refer paragraph 2.6) 
Statement showing details of pensioners found ineligible in post-audit 
(Amount in ₹) 
S.No. Name of Block  PPO Number Pension 
Scheme 
Pensioner  
Name 
 Name of 
Father/Husband 
Date of 
Sanction 
Total 
1 ALWAR RJ-S-10011884   CMENSPS Sarita Taneja  
Savanram Taneja 
06-09-2019 500 
2   RJ-S-09986211   CMOASPS Babu Lal  
Kanhaiya Lal 
06-09-2019 3750 
3   RJ-S-10032424   CMOASPS Beena  Chjuram Ram 
Saini 
06-09-2019 750 
4   RJ-S-10048491   CMOASPS Rajendra 
Kumar 
 
Komal Chand 
06-09-2019 750 
5   RJ-S-09995557   CMOASPS Hariom Gupta  
Ram Charan Gupta 
06-09-2019 750 
6   RJ-S-10037390   CMENSPS Alka Gupta Rajendar Parsad 06-09-2019 500 
7   RJ-S-10027046 CMOASPS Ramavtar   
Ghasi Ram 
06-09-2019 750 
8   RJ-S-08650752   CMOASPS Ramesh Chand 
Sharma 
 
Kalicharan Sharma 
12-09-2019 750 
9   RJ-S-08658498   CMOASPS Kamlesh 
Sharma 
Bhagirath Sharma 12-09-2019 750 
10   RJ-S-09994216   CMOASPS Premlata  Nem Chand 06-09-2019 750 
11   RJ-S-10004043   CMOASPS Daulat Ram  
Late Sahida Ram 
06-09-2019 750 
12   RJ-S-10004084   CMOASPS Gulab Devi Late Roopa 06-09-2019 750 
13   RJ-S-10028539              CMOASPS Geeta Gupta           Omprakash 06-09-2019 750 
14   RJ-S-10028590   CMOASPS Omprakash   
Rameshwar Dayal 
06-09-2019 750 
15   RJ-S-10037292   CMOASPS PHOOL WATI RAM SINGH 
SAINI 
06-09-2019 750 
16   RJ-S-08441386   CMOASPS Sarla Devi Gangaram 06-09-2019 750 
17   RJ-S-10028562   CMOASPS Lokesh Sharma  
Bihari Lal Sharma 
06-09-2019 750 
18   RJ-S-10028791   CMOASPS Umesh Sharma  
Bihari Lal 
06-09-2019 750 
19   RJ-S-10028915   CMOASPS Shila Sharma  
Puran Mal Sharma 
06-09-2019 750 
20   RJ-S-10038177   CMOASPS Usha Sharam  
Lt Pooran 
06-09-2019 750 
21   RJ-S-10012967   CMOASPS Surendra Singh 
Chauhan 
 
Ram Charan 
06-09-2019 750 
22   RJ-S-10057454   CMOASPS Babulal   
Munna Lal 
06-09-2019 750 
23   RJ-S-10074811   CMOASPS Usha Rani Jagdish Prasad 09-09-2019 750 
24   RJ-S-09994702   CMENSPS Santosh 
Kumari 
 
Chiman Lal 
06-09-2019 750 
25   RJ-S-09994758   CMOASPS Jagdish Prasad  
Harish Chand 
06-09-2019 750 
26   RJ-S-10008587   CMOASPS SUSHILA 
VERMA 
SUWA 06-09-2019 750 
27   RJ-S-09981423   CMOASPS Nihal Jain  
Shikhar Jain 
06-09-2019 750 
28   RJ-S-09984769   CMOASPS Umesh Chand  
Madan Mohan 
06-09-2019 750 
29   RJ-S-09984878   CMOASPS Sharda  Gangaram 06-09-2019 750 
30   RJ-S-10073441  CMOASPS Vimla Devi Sampat Ram 06-09-2019 3000 

Annexures 
71 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
S.No. Name of Block  PPO Number Pension 
Scheme 
Pensioner  
Name 
 Name of 
Father/Husband 
Date of 
Sanction 
Total 
31   RJ-S-10062912   CMOASPS koyal devi  
chunna lal/nand lal 
06-09-2019 750 
32   RJ-S-09981442   CMOASPS Pushpa Devi Pannalal 06-09-2019 750 
33   RJ-S-10011062   CMOASPS janak dulari bhiram singh 06-09-2019 750 
34   RJ-S-10042744   CMENSPS sheela devi tulsi ram 06-09-2019 750 
35   RJ-S-10057629   CMENSPS Parwati Sindhi Jaldas 06-09-2019 1500 
36   RJ-S-10044152   CMOASPS Panna Lal  
Shiv Dayal Gupta 
06-09-2019 750 
37   RJ-S-09987870   CMOASPS Santosh Devi Bhore Lal 06-09-2019 750 
38   RJ-S-10023304   CMOASPS Bhagwan Das 
Agrawal 
 
Pyarelal Agrawal 
06-09-2019 750 
39   RJ-S-10025696   CMOASPS Premlata  Madan Lal 06-09-2019 750 
40   RJ-S-10051675   CMOASPS Ramavtar 
Sharma 
 
Hajari Lal 
06-09-2019 750 
41   RJ-S-09993142   CMOASPS Sushila Devi Sohan Lal 06-09-2019 750 
42   RJ-S-09981153   CMOASPS Kelash Chand  
Ghasi Ram 
06-09-2019 750 
43   RJ-S-10070808   CMENSPS Santosh   
Fouji/Lilu Yogi 
06-09-2019 500 
44   RJ-S-10003764   CMOASPS Asha Agrawal Badri Prasad 06-09-2019 750 
45   RJ-S-10002060   CMOASPS Lata Jain Tej Pal Jain 06-09-2019 750 
46   RJ-S-10056984   CMOASPS Deep Chand  
Radhe Shyam 
06-09-2019 750 
47   RJ-S-10003172   CMOASPS Bhagwan 
Sahay Saini 
 
Baljiram 
06-09-2019 750 
48   RJ-S-10003327   CMOASPS Gangoli Devi Ramyo Saini 06-09-2019 750 
49   RJ-S-10055964   CMOASPS Manbhari Devi Mool Chand 06-09-2019 1000 
50   RJ-S-10056059   CMOASPS Brij Mohan 
Khandelwal 
 
Gopi Lal 
Khandelwal 
06-09-2019 1000 
51   RJ-S-10066502   CMENSPS Sapna Sharma Brahmdat 06-09-2019 3500 
52   RJ-S-10041692   CMOASPS Vimla Sharma  
Nanagram/Yadram 
06-09-2019 750 
53   RJ-S-09980653   CMOASPS Manju   
Manni 
Ram/Manniram 
06-09-2019 750 
54   RJ-S-10002089   CMOASPS Chotelal   
Asha Ram 
06-09-2019 750 
55   RJ-S-10011610   CMOASPS Kamlesh  Manak Chand 06-09-2019 750 
56   RJ-S-10006641   CMOASPS Mulchand Jaga  
Kishanlal 
06-09-2019 750 
57   RJ-S-10056460   CMOASPS Shree Niwas 
Gupta 
 
Vishambhar Dayal 
06-09-2019 750 
58   RJ-S-10056495   CMOASPS Suman Gupta Prahlad Raj 06-09-2019 750 
59   RJ-S-09995552           CMOASPS Satish                         Deshraj 23-07-2019 750 
60   RJ-S-10062869   CMOASPS Raghuvir 
Prasad Gupta 
 
Makkhan Lal 
09-06-2020 750 
61   RJ-S-10074510   CMOASPS Jamoti Devi Mool Chand 
Agarwal 
09-09-2019 1000 
62   RJ-S-09995482   CMOASPS Vijay Kumar  
Roshan Lal 
09-06-2019 750 
63   RJ-S-09983271   CMOASPS Puran Chand  
Ram Dayal 
09-06-2019 750 
64   RJ-S-10057809   CMOASPS Sarala Sharma  
Govinn D Za 
09-06-2019 750 
65 Bansur RJ-S_10374393 CMOASPS Kesar Devi Moolchan 20.11.2019 2250 
66   RJ-S_10620086 CMOASPS Matadeen  Givinda 02.02.2020 750 

Annexures 
72 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
S.No. Name of Block  PPO Number Pension 
Scheme 
Pensioner  
Name 
 Name of 
Father/Husband 
Date of 
Sanction 
Total 
67   RJ-S_10374310 CMOASPS Ramrati Devi l Shimbhu dayal 20.11.2019 2250 
68   RJ-S_10374379 CMOASPS Ramniwas 
yadav  
 Kanehya lal  20.11.2019 2250 
69   RJ-S_10372066 CMOASPS Barkat Devi   Makhan lal 02.12.2019 1500 
70   RJ-S_10337305 CMOASPS Ramesh Devi   Ramshwroop 12.11.2019 2250 
71   RJ-S_10370802 CMOASPS Jasram   Duala ram 19.11.2019 2250 
72   RJ-S_10411134 CMOASPS Kishori lal   Madan lal 01.12.2019 1500 
73   RJ-S_10364880 CMOASPS Mahesh   Arjan 18.11.2019 2250 
74   RJ-S_10367394 CMOASPS Harial 
/Sujaram 
Sujaram 24.11.2019 2250 
75   RJ-S_10385566 CMOASPS Hanuman 
Gujar/  
 Surjan Gujar 24.11.2019 2250 
76   RJ-S_10382311 CMOASPS Totaram  Kabul chand 23.11.2019 2250 
77   RJ-S_10355410 CMOASPS Hardan  Shyolal 18.11.2019 2250 
78   RJ-S_10411060 CMOASPS Krishana   Kishori lal 01.12.2019 1500 
79   RJ-
S_104226714 
CMOASPS Bimla Devi Jit Ram 06.12.2019 1500 
80   RJ-S_10338516 CMOASPS Gyana Devi  Sardara 12.11.2019 1500 
81   RJ-S_10635762 CMOASPS Maya Devi   Mukh ram 06.02.2020 750 
82   RJ-S_10355437 CMOASPS Koshyala Devi   Bhura ram 18.11.2019 2250 
83   RJ-S_10650316 CMOASPS Sampat ram   Kaluram 10.02.2020 750 
84   RJ-S_10383236 CMOASPS Patashi Devi Chandar das 23-11-2019 2250 
85 TONK RJ-S-10042472   CMOASPS Mubark   
Saadat Ali 
16.09.2019 6000 
86   RJ-S-
010866649   
CMOASPS Shahida  
Noshekhan 
12.04.2020 750 
87   RJ-S-10872784  CMOASPS Mohmmad   
Zahurkhan 
13.03.2020 1500 
88   RJ-S-10002602   CMOASPS Nasrin  
Farukh 
16.09.2019 9750 
89   RJ-S-11018469   CMOASPS Manbhar  
Bhuraji 
29.05.2020 750 
90 KISHANGARH RJ-S-10594301   CMOASPS Ummed Singh Hanuman Singh 25/01/2020 750 
91   RJ-S-10454723   CMOASPS Hajari  Chhitar 17/12/2019 1500 
92   RJ-S-10603677   CMOASPS Ladi Devi Jagram 27/01/2020 1500 
93   RJ-S-10590753   CMOASPS Galla Devi Ramdhan 28/01/2020 750 
94   RJ-S-10437451   CMOASPS Shri Kishan Rodu Ji 16/12/2019 1500 
95   RJ-S-10586366   CMOASPS Guman Singh 
Rajpurohit 
Sivraj Singh 
Rajpurohit 
22/01/2020 750 
96   RJ-S-08520999   CMOASPS Ghisa  Rama 21/09/2019 9750 
97 RUPANGARH RJ-S-10695623   CMOASPS Rama Gurjar Chhothu 27/02/2020 750 
98   RJ-S-11044990   CMOASPS Singari  Mangu Ram 24/06/2020 750 
99   RJ-S-11025063   CMOASPS Mangudi  Uma Ram 19/06/2020 750 
100   RJ-S-10602745   CMOASPS Heera Devi Rama Ram 27/01/2020 750 
101 SIKAR RJ-S-10483310   CMOASPS Nasim Bano Gulser Khan 25/12/2019 1500 
102   RJ-S-10395950   CMOASPS Patasi Devi Boduram 24/12/2019 3000 
103   RJ-S-10408057   CMENSPS Lali Devi Bheru Lal 24/12/2019 1500 
104   RJ-S-10454989   CMOASPS Dula Ram Panna Ram 24/12/2019 1500 
105   RJ-S-10027904   CMOASPS Likhama Ram 
Swami 
Ladu Ram 16/09/2019 1000 
106   RJ-S-10032531   CMENSPS Rampyari  Khumanaram 16/09/2019 500 
107   RJ-S-10141730   CMOASPS Guljhari  Mangalaram 07/10/2019 7500 
108   RJ-S-09961849   CMOASPS Sanwar Mal Kishan Lal 16/09/2019 12750 
109   RJ-S-10466004   CMOASPS Mahaveer  Jgnath 24/12/2019 10500 

Annexures 
73 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
S.No. Name of Block  PPO Number Pension 
Scheme 
Pensioner  
Name 
 Name of 
Father/Husband 
Date of 
Sanction 
Total 
110   RJ-S-10288708   CMOASPS Teja Ram Bhagwan Ram 19/11/2019 2250 
111   RJ-S-09943504   CMENSPS Sukhi Devi Nandlal Sharma 16/09/2019 17000 
112   RJ-S-10451534   CMOASPS Nathi  Baksaram 24/12/2019 1500 
113   RJ-S-10372622   CMOASPS Chimana Ram 
Adav 
Hanamana Ram 19/11/2019 3000 
114   RJ-S-10001474   CMOASPS Gopal Ram Kushala Ram 16/09/2019 12750 
115   RJ-S-11459612   CMOASPS Islami Bano Mukarab Khan 17/09/2020 3750 
116   RJ-S-10944658   CMENSPS Rahmat Bano Sadul Khan 27/04/2020 5000 
117   RJ-S-10843221   CMOASPS Ram Kanwar Ugam Singh 07/04/2020 6750 
118   RJ-S-10390653   CMOASPS Gokul Chand 
Saini 
Prahlad Ram Saini 25/11/2019 11250 
119   RJ-S-10475183   CMOASPS Saravati  Gidaram 24/12/2019 1500 
120   RJ-S-10028007   CMOASPS Jora Devi Ghasi Ram 16/09/2019 750 
121   RJ-S-10259821   CMOASPS Om Prakash Partu Ram 24/12/2019 1500 
122   RJ-S-10037381   CMOASPS Ramdev Singh Moba Ram 16/09/2019 17000 
123   RJ-S-10441494   CMOASPS Gyarsi Devi Madev 24/12/2019 1500 
124   RJ-S-10475184   CMOASPS Pappu Ram Phual Ram 24/12/2019 1500 
125   RJ-S-10037802   CMOASPS Madan Lal Ganpat Ram 24/12/2019 1500 
126   RJ-S-09984198   CMOASPS seva ram dula ram 16/09/2019 12750 
127   RJ-S-10459142   CMOASPS Shyopal  Nathu Ram 24/12/2019 9750 
128   RJ-S-10407986   CMOASPS Sonpal  Mangala Raam 24/12/2019 1500 
129   RJ-S-10433655   CMOASPS Amar Singh Chotu Singh 24/12/2019 5250 
130   RJ-S-10357034   CMOASPS Radha Devi Ganpat Raam 16/11/2019 2250 
131   RJ-S-09918002   CMOASPS Raghunath  Gida Ram 16/09/2019 750 
132   RJ-S-09994622   CMOASPS Tulsiram  Chaukharam 16/09/2019 750 
133 DANTA 
RAMGARH 
RJ-S-11129606   CMOASPS Narain hanman 20/07/2020 4500 
134   RJ-S-10531992   CMOASPS Chhota Ram Suwa Lal 08/01/2020 6750 
135 SAMBHAR RJ-S-10983178   CMOASPS Lalita Devi Rameshwar Lal 03/05/2020 750 
136   RJ-S-10036361   CMOASPS Mohani Devi Hiralal Saini 17/09/2019 1500 
137   RJ-S-09583857   CMOASPS Prem Devi Narayan Ji Sain 16/09/2019 3000 
138   RJ-S-10983194   CMOASPS Satyanaryan 
Sharma 
Ramniwas 03/05/2020 750 
139   RJ-S-09929082   CMOASPS Rajendra 
Kumar 
Agarwal 
Ramprasad 16/09/2019 3750 
140   RJ-S-10983078   CMOASPS Raju Gujrati Kodna 03/05/2020 750 
141   RJ-S-10983093   CMOASPS Shanti  Tanji Gujrati 03/05/2020 750 
142 DAUSA RJ-S-10030792   CMOASPS Uma Shanker 
Sharma 
Banwari Sharma 16/09/2019 3000 
143   RJ-S-10031752   CMOASPS Urmila Sain Nathu Lal 16/09/2019 3000 
144   RJ-S-10029303   CMOASPS Rambabu 
Sharma 
Kalyan Sahay 16/09/2019 3000 
145   RJ-S-10038318   CMOASPS Rameshwar 
Prasad Sharma 
Balu Ram Sharma 16/09/2019 3000 
146   RJ-S-09985140   CMOASPS Lalata Prashad Kalayan Sahay 16/09/2019 3000 
147   RJ-S-08188037   CMOASPS gulab devi man phool 22/09/2019 3000 
148   RJ-S-09990961   CMOASPS Jagdish 
Sharma 
Ramkishor Sharma 16/09/2019 3000 
149   RJ-S-08185916   CMOASPS ganga ram narayan beirwa 22/09/2019 3000 
150   RJ-S-09990703   CMOASPS Mohan Lal 
Gupta 
Ganga Sahay 
Gupta 
16/09/2019 4000 
151   RJ-S-10137623   CMOASPS Ramniwas 
Bairwa 
Mahadev Bairwa 06/10/2019 2250 

Annexures 
74 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
S.No. Name of Block  PPO Number Pension 
Scheme 
Pensioner  
Name 
 Name of 
Father/Husband 
Date of 
Sanction 
Total 
152 LALSOT RJ-S-10478727   CMOASPS Mool Chand 
Sahu 
Vijay Narayan 
Sahu 
23/12/2019 2250 
153   RJ-S-11240523   CMENSPS Manbhar Devi Bhonrilal 06/08/2020 500 
154   RJ-S-11100013   CMOASPS Fulchand 
Meena 
Ramchandra 23/07/2020 1500 
155   RJ-S-11105686   CMOASPS anita devi ramkhiladi 23/07/2020 1500 
156   RJ-S-11169395   CMENSPS Suman Devi 
Sain 
Badree Lal 26/07/2020 1000 
157   RJ-S-11105813   CMOASPS Ramavatar 
Sain 
Kesari Lal 23/07/2020 1500 
158   RJ-S-10462676   CMOASPS Bhart Lal Chanda Gurjar 20/12/2019 2250 
159   RJ-S-10483547   CMOASPS Shri Kishan 
Gurjar 
Hardev Gurjar 25/12/2019 2250 
160   RJ-S-11163548   CMOASPS Puniram Saini Jayraam 25/07/2020 1500 
161   RJ-S-11498546   CMOASPS Bhouri Devi Ramchandra 28/09/2020 750 
162   RJ-S-11114056   CMOASPS Basanti Devi Kistur 18/07/2020 1500 
163   RJ-S-11114063   CMOASPS Ramjilal Tailor Bheru Lal 18/07/2020 2000 
164   RJ-S-10561539   CMENSPS Chandr Bai 
Kanwar 
Govindsingh 16/01/2020 6000 
165   RJ-S-11146072   CMENSPS Badam Meena Sanwal Ram 
Meena 
22/07/2020 1000 
166   RJ-S-11151672   CMOASPS Munni Devi 
Chhipa 
Lallu Chhipa 24/07/2020 1500 
167   RJ-S-11500953   CMOASPS Laxmi Narayan 
Saini 
Jaynarayan 28/09/2020 750 
168   RJ-S-09977308   CMENSPS rekha sharma kailashchand 
sharma 
16/09/2019 6000 
169   RJ-S-11322300   CMOASPS Kailash Meena Krishn 21/08/2020 750 
170   RJ-S-10496045   CMOASPS Gallu Prasad 
Meena 
Tundaram 30/12/2019 3750 
171   RJ-S-10650146   CMENSPS Bhuli Devi Narayan Meena 10/02/2020 1500 
172   RJ-S-10431650   CMOASPS bholi devi nanagram 07/12/2019 5250 
173   RJ-S-11374288   CMOASPS Ramkaran 
Meena 
Panchu Ram 
Meena 
30/08/2020 750 
174   RJ-S-11498583   CMOASPS Panchuram 
Kharwal 
Gyarsilal Kharwal 28/09/2020 750 
175   RJ-S-10588633   CMOASPS Gulab Devi Rama Nand 
Sharma 
23/01/2020 3750 
176   RJ-S-10498127   CMOASPS Panchi Devi Raghunath 30/12/2019 1500 
177   RJ-S-10651240   CMOASPS Jagdish Prasad mulachand 10/02/2020 750 
178   RJ-S-10412104   CMOASPS Indra Devi 
Sharma 
shyamlal sharma 01/12/2019 2250 
            Total 400500 
 
  

Annexures 
75 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
Annexure H 
(Refer paragraph 2.8) 
 Statement showing Duplicate Beneficiaries 
 
S. 
No. 
Name 
of 
benef-
iciary 
Husband/ 
Father’s 
name 
Date of 
Birth 
Address PPO 
Number 
Date of 
Sanction 
Is seeded 
with 
Aadhaar/ 
Jan-
aadhaar 
Name of 
Scheme 
Bank Account 
Number 
Payme
nt 
made 
upto 
1 Halki 
Meena 
Gulab 01-01-1959 Karouli, 
Block 
Mandraya
l Village 
Dhoreta 
RJ-S-
0780179
7 
13-01-
2017 
Yes CMOASP
S 
41340100004034 May 
2021 
2 RJ-S-
0804800
1 
31-07-
2017 
No 478220791909 
3 Santosh 
Devi 
Kishan 
Lal  
13-07-1958 Jhunjhunu
, ward -19 
Pilani 
RJ-S-
0804436
8 
18-07-
2017 
No CMOASP
S 
34227373414 Februa
ry 
2021 
4 RJ-S-
0804570
3 
20-09-
2017 
Yes IGNWPS 34297373414 May 
2021 
5 Vidya 
Devi 
Banwari 
Lal 
01-01-1959 Ward no. 
12, 
Sadulpur 
Churu 
 
RJ-S-
0809327
8 
12-09-
2017 
No CMOASP
S 
09568100005974 May 
2021 
6 RJ-S-
0781662
9 
16-02-
2017 
Yes 2000511852001355
1 
7 Sayar 
Kanwar 
Punjraj 
Singh 
01-01-1954 Gram 
Gopalsar, 
Balesar, 
Jodhpur 
RJ-S-
0792372
7 
12-04-
2017 
No CMOASP
S 
122232110006473 April 
2021 
8 RJ-S-
0717750
8 
31-05-
2015 
Yes May 
2021 
 
 
  

Annexures 
76 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
Annexure I 
(Refer paragraph 2.8, Case Study 3) 
 Statement showing details of double payment to beneficiaries 
Sikar (Urb(Amount in ₹) 
S. 
No. 
Name of 
beneficiary 
Scheme PPO 
Number 
Sanction 
Date 
Type of payment From To Months Pension Total 
pay-
ment 
1 
Rajdevi/ 
Lal Singh 
Yadav 
CMENSPS RJ-S-
07642610  
29.08.2016 Payment to bank 
account number 
01260100004119, 
Bank of Baroda, 
Rupangarh   
Aug-16 Feb-19 31 500 15500 
Mar-19 Jul-20 17 750 12750 
CMOASPS RJ-S-1-
03141653  
23.05.2013 Payment by 
money order 
Apr-16 Dec-18 33 500 16500 
Jan-19 Jul-20 19 750 14250 
2 
Mangi 
Devi / 
Sawant 
Singh 
IGNOAPS RJ-S-
00297109  
27.12.2004 Payment to bank 
account number 
01260100006484, 
Bank of Baroda, 
Rupangarh  
Apr-17 Dec-18 21 750 15750 
Jan-19 Jul-20 19 1000 19000 
CMENSPS RJ-S-1-
01324336  
27.12.2004 Payment by 
money order 
Jul-16 Feb-18 20 500 10000 
Mar-18 Jul-20 29 1000 29000 
3 
Rampyari/ 
Premchand 
CMENSPS RJ-S-
05353439    
29.07.2013 Payment by 
money order 
Apr-16 Feb-19 35 500 17500 
Mar-19 Jul-20 17 750 12750 
CMENSPS RJ-S-
01455482  
30.07.2012 Payment to bank 
account number 
50097262291, 
Allahabad Bank, 
Rupangarh 
Apr-16 Jul-20 52 500 26000 
Total  189000 
 
  

Annexures 
77 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
Annexure J 
(Refer paragraph 2.8) 
 Statement showing details of beneficiaries not having Aadhaar/ Jan-Aadhaar 
 
S.No. Name of Block Sanction No. Pensioner Name Father Name 
1 Ajmer RJ-S-1-01502366 Jethi Bai Rugha 
2 Ajmer RJ-S-1-01502571 Nathu Devi Prabhu Lal 
3 Ajmer RJ-S-1-01510684 Naina Devi Lal 
4 Ajmer RJ-S-1-01132648 Shakuntala Ashok Chand 
5 Ajmer RJ-S-1-01128589 Parwati Devi Roshan Lal 
6 Ajmer RJ-S-1-01254134 Ram Pyari Ramet 
7 Ajmer RJ-S-1-01128271 Seeta Shankar Lal 
8 Ajmer RJ-S-1-01529050 Krishna Chouhan Ajitraj Singh 
9 Ajmer RJ-S-2-01533528 Renu Naresh 
10 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03330292 Prem Kumari Rampal Singh 
11 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03368533 Hera Devi Nanak Ram 
12 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03383103 Lila Bhagwaan Das 
13 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03404127 Sudha Panna Lal 
14 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03445584 Vidhya Devi Satya Narayan 
15 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03449535 Durga Dvi Madan Lal 
16 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03460256 Radha Ramnivas 
17 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03355667 Gulab Bai Kishan 
18 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03355435 Ruki Nand Lal 
19 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03348487 Chandra Kala Madan Lal 
20 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03435354 Malti Kailash Chand 
21 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03343082 Biki Bai Moti Ram 
22 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03352965 Renuka Chorasiya Pram Chand Chorasiya 
23 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03386187 Leelu Devi Shrawan Kumar 
24 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03366227 Manju Devi Shankar Lal 
25 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03400081 Banshi Singh Shekhawat Bhagwan Singh 
26 Ajmer RJ-S-2-03453846 Badhu Mal Nainmal 
27 Ajmer RJ-S-2-03447427 Savitri Bai Rameshwar Lal 
28 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03340901 Munni Devi Chorisiya Suraj Narayan Chorisiya 
29 Ajmer RJ-S-2-03635198 Kulwant Kour Shayam Singh 
30 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03622407 Genni Mangal Singh 
31 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03629625 Birma Devi Shambu Dayal 
32 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03692722 Panchi Devi Rampal 
33 Ajmer RJ-S-2-03726069 Bina Devi Sharma Amrit Kumar Sharma 
34 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03727732 Meena Agarwal Premnarayan 
35 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03748451 Gulab Nanu Ram 
36 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03782099 Kamla Devi Kanhiya Lal 
37 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03807344 Sheela Devi Om Parkash 
38 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03814592 Sheela Sharma Omprakash Sharma 
39 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03734530 prem kanwar mohan singh 
40 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03860017 Basanti Devi Lt Ramsingh 
41 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03666552 Seeta Devi Ramdev Mali 
42 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03824767 Jubeda Bano Abdul Ajij 
43 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03702584 Ratan Lal Sunda Ji 
44 Ajmer RJ-S-2-03622989 Yashoda Devi Mohan Lal 
45 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03774171 Soni Shrawan 
46 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03889324 Krishna Devi Pushp Kumar 
47 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03910230 Renuka Sharma Kailash Shankar Sharma 

Annexures 
78 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
S.No. Name of Block Sanction No. Pensioner Name Father Name 
48 Ajmer RJ-S-2-03915946 Jivani Sardar Ji 
49 Ajmer RJ-S-1-04003647 Eshwari Lekhumal 
50 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03958436 Sushila Pawar Ramesh Pawar 
51 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03733595 Lajwanti Chelaram 
52 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03649012 Baraji Devi Amba Lal 
53 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03841452 Mani Bai Rama 
54 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03660490 Pritam Kour Harbhajan Singh 
55 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03655980 Sayari Kalaji 
56 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03998672 Rasida Begam Gulam Muinudin 
57 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03943567 Fatama Begam Abbas Khan 
58 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03963831 Kanta Devi Tapadiya Ghanshyam Das 
59 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03709705 Jamna Bai Madan Lal 
60 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03710701 Choti Kaluram 
61 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03777984 Panni Devi Lt Mohan Lal 
62 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03782680 Soni Bai Natthu Lal 
63 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03866187 Surja Bai Shayam Lal 
64 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03992481 Shanti Devi Dhanna Lal 
65 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03992183 Meera Devi Puran 
66 Ajmer RJ-S-2-03907482 Nangi Devi Ram Singh 
67 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03905584 Leela Devi Kailash Chand 
68 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03901274 Munni Devi Chittarmal 
69 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03734058 Choti Mannaram 
70 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03639240 Jamna Devi Lalchand 
71 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03866212 Bhanwari Surajmal 
72 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03648678 Shanti Devi Laduram 
73 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03665262 Sharda Marothiya Shankarlal Marothiya 
74 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03665402 Lachhi Devi Sadul Gurjar 
75 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03775416 Rukama Devi Madan Lal 
76 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03839221 Neelu Rajkumar 
77 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03779060 Kamlesh Gehlot Hari Singh 
78 Ajmer RJ-S-2-03818417 Shravani Kanheyalal 
79 Ajmer RJ-S-2-03905399 Nani Bai Babulal Jachak 
80 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03927594 Kanta Devi Lt Satyanarayan Sen 
81 Ajmer RJ-S-2-03931023 Archena Rajandra Sen 
82 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03988490 Chanda Devi Om Prakash Verma 
83 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03886432 Sita Sadul 
84 Ajmer RJ-S-4-03908848 Reshami Bano Husain 
85 Ajmer RJ-S-2-03814237 Meena Devi Shankar Lal 
86 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03799774 Beena Devi Bhagwan Singh 
87 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03859580 Nosar Rama 
88 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03806481 Bhawari Devi Amarchand 
89 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03851543 Kamla Devi Ratanlal 
90 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03846520 Amri Devi Ramdhan Khrol 
91 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03802077 Akil Ahmad Bashir Ahmad 
92 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03963970 Suresh Gur Pesuram Gur 
93 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03976043 Kishan Gopal Mittal Ramratan Mittal 
94 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03869874 Kishan Lal Mohan Lal 
95 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03731139 Bhanwar Lal Tak Nathulal 
96 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03631147 Fulchand Jodharam 
97 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03891607 Abdul Rashid Chotu Khan 
98 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03631635 Santokh Singh Ramchndra 
99 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03794737 Ishwar Tarachand 
100 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03738322 Ram Swarop Narayan Singh 
101 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03902404 Ajay Kumar Jamman Lal 

Annexures 
79 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
S.No. Name of Block Sanction No. Pensioner Name Father Name 
102 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03982203 Amba Lal Bhawar Lal 
103 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03963576 Ramprasad Mitthuram 
104 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03877117 Kishan Lal Chandar Ji 
105 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03969167 Ajeet Singh Ramdev 
106 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03902589 Chotu Singh Kamma Singh 
107 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03820867 Rupa Gurjar Narayan Gurjar 
108 Ajmer RJ-S-2-03938594 Sharwan Kumar Choudhary Kana Ram 
109 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03931274 Nirmala Lt Hasaram 
110 Ajmer RJ-S-1-04558034 Dhapu Bai Lal Chand 
111 Ajmer RJ-S-1-04662022 Munnu Devi Heera Lal 
112 Ajmer RJ-S-1-04613956 Chhotu Lal Lalaram Kahar 
113 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05190130 Seeta Devi Taju Mal 
114 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05162936 Sarswati Let Shri Pritam Kumar 
115 Ajmer RJ-S-1-04883812 Munni Bano Bashir Mohammad 
116 Ajmer RJ-S-1-04959938 Sugani Devi Chiranji Lal 
117 Ajmer RJ-S-1-04979898 Madhubala Bansilal Sharma 
118 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05072093 Pushpa Sharma Ashok Kumar 
119 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05093127 Krishna Soni Sataynaryan Soni 
120 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05092863 Meera Hargun Das 
121 Ajmer RJ-S-1-04853547 Gomati  Devi  Khendelwal Amarchand  Khendelwal 
122 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05068508 Bina Bai Bai Shyam Lal 
123 Ajmer RJ-S-1-04980889 Manna Devi Surajmal 
124 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05091010 Mangi Bai Chatarbhuj 
125 Ajmer RJ-S-1-04927713 Tara Devi Shobhagat Amba 
126 Ajmer RJ-S-1-04977178 Galku Devi Kaluram Nirmal 
127 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05000066 Prem Devi Rajesh 
128 Ajmer RJ-S-1-04826297 Shanti Devi Keval Chand Chouhan 
129 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05067625 Duli Bai Bheemraj 
130 Ajmer RJ-S-2-04866595 Jadaw Magan Singh 
131 Ajmer RJ-S-2-05093893 Anveera Shamsudin 
132 Ajmer RJ-S-1-04927471 Hjara Bano Yasin Mohmad 
133 Ajmer RJ-S-1-04927815 Khatun Bano Taj Mohmad 
134 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05079453 Birji Devi Ghisu Lal 
135 Ajmer RJ-S-1-04854001 Amarchand Khandelwal Sualal Khandelwal 
136 Ajmer RJ-S-1-04852376 Sajjan Singh Marothiya Banshi Lal Marothiya 
137 Ajmer RJ-S-1-04887279 Chen Singh Mangal Singh 
138 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05093646 Ramniwas Parik Parik Mohraj Parik 
139 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05071698 Shyam Lal Lal Shankar Lal 
140 Ajmer RJ-S-1-04890088 Babulal Mulchand 
141 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05091559 Hanuman Prasad Soni Chaturbuj Soni 
142 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05001464 Dulari Devi Tejpaal 
143 Ajmer RJ-S-1-00207350 Kundan Kanwar Ram Niwas 
144 Ajmer RJ-S-1-00261380 Sakina Mota 
145 Ajmer RJ-S-1-00307168 Vimla Devi Gopal Kishan Sharma 
146 Ajmer RJ-S-1-00327026 Sushila Madan Lal 
147 Ajmer RJ-S-1-00277950 Ghuman Kanwar Hanuman Sing 
148 Ajmer RJ-S-1-00278033 Rekha Kishan Chand 
149 Ajmer RJ-S-1-00274501 Jagdish Sharma Chet Ram 
150 Ajmer RJ-S-1-00215611 Hemlata Devi Govind Cheepa 
151 Ajmer RJ-S-1-00388294 Poornima D M Saxena 
152 Ajmer RJ-S-1-00222455 Vimla Sardar Bahadur Singh 
153 Ajmer RJ-S-1-00327018 Norat Mal Devi Lal 
154 Ajmer RJ-S-1-00389415 Phuli Devi Yakub 
155 Ajmer RJ-S-1-04050954 Seeta Basant 

Annexures 
80 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
S.No. Name of Block Sanction No. Pensioner Name Father Name 
156 Ajmer RJ-S-1-04078807 Hamida Alauddin 
157 Ajmer RJ-S-1-04099617 Seeta Devi Radheshyam 
158 Ajmer RJ-S-1-04178956 Madhu Laxman 
159 Ajmer RJ-S-1-04042354 Leela Jayram Das 
160 Ajmer RJ-S-1-04045822 Jaya Omprakash 
161 Ajmer RJ-S-1-04112396 Champa Amarchand 
162 Ajmer RJ-S-3-04169627 Sundar Partap 
163 Ajmer RJ-S-1-04139514 Kamala Seerumal 
164 Ajmer RJ-S-1-04066905 Brajmohini Vijaykant 
165 Ajmer RJ-S-1-04100637 Narayani Bai Bhagwan Das 
166 Ajmer RJ-S-1-04060379 Justina Abraham 
167 Ajmer RJ-S-1-04128710 Meru Visha Gulab Rasul 
168 Ajmer RJ-S-1-04114602 Pushpa Devi Verma Ram Gopal 
169 Ajmer RJ-S-1-04042973 Geeta Devi Bansi Lal 
170 Ajmer RJ-S-1-04044572 Saraswati Chaman Kishor Uchenia 
171 Ajmer RJ-S-1-04075941 Nathi Devi Seeta Ram 
172 Ajmer RJ-S-1-04114501 Pani Devi Sukhdev 
173 Ajmer RJ-S-1-04159599 Santosh Satynarayan 
174 Ajmer RJ-S-1-04176734 Seema Mukesh 
175 Ajmer RJ-S-1-04204098 Pushpa Premchand 
176 Ajmer RJ-S-1-04124360 Kamla Bai Govind Das 
177 Ajmer RJ-S-1-04060041 Munni Devi Brajendar Singh 
178 Ajmer RJ-S-1-04043694 Chandra Devi Sundar Das Manwani 
179 Ajmer RJ-S-1-04273371 Rameshwari Devi Bhanwarlal 
180 Ajmer RJ-S-2-04104289 Gyan Chand Amar Chand 
181 Ajmer RJ-S-1-04169135 Omparkash Poonam Chand 
182 Ajmer RJ-S-1-04183806 Madan Singh Bhanwar Singh 
183 Ajmer RJ-S-1-04248411 Ram Gopal Verma Ganpat Lal 
184 Ajmer RJ-S-1-04114871 Deep Chand Tak Bala Baksh 
185 Ajmer RJ-S-1-04163221 Bhanwar Lal Dyma Lalu Ram 
186 Ajmer RJ-S-1-04027819 Gyarsi Devi Kishan Lal 
187 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03383608 Rukma Samratha 
188 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03974347 Nanda  Ji Hameer Guwariya 
189 Ajmer RJ-S-1-04004926 Kanaram Late Hajari 
190 Ajmer RJ-S-1-04517959 Rukhmani Mirchumal 
191 Ajmer RJ-S-1-04318913 Mohni Devi Hukam Chand 
192 Ajmer RJ-S-4-04327114 Lattu Devi Sharvan Lal 
193 Ajmer RJ-S-1-04326738 Rukma Sukhdev 
194 Ajmer RJ-S-2-05108123 Asmat Bibi Akbar Ali 
195 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05108662 Barkat Mustak Ahmad 
196 Ajmer RJ-S-2-05108959 Panibai Mangi Lal 
197 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05113653 Saliya Bibi Najeer Shekh 
198 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05164145 Kishanbai Shravan Kumar 
199 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05182173 Lijved Victor 
200 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05191640 Taramani Devid John Devid 
201 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05205961 Najiran Nisha Moha Umar 
202 Ajmer RJ-S-2-05121731 Sita Mangha Ram 
203 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05099628 Rajkumari Chaudhary Radeysham Chaudhary 
204 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05137177 Mumtaj  Khan Zafar Ahmad Khan 
205 Ajmer RJ-S-2-05136768 Leela Dayal Das 
206 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05126394 Kesar Bai Tola Ram 
207 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05095684 Kanchan Devi Ramchandre 
208 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05106507 Bhagwati Pravan 
209 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05144212 Hardevi Naresh 

Annexures 
81 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
S.No. Name of Block Sanction No. Pensioner Name Father Name 
210 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05137973 Deropti Devi Nihalchand 
211 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05144581 Godawari Badri Prasad 
212 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05121374 Pushpa Devi Om Prakash 
213 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05114206 Geeta Devi Prahalad Chand 
214 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05151727 Rahmati Bano Mahboob 
215 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05109350 Bano Begam Munir Ahemad 
216 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05100679 Halima Baigam Sikandar Khan 
217 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05134463 Norti Devi Mohanlal 
218 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05178095 Vimla Devi Nathu Lal 
219 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05098404 Haliman Imamudin 
220 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05106518 Dhapu Devi Rawat Bhomsingh 
221 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05128806 Munna Lal Gupta Khayali Ram Gupta 
222 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05201298 Govind Ram Rajomal 
223 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05150891 Ramchandra Soni Juharmal Soni 
224 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05200902 Ishwar Lal Surajmal 
225 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05176729 Panna Lal Girdhari Lal 
226 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05100663 Shabir Khan Saidurahman 
227 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05977747 Jannat Mangal Khan 
228 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05997734 Premwati Shyam Sunder 
229 Ajmer RJ-S-1-06051556 Duru Manglani Narayan Das Manglani 
230 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05918235 Godawari Rohara Nandlal Rohara 
231 Ajmer RJ-S-1-06022821 Jameela Bholu Khan 
232 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05998366 Gulab Bai Mangi Lal 
233 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05884397 Raji Bai Moti Lal 
234 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05806185 Kesar Madha Gurjar 
235 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05904791 Gafoor Rahaman 
236 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05887620 Zahoor Mohd Lal Mohd 
237 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05939074 Sampat Pushkar Narayan Sain 
238 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05977910 Nanki Devi Bhanwar Lal 
239 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05922222 Jivan Lal Sharma Motilal 
240 Ajmer RJ-S-1-01850324 Rama Gupta Shiv Shankar Gupta 
241 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03180698 Padma Devi Late Shri Vishan Das Vatvani 
242 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03065073 Kethreen Fancis Francis Stifan 
243 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03067733 Kesar Devi Mohan Lal 
244 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03067586 Savitri Devi Bhagwan Das Jalotiya 
245 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03140596 Kishni Devi Ganpath Lal 
246 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03089243 Kamla Devi Devkaran Jangid 
247 Ajmer RJ-S-2-01850351 Prem Devi Mohan Lal 
248 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03155012 Shankarlal Kesaram 
249 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03148942 Jareena Rahman Khan 
250 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03476267 Gaytry Agarwal Arun Kumar Agarwal 
251 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03478769 Lilawati Jariwala Thakur Bhai Jariwala 
252 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03544073 Ishvari Devi Khushal Das 
253 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03510976 Rekha Sharma Om Prakash 
254 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03512412 Meena Mathur Omprakash Mathur 
255 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03520245 Prem Lata Om Parkash 
256 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03559644 Manju Sharma Vishnu Datt 
257 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03537939 Munni Devi Bhagwan Das 
258 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03473762 Kamla Ramlal 
259 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03595507 Sarla Devi Bhajan Lal 
260 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03586724 Krishana Rawat Prem Prakash Rawat 
261 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03595480 Hasrat Begam Chand Mohammad 
262 Ajmer RJ-S-2-03595348 Kanchan Pal Chouhan Lal Singh Chouhan 
263 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03559686 Ramlal Gokul Gurjar 

Annexures 
82 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
S.No. Name of Block Sanction No. Pensioner Name Father Name 
264 Ajmer RJ-S-2-03984203 Chothi Bheru Ji 
265 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03793316 Mangi Bai Heera Ji 
266 Ajmer RJ-S-1-04143163 Lila Bulchandani Moolchand 
267 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05380437 Chanra Joshi Bhuvnashwar Joshi 
268 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05393934 Tara Bai Bhanwar Singh Gehlot 
269 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05395973 Rami Devi Gulab Daan 
270 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05405123 Parbha Mundra Satyanarayan Mundra 
271 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05413939 Fatma Begam Fazluddin 
272 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05414449 Kamla Roopchand 
273 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05414452 Vidhya Devi Gulab Ray 
274 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05445774 Afjal Bano Aslam 
275 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05471871 Kesar Nathu Lal 
276 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05486389 Fooli Hajari 
277 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05455783 Santosh Agrawal Laxminarayan 
278 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05357702 Safedi Bano Chhote Khan 
279 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05396031 Anita Kumawat Moti Lal 
280 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05394013 Shama Varma Mukesh Varma 
281 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05445731 Amina Begam Waliodin Shekh 
282 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05469043 Norin Chabda Devender Singh Chabda 
283 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05448666 Jubeda Nasriudin 
284 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05490002 Kavita Tulsani Tola Ram 
285 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05406306 Krishana Devi Lal Singh 
286 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05486360 Choti Bai Ranjit Singh 
287 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05492717 Prem Devi Amar Chand Chauhan 
288 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05445713 Meena Ramchandani Hariram Chandani 
289 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05486322 Sati Devi Saval Das 
290 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05372282 Kamla Devi Chandra Narayan 
291 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05413239 Qamar Zehra Mukhtar Hussain 
292 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05451325 Biradhibai Khiyaram 
293 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05458379 Choti Devi Lalchand 
294 Ajmer RJ-S-3-05486100 Sushila Sharma Om Prakash 
295 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05491866 Geeta Devi Ashok 
296 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05419298 Shanti Devi Rameshwar Parsad 
297 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05455802 Methi Budha 
298 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05489680 Munna Devi Ramchandra 
299 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05414456 Rabiya Bibi Abdul Gaffar 
300 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05401416 Mukhtar Hussain Ronak Husain 
301 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05448717 Abdul Jabbar Abdul Sattar 
302 Ajmer RJ-S-2-05138232 Manju Devi Verma Pirem Parksh 
303 Ajmer RJ-S-1-06089812 Purnima Maheswari Radhe Shyam 
304 Ajmer RJ-S-1-06065377 Ghisi Ummed Khan 
305 Ajmer RJ-S-1-06066180 Kesar Devi Mela Singh 
306 Ajmer RJ-S-1-06067042 Sajani Harchand 
307 Ajmer RJ-S-1-06131027 Gulabi Chagan 
308 Ajmer RJ-S-3-06172204 Ramati Ramchandra 
309 Ajmer RJ-S-1-06172986 Moulana Kamruddin Badrudeen 
310 Ajmer RJ-S-1-06086789 Jawari Khan Mangla Khan 
311 Ajmer RJ-S-1-06188629 Jagdish Sen Habu Lal 
312 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05991519 Kamla Devi Moti Bhagat 
313 Ajmer RJ-S-1-05913147 Lakshi Jagdish Gir 
314 Ajmer RJ-S-2-06930204 Kavita Basntani Ghanshyam 
315 Ajmer RJ-S-1-06971032 Vina Aswani Aswani Chandra Prakash 
316 Ajmer RJ-S-1-06997221 Paras Devi Jain Harak Chand 
317 Ajmer RJ-S-1-07005132 Gopi Bai Damani Sadhu Mal 

Annexures 
83 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
S.No. Name of Block Sanction No. Pensioner Name Father Name 
318 Ajmer RJ-S-1-06968038 Sister Tressy Sister Methyu 
319 Ajmer RJ-S-1-06928760 Sohan Kanwar Kanwar Mangal Singh 
320 Ajmer RJ-S-1-06930546 Shanti Devi Devi Suraj Mal 
321 Ajmer RJ-S-1-06751086 Geeta Devi Kishan Rawat 
322 Ajmer RJ-S-1-06755039 Kiran Devi Devi Singh 
323 Ajmer RJ-S-1-06818556 Lad Devi Devi Prahlad Chandra 
324 Ajmer RJ-S-1-06934732 Ashiya Bibi Bibi Mohammad Hanif 
325 Ajmer RJ-S-1-06790574 Deepa Kakwani Gul Kakwanai 
326 Ajmer RJ-S-1-06985094 Kamla Devi Hajari Lal 
327 Ajmer RJ-S-1-06771234 Kanchan Sankhla Bhupendra Singh 
328 Ajmer RJ-S-1-06960992 Lila Devi Lila Ram 
329 Ajmer RJ-S-1-06938316 Madhu Ji Tanwar Onkar 
330 Ajmer RJ-S-1-06953286 Mool Chand Lalwani Natthu Mal 
331 Ajmer RJ-S-1-06935128 Vishnu Datt Tailor Ghisu Lal 
332 Ajmer RJ-S-1-06926787 Mahadev Prasad Prasad Nathu Lal 
333 Ajmer RJ-S-1-06929648 Shekh Jalim Shek Kadar 
334 Ajmer RJ-S-1-07674505 Rebecca Sen Ramesh Chandra 
335 Ajmer RJ-S-1-01633231 Narbada Devi Mangilal 
336 Ajmer RJ-S-1-01789681 Durga Devi Darshan Singh 
337 Ajmer RJ-S-1-01720597 Kamla Bai Chandar Lal 
338 Ajmer RJ-S-1-01667509 Leena Dinesh Kumar 
339 Ajmer RJ-S-2-03235655 Koshliya Motiyani Sobhraj Motiyani 
340 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03270602 Hari Bai Paaru Mal 
341 Ajmer RJ-S-2-03285727 Bhuri Devi Mohan Lal 
342 Ajmer RJ-S-2-03299593 Kusum Lata Vishnu Sawrup 
343 Ajmer RJ-S-2-03288866 Radha Tolani Syam Sundar Tolani 
344 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03319987 Gulab Devi Om Singh 
345 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03053268 Parvati Devi Tekam Chand 
346 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03299305 Premlata Mishra Ramesh Dut 
347 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03208015 Savitri Devi Paman Das 
348 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03232956 Laxmi Devi Amrit Kumar 
349 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03321612 Chandrkanta Omprakash 
350 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03311918 Munni Devi Satyanarayan 
351 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03200793 Ganga Tejumal 
352 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03295908 Choti Ratanlal 
353 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03274995 Norati Bai Ratan Lal 
354 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03277834 Lila Kishan Lal 
355 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03242416 Mastan Shah Qurban Shan 
356 Ajmer RJ-S-1-03478909 Salimi Devi Hurra Kathat 
357 Ajmer RJ-S-1-06074766 Sister Selina M M Josef 
358 Ajmer RJ-S-1-07021926 Martha Patrick Patrick Raviendra Kumar 
359 Ajmer RJ-S-1-07114069 Rekha Sharma Sharma Laxmi Narayan 
360 Ajmer RJ-S-2-07123870 Vishani Narayan Das 
361 Ajmer RJ-S-1-07298561 Radha Devi Devi Girdhari Lal 
362 Ajmer RJ-S-2-07300944 Satwant Kour Kour Trilochan Singh 
363 Ajmer RJ-S-1-07301623 Maya Devi Kishan Chand 
364 Ajmer RJ-S-1-07302490 Radha Agarwal Agarwal Bhagwan Das 
365 Ajmer RJ-S-1-07134197 Lata Assudani Assudani Prem Assudani 
366 Ajmer RJ-S-1-07222374 Dayavati Bhagwan Das 
367 Ajmer RJ-S-2-07227572 Sunita Tulsani Trith Das 
368 Ajmer RJ-S-1-07237006 Laxmi Devi Gidwani Bhag Chand 
369 Ajmer RJ-S-1-07256975 Devki Pahlad Sirwani Prahlad 
370 Ajmer RJ-S-1-07260272 Bhagwanti Meva Ram 
371 Ajmer RJ-S-1-07270183 Gita Devi Narsingh 

Annexures 
84 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
S.No. Name of Block Sanction No. Pensioner Name Father Name 
372 Ajmer RJ-S-1-07132462 Chanda Devi Devi Lal Das 
373 Ajmer RJ-S-1-07119975 Meena Devi Prabhu Lal 
374 Ajmer RJ-S-2-07234642 Kamla Devi Gordhan Lal 
375 Ajmer RJ-S-1-07259545 Jhamkoo Dalla Ji 
376 Ajmer RJ-S-1-07294283 Hira Devi Devi Ram Prasad 
377 Ajmer RJ-S-1-07015131 Loretta Lowden Lowden J P Lowden 
378 Ajmer RJ-S-1-07058541 Madhu Kanwar Shivraj Singh 
379 Ajmer RJ-S-1-07122824 Rani Mathur Vijay Mathur 
380 Ajmer RJ-S-1-07104509 Krishna Devi  Bijawat Bijawat Kishan Chand 
381 Ajmer RJ-S-1-07217335 Dalbir Singh Singh Harbans Singh 
382 Ajmer RJ-S-1-07262695 Mohan Nagora Nagora Devi Lal 
383 Ajmer RJ-S-1-07103735 Ganpat Rai Lala Ram 
384 Ajmer RJ-S-1-07105371 Saty Narayan Jhanwar Harvilas 
385 Ajmer RJ-S-1-06221747 Pushpa Sharma Ravindra Kumar Sharma 
386 Ajmer RJ-S-1-06341478 Bhavana Adhikari Kamal Singh 
387 Ajmer RJ-S-1-06357970 Santara Devi Dindayal 
388 Ajmer RJ-S-1-06577240 Laxmi  Devi Shayam Das 
389 Ajmer RJ-S-1-06661451 Radha Swami Trilok Chand 
390 Ajmer RJ-S-1-06625095 Pooja Devi Ghanshyam Das 
391 Ajmer RJ-S-1-06662789 Sundari Hundal Lal 
392 Ajmer RJ-S-1-06253678 Afsari Begam Hashmatullah 
393 Ajmer RJ-S-3-06197114 Kamala Devi Brij Lal Chouhan 
394 Ajmer RJ-S-1-06434540 Nathi Bai Gopi Ram 
395 Ajmer RJ-S-1-06459740 Gita Nahar Singh 
396 Ajmer RJ-S-1-06579644 Kamla Tarachand 
397 Ajmer RJ-S-1-06297641 Panchi Devi Rawat Choga Singh Rawat 
398 Ajmer RJ-S-1-06553674 Kiran Devi Ratan Lal 
399 Ajmer RJ-S-1-06663934 Meera Meera Laxman  Singh 
400 Ajmer RJ-S-1-06716968 Kanij  Fatma Sayed Wahid Hussen 
401 Ajmer RJ-S-1-06699638 Hira Bai Sewa Ram 
402 Ajmer RJ-S-1-06434724 Shanti Devi Bhagchand Rawat 
403 Ajmer RJ-S-1-06683177 Maina Nami Chand 
404 Ajmer RJ-S-1-06373027 Vimala  Gehlot Ramesh Chand Gehlot 
405 Ajmer RJ-S-2-06349394 Vidhyadhar Shashtri Dwarka Prasad 
406 Ajmer RJ-S-1-06216326 Wasima Bibi Dilshad Hussain 
407 Ajmer RJ-S-1-06398179 Johari Lal Jain Lajjaram 
408 Ajmer RJ-S-1-06387635 Aisha Khatoon Mohammad Islam Warsi 
409 Ajmer RJ-S-1-06463667 Nand Lal Bansal Duli Chand 
410 Ajmer RJ-S-1-06474021 Ghisa Singh Raju Singh 
411 Ajmer RJ-S-1-06477908 Ratan Devi Soni Sobhag Chander 
412 Ajmer RJ-S-1-06719058 Nirmal Kumar Jain Nami Chand 
413 Ajmer RJ-S-1-07277507 Ramu Birada Nai 
414 Ajmer RJ-S-1-07212015 Bhanwar Lal Lal Mangi Lal 
415 Ajmer RJ-S-1-06926588 Dhapu Devi Ladu 
416 Alwar RJ-S-1-00536120 Jagana Bhavni Singh 
417 Alwar RJ-S-1-00545955 LALTA Manga Lal 
418 Alwar RJ-S-1-00553516 Laxmi Devi Gokul Chand 
419 Alwar RJ-S-2-00447967 Pyaro Devi SHANKAR LAL 
420 Alwar RJ-S-1-00451031 Pachi Puran Mal 
421 Alwar RJ-S-1-00536102 PHOOL DEVI Mohan 
422 Alwar RJ-S-1-00447951 PHOOL DEVI Bhagwan 
423 Alwar RJ-S-1-03002408 Sumitra Devi Laxmi Chand 
424 Alwar RJ-S-1-03002500 Vimla Somnath 
425 Alwar RJ-S-1-03009503 Ram Bai Ram Lal 

Annexures 
85 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
S.No. Name of Block Sanction No. Pensioner Name Father Name 
426 Alwar RJ-S-1-03047251 Shkuntla Kishan Lal 
427 Alwar RJ-S-1-03002930 Ramkali Pannalal 
428 Alwar RJ-S-1-03940464 Gyarasi Devi Sharma Kishan Lal 
429 Alwar RJ-S-1-03751568 Chamali Mohan Lal 
430 Alwar RJ-S-1-03942320 Mahendar Kaur Meva Singh 
431 Alwar RJ-S-1-03849842 Ganga Leela Ram 
432 Alwar RJ-S-1-03854907 Natthi Bai Heera Lal Jatav 
433 Alwar RJ-S-1-03825382 Trivani Devi Om Prakash 
434 Alwar RJ-S-1-04003767 Revati Devi Kailasha Prasad 
435 Alwar RJ-S-1-03646010 Sangita Sharma Nand Lal 
436 Alwar RJ-S-1-03623962 Baghu Girdhari 
437 Alwar RJ-S-1-03651060 Phooli Devi Haraya Ram 
438 Alwar RJ-S-1-03892226 Santo Devi Shivlal 
439 Alwar RJ-S-1-03683469 Meera Sain Ram Babu Sain 
440 Alwar RJ-S-2-03679395 Maya Devi Mohanlal 
441 Alwar RJ-S-2-03831873 Champa Kishan Lal 
442 Alwar RJ-S-1-03980094 Lichcho Mohan Ram Saini 
443 Alwar RJ-S-2-03987658 Pram Saini Mohanlal 
444 Alwar RJ-S-1-07018934 Radha Luhar Bhajan Lal 
445 Alwar RJ-S-1-07130537 Radha Khatri Kishan Lal Khatri 
446 Alwar RJ-S-1-02364327 Imarati Shersingh 
447 Alwar RJ-S-1-03094830 Kalawati Devi Suresh Chand 
448 Alwar RJ-S-2-03068820 Phool Bai Balkishan 
449 Alwar RJ-S-2-03061207 Deendayal Gupta Prabhu Dayal Gupta 
450 Alwar RJ-S-1-03515528 Jamni Balkishan 
451 Alwar RJ-S-1-03471903 Malti Devi Hukam Chand 
452 Alwar RJ-S-1-03568561 Ram Sukhi Kishan Gopal 
453 Alwar RJ-S-2-03469952 Sita Devi Manohar Lal 
454 Alwar RJ-S-1-03487941 Kiran Kishori 
455 Alwar RJ-S-1-03487893 Ram Devi Laxmi Narayan 
456 Alwar RJ-S-1-03471248 Desh Raj Jay Dayal 
457 Alwar RJ-S-1-03985128 Vidha Devi Vijay Singh Yadav 
458 Alwar RJ-S-1-04761136 Girraji Devi Saini Kundan Singh 
459 Alwar RJ-S-1-04728879 Sukhram Shyambaksh 
460 Alwar RJ-S-1-04611851 Meena Devi Soni Sita Ram Soni 
461 Alwar RJ-S-1-07240499 Moolchand Saini Tarachand Saini 
462 Alwar RJ-S-1-01765884 Puspa Devi Saini Rajendra Prasad 
463 Alwar RJ-S-1-02558366 Bhoti Devi Kishori Lal 
464 Alwar RJ-S-1-03368278 Kishan Pyari Pyare Lal 
465 Alwar RJ-S-1-03407987 Guddi Devi Jagdish 
466 Alwar RJ-S-1-03434543 Shanti Devi Puran Mal 
467 Alwar RJ-S-1-03348433 Chrandarkala Ramkishan 
468 Alwar RJ-S-1-05357314 Kamla Devi Sahajram 
469 Alwar RJ-S-1-05361768 Omprakash Kapoor Lal Chand Kapoor 
470 Alwar RJ-S-1-06768799 Anjue Kaur Nanak Singh 
471 Alwar RJ-S-1-01072590 Sugana Ramji Lal 
472 Alwar RJ-S-1-01068745 Pushpa Devi Yadram 
473 Alwar RJ-S-1-01071503 Prem Bai Narayan Daas 
474 Alwar RJ-S-1-02792681 Dharm Singh Dayal Singh 
475 Alwar RJ-S-1-02823726 Mulchand Gorelal 
476 Alwar RJ-S-1-04150326 Sona Devi Laxman Ram 
477 Alwar RJ-S-1-04181327 Phoola Devi Ganga Ram 
478 Alwar RJ-S-1-04286428 Rani Devi Bhagchand Gijwani 
479 Alwar RJ-S-2-04300805 Kanta Devi Ramchandra Gupta 

Annexures 
86 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
S.No. Name of Block Sanction No. Pensioner Name Father Name 
480 Alwar RJ-S-1-04317028 Narayani Kajodram 
481 Alwar RJ-S-1-04363113 Chhota Devi Anandi Lal 
482 Alwar RJ-S-3-04287533 Pushpa Devi Subash Chand 
483 Alwar RJ-S-1-04354651 Ramaavtar Sahu Lalaram 
484 Alwar RJ-S-1-04929601 Shakuntala Devi Shyam Vihari Gupta 
485 Alwar RJ-S-1-06182332 Prem Sharma Radheshyam Sharma 
486 Bansur RJ-S-2-01073785 Santi Devi Sujan Singh 
487 Bansur RJ-S-1-01148650 Bhawar Kawar Matadeen Singh Rajut 
488 Bansur RJ-S-1-02109785 Sarvan  Devi Bhambhu Ram Meena 
489 Bansur RJ-S-1-05315831 Sarti Devi Bhagvana 
490 Bansur RJ-S-1-06765851 Prem Devi Chhitar Mal 
491 Bansur RJ-S-1-06746563 Buddha Ram Jita Ram 
492 Bansur RJ-S-1-01684001 Para Devi Sadhu Ram Gurjar 
493 Bansur RJ-S-1-02025890 Tofa Devi Dashrath Singh 
494 Bansur RJ-S-1-05584314 Soni Devi Chhotu 
495 Bansur RJ-S-1-03111348 Sarvan Devi Bansiram 
496 Bansur RJ-S-1-03860596 Narayani Devi Mojiram 
497 Bansur RJ-S-2-04096740 Suraji Devi Nand Ram Swami 
498 Bansur RJ-S-1-04854501 Phoola Ram Balu Ram 
499 Bansur RJ-S-3-06803620 Prabhati Devi Ramniwas 
500 Bansur RJ-S-2-06812562 Panna Devi Ruga Das 
501 Dantaramgarh RJ-S-1-02898086 Chandri Bhura Ram 
502 Dantaramgarh RJ-S-1-02834811 Kesari Devi Kanaram Kichar 
503 Dantaramgarh RJ-S-1-04362081 Mohani Devi Narayan Lal 
504 Dantaramgarh RJ-S-1-05112839 Supyar Kawer Hanuman Singh 
505 Dantaramgarh RJ-S-1-04898596 Gulli Devi Keshu Ram Kumawat 
506 Dantaramgarh RJ-S-1-04950560 Mukati Devi Pratap Das Swami 
507 Dantaramgarh RJ-S-1-04951211 Pemali Devi Chandra Ram Yadav 
508 Dantaramgarh RJ-S-3-05669744 Bajaji Devi Balai Chandra Ram Balai 
509 Dantaramgarh RJ-S-1-01992234 Anjan Kanwar Kalyan Singh 
510 Dantaramgarh RJ-S-1-02768728 Chunki Devi Anandi Lal 
511 Dantaramgarh RJ-S-1-03229138 Bhagchand Nandaram 
512 Dantaramgarh RJ-S-1-04798467 Radha Devi Lichman Jat 
513 Dantaramgarh RJ-S-1-04654535 Lad Kanwar Bachan Singh 
514 Dantaramgarh RJ-S-1-06994513 Tulsi Devi Jat Narayan Ram 
515 Dantaramgarh RJ-S-1-01374202 Rukma Devi Kajju Ram Balai 
516 Dantaramgarh RJ-S-1-02387572 Aachuki Devi Mangi Lal 
517 Dantaramgarh RJ-S-1-02443776 Bali Davi Hanaman 
518 Dantaramgarh RJ-S-1-02444021 Kesar Dama 
519 Dantaramgarh RJ-S-1-03229074 Supyar Kanwar Mal Singh 
520 Dantaramgarh RJ-S-1-02975280 Narayani Devi Hanman Ram 
521 Dantaramgarh RJ-S-1-03066644 Ramli Devi Dala Ram Jat 
522 Dantaramgarh RJ-S-1-03162892 Paipi Devi Chuna Ram 
523 Dantaramgarh RJ-S-1-03452732 Baluri Devi Bhura Ram 
524 Dantaramgarh RJ-S-1-05033727 Kawari Devi Bholu Ram 
525 Dantaramgarh RJ-S-1-05014778 Patasi Dola Ram 
526 Dantaramgarh RJ-S-1-05304986 Guli Devi Jodha Ram Jat 
527 Dantaramgarh RJ-S-1-05339251 Bhagwani Devi Godu Ram Kumawat 
528 Dantaramgarh RJ-S-1-05103237 Munga Lal Bagari Hanuman Prasad Bagari 
529 Dantaramgarh RJ-S-2-02185640 Phooli Devi Bhairu Ram Raigar 
530 Dantaramgarh RJ-S-1-02157534 Laduri Boduram 
531 Dantaramgarh RJ-S-2-02198577 Hava Kanwar Sawai Singh 
532 Dantaramgarh RJ-S-1-03306874 Narayani Devi Bholu Ram 
533 Dantaramgarh RJ-S-1-03848553 Shanti Mula Ram 

Annexures 
87 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
S.No. Name of Block Sanction No. Pensioner Name Father Name 
534 Dantaramgarh RJ-S-1-04790640 Mangi Devi Mangu Ram 
535 Dantaramgarh RJ-S-1-05159113 Birdi Devi Chhotu Ram 
536 Dantaramgarh RJ-S-1-05133006 Chandri Devi Jasa Ram Jat 
537 Dausa RJ-S-1-04616766 Nayaran Saini Birda Saini 
538 Dausa RJ-S-1-05306604 Panchi Devi Saini Mulchand Saini 
539 Dausa RJ-S-1-05902200 Shanti Devi Rangal Lal Bairwa 
540 Dausa RJ-S-2-06460115 Laxma Devi Arjun Lal Meena 
541 Dudu RJ-S-3-03102888 Mali Devi Raigar Kanaram Raigar 
542 Dudu RJ-S-1-03739256 Gulab Devi Nathuram Bairwa 
543 Dudu RJ-S-1-03454709 Bhanwar Lal Jat Bholu Ram Jat 
544 Dudu RJ-S-1-04660816 Soni Devi Mansukh 
545 Dudu RJ-S-2-05405387 Ramkanya Bhanwar Lal 
546 Dudu RJ-S-1-05405504 Sajna Devi Ramchandr Jat 
547 Dudu RJ-S-1-05405258 Bhanwar Lal Pachu Ram 
548 Dudu RJ-S-1-05404798 Ramchandr Goradhan 
549 Dudu RJ-S-1-01594963 Suwa  Devi Sharvan Lal 
550 Dudu RJ-S-2-01512740 Gopi Ram Jat Gordhan Jat 
551 Dudu RJ-S-2-03120887 Gopali Devi Bairwa Shyojiram Bairwa 
552 Dudu RJ-S-1-03696584 Kanwari Devi Devkaran 
553 Dudu RJ-S-1-05127056 Bholu Ram Heera Ram Jat 
554 Dudu RJ-S-1-02484290 Sharvan Lal Bhura Ram Jat 
555 Dudu RJ-S-1-03531870 Keli Devi Kisan Ram 
556 Dudu RJ-S-1-04034730 Rampyari Devi Ganga Ram 
557 Kishangarh RJ-S-1-02939052 Harchand Mukna 
558 Kishangarh RJ-S-1-03113449 Bhanwar Lal Rampal Khatik 
559 Kishangarh RJ-S-1-03123549 Dwarka Prasad Rupa Das 
560 Kishangarh RJ-S-1-04201557 Sayari Devi Gopal Regar 
561 Kishangarh RJ-S-1-01947377 Rampyari Devi Lal 
562 Kishangarh RJ-S-1-03122440 Motiram Soram Jajunda 
563 Kishangarh RJ-S-1-03015265 Rukama Bhanwar Lal 
564 Kishangarh RJ-S-1-05333497 Panna Bija Regar 
565 Kishangarh RJ-S-1-05341571 Bhanwari Devi Shoyoram 
566 Kishangarh RJ-S-1-05986144 Chothi Regar Rameshwar Regar 
567 Kishangarh RJ-S-1-03049517 Jhamri Devi Moti Ram Regar 
568 Kishangarh RJ-S-2-03274127 Bhagchand Parashar Babulal 
569 Kishangarh RJ-S-1-03810933 Savitri Devi Bajarang Lal Sharma 
570 Kishangarh RJ-S-1-03364622 Ghishi Devi Kana Gurjar 
571 Kishangarh RJ-S-1-04312552 Ratan Lal Jat Hira Lal Jat 
572 Kishangarh RJ-S-1-04826028 Santosh Kanwar Moti Singh 
573 Kishangarh RJ-S-1-06481117 Rukma Devi Jat Rama Jat 
574 Lalsot RJ-S-1-00656899 Ramki Devi Prajapat Ramchandar  Parjapat 
575 Lalsot RJ-S-1-05650357 Ram Chandra Gurjar Ranjeet Gurjar 
576 Lalsot RJ-S-1-01976211 Rampati  Devi Jaga Rameshwar Jaga 
577 Malpura RJ-S-1-04872595 Rampayri Devi Bajrang   Daroga 
578 Sikar RJ-S-1-02409487 Nazama Bano Usmangani 
579 Sikar RJ-S-1-02453133 Patasi Devi Shiv Karan 
580 Sikar RJ-S-1-04765733 Ramdev Kesha Ram 
581 Sikar RJ-S-1-03513329 Ghoki Devi Ganpat Ram 
582 Sikar RJ-S-1-04074747 Jamila Mahamud 
583 Sikar RJ-S-1-05298754 Rajiya Bano Anwar Ali 
584 Sikar RJ-S-1-05244252 Geeta Devi Babu Lal 
585 Sikar RJ-S-1-05265577 Parwati Devi Surjaram Dhaka 
586 Sikar RJ-S-1-05327166 Shanti Devi Rugnath Saini 
587 Sikar RJ-S-1-05125027 Sajana Devi Mohan Lal 

Annexures 
88 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
S.No. Name of Block Sanction No. Pensioner Name Father Name 
588 Sikar RJ-S-1-05113633 Ratandi Devi Mangi Lal 
589 Sikar RJ-S-1-04446599 Soni Majid Khan 
590 Sikar RJ-S-2-05079333 Jiwani Devi Aladeen 
591 Sikar RJ-S-2-05319565 Vimla Devi Nayak Nathuram Nayak 
592 Sikar RJ-S-1-05357691 Narani Devi Danaram 
593 Sikar RJ-S-1-05270115 Chand Bano Khuda Bax 
594 Sikar RJ-S-1-05177266 Radha Devi Chula Ram 
595 Sikar RJ-S-2-05127697 Satyanarayan Jamana Lal 
596 Sikar RJ-S-1-03128961 Mohani Devi Banwari Lal 
597 Sikar RJ-S-1-02485967 Deendayal Mathur Chajulal 
598 Sikar RJ-S-2-04796457 Mangej Devi Nath Mal Pareek 
599 Sikar RJ-S-1-05180044 Shugra Abdul Gaffur 
600 Sikar RJ-S-1-05123443 Liyakat Abdullah 
601 Sikar RJ-S-1-05164903 Sabir Bhure Kha 
602 Sikar RJ-S-1-05370645 Maya Devi Nayak Ganpat Ram Nayak 
603 Tonk RJ-S-1-04910973 Rasheeda Mohammad Yusuf 
604 Tonk RJ-S-1-01360839 Hamida Be Makbul Amahad 
605 Tonk RJ-S-1-01357098 Jainab Fayyaz 
606 Sambhar RJ-S-1-04009276 Aachuki Devi Kedarmal Sain 
607 Sambhar RJ-S-1-02658898 Radha Devi Ishwar Lal Kumawat 
 
 
  

Annexures 
89 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
Annexure K 
(Refer paragraph 2.10.5 (a) (ii)) 
Screenshot of “Husband Divorce Issuing Authority” table of RajSSP not showing required 
information  
 
 
 
  


Annexures 
90 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
Annexure L 
(Refer paragraph 2.10.5 (a) (iii)) 
Screenshot of grievance redressal table in RajSSP without description of the complaints  
f beneficia 
 
  
  


Annexures 
91 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
Annexure M 
(Refer paragraph 2.10.5 (c) (i)) 
Screenshot of Pensioner's Payment Register (OAP 7) of RajSSP erroneously showing 
payment of pension  
 
 
  


Annexures 
92 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
Annexure N 
(Refer paragraph 2.10.5 (c)(i)) 
Screenshot showing Pension Payment not having TV Number 
 
 
 


Annexures 
93 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
 
 
  


Annexures 
94 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
Annexure O 
 (Refer paragraph 2.10.5 (c) (ii)) 
Screenshots of OAP 7 and Service Guarantee reports of RajSSP showing mismatched 
information regarding payment of pension of the same beneficiary (PPO No. RJ-S-08141587) 
 
 
 
 
 


Annexures 
95 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
Annexure P 
(Refer paragraph 4.3 (ii)) 
Statement showing details of beneficiaries whose pension arrears were not paid 
(Amount in ₹) 
S. 
No. 
Name of 
Beneficiary 
Name of 
Father/Husb
and 
PPO No. Month of 
stoppage of 
pension 
Month of 
restoring 
of pension 
Total 
months 
for which 
pension 
was not 
received 
Per 
month 
amount 
of pen-
sion 
arrear 
Total 
amount 
of 
pension 
arrear 
1 Jrina Abdul Hamid RJ-S-04668040 May-16 Aug-17 15 500 7500 
2 Harinarayan Ladhu RJ-S-03914182 Sep-16 Aug-17 11 500 5500 
3 Koslya Devi Ramkishan 
Jat 
RJ-S-05344435 Sep-16 Aug-17 11 500 5500 
4 Bijaram 
Meena 
Jodhram 
Meena 
RJ-S-05691235 Sep-16 Aug-17 11 500 5500 
5 Rampal Ji 
Kumawat 
Ramdev Ji 
Kumawat 
RJ-S-04707168 May-16 Aug-17 15 500 7500 
6 Aandi Devi 
Kumawat 
Rampal Ji 
Kumawat 
RJ-S-04707234 May-16 Aug-17 15 500 7500 
7 Bhuli Devi Hariram 
Gurjar 
RJ-S-03914320 Sep-16 Aug-17 11 500 5500 
8 Ramkishan 
jat 
Ramlal Jat RJ-S-04576531 May-16 Aug-17 15 500 7500 
9 Jhamku 
Devi 
Ramdev 
Bairwa 
RJ-S-01420267 May-16 Sep-17 16 500 8000 
10 Rukama 
Devi 
Mohoru Ram 
Jat 
RJ-S-02088388 Jun-16 Sep-17 15 500 7500 
11 Madan Sujaram RJ-S-01425085 May-16 Sep-17 16 500 8000 
12 Fula Devi 
Kharol 
Mul Chand RJ-S-04030658 Sep-16 Sep-17 12 500 6000 
13 Chhitar 
Mali 
Ramkaran RJ-S-01512758 Jul-16 Sep-17 14 500 7000 
14 Bhuli Devi Harnath 
Bagariya 
RJ-S-01423112 May-16 Sep-17 16 500 8000 
15 Chanda 
Ram Balai 
Baluram RJ-S-01366141 Jun-16 Oct-17 16 500 8000 
16 Barji Devi Devkaran 
Gurjar 
RJ-S-07160478 Sep-16 Oct-17 13 500 6500 
17 Chind Devi Gopi Ram RJ-S-05290282 Jun-16 Oct-17 16 500 8000 
18 Bhuri Devi Ram Karan 
Gurjar 
RJ-S-06392759 May-16 Oct-17 17 500 8500 
19 Ramkaran Ladu Gurjar RJ-S-06392753 May-16 Oct-17 17 500 8500 
20 Gayarsi 
Devi 
Manmal 
Prajapat 
RJ-S-04660095 May-16 Oct-17 17 500 8500 
21 Girdhari Lal 
Meena 
Mangu Ram 
Meena 
RJ-S-2-
05400622 
Oct-16 Oct-17 12 500 6000 
22 Mangal 
Chand 
Rugha Ram 
Raigar 
RJ-S-05980436 Dec-16 Nov-17 11 750 8250 
23 Krisna Devi Sarwan Lal RJ-S-04697779 May-16 Nov-17 18 500 9000 
24 Syani Devi Ramlal Jat RJ-S-05005390 Oct-16 Nov-17 13 500 6500 

Annexures 
96 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
S. 
No. 
Name of 
Beneficiary 
Name of 
Father/Husb
and 
PPO No. Month of 
stoppage of 
pension 
Month of 
restoring 
of pension 
Total 
months 
for which 
pension 
was not 
received 
Per 
month 
amount 
of pen-
sion 
arrear 
Total 
amount 
of 
pension 
arrear 
25 Meera Devi Banna Ram 
Raigar 
RJ-S-01418225 Jun-16 Nov-17 17 500 8500 
26 Ratani Devi Ratan Lal 
Raigar 
RJ-S-03710790 Dec-16 Nov-17 11 500 5500 
27 Bardi Devi Sharvan 
Raigar 
RJ-S-03743359 Dec-16 Nov-17 11 500 5500 
28 Gopal 
Kanwar 
Radhuveer 
Singh 
Khagarot 
RJ-S-01486211 May-16 Nov-17 18 500 9000 
29 Radhuveer 
Singh 
Harisingh 
Kagarot 
RJ-S-01486204 May-16 Nov-17 18 500 9000 
30 Geeta Kishan Lal RJ-S-01479010 Oct-16 Nov-17 13 500 6500 
31 Chotu Ram 
Mali 
Kana Ram 
Mali 
RJ-S-07189744 May-16 Nov-17 18 500 9000 
32 Dhapu Devi Ugmaram 
Bairwa 
RJ-S-03740058 May-16 Nov-17 18 500 9000 
33 Dhapu Devi Ramnarayan RJ-S-01722869 Oct-16 Dec-17 14 500 7000 
34 Jebun 
Begam 
Munir 
Ahmad 
RJ-S-03939944 Jan-17 Jan-18 12 500 6000 
35 Ladhu Ram 
Gujar 
Bhairu RJ-S-03393290 Sep-16 Jan-18 16 500 8000 
36 Gyana Devi Mangu 
Bagaria 
RJ-S-01418723 Nov-16 Feb-18 15 500 7500 
37 Mangal 
Ram Gurjar 
Nanda Ram 
Gurjar 
RJ-S-06245322 Jan-17 Feb-18 13 500 6500 
38 Rampyari 
Jat 
Kana Jat RJ-S-03461212 Jun-16 Mar-18 21 500 10500 
39 Bannaram 
Jat 
Ramdev RJ-S-05139488 Apr-17 Mar-18 11 750 8250 
40 Ganga Devi Madan Lal 
Yadav 
RJ-S-04223032 Apr-17 Apr-18 12 750 9000 
41 Jassa Kalu RJ-S-07763825 Apr-17 Apr-18 12 750 9000 
42 Mukna 
Bagriya 
Chanda 
Bagriya 
RJ-S-01418988 Nov-16 Apr-18 17 500 8500 
43 Rampyari 
Gurjar 
Narayan 
Gurjar 
RJ-S-03480630 Mar-17 Apr-18 13 500 6500 
44 Ghasi Ram Ram Lal Jat RJ-S-02087044 Jan-17 Apr-18 15 500 7500 
45 Chitar Mal Chigan Lal RJ-S-04223799 Sep-16 Apr-18 19 500 9500 
46 Badri 
Sanwal 
Ramnath 
Sanwal 
RJ-S-05620752 Sep-16 Apr-18 19 500 9500 
47 Goga Devi 
Meena 
Mohan Lal 
Meena 
RJ-S-04007740 Mar-17 May-18 14 500 7000 
48 Jamuna 
Devi 
Hanuman 
Choudhary 
RJ-S-07290385 Mar-17 May-18 14 500 7000 
49 Hanuman 
Singh 
Magan Singh RJ-S-05223771 Dec-16 May-18 17 500 8500 
50 Prakash 
Kanwar 
Padam Singh RJ-S-04401727 May-17 May-18 12 500 6000 
51 Kani Gurjar Bhanwar 
Gurjar 
RJ-S-04444136 Jan-17 Jul-18 18 500 9000 

Annexures 
97 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
S. 
No. 
Name of 
Beneficiary 
Name of 
Father/Husb
and 
PPO No. Month of 
stoppage of 
pension 
Month of 
restoring 
of pension 
Total 
months 
for which 
pension 
was not 
received 
Per 
month 
amount 
of pen-
sion 
arrear 
Total 
amount 
of 
pension 
arrear 
52 Lachha 
Devi 
Ramchandra 
Kumawat 
RJ-S-07336686 Jul-17 Aug-18 13 500 6500 
53 Gulab Devi Radheshyam 
Ji 
RJ-S-01513680 Jun-17 Aug-18 14 500 7000 
54 Dhnaa Kishna Ram RJ-S-04370270 Jul-17 Aug-18 13 750 9750 
55 Ladalisaran 
Sharma 
Kalyan Mal 
Sharma 
RJ-S-07140697 Sep-16 Aug-18 23 500 11500 
56 Shree Ram Kamai Jat RJ-S-04767325 Oct-16 Aug-18 22 500 11000 
57 Laxmi Rupnaryan RJ-S-04432478 Jul-17 Sep-18 14 500 7000 
58 Sita Ram Deva Ram RJ-S-04435859 Jul-17 Oct-18 15 500 7500 
59 Pura Ram Bodu Ram 
Balai 
RJ-S-01281563 Nov-17 Oct-18 11 750 8250 
60 Bhuri  Ramdhan RJ-S-01294164 Aug-17 Oct-18 14 500 7000 
61 Hanuman 
Todawata 
Dhanna Ram 
Todawata 
RJ-S-03569740 Nov-17 Nov-18 12 750 9000 
62 Manbhar Jutharam RJ-S-03884396 Sep-17 Nov-18 14 500 7000 
63 Manni Devi Jagdish 
Prasad 
Kumawat 
RJ-S-04207356 Feb-17 Nov-18 21 500 10500 
64 Rampyari 
Devi Balai 
Mevaram 
Balai 
RJ-S-02105169 Nov-17 Dec-18 13 500 6500 
65 Laxmi Devi Nanagram 
Bairwa 
RJ-S-04447088 Nov-17 Dec-18 13 500 6500 
66 Manna Devi Rampal RJ-S-07992441 Nov-17 Dec-18 13 500 6500 
67 Hira Hanuman RJ-S-04575293 Jul-17 Dec-18 17 500 8500 
68 Gopal Shrawan RJ-S-05400218 Apr-17 Jan-19 21 500 10500 
69 Manbhar Shoji RJ-S-04455327 Nov-17 Jan-19 14 500 7000 
70 Gandi Devi Aanandi Lal RJ-S-04334244 Jul-17 Jan-19 18 500 9000 
71 Hanuman 
Shai Meena 
Okar Mal 
Meena 
RJ-S-04028644 Nov-17 Feb-19 15 500 7500 
72 Chanda 
Ram Jat 
Uda Ram Jat RJ-S-05578374 Jan-18 Apr-19 15 500 7500 
73 Lata Devi Madan 
Rajnat 
RJ-S-07405934 Nov-17 Mar-19 16 500 8000 
74 Narayan Jat Chanda Ram RJ-S-07982616 Jan-18 Mar-19 14 500 7000 
75 Kali devi Girdhari RJ-S-05338800 Nov-18 May-19 6 500 3000 
76 Girdhari Lal Pannaram 
Gurjar 
RJ-S-05344481 Oct-18 Apr-19 6 500 3000 
77 Jhamku 
Devi 
Birdi Chand RJ-S-07890290 Nov-18 May-19 6 500 3000 
78 Sangari 
Devi 
Chhitar Mal 
Devanda 
RJ-S-06397031 May-18 Apr-19 11 500 5500 
79 Prabhati Hanuman RJ-S-04316970 May-18 Apr-19 11 500 5500 
80 Ratni Devi Ram Avtar RJ-S-04014360 May-18 Apr-19 11 500 5500 
81 Tejram 
Gurjar 
Surajkaran RJ-S-05214436 May-18 Apr-19 11 500 5500 
82 Chottu Ram Harlal Jat RJ-S-05427356 May-18 Apr-19 11 500 5500 

Annexures 
98 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
S. 
No. 
Name of 
Beneficiary 
Name of 
Father/Husb
and 
PPO No. Month of 
stoppage of 
pension 
Month of 
restoring 
of pension 
Total 
months 
for which 
pension 
was not 
received 
Per 
month 
amount 
of pen-
sion 
arrear 
Total 
amount 
of 
pension 
arrear 
83 Jamana 
Devi 
Chottu Ram RJ-S-05533414 May-18 Apr-19 11 500 5500 
84 Lachhma 
Devi 
Harji RJ-S-07712592 May-18 Apr-19 11 500 5500 
85 Bhavri Devi Chuttan RJ-S-04698459 May-18 Apr-19 11 500 5500 
86 Ramkanwari 
Devi 
Jaidev Jat RJ-S-06899385 May-18 Apr-19 11 750 8250 
87 Rameshvar 
Meena 
Rughnath 
Meena 
RJ-S-06291007 May-18 Apr-19 11 750 8250 
88 Rameshwari 
Devi 
Rameshwar 
Lal 
RJ-S-07942488 May-18 Apr-19 11 500 5500 
89 Bhuli Devi Chitar Mal 
Gurjar 
RJ-S-03718444 May-18 Apr-19 11 750 8250 
90 Jamna Devi Bhuranath RJ-S-05444270 May-18 Apr-19 11 500 5500 
91 Sita Devi Sreshwar RJ-S-03459628 May-18 Apr-19 11 500 5500 
92 Soni Hanuman RJ-S-03699190 May-18 Apr-19 11 500 5500 
93 Lachhma 
Devi 
Maharam Jat RJ-S-03702864 May-18 Apr-19 11 500 5500 
94 Prabhati 
devi 
Ramchand 
Jat 
RJ-S-03722112 May-18 Apr-19 11 750 8250 
95 Manbhr 
Devi 
Ramjivan 
Gurjar 
RJ-S-05184748 May-18 Apr-19 11 500 5500 
96 Chhoti Devi Dhanna Ram 
Burdak 
RJ-S-06568370 Oct-18 Apr-19 6 500 3000 
97 Ramjiwan 
Jat 
Bhura ram RJ-S-03357380 May-18 Apr-19 11 500 5500 
98 Rama Devi Madan Lal 
Kumawat 
RJ-S-07088652 May-18 Apr-19 11 500 5500 
99 Ramlal Laduram RJ-S-03602600 May-18 Apr-19 11 500 5500 
100 Thija Hira RJ-S-04316491 May-18 Apr-19 11 750 8250 
101 Sarju Devi Ramswaroop 
Bairwa 
RJ-S-03454849 May-18 Apr-19 11 500 5500 
102 Narbda 
Devi 
Arjun Bhopa RJ-S-01444116 Mar-18 Apr-19 13 500 6500 
103 Teja Lalaram RJ-S-04560177 May-18 Apr-19 11 750 8250 
104 Ghisi Devi Pachuram 
Gujar 
RJ-S-06599867 May-18 Apr-19 11 750 8250 
105 Husan 
Mohmmad 
Bodu Khan RJ-S-05219738 May-18 Apr-19 11 500 5500 
106 Pachi Devi 
Jat 
Syokaran RJ-S-03395132 May-18 Apr-19 11 500 5500 
107 Sayer Dvi Ugma Jat RJ-S-03464922 May-18 Apr-19 11 500 5500 
108 Perm Chand RJ-S-03961069 May-18 Apr-19 11 500 5500 
109 Chand Ramdev RJ-S-03960733 May-18 Apr-19 11 500 5500 
110 Ratan 
Khatik 
Bholu Ram RJ-S-04114587 May-18 Apr-19 11 500 5500 
111 Harfuli Ladhu RJ-S-04323751 May-18 Apr-19 11 500 5500 
112 Bhuli devi Boduram Jat RJ-S-06466702 May-18 Apr-19 11 500 5500 

Annexures 
99 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
S. 
No. 
Name of 
Beneficiary 
Name of 
Father/Husb
and 
PPO No. Month of 
stoppage of 
pension 
Month of 
restoring 
of pension 
Total 
months 
for which 
pension 
was not 
received 
Per 
month 
amount 
of pen-
sion 
arrear 
Total 
amount 
of 
pension 
arrear 
113 Subla Devi Gopal Lal 
Garva 
RJ-S-01378377 Oct-18 Apr-19 6 500 3000 
114 Amari Devi Kajod Mal 
Bawariya 
RJ-S-05314442 May-18 Apr-19 11 500 5500 
115 Jugpal Das Shyoji Ram 
das 
RJ-S-07729101 May-18 Apr-19 11 500 5500 
116 Sarju Devi Bhagaram Jat RJ-S-05691308 May-18 May-19 12 500 6000 
117 Jyana Devi Surajmal RJ-S-03620549 May-18 May-19 12 500 6000 
118 Bhuri Devi Mohan Bali RJ-S-07159898 May-18 May-19 12 500 6000 
119 Sita Madan RJ-S-04035481 May-18 May-19 12 500 6000 
120 Ghisi Devi Bhura Balai RJ-S-05522697 May-18 May-19 12 750 9000 
121 Rukamani 
Devi 
Sharma 
Gopi Ram RJ-S-04223063 May-18 May-19 12 750 9000 
122 Sawta Ram Dalu Ram RJ-S-05343848 May-18 May-19 12 500 6000 
123 Narayan Balu Ram RJ-S-05290086 May-18 May-19 12 500 6000 
124 Shanti Devi 
Bairwa 
Shankar Lal 
Bairwa 
RJ-S-05415033 May-18 May-19 12 500 6000 
125 Rampal Chanda RJ-S-03947791 May-18 May-19 12 750 9000 
126 Rama Devi Baluram 
Kumawat 
RJ-S-05344845 May-18 May-19 12 500 6000 
127 Kesar Mohan RJ-S-04034634 May-18 May-19 12 500 6000 
128 Hanuman Nanag RJ-S-04331012 May-18 May-19 12 500 6000 
129 Kamla Hanuman RJ-S-04326624 May-18 May-19 12 500 6000 
130 Manbhar 
Devi 
Hanuman RJ-S-04004601 May-18 May-19 12 500 6000 
131 Kanvari 
Devi 
Ranglal RJ-S-05288714 May-18 May-19 12 500 6000 
132 Mewa Ram 
Gurjar 
Moola Ram 
Gurjar 
RJ-S-1-
04007745 
May-18 May-19 12 500 6000 
133 Gulab Devi Balveer 
Bhopa 
RJ-S-04446233 May-18 May-19 12 500 6000 
134 Chitar Mal 
Sharma 
Ramnath 
Sharma 
RJ-S-07058246 May-18 May-19 12 500 6000 
135 Batul Bano Bhadar Kha RJ-S-06653170 May-18 May-19 12 500 6000 
136 Shanti Devi Gopiram 
Gurjar 
RJ-S-05220137 May-18 May-19 12 500 6000 
137 Kisturi Devi Hari Raigar RJ-S-06391827 May-18 May-19 12 750 9000 
138 Sayar Devi Ram Narayan 
Jat 
RJ-S-07438888 May-18 May-19 12 500 6000 
139 Shusila 
Devi 
Ramcharan 
Berwa 
RJ-S-05419990 May-18 May-19 12 500 6000 
140 Kani Devi 
Berwa 
Nathuram RJ-S-05290014 May-18 May-19 12 500 6000 
141 Suraj Devi Sita Ram RJ-S-05339946 May-18 May-19 12 500 6000 
142 Keli Devi Ramlal 
Gurjar 
RJ-S-03378740 May-18 May-19 12 500 6000 

Annexures 
100 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
S. 
No. 
Name of 
Beneficiary 
Name of 
Father/Husb
and 
PPO No. Month of 
stoppage of 
pension 
Month of 
restoring 
of pension 
Total 
months 
for which 
pension 
was not 
received 
Per 
month 
amount 
of pen-
sion 
arrear 
Total 
amount 
of 
pension 
arrear 
143 Prem Devi Laxman 
Khatik 
RJ-S-07403417 May-18 May-19 12 500 6000 
144 Jmal Khudhbaksh RJ-S-03775246 May-18 May-19 12 500 6000 
145 Kesar Devi Shyojiram 
Gujar 
RJ-S-06653172 May-18 May-19 12 500 6000 
146 Ram Lal 
Meena 
Narayan 
Meena 
RJ-S-03603778 May-18 May-19 12 500 6000 
147 Sarju Devi Ramlal 
Meena 
RJ-S-03669323 Jun-18 May-19 11 500 5500 
148 Sitaram 
Meena 
Madhuram RJ-S-04914924 May-18 May-19 12 500 6000 
149 Gopi Mahdev RJ-S-03699469 May-18 May-19 12 750 9000 
150 Laxmi 
Narayan 
Daroga 
Deva Ram RJ-S-07933262 Jun-18 May-19 11 500 5500 
151 Hanuman 
Lal Berwa 
Kalu Ram RJ-S-04213420 May-18 May-19 12 500 6000 
152 Tara Devi Hanuman 
Berwa 
RJ-S-04030859 May-18 May-19 12 500 6000 
153 Mani Devi Ladu Ram 
Mena 
RJ-S-07058656 May-18 May-19 12 750 9000 
154 Shyoji Ram 
Singh 
Durga Singh 
Naruka 
RJ-S-04049549 May-18 May-19 12 500 6000 
155 Muli Devi Hanuman RJ-S-04336733 May-18 May-19 12 500 6000 
156 Lala Ram 
Gurjar 
Kana ram 
Gurjar 
RJ-S-05420046 May-18 May-19 12 500 6000 
157 Keshar Devi Laxmi 
Narayan 
Daroga 
RJ-S-07933256 Jun-18 May-19 11 500 5500 
158 Gangha Ramkaran RJ-S-03758672 May-18 May-19 12 750 9000 
159 Tara Chand Kalyan Mal RJ-S-04322910 Jul-17 May-19 22 500 11000 
160 Bardi Devi Pratap Gurjar RJ-S-03686202 Jun-18 May-19 11 500 5500 
161 Bardi Devi Narayan RJ-S-04328923 May-18 May-19 12 500 6000 
162 Gulab Devi Okar Mal 
Bagda 
RJ-S-05530223 Jun-18 May-19 11 500 5500 
163 Onkar Mal 
Bagda 
Balu Ram RJ-S-05344509 Jun-18 May-19 11 500 5500 
164 Jhamku  
Devi Jat 
Laxman 
Todawata 
RJ-S-03567126 May-18 Jun-19 13 500 6500 
165 Rammi 
Bano 
Santar Khan RJ-S-05220436 May-18 Jun-19 13 500 6500 
166 Sayr Devi Mularam 
Gujar 
RJ-S-05185385 May-18 Jun-19 13 500 6500 
167 Koyali Devi Kan Singh 
Daroga 
RJ-S-04049630 Feb-19 Jun-19 4 750 3000 
168 Sujaram Roduram 
Gurjar 
RJ-S-03743143 Jan-17 May-18 16 500 8000 
169 Sugna Panchuram RJ-S-03532928 Dec-16 May-18 17 500 8500 
170 Sayri Ram Karan RJ-S-02433502 Apr-17 May-18 13 500 6500 

Annexures 
101 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
S. 
No. 
Name of 
Beneficiary 
Name of 
Father/Husb
and 
PPO No. Month of 
stoppage of 
pension 
Month of 
restoring 
of pension 
Total 
months 
for which 
pension 
was not 
received 
Per 
month 
amount 
of pen-
sion 
arrear 
Total 
amount 
of 
pension 
arrear 
171 Kamla Devi Ratan Lal 
Khati 
RJ-S-1-
05661065 
Oct-16 Jun-18 20 500 10000 
172 Heera Lal 
Mali 
Norata Mali RJ-S-1-
04706350 
Apr-17 Jul-18 15 500 7500 
173 Bhawari Suwa 
Bagariya 
RJ-S-01422271 Nov-16 Jul-18 20 500 10000 
174 Ranglal 
Gurjar 
Harji Gurjar RJ-S-1-
03711046 
Sep-16 Aug-18 23 500 11500 
175 Harji Bholu RJ-S-02200547 Jun-17 Aug-18 14 500 7000 
176 Klla Ram 
Jat 
Narayan Jat RJ-S-05650654 Apr-17 Aug-18 16 750 12000 
177 Bhanwar 
Lal Jat 
Suwa Lal Jat RJ-S-05778086 Apr-17 Sep-18 17 500 8500 
178 Babu Abdul RJ-S-04096206 Jan-17 Oct-18 21 500 10500 
179 Fula Devi Kanaram 
Khumahar 
RJ-S-04736260 Dec-17 Nov-18 11 500 5500 
180 Nosar Devi 
Daroga 
Govind Ram 
Daroga 
RJ-S-01323494 Feb-18 Jan-19 11 500 5500 
181 Ladu Ram 
Bairwa 
Dhanna Ram 
Bairwa 
RJ-S-08036167 Feb-18 Jan-19 11 500 5500 
182 Galku Devi Kishan 
Gurjar 
RJ-S-01582204 Jun-17 Jan-19 19 750 14250 
183 Jagdish Bahwar Lal RJ-S-05640467 Nov-17 Jan-19 14 500 7000 
184 Suwa Lal 
Bairwa 
Juwar Lal RJ-S-03775897 Feb-17 Jan-19 23 500 11500 
185 Daya Ram Mithu Mau RJ-S-
01417121/84004 
Apr-17 Feb-19 22 500 11000 
186 Seeta Devi Ganesh RJ-S-02206320 Mar-17 Feb-19 23 500 11500 
187 Kamali 
Devi 
Chitar Gurjar RJ-S-03047821 Feb-18 Feb-19 12 500 6000 
188 Bhagwati 
Devi Swami 
Shyam Lal 
Swami 
RJ-S-01486111 Dec-17 Mar-19 15 500 7500 
189 Sugani Devi Banaram RJ-S-03062808 Aug-17 Mar-19 19 500 9500 
190 Rajkanwar Rup Singh RJ-S-04732669 May-18 Apr-19 11 500 5500 
191 Jagdish Mukana RJ-S-04098277 May-18 Apr-19 11 500 5500 
192 Prabhati 
Mali 
Gordan Mali RJ-S-04573709 May-18 Apr-19 11 500 5500 
193 Jainu Bano Piru 
Mohaamad 
RJ-S-04755420 May-18 Apr-19 11 500 5500 
194 Chunni 
Devi 
Gullaram RJ-S-07583564 May-18 May-19 12 500 6000 
195 Norti Devi Ganesh Ram RJ-S-07823515 May-18 Apr-19 11 500 5500 
196 Saraju Devi Kishan Lal 
Balai 
RJ-S-
01307509/83656 
Mar-18 Apr-19 13 500 6500 
197 Ganga Devi Heera Bairwa RJ-S-03739058 May-18 Apr-19 11 500 5500 

Annexures 
102 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
S. 
No. 
Name of 
Beneficiary 
Name of 
Father/Husb
and 
PPO No. Month of 
stoppage of 
pension 
Month of 
restoring 
of pension 
Total 
months 
for which 
pension 
was not 
received 
Per 
month 
amount 
of pen-
sion 
arrear 
Total 
amount 
of 
pension 
arrear 
198 Mohan 
Kanwar 
Bahadur 
Singh 
RJ-S-04478479 May-18 Apr-19 11 750 8250 
199 Hangam 
Devi 
Nanda Ram 
Gurjar 
RJ-S-07438664 May-18 Apr-19 11 750 8250 
200 Gulab Devi Bodu Ram RJ-S-04462372 Mar-17 Feb-18 11 500 5500 
201 Gora Devi 
Kumhar 
Ramdhan 
Kumhar 
RJ-S-1-
03638591 
Aug-16 Mar-18 19 750 14250 
202 Badam Devi Pachu Raigar RJ-S-
01423762/83237 
Oct-16 Mar-18 17 500 8500 
203 Parsan Devi Chitter 
Meena 
RJ-S-1-
03592803 
Dec-16 Mar-18 15 500 7500 
204 Laxman 
Kharol 
Baluram 
Kharol 
RJ-S-04614316 May-16 Apr-18 23 500 11500 
205 Prabhati 
Devi 
Nathu Mali RJ-S-07480813 Oct-16 Dec-17 14 500 7000 
206 Babu Khan Wajir Kha RJ-S-1-
014474945 
Nov-16 Dec-17 13 500 6500 
207 Jamela Babu Kha RJ-S-1-
04683628 
Nov-16 Dec-17 13 500 6500 
208 Mumtaj Beli Kha RJ-S-01515117 Jan-17 Jan-18 12 500 6000 
209 Nandaram Devkaran RJ-S-03688990 Jan-17 Jan-18 12 500 6000 
210 Ratani Devi Nandaram RJ-S-03613454 Jan-17 Jan-18 12 500 6000 
211 Jamana Pachu RJ-S-03927941 Jun-16 Jan-18 19 500 9500 
212 Jarina Abdul Hamid RJ-S-04668040 May-16 Aug-17 15 500 7500 
213 Santosh 
Devi 
Laxman 
Kharol 
RJ-S-04700349 May-16 Jan-18 20 500 10000 
214 Shyonaraya
n 
Harakn RJ-S-04475678 Oct-16 Jan-18 15 500 7500 
215 Chhoti Devi Sukha Raigar RJ-S-03920815 Jun-16 Jan-18 19 500 9500 
216 Ganga Devi Madhu 
Bawriya 
RJ-S-07398802 May-16 Feb-18 21 500 10500 
217 Geta Meena Ramjilal 
Meena 
RJ-S-0371110 Dec-16 Feb-18 14 500 7000 
218 Hukama 
Ram Jat 
Heera RJ-S-03764624 Jun-16 Feb-18 20 500 10000 
219 Ram Pal Jat Onkar Jat RJ-S-04566794 May-16 Feb-18 21 750 15750 
220 Sita Ram Chitar 
Bairwa 
RJ-S-04655418 May-16 Apr-18 23 500 11500 
221 Ratani Devi 
Bairwa 
Narayan 
Bairwa 
RJ-S-01390925 Aug-16 Apr-18 20 750 15000 
222 Jayana Devi 
Jat 
Nandaram RJ-S-01483861 Jan-17 Apr-18 15 500 7500 
223 Bajrang 
Dhobi 
Govardhan 
Dhobi 
RJ-S-03710979 Sep-16 Apr-18 19 500 9500 
224 Parema 
Lohar 
Masru Lohar RJ-S-06998704 Apr-17 Apr-18 12 500 6000 
225 Shanti Devi Bajrang 
Meena 
RJ-S-03743314 Dec-16 May-18 17 500 8500 

Annexures 
103 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
S. 
No. 
Name of 
Beneficiary 
Name of 
Father/Husb
and 
PPO No. Month of 
stoppage of 
pension 
Month of 
restoring 
of pension 
Total 
months 
for which 
pension 
was not 
received 
Per 
month 
amount 
of pen-
sion 
arrear 
Total 
amount 
of 
pension 
arrear 
226 Nandu Devi Shyoji Ram RJ-S-05470788 Jul-17 Apr-19 21 500- 10500 
227 Gyarsi Ramdhan RJ-S-04684083 May-18 Apr-19 11 500 5500 
228 Sawalram 
Kumhar 
Ramdev 
kumhar 
RJ-S-03529681 May-18 Apr-19 11 500 5500 
229 Gyarsi Devi Bheru Ram 
khati 
RJ-S-07221577 May-18 May-19 12 750 9000 
230 Shrawani 
Devi 
Gopi Ram Jat RJ-S-07299723 May-18 Apr-19 11 500 5500 
231 Bhadam 
Devi 
Bagriya 
Bagawan 
Bagriya 
RJ-S-05668809 May-18 Apr-19 11 500 5500 
232 Indra Gayarsi Lal 
Mali 
RJ-S-04708611 May-18 Apr-19 11 500 5500 
233 Mangal Rampal RJ-S-04583407 May-18 Apr-19 11 500 5500 
234 Dakha Devi 
Jat 
Kalyan RJ-S-07848125 May-18 Apr-19 11 500 5500 
235 Sujan Singh Kishor Singh RJ-S-
05980505/82135
A 
May-18 May-19 12 750 9000 
236 Ramkaran 
Gurjar 
Ramdev 
Gurjar 
RJ-S-04508839 May-18 May-19 12 500 6000 
237 Deu Devi Ramkaran 
Gurjar 
RJ-S-04521014 May-18 May-19 12 500 6000 
238 Gopal 
Swami 
Ramchandra RJ-S-03699539 May-18 May-19 12 500 6000 
239 Jumma Gopi Ram RJ-S-04476260 Jun-18 May-19 11 500 5500 
240 Pokhar Jat Harkaran RJ-S-05176410 May-18 May-19 12 500 6000 
241 Ghordhan Nathu Ram RJ-S-04455065 May-18 May-19 12 500 6000 
242 Bhawri 
Devi 
Ghordhan RJ-S-04453224 May-18 May-19 12 500 6000 
243 Rama Devi Rameswar 
Jat 
RJ-S-07348522 Dec-18 May-19 5 500 2500 
244 Hagami 
Devi 
Harji Raam 
Bhil 
RJ-S-1-
04503724 
May-18 May-19 12 500 6000 
245 Amri Devi Shyoji RJ-S-05191504 May-18 May-19 12 500 6000 
246 Ramdhan 
Jat 
Chitar Jat RJ-S-06252794 May-18 May-19 12 500 6000 
247 Suwa Lal 
Mali 
Gordhan 
Mali 
RJ-S-05621808 May-18 May-19 12 500 6000 
248 Laduram Mulchand 
Rana 
RJ-S-06836223 Jun-18 May-19 11 500 5500 
249 Sayar Balu Ram RJ-S-03770368 May-18 May-19 12 500 6000 
250 Sita Devi Ram Chandra 
Daroga 
RJ-S-07844573 May-18 May-19 12 500 6000 
251 Hari Ram 
Mali 
Norata mali RJ-S-04711354 May-18 May-19 12 500 6000 
252 Mangi Devi Hari Ram 
Mali 
RJ-S-04711985 May-18 May-19 12 500 6000 
253 Manbhar 
Devi Jat 
Sunda Ram 
Jat 
RJ-S-06606581 May-18 May-19 12 500 6000 

Annexures 
104 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
S. 
No. 
Name of 
Beneficiary 
Name of 
Father/Husb
and 
PPO No. Month of 
stoppage of 
pension 
Month of 
restoring 
of pension 
Total 
months 
for which 
pension 
was not 
received 
Per 
month 
amount 
of pen-
sion 
arrear 
Total 
amount 
of 
pension 
arrear 
254 Rupa Devi Kishana Ram 
Gurjar 
RJ-S-07153092 May-18 May-19 12 500 6000 
255 Banni Devi Shri Ram 
karan 
RJ-S-04469720 May-18 May-19 12 500 6000 
256 Mangali 
Devi 
Gopi Ram 
Mali 
RJ-S-05687249 May-18 May-19 12 500 6000 
257 Panna Lal Kunji Lal RJ-S-04594943 May-18 May-19 12 500 6000 
258 Bhuli devi Chotu RJ-S-03638648 May-18 May-19 12 500 6000 
259 Mohani 
Devi 
Ram Jeevan 
Jat 
RJ-S-03967607 May-18 May-19 12 500 6000 
260 Paana Devi Madhu Puri RJ-S-04460031 May-18 May-19 12 750 9000 
261 Santosh 
Devi Meena 
Mohan Lal 
Meena 
RJ-S-05687202 May-18 May-19 12 500 6000 
262 Madan Lal 
Kumhar 
Shrilal 
Kumahar 
RJ-S-1-
03669912 
May-18 May-19 12 500 6000 
263 Manohar 
Devi 
Madan 
Kumhar 
RJ-S-1-
03644471 
May-18 May-19 12 500 6000 
264 Ratan Lal 
Berwa 
Ramu Berwa RJ-S-04433006 May-18 May-19 12 500 6000 
265 Ghisi Devi Ratan Lal RJ-S-04828430 May-18 May-19 12 500 6000 
266 Tejpal 
Berwa 
Madu Ram 
Berwa 
RJ-S-07213870 May-18 May-19 12 500 6000 
267 Geeta Devi 
Harijan 
Kishan Lal 
Harijan 
RJ-S-1-
04735660 
May-18 May-19 12 500 6000 
268 Magadhu 
Devi 
Ramesawar RJ-S-04540510 May-18 May-19 12 500 6000 
269 Hasina 
Bano 
Sabbir 
Mohomad 
RJ-S-07733431 May-18 May-19 12 500 6000 
270 Chind Devi Gopi Ram RJ-S-05290282 May-18 May-19 12 500 6000 
271 Bidam Devi Badri Meena RJ-S-05050727 Mar-18 May-19 14 500 7000 
272 Lad Kanwar Kalyan Singh RJ-S-04738092 May-18 May-19 12 500 6000 
273 Nirmla Devi Tikam Chand RJ-S-01357295 May-16 Aug-17 15 750 11250 
274 Prem Devi Ramchandra 
Regar 
RJ-S-01186905 Sep-16 Aug-17 11 500 5500 
275 Surgyan 
devi 
Ramuji 
Daroga 
RJ-S-01284535 Jun-16 Sep-17 15 500 7500 
276 Sharvani 
Devi 
Mhadev Jat RJ-S-01332322 May-16 Sep-17 16 500 8000 
277 Jyana Devi Banna Ram 
Burdak 
RJ-S-05291759 Oct-16 Sep-17 11 500 5500 
278 Manbhar 
Devi 
Bhanwar Lal 
Gurjar 
RJ-S-01326803 Jun-16 Oct-17 16 500 8000 
279 Syani Devi Ramjivan Jat RJ-S-01301136 May-16 Nov-17 18 500 9000 
280 Kesar Devi Bhagvat Ram 
Khatik 
RJ-S-01353252 Nov-16 Feb-18 15 500 7500 

Annexures 
105 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
S. 
No. 
Name of 
Beneficiary 
Name of 
Father/Husb
and 
PPO No. Month of 
stoppage of 
pension 
Month of 
restoring 
of pension 
Total 
months 
for which 
pension 
was not 
received 
Per 
month 
amount 
of pen-
sion 
arrear 
Total 
amount 
of 
pension 
arrear 
281 Shree 
Kanwar 
Bheru Singh RJ-S-01346577 Jan-17 Mar-18 14 500 7000 
282 Papu Devi Sardar Gurjar RJ-S-01581549 Sep-16 Apr-18 19 500 9500 
283 santosh 
Devi 
Ramratan 
Meena  
RJ-S-07304234 Jul-17 Jun-18 11 500 5500 
284 Kamla Devi  Kaluram 
Kumavat 
RJ-S-
01277857/83521 
Nov-17 Jan-19 14 500 7000 
285 Rekha 
Kanwar 
Sharwan 
Singh 
RJ-S-01378071 Jul-17 Jan-19 18 500 9000 
286 Kesar Devi Mool Chand RJ-S-07705231 Jul-17 Jan-19 18 500 9000 
287 Sugani Sitaram 
Khatik 
RJ-S-05755018 May-18 Apr-19 11 500 5500 
288 Bodi Devi Nanu ram 
Kumawat 
RJ-S-07146513 May-18 Apr-19 11 500 5500 
289 Maya Devi Ram Dayal RJ-S-04159239 May-18 Apr-19 11 500 5500 
290 Santosh 
Devi 
Birdi Chand 
Badbhujy 
RJ-S-07928984 May-18 May-19 12 500 6000 
291 Pabti Devi Sawta Ram RJ-S-1-
05344706 
May-18 May-19 12 1000 12000 
292 Puspa Devi 
Bhad 
Mularam 
Bhad 
RJ-S-06792768 May-18 May-19 12 500 6000 
293 Puspa Devi 
Tepan 
Malu Ram 
Tepan 
RJ-S-07980565 Jun-18 May-19 11 500 5500 
294 Bhanwari 
Devi 
Hanuman 
Kumawat 
RJ-S-04449125 May-18 May-19 12 500 6000 
295 Bhwer Devi Ram Sukh RJ-S-03944967 May-18 May-19 12 500 6000 
296 Laxmi Suraj Mal 
Khatik 
RJ-S-07701111 May-18 May-19 12 500 6000 
297 Sajna Devi Mitthan Lal 
Yadav 
RJ-S-04013531 May-18 May-19 12 500 6000 
298 Raja Devi Rameshvar 
Jat 
RJ-S-
01295797/84160 
May-18 May-19 12 1000 12000 
299 Kani Devi Sitaram RJ-S-03886295 May-18 May-19 12 500 6000 
300 Manphool 
Devi 
Late Narayan 
Kumhar 
RJ-S-1-
03564470 
Jul-16 May-18 22 500 11000 
301 Sumitra 
Devi 
Shiv Parsad 
Sharma 
RJ-S-
01355093/85162 
Apr-17 Jun-18 14 500 7000 
302 Bhuli Devi Bhanwar Lal 
Jat 
RJ-S-
01286564/83771 
Sep-16 Aug-18 23 500 11500 
303 Rasal Devi Hari Ram 
Gurjar 
RJ-S-01592218 Jun-17 Feb-19 20 500 10000 
304 Durga Sen Mahesh 
Chand Sen 
RJ-S-03712128 Mar-18 Mar-19 12 500 6000 
305 Ruksana Abdul 
Rehman 
RJ-S-04722740 May-18 Apr-19 11 500 5500 

Annexures 
106 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
S. 
No. 
Name of 
Beneficiary 
Name of 
Father/Husb
and 
PPO No. Month of 
stoppage of 
pension 
Month of 
restoring 
of pension 
Total 
months 
for which 
pension 
was not 
received 
Per 
month 
amount 
of pen-
sion 
arrear 
Total 
amount 
of 
pension 
arrear 
306 Nanthi Devi Ram Lal RJ-S-03294178 May-18 Apr-19 11 500 5500 
307 Santosh 
Devi Pareek 
Ganesh 
Narayan 
Pareek 
RJ-S-01323343 May-16 Mar-18 22 500 11000 
308 Sayar Devi Banshi Rana RJ-S-
01313187/82688 
Apr-17 Apr-18 12 500 6000 
309 Supyar Devi Mahaveer 
Prasad 
Bairva 
RJ-S-
01332839/82890 
May-16 Feb-18 21 500 10500 
310 Lada Devi Bodhuram 
Meena 
RJ-S-
01286673/83823 
Sep-16 Feb-18 17 500 8500 
311 Vinod 
Kanwar 
Suresh Singh 
Badwa 
RJ-S-07304148 May-18 Apr-19 11 500 5500 
312 Nirmla Devi Bansi Lal 
Rana 
RJ-S-04724120 May-18 Apr-19 11 500 5500 
313 Rafika Munni Shak RJ-S-04724329 May-18 May-19 12 500 6000 
314 Kanta Devi Bhagchand 
Jain 
RJ-S-
01299667/83228 
Mar-18 May-19 14 1000 14000 
315 Manisha 
Devi 
Hansraj 
Bairwa 
RJ-S-07705390 May-18 May-19 12 500 6000 
316 Kesar Devi Harlal Balai RJ-S-
01256541/83856 
Mar-18 May-19 14 500 7000 
Total 2249750 
 
  

Annexures 
107 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
Annexure Q 
(Refer paragraph 4.3(iii)) 
 Statement showing details of beneficieries of CMWPS (now CMENSPS ) whose 
pension was stopped 
 
S.No Name of Pensioner Block PPO No Month of Last 
Pension  paid 
1 Bina/Rajkumar Ajmer/ Urban RJ-S-00226294 Apr-18 
2 Godawari/Sukhdev Ajmer/ Urban RJ-S-03245450 Apr-18 
3 Pankaj Sharma/Govind 
narayan  
Ajmer/ Urban RJ-S-03448869 Apr-18 
4 Bal Kanwar/Sher Singh Ajmer/ Urban RJ-S-03456904 Apr-18 
5 Anjana Bansal/Jagdish 
Chander 
Ajmer/ Urban RJ-S-1-03475799 Apr-18 
6 Shanti Devi/Panna Lal Ajmer/ Urban RJ-S-1-02126545 Apr-18 
7 Anita/Mahesh Chand Alwar/Urban RJ-S-01137154 Sep-18 
8 Ram Bai/Chhitter Mal Alwar/Urban RJ-S-01619602 Aug-18 
9 Lali Devi/Ram Dhan Alwar/Urban RJ-S-04188856 Jul-17 
10 Santosh Devi/ 
Mudrram 
Alwar/Urban RJ-S-03009808 Aug-18 
  

Annexures 
108 
Performance Audit of ‘Direct Benefit Transfer’ 
Annexure R 
 (Refer paragraph 4.5) 
 Screenshot showing unattended complaints on RajSSP portal 
 
 
 
 
  
  


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© COMPTROLLER AND 
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA 
https://cag.gov.in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
https://cag.gov.in/ag1/rajasthan/en 