yksdfgrkFkZ lR;fu”Bk
Dedicated to Truth in Public Interest 
KARTIKAY
E MATHUR
Digitally signed by 
KARTIKAYE 
MATHUR 
Date: 2022.12.16 
10:54:48 +05'30'

 
 
        Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General  
of India 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Performance Audit on  
Working of Customs Bonded Warehouses 
(CBWs) and Free Trade Warehousing 
Zones (FTWZs)  
 
Union Government 
(Department of Revenue - Indirect Taxes – Customs) 
No. 19 of 2022 
 
 
 
Laid on the table of Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha on ……………….. 

 
 
  

Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
 
 
Table of contents 
 
Sl. No Contents Page 
1 Preface i 
2 Executive Summary iii 
3 Glossary xi 
4 Chapter 1: Customs Bonded Warehouses and Free Trade 
Warehousing Zones in India: An Overview 
1 
5 Chapter 2: Audit Objectives, Criteria and Methodology 13 
6 Chapter 3: Customs Bonded Warehouses 17 
7 Chapter 4: Free Trade Warehousing Zones 49 
8 Annexures 67 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 

Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
i 
 
 
Preface 
This Report has been prepared for submission to the President of India under 
Article 151 of the Constitution of India.  
The Report contains significant results of the performance audit on the 
‘Working of Customs Bonded Warehouses (CBWs) and Free Trade 
Warehousing Zones (FTWZs)’.  
The instances mentioned in this Report are those which came to notice in the 
course of test aud it conducted during the period from August 2020 to 
December 2020 and covering transactions of the period April 2015 to March 
2020. 
The audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards 
issued by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
Audit wishes to acknowledge the cooperation received from the Department 
of Revenue, Ministry of Finance and Department of Commerce, Ministry of 
Commerce and Industry, and its field formations at each stage of the audit 
process. 
 

 
 
  

Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
 
iii 
 
 
 
 
About the Performance Audit 
 
Performance Audit on the w orking of Customs Bonded Warehouses  (CBWs) 
and Free Trade Warehousing Zones (FTWZs) was conducted to (a) assess  the 
effectiveness of the changes made in the Warehousing Regulations , 2016 in 
improving facilitation and self-clearance mechanism without detriment to the 
interest of revenue, and also the adequacy of Rules, Regulations, Notifications, 
Circulars, etc. issued from time to time in relation to CBWs under the Customs 
Act 1962; and (b) assess whether the establishment and operationalization of 
FTWZs are duly aligned with the o bjectives of FTWZs’ policy and whether the 
internal control system, monitoring and coordinating mechanism are adequate 
and designed to minimize the risk of revenue loss. 
CBWs enable importers to store imported goods without immediate payment 
of customs duties and thereby without blockage of working capital. There has 
been a phenomenal growth in CBWs after introduction of the new 
Warehousing Regulations 2016. Under the new liberalized regime, the concept 
of warehousing station has been removed. This has led to establishment of 
CBWs at any place, if approved by the licencing authority and the Public and 
Private Warehouses are no longer under the physical control of the Custom s 
Officers, moving to record based control. As part of this PA, 2191 out of 1,0352 
warehouses under the jurisdiction of 24 Commissionerate were selected for 
detailed audit. 
FTWZs are special categories of SEZs with a focus on trading and warehousing 
and other activities related thereto. FTWZ Policy as a part of Foreign Trade 
Policy (FTP) 2004-2009 is governed by the SEZ Act 2005 and SEZ Rules 2006 to 
leverage India’s strategic geographical location and cost and skill arbitrage. The 
objective of FTWZ is to create trade -related infrastructure to facilitate the 
import and export of goods and services with freedom to carry out trade 
transactions in free currency. There w ere a total of seven FTWZs notified and 
out of this only four FTWZs are operational. Further, five formal approvals and 
five in-principal approvals have been granted to FTWZs.  As part of this PA, a  
sample of seven FTWZ Developers along with 44 units in FTWZs out of 222 
Units in FTWZs spread over seven States were selected for detailed audit.   
Audit covered different aspects of Warehouses/FTWZs and examined                 
relevant    records    maintained    at     the   Customs     Offices,        Development     
 
 
1 Public Warehouses- 55, Private Warehouses- 64 and Special Warehouses- 100 
2 Public Warehouses – 512, Private Warehouses – 343 and Special Warehouses - 180 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
 
Customs duty is levied on import of 
goods into India and on export of 
certain goods out of India (Entry 83 
of List 1 of the Seventh Schedule of 
the Constitution). Customs receipts 
form part of the indirect tax revenue 
of the government. 
Duties of customs are levied under 
the Customs Act 1962, and the rates 
of duties are governed under the 
Customs Tariff Act and notifications 
issued from time to time. 
Customs receipts before the 
introduction of Goods and Service 
Tax (GST) comprised of the basic 
customs duty (BCD), countervailing 
duty (CVD) and special additional 
duties of customs (SAD). After 
introduction of GST w.e.f. 1 July 
2017, the CVD and SAD on import of 
all commodities, except petroleum 
products and spirits, have been 
subsumed and replaced by 
integrated tax (IGST). 
Department of Revenue under 
Ministry of Finance is responsible for 
administration of Direct and Indirect 
Union Taxes, through two statutory 
Boards namely, the Central Board of 
Indirect Taxes and Customs (CBIC) 
and the Central Board of Direct Taxes 
(CBDT) constituted under the Central 
Board of Revenue Act, 1963. 
The levy and collection of customs 
duty and cross-border preventive 
functions are administered by the 
CBIC through 67Customs 
Commissionerates across the 
country. 
The Department of Commerce under 
Ministry of Commerce and Industry, 

Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
 
iv 
 
Commissioners’ Office and Specified Officer for the period 2015 -16 to 2019 -
20. 
Responses received from the Department of Revenue (March/April 2022) and 
Department of Commerce (March/April 2022) to the draft Audit Report issued 
in December 2021, have been considered and appropriately included in th is 
report. 
Structure of the Report 
This report is divided  into four chapters. Chapter 1 present an overview of 
Customs Bonded Warehouses and Free Trade Warehousing Zones. Chapter 2 
indicates the audit objectives, scope, sample, audit Criteria and audit 
methodology used for conduct of this Performance Audit. Chapters 3 and 4 
cover the audit findings, conclusions and recommendations pertaining to 
CBWs and FTWZs respectively. 
This report contains 49 audit observations, including sub-paragraphs, and nine 
recommendations. Responses were received for 41 observations out of which 
26 have been fully/partially accepted and 1 5 have not been accepted. No 
response was received in respect of eight audit observations. Similarly, five out 
of the nine recommendations were accepted and reply is awaited in respect of 
the remaining f recommendations. our 
 
 
Chapter 3: Customs Bonded Warehouses 
The supervision and control of the warehouse has been shifted  from physical 
control to record based control. Audit scrutiny in respect of the sampled CBWs 
revealed that digitization by online filing of monthly returns using digital 
signatures of warehouse keeper has not been achieved so far; in the majority 
of sampl ed CBWs, the records were not maintained in the prescribed 
electronic formats. The details of goods removed from the warehouse and the 
purpose of removal i .e, home consumption/deposit in another 
warehouse/export/sold/destruction etc. cannot be assessed. He nce, whether 
the licensee has correctly paid duty and interest, and whether the licensee has 
submitted the correct amount of bond and bank guarantee cannot be correctly 
assessed by the Department. If the detailed records are not maintained 
electronically by the licensee, the process of reconciliation and monitoring of 
monthly returns would be a very difficult task. 
(Para 3.2.1) 
Summary of Audit Findings 


Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
 
v 
 
Audit scrutiny revealed that the Department was totally dependent upon the 
Monthly Technical Reports and monthly returns submitted by each bonded 
warehouse; the monthly reports are not automated.  There was absence of a 
structured and seamless flow of data between the IT systems maintained by 
the warehouses and ICES, the main IT Systems of Customs. Further, 
warehouses were required to maintain data in Form A and B which were not 
integrated with ICES. While ex -bonding of goods for home consumption is 
accounted for in ICES, other transactions such as re-export of the warehoused 
goods, transfer to S EZs and transfer from one bonded warehouse to another 
bonded warehouse were not captured in ICES. The SEZ Online IT System 
(managed by NSDL) which covers the SEZs was not integrated with ICES. 
(Para 3.2.2) 
The form prescribed for monthly return of the receipt, storage, operations and 
removal of the goods in the warehouse (Form A) was deficient as the removal 
details do not capture the ex-bond details. 
(Para 3.2.3) 
Non-submission/delay in submission of monthly returns raises serious  
concerns over the monitoring of warehouses since the Department’s control 
over the warehouses has shifted to record based control from physical control. 
The Department would not know the details of removal of goods including 
date of removal, purpose of re moval (home consumption/deposit in another 
warehouse/export/sold/destruction etc.), quantity cleared, value, duty, 
interest, balance quantity etc. Details of goods stored in the warehouse 
including value, duty and quantity would also not be known. Further,  the 
present system does not immediately generate an alert if the triple duty bond 
and the bank guarantee do not cover the duty for the goods imported in 
warehouse. 
(Para 3.2.4) 
There was no standard operating procedure for antecedent verification and 
different procedures were followed by different Customs Commissionerates ; 
further, the details required to be filled in Part IV of the application for license 
were not complete in respect of 36 test checked warehouses. 
(Paras 3.3.1 and 3.3.2) 
There were delays, ranging from 7 to 440 days, beyond the stipulated time 
limit of 30 days in issue of licenses of 30 out of the test -checked 219 CBWs. 
This delay affects the “ease of doing business” policy of the government. 
(Para 3.3.4) 


Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
 
vi 
 
Instances of non-short/ deduction of Customs duty in the general bond and 
excess holding of goods beyond the permissible limits prescribed in the 
licenses was noticed. Excess stock would not be covered by insurance coverage 
and the Department is liable to lose Customs duty in the event of disaster like 
fire, accident and others. 
(Paras 3.4.1 and 3.4.2) 
There was short/irregular payment of Merchant Overtime (MOT) charges in 14 
warehouses, and in 10 warehouses, customs supervision charges were levied 
incorrectly on MOT basis , instead of cost recovery charge  basis, leading to 
short recovery of customs supervision charges of ₹10.29 crore. 
(Para 3.4.3 and 3.4.4) 
In 129 warehouses, l icensees failed to comply with the Board’s Regulation 
stipulating an all risk insurance policy for a sum equivalent to the amount of 
duty involved on the dutiable goods proposed to be stored ; this entailed risk 
of losing the customs duty on the warehoused goods in the event of any 
disaster in the warehouses. Out of 129 cases, in 56 cases insurance cover was 
deficient at a point of time or for a period by an amount of ₹1,015.71 crore. In 
73 Warehousing license cases, the same could not be quantified because the 
maximum value of d uty on goods proposed to be stored (as per licence) was 
not available. 
(Para 3.5.3) 
Regular audit and inspection of CBWs were not carried out by the Department 
during the period from 2015-16 to 2019-20. 
(Para 3.5.8) 
Chapter 4:  Free Trade Warehousing Zones (FTWZs) 
FTWZs are a special category of SEZ introduced in Foreign Trade Policy (FTP) 
2004-2009. Even after 14 years, only seven FTWZs have been notified as of 
March 2020. Out of the seven notified FTWZs only four are in operation. It was 
noticed that the SEZ Act 2005 and SEZ Rules 2006 contain no separate 
guidelines/policies or any specific rules in respect of FTWZ. Further, the 
Department has not conducted any evaluation/review of the scheme, to 
determine why enough private players are not showing interest in the scheme, 
and accordingly appropriate policy changes, if required, to attract developers 
for setting up more FTWZs. 
(Para 4.2 and 4.3) 


Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
 
vii 
 
Government issued instructions in July 2010 allowing FTWZ units to hold goods 
on behalf of Domestic Tariff Area (DTA) suppliers and buyers. However, no 
amendment was made in the SEZ Rules, 2006 which still stipulate that an FTWZ 
unit can hold goods only on account of a foreign supplier. 
(Para 4.5) 
Audit noticed instances of short levy of duty on domestic clearance due to 
adoption of incorrect tariff value; i ncorrect calculation of NFE due to non -
consideration of other outflow (like royalty payment, business  support fee, 
technical service fee and foreign travelling expenses ); instances of irregular 
sanction of duty drawback where payments were not made from the Foreign 
Currency Account of the FTWZ unit. 
(Paras 4.6, 4.8 and 4.9) 
Comparison of projected targets  of exports/investments/employment/NFE 
against the actual achievements showed shortfall in performance of 
developers and units. The Department needs to analyse the reasons for such 
shortfalls as part of monitoring the performance of FTWZ s and take possible 
steps to improve the same. 
(Para 4.10) 
Rule 79 of SEZ Rules 2006 prescribes audit by the Customs Officers of all 
authorized operations and related transactions in SEZs and units in SEZs. No 
such audit was conducted by DC Offices located at Ahmedabad, Beng aluru, 
Hyderabad and Mumbai. 
(Para-4.11) 
Review of APRs revealed instances of failure to file APRs, delay in submission 
of APRs, acceptance of non –certified APRs and submission of revised APRs 
indicating different NFE, though there is no provision in the extant rule for filing 
revised APR. 
(Para 4.12) 
 
 
Recommendation 1: With the move from physical control to record based IT 
control under the Warehousing  Regulations, 2016, the Department needs to 
have a time bound action plan to: 
a) Devise an IT strategy for integration/reconciliation and digitisation 
of warehouse data with ICES, as well as with SEZ Online 
Recommendations 


Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
 
viii 
 
b) Specify an appropriate electronic format in which monthly returns 
from warehouses shall mandatorily be submitted digitally 
(dispensing completely with manual reports) and integrated with 
ICES, and analyse such integrated data electronically for monitoring 
and control. 
c) Conduct analytical review of the electronic data submitted by 
warehouses to identify warehouses, using a risk based approach, for 
detailed verification and audit. 
Without such a systematic approach, the move from physical control to 
record based controls of warehouses results in lack of control, leaving room 
for misuse and abuse of the liberalised Regulations. 
 (Para 3.2.2) 
 
Ministry, while accepting the recommendations (March 2022), has stated that 
the recommendations are for systemic improvement and would lead to more 
efficient and IT driven record based control. These recommendations would 
be further examined by DG (Sy stems) for implementation. Further, for 
maintenance of records in relation to warehoused goods by licensees 
permitted to carry manufacturing and other operations in the warehouse 
under Section 65, DG (Systems) is already working on developing a module on 
ICEGATE and ICES. In the module, the generation of electronic monthly returns 
has also been taken up. 
 
Recommendation 2: Monthly return (Form A) should be suitably modified  to 
capture the details of ex -bond BsE/Shipping Bill as well as date to capture 
complete information regarding removal of goods. 
(Para 3.2.1) 
Ministry has accepted the recommendation and replied (March 2022) that a 
suitable amendment in Form A of Circular No.25/2016-Customs dated 08 June 
2016 is under examination. 
Recommendation 3: Bond module in ICES should be modified, in a time bound 
manner, to capture all types of warehouse transactions such as bond to bond 
clearance, clearance to SEZ units etc. Further , a suitable mechanism should 
be put in place for online filing of extension of bonds and bank guarantees 
and there should be an alert when the bond and bank guarantee are expiring. 
The system should also be able to do age-wise analysis of time expired goods. 
(Para 3.2.4) 
Ministry in their reply has stated that ICES is a transactional database for 
processing of imported and export goods. Movement of cargo in domestic 


Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
 
ix 
 
area is not part of the ICES transactional platform. As regards coverage of SEZ 
units, the implementation of the same has been announced in Budget 2 022 
and will be taken up shortly.  Further, Customs Policy Wing is actively 
examining measures for implementation of electronic submission of bonds 
and bank guarantees to Customs. This initiative is for fostering an 
environment of ease of doing business and  to reduce usage of paper. At the 
initial juncture, the implementation of this initiative would subsume various 
scenarios including provisional assessments under Section 18 of the Customs 
Act, 1962, imports under Concessional rates of duty, warehousing of goods as 
per Section 59 of the Customs Act, 1962, manufacture and other operations 
in Private Warehous e and Special Warehouse as per S ection 65 of the 
Customs Act, imports made under Export Promotion Schemes etc. 
Recommendation 4: The Department needs to have a time bound action plan 
to develop IT systems by which the process of vetting of applications for 
warehouse licenses, antecedent verifications, surrender of licenses etc is 
done in an effective and timely manner and uniform and consistent 
procedures are followed to minimize unwarranted deficiencies and delays. 
(Para 3.3) 
Ministry in their reply (March 2022) has stated that audit recommendation is 
under examination and response will be provided after receiving comments 
from the field formations. 
Recommendation 5: The Department must develop, in a time bound manner, 
an IT systems/module for tracking and monitoring submission and renewal 
of Solvency Certificate, Duty bond and Bank guarantee, and Risk insurance 
policy. The system should t rack and monitor 100 per cent duty coverage 
under insurance as prescribed in the rules. 
(Para 3.5.3) 
Ministry in their reply (March 2022) has stated that the recommendation is 
noted and once the Audit Report is published, the Report will be circulated to 
all field formations for exercising due diligence. 
Recommendation 6. Ministry must ensure that a mechanism for internal 
audit and inspection of CBWs, including guidelines/SOPs for such audit, is 
implemented immediately. 
(Para 3.5.8) 
Recommendation 7: The Department needs to consider the possibility of 
integration of the   S EZ Online IT systems with ICEGATE/ICES, the Customs 
portal maintained and managed by DG Systems. 
(Para 4.7) 


Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
 
x 
 
DoC stated (January 2022) that integration of SEZ Online System with ICEGATE 
for real time sharing of data and use of EDT RMS for providing inputs to SEZ 
Customs is underway and necessary support from DG Systems, CBIC is 
requested in this regard. 
Recommendation 8. Ministry should ensure  that periodic audit of the SEZ 
units by Customs officers in accordance with Rule 79 of the SEZ Rules is 
conducted in all SEZs. 
(Para 4.11) 
Recommendation 9: The Department need to implement 100 per cent digital 
submission of Annual Performance Reports in the case of units and 
HPRs/QPRs in respect of developers and not allowing, any  manual 
submission. This will promote transparency and evolve effective monitoring. 
(Para 4.12) 
****************** 
  


Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
 
xi 
 
  
Abbreviation Expanded form 
A&G Airport and General 
ACC Air Cargo Complex 
ADG Additional Director General 
AP&ACC Airport and Air Cargo Complex 
APRs Annual Performance Reports 
AR Audit Report 
BGs Bank Guarantees 
BLUT Bond-Cum-Legal Undertaking 
BoA Board of Approval 
BsE Bills of Entry 
CA Chartered Accountant 
CAGR Compound Annual Growth Rate 
CBIC Central Board of Indirect Taxes and Customs 
CBWs Customs Bonded Warehouses 
CCO Chief Commissionerate office 
CFS Container Freight Station 
CHA Customs House Agent 
CIF Cost, Insurance and Freight 
CRC Cost Recovery Charges 
CSIA Chhatrapati Shivaji International Airport 
DA Dearness Allowance 
DC Development Commissioner 
DC/AC Deputy Commissioner/Assistant Commissioner 
DFS Duty-Free Shop 
DG Director General 
DGCEI Directorate General of Central Excise Intelligence 
DGCIS Directorate General of Commercial Intelligence and 
Statistics 
DGFT Directorate General of Foreign Trade 
DGGSTI Directorate General of Goods & Services Tax 
Intelligence 
DoC Department of Commerce 
DoR Department of Revenue 
DRI Directorate of Revenue Intelligence 
DTA Domestic Tariff Areas 
EDI Electronic Data Interchange 
Glossary  

Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
 
xii 
 
Abbreviation Expanded form 
EDPMS Export Data Processing and Monitoring System 
EHTP Electronic Hardware Technology Park 
EoUs Export Oriented Units 
EXIM Export-Import 
FoB Free on Board 
Forex Foreign Exchange 
FSSAI Food Safety and Standards Authority of India 
FTP Foreign Trade Policy 
FTWZ Free Trade Warehousing Zone 
FY Financial Year 
GDP Gross Domestic Product 
GoI Government of India 
HBP Handbook of Procedures 
HPR Half Yearly Performance Report 
HRA House Rent Allowance 
ICDs Inland Container Depots 
ICEGATE Indian Customs Electronic Gateway 
ICES Indian Customs Edi System 
IDPMS Import Data Processing and Monitoring System 
IGST Integrated Goods and Services Tax 
INR Indian Rupees 
IT Information Technology 
JNCH Jawaharlal Nehru Customs House 
KASEZ Kandla Special Economic Zone 
LEADS Logistics Ease Across Different States 
LoP Letter of Permission 
LPI Logistics Performance Index 
MEIS Merchandise Exports from India Scheme 
MIS Management Information Systems 
MoCI Ministry of Commerce and Industry 
MoF Ministry of Finance 
MOT Merchant Overtime 
MoU Memorandum of Understanding 
MTRs Monthly Technical Reports 
NCH New Customs House 
NFE Net Foreign Exchange 
NSDL National Securities Depository Limited 

Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
 
xiii 
 
Abbreviation Expanded form 
NSWS National Single Window System 
NT Non-Tariff 
PA Performance Audit 
PCC Principal Commissioner of Customs 
QPR Quarterly Performance Report 
RBI Reserve Bank of India 
RMS Risk Management System 
RWC Re-Warehousing Certificates 
SBs Shipping Bills 
SCN Show Cause Notice 
SEZ Special Economic Zones 
SO Specified Officer 
STPI Software Technology Parks of India 
ToR Terms of Reference 
TR Temporary Removal of Goods 
UAC Unit Approval Committee 
US United States 
USD United States Dollar 
VSEZ Visakhapatnam Special Economic Zone 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Report No.19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
1 
 
CHAPTER 1 
CUSTOMS BONDED WAREHOUSES (CBWs) AND FREE TRADE 
WAREHOUSING ZONES (FTWZs) IN INDIA: AN OVERVIEW 
1.1 Warehousing  
Warehousing primarily refers to the storage of goods, which are to be 
transported, whether inbound or outbound, and is one of the major 
segments of the rapidly growing logistics industry. Warehousing is an 
important component of the logistic value chain an d plays a significant role 
in quality storage of goods and merchandise during the varied stages of 
transportation. Until a few decades ago, warehouses were mere ‘holding’ 
areas, housed in dingy or dilapidated buildings with poor light or ventilation 
facilities. Since then, warehousing as a sector in India has evolved manifold, 
with the low -grade godowns being replaced by pre -engineered structures 
that are insulated, ventilated and climate -controlled, with round the clock 
surveillance, and standard safety pr ocedures and the segment has evolved 
from providing not only custody for goods but also offering value -added 
services such as sorting, packing, blending and processing. 
India’s supply chain and logistics sector is one of the largest globally, with a 
logistics industry of USD 215 billion3 and growing at a CAGR of 10.7 per cent. 
It has received around USD 3.4 billion of institutional capital over the last five 
years. Of the total private equity investments into real estate, around 26 per 
cent account for investments into the warehousing sector.  
1.2 Types of Warehouses:  
Warehouses can be categorised by type (General, Specialty, Refrigerated); 
by ownership (Public, Private, Bonded); by sector (Industrial v/s Agricultural); 
by usage pattern (Single v/s Co -warehousing); by infrastructure (Single 
Storey v/s Multi -Storey) or by End User Industry (Automotive, Food & 
Beverage, Chemical, Consumer Goods & Retail, Textile, Pharm aceutical, 
Others). Warehouses could also be broadly classified into public -private, 
bonded, government and co -operative warehouses. ‘Grade A’ warehouses 
are usually labelled based on their superior construction quality, location, 
space, amenities, and clients, among others.  
  
 
3 India Expo 2020 

Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit)
2
1.2.1 Warehousing Sector from a Customs Perspective
1.2.1.1 Types of Customs Bonded Warehouses
1.2.1.2   Inland Container Depots & Container Freight Stations
1.2.1.3 Free Trade Warehousing Zones (FTWZs)
Earlier, a Performance Audit (PA) on working of ICD and CFS was featured in 
the CAG’s Audit Report No. 16 of 2018. During the present PA, the working 
of Customs Bonded Warehouses (CBWs) administered by the Central Board 
of Indirect Taxes and Customs (CBIC), Department of Revenue (DoR) under 
the Ministry of Finance (MoF) as well as Free Trade Warehousing Zones 
(FTWZs), which are administered by the Ministry of Commerce and Industry 
(MoCI) was taken up for audit scrutiny for having a comprehensive coverage 
of the warehousing sector.
•License given by the Principal Commisssioner or Commissioner of Customs 
as per Section 57 of the Customs Act 1962, where dutiable goods may be 
deposited.
Public warehouse
•License given by Principal Commisssioner or Commissioner of Customs as 
per Section 58 of the Customs Act 1962 wherein dutiable goods imported 
by or on behalf of the licensee may be deposited. 
Private Warehouse
•As per Section 58A of the Act, the Principal Commissioner of Customs or 
Commissioner of Customs may grant license for Special warehouses, 
subject  to  such conditions as may be prescribed.
Special Warehouse
•Inland Container Depot (ICD) is Customs station in the hinterland for
clearance of imported and export goods transshipped from gateway
ports. Inland Container Depots are also sometimes referred to as ‘Dry
Ports.’
Inland Container 
Depot
•A Container Freight Station (CFS) is a Customs area linked to gateway
ports situated in close proximity, to de-congest the port by shifting
cargo and completing the customs clearance activities away from the
port.
Container Freight 
Station
•The Free Trade and Warehousing Zones are special catagories of
Special Economic Zones with a focus on trading and warehousing and
other activities related thereto.
•
FTWZ

Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
3 
 
1.3 Customs Bonded Warehouses 
Customs Bonded Warehouses (CBWs) enable importers to store imported 
goods without immediate payment of customs duties and thereby without 
blockage of working capital. In India, an importer who wishes to warehouse 
the goods, files an ‘into-bond’ bill of entry, which is assessed to Customs duty 
at the port of import. The importer has to execute a bond to cover the risk 
to Customs duty; the assessing officer at the port of import, upon the bond 
being executed, allows the goods to be deposited without payment o f duty 
in a Custom Bonded Warehouse, which is permitted under the Customs Act 
1962. The Customs Act and Warehousing Regulations provide for licensing of 
Public, Private and Special warehouses wherein dutiable goods may be 
deposited by the importers. 
Sections 59 and 61 of the Customs Act, as amended in 2016, read with t he 
new Warehousing Regulations 2016, also lay down the procedure for 
execution of warehousing bond and the time period up to which the goods 
may remain in a warehouse, with or without incurrin g any interest liability. 
The Act also provides for the procedures and conditions under which the 
owner of any warehoused goods may carry on any manufacturing process or 
other operations in the warehouse in relation to such goods. The statutory 
provisions of warehousing are contained in Sections 57 to 73A of the 
Customs Act 1962.  
The law relating to Customs warehousing in India has been considerably 
liberalised with effect from 14 May 2016. The important changes are 
summarised below: 
• The concept of warehou sing station has been removed. This means 
that a Customs Bonded Warehouse can be established in any place, 
if approved by the licensing authority.  
• The Commissioner has been named as the officer who will issue all 
types of warehouse licences, instead of th e Assistant/Deputy 
Commissioner. 
• The requirement of physical supervision of the Customs officer for 
accessing the warehouse has been removed for most goods. The 
responsibility is shifted to the warehouse keeper and importer. Only 
some sensitive goods, as notified, will be under physical Customs 
supervision, in a different category of warehouse. (Special 
Warehouse (Custody and Handling of Goods) Regulations 2016).  

Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
 
4 
 
• The amount of the wareho using bond has been increased, and cash 
security has been made a statutory requirement. (Section 59 of the 
Customs Act 1962). 
• The warehousing period will not apply to EOUs. They can keep goods 
imported without payment of duty or interest on duty, till thes e are 
issued for use in manufacture.  
• Extensions of warehousing period can be given for one year at a time 
by the Commissioner/Principal Commissioner of Customs. (Section 61 
of the Customs Act 1962).  
• Movement of goods to warehouse, inter -warehouse, and fr om 
warehouse for export will be under Customs one -time lock. 
(Warehouse (Custody and Handling of Goods) Regulations 2016 and 
Warehoused Goods (Removal) Regulations 2016). 
• The Customs Department will not concern itself with rent and other 
dues to the warehouse keeper.  
• A single integrated application form for both license and 
manufacturing permission has been prescribed vide Circular No. 
34/2019 dated 01 October 2019 issued along with Manufacturing or 
Other Operations in Warehouse (No. 2) Regulations 2019, c ompared 
to the earlier situation where license and manufacturing permissions 
were issued separately. 
1.3.1 Growth of Customs Bonded Warehouses: 
There has been phenomenal growth after introduction of the new 
Warehousing Regulations 2016. There were 1,035 warehouses as of March 
2020 (Public -512, Private -343 and Special -180), while the total number of 
Public, Private and Special Warehouses was only 88 up to May 2016. 
Chart 1: Growth of Customs Bonded Warehouses 
 

Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
5 
 
The aggregate data on transaction in Custom Bonded Warehouses for the 
period 2015-16 to 2019-20 is depicted below: 
Table 1.1 : Data on transaction in Custom Bonded Warehouses 
(₹ in crore) 
Year 
Total No. of 
into Bond 
BsE 
Into Bond 
assessable 
value 
Into Bond 
duty 
assessed 
Total No. of 
Ex-bond 
BsE 
Ex-bond 
assessable 
value 
Ex-bond duty 
assessed 
2015-16 2,66,920 3,10,000.80 30,749.31 2,75,705 2,36,018.42 15,983.83 
2016-17 1,83,222 3,13,050.81 34,016.04 3,97,249 2,70,742.08 17,618.97 
2017-18 1,17,632 3,68,732.15 45,251.28 4,05,014 3,46,929.46 24,577.37 
2018-19 1,16,871 3,42,263.19 61,732.81 3,70,892 3,25,398.81 31,437.18 
2019-20 1,13,205 2,98,136.12 58,879.28 3,72,254 2,78,098.99 26,342.12 
Source: DG Systems & Data Management, CBIC 
The pan India Chief Commissionerate wise data on transactions in Custom 
Bonded Warehouses for the period 2015-16 to 2019-20 is given in Annexure 
1.1. 
1.3.2 Customs Bonded Warehousing Process 
The functioning of Customs Bonded Warehouses is governed by a three-tier 
administrative structure - License Issuing Authority; Proper Officer at 
Customs Station; and Bond Officer of warehouse. 
 
License Issuing Authority: - The Principal Commissioner of Customs or 
Commissioner of Customs is the License Issuing Authority and issues a license 
within 30 days from the date of receipt of application from the applicant. He 
is also the permitting authority for carrying on manufacturing and other 
operations in Private Warehouses. He may, on sufficient cause being shown, 
extend the period for which the goods may remain in the warehouse. 
Proper Officer: - The Deputy Commissioner/Assistant Commissioner of 
Customs and Central Excise is assigned as the Proper Officer for functions in 
relation to Sections 59, 60, 61, 67, 72 and 73 o f the Act, and the 
Superintendent of Customs and Central Excise or Appraiser is assigned as the 
License Issuing 
authority Proper Officer Bond Officer


Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
 
6 
 
Proper Officer for functions in relation to Sections 64, 68 and Section 69 of 
the Act. 
Bond Officer : The Bond Officer is an officer of customs in -charge of a 
warehouse. The transfer of goods from one warehouse to another 
warehouse, removal of goods for home consumption and export are allowed 
on permission given by the Bond Officer. The Bond Officer is also responsible 
for inspection of records maintained and receiving/checking of monthly 
returns in relation to the warehoused goods. 
1.3.3 Advantages of Customs Bonded Warehouse  
The major advantages of Customs Bonded Warehouses are as follows: 
• Duty is not collected until the merchandise is withdrawn for 
consumption. An importer, therefore, has control over use of his/her 
money until the duty is paid upon withdrawal of the merchandise.  
• If no domestic buyer is found for the imported articles, the importer 
can sell the merchandise for exportation, thereby eliminating his 
obligation to pay duty.  
• Duties owed on articles that have been manipulated are determined 
at the time of withdrawal from the bonded warehouse. 
1.3.4 Norms for warehousing of goods  
• Only dutiable goods can be warehoused in Public, Private and Special 
Customs Warehouses. Goods can remain in Public, Private and 
Special warehouses till the expiry of one year from the date on which 
the Proper Officer has made an order permitting the removal of 
goods from the Customs station to the warehouse. 
• The importer has to execute a bond for a sum equal to thrice the 
amount of the duty assessed on goods in respect of which a bill of 
entry for warehousing has been presented.  
• Interest shall be payable when goods  remain in the warehouse 
beyond a period of ninety days from the date of the order permitting 
removal of goods from the Customs station for deposit in the 
warehouse. 
• Import duty has to be paid when warehoused goods are cleared for 
home consumption.  
• Any wa rehoused goods can be exported to a place outside India, 
without payment of import duty if the shipping bill/bill of export is 
presented and export duty, fine and penalties, if any, are paid. 

Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
7 
 
• The Proper Officer may demand, and the owner of goods shall pay, 
the full amount of duty chargeable together with interest, fine and 
penalties if warehoused goods are removed in contravention to 
Section 71 or have not been removed at the expiration of the 
warehousing period for home consumption or export or are not duly 
accounted for to the satisfaction of the Proper Officer. 
1.4 Free Trade Warehousing Zones (FTWZs) 
Free Trade and Warehousing Zones (FTWZs) are special categories of Special 
Economic Zones with a focus on trading and warehousing and other activities 
related thereto. FTWZ Policy, as a part of the Foreign Trade Policy (FTP) 2004-
2009, is governed by the SEZ Act 2005 and SEZ Rules 2006 to leverage India’s 
strategic geographical location and cost and skill arbitrage. 
The objective of FTWZs is to create trade -related infrastructure to facilitate 
the import and export of goods and services with freedom to carry out trade 
transactions in free currency. The policy envisages creation of world -class 
infrastructure for warehousing of various products, state -of-the-art 
equipment, transportation and handling facilities, commercial office -space, 
water, power, communications and connectivity, with one-stop clearance of 
import and export formalities, to support the integrated zones as 
‘international trading hubs’. 
These zones are planned to be established in areas proximate to seaports, 
airports or dry ports so as to offe r easy access by rail and road. Free Trade 
and Warehousing Zones (FTWZs) are envisaged to be essential logistics 
infrastructure to facilitate EXIM trade and to root out inefficiencies 
associated with movement and value addition of EXIM cargo in India.  
FTWZs are duty-free areas that offer warehousing, storage, and distribution 
facilities for trade, transhipment, and re -export operations. They provide 
end-to-end supply chain facilities with value -added services. Such services 
may include facilities such as c ategorized and temperature -controlled 
warehouses, break bulk cargo distribution, swift one-stop Custom clearances 
for imports and exports, service tax exemptions on services rendered within 
FTWZs, exemptions from local taxes and hassle-free re-exports.  
FTWZs provide the flexibility of carrying out various types of transactions 
based on business needs. They can be used for transshipment,  
• import from overseas into FTWZs and re-export with or without value 
addition; 

Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
 
8 
 
• import from overseas to Domestic Tariff Areas (DTAs) through FTWZs 
with or without value addition that allows vendor inventory 
management and just-in-time delivery; 
• export from DTA/Export Oriented Units (EOUs)/other SEZs to 
overseas through FTWZs with or without value addition; 
• export fro m overseas and DTA to FTWZ and re -export to overseas 
through FTWZs; and  
• import from overseas to DTA through FTWZs with addition of 
domestic inputs at FTWZs. 
1.4.1 Growth of FTWZ in India 
The growth rate of notified FTWZs during the period from 2006 to 2020 is as 
follows:  
Chart 2 : Notified FTWZ during the period 2006-2020 
Source: Ministry of Commerce & Industry 
During the first four years of the inception of the FTWZ policy, six FTWZ were 
notified. In the next five years not a single FTWZ was notified, and only one 
FTWZ was notified during 2016-2020. Therefore, only seven FTWZ have been 
notified as of March 2020. 
1.4.2 Volume of transactions/Growth of FTWZs 
1.4.2.1 Value of Imports and Exports handled through FTWZs 
Chart 3 : Total Imports and Exports by FTWZs (₹ in crore) 
 
 
Source: Ministry of Commerce & Industry 
In absolute rupee terms, the value of year -on-year imports through FTWZs 
has increased from ₹8,937 crore in FY 2015 -16 to ₹19,617 crore in FY 2019 -
19,617.00
15,234.73
11,254.38
7,715.00
8,937.00
3,440.00
3,080.81
2,211.75
2,147.00
5,063.00
2019-20
2018-19
2017-18
2016-17
2015-16
Exports
Imports
6
0 1
2006 - 2010 2011 - 2015 2016 - 2020

Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit)
9
20. The annual growth rate of imports, after a slight decline in FY 2016 -17, 
increased by 46 per cent during FY 2017 -18 and by 35 per cent and 29 per 
cent in FY 2018-19 and 2019-20, respectively.
The value of exports through FTWZs, on the other hand, declined by 58 per 
cent in FY 2016-17 increased marginally by 3 per cent in FY 2017-18, followed 
by increases of 39 per cent in FY 2018 -19 and 11 per cent in FY 2019 -20. 
Overall, the exports from FTWZs fell from ₹5,063 crore in FY 2015 -16 to 
₹3,440 crore in FY 2019-20 i.e. a drop of 32 per cent.
1.4.2.2 Commodity wise Exports and Imports
The data furnished by the Ministry of Commerce and Industry regarding 
imports by FTWZs during 2015 -20 shows that the topmost product 
categories imported were Electricals/Machineries/Automobiles & 
Instruments followed by Chemicals/Minerals and Base Metals/Articles of 
Metals as depicted in the following graph:
Chart 4 : 
Imports by FTWZ during 2015-20 (₹ in crore)
The topmost product categories exported from FTWZs during 2015-20 were 
Base Metals/Articles of Metals followed by Electricals/Machineries/ 
Automobiles & Instruments and Chemicals/Minerals as shown below:
0 10000 20000 30000 40000
Textile (Natural & manmade) & Footwear
Plastics/Wood & Rubber Articles
Miscellaneous
Gems & Jewellery
Electrical/Machinery/Automobile & Instruments
Chemical/Minerals
Ceramic & Glassware
Base metal/Articles of Metals
Arms & Nuclear Products
Agriculture & Animal Products
2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20

Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
 
10 
 
Chart 5 : Exports by FTWZ Units during 2015-20 (₹ in crore) 
 
Source: Ministry of Commerce & Industry 
Comparison of imports and exports through FTWZs shows that imports were 
4 to 5 times more than exports, except in the year 2015 -16 wherein it was 
2.5 times of exports.  
 
Chart 6 : Summary of Imports and Exports from FTWZ (2015-16 to 2019-20) (₹ in 
crore) 
 
Source: Ministry of Commerce & Industry 
 
This implies that the major chunk of the goods imported into FTWZs are 
cleared into the Domestic Tariff Area (DTA). 
0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000
Textile (Natural & manmade) & Footwear
Plastics/Wood & Rubber Articles
Miscellaneous
Gems & Jewellery
Electrical/Machinery/Automobile & Instruments
Chemical/Minerals
Ceramic & Glassware
Base metal/Articles of Metals
Arms & Nuclear Products
Agriculture & Animal Products
2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
30000
Import Export Import Export Import Export Import Export Import Export
2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20
Textile (Natural & manmade) & Footwear Plastics/Wood & Rubber Articles
Miscellaneous Gems & Jewellery
Electrical/Machinery/Automobile & Instruments Chemical/Minerals
Ceramic & Glassware Base metal/Articles of Metals
Arms & Nuclear Products Agriculture & Animal Products

Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
11 
 
1.4.3 Authorities involved in implementation 
The functioning of the FTWZs is governed by a three-tier administration - the 
Board of Approval, the Approval Committee and the Development 
Commissioner.  
● Board of Approval : - The Board of Approval is the apex body and is 
headed by the Secretary, Department of Commerce. The Proposals 
for setting up of FTWZs are considered by the Board, which is a 19 -
member body in the Ministry of Commerce & Industries, on the 
recommendations of the respective State Governments and final 
approval is granted by the Central Government;  
● Approval Committee : - Deals w ith approval of units in FTWZ and 
other related issues.  
● Developer: -means a person who, or a State Government which has 
been granted a letter of approval by the Central Government;  
● Co-Developer: - means a person who, or a State Government which, 
has been granted a letter of approval by the Central Government, for 
development of infrastructural facilities in the identified area;  
● Development Commissioner : - Each Zone is headed by a 
Development Commissioner, who is ex -officio Chairperson of the 
Approval Committee.  
1.4.4 Advantages of Free Trade Warehousing Zone  
● Customs duties, if applicable, are paid  when the merchandise is 
transferred from the zone for consumption. While in the zone, 
merchandise is not subject to Customs duty. Merchandise may 
remain in a zone indefinitely, whether or not subject to duty. 
● Goods may be exported from the zone free of Customs duty. 
● The developers of the zone provide security requirements and 
protection against theft. 
1.4.5 Norms for FTWZs 
● Special Economic Zone for Free Trade and Warehousing should have 
an area of forty hectares or more with a built-up area of not less than 
1,00,000 square metres. From 17 December 2019, FTWZ should have 
a minimum contiguous land area of fifty hectares (i.e. 500,000 square 
metres). For creating a Free Trade Warehousing Zone, the proposal 
must entail a minimum outlay of ₹100 crore. 
● In a st andalone Free Trade and Warehousing Zone, at least fifty per 
cent of the area should be earmarked for developing processing area. 

Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
 
12 
 
Free Trade and Warehousing Zone may also be set up as part of a 
Special Economic Zone for multi- products. 
● In Special Economic Zone having area of less than five hundred 
hectares, Free Trade and Warehousing Zones may be permitted with 
no minimum area requirement but subject to the condition that the 
maximum area of such Free Trade and Warehousing Zone shall not  
exceed 20 per cent of the processing area. 
● From 17 December 2019, all existing notified Special Economic Zones 
shall be deemed to be multi-sector Special Economic Zones;  
● All transactions by a unit in a Free Trade and Warehousing Zone 
should only be in convertible foreign currency. 
● A unit engaged in trading or warehousing should not be allowed the 
facility of sub-contracting of production or production process in the 
domestic tariff area. 
● The units in FTWZ should achieve Net Foreign Exchange to be 
calculated cumulatively for a period of five years from the 
commencement of free trade and warehousing activity. 
● The Developer shall not sell the land in a Special Economic Zone. 
Leasing, however, is permissible. 
● A unit may opt out of a Special Economic Zone with the approval of 
the Development Commissioner and such exit shall be subject to 
payment of applicable duties in respect of capital goods, unutilized 
raw materials and finished goods lying in stock. 
  

Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
13 
 
CHAPTER 2 
AUDIT OBJECTIVES, CRITERIA AND METHODOLOGY  
2.1 Audit Objectives 
The objectives of the performance audit were: 
• To assess the effectiveness of changes made in the Warehousing 
Regulations 2016, in improving facilitation and self -clearance 
mechanism without detriment to the interest of revenue, and also to 
assess the adequacy of Rules, Regulations, Notifications, Circulars, 
etc. issued from time to time in relation to Customs Bonded 
Warehouses under the Customs Act 1962;  
• To assess whether the establishment and operationalization of 
FTWZs was duly aligned with the objectives of the policy for FTWZs;  
• To examine whether the internal control s ystems, and monitoring 
and coordination m echanisms are adequate and designed to 
minimize the risks of revenue loss. 
2.2  Audit Coverage 
Audit covered different aspects of Warehouses/FTWZs and examined the 
relevant records maintained at the Customs Offices, Development 
Commissioners’ Offices and Specified Officer for the period 2015-16 to 2019-
20.  
2.3 Audit Methodology 
The Performance Audit was conducted during the period August 2020 to 
December 2020, as per the guidelines of the CAG of India for Performance 
Audit and within the scope prescribed in the CAG’s DPC Act, 1971. Audit 
examination included data analysis and test check of records pertaining to 
CBWs (license records, Bills of Entry for wa rehousing, warehousing orders, 
bonds register, monthly returns relating to the warehouse operations 
submitted by the warehouse keeper, permissions given by the Bond Officer, 
clearance orders of warehoused goods, shipping bills etc. at the respective 
Customs Offices). 
In case of FTWZs, audit examination entailed study and examinati on of 
various records such as documents/returns submitted by Developers/ Units, 
Quarterly and Annual Performance Reports, Customs related documents like 
Bills of Entry (BsE), Shipping B ills, related invoices etc. at the respective 
Development Commissioner’s office. 

Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
 
14 
 
The Entry/Exit Conference for the PA was conducted on 7 October 2020 and 
30 March 2022, respectively, with MoCI/DoR. The first draft was sent to 
MoCI/DoR on 24 December 2021, reply to which was received during 
March/April 2022. 
2.4 Sample Selection 
Customs Bonded Warehouses (CBWs) 
Since all India data of imports and exports volume/value handled through 
CBWs was not available, the Field Audit offices, based on the criteria given 
below, selected a sample of the warehouses falling under their jurisdiction. 
• Volume/value of cargo, exports/imports handled, past audit objections 
if any, and nature of cargo handled specific ally if hazardous and 
sensitive commodities, and other relevant information.  
• The total sample size selected for audit was 50 per cent of the total 
number of Public/Private Bonded Warehouses subject to a maximum 
of 10 warehouses under different categories (operational/closed/ 
exited/withdrawn) per Field Audit office.  
• 100 per cent of Special Warehouse licensed by the Department were 
selected for audit.  
Based on the above criteria, out of 1,035 4 CBWs, a total of 219 CBWs under 
the jurisdiction of 24 Commissionerates were selected for audit by the Field 
Audit offices.  
Free Trade Warehousing Zones (FTWZs) 
There are a total of seven FTWZs notified as of March 2020 out of which, four 
FTWZs are operational. Further, f ive formal Approvals and five in -principle 
Approvals have been granted to FTWZs . A representative sample of seven 
FTWZ Developers were selected  for detailed audit. Out of 222 FTWZ 5 units, 
44 units spread over seven S tates (Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Karnata ka, 
Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu, Telangana and Uttar Pradesh) were selected for 
detailed audit.  
2.5 Some of the Audit Criteria  
Audit criteria have been derived from the existing legislation, prescribed 
manuals and rules, government notifications, public noti ces and circulars as 
summarized below: 
 
4 Public Warehouses – 512, Private Warehouses – 343 and Special Warehouses - 180 
5 Number of Units in M/s. F FTWZ Limited, Uttar Pradesh not available 

Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
15 
 
● Customs Act, 1962;  
● Customs Manual 2018;  
● Customs Notifications/Circulars/Regulations etc. issued by CBIC on 
Warehousing;  
● Foreign Trade Policy 2015-20 as updated;  
● SEZ Act 2005;  
● SEZ Rules 2006;  
● IGST Act and Rules; 
● Handbook of Procedures and its Appendices; 
● Public Notices/Circulars etc. issued by the DGFT  (Director General of 
Foreign Trade); 
● Foreign Trade (Development and Regulation) Act, 1992; 
● Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999. 
 
  

 
 
 
 
  

Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
17 
 
CHAPTER 3 
CUSTOMS BONDED WAREHOUSES 
3.1 Introduction 
The facility of warehousing of imported goods in Customs Bonded 
Warehouses (CBWs), without payment of Customs duty, is permitted under 
the Customs Act 1962. The Customs Act and Warehousing Regulations 
provide for licensing of Public, Private and Special Warehouses wherein 
dutiable goods may be deposited by the importers. The Act also provides for 
the procedures and conditions under which the owner of any warehoused 
goods may carry on any manufacturing process or ot her operations in the 
warehouse in relation to such goods. The statutory provisions of 
warehousing are contained in Sections 57 to 73A of the Customs Act 1962. 
The law relating to Customs warehousing in India has been considerably 
liberalised with effect from 14 May 2016. Under the new regime, the concept 
of warehousing station has been removed. This has led to establishment of 
CBWs at any place, if approved by the licencing authority and the Public and 
Private Warehouses are no longer under the physical control of the Customs 
Officers, moving to record based control. Physical escorting for movement of 
goods from Customs Stations to warehouses, from one warehouse to 
another warehouse or from warehouses to Customs Stations, has been 
dispensed with. Other facilitation like online permission to warehousing of 
imports; shifting of responsibility of storage, security and removal of goods 
to the warehouse keeper and the importer; and online clearance of ex-bond 
BsE for removal of goods are added advantages to the t rade in reducing the 
cost of Customs clearances and dwell time. A process chart for the liberalised 
process is depicted in Chart 7. 
One key objective of this Performance Audit has been to assess the 
effectiveness of the changes made in the Warehousing Regulations 2016 in 
improving facilitation and self -clearance mechanism without detriment to 
the interest of revenue, and also to assess the adequacy of Rules, 
Regulations, Notifications, Circulars, etc. issued from time to time in relation 
to Warehouses under the Customs Act 1962. 
Out of 1,035 CBWs, we selected 219 CBWs6 for detailed audit. 
  
 
6 Public Warehouses- 55, Private Warehouses- 64 and Special Warehouses- 100 


Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit)
18
Chart 7: 
Chart 7
: 
Process chart for warehousing of goods post introduction of New 
warehousing of goods post introduction of New 
Warehousing Regulations
  
     
            
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
     
* Indian Customs EDI System
Physical ControlRecord Based Control
Special Warehouse-
Section 58A
Public Warehouse-
Section 57
Private Warehouse-
Section 58
Bill of Entry warehousing (Into bond in ICES*)
Warehousing order by Proper Officer (Manually 
or through ICES)
Submission of Triple Duty Bond by importer 
(Submitted manually and entered in ICES)
Transfer to another warehouse-
Section 67 
(Re-warehousing) -
• Manual form for transfer of goods,
• Bond Officer to tally the Form 
before dispatch and after receipt,
• Licensee to verify the one time 
lock and quantity of goods and 
submit the manual form to Bond 
Officer
Clearance for Home consumption-
Section 68
By filing Ex-bond BsE in ICES
Clearance for Export-
Section 69
By filing SBs in ICES
Clearance to SEZ
By filing manual ex -bond BsE not routed 
through ICES wi th corresponding BsE in the 
SEZ online IT Systems maintained by NSDL.
Currently, there is no integration between SEZ 
online and ICES
Private Warehouse with 
manufacturing operations-
Sections 58 & 65
Monthly Technical Reports are prepared from the manual monthly returns submitted by the Warehouse Licensees, 
which shows the consolidated figures i.e. number of bonds, bond value etc. only and not consignment-wise reports. No 
consolidated reports are generated in the ICES to monitor clearance of the warehoused goods and also to monitor the 
expiry of the bond period. 
Bonds executed at the time of warehousing the goods are captured in the ICES, but extension of time limits of bonds 
and bank guarantees are not appearing in ICES.
Customs Station of Import

Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
19 
 
3.2 Extent of digitisation 
3.2.1 Assessment of extent of digitisation of records of individual 
warehouses 
Regulation 11 of the Warehouse (Custody and Handling of Goods) 
Regulations, 2016 prescribes that the licensee should maintain detailed 
records of the receipt, handling, storage and removal of goods into and from 
the warehouse and file monthly returns regarding the same. 
CBIC in their Circular 7 dated 8 June 2016 prescribed the form in which the 
data is required to be maintained by the licensee. Further, the data 
prescribed in the form shall be stored electronically and such electronic 
records should be kept updated, accurate and complete and sha ll be 
available at the warehouse at all times and accessible to the Bond Officer or 
any other authorized officer for verification. The software for maintenance 
of electronic records must also incorporate a feature of audit trail, which 
means a secure, comp uter generated, time -stamped electronic record that 
allows for reconstruction of the course of events. 
In the format prescribed for monthly return, the details of receipt of goods 
including BE details, description of goods, value, duty assessed, quantity e tc 
are captured; handling and storage includes details of bond and bank 
guarantee; Removal includes details of date of removal, purpose of removal 
(home consumption/deposit in another warehouse/export/sold/destruction 
etc), quantity cleared, value, duty, i nterest, balance quantity etc; details of 
goods stored in the warehouse where the period is expiring in the following 
month includes BE details, bond details, expiry/extension of bond, bank 
guarantee etc. Hence, it is important that the licensee should mai ntain the 
records accurately in the formats prescribed. 
The supervision and control of the warehouse has been shifted from physical 
control to record based control. If the records are not maintained correctly 
by the licensee the details of goods removed fr om the warehouse and the 
purpose of removal ie home consumption/deposit in another 
warehouse/export/sold/destruction etc. cannot be assessed. Hence, 
whether the licensee has correctly paid duty and interest cannot be correctly 
assessed. 
Further, if the above records are not correctly maintained, the amount of 
goods stored including value, duty and quantity in the warehouse cannot be 
correctly assessed. Hence, whether the licensee has submitted the correct 
 
7 Circular No. 25/2016-Customs dated 8 June 2016 

Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
 
20 
 
amount of bond and bank guarantee cannot be assessed by the Department. 
Bond and bank guarantees for which extension is required cannot be 
monitored. Possibilities of leakages, underreporting, incorrect levy of 
interest etc. cannot be ruled out. 
Also, if the detailed records are not maintained electronically by the licensee, 
the process of reconciliation and monitoring of monthly returns would be a 
very difficult task. Checking whether the triple duty bond and bank guarantee 
are correctly submitted by the licensee is also a very difficult task. Further, 
the software for maintenance of electronic records should have features of 
audit trail and time -stamped electronic records which allow reconstruction 
of the course of events. In the absence, the authenticity of records submitted 
cannot be vouchsafed. 
The electronic systems maintained by the licensee are standalone systems 
and have no linkages with ICES or SEZ online systems. Into bond BE details, 
bond details and bank guarantee details are initially captured in ICES. But the 
storage and remov al details are not captured in ICES. Hence, even the 
electronic forms submitted by the licensee have to be manually reconciled 
with the into bond ICES data. 
The digitisation of warehouse records was reviewed in 219 warehouses 
under 24 Commissionerates and it was observed in 17 Commissionerates 
that the above instructions were not followed by 121 licensees. The records 
were not maintained by these licensees in the prescribed forms and they 
were being maintained manually. (Annexure 3.1) 
Audit further observed that digitisation through online filing of monthly 
returns using digital signatures of the warehouse keeper, as envisaged in 
Rule 3(2) of Warehouse (Custody and Handling of Goods) Regulations 2016, 
had not been achieved so far. 
Ministry in their reply (March 2022) accepted the audit observation and 
initiated remedial action in respect of 50 warehouses, while the reply of the 
Ministry is still awaited (May 2022) in respect of 39 warehouses. 
Ministry has not accepted the audit observation in 32 cases and replied that 
five warehouses were either not operational or had not imported any goods 
during the period covered by audit. They had further stated that the 
remaining 27 warehouses have maintained their records digitally. 
The reply of the Ministry is not fully acceptable as the returns have to be 
submitted even if there are no transactions. Further, many warehouses were 


Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
21 
 
maintaining records digitally but not in the  format prescribed by CBIC and 
digital signatures were not obtained by two warehouses in the audit sample. 
3.2.2 Extent of integration of warehouse record with Customs ICE System 
With the May 2016 liberalisation, there has been a paradigm shift from 
physical control of warehouse to record based control. This shift required 
monitoring of warehouse related operations purely on the basis of records 
provided by the warehouse licensee. The Circular dated 8 June 2016 
envisaged that such electronic records should be kept updated, accurate and 
complete and shall be always available at the warehouse and accessible to 
the Bond Officer or any other authorised officer for verification. 
During 2 015-16 to 2019 -20, for 20 Commissionerates the total number of 
into Bond BEs, into Bond assessable value, into bond duty assessed was 
7,97,850, `16,32,183 crore and `2,30,629 crore, respectively. The total 
number of ex -Bond BEs, ex -Bond assessable value, e x-bond duty assessed 
was 18,21,114, `14,57,188 crore and `1,15,959 crore, respectively. Given 
the large volume of transactions, failure to exercise effective control for 
compliance with statutory provisions could result in a loss of duty, interest 
etc., which cannot, however, be quantified. 
However, based on the records produced to audit, no such systematic 
verification of warehouse  level of records was done by the Department. 
Periodic evaluation of the warehousing provisions for record based control 
in lieu of physical control would have helped in ensuring that the intended 
objectives are being met and for mid -course correction also in case of any 
deficiencies. No such mid-course evaluation/review was attempted since the 
introduction of the liberalised Regulation in 2016. 
Audit further assessed the extent of digitisation in warehouses and its 
integration with Indian Customs EDI System (ICES) and observed the 
following lacunae: 
i. The Department was totally dependent upon the Mont hly Technical 
Reports and monthly returns submitted by each bonded warehouse. 
The monthly reports are manual and not automated. 
ii. There was absence of structured and seamless flow of data between 
the IT systems maintained by the warehouses and ICES, the main IT 
Systems of Customs. 
iii. As per the Circular of June 2016, warehousing data was required to 
be maintained by the CBWs in Form A and B. This information was 
not integrated with ICES. 

Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
 
22 
 
iv. No consolidated reports are generated in ICES to monitor clearance 
of the warehoused goods and also to monitor the expiry of the bond 
period or the shelf life of the goods. 
v. Since a huge number of bonds (such as triple duty bond, bond related 
to transfer of ownership, waiver etc.) are being submitted on a daily 
basis and month ly returns filed by the warehouse keepers, the 
manual reconciliation of the transactions is a humungous task. 
Besides, adding to lot of manual records, Bond Registers are required 
to be manually maintained/reconciled in the absence of automation/ 
integration with ICES. 
vi. Once the warehouse BsE are filed in ICES, ex-bonding of the goods for 
home consumption only will be accounted for in ICES. However, other 
transactions such as re-export of the warehoused goods, transfer to 
Special Economic Zones (SEZs), and t ransfer from one bonded 
warehouse to another bonded warehouse are totally manual and are 
not accounted for in ICES. 
vii. The SEZ Online IT Systems managed by NSDL which covers the SEZs 
was not integrated with ICES. 
Initially, when goods enter warehouse, an into-bond BE is filed in ICES. When 
good are removed for home consumption an ex-bond BE is filed in ICES which 
is linked to the into-bond BE. Hence, the duty payable and interest levy able 
can be correctly captured . But when goods are removed for deposit in 
another warehouse/export/destruction etc there is no linkage with the into-
bond BE initially filed in ICES. When goods are re-exported from warehouse, 
a SB is filed in ICES but it has no linkage with the initial into-bond BE. Transfer 
of goods from one warehouse to another is manual and not accounted in 
ICES. When goods are transferred to a SEZ, the SB is filed in SEZ online, which 
is not linked with ICES. 
Consequently, in the absence of vital records such as license file, Form A and 
B, extension of warehousing period, statistical information etc. for the 
selected warehouses, non-integration of warehouse transactions with ICES, 
manual maintenance of records and non-verification of the monthly returns 
by the Department, Audit could not derive full assurance as to the adequacy 
and effectiveness of the control mechanism existing in the Department in the 
new record-based control regime for Customs Warehouses.  
Ministry in their reply (April 2022) stated that automation till date had been 
done only for transactional data being fed to ICES and although warehousing 
data was required to be maintained electronically by the warehouse keepers, 
the returns to CBIC were being manually maintained by the Department. 

Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
23 
 
While accepting the observation and associated recommendation, the Board 
stated (April 2022) that a portal would be developed for electronic filing of 
returns and better monitoring of receipts, issue, re-export from warehouses 
and would be part of the roadmap on automation. 
Recommendation 1. With the move from physical control to record based 
IT control  under the Warehousing Regulations, 2016 , the Department 
needs to have a time bound action plan to: 
d) Devise an IT strategy for integration/reconciliation and digitisation 
of warehouse data with ICES, as well as with SEZ Online 
e) Specify an appropriate electronic format in which monthly returns 
from warehouses shall mandatorily be submitted digitally (dispensing 
completely with manual reports) and integrated with ICES, and analyse 
such integrated data electronically for monitoring and control. 
f) Conduct analytical review of the electronic data submitted by 
warehouses to identify warehouses, using a risk based approach, for 
detailed verification and audit. 
Without such a systematic approach, the move from physical control to 
record based controls of warehouses results in lack of control, leaving room 
for misuse and abuse of the liberalised Regulations. 
Ministry, while accepting the recommendations (March 2022), has stated 
that the recommendations are for systemic improvement and would lead 
to more efficient and IT driven record based control. These 
recommendations would be further examined by DG (Systems ) for 
implementation. They f urther added that  for maintenance of records in 
relation to warehoused goods by licensees permitted to carry 
manufacturing and other operations in the warehouse under Section 65, 
DG (Systems) is already working on developing a m odule on ICEGATE and 
ICES. In the module, the generation of electronic monthly returns has also 
been taken up. 
3.2.3 Deficiency in the formats prescribed for monthly return 
Central Board of Indirect Taxes and Customs (CBIC) in their Circular dated 8 
June 2016 prescribed the form in which the data is required to be maintained 
by the licensee. It was observed in audit that the form prescribed for monthly 
return of the receipt, storage, operations and removal of the goods in the 
warehouse (Form A) was deficient as the removal details do not capture the 
ex-bond details such as BsE number and date for home consumption. In the 
absence of such details, Audit could not verify the clearance of goods within 

Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
 
24 
 
the stipulated period and correctness of interest levied where goods are kept 
in the warehouses beyond ninety days. 
Recommendation 2. Monthly return (Form A) should be suitably modified 
to capture the details of ex -bond BsE/Shipping B ill as well as date to 
capture complete information regarding removal of goods. 
Ministry has accepted the recommendation and replied (March 2022) that 
a suitable amendment in Form A of Circular No.25/2016-Customs dated 08 
June 2016 is under examination. 
3.2.4 Monitoring of submission of monthly returns 
As per Regulation 11(4) of Warehouse (Custody and Handling of Goods) 
Regulations, 2016, a Licensee shall file with the Bond Officer, a monthly 
return in Form-A of the receipt, storage, operations and removal of goods in 
the warehouse within ten days after the close of the month to which such 
return relates. Further, Regulation 11(5) stipulates that the Licensee shall 
furnish the information relating to the expiring of warehousing goods 
specified in Sec tion 61 in a particular month in Form -B to the Bond Officer 
on or before the 10th day of the month immediately preceding the month of 
such expiry. 
Audit of 219 warehouses under 24 Commissionerates revealed that under 12 
Commissionerates, 59 warehouse licensees had not submitted their monthly 
reports or had delayed in submitting these monthly returns in the prescribed 
format. (Annexure 3.2) 
Since the Department’s control over warehouses was shifted to record -
based control instead of physical controls on ware housing activities, non -
submission/delay in submission of monthly returns adversely affects the 
monitoring of warehouses. The Department would not know the details of 
removal of goods including date of removal, purpose of removal (home 
consumption/deposit in another warehouse/export/sold/destruction etc.), 
quantity cleared, value, duty, interest, balance quantity etc. Details of goods 
stored in the warehouse including value, duty and quantity would also not 
be known. Department would also not know whether t riple duty bond 
submitted by the importer and bank guarantee are correct. Possibilities of 
leakages, underreporting, incorrect levy of interest cannot be ruled out. 
This further re -emphasises the need for a comprehensive IT approach to 
digitisation and int egration of warehouse data, monthly returns and ICES 
as well as SEZ Online. 


Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
25 
 
Ministry in their reply (March 2022) accepted the audit observation and 
initiated remedial action in respect of 48 warehouses, while the reply of the 
Ministry is still awaited (May 2022) in respect of one warehouse. 
While not accepting the audit observation in respect of 10 warehouses, 
Ministry replied that there were no transactions in two warehouses and in 
one warehouse, the information pertaining to goods is accessible in the EDI 
System. In respect of the remaining seven warehouses, it was replied that 
monthly returns were regularly submitted by them. 
Reply of the Ministry is not acceptable as it is mandatory to submit the 
monthly returns as envisaged in the Board Circular irre spective of nil 
transactions or not. Further, monthly returns in respect of the seven 
warehouses were not furnished to audit. 
The present system does not immediately generate an alert if the triple duty 
bond and the bank guarantee do not cover the duty for  the goods imported 
in warehouse. No report is generated by ICES to automatically warn when 
the bond period is expiring or stock exceeds the bond value. Hence, 
immediate action cannot be taken by the Department for time expired 
goods. Also, there is no pro vision in ICES to do automated age wise analysis 
of non-disposed goods of expired bonds. Also, it is not possible to check if 
the total duty on the imported goods in the warehouse is more than that 
permissible as per the licensee. All these are manually mo nitored through 
monthly returns. 
Recommendation 3. Bond module in ICES should be modified, in a time 
bound manner, to capture all types of warehouse transactions such as bond 
to bond clearance, clearance to SEZ units etc. Further, a suitable 
mechanism should be put in place for online filing of extension of bonds 
and bank guarantees and there should be an alert when the bond and bank 
guarantee are expiring. The system should also be able to do age -wise 
analysis of time expired goods. 
Ministry in their reply has stated that ICES is a transactional database for 
processing of imported and export goods. Movement of cargo in domestic 
area is not part of the ICES transactional platform. As regards  coverage of 
SEZ units, the implementation of the same has been announced in Budget 
2022 and will be taken up shortly. Further, Customs Policy Wing is actively 
examining measures for implementation of electronic submission of bonds 
and bank guarantees to Customs. This initiative is for fostering an 
environment of ease of doing business and to reduce usage of paper. At the 
initial juncture, the implementation of this initiative would subsume 

Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
 
26 
 
various scenarios including provisional assessments under Section 18 of the 
Customs Act, 1962, imports under Concessional rates of duty, warehousing 
of goods as per Section 59 of the Customs Act, 1962, manufacture and other 
operations in Private Warehouse and Special Warehouse as per Section 65 
of the Customs Act, imports made under Export Promotion Schemes etc. 
3.2.5 Non-implementation of Warehouse code declaration in BsE 
CBIC Circular No.19/2016 dated 20 May 2016 specified that all the 
warehouses were to be allotted with a unique code through ICES and from 
20 June 2016, declared that the Warehousing Code in the BsE would become 
mandatory for filing Into-Bond and Ex-Bond BsE.  
It was observed that the declaration of Warehouse Code had not been 
implemented under the Commissionerate of Customs (Air Cargo Exports), 
New Delhi. Declaration of Warehouse Code in the BsE would have facilitated 
easy identification of warehouse agains t the BsE and for tracking their 
location at any point of time. 
No reply was received from the Ministry (May 2022). 
3.3 Processing of applications for issue of warehouse licenses 
3.3.1 Absence of standard operating procedure for antecedent verification 
As per Regulation 5 of the Public, Private and Special Warehouse Licensing 
Regulations 2016, a warehouse license shall be granted upon the fulfilment 
of certain conditions e.g., the applicant is not insolvent or bankrupt, has not 
been convicted for an offence under any law for the time being in force, has 
not been penalised for an offence under the Act of Central Excise and 
Chapter V of the Finance Act.  In this regard, the Board vide Circular No. 
26/2016 dated 9 June 2016, proposed that a centralised system of 
verification be followed by referring the name of the applicant and 
Directors/Partners/Proprietors to DRI 8 and DGGSTI 9 for checking 
antecedents and the existence of any past cases, instead of r eferring to all 
formations. 
This aspect was reviewed in 219 warehouses under 24 Commissionerates 
and it was observed in nine Commissionerates that there was no standard 
operating procedure for antecedent verification and different procedures 
were followed by different Customs Commissionerates. (Annexure 3.3) 
 
8 DRI : Directorate of Revenue Intelligence 
9 DGGSTI : Directorate General of GST Intelligence 


Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
27 
 
Box No. 3.1 – Antecedent verification 
In five Customs Commissionerates, the time taken to complete the antecedent verification 
ranged from 63 days to 4 years in 25 warehouses. Antecedent verification of 31 warehouses 
under seven Customs Commissionerates was not done after issue of license even after a 
lapse of more than 5 years . Further, in respect of two cases in one Customs 
Commissionerate, no action was initiated against the licensees on the basis of adverse 
antecedent report of DRI.  
Ministry in their reply (March 2022) accepted the audit observation and initiated remedial 
action in respect of 12 warehouses, while the reply of the Ministry is still awaited (May 2022) 
in respect of 11 warehouses. In respect of other 32 cases, it was replied that as per Circular 
26/2016 dated 9 June 2016, the Board has proposed a centralised system for antecedent 
verification and there is no time limit specified for verification.  
The reply is not acceptable as the time taken to complete the antecedent verification ranged 
from 63 days to 4 years in 25 cases and in 33 cases antecedent verification was still pending. 
Even though no timeframe was prescribed for antecedent verification in the Circula r ibid 
and the delay did not affect the issue of license, there has to be a definite timeframe for 
completion of antecedent verification to have uniformity among the different Customs 
Commissionerates 
3.3.2 Non-capturing of certain details in the application for license 
For the purpose of certainty in providing of information by applicants and 
transparency in procedures regarding processing of applications, the CBIC 
has prescribed the Form to be used by an applicant seeking a license for a 
bonded warehouse vide Circular No.26/2016-Customs dated 09 June 2016 in 
consonance with the Notification of Public, Private and Special Warehouse 
Licensing Regulations, 2016. The form has been designed as a check list for 
obtaining information relevant for evaluation of the applicant at one go and 
ascertaining the facilities for security of goods available at the proposed site. 
This information is expected to enable a comprehensive assessment of the 
applicant and of the premises by the licensing authority. 
The det ails in Part IV of the application contains details in respect of 
warehouse keeper, digital signature, IT based record, Solvency Certificate, 
insurance policy etc. which are to be filled by Customs Department under the 
signature of Bond Officer and is incl uded as a final check and approval for 
license. 
This aspect was reviewed in 219 warehouses under 24 Commissionerates 
and during audit scrutiny of licence files, it was noticed that in respect of 36 
warehouses in five Commissionerates, the details in Part IV of the application 
form were incomplete. Further, property holding rights in respect of five 
warehouses in Part II were also not verified while granting licenses. 
(Annexure 3.4) 


Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
 
28 
 
As these details in application are by nature a final check before approval,  
non-capturing of these details showed a weakness in the system while 
granting approval to warehouses and disregard of the directives of the 
Board. 
Ministry in their reply (March 2022) accepted the audit observation and 
noted for future compliance in respect of 18 warehouses, while the reply of 
the Ministry is still awaited (May 2022) in respect of 15 warehouses. 
While not accepting the audit observation in respect of three warehouses, 
Ministry replied that the lease deed was valid up to 2018 in one case and the 
property was owned by the licensee in the second case. In respect of the 
third case, it was replied by the Ministry that lease deed was rolled over by 
the lessor through their letters. 
The reply of the Ministry is not acceptable as in the first case the agreement 
was valid up to August 2016 and the licence was issued in October 2016. In 
the other two cases, there was no agreement between the lessor and lessee 
and the lease was extended through letters issued by the lessors. 
3.3.3 Grant of licence without required detail  
As per Public/Private Warehouse Licensing Regulations 2016 on fulfilment of 
the conditions specified in the Regulation 3 and Regulation 4, the Principal 
Commissioner of Customs or Commissioner of Customs, as the case may be, 
may grant a license in respect of the Public/Private warehouse subject to 
such conditions as deemed necessary.  
Audit examination revealed that in case of M/s. A Ltd (Private Warehouse -
surrendered) and M/s. B Ltd ( Public Warehouse) under Customs 
Commissionerate ICD Patparganj  Delhi, the license value of the goods 
proposed to be stored was not mentioned in the license. Hence the capacity 
of the warehouse could not be ascertained from the license.  
In the absence of such details, fulfilment of the conditions of the 
Warehousing Regulations viz. furnishing of Solvency Certificate from a 
scheduled bank and Risk Insurance Policy both for a sum equivalent to the 
amount of duty involved on the dutiable goods proposed to be stored in the 
Private Warehouse at any point of time could not be established. Further, in 
case of losses due to any unforeseen reasons, the Customs duty in respect of 
the goods stored in the warehouse is also at risk. 
No reply was received from the Ministry (May 2022). 
  

Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
29 
 
3.3.4 Delay in issue of warehouse license  
Board Circular dated 9 June 2016 stipulates that the Commissionerates shall 
undertake to examine and complete the process of granting a license within 
30 days of the receipt of the application. The Bond officer must complete the 
process of examining the application, visiting the premises to be licensed and 
submitting his report to the Principal Commissioner/Commissioner within 15 
days of the receipt of the application. The approval or rejection of the 
application by the Licensing Authority (Principal Commissioner/ 
Commissioner) should be completed within the next 15 days. 
The delay in issue of warehouses license was reviewed in 219 warehouses 
under 24 Commissionerates and it was observed in 12 Commissionerates 
that there were delays ranging from 7 days to 440 days in issue of license 
beyond the presc ribed time- limit of 30 days in respect of 41 warehouses 
(Annexure3.5). CBWs enable importers to store imported goods without 
immediate payment of customs duties and thereby without blockage of 
working capital. This delay affects the “ease of doing busines s” policy of the 
government. 
Ministry in their reply (March 2022) accepted the audit observation and 
noted for future compliance in respect of 17 warehouses, while the reply of 
the Ministry is still awaited (May 2022) in respect of five warehouses. 
Ministry has not accepted the audit observation in respect of 19 cases and 
replied that in most of the cases, the delay was due to late submission of 
compliance to deficiency memo and other documents. The reply of the 
Ministry is not acceptable as there was delay on the part of the Department 
also in processing and issuance of deficiency memo and revalidating the 
licences. 
An illustrative case is discussed below: 
Box No. 3.2 – Delay in issue of licence 
M/s. C Pvt Ltd under Chennai III Commissionerate applied for warehousing 
license in February 2019 and license was issued only in May 2020 i.e., after 15 
months. During the period of delay, the applicant had to seek permission of the 
Department to allow offloading of 'base oil' from a container ship that had arrived 
in the Chennai Harbour in the month of April 2020 into an unauthorized tank of 
M/s. D which neither had the warehousing license nor had applied for it. The 
applicant cited the detention/demurrage  charges of approximately USD 20 ,000 
per day, to the Port Authority and the National lockdown to get such permission. 


Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
 
30 
 
Although, the permission granted by the Department obviated the problems, the 
fact remains that such permission was not authorised, as nei ther the applicant 
nor the holder of the tank had a warehousing license. This also resulted in the 
applicant extending the insurance policy taken at the time of application by 
another year. 
Ministry, while giving a chronology of events of issuing license, has stated (March 
2022) that there was no delay on the part of the Department in issue of license.  
The reply of the Ministry is not acceptable as even after submission of documents 
and clearance from DRI in November 2019, the inspection of the site was 
conducted by the Department only in January 2020, which was beyond the 
prescribed time limit.  
 
3.3.5 Warehousing operations without valid licence 
A Public Warehouse appointed under Section 57 or a Private Warehouse 
licensed under Section 58 as it stood immediately before the 
commencement of the Finance Act, 2016 (28 of 2016), may continue to carry 
out operations in respect of goods notified under Sub -section (2) of Section 
58A for a period of three months from the date of coming into force of these 
Regulations. 
Audit examination of the records in three Commissionerates10 revealed that 
three warehouses 11 had not complied with the aforesaid regulations and 
there has been considerable delay in compliance. 
Ministry, while not accepting the observation in the case of M/s F ltd.,  
Kolkata under Commissionerate of Customs (Airport), Kolkata, replied that 
no operation/stock was held by the licensee since November 2016 and no 
warehousing operation took place.  
Ministry’s reply is not acceptable as scrutiny of records revealed that the 
licensee continued its operations till issue of the new Special Warehouse 
License in February 2017 and held stock of goods notified under Sub-section 
(2) of Section 58A as evident from the Monthly Consumption Statements of 
the relevant months. 
Reply of the Ministry in the case of M/s. E Ltd. , New Delhi under the 
Commissionerate, ICD Patparganj, Delhi is awaited (May 2022). 
 
10ICD Patparganj, Delhi, Commissionerate of Customs (Airport), Kolkata & JNCH, Mumbai  
11 M/s. E Ltd, New Delhi,  M/s. F Ltd, Kolkata and M/s. G Pvt Ltd 

Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
31 
 
One case is illustrated below: 
In JNCH, Mumbai, scrutiny of the license file of M/s. G Ltd.,  a Private 
Warehouse, revealed that although no license had been issued by the 
Customs Department, it was operating without any license. Reasons for 
allowing the operation of warehouse without li cense were not available on 
records. 
Ministry in their reply stated that provisional licenses under Section 58 of 
the Customs Act, 1962 were issued to twelve tanks and the said provisional 
licenses were extended from time to time. However, in April 2021, M/s. G 
Ltd. had applied for Public Warehouse License under Section 57 and Public 
Warehouse license was issued in August 2021. 
The contention of the Ministry is not acceptable, as there is no provision in 
the Regulations to issue a provisional license and the fact remained that the 
entity did not comply with the new Warehousing Regulations and continued 
its operation up to July 2021 without a proper license.  
3.3.6 Delay in Surrender/cancellation of Public Bonded Warehouse license  
According to Regulation 8 o f the Public Warehouse Licensing Regulations, 
2016, a licensee may surrender the license granted to him by making a 
request in writing to the Principal Commissioner of Customs or 
Commissioner of Customs, as the case may be subject to certain conditions.  
During audit scrutiny of license files, it was seen that M/s. H Ltd. under 
Customs Commissionerate, ICD Patparganj, Delhi was issued a Public Bonded 
Warehouse License No.2/2009-10 which was valid up to August 2016. As the 
conditions under Regulations 2016 w ere not fulfilled, it was decided by the 
Department in February 2017 to proceed for cancellation of the license.  
Since bonded goods i.e., a set of escalators were lying in the Warehouse, the 
surrender of license could not be considered  before removal of goods. No 
further progress was made and the case is pending till date. 
Further, inordinate delay in disposal of the goods lying in the warehouse led 
to blockage of Government revenue amounting to ₹14.24 lakhs (duty, fine 
and penalty) plu s interest due to non -disposal of goods, whose warehouse 
bond had expired. 

Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
 
32 
 
Similarly in Bengaluru City Customs Commissionerate, scrutiny of records 
revealed that three 12 licenses were not cancelled and reasons for non -
cancellation were not available on records.  
No reply was received from the Ministry (May 2022). 
Recommendation 4. The Department needs to have a time bound action 
plan to develop IT systems by which the process of vetting of applications 
for warehouse licenses, antecedent verifications, surre nder of licenses etc 
is done in an effective and timely manner and uniform and consistent 
procedures are followed to minimize unwarranted deficiencies and delays. 
3.4 Instances of non-compliance in Warehouse Operations 
3.4.1 Non/Short deduction of Customs Duty in the General Bond 
As per Section 59 (1) of Customs Act 1962, the importer of any goods in 
respect of which a BE for warehousing has been presented under Section 46 
and assessed to duty under Section 17 or Section 18 has to execute a bond 
of a sum equal to thrice the amount of duty assessed on such goods. Further, 
in terms of Section 59(2) of Customs Act 1962, the Assistant 
Commissioner/Deputy Commissioner of Customs may permit an importer to 
execute a general bond in respect of the warehousing of goods to be 
imported by him within a specified period.  
Scrutiny of records of two Special Warehouses 13 in Customs 
Commissionerate, Hyderabad revealed that the Bond Officer debited general 
bond by ₹0.18 crore and ₹161.26 crore equal to duty assessed, instead of the 
required triple duty amount of ₹0.55 crore and ₹483.77 crore respectively.  
In another case14, while debiting the triple duty of the closing stock from the 
newly executed general bond, one entry of ₹3 crore was omitted fr om 
debiting from the new bond. Overall t his resulted in short deduction of 
Custom duty bond of ₹325.88 crore. 
Ministry has accepted the observation and stated that both the parties have 
executed a triple duty Bond as per the Circular No.18/2016 -Customs dated 
14 May 2016, whereas they have taken credit of actual duty assessed and 
debited the same with the actual du ty assessed instead of crediting and 
debiting triple duty as specified in the Circular. The correct procedure of 
crediting triple duty and debiting triple duty was implemented from 
September 2018. 
 
12 M/s. I Ltd, M/s. J Ltd. and M/s. K Ltd. 
13  M/s. L Pvt Ltd and M/s. M Ltd 
14  M/s. N Ltd. 

Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
33 
 
In two other cases i.e. M/s. O Ltd.15, a Special Warehouse under Ahmedabad 
Commissionerate and M/s. P Ltd. 16, under Commissioner of Customs, New 
Customs House, Mangaluru goods lying in the warehouse were not covered 
under bond in contravention of the aforesaid provisions.  
In the case of M/s. O Ltd. under Ahmedabad Commissionerate, Ministry has 
accepted the observation and replied that Show Cause Notice has been 
issued in December 2021 for imposition of penalty for non -submission of 
bond equal to thrice the amount of duty assessed. 
In the case of M/s. P Ltd . under Commissioner of Customs, New Customs 
House, Mangaluru, reply of the Ministry is awaited (May 2022). 
3.4.2 Excess holding of goods in warehouses  
At the time of grant of licenses to the warehouses under Sections 57, 58 or 
58A of Customs Act 1962, the maximum stock in terms of value of goods and 
duty that can be stored in the warehouse is specified in the license by the 
Customs Department, wherein it is stipulated that the value of goods stocked 
in the warehouse and duty thereon should not at any point of time exceed 
the ceilings specified. Further, as per Para 4 (a) of the Customs Notification 
No. 72/2016 - Customs (NT) dated 14 May 2016, the warehou se licensee is 
required to provide an all risk insurance policy, that includes natural 
calamities, riots, fire, theft, skilful pilferage and commercial crime, in favour 
of the President of India for a sum equivalent to the amount of duty involved 
on the dutiable goods proposed to be stored in the Warehouse at any point 
of time.  
This aspect was reviewed in 219 warehouses under 24 Commissionerates 
and audit examination of monthly records revealed that in the case of eight 
warehouses under six Commissionerate s, excess stock with duty amounts 
ranging from ₹2 lakh to ₹68.89 crore was held by warehouse licensees during 
the period 2015-20. As such, the excess stock would not be covered by the 
insurance coverage and the Department is liable to lose Customs duty in the 
event of disaster like fire, accident and others. (Annexure 3.6) 
Ministry in their reply (March 2022) accepted the audit observation and 
noted for future compliance in respect of five warehouses, while the reply of 
the Ministry is still awaited (May 20 22) in respect of two warehouses. 
Ministry has not accepted the audit observation in one case and replied that 
there was no revenue leakage and it was a procedural inconsistency. 
 
15From 24.05.2017 to 07.08.2017 and 20.12.2018 to 31.05.2019 
16From 24.04.2019 onwards 


Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
 
34 
 
Ministry’s reply is not acceptable as excess storage of goods in the 
warehouse was in violation of the licensing conditions. 
One case is illustrated below: 
Box No. 3.3 – Excess holding of stock 
As per the conditions of license issued to M/s. R Ltd. under the jurisdiction of NCH 
Commissionerate, Mumbai, the stock to be held shall not exceed the duty amount of ₹27 
crore. The duty amount was increased from ₹27 crore to ₹ 50 crore from 17 April 2017. Audit 
scrutiny of the monthly statement submitted by the licensee revealed excess stocking of 
warehoused goods ranging from ₹4 cro re to ₹380 crore in terms of value and ₹42 lakh to 
₹68.89 crore in terms of duty during September 2016 to March 2020.  
Ministry has accepted (March 2022) that the stock exceeded the specified 
limit but the excess stock remained for some period. As per urgen cy of 
demand and change in product price, insurance coverage amount was 
increased to ₹60 crore for the period Aug -2019 to Dec -2020. The revised 
coverage takes care of fluctuation, if any. The current insurance coverage is 
for ₹90 crore.  
The contention of the Ministry is not acceptable as the maximum duty on 
cargo to be warehoused should not exceed the limits prescribed in the 
license. 
3.4.3 Non-payment/excess payment of MOT charges 
Merchant Overtime (MOT) charges are collected in terms of Section 36 of 
the Customs Act 1962 read with Customs (Fees for Rendering Services by 
Customs Officers) Regulations, 1998 which prescribes the rates and the 
manner for collection of such fee. Further , Regulation 3(e) of the Special 
Warehouse Regulations 2016 and Circular No.20/2016 –Customs dated 20 
May 2016 read with Circular No.32/2016 dated 13 July 2016 provides that 
the licensee of a Special Warehouse shall undertake to bear the costs of 
Customs supervision on MOT basis or on Cost Recovery (CRC) basis. 
The prescribed rates of overtime fee for services rendered by the Customs 
officers, as per Chapter 12 of Customs Manual are as follows: 
Table 3.1 
Category of officers Fee per hour or part thereof 
on working days (in ₹) 
Fee per hour or part thereof on 
holidays (in ₹) 
6 am to 
8 pm 
8 pm to 
6 am 
6 am to 
8 pm 
8 pm to 
6 am 
Appraisers, Superintendent 
(Customs Preventive) 85 125 140 180 
Air customs officers, Examiners & 
Preventive Officers 75 100 105 145 
Staff 35 45 55 60 

Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
35 
 
 
Audit observed that in five Commissionerates, there was short/irregular 
payment of MOT charges in respect of 14 warehouses ( Annexure 3.7 ). 
Reasons for short/irregular payment of MOT charges were not available on 
records. There are also instances of excess recovery of MOT charges. 
An illustrative case is narrated below: 
Audit scrutiny of MOT charges collected by Chhatrapati Shivaji International 
Airport Commissionerate (CSIA), Mumbai from four 17 warehouses revealed 
that MOT charges were computed at the highest rates instead of the rates 
applicable to working days and holidays or computed beyond 24 hours per 
day. This resulted in exc ess collection of ₹4.08 lakh in case of three 
warehouses. Further, it was noticed that in one unit, MOT was collected at a 
lower rate than the applicable rate resulting in short collection of ₹0.25 lakh. 
Thus, the MOT charges were not collected by the Department uniformly.  
Ministry in their reply (March 2022) accepted the audit observation and 
recovered MOT charges of ₹65,790 in respect of one warehouse and took 
remedial action in respect of two warehouses, while reply of the Ministry is 
still awaited (May 2022) in respect of four warehouses. 
Ministry has not accepted the audit observation in respect of seven 
warehouses and replied that there was no shortfall in MOT Charges. The 
contention of the Ministry is not acceptable as these licensees have paid 
MOT Charges at the same rate without any reference to the total number of 
hours. Moreover, adoption of rates without considering the block period and 
holidays was not correct. 
3.4.4 Collection of MOT charges in place of Cost Recovery Charges 
Cost Recovery Charges (CRC) are the amount recoverable from the bonded 
warehouses on account of the expenses incurred by the Government for the 
posting of Customs staff at its premises to supervise their operations. The 
cost of posts created has been deter mined at an amount equivalent to the 
actual salary and emoluments of the staff deployed i.e. the average pay and 
allowances including D.A., H.R.A etc. When one Customs officer supervises 
the functioning of four to five units, the cost recovery charges are shared 
amongst them. 
Clause (e) of Regulation 3 of the Special Warehouse Regulations 2016 and 
Circular no. 20/2016 –Customs dated 20 May 2016 read with Circular 
No.32/2016 dated 13 July 2016 provide that the licensee of a Special 
 
17M/s. S Ltd, M/s. T Ltd., M/s. U Ltd. and M/s. V Ltd. 


Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
 
36 
 
Warehouse shall undertake to bear costs of customs supervision on MOT 
basis or on Cost Recovery basis. The Circular further clarifies that if the 
requirement of the licensee warrants the operation of the warehouse once 
in a week or once in a day, the cost of supervision shall be charged on MOT 
basis.  However, if the warehouse is at such distance from the nearest 
Customs office or the  nature  and  duration  of work is such that, the visit  of 
the  bond  officer on everyday basis, i.e. his absence from his office for  an  
entire  day  or  better  part  thereof,  the licensee shall have to undertake the 
services on cost recovery basis. Further, in cases where the licensee requires 
services of a Customs officer more than once in a day, he shall have to 
undertake supervision on cost recovery basis. Similarly, in case where round 
the clock services are requested, the licensee will have to bear charges on 
cost recovery basis.  
Under the three Commissionerates in respect of 10 Special Warehouses, 
Customs supervision charges were levied on MOT basis instead of CRC basis. 
Incorrect adoption of the mode of recovery resulted in short recovery of 
Customs supervision charges of ₹10.29 crore.  
Some illustrative cases are discussed below: 
Box No. 3.4 - MOT charges in place of CRC 
i) In CSIA Commissionerate, Mumbai, although Customs officials were posted round the 
clock, Customs supervision charges were recovered on MOT basis instead of CRC basis in 
respect of six warehouses. This has resulted in short recovery of Customs sup ervision 
charges of ₹6 crore.  
ii) In Commissionerate of Customs (Airport), Kolkata, in two Special Warehouses viz. M/s. W 
Ltd. and M/s. X Ltd. availed Customs supervision for more than six hours a day regularly. The 
Department recovered Customs supervision charges on MOT basis instead of CRC basis 
resulting in short recovery of ₹2.93 crore. 
iii) In respect of M/s. Y Ltd. and M/s. Z Ltd. under Cochin Preventive Commissionerate, there 
was short recovery of ₹1.36 crore as the Department adopted MOT charges instead of CRC 
for recovery of Customs supervision charges in contravention of extant provisions . 
Ministry has accepted the observation (March 2022) in the case of M/s. W Ltd. under 
Commissionerate (Airport), Kolkata and stated that the Department evaluated the 
frequency of Customs supervisions availed by the licensee and issued Show Cause Notice in 
February 2019 demanding supervision costs on CRC basis. Further, in the case of M/s. X Ltd., 
the recovery of CRC/MOT charges is under examination and action taken would be intimated 
in due course.For CSIA Commissionerate, Mumbai and Commissionerate (Preventive), 
Cochin, reply of the Ministry is awaited (May 2022). 
3.5 Monitoring and Internal Control Mechanisms 
3.5.1 Insufficient/deficient Solvency Certificate 
As per Regulation 3(1) of Public/Private/Special Warehouse Licensing 
Regulations, 2016 read with Circulars No. 24/2016 -Customs dated 02 June 

Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
37 
 
2016 and Circular No.32/2016-Customs dated 13 July 2016, the applicant for 
warehouse should submit a Solvency Certificate from a Scheduled Bank. 
(i) for Rupees two crore in respect of Public Warehouse license 
(ii) for an amount equivalent to the maximum duty involved on the 
goods proposed to be stored at any given point of time in respect of 
Private/Special Bonded Warehouse licensee.  
The aspect was reviewed in 219 warehouses under 24 Commissionerates and 
Audit scrutiny of the records revealed that in seven warehouses under five 
Commissionerates18, Solvency Certificates were either not produced or the 
Solvency Certificate produced by the warehouse keepers was for an amount 
less than the amount prescribed under the Warehouse License Regulations 
2016. (Annexure 3.8) 
Ministry in their reply (March 2022) accepted the audit observation and 
initiated action in respect of three warehouses, while reply of the Ministry is 
still awaited (May 2022) in respect of one warehouse. 
Ministry has not accepted the audit observation in respect of three 
warehouses and replied that there was no specific requirement to verify the 
genuineness of the Solvency Certificate. In respect of another warehouse, it 
was replied by the Ministry that the Customs duty was well covered by Bonds 
and Bank Guarantees. Ministry’s reply is not acceptable as the Department 
themselves have initiated the action of ver ifying the genuineness the 
Solvency Certificates submitted by the licensees and non -submission of 
Solvency Certificate was in violation of the Government directives. 
Illustrative cases are discussed below: 
• In ACC Export Commissionerate, New Delhi, a license was issued to 
M/s. AA Ltd. to operate a Public Warehouse in May 2018.  Scrutiny of 
records indicated that a letter was issued to the bank in May 2018 to 
verify the genuineness of the certificate and their  reply that the 
Solvency Certificate submitted by the licensee was not genuine was 
received in June 2020. Ministry has accepted the observation and 
stated that the licences has been cancelled in October 2020. 
Nevertheless, the delay in following up with th e bank resulted in 
issuance of license to an ineligible applicant.  
• In another case in Customs Commissionerate, Ahmedabad, we 
observed that M/s. AB Ltd. had submitted a Solvency Certificate 
 
18 ACC Export, Delhi, ACC Zone -III, Mumbai, Customs Commissionerate, Ahmedabad, 
Customs Commissionerate, Bhubaneshwar and Customs Commissionerate, Hyderabad  


Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
 
38 
 
issued by a Chartered Acc ountant’s firm M/s. AC & Co. instead of 
from a Scheduled Bank. Ministry has accepted the observation and 
stated that a ction for invoking penal provisions has been initiated 
under the relevant provisions of Customs Act. 
3.5.2 Annual renewal of Solvency Certificate 
Clause 8 of Circular 26/2016 dated 9 June 2016 issued by CBIC states that the 
licensee is required to renew the insurance policy annually and continue to 
comply with solvency conditions (as applicable) and the same shall be 
required to be submitted annually.  
The aspect of renewal of Solvency Certificate by warehouse was reviewed in 
219 warehouses under 24 Commissionerates and it was observed in eight 
Commissionerates19 that 52 warehouse licensees failed to furnish Solvency 
Certificates regularly (Annexure 3.9). 
Ministry in their reply (March 2022) accepted the audit observation and 
initiated action in respect of 48 warehouses. While not accepting the audit 
observation in respect of four warehouses, Ministry replied that Solvency 
Certificate was submitted by two w arehouses; this response is not 
acceptable as the Solvency Certificate should have been obtained before 
issue of the license and thereafter renewed every year. 
In the remaining two cases, Ministry replied that one warehouse was holding 
Risk Insurance Polic y and the other licensee had submitted a Chartered 
Accountant’s Certificate. The contention of the Ministry is not acceptable as 
the Department should have obtained Solvency Certificate before issue of 
the license from a Scheduled Bank and ensure its renewal every year. 
3.5.3 Risk insurance policy 
As per Regulation 4 of Public/Private/Special Warehouse Licensing 
Regulations, 2016, the applicant has to provide an all risk insurance policy 
that includes natural calamities, riots, fire, theft, skilful pilferage and 
commercial crime, in favour of the President of India for a sum equivalent to 
the amount of duty involved on the dutiable goods proposed to be stored at 
any point of time. Further, as per Circular 26/2016 dated 9 June 2016, the 
licensee is required to renew the insurance policy annually.  
 
19ACC Export, NCH, Delhi, Customs Commissionerate(A&G), Delhi, Customs 
Commissionerate (Port), Kolkata , Customs Commissionerate, Ahmedabad, Customs 
Commissionerate (Preventive), Vijayawada, Customs Commissionerate, Hyderabad, 
Customs Commissionerate, ICD Patparganj & Other ICDs, Delhi, Customs Commissionerate, 
Jaipur  


Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
39 
 
This was reviewed in 219 warehouses under 24 Commissionerates and Audit 
examination of records in 13 Commissionerates20 revealed that in respect of 
129 warehouses, the licensees failed to comply with the Regulations and 
Instructions issued by the Board. This entailed the risk of losing the Customs 
duty on the warehoused goods in the event of any disaster in the warehouses 
like fire, theft etc. (Annexure 3.10) 
Out of 129 cases, in 56 cases insurance cover was deficient at a point of time 
or for a period by an amount of ₹1,015.71 crore. In 73 Warehousing license 
cases, the same could not be quantified because the maximum value of duty 
on goods proposed to be stored (as per licence) was not available. 
Ministry in their reply (March 2022) accepted the audit observation and 
initiated remedial action in respect of 63 warehouses, while reply of the 
Ministry is still awaited (May 2022) in respect of 66 warehouses.  
Ministry has not accepted the audit observation in 17 cases and their reply is 
not acceptable as in seven cases, insurance policy documents were not 
available on record. In another seven cases, insurance policies were not 
regularly renewed. Ou t of the remaining three cases, in respect of one 
warehouse, Ministry replied that the license holder had applied for 
surrender of licence in October 2017, whereas the records revealed that the 
application for surrender was mooted only in March 2021. Further, there was 
break in insurance coverage in one case. 
Recommendation 5. The Department must develop, in a time bound 
manner, an IT systems/module for tracking and monitoring submission and 
renewal of Solvency Certificate, Duty bond and Bank guarantee, and  Risk 
insurance policy. The system should track and monitor 100 per cent duty 
coverage under insurance as prescribed in the rules. 
Ministry in their reply (March 2022) has stated that the recommendation is 
noted and once the Audit Report is published, the Report will be circulated 
to all field formations for exercising due diligence. 
  
 
20ACC Export, NCH, Delhi, ACC Zone -III, Mumbai, Bengaluru City Commissionerate, 
Bengaluru, Customs Commissionerate, Chennai -III, Cochin Customs Commissionerate, 
Customs Commissionerate(Port), Kolkata, Customs Commissionerate (A&G), Delhi, Customs 
Commissionerate, Ahmedabad, Customs Commissioner ate, Jaipur, Customs 
Commissionerate, ICD Patparganj & Other ICDs, Delhi, JNCH, Zone -II, Mumbai, NCH 
Mangaluru & NCH, Zone-I, Mumbai 


Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
 
40 
 
3.5.4 Short execution of Bank Guarantee for extension of warehousing 
period 
In accordance with section 59 (3) of the Customs Act 1962 read with Circular 
No 21/2016 -Customs dated 31 May 2016, the importer has to furnish a 
security by way of a bank guarantee at the rate of 25 per cent, 50 per cent 
and 100 per cent of sum of duty plus interest accrued thereon for extensions 
beyond one year, two years and three years respectively. 
In Bangalore City Commissionerate, M/s. AD Ltd., a Private Warehouse, had 
furnished bank guarantee of ₹1.59 lakh as against ₹3.09 lakh in respect of 
imports made under three BsE. This has resulted in short execution of bank 
guarantee and risking Government revenue. 
No reply was received from Ministry (May 2022). 
3.5.5 Non-disposal of goods of expired bonds 
As per Sub -section 1(b) of Section 72 of Custom Act 19 62, where any 
warehoused goods have not been removed from a warehouse at the 
expiration of the period during which such goods are permitted under 
Section 61 to remain in a warehouse,  the Proper Officer may demand, and 
the owner of such goods shall forthwit h pay, the full amount of duty 
chargeable on account of such goods together with interest, fine and 
penalties payable in respect of such goods.  
Further, as per Sub -section (2), if any owner fails to pay any amount 
demanded under Sub-section (1), the Proper Officer may, without prejudice 
to any other remedy, cause to be detained and sold, after notice to the 
owner such sufficient portion of his goods, if any, in the warehouse, as the 
said officer may deem fit. 
This was reviewed in 219 warehouses under 24 Commissionerates and Audit 
analysis of data revealed that in 35 warehouses under nine 
Commissionerates21, 525 time expired bonds/BsE involving a duty element 
of ₹75.75 crore were lying undisposed (Annexure 3.11) 
Non-initiation and non -follow up had resulted in blockage of revenue. 
Further, this entailed risk of Custom duty loss in case of any disaster in the 
 
21ACC Export, NCH, Delhi, Customs Commissionerate, ICD Patparganj & Ohers, Bengaluru 
City Commissionerate, Bengaluru, Custom s Commissionerate Chennai -III, Customs 
Commissionerate Chennai -VII, Cochin Customs Commissionerate, Customs 
Commissionerate (Port) Kolkata, Customs Commissionerate, Ludhiana & JNCH, Zone -II, 
Mumbai  


Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
41 
 
warehouses like fire, theft etc., as there would not be insurance coverage in 
respect of the goods whose bonds had expired. 
Ministry in their reply (March 2022) accepted the audit observation and 
initiated remedial action in respect of 25 warehouses, while reply of the 
Ministry is still awaited (May 2022) in respect of eight warehouses. 
Ministry’s reply in two cases that reports were sent to Customs on monthly 
basis and there was no case where an extension was required to be taken is 
not acceptable as the reply is not relevant to the observation and the 
Monthly Technical Report for the month of March 2020 showed goods worth 
₹5.50 lakh under seven Bonds were time-barred. 
An illustrative case is discussed below: 
M/s. AE Ltd. was issued license under Section 57 of the Customs Act 1962 to 
operate warehouse vide Commissioner of Customs approval  dated 14 
October 2016.  
The licensee informed the Department that there was a huge fire in the 
bonded warehouse on 17 April 2018. The stock held in the warehouse at the 
time of fire was ₹3.93 crore with a duty liability of ₹1.79 crore which included 
goods worth ₹1.68 crore having a duty liability of ₹1.06 crore whose bonds 
were expired. 
Although the surveyor assessed a loss of duty of ₹1.60 crore, the Insurance 
Company reduced the claim of ₹1.06 crore in respect of the goods as the 
bonds had expired. Furth er verification of the conditions attached to the 
insurance policy revealed that the policy did not cover the goods, as these 
goods remained in the bonded warehouse for a period beyond 365 days and 
no extension had been accorded by the Commissioner of Cust oms. Inaction 
on the part of the Department to ensure renewal of bonds/clearance of the 
stocks where the bonds had expired resulted in denial of insurance claim by 
the insurance agency and loss of Customs duty to the extent of ₹1.06 crore. 
No reply was received from the Ministry (May 2022). 
3.5.6 Non levy of interest on delayed removal of warehouse goods 
As per Section 61(2) of Customs Act 1962,  in respect of any goods 
warehoused under Section 60, other than  capital or non -capital goods 
intended for use in any hundred per cent EOU22 or EHTP unit or STPI unit, and 
 
22 Units undertaking to export their entire production of goods and services (except 
permissible sales in the DTA), may be set up under the Export Oriented Unit (EOU) Scheme, 
Electronic Hardware Technology Park (EHTP) Scheme or Software Technology Park (STP) 

Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
 
42 
 
remaining in a warehouse beyond a period of ninety days, interest shall be 
payable at such rate as may be fixed by the Central Government under 
Section 47, on the amount of duty payable at the time of clearance of the 
goods, for the period from the expiry of the said ninety days till the date of 
payment of duty on the warehoused goods. 
Analysis of 40 ex-bond BsE in NCH Commissionerate, Mumbai revealed that 
an interest of ₹5.41 lakh payable on removal of warehoused goods beyond 
the period of 90 days was not computed by the ICES IT System.  The reason 
for this System error was called for fr om the Department, and no reply has 
been furnished by the Department till date.  
Ministry, while not accepting the observation (March 2022), has stated that 
the goods were ex -bonded under the benefit of MEIS and the duty is 
exempted on such goods which are imported against a duty credit scrip 
issued by the DGFT Regional Authority under  MEIS. As there was no duty 
incidence, no interest was levied in the system.  
The contention of the Ministry is not acceptable as the goods were not 
cleared without payment of duty but after debiting duty credit scrips. In such 
cases, where ex-bonding was beyond a period of ninety days, interest on ex-
bond duty forgone has to be levied. Further, it was seen that in similar cases, 
interest was levied where the warehousing period was beyond ninety days. 
3.5.7 Irregularities in warehousing bond management 
As per Section 73 of the Customs Act 1962, when the whole of the goods 
covered by any bond executed under Section 59 have been cleared for home 
consumption or exported or transferred or are otherwise duly accounted for, 
and when all amounts due on account of s uch goods have been paid, the 
Proper Officer shall cancel the bond as discharged in full, and shall on 
demand deliver it, so cancelled, to the person who has executed or is entitled 
to receive it. The importer of any goods has to submit a warehousing bond 
under Section 59 to observe all the provisions of the Act and the rules and 
regulations in respect of such goods; all duties, and interest payable and to 
discharge all penalties incurred for violation of the provisions of the Act. 
Audit scrutiny of records in four Commissionerates 23 revealed that 14,144 
warehousing bonds executed under Section 59 were not cancelled by the 
Department in disregard of the aforesaid provisions. Further, no uniform 
 
Scheme for manufacture of goods, including repair, re -making, reconditioning, re -
engineering, and rendering of services. 
23Pr. Commissioner of Customs, ICD Tughlakabad, Commissioner of Customs, ICD Patparganj 
& Other ICDs,   Pr. Commissioner of Customs, NCH, Delhi and Air Cargo Complex, Mumbai  

Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
43 
 
prescribed procedures had been adopted by the Department.  Audit further 
observed that the System did not capture details such as export, transfer to 
other warehouses and SEZs . After goods have been removed from the 
warehouse and duty has been paid, the bond should be cancelled in the ICES 
system. Non cancelling of such bonds in ICES gives an incorrect status of live 
bonds. 
Illustrative Cases are discussed below: 
In ACC, Mumbai, pursuant to Board Circular No. 18/2016 dated 14 May 2016,  
a local Standing Order was issued by the office of Commissioner of Customs 
(General) specifying the procedure for accepting bonds at the Bond section 
to permit the warehousing of imports in Special Warehouses viz. airline 
caterers and duty free shops, watching for receipt of re -warehousing 
certificates (RWC)24 within 30 days from the Bond Officer in charge of Special 
Warehouse, and monitoring of filing a consolidated ex -bond BsE after 
clearance of all goods in respect of a  bond for cancellation of bond. Thus, 
the Customs port of import acts as a focal point fo r monitoring of the 
warehousing periods of bonds and action to be taken in case of expiry of 
bonds. 
Analysis of MTRs in the Bond section under ACC Mumbai revealed diverse 
practices for cancellation of manual bonds in case of Special Warehouses, 
Public and Private Warehouses, and other licensees in disregard of the 
prescribed procedures: 
• RWCs had been not received in 32 bonds involving duty element of 
₹55.73 lakh, although six bonds were more than one year old.  In case 
of 13 bonds, RWCs were received after the expiry of 30 days, while in 
12 cases no RWC was available in the register despite the fact that 
bonds were expired. 
• In case of two Special Warehouses i.e. M/s. AF Ltd and M/s. AG Ltd , 
no systems and procedures had been put in place to watch receipt of 
RWC. Audit, further, observed that although 6,438 bonds pertaining 
to the period 2016 -17 to 2018-19 are still live in ICES, no action has 
been taken by the Department for their cancellation. 
• In respect of Bonds accepted for mo vement of goods to Public and 
Private Warehouses, the bonds were being closed manually in bond 
registers based on ex -bond BsE. In respect of 3712 cases where 
 
24 Removal of excisable goods from one factory or a warehouse to another is called as Re -
warehousing and o n arrival of the goods at the warehouse of destination Re -warehousing 
Certificate is issued.  Board had prescribed maximum period of 90 days from the date of 
issuance of Procurement Certificate (PC) for submission of the RWC. 

Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
 
44 
 
consignment- wise EDI bonds were accepted during 2015 -18, no 
action was taken towards their cancellation. 
In Commissionerate of Customs, Import, ICD, Tughlakabad and 
Commissionerate of Customs ICD Patparganj & Other ICDs, there were 2,733 
and 4,194 bonds pending for cancellation. The delay in cancellation of bonds 
ranged from one month to more than three years. 
No reply was received from the Ministry (May 2022). 
3.5.8 Internal audit and inspection of bonded warehouses 
Circular No. 52/98-Customs dated 27 July 1998 envisages that there should 
be regular audit and inspection of CBWs by the senior officers and the 
Custom House audit parties so that the nature, quantity, number and other 
relevant particulars with reference to the concerned documents are verified. 
The exercise could be done once in six months by audit parties supported by 
surprise checks by the senior officers. In the course of audit, all the 
consignments which continue to lie in the warehouse after expiry of the 
warehousing period should be taken up for scrutiny in order to guard against 
deterioration, substitution or other unlawful removal.  
Audit scrutiny revealed that regular audit and inspection of CBWs was not 
carried out by the Department during the period from 2015-16 to 2019-20. 
Non conduct of audit and supervision by Departmental authorities reflected 
lack of effective monitoring by the Department. Further, Audit also could not 
derive assurance whether appropriate action was taken in the event of 
consignments lying in warehouses after lapse of warehousing period 
entailing risk of deterioration, substitution or other unlawful removal of 
goods. 
Ministry has accepted (March 2022) the observation and stated that a 
Committee headed by ADG (Hqrs) Audit under DG (Audit) has been 
constituted in January 2022 with a mandate to draft guidelines/SOPs for 
audit of warehouses under Section 57, 58, 58A and 65 of the Customs Act 
1962. The Terms of Reference (ToR) of the Committee also includes defining 
specific audit pa rameters in view of the extant legal requirements, and  
determining selection criteria of units to be audited, coverage plan, 
periodicity of such audit, varying degree of audit dependent on risk criteria, 
stages of audit and related workflow/ checklists/ forms etc. 
Recommendation 6. Ministry must ensure that a mechanism for internal 
audit and inspection of CBWs, including guidelines/SOPs for such audit, is 
implemented immediately. 

Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
45 
 
3.5.9 Irregular storage of goods in Public/Private Bonded Warehouse 
As per Circular No.26/2016 dated 09 June 2016, a Public Bonded Warehouse 
is strictly for warehousing of goods belonging to third parties and the 
applicant shall declare that goods imported by him shall not be stored in the 
Public Bonded Warehouse for which the appl ication has been made. At the 
same time, as per Section 58 of the Customs Act, 1962, in Private 
Warehouses, only dutiable goods imported by or on behalf of the licensee 
may be deposited. 
Scrutiny of records revealed two instances of irregular storage of go ods in 
contravention to the set procedures.  
• In ACC Export Commissionerate, New Delhi, M/s. AH Ltd. , a Public 
Warehouse, the licensee had imported goods worth ₹78.63 lakh and 
the goods were warehoused in the Public Warehouse of the 
importer. This is not permissible as a Public Bonded Warehouse is 
strictly for warehousing of goods belonging to third parties.  
No reply was received from the Ministry (May 2022). 
• In JNCH Commissionerate, Mumbai, Audit examination of the MTR 
for August and September 2020 disclosed that M/s. AI Ltd., a Private 
Warehouse, had allowed storage of 7,691 MT of third -party goods 
worth ₹37 crore in its bonded tanks contrary to the provision s of 
section 58 of Customs Act, 1962.  
Ministry has accepted the observation (March 2022) and stated that in 
certain cases third party goods were also deposited in the Private Bonded 
Warehouses licensed provisionally. However, the goods warehoused are 
identical goods of liquid bulk. No revenue loss had occurred to Customs, 
though there has been procedural/technical infraction. Further, the licensee 
was asked to apply for a Public Warehouse License under Section 57 of the 
Customs Act 1962 and Public Warehouse License was issued to the licensee.  
3.6 Instances of other irregularities 
3.6.1 Difference in assessable value at the time of ex-bonding 
CBIC Circular No. 46/2017-Customs dated 24 November 2017, stipulates that 
the value of imported goods, for purposes of charging Customs duty, is to be 
determined as per Section 14 of the Customs Act, 1962 at the time of import 
i.e. at the time of filing of the into-bond BsE. As such, there is no provision to 
vary the assessable value of the goods at the ex -bond stage unless they are 
such goods on which tariff valuation applies. 

Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
 
46 
 
Audit observed 30 instances in respect of M/s. AJ Pvt Ltd under JNCH 
Commissionerate, Mumbai where there were variations in assessable value 
of warehoused goods ranging from ₹0.76 lakh to ₹12.46 lakh at the time of 
ex-bonding.  However, such variation in assessable value of warehoused 
goods at the time of ex-bonding was not in order. 
No reply was received from the Ministry (May 2022). 
3.7 Conclusion 
The law relating to Customs Warehousing in India has been considerably 
liberalised with effect from May 2016 and the  concept of warehousing 
station has been re moved which has led to establishment of CBWs at any 
place. The warehouses are no longer under the physical control of the 
Customs officers and have moved to record based control . The details of 
goods removed from the warehouse and the purpose of removal ie  home 
consumption/deposit in another warehouse/export/sold/destruction etc 
cannot be assessed. Hence, whether the licensee has correctly paid duty and 
interest cannot be correctly assessed. Whether the licensee has submitted 
the correct amount of bond and bank guarantee cannot be correctly 
assessed by the Department. If the records are not maintained electronically 
by the licensee, the process of reconciliation and monitoring of monthly 
returns would be a very difficult task. 
Audit observed that the Departm ent was totally dependent upon the 
manual, non -automated Monthly Technical Reports and monthly returns 
submitted by each bonded warehouse . There was absence of a structured 
and seamless flow of data between IT systems maintained by the individual 
warehouses and ICES. Further, warehouses were required to maintain data 
in Form A and B which were not integrated with ICES. No consolidated 
reports were generated in ICES to monitor clearance of the warehoused 
goods and also to monitor the expiry of the bond perio d or the shelf life of 
the goods. 
While e x-bonding of goods for home consumption is accounted for in the 
ICES, other transactions such as re-export of the warehoused goods, transfer 
to SEZ, and transfer from one bonded warehouse to another bonded 
warehouse were totally manual and were not captured in ICES. The SEZ 
Online IT System (managed by NSDL) was not integrated with ICES. 
No enabling provision had been made for recording extension of time limits 
of bonds and bank guarantees in ICES once initial time -limits are expired. 
Moreover, warehouse bonds were also not cancelled in the system once 
goods had been completely removed from warehouse. 

Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
47 
 
Audit observed that 59 warehouse l icensees had not submitted their 
monthly reports or delayed submission of these monthly returns in the 
prescribed format. 121 licensees had either not maintained records in digital 
format, or records were not maintained in the prescribed forms. 
During issu e of license , there were instances of delay in antecedent 
verification and in 31 cases antecedent verification was still pending. In 
respect of 36 warehouses, the details in Part IV of the application form were 
incomplete and property holding rights in respect of five warehouses in Part 
II were also not verified while granting licenses. There were delays ranging 
from 7 days to 440 days in issue of licence beyond the prescribed time- limit 
of 30 days in respect of 41 warehouses. Audit observed that three 
warehouses were operating without a valid license.  
It was observed that in case of eight warehouses , there was excess holding 
of goods was there, with the duty on excess stock ranging from ₹2 lakh to 
₹68.89 crore. 
Audit observed that in 14 warehouses there was short/irregular payment of 
MOT (Merchant Overtime)  charges. In 10 Special Warehouses, Customs 
supervision charges were incorrectly levied on MOT basis instead of cost 
recovery charge basis , resulting in short recovery of Customs supervision 
charges of ₹10.29 crore. 
In 129 warehouses, the licensees failed to comply with the regulations and 
instructions regarding Risk insurance policy issued by the Board . Out of 129 
cases, in 56 cases insurance cover was deficient at a point of time or for a 
period by an amount of ₹1,015.71 crore. In 73 Warehousing license cases, 
the same could not be quantified because maximum value of duty on goods 
proposed to be stored (as per licence) was not available. This entailed risk of 
loss of the Customs duty on the warehoused goods in the event of any 
disaster in the warehouses like fire, theft etc. Further, in 35 warehouses, 525 
time expired bonds/BsE involving a duty element of ₹75.75 crore were lying 
undisposed. Also, regular audit and inspection of CBWs was not carried out 
by the Department during the period from 2015-16 to 2019-20. 
  

 
 
 
 
  

Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
49 
 
CHAPTER 4 
FREE TRADE WAREHOUSING ZONEs (FTWZs) 
4.1 Introduction 
Audit examined whether the establishment and operationalization of FTWZs 
was duly aligned with the objectives of the policy for FTWZ and also assessed 
the control system and monitoring and coordination mechanism were 
adequate and effective. 
Performance Audit was conducted at the premises of the Development 
Commissioner (DC) (SEZ) offices , based on the files and records relating to 
project and monitoring files maintained therein, for monitoring of FTWZ 
developers and units therein. 
Annual monitoring on the functioning and performance of the units in the 
FTWZs is carried out by the Unit Approval Committee (UAC). The 
performance of the FTWZ units/Developers is being monitored annually 
through the Annual Performance Reports (APRs) in ca se of units and Half -
yearly/Quarterly returns in case of Developers, which are required to be filed 
digitally. Based on such review, the DCs may take corrective measures to 
enable the defaulting units to fulfil their obligations as per the SEZ Act/Rules. 
For any violation, the DC is empowered to initiate action under the Foreign 
Trade (Development and Regulation) Act, 1992, which includes issue of Show 
Cause Notice (SCN), levy of penalty, cancellation of the Letter of Permission 
(LoP), etc. The applicable c ustoms duty forgone on such violations is to be 
recovered by the Department. 
A representative sample of seven FTWZ Developers were selected (four 
operational and three non -operational). Out of 222 FTWZ units, 44 units 
spread over seven States (Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Karnataka, Maharashtra, 
Tamil Nadu, Telangana and Uttar Pradesh) were selected for detailed audit. 
4.2 Guidelines/Policies for FTWZs  
FTWZ Policy, as a part of the Foreign Trade Policy (FTP) 2004 -2009 is 
governed by the SEZ Act 2005 and SEZ Rules 2006 to leverage India’s strategic 
geographical location and cost and skill arbitrage. It was noticed that the SEZ 
Act 2005 and SEZ Rules 2006 do not contain any separate guidelines /policies 
and specific rules in respect of FTWZ. 
The Department agreed with the observation and replied (September 2020) 
that no such specific chapter guidelines/rules in respect of FTWZ were 
incorporated in SEZ Act 2005. However, the details/documents required for 

Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
 
50 
 
setting up of FTWZ in terms of SEZ Act 200 5 were issued vide a letter dated 
07 January 2019. Further, DoC stated (December 2020) that in the SEZ Act 
2005, an FTWZ is defined as a SEZ wherein mainly trading, warehousing and 
other activities related thereto are carried on. It also stated that recent ly a 
proviso in Rule 24(3) of SEZ Rules on admissibility of drawback or any other 
similar scheme was added that may be helpful to enhance the performance 
of FTWZs. 
DOC stated (March 2022) that FTWZ is not a scheme. FTWZ as defined under 
Section 2(n) of the  SEZ Act 2005 means a SEZ wherein mainly 
trading/warehousing and other related activities are carried on. As such, 
FTWZs are a category of SEZs. Consequently, all provisions of SEZ law are 
applicable to FTWZs mutatis mutandis  and where necessary, specific 
provisions for facilitating FTWZs have also been provided under SEZ law. 
Hence, there has not been any requirement for formulating a separate set of 
specific guidelines / policies/ rules. 
Audit is of the view that a separate set of specific guidelines/poli cies/rules 
for setting up of FTWZ may need to be formulated, which will enable 
potential Developers to understand the policy in a more coherent manner. 
In her Budget speech 2022, the Hon’ble Finance Minister indicated that the 
Special Economic Zones Act would be replaced with a new legislation that 
would enable the States to become partners in ‘Development of Enterprise 
and Service Hub’. This would cover all large existing and new industrial 
enclaves to optimally utilise available infrastructure and enhance 
competitiveness of exports. 
4.3 Review/evaluation of the FTWZ policy 
The Ministry was asked whether any policy changes, evaluation/ review were 
carried out by the Ministry to attract developers for setting up of FTWZs. 
Department of Commerce (DoC) stated (December 2020) that Rule 5 of the 
SEZ Rules, 2006 (Notification dated 17.12.2019) has been amended and now 
all existing notified SEZs (including  FTWZ) having land area of 50 hectare or 
more shall be deemed to be multi-sector Special Economic Zones. 
Therefore, it is recommended that the Department should evaluate/review 
the scheme, to determine why enough private players are not showing 
interest in the scheme and appropriate policy changes, if required, may be 
made accordingly to attract developer for setting up more FTWZs. 
 

Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
51 
 
4.4 Instances of irregularity in granting approval for FTWZ 
As per Section 9 of the SEZ Act, 2005, the duties, powers and functions of the 
Board of Approval shall include granting of approval or rejecting proposals or 
modifying such proposals for establishment of the SEZs and also granting 
approval of the authorized operations to be carried out in the SEZs by the 
Developer. 
Further as per Sub -Rule 2(d) of Rul e 5 of SEZ Rules, 2006, if a Developer , 
subsequent to approval or notification of a SEZ , acquires more contiguous 
and vacant land which makes the total area available, including the area 
already notified as SEZ, more than the minimum area required for anot her 
class of SEZ, the Board of Approval may consider such cases on a case to case 
basis for allowing conversion to another class of SEZ by subsuming such 
already approved or notified SEZs. 
In DC VSEZ, Telangana, it was observed that M/s. A Limited (Develop er) 
approached the DC for grant of approval for setting up a n FTWZ within the 
existing SEZ. Approval was granted by DC in contravention to Section 9 of SEZ 
Act, 2005 and Rule 5 of SEZ Rules, 2006 without forwarding the proposal to 
the Board of Approval (BOA). 
DoC stated (March 2022) that the DC is being advised to take appropriate 
action for corrective measures. 
4.5 Non-amendment of Rule 18(5) of SEZ Rules 2006 
Section 55(1) of the SEZ Act 2005, empowers the Central Government to 
make rules for carrying out the provisions of the SEZ Act.  The procedure for 
making such Rule is laid down under Section 55(3) of the SEZ Act. As per Rule 
18(5) of the SEZ Rules 2006, an FTWZ unit can hold goods only on account of 
a foreign supplier. Government issued instructions 25(July 2010) allowing 
FTWZ units to hold goods on behalf of Domestic Tariff Area (DTA) suppliers 
and buyers.  However, even after 10 years of issuance of the above 
Instruction, the SEZ Rules, 2006, were not amended to include this provision. 
DoC stated (March 2022) that policy related to SEZs in India is reviewed on 
time to time basis. This issue is under deliberation with the Department of 
Revenue (DoR) for incorporating necessary changes in the SEZ Rules. 
 
 
25F.No. D.12/4/2010-SEZ (Instruction No. 60) dated 06.07.2010 

Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
 
52 
 
4.6 Instance of short levy of duty due to adoption of incorrect tariff values 
Section 30 of the SEZ Act 2005, provides for domestic clearance by units 
subject to the conditions specified in the rules made by the Central 
Government in this behalf, 
(a) Any goods removed from an SEZ to the DTA shall be chargeable to duties 
of customs including anti -dumping, countervailing and safeguard duties 
under the Customs Tariff Act, 1975, where applicable, as leviable on such 
goods when imported; and 
(b) the rate of duty and tariff valuation, if any, applicable to goods removed 
from a SEZ should be at the rate and tariff valuation in force as on the date 
of such removal, and where such date is not ascertainable, on the date of 
payment of duty. 
Further, as per Section 51 of the SEZ Act 2005, the provisions of the SEZ Act 
2005 have overriding effect. The provisions of the SEZ Act 2005 shall have 
effect, notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any 
other law for the time being in force or in any instrument having effect by 
virtue of any law other than the SEZ Act 2005. 
In the case of M/s. B Ltd., a FTWZ unit in M/s. B1 SEZ, Andhra Pradesh, it was 
noticed during test check of Bills of Entry (BsE) for DTA sales made on behalf 
of their clients that during the period 2017 -18 to 2019-20, the Department 
assessed the duties by applying the Tariff values notified by CBIC for gold and 
silver which were effective as on the date of filing of BsE for DTA sales instead 
of those prevailing as on the da te of removal of goods or on the date of 
payment of  duties as stipulated in the SEZ Act, 2005.  Adoption of incorrect 
Tariff value prevailing on the date of filing BsE instead of the date of Out of 
Charge/Date of payment of duty resulted in short levy of duty to the tune of 
₹6.03 crore. 
DoC stated (March 2022) that M/s. B1 SEZ is a Port in terms of Rule 53(2) of 
the Customs Act 1962 and in terms of  Rule 47(4) and 48(2) of SEZ Rules 2006, 
that are framed under Section 30 of the SEZ Act 2005, the rate of du ty and 
tariff valuation for goods cleared from an SEZ/ FTWZ are to be under the 
provisions of the Customs Act , 1962 and as per Section 15 of the Customs 
Act 1962, the date of presentation of Bill of Entry is the date for determining 
rate of duty and tariff valuation, which is being followed. Further, it will deny 
a level playing field for the SEZ importers when compared to the direct 
importers where the date of presentation of Bill of Entry (Home 
Consumption) is the date for assessment. 

Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
53 
 
The reply of the DoC is not tenable as Section 30 of SEZ Act 2005 clearly 
mentions that the rate of duty and tariff valuation should be those prevailing 
on the date of removal of goods and where such date is not ascertainable, 
on the date of payment of duty. 
Further, Section 15(1) of Customs Act stipulates that if a Bill of Entry has been 
presented before the date of entry inwards of the goods imported, the Bill 
of Entry shall be deemed to have been presented on the date of such entry 
inward or arrival as the case may be. H ence, date of physical removal of 
goods shall be taken into account as stipulated in Section 30 of the SEZ Act 
2005. 
4.7 Inconsistency in data as per Annual Performance Report (APR) and SEZ 
Online data 
In DC Offices, Karnataka and Maharashtra, it was notic ed that imports and 
exports and the figures of sales reported in APRs of the units did not tally 
with SEZ Online data maintained by NSDL as discussed below:  
• Out of 44 FTWZ units, in seven cases, APR export data was less than 
the SEZ Online data while in eight cases, APR export data was more 
than the SEZ Online data. No reconciliation of the data was made by 
the Department during monitoring of NFE performance o f the unit 
(Annexure 4.1). 
• Out of 44 FTWZ /SEZ units, APR import data in twelve cases was less 
than the SEZ Online data, while in four cases, APR import data was 
more than the SEZ Online data. No reconciliation of the data was made 
by the Department during monitoring of NFE performance of the unit 
(Annexure 4.2). 
• Out of 44 FTWZ units, although APR data in five cases indicated nil DTA 
sales, SEZ Online data reflected DTA sales. In the remaining six cases, 
DTA sale data as per APR was less than the SEZ Online data of DTA sales. 
No reconciliation of the data was made by the Department during 
monitoring of NFE performance of the unit (Annexure 4.3). 
DoC stated (March 2022) that the data in respect of imports and exports 
from SEZ Online includes the transactions made by their foreign as well as 
domestic clients. As per MoCI Instruction (July 2010) the export and import 
figures pertaining to clients of service provider units may not be considered 
towards the calculation of NFE. The actual APR figures submitted by the 
service provider units include the income generated by providing 
warehousing services, CHA services, other similar facilities, etc. Therefore, 
APR figures would not match the SEZ Online figures. 


Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
 
54 
 
Audit is aware of and notes the possible reasons for inconsistency in data. 
However, the data from APRs and SEZ Online needs to be reconciled by the 
Department, to draw assurance as to the accuracy of the NFE calculated by 
the units; in the instant case such NFE reconciliation could be after excluding 
the export and import figures of clients of service provider units. 
Recommendation 7. The Department needs to consider the possibility of 
integration of the SEZ Online IT systems with ICEGATE/ICES, the Customs 
portal maintained and managed by DG Systems. 
DoC stated (January 2022) that integration of SEZ Online System with 
ICEGATE for real time sharing of data and use of EDT RMS for providing 
inputs to SEZ Customs is underway and necessary support from DG 
Systems, CBIC is requested in this regard. 
4.8 Instance of incorrect Calculation of Net Foreign Exchange (NFE) 
Rule 53 of the SEZ Rules, 2006 stipulates that the unit shall achieve Positive 
Net Foreign Exchange to be calculated cumulatively for a period of five years 
from the commencement of production according to the following formula: 
Positive Net Foreign Exchange = A – B > 0 
where A is Free on Board (FoB) value of exports and B is the sum total of CIF 
value of all imported inputs and CIF value of all imported capital goods, and 
value of all payments made in foreign exchange by way of export 
commission, royalty, fees, dividends, interest  on external commercial 
borrowings during first five-year period or any other charges. 
It was noticed in three cases mentioned below (two cases in DC SEEPZ, 
Maharashtra and one case in DC VSEZ Telangana), that the NFE was not 
calculated correctly as per the above rule. 
Table: 4.1   (₹ in crore) 
Sl 
No. State FTWZ/SEZ Name of unit Period NFE as 
per APR 
Correct 
NFE Difference 
1 
Maharashtra 
M/s. C1 
Panvel M/s. C Ltd., 2016-17 to 
2019-20 568.28 180.49 387.80 
2 M/s. C1 
Panvel M/s. D Ltd., 2014-15 to 
2018-19 33.60 16.19 17.41 
3 Telangana M/s. A Ltd. M/s. E. Ltd., 2015-16 to 
2019-20 2.93 -3.04 5.98 

Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
55 
 
The DC office failed to detect this and accepted the APRs filed by the unit. 
The incorrect calculation was attributable to non -consideration of other 
outflows in foreign exchange and  non-inclusion of certain imports as seen 
from the import data available on SEZ Online which resulted in incorrect 
calculation of NFE. One case is illustrated below: 
Box No. 4.1 - Incorrect calculation of NFE 
M/s. C Ltd. , in DC SEEPZ, Maharashtra had debited royalty payment, interest on External 
Commercial Borrowings, foreign travel, technical fees, in its books of accounts during 2016-
17 to 2019 -20. If these payments were to be considered for calculation of NFE, the 
cumulative NFE would have been negative. 
DoC in respect of M/s. C Ltd ., Mumbai stated (March 2022 ) that the 
commented expenses which are debited in the account of the respective 
year, but not debited for calculation of NFE, are the expenses pertaining to 
their domestic unit and not that for their FTWZ unit. Hence, the same  may 
not be considered for calculation of NFE. In respect of M/s. D Ltd. Ltd., 
Mumbai it was stated that the NFE remains positive even after considering 
expenses in foreign exchange on account of documentation and warehouse 
rent paid to Indian entity in In dia. In respect of M/s. E Ltd, Telangana, now 
with the observations of Audit, NFE is being calculated on the APRs 
submitted online which are certified by the Chartered Accountant. 
In respect of M/s C Ltd., Mumbai, it is not clear how the expenses debited to 
P & L Account like royalty, interest on external commercial borrowing, 
technical services fee, foreign travelling etc. c ould be termed as purely 
domestic unit’s expenses. However, Audit calculation as above involves 
reworking of NFE proportionately in th e ratio of revenue generated by 
various units. DC SEEPZ Mumbai replied (April 2022) a reminder dated 
25.03.2022 has been issued to the unit for submission of clarification. 
In case of M/s. D Ltd., Mumbai and M/s. E Ltd, Telangana, the Department 
has accepted the findings. 
4.9 Instances of irregular sanction of Duty Drawback 
As per Rule 30(8) read with 24(3) of the SEZ Rules, 2006, drawback or any 
other similar benefit under the Customs and Central Excise Duties Drawback 
Rules, 2017, as amended from time to time, against supply of goods by DTA 
supplier shall be admissible where payments for the supply are made from 
the Foreign Currency Account of the FTWZ unit. 
The Specified Officer (SO), M/s. B1  SEZ, Andhra Pradesh sanctioned duty 
drawback to DTA agencies on Bills of Export to FTWZ under Section 74 of the 

Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
 
56 
 
Customs Act 1962 read with Re -export of Imported Goods (Drawback of 
Customs Duties) Rules 1995, in four cases amounting to ₹0.82 crore as 
detailed below: 
Table: 4.2     (₹ in lakh) 
Name of the 
FTWZ unit 
DTA 
Agencies 
Bill of Export No. and date Amount of Drawback 
Sanctioned 
M/s. F Ltd. M/s. G Ltd 189 dated 29/12/2016 30.76 
190 dated 29/12/16 1.93 
191 dated 29/12/16 2.32 
M/s. H ltd. 98 dated 20/06/17 47.35 
  Total 82.36 
It was seen that Rule 30(8), read with Rule 24(3) of SEZ Rules 2006 , was not 
complied as the Bills of Export were filed by the FTWZ unit on behalf of DTA 
agencies and there was no payment to DTA agencies from the Foreign 
Currency Account which resulted in irregular sanction of Duty Drawback. 
DoC stated (March 2022) that the goods were initially imported into India 
(DTA) and later exported to the FTWZ unit and therefrom exported out of 
country. The duties paid at the time of import have been sanctioned in terms 
of Section 74 of the Customs Act, 1962 (i.e. Re -Export of Duty paid 
goods) after re-export of the same out of India and receipt of the f oreign 
currency. The FTWZ unit in this case is a service unit that collects service 
charges only in foreign currency and is not responsible for the transaction 
between the exporter and buyer–importer of the foreign country. Therefore, 
receiving the transac ted amount in foreign currency through the FTWZ 
service unit Account does not arise.  
The reply of the DoC is not acceptable since as per Rules 30(8) and 24(3), of 
SEZ Rules, 2006, drawback or any other similar benefit against supply of 
goods by DTA supplier is admissible only when payments for such supply are 
made from the Foreign Currency Account of the FTWZ unit.  Further, it is 
pertinent to mention that there is no provision either in the SEZ Act, 2005 or 
in the SEZ Rules, 2006 to sanction drawback to clients of FTWZ units. 
4.10 Performance of Free Trade Warehousing Zones (FTWZs)  
Section 5(1) of SEZ Act, 2005, provides that the Central Government, while 
notifying any area as a SEZ or an additional area to be included in the SEZ and 
discharging its functions under this Act, shall be guided by the following, 
namely: 
i) Generation of additional economic activity 
ii) Promotion of exports of goods and services 
iii) Promotion of investment from domestic and foreign sources 
iv) Creation of employment opportunities 

Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
57 
 
v) Development of infrastructure facilities 
Comparison of exports/investments/ employment/NFE provided by the 
developers in their QPRs/HPRs filed for the period 2015 -16 to 2019-20 and 
APRs submitted by FTWZ units to DC offices as part of their monitoring 
mechanism with the projections made by them while applying for the fresh 
or renewal of LoA, revealed the following: 
4.10.1 Shortage of exports vis-à-vis projections 
Audit scrutiny of APRs of  selected FTWZ units during the period 2015 -16 to 
2019-20 revealed that out of 44 test checked FTWZ units, 29 units did not 
achieve the projected export target. The shortfall of achievement ranges 
from ₹ 0.12 crore (one per cent) to ₹ 346.15 crore (100 per cent). 
Out of the 29 units, 22 units had a shortfall of more than 50 per cent of the 
projected export target (Annexure 4.4) 
4.10.2 Shortfall in actual investment vis-à-vis projected investment  
It was noticed in respect of all selected developers of the operational FTWZs 
that the total investment fell short of the Projected Investment as under: 
Table: 4.3 
Audit scrutiny of applications for setting up of units in FTWZs and their latest 
Performance Reports revealed that out of the 44 test checked FTWZ units, in 
6 cases (Annexure 4.5), the amount of actual investment fell short of the 
projections. The shortfall ranges from ₹ 0.21 crore (17.14 per cent) to ₹ 5.41 
crore (100 per cent). 
4.10.3 Generation of employment 
The half yearly  and quarterly progress report of the FTWZ developers does 
not capture the actual employment, due to which the DC Offices cannot 
monitor the actual employment generated against projected employment in 
the case of developer. 
 
 
 
 
S. 
No. 
State Developer 
Name 
Investment (₹ in crore) Percentage 
of Shortfall Projected Actual Shortfall 
1. Maharashtra M/s. I Ltd 1,456 126.73 1,329.27 91.30 
2. Uttar 
Pradesh 
M/s. J Ltd 14.45 8.50 5.95 41.18 
3. Tamil Nadu M/s. K Ltd 1,450 604.85 845.15 58.29 
4. Ahmedabad M/s. L Ltd 1.20 0.60 0.60 50 


Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
 
58 
 
Table: 4.4 
S. 
No. 
State Developer 
Name 
Employment 
Projected Actual 
1. Maharashtra M/s. I Ltd 36,000 Actual Employment 
figures are not captured 
in Half Yearly/Quarterly 
Progress report 
2. Uttar Pradesh M/s. J Ltd 220 
3. Tamil Nadu M/s. K Ltd 50 
4. Ahmedabad M/s. L Ltd 3,000 
In case of the selected FTWZ units, Audit examination disclosed that out of 
44 FTWZ units, 22 units (Annexure 4.6)  failed to achieve the targeted 
employment generation. The shortfall ranges from nine employees (10  per 
cent) to 120 employees (100 per cent).  
4.10.4 Shortfall in Net Foreign Exchange earnings (NFE) vis-à-vis 
projections 
Audit scrutiny of APRs of 44 selected FTWZ units which completed the block 
period during 2015 -16 to 2019 -20 revealed that in respect of 24 units 
(Annexure 4.7), actual Net Foreign Exchange (NFE) earned during the Block 
had fallen short of projections made by the units. The percentage of shortfall 
in respect of realisation of NFE by the 24 units ranged from ₹ 0.80 crore (0.94 
per cent) to ₹ 5.85 crore (232.04 per cent).  
DoC stated (March 2022) in reply to para 4.10.1 to 4.10.4 that Rule 19 (6B) 
of SEZ Rules, 2006 was amended (March 2019) which considered the criteria 
of export performance and the employment generation in the last block 
period. In view of the amen dments made in the SEZ Act and Rules, at the 
time of renewal of LoA, due emphasis is accorded to the efforts made and 
the results achieved or status of the criteria, including export performance 
and employment generated during the last block. Further, it is also pertinent 
to note that no penal provision is prescribed in the SEZ law on non -
achievement of projected business plans and the said position is aligned with 
the larger export facilitation mandate of SEZs. 
The fact, however, remains that though projections are not binding, they do 
serve as benchmarks for assessing a unit’s performance. No records were 
available to show that current operations were being pegged with the 
intended scale of operations and consequently no attempts were on record 
regarding corrective action initiated to understand the possible reasons for 
the shortfall so as to realise the full potential of FTWZs. Absence of any 
monitoring or study in order to redress possible reasons for the shortfall 
makes the “projected figures” redundant. Hence, audit is of the view that the 
Department needs to analyse the reasons for such shortfalls as part of 
monitoring the performance of FTWZ and take possible steps to improve the 
same. 


Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
59 
 
Internal Control and Monitoring Mechanism 
The SEZ Act 2005 and SEZ Rule 2006 provides for monitoring of developers 
and units under SEZ through the Unit Approval Committee under the 
chairmanship of Development Commissioner. The performance of the 
units/Developers is being monitored annually through  the APRs in the case 
of units and HPRs/QPRs in the case of Developers. Based on such review, the 
DCs may take corrective measures to enable the defaulting units to fulfil their 
obligations as per the SEZ Act/Rules. For any violation, the DC is empowered 
to initiate action under the Foreign Trade (Development and Regulation) Act, 
1992, which includes issue of SCN, levy of penalty, cancellation of the Letter 
of Permission (LoP), etc. The applicable Customs duty forgone on such 
violations is to be recovered by the Department. 
Audit verified criteria such as adherence to prescribed procedures for 
internal/special audit, system of data management, accounting, and internal 
reporting to assess the effectiveness of internal controls and found the 
following deficiencies: 
4.11 Non-Conduct of audit in FTWZs 
Rule 79 prescribes (with effect from August 2016) that all the authorized 
operations under the SEZ Act 2005 and related transactions in SEZs and units 
in the SEZ shall be audited by the Customs officers from a panel drawn by the 
Jurisdictional Development Commissioner in consultation with the 
Jurisdictional Chief Commissioner of Customs and Central Excise. 
No audit had been conducted during 2015-16 to 2019-20 by the offices of DC 
located at Ahmedabad, Bengaluru, Hyderabad and Mumbai. 
DoC stated (March 2022) that audit is being regularly conducted in one unit 
(M/s.C1 Mumbai). In respect of KASEZ, Ahmedabad, Chief Commissioners 
Office (CCO) Customs is yet to empanel officers for conducting audit. No 
audit ha d been undertaken in CSEZ, Bengaluru and audit got delayed in 
Hyderabad. In DC SEEPZ, Mumbai a  proposal was submitted (Feb 2021) to 
audit FTWZ units under rule 79 of SEZ Rules, 2006 and audit of M/s.C1 FTWZ 
is still under way (April 2022) and a letter was issued by the DC office to the 
Commissioner of Customs (Audit) to expedite the matter. 
Failure to conduct internal audit as prescribed in the rules is fraught with the 
risk of undetected misrepresentation of facts by FTWZ developers/units. 

Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
 
60 
 
Recommendation 8. Ministry should ensure that periodic audit of the SEZ 
units by Customs officers in accordance with Rule 79 of the SEZ Rules is 
conducted in all SEZs. 
4.12 Review of Annual Performance Reports (APRs) 
Rule 22(3) of SEZ Rule 2006, stipulates that the units shall submit APR in Form 
I, to the Development Commissioner and the Development Commissioner 
shall place the same before the Approval Committee for consideration. Rule 
54 read with Annexure I states that the annual review of performance of unit 
and compliance with the conditions of approval shall be done by the UAC on 
the basis of APRs which needs to be certified by an independent Chartered 
Accountant and submitted before the end of the second quarter of the 
following Financial Year. 
As per condition 7 of BLUT (Form H) furnished by the unit, in case s where 
APR is not submitted within 180 days from the close of the Financial Year in 
the prescribed form or in the case of submissi on of wrong information, the 
permission granted for carrying out the authorized operations may be 
withdrawn and/or permission for further imports and sales in the DTA may 
be stopped. Monitoring of performance is done by the UAC based on APRs 
and the units with Negative NFE for 1st and 2nd year are to be kept on a watch 
list. SCN needs to be issued at the end of 3 rd year and penal action is to be 
initiated at the end of 5th year.  
The deficiencies observed in this regard are discussed below: 
4.12.1 Failure to file APRs 
In DC SEEPZ, Mumbai, it was observed that two units failed to file APRs within 
the stipulated time as tabulated below: 
Table: 4.5 
Name of the unit State APR not filed for FY Remarks 
M/s. M Ltd Maharashtra 2018-19 No action was 
initiated by the 
Department. 
M/s. N Ltd Maharashtra 2015-16 
DoC stated (March 2022) that DC SEEPZ, Mumbai has issued SCN to the 
concerned units for their failure to file APRs. 
4.12.2 Delay in submission of APRs 
Abnormal Delay in filing of APRs was noticed in the case of seven FTWZ units 
out of 44 test checked units (three units in Andhra Pradesh, three units in 
Karnataka and one unit in Telangana). The delay in filing APRs ranged from 
five days to 1,450 days (Annexure 4.8).  


Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
61 
 
DC Office, Telangana replied (April 2021) that a SCN was issued and 
adjudicated imposing penalty of ₹ 25,000 for non -submission of APR , 
certified by the Chartered Accountant, within the stipulated time. DC Office, 
Andhra Pradesh replied (Feb 2021) that the observation is noted and would 
be complied with in future. 
DoC stated (March 2022) that SCNs were issued for delay for all the three 
units and adjudicated with penalty.  The reply did not relate to the audit 
finding in respect of three units in Karnataka 
4.12.3 Instance of acceptance of non-certified APRs 
In DC SEZ, Karnataka, it was observed that two APRs were submitted without 
being certified by an Independent Chartered Accountant. DoC stated (March 
2022) that the units have now submitted CA Certified APRs for the respective 
Financial Years. 
4.12.4 Submission of revised APRs 
In DC SEEPZ, Mumbai one unit submitted APR for FY 2013 -14 in June 2014 
showing NFE of ₹0.06 crore. Although the APR was filed for FY 2013 -14, a 
SCN was issued calling for APRs from 2012-13 to 2016-17. The unit submitted 
a revised APR for FY 2013-14 in December 2017 showing a different NFE at ₹ 
0.49 crore. Though there is no provision in the extant rule to file revised APR, 
the same was accepted by the DC office. 
DoC stated (March 2022) that appropriate action against the unit for 
submission of revised APRs is being initiated as per the provisions of the SEZ 
Act 2005 and SEZ Rules 2006. 
Recommendation 9. The Department need to implement 100 per cent  
digital submission of Annual Performance Reports in the case of units and 
HPRs/QPRs in respect of developers and not allowing, any manual 
submission. This will promote transparency and evolve effective 
monitoring. 
4.13 Instances of failure to submit registered lease deed by FTWZ units 
Rule 18(2)(ii) provides that a copy of the registered lease deed shall be 
furnished to the Development Commissioner concerned within six months 
from the issuance of the Letter of Approval and failure to do so, the Approval 
Committee may take action to withdraw the Letter of Approval after giving 
an opportunity of being heard. 

Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
 
62 
 
It was noticed in DC SEEPZ, Maharashtra out of the 56 LoA issued, only four 
lease deeds were registered. 
DoC in respect of DC SEEPZ stated (Ma rch 2022) that letters were issued in 
2017 to all the unit holders for execution of registered lease deed and the 
same was intimated to the developer too.   It is understood from the 
developer that 30 per cent of the units have executed the agreement and for 
the rest, this office is continuously following up with the units and developer.  
4.14 Delay in disposal of applications received for setting up of units  
Rule 18(1) prescribes that the Unit Approval Committee shall approve or 
approve with modification or reject a proposal within 15 days of its receipt. 
It was  observed in DC SEEPZ, Maharashtra that in respect of 52 out of 62 
applications received for setting up of units in FTWZ s, there were delay 
ranging from 2 days to 100 days in disposal. 
It was observed in DC MEPZ, Tamil Nadu in 13 out of 15 applications received 
for setting up of units in FTWZ, there were delays ranging from one day to 24 
days in disposal. (Annexure 4.9).  
DoC stated (March 2022) that on receipt of the proposals, 
deficiencies/discrepancies, if any noticed are conveyed to the applicant. Only 
on receipt of complete documents and relevant permissions, the subjected 
proposal is placed before the Approval committee. 
The fact remains that delay in disposal was observed in a large percentage of 
applications received. 
4.15 Delay in assessment of Bills of Entry 
In DC SEEPZ, Maharashtra, analysis of SEZ Online data revealed 328 BsE filed 
during the period 2015 -16 to 2019 -20 were either pending assessment or 
assessed but not yet out of charge. The delay ranged from 258 days to 1,788 
days (Annexure 4.10).  
DoC stated (March 2022) that since all the BsE are 2-5 years old, the present 
status of the BsE is being ascertained from the concerned units to minimise 
the pendency. 
4.16 Failure to monitor return of goods removed temporarily out of FTWZ 
Rule 51 of SEZ Rules 2006 stipulates that the temporarily removed goods 
shall be brought back to the SEZ within 120 days from removal or within the 


Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
63 
 
extended time where such extension granted. Failure to bring back the goods 
makes the units liable for payment of duty on such goods. 
An analysis of data available  in the SEZ Online system in DC SEEPZ, 
Maharashtra revealed that during the period 2017-18 to 2019-20, in respect 
of 11 cases (Annexure 4.11), although goods were temporarily removed out 
of FTWZ for display, repairs and others, these goods have not come back to 
the FTWZ till date even after a lapse ranging from 266 to 1,329 days from the 
date of removal. Details of any extension granted, or duty levied were not 
available online. Department should watch and monitor the return of goods 
temporarily removed as there is a risk of disposing off the goods in the local 
market without payment of duty. 
DoC stated (March 2022) that since all the TR (Temporary Removal of Goods) 
are 1-4 years old, the present status of the TR is being ascertained from the 
concerned units to close the pendency. 
4.17 Instances of erroneous transactions made by trading/service units in 
Indian Rupee (INR) 
As per Proviso under Rule 18(5) of SEZ Rules 2006, all transactions by a unit 
in FTWZ or unit in FTWZ set up in other SEZ shall only be in convertible foreign 
currency.  The MoCI, Government of India (GoI), also clarified in Instruction 
No.6026, dated 6 July 2010 that FTWZ can hold the goods on behalf of foreign 
suppliers and buyers and DTA supplier and buyer as well, subject to 
fulfilment of provisions made in Rule 18(5) of SEZ Rules, 2006. 
In case of two units in DC B1 SEZ, Andhra Pradesh and one unit in DC VSEZ, 
Telangana, it was  observed from the Sales and Purchases (available on SEZ 
Online) done on behalf of their clients during the period 2015-16 to 2019-20 
those 1,676 sales transactions were made to DTA, EOU and STPI having 
money value of ₹416.08 crore, which was in ‘INR’.  Fu rther, one unit also 
made DTA procurements in respect of 17 transactions with a value of ₹ 0.18 
crore as detailed below: 
Table: 4.6  
   
 (₹ in crore) 
Name of the 
FTWZ/SEZ 
Name of 
the Unit 
 
No. of Purchase 
transactions made in ‘DTA’ Value  No. of Sales 
transactions in ‘DTA’ 
Value 
 
B1 SEZ P. Ltd. 
Andhra Pradesh 
F Ltd - - 1,666 415.68 
O Ltd - - 1 0.01 
M/s. A Ltd E Ltd 17 0.18 9 0.38 
Total  17 0.18 1,676 416.08 
 
26Ins
truction No. 60/F.No. D.12/4/2010-SEZ 
dated 06.07.2010 
 


Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
 
64 
 
The above transactions in ‘INR’ by Trading/Service FTWZ units were in 
contravention to Rule 18(5) of the SEZ Rules 2006 which specifically 
stipulated that all the transactions should be in convertible foreign currency 
only. 
DoC in respect of B1 Ltd. stated (March 2022) that cases where DTA importer 
import the goods supplied by a foreign supplier and further sells it to another 
DTA buyer in India, in such a scenario, while the receipt/payment of the 
consideration between the foreign supplier and DTA importer would be in 
forex, the receipt/payment of the consideration between the DTA importer 
and DTA buyer would be in INR only because the transaction is between two 
DTA entities.   It is pertinent to mention that the Service Charges paid to the 
FTWZ unit by their Clients, irrespective of whether they are foreign Clients or 
DTA Clients, is in Foreign Exchange only.   In respect of M/s. A Ltd., VSEZ has 
already taken necessary action 
The reply of DoC in respect of B1 SEZ P. Ltd. Andhra Pradesh is not acceptable 
as Rule 18(5) of SEZ Rules, 2006 allows FTWZ units to hold goods on account 
of their foreign clients and DTA clients subject to the condition that all 
transactions would only be in convertible foreign currency, as also reiterated 
in MoCI’s instruction (July 2010).  
4.18 Incomplete information on SEZ Online 
Rule 47 of the SEZ Rules, 2006 lays down the conditions subject to which 
goods may be removed  from a SEZ/FTWZ to the DTA. Rule 47(1) provides 
that a unit may sell goods and services including rejects or wastes or scraps 
or remnants or broken diamonds or by -products arising during the 
manufacturing process or in connection therewith, in the DTA on payment 
of Customs duties under Section 30. 
In DC SEEPZ, Maharashtra, analysis of reports generated on SEZ Online in 
respect of two units 27 revealed that during the period 2017 -18 to 2019 -20, 
the units had made several clearances to ‘DTA’ without payment of duty. The 
report generated indicated duty as payable; however, no duty was paid, 
whereas the column on exemptions claimed was also blank. Reasons for non-
payment of duty were not available on-line. 
DoC stated (March 2022) that letters have been issued to the units (June 
2021) followed by reminders during February/March 2022. It was also stated 
that certain BsE has been mistakenly ‘Assessed with Duty foregone’ instead 
 
27M/s. P Ltd and M/s. M Ltd. 
 

Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
65 
 
of ‘Assessed with Duty Paid’ in the SEZ Online system, but the duty has been 
paid before providing Out of Charge in the system, as evidenced by the Duty 
challan endorsed at the time of clearance. A few BsE were randomly verified 
and it was found that exemption notification had bee n mentioned in the 
randomly selected BsE. As the BsE are more than 3 years old and it is a work 
in progress to track each case. 
4.19 Conclusion 
FTWZs are a special category of SEZ introduced as Foreign Trade Policy (FTP) 
2004-2009. Even after 14 years, only seven FTWZs have been notified as of 
March 2020. Out of the seven notified FTWZs only four are in operation. It 
was noticed that the SEZ Act 2005 and S EZ Rules 2006 contain no separate 
guidelines/policies or any specific rules in respect of FTWZ. Further, the 
Department has not conducted any evaluation/review of the scheme, to 
determine why enough private players are not showing interest in the 
scheme, and accordingly appropriate policy changes, if required, to attract 
developers for setting up more FTWZs. 
Government issued instructions in July 2010 allowing FTWZ units to hold 
goods on behalf of Domestic Tariff Area (DTA) suppliers and buyers. 
However, no  amendment was made in the SEZ Rules, 2006 which still 
stipulate that an FTWZ unit can hold goods only on account of a foreign 
supplier. 
Audit noticed instances of short levy of duty on domestic clearance due to 
adoption of incorrect tariff value; i ncorrect calculation of NFE due to non -
consideration of other outflow (like royalty payment, business support fee, 
technical service fee and foreign travelling expenses ); instances of irregular 
sanction of duty drawback where payments were not made from the Foreign 
Currency Account of the FTWZ unit. 
Comparison of projected targets of exports/investments/employment/NFE 
against the actual achievements showed shortfall in performance of 
developers and units. The Department needs to analyse the reasons for such 
shortfalls as part of monitoring the performance of FTWZs and take possible 
steps to improve the same. 
Rule 79 of SEZ Rules 2006 prescribes audit by the Customs Officers of all 
authorized operations and related transactions in SEZs and units in SEZs. No 
such audit was conducted by DC Offices located at Ahmedabad, Bengaluru, 
Hyderabad and Mumbai. 

Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit)
66
Review of APRs revealed instances of failure to file APRs, delay in submission 
of APRs, acceptance of non-certified APRs and submission of revised APRs 
indicating different NFE, though there is no provision in the extant rule for 
filing revised APR. 
New Delhi        (Kartikaye Mathur) 
Dated:       Principal Director (Customs) 
Countersigned 
New Delhi                      (Girish Chandra Murmu) 
Dated:   Comptroller and Auditor General of India
            8 August 2022
            8 August 2022


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURES 
 

 
 
 
 

Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
69  
 
 
Annexure 1.1 
Chief Commissionerate wise warehousing transaction 
(Reference: Para No. 1.3.1 of the report)                                       (` in crore) 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of Chief 
Commissionerate Year 
Number 
of Into 
Bond 
BEs 
Into Bond 
Assessable 
Value 
Into Bond 
Duty 
Assessed 
Number 
of Ex-
Bond 
BEs 
Ex-Bond 
Assessabl
e Value 
Ex-
Bond 
Duty 
Assess
ed 
1 Chief Commissioner 
of Customs, Delhi 
2015-16 30528 9714.47 1888.17 69068 3270.37 849.99 
2016-17 27843 7585.58 1813.03 61578 3268.02 965.33 
2017-18 14733 4934.37 1905.26 59626 3578.09 
1061.4
3 
2018-19 12446 5767.74 2651.80 70589 4169.97 
1427.6
2 
2019-20 10204 5334.73 2610.89 82140 3890.25 
1461.1
0 
2 
Chief Commissioner 
of Central Tax, 
Bhopal 
2015-16 35 29.98 6.45 9 12.86 1.28 
2016-17 53 55.18 12.62 15 30.42 5.75 
2017-18 32 64.35 13.15 22 36.08 6.79 
2018-19 30 55.35 11.52 14 26.47 5.14 
2019-20 18 14.85 3.28 11 18.35 3.38 
3 
Chief Commissioner 
of Customs, 
Mumbai Zone-I 
2015-16 2779 40893.68 2328.16 12077 40061.63 
1516.8
8 
2016-17 2661 46280.88 2346.68 10645 44825.86 
1518.8
4 
2017-18 2672 50346.26 2624.59 9106 50473.77 
1833.9
2 
2018-19 2577 72561.75 2949.29 9593 71750.27 
2335.2
8 
2019-20 2326 60305.82 2245.85 8353 59182.63 
1716.7
8 
4 
Chief Commissioner 
of Customs 
(Preventive), Patna 
2015-16 91 32.18 2.33 200 4.52 0.80 
2016-17 129 38.20 2.62 221 5.05 0.78 
2017-18 78 23.83 5.09 342 14.52 2.19 
2018-19 81 21.59 6.13 429 20.09 5.04 
2019-20 91 17.99 7.07 533 17.41 6.13 
5 
Chief Commissioner 
of GST & Customs, 
Hyderabad 
2015-16 11967 3971.61 179.71 2755 725.52 93.66 
2016-17 8177 1931.32 176.55 8184 475.50 56.45 
2017-18 1863 560.77 189.46 14724 435.63 78.83 
2018-19 1574 474.76 192.30 7879 408.31 83.49 
2019-20 1480 441.05 222.79 4052 328.53 64.14 
6 
Chief Commissioner 
of Customs & 
Central Taxes, 
Meerut 
2015-16 2315 1636.40 283.93 2401 1249.41 127.33 
2016-17 3152 1965.07 360.80 2814 1532.34 176.61 
2017-18 2158 1885.09 403.35 3174 1365.50 280.63 
2018-19 2001 1963.43 560.99 3262 2235.55 565.21 


Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
 
70  
 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of Chief 
Commissionerate Year 
Number 
of Into 
Bond 
BEs 
Into Bond 
Assessable 
Value 
Into Bond 
Duty 
Assessed 
Number 
of Ex-
Bond 
BEs 
Ex-Bond 
Assessabl
e Value 
Ex-
Bond 
Duty 
Assess
ed 
2019-20 1637 1410.45 410.06 2899 1336.04 333.07 
7 
Chief Commissioner 
of Customs, 
Mumbai Zone-II 
2015-16 38432 24503.76 5400.14 55078 14168.64 
3163.8
1 
2016-17 30389 20142.06 5849.38 75379 14628.65 
3616.8
5 
2017-18 27680 21408.83 7266.04 90225 18171.12 
4802.2
7 
2018-19 27581 26476.74 10491.95 86645 23254.08 
6003.1
1 
2019-20 25565 24944.96 9987.30 84098 22286.75 
5121.7
5 
8 
Pr. Commissioner 
of Customs, 
Chennai 
2015-16 32084 42069.22 4373.73 43289 32834.07 
2887.6
6 
2016-17 24842 42170.38 4835.04 47908 37665.93 
3382.2
1 
2017-18 21957 45813.59 6390.98 48766 44337.67 
4036.0
4 
2018-19 24170 59420.16 9526.45 54484 57538.09 
5235.1
3 
2019-20 22689 51359.73 7949.68 51812 49719.28 
4316.2
5 
9 
Chief Commissioner 
of Customs, 
Ahmedabad 
2015-16 10931 25233.88 6207.86 46280 20442.62 
3080.2
5 
2016-17 10902 27504.67 7260.42 51171 22794.43 
2984.9
9 
2017-18 11066 65063.12 13615.10 44310 61840.19 
6266.2
3 
2018-19 12221 51546.51 20019.17 44894 48540.76 
9593.9
0 
2019-20 13629 50499.97 19599.78 47371 48091.39 
8150.1
2 
10 
Chief Commissioner 
of Customs, 
Mumbai Zone-III 
2015-16 27312 13339.59 905.76 3976 1886.04 304.56 
2016-17 14151 8915.68 934.71 3346 2351.35 406.64 
2017-18 8522 8976.24 1348.54 4679 5463.25 997.76 
2018-19 11791 8808.68 1459.67 6741 2950.41 595.90 
2019-20 13858 9792.29 1684.64 7911 3079.08 620.16 
11 
Chief Commissioner 
of CGST & Customs, 
Thiruvananthapura
m 
2015-16 4238 3027.43 600.04 2220 1208.92 236.54 
2016-17 2897 2294.11 519.40 2399 1627.95 224.72 
2017-18 1621 1703.76 498.45 1887 1489.99 259.02 
2018-19 1551 1955.63 578.07 2247 1791.97 328.16 
2019-20 2213 1670.45 523.14 2298 1467.89 265.60 
12 Chief Commissioner 
of Customs, Kolkata 
2015-16 3105 6787.48 932.86 2657 1576.75 325.72 
2016-17 3263 4817.79 1624.26 2581 3181.13 307.42 
2017-18 1683 3083.53 1040.17 2394 3145.62 501.66 
2018-19 1166 4980.80 1880.01 2499 4635.64 688.49 

Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
71  
 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of Chief 
Commissionerate Year 
Number 
of Into 
Bond 
BEs 
Into Bond 
Assessable 
Value 
Into Bond 
Duty 
Assessed 
Number 
of Ex-
Bond 
BEs 
Ex-Bond 
Assessabl
e Value 
Ex-
Bond 
Duty 
Assess
ed 
2019-20 1402 7837.85 3248.47 2899 7465.78 931.13 
13 
Chief Commissioner 
of Customs, 
Bengaluru 
2015-16 93071 46610.43 1439.63 19432 33620.91 677.26 
2016-17 46152 37666.80 1355.89 112072 31378.81 847.76 
2017-18 14931 37032.79 1688.02 108268 37751.63 
1019.0
9 
2018-19 12440 51706.04 2420.89 64243 50097.95 
1225.5
0 
2019-20 11289 38408.17 2263.29 61914 38755.33 
1030.2
5 
14 
Chief Commissioner 
of CGST, 
Vishakhapatnam 
2015-16 4479 32542.52 2722.04 4839 27912.91 944.27 
2016-17 3443 36450.47 3375.58 7517 33937.45 
1428.3
7 
2017-18 3598 39491.16 4941.58 8736 37172.94 
1786.4
5 
2018-19 3322 49445.11 6571.68 9888 48575.91 
2295.1
2 
2019-20 3423 41342.25 6184.69 8741 37677.95 
1426.5
7 
15 
Chief Commissioner 
of Customs, 
Bhubaneswar 
2015-16 125 42409.33 91.51 130 41797.77 97.32 
2016-17 154 58311.07 125.78 154 57431.82 125.07 
2017-18 149 68596.91 135.04 145 67529.85 133.63 
2018-19 1 63.14 6.47 8 2855.43 5.31 
2019-20 15 179.50 35.97 14 113.14 20.61 
16 
Chief Commissioner 
of GST & Customs, 
Guwahati 
2015-16 0   0   
2016-17 0   0   
2017-18 0   0   
2018-19 0   0   
2019-20 0   0   
17 
Chief Commissioner 
of Customs 
(Preventive), 
Tiruchirappalli. 
2015-16 2313 14385.44 2883.77 3847 13235.91 
1336.4
3 
2016-17 2131 14640.33 2973.60 4023 13829.19 
1281.4
6 
2017-18 3005 17811.39 2755.38 4107 12347.38 
1196.3
9 
2018-19 2662 5651.07 1984.48 4480 5164.27 789.56 
2019-20 2318 3850.80 1668.65 4369 3844.08 671.69 
18 Chief Commissioner 
of CGST, Pune 
2015-16 1437 1071.70 166.24 3385 588.01 103.01 
2016-17 1236 856.28 164.63 3713 670.61 101.79 
2017-18 894 1265.34 256.58 2475 1170.95 181.42 
2018-19 714 815.21 263.66 2001 901.13 146.36 
2019-20 602 431.84 122.42 1708 464.79 97.01 
19 2015-16 248 96.00 17.61 223 41.19 10.22 
2016-17 329 228.98 30.34 321 140.99 19.29 

Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
 
72 
 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of Chief 
Commissionerate Year 
Number 
of Into 
Bond 
BEs 
Into Bond 
Assessable 
Value 
Into Bond 
Duty 
Assessed 
Number 
of Ex-
Bond 
BEs 
Ex-Bond 
Assessabl
e Value 
Ex-
Bond 
Duty 
Assess
ed 
Chief Commissioner 
of Customs 
(Preventive),Delhi 
2017-18 204 94.45 21.64 244 59.01 12.63 
2018-19 169 133.76 46.31 267 110.54 34.40 
2019-20 205 150.12 69.81 558 160.16 63.56 
20 Chief Commissioner 
of Customs, Nagpur 
2015-16 1430 1645.70 319.34 3839 1380.39 226.85 
2016-17 1318 1195.97 254.69 3208 966.58 168.62 
2017-18 786 576.37 152.88 1784 546.27 120.99 
2018-19 374 415.70 111.97 729 371.96 74.47 
2019-20 241 143.29 41.50 573 200.17 42.83 
 
  

Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
73 
 
Annexure 3.1 
Assessment of extent of digitisation of records of individual warehouses 
(Reference: Para No. 3.2.1 of the report) 
Sl. 
No. 
Customs 
Commissionerate 
Number of  
warehouses 
Type of 
warehouse Irregularity 
1 Ahmedabad 7 Private & 
Special 
Non-maintenance of records 
in digital form and non 
obtaining of digital signature. 
2 Jodhpur 2 Private & 
Special 
Non-maintenance of records 
in digital form. 
3 NCH Mangaluru 4 Public & Private Returns were filed manually. 
4 ACC, Bengaluru 20 Special Returns were filed manually. 
5 Ludhiana 12 Public, Private & 
Special 
Non-maintenance of records 
in digital form. 
6 Chennai III 17 Public, Private & 
Special 
Non-maintenance of records 
in digital form, absence of 
audit trail and non obtaining 
of digital signature 
7 Chennai VII 5 Special 
Non-maintenance of records 
in digital form, absence of 
audit trail and non obtaining 
of digital signature 
8 Cochin 1  Returns were filed manually. 
9 ACC Export, NCH, 
Delhi 13 Special & Public 
Non-maintenance of records 
in digital form and thus 
absence of audit trail. 
10 ICD Patparganj & 
other ICDs , Delhi 4 Private 
Non-maintenance of records 
in digital form and thus 
absence of audit trail. 
11 Airport & General, 
New Delhi 15 Special 
Improper maintenance of 
stock records in Form A. 
Digital signature was not 
obtained 
12 Hyderabad 1 Special Non-maintenance of records 
in digital form. 
13 Vijayawada 
(Preventive) 2 Special Non-maintenance of records 
in digital form. 
14 Lucknow 3 Public & Special 
Non-maintenance of records 
in digital form and non 
obtaining of digital signature. 
15 NCH, Zone I, Mumbai 2 Public & Special Improper maintenance of 
stock records in Form A 
16 JNCH, Zone II, 
Mumbai 6 Public Improper maintenance of 
stock records in Form A 
17 ACC, Zone III, 
Mumbai 7 Special 
Non-maintenance of records 
in Form A & Form B and 
manual filing of returns. 
 Total 121   
 
  


Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
 
74 
 
Annexure 3.2 
Monitoring of submission of monthly returns 
(Reference: Para No. 3.2.4 of the report) 
Sl. 
No. 
Customs 
Commissionerate 
Number of 
warehouse Irregularity 
1 Ahmedabad 2 Non submission of monthly returns in Form A & 
Form B. 
2 Jodhpur 4 Non submission of monthly returns in Form A & 
Form B. 
3 ACC, Bengaluru 2 Non submission of monthly returns in Form A & 
Form B regularly. 
4 BCC, Bangalore 7 Non submission of monthly returns in Form A & 
Form B regularly. 
5 Chennai III 18 Non submission of monthly returns in Form A & 
Form B regularly. 
6 Hyderabad 8 Non submission of monthly returns in Form A & 
Form B regularly. 
7 Visakhapatnam 4 Non submission of monthly returns in Form A & 
Form B regularly. 
8 Vijayawada 
(Preventive) 2 Non submission of monthly returns in Form A & 
Form B regularly. 
9 Bhubaneswar 2 Non submission of monthly returns in Form A & 
Form B regularly. 
10 Kolkata (Port) 6 Monthly return for September 2019 was 
submitted with a delay of 5 days. 
11 Lucknow 3 Non submission of monthly returns in Form A & 
Form B. 
12 Ludhiana 1 Delay in filing of monthly returns in 9 instances, 
ranging from 1 to 40 days. 
 Total 59  
  


Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
75 
 
Annexure 3.3 
Absence of standard operating procedure for antecedent verification 
(Reference: Para No. 3.3.1 of the report) 
Sl. 
No. 
Customs 
Commissionerate 
Name of 
Warehouse Irregularities 
1 BCC, Bengaluru 3 
Antecedent verification was not done after issue of 
licence/No action was initiated against the licensee on 
the basis of adverse antecedent report of DRI. 
2 NCH, Bengaluru 1 
Antecedent verification was not done after issue of 
licence. 
3 Ludhiana 7 Clearances were not received from the investigating 
agencies nor department pursued the matter. 
4 ACC Export, NCH, 
Delhi 32 Delay in antecedent verification/Antecedent 
verification was not done after issue of licence. 
5 Airport & General, 
New Delhi 4 Delay in antecedent verification/Antecedent 
verification was not done after issue of licence. 
6 ICD Patparganj & 
other ICDs , Delhi 3 
Antecedent verification was not done after issue of 
licence. 
7 Hyderabad 2 Clearances were not received from the investigating 
agencies nor department pursued the matter. 
8 Vijayawada 
(Preventive) 3 
Antecedent verification was not done after issue of 
licence. 
9 Kolkata (Port) 3 
Antecedent verification was not done after issue of 
licence/No action was initiated against the licensee on 
the basis of adverse antecedent report of DRI. 
 Total 58  
  


Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
 
76 
 
Annexure 3.4 
Non Capturing of details in the application for license 
(Reference: Para No. 3.3.2 of the report) 
Sl. 
No. 
Customs 
Commissionerate 
Number of 
Warehouse 
Type of 
Warehouse Irregularity 
1 NCH, Bengaluru 1 Private 
The lease agreement of the 
warehouse had expired since 
December 2018. Thus, goods were 
stored in a place where the licensee 
had no legal right/ ownership on the 
land. 
2 ACC Export, NCH, 
Delhi 13 Public, Private & 
Special 
Part IV of the license application 
was not captured/ incomplete/ 
License was granted without 
verification of validity of property 
holding rights in Part II of the 
application form. 
3 Airport & General, 
New Delhi 14 Special Part IV of the license application 
was not captured/ incomplete. 
4 ICD Patparganj & 
other ICDs , Delhi 2 Private  & Public Part IV of the license application 
was not captured/ incomplete. 
5 Port, Kolkata 6 Public, Private & 
Special 
Part IV of the license application 
was not captured/ incomplete. 
 Total 36   
 
  


Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
77 
 
Annexure 3.5 
Delay in issue of Warehousing license 
(Reference: Para No. 3.3.4 of the report) 
Sl No. Customs Commissionerate Number of Warehouses Delay in days 
1 Ahmedabad 7 8 to 260 
2 Jodhpur 2 35 to 80 
3 NCH, Mangaluru 1 219 
4 BCC, Bengaluru 8 12 to 117 
5 Ludhiana 3 7 to 76 
6 Chennai III 1 424 
7 ACC Export, NCH, Delhi 6 13 to 75 
8 Airport & General, New Delhi 1 50 
9 ICD Patparganj & other ICDs , Delhi 1 97 
10 Vijayawada (Preventive) 5 15 to 87 
11 Bhubaneshwar 1 149 
12 Kolkata (Port) 5 30 to 440 
 Total 41  
  


Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
 
78 
 
Annexure 3.6 
Excess holding of goods in warehouses 
(Reference: Para No. 3.4.2 of the report) 
Sr. 
No. 
Customs 
Commissionerate 
Name of 
Warehouse 
Month Excess in duty 
limit 
(` in crore) 
1 Ahmedabad A1 Jul 2016 & Jan 2019 1.29 to 2.19 
2 Hyderabad A2 Jan 2018 to June 2018 0.61 to 5.14 
3 Kolkata (Port) A3 Feb 2020 0.04 
4 JNCH, Zone II, 
Mumbai A4 July-Aug 2015 & Jan 2016 NA 
5 JNCH, Zone II, 
Mumbai A5 Jul 2018 to Mar 2020 20.61 to 44.07 
6 NCH, Zone I, 
Mumbai A6 Sept 2016 to Mar 2020 0.42 to 68.89 
7 NCH, Zone I, 
Mumbai A7 May & June 2019 0.07 
8 ACC Export, NCH, 
Delhi A8 Nov 2016 to Jan 2019 0.02 to 11.54 
 
 
  


Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
79 
 
Annexure 3.7 
Non-payment/excess payment of MOT charges 
(Reference: Para No. 3.4.3 of the report) 
Sl 
No. 
Customs 
Commissionerate 
Name of 
the 
warehouse 
Irregularity Tax Effect 
(in `) 
1 Ahmedabad B1 MOT charges not paid by the warehouse. Not ascertainable 
2 Jaipur B2 
Audit noticed that records/registers/ files 
related to MOT charges was not maintained 
by department. 
Not ascertainable 
3 Jaipur B3 
Audit noticed that records/registers/ files 
related to MOT charges was not maintained 
by department. 
Not ascertainable 
4 Chennai VII B4 
Short payment of MOT charges in 
November 2016. Moreover, MOT was paid 
at the same rate for all the years from 2016 
to 2020. 
5,958 
5 Chennai VII B5 
Short payment of MOT charges in 
November 2016. Moreover, MOT was paid 
at the same rate for all the years from 2016 
to 2020. 
19,578 
6 Chennai VII B6 
Short payment of MOT charges in 
November 2016. Moreover, MOT was paid 
at the same rate for all the years from 2016 
to 2020. 
19,656 
7 Chennai VII B7 
Short payment of MOT charges in 
November 2016. Moreover, MOT was paid 
at the same rate for all the years from 2016 
to 2020. 
22,596 
8 Chennai VII B8 
Short payment of MOT charges in 
November 2016. Moreover, MOT was paid 
at the same rate for all the years from 2016 
to 2020. 
6,615 
9 Chennai VII B9 
Short payment of MOT charges in 
November 2016. Moreover, MOT was paid 
at the same rate for all the years from 2016 
to 2020. 
22,596 
10 Bhubaneswar B10 
No demand was raised by the department 
for Cost recovery charge/ MOT charges 
from August 2017 onwards. 
Not ascertainable 
11 ACC, Zone III, 
Mumbai B11 Excess collection of MOT charges from April 
2015 to November 2019. 3,61,880 
12 ACC, Zone III, 
Mumbai B12 Less collection of MOT charges from April 
2015 to December 2019. 25,380 
13 ACC, Zone III, 
Mumbai B13 Excess collection of MoT charges from May 
2018 to March 2020. 16,200 


Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
 
80 
 
Sl 
No. 
Customs 
Commissionerate 
Name of 
the 
warehouse 
Irregularity Tax Effect 
(in `) 
14 ACC, Zone III, 
Mumbai B14 Excess collection of MoT charges. 30,240 
 
  

Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
81 
 
Annexure 3.8 
Insufficient/deficient Solvency Certificate 
(Reference: Para No. 3.5.1 of the report) 
Sr. 
No. 
Customs 
Commissionerate 
Name of the 
Warehouse Irregularity 
1 Ahmedabad C1 
Licensee submitted Solvency Certificate 
issued by a Chartered Accounting Firm and 
not from a scheduled bank. 
2 ACC Export, NCH, 
Delhi C2 
The genuineness of the Solvency Certificate 
was not verified at the time of issue of 
license in 2018 and later on in 2020 it was 
found to be forged/fabricated. 
3 ACC Export, NCH, 
Delhi C3 
The verification of Solvency Certificate was 
done after more than two years and the 
bank intimated that they could not verify 
the genuineness of such old solvency 
certificate. 
4 ACC Export, NCH, 
Delhi C4 
The verification of Solvency Certificate was 
done after more than three years and the 
bank intimated that they could n ot confirm 
the genuineness the Solvency Certificate. 
5 Hyderabad C5 Solvency Certificate of `10 lakh was 
furnished instead of `12 crore 
6 Bhubaneswar C6 Solvency Certificate of `2.00 crore from a 
scheduled bank was not submitted. 
7 ACC, Zone III, 
Mumbai C7 
Solvency Certificate of `25 crore and 
Customs duty insurance of `70 crore were 
furnished by the licensee, however, in 
certain months duty of bonded goods 
exceeded the limit of Solvency Certificate. 
(Oct and Nov, 2017, Feb 2019 and March 
2020). 
 
  


Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
 
82 
 
Annexure 3.9 
Annual renewal of Solvency Certificate 
(Reference: Para No. 3.5.2 of the report) 
Sl 
No. 
Customs 
Commissionerate 
Name of the 
Licensee 
Date of the 
license 
Whether renewed 
annually 
1 Ahmedabad D1 05.12.2019 No 
2 Ahmedabad D2 10.06.2016 No 
3 Ahmedabad D3 01.07.2016 No 
4 Ahmedabad D4 22.01.2019 No 
5 Ahmedabad D5 07.12.2018 No 
6 Jaipur D6 03.09.2017 No 
7 ACC Export, NCH, Delhi D7 23.02.2017 No 
8 ACC Export, NCH, Delhi D8 17.08.2016 No 
9 ACC Export, NCH, Delhi D9 29.05.2018 No 
10 ACC Export, NCH, Delhi D10 06.06.2017 No 
11 ACC Export, NCH, Delhi D11 17.09.2019 No 
12 ACC Export, NCH, Delhi D12 13.12.2018 No 
13 ACC Export, NCH, Delhi D13 14.03.2019 No 
14 ACC Export, NCH, Delhi D14 10.10.2016 No 
15 ACC Export, NCH, Delhi D15 14.06.2019 No 
16 ACC Export, NCH, Delhi D16 2017 No 
17 ACC Export, NCH, Delhi D17 27.01.2016 No 
18 ACC Export, NCH, Delhi D18 02.07.2018 No 
19 ACC Export, NCH, Delhi D19 29.12.2016 No 
20 ACC Export, NCH, Delhi D20 23.05.2018 No 
21 ACC Export, NCH, Delhi D21 10.07.2017 No 
22 ACC Export, NCH, Delhi D22 01.10.2016 No 
23 ACC Export, NCH, Delhi D23 07.05.2018 No 
24 ACC Export, NCH, Delhi D24 17.10.2016 No 
25 ACC Export, NCH, Delhi D25 21.11.2016 No 
26 ACC Export, NCH, Delhi D26 16.04.2018 No 
27 ACC Export, NCH, Delhi D27 23.02.2017 No 
28 ACC Export, NCH, Delhi D28 30.08.2016 No 
29 ACC Export, NCH, Delhi D29 03.10.2016 No 
30 ACC Export, NCH, Delhi D30 24.08.2016 No 
31 ACC Export, NCH, Delhi D31 01.03.2018 No 
32 ACC Export, NCH, Delhi D32 08.08.2016 No 
33 ACC Export, NCH, Delhi D33 03.07.2017 No 
34 ACC Export, NCH, Delhi D34 29.09.2016 No 
35 ACC Export, NCH, Delhi D35 05.10.2016 No 
36 ACC Export, NCH, Delhi D36 15.02.2017 No 
37 ACC Export, NCH, Delhi D37 05.08.2016 No 
38 ACC Export, NCH, Delhi D38 28.09.2016 No 
39 ACC Export, NCH, Delhi D39 01.03.2018 No 
40 ACC Export, NCH, Delhi D40 08.11.2016 No 


Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
83 
 
Sl 
No. 
Customs 
Commissionerate 
Name of the 
Licensee 
Date of the 
license 
Whether renewed 
annually 
41 ACC Export, NCH, Delhi D41 27.11.2018 No 
42 ACC Export, NCH, Delhi D42 11.09.2015 No 
43 ACC Export, NCH, Delhi D43 23.08.2016 No 
44 Airport & General, New 
Delhi D44 05.07.2016 No 
45 ICD Patparganj & other ICDs 
, Delhi D45 22.11.2016 No 
46 Hyderabad D46 17.10.2017 No  
(Oct 2019 to March 2020) 
47 Vijayawada (Preventive) D47  No  
(Nov 2018 to Oct 2019) 
48 Vijayawada (Preventive) D48  No  
(July 2017 to March 2020) 
49 Kolkata (Port) D49 18.08.2016 No (Jan 2018 to Dec 2018) 
50 Kolkata (Port) D50 11.02.2016 No  
(Jan 2020 to Dec 2020) 
51 Kolkata (Port) D51 20.06.2016 No  
(Oct 2016 to Jan 2018) 
52 Kolkata (Port) D52 20.06.2016 No  
(May 2017 to March2019) 
 
  

Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
 
84 
 
Annexure 3.10 
Risk insurance policy 
(Reference: Para No. 3.5.3 of the report) 
S.No Customs 
Commissionerate 
Name of 
the 
warehouse 
Irregularity 
1 ACC Export, NCH, Delhi E1 Non renewal of Risk Insurance Policy 
2 Airport & General, New 
Delhi E2 Non renewal of Risk Insurance Policy 
3 ACC Export, NCH, Delhi E3 
Risk Insurance policy amount was less 
than the amount of duty involved on the 
goods. 
4 ACC Export, NCH, Delhi E4 
Risk Insurance policy amount was less 
than the amount of duty involved on the 
goods. 
5 ACC Export, NCH, Delhi E5 
Non renewal of Risk Insurance Policy & 
Risk Insurance policy amount was less 
than the amount of duty involved on the 
goods. 
6 ACC Export, NCH, Delhi E6 
Non renewal of Risk Insurance Policy & 
Risk Insurance policy amount was less 
than the amount of duty involved on the 
goods. 
7 ACC Export, NCH, Delhi E7 Non renewal of Risk Insurance Policy 
8 ACC Export, NCH, Delhi E8 Non renewal of Risk Insurance Policy 
9 ACC Export, NCH, Delhi E9 Non renewal of Risk Insurance Policy 
10 ACC Export, NCH, Delhi E10 Non renewal of Risk Insurance Policy 
11 ACC Export, NCH, Delhi E11 Non renewal of Risk Insurance Policy 
12 Airport & General, New 
Delhi E12 Non renewal of Risk Insurance Policy 
13 Airport & General, New 
Delhi E13 Non renewal of Risk Insurance Policy 
14 ACC Export, NCH, Delhi E14 Inadequate coverage in Risk Insurance 
Policy 
15 ACC Export, NCH, Delhi E15 Inadequate coverage in Risk Insurance 
Policy 
16 ACC Export, NCH, Delhi E16 Inadequate coverage in Risk Insurance 
Policy 
17 ACC Export, NCH, Delhi E17 Inadequate coverage in Risk Insurance 
Policy 
18 ACC Export, NCH, Delhi E18 Inadequate coverage in Risk Insurance 
Policy 
19 ACC Export, NCH, Delhi E19 Inadequate coverage in Risk Insurance 
Policy 
20 Airport & General, New 
Delhi E20 Inadequate coverage in Risk Insurance 
Policy 
21 Airport & General, New 
Delhi E21 Inadequate coverage in Risk Insurance 
Policy 
22 Airport & General, New 
Delhi E22 Inadequate coverage in Risk Insurance 
Policy 


Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
85 
 
S.No Customs 
Commissionerate 
Name of 
the 
warehouse 
Irregularity 
23 Airport & General, New 
Delhi E23 Inadequate coverage in Risk Insurance 
Policy 
24 ACC Export, NCH, Delhi E24 No insurance for the period 29.08.2017 
to 30.12.2017 and after 29.12.2018. 
25 ACC Export, NCH, Delhi E25 No insurance for the period 04.09.2017 
to 08.05.2018. 
26 ACC Export, NCH, Delhi E26 
No insurance for the period 20.07.2017 
to 23.07.2017 & 23.07.2019 to 
01.08.2019 
27 ACC Export, NCH, Delhi E27 No insurance for the period 15.08.2019 
to 23.08.2019 (7 days). 
28 ICD Patparganj& other ICDs 
, Delhi E28 No insurance for the period 30.08.2017 
to 26.04.2018. 
29 ACC Export, NCH, Delhi E29 
Licence was granted to licencee  but 
insurance policy for two years 2016-17 to 
2017-18 was  not in the name of the 
licencee 
30 ACC Export, NCH, Delhi E30 
Insurance policy for 2016 -17 covered 
building 1 and 3 but subsequent policies 
did not cover building no.1 which was 
also used for warehousing goods. 
31 Ahmedabad E31 Non renewal of Risk Insurance Policy 
32 Ahmedabad E32 Non renewal of Risk Insurance Policy 
33 Ahmedabad E33 Non renewal of Risk Insurance Policy 
34 Ahmedabad E34 Non renewal of Risk Insurance Policy 
35 Ahmedabad E35 Insufficient insurance cover after 14 June 
2018. 
36 Jaipur E36 Non renewal of Risk Insurance Policy for 
the period 29-07-2017 to 31-03-2020. 
37 Jaipur E37 
Insufficient insurance cover for the 
period 15.07.2016 to 14.07.2017 and non 
renewal of policy for the period 15 -07-
2017 to 03-09-2017. 
38 Kolkata (Port) E38 Non submission of Risk Insurance Policy 
for enhanced duty amount. 
39 Kolkata (Port) E39 License granted on the basis of Special 
Contingency Policy. 
40 Kolkata (Port) E40 
The Insurance Policies accepted for 
granting Special Bonded Warehouse 
Licence in the present case thus failed to 
maintain the very essence of the All Risk 
Insurance Policy. 
41 Kolkata (Port) E41 
The Insurance Policies accepted for 
granting Special Bonded Warehouse 
Licence in the present case thus failed to 
maintain the very essence of the All Risk 
Insurance Policy. 

Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
 
86 
 
S.No Customs 
Commissionerate 
Name of 
the 
warehouse 
Irregularity 
42 NCH, Zone I, Mumbai E42 
Customs Duty Package Policy for the 
period 09.08.2016 to 08.08.2021 covered 
only 25 per cent of sum insured in case of 
loss occurred due to theft, skillful 
pilferage and commercial crime. 
43 NCH, Zone I, Mumbai E43 
Customs Duty Package Policy for the 
period 10.08.2016 to 12.08.2021 covered 
only 25 per cent of sum insured in case of 
loss occurred due to theft, skillful 
pilferage and commercial crime. 
44 JNCH, Zone II, Mumbai E44 
Customs Duty Package Policy for the 
period 16.08.2019 to 15.08.2020 covered 
only 25 per cent of sum insured in case of 
loss occurred due to theft, skillful 
pilferage and commercial crime. 
45 JNCH, Zone II, Mumbai E45 
Customs Duty Package Policy for the 
period 12.08.2016 to 11.08.2017 and 
09.10.2020 to 08.10.2021 covered only 
25 per cent of sum insured in case of loss 
occurred due to theft, skillful pilferage 
and commercial crime. 
46 JNCH, Zone II, Mumbai E46 
No insurance coverage for the period 
17.11.2018 to 22.11.2018 and 
22.11.2019 to 10.01.2020. 
47 JNCH, Zone II, Mumbai E47 
Instead of `100 crore insurance coverage 
for the period 04.11.2017 to 03.11.2018 
and 04.11.2018 to 03.11.2019 was `80 
crore and `50 crore respectively. Further, 
in case of loss due to theft, skillful 
pilferage and commercial crime it 
covered only 25 per cent of sum insured 
of `50 crore 
48 ACC, Zone III, Mumbai E48 
Customs Duty Package Policy for the 
period Sept 17 to Sept 19 covered only 25 
per cent  of sum insured in case of loss 
occurred due to burglary, skillful theft, 
skillful pilferage, leakage and 
contamination, acts of Commercial 
crime. 
49 ACC, Zone III, Mumbai E49 
Customs Duty Package Policy for the 
period Aug 19 to Aug 20 covered only 25 
per cent  of sum insured in case of loss 
occurred due to burglary, skillful theft, 
skillful pilferage, leakage and 
contamination, acts of Commercial 
crime. 

Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
87 
 
S.No Customs 
Commissionerate 
Name of 
the 
warehouse 
Irregularity 
50 ACC, Zone III, Mumbai E50 
Commercial crime liability policy for 
`16.80 lakh for the period FY June 19 to 
May 20, and June 20 to May 21 excluded 
computer fraud/crime, counterfeiting or 
forgery, terrorism. 
Burglary (House breaking) Insurance for 
`16.80 lakh for the periods, June 2016 to 
May 20. But Unexplained losses and 
losses discovered at the time inventory 
excluded. 
Any direct/indirect loss due to 
infectious/contagious disease-Covid-19. 
51 ACC, Zone III, Mumbai E51 
Customs Duty Package Policy for the 
period Aug 16 to Aug 17 covered only 25 
per cent  of sum insured in case of loss 
occurred due to theft, skillful pilferage 
and commercial crime. 
52 ACC, Zone III, Mumbai E52 
Customs Duty Package Policy for the 
period Aug 17 to Aug 18 covered only 25  
per cent  of sum insured in case of loss 
occurred due to theft, skillful pilferage 
and commercial crime. 
53 ACC, Zone III, Mumbai E53 
Customs Duty Package Policy for the 
period Aug 17 to Aug 18 covered only 25 
per cent  of sum insured in case of loss 
occurred due to theft, skillful pilferage 
and commercial crime. 
54 ACC, Zone III, Mumbai E54 
Customs Duty Package Policy for the 
period Aug 17 to Aug 18 covered only 25 
per cent  of sum insured in case of loss 
occurred due to theft, skillful pilferage 
and commercial crime. 
55 ACC, Zone III, Mumbai E55 
Customs Duty Package Policy for the 
period Aug 16 to July 17 covered only 25 
per cent  of sum insured in case of loss 
occurred due to theft, skillful pilferage 
and commercial crime. 
56 ACC, Zone III, Mumbai E56 
Duty of goods stored for March 2018, 
March 2019 June 2019 and March 2020 
exceeded the insurance coverage of `30 
crore. 
57 ACC, Zone III, Mumbai E57 
There were 18 incidents where duty of 
goods stored exceeded the insurance 
coverage. 
58 ACC, Zone III, Mumbai E58 
There were 6 incidents where duty of 
goods stored exceeded the insurance 
coverage. 

Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
 
88 
 
S.No Customs 
Commissionerate 
Name of 
the 
warehouse 
Irregularity 
59 ACC, Zone III, Mumbai E59 
There were 8 incidents where duty and 
value of goods stored exceeded the 
insurance and general bond coverage. 
60 ACC, Zone III, Mumbai E60 
The general bond taken for `80 lakh fell 
short to cover goods stored in Jan 2019 
by `7,949/- . 
61 ACC, Zone III, Mumbai E61 
1.The bond executed u/s 59(2) of the 
Customs Act towards duty free removal 
of soiled linen, cutlery, crockery and 
commissary items from the Aircraft and 
re-shipping to the same aircraft or to any 
other aircraft. This bond was valid only 
for the period 14.8 .2016 to 13.8.2017. 
This was not renewed or fresh bond 
executed, though activity being 
continued thereafter. 
 
2. The bond executed u/s 59(2) of the 
Customs Act towards loading and offload 
the bonded material in suitable trolleys, 
which would be double lock ed and 
moved under Customs supervision from 
bonded area to the aircraft and back. The 
bond was valid for the period 13.8.2016 
to 17.8.2017. The bond was not renewed 
or fresh bond executed, though such 
activity continued thereafter. 
62 Chennai III E62 No detail 
63 Chennai III E63 No policy for 2015-16,2018-19 & 2019-
2020 
64 Chennai III E64 No detail 
65 Chennai III E65 No detail 
66 Chennai III E66 No policy for 2017-18 & 2019-2020 
67 Chennai III E67 No detail 
68 Chennai III E68 No detail 
69 Chennai III E69 No detail 
70 Chennai III E70 No policy for 2015-16, 2016-17 and 
2018-19. 
71 Chennai III E71 No policy for 2015-16 & 2016-17. 
72 Chennai III E72 No policy for 2015-16 & 2016-17 
73 Chennai III E73 No policy for 2017-18, 2018-19  2019-
2020 
74 Chennai III E74 No policy for 2019-2020 
75 Chennai III E75 No policy for 2019-2020 
76 Chennai III E76 No policy for 2017-18, 2018-19 and 
2019-20 
77 Cochin E77 
No valid license for warehouse for the 
period 1.11.2017 to 31.10.2019 was 
available in the file. 

Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
89 
 
S.No Customs 
Commissionerate 
Name of 
the 
warehouse 
Irregularity 
78 Cochin E78 
Copy of the insurance policy for the 
period 01.04.2017 to 31.05.2019 was not 
available in the file. 
79 BCC, Bengaluru E79 
Variation in value in policy and value of 
duty of goods stored & Insurance not 
renewed from 25.01.2020 to till date 
80 BCC, Bengaluru E80 
Variation in value in policy and value of 
duty of goods stored. Insurance not 
renewed from   2018-19 to till date 
81 BCC, Bengaluru E81 Variation in value in policy  and value of 
duty of goods stored 
82 BCC, Bengaluru E82 Insurance not furnished for  2018-19 
83 BCC, Bengaluru E83 Insurance not furnished for 2017-18 
84 BCC, Bengaluru E84 Insurance not furnished for 2016-17 
85 BCC, Bengaluru E85 Insurance not furnished for 2016-17 and 
2017-18 
86 BCC, Bengaluru E86 Insurance not furnished for 2017-18 to 
till date 
87 BCC, Bengaluru E87 Insurance not furnished for  2017-18 
88 BCC, Bengaluru E88 Insurance not furnished from 2017-18 to 
till date 
89 BCC, Bengaluru E89 Insurance not furnished for 2017-18 
90 BCC, Bengaluru E90 Insurance not furnished for 2017-18 
91 BCC, Bengaluru E91 Insurance not furnished for 2017-18 
92 BCC, Bengaluru E92 Insurance not furnished for 2017-18 
93 BCC, Bengaluru E93 Insurance not furnished for 2017-18 
94 BCC, Bengaluru E94 Insurance not furnished for 2019-20 
95 BCC, Bengaluru E95 Insurance not furnished for  2016-17 
and 2017-18 
96 BCC, Bengaluru E96 Insurance not furnished for 2017-18 
97 BCC, Bengaluru E97 Insurance not furnished for 2017-18 and 
2019-20 
98 BCC, Bengaluru E98 Insurance not furnished for  2017-18, 
2018-19 and 2019-20 
99 BCC, Bengaluru E99 Insurance not furnished for 22.09.2019 
to till date 
100 BCC, Bengaluru E100 Insurance not furnished for 08.09.2018 
to till date 
101 BCC, Bengaluru E101 Insurance not furnished for 12.6.2020 to 
till date 
102 BCC, Bengaluru E102 Insurance not furnished for 15.08.2020 
to till date 
103 BCC, Bengaluru E103 Insurance not furnished from 
01.01.2017 to 10.09.2018 
104 BCC, Bengaluru E104 Insurance not furnished from 
15.07.2017 to 11.08.2019 
105 BCC, Bengaluru E105 Insurance not furnished from 
27.07.2017 to 18.08.2018 

Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
 
90 
 
S.No Customs 
Commissionerate 
Name of 
the 
warehouse 
Irregularity 
106 BCC, Bengaluru E106 Insurance not furnished from 
17.06.2017  to 07.10.2017 
107 BCC, Bengaluru E107 Insurance not furnished from 
04.10.2016 to 29.08.2019 
108 BCC, Bengaluru E108 Insurance not furnished from 
17.06.2017 to 07.10.2017 
109 BCC, Bengaluru E109 Insurance not furnished from Aug 2016 
to Aug 2018 
110 BCC, Bengaluru E110 Insurance not furnished from April 17 to 
Aug 18 
111 BCC, Bengaluru E111 Insurance not furnished from 
20.10.2019 to till date 
112 BCC, Bengaluru E112 Insurance not furnished from 
27.03.2019 to till date 
113 BCC, Bengaluru E113 Insurance not furnished from 
03.08.2017 to till date 
114 BCC, Bengaluru E114 Insurance not furnished from 
26.08.2016 to 25.08.2018 
115 BCC, Bengaluru E115 No All-risk Insurance from 01.01.2016  
to  31.12.2016 
116 BCC, Bengaluru E116 No All-risk Insurance from 15.07.2016 to 
14.07.2017 
117 BCC, Bengaluru E117 No All-risk Insurance from 17.06.2016 to 
16.06.2017 
118 BCC, Bengaluru E118 No All-risk Insurance from 30.06.2016 to 
29.06.2017 
119 BCC, Bengaluru E119 No All-risk Insurance from 03.08.2018 to 
19.10.2018 
120 BCC, Bengaluru E120 No All-risk Insurance from 27.03.2018 to 
26.03.2019 
121 BCC, Bengaluru E121 No All-risk Insurance from 01.10.2016 to 
06.08.2017 
122 BCC, Bengaluru E122 No All-risk Insurance 
123 NCH, Mangaluru E123 Insurance not furnished from 
19.12.2017 to till date 
124 NCH, Mangaluru E124 Insurance not furnished from 
13.12.2018 to till date 
125 NCH, Mangaluru E125 Insurance not furnished from 
11.02.2020 to till date 
126 NCH, Mangaluru E126 Insurance not furnished from 
24.11.2018 to 07.01.2019 
127 NCH, Mangaluru E127 Insurance not furnished from 10.8.2017 
to 09.8.2019 
128 NCH, Mangaluru E128 Insurance not furnished Not available 
prior to 01.06.2020 
129 NCH, Mangaluru E129 Insurance not furnished for part period 
  

Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
91 
 
Annexure 3.11 
Non disposal of goods of expired bonds 
(Reference: Para No. 3.5.5 of the report) 
Sl. 
No
. 
Customs 
Commission
erate 
Name of 
Warehouse 
No of 
Bonds/
BEs 
Extens
ion 
Notice u/s 
72 
(Y/N) 
Extensio
n valid 
as of 
31/03/2
020 
Assessed 
Duty 
involved  
(` in lakh) 
1 BCC, 
Bengaluru F1 131 No No No 356 
2 Chennai III F2 1 Not 
known Not known No 7.03 
3 Chennai III F3 2 Not 
known Not known No 170.25 
4 Chennai VII F4 2 Not 
known Not known No 121.91 
5 Chennai VII F5 37 Not 
known Not known No 98.3 
6 Cochin F6 1 Not 
known Not known No 0.33 
7 ACC Export, 
NCH, Delhi F7 91 Yes Yes Not 
applicable 616 
8 ACC Export, 
NCH, Delhi F8 29 Yes Yes No 417 
9 
ICD Patparganj 
& other ICDs, 
Delhi 
F9 47 Yes Not known No 22.91 
10 ACC Export, 
NCH, Delhi F10 1 Yes No No 32 
11 Kolkata (Port) F11 3 No No No 122.31 
12 Kolkata (Port) F12 1 No No No 2.94 
13 Kolkata (Port) F13 1 No No No 176 
14 Kolkata (Port) F14 3 No No No 20.98 
15 Kolkata (Port) F15 1 No No No 29.95 
16 Kolkata (Port) F16 10 No No No 1195.77 
17 Kolkata (Port) F17 1 No No No 11.91 
18 Kolkata (Port) F18 1 No Yes 
(20.10.2016) 
Not 
applicable 53.85 
19 Kolkata (Port) F19 1 No Yes  
(25.09.2018) 
Not 
applicable 590.53 
20 Kolkata (Port) F20 1 No Yes  
(12.06.2018) 
Not 
applicable 7.02 
21 Kolkata (Port) F21 3 No Yes 
(24.10.2019) 
Not 
applicable 774.68 
22 Kolkata (Port) F22 1 No Yes 
(31.03.2020) 
Not 
applicable 2.16 
23 Kolkata (Port) F23 1 No Yes 
(31.03.2020) 
Not 
applicable 7.79 
24 Kolkata (Port) F24 2 No Yes 
(31.03.2020) 
Not 
applicable 7.25 


Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
 
92 
 
Sl. 
No
. 
Customs 
Commission
erate 
Name of 
Warehouse 
No of 
Bonds/
BEs 
Extens
ion 
Notice u/s 
72 
(Y/N) 
Extensio
n valid 
as of 
31/03/2
020 
Assessed 
Duty 
involved  
(` in lakh) 
25 Kolkata (Port) F25 1 No Yes 
(31.03.2020) 
Not 
applicable 0.58 
26 Kolkata (Port) F26 2 No Yes 
(31.03.2020) 
Not 
applicable 5.09 
27 Kolkata (Port) F27 1 No Yes 
(31.03.2020) 
Not 
applicable 0.68 
28 Kolkata (Port) F28 1 No Yes 
(31.03.2020) 
Not 
applicable 14.54 
29 Ludhiana F29 10 No No No 98.67 
30 Ludhiana F30 1 No No No 11.53 
31 JNCH, Zone II, 
Mumbai F31 10 No No No 63.65 
32 JNCH, Zone II, 
Mumbai F32 3 No No No 24.52 
33 JNCH, Zone II, 
Mumbai F33 2 No No No 21.87 
34 JNCH, Zone II, 
Mumbai F34 7 No No No 51.5 
35 JNCH, Zone II, 
Mumbai F35 115 No No No 2,437.8 
  
Total 525 
   
7,575.3 
  

Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
93 
 
Annexure 4.1 
(Reference: Para No. 4.7 of the report) 
Difference in value of exports as per APR data vis-à-vis NSDL data/Accounts Data 
(` in lakh) 
S. 
No State Name of the 
FTWZ Unit 
Value of exports 
Difference As per APR As per SEZ online 
data/Accounts 
1 
Maharashtra 
A1 10,263.48 4,51,188.23 -4,40,924.75 
2 A2 19,637.89 11,072.26 8,565.63 
3 A3 11,380.39 6,2974.05 -51,593.24 
4 A4 1,240.08 165.02 1,075.06 
5 A5 9,72,229.43 9,990.02 9,62,239.58 
6 A6 43,514.11 41,805.45 1,708.66 
7 A7 18,623.4 18,273.44 350.59 
8 A8 3,531.97 2,2861.24 -20,943.06 
9 A9 3,15,273.92 1,05,158.76 2,10,115.16 
10 A10 5,731.32 5,825.35 -94.03 
11 A11 10,666.85 21,4862.37 -2,04,195.52 
12 
Karnataka 
A12 8,608.07 8,551.61 57.06 
13 A13 1,791.5 1,850.01 -58.51 
14 A14 531.05 564.75 -33.7 
15 A15 1,771.02 932.37 838.65 
  


Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
 
94 
 
 
Annexure 4.2 
(Reference: Para No. 4.7 of the report) 
Difference in value of imports as per APR data vis-à-vis EDI data/Accounts Data 
(` in lakh) 
S. 
No State Name of the 
FTWZ Unit 
Value of imports 
Difference As per APR As per SEZ online 
data/Accounts 
1 
Maharashtra 
B1 0 10,47,271.23 -10,47,271.23 
2 B2 19,473.79 19,000.91 -1,351.8 
3 B3 0 7,72,035.12 -7,72,035.12 
4 B4 1,269.96 1,754.36 -904.69 
5 B5 92,6518.3 9,19,395.74 -3,995.43 
6 B6 28,008.38 34,073.99 -6,065.61 
7 B7 13,754.14 65,921.87 -56,658.48 
8 B8 0 1,25,742 -1,25,742 
9 B9 2,93,768.9 2,93,559.98 -6,091.65 
10 B10 5,744.5 2,542.49 2,590.39 
11 B11 0 10,04,561.64 -10,04,561.64 
12 
Karnataka 
B12 7,612.09 8,140.46 -528.37 
13 B13 27.45 34.89 -7.44 
14 B14 447.64 406.02 41.62 
15 B15 458.82 451.67 7.15 
16 B16 1,278.79 1,237.8 40.55 
  


Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
95 
 
 
Annexure 4.3 
(Reference: Para No. 4.7 of the report) 
Difference in value of DTA sales as per APR data vis-à-vis EDI data/Accounts Data 
(` in lakh) 
S. 
No State Name of the 
FTWZ Unit 
Value of DTA Sales  
As per APR As per SEZ on-line 
data Difference 
1 
Maharashtra 
C1 0 5,99,819.23 -5,99,819.23 
2 C2 0 9,057.58 -9,057.58 
3 C3 2,622.31 10,95,902.76 -10,93,280.45 
4 C4 1,235.18 2,475.82 -1,240.64 
5 C5 0 12,58,032.36 -12,58,032.36 
6 C6 360.79 482.78 -121.99 
7 C7 195.18 40,734.51 -31,744.7 
8 C8 33.84 1,46,651 -1,46,617.16 
9 C9 0 2,19,251.42 -2,19,251.42 
10 C10 52.26 57.07 -4.81 
11 C11 0 9,64,713.91 -9,64,713.91 
 
 
  


Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
 
96  
 
Annexure 4.4 
(Reference: Para No. 4.10.1 of the report) 
Shortfall in Exports vis-à-vis Projections   (` in lakh) 
S. 
No State Name of 
FTWZ 
Name of the 
Unit Year/Block Projected 
exports 
Actual 
Exports Shortfall %age 
shortfall 
1 Gujarat A FTWZ D1 2018-19 167.82 21.49 146.33 87 
2 
Karnataka B SEZ 
D2 Not 
Available 2048 909.82 1138.18 56 
3 D3 Not 
Available 720 531.08 188.92 26 
4 D4 
2016-17 2426 813.55 1612.45 66 
2017-18 3100 1390.65 1709.35 55 
5 D5 
2016-17 700 648.23 51.77 7 
2017-18 800 498.83 301.17 38 
2018-19 900 377.5 522.5 58 
2019-20 365 149.62 215.38 59 
6 Tamil Nadu C FTWZ D6 2016-17 2600 1093.97 1506.03 58 
7 D7 2018-19 1630 0 1630 100 
8 Telangana D FTWZ D8 2015-20 3670 293.16 3376.84 92 
9 D9 2015-20 2636 745.48 1890.52 72 
10 Andhra 
Pradesh 
E SEZ (Multi 
Product) 
D10 2015-16 201.5 46.89 154.61 77 
11 D11 2018-20 6872 6615.17 256.83 4 
12 
Maharashtra F (FTWZ) 
Panvel 
D12 2018-19 829 391.56 437.44 53 
2019-20 5082 4956.13 125.87 2 
13 D13 2019-20 5802.14 168.44 5633.7 97 
14 D14 
2016-17 24718.86 289.7 24429.16 99 
2017-18 29254.89 100.98 29153.91 100 
2018-19 34755.46 140.23 34615.23 100 
2019-20 800 0 800 100 
15 D15 2018-19 1100 0 1100 100 
2019-20 3000 1.34 2998.66 100 
16 D16 
2015-16 4000 7 3993 100 
2016-17 4000 2190.77 1809.23 45 
2017-18 8820 4074.68 4745.32 54 
2018-19 9261 4393.06 4867.94 53 
2019-20 61240.64 32667.7 28572.94 47 
17 D17 2015-16 67364.71 49811.4 17553.31 26 
2016-17 2511.66 1121.84 1389.82 55 
18 D18 
2015-16 3522.72 1182.96 2339.76 66 
2016-17 4040.96 2483.57 1557.39 39 
2017-18 4389.46 3371.23 1018.23 23 
2018-19 48300 7992.63 40307.37 83 
19 D19 2016-17 369.05 205.51 163.54 44 
20 D20 2015-16 488.07 370.72 117.35 24 


Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
97  
 
 
  
Annexure 4.4 
(Reference: Para No. 4.10.1 of the report) 
Shortfall in Exports vis-à-vis Projections   (` in lakh) 
S. 
No State Name of 
FTWZ 
Name of the 
Unit Year/Block Projected 
exports 
Actual 
Exports Shortfall %age 
shortfall 
2017-18 1088 1051.57 36.43 3 
21 D21 2017-18 1337.05 1325.35 11.7 1 
2019-20 73 0 73 100 
22 
U.P G FTWZ 
D22 2018-19 399.89 170.58 229.31 57 
2019-20 459.87 74.31 385.56 84 
23 D23 
2015-16 13.71 4.33 9.38 68 
2016-17 26.8 15.05 11.75 44 
2017-18 37.41 3.27 34.14 91 
24 D24 2015-16 948.72 62.95 885.77 93 
2016-17 1091.03 99.44 991.59 91 
25 D25 2018-19 3105 173.79 2931.21 94 
2019-20 3960 167.99 3792.01 96 
26 D26 
2017-18 1020 87.71 932.29 91 
2018-19 1122 406.17 715.83 64 
2019-20 1234.02 113.11 1120.91 91 
27 D27 2018-19 1020 0 1020 100 
2019-20 1122 234.29 887.71 79 
28 D28 2015-16 156 95.56 60.44 39 
2016-17 202.8 113.32 89.48 44 
29 D29 2015-16 2921.34 204.57 2716.77 93 


Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
 
98  
 
Annexure 4.5 
(Reference: Para No. 4.10.2 of the report) 
Shortfall in investment vis-à-vis Projections 
(` in lakh) 
S No State Name of 
FTWZ 
Name of 
unit 
Value of Investment 
Shortfall 
Percentage 
of  
Shortfall Projected Actual 
1 Maharashtra A Panvel E1 563.34 123.07 440.27 78.15 
2 E2 541.32 0 541.32 100 
3 Tamil Nadu B FTWZ E3 57.51 4.97 52.54 91.36 
4 E4 42 30.14 11.86 28.24 
5 Telangana C FTWZ E5 425.2 308.82 116.38 27.37 
6 Andhra Pradesh 
D SEZ (Multi 
Product) 
Chittoor 
E6 125 103.58 21.42 17.14 
 
  


Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
99 
 
 
Annexure 4.6 
(Reference: Para No. 4.10.3 of the report) 
Shortfall in generation of employment vis-à-vis projection 
S 
No State 
Name 
of 
FTWZ 
Name 
of the 
Unit 
FY Projected 
Employment 
Actual 
Employment Shortfall Percentage  
of shortfall 
1 Gujarat A FTWZ F1  8 5 3 38 
2 Tamil Nadu B FTWZ F2  40 4 36 90 
3 F3  15 4 11 73 
4 
Maharashtra C 
Panvel 
F4 
2015-16 120 52 68 57 
2016-17 120 41 79 66 
2017-18 120 41 79 66 
2018-19 120 0 120 100 
2019-20 120 0 120 100 
5 F5 2015-16 2 0 2 100 
2016-17 2 0 2 100 
6 F6 
2015-16 93 71 22 24 
2016-17 93 28 65 70 
2017-18 93 84 9 10 
2018-19 93 23 70 75 
2019-20 93 26 67 72 
7 F7 
2015-16 2 0 2 100 
2016-17 2 0 2 100 
2017-18 2 0 2 100 
2018-19 2  2  
8 F8 
2016-17 55 3 52 95 
2017-18 55 15 40 73 
2018-19 55 16 39 71 
2019-20 55 16 39 71 
9 F9 
2015-16 4 2 2 50 
2016-17 4 0 4 100 
2017-18 4 2 2 50 
10 F10 2017-18 2 0 2 100 
2018-19 2 0 2 100 
11 F11 
2015-16 7 3 4 57 
2016-17 7 4 3 43 
2017-18 7 6 1 14 
2018-19 7 5 2 29 
2019-20 7 6 1 14 
12 F12 2019-20 2 0 2 100 
13 Telangana D SEZ F13 2015-16 17 11 6 35 
2016-17 17 8 9 53 


Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
 
100 
 
 
  
2017-18 17 4 13 76 
2018-19 17 3 14 82 
2019-20 17 3 14 82 
14 
Andhra 
Pradesh 
E SEZ 
Multi 
Product 
Chittoor 
F14 2018-19 10 6 4 40 
2019-20 14 6 8 57 
15 F15 2017-18 65 50 15 23 
16 F16 2015-16 20 1 19 95 
17 
U.P F FTWZ 
F17 
2015-16 12 5 7 58 
2016-17 12 5 7 58 
2017-18 12 5 7 58 
2018-19 12 5 7 58 
2019-20 12 6 6 50 
18 F18 
2015-16 2 1 1 50 
2016-17 2 1 1 50 
2017-18 2 1 1 50 
19 F19 2018-19 25 3 22 88 
2019-20 25 3 22 88 
20 F20 2018-19 10 3 7 70 
2019-20 10 4 6 60 
21 F21 2015-16 2 0 2 100 
2016-17 2 0 2 100 
22 F22 2015-16 130 8 122 94 

Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
101  
 
Annexure 4.7 
(Reference: Para No. 4.10.4 of the report) 
Shortfall in NFE Vis-à-vis projections 
S No. State Name of 
FTWZ 
Name of the 
Unit in FTWZ Year NFE Short fall 
if any Percentage 
of shortfall Projected Actual  
1 
Maharashtra A FTWZ 
G1 2018-19 1100 0 1100 100.00 
2019-20 1300 0 1300 100.00 
2 G2 2015-16 252.12 -332.9 585.02 232.04 
2016-17 327.74 -423.98 751.72 229.36 
3 G3 
2015-16 2432.94 710.8 1722.14 70.78 
2016-17 3494.84 1182.96 2311.88 66.15 
2017-18 4040.69 2484 1556.69 38.53 
2018-19 4389.46 3847.93 541.53 12.34 
4 G4 2015-16 151.68 72.37 79.31 52.29 
2017-18 250 111.26 138.74 55.50 
5 G5 
2016-17 7245 -3182.68 10427.68 143.93 
2017-18 25200 -
19711.45 44911.45 178.22 
6 G6 
2015-16 207.00 1.34 205.66 99.35 
2016-17 252.00 7 245 97.22 
2018-19 8,820.00 4,074.68 4745.32 53.80 
2019-20 9,261.00 4,393.06 4867.94 52.56 
7 G7 
2016-17 -1277.61 142.03 -1419.64 111.12 
2017-18 5297.75 263.16 5034.59 95.03 
2018-19 8528 71.98 8456.02 99.16 
2019-20 1565.81 128.46 1437.35 91.80 
8 G8 
2015-16 8,537.17 8,456.73 80.44 0.94 
2016-17 9,390.89 2,229.04 7161.85 76.26 
2019-20 2762.7 2580.86 181.84 6.58 
9 G9 2019-20 200.56 86.54 114.02 56.85 
10 
Karnataka B SEZ 
Belgaum 
G10 2015-20 528.08 462.2 65.88 12.48 
11 G11 2015-20 93.92 89.33 4.59 4.89 
12 G12 2015-20 487 315.99 171.01 35.11 
13 
Telangana 
C SEZ 
Limited, 
Hyderabad 
G13 
2015-16 332 244.35 87.65 26.40 
2016-17 350 333.28 16.72 4.78 
2017-18 372 57.27 314.73 84.60 
2018-19 375 30.58 344.42 91.85 
2019-20 382 46.048 335.952 87.95 
14 G14 
2015-16 198 88.65 109.35 55.23 
2016-17 238 30.36 207.64 87.24 
2017-18 286 85.91 200.09 69.96 
2018-19 337 19.07 317.93 94.34 
2019-20 397 69.17 327.83 82.58 


Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
 
102 
 
S No. State Name of 
FTWZ 
Name of the 
Unit in FTWZ Year NFE Short fall 
if any Percentage 
of shortfall Projected Actual  
15 Tamil Nadu D FTWZ G15 2016-17 375.9 276.01 99.89 26.57 
16 G16 2018-19 1579 0 1579 100.00 
17 
Andhra 
Pradesh 
E SEZ 
(Multi 
Product ), 
Chittoor 
G17 NA 1556 1379.33 176.67 11.35 
18 G18 2015-16 141 41.79 99.21 70.36 
19 
U.P F FTWZ 
G19 2019-20 78.01 53.69 24.32 31.18 
20 
G20 2015-16 17.53 0.34 17.19 98.06 
2016-17 22.07 2.24 19.83 89.85 
21 
G21 2015-16 751.47 46.92 704.55 93.76 
2016-17 864.2 64.68 799.52 92.52 
22 G22 2018-19 175 0 175 100.00 
23 
G23 2015-16 44.16 14.62 29.54 66.89 
2016-17 54.71 11.62 43.09 78.76 
24 G24 2015-16 446.34 204.57 241.77 54.17 
 
  

Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
103 
 
Annexure 4.8 
(Reference: Para No. 4.12.2 of the report) 
Delay in submission of APRs 
S No State 
Name 
of the 
SEZ Unit 
Period of 
Return Due Date Date of 
Submission 
Delayed 
Submission 
in days 
1 
Karnataka 
H1 2015-16 30-Sep-16 29-Jun-17 270 
2018-19 30-Sep-19 09-Oct-20 365 
2 H2 
2015-16 30-Sep-16 15-Apr-19 930 
2016-17 30-Sep-17 15-Apr-19 570 
2017-18 30-Sep-18 03-Jul-20 660 
3 H3 
2015-16 30-Sep-16 05-Oct-18 720 
2016-17 30-Sep-17 05-Oct-18 365 
2017-18 30-Sep-18 05-Oct-18 5 
2018-19 30-Sep-19 23-Sep-20 365 
4 Telangana H4 
2015-16 29-Jun-16 18-Jun-20 1,450 
2016-17 27-Sep-17 18-Jun-20 995 
2017-18 27-Sep-18 18-Jun-20 630 
2018-19 27-Sep-19 18-Jun-20 265 
5 
Andhra 
Pradesh 
H5 2017-18 27-Sep-18 13-Mar-19 167 
2018-19 27-Sep-19 13-Nov-19 47 
6 H6 2017-18 27-Sep-18 19-Feb-19 145 
2018-19 27-Sep-19 04-Oct-19 7 
7 H7 2016-17 27-Sep-17 09-Jan-18 104 
2018-19 27-Sep-19 04-Sep-20 343 
 
  


Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
 
104  
 
Annexure 4.9 
(Reference: Para No. 4.14 of the report) 
Delay in disposal of applications received for setting up of Units 
S 
No State 
Name 
of 
FTWZ 
Name of the 
applicant 
Date of 
receipt of 
application 
Date of UAC 
meeting 
Date of 
disposal of 
application 
Total time 
taken 
1 
Tamil Nadu A FTWZ 
J1 27-Mar-15 24-Apr-15 05-May-15 39 
2 J2 13-May-15 29-May-15 06-Mar-15 20 
3 J3 21-Aug-16 24-Aug-16 09-Jun-16 16 
4 J4 08-Jun-16 24-Aug-16 09-Jul-16 22 
5 J5 13-Apr-18 27-Apr-18 05-Sep-18 26 
6 J6 08-Jul-18 24-Aug-18 09-Jun-18 30 
7 J7 15-Nov-18 28-Nov-18 13-Dec-18 28 
8 J8 28-Jan-19 27-Feb-19 18-Mar-19 21 
9 J9 03-Nov-19 29-Mar-19 04-May-19 25 
10 J10 05-Oct-19 27-May-19 06-Apr-19 25 
11 J11 01-Jul-20 24-Jan-20 02-May-20 29 
12 J12 01-Apr-20 24-Jan-20 02-May-20 32 
13 J13 01-Feb-20 24-Jan-20 02-May-20 34 
14 
Maharashtra B FTWZ 
J14 23-Oct-17 17-Jan-18 14-Feb-18 115 
15 J15 26-Sep-17 05-Dec-17 20-Dec-17 86 
16 J16 09-Oct-17 05-Dec-17 20-Dec-17 73 
17 J17 27-Feb-18 27-Mar-18 10-May-18 73 
18 J18 26-Aug-19 16-Sep-19 09-Oct-19 70 
19 J19 11-Jun-18 28-Jun-18 16-Aug-18 67 
20 J20 17-Apr-15 05-Jun-15 16-Jun-15 61 
21 J21 25-May-18 28-Jun-18 24-Jul-18 61 
22 J22 26-Oct-15 26-Nov-15 23-Dec-15 59 
23 J23 12-Sep-17  09-Nov-17 59 
24 J24 16-Nov-18 27-Dec-18 08-Jan-19 54 
25 J25 14-Feb-17 17-Mar-17 06-Apr-17 52 
26 J26 17-Feb-17 17-Mar-17 06-Apr-17 49 
27 J27 25-Sep-17 Not furnished by dept 46 
28 J28 20-Dec-16 13-Jan-17 02-Feb-17 45 
29 J29 21-Mar-17 24-Apr-17 03-May-17 44 
30 J30 30-Jul-18 23-Aug-18 11-Sep-18 44 
31 J31 09-Mar-16 _ 20-Apr-16 43 
32 J32 07-Sep-16 23-Sep-16 19-Oct-16 43 
33 J33 14-Dec-16 13-Jan-17 24-Jan-17 42 
34 J34 30-Jan-18 22-Feb-18 12-Mar-18 42 
35 J35 22-Apr-16 20-May-16 01-Jun-16 41 
36 J36 09-Sep-16 23-Sep-16 19-Oct-16 41 
37 J37 12-Apr-18 02-May-18 21-May-18 40 
38 J38 20-Dec-16 13-Jan-17 25-Jan-17 37 
39 J39 23-Nov-16 05-Dec-16 27-Dec-16 35 
40 J40 05-Mar-16 18-Mar-16 07-Apr-16 34 


Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
105 
 
S 
No State 
Name 
of 
FTWZ 
Name of the 
applicant 
Date of 
receipt of 
application 
Date of UAC 
meeting 
Date of 
disposal of 
application 
Total time 
taken 
41 J41 12-May-17 30-May-17 14-Jun-17 34 
42 J42 18-Apr-18 02-May-18 21-May-18 34 
43 J43 23-Oct-17 - 24-Nov-17 33 
44 J44 31-Jan-20 27-Feb-20 03-Mar-20 33 
45 J45 02-Jun-16 17-Jun-16 01-Jul-16 30 
46 J46 02-Jun-16 17-Jun-16 01-Jul-16 30 
47 J47 04-Jan-17 13-Jan-17 01-Feb-17 29 
48 J48 04-Jan-17 13-Jan-17 01-Feb-17 29 
49 J49 12-Sep-17 - 10-Oct-17 29 
50 J50 22-Mar-18  19-Apr-18 29 
51 J51 18-Nov-19 - 16-Dec-19 29 
52 J52 16-Jun-18 - 13-Jul-18 28 
53 J53 17-Jul-18 27-Jul-18 13-Aug-18 28 
54 J54 02-Jul-16 15-Jul-16 28-Jul-16 27 
55 J55 25-Oct-16 07-Nov-16 21-Nov-16 27 
56 J56 12-Jul-18  07-Aug-18 27 
57 J57 17-Sep-18 27-Sep-18 12-Sep-18 26 
58 J58 21-Sep-15 - 14-Sep-15 25 
59 J59 05-Oct-19 - 29-Oct-19 25 
60 J60 08-Jun-16 17-Jun-16 01-Jul-16 24 
61 J61 05-Jul-16 15-Jul-16 28-Jul-16 24 
62 J62 25-Oct-16 07-Nov-16 18-Nov-16 24 
63 J63 21-Nov-18 30-Nov-18 12-Dec-18 22 
64 J64 08-Jul-19 - 29-Jul-19 21 
65 J65 21-Jan-19 - 06-Feb-19 17 
  

Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
 
106 
 
Annexure 4.10 
(Reference: Para No. 4.15 of the report) 
Delay in assessment and out of charge of Bill of Entry 
Report of Bill of Entry transactions (Submitted but not Assessed) 
S.No Request ID Entity 
Name Entity Id Submission 
Date 
No. of days 
pending 
1 171600206396 K1 3077 29-Jan-16 1,770 
2 171601331204 K2 2806 7-Jun-16 1,640 
3 171602402915 K3 4406 12-Oct-16 1,513 
4 171602668996 K4 5337 7-Nov-16 1,487 
5 171602669560 K5 5337 7-Nov-16 1,487 
6 171602802626 K6 2735 21-Nov-16 1,473 
7 171602868673 K7 1807 30-Nov-16 1,417 
8 171700184320 K8 4406 23-Jan-17 1,408 
9 171700448533 K9 1807 23-Feb-17 1,379 
10 171701347532 K10 2806 3-Jun-17 1,279 
11 171702067386 K11 1807 14-Aug-17 1,207 
12 171702068311 K12 1807 14-Aug-17 1,207 
13 171702469842 K13 5337 23-Sep-17 1,167 
14 171702694144 K14 2783 23-Oct-17 1,137 
15 171702789672 K15 5827 30-Oct-17 1,130 
16 171703016063 K16 5827 21-Nov-17 1,108 
17 171703051925 K17 5827 24-Nov-17 1,105 
18 171703318964 K18 2806 22-Dec-17 1,077 
19 171800342033 K19 3209 12-Feb-18 1,025 
20 171801162551 K20 4406 7-May-18 941 
21 171803457545 K21 3209 27-Dec-18 707 
22 171803458772 K22 3209 27-Dec-18 707 
23 171900238403 K23 4406 29-Jan-19 674 
24 171900680070 K24 6355 16-Mar-19 628 
25 171900716083 K25 4406 19-Mar-19 625 
26 171502966375 K26 4406 11-Jan-16 1,788 
27 171600008333 K27 4406 12-Jan-16 1,787 
28 171600106790 K28 4406 27-Jan-16 1,772 
29 171600144111 K29 2151 20-Jan-16 1,772 
30 171600144914 K30 2151 20-Jan-16 1,772 
31 171600157072 K31 4406 27-Jan-16 1,772 
32 171600200321 K32 4406 2-Feb-16 1,766 
33 171600261696 K33 3077 4-Feb-16 1,764 
34 171600276503 K34 3075 5-Feb-16 1,763 
35 171600456230 K35 1807 29-Feb-16 1,665 
36 171600526020 K36 4406 8-Mar-16 1,731 
37 171600565426 K37 4406 14-Mar-16 1,724 
38 171600646814 K38 2806 21-Mar-16 1,718 


Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
107 
 
S.No Request ID Entity 
Name Entity Id Submission 
Date 
No. of days 
pending 
39 171600690332 K39 4406 28-Mar-16 1,711 
40 171600746575 K40 4406 4-Apr-16 1,704 
41 171600746656 K41 4406 1-Apr-16 1,707 
42 171600758066 K42 2151 5-Apr-16 1,596 
43 171600771451 K43 2151 5-Apr-16 1,596 
44 171600802144 K44 2806 18-Apr-16 1,690 
45 171600813506 K45 4406 11-Apr-16 1,697 
46 171600834565 K46 4406 12-Apr-16 1,693 
47 171600857400 K47 4406 18-Apr-16 1,690 
48 171600870954 K48 3077 18-Apr-16 1,690 
49 171600878875 K49 4406 18-Apr-16 1,686 
50 171600919641 K50 3077 22-Apr-16 1,686 
51 171601020205 K51 4406 4-May-16 1,674 
52 171601037053 K52 3077 5-May-16 1,673 
53 171601057655 K53 1807 6-May-16 1,672 
54 171601060481 K54 1807 9-May-16 1,669 
55 171601083651 K55 1807 10-May-16 1,668 
56 171601087954 K56 1807 11-May-16 1,667 
57 171601102083 K57 4406 17-May-16 1,660 
58 171601208936 K58 5337 26-May-16 1,651 
59 171601231804 K59 4406 27-May-16 1,648 
60 171601243144 K60 1807 27-May-16 1,651 
61 171601274003 K61 4406 2-Jun-16 1,644 
62 171601284750 K62 4406 6-Jun-16 1,641 
63 171601297276 K63 4406 30-Jun-16 1,616 
64 171601306461 K64 4406 6-Jun-16 1,639 
65 171601340116 K65 4406 11-Jun-16 1,634 
66 171601356931 K66 4406 11-Jun-16 1,630 
67 171601369100 K67 4406 11-Jun-16 1,634 
68 171601412511 K68 2693 16-Jun-16 1,626 
69 171601446391 K69 4406 21-Jun-16 1,625 
70 171601477482 K70 2806 25-Jul-16 1,592 
71 171601478495 K71 2806 25-Jul-16 1,592 
72 171601478812 K72 2806 25-Jul-16 1,592 
73 171601492860 K73 4406 25-Jun-16 1,,622 
74 171601596773 K74 4102 8-Jul-16 1,606 
75 171601597230 K75 2806 8-Jul-16 1,609 
76 171601652316 K76 2735 14-Jul-16 1,603 
77 171601979986 K77 4406 22-Aug-16 1,564 
78 171601998842 K78 4406 23-Aug-16 1,563 
79 171602027446 K79 3027 25-Aug-16 1,560 
80 171602029244 K80 3027 25-Aug-16 1,560 

Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
 
108 
 
S.No Request ID Entity 
Name Entity Id Submission 
Date 
No. of days 
pending 
81 171602084824 K81 4406 2-Sep-16 1,553 
82 171602111925 K82 4406 20-Sep-16 1,535 
83 171602113863 K83 4406 7-Sep-16 1,548 
84 171602139332 K84 4406 8-Sep-16 1,540 
85 171602289305 K85 2735 24-Sep-16 1,531 
86 171602365896 K86 4406 6-Oct-16 1,512 
87 171602409462 K87 1807 15-Nov-16 1,479 
88 171602411746 K88 1807 21-Oct-16 1,503 
89 171602455415 K89 4406 14-Oct-16 1,511 
90 171602477863 K90 4406 17-Oct-16 1,508 
91 171602487560 K91 5337 20-Oct-16 1,504 
92 171602511334 K92 5337 25-Oct-16 1,499 
93 171602686603 K93 4406 17-Nov-16 1,477 
94 171602733245 K94 5337 15-Nov-16 1,478 
95 171602790096 K95 4406 25-Nov-16 1,469 
96 171602816910 K96 2735 22-Nov-16 1,471 
97 171602852411 K97 4406 26-Nov-16 1,468 
98 171602889614 K98 4406 30-Nov-16 1,464 
99 171603052073 K99 2806 31-Dec-16 1,428 
100 171700034774 K100 5337 10-Jan-17 1,423 
101 171700038090 K101 5337 10-Jan-17 1,423 
102 171700038613 K102 5337 10-Jan-17 1,423 
103 171700039324 K103 5337 10-Jan-17 1,423 
104 171700039663 K104 5337 10-Jan-17 1,423 
105 171700039873 K105 5337 10-Jan-17 1,423 
106 171700050690 K106 5337 10-Jan-17 1,423 
107 171700050992 K107 5337 10-Jan-17 1,423 
108 171700051515 K108 5337 10-Jan-17 1,423 
109 171700051913 K109 5337 10-Jan-17 1,423 
110 171700052344 K110 5337 10-Jan-17 1,423 
111 171700110186 K111 2763 27-Jan-17 1,406 
112 171700259636 K112 5337 2-Feb-17 1,399 
113 171700298534 K113 4406 6-Feb-17 1,394 
114 171700325602 K114 4406 9-Feb-17 1,393 
115 171700326943 K115 4406 8-Feb-17 1,394 
116 171700473125 K116 4406 25-Feb-17 1,377 
117 171700474341 K117 4406 24-Feb-17 1,378 
118 171700487722 K118 4406 27-Feb-17 1,375 
119 171700489166 K119 4406 28-Feb-17 1,374 
120 171700562191 K120 4406 7-Mar-17 1,367 
121 171700569670 K121 4406 21-Mar-17 1,352 
122 171700595301 K122 4406 10-Mar-17 1,364 

Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
109  
 
S.No Request ID Entity 
Name Entity Id Submission 
Date 
No. of days 
pending 
123 171700597541 K123 4406 10-Mar-17 1,364 
124 171700610406 K124 4406 14-Mar-17 1,357 
125 171700655350 K125 5337 17-Mar-17 1,357 
126 171700676991 K126 4406 18-Mar-17 1,356 
127 171700703064 K127 4406 22-Mar-17 1,352 
128 171700730644 K128 4406 23-Mar-17 1,351 
129 171700735500 K129 2735 24-Mar-17 1,350 
130 171700735511 K130 2735 24-Mar-17 1,350 
131 171600475771 K131 3523 17-Jul-17 1,234 
132 171700879066 K132 4406 7-Apr-17 1,333 
133 171700953830 K133 4406 17-Apr-17 1,326 
134 171701012011 K134 4406 22-Apr-17 1,321 
135 171701022054 K135 1807 25-Apr-17 1,109 
136 171701056914 K136 5827 2-May-17 412 
137 171701115504 K137 5337 13-May-17 1,298 
138 171701169570 K138 4406 9-May-17 1,304 
139 171701468470 K139 4406 9-Jun-17 1,273 
140 171701526474 K140 5995 16-Jun-17 1,265 
141 171701537560 K141 5337 19-Jun-17 1,263 
142 171701576351 K142 5337 23-Jun-17 1,258 
143 171701610986 K143 4406 24-Jun-17 1,258 
144 171701690646 K144 4406 4-Jul-17 1,248 
145 171701720901 K145 2993 6-Jul-17 1,245 
146 171701739624 K146 4406 10-Jul-17 1,241 
147 171701773213 K147 4406 13-Jul-17 958 
148 171701789195 K148 2763 14-Jul-17 1,238 
149 171701898933 K149 5995 28-Jul-17 1,218 
150 171701983456 K150 4406 2-Aug-17 1,219 
151 171701997331 K151 4406 17-Aug-17 1,204 
152 171702027873 K152 4406 7-Aug-17 1,214 
153 171702097906 K153 2735 16-Aug-17 1,205 
154 171702172515 K154 3166 22-Aug-17 1,198 
155 171702216501 K155 4406 29-Aug-17 1,192 
156 171702262513 K156 4406 2-Sep-17 1,184 
157 171702288332 K157 3209 6-Sep-17 1,184 
158 171702315525 K158 4406 8-Sep-17 1,182 
159 171702317743 K159 4406 8-Sep-17 1,182 
160 171702328066 K160 4406 9-Sep-17 1,179 
161 171702331706 K161 5337 11-Sep-17 1,178 
162 171702332292 K162 5337 11-Sep-17 1,178 
163 171702332480 K163 5337 11-Sep-17 1,178 
164 171702337424 K164 2687 11-Sep-17 1,179 

Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
 
110 
 
S.No Request ID Entity 
Name Entity Id Submission 
Date 
No. of days 
pending 
165 171702345194 K165 4406 12-Sep-17 1,178 
166 171702400225 K166 3209 19-Sep-17 1,171 
167 171702427105 K167 5337 20-Sep-17 1,170 
168 171702556023 K168 4406 4-Oct-17 1,156 
169 171702585235 K169 3209 6-Oct-17 1,154 
170 171702586296 K170 4406 12-Oct-17 1,134 
171 171702600075 K171 3209 9-Oct-17 1,136 
172 171702641176 K172 4406 12-Oct-17 1,147 
173 171702662935 K173 4406 16-Oct-17 1,144 
174 171702687586 K174 3209 17-Oct-17 1,108 
175 171702704025 K175 4406 20-Oct-17 1,140 
176 171702737555 K176 2783 25-Oct-17 1,134 
177 171702753666 K177 5337 25-Oct-17 1,134 
178 171702760596 K178 3209 30-Oct-17 1,130 
179 171702761204 K179 3209 26-Oct-17 1,134 
180 171702801270 K180 4406 31-Oct-17 1,129 
181 171702863592 K181 4406 6-Nov-17 1,123 
182 171702863636 K182 5337 6-Nov-17 1,122 
183 171702871255 K183 4406 7-Nov-17 1,111 
184 171702946052 K184 3209 16-Nov-17 1,113 
185 171702980142 K185 1807 17-Nov-17 1,112 
186 171702985381 K186 5337 18-Nov-17 1,111 
187 171703032325 K187 4406 22-Nov-17 1,107 
188 171703039395 K188 4406 23-Nov-17 1,106 
189 171703183621 K189 4406 8-Dec-17 1,091 
190 171703187876 K190 5827 8-Dec-17 302 
191 171703241636 K191 4406 14-Dec-17 1,085 
192 171703241710 K192 4406 14-Dec-17 1,085 
193 171703274783 K193 3209 18-Dec-17 1,081 
194 171703282133 K194 5337 18-Dec-17 1,081 
195 171703311113 K195 3209 21-Dec-17 1,078 
196 171703328263 K196 4406 22-Dec-17 1,077 
197 171703329991 K197 5337 22-Dec-17 1,077 
198 171703391790 K198 4406 30-Dec-17 1,069 
199 171703393046 K199 4406 30-Dec-17 1,069 
200 171800058706 K200 4406 8-Jan-18 1,060 
201 171800065360 K201 5929 9-Jan-18 1,059 
202 171800119805 K202 4406 16-Jan-18 1,052 
203 171800191651 K203 4406 22-Jan-18 1,045 
204 171800227196 K204 4406 25-Jan-18 1,041 
205 171800304071 K205 4406 5-Feb-18 1,032 
206 171800304185 K206 4406 5-Feb-18 1,032 

Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
111 
 
S.No Request ID Entity 
Name Entity Id Submission 
Date 
No. of days 
pending 
207 171800348790 K207 4406 20-Feb-18 1,017 
208 171800369123 K208 4406 9-Feb-18 1,028 
209 171800422290 K209 4406 14-Feb-18 1,023 
210 171800472620 K210 4406 5-Mar-18 1,003 
211 171800482711 K211 4406 22-Feb-18 1,015 
212 171800486686 K212 4406 21-Feb-18 1,016 
213 171800582892 K213 4406 6-Mar-18 1,002 
214 171800678000 K214 5337 15-Mar-18 994 
215 171800701715 K215 4406 17-Mar-18 992 
216 171800721411 K216 5337 20-Mar-18 989 
217 171800722063 K217 5337 20-Mar-18 989 
218 171800730673 K218 2806 21-Mar-18 988 
219 171800811803 K219 4406 29-Mar-18 976 
220 171800843513 K220 2806 3-Apr-18 975 
221 171800919990 K221 4406 8-May-18 940 
222 171801095981 K222 3209 3-May-18 945 
223 171801138364 K223 4406 5-May-18 943 
224 171801195005 K224 4406 9-May-18 939 
225 171801197444 K225 4406 16-May-18 932 
226 171801209005 K226 3209 14-May-18 934 
227 171801232551 K227 3209 14-May-18 923 
228 171801268940 K228 4406 16-May-18 932 
229 171801307613 K229 4406 23-May-18 925 
230 171801388942 K230 4406 29-May-18 919 
231 171801493065 K231 3209 11-Jun-18 906 
232 171801517705 K232 4406 12-Jun-18 905 
233 171801538440 K233 3209 13-Jun-18 904 
234 171801553280 K234 4406 15-Jun-18 902 
235 171801601775 K235 5337 20-Jun-18 897 
236 171801701595 K236 4406 30-Jun-18 884 
237 171801709973 K237 3209 29-Jun-18 887 
238 171801832624 K238 5337 16-Jul-18 871 
239 171801832930 K239 5929 16-Jul-18 870 
240 171801847512 K240 4406 17-Jul-18 870 
241 171801879395 K241 3166 25-Jul-18 861 
242 171801982321 K242 3209 28-Jul-18 859 
243 171802001055 K243 5929 2-Aug-18 854 
244 171802085221 K244 5337 13-Aug-18 843 
245 171802085556 K245 5337 13-Aug-18 843 
246 171802085906 K246 5337 13-Aug-18 843 
247 171802092932 K247 5337 13-Aug-18 843 
248 171802110303 K248 5337 13-Aug-18 843 

Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
 
112  
 
S.No Request ID Entity 
Name Entity Id Submission 
Date 
No. of days 
pending 
249 171802236933 K249 5337 25-Aug-18 831 
250 171802237283 K250 5337 25-Aug-18 831 
251 171802238576 K251 5337 25-Aug-18 831 
252 171802240621 K252 5337 25-Aug-18 831 
253 171802279342 K253 3209 6-Sep-18 818 
254 171802507096 K254 4406 22-Sep-18 803 
255 171802579270 K255 6215 26-Sep-18 799 
256 171802579712 K256 6215 26-Sep-18 799 
257 171802775535 K257 4406 16-Oct-18 778 
258 171802822494 K258 3209 23-Nov-18 740 
259 171802822785 K259 3166 23-Oct-18 772 
260 171802879102 K260 3209 30-Oct-18 765 
261 171802881972 K261 4406 12-Nov-18 748 
262 171802940330 K262 4406 2-Nov-18 762 
263 171802965250 K263 4406 6-Nov-18 755 
264 171802990634 K264 2806 12-Nov-18 749 
265 171803156862 K265 3209 27-Nov-18 737 
266 171803157260 K266 3209 27-Nov-18 737 
267 171803157912 K267 3209 27-Nov-18 737 
268 171803158144 K268 3209 27-Nov-18 737 
269 171803158354 K269 3209 27-Nov-18 737 
270 171803158446 K270 3209 27-Nov-18 737 
271 171803158656 K271 3209 27-Nov-18 737 
272 171803158726 K272 3209 27-Nov-18 737 
273 171803159054 K273 3209 27-Nov-18 737 
274 171803159216 K274 3209 27-Nov-18 737 
275 171803455294 K275 3209 26-Dec-18 696 
276 171803464313 K276 4406 21-Jan-19 682 
277 171900095651 K277 5337 15-Jan-19 688 
278 171900118880 K278 3209 18-Jan-19 682 
279 171900192030 K279 4406 24-Jan-19 679 
280 171900253943 K280 4406 29-Jan-19 674 
281 171900335423 K281 4406 7-Feb-19 665 
282 171900480146 K282 4406 25-Feb-19 636 
283 171900611175 K283 4406 18-Mar-19 626 
284 171900803594 K284 5337 2-Apr-19 611 
285 171900826580 K285 4406 1-Apr-19 612 
286 171901001790 K286 5337 18-Apr-19 595 
287 171901002335 K287 5337 18-Apr-19 595 
288 171901161810 K288 3209 8-May-19 567 
289 171901322202 K289 4406 24-May-19 559 
290 171901373114 K290 5337 28-May-19 555 

Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
113  
 
S.No Request ID Entity 
Name Entity Id Submission 
Date 
No. of days 
pending 
291 171901386635 K291 3209 3-Jun-19 549 
292 171901394416 K292 2687 31-May-19 552 
293 171901464534 K293 4406 7-Jun-19 545 
294 171901484510 K294 2806 11-Jun-19 541 
295 171901499604 K295 4406 11-Jun-19 540 
296 171901673786 K296 4406 29-Jun-19 523 
297 171901800184 K297 3209 15-Jul-19 507 
298 171901800394 K298 3209 15-Jul-19 507 
299 171901800604 K299 3209 15-Jul-19 507 
300 171901801385 K300 3209 15-Jul-19 507 
301 171901801621 K301 3209 15-Jul-19 507 
302 171901801816 K302 3209 15-Jul-19 507 
303 171901811701 K303 3209 15-Jul-19 507 
304 171901880975 K304 3209 29-Jul-19 482 
305 171902216172 K305 5337 27-Aug-19 464 
306 171902263610 K306 4406 31-Aug-19 457 
307 171902301686 K307 3209 5-Sep-19 451 
308 171902307824 K308 2687 6-Sep-19 453 
309 171902316084 K309 3209 9-Sep-19 451 
310 171902494002 K310 3209 26-Sep-19 363 
311 171902582924 K311 4406 7-Oct-19 423 
312 171902759453 K312 3209 4-Nov-19 395 
313 171902761741 K313 6355 31-Oct-19 398 
314 171902858746 K314 3209 6-Nov-19 381 
315 171903105205 K315 3209 4-Dec-19 359 
316 171903130976 K316 5337 6-Dec-19 363 
317 171903221884 K317 4406 14-Dec-19 353 
318 171903303843 K318 3209 23-Dec-19 345 
319 171903327503 K319 5827 25-Dec-19 342 
320 172000032396 K320 3209 6-Jan-20 332 
321 172000505110 K321 3209 27-Feb-20 280 
322 172000510651 K322 3209 7-Mar-20 271 
323 172000565785 K323 3209 7-Mar-20 269 
324 172000677866 K324 4406 17-Mar-20 261 
325 172000701460 K325 5827 18-Mar-20 259 
326 172000708950 K326 4406 19-Mar-20 259 
327 172000708972 K327 5337 20-Mar-20 258 
328 172000715703 K328 4406 20-Mar-20 258 
  

Report No. 19 of 2022 (Performance Audit) 
 
114  
 
 
Annexure 4.11 
(Reference: Para No. 4.16 of the report) 
Temporary Removal And Sub Contracting Status Report from  1-Apr-17 to 31-Mar-20 
S. 
No. Request ID Challan 
Number 
Challan 
Date 
SEZ  
Name Currency Date of 
removal 
Due date 
of receipt 
No of 
days 
since 
removal 
Last status 
date 
1 481700196622 9000039 04-Apr-17 L1 USD 4-Apr-17 02-Aug-
17 1,329 6-Nov-17 
2 481700497714 9000075 23-Aug-17 L2 EURO 23-Aug-17 21-Dec-17 1,188 23-Aug-17 
3 481700696374 9000143 28-Nov-17 L3 USD 28-Nov-17 29-Mar-
18 1,091 11-Dec-17 
4 481800523492 9000158 29-Aug-18 L4 USD 28-Aug-18 29-Dec-18 818 25-Oct-18 
5 481800790413 9000265 14-Dec-18 L5 EURO 14-Dec-18 25-Apr-19 710 9-Apr-19 
6 481900205231 9000052 26-Mar-19 L6 USD 25-Mar-19 25-Jul-19 609 22-Aug-19 
7 482000055600 9000019 29-Jan-20 L7 EURO 28-Jan-20 29-May-
20 300 20-Jul-20 
8 482000060286 9000015 24-Jan-20 L8 POUND 
STERLING 24-Jan-20 23-May-
20 304 24-Jan-20 
9 482000073494 9000023 04-Feb-20 L9 EURO 29-Jan-20 3-Jun-20 299 4-Feb-20 
10 482000086691 9000024 06-Feb-20 L10 EURO 5-Feb-20 6-Jun-20 292 7-Feb-20 
11 482000164030 9000036 02-Mar-20 L11 USD 2-Mar-20 1-Jul-20 266 3-Mar-20 
 
 
 


Comptroller and Auditor General of India
2022
www.cag.gov.in