 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
Performance Audit on Land Records 
Management in Tamil Nadu
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government of 
Report No.
Dedicated to Truth in Public Interest
Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
Performance Audit on Land Records 
Management in Tamil Nadu
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government of Tamil Nadu 
Report No. 3 of 2022 
लोकǑहताथ[ स×यिनƵा 
Dedicated to Truth in Public Interest 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India  
Performance Audit on Land Records 
Management in Tamil Nadu 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Performance Audit on Land Records 
Management in Tamil Nadu 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government of Tamil Nadu 
Report No. 3 of 2022 

 i 
  
 
 Paragraph Page 
Preface  vii 
Executive Summary  ix 
CHAPTER I  - INTRODUCTION 
About the schemes 1.1 1 
Audit Objectives 1.2 1 
Organisational set up 1.3 2 
Audit Scope 1.4 3 
Audit Methodology 1.5 3 
Audit Criteria 1.6 4 
Previous Audit Reports  1.7 4 
Acknowledgement 1.8 4 
Audit Findings 1.9 5 
CHAPTER II – COMPUTERISATION OF LAND RECORDS  
Status of computerisation of land records 2.1 7 
Textual land records 2.2 9 
Spatial land records 2.3 17 
Computerisation of Natham (dwelling) land 
records 
2.4 22 
Computerisation of Adangal records (e-Adangal 
project) 
2.5 23 
Non-updation of records relating to Government 
acquired/alienated lands even after final 
notification 
2.6 27 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 

Performance Audit on Land Records Management in Tamil Nadu 
 
 ii 
 Paragraph Page 
Deficient integration between Revenue and 
Registration Departments 
2.7 29 
Conclusion 2.8 31 
Recommendations 2.9 31 
CHAPTER III – CITIZEN SERVICES  
Processing of online patta transfer application 3.1 33 
Conclusion 3.2 44 
Recommendations 3.3 44 
CHAPTER IV – PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION  
Execution of survey work using modern 
equipment 
4.1 45 
Asset Management 4.2 47 
Conclusion 4.3 52 
Recommendations 4.4 52 
CHAPTER V – DATA SECURITY AND MONITORING 
Misuse of login credentials resulted in illegal 
transfer of Government lands to individuals 
5.1 53 
Delay in implementation of Disaster Recovery 
Plan 
5.2 54 
Non-commencement of Aadhaar seeding of land 
records in TamilNilam 
5.3 54 
Security Audit Certificate 5.4 55 
Non-implementation of Local Government 
Directory codes 
5.5 55 
Lack of monitoring by Programme Management 
Unit  
5.6 55 
Conclusion 5.7 56 
Recommendations 5.8 57 
 
 
  

Table of Contents 
 
 iii 
 
Appendix 
No. Details Page 
2.1 Details of differences in village extent between manual and 
computerised A-Registers 59 
2.1 (a) Cases of difference in land extent in Kattanagaram village of  
Tiruvidaimarudhur Taluk in Thanjavur District 60 
2.2 Illustrative cases of incomplete capture of legacy information 61 
2.3 Details of discrepancies in capture of old survey numbers  
in computerised records 62 
2.4 (a) Special Characters in Survey numbers/Sub-division numbers in 
rural taluks 63 
2.4 (b) Special Characters in Survey numbers/Sub-division numbers in 
urban taluks 63 
2.5 Details of instances where the length of Sub-division number 
exceeded four digits/characters 64 
2.6 Taluk-wise details of non-adherence of Notation Rules while sub-
dividing land parcels 65 
2.7 (a) Details of multiple patta numbers assigned to single Pattadhar in a 
village 66 
2.7 (b) Details of multiple patta numbers assigned to single Pattadhar in 
Urban Taluks 67 
2.8 (a) Discrepancies found in computerised Chitta (ownership details) in 
sampled rural taluks 68 
2.8 (b) Discrepancies found in computerised Chitta (ownership details) in 
sampled urban taluks 69 
2.9 (a) Redundant patta numbers in computerised Chitta in rural taluks 70 
2.9 (b) Redundant patta numbers in computerised Chitta in urban taluks 71 
2.10 Details of gaps noticed in Sub-division numbers 72 
APPENDICES 

Performance Audit on Land Records Management in Tamil Nadu 
 
 iv 
Appendix 
No. Details Page 
2.11 Survey numbers with textual records but without spatial records 73 
2.12 Sub-divisions with textual records but without spatial records 74 
2.13 Textual area from A-Register captured wrongly in spatial (FMS) 
data 75 
2.14 Percentage of variation between textual area as per A-Register and 
calculated area as per CollabLand 76 
2.15 Sub-division information erroneously captured in spatial (FMS) data 77 
2.16 Incorrect capture of adjacency details in spatial (FMS) data 78 
2.17 Status of delay in updation of spatial (FMS) records in taluk server 
and central server 79 
2.18 Natham land parcels without ownership details in computerised 
Chitta 80 
2.19 Redundant patta numbers in computerised Natham chitta 81 
2.20 Deficiencies in computerised Natham chitta 82 
2.21 Deficiencies in codification of Government land 83 
2.22 Ineffective use of provisions available in integration module for 
STR applications 84 
3.1 Delays in approving NISD-OPT applications 85 
3.2 Delays in rejecting NISD-OPT applications 86 
3.3 Delays in processing pending NISD-OPT applications 87 
3.4 Delays in approving ISD-OPT applications 88 
3.5 Delays in rejecting ISD-OPT applications 89 
3.6 Delays in processing pending ISD-OPT applications 90 
3.7 (a) Details of delays in processing applications relating to addition/ 
deletion of land records 91 

Table of Contents 
 
 v 
Appendix 
No. Details Page 
3.7 (b) Details of delays in processing applications relating to correction of 
land records 92 
3.8 High percentage of rejection of OPT applications received from Sub 
Registrar Offices 93 
3.9 Details of ISD-OPT applications where seniority principle was not 
followed in scheduling 94 
3.10 Details of NISD-OPT applications where seniority principle was not 
followed in scheduling 95 
3.11 Non-use of codified reasons for rejection of OPT applications 96 
3.12 Details of OPT applications verified by Audit 97 
3.13 Delay in transfer of incorrectly classified applications 100 
3.14 Delay in rejection of incorrectly classified applications 101 
 Glossary of Abbreviations 102 
 

 
vii 
PREFACE 
 
This Report for the year ended March 2021 has been 
prepared for submission to the Governor of Tamil Nadu 
under Article 151 (2) of the Constitution of India, for 
being laid before the State Legislature. 
The Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of 
India contains the results of Performance Audit on Land 
Records Management in Tamil Nadu covering the period 
from 2016-21. 
The instances mentioned in the Report are those, which 
came to notice in the course of the performance audit 
conducted during August 2020 to October 2021.  Matters 
relating to the periods outside the audit period have also 
been reported in places where they were found necessary.  
The Audit has been conducted in conformity with the 
Auditing Standards issued by the Comptroller and 
Auditor General of India. 
vii 

 EXECUTIVE 
SUMMARY 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 ix 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
 
The Purpose 
Land is an important natural resource of every country. It plays a major role in 
economic progress, social development, environmental protection, etc. Besides 
owning large chunks of land, Government is the custodian of all lands. 
Government seeks to regulate private ownership of land for orderly development. 
It is one of the oldest and most prominent functions of Government.  
In 2008, Government of India (GoI) launched the National Land Records 
Modernisation Programme (NLRMP) with the objective of digitising all land 
records, to improve their quality and to make them more accessible.  In 2016, 
NLRMP was revamped as the Digital India Land Records Modernisation 
Programme (DILRMP). It is being implemented as a centrally sponsored scheme 
with cent per cent GoI funding with effect from 1 April 2016. DILRMP seeks to 
(a) usher in a system of updated land records, (b) automate mutation,  
(c) integrate textual and spatial records, (d) interconnect Revenue records and 
Registration records and (e) establish conclusive land titles and title-guarantee. 
This Performance Audit was conducted to assess (1) the achievement of 
computerisation in ensuring a conclusive land-titling with title guarantee (2) the 
effective use of data by Revenue and Registration Departments, and (3) the 
efficacy of the system in place for ensuring data security, capacity building, 
monitoring, etc.  
Results in brief 
At the outset, digitization of land records in the State has resulted in better access 
and more transparency in land record management. The outcomes of the scheme 
were, however, marred by significant deficiencies in converting manual records 
into digital records, abnormal delays in launching online services for Natham land 
records and e-Adangal, and unresolved issues affecting transparency and timely 
delivery of online patta transfers. Moreover, there were also deficiencies in data 
linkage between Registration and Revenue Departments, asset management, data 
security and monitoring of the scheme.  
Principal Findings 
 In 61 per cent of the sampled villages, there were significant 
differences in the total land area of the village, between the manual and 
computerised A-Register.  
(Paragraph 2.2.1) 

Performance Audit on Land Records Management 
 x 
 
 Lack of validation controls in the application software resulted in errors 
and discrepancies in capture of old Survey numbers and assigning  
Sub- division numbers as per notation rules. 
(Paragraphs 2.2.2 and 2.2.3) 
 Continued erroneous classification of 3.22 lakh private land parcels as 
Government land in the computerised land records has put the land 
owners to hardship.  
(Paragraph 2.2.4) 
 Multiple patta numbers assigned to a single land owner in a village and 
redundant patta numbers hampered the workflow processing of online 
patta transfers. 
(Paragraph 2.2.5) 
 Computerisation of Field Measurement Sketches (FMS) is far from 
complete. Delivery of services to citizen was impacted, as 6.25 out of 
23.25 lakh Sub-divisions in the A-Register had no corresponding 
entries in the FMS database. FMS data also had errors in land area 
when compared to computerised A-Register. 
(Paragraphs 2.3.1 and 2.3.2) 
 As of March 2021, 1.42 crore computerised and validated Natham land 
records were not brought on-line even after four years and also had 
deficiencies. The e-Adangal Project, taken up in 2017, was not fully 
implemented. 
(Paragraph 2.4 and 2.5) 
 In the sampled taluks, delays in approving, rejecting and processing of 
on-line patta transfer applications, which did not involve Sub-division, 
were 43 per cent, 79 per cent and 60 per cent respectively.  Similarly, 
delays in approving, rejecting and processing of on-line patta transfer 
applications, which involved Sub-division, were 53 per cent,  
93 per cent and 73 per cent respectively.  
(Paragraph 3.1.1) 

Executive Summary 
 
 xi 
 
 Despite integration of data between Registration and Revenue 
Departments, 49 per cent of patta transfers, not involving  
Sub-divisions, were rejected resulting in delays and hardship to land 
owners. Due to incorrect classification of OPT applications, abnormal 
delays were noticed in approving, rejecting and processing on-line 
applications seeking patta transfers. 
 (Paragraph 3.1.2 and 3.1.6) 
 Manual scrutiny of sample patta transfer applications disclosed that  
66 per cent of the applications were approved incorrectly. Similarly,  
86 per cent of applications were rejected incorrectly. 
(Paragraph 3.1.5) 
 The Resurvey work taken up is incomplete and in its present form 
could not reach the final stage of ‘Settlement’.  In three sample Taluks 
the ‘Settlement’ process was still in progress though the town survey 
work commenced 13 to 19 years ago. 
(Paragraphs 4.1.1 and 4.1.2) 
 Despite spending  33.91 crore under the scheme for establishing Land 
Record Management Centres (LRMCs), 15 out of 22 LRMCs in the 
sampled taluks did not have all the envisaged facilities. 
(Paragraph 4.2.1) 
 Monitoring at all levels was deficient and especially at the district level, 
in three sampled districts, the monitoring committee did not meet even 
once.  
(Paragraph 5.6) 
 

CHAPTER I 
INTRODUCTION 
 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 1 
CHAPTER I 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
1.1  About the schemes 
Government of India (GoI) launched (2008) the National Land Records 
Modernisation Programme (NLRMP) to achieve digitization of all land 
records, to improve their quality and to make them more accessible.  NLRMP 
is a Centrally Sponsored Scheme formulated by merging two Centrally 
Sponsored Schemes of Computerisation of Land Records1 (CLR) and 
Strengthening of Revenue Administration and Updating of Land Records2 
(SRA&ULR). NLRMP, was revamped as the Digital India Land Records 
Modernisation Programme (DILRMP) with cent per cent Central funding with 
effect from 1 April 2016. 
Major components of DILRMP are: (i) computerisation of record of rights;  
(ii) digitization of cadastral maps; (iii) integration of record of rights (textual) 
and cadastral maps (spatial); (iv) survey/resurvey; (v) modern record rooms; 
(vi) computer centres at taluk, Sub-division, district level and data centre at 
State level; (vii) connectivity between revenue offices; (viii) computerisation 
of registration; (ix) connectivity between Sub-Registrar offices and taluks; and  
(x) integration of registration and land records. The main objectives of 
DILRMP are 
 To usher in a system of updated land records  
 Automatic mutation 
 Integration between textual and spatial records 
 Interconnectivity between Revenue records and Registration records 
 To replace the present deeds registration and presumptive title 
system with conclusive title and title-guarantee. 
NLRMP was to be completed by the end of the 12th Five Year Plan period viz., 
31 March 2017 and as per the revised DILRMP guidelines, the State targeted 
to complete all the components/activities of DILRMP latest by  
31 March 2020.   
1.2  Audit Objectives  
The objectives of audit will be to assess whether:  
(i) the Record of Rights (RoR) computerisation, digitization of maps, 
survey/resurvey of lands and activities under other components were carried 
out to achieve conclusive land-titling system with title guarantee, 
                                                           
 Abbreviations used in this report are listed in the Glossary at Page 102 
1 CLR was launched in 1988-89. 
2 SRA&ULR was launched  in 1987. 

Performance Audit on Land Records Management in Tamil Nadu 
 
 2 
Central Survey Office, 
Chennai 
Commissioner/Director of Survey and Settlement 
Directorate of Survey 
and Settlement, Chennai 
Survey Training 
Institute, Thanjavur 
Technical 
Wing Field Wing Ministerial 
Wing 
Four Regional Survey Offices (Chennai, Coimbatore, Madurai & Trichy) 
Manager 
Technical  
Inspector of 
Survey Superintendent 
assisted by 
Assistants, 
Record Clerk 
Zonal/ 
Headquarters 
Deputy 
Tahsildar 
Village 
Administrative 
Officer 
Deputy Inspector of 
Survey 
Sub 
Inspector of 
Survey 
Firka 
Surveyor 
Tahsildar 
Senior/Land 
Records 
Draftsman 
Draftsman 
Assistant Director of Survey and Land Records in each District 
Head 
Draftsman 
District Collector 
Regional Survey Offices 
(Chennai, Coimbatore, 
Madurai & Trichy) 
At Taluk Office 
District Revenue Officer 
Revenue Divisional 
Officer 
(ii) the available data is effectively used by the Revenue and Registration 
Departments, and  
(iii) data security, required infrastructure, adequate training and capacity 
building for effective maintenance and sustenance of the scheme were in place 
and monitoring of the programme was adequate. 
1.3 Organisational set up  
The Revenue and Disaster Management Department (R&DMD), headed by 
the Additional Chief Secretary to the Government, is the custodian of 
Government land.  The Director of Survey and Settlement (DoSS), coming 
under R&DMD, heads the field formations handling the land records of the 
State. All Survey and Settlement schemes and other related works are 
designed, implemented and monitored by the DoSS. A chart depicting the 
organisational structure of the Directorate as well as the hierarchy of Revenue 
officials associated with land records is shown in Exhibit 1.1 below.  
Exhibit 1.1 – Organisational set up  
  

Chapter I 
 
 3 
1.4  Audit Scope  
The Performance Audit (PA) covered the activities during 2016-21.  The field 
visits included examination of records at the offices of R&DMD, DoSS, 
Assistant Directors of Survey and Land Records (ADSLR) and Taluks.  
Audit sampled 25 per cent of the 32 districts3 in the State, i.e. eight districts. 
viz., Chennai, Kanyakumari, Madurai, Perambalur, Thanjavur, The Nilgiris, 
Tiruvallur and Tiruppur. Sample selection was done by geographically 
grouping the 32 districts into West, East, South and North regions and 
adopting stratified random sampling method.  Taluks are responsible for 
maintaining the registry of land records and for carrying out Sub-division and 
mutations of land records.  Therefore, out of the 305 Taluk offices in the State 
at the time of commencing the PA, 22 Taluks4 being 25 per cent of the Taluks 
in each of the selected districts were selected by random sampling for field 
verification.   
1.5  Audit Methodology  
Patta transfer (Record of Rights) transactions relating to all the lands in the 
State are carried out through a web-based online workflow system developed 
and maintained by the National Informatics Centre (NIC).  Tamil Nadu 
Information System on Land Administration and Management (TamilNilam) 
database and Field Measurement Sketches (FMS) database in CollabLand5 are 
the back-end databases for the above computerised workflow system. Audit 
obtained and analysed the back-end data of land record management, viz., 
TamilNilam data of Rural and Urban areas, including Online Patta Transfer 
(OPT), Natham6 and Adangal7 data, together with the CollabLand data of 
FMS as ‘data dumps’, in respect of the 22 sampled taluks.  The observations 
emerging from the data analysis were verified randomly in the selected  
22 Taluks to ensure data accuracy and completeness. 
The Audit commenced with an entry meeting with the Additional Chief 
Secretary, R&DMD and the DoSS on 22 July 2020 to discuss the audit 
objectives.  An exit conference was held with the Principal Secretary, 
R&DMD and the DoSS on 4 October 2021 to discuss the Audit observations.   
                                                           
3        At the time of commencement of Audit, the State had 32 districts. 
4 (i) Alandur, (ii) Velachery, (iii) Mambalam and (iv) Madhavaram Taluks in Chennai 
District; (v) Agastheeswararm and (vi) Vilavancode Taluks in Kanyakumari District; 
(vii) Madurai North, (viii) Tirupparankundram and (ix) Madurai East Taluks in 
Madurai District; (x) Perambalur and (xi) Veppanthattai Taluks in Perambalur 
District; (xii) Thiruvaiyaru, (xiii) Papanasam and  (xiv) Thiruvidaimaruthur Taluks in 
Thanjavur District;  (xv) Kothagiri and (xvi) Udhagamandalam Taluks in the The 
Nilgiris District; (xvii) Avadi, (xviii) Gummidipoondi and  (xix) Tiruvallur Taluks in 
Tiruvallur District; (xx) Tiruppur-North, (xxi) Uthukuli and (xxii) Avinashi Taluks in 
Tiruppur District. 
5  Software for digitization and mosaicing of survey maps. 6  Dwelling area of a village. 
7  Basic land register which captures season-wise crops cultivated by the farmers, its 
yield, irrigation source etc.  

Performance Audit on Land Records Management in Tamil Nadu 
 
 4 
The replies received from DoSS, eight ADSLR offices and 22 Taluks and the 
response of the Department in the exit conference were considered while 
drafting this Report.   
1.6  Audit Criteria  
With a view to validate the Audit Objectives (i) and (iii) mentioned under 
Paragraph 1.2 above, the audit findings were benchmarked against the 
following criteria:  
 NLRMP and DILRMP guidelines issued by Government of India.   
 Survey Manual - Volumes I ,II and III; Chain Survey Manual- 
Volumes I & II, 1923;  Tamil Nadu Survey Boundaries Act / Rules.  
 Registration Manual/Revenue Manual/Revenue Standing Orders/ 
Board of Standing Orders.  
 Government Orders issued by R&DMD.  
 Notifications/Gazette/Amendments to Legislative Act.  
 Agreements between GoI and GoTN, NIC etc.  
 Tamil Nadu Tender Transparency Act, 1998 and Rules.  
Similarly, with a view to validate the Audit Objective (ii), the audit findings 
were benchmarked against the following criteria: 
 System Requirement Specifications/User Manuals relating to 
software applications. 
 Guidelines/circulars/instructions issued by DoSS/Project 
Management Unit/Committees.    
1.7  Previous Audit Reports 
Two Performance Audits (PA) on Computerisation of Land Records were 
included in C&AG’s Audit Reports on GoTN for the years 2002-03 and  
2008-09.  The Public Accounts Committee (PAC) of the Legislative Assembly 
discussed the findings included in the AR 2002-03 and gave its 
recommendations in 2012.  The PA included in the AR 2008-09 is yet to be 
discussed (March 2022) by the PAC. 
Despite bringing out various issues in the management of land records in  
these two PAs, GoTN had not taken effective action on the inaccuracies in 
land and ownership details, deficiencies in Field Measurement Sketches etc., 
which resulted  in non-achievement of objectives of Computerisation of Land 
Records.  
1.8  Acknowledgement 
Audit acknowledges the co-operation and assistance extended by the 
Department and audited entities in conduct of this Performance Audit.  Audit 
also acknowledges and appreciates the action taken by the Government to put 

Chapter I 
 
 5 
in place a suitable system through two8 Government Orders issued in  
October 2021 to address issues such as (i) data entry errors, (ii) missing 
entries, (iii) land extent correction, (iv) owner/relative name corrections 
including relationship status, (v) enumerating classification changes like 
Government to Private and vice versa etc. pointed out in this report. 
1.9  Audit Findings 
The audit findings are grouped under the following Chapters.  
 Chapter II: Computerisation of land records  
 Chapter III: Citizen services  
 Chapter IV: Project implementation  
 Chapter V: Data security and monitoring 
                                                           
8  R&DMD (Survey and Settlement Wing) G.O. Ms. No. 612 dated 01/10/2021 and 
G.O.Ms. No. 644 dated 11/10/2021. 

CHAPTER II 
COMPUTERISATION 
OF LAND RECORDS 
 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 7 
CHAPTER II 
 
COMPUTERISATION OF LAND RECORDS 
 
2.1 Status of computerisation of land records 
2.1.1 Physical progress 
The important land records in rural areas of the State are (i) ‘A’ Register1,  
(ii) Chitta2, (iii) Field Measurement Book (FMB), (iv) e-Adangal and  
(v) Village maps. Land records of urban areas are (i) Town Survey Land 
Register (TSLR) and (ii) Block maps. The manual land records are over a 
century old.   Under a scheme for Updating of Registry (UDR), the manual 
land records relating to all agricultural lands were inspected and the revenue 
records were updated during 1979-87. 
Computerisation of Land Records (CLR) scheme was launched in 1988-89. 
After computerising ‘A Register’ and Chitta, the TamilNilam application 
started running in stand-alone computers in all the taluks from 2002.  In 2014, 
a special drive was carried out to make TamilNilam error-free and the system 
was brought online. By 2016, under DILRMP, all land records except Natham 
textual and Urban spatial records were made online and as of  
2020-21, 3.75 crore textual records and 0.55 crore spatial records are held  
online in TamilNilam.  But 1.42 crore Natham land records are still maintained 
in stand-alone computers in district survey offices. The component-wise status 
of DILRMP as of March 2021 is given in Table 2.1.  
Table 2.1: Component-wise status of DILRMP 
Component Status as of March 2021 
Creation of Land Records Management 
Centres (LRMC)  
Out of the 305 LRMCs proposed, 161 were completed and  
144 LRMCs are yet to be established. 
Data entry Data entry of Rural, Urban and Natham textual land records has been 
completed. While Rural and Urban land records have been brought 
online, Natham is yet to be brought online as software is under 
development. 
Creation of Taluk/Division/District 
data centres 
Completed 
State Data Centre for Land Records Completed 
Interconnectivity Established 
Project Management Unit (PMU) Established 
Digitization of Cadastral Maps Out of 55.20 lakh FMS in rural taluks, 54.90 lakh were digitized and 
brought online. In urban taluks only 2,343 FMS out of 25,840 have 
been digitized so far. 
Survey/Resurvey Resurvey taken up in the pilot taluks in three districts is in progress. 
NLRMP Training Cell  Created and functioning in Orathanadu, Thanjavur District. 
(Source: Details furnished by DoSS) 
 
                                                           
1  Land register containing details of Survey number, Sub-division number, old Survey 
number, whether part or independent, Government/Private, Dry/Wet, Irrigation source, 
Cropping frequency, Soil texture, Soil quality, Rate of tax per hectare/Ares, Area 
(Hectares/Ares), Total tax, patta number and remarks for each land parcel. 
2  Document providing details of ownership of land. 

Performance Audit on Land Records Management in Tamil Nadu  
 
 8 
2.1.2 Financial management 
As per guidelines of NLRMP, the funds are managed by NLRMP 
Implementation Society of Tamil Nadu (NIST), which is registered under the 
TN Societies Registration Act, 1975. The year-wise expenditure during the 
audit period, and the component-wise breakup since commencement of the 
scheme are furnished in Tables 2.2 and 2.3 respectively. 
Table 2.2: The year-wise breakup of release of funds and expenditure during the  
audit period 
( in lakh) 
Year Fund released Expenditure Balance 
2016-17  40.00 37.21 2.79 
2017-18  10.00 10.00 0 
2018-19  1,530.21 1,300.07 230.14 
2019-20  375.13 18.94 356.19 
2020-21  230.63 83.54 147.09 
Total  2,185.97* 1,449.76* 736.21 
* Details of funds released and expenditure shown here differs with that shown in  
Columns (4) and (5) in Table 2.3 which include the funds released and expenditure incurred 
since 2011-12 
(Source: Details furnished by DoSS) 
Table 2.3: The component-wise breakup of release of funds and expenditure 
 ( in lakh) 
Component Funds released Expenditure Balance 
available 
Percentage of 
expenditure to 
funds released GoI GoTN Total 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 
((5)/(4) x 100) 
Creation of LRMCs 2,742.50 1,545.00 4,287.50 3,390.88 896.62 79 
Data entry 123.00 0 123.00 121.18 1.82 99 
Creation of Taluk/Division/ 
District data centers 
259.80 0 259.80 250.26 9.54 96 
State Data Centre for Land 
Records 
200.00 0 200.00 198.73 1.27 99 
Interconnectivity 89.60 0 89.60 89.60 0 100 
Creation of NLRMP Cell 173.77 0 173.77 159.68 14.09 92 
Project Management Unit  67.20 0 67.20 59.52 7.68 89 
Expenses towards meeting 1.49 0 1.49 1.49 0 100 
Digitization of Cadastral 
Maps 
319.00 0 319.00 319.00 0 100 
Survey/Resurvey 728.79 1,002.21 1,731.00 1,518.16 212.84 88 
NLRMP Training Cell 147.34 0 147.34 0 147.34 0 
Total 4,852.49 2,547.21 7,399.70 6,108.50 1,291.20 83 
(Source: Details furnished by DoSS) 
  

Chapter II 
 
 9 
Under the ‘Survey/Resurvey’ component, despite utilising 88 per cent of 
funds, the works were completed only in 19 to 24 per cent  of the villages in 
the three Taluks where these works were taken up, as  discussed in  
Paragraph 4.1.1. 
Only 53 per cent of LRMCs were established despite utilising 79 per cent of 
the funds earmarked therefor, as commented in Paragraph 4.2. 
DOSS did not utilise the funds earmarked for setting up NLRMP Training Cell 
at Chennai, and hence the entire provision of 1.47 crore was lying idle with 
NIST. 
2.2 Textual land records 
As per para 6.4.1 of GoTN Policy Note for the year 2016-17, the land records 
are maintained in two formats viz., textual (‘A-Register’ containing details of 
land and ‘Chitta’ containing details of ownership) and Spatial (Field 
Measurement Sketches). 
2.2.1 Differences in land area captured in manual and computerised 
A-Registers 
As per Rule 27 of Chapter IX of Survey Manual Volume I, the area of the 
village should be the sum of the areas of the Survey fields in that village. 
Audit compared the land extent between the computerised (in TamilNilam) 
and the manual A-Registers of the 463 test-checked3 villages, variations  
(61 per cent) in the extent were noticed in 282 villages (Appendix 2.1). 
To ascertain the reasons for the above variation, Audit reconciled the land 
extent of each Sub-division under all the Survey numbers in one village in 
each of the sampled taluks.  
 For eg. in Kattanagaram village of Tiruvidaimarudhur Taluk in 
Thanjavur District, out of the five Survey numbers where there was 
difference in area of land between manual A-Register and 
computerised A-Register, in four Survey numbers the area as per 
computerised A-Register was lesser by 17 Ares. In one Survey 
number the area was more by 0.25 Are.  The details are given in 
Appendix 2.1 (a). 
In response to Audit, the Tahsildars attributed the differences in the land 
extent to (i) incorrect totalling in the UDR A-Register, (ii) omission during 
computerisation and (iii) data entry errors.  
However, the fact was that the wrong entries and totalling errors caused these 
deficiencies even after carrying out a special drive in 2014 for verification and 
updation. The Principal Secretary to Government and DoSS accepted  
(October 2021) the points relating to wrong entries and agreed to take 
corrective action to rectify the differences. 
                                                           
3  Ten randomly selected villages per sampled taluk were checked. In taluks, where the 
number of villages were less than 10, the actual number of villages were checked.   
In Tiruvallur, Avinashi and Madurai East taluks, based on the data furnished, all the 
villages were checked. 

Performance Audit on Land Records Management in Tamil Nadu  
 
 10 
2.2.2 Capturing information from manual registers to computerised 
records 
An order issued by GoTN in September 2003, made the computerised land 
records as the only legally valid document and envisaged ensuring its 
accuracy. During digitization of manual land records, all information available 
in A-Register and Chitta were to be taken to the computerised system without 
any omission or error. Since the computerised records form the basis for all 
land transactions, the correctness and completeness of the computerised 
records were verified in Audit. The deficiencies noticed in this regard are as 
follows: 
(i) Rule 44 under Chapter VI (Field Demarcation) of the Tamil Nadu 
Survey Manual of Departmental Rules (Volume-I) published in 1976 state that 
‘fields must be numbered consecutively throughout a village commencing 
from the north-west corner of the first khandam4.  The last field in the  
first khandam must touch the boundary of the second khandam and so on, so 
that there may be no break in the continuity of the numbers’.  An analysis of 
the TamilNilam Rural database disclosed that there were gaps in the Survey 
numbers. In the verification it was found that the gaps were mainly due to 
clubbing of Survey numbers and splitting of villages.  However, the 
computerised A-Register did not contain information about the clubbed 
Survey numbers and their respective land type. The details of such cases 
noticed in the sampled taluks are furnished in Appendix 2.2.  
Under the manual system, whenever there was skipping of Survey numbers, 
reasons for the same were indicated in the manual A-Register against each 
number. However, in the TamilNilam software, no suitable provision was 
made to capture and store this information.  Non-capture of all land details 
would be an impediment to the field level survey officials and impact smooth 
flow of information to the public. Thus, incorrect mapping of business rule 
had resulted in discontinuity in Survey numbers. The Principal Secretary 
instructed (October 2021) DoSS/NIC to look into the issue and put up an 
action plan for capturing the missing information. 
(ii) As laid down in the Survey Manual, land parcels under a Survey 
number will be assigned a new Sub-division number whenever they are  
sub-divided or clubbed.  In order to keep track of the history of the  
sub-divided/clubbed land parcels, the Survey number under which the  
Sub-division/clubbing took place is stored in the ‘Old Survey number’ column 
in the manual system. The computerised system also provides for a column to 
store the old Survey number. 
With a view to ascertain the completeness and correctness of the old Survey 
numbers stored in the TamilNilam database, Audit examined the data of 
sampled taluks and found that in 5,06,518 out of 23,24,618 records  
(22 per cent) the old Survey number column did not contain any reference to 
the Survey number from which the Sub-division was done.  The details are 
given in Appendix 2.3. 
                                                           
4  Survey field in a village. 

Chapter II 
 
 11 
The missing/incomplete information in the data was due to lack of input 
controls in TamilNilam software. It is the responsibility of the DOSS to ensure 
a trail of land transactions as it has legal implications. The failure of the 
system to keep track of the old Survey numbers would lead to legal 
complications.   The Principal Secretary instructed (October 2021) NIC to 
ensure that old Survey numbers are correctly captured in the system and also 
rectify the errors pointed out by Audit. 
(iii) A special drive to clean the Survey/Sub-division numbers having 
special characters like ‘= / . - space’ was undertaken from December 2018. 
In this regard, Tahsildars were tasked with the work of checking and 
reconciling such Survey and Sub-division numbers, communicated by NIC 
through the ADSLR, with the respective A-Register/Chitta/FMS and to send 
the purified data to NIC through DOSS for cleansing TamilNilam database. 
However, from the data analysis of sampled rural and urban taluks it was 
found that 212 Survey and 1,282 Sub-division numbers continue to carry 
special characters as given in Appendices 2.4 (a) and (b).  These 
discrepancies persist despite undertaking the special data cleaning drive. 
Capturing of inadmissible special characters would impact issue of online 
patta as the system would not respond to the actual Sub-division number 
keyed in by the applicant.   
2.2.3 Non-adherence of notation rules while sub-dividing land parcels 
DoSS reiterated  (November 2017) the revision of notation rules restricting the 
length of the Sub-division number to a maximum of four digits/characters and 
intimated NIC that if the number of characters in the existing Sub-division 
exceeds four digits/character, while creating a new Sub-division, the next to 
the last of the whole Sub-division number within the same Survey number 
should be automatically assigned as the next Sub-division number.  It was also 
stated that it is mandatory to retain the parent Sub-division number. 
During field visit to taluks, it was noticed that the software prompts for new 
numbers to be provided for newly sub-divided land parcels thereby preventing 
the retention of parent Sub-division number for the newly sub-divided parcel. 
Audit noticed that out of 23,24,618 Sub-divisions in 1,029 villages of the 
sampled taluks, in 53,711 instances the Sub-division notation exceeded the 
four-character limit. Number of such instances that occurred after the 
implementation of Online Patta Transfer (OPT) i.e. 2016 was 34,656. The 
details of such instances are given in Appendix 2.5.  
In 2,70,692 Sub-divisions relating to transactions Involving  
Sub-divisions (ISD) (Appendix 2.6) in the sampled taluks, it has been 
observed that the mandatory retention of parent Sub-division number had not 
been followed as illustrated below: 
 In Placepalayam village of Tiruvallur Taluk, the parent  
Sub-division 3A1A under Survey number 292 was sub-divided into 
3A1A1 and 3A1A2.  As per the revised notation rule, one of the 

Performance Audit on Land Records Management in Tamil Nadu  
 
 12 
newly sub-divided land parcel should have retained parent  
Sub-division viz. 3A1A.    
 In Movur village of Tiruvallur Taluk, the parent Sub-division 1A1 
under Survey number 224 was sub-divided into 1A1A, 1A1B, 
1A1C, 1A1D, 1A1E, 1A1F and 1A1G.  In this case, one of the 
newly sub-divided land parcel should have retained parent  
Sub-division viz. 1A1, in line with revised notation rule. 
2.2.4 Classification of private lands as Government lands 
As per the Survey Manual, Patta is the document establishing the ownership 
of lands held by individuals.  Therefore, patta cannot be issued to private 
parties for lands, which are categorised as ‘Government land’.  During 
scrutiny of files in the office of the DoSS, Audit noticed that certain patta 
lands (private lands) in Coimbatore District were not accessible in TamilNilam 
for the applicant to register OPT applications through Common Service Centre 
(CSC) or for downloading Record of Rights (RoRs).  These patta lands 
categorised as ‘Government Punjai’5 in the original survey records of 1912, 
had patta numbers as per the system in vogue at that time. In the subsequent 
Town Survey (1955), these lands continued to be categorised as ‘Sarkar 
Punjai/Nanjai’6.  Later, under Updating of Registry (UDR) scheme (1979) in 
the Towns, the ownership type of these lands was recorded as ‘Ryotwari 
Nanjai/Punjai’7 and pattas were issued. At the time of computerising urban 
land records these lands were captured under the category ‘Sarkar Nanjai/ 
Punjai’ in the TamilNilam (Urban) database based on Town Survey records 
instead of relying on UDR scheme which categorised these lands as 
‘Ryotwari’.  
Any change in land classification from Government to private required the 
orders of the District Collectors.  Therefore, all the District Collectors were 
informed (September 2018) about the wrong categorisation of 6.22 lakh land 
records across 111 towns in the State i.e., land parcels reflected in Revenue 
records as private ownership but classified as Sarkar Nanjai/Punjai/Manai/ 
Poromboke8, for taking suitable action.  
DoSS replied (January 2021) that this issue was prevalent across 30 districts 
and stated (October 2021) that nearly 3 lakh out of the 6.22 lakh cases have 
been rectified till date and assured that the remaining cases would also be 
rectified soon. 
It is, however, a matter of serious concern that owners of about 3.22 lakh land 
parcels are put to hardship in getting patta transfers.  
  
                                                           
5  Government dry lands. 6  Government dry lands/wet lands. 
7  Private dry lands/wet lands. 
8  Government wet lands/dry lands/residential plot/waste lands. 

Chapter II 
 
 13 
2.2.5 Deficiencies in ownership details 
As per System Requirement Specifications (SRS) of TamilNilam, Patta 
number is the common information, which links the A-Register (details of 
lands) and the Chitta (details of owners) tables. The Patta extract (RoR) 
issued to the land owners is generated by combining information from these 
two tables. Data analysis of ‘Chitta’ table revealed the following deficiencies:  
(i)   Assigning of multiple patta numbers to single pattadhar in a village: 
As per SRS of TamilNilam, if the buyer already has a patta number in that 
village, then his new land holdings would be added to that patta number. This 
control is intended for ascertaining the maximum extent of land that a family 
can hold in the State as envisaged under the Tamil Nadu land Reforms 
(Fixation of Ceiling on land) Fourth Amendment Act, 1972  
(Tamil Nadu Act 39/72). New patta number would be assigned only for new 
Pattadhars (one who holds the land title). 
Data analysis in sampled rural taluks revealed that 1,43,808 land owners in 
1,029 villages (Appendix 2.7 (a)) were assigned different patta numbers for 
their land holdings within a village.  Similar analysis in the sampled urban 
taluks revealed that 29,128 land owners (Appendix 2.7 (b)) were assigned 
different patta numbers for their land holdings within a village.   
Even after implementation of OPT system, 66,2909 such cases were created as 
controls in TamilNilam were inadequate as it allowed the workflow officials to 
bypass the existing patta number. 
DOSS stated (October 2021) that Aadhar integration could be an effective 
solution and till its implementation, suitable instructions would be issued. 
(ii)  Discrepancies in ownership details: Patta is the primary land 
document which gives conclusive titling rights to the land owner and it should 
be complete in all aspects. Data analysis in the sampled taluks revealed 
discrepancies in 75,929 (3.27 per cent) out of 23.25 lakh Sub-divisions. As 
these discrepancies are only in respect of the sampled 22 out of 305 taluks  
(seven per cent), the magnitude of similar cases across the State would be 
significant. Hence, timely remedial action by the Department is required. The 
details are discussed below: 
 13,359 private lands did not have any ownership information like 
name of the owner, name of the relative and the nature of 
relationship (father, son, mother, wife etc.). In another  
8,68,140 cases, though a record was available in the ‘Chitta table’10, 
the name of owner/relative was not available.  As a result RoRs 
downloaded by the citizen would be without complete information. 
                                                           
9 50,553 cases in the sampled rural taluks and 15,737 cases in the sampled urban 
taluks. 10  ‘ Chitta table’ contains the ownership details of private lands in the following 
columns viz., Patta Number, Owner Name, Relative Name, Owner Number, Relative 
Number etc.   

Performance Audit on Land Records Management in Tamil Nadu  
 
 14 
 The combination of owner name, relative name and patta number 
should be unique and should not be duplicated in the ‘Chitta’ table. 
It was, however, seen that in 19,374 records of the Chitta table, this 
combination occurred more than once for a patta number resulting 
in duplication of owner name in the Chitta copy generated through 
e-services.  
 In 43,196 cases, it was found that there were names ending with ‘
’ 
and ‘
’ instead of ‘
’ and ‘
’ respectively. Hence, an error in Tamil 
will result in the English spelling of the name ‘Kumar’ as ‘Kumara’. 
Similarly the name ‘Venkatram’ will be ‘Venkatrama’. In all these 
cases the Pattadhars have to apply for name change for getting the 
owner/relative name with correct spelling in their patta/Chitta 
extracts. As the above inaccuracies are only sample cases pointed 
out by Audit, corrective action has to be taken by the Department to 
identify and rectify errors of similar nature in all taluks and also 
take suitable steps to prevent recurrence of such events. 
The above deficiencies were grouped rural and urban taluk-wise and are given 
in Appendices 2.8 (a) and 2.8 (b) respectively. DoSS stated (October 2021) 
that necessary steps would be taken to resolve the issues. 
(iii)  Redundant patta numbers: Data analysis in sampled rural and urban 
taluks revealed that 2,95,780 out of 16,15,975 patta numbers (Appendices  
2.9 (a) and 2.9 (b)) in Chitta table in the TamilNilam software were available 
with no matching entry in the A-Register. On further analysis, it was observed 
that these were redundant patta numbers as the connected land parcel had 
already been assigned with a new patta number during subsequent land 
transactions.  
As the land transactions in the State are completely dependent on the 
TamilNilam database, keeping the redundant patta numbers poses a risk of 
misuse in the online workflow system.  
DoSS stated (October 2021) that redundant patta numbers were required for 
tracing all land mutations that a land parcel underwent. DoSS further added 
that these redundant records would be archived separately within the database 
to prevent their misuse.  
As the patta number is the common information, which links the A-Register 
and the Chitta tables, once a new patta number is assigned to the land 
transferred to new owner, details of the old patta number in the A-Register 
and Chitta tables should be moved together and archived separately.  If this is 
not done, the old patta number in the Chitta table without a corresponding 
entry in the A-Register could be misused to issue patta to wrong persons.   
Therefore, it is suggested that necessary action to archive the old patta number 
should be taken to make the system efficient. 
  

Chapter II 
 
 15 
2.2.6 Inconsistent capture of legacy records in TamilNilam (Urban) 
database 
As per para 3.1 of DILRMP guidelines, all textual land records and other 
attributes of land are to be computerised. However, examination of the 
Management Information System (MIS) reports revealed that there were land 
records yet to be brought into TamilNilam software, which were pending 
verification by the Tahsildar. It would be available online for OPT transaction 
only after verification.  The pendency in such instances in the sampled taluks 
are as detailed in Table 2.4. 
Table 2.4: Inconsistent capture of legacy records in TamilNilam (Urban) database 
Taluk Number of ‘Land 
not verified’ cases 
Number of ‘Owner 
not verified’ cases 
Alandur - 1 
Madurai North 28 68 
Mambalam - 333 
Thirupparankundram 33 2 
Tiruppur North - 1 
Tiruvallur 22 55 
Velachery 5 6 
Total 88 466 
(Source: Tahsildar’s login in the TamilNilam  workflow system) 
Due to this, whenever an individual applies for OPT transactions in respect of 
these land records (Table 2.4) a message ‘Contact Tahsildar’ pops-up in the 
OPT registration screen.  Unless these cases are verified and updated in 
TamilNilam, the land owner cannot apply for OPT. Taluk offices attributed 
damaged/missing land records for the ‘non-verified’ status of these cases. 
Thus, the MIS reports are to be utilised by the Tahsildars to monitor the 
pendency and conduct the verification at the earliest.  
2.2.7 Discrepancies in allotment of Sub-division numbers 
As per Rule 44 and 45 of the Tamil Nadu Survey Manual Departmental Rules 
Volume-I, ‘Sub-divisions in each Survey field should be numbered 
consecutively from the north-west corner of the field’. Lands records (Textual 
data of ‘A’ Register and Chitta) of Chennai District were ported to 
TamilNilam (Urban) in July 2016.  During scrutiny of files in DoSS, Audit 
noticed that there were missing entries in the TamilNilam (Urban) database of 
Chennai District besides other errors. In order to verify these discrepancies, 
Audit obtained the MIS exception reports relating to Chennai District through 
the Department’s login.  The MIS report was then analysed and compared 
with e-services web portal and the observations are as follows:   
When a Survey number is divided into two or more Sub-divisions, the  
Sub-division notation ‘0’ should not be continued and the numbering should 
commence from ‘1’ onwards.  However, 910 Survey numbers with multiple 
Sub-divisions, had one of the Sub-division numbered as ‘0’.  Further analysis  
 

Performance Audit on Land Records Management in Tamil Nadu  
 
 16 
also revealed that there were gaps in the Sub-division numbers. Out of the 
above, it was seen that 3,416 Sub-divisions were missing under  
137 Survey numbers.  
In the illustration given in Table 2.5, while the last Sub-division is 5 (Record 
No.3), the Survey number 102 should carry five records as per the rule cited.  
The availability of only three records thus indicates that either two land record 
details were not brought into the TamilNilam database or the information 
captured was incorrect. 
Table 2.5: Illustrative case of discrepancies in allotment of Sub-division numbers 
Record 
No. 
Town Ward Block Survey 
number 
Sub-
division 
number 
1 Ambattur Mogappair 0060 102 0 
2 Ambattur Mogappair 0060 102 4 
3 Ambattur Mogappair 0060 102 5 
(Source: MIS Report from the TamilNilam web portal) 
Similar analysis of sampled urban taluks data revealed that  
10,592 Sub-divisions in 978 Survey numbers were missing as detailed in  
Appendix 2.10. 
DoSS in their reply (January 2021) stated that this occurred due to human 
error and such errors were rectified as and when brought to notice. He further 
stated that instructions were already issued through circulars (March 2020) 
and review meetings to complete the restoration of missing records. In 
continuation, GoTN has issued orders (October 2021) inter alia to verify and 
rectify the deficiencies pointed out. The reply of DoSS confirms that the 
VAOs and line officials need to be trained in this area or land related rules, 
provisions and processes so as to capture data without errors or minimise 
error.  
2.2.8 Non-updation of land Sub-division changes in TamilNilam - 
Aranthangi taluk 
As per GoTN order issued in December 2016, transfer of Record of Right 
should be carried out only through online mode. During scrutiny of files in the 
Directorate, it was seen that OPT applications were being rejected in 
Aranthangi Taluk, Pudukottai District due to the following discrepancies: 
 The land Sub-division changes effected in the manual records viz.,  
A-Register and Chitta were not captured/updated in TamilNilam 
resulting in name of earlier pattadars continuing in the system. 
 769 Sub-divisions of four Wards of Aranthangi Town (A Ward - 
125; B Ward - 111; C Ward - 133 and D Ward - 400) were not 
captured in TamilNilam. 
To an audit enquiry in this regard, DoSS stated (January 2021) that this was an 
isolated incident arising from human error and missed out during verification 
and that such errors were rectified as and when brought notice.  It was also 

Chapter II 
 
 17 
stated that the errors were rectified/updated by tracing out the patta transfer 
files for the omitted entries. Audit cross checked (October 2021) the status of 
rectification and found that out of the 769 Sub-divisions only 271 were set 
right by capturing their details and the remaining 498 Sub-divisions were not 
yet brought into TamilNilam. In October 2021, GoTN has issued orders  
inter alia to verify and rectify the deficiencies pointed out.  
2.3 Spatial land records 
The spatial data has been organised in two ways viz., (i) village maps with 
land parcel boundaries and (ii) ladder data of individual land parcels as Field 
Measurement Sketches (FMSs).  FMS form an integral part of the land records 
and is the basic input for digitization and mosaicing11 of the cadastral maps. 
According to NLRMP guidelines 2009, FMS is the sketch showing 
measurement boundaries of the Survey number, and it contains measurement 
of all land parcels in a village.  Thus, each Survey number should have a 
corresponding FMS showing measurement boundaries of the Survey number, 
outlines of all the Sub-divisions contained within the Survey number and the 
Survey number of all its adjoining fields. Field Measurement Book (FMB) 
contains several FMS covering all lands in a village.  Digitization of FMSs 
result in faster processing of the FMS including creation of new Sub-divisions, 
modification of existing sketches, portability of data, facility to draw the FMS 
to different scales leading to higher clarity, and quicker delivery of copies of 
FMS to land owners. 
The Department claimed (October 2020) that out of 55.20 lakh FMSs, 
digitization of 54.97 lakh FMSs were completed and brought online. The 
digitization work was executed in-house at the district level by outsourcing.  
Out of the 0.23 lakh FMSs required to be computerised, 0.20 lakh were stated 
to be missing and the available FMSs were yet to be computerised.  DoSS 
stated that efforts were underway to trace the missing FMSs in the State’s 
archive and those not traceable will be recreated through Resurvey.  In the 
case of Block maps (Urban areas) the digitization was in progress and only 
2,343 out of 25,840 were digitized so far. 
In the CollabLand software12, the process of digitization of FMS involved 
generation of FMSs based on the ladder data of legacy FMS.  However, the 
area of the Survey number/Sub-division calculated and displayed in the FMS 
in CollabLand differed from the area as per the textual data i.e. manual  
A-Register.  The Department attributed this difference to the traditional 
Survey methodology (using links and chains) that was adopted earlier and the 
computerisation of the traditional ladder data in CollabLand.  To overcome 
this, the Department decided to overlay the area as per the manual A-Register 
                                                           
11  Combining sketches of smaller and irregular land parcels to generate field maps, 
village maps and higher order maps. 
12 CollabLand software can handle a variety of Survey systems like Chain, Theodolite 
and Electronic Total Station. CollabLand can create maps of individual land parcels 
and mosaic them to village maps. Besides, it can import maps from Shape files, and 
can handle a host of measurement units. 

Performance Audit on Land Records Management in Tamil Nadu  
 
 18 
on to the CollabLand generated FMSs to avoid complaints from land owners. 
For this purpose, the area of the Survey number/Sub-division as available in 
the computerised A-Register was brought into CollabLand by data entry.  
Prior to computerisation, land owners sought and obtained copies of their land 
sketches on payment of prescribed fees.  Consequent to computerisation, the 
land owners can download the FMS free of cost through the Department’s  
e-services web portal. 
In order to derive assurance on the digitization of the legacy spatial data 
(FMS), its completeness, correctness and updation of subsequent land 
maintenance carried out at the Taluk level, Audit scrutinised related files and 
records in the office of the DoSS, offices of the ADSLR in the sample 
districts, the sampled taluks offices and the spatial database maintained in 
PostgreSQL. The findings are as follows: 
2.3.1 Discrepancies between textual and spatial records  
 Lack of matching Survey number between TamilNilam (Rural) and 
FMS database: All the Survey numbers available in A-Register 
(textual data) should have corresponding entries with matching 
details in FMS (spatial data). However, it was observed that  
20,679 out of 2,58,661 Survey numbers (Appendix 2.11) did not 
have corresponding FMS in the CollabLand database. 
 Lack of matching Sub-division number between TamilNilam 
(Rural) and FMS database: A similar examination to check whether 
all the Sub-divisions available in the A-Register had corresponding 
entries in the CollabLand database of the sampled taluks disclosed 
that 6,25,223 out of 23,24,618 Sub-divisions (Appendix 2.12) had 
no corresponding FMSs in the CollabLand database. 
2.3.2 Differences in land area between TamilNilam (Rural) and FMS 
database 
On comparison of the A-Register with FMS databases relating to the sampled 
taluks (Appendix 2.13), it was found that the land area under 32,120 out of 
2,37,982 Survey numbers and 2,27,459 out of 15,88,564 Sub-divisions were at 
variance. 
The reason for this was that the Department did not auto populate the required 
details from the already available computerised A-Register and instead chose 
to capture the details by data entry. This resulted in incorrect display of land 
area in the FMSs in the above cases resulting in deficient service to citizens 
through the e-services web portal of the Department. 
NIC accepted (October 2021) that these details were captured by data entry in 
CollabLand. The Department stated that these data entry errors would be 
rectified.  
2.3.3  Differences in land extents captured and calculated in spatial 
(FMS) database  
Considering the wide variations between the area in the A-Register and the 
area calculated by the CollabLand, the Department decided to permit variation 

Chapter II 
 
 19 
allowance of up to five per cent.  Audit analysed the FMS database by 
comparing the textual and the calculated areas.  The analysis disclosed that the 
percentage of variation exceeded in 32,143 out of 2,37,974 FMSs in the 
sampled taluks as detailed in Appendix 2.14. The variation ranged from  
6 to more than 100 per cent. This was due to lack of validation checks. 
The Department replied (October 2021) that these variations would be 
checked in consultation with NIC and sorted out.  DoSS also informed that  
A-Register and FMS would be integrated to avoid inconsistency shown in land 
area between the textual and spatial computerised data. 
Cases of variations beyond the allowed limit should be reviewed, by doing a 
Resurvey using the latest technology, wherever required and the extent of land 
on the ground should be adopted to achieve conclusive land-titling system 
with title guarantee. 
2.3.4 Inconsistent capture of details in spatial (FMS) database 
resulting in non-accessibility of FMS by citizens 
It was noticed that in 55,386 out of 22,26,501 Sub-divisions (Appendix 2.15), 
the Survey number/Sub-division information was erroneously captured. In 
these cases, citizens would not be able to download their FMSs. A sample case 
bringing out the above deficiency is given in Table 2.6. 
Table 2.6: Illustrative case of inconsistent capture of details in spatial (FMS) database 
‘landRecID’ 3201003316 32 denotes Tiruppur District 
01 denotes Tiruppur North Taluk 
003 denotes Nerupperichal Village and  
316 denote the Survey number which has two Sub-
divisions viz., ‘1’ and ‘2’ as per A-Register 
Survey number and Sub-divisions as 
per ‘A-Register’ 
316/1, 316/2 
Survey number and Sub-divisions as 
per spatial data 
315/1, 315/2 
In e-Services, only the Sub-divisions as available in the A-Register under the selected Survey 
number were displayed to the user to fetch either the patta or the FMB. In the above instance, 
when either Survey number/Sub-division 316/1 or 316/2 was selected by the user for downloading 
the FMS, the e-services portal displayed the message ‘Sub-division 316/1 does not exist in the 
map’ or ‘Sub-division 316/2 does not exist in the map’, and did not display the FMS. 
(Source: FMS database furnished by the Department) 
ADSLR, Tiruvallur while accepting the erroneous data entry, replied (August 
2021) that they have rectified the data entry error in the sample cases pointed 
by Audit. ADsSLR, Tiruppur and Madurai (August/September 2021) stated 
that these errors would be rectified after verification of FMS data with 
TamilNilam data on getting orders from DoSS for the proposed special drive. 
2.3.5 Incorrect capture of adjacency details in FMS 
Paragraphs 140 to 143 under Chapter XIII of The Tamil Nadu Survey Manual 
of Department Rules Volume I, envisage that the measurements for the 
common boundaries between adjoining properties and blocks should be 
carefully examined to see whether they agree. 

Performance Audit on Land Records Management in Tamil Nadu  
 
 20 
The details of all fields adjoining a Survey field are captured and stored in 
column ‘ad1’ of the ‘adjacencytabledatamain’ table in the CollabLand 
database. This information was used by the system to fetch and display the 
FMS of a Survey field as well as the Survey numbers of its adjoining fields.  
This information was also required for the complete and accurate mosaicing of 
village maps which is a prelude to mosaicing higher order maps like Taluk, 
District and State maps.  
Examination of CollabLand data in the sampled taluks disclosed that out of 
8,82,977 FMSs in 1,411 FMSs (Appendix 2.16) details of adjoining fields of 
a Survey field was captured incorrectly.   
An illustration, bringing out the deficiency is given in Exhibit 2.1 below: 
Exhibit 2.1: Illustrative case depicting incorrect capture of adjacent field details 
Taluk Village Survey Field Adjacent Survey numbers 
Tiruvallur Guruvayal 204 214, 203, 204, 197, 196, 205 
 
In the above example, it is observed that one of the adjacent field details of Survey field 204 is 
denoted as 204 (circled) which is not correct as the Survey number of the FMS itself cannot be 
one of its adjacent field number. On placing the adjacent fields of Survey field 204 beside 
each other, it was noticed that the number circled in the diagram above should be 199 instead 
of 204.  The sketch of Survey field 199 placed in the diagram above also confirms this 
observation. 
(Source: Department’s e-services web portal) 
Thus, the presence of errors in the adjacent field numbers would impede the 
envisaged goal of mosaicing maps. In reply, the ADsSLR stated that the above 
data entry errors will be verified and corrected.  These lapses in the FMS  
 

Chapter II 
 
 21 
indicate that the quality checks carried out by the technical staff in the 
respective district survey offices i.e. ADsSLR at the time of digitization of 
FMS were deficient.  
In response, DoSS informed that these errors would be corrected in the FMS 
database in co-ordination with NIC.  
2.3.6 Delay in updating records in FMS database  
As per the departmental instructions issued by DoSS in 2017, as soon as the 
OPT application in respect of ISD cases are approved in the Taluk, the 
resultant changes in land details are to be entered in Taluk manual registers 
and Sub-division sketches drawn in the manual records as well as in 
CollabLand System. However, due to non-integration of the textual and spatial 
computerised land records, after approval of an ISD OPT application by 
Tahsildar, the related FMS had to be updated in the manual records and then 
the FMS database was to be updated using CollabLand application in the 
Taluk Server within 24 hours. 
With a view to ascertain the status of updation of FMS changes in the Taluk 
CollabLand, 50 applications were randomly selected from the ISD cases 
approved during January 2021 to March 2021 for audit scrutiny in the sampled 
taluks.  Audit noticed that while the non-updation of FMS at the Taluk Server 
level was 30 per cent, at the Central Server level it was 61 per cent.  The 
details of non-updation both at the Taluk and at the Central Servers are given 
in Appendix 2.17. 
NIC replied (October 2021) that they had taken action to clear the backlog of 
FMS changes in the CollabLand and also stated that they would soon 
implement Web CollabLand (BhuNaksha) for real time updation of spatial 
data and are taking all efforts to bring the FMS database up-to-date. 
When both textual and spatial land records were computerised and brought  
online, the non-integration of the two databases in the TamilNilam application 
was responsible for not achieving real time updation of spatial data for 
delivery of  better services to the public.  
2.3.7 Delay in preparation of Village/Taluk/District Maps in Tamil 
In September 2014, GoTN issued orders for the preparation of 
village/taluk/district maps in Tamil language in addition to the existing maps 
in English.  Sale of these maps besides being a service to the public also 
generates revenue for the Government. During the period March 2017 to 
February 2020, the Department collected 64.48 lakh from the sale of village, 
taluk and district maps (English version). 
GoTN instructed DOSS to complete the preparation of village/taluk/district 
maps in Tamil language on or before 31 March 2016.  The status  
(October 2020) of the work of digitization of maps in English and Tamil is as 
given in Table 2.7. 
  

Performance Audit on Land Records Management in Tamil Nadu  
 
 22 
Table 2.7: Status of the work of digitization of maps in English and Tamil 
Sl. 
No. 
Category of map Number of 
maps 
Vectorised so far 
In English In Tamil 
1 Village 16,721 11,734 7,684 
2 Taluk outline 312 312 267 
3 Taluk colour 312 256 2 
4 District outline 38 38 15 
5 District colour 38 32 11 
(Source: Details furnished by the Department) 
From the Table 2.7 it is seen that the digitization work remained incomplete, 
even after more than four years of the timeline for completing the work.  Due 
to this, sale of digital village, taluk and district maps to the public through 
online mode was delayed and also caused hardship to the public as they are 
compelled to visit district survey offices for purchasing maps in the absence of 
sale of manual maps at the Taluk level. 
The Department, in its reply (October 2020) stated that in so far as district and 
taluk outline maps of the newly created districts and taluks are concerned, 
Gazette notification, verification from the District office concerned (ADSLR) 
and approval from the Ministry of Defence, Survey of India and Ministry of 
Environment and Forests were awaited.  Reply stated only about the newly 
created district/taluks and is silent about the delay in/non-completion of the 
work of digitization of nearly 30 per cent of village maps in English and  
46 per cent of village maps in Tamil.  
2.4 Computerisation of Natham (dwelling) land records  
According to land classification, being followed by Revenue Department, 
Government lands used for dwelling purposes by the public were classified as 
‘Natham’ and pattas were issued by conducting survey in 1989.  While 
Natham Settlement13 work was completed in all the villages of the State, the 
same is in progress in municipal towns and Corporations.   
The Department carried out the work of computerising 1.42 crore Natham land 
records in the State, through its District Survey Offices i.e. O/o the Assistant 
Director of Survey and Land Records (ADSLR) and completed it in 2017. 
This activity was carried out by utilising the services of outsourced Data Entry 
Operators. The computerised Natham land records, pending online porting is 
currently available/stored in the respective ADSLR offices in the districts. 
Audit checked the correctness and completeness of the Natham database 
relating to the seven sampled taluks and found the following inconsistencies. 
  
                                                           
13  An activity, which verifies, corrects and establishes aspects of a land record such as 
land type, classification, assessment and ownership. 

Chapter II 
 
 23 
2.4.1 Natham land parcels without ownership details in computerised 
Natham Chitta 
Audit examined the Natham database of the sampled taluks using the key 
field ‘Patta’ numbers (which links the ‘Natham A-Register’ and ‘Natham 
Chitta’ tables) and found that ownership details were not available in 14,604 
out of 4,29,299 private land parcels (Appendix 2.18). 
2.4.2 Redundant Natham patta numbers in computerised Natham 
Chitta 
Audit examination also revealed the presence of patta numbers in the ‘Natham 
Chitta’ table with no corresponding record in the Natham A-Register 
(Adangal) table indicating that these pattas were redundant. The number of 
redundant patta numbers noticed in Audit was 19,646 in the sampled taluks  
(Appendix 2.19). 
2.4.3 Deficiency in computerised Natham Chitta  
During the Audit examination, it was also seen that the Natham Chitta table 
did not have name of the owner and/or the relative. The number of such 
instances in the sampled taluks were 293 and 328 cases respectively 
(Appendix 2.20). 
All the above lapses point to the fact that the computerised Natham database 
was deficient due to lack of validation control in the application software and 
also not carrying out the data verification exercise properly with reference to 
the manual records. Besides, after a lapse of four years, 1.42 crore Natham 
land records have not been brought online due to non-development of required 
software.  As a result, all transactions relating to Natham lands are being 
carried out manually till date.   
The Principal Secretary stated (October 2021) that necessary arrangements are 
being made to bring the Natham land records online at the earliest. Given the 
importance of Natham land data, the Principal Secretary instructed DoSS and 
NIC to iron out the errors pointed out by Audit before going online. 
2.5 Computerisation of Adangal records (e-Adangal project) 
According to Board of Revenue Standing Order 12, 1976, Adangal, the basic 
land register maintained by the Village Administrative Officers (VAOs) for 
each village, captures season-wise crops cultivated, its yield, irrigation source 
etc., and the data so collected is used to generate G-Return (total cultivation 
statistical report). It is an essential document for giving relief to the farmers 
for crop damage whose crops are damaged due to flood, drought and insect 
infestation. 
GoTN ordered the computerisation of Adangal in August 2017. The web 
based e-Adangal application was launched on 26 October 2018. Up to the 

Performance Audit on Land Records Management in Tamil Nadu  
 
 24 
Fasli year14 1428, the Adangal was written manually by VAOs, which was 
laborious and time consuming. 
In the earlier system, the farmer had no role in the Adangal register prepared 
by VAOs. Under the e-Adangal system, to empower them, farmers are 
allowed to record their crop details. Whenever there is a mismatch between 
the entries made by the VAO and a farmer, it is automatically referred to the 
next higher level officer to verify the correctness of the entry. The other 
stakeholders like Agriculture, Horticulture, Sericulture and Statistics 
Department officials are also authorised to make entries of crop raised in their 
jurisdiction in a separate window in the e-Adangal thereby enabling the 
automated reconciliation of the crop data and eliminate the manual process of 
reconciliation. Farmers can view their Adangal entry and download the  
e-Adangal extract at their convenience or at the Common Service Centres 
(CSCs) on payment of100 per page. 
2.5.1 Delay in procurement of dedicated server infrastructure for  
e-Adangal 
Tamil Nadu e-Governance Agency (TNeGA) was entrusted with the work of 
development of online application and mobile application for e-Adangal in 
June 2017.  TNeGA contracted M/s. CMS Computers Ltd., for software 
development in October 2017.  The User Acceptance Testing (UAT) was 
completed on 25 October 2018 and the application was hosted in the existing  
e-Sevai server. 
But after the launch, owing to steep increase in the number of simultaneous 
users and the size of the software application, the developer requested 
(September 2019) dedicated infrastructure for hosting the e-Adangal 
application. GoTN accordingly sanctioned 2.24 crore towards the purchase 
of server for e-Adangal application and the amount was transferred to TNeGA 
in September 2020.  However, the procurement has not been done (October 
2021). In reply, TNeGA stated (May 2021) that they were totally engaged in 
Information Technology (IT) support for COVID related issues and action was 
being taken for procurement within a short period of time.  
2.5.2 Deficiencies noticed in the e-Adangal System 
Under the e-Adangal system, farmers can enter the crop details either directly 
through their registered login or through CSC.  During registration, the 
farmer’s personal details (viz., Name, Address, Contact numbers, Bank 
account) are captured. The land details of farmers are fetched from the 
TamilNilam database. Once the process is completed a Citizen Access Number 
(CAN) is generated and crop details viz., irrigation source, land owner name, 
type of cultivation, crop type, crop name, date of sowing for the season are 
captured.  Similarly, in case of crop damage and when the field is cultivated 
again, the re-sown details are also captured.  The captured details are then 
                                                           
14 Fasli year is the period of 12 months from July to June and is specifically used for 
land revenue purposes. Adding 590 to a fasli year will be the Gregorian calendar 
year. Fasli year 1428 corresponds to Gregorian year 2018.  

Chapter II 
 
 25 
available in the login of the VAOs concerned to enable physical verification of 
these details during their field inspection.  VAOs can also make suo-moto crop 
entries based on their field inspection. 
The e-Adangal data for the State, obtained from the Revenue Department, was 
analysed in respect of 18 taluks relating to seven out of eight sampled Districts 
(excluding Chennai) viz., Kanniyakumari, Madurai, Nilgiris, Tiruppur, 
Thanjavur, Perambalur and Tiruvallur District. Audit analysis revealed the 
following: 
 Farmers’ crop entries not inspected/verified by VAOs: Of the 
38.87 lakh crop entries captured in the Fasli year 1429 (2019-20), 
5,317 entries (0.14 per cent) were made by farmers through CSCs.  
However, none of the farmers’ entries were verified by the VAOs 
concerned despite mandatory 100 per cent inspection.  This 
situation was noticed in respect of Fasli years 1428 and 1430 also 
as given in Table 2.8. 
Table 2.8: Farmers’ crop entries not inspected/verified by VAOs 
Fasli Year Total crop entries Crop entries made through CSCs by farmers 
1428 29,031 228 
1429 38,87,090 5,317 
1430 11,31,999 719 
(Source: e-Adangal database furnished by Tamil Nadu e-Governance Agency) 
 Crop cultivation details not captured by VAOs: Crop details of 
cultivable lands have to be captured in its entirety under the  
e-Adangal system.  Audit however noticed that, in the sampled 
districts, the percentage of capture of cultivated crop details in  
Fasli year 1429 was meagre in all the sampled districts except in 
The Nilgiris and Perambalur districts as shown in Table 2.9. 
Table 2.9: Crop cultivation details not captured by VAOs 
Sl. 
No. 
District Total Survey 
numbers under 
cultivable lands 
Survey numbers for 
which crop entries 
was captured 
Percentage 
captured 
1 Kanniyakumari 54,748 6,111 11.16 
2 Madurai 1,37,374 32,872 23.93 
3 Perambalur 1,29,976 78,988 60.77 
4 Thanjavur 1,83,698 6,520 3.55 
5 The Nilgiris 52,471 47,150 89.86 
6 Tiruppur 1,23,518 23,372 18.92 
7 Tiruvallur 3,99,875 69,019 17.26 
(Source: e-Adangal database furnished by Tamil Nadu e-Governance Agency) 

Performance Audit on Land Records Management in Tamil Nadu  
 
 26 
 Incomplete data capture: e-Adangal application is designed to 
capture the stages of the cultivated crops viz., sowing stage, 
standing stage, harvesting stage etc., to watch the progress of crop 
cultivation and VAOs can capture the dates of each stage.  It was 
noticed that the data captured in the sampled taluks was incomplete 
as it did not completely flow through the stage-wise hierarchy to its 
finality i.e. ‘Harvesting stage’ as tabulated in Table 2.10. 
Table 2.10: Incomplete data capture 
Sl. 
No. 
District Total Survey 
numbers 
having crop 
entries 
Sowing stage 
captured 
Standing 
stage 
captured 
Harvesting 
stage 
captured 
1 Kanniyakumari 6,111 6,111 0 0 
2 Madurai 32,872 32,854 13,517 6,837 
3 Perambalur 78,988 78,961 441 54 
4 Thanjavur 6,520 6,507 212 2 
5 The Nilgiris 47,150 47,144 14,014 0 
6 Tiruppur 23,372 23,340 270 7 
7 Tiruvallur 69,019 69,016 748 9 
(Source: e-Adangal database furnished by Tamil Nadu e-Governance Agency) 
 Cultivation details captured against Government poromboke 
lands: Data analysis disclosed instances of crop details cultivated in 
Government Poromboke lands in the sampled taluks/villages as 
detailed in Table 2.11. 
Table 2.11: Cultivation details captured against Government poromboke lands 
Sl. 
No. 
District Survey numbers for which crop entries were 
made in Government Poromboke land  
(Cases specified are from sampled taluks) 
Area 
cultivated 
(in Ares) 
1 Kanniyakumari 4 58.00 
2 Madurai 185 1,248.15 
3 Perambalur 15 763.50 
4 Thanjavur 10 39.00 
5 The Nilgiris 45 5,307.97 
6 Tiruppur 6 42.71 
7 Tiruvallur 73 1,953.40 
(Source: e-Adangal database furnished by Tamil Nadu e-Governance agency) 
Since e-Adangal is integrated with TamilNilam, the type of land of each 
Survey number is available in e-Adangal.  The cases mentioned above are 
categorised as Government lands in TamilNilam also.  In the absence of 
suitable validation controls as envisaged in the SRS for tackling such issues, 
the system allows VAO’s to enter crop details in Government lands.  

Chapter II 
 
 27 
 Discrepancies shown in the chronology of crop stages in  
e-Adangal: The facility to capture stage-wise date under e-Adangal 
takes into account the hierarchy of each stage, where one stage by 
its very nature cannot precede its subsequent stage for e.g. the 
‘Harvesting’ cannot be preceded by ‘Inspection’ etc. However, 
there were inconsistencies (as given in Table 2.12) in the stage wise 
capture indicating lack of suitable validation controls.  
Table 2.12: Discrepancies shown in the chronology of crop stages in e-Adangal 
Discrepancies No. of Cases 
Inspection after harvested 3,558 
Inspection before sowing 13,418 
Sowing date not within Fasli Year 10,21,154 
Invalid inspection date (‘01-01-1900’) 2,42,734 
Invalid sowing date (‘01-01-1900’) 7,34,763 
(Source: e-Adangal database furnished by Tamil Nadu e-Governance agency) 
From the above stated issues, it is recommended that the VAO’s should be 
instructed to complete the e-Adangal data capture in its entirety and necessary 
verification completed. Moreover, proper validation controls should also be 
put in place to make the system more robust.  
In its reply (May 2021), TNeGA stated that e-Adangal software is working 
with limitations at present. DoSS stated (October 2021) that this was being 
handled by TNeGA and that the software was developed by a private company 
viz., M/s. CMS Computers Ltd.,  but agreed that there were issues in its 
implementation. The Principal Secretary stated that the e-Adangal would be 
integrated with TamilNilam to make it more effective. 
2.6 Non-updation of records relating to Government 
acquired/alienated lands even after final notification 
According to Section 11 of Land Acquisition Act 2013, the Revenue 
Department should update the land records whenever private lands are 
acquired by Government for public use. Scrutiny of land records in Tiruppur 
district revealed that lands acquired from private land owners by the 
Government for various schemes were pending updation in the land records 
since September 2018, thus not only reflecting incorrect ownership of the land 
record but also making it susceptible to misuse.  For example, audit observed 
that the work of acquiring 57 land parcels measuring a total extent of  
16,062 sq.m. in South Avinashipalayam (Tiruppur District) for four-laning and 
strengthening of Ottanchatram-Dharapuram-Tiruppur Road was completed 
and compensation to the tune of 10.05 crore was paid to private land 
owners.  
A sample case of the final award passed in one land parcel is given in  
Table 2.13 and Exhibit 2.2. 
  

Performance Audit on Land Records Management in Tamil Nadu  
 
 28 
Table 2.13: Illustrative case of non-updation of records relating to Government 
acquired/alienated lands even after final notification 
District: Tiruppur 
Taluk: Tiruppur 
South 
Village: South 
Avinashipalayam 
Old 
Survey 
number 
Extent of  
land 
(Hect-Are-Sq.m.) 
Sub-division made 
during land acquisition 
Extent of   
sub-divided lands 
(Hect-Are-Sq.m.) 
587/1 
(Ryot – 
Punjai) 
2.93.00 587/1A 
(Ryot – Punjai) 
2.07.11 
587/1B 
(Government Poromboke) 
0.85.89 
Total 2.93.00 
(Source: Information furnished by the Taluk) 
Exhibit 2.2: Present Status as per computerised A-Register (as on 13 September 2021) 
(Source: Department’s e-services web portal) 
In the sampled taluks, Audit noticed similar cases where mutation of 
computerised land records were yet to be given effect even though orders for 
change of ownership to Government departments were issued as early as in the 
year 2005 as given in Table 2.14.  
Table 2.14: Number of cases where computerised land records not updated to reflect 
change of ownership to Government  
Sl. 
No. 
Taluk Type Completed 
Cases 
Orders passed between 
1 Agastheeswaram Land Alienation 7 October 2008 to November 2017 
2 Avinashi Land Transfer 2 July and August 2020 
3 Kothagiri Land Transfer and Alienation 3 July 2019 to May 2021 
4 Madurai East Land Transfer and Alienation 2 July and September 2021 
5 Papanasam Land Transfer and Alienation 2 May 2013 and January 2021 
6 Perambalur Land Transfer and Alienation 7 June 2014 to August 2015 
7 Thirupparankundram Land Transfer and Alienation 5 March 2019 to December 2020 
8 Tiruppur North Land Transfer and Alienation 13 November 2005 to January 2021 
9 Veppanthattai Land Transfer 1 November 2014 
  Total 42  
(Source: Information furnished by the taluks) 
In this connection, when Audit compiled information on lands that were 
notified for acquisition by various government departments for various 


Chapter II 
 
 29 
schemes/projects during the years 2015-2018, it was noticed that nearly 
26,000 land parcels were under acquisition process. The department-wise 
details of such land parcels are tabulated in Table 2.15. 
Table 2.15: Land parcels notified for Acquisition 
Sl. No. Name of departments Number of land parcels  
1 Energy 959 
2 Highways and Minor Ports 14,945 
3 Industries 3,886 
4 Planning, Development & Special Initiatives 223 
5 Transport 6,094 
Total 26,107 
(Source: Compilation of Gazette Notifications from the GoTN website) 
Timely updation of records of the lands acquired/transferred/alienated to the 
Government should be taken up to safeguard the interest of the Government as 
well as to prevent the risk of fraudulent transactions.  
The Principal Secretary stated (October 2021) that there were many instances 
of lands acquired by Government from private owners which have not been 
updated in TamilNilam and added that this would be addressed on completion 
of the work of updation of Adi Dravidar lands which was in progress. 
2.7 Deficient integration between Revenue and Registration 
Departments 
Registration Department rolled out a comprehensive web-based software 
(STAR 2.0) in which data of land records of Revenue Department was linked 
with the Registration database through a separate integration module 
(February 2018) to facilitate transfer of Patta without calling for fresh 
applications from the land buyers immediately after registration. From a 
scrutiny of the related files, Audit noticed the following:  
2.7.1 Deficiencies in codification of Government lands  
GoTN advised Revenue Department (June 2018) to take steps to enter details 
of Panchami lands, Bhoodhan lands, Wakf Board property in TamilNilam 
software to enable Registration Department to assign the land value as zero to 
prevent transaction of such lands and this was reiterated in the subsequent 
meeting (July 2018) conducted by DoSS with the Inspector General of 
Registration and NIC officials.  
In the TamilNilam database the ownership of Government lands is coded as 
‘1’ and for private lands as ‘2’ which are indicated against each land parcel.  
In addition, Government lands had further sub categories viz., Natham, 
Panchami, Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments (HR&CE) lands, 
excess lands under Land Ceiling Act, Private Forest Act, Forest lands etc.  
These sub categories were not codified in TamilNilam.  

Performance Audit on Land Records Management in Tamil Nadu  
 
 30 
Ordinarily, land transactions are not permitted on Government Lands  
(Code ‘1’).  The Registration Department assigns market/guideline value as 
‘0’ in the database shared periodically by Revenue Department to prevent 
clandestine registration of Government lands. In the absence of a separate 
codification for all the sub categories of Government lands, their 
market/guideline value could not be assigned as zero.  
In the sampled taluks, Audit found that the Registration Department permitted 
transactions and sent 593 ‘Involving Sub Division’ (ISD) and 163 ‘Not 
Involving Sub Division’ (NISD) OPT applications of such cases to Taluk 
offices (Appendix 2.21). These applications were then rejected by the taluks 
for the reason that they were sub categories of Government lands. This 
indicated that the integration module implemented in 2018 did not effectively 
prevent the registration of Government lands due to non-codification. 
DoSS stated (October 2021) that they were already taking action in this regard 
and that nearly two lakh temple lands belonging to HR&CE Department have 
been codified as ‘T’ as of now and similarly all other Government lands would 
also be appropriately codified.   However, the interface module needs 
immediate correction with the addition of codes to all categories of 
Government lands. 
2.7.2 Ineffective use of provisions available in integration module for 
Sub-Registrar Office Transfer Registry applications 
Scrutiny of files revealed that scanned Registration documents for the period 
from July 2009 onwards was shared with the Revenue Department and was 
available for viewing within the dashboard of TamilNilam users.  
DoSS advised (July 2018) the District Collectors to instruct all taluk offices of 
the availability of this facility and to insist for production of original link and 
parent documents only for the period prior to July 2009, wherever required.  
It was also instructed that the Revenue Department/NIC had to make a 
provision in the logins of VAO and Surveyor to enter details of missing 
documents (i.e. mandatory documents not submitted by the applicant at the 
time of applying for OPT) and to send an SMS to the applicant asking him to 
scan and attach the missing documents to the related application through CSC. 
Despite the above instructions and provision of links in the workflow it was 
noticed in the sampled taluks that 10,640 NISD and 19,841 ISD OPT 
applications (Appendix 2.22) were rejected with reasons like ‘No Link’, 
‘Document file not open’, ‘ெதாடர்௖ பத்ொரம ்/௛ லப்பத்ொர நகல ் 
சமர்ப்௔க்க௳ ல ் ைல’, ‘need link document’, ‘EC not properly submitted’ etc.  
The Principal Secretary replied (October 2021) that necessary instructions 
would be issued to the concerned officials to avoid such occurrences in future. 
In any case, the applicants had not received the desired services. 
  

Chapter II 
 
 31 
2.8 Conclusion 
The digitization of land records contributed to overall improvement in access 
of land records to the public. The digitized land records, however, had errors 
and deficiencies. There were differences in land area between manual and 
computerised A-Register in 61 per cent of sampled villages. Though the 
Department claims that all the FMS in rural taluks are online, it was seen that 
6.25 lakh out of 23.25 lakh (27 per cent) Sub-divisions in the A-Register had 
no entries in the FMS database. Further, there were difference in land area in 
2.27 lakh out of 15.89 lakh (14 per cent) Sub-divisions between A-register and 
FMS data. 3.22 lakh private land parcels were erroneously classified as 
Government land in the computerised land records resulting in the private land 
owners not being able to transact their land in TamilNilam.  Due to the 
absence of suitable validation controls in the application software, errors and 
discrepancies were noticed in capture of old Survey numbers and assigning 
Sub-division numbers as per notation rules. Further, as multiple patta numbers 
were assigned to the same land owner, all the land holdings of an individual in 
a village cannot be ascertained. As of March 2021, 1.42 crore computerised 
and validated Natham land records were not brought online even after four 
years. The e-Adangal project taken up in 2017 was not fully implemented. 
2.9 Recommendations 
Government may consider: 
 Reviewing the computerised A-Register, Chitta and FMS to ensure 
their correctness and completeness so as to ensure error free 
conclusive titling. 
 Auto-populating the FMS database from the computerised  
A-Register, wherever required, to avoid errors. 
 Validating and bringing Natham land records online within a 
definite timeframe.  
 Making e-Adangal fully functional and integrate with TamilNilam 
on priority. 
 Imparting periodical training to VAOs and other line officials to 
avoid or minimise data entry errors. Further, the Department may 
ensure that data entry is duly validated with physical records to 
ensure correctness.  
 
 
 

CHAPTER III 
CITIZEN SERVICES 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 33 
CHAPTER III 
 
CITIZEN SERVICES 
 
3.1 Processing of online patta transfer application 
One of the scheme objective of conclusive title with title guarantee warrants 
accurate mutation of land records.  Immediately after the transfer of land  
ownership through registration, the ownership details are to be reflected in the 
records of the Revenue Department.  Despite repeatedly pointing out issues in 
the system by Audit from 2003 onwards, the issues persist in the delivery of 
mutation related services to citizens. The issues are discussed in the 
subsequent paragraphs.   
From November 2014, Online Patta Transfer (OPT) applications are being 
received through TamilNilam workflow software of the taluk offices from  
two sources viz., Sub-Registrar Office Transfer Registry (STR) and Revenue 
Transfer Registry of Common Service Centres.  There are two categories of 
OPT applications viz., Not Involving Sub Division (NISD) and Involving Sub 
Division (ISD). The workflow showing the receipt and processing of the OPT 
applications are given in the following Exhibit 3.1.  
Exhibit 3.1: Workflow showing the receipt and processing of the OPT application 
 
(Source: Instructions issued by the department for TamilNilam OPT workflow) 
On Registration of a land in Sub Registrar’s 
Office, Application is automatically transmitted 
online through Integration Module 
On submission of a patta transfer request at a 
Common Service Centre (CSC), application is 
received online 
Two types of Applications 
received 
Involving Sub Division of land 
(ISD) approval workflow 
Not involving Sub Division of land 
(NISD) approval workflow 
Towns and Villages Villages Towns 
Surveyor 
Draughtsman 
 
Deputy Inspector of Survey 
Tahsildar 
Order to be passed in 30 days 
Village Administrative Officer Surveyor 
Zonal Deputy Tahsildar Draughtsma
n 
Zonal Deputy Tahsildar 
Order to be passed in 15 days 

Performance Audit on Land Records Management in Tamil Nadu 
 
 34 
The following Exhibit 3.2 describes the sources and categories of OPT 
applications and how they are processed (approved/rejected/pending) at 
different stages in the web-based workflow system.  
Exhibit 3.2 Sources and categories of OPT applications and stages of processing 
 
(Source: Instructions issued by the department for TamilNilam OPT workflow) 
With a view to ascertain whether the OPT applications were processed within 
the prescribed timelines, audit examined data relating to 9,42,102 completed 
applications and 50,881 pending applications from the TamilNilam databases 
provided for the sampled taluks. The observations are as follows: 
3.1.1 Delay in processing OPT applications 
(a) According to the Citizen Charter of the Revenue Department,  
NISD-OPT applications should be decided within 15 days of its receipt. NISD 
applications are processed through a workflow in web-based TamilNilam 
software in all rural and urban taluks of Tamil Nadu. The VAO/Surveyor, on 
receipt of the RTR/STR applications processes, recommends either for 
approval/rejection and sends it online to the Zonal Deputy Tahsildar (ZDT) for 
his assent which is sealed with the Digital Signature Certificate (DSC). 
In order to ascertain the adherence to the timeline of 15 days, the data dump 
for the period from 2014 till 2021 was analysed. The analysis also factored in 
the loss of time arising due to return of OPT application by the approving 
authority (i.e. ZDT) to VAO seeking clarifications etc., and excluded such 
Approved 
 
Rejected 
 
Rejected 
 
Approved Approved 
 
Approved 
 
Rejected 
 
STR 
 (Sub-Registrar Transfer Registry)  
through Sub-Registrar Office 
RTR 
(Revenue Transfer Registry)  
through common Service Centres 
ISD 
(Involving Sub-division) NISD 
(Not Involving Sub-division) ISD 
(Involving Sub-division) 
Processed Pending Processed Pending Processed Pending 
NISD 
(Not Involving Sub-division) 
Processed Pending 
Rejected 
Online Patta Transfer 
OPT
Applications 
Process 
Category 
Source 

Chapter III 
 
 35 
records from the analysis.  The results are tabulated in Table 3.1 and  
Taluk-wise details are available in Appendices 3.1, 3.2 and 3.3. 
Table 3.1: Delay in processing NISD-OPT applications 
Sl.  
No. 
Category and status 
of OPT applications 
Number of  applications where 
delay was noticed and its 
percentage 
Delay range in 
number of days 
1 NISD approved OPTs 1,73,567 out of 4,05,027 cases  
(43 per cent) 
From 16 to 519 days 
2 NISD rejected OPTs 1,23,061 out of 1,56,354 cases  
(79 per cent) 
From 16 to 1,206 days 
3 NISD pending OPTs 6,132 out of 10,226 cases  
(60 per cent) 
From 16 to 1,379 days 
(Source: TamilNilam taluk database furnished by the department) 
(b) Similarly, the workflow of ISD-OPT applications involves a 
hierarchical set-up of four officials viz.,  Surveyor, Land Record Draughtsman 
(LRD), Deputy Inspector of Survey (DIS) and Tahsildar for processing the 
OPT applications to its finality within 30 days. The Surveyor on receipt of 
ISD-OPT application, will schedule for field visit as per seniority and submit 
field enquiry report to the LRD for vetting.  The LRD, in turn, verifies the 
submitted manual sketch scans and uploads the same to the online workflow 
and escalates it to the DIS login along with remarks. The DIS, after ensuring 
the receipt of the prescribed sub-division fees into Government Account, 
forwards the application online with his/her remarks to the approving authority 
i.e. Tahsildar.  The outcome of the data examination by Audit is tabulated in 
Table 3.2. Taluk-wise details are available in Appendices 3.4, 3.5 and 3.6. 
Table 3.2: Delay in processing ISD-OPT applications 
Sl.  
No. 
Category and status 
of OPT applications 
Number of  applications 
where delay was noticed and 
its percentage 
Delay range in 
number of days 
1 ISD approved OPTs 85,148 out of 1,60,048 cases  
(53 per cent) 
From 31 to 651 days 
2 ISD rejected OPTs 2,05,889 out of 2,20,673 cases  
(93 per cent) 
From 31 to 866 days 
3 ISD pending OPTs 29,644 out of 40,655 cases  
(73 per cent) 
From 31 to 321 days 
(Source: TamilNilam taluk database furnished by the department) 
(c) On examination of delay at various stages of the workflow, it was 
found that 69 to 82 per cent of the ISD applications and 27 to 29 per cent of 
the NISD applications were kept pending for more than 50 days with at least 
one of the officials in the approval workflow (Table 3.3). 
  

Performance Audit on Land Records Management in Tamil Nadu 
 
 36 
Table 3.3: Pendency of OPT applications 
Officials 
involved in the 
workflow 
OPT applications pending for Percentage of 
applications 
kept pending 
for more than 
50 days 
16 to  
25 days 
26 to  
50 days 
51 to  
75 days 
76 to 
100 days 
More than 
100 days 
Total 
NISD - VAO  1,311 1,645 487 283 332 4,058 27 
NISD - ZDT  488 985 354 153 94 2,074 29 
  31 to  
50 days 
51 to  
75 days 
76 to  
100 days 
More than 
100 days 
  
ISD - Surveyor  - 5,118 4,391 4,475 12,171 26,155 80 
ISD - LRD  - 80 38 44 100 262 69 
ISD - DIS  - 55 33 27 62 177 69 
ISD - Tahsildar  - 141 172 231 1,398 1,942 82 
(Source: TamilNilam taluk database furnished by the department) 
In response to the delays in processing brought out above, the Tahsildars 
generally attributed the following reasons viz., (i) increase in number of 
applications consequent to integration of STR applications in TamilNilam,  
(ii) non-submission of required documents by the applicant, (iii) inability to 
contact the applicant due to incorrect phone numbers furnished, (iv) poor 
response of the applicant when contacted, (v) diversion of survey staff for 
other work, (vi) inability to process applications, if another application in the 
same Survey number is pending at any level in the ISD/NISD workflow and  
(vii) vacancies in the post of Surveyor etc.  
DoSS accepted (October 2021) that they were aware of such delays and 
necessary MIS reports were available in the TamilNilam for monitoring.  He 
assured that appropriate action would be taken to reduce the delay in 
processing of OPT applications by making use of MIS reports more 
effectively.  
(d) Processing of addition/deletion/correction applications  
A new software module was included in the web based TamilNilam Rural 
from September 2016 for incorporating the corrections in the existing records 
and for adding new entries in the on-line TamilNilam database.  By using this 
module, missing Survey numbers/Sub-division numbers could be added and 
errors that had crept into the existing land records can be corrected. The 
corrections could be carried out in the database after the authorised officers at 
appropriate levels1 pass orders in the manual files. 
Analysis of the correction module data of the sampled taluks revealed that 
there were delays in processing the applications.  Out of 16,100 applications 
relating to addition/deletion of land records, it was noticed that  
                                                           
1 Revenue Divisional Officer for all corrections/additions other than those related to 
Government to private land transfer entries.  District Collector for all corrections/ 
additions in respect of Government to private land transfer entries. 

Chapter III 
 
 37 
684 (4.2 per cent) were still pending action.  Further 2, 096 (13 per cent) and 
809 applications (5 per cent) respectively were approved and rejected 
belatedly (Appendix 3.7 (a)). Similarly, out of 18,965 applications for 
correction of land records, while 630 (3.3 per cent) were pending action for 
various periods ranging up to four years, 2,180 (11.5 per cent) and  
1,029 applications (5.4 per cent) were approved and rejected belatedly 
(Appendix 3.7 (b)). 
Further analysis revealed that the ‘correction’ module had no provision for 
storing details of sub-categories like name correction, address correction, land 
area correction, etc. It was also noticed that the ‘correction’ module did not 
have a provision to store the history of changes arising from corrections.  Any 
correction made by an unauthorised user could not be prevented or monitored. 
3.1.2 High percentage of rejection of OPT applications from  
Sub Registrar office  
As per the ‘STAR 2.0’ - ‘TamilNilam’ integration module, once a land is 
registered in the Sub Registrar office, the details mentioned in the schedule of 
properties in the land document is transmitted to TamilNilam for patta 
transfer. This process eliminates the need for land owners to apply for patta 
transfer again.  Data analysis of OPT applications from sampled taluks 
revealed that there was high percentage of rejection of OPT applications 
received from Sub Registrar Office (SRO). Taluk-wise details of 
approved/rejected OPT applications is given in Appendix 3.8. 
It was noticed that the percentage of STR rejection was 49 per cent for NISD. 
The high rejection rate of STR-NISD applications which are simple patta 
transfers involving only name change of owner without need for field 
inspection indicate that monitoring of OPT system by the Tahsildar was not 
effective. 
3.1.3 Non-observance of queuing while processing OPT applications 
As per the SRS of TamilNilam, patta transfer applications are required to be 
processed on a first-come-first-served basis unless prevented by the system 
due to an earlier application under the same Survey number for which 
processing is pending. 
To check the implementation of the above seniority principle, NISD and ISD 
applications of 10 sampled villages in each of the sampled taluks which were 
pending in the TamilNilam VAO and Sub Inspector of Survey (SIS) logins 
were examined.  It revealed that while 2,617 ISD (Appendix 3.9) and 700 
NISD (Appendix 3.10) applications received earlier were pending, 
applications received later were already scheduled for processing. This was in 
contravention to instructions on seniority-wise processing of patta transfer 
applications, which is irregular. 
DoSS informed (October 2021) that though scheduling was available, due to 
logistical difficulties, the surveyors visiting a village would complete the work 
for all the applications relating to that village irrespective of the seniority.   
However, audit found many instances of queue jumping within a village itself 

Performance Audit on Land Records Management in Tamil Nadu 
 
 38 
and reasons necessitating the queue jumping were not recorded in the system 
to ensure transparency.  
3.1.4 Non-use of codified reasons for rejection 
According to the workflow system, each line official record their remarks 
while recommending/rejecting/approving OPT applications. The ‘Remarks’ 
column permits the capture of text upto 500 characters and the ‘Recommend’ 
column captures ‘Y’ or ‘N’.  In respect of rejected cases, the remarks of final 
approving authority is printed under the column ‘Reason for Rejection’. An 
illustrative Patta transfer rejection order is given in Exhibit 3.3. 
Exhibit 3.3:Illustrative sample case: Rejection orders of OPT in Avinashi Taluk  
having contradictory reason 
 
In the above case, though the application for patta transfer was rejected, the reason for 
rejection was recorded as ‘Approved’. 
(Source: Department’s e-services web portal) 
Though TamilNilam has a codified set of 17 reasons for rejecting applications 
these were not recorded as the reason by the approving official while rejecting 
OPT applications.  Instead, the custom text entered by the line officials was 
stored in the remarks column, indicating that the officials were not using the 
codified reasons.  It was noticed from the data examination that in  
85,044 instances the reasons for rejection were either contradictory to the final 
orders (2,134 applications) passed on OPT applications or was without any 
specific reasons (82,910 applications) as given in Appendix 3.11. 
The Principal Secretary stated (October 2021) that the software should not 
permit such deficiencies and advised NIC to bring in suitable controls in the 
system. He also stated that the codified remarks already available in the 
system could be increased and strictly adhered to by the officials. However, 
Audit is of the view that the reasons for rejection of OPT applications must be 
rationalized under broad categories and made user friendly for correct 
selection of reasons for rejection by the workflow officials.  
  


Chapter III 
 
 39 
3.1.5 Deficiencies noticed during manual scrutiny of processed OPT 
applications 
The OPT workflow clearly outlines the procedures to be followed for 
acceptance or rejection of applications. In addition to the data analysis, audit 
also manually verified the complete workflow process by randomly selecting 
20 OPT applications (a mix of RTR/STR and ISD/NISD applications) that 
were processed during 2019-20 for detailed scrutiny in each of the sampled 
taluk.  
The taluk-wise and application category-wise number of instances, with 
deficiencies in processing the OPT applications are given in Appendix 3.12.  
An abstract is given in Table 3.4. 
Table 3.4: Deficiencies in OPT application processing 
Type and 
source 
Number of approved applications Number of rejected applications 
Checked Deficiencies noticed 
by Audit 
Checked Deficiencies 
noticed by Audit 
ISD - RTR 79 68 54 49 
NISD - RTR 72 53 40 31 
ISD - STR 45 27 46 43 
NISD - STR 42 8 50 41 
Total 238 156 190 164 
(Source: Taluk records and Department’s e-services web portal) 
The deficiencies noticed were as follows: 
 OPT approval process was to be carried out based on Sale Deed and 
Encumbrance Certificate uploaded at CSC. However, 141 OPT 
applications in 18 taluks, where the uploaded mandatory documents 
were either incorrect or missing, were approved. 
 Nine OPT applications relating to five taluks received from SRO 
through integration module were rejected whereas the same were 
approved when applied through CSC. 
 ‘Correction Module’ in TamilNilam software was used for 
correction of name/relationship of the Pattadhar. Revenue 
Divisional Officer (RDO) is the approving authority for such 
corrections. In two instances in two taluks, instead of ‘Correction 
Module’ OPT workflow module was used for correcting the 
name/relationship. A suitable validation control using the 
applicant’s mandatory information and Aadhaar number will 
prevent such occurrences. 

Performance Audit on Land Records Management in Tamil Nadu 
 
 40 
 Two OPT applications in two taluks were rejected citing them as 
‘Double Entries’ though such applications related to different land 
parcel under different Sale Deed. 
 19 STR applications in 10 taluks were rejected with reasons ‘Link 
Documents not submitted’, though such documents were available 
in the online workflow for scrutiny.   
 Two OPT applications in two taluks were rejected stating that 
(i) ‘Patta already issued’ when the Patta was issued for a different 
Plot Number and (ii) 'Already Sub-divided' though it remained 
undivided till date. 
It is seen from Table 3.4 that 66 per cent (156 out of 238) of approved and  
86 per cent (164 out of 190) of rejected OPT applications were not processed 
correctly. DoSS stated (October 2021) that necessary instructions would be 
issued and stringent action would be taken wherever such cases were brought 
to notice.  
3.1.6 Delay in transfer and rejection of incorrectly classified 
applications 
As per instructions (October 2015) of DoSS, CSCs should capture the details 
under ISD or NISD after checking the details submitted by the applicant in the 
OPT application. Data analysis of sampled taluks revealed the following: 
(i) Delay in transfer: The OPT application, if wrongly categorised (NISD 
as ISD and vice versa), has to complete all the stages in the workflow before it 
can be transferred to the right category. In case of wrong categorisation, ZDT 
(NISD) and DIS (ISD) transfer the applications to Surveyor (ISD) and VAO 
(NISD) respectively and the date on which the application is transferred to 
another categorisation (NISD or ISD) becomes the date of application in the 
new categorisation. 
During 2018-21, taluk-wise breakup of transfer of OPT applications is given 
in Appendix 3.13. 
Audit noticed significant delays in transferring the wrongly categorised 
applications adding further delay in service to the applicants (Table 3.5). 
Table 3.5: Time taken for transfer of incorrectly classified applications 
Sl. No. Delay range NISD ISD 
1 0 to 10 days 2,079 15,835 
2 11 to 25 days 1,757 7,140 
3 26 to 50 days 1,701 7,151 
4 51 to 75 days 904 4,297 
5 76 to 100 days 500 3,701 
6 More than 100 days 500 13,321 
Total 7,441 51,445 
(Source: TamilNilam taluk database furnished by the Department) 

Chapter III 
 
 41 
(ii) Rejection instead of transfer: 3,006 out of the 1,57,163 NISD 
applications were rejected stating that they were sub-division cases i.e. ISD 
cases. These applications should have been transferred to Surveyor in ISD 
workflow instead of being rejected.  
Similarly, 4,263 out of 2,83,535 ISD applications were rejected on the ground 
that they are ‘Full Patta’ transfer cases i.e. NISD cases. These applications 
should have been transferred to VAO in NISD workflow instead of being 
rejected. The details are furnished in Appendix 3.14. 
The time taken to reject these cases is tabulated in Table 3.6. 
Table 3.6: Time taken for the rejection 
Sl. No. Delay range NISD ISD 
1 0 to 10 days 489 89 
2 11 to 25 days 653 144 
3 26 to 50 days 668 280 
4 51 to 75 days 383 339 
5 76 to 100 days 245 426 
6 More than 100 days 568 2,985 
Total 3,006 4,263 
(Source: TamilNilam taluk database furnished by the Department) 
DoSS accepted (October 2021) that they were aware of such delays and 
necessary MIS reports were available in the TamilNilam for monitoring.  He 
assured that appropriate action would be taken to reduce the delay in 
processing of OPT applications. The line officials would also be strictly 
instructed to promptly transfer the OPTs correctly (i.e. NISD as ISD and vice 
versa) to avoid hardship to the applicants. 
3.1.7 Deficiencies in the SMS communication to applicants 
As per activity No. 8 of the SRS of TamilNilam (Rural), the details of 
approval/rejection order and date should be intimated to the applicant through 
SMS. This has also been reiterated in the DOSS’s instructions for 
implementing OPT system. 
In the OPT workflow, the receipt of an OPT application is to be acknowledged 
through the SMS module and applicant should also be intimated about its  
stage-wise progress and final outcome through this module.  It was observed 
that the SMS log in respect of rejected applications either (i) did not have any 
entry, (ii) had entry as ‘failed’ or (iii) had an entry but carried a blank message 
in the following cases (Tables 3.7, 3.8 and 3.9). 
  

Performance Audit on Land Records Management in Tamil Nadu 
 
 42 
Table 3.7: Rejected applications without SMS log entry 
Description Number of OPT 
applications 
ISD NISD 
Number of applications which were rejected without SMS 
intimation 94,180 65,963 
Out of the above, applications where mobile number (10 digits with 
numbers starting with 6,7,8 & 9) was available for intimation 61,108 57,549 
Cases where application was rejected either because applicant did 
not attend field visit or for want of physical documents 17,510 7,151 
Table 3.8: Rejected applications with SMS log entry as ‘failed’ 
Description Number of OPT 
applications 
ISD NISD 
Number of cases where SMS intimation failed and applications were 
subsequently rejected 1,176 469 
Number of cases where failure was attributable to department (not 
enough balance for bulk SMS, Daily SMS limit reached, TRAI 
exemption validity expired) 
1,039 437 
Cases where application was rejected either because applicant did 
not attend field visit or for want of physical documents 266 86 
 
Table 3.9: Rejected applications with SMS log entry but with blank message 
Description Number of OPT 
applications 
ISD NISD 
Number of applications which were rejected subsequent to a ‘blank’ 
SMS intimation 38,005 17,099 
Cases where application was rejected either because applicant did 
not attend field visit or for want of physical documents 7,176 3,273 
(Source: TamilNilam taluk database furnished by the department) 
As intimation by SMS is the only mode of communication to the applicant by 
the Department, the above deficiencies meant that the applicant was deprived 
of an opportunity to rectify any shortcomings on his/her part for the successful 
completion of the land transaction request.  
The Principal Secretary asked (October 2021) Inspector General of 
Registration/NIC to probe the reasons for such discrepancies and to take 
action against document writers etc., who were repeatedly giving their mobile 
numbers instead of the applicant’s mobile number or giving mobile numbers 
in non-standard format. 

Chapter III 
 
 43 
Capturing of the mobile numbers not pertaining to the actual buyers pointed to 
deficiencies in input controls, which could potentially enable vitiation of the 
process by agencies/middlemen involved in the process. 
3.1.8 Non-collection of sub-division fees for RTR applications 
Government revised (July 2020) the sub-division fees from 40 (for 
Villages), 50 (for Municipalities) and 60 (for Corporations) to 400,  
500 and 600 respectively.  
The details of Sub-division fees remitted by the applicant were captured in the 
TamilNilam OPT workflow system by the Deputy Inspector of Survey through 
the front-end screen before forwarding the application to Tahsildar for 
approval.  
During field visit in four sampled taluks, Audit noticed that the Sub-division 
fees was not being collected. The details of RTR-ISD applications processed 
as per the reports furnished by the respective taluks and the amount of fees 
that should have been collected for such cases, as worked out in Audit, is 
given in Table 3.10. 
Table 3.10: Non-collection of Sub-division fees for RTR applications 
Sl. 
No. 
District Taluk Sub-division fees not collected 
between April 2015 - August 2021  
(In ) 
1 Kanyakumari Agastheeswaram 26,04,960 
2 Madurai Madurai East 34,22,480 
3 Madurai Madurai North 40,29,560 
4 Madurai Thirupparankundram 10,89,240 
  Total 1,11,46,240 
(Source: Information compiled from the details furnished by the taluks) 
Non-collection of Sub-division fees, as ordered by the GoTN, in the above 
taluks is a failure on the part of workflow officials. The lapse is also due to 
inadequate controls in the TamilNilam application software, which permitted 
forwarding of OPTs to the approving authority without entering the 
information about the Sub-division fees collected. 
To an Audit enquiry, the Tahsildars replied that they will get the matter 
clarified from the competent authority and based on the clarification, they will 
collect Sub-division fees hereafter.  The Principal Secretary accepted  
(October 2021) that the inadequate controls in TamilNilam, contributed to the 
non-collection of Sub-division fees and stressed the necessity of integrating 
the payment of Sub-division fees within the TamilNilam application software 
in co-ordination with NIC. The Government however, did not fix any 
timeframe for the integration, exposing the system to the risk of revenue loss. 
  

Performance Audit on Land Records Management in Tamil Nadu 
 
 44 
3.2 Conclusion 
Despite integrating the data between Registration and Revenue Departments, 
49 per cent of OPT applications, not involving Sub-division, received from 
Sub Registrars, were rejected, resulting in citizens applying for OPT again 
through Common Service Centre.  As against the stipulated timeline of  
15 days for OPT applications, not involving Sub-division, there were delays in 
approving (43 per cent cases), rejecting (79 per cent cases) and processing  
(60 per cent cases). Similarly, as against the timeline of 30 days for OPT 
applications involving Sub-division, the percentage of delays in approving, 
rejecting and processing them were 53 per cent, 93 per cent and 72 per cent 
respectively. Further, 66 per cent of approved and 86 per cent of rejected 
applications were not processed correctly.  OPT applications were not 
processed within the stipulated time period. The lack of controls in the system 
resulted in rejection of OPT applications with inconsistent remarks and 
processing of OPT application, involving Sub-divisions, without collecting 
Sub-division fees.   
3.3 Recommendations 
Government may consider: 
 Identifying the reasons and reducing the delays in OPT system for 
ensuring time bound delivery of patta transfer services to citizens. 
 Rationalising the list of reasons for approval/rejection of OPT 
applications for ensuring transparent service to citizens. 
 Ensuring percentage check of the approved/rejected applications is 
carried out effectively on a monthly basis by the ADSLR in respect 
of all the taluks under his control.  Suitable MIS may be developed 
to ensure the same. 
 
 

CHAPTER IV 
PROJECT 
IMPLEMENTATION 
 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 45 
CHAPTER IV 
 
PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION 
 
4.1  Execution of Survey work using modern equipment 
As per para 3.2 of DILRMP guidelines, the ‘Survey and Resurvey’ component 
should be implemented using modern technology like Differential Global 
Positioning System (DGPS) and Electronic Total Station (ETS) which ensures 
accuracy in creation of digital database of lands and their attributes. This helps 
the public to know about their land details and also aids the land 
administration officials for land use planning. Also, fraudulent transactions 
will be curbed and Government lands can be protected through the digital 
database and web-based monitoring. 
4.1.1 Resurvey 
(i) Funding 
Funding for the Resurvey component of DILRMP was shared equally between 
GoI and GoTN upto 31 March 2016 and funded wholly by GoI from  
01 April 2016.  Under this component, GoI sanctioned (October 2014)  
16.91 crore for Resurvey work in Kanyakumari, Krishnagiri and The 
Nilgiris districts using DGPS (in open/semi-open areas) and ETS (in built up 
areas/areas covered by foliage).  
(ii) Status of Resurvey work 
The status (October 2021) of the Resurvey work in the three districts is given 
in Table 4.1. 
Table 4.1: Status of Resurvey work 
District  
(Number of Taluks) 
Total 
villages 
Progress of Survey/Resurvey work 
Completed Ongoing Not started 
Number In per cent 
Kanniyakumari  (6 Taluks) 188 36 19.15 6 146 
Krishnagiri (8 Taluks) 636 84 14.47 13 539 
The Nilgiris (6 Taluks) 54 13 24.07 2 39 
(Source: DILRMP MIS report) 
As seen from the table above, the progress of Resurvey work was poor and 
also had deficiencies which was seen in two sampled Taluks as discussed 
below:  
 Only ‘poromboke’ lands were Resurveyed in 6 of the 15 villages in 
Kothagiri Taluk. This serves no purpose as it constitutes a partial 
Resurvey and cannot be stated as ‘Settlement’, which is the final 
stage of the Resurvey. 

Performance Audit on Land Records Management in Tamil Nadu  
 
 46 
 ‘A stones’ and ‘B stones’ are fixed to identify the village and field 
boundaries respectively. Re-fixing of fallen and missing stones is 
one of the preliminary works in Resurvey. In Kothagiri and 
Agastheeswaram Taluks, out of 804 ‘A’ stones and 25,210 ‘B’ 
stones which were found to be missing, only 1,710 ‘B’ stones were 
fixed. 
 DoSS procured (June 2017) 70 Continuously Operating Reference 
Stations (CORS) at an amount of 696.50 lakh which was not 
among the GoI approved equipment for Resurvey.  The CORS units 
were installed all over the State at 70 locations.  However, due to 
non-sanction of funds, payment to the vendor has not been made till 
date.  Due to non-payment, the vendor did not provide training and 
technical support, which is required for uninterrupted functioning of 
CORS units.  Thus, the CORS units in Kothagiri and 
Agastheeswaram Taluks were not utilised and Resurvey work was 
conducted with DGPS units alone.  
The above deficiencies indicated that the Resurvey work is incomplete and in 
its present form could not reach the final stage of ‘Settlement’. 
DoSS stated (October 2021) that this was only a pilot study and due to 
technical issues and the topography of the pilot Taluks the work could not be 
completed. The Principal Secretary added that alternative methodology was 
being worked out to complete the Resurvey work.  The reply of DoSS was not 
acceptable as the technical specification of the equipment should have been 
based on the topography. 
4.1.2 Town Survey - status of settlement work in sampled taluks 
As per Chapter XIII of Survey Manual, when a Town is notified for Town 
Survey and the Survey is carried out, a new set of urban land records viz. 
Town Survey Land Register (TSLRs) and Block Maps  are created and these 
records replace the rural land records (A-Register and FMB). The Town 
Survey which ascertains individual land parcels, their extents and redraws 
them into wards, Blocks, Town Survey numbers and Sub-divisions for 
identification, is to be ideally followed by Town Settlement, an activity which 
verifies, corrects and establishes other aspects of a land record such as land 
type, classification, assessment and ownership. However, it was observed that 
Towns have come under ‘maintenance’1 i.e for patta transfer, without 
‘settlement’ process. The status of Town Settlement, which was in progress in 
three out of the 22 sampled taluks is in Table 4.2. 
  
                                                           
1 The intervening period between creation of new set of urban land records upto 
completion of settlement process is termed as ‘coming under maintenance’. 

Chapter IV 
 
 
 47 
Table 4.2: Town Survey - status of settlement work  
Taluk Year of completion 
of Town Survey 
Year of 
commencement of 
settlement 
Status of settlement work as 
on the date of Audit 
Alandur 2002 2011 
(Under progress) 
14,514 out of 19,429 Town 
Survey numbers completed 
Avadi 2005 2017 
(Under progress) 3 out of 9 wards completed 
Madhavaram 2008 2013 
(Under progress) 
18,679  out of 28,043 Town 
Survey numbers completed 
(Source: Information furnished by the Taluks) 
From the above table, it is observed that the settlement process is still in 
progress though survey activities were completed 13 to 19 years ago.  The 
abnormal delay in commencing the settlement work and its slow progress 
resulted in non-achievement of the objective of the Survey.  Consequently, the 
land owners were given manual pattas and the land transaction under these 
TSLRs remain outside TamilNilam defeating the objective of computerisation 
of Land Records.  
4.2 Asset Management 
4.2.1 Land Record Management Centres  
Land Record Management Centres (LRMCs) is a component under 
NLRMP/DILRMP for establishing a modern record room in each taluk with 
three distinct functional areas. The three areas are (i) a storage area with 
compactors/storage devices for physical storage of records and maps, (ii) an 
operational area with computers/servers, storage area network, printers, etc., and 
(iii) a public services area for waiting/reception, etc.  The physical and financial 
status of the implementation of LRMC component in the State as of  
31 March 2021 are as given in Tables 4.3 and 4.4. 
Table 4.3: Physical: Phase-wise status of Land Record Management Centres  
as on 31 March 2021 
Sl. 
No. 
Phase Sanctioned 
LRMCs 
LRMCs commenced 
operation 
LRMCs pending 
completion 
1 Phase I 21 21 0 
2 Phase  II 57 57 0 
3 Phase III 76 41 35 
4 Phase IV 138 42 96 
5 Phase V 13 0 13 
Total 305 161 144 
(Source: Information furnished by the Department) 
  

Performance Audit on Land Records Management in Tamil Nadu  
 
 48 
Table 4.4: Financial: Phase-wise funds sanctioned, released and expended as on  
31 March 2021 
( in lakh) 
Year Phase/ 
Number of 
LRMCs 
sanctioned 
Amount 
sanctioned 
Funds Released Expendi
-ture 
Balance 
GoI GoTN Total 
2011-12 I/ 21 LRMCs 525 157.50 157.50 315.00 303.25 11.75 
2013-14 II/57 LRMCs 1,425 427.50 427.50 855.00 811.07 43.93 
2014-15(1) I (40 per cent)/ 
21 LRMCs 
-- 105.00 105.00 210.00 210.00 0.00 
2014-15(2) III/ 76 LRMCs 1,900 570.00 570.00 1,140.00 946.74 193.26 
2015-16 II (40 per cent)/ 
57 LRMCs 
-- 285.00 285.00 570.00 284.12 285.88 
2018-19 IV/ 138 LRMCs 3,450 1,035.00 -- 1,035.00 804.86 230.14 
2020-21 V/ 13 LRMCs 325 162.50 -- 162.50 30.84 131.66 
Total 305 LRMCs 7,625 2,742.50 1,545.00 4,287.50 3,390.88 896.62 
(Source: Information furnished by the Department) 
It could be seen from the Table 4.3 that as of March 2021 only 161 out of  
305 LRMCs (53 per cent) commenced operations.  In the joint physical 
verification of 22 sampled taluks, the following were noticed: 
 In seven2 taluks, LRMC was not established. 
 In 15 taluks where the LRMC was established it was noticed that 
 Seven taluks did not have storage area for physical storage of 
records and maps.  No compactors were provided in the  
15 taluks. 
 Though all 15 taluks had operational area, 11 taluks did not 
have networking (LAN) facility.  
 Three taluks did not have a waiting/reception area for the public.  
 Among the 15, the LRMCs at Thirupparankundram and Uthukuli 
taluks had all the necessary facilities except compactors. 
 In two out of the 15 taluks (Agastheeswaram and Vilavancode), the 
LRMC was established by constructing a new building which was 
not in line with the programme guidelines which stipulated that 
central funding will not be provided for new constructions and 
renovations. In Agastheeswaram Taluk, the new building for LRMC 
                                                           
2  Alandur, Avadi, Avinashi, Tiruppur North, Mambalam, Perambalur and 
Udhagamandalam. 

Chapter IV 
 
 
 49 
was used by Taluk Supply Office and e-Aadhaar Service Centres 
and in Vilavancode Taluk, it was not put to use for the desired 
purpose.  
 LRMC established in the Kothagiri Taluk building, was not put to 
use. 
DoSS replied (October 2021) that LRMCs were only an extension of the 
existing office infrastructure and added that as all records were digitized and 
available through e-services and as scanning of land records for archival 
purpose was also underway, the relevance of LRMCs had come down. 
However, he accepted that LRMCs could not be established as originally 
envisaged with facility of compactors for storing maps, etc.  
As the Department had spent  33.91 crore (56 per cent of the total 
expenditure under DILRMP) on LRMCs (March 2021), it should take 
appropriate steps to establish all the envisaged facilities for utilisation of the 
public. Further, Government should device a mechanism to record the details 
of citizens visiting the LRMCs for land related services and take action for 
redressing their grievances. 
4.2.2 Utilisation of programme funds on excluded activities 
As per Para 3, ‘Choice of Software’ of Chapter 4 of NLRMP guidelines - 
Technical Manual, “States should bear in mind that they have to meet the 
required funding for software from their own resources”.  Further, the terms 
and conditions of GoI sanction orders state that funds shall be utilised for the 
purpose for which it was released.   
It was seen that between May 2017 and August 2020, the Department released 
98.29 lakh towards outsourcing programmers for developing TamilNilam 
(Rural & Urban) software which were sanctioned for other components of the 
programme like Digitization of FMS, Programme Monitoring Unit, State Data 
Centre, Survey/Resurvey and LRMC.  
In reply to an Audit enquiry, the DoSS replied (January 2021) that there is no 
provision of funds under DILRMP specifically for development of software 
and that savings in other components of the programme was used for the 
purpose and that GoI had been addressed seeking ratification of the inter 
component transfers.  It further stated that while 3.18 crore was released 
from State funds to NIC till date towards software and hardware, funds 
sanctioned by the Central as well as State Governments was used 
interchangeably depending on the need and availability for bringing the 
computerised land records online through e-services to the public.  
Reply is not acceptable, as pending ratification by GoI for development of 
software, the utilisation of programme funds for other than the approved 
programme expenditure, tantamount to violation of DILRMP guidelines. 
  

Performance Audit on Land Records Management in Tamil Nadu  
 
 50 
4.2.3 Other points of interest  
(i) Non-compliance with e-Waste Policy 
As per the e-Waste (Management) Rules 2016, the maximum e-waste storage 
period is 180 days. As per the Government guidelines3, the Head of 
Department should form a Hardware Disposal Committee (HDC), with a 
minimum of three members each from Finance/Accounts, 
Purchase/Procurement and Technical/Computer knowledge, and empower 
them to identify, certify and recommend item-wise disposal.  Based on the 
recommendations of the HDC, the Department may go for replacement of the 
items with proper entry and removal in stock register.  After ensuring proper 
backup of the data held in old system, the recommended condemned items had 
to be disposed off as per Tamil Nadu Government’s e-Waste Policy. Further, 
an inventory system was to be maintained and the departments had to 
implement a web based Asset Management System for managing e-waste 
disposal.  
As the Department has been procuring Information Technology (IT) hardware 
and equipment for replacement of old hardware and for adoption of latest 
technology in Survey/Resurvey, most of the IT hardware purchased under the 
CLR/NLRMP/DILRMP programmes over a period spanning 25-30 years have 
become obsolete now due to regular wear and tear and adoption of latest 
technology.  
During the field visit to ADSLR offices in three sampled districts, Audit 
noticed that no action was taken to identify e-waste in the units under the 
control of the respective ADSLR for their eventual disposal, as IT assets to the 
taluks are issued only through ADSLR.  
The ADsSLR of The Nilgiris, Perambalur and Kanyakumari Districts replied 
(August to October 2021) that action would be taken shortly to prepare 
exhaustive list of e-waste for their disposal.  
(ii) Non-utilisation of ‘A0’ Plotter provided to District Survey Offices  
In March 2005, GoTN issued orders outlining the procedure for maintenance 
of computers and peripherals. During field visit (June 2021 to October 2021) 
to the sampled district survey offices (ADSLR), Audit noticed that an ‘A0’ 
Plotter was supplied (during the period 2007 to 2012) to each of the eight 
ADSLR offices for taking print outs of ward maps, block maps and village 
maps.  However, in all the sampled ADSLR offices, the ‘A0’ Plotters were not 
in working condition as detailed in Table 4.5. 
 
 
  
                                                           
3  (i) Information technology (e.Gov.II) Department G.O.Ms. No.18 Dated  
07 May 2010 on E-Waste Policy of Tamil Nadu 2010 and (ii) Information 
Technology (e.Gov.II) Department G.O.Ms.No. 9 dated 23 April 2013. 

Chapter IV 
 
 
 51 
Table 4.5: Status of ‘A0’ Plotter provided to District Survey Offices 
Sl. 
No. 
District Month & 
Year of 
receipt of 
A0 plotter 
Period upto 
which the 
plotter was 
stated to be 
working 
Present state of 
A0 plotter 
Remarks 
1 Chennai Not Known Not Known Not working Certified to be unserviceable by 
the technician deputed from 
DoSS. 
2 Kanniyakumari 2008 Not mentioned Not working- 
unserviceable 
Service engineer stated that the 
printer is unserviceable. 
3 Madurai 2007 2015 Not working due 
to ‘frozen toner’ 
Status reported to DoSS vide 
letter dated 09 December 2020, 
further action awaited. 
4 Perambalur 2008 Not mentioned Not Working Annual Maintenance Contract 
not executed. 
5 Thanjavur 2012 Not mentioned Not Working Letter addressed to DoSS, 
Technician visited to assess the 
condition of the plotter.  No 
funds provided for consumables. 
6 The Nilgiris 2008 Warranty 
ended by 2011 
Not Working No funds provided for printer 
consumables. 
7 Tiruppur 2012 2014 Was repaired 
and then it was 
not used 
Awaiting visit from Service 
Engineer to be deputed by 
EPSON on instructions from 
DoSS. 
8 Tiruvallur 2008 Not Known Not working As per inspection report of the 
technician, Repair Estimate 
given to Head Office. 
(Source: Compiled from information furnished by District Survey Offices) 
In the absence of connected records in the sampled units, the cost of each 
plotter and the source of funds could not be ascertained in Audit.  To an Audit 
query, it was stated by the ADsSLR concerned that the Plotters could not be 
put to use and had declined into state of disrepair due to non-provision of 
funds for printer consumables.   It was also stated that no funds were provided 
for executing Annual Maintenance Contract after the expiry of warranty. 
(iii) Non-installation of procured AutoCad in Survey Training 
Institute, Orthanadu 
Under NLRMP, Government of India sanctioned 26.25 lakh and released  
15.75 lakh for the purchase of Geographical Information System (GIS) 
ready digitization software with AutoCAD for imparting training on 
‘Digitization and GIS’ to Surveyor and Draughtsman in Survey Training 
Institute (STI), Orathanadu.  The software was procured (February 2015) at a 
cost of 9.50 lakh. However, it was observed that the licensed AutoCAD 
software was not installed.  
The Principal, STI, Orathanadu in his reply (October 2021) stated that in the 
absence of AutoCAD, training was imparted through other applications like 
CollabLand and MS CAD. Thus, the expenditure on procuring the AutoCAD 
became infructuous and the programme objective of imparting training in 
AutoCAD was also defeated. 

Performance Audit on Land Records Management in Tamil Nadu  
 
 52 
 
4.3 Conclusion 
Computerisation of land records has been in progress since 1998 under three 
schemes viz., CLR, NILRMP and DILRMP. As per the latest target, the 
Project should have been completed by March 2020.  It is, however, a matter 
of concern that due to the lack of adherence to deadlines for the Project, the 
desired objectives of providing timely and efficient services to the citizen were 
yet to be achieved.  The Resurvey works in three districts were progressing in 
a slow pace.  LRMCs were not completed in 144 out of the 305 taluks  
(47 per cent), thereby the envisaged facilities were not provided to the citizens 
seeking land record related services. 
4.4 Recommendations 
Government may consider: 
 Accelerating the Resurvey work in the selected taluks and working 
out an alternative methodology to complete the Resurvey work. 
 Completing pending settlement work in Town Survey in a  
time-bound manner. 
 Taking steps to establish all the envisaged facilities in the 
established LRMCs for utilisation of the public. 
 

CHAPTER V 
DATA SECURITY 
AND MONITORING 
 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 53 
CHAPTER V 
 
DATA SECURITY AND MONITORING 
 
5.1  Misuse of login credentials resulted in illegal transfer of 
Government lands to individuals  
The e-Security Policy of Tamil Nadu, 2010 envisages safeguards against IT 
related threats and vulnerabilities in the IT System. During scrutiny of files 
relating to TamilNilam (Urban), Audit noticed that the Additional Chief 
Secretary sought (September 2019) action taken report from the DoSS on the 
incident of misuse of official key password and illegal transfer of Government 
Poromboke lands to individuals by Revenue officials in Dindigul district.  In 
the incident, four Revenue officials misused the key password assigned to 
RDO, Kodaikanal and transferred, through the online system, 32 Hectares 
(79.0737 acres) of Government lands (103 Sub-divisions in Kodaikanal town) 
between October 2018 and 04 June 20191.  The DoSS, in turn sought 
(September 2019) from the ADSLR, Dindigul the manuscript data and 
computerised data for the town Survey numbers involved and requested the 
District Collector, Dindigul to take necessary action against the officials 
involved. 
Later (December 2019) DoSS provided the details about Anadheenam lands in 
Kodaikanal to NIC for blocking them from online land transactions. Based on 
the request of DoSS, NIC blocked all transactions (December 2019) for 
‘Government assessed and non-assessed wastelands’ in Kodaikanal town.  
DoSS also asked NIC to block all Government assessed and unassessed 
wastelands of Udhagamandalam, Coonoor, Yercaud and Yelagiri Taluks from 
land transactions in TamilNilam (Urban & Rural).  In response NIC blocked 
(December 2019) 1,839 TSLRs in TamilNilam (Urban). 
To an Audit enquiry, DoSS replied that the incident in Kodaikanal which 
involved land classification change from ‘Government’ to ‘Private’ requires 
the workflow up to District Collector’s level for appropriate orders.  But  
by-passing this work, the ‘Additions and Corrections’ modules which goes 
upto the RDO level was utilised for fraudulently changing the land 
classification.  The Department stated that the classification of the lands 
involved have been restored to original classification viz., ‘Government’ and 
that these lands were blocked for further land transactions and the pattas 
issued were revoked.  However, Audit verified (October 2021) the  
103 Sub-divisions in the Department’s web-portal and found that in one 
instance the land parcel was not blocked and in three2 instances though the 
land parcels were blocked, the name of the individual to whom the lands were 
transferred illegally continued to be displayed.  This is indicative of 
incomplete action taken by the Department.   
                                                           
1  The RDO was working from 04/09/2017 to 16/10/2018 and on transfer to Madurai 
handed over the key password to the Revenue Inspector.  He retired on 31/07/2019. 2  Survey No.7/2 under Ward D, Block 19 (not blocked). Survey Nos. No.5/40 under 
Ward A, Block 5 and Survey Nos.1/2D and 55/7A under Ward C, Block 2 (blocked 
but name displayed). 

Performance Audit on Land Records Management in Tamil Nadu  
 
 54 
Further, during examination of the urban database of Tiruvallur and 
Mambalam Taluks, Audit came across 73 cases (5 in Tiruvallur and 68 in 
Mambalam) where the ownership of Government assessed waste lands was in 
the name of individuals. It is suggested that the Department rectifies the above 
issues and conduct a similar exercise in respect of such lands across the State. 
5.2 Delay in implementation of Disaster Recovery Plan 
As per e-Security Policy of Tamil Nadu 2010, any disruption of operation of 
information systems of critical infrastructure would have a devastating effect 
on citizens, the economy and Government services. In view of the potential 
impact, protection of critical information infrastructure was essential to ensure 
that disruptions are of minimal duration, manageable and cause the least 
damage possible.  All Departments should develop and implement an  
IT Disaster Recovery (DR) Plan for critical IT Systems and review for 
relevance annually.  Contingency planning along with a standard response 
chart was required to prevent interruptions to normal operations for critical 
Government processes and procedures.  Backups of all configurations on 
devices as per required frequency were to be taken, documented and verified 
by restoring backups as per criticality of devices.   
In the absence of a disaster recovery system in place, due to power outage, all 
servers of TamilNilam came to halt on 19/05/2018 and 02/06/2018.  Similarly 
disruption in services also took place between 29/04/2020 (2:17 pm) and 
01/05/2020 (2:00 pm).   In reply (November 2020), DoSS stated that the 
servers for the Disaster Recovery System has been installed at Tamil Nadu 
Data Recovery Centre, Trichy in July 2020 and NIC in its reply  
(December 2020) stated that DR is being set up and this would ensure un-
interrupted services once it is in place. It was also stated that the replication of 
TamilNilam (Rural) data to DR site is currently under progress and on its 
completion, TamilNilam (Urban) and FMB will be replicated to DR. 
NIC informed (October 2021) that the offsite backup storage was now ready at 
Trichy.   The installation of the offsite backup storage alone does not fulfil the 
requirement for DR and would not assure business continuity without loss of 
time in the event of disruptions.  
5.3 Non-commencement of Aadhaar seeding of land records in 
TamilNilam  
DILRMP guidelines states that Aadhaar integration is vital to check benami/ 
fraudulent transactions of land and also essential to promote Direct Benefit 
Transfer (DBT) to the beneficiaries. GoTN directed (November 2016) DoSS 
to take necessary steps to enter the Aadhaar number in a phased manner in the 
TamilNilam database against the land owners.  
To an Audit query, the Department replied (October 2021) that Aadhaar 
seeding of land record database has not yet commenced in the State. As 
Aadhaar authentication is not mandatory after the Hon’ble Supreme Court 
Order (September 2018), the Department has requested GoTN to issue orders 

Chapter V 
 
 
 55 
to obtain Aadhaar numbers from land owners with their informed consent to 
avail the web services of the land records. Alternatively, acceptance of voter 
ID for identification of land owners was proposed and orders from GoTN in 
this regard were awaited.   
Though the Department has taken steps, in the absence of necessary 
Government Orders, the land record database still does not have a provision to 
uniquely identify land owners. 
5.4 Security Audit Certificate 
The e-security policy of Government of Tamil Nadu 2010, also states that 
third-party IT Security Assessments of all IT devices, applications and assets 
shall be done annually. The details of such security assessment has been dealt 
under Para 2.4.2 of the e-Security Policy.  
Scrutiny of records indicated that Security Audit Certificates obtained for 
TamilNilam (Rural) and (Urban) had expired on 13 December 2019, 31 March 
2020 and 09 June 2020.  It was seen from the files produced to Audit that no 
web applications of the Department were covered by security audit. 
In the exit meeting, DoSS and NIC stated (October 2021) that all applications 
under TamilNilam have now been covered under Security Audit. The final 
reply with supporting document is awaited. 
5.5 Non-implementation of Local Government Directory codes 
The Ministry of Rural Development, Department of Land Resources (MoRD) 
envisaged (November 2017) the use of the MIS data for monitoring the 
progress of DILRMP and the DILRMP-MIS database had to be Local 
Government Directory (LGD) compliant as the use of LGD codes would help 
in inter-operability of data among Ministries/Departments in the State.  The 
Ministry of Panchayati Raj maintains the LGD application, which is a standard 
location directory of all administrative units viz. district, block, gram 
panchayat, village, urban local bodies, etc.  The application also has an online 
updating mechanism.  The State was also advised to co-ordinate with NIC to 
expedite the updation and validation of LGD before 31 December 2019. 
At present, the DILRMP-MIS database remains LGD non-compliant in the 
State. The DoSS replied (January 2021) that LGD codes were yet to be 
brought into the online land records and that currently Revenue village codes 
were being used instead.  He further stated that the vast difference between the 
two codes necessitated reconciliation and action would be taken in this regard 
in consultation with NIC, CLA, CRA and other line departments. Thus, non-
adoption of LGD codes restrict the inter-operability among the Central and 
State Governments.  
5.6 Lack of monitoring by Programme Management Unit   
The DILRMP guidelines provides for monitoring of scheme implementation 
by the Programme Management Unit (PMU).  PMU is a two-tiered structure at 
the State level consisting of (i) the State Level Monitoring Committee of 

Performance Audit on Land Records Management in Tamil Nadu  
 
 56 
NLRMP (SLMC) headed by the Principal Secretary, Revenue Department and 
(ii) the NLRMP Implementation Society of Tamil Nadu (NIST) headed by the 
Principal Secretary/Commissioner of Survey and Settlement and at the district 
level, a District Level Monitoring and Review Committee (DLMRC) headed 
by the District Collector. 
(a) The SLMC was to meet every quarter to monitor the progress of 
implementation of NLRMP. However, Audit noticed that the SLMC of 
NLRMP had convened only thrice (27/06/2012, 21/06/2017 and 05/07/2019) 
since its constitution (May 2012).  Considering the delay in implementation in 
many of the sub-components of the programme, non-convening the SLMC at 
regular intervals i.e. once in a quarter, contributed to the deficient monitoring.    
(b) NIST was constituted to take care of the ground level activities of the 
programme and to manage the funds sanctioned under the programme. It was 
observed from records produced to Audit that the NIST had convened on 
seven occasions3. These meetings mostly dealt with approval of annual 
accounts and other routine matters and saw minimal discussions on 
factors/challenges in the progress of the program.  
(c) DLMRC was ordered to be constituted (April 2015) for monitoring the 
implementation of the DILRM Programme at the district level. Monthly 
meetings were to be conducted and the minutes intimated to DoSS.  Audit 
noticed in the eight sampled districts that district level meetings were not 
conducted periodically.  In three districts no meeting was conducted and in the 
remaining five districts the meetings were conducted only for one to six times 
till date. Further frequent transfer4 of Tahsildars impacted continuous and 
effective monitoring.  
To an Audit enquiry, DoSS replied (December 2020) that progress of each and 
every component of the DILRMP was discussed in the SLMC meeting 
conducted atleast once in a year based on need and also the progress of various 
schemes was reviewed frequently by the SLMC. He also added that the 
progress of the scheme were elaborately discussed in the NIST meeting and 
discussions and meeting were conducted frequently in this regard. Regarding 
DLRMC, it was stated that details would be furnished on receipt of 
information called from ADSLRs. It was, however, seen that the 
implementation of DILRMP suffered mainly due to poor monitoring at State, 
District and Taluk level.  
5.7 Conclusion 
Deficiencies in data security resulted in transfer/classification of Government 
land as private land. The Department does not have a Disaster Recovery 
system in place to safe guard the critical data of TamilNilam.  In the absence 
of Aadhaar seeding in land records database, the system does not have a 
                                                           
3 Dates of Meeting: 04/01/2013, 17/10/2014, 17/02/2016, 20/04/2017, 28/05/2018, 
29/07/2019 and 07/01/2021. 
4 During the period 2016-21, transfer of Tahsildar in a taluk occurred 8 to 14 times in  
9 out of 18 sampled taluks.  

Chapter V 
 
 
 57 
provision to uniquely identify land owners.  Monitoring at all levels, 
especially at the district level, were deficient. In the three sampled districts, 
the monitoring committees did not meet even once.  
5.8 Recommendations 
Government may consider: 
 Following MeitY guidelines on security architecture to ensure IT 
security process with proper viewing/editing rights etc., based on 
segregation of duties and need-to-know basis so that the sensitive 
data cannot be accessed by unauthorised users.  
 Checking and rectifying the defects, pointed out by Audit in the 
sampled taluks, across all the Taluks in the State. 
 Directing NIC to incorporate necessary input controls and 
validation checks in the software applications to ensure correct and 
complete capture of data. 
 Speeding up Aadhaar seeding of land records to avoid multiple 
patta numbers for the same pattadhar and facilitate consolidation of 
land holdings of individual owners. 
 Holding State and District level meetings periodically and use the  
MIS reports available in TamilNilam for effective monitoring of the  
system. 
 
           (R. AMBALAVANAN) 
Chennai  Principal Accountant General (Audit-I), 
The  08 June 2022                         Tamil Nadu  
  
Countersigned 
 
    (GIRISH CHANDRA MURMU) 
New Delhi                 Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
The  20 June 2022 
 
 


APPENDICES 
 
 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 59 
Appendix 2.1 
(Reference:  Paragraph 2.2.1; Page 9) 
Details of differences in village extent between manual and computerised A-Registers 
Sl.
No. 
Taluk 
Total number of Villages Villages test-checked Details of Villages where there were differences in land extent No. of villages 
Total extent as 
per manual  
A-Register  
(Ha. Are. SqM.) 
Total extent as per 
computerised  
A-Register  
(Ha. Are. SqM.) 
Differences (+/-) 
(Ha. Are. SqM.) 
 
1 Agastheeswaram 36 10 10 6718.49.98 6852.91.97 (-) 134.41.99 
2 Alandur 10 5 5 1288.97.00 1314.27.55 (-) 025.30.55 
3 Avadi 54 10 10 4149.36.40 4130.52.00 (+) 018.84.36 
4 Avinashi 41 41 41 44745.23.00 45239.25.96 (-) 494.02.96 
5 Gummidipoondi 90 10 9 3331.01.50 3418.04.63 (-) 087.03.13 
6 Kothagiri 15 10 10 13109.58.50 32181.36.01 (-) 19071.77.51 
7 Madurai East 106 106 87 19999.66.00 21120.43.03 (-) 1120.77.03 
8 Madurai North 82 10 10 2209.80.00 2206.10.85 (+) 3.69.15 
9 Papanasam 120 10 9 3280.92.00 3287.83.07 (-) 6.91.07 
10 Perambalur 27 10 10 11130.91.50 11650.99.84 (-) 520.08.34 
11 Thiruvaiyaru 56 10 8 2689.25.00 2675.99.80 (+) 013.25.20 
12 Thiruvidaimaruthur 89 10 10 3401.95.00 3404.57.33 (-) 002.62.33 
13 Tiruppur North 7 7 7 8914.48.50 7261.93.10 (+) 1652.55.40 
14 Tiruvallur 165 165 11 3798.43.00 3909.56.20 (-) 111.13.20 
15 Tirupparankundram 27 10 9 6084.56.00 6098.03.37 (-) 13.47.37 
16 Udhagamandalam 12 10 9 35397.87.50 35496.08.78 (-) 98.21.28 
17 Uthukuli 49 10 8 3253.63.50 3251.84.03 (+) 1.79.47 
18 Veppanthattai 39 10 10 13883.91.00 13991.56.33 (-) 107.65.33 
19 Vilavancode 27 9 9 8326.74.80 8330.66.57 (-) 003.91.77 
Total 1,052 463 282    

Performance Audit on Land Records Management in Tamil Nadu  
 
 60 
Appendix 2.1 (a) 
(Reference:  Paragraph 2.2.1; Page 9) 
Cases of difference in land extent in Kattanagaram village of 
Tiruvidaimarudhur Taluk in Thanjavur District 
Sl. 
No. 
Survey 
number 
As per 
manual A-
register 
(in Ares) 
As per 
computerised 
A-register 
(in Ares) 
Difference 
(in Ares) 
Reasons for difference 
1 77 160.00 151.00 (-) 9.00 The error occurred due to incorrect 
totalling which is wrongly exhibited 
in the UDR A-Register. 
2 124 173.00 170.00 (-) 3.00 Due to omission during 
computerisation - 3 Ares under  
sub-division 124/7 and 1.5 Ares 
under sub-division 127/1B2 and  
3.5 Ares under sub-division 146/3C2 
in the UDR A-register not captured. 
3 127 141.00 139.50 (-) 1.50 
4 146 169.00 165.50 (-) 3.50 
5 71 213.50 213.75 (+) 0.25 Due to data entry error during 
computerisation the 2.75 Ares of  
sub-division 71/7A captured as 3 
Ares. 
  Total 856.50 839.75 (-) 16.75   
 
  

Appendices 
 
 
 61 
Appendix 2.2 
(Reference:  Paragraph 2.2.2 (i); Page 10) 
Illustrative cases of incomplete capture of legacy information 
Sl. 
No. 
Taluk Village Survey number Reasons for the gap 
1 Avadi Pammathukulam 15 to 29, 47,  
95-114, 181-338, 
340, 346-352, 353-
360, 371-399, 407-
417, 421, 422, 444, 
445, 447-454 and  
456-466 
Stated to be clubbed 
with Puzhal Lake in 
manual A-Register 
but this information 
not brought  
into computerised  
A-Register 
2 Gummidipoondi Siruvada 225 
Omitted during 
computerisation of 
A-Register. 
3 Madurai East  Kodikulam Part 2 198 and 212 
4 Madurai East  Perakkur 7, 9, 15 and 30 
5 Madurai North Kadavur 111 
6 Tiruvallur Ayathur  61 to 64, 310, 311, 
313, 315, 317, 322 to 
327, 329 to 350, 353, 
354, 356, 359-361 
and 363-374 
Stated to be clubbed 
with Survey No.312 
in manual A-Register 
but this information 
not brought  
into computerized  
A-Register 
7 Tiruvallur Valasvettikadu 169 Omitted during 
computerisation of 
A-Register 
 
  

Performance Audit on Land Records Management in Tamil Nadu  
 
 62 
Appendix 2.3 
(Reference:  Paragraph 2.2.2 (ii); Page 10) 
Details of discrepancies in capture of old Survey numbers  
in computerised records 
Sl. 
No. 
Taluk Number of 
Records 
Old Survey number 
captured correctly 
Old Survey number 
not captured 
correctly 
1 Agastheeswaram 1,82,560 15,568 179 
2 Alandur 13,952 5,693 6,200 
3 Avadi 1,08,428 90,428 16,731 
4 Avinashi 1,02,518 1,02,505 13 
5 Gummidipoondi 2,23,117 2,21,493 898 
6 Kothagiri 64,184 8,728 55,314 
7 Madhavaram 39,545 31,770 6,924 
8 Madurai East 1,12,895 77,343 35,389 
9 Madurai North 1,00,331 77,661 22,644 
10 Papanasam 1,91,644 1,83,389 7,728 
11 Perambalur 1,19,227 91,572 27,390 
12 Thirupparankundram 64,048 26,818 37,038 
13 Thiruvaiyaru 75,537 71,943 3,586 
14 Thiruvidaimarudhur 1,28,438 1,25,735 2,696 
15 Tiruppur North 25,767 21,747 4,019 
16 Tiruvallur 3,94,310 2,14,041 1,48,926 
17 Udhagamandalam 53,346 4,655 48,617 
18 Uthukkuli 59,298 8,887 50,369 
19 Veppanthattai 1,48,688 1,16,823 31,741 
20 Vilavancode 1,16,785 6,626 116 
 Total 23,24,618 15,03,425 5,06,518 
 
  

Appendices 
 
 
 63 
Appendix 2.4 (a) 
(Reference:  Paragraph 2.2.2 (iii); Page 11) 
Special characters in Survey numbers/Sub-division numbers in  
rural taluks 
Sl. 
No. 
Taluk Number of records with 
special characters in Survey 
numbers 
Number of records with 
special characters in  
Sub-division numbers 
1 Gummidipoondi 0 59 
2 Madhavaram 0 3 
3 Perambalur 3 29 
4 Tiruvallur 0 93 
5 Thiruvaiyaru 1 19 
6 Veppanthattai 0 1 
Total 4 204 
 
Appendix 2.4 (b) 
(Reference:  Paragraph 2.2.2 (iii); Page 11) 
Special characters in Survey numbers/Sub-division numbers in  
urban taluks 
Sl. 
No. 
Taluk Number of records with 
special characters in Survey 
numbers 
Number of records with 
special characters in  
Sub-division numbers 
1 Alandur 25 773 
2 Avadi 90 169 
3 Madhavaram 68 11 
4 Madurai North 23 1 
5 Thirupparankundram 0 4 
6 Tiruvallur 2 14 
7 Udhagamandalam 0 2 
8 Vilavancode 0 104 
Total 208 1,078 
 
 
  

Performance Audit on Land Records Management in Tamil Nadu  
 
 64 
Appendix 2.5 
(Reference:  Paragraph 2.2.3; Page 11) 
Details of instances where the length of Sub-division number exceeded 
four digits/characters 
Sl. 
No. 
Taluk 
Total number of Villages 
Total  
Sub-divisions 
Number of instances where the 
length of Sub-division number 
exceeded four digits/characters 
Total 
number of 
cases 
Number of cases 
after 
implementation of 
OPT 
1 Agastheeswaram 36 1,82,560 1,675 1,323 
2 Alandur 5 13,952 617 573 
3 Avadi 21 1,08,428 7,548 4,823 
4 Avinashi 41 1,02,518 1,284 1,242 
5 Gummidipoondi 90 2,23,117 4,708 2,604 
6 Kothagiri 23 64,184 586 553 
7 Madhavaram 11 39,545 4,729 2,517 
8 Madurai East 106 1,12,895 3,070 1,846 
9 Madurai North 75 1,00,331 3,919 2,692 
10 Papanasam 119 1,91,644 1,088 829 
11 Perambalur 27 1,19,227 2,975 2,577 
12 Thirupparankundram 26 64,048 2,346 1,643 
13 Thiruvaiyaru 56 75,537 387 303 
14 Thiruvidaimarudhur 89 1,28,438 829 534 
15 Tiruppur North 7 25,767 733 713 
16 Tiruvallur 165 3,94,310 15,054 8,185 
17 Udhagamandalam 17 53,346 289 289 
18 Uthukkuli 49 59,298 326 308 
19 Veppanthattai 39 1,48,688 912 674 
20 Vilavancode 27 1,16,785 636 428 
Total 1,029 23,24,618 53,711 34,656 
 
 

Appendices 
 
 
 65 
Appendix 2.6 
(Reference:  Paragraph 2.2.3; Page 11) 
Taluk-wise details of non-adherence of notation rules while sub-dividing 
land parcels 
Sl. 
No. 
Taluk Number of Sub-divisions 
(ISD transactions) 
1 Agastheeswaram 12,520 
2 Alandur 1,935 
3 Avadi 30,305 
4 Avinashi 9,517 
5 Gummidipoondi 24,744 
6 Kothagiri 5,759 
7 Madhavaram 8,536 
8 Madurai East 22,958 
9 Madurai North 28,243 
10 Papanasam 6,052 
11 Perambalur 15,850 
12 Thirupparankundram 13,599 
13 Thiruvaiyaru 3,075 
14 Thiruvidaimarudhur 4,040 
15 Tiruppur North 5,706 
16 Tiruvallur 52,668 
17 Udhagamandalam 3,397 
18 Uthukkuli 5,895 
19 Veppanthattai 10,554 
20 Vilavancode 5,339 
 Total 2,70,692 
  

Performance Audit on Land Records Management in Tamil Nadu  
 
 66 
Appendix 2.7 (a) 
(Reference:  Paragraph 2.2.5 (i); Page 13) 
Details of multiple Patta numbers assigned to  
single Pattadhar in a village 
Sl. 
No. 
Taluk Total number of 
cases 
Number of cases 
after 
implementation of 
OPT 
1 Agastheeswaram 18,501 5,729 
2 Alandur 692 213 
3 Avadi 4,242 2,024 
4 Avinashi 8,372 3,595 
5 Gummidipoondi 7,934 2,509 
6 Kothagiri 4,972 2,284 
7 Madhavaram 1,806 787 
8 Madurai East 4,362 1,666 
9 Madurai North 4,330 2,903 
10 Papanasam 8,935 2,408 
11 Perambalur 10,417 3,627 
12 Thirupparankundram 3,588 1,100 
13 Thiruvaiyaru 4,273 977 
14 Thiruvidaimarudhur 6,845 1,569 
15 Tiruppur North 2,894 1,603 
16 Tiruvallur 16,560 4,743 
17 Udhagamandalam 3,126 1,378 
18 Uthukkuli 5,768 3,535 
19 Veppanthattai 13,417 3,633 
20 Vilavancode 12,774 4,270 
Total 1,43,808 50,553 

Appendices 
 
 
 67 
Appendix 2.7 (b) 
(Reference:  Paragraph 2.2.5 (i); Page 13) 
Details of multiple Patta Numbers assigned to single Pattadhar in  
urban taluks 
Sl. 
No. 
Taluk Total number of 
cases 
Number of cases 
after 
implementation of 
OPT 
1 Alandur 757 5 
2 Avadi 3,955 820 
3 Madhavaram 887 174 
4 Madurai North 2,671 312 
5 Mambalam 797 355 
6 Thirupparankundram 1,380 261 
7 Tiruppur North 10,160 10,160 
8 Tiruvallur 1,274 160 
9 Udhagamandalam 1,539 1,116 
10 Velachery 1,079 317 
11 Vilavancode 4,629 2,057 
Total 29,128 15,737 
 
  

Performance Audit on Land Records Management in Tamil Nadu  
 
 68 
Appendix 2.8 (a) 
(Reference:  Paragraph 2.2.5 (ii); Page 14) 
Discrepancies found in computerised Chitta (ownership details) in 
sampled rural taluks 
Sl. 
No. 
Taluk Private lands 
without 
ownership 
information 
Owner Name/ 
Relative Name  
not available 
Duplication 
in owner 
name 
Incorrect 
spelling of 
owner/relative 
name (Tamil) 
during Unicode 
conversion 
1 Agastheeswaram 0 6,100 4,134 705 
2 Alandur 0 151 14 12 
3 Avadi 653 2,406 79 717 
4 Avinashi 1,297 41,773 2,247 220 
5 Kothagiri 0 4,66,810 17 458 
6 Gummidipoondi 7 8,228 10 3,615 
7 Madhavaram 0 268 52 248 
8 Madurai East 0 8,244 61 213 
9 Madurai North 0 10,163 18 108 
10 Papanasam 0 339 1,448 152 
11 Perambalur 4 6,468 873 2,248 
12 Thirupparankundram 216 6,385 44 18 
13 Thiruvaiyaru 0 6,982 194 36 
14 Thiruvidaimarudhur 0 23,180 220 452 
15 Tiruppur North 3,278 17,945 1,798 80 
16 Tiruvallur 57 19,587 61 4,877 
17 Udhagamandalam 0 1,84,555 222 2,334 
18 Uthukkuli 6,495 54,031 1,237 92 
19 Veppanthattai 118 3,872 397 86 
20 Vilavancode 0 149 4,553 22,190 
Total 12,125 8,67,636 17,679 38,861 
 

Appendices 
 
 
 69 
Appendix 2.8 (b) 
(Reference:  Paragraph 2.2.5 (ii); Page 14) 
Discrepancies found in computerised Chitta (ownership details) in 
sampled urban taluks 
Sl. 
No. 
Taluk Private lands 
without 
ownership 
information 
Owner name/ 
Relative name  
not available 
Duplication 
in owner 
name 
Incorrect 
spelling of 
owner/relative 
name (Tamil) 
during unicode 
conversion 
1 Alandur 0 0 6 336 
2 Avadi 808 292 22 1,419 
3 Madhavaram 108 10 96 1,149 
4 Madurai North 66 147 207 33 
5 Mambalam 193 1 106 385 
6 Thirupparankundram 2 18 6 20 
7 Tiruppur North 0 11 129 10 
8 Tiruvallur 50 6 50 157 
9 Udhagamandalam 3 0 716 36 
10 Velachery 4 12 170 531 
11 Vilavancode 0 7 187 259 
Total 1,234 504 1,695 4,335 
  

Performance Audit on Land Records Management in Tamil Nadu  
 
 70 
Appendix 2.9 (a) 
(Reference:  Paragraph 2.2.5 (iii); Page 14) 
Redundant patta numbers in computerised Chitta in rural taluks 
Sl. 
No. 
Taluk Number of Patta numbers in 
Chitta and in A-Register 
Number of Patta numbers in 
Chitta but not in A-Register 
1 Agastheeswaram 1,45,151 3,645 
2 Alandur 10,268 3,059 
3 Avadi 78,833 18,732 
4 Avinashi 56,460 12,414 
5 Gummidipoondi 84,277 26,178 
6 Kothagiri 36,955 3,725 
7 Madhavaram 29,707 13,542 
8 Madurai East 65,514 19,536 
9 Madurai North 66,017 18,289 
10 Papanasam 74,479 21,247 
11 Perambalur 63,164 17,028 
12 Thirupparankundram 37,048 10,313 
13 Thiruvaiyaru 32,539 10,833 
14 Thiruvidaimarudhur 50,321 13,560 
15 Tiruppur North 17,298 2,841 
16 Tiruvallur 2,27,800 54,520 
17 Udhagamandalam 24,481 2,191 
18 Uthukkuli 31,703 3,927 
19 Veppanthattai 70,131 32,337 
20 Vilavancode 97,858 2,986 
Total 13,00,004 2,90,903 
  

Appendices 
 
 
 71 
Appendix 2.9 (b) 
(Reference:  Paragraph 2.2.5 (iii); Page 14) 
Redundant patta numbers in computerised Chitta in urban taluks 
Sl. 
No. 
Taluk Number of Patta numbers in 
Chitta and in A-Register 
Number of Patta numbers in 
Chitta but not in A-Register 
1 Alandur 16,876 5 
2 Avadi 58,936 2,719 
3 Madhavaram 28,690 26 
4 Madurai North 36,106 20 
5 Mambalam 40,478 129 
6 Thirupparankundram 21,686 793 
7 Tiruppur North 38,306 20 
8 Tiruvallur 18,765 522 
9 Udhagamandalam 9,780 461 
10 Velachery 40,533 0 
11 Vilavancode 5,815 182 
Total 3,15,971 4,877 
 
  

Performance Audit on Land Records Management in Tamil Nadu  
 
 72 
Appendix 2.10 
(Reference:  Paragraph 2.2.7; Page 16) 
Details of gaps noticed in Sub-division numbers 
Sl. 
No. 
Taluk Number of missing  
Sub-divisions 
Number of Survey numbers 
involved 
1 Alandur 564 119 
2 Avadi 2,547 117 
3 Madhavaram 845 90 
4 Madurai North 393 139 
5 Mambalam 454 76 
6 Thirupparankundram 392 58 
7 Tiruppur North 1 1 
8 Tiruvallur 1,088 94 
9 Udhagamandalam 849 128 
10 Velachery 3,316 56 
11 Vilavancode 143 100 
Total 10,592 978 
 
  

Appendices 
 
 
 73 
Appendix 2.11 
(Reference:  Paragraph 2.3.1; Page 18) 
Survey numbers with textual records but without spatial records 
Sl. 
No. 
Taluk Number 
of 
villages 
Survey 
numbers 
in  
A-Register 
Survey 
numbers 
without 
FMS 
Number of  
Sub-divisions 
for the Survey 
numbers in 
Col. (5) 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
1 Agastheeswaram 36 14,778 2,614 35,624 
2 Alandur 5 1,292 54 163 
3 Avadi 21 5,561 137 1,697 
4 Avinashi 41 19,216 41 309 
5 Gummidipoondi 90 25,208 876 8,673 
6 Kothagiri 23 7,892 1,801 13,959 
7 Madhavaram 11 2,012 35 332 
8 Madurai East 106 9,774 45 475 
9 Madurai North 75 6,954 4 41 
10 Papanasam 119 26,278 3,430 37,482 
11 Perambalur 27 10,361 128 1,468 
12 Thiruvaiyaru 56 11,049 603 3,302 
13 Thiruvidaimarudhur 89 19,722 669 5,354 
14 Tirupparankundram 26 3,772 4 45 
15 Tiruppur North 7 3,188 0 0 
16 Tiruvallur 165 46,315 3,233 44,747 
17 Udhagamandalam 17 10,031 340 1,165 
18 Uthukuli 49 9,658 22 156 
19 Veppanthattai 39 17,261 72 515 
20 Vilavancode 27 8,339 6,571 94,261 
Total 1,029 2,58,661 20,679 2,49,768 
   

Performance Audit on Land Records Management in Tamil Nadu  
 
 74 
Appendix 2.12 
(Reference:  Paragraph 2.3.1; Page 18) 
Sub-divisions with textual records but without spatial records 
Sl. 
No. 
Taluk Number 
of villages 
Sub-divisions in 
 A-Register 
Sub-divisions  
without FMS 
1 Agastheeswaram 36 1,82,560 40,609 
2 Alandur 5 13,952 4,670 
3 Avadi 21 1,08,428 54,873 
4 Avinashi 41 1,02,518 5,594 
5 Gummidipoondi 90 2,23,117 44,156 
6 Kothagiri 23 64,184 22,863 
7 Madhavaram 11 39,545 15,925 
8 Madurai East 106 1,12,895 32,284 
9 Madurai North 75 1,00,331 26,537 
10 Papanasam 119 1,91,644 46,839 
11 Perambalur 27 1,19,227 15,861 
12 Thirupurankundram 26 64,048 12,013 
13 Thiruvaiyaru 56 75,537 7,163 
14 Thiruvidaimarudhur 89 1,28,438 14,625 
15 Tiruppur North 7 25,767 3,112 
16 Tiruvallur 165 3,94,310 1,54,346 
17 Udhagamandalam 17 53,346 3,094 
18 Uthukuli 49 59,298 3,327 
19 Veppanthattai 39 1,48,688 12,160 
20 Vilavancode 27 1,16,785 1,05,172 
Total 1,029 23,24,618 6,25,223 

Appendices 
 
 
 75 
Appendix 2.13 
(Reference:  Paragraph 2.3.2; Page 18) 
Textual area from A-Register captured wrongly in spatial (FMS) data 
Sl.No. Taluk Number 
of 
villages 
Survey numbers Sub-division numbers 
Total Instances 
where land 
area was 
captured 
wrongly 
Total Instances 
where land 
area was 
captured 
wrongly 
1 Agastheeswaram 36 12,164 1,754 1,38,853 3,624 
2 Alandur 5 1,238 372 8,784 5,433 
3 Avadi 21 5,424 1,275 52,305 11,958 
4 Avinashi 41 19,175 1,183 92,504 2,948 
5 Gummidipoondi 90 24,332 2,199 1,72,273 9,952 
6 Kothagiri 23 6,091 1,042 39,053 3,155 
7 Madhavaram 11 1,977 666 23,061 7,176 
8 Madurai East 106 9,729 2,668 79,011 15,460 
9 Madurai North 75 6,950 1,842 72,633 7,663 
10 Papanasam 119 22,848 3,119 1,38,788 69,398 
11 Perambalur 27 10,233 2,689 82,476 14,655 
12 Thiruvaiyaru 56 10,446 1,846 66,644 9,591 
13 Thiruvidaimarudhur 89 19,053 3,445 1,10,306 15,067 
14 Tirupparankundram 26 3,768 1,047 51,485 8,367 
15 Tiruppur North 7 3,188 437 21,966 2,051 
16 Tiruvallur 165 43,082 179 1,95,270 11,372 
17 Udhagamandalam 17 9,691 990 46,821 2,509 
18 Uthukuli 49 9,636 682 53,514 4,187 
19 Veppanthattai 39 17,189 3,155 1,32,383 16,829 
20 Vilavancode 27 1,768 1,530 10,434 6,064 
Total 1,029 2,37,982 32,120 15,88,564 2,27,459 
  

Performance Audit on Land Records Management in Tamil Nadu  
 
 76 
Appendix 2.14 
(Reference:  Paragraph 2.3.3; Page 19) 
Percentage of variation between textual area as per A-Register and  
calculated area as per CollabLand 
(In numbers) 
Sl. 
No. 
Taluk Range of variation with number of records 
0 
per 
cent 
Between  
1 and 5  
per cent 
Between  
6 and 25  
per cent 
Between 
26 and 50  
per cent 
Between  
51 and 75  
per cent 
Between 
 76 and 100 
per cent 
More 
than 100 
per cent 
1 Agastheeswaram 31 10,510 1,346 191 50 26 10 
2 Alandur 0 934 252 28 11 8 5 
3 Avadi 9 4,461 822 81 25 10 15 
4 Avinashi 60 17,319 1,298 137 36 28 295 
5 Gummidipoondi 45 20,465 3,222 362 106 72 60 
6 Kothagiri 11 4,664 1,224 105 26 25 36 
7 Madhavaram 6 1,538 366 46 12 7 2 
8 Madurai East 32 8,361 1,002 105 30 22 177 
9 Madurai North 10 5,929 784 73 19 18 117 
10 Papanasam 65 20,541 1,707 214 109 110 102 
11 Perambalur 27 9,416 687 44 18 17 24 
12 Thiruvaiyaru 28 9,193 650 198 174 133 69 
13 Thiruvidaimarudhur 65 16,698 1,493 280 179 274 62 
14 Tirupparankundram 13 3,356 271 22 9 5 92 
15 Tiruppur North 12 2,911 185 11 8 8 52 
16 Tiruvallur 7,929 29,135 5,174 553 131 65 95 
17 Udhagamandalam 13 7,202 2,128 208 58 38 43 
18 Uthukuli 24 8,474 872 57 28 45 136 
19 Veppanthattai 56 15,979 851 65 36 30 172 
20 Vilavancode 0 309 212 269 246 239 493 
Total 8,436 1,97,395 24,546 3,049 1,311 1,180 2,057 
  

Appendices 
 
 
 77 
Appendix 2.15 
(Reference:  Paragraph 2.3.4; Page 19) 
Sub-division information erroneously captured in spatial (FMS) data 
Sl. 
No. 
Taluk Number of  
Sub-divisions 
Sub-divisions 
with erroneous 
numbering 
1 Agastheeswaram 1,38,853 325 
2 Alandur 14,494 2,378 
3 Avadi 77,579 3,558 
4 Avinashi 1,32,422 1,733 
5 Gummidipoondi 2,29,234 2,210 
6 Kothagiri 39,053 495 
7 Madhavaram 33,628 1,045 
8 Madurai East 1,24,537 3,179 
9 Madurai North 1,07,867 1,999 
10 Papanasam 1,38,788 7,800 
11 Perambalur 82,476 1,108 
12 Thiruvaiyaru 99,205 876 
13 Thiruvidaimarudhur 1,53,501 2,556 
14 Tiruppur North 33,585 915 
15 Tiruvallur 3,34,706 5,891 
16 Tirupparankundram 76,178 1,374 
17 Udhagamandalam 58,973 1,151 
18 Uthukuli 77,806 597 
19 Veppanthattai 1,58,935 15,283 
20 Vilavancode 1,14,681 913 
Total 22,26,501 55,386 
   

Performance Audit on Land Records Management in Tamil Nadu  
 
 78 
Appendix 2.16 
(Reference:  Paragraph 2.3.5; Page 20) 
Incorrect capture of adjacency details in spatial (FMS) data 
Sl. 
No. 
Taluk Total Survey numbers Survey numbers with 
adjacency errors 
1 Agastheeswaram 12,157 69 
2 Alandur 8,649 10 
3 Avadi 37,463 46 
4 Avinashi 22,149 181 
5 Gummidipoondi 1,59,436 182 
6 Kothagiri 1,860 53 
7 Madhavaram 13,897 6 
8 Madurai East 11,193 30 
9 Madurai North 46,798 76 
10 Papanasam 0 0 
11 Perambalur 4,450 12 
12 Thiruvaiyaru 64,956 58 
13 Thiruvidaimarudhur 1,13,726 172 
14 Tirupparankundram 27,531 54 
15 Tiruppur North 22,002 26 
16 Tiruvallur 50,287 14 
17 Udhagamandalam 54,771 80 
18 Uthukuli 61,171 72 
19 Veppanthattai 1,20,751 196 
20 Vilavancode 49,730 74 
Total 8,82,977 1,411 
  

Appendices 
 
 
 79 
Appendix 2.17 
(Reference:  Paragraph 2.3.6; Page 21) 
Status of delay in updation of spatial (FMS) records in taluk server and  
central server 
Sl. 
No. 
Taluk Number 
of cases 
checked 
Number of 
cases updated in 
taluk server 
Number of cases 
not updated in 
taluk server 
Percentage of 
non-updation 
Number of 
updated cases 
available in  
e-Services 
1 Agastheeswaram 50 50 0 0 48 
2 Avadi 50 31 19 38 0 
3 Avinashi 50 38 12 24 26 
4 Gummidipoondi 50 21 29 58 0 
5 Kothagiri 50 47 3 6 28 
6 Madhavaram 30 4 26 87 0 
7 Madurai East 50 47 3 06 38 
8 Madurai North 50 34 16 32 34 
9 Papanasam 48 25 23 48 1 
10 Perambalur 49 44 5 10 0 
11 Thiruvaiyaru 50 0 50 100 0 
12 Thiruvidaimaruthur 50 38 12 24 0 
13 Tiruppur North 50 48 2 4 42 
14 Tiruvallur 44 25 19 43 0 
15 Tirupparankundram 50 49 01 2 47 
16 Udhagamandalam 44 44 0 0 34 
17 Uthukuli 50 47 03 06 38 
18 Veppanthattai 50 47 3 6 19 
19 Vilavancode 50 0 50 100 0 
Total 915 639 276  355 
 
  

Performance Audit on Land Records Management in Tamil Nadu  
 
 80 
Appendix 2.18 
(Reference:  Paragraph 2.4.1; Page 23) 
Natham land parcels without ownership details in computerised chitta 
Sl. No. Taluk Total land 
parcels 
Private land 
parcels as per 
Natham  
A-Register 
Private land 
parcels with no 
corresponding 
entry in 
ownership table 
(Chitta) 
1 Agastheeswaram 970 578 0 
2 Alandur 5,641 3,508 96 
3 Avadi 10,566 6,809 173 
4 Avinashi 42,685 27,899 374 
5 Gummidipoondi 37,776 29,244 474 
6 Kothagiri 6,627 4,252 67 
7 Madhavaram 6,378 3,422 9 
8 Madurai North 67,634 46,285 1,050 
9 Papanasam 65,264 52,271 273 
10 Perambalur 40,595 34,951 47 
11 Thiruvaiyaru 33,858 27,757 210 
12 Thiruvidaimarudhur 56,742 49,605 441 
13 Tiruppur North 13,993 10,947 158 
14 Tiruvallur 1,02,755 68,998 9,612 
15 Udhagamandalam 13,605 8,104 154 
16 Uthukkuli 29,005 19,460 1,073 
17 Veppanthattai 43,101 34,565 389 
18 Vilavancode 1,448 644 4 
Total 5,78,643 4,29,299 14,604 
 

Appendices 
 
 
 81 
Appendix 2.19 
(Reference:  Paragraph 2.4.2; Page 23) 
Redundant patta numbers in computerised Natham chitta 
Sl. 
No. 
Taluk Patta numbers 
as per Natham 
A-Register 
Excess Patta 
numbers in 
ownership table 
(Chitta) 
1 Agastheeswaram 578 0 
2 Alandur 3,412 22 
3 Avadi 6,636 2,995 
4 Avinashi 27,525 2,448 
5 Gummidipoondi 28,770 995 
6 Kothagiri 4,185 124 
7 Madhavaram 3,413 147 
8 Madurai North 45,235 2,117 
9 Papanasam 51,998 366 
10 Perambalur 34,904 347 
11 Thiruvaiyaru 27,547 228 
12 Thiruvidaimarudhur 49,164 329 
13 Tiruppur North 10,789 422 
14 Tiruvallur 59,386 5,934 
15 Udhagamandalam 7,950 985 
16 Uthukkuli 18,387 1,873 
17 Veppanthattai 34,176 314 
18 Vilavancode 640 0 
Total 4,14,695 19,646 
 
  

Performance Audit on Land Records Management in Tamil Nadu  
 
 82 
Appendix 2.20 
(Reference:  Paragraph 2.4.3; Page 23) 
Deficiencies in computerised Natham chitta 
Sl. No. Taluk Owner name 
missing 
Relative name 
missing 
1 Agastheeswaram 0 0 
2 Alandur 5 1 
3 Avadi 4 2 
4 Avinashi 4 41 
5 Gummidipoondi 26 5 
6 Kothagiri 11 3 
7 Madhavaram 2 1 
8 Madurai North 56 3 
9 Papanasam 25 13 
10 Perambalur 2 1 
11 Thiruvaiyaru 29 9 
12 Thiruvidaimarudhur 15 8 
13 Tiruppur North 11 9 
14 Tiruvallur 20 1 
15 Udhagamandalam 1 2 
16 Uthukkuli 38 12 
17 Veppanthattai 44 217 
18 Vilavancode 0 0 
 Total 293 328 
 
  

Appendices 
 
 
 83 
Appendix 2.21 
(Reference:  Paragraph 2.7.1; Page 30) 
Deficiencies in codification of Government land 
Sl. 
No. 
Taluk Number of rejected STR-OPT 
applications involving 
Government  land  
sub categories 
ISD NISD 
1 Agastheeswaram 1 16 
2 Alandur 0 0 
3 Avadi 4 13 
4 Avinashi 8 13 
5 Gummidipoondi 31 6 
6 Kothagiri 0 0 
7 Madhavaram 3 1 
8 Madurai East 15 3 
9 Madurai North 162 6 
10 Papanasam 13 15 
11 Perambalur 129 40 
12 Thirupparankundram 171 2 
13 Thiruvaiyaru 0 2 
14 Thiruvidaimarudhur 0 2 
15 Tiruppur North 12 0 
16 Tiruvallur 22 7 
17 Udhagamandalam 1 0 
18 Uthukkuli 2 10 
19 Veppanthattai 9 27 
20 Vilavancode 10 0 
  Total 593 163 
 
 
  

Performance Audit on Land Records Management in Tamil Nadu  
 
 84 
Appendix 2.22 
(Reference:  Paragraph 2.7.2; Page 30) 
Ineffective use of provisions available in integration module for  
STR applications 
Sl. 
No. 
Taluk ISD applications NISD applications 
Total 
rejected 
Rejected despite 
provision of 
mandatory document 
links under 
Integration Module 
Total 
rejected 
Rejected despite 
provision of 
mandatory document 
links under 
Integration Module 
1 Agastheeswaram 75,577 170 16,001 372 
2 Alandur 16,134 155 7,315 586 
3 Avadi 27,821 1,445 5,437 733 
4 Avinashi 1,17,938 1,373 15,119 630 
5 Gummidipoondi 30,147 965 12,692 378 
6 Kothagiri 5,968 33 155 2 
7 Madhavaram 12,999 618 4,344 361 
8 Madurai East 93,434 1,311 10,252 406 
9 Madurai North 1,06,833 6,984 11,400 762 
10 Papanasam 12,141 268 9,966 1,156 
11 Perambalur 38,314 229 5,800 91 
12 Thirupparankundram 42,470 1,148 4,004 467 
13 Thiruvaiyaru 5,192 17 3,779 293 
14 Thiruvidaimarudhur 8,353 258 6,465 535 
15 Tiruppur North 37,494 124 4,421 61 
16 Tiruvallur 48,215 2,091 12,862 1,493 
17 Udhagamandalam 4,672 10 488 0 
18 Uthukkuli 77,628 27 7,190 814 
19 Veppanthattai 35,899 69 6,822 233 
20 Vilavancode 57,918 2,546 19,072 1,267 
 Total 8,55,147 19,841 1,63,584 10,640 
  

Appendices 
 
 
 85 
Appendix 3.1 
(Reference:  Paragraph 3.1.1 (a); Page 35) 
Delays in approving NISD-OPT applications 
 
Sl. 
No. Taluk Number of  applications 
where delay was noticed 
Delay range in 
number of days 
1 Agastheeswaram 41,035 out of 66,126 cases  
(62 per cent delay) From 16 to 258 days 
2 Alandur 533 out of 1,300 cases   
(41 per cent delay) From 16 to 440 days 
3 Avadi 2,383 out of 10,614 cases  
(22 per cent delay) From 16 to 176 days 
4 Avinashi 24,510 out of 42,829 cases  
(57 per cent delay) From 16 to 470 days 
5 Gummidipoondi 4,866 out of 14,047 cases  
(35 per cent delay) From 16 to 287 days 
6 Kothagiri 2,767 out of 14,734 cases  
(19 per cent delay) From 16 to 212 days 
7 Madhavaram 2,182 out of 5,421 cases  
(40 per cent delay) From 16 to 424 days 
8 Madurai East 2,920 out of 8,339 cases  
(35 per cent delay) From 16 to 375 days 
9 Madurai North 2,903 out of 8,206 cases  
(35 per cent delay) From 16 to 377 days 
10 Papanasam 9,453 out of 20,748 cases  
(46 per cent delay) From 16 to 519 days 
11 Perambalur 18,073 out of 37,891 cases  
(48 per cent delay) From 16 to 469 days 
12 Thirupparankundram 960 out of 4,438 cases  
(22 per cent delay) From 16 to 375 days 
13 Thiruvaiyaru 3,977 out of 8,165 cases  
(49 per cent delay) From 16 to 361 days 
14 Thiruvidaimarudhur 6,424 out of 12,844 cases  
(50 per cent delay) From 16 to 383 days 
15 Tiruppur North 12,113 out of 25,248 cases  
(48 per cent delay) From 16 to 445 days 
16 Tiruvallur 6,875 out of 23,217 cases  
(30 per cent delay) From 16 to 247 days 
17 Udhagamandalam 2,316 out of 8,890 cases  
(26 per cent delay) From 16 to 219 days 
18 Uthukkuli 8,859 out of 17,205 cases  
(51 per cent delay) From 16 to 338 days 
19 Veppanthattai 7,139 out of 25,311 cases  
(28 per cent delay) From 16 to 383 days 
20 Vilavancode 13,279 out of 49,454 cases  
(27 per cent delay) From 16 to 246 days 
  1,73,567 out of 4,05,027 cases  
(43 per cent delay) From 16 to 519 days 

Performance Audit on Land Records Management in Tamil Nadu  
 
 86 
 
Appendix 3.2 
(Reference:  Paragraph 3.1.1 (a); Page 35) 
Delays in rejecting NISD-OPT applications 
 
Sl. 
No. Taluk Number of  applications 
where delay was noticed 
Delay range in 
number of days 
1 Agastheeswaram 24,352 out of 29,842 cases  
(82 per cent delay) From 16 to 395 days 
2 Alandur 1,279 out of 1,364 cases  
(94 per cent delay) From 16 to 802 days 
3 Avadi 3,241 out of 4,222 cases  
(77 per cent delay) From 16 to 387 days 
4 Avinashi 11,009 out of 12,783 cases  
(86 per cent delay) From 16 to 482 days 
5 Gummidipoondi 5,585 out of 7,718 cases  
(72 per cent delay) From 16 to 358 days 
6 Kothagiri 976 out of 1,742 cases  
(56 per cent delay) From 16 to 207 days 
7 Madhavaram 2,465 out of 2,765 cases  
(89 per cent delay) From 16 to 522 days 
8 Madurai East 4,093 out of 4,524 cases  
(90 per cent delay) From 16 to 590 days 
9 Madurai North 4,614 out of 5,452 cases  
(85 per cent delay) From 16 to 799 days 
10 Papanasam 7,607 out of 9,254 cases  
(82 per cent delay) From 16 to 535 days 
11 Perambalur 9,334 out of 13,609 cases  
(69 per cent delay) From 16 to 669 days 
12 Thirupparankundram 1,503 out of 2,009 cases  
(75 per cent delay) From 16 to 1,206 days 
13 Thiruvaiyaru 3,415 out of 3,894 cases  
(88 per cent delay) From 16 to 427 days 
14 Thiruvidaimarudhur 6,248 out of 7,932 cases  
(79 per cent delay) From 16 to 419 days 
15 Tiruppur North 5,880 out of 7,085 cases  
(83 per cent delay) From 16 to 445 days 
16 Tiruvallur 8,196 out of 10,528 cases  
(78 per cent delay) From 16 to 346 days 
17 Udhagamandalam 1,239 out of 2,060 cases  
(60 per cent delay) From 16 to 304 days 
18 Uthukkuli 4,833 out of 5,363 cases  
(90 per cent delay) From 16 to 394 days 
19 Veppanthattai 4,592 out of 7,737 cases  
(59 per cent delay) From 16 to 773 days 
20 Vilavancode 12,600 out of 16,471 cases  
(76 per cent delay) From 16 to 235 days 
  1,23,061 out of 1,56,354 cases 
(79 per cent delay) From 16 to 1,206 days 
 

Appendices 
 
 
 87 
Appendix 3.3 
(Reference:  Paragraph 3.1.1 (a); Page 35) 
Delays in processing pending NISD-OPT applications 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Taluk Number of  applications 
where delay was noticed 
Delay range in 
number of days 
1 Agastheeswaram 2,626 out of 3,596 cases  
(73 per cent delay) From 16 to 221 days 
2 Alandur 89 out of  142 cases   
(63 per cent delay) From 16 to 98 days 
3 Avadi 116 out of 234 cases  
(50 per cent delay) From 16 to 43 days 
4 Avinashi 358 out of 962 cases  
(37 per cent delay) From 16 to 29 days 
5 Gummidipoondi 178 out of 324 cases  
(55 per cent delay) From 18 to 48 days 
6 Kothagiri 8 out of 68 cases  
(12 per cent delay) From 16 to 32 days 
7 Madhavaram 160 out of 238 cases  
(67 per cent delay) From 17 to 343 days 
8 Madurai East 141 out of 288 cases  
(49 per cent delay) From 16 to 286 days 
9 Madurai North 115 out of 206 cases  
(56 per cent delay) From 16 to 346 days 
10 Papanasam 353 out of 500 cases  
(71 per cent delay) From 16 to 289 days 
11 Perambalur 102 out of 311 cases  
(33 per cent delay) From 16 to 1,379 days 
12 Thirupparankundram 60 out of 93 cases  
(65 per cent delay) From 16 to 318 days 
13 Thiruvaiyaru 52 out of 100 cases  
(52 per cent delay) From 16 to 337 days 
14 Thiruvidaimarudhur 75 out of 141 cases  
(53 per cent delay) From 16 to 335 days 
15 Tiruppur North 162 out of 371 cases  
(44 per cent delay) From 17 to 33 days 
16 Tiruvallur 621 out of 864 cases  
(72 per cent delay) From 16 to 138 days 
17 Udhagamandalam 6 out of 64 cases  
(51 per cent delay) From 16 to 34 days 
18 Uthukkuli 165 out of 429 cases  
(38 per cent delay) From 17 to 50 days 
19 Veppanthattai 18 out of 115 cases  
(16 per cent delay) From 16 to 45 days 
20 Vilavancode 727 out of 1,180 cases  
(62 per cent delay) From 16 to 326 days 
  6,132 out of 10,226 cases  
(60 per cent delay) From 16 to 1,379 days 
 
  

Performance Audit on Land Records Management in Tamil Nadu  
 
 88 
Appendix 3.4 
(Reference:  Paragraph 3.1.1 (b); Page 35) 
Delays in approving ISD-OPT applications 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Taluk Number of  applications 
where delay was noticed 
Delay range in 
number of days 
1 Agastheeswaram 4,928 out of 7,578 cases  
(65 per cent delay) From 31 to 449 days 
2 Alandur 552 out of 1,330 cases  
(42 per cent delay) From 31 to 524 days 
3 Avadi 9,215 out of 17,128 cases  
(54 per cent delay) From 31 to 427 days 
4 Avinashi 5,912 out of 7,373 cases  
(80 per cent delay) From 31 to 569 days 
5 Gummidipoondi 4,950 out of 10,854 cases  
(46 per cent delay) From 31 to 423 days 
6 Kothagiri 1,327 out of 3,091 cases  
(43 per cent delay) From 31 to 230 days 
7 Madhavaram 1,848 out of 5,287 cases  
(35 per cent delay) From 31 to 381 days 
8 Madurai East 7,425 out of 14,542 cases  
(51 per cent delay) From 31 to 447 days 
9 Madurai North 10,390 out of 17,473 cases  
(59 per cent delay) From 31 to 437 days 
10 Papanasam 2,416 out of 3,928 cases  
(62 per cent delay) From 31 to 425 days 
11 Perambalur 4,984 out of 11,088 cases  
(45 per cent delay) From 31 to 651 days 
12 Thirupparankundram 3,305 out of 8,339 cases  
(40 per cent delay) From 31 to 458 days 
13 Thiruvaiyaru 1,174 out of 2,306 cases  
(51 per cent delay) From 31 to 311 days 
14 Thiruvidaimarudhur 1,592 out of 2,831 cases  
(56 per cent delay) From 31 to 335 days 
15 Tiruppur North 3,043 out of 4,194 cases  
(73 per cent delay) From 31 to 584 days 
16 Tiruvallur 14,534 out of 25,669 cases  
(57 per cent delay) From 31 to 326 days 
17 Udhagamandalam 686 out of 1,639 cases  
(42 per cent delay) From 31 to 233 days 
18 Uthukkuli 2,388 out of 3,717 cases  
(64 per cent delay) From 31 to 480 days 
19 Veppanthattai 2,746 out of 8,235 cases  
(33 per cent delay) From 31 to 544 days 
20 Vilavancode 1,733 out of 3,446 cases  
(50 per cent delay) From 31 to 328 days 
  85,148 out of 1,60,048 cases 
(53 per cent delay) From 31 to 651 days 
 
  

Appendices 
 
 
 89 
Appendix 3.5 
(Reference:  Paragraph 3.1.1 (b); Page 35) 
Delays in rejecting ISD-OPT applications 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Taluk Number of  applications 
where delay was noticed 
Delay range in 
number of days 
1 Agastheeswaram 24,324 out of 28,724 cases  
(85 per cent delay) From 31 to 555 days 
2 Alandur 1,860 out of 2,172 cases  
(86 per cent delay) From 31 to 866 days 
3 Avadi 15,870 out of 17,117 cases  
(93 per cent delay) From 31 to 444 days 
4 Avinashi 9,804 out of 10,208 cases  
(96 per cent delay) From 31 to 587 days 
5 Gummidipoondi 9,895 out of 10,608 cases  
(93 per cent delay) From 31 to 367 days 
6 Kothagiri 1,439 out of 1,652 cases  
(87 per cent delay) From 31 to 290 days 
7 Madhavaram 4,847 out of 5,718 cases  
(85 per cent delay) From 31 to 425 days 
8 Madurai East 23,517 out of 24,249 cases  
(97 per cent delay) From 31 to 459 days 
9 Madurai North 26,796 out of 27,214 cases  
(98 per cent delay) From 31 to 525 days 
10 Papanasam 3,540 out of 4,363 cases  
(81 per cent delay) From 31 to 433 days 
11 Perambalur 12,930 out of 13,614 cases  
(95 per cent delay) From 31 to 764 days 
12 Thirupparankundram 10,696 out of 11,006 cases  
(97 per cent delay) From 31 to 571 days 
13 Thiruvaiyaru 2,427 out of 2,826 cases  
(86 per cent delay) From 31 to 335 days 
14 Thiruvidaimarudhur 2,576 out of 3,211 cases  
(80 per cent delay) From 31 to 408 days 
15 Tiruppur North 3,820 out of 3,906 cases  
(98 per cent delay) From 31 to 595 days 
16 Tiruvallur 20,210 out of 21,465 cases  
(94 per cent delay) From 31 to 478 days 
17 Udhagamandalam 1,018 out of 1,270 cases  
(80 per cent delay) From 31 to 318 days 
18 Uthukkuli 5,469 out of 5,674 cases  
(96 per cent delay) From 31 to 496 days 
19 Veppanthattai 9,788 out of 10,099 cases  
(97 per cent delay) From 31 to 692 days 
20 Vilavancode 15,063 out of 15,577 cases  
(97 per cent delay) From 31 to 405 days 
  2,05,889 out of 2,20,673 cases 
(93 per cent delay) From 31 to 866 days 
  

Performance Audit on Land Records Management in Tamil Nadu  
 
 90 
Appendix 3.6 
(Reference:  Paragraph 3.1.1 (b); Page 35) 
Delays in processing pending ISD-OPT applications 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Taluk Number of  applications 
where delay was noticed 
Delay range in 
number of days 
1 Agastheeswaram 3,574 out of 5,013 cases  
(71 per cent delay) From 31 to 223 days 
2 Alandur 37 out of 79 cases  
(47 per cent delay) From 33 to 107 days 
3 Avadi 1,319 out of 2,315 cases  
(57 per cent delay) From 31 to 196 days 
4 Avinashi 1,986 out of 2,668 cases  
(74 per cent delay) From 31 to 206 days 
5 Gummidipoondi 1,313 out of 1,789 cases  
(73 per cent delay) From 31 to 201 days 
6 Kothagiri 87 out of 226 cases  
(38 per cent delay) From 33 to 93 days 
7 Madhavaram 71 out of 252 cases  
(28 per cent delay) From 33 to 103 days 
8 Madurai East 3,056 out of 4,560 cases  
(67 per cent delay) From 32 to 162 days 
9 Madurai North 4,744 out of 6,083 cases  
(78 per cent delay) From 31 to 311 days 
10 Papanasam 631 out of 962 cases  
(66 per cent delay) From 31 to 174 days 
11 Perambalur 1,412 out of 2,020 cases  
(70 per cent delay) From 31 to 206 days 
12 Thirupparankundram 1,385 out of 1,877 cases  
(74 per cent delay) From 31 to 306 days 
13 Thiruvaiyaru 329 out of 427 cases  
(77 per cent delay) From 33 to 285 days 
14 Thiruvidaimarudhur 480 out of 603 cases  
(80 per cent delay) From 31 to 315 days 
15 Tiruppur North 599 out of 806 cases  
(74 per cent delay) From 32 to 200 days 
16 Tiruvallur 3,018 out of 4,066 cases  
(74 per cent delay) From 31 to 147 days 
17 Udhagamandalam 63 out of 151 cases  
(42 per cent delay) From 31 to 77 days 
18 Uthukkuli 737 out of 1,037 cases  
(71 per cent delay) From 31 to 209 days 
19 Veppanthattai 885 out of 1,233 cases  
(72 per cent delay) From 31 to 202 days 
20 Vilavancode 3,918 out of 4,488 cases  
(87 per cent delay) From 31 to 321 days 
  29,644 out of 40,655 cases 
(73 per cent delay) From 31 to 321 days 
  

Appendices  
 
 91 
Appendix 3.7 (a) 
(Reference:  Paragraph 3.1.1 (d); Page 37) 
Details of delays in processing applications relating to addition/deletion of land records 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Taluk  Applications relating to  addition/deletion of land records 
Total 
number of 
applications 
Pending action  Approved belatedly Rejected belatedly 
Number Percentage Pending range 
(in days) 
Number Percentage Delay range 
(in days) 
Number Percentage Delay range 
 (in days) 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) 
1 Agastheeswaram 4,336 315 7.3 214 to 642  405 9.3 1 to 523  393 9.1 2 to 474  
2 Alandur 80 0 - - 10 12.5 1 to 559  6 7.5 7 to 54  
3 Avadi 20 0 - - 3 15.0 24 to 135  1 5.0 36  
4 Avinashi 742 16 2.2 1 to 1,388  39 5.3 5 to 796  83 11.2 17 to 953  
5 Gummidipoondi 163 5 3.1 18 to 67  26 16.0 1 to 270  4 2.5 5 to 292  
6 Kothagiri 262 3 1.1 323 to 799  41 15.6 1 to 581  2 0.8 44 to 84  
7 Madhavaram 169 2 1.2 642 to 1,768  29 17.2 8 to 291  4 2.4 7 to 973  
8 Madurai East 422 4 0.9 289 to 1,398  39 9.2 7 to 219  10 2.4 63 to 594  
9 Madurai North 472 16 3.4 8 to 307  70 14.8 2 to 501  6 1.3 5 to 273  
10 Papanasam 356 7 2.0 26 to 189  40 11.2 2 to 786  26 7.3 34 to 1,252  
11 Perambalur 45 0 - - 8 17.8 1 to 73  1 2.2 22  
12 Thirupparankundram 130 0 - - 24 18.5 1 to 545  1 0.8 240  
13 Thiruvaiyaru 31 1 3.2 764  6 19.4 5 to 657  0 - - 
14 Thiruvidaimarudhur 176 5 2.8 95 to 1,038  23 13.1 8 to 547  9 5.1 27 to 429  
15 Tiruppur North 1,261 271 21.5 1,557 to 1,559  10 0.8 1 to 296  181 14.4 9 to 1,081  
16 Tiruvallur 210 5 2.4 308 to 1,209  28 13.3 1 to 152  2 1.0 7 to 57  
17 Udhagamandalam 218 2 0.9 62  21 9.6 3 to 582  5 2.3 2 to 171  
18 Uthukkuli 260 0 - - 26 10.0 1 to 453  11 4.2 65 to 955  
19 Veppanthattai 170 6 3.5 41 to 74  20 11.8 2 to 1,014  6 3.5 2 to 98  
20 Vilavancode 6,577 26 0.4 18 to 816  1,228 18.7 2 to 540  58 0.9 1 to 530  
 Total 16,100 684 4.2   2,096 13.0   809 5.0   

Performance Audit on Land Records Management in Tamil Nadu  
 92 
 
Appendix 3.7 (b) 
(Reference:  Paragraph 3.1.1 (d); Page 37) 
Details of delays in processing applications relating to correction of land records 
Sl. 
No. 
Taluk  Applications relating to  correction of land records 
Total 
number of 
applications 
Pending action  Approved belatedly Rejected belatedly 
Number Percentage Pending range 
(in days) 
Number Percentage Delay range 
(in days) 
Number Percentage Delay range 
(in days) 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) 
1 Agastheeswaram 364 99 27.20 1 to 630  45 12.36 2 to 175  5 1.37 6 to 38  
2 Alandur 238 3 1.26 237 to 1,316  26 10.92 1 to 49  11 4.62 1 to 30  
3 Avadi 55 1 1.82 238  8 14.55 2 to 23  1 1.82 2  
4 Avinashi 3,102 42 1.35 99 to 1,346  165 5.32 1 to 380  428 13.80 6 to 961  
5 Gummidipoondi 204 23 11.27 7 to 689  27 13.24 1 to 295  1 0.49 138  
6 Kothagiri 1,504 210 13.96 349 to 405  74 4.92 1 to 581  0 - - 
7 Madhavaram 1,303 119 9.13 1,415 to 1,739  161 12.36 1 to 343  1 0.08 695  
8 Madurai East 192 2 1.04 7 to 19  11 5.73 1 to 92  7 3.65 41  
9 Madurai North 1,007 19 1.89 5 to 431  177 17.58 1 to 418  4 0.40 5 to 393  
10 Papanasaam 107 3 2.80 97 to 935  19 17.76 1 to 1,267  0 - - 
11 Perambalur 72 0 - - 10 13.89 2 to 73  4 5.56 20 to 1,086  
12 Thirupparankundram 851 2 0.24 31 to 630  137 16.10 1 to 623  10 1.18 20 to 704  
13 Thiruvaiyaru 46 5 10.87 308 to 1,195  6 13.04 14 to 1,111  1 2.17 739  
14 Thiruvidaimarudhur 123 5 4.07 5 to 1,258  11 8.94 1 to 267  9 7.32 35 to 878  
15 Tiruppur North 3,081 89 2.89 1,552 to 1,576  121 3.93 3 to 1,020  460 14.93 9 to 1,548  
16 Tiruvallur 796 1 0.13 196  137 17.21 1 to 152  9 1.13 1 to 64  
17 Udhagamandalam 428 2 0.47 62 to 98  72 16.82 1 to 411  2 0.47 349 to 353  
18 Uthukkuli 982 1 0.10 1,568  150 15.27 1 to 258  35 3.56 3 to 980  
19 Veppanthattai 417 2 0.48 34 to 1,673  42 10.07 1 to 410  9 2.16 2 to 31  
20 Vilavancode 4,093 2 0.05 18 to 1,414  781 19.08 1 to 1,341  32 0.78 14 to 491  
 Total 18,965 630 3.32   2,180 11.49   1,029 5.43   

Appendices 
 
 93 
Appendix 3.8 
(Reference:  Paragraph 3.1.2; Page 37) 
High percentage of rejection of OPT applications received from Sub Registrar Offices 
 
Sl. No. Taluk  RTR (Common Service Centres) STR (Sub Registrar Office) 
NISD ISD NISD ISD 
Approved Rejected Rejection (per cent) Approved Rejected Rejection (per cent) Approved Rejected Rejection (per cent) Approved Rejected Rejection (per cent) 
1 Agastheeswaram 55,558 26,212 32 12,165 4,773 28 7,242 17,153 70 686 12,944 95 
2 Alandur 1,249 562 31 148 904 86 1,256 855 41 87 1,337 94 
3 Avadi 9,950 3,086 24 17,695 19,317 52 1,121 1,363 55 652 4,765 88 
4 Avinashi 34,130 10,314 23 1,638 1,383 46 9,531 3,082 24 5,828 11,448 66 
5 Gummidipoondi 11,632 6,501 36 9,442 10,075 52 3,932 1,892 32 1,836 4,240 70 
6 Kothagiri 13,139 1,799 12 2,125 44 2 1,989 1,070 35 1,161 652 36 
7 Madhavaram 4,724 1,692 26 5,097 4,070 44 1,028 1,133 52 424 2,230 84 
8 Madurai East 7,153 2,371 25 11,522 9,055 44 1,708 2,337 58 3,268 18,045 85 
9 Madurai North 7,018 2,890 29 13,840 11,439 45 2,039 2,734 57 4,075 20,113 83 
10 Papanasam 18,473 6,883 27 3,039 2,719 47 2,689 2,689 50 1,382 1,966 59 
11 Perambalur 34,613 12,610 27 3,948 1,263 24 9,619 8,865 48 1,681 5,143 75 
12 Tiruvallur 21,517 8,466 28 26,112 24,324 48 2,328 2,632 53 1,353 7,382 85 
13 Thirupparankundram 3,896 1,395 26 7,415 5,787 44 928 897 49 1,100 7,854 88 
14 Thiruvaiyaru 7,455 2,901 28 1,068 1,092 51 1,746 1,956 53 613 923 60 
15 Thiruvidaimarudhur 11,470 6,736 37 2,084 1,576 43 2,204 1,875 46 707 1,380 66 
16 Tiruppur North 22,068 6,706 23 1,217 847 41 3,795 1,005 21 3,067 4,766 61 
17 Udhagamandalam 8,121 2,046 20 1,035 137 12 1,014 818 45 666 510 43 
18 Uthukkuli 14,612 4,570 24 1,115 614 36 3,521 1,697 33 2,629 5,257 67 
19 Veppanthattai 21,937 6,606 23 3,994 1,274 24 7,273 5,763 44 1,047 4,571 81 
20 Vilavancode 45,568 11,197 20 5,160 5,884 53 2,911 5,199 64 613 11,062 95 
Total 3,54,283 1,25,543 26 1,29,859 1,06,577 45 67,874 65,015 49 32,875 1,26,588 79 

Performance Audit on Land Records Management in Tamil Nadu  
 94 
Appendix 3.9 
(Reference:  Paragraph 3.1.3; Page 37) 
Details of ISD-OPT applications where seniority principle was not followed in 
scheduling 
Sl. 
No. 
Taluk/Village name Number of ISD 
applications 
pending scheduling 
Period during which the 
applications in Col. (3) were 
received 
Date of receipt 
of last 
scheduled 
application From To 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
1 Agastheeswaram 398 05/02/2021 17/09/2021 27/09/2021 
2 Avadi 442 19/03/2021 23/07/2021 23/07/2021 
3 Avinashi 51 15/02/2021 04/05/2021 10/05/2021 
4 Gummidipoondi 19 26/04/2021 26/07/2021 26/07/2021 
5 Kothagiri 05 09/09/2021 20/09/2021 22/09/2021 
6 Madhavaram 02 02/02/2021 15/02/2021 22/02/2021 
7 Madurai East 145 09/06/2021 23/09/2021 23/09/2021 
8 Madurai North 160 12/04/2021 07/09/2021 07/09/2021 
9 Papanasam 03 11/06/2021 01/07/2021 14/07/2021 
10 Perambalur 102 01/03/2021 04/08/2021 04/08/2021 
11 Thiruvidaimaruthur 03 19/03/2021 20/04/2021 07/07/2021 
12 Tiruppur North 639 02/03/2021 25/08/2021 25/08/2021 
13 Tiruvallur 76 06/03/2021 12/07/2021 13/07/2021 
14 Tirupparankundram 557 10/06/2021 24/09/2021 25/09/2021 
15 Uthukuli 15 11/04/2021 16/08/2021 25/08/2021 
Total 2,617    
  

Appendices 
 
 
 95 
Appendix 3.10 
(Reference:  Paragraph 3.1.3; Page 37) 
Details of NISD-OPT applications where seniority principle was not followed in 
scheduling 
Sl. 
No. 
Taluk/Village name Number of NISD 
applications 
pending scheduling 
Period during which the 
applications in Col. (3) were 
received 
Date of receipt 
of last 
scheduled 
application From To 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
1 Agastheeswaram 297 05/07/2021 30/09/2021 01/10/2021 
2 Avadi 15 05/07/2021 19/07/2021 21/07/2021 
3 Avinashi 18 16/08/2021 08/09/2021 08/09/2021 
4 Kothagiri 01 23/09/2021 23/09/2021 24/09/2021 
5 Madhavaram 219 01/06/2020 23/02/2021 24/02/2021 
6 Madurai East 02 21/09/2021 28/09/2021 29/09/2021 
7 Madurai North 02 09/08/2021 18/08/2021 23/08/2021 
8 Papanasam 03 30/07/2021 05/08/2021 31/08/2021 
9 Tiruppur North 143 23/07/2021 26/08/2021 26/08/2021 
Total 700    
  

Performance Audit on Land Records Management in Tamil Nadu  
 96 
Appendix 3.11 
(Reference:  Paragraph 3.1.4; Page 38) 
Non-use of codified reasons for rejection of OPT applications 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Taluk Applications 
Total Applications with 
contradictory 
recommendations 
Applications 
rejected without 
specific remarks 
1 Agastheeswaram 78,747 778 3,157 
2 Alandur 3,658 2 3,419 
3 Avadi 28,531 24 1,789 
4 Avinashi 26,227 147 7,157 
5 Gummidipoondi 22,708 67 9,855 
6 Kothagiri 6,563 24 1,148 
7 Madhavaram 9,125 19 2,027 
8 Madurai East 31,808 65 6,683 
9 Madurai North 37,176 23 1,415 
10 Papanasam 21,746 55 2,824 
11 Perambalur 48,327 184 306 
12 Thirupparankundram 15,934 39 145 
13 Thiruvaiyaru 6,872 0 406 
14 Thiruvidaimarudhur 27,501 68 601 
15 Tiruppur North 13,325 63 3,530 
16 Tiruvallur 42,804 269 15,090 
17 Udhagamandalam 3,511 26 2,240 
18 Uthukkuli 12,138 122 12,944 
19 Veppanthattai 18,214 47 2,045 
20 Vilavancode 33,342 112 6,129 
  Total 4,88,258 2,134 82,910 
 
  

Appendices 
 
 
 97 
Appendix 3.12 
(Reference:  Paragraph 3.1.5; Page 39) 
Details of OPT applications verified by Audit 
Taluk Source and 
Type 
Number of approved applications Number of rejected applications 
Checked Procedural 
lapse 
Incorrect 
processing 
Checked Procedural 
lapse 
Incorrect 
Processing 
Agastheeswaram RTR-ISD 3 2 0 2 2 0 
Agastheeswaram RTR-NISD 3 2 1 2 2 0 
Agastheeswaram STR-ISD 3 3 0 2 2 0 
Agastheeswaram STR-NISD 3 1 0 2 0 0 
Alandur RTR-ISD 0 0 0 3 0 0 
Avadi RTR-ISD 3 3 0 2 0 2 
Avadi RTR-NISD 3 3 0 2 1 1 
Avadi STR-ISD 2 0 0 3 0 3 
Avadi STR-NISD 2 0 0 3 0 3 
Avinashi RTR-ISD 3 2 0 2 0 3 
Avinashi RTR-NISD 2 1 0 2 1 0 
Avinashi STR-ISD 2 1 0 3 2 0 
Avinashi STR-NISD 3 0 0 3 2 0 
Gummidipoondi RTR-ISD 4 3 1 2 1 1 
Gummidipoondi RTR-NISD 3 3 0 2 0 2 
Gummidipoondi STR-ISD 2 0 0 3 1 1 
Gummidipoondi STR-NISD 2 1 0 3 0 3 
Kothagiri RTR-ISD 3 2 0 2 2 0 
Kothagiri RTR-NISD 3 0 0 2 2 0 
Kothagiri STR-ISD 3 2 0 2 1 1 
Kothagiri STR-NISD 3 0 0 2 1 1 
Madhavaram RTR-ISD 10 10 0 7 6 1 
Madhavaram STR-ISD 0 0 0 3 3 0 
Mambalam RTR-ISD 7 6 0 3 3 0 
Mambalam RTR-NISD 13 8 2 1 1 0 
Madurai East RTR-ISD 3 2 1 2 2 0 
Madurai East RTR-NISD 3 3 0 2 2 0 
Madurai East STR-ISD 2 1 0 3 0 3 
Madurai East STR-NISD 2 0 0 3 0 3 
Madurai North RTR-ISD 3 2 0 2 0 2 
Madurai North RTR-NISD 3 2 1 2 0 2 
Madurai North STR-ISD 2 0 0 3 0 3 
Madurai North STR-NISD 2 0 0 3 0 3 
  

Performance Audit on Land Records Management in Tamil Nadu  
 98 
Taluk Source and 
Type 
Number of approved applications Number of rejected applications 
Checked Procedural 
lapse 
Incorrect 
processing 
Checked Procedural 
lapse 
Incorrect 
Processing 
Papanasam RTR-ISD 3 2 0 2 1 0 
Papanasam RTR-NISD 3 2 1 3 2 1 
Papanasam STR-ISD 3 2 0 2 2 0 
Papanasam STR-NISD 1 0 0 3 1 1 
Perambalur RTR-ISD 3 3 0 2 2 0 
Perambalur RTR-NISD 2 0 0 3 2 0 
Perambalur STR-ISD 3 3 0 2 1 0 
Perambalur STR-NISD 2 0 0 3 2 0 
Thiruvaiyaru RTR-ISD 2 2 0 3 3 0 
Thiruvaiyaru RTR-NISD 2 1 0 3 2 0 
Thiruvaiyaru STR-ISD 2 2 0 3 3 0 
Thiruvaiyaru STR-NISD 2 1 0 3 0 1 
Thiruvidaimarudhur RTR-ISD 3 3 0 2 2 0 
Thiruvidaimarudhur RTR-NISD 3 2 0 2 1 0 
Thiruvidaimarudhur STR-ISD 3 2 1 2 1 1 
Thiruvidaimarudhur STR-NISD 3 0 0 3 1 2 
Tirupparankundram RTR-ISD 2 2 0 3 0 3 
Tirupparankundram RTR-NISD 2 2 0 2 0 2 
Tirupparankundram STR-ISD 3 0 2 2 0 2 
Tirupparankundram STR-NISD 3 0 0 3 0 3 
Tiruppur North RTR-ISD 3 1 0 2 2 0 
Tiruppur North RTR-NISD 3 3 0 2 2 0 
Tiruppur North STR-ISD 2 0 0 3 0 3 
Tiruppur North STR-NISD 2 1 0 3 1 2 
Tiruvallur RTR-ISD 8 6 0 5 1 2 
Tiruvallur RTR-NISD 6 5 0 1 1 0 
Tiruvallur STR-ISD 1 0 0 1 1 0 
Tiruvallur STR-NISD 2 0 0 3 3 0 
Udhagamandalam RTR-ISD 3 1 1 2 2 0 
Udhagamandalam RTR-NISD 3 0 0 2 0 1 
Udhagamandalam STR-ISD 3 0 0 2 2 0 
Udhagamandalam STR-NISD 3 0 0 2 0 1 
Uthukkuli RTR-ISD 3 3 0 2 0 2 
Uthukkuli RTR-NISD 3 2 0 2 0 2 
Uthukkuli STR-ISD 2 0 2 3 0 3 
Uthukkuli STR-NISD 2 1 0 3 0 3 
Velachery RTR-ISD 4 4 0 0 0 0 
Velachery RTR-NISD 6 5 0 0 0 0 

Appendices 
 
 
 99 
Taluk Source and 
Type 
Number of approved applications Number of rejected applications 
Checked Procedural 
lapse 
Incorrect 
processing 
Checked Procedural 
lapse 
Incorrect 
Processing 
Veppanthattai RTR-ISD 3 3 0 2 1 1 
Veppanthattai RTR-NISD 3 2 0 3 0 0 
Veppanthattai STR-ISD 4 4 0 2 2 0 
Veppanthattai STR-NISD 2 1 0 3 0 2 
Vilavancode RTR-ISD 3 2 1 2 2 0 
Vilavancode RTR-NISD 3 2 0 2 0 1 
Vilavancode STR-ISD 3 2 0 2 1 1 
Vilavancode STR-NISD 3 2 0 2 2 0 
Total 238 142 14 190 86 78 
 
  

Performance Audit on Land Records Management in Tamil Nadu  
 100 
Appendix 3.13 
(Reference:  Paragraph 3.1.6 (i); Page 40) 
Delay in transfer of incorrectly classified applications 
 
Sl.  
No. 
Taluk NISD to ISD 
transfer 
ISD to NISD 
transfer 
1 Agastheeswaram 1,622 12,785 
2 Alandur 25 213 
3 Avadi 699 330 
4 Avinashi 100 8,932 
5 Gummidipoondi 339 214 
6 Kothagiri 67 1,399 
7 Madhavaram 288 442 
8 Madurai East 504 943 
9 Madurai North 550 1,254 
10 Papanasam 68 2,123 
11 Perambalur 167 1,739 
12 Thirupparankundram 174 372 
13 Thiruvaiyaru 38 990 
14 Thiruvidaimarudhur 358 1,719 
15 Tiruppur North 80 3,554 
16 Tiruvallur 906 585 
17 Udhagamandalam 28 829 
18 Uthukkuli 26 3,994 
19 Veppanthattai 70 604 
20 Vilavancode 1,332 8,424 
Total 7,441 51,445 
 
  

Appendices 
 
 
 101 
Appendix 3.14 
(Reference:  Paragraph 3.1.6 (ii); Page 41) 
Delay in rejection of incorrectly classified applications 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Taluk NISD ISD 
Total 
rejected 
Rejected for 
being ISD 
Total 
rejected 
Rejected for 
being NISD 
1 Agastheeswaram 30,985 83 30,097 615 
2 Alandur 1,299 30 2,174 2 
3 Avadi 4,234 440 23,478 153 
4 Avinashi 11,432 22 12,762 196 
5 Gummidipoondi 8,276 186 14,032 245 
6 Kothagiri 1,843 3 1,722 183 
7 Madhavaram 2,580 134 6,056 240 
8 Madurai East 4,041 55 26,672 418 
9 Madurai North 4,620 562 31,101 707 
10 Papanasam 9,602 29 4,580 91 
11 Perambalur 13,873 31 14,008 216 
12 Thirupparankundram 2,058 258 13,536 269 
13 Thiruvaiyaru 3,255 0 2,848 2 
14 Thiruvidaimarudhur 14,156 476 31,392 501 
15 Tiruppur North 7,052 8 5,546 9 
16 Tiruvallur 10,678 582 31,045 251 
17 Udhagamandalam 1,952 1 1,305 11 
18 Uthukkuli 4,938 4 5,880 11 
19 Veppanthattai 7,683 23 10,276 39 
20 Vilavancode 12,606 79 15,025 104 
Total 1,57,163 3,006 2,83,535 4,263 
 
  

Performance Audit on Land Records Management in Tamil Nadu  
 102 
Glossary of abbreviations 
Abbreviations Full Form 
ADSLR Assistant Directors of Survey and Land Records 
CAN Citizen Access Number 
CLR Computerisation of Land Records 
CORS Continuously Operating Reference Stations 
CSC Common Service Centre 
DBT Direct Benefit Transfer 
DGPS  Differential Global Positioning System 
DILRMP Digital India Land Records Modernisation Programme 
DIS Deputy Inspector of Survey 
DLMRC District Level Monitoring and Review Committee 
DoSS Director of Survey and Settlement 
DR Disaster Recovery 
DSC Digital Signature Certificate 
EC Encumbrance Certificate 
ETS  Electronic Total Station 
FMB Field Measurement Book 
FMS Field Measurement Sketch 
GIS Geographical Information System 
GoI Government of India 
GoTN Government of Tamil Nadu 
HDC Hardware Disposal Committee 

Appendices 
 
 
 103 
Abbreviations Full Form 
HR&CE Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments 
ISD Involving Sub Division 
IT Information Technology 
LGD Local Government Directory 
LRD Land Record Draughtsman 
LRMCs Land Record Management Centres 
MIS Management Information System 
MoRD Ministry of Rural Development 
NIC National Informatics Centre 
NISD Not Involving Sub-division 
NIST NLRMP Implementation Society of Tamil Nadu 
NLRMP National Land Records Modernisation Programme 
OPT Online Patta Transfer 
PA Performance Audit 
PMU Programme Management Unit 
RDO Revenue Divisional Officer 
R&DMD Revenue and Disaster Management Department 
RoRs Record of Rights 
RTR Revenue Transfer Registry 
SIS Sub Inspector of Survey 
SLMC State Level Monitoring Committee 
  

Performance Audit on Land Records Management in Tamil Nadu  
 104 
Abbreviations Full Form 
SRA&ULR Strengthening of Revenue Administration and Updating 
of Land Records 
SRO Sub Registrar Office 
SRS System Requirement Specifications 
STI Survey Training Institute 
STR Sub-Registrar Office Transfer Registry 
TamilNilam Tamil Nadu Information System on Land 
Administration and Management 
TNeGA Tamil Nadu e-Governance Agency 
TSLR Town Survey Land Register 
UAT User Acceptance Testing 
UDR Updating of Registry 
VAO Village Administrative Officer 
ZDT Zonal Deputy Tahsildar 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© COMPTROLLER AND 
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA 
www.cag.gov.in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
http://www.cag.gov.in/ag1/tamil-nadu/en 