SUPREME AUDIT INSTITUTION OF INDIA
Report of the 
Infrastructure Development Limited
Government of Karnataka
Report No 9. of the year 2022
Comptroller and Auditor General of India
Performance Audit on Karnataka Rural

 
 
 
 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of 
India on Performance Audit of Karnataka Rural 
Infrastructure Development Limited  
 
 
 
for the 
year
 ended March 2021   
 
 
 
 
Government of Karnataka 
Report No. 9 of the year 2022 

 
i 
 
Paragraph Contents Page 
Number 
 Preface  v 
 Executive Summary vii 
Chapter I Introduction  
1.1 Objectives of KRIDL 1 
1.2 Organisation set up 1 
1.3 Audit Objectives 3 
1.4 Audit Criteria 3 
1.5 Audit Scope and methodology 3 
1.6 Acknowledgement 4 
1.7 Organisation of Audit findings 4 
Chapter II Financial Management   
2.1 Receipt and utilisation of funds 6 
2.2 Non recovery/short recovery of Royalty - ₹4.81 
crore 
9 
2.3 Non crediting of interest earned ₹238.89 crore on 
scheme funds 
9 
Chapter III Entrustment, Estimates and Sanction of 
works 
 
3.1 Project Management System (Bhusiri) in 
KRIDL 
12 
3.2 Entrustment of works 13 
3.3 Preparation of estimates 16 
3.4 Administrative Approval 20 
3.5 Wasteful expenditure on works abandoned due 
to site problem- ₹15.25 lakh 
21 
3.6 Technical Sanction 22 
Chapter IV Execution of work  
4.1 Planning of the works 28 
4.2 Delay in completion of works 31 
4.3 Execution of sub-standard work without 
entering into formal agreement 
32 
 
 
4.4 Execution of sub-standard work by Kolar sub- 
division 
32 
Table of contents 

Table of contents 
ii 
Paragraph Contents Page 
Number 
4.5 Execution of works through Group Leaders 33 
4.6 Economy and effectiveness in execution of 
works 
34 
4.7 Execution of works entrusted by BBMP 36 
Chapter V Accounting, Internal Controls and 
Monitoring 
 
5.1   Accounting System in KRIDL 39 
5.2 Procurement of stores 43 
5.3 Absence of control mechanism in receipts, issues 
and accounting of stores 
45 
5.4 Audit Committee and Board of Directors Meetings 46 
5.5 GSK software 47 
5.6 Issues relating to Quality Control 47 
5.7 Recruitment and Training 51 
 Appendices 55 
 Glossary 76 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Table of contents 
iii 
List of Appendices  
 
Appendix 
Number 
Details Page 
Number 
I List of selected Sub-Divisions 55 
II Test-checked works 56 
III Excess expenditure over the estimated cost 57 
IV Non-recovery/short recovery of Royalty 58 
V Works more than Rupees two crore 59 
VI Splitting up of estimates costing more than Rupees 
two crores by EA 
60 
VII Entrustment of ineligible Works 61 
VIII Splitting up of estimates costing more than Rupees 
two crores by KRIDL 
62 
IX Differential cost due to adoption of PWD SR 
instead of PRED SR 
63 
X Release of funds before administrative approval 64 
XI(a) Splitting up of estimates to avoid higher TS 65 
XI(b) Technical sanction accorded by CE instead of 
Sub-Committee 
66 
XII Commencement of works prior to technical 
sanction 
67 
XIII Delay in commencement of works 68 
XIV Delay in completion of works 69 
XV Execution of works on lump sum basis 70 
XVI Non-reporting excess expenditure 71 
XVII Non-reporting of savings 72 
XVIII Procurement of Steel/Cement from unapproved 
firms 
73 
XIX Material Procured without inviting tender 74 
XX Loss of input tax credit due to procurement of 
material and labour from URD 
75 
 
 
 

 
v 
  
 
  
  
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of 
India for the year ended 31 March 2021 has been 
prepared for submission to the Governor of Karnataka 
under Article 151 (2) of the Constitution to be tabled in 
the State Legislature. 
The Report covering the period 2016-21 contains the 
results of performance audit of Karnataka Rural 
Infrastructure Development Limited. 
Audit has been conducted in conformity with the 
Auditing Standards issued by the Comptroller and 
Auditor General of India. 
 
 
Preface 

vii 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
 
Why CAG did this audit  
Karnataka Rural Infrastructure Development Limited (KRIDL) was established 
in 1971 as a Government of Karnataka (GoK ) undertaking under the Rural 
Development and Panchayat Raj Department (RDPR) with the objectives of  
(i) execution of rural development projects to improve employment opportunities 
to rural unemployed, (ii) to build infrastructure by executing works 
departmentally by eliminating middlemen and (iii) to pass on the full worth of 
money to the people.  
 
Considering the magnitude of works  entrusted to KRIDL during the last five 
years coupled with  exemptions given to KRIDL from KTPP Act  and based on 
previous aud it findings,  CAG took the Performance audit for the period upto 
2016-17 to 2020-21. The Performance Audit was conducted with the objective to 
assess the entrustment procedures of the departments, efficiency, effectiveness 
and economy in works executed by K RIDL, the procurement of labo ur and 
materials and internal controls and accounting system in KRIDL. 
 
Major Audit Observations 
Contrary to 4 (g) exemption notification, Entrustment Agencies (EAs) entrusted 
works costing more than ₹2.00 crore by splitting such works to suit the 
entrustment criteria and thereby avoiding regular tender process. Entrustment/  
execution of ineligible works such as event management, procurement of UPS, 
shifting of HT line, etc., were also noticed. 
There was neither procurement plan for materials nor the details of machinery 
hired for execution of works. The payment was made to Group Leader (GL) on 
lumpsum basis. The acceptance of the Government that GL brings the required 
men and machinery for execution of the works is indicative of sub-contracting in 
execution of works. A cross verification of GST/TIN status of test-checked GLs 
in BBMP revealed that their activity was works contract. Outsourced staff, AEs 
and JEs was treated as GLs and payments were made to them for the job works 
executed 
As against 84 ,574 works received during the audit period, the KRIDL could 
complete only 24,014 works (28 per cent). There were inordinate delays, ranging 
from one month to 24 months in commencement of works despite availability of 
funds. KRIDL does not have a mechanism to  analyse the capacity in terms of 
resources available and works-on-hand.  
As against the utilisation of funds ranging from ₹352.88 crore to ₹1,679.74 crore, 
KRIDL received funds ranging from ₹2,604 crore to ₹4,610.35 crore, which 
resulted in accumulation of ₹17,320.30 crore at the end of 2020-21. The inability 
to timely complete the entrusted works resul ted in blocking up of funds with 
KRIDL. 
The non-allotment of work code to the tune of ₹303.76 crore, non-settlement of 
mobilisation advances to the extent of ₹389.90 crore and increase of funds in 
suspense account from ₹3.95 crore to ₹66.92 crore indicated poor financial 

Executive Summary 
vii 
management.  KRIDL incurred expenditure before release of funds, in excess of 
funds released by EAs and in excess of estimated cost indicating poor financial 
controls.  Non -recovery of royalty from the JWB resulted in extending 
unintended benefit to GLs and loss of revenue to the Government. 
There were various lapses in execution of works, non-reporting of completion of 
works and excess expenditure, non-submission and non-settlement of final bills, 
and non-surrender of savings to EA indicating  poor monitoring and follow -up 
mechanism.  
The quality control system in KRIDL  is non -existent. The three -tier Q uality 
Control (QC)  mechanism is not implemented in letter and spirit. Third -party 
monitors were not appointed, QC divisions are defunct and there is no Quality 
Management System (QMS) and Q uality Assurance Programme (QAP) as 
required under KPWD code. 
The KRIDL Standing Orders formulated in 1974 were n ot revised/updated 
thereafter to suitably incorporate t he KTPP Act , 1999 provisions meant for 
transparency in public procurement.  The Standing  Orders were minimally 
followed indicating lack of requisite accounting controls, non -submission of 
monthly returns led to non -evaluation of monthly accounts/quarterly financial 
statements by the Board for suitable interventions.  
What CAG recommends  
1. The State Government must ensure periodical reconciliation of funds 
between EAs and KRIDL. Responsibility should be fixed for any 
delay in commencement of works. 
2. The State Government must mandate the departments to provide 
detailed justification for direct en trustment of works along with 
reasons for not going through tender process and initiate action 
against erring officials for violations in entrustment conditions. 
3. The State Government must ensure responsibility is fixed at each level 
for preparation, scrutiny and sanction of estimates. KRIDL standing 
orders must be suitably modified to ensure accountability. 
4. The State Government must ensure KRIDL execute works by itself 
and not through Group Leaders. Responsibility should be fixed for 
subletting of works without tendering and ensure KRIDL maintains a 
digital database of payments made to the labourers in the Project 
Monitoring Software. 
5. The State Government should mandate the departments to enter into 
agreements with KRIDL as practiced by BBMP to ensure timely  
release of funds and timely execution of works. 
6. The State Government must fix responsibility for procurement of 
stores in violation of KTPP Act and payments made without valid 
Measurement Book recordings. 
7. The State Government must instruct KRIDL to update /modify the 
existing Project Monitoring Software (Bhusiri) - for real-time   
  

 
viii 
monitoring of works including stores management along with a 
module for the Entrustment Departments for tracking the physical and 
financial progress of entrusted works for suitable interventions. 
8. The State Government must ensure implementation of 3 tier Quality 
Monitoring System and operationalise the defunct QC divisions. 
9. The State Government must ensure periodical revision of the KRIDL 
Standing Orders keeping in view the p rovisions of KTPP Act, 
revisions in KPW A and D Codes and any other relevant statutes and 
guidelines related to procurement and execution of works. The 
KRIDL should evolve a mechanism for constant updation of prices as 
per Schedule of Rates and prevailing market rates.  
10. The State Government must ensure that KRIDL accept or refuse the 
works based on the manpower available to complete the entrusted 
works in time. 
 
Management’s response to audit recommendations 
• The Government replied that the Group Leaders wil l be empanelled, and 
payments will be regulated accordingly.  It further stated that Board is not 
able to make online payments as statutory deductions are to be made by 
Divisions/Sub-Divisions.  The response of the Government is not acceptable 
as online pa yments brings more transparency and proper control over 
accounting affairs.  Further, empanelment could result in formali sation of 
contractors as Group Leaders. 
• The Government accepted that the Standing Orders issued during 1974 
based on the requirements a t that time and it felt necessary to amend the 
Standing Orders in tune with the present -day requirement for effective 
execution of works. 
Executive Summary

 
1 
Chapter 1 - Introduction 
Karnataka Rural Infrastructure Development Limited (KRIDL), a Government 
of Karnataka (GoK) undertaking under the Rural Development and Panchayat 
Raj Department (RDPR), is involved in Civil Engineering construction and 
creation of assets in the State.  It started as a Directorate of Land Army in the 
year 1971 and was incorporated (August 1974) as ‘Karnataka Land Army 
Corporation (KLAC)’ under the complete ownership of GoK and  renamed 
(August 2009) as ‘KRIDL’. 
1.1  Objectives of KRIDL  
The objectives of the Company are: 
➢ Execution of rural development projects concentrating on labour-
oriented works, so that rural unemployed and under employed youth are 
provided with adequate employment opportunities to improve their skill and 
economic conditions. 
➢ To undertake all rural development civil works directly supervised and 
executing Departmentally by eliminating middlemen, to avoid more premium 
and exploitation of the rural poor, thereby passing on the full worth of money 
to the people. 
➢ Help to build inf rastructure relating to integrated a rea development, 
water resource development, dairy, fisheries , minor irrigation, rural 
communication, bridges, roads, buildings like schools, hospitals, houses and 
soil conservation works, which is vital for development. 
1.2 Organisation set up  
The Company is headed by a Managing Director (MD).  The activities of 
KRIDL are controlled and managed by the Board of Directors nominated by the 
State Government.  As on 1 August 2021, KRIDL ha s three Chief Engineers 
(CE) under whom 6 zones, 41 divisions and 90 sub-divisions (also known as 
Project Implementing Units) are functioning, which are in  turn headed by 
Superintending Engineer (SE), Executive Engineer (EE) and Assistant 
Executive Engineer (AEE) respectively as shown below in Chart 1.1. 
 
            
    
            
            
              
              

Chapter 1 
2 
Chart 1.1:  Organogram of the company 
 
Source: Annual Report of KRIDL  
 
 
 
 
 
 


Introduction 
3 
1.3 Audit Objectives  
The objectives of the Performance Audit (PA) were to examine whether: 
➢ the Departments of Government were justified in entrusting the works to 
KRIDL by invoking the provisions of Section 4(g) of the Karnataka 
Transparency in Public Procurement Act (KTPP) Act, 1999; 
➢ the entrusted works were executed by KRIDL efficiently, effectively and 
economically adhering to the quality norms prescribed; 
➢ the procurement of stores, labour and machineries were done economically 
and directly by KRIDL; 
➢ the accounting system/taxation and sound internal control system along 
with coordination with entrusting Departments exist; 
1.4 Audit Criteria      
The main sources of audit criteria for the PA were: 
➢ Standing Orders  (SOs)/Procurement and operation manual o f 
KLAC/KRIDL. 
➢ Schedule of Rates  (SR) prescribed by the Public Works Department 
(PWD)/Panchayat Raj Engineering Department (PRED) and other Departments 
of Government/prevailing market rates of major materials. 
➢ Ministry of Road Transport and Highways (M oRTH)/Ministry of Rural 
Development (MoRD)/Indian Road Congress (IRC) and Pradhan Mantri Gram 
Sadak Yojana (PMGSY) program guidelines. 
➢ Karnataka Public Works Accounts  code and Karnataka Public Works 
Department code (KPWD code)/manual, KTPP Act, Karnataka Financial Code. 
➢ Government of India /GoK orders, instructions/guidelines issued by the 
State Government/entrusting Departments, minutes of Board Meetings, contract 
documents etc., 
➢ Action Plans prepared by the Entrusting Agencies (EA s)/Company from 
time to time. 
1.5 Audit Scope and Methodology    
The PA covering the period 2016 -17 to 2020 -21 was conducted during July 
2021 to March 2022 by test-check of records of the offices of the MD, KRIDL 
and 24 sub-divisions covering all the six  zones1.  Audit adopted R andom 
Sampling method for selection of sub-divisions and four sub-divisions from 
each of the six zones were selected as detailed in Appendix-I.  The selection of 
 
1 Belagavi, Bengaluru, Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike, Central, Kalaburagi and 
Mysuru. 

Chapter 1 
4 
works within each selected sub-division was based on the monetary value of the 
works.  Accordingly, out of 37,906 works executed in the selected sub-
divisions, 1,379 works were selected for test -check.  Details of sub-divisions 
wise number of selected works are indicated at Appendix-II.  Joint Physical 
Verification (JPV) were also conducted along with AEE/Officials of KRIDL. 
The audit objectives, scope and methodology were discussed with the Principal 
Secretary, RDPR during the Entry Conference held on 18 August 2021.  The 
Exit Conferenc e with the Additional Chief Secretary (ACS), RDPR was 
conducted on 13 July 2022. 
1.6 Acknowledgement  
Audit acknowledges the cooperation and assistance extended by the State 
Government, RDPR, Office of the MD, KRIDL Bengaluru and test -checked 
sub-divisions in conducting the PA. 
1.7 Organisation of Audit Findings   
The PA findings have been organised in line with the audit objectives as below: 
Chapter 2: Financial Management 
Chapter 3: Entrustment, Estimates and Sanctions of works 
Chapter 4: Execution of works 
Chapter 5: Accounting, Internal Controls and Monitoring 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
5 
 Chapter 2 - Financial Management  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The process of flow of funds from the EAs to the Head Office of KRIDL (HO) 
and to the sub-divisions from the H O until the submission of final accounts is 
shown below in Chart 2.1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Audit observed that work code, which is a formal acceptance, was not 
allotted for the funds received from EAs to the tune of ₹303.76 crore, since 
2017-18. 
Commencement of works prior to release of funds by the EAs and instances 
of incurring expenditure more than EAs releases was noticed in audit.  
Further, KRIDL failed to expedite the dues from EAs, wherein, expenditure 
has overshot the estimated costs by ₹3.82 crore in 15 works and actual 
releases by ₹54.39 crore in 439 works. The funds kept at the disposal of 
KRIDL by EAs were underutilised to the tune of 33 per cent.  Lack of efforts 
of KRIDL resulted in piling up of unsettled mobili sation advances to the 
tune of ₹389.90 crore. 
The Suspense Account which was to account the transactions of 
unidentified final head of account kept on increasing year after year.  
KRIDL failed to affect the statutory recovery of royalty from Job Work Bills 
(JWB) of Group Leaders to an extent of ₹4.81 crore.   
Non-maintenance of work -wise records, non -allocation of work codes, 
expenditure in excess of releases by EAs, non -compliance to Government 
orders on remittance of interest earned on scheme funds coupled with 
unsettled mobili sation advances and suspense accounts led to weak 
financial management by KRIDL. 

Chapter 2 
6 
Chart 2.1: Process flow of funds 
 
Source: Information furnished by KRIDL 
2.1  Receipt and utilisation of funds/physical and financial progress 
As per the audited annual accounts of KRIDL for the years 2016 -17 to 2020 -
21, the funds received, utilised and adjusted towards works executed is depicted 
in the Table 2.1 below:  
Table 2.1: Trends in physical and financial progress 
           (₹ in crore) 
Year 
Total 
number 
of works 
entruste
d 
Total 
number 
of works 
complete
d 
Percentag
e of 
works 
complete
d 
Funds 
received 
during 
the year 
Total funds 
available 
(a+ closing 
balance of 
previous 
year i.e., d) 
Funds 
adjusted 
during 
the year 
Balance of 
funds 
available 
(b-c) 
    (a) (b) (c) (d) 
2016-17 12,802 4,967 38.79 2,604.14 *7,816.15 1,068.05 6,748.10 
2017-18 19,384 5,250 27.08 3,640.98 10,389.08 1,247.79 9,141.29 
2018-19 24,963 6,169 24.71 3,590.21 12,731.50 1,679.74 11,051.76 
2019-20 17,893 6,296 35.18 4,610.35 15,662.11 1,346.68 14,315.43 
2020-21 9,532 1,332 13.97 3,357.75 17,673.18 352.88 17,320.30 
 Source: Compiled by audit based on information furnished by KRIDL 
*includes opening balance of ₹5,212.01 crore 
The accumulation of funds steadily increased from ₹6,748.10 crore to 
₹17,320.30 crore from 2016-17 to 2020-21. 


Financial Management 
7 
The funds adjusted towards work done during the period ranged between 
₹352.88 crore to ₹1,679.74 crore. Though the funds were available, only 28 per 
cent (24,014 out of 84,574) of works were completed during the Audit period 
as discussed in para 4.2. 
Audit observations related to fund management are discussed below: 
2.1.1 Non-settlement of Mobilisation Advances received by KRIDL - 
₹389.90 crore 
As per Para 200 of KPWD code, mobilisation advance not exceeding five per 
cent of the contract price shall be released to the contractor subject to production 
of Bank Guarantee and within 15 days of issue of work order. The mobilisation 
advance shall be adjusted from the Running Account Bills as and when the work 
progressed by 15 per cent or more. 
As observed from the audited annual accounts, unsettled mobilisation advances 
of KRIDL stood at ₹389.90 crore to the end of 2020-21.  The non-settlement of 
mobilisation advance indicate d that KRIDL is yet to settle the final running 
account bills.  The practice of receipt of mobilisation advance is not justified as 
the EAs are releasing the funds in advance to KRIDL. This has resulted in idling 
of funds and impacting the completeness of the company’s accounts. 
The State Government while accepting the observation agreed that KRIDL will 
initiate action to reduce the outstanding mobilisation advance by 50 per cent for 
the year 2021 -22, which reiterates that concerted efforts are lacking in 
settlement of mobilisation advance. 
2.1.2 Non-allotment of work code for the funds received from EAs-₹303.76 
crore 
Audit scrutiny of the accounts pertaining to 2 4 test-checked sub-divisions for 
the period 2016-17 to 2020-21 revealed that the funds were released to the sub-
divisions without generating work code 2.  As per the audited accounts for the 
year 2020-21, the company is yet to allocate work codes against funds received 
from various entrusting Departments during the years 2017-18, 2018-19, 2019-
20 and 2020 -21, amounting to ₹24.79 crore, ₹35.80 crore, ₹143.41 crore and 
₹99.76 crore respectively totalling to ₹303.76 crore. The allotment of work code 
for each work is a pre -requisite for commencement of works, release of funds 
and monitoring by the sub-divisions.  Non-allotment of work code resulted in 
idling an d parking up of funds of entrusting Departments outside the 
Government Accounts. 
The State Government while accepting the observation stated that steps are 
being taken to allot work code as per the information/details available, which 
indicates absence of accounting controls in the Company as the work codes are 
yet to be allotted for works worth ₹303.76 crore.  
 
2 A unique running serial number allotted to a particular work at HO based on requisition of  
  funds in Form-9 from the sub-divisions after ascertaining release of funds, administrative  
  approval by the entrusting departments and accordal of technical sanction. 

Chapter 2 
8 
2.1.3 Funds parked under suspense accounts-₹66.92 crore 
As per the audited accounts, the company could not ascertain the final head of 
account in respect of certain receipts and placed them under ‘Suspense 
Account’.  The funds so categorised as ‘Suspense Account’ showed an 
increasing trend for the years 2016 -17 to 2020-21, wherein, it rose from ₹3.95 
crore to ₹66.92 crore.  
The amount lying in suspense accounts include funds received from District 
Treasuries, various EAs and funds returned by sub-divisions of KRIDL.  Non-
settlement of suspense receipts over a period of years indicates lack of concrete 
efforts by KRIDL towards their settlement  impacting the completeness of the 
Company’s annual accounts.  
The State Government while accepting the findings stated that the internal 
financial controls of KRIDL will be strengthened and suspense account will be 
reconciled. 
2.1.4 Commencement of works prior to release of funds by EAs -₹25.35 
crore 
Audit observed that in 11 sub-divisions3, 23 works estimated to cost ₹25.35 
crore were commenced prior to release of funds (ranging from 01 to 20 months) 
by the entrusting Departments.  The commencement of works without ensuring 
availability of funds amounted to utilisation of funds earmarked for other works. 
2.1.5 Excess of expenditure over and above releases by EAs-₹54.39 crore 
It was observed that out of 1,379 test-checked works in 439 works (32 per cent) 
which were estimated to cost ₹586.05 crore, KRIDL received only ₹515.16 
crore from EAs .  However, the sub-divisions incurred ₹569.54 crore 
expenditure, which was ₹54.39 crore (11 per cent) over and above the releases. 
The revised demands against this excess expenditure were not raised  with the 
EAs. 
2.1.6 Excess of expenditure over the estimated costs-₹3.82 crore 
In six test -checked sub-divisions, the expenditure incurred in respect of 15 
works costing ₹27.24 crore were exceeded by ₹3.82 crore (14 per cent) which 
neither had the approval of HO nor were supported by revised estimates as 
detailed in Appendix III. 
KRIDL failed to raise the demands against the EAs for settlement of accounts 
in respect of the above works. 
The State Government stated that the above practice has since been 
discontinued and works are commenced only upon receipt of advance money 
from the respective EAs.  Further, it was stated that EAs like Kalyana Karnataka 
 
3 Chikkaballapura, Davanagere, East -I(BBMP), Gadag, Huvinahadagali, Kalabur agi-I, 
Kalaburagi-II, Koppala (Nelogipura), Mysuru, Ramanagara and Shivamogga. 

Financial Management 
9 
Region Development Board, Thanda Development Corporation  etc., are 
releasing only 80 per cent of the estimated cost and balance expenditure was 
borne by KRIDL in anticipation of funds.  It was also stated that, t o overcome 
the deficiencies, the Company has introduced a  pre-audit system at 
division/sub-divisions level for effective financial management to avoid 
diversion/excess expenditure.  However, the fact remains that sub-divisions 
needs the differential funds for completion of works. 
2.2 Non-recovery/short recovery of Royalty-₹4.81 crore 
As per the orders of Department of Mines and Geology, GoK, royalty had to be 
paid on materials such as sand, jelly, stone, murrum etc., utilised in execution 
of works as per the rates prescribed from time to time .  The Department shall 
allow the claims of agencies, wherein, royalty was previously paid  and 
supported by a valid Mineral Despatch Pass issued by them. 
Audit observed that t he sub-divisions executed various construction works of 
roads and buildings during the period 2016 -17 to 2020-21 as per the item rate 
provided in the PW D SR /PRED SR , which was inclusive of royalty.  The 
payments to Group Leaders (GLs)4 through JWBs were to be regulated duly 
deducting the royalty and such proceeds were to be remitted to relevant receipt 
Head of Account of the Department of Mines and Geology.  The payments made 
to GLs revealed that the royalty was not deducted in such works amounting to 
₹4.82 crore in 287 works as detailed Appendix-IV. 
In reply it was stated that Hon’ble High Court of Karnataka in W rit Petition 
No.539/2006 (M/s Karnataka Crushers Vs State of Karnataka) held that where 
the contractor uses the materials purchased in open market like quarry lease 
holders, private quarry owners, there is no liability on the contractors to pay any 
royalty charges. 
The reply of the  State Government is not tenable  as Bruhat  Bengaluru 
Mahanagara Palike ( BBMP) deducted the royalty in respect of claims of 
KRIDL, the same were not regulated by KRIDL in the JWBs of GLs. KRIDL 
also failed to ensure that the GLs produce valid M ineral Despatch Pass in 
respect of non-BBMP works. 
2.3 Non-crediting of interest earned ₹238.89 crore on scheme funds 
The Finance Department vide circular dated 01.03.2018 instructed that the  
interest earned on Government funds w ere to be remitted to interest receipt 
Head of Account ‘0049’ at the end of each financial year.  The unutilised portion 
of Government funds which are released by EAs for execution of works are 
being invested in Flexi deposits  by KRIDL.  The interest earned on such flexi 
deposits to the tune of ₹238.89 crore during the period 2018-21 was not remitted 
to Government account. 
 
 
4 Group Leader is one among the group of workers not more than 20 to 25. 

Chapter 2 
10 
 
 
Recommendation 1 : The State Government must ensure periodical 
reconciliation of funds between EAs and KRIDL. Responsibility should be 
fixed for any delay in commencement of works. 

11 
Chapter 3 - Entrustment, Estimates and Sanction of works 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
KRIDL undertakes all types of rural development works entrusted by 
Government including L ocal Bodies, Public or Private Undertakings, 
Institutions etc.  In case of PWD works, the responsibility of KRIDL lies in 
executing only such works which have been thoroughly investigated, 
plans/estimates prepared and sanctioned both administratively and technically.  
However, in the case of works entrusted by various other Departments of the 
State Government, KRIDL prepares plans and estimates. 
The flow of award of works by EAs, process of administrative approvals , 
technical sanctions, release of funds, preparation of work programme chart, 
engaging GLs, execution of works and settlement of accounts are depicted 
below Chart 3.1.  
 
Contrary to 4(g) exemption notification, EAs entrusted works costing more 
than ₹2.00 crore and works were split, to suit the entrustment criteria and 
thereby bypassing the tender process.  Entrustment/execution of ineligible 
works such as event management, procurement of Un -interruptible Power 
Supply (UPS), shifting of High-Tension line, etc., were also noticed. 
Instances of preparation of estimates without conducting proper survey, 
incorrect adoption of SR and resultant excess expenditure are also noticed, 
which were devoid of canons for financial propriety and consequential 
avoidable financial burden on the EAs. 
Preparation and scrutiny of estimates were found to be at variance with the 
SOs of KRIDL as estimates costing less than ₹1.00 crore were scrutinised 
at EE/SE level instead of HO. Estimates were loaded with labour cess and 
Value Added Tax (VAT) in excess to SR item (already loaded) resulting in 
extra expenditure of ₹1.90 crore which only benefited the GLs. Practice of 
execution of works without/prior to administrative approval and delayed 
technical sanction were also noticed in audit. Funds were released to KRIDL 
to avoid lapse of budgetary allotments by respective administrative 
Departments.  
Estimates preparation were flawed as laid down procedures were minimally 
followed resulting in undue benefit to the Group Leaders. Exe cution of 
works without requisite administrative approvals and technical sanctions 
are indicative of drawal of funds to avoid lapse of budgetary grants. 

Chapter 3 
12 
Chart 3.1: Process flow of entrustment 
 
  Source: Information furnished by KRIDL 
3.1 Project Management System (Bhusiri) in KRIDL 
The KRIDL monitors its works through Project Monitoring Software (PMS) , 
namely ‘Bhusiri’, for tracking of all transactions relating to execution of works 
which would capture details from administrative approval/technical sanction to 
settlement of final bills.   
Examination of the ‘Bhusiri’ application revealed that there were no provisions 
for capturing the details viz., date of entrustment, details of authority 
scrutinising the estimates, actual date of commencement of work, requirement 
of men/machinery and material, details of stage wise completion of work along 
with Q uality Control (Q C)/Third Party Inspection (TPI)  reports, actual 
expenditure incurred and date of completion.  Further, it was also observed that 
the data captured in PMS viz., date of administrative approval, date of technical 
sanction were at variance with the manual records  rendering the application 
unreliable.  The I nformation Technology application lacked hierarchical 
controls for securing the integrity of data and failed to provide granular data for 
suitable interventions of the management .  D ue to non -capturing of essential 
data, the job savings for each work could not be arrived at in PMS rendering the 
application incomplete.  
Though the PMS was aimed to act as a tool for management in monitoring the 
execution of works, it failed to provide broad and reliable data for suitable 
interventions. 
The systemic issues relating to entrustment of works, pre paration of estimates 
and technical sanctions are brought out in subsequent paragraphs. 
 
 
 


Entrustment, Estimates and Sanction of works 
13 
3.2 Entrustment of works  
The GoK introduced the KTPP Act, 1999 for ensuring transparency in public 
procurement of goods and services by streamlining the procedure in inviting, 
processing and acceptance of tenders including Contract Execution 
Management by procurement entities and for matters related thereto in public 
interest.  Section 4 of KTPP Act, 1999 permits certain exemptions from 
tendering for the procurement of goods and services. 
Section 4(g) of KTPP Act, 1999 stipulates that the provisions of Chapter II 
(Regulation of Procure ment) shall not apply to procurement of goods and 
services in respect of specific procurements as may be notified by the 
Government fr om time to time.  Accordingly, GoK year -on-year issued 
Government Orders exempting procurement entities/EAs for ‘ direct 
entrustment of works to KRIDL up to ₹2.00 crore’ under Section 4(g) of the 
KTPP Act, 1999.   The Act was amended during April 2021, empo wering the 
procurement entities/ EAs to entrust the works to KRIDL by inserting new 
clause 4e(4)5 thereby avoiding issuance of exemption order every year. 
Entrustment Criteria as per 4(g) exemption 
As per 4(g) exemption notifications (2016 -17 to 2020 -21), the Government 
Departments /Corporations/Boards shall 
➢ Entrust works costing not more than ₹2.00 crore 
➢ Not split the works before entrustment to KRIDL 
➢ Entrust only the following types of works 
• All types of building construction and maintenance, layout  
formation, related electrical works, street light maintenance. 
• Basic infrastructure works, construction and maintenance of 
roads.  
• Rural water supply and sewerage works. 
The subsequent amendment to the Act and insertion of new clause 4e(4) which 
avoided issuance of exemption every year has no impact on audit findings. 
Comparison between 4(g)/tendering process 
The various steps involved in direct entrustment by procurement entity/EAs 
under 4(g)/4(e4) and normal tendering process are detailed in Table 3.1 below: 
 
 
 
 
 
5 KTPP Amendment 2021, Karnataka Act No.19 of 2021 published in Gazette on 6.4.2021. 

Chapter 3 
 
14 
Table 3.1: Steps involved in entrustment and tendering process 
Entrustment under exemption 
under 4(g) of KTPP Act Tendering Process 
1. Entrustment order from the 
entrusting Department. 
2. Preparation of estimates by 
KRIDL. 
3. Administrative approval by 
entrusting Department. 
4. Technical sanction by KRIDL. 
5. Execution of work by KRIDL. 
6. Handing over 
1. Preparation of estimates by the 
PWD/Engineering division of the 
Departments. 
2. Administrative Approval by the 
Departments and Technical Sa nction by 
PWD/Engineering division of the 
Departments. 
3. Notice inviting Tenders 
4. Evaluation of Technical Bids  
5. Evaluation of Financial Bids 
6. Acceptance of the Financial bids 
7. Execution of agreement with the 
successful Tenderer/Bidder and Issue of 
work order 
8. Execution of work 
9. Handing over 
  Source: KRIDL Notification dated 31.8.2009, KPWD Code, KW-4 
The Judicial pronouncement of the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India, states that 
‘the Government cannot act arbitrarily at its sweet will but its action must be in 
conformity with the standard norms or norms which is not arbitrary. The power 
of discretion of the Government in the matter of grant of largesse including 
award of jobs/works, contracts etc., must be confined and structured by 
standard or norm and if the Government departs from such standard or norm 
the action of the Government would be liable to be struck down’. 
Further, the Guidelines of Central Vigilance Commission reiterated that 
‘Tendering process or public auction is a basic requirement for award  of 
contract by any Government agency.  Contracts/projects/procurements on 
nomination basis without adequate justification amounts to restrictive practice 
eliminating competition, fairness and equity. Hence, award of contracts through 
open competitive bids should remain the most preferred mode of tendering. 
However, in some exceptional and inevitable circumstances, the contracts may 
be awarded on nomination basis like during natural calamities and emergencies 
declared by the Government’. 
In view of the above guidelines/judicial pronouncements, though direct 
entrustment will primarily save time involved in tendering process, it prevents 
competitiveness and market price discovery which is essential for transparency 
in public procurement.  The direct entrustment of works is justifiable in case of 
emergency works only and not in respect of works which can be awarded under 
normal tender process. 
The violations in entrustment of works by EAs observed by audit are brought 
out as under: 

Entrustment, Estimates and Sanction of works 
15 
3.2.1 Entrustment of works in violation of 4(g) exemption 
3.2.1.1 Entrustment of works costing more than ₹2.00 crore  
Out of 1379 works, 1280 works costing less than ₹2.00 crore were executed by 
24 sub-divisions while remaining 99 (seven per cent) works costing more than 
₹2.00 crore were entrusted in contravention of 4(g) exemption notifications in 
18 out of 24 sub-divisions test -checked.  The works so awarded to KRIDL 
estimated to cost ranged from ₹2.04 crore to ₹56.50 crore totalling to ₹593.51 
crore (Appendix-V). 
The conditions laid down by GoK therein is binding both on EAs and KRIDL, 
wherein, the works costing more than ₹2.00 crore were to be executed duly 
following tender process under the Act. The acceptance of works costing more 
than ₹2.00 crore by KRIDL indicated that the notification was not implemented 
in its spirit. 
Audit observed that there is no mechanism for fixi ng responsibility for 
acceptance of works in violation of exemption notification. 
The State Government furnished reply in respect of 14 works, wherein, it stated 
that BBMP obtained exemption under 4(a) of KTPP Act (emergency works) for 
five works and nine works of Bengaluru Metro Rail Corporation Limited 
(BMRCL) under 4(g) of KTPP Act.  The reply was verified and found to be in 
order in respect of five works and the exemptions of nine works of BMRCL  
were not in order  as they did not meet the entrustment cri teria.  The status of 
work specific exemptions in respect of other 85 works were not furnished to 
audit. 
3.2.1.2 Entrustment of works by splitting-up of estimates costing more         
 than ₹2.00 crore by EAs 
The 4(g) notification prohibited the EAs to split and entrust the works to KRIDL 
and works more than ₹2.00 crore were to be executed by duly following tender 
process.  Instances of splitting-up works by EAs to suit the entrustment criteria 
were noticed in five out of 24 test -checked sub-divisions. The estimates of 12 
works amounting to ₹92.43 crore, each costing more than ₹2.00 crore were split 
by EAs into 85 works as listed in Appendix-VI. The award of split works 
indicates that EAs preferred KRIDL to bypass the tender process. 
The State Government replied that KRIDL executes works entrusted by the EAs 
and splitting -up of work was not carried out by KRIDL.  The splitting -up of 
works by EAs contravened 4(g) notification conditions laid down by the GoK, 
wherein, works of composite nature wer e split into two to 40 works to bring 
them within the ambit of 4(g) exemption limit of ₹2.00 crore. 
3.2.1.3 Entrustment of ineligible works to KRIDL 
Contrary to the provisions of KTPP Act, 1999 and Government notification, 
Departments entrusted ineligible works such as event management, 

Chapter 3 
 
16 
procurement of UPS, shifting of High-Tension line, etc., to KRIDL.  In six6 out 
of 24 sub-divisions, out of 1,379 test-checked works, 14 (one per cent ) 
ineligible works were executed by incurring an expenditure of ₹16.28 crore 
during 2016-17 to 2020-21 as shown in Appendix VII. 
 
 
 
 
 
The State Government admitted that certain works which are not eligible under 
4(g) exemption of the Act were also entrusted to KRIDL apart from civil 
construction works by the EAs. 
 
 
 
 
3.3 Preparation of Estimates  
An Estimate is a valuation or a statement, in advance, of the amount for which 
certain work can be done.  It is an approximate judgement or opinion on a rough 
calculation or measurement or a statement based on the Departmental rates 
published by respective circles at the time of preparation, generally in writing, 
specifying the amount of money for which a contracting party is likely to 
perform certain work. 
As per provisions of KPWD code (Para 92), estimates shall be prepared and 
submitted in a complete form so that it may not be necessary to prepare 
supplementary estimates as far as possible.  Detailed estimates for water supply 
shall also be included in the main estimate.  All plans and estimates for sanitary, 
electrical and special fitting or  fixtures should be prepared and approval of 
competent authorities obtained before the commencement of construction of 
building.  In the case of new road construction , traffic survey shall also be 
carried out wherever required. 
Technical Officers of KRIDL prepares estimates for all the works entrusted to 
them except BBMP, wherein, estimates and technical sanctions are provided by 
BBMP itself. 
 
6 Davangere, East-I(BBMP), Gadag, Kalaburagi-I, Kalaburagi-II and Koppal (Nelogipura).  
Illustration 
Installation of Pendal/Dais, Sound System, Mike Set, Barricade etc., by 
Koppala (Nelogipura) sub-division 
KRIDL Koppala (Nelogipura) sub-division executed three works at a cost of 
₹82.98 lakh relating to installation of pendal/dais, sound system, mike set, 
barricade etc., for Anegundi Utsav in Anegundi Village, Gangavathi Taluk 
and for Army recruitment camp at Koppala Town. 
Recommendation 2: The State Government must mandate the Departments 
to provide detailed justification for direct entrustment of works along with 
reasons for not going through tender process. 
The State Government should take action against erring officials for 
violations in entrustment conditions. 

Entrustment, Estimates and Sanction of works 
17 
Various p rovisions contained in KRIDL SOs read with relevant sections of 
KPWD code and orders issued from time to time by MoRD were to be followed 
in preparation of estimates.  Audit observed the following discrepancies in 
preparation of estimates: 
3.3.1 Splitting-up of estimates by KRIDL 
As per 4(g) notification, the KRIDL was not to accept works costing more than 
₹2.00 crore from the EAs.  Audit observed that in seven out of 24 test-checked 
sub-divisions, the estimates of  12 works amounting to  ₹30.86 crore, each 
costing more than ₹2.00 crore were split by KRIDL into 30 works as listed in 
Appendix-VIII.  One such case is illustrated below: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.3.2 Mandatory certificates not enclosed  
As per Para 15 of SOs, the AE/AEEs are responsible for preparation of estimates 
and detailed plans correctly, who were to visit the worksite, make a detailed 
survey which should be followed by detailed investigation and preparation of 
estimates.   Further, the KPWD code (Para  101) prescribes a mandatory 
certificate7 to be recorded by the section officer and the AEE to that effect. 
Audit observed that the above prescribed procedure of preparation of estimate 
for technical sanction and recording of certificates by the AEE/AE as envisaged 
was not followed by KRIDL sub-divisions and divisions test-checked in audit 
except Udupi division where the certificates were enclosed.  However, the fact 
remains that no responsibility has been fixed for shortcomings in preparation of 
estimates on the concerned Engineers. 
On this being pointed out, the State Government replied that necessary 
certification on the estimates by the respective Engineers of KRIDL will be 
indicated in future.   
 
 
 
7 Certified I………...……………(name & designation) have personally visited the site on  
  (DD)/(MM)/(YY) and prepared the estimate adopting the sanctioned schedule of rates of   
  year………...and providing for the most economical and safe way of executing the work. 
Illustration 
Splitting-up of estimates by Huvinahadagali sub-division 
The construction of road and drain surrounding Sri Kshetra Mylara Kanaka 
Guru Peeta Shaka Mutt premises at an estimated cost of ₹3.00 crore was 
entrusted to Huvinahadagali sub-division.  The work entrusted was a single 
composite work.  However, the sub-division split the work into four separate 
estimates costing ₹0.71 crore, ₹0.52 crore, ₹0.86 crore & ₹0.91crore to 
bring the value of work below ₹2.00 crore to suit the entrustment need of 
KRIDL. 

Chapter 3 
 
18 
3.3.3 Road estimates 
Audit observed the following in preparation of road estimates. 
3.3.3.1 Non-furnishing of justification for construction of Cement  
             Concrete (CC) Roads 
KRIDL being a Government Company is responsible for the Government funds 
and is expected to exercise the same vigilance while incurring expenditure from 
public money as a person  of ordinary prudence would exercise in respect of 
expenditure of his own money.   
Para 8.5(iii) of PMGSY Program Guidelines, stipulates that C ement Concrete 
(CC) roads is justified only to an extent of 50 meter on either side of the built -
up area of habit ation.  Further, a s per the Manual of Rural Roads, the 
construction of rural roads is to be carried out in the most economical manner. 
The construction of CC roads is expensive when compared to Bituminous (BT) 
roads.  Hence, the CC road construction is jus tified only in densely populat ed 
colonies with narrow lanes. 
Audit observed that out of 711 test-checked road works, 444 works (62 per cent) 
were provided with estimates for construction of CC roads which were not 
supported by any justification as per PMGSY guidelines. 
The State Government replied that the EAs suggested CC roads to be executed 
in rural areas as majority of the villages were having narrow lanes wherein 
paver/machineries trucks could not be moved for laying BT roads.  The reply is 
not acceptable as laying of CC roads is justified only to an extent of 50 meter 
on either side of the built -up area of habitation as per PMGSY  Program 
Guidelines. 
3.3.3.2 Increase in cost of estimation for rural roads due to adoption of  
PWD SR instead of PRED SR 
The circular instructions8 of MoRD specified that the estimates for all civil and 
other works to be executed by the RDPR are to be prepared as per the rates 
provided in the PRED SR and only for items of work not provided in the PRED 
SR, rates as per PWD SR may be adopted. 
Audit scrutiny of nine works (2017-18 to 2019-20) which were estimated to cost 
₹9 crore (₹1 crore x nine roads) were prepared based on the PWD SR for the 
year 2018-19 of Bengaluru Circle instead of PRED SR of relevant year. 
Audit observed that KRIDL executed all the nine CC road works by adopting 
PWD SR, which is higher than the rates as per PRED SR for similar items of 
 
8 NRRDA Circular No P17023/5/2005-P-1 dt 03.06.2005. 
NRRDA Letter No P17023/2005-P-1/122 dt 07.07.2005. 
NRRDA Letter F. No. P17023/5/2005/P1/NRRDA dt 27.04.2016. 
  

Entrustment, Estimates and Sanction of works 
19 
work. This resulted in excess payment of ₹1.02 crore to KRIDL as detailed in 
Appendix-IX. 
Further, audit ob served that 444 (74 per cent ) out of 598  test-checked cases, 
KRIDL prepared the estimates of rural roads adopting PWD SRs instead of 
PRED SR, which inflated the estimated cost of road works. 
The State Government replied that the KRIDL is adopting the PWD SR over a 
period of years due to heavy traffic in the said roads. The reply is not tenable as 
adoption of PRED SR as per MoRD directions for rural roads is mandatory and 
economical when compared to PWD SR. 
3.3.4 Inflated estimates due to inclusion of Labour cess and VAT in the 
estimates and extending undue benefit to GLs - ₹1.90 crore  
Though the SR rates (upto 2017-18) are inclusive of all rates, duties and taxes, 
audit noticed in all the test -checked estimates o f selected sub-divisions that 
VAT prior to introduction of Goods and Services Tax ( GST) and labour cess 
were added to the estimates, inflating the estimates by six per cent (one per cent 
labour cess and  five per cent VAT). This resulted in excess drawal of  funds 
from Government Departments and excess payment to GLs of KRIDL.  In six 
sub-divisions, test-check of 45 estimates costing ₹36.41 crore  were increased 
by making addition of VAT and labour cess amounting to ₹1.78 crore and ₹0.43 
crore respectively which only benefited the GLs. 
The State Government replied that the Company was allowed to collect the 
taxes liable under Karnataka Sales Tax Act, which is in addition to other charges 
from the EAs.  The reply is not tenable as the GO permitted KRIDL for levy of 
taxes liable under the Act, however, the item of SR has already included the tax 
liability. 
 
 
 
3.3.4.1 Other omissions in preparation of road estimates prepared by  
KRIDL. 
Para 90(8) of KPWD Code stipulates that the estimates should include detailed 
rate analysis and the practice of making lumpsum provision shall not be resorted 
to.  As per KPWD Code the following details should normally be furnished in 
the report accompanying the estimate. 
a. History- A brief review of circumstances leading to the need for undertaking 
the work. 
b. Scope- The extent of the work involved. 
c. Specifications- Specifications for materials. 
d. Fund- Cost of work allocation of charges under budget or account. 
e. Rate analysis for items of work not contemplated in the sanctioned SR. 
f. Countersignature by competent authority. 
Recommendation 3 : The State Government must ensure responsibility is 
fixed at each level for preparation, scruti ny and sanction of estimates. 
KRIDL standing orders must be suitably modified to ensure accountability. 

Chapter 3 
 
20 
g. Execution/Flow chart indicating the time  frame for each physical 
activity/progress. 
Audit observed that KRIDL while preparing the estimates had not only resorted 
in making lumpsum provisions but also made payments to GLs on lumpsum 
basis as detailed in Para 4.5.2.  It was also observed that  in none of the test -
checked sub-divisions the report accompanying the estimate were prepared.  
3.4 Administrative Approval   
Administrative Approval denotes the formal acceptance by the administrative 
Department concerned, of the proposals for incurring any expenditure in the 
executing Department on a work initiated by or connected with the requirements 
of such administrative Department.  SO (Para 16) states that all estimates must 
have administrative approval before the works are started for execution. 
3.4.1 Execution of works without Administrative Approval.  
In Gadag sub-division, three works costing ₹3.89 crore were executed incurring 
an expenditure of ₹3.86 crore without administrative approval .  Execution of 
works without administrative approval affects the recovery of cost from the 
entrusting Departments.  Such an instance is given below: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The reply for remaining two cases pointed out in audit is still awaited. 
3.4.2 Release of funds to K RIDL before Administrative Approval - ₹73.31 
crore 
Audit observed that in 19 sub-divisions, in 173 (13 per cent) out of 1,379 works, 
the entrusting Departments had released funds amounting to ₹73.31 crore before 
accordal of administrative approval, wherein, such approvals were received 
after a delay ranging from one month to 82 months as detailed in Appendix-X.  
Such release of funds is indicative of parking of funds with KRIDL to avoid 
lapse of budgetary allotments by respective administrative Departments. 
Illustration 
Execution of work without administrative approval by sub -division, 
Gadag:   
The HO had released an amount of ₹3.00 crore to the sub-division, Gadag 
and an expenditure of ₹2.95 crore was incurred towards construction of K 
H Patil Government First Grade College without administrative  approval.  
Though the work was completed (November 2019) and handed over, KRIDL 
is yet to receive the funds from the EA (August 2022). On this being pointed 
out the State Government stated that administrative approval (post facto) 
was accorded during March 2020.  However, the fact remains that the work 
was completed without administrative approval and reply is silent about the 
funds to be received. 

Entrustment, Estimates and Sanction of works 
21 
3.4.3 Wasteful expenditure on works abandoned due to deviation from the 
original plan - ₹99.94 lakh 
The cons truction of Sri Gondhavali Maharaj Samudaya Bhavana at Beldadi 
Village in Gadag Taluk was initially planned (March 2017) for execution of 
ground floor, first floor and compound wall at an estimated cost of ₹100 lakh.  
However, deviating from original plan,  KRIDL executed works relating to 
basement (cost for basement as per revised estimate was ₹72.92 lakh), ground 
floor and Borewell.  Due to execution of items not included in the estimate, the 
funds allocated were not sufficient and could not be completed as contemplated 
in original plan and expenditure of ₹99.94 lakh (April 2021) rendered wasteful 
as the building remained incomplete and in dilapidated condition (Exhibit 3.1). 
The State Government replied that the original plan was revised as per the 
request of Gram Panchayat and Hon’ble MLA of Gadag Constituency.  The 
work was executed to the extent grant was released by the ZP, Gadag and the 
incomplete work was handed over to the concerned authority and requested for 
further release of grant. The reply is not acceptable as KRIDL should have 
obtained administrative approval for increased costs and appraised the EA’s of 
the additional requirement of funds to complete the works in all respects.  
Exhibit 3.1: Abandoned stage of Samudaya Bhavana 
 
Source: Photograph taken during JPV 
3.5 Wasteful expenditure on works abandoned due to site problems -
₹15.25 lakh 
As per the codal provisions of KPWD Code, the land in which works are 
executed shall be free from all encumbrances and works were to be executed in 
public premises and beneficial for all the members of public.  Further, as per 
para 15 of Standing instructions, the estimates were to be prepared on the basis 
of detailed survey and investigations conducted by EE/AEE at the site. During 
JPV, Audit observed  that the  construction of Anganwadi building was 
abandoned due to site problems as detailed below: 
The construction of two Anganwadis at Badajanabandi and TK Gollarahatti in 
Kudligi Taluk were carried out at an abandoned quarry and private land 
respectively.  The financial progress in respect of these two works were ₹6.95 
lakh and ₹8.30 lakh (March 2019) respec tively against release of ₹18.34 lakh.  
The work at Badajanabandi was abandoned as per the directions of elected 


Chapter 3 
 
22 
representative, while the work at TK Gollarahatti was stopped due to objection 
raised by the owner of the property as the building was erected in private 
property rendering the expenditure of ₹15.25 lakh incurred wasteful.  The 
KRIDL/EAs failed to fix responsibility on the concerned officials for not 
ensuring the suitability and ownership of land before commencement of these 
works (Exhibit 3.2). 
Government is yet to furnish final reply. 
Exhibit 3.2: Abandoned construction of Anganwadi Building  
Badajanabandi          TK Gollarahatti 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Source: photographs taken during JPV  
3.6 Technical Sanction    
The KPWD code states that ‘Technical Sanction is the order of the competent 
authority sanctioning a detailed estimate of the cost of a work of construction 
or repair proposed to be carried out’.  Ordinarily, such sanction can be accorded 
by only such authorities of the Department to whom the power has been 
delegated by the Government and only after receipt of administrative approval 
from the Competent Authority.   
As per the Boards directions, dele gation of financial powers for preparation, 
technical scrutiny and technical sanction is given in Table 3.2 below: 
Table 3.2: Delegation of financial powers 
Estimated cost Preparation 
of estimates Scrutiny of estimates Technical sanction 
Up to ₹50 lakh 
Assistant 
Executive 
Engineer 
Executive Engineer Executive Engineer 
₹50.00 lakh to         
₹100.00 lakh Superintendent Engineer Superintendent Engineer 
₹100.00 lakh to    
₹200.00 lakh Chief Engineer Chief Engineer 
More than                   
₹200.00 lakh Chief Engineer Sub Committee 
Source: KPWD code 
 


Entrustment, Estimates and Sanction of works 
23 
The KRIDL SOs further prescribe that  
➢ For the works other than PWD entrusted by Government Departments, 
 Local Bodies or other agencies, KRIDL will accord Technical Sanction 
 (Para 17, Section 5). 
➢ The works are to be executed after obtaining technical sanction for the 
 estimates (Para 18 Section 5). 
Audit observed the following: 
3.6.1 Splitting-up of estimate s resulting in avoiding  higher technical 
sanction 
Instances of splitting-up of estimates in violation of financial delegation powers 
were noticed in three  test-checked sub -divisions 9. It was noticed that the 
estimates of seven works costing between ₹71 lakh to ₹200 lakh were split into 
32 works costing between less than ₹2 lakh to ₹100 lakh as detailed in 
Appendix-XI (a). Splitting-up of the estimates resulted in avoiding of technical 
sanction from higher authorities, thereby diluting the prescribed controls. 
The State Government replied that KRIDL did not resort to splitting -up of 
estimates (sub-division–Basavanabagewadi) and the same were prepared based 
on the administrative orders received from the EA’s.  T he same could not be 
verified in audit due to non-submission of such orders. The reply in respect of 
other works was not furnished. 
Further, in 14 test -checked sub-divisions, 49 works costing more than  ₹2.00 
crore each were executed and completed based on technical sanction of CE 
instead of Sub-Committee as per the delegation of financial powers as shown in 
Appendix-XI (b).  The action of the divisions in splitting the works worth more 
than ₹2.00 crore into sub -works led to avoiding technical sanctions from 
competent authority including Sub-Committee. 
The State Government replied that the Sub-Committee concurred technical 
sanction for the work relating to ‘C onstruction of road at Gopinatha Swamy 
Hills in Chikkaballa pura’.  The reply is not acceptable as the delegated Sub -
Committee accorded Technical Sanction for the estimate of ₹2.80 crore after 
completion of work. 
3.6.2 Absence of timelines and resultant d elay in according Technical 
sanction  
As per notification dated 31.08.2009, (the obligation of public authorities under 
Right to information ) states that GoK has empowered the KRIDL for direct 
entrustment of works by Government Department, Boards, Corporations and 
other Autonomous Bodies so as to sav e precious time lost in ‘issue and 
acceptance’ of tenders.  Accordingly, upon receipt of administrative approval, 
 
9 Basavanabagewadi, Kalaburagi-I, and Kudligi. 

Chapter 3 
 
24 
technical sanctions for the works were to be accorded in reasonable time by 
KRDIL.   
Audit observed that there were delays ranging from one month to 32 months, in 
according technical sanction by KRIDL in 620 works (66 per cent) out of 933 
test-checked estimates of 19 sub-divisions. The range of delay is furnished in 
Chart 3.2 below:  
Chart 3.2: Delay in according technical sanction 
 
Source: Compilation by audit based on information furnished by KRIDL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Source: Compilation by audit based on information furnished by KRIDL 
The delay in according technical sanction result s in delay in commencement 
and completion of works defeating the purpose of entrustment of works under 
4(g) of KTPP Act.  
On this being pointed out, the State Government replied that the technical 
sanction would be accorded only after administrative approva l and release of 
funds by the EA’s.  The delay in according technical sanction may be due to 
delay in handing over the site/release of funds and delay in submission of soil 
test reports, drawings, site disputes etc.  The reply is not tenable, as the estimates 
for such works were prepared by KRIDL itself based on actual site conditions. 
3.6.3 Commencement of works without/prior to technical sanction       
Audit noticed that in one  test-checked sub-division (Gadag), four works 
amounting to ₹4.25 crore were commenced without obtaining technical sanction 
(February 2022), which is in violation of SOs.  Further, in 20 test- checked sub-
divisions, 160 works costing ₹180.05 crore as detailed in Appendix-XII had 
been commenced prior to obtaining technical sanction, for which sanction was 
obtained after commencement of works.  
Execution of works without and prior to technical sanction nullified the sanctity 
of technical scrutiny and shortcomings in the estimates could not be rectified. 
On this being pointed out, it was replied that the field officers normally do not 
commence the works without technical sanction of Competent Authority.  Due 
to unavoidable circumstances, sub-divisional officers are required to commence 
31 40 43 53
167
44
20 26 21
111
152
57 61 72
342
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
1 to 3 months 4 to 6 months 7 to 12 months Above 12
months
Chief Engineer
 Supdt Engineer
 Ex. Engineer

Entrustment, Estimates and Sanction of works 
25 
the work in anticipation of approval from the Competent Authority, for which 
technical sanctions were obtained after commencement of works. 
The reply is not acceptable as the works were commenced prior to technical 
sanction. Violation of such codal rules has potential risk of erroneous 
construction due to adoption of possible faulty drawings and designs, structural 
requirements etc., as evident from the following instance.  The replies are silent 
on the four works where technical sanction was not obtained. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Illustration 
Execution of work without technical sanction by Chikkaballapura sub -
division: 
 A Memorandum of Understanding (July 2015) was entered into by the 
Deputy Commissioner, Chikkaballapura and Canara Bank (Sponsoring 
Agency-SA) wherein, it was formally agreed by the SA to provide financial 
assistance of ₹1.44 crore under Corporate Social R esponsibility towards 
construction of five Laboratories and one Multi -Purpose Hall on the first 
floor of Govt. First Grade College for Women, Chikkaballapura, which was 
under construction.  As against the approved plan, the sub -division 
commenced the work without obtaining technical sanction from the CE 
concerned and incurred an expenditure of ₹34.65 lakh (March 2016).  
Despite non -receipt of funds from SA and non -obtaining of technical 
sanction, the sub-division went ahead and commenced the work and incurred 
expenditure of ₹34.65 lakh during March 2016 itself, out of funds earmarked 
for other scheme works, the bills were admitted by HO through Monthly 
Running Account (MRA) bills, which was in violation of SOs.  Non -receipt 
of under Corporate Social Responsi bility funds from SA due to non -
submission of plan approved by District Commissioner (DC) had stalled the 
project and no progress of work was made for more than five years. While 
observing the above discrepancies, KRIDL initiated disciplinary 
proceedings against the Engineers concerned and ordered for recovery of 
the above expenditure.  KRIDL has so far recovered ₹3.00 lakh from those 
officials.  
It was replied that the matter is being followed up with SA for release of 
funds through the DC.  The reply is n ot tenable as work is in abandoned 
condition for more than five years and commencement of the work appears 
remote. 

27 
 Chapter 4 – Execution of works  
z 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
KRIDL executes the works of various Government Departments and it is the 
responsibility of KRIDL to ensure that works entrusted to them are executed 
efficiently, effectively and economically . The process flow of execution is 
shown in Chart 4.1. 
 
Audit observed inordinate delays in execution of works due to lack of 
planning at sub -divisions, which failed to draw work programme chart, 
procurement plan for stores as required under SOs. In respect of works 
entrusted by BBMP, formal agreement was entered into, which minimised 
the delays. Audit observed delay ranging from one month to 24 months in 
commencement of works despite availability of funds. 
KRIDL execu ted the works without purchase or hire of 
machinery/equipment and was dependent on GLs, indicating sub -
contracting of works.  Engagement of labourers lacks transparency and 
payments were made to GLs defeating the objective of providing 
employment to rural youth and eliminating middlemen. Outsourced staff, 
AEEs were treated as GLs and payments were made to them. GST/TIN 
status of test-checked GLs indicated that the nature of business carried out 
by them were ‘Works Contract’ and PWD Class -I Contractors. As s uch 
engaging these GLs for execution of works on nomination basis was in the 
nature of sub-contracting and lacks justification. 
Engaging GLs for execution of works indicated that works entrusted to 
KRIDL escaped the transparency statutes and payments made to labourers 
engaged by GLs were not on the records, as such the objectives of KRIDL 
could not be achieved. 

Chapter 4 
28 
Chart 4.1: The process flow of execution  
 
4.1 Planning of the works 
4.1.1 Absence of planning mechanism in KRIDL 
The various provisions of SOs laid down the systematic procedure viz., planning 
by the HO duly indicating priorities, workload and target date of completion, 
preparation of work programme chart and procurement plan by sub-divisional 
offices and monitoring for timely execution and completion of entrusted works. 
Audit observed HO had not set priorities and target date of completion for each 
work.  T he test -checked divisions/ sub-divisions failed to prepare requisite 
detailed plan for execution of work, work programme charts and procureme nt 
plan for stores.  The PMS aimed to provide broader and reliable database failed 
as a tool for hierarchical monitoring as data capturing was improper.   
The State Government stated that the work programme chart is being prepared 
for priority works and such works are executed as per the work programme chart 
along with forecasting the stores requirement .  The reply is not tenable as the 
test-checked sub-divisions failed to furn ish the work s programme chart and 
indents in proof of stores requirement. 
4.1.2 Delay in commencement of works  
Audit in test -checked works of 21 selected sub-divisions observed that there 
was a delay in commencement of 489 works from the date of administrative 
approval/technical sanction, date of release of funds by the EAs and date of 


Execution of works 
 
29 
receipt of funds by sub-divisions whichever was later.  The delay 10 in 
commencement ranged from one month to 66 months as shown in Chart 4.2 
below. The details are given in Appendix-XIII.   
      Chart 4.2: Delay in commencement of works 
 
Source: compiled by audit based on information furnished by KRIDL 
The delay in commencement of works defeated the purpose of entrustment of 
works to KRIDL (under 4(g) exemption of KTPP Act) to save precious time 
lost in ‘issue and acceptance’ of tender.  Further, audit observed that EAs did 
not correspond with KRIDL for speedy completion of works. 
The State Government replied that the reasons for delay w ere due to delay in 
according administrative approval/technical sanction/release of funds by 
EA/delay in handing over/disruption by public/locals.  The reply is not tenabl e 
as audit has calculated the delay after considering all  of the above conditions.  
Further, details for the delay in handing over/ disruption by public/locals were 
not on record. 
4.1.3 Non-availability of Plant/Equipment and absence of transparency in 
procurement of labour for execution of works –Possible execution of 
works through sub-contracting 
The SR item rate which is inclusive of quantity of material, labour (skilled & 
unskilled), overheads, machinery, duties, taxes and contractors profit is adopted 
by KRIDL as base price. From the base price, the job savings (profit margin of 
KRIDL at 10 per cent in non -BBMP works and at five per cent in BBMP 
works), is reduced to arrive at job rate at which the job work is executed by 
engaging GLs. 
As per the SOs, the HO was to provide the required plant and equipment like 
Diesel Road Rollers, Compressors, Concrete Mixers, Vibrators Water Tankers, 
Trucks etc., for execution of works by sub-divisions. 
 
10 The delay was considered for more than 30 days from the date of receipt of funds by  
     sub-divisions. 
207
98
49 30 25 25
55
0
50
100
150
200
250
1 to 2
months
3 to 4
months
5 to 6
months
7 to 8
months
9 to 10
months
11 to 12
months
> 12
Months
Periodicity of delay in commencement of works
No of works

Chapter 4 
 
30 
Apart from the above, the EE/AEE was to work out and arrange required labour 
for executing the job work by engaging GL to whom payments were made duly 
recording the requisite details M easurement Books (MB) /MRA bills.  One of 
the objectives of KRIDL is to provide rural youth with adequate employment 
opportunities and also passing on full worth of money to people by directly 
supervising the works. Hence , transparency and accountability in procurement 
of labour and payment is essential.  
Audit findings in respect of lack of plant, machinery and labour are brought out 
as detailed below: 
4.1.3.1 Absence of plant and equipment  
The sub-divisions during the period of audit had executed road works, building 
works which require various types of machinery such as road rollers, 
mechanical/sensor pavers, vibrator s, trucks, tempos, earth movers, excavators, 
scaffoldings etc.  
However, these works were executed by the sub-divisions with the aid of plant 
and machinery neither owned/leased nor hired.  The divisions/sub-divisions did 
not furnish any details of availability/requirement of such equipment .  In view 
of this, the possibility of execution of works through sub-contracting could not 
be ruled out  which implies that works entrusted to KRIDL are bypassing the 
tender process. 
The State Government in its rep ly stated that the GLs bring the required men 
and machinery for execution of works.  The reply further stated that the SOs 
were issued during 1974 and needs to be amended with present day requirement 
for effective execution of works.  
It is evident from the reply that execution of works by GLs with their own men 
and machinery indicates sub-contracting of works. 
4.1.3.2 Absence of transparency and accountability in procurement of  
 labour. 
The sub-divisions during the period of audit had executed road works, building 
works which require skilled/unskilled labourers.  Audit observed that the 
control records viz., MBs/ JWBs and connected MRA bills though maintained 
did not record the details of labourer s engaged in each job work executed by 
sub-divisions. None of the KRIDL work records indicated quantum of work 
executed and rates at which payments were made to labourers, instead lumpsum 
payments were made to the GLs. 
Due to want of above details, audit c ould not verify the payments to labourers 
were in accordance with prevailing labour laws.   The mechanism adopted by 
KRIDL evidenced that works are being sub -contracted as the details of cost 
towards labour engaged and material utilised were not computed in  any of the 
works. 

Execution of works 
 
31 
In reply, it was stated that the labour component is worked out and paid to GLs 
on the basis of approved job rate, who in turn make payment to all the labourers 
and the details of such payments are maintained by the GLs only.  The reply is 
not acceptable as the work was to be executed on quantum basis and the job rate 
was to be computed for the labour involved in each quantum of work executed.  
The details of labour deployed shall be recorded in JWBs and MB. 
 
 
 
 
4.2 Delay in completion of works 
During the years 2016-17 to 2020-21 a total of 84,574 works were entrusted, of 
which, KRIDL was able to complete 24,014 works onl y (28 per cent ). The 
percentage of completion of works during the said period ranged from 14 per 
cent to 39 per cent.  
Instances of inordinate delay (audit considered 11 months 11 for completion of 
work and delay was considered beyond 11 th month) in execution of work s in 
814 selected works of test-checked 21 sub-divisions was noticed as detailed in 
Appendix XIV. The range of delay in completion of works is depicted in Table 
4.1 below: 
Table 4.1: Range of delay in completion of works 
Periodicity of delay No of works 
1 to 4 months 124 
5 to 9 months 95 
10 to 19 months 224 
20 to 29 months 136 
> 29 Months 235 
  Source: computed by audit based on information furnished by KRIDL 
The entrustment of works to KRIDL was showing increasing trend during the 
years 2016-19 and steep decreasing trend during the years 2019-21.  The rate of 
completion of entrusted works during the five years was 28 per cent only. Thus, 
the i nordinate delay defeat ed the purpose of direct entrustment of works to 
KRIDL under 4(g) exemption.  
In reply to audit observations the State Government stated that though KRIDL 
physically completed the works, the same are not accounted as completed in the 
books of accounts for want of receipt of balance grant, Tax Deduction at Source 
(TDS) certificates from EAs and non -submission of handing over note by the 
 
11 Price variation clause needs to be included in tender/entrustment orders for works requiring 
more than 12 months for completion and no such clause was enforced. 
Recommendation 4: The State Government must ensure that KRIDL execute 
works by itself and not through GLs. Responsibility should be fixed for 
subletting of works without tendering. The State Government must also 
ensure that KRIDL main tains a digital database of payments made to the 
labourers engaged for each work in the PMS. 

Chapter 4 
 
32 
sub-divisions to HO.  However, the reply is not supported by c ompletion 
certificates and hence audit could not vouch its completion. The reply highlights 
the shortfall in Person-in-Position against sanctioned strength to carry out the 
assigned duties effectively such as communicating excess/savings statement to 
EA for early settlement of accounts after completion of works. 
4.3 Execution of works without entering into formal agreement 
Para 135 (1) of KPW D Code stipulates that all works shall be commenced only 
after issue of work orders by competent authority and signing of agreement 
along with handing over the site free from encumbrances.  
A good practice of entering into a formal agreement was observed for the works 
entrusted by BBMP t o KRIDL, wherein, scheduled date for completion of 
works are being included and adhered to.  Audit observed that delays in 
completion of these works were minimal as the agreement conditions was 
binding on both BBMP and KRIDL.  Lack of formal agreements bet ween 
KRIDL and EAs (other than BBMP) resulted in delay not only in 
commencement but also in completion of works.   
In reply KRIDL stated that agreements are being entered into with 
BMRCL/BBMP Tourism Department and Karnataka State Beverages 
Corporation Limited etc.  The reply is not acceptable as formal agreements are 
not being executed with Local Bodies such as ZP/TP/GPs, DC Office, 
Education Department etc., who entrust majority of the works. 
 
 
 
 
4.4 Execution of sub-standard work by Kolar sub-division 
The construction work of approach road from the foothill at Byatrayana village 
in Bangarapet Taluk to Byatrayana Swamy temple was entrusted to KRIDL by 
Tourism Department during 2016 -17.  The Kolar sub-division prepared the 
estimates for ₹2.00 crore for 2.277  km using Bituminous macadam (BM) and 
Semi Dense Bituminous concrete (SDBC) (specification used for highway 
roads) for this village road. The designed life of BT road is 10 years. As per 
August 2021 MRA bill the sub-divisions incurred expenditure of ₹1.82 crore 
including construction of roadside concrete drain.  During JPV (03 September 
2021) audit observed that despite adopting specification used in Highways, (BM 
and SDBC) the road was found deteriorated with worn out surface at several 
stretches indicating sub-standard quality of construction. Further, the Roadside 
concrete drain and requisite number of cross drains were not laid as per 
estimates and expenditure claimed was irregular (Exhibit 4.1). 
Recommendation 5 : The State Government should mandate the 
Departments to enter into agreements with KRIDL as practiced by BBMP to 
ensure timely release of funds and timely execution of works. 
 

Execution of works 
 
33 
Exhibit 4.1: Worn out newly laid asphalt and road sharp rain cut  and 
Concrete drains were also not provided  
Source: Photograph taken during JPV 
4.5 Execution of works through GLs 
KRIDL SOs provides that names of all labourers in the group will be entered in 
the proforma attached to the JWB with particulars of man days employed, actual 
quantity of work done by each, and the amount payable to each labourer.  The 
amount shall be paid to individuals or to the GL as convenient after obtaining 
their acknowledgement in the presence of other labourers of the group (Para 
41).  Audit observed the following discrepancies: 
4.5.1 Execution of works through sub-contracting in the name of GLs 
AEE in charge of the works is r esponsible for arrangements relating to 
assessment of labour based on quantum of work, materials/machinery required 
for smooth execution of works. 
As already brought out in para 4.1.3 in the report, the sub-divisions had neither 
owned nor hired any of the machinery and the details of labourers, payments 
made to them were neither recorded in MBs nor in MRA bills.  Instead, it was 
observed that payment was made to the GL on lump sum basis. 
In reply it was stated that the GL brings the required men and machine ry for 
execution of the works.  Further, it was stated that Company is not able to have 
own plant and machinery or to hire locally for a limited period/for small works.  
The reply confirms that KRIDL is not hiring labour and relying on GLs for 
executing th e works.  Despite having dedicated engineering wings for civil, 
electrical, QC, Storm Water Management, Storm Water Drainage etc., the fact 
that BBMP entrusted works to KRIDL implied that the BBMP took advantage 
of the provisions of 4(g) exemption to avoid tender process.  
A cross verification of GST/TIN status of test-checked GLs in BBMP revealed 
that their activity was works contract 12. Engaging these GLs/firms/agencies 
 
12 As per GST registration status. 


Chapter 4 
 
34 
(executing the works with their men and machinery) tantamount to sub -
contracting which is prohibited as per 4(g) notification.  
In reply , KRIDL explained that their AEEs were involved in assessing the 
requirement of work force available in the area and identify one of them as GL 
having the ability to mobilise the requisite number of labourers.  The preference 
will be given to those GLs having Permanent Account Number , financial 
stability and capability to invest the money in men and material and had to wait 
for payment since the BBMP do not advance any money for the works entrusted 
and KRIDL has no sufficient capital. It was also stated that the management has 
initiated necessary action for empanelment of GLs who are having registered 
GST and Permanent Account Number. 
The reply evidence that the GLs are highly resourceful and cannot be considered 
as one among the labour force.  In fact, all the test-checked GST TIN Numbers 
of GLs engaged in BBMP works were found to be Class -I PWD/Works 
Contractors to whom  the works are being entrusted . Thus, the procedure 
adopted by KRIDL is in the nature of s ub-contracting and is in violation of  
KTPP Act and CVC guidelines. 
4.5.2 Deployment of outsourced staff as ‘GLs’   
Audit scrutiny of records revealed that in nine test-checked sub-divisions,13 32 
outsourced Engineers/Work Inspectors were treated as GLs and ₹28.22 crore 
was drawn and disbursed towards supply of labour and material.  The  above 
personnel are assisting the AEEs in preparation of estimates, testing the quality 
of material brought to site and recording the measurements of works executed.  
This type of working arrangement of KRIDL is fraught with the risk of 
manipulation of the preparation of estimate, recordi ng the measurements and 
compromise with the quality of works executed  indicating absence of internal 
control mechanism at respective levels of KRIDL. 
In reply KRIDL stated that the outsourced Engineers/work Inspectors are 
deployed purely to assist the regular officials of the Company.  The said 
outsourced staffs are not being involved in preparation of estimates and the sub-
divisions are strictly adhering to the quality norms.  The reply is not tenable as 
audit observed that except AEE rest are outsourced staff working in test -
checked divisions/sub-divisions and payments are made to these outsourced 
staff treating them as GLs.  
4.6 Economy and effectiveness in execution of works 
As per para 114(2) of the KPWD Code, the construction management is defined 
as the art of directing and coordinating human and materials (resources) 
throughout the life of a project by using modern management techniques to 
achieve pre-determined objectives of scope, cost, time, quality and participation 
satisfaction to accomplish the purpose of the project objectives of time and 
 
13 Davangere, Gadag, Huvinahadagali, Kalaburagi-I, Kal aburagi-II, Kudligi,  Mysuru,    
Shivamogga and Sirsi. 
 

Execution of works 
 
35 
budget. In the broad sense, it envisages all the actions taken to ensure that a 
project is conceived and plan ned carefully, resources and costs are worked out 
in detail, designs are made economically and accurately according to requisite 
standards, the project is executed in the shortest possible time with minimum 
cost and time  in achieving high standards of qual ity. Audit observed the 
following issues relating to execution. 
4.6.1 Execution of works on lump sum basis   
Para 90 (8) of KPWD Code state that the estimate should include detailed rate 
analysis on the basis of the approved SR and the practice of making l umpsum 
provisions for works like water supply, electrification, etc., shall not be resorted 
to. Further, while according Technical Sanction the EE/SE/CE instructed that 
lump sum provisions made in the estimate shall not be operated until detailed 
estimate was prepared and got approved from the competent authority.    
Audit observed that in respect of building works, the estimates prepared by AEE 
of sub-divisions inter-alia included lump sum provisions for electrical, 
plumbing, water and sanitation works etc.  Though o ne AEE (Electrical) is 
scrutinising the electrical estimates, the same are forwarded to respective 
divisions for technical sanction. In contravention of conditions of technical 
sanction, the sub-divisions operated lump sum provisions and payment  to GLs 
were made accordingly. Audit observed that in eight sub-divisions14 (42 works) 
lump sum payments amounted to ₹7.92 crore ( Appendix-XV) were made 
which lacks detailed estimates and hence job savings to KRIDL in this regard 
could not be arrived at. 
While accepting the audit observations, Government stated that sub estimates 
will be prepared and approved before making payments and sub-divisions will 
be suitably instructed. 
4.6.2 Execution of works in non-jurisdictional area 
The KRIDL has divisions and sub-divisions functioning all over the state with 
pre-defined jurisdictions.  The works entrusted by various Departments shall be 
executed by the concerned sub-divisions having the jurisdictional limits.  Audit 
observed that three KRIDL BBMP sub-divisions15, apart from the works within 
their jurisdictions, were entrusted with 46 (13 per cent) out of 348 test-checked 
works costing ₹26.52 crore beyond (ranging from 143 km to 475 km) their 
jurisdictional areas which were as far as Mysuru  (143 km), Chitradurga (202 
km), Shivamogga (302 km) and Bagalkot (475 km) Districts outside Bengaluru.  
KRIDL failed to produce relevant records viz., procurement of labour, material 
and machinery approved tour programme of the Project officers (EE/AEEs) 
either for preparation of estimates or for monitoring and supervision of such 
works along with relevant MBs.  
 
14 Basavanabagewadi, Kal aburagi-I, Kolar, Kollegala, Koppal a, Kudligi, Mysuru and 
Vijayapura. 
15  Dasarahalli, East-I (BBMP) and RR Nagar. 

Chapter 4 
 
36 
Execution of works through these sub-divisions lacks justification and audit 
could not vouch whether the works were indeed executed by the sub-divisions 
(BBMP-KRIDL), as KRIDL sub-divisions existed in the respective areas.    
In reply it was stated that due to unavoidable circumstances and as per the 
instructions of the EA’s some of the divisions/sub-divisions were required to 
execute the works beyond th eir jurisdiction.  It further stated that circular 
instructions were issued to all divisions and sub-divisions to carry out the works 
in their jurisdiction only.  The reply is not acceptable since KRIDL divisions do 
exist in the respective Districts and entrustment of works to KRIDL BBMP sub-
divisions far away from the work spot totally lacks justification. 
4.7 Execution of works entrusted by BBMP  
KRIDL has a separate wing for execution of BBMP works under the charge of 
a CE and a SE. BBMP entrusted the works to KRIDL on specific terms and 
conditions unlike other EAs.The following were the salient features of works 
entrusted by BBMP and executed by KRIDL: 
❖ The estimates were prepared by the BBMP Engineers by adopting PWD 
SR, Technical sanction and Administrative Approval were also given by 
BBMP. On the works entrusted to KRIDL, the BBMP incurs additional 
expenditure towards KRIDL service charges, GST, Labour  Welfare 
Cess and the actual cost gets higher than the sanctioned estimated cost 
of the works. 
❖ Specific timelines were drawn for the works entrusted to BBMP. 
❖ BBMP records the measurements in MBs and monitors the quality of 
works through TPI. 
❖ BBMP prepares the Running Account (RA) Bills and payments were 
made according to the progress of works. 
❖ All the statutory levies including Royalty, IT, Labour Welfare Cess, 
GST and Further Security Deposit were deducted from the RA Bill and 
remitted to concerned authorities by BBMP. 
❖ The Further Security Deposit were released after completion of Defect 
Liability Period to KRIDL. 
Important audit findings in respect of works entrusted to BBMP -KRIDL 
divisions: 
4.7.1 Adoption of pre-revised rate resulting in avoidable excess expenditure  
Test-check of records pertaining to selected works such as estimates, MRA and 
prevailing SR of Bangalore circle 2016 -17 in East -II(BBMP) sub-divisions 
revealed that the items provided and executed for road works inter alia included 
the item of work ‘ Dense graded Bituminous Macadam’ and ‘ Bituminous 
Concrete’. As the item rates specified in the SR are subject to changes in rates 
of bitumen and concrete for which the revised rates are issued by PWD, the 
revised rates had to be considered for the preparation of estimate s and for 
subsequent payments. 

Execution of works 
 
37 
However, it was noticed that the rate adopted by th e sub-divisions was not as 
per the revised rate.  Thus, adoption of pre-revised rates in six cases resulted in 
excess expenditure to the tune of ₹ 67.67 lakh as detailed in Table No.4.2. 
Table No.: 4.2 Excess expenditure due to adoption of pre-revised rate 
     (₹ in rupees) 
             Particulars Rate 
adopted 
Rate to be 
adopted 
Executed 
Qty 
(cum) 
Excess 
expenditure 
A B C D E=(B-C) *D 
Dense Graded Bituminous 
Macadam 7,120.02 6,279.44 4,057 34,09,956 
Bituminous Concrete 8,118.54 7,083.98 3,245 33,57,478 
Total excess expenditure 67,67,434 
Source: SR/issue rate and final RA bills 
In reply , it was stated that the estimates were prepared and approved by the 
competent authority and payments for each item is scrutinised by Technical 
Vigilance Control Cell in BBMP and works are executed accordingly. The reply 
is not tenable as payments for procurement of labour and machinery to the GLs 
is made by KRIDL, it failed to regulate the payments accordingly. 
4.7.2 Loss of Job savings in respect of BBMP works 
  As per the HO instructions and Board Meeting Resolutions, the job rate 16 for 
each item of work was to be worked out at 90 per cent of the SR item rate and 
10 per cent being job savings17 to KRIDL.  Instances of low job savings were 
noticed in the case of BBMP works in all the four  test-checked sub-divisions 
wherein KRIDL reported job savings of five per cent as against the prescribed 
10 per cent. This resulted in extending undue benefit to BBMP/ GLs in the form 
of payment for labour and material. 
  In reply it was stated that BBMP sub-divisions are also executing works 
entrusted by other EAs such as VJNL, Minorities Department etc., for which 
the company is recovering job savings of 10 per cent.  In respect of works in 
BBMP jurisdiction, escalation in the costs were attributed to execution of works 
during night time, restricted areas, narrow lanes, high traffic intensity areas and 
hence job savings in BBMP were limited to five per cent with prior intimation 
to Headquarters office and in line with Boards directions (1 93rd meeting of 
Board of Directors held on 07 March 2019). The reply is not acceptable as the 
Board of Directors in its 194 th meeting decided to restore the 10 per cent job 
savings. 
 
16 Job rate is the rate derived by EE/KRIDL to be adopted for labour payments. 
17 Job savings is SR item rate minus job rate. 

  
39 
Chapter 5- Accounting, Internal Controls and Monitoring  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter IV of KRIDL SOs has laid down the duties and responsibilities of 
concerned officers, system of accounting, audit of accounts  and records to be 
maintained for proper accounting. 
5.1 Accounting System in KRIDL  
Funds received by KRIDL from various EAs are deposited in works account 
(bank account maintained in HO). On receipt of requisition from sub-divisions 
for funds in Form 918, a unique work code is generated for each work and funds 
are released to the sub-divisions and works executed. 
The JWB and Monthly Running Account Bill are prepared by sub-divisions, 
scrutinised by AE and AEE (Tech) in divisional office with reference to 
estimates and monthly accounts verified are forwarded to H O of KRIDL 
Accounts Wing. The final bill after scrutiny will be forwarded to various EAs 
concerned for their acceptance and adjustments.  The Accounts section shall 
compile all transactions, generate monthly consolidated accounts, Quarterly and 
Half-Yearly Balance Sheet and Profit and Loss Account and submit it to MD 
and Board of Directors within the due dates prescribed.  The Internal Auditor 
 
18  Form 9 is the requisition sent by sub-divisions to HO for release of funds and permission for 
execution of works which are administratively approved and funds received from EA . 
Evaluation of systemic issues in accounting, internal control systems and 
monitoring against the codal  provisions and SOs in force indicated several 
shortcomings viz., non-conducting of requisite Board meetings and 
ineffective functioning of Audit Committee.  The absence of timelines for 
works caused delays in execution of works despite release of funds by  the 
departments 
The requirement of uploading details of works executed by KRIDL in 
Gandhi Sakshi Kayaka (GSK) software were not adhered to and 
implemented as required under GoK orders. 
The controls on procurement, receipts, issues and accounting of stores  
prescribed in SOs was not followed.  There were no regular sanctioned post 
of storekeepers and in the absence of storekeeper/regular accountant, high 
value store items were handled by outsourced staff, without valid 
certification of receipts and issues. 
The quality of works executed was not properly monitored and completion 
of works was not supported by TPI reports. 
Audit observed that the requisite accounting controls were not exercised and 
enforced leading to shortage of stores and non-submission of monthly returns 
which resulted in non-evaluation of monthly accounts and quarterly financial 
statements by the Board as required under SOs. 

Chapter 5 
40 
and Statutory Auditors will conduct detailed audit and offer comme nts on 
annual accounts of the KRIDL. 
Pictorial diagram depicting the accounting system is given in Chart 5.1 below: 
Chart 5.1: Accounting system in KRIDL 
Source: Procedures laid down in SOs 


Accounting, Internal control and Monitoring 
41 
5.1.1 Discrepancies noticed in monthly accounts. 
The monthly accounts are to be prepared and maintained as per the KPWD codal 
rules.   
Audit test -checked the vouchers in selected sub-divisions/divisions for the 
selected months and verified the entries made in cashbook with reference to 
entries in bank pa ss sheets, petty bills/payment vouchers, MBs, work bills, 
material supply bills, monthly account statement, stock and issue register, 
statutory deductions etc. The major issues noticed during the course of audit are 
given below: 
• Payment vouchers were not supported by valid MB recordings/check 
measurement/labourers engaged, not attested by AE/AEE, not supported 
by QC Reports and authorised signatory (Accountant). 
• No deduction was made towards statutory levies from the supply and 
labour bills. 
• Materials procured (sand, jelly, murrum, stone, bricks etc.,) were not 
supported by stock inward/outward register. 
• Key functions of accounting and technical work were managed by 
outsourced staff. 
• None of the sub vouchers were attested by the AE and AEE (Tech) for 
the bona fide entries in the voucher.  Instances were noticed where final 
bills were not properly scrutinised which resulted in excess/incorrect 
payment to GLs as illustrated below: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.1.2 Non-preparation of Excess and Savings statement 
Each sub-division carrying out the works w as to prepare excess/savings 
statement for each work as required under SOs. Sub-divisions failed to produce 
the same to audit.  Audit attempted to compute the statements with the available 
details in respect of completed works, which revealed the following: 
 
 
Illustration 
Excess payment to GL due to non-exercising proper check at division and 
HO. 
In East-II (BBMP) sub-divisions, audit observed that the quantity claimed in 
the final bill was more than the quantity executed as per the recordings made 
in the MB. H owever, payment was allowed without scrutiny of bill, which 
resulted in excess claim of quantity and consequent undue benefit to the GL 
amounting to ₹57.82 lakh.  
In reply it was stated that there were no excess payment and the quantities 
recorded in MB and MRA bills are one and the same.  However, no relevant 
documents were furnished and hence, the reply is not verifiable. 

Chapter 5 
42 
5.1.2.1 Non-reporting of excess expenditure  
Out of 1379 works test-checked, 231 works (17 per cent) were completed in all 
respects and final bills submitted to HO of KRIDL. In respect of 231 works the 
expenditure incurred was more than funds released by EAs to the tune of ₹18.86 
crore as detailed in Appendix-XVI. HO neither monitored such excess 
expenditure nor sought additional funds from the EAs. Consequently, the works 
accounts were not closed and the accounts with entrusting Department remained 
unsettled.   
5.1.2.2 Non-reporting of completion and non-surrender of savings  
Similarly, as worked out in audit in respect of 47  completed works, there was 
savings amounting to ₹0.98 crore ( Appendix-XVII).  The details of savings 
reported and refunds made to entrusting Department were not furnished by HO 
section.   
The State Government replied that the difference between the value of work 
done and final bill value is being treated as net savings. The reply is not 
acceptable as the audit observation is relating to non-reporting of savings to EAs 
after deducting the up-to-date expenditure, KRIDL charges, labour cess and 
GST/VAT.  
Though the State Government stated that the month -wise excess/savings 
statement of each sub-division are being prepared and submitted to HO of 
KRIDL, the same were not produced to audit.   
5.1.3 Non-submission of final Bill 
Audit observed that out of the 794 works test-checked in 16 sub-divisions, 102 
(13 per cent ) works were completed in all respect  but final bills were not 
submitted for the reason that MRA  was yet to be uploaded. The delay in 
uploading ranged between three months to 70 months from the date of 
submission of last MRA.  The reasons for not uploading the final MRA and 
closure of the acc ounts were not on record indicating non -submission of 
monthly returns as required under SOs. 
The State Government replied that the company prepares and settles the final 
bills in respect of those works which are completed financially and physically.  
Reasons for delayed/non-submission of final bills were attributed to non-receipt 
of balance grant/TDS certificate from the EA, non-availability of handing over 
letters of the completed works. Further , circular instructions were issued for 
adjustment of final bill in respect of physically completed works where 95 per 
cent of the grant is received.   
The reply is not acceptable for the reason that instances of non -settlement of 
final accounts was noticed even in works where full funds were received from 
EAs. In th e case of works which are physically completed and balance funds 
are yet to be received, such works are to be removed from ‘work in progress’ 
list and communicated to EA for early settlement of accounts closed. 

Accounting, Internal control and Monitoring 
43 
5.1.4 Non-settlement of final work bills - ₹4.37 crore 
The final bills submitted by the sub-divisions in respect of 25 completed works 
were rejected by the HO. Reasons for rejection, and remedial action taken to 
clear the objections of Final Bill Section were not on record.   
Audit observed that in respect of six sub-divisions, the final bill for 25 works 
were rejected even though the expenditure of ₹4.37 crore incurred by the sub-
divisions was in agreement with the estimated cost, funds released by EA and 
HO.  The reason for rejection was not on record.  The submission of last MRA 
bill up to March 2022 ranged from eight months to 53 months. 
The State Government replied that the reasons for rejection of bill was that last 
MRA did not match  with work-in-progress and final bill, excess expenditure 
over the estimate and fund release etc.  However, the reply is not acceptable as 
no follow-up action was taken up by the HO with the concerned sub-divisions 
in clearing the objections for settlement of final bills and communicating the 
work completion to the EA concerned. 
5.1.5 Non-accounting of hard rock excavated 
KRIDL SOs (Para 78) prescribe that the Monthly Metal Returns  (MMR) were 
to be maintained for road metal coll ected by employing either Departmental 
labour on daily wages or GLs and to account its receipt/issue, which needs to 
be adjusted in respective works accordingly. Scrutiny of records of 11 test -
checked works in three  sub-divisions 19 revealed that 35,961.1 0 Cum of hard 
rock was excavated.  The sub-divisions did not prepare and submit MMR duly 
accounting such hard rock excavated and its issue.   
The State Government replied that the nature of excavated hard rock is skinny 
and scaly which cannot be re -used in construction. The reply is not tenable as 
the sub-divisions did not prepare M MR as required under SOs and necessary 
test reports regarding re -usability or otherwise and proper disposal of the 
excavated hard rocks was not placed on record. 
5.2 Procurement of Stores  
As per the HO instructions (June 2018), the project offices shall procure cement 
and steel required for execution of various works from the approved firms 
selected through tender system at HO. Procurement of other items for execution 
of work were also to be governed by the provisions of KTPP Act.  
Audit observed various systemic issues in control and monitoring the 
procurement of stores as detailed below: 
5.2.1 Procurement of Cement and Steel from unapproved firms  
Audit observed that 17 test -checked sub-divisions procured steel and cement 
worth ₹720.89 crore as detailed in Appendix-XVIII from unapproved firms in 
 
19  East-I (BBMP), Kolar, and R R Nagar. 

Chapter 5 
44 
contravention to the provisions contained in SOs. The sub-divisions repeatedly 
violated the rules despite strict warnings, which indicated that the HO lacked 
control over the affairs of sub-divisions in procurement of stores. 
The State Government replied that to execute the works within the stipulated 
time, the units resorted to purchase of steel and cement from unapproved firms 
and for the reasons  that tenders w ere not finalised and inability of approved 
firms in supplying required quantity in time .  The reply is not acceptable as 
indents for purchase from the approved firms are not on record. Further, the sub-
division resorted to purchases from unapproved firms without prior approval or 
intimation to HO and also instances of cement and steel purchased from 
unapproved firms were lying in stores, and Material-at-site Account of 
respective engineers without being used in works. 
5.2.2 Procurement of other Store items without inviting tender 
As per the circular instructions (May 2018), materials other than steel, cement 
& bitumen costing less than ₹5.00 lakh could be procured through purchase 
committee functioning at zonal/divisional level as per Section 4 (e)(i) of KTPP 
Act.  In case the value of such materials exceeds ₹5.00 lakh, then the same had 
to be procured by inviting tender through e-procurement portal. 
Audit scrutiny of consolidated procurement of stores (trial balance ) for the 
period from 2016 -17 to 2020 -21 revealed that the test -checked sub-divisions 
had procured stores worth ₹754.32 crore (Appendix-XIX) without adhering to 
the provisions of KTPP Act and circular instructions issued by HO. Though the 
sub-divisions were aware of  the works in hand for a particular month/quarter, 
requirement of stores  was neither forecasted nor requisite approval obtained . 
Instead, the sub-divisions arranged the procurement of store items from local 
suppliers and GLs in small quantities avoiding the tendering process. 
The State Government replied that necessary instructions have been issued to 
adhere to KTPP Act and also action will be initiated against the erring officers. 
5.2.3 Procurement of Stores items from un-registered dealers and payment of 
wages to un-registered GLs  
As per the instructions issued (June 2018) by MD, KRIDL the procedures laid 
down for procurement of construction materials 20 was to be compulsorily  
followed and the local procurement was to be made only from GST registered 
dealers.  Any violations would attract penal provisions of KTPP Act, 1999 and 
also loss of input tax credit to the concerned office.  Despite these instructions, 
the test -checked sub-divisions procured construction material worth ₹448.35 
crore and labour ₹1,066.92 crore (totalling ₹1,515.27 crore) from un-registered 
dealers during the period from 2018 -19 to 2020-21, which would attract GST 
of ₹214.46 crore under Reverse Charge Mechanism21 as detailed in Appendix-
XX. Audit further observed that no action was initiated against the erring 
 
20 Timber, Hardware materials, paints, size stone, Jelly, sand, Bricks etc. 
21 Reverse Charge is a mechanism where the recipient of the goods or services is liable to pay     
    GST instead of the supplier. 

Accounting, Internal control and Monitoring 
45 
officials despite persisting irregularities which indicated weak financial controls 
exercised by the HO. 
 
 
 
5.3 Absence of control mechanism in receipts, issues and accounting of 
stores  
The administration, maintenance and accounting of stores were to be in 
consonance with the KRIDL SOs. 
Audit scrutiny of the store records revealed that the sub-divisions were not 
adhering to the provisions of KRIDL SOs as shown below: 
❖ In the absence of regular storekeeper in the sub-divisions, AEE/in -
 charge is accounting the receipts and issues of stores by himself. 
❖ No stock records were maintained for items such as sand, stone, jelly, 
 murram, which accounts for nearly 40  per cent  of the total material 
 purchased from un-registered dealers. 
❖ Proper acknowledgement from the concerned Engineer that the goods 
 were received in good condition along with value of the goods was not 
 on record. 
❖ The monthly abstract of opening balance, quantity and value of goods 
 received, issued and closing balance was not recorded and attested by 
 the AEE. 
5.3.1 Shortage of stores noticed during annual stock verification 
Audit scrutiny of annual stock verification reports and other connected records 
revealed shortage of stores reported against the officials to whom stores items 
were issued while working in the sub-divisions as mentioned in Table 5.1  
below: 
Table 5.1: Name and Designation of Officers on whom shortages of stores  
reported 
Source: Compiled by audit based on records furnished by KRIDL 
Division/Sub-
Division Name of the Officer Designation Amount (₹ ) 
Huvinahadagali Sri R Uthaiah Storekeeper 8,47,464 
Kolar Sri B.N. Vijaykumar AEE 2,39,19,714 
Koppala Sri H T Venkatesh AE 24,00,911 
Sri P K Mallikarjun EE 10,08,814 
Mangaluru Sri K.S Patil AEE 1,30,59,953 
Shivamogga Sri G.E. Mallikarjunappa AEE 22,16,691 
Total 4,34,53,548 
Recommendation 6 : The State Government must fix responsibility for 
procurement of stores in violation of KTPP Act and payments made without 
valid MB recordings. 

Chapter 5 
46 
Audit observed that high value stores are issued to Assistant Engineer 
(AE)/Junior Engineer (JE) and even to EE and AEE without settlement of stores 
account issued earlier.  The stores items are issued to the officials without proper 
security and timely recovery.  Failure on the part of the HO to obtain Half-yearly 
stock verification reports from the concerned EE/AEE resulted in “outstanding 
store items recoverable in cash” from officials who retired from service. 
The State Government replied that circular instructions will be issued to the 
projects for strict compliance and suitable actions  will be taken in this regard.  
Further, it was replied that to overcome the deficiency as pointed out in Audit, 
the company has developed a mobile application (APP) for project officers i.e., 
‘Cement and Steel app’ to track its supply, deliveries and their consumption. 
5.3.2 Non-maintenance of stores accounts by BBMP sub-divisions 
Audit observed that none of the test -checked BBMP sub-divisions of KRIDL, 
maintained any records relating to the procurement receipts and issue of stores.  
In the absence of maintenance of records of stores , the authenticity o f 
procurement and veracity of payment and utili sation of store items were not 
verifiable.  Further, all the store items including cement and steel were procured 
through GLs locally in gross disregard to the SOs and HO instructions. 
The State Government replied that the materials are being procured as and when 
required and no buffer stock is maintained.  The reply is not acceptable as the 
accounts of stores is not only just for buffer stock but also should be maintained 
for all the items that have been procured by the sub-divisions. 
5.4 Audit Committee and Board of Directors Meetings 
The Company had to conduct minimum of four meetings of its Board of 
Directors every financial year in such a manner that not more than 120 days 
shall intervene between two consecutive meetings of the Board.  However, the 
Board of Directors met only three times as against the requisite six meetings 
during the years 2017 -18 and 2018 -19 and the intervening gap between two 
meetings was more than 120 days.  
The Audit Committee was set up during the year 2018-19 and two sittings were 
held on 3 December 2019 and 20 December 2019 and was stated to have 
perused the financial statement for the year.  The details of monitoring work 
carried out by the Audit Committee during the year 2018-19 was not on record. 
Due to lack of monitoring by the HO on the activities of the divisions/sub-
divisions, there were delays in commencement of works, execution and 
completion of the entrusted works. The fund management was not efficien t 
which resulted in non -maintenance of work -wise accounts and entrusting 
Department-wise accounts. The HO was not exercising enough control over the 
affairs of the divisions/sub-divisions, which resulted in the Project 
Implementing Units  accepting works entrusted by Departments/agencies 
directly.  

Accounting, Internal control and Monitoring 
47 
The State Government replied that during the financial years 2017-18 and 2018-
19, the Company had convened six meetings.  However, due to unavoidable 
administrative reasons the Board Meetings c ould not be conducted within the 
prescribed period of intervening gap between two meetings.  The reply is not 
acceptable as the Company was required to convene in each financial year a 
minimum of four meetings and the intervening gap between two meetings shall 
not exceed 120 days. 
5.5 Gandhi Sakshi Kayaka software 
The RDPR with the help of National Informa tics Centre (NIC), developed 
application software for monitoring the works taken up by the Department for 
effective and efficient monitoring at various levels of the Department. The GSK 
application was developed to bring accountability, transparency and public 
participation in the execution of developmental works. The Annual report of 
RDPR states that from 03 October 2013 onwards, no payments can be made for 
the bills without generating the payment advice from GSK system and all details 
of works along with photographs should be recorded and submitted to 
Government and uploaded in GSK Work Soft. Also, the same p rocedure was 
reiterated while according technical sanction for the estimates and for all the 
works entrusted to KRIDL.  
Audit scrutiny of the records of test -checked sub-divisions revealed that none 
of the sub-divisions/divisions of KRIDL was adhering to t he above GoK 
instructions and the details of the works executed, including three stage -wise 
photographs of execution by KRIDL sub-divisions were not being recorded and 
updated in GSK.  
On this being pointed out, it was replied that all details will be updated in new 
GSK software. 
 
 
 
 
5.6 Issues relating to QC  
5.6.1 Absence of Quality Management System (QMS) and Quality 
Assurance Programme (QAP)  
The KPWD Code and Publications of IRC stipulate that the Officers at higher 
echelons must set quality guidelines and establish QMS and QAP applicable to 
all site activities to monitor the quality during the construction process.   
Audit observed that the QMS and QAP were not established in KRIDL.  Further, 
the QC divisions set up under section 8 para 46 of the SOs the KRIDL was also 
found to be defunct. 
Recommendation 7 : The State Government must instruct KRIDL to 
update/modify the existing PMS (Bhusiri) - for real-time monitoring of works 
including stores management. The software must include a module for the 
Entrustment Departments for tracking the physical and financial progress of 
entrusted works to enable them for suitable interventions. 

Chapter 5 
48 
5.6.2 Non-implementation of Quality assurance and control mechanism  in 
KRIDL 
The CE (North) KRIDL (February 2014) instructed all the SEs/EEs/AEEs to 
adopt QC measures which inter alia included  
 
The implementation of three -tier QC Mechanism was discussed in SEs/EEs 
conference held on 12 December 2014 and QC manual and other details were 
uploaded in KRIDL website.  The AEE was responsible to carry out 20 per cent 
of the quality tests and five per cent of the tests should be conducte d in the 
presence of the in-charge EE.  The EE should record his observations in the QC 
Register Part-I.  The EE should also ensure that the non -conformance reports 
are issued in time and the Engineer acts in time.  
Audit however observed that no mandatory  tests were conducted by the 
divisions and sub-divisions, to monitor the quality of the works entrusted to 
them as envisaged in the Tier -I level.  Further, no follow -up action was taken 
up for implementing the QMS and District Quality Monitors (DQMs) (Tier-II 
level) / State Quality Monitors ( SQMs) (Tier-III level) were not appointed 
during the period of audit. 
The State Government replied that retired EE s from PWD, PRED and other 
Departments and Professors of Engineering colleges were empaneled as DQMs 
and retired C Es, SEs and Senior Professors as SQMs were empaneled and 
approval obtained from the ACS, RDPR for Tier -II and Tier -III quality 
monitoring. Further the AEEs and EEs of KRIDL were regularly inspecting 
works and taking quality analysis from local  Engineering college laboratories 
and local technical laboratories for first tier of quality management which is in 
force for regular quality management of all the works. The quality registers are 
maintained in sites as prescribed in the codal rules and DQM/SQM inspects the 
sites with the observations and guidance of those works for further improvement 
of the works.  The observation that the quality system found to be defunct is not 
true as the process of quality management is intact. The reply is not acceptable 
on following reasons: 
•The Project Officers shall conduct required quality test on
materials and workmanship as per specifications.
First Tier 
•DQMs would be empaneled in KRIDL for conducting
inspections of works and submission of reports. Project Officers
shall co-ordinate and provide necessary details to DQM.
Second Tier 
•SQMs would carry out inspections as per the guidelines of
RDPR Department.
Third Tier 

Accounting, Internal control and Monitoring 
49 
❖ In the test-checked 24 sub-divisions and HO the details of QC monitors 
empanelled and appointed were not furnished to audit. 
❖ SQMs/DQMs appointment shall be with specific terms and conditions.  
KRIDL did not furnish the details o f SQM/DQM in respect of number 
of works checked, quantum of tests conducted, remuneration, travelling 
allowance etc.   
❖ Except in few test-checked works of Chikkaballapura sub-division, none 
of the other sub-divisions furnished the QC Registers to audit.   
❖ The reply further stated that the KRIDL AEEs and EEs monitoring the 
quality through local Engineering colleges and local technical 
laboratories are not supported with documentary evidence except for 
maintenance of Part -I of QC registers in respect of only seven works.   
❖ It was replied that the quality system found to be functional was not 
acceptable as evident from the fact that there is no sanctioned post of 
AEE and EE for Quality monitoring. 
5.6.3 Non-appointment of third-party monitors  
As per the entrustment Orders issued by the RDPR and other entrusting 
Departments, apart from the three-tier quality monitoring, an independent third-
Party monitoring was also to be conducted to ensure transparency. The sub-
divisions while preparing the estimates had to earmark half per cent of the 
estimated cost of each work towards third party monitoring.  As per the rules 
governing QC management, prior intimation shall be provided to the QC 
monitors regarding the execution of works.  Audit observed that:  
❖ The third-party monitors (TPM) were neither empanelled by the HO nor 
third party monitors were appointed by the sub-divisions on specific terms 
and conditions.  However, in very few test -checked works, third -party 
monitoring reports were made available to audit. 
❖ The said third-party monitoring reports obtained from the neighbouring 
Engineering colleges were found to be sieve analysis/gradation 22 of 
materials brought to the site by the GLs and Cube test23 report on concrete 
works. Such test reports cannot be construed as independent samples 
collected from work spot. 
❖ Except for gradation test of Granular Sub-base and Wet Mix Macadam and 
Cube test for CC Pavement, no other tests prescribed in M oRTH 
specification 900 were being carried out. This was grossly insufficient and 
even in such cases the sub-divisions had not ensured that materials of such 
specifications were utilised in the works. 
❖ The procurement of store items was not supported with prescribed quality 
test reports. 
❖ Material test report conducted by the third -parties was not available in all 
the works test-checked in audit. 
❖ In none of the JWBs the QC reports and third-party monitoring reports were 
attached and the bills were passed for payment in violation of the codal 
rules.  However, in the case of BBMP works, BBMP was carrying out QC 
 
22  It is a test conducted to ascertain the quality of coarse aggregates used in construction work. 
23  Cube test is conducted to ascertain the tensile strength of the design mix of the concrete . 

Chapter 5 
50 
tests and the reports were attached with each RA Bill. The QC tests 
conducted were not uploaded in the PMS (Bhusiri). 
❖ QC charges were reimbursed to the GL/Sub contractors for material quality 
tests conducted by them in private labs. 
❖ No QC Registers were maintained and produced to audit for verifying the 
quantum of tests conducted in respect of works test-checked in audit. 
On this being pointed out in audit, it was replied that the  instructions of  TPM 
appointed by the EA’s are being followed, without which further payments are 
not released by EA’s. 
The reply  is not acceptable  as the condition stipulated in  entrustment order 
indicates that TPI has to be carried out by KRDIL and the EA’s relea ses 50 to 
100 per cent of the estimated cost to KRIDL, which is inclusive of TPI charges. 
In the absence of TPM/ QC reports with the JWBs, audit could not ensure the 
mechanism adopted by KRIDL for adherence to  QC norms by Zonal Audit 
Offices /SE offices. 
 
 
5.6.4 Other major lapses related to accounting:  
• Instructions contained in Para 205, section 27 of KRIDL SOs that the 
omissions or mistakes found in the bills shall be noted in the Objection 
Register which were not adhered by Divisional Accountant/Account 
Superintendents as required under SOs. 
• The sub-divisions were not furnishing the monthly accounts to HO within 
the prescribed due dates 24 which is impacting the preparation of monthly 
accounts and the delay ranged from five days to 72 days. 
• The Audit Officers did not maintain any ledger accounts and were not 
preparing the monthly Consolidated Accounts.  Consequently, the 
Quarterly, Half yearly Balance Sheets, Profit and Loss accounts were not 
prepared and submitted to MD/ Board of Directors of KRIDL.   
• The quarterly tour programme of Deputy Finance Officer, Internal Auditor 
and Statutory Auditor approved by the MD KRIDL and the details of sub-
divisions visited and audited by them were not on record. 
• The details of scrutiny of accounts in respe ct of work expenditure and 
monthly progress report and JWBs by the Works Branch as envisaged in 
paras 163 and 164 were also not on record. 
It was replied that the JWBs are being scrutinised and attested by AE and AEE 
(Tech) at divisional office and also ve rified during finalisation of 
accounts/objections raised and are forwarded to the concerned sub-divisions 
and steps are initiated for submission of monthly accounts/provisional P rofit 
 
24 Due dates prescribed for submission of monthly accounts to Audit Officers are 10 th of   
    the following month for which accounts are to be submitted.  
 
Recommendation 8: The State Government must ensure implementation of 
three tier QMS and operationalise the defunct QC divisions 

Accounting, Internal control and Monitoring 
51 
and Loss statement to the competent authority.  Further, Deputy Finance 
Officer, scrutinizes reports submitted by pre-auditors engaged by the company.   
The replies of the KRIDL are not tenable as the sub-divisions failed to produce 
documentary evidence in proof o f verification of JWB by AE/AEE.  The 
objection book was not maintained for recording the remedial measures as 
required under SOs and pre -auditors engaged at divisional level did not carry 
out periodical verification of project accounts as the lapses were not avoided. 
5.6.5 Shortcomings in maintenance of records/registers 
Documentation of execution of works are governed by Section 10 of KRIDL 
SOs.  Maximum care needs to be taken by the EE/AEE/AEs and JEs in the 
maintenance of ledgers, registers etc., pertaining to various works in their sub-
divisions.  Audit observed the following discrepancies: 
➢ Improper maintenance of MBs and recordings therein. 
➢ Non- accountal of MBs in stock registers. 
➢ Non- maintenance of Nominal Muster Rolls (NMRs) and its receipt and 
issue.  
➢ Non-submission of daily labour/fortnightly reports by the sub-divisions 
to HO. 
➢ Improper maintenance of cash book and non -reconciliation of balances 
and non-maintenance of Works Cash Book. 
➢ Non-maintenance of monthly work progress reports duly indicating the 
particulars of works, their estimated cost, value of work done, actual 
expenditure incurred in the month and savings against each work. 
➢ The Objection Register, Works Register and Works Abstract Register 
were also not maintained. 
In reply the KRIDL had accepted and agreed to issue necessary instructions to 
maintain the records as suggested by the Audit. 
 
 
 
 
5.7 Recruitment and Training 
As per SOs, the vacancies arising from time to time, in the Corporation shall be 
filled up by recruitment, promotion or by deputation of suitable persons from 
State and the training camps are to be arranged in  Bengaluru and various other 
places as prescribed by the HO.  The details of training camps conducted for 
various technical staff at junior level and details of recruitment were not 
furnished (March 2022). 
KRIDL through their circular (April 2018) fixed the  requirement of technical 
and ministerial staff for the zonal office, divisional office and sub-divisional 
Recommendation 9: The State Government must ensure periodical revision 
of the KRIDL Standing Orders keeping in view the provisions of KTPP Act, 
revisions in KPW A and D Codes and any other relevant statutes and 
guidelines related to procurement and execution of works. The KRIDL should 
evolve a mechanism for constant updation of prices as per SR and prevailing 
market rates. 

Chapter 5 
52 
offices.  As per the circular, the revised staffing pattern for each sub-divisions 
for performing the allocated works are as detailed in Table 5.2 below: 
Table 5.2: Staffing pattern for each sub-division 
Sl No Cadre Requirement 
01 AE/JE  One each for ₹5 crore work per year 
02 
First Division 
Assistant/Second Division 
Assistant/GST work 
02 for preparation of MRA bills, monthly 
accounts, taxation including GST 
03 Data Entry Operator 02 
04 Work Inspector One each for each AE/JE 
Source: KRIDL circular dated 5.4.2018 
As could be seen from the above table the requirement of staffing pattern 
adopted by KRIDL is flawed as it is based on the quantum of works entrusted 
by EAs which varies year to year. 
5.7.1 Shortage/absence of regular staff to monitor key functions in sub-
divisions  
Considering the huge number of works entrusted to KRIDL every year, the  
administrative and technical functions in a division/ sub-division require 
qualified staff for smooth functioning and timely execution of works. However, 
there was a significant shortage of staff as detailed in Table 5.3 below:  
Table 5.3: Sanctioned and men-in-position of various posts in KRIDL 
as on February 2022 
Name of the post Sanctioned 
Post (A) 
Men-in-
Position 
Regular (B) 
Shortage of staff 
(C=A-B) 
AE/JE 196 85 111 (57) 
First Division 
Assistant/Second Division 
Assistant/GST work 
176 115 61 (35) 
Data Entry Operator 30 13 17 (57) 
Work Inspector 223 128 95 (43) 
SEs (Zonal Office) 06 05 1 (20) 
EE (divisional Office) 33 28 05 (15) 
AEE (Sub-divisional 
Office) 74 68 06 (8) 
Total 738 442 296 (40) 
                             Source: Staff Disposition Statement furnished by KRIDL.  
       *Figures indicated in bracket are per cent. 
It can be seen from the Table 5.3 that as against the sanctioned strength of 738, 
the men-in-position was only 442 (60 per cent) and the shortage of staff to the 
extent of 296 (40 per cent). 

Accounting, Internal control and Monitoring 
53 
In the absence of requisite manpower, audit observed shortcomings in 
performing the technical functions lik e preparation of estimates, delay in  
execution of works, recording of measurements and accounting functions which 
are discussed in earlier chapters of the report. 
On the above issues being pointed out in audit, the State Government admitted 
that there is an acute shortage of regular staff in KRIDL, due to which 
outsourced staff is being deployed for execution of various works and it is 
exploring the revision of Cadre and Recruitment Rules to strengthen the 
technical and accounts wing to efficiently discharge its duties. 
Audit observed that outsourced personnel are carrying out key functions in 
accounting, recording check measurements and acting as GLs wherein 
significant amount has been disbursed towards procurement of mat erial and 
labour. Hence, the responsibility for the shortcomings in key functions could 
not be fixed. It was replied that the Company had initiated action to fill up 76 
posts in various cadres. Further, the management has initiated necessary action 
for in house training.  
 
 
 
 
 
Bengaluru                           (SHANTHI PRIYA S)  
The                                    Principal Accountant General (Audit-I) 
                                    Karnataka 
 
 
 
Countersigned 
 
 
 
New Delhi       (GIRISH CHANDRA MURMU) 
The             Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
Recommendation 10: The State Government must ensure that KRIDL accept 
or refuse the works based on the manpower available to complete the 
entrusted works in time. 


Appendices 
55 
Appendix-I  
(Reference: Para 1.5, Page 3) 
List of selected Sub-Divisions 
 
Sl. No. Name of the 
Zone 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the Division Sl. 
No.  
Name of the Sub-
Divisions  
1 BBMP 1 BBMP Div-1 1 East-II 
2 BBMP Div-4 2 Dasarahalli 
3 R R Nagara 
3 BBMP Div-5 4 East-I 
2 Bengaluru 4 BMRCL 5 BMRCL 
5 Chikkaballapura 6 Chikkaballapura 
6 Kolar 7 Kolar 
7 Ramanagara 8 Ramanagara 
3 Belagavi 8 Vijayapura 9 Basavanabagewadi 
10 Vijayapura 
9 Gadag 11 Gadag 
10 Karwar 12 Sirsi 
4 Central 11 Davanagere-1 13 Davanagere 
12 Huvinahadagali 14 Huvinahadagali 
15 Kudligi 
13 Shivamogga 16 Shivamogga 
5 Kalaburagi 14 Kalaburagi-1 17 Kalaburagi-1 
15 Kalaburagi-2 18 Kalaburagi-2 
16 Koppal 19 Koppala 
20 Koppala Nelogipura 
6 Mysuru 17 Chamarajanagara 21 Kollegala 
18 Mysuru 22 Mysuru 
19 Mangaluru 23 Mangaluru 
20 Udupi 24 Udupi 

Appendices 
56 
Appendix II  
(Reference: Para 1.5, Page 4) 
Test-Checked Works 
Sl 
No 
Name of the Sub-
Division 
No of works Total No of works 
test-checked 
1 Basavanabagewadi 1,636 54 
2 BMRCL 69 18 
3 Chikkaballapura 1,161 57 
4 Dasarahalli 5,074 129 
5 Davanagere 843 52 
6 East-I 3,186 93 
7 East-II 1,024 80 
8 Gadag 1,416 60 
9 Huvinahadagali 373 26 
10 Kalaburagi-I 1,363 48 
11 Kalaburagi-II 1,266 65 
12 Kolar 2,113 68 
13 Kollegala 608 42 
14 Koppala 645 30 
15 Koppala Nelogipura 1,649 52 
16 Kudligi 548 28 
17 Mangaluru 2,965 44 
18 Mysuru 862 38 
19 R R Nagara 1,928 126 
20 Ramanagara 1,159 78 
21 Shivamogga 2,602 56 
22 Sirsi 531 39 
23 Udupi 3,015 52 
24 Vijayapura 1,870 44 
   Total 37,906 1,379 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Appendices 
57 
Appendix III 
(Reference: Para 2.1.6, Page 8) 
Excess expenditure over the Estimated Cost 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl No Name of the 
Sub-Division 
No of 
works test- 
checked 
No. of works in 
which 
expenditure 
incurred more 
than estimated 
cost 
Total 
Estimated 
cost 
Expenditure 
Incurred  
Excess 
expenditure 
incurred  
1 Davangere 52 8 20.97 24.44 3.48 
2 Gadag 60 1 0.43 0.45 0.01 
3 Koppala  
Nelogipura 
52 1 0.60 0.61 0.01 
4 Mysuru 38 1 0.420 0.421 0.001 
5 Ramanagara 78 1 0.045 0.047 0.002 
6 Shivamogga 56 3 4.78 5.10 0.32 
  Total 336 15 27.24 31.06 3.82 

Appendices 
58 
Appendix-IV 
(Reference: Para 2.2, Page 9) 
Non-Recovery/Short Recovery of Royalty 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl 
No 
Name of the Sub-
Division 
No of 
works test- 
checked 
No. of works in which 
non/short recovery of 
royalty commented 
Non/short 
Recovery of 
royalty  
1 Basavanabagewadi 54 25 0.79 
2 Chikkaballapura 57 11 0.06 
3 Dasarahalli 129 9 0.09 
4 Davanagere 52 10 0.31 
5 East-I 93 21 1.29 
6 East-II 80 10 0.15 
7 Gadag 60 3 0.04 
8 Huvinahadagali 26 22 0.10 
9 Kalaburagi-I 48 13 0.22 
10 Kalaburagi-II 65 4 0.03 
11 Kolar 68 19 0.20 
12 Kollegala 42 11 0.04 
13 Koppala 30 27 0.30 
14 Koppala Nelogipura 52 3 0.04 
15 Kudligi 28 12 0.20 
16 Mangaluru 44 20 0.16 
17 Mysuru 38 5 0.06 
18 Ramanagara 78 6 0.03 
19 Shivamogga 56 8 0.06 
20 Sirsi 39 4 0.03 
21 Udupi 52 33 0.40 
22 Vijayapura 44 11 0.24 
Total 1,235 287 4.82 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Appendices 
59 
Appendix-V 
(Reference: Para 3.2.1.1, Page 15) 
Works more than Rupees two crore 
(₹ in Crore) 
Sl 
No 
Name of the Sub-
Division 
Ineligible works 
No. of 
works 
Estimated 
Cost 
Minimum Maximum 
1 Basavanabagewadi 1 3.35 3.35 3.35 
2 BMRCL 9 62.92 2.60 13.90 
3 Chikkaballapura 3 8.99 2.80 3.26 
4 Dasarahalli 1 2.64 2.64 2.64 
5 Davanagere 13 54.47 2.39 9.07 
6 East-I 8 113.65 2.51 56.50 
7 Gadag 2 10.42 3.00 7.42 
8 Kalaburagi-I 8 28.63 2.58 7.05 
9 Kalaburagi-II 1 3.29 3.29 3.29 
10 Koppala Nelogipura 4 10.73 2.16 3.26 
11 Kudligi 2 6.53 3.27 3.27 
12 Mangaluru 2 5.50 2.50 3.00 
13 Mysuru 3 7.38 2.18 3.00 
14 R R Nagara 32 237.58 2.04 47.04 
15 Ramanagara 3 9.10 2.57 3.27 
16 Shivamogga 1 2.30 2.30 2.30 
17 Udupi 1 5.88 5.88 5.88 
18 Vijayapura 5 20.15 3.00 6.81 
Total 99 593.51   
 
  

Appendices 
60 
Appendix-VI 
(Reference: Para 3.2.1.2, Page 15) 
Splitting up of Estimates costing more than two crores by EA 
Sl. 
No 
Name of the 
Sub-Division 
No. of works above two 
crore split EA before 
entrustment 
No. of 
works split 
into 
Value 
(₹ in crore) 
1 Kalaburagi-I 6 18 28.07 
2 Kudligi 3 12 12.35 
3 Mangaluru 1 13 3.52 
4 R R Nagara 1 40 44.51 
5 Vijayapura 1 2 3.98 
Total 12 85 92.43 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Appendices 
61 
Appendix-VII 
(Reference: Para 3.2.1.3, Page 16) 
Entrustment of ineligible works 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Sub-division 
Work 
Code 
Name of the work Estimated 
Cost  
Expenditure 
incurred as per 
latest MRA Bill  
1 Davanagere 78293 Shifting of HT/LT line and Transformer Centre of Hi-Tech Hospital Road from 
Nituvalli Vegetable Market to By-Pass Road’ 
0.30 0.13 
2 East-I 141968 Extinguishing of accidental fire hazard occurred on 10-4-2018 in scientific land fill 
quarry at Bellahally village in Sy. No.13 (310-20-000046) 
0.70 0.70 
3 141965 Emergency fire dousing and formation of earthen bund to form blocks in Scientific 
landfill site in Mittaganahally Sy. No.2 (310-20-000048) 
1.98 1.98 
4 141966 Extinguishing work of accidental fire hazard occurred on 13-3-19 in scientific land 
fill quarry in Bellahally village Sy. No.13 (310-20-000047) 
1.93 1.93 
5 No work 
code 
Gandhi Jayanthi Puraskara function 5.25 8.89 
6 Gadag 99980 Arrangement of Sadhana Samavesha Programme at Gadag District 0.49 0.43 
7 90285 Expenditure related to declaration programme of Nargund Taluk, Gadag District as 
Eradication of open defecation by Vice-President 
0.41 0.41 
8 99977 Arrangement of Sadhana Samavesha Programme in Gadag District  0.41 0.29 
9 94789 Gadag Utsav Sarasa Mela Programme 0.40 0.34 
10 Kalaburgi-I 70861 Extraction of Sand by Manual means from Sand Block No. 2 with a total area of 3.00 
acres of Kundanoor Village in Chittapur Tq, Kalaburagi Dist. 
0.27 0.12 
11 Kalaburgi-II No work 
code 
Providing and Supplying of UPS & electrical installation 0.23 0.23 
12 Koppala 
Nelogipura 
125024 Installation of Pendal/Dias, Sound System, Mic Set, Barricade, Seating 
Arrangement, Generators at Important Places for Anegundi Utsava, Anegundi 
Village, Gangavathi Taluk, Koppala District 
0.65 0.65 
13 125022 Installation of Pendal & Barricade for Army Recruitment Camp at Koppala Town  0.10 0.10 
14 143002 Installation of Pendal & Barricade for Army Recruitment Camp at Koppala Town  0.08 0.08 
Total   13.21 16.28 

Appendices 
62 
Appendix-VIII 
(Reference: Para 3.3.1, Page 17) 
Splitting up of Estimates costing more than two crores by KRIDL 
Sl. 
No 
Name of the Sub-
Division 
No. of works 
above ₹2 crore 
split by KRIDL 
No. of 
works split 
into  
Value  
(₹ in crore) 
1 Chikkaballapura 2 4 6.19 
2 Gadag 2 8 2.33 
3 Huvinahadagali 1 4 3.00 
4 Kolar 1 2 2.10 
5 Koppala Nelogipura 3 6 7.47 
6 Ramanagara 1 2 2.57 
7 Udupi 2 4 7.20 
Total 12 30 30.86 
 

Appendices 
63 
Appendix-IX 
(Reference: Para 3.3.3.2, Page 19) 
Differential cost due to adoption of PWD SR instead of PRED SR 
Sl 
No 
Name of the work Estimated 
Cost (₹ in 
crore) 
Length 
of road  
(in Mtr) 
Excess  
(₹ in 
crore) 
1 Agara Village, Agara GP 1.00 898.0 0.1133 
2 Ramasandra Kannika Layout 1.00 868.2 0.1132 
3 Ramasandra Gayathri Layout 1.00 868.2 0.1132 
4 Punugamaranahalli to Ramohalli Maragondanahalli 1.00 898.0 0.1133 
5 Manganahalli Udaynagar, Kodigehalli Grama 1.00 898.0 0.1133 
6 Kannahalli Village, Kodigehalli GP 1.00 868.0 0.1132 
7 Nettigere Gate to APCO Factory Road, Nelaguli GP 1.00 868.2 0.1132 
8 Kanakapura Main Road to Vadderahalli, Agara GP 1.00 868.2 0.1132 
9 Dinneapalya to Goshale Road, Kaggalipura GP 1.00 898.0 0.1133 
Total 9.00 7,932.8 1.02 
 

Appendices 
64 
Appendix X 
(Reference: Para 3.4.2, Page 20) 
Release of funds before administrative approval 
Sl 
No 
Name of the Sub-
Division 
No of works where funds were released by EA 
before AA 
Minimum 
no of 
months 
Maximum 
no of 
months 
Total funds 
released in 
advance of AA 
(₹ in crore) 
1 to 3 
months 
4 to 6 
months 
7 to 12 
months 
> 12 
months 
Total 
1 Basavanabagewadi 3 8 2 1 14 1 23 4.28 
2 Chikkaballapura 4 1 5 4 14 1 24 6.79 
3 Davanagere 0 1 0 0 1 5 5 0.41 
4 Gadag 8 2 0 2 12 1 49 8.80 
5 Huvinahadagali 8 0 0 0 8 1 3 3.15 
6 Kalaburagi-I 3 0 1 0 4 1 10 1.77 
7 Kalaburagi-II 1 2 0 3 6 1 26 1.03 
8 Kolar 7 3 1 1 12 1 62 8.35 
9 Kollegala 1 6 1 3 11 2 18 2.71 
10 Koppala 12 0 5 0 17 2 10 8.28 
11 Koppala Nelogipura 6 1 3 3 13 1 32 5.61 
12 Kudligi 3 2 0 0 5 1 5 1.28 
13 Mangaluru 5 3 0 0 8 1 5 3.71 
14 Mysuru 1 0 0 3 4 1 79 1.25 
15 Ramanagara 4 7 3 5 19 1 36 3.86 
16 Shivamogga 1 0 0 2 3 1 19 4.11 
17 Sirsi 1 1 3 5 10 1 39 3.72 
18 Udupi 3 1 0 2 6 1 60 1.75 
19 Vijayapura 2 1 0 3 6 1 82 2.48 
Total 73 39 24 37 173 1 82 73.31 
 
 
 
 
 

Appendices 
65 
Appendix-XI (a) 
(Reference: Para 3.6.1, Page 23) 
Splitting up of Estimates to avoid higher TS 
Sl 
No 
Name of the Sub-
Division 
No of 
works 
test -
checked 
No. of works 
entrusted as 
single composite 
work 
Range of estimate cost 
before split  
(₹ in crore) 
No. of works 
split to avoid 
higher 
sanction  
Range of estimate cost 
after split (₹ in crore) 
Total 
estimated 
value 
(₹ in crore) Minimum Maximum Minimum Maximum 
1 Basavanabagewadi 54 5 100 200 10 50 100 800.00 
2 Kalaburagi-I 48 1 71 71 16 2 5 71.00 
3 Kudligi 28 1 200 200 6 25.5 45 200 
Total  130 7     32     1,071 
 
 
 

Appendices 
66 
Appendix-XI (b) 
(Reference Para 3.6.1, Page 23) 
Technical sanction accorded by CE instead of Sub-Committee 
Sl 
No 
Name of the Sub-
Division 
No of works 
test-checked 
No. of 
works 
Estimated Cost  
(₹ in crore) 
1 Basavanabagewadi 54 1 3.35 
2 Chikkaballapura 57 3 8.99 
3 Davanagere 52 13 54.47 
4 Gadag 60 2 10.42 
5 Kalaburagi-I 48 8 28.63 
6 Kalaburagi-II 65 1 3.29 
7 Koppala Nelogipura 52 4 10.73 
8 Kudligi 28 2 6.53 
9 Mangaluru 44 2 5.50 
10 Mysuru 38 3 7.38 
11 Ramanagara 78 3 9.10 
12 Shivamogga 56 1 2.30 
13 Udupi 52 1 5.88 
14 Vijayapura 44 5 20.15 
Total 728 49 176.73 

Appendices 
67 
Appendix-XII  
(Reference: Para 3.6.3, Page 24) 
Commencement of works prior to technical sanction 
Sl 
No 
Name of the Sub-
Division 
No of 
works 
test-
checked 
No. of works 
commenced 
before 
obtaining TS 
Total 
Estimated 
Cost  
(₹ in crore) 
1 Basavanabagewadi 54 1 3.35 
2 Chikkaballapura 57 11 17.22 
3 Dasarahalli 129 3 2.44 
4 Davanagere 52 4 13.29 
5 Gadag 60 19 15.78 
7 Kalaburagi-I 48 35 54.64 
8 Kalaburagi-II 65 13 11.31 
9 Kolar 68 4 2.90 
10 Kollegala 42 13 7.75 
11 Koppala 30 3 3.30 
13 Kudligi 28 2 3.76 
14 Mangaluru 44 5 1.70 
15 Mysuru 38 9 11.26 
16 Ramanagara 78 9 6.37 
17 Shivamogga 56 10 16.73 
18 Sirsi 39 3 4.11 
19 Udupi 52 1 0.51 
20 Vijayapura 44 1 3.64 
Total 984 146 180.05 

Appendices 
68 
Appendix-XIII 
(Reference: Para 4.1.2, Page 29) 
Delay in Commencement of works 
Sl 
No 
Name of the Sub-
Division 
1 to 2 
months 
3 to 4 
months 
5 to 6 
months 
7 to 8 
months 
9 to 10 
months 
11 to 
12 
months 
> 12 
Months 
Total Minimum Maximum 
1 Basavanabagewadi 17 6 5 1 1 2 4 36 1 13 
2 Chikkaballapura 6 6 3 1 1 2 6 25 1 38 
3 Davanagere 15 5 2 0 1 2 2 27 1 19 
4 East-I 5 0 0 0 1 0 0 6 1 9 
5 Gadag 14 5 3 1 1 1 0 25 1 11 
6 Huvinahadagali 8 1 1 2 1 2 2 17 1 34 
7 Kalaburagi-I 1 1 2 0 0 0 3 7 1 66 
8 Kalaburagi-II 11 10 5 4 4 1 3 38 1 24 
9 Kolar 10 5 2 5 1 1 1 25 1 14 
10 Kollegala 13 2 1 2 0 0 2 20 1 23 
11 Koppala 10 3 0 0 1 2 2 18 1 36 
12 Koppala Nelogipura 14 0 1 2 2 5 1 25 1 19 
13 Kudligi 4 5 1 0 0 1 5 16 1 28 
14 Mangaluru 6 10 7 1 0 1 11 36 1 52 
15 Mysuru 1 0 1 0 0 2 1 5 2 15 
16 R R Nagara 31 3 4 0 0 0 1 39 1 13 
17 Ramanagara 18 10 2 5 1 1 2 39 1 15 
18 Shivamogga 0 1 0 0 6 0 3 10 3 26 
19 Sirsi 2 6 4 1 1 0 1 15 1 17 
20 Udupi 7 11 2 4 1 1 2 28 1 34 
21 Vijayapura 14 8 3 1 2 1 3 32 1 49 
 Total 207 98 49 30 25 25 55 489 1 66 

Appendices 
69 
Appendix – XIV 
(Reference: Para 4.2, Page 31) 
Delay in completion of works 
Sl 
No 
Name of the Sub-
Division 
No of 
works in 
which 
completion 
delayed 
No of months range 
1 to 4 
months 
5 to 9 
months 
10 to 19 
months 
20 to 29 
months 
> 29 
months Total 
1 Basavanabagewadi 29 4 4 8 7 6 29 
2 Chikkaballapura 52 2 4 7 3 36 52 
3 Davanagere 36 17 4 4 5 6 36 
4 East-I 72 19 20 17 13 3 72 
5 Gadag 44 18 6 8 6 6 44 
6 Huvinahadagali 23 2 0 2 15 4 23 
7 Kalaburagi-I 43 1 2 2 4 34 43 
8 Kalaburagi-II 46 8 3 14 7 14 46 
9 Kolar 54 0 4 6 18 26 54 
10 Kollegala 31 8 3 8 4 8 31 
11 Koppala 24 1 3 9 6 5 24 
12 Koppala Nelogipura 30 7 2 6 5 10 30 
13 Kudligi 24 2 7 8 1 6 24 
14 Mangaluru 41 0 8 16 6 11 41 
15 Mysuru 31 2 3 16 4 6 31 
16 RR Nagar 65 8 1 40 5 11 65 
17 Ramanagara 41 6 8 9 10 8 41 
18 Shivamogga 33 11 7 8 3 4 33 
19 Sirsi 19 1 3 4 6 5 19 
20 Udupi 35 3 2 12 4 14 35 
21 Vijayapura 41 4 1 20 4 12 41 
Total 814 124 95 224 136 235 814 
 
  

Appendices 
70 
Appendix – XV 
(Reference: Para 4.6.1, Page 35) 
Execution of works on lump sum basis 
Sl 
No 
Name of the Sub-
Division 
No. of works in 
which lumpsum 
provision made 
in the estimate 
Lumpsum 
Provision 
made in the 
estimate  
(₹ in crore) 
Expenditure 
incurred without 
detailed estimate  
(₹ in crore) 
1 Basavanabagewadi 2 0.45 0.45 
2 Kalaburagi-I 5 3.29 3.29 
3 Kolar 1 0.06 0.06 
4 Kollegala 6 2.04 0.45 
5 Koppala 12 1.81 1.81 
6 Kudligi 5 0.62 0.62 
7 Mysuru 8 1.36 0.80 
8 Vijayapura 3 0.43 0.43 
 Total 42 10.07 7.92 
 
 
  

Appendices 
71 
Annexure – XVI  
(Reference: Para 5.1.2.1, Page 42) 
Non-Reporting  of Excess Expenditure 
 (₹ in crore) 
Sl No Name of the Sub-
Division 
No. of works 
in which 
expenditure 
incurred 
more than EA 
releases 
Total 
Estimated 
cost 
Total funds 
released by 
EA 
Expenditure 
Incurred 
Excess 
expenditure 
incurred 
1 Basavanabagewadi 1 1.50 1.50 1.57 0.07 
2 BMRCL 2 2.77 2.54 2.77 0.23 
3 Chikkaballapura 2 0.81 0.74 0.80 0.06 
4 Dasarahalli 41 39.69 36.67 39.12 2.45 
5 Davanagere 12 30.05 28.33 33.05 4.72 
6 East-I 68 103.75 90.06 96.03 5.96 
7 East-II 49 62.26 60.89 62.32 1.43 
8 Gadag 2 0.88 0.72 0.85 0.13 
9 Kalaburagi-I 4 5.10 4.39 5.05 0.66 
10 Kalaburagi-II 8 7.58 5.98 7.32 1.34 
11 Kolar 3 3.50 3.50 3.62 0.12 
12 Kollegala 1 0.38 0.38 0.39 0.01 
13 Koppala 1 0.50 0.48 0.50 0.02 
14 Kudligi 3 4.62 4.51 4.56 0.05 
15 Mysuru 1 0.42 0.39 0.42 0.04 
16 RR Nagar 27 37.32 35.79 37.29 1.50 
17 Shivamogga 2 1.49 1.41 1.49 0.08 
18 Sirsi 5 2.58 2.52 2.58 0.05 
Total 231 303.70 279.29 298.16 18.86 

Appendices 
72 
Appendix - XVII  
(Reference: Para 5.1.2.2, Page 42) 
Non-Reporting of Savings 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl No Name of the Sub-
Division 
No. of works 
in which 
expenditure 
incurred less 
than 
estimated cost 
Total 
Estimated 
cost 
Total funds 
released by 
EA 
Expenditure 
Incurred Savings 
1 Basavanabagewadi 9 7.25 7.25 7.18 0.07 
2 BMRCL 1 0.43 0.42 0.39 0.03 
3 Dasarahalli 1 1.00 0.99 0.98 0.01 
4 Davanagere 2 6.18 5.72 5.66 0.05 
5 East-II 2 3.00 2.98 2.95 0.03 
6 Gadag 5 5.00 5.00 4.97 0.03 
7 Kalaburagi-I 1 0.27 0.22 0.16 0.05 
8 Kalaburagi-II 2 0.82 0.82 0.79 0.03 
9 Kolar 3 1.69 1.69 1.68 0.01 
10 Kollegala 7 3.07 3.07 3.06 0.01 
11 Koppala Nelogipura 1 0.08 0.08 0.08 0.00 
12 Kudligi 5 5.79 5.68 5.29 0.39 
13 Mysuru 2 1.80 1.80 1.80 0.00 
14 Shivamogga 3 1.94 1.93 1.83 0.10 
15 Udupi 1 0.40 0.40 0.24 0.16 
16 Vijayapura 2 1.90 1.90 1.89 0.01 
Total 47 40.64 39.95 38.97 0.98 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Appendices 
73 
Appendix – XVIII 
(Reference: Para 5.2.1, Page 43) 
Procurement of Steel/Cement from unapproved firms 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl 
No 
Name of the Sub-
Division  
Item Description 
Steel Cement 
1 Basavanabagewadi 1.82 1.13 
2 Chikkaballapura 0.00 3.80 
3 Dasarahalli 249.09 84.31 
4 East-I 113.28 35.94 
5 East-II 41.91 12.37 
6 Huvinahadagali 0.00 0.09 
7 Kalaburagi-I 2.15 0.32 
8 Kalaburagi-II 3.67 3.58 
9 Koppala 2.09 0.55 
10 Koppala Nelogipura 11.07 6.76 
11 Kudligi 0.07 0.39 
12 Mangaluru 0.07 0.66 
13 R R Nagara 121.12 13.68 
14 Shivamogga 0.20 0.00 
15 Sirsi 0.22 0.00 
16 Udupi 0.87 1.63 
17 Vijayapura 4.93 3.12 
Sub-Total 552.55 168.34 
Total 720.89 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Appendices 
74 
Appendix - XIX  
(Reference: Para 5.2.2, Page 44) 
Material Procured without inviting tender 
Sl No Name of the Sub-
Division Material Purchased without inviting tender (₹ in crore) 
    2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 Total 
1 Basavanabagewadi 3.63 11.33 2.85 13.12 10.34 41.26 
2 BMRCL 3.20 1.84 0.89 0.86 0.00 6.79 
3 Chikkaballapura 1.89 14.12 8.90 5.86 0.96 31.74 
4 Dasarahalli 2.35 22.40 40.25 1.23 0.02 66.26 
5 Davanagere 7.95 7.36 9.73 5.49 3.23 33.77 
6 East-I 3.53 13.43 0.08 0.26 0.01 17.31 
7 East-II 1.10 6.08 0.00 0.00 0.00 7.18 
8 Gadag 9.60 10.37 7.98 3.92 0.28 32.15 
9 Huvinahadagali 0.91 0.68 0.49 0.56 0.18 2.82 
10 Kalaburagi-I 8.19 13.59 7.02 4.98 2.54 36.32 
11 Kalaburagi-II 4.87 14.07 8.59 6.04 6.55 40.12 
12 Kolar 4.01 12.55 14.26 13.23 4.18 48.24 
13 Kollegala 0.79 3.37 5.95 5.53 1.84 17.46 
14 Koppala 2.05 4.38 3.93 4.79 3.34 18.48 
15 Koppala Nelogipura 8.51 4.19 0.32 0.30 10.12 23.45 
16 Kudligi 1.34 1.23 0.17 2.08 0.45 5.26 
17 Mangaluru 6.02 11.02 17.15 12.45 0.04 46.68 
18 Mysuru 4.06 5.33 6.94 4.05 1.85 22.23 
19 R R Nagara 0.17 3.57 3.61 0.00 0.00 7.35 
20 Ramanagara 2.82 6.85 9.05 10.64 1.70 31.06 
21 Shivamogga 5.57 16.10 24.64 51.50 48.23 146.03 
22 Sirsi 3.45 5.71 5.20 4.63 0.00 18.99 
23 Udupi 6.43 9.17 0.95 0.28 0.06 16.89 
24 Vijayapura 4.00 10.79 16.85 4.83 0.00 36.47 
Total 96.44 209.53 195.80 156.63 95.92 754.32 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Appendices 
75 
Appendix – XX 
(Reference: Para 5.2.3, Page 44) 
Loss of input tax credit due to procurement of material and labour from 
URD 
Year Material 
Purchased from 
URD  
Loss of Input 
Tax Credit 
@5% on URD 
material  
Payment of 
wages to 
URD 
Loss of Input 
Tax Credit @ 
18% on URD 
wages  
Total Loss of 
Input Tax 
Credit  
a b c=b*5% d e=d*18% f=c+e 
2018-19 195.80 9.79 508.60 91.55 101.34 
2019-20 156.63 7.83 340.09 61.22 69.05 
2020-21 95.92 4.80 218.24 39.28 44.08 
Total 448.35 22.42 1,066.93 192.05 214.46 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Appendices 
76 
 
Glossary 
ACS Additional Chief Secretary 
AEE Assistant Executive Engineer 
BBMP Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike 
BMRCL Bangalore Metro Rail Corporation Limited 
BT Bituminous 
CC Cement Concrete 
CE Chief Engineers 
CSR Corporate Social Responsibility 
DC District Commissioner 
DQM District Quality Monitors 
EA Entrusting Agencies 
EE Executive Engineer 
GL Group Leader 
GoK Government of Karnataka 
GSK Gandhi Sakshi Kayaka 
IRC Indian Road Congress 
IT Income Tax 
JE Junior Engineer 
JPV Joint Physical Verification 
JWB Job Work Bill 
KLAC Karnataka Land Army Corporation 
KPWD Karnataka Public Works Departmental 
KRIDL Karnataka Rural Infrastructure Development Limited 
KTPP Karnataka Transparency in Public Procurement 
MB Measurement Book 
MD Managing Director 
MORD Ministry of Rural Development 
MORTH Ministry of Road Transport and Highways 
MRA Monthly Running Account 
PMGSY Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana 
PMS Project Monitoring Software 
PRED Panchayat Raj Engineering Department 
PWD Public Works Department 
QAP Quality Assurance Programme 
QC Quality control 
QMS Quality Management system 
RA Running Account 
RDPR Rural Development and Panchayat Raj Department 
SA Sponsoring Agency 
SDBC Semi Dense Bituminous concrete 
SE Superintending Engineer 
SQM State Quality monitors 
SR Schedule of Rates 
TDS Tax Deduction at source 
TIN Taxpayer Identification Number 
TPI Third party inspection 
VAT Value added tax 
VJNL Viswesariah Jala Nigam Limited 
 

© COMPTROLLER AND  AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA
https://cag.gov.in/ag1/karnataka/en