 
Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
on Performance Audit on  
Implementation of Mahatma Gandhi National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Scheme in Punjab  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Government of Punjab 
Report No. 1 of the year 2023 

i 
Table of Contents  
 
Description Reference to 
Paragraph  Page 
Preface  iii 
Executive Summary  v-viii 
Chapter-I: Introduction  
Introduction 1.1 1 
Audit framework  1.2 3 
Chapter-II: Effectiveness of Planning  
Non-conducting of door-to-door survey 2.1 8 
Deficiencies in issue and updation of Job cards 2.2  9 
Preparation of labour budget 2.3 11 
Non-formation of District Level Technical Committee 2.4 19 
Non-preparation of IEC Plan 2.5 19 
Shortfall in conducting Rozgar Diwas  2.6 21 
Conclusion 2.7 21 
Recommendations 2.8 23 
Chapter-III: Financial Management  
Financial Management 3.1 26 
Pending liability  3.2 28 
Pending compensation for delayed payments to 
workers 3.3 30 
Non-providing of unemployment allowance 3.4 31 
Mismatch of Departmental data with NREGASoft 
data 3.5 32 
Conversion of account into Aadhaar Based Payment 3. 6 33 
Inadmissible expenditure  3.7 35 
Conclusion 3.8 35 
Recommendations 3.9 35 
Chapter-IV: Implementation and Employment Generation  
Sample of selected works 4.1 37 
Generation of Person Days for works executed 4.2 38  
Quality of Works 4.3 48 
Analysis of MIS data 4.4 54 
Conclusion 4.5 60 
Recommendations 4.6 61 

Table of Contents  
ii  
Description 
Reference to 
Paragraph  Page 
Chapter-V:  Grievance Redressal, Monitoring and Internal Control 
Functioning of State Employment Guarantee Council 5 .1 63 
Existence of grievance redressal mechanism 5.2 64 
Non-constitution of Vigilance Cell 5.3 66 
Non-appointment of State and District Quality 
Monitors 5.4 66 
Non-preparation of Citizens’ Charter 5.5 67 
Social Audit 5.6 67 
Shortage of manpower 5.7 70 
Non-planning for capacity building 5.8 72 
Non-coverage of workers under Janashree Bima 
Yojana and Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana 5.9 73 
Mandatory records and their maintenance 5.10 74 
Conclusion 5.11 74 
Recommendations 5.12 75 
Appendices  77 
 

iii 
Preface  
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India for the period 
April 2016 to March 2021 has been prepared for subm ission to the Governor 
of the State of Punjab under Article 151(2) of the Constitution of India.   
The Report contains the results of performance audi t on Implementation of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme in Punjab 
in terms of State’s performance in achieving the ob jectives of the scheme on 
the basis of National Rural Employment Guarantee Ac t 2005, Operational 
Guidelines, 2013 and Master Circulars issued by Gov ernment of India for 
respective years. 
The instances mentioned in this Report are those, w hich came to the notice in 
the course of test audit for the period April 2016 to March 2021 as well as 
those which came to notice in earlier years.  The f indings of Performance 
Audit on “Implementation of Mahatma Gandhi National  Rural Employment 
Guarantee Scheme” printed in the Comptroller and Au ditor General of 
India’s Audit Report for the year ended March 2012 was also evaluated with 
reference to outcomes of Public Accounts Committee meeting held in 
September 2014, May and November 2016 have also bee n included, 
wherever necessary. 
The audit has been conducted in conformity with the  Auditing Standards 
issued by the Comptroller and Auditor General of In dia. 
 

Executive Summary 

v 
Executive Summary 
Productive absorption of under employed and surplus  labour force of the rural 
sector had been a major focus of planning for rural  development.  In order to 
provide direct supplementary wage-employment to the  rural poor through 
public works, many programmes were initiated in the  country.  The situation 
of unemployment was compounded by the absence of an y social security 
mechanism.  There was, therefore, an urgent need to  ensure at least some 
minimum days of employment in the shape of manual l abour to every 
household in the rural areas.  Recognising the urge nt need to ensure certain 
minimum days of wages employment, Government of Ind ia (GoI) passed 
(September 2005), National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (NREGA) with 
a legal guarantee by providing at least 100 days of  guaranteed wage 
employment in a financial year to every household whose adult members were 
ready to do unskilled manual work.  The other objective of the NREGA was to 
create durable assets, to ensure that there is a so urce of livelihood for the 
economically weaker section of the population to pr oactively include the 
weaker section of society and also aims at strength ening of Panchayati Raj 
establishments across India.  The scheme of NREGA w as known as National 
Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme which was rechris tened (October 2009) 
as Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarant ee Scheme 
(MGNREGS). It is a centrally sponsored scheme imple mented on a cost 
sharing basis between the GoI and the State Governm ent. The State 
Government also bears the total expenditure of dela yed payment of the wages 
to the workers, unemployment allowance and administ rative expenses of the 
State Employment Guarantee Council (SEGC). 
Punjab is a rural area dominated State. Out of tota l area of 50,362 square 
kilometre, 48,265 square kilometre of area was unde r rural category. 
Similarly, 62.52 per cent  of the population was rural population. Agriculture is 
the mainstay of the rural population and rural work  force was dependent on 
crop seasons for work. MGNREGS can be implemented effectively in the State 
by synchronising the demand of work by the said labour. 
The United Nations’ member states jointly committed (September 2015) to the 
Sustainable Development Goal (SDG)-1 and 2 which se ek to end poverty in 
all forms everywhere and to end hunger, achieve foo d security and improved 
nutrition. To that extent, this scheme supports the se SDG goals. 
The PA was conducted during July 2021 to April 2022  by covering the period 
of 2016-2021 by test checking the records of Joint Development 
Commissioner-cum-Commissioner (MGNREGS), Punjab.  I n this PA out of 
22 districts, six districts, 12 Blocks (two blocks from each selected district), 
and 120 GPs (10 GPs from each selected blocks) were  selected by adopting 

Performance Audit Report on ‘Implementation of MGNR EGS in Punjab’  
vi 
statistical sampling method i.e. Stratified Random Sampling on expenditure 
basis through IDEA software. Besides, 1,200 benefic iaries were also selected 
randomly to conduct beneficiaries’ survey.  In the selected GPs, 1,573 works 
were completed during 2016-2021, out of which, 551 works were selected for 
physical verification and audit examination. 
Audit examined the planning process for implementat ion of the scheme; the 
allocation, release and utilisation of funds earmar ked for the scheme; 
implementation of the scheme and the achievement of  the relevant Sustainable 
Development Goals;  and the monitoring, internal control and grievance 
redressal mechanism. 
Audit noticed that planning was from top to down. A ssessment of demand had 
not been done through door-to-door and baseline sur veys. The Labour Budget 
prepared, was not realistic in nature. Department, therefore, had resorted to 
calculating the demand taking budget as the basis. The approved budget was 
then distributed down to the districts and the Gram  Panchayats.  Development 
Plans were not prepared at GP level and convergence  works were not 
proposed by the GPs. Rather, these were allocated a t the block level.   District 
Perspective Plans were not prepared despite require ments.  There were 
deficiencies in issuing and updation of Job Cards. IEC activities and Rozgar 
Diwas  were not conducted to spread awareness about the Scheme. 
Funds were released with delays ranging between thr ee and 304 days with an 
average delay of 87 days. Though the scheme is for giving employment to 
those, in need of daily wages; non-payment of wages  defeated the very 
objective of the scheme. Further, harassment of ven dors cannot be ignored as 
well, as the payments due to vendors was running in to crores for each year. 
There was no provision made for compensating the wo rkers for delay in 
payment of wages. Policy for payment of unemploymen t allowance was not 
formulated. There were variations between the NREGA Soft data and the 
certified financial accounts. It was noticed that e xpenditures were irregularly 
incurred on maintenance of old vehicles, civil works and on other items which 
were not covered under the scheme.  Convergence wor ks were decided and 
marked as convergence by the POs and no discussion was held in Gram 
Sabhas.  In this scenario, whether the works were c onvergence works in the 
true sense or not could not be verified in audit. I t could also not be verified 
whether other sector resources were substituted by MGNREGS resources. 
Many of the works taken up were lying incomplete. T he mandatory records 
like Measurement Books and Muster Rolls were not ma intained and the 
NREGAsoft system lacked necessary application contr ol to prevent system 
override for making payments in the absence of vali dated data from MBs. 
Payments were seen to have been released though mea surement were not 
recorded or incompletely recorded in the measuremen t books. It was seen that 

Executive Summary 
vii 
expenditure was being booked against completed work s as well. Work site 
facilities as envisaged were not provided in most o f the cases. No verification 
of bills/vouchers was being done as envisaged. Ther e were cases of 
non-observance of wage to material ratio of 60:40.  The Department had done 
little to maintain transparency in release of payme nts for execution of works. 
In the absence of validation checks, persons were d rawing wages on two job 
cards, simultaneously on different works. Physical verification of certain 
works revealed expenditure rendered unfruitful due to works lying incomplete 
or work lying in various states of disuse. One of t he most glaring discrepancy 
noticed was that during 2016-17 to 2017-18, 28 and 19 per cent  respectively 
of GPs did not generate a single person day of job. 
The envisaged monitoring and steering of the scheme  at the highest level of 
State Employment Guarantee Council (SEGC) was reduc ed to being a 
perfunctory exercise reducing accountability of Exe cutive to the Legislature. 
The mechanism to be set up for monitoring and griev ances redressal were  
dys-functional. In the absence of proper analysis o f manpower requirements, 
initial records and registers were not maintained. These coupled with the lack 
of vigilance and monitoring, made the scheme most s usceptible to misuse of 
funds and frauds. There was no assurance on faithfu l recording of demand and 
payment of wages defeating the objective of the scheme. 
Recommendations: 
In light of the audit findings, the Department need s to conduct baseline and 
door-to-door surveys, so that rights-based entitlem ent can be ensured to the 
eligible beneficiaries. The Department should ensur e to adopt bottom to top 
approach in preparation of Labour Budget. MGNREGS, being a demand 
driven programme, requires the beneficiaries to be aware of their rights. 
Therefore, IEC activities need to be stepped up bes ides organising Rozgar 
Diwas  on regular basis.  
The Department may ensure that funds are released t o the implementing 
agencies in time to avoid delay in utilisation of f unds. It may be ensured that 
timely payment of due wages is made to the workers.  The Department may 
take steps to resolve the issue of non-payment of u nemployment allowance to 
the eligible beneficiaries. It may also take steps to ensure that the expenditure 
is not incurred on prohibited heads of expenditure. 
The Department may ensure the updation of Job Cards  to avoid the irregular 
expenditure from MGNREGS funds by making payment to  deceased workers 
or to double job card holders in a single household . The Department may 
consider clearing the pendency of compensation for delayed payments to 
unskilled workers. The Department may prepare the e stimates for works in a 
manner provided in the operational guidelines. All mandatory record may be 

Performance Audit Report on ‘Implementation of MGNR EGS in Punjab’  
viii 
maintained to ensure transparency. The Department s hould prepare the 
estimates for works in a realistic manner after mak ing proper analysis of 
requisite work. 
The SEGC and the Department need to ensure intensiv e monitoring of the 
Scheme for proper implementation. The SEGC may cons ider undertaking a 
State level, comprehensive, independent evaluation of the Scheme. The 
Department should evolve a proper mechanism to cond uct social audit of all 
the GPs and ensure the timely settlement of gaps ra ised in the social audit 
reports. The Department should reassess the manpowe r requirement and 
ensure that adequate number of staff with requisite  skills are provided for the 
smooth functioning of the scheme. Record maintenanc e at all levels needs to 
be streamlined with sound mechanism of monitoring a nd funds release should 
be linked with proper maintenance/verification of records. 
 

Chapter-I 
Introduction  

1 
Chapter-I 
 
Introduction  
 
1.1 Introduction 
Government of India (GoI) had passed (September 200 5) National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Act (NREGA ) with a legal guarantee of providing, at 
least 100 days of guaranteed wage employment, in a financial year, to every 
household whose adult members volunteer to do unski lled manual work.  The 
other objective of the NREGA was to create durable assets, to ensure that 
there is a source of livelihood for the economicall y weaker section of the 
population to proactively include the weaker sectio n of society and to 
strengthen Panchayati Raj establishments across Ind ia .  The scheme of 
NREGA was rechristened (October 2009) as Mahatma Ga ndhi National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS). It is a cent rally sponsored 
scheme implemented on a cost sharing basis 1 between GoI and the State 
Government. The State Government also bears the tot al expenditure of 
delayed payment of the wages to the workers, unempl oyment allowance and 
administrative expenses of the State Employment Guarantee Council (SEGC). 
Out of total area of 50,362 Square Kilometre (Sq km) in Punjab, 48,265 Sq km 
comes under rural area and out of 2.77 crore population in the State, 1.73 crore 
(62.52  per cent ) is living in the rural area 2. Main occupation of the rural 
population is agriculture and rural labour work for ce is dependent on 
agriculture. As agriculture has a seasonal pattern,  MGNREGS can be 
implemented effectively in the State by synchronisi ng the demand of work 
during the period when agricultural demand is slack. 
India, as part of the United Nations’ member states , jointly committed 
(September 2015) to the Sustainable Development Goa l (SDG)-1 and 2 which 
seeks to end poverty in all forms everywhere and to end hung er, achieve food 
security and improved nutrition. To that extent, th is scheme supports these 
SDG goals.  
1.1.1 Organisational Set-up 
The organisational set up for implementation of the  scheme at different levels 
is as follows: 
 
                                                           
1 The GoI bears the entire cost of wages for unskill ed manual workers, 75 per cent  of the cost of 
material and wages for skilled and semi-skilled wor kers whereas, the State Government bears the 
25 per cent  of the cost of material and wages for skilled and semi-skilled workers. 
2 As per census 2011. 

Performance Audit Report on ‘Implementation of MGNR EGS in Punjab’ 
2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The responsibility of the designated officers at State, districts, blocks and GPs 
levels to implement the MGNREGS is given in Table 1.1 . 
Table 1.1: Responsibilities of designated officers to implement the Scheme 
Level Designated Officers Roles and responsibilities 
State level Financial 
Commissioner, Rural 
Development and 
Panchayat Department 
Provides guidance and support to the 
State Programme Co-ordinator (SPC); 
monitors and co-ordinates with the 
relevant departments; makes rules; 
plans and implements the scheme. 
Joint Development 
Commissioner-cum-
Commissioner 
Co-ordinates with Panchayati Raj 
Institutions (PRIs) and other line 
departments for implementation of the 
scheme Works as State Programme 
 
Co-ordinator (SPC) and Nodal Officer 
of the scheme. 
Director, State 
Employment 
Guarantee Council 
(SEGC) 
Advises State Government, reviews and 
monitors the implementation of the 
scheme and prepares annual reports to 
lay before State Legislature. 
District level 
 
Deputy Commissioner, 
designated as District 
Programme  
Coordinator (DPC)  
Responsible for overall co-ordination 
and implementation of the scheme in 
the district.  
Additional DPCs  Assists the DPC in implementation of 
the scheme. 
Joint Development Commissioner-cum-
Commissioner (JDCC), MGNREGS Punjab 
 
Deputy Commissioner-cum-District Programme 
Coordinator (DPC), MGNREGS 
Additional District Programme Coordinator (ADPC) 
Programme Officer (PO) 
Gram Rozgar Sahayak (GRS) 
Financial Commissioner (FC) Department of Rural 
Development and Panchayats, Punjab 

Chapter-I: Introduction  
3 
Level Designated Officers Roles and responsibilities 
Block level 
 
Block Development 
Programme Officer 
designated as 
Programme Officer 
Responsible for matching demand with 
work and ensures effective 
implementation of the scheme at Block 
level; co-ordinates with the ADPCs and 
consolidates Labour Budget data. 
Assistant Programme 
Officer (APO) 
Assists the Programme Officer, 
 
in-charge of MIS at Block level; 
uploads the work orders, pay orders, 
muster rolls, etc. on MIS. 
Gram 
Panchayat 
(GP) level 
 
Technical Assistant 
(TA) - for a group of 
GPs 
Assists the GPs in preparation of 
estimates and detailed designs, and 
conducts measurement of works.  
Gram Rozgar Sahayak Assists the Panchayat Secretary , 
supervises the works, maintains the 
muster rolls, gives mark outs at work 
sites, maintains the register of material 
procured, maintains the village 
information boards. 
Other 
Implementing 
Agencies 
Departments of Water 
Resources, Agriculture, 
Water Supply and 
Sanitation, Forest, 
Horticulture etc. 
Assists the DPC in implementation of 
the scheme by implementing works 
(other than works implemented by GPs) 
and provides technical support.  
Source: Operational Guidelines, 2013 
1.2  Audit framework  
 
1.2.1 Audit Objectives 
The objectives of the Performance Audit (PA) were to assess whether: 
 the planning process for implementation of the sche me was efficient and 
effective; 
 the allocation, release and utilisation of funds ea rmarked for the scheme 
was judicious, adequate and effective to achieve the goals of the scheme; 
 the implementation of scheme was economical, effici ent and effective 
and in line with achieving the objectives of relevant SDGs; and 
 the monitoring, internal control and grievance redr essal mechanism was 
adequate and effective. 
1.2.2 Audit Criteria 
The audit criteria were mainly derived from the following sources: 
1.  National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005 (amen ded up to 2017) 
and Operational Guidelines, 2013; 

Performance Audit Report on ‘Implementation of MGNR EGS in Punjab’ 
4 
2.  Annual Master Circulars for the period of 2016-17 t o 2020-21 issued by 
the Government of India, Ministry of Rural Development; 
3.  Orders/guidelines/notifications issued by the GoI a nd Government of 
Punjab (GoP);  
4.  Punjab Financial Rules (PFR) and General Financial Rules (GFR); and  
5.  State Employment Guarantee Fund Rules. 
The Comptroller and Auditor General of India’s Report on Social, General and 
Economic Sectors (Non Public Sector Undertakings) f or the year ended 
31 March 2012 (Paragraph 2.2-Implementation of Maha tma Gandhi National 
Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme) brought out seve ral areas of concern 
such as; improper preparation of labour budget, sho rt release of State’s share, 
diversion of funds, non/delayed issue of job cards,  execution of impermissible 
works, irregularities in muster rolls and lack of t ransparency and 
accountability towards implementation of programme.   The Report was 
discussed (September 2014, May and November 2016) i n the Public Accounts 
Committee (PAC). Audit also examined the compliance  with 
recommendations of the PAC. 
1.2.3 Audit scope and methodology 
An entry conference was held on 09 August 2021 with  JDCC (MGNREGS), 
wherein audit objectives, criteria, scope and metho dology were discussed.  
The PA was conducted for the period 2016-2021 by te st checking the records 
of JDCC (MGNREGS), Punjab and offices in the sample . In the PA, out of 
22 districts, six districts 
3 covering12 Blocks (two blocks from each selected 
district), and 120 GPs (10 GPs from each selected b lock) were selected 
(Appendix 1.1) by adopting Stratified Random Sampling method on 
expenditure basis through IDEA software.  Besides, 1,200 beneficiaries 4 
(10 beneficiaries 5 in each selected GP) were also selected randomly to conduct 
beneficiaries’ survey.  In the selected GPs, 1,573 works were completed 
during 2016-2021, out of which, 551 works 6 were selected for physical 
verification.  
  
                                                           
3 (i) Amritsar; (ii) Ferozepur; (iii) Jalandhar; (iv ) Moga; (v) Sangrur; and (vi) SAS Nagar. 
4 It includes 103 Below Poverty Line persons who were  not covered under the scheme as job cards 
 were not issued to them.  
5 Two persons belonged to BPL families who were not part of the scheme. 
6 Five completed works in each GP, subject to availa bility of works. In these works, two works in 
each GP relating to Line department were included. 

Chapter-I: Introduction  
5 
Figure 1.1: Location of selected Districts and Blocks 
 
For the PA, the records maintained at head office l evel and districts, blocks 
and GPs level were scrutinised during July 2021 to April 2022. The results of 
beneficiary survey have been included under the rel evant findings.  The 
pictorial evidences of selected works were also gat hered and used in the PA to 
strengthen the audit observations, wherever necessa ry.  In the selected units, 
the maintenance of records was poor, as prescribed basic records were not 
found maintained. Hence, Audit was forced to use da ta entered in the 
NREGASoft 7 (MIS data), which was unreliable.  Audit observed that the data 
was being uploaded in MIS at Programme Officer (PO)  level on the basis of 
verbal information provided by the GRS. 
The Exit Conference was held on 16 September 2022 a nd response of the 
Department has been included in the Report. 
1.2.4 Acknowledgement  
We acknowledge the co-operation extended by the Rur al Development 
Department, JDCC, selected DPCs, ADPCs, POs and GPs  during the conduct 
of performance audit. 
                                                           
7 It is a web enabled application, developed by GoI to capture the real time data of the scheme. 


Chapter-II 
Effectiveness of Planning 

7 
Chapter-II 
 
Effectiveness of Planning 
The Department did not undertake baseline and door- to-door survey so 
that rights-based entitlement could be ensured to t he eligible 
beneficiaries. This resulted in Labour Budget getti ng prepared on the 
basis of ad hoc figures and generation of projected PDs on the basi s of 
budget rather than demand. The Development Plans an d District 
Perspective Plans were also not prepared.  Serious deficiencies in issuing 
and updating of Job Cards (JC) were noticed which r endered them 
useless as original and initial records of employme nt given to the JC 
holders were not maintained. IEC activities and Rozgar Diwas  were not 
conducted as required to spread awareness about the Scheme.  
Participatory planning is most critical for the successful implementation of any 
Scheme.  MGNREGS is a demand driven programme for t imely generation of 
employment. Therefore, it is expected that Gram Pan chayats identify their 
own needs to create infrastructure or quality asset s for their community and 
put their demand in proposals and get them sanction ed from the block and 
district administrations. In MGNREGS policy framewo rk, bottom-up 
approach is adopted, and decentralisation of power is institutionalised. 
The Job Card is a key document that records workers ’ entitlements under 
MGNREGS. It legally empowers the registered househo lds to apply for work, 
ensures transparency and protects workers against f raud. Under the planning 
process, the Department was required to issue job c ards after verification, 
conduct the base line survey, door-to-door survey a nd prepare the Labour 
Budget (LB).  The key process of issuing of job card is given in Chart 2.1 . 
Chart 2.1: Process of issuing of job cards 
 
Source: Operational Guidelines, 2013 

Performance Audit Report on ‘Implementation of MGNR EGS in Punjab’  
8 
Audit analysed the data of selected districts, bloc ks and Gram Panchayats 
(GPs) and it was noticed that receipt of applicatio ns, verification thereof and 
processes of issuance of job cards was not done as prescribed in the 
guidelines, and the findings are discussed in the succeeding paragraphs. 
2.1 Non-conducting of door-to-door survey 
Para 3.1.1 (ii) of Operational Guidelines, 2013 pro vides that a door-to-door 
survey should be undertaken by each GP every year t o identify eligible 
households who have been missed out and wish to be registered under the Act. 
It needs to be ensured that this survey is held at that time of the year when 
people have not migrated to other areas in search o f employment or for other 
reasons. 
• During field audit (September 2021 to April 2022) i t was observed that no 
door-to-door survey was conducted by the POs during  2016-2021. Further, 
the application register required for registration of JC holders were also not 
maintained. In the absence of JC application register, Audit could not verify 
the effectiveness of the process adopted at the operational level. 
• In addition to that, Audit came across 18 cases in 14 GPs, where work was 
executed in the name of dead JC holders (as discussed in Chapter-IV) and 
payments were made.  Audit checked the muster rolls  of these cases and it 
was noticed that even the attendance was recorded i n the name of the dead 
JC holders.  
• In 315 cases of 37 GPs, two job cards were issued t o a single household 
(HH) against the norms of the scheme. Out of these,  31 JC holders had got 
work on both the JCs. Thus, deficiencies in the reg istration process had led 
to inclusion and exclusion errors in the registration process.  
Results of Beneficiary Survey: 
 
 
 
 1,097 beneficiaries were 
registered under the scheme  
103 people were BPL card 
holders but were not 
registered 
983 people registered on 
verbal and 114 on written 
requests, interested in the 
scheme for work 
68 people showed their interest to register 
but were still to register under the scheme. 
Total 1,200 Beneficiaries 

Chapter-II: Effectiveness of Planning  
9 
The survey showed that 160 (14.59 per cent ) beneficiaries got their Job cards 
after prescribed limit of 15 days. However, as the crucial records were not 
maintained, Audit could not verify the contention.  
The analysis of these selected beneficiaries’ JCs s howed that 356 
(32.45 per cent ) job cards were without photographs and no work en try was 
found in 812 (74.02 per cent ) job cards.  Such faulty Job Cards would not 
enable verification or social audit of employment generated.   
Further, the beneficiaries during the beneficiary s urvey had confirmed that no 
door-to-door survey was undertaken. As the exercise  was not undertaken, the 
authorities could not assess the requirements of th e beneficiaries.  The 
indifferent attitude of the Department is also evid ent from the fact that it did 
not make any effort to conduct door-to-door survey despite the Public 
Accounts Committee (PAC) recommendations (September  2014) to conduct 
door-to-door survey and maintain proper records. 
In the exit conference, the Department assured that  the verification would be 
conducted from October 2022.  The fact remains that  accuracy of information 
was not ensured in the most basic records making th e scheme very susceptible 
to frauds.  The Department needs to strengthen its feedback mechanism to 
quickly respond to complaints of omission and commi ssion so that the rural 
poor do not get excluded from the scheme and the un scrupulous elements do 
not get enriched from the scheme. 
2.2 Deficiencies in issue and updation of Job cards  
Para 3.1.2 (i) of Operational Guidelines, 2013 stip ulates that a household 
having adult members desirous of seeking unskilled employment in 
MGNREGS may apply for registration. The application  for registration may 
be given on plain paper to the local Gram Panchayat . Application for 
registration must be made on behalf of the househol d by any adult member. 
However, all members included in the application should be local 1 residents.  
Para 3.1.4 (ii) (d) provides that it is mandatory t o take the Household ID 2 at 
the time of registration of beneficiaries in NREGASoft. 
Further para 3.1.5 (xii) explained that all entries  in the JC should be duly 
authenticated by means of signature of an authorised officer . 
Further, Para 3.1.5 (i) stipulates that if a househ old is found to be eligible for 
registration, the GP will, within a fortnight of the receipt of application, issue a 
                                                           
1 Local implies residing within the GP and includes families of that area that may have migrated some 
time ago but may return. 
2  Name of applicant, Individual Photo of applicant, Aadhaar Number, etc.  

Performance Audit Report on ‘Implementation of MGNR EGS in Punjab’  
10 
JC to the household. Para 10.3.5 stipulates that Jo b Card Application Register 
is required to be maintained at GP level by the Panchayat Secretary. 
Audit noticed various shortcomings in the selected GPs as detailed below: 
The application register for registration was not m aintained at GP level except 
GP under Lohian Block.  Therefore, Audit could not verify whether the 
beneficiary, who had applied for registration, was able to register or not. 
Job Card Registers of workers were not maintained a t GP level except GPs 
under Lohian Block.  Therefore the authenticity of issuance of job card within 
a period of 15 days as desired under the Right to S ervice Act, 2011 could not 
be ascertained.  
Further, proofs of job card updation like marking o f attendance on job cards, 
payments made so far, work demanded by the benefici aries, affixing of 
photographs on the job cards as well as on job card register were not found.  
Test check of records of NREGASoft of selected bloc ks revealed that no 
records related to photo identity of JC holders, wa s found maintained at GP 
level though the JCs were issued on NREGASoft.  Mor eover, during physical 
verification 85 beneficiaries were found without ph ysical job cards.  In the 
absence of this, identity of registered beneficiary could not be verified in audit. 
Beneficiary Survey: 
Shortcomings noticed during Beneficiaries survey 
No. of 
Beneficiaries 
No. of 
Beneficiaries 
Without 
physical job 
card 
Without 
Photograph 
No entry of 
employment 
demanded by 
JC holder 
No entry of 
number of days 
employment 
provided 
No entry of 
Payment 
made to 
beneficiaries 
Job cards 
given to the 
JC Holder 
after 15 days 
1,097 85 356 812 (No work entry was found) 160 
The Department replied (October 2022) that due to r ush of works and having 
charge of 15-20 GPs with one GRS, these registers could not be maintained. In 
respect of identity of JC holders, it was replied t hat at the time of registration, 
IDs were taken from the beneficiaries but due to no n-availability of shelf and 
infrastructure, copies of IDs could not be stored.  The reply is untenable 
because it is not expected that copies of IDs are s tored in a shelf.  The issue is 
that Department was not maintaining the required re gisters of applicants, JC 
holders and was also not recording the details of b eneficiaries and the works 
allotted to them and authenticating the records as required under the rules.   
The fact remains that due to failure of the Departm ent to maintain requisite 
records such as application register, job card regi ster, marking of attendance 
on job cards, affixing photographs on job cards, fa ke/fictitious payments to 
ghost workers could not be ruled out.  

Chapter-II: Effectiveness of Planning  
11 
2.3 Preparation of labour budget 
The process of preparation of Labour Budget is depicted in Chart 2.2  below:  
Chart 2.2: System for preparation of labour budget 
 
Source: Operational Guidelines, 2013 
Before preparation of labour budget, various activi ties need to be completed 
first such as: 
• conducting of baseline survey to assess the quantum  and timing of 
demand for work; 
• preparation of Development Plan and shelf of projects; 
• preparation of District Perspective Plan to identif y the needs and gaps 
in the districts in all the sectors; and 
• adherence of timeline in preparation of labour budget, etc. 
However, in preparation of Labour Budget various de ficiencies/irregularities 
were noticed which are discussed in the succeeding paragraphs: 
2.3.1 Non-conducting of baseline survey  
Para 6.2 (i) of Operational Guidelines, 2013 stipul ated that a survey of job 
card holders was to be mandatorily conducted in eve ry GP, in order to prepare 
a base line to assess the quantum and timing of dem and for employment in the 
GP. Expert institutions were to be empaneled separa tely in each State to 
finalise the framework and methodology. The pilots for baseline survey was to 
be done in 2012-13 so that the surveys for all GPs were completed in 2013-14. 
Scrutiny of records (July 2021) revealed that neith er baseline survey was 
conducted nor expert institution was empaneled with in the prescribed time 
frame i.e., before or after 2013-14.  It was also o bserved that the baseline 
survey was not conducted during the period 2016-202 1. In the absence of the 

Performance Audit Report on ‘Implementation of MGNR EGS in Punjab’  
12 
survey, GPs could not ascertain the actual demand o f work from the 
beneficiaries, nature of works to be carried out an d timing of demand for 
employment due to which a realistic development pla n could not be prepared 
at the grass root level i.e. by the involvement of GPs. Moreover, in the absence 
of baseline survey, the Department could not access  distress migration of 
households. 
The Department stated (September 2022) that though no baseline survey was 
conducted but Gram Panchayat Development Plan (GPDP ) had been prepared 
from 2021-22. The reply of the Department should be  seen in the light of the 
fact that due to non-conducting of baseline survey,  actual demand of works 
could not be taken into account resulting in unreal istic preparation of 
Development Plan and the Labour Budget. Consequentl y, it was not possible 
to correlate the person days created, wages paid against the work done.  So the 
correctness of the payments for development works could not be ascertained.  
2.3.2 Non-preparation of Development Plan 
Para 6.3 of Operational Guidelines, 2013 provides t hat the projects to be taken 
up as part of the Labour Budget should emerge from an integrated plan for 
local development with focus on Natural Resource Ma nagement especially on 
a micro watershed basis so that sustainable livelih oods are created. The needs 
of the people may be identified through consultatio ns with different 
stakeholders like MGNREGS workers, Self Help Groups  (SHGs), small and 
marginal farmers, Watershed Committees and agricult ural labour and their 
needs identified and prioritised.  Special efforts should be taken to include the 
priorities suggested by SCs and STs. 
Audit observed that the Development Plans were not prepared by the GPs.  
Since Development plans play a pivotal role in impl ementing the scheme, 
therefore, in absence of development plan, the Depa rtment could not ascertain 
the labour demand, identify works to meet estimated  labour demand or 
estimate the cost of works and wages and benefits e xpected in terms of 
employment generated along with physical improvemen ts. Thus, the 
Department failed to identify the needs and resourc es of different stakeholders 
as prescribed in the guidelines ibid.   Moreover, overall development of the 
GPs could not take place as convergence works were not included in the 
development plans. 
The Department replied (October 2022) that no instr uctions had been issued 
by the higher authority to prepare the development plan. The reply is not 
acceptable because scheme guidelines clearly reflec t the importance of 
preparation of Development Plans. 

Chapter-II: Effectiveness of Planning  
13 
Thus, there was no holistic deliberate approach to plan for works based on 
local development priorities to derive benefits for  the local population, 
particularly the vulnerable groups.   
2.3.3 Non-preparation of District Perspective Plan 
Paras 15.3.1 and 15.3.1.1 of Operational Guidelines , 2013 provide that for 
implementation of convergence a District Perspectiv e Plan (DPP) should be 
prepared by the DPC which identifies the needs and gaps in the districts in all 
the sectors. This plan is a multi-year plan for dif ferent departmental projects 
and requires to be included in the Development Plan of the GP. It also requires 
maintaining of a shelf of possible works to be take n up under the Scheme as 
and when demand for works arises. 
Scrutiny of records revealed that the DPP was not p repared in the selected 
districts, though the convergence works had been in cluded in the shelf of 
projects, without any DPP.  Thus, needs and gaps of  all the sectors in the 
districts, with reference to convergence could not be identified. 
The Department stated (September 2022) that the exe rcise of preparing DPP 
was unfruitful as the scheme was on demand basis an d the shelf of projects 
was to be prepared by the GPs concerned.  The reply  of the Department was 
not tenable because the scheme sought to bring into  focus the local 
development needs with focus on natural resource ma nagement and 
development of micro watersheds to create sustainab le livelihoods for the 
people and demand was to be met from employment gen erated from such 
projects.  Further, though the Department claimed t hat the shelf of projects 
was to be prepared by the GPs concerned but in real ity, it was being decided 
by the PO without the involvement of the GPs.  
2.3.4 Non-adherence to timeline in preparation of L abour Budget  
Para 6 of the Operational Guidelines, 2013 provides  the steps required for 
setting up systems, to accurately record demand for  work by wage-seekers. 
Before recording demand, one needs to make a prior assessment of the 
quantum of work likely to be demanded and also to a scertain the timing of 
such demand. Concomitantly, a shelf of projects is to be prepared and 
prioritised to meet this demand. This matching of d emand and supply of work 
is the process of planning under MGNREGS, and this is to be achieved 
through the preparation of a Labour Budget (LB). Th e LB, thus, covers two 
aspects viz. assessment of quantum and timing of de mand for work and 
preparation of a shelf of projects to meet demand f or works within the 
prescribed time. 

Performance Audit Report on ‘Implementation of MGNR EGS in Punjab’  
14 
Government of India (MoRD) issued (August 2016) directions to all the States 
to take up a time bound participatory planning exer cise followed with other 
relevant activities to ensure timely and realistic preparation of LB.  
The time frame for preparation and submission of LB at every level is given in 
Chart 2.3 . 
Chart 2.3: Time frame for finalisation and submission of labour budget  
 
However, Audit noticed various discrepancies in pre paration and following of 
timeline at every level as discussed in succeeding paragraphs: 
(i)  Irregular change in number and nature of works at Block level 
The details of preparation of LB by GPs, submitted to Block and consolidated 
at Block and District levels for the year 2016-2021 is given in Table 2.1. 
Table 2.1: Labour Budget proposals bottom to top approach in respect of 120 
selected GPs 
Sr. 
No. 
Particular 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 
1. LB proposed by the No. of GPs 75 69 74 95 93 
2. LB not proposed by the No. of GPs 45 51 46 25 27 
3. Proposed No. of works by GPs (Out of details 
of Sr. No. 1) 
490 544 591 930 964 
4. No. of works included in the LB by the blocks 
(Out of Sr. No. 3) 
201 303 363 524 674 
5. LB was not proposed by GPs but included in 
LB at Block level (Out of Sr. No. 2) 
31 40 24 16 22 
6. LB proposed by GPs but proposals not included 
in LB at Block level (Out of Sr. No. 1) 
42 35 34 40 37 
7. No. of GPs who passed their LB proposals after 
the due date of submission to the district by the 
block (Out of Sr. No. 1) 
9 13 11 59 25 
8. No. of GPs who passed their LB proposal after 
the due date of submission to the State by the 
District (Out of Sr. No. 7) 
6 9 7 9 7 
Source: Departmental data  

Chapter-II: Effectiveness of Planning  
15 
Analysis of the table revealed that out of selected 120 GPs: 
• GPs ranging between 69 and 95 submitted their propo sals of LB  
(Appendix 2.1 ) whereas GPs ranging between 25 and 51 did not submi t 
their proposals of LB during 2016-2021 (Appendix 2.1). 
• GPs ranging between 16 and 40 had not submitted the ir proposal for LB. 
However, Works had been included in LB at Block lev el without any 
involvement of the GPs (Appendix 2.1). 
• GPs had submitted their LB proposals by including t he works ranging 
between 490 and 964 works, against which the LBs th at were consolidated 
at Block level had works ranging between 201 and 67 4 during 2016-2021. 
This change in works had happened without involveme nt of the GPs 
concerned as required under provision ibid (Appendix 2.1). 
• The LB proposals of GPs ranging between 34 and 42 w ere not included in 
the LB proposals of blocks despite timely submissio n of LB proposals by 
these GPs (Appendix 2.1). 
• GPs ranging between 9 and 59 had submitted their LB  proposal to the 
Block after submission of LB by block to the DPC.  Further, out of these 
GPs, the GPs ranging between 6 and 9 submitted the LB proposal after 
submission of LB proposal by DPC to State Authority (Appendix 2.1). 
• In selected 10 GPs of Rayya block, the labour budge t was prepared on the 
basis of funds without incorporating number of work s during 2016-17 and 
2018-19 whereas during 2017-18, the LB was prepared  by including only 
one work in each GP . 
Thus though the works were executed, they were not as per demands of GPs. 
(ii) Delay in submission of labour budget 
• Five blocks, while sending the proposals of LB to t he districts concerned, 
did not mention any date. Therefore, it could not b e ascertained as to 
whether these blocks submitted their proposal in ti me, as per the stipulated 
schedule. 
• Seven blocks 
3 during 2017-18 and six blocks 4 during 2018-21 submitted 
their LB proposal after due date. 
• Four blocks- Ghal Khurd, Sangrur, Malerkotla-2 and Zira (during 2018-19) 
were also not following the practice of preparing a nd submitting the GP 
wise LB proposals during 2016-2021. In absence of w hich, inclusion of 
selected GPs’ proposal in block LB proposal, could not be verified . 
                                                           
3 (i) Moga-1; (ii) Baghapurana; (iii) Majri; (iv) Kha rar; (v) Sangrur;  (vi) Malerkotla ; and (vii) Rayya. 
4 (i) Moga-1; (ii) Baghapurana; (iii) Majri; (iv) Kharar; (v) Sangrur; and (vi) Malerkotla. 

Performance Audit Report on ‘Implementation of MGNR EGS in Punjab’  
16 
• SAS Nagar district during 2020-21 and Sangrur distr ict during 2017-18 
passed their LBs after finalisation of LB by the Go I. Passing of LB after 
the date of its presentation to the GOI defeated th e purpose of preparation 
of labour budget. 
• The District Panchayat of the Sangrur passed the LB  of 2017-18 after the 
due date of its submission to the State while the D istrict Panchayat of 
Ferozepur passed LB after due date during 2017-2021 . Two districts 5 had 
not got passed its LB from the District panchayat d uring 2016-2021.  
District Panchayat of SAS Nagar passed LB after due date during 2017-18,  
2019-20 and 2020-21. In Jalandhar district, LB was approved by the 
district panchayat on 21.03.2017 whereas the LB was  sent to the State by 
DPC Jalandhar on 29.12.2016 without approval of District Panchayat.  
• One district 6 issued separate directions every year to its block  offices to 
ensure completion of the works in the GPs within th e person days fixed by 
the district.  
In addition to the above it was noticed that Depart ment of Rural Development 
and Panchayats issued (September 2015) directions t o all the districts to 
prepare labour budget of ₹ 1,300.00 crore to generate 3,71,42,857 PDs for the 
year 2016-17. Each district was also directed to pr epare its LB by projecting 
the PDs according to the directions.  This signifie s that the Department 
adopted top-to-bottom approach instead of bottom-to -top approach in 
preparing LB and thereby, leading to limited participation of the panchayati raj 
institutions in the preparation of a LB. Without pa rticipatory planning derived 
out of surveys, the labour budget exercise was redu ced to a mere act of fitting 
the numbers to the approved budget of the Department.  
The GPs proposed their LBs in terms of number of wo rks and/or amount only 
instead of prescribed labour budget format 7. There was no uniformity in 
preparation of LB at GP level. According to the pro posal of GPs, utilisation of 
labour/person-days and material was neither assesse d at the GP level nor at 
block level.  No records relating to the preparatio n of rough cost estimates to 
assess the cost of labour/person-days and material on proposed works were 
found prepared at block level.  Convergence works were also not part of LB at GP 
level. The addition and deletion of works in labour budget  was done at block 
level, without any proposal, which shows the arbitr ary/ ad hoc  approach of the 
Department.  This shows that annual LBs were prepar ed on presumption basis 
and the figures of projected person days are arbitrary and vague.  
                                                           
5 (i) Amritsar and (ii) Moga. 
6 Amritsar. 
7 Annexure 10 of Operational Guidelines of MGNREGS 20 13. 

Chapter-II: Effectiveness of Planning  
17 
The Department accepted the fact and assured (Septe mber 2022) that 
necessary directions would be issued to the field o ffices. Compliance was 
awaited (November 2022). 
However, the fact remains that the Department faile d to make any effort to 
adopt a bottom-up approach, depriving the GPs of th e opportunity to identify 
their own needs to create infrastructure for their community.  
These shortcomings in planning had repercussions on  the State level budget 
planning which has been explained in the para below. 
2.3.5 Gap in projected and achieved person days 
Para 6.1.3 of Operational Guidelines, 2013 provides  that DPC has to ensure 
strict adherence to the principle of bottom-up appr oach from planning to 
approval of the selected shelf of projects by each of the Gram Sabhas in the 
district.  
Audit observed that the LB was not prepared in a bo ttom-up approach as 
following shortcomings were noticed during audit: 
• The work proposals prepared by the GPs were not bei ng consolidated at 
block level, as no records relating to compilation of GPs proposals was 
maintained in blocks and annual LBs were prepared o n the presumption 
basis at block level.  This resulted into non-parti cipation of GPs in the 
preparation of LB. 
• In one selected district – Amritsar, a difference r anging between 
45,714 PDs and 2,12,940 
8 PDs was noticed between the proposals 
received from the blocks and consolidated in the district/State. 
It was also observed that changes in the PDs of LB were made by the district 
on the verbal directions of the JDCC office.  The c hanges made in the 
proposal of LB were not intimated to the Blocks/GPs concerned.  
The JDCC office did not maintain records related to  compilation of LB 
proposals received from the districts.  As a result  of this, huge variation 
between projected and actually generated PDs was no ticed during 2016-21 as 
discussed below: 
                                                           
8 
Year PDs received from Block PDs consolidated in District/State Difference 
2016-17 15,05,567 12,92,627 2,12,940 
2017-18 14,78,612 14,03,670 74,942 
2018-19 17,03,085 17,82,010 78,925 
2019-20 23,81,486 23,25,529 55,957 
2020-21 37,90,423 37,44,709 45,714 
 

Performance Audit Report on ‘Implementation of MGNR EGS in Punjab’  
18 
Table 2.2: PDs proposed, approved and actual generation in the State 
(Figures in lakh ) 
Year No. of PDs 
projected 
in LB 
No. of PDs 
approved 
by GoI 
No. of PDs 
actually 
generated 
Revised 
approval of 
PDs by GoI 
Short 
approval 
of PDs 
Shortfall in PDs 
with reference 
to projected 
Excess generation 
of PDs against 
original approval  
1 2 3 4 5 6 (4-5) 7(2-4) 8 (4-3) 
2016-17 383.66 137.56 157.73 Not accorded 20.17 225 .93(59) 20.17 (14.66) 
2017-18 446.86 180.00 223.13 218.00 5.13 223.73 (50 ) 43.13 (23.96) 
2018-19 509.23 150.00 204.49 2,00.00 4.49 304.74 (6 0) 54.49 (36.33) 
2019-20 527.43 200.00 235.25 234.00 1.25 292.18 (55 ) 35.25 (17.63) 
2020-21 659.77 250.00 376.87 360.00 16.87 282.90 (4 3) 126.87 (50.75) 
Total 2,526.95 917.56 1,197.47     
Source: Departmental data   
Note: Figures in parenthesis indicate percentage. 
From the above table it is evident that: 
• Due to non-adoption of scientific criteria provided  in the guidelines, 
huge shortfall in achievement of projected PDs, ran ging between 43 and 
60 per cent  was noticed. Excess generation of PDs ranging betw een 
14.66 per cent and 50.75 per cent over the GoI approved PDs was noticed 
during 2016-2021. 
• Though, the provision to revise the LB existed, rev ised LB was not got 
approved as per actually generated PDs. GoI short a pproved PDs ranging 
between 1,25,000 and 16,87,000.  It is pertinent to  mention that the excess 
generation of PDs for the year 2016-17 was not appr oved by GoI 
(May 2022). As a result of this, irregular payments  amounting 
₹ 114.08 crore beyond the approval of GoI were made during 2016-2021. 
Similarly, the variation in projected PDs and actua l generation of PDs in 
the selected districts was also noticed. 
• Shortfall in achievement of projected PDs ranging b etween 23.19 and 
94.91 per cent  during 2016-2021 was noticed in the selected distr icts.  In 
Ferozepur, the PDs were generated, in excess during  2016-17  
(Appendix 2.2).  In the selected blocks, the shortfall in achieveme nt of 
projected PDs, was ranging between 12.18 per cent and 89.26 per cent 
(Appendix 2.3 ). This indicated that the LB did not originate fro m 
proposals, submitted at GP level and the modificati ons in number and 
nature of works at block and District level were made.  
• The labour budget was not prepared at GP level due to which frequent 
changes in the number and nature of works approved at block and district 
levels were made. As a result, projected PDs could not be approved 
from GoI. 
While admitting the facts, the Department stated (S eptember 2022) that some 
districts, did not prepare labour budget in a reali stic manner and assured to 
issue directions to the field offices, to prepare t he labour budget in a realistic 
manner. Further, the Department assured to streamline the preparation of LB. 

Chapter-II: Effectiveness of Planning  
19 
The fact remains that the projection of man-days wa s not derived from the 
door-to-door or baseline surveys. Also, no shelf of  works based on the felt 
needs of the community was prepared at any level. S o, the projections made 
were without any basis. Again, no assurance can be drawn on the correctness 
of the demand shown, and payments made.  This requi res internal inquiry by 
the Department as various unauthorised payments suc h as payment to double 
job card holders, dead workers etc. came to notice in audit as discussed in 
Paragraph 4.2.6.   
While discussing the CAG’s Report for the year ende d March 2012 
(Paragraph 2.2.7.2), PAC advised (September 2014) t he Department to see the 
matter in future. However, it was observed that the Department did not comply 
with the advice of the highest Legislative authority of the State. 
2.4 Non-formation of District Level Technical Commi ttee  
Para 4.4.3 of Operational Guidelines, 2013 provides  that a District-level 
Technical Committee may be formed at district-level , to guide the 
implementation of the Act. The District Level Techn ical Committee must 
comprise district officers, from the relevant techn ical departments 
representatives of NGOs and the academic community.  The Committee will 
examine shelf of project, preparation of district s pecific schedule of rates for 
common tasks under MGNREGS, determine the rates, qu ality parameters and 
list of suppliers for the district for the material , and will lay down norms to 
ensure quality of assets being created under MGNREGS. 
Audit observed in five selected districts 9 that no District Level Technical 
Committee was formed to provide guidance for the im plementation of 
MGNREGS. In absence of this, GP and Block Developme nt Plans could not 
be examined on the basis of technical consideration s and the district level 
development priorities.  Therefore, possibility of over/under-estimation of cost 
of work and time overrun could not be ruled out. Te chnical soundness of the 
works in terms of the quality of the assets could not be watched as well.  
The Department admitted the facts (September 2022) and assured to issue 
directions to the field offices to form technical c ommittees.  However, 
compliance was awaited (November 2022). 
2.5 Non-preparation of Information, Education and 
Communication Plan 
Para 5.4.2 of Operational Guidelines, 2013 provides  that all States should 
develop an Information, Education and Communication  (IEC) plan of the 
scheme with focus on reaching out to the registered  workers as well as other 
                                                           
9 (i) Amritsar; (ii) Ferozepur; (iii) Jalandhar; (iv ) Moga; and (v) SAS Nagar. 

Performance Audit Report on ‘Implementation of MGNR EGS in Punjab’  
20 
groups which could benefit from the scheme. The IEC  plan should clearly 
indicate State, District, Block and local level activities. 
Audit observed that no IEC plan was prepared at Sta te, district and block level 
during 2016-2021. In Amritsar district, IEC activit ies were conducted during 
2016-2021. However, no IEC activity was conducted d uring 2017-18 and  
2020-2021 in Sangrur district and during 2016-17, 2 017-18 and 2019-21 in 
Ferozepur district. Though, a few activities like w all paintings, printing of 
pamphlets and job cards were conducted at Ferozepur  and Sangrur, no 
organised or systematic effort was made by the dist ricts to execute the IEC 
activities.  
Beneficiaries survey results 
Due to non-preparation of IEC plan, following point s were noticed during 
survey of 1097 beneficiaries: 
• 198 (18.05 per cent ) beneficiaries were not aware about the entitlemen t of 
wages. 
• 568 (51.78 per cent ) beneficiaries were not aware about the timelines of 
payment of wages; 
• 218 (19.87 per cent ) beneficiaries were not aware about the minimum 10 0 
days of employment during a financial year. 
• 45 (4.10 per cent ) beneficiaries were not aware about the muster roll; and 
• 57 (5.20 per cent ) beneficiaries stated that the selection of works was not 
discussed with them in the Gram Sabha meetings. 
Thus, non-preparation of IEC plan had adversely aff ected the outcome of the 
scheme as the stakeholders were not aware about the  scheme. Further, it has 
eroded the authority of the stakeholders as the asy mmetrical/skewed 
information has made the government official immune and non-accountable. 
The Department admitted the facts (September 2022) and agreed to prepare 
the IEC plan.  However, compliance was awaited (November 2022). 
Thus, non-preparation of IEC plan led to the intend ed beneficiaries remaining 
unaware of the provisions of the scheme.  
While discussing the CAG’s Report for the year ende d March 2012 
(Paragraph 2.2.7.2), PAC advised (September 2014) t o formulate cluster and 
committee to spread awareness amongst the people.  However, no committee 
was constituted which shows indifferent approach of the Department. 

Chapter-II: Effectiveness of Planning  
21 
2.6 Shortfall in conducting Rozgar Diwas  
Para 3.3 (i) of Operational Guidelines, 2013 provid es that every GP should 
organise a Rozgar Diwas  at least once every month.  At this event, the GP 
should pro-actively invite applications for work fr om potential workers for the 
current, as well as, subsequent quarters.  The ‘Emp loyment Guarantee Day’ 
should be earmarked for processing work application s and related activities 
such as disclosure of information, allocation of wo rk, payment of wages and 
payment of unemployment allowances. Further, para 1 1 of Guidelines for 
Rozgar Diwas  provides that the DPC will submit the compiled rep ort of the 
district to the State Rural Development Department, on a monthly basis. 
Audit observed various shortcomings in respect of o rganising of Rozgar 
Diwas  during 2016-2021:  
• Out of selected 120 GPs, in 43 GPs of eight blocks 10 , no Rozgar Diwas  
was organised.  In remaining 77 GPs, the shortfall in organising of Rozgar 
Diwas  was ranging between 78.33 per cent and 98.33 per cent 
(Appendix 2.4). 
• Out of selected 12 blocks, in five blocks 11 , the shortfall in organising of 
Rozgar Diwas  ranged between 84.70 and 100 per cent .  In seven selected 
blocks 12 , the data of organising the Rozgar Diwas  was not maintained 
(Appendix 2.5). 
• Out of six selected districts, in four districts 13  the data regarding Rozgar 
Diwas  was not maintained.  In two districts, there was s hortfall in 
organising the Rozgar Diwas  ranging between 82.04 per cent and 
98.32 per cent  during 2016-2021 (Appendix 2.5). 
The Department admitted the facts (September 2022) and assured to conduct 
the Rozgar Diwas  on last Friday of each Month.  However, compliance  was 
awaited (November 2022). 
2.7  Conclusion 
Punjab has a very unique structure of agricultural labour. As per one 
estimate 14 , the migrant workers constituted 23 per cent  of the agricultural 
workforce of the state in 2007 and in absolute numb ers, it was 8,00,000. 
Besides, there was original rural population of Pun jab which needed 
employment under the scheme. The Department did not  have latest data 
                                                           
10  (i) Ghall Khurd; (ii) Kharar; (iii) Mazri; (iv) Mog a-I; (v) Lohian; (vi) Rayya; (vii) Sangrur; and 
(viii) Verka. 
11  (i) Ghall Khurd; (ii) Zira; (iii) Sangrur; (iv) Ma lerkotla-II; and (v) Mehatpur. 
12  (i) Baghapurana; (ii) Kharar; (iii) Lohian; (iv) Ma jri; (v) Moga-I; (vi) Rayya; and (vii) Verka. 
13  (i) Amritsar; (ii) Jalandhar; (iii) Moga; and (iv)  SAS Nagar. 
14   Wiley Public Health Emergency Collection. 

Performance Audit Report on ‘Implementation of MGNR EGS in Punjab’  
22 
regarding the Below Poverty Line (BPL) persons of t his rural population.  
As per the estimates of 2011-12 15 , the BPL persons in 2011-12 was  
7.7 per cent  of rural population. Based on the census figures o f 2010-11 and 
making an approximation based on estimates of Plann ing Commission of 
India, the BPL persons in Punjab translated to 13,3 5,503 16  as on 2010-11. 
However, the MIS system did not have the functional ity of identifying BPL 
beneficiaries. Against this backdrop, the Departmen t had 31,43,568 registered 
beneficiaries on 20,20,525 JCs 17  as on 31 March 2021.  
The Department had not assessed the quantum and tim ing of labour demand. 
Thus, the very basic tenet of the scheme that it wa s a demand-based scheme 
for rural employment was violated in Punjab as no d oor-to-door survey was 
done despite the prescribed Operational Guidelines and recommendation of 
the PAC.  
Thus, instead of running the scheme with its intend ed demand-based 
employment, the Department converted it into supply -based employment (as 
discussed in Paragraph 2.3.4 ). Audit noticed that first budget was allocated 
and then job and person days were fitted-in. This c onfirms that the scheme 
was not run in the way, it was intended to be run. This fact can also be seen 
corroborated from the table given below: 
Table 2.3: Expenditure for each PD generated 
Year Total 
Expenditure 
(₹ in crore) 
No. of PDs 
generated 
(No. in 
lakh) 
Amount 
spent to 
generate 
each PD 
(in ₹) 
Approved 
wage rate for 
1 Day  
(in ₹) 
Percentage 
increase over 
previous year 
1 2 3 4 5 6 
2016-17 506.86 157.73 321.35 218 - 
2017-18 607.10 223.13 272.08 233 6.88 
2018-19 633.68 204.49 309.88 240 3.00 
2019-20 824.46 235.25 350.46 241 0.42 
2020-21 1,313.75 376.87 348.60 263 9.13 
As can be seen from Table 2.3 , the Department claimed to have generated 
PDs by spending ₹ 272 to ₹ 350 for each PD. However, there was no 
consistency in per PD expenditure and it was not co mmensurate even with the 
percentage wage increase. While the wage increase w as in an upward trend 
year-after-year, per PD rate showed abrupt down and  up trends. Even the 
percentage increase in wage rate alone would not ju stify such abrupt changes 
                                                           
15   Niti Aayog, erstwhile Planning Commission of Indi a. 
16   Population of Punjab in 2010-11: 2,77,43,338; Rur al population: 1,73,44,192. 
17   Applied for. 

Chapter-II: Effectiveness of Planning  
23 
as Audit did not come across any specific change in  nature of works executed 
during the audit period as the wage rates compared here are for unskilled work 
only.  Thus, the data maintained by the Department itself was inconsistent and 
suspicious.  
It has also been seen that the most fundamental req uirements for planning in 
terms of assessment of demand and preparation of labour budget were not met. 
Further, the non-maintenance of essential records, non-conducting of Gram 
Sabha discussions, insertion of works at PO level i nstead of inclusion at GP 
level, inordinate delay in payments of dues to supp liers and payments to 
labour without using the Aadhaar Based Payment (ABP ) methods, were all 
indicative of suspicious nature of programme implementation. 
Thus, in the absence of crucial data like BPL popul ation, the list of identified 
beneficiaries and the extent and timing of demand, the Department was not in 
a position to give assurance to Audit that the sche me was being run in a 
transparent manner and the intended beneficiaries w ere indeed gainfully 
employed. 
2.8 Recommendations  
(i)  The Department may fix responsibility on defaulting  officials for  
non-conducting of door-to-door survey, non-updation  of job cards, 
non-preparation of development/perspective plan and irregular change 
in number and nature of works at block levels; 
(ii)  The Department should ensure to adopt bottom to top  approach in 
preparation of Labour Budget; and 
(iii) MGNREGS, being a demand driven programme, req uires the 
beneficiaries to be aware of their rights. Therefor e, IEC activities need 
to be stepped up besides organising Rozgar Diwas on regular basis.  
 

Chapter-III 
Financial Management  

25 
Chapter-III 
 
Financial Management 
Financial Management was inefficient as the Departm ent failed to 
utilise the available funds, on one side whereas hu ge liabilities were 
pending on the other. Delay in release of funds att racted interest 
liability of ₹ 18.70 crore.  Pending liability in respect of wages  and cost 
of material was ₹ 426.90 crore.  No compensation was paid for delayed  
payments to workers though envisaged. Most importan tly, the 
Department had not provisioned for payment of unemp loyment 
allowance under the scheme. There were variations b etween the 
NREGASoft figures and those in the certified financial accounts. 
The MGNREGS is a centrally sponsored demand driven employment 
programme, implemented on a cost sharing basis betw een GoI and State 
Government.  Releases of Central share or funds are based on the projection of 
labour demand 1 in the LB. The State government also bears the com pensation 
for delayed payments of wages to the workers, unemp loyment allowance and 
administrative expenses of the State Employment Guarantee Council. 
Funding Pattern 
Central Share (CS) of funds under the scheme is nor mally released in two 
tranches.  While release of 1 st  tranche of CS is based on proportionate fund 
requirement as per the agreed to LB to take care of requirement for the first six 
months of the financial year subject to a maximum o f 50 per cent  of the total 
fund required for a whole year, the release of 2 nd  tranche is based on unspent 
balances and actual performance against the agreed to LB during the year.  
The sharing ratio between GoI and State under the v arious components of the 
scheme is given in Table 3.1 . 
Table 3.1: Funding pattern 
Details of component Central share State share 
Wages for unskilled manual workers 100 per cent  Nil 
Wages for skilled and semi-skilled workers 75 per cent  25 per cent  
Cost of material 75 per cent  25 per cent  
Unemployment allowance Nil 100 per cent  
Administrative Expenditure 100 per cent 2 Expenditure of SEGC 
Source: MGNREGS Operational Guidelines, 2013 
 
 
                                                           
1  Agreed to between GoI and State Government. 
2 Administrative expenditure may be upto six per cent  of the total expenditure during 2016-2021. 

Performance Audit Report on ‘Implementation of MGNR EGS in Punjab’  
26 
The funds flow under the scheme is given in Chart 3.1 . 
Chart 3.1: Funds flow under MGNREGS 
 
Source: Operational Guidelines, 2013 
Funds of unskilled wages are transferred by the GoI  directly in the State 
Employment Guarantee Fund (SEGF) - nodal bank accou nt. GoI also releases 
75 per cent  of the expenditure of skilled, semi-skilled and material cost to GoP 
in two tranches.  The GoI releases its share under skilled, semi-skilled and 
material to the Finance Department (FD) of the GoP.  The GoP releases the 
funds to the SEGF, Punjab after including its share . Under the scheme, 
payments of unskilled, skilled, semi-skilled wages and material are transferred 
into the accounts of labour/vendors/suppliers. 
3.1 Financial Management 
Para 2 of sanction letter issued by the GoI provide s that State Government 
must transfer the funds along-with the State share to the SEGF for programme 
implementation within three days positively from th e date of receipt of these 
funds. Further, Para 4.1.2 (vi) of Operational Guid elines, 2013 provides that 
the cost of payments to the technical personnel inc luding the mates, technical 
assistant etc., shall be part of the material component. 
The funds released and expenditure incurred thereag ainst during 2016-2021 
are given in Table 3.2 . 

Chapter-III: Financial Management  
27 
Table 3.2: Funds released and expenditure 
(₹ in crore) 
Year OB Released funds Total 
released  
Misc. 
Receipt  
Total 
funds 
available 
Expenditure incurred Total 
Exp. 
CB 
Material Wages Material Wages Admn.  
Exp. CS SS CS SS 
1 2 3 4 5 6 
(3+4+5) 
7 8 
(2+6+7) 
9 10 11 12 13 
(9+10+ 
11+12) 
14 
2016-17  15.49  72.81  24.26  403.10  500.17  7.54  523.20  52.25  17.42  414.49 3 22.70  506.86  16.34  
2017-18  16.34 4 109.58 5 31.32  478.16  619.06  1.68  637.08  76.28  25.43  478.16  27.23  607.10  29.98  
2018-19  29.98  163.94 6 55.85  460.48  680.27  15.78 7 726.03  104.93  34.98  460.48  33.29  633.68  92.35  
2019-20  92.35  145.84  44.79  604.76  795.39  2.23  889.97  141.19  44.79  604.76  33.72  824.46  65.51  
2020-21  65.51  217.90  80.43  1,027.31  1,325.64  2.22  1,393.37  184.42  61.47  1,027.31  40.55  1,313.75  79.62  
Total  710.07  236.65  2,973.81  3,920.53  29.45  4,169.65  559.07  184.09  2,985.20  157.49  3,885.85   
Source: Departmental data 
Note: Figures of expenditure incurred included only disbursed amount during the year. 
From the above table it is seen that  
• There was enhancement in LB during the Covid-19 pan demic year  
2020-21. 
• Despite the availability of funds for skilled/semi- skilled labour and 
material, the Department failed to utilise the enti re amount.  This was 
partly due to late release of funds by the Finance Department, Punjab.  
• Out of 
₹ 946.72 crore (Central and State share) released by  GoP during 
2016-2021, an amount of ₹ 881.38 crore was released by the Finance 
Department with delays ranging from three to 304 da ys with an average 
delay of 87 days. As per the instructions of GoI, the State Government was 
liable to pay interest of ₹ 18.70 crore at the rate of 12 per cent  per annum 
for delay in release of funds. No correspondence re lating to raising of 
demand of interest from State was found on record in JDCC office.  
Audit raised the issue of non-demand of interest fr om the GoP for delayed 
release of funds, the Department assured to take up  the matter with the 
Finance Department.  However, compliance was awaited (November 2022). 
Thus, failure of the Department to efficiently mana ge the financial resources 
led to undue creation of interest liability of ₹ 18.70 crore.  
The Department may ensure that funds are released t o the implementing 
agencies in time to avoid delay in utilisation of f unds and fix responsibility on 
the defaulting officials for delayed release of funds.  
 
                                                           
3 Includes ₹ 11.40 crore pertaining to previous year expenditure. 
4 Actual difference of total available funds and tot al expenditure is ₹ 27.74 crore which includes 
₹ 11.40 crore pertaining to previous year expenditur e. Hence Opening balance has been taken as 
₹ 16.34 crore for the year 2017-18 (as per CA report). 
5 It includes ₹ 14.92 crore pertaining to financial year 2016-17 w hich was released during  
2017-18. 
6 It includes ₹ 46.14 crore pertaining to financial year 2017-18 w hich was released during  
2018-19. 
7 It includes ₹ 13.40 crore of PMKSY Fund which was authorised to be incurred under MGNREGS. 

Performance Audit Report on ‘Implementation of MGNR EGS in Punjab’  
28 
3.2 Pending liability 
As per instructions issued (July 2016) by MoRD, GoI , the pending liabilities 
of wages under the scheme should be cleared as per the MGNREGS 
guidelines, payment to the workers should be made w ithin 15 days of work 
done. 
The data available on the Management Information Sy stem was scrutinised 
and following observations were found: 
(i) In the State, an amount of 
₹ 426.90 crore was outstanding in respect of 
unskilled wages, semi-skilled/skilled wages, materi al, and taxes during  
2016-2021. The details of outstanding liability are given in Table 3.3 . 
Table 3.3: Outstanding liabilities 
(₹ in crore) 
Year Unskilled wages Semi-skilled/  
skilled wages 
Material Tax Total 
2016-17 0.98 0.10 6.79 0.01 7.88 
2017-18 1.16 0.31 6.50 0.51 8.48 
2018-19 1.63 0.64 23.43 1.90 27.60 
2019-20 1.88 0.60 27.02 2.24 31.74 
2020-21 6.54 8.28 317.68 18.70 351.20 
Total 12.19 9.93 381.42 23.36 426.90 
Source: Departmental data  
As can be seen from the above, against a total expe nditure of ₹ 743.16 crore 
on material during the period 2016-2021, the Department had not cleared dues 
of ₹ 381.42 crore constituting 51.32 per cent  of total expenditure claimed. The 
pending dues were over periods ranging from one to five years. Non-payment 
of dues to suppliers over unduly long periods would  result in losing their 
interest in the scheme which had been cited as a re ason for incomplete works 
in this report.  At the same time, given the state of record maintenance and 
lack of monitoring, (discussed in a later chapter) it would not be farfetched to 
question the genuineness of supplies.   
Similarly, wages to the tune of 
₹ 22.12 crore were pending for one to five 
years during the period 2016-2021, towards both ski lled and unskilled wages.  
Again, if genuine, this was denial of wages to the very poor people defeating 
the scheme objective.  However, in the absence of p roper recording of events 
as per the guidelines, the presence of ghost works and workers cannot be ruled 
out.  These liabilities require detailed investigat ion by the Department and 
early resolution.   
(ii)   Out of selected 120 GPs, the pending liability in  18 GPs was ‘Nil’ 
whereas in 102 GPs, an amount of 
₹ 2.07 crore was required to be paid to the 
unskilled/semi-skilled/skilled workers, for material and taxes (Appendix 3.1). 
(iii) In selected districts, the pending liability was ₹ 79.04 crore 
(March 2021) whereas in selected blocks it was ₹ 21.13 crore (March 2021) 

Chapter-III: Financial Management  
29 
which was to be paid for unskilled/semi-skilled/ski lled wages, material and 
taxes for the period 2016-2021 (Appendices 3.2 and  3.3). 
Thus, as MGNREGS is employment given to those, in n eed of daily wages, 
non-payment of wages defeated the very objective of  the scheme. Further, 
harassment of vendors cannot be ignored as well; as  the payments due to 
vendors, was running into crores for each year. 
(iv)  Further, in selected districts, total 1,21,993 tra nsactions of 
₹ 17.70 crore were rejected during 2016-2021, out of  which total 
5,394 transactions of ₹ 0.79 crore 8 were still pending for regeneration. 
(v)  In the State, the reasons for non-making payment t o the unskilled 
workers were analysed and found that during the per iod 2016-2021, total 
4,34,070 transactions of ₹ 63.09 crore of unskilled workers had been rejected . 
The stated reasons were dormant bank accounts, chan ging of bank, variation 
in IFSC code, incorrect bank accounts and non-mappi ng of Aadhaar of 
beneficiaries.  
The status of transactions rejected and action take n on it is given in  
Table 3.4 . 
Table 3.4: Status of transactions rejected and regenerated 
(Amount in ₹) 
Year Total 
Rejected 
Transactions  
Amount of 
total 
Rejected 
Transactions 
Rejected transactions 
Successfully regenerated 
and payment made 
Transactions Regenerated 
but pending for payment at 
Bank level  
Transactions 
Pending for 
Regeneration 
Amount 
Pending for 
Regeneration  
No. of 
Transactions  
Transaction 
Amount 
No. of 
Transactions  
Transaction 
Amount 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
2016-17 58,022 7,64,03,932 54,288 7,15,00,674 1,572 20,86,333 2,162 28,16,925 
2017-18 88,700 12,31,42,791  83,970 11,67,07,570  2,906 37,96,880 1,824 26,38,341 
2018-19 1,01,549 14,97,71,822  95,163 14,08,55,275  3,594 49,58,446 2,792 39,58,101 
2019-20 1,03,401 14,80,63,920  92,535 13,24,81,981  6,997 1,02,11,299 3,869 53,70,640 
2020-21 82,398 13,34,83,983  60,520 9,77,04,401 11,281 1,90,34,936 10,597 1,67,44,646 
Total  4,34,070 63,08,66,448  3,86,476 55,92,49,901  26,350 4,00,87,894 21,244 3,15,28,653 
Source: MIS data 
Table 3.4  shows that out of total rejected 4,34,070 transact ions, 4,12,826 
transactions had been regenerated. Out of regenerat ed transactions, payment 
of ₹ 4.01 crore pertaining to 26,350 transactions was p ending at bank level 
whereas 21,244 transactions of ₹ 3.15 crore were still pending for 
regeneration. 
                                                           
8  
District No. of rejected 
transactions 
Amount 
(₹ in crore) 
Pending transactions 
for regeneration 
Amount 
(₹ in crore) 
Amritsar 16,438 2.59 1,549 0.24 
Jalandhar 9,929 1.80 126 0.02 
Moga 28,705 3.17 609 0.05 
Sangrur 27,630 3.57 24 0.003 
Ferozepur 30,350 5.24 2,760 0.44 
SAS Nagar 8,941 1.33 326 0.04 
Total 1,21,993 17.70 5,394 0.79 
 

Performance Audit Report on ‘Implementation of MGNR EGS in Punjab’  
30 
The Department accepted the facts (September 2022) and stated that they 
would try to clear the pending liabilities. It was also stated that efforts in this 
regard had been made and now only 2,000 cases were pending.  However, 
final compliance was awaited (November 2022).    
3.3 Pending compensation for delayed payments to wo rkers  
In terms of Para 29 of the revised schedule II of N REGA, 2005 and vide GoI 
notification No. S.O.19 (E) January 2014, a detaile d procedure for 
establishing a compensation system for delay in payments has been laid down. 
As per system, MGNREGS workers are entitled to rece ive delay 
compensation, at a rate of 0.05 per cent  of the unpaid wages per day for the 
duration of the delay beyond the 15 th  day of the closure of the muster roll. The 
amount paid for delayed compensation, is to be reco vered from the 
responsible officials. 
The data regarding pending compensation was availab le only in MIS data. 
The scrutiny revealed that out of selected 120 GPs,  in 62 GPs an amount of 
₹ 0.63 lakh was outstanding for making payment as co mpensation for delayed 
payments (March 2021) of wages for the period 2016-2021 ( Appendix 3.4). 
In selected districts, an amount of ₹ 18.36 lakh 9 was payable to the workers on 
account of late payment against the works executed.  In selected blocks, an 
amount of ₹ 2.91 lakh pertaining to compensation for delayed p ayments was 
also outstanding as of March 2021 (Appendix 3.5). 
Scrutiny of records and information collected from JDCC revealed that 
against approved compensation of ₹ 1.35 crore for the period 2016-2021, an 
amount of ₹ 0.89 crore was paid leaving balance amount of ₹ 0.46 crore to be 
paid as of March 2021 as detailed in Table 3.5 . 
Table 3.5: Pending compensation for delayed payment of wages  
(Amount in ₹) 
Year Approved  
delay in Days 
Approved 
amount 
Delayed 
compensation Paid 
Pending 
compensation 
2016-17 1,47,91,115 99,58,979 73,72,952 25,86,027 
2017-18 32,93,541 24,69,287 12,08,776 12,60,511 
2018-19 11,39,580 7,28,516 2,03,069 5,25,447 
2019-20 3,21,937 2,29,828 88,205 1,41,623 
2020-21 2,50,675 1,72,299 68,965 1,03,334 
Total 1,97,96,848 1,35,58,909 89,41,967 46,16,942 
Source: Departmental data  
During beneficiary survey of 1,097 beneficiaries, 7 1 (6.47 per cent ) 
beneficiaries stated that they could not get paymen t of wages within 
                                                           
9 (i) Amrisar: ₹ 7,85,451; (ii) Ferozepur: ₹ 32,507; (iii) Jalandhar: ₹ 1,89,762; (iv) Moga: ₹ 3,05,422; 
(v) SAS Nagar : ₹  71,482; and (vi) Sangrur: ₹  4,50,990. 

Chapter-III: Financial Management  
31 
prescribed limit of 15 days from the date of comple tion of work and 180 
(16.40 per cent ) beneficiaries did not know about their payment details. 
The Department acknowledged the fact and stated (Se ptember 2022) that 
pending compensation for delayed payments would be cleared as per direction 
of GoP. It was also stated by the Department that d elayed compensation 
amount would be recovered from the responsible offi cials.  Audit noticed a 
meager recovery of ₹ 1,697 till November 2022.  Recovery of balance amo unt 
may be made at the earliest. Delayed payment of wag es defeat the very 
purpose of providing employment in time of need. 
3.4 Non-providing of unemployment allowance 
Para 3.5 of Operational Guidelines, 2013 provides t hat if an applicant is not 
provided employment within fifteen days of receipt of his/her application 
seeking employment, he/she shall be entitled to a d aily unemployment 
allowance which will not be less than one-fourth of  the wage rate for the first 
thirty days and not less than one-half of the wage rate for the remaining period 
of the financial year. Further, as per departmental  instructions (July 2016), 
employment register is required to be maintained manually.  
Physical records such as demand register for employ ment demanded and 
offered were not maintained in any of the selected GPs. Thus, the work 
demanded and work offered cannot be compared and th erefore, the 
unemployment allowance could not be calculated. 
However, the data available on the Management Infor mation System was 
scrutinised and observations were made. 
In selected districts, the unemployment allowance t o 
1,72,390  HHs was not 
provided though they had demanded the work.  The de tails are given in 
Table 3.6 . 
Table 3.6: Unemployment allowance not paid to number of households 
Year Amritsar Ferozepur Jalandhar Moga SAS 
Nagar Sangrur Total  
2016-17 1,303 3,331 2,393 4,578 587 4,510 16,702 
2017-18 2,677 4,484 3,800 5,459 771 7,216 24,407 
2018-19 11,160 8,976 4,693 7,987 1,171 13,220 47,20 7 
2019-20 11,218 10,119 2,686 8,954 1,983 6,363 41,32 3 
2020-21 14,932 7,238 6,394 6,497 1,107 6,583 42,751  
Total 41,290 34,148 19,966 33,475 5,619 37,892 1,72,390 
Audit observed that due unemployment allowance was available in MIS data 
for 2020-21 only. As per this data, out of selected  120 GPs, in 65 GPs of 
12 blocks, the unemployment allowance of ₹ 8.35 lakh was to be paid to 
723 workers for 6,349 days who demanded the work bu t not provided within 
prescribed time limit of 15 days 10 .  The delay of eligible unemployment 
                                                           
10  The delay was noticed from one to 20 days. 

Performance Audit Report on ‘Implementation of MGNR EGS in Punjab’  
32 
allowance was ranging between one to 20 days (Appendix 3.6). Further, the 
unemployment allowance was calculated by taking 50 per cent  of applicable 
wages, whereas it was required to be calculated by taking 25 per cent  of 
applicable wages, as the delay was less than 30 days.  
The Department accepted the facts and stated (Septe mber 2022) that policy in 
respect of Unemployment allowance had already been submitted to FD for 
approval. Due to non-framing of unemployment allowa nce policy, 
unemployment allowance could not be provided to any beneficiary.  
3.5 Mismatch of Departmental data with NREGASoft da ta 
As per para 11.3 of Operational Guidelines, 2013, t he entire data is put in the 
public domain through MIS and is viewable over the Internet and the states 
must devise a mechanism to ensure integrity of the data being entered.  
Scrutiny of the record (August 2021) revealed that there was mismatch 
between the data related to budget allotment and ex penditure, opening and 
closing balances of fund at State level provided by  the Department prepared 
by a chartered accountant and data uploaded on NREG ASoft during  
2016-2021.  The difference is given in Tables 3.7 and 3.8 . 
Table 3.7: Mis-match of Available funds and expenditure 
(₹ in crore) 
Year Data provided by Department Data as per NREGASoft Difference 
Total 
available 
fund 
Total 
expenditure 
Total 
available 
fund 
Total 
expenditure 
Total 
available 
fund 
Total 
expenditure 
1 2 3 4 5 6 (2-4) 7 (3-5) 
2016-17 523.20 506.86 542.59 531.27 (-) 19.38 (-) 2 4.40 
2017-18 637.08 607.10 202.83 638.00 434.26 30.89 
2018-19 726.03 633.68 240.95 669.76 485.08 (-) 36.0 8 
2019-20 889.97 824.46 188.59 767.33 701.37 57.11 
2020-21 1,393.37 1,313.75 230.92 1,240.81 1,162.05 72.94 
Source: MIS and Certified Financial Statements  
Similarly, out of six selected districts, in three districts 11 , the difference in the 
departmental data and data uploaded on the MIS (NRE GASoft) regarding 
funds available and expenditure thereagainst was ob served during 2016-2021 
(Appendix 3.7). 
Table 3.8: Mis-match of data in Opening and Closing balances in State  
(₹ in crore) 
Data available on NREGASoft 
Year OB CB Difference within NREGASoft 
A B C D 
2016-17 5.71 11.32 CB not available 
2017-18 13.22 (-) 435.18 (+) 1.90 
2018-19 21.51 (-) 428.81 (-) 456.69 
2019-20 47.95 (-) 578.74 (-) 476.76 
2020-21 44.33 (-) 1,009.89 (-) 623.07 
Source: MIS and departmental data  
                                                           
11  (i) Amritsar; (ii) Ferozepur; and (iii) Jalandhar. 

Chapter-III: Financial Management  
33 
In all selected districts, there was difference wit hin opening and closing 
balances for the period 2016-2021 within the NREGASoft (Appendix 3.8). 
The Department accepted the facts (September 2022) and stated that this was 
due to not updating the data on NREGASoft and any c hange in the data base 
could not be made at state level as it is being mai ntained by NIC. It, further 
stated that the matter would be taken up with MoRD. 
The reply of the Department is not acceptable as it  did not disclose as to what 
really caused such variations in the NREGASoft. As this information is 
available in the public domain through NREGASoft, t he reliability of 
information should have been ensured. 
3.6 Conversion of account into Aadhaar Based Paymen t  
Para 15.2 of Master Circular of 2017-18 provides th at the account details of 
the workers will be updated regularly in the MIS, b ut in order to make 
Aadhaar Based Payments (ABP), there is a need for A adhaar seeding and its 
mapping at National Payments Corporation of India mapper by the banks. Para 
8.8 (ii) of Operational Guidelines, 2013 provides t hat in order to ensure timely 
payments to the workers for the work done, State sh all fix up maximum time 
limits for each complete process resulting in payme nt of wages to the wage 
seekers, in such a way that each wage seeker gets t he wage payments for the 
work done in a week by the end of the subsequent week. 
The physical records were not maintained related to  Aadhaar mapping with 
accounts of active workers. 
The data from the Management Information System was  scrutinised and 
following observations were found:- 
The details of rejected transaction due to non-mapp ing with Aadhaar during 
2016-2021 in respect of selected blocks are given in Table 3.9. 
Table 3.9: Transaction rejected due to non-mapping of Aadhaar Cards 
Name of Block Transaction 
rejected 
Amount  
(in ₹) 
Transaction not 
regenerated 
Amount 
(in ₹) 
Regenerated 
transactions 
not processed 
Amount 
(in ₹) 
Verka 35 51,693 0 0 9 13,492 
Rayya 226 17,13,754 0 0 136 1,70,035 
GhallKhurd 94 1,37,466 0 0 3 4,713 
Zira 242 4,11,002 3 5,528 26 53,545 
Mehatpur 117 2,45,759 5 8,146 28 56,691 
Lohian 819 11,74,920 7 10,988 23 31,967 
Baghapurana 464 3,79,423 4 4,194 129 99,467 
Moga-1 177 1,72,165 0 0 3 1,440 
Malerkotla 650 7,55,627 0 0 120 1,34,073 
Sangrur 950 12,84,780 0 0 0 0 
Kharar 2,831 39,43,752 36 42,370 155 2,00,066 
Majri 1,578 22,93,841 3 7,540 21 39,667 
Total 8,183 1,25,64,182 58 78,766 653 8,05,156 
Source: MIS data  

Performance Audit Report on ‘Implementation of MGNR EGS in Punjab’  
34 
From the above table it is evident that: 
• In selected blocks 8,183 transactions having 
₹ 1.26 crore were rejected 
due to non- mapping of Aadhaar during 2016-2021. 
• 58 transactions of ₹ 0.79 lakh, pertained to six blocks, were not 
regenerated (August 2021). 
• 653 transactions of ₹ 8.05 lakh were neither shown proceeded for payment 
in individual transaction trial even after re-gener ation of transactions nor 
shown as pending transactions available on NREGASoft. 
Thus, 711 workers were waiting for payment of their  wages in the selected 
blocks.  
In the State, Aadhaar mapping with accounts of acti ve workers was still 
pending as given in Table 3.10 . 
Table 3.10: Status of conversion of account in Aadhaar Based Payment  
Name of 
entity 
Total 
active 
workers 
Workers converted 
into Aadhaar based 
payment 
Workers yet to be 
converted into Aadhaar 
based payment 
Percentage of 
non conversion 
JDCC 16,49,671 7,31,437 9,18,234 55.66 
SANGRUR  90,323 49,352 40,971 45.36 
Ferozepur 1,05,997 29,538 76,459 72.13 
Amritsar 82,873 15,603 67,270 81.17 
Moga 82,677 45,475 37,202 44.99 
Jalandhar 53,859 22,203 31,656 58.77 
SAS Nagar  23,552 9,449 14,103 59.88 
Source: Departmental data  
Table 3.10  shows that 55.66 per cent accounts of HHs were pending for 
conversion into ABP at State level (March 2021) whe reas in selected districts 
the accounts ranging between 44.99 per cent and 81.17 per cent were pending 
for conversion into ABP. 
Beneficiary survey results: 
All 1,097 beneficiaries surveyed during field visit  in selected GPs stated that 
they were in possession of Aadhaar cards.  
Thus, the Department failed to ensure that all the active workers were paid 
through ABP system.  Had all the payments to the wo rkers been converted 
into Aadhaar based payment, the delay in payments i .e. 15 days from 
completion of works, possibility of payment to othe r workers could have been 
avoided. Further, transparency would be there if ac counts of workers were 
mapped with Aadhaar. Beneficiary survey also showed  that Aadhaar cards 
were available for all the works which were surveye d. Thus, Department had 

Chapter-III: Financial Management  
35 
not taken any sincere efforts for Aadhaar mapping t o bring beneficiaries into 
Aadhaar Based Payment.  
The Department stated (September 2022) in exit conf erence that the 
compliance would be made shortly. Final compliance was awaited 
(November 2022) in audit.  
Non-mapping of 55.66 per cent accounts of HHs for conversion into ABP at 
State level resulted in lack of assurance as to whether the payments were made 
to the beneficiary, in whose name, the works were e xecuted and muster roll 
had been prepared. 
3.7 Inadmissible expenditure  
Para 12.5.2 of Operational Guidelines, 2013 provide s that Central 
Government gives up to six per cent  of the total expenditure on administrative 
expenses. Further, para 12.5.6 provides that expend iture should not be 
incurred on Specific 12  items. 
Scrutiny of the records (August to December 2021) revealed that an amount of 
₹ 4.59 lakh was irregularly incurred on maintenance of old vehicles , civil 
works and on other items which were not covered und er the scheme 
(Appendix 3.9). 
The Department admitted the fact and assured (Septe mber 2022) to recover 
the irregularly incurred expenditure.  
3.8 Conclusion  
There were instances of delayed release of funds to the implementing agencies 
and unemployment allowances were not paid. There we re many instances of 
late payment of wages to the workers. Instances of expenditure on prohibited 
heads were also noticed. 
3.9 Recommendations 
(i)  The Department may ensure that funds are released t o the 
implementing agencies in time to avoid delay in utilisation of funds; 
(ii)  The Department may ensure timely payment of due wag es to the 
workers; 
                                                           
12  (i) Purchase of vehicles and repair of old vehicle s; (ii) Civil works; (iii) Salaries/ remuneration of  
functionaries already engaged by the Government/ PRI s/ any other implementing agency; and 
(iv) Material procurement for works. 

Performance Audit Report on ‘Implementation of MGNR EGS in Punjab’  
36 
(iii)  The Department may take steps to resolve the issue of non-payment of 
unemployment allowance to the eligible beneficiaries; 
(iv)  The Department may take steps to ensure that the ex penditure is not 
incurred on prohibited heads of expenditure; and 
(v)  The Department may consider clearing the pendency o f compensation 
for delayed payments to unskilled workers. 
 
 

Chapter-IV 
Implementation and Employment 
Generation  

37 
Chapter-IV 
 
Implementation and Employment Generation  
The Department had done little to maintain transpar ency, in release of 
payments, for execution of works. The mandatory rec ords, like MBs 
and Muster Rolls were not maintained and the NREGAS oft system 
lacked necessary application control, to prevent sy stem override, for 
making payments in the absence of validated data fr om MBs. In the 
absence of validation checks persons were drawing w ages on two job 
cards simultaneously, on different works. Physical verification of certain 
works revealed expenditure rendered unfruitful due to works lying 
incomplete or works lying in various states of disu se. There were cases 
of short and delayed payment of wages and wages wer e denied to 
workers as Government of Punjab had not evolved a m echanism for 
paying funds/wages for work done over hundred days. 
The main objectives of MGNREGS are to provide minim um 100 days of 
guaranteed wage employment every year to a willing household whose adult 
members volunteer to do unskilled manual work and to create durable assets to 
strengthen the livelihood resource base of the rura l poor.  The scope of 
works/activities to be taken-up under the scheme ar e broadly categorised into 
water conservation and harvesting, drought-proofing , micro and minor 
irrigation work, renovation of traditional water bo dies, rural connectivity and 
land development etc. The implementation of MGNREGS  depends on 
execution of works against which employment is provided and PDs generated. 
4.1 Sample of selected works  
As mentioned in previous chapter on planning, the a ssessment of demand was 
not based on any survey. The Department had provide d employment through 
allotment of works based on the budget distributed as has been pointed out in 
Chapter II 1.  
In the PA, out of 22 districts, six districts 2 covering 12 Blocks (two blocks 
from each selected district), and 120 GPs (10 GPs f rom each selected block) 
were selected (Appendix 1.1) . A sample size of five works including three 
works executed by GPs and two works executed by Lin e department in 
120 selected GPs were taken for physical survey. To tal 600 completed works 
were required to be checked in selected GPs whereas  only 551 completed 
works were actually test checked. 3 Of this, 138 works pertained to  
                                                           
1   In display of top to bottom approach, the Depart ment asked its field units to prepare a labour budget 
of ₹ 1300 crore generating 3,71,42,857 PDs. 
2 (i) Amritsar; (ii) Ferozepur; (iii) Jalandhar; (iv ) Moga; (v) Sangrur; and (vi) SAS Nagar. 
3  Only labour component of works executed by line d epartments was checked during field audit as 
the material component was borne by the line department. 

Performance Audit Report on ‘Implementation of MGNR EGS in Punjab’ 
38 
Line departments and 413 works pertained to GPs. Th e sample fell short of 
49 works because no work was executed during 2016-2 021 in four 4 selected 
GPs and in some other GPs, less than five works wer e completed during the 
audit period. 413 works executed by GPs included re novation of ponds, 
cleaning of ponds, berms works and plantation works. 
4.2 Generation of Person Days for works executed  
Availability of records relating to the test checked works was as under: 
Table 4.1: Convergence and GPs works  
(₹ in lakh)  
Sr. 
No. 
Descriptions Available 
Related to 
Line 
department  
Available  
Related 
to GPs 
Not 
Available 
Related to 
Line 
department  
Not 
Available  
Related 
to GPs 
Total 
Related to 
Line 
department 
works 
Total 
related 
to GPs 
works 
A B C D A+C B+D 
1. Estimates 81 192 57 221 138 413 
2. Sanction 101 242 37 171 138 413 
3. Muster Roll 104 295 34 118 138 413 
4. Manual MB 60* 185 78 228 138 413 
5. Payments on 
Labour  
373.94 1,058.56 ---- --- 373.94 1,058.56 
6. Payments on 
material 
220.59 320.26 --- ----- 220.59 320.26 
Total 594.53 1,378.82 
Source: Departmental data  
* Out of 60 manual MBs, measurement of works only was  mentioned in 5 MBs and out of 
185 manual MBs, measurement of works only was mentioned in 20 MBs.   
Audit findings relating to these works are discussed below: 
1.  Convergence works: As per chapter 15 of the Operational Guidelines, th e 
objectives of MGNREGS, namely creation of durable a ssets and securing 
livelihood of rural households, can be facilitated through convergence of 
MGNREGS works with resources of other programmes/ schemes available 
with GPs and other line departments.  These resourc es would be in the 
nature of availability of funds, technical expertis e and knowhow of 
officials of the line departments. However, it must  be ensured that while 
exploring options of convergence, MGNREGS do not su bstitute resources 
from other sectors or schemes. The projects which a re identified for 
convergence are required to be discussed in the Gra m Sabhas located in 
the project area.  
However, it was noticed that all the convergence wo rks were decided and 
marked as convergence by the POs and no discussion was held in Gram 
Sabhas.  In this scenario, whether the works were c onvergence works in 
                                                           
4  (i) Thater kalan (Ghall Khurd); (ii)  Khursadpur (Mehatpur); (iii) Nannu Majra; and (iv) Balongi 
Colony (Kharar). 

Chapter-IV: Implementation and Employment Generatio n  
39 
the true sense or not could not be verified in audi t. It could also not be 
verified whether other sector resources were substi tuted by MGNREGS 
resources.  
2.  Work Estimates : Estimates in 57 works of convergence and 221 GP 
works were not found available in files.  The corre ctness of the 
expenditure incurred on each component could not be  verified in audit in 
such cases. Even out of the works for which Budget Estimates were 
available it was found that out of 12 selected bloc ks, in nine blocks, 
51 works were administratively approved for ₹ 1.52 crore against which an 
amount of ₹ 2.01 crore was incurred during 2016-2021.  This re sulted into 
excess expenditure of ₹ 0.49 crore over sanctioned amount for which 
revised sanction was not obtained from competent au thority. The details 
are given in Table 4.2 . 
Table 4.2: Excess expenditure beyond sanction amount  
(₹ in lakh) 
Block Baghapurana  Malerkotla  Lohian  Moga-1 Ghal 
Khurd  
Sangrur  Zira Kharar  Majri Total 
No. of works 14 7 2 6 4 3 4 3 8 51 
Sanctioned Amount  52.59 17.96 1.83 38.11 5.96 8.02 4.27 6.89 16.16 15 1.79 
Actual expenditure 72.75 21.4 2.32 53.23 7.65 10.92  4.92 8.58 19.30 201.07 
Excess Expenditure  20.16 3.44 0.49 15.12 1.69 2.9 0.65 1.69 3.14 49.28  
Source: Departmental data  
Further, it was also noticed that out of six, in fo ur selected blocks in respect of 
28 completed works, an expenditure of ₹ 63.34 lakh was incurred against the 
sanctioned amount of ₹ 194.27 lakh, which resulted into savings of 
₹ 130.93 lakh, as detailed in Table 4.3 . 
Table 4.3: Savings against sanctioned estimates 
(₹ in lakh)  
Block Malerkotla Mehatpur Sangrur Zira Total 
No. of works 8 8 8 4 28 
Sanctioned Amount  75.89 19.38 74.26 24.74 194.27 
Actual expenditure 24.12 8.25 24.08 6.89 63.34 
Less Expenditure 51.77 11.13 50.18 17.85 130.93 
Source: Departmental data  
The huge variations between the estimated cost and actual expenditure on the 
works showed that the estimates of works were not p repared on realistic basis. 
The Department acknowledged the fact and stated (Se ptember 2022) that the 
instructions would be issued to field offices to pr epare the estimates in a 
realistic manner.  
3.  Sanctions : Sanctions in 37 works of convergence and 171 GP w orks were 
not found attached in files, which showed the works  were executed 
without required approval.  Thus, in the absence of  required sanctions, the 
possibility of unapproved work/fictitious work gett ing executed could not 
be ruled out. 

Performance Audit Report on ‘Implementation of MGNR EGS in Punjab’ 
40 
4.  Muster Roll : Muster Roll in 34 works of convergence and 118 wo rks of 
GPs were not found available in files; still paymen ts were made based on 
entries in the NREGASoft muster rolls. 
As muster rolls are the base of generation of FTOs,  non-maintenance/non-
availability of the Muster rolls makes the payments  doubtful and 
questionable.  Without acquittance of the beneficia ries, the veracity of 
payments could not be verified.  
5.  Measurement Books (MB) : Para 7.5 of Chapter II of section 1 of CPWD 
Manual stipulates that the measurement Book is one of the most important 
records. It is the basis of all accounts of quantit ies of work done, purchase 
made etc. and it must contain such a complete recor d of facts as to be 
conclusive evidence in court of law. The descriptio n of the work/materials 
must be lucid, and such as to admit easy identifica tion and check. MBs in 
78 works of convergence and 228 GP works were not a vailable in work 
files. Without verification of MBs, Audit could not  ascertain the accuracy 
and authenticity of payments made against the works. 
In five line works and 20 GP works, the measurement was only in terms of 
quantity and not in monetary terms.  
Para 7.13.2 of MGNREGS Operational Guidelines, 2013  provides that 
weekly measurement of works should be undertaken by  measurement 
officers (Technical Assistants/Overseers/Junior Eng ineers). Measurement 
officers should ensure that all measurements are ta ken within three days 
after close of weekly muster rolls. This is crucial  for timely payment of 
wages.  Further, para 7.13.4 explained that measure ment recorded in MBs 
need to be entered in NREGASoft to determine valuation of work done.  
In audit of records in the Verka (41 works) and Ray ya Blocks (seven 
works), it was noticed that the measurement of work s entries were not 
recorded in the MBs. However, funds transfer orders  were generated by 
overriding the system and payment of wages was made  by entering ‘0’ as 
MB number and ‘0’ as page number of the MB in MIS. It was not feasible 
to make the task entries in a single page of MB.  T his shows that it was 
done only for generation of FTOs and entries relati ng to mandatory 
records of the executed works were not made. FTOs i n respect of these 
41 selected works and seven selected works of Verka  and Rayya block 
respectively were generated and payment of 
₹ 45.93 lakh and ₹ 7.57 lakh 
respectively were made without measurement of executed works.  
Further, it was observed that a payment of ₹ 13.99 lakh was made by the 
implementing agency without measurement of the work s in 13 works in 
two other blocks. In absence of measurement of work s, genuineness of 
works executed could not be verified. Also, the gen uineness of wages paid 
could not be verified.  

Chapter-IV: Implementation and Employment Generatio n  
41 
In light of the fact that basic records at GP level  were not available, yet were 
found entered in the NREGASoft, Audit relied on the  works implemented in 
the selected GPs where measurement books were avail able to arrive at a 
meaningful analysis of the works undertaken and PDs  generated. The PDs 
generated in our sample, for such cases came to 4,6 5,064 PDs. Against this, a 
total of 6,28,300 PDs were claimed to have been gen erated in NREGASoft in 
the selected GPs. The difference of 1,63,236 PDs ha d no basis. This, however, 
did not mean that the entire demand at the GP level  had been met as no such 
assessment was available anywhere with the Departme nt because such an 
exercise to assess the demand was not made by the D epartment as discussed 
earlier in this report.  The authenticity of the pa yments made against the 
differential PDs was questionable and needed investigation. 
The Department accepted the facts and stated (Octob er 2022) that the record 
entries would be made regularly in the MBs and MIS data in future.  
The fact that departmental officials were not maint aining mandatory record, 
was making authenticity of the executed works and p ayments made there 
against, doubtful. The serious lapses in not mainta ining the requisite records 
need to be investigated by the Department. 
Besides, a number of other irregularities were noticed as detailed below: 
4.2.1 Irregular booking of expenditure 
Para 11.5 (xiii) of Operational Guidelines, 2013 pr ovides that no expenditure 
can be booked against a work after it is shown as completed in MIS.  
Scrutiny of MIS data on NREGASoft regarding complet ed 29 works of one 
selected block 
5 of district Ferozepur revealed that expenditure of  ₹ 1.47 crore 
was booked in NREGASoft against these works.  Out o f booked expenditure, 
₹ 0.61 lakh was booked after the works were shown as  completed in MIS 
during 2016-2021 ( Appendix 4.1 ). Thus, the expenditure booked after 
completion of works indicated that the MIS data was  not reflecting a true 
picture on a particular date on which the work was entered as completed. 
The Department accepted the facts (September 2022) and stated that the 
matter was being scrutinised based on technical angles. 
The Department needs to urgently investigate and re solve the matter as this 
kind of system override has exposed the system to p ossibility of large scale 
manipulation and fraud.  In all cases where the sta tus of works was wrongly 
shown, action may be taken on those responsible.   
 
                                                           
5 Ghall Khurd. 

Performance Audit Report on ‘Implementation of MGNR EGS in Punjab’ 
42 
4.2.2 Non-providing of Work site facilities  
Para 7.12 of Operational Guidelines provides that work site facilities 
6 are to be 
provided.  The first aid box should be replenished as and when required and 
should not have medicines that are expired.  Provis ion of drinking water may 
require trolleys for fetching water from long dista nces. In case the children 
below the age of six years accompanying the women w orkers at any site are 
five or more, a crèche will need to be provided. Pa ra 7.12.5 provides that all 
expenditure on worksite facilities should be booked  as part of administrative 
expenditure and not as part of work. 
Scrutiny of record revealed that no work site facil ity in sampled works were 
provided to the workers as no expenditure was incur red for providing these 
facilities. The beneficiary survey of the 1,097 ben eficiaries showed the 
following: 
 154 (14.04 per cent ) beneficiaries stated that drinking water facility  at 
work sites was not adequate; and 
  841 (76.66 per cent ) beneficiaries stated that first aid facility at w ork sites 
was poor. 
In the exit conference (September 2022), the Depart ment acknowledged the 
fact and assured to take necessary corrective measures.  The Department stated 
(October 2022) that no funds were provided by the h eadquarter office for this 
purpose.  
The reply is not acceptable as funds were available  under the head of 
administrative expenses.  Moreover, non-availibilit y of basic facilities at work 
sites might result into exclusion of women/old-age beneficiaries in 
MGNREGS works. 
4.2.3  Non-verification of the bills/vouchers at th e worksite  
Rule 7.11.5 of Operational Guidelines, 2013 provide s that when a work is in 
progress, the workers engaged in that work will sel ect, from among 
themselves, not less than five workers, on a weekly  rotational basis, to verify 
and certify all the bills/vouchers of their worksite, at least once a week.  
Scrutiny of records and information of 551 sampled works collected from the 
selected 12 Block offices revealed that this aspect  of verification/certification 
of bills/vouchers was not operationalised.  
                                                           
6  Medical aid, drinking water and shade. 

Chapter-IV: Implementation and Employment Generatio n  
43 
The Department replied (October 2022) that vouchers , bills and muster rolls 
would be got verified from at least five workers who would be deputed on that 
work.  
Beneficiaries survey results 
All the 1,097 surveyed beneficiaries were not aware  about the social audit. 
Thus, shortfall in conducting of social audit affec ted the monitoring 
mechanism of works executed.  
4.2.4 Non-maintenance of Wage and Material ratio  
Para 20 of schedule-I of MGNREGA provides that for all works taken up by 
the Gram Panchayats and other implementing agencies , the cost of material 
component including the wages of the skilled and se mi-skilled workers shall 
not exceed forty per cent  at the District level. 
While discussing the CAG’s Report for the year ende d March 2012 
(Paragraph 2.2.9.5.2), PAC settled the para (Septem ber 2014).  However, it 
was noticed that the irregularity still persists in the Department. 
Out of six selected districts, one district 
7 had not maintained the prescribed 
wage material ratio (60:40). The percentage of expe nditure incurred on 
materials was more than the prescribed limit of 40 per cent  and expenditure 
incurred on wages was lower than the prescribed lim it of 60 per cent at 
district level, as given in Table 4.4. 
Table 4.4: Non-maintenance of Wages Material ratio 
(₹ in crore) 
Year Labour 
expenditure on 
cost basis 
Material expenditure 
on cost basis 
Total 
expenditure 
Percentage 
expenditure 
on labour 
Percentage 
expenditure 
on material 
2016-17 8.23 15.36 23.59 34.89 65.11 
2017-18 17.03 8.28 25.30 67.28 32.72 
2018-19 22.48 20.64 43.12 52.13 47.87 
2019-20 31.96 18.92 50.88 62.81 37.19 
2020-21 55.34 52.60 107.94 51.27 48.73 
Source: Departmental data  
Table 4.4 shows that the wages and material ratio was not mai ntained during 
2016-17, 2018-19 and 2020-21 and expenditure on mat erial was incurred in 
excess of prescribed limit of 40 per cent . 
The Department acknowledged the fact and assured (S eptember 2022) to take 
necessary corrective measures.  The responsibility of the authority who 
sanctioned/approved the works in which material cos t exceeded the prescribed 
limit may be fixed. 
                                                           
7 Ferozepur. 

Performance Audit Report on ‘Implementation of MGNR EGS in Punjab’ 
44 
4.2.5 Payments made to mates from unauthorised comp onent resulting 
into extra burden on Central Government  
Para 4.1.2 (vi) of Operational Guidelines, 2013 pro vides that the cost of 
payments to the technical personnel including the m ates, Technical Assistant 
etc. shall be part of the material component. 
In selected 30 GPs of four blocks, 37 ‘Mates’ were deployed by the GPs for 
the tasks such as; giving mark out, taking measurem ent, maintenance of MBs 
and updating the job cards with details of each wor ker, quantum of work done 
and wages received. An amount of 
₹ 15.93 lakh was paid to the mates during 
2016-2021 against the due amount of ₹ 23.41 lakh.  The payment was made 
out of funds available for unskilled workers wherea s it should have been paid 
out of funds of material component i.e. wages of se mi-skilled workers.  Thus, 
making of payment out of unskilled component not on ly resulted in extra 
burden on this component but also short payment of ₹ 7.48 lakh of wages to 
the mates.  This showed that state Government was r eluctant to pay wages 
from the state component.  
The Department admitted the fact and stated (Septem ber 2022) that 
responsibility would be fixed and assured to make a  mechanism to break  
such type of misappropriation. However, compliance was awaited 
(November 2022). 
4.2.6 Short /non-payment of wages  
(A)   Para 16 of Schedule-I of NREGA-2005 provides that  payment should 
only be made based on the measurements taken at the  worksite by the 
authorised person within three days of closure of t he muster roll. The State 
Government shall ensure that adequate technical per sonnel are deployed to 
complete the work within the stipulated period. 
It was observed that in two selected GPs 
8, the wages of unskilled workers 
were paid less than the scheduled rates in two work s without entering the 
reduced rate entry in the MB.  The PO reduced the w age rate according to the 
executed work in 34 muster rolls in which 630 worke rs were engaged and an 
amount of ₹ 0.94 lakh was short paid to them during 2020-21 (Appendix-4.2). 
Thus, the workers were denied their legitimate payment of wages. 
The Department stated (September 2022) that correct ive measures to provide 
the wages to the workers would be taken.  However, final compliance in this 
respect was awaited (November 2022). 
(B) 
 Para 7.14.2 of Operational Guidelines, 2013 provide s that Pay orders 
can be generated through the software after weekly muster rolls and 
measurements recorded in Measurement Book are enter ed into NREGASoft.  
                                                           
8 Tharaj and Sukhanand of Baghapurana block of Moga D istrict.  

Chapter-IV: Implementation and Employment Generatio n  
45 
In order to assure timely payment of wages to the l abour, pay orders should be 
generated within 3 days after close of weekly muster rolls. 
Scrutiny of records (September to December 2021) re vealed that the seven 
works were executed during 2018-2021 in seven selec ted GPs of five selected 
blocks 9.  In these works, 168 workers were deployed throug h eleven muster 
rolls and 945 PDs were generated.  However, the sai d Muster Rolls were not 
entered in MIS for generating pay orders due to which the wages amounting to 
₹ 2.49 lakh were not paid to the workers engaged to execute the work.  In MIS 
data, the attendance against these workers was mark ed ‘Zero’. Therefore, the 
workers were denied, their legitimate payment of wa ges against the work 
done.  
The Department admitted the facts and stated (Septe mber 2022) that 
expenditure was incurred in excess of the estimates  and FTOs could not be 
generated by block offices and assured to take all necessary corrective 
measures for payment of wages. However, compliance was awaited 
(November 2022) in audit. 
(C)   Scrutiny of muster rolls of four PO offices 10  revealed that wages of, 
₹ 18,998 /- (Appendix 4.3) were paid short to 20 workers in 14 muster rolls as  
explained below: 
• payment of wages of ₹ 3,964/- to the four workers was denied by the PO 
office of Baghapurana as these workers had worked i n excess of 100 days 
during the year 2020-21. Denial of payment of wages  for the works done 
in excess of 100 days was irregular as the Departme nt was required to pay 
the wages beyond 100 days from the State Fund. Furt her, there was no 
in-built check in NREGASoft to flag cases where the  beneficiary had 
worked for 100 days.  
• Similarly, wages of ₹ 15,034/- in respect of 16 workers were paid short by 
marking less attendance in 11 muster rolls. 
The Department admitted the facts and stated (Septe mber 2022) that the 
GoP had not framed policy for the payment of more t han 100 days of wages 
during the financial year to a house hold.  Further , Department assured to take 
up the matter with GoP to frame the policy. Complia nce was awaited 
(November 2022) in audit. 
The NREGASoft should have mechanism of highlighting  the cases where 
100 days employment has been generated so as to ens ure provisioning of the 
wages from the State Funds for the period beyond 100 days. 
                                                           
9  Baghapurana, Moga-1, Lohian, Mehatpur and Rayya. 
10   Baghapurana, Kharar, Mehatpur and Rayya. 

Performance Audit Report on ‘Implementation of MGNR EGS in Punjab’ 
46 
In above cases, the responsibility of officials/off icers concerned may be fixed 
as the records showed that workers had performed th eir duties at work site but 
wages were denied to them. The Department may inves tigate whether the 
beneficiaries had actually worked and if so, the reasons for non-payment to the 
beneficiaries may be examined.  Department may also  investigate into the 
reasons for allowing workers to work beyond 100 days. 
4.2.7 Irregular payments 
(i) Employment to the deceased workers 
 
Para 3.1 (iii) of Operational Guidelines, 2013 prov ides that apart from  
door-to-door survey for identification of eligible HH for registration under 
MGNREGS, details of individuals in the registered h ouseholds should also be 
verified by the Panchayat Secretary with assistance  of Gram Rozgar Sahayak. 
Corrections in the database should be made after due verification. 
Audit had collected copy of death register from Civ il Surgeon of selected 
districts to compare the deceased persons with the names of workers to whom 
work had been provided during 2016-2021. During com parison of records of 
Civil Surgeon with the online registration register  of selected GPs, it was 
noticed that total 231 Job Card Holders (JC Holders ) died in six selected 
blocks of four districts 11  during 2016-2021. Out of which, 18 deceased JC 
holders pertaining to 14 selected GPs had got work during June 2016 to 
January 2021 as well as wages of ₹ 63,633 were paid after their death 
(Appendix 4.4)  during April 2016 to January 2020. Block and GPs wi se 
details are given in Table 4.5 . 
Table 4.5: Details of Blocks and GPs where payment was made to deceased 
workers 
Block Verka Rayya Moga-1 Baghapurana Kharar Lohian Total 
Number of JC 
holders deceased  
46 52 66 34 13 20 231 
No. of deceased 
JC holders shown 
as working 
2 
(2 GPs) 
12  
6 
(5 GPs) 13  
3 
(2 GPs) 14  
5 
(3 GPs) 15  
2 
(2 GPs) 16  
0 18 
(14 GPs) 
Wages paid (in ₹) 19,439 29,204 3,918 8,180 2,892 0 63,633 
Source: Departmental data  
Further, out of above 231 deceased workers, 42 work ers of five selected 
blocks were shown as demanding work. Moreover, the Department was also 
offering them work for 590 days as depicted in NREG ASoft data. It is 
pertinent to mention here that Audit also approache d the family members of 
                                                           
11  (i) Amritsar: Rayya and Verka; (ii) Jalandhar: Lohi an; (iii) Moga: Moga-I and Bagha Purana; and 
(iv) SAS Nagar: Kharar. 
12  (i) Ball Kalan; and (ii) Ganushabad. 
13  (i) Butari; (ii) Gagadbhana (two cases); (iii) Khan pur; (iv) Palah; and (v) Dayan Pur. 
14  (i) Charik Patti Sarkar (two cases); and (ii) Daudh ar Garbi. 
15  (i) Kale Ke (three cases); (ii) Lagiana Nawan; and  (iii) Tharaj. 
16  (i) Kailaon; and (ii) Mausal. 

Chapter-IV: Implementation and Employment Generatio n  
47 
deceased workers and they confirmed the fact that t he workers had died which 
confirmed the irregular payments.   
The Department, while admitting the facts stated (S eptember 2022) that 
responsibility would be fixed and assured to make a  mechanism to break such 
type of misappropriation. However, compliance was awaited (November 2022). 
(ii)  Providing employment on two Job Cards simulta neously 
Para 3.1.4 of Operational Guidelines, 2013 provides  that every registered 
household will be assigned, through the system, a u nique registration number. 
The registration number shall be assigned in accord ance with the prescribed 
coding system. The registration shall be valid for a period of five years and 
may be renewed/re-validated after following the pro cess prescribed for 
renewal/revalidation as and when required.  
Scrutiny of MIS data i.e. online register available  for registration of 
beneficiaries for the period 2016-2021 revealed tha t six POs issued more than 
one job card to 315 HHs in 37 GPs in contravention of ibid guidelines. 
Providing of work on second JC for 14,319 days to 1 74 workers and payment 
of wages 
₹ 34.05 lakh  on second JC was also irregular.  This resulted int o 
undue favour to particular households and deprived the other wage seekers to 
get employment. 
Further, test check of data in respect of employmen t details provided in 
NREGASoft revealed that 31 JC holders of 20 GPs to whom double JCs were 
issued were doing work on both JCs simultaneously. This resulted into 
irregular payment of 
₹ 1,60,087 (Appendix 4.5) by providing employment on 
both JCs simultaneously as details given in  Table 4.6 . 
Table 4.6: Details of double JCs issued and employment provided 
(Amount in ₹) 
Block Verka Rayya Moga-1 Baghapurana  Lohian Mehatpur  Total 
No. of double JC issued (No. of 
GPs ) 
14 
(4) 
84 
(9) 
111 
(8) 
71 
(8) 
34 
(7) 
1 
(1) 
315(37) 
JC holders worked on both JCs 
simultaneously (GPs) 
0 6 
(5) 
9 
(6) 
11 
(6) 
5 
(3) 
0 31 
(20) 
Amount of irregular payment  0 26,167 67,165 37,421  29,334 0 1,60,087 
Source: Departmental data  
(iii) Excess payment of wages to the unskilled work ers 
Scrutiny of records (December 2021) of four selecte d blocks 17  revealed that 
excess payment of wages of ₹ 24,244 for 94 PDs was given in 18 muster rolls 
by marking excess attendance while uploading it onl ine instead of actual 
attendance on original muster rolls. This resulted in giving undue favour to the 
workers by enhancing their working days during gene ration of FTOs 
(Appendix 4.6). 
                                                           
17  (i) Baghapurana (Moga); (ii) Lohian (Jalandhar); (i ii) Kharar (SAS Nagar); and  
(iv) Rayya (Amritsar). 

Performance Audit Report on ‘Implementation of MGNR EGS in Punjab’ 
48 
The Department admitted the facts and assured to st art a drive from 
October 2022 to delete the Job Cards of deceased wo rkers; responsibility 
would be fixed and a mechanism would be put in place to prevent such type of 
misappropriation.  Final action was awaited (November 2022). 
4.3 Quality of Works 
The outcomes of physical verification of completed works are discussed in 
succeeding paragraphs: 
4.3.1 Incomplete Works  
Rule 17.6 (a) of PFR Vol-I provides that it is not sufficient merely to have 
sanction of competent authority to the expenditure,  but it must not be 
entertained until the budget has been passed and th e requisite funds 
communicated. 
(A)  The PO Mehatpur (District Jalandhar) accorded (Janu ary 2018) 
administrative approval of 
₹ 1.90 lakh which included, ₹ 0.82 lakh of GPs’ 
share and rest of the amount was to be incurred fro m MGNREGS funds for 
construction of park. 
It was noticed that without obtaining the share of the GP, the work was started 
and expenditure of 
₹ 0.97 lakh ( ₹ 0.25 lakh on 
labour and ₹ 0.72 lakh on material) was 
incurred during February to May 2018. 
Though, the MIS report indicated the work as 
completed but during physical verification 
(January 2022) of the park, it was noticed that 
the park was lying incomplete as only one side 
boundary wall was constructed. Thus, due to 
non-completion of park expenditure of 
₹ 0.97 lakh remained unfruitful. 
(B)  Similarly, with a view to generate 796 PDs, the work of construction of 
play field in GP Rupewal, PO Lohian, Jalandhar was sanctioned (2020-2021) 
for ₹ 6.10 lakh 18 .  However, it was observed that the work was stopp ed after 
incurring an expenditure of ₹ 0.30 lakh as the site was situated in a low lying 
area and waste water accumulated there. Thus, due t o selection of 
inappropriate site, the expenditure of ₹ 0.30 lakh incurred on this work was 
unfruitful. 
                                                           
18  GP funds ₹ 1.00 lakh; and MGNREGS funds ₹ 5.10 lakh. 
 
 
Incomplete Park at GP, Parjian 
Khurd (04.01.2022) 

Chapter-IV: Implementation and Employment Generatio n  
49 
(C)  The work of construction of park 
with various sports facilities at GP 
Ramuwala Harchoke, Block Moga-I was 
sanctioned (2017-18) for 
₹ 13.00 lakh. It 
was observed that ₹ 10.37 lakh was 
incurred on execution of work during 
March 2018 to August 2019 and in MIS 
data the work was shown as complete. 
However, during physical verification, it was observed that the work was lying 
incomplete as work to provide sports facilities was  not executed in the park, 
due to which the park was found in very dilapidated  condition.  Consequently, 
the park was not in use and expenditure of 
₹ 10.37 lakh was unfruitful. It also 
resulted in denial of intended benefits of the park to the people of the village. 
The Department acknowledged the audit observation a nd stated 
(September 2022) that directions would be issued to  the field offices to incur 
the MGNREGS funds on fruitful works and assured to take strict action, if 
discrepancies were found in the districts in this r egard. However, compliance 
was awaited (November 2022). 
(D)  In terms of Para 14.1 of Operational Guidelines, 2 013, the important 
objective of the MGNREGS is to create durable asset s and strengthen the 
livelihood resource base of the rural poor. It is, therefore, of utmost 
importance to ensure good quality and durability of  assets being created under 
MGNREGS.  
Audit observed that a work was sanctioned (November  2019) for 
₹ 2.67 lakh 
to construct a street - brick work from 
Baljinder Singh House to village Phirni 
19  at 
GP ‘MiranKot Kalan’, Block Verka District 
Amritsar. An amount of 
₹ 2.66 lakh 
(Material: ₹ 2.38 lakh and Labour 
₹ 0.28 lakh) was spent during 2019-2020 for 
execution. During physical verification, it 
was observed that the work was partially executed d ue to objections raised by 
the land owners and the material costing 
₹ 0.94 lakh was lying with the 
vendor.  However, the status of the work had been d epicted as complete in the 
MIS data.  
The Department acknowledged the fact and stated (Se ptember 2022) that the 
directions would be issued to the field offices to take appropriate action 
against the responsible person. However, the compli ance was awaited 
(November 2022) in audit. 
                                                           
19   Outer limit of village. 
 
Pond at GP Ramuwala Harchoke 
(02.11.2021) 
 
Street work at GP MiranKot Kalan 
(20.09.2021)  

Performance Audit Report on ‘Implementation of MGNR EGS in Punjab’ 
50 
4.3.2 Wasteful expenditure  
(i)  Work of cleaning and digging of pond of 
‘Dere Wala’ was executed during 2020-21 at 
Sukhanand Village - District Moga under 
MGNREGS. The work was completed after 
incurring an expenditure of 
₹ 4.57 lakh. During 
physical verification of the site, it was observed 
that instead of using the pond for village 
wastewater, the villagers were using this pond for 
storage of cow/buffalo dung cake. Thus, incurring o f expenditure for cleaning 
of pond was defeated.  
(ii)  The PO Baghapurana incurred an expenditure of 
₹ 8.14 lakh on 
cleaning of silt and digging of pond at Gholia 
Kalan. During physical visit, it was noticed 
that there was no water in the pond and the 
residents were dumping debris and other 
material in it. Thus, the dumping of debris in 
the pond area has defeated the purpose of 
cleaning of the pond. 
(iii) Works of Renovation of community 
ponds in GPs Dhindsa and Mansur Deva 
Gram Panchayats of Block Ghall Khurd 
and Zira respectively were executed 
between May 2020 and January 2021. The 
works were completed after incurring an 
expenditure of 
₹ 10.50 lakh 20 . During 
physical verification of the sites of works 
(November and December 2021), no 
renovation work of pond was found 
executed in the pond of Mansur Deva and it 
was covered with jungle jaala booti 
whereas work was found executed in 
May 2020 in the pond located in Dhindsa GP. 
 
                                                           
20  Dhindsa: ₹ 0.16 lakh and Mansur Deva: ₹ 10.34 lakh. 
 
 
Pond at GP, Sukhanand 
(16.12.2021) 
 
Pond at GP, Gholia Kalan 
(07.12.2021)  
 
Pond at GP, Mansur Deva  
(21.12.2021) 
 
Pond at GP, Dhindsa  
(17.11.2021) 

Chapter-IV: Implementation and Employment Generatio n  
51 
(iv) The work of renovation (earthwork 
excavation, retaining wall, ring bunds etc.) of 
pond in GP Dhudike, Block Moga-I, District 
Moga was technically sanctioned (June 2020) 
for 
₹ 8.12 lakh. The work was executed 
between June 2020 to January 2021 and 
expenditure of 
₹ 7.70 lakh was incurred.  
As per NREGASoft data, the status of the 
work had been shown as completed. During physical v erification, the work 
was found incomplete. 
(v)  It was observed that the work of renovation of pond  located in GP 
Daudhar Garbi,Block Moga-I, District Moga was execu ted every year since 
2017 by the Gram Panchayat under MGNREGS and an amo unt of 
₹ 35.86 lakh was incurred on the works during 2017-2 021. As detailed in 
Table 4.7. 
Table 4.7: Expenditure on the same pond in four years 
(Amount in ₹) 
Year Name and code of work Status of the work Actual expenditure 
2017-18 Pond Work WH/40166 Completed 10,52,461 
2018-19 Pond Work WH/41643 Completed 9,17,560 
2019-20 Pond Work WH/86197 Completed 6,53,522 
2020-21 Pond Work  WH/92308 Completed 9,63,106 
Total 35,86,649 
Source: Departmental data  
During physical verification (November 2021) of the work, it was noticed that 
no inlet channel for water was found at site 
from where the water was to be collected in 
the pond. The water was not available in the 
pond and the villagers were dumping debris 
and other waste material in it. Thus, incurring 
of huge expenditure for renovation of pond 
was unjustified.   
(vi)  The work of construction of Retaining 
wall, digging and cleaning of pond located in 
GP Awan Khalsa, Block Mehatpur, District 
Jalandhar was sanctioned (October 2018) for 
₹ 7.01 lakh.  Against the approved cost, an 
amount of ₹ 3.44 lakh was incurred on the 
work and it was shown as complete in MIS. 
However, during physical verification, it was 
noticed that the work of retaining wall was 
 
Pond at GP, Dhudike 
(16.12.2021)  
 
Pond at GP, Daudhar Garbi 
(10.11.2021)  
 
Pond at GP, Awan Khalsa 
(30.12.2021)  

Performance Audit Report on ‘Implementation of MGNR EGS in Punjab’ 
52 
not completed and the pond was not being maintained. The non-completion of 
the work of pond would lead to non-accumulation of excess water during 
rainy season.  
The above shortcomings highlight that neither inten ded infrastructure nor 
durable assets were created despite incurring expen diture of 
₹ 70.21 lakh, 
thus, affecting the lives of the rural poor. 
The Department stated (September 2022) that directi ons would be issued to 
the field offices to execute the work according to the guidelines of the 
scheme. The reply of the Department is not acceptab le as reasons for 
incomplete work were not given. The Department may investigate and fix 
responsibility on delinquent officials as 
₹ 70.21 lakh remained unfruitful on 
the above mentioned works.   
4.3.3 Doubtful execution of work 
(A)   The work of construction of street in GP Samalsar , block Baghapurana, 
District Moga was sanctioned (October 2019) for 
₹ 10.25 lakh.  In the scope of 
work, the interlocking tiles were to be laid after preparation of sand bed.  As 
per the technical sanction and approved estimate of  the work, total area of 
14,169 square feet (Sq. ft) was to be covered with interlocking tiles. 
However, during measurement of the work done by Aud it by obtaining 
technical assistance of the departmental officials, it was found that total area of 
9,995 square feet was covered with tiles whereas as per records it was shown as 
14,169 square feet. Therefore, a doubtful execution of 4,174 sq. ft was made and 
an amount of ₹ 1.17 lakh was booked only on tiles.  The actual ex penditure on 
other components i.e. labour, sand, cement etc. cou ld not be calculated.  Thus, 
due to discrepancies, doubtful execution could not be ruled out. 
The Department acknowledged the fact and stated (Se ptember 2022) that the 
directions would be issued to the field offices to take appropriate action 
against the responsible person.  However, complianc e in this respect was 
awaited (November 2022) in audit. 
(B)   Scrutiny of record of work of construction of par k at GP Khizrabad 
block Majri district SAS Nagar revealed that agains t the estimated provision 
of 
₹ 0.25 lakh for purchase of grass, an expenditure of  ₹ 0.90 lakh was 
incurred. Further, 9,215 saplings plants were also claimed to be procured for 
₹ 1.47 lakh, whereas there was no provision for plan tation in the estimate. No 
plant saplings were found planted. Moreover, no ent ry of plants was found 
made in the MB for making payment. Thus, the Depart ment not only incurred 
an excess expenditure of ₹ 0.65 lakh on grass but also incurred doubtful 
expenditure of ₹ 1.47 lakh on plantation of trees. 

Chapter-IV: Implementation and Employment Generatio n  
53 
The Department stated (October 2022) that letter wo uld be issued to GRS and 
TA concerned and final reply would be submitted aft er obtaining clarification 
from them.  Reply of the Department was not accepta ble as neither the plants 
expenditure was allowed in estimate nor plantation was appearing in the 
measurement book.  
(C)   During Physical verification of the works execute d and beneficiaries’ 
surveyed at the Gaggad Bhana Gram Panchayat, Rayya (Amritsar), it was 
noticed that the works were not found executed at ground level.  As per muster 
roll, an amount of 
₹ 6.10 lakh was incurred on plantation at the jungle  
clearance site in the village during 2020-21 but no  plantation by the Forest 
Department was found on the site. Three stage photographs of the execution of 
works were not attached in the work file. 
The Department stated (September 2022) that the rep ly from the district 
concerned was still awaited and action would be taken on the basis of the reply 
received from the district concerned.  The reply wa s not acceptable because 
during physical visit to the site with departmental officials, audit observed that 
the work was not executed at site, for which no justification was provided. 
Thus, the payment was made for non-existent works. Therefore, the 
departmental inquiry should be initiated in such ca ses for taking appropriate 
disciplinary action against the defaulting officials. 
4.3.4  Irregular use of JCB Machine  
The scheme guidelines para 15.4.2 (VI and VII) stri ctly prohibits the 
deployment of machine for excavation works. During test check of pond work 
in GP Samalsar, it was noticed that the Gram Pancha yat incurred an 
expenditure of 
₹ 0.53 lakh on hiring of JCB machine for excavation of village 
pond instead of deploying manual labour available with them. 
The Department stated that (October 2022) the point was noted for compliance 
and necessary directions would be issued to the GRS /Sarpanch to stop the 
irregular expenditure from the MGNREGS funds.  Howe ver, the fact remains 
that the work was done in contravention of the sche me guidelines and strict 
action may be taken against the officials concerned. 
4.3.5 Irregular procurement of material by the GPs 
As per para 7.1.7 of master circular MGNREGS 2019-2 0, if some items are to 
be used across the entire block e.g. bricks, reinfo rcement bars etc., then the 
requirement from each GP for the entire financial y ear may be aggregated at 
the block level. The BDPO shall call a tender for such aggregated items so that 
materials are procured at competitive rates and eco nomies of scale are 
achieved. The BDPO shall approve the vendors along with rates for 

Performance Audit Report on ‘Implementation of MGNR EGS in Punjab’ 
54 
procurement of the aggregated items. In all such ca ses, the GPs may procure 
the material at approved rates through vendors approved by BDPO. 
Scrutiny of records and information provided by the  selected blocks in respect 
of procurement of material for the works in the GPs  concerned revealed that 
procurement of material like bricks, cement, steel etc. was purchased by the 
GPs on the basis of quotations and no tender were c alled for by the POs 
concerned for the procurement of material for the w orks in the GPs.  It was 
also noticed that rates of material like bricks, ce ment and steel was fixed by 
the Collector of districts concerned in the four di stricts out of six selected 
districts.  However, in Kharar and Majri blocks (SA S Nagar), no such rates 
were fixed by the district collector and it was not iced that during 2016-2021, 
material like cement, interlock tiles, bricks etc. were purchased by the selected 
GPs for the selected works for ₹ 20.71 lakh (Kharar: ₹7.80 lakh and Majri: 
₹ 12.91 lakh) on the basis of quotations. No assessm ent was worked out at 
block level for the requirement of material in the block. It was also noticed 
that no tenders were called for and no rates were a pproved by PO Majri and 
PO Kharar.  The deviation from the rules ibid resul ted into irregular purchase 
of material in the blocks by the GPs and possible n on-detection of competitive 
rates. 
On being pointed out, the Department replied that t his matter would be taken 
up with higher authority and procurement would be m ade as per their 
instructions.  Reply of the Department is not tenab le as the material purchased 
on quotation basis, in contravention of the guideli nes, should have been 
investigated promptly and remedial measures taken. 
4.4 Analysis of MIS data  
As MIS data maintenance at the GP or block level was poor, the data available 
publicly in the NREGASoft was perused for audit ana lysis. It was noticed that 
there were inconsistencies even in the data, so available. 
4.4.1 Shortfall in achievement of targets of execut ion of works 
Para 7.17 of Operational Guidelines, 2013 provides that there should be a 
strategy to address incomplete works. Further, para  7.17.4 of Operational 
Guidelines, 2013 provides that no sanction should b e given to those 
Programme Implementing Agencies (PIA) where works a re lying incomplete 
for more than one fiscal year, after the year in which these were proposed. 
The overall status of work was taken from MIS. The status of works 
approved, completed, incomplete and not started in the selected districts 
during 2016-2021 is given in Table 4.8. 
 

Chapter-IV: Implementation and Employment Generatio n  
55 
Table 4.8: Status of works in selected Districts 
District Work to be 
executed 
No. of works 
completed 
No. of Works 
not completed/ 
suspended 
Expenditure of 
incomplete works 
(₹ in crore)  
No of 
works not 
started 
Amritsar 36,583 6,941 11,908 45.09 17,734 
Moga 17,132 4,682 7,778 34.17 4,672 
Jalandhar 26,686 6,013 17,001 41.52 3,672 
Mohali 16,089 1,944 9,666 36.03 4,479 
Ferozepur 44,429 7,432 26,556 98.65 10,441 
Sangrur 47,536 7,630 16,138 51.40 23,768 
Total  1,88,455 34,642 89,047 306.86 64,766 
Source: NREGASoft data  
In the selected districts out of 1,88,455 works, on ly 34,642 (18.38 per cent ) 
were completed and 89,047 were lying incomplete as of March 2021 besides, 
64,766 were not started even after approval. 
In selected blocks, out of approved 48,564 works on ly 9,552 (19.67 per cent ) 
were completed, whereas 23,939 were lying incomplet e/suspended besides 
15,074 were not started at all during 2016-2021 (Appendix 4.7).  Further, in 
selected GPs, only 1,573 works were completed, 3,17 2 works were lying 
incomplete and 1,759 works were not started during 2016-2021 .   
Further, 21 new works costing 
₹ 21.14 lakh were allotted to GP Sahoke during 
2020-21 despite the fact that GP did not complete t hree works during  
2018-19, in contravention of MGNREGS Rule 7.17.4.  
The status of total number of works to be executed in State, number of works 
completed is given in the Table 4.9. 
Table 4.9: Status of approved works 
(₹ in crore) 
Year No. of 
works to 
be 
executed 
No. of 
works 
completed 
No. of 
incomplete 
works 
Expenditure 
incurred on 
incomplete 
works 
No. of 
works 
abandoned 
Expenditure 
incurred on 
abandoned 
works 
No. of works 
suspended 
No. of 
works not 
started 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
2016-17 47,667 20,115 129 3.41 11,766 1.65 0 15,657  
2017-18 63,802 34,816 399 11.66 6,990 1.75 13 21,58 4 
2018-19 96,600 40,318 4,819 82.28 9,799 0.08 51 41, 613 
2019-20 1,04,701 25,439 32,196 372.86 6,678 0 181 4 0,207 
2020-21 1,49,356 7,125 77,930 520.43 1,913 0 132 62 ,256 
Total 4,62,126 1,27,813 1,15,473 990.64 37,146 3.48 377 1,81,317 
Source: Departmental data 
From the above table it is evident that: 
• Out of total 4,62,126 works proposed to be executed  only 1,27,813  
(27.66 per cent) were completed and 1,15,473 (24.99 per cent ) were lying 
incomplete as of March 2021 after incurring an expe nditure of 
₹ 990.64 crore. 
• An amount of ₹ 3.48 crore was spent on 37,146 abandoned works. 
• The Department failed to start 1,81,317 works (39.2 4  per cent ) even after 
planning.  It was noted that the number of non-star ted works were more 

Performance Audit Report on ‘Implementation of MGNR EGS in Punjab’ 
56 
than the completed works. This was again indicative  of the fact that the 
works were being exhibited to fit into the budget a llotted.  This is a matter 
of concern as the projected person days was also ca lculated thus and this 
would translate to non-generation of as many person days. 
The Department stated (September 2022) that incompl ete works were due to 
pending material payments to vendors due to late re lease of grant from GoI. 
Further, in respect of abandoned/suspended works, D epartment stated that 
details of abandoned works could not be deleted fro m MIS as some 
expenditure had been booked against these works out  of panchayat funds and 
other sources. The reply is not justified as no str ategy was prepared to 
complete the incomplete works as provided in the guidelines ibid . 
Audit observed that expenditure of ₹ 990.64 crore on incomplete works may 
result into time and cost overrun while expenditure  of ₹ 3.48 crore for 
abandoned works was wasteful which required investigation. 
4.4.2 Expenditure on Natural Resources Management w orks  
Para 6.1.10 of Annual Master Circular 2017-18 of th e scheme stipulates that 
the DPC will ensure, at least 65 per cent of the expenditure under MGNREGS 
to be incurred on works related to Natural Resource  Management 21  (NRM) 
during the year in the blocks under Mission of Water Conservation (MWC). 
Scrutiny of report generated on Management Informat ion System revealed the 
following observations: 
Out of selected 12 blocks, the requisite percentage  of expenditure was not 
maintained in five blocks (Sr. No. one to five of Appendix 4.8) .  In remaining 
seven blocks the percentage of expenditure on NRM w orks was partially 
maintained (Sr. No. six to 12 of Appendix 4.8) during 2017-2021. 
The percentage of expenditure on NRM works in selec ted districts except 
Moga and Sangrur during 2017-2021 was lower than th e norms as shown in 
Table 4.10 : 
Table 4.10: Percentage of expenditure on NRM works in selected districts 
Year 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 
Amritsar 49.24 67.38 63.78 57.72 
Ferozepur 51.93 47.54 44.60 36.61 
Jalandhar 57.38 56.53 61.20 58.92 
Moga 66.58 64.54 73.62 72.90 
Sangrur 66.26 71.22 70.03 60.63 
SAS Nagar 47.78 44.87 57.26 48.09 
Source: MIS data  
                                                           
21  Started during 2017-18 under which the various wor ks were to be executed i.e. Check dam, ponds, 
renovation of traditional water bodies, land development, embankment, field bunds, etc.  

Chapter-IV: Implementation and Employment Generatio n  
57 
Similarly, as per the data collected from the JDCC,  the position of mandatory 
expenditure on NRM works during the year 2017-2021 was as detailed in 
Table 4.11 . 
Table 4.11: Shortage in mandatory expenditure on NRM works 
(₹ in crore) 
Year Total Works 
(Complete/ 
ongoing) 
Expenditure 
on works 
 
NRM Works 
taken-up 
(out of column 2) 
Expenditure on 
NRM Works 
Percentage of 
expenditure on 
NRM works 
1 2 3 4 5 6 
2017-18 35,215 660.64 26,404 374.29 56.66 
2018-19 45,137 692.90 31,774 420.87 60.74 
2019-20 57,635 741.17 40,311 450.26 60.75 
2020-21 85,055 1,473.63 58,981 811.86 55.09 
Source: MIS data  
From the above, it is evident that the expenditure incurred on NRM works in 
the state was ranging between 55.09 per cent  and 60.75 per cent  during  
2017-2021 against the mandatory expenditure of 65 per cent . 
The Department stated (September 2022) that develop ment plans/shelf of 
Projects were prepared according to the norms of 65  per cent of NRM works 
but due to non-clearance of payment, percentage of expenditure on NRM 
works was low in some districts. Further, Departmen t assured to take 
necessary corrective measures. 
4.4.3 Employment provided to the differently abled persons  
Para 9.3.9 of Operational Guidelines, 2013 provides that a special drive should 
be initiated to identify all persons with disabilit y and other vulnerable persons 
and provide 100 days of work to each of the househo ld that they belong to in 
all the villages within a specified timeframe. The Co-ordinator (Vulnerable 
Groups) shall hold a monthly meeting to review the progress of such 
implementation with Block and Gram Panchayat level officials and he will 
submit monthly and quarterly progress reports to the DPC. 
Audit noticed that no special drive had been initia ted by the Department for 
the disabled and other vulnerable persons. Further,  no demand register was 
maintained for checking work demanded/offered in an y of the selected  
120 GPs. 
In selected blocks, no  monthly meeting of Coordinator (Vulnerable Groups) to 
review the progress of identified disabled and othe r vulnerable persons was 
held with Block and Gram Panchayat level officials. 
Further, the data available on the Management Infor mation System regarding 
employment generated was scrutinised and following shortcomings were 
found: - 

Performance Audit Report on ‘Implementation of MGNR EGS in Punjab’ 
58 
Out of 120 selected GPs, in 23 GPs, 59 differently abled persons were 
registered against which employment was provided to  24 persons only and 
100 days work was not provided to any of the differently abled person. 
In the selected blocks, the percentage of employmen t provided was ranging 
between ‘Zero’ and 77.78 per cent.  Further, 100 days employment was not 
provided to any differently abled person during 2016-2021 (Appendix 4.9). 
In the selected districts, employment ranging betwe en eight per cent  and 
53 per cent  to the registered differently abled persons was pr ovided. 
(Appendix 4.10). 
In State, it was observed that total 9,469 differen tly abled persons were 
registered upto March 2021. The employment provided  to differently abled 
persons is given in Table 4.12 . 
Table: 4.12: Employment generation of differently abled persons 
Year Registered differently abled persons  Differently abled persons provided work  Percentage 
2016-17 3,245 983 30 
2017-18 3,832 1,249 33 
2018-19 4,395 1,374 31 
2019-20 9,271 2,562 28 
2020-21 9,469 3,421 36 
Source: MIS data  
Table 4.12 shows that employment ranging between 28 per cent  and 
36 per cent only was provided to differently abled persons during 2016-2021. 
Further, it was noticed that data of differently ab led persons who demanded 
works during 2016-2021 was neither depicted in NREG ASoft nor any 
corroborative physical record was maintained. There fore, the percentage of 
differently abled persons who demanded works could not be ascertained in 
audit.  
The Department acknowledged the fact and assured (S eptember 2022) to take 
necessary corrective measures to provide work to di fferently abled persons. 
However, compliance was awaited (November 2022). 
4.4.4 Non-generation of a single PD in Gram Panchay ats  
Para 1.1 of Operational Guidelines, 2013 provides t hat the mandate of the Act 
is to provide at least 100 days of guaranteed wage employment in a financial 
year to every rural household whose adult members v olunteer to do unskilled 
manual work. 
This data was available only on MIS and on scrutiny, it revealed that: 

Chapter-IV: Implementation and Employment Generatio n  
59 
Out of 120 selected GPs, 27 GPs of 10 selected bloc ks have registered HHs 
and Labour Budget was also projected; however, PDs were not generated 
every year during 2016-2021 (Appendix 4.11 ).  Further, the demand register 
or work register was not maintained in these GPs. T herefore, it was not 
possible to ascertain the number of persons who dem anded work. Thus , ‘Nil’ 
generation of PDs in the GPs defeated the basic obj ective of the scheme of 
providing 100 days of employment to the volunteer workers. 
It was, further, observed that in selected district s, the GPs ranging between  
one per cent  and 48.10 per cent did not generate a single PD (Appendix 4.12) 
during 2016-2021. 
It was observed (August 2021) that GPs ranging betw een one per cent 
and 28 per cent did not generate even a single PD of employment 
during 2016-2021.  The detail of GPs where no PD wa s generated is given in 
Table 4.13 : 
Table 4.13: Details of GPs with nil person days 
Year Total GPs in the State GP generated nil PDs Percentage  
2016-17 13,380 3,718 27.78 
2017-18 13,369 2,604 19.48 
2018-19 13,359 1,591 11.91 
2019-20 13,330 373 2.80 
2020-21 13,330 119 0.89 
Source: Departmental data  
The Department acknowledged the fact and stated (Se ptember 2022) that 
number of GPs having nil PDs had been reducing ever y year. However, the 
fact remains that the problem of non-generation of PDs was still existing even 
after a lapse of 15 years of the scheme.  
4.4.5 Unfruitful expenditure on Rajiv Gandhi Sewa K endra 
Government of India, Ministry of Rural Development has expanded 
(November 2009) the scope of works under schedule-I  para 1(g) to include 
construction of Bharat Nirman Rajiv Gandhi Sewa Ken dra (RGSK) at the 
Gram Panchayat and block level to use these for (i)  the meeting/Training hall, 
(ii) office space for MGNREGA and for (iii) the use  of citizen centric 
interface room. 
In four GPs of one selected block 
22 , an amount of ₹ 36.57 lakh was incurred 
on construction of RGSKs. These works were completed between March 2013 
and February 2019. However, these RGSKs were not in  use.  This resulted 
into unfruitful expenditure of ₹ 36.57 lakh. (Appendix 4.13). 
                                                           
22  Lohian. 

Performance Audit Report on ‘Implementation of MGNR EGS in Punjab’ 
60 
In the State, 994 RGSKs were to be constructed out of which 942 and 
52 RGSKs were to be constructed at Gram Panchayat a nd block level 
respectively.  250 RGSKs and one RGSK at GP and blo ck level respectively 
were not started as the sanction for these Kendras was not accorded.  Further, 
655 and 12 RGSKs were completed at GP and block lev els respectively 
whereas 76 RGSKs 23  were in progress. The status of works related to R GSKs 
in the selected districts is given in Table 4.14. 
Table 4.14: Details of RGSKs of selected districts 
Sr. 
No. 
District To be 
constructed 
Work started Sanctioned 
but not 
started 
Completed Incomplete Amount of 
incomplete RGSK 
(₹ in lakh) 
  GP Block GP Block GP Block GP Block GP Block GP Block 
1. Amritsar 5 7 4 7 1 0 4 0 0 7 0 479.51 
2. Ferozepur 97 0 92 0 5 0 91 0 1 0 1.71 0 
3. Jalandhar 61 2 59 2 2 0 40 0 19 2 98.03 16.97 
4. Moga 32 0 24 0 8 0 21 0 3 0 14.97 0 
5. Sangrur 83 0 44 0 39 0 44 0 0 0 0 0 
6. SAS Nagar 17 2 16 2 1 0 16 1 0 1 0 12.47 
Total 295 11 239 11 56 0 216 1 23 10 114.71 508.95 
Source: MIS data  
Table 4.14 shows that total 306 works of RGSKs were sanctioned  in selected 
districts, out of which only 250 RGSKs were taken u p and 56 RGSKs were 
sanctioned but not started.  The works of 217 RGSKs were completed whereas 
33 RGSKs were lying incomplete (June 2022) after incurring of ₹ 6.24 crore.   
The Department acknowledged the fact and 
stated (September 2022) that the efforts would 
be made to complete the works and 
instructions would be issued to field offices to 
utilise the buildings.  However, compliance 
was awaited (November 2022). 
4.5 Conclusion 
The scheme implementation showed serious lacunae in  maintenance of basic 
records like the measurement books and muster rolls. Instances of payments to 
deceased workers and payments on more than one job card issued to same 
family were noticed.  Audit unearthed cases of frau dulent payments and 
fictitious works.  There were also cases of short a nd delayed payment of 
wages to the workers.  These problems point to the fact that the Operational 
Guidelines were not being followed to ensure transp arency in implementation 
of the scheme.   
                                                           
23  GP level : 37 and Block level: 39. 
 
RGSK at GP Rupewal  
(05.01.2022)  

Chapter-IV: Implementation and Employment Generatio n  
61 
4.6 Recommendations 
(i)  The Department may ensure the updation of Job Cards  to avoid the 
irregular expenditure from MGNREGS funds by making payment to 
deceased workers or to double job card holders in a  single household, 
etc; 
(ii)  The Department may prepare the estimates for works in a manner 
provided in the Operational Guidelines. All mandato ry records may be 
maintained to ensure transparency; and  
(iii)  The Department should prepare the estimates for works in a realistic 
manner after making proper analysis of requisite work. 

Chapter-V 
Grievance Redressal, Monitoring 
and Internal Control 

63 
Chapter-V 
 
Grievance Redressal, Monitoring and Internal Control 
The envisaged monitoring and grievance redressal me chanism was 
dysfunctional.  The Department had not appointed the requisite number 
of Ombudsmen in the State.  The Department failed t o ensure timely 
disposal of complaints, constitute vigilance Cell, appoint State and 
District quality monitors and prepare Citizens’ Cha rter.  Besides this, 
shortfall in conducting social audit, concurrent social audit and shortage 
of manpower was also noticed during audit. State Em ployment 
Guarantee Council failed to lay requisite Annual Re ports in State 
Legislature every year.  
The substantial funds involved in the implementatio n of MGNREGS coupled 
with its implementation across the State in 13,330 1 GPs, makes the monitoring 
and evaluation of the Scheme challenging. It was th us imperative to have a 
robust and efficient monitoring, evaluation and rev iew mechanism of the 
Scheme. In addition, there are also increased deman ds for accountability and 
transparency in the execution of the scheme by various stakeholders. 
5.1 Functioning of State Employment Guarantee Counc il 
GoP, Department of Rural Development and Panchayats  formulated 
(October 2006) “State Employment Guarantee Council”  (SEGC) to advise the 
State Government on all matters concerning the sche me, to review the 
monitoring and redressal mechanism to give recommendations for improvement 
and to prepare the annual report to be laid before the State Legislature.  
Scrutiny of records (July 2021) revealed that the S EGC met only two times 
(May 2016 and September 2020) during 2016-2021 to d iscuss the progress of 
the scheme in the State.  Further, it was also noti ced that the six annual reports 
from 2014-15 to 2019-20 were discussed and approved  in a single meeting 
held in September 2020 and these annual reports wer e laid (March 2021) 
together before the State Legislature. Further, the  annual report of 2020-21 
was not approved by SEGC till November 2022. 
Thus, the envisaged monitoring and steering of the scheme at the highest level 
was reduced to being a perfunctory exercise reducin g accountability of 
executive to the legislature. 
The Department accepted the facts (September 2022) and assured to take 
necessary corrective measures. 
                                                           
1  March 2021.  

Performance Audit Report on ‘Implementation of MGNR EGS in Punjab’ 
64 
5.2  Existence of grievance redressal mechanism  
Keeping in view, the principles of transparency and  accountability, the State 
Government was required to establish the office of Ombudsman in the State, 
for redressal of grievances regarding implementatio n of the scheme.  Further, 
the State Government was required to determine appr opriate grievance 
redressal mechanisms, at the district and block lev els for dealing with any 
complaint in respect of implementation of the MGNRE GS and lay down the 
procedure for disposal of such complaints.  A legislation dealing with delivery 
of public services, processes within MGNREGA was to  be mandatorily 
covered in the ambit of such legislation. 
The shortcomings in appointment and working of Ombu dsman and status of 
complaints received and their disposal are discussed in succeeding paragraphs. 
5.2.1 Non-appointment of Ombudsman  
Para 13.14 of the Operational Guidelines, 2013 prov ides that the State 
Government will establish the office of Ombudsman i n all districts for 
expeditious redressal of grievances regarding imple mentation of the scheme. 
Depending on requirement, initially one Ombudsman m ay be appointed for 
two districts to watch the workload.  The main duti es of the Ombudsman are 
as under: 
• Sending monthly and annual report and list of award s passed to Chief 
Secretary and Secretary in charge of MGNREGA. 
• Highlight action to be taken against erring MGNREGA functionaries. 
• Summary report of cases disposed by Ombudsman will be reported to 
SEGC and it will also be part of annual report prep ared by SEGC to be 
placed in the State Legislature. 
Scrutiny of records (August 2021) revealed that the State Government initially 
appointed two Ombudsmen (June 2014 and August 2015) for six 
2 districts, but 
only one Ombudsman 3 had taken charge and his tenure ended in August 20 17.  
Thereafter, the State Government appointed six Ombu dsmen between 
October 2020 and April 2021 by giving the charge of  four or more districts 
against the requirement of maximum two districts. 
It was observed that the Ombudsman appointed in Aug ust 2015 did not 
perform his duty as ibid.  He had neither submitted any monthly/annual report 
to the designated higher authorities nor submitted any summary report to 
SEGC due to which the activities of Ombudsman were not included in the 
                                                           
2 (i) Bhatinda; (ii) Faridkot; (iii) Jalandhar; (iv) K apurthala; (v) Mansa; and (vi) Shaheed Bhagat 
Singh Nagar. 
3 Appointed in August 2015 worked for Jalandhar, Kap urthala and Shaheed Bhagat Singh Nagar. 

Chapter-V: Grievance Redressal, Monitoring and Internal Control 
65 
annual report laid in the Legislative Assembly (as discussed in 
Paragraph 5.1 above) .  Further, the activities of other Ombudsmen appointe d 
during October 2020 to April 2021 were not provided to Audit. 
Thus, due to non-appointment of requisite number of  Ombudsmen in the State 
and inefficient functioning of appointed Ombudsmen the Department failed to 
create an effective mechanism for grievances redressal. 
The Department accepted the facts and stated (September 2022) that corrective 
measures would be taken.  
5.2.2 Disposal of Complaints 
Section 23(6) of the MGNREGA provides that the PO s hall enter every 
complaint in a compliant register maintained by him  and shall dispose of the 
dispute and complaints within seven days of their r eceipt and in case 
complaints relate to matters to be resolved by any other authority they shall be 
forwarded to such authority under intimation to the  complainant.  For 
monitoring of status, complaint register should be maintained at GP, Block 
and District levels, as required under para 10.3.9 of Operational 
Guidelines, 2013. 
Scrutiny of records (July 2021 to April 2022) revea led that out of six selected 
districts, in two districts 
4, no complaint register was maintained.  Hence, the  
status of complaints could not be verified in audit .  In SAS Nagar out of four 
complaints, two complaints were disposed of after a  delay of 57 and 103 days 
and one complaint was pending for disposal where as  one complaint was 
disposed of within time during 2016-2021.  In Moga,  no complaint was found 
registered. 
Further, in remaining two districts, 182 complaints  (Ferozepur: 118 and 
Sangrur: 64) were received in Ferozepur and Sangrur  respectively.  Out of 
these complaints, 69 complaints (Ferozepur: 26, Sangrur: 43) relating to issues 
such as; non-issue of job cards, non-starting of wo rk, non-payment of wages 
etc. were lying unattended (April 2022) even after a lapse of one to five years.  
In Ferozepur, 92 complaints were forwarded to block s concerned for taking 
action, however, the final disposal/follow-up of th ese complaints was not 
available. In Sangrur, 18 complaints were disposed with delays ranging 
between 10 days and 436 days against the requirement of seven days. 
In selected blocks, the complaint register was issu ed but no complaint was 
entered in it due to which the action taken on comp laints received from 
districts could not be ascertained in audit. 
                                                           
4 (i) Amritsar; and (ii) Jalandhar. 

Performance Audit Report on ‘Implementation of MGNR EGS in Punjab’ 
66 
While discussing the CAG’s report for the year ende d March 2012 (Paragraph 
2.2.13), the PAC transferred this para to the Depar tment (November 2020) 
with instructions to take action at its own level. However, Department failed to 
evolve an effective complaint disposal mechanism. 
Thus, no assurance can be drawn on the correctness of scheme implementation 
for delivery of the scheme benefits without an acce ptable grievances redressal 
mechanism in place. 
The Department accepted the facts (September 2022) and assured to take 
necessary corrective measures. 
5.3 Non-constitution of Vigilance Cell  
Paras 13.6.2, 13.6.3 and 13.6.4 of Operational Guidelines, 2013 provide that at 
the State level, a Vigilance Cell consisting of a C hief Vigilance Officer 
(CVO), at the District level, the District Vigilanc e Cell under the district level 
authority and at local level a Vigilance and Monito ring Committee were to be 
set-up after approval of Gram Sabha. These cells we re required to be set-up 
for r eceiving complaints about the implementation of the  scheme, for 
conducting regular field visits to detect irregular ities, and for taking suo-moto  
action based on reports appearing in the media, vis it to the work sites and 
interaction with workers. 
Scrutiny of records (August 2021 to December 2021) revealed that no 
Vigilance Cell was constituted at the State level t ill November 2022.  Further, 
the requisite Vigilance Cells were not constituted at any level of selected 
Districts and GPs during 2016-2021. Thus, non-const itution of Vigilance Cell 
during 2016-2021, resulted into various shortcomings that were noticed during 
physical verification of works (as discussed in the para 4.3 of chapter IV). 
The Department accepted the facts (September 2022) and assured to take 
necessary corrective measures. 
5.4 Non-appointment of State and District Quality M onitors 
In terms of paras 14.8 (vi) and 14.10.4 of Operatio nal Guidelines, 2013 the 
State Quality Monitor (SQM) will inspect at least f ive per cent  works while 
they are still in progress, so as to assess process quality aspects.  Further, as per 
para 7.12.1 of Annual Master Circular 2019-20, ther e will be a District Quality 
Monitoring (DQM) cell which would have a panel of 1 0 to 15 technical 
officials.  These officials will monitor and evalua te at least 10 per cent  of the 
works executed under the scheme. 
Scrutiny of records and information supplied by the  JDCC, MGNREGS, 
Punjab revealed that SQM/DQM was not appointed duri ng the period  

Chapter-V: Grievance Redressal, Monitoring and Internal Control 
67 
2016-2021 for the said purpose.  Due to non-appoint ment of SQM/DQM, no 
work was inspected during progress or completion of  work for its quality or 
authenticity.  Further, the Department had not made efforts for the appointment 
of SQM/DQM. 
The Department replied (September 2022) that SQM had not been appointed in 
the State. It further stated that recruitment of DQMs was under process.  
5.5 Non-preparation of Citizens’ Charter 
As per para 13.12.1 of Operational Guidelines, Citi zens’ Charter shall cover all 
aspects of the duties of Panchayats and officials u nder the Act.  It should 
describe the specific steps involved in implementin g the provisions of the Act, 
and lay down the minimum service levels mandated by  these provisions on the 
Panchayats and the officers concerned. 
During test check of records, it was noticed that n o Citizens’ Charter was 
prepared by the State Government during the period covered under audit. It 
had also been observed that Ministry of Panchayati Raj with National Institute 
of Rural Development and Panchayati Raj (NIDPR) had  prepared a Model 
Panchayat Citizens’ Charter/framework for delivery of the services across the 
29 sectors, aligning actions with localised Sustain able Development Goals 
(SDGs) for the Panchayats to adopt and customise du ring July-August 2021 
and supplied to the State Government for preparatio n of their own Citizens’ 
Charter. But the work of preparation of State Gover nments’ Citizens’ Charter 
was not initiated. 
The JDCC stated (October 2022) that Citizens’ Chart er was pending for 
approval at Government level.  
While discussing the CAG’s report for the year ende d March 2012 (Paragraph 
2.2.6.4), PAC advised (September 2014) to implement  the Citizens’ Charter at 
the earliest in time bound manner. However, it was observed that the 
Department did not make any efforts to comply with the instructions of PAC. 
This shows casual approach of the Department toward s establishing the 
necessary accountability structures in the State. 
5.6 Social Audit 
An innovative feature of the Mahatma Gandhi NREGA i s that it has 
institutionalised ‘Social Audit’ as a means of cont inuous public vigilance. The 
basic objective of social audit is to ensure public  accountability in the 
implementation of projects, laws and policies.  
5.6.1 Shortfall in required social audit  
Paras 13.1.1 and 13.2.2 of Operational Guidelines, 2013 provide that Social 
Audit Unit (SAU) shall identify appropriate number of Resource persons at 

Performance Audit Report on ‘Implementation of MGNR EGS in Punjab’ 
68 
State, District, Block and GP levels to facilitate the Gram Sabha in conducting 
social audit.  Social Audit has the following dimensions:  
 As a continuous and ongoing process, involving publ ic vigilance and 
verification of quantity and quality of works at di fferent stages of 
implementation; and 
 As a process it is to be conducted in every GP at l east once in six months, 
involving a mandatory review of all aspects. 
Audit noticed that the SAU prepared an annual socia l plan against the six 
monthly which was a major deviation from the Operational Guidelines.   
Scrutiny of records (July 2021) of selected GPs revealed the following. 
Table 5.1: Annual Social Audits in selected GPs 
Total No. 
of GPs 
Annual Audit Not 
completed even once 
Annual Audit 
completed in all 4 years 
Annual Audit 
partially completed 
120 25 20 75 
As can be seen from above, annual social audit was not conducted in 25 GPs 
even once during the audit period. Annual social au dit was conducted  
100 per cent  only in 20 GPs and was conducted only partially in  75 GPs.  
The details of social audit conducted has been given in Appendix 5.1 . 
The nature of observations in the selected GPs show ed the following types of 
observations: 
• Non-conducting of the Rozgar Diwas,   
• Complaints like inability to get work, non-provisio n of work site 
facilities and grievance redressal,  
• Non-production of works records i.e. administrative  and technical 
sanctions, Asset registers, Muster rolls, MBs and vouchers,  
• Non-existence of citizen charter,  
• Non-linking of Aadhaar Card,  
• Excess expenditure than sanctioned amount,  
• Issuance of multiple job cards,  
• Non-collection of applications for demand of works,  
• Non-payment of delayed compensation.  
As can be seen from the above, the social audit had  thrown up observations on 
similar lines as those pointed out by Audit. Thus, the Department had wasted 
the opportunity to strengthen the scheme implementa tion for the benefit of the 
people through the mechanism of social audit.  Such  persistent irregularities 
over long periods of time can have the effect of lo wering the faith of the 
dependent population on the scheme and result in di stress migration,  
a problem that the scheme had sought to address.   

Chapter-V: Grievance Redressal, Monitoring and Internal Control 
69 
The shortfall in conducting of social audit during 2016-2021 with respect to 
the State is given in Table 5.2 : 
Table 5.2: Shortfall in conducting social audit 
Year Total GPs 
in the State 
No. of GPs planned 
for Social Audit 
Social Audit 
conducted 
Shortfall in 
Social Audit 
Percentage 
1 2 3 4 5  
2016-17 13,380 10 10 --- -- 
2017-18 13,369 3,700 3,700 9,669 72.32 
2018-19 13,359 4,760 4,760 8,599 64.36 
2019-20 13,330 6,700 6,623 6,707 50.32 
2020-21 13,330 7,000 5,750 7,580 56.86 
Total   22,170 20,843   
Source: Departmental data 
Thus, GPs ranging between 50.32 per cent  and 72.32 per cent  remained 
unaudited.  In the selected districts, the shortfal l in conducting of social audit 
was ranging between 45.88 per cent  and 96.76 per cent . In selected blocks the 
shortfall in conducting of social audit was ranging  between 10.17 per cent and 
100 per cent and in selected GPs it was ranging between 25 per cent and 
100 per cent (Appendix 5.1) . 
The Department accepted the facts (September 2022) and stated that this was 
due to shortage of funds. The reply is not acceptab le as SAU was found to 
have sufficient funds. As social audit is a mechani sm for promoting 
transparency and accountability in local governance  and gives a voice to the 
marginalised and poor groups, its healthy functioni ng is necessary to ensure 
that demand is faithfully recorded and wages are co rrectly paid and frauds are 
adequately deterred.   
5.6.2 Huge pendency in settlement of Social Audit O bservations 
Para 13.4.2 of Operational Guidelines, 2013 provide s that the ADPC shall 
ensure that time bound corrective action is taken on the social audit report. 
Scrutiny of records (July 2021) of selected GPs (Appendix 5.2)  revealed the 
following: 
Table 5.3: Social audit observations pendency status in selected GPs  
No. of 
GPs 
Social audit 
observations raised 
Social audit 
observations settled 
Outstanding Social 
audit observations 
Percentage  
92 346 276 70 20 
The pendency of the issues outstanding ranged from one to five years. 
It was observed (August 2021) that the SAU raised 2 7,287 audit observations 
during 2016-2021 for the entire state.  However, th e corrective measures were 
taken only in 7,472 social audit observations.  The  status of social audit 
conducted and observations at State level is given in Table 5.2 : 
 

Performance Audit Report on ‘Implementation of MGNR EGS in Punjab’ 
70 
Table 5.4: Social audit observations pendency status in State 
Year Social audit 
observations raised 
Social audit 
observations settled 
Outstanding Social 
audit observations 
Percentage 
2016-17 10 10 00 0 
2017-18 3,998 3,177 821 20.54 
2018-19 6,783 3,108 3,675 54.18 
2019-20 8,126 889 7,237 89.06 
2020-21 8,370 288 8,082 96.56 
Total  27,287 7,472 19,815  
Source: Departmental data  
Table 5.4 shows the year-wise pendency and it showed that the  social audit 
observations ranging between 20.54 per cent and 96.56 per cent  were 
outstanding for want of corrective measures. 
The Department accepted the facts (September 2022) and stated that the old 
observations were being settled 
. The reply is not acceptable because  
54.18 per cent  paras for the period 2018-19 were still outstanding.  
5.6.3 Non-conducting of Concurrent social audit  
Concurrent social audit shall be done for all works  every month. For this 
purpose, self-help groups, village social auditors,  Village Monitoring 
Committees (VMC) and other village level organisati ons (VO) will have the 
right to inspect all records of works done and expe nditure made in the Gram 
Panchayat on a fixed day of the week. Copies of rec ords, where needed, will 
be provided by the Programme Officer at a nominal c ost. VMC may visit each 
active worksite once a month. The VMC shall sign it s report and submit the 
same to the Programme Officer. 
Scrutiny of records and information collected from all the selected blocks 
revealed that neither the VMC was formed in any sel ected block nor the 
concurrent social audit was conducted . 
The Department replied (October 2022) that no such type of instructions were 
received from headquarter office.  The reply was no t acceptable because 
Operational Guidelines of the scheme provide for th e conduct of concurrent 
social audit. 
5.7 Shortage of manpower 
Section 18 of the MGNREGA provides that State Gover nment is mandated to 
make available to the DPC and PO necessary staff an d technical support as 
may be necessary for effective implementation of the scheme. Supporting staff 
could also be hired, on contractual basis, to provi de professional services at 
the State level. The recruitment policy for the fun ctionaries will be decided by 
the State Government. 

Chapter-V: Grievance Redressal, Monitoring and Internal Control 
71 
Scrutiny of records (July 2021) revealed that total  2,875 posts of various 
categories were sanctioned (March 2021) against which 1,830 employees were 
deployed against the sanctioned posts. The availabi lity of staff against the 
sanctioned posts are given in Table 5.5: 
Table 5.5: Shortage of staff 
Name of post  Sanctioned 
post 
Person in 
position 
Shortfall Shortfall 
(per cent)  
IT Manager 22 16 6 27.27 
Works Manager 22 3 19 86.36 
Accounts Manager 22 6 16 72.72 
Computer Assistant (at District level) 22 15 7 31.8 2 
District Coordinator 22 6 16 72.72 
District Social Audit Coordinator 22 6 16 72.72 
Grievance Redressal Coordinator 22 1 21 95.45 
APO 150 146 4 02.67 
Technical Assistant  491 223 268 54.58 
Accountant 150 29 121 80.67 
Computer Assistant (At Block level) 150 150 0 0 
Data Entry Operator 150 48 102 68.00 
Gram Rozgar Sahayak 1,608 1,176 432 26.87 
Technical Coordinator 22 5 17 77.27 
Total 2,875 1,830 1,045 36.34 
Source: Departmental data  
Table 5.5  shows that the shortfall of available staff agains t the sanctioned 
strength for implementation of scheme was ranging b etween Zero and 
95.45 per cent . Acute shortage can be seen in respect of importan t 
functionaries viz: work manager, accounts manager, district coordinator, 
district social audit coordinator, grievance redres sal coordinator, APO, 
technical assistant, accountant, DEO and technical coordinator. There was no 
way that the scheme could have been implemented wit hout these important 
functionaries to keep records and manage and guide works.   
Further as per norms issued (September 2019) the St ate may ensure that at 
least one Gram Rozgar Sahayak  (GRS) is deployed in every 7-10 GPs and one 
TA for every five villages. 
Scrutiny of records and information provided by the  test checked districts 
revealed that in these districts there was huge sho rtage of GRS and TA as 
detailed below. 
 

Performance Audit Report on ‘Implementation of MGNR EGS in Punjab’ 
72 
Table 5.6: Shortage of Gram Rozgar Sahayak (GRS) as on 31.03.2021 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of 
district 
No of gram 
panchayat 
No of 
GRS 
required 
No. of 
GRS 
appointed 
Shortage Percentage 
of shortage 
1. Sangrur 596 60 64 Nil --- 
2. Ferozepur 838 84 75 09 10.71 
3. Amritsar 862 86 50 36 41.86 
4. Moga 340 34 69 Nil --- 
5. Jalandhar 902 90 85 5 05.55 
6. SAS Nagar 341 34 50 Nil --- 
Table 5.7: Shortage of Technical Assistant (TA) as on 31.03.2021 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of 
district 
No of gram 
Panchayat 
No of TA 
required 
No. of TA 
appointed 
Shortage Percentage 
of shortage 
1. Sangrur 596 119 07 112 94.12 
2. Ferozepur 838 168 20 148 88.10 
3. Amritsar 862 172 7 165 95.93 
4. Moga 340 68 10 58 85.29 
5. Jalandhar 902 180 7 173 96.11 
6. SAS Nagar  341 68 7 61 89.71 
Thus, due to shortfall in the availability of staff  against the sanctioned posts, 
various shortcomings were noticed in performance au dit such as; improper 
preparation of labour budget, non-maintenance of re cords, delay in disposal of 
complaints etc. (as discussed in Paragraphs 2.3, 5.2.2 and 5.10).  
The Department accepted the facts (September 2022) and assured to take 
necessary corrective measures.  Acute manpower defi ciencies when seen 
along with the earlier discussed lack of vigilance and monitoring leads one to 
question the correctness of scheme implementation a s no assurance can be 
drawn on execution of works and related payments.   
While discussing the CAG’s report for the year ende d March 2012 (Paragraph 
2.2.12.1), PAC transferred (November 2020) this par a to the Department with 
instructions to take action at its own level. However, Department failed to take 
action as the shortfall in manpower still persisted. 
5.8 Non-planning for capacity building  
Paras 5.2.1 and 5.2.2 of Operational Guidelines, 20 13 provide that each State 
will set up a MGNREGA Human Resource Development an d Capacity 
Building Division (HRDCBD) to identify and mobilise  institutions which play 
the role of training institutions of MGNREGA, draw up a state level training 

Chapter-V: Grievance Redressal, Monitoring and Internal Control 
73 
plan as per courses 5 defined in para 5.3 of Operation Guidelines, 2013 for 
every stakeholder. 
Scrutiny of records (July 2021) revealed that no HR DCBD was established at 
State level during the period 2016-2021 due to whic h no training plan was 
prepared.  However, it was observed that during the  period 2016-2021, State 
Institute of Rural Development (SIRD) had organised  only 19 
6 departmental 
training programmes (TP) of various activities 7as assigned by MoRD.  It was 
further observed that these trainings were attended  by a total of 2,780 trainees 
during 2016-2021 and in these trainings all the cou rses defined in Guidelines 
were not conducted. 
In the exit conference (September 2022), the Department admitted the fact and 
assured to take necessary corrective measures for c apacity building. 
Compliance was awaited (November 2022) in audit. 
While discussing the CAG’s Report for the year ende d March 2012 
(Paragraph 2.2.12.2), PAC transferred (September 20 14) this para to the 
Department with instructions to take action at its own level. However, 
Department failed to take any corrective measure in this regard.  
5.9 Non-coverage of workers under Janashree Bima Yo jana and 
Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana 
Para 8.9 of Operational Guidelines provides that Ma hatma Gandhi NREGA 
workers are covered under the Janashree Bima Yojana  (JBY) implemented by 
Ministry of Finance. JBY provides life coverage and disability benefits to rural 
people. Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana (RSBY) has b een extended to all 
Mahatma Gandhi NREGA workers/beneficiaries who have  worked for more 
than 15 days in the preceding financial year. DPCs and POs are required to 
make workers aware of these schemes. For RSBY, a li st of 
workers/households that are entitled to this scheme  is available in 
NREGASoft.  
Scrutiny of information collected from all the sele cted districts and selected 
blocks revealed that list of workers for their cove rage under both the schemes 
was not sent to the nodal agency during  2016-2021. 
The Department replied (October 2022) that no such type of instructions had 
been received from JDCC office.  The reply was not acceptable because 
scheme guidelines provide for coverage of these schemes under MGNREGS. 
                                                           
5 IEC, Planning for works, wage payments, measurement of works, Social audit, review of field work 
done, worksite facilities, maintenance of records, etc. 
6 2016-17: two TPs; 2017-18: five TPs; 2018-19: six TPs; 2019-20: five TPs; and 2020-21: one TP. 
7 Social audit, labour budget, gem portal, GIS capac ity building, e-FMS, PFMS, etc.  

Performance Audit Report on ‘Implementation of MGNR EGS in Punjab’ 
74 
 
5.10 Mandatory records and their maintenance 
Chapter-10 of the Operational Guidelines, 2013 desc ribes the mandatory 
records required to be maintained.  GOI issued inst ruction for proper 
maintenance of records for the effective implementa tion of any scheme and 
provided simplified formats of the seven Registers 8. These registers are 
designed with a view to ease the functioning of the  field level personnel and 
reduce duplication of work without compromising the  quality of information 
especially those relating to entitlements of worker s. Registers II, III and V 
were required to be maintained manually and registers I, IV, VI and VII can be 
maintained partially manually and partially printed and pasted from MIS itself. 
Scrutiny of records (September 2021 to December 202 1) of selected 12 blocks 
revealed that said registers were not maintained/pa rtially maintained by the 
selected GPs. 
It was further noticed that the said registers were  issued during January 2015 
to March 2019 by six selected districts 
9 to the blocks for further distribution to 
GPs. Despite the issue of requisite registers, thes e were not maintained at 
Block/GPs level to record the data such as; applica tion of work, allotment of 
work, performance of work, wages or unemployment al lowance paid to the 
workers, details of complaints, etc. 
In the exit conference (September 2022), the Depart ment acknowledged the 
fact and assured to take necessary corrective measu res. However, the fact 
remained that the maintenance of mandatory records was not being done, as 
required under the Scheme guidelines. 
5.11 Conclusion 
The envisaged monitoring and grievance redressal me chanism was practically 
non-functional.  The envisaged monitoring and steering of the Scheme  at the 
highest level of State Employment Guarantee Council  (SEGC) was reduced to 
being a perfunctory exercise reducing accountabilit y of Executive to the 
Legislature. There were shortcomings in number of s ocial audits carried out 
and settlements of objections raised in Social Audi t Reports. There was no 
proper assessment of manpower requirement and gaps between  
men-in-position and sanctioned strength were notice d in key field level posts. 
Records maintenance at GP level was poor and most b asic records were also 
not maintained.  
                                                           
8 I -Register for Job Card (Application, Registration, J ob Card Issue) and Household Employment 
Reports; II-Gram Sabha Register; III-Demand for Work,  Allocation of Work and Payment of 
Wages Register; IV-Work Register; V-Fixed Asset Regist er; VI-Complaint Register; and  
VII-Material Register.  
9 (i) Amritsar: November 2016; (ii) Jalandhar: Septe mber 2018; (iii) Sangrur: January 2015;  
(iv) SAS Nagar: December 2017; (v) Moga: August 2017; and (vi) Ferozepur: March 2019. 

Chapter-V: Grievance Redressal, Monitoring and Internal Control 
75 
5.12 Recommendations  
(i) 
 The SEGC and the Department need to ensure intensive monitoring of 
the Scheme for proper implementation. The SEGC may consider 
undertaking a State level, comprehensive, independent evaluation of the 
Scheme; 
(ii) The Department should evolve a proper mechanism to conduct social 
audit of all the GPs and ensure the timely settlement of gaps raised in 
the Social Audit Reports; 
(iii)  The Department should reassess the manpower requirement and ensure 
that adequate number of staff with requisite skills are provided for the 
smooth functioning of the Scheme; and 
(iv) Records maintenance at all levels needs to be streamlined with sound 
mechanism of monitoring and funds release should be linked with proper 
maintenance/verification of records. 
 
Chandigarh 
The  
(NAZLI J. SHAYIN) 
Principal Accountant General (Audit), Punjab 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi 
The  
Countersigned 
(GIRISH CHANDRA MURMU) 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 

Appendices 

77 
Appendix 1.1     
(Referred to in para 1.2.3; page 4) 
Details of selected Districts, Blocks and Gram Panchayats 
Name of District Name of Block Name of selected Gram Panchayat 
Amritsar  Verka 
 
1 Baba Deep Singh Avenue 
2 Abadi Guru Nanak Nagar 
3 Ganusabad 
4 Mehniya Koharan 
5 Nangli 
6 Jethuwal 
7 MiranKot Kalan 
8 Wadala Bhittewid 
9 Bal Khurd 
10 Bal Kalan 
Rayya 
 
1 Jhirinangal 
2 Dardeo Sardara 
3 Kartarpur 
4 Butari 
5 Palah 
6 Khanpur 
7 Jallupur Kheda 
8 Khalchian 
9 Dyanpur 
10 Gaggarbhana 
Ferozepur Ghall Khurd  1 Gajjan Singh Colony 
2 Thethar Khurd 
3 Kulgarhi 
4 Basti Khalil Wali 
5 HastiWala 
6 Ferozeshah 
7 Waloor 
8 Thethar Kalan 
9 Dhindsa 
10 Malwal kadim 
Zira 1 Thatha Kishan Singh  
2 Gadri Wala 
3 Shah Wala 
4 Noorpur 
5 Behak Gujjran 
6 Lohke Kalan 
7 Rattaul Rohi 
8 Mansur Deva  
9 Katora 
10 Boran Wali 
Jalandhar Mehatpur 1 Gobindpur 
2 Bangiwal khurd 
3 Passarian 

Performance Audit Report on ‘Implementation of MGNR EGS in Punjab’  
78 
Name of District Name of Block Name of selected Gram Panchayat 
4 Khursadpur 
5 Jhugian 
6 Nawan Pind Dhakni 
7 Parjian Khurd 
8 Awan Khalsa 
9 Rouli 
10 Adraman 
Lohian 1 ChakPipli 
2 Janian Chahal 
3 Bara Budh Singh  
4 Kotha 
5 Rupewal 
6 Nawan Pind Khalewal 
7 Sidhupur 
8 Nasirpur 
9 Shindhar 
10 Gatta Mundi Kasu 
Moga Bagha-purana 1 Guru Tegha Bahadur Garh 
2 Sukhanand 
3 Malke 
4 Pandit Bhoom Raj  
5 Gholian Kalan  
6 Tharaj 
7 Dhilwan Wala 
8 Langiana Nawan 
9 Kaleke 
10 Smalsar 
Moga-1 1 Butter Khurd 
2 Kokri Phula Singh  
3 Dosanjh 
4 Chrik Pati Sarkar  
5 MallianWala 
6 Ramuwala Harchoke 
7 Durdhar Garbi 
8 Dhudike 
9 Mehna 
10 Dala  
Sangrur Ahmedgarh 
(Malerkotla-2) 
1 Bishangarh 
2 Asdullahpur (Bourhai Khurad)  
3 Mubarakpur (Chungha)   
4 JitwalKhurd 
5 Mithewal 
6 Kasba Bharal 
7 Jandali Kalan  
8 Kalian  
9 Jhaner 
10 Jalwana  

Appendices  
79 
Name of District Name of Block Name of selected Gram Panchayat 
Sangrur 1 Gurdaspura Gurthali 
2 Shaheed Udyabhan Singh Nagar 
3 Gobind Nagar 
4 Kular Khurd 
5 Ubhawal 
6 Togawal 
7 Bhindra 
8 Sahoke 
9 Dialgarh 
10 Bahadurpur 
SAS Nagar Majri 1 Karondian Wala 
2 Rakauli 
3 Choti Badi Nagal 
4 Hushiarpur 
5 Baroudi 
6 Majri Colony  
7 Guno Majra 
8 Teur 
9 Tara Pur 
10 Khizrabad 
Kharar 1 Naanu Majra 
2 Singhpura 
3 Balongi Colony 
4 Kailon 
5 Soonk 
6 Mausal 
7 Majatri 
8 Bhukri 
9 Popna 
10 Madanheri  
Source: Departmental data 
 
 

Performance Audit Report on ‘Implementation of MGNR EGS in Punjab’  
80 
Appendix 2.1 
(Referred to in para 2.3.4; page 15) 
Details showing preparation of Labour Budget by District Panchayat/Block/GPs  
Sr. 
No. 
Selected GP 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 
Date of LB 
proposals 
No. of 
works 
proposed 
By GPs 
Works 
proposed 
by the 
block 
Date of 
LB 
proposals 
No. of 
works 
proposed 
By GPs 
Works 
proposed 
by the 
block 
Date of LB 
proposals 
No. of 
works 
proposed 
By GPs 
Works 
proposed 
by the 
block 
Date of LB 
proposals 
No. of 
works 
proposed 
By GPs 
Works 
proposed 
by the 
block 
Date of 
LB 
proposals 
No. of 
works 
proposed 
By GPs 
Works 
proposed 
by the 
block 
1.   Karondian 
Wala (Majri) 
N/A 
 N/A  2 N/A N/A 3 02.02.2018 5 4 19.02.2019 7 6 30.11.201 9 8 6 
2.   Rakauli (Majri) N/A  N/A  4 N/A N/A 4 N/A N/A 5 N/A N/A 6 20.11.2019 8 10 
3.   Chhoti Badi 
Nangal (Majri) 
N/A 
 N/A  3 20.09.2016 4 3 10.12.2017 4 3 22.01.2019 9 5 N/A N/A 10 
4.   Hushiar Pur 
(Majri) 
16.10.2015 
 7 2 20.12.2016 5 5 N/A N/A 5 04.02.2019 7 5 27.11.201 9 7 9 
5.   Baroudi (Majri) 16.10.2015  8 3 10.11.2016 11 5 N/A N/A 6 06.10.2018 6 7 19.06.20 19 10 13 
6.   Majri Colony 
(Majri) 
N/A 
 N/A  3 N/A N/A 6 11.10.2017 4 8 22.01.2019 6 8 28.11.201 9 11 9 
7.   Guno Majra 
(Majri) 
25.10.2015 
 6 2 N/A N/A 5 30.09.2017 3 8 22.01.2019 10 8 15.11.20 19 6 12 
8.   Teur (Majri) 11.09.2015  6 3 09.12.2016 9 5 30.10.2017 5 8 12.02.2019 12 8 20. 11.2019 7 9 
9.   Tara Pur 
(Majri) 
N/A 
 N/A  3 N/A N/A 6 04.12.2017 7 8 22.01.2019 11 8 24.11.20 19 7 10 
10.   Khizrabad 
(Majri) 
05.01.2016 
 2 3 10.11.2016 8 3 19.11.2017 8 6 22.01.2019 10 7 19. 07.2019 2 7 
11.   Popna (Kharar) N/A  N/A  1 10.09.2016 3 4 28.10.2017 4 3 17.01.2019 21 9 27. 11.2019 13 7 
12.   Bhukhri 
(Kharar) 
N/A 
 N/A  2 23.09.2017 3 4 01.03.2018 5 2 25.01.2019 22 7 24. 07.2020 4 16 
13.   Madanheri 
(Kharar) 
02.10.2015 
 2 2 19.08.2016 2 3 18.10.2017 6 1 23.01.2019 16 9 11. 10.2019 12 7 
14.   Singhpura 
(Kharar) 
22.10.2015 
 1 1 N/A N/A 1 N/A N/A 2 01.03.2019 3 2 28.12.2019 10 5 
15.   Majatri 
(Kharar) 
14.08.2015 
 2 1 02.10.2016 3 3 N/A 4 2 25.01.2018 15 7 11.11.2019  9 8 
16.   Kailo (Kharar) N/A  N/A  1 N/A N/A 3 N/A N/A 3 20.02.2019 6 6 14.11.2019 10 9 
17.   Nannu Majra 
(Kharar) 
10.12.2015 
 3 1 22.11.2016 5 3 25.11.2017 5 1 20.11.2018 4 4 18.1 1.2019 6 11 
18.   Balongi Colony 
(Kharar) 
N/A 
 N/A  1 N/A N/A 1 N/A N/A 2 30.12.2019 2 3 25.12.2020 4 7  
19.   Soonk (Kharar) N/A  N/A  N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3 N/A N/A 10 N/A N/A N/A 

Appendices  
81 
Sr. 
No. 
Selected GP 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 
Date of LB 
proposals 
No. of 
works 
proposed 
By GPs 
Works 
proposed 
by the 
block 
Date of 
LB 
proposals 
No. of 
works 
proposed 
By GPs 
Works 
proposed 
by the 
block 
Date of LB 
proposals 
No. of 
works 
proposed 
By GPs 
Works 
proposed 
by the 
block 
Date of LB 
proposals 
No. of 
works 
proposed 
By GPs 
Works 
proposed 
by the 
block 
Date of 
LB 
proposals 
No. of 
works 
proposed 
By GPs 
Works 
proposed 
by the 
block 
20.   Masaul 
(Kharar) 
N/A 
 N/A  1 N/A N/A 3 N/A N/A 4 N/A N/A 7 22.12.2020 10 11 
21.   Butter Khurd 
(Moga-I) 
29.09.2015 6 5
 10.02.2017 7 5  05.12.2017 8 5 12.01.2019 11 10 21.12.2019 8 5 
22.   Kokri Phula 
Singh (Moga-I) 
N/A N/A 8
 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 8 N/A N/A 9 N/A N/A 8 
23.   Dosanjh 
(Moga-I) 
N/A N/A 5
 20.12.2016 7 5  12.10.2017 10 5 14.01.2019 16 11 18.12.2019 10 5 
24.   Charik Pati 
Sarkar (Moga-
I) 
N/A N/A 8
 N/A N/A 8  12.12.2017 9 8 15.01.2019 17 11 12.12.2019 16 8 
25.   Mallian Wala 
(Moga-I) 
23.09.2015 9 7
 17.08.2016 13 7  17.12.2017 11 7 15.01.2019 17 11 10.01.2020 12 7 
26.   Ramuwala 
Harchoke 
(Moga-I) 
N/A N/A 6
 N/A N/A 6  06.12.2017 8 6 19.01.2019 15 10 N/A N/A 6 
27.   Dudhar Garbi 
(Moga-I) 
30.09.2015 11 6
 18.11.2016 14 6  06.12.2017 9 6 15.01.2019 18 9 26.08.2019 10 6 
28.   Dhudike 
(Moga-I) 
15.09.2015 8 7
 10.10.2017 8 7  23.10.2018 9 7 10.01.2019 10 11 09.02.2020 12 7 
29.   Mehna  
(Moga-I) 
N/A N/A 9
 N/A N/A 8  N/A N/A 9 N/A N/A 10 N/A N/A 9 
30.   Dala (Moga-I) N/A N/A 10  N/A N/A 10  N/A N/A 10 N/A N/A 11 N/A N/A 10 
31.   GTB Garh 
(Baghapurana) 
14.09.2015 13 5 06.10.2016 18 7 04.10.2017 8 7 16.0 1.2019 10 7 04.10.2019 12 7 
32.   Sukhanand 
(Baghapurana) 
12.10.2015 10 N/A 04.10.2016 10 15 06.10.2017 8 14 14.01.2019 12 14 14.12.2019 8 14 
33.   Malke  
(Baghapurana) 
02.10.2015 9 6 03.10.2016 9 11 04.10.2017 10 11 02. 10.2018 10 10 05.10.2019 12 10 
34.   Pandit Bhoom 
Raj 
(Baghapurana) 
16.09.2015 7 6 22.09.2016 6 8 03.10.2017 9 8 12.01. 2019 13 8 25.10.2019 11 8 
35.   Gholian Kalan 
(Baghapurana) 
28.09.2015 10 5 17.09.2016 7 11 20.11.2017 8 11 16. 01.2019 14 11 12.12.2019 30 11 
36.   Tharaj  
(Baghapurana) 
19.09.2015 10 6 17.09.2016 8 13 03.10.2017 9 13 12. 01.2019 12 13 10.12.2019 12 13 
37.   Dhilwan Wala 
(Baghapurana) 
03.10.2015 7 5 04.10.2016 7 13 N/A N/A N/A 13.01.20 19 10 N/A 09.12.2019 6 N/A 

Performance Audit Report on ‘Implementation of MGNR EGS in Punjab’  
82 
Sr. 
No. 
Selected GP 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 
Date of LB 
proposals 
No. of 
works 
proposed 
By GPs 
Works 
proposed 
by the 
block 
Date of 
LB 
proposals 
No. of 
works 
proposed 
By GPs 
Works 
proposed 
by the 
block 
Date of LB 
proposals 
No. of 
works 
proposed 
By GPs 
Works 
proposed 
by the 
block 
Date of LB 
proposals 
No. of 
works 
proposed 
By GPs 
Works 
proposed 
by the 
block 
Date of 
LB 
proposals 
No. of 
works 
proposed 
By GPs 
Works 
proposed 
by the 
block 
38.   Langiava 
Nawan  
(Baghapurana) 
30.10.2015 11 8 30.10.2016 28 10 30.10.2017 11 10 1 6.01.2019 11 10 25.10.2019 49 10 
39.   Kaleke  
(Baghapurana) 
30.09.2015 9 6 11.02.2017 8 12 04.10.2017 9 12 24.0 1.2019 18 11 20.12.2019 18 11 
40.   Smalsar 
 (Baghapurana) 
02.10.2015 12 7 04.10.2016 15 11 03.10.2017 15 11 2 6.10.2018 21 11 20.11.2019 12 11 
41.   Abadi Guru 
nanak nagar 
(Verka) 
02.10.2015 9 3 N/A N/A 3 N/A N/A 3 15.10.2018 9 5 1 6.10.2019 9 6 
42.   Baba Deep 
Singh Avenue 
(Verka) 
N/A N/A 2 N/A N/A 1 N/A N/A 2 N/A 2 3 02.10.2019 5 2 
43.   Bal Khurd 
(Verka) 
04.10.2015 7 2 02.10.2016 4 2 02.10.2017 6 3 04.10. 2018 5 0 02.10.2019 8 15 
44.   Bal Kalan 
(Verka) 
15.10.2015 6 2 N/A N/A 3 25.12.2017 14 4 06.12.2018  5 0 10.10.2019 11 36 
45.   Ganusabad 
(Verka) 
N/A N/A 2 N/A N/A 3 N/A N/A 4 N/A N/A 0 N/A N/A 9 
46.   Jethuwal 
(Verka) 
02.10.2015 4 2 10.02.2016 9 3 21.08.2017 10 4 21.01 .2019 17 0 06.11.2019 13 39 
47.   Mehniya 
Koharan 
(Verka) 
28.08.2015 5 2 02.08.2016 4 3 02.09.2017 11 4 22.01 .2019 16 0 26.12.2019 9 9 
48.   Miran Kot 
Kalan (Verka) 
N/A N/A 2 N/A N/A 4 N/A N/A 4 N/A N/A 0 N/A N/A 13 
49.   Nangli (Verka) N/A N/A 2 N/A N/A 2 N/A N/A 5 N/A N/ A 0 N/A N/A 5 
50.   Wadala 
Bhittewind 
(Verka) 
02.10.2015 10 2 N/A N/A 4 N/A N/A 5 N/A N/A 0 N/A N /A 17 
51.   Butari (Rayya) 10.02.2015 3 N/A  15.08.2016 2 1 25.02.2018 4 N/A  25.02.2019 4 5 N/A  N/A  6 
52.   Dardeo Sardara 
(Rayya) 
N/A N/A N/A 
 N/A  N/A  1 N/A  N/A  N/A  28.01.2019 12 6 N/A  N/A  7 
53.   Dyanpur 
(Rayya) 
02.10.2015 3 N/A 
 N/A  N/A  1 N/A  N/A  N/A  28.01.2019 9 6 N/A  N/A  11 
54.   Gaggarbhana 
(Rayya) 
N/A 
 N/A  N/A  N/A  N/A  1 N/A  N/A  N/A  N/A  N/A  6 N/A  N/A  7 
55.   Jallupur Kheda 
(Rayya)  
N/A 
 N/A  N/A  N/A  N/A  1 N/A  N/A  N/A  N/A  N/A  6 25.01.2020 5 7 

Appendices  
83 
Sr. 
No. 
Selected GP 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 
Date of LB 
proposals 
No. of 
works 
proposed 
By GPs 
Works 
proposed 
by the 
block 
Date of 
LB 
proposals 
No. of 
works 
proposed 
By GPs 
Works 
proposed 
by the 
block 
Date of LB 
proposals 
No. of 
works 
proposed 
By GPs 
Works 
proposed 
by the 
block 
Date of LB 
proposals 
No. of 
works 
proposed 
By GPs 
Works 
proposed 
by the 
block 
Date of 
LB 
proposals 
No. of 
works 
proposed 
By GPs 
Works 
proposed 
by the 
block 
56.   Jhirinangal 
(Rayya) 
02.10.2015 2 N/A 
 N/A  N/A  1 N/A  N/A  N/A  28.01.2019 8 5 01.02.2020 8 6 
57.   Kartarpur 
(Rayya) 
02.10.2015 3 N/A 
 15.08.2016 3 1 N/A  N/A  N/A  15.01.2019 11 7 N/A  N/A  7 
58.   Khalchian 
(Rayya) 
02.10.2015 3 N/A 
 15.08.2016 4 1 N/A  N/A  N/A  31.01.2019 6 6 N/A  N/A  7 
59.   Khanpur 
(Rayya) 
02.10.2015 4 N/A 
 15.08.2016 4 1 N/A  N/A  N/A  19.01.2019 11 5 N/A  N/A  6 
60.   Palah (Rayya) N/A  N/A  N/A  N/A  N/A  1 N/A  N/A  N/A  N/A  N/A  5 N/A  N/A  6 
61.   Bada Budh 
Singh 
(Jalandhar) 
08.11.2015 1 1 N/A 
 N/A  1 27.01.2018 3 4 15.01.2019 3 13 24.11.2019 12 9 
62.   Chak Pipli 
(Jalandhar) 
02.11.2015 2 1 N/A 
 N/A  2 18.10.2017 2 4 23.01.2019 5 2 29.12.2019 15 9 
63.   Gatta Mundi 
(Jalandhar) 
Kasu 
N/A N/A 1 N/A 
 N/A  1 12.10.2016 5 26 16.08.2018 5 34 16.12.2019 10 10 
64.   Jania Chahal 
(Jalandhar) 
N/A N/A 1 N/A 
 N/A  3 10.10.2017 8 4 N/A  N/A  2 N/A  N/A  9 
65.   Kotha 
(Jalandhar) 
N/A N/A 1 N/A 
 N/A  2 24.10.2017 1 7 25.09.2018 1 8 21.11.2019 4 9 
66.   nasirpur 
(Jalandhar) 
N/A N/A 1 N/A 
 N/A  1 20.10.2017 1 2 21.08-2018 4 6 10.12.2019 1 7 
67.   nawan Pind 
Khalewal 
(Jalandhar) 
01.01.2016 2 2 N/A 
 N/A  2 05.09.2017 7 2 14.01.2019 7 12 05.12.2019 6 9 
68.   Rupewal 
(Jalandhar) 
N/A N/A 1 N/A 
 N/A  2 N/A  N/A  8 N/A  N/A  3 20.12.2019 6 9 
69.   Shindhar 
(Jalandhar) 
N/A N/A 1 N/A 
 N/A  2 N/A  N/A  5 N/A  N/A  5 N/A  N/A  11 
70.   Sidhupur 
(Jalandhar) 
02.11.2015 1 1 30.09.2017 1 2 N/A 
 N/A  5 24.01.2019 14 4 09.12.2019 13 9 
71.   Shaheed Uday 
Bhan Singh 
Nagar 
(Sangrur) 
16.08.2015 3 N/A 
 27.10.2016 5 N/A  02.10.2017 5 N/A  23.01.2019 7 N/A  N/A  N/A  N/A  
72.   Shoke 
(Sangrur) 
19.08.2015 8 N/A 
 25.12.2016 10 N/A  02.10.2017 9 N/A  22.11.2018 13 N/A  07.12.2019 20 N/A  

Performance Audit Report on ‘Implementation of MGNR EGS in Punjab’  
84 
Sr. 
No. 
Selected GP 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 
Date of LB 
proposals 
No. of 
works 
proposed 
By GPs 
Works 
proposed 
by the 
block 
Date of 
LB 
proposals 
No. of 
works 
proposed 
By GPs 
Works 
proposed 
by the 
block 
Date of LB 
proposals 
No. of 
works 
proposed 
By GPs 
Works 
proposed 
by the 
block 
Date of LB 
proposals 
No. of 
works 
proposed 
By GPs 
Works 
proposed 
by the 
block 
Date of 
LB 
proposals 
No. of 
works 
proposed 
By GPs 
Works 
proposed 
by the 
block 
73.   Togawal 
(Sangrur) 
18.08.2015 7 N/A 
 30.10.2016 11 N/A  03.10.2017 8 N/A  02.10.2018 10 N/A  22.10.2019 18 N/A  
74.   Kular Khurd 
(Sangrur) 
02.10.2016 8 N/A 
 10.02.2017 12 N/A  N/A N/A  N/A  29.01.2019 18 N/A  02.12.2019 27 N/A  
75.   Gobind Nagar 
(Sangrur) 
16.08.2015 4 N/A 
 29.10.2016 5 N/A  02.10.2017 5 N/A  24.01.2019 16 N/A  11.12.2019 14 N/A  
76.   Ubhawal 
(Sangrur) 
03.09.2015 11 N/A 
 11.09.2016 11 N/A  01.04.2018 8 N/A  27.07.2018 4 N/A  15.10.2020 6 N/A  
77.   Dialgarh 
(Sangrur) 
28.03.2016 11 N/A 
 02.10.2017 10 N/A  N/A N/A N/A  25.01.2019 21 N/A  21.12.2020 15 N/A  
78.   Bhindra 
(Sangrur) 
02.10.2015 6 N/A 
 15.10.2016 5 N/A  20.10.2017 5 N/A  16.08.2018 6 N/A  02.11.2019 10 N/A  
79.   Bahadurpur 
(Sangrur) 
02.10.2015 10 N/A 
 07.10.2016 10 N/A  20.10.2017 10 N/A  03.10.2018 11 N/A  02.10.2019 12 N/A  
80.   Gurdaspur 
Gurthali 
(Sangrur) 
15.10.2016 3 N/A 
 02.10.2017 4 N/A  N/A N/A N/A  N/A N/A N/A  02.10.2020 5 N/A  
81.   Mubarakpur 
(Malerkotla-2) 
02.10.2015 5 N/A 
 27.10.2016 9 N/A  02.10.2017 10 N/A  08.10.2018 11 N/A  02.10.2019 7 N/A  
82.   Jalwana 
(Malerkotla-2) 
02.10.2015 9 N/A 
 24.11.2016 10 N/A  02.10.2017 6 N/A  04.10.2018 10 N/A  02.11.2019 8 N/A  
83.   Jhaner 
(Malerkotla-2) 
18.09.2015 6 N/A 
 02.10.2016 9 N/A  02.10.2017 9 N/A  02.10.2018 10 N/A  02.10.2019 7 N/A  
84.   Jandhali Kalan 
(Malerkotla-2) 
25.09.2015 6 N/A 
 15.11.2016 7 N/A  02.10.2017 7 N/A  18.01.2019 10 N/A  28.10.2019 10 N/A  
85.   Bishangarh 
(Malerkotla-2) 
02.10.2015 7 N/A 
 02.10.2016 7 N/A  02.10.2017 6 N/A  02.10.2018 8 N/A  02.10.2019 9 N/A  
86.   Kaliyan 
(Malerkotla-2) 
02.10.2015 7 N/A 
 02.10.2016 6 N/A  02.10.2017 8 N/A  02.10.2018 12 N/A  02.10.2019 9 N/A  
87.   Jitwal Khurd 
(Malerkotla-2) 
01.10.2015 5 N/A 
 02.10.2016 6 N/A  02.10.2017 8 N/A  02.10.2018 8 N/A  02.10.2019 10 N/A  
88.   Asdhulapur 
(Malerkotla-2) 
01.07.2015 4 N/A 
 30.11.2016 5 N/A  02.10.2017 7 N/A  22.01.2019 8 N/A  02.10.2019 9 N/A  
89.   Kaswa Bharal 
(Malerkotla-2) 
20.10.2015 12 N/A 
 24.11.2016 8 N/A  02.10.2017 6 N/A  02.10.2018 7 N/A  02.10.2019 9 N/A  
90.   Mithawal 
(Malerkotla-2) 
02.09.2015 5 N/A 
 10.11.2016 9 N/A  02.10.2017 11 N/A  25.11.2019 1 N/A  07.10.2019 14 N/A  
91.   Waloor (Ghall 
Khurd) 
09.10.2015 14 N/A 
 05.10.2016 8 N/A  12.10.2017 12 N/A  24.10.2018 9 N/A  15.10.2019 7 N/A  

Appendices  
85 
Sr. 
No. 
Selected GP 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 
Date of LB 
proposals 
No. of 
works 
proposed 
By GPs 
Works 
proposed 
by the 
block 
Date of 
LB 
proposals 
No. of 
works 
proposed 
By GPs 
Works 
proposed 
by the 
block 
Date of LB 
proposals 
No. of 
works 
proposed 
By GPs 
Works 
proposed 
by the 
block 
Date of LB 
proposals 
No. of 
works 
proposed 
By GPs 
Works 
proposed 
by the 
block 
Date of 
LB 
proposals 
No. of 
works 
proposed 
By GPs 
Works 
proposed 
by the 
block 
92.   Malwan Kadim 
(GhallKhurd) 
10.10.2015 10 N/A 
 02.10.2016 6 N/A  06.10.2017 12 N/A  12.10.2018 10 N/A  09.10.2019 9 N/A  
93.   Dhindsa 
(GhallKhurd) 
N/A N/A N/A 
 06.10.2016 10 N/A  08.10.2017 9 N/A  14.10.2018 10 N/A  24.10.2019 11 N/A  
94.   Ferozeshah 
(GhallKhurd) 
N/A N/A N/A 
 02.10.2016 8 N/A  11.10.2017 10 N/A  14.10.2018 10 N/A  16.10.2019 12 N/A  
95.   Kulgarhi 
(GhallKhurd) 
08.10.2015 6 N/A 
 11.10.2016 8 N/A  11.10.2017 8 N/A  09.10.2018 13 N/A  09.10.2019 13 N/A  
96.   Thathar Khurd 
(GhallKhurd) 
N/A 
 N/A  N/A  N/A  N/A  N/A  N/A  N/A  N/A  N/A  N/A  N/A  N/A  N/A  N/A  
97.   Basti Khalil 
Wali 
(GhallKhurd) 
N/A 
 N/A  N/A  N/A  N/A  N/A  N/A  N/A  N/A  23.01.2019 6 N/A  08.01.2020 12 N/A  
98.   Gajjan Singh 
Colony 
(GhallKhurd) 
N/A 
 N/A  N/A  N/A  N/A  N/A  N/A  N/A  N/A  26.11.2018 11 N/A  06.11.2019 7 N/A  
99.   Hasti Wala 
(GhallKhurd) 
N/A 
 N/A  N/A  N/A  N/A  N/A  N/A  N/A  N/A  N/A N/A N/A  N/A  N/A  N/A  
100.   Thathar Kalan 
(GhallKhurd) 
N/A 
 N/A  N/A  N/A  N/A  N/A  N/A  N/A  N/A  N/A N/A N/A  N/A  N/A  N/A  
101.   Rattaul Rohi 
(Zira) 
05.10.2015 9 N/A 
 07.10.2016 8 N/A  25.03.2017 13 N/A  25.01.2019 8 N/A  19.11.2019 7 N/A  
102.   Boran Wali 
(Zira) 
15.10.2015 8 N/A 
 10.10.2016 12 N/A  17.11.2017 10 N/A  20.11.2018 12 N/A  21.11.2019 6 N/A  
103.   Behak Gujjran 
(Zira) 
15.10.2015 8 N/A 
 16.10.2016 8 N/A  02.11.2017 13 N/A  08.11.2018 10 N/A  21.11.2019 9 N/A  
104.   Thetha Kishan 
Singh (Zira) 
10.10.2015 4 N/A 
 10.10.2016 4 N/A  10.10.2017 4 N/A  10.10.2018 4 N/A  22.10.2019 10 N/A  
105.   Lokhe Kalan 
(Zira) 
02.01.2015 11 N/A 
 05.06.2016 11 N/A  26.10.2017 11 N/A  10.12.2018 11 N/A  06.11.2019 10 N/A  
106.   Shah Wala 
(Zira) 
04.10.2015 10 N/A 
 11.10.2016 9 N/A  25.10.2017 12 N/A  10.10.2018 9 N/A  09.10.2019 10 N/A  
107.   Noorpur (Zira) 22.10.2015 11 N/A  11.10.2016 12 N/A  25.10.2017 13 N/A  05.12.2018 7 N/A  06.11.2019 6 N/A  
108.   Mansoor Deva 
(Zira) 
15.10.2015 4 N/A 
 16.10.2016 5 N/A  09.10.2017 4 N/A  10.10.2018 6 N/A  06.10.2019 8 N/A  
109.   Katora (Zira) 15.10.2015 11 N/A  11.10.2016 11 N/A  25.10.2017 10 N/A  05.12.2018 11 N/A  06.11.2019 11 N/A  
110.   Gadri Wala 
(Zira) 
05.02.2015 11 N/A 
 28.02.2016 11 N/A  28.10.2017 11 N/A  10.12.2018 10 N/A  06.12.2019 10 N/A  

Performance Audit Report on ‘Implementation of MGNR EGS in Punjab’  
86 
Sr. 
No. 
Selected GP 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 
Date of LB 
proposals 
No. of 
works 
proposed 
By GPs 
Works 
proposed 
by the 
block 
Date of 
LB 
proposals 
No. of 
works 
proposed 
By GPs 
Works 
proposed 
by the 
block 
Date of LB 
proposals 
No. of 
works 
proposed 
By GPs 
Works 
proposed 
by the 
block 
Date of LB 
proposals 
No. of 
works 
proposed 
By GPs 
Works 
proposed 
by the 
block 
Date of 
LB 
proposals 
No. of 
works 
proposed 
By GPs 
Works 
proposed 
by the 
block 
111.   Adraman 
(Mehatpur) 
N/A 
 N/A  1 N/A  N/A  1 25.11.2019 3 1 N/A N/A 3 05.07.2019 N/A 3 
112.   Awan Khalsa 
(Mehatpur) 
N/A 
 N/A  1 N/A  N/A  1 N/A  N/A  1 23.01.2019 7 3 30.12.2019 14 3 
113.   Bhangiwal 
Khurd 
(Mehatpur) 
13.02.2016 1 N/A 
 N/A  N/A  N/A  N/A  N/A  N/A  22.01.2019 4 3 16.12.2019 13 3 
114.   Gobindpur 
(Mehatpur) 
N/A 
 N/A  1 N/A  N/A  1 N/A  N/A  1 N/A  N/A  3 18.12.2019 4 2 
115.   Jhungian 
(Mehatpur) 
N/A 
 N/A  N/A  N/A  N/A  N/A  N/A  N/A  1 23.01.2019 4 3 24.12.2019 17 3 
116.   Khursadpur 
(Mehatpur) 
N/A 
 N/A  N/A  N/A  N/A  N/A  N/A  N/A  1 06.02.2019 3 3 11.01.2020 14 1 
117.   Nawan Pind 
Jattan 
(Mehatpur) 
N/A 
 N/A  1 23.01.2019 5 1 20.02.2019 19 N/A  N/A  N/A  3 N/A  N/A  1 
118.   Parjian Khurd 
(Mehatpur) 
25.12.2016 N/A 
 N/A  N/A  N/A  N/A  24.01.2018 6 1 24.01.2019 14 3 24.12.2019 8 2 
119.   Passarian 
(Mehatpur) 
N/A 
 N/A  N/A  N/A  N/A  N/A  N/A  N/A  N/A  22..01.2019 4 3 N/A  N/A  1 
120.   Rouli 
(Mehatpur) 
23.12.2016 1 N/A 
 N/A  N/A  N/A  N/A  N/A  N/A  N/A  N/A  3 N/A  N/A  1 
Source: Departmental data  
N/A- Not available 

Appendices  
87 
 
Appendix 2.1(A) 
(Referred to in para 2.3.4; page 14) 
Details of Labour Budget of GP, Block related to column 5, 6, 7 & 8 of Table 2.1 
Description Serial Number Total 
Number 
Serial Number Total 
Number 
Serial Number Total 
Number 
Serial Number Total 
Number 
Serial Number Total 
Number 
2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 
LB was not proposed by GPs but 
included in LB at Block level  
(Out of Sr. No. 2) 
1,2,3,6,9,11,12,16,18, 
20,22,23,24,26,29,30, 
42,45,48,49,63,64,65, 
66, 68,69,111,112,114, 
117, 119 
31 1,2,6,7,9,14,16,18,20, 
24,26,29,30,41,42.44. 
45,48,49,50,52,53,54, 
55,56,60,61,62,63,64, 
65,66,67,68,69,111, 
112,114,117,119 
40 2,4,5,14,16,18, 
19,20,22,29,30, 
41,42,45,48,49, 
50,68,69,70, 
112,114,115, 
116 
24 2,19,20,22,29, 
30,54,55,60,64, 
68,69,111,114, 
117,120 
16 3,22,26,29,30,45, 
48,49,50,51,52, 
53,54,57,58,59, 
60,64,69,117, 
119,120 
22 
LB proposed by GPs but not included 
their proposals in LB at Block level 
(Out of Sr. No. 1) 
32,51,53,56,57,58,59, 
71,72,73,74,75,76,77, 
78,79,80,81,82,83,84, 
85,86,87,88,89,90,91, 
92,95,101,102,103,104, 
105, 106,107,108,109, 
110, 113,120 
42 71,72,73,74,75,76,77, 
78,79,80,81,82,83,84, 
85,86,87,88,89,90,91, 
92,93,94,95,101,102, 
103,104,105,106,107, 
108,109,110 
35 51,71,72,73,75, 
76,78,79,81,82, 
83,84,85,86,87, 
88,89,90,91,92, 
93,94,95,101, 
102,103,104, 
105,106,107, 
108,109,110, 
117 
34 37,43,44,46,47, 
71,72,74,75,76, 
77,78,79,81,82, 
83,84,85,86,87, 
88,89,90,91,92, 
93,94,95,97,98, 
101,102,103, 
104,105,106, 
107,108,109,110 
40 37,72,73,74,75, 
76,77,78,79,80, 
81,82,83,84,85, 
86,87,88,89,90, 
91,92,93,94,95, 
96,97,101,102, 
103,104,105,106, 
107,108,109,110 
37 
No. of GPs passed their LB proposal 
after the due date of submission of 
Block to the district  
(Out of Sr. No. 1) 
10,17,67,74,77,80,113, 
118,120 
9 4,8,12,21,23,28,39, 
70,72,74,77,80,117 
13 24,25,26,27,44, 
51,61,76,111, 
117,118 
11 1,3,4,6,7,8,9,10, 
11,12,13,14,16, 
18,21,23,24,25, 
26,27,28,31,32, 
34,35,36,37,38, 
39,46,47,51,52, 
53,56,57,58,59, 
61,62,67,70,71, 
74,75,77,84,88, 
90,97,101,105, 
110,112,113, 
115,116,118,119 
59 18,20,21,23,24, 
25,28,32,35,36, 
37,39,47,55,56, 
62,63,66,68,70, 
75,77,97,116,118 
25 
No. of GPs passed their LB proposal 
after the due date of submission of 
District LB to the State  
(Out of Sr. No. 7) 
74,77,113,118,120 6 12,21,28,39,70,74,77, 
80,117 
9 1,12,28,51,76, 
111,117 
7 1,4,13,14,16,18, 
51,90,116 
9 1,12,28,56,76,77, 
80 
7 
Source: Departmental data  
 
 

Performance Audit Report on ‘Implementation of MGNR EGS in Punjab’  
88 
 
Appendix 2.2 
(Referred to in para 2.3.5; page 18) 
Details of projected PDs and PDs generated in selected districts 
District Year No. of PDs 
projected 
in LB by 
the district 
No. of PDs 
allotted by 
JDCC 
No. of PDs 
generated 
Shortfall 
in PDs 
against 
projected 
Percentage of 
short 
generation of 
PDs against 
projection of 
LB 
1 2 3 4 5 6 (3-5) 7 
Sangrur 
  
  
  
  
2016-17 2550066 
 649124  772036  1778030 69.72 
2017-18 2716716  1266655  1276025  1440691 53.03 
2018-19 2848875  922309  924298  1924577 67.56 
2019-20 2340071  1335076  1173107  1166964 49.87 
2020-21 2462518  1875122  1848528  613990 24.93 
Total 1,29,18,246 60,48,286 59,93,994 69,24,252   
Ferozepur 
  
  
  
  
2016-17 342548 
 342548  379527  (+)36979* 10.80 
2017-18 1778138  719335  744802  1033336 58.11 
2018-19 1748644  883702  948240  800404 45.77 
2019-20 26247000  1168370  1336651  24910349 94.91 
2020-21 3775091  2022780  2123972  1651119 43.74 
Total 3,38,91,421 51,36,735 55,33,192 2,83,95,208   
SAS Nagar 
  
  
  
  
2016-17 894220 
 266182  301998  592222 66.23 
2017-18 1167756  353271  359562  808194 69.21 
2018-19 1152917  298225  296199  856718 74.31 
2019-20 1134803  405069  385817  748986 66.00 
2020-21 1435548  673468  657500  778048 54.20 
Total 57,85,244 19,96,215 20,01,076 37,84,168   
Amritsar 
  
  
  
  
2016-17 1618313 
 369567  365644  1252669 77.41 
2017-18 1403670  772974  790898  612772 43.65 
2018-19 1782010  908934  902764  879246 49.34 
2019-20 2325529  1181626  943945  1381584 59.41 
2020-21 3744709  1914017  1980694  1764015 47.11 
Total 1,08,74,231 51,47,118 49,83,945 58,90,286   
Moga 
  
  
  
  
2016-17 1673289 
 1025199  868168  805121 48.12 
2017-18 2051160  1558722  1575551  475609 23.19 
2018-19 1758927  1116805  1154575  604352 34.36 
2019-20 2010449  1090494  1047419  963030 47.90 
2020-21 2125954  1413188  1458550  667404 31.39 
Total 96,19,779 62,04,408 61,04,263 35,15,516   
Jalandhar 
  
  
  
  
2016-17 2126700 
 260208  326571  1800129 84.64 
2017-18 1037100  598287  630739  406361 39.18 
2018-19 1943700  638755  642184  1301516 66.96 
2019-20 2901400  804815  768449  2132951 73.51 
2020-21 2529500  1304462  1351751  1177749 46.56 
Total 1,05,38,400 36,06,527 37,19,694 68,18,706   
Source: MIS data 
* PDs generated in excess of projected PDs.  

Appendices  
89 
 
Appendix 2.3 
 (Referred to in para 2.3.5; page 18) 
Details of projected PDs and PDs generated in selected Blocks 
Block Year No. of PDs 
projected in 
Labour Budget by 
the block 
No. of PDs 
generated 
Shortfall in 
PDs 
Percentage of 
shortfall in 
generation of PDs 
against projection 
of LB 
1 2 3 4 5 (3-4) 6 
Verka (Amritsar) 2016-17 177808  19918  157890 88.80 
2017-18 151065  48448  102617 67.93 
2018-19 156155  65158  90997 58.27 
2019-20 157356  78293  79063 50.24 
2020-21 306490  153252  153238 50.00 
Rayya (Amritsar) 2016-17 185598  30091  155507 83.79 
2017-18 123853  90303  33550 27.09 
2018-19 245400  114167  131233 53.48 
2019-20 323600  114686  208914 64.56 
2020-21 300182  263616  36566 12.18 
Moga-I (Moga) 2016-17 290470  119123  171347 58.99 
2017-18 352552  249698  102854 29.17 
2018-19 285594  206080  79514 27.84 
2019-20 360643  171256  189387 52.51 
2020-21 390291  246890  143401 36.74 
Bagha purana 
(Moga) 
2016-17 404358 
 132856  271502 67.14 
2017-18 451569  283361  168208 37.25 
2018-19 398220  246659  151561 38.06 
2019-20 408220  238117  170103 41.67 
2020-21 447162  338932  108230 24.20 
Lohian (Jalandhar) 2016-17 189500  20356  169144 89.26 
2017-18 44128  65906  (+)21778* -- 
2018-19 261800  76008  185792 70.97 
2019-20 448500  74396  374104 83.41 
2020-21 267000  146662  120338 45.07 
Majri (SAS Nagar) 2016-17 201821  58746  143075 70.89 
2017-18 405464 107988  297476 73.37 
2018-19 348518 120392  228126 65.46 
2019-20 388407 110256  278151 71.61 
2020-21 437392 192697  244695 55.94 
Kharar (SAS Nagar) 2016-17 362018  109837  252181 69.66 
2017-18 392704 155158  237546 60.49 
2018-19 403333 103316  300017 74.38 
2019-20 413573 177103  236470 57.18 
2020-21 444738 283439  161299 36.27 
Ghall Khurd 
(Ferozepur) 
2016-17 95325 
 74553  20772 21.79 
2017-18 310852 185812 125040 40.22 
2018-19 380259 189541 190718 50.15 
2019-20 621780 248721 373059 60.00 
2020-21 817950 458147 359803 43.99 

Performance Audit Report on ‘Implementation of MGNR EGS in Punjab’  
90 
Block Year No. of PDs 
projected in 
Labour Budget by 
the block 
No. of PDs 
generated 
Shortfall in 
PDs 
Percentage of 
shortfall in 
generation of PDs 
against projection 
of LB 
1 2 3 4 5 (3-4) 6 
ZIRA (Ferozepur) 2016-17 482110  101045  381065 79.04 
2017-18 481115 912832 (+)431717*  --- 
2018-19 510416 153416 357000 69.94 
2019-20 539419 366049 173370 32.14 
2020-21 912547 461095 451452 49.47 
Sangrur 2016-17 259714  111958  147756 56.89 
2017-18 292741 145072 147669 50.44 
2018-19 302339 116027 186312 61.62 
2019-20 277690 150485 127205 45.81 
2020-21 277944 221609 56335 20.27 
Malerkotla-2 
(Sangrur)  
2016-17 290571 
 57078  233493 80.36 
2017-18 307901 141620 166281 54.00 
2018-19 323839 105676 218163 67.37 
2019-20 339331 116967 222364 65.53 
2020-21 337939 170064 167875 49.68 
Mehatpur 
(Jalandhar) 
2016-17 65528 
 16593  48935 74.68 
2017-18 98817 41804 57013 57.70 
2018-19 92300 50983 41317 44.76 
2019-20 211000 38153 172847 81.92 
2020-21 210000 85630 124370 59.22 
Source: MIS data  
* There was excess generation of PDs in Block Lohian  and Zira during 2017-18 against the projected 
PDs. 

Appendices  
91 
 
Appendix 2.4 
(Referred to in para 2.6; page 21) 
Status of organising of ‘Rozgar Diwas’ in selected GPs 
Block Gram panchayat Year Rozgar diwas to 
be conducted 
No of Rozgar 
Diwas 
organised 
Shortage Percentage 
of shortage 
Ghall Khurd Basti khalil wali 2016-21 60 3 57 95.00 
Dhindsa 2016-21 60 5 55 91.67 
Ferozeshah 2016-21 60 5  55 91.67 
Gajjan singh colony 2016-21 60 3 57 95.00 
Kulgarhi 2016-21 60 5 55 91.67 
Malwal kadim 2016-21 60 5 55 91.67 
Thethar khurd 2016-21 60 1 59 98.33 
Waloor 2016-21 60 5 55 91.67 
Zira Behak Gujjran 2016-21 60 5 55 91.67 
Boran wali 2016-21 60 5 55 91.67 
Gadri wala 2016-21 60  5 55 91.67 
Katora 2016-21 60 5 55 91.67 
Lohke kalan 2016-21 60 5 55 91.67 
Mansur deva 2016-21 60 5 55 91.67 
Noorpur 2016-21 60 5 55 91.67 
Rattaul rohi 2016-21 60 5 55 91.67 
Shah wala 2016-21 60 5 55 91.67 
Thatha kishan singh 2016-21 60 5 55 91.67 
Baghapurana GTB Garh 2016-21 60 7  53 88.33 
Sukhanand 2016-21 60 5  55 91.67 
Malke 2016-21 60 5 55 91.67 
Panditbhoom raj  2016-21 60 5 55 91.67 
Gholian kalan 2016-21 60 10 50 83.33 
Tharaj 2016-21 60 7 53 88.33 
Dhilwanwala 2016-21 60 11 49 81.67 
Langiananawan 2016-21 60 10 50 83.33 
Kaleke 2016-21 60 10 50 83.33 
Smalsar 2016-21 60 9 51 85.00 
Moga-I Butter khurd 2016-21 60 7  53 88.33 
Dosanjh 2016-21 60 5  55 91.67 
Chrikpati sarkar 2016-21 60 5  55 91.67 
Mallianwala 2016-21 60 7 53 88.33 
Ramuwalaharchoke 2016-21 60 8 52 86.67 
Daudhargarbi 2016-21 60 6 54 90.00 
Dhudike 2016-21 60 5 55 91.67 
Dala 2016-21 60 1 59 98.33 
Kharar Naanumajra 2016-21 60 5  55 91.67 
Kailon 2016-21 60 1 59 98.33 
Soonk 2016-21 60 3 57 95.00 
Majatri 2016-21 60 2 58 96.67 
Popna 2016-21 60 9 51 85.00 
Madan heri 2016-21 60 5 55 91.67 

Performance Audit Report on ‘Implementation of MGNR EGS in Punjab’  
92 
Block Gram panchayat Year Rozgar diwas to 
be conducted 
No of Rozgar 
Diwas 
organised 
Shortage Percentage 
of shortage 
Majri Karondian wala 2016-21 60 10  50 83.33 
Rakauli 2016-21 60 6  54 90.00 
Chotibadinagal 2016-21 60 3 57 95.00 
Hushiarpur 2016-21 60 2 58 96.67 
Majri colony 2016-21 60 3 57 95.00 
Gunomajra 2016-21 60 4 56 93.33 
Teur 2016-21 60 2 58 96.67 
Tara pur 2016-21 60 1 59 98.33 
Lohian Chakpipli 2016-21 60 6  54 90.00 
Jania chahal  2016-21 60 1  59 98.33 
Kotha 2016-21 60 1 59 98.33 
Nasirpur 2016-21 60 1 59 98.33 
Nawanpindkhalewal 2016-21 60 2 58 96.67 
Rupewal 2016-21 60 2 58 96.67 
Sidhupur 2016-21 60 2 58 96.67 
Malerkotla-2 Bishangarh 2016-21 60 3  57 95.00 
Asdullahpur 2016-21 60 2 58 96.67 
Mubarkpur 2016-21 60 3 57 95.00 
Jitwal khurd 2016-21 60 3 57 95.00 
Mithewal 2016-21 60 3 57 95.00 
Kesba bharal 2016-21 60 5 55 91.67 
Jandali kalan 2016-21 60 3 57 95.00 
Kaliyan 2016-21 60 1 59 98.33 
Jhaner 2016-21 60 5 55 91.67 
Jalwana 2016-21 60 4 56 93.33 
Mehatpur Gobindpur 2016-21 60 13  47 78.33 
Bangiwal khurd 2016-21 60 7  53 88.33 
Passarian 2016-21 60 10 50 83.33 
Khurshadpur 2016-21 60 10 50 83.33 
Jhugian 2016-21 60 10 50 83.33 
Nawa pinddakhni 2016-21 60 7 53 88.33 
Parjian khurd 2016-21 60 2 58 96.67 
Awan khalsa 2016-21 60 4 56 93.33 
Rouli 2016-21 60 6 54 90.00 
Adraman 2016-21 60 10 50 83.33 
Source: MIS data and Departmental data  
 

Appendices  
93 
Appendix 2.5 
(Refer to para 2.6; page 21) 
Status of organising of ‘Rozgar Diwas’ in selected districts and five blocks 
Year No. of GPs Rozgar diwas to be conducted Number of Rozgar diwas organised Shortage Percentage of shortage 
Ferozepur Ghall 
Khurd 
Zira Ferozepur Ghall 
Khurd 
Block 
Zira 
Ferozepur Ghall 
Khurd 
Zira Ferozepur Ghall 
Khurd 
Zira Ferozepur Ghall 
Khurd 
Zira 
2016-17 833 138  114  9996 1656 1368 168  28  24  9828 1628 1344 98.32 98.31 98.25 
2017-18 833 138 114 9996 1656 1368 284 39 35 9712 1 617 1333 97.16 97.64 97.44 
2018-19 833 138 114 9996 1656 1368 474 51 48 9522 1 605 1320 95.26 96.92 96.49 
2019-20 838 126 114 10056 1512 1368 578 72 87 9478 1440 1281 94.25 95.24 93.64 
2020-21 838 126 114 10056 1512 1368 701 112 147 935 5 1400 1221 93.03 92.59 89.25 
Year Sangrur Sangrur 
(Block) 
Maler 
kotla-2 
Sangrur Sangrur 
(Block) 
Maler 
kotla-2 
Sangrur Sangrur 
(Block) 
Maler 
kotla-2 
Sangrur Sangrur 
(Block) 
Maler 
kotla-2 
Sangrur Sangrur 
(Block) 
Maler 
kotla-2 
2016-17 595 73  88 7140 876 1008 158  83  0 6982 793 990 97.79 90.53 98.21 
2017-18 595 73 88 7140 876 1008 384 85 2 6756 791 9 59 94.62 90.30 95.14 
2018-19 595 73 88 7140 876 1008 668 93 6 6472 783 9 40 90.64 89.38 93.25 
2019-20 595 73 88 7140 876 1008 983 103 9  6157 773 906 86.23 88.24 89.88 
2020-21 595 73 88 7140 876 1008 1282 134 12  5858 742 900 82.04 84.70 89.29 
Year Jalandhar Mehatpur Lohian Jalandhar Mehatpur Lohian Jalandhar Mehatpur Lohian Jalandhar Mehatpur Lohian Jalandhar Mehatpur Lohian 
2016-17 NM * 59  NM NM 708 NM NM  0 NM NM 708 NM NM 100 NM 
2017-18 NM 59 NM NM 708 NM NM  2 NM NM 706 NM NM 99.72 NM 
2018-19 NM 59 NM NM 708 NM NM 6 NM NM 702 NM NM 99. 15 NM 
2019-20 NM 59 NM NM 708 NM NM 9 NM NM 699 NM NM 98. 73 NM 
2020-21 NM 59 NM NM 708 NM NM 12 NM NM 696 NM NM 98 .31 NM 
Source: Departmental data 
* Not Maintained 
 

Performance Audit Report on ‘Implementation of MGNR EGS in Punjab’  
94 
Appendix 3.1 
(Referred to in para 3.2; page 28) 
Pending liability in selected Gram Panchayats 
(₹ in lakh) 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of GP Year Unskilled 
wages 
Semi-
skilled 
wages 
Material Taxes Total 
1.   Bahadurpur (Sangrur) 2016-21 0 0 0.94 0.04 0.98 
2.   Bhindra (Sangrur) 2016-21 0 0 0 0 0 
3.   Dialgarh (Sangrur) 2016-21 0.01 0 2.07 0.24 2.32 
4.   Gobindnagar (Sangrur) 2016-21 0 0 3.95 0 3.95 
5.   Gurdaspurgurthali (Sangrur) 2016-21 0 0 0 0 0 
6.   Kular khurd (Sangrur) 2016-21 0 0 10.83 1.42 12.25 
7.   Sahoke (Sangrur) 2016-21 0.05 0 2.08 0.04 2.17 
8.   Shaheed Udhaybhan Singh 
Nagar (Sangrur) 2016-21 0 0 3.46 0.03 3.49 
9.   Togawal (Sangrur) 2016-21 0.04 0 0.05 0 0.09 
10.   Ubhawal (Sangrur) 2016-21 0 0 4.05 0.30 4.35 
11.   Asdullahpur (Malerkotla-2) 2016-21 0 0 1.06 0 1.06 
12.   Bishangarh (Malerkotla-2) 2016-21 0 0 0.02 0 0.02 
13.   Jalwana (Malerkotla-2) 2016-21 0.03 0 0 0 0.03 
14.   Jandali kalan (Malerkotla-2) 2016-21 0.24 0 0 0 0.2 4 
15.   Jhaner (Malerkotla-2) 2016-21 0.16 0 1.31 0 1.47 
16.   Jitwalkhurd (Malerkotla-2) 2016-21 0 0 0 0 0 
17.   Kalian (Malerkotla-2) 2016-21 0.06 0 0.11 0 0.17 
18.   Kasba bharal (Malerkotla-2) 2016-21 0 0 5.42 0 5.42  
19.   Mithewal (Malerkotla-2) 2016-21 0 0 0 0 0 
20.   Mubarakpur (Malerkotla-2) 2016-21 0.03 0 0 0 0.03 
21.   Adraman (Mehatpur) 2016-21 0.01 0 2.95 0 2.96 
22.   Awan khalsa (Mehatpur) 2016-21 0 0.25 4.70 0.18 5.1 3 
23.   Bangiwal Khurd (Mehatpur) 2016-21 0.13 0.36 0.65 0. 01 1.15 
24.   Gobindpur (Mehatpur) 2016-21 0 0.14 0.55 0.06 0.75 
25.   Jhungian (Mehatpur) 2016-21 0 0.22 0 0 0.22 
26.   Khursadpur (Mehatpur) 2016-21 0.08 0 1.02 0.04 1.14  
27.   Nawanpind Dakhni (Mehatpur) 2016-21 0 0 13.76 0.44 14.20 
28.   Parjiankhurd (Mehatpur) 2016-21 0.11 0 0 0 0.11 
29.   Passarian (Mehatpur) 2016-21 0 0 0 0 0 
30.   Rouli (Mehatpur) 2016-21 0.05 0.53 7.90 0.67 9.15 
31.   Basti Khalilwali (Ghall Khurd) 2016-21 0.15 0 1.85 0.27 2.27 
32.   Dhindsa (Ghall Khurd) 2016-21 0.12 0 0 0 0.12 
33.   Ferozeshah (Ghall Khurd) 2016-21 0.30 0 7.15 0 7.45  
34.   Gajjansingh Colony (Ghall 
Khurd) 2016-21 0.02 0.10 0 0 0.12 

Appendices  
95 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of GP Year Unskilled 
wages 
Semi-
skilled 
wages 
Material Taxes Total 
35.   Hastiwala (Ghall Khurd) 2016-21 0 0 0 0 0 
36.   Kulgari (Ghall Khurd) 2016-21 0.07 0 0.08 0 0.15 
37.   Malwalkadim (Ghall Khurd) 2016-21 0.11 0 3.17 0.57 3.85 
38.   Thetharkalan (Ghall Khurd) 2016-21 0.17 0.11 11.29 0.64 12.21 
39.   Thetarkhurd (Ghall Khurd) 2016-21 0 0 7.24 0.93 8.1 7 
40.   Waloor (Ghall Khurd) 2016-21 0.39 0 0.14 0 0.53 
41.   Behakgujran (Zira) 2016-21 0.07 0 3.06 0.38 3.51 
42.   Boranwali (Zira) 2016-21 0.16 0 2.99 0.36 3.51 
43.   Gadri wala (Zira) 2016-21 0.03 0 0 0 0.03 
44.   Kotara (Zira) 2016-21 0.07 0 0 0 0.07 
45.   Lohke kalan (Zira) 2016-21 0.37 0 3.23 0.01 3.61 
46.   Mansur deva (Zira) 2016-21 0.16 0 3.64 0.02 3.82 
47.   Noorpur (Zira) 2016-21 0 0 0.60 0.08 0.68 
48.   Rattualrohi (Zira) 2016-21 0.09 0 0.78 0 0.87 
49.   Shah wala (Zira) 2016-21 0.01 0.27 5.03 0.78 6.09 
50.   Thathakishan Singh (Zira) 2016-21 0 0 0 0 0 
51.   Abadi Guru Nanak Nagar 
Verka 2016-21 0.06 0 0 0 0.06 
52.   Baba Deep Singh Avenue 
Verka 2016-21 0 0 0 0 0 
53.   Bal Kalan (Verka) 2016-21 0.21 0 0 0 0.21 
54.   Bal Khurd (Verka) 2016-21 0.43 0 0.84 0.04 1.31 
55.   Ganusabad (Verka) 2016-21 0.02 0 0 0 0.02 
56.   Jethuwal (Verka) 2016-21 0.12 0 0 0 0.12 
57.   Mehniya koharan (Verka) 2016-21 0.08 0 0 0 0.08 
58.   Miran kot kalan (Verka) 2016-21 0.19 0 0.71 0.04 0. 94 
59.   Nangli (Verka) 2016-21 0.23 0 0 0 0.23 
60.   Wadala Bhittewid 2016-21 0.94 0 0.71 0 1.65 
61.   Butari (Rayya) 2016-21 0.03 0 0 0 0.03 
62.   Dardeo Sardara (Rayya) 2016-21 0 0 0 0 0 
63.   Dyanpur (Rayya) 2016-21 0.06 0 0 0 0.06 
64.   Gaggarbhana (Rayya) 2016-21 0.20 0 0 0 0.20 
65.   Jallupur kheda (Rayya) 2016-21 0.06 0 0 0 0.06 
66.   Jhirinangal (Rayya) 2016-21 0 0 0 0 0 
67.   Kartarpur (Rayya) 2016-21 0.06 0 0 0 0.06 
68.   Khalchian (Rayya) 2016-21 0.06 0 0 0 0.06 
69.   Khanpur (Rayya) 2016-21 0 0 0.86 0.05 0.91 
70.   Palah (Rayya) 2016-21 0.11 0 0 0 0.11 
71.   Butter Khurd (Moga 1) 2016-21 0.05 0 0 0 0.05 

Performance Audit Report on ‘Implementation of MGNR EGS in Punjab’  
96 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of GP Year Unskilled 
wages 
Semi-
skilled 
wages 
Material Taxes Total 
72.   Chrik Pati Parkar (Moga 1) 2016-21 0.06 0 4.12 0.51  4.69 
73.   Dala (Moga 1) 2016-21 0.74 0 0.81 0.06 1.61 
74.   Dhudike (Moga 1) 2016-21 0.40 0 0 0 0.40 
75.   Dosanjh (Moga 1) 2016-21 0.08 0.60 0 0 0.68 
76.   Durdhar garbi (Moga 1) 2016-21 0.03 0 0 0 0.03 
77.   Kokri phula singh (Moga 1) 2016-21 0.12 0.05 0 0 0. 17 
78.   Mallian Wala (Moga 1) 2016-21 0.15 0 0.87 0 1.02 
79.   Mehna (Moga 1) 2016-21 0.41 0.36 0.27 0.04 1.08 
80.   Ramuwala Harchoke (Moga 1) 2016-21 0 0 0.14 0 0.14 
81.   Dhilwan Wala (Bhagapurana) 2016-21 0.12 0 0 0 0.12 
82.   Gholian Kalan (Bhagapurana) 2016-21 0.05 0 0 0 0.05  
83.   Guru Tegha Bahadur Garh 2016-21 0 0 0 0 0 
84.   Kaleke (Bhagapurana) 2016-21 0.05 0.37 5.98 0.44 6. 84 
85.   Langiana Nawan 2016-21 0.06 0.73 2.32 0.24 3.35 
86.   Malke (Bhagapurana) 2016-21 0.01 0 0 0 0.01 
87.   Pandit Bhoom Raj 2016-21 0.01 0 3.07 0.39 3.47 
88.   Smalsar (Bhagapurana) 2016-21 0.01 0 4.76 0.15 4.92  
89.   Sukhanand (Bhagapurana) 2016-21 0.01 0 0 0 0.01 
90.   Tharaj (Bhagapurana) 2016-21 0.06 0.05 0 0 0.11 
91.   Baroudi (Majri) 2016-21 0 0 0 0 0 
92.   Choti Badi Nagal (Majri) 2016-21 0 0 2.06 0 2.06 
93.   Guno Majra (Majri) 2016-21 0 0 2.86 0.01 2.87 
94.   Hushiar pur (Majri) 2016-21 0 0 0.66 0 0.66 
95.   Karondian Wala (Majri) 2016-21 0 0 0 0 0 
96.   Khizrabad (Majri) 2016-21 0 0 0 0 0 
97.   Majri Colony (Majri) 2016-21 0 0 2.47 0 2.47 
98.   Rakauli (Majri) 2016-21 0 0 2.13 0 2.13 
99.   Tara Pur (Majri) 2016-21 0.04 0 4.72 0 4.76 
100.   Teur (Majri) 2016-21 0 0 1.53 0 1.53 
101.   Balongi colony (Kharar) 2016-21 0 0.06 0 0 0.06 
102.   Bhukri (Kharar) 2016-21 0 0 0 0 0 
103.   Kailon (Kharar) 2016-21 0.04 0 0 0 0.04 
104.   Madan heri (Kharar) 2016-21 0.02 0.62 0.85 0.12 1.6 1 
105.   Majatri (Kharar) 2016-21 0.02 0 0 0 0.02 
106.   Mausal (Kharar) 2016-21 0.02 0 0 0 0.02 
107.   Naanu Majra (Kharar) 2016-21 0 0 0 0 0 
108.   Popna (Kharar) 2016-21 0.03 0 0 0 0.03 
109.   Singhpura (Kharar) 2016-21 0 0 4.37 0 4.37 

Appendices  
97 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of GP Year Unskilled 
wages 
Semi-
skilled 
wages 
Material Taxes Total 
110.   Soonk (Kharar) 2016-21 0.04 0 0 0 0.04 
111.   Bara Budh Singh (Lohian) 2016-21 0 0 0 0 0 
112.   Chakpipli (Lohian) 2016-21 0.01 0 0.78 0.02 0.81 
113.   Gatta Mundi Kasu (Lohian) 2016-21 0.06 0 5.88 0.04 5.98 
114.   Janian Chahal (Lohian) 2016-21 0 0 2.78 0 2.78 
115.   Kotha (Lohian) 2016-21 0 0 1.57 0 1.57 
116.   Nasirpur (Lohian) 2016-21 0.04 0 0 0 0.04 
117.   Nawanpind Khalewal 2016-21 0 0 0 0 0 
118.   Rupewal (Lohian) 2016-21 0 0 0.80 0.14 0.94 
119.   Shindhar (Lohian) 2016-21 0 0.29 4.86 0.19 5.34 
120.   Sidhupur (Lohian) 2016-21 0.04 0 2.22 0.10 2.36 
Total  8.93 5.11 183.13 10.09 207.26 
Source: MIS data  

Performance Audit Report on ‘Implementation of MGNR EGS in Punjab’  
98 
 
Appendix 3.2 
(Referred to in para 3.2; page 29) 
Pending liability in selected districts 
(₹ in lakh) 
District Year Unskilled 
wages 
Semi-
skilled 
wages 
Material Tax Total 
Amritsar 2016-17  2.62 1.59 11.80 0 16.01 
2017-18  6.44 2.50 31.34 2.82 43.10 
2018-19  12.66 3.96 73.04 4.97 94.63 
2019-20  10.04 1.93 28.72 1.77 42.46 
2020-21  47.53 10.67 102.25 6.53 166.98 
Moga 2016-17  4.81 0.10 0.46 0 5.37 
2017-18  4.99 0.05 17.73 0.80 23.57 
2018-19  14.07 4.55 336.68 30.62 385.92 
2019-20  10.49 2.86 368.45 12.90 394.70 
2020-21  24.91 20.95 618.89 42.15 706.90 
Jalandhar 2016-17  2.82 0 2.00 0.09 4.91 
2017-18  3.14 0.14 32.21 3.82 39.31 
2018-19  4.50 2.88 232.52 13.89 253.79 
2019-20  1.95 5.06 134.53 14.28 155.82 
2020-21  5.99 4.47 886.23 51.96 948.65 
SAS Nagar 2016-17  2.25 0 5.29 0.69 8.23 
2017-18  0.55 0 3.04 0.48 4.07 
2018-19  1.50 0.34 2.14 0.34 4.32 
2019-20  2.08 0.18 20.11 2.97 25.34 
2020-21  0.25 2.41 493.05 12.38 508.09 
Sangrur 2016-17  3.28 0.12 9.59 0 12.99 
2017-18  5.70 0.01 4.43 0.58 10.72 
2018-19  2.46 0.02 35.29 2.67 40.44 
2019-20  0.94 0.20 133.54 13.61 148.29 
2020-21  3.85 12.78 1478.52 74.10 1569.25 
Ferozepur 2016-17  7.91 0.37 463.39 0.52 472.19 
2017-18  12.00 0.84 97.30 2.41 112.55 
2018-19  10.10 8.73 214.52 20.28 253.63 
2019-20  8.48 6.73 157.38 13.96 186.55 
2020-21  13.81 47.68 1118.05 85.24 1264.78 
Total 232.12 142.12 7,112.49 416.83 7,903.56 
Source: MIS data  
 

Appendices  
99 
 
Appendix 3.3 
(Referred to in para 3.2; page 29) 
Pending liability in selected blocks 
(₹ in lakh) 
Block Year Unskilled 
wages 
Semi-skilled 
wages 
Material Tax Total 
Verka 
  
 
2016-17 
 0.30 0 0 0 0.30 
2017-18  0.93 0 2.32 0.85 4.10 
2018-19  3.91 0.10 16.18 0.85 21.04 
2019-20  2.10 0.07 0 0 2.17 
2020-21  6.85 0 8.20 0.46 15.51 
Rayya 
 
2016-17 
 0 0 10.03 0 10.03 
2017-18  0.12 0 11.49 0.81 12.42 
2018-19  0.80 0 18.72 1.56 21.08 
2019-20  0.06 0 8.80 0.41 9.27 
2020-21  1.96 2.42 9.48 0.72 14.58 
Moga-I 
 
2016-17 
 2.99 0 0.46 0 3.45 
2017-18  0.93 0.05 3.12 0.07 4.17 
2018-19  2.05 0.10 47.85 6.68 56.68 
2019-20  1.20 0.04 10.13 1.34 12.71 
2020-21  3.07 1.36 35.66 4.41 44.50 
Baghapurana 
 
2016-17 
 0.21 0 0 0 0.21 
2017-18  0.55 0 0 0 0.55 
2018-19  2.46 3.07 103.63 7.80 116.96 
2019-20  0.43 1.97 18.77 1.09 22.26 
2020-21  0.49 6.29 141.00 8.95 156.73 
Lohian 
 
2016-17 
 0.02 0 0 0 0.02 
2017-18  0.06 0.14 2.36 0.34 2.90 
2018-19  0.70 0.31 11.80 0.52 13.33 
2019-20  0.13 0.80 23.42 2.84 27.19 
2020-21  0.16 3.07 111.61 8.03 122.87 
Majri 
 
2016-17 
 1.64 0 0 0 1.64 
2017-18  0.10 0 0.03 0.01 0.14 
2018-19  0.06 0 0.84 0.15 1.05 
2019-20  0.09 0 0 0 0.09 
2020-21  0.02 0 145.96 5.44 151.42 
Kharar 
 
2016-17 
 0.59 0 5.29 0.69 6.57 
2017-18  0.41 0 3.01 0.47 3.89 
2018-19  1.30 0.34 1.20 0.18 3.02 
2019-20  1.96 0.18 12.42 1.97 16.53 
2020-21  0.09 2.41 61.58 2.56 66.64 

Performance Audit Report on ‘Implementation of MGNR EGS in Punjab’  
100 
Block Year Unskilled 
wages 
Semi-skilled 
wages 
Material Tax Total 
Sangrur  2016-17  0.15 0 0 0 0.15 
2017-18  0.13 0 0 0 0.13 
2018-19  0 0 3.80 0.43 4.23 
2019-20  0 0 6.89 0.78 7.67 
2020-21  0 0 177.57 10.89 188.46 
Malerkotla 
 
2016-17 
 0.80 0 0 0 0.80 
2017-18  2.45 0 0 0 2.45 
2018-19  0.09 0 2.84 0.26 3.19 
2019-20  0 0 3.17 0.25 3.42 
2020-21  0.06 0.03 98.75 1.10 99.94 
Ghall Khurd 
 
2016-17 
 0.22 0 3.31 0 3.53 
2017-18  2.72 0.26 7.37 0.07 10.42 
2018-19  3.73 0.48 19.93 0.42 24.56 
2019-20  2.54 2.03 25.82 1.70 32.09 
2020-21  7.17 17.68 234.83 22.33 282.01 
Zira 
 
2016-17 
 1.08 0 139.48 0 140.56 
2017-18  1.71 0 14.35 0.17 16.23 
2018-19  1.09 0.18 24.68 1.13 27.08 
2019-20  0.72 1.15 20.02 2.00 23.89 
2020-21  2.89 2.63 100.16 6.38 112.06 
Mehatpur 
 
2016-17 
 0.16 0 0 0 0.16 
2017-18  0.24 0 1.82 0 2.06 
2018-19  0.78 1.21 0 0 1.99 
2019-20  0.21 4.15 30.53 2.08 36.97 
2020-21  0.46 0.01 136.33 5.94 142.74 
Total 68.14 52.53 1,877.01 115.13 2,112.81 
Source: MIS data  
 
 

Appendices  
101 
 
Appendix 3.4 
(Referred to in para 3.3; page 30) 
Pending compensation for delayed payment of wages in selected GPs 
(Amount in ₹) 
Name of 
Block 
Sr. No. Name of GP Year Approved 
delay 
(In Days) 
Approved 
amount 
Delayed 
compensation 
Paid 
Pending 
compensation 
Zira 1. BoranWali 2019-20 58 28 0 28 
 2. Shah Wala 2019-20 60 46 0 46 
Sangrur  3. Dialgarh 2018-19 61 49 45 4 
 4. Sahoke 2018-19 459 347 109 238 
 5. Togawal 2018-19 300 246 137 109 
Malerkotla-2 6. Asdullapur 2016-17 2714 2057 2012 45 
 7. Jalwana 2017-18 882 467 463 4 
 8. Jandali Kalan 2018-19 180 144 0 144 
Kharar  9. Kailon 2016-17 4595 2777 2582 195 
10. Madan heri 2016-17 5492 2941 2826 115 
11. Mausal 2017-18 13326 11023 11012 11 
12. Popna 2016-17 5256 3328 3071 257 
Majri  13. Baroudi 2016-17 1841 1023 998 25 
14. Hushiarpur 2016-17 9737 6153 5265 888 
15. Khizrabad 2016-17 4382 2261 2187 74 
16. Tara pur 2016-17 8182 5116 3613 1503 
17. Teur 2016-17 3820 2162 2149 13 
Moga-I 18. Butter Khurd 2018-19 207 94 0 94 
2019-20 43 30 0 30 
2020-21 344 230 0 230 
19. ChrikPati Sarkar 2018-19 10959 3037 0 3037 
2019-20 40 30 0 30 
2020-21 1888 950 0 950 
20. Dala 2017-18 12 6 0 6 
2018-19 2576 1410 0 1410 
2019-20 4 3 0 3 
2020-21 766 375 0 375 
21. Dhudike 2018-19 8659 4591 0 4591 
2019-20 741 258 0 258 
2020-21 1535 966 0 966 
22. Dosanjh 2018-19 43 28 0 28 
2019-20 183 86 0 86 
2020-21 707 442 0 442 
23. DurdharGarbi 2018-19 19 15 0 15 
2019-20 727 381 0 381 
2020-21 354 254 0 254 
24. KokriPhula Singh 2017-18 4260 1821 0 1821 
2020-21 273 173 0 173 
25. MallianWala 2018-19 1775 593 0 593 
2019-20 1095 703 0 703 
2020-21 1077 786 0 786 
26. Mehna 2017-18 6916 3836 0 3836 
2018-19 11234 5153 0 5153 

Performance Audit Report on ‘Implementation of MGNR EGS in Punjab’  
102 
Name of 
Block 
Sr. No. Name of GP Year Approved 
delay 
(In Days) 
Approved 
amount 
Delayed 
compensation 
Paid 
Pending 
compensation 
2019-20 330 135 0 135 
2020-21 1296 618 0 618 
27. Ramuwala Harchoke 2017-18 512 365 0 365 
2018-19 2858 1560 0 1560 
2019-20 817 522 0 522 
2020-21 100 76 0 76 
Bhagapurana  28. Dhilwan Wala 2019-20 586 284 0 284 
29. Gholian Kalan 2019-20 383 263 0 263 
30. Guru Tegh Bahadur 
Garh 
2019-20 246 139 0 139 
31. Kaleke 2018-19 2551 1308 1303 5 
2019-20 9448 4911 0 4911 
32. Langiana Nawan  2017-18 190 70 9 61 
2019-20 1740 1127 0 1127 
33. Malke 2019-20 694 350 0 350 
34. Panditbhoom raj 2019-20 30 16 0 16 
35. Smalsar  2016-17 2537 414 405 9 
2019-20 2024 1012 0 1012 
 36. Sukhanand 2019-20 228 146 0 146 
37 Tharaj 2019-20 1699 144 0 144 
Verka  38. Abadi Guru Nanak 
Nagar 
2018-19 3 5 0 5 
2019-20 49 81 0 81 
39. Bal Kalan 2018-19 278 234 0 234 
2019-20 7 7 0 7 
40. Bal Khurd  2017-18 216 179 85 94 
2018-19 1281 933 0 933 
2019-20 25 10 0 10 
41. Ganusabad 2017-18 303 245 230 15 
2018-19 64 59 0 59 
2019-20 4 2 0 2 
42. Jethuwal 2017-18 6855 4165 2090 2075 
2018-19 2219 1357 0 1357 
2019-20 189 199 0 199 
43. Mehniya Koharan 2017-18 901 669 618 51 
2018-19 41 26 0 26 
2019-20 4 6 0 6 
44. MiranKot Kalan 2017-18 886 732 673 59 
2018-19 37 37 0 37 
45. Nangli 2018-19 101 101 0 101 
46. Wadala Bhittewid 2018-19 294 150 0 150 
Rayya  47. Butari 2016-17 52 26 0 26 
2018-19 252 169 0 169 
2020-21 68 68 0 68 
48. Dardeo Sardara 2019-20 15 18 0 18 
49. Dyanpur 2017-18 3623 2292 0 2292 
2018-19 668 426 0 426 
2019-20 31 25 0 25 
2020-21 26 23 0 23 

Appendices  
103 
Name of 
Block 
Sr. No. Name of GP Year Approved 
delay 
(In Days) 
Approved 
amount 
Delayed 
compensation 
Paid 
Pending 
compensation 
50. Gaggarbhana 2016-17 5766 3615 2467 1148 
2017-18 6017 4163 0 4163 
2018-19 716 510 0 510 
2019-20 78 38 0 38 
2020-21 344 291 0 291 
51. Jallupur Kheda  2016-17 4717 2546 0 2546 
2017-18 661 448 0 448 
2018-19 507 292 0 292 
2020-21 60 40 0 40 
52. Kartarpur 2018-19 12 12 0 12 
2020-21 20 19 0 19 
53. Khalchian 2017-18 1366 898 0 898 
2018-19 348 219 0 219 
2019-20 4 4 0 4 
2020-21 375 281 0 281 
54. Khanpur 2016-17 1341 885 485 400 
2017-18 381 258 0 258 
2018-19 11 10 0 10 
55. Palah 2018-19 950 647 0 647 
2020-21 101 78 0 78 
Lohian  56. Bara Budh Singh 2017-18 1163 909 791 118 
57. Chakpipli 2017-18 39 13 0 13 
58. Gatta Mundi Kasu 2017-18 98 49 0 49 
59. Kotha 2017-18 1664 997 969 28 
60. Rupewal 2017-18 75 70 0 70 
61. Shindhar 2017-18 312 99 60 39 
62. Sidhupur 2017-18 54 42 9 33 
Total 1,91,723 1,09,556 46,663 62,893 
Source: MIS data  

Performance Audit Report on ‘Implementation of MGNR EGS in Punjab’  
104 
 
Appendix 3.5 
(Referred to in para 3.3; page 30) 
Pending compensation for delayed payment of wages in selected Blocks 
(Amount in ₹) 
Name of 
Block 
Year Approved 
delay 
(In Days) 
Approved 
amount 
Delayed 
compensation 
Paid 
Pending 
compensation 
Verka  2016-17 34674 25769 25684 85 
2017-18 23958 17530 12922 4608 
2018-19 18230 13369 0 13369 
2019-20 2942 3053 0 3053 
2020-21 350 549 0 549 
Rayya  2016-17 34164 20600 13662 6938 
2017-18 48662 32687 0 32687 
2018-19 25022 16312 0 16312 
2019-20 3973 1968 0 1968 
2020-21 3040 2326 0 2326 
Moga-I 2017-18 18598 9522 0 9522 
2018-19 94304 40990 0 40990 
2019-20 19341 9834 0 9834 
2020-21 46922 27095 0 27095 
Baghapurana  2016-17 103941 42263 42254 9 
2017-18 18863 7922 6786 1136 
2018-19 68373 28316 28213 103 
2019-20 79321 39524 0 39524 
Lohian  2016-17 19910 18622 15454 3168 
2017-18 32260 25015 21734 3281 
2018-19 7580 4615 4615 0 
2019-20 275 289 0 289 
Majri  2016-17 333349 236465 176877 59588 
Kharar  2016-17 324442 205786 196755 9031 
2017-18 88008 84668 83845 823 
2018-19 4041 2558 2005 553 
Zira  2016-17 31073 25639 24698 941 
2019-20 4017 2380 0 2380 
Sangrur  2016-17 27318 17031 17016 15 
2018-19 1907 1486 1127 359 
GhallKhurd  2016-17 66438 46460 46256 204 
Malerkotla-2  2016-17 39385 17618 17573 45 
2017-18 5501 2946 2942 4 
2018-19 1045 734 75 659 
Total 16,31,227 10,31,941 7,40,493 2,91,448 
Source: MIS data  

Appendices  
105 
 
Appendix 3.6 
(Referred to in para 3.4; page 32) 
Non-payment of unemployment allowance in respect of selected GPs 
Sr.  
No. 
Name of GPs (Block) Year No. of 
beneficiary 
Eligible 
unemployment 
days 
Unemployment 
wage rate 
Amount 
payable  
(in ₹) 
1.  Basti Khalil Wali (GhallKhurd) 2020-21 2 10 131.50 1315.00 
2.  Ferozeshah (GhallKhurd) 2020-21 2 12 131.50 1578.00  
3.  Gajjan Singh Colony 
(GhallKhurd) 
2020-21 1 6 131.50 789.00 
4.  MalwalKadim (GhallKhurd) 2020-21 7 35 131.50 4602.5 0 
5.  ThetharKhurd (GhallKhurd) 2020-21 1 6 131.50 789.00  
6.  Adraman (Mehatpur) 2020-21 85 402 131.50 52863.00 
7.  Awan Khalsa (Mehatpur) 2020-21 3 21 131.50 2761.50 
8.  Bangiwal Khurd (Mehatpur) 2020-21 21 210 131.50 276 150 
9.  Jhugian (Mehatpur) 2020-21 38 494 131.50 64961.00 
10.  Khursadpur (Mehatpur) 2020-21 2 26 131.50 3419.00 
11.  Parjian Khurd (Mehatpur) 2020-21 26 283 131.50 3721 4.50 
12.  Passarian (Mehatpur) 2020-21 2 26 131.50 3419.00 
13.  Bahadurpur (Sangrur) 2020-21 13 90 131.50 11835.00 
14.  Gobind Nagar (Sangrur) 2020-21 3 21 131.50 2761.50 
15.  GurdaspuraGurthali (Sangrur) 2020-21 2 14 131.50 18 41.00 
16.  Kular Khurd (Sangrur) 2020-21 2 14 131.50 1841.00 
17.  Sahoke (Sangrur) 2020-21 4 27 131.50 3550.50 
18.  Togawal (Sangrur) 2020-21 6 42 131.50 5523.00 
19.  Ubhawal (Sangrur) 2020-21 8 90 131.50 11835.00 
20.   Kalian (Ahmedgarh) 2020-21 8 54 131.50 7101.00 
21.  Jhaner (Ahmedgarh) 2020-21 10 70 131.50 9205.00 
22.  Asdullahpur (Ahmedgarh) 2020-21 2 14 131.50 1841.00  
23.  Mubarakpur (Ahmedgarh) 2020-21 2 14 131.50 1841.00 
24.  Behakgujran (Zira) 2020-21 8 65 131.50 8547.50 
25.  Gadriwala (Zira) 2020-21 5 50 131.50 6575.00 
26.  Katora (Zira) 2020-21 69 577 131.50 75875.50 
27.  Lohke Kalan (Zira) 2020-21 1 10 131.50 1315.00 
28.  Mansur Deva (Zira) 2020-21 3 22 131.50 2893.00 
29.  RattaulRohi (Zira) 2020-21 5 70 131.50 9205.00 
30.  Shah wala (Zira) 2020-21 2 16 131.50 2104.00 
31.  Thathakishansingh (Zira) 2020-21 1 8 131.50 1052.00  
32.   Bal Kalan (Verka) 2020-21 69 978 131.50 128607.00 
33.  Ganusabad (Verka) 2020-21 20 314 131.50 41291.00 
34.  Jethuwal (Verka) 2020-21 5 64 131.50 8416.00 
35.  Mehniya Koharan (Verka) 2020-21 4 50 131.50 6575.00  
36.  MiranKot Kalan (Verka) 2020-21 40 345 131.50 45367. 50 

Performance Audit Report on ‘Implementation of MGNR EGS in Punjab’  
106 
Sr.  
No. 
Name of GPs (Block) Year No. of 
beneficiary 
Eligible 
unemployment 
days 
Unemployment 
wage rate 
Amount 
payable  
(in ₹) 
37.  Wadala Bhittewid (Verka) 2020-21 11 176 131.50 2314 4.00 
38.  Butari (Rayya) 2020-21 66 396 131.50 52074.00 
39.  Dardeo Sardara (Rayya) 2020-21 4 24 131.50 3156.00 
40.  Dyanpur (Rayya) 2020-21 1 6 131.50 789.00 
41.  Jallupur Kheda (Rayya) 2020-21 11 72 131.50 9468.00  
42.  Khanpur (Rayya) 2020-21 4 48 131.50 6312.00 
43.  Palah (Rayya) 2020-21 1 12 131.50 1578.00 
44.  Chrik Pati Sarkar (Moga 1) 2020-21 1 12 131.50 1578 .00 
45.  Dhudike (Moga 1) 2020-21 1 6 131.50 789.00 
46.  Dosanjh (Moga 1) 2020-21 13 176 131.50 23144.00 
47.  Durdhar Garbi (Moga 1) 2020-21 7 42 131.50 5523.00 
48.  Kokri Phula Singh (Moga 1) 2020-21 4 44 131.50 5786 .00 
49.  Mallian Wala (Moga 1) 2020-21 46 259 131.50 34058.5 0 
50.  Mehna (Moga 1) 2020-21 1 18 131.50 2367.00 
51.  Guru Tegh Bahadur Garh 
(Baghapurana) 
2020-21 1 12 131.50 1578.00 
52.  Langiana Nawan (Baghapurana) 2020-21 2 11 131.50 14 46.50 
53.  Malke (Baghapurana) 2020-21 9 78 131.50 10257.00 
54.  Smalsar (Baghapurana) 2020-21 28 138 131.50 18147.0 0 
55.  Sukhanand (Baghapurana) 2020-21 9 54 131.50 7101.00  
56.  Tharaj (Baghapurana) 2020-21 3 3 131.50 394.50 
57.  Choti Badi Nagal (Majri) 2020-21 1 12 131.50 1578.0 0 
58.  Hushiarpur (Majri) 2020-21 1 18 131.50 2367.00 
59.  Tara pur (Majri) 2020-21 2 30 131.50 3945.00 
60.  Majatri (Kharar) 2020-21 1 6 131.50 789.00 
61.  Popna (Kharar) 2020-21 1 7 131.50 920.50 
62.  Singhpura (Kharar) 2020-21 2 24 131.50 3156.00 
63.  Chakpipli (Lohian) 2020-21 2 26 131.50 3419.00 
64.  Nasirpur (Lohian) 2020-21 5 65 131.50 8547.50 
65.  Rupewal (Lohian) 2020-21 3 24 131.50 3156.00 
Total  723 6,349  8,34,893.50 
Source: MIS data  
 
 

Appendices  
107 
 
Appendix 3.7  
(Referred to in para 3.5; page 32) 
Details of mismatch of departmental data with NREGASoft data 
(₹ in crore)  
Year Data provided by 
Department 
Data as per 
NAREGASoft 
Difference 
Total 
available 
funds 
Total 
expenditure 
Total 
available 
funds 
Total 
expenditure 
Total 
available 
funds 
Total 
expenditure 
1 2 3 4 5 2-4 3-5 
Amritsar 
2016-17 14.43 14.36 14.53 14.14 (-)0.10 0.22 
2017-18 22.73 22.49 22.68 22.17 0.05 0.32 
2018-19 29.02 28.73 29.17 28.48 (-)0.15 0.25 
2019-20 27.69 27.15 28.01 26.71 (-)0.32 0.44 
2020-21 60.35 59.15 67.88 61.99 (-)7.53 (-)2.84 
Ferozepur  
2016-17 35.13 23.85 19.08 18.75 16.05 5.10 
2017-18 75.10 58.86 24.78 24.28 16.24 34.08 
2018-19 154.59 133.41 35.73 35.06 21.18 112.33 
2019-20 93.06 59.20 55.56 54.51 118.56 4.69 
2020-21 147.35 94.06 83.87 83.02 63.98 11.01 
Jallandhar 
2016-17 10.17 9.39 10.17 9.74 0 (-)0.35 
2017-18 19.75 18.19 19.75 18.88 0 (-)0.69 
2018-19 23.04 20.55 23.04 21.85 0 (-)1.30 
2019-20 22.02 20.06 22.02 20.91 0 (-)0.85 
2020-21 42.64 39.81 42.64 41.40 0 (-)1.59 
Source: Departmental data  

Performance Audit Report on ‘Implementation of MGNR EGS in Punjab’  
108 
 
Appendix 3.8  
(Referred to in para 3.5; page 33) 
Details of mismatch of data within NREGASoft 
(₹ in crore) 
District Year Opening Balance Closing Balance 
To be Taken taken 
Amritsar 2015-16 -- 10.04 10.79 
2016-17 10.79 13.76 38.69 
2017-18 38.69 13.13 51.51 
2018-19 51.51 24.13 69.12 
2019-20 69.12 49.78 130.37 
2020-21 130.37 78.39 89.31 
Moga 2015-16 89.31 (-)92.43 (-)42.96 
2016-17 (-)42.96 (-)98.42 (-)68.46 
2017-18 (-)68.46 (-)93.22 11.34 
2018-19 11.34 166.53 181.98 
2019-20 181.98 169.98 201.95 
2020-21 201.95 96.85 262.52 
Jalandhar 2015-16 262.52 23.24 28.45 
2016-17 28.45 25.82 43.21 
2017-18 43.21 38.08 87.09 
2018-19 87.09 127.36 119.24 
2019-20 119.24 75.79 111.64 
2020-21 111.64 70.64 124.16 
SAS Nagar 2015-16 45.34 6.40 11.04 
2016-17 11.04 13.70 72.57 
2017-18 72.57 32.39 49.77 
2018-19 49.77 38.64 61.87 
2019-20 61.87 19.89 22.10 
2020-21 22.10 17.28 63.58 
Sangrur 2015-16 -- 16.44 15.48 
2016-17 15.48 6.35 37.84 
2017-18 37.84 6.94 99.47 
2018-19 99.47 50.39 373.31 
2019-20 373.31 26.46 58.78 
2020-21 58.78 19.22 70.81 
Ferozepur 2015-16 -- 10.12 5.77 
2016-17 5.77 3.92 33.48 
2017-18 33.48 1.05 50.89 
2018-19 50.89 30.32 67.70 
2019-20 67.70 8.66 105.09 
2020-21 105.09 1.95 85.40 
Source: MIS data  

Appendices  
109 
 
Appendix 3.9 
(Referred to in para 3.7; page 35) 
Expenditure on inadmissible items out of Administrative Expenditure 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of Agency Voucher/Invoice 
No. 
Date Name of item Amount  
(in ₹) 
1. Shergill Travel  3091 25.04.2016 Air ticket for election 
duty 
28700 
2. Jain Enterprises 7/7334 16.07.2016 Parts of vehi cle 9894 
3. Executive Engineer 
Panchayati Raj PWD,SAS 
Nagar  
17 &18 03.08.2016 Construction of office 
Partition and 
Workstation 
130000 
4. Jeet Kumar 15 08.08.2016 -do- 1915 
5. Toyota 18 18.11.2016 -do- 11489 
6. Jeet Kumar 14 19.01.2017 -do- 895 
7. JK Tyre 23 07.04.2017 -do- 18356 
8. Income Tax Department 29 & 30 27.07.2018 Penalty  paid to IT 
Department  
8800 
9. Toyota 00483 31.08.2018 -do- 14650 
10. Toyota 5 09/2018 Parts of vehicle 14414 
11. JK Tyre 11 07.12.2018 -do- 10701 
12. Toyota 11 07.02.2019 -do- 12104 
13. Bharat Travels 10 05/2019 Air ticket for electio n 
duty 
10913 
14. H.S. Furniture 1/183 16.08.2019 Almirah for DRDA  
Branch  
10030 
15. -do- 11 12.09.2019 -do- 12169 
16. Guest House 17 06/2020 Guest house payment 1294 0 
17. -do- 23 29.07.2020 -do- 30877 
18. Life Furnishing House 11/1363 02.09.2020 Matt s et 7823 
19. -do- 11 11/2019 Hired taxi for election 5743 
20. -do- 11 11/2019 -do- 14184 
21. Navdesh Autos LLP 1319 18.09.2020 -do- 16224 
22. Globe Automobiles Pvt. Ltd.  02172 23.10.2020 -do- 4213 
23. -do- 07100 31.12.2020 -do- 15916 
24. PSPCL paid by ADC 
Amritsar 
64 15.03.2019 Payment of electricity 
bills 
29460 
25. Balaji Sanitation paid by 
ADC Moga 
99 & 101 28.03.2018 Payment of tile for 
office uses 
26798 
Total 4,59,208 
Source: Departmental records  
 
 

Performance Audit Report on ‘Implementation of MGNR EGS in Punjab’  
110 
 
Appendix 4.1 
(Referred to in para 4.2.1; page 41) 
Details showing irregular booking of expenditure 
(₹ in lakh) 
Year Name of GP Work code Work 
completion 
date in MIS 
Sanction 
Amount 
Expenditure 
booked on  
22 October 2021 
Expenditure 
booked on  
09 November 2021 
2019-20 Ferozeshah 989521 25.11.2020 9.72 3.81  9.36  
2016-17 Dhindsa 52012 30.10.2018 5.70 3.50 3.54 
2017-18 Dhindsa 
27885 01.10.2018 1.76 1.35 1.39 
74575 01.02.2019 6.99 6.66 6.69 
46608 29.10.2020 19.52 18.15 18.42 
2018-19 Dhindsa 78897 01.11.2019 2.00 1.94 1.96 
2019-20 Dhindsa 
48205 06.01.2020 1.01 1.16 1.19 
1787 19.10.2020 7.28 0.43 5.97 
9989001788 29.10.2020 2.23 1.92 2.00 
2020-21 Dhindsa 93304 29.10.2020 1.84 0.01 2.38 
2018-19 Malwal Kadim 86921 31.03.2019 8.96 5.15 5.1 8 
2019-20 Malwal Kadim 86046 25.11.2020 0.29 0.09 0.2 8 
 
-do- 633 02.02.2020 3.82 3.77 3.86 
2020-21 -do- 701 10.08.2020 2.00 0 1.99 
2018-19 Thethar Kalan 90073 25.11.2020 8.00 1.18 6. 86 
2019-20 -do- 86057 25.11.2020 0.29 0.20 0.26 
 
-do- 98522 05.11.2020 9.78 2.42 10.64 
2020-21 -do- 113961 01.05.2021 18.00 2.13 18.70 
2019-20 Basti Khalil Wali 48397 29.10.2020 6.56 5.3 2 6.10 
 
-do- 86534 29.10.2020 1.79 1.08 1.09 
 
-d0- 85363 25.11.2020 2.86 0 2.51 
2020-21 -do- 18689 01.05.2021 0.24 0.07 0.23 
 
-do- 18690 01.05.2021 0.24 0.06 0.22 
2016-17 Waloor 9988992082 30.03.2020 4.81 4.20 4.23  
 
-do- 5088 25.08.2020 2.08 1.39 1.40 
2017-18 Waloor 29735 05.11.2020 10.00 6.84 10.08 
 
-do- 37185 15.08.2018 2.08 2.87 2.90 
2018-19 -do- 78148 25.11.2020 25.00 8.70 15.85 
2017-18 Hasti Wala 37181 01.10.2018 1.63 1.50 1.55 
Total 85.90 146.83 
Source: Departmental records and MIS data  
 

Appendices  
111 
 
Appendix 4.2 
(Referred to in para 4.2.6; page 44) 
Details of less payment of unskilled wages  
(Amount in ₹) 
Sr. 
No. 
Muster 
Roll 
Period of Work No. of 
Worker 
Attendance Wages Less 
payment From To Amount as per 
notified rate 
Payment 
as per 
MR 
1. 2365  21.09.2020 27.09.2020 19 69 18147 15249 2898 
2. 2366  21.09.2020 27.09.2020 19 100 26300 22100 4200 
3. 2367  21.09.2020 27.09.2020 24 87 22881 19227 3654 
4. 2368  21.09.2020 27.09.2020 3 15 3945 3315 630 
5. 2187  10.09.2020 16.09.2020 4 24 6312 5448 864 
6. 2476  28.09.2020 04.10.2020 35 188 49444 42676 6768 
7. 2477  28.09.2020 04.10.2020 18 89 23407 20203 3204 
8. 2480  28.09.2020 04.10.2020 5 29 7627 6583 1044 
9. 4125  19.12.2020 25.12.2020 40 184 48392 44344 4048 
10. 4126  19.12.2020 25.12.2020 42 211 55493 50851 4642 
11. 4127  19.12.2020 25.12.2020 6 22 5786 5302 484 
12. 4128  19.12.2020 25.12.2020 5 30 7890 7230 660 
13. 4688  19.01.2021 25.01.2021 7 42 11046 10920 126 
14. 2854  21.10.2020 27.10.2020 37 211 55493 52961 2532 
15. 2855  21.10.2020 27.10.2020 2 12 3156 3012 144 
16. 2856  28.10.2020 03.11.2020 38 201 52863 50451 2412 
17. 2857  28.10.2020 03.11.2020 1 6 1578 1506 72 
18. 2864  21.10.2020 27.10.2020 27 123 32349 30873 1476 
19. 2865  21.10.2020 27.10.2020 1 5 1315 1255 60 
20. 2980  28.10.2020 03.11.2020 29 115 30245 28865 1380 
21. 2981  28.10.2020 03.11.2020 9 43 11309 10793 516 
22. 3133  06.11.2020 12.11.2020 33 138 36294 34086 2208 
23. 3134  06.11.2020 12.11.2020 11 59 15517 14573 944 
24. 3135  13.11.2020 19.11.2020 35 157 41291 38779 2512 
25. 3136  13.11.2020 19.11.2020 14 54 14202 13338 864 
26. 3149  06.11.2020 12.11.2020 34 173 45499 42731 2768 
27. 3152  06.11.2020 12.11.2020 2 12 3156 2964 192 
28. 3163  06.11.2020 12.11.2020 2 12 3156 2964 192 
29. 3300  13.11.2020 19.11.2020 35 201 52863 49647 3216 
30. 3301  13.11.2020 19.11.2020 6 33 8679 8151 528 
31. 3979  11.12.2020 17.12.2020 31 129 33927 21930 11997 
32. 3980  11.12.2020 17.12.2020 29 144 37872 24480 13392 
33. 4009  11.12.2020 17.12.2020 4 20 5260 3400 1860 
34. 3986  11.12.2020 17.12.2020 23 122 32086 20740 11346 
Total 630 3,060 8,04,780 7,10,947 93,833 
Source: Departmental data  

Performance Audit Report on ‘Implementation of MGNR EGS in Punjab’  
112 
 
Appendix 4.3 
(Referred to in para 4.2.6; page 45) 
Details showing short/non-payment of wages to workers  
Sr. 
No. 
Muster 
Roll 
(MR) 
No. 
Period of work Job Card 
(JC) Number 
Name of 
Worker 
Attendance as 
per 
Less Attend 
ance taken 
in MIS 
Wage 
per 
day 
(in ₹) 
Denial of 
payment 
(in ₹) 
From To Actual 
MR 
MIS 
MR 
1. 3300 13.11.2020 19.11.2020 PB-15-003-
066-001/122 
Amandeep 
Kaur 
6
 4 2 247 494 
2. -do- -do- -do- PB-15-003-
066-001/177 
Gurmit Singh 6
 3 3 247 741 
3. 2854 21.10.2020 27.10.2020 PB-15-003-
066-001/50 
Satnam Singh 6  4 2 251 502 
4. -do- -do- -do- PB-15-003-
066-001/256 
Amarjit Kaur 6
 5 1 251 251 
5. 3149 06.11.2020 12.11.2020 PB-15-003-
066-001/122 
Amandeep 
Kaur 
6
 2 4 247 988 
6. -do- -do- -do- PB-15-003-
066-001/256 
Amarjit Kaur 6
 2 4 247 988 
7. 1393 18.10.2019 31.10.2019 PB-05-020-
110-001/82 
Balkar Singh 12 11 1 241 241 
8. -do- -do- -do- PB-05-020-
110-001/112 
Jaspal Singh 10 9 1 241 241 
9. -do- -do- -do- PB-05-020-
110-001/106 
Jagga 13 12 1 241 241 
10. -do- -do- -do- PB-05-020-
110-001/103 
Baljit Kaur 12 11 1 241 241 
11. 1724 08.09.2020 14.09.2020 PB-02-006-
031-001/97 
Bhagwan 
Singh 
5 4 1 263 263 
12. 4491 28.02.2021 06.03.2021 PB-02-006-
067-001/41 
Surinder Kaur 5 4 1 263 263 
13. 1103 28.07.2020 03.08.2020 PB-02-006-
032- 001/33 
Anoop Singh 
(Self) 
6 00 6 263 1578 
14. 1459 24.08.2020 28.08.2020 PB-02-006-
017- 
23001/144 
Gurmit Kaur 
(Self) 
5 00 5 263 1315 
15. 1459 24.08.2020 28.08.2020 PB-02-006-
016- 001/242 
Kulwinder 
Kaur 
4 00 4 263 1052 
16. 1987 23.09.2020 29.09.2020 PB-02-006-
044- 001/11 
Butta Singh 6 00 6 263 1578 
17. 2920 23.11.2020 29.11.2020 PB-02-006-
016- 001/52 
Pargat Singh 6 00 6 263 1578 
18. 2920 23.11.2020 29.11.2020 PB-02-006-
016- 001/43 
Baldev Singh 6 00 6 263 1578 
19. 939 18.07.2020 24.07.2020 PB-02-006-
034- 001/16 
Kulwinder 
Kaur 
6 00 6 263 1578 
20. 3336 21.08.2020 27.08.2020 PB-19-005-
058-001/92 
Ms. Shinder 
Kaur 
6 0 6 263 1578 
21. 5018 22.10.2020 28.10.2020 PB-19-005-
058-001/92 
Paramjit Kaur 6 0 6 241 1446 
22. 1560 21.11.2019 27.11.2019 PB-19-005-
070-001/133 
Jaswant Kaur 6 5 1 263 263 
Total 150 76 74  18,998 
Source: Departmental records and MIS data  

Appendices  
113 
 
Appendix 4.4 
(Refer to para 4.2.7(i); page 46) 
Details of demised JC holders to whom payment was made after their death 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of GP and 
Block 
Name, 
Father/Husband 
name 
JC No. Date of death Date of MR (No. 
of days worked) 
Amount of 
wages paid 
(in ₹) 
1.   Kaleke 
(Baghapurana) 
Bhagta Singh S/o 
Diwan Singh 
 
PB-15-003-
034-001/32  
17.01.2017 01.06.2019 (1)  200 
2.   -do- Ajaib Singh S/o Gujar 
Singh  
PB-15-003-
034-001/121  
24.02.2018 01.06.2019 (6)  1200 
3.   -do- Gurjant Singh S/o 
Gura Singh  
PB-15-003-
034-001/255  
12.11.2017 13.12.2018 (6)  600 
4.   Langiana Nawan 
(Baghapurana) 
Karam Singh S/o 
Inder Singh 
 
PB-15-003-
010-001/531  
14.06.2019 14.12.2020 (6) 
24.12.2020 (6) 
03.01.2021 (6) 
 
4734 
5.   Tharaj 
(Baghapurana) 
Gurtej Singh S/o 
Gurmel Singh 
 
PB-15-003-
028-001/172  
17.02.2018 14.06.2019 (6)  1446 
6.   Gaunshabad 
(Verka) 
 
Surjit Singh S/o 
Thakur Singh 
 
PB-02-005-
033-001/7  
24.09.2019 
 
01.09.2020, (5) 
10.09.2020, (5) 
18.09.2020, (2) 
21.09.2020, (3) 
29.09.2020, (3) 
19.01.2021, (15) 
 
8679 
7.   Bal Kalan (Verka) Palwinder Singh S/o 
Saktar Singh  
PB-02-005-
010-001/231  
22.12.2019 12.05.2021, (8) 
18.05.2021, (7) 
20.05.2021, (14) 
26.05.2021, (11) 
 
10760 
8.   Charikpatti Sarkar 
(Moga-1) 
Jaskaran Singh S/o 
Bachittar Singh 
 
PB-15-001-
025-001/10  
25.07.2016 14.06.2018, (3)  720 
9.   -do- Surjit Kaur W/o Ajit 
Singh  
PB-15-001-
025-001/125  
01.12.2017 01.03.2021, (6) 1578 
 14.06.2018, (3)  720 
10.   DaudharGarbi 
(Moga-1) 
Jit Singh S/o Bhan 
Singh 
 
PB-15-001-
031-001/59  
03.12.2018 04.10.2019, (5)  900 
11.   Butari (Rayya) Balwinder Singh S/o 
Bawa Singh  
PB-02-006-
016-001/66  
02.12.2017 17.03.2021, (6)  1578 
12.   Gagadbhana 
(Rayya) 
Jasbir Singh S/o 
Garib Singh 
 
PB-02-006-
034-001/282  
09.08.2016 27.11.2019, (5) 
04.12.2019, (3) 
11.12.2019, (6) 
 
3374 
13.   -do- Saudagar Singh S/o 
Teja Singh  
PB-02-006-
034-001/4  
08.09.2017 23.06.2021, (1)  269 
14.   Khanpur (Rayya) Kulwinder Singh S/o 
Dhyansingh  
PB-02-006-
051-001/109  
22.03.2017 01.04.2017, (6) 
23.05.2017, (6) 
11.10.2017, (6) 
4194 
15.   Palah (Rayya) Prem Singh S/o Fakir 
Singh  
PB-02-006-
069-001/7  
14.01.2019 
 
01.06.2019, (3) 
15.06.2019, (4) 
22.06.2019, (3) 
05.02.2020, (6) 
12.02.2020, (5) 
03.07.2020, (3) 
10.07.2020, (6) 
17.07.2020, (3) 
24.07.2020, (4) 
31.07.2020 (5) 
14.08.2020, (4) 
21.08.2020, (2) 
28.08.2020 (3) 
04.09.2020, (5) 
11.09.2020, (5) 
18.09.2020, (2) 
28.09.2020, (5) 
17422 

Performance Audit Report on ‘Implementation of MGNR EGS in Punjab’  
114 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of GP and 
Block 
Name, 
Father/Husband 
name 
JC No. Date of death Date of MR (No. 
of days worked) 
Amount of 
wages paid 
(in ₹) 
16.   Dayanpur (Rayya) Baldev Singh S/o 
Dharm Singh  
PB-02/006/ 
031/001/107  
07.04.2016 19.05.2020 (9)  2367 
17.   Kailon (Kharar) Angrej Kaur W/o 
Joginder Singh  
PB-19-005-
058-001/101  
09.01.2020 05.02.2020 (6) 1446 
18.   Mausal (Kharar) Kaka Singh S/o 
Shankar Singh  
PB-19-005-
078-001/35  
29.12.2018 26.07.2019 (6)  1446 
Total GPs 13 63,633 
Source: Departmental data  

Appendices  
115 
 
Appendix 4.5 
(Refer to para 4.2.7(ii); page 47) 
Details of double JC holder working simultaneously on both cards 
(Amount in ₹) 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of GP Name and 
father/husband 
name 
Job Card No. Year wise 
work and 
days 
Muster 
roll of 
working 
Days 
of 
work 
Wages 
credited 
Date of 
credit 
Amount of 
mis-
appropriation 
Days 
involved 
1. Butari (Rayya) Jarnal Singh s/o 
Pooran Singh 
PB-02-006-
016-001/272 
2020-21=06  4699 
 6 1578 01.05.2021 1578 6 
2. Butari (Rayya) Jarnal Singh s/o 
Pooran Singh 
PB-02-006-
016-001/104 
2020-21=17 4699 
 6 1578 01.05.2021 0 0 
3. Dayanpur 
(Rayya) 
Sukhwinder 
Kaur w/o 
Balwinder 
Singh 
PB-02-006-
031-001/196 
2020-21=99 1725 6 1578 28.09.2020 1315 5 
1968 6 1578 07.10.2020 1315 5 
2179 6 1578 09.11.2020 1578 6 
2273 6 1578 09.11.2020 1578 6 
2364 5 1315 10.11.2020 1315 5 
4. Dayanpur 
(Rayya) 
Sukhwinder 
Kaur w/o 
Balwinder 
Singh 
PB-02-006-
031-001/262 
2020-21=93  1812 6 1578 07.10.2020 0 0 
1813 6 1578 07.10.2020 0 0 
2170 6 1578 16.10.2020 0 0 
2171 6 1578 09.11.2020 0 0 
2361 6 1578 11.11.2020 0 0 
5. Gagadbhana 
(Rayya) 
Mangal Singh 
s/o Amrik Singh 
PB-02-006-
034-001/361 
2016-17=95 
2017-18=84 
2018-19=96 
2020-21=78   
3063 6 1578 08.12.2020 789 3 
3193 6 1578 01.01.2021 789 3 
3322 6 1578 -do- 789 3 
3492 6 1578 02.01.2021 1052 4 
3628 6 1578 16.01.2021 1315 5 
6. Gagadbhana 
(Rayya) 
Mangal Singh 
s/o amrik singh 
PB-02-006-
034-001/400 
2020-21=100 3090 6 1578 11.12.2020 0 0 
3266 6 1578 01.01.2021 0 0 
3429 6 1578 02.01.2021 0 0 
3538 5 1315 07.01.2021 0 0 
3637 6 1578 15.01.2021 0 0 
7. Khanpur 
(Rayya) 
Raja Singh s/o 
Tarsem Singh 
PB-02-006-
051-001/249 
2020-21=48 4161 6 1578 12.03.2021 1578 6 
4240 6 1578 12.03.2021 1578 6 
4359 6 1578 12.03.2021 1578 6 
4445 6 1578 12.03.2021 1578 6 
4551 6 1578 17.03.2021 1578 6 
8. Khanpur 
(Rayya) 
Raju Singh s/o 
Tersem Singh 
PB-02-006-
051-001/27 
2017-18=57 
2018-19=95 
2020-21=30  
4161 6 1578 12.03.2021 0 0 
4240 6 1578 12.03.2021 0 0 
4359 6 1578 12.03.2021 0 0 
4445 6 1578 12.03.2021 0 0 
4551 6 1578 18.03.2021 0 0 
9. Palah (Rayya) Gurmukh Singh 
s/o Desa Singh 
PB-02-006-
069-001/113 
2018-19=23 
2019-20=50 
2020-21=71 
2028, 
 6 1446 29.07.2020 1446 6 
2029 5 1205 29.07.2020 1205 5 
759 3 789 29.07.2020 526 2 
10. Do Gurmukh Singh 
s/o Desa Singh 
PB-02-006-
069-001/14 
2019-20=11 
2020-21=06 
2028 
 6 1446 14.04.2020 0 0 
2029 5 1205 14.04.2020 0 0 
759 6 1578 14.07.2020 0 0 
11. Palah (Rayya) Sandeep Kaur 
w/o Gurmeet 
Singh 
PB-02-006-
069-001/128 
2019-20=07 
2020-21=86 
2021-22=14 
2028 3 723 14.04.2020 723 3 
2029 4 964 -do- 964 4 
12. Palah (Rayya) Sandeep Kaur 
w/o Gurmeet 
Singh 
PB-02-006-
069-001/130 
2019-20=19 
2021-22=02 
2028 6 1446 14.04.2020 0 0 
2029  5 1205 09.04.2020 0 0 
13. Chatik Patti 
Sarkar (Moga-1) 
Bawasingh s/o 
Gulzar Singh 
PB-15-001-
025-001/374 
2016-17=13 
2019-20=02 
2583 
 3 654 08.02.2017 654 3 
3086 2 436 10.05.2017 218 1 
3111 6 1308 21.04.2017 1090 5 
14. Do- Bawa Singh s/o 
Gulzar Singh 
PB-15-001-
025-001/483 
2016-17=33 
2017-18=01 
2588 6 1308 08.02.2017 0 0 
3093 1 218 10.05.2017 0 0 
3116 5 1090 21.04.2017 0 0 

Performance Audit Report on ‘Implementation of MGNR EGS in Punjab’  
116 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of GP Name and 
father/husband 
name 
Job Card No. Year wise 
work and 
days 
Muster 
roll of 
working 
Days 
of 
work 
Wages 
credited 
Date of 
credit 
Amount of 
mis-
appropriation 
Days 
involved 
15. Dhudike 
(Moga-1) 
  
  
Kamaljit Kaur 
w/o Gurpreet 
Singh 
  
PB-15-001-
051-001/355 
  
  
2016-17=47 
2017-18=04 
2019-20=04 
2020-21=18 
3310 5 1090 18.04.2017 218 1 
3334 6 1308 10.05.2017 654 2 
3358 3 654 -do- 654 3 
1005 1 233 24.07.2017 233 1 
16. Dhudike  
(Moga-1)  
  
  
Kamaljit Kaur 
w/o Gurpreet 
Singh 
  
PB-15-001-
051-001/406 
  
  
2016-17=07 
2017-18=42 
2018-19=15 
  
3313 1 218 18.04.2017 0 0 
3337 3 654 10.05.2017 0 0 
3361 3 654 -do- 0 0 
1570 5 1165 24.07.2017 0 0 
17. Dhudike  
(Moga-1) 
Manjit Kaur w/o 
Buta Singh 
PB-15-001-
051-001/295 
2017-18=22 950 
 
3 699 24.07.2017 699 3 
18. Dhudike  
(Moga-1) 
Manjit Kaur w/o 
Buta Singh 
PB-15-001-
051-001/310 
2017-18=03 951 
 
3 699 -do- 0 0 
19. Doshanjh 
(Moga-1) 
Harnek Singh 
s/o Dhanna 
Singh 
PB-15-001-
006-001/12 
2016-17=11 
2017-18=43 
7421 6 1398 12.03.2018 1165 5 
5799 6 1446 11.05.2020 1446 6 
20. Doshanjh 
(Moga-1) 
Harnek Singh 
s/o Dhanna 
Singh 
PB-15-001-
006-001/90 
2017-18=06 
2018-19=19 
2019-20=82 
7425 6 1398 05.08.2020 0 0 
5993 6 1446 14.04.2020 0 0 
21. Kokriphula 
Singh 
(Moga-1) 
 
Paramjit Kaur 
w/o Jagsir Singh 
 
PB-15-001-
024-001/31 
 
2016-17=11 
2017-18=36 
2018-19=12 
2019-20=34 
2020-21=16 
 
709 5 1090 21.07.2016 1090 5 
908 6 1308 -do- 1308 6 
1320 6 1398 24.07.2017 1398 6 
1331 6 1398 24.07.2017 1398 6 
4460 6 1398 27.12.2017 1165 5 
4471 6 1398 27.12.2017 1398 6 
6695 2 466 31.01.2018 466 2 
3118 2 480 01.09.2018 480 2 
5328 3 720 12.03.2019 480 2 
5337 5 1200 -do- 960 4 
7776 2 480 11.04.2019 480 2 
447 3 723 09.05.2019 0 0 
537 4 964 14.05.2019 241 1 
1225 4 964 26.06.2019 0 0 
4136 5 1205 28.01.2020 723 3 
5051 4 720 -do- 540 3 
7433 1 263 12.03.2021 263 1 
22. Kokriphula 
Singh (Moga-1) 
  
  
  
Paramjit Kaur 
w/o Jagsir Singh 
   
  
  
PB-15-001-
024-001/55 
   
  
2016-17=12 
2017-18=36 
2018-19=22 
2019-20=10 
2020-21=12 
  
  
  
  
710 6 1308 21.07.2016 0 0 
909 6 1308 21.07.2016 0 0 
1321 6 1398 24.07.2017 0 0 
1332 6 1398 24.07.2017 0 0 
4461 5 1165 27.12.2017 0 0 
4472 6 1398 -do- 0 0 
6697 2 466 31.01.2018 0 0 
3119 2 480 01.09.2018 0 0 
5329 2 480 12.03.2019 0 0 
5338 5 1200 12.03.2019 0 0 
7776 2 480 11.04.2019 0 0 
537 1 241 14.05.2019 0 0 
4201 3 723 28.01.2020 0 0 
5051 3 540 28.01.2020 0 0 
7434 6 1578 15.03.2021 0 0 
23. Kokriphula 
Singh (Moga-1) 
 
Paramjit Kaur 
w/o Kulwant 
Singh 
   
PB-15-001-
024-001/166 
  
2017-18=20 
2018-19=03 
2019-20=03 
2020-21=15 
1329 4 932 27.12.2017 932 4 
4456 5 1165 13.04.2018 932 4 
4467 6 1398 -do- 1398 6 
1224 2 482 26.06.2019 482 2 

Appendices  
117 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of GP Name and 
father/husband 
name 
Job Card No. Year wise 
work and 
days 
Muster 
roll of 
working 
Days 
of 
work 
Wages 
credited 
Date of 
credit 
Amount of 
mis-
appropriation 
Days 
involved 
24. Kokriphula 
Singh (Moga-1) 
Paramjit Kaur 
w/o Kulwant 
Singh 
PB-15-001-
024-001/172 
 
2016-17=11 
2017-18=34 
2019-20=02 
2020-21=06 
1329 6 1398 24.07.2017 0 0 
4456 4 932 27.12.2017 0 0 
4467 6 1398 21.12.2017 0 0 
1236 2 482 26.06.2019 0 0 
25. Ramuwala 
Harchoke 
(Moga-1) 
Karmjeet Singh 
s/o Gurdev 
Singh 
PB-15-001-
016-001/23 
2016-17=04 
2017-18=28 
2018-19=44 
2019-20=49 
2020-21=75 
    0 0 
6677 3 720 11.04.2019 0 0 
6683 6 1440 -do- 1440 6 
6690 5 1200 -do- 1200 5 
3025 3 360 05.10.2019 360 3 
5813 5 1205 14.04.2020 1205 5 
5827 1 241 -do- 241 1 
4709 6 1578 10.11.2020 1578 6 
5308 5 1315 -do- 1315 5 
5309 4 1052 02.12.2020 1052 4 
26. Ramuwala 
Harchoke 
Karamjit Singh 
s/o Gurdev 
Singh 
PB-15-001-
016-001/165 
2018-19=40 
2019-20=55 
2020-21=80 
6720 6 1440 12.04.2019 0 0 
6872 6 1440 12.04.2019 0 0 
6874 6 1440 12.04.2019 0 0 
3032 3 360 05.10.2019 0 0 
5812 5 1205 09.04.2020 0 0 
5826 1 241 -do- 0 0 
4991 6 1578 11.11.2020 0 0 
5308 6 1578 11.112020 0 0 
5309 6 1578 02.12.2020 0 0 
27. Ramuwala 
Harchoke 
(Moga-1) 
Roopsingh s/o 
Veer Singh 
PB-15-001-
016-001/14 
Roop Singh 
2016-17=03  
2017-18=11 
2018-19=21  
2019-20=39  
2020-21=17  
Amrjitkaur 
2017-18=16  
2018-19=41  
2019-20=02  
Roop S 
865 
03 654 21.07.2016 218 1 
1303 2 436 -do- 436 2 
129 3 699 10.05.2017 466 3 
4128 5 1165 27.12.2017 1165 5 
4135 6 1398 -do- 1165 5 
11 2 480 21.04.2018 240 1 
3809 4 960 06.10.2021 720 3 
3810 6 1440 04.12.2018 1440 6 
4066 6 1440 -do- 1440 6 
2613 6 1446 17.09.2019 1205 5 
3018 6 1446 05.10.2011 1446 6 
3024 3 360 05.10.2019 360 3 
5326 5 1205 14.04.2020 964 4 
5327 6 1446 14.04.2020 1446 6 
5333 5 1205 14.04.2020 964 4 
5523 6 1080 14.04.2020 1080 6 
5531 5 1205 14.04.2020 1205 5 
258 6 1578 16.05.2020 1052 4 
2533 6 1578 04.08.2020 1578 6 
Amarjit 
971 
2 466 24.07.2017 466 2 
3958 6 1398 03.10.2017 1398 6 
4035 3 699 15.11.2017 699 3 
4683 6 1398 27.12.2017 1398 6 
4692 6 1398 27.12.2017 1398 6 
11 6 1440 21.04.2018 240 1 
22 5 1200 25.04.2018 960 4 
194 6 1440 17.05.2018 1440 6 
205 6 1440 17.05.2018 1200 5 
374 6 1440 17.05.2018 1440 6 
386 5 1200 29.05.2018 1200 5 
1173 4 960 30.06.2018 960 4 
2011 3 723 17.09.2019 482 2 

Performance Audit Report on ‘Implementation of MGNR EGS in Punjab’  
118 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of GP Name and 
father/husband 
name 
Job Card No. Year wise 
work and 
days 
Muster 
roll of 
working 
Days 
of 
work 
Wages 
credited 
Date of 
credit 
Amount of 
mis-
appropriation 
Days 
involved 
28. Ramuwala 
Harchoke 
(Moga-1) 
Amarjit Kaur 
w/o Roop Singh 
PB-15-001-
016-001/68 
Roop S. 
827 
1 218 21.07.2016 0 0 
1309 4 872 21.07.2016 0 0 
136 2 466 10.05.2017 0 0 
4081 5 1165 27.12.2017 0 0 
4139 5 1165 27.12.2017 0 0 
38 1 240 21.04.2018 0 0 
3669 5 1200 06.10.2018 0 0 
3677 6 1440 04.12.2018 0 0 
4072 6 1440 04.12.2018 0 0 
2617 6 1446 17.09.2019 0 0 
3021 6 1446 05.10.2019 0 0 
3027 3 360 05.10.2019 0 0 
5299 4 964 14.04.2020 0 0 
5331 6 1446 14.04.2020 0 0 
5337 4 964 14.04.2020 0 0 
5527 6 1080 14.04.2020 0 0 
5534 5 1205 14.04.2020 0 0 
213 4 1052 18.05.2020 0 0 
304 5 1315 27.05.2020 0 0 
2533 6 1578 04.08.2020 0 0 
2534 6 1578 21.08.2020 0 0 
Amarjit K    0 0 
1742 6 1398 24.07.2017 0 0 
3960 6 1398 04.10.2017 0 0 
4040 6 1398 15.11.2017 0 0 
4687 6 1398 27.12.2017 0 0 
4696 6 1398 27.12.2017 0 0 
16 1 240 21.04.2018 0 0 
27 4 960 25.04.2018 0 0 
197 6 1440 17.05.2018 0 0 
210 5 1200 17.05.2018 0 0 
379 6 1440 17.05.2018 0 0 
391 6 1440 29.05.2018 0 0 
1176 4 960 30.06.2018 0 0 
2016 2 482 17.09.2019 0 0 
29. Mehna 
(Moga-1) 
  
Baljinder Kaur 
w/o Kuldeep 
Singh  
PB-15-001-
010-001/237 
 
2016-17=18 
2017-18=53 
2018-19=37 
2020-21=11 
1624 5 1200 30.06.2018 1200 5 
5403 1 240 20.02.2019 240 1 
5887 3 720 -do- 720 3 
30. Mehna (Moga-1) Baljinder Kaur 
w/o Kuldeep 
Singh 
PB-15-001-
010-001/262 
2018-19=19 
2019-20=06 
2020-21=06 
1680 6 1440 30.06.2018 0 0 
5474 5 1200 20.02.2019 0 0 
5859 4 960 20.02.2019 0 0 
31. Dhilawnwala 
(Baghapurana) 
Baloor Singh 
s/o Malkeet 
Singh 
PB-15-003-
021-001/10 
2017-18=01 
2018-19=27 
2019-20=36 
2020-21=76 
258 6 1311 15.06.2018 1311 6 
596 5 1200 28.06.2018 1200 5 
864 5 853 03.07.2018 682 4 
2170 5 1000 28.02.2019 1000 5 
1603 3 540 17.09.2019 180 1 
32. Dhilawnwala 
(Baghapurana) 
Baloor Singh 
s/o Malkeet 
Singh 
PB-15-003-
021-001/135 
2018-19=21 
2019-20=08 
258 6 1311 15.06.2018 0 0 
596 5 1200 28.06.2018 0 0 
864 4 682 03.07.2018 0 0 
2170 5 1000 28.02.2019 0 0 
1603 2 360 17.09.2019 0 0 
33. Samalsar 
(Baghapurana) 
 
Jaswinder Kaur 
w/o Balveer 
Singh 
PB-15-003-
033-001/786  
 
2016-17 =13 
2017-18 =10 
2018-19 =22 
2019-20 =43 
2020-21 =39 
3937 3 699 27.12.2017 466 2 
5905 2 466 12.04.2018 466 2 
83 4 960 17.05.2018 720 4 
105 6 1440 17.05.2018 1440 6 
318 3 609 18.06.2018 406 3 

Appendices  
119 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of GP Name and 
father/husband 
name 
Job Card No. Year wise 
work and 
days 
Muster 
roll of 
working 
Days 
of 
work 
Wages 
credited 
Date of 
credit 
Amount of 
mis-
appropriation 
Days 
involved 
2203 5 900 13.03.2019 360 2 
755 6 1446 11.06.2019 482 2 
894 6 1446 20.06.2019 1446 6 
1099 6 1446 20.06.2019 1446 6 
34. Samalsar 
(Baghapurana) 
Jaswinder Kaur 
w/o Balveer 
Singh 
PB-15-003-
033-001/923 
2016-17=32  
2017-18=38 
2018-19=98 
2019-20=44 
3753 2 466 27.12.2017 0 0 
3941 5 1165 27.12.2017 0 0 
4092 4 932 27.12.2017 0 0 
5906 6 1398 13.04.2018 0 0 
84 5 1200 17.05.2018 0 0 
106 6 1440 17.05.2018 0 0 
367 6 1440 17.07.2018 0 0 
2233 3 450 12.03.2019 0 0 
647 4 964 11.06.2019 0 0 
892 6 1446 21.06.2019 0 0 
1097 6 1446 21.06.2019 0 0 
35. Samalsar 
(Baghapurana) 
Kuldip Kaur 
w/o Chamkaur 
Singh 
PB-15-003-
033-001/310 
2017-18=50 
2018-19=12 
2020-21=12 
82 5 1165 06.05.2017 1165 5 
152 6 1398 06.05.2017 1398 6 
229 6 1398 06.05.2017 1398 6 
287 6 1398 24.07.2017 1398 6 
885 6 858 24.07.2017 858 6 
1455 5 850 24.07.2017 850 5 
1875 6 1398 24.07.2017 1398 6 
314 5 1015 18.06.2018 812 4 
36. Samalsar 
(Baghapurana) 
Kuldip Kaur 
w/o Chamkaur 
Singh 
PB-15-003-
033-001/621 
2016-17=39 
2017-18=61 
2018-19=11 
2019-20=07 
89 5 1165 06.05.2017 0 0 
159 6 1398 06.05.2017 0 0 
236 6 1398 06.05.2017 0 0 
295 6 1398 24.07.2017 0 0 
897 6 858 24.07.2017 0 0 
1467 6 1020 24.07.2017 0 0 
1885 6 1398 24.07.2017 0 0 
317 4 812 18.06.2018 0 0 
37. Samalsar 
(Baghapurana) 
Paramjit Kaur 
w/o Gurmit 
Singh 
PB-15-003-
033-001/28-A 
 
2018-19=34 
2016-17=92 
2017-18=94 
2018-19=69 
2019-20=16 
2020-21=12 
1053 2 480 18.07.2018 480 2 
38. Samalsar 
(Baghapurana) 
Paramjit Kaur 
w/o Gurmit 
Singh 
PB-15-003-
033-001/217 
 
1052 6 1440 20.07.2018 0 0 
39. Samalsar 
(Baghapurana) 
Gurmal Kaur 
w/o Gurnam 
Singh 
PB-15-003-
033-001/962 
2016-17=25 
2017-18=52 
2018-19=33 
2019-20=30 
2020-21=56 
 
319 5 1015 18.06.2018 1015 5 
498 1 203 18.06.2018 203 1 
2204 3 540 12.03.2019 540 3 
843 6 282 26.06.2019 282 3 
1757 4 964 17.09.2019 723 3 
1837 6 1446 17.09.2019 964 4 
1993 4 964 18.09.2019 723 4 
1204 6 1410 03.08.2020 940 4 
1311 6 1122 26.08.2020 708 4 
1503 6 1302 26.08.2020 1302 6 
2489 6 1242 13.10.2020 868 3 
40. Samalsar 
(Baghapurana) 
Gurmail Kaur 
w/o Gurnam 
Singh 
PB-15-003-
033-001/1091 
2017-18=11 
2018-19=25 
2019-20=39 
2020-21=64 
313 5 1015 18.06.2018 0 0 
492 1 203 18.06.2018 0 0 
2200 5 900 12.03.2019 0 0 
740 3 723 20.06.2019 0 0 
1771 5 1205 17.09.2019 0 0 
1869 6 1446 29.01.2020 0 0 
1969 6 1446 17.09.2019 0 0 
1241 5 935 21.08.2020 0 0 
1383 4 708 26.08.2020 0 0 
1516 6 1302 26.08.2020 0 0 
2519 4 868 21.10.2020 0 0 

Performance Audit Report on ‘Implementation of MGNR EGS in Punjab’  
120 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of GP Name and 
father/husband 
name 
Job Card No. Year wise 
work and 
days 
Muster 
roll of 
working 
Days 
of 
work 
Wages 
credited 
Date of 
credit 
Amount of 
mis-
appropriation 
Days 
involved 
41. Samalsar 
(Baghapurana) 
Mukhtiare Kaur 
w/o Mukhtiar 
Singh 
PB-15-003-
033-001/755 
2016-17=22 
2017-18=35 
2018-19=61 
2019-20=24 
2020-21=05 
2266 5 1205 09.01.2020 241 1 
42. Samalsar 
(Baghapurana) 
Mukhtiare Kaur 
w/o Mukhtiar 
Singh 
PB-15-003-
033-001/819 
2019-20=06 2221 6 1446 14.04.2020 0 0 
43. Kaleke 
(Baghapurana) 
Manjit Kaur w/o 
Gurmail Singh 
PB-15-003-
034-001/250 
2019-20=58 
2020-21=80 
208 6 1446 30.04.2019 1446 6 
1583 6 1446 17.09.2019 1205 6 
44. Kaleke 
(Baghapurana) 
Manjit Kaur w/o 
Gurmail Singh 
PB-15-003-
034-001/345 
2019-20=28 
  
209 6 1446 30.04.2019 0 0 
1584 5 1205 17.09.2019 0 0 
45. Kaleke 
(Baghapurana) 
Manpreet Kaur 
w/o Jagseer 
Singh 
PB-15-003-
034-001/327 
2017-18=27 
2019-20=14 
2020-21=14 
332 4 960 28.06.2018 960 4 
1289 5 1180 01.09.2018 708 3 
2372 5 500 12.03.2019 300 3 
929 1 200 20.06.2019 200 1 
46. Kaleke 
(Baghapurana) 
Manpreet kaur 
w/o jagseer 
singh 
PB-15-003-
034-001/410 
2017-18=04 
2019-20=12 
2020-21=02 
333 4 960 28.06.2018 0 0 
1291 3 708 01.09.2018 0 0 
2373 3 300 12.03.2019 0 0 
930 2 400 20.06.2019 0 0 
47. Gholian Kalan 
(Baghapurana) 
Amarjit Singh 
s/o Nachhatar 
Singh 
PB-15-003-
017-001/212 
2017-18=12 
2018-19=06 
2019-20=26 
2020-21=20 
775 4 964 12.06.2019 763 3 
48. Gholian Kalan 
(Baghapurana) 
Amarjit Singh 
s/o Nachhatar 
Singh 
PB-15-003-
017-001/364 
2019-20=12 
2017-18=07 
2018-19=27 
2019-20=16 
2020-21=14 
782 6 1446 26.06.2019 0 0 
49. Langiana Nawan 
(Baghapurana) 
Jaswinder Kaur 
w/o Nirmal 
Singh 
PB-15-003-
010-001/383 
2016-17=11 
2017-18=07 
2018-19=27 
2019-20=16 
2020-21=14 
1714 6 1200 04.12.2020 800 4 
1746 5 1100 04.12.2018 660 3 
50. Langiana Nawan 
(Baghapurana) 
Jaswinder Kaur 
w/o Nirmal 
Singh 
PB-15-003-
010-001/74 
  
2018-19=11 
2019-20=03 
2020-21=04 
1702 6 1440 04.12.2018 0 0 
1764 6 1440 04.12.2018 0 0 
51. Malke 
(Baghapurana) 
Amandeep Kaur 
w/o Jasveer 
Singh 
PB-15-003-
048-001/595 
2020-21=12 1590 
 
3 351 27.08.2020 351 3 
1745 1 157 19.09.2020 157 1 
52. Malke 
(Baghapurana) 
Amandeep Kaur 
w/o Jasveer 
Singh 
PB-15-003-
048-001/598 
  
2020-21=11 
  
1590 6 702 27.08.2020 0 0 
1745 1 157 19.09.2020 0 0 
53. Gatta Mundi 
Kasu (Lohian) 
  
Kulwinder Kaur 
w/o Balwinder 
Singh 
PB-05-005-
017-001/121 
  
  
 
2017-18=08  
2018-19=21  
2019-20=10 
2020-21=11   
  
839 8 1864 13.04.2018 1864 8 
112 13 3120 18.06.2018 3120 13 
170 5 1200 16.07.2018 1200 5 
399  3 720 05.10.2018 720 3 
1121 4 1052 09.10.2020 526 2 
54. Gatta Mundi 
Kasu (Lohian) 
  
   
Kulwinder Kaur 
w/o Balwinder 
Singh 
   
  
PB-05-005-
017-001/109 
  
 
2017-18=08 
2018-19=21 
2019-20=05 
2020-21=07 
  
839 8 1864 13.04.2018 0 0 
112 13 3120 18.06.2018 0 0 
170 6 1440 16.07.2018 0 0 
399  3 720 05.10.2018 0 0 
1121  2 526 09.10.2020 0 0 
55. Gatta Mundi 
Kasu (Lohian) 
   
Balkar Singh s/o 
Makhan Singh 
   
PB-05-005-
017-001/38 
  
 
2017-18=12 
2018-19=50 
2019-20=16 
2020-21=48 
2021-22=05 
839 6 1398 13.04.2018 1398 6 
112 13 3120 18.06.2018 3120 13 
170 6 1440 16.07.2018 1200 5 
399  3 720 05.10.2018 720 3 

Appendices  
121 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of GP Name and 
father/husband 
name 
Job Card No. Year wise 
work and 
days 
Muster 
roll of 
working 
Days 
of 
work 
Wages 
credited 
Date of 
credit 
Amount of 
mis-
appropriation 
Days 
involved 
56. Gatta Mundi 
Kasu (Lohian) 
Balkar Singh s/o 
Makhan Singh 
PB-05-005-
017-001/103 
  
2017-18=08 839 8 1864 16.04.2018 0 0 
2018-19=31 112 13 3120 18.06.2018 0 0 
2019-20=61 170 5 1200 16.07.2018 0 0 
2020-21=08 399  3 720 05.10.2018 0 0 
57. Nasirpur 
(Lohian) 
Balkar Singh s/o 
Jeet Singh 
PB-05-005-
061-001/19 
2016-17=17 
2017-18=44 
2019-20=13 
70 4 932 31.07.2017 932 4 
110 1 233 04.10.2017 233 1 
141 10 2330 03.10.2017 2330 10 
233 9 2097 27.12.2017 2097 9 
314 10 2330 15.11.2017 2097 9 
578 6 1398 20.05.2019 1398 6 
622 9 2097 20.05.2019 2097 9 
58. Nasirpur 
(Lohian) 
 
Balkar Singh s/o 
Jeet Singh 
PB-05-005-
061-001/24 
  
 70 4 932 31.07.2017 0 0 
2017-18=75 110 1 233 03.10.2017 0 0 
2018-19=83 141 10 2330 03.10.2017 0 0 
2019-20=35 233 9 2097 27.12.2017 0 0 
2020-21=81 314 9 2097 15.11.2017 0 0 
  578 10 2330 13.04.2018 0 0 
  622 9 2097 13.04.2018 0 0 
59. Nasirpur 
(Lohian)  
Balvir Kaur w/o 
Sucha Singh 
PB-05-005-
061-001/54 
2017-18=39 
2018-19=28 
2020-21=05 
516 5 1165 12.04.2018 1165 5 
622 3 699 13.04.2018 466 3 
60. Nasirpur 
(Lohian)  
Balvir Kaur w/o 
Sucha Singh 
PB-05-005-
061-001/61 
2017-18=39 516 6 1398 12.04.2018 0 0 
 622 2 466 13.04.2018 0 0 
61. Rupewal 
(Lohian) 
Lakhwinder 
Kaur w/o Avtar 
Singh 
PB-05-005-
070-001/86 
2019-20=16  
2020-22=75 
713 11 2651 30.10.2019 2651 11 
62. Rupewal 
(Lohian)  
Lakhwinder 
Kaur w/o Avtar 
Singh 
PB-05-005-
070-001/99 
2018-19=41 
2019-20=11 
713 11 2651 30.10.2019 0 0 
Total 1,60,087 691 
Source: Departmental data  

Performance Audit Report on ‘Implementation of MGNR EGS in Punjab’  
122 
 
Appendix 4.6 
(Referred to in para 4.2.7 (iii); page 47) 
Excess payment of wages to the unskilled workers 
(Amount in ₹) 
Sr.  
No. 
Muster 
Roll (MR) 
No. 
Period of work Job Card 
Number 
 
Name of 
Worker 
Attendance as per Excess 
Attend 
ance 
Wage 
per day 
Excess 
payment  
From To   Physical 
MR 
MIS 
MR 
1. 4752 21.01.2021 27.01.2021 PB-15-003-
017-001/222 
Harpal Kaur 4  6 2 263 526 
2.       PB-15-003-
017-001/227 
Surjit Kaur 4  6 2 263 526 
3.       PB-15-003-
017-001/227 
Jagsir Singh 5  6 1 263 263 
4.       PB-15-003-
017-001/235 
Amarjit Kaur 3  6 3 263 789 
5.       PB-15-003-
017-001/265 
Lakhveer 
Singh 
5
 6 1 263 263 
6. 4296 29.12.2020 04.01.2021 PB-15-003-
001-001/274 
Karmjit Kaur 5  6 1 263 263 
7.       PB-15-003-
001-001/358 
Baldev Singh 5  6 1 263 263 
8.       PB-15-003-
001-001/366 
Mohinder 
Kaur 
5
 6 1 263 263 
9.       PB-15-003-
001-001/366 
Kulwinder 
Kaur 
5
 6 1 263 263 
10.       PB-15-003-
001-001/371 
Baljit Kaur 5  6 1 263 263 
11.       PB-15-003-
001-001/373 
Jagdeep Kaur 5  6 1 263 263 
12.       PB-15-003-
001-001/373 
Maghar 
Singh 
4
 6 2 263 526 
13.       PB-15-003-
001-001/421 
Satpal Singh 5  6 1 263 263 
14.       PB-15-003-
001-001/423 
Harpal Kaur 5  6 1 263 263 
15.       PB-15-003-
001-001/426 
Mander 
Singh 
5
 6 1 263 263 
16.       PB-15-003-
001-001/481 
Gurpreet 
Singh 
5
 6 1 263 263 
17. 4297 05.01.2021 11.01.2021 PB-15-003-
001-001/358 
Baldev Singh 4  6 2 263 526 
18.       PB-15-003-
001-001/373 
Jagdeep Kaur 5  6 1 263 263 
19.       PB-15-003-
001-001/454 
Sukhdev 
Kaur 
4
 6 2 263 526 
20.       PB-15-003-
001-001/481 
Gurpreet 
Singh 
5
 6 1 263 263 
21. 2864 21.10.2020 27.10.2020 PB-15-003-
066-001/67 
Harbhajan 
Singh 
4
 6 2 251 502 
22. 3136 13.11.2020 19.11.2020 PB-15-003-
066-001/65 
Jaswinder 
Kaur 
0
 4 4 247 988 
23. 2123 18.02.2021 04.03.2021 PB-05-005-
004-001/31 
Baljeet Kaur 0  13  13 263 3,419 
24. 1724 08.09.2020 14.09.2020 PB-02-006-
031-001/157 
Ranjit Kaur 5 6 1 263 263 
25. 4670 14.03.2021 20.03.2021 PB-02-006-
039-001/226 
Balwinder 
Kaur 
5 6 1 263 263 
26. 4670 14.03.2021 20.03.2021 PB-02-006-
006-001/226 
Harpreet 
Singh 
5 6 1 263 263 

Appendices  
123 
Sr.  
No. 
Muster 
Roll (MR) 
No. 
Period of work Job Card 
Number 
 
Name of 
Worker 
Attendance as per Excess 
Attend 
ance 
Wage 
per day 
Excess 
payment  
From To   Physical 
MR 
MIS 
MR 
27. 499 29.04.2021 05.05.2021 PB-02-006-
067-001/36 
Lakhwinder 
Singh 
4 5 1 263 263 
28. 499 29.04.2021 05.05.2021 PB-02-006-
067-001/37 
Sarbjit Kaur 4 5 1 263 263 
29. 499 29.04.2021 05.05.2021 PB-02-006-
039-001/149 
Sarbjit Kaur 5 6 1 263 263 
30. 363 22.04.2021 28.04.2021 PB-02-006-
067-001/108 
Amarjit Kaur 4 6 2 263 526 
31. 412 01.06.2020 07/06/2020 PB-02-006-
017- 001/96 
Ranjit Kaur 
(Self) 
5 6 1 263 263 
32. 158 09.06.2017 15.06.2017 PB-02-006-
031-001/166 
Ranjit Kaur 
(Self) 
5 6 1 233 233 
33. 14 08.04.2016 14.04.2016 PB-02-006-
034-001/361 
Mangal 
Singh 
0 6 6 218 1308 
34. 3335 14.08.2020 20.08.2020 PB-19-005-
058-001/135 
Paramjit 
Kaur 
0 6 6 263 1578 
35. 1229 28.06.2021 07.07.2021 PB-19-005-
058-001/78 
Balwinder 
Kaur  
8 9 1 269 269 
36. 1229 28.06.2021 07.07.2021 PB-19-005-
058-001/113 
Kamaljit 
Kaur 
8 9 1 269 269 
37. 1229 28.06.2021 07.07.2021 PB-19-005-
058-001/131 
Harwinder 
Singh 
8 9 1 269 269 
38. 1229 28.06.2021 07.07.2021 PB-19-005-
058-001/24 
Swarn Kaur 8 9 1 269 269 
39. 1229 28.06.2021 07.07.2021 PB-19-005-
058-001/119 
Harbans Kaur 8 9 1 269 269 
40. 1229 28.06.2021 07.07.2021 PB-19-005-
058-001/18 
Balbir Kaur 8 9 1 269 269 
41. 1229 28.06.2021 07.07.2021 PB-19-005-
058-001/85 
Vidia 8 9 1 269 269 
42. 2528 25.07.2020 31.07.2020 PB-19-005-
070-001/25 
Paramjit 
Singh 
0 6 6 263 1578 
43. 2529 01.08.2020 07.08.2020 PB-19-005-
070-001/9 
Baljit Kaur 0 6 6 263 1578 
44. 4351 15.09.2020 21.09.2020 PB-19-005-
070- 001/43 
Kiran bala 5 6 1 263 263 
45. 1560 21.11.2019 27.11.2019 PB-19-005-
070-001/29 
Harpreet 
Kaur 
0 6 6 241 1446 
Total 200 294 94  24,244 
Source: Departmental records and MIS data  

Performance Audit Report on ‘Implementation of MGNR EGS in Punjab’  
124 
 
Appendix 4.7 
(Referred to in para 4.4.1; page 55) 
Statement showing status of works in selected blocks 
(₹ in lakh)  
Block Year Works to 
be executed 
No. of 
Works 
completed 
No. of Works 
ongoing/ 
suspended 
Amount incurred 
on ongoing/ 
suspended Works 
No of 
Works not 
started 
Sangrur 2016-17 434 134 182 0 118 
2017-18 482 212 140 1.18 130 
2018-19 760 175 352 14.26 233 
2019-20 1121 230 464 27.25 427 
2020-21 1812 371 899 104.66 542 
Malerkotla-2 2016-17 790 103 72 0 615 
2017-18 1060 176 101 0.84 783 
2018-19 1199 82 263 12.87 854 
2019-20 1192 111 211 20.50 870 
2020-21 1671 153 530 178.43 988 
GhallKhurd 2016-17 452 111 335 3.46 6 
2017-18 782 300 439 22.25 43 
2018-19 909 369 431 150.77 109 
2019-20 1548 188 1035 379.05 325 
2020-21 2639 365 1786 1103.35 488 
 Zira 2016-17 253 81 97 13.21 75 
2017-18 391 130 151 42.29 110 
2018-19 800 145 447 101.88 208 
2019-20 1134 162 667 199.29 305 
2020-21 2236 216 1453 559.65 567 
Mehatpur 2016-17 67 46 18 7.29 3 
2017-18 193 81 97 5.65 15 
2018-19 416 208 146 26.89 62 
2019-20 403 57 273 61.10 73 
2020-21 853 44 687 217.06 122 
Verka  2016-17 447 76 137 0 234 
2017-18 510 125 130 0.88 255 
2018-19 740 140 306 5.28 294 
2019-20 801 237 241 31.88 323 
2020-21 1441 245 428 337.98 768 
Rayya 2016-17 352 52 47 0 253 
2017-18 431 52 110 24.46 269 
2018-19 757 116 313 70.18 328 
2019-20 362 137 138 82.44 87 
2020-21 466 149 96 423.11 221 
Moga-I 2016-17 334 122 74 0.23 138 
2017-18 468 293 129 83.11 46 
2018-19 681 107 265 87.02 309 
2019-20 818 164 291 175.26 363 
2020-21 1096 218 436 316.10 442 
Bagapurana  2016-17 203 149 53 0 1 
2017-18 286 225 54 6.70 7 
2018-19 488 190 292 68.95 6 
2019-20 832 211 558 94.16 63 
2020-21 1101 333 637 205.52 131 
Lohian  2016-17 137 37 60 11.56 40 
2017-18 445 134 227 31.07 84 
2018-19 680 253 305 63.04 122 
2019-20 819 196 458 63.76 165 
2020-21 1251 217 753 235.74 281 
Majri  2016-17 250 139 110 14.82 1 
2017-18 374 63 306 105.51 5 
2018-19 669 167 427 195.84 75 
2019-20 860 168 538 259.53 154 
2020-21 1696 16 1265 621.31 415 
Kharar  2016-17 277 202 72 16.23 3 
2017-18 402 104 266 111.91 32 
2018-19 802 116 573 184.87 114 
2019-20 1053 139 681 370.48 233 
2020-21 2638 10 1887 795.80 741 
Total 48,564 9,552 23,939 8,347.91 15,074 
Source: MIS data  

Appendices  
125 
Appendix 4.8 
(Referred to in para 4.4.2; page 56) 
Percentage of expenditure on NRM works in selected blocks 
(₹ in lakh)  
Sr. 
No. 
Name of Block Year Works 
Completed 
Total expenditure Expenditure on NRM 
Works 
Percentage of 
expenditure on 
NRM Works 
1. Zira  2016-17 36 259.33 69.54 26.82 
2017-18 70 240.27 128.51 53.49 
2018-19 59 532.84 238.85 44.83 
2019-20 37 942.08 338.33 35.91 
2020-21 71 1785.38 520.35 29.15 
2. Mehatpur 
 
2016-17 33 6.23 0.69 11.08 
2017-18 41 41.49 15.27 36.80 
2018-19 74 24.00 6.87 28.62 
2019-20 36 73.78 17.88 24.23 
2020-21 23 149.09 18.94 12.70 
3. Baghapurana 
 
2016-17 79 314.43 103.89 33.04 
2017-18 163 728.18 452.14 62.09 
2018-19 180 867.61 557.34 64.24 
2019-20 160 722.98 452.35 62.57 
2020-21 234 1240.95 742.70 59.85 
4. Kharar 
 
2016-17 71 306.31 139.88 45.67 
2017-18 40 494.46 222.66 45.03 
2018-19 72 297.37 111.82 37.60 
2019-20 45 493.39 269.43 54.61 
2020-21 4 1001.91 622.61 62.14 
5. 
 
GhallKhurd 
 
2016-17 36 432.88 111.33 25.72 
2017-18 105 542.00 307.98 56.82 
2018-19 174 732.60 422.04 57.61 
2019-20 106 920.60 485.90 50.95 
2020-21 211 2145.32 914.96 42.65 
6. Sangrur  2016-17 86 498.08 268.35 53.88 
2017-18 107 435.69 301.38 69.17 
2018-19 120 400.74 283.28 70.69 
2019-20 150 669.82 392.00 58.52 
2020-21 216 1012.35 538.84 53.23 
7. Verka  2016-17 36 157.77 49.28 31.24 
2017-18 38 285.24 124.76 43.74 
2018-19 137 300.93 210.05 69.80 
2019-20 131 277.95 161.56 58.13 
2020-21 122 821.48 348.49 42.42 
8. Rayya  2016-17 38 104..44 89.30 85.50 
2017-18 44 334.88 198.63 59.31 
2018-19 83 352.52 238.84 67.75 
2019-20 85 334.00 215.96 64.66 
2020-21 87 770.26 524.59 68.10 

Performance Audit Report on ‘Implementation of MGNR EGS in Punjab’  
126 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of Block Year Works 
Completed 
Total expenditure Expenditure on NRM 
Works 
Percentage of 
expenditure on 
NRM Works 
9. Moga-I 
 
2016-17 76 383.14 213.87 55.82 
2017-18 76 653.88 429.22 65.64 
2018-19 82 636.70 442.52 69.50 
2019-20 128 459.13 352.93 76.87 
2020-21 147 728.79 635.19 87.16 
10. Lohian  2016-17 17 72.25 27.58 38.17 
2017-18 116 202.06 147.28 72.89 
2018-19 190 237.83 157.91 66.40 
2019-20 122 258.87 169.01 65.29 
2020-21 119 533.63 338.35 63.41 
11. Majri  2016-17 70 140.16 84.11 60.01 
2017-18 37 295.64 152.30 51.52 
2018-19 64 360.24 209.08 58.04 
2019-20 77 327.06 217.40 66.47 
2020-21 9 791.42 417.63 52.77 
12. Malerkotla 2  2016-17 64 261.42 196.64 75.22 
2017-18 67 387.89 239.92 61.85 
2018-19 33 290.62 234.64 80.74 
2019-20 58 406.59 346.78 85.29 
2020-21 56 682.86 485.82 71.14 
Source: Departmental data  
  

Appendices  
127 
 
Appendix 4.9 
(Referred to in para 4.4.3; page 58) 
Employment provided to differently abled persons in the selected blocks 
Name of 
Block 
Year No. of differently 
abled persons 
registered 
Work provided out of 
registered differently 
abled persons 
Percentage 100 days 
employment 
provided 
Verka 2016-17 12 2 16.67 0 
2017-18 36 3 8.33 0 
2018-19 45 10 22.22 0 
2019-20 47 12 25.53 0 
2020-21 47 15 31.91 0 
Rayya 2016-17 10 1 10.00 0 
2017-18 21 0 0.00 0 
2018-19 22 12 54.55 0 
2019-20 30 10 33.33 0 
2020-21 30 17 56.67 0 
Moga-I  2016-17 37 14 37.84 0 
2017-18 37 14 37.84 0 
2018-19 37 11 29.73 0 
2019-20 45 14 31.11 0 
2020-21 45 14 31.11 0 
Baghapurana 2016-17 22 6 27.27 0 
2017-18 27 10 37.04 0 
2018-19 42 10 23.81 0 
2019-20 46 11 23.91 0 
2020-21 48 18 37.50 0 
Lohian 2016-17 3 0 0.00 0 
2017-18 4 2 50.00 0 
2018-19 4 2 50.00 0 
2019-20 5 2 40.00 0 
2020-21 5 3 60.00 0 
Mehatpur 2016-17 1 0 0.00 0 
2017-18 1 0 0.00 0 
2018-19 2 0 0.00 0 
2019-20 6 1 16.67 0 
2020-21 8 5 62.50 0 
Malerkotla 2016-17 87 42 48.28 0 
2017-18 87 41 47.13 0 
2018-19 90 44 48.89 0 
2019-20 92 46 50.00 0 
2020-21 92 40 43.48 0 
Galkhurd 2016-17 4 3 75.00 0 
2017-18 10 2 20.00 0 
2018-19 9 7 77.78 0 
2019-20 11 7 63.64 0 
2020-21 11 7 63.64 0 

Performance Audit Report on ‘Implementation of MGNR EGS in Punjab’  
128 
Name of 
Block 
Year No. of differently 
abled persons 
registered 
Work provided out of 
registered differently 
abled persons 
Percentage 100 days 
employment 
provided 
Zira  2016-17 8 1 12.50 0 
2017-18 9 0 0.00 0 
2018-19 13 2 15.38 0 
2019-20 15 4 26.67 0 
2020-21 23 6 26.90 0 
Majri 2016-17 3 0 0.00 0 
2017-18 3 0 0.00 0 
2018-19 3 0 0.00 0 
2019-20 3 0 0.00 0 
2020-21 3 0 0.00 0 
Kharar 2016-17 59 28 47.46 0 
2017-18 62 16 25.81 0 
2018-19 65 17 26.15 0 
2019-20 65 20 30.77 0 
2020-21 65 13 20.00 0 
Sangrur 2016-17 17 3 17.65 0 
2017-18 17 5 29.41 0 
2018-19 55 5 9.09 0 
2019-20 56 25 44.46 0 
2020-21 60 29 48.33 0 
Source: MIS data  
 
  

Appendices  
129 
 
Appendix 4.10 
(Referred to in para 4.4.3; page 58) 
Status of employment provided to the differently abled persons in selected 
districts 
Name of 
District 
Year No. of differently abled 
persons registered 
No. of differently abled persons 
to whom work was provided 
Percentage 
Amritsar 2016-17 291 23 8 
2017-18 370 44 12 
2018-19 387 77 20 
2019-20 480 72 15 
2020-21 487 143 29 
Moga 2016-17 138 50 36 
2017-18 157 60 38 
2018-19 184 60 33 
2019-20 207 60 29 
2020-21 212 74 35 
Jalandhar 2016-17 49 8 16 
2017-18 56 25 45 
2018-19 73 26 36 
2019-20 92 28 30 
2020-21 98 52 53 
SAS Nagar 2016-17 78 28 36 
2017-18 83 16 19 
2018-19 86 18 21 
2019-20 86 21 24 
2020-21 86 15 17 
Sangrur  2016-17 198 91 46 
2017-18 198 91 46 
2018-19 246 91 37 
2019-20 300 98 33 
2020-21 305 142 47 
Ferozepur  2016-17 153 20 13 
2017-18 184 61 33 
2018-19 209 62 30 
2019-20 222 68 31 
2020-21 344 65 19 
Source: Departmetnal data  

Performance Audit Report on ‘Implementation of MGNR EGS in Punjab’  
130 
  
Appendix 4.11 
(Referred to in para 4.4.4; page 59) 
Details of GPs where PDs were not generated in all the years  
during 2016-2021  
Sr. 
No. 
Name of the GP Status of scheme in the GP 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 
1. Butari (Rayya) No. of JC in the GP 145 145 214 234 277 
No. of works proposed in LB  NA 1 NA 5 6 
No. of PDs proposed in LB 2952 1514 1618 4372 4014 
Person-days generated or not Yes No Yes Yes Yes 
2. Dardeo Sardara No. of JC in the GP 142 142 143 16 9 194 
No. of works proposed in LB  NA 1 NA 6 7 
No. of person-days proposed 
in LB  
2744 1583 1680 1888 1738 
Person-days generated or not Yes No No Yes Yes 
3. Jhirinangal (Rayya) No. of JC in the GP 18 18 27 2 8 32 
No. of works proposed in LB  NA 1 NA 5 6 
No. of PDs proposed in LB  374 413 1369 1967 1810 
Person-days generated or not No No Yes Yes Yes 
4. Kartarpur (Rayya) No. of JC in the GP 95 95 110 11 6 140 
No. of works proposed in LB  NA 1 NA 7 7 
No. of PDs proposed in LB 1642 1514 1369 3144 4292 
Person-days generated or not Yes No Yes Yes Yes 
5. Baba Deep Singh Avenue 
(Verka) 
No. of JC in the GP 65 65 65 79 89 
No. of works proposed in LB  2 1 2 3 2 
No. of PDs proposed in LB 936 1198 904 No No 
Person-days generated or not No No No Yes Yes 
6. Bal Kalan (Verka) No. of JC in the GP 184 198 230 267 403 
No. of works proposed in LB  2 3 4 0 36 
No. of PDs proposed in LB No No No No No 
Person-days generated or not No Yes Yes Yes Yes 
7. Chakpipli No. of JC in the GP 59 64 65 75 94 
No. of works proposed in LB  1 2 4 2 9 
No. of PDs proposed in LB No No 3751 No No 
Person-days generated or not Yes Yes No Yes Yes 
8. Janian Chahal No. of JC in the GP 8 18 19 18 30 
No. of works proposed in LB  1 3 4 2 9 
No. of PDs proposed in LB 1714 No  No  No  No  
Person-days generated or not No Yes Yes Yes Yes 
9. Nawan Pind Khalewal 
(Lohian) 
No. of JC in the GP 11 58 71 80 86 
No. of works proposed in LB  2 2 2 12 9 
No. of PDs proposed in LB 1714 No No No No 
Person-days generated or not No Yes Yes Yes Yes 
10. Shindhar (Lohian) No. of JC in the GP 53 102 104  117 213 
No. of works proposed in LB  1 2 5 5 11 
No. of PDs proposed in LB 3238 No No No No 
Person-days generated or not No Yes Yes Yes Yes 
11. Sidhupur (Lohian) No. of JC in the GP 13 29 44 4 6 77 
No. of works proposed in LB  1 2 5 4 9 
No. of PDs proposed in LB 2000 No No No No 
Person-days generated or not No Yes Yes Yes Yes 
12. Gurdaspur Gurthali 
(Sangrur)  
No. of JC in the GP 23 23 29 31 43 
No. works proposed in LB  3 4 NA NA 5 
No. of PDs proposed in LB No No No No No 
Person-days generated or not No No No Yes Yes 
13. Gajjan Singh Colony 
(Ghall Khurd)` 
No. of JC in the GP 0 0 2 15 17 
No. of works proposed in LB  NA NA NA 11 7 
No. of PDs proposed in LB No No No No No 
Person-days generated or not No Yes Yes Yes Yes 

Appendices  
131 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of the GP Status of scheme in the GP 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 
14. Thather Khurd 
(GhallKhurd) 
No. of JC in the GP 43 45 46 46 48 
No. of works proposed in LB  NA NA NA NA NA 
No. of PDs proposed in LB No No No No No 
Person-days generated or not No No Yes Yes Yes 
15. Kotara (Zira) No. of JC in the GP 80 80 81 141 2 25 
No. of works proposed in LB  11 11 10 11 11 
No. of PDs proposed in LB No  No No No No 
Person-days generated or not No Yes Yes Yes Yes 
16. Thatha Kishan Singh 
(Zira) 
No. of JC in the GP 79 77 79 108 143 
No. of works proposed in LB  4 4 4 4 10 
No. of PDs proposed in LB No  No  No  No No 
Person-days generated or not No No No Yes Yes 
17. Shah Wala (Zira) No. of JC in the GP 123 124 136  147 150 
No. of works proposed in LB  10 9 12 9 10 
No. of PDs proposed in LB No  No  No No No 
Person-days generated or not No No Yes Yes Yes 
18. Awan Khalsa (Mehatpur) No. of JC in the GP 9 29 41 59 73 
No. of works proposed in LB  1 1 1 7 14 
No. of PDs proposed in LB No  No No No No 
Person-days generated or not No Yes Yes Yes Yes 
19. Gobindpur (Mehatpur) No. of JC in the GP 4 7 13 14 25 
No. of works proposed in LB  1 1 1 3 4 
No. of PDs proposed in LB No No No No No 
Person-days generated or not No Yes Yes Yes Yes 
20. Jhugian (Mehatpur) No. of JC in the GP 11 26 45 55 66 
No. of works proposed in LB  NA NA 1 4 17 
No. of PDs proposed in LB No  No No No No 
Person-days generated or not No Yes Yes Yes Yes 
21. Passairan (Mehatpur) No. of JC in the GP 7 7 11 13 20 
No. of works proposed in LB  1 NA NA 4 1 
No. of PDs proposed in LB No  No No No No 
Person-days generated or not No Yes Yes Yes Yes 
22. Rouli (Mehatpur) No. of JC in the GP 71 93 99 106  132 
No. of works proposed in LB  1 NA NA 3 1 
No. of PDs proposed in LB No No No No No 
Person-days generated or not No Yes Yes Yes Yes 
23. Sukhanand 
(Baghapurana) 
No. of JC in the GP 47 47 47 56 61 
No. of works proposed in LB  10 15 14 14 14 
No. of PDs proposed in LB 0 10496 7138 7404 7404 
Person-days generated or not No Yes Yes Yes Yes 
24. KarondianWala (Majri) No. of JC in the GP 36 36 38 44 46 
No. of works proposed in LB  2 3 4 6  6 
No. of PDs proposed in LB No No No  No  No 
Person-days generated or not Yes Yes No Yes  Yes 
25. Rakuli (Majri) No. of JC in the GP 68 68 68  69  85 
No. of works proposed in LB  4 4 5 6 10 
No. of PDs proposed in LB No  No  No No No 
Person-days generated or not No No Yes Yes Yes 
26. NannuMajra (Kharar) No. of JC in the GP 36 36 36  36 37 
No. of works proposed in LB  1 3 1 4 11 
No. of PDs proposed in LB No No No No No 
Person-days generated or not Yes No No Yes Yes 
27. Singhpura (Kharar) No. of JC in the GP 17 17 28 37 43 
No. of works proposed in LB  1 1 2 2 5 
No. of PDs proposed in LB No No  No  No No 
Person-days generated or not Yes No No Yes Yes 
Source: Departmental data  

Performance Audit Report on ‘Implementation of MGNR EGS in Punjab’  
132 
 
Appendix 4.12 
(Referred to in para 4.4.4; page 59) 
GPs of selected Districts where PDs were not generated  
Name of Districts Year Total No. of 
Panchayats 
No. of GP generating 
NIL Person Days 
Percentage 
Sangrur 
2016-17 604 62 10.26 
2017-18 604 69 11.42 
2018-19 604 33 5.46 
2019-20 600 10 1.67 
2020-21 600 6 1.00 
Ferozepur 
2016-17 869 418 48.10 
2017-18 869 256 29.46 
2018-19 869 186 21.40 
2019-20 869 50 5.75 
2020-21 869 29 3.34 
Amritsar 
2016-17 862 304 35.27 
2017-18 862 232 26.91 
2018-19 862 144 16.71 
2019-20 862 43 4.99 
2020-21 862 16 1.86 
Moga 
2016-17 343 47 13.70 
2017-18 340 26 7.65 
2018-19 340 35 10.29 
2019-20 340 7 2.06 
2020-21 340 0 0.00 
Jalandhar 
2016-17 902 361 40.02 
2017-18 902 159 17.63 
2018-19 902 145 16.08 
2019-20 891 28 3.14 
2020-21 891 10 1.12 
SAS Nagar 
2016-17 346 93 26.88 
2017-18 343 78 22.74 
2018-19 341 52 15.25 
2019-20 341 22 6.45 
2020-21 341 8 2.35 
Source: MIS data  

Appendices  
133 
  
Appendix 4.13 
(Referred to in para 4.4.5; page 59) 
Details of RGSKs completed but not functional  
(₹ in lakh) 
Sr. 
No.  
Name of the GP 
where RGSK 
constructed 
Sanctioned 
amount 
Date of 
Sanction 
Expenditure Whether 
completed or 
ongoing 
Date of 
completion 
Functioning/ 
not functioning 
1. Jamser 10 23.08.2016 9.76 Completed 16.01.2018 N ot Functioning 
2. Rupewal 10 28.01.2011 6.65 Completed 12.03.2013 Not Functioning 
3. Phul 10 23.08.2016 10.26 Completed 30.04.2018 No t Functioning 
4. Nall 10 18.05.2015 9.90 Completed 20.02.2019 Not  Functioning 
Total 36.57    
Source: Departmental data  

Performance Audit Report on ‘Implementation of MGNR EGS in Punjab’  
134 
 
Appendix 5.1 
(Referred to in para 5.6.1; page 68 and 69) 
Shortfall in conducting of social audit in selected GPs 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of the GP Year No. of 
audit due 
Audit 
conducted 
Shortfall Shortfall 
(in per cent ) 
1.  Butter Khurd (Moga-1) 2017-21 4 1 3 75 
2.  Charikpati Sarkar (Moga-1) 2017-21 4 3 1 25 
3.  Dala (Moga-1) 2017-21 4 4 0 0 
4.  Dhudike (Moga-1) 2017-21 4 4 0 0 
5.  Dosanjh (Moga-1) 2017-21 4 2 2 50 
6.  Dudhar Garbi (Moga-1) 2017-21 4 4 0 0 
7.  Kokri Phula Singh (Moga-1) 2017-21 4 0 4 100 
8.  Mallian Wala (Moga-1) 2017-21 4 3 1 25 
9.  Mehna (Moga-1) 2017-21 4 4 0 0 
10.  Ramuwala Harchoke  
(Moga-1) 
2017-21 4 3 1 25 
11.  Dhilwan Wala 
(Bhagapurana) 
2017-21 4 2 2 50 
12.  Gholian Kalan 
(Bhagapurana) 
2017-21 4 1 3 75 
13.  GTB Garh (Bhagapurana) 2017-21 4 0 4 100 
14.  Kaleke (Bhagapurana) 2017-21 4 1 3 75 
15.  Langiana Nawan 
(Bhagapurana) 
2017-21 4 1 3 75 
16.  Malke (Bhagapurana) 2017-21 4 0 4 100 
17.  Pandit Bhoom Raj 
(Bhagapurana) 
2017-21 4 1 3 75 
18.  Smalsar (Bhagapurana) 2017-21 4 1 3 75 
19.  Sukhanand (Bhagapurana) 2017-21 4 1 3 75 
20.  Tharaj (Bhagapurana) 2017-21 4 1 3 75 
21.  Baroudi (Majri) 2017-21 4 4 0 0 
22.  Chhoti Badi Nangal (Majri) 2017-21 4 1 3 75 
23.  Guno Majra (Majri) 2017-21 4 2 2 50 
24.  Hushiarpur (Majri) 2017-21 4 4 0 0 
25.  Karondian Wala (Majri) 2017-21 4 0 4 100 
26.  Khizrabad (Majri) 2017-21 4 2 2 50 
27.  Majri Colony (Majri) 2017-21 4 2 2 50 
28.  Rakauli (Majri) 2017-21 4 0 4 100 
29.  Tara Pur (Majri) 2017-21 4 4 0 0 
30.  Teur (Majri) 2017-21 4 2 2 50 
31.  Balongi Colony (Kharar) 2017-21 4 1 3 75 
32.  Bhukhri (Kharar) 2017-21 4 4 0 0 
33.  Kailo (Kharar) 2017-21 4 4 0 0 
34.  Madanheri (Kharar) 2017-21 4 4 0 0 
35.  Majatri (Kharar) 2017-21 4 3 1 25 
36.  Mausal (Kharar) 2017-21 4 2 2 50 
37.  Nannu Majra (Kharar) 2017-21 4 0 4 100 
38.  Popna (Kharar) 2017-21 4 4 0 0 
39.  Singhpura (Kharar) 2017-21 4 0 4 100 
40.  Soonk (Kharar) 2017-21 4 0 4 100 
41.  Bara Budh Singh (Lohian) 2017-21 4 1 3 75 
42.  Chakpipli (Lohian) 2017-21 4 0 4 100 
43.  Gatta Mundi Kasu (Lohian) 2017-21 4 2 2 50 

Appendices  
135 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of the GP Year No. of 
audit due 
Audit 
conducted 
Shortfall Shortfall 
(in per cent ) 
44.  Janian Chahal (Lohian) 2017-21 4 0 4 100 
45.  Kotha (Lohian) 2017-21 4 1 3 75 
46.  Nasirpur (Lohian) 2017-21 4 0 4 100 
47.  Nawan Pind Khalewal 
(Lohian) 
2017-21 4 0 4 100 
48.  Rupewal (Lohian) 2017-21 4 0 4 100 
49.  Shindhar (Lohian) 2017-21 4 0 4 100 
50.  Sidhupur (Lohian) 2017-21 4 0 4 100 
51.  Baba Deep Singh Avenue 
(Verka) 
2017-21 4 1 3 75 
52.  Abadi Guru Nanak Nagar  
(Verka) 
2017-21 4 1 3 75 
53.  Ganusabad (Verka) 2017-21 4 3 1 25 
54.  Mehniya Koharan (Verka) 2017-21 4 2 2 50 
55.  Nangli (Verka) 2017-21 4 3 1 25 
56.  Jethuwal (Verka) 2017-21 4 3 1 25 
57.  MiranKot Kalan (Verka) 2017-21 4 4 0 0 
58.  Wadala Bhittewind (Verka) 2017-21 4 4 0 0 
59.  Bal Khurd (Verka) 2017-21 4 3 1 25 
60.  Bal Kalan (Verka) 2017-21 4 3 1 25 
61.  Butari (Rayya) 2017-21 4 2 2 50 
62.  Dardeo Sardara (Rayya) 2017-21 4 0 4 100 
63.  Dyanpur (Rayya) 2017-21 4 3 1 25 
64.  Gaggarbhana (Rayya) 2017-21 4 4 0 0 
65.  Jallupur Kheda (Rayya) 2017-21 4 4 0 0 
66.  Jhiri Nangal (Rayya) 2017-21 4 1 3 75 
67.  Kartarpur (Rayya) 2017-21 4 3 1 25 
68.  Pallah (Rayya) 2017-21 4 4 0 0 
69.  Khanpur (Rayya) 2017-21 4 3 1 25 
70.  Khalchian (Rayya) 2017-21 4 4 0 0 
71.  Bahadurpur (Sangrur) 2017-21 4 3 1 25 
72.  Bhindra (Sangrur) 2017-21 4 3 1 25 
73.  Dialgarh (Sangrur) 2017-21 4 3 1 25 
74.  Gobind Nagar (Sangrur) 2017-21 4 3 1 25 
75.  Gurdaspura Gurthali 
(Sangrur) 
2017-21 4 0 4 100 
76.  Kular Khurd (Sangrur) 2017-21 4 2 2 50 
77.  Sahoke (Sangrur) 2017-21 4 3 1 25 
78.  Shaheed UdyaBhan Singh 
Nagar (Sangrur) 
2017-21 4 1 3 75 
79.  Togawal (Sangrur) 2017-21 4 4 0 0 
80.  Ubhawal (Sangrur) 2017-21 4 4 0 0 
81.  Asdullahpur (Malerkotla-2) 2017-21 4 1 3 75 
82.  Bishangarh (Malerkotla-2) 2017-21 4 0 4 100 
83.  Jalwana (Malerkotla-2) 2017-21 4 2 2 50 
84.  Jandali Kalan (Malerkotla-2) 2017-21 4 3 1 25 
85.  Jhaner (Malerkotla-2) 2017-21 4 3 1 25 
86.  Jitwal Khurd 2017-21 4 3 1 25 
87.  Kalian (Malerkotla-2) 2017-21 4 2 2 50 
88.  Kasba Bharal (Malerkotla-2) 2017-21 4 3 1 25 
89.  Mithewal (Malerkotla-2) 2017-21 4 3 1 25 

Performance Audit Report on ‘Implementation of MGNR EGS in Punjab’  
136 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of the GP Year No. of 
audit due 
Audit 
conducted 
Shortfall Shortfall 
(in per cent ) 
90.  Mubarakpur (Malerkotla-2) 2017-21 4 2 2 50 
91.  Basti Khalil Wala 
(GhallKhurd) 
2017-21 4 1 3 75 
92.  Dhindsa (GhallKhurd) 2017-21 4 2 2 50 
93.  Ferozeshah (GhallKhurd) 2017-21 4 1 3 75 
94.  Gajjan Singh Conoly 
(GhallKhurd) 
2017-21 4 0 4 100 
95.  HastiWala (GhallKhurd) 2017-21 4 2 2 50 
96.  Kulgarhi (GhallKhurd) 2017-21 4 1 3 75 
97.  MalwalKadim (GhallKhurd) 2017-21 4 2 2 50 
98.  Thethar Kalan (GhallKhurd) 2017-21 4 0 4 100 
99.  Thethar Khurd (GhallKhurd) 2017-21 4 0 4 100 
100.  Waloor (GhallKhurd) 2017-21 4 2 2 50 
101.  Behak Gujjran (Zira) 2017-21 4 0 4 100 
102.  Boran Wali (Zira) 2017-21 4 2 2 50 
103.  Gadri Wala (Zira) 2017-21 4 0 4 100 
104.  Kotara (Zira) 2017-21 4 2 2 50 
105.  Lokhe Kalan (Zira) 2017-21 4 2 2 50 
106.  Mansur Deva (Zira) 2017-21 4 1 3 75 
107.  Noorpur (Zira) 2017-21 4 1 3 75 
108.  Rattaul Rohi (Zira) 2017-21 4 2 2 50 
109.  Shah Wala (Zira) 2017-21 4 1 3 75 
110.  Thatha Kishan Singh (Zira) 2017-21 4 0 4 100 
111.  Adraman (Mehatpur) 2017-21 4 4 0 0 
112.  Awan Khalsa (Mehatpur) 2017-21 4 2 2 50 
113.  Bangawal Khurd (Mehatpur) 2017-21 4 1 3 75 
114.  Gobindpur (Mehatpur) 2017-21 4 0 4 100 
115.  Jhugian (Mehatpur) 2017-21 4 2 2 50 
116.  Khursadpur (Mehatpur) 2017-21 4 2 2 50 
117.  Nawan Pind Dhanki 
(Mehatpur) 
2017-21 4 2 2 50 
118.  Parjian Khurd (Mehatpur) 2017-21 4 2 2 50 
119.  Passarian (Mehatpur) 2017-21 4 2 2 50 
120.  Rouli (Mehatpur) 2017-21 4 3 1 25 
Source: MIS data  

Appendices  
137 
 
Appendix 5.2 
(Referred to in para 5.6.2; page 69) 
Outstanding social audit issues in Selected GPs 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of GPs Year Total No. 
of issues 
reported 
Total No. 
of issues 
closed 
Issues 
outstanding 
Percentage 
of issues  
outstanding 
1.  Bhindra (Sangrur) 2017-2021 17 12 5 29.41 
2.  Gobind Nagar (Sangrur) 2017-2021 19 14 5 26.32 
3.  Sahoke (Sangrur) 2017-2021 27 23 4 14.81 
4.  Kular Khurd (Sangrur) 2017-2021 13 10 3 23.08 
5.  Togawal (Sangrur) 2017-2021 21 18 3 14.29 
6.  Ubhawal (Sangrur) 2017-2021 18 15 3 16.67 
7.  HushiarPur (Majri) 2017-2021 5 2 3 60.00 
8.  Tara Pur (Majri) 2017-2021 4 1 3 75.00 
9.  Asdullahpur (Malerkotla-2) 2017-2021 2 0 2 100.00 
10.  Jalwana (Malerkotla-2) 2017-2021 2 0 2 100.00 
11.  Jandali Kalan  
(Malerkotla-2) 
2017-2021 4 2 2 50.00 
12.  Jhaner (Malerkotla-2) 2017-2021 4 2 2 50.00 
13.  Jitwal Khurd  
(Malerkotla-2) 
2017-2021 4 2 2 50.00 
14.  Kasba Bharal  
(Malerkotla-2) 
2017-2021 4 2 2 50.00 
15.  Charikpati Sarkar (Moga-1) 2017-2021 2 0 2 100.00 
16.  Dala (Moga-1) 2017-2021 4 2 2 50.00 
17.  Mallian Wala (Moga-1)  2017-2021 2 0 2 100.00 
18.  Mehna (Moga-1) 2017-2021 4 2 2 50.00 
19.  Ramuwala Harchoke  
(Moga-1) 
2017-2021 3 1 2 66.67 
20.  Kailo (Kharar) 2017-2021 4 2 2 50.00 
21.  Kotha (Lohian) 2017-2021 2 0 2 100.00 
22.  Mithewal (Malerkotla-2) 2017-2021 3 2 1 33.33 
23.  Jhugian (Mehatpur) 2017-2021 2 1 1 50.00 
24.  Nawan Pind Dhanki 
(Mehatpur) 
2017-2021 1 0 1 100.00 
25.  Passarian (Mehatpur) 2017-2021 2 1 1 50.00 
26.  Butter Khurd (Moga-1) 2017-2021 1 0 1 100.00 
27.  Dosanjh (Moga-1) 2017-2021 1 0 1 100.00 
28.  Dudhar Garbi (Moga-1) 2017-2021 3 2 1 33.33 
29.  Khizrabad (Majri) 2017-2021 4 3 1 25.00 
30.  Majri Colony (Majri) 2017-2021 2 1 1 50.00 
31.  Teur (Majri) 2017-2021 2 1 1 50.00 
32.  Balongi Colony (Kharar) 2017-2021 1 0 1 100.00 
33.  Bhukhri (Kharar) 2017-2021 4 3 1 25.00 
34.  Madanheri (Kharar) 2017-2021 3 2 1 33.33 
35.  Majatri (Kharar) 2017-2021 3 2 1 33.33 
36.  Popna (Kharar) 2017-2021 6 5 1 16.67 
37.  Bahadurpur (Sangrur) 2017-2021 18 18 0 0.00 

Performance Audit Report on ‘Implementation of MGNR EGS in Punjab’  
138 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of GPs Year Total No. 
of issues 
reported 
Total No. 
of issues 
closed 
Issues 
outstanding 
Percentage 
of issues  
outstanding 
38.  Dialgarh (Sangrur) 2017-2021 15 15 0 0.00 
39.  Adraman (Mehatpur) 2017-2021 4 4 0 0.00 
40.  Dhudike (Moga-1) 2017-2021 4 4 0 0.00 
41.  Nangli (Verka) 2017-2021 4 4 0 0.00 
42.  Mirankot Kalan (Verka) 2017-2021 4 4 0 0.00 
43.  Wadala Bhittewin (Verka) 2017-2021 4 4 0 0.00 
44.  Jallupur Kheda (Rayya) 2017-2021 4 4 0 0.00 
45.  Khalchian (Rayya) 2017-2021 4 4 0 0.00 
46.  Rouli (Mehatpur) 2017-2021 3 3 0 0.00 
47.  Baroudi (Majri) 2017-2021 3 3 0 0.00 
48.  Ganusabad (Verka)  2017-2021 3 3 0 0.00 
49.  Bal Khurd (Verka) 2017-2021 3 3 0 0.00 
50.  Bal Kalan (Verka) 2017-2021 3 3 0 0.00 
51.  Dyanpur (Rayya) 2017-2021 3 3 0 0.00 
52.  Gaggarbhana (Rayya) 2017-2021 3 3 0 0.00 
53.  Pallah (Rayya) 2017-2021 3 3 0 0.00 
54.  Kalian (Malerkotla-2) 2017-2021 2 2 0 0.00 
55.  Mubarakpur (Malerkotla-2) 2017-2021 2 2 0 0.00 
56.  Dhindsa (GhallKhurd) 2017-2021 2 2 0 0.00 
57.  HastiWala (GhallKhurd) 2017-2021 2 2 0 0.00 
58.  Malwal Kadim (GhallKhurd) 2017-2021 2 2 0 0.00 
59.  Waloor (GhallKhurd) 2017-2021 2 2 0 0.00 
60.  Boran Wali (Zira) 2017-2021 2 2 0 0.00 
61.  Lokhe Kalan (Zira) 2017-2021 2 2 0 0.00 
62.  Rattaul Rohi (Zira) 2017-2021 2 2 0 0.00 
63.  Awan Khalsa (Mehatpur) 2017-2021 2 2 0 0.00 
64.  Khursadpur (Mehatpur) 2017-2021 2 2 0 0.00 
65.  Parjian Khurd (Mehatpur) 2017-2021 2 2 0 0.00 
66.  Mausal (Kharar) 2017-2021 2 2 0 0.00 
67.  Gatta Mundi Kasu (Lohian) 2017-2021 2 2 0 0.00 
68.  Mehniya Koharan 2017-2021 2 2 0 0.00 
69.  Jethuwal (Verka) 2017-2021 2 2 0 0.00 
70.  Butari (Rayya) 2017-2021 2 2 0 0.00 
71.  Kartarpur (Rayya) 2017-2021 2 2 0 0.00 
72.  Khanpur (Rayya) 2017-2021 2 2 0 0.00 
73.  Shaheed Udya Bhan Singh 
Nagar (Sangrur) 
2017-2021 1 1 0 
0.00 
74.  Ferozeshah (GhallKhurd) 2017-2021 1 1 0 0.00 
75.  Kulgarhi (GhallKhurd) 2017-2021 1 1 0 0.00 
76.  Kotara (Zira) 2017-2021 1 1 0 0.00 
77.  Mansur Deva (Zira) 2017-2021 1 1 0 0.00 
78.  Noorpur (Zira) 2017-2021 1 1 0 0.00 

Appendices  
139 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of GPs Year Total No. 
of issues 
reported 
Total No. 
of issues 
closed 
Issues 
outstanding 
Percentage 
of issues  
outstanding 
79.  Shah Wala (Zira) 2017-2021 1 1 0 0.00 
80.  Bangawal Khurd (Mehatpur) 2017-2021 1 1 0 0.00 
81.  Dhilwan Wala (Bhagapurana) 2017-2021 1 1 0 0.00 
82.  Gholian Kalan (Bhagapurana) 2017-2021 1 1 0 0.00 
83.  Kaleke (Bhagapurana) 2017-2021 1 1 0 0.00 
84.  Langiana Nawan 
(Bhagapurana) 
2017-2021 1 1 0 
0.00 
85.  Pandit Bhoom Raj 
(Bhagapurana) 
2017-2021 1 1 0 
0.00 
86.  Smalsar (Bhagapurana) 2017-2021 1 1 0 0.00 
87.  Sukhanand (Bhagapurana) 2017-2021 1 1 0 0.00 
88.  Tharaj (Bhagapurana) 2017-2021 1 1 0 0.00 
89.  Chhoti Badi Nangal (Majri) 2017-2021 1 1 0 0.00 
90.  Guno Majra (Majri) 2017-2021 1 1 0 0.00 
91.  Bara Budh Singh (Lohian) 2017-2021 1 1 0 0.00 
92.  Abadi Guru Nanak Nagar 
(Verka) 
2017-2021 1 1 0 
0.00 
93.  Gurdaspura Gurthali (Sangrur) 2017-2021 0 0 0 0.00 
94.  Bishangarh (Malerkotla-2) 2017-2021 0 0 0 0.00 
95.  Basti Khalil Wala 
(GhallKhurd) 
2017-2021 0 0 0 
0.00 
96.  Gajjan Singh Conoly 
(GhallKhurd) 
2017-2021 0 0 0 
0.00 
97.  Thethar Kalan (GhallKhurd) 2017-2021 0 0 0 0.00 
98.  Thethar Khurd (GhallKhurd) 2017-2021 0 0 0 0.00 
99.  Behak Gujjran (Zira) 2017-2021 0 0 0 0.00 
100.  Gadri Wala (Zira) 2017-2021 0 0 0 0.00 
101.  Thatha Kishan Singh (Zira) 2017-2021 0 0 0 0.00 
102.  Gobindpur (Mehatpur) 2017-2021 0 0 0 0.00 
103.  Kokri Phula Singh (Moga-1) 2017-2021 0 0 0 0.00 
104.  GTB Garh (Bhagapurana) 2017-2021 0 0 0 0.00 
105.  Malke (Bhagapurana) 2017-2021 0 0 0 0.00 
106.  Karondian Wala (Majri) 2017-2021 0 0 0 0.00 
107.  Rakauli (Majri) 2017-2021 0 0 0 0.00 
108.  Nannu Majra (Kharar) 2017-2021 0 0 0 0.00 
109.  Singhpura (Kharar) 2017-2021 0 0 0 0.00 
110.  Soonk (Kharar) 2017-2021 0 0 0 0.00 
111.  Chak Pipli (Lohian) 2017-2021 0 0 0 0.00 
112.  JanianChahal (Lohian) 2017-2021 0 0 0 0.00 
113.  Nasirpur (Lohian)  2017-2021 0 0 0 0.00 
114.  Nawan Pind Khalewal 2017-2021 0 0 0 0.00 
115.  Rupewal (Lohian) 2017-2021 0 0 0 0.00 
116.  Shindhar (Lohian) 2017-2021 0 0 0 0.00 
117.  Sidhupur (Lohian) 2017-2021 0 0 0 0.00 

Performance Audit Report on ‘Implementation of MGNR EGS in Punjab’  
140 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of GPs Year Total No. 
of issues 
reported 
Total No. 
of issues 
closed 
Issues 
outstanding 
Percentage 
of issues  
outstanding 
118.  Baba Deep Singh Avenue 
(Verka) 
2017-2021 0 0 0 
0.00 
119.  Dardeo Sardara (Rayya) 2017-2021 0 0 0 0.00 
120.  Jhiri Nangal (Rayya) 2017-2021 0 0 0 0.00 
Total 346 276 70  
Source: MIS data  