 
Report of the  
Comptroller and Auditor General of India  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Performance Audit on 
Management of Heritage Sites, Archives and Museums 
for the year ended 31 March 2021 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                        Government of Madhya Pradesh 
Report No. 7 of the year 2022 
 

i 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 Paragraph 
number 
Page 
number 
Preface  iii 
Executive Summary  v 
Chapter I 
Introduction and Audit Approach 
Introduction 1.1 1 
Organizational Structure 1.2 5 
Budget Provisions and Expenditure 1.3 7 
Audit Criteria 1.4 8 
Audit Objectives 1.5 9 
Scope of Audit 1.6 9 
Audit Methodology 1.7 10 
Acknowledgement 1.8 11 
Chapter II 
Excavation of Sites, Identification, Notification of Monuments and Related Issues 
Introduction 2.1 13 
Declining number of excavations 2.2 14 
Inadequacy in S urvey and Issues r elated to notification of 
Monuments 
2.3 15 
Instances of continued possession after notification 2.4 19 
Notification of Incorrect Monument 2.5 23 
De-notification of Heritage Sites 2.6 25 
Recommendations 2.7 29 
Chapter III 
Management of Heritage Sites 
Introduction 3.1 31 
Deficiencies in formulation of Policies 3.2 32 
Facilities at Monuments 3.3 34 
Security and Maintenance 3.4 40 
Matters related to specific issues related to other Monuments 3.5 50 
Internal Control 3.6 66 
Expenditure on unprotected Monuments 3.7 69 
Recommendations 3.8 69 
Chapter IV 
Management of Museums 
Introduction 4.1 71 
Policy/ Guidelines in management of Museum 4.2 73 
Non-existent visitor engagement efforts 4.3 76 
Digitization 4.4 80 
Inadequate protection mechanisms in Museums 4.5 81 
Maintenance of Museum artefacts and buildings 4.6 83 
Management/ safe keeping of Antique Coins 4.7 90 

ii 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 Paragraph 
number 
Page 
number 
Recommendations 4.8 92 
Chapter V 
Management of Archives 
Introduction 5.1 93 
Human Resource Management 5.2 95 
Maintenance of archival records 5.3 96 
Storage and safekeeping of records 5.4 97 
Recommendations 5.5 102 
 
 
Annexures 
Annexure 
number Title Page number 
1.1 List of units selected for audit 103 
1.2 List of the selected Museums 104 
1.3 Zone-wise Details of selected Monuments 105 
3.1 List of Monuments not conserved since taken 
under protection 111 
3.2 List of Monuments where no -approach road was 
available 113 
3.3 List of Monuments where no sign board was 
available 115 
3.4 List of Monuments where penal sig n board was 
not available  118 
3.5 List of Monuments where Security Guards/  
Caretakers were not found 123 
3.6 List of Monuments where Security Fencing/ 
Protection Wall was not found 127 
3.7 List of Monuments where encroachments were 
noticed during Joint Physical Inspection 130 
3.8 Details of irregular expenditure incurred on 
unprotected Monuments 133 
 
 

iii 
 
 
PREFACE 
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India  for the year ended  31st March 
2021 has been prepared for submission to the Governor of Madhya Pradesh under Article 151 
of the Constitution of India, for being laid before the Legislature of the State. 
The Report contains significant results of  Performance Audit on ‘Management of Heritage  
Sites, Archives and Museums’ covering the period 2016-17 to 2020-21.  
The instances mentioned in this Report are among those whic h came to notice in the course 
of test audit.   
The audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards  
issued by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 

 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Executive Summary 


v 
 
Executive Summary 
Madhya Pradesh, the Central State of India, has a rich archaeological heritage with large 
number of beautiful Monuments, i.e., pre-historic rock -cut shelters and caves to temples, 
palaces and forts. Directorate of Archaeology, Archives and Museums under the Department 
of Culture, Madhya Pradesh is responsible for overall management of the Monuments, 
Museums, records and important documents under the State Archives.  The preservation, 
protection and conservation of the historic structures , artef acts and archival records  is of 
much importance so that these do not get destroyed by the ravages of time . Looking at the 
importance of the heritage assets  in the State  and the fact that  previously no Audit was 
conducted on this topic in Madhya Pradesh, the topic of Performance Audit on ‘Management 
of Heritage Sites, Archives and Museums ’ was selected . The a udit was conducted for the 
period 2016 -17 to 2020 -21 with a view to ascertain adequacy and effectiveness of 
Department’s efforts on identification, protection and preservation of Heritage Sites  as well 
as management of Museums and Archives. For this purpose, 12 offices were selected for audit 
along with the Commissioner, Archaeology, Archives and Museum, Bhopal and the Deputy 
Director, Archives, Bhopal. 189 out of the 526 Monuments notified by the State Government, 
22 out of 43 Museums and all six Archives  were jointly inspected by Audit along with 
departmental officials. (Chapter I) 
Monuments, forts, buildings and Sites which are unique in their art, archaeological styles and 
historical importance in the State are to be identified, as the first step, before taking up their 
appropriate preservation, protection and conservation.  However, no Guidelines/  Manuals 
existed for identification of historically a nd culturally significant Monuments which can be 
brought under the ambit of Department’s protection.  Also during 2011 to 2021, the number 
of excavation work had declined significantly.  Audit also found that there is no provision in 
the Madhya Pradesh Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1964 to 
get the Monuments vacated before issuance of final notification, in case they are  already 
occupied. De-notification of the Heritage Sites was done without mentioning justification and 
benefits to the cause of their conservation and sole purpose of De-notification was to convert 
these into Heritage Hotels . To overcome the shortcomings , it is  recommended that the 
Department may set up suitable mechanisms so that excavations can be increas ed and 
periodically reviewed and appropriate procedures are established for identifying Monuments 
for their Notification as Protected Monument. The Department should also ensure to identify 
and get evicted the irregular possession s, if any, from the notified Monuments and monitor 
the status of de -notified Monuments diverted for commercia l/ other purposes and ensure 
their proper usage. (Chapter II)  
Identification, protection, preservation, sustainability and enhancement of these heritages 
should be the top-most priority of the State, as they can never be recreated once lost. Audit 
of the Department revealed that no exhaustive Policy or Guidelines had been prepared for 
effective conservation of the Monuments . There was lack of public amenities  like clean 
drinking water, public conveniences, parking, etc. at Protected Sites. In many cases, there was 
lack of approach roads to the Monuments and interpretation was inadequate leading to poor 
visitor experience. Further, shortage of attendants/ caretaker s, absence of protection wall/ 
fencing, instances of encroachments and irregular constructions in and aro und Monuments, 
lack of cleanliness in the Monuments were indicative of insufficient security and maintenance 
of the Monuments which led to cascading adverse impact on some of the se Monuments. 
Audit noticed that neither fencings in surroundings of Rock Art was erected, nor sheds were 

vi 
 
constructed to protect the Rock Arts from the effects of sun and rain. Occurrences of  
deterioration in Rock Arts, inadequacies in Management of Mahals and Forts, change in the 
original appearance of the Monuments, deterioration due to non -conservation and non-
maintenance and vandalism of Monuments were also observed during audit. Important and 
historic Bawris were also a ffected by deterioration due to non -conservation, non-
maintenance and unauthorised uses of water. Religious Buildings could also have been better 
managed as instances of change in appearance of the Temples  and deterioration were seen 
by Audit. In view of the above, it is recommended to ensure that Annual Conservation Plan is 
prepared for the Protected Monuments, conservation work shall not distort the original 
appearance of the Monuments, staff shortage is reduced in phased manner and 
encroachments/ cases of illegal trespassing and/ or possessions are removed in coordination 
with District Administration. (Chapter III)  
The M useums of Madhya Pradesh provide a throwback to the eras of Mauryas, Guptas, 
Mughals, Marathas, Britishers and even the prehistoric era  with a rich collection of 
inscriptions, stone pillars, paintings, coins, artefacts, sculptures, etc. Audit observed that the 
Department did not have any Policy/ Guidelines in place for efficient management of 
Museums. Periodic Rotation Policy for displaying the artefacts  had not been prepared . The 
Department is yet to prepare any Disaster Management Plan to mitigate the risks to the 
Museums in the event of any disaster. Also, n o system was in existence for periodical 
verification of the artefacts in the Museums and physical verification of the Museums was 
being carried out after long intervals. Further, the Department had made no efforts to digitize 
the database of any of the Museums under its control. CCTVs were installed and operational 
in only in a few Museums and fire detection and alarm systems were not installed in any of 
the Museums, staff was also not found to be trained in the operation of fire extinguishers.  
Audit also revealed an acute shortage of staff across all cadres, more so in the technical 
cadres, which impacted adversely the performance and output of the Organisation . In view 
of the findings, it is recommended that the Department may take steps to create a 
Management Plan for periodic maintenance  of Museums, repair of artefacts both in disp lay 
and in storage, to develop a centralised and digitised data base of all artefacts in the State 
and verify them periodically and to provide suitable public amenities and deploy sufficient 
manpower. (Chapter IV) 
Archives are important cultural heritage and they are basic sources of research which play an 
important role in uncovering the life of the past. Audit noted that the archived records were 
not fully catalogued. Work of digitization of records was taken up only in Bhopal Archives and 
little less than 11 lakh pages had been digitized during the last eight years. Further, no physical 
verification had been conducted in any of the six Archives. Thus, the Department could not 
assess the physical well-being of the documents in the Archives, and the level of maintenance 
required. Audit further observed that training programmes for operation of fire extinguishers 
and fire drill for the staff had not been arranged by the Department . Further, the automatic 
fire detection and alarm systems were not found installed in any of the six Archives. To 
overcome these issues, it is recommended that the Department may complete cataloguing 
and digitization of the documents for their continued preservation a nd easy retrieval, to 
ensure that facilities like pest control measures, fire p revention and control equipment  and 
suitable storage methods are invariably provided to Archives and adopt preservation and 
conservation techniques like fumigation, de-acidification, etc. for preservation of valuable 
records. (Chapter-V)

 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION AND AUDIT APPROACH 
CHAPTER I 


 
 
Chapter I 
 
Introduction and Audit Approach 
Summary 
Madhya Pradesh is endowed with a rich archaeological heritage and beautiful Monuments, 
ranging from pre -historic Rock Shelters, Caves, Temples, Palaces and Forts. Some of the 
prominent examples include Bhimbetka and Bagh Caves, Sanchi Stupa, Khajuraho and Orchha 
Temples, Hindola Mahal  and Jahaz Mahal,  etc. Directorate of Archaeology, Archives and 
Museums under the Department of Culture, Madhya  Pradesh holds the responsibility of  
overall management of the Monuments. It also manages various Museums, records and 
important documents under the State Archives. The preservation, protection and 
conservation of the historic structures, artefacts and archival records is of mu ch importance 
so that these do not get destroyed by the ravages of time. The audit was conducted with a 
view to ascertain adequacy and effectiveness of Department’s efforts on identification, 
protection and preservation of Heritage Sites, Monuments as well as management of 
Museums and Archives. For this purpose, 12 offices were selected for audit along with the 
Commissioner, Archaeology, Archives and Museum, Bhopal and the Deputy Director, 
Archives, Bhopal. The audit was conducted for the period 2016 -17 to 2020 -21. During the 
Audit, 189 out of the 526 Monuments notified by the State Government, 22 out of 43 
Museums and all six  Archives were jointly inspected by Audit along with Departmental 
officials for obtaining better evidence about their actual status. 
1.1 Introduction 
Our heritage is what we have inherited from the past so that we can value and enjoy it in the 
present and preserve and pass on to future generations  and its conservation is a subject of 
utmost importance.  
 
Picture 1.1: Solah Khambi, Rajgarh, Picture: Audit Team (08-09-2021) 


Performance Audit on Management of Heritage Sites, Archives and Museums 
2 
Madhya Pradesh is a n important region in India from the archaeological point of view. The 
Narmada Valley yiel ded potential Pleistocene fossi ls and human artefacts. In other valleys 
too, such as Chambal, Shivana, Betwa, Kalisindh and Sone, a large number of different fossils 
and artefacts from the Paleolithic Age have been discovered. Numerous rock-cut shelters and 
caves found in these  regions a re also valuable for the study of stone -age cultures.  In the 
archaeological excavation s, different antiquities , such as foundation s of buildings, pot tery 
objects, terracottas, metal objects, g rains, beads and ornaments, were  discovered which 
throw light on the material life of the people during the Chalcolithic period. The region has 
also made significant contributions to the  understanding of the growth and spread of 
different religions in this region.  
The diverse architectural riches of Madhya Pradesh enjoy a deep historical legacy and it also 
includes a large number of stupas, temples and forts, along with various inscriptions engraved 
on rocks, walls, etc. 
The following part introduces one to the rich heritage of Madhya Pradesh, which will be useful 
in appreciating the subsequent Chapters containing Audit Observations. These sites are being 
managed by Archaeological Survey of India (A SI) or by the Directorate of Archaeology, 
Archives and Museums (Directorate), Government of Madhya Pradesh.  
Prehistoric sites: Bhimbetka caves are testament to the earliest humans that existed in India 
and is one of three World Heritage Sites of United Nations Educational Scientific and Cultural 
Organisation (UNESCO) in Madhya Pradesh.  Some of the Bhimbetka Rock S helters feature 
prehistoric cave paintings and the earliest are about 10,000 years old. 
Ancient caves:  Unlike the pre -historic caves, these caves  also have religious connotation 
attached. 
The Rock-cut Temples at Bagh Caves in the Kukshi Tehsil of the Dhar District attest to the rule 
of the Gupta Dynasty in the region. The Bagh Caves built around the fifth and the sixth century 
Common Era (CE)  have Buddhist elements and have stark sim ilarity to the Ajanta C aves in 
Maharashtra. 
The Pola Dongar caves in Garoth Tehsil, Mandsaur District were made of red stone during 9th-
10th century CE. These caves belong to the Hinayana Sect of Buddhism.  
Stupas: In the tradition of Buddhism , stupas hold immense significance. Stupa architecture 
was at its peak during the  rule of Ashoka in the 3 rd Century Before Common Era (BCE).  The 
Sanchi Stupa is one of the most important pi eces of stupa architecture in Buddhism. It was 
constructed by Emperor Ashoka and is currently a UNESCO World Heritage Site. 
Temple architecture:  The antiquity and grandeur of the temples in Madhya Pradesh are  
central to the State’s culture and a testimony to the rich architectural heritage of the State.  
The world famous Khajuraho School of temple architecture in the Nagara style was developed 
under the Chandela kings during the 11th century CE. 
Most temples of Khajuraho were built between 950 CE and 1050 CE by the Chandel Dynasty. 
It follows a distinctive architectural style marked by majestic  towers and intricate sculpting 
and is the third UNESCO World Heritage Site of Madhya Pradesh. It is one of the most popular 
destinations for foreign tourists in India.  

Chapter I: Introduction and Audit Approach 
3 
In Orchha, t he Chaturbhuj temple is an important Monument from the historical and 
archaeological point of view. Th e construction of this  temple was started by Maharaja 
Madhukar Shah in 1574 CE.  
Forts and Ma hals: The entry of Islam in India saw a new evolution in the erstwhile ancient 
architecture. The fusion of the two different styles, now merging to become the Indo-Islamic 
style, is the hallmark of the medieval architecture of India. The Malwa region also embraced 
this change and saw some of the most majestic forts, tombs, etc. built on its soil.  
These came to be known as part of Malwa School of architecture, some notable examples of 
which are: Rani Roopmati Pavilion, Hindola Mahal, Hoshangshah's Tomb, Ashrafi Mahal, Jahaz 
Mahal, etc. 
The rich cultural and historical saga of Madhya Pradesh unfurls itself  in the form of its 
staggering array of forts. Hinglajgarh (in Mandsaur District) was a large fort town during 10th 
-11th century CE where the idols pertaining to Shaiv, Shakt, Vaishnava  and Jain sects were 
made in an exclusive style.  More than 500 idols/ statues had been found during excavation 
from the remains of the Hinglajgarh Fort which are presently in exhibition in the Museums of 
Indore, Bhopal and Bhanpura.  
The rich tangible heritag e of the S tate enjoys great religious, cultural and societal value , 
thereby boasting of an overwhelming tourist potential that is second to none. Hence , the 
preservation1, protection and conservation of these structures of historic importance is in our 
interest and needs to be given suitable priority so that they do not get lost to the ravages of 
time and societal apathy. 
 
1  Preservation means maintaining the status quo of a monument including its setting thereby not allowing 
any changes, either through deliberate human interventions or due to action of natural agents of decay 
to its fabric or its immediate environment. 
 
Picture 1.2: Bhimbetka Rock Shelters (02-01-2022) 
 
Picture 1.3: Bagh Caves (12-01-2022) 


Performance Audit on Management of Heritage Sites, Archives and Museums 
4 
 
Picture 1.4: Pola Dongar Caves (06-10-2021) 
 
Picture 1.5 Sanchi Stupa (03-01-2022) 
 
Picture 1.6: Kandaria Mahadeo Temple, Khajuraho  
(12-11-2021) 
Picture 1.7: Chaturbhuj Temple, Orchha  
(23-09-2021) 
 
Picture 1.8: Jahaz Mahal, Mandu (28-09-2021) 
 
Picture 1.9: Rani Roopmati Pavilion, Mandu           
(28-09-2021) 


Chapter I: Introduction and Audit Approach 
5 
 
1.2 Organizational structure 
ASI protects 290 Monuments of Madhya Pradesh, while t he Directorate  under the 
Government of Madhya Pradesh, protects another 526 Monuments. 
The Directorate was established in 1956. The Directorate of State Archives was set up in 1974 
while the Department of Culture was established in 1980 by the State Government to 
preserve the cultural traditions, and Monuments of archaeological and historical importance 
in the State , with a Directorate of Archaeology under it.  The Government Archives were 
merged with the Directorate of Archaeology to form the Directorate in 1994.  
The Directorate is responsible for surveying, identifying, filmming, compiling, and preserving, 
displaying, excavating  and maintain ing the Monuments spread across the State . It also 
ensures collection, preservation and display of antiquities through various Museums. 
Furthermore, restoration of paintings  and reconstruction of replicas of important statues, 
organizing exhibitions and research seminars focu sing on archaeology, publication of 
archaeological materials, and promotion of records and important documents under the State 
Archives are also carried out by the Directorate.  
The organogram of the Directorate functioning under the Department of Culture is shown 
below: 
 
Picture 1.10: Gwalior Fort (09-09-2021) 
 
Picture 1.11: Hinglajgarh Fort, Mandsaur               
(07-10-2021) 


Performance Audit on Management of Heritage Sites, Archives and Museums 
6 
 
The Department of Culture is headed by the Principal Secretary (PS) at the Government level. 
The office of the Commissioner , Archaeology, Archives and Museums  (the Head of the 
Department) functions under the Depa rtment of Culture . The various branches working at 
the Directorate are Excavation, Survey, Maintenance, Numismatics 2, Facsimile, Chemistry, 
Cinematography, Publishing and Museum. After the bifurcation of the State, three regional 
Deputy Director Offices, i.e., Eastern Region located at Jabalpur, Western Region at Indore 
and Northern Region at Gwalior were established under the Directorate. The Central Zone at 
Bhopal is functioning direc tly under the Directorate.  Under the Archives branch at Bhopal, 
two regional Archives are functioning at  Indore and Gwalior . The Curators look  after the 
management of Museums, while the Archaeologists are responsible for survey, identification, 
notification and management of Monuments.  
Apart from Directorate, there are a few other Government entities which , even though not 
primarily responsible for protection of Monuments, are dealing with ancient Monuments of 
historical importance. The seven3 Smart City Corporations under the Urban Development and 
Housing Department, Madhya Pradesh carry out renovation and restoration works of some 
Heritage Buildings within their respective jurisdiction.  Further, the Madhya Pradesh State 
Tourism Development Corporation (MPSTDC) had also initiated the process for transfer of 
 
2  The study or collection of Coins and Medals. 
3  Bhopal, Gwalior,Indore, Jabalpur, Sagar, Satna and Ujjain.  


Chapter I: Introduction and Audit Approach 
7 
Monuments for converting them into Heritage Hotels. For this purpose, the Corporation had 
taken over seven4 Monuments from the Directorate during the last ten years. 
1.3 Budget Provisions and Expenditure 
The Budget provisions and Expenditure incurred by the Department during the years 2016-17 
to 2020-21 are as shown in Table 1.1 below: 
Table 1.1: Budget Provision and Expenditure 
                                                                                                                                                     (` in crore) 
S.N. Year Budget 
Demanded 
Budget 
Provison 
Expenditure Expenditure against 
budget demanded 
(per cent) 
Saving against budget 
provision 
Amount per cent 
1 2016-17 41.71 39.48 27.18 65.16 12.30 31.16 
2 2017-18 43.90 36.01 28.98 66.01 7.03 19.52 
3 2018-19 44.95 41.85 30.92 68.78 10.93 26.11 
4 2019-20 52.55 49.82 34.88 66.37 14.94 29.98 
5 2020-21 49.07 38.00 32.73 66.70 5.27 13.87 
Total 232.18 205.16 154.69 66.63 50.47 24.60 
 (Source: O/ o the Commissioner, Archaeology, Archives and Museum, Bhopal) 
It can be seen from the above table that:  
➢ Expenditure against budget demanded ranged between 65.16 and 68.78 per cent, which 
indicates a pattern of exaggerated budget estimation across all years audited . Reasons for 
excess demand across all the five years despite partial utilisation of funds could not be 
explained to Audit. 
➢ The Directorate failed to spend the allotted funds during the respective years. Savings 
ranged between 13.87 and 31.16 per cent  of budget allocated , indicating thereby that the 
Department did not achieve the annual targets for conservation work. 
Audit sought information on the head wise expenditure carried out by the Department during 
the five-year period from 2016-17 to 2020-21. The information is given in Table 1.2 below: 
Table 1.2: Head wise budget allocation and expenditure for the period 
from 2016-17 to 2020-21 
(` in crore) 
S.N. Head of Expenditure Total  Percentage shortfall in 
expenditure vis-à-vis allotment Allotment Expenditure 
1 Excavation and Survey Work 2.84 0.96 66.30 
2 Maintenance work of 
Monuments  17.40 9.27 46.70 
3 Chemical Treatment 0.77 0.65 16.02 
4 Security arrangement of 
Monuments 31.50 28.22 10.43 
5 Dr. V.S. Vakankar Srajan peeth 1.52 0.55 63.54 
6 Advertisement of Archaeological 
activities  2.38 1.39 41.42 
7 Conservation of Archives 1.81 1.42 21.43 
8 Improvement and Development 
of Libraries 2.51 0.86 65.61 
 
4  Baldevgarh Fort (Tikamgarh), Vijayraghavgarh Fort (Katni), Keoyti Fort (Rewa), Rajgarh Palace (Chhatarpur), 
Tajmahal Palace (Bhopal), Madhavgarh Fort (Satna) and Royal Hotel (Jabalpur). 

Performance Audit on Management of Heritage Sites, Archives and Museums 
8 
S.N. Head of Expenditure Total  Percentage shortfall in 
expenditure vis-à-vis allotment Allotment Expenditure 
9 Maintenance of Museums 8.47 3.76 55.54 
10 Expenditure on District 
Puratatva Museums 3.92 2.66 32.13 
11 Modelling 0.24 0.15 35.26 
12 Purchase of Artefacts of 
Archaeological importance 0.09 0.01 84.22 
Total 73.46 49.93 32.03 
        (Source: O/ o the Commissioner, Archaeology, Archives and Museum, Bhopal)  
It can be seen from the above that the Department could not utilise 32 per cent of the alloted 
grants under various heads meant for repair, restoration, excavation, etc. of archaeological 
sites. Consequently, an amount of ₹23.53 crore remained unutilised . The Department had 
partly attributed most of the lapses (point ed out subsequently) to shortage of funds. This is 
an ironic situation where a Department which was created to preserve our cultural heritage 
for posterity failed to effectively utilise funds for the intended purpose.  
The Department stated (July 2022) that the main reason for the non -utilisation of the 
allocated funds was non-completion of the proposed works in a financial year. It was also due 
to acute shortage of staff and the funds allotted under Salary is being surrendered each year.  
1.4 Audit Criteria 
The criteria for the Audit have been derived from the following Central an d State Laws and 
the Rules made thereunder: 
➢ The Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Ac t, 1958 (Central 
Act); 
➢ The Madhya Pradesh Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains  
(AMASR) Act, 1964 and 1970 (Amendment Act); 
➢ Implementation of the Acts and Rules and regulations of ASI, National Museum and 
autonomous Museums; 
➢ Guidelines for ASI Museums; 
➢ Indian Standard 2663:1989, 11460:1985 for maintenance and safety of Archives and 
Public Records Act, 1993; 
➢ National Policy of Conservation of Ancient Monuments, Archaeo logical Sites and 
Remains, 2014; 
➢ The Madhya Pradesh AMASR Rules, 1975; 
➢ The Antiquities and Art Treasures Rules, 1972 and 1973; 
➢ Policies, Rules and Orders framed by State Government from time to time; 
➢ Notifications/ Guidelines and instructions for carrying out the activities of the 
Department issued by the State/ Central Government; and 
➢ Manuals related to the Conservation of M onuments and Antiquities like 
Archaeological Works Manual and John Marshall Conservation Manual5.  
 
 
 
5  The Manual was published in 1922 by John Marshall, the then Director General of ASI and is the main 
authority for conservation of monuments under ASI. 

Chapter I: Introduction and Audit Approach 
9 
1.5 Audit Objectives 
The Performance Audit was conducted with a view to ascertaining whether: 
➢ The efforts towards identification, protection and preservation of heritage/ excavated 
Sites and Monuments of historical importance were adequate and effective; and 
➢ The Museums and Archives were being managed properly. 
1.6 Scope of Audit 
This Audit was conducted to seek assurance on the working of the Directorate in 
conservation of Monuments, Museums and Archives.  
This Performance Audit was restricted to activities relating to State Protected Monuments, 
Archives and Museums which are under the Department of Culture, Madhya Pradesh. The 
cases of transfer of Monuments from the Directorate to other agencies/ Departments, such 
as Smart City Corporation Limited and Tourism Department, were also examined.  
For scrutinising the state of artefacts, Audit covered seven6 State Museums, six7 District 
Museums, three8 local Museums and two9 Site Museums under the control of the Directorate 
and four10 Puratatva Sangh Museum under the control of the District Administrations.  
The period covered under audit was from 2016-17 to 2020-21. The records pertaining to the 
earlier periods were also scrutinized, wherever required. 
Selection of offices 
There are 22 offices of Archaeolog ist-cum-Curator in four Zones i.e., Central Zone (Bhopal), 
West Zone (Indore), North Zone (Gwalior) and East Zone (Jabalpur) , out of which 12  offices 
were selected for audit through Simple Random Sampling11. In addition, the Commissioner, 
Archaeology, Archives and Museum, Bhopal being the Apex Unit and the Deputy Director, 
Archives, Bhopal, being the only such office to deal with Archival matter, were included in the 
scope of audit for holistic analysis of the subject. The list of units selected have been detailed 
in Annexure-1.1. 
Selection of Heritage Sites for physical inspection 
Sample of Heritage Sites chosen for Joint Physical Inspection with officers of the Directorate 
was selected in view of the historical importance and geographical spread of the sites . The 
selection details are as under: 
➢ Museums 
Museums are divided into five categories , namely State level, District level, Local Museum, 
Site Museum (all these four categories being under the control of the Directorate) and the 
Puratatva Sangh Museum (under the control of District Administration concerned). Audit 
 
6  Bhopal, Chhatarpur, Gwalior, Indore, Jabalpur, Satna and Ujjain.  
7  Dewas, Dhar, Hoshangabad, Niwari, Rewa and Vidisha. 
8  Ashapuri (Raisen), Chanderi (Ashoknagar) and Maheshwar (Khargone). 
9  Chhappan Mahal- (Mandu, Dhar) and Golghar (Bhopal). 
10  Betul, Datiya, Khandwa and Seoni. 
11  It is a process of selecting a sample in a random way. 

Performance Audit on Management of Heritage Sites, Archives and Museums 
10 
selected12 22 out of 43 Museums of four Zones for Joint Physical Inspections, details of which 
may be seen in Annexure-1.2. 
➢ Monuments 
There are 526 Sta te Protected Monuments spread across four Zones, namely Central Zone 
(with headquarters at Bhopal ), West Zone (Indore), North Zone (Gwalior) and East Zone 
(Jabalpur). These 526 monuments were divided under seven13 categories. The Simple Random 
Sampling Method was adopted for sampling the monuments under each category.  
Out of the 526 Monuments notified by the State Government, 89 Monuments (17 per cent) 
were selected (through Simple Random Sampling Method)  for Joint Physical Inspection . In 
addition, Audit also jointly inspected  104 Monuments which were near  the sampled 
Monuments for a better ap preciation of the issues at hand . Out of the sampled 89 
Monuments, Joint Inspection of 8 5 Monuments could be carried out. The remaining  four14 
Monuments could not be inspected due to inaccessibility.  
Accordingly, a total of 189 Monuments (85 sampled and 104 nearby Monuments) have been 
Jointly Inspected. The Zone-wise details of selected Monuments are given in Annexure 1.3. 
➢ Archives 
The office of the Deputy Director, Archives, Bhopal was selected by default, being the only 
such office to deal with archival matters. There are two Regional Archives Offices, at Gwalior 
and Indore under the Deputy Director . Six archival sites in Bhopal, Gwalior and Indore are 
functioning under these offices . All the six archival sites have been jointly inspected for the 
purpose of this Performance Audit. 
1.7 Audit Methodology 
Audit test-checked (between July 2021 and December 2021) the records of the Directorate, 
offices of the D eputy Directors and office s of Curators for the period April 2016 to March 
2021. Joint Physical Inspection of the Monuments and artefacts were carried out by Audit, 
along with the officials of the Department. During the Joint Physical Inspections , relevant 
photos were taken. Random physical verification of coins and Artefacts was also conducted. 
Photos of Artefacts, Archives, Buildings, Museums and Monuments were captured by Audit 
during site visits and from Department records and used in the Report. 
An Entry Conference was held ( 15 July 2021) wi th the Principal Secretary, Department of 
Culture, Gov ernment of Madhya Pradesh, wherein the Audit Objectives, Scope and 
Methodology were explained. Audit conclusions were drawn on the basis of test -check of 
records, analysis of data furnished, site visits  and replies given by the Department. Reply of 
Department was received in July 2022. 
The audit findings were discussed with the Principal Secretary and Commissioner , 
Archaeology during the Exit Conference (26 July 2022). The responses of the Department and 
views expressed during the Exit Conference have been suitably included in this Report. 
 
12  Cental Zone (six out of eight), East Zone (four out of seven), North Zone (five out of 13) and West Zone 
(seven out of 15).  
13  Religious Buildings, Rock Arts, Forts, Mahals, Tomb/ Maqbara, Bawri and Others. 
14  Four Rock Art sites situated within Satpura Tiger Reserve at Hoshangabad could not be visited as they 
were inside wildlife reserve and were inaccessible.  

Chapter I: Introduction and Audit Approach 
11 
1.8 Acknowledgement 
Audit acknowledges the co-operation of the staff of the Commissioner’s Office and their field 
staff. The information provided by field-level staff during Joint Physical Inspections was found 
to be very useful in understanding the conservation process. 

 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EXCAVATION OF SITES, 
IDENTIFICATION, NOTIFICATION OF 
MONUMENTS AND RELATED ISSUES 
CHAPTER II 

 
 
 
 
Chapter II 
 
Excavation of Sites, Identification, Notification of Monuments and Related 
Issues 
Summary 
Audit revealed that excavation assignments had reduced drastically during last 10 years 
indicating declining research and exploration activities in the Department. There was lack 
of Guidelines or Manual to provide a uniform basis for selection of Monuments  for 
protection. Audit noted that eight Monuments despite being more than 100 years old and 
of historic and cultural significance, were not notified by the Department for protection, 
possibly due to lack of adequate survey. In case of the Monuments being already 
occupied, there is no provision in the Madhya Pradesh Ancient Monuments and 
Archaeological Sites and Remains  Act, 1964 to get them vacated before final notification . 
Therefore, in seven cases, unauthorized occupants continued their possessions even after 
the issue of notifications for their protection and efforts of the Department were not 
yielding the expected results. De -notification of seven Heritage Sites was done without 
mentioning justification and benefits to the cause of their conservation,  with the sole  
purpose of getting these converted into Heritage Hotels. Further, these Heritage Sites 
were not converted into Heritage Hotels and in absence of regular maintenance and 
upkeep, these Heritage Sites were getting deteriorated day by day.  
2.1  Introduction 
Monuments, f orts, buildings and sites which are unique in their art, archaeological styles 
and historical importance in the State are to be identified , as the first step, before taking up 
their appropriate preservation, protection and conservation.  
In accordance with Point No. 1.09 of  the National Policy for Conservation of the Ancient 
Monuments, 2014, the process of identifying Monuments of national importance, industrial 
heritage1 and vernacular heritage , as well as  cultural la ndscapes, cultural routes, historic 
gardens, historic cities (settlements and precincts), etc. should be carried out regularly.  
In the State of Madhya Pradesh, t he Directorate primarily identifies the Monuments, for 
their proper protection and conservation, by conducting archaeological surveys and 
explorations. After proper documentation of the Monuments and collection of their land 
details from the Revenue D epartment, appropriate proposals are prepared and sent to the 
State Gover nment for declaration of  the Monuments as ‘P rotected’, considering their 
historical and cultural importance , and architectural uniqueness. Further, the State 
Government declares the Monuments as  ‘State Protected’ through a Gazette Notification 
under Section 3 (1) of the Madhya Pradesh Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites 
and Remains Act, 1964 (AMASR Act, 1964). 
Apart from identification and notification, excavation is an essential activity undertaken by 
an Arch aeological Institution that  yields the cultural sequence of an arch aeological site. 
Excavation helps in identification and systematic classification of the strata, which enables 
correct dating of antiquities and delineation of the various phases of activities at the site. 
After excavating these layers on the basis of principles of stratigraphy , the artefacts throw 
 
1  Industrial heritage  refers to the physical remains of the history of technology  and industry, such as 
manufacturing and mining sites, as well as power and transportation infrastructure.  

Performance Audit on Management of Heritage Sites, Archives and Museums 
14 
 
light on the  antiquity and development of the cultures at the site. In Madhya Pradesh, 
excavations have been taking place under the aegis of the Directorate since 1958. 
During the course of audit, the deficiencies related to insufficient excavations, inadequacies 
in survey, hasty notifications , continued possession of Monuments by third parties 
(government and private) and use of protected Monuments for other purposes  were 
noticed. These are discussed in the succeeding paragraphs. 
2.2 Declining number of excavations 
Excavation of archaeological remains is one of the primary  responsibilities of the  
Directorate. As per Sections 21 and 22 of the AMASR Act, 1964, an Archaeological Officer or 
an officer authori sed by him on his behalf or any person  holding a license granted in this 
behalf under the Act, may make excavation in any  protected or unprotected area and 
submit the excavation report as soon as practicable to the State Government so that the 
Government may make an order for compulsory purchase of any such antiquities.  
There were 29 excavation works (between 1985 to 2021) carried out, under approval from 
the Archaeological Survey of India. The detail of excavation works carried out may be seen  
in Table 2.1 below: 
Table 2.1 : Details of excavation work carried out 
Sl.No. Period Number of excavation 
works carried out 
1 1985 to 1990 4 
2 1991 to 2000 11 
3 2001 to 2010 11 
4 2011 to 2021 3 
 Total 29 
It can be seen from the above table that in the last 10 years  (2011 to 2021)  the number of 
excavation work had significantly declined, with excavations having been carried out at only 
three Heritage Sites (Koshan at Bhind , Virjakhedi at Harda  and Rinmukteswar at Ujjain) . It 
was observed that: 
➢ Excavation work in Virjakhedi had started i n December 2012 and was completed in 
September 2013. Although the Department stated ( July 2021) that there was a need 
for further exploration, it was not taken up (March 2022).  
➢ Excavation work of Koshan  was completed in September 2 015 and the Excavation 
Report was also submitted, but it was not published till March 2022.  
➢ The last excavation work was started in January 2020 in Rinmukteshwar but was left 
incomplete due to Covid -19 and the same was resumed in August 2021 and carried 
out upto October 2021.  
➢ In all the three cases, detailed reports indicating the findings of th e excavation have 
not yet been prepared and submitted to the GoMP despite a significant lapse of 
time. 
Such substantial reduction in undertaking of excavation assignments indicates declining 
research and exploration activities in the Department. Excavation  is an activity which needs 
to be given its due importance by the Department as with increasing development al 
activities, there are chances of our unknown historical treasures being destroyed or 
obliterated. Moreover, no separate fund s have been allotted for carrying out excavation 
work. 

Chapter II: Excavation of Sites, Identification, Notification of Monuments and Related Issues  
15 
 
The Department stated (July 2022) that according to the norms of the Archaeological Survey 
of India, it is mandatory to have an excavation Director in every excavation, but due to the 
shortage of about 90 per cent of the qualified staff in the Department, the excavation s had 
decreased. Only preliminary report of the excavation works could be prepared  due to the 
shortage of staff. However, the work of detailed report preparation is still under process.  
2.3 Inadequacy in Survey and issues related to notification of Monuments 
A Heritage S urvey is  a well -established technique for systematically investigating heritage 
resources within a defined geographic area . The information contained in a Heritage Survey 
can enhance public appreciation and understanding of an area's history and the collective 
significance of its Heritage Places. The results of a Heritage S urvey are used by the 
Government to make decisions about heritage protection. Similarly, monitoring of proposals 
based on the  survey is also a vital aspect to ensure that each proposal for notification is 
screened adequately and timely.  Inadequacies noticed in above issues are mentioned 
below: 
2.3.1 Process of ‘surveying’ exists, but ‘identification’ does not 
The Directorate should survey the Monuments, archaeological sites and remains  in an area 
to identify if a given Monument is ancient and of historical importance, to decide if it should 
be given protection against destruction, damage, alteration, mutilation, defacement, 
removal, disperse or decay. Also, only those Monuments which are in existence for not less 
than 100 years may be declared as ‘State Protected’.  
Audit noticed that  during the period from 1995 to 2021 , the Directorate could conduct a 
Detailed Survey in only 30 out of 52 Districts in Madhya Pradesh for identifying Monuments 
for inclusion in the list of State Protected Monuments. Out of the 30 Districts surveyed: 
➢ Village-wise surveys of all the villages under these 30 Districts had been conducted 
by the Department. 
➢ Out of 30 2 surveyed Districts, Survey Reports in respect of only 21 3 Districts have 
been published till date (March 2022). In another four4 Districts, the Survey Reports 
have been prepared and are presently in publication stage. In respect of the 
remaining five5 Districts, the Reports were yet to be prepared (March 2022). 
Audit further observed that no Guidelines/ Manuals existed for identification of  historically 
and culturally significant Monuments which can be brought under the ambit of 
Department’s protection . Further, o nly two workshop s were arranged during the last five 
years (2016-17 to 2020-21) to train the staff for survey works.  
The Department stated (July 2022) that the work of survey is done by the Departmental 
surveyor who is well acquainted with the archaeological parameters. Accordingly, survey is 
done and report is given. Archaeological survey and marking is a continuous process of the 
Department, which is done according to the available staff and budget. After the survey of 
all the Tehsils of the District, the book of the District is published. 
 
2   Alirajpur, Anuppur, Bhopal, Burhanpur, Chhatarpur, Chhindwara, Datia, Damoh, Dindori, Guna, Indore, 
Jhabua, Jabalpur, Khargone, M andsaur, Neemuch, Panna, Rajgarh, Raisen, Rewa, Satna, Shahdol, Sidhi, 
Sagar, Sheopur, Singrouli, Tikamgarh, Umaria, Ujjain and Vidisha. 
3   Anuppur, Bhopal, Chhatarpur, Datia, Dindori, Guna, Indore, Mandsaur, Neemuch, Panna, Raisen, 
Rajgarh, Rewa, Shahdol, Sidhi, Sagar, Sheopur, Singrouli, Ujjain, Umaria and Vidisha. 
4   Chhatarpur, Damoh, Jabalpur and Narsinghpur. 
5   Barwani, Bhind, Khargone, Morena and Narmadapuram. 

Performance Audit on Management of Heritage Sites, Archives and Museums 
16 
 
The reply endorses the fact that the Directorate does not have a well-defined mechanism 
for detailed survey for identification of Monuments for conservation purpose and that the 
process of identification and classification of Monuments is at present, arbitrary and 
discretionary. 
Audit tried to identify few  Monuments which were more than 100 years old  and appeared 
to be worthy of protection on account of their historical and cultural importance , and 
unique architectural value . However, these were not notified  by the Department as 
protected Monuments, as these had never been surveyed.  Thus, due to inadequate survey  
procedures, these Monuments have, so far, not be en eligible for S tate protection till now. 
The details of the Monuments identified by Audit on the basis of their age and prominence 
(historic/ cultural connection) are given in Table 2.2 below: 
Table 2.2: Details of unprotected Monuments 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
Monument 
Location Approximate 
Age 
Description of the Monument 
1 Balaji Sun Temple, 
Unnao 
Datia 16th Century Balaji Temple is a very old temple and is 
said to exist from Pre-Historic times. In this 
temple 21 triangles, representing the 
phases of the Sun are engraved in the 
shrine. 
2 Step well, Raipura Sheopur 18th Century Ancient step well having a three -storeyed 
baradari beside it. The baradari has pillars 
and an inscription dating to 1791.  
3 Jaam Gate Indore 18th century The Jaam Gate was constructed in 1847 by 
Queen Ahilya Bai Holkar in memory of her 
husband Shri Khanderao Holkar. It is 
situated in the Vindhya Ranges. It is six-
meter broad, and 11 meter high and built 
with Red sand stone. 
4 Mandsaur Fort 
and its wall 
Mandsour 15th century Constructed by an Army offi cer Mukhbil 
Khan in 1490, Mandsa ur Fort is an 
imposing structure with  twelve gates  and 
is surrounded by an outer wall. 
5 Bhim Kund Chhatarpur Pre-historic. 
Date cannot be 
established 
Bhim Kund is a natural water source and a 
holy place that dates back from the era of 
the Mahabharata. 
6 Ginnorgarh Fort Raisen 18th century The Ginnorgarh Fort was constructed (12 th 
century) during the Parmar Period 6. The 
fort is situated in the Vindhya Ranges. 
7 Chhatri of 
Scindia’s Dynasty 
Gwalior 19th century Chhatri is a dome shaped pavilion depicts 
the beauty of the medieval period and is 
built with pink and white stones  decorated 
with stone carvings of elephants, horse s 
and tigers.  
8 Dufferin ki Sarai Gwalior 18th century In the 18th century, a court was 
established in the Dufferin ki Sarai . This 
building is of immense historical 
significance as nearly 800 people of 
Gwalior region were sentenced to death 
by Lord Dufferin here.  
 
6  The Paramara dynasty  ruled Malwa and surrounding areas in west -central India between 9th and 14th 
centuries. They belonged to the Parmara clan of the Rajputs. 

Chapter II: Excavation of Sites, Identification, Notification of Monuments and Related Issues  
17 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
Monument 
Location Approximate 
Age 
Description of the Monument 
9 Rock Shelter, 
Jardhora 
Panna Prehistoric 
period 
Rock shelter at Jardhora  contains different 
styles of rock paintings. The animal figures, 
human figures in different moods, hunting 
scenes and scenes of battle can be seen. 
The paintings are made of ochre colour. 
10 Rock Shelters at 
Lalghati, 
Gondarmau and 
Dharampuri 
Bhopal Prehistoric 
period 
 
Rock shelter at Lal Ghati contains different 
styles of roc k paintings. These belong to 
pre and proto -historic times. Part of an 
inscription in Sankha script can also be 
seen. 
11 Rajgarh Palace Datia 18th century  Built on a hill, this seven -storied tall palace 
is made entirely from brick and stones. It is 
a mix of  Mughal architecture and 
Rajputana architecture.  
All of these Monuments as identified by Audit , have unique elements of history associated 
with them , boast of significant architectural value  and fulfil the criteria of being called 
Monuments of historical importance. However, they are not yet part of the list of State 
Government’s protected Monuments and have not as yet been surveyed for the purpose.  
The Department stated (July 2022) that survey is being done according to the availability of 
staff and budget by the departmental surveyor who is well acquainted with the 
archaeological parameters. However, the fact remains that the survey done by the 
Department was not adequate and some important Monuments could not be Protected. 
Picture 2.1: Ginnorgarh Fort (24-10-2021) 
 Picture 2.2: Jaam Gate, Mau, Indore (03-08-2022) 

Performance Audit on Management of Heritage Sites, Archives and Museums 
18 
 
Picture 2.3: Rajgarh Palace, Datia (26-09-2021) 
 
Picture 2.4: Dufferin ki Sarai, Gwalior (19-09-2021) 
 
2.3.2 Deficiencies in monitoring of proposals for notification of Monuments 
In terms of Section 3 of the MP AMSAR Act, 1964, if the State Government is of the opinion 
that any ancient Monument, archaeological site or remains are of historical importance and 
unique architecture, it may, by notification , give two months notice  of its intention to 
declare such ancient Monument or archaeological site or remains to be of State importance. 
A copy of each such notification shall be affi xed in a conspicuous place near the Monument 
or site or remains. On the expiry of the said period of two months and after considering the 
objections, if any, the ancient Monument or archaeological site or re mains are officially 
notified to be “Protected”. The proposals for notification of sites as “ Protected” were to be 
sent by the Directorate to the State Government. 
Audit observed that: 
➢ The State Government did not seek information from the Directorate on the list of 
Monuments/ historical struc tures which can be identified for notification and 
subsequent protection. 
➢ The Directorate does not have a list / database of structures across the State which 
are in need of protection considering their historical/  cultural importance and 
antiqueness. 
➢ The zonal offices do not have a system in place for periodic inspection of 
Monuments across their jurisdiction. Consequently, the zonal offices do not send 
any periodic information to the Directorate on historically important Monuments in 
need of protection. 
➢ The Directorate had issued the first notification for declaring State Protected 
Monuments in respects of 21 Monuments during last five years. The reason given 
for non -issue of final notification were pending claims a t the  end of District 
Collectors concerned. This has resulted in non -inclusion of these Monuments in the 
State protected list and thus having adverse effect on the Monument due to non -
conservation. 

Chapter II: Excavation of Sites, Identification, Notification of Monuments and Related Issues  
19 
 
On this being pointed out, the Directorate stated (November 2021) that the Zonal Offices 
prepare and send proposals to the Directorate as and when needed, but detailed records of 
such proposals, viz. number of proposals received, number of proposals accepted, etc. were 
not being maintained at the Directorate. 
In the absence of any laid down procedures, selection of Monuments becomes discretionary 
and arbitrary. Further, in the absence of appropriate documents being maintained at the 
Directorate, the reasoning behind selection or non-selection of Monuments for protection 
can also not be assessed and commented upon. This inadequacy in monitoring of proposals, 
coupled with inadequate identification mechanism indicates that a robust system was not in 
place to identify and notify the Monuments which need protection and conservation. 
The Department stated (July 2022) that conservation proposals received from Regional 
Offices are duly sent to the Government as per the procedure. However, a register for 
conservation proposals will be prepared as suggested by Audit. 
2.4 Instances of continued possession after notification 
Section 3 of the MP AMASR Act, 1964 provides that- 
➢ Where the State Government is of the opinion that it is necessary to protect  an 
ancient Monument or archaeological site and remains against destruction, injury, 
alteration, mutilation, defacement, removal,  disperse or falling into decay, It may by 
notification in the Official Gazette, give two months notice of its intention to declare 
such ancient Monument to be State Protected. 
➢ Any person interested in any ancient Monument or archaeological site and remains 
may within one month after the issue of notification, object to the declaration. 
➢ On the expiry of the said period of two months , the State Government may, after 
considering the objections, if any, received by it, declare the notification in the 
Gazette.   
However, there is no provision in the Act to get the Monuments vacated before issuance of 
final notification, in case they are already occupied. In such cases, the only remedy available 
to the Department is to request the  Civil Administration to get the Monument vacated. 
However, such efforts are not yielding the expected results. 
During a Joint Inspection by the Audit and officials of the Directorate, Audit noticed that in 
case of at least seven “protected” Monuments, unauthorised occupants continued to 
possess the properties even after the issue of notifications.  The list of occupants includes 
District administration, Nagar Parishad, private companies and even private individuals. 
Table 2. 3 below indicates the Monuments which are not in possession of the Directorate 
even after being declared as protected: 
Table 2.3: Protected Monuments which are not in possession of Directorate 
S.N. Name of the monument and 
place 
Date of 
notification 
Name of 
institution/ person 
holding possession 
Efforts by Department 
1 Maharaja Bhav Singh ki 
Garhi, Amarpatan 
31.05.1990 Private possession Letters had been written to 
District Collector, Satna on 
16.07.2015 and Tehsildar, 
Amarpatan on 10.09. 2015 to 
remove unauthorised 
possession / encroachment. No 
further action on record. 

Performance Audit on Management of Heritage Sites, Archives and Museums 
20 
 
S.N. Name of the monument and 
place 
Date of 
notification 
Name of 
institution/ person 
holding possession 
Efforts by Department 
2 Jujhar Singh Mahal, Orchha 21.01.2010 Nagar Parishad, 
Orchha  
A letter had  been written to 
Tehsildar, Orchha on 
24.12.2020 to make alternate 
arrangement for the staff 
residing in Mahal.  
3 Sadar Manzil, Bhopal 23.03.2013 Nagar Nigam, 
Bhopal 
No correspondence has been 
made with the occupants. 
4 Moti Mahal, Bhopal 27.05.2013 Nagar Nigam, 
Bhopal 
The Directorate is in the process 
of de-notifying the “protected” 
structure.  
5 Kaleshwar Mandir, 
Maheshwar, Dist. Khargone 
12.02.2014 Khagsi Trust, 
Maheshwar 
A letter has been written to 
Collector, Khargone on 
29.03.2022 for necessary 
action.  
6 Jaleshwar Mandir, 
Maheshwar, Dist. Khargone 
12.02.2014 District Collector, 
Khargone 
7 Baradari (Chhatri) 
Dharampuri, Shayamla Hills, 
Bhopal 
07.03.2019 Union Carbide India 
Limited 
Case is sub -judice and a letter 
has been written to Collector, 
Bhopal on 25.02. 2021 for an 
alternate approach road to the 
Monument. No further action 
on record. 
From the above table, it can be seen that there was an insufficient follow -up of eviction 
process and absence of suitable co-ordination with the District Administration . As a result, 
the Directorate was unable to carry out any conservation work at the Monuments. Thus, 
the very purpose of taking these Monuments under State protection remained unfulfilled. 
A few of these cases are illustrated below: 
2.4.1 Maharaja Bhav Singh Ki Garhi, Amarpatan, Satna (occupied by private 
individuals) 
Maharaja Bhav Singh Ki Garhi, Amarpatan, Satna  was built by the 25th Maharaja of Rewa 
between 1660 and 1690. The Department notified this Monument as protected on 31 May 
1990. However, this Monument was still being used as a residence. 
 
Picture 2.5: Outside view of Maharaja Bhav Singh ki 
Garhi, Amarpatan, Satna (10-11-2021) 
 
Picture 2.6: Inside view of Maharaja Bhav Singh ki 
Garhi, Amarpatan, Satna (10-11-2021) 
Present status: The Monument is in a dilapidated condition and is in risk of collapse. 

Chapter II: Excavation of Sites, Identification, Notification of Monuments and Related Issues  
21 
 
2.4.2 Jujhar Singh Mahal, Orchha, Niwari (occupied by Governmental institutions) 
The Department had notified Jujhar Singh Mahal, Orchha, Niwari  and declared it as a State 
Protected Monument on 21 January 2010. At the time of notification, the possession of this 
Monument was with Nagar Parishad, Orch ha and this Monument was being utilised as a 
residence of a Civil Judge. But till now, the Monument is being used for the same purpose 
only. 
Picture 2.7: Jujhar Singh Mahal, Orchha, Niwari          
   (23-09-2021) 
 
Picture 2.8: Jujhar Singh Mahal, Orchha, Niwari  
(23-09-2021) 
However, a letter had been issued by the Curator, Jahangir Mahal, Orch ha to the Tehsildar, 
Orchha (24 December 2020) to make alternate arrangement for the resident in Jujhar Singh 
Mahal. 
Present status: The Monument is losing its essence due to non -maintenance. Additional 
repairs, which are not in keeping with the traditionalist renovation techniques are being 
carried out by the present occupants, resulting in risk of loss of heritage. 
2.4.3 Sadar Manzil, Bhopal (occupied by Governmental institutions) 
The Department had notified Sadar Manzil, Bhopal as a State Protected Monument on 23 
March 2013, which was till then in the possession of Municipal Corporation, Bhopal. For a 
long time  (since January 2015) , it was being used as the headquarte rs of the Municipal 
Corporation. 
The Smart City Corporation , Bhopal which came into existence in March 2016 took up the  
conservation work of this Monument in September 2016. This was, however, done without 
any prior permission from the Directorate and the Monument is still not in the possession 
of the Directorate (March 2022). The conservation work also affect ed the originality of the 
Monument as can be seen in pictures 2.9 and 2.10 below: 
 
Picture 2.9: Condition of Sadar Manzil, Bhopal  before 
renovation (File photo) 
 
Picture 2.10: Condition of Sadar Manzil, Bhopal  
after renovation 

Performance Audit on Management of Heritage Sites, Archives and Museums 
22 
 
The Directorate accepted the fact and stated (July 2021) that no efforts have been made to 
take the possession of this Monument and the office of Municipal Corporation of Bhopal 
was operational even before the notification was issued.  
In the Exit Conference (July 2022), the Commissioner stated that the Department has 
planned to conduct a special drive with the help of local administration to take the 
possession of these Monuments. 
Present status: The Monument appears to have lost its essence due to the unauthorised 
renovation. 
Box 2.1: Violation of the “protected” site provisions by the Department itself 
The AMASR (Amendment &  Validation) Act , 2010 prohibit s construction within 100 
meters of any protected Monument. Further, the Department of Culture, Madhya 
Pradesh at the time of issuing final notification (in respect of “protected” Monuments) 
prohibits any mining work in the boundary of 100 meter and construction work in the 
boundary of 200 meter of the protected Monument.  
Audit observed that the Department itself was not complying with the  aforesaid 
provisions of the Act.  The Deputy Director, West Zone, Indore and the Deputy Director, 
North Zone, Gwalior were utilising Rajwada Palace, Indore and Gujri Mahal, Gwalior 
respectively for office use even though both are state protected Monuments. While 
using the protected building s, the Department carried out extensive changes to the 
internal structures of the Monuments through electrical fittings, ply-board partit ions, 
water pipes, toilets, etc. These changes were not consistent with the original character 
of these Monuments, resulting in distortion in heritage value of these Monuments.  

Chapter II: Excavation of Sites, Identification, Notification of Monuments and Related Issues  
23 
 
 
Picture 2.11: Rajwada Palace, Indore (23-09-2021) 
 
Picture 2.12: Office functioning inside the Rajwada 
Palace, Indore (23-09-2021) 
 
Picture 2.13: Gujri Mahal, Gwalior (13-09-2021) 
 
 
Picture 2.14: Modern electric fittings in office 
functioning inside Gujri Mahal (13-09-2021) 
The Department stated (July 2022) that necessary facilities like light, water, toilets , etc. 
which had been made available at Monuments should mandatorily be in accordance with 
the Monument. Further, establishment of offices were essential for the  functional 
control of the Monuments/ Museums. However, functioning of offices in the Heritage 
Sites are contrary to the provision of  AMASR Act which may also affect the Heritage 
Properties.  
2.5 Notification of incorrect Monument 
During joint inspections of 18 9 Monuments, Audit also noted few instances of incorrect 
notification of Monuments under “protected” category as discussed below: 
2.5.1 Notification of a “different” site other than the “intended” Monument 
The Department had selected the Chhatri of Raja Inder Singh-II and Raja Kishore Das located 
at Sheopur Fort for notifying as protected Monument in 1988 . However, in the Gazette 
Notification issued on 24 September 1992 , the State Government  mistakenly notified the 
Chhatri of Manohar Das, located at Sheopur City as the protected Monument instead of the 
actual one. Thus, due to inclusion of a different Monument other than the intended one, the 
proposed Monument could not be protected under the MP AMASR Act, 1964. 

Performance Audit on Management of Heritage Sites, Archives and Museums 
24 
 
 
Picture 2.15: Chhatri of Manohar Das at Sheopur City 
(16-09-2021) 
 
Picture 2.16: Chhatri of  Raja Inder Singh-II and Raja 
Kishore Das at Sheopur Fort (16-09-2021) 
The Department stated (July  2022) that the notification regarding the protection of the 
Chhatri of Manohar Das located at Sheopur is being re-examined. If this notification is found 
to be issued erroneously, then its revised notification will be issued. 
However, t he fact  remains that the Department was unaware of this faux pa s and 
consequently, the intended Monument remained unprotected even after a lapse of 29 
years. 
2.5.2 Monuments protected before completion of 100 years 
As per Section 2 (a) of the MP  AMASR Act , 1970, only those structures which are in 
existence for not less than 100 years shall be treated as “Ancient Monument”. 
Audit noticed that two Monuments - Maharaja Yashwant Rao Ki Chhatri, Indore and Tatya 
Tope Monument Park, Shivpuri were declared protected by the Department7, although they 
were in existence 8 for only 52 and 36 years  respectively, both well before completing 100 
years of their existence. 
 
Picture 2.17: Maharaja Yashwant Rao Ki Chhatri, 
Indore (23-09-2021) 
 
Picture 2.18: Tatya Tope Monument park, Shivpuri 
(29-09-2021) 
The Department stated (July 2022) that being a part of group of Indore Chhatris, Chhatri of 
Maharaja Yashwant Rao  had been declared as protected . The necessary action of its  
 
7  Maharaja Yashwant Rao Ki Ch hatri, Indore in January 2013 and Tatya Tope Monument Park, Shivpuri in 
August 2007. 
8  Maharaja Yashwant Rao Ki Ch hatri, Indore was constructed in 1961  and Tatya Tope Monument Park, 
Shivpuri in 1971. 

Chapter II: Excavation of Sites, Identification, Notification of Monuments and Related Issues  
25 
 
de-notification is under process. In case of Tat ya Tope Monument park, the park was 
constructed in 1971 . But it has historical importance as Tatya Tope was hanged here . To 
keep the memories of Tatya Tope  to remain unabated in public sentiments  this place was 
declared as protected Monument.  
However, there should be enabling provision to declare such Monuments as ‘Protected’. 
2.6 De-notification of Heritage Sites  
As per section act 34 of MP AMASR Act-1964, if the State Government is of opinion that it is 
no longer necessary to protect any State Protected Monument, it may, by notification make 
a declaration to that effect and there upon such Monument protected area shall cease to 
be a State protected Monument.  
The Department of Culture, Madhya Pradesh  had de -notified seven Heritage Sites and 
transferred them to the Madhya Pradesh  Tourism Development Corporation for their 
conversion into Heritage Hotels. Out of the seven, three Heritage Sites had been de-notified 
and transferred to M.P. Tourism Department for the purpose of converting them into 
Heritage Hotels. Remaining f our Heritage Sites , however, had been transferred u nder the 
Madhya Pradesh Tourism Policy -2016. An empowered committee under the chairmanship 
of Chief Secretary , Government of Madhya Pradesh had sanctioned the process of transfer 
of Heritage Sites in the four cases.  
Audit noticed the following inconsistencies in the de-notification of Seven Heritage Sites: 
➢ De-notification of the He ritage Sites was done  without mentioning  its justification 
and benefit to the cause of their conservation due to the de -notification. Only 
emphasis was given to convert them into Heritage Hotels. 
➢ Out of these Heritage Sites, the Madhya Pradesh Tourism Development Corporation 
(MPTDC) failed to lease out three properties and could not convert them into 
Heritage Hotel as envisaged and the process of leasing out of these Heritage Sites is 
still in progress as shown in Table 2.4 below: 
Table 2.4: Status of leasing out the Heritage Sites 
S. N. Name of the 
Monument 
Description Date of De-
notification 
Date of 
transfer to 
MPTDC 
Present Status and reason for 
delay in lease out 
1 Taj Mahal, 
Bhopal 
Taj Mahal Palace was built by 
Begum Sultan Shah Jahan. Its 
construction spanned over a 
period of 13 years, from 1871 
to 1884. 
13.10.2011 26.09.2013 Leased out  to a private party. 
Property not yet developed 
into hotel.  
2 Madhavgarh 
Fort, Satna 
Madhavgarh Fort was built 
about 400 years ago by 
Madho Singh Ji. 
13.10.2011 14.08.2018 Leased out  to a private party. 
Property not yet developed 
into hotel.  
3 Royal hotel9, 
Jabalpur 
This building was constructed 
by Raja Gokuldas  in 1857. The 
hotel was available only for 
lodging of British and 
European citizens, and Indians 
were not allowed in the hotel. 
25.01.2018 07.01.2020 Leased out  to a private party. 
Property not yet developed 
into hotel. 
4 Rajgarh 
Palace, 
It was built by Maharaja Hinu 
Pat Shah of Bundela dynasty. 
1996 18.11.1996 Leased out in 1996. 
 
9   Also known as Rajkumari Bai Ki Kothi  (British Hotel Royal Palace) . 

Performance Audit on Management of Heritage Sites, Archives and Museums 
26 
 
S. N. Name of the 
Monument 
Description Date of De-
notification 
Date of 
transfer to 
MPTDC 
Present Status and reason for 
delay in lease out 
Chhatarpur It is known for its huge rooms 
and paintings of exotic birds. 
5 Baldevgarh 
Fort, 
Tikamgarh 
The fort was built by 
Vikramajit Singh for storage of 
amunitions and protec tion of 
the Emperor from Marathas 
and Mughals.  
25.01.2018 19.09.2019 Bid dated 18.03.2020 
rejected. Case pending in High 
Court, Jabalpur. 
6 Kyoti Fort, 
Rewa 
The fort was built by Nagmal 
Dev Singh in 18th Century. 
25.01.2018 15.10.2019 Administrative approval for 
tendering awaited from 
GoMP. 
7 Vijay 
Raghogarh 
Fort, Katni 
It was constructed by Thakur 
Prayag Das in 1826 C.E. 
25.01.2018 28.09.2019 NIT not received in 2020 and 
2021. Fresh tendering done in 
January 2022. 
 
As evident from the above table, four Heritage Sites had been leased out to be converted 
into Heritage Hotels. However, even after the lapse of period ranging from three years to 25 
years, these Heritage Sites were not converted into Heritage Hotels. In absence of regular 
maintenance and upkeep , these Heritage Sites are deteriorating day by day as no 
conservation work is being  carried out . Audit physically inspected three sites to ascertain 
their present status. The details based on inspection are given below:  
➢ Madhavgarh Fort 
This had been notified and declared State Protected Monument on 28 December 1984  and 
was again de-notified in October 2011.  
Picture 2.19: Madhavgarh Fort, Satna (23-11-2021) 
After de -notification the Monument was transferred to the MPTDC for conversion into 
Heritage Hotel. However, examination of records corroborated by physical in spection 
revealed that the Monument is in an utter state of neglect . Although the property has been 
leased out, the same is yet to be converted into a hotel. Thus, due to lack of efforts on the 
part of the Government to either ensure time -bound conversion of a Heritage Monument 
into a hotel or re -notify the same as a “ Protected” Monument, the condition of this 
Monument is deteriorating day by day.  

Chapter II: Excavation of Sites, Identification, Notification of Monuments and Related Issues  
27 
 
 
  
 
  
Picture 2.20, 2.21, 2.22 and 2.23: Deteriorating condition of Madhavgarh Fort, Satna (23-11-2021) 
➢ The Taj Mahal Palace, Bhopal  
This had been notified and declared State Protected Monument in April 2005 and was again 
de-notified in October 2011.  
After de -notification the Monument was transferred to the MPTDC for conversion into 
Heritage Hotel. However, examination of records corroborated by physical inspection 
revealed that the Monument is in an utter state of neglect. Although the property has been 
leased out, the same is yet to be converted into a hotel. Thus, due to lack of efforts on the 
part of the Government to either ensure time -bound conversion of a Heritage Monument 
into a hotel or re-notify the same as a “ Protected” Monument, the Monument continues to 
deteriorate due to non -conservation of the Monument since last ten years . Some pictures 
depicting the deterioration of the Monument are shown below: 

Performance Audit on Management of Heritage Sites, Archives and Museums 
28 
 
 
  
 
  
Picture 2.24, 2.25, 2.26 and 2.27: Deteriorating condition of Taj Mahal Palace, Bhopal (28-04-2022) 
Thus, the envisaged aim to convert these Heritage Sites in to Heritage Hotel s was not 
fullfilled. Moreover, the delayed action of leasing out and non -conservation work threatens 
the existence of these valuable Heritage Properties.  
Further, Audit could not understand State Government’s motive behind the hasty de -
notifications of these Monuments, especially in the light of the fact that there seems to be  
no urgency on the part of the Government to ensure that these properties are used suitably 
for the intended purpose for which they were de-notified in the first place.  
The Department stated (July 2022) that there is a provision to build Heritage Hotels in the 
Tourism Policy 2016. After taking a considerate decision on the recommendations of the 
Empowered Committee, the proposal  to convert these Heritage Sites in to Heritage Hotels  
was sent to the Government. Once a Monument is declared unprotected, it is handed over 
to the Tourism Department. After this the action is taken by the Tourism Department. 
Therefore, non-action by them is not related to this Department. 
Reply is not acceptable as these Monuments are deteriorating day by day due to lack of 
efforts on the part of the Government to either ensure time -bound conversion of a Heritage 
Site into a hotel or re-notify the same as a “Protected” Monument. 
 
 

Chapter II: Excavation of Sites, Identification, Notification of Monuments and Related Issues  
29 
 
2.7 Recommendations 
On the basis of the above findings, Audit recommends that the Department/  Government 
may: 
1. Put in place suitable mechanisms so that excavations can be increased  and 
periodically reviewed. 
2. Establish appropriate procedures for identifying Monuments for notifying. 
3. Ensure to identify and get evicted the irregular possession, if any,  from the 
Monuments, once a Monument is notified as protected.  
4. Monitor the status of de -notified Monuments diverted for commerical/  other 
purposes and ensure their proper usage and/  or take steps to re -notify in case of 
their non-conversion. 

 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MANAGEMENT OF HERITAGE SITES 
CHAPTER III 


Chapter III 
 
Management of Heritage Sites 
Summary 
Audit jointly inspected a total of 18 9 out of 526 Monuments and noticed numerous 
issues. Audit noted that the Directorate conducted a detailed survey in just a few more 
than half of the Districts in Madhya Pradesh for identifying Monuments in the list of State 
Protected Monuments and Survey Reports in respect of only 70 per cent of such Districts 
had been published. Audit found that no exhaustive Policy or Guidelines was prepared by 
the Directorate for enhancing conservation of the Monuments. Along with this, it was 
noticed that Annual Conservation Plans were not being prepared, logbooks for 
conservation works were no t being maintained and periodic inspections were also not 
being carried out, which resulted in insufficient conservation of the Monuments. Shortage 
of manpower ranged from 27.95 per cent to 78.04 per cent in different cadres resulting in 
several issues like weak security and maintenance, Monuments remaining unnoticed, lack 
of supervision of Protected Monuments, etc. Audit also found issues like lack of public 
amenities, such as clean drinking water, public conveniences, parking, etc. Further, lack of 
approach roads to four Monuments caused hindrance to optimal visitor experience. 
Instances of encroachments and irregular  constructions in and around Monuments, 
shortage of attendants/ caretakers, inadequacy of fencing/ protection wall, lack of 
cleanliness and absence of annual maintenance mechanism for Monuments and  use of 
cement in conservation work had distorted the archaeological value and undermined the 
objective of protection of Monuments. There was lack of fencing around Rock Art and 
shading to protect the Rock Arts from the effects of sun and rain leading to  deterioration 
in Rock Arts. Inadequacies in management of Mahals and Forts, change in the original 
appearance of the Monuments, deterioration due to non -conservation and maintenance 
and vandalism of monument s were also observed during audit. Audit noticed that 
important and historic Bawris had deteriorated due to non -conservation and 
maintenance and unauthorised use of water. I nstances of change in appearance of the 
Temples and deterioration were also noticed by Audit. 
3.1 Introduction 
Heritage Management is the application of  management techniques to conserve and 
develop cultural resources so that they remain part of our cultural heritage with long-term 
value and benefit for the society. 
Madhya Pradesh, with its glorious past, has inherited a remarkable variety of rich cultural 
heritage, right from the prehistoric times. Since the cultural properties are the living 
witnesses of our age-old traditions, it is a common responsibility of all mankind to safeguard 
them for posterity. 
Article 49 of the Constitution of India makes it binding on the State to protect every 
Monument or place or object of artistic or historic interest  (of national importance ) from 
spoliation, disfigurement, destruction, removal, disposal or export, as the case may be.  

Chapter III: Management of Heritage Sites 
32 
 
Picture 3.1: Shaka Shyam ki Chatri, Rajgarh (08-09-2021)                                      
Identification, protection, preservation, sustainab ility and enhancement of these H eritages 
should remain one of the top -most priority of the State, as they can never be recreated 
once lost. 
However, as  we shall see in this Chapter,  due to  negligence and lack of vision in the 
Department coupled with non -policy formulation and improper management of sites , the 
longevity of these Monuments is at peril.  
As mentioned in Para 1.6 , Audit carried out  Joint Physical Inspection of 85 sampled 
Monuments and 104 nearby Monuments. These Monuments were part of  four Zones as 
shown in Table 3.1: 
Table 3.1: Zone wise details of inspected Monuments 
S. N. Category/ Zone Central 
Zone East Zone North Zone West 
Zone Total 
1 Sampled Monuments 11 18 38 18 85 
2 Nearby Monuments 11 11 57 25 104 
 Total 22 29 95 43 189 
The deficiencies that were  noticed by us,  relating to the identification, protection, 
preservation and sustainability of the se Monuments are discussed in the following 
paragraphs. 
3.2  Deficiencies in formulation of Policies  
The policies of an institu tion are framed to set the tone  and provi de long -term guiding 
principles for the management of Heritage  Sites. Audit of the Department revealed that no 
exhaustive Policy or Guidelines had been prepared by the Directorate for effective 
conservation of the Monuments. Some of the critical issues are detailed in the following 
paragraphs (3.2.1 to 3.2.3). 
3.2.1  Non-preparation of Conservation Plans 
Preservation, conservation and de velopment of Monuments are time-consuming processes 
and thus, a long-term Action Plan helps in better utilisation of resources and achievement of 
strategic goals. According to Para 4.06 of the National Policy for the Conservation of t he 

Performance Audit on Management of Heritage Sites, Archives and Museums 
33 
Ancient Monuments, 2014, an Annual Conservation P lan should be carefully drawn up 
before taking up of a conservation work.  
Audit noticed that no Annual Conservation Plan for preservation, conservation and 
development of Monuments had been prepared by the Department. The Department 
neither had vision statement nor had it outlined a roadmap for time -bound conservation/ 
restoration of Monuments. It also did not  make efforts for creating/  improving civic 
amenities with an eye on tourism. In the absence of Annual Conservation Plan s, the 
Department had failed to identify Monuments in need of immediate attention. In East Zone, 
Jabalpur, North Zone, Gwalior  and West Zone, Indore , no conservatio n work had been 
carried out even once in 63 Monuments under them (Annexure 3.1) after their notification 
as protected Monuments. The dates of n otification of these Monuments ranged from 1984 
to 2019. 
The Department stated (July 2022) that  according to the availability of budget funds, plans 
are prepared for the maintenance works of the identified Monuments each year, and after 
examining the proposals received, administrative/  technical approvals are issued  and these 
works are  done under the maintenance plan . Further, th e Department said that they had  
less than 30 per cent staff for accomplishing the works at present. 
The reply is not acceptable as the Department had not carried out survey of the Monuments 
under its control/  management to ascertain their status and whether they require d 
maintenance. Audit carried out Physical Inspection of 14 out of the 63 Monuments where 
no conservation work had ever been carried out, and observed that these Monuments were 
in a state of utter negligence, some were even to the point of crumbling. Thus, the reply of 
the Department confirms that the Department had shown total nonchalance with respect to 
preservation of Monuments as it did not have any established Policy/ Action Plan regarding 
conservation of Monuments.  
3.2.2 Non-maintenance of log-books for Conservation works  
According to para 4.0 9 of National Conservation P olicy for Ancient Monuments , entire 
process of conservation should be documented before, during and after conservation , in 
maps, drawings, photographs, digital records and field notes , so as to create continuous 
records of interventions. All information related to the past and on -going conservation 
works should be made available at the site office for the benefit of unders tanding all past 
interventions. For this purpose, the practice of maintaining log-books at sites should be 
adopted mandatorily for all Monuments.  
Audit noticed that the Department did not maintain log -books detailing the process of 
conservation works carr ied out in the Monuments under its control. In the absence of log -
books, information relating to the previous works undertaken on the Monuments 
concerned were not readily available with the departmental o fficials at the Zonal Level. 
Absence of necessary documentation may result in insufficient and inadequate conservation 
planning, as and when it is taken up.  Further, the continuity in conservation techniques 
adopted earlier cannot be ensured which may result in change in the nature of the 
Monuments after conservation. 
The Department stated (July 2022) that all the work s were carried out in planned manner. 
The Measurement Book (MB) of the work and photographs of before and after work had 

Chapter III: Management of Heritage Sites 
34 
also been maintained. Further, instructions have been issued to the departmental officers to 
maintain the log-book. 
The reply of the Department is not accept able as log -books were to be mandatorily 
maintained for posterity and future planning. 
3.3 Facilities at Monuments 
The aesthetics of Heritage Sites is a dialogue built upon the consciousness of how we are 
able to remember and learn from our past . The attractiveness of the sites depends on their 
historical au thenticity, aesthetical quality, physical appearance , as well as the amenities 
which make the experience comfortable for the visitors . Accordingly, t o analyse the 
aesthetics and availability of public amenities at protected sites, Audit had jointly inspected1 
189 Monuments and observed several irregularities which are discussed in the succeeding 
paragraphs: 
3.3.1 Lack of approach roads to the Monuments 
Infrastructure development in and around Monuments (including building approach roads) 
can unlock the potential of cultural Heritage Assets to provide opportunities for sustainable 
social and economic benefits for communities.  
During Joint Inspection of 189 Monuments, it was found that 43 (Annexure 3.2) State 
Protected Monuments were not easily accessible due to lack of all -weather approach roads. 
Out of these, Audit was not able to inspect four 2 State Protected Monuments (notified on 
24.01.2013), as these were  located in remote areas and approach roads were completely 
non-existent. Thus, these Monuments evidently were inaccessible to the departmental 
officials and visitors as well. Non -construction of approach roads even after two to 41 years 
of declaring the sites as protected Monuments shows that the Department was indifferent 
towards the management of these historical Monuments. Some instances of the absence of 
approach roads are shown in following images. 
 
1  Joint Inspection of Monuments was carried out with departmental officials.  
2   1. Rock Art Site, Bhurbhuri, Belkhandar, Park Range, Pachmadi, Dist. Hoshangabad;  
     2. Rock Art Site, Tasvir Pahadi, Harrapal, Game Range, Boari, Dist. Hoshangabad; 
     3. Rock Art Site, Bawri Harrapal-2, Game Range, Boari, Dist. Hoshangabad; and 
     4. Rock Art Site, Bawri Harrapal-1, Game Range, Boari, Dist. Hoshangabad. 
 

Performance Audit on Management of Heritage Sites, Archives and Museums 
35 
 
Picture 3.2: Poor condition of approach road to Solahkhambi, Vidisha (11-08-2021) 
 
Picture 3.3: Lack of approach road to Garhi Sumaoli, Morena (14-09-2021) 
 
Picture 3.4: Lack of approach road to Prachin Bawri, Pansemal, Barwani  (29-09-2021) 


Chapter III: Management of Heritage Sites 
36 
 
Picture 3.5: Lack of approach road to Patiyan Dai Temple, Bandi Muhar, Uchehara, Satna  (11-11-2021) 
 
Picture 3.6: Lack of approach road to Painted Rock Shelter, Gaddi, Rewa  (10-11-2021) 
The Department stated (July 2022) that constant contact is being made with the Collector of 
the District concerned regarding the construction of access roads for the Monuments where 
the arrangement of access road is not available. 
Due to inaccessible approach roads , it is very difficult to visit these Monuments, not only by 
departmental officials, but also by visitors,  thus rendering the objectives of notifying the se 
Monuments as protected quite redundant. 
3.3.2 Issues noticed relating to Site Interpretation  
Heritage Interpretation can enhance the visitor’s experience. Interpretation  improves the 
public appreciation and enhances the awareness of these sites. The visitors gain an 
understanding of how the sites came to be, their importance and unusual features, and why 
their preservation and maintenance is important. 
For interpreting the site s, Audit noticed that the Department’s efforts were mostly limited 
to providing signages  and notice boards. The Department provided three types of signage s 
and notice boards on its Monuments: 
➢ Name of the Monument; 
➢ Protection Notice Board:  Declaring the site as “Protected Monument” and  the 
rules regarding the prohibited and regulated area and the fines for carrying   
unauthorised activities in and around the Monument; and 

Performance Audit on Management of Heritage Sites, Archives and Museums 
37 
➢ Cultural Notice Board:  Describing the history of the Monument in Hindi and  
English.  
Though only the third type of signage above provided interpretation of the site, the first 
two categories were equally important to make visitors familiar with the site.  
During the Joint Inspection of the Monuments, Audit noticed the following shortcomings in 
respect of the signages and notice boards provided at the sites: 
(a) In respect of  89 Monuments (Annexure 3.3), even the name of the Monument was not 
mentioned. Some examples included the Ata Karnelgarh ka Kila at Sagar, Garhi Sumaoli at 
Morena, Sank River Bridge, Noorabad at Morena , etc. In the absence of the name of the 
Monuments, most visitors would find it difficult to even recognise them. 
Picture 3.7: No signage board noticed at Ata   
Karnelgarh ka kila at Sagar (08-11-2021) 
Picture 3.8: No signage board noticed at Sank River 
Bridge, Noorabad at Morena (14-09-2021) 
(b) Presence of penal sign  boards can act as deterrent to vandals and trespassers. It was 
noticed that the penal sign boards were not available at 13 4 places (Annexure 3.4) while 
these were illegible at three other places.  

Chapter III: Management of Heritage Sites 
38 
Picture 3.9: (Inset) Illegible sign board at Pola Dongar caves, Bhanpura at Mandsaur (06-10-2021) 
Picture 3.10: (Inset) Blank Signage Board at Bhuritori, Sironj,Vidisha (11-08-2021) 
Picture 3.11: (Inset) Blank Signage Board at Chaturbhuj Mandir Amjhera, Dhar (27-09-2021) 
The Department stated (July 2022) that t he installation of statutory plaques and other 
signage on protected Monuments is a continuous process. Where ver boards are damaged, 
they are replaced. Boards are put up on new Monuments. 
Box 3.1: Non-installation of Signage Boards 
According to Para 9.08 of the “National Policy for C onservation 2014”, adequate signage 
should be provided at the appropriate locations to give necessary and unambiguous 
information. 
Audit noticed that the Directorate had  purchased  signage boards for installing at the 
Monuments under the control  of Deputy Director, Archaeology, Archives and Museums  
East Zone, Jabalpur . However , these were not installed since August 2018  till date 


Performance Audit on Management of Heritage Sites, Archives and Museums 
39 
(December 2021). 
 
Picture 3.12: Un-installed signage boards at Deputy Director Office Jabalpur (08-12-2021) 
The Department stated (July 2022) that the signage boards kept at the Deputy Director, 
Jabalpur have been directed to be installed on the respective Monuments immediately. 
(c) Joint Inspection of the Monuments also revealed that in North Zone, due care was not 
exercised while installing the signage s at the Monuments and the signage of the ‘Gusai ka 
Math’ was installed at another Monument named   ‘Purani Haveli’.  
 
Picture 3.13: Signage of Gosain ka Math was 
installed at Purani Haveli, Orchha (23-09-2021) 
 
Picture 3.14: Signage of G osain ka Math was 
installed at Purani Haveli, Orchha (23-09-2021) 
The Department stated (July 2022) that as per information provided by the Deputy Director, 
Gwalior, the board meant for Gosain Math was wrongly placed in old Ha veli Orchha, which 
has now been placed on the right memorial. 
Due to these deficiencies, public appreciation and the awareness could not be enhanced 
during the site visits  and also public could not gain an understanding of their unusual / 
special features and the importance of preservation and maintenance of the site s. Further, 
no evidence was provided in support of the reply. 
 
 

Chapter III: Management of Heritage Sites 
40 
3.3.3  Lack of availability of public amenities  
Basic amenities are an important aspect in Heritage Tourism as they enhance the experience 
of site visits and increase  the popularity of the place . They also encourage repeated visits 
and word of mouth publicity. As per P ara 9.04 of the National Conservation Policy, 2014, 
necessary public amenities (toilets / washrooms, drinking water , etc.) should be made 
available at every protected site/ Monument site so that the visitors feel comfortable. 
Audit noticed that at none of the Monuments inspected, basic public amenities like clean 
drinking water, public conveniences, parking , etc. were available  for visitors . This also 
indicated lack of monitoring by the Commissioner, Archaeology, Archives and Museum. 
Absence of these will not only make tourists uncomfortable but will also discourage 
prospective visitors from their future visits.  
The Department stated (July 20 22) that keeping in view the convenience of the visitors, 
Detailed Project Report (DPR) for large Monuments is being prepared, in which facilities like 
drinking water, toilets, ramps , etc. will be ensured. Same facilities will also be ma de 
available at other selected Monuments wherever it is not available. 
3.4  Security and Maintenance 
Maintenance means taking care of a Monument so as to prevent damage and deterioration, 
and to avoid subsequent intervention as long as possible. All Monuments should be duly 
maintained in order to retain their significance and should be regularly monitored to avoid 
any major unnecessary intervention. 
3.4.1 Shortage of Monument attendants/ caretakers 
Monument Attendants were responsible for day- to- day maintenance of the Monuments, 
including vegetation clearance, cleaning, dusting, sweeping, regulating the visitors , etc. 
besides providing security.  
Audit noticed that against the requirement of three full time Attendants/ Caretakers for 
providing 24 hours ’ security, only one person  alone was deployed at each of these 
Monuments. Consequently, none of  the Monuments had full time Attendants/ Caretakers. 
Further, d uring Joint Inspection of the  189 Monuments, it was noticed that at 105 
Monuments (Annexure 3.5), no Attendants/  Caretakers were available. This can lead to  
encroachments, unauthorized constructions, etc. at these Monuments in future due to 
absence of adequate supervision. 
The Department accepted the facts and stated (July 2022) that at present only 444 security 
guards against 523 protected Monuments has been sanctioned. The process of sanctioning 
additional 200 guards from the Government is under process.  
3.4.2 Absence of Security Fencing/ Protection Wall 
To ensure the security of a protected Monument, fencing / protection wall is an essential 
requirement. This fenced area of the Monument is expected to  remain free from possible 
encroachment. 
Para 1.01 of National Conservation Policy of Ancient Monuments, 2014, provides that 
portion of land adjoining/  surrounding to the ancient Monument site should be security 
fenced so as to preserve the Monument from encroachment and unauthorised use.  

Performance Audit on Management of Heritage Sites, Archives and Museums 
41 
During Joint Inspection of the 18 9 Monuments, it was noticed that at 7 9 Monuments 
(Annexure 3.6), no security fencing had been erected by the Department . In the absence of 
protection wall/ fencing, these Monuments were encroached and are prone to damage by 
locals and stray animals. Three images depicting such instances are shown below: 
Picture 3.15: Asaf Khanka Maqbara, Mandla being  used for day-to-day activities(Inset) like bathing,  
washing, etc. (07-12-2021) 
Picture 3.16: Shiv Temple Antraliya, Mandsour was encroached from three sides(Inset) by local  
farmers (06-10-2021) 
 
Picture 3.17: Chaturbhuj Mandir, Amjhera, Dhar was encroached as houses were built adjoining the temple 
(27-09-2021) 
The Department stated (July 2022) that security fencing or wall should be built on every 
protected Monument. These works are continuous process and are to be done according to 
availability of budget and administrative approval. 
Thus, lack of fencing/ protection wall around the protected Monuments largely undermined 
the very objective of protection of the Monuments. 
 
 


Chapter III: Management of Heritage Sites 
42 
3.4.3 Instances of e ncroachments and irregular constructions in and around 
Monuments 
Encroachments affect the aesthetic appearance of these Monuments and are also a great 
threat to the safety of these Monuments. Further, a ccording to Section 20a of AMASR Act 
2010, any Private/ Government construction which affects the originality of the Monument, 
should not be done within a radius of 100 meters of the Monuments without the permission 
or knowledge of the Department. Also, there is no provision in the rules to vacate or remove 
the irregular constructions, resulting in continued possessions in and around the 
Monuments. 
During the Joint Inspection s, instances of encroached and un -authorised construction and 
activities were noticed in 64 out of 189 Monuments. The details are shown in Annexure 3.7. 
Some photographs of instances of encroachment in these Monuments are shown below: 
 
 
Picture 3.18: Houses of locals within 100 meter of 
premises of Gond Mahal, Islam Nagar, Bhopal (01-
09-2021) 
 
Picture 3.19: School was operating within the 
premises of Garhi, Gurh, Rewa (10-11-2021) 
 

Performance Audit on Management of Heritage Sites, Archives and Museums 
43 
Picture 3.20: Shops surrounding the Palki Mahal (inset) at Orchha(23-09-2021) 
Picture 3.21 : Hamamkhana, Orchha (Inset) at Niwari being used as cattle shed (24-09-2021) 
 
Picture 3.22: Cafeteria was in operation in Mahraja 
Pratap Ki Chatri at Khajuraho (12-11-2021) 
 
 
Picture 3.23: Concrete slab and columns were 
noticed over Prachin Bawri No.1, Choti 
Jam,Mahu,Indore (23-09-2021) 
 
 
 
 
    


Chapter III: Management of Heritage Sites 
44 
Picture 3.24: Shiv Mandir, Orchha at  Niwari being used for storing cattle food(inset) (24-09-2021) 
 
In the Exit Conference (July 2022), the Commissioner stated that the Department would 
make an action plan to examine all these cases and take up necessary remedial ac tion with 
the help of local administration. 
It is clear that cases of encroachments  clearly warrant a robust system of regular 
inspections, identification of encroachment and prompt eviction. 
3.4.4 Absence of Annual Maintenance mechanism for Monuments 
According to Clause 2.05 of the National Policy for Conservation , 2014, maintenance or 
preventive conservation means taking care of a Monument in order to prevent damage and 
deterioration and to avoid an intervention as long as possible . Regular maintenance of 
Monuments can not only save the Monuments, but it is also cost-effective for prolonged 
conservation of the Monuments. 
Audit noticed that the Department did not have any Policy for annual maintenance of 
Monuments. Neither was budget demanded for the same, nor was the annual maintenance 
of Monuments carried out from any other source . In the absence of any resources, basic 
repair needs of protected Monuments could not be met on a regular basis, as is also evident 
from wild vegetation on the Monuments. This can be a potential threat to their prolonged 
existence. Some images depicting deteriorated condition s of Monuments due to non -
maintenance are shown below: 
 


Performance Audit on Management of Heritage Sites, Archives and Museums 
45 
 
Picture 3.25 and 3.26: Chogan Fort (Gadarwada) was declared protected on 14-08-81 but no conservation 
work was carried out till date (10-12-2021) 
 
Picture 3.27 and 3.28: Deteriorating condition of Chandrawat ki Garhi, Antraliya at Mandsaur (06-10-2021) 
 
  
Picture 3.29 and 3.30: Deteriorating condition of Kharbuja Mahal, Dhar (30-09-2021) 
 
 
 


Chapter III: Management of Heritage Sites 
46 
 
Picture 3.31 and 3.32: Deteriorating condition of Hanuman Mandir, Sarbhanga,  
Satna (11-11-2021) 
 
Picture 3.33 and 3.34: Deteriorating condition of Hanuman Mandir, Sarbhanga, Satna (11-11-2021) 
 
Picture 3.35: Deteriorating condition of Bakhtawar Singh ki Garhi, Amjhera, Dhar (27-09-2021) 
Thus, non-formulation of policy for annual maintenance by the Commissioner , Archeology, 
Archives and Museum had a cascading adverse impact on the Monuments.  
The Department stat ed (July 2022) that the annual maintenance of the Monuments had 
been carried out from the budget of the maintenance head received by the Directorate.  
However, the fact remains that the Department had not maintained the Monuments cited 
by Audit above.  Status of deteriorated conditions of the Monuments was visible in the 


Performance Audit on Management of Heritage Sites, Archives and Museums 
47 
photographs taken during Joint Inspection , which clearly suggested that annual 
maintenance was not done for long period.  
3.4.5 Lack of cleanliness in the Monuments 
A cleaner Monument enhance s visual perception. According to Secti on 13 of the M.P. 
AMASR Act, 1964, t he State Government shall maintain every Monument which has been 
acquired by it. In addition , as per C lause 2.16 of the National Policy for Conservation of 
Ancient Monuments, 2014, cleaning means periodic removal of any harmful vegetation or 
non-original surface deposits and bio-deteriorating agents from the surface of a Monument.  
During the Joint Inspection, Audit noticed that Heritage Sites were surrounded by garbage, 
bushes and creepers, among other vegetation . This indicated sub-optimal maintenance of 
protected Monuments which not only vitiates the visual appeal of these Monuments but 
also threaten the structure as well. Following eight photographs depicts such examples: 
 
Picture 3.36: Vegetation on the wall of Gujri Mahal 
at Gwalior (13-09-2021) 
 
Picture 3.37: Vegetation on the walls of Palki Mahal 
at Orchha (23-09-2021) 
 
 

Chapter III: Management of Heritage Sites 
48 
 
Picture 3.38: Vegetation and garbage in Prachin 
Bawri No.1, Choti Jam, Mahu, Indore (23-09-2021) 
 
Picture 3.39: Vegetation on the roof of Aasaf Khan ka 
Maqbara, Mandla (07-12-2021) 
 
Picture 3.40 and 3.41: Vegetation on the walls of fort and growth of algae in Suraj Kund, Hinglajgarh Fort, 
Mandsaur (07-10-2021) 
 
Picture 3.42 and 3.43: Vegetation has fully covered the Chamunda Devi Pratima, Sarbhanga,  
Satna (11-11-2021) 
The Department stated (July 2022) that minor vegeta tions that grow in the rainy season are 
cleaned at the selected Monuments after the rainy season by available staff. In future, 
arrangements for cleanliness will be ensured at all the Monuments. 
These inadequacies  stem from the issues like absence of maintenance Policy, absence of 
Action Plan for conservation, inadequate staff,  etc. which Audit has separately discussed at 
length throughout this chapter. Unless those foundational issues are addressed  by the 


Performance Audit on Management of Heritage Sites, Archives and Museums 
49 
Department, these problems will continue to go unnoticed until it is too late to take any 
remedial measures. 
3.4.6 Use of Cement in conservation work 
According to John Marshall’s Conservation Manual 1922, use of cement is strictly prohibited 
in conservation work because it will impart an obtrusively modern note to the structure . If 
the conservation work is urgently needed , it should be carried out with the material already 
utilized in the Monument (viz, lime, mortar, surkhi, etc.). 
During Joint Inspection of the Monuments, in six cases, it was noticed that the conservation 
works were carried out using modern techniques and material contrary to the requirement 
of the Conservation M anual. This not only violates  the provision of the M anual but also 
disfigures the aesthetics of the heritage structure . Three such examples are shown in the 
images below: 
 
Picture 3.44: Cement used in joint of stone at Roja ka 
Maqbara, Mandu, Dhar (28-09-2021) 
 
Picture 3.45: Cement used in plastering work of 
Kharbuja Mahal, Dhar (30-09-2021) 
  


Chapter III: Management of Heritage Sites 
50 
  
Picture 3.46: Cement used in repairing of wall of 
Moti Mahal, Ramnagar, Mandla (07-12-2021) 
  
Picture 3.47: Cement used in plastering of wall at 
Jujhar Singh Mahal, Orchha (23-09-2021) 
 
Picture 3.48: Cement used to close the entrance of 
Raiman Dau Ki Kothi at Orchha (24-09-2021) 
  
Picture 3.49: Cement used in repairing work of wall of 
Garhi Sumawali, Morena (14-09-2021) 
Evidently, use of cement in conse rvation work had distorted the archival value of the 
Monuments. This also indicated lack of adherence to the John Marshall’s Conservation 
Manual 1922 by the Technical Officers of the Department involved in  supervision of  the 
conservation works. 
The Department stated (July 2022) the materials used at the time of maintenance will be re -
examined on the Monuments mentioned by the audit team. However, the fact remains that 
the appearance of the Monuments had changed due to use of cement in conservation work. 
3.5  Matters related to specific issues in other Monuments 
3.5.1 Management of Rock Arts 
Rock Art, that is paintings and carvings on natural rock formations, is one of the earliest 
forms of creative expression and a universal phenomenon amo ng prehistoric societies. Rock 
Art is the primary source to study the culture, rituals, traditions, and lives of prehistori c 
societies, and  includes pictographs (drawings or paintings), petroglyphs (carvings or 
inscriptions), engravings (incised motifs), petro  forms (rocks laid out in patterns), and 
geoglyphs (ground drawings). The ancient animals, tools and human activities depicted 


Performance Audit on Management of Heritage Sites, Archives and Museums 
51 
often help shed light on daily life in the distant past, though the images are frequently 
symbolic rather than representative.  
In Madhya Pradesh, remains of rock paintings were found on the wal ls of caves located in 
several Districts of Kaimur Hills, Satpura and Vindhyas. Displaying a collection of nearly 700 
rock shelters and wall paintings spanning the Palaeolithic and Mesolithic stone ages, the 
Bhimbetka rock shelters depict one of the earliest traces of human settlement in India and is 
a UNESCO World Heritage Site under the protection of ASI. The State boasts of nearly 250 
separate locations of C ave/ Rock A rt, out of which 22 are  under the p rotection of the 
Directorate. 
 
Picture 3.50: Rock Art at Yogni Mata Sthal, Sirmour, Rewa (10-11-2021)  
Out of 11 sampled Rock Art sites under the protection of Directorate, Audit jointly inspected 
seven sites as shown in picture below: 
 
Additional specific deficiencies, based on Joint Inspections, have been discussed below. 
 
 
 

Chapter III: Management of Heritage Sites 
52 
3.5.1.1 Deterioration in Rock Arts  
In case of Rock Arts, it is necessary to provide a protective cover so that these are not 
exposed to wind, rain and sunlight which can accelerate degradation of these sites.  
During Joint Inspection, Audit noticed that neither fencing had been erected in surroundings 
of Rock Art, nor shed ha d been constructed to protect these valuable Rock Arts from the 
effects of sun rain and other hazards of nature.  In the absence of fencing , vandalism cannot 
be ruled out  (Pic. 3.51 to 3.60). Further, no inspection of these seven Rock Arts sites were 
carried out by the Officials of the Departmen t in the last five  years and no conservation 
work had been undertaken at these sites  since their notification , for periods ranging from 
eight to 31 years. The f ollowing images indicate some instances of the harm caused to the 
Rock Arts: 

Performance Audit on Management of Heritage Sites, Archives and Museums 
53 
Picture 3.51 and 3.52: Rock Art at Gaddi-Rewa was blackened due to smoke emitting from chulha used 
for cooking food (10-11-2021) 
 
Picture 3.53 and 3.54: Rainwater impression on Rock Art at Churna Gundi, Hoshangabad (11-08-2021) 
     
Picture 3.55 and 3.56: Rain water impression on Rock Art at Gora Pahad, Bichhi at Singrauli. Pictures also 
show human interference in the form of graffiti (07-12-2021) 
 
Picture 3.57 and 3.58: Rock Art faded due to direct exposure to heat, light and water at  
Gaddi-Rewa (10-11-2021) 
   


Chapter III: Management of Heritage Sites 
54 
    
Picture 3.59 and 3.60: Rock Art faded due to direct exposure to heat, light and water, also human 
interference as indicated by graffiti, Likhidant-Chanderi (01-12-2021) 
 
Thus, lack of fencing around the Rock Art and sheds to protect  them had adverse impact on 
these valuable Monuments. 
The Department stated (July 2022) that most of the rock paintings are located in forest area, 
in which prior permission of Forest Department is required to carry out any conservation 
works. Hence, necessary conservation work and fencing, plantation, signage , etc.  will be 
done with intimation to Forest Department. 
3.5.2 Inadequacies in the Management of Mahals (palaces) and Forts 
There are total of 49 Mahals and 49 Forts were under the protection of the Department, out 
of which Joint Inspection of a total of 28 Mahals and 17 Forts were carried out (Map 3.2).  
 
Specific issues noticed during Joint Inspections, have been discussed below: 
 
 


Performance Audit on Management of Heritage Sites, Archives and Museums 
55 
3.5.2.1 Change in the original appearance of the Monument 
Para 25  of John Marshal l’s Conservation Manual  stipulates that in the event of  the 
originality of a Monument getting damaged, the first duty is not to renew but preserve it. A 
broken or h alf-decayed original work is considered infinitely more valuable than a perfect 
new work.  
During Joint I nspections, the following instances of irregular conservation/  maintenance 
work had been noticed: 
➢ During conservation  work of Raj Mahal of old Gond Pe riod, Narsinghpur, the 
contractor had not maintained the originality of the work and changed the design 
of pillars and brackets impacting originality of the Monument. Even the work 
carried out appears shoddy, as can be seen in the following images. 

Chapter III: Management of Heritage Sites 
56 
      
Picture 3.61 and 3.62: Improper maintenance work in pillars (09-12-2021) 
 
Picture 3.63: Design of brackets not maintained in conservation work (09-12-2021) 
     
Picture 3.64 and 3.65: Change in the design of the brackets during conservation (09-12-2021) 


Performance Audit on Management of Heritage Sites, Archives and Museums 
57 
The Department stated (July 2022) that appropriate action will be taken after conducting an 
inspection.  
Departmental Officers such as Deputy Director, Archaeologist and Curators are heritage 
experts and conservation works were carried out under their supervision. However, despite 
their supervision of the conservation work s, there were instances of change in originality of 
Monuments. Also it was observed that in none of the cases were outside experts engaged to 
ensure correctness of the restoration works being carried out. 
This indicates that the Department will incur wasteful expenditure on re -restoration work, 
which was poorly carried out due to lack of monitoring by aforesaid departmental officials. 
➢ The Department is using Gujri Mahal, Gwalior and Hindupat Mahal, Panna , as 
Office and Museum  respectively and has made modern changes to the 
Monuments, i.e., false ceiling, wooden furnishing s on the walls and plastic carpet 
on the floor. 
 
 
Picture 3.66 and 3.67: Wooden paneling  and false ceiling work at Gujri Mahal, Gwalior  (13-09-2021) 
 
Picture 3.68: False ceiling work at Hindupat Mahal, Panna (12-11-2021) 
The Department stated  (July 2022) that  offices and Museums are functioning in  Gujari 
Mahal Museum, Gwalior and Hindupat Mahal, Panna. In these, the false ceiling and wooden 
cover had been provided for covering the walls while plastic carpet was spread on the floor 
according to the Museums . This d id not change the original appearance of the Monument, 
but it is necessary from the point of view of the Museum. 


Chapter III: Management of Heritage Sites 
58 
However, evidently the work carried out was not consistent with the aesthetic values of the 
Monument.  
➢ During the Joint Inspection of Jujhar Singh Mahal  and Palki Mahal  (both in Orchha), 
Audit noticed that the agencies concerned did not follow the rules and regulation for 
maintenance/ repair of h eritage buildings, such as restriction on use of cement, lime 
paint on walls, installation of drainage pipes, electrical fittings, etc. during 
maintenance work. Thus, the originality of t hese Monuments had been compromised. 
Two such examples are given in the photographs below: 
 
Picture 3.69 and 3.70: Cement and modern pipe fittings have been used in the maintenance work  in  
Jujhar Singh Mahal (23-09-2021) 
 
Pic. 3.71: Modern electric fittings has been installed inside the Palki Mahal, Orchha (23-09-2021) 
The Department stated (July 2022) that after inspection of Jujhar Singh Mahal and Palki 
Mahal Orchha, necessary action will be taken.   
The reply indicates systemic deficiencies in the conservation efforts of the Department as 
protected Monuments continue to be used for other purposes, thus undermining the 
rationale behind protecting the Monuments in the first place. 


Performance Audit on Management of Heritage Sites, Archives and Museums 
59 
3.5.2.2 Deterioration due to non-conservation and maintenance  
After declaring a historical Monument as protected, the Department should do necessary 
conservation/ maintenance work from time to time to preserve it in its original form. 
It was noticed that the Department did not prepare any Annual Conservation Plans (refer to 
paragraph 3.2.1) nor had any plans for day-to-day maintenance of the Monuments. Due to 
this, the condition of  many of these Mahals and F orts are deteriorating and they are in a 
poor condition. Two cases have been detailed below: 
➢ The structure of  Kharbuja Mahal, Dhar and the Gond Mahal, Bhopal have 
weakened severely and visitors were not allowed to visit these  Monuments due to 
safety concerns. 
Picture 3.72: Kharbuja Mahal at Dhar. Entry closed over safety concerns (inset) (30-09-2021) 
 
Picture 3.73 and 3.74: Gond Mahal, Islam Nagar at Bhopal (01-09-2021) 
The Department accepted the facts and stated (July 2022) that maintenance work of 
Monuments will be started after administrative approval. 
However, reasons for not having assessed the s tate of the Monuments previously or not 
having initiated the process of restoration earlier were not stated. 
 
 
 
 


Chapter III: Management of Heritage Sites 
60 
3.5.2.3 Vandalism 
“Vandalism” is a deliberate or wilful destruction or damage to public property. The heritage 
remnants, once lost, cannot be recovered or restored back to their original form.  Graffiti, 
defacement and the associated issues are acts of vandalism which harm the Monuments. 
Due to non -installation of warning boards and non -deployment of caretakers at 
Monuments, the visitor s have been scribbling their names on the walls, which not only 
damages the heritage  structures but also affects their beauty. In 77 Monuments, Audit 
could observe scattered cases of graffiti and defacements which has resulted in change in 
the intrinsic value of the Monuments. 
In respect of three Monuments (Kharbuja Mahal at Dhar, Old Fort at Hoshangabad and 
Garhi of Gurh, Rewa), photographs showing the cases of vandalism may be seen below: 
Picture 3.75: Graffiti  on the walls (inset) of Kharbuja Mahal, Dhar (30-09-2021) 
Picture 3.76: Graffiti on the wall (inset) of  Old Fort, Hoshangabad 
 


Performance Audit on Management of Heritage Sites, Archives and Museums 
61 
Picture 3.77 : Advertisement on the wall (inset) of Garhi, Gurh, Rewa (10-11-2021) 
The Department stated (July 2022) that efforts are being made at various levels to make 
tourists sensitive. The process of educating schools/  universities through heritage club is 
also under process. 
3.5.3 Management of Bawris 
Bawris are wells or ponds in which the water is reached by descending a set of steps to the 
water level. They may be multi -storeyed. Bawris w ere built in the olden times for storing 
rainwater.  
 
Picture. 3.78: Prachin Bawri, Jalgon at Barwani (29-
09-2021) 
 
Picture 3.79 District marked in blue were covered 
during Audit 
There are 32 Bawris protected by the Department. Out of these, Audit has jointly inspected a 
total of 11 (Map 3.3) Bawris.  
The Bawris are facing critical conservation issues which are leading to the loss of their 
originality. Deficiencies detected during Audit have been discussed below: 
3.5.3.1 Deterioration due to non-conservation and maintenance  
During Joint Inspection, it was noticed that due to non-maintenance, the condition of Bawris 
were deteriorat ing and Audit noticed that many of the Bawris were in dilapidated 
conditions. Their original structures had also faced damage owing to continued negligence. 


Chapter III: Management of Heritage Sites 
62 
Picture 3.80: Prachin Bawri, Jalgon, at the time of 
Notification (November 1990) 
 
Picture 3.81: Prachin Bawri, Jalgon, present 
condition (29-09-2021) 
 
The Department stated (July 2022) that necessary action will be taken after obtaining the 
present condition of Bawri from the Regional Officer concerned. 
3.5.3.2 Unauthorised usage of water 
According to the John Marshall’s Conservation Manual, regular and systematic inspections 
of Monuments and sites were to be carried out annually or even more frequently. 
In order to protect the Monuments from damages and unauthorised usage, it is necessary  
to conduct frequent systematic inspections of the Monuments.  
During Joint I nspections of the Bawris, it was noticed  that the water was being illegally 
extracted for private, domestic and irrigation purposes by the nearby residen ts without 
getting prior permission from the Department.  


Performance Audit on Management of Heritage Sites, Archives and Museums 
63 
Picture. 3.82: Unauthorised extraction of water (inset) from Prachin Bawri, Choti Jam, Mhow, Indore  
(23-09-2021) 
Picture 3.83: Unauthorised extraction of water (inset) Aaliya Bawri, Chanderi (03-12-2021) 
In the Exit Conference (July 2022), the Commissioner stated that all these cases are noted 
and corrective action will be taken. 
3.5.4 Management of Religious Buildings 
Madhya Pradesh is a beautiful State noted for its heritage temple town s and sites. The state 
boasts of a large number of buildings, religious sites and Monuments that are histo rically 
significant and attract tourists from across the globe. 
 
Picture 3.84: Chaturbhuj Temple, Orchha 
There are 232 r eligious buildings protected by the Directorate in Ma dhya Pradesh.  Audit 
have jointly inspected a total of 52 (Map 3.4) religious buildings.  


Chapter III: Management of Heritage Sites 
64 
 
The issues noted during inspection of the Monuments are discussed below. 
 
3.5.4.1 Change in Appearance of the Temples 
The following instances of irregular conservation/ maintenance work were noticed: 
Name of Temple Audit observation 
Dhumeshwar Mahadev Mandir , 
Bhitarwar, Gwalior 
This temple was originally constructed with 
red stones, however, a major portion of the 
temple is now painted with white color, 
which has not only affected the heritage 
value of Monument but is also against the 
provisions of Conservation Manual3. 
Kaleshwar Mandir, Maheshwar, Dist. 
Khargone 
This temple was originally constructed with 
stones and major portion of the temple is 
now painted with red paint (by local citizens) 
which has completely changed the original 
appearance of the temple.  Department was 
not aware of the restoration work carried 
out. 
 
 
3  Para 25 of John Marshall’s Conservation Manual. 

Performance Audit on Management of Heritage Sites, Archives and Museums 
65 
     
 
Picture 3.85 and 3.86: Dhumeshwar Mahadev Mandir, Bhitarwar, Gwalior (21-09-2021) 
 
Picture 3.87: Kaleshwar temple at the time of 
notification (February 2014) 
 
Picture 3.88: Kaleshwar temple at the time of Joint 
Inspection (01-10-2021) 
Thus, conservation work that was not carried in accordance with the provisions in the 
Manual had damaged the authenticity of the ancient temples to a large extent and the 
Directorate had not intervened to restore their originality.  
The Department  accepted the facts and stated (July 2022) that corrective measures are 
being taken as per rules in respect of deficiencies found in Dhumeshwar temple, Bhitarwar, 
Gwalior, and Kaleshwar temple, Maheshwar, Khargone. 

Chapter III: Management of Heritage Sites 
66 
3.5.4.2 Deterioration due to non-conservation and maintenance  
After declaring  a historical Monument as protected, the Department should do necessary 
conservation/ maintenance work from time to time to preserve it in its original form. Due to 
non-maintenance, the condition of some of these religious buildings are deteriorating. Some 
cases are detailed below: 
➢ The Satmarhi Temple complex, Badoh, Vidisha  was declared as  a State Protected 
Monument on 30 December 1985  (after ASI de -notified the Monument). The 
complex initially had seven temples out of which six were in existence at the time 
of the notification.  
During Joint I nspection, it was noticed that only five temples are in existence now as one 
temple had collapsed due to not taking up of any conservation work since its notification . 
Further, condition of the remaining five temples has also become fragile over the period of 
time. Thus, the Department ended up doing mere paper work in notifying the Monument as 
non-maintenance on the part of the Department resulted in complete destruction of the 
temple after notification. 
Picture 3.89: Satmarhi Temple, Badoh, Vidisha (11-
08-2021) 
 
Picture 3.90: Remains of destroyed temple, Satmarhi, 
Badoh, Vidisha (11-08-2021) 
In the Exit Conference (July 2022), the fact regarding collapse of one temple after 
notification was denied and it was stated that the Department has plan to reconstruct these 
ruined temples from the remains in near future.  
However, as per the records relating to the notification of Satmarhi temples, there were six 
Temples in the campus.  
3.6 Internal control 
3.6.1  Shortage of manpower 
Adequately trained, experienced and sufficient manpower is a pre requisite for the proper 
functioning of any agency involved in Heritage Conservation.  
It was noticed that the Department of Culture in Madhya Pra desh is facing an acute 
shortage of technical and non-technical manpower, ranging from 27.95 per cent to 78.04 per 
cent, in different cadres . The overall position of Sanctioned Strength vis-à-vis Men in 
Position in different cadres is detailed in Table 3.2 below: 
 
 


Performance Audit on Management of Heritage Sites, Archives and Museums 
67 
Table 3.2: Status of manpower in the Department 
S. N. Classification of posts Sanctioned 
Strength Filled Vacant Percentage of 
Vacancy 
1. Class-I (Technical) 9 2 7 77.77 
2. Class-II (Technical) 41 9 32 78.04 
3. Class-III(Technical) 99 37 62 62.62 
4. Class-III (Non Technical) 105 57 48 45.71 
5. Class-IV (Non Technical) 376 272 104 27.95 
Total 630 377 253  
The above table reveals an acute shortage of staff  across all cadres , with the technical 
cadres being affected more . This adversely affected the performance and output of the 
Organisation. The shortage of manpower resulted in absence of monitoring and 
professionalism in manageme nt of heritage sites  which reflected in change in original 
appearance of Monuments during conservation works,  insufficient functioning of the 
Department in terms of weak security and maintenance, issues pertaining to Monuments 
remaining unnoticed, lack of supervision of “protected” Monuments, etc. which have been 
discussed in previous Paragraphs. 
The Department accepted the facts and stated (July 2022) t hat the Department is currently 
functioning with about 50 per cent of its sanctioned staff. However, 444 security guards and 
office staff/ Archaeologists, as per requirement had been engaged through outsourcing. 
3.6.2 Absence of Policy regarding periodic inspections  
According to the Conservation Manual of John Marshall, regular and systematic 
inspections of Monuments and sites were to be carried out annually or even more 
frequently. This was also mentioned in Para 4.05 of National Policy for Conservation, 2014. 
Further, periodic physical verification of Monuments will aid in examining the condition of 
Monuments and to draw up Inspection Notes which will aid in the preparation of 
necessary conservation programme or plan. 
Scrutiny of the records of the Directorate revealed that a system of proper/  regular 
inspection and monitoring of Monuments had not been established. In the absence of 
regular inspection and monitoring of Monuments, proper conservation, maintenance, and 
protection cannot be assured by the Department. 
In the Exit C onference (July 2022) , the Principal Secretary stated that the Department 
should make Guidelines for periodic inspections, so that every Monument must be visited at 
least once in a year by departmental officials. 
Box 3.2 below indicates a few instances where due to lack of monitoring and supervision, 
some important Monuments have lost their heritage value.  
Box 3.2: Cases of disappearance and change in original appearance of Monuments 
Case 1: Major parts of a “protected” Monument missing 
Patiyan Dai Temple, Bandhi Mohar, Satna (East Zone, Jabalpur)  is a 10 th century temple 
and was declared protected in September 1986. Over a period of 30 years since the 
notification, valuable structural components associated with the temple including sculpted 
images have gone missing from the temple and at present, the Monument is nothing short 
of a stone structure devoid of any cultural/  heritage value. However, the Department is 
completely oblivious of the fact, which indicates that the Department had never carried 

Chapter III: Management of Heritage Sites 
68 
out any inspection of the site or made any attempt to protec t the site.  Further, no 
protection signage was found installed there. 
 
Picture 3.91: Patiyan Dai Temple at the time of 
notification (September 1986) (Image: File photo) 
 
Picture 3.92:  Patiyan Dai Temple at the time of 
Joint Inspection (11-11-2021) 
In E xit Conference (July 2022) , the Principal Secretary stated to enquire  about the issue 
and to take strict action against the officers responsible for the negligence. 
Case 2: Change in the appearance of the Monument due to “unskilled” beautification 
Boliya Sarkar ki Chatri , Indore  was constructed in 1858 and was notified in December 
1985. 
Audit observed that the Deputy Director, Archaeology, Archives and Museums West Zone, 
Indore remained unaware that the conservation work , had been taken up by the Smart  
City Corporation, Indore and the appearance of Monument was distorted by changing its 
colour.  
      
Picture 3.93:  Boliya Sarkar ki Chatri, Indore before 
conservation work (2016)                                                                     
 
Picture 3.94:  Boliya Sarkar ki Chatri, Indore         
after conservation work (2021) 
This happened on acc ount of the fact that the Department did not monitor the 
“renovation” work carried out by Smart City Corporation, which clearly was not trained 
and equipped for renovation of heritage structures. Further, during the Joint Inspection, 
Audit noticed that a sign board declaring it a P rotected Monument was already installed. 
In spite of the fact, the Smart City worked on it and changed its appearance.  
In the Exit Conference  (July 2022),  the Principal Secretary stated to enquire about the 
issue and take strict action against the officers responsible for the negligence. Further, he 
also stated that instructions would be issued to the Deputy Director concerned to ensure 
adherence to Archaeological norms in conservation work of such Heritage Sites.    


Performance Audit on Management of Heritage Sites, Archives and Museums 
69 
3.7  Expenditure on unprotected Monuments 
The Government of India instructed (February 2013) that conservation work of any 
Monument can only be undertaken after declaring it Protected.  
Audit noticed that an amount of ` 157.50 crore was received from the Government of India 
under the 13th Finance Commission for the maintenance work of the protected Monuments 
during the period from 2011-12 to 2014-15. Out of the total funds: 
➢ An amount of ` 121.13 crore (77 per cent ) could only be spent by the Directorate 
(March 2021). The fact that the Department has not been able to  utilize the funds 
even after seven years since the target date of utilization (March 2015) clearly 
indicated inefficient implementation of maintenance and conservation plans. As 
such, the purpose of these grants stands defeated. 
➢ An amount of ` 2.30 crore was expended on the maintenance work of 17 
unprotected Monuments in violation of the Government of India order  (Annexure 
3.8). Audit could not ascertain the need or urgency on the part of the Department in 
carrying out restorative/ maintenance works in unprotected Monuments even as 
many protected Monuments are in dire need of restoration, and few have even 
collapsed or been damaged on account of non-maintenance.  
The Department stated (July 2022) that due to vacant posts, the Department could not 
spend the amount within the time limit. As far as the  matter of  amount spent on 
unprotected Monuments is concerned, this amount was spent only on those Monuments, 
which were already protected or the process of taking them under protection was in vogue. 
Similarly, according to the instructions of the State Government, some Monuments were 
separated from the category of protection and unprotected. 
The reply is not ac ceptable as the Government of India , instructions in the approval letter 
ibid clearly mentioned that the amount being released was  to be used for maintenance of 
Heritage Sites (including World Heritage Sites). Moreover, inability to utilise funds meant to 
restoration of Monuments (which are in dire need of restoration) indicates apathy on the 
part of the Department.  
3.8  Recommendations 
It is recommended that the Department may ensure: 
5. Annual Conservation Plan is prepared considering the needs of protected 
Monuments and implemented in timely manner. 
6. Conservation Works are carried out in a way that does not distort the original   
appearance of the Monuments and responsibility of the Supervisor concerned 
should be fixed in case there is  defacement of the artefacts and original appearance 
of monuments gets distorted during conservation works. 
7. Shortage of staff is reduced in a phased manner after assessing the actual 
requirement and short fall; and 
8.  A co -ordination mechanism is established with support from the District 
Administration for removing encroachment/ illegal trespassing and/ or possession. 

 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MANAGEMENT OF MUSEUMS 
CHAPTER IV 


Chapter IV 
 
Management of Museums 
Summary 
Audit of seven State Museums, six District Museums, three local Museums, two Site 
Museums and four Puratatava Sangh Museums was conducted which revealed  that 
policies on aspects relating to Museum management were not in existence. Rotation Policy 
for display of artefacts to minimize the potential damage and enhance visitor experience 
was also missing. The Department had not prepared Disaster Management Plan to mitigate 
the risks from natural and man -made disasters.  Also, no system was in existence for 
periodical verification of the artefacts in the Museums. In fact, in last ten years, physical 
verification of the Museums had been carried out at the interva l of two to four years and 
in some cases, it was even carried out once in last ten years. Further, the Department had 
made no efforts to digitize the database of any of the Museums under its control. This not 
only deprived the global audience from access t o the Indian heritage online, but also did 
not enable the interested individuals to have any remote access . Audit also noticed 
shortcomings on the issues relating to identification of artefacts, lighting facilities, galleries 
remaining closed for visitors for a significant time , unsuitable display of at least 500 
artefacts in open space in 17 Museums. Further, use of cement in conservation work was 
noticed which distorted the original appearance of the artefacts. There was lack of suitable 
amenities, such a s online tickets, potable drinking water , cloak room, etc. for visitors. 
Security concerns had not been adequately addressed. Audit further noticed that artefacts 
displayed in the Museums showed signs of paint splatters and cement. This indicated that 
the artefacts were not properly protected during restoration/ civil works going on in these 
Museums. Audit noticed that CCTVs were installed (and operational) only in a few  
Museums, fire detection and alarm systems were not installed in any of the Museums. Staff 
was not found to be trained in the operation of fire extinguishers and no fire training was 
conducted. Museum buildings, i.e., Ramnagar Fort ( Chanderi), Venkat Bhavan (Rewa), 
Chhapan Mahal ( Mandu) and Tulsi State Museum (Ramvan, Satna) had not been 
maintained adequately. 
4.1 Introduction 
Museums are repositories of a nation’s culture as they connect the past with the present and 
the future. Museums conserve collections of artefacts and other objects of  artistic, cultural, 
historical or scientific importance and make them available for public viewing through exhibits 
that may be permanent or temporary.  
Madhya Pradesh is one such State in India which is archaeologically, historically and culturally 
very rich. The Museums of Madhya Pradesh provide a throwback to the era s of Mauryas, 
Guptas, Mughals, Marathas, Britishers and even the prehistoric era. These Museums have a 
rich collection of inscriptions, seals, stone pillars, paintings, coins, porcelain obje cts, metals 
and ivory toys, artefacts, sculptures , etc. The sculptural wealth exhibits the gradual 
development of art from 1st century BC to 17th century AD in the Indian continent. 

Performance Audit on Management of Heritage Sites, Archives and Museums  
72 
Picture 4.1: Salbhanjika dateable in 10th century A.D. at 
State Museum Gujri Mahal, Gwalior (08-09-2021) 
 
 
Picture 4.2: Nandi belonging to the 11th century at  
Local Museum, Bhanpura, Mandsaur (07-10-2021) 
Picture 4.3: Uma Maheshwar 11th century at State 
Museum, Jabalpur (07-12-2021) 
Management of the Museums in Madhya Pradesh rests with the Directorate. The Museums 
in Madhya Pradesh have been divided into five categories as detailed in Table 4.1 below: 
Table 4.1: Details of Museums 
S. N. Category of Museum No. of Museums in 
the State 
1 State Level Museums (housing artefacts from all across the State) 07 
2 District Level Museums (housing important artefacts from all across the State)  14 
3 Local Level Museums (housing important artefacts from that particular area)  08 
4 Site Museums (housing important artefacts from one particular Monument/ Site) 05 
5 Puratatava Sangh Museums ( Museums under the control of District 
Administration) 
09 
 Total 43 
   (Source: Directorate) 
For the purpose of Joint Inspection, Audit covered 22 Museums, i.e., seven1 State Museums, 
six2 District Museums, three3 Local Museums and two 4 Site Museums (under the control of 
the Directorate ) and four 5 Puratatava Sangh  Museums under the control of the District 
Administrations concerned.  
 
1  Bhopal, Chhatarpur, Gwalior, Indore, Jabalpur, Satna and Ujjain.  
2  Dewas, Dhar, Hoshangabad, Niwari, Rewa and Vidisha. 
3  Ashapuri, Raisen District (contains artefacts/  remains of temple complex in Ashapuri  and nearby area ), 
Chanderi, Ashoknagar District (contains artefacts found in nearby area ) and Maheshwar ( contains 
artrefacts found in nearby area). 
4   Chhappan Mahal- (Mandu, Dhar) and Golghar (Bhopal). 
5   Betul, Datia, Khandwa and Seoni. 


Chapter IV: Management of Museums  
73 
The issues observed during joint inspection as well from departmental records have been 
detailed below. 
4.2 Policy/ Guidelines in management of Museums 
4.2.1 Lack of policies with regard to management of Museums 
The policies of an institution are framed to set the tone and provide long -term guiding 
principles. A well-defined policy should be prepared and adopted for smooth functioning of 
various activities of the Museums. These policies should be comprehensive and should cover 
the matters needed for ongoing management and future development. As per Guidelines for 
ASI Museums, 2013, five pillars should be adopted and practiced for Museum management 
and development, viz.: 
(a) Preservation and Conservation: to conserve values and attributes of the Site through the 
preservation of objects discovered from the Site; 
(b) Interpretation and Presentation: to share the value of the Site with everyone; 
(c) Education and Outreach: to encourage and nurture the visitors’ interest i n the Museum 
and its collection; 
(d) Visitor Services and Amenities : to provide facilities and access to all and to encourage 
more visitors to the Site and the Museum; 
(e) Administration and Management : to ensu re employment of professionals and the 
continuous upgradation of staff skills for efficient Museum management and administration.  
Audit observed that the Department did not have any policy/ guidelines in place for efficient 
management of Museum and Museum Sites. Even though the ASI has prepared well -
documented and detailed guidelines for the management of Museums, the State, despite 
having 43 Museums across various categories, have not only f ailed to prepare their own 
policy, but also to implement the guidelines formulated by ASI. This has resulted in the 
mismanagement of Museums as discussed in subsequent paragraphs.  
The Department stated (July 2022) that the Museums are operated in accordance with the 
Guidelines of the International Council of Museums (ICOM) and Museology. Display of 
exhibits and antiquities and maintenance, control and security of Museum has been ensured 
accordingly, however, action would be taken on the suggestion as per Rules. 
The reply is not acceptable as the Department has not actively followed the five pillars 
enshrined in the ASI guidelines and in the absence of a well -structured and codified process, 
the system of Museum management may become discretionary and arbitrary. 
4.2.2 Absence of Rotation Policy for Display of Artefacts 
Given the space constraints, all Museums in the world devise policy for periodic rotation of 
display items. Rotation of artefacts in a Museum or gallery is about replacing one object on 
display with another object, so that all the objects in possession of the Museum are 
showcased from time to ti me. This is extremely necessary as in addition to the risk of theft 
and vandalism, these items are also exposed to vibrations, dust, fluctuations in temperature 
and humidity, if showcased for a longer duration of time. Therefore, to minimize the potential 
damage to the objects, the Museum must periodically rotate the objects. T he Parliamentary 
Committee of Rajya Sabha recommended  (July 2021) that the Museums should ensure that 

Performance Audit on Management of Heritage Sites, Archives and Museums  
74 
their entire collection of artefacts is displayed to the audience by implementati on of a well 
thought-out, pre-planned rotation schedule, physically as well as on the Museum websites.  
The Department has not prepared a periodic Rotation Policy for displaying the artefacts. Table 
4.2 below shows the details of artefacts displayed in various Museums: 
Table 4.2: Details of the objects displayed and in reserve  
S. N. Name of the Museum No. of objects 
possessed till date 
No. of objects 
displayed 
No of objects 
in reserve 
Total objects kept in 
reserve    (in per cent) 
1 State Museum, Bhopal 11,515 3,634 7,881 68 
2 Central Museum, Indore 10,457 1,581 8,876 84 
3 Gujari Mahal Museum, 
Gwalior 
8,782 688 8,094 92 
4 State Museum Ramvan, 
Satna 
1,176 194 982 83 
5 Rani Durgawati Museum, 
Jabalpur 
6,163 271 5,892 95 
6 State Museum, Ujjain 417 254 163 40 
7 Dhubela Museum, 
Chhatarpur 
2,656 803 1,853 70 
8 District Museum, Dewas 302 257 45 15 
9 District Museum, Rewa 468 146 322 69 
10 District Museum, Dhar 453 241 212 47 
(Source: Directorate) 
It is evident from the above t able that these Museums have collections whose size is much 
larger than what can be displayed by the Museums at a time. This should , therefore, have 
prompted a very robust policy of rotation of artefacts so that most, if not all, artefacts can be 
displayed within a reasonable span of time.  Further, constant rotation of artefacts also 
prompts an enhanced care of the artefacts kept in storage , lest they remain out of complete 
focus. 
The Department stated (July 2022) that the procedure to display all the artefacts of Museum 
time to time is followed. In some Museums where the number  of artefacts is less, it is not 
possible to display the antiquities alternately.  
Reply is not acceptable as no rotation policy was available in the Department and during Joint 
Inspections of Museums, significant number of artefacts were found kept in the store which 
were not displayed since long time. 
4.2.3  Absence of Disaster Management Plan  
According to Para 15.03 of the National Policy of Conservation 2014, a Disaster Management 
Plan should be made as an important pre-requisite of the Conservation Plan for a Monument 
and a Museum. Identifying, understanding, and preparing for risks are vital parts of Museum 
management. Government Museums keep resources in trust for the public  and therefore, 
must minimize risks to their collections. Having a strong Disaster Management Plan helps the 
Museum safeguard the ancient heritage it possesses. The Disaster Management Plan should 
include the e vacuation plan clearly outlining the strategy to recover the collections in the 
event of a disaster.  

Chapter IV: Management of Museums  
75 
The State of Madhya Pradesh is vulnerable to various natural disasters. There are 28 Districts 
that come under Zone –III6 seismic zone and 22 Districts that come under Zone – II7 seismic 
zone. There are 32 Districts of the State that are affected from the floods. Apart from these, 
there is always a constant risk of manmade disasters such as fire. As such, the archaeological 
heritage in the possession of the Directorate remains vulnerable to these disasters.  
Audit observed that despite constant threats of disasters, the Department is yet to prepare 
any Disaster Management P lan to mitigate  the risk s to the Museums in the event of any 
disaster. Consequently, the Department has no plans in place or protocols to be followed in 
case of imminent disasters, so as to protect/  preserve the heritage under its possession. 
Further, the Department has also not provided appropriate training to the staff to  handle 
disasters and emergencies. During the  last five years, only three officials had attended 
training programmes on Museum Safety and Disaster Risk Reduction, which indicates the 
Department was indifferent towards the capacity building of staff. 
In the Exit Conference (July 2022), the Commissioner assured that necessary action will be 
taken soon. 
4.2.4 Lack of mechanism for Periodical Verification 
Periodical Physical verification of artefacts was essential to ensure the availability and 
existence of the artefacts and also to assess the conditions of the antiquities. In the absence 
of it, there are always risks of artefacts getting stolen or their condition getting deteriorated. 
If no inspections are carried out there is always the risk that antiques are stolen and replaced 
with fakes.  
Audit noticed that no such system exists in the Department for periodical verification of the 
artefacts in the Museums. Further, in last ten years, physical verification of the Museums has 
been carried out at the interval of two to four years and in some cases, it was carried out once 
in last ten years only. As a result of which, timely maintenance of artefacts could not be done 
and their need for co nservation could not even be assessed. The details of physical 
verification carried out  by the Department officials  in the audited Museums are shown in 
Table 4.3 below: 
Table 4.3: Details of physical verification of Museums 
S. N. Name of Museum Date of physical inspection Number of inspection in 
last 10 years 
1 State Museum, Bhopal 01.08.2019 and 19.09.2021 Two 
2 State Museum, Ujjain 05.07.2021  One 
3 State Museum, Jabalpur 08.08.2012, 07.10.2013, 
19.07.2018 and 05.12.2019 
Four 
4 State Museum, Gwalior 11.11.2014 and 22.07.2020  Two 
5 District Museum, Dhar 05.01.2021 One 
6 District Museum, Rewa December 2012, May 2014, 
February 2017 and July 2021 
Four 
7 District Museum, Hoshangabad 04.08.2021 One 
8 District Museum, Orcha (Niwari) 31.07.2017 and 02.08.2018 Two 
9 Local Museum, Ramnagar, Chanderi 10.07.2018 One 
10 Local Museum, Ashapuri 05.10.2021 One 
11 Local Museum, Maheshwar 11.03.2022 One 
 
6  Seismic Zone III is classified as the moderate-damage risk zone. 
7  Seismic Zone II is classified as the low-damage risk zone.  

Performance Audit on Management of Heritage Sites, Archives and Museums  
76 
S. N. Name of Museum Date of physical inspection Number of inspection in 
last 10 years 
12 Site Museum Golghar, Bhopal 26.08.2021 One 
13 Site Museum Chappan Mahal, Mandu 07.01.2021 One 
(Source: Directorate) 
The Department stated (July 2022) that physical verification of the artefacts of the Museum 
is done time to time and the condition of the artefacts stored in the Museum is confirmed. 
The Museums where physical verification has not been done in the stipulated time, their 
verification will be ensured. 
The reply is not acceptable as during aud it of Museum, it was noticed that the physical 
verification of the artefacts was done at the time of handing over of charge during transfer.  
The system being practiced by the Curators/ Department is, in essence, flawed on account of 
the following reasons: 
➢ Transfer/ Posting is not a regular practice and there are cases where such transfers 
have taken place after long periods. As such, not having a periodic system of 
verification renders the items vulnerable to theft and damage.  
➢ In few cases, concerned offic ials relinquished their charge much before the new 
incumbents could take charge. In such a situation the authenticity of verification at 
the time of handing over of charge is suspect. 
➢ It may be difficult to retrieve items or fix responsibility if such theft/ loss comes to light 
only at the time of charge relinquishment.  
4.3  Non-existent visitor engagement efforts 
One of the most important goals of effective Museum management is to take steps in making 
Museums attractive for visitors to come, and to make them feel connected. This not only adds 
purpose to the existence of Museums, but it also glorifies the past heritage and makes it easy 
for people to understand culture and identify with it. Besides, increase in  visitors adds to 
revenue, which in turn can be used for improving the quality of Museums and modernise 
them. 
The ASI’s Guidelines for Museums, 2013 stipulate that in order to encourage more visitors to 
visit the Site, the management should inter alia: 
➢ develop clear and standardized directional and informative signage for the Museums 
and Site, using materials that are in harmony with the Site; 
➢ create adequate public amenities such as toilets  and clean drinking water facility for 
visitors; 
➢ publicise the Site and the Museum and reach out to wider and newer audiences 
through outreach programmes, calendar of events, and multi-platform access on and 
off-site. 
Audit observed that the Department has not made any efforts towards garnering visitors’  
interest despite having such a large number of Museums and artefacts under its control. The 
details are covered in succeeding paragraphs. 
 
 

Chapter IV: Management of Museums  
77 
4.3.1  Absence of identification captions/ labels and lighting 
The gallery texts for groups of objects and individual captions for each object on disp lay 
should be in Hindi, English and the local language8. The Identification label provides the most 
basic information about the artefacts, usually the name, age, place of origin, etc. The visitors 
usually read th e description to help their understanding of the artworks. Further, this is 
something which needs little effort  from the administration but can increase multifold the 
effectiveness of Museum engagement. Further, lighting plays a significant role in developing 
a visually enriching and interactive experience for the visitors.  
During the Joint Inspections, Audit noticed that a large number of the artefacts displayed in 
the twelve9 out of the 22 jointly inspected Museums have not even been given identification 
captions/ labels. Absence of such elementary requirements indicates lack of emphasis on 
improving the visitor’s experience, even in most basic ways.  Following images indicate few 
such instances: 
 
Picture 4.4: Artefacts displayed without captions/ 
labels at District Museum, Dhar (28-09-2021) 
Picture  4.5: Artefacts displayed without captions/ 
labels at District Museum, Vidisha (11-08-2021) 
The Department stated (July 2022) that all the Curators have been directed to ensure labeling 
of displayed material. 
Audit further observed that in 1110 out of 22 Museums, spot lighting facility to showcase the 
artefacts was not available. Thus, the artefacts and sculptures failed to impose their due 
impact among the visitors.  
 
8   Para 4.6 of the Guidelines for ASI Museums, 2013. 
9   State Museum, Bhopal, Gwalior and Satna; District Museum, Dhar, Orchha and Vidisha; Local Museum, 
Chanderi and Maheshwar, Site Museum, Chappan Mahal (Mandu); and Puratatva Museum; Betul, Datia 
and Khandwa. 
10   State Museums at Jabalpur and  Satna; District Museums at Dhar, Hoshangabad, Re wa and Vidisha; Site  
Museums at Ashapuri, Mandu; and Puratatva Museums at Betul, Khandwa and Seoni. 


Performance Audit on Management of Heritage Sites, Archives and Museums  
78 
 
Picture 4.6: Insufficient lighting arrangement at 
State Museum, Jabalpur (07-12-2021) 
 
Picture 4.7: Insufficient lighting arrangement at 
District Museum, Vidisha (11-08-2021) 
In the Exit Conference (July 2022), the Commissioner assured that necessary action will be 
taken soon. 
4.3.2  Closed galleries in Museums 
During the Joint Inspection of District Museums at Rewa and Dhar,  State Museum, Ramvan, 
Satna, Audit observed that one gallery was found closed for visitors in each Museum. Exact 
period indicating since when these were closed, were not provided by these Museums, except 
in one case. Various paintings of historical importance, sculptures, mounted tigers, artefacts 
made of ivory, etc. were kept in these closed galleries.  
Table 4.4: Details of closed galleries in Museums 
S. N. Name of the Museum Name/ Details of closed gallery Audit remarks 
1 State Museum, Bhopal Bronze Gallery. The gallery 
contained bronze artefacts. 
The gallery is closed for more than one 
year for termite treatment (April 2022).  
Reasons for  delay in completing the 
treatment and re -opening the gallery 
were not available in the records. 
2 Tulsi Museum, Ramvan, 
Satna 
No name. The gallery contained 
artefacts pertaining to Bharhut 
Stupa, Gupta period and Kalchuri 
period. 
The gallery is closed to general public. 
Period since when closed was not 
intimated to Audit. Reasons for closure 
were also not intimated. 
3 District Museum, Dhar No name. The gallery contained 
ivory artefacts. 
The gallery has been closed since 2015 on 
account of staff shortage. Precious ivory 
artefacts are lying in precarious condition 
and the entire gallery was covered in 
dust. Chances of damage to the artefacts 
on account of non -maintenance are very 
high.  
4 District Museum, Rewa No name. The gallery contained 
mounted tigers and paintings 
pertaining to the Rewa royal 
family.  
Reasons for closure  were not inti mated 
to Audit. The artefacts are covered in 
dust owing to non -maintenance. The 
taxidermy mounts of tigers appear to 
have been damaged beyond repair/  
restoration. 
Audit is of the view that the closure of the galleries was arbitrary as reasons for closure were 
either not available or were not justifiable.  Even though the galleries were closed to the 
general public, the Museum staff could have taken steps to keep them  under proper 


Chapter IV: Management of Museums  
79 
maintenance. Failure to do so not only resulted in degradation of the stored artefacts but also 
deprived the visitors of the viewing experience. 
Picture 4.8: Artefacts made of bronze displayed in 
closed gallery of State Museum, Bhopal (13-07-2021) 
Picture 4.9: Artefacts displayed in closed gallery of 
State Museum, Ramvan, Satna (08-11-2021) 
 
Picture 4.10:  Ivory artefacts covered in dust in the 
closed gallery of District Museum, Dhar (28-09-2021) 
 
Picture 4.11: Damaged mounted tigers kept in 
closed Gallery (22-11-2021) 
The Department stated (July 2022) that in an unavoidable situation, such as at the time of 
renovation of the gallery, the galleries are kept closed and it will be open ed as soon as the 
renovation is complete. 
The replies, however, failed to address the reasons for non -maintenance of the closed 
galleries. Further, no definite timelines were given by the Department for their re-opening. 
4.3.3  Lack of amenities for visitors 
People visit  Museums and Monuments for a variety of reasons, such as education, 
information, recreation and entertainment. During such visits, basic amenities such as online 
ticketing, cloak rooms, toilets, drinking water, ease of access, etc. at the Museums can work 
as a catalyst for tourist attraction and enhance the overall experience.  
Audit collected data on visitor footfall in respect of 1011 Museums for the period of 2016-17 
to 2019-2012. The details are shown in the Table 4.5 below: 
Table 4.5: Visitors’ footfall in Museums 
S. N. Name of the Museum Number of visitors year-wise Total 
2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 
 State Level Museums 
1 Bhopal 16,526 18,292 15,906 20,683 71,407 
 
11   State Museums - Bhopal, Chhatarpur, Gwalior, Indore, Jabalpur and Satna; District Museums - Dhar, 
Orchha, Rewa and Vidisha. 
12   During 2020-21, there was adverse impact of Covid-19 on footfall, hence, data was not considered. 


Performance Audit on Management of Heritage Sites, Archives and Museums  
80 
S. N. Name of the Museum Number of visitors year-wise Total 
2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 
 State Level Museums 
2 Maharaja Chatrasal Museum, 
Dubhela, Chattarpur 
28,048 24,626 44,661 38,742 1,36,077 
3 Gujri Mahal, Gwalior 1,97,850 2,63,426 3,17,282 3,52,779 11,31,337 
4 Indore 22,591 23,577 29,460 32,563 1,08,191 
5 Jabalpur 5,580 7,872 7,612 7,183 28,247 
6 Tulsi Museum, Ramvan, Satna 1,592 1,379 629 468 4,068 
7 Triveni Museum, Ujjain 0 0 6,889 16,277 23,166 
 District Level Museums 
8 Orchha 2,04,243 2,99,366 2,61,771 2,03,996 9,69,376 
9 Rewa 4,049 8,055 0 4,171 16,275 
10 Vidisha 1,031 876 853 871 3,631 
From the above table it can be seen that in District Museum, Orchha, annual visitor footfall 
was more than two lakh and in other three13 Museums, annual visitors were over 20,000 
during the period. These figures indicate that there is a great potential in these Museums and 
improving public amenities can in fact help in augmenting the number of visitors.  
However, Audit inspection revealed that the current state of the Museums leaves a lot to be 
desired, as detailed below: 
➢ No facility for purchase of online tick ets was in place in any of the Museums. The 
tickets were sold in lieu of cash only.  
➢ No cloakrooms have been provided in any of the Museums, for safe custody of 
visitors’ items. 
➢ Potable drinking water facility was not available in 1714 Museums. 
➢ Ramps for differently abled visitors were not provided, thus not only limiting their 
entry into the Museums but also constitut ing a violation of the Persons with 
Disability Act, 1995. 
Lack of these basic amenities might affect the footfall in these Museums and also reduce the 
quality of experience for the visitors.  
The Department stated (July 2022) that arrangements were being made for online booking, 
ticketing, sale of departmental publications and replicas, etc. at major Museums.  
4.4  Digitization 
Digitization15 involves acquiring, converting, storing and providing information in a 
standardised, organised format and making it available on demand from a common 
system accessible to the users of Museum objects for various purposes. Further, 
Museums being hotspots for cultural tourism, digital engagement enables them to promote 
culture and heritage to global audiences through digital channels. Museums can engage 
diverse audiences in the backdrop of massive growth of the internet, increased mobile usage 
via smart phone s and tablets and the prevalence of social media. Further, digitization 
 
13   State Museums – Bhopal, Chhatarpur and Indore. 
14  State Museums- Indore, Jabalpur and Satna, District Museums- Chhatarpur, Dewas, Dhar, Hoshangabad, 
Rewa, and Vidisha, Site Museums- Ashapuri and Mandu, Maheshwar, Golghar and Puratatva Museums- 
Betul, Datia, Khandwa and Seoni. 
15   Digitisation means conversion of analog data to digital formats and preparation of textual and image 
data of artefacts. 

Chapter IV: Management of Museums  
81 
safeguards visual materials and converts them into machine -readable format that prevents 
them from deterioration.  
According to Para 1.7 of Guidelines for ASI Museums, 2013, Museums should create digitized 
documentation of Museum collection for purposes of preservation, conservation, 
interpretation, design, publications and outreach programmes. 
Audit observed that the Department had made no efforts to digitize the database of any of 
the Museums under its control. This not only deprived the global audience from access to the 
Indian heritage  online, but also did not enable the interested individuals to have remote 
access, if they wished to.  
In the absence of a digitized and centralized da tabase, the Department has no monitoring 
mechanism in place to: 
➢ keep a watch over the artefacts and verify the same periodically. 
➢ keep a watch over the rotational policy of artefacts in the Museums.  
➢ keep a watch over the condition of the artefacts and  see the need of periodic 
restoration, treatments. 
➢ keep a control over the artefacts in case the physical accession registers get lost/  
damaged due to manmade or natural causes. 
The Department stated (July 2022) that action will be taken for digitization as per Rules. 
Box 4.1: Website of Directorate  
Directorate have a Department -run website (www.archaeology.mp.gov.in), but the same 
was not updated. The deficiencies noticed are listed below: 
➢ There were 526 State Protected Monuments but at  the website, detail of only 497 
Monuments was found to be displayed; 
➢ Pictures and details of all the protected Monuments are not available; 
➢ List of excavations is not updated since 2003-04; 
➢ No Excavation Report is available; 
➢ Survey report of only six Districts (out of 21 surveyed Districts) had been displayed; 
➢ GPS tagging of Monuments was also not available; and 
➢ There are many webpages where information is blank. 
In the Exit Conference (July 2022) , the Commissioner stated that updation work of 
Departmental website is under process. 
4.5 Inadequate protection mechanisms in Museums 
4.5.1 Security Surveillance System 
A well-designed and well-maintained perimeter fence or wall provides a first line of defence. 
The security systems are, however, better served by CCTVs which are now a common sight in 
all important public places and can act as a deterrent in reducing crime. 

Performance Audit on Management of Heritage Sites, Archives and Museums  
82 
Audit noticed that out of 22 Museums, CCTVs were installed (and operational) in only four16 
Museums. Thus, the Department failed to address the security issue especially considering 
the fact that the Museums under its control contain very rare and priced items. I n 17 out of 
the 22 Museums, artefacts were displayed outside the Museums and these artefacts remain 
vulnerable to theft/ vandalism in the absence of effective security measures.  
Picture 4.12: Non-operational CCTV Camera at 
District Museum, Dhar (28-09-2021) 
Picture 4.13: Non-functional Control Panel of CCTV 
at District Museum, Vidisha (11-08-2021) 
In the Exit Conference (July 2022), the Commissioner assured that necessary action will be 
taken soon. 
However, the fact remains that the Department was aware of the importance of having CCTVs 
but failed to take any action to address this issue. 
4.5.2 Fire Prevention 
Displaying priceless artefacts to the public demands the highest levels of security , as well as 
fire protection. Authorities concerned should ensure both passive and active  measures to 
provide maximum fire protection. The risks to human life and property in historical buildings 
and Museums are relatively high  due to high concentration of people and due to the 
combustible nature of the interior furnishings and fittings frequ ently present in such 
buildings.  
Joint Inspection of 22 Museums revealed the following lacunae: 
➢ Fire detection and alarm systems were not installed in any of the Museums.  
➢ In respect of 21 Museums, fire extinguishers installed at different locations of the 
Museum buildings had not been replaced/  refilled beyond their expiry , rendering 
them unfit for use to meet any emergency. 
➢ Staff was not found to be trained in th e operation of fire extinguishers  and no fire 
training was conducted. Thus, the staff remained untrained and unprepared to handle 
fire incidents and will not be in position to  handle the available equipment  properly 
and save the Museum Artefacts in case of situation of fire. 
The Department stated (July 2022) that at present, fire extinguishers have been refilled in all 
the Museums and the employees have also been trained to operate these fire extinguishers. 
 
16   State Museum- Bhopal, Gwalior, Jabalpur and Ujjain. 


Chapter IV: Management of Museums  
83 
However, veracity of the claim could not be verified as no supporting documents were 
provided. 
4.6  Maintenance of Museum artefacts and buildings 
4.6.1  Poor management/ handling of artefacts 
According to Para 6.6 of Guideline for ASI Museum, 2013, a maintenance plan to ensure the 
upkeep of Museum and its facilities should be prepared. The Museums hold hi storical 
antiquities, coins, books, manuscripts and records, and are supposed to preserve them 
through scientific methods. As these are kept in Museum’s trust on behalf of public, it is very 
important to maintain them in their original form. Accordingly, preventive measures should 
be taken so that damage to the collections due to these external influences remain minimal. 
As dirt and dust contribute to the deterioration of artefacts and unclean spaces attract 
rodents and pests, the responsibility of the thor ough cleanliness of the Museums also rests 
with the Museum administration.  
During the Joint Inspection, Audit noticed that in sixteen 17 Museums, at least 160 artefacts 
displayed in the Museum showed signs of paint splatters and cement. This indicated that the 
artefacts we re not properly protected during restoration/  civil works going on in these 
Museums. Thus, poor handling of invaluable artefacts resulted in damage to their structure 
which affected the originality and beauty of these artefacts.  
Even though the Department was aware that the construction/  civil work had damaged the 
artefacts, they did precious little to begin the process of restoration of these artefacts.  
Picture 4.14: Splatters of paint on antiquity at 
Jabalpur (08-12-2021) 
Picture 4.15:  Spot of cement on the idol at District 
Museum, Dhar (28-09-2021) 
 
 
 
17  State Museums - Bhopal, Gwalior, Indore , Jabalpur and Satna;  District Museums -  Hoshangabad, Dhar, 
Rewa and Vidisha;  Site Museums -  Ashapuri and Golghar;  Local Museums - Datia and Mandu and 
Puratatva Museums - Betul, Khandwa and Seoni. 


Performance Audit on Management of Heritage Sites, Archives and Museums  
84 
 
Picture 4.16: Spot of paint on antiquity at District 
Museum, Rewa (22-11-2021)  
 
Picture 4.17: Spot of paint on antiquity at District 
Museum, Dewas (18-11-2021) 
The Department stated (July 2022) that instructions have been given to the concerned officers 
to remove the paint marks from the artefacts.  
Further, Audit noticed that at least 500 artefacts were displayed in an open area in 17 18 
Museums. In such a situation, due to sunlight, wind and water, t hese ancient artefacts were 
getting covered with moss and algae and thus, were seeing a change in their original form. 
This deterioration in original form was seriously impacting the attractiveness of these 
artefacts while deteriorating their historical value.  
 
Picture 4.18: Algae on the Artefacts displayed in 
open space at District Museum, Vidisha 
Picture 4.19: Algae on the Artefacts displayed in 
open space at District Museum, Rewa 
 
 
 
18 State Museums - Bhopal, Gwalior, Indore, Jabalpur, Satna and Ujjain, Distr ict Museums - Chhatarpur, 
Dewas, Dhar, Hoshangabad, Rewa and Vidisha, Site Museums - Ashapuri and Mandu, and Puratatva 
Museums- Betul, Khandwa and Seoni. 


Chapter IV: Management of Museums  
85 
 
Picture 4.20 :Erosion on artefacts due to display in 
open at District Museum Dhar (28-09-2021) 
 
Picture 4.21 :Erosion on artefacts due to display in 
open at Local Museum, Chappan Mahal, Dhar  
(28-09-2021) 
The Department stated (July 2022) that usually large and antiquities unsuitable to be 
displayed in the galleries only are displayed in the open space of Museums. Further, necessary 
steps, like construction of shed, lighting, installation of CCTV Camera , etc. were taken to 
protect them from sunlight, rain, theft, etc. These facilities were also ensured in the Museums 
mentioned in the audit observation. However, efforts will be made for additional security. 
Reply is not acceptable as in the jointly inspected  Museums, many of the artefacts were 
displayed in the open space without having protection from sunlight, rain, etc. 
4.6.2  Use of cement in conservation work 
Audit had previously commented on use of cement in conservation work of Monuments 
Paragraph 3.4.6 (Chapter 3). During Joint Inspection of Museums, Audit noticed that in three 
Museums, the same modus operandi had been followed by the Department resulting in use 
of cement in the conservation of artefacts. This indicates that: 
➢ Either the Department is not aware of the processes to be followed in conservation of 
artefacts or; 
➢ The Department does not monitor the restoration work being carried out even though 
Museum artefacts have to be restored/  cleaned by the Museum curators/  staff 
themselves. 
Not adhering to the provisions of the John Marshall ’s Conservation Manual showed lack of 
supervision in conservation works by the Departmental Officers which had visibly resulted in 
marring of their visual and aesthetic appeal.  


Performance Audit on Management of Heritage Sites, Archives and Museums  
86 
Picture 4.22: Use of cement in conservation work of 
artefacts at District Museum, Vidisha (17-08-2021) 
Picture 4.23: Use of cement in conservation work at 
State Museum, Ujjain (22-11-2021) 
Picture 4.24: Use of cement in conservation work  
of artefacts at State Museum, Gujri Mahal,  
Gwalior (01-11-2021) 
Picture 4.25: Use of cement in conservation  
work of artefacts at District Museum,  
Vidisha (11-08-2021) 
The Department stated (July 2022) that artefacts shown will be rectified by deploying the 
departmental officers and technical staff. 
4.6.3  Improper Storage facility 
A Museum should have a storage area for housing artefact collections (which cannot be 
displayed) that is separate from the exhibit areas. The storage area should have enough space 
for safe keeping of the artefacts and there should be adequate measures in place to ensure 
that they remain well-protected. 


Chapter IV: Management of Museums  
87 
Out of the 22 Museums where joint inspections were to be carried out, storage facility of 
five19 Museums could not be checked. Nine Museums did not have (or require) storage facility 
as all the artefacts were on display. In respect of the remaining eight20 Museums, 31,485 
artefacts, representing 40-92 per cent  of all available artefacts were under storage. 
Examination of the storage facilities revealed that: 
➢ In all the eight Museums, 2,649 artefacts were found lying haphazardly on the floor 
without being assigned a safe storage area. 
➢ No planning was in place for ensuring systematic placement of artefacts in the storage 
area. Such unplanned storage of art objects would inevitably lead to their 
deterioration. 
➢ CCTV facility was not available in the storage area. In such a situation  12,29021 
artefacts remained vulnerable to theft.  
➢ The artefacts in the storage area were neither periodically put to display (discussed in 
paragraph 4.2.2) nor were being regularly cleaned.  
In such a situation where the Museums have taken little to no action to ensure safe custody 
of the artefacts coupled with their poor upkeep and maintenance and  absence of Periodical 
Verification mechanism, these treasured items will continue to deteriorate even further while 
chances of theft also cannot be ruled out.  
Picture 4.26: Artefacts lying on floor at District 
Museum, Dhar (28-09-2021) 
Picture 4.27: Artefacts were lying on floor in 
haphazard manner at State Museum, Bhopal (15-
09-2021) 
The Department stated (July 2022) that though all the Museums have less storage space but 
instructions have been issued to concerned staff to expand the storage space. 
4.6.4 Maintenance of Museum buildings 
A dilapidated structure can not only cause harm to the artefacts kept in the Museum but can 
also pose a danger  to the staff employed there. A number of natural factors may affect a 
building like termite infestation, seepage due to rains, natural process of  decay, etc. Apart 
 
19  State Museums - Chhatarpur, Indore, Jabalpur and Satna and Puratatva Museum - Datia. 
20  State Museums - Bhopal, Gwalior, Indore and Ujjain; District Museums - Dhar, Dewas, Rewa and Vidisha. 
21  State Museums - Chhatarpur, Indore and Satna; District Museums- Dewas, Dhar and Rewa. 


Performance Audit on Management of Heritage Sites, Archives and Museums  
88 
from that, as some of the Museum buildings itself are heritage structures, lack of maintenance 
can adversely impact their structure, making them feeble. Periodic maintenance of building 
is not only cost effective in the long run but it also extends the life of the building.  
Audit observed that:  
➢ Local Museum, Chanderi was housed in Ramnagar Fort (built in 1698) since the last 20 
years. Due to non-maintenance, the fort was in a deplorable condition and for the safety 
of the artefacts and visitors , the artefacts  were eventually transferred (2019) to Old 
Kacheri building at Chanderi.  
➢ District Museum, Rewa was housed in Venkat Bhavan (built by the Maharaja of Rewa in 
1908) since the last 30 years. At present, condition of the building has deteriorated 
severely and is in urgent need of repairs. 
➢ The District Museum, Vidisha, and the Tulsi Museum, Ramvan, Satna have developed 
cracks on the walls and suffer from seepage and ter mite infestations were noticed due 
to non-maintenance of the buildings. Apart from damaging the structure of the building, 
these also diminish the visual appeal of the Museums. 
➢ Due to the blockage of the drainage system in the Museum, rain-water had filled up in 
the galleries located on the ground floor of the State Museum, Jabalpur (August 2019). 
The ply boards installed on the walls of the galleries and pedestals were also damaged 
due to this. Further, dampness and cracks were still visible on the walls of the Museum 
building. 
Picture 4.28: Deteriorated building of Local 
Museum Ramnagar, Chanderi (02-12-2021) 
Picture 4.29: Deteriorated pillars of District 
Museum, Rewa (22-11-2021) 
 
 


Chapter IV: Management of Museums  
89 
Picture 4.30: Deteriorated building of District 
Museum, Vidisha (11-08-2021) 
Picture 4.31: Deteriorated building of State Museum 
Ramvan, Satna (09-11-2021) 
In the Exit Conference (July 2022), the Principal Secretary instructed for issuance of necessary 
advisory guidelines to local administra tions for carrying out conservation work in Museums 
only under the supervision and in consultation with the State Archaeology Department.  
Box 4.2: Inadequate maintenance of Tulsi Library, Satna 
Tulsi Library is situated inside the State Museum, Ramvan, Satna. The L ibrary has over 
25,000 books in its collection and houses many rare and priceless collection of books which 
include: 
➢ Seven illustrated and handwritten books including a handwritten book written in 
1851, containing beautiful paintings and stories about Lord Rama.  
➢ The commentary of Balabhadra Bhagavad Gita  (available in its original form only 
here). 
➢ The commentary on Kalidasa’s Meghdoot (dated 1522) by Mallinatha Suri. 
➢ Around 1,250 handwritten books on Vedic rituals and sciences.  
Audit noticed that th e library was lying closed since September 2018 and due to non -
maintenance/ upkeep, the library was in a deplorable state and the place was full of dust, 
web, and termites. Despite having storage options, the books were lying scattered all 
around the place in the open and many had been infested with termites which had severely 
damaged the books. There was no security in place to ensure safe custody of the rare 
books.  
The new books p urchased had not been taken in the accession register and not been 
accounted for.  


Performance Audit on Management of Heritage Sites, Archives and Museums  
90 
Picture 4.32: Poor condition of books kept in 
Library (09-11-2021) 
Picture 4.33: Books kept in haphazard manner in 
Library (09-11-2021) 
The Department stated (July 2022) that the post of Librarian is vacant. Alternative 
arrangements will be made to keep a proper record of these handwritten texts. 
The reply reflects the callousness of the Department as despite lapse of more than three 
years since the vacancy, the Department did not make any efforts to seek a replacement 
or take steps to maintain the library with the available in-house staff of the Museum where 
the library is housed. 
4.7  Management/ safe keeping of Antique Coins  
The Museums of Madhya Pradesh, besides storing invaluable artefacts also contain a vast 
collection of coins dating back to the medieval era. Since coins are not only historically 
important but also valuable and rare and henc e in need of constant protection and 
safekeeping. Audit assessed the internal controls in place in the Department for the safe 
keeping of the coins and observed the following deficiencies. 
4.7.1  Non-display of coins 
During the Joint Inspection of Museums, it was noticed that in four 22 Museums all the coins 
were kept in a safe and no arrangements had been made for display of coins to the general 
public. 
 
22   State Museum Ramvan, Satna; District Museums – Dhar, Rewa and Vidisha. 


Chapter IV: Management of Museums  
91 
Picture 4.34: District Museum, Vidisha (27-08-2021) Picture 4.35: State Museum, Ramvan Satna (08-11-
2021) 
On being pointed out, it was replied that due to space constraints, security issues and non -
availability of separate coin gallery, the coins could not be displayed in the Museums. 
Display of coins will not only help in garnering interest among the visitors but will also be an 
efficient way of keeping the coins under constant monitoring, thereby increasing 
accountability. 
4.7.2  Weight of precious metal coins not shown 
During joint inspection of Museums, it was noticed that coins of gold, silver and copper were 
kept in the custody of Museums, but their actual weight has not been shown anywhere in the 
Museum records. Also, no document related to periodic testing of the metal s was available 
in the Museum. 
It may also be mentioned that the coins are kept in safe custody and are only opened/ checked 
at the time of handing over/ taking over of the charge by the concerned officers.  
Audit is of the view that this method of safe custody of coins is deficient on account of the 
fact that the physical verification (as and when carried out) is on the basis of the number of 
coins and not on the basis of additional factors such as weight, genuineness, etc. of the coins. 
Thus, the possibility of loss in weight of the coins or their replacement cannot be ruled out. 


Performance Audit on Management of Heritage Sites, Archives and Museums  
92 
Picture 4.36: Gold coins at District Museum, Dhar 
(28-09-2021) 
Picture 4.37: Gold wires at District Museum, Dhar 
(28-09-2021) 
Picture: 4.38 Accession register of State Museum, 
Jabalpur (07-10-2021) 
Picture: 4.39 Accession register of District Museum, 
Rewa (22-11-2021) 
On being pointed out, the Museum Curators stated ( October 2021) that the weight of the 
coins were mentioned on the envelopes (encasing the coins). 
The Reply was not acceptable as weight of coins were not recorded on envelopes. 
4.8  Recommendations 
It is recommended that the Department may take steps to:  
9. Create a Management Plan for Museums which inter alia provide detailed instructions 
for periodic maintenance, repair of artefacts both in display and in storage. 
10. Develop a c entralised and digitised data base of all artefacts  in the State  and verify 
them periodically.  
11. Provide suitable public amenities and deploy sufficient manpower (viz. Caretakers and 
Museum Attendants). 
12. Sensitize the existing staff on the procedures to be followed for scientific upkeep and 
maintenance of the artefacts inside the Museum including the restoration. 
13. Evolve a control system for proper safekeeping of rare artefacts including coins. 


 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MANAGEMENT OF ARCHIVES 
CHAPTER V 

Chapter V 
 
Management of Archives 
Summary 
Audit jointly inspected six Archives and found that 82 per cent of all the technical posts 
were vacant. Files/ Records have not been segregated in order of classification such as war, 
famine, administrative orders, etc. Due to shortage of staff, the continuous process of 
verification of records was affected. There was lack of cataloguing as well as digitization of 
records, except in Archives at Bhopal where about 11 lakh pages were digitized. Audit 
noticed improper up -keep of records due to absence of fumigation, air conditioning 
facilities and appropriate humidity control measures. Out of six Archives, air conditio ning 
facility was available only at one Archives at Satpura Bhawan, Bhopal. Further, due to non-
adoption of de -acidification process and improper storage of records, there was great 
possibility of damage to historical and fragile archived records. No physical verification had 
been conducted in any of the six Archives.  No training programmes for operation of fire 
extinguishers and fire training was conducted by the Department for the staff. Due to this, 
the Department could not assess the physical well-being of the records. The automatic fire 
detection and alarm systems were not installed in the record room in any of the six Archives 
indicating serious lapse as per the prescribed fire safety standards. 
5.1  Introduction 
Archives consist of records that have been selected for permanent or long-term preservation 
on the basis of their enduring cultural, historical and evidentiary values. Archival records are 
normally unpublished, original and almost unique, unlike books or magazines, of which many 
identical copies may exist. These records are important cultural heritage and they are basic 
sources of research which play an important role in uncovering the life of the past . Hence, it 
is essential to preserve them for future generations.  

Performance Audit on Management of Heritage Sites, Archives and Museums 
94 
 
Picture 5.1: Notification issued by Government in 1857, to apprehend Nana Sahib  
 (Source: Directorate)  
 
 
Picture 5.2: Notice issued by Government in 1913, for Delhi bomb outrage   
(Source: Directorate) 
The State of Madhya Pradesh came into existence on 1st November 1956. It was carved out 
of the parts of old Madhya Pradesh (Central Provinces and Berar), the erstwhile States of 
Gwalior, Indore, Bhopal, Rewa and Madhya Bharat. As a result, t he records maintained by 


Chapter V: Management of Archives 
95 
these States also came into the possession of the  Government of Madhya Pra desh. The 
Directorate of State Archives of Madhya Pradesh was set up in 1974 , which became their 
natural custodian . Thereafter, t he Directorate of State Archives was merged with the 
Directorate of Archaeology in 1994.  Under the Archives Branch at Bhopal, two Regional 
Archive Offices are functioning at Indore and Gwalior. 
The following historical records had been collected and maintained at the Archives in Bhopal, 
Indore and Gwalior under the adminis trative control of the D eputy Director, Puratatava 
Abhilekhagar, Bhopal, as shown in Table 5.1 below:  
Table 5.1: Details of Archival records 
S. N. Name of State and 
period of historical 
records 
Approximate 
number of 
records 
Name and place of Archives Under control of Office 
1 Bhopal State 
(1914-1948) 
3,58,000 files Directorate of Archaeology, 
Archives and Museums, Bhopal 
Deputy Director  
Abhilekhagar, Puratatava 
Abhilekhagar and Museum , 
Bhopal 
2 Indore State (1818-
1947) 
2,75,000 files  
3 Madhya Prant 
(1798-1919) 
51,000 files  
4 Gwalior State 
(1800-1947) 
5,10,000 files Old Secretariat Building D -
Block, Bhopal 
5 Madhya Bharat 
Rajya 
(1948-1956) 
1,20,000 files Satpura Bhavan, B-Wing, Lower 
Ground Floor, Bhopal 
6 Indore State 
Record 
(1855-1947) 
2,713 Bags Rajwada, Indore Deputy Director, Puratatava 
Abhilekhagar and Museum,  
Indore 
7 4,542 Bags Rampur Kothi (Lalbagh), Indore 
8 Narsinghgarh State 
(1896-1947) 
479 Bags and 
12,695 files 
(approximate) 
Moti Mahal, Gwalior Deputy Director, Puratatava 
Abhilekhagar and Museum, 
Gwalior 
        (Source: Directorate) 
Audit carried out joint inspection of the records maintained by the above six Archival offices 
(shown in column 4 of Table 5.1) in Bhopal, Gwalior and Indore.  
The details are discussed in succeeding paragraphs. 
5.2 Human Resource Management 
Human Resource Management is an important aspect which impacts most of the operational 
activities. Further, periodic physical verification is an important control tool which not only 
helps in finding prevailing shortcomings  but also helps in course corrections and future 
planning. 
5.2.1 Shortage of technical staff 
Audit observed that against 61 Sanctioned Posts (22 technical and 39 non-technical), only 25 
(four technical and 21 non-technical) officers/ staff were posted in the Archives Department 
as of September 2021. The category-wise vacancy position is shown in Table 5.2 below: 
Table 5.2: Details of staff position 
S. N. Category Sanctioned 
Post 
Men in 
Position 
Vacant 
Posts Percentage 
1 Class II (Technical) 5 0 5 100 
2 Class III (Technical) 17 4 13 76 

Performance Audit on Management of Heritage Sites, Archives and Museums 
96 
3 Class III (Non-Technical) 12 8 4 33 
4 Class IV (Non-Technical) 26 13 13 50 
 Total 60 25 35 58 
    (Source: Directorate) 
It can be seen from the above table that 82 per cent of all the technical  posts were vacant 
(April 2022). Reasons for not filing up of the vacant posts were not available. In such a 
situation where more than 80 per cent technical posts remained vacant, the Department was 
not in position to ensure proper safekeeping of important historical records . Deficiencies 
emanating from this issue have been brought out in subsequent paragraphs. 
The Department stated (July 2022) that the work of the Archives Division has been affected 
due to the vacancy of 37 percent posts. Records are being protected by preparing optimizers 
and carton boxes and action is being taken to get their digitization. 
5.3 Maintenance of archival records 
5.3.1 Cataloguing of records 
Archives are increasingly consulted by researchers who require references for their specific 
needs. The researchers include historians, lawyers, publishers, journalists, environmentalists, 
criminal investigators, etc. Further, technological advances are pr oviding opportunities for 
improved Archival service. Thus, it is important to make this heritage accessible to as many 
people as possible, using the most appropriate technologies in the Archives. 
During 2016-17 to 2020-21, 141 persons requisitioned the rec ords from three1out of the six 
Archives, out of which 56 were researchers, underlying the importance of having a well-
maintained and accessible A rchival database.  For this, it is imperative that records are 
catalogued and organized for easy search, retrieval and up-keep of records.  
Audit observed in all the six Archives that the archived records were not fully catalogued. This 
included the following: 
➢ Files/ Records had not been segregated in order of their age or historical importance 
or events. 
➢ Files/ Records have not been segregated in order of classification such as war, famine, 
administrative orders, etc. 
➢ Orders, documents, or photographs have not been segregated and classified 
accordingly. 
➢ All the files  have been bunched together and kept inside bags. There has been no 
attempt to check the files and classify them appropriately on the lines stated above. 
In such a situation, the Archives were simply acting as a repository of the old records and 
served no useful purpose in terms of retrieval of information or records either for 
governmental use or for research purposes. 
The Department stated (July 2022) that year wise and Department wise bags of protected 
Archives have been maintained. This was no t done in Indore office of Archives Division  due 
to shortage of staff, which will be arranged on priority basis.  
 
1 Directorate of Archaeology,  Archives and Museum s, Bhopal, Old Secretariat Building, Bhopal  and 
Satpura Bhavan, Bhopal. 

Chapter V: Management of Archives 
97 
However, the fact remains that protected Archives have not been catalogued and organized 
for easy search, retrieval and up-keep of records. 
5.3.2  Digitization of records 
Due to repeated use of the Archives for various purposes such as research and documentary 
work, and also due to humidity, acidification, termites, accidental fire, flood, etc. there is a 
possibility of decay in the original form of records. Accordingly, digitization of records should 
be done to avoid such losses. This will also help in making the copies of these records available 
in digital format which can then be easily acces sed remotely. That would serve the dual 
purpose of both ease of access, as well as longer preservation of fragile and important 
documents which would then not have to be physically handled. 
Audit observed that work of digitization was taken up in 2013-14 for the records kept in 
Bhopal Archives and since then a total of 10,79,170 pages had been digitized during the last 
eight years (up to March 2020). However, the digitization work was stopped during 2020-21 
due to non-allotment of budget. The percentage of digitization could not be checked as the 
information pertaining to the total number of pages to be digitized vis-à-vis the pages actually 
digitized was not furnished to Audit. Digitization of records had not been taken up at Gwalior 
and Indore Archives (April 2022).  
The Department stated (July 2022 ) that  so far 10 ,79,170 important and historical records 
related to Central Provinces have been digitized. The process of digitization of records is under 
process. Efforts are being made to complete them on priority basis. 
5.4 Storage and safekeeping of records 
5.4.1 Absence of mechanism for periodic Physical Verification  
For proper maintenance and protection of records, periodic physical verification should be 
conducted at all the A rchives, so that the up -keep, maintenance and protection could be 
planned properly and effectively. 
Audit observed that no physical verificatio n had been conducted in any of the six A rchives. 
Due to this, the Department could not assess the physical well -being of the records and the 
documents in the Archives, and the level of maintenance required. 
The Department stated that (July 2022) physical verification of the records is being done while 
examining them from time to time. Due to shortage of staff the continuous process of 
verification of records was affected. According to the suggestion of the audit team, air -
conditioning and other measures for  humidity control in the record rooms will be done on 
priority basis. 
The reply is not acceptable as physical verification of records is extremely necessary for future 
planning related to A rchives, especially with regard to their preservation and maintenan ce 
and will also be a guard against theft of important documents.  
 
 
 
 
 

Performance Audit on Management of Heritage Sites, Archives and Museums 
98 
5.4.2 Absence of fumigation facilities 
A vacuum fumigation chamber2 is required for preservation of records at the record receiving 
room3.This technique helps in getting rid of any pests or insects that might be present in the 
records. 
During Joint Inspection in the A rchives, Audit found that fumigation facilities were n ot 
available in any of the six Archives. This can prove disastrous in case of any insect infestation 
and might result in significant damage or even complete destruction of documents in future. 
The Department stated that (July 2022) in order to prevent mois ture and erosion arising out 
of the records, spraying of insecticides and proper lighting arrangements are made from time 
to time. Equipment and other measures will be taken for the fumigation. 
5.4.3 Non-adoption of de-acidification process 
For conservation of Archival records, de-acidification is a curative treatment which involves 
treatment of brittle, fragile and acidic page/  records of permanent value so as to minimize 
and mitigate the deterioration of these documentary heritages.  
During Joint Inspection of all the six Archives, Audit observed that most of the Archival records 
were pertaining to the period 1800-1963 but no measures for de-acidification were taken by 
the Directorate to remove acidity for long term preservation of records. 
The Department stated that (July 2022) de-acidification is a continuous process of the 
Department but due to shortage of staff, the process of de -acidification had slowed down. 
Action for filling of the vacancy of staff is under process.  
5.4.4  Absence of air condition ing facility and appropriate humidity control 
measures 
Uninterrupted air conditioning is needed throughout the year for maintaining optimum 
storage conditions for preservation of records 4. Further, fans and exhaust fans are desirable 
for controlling humid ity and for proper circulation of air in such record rooms where no air 
conditioning facility is available5. 
Audit noticed during Joint Inspection of Archives that out of six A rchives, air conditioning 
facility was available only at one Archive situated at Satpura Bhawan, Bhopal (during working 
hours). In the absence of continuous air conditioning facility or any alternative arrangement 
such as fans/ exhaust fans, there is a possibility of damage to records due to excess humidity.  
In Exit C onference (July 2022) , the Commissioner accepted the facts and assured that  
corrective necessary action will be taken. 
 
 
 
 
 
2 To apply smoke, vapour, or gas especially for the purpose of disinfecting or destroying pests. 
3 Para 8 of Indian Standard 2663:1989 on Design of Buildings for Archives. 
4 Para 16.1 of Indian Standard 2663:1989 on Design of Buildings for Archives. 
5 Section 5.1 of the Minimum Qualification Note for record rooms of Public Records Act, 1993. 

Chapter V: Management of Archives 
99 
Box 5.1: Seepage in Archive Building at Directorate Bhopal 
According to Section 3.1 of the Minimum Qualification Note for record rooms of Public 
Records Act, 1993, the drainpipes should be kept clean and water should not be allowed to 
stagnate on the roof to avoid dampness in the record rooms.  
During Joint Inspection, Audit noticed water-logging on the roof of the office of the Deputy 
Director, Bhopal. This resulted in dampness in the record rooms and leakage of water from 
the ceiling in the Record Rooms numbered 1, 2 and 3.  
   
Picture 5.3 and 5.4: Water logging on terrace and seepage on walls of Archives, Bhopal (08-09-2021) 
The Deputy Director , Bhopal stated (September 2021) that the T echnical Branch at the 
Directorate had been informed for ensuring cleanliness in the roofs. 
5.4.5 Use of naphthalene balls/ bricks  
Naphthalene balls/ bricks should be used to protect the records from insects in record rooms 
where there is no facility of air-conditioning6.  
Audit noticed during Joint Inspection of Archives that out of six A rchives, air conditioning 
facility was available only at one Archive situated at Satpura Bhawan, Bhopal (during working 
hours). However, out of the remaining five Archives, naphthalene balls/ bricks, which were a 
basic and cost-effective means of protecting documents, were not being used  in respect of 
four7 Archives. Without the use of naphthalene balls/ bricks in the absence of air conditioning, 
there is a chance of insect infestation which can result in damage to records.  
The Department stated (July 2022) that use of naphthalene balls/ bricks for preservation of 
records is a continuous process . In case of unavailability of  naphthalene balls/ bricks during 
inspections or these get evaporated , these are kept again in those places, and i t is a 
continuous process. 
The reply is not acceptable as use of naphthalene balls/  bricks in the absence of air 
conditioning was not noticed during the joint inspection of Archives. 
 
 
 
6  Section 7.5 of the Minimum Qualification Note for record rooms of Public Records Act, 1993. 
7  Old Secretariat building  (Bhopal), Rajwada (Indore),  Rampur Kothi building ( Indore) and Moti Mahal  
(Gwalior). 


Performance Audit on Management of Heritage Sites, Archives and Museums 
100 
5.4.6 Fire prevention 
5.4.6.1 Lack of training of staff in fire-fighting operations  
Archives are filled with papers, records, documents, etc. which are highly vulnerable to 
damage and complete destruction in the event of a fire. Loss due to fire to a library/ Archives 
cannot be assessed in terms of money and such losses are irreparable. As such, all staff in the 
Archives should be trained appropriately to fight fires so that  they can  operate the fire 
extinguishers8 and form the first line of first defence in the event of a fire. 
Scrutiny of official records revealed that no training programme s for operation of fire 
extinguishers had been arranged by the Department for the staff consequently . Th e staff 
remained untrained and unprepared to handle fire incide nts and will not be in position to  
handle the available equipment properly and save the archived records in case of situation of 
fire. 
Thus, the safety of the historical records continues to remain in jeopardy despite the presence 
of fire extinguishers, if any fire incident were to occur. 
The Department stated (July 2022) that fire extinguishers have been installed in all the records 
rooms as necessary to protect the A rchives from fire and the staff posted there have also 
been trained to operate the fire ex tinguishers. However, no documentary evidence was 
provided in support of the reply. 
5.4.6.2 Installation of fire detection system and alarm system 
An automatic fire detection and alarm system should be installed in the Archives9. 
Audit noticed during the Joint Inspection that the automatic fire detection and alarm systems 
were not installed in any of the record room in any of the six Archives. This was a serious lapse 
as per the prescribed fire safety standards. 
The Department stated (July 2022) that keeping the records safe from the outbreak of fire is 
absolutely necessary and is a continuous process of the Department. Efforts are being made 
to install fire alarm system to make the record rooms extra secure. Where there is no 
firefighting system and fire alarm, it is being ensured to be installed on priority basis.  
5.4.7  Storage of records 
The guidelines prescribed by the Government of India for prot ection of Museum documents 
and Archives include the following: 
➢ Books and records should not be piled on the floor (Para 3.1.7 of the Indian Standard 
11460:1985 on Practice for fire safety of Libraries and Archives).  
➢ Records should not be kept one over another and should not touch either walls, ceiling 
or floor. The distance from the wall, ceiling or floor should be at least 15 cm, so as to 
enable free circulation of air and to prevent formation of pockets of high humidity  
(Section 7.1 of the Minimum Qualification Note for the record rooms of Public Records 
Act, 1993).  
 
 
8  Para 8.1 of Indian Standard 11460:1985 on Practice for Fire Safety of Libraries and Archives. 
9 Para 4.1.1 of Indian Standard 11460:1985 on Practice for Fire Safety of Libraries and Archives. 

Chapter V: Management of Archives 
101 
Audit in course of examination of  the storage facilities in the A rchives observed that  the 
records in the Old Secretariat building, Bhopal  and Room Number “1” of the office of the 
Deputy Director, Archives, Bhopal, were found piled up on the floor . This was the situation 
even when several empty racks were available, in both the places where these records could 
easily have been stored. 
 
Picture 5.5: Records piled on floor (15-09-2021) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Picture 5.6: Records piled on floor (08-09-2021) 
Further, the records were kept one over the other in sacks/ bags and at some places, even 
without the bags. Further, at Old Secretariat building, Bhopal, the records were kept along 
with the wall. This might cause hindrance in air circulation and might make the rooms damp 
and humid, affecting the records.  Evidently, the records were kept very badly and may get 
damaged very soon if not preserved immediately and may not be available for future use. 
In Exit C onference (July 2022) , the Commissioner accepted the facts and assured that  
corrective necessary action will be taken. 


Performance Audit on Management of Heritage Sites, Archives and Museums 
102 
5.5  Recommendations 
The Department may: 
14. Complete cataloguing and digitization of the documents for their continued 
preservation and easy retrieval. 
15. Ensure tha t basic maintenance facilities like pest control measures, fire prevention 
and control equipment, and suitable storage meth ods are invariably provided to 
Archives. 
16. Comprehensively a dopt appropriate preservation and conservation techniques  like 
fumigation, de -acidification, etc. for preservation of valuable records under their 
custody. 
17. Take immediate conservation efforts needed to save the archives which have been 
wrongly kept/ stored, from complete damage. 
 
 
 
 
 
Bhopal  
The 06 February 2023 
 
(PRIYA PARIKH) 
Accountant General 
(Audit-II) 
Madhya Pradesh 
Countersigned 
New Delhi 
The 09 February 2023 
(GIRISH CHANDRA MURMU) 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 


 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annexures 

Annexure 1.1 
(Reference: Paragraphs 1.6) 
List of units selected for audit 
 
S.N. Name of units Unit Type Zone 
1 The Commissioner,  Archaeology, Archives and Museums, Bhopal Directorate 
Central (Bhopal) 
2 Dy. Director Archive, Archaeology, Archives and Museums, Bhopal DDO 
3 Curator, State Museum, Bhopal DDO 
4 Archaeologist, Archives and  Museums, Hoshangabad DDO 
5 Curator, Archaeology, Archive and Museums, Vidisha DDO 
6 Dy.Director, Archaeology, Archieves and Museums, Indore DDO 
West (Indore) 7 Curator, Central Museums, Indore DDO 
8 Curator,  Archaeology and Museums, Dewas DDO 
9 Dy. Director, Archaeology, Archives and Museum, Gwalior DDO 
North (Gwalior) 10 Curator, Archaeology, Archives and Museums, Gujari Mahal, 
Gwalior DDO 
11 Curator, Archaeology, Archives and Museums Dhubela, Nowgaon, 
Chhatarpur DDO 
12 Dy. Director, Archaeology, Archives and Museums, Jabalpur DDO 
East (Jabalpur) 13 Curator, Rani Durgawati Museum,  Jabalpur DDO 
14 Curator, State Museum, Ramvan, Satna DDO 
 
  

Performance Audit on Management of Heritage Sites, Archives and Museums 
104 
Annexure 1.2 
(Reference: Paragraphs 1.6)  
List of the selected Museums 
State Museums 
 
S.N. Name Of Place Zone 
1 Bhopal Central 
2 Jabalpur East 
3 Gwalior North 
4 Ujjain West 
 
District Museums 
 
1 Hoshangabad Central 
2 Rewa East 
3 Orcha (Niwari) North 
4 Dhar West 
 
Local Museums 
 
1 Ashapuri Central 
2 Chanderi North 
3 Maheshwar West 
 
Site Museums 
 
1 Golghar, Bhopal Central 
2 Chhapan Mahal (Mandav) West 
 
Puratatva Sangh Museums 
 
1 Betul Central 
2 Seoni East 
3 Datia North 
4 Khandwa West 
 
Museums selected from the list of DDOs  
 
S.N. Name Of Place Zone Category 
1 Vidisha Central District 
2 Indore West State 
3 Dewas West District 
4 Dhubela, 
Chhatarpur North State 
5 Ramvan, Satna East State 
 
  

Annexures 
 
105 
Annexure 1.3 
(Reference: Paragraphs 1.6)  
Zone-wise Details of selected Monuments 
 
S.N. Name Of Monument District Place and Tehsil Zone Category 
1 Bhutnath Mandir and Idols Raisen Ashapuri, Goharganj 
Central 
Religious 
Building 
2 Vishnu Temple Vidisha Gopalpur, Sironj Religious 
Building 
3 Part of Old Fort Hoshangabad Hoshangabad Fort 
4 Gaund Mahal Bhopal Islamnagar, Bhopal Mahal 
5 Rock Art Site Hoshangabad Churnagundi, Park Range 
Kanti Rock Art 
6 Maqbara Hajiwali Ki Dargah Vidisha Durganagar, Vidisha Tomb/Maqbara 
7 Semli Jagir Bawri Rajgarh Lalbarh, Rajgarh Bawri 
8 Mor Pipli Bawri Rajgarh Pipli, Lalbarh, Rajgarh Bawri 
9 Solah Khambi Vidisha Badoh, Kurwai Others 
10 Historical Dam Raisen Keerat Nagar, Raisen Others 
11 Astronomy Study  Vidisha Bhuritori, Sironj Others 
12 Pandav Math Narsinghpur Noniya, Narsinghpur 
East 
Religious 
Building 
13 Shri Garur Dev Temple  Narsinghpur Gararu, Narsinghpur Religious 
Building 
14 Patiyan Dai Mandir Satna Bandhimuhar, Nagod Religious 
Building 
15 Vishnu Varah Mandir Jabalpur Majholi, Patan Religious 
Building 
16 Khairmata Ki Madhiya Shahdol Mau, Byohari Religious 
Building 
17 Kankali Mata ka Mandir Shahdol Antra, Sohagpur Religious 
Building 
18 Ruins of Fort Dindori Ramgarh Fort 
19 Garhi (Fortress) Satna Amarpatan Fort 
20 Garhi (Fortress) Rewa Gudh Fort 
21 Chowgan Ka Qila Narsinghpur Chouragarh, Gadarwara Fort 
22 Raj Mahal of Old Gond Period Narsinghpur Pithara Mahal 
23 Painted Rock Shelter  Singrauli Dhoulagiri, Bichhi Chitrangi Rock Art 
24 Painted Rock Shelter  Singrauli Gora Pahad, Bichhi Chitrangi Rock Art 
25 Painted Rock Shelter Rewa Gaddi Rock Art 
26 Rock Cut Chamunda  Satna Sanvar Pahadi, Sarbhanga, 
Manjhgawan Rock Art 
27 Maqbara Mandla Bichhiya, Mandla Tomb/Maqbara 
28 Prachin Bawri Jabalpur Sihora, Jabalpur Bawri 
29 Prachin Garud Stambh Narsinghpur Barmankala, Kareli Others 
30 ShantinathMandir (Jain Mandir) Chhatarpur Urdmau, Chhatarpur 
North 
Religious 
Building 
31 Shiv Mandir Bhind Chimka, Gohad Religious 
Building 

Performance Audit on Management of Heritage Sites, Archives and Museums 
106 
S.N. Name Of Monument District Place and Tehsil Zone Category 
32 Lalpir Ashoknagar Fatehabad, Chanderi Religious 
Building 
33 Prachin Mandir  Niwari (Sitamarhi Mahal Ke 
Pichhe), Orchha, Niwari 
Religious 
Building 
34 Surya Mandir Shivpuri Sesai, Kolaras Religious 
Building 
35 Dhumeshwar Mahadev Mandir Gwalior Dhumeshwar, Bhitarwar Religious 
Building 
36 Shiv Mandir  Niwari (Qile Ke Andar), Orchha, 
Niwari 
Religious 
Building 
37 Laxmi Mandir Niwari Orchha, Niwari Religious 
Building 
38 Bihariju Ka Mandir Chhatarpur Suhaniya, Nowgaon Religious 
Building 
39 Gusai ka Math Niwari Orchha, Niwari Religious 
Building 
40 Garhi Morena Sumavali, Jora, Morena Fort 
41 Prachin Gadhi Shivpuri Kachhoa, Pichhor Fort 
42 Ata ka Quila Sagar Atkanergarh, Malthon Fort 
43 Jujhar Singh Mahal Niwari Orchha, Niwari Mahal 
44 Gujri Mahal Gwalior Gwalior, Gwalior Mahal 
45 Hindupat Mahal Panna Panna, Panna Mahal 
46 Motimahal Gwalior Gwalior, Gwalior Mahal 
47 Palki Mahal Niwari Orchha, Niwari Mahal 
48 Teeth with Rock Panting Ashoknagar Nanon, Chanderi Rock Art 
49 Maharaja Shahkarna Ki Chhatri Datia Datia Tomb/Maqbara 
50 Chhatri Houj Khas Ashoknagar Chanderi Tomb/Maqbara 
51 Maharani Laxmi Bai Ki Chhatri Gwalior Gwalior, Gwalior Tomb/Maqbara 
52 Maharaja Kishore Singh ki patni 
ka maqbara, Panna Panna Circuit house, Panna Tomb/Maqbara 
53 Hanso ki Chhatri Ashoknagar Chanderi Tomb/Maqbara 
54 Bharat Shah ki Chhatri Ashoknagar Chanderi Tomb/Maqbara 
55 Sufi Maqbara, Khankah Dargah  Ashoknagar Shah Vilayat Complex, 
Chanderi Tomb/Maqbara 
56 Maharala Parikshit Ki Chhatri Datia Datia Tomb/Maqbara 
57 Bhimsen Rana Ki Chhatri Gwalior Gwalior, Gwalior Tomb/Maqbara 
58 Yagyashala  Niwari Qila Parkota ke Andar Sthit 
Samarak, Orchha, Niwari Tomb/Maqbara 
59 Maharaj Pratap Singh Ki Chhatri Chhatarpur Khajuraho, Rajnagar Tomb/Maqbara 
60 Betwa Kinare Stith Prachin 
Chhatriyan Niwari Orchha, Niwari Tomb/Maqbara 
61 Aaliya Bawri Ashoknagar Fatehabad, Chanderi Bawri 
62 Raiman Dau Ki Kothi  Niwari Orchha, Niwari Others 
63 Dholiya Darwaja Kot Shaharpana Ashoknagar Chanderi Others 
64 Dharm Talaiya  Shivpuri Kachhoa, Pichhor Others 
65 Hamamkhana Niwari Orchha, Niwari Others 
66 Naune Ju ki Haveli Niwari Orchha, Niwari Others 

Annexures 
 
107 
S.N. Name Of Monument District Place and Tehsil Zone Category 
67 Ghudsal Sheopur Sheopur, Sheopur Others 
68 Chaturbhuj Mandir Dhar Amzhera, Sardarpur 
West 
Religious 
Building 
69 Kaleshwar Khargone Maheshwar, Khargone Religious 
Building 
70 Dholadiri Mahadev Temple Mandsaur Khilchipura, Mandsaur Religious 
Building 
71 Prachin Mandir No. 2 Neemuch Barukheda, Neemuch Religious 
Building 
72 Shiva Temple Mandsaur Antraliya, Mandsaur Religious 
Building 
73 Garhi of Thakur Chaman Singh Mandsaur Achera, Mandsaur Fort 
74 Hinglajgarh Durg (Fort) Mandsaur Hinglajgarh, Bhanpura Fort 
75 Begum Mumtaz Mahal Tomb Burhanpur Burhanpur Mahal 
76 Kharbuja Mahal Dhar Dhar Mahal 
77 Roshan Bagh Mahal Dhar Mandu, Dhar Mahal 
78 Rock Cut Caves and Temple 
Group Mandsaur Poladongar, Garoth Rock Art 
79 Roja ka Maqbara Dhar Mandu Tomb/Maqbara 
80 Bawri No. 1 and 2, ( Old Step 
Well)  Indore Chhoti Jam Khurd, Mahu, 
Indore Bawri 
81 Prachin Bawri (Old Step Well) Badwani Jalgone, Parasmal Bawri 
82 Shrimant Maharaja Savai 
Yashvant Holkar Indore Indore Others 
83 Baradari Burhanpur Burhanpur Others 
84 Kothri Sarai Dhar Mandu Others 
85 Malcom Kothi Dhar Nalcha, Dhar Others 
 
Zone-wise Details of Monuments which were situated nearby selected Monuments 
S.N. Name Of Monument District Place and Tehsil Zone Period/   Century 
1 Chaman Mahal Bhopal Islamnagar 
Central 
Mahal 
2 Rani Mahal Bhopal Islamnagar Mahal 
3 Fortification Wall Bhopal Islamnagar Fort 
4 Handi Rani ki Bawri Rajgarh Lalbarh Bawri 
5 Solah Khambi Rajgarh Bihar, Narsinghgarh Others 
6 Hajiwali ki Dargah Rajgarh Bihar, Narsinghgarh Tomb/Maqbara 
7 Prachin Masjid Rajgarh Bihar, Narsinghgarh Religious Building 
8 Narsinghdev ka Mandir Rajgarh Narsinghgarh Religious Building 
9 Charbagh ki Chhatri Rajgarh Rajgarh Tomb/Maqbara 
10 Sanka Shyam ki Chhatri Rajgarh Sanka, Narsinghgarh Tomb/Maqbara 
11 
Satmarhi 
 Vidisha 
Badoh, Kurwai 
 Others 
12 MahaLaxmi Shaktipeeth 
(Pachmatha Mandir) Jabalpur Adhartal East Religious Building 
13 Moti Mahal (Rajmahal) Mandla Ramnagar, Mandla Mahal 

Performance Audit on Management of Heritage Sites, Archives and Museums 
108 
S.N. Name Of Monument District Place and Tehsil Zone Period/   Century 
14 Raibhagat Ki Kothi Mandla Ramnagar, Mandla Others 
15 Vishnu Mandir (Suraj Mandir) Mandla Ramnagar, Mandla Religious Building 
16 Shiva Temple Narsinghpur Gararu, Narsinghpur Religious Building 
17 Someshwar Mandir Narsinghpur Barmankala, Kareli Religious Building 
18 Ruins of Pranchin Mandir  Satna 
Yagyavedi sthal, 
Sarbhanga, 
Manjhgawan 
Religious Building 
19 Mahavir pahadi ka Hanuman 
mandir Satna Sarbhanga, 
Manjhgawan Religious Building 
20 Prachin Shiv mandir  Satna 
Behind old age home, 
Sarbhanga, 
Manjhgawan 
Religious Building 
21 Rock Cut Ganesh Pratima  Satna 
Near mandir of Bramha 
kund and Chhatri, 
Sarbhanga, 
Manjhgawan 
Religious Building 
22 
Pachmatha Temple (Prachin 
Bhavan Panchmattha 
Pratimayen) 
Shahdol Singhpur, Sohagpur Religious Building 
23 Aaliya Masjid Ashoknagar Fatehabad, Chanderi 
North 
Religious Building 
24 Chakla Bawri Ashoknagar Chanderi Religious Building 
25 Dilli Darwaja Ashoknagar Chanderi Others 
26 Purani Kachahari Ashoknagar Chanderi Others 
27 Nayapura ki Chhatri Ashoknagar Chanderi Tomb/Maqbara 
28 Sufi Sant ka Maqbara Ashoknagar Chanderi Tomb/Maqbara 
29 Devi Singh ki Chhatri Ashoknagar Chanderi Tomb/Maqbara 
30 Anniruddha Singh ki Chhatri Ashoknagar Chanderi Tomb/Maqbara 
31 Sheetal Garhi Chhatarpur Maheba Fort 
32 Dhubhela Mahal Chhatarpur Dhubela Mahal 
33 Hriday Shah Palace Chhatarpur Mou, Nowgaon Mahal 
34 Maheba Gate Chhatarpur Maheba Others 
35 Nag Mandir Chhatarpur Mou, Nowgaon Religious Building 
36 Chousath Yogini Mandir Chhatarpur Mou, Nowgaon Religious Building 
37 Ganesh Mandir Chhatarpur Mou, Nowgaon Religious Building 
38 Bhim Kund Temples of Group Chhatarpur Mou, Nowgaon Religious Building 
39 Surya Mandir Chhatarpur Chhatarpur Religious Building 
40 Sawai Singh Ka Maqbara Chhatarpur Suhaniya, Nowgaon Tomb/Maqbara 
41 Kamlapati Ka Maqbara Chhatarpur Mou, Nowgaon Tomb/Maqbara 
42 Chhatrasal Ka Maqbara Chhatarpur Dhubela Tomb/Maqbara 
43 Bawri Datia Chakchandaiya, 
Chandewa Bawri 
44 Pracheen Bawri Datia Aspatal Parisar, Datia Bawri 
45 Bhawani Singh Ki Chhatri Datia Datia Tomb/Maqbara 
46 Maharaja Indrajeet ki Chhatri Datia Datia Tomb/Maqbara 
47 Maharani Shahkarn ki Chhatri Datia Datia Tomb/Maqbara 
48 Jahangir Mahal and Shahajahan 
Mahal Gwalior Fort, Gwalior Mahal 
49 Karn Mahal Gwalior Fort, Gwalior Mahal 

Annexures 
 
109 
S.N. Name Of Monument District Place and Tehsil Zone Period/   Century 
50 Vikaram Mahal Gwalior Fort, Gwalior Mahal 
51 Jauhar Kund and Ordinance 
Factory Gwalior Fort, Gwalior Others 
52 Kila Burj Gwalior Fort, Gwalior Others 
53 Ladhedi Gate Gwalior Gwalior Others 
54 Sank River Bridge (Noorabad ka 
Pool) Morena Noorabad Others 
55 Ganna Beghum ka Maqbara Morena Noorabad Tomb/Maqbara 
56 Hathi Sav Mahal Orchha Orchha Mahal 
57 Supari Sav Mahal Orchha Orchha Mahal 
58 Rai Praveen Mahal Orchha Orchha Mahal 
59 Raja Mahal Orchha Orchha Mahal 
60 Jahangir Mahal Orchha Orchha Mahal 
61 Ramnagar ka Darwaja Orchha Orchha Others 
62 Phool Bagh Orchha Orchha Others 
63 Topkhana Orchha Orchha Others 
64 UnthKhana Orchha Orchha Others 
65 Teen Dasiyon ki Haveli Orchha Orchha Others 
66 Chaturbhuj Temple Orchha Orchha Religious Building 
67 Panchmukhi Mahadev Mandir Orchha Orchha Religious Building 
68 Vanvasi Mandir Orchha Orchha Religious Building 
69 Radhika Bihari Mandir Orchha Orchha Religious Building 
70 Maharaja Kishore Singh ka 
maqbara Panna Circuit House Tomb/Maqbara 
71 Mirza Raja ka Maqbara Panna Panna Tomb/Maqbara 
72 Narsingh Mahal Sheopur Fort, Sheopur Mahal 
73 Raja Manohar Das avam 
Aniruddh Singh ki Chhatri Sheopur Sheopur Tomb/Maqbara 
74 
Shershah Suri ke Sipehsalar ka 
Maqbara, Sheopur (Tomb of 
Shershah Suri's General Mohd. 
Munnavar Alam Khan) 
Sheopur Sheopur Tomb/Maqbara 
75 Narwar Fort Shivpuri Narwar Fort 
76 Pichhore Fort Shivpuri Pichhore Fort 
77 Tatya Tope Statue Shivpuri Shivpuri Others 
78 Kothi No. 17 Shivpuri Shivpuri Others 
79 Shiv Mandir Shivpuri Chorpura Religious Building 
80 Kila Sendhwa Badwani Sendhwa, Badwani 
West 
Fort 
81 Rao Ratan Mahal Burhanpur Burhanpur Mahal 
82 Jainabad ki Sarai and Masjid Burhanpur Burhanpur Religious Building 
83 Daulat Khan Lodhi ka Maqbara Burhanpur Burhanpur Tomb/Maqbara 
84 Shahzada Parvez ka Maqbara Burhanpur Burhanpur Tomb/Maqbara 
85 Shaheed Bakhtawar Singh 
Smarak and Garhi Dhar Amjhera Fort 
86 Chhappan Mahal Dhar Mandu Mahal 
87 Madankui Sarai Dhar Mandu Others 
88 Ancient Fort, Lunera Sarai Dhar Lunera, Dhar Others 

Performance Audit on Management of Heritage Sites, Archives and Museums 
110 
S.N. Name Of Monument District Place and Tehsil Zone Period/   Century 
89 Phuta Mandir Dhar Mandu Religious Building 
90 Chhatriyan of King of Udaji 
Pawar Dhar Dhar Tomb/Maqbara 
91 Bawri No. 3, (Step Well) Chhoti 
Jam Khurd Indore Mahu, Indore Bawri 
92 Rajvada Palace Indore Indore Mahal 
93 Lalbag Palace and Champa 
Bawri Indore Indore Mahal 
94 Bule Sarkar ki Chhatri Indore Indore Tomb/Maqbara 
95 Jaleshwar Temple Khargone Maheshwar Religious Building 
96 Keshav Temple Khargone Maheshwar Religious Building 
97 Gadi of Chandravata Mandsaur Antraliya, Mandsaur Fort 
98 Suraj Mandir Mandsaur Khilchpura Religious Building 
99 Chhatri of Yashwantarao Holkar Mandsaur Bhanpura, Mandsaur Tomb/Maqbara 
100 Jeeran Ki Garhi Neemuch Jeeran Fort 
101 Prachin Mandir No. 1 (Shiv 
Temple No.1) Neemuch Barukheda Religious Building 
102 Prachin Mandir No. 4 (Shiv 
Temple No.4) Neemuch Barukheda Religious Building 
103 Panchdeval Mandir Neemuch Jeeran Religious Building 
104 Bhanu Tikait ki Chhatri Neemuch Jeeran Tomb/Maqbara 
 
  

Annexures 
 
111 
Annexure 3.1 
(Reference: Paragraphs 3.2.1) 
List of Monuments not conserved since taken under protection 
 
S.N. Name of the Monument Place and District Date of taken 
under protection Zone 
1 Maladevi Gadapurva, Jabalpur 16.04.1984 East 
2 Mudiya Shiv Mandir Gada Adhartal, Jabalpur 20.02.1983 East 
3 Radhakrishna Mandir Lamheta Ghat, Jabalpur 07.08.2015 East 
4 Ancient Someshwar Mandir Barmankala, Narsinghpur 22.06.1990 East 
5 Narsingh Mandir Narsinghpur 16.12.2016 East 
6 Nakti Devi (Surya Pratima) Selwara, Mandla 27.06.1990 East 
7 Painted Rock Shelter Gaddi, Rewa 14.05.2009 East 
8 Lukeshwar Nath Mandir Java, Rewa 16.12.2016 East 
9 Yogini Mata Sthal Sirmor, Rewa 02.01.2017 East 
10 Garhi Amarpatan, Satna 31.05.1990 East 
11 Patiyan Dai Mandir Bandimohar, Satna 20.03.1986 East 
12 Shiv Mandir Patharkachar, Satna 25.07.1990 East 
13 Gora Pahad Rock Shelter Bichhi, Singrauli 18.01.1990 East 
14 Painted Rock Shelter (Rani 
Machi) Bichhi, Singrauli 04.04.1990 East 
15 Dhaulagiri Painted Rock 
Shelter Bichhi, Singrauli 15.11.1991 East 
16 Ancient Temple Dorajkhurd, Singrauli 04.04.1990 East 
17 Ancient Shiv Mandir Sagra, Umaria 30.09.1992 East 
18 Ancient Shiv Mandir Dhadharkala, Anuppur 17.09.2014 East 
19 Mahraj Kishore Singh ka 
Maqbara Panna, Panna 30.07.2018 North 
20 Mahraj Kishore Singh ki Rani 
ka Maqbara Panna, Panna 30.07.2018 North 
21 Surya Mandir Mausahania, Dhubela, 
Chhatarpur 28.03.2019 North 
22 Fort of Khurai Khurai, Sagar 28.03.2019 North 
23 Maqbara No.1 and 2, Inside 
Mahraja Chhatrasal Park Panna, Panna 28.03.2019 North 
24 Garhi Sumavali, Morena 31.08.2006 North 
25 Chakla Bawri ki Do Chhatriyan Chanderi, Ashoknagar 30.07.1993 North 
26 Purani Kachahri Chanderi, Ashoknagar 04.10.2013 North 
27 Panchmarhi Bawri Mosque Chanderi, Ashoknagar 04.10.2013 North 
28 Gol Bawri Chanderi, Ashoknagar 04.10.2013 North 
29 Kazi Bawri Chanderi, Ashoknagar 04.10.2013 North 
30 Aaliya Bawri Chanderi, Ashoknagar 04.10.2013 North 
31 Tapa Bawri Chanderi, Ashoknagar 07.08.2015 North 
32 Pandey Bawri Chanderi, Ashoknagar 07.08.2015 North 
33 Chandai Bawri Chanderi, Ashoknagar 07.08.2015 North 
34 Akol Bawri Chanderi, Ashoknagar 07.08.2015 North 
35 Jhalari Bawri Chanderi, Ashoknagar 07.08.2015 North 
36 Jananan Bawri Chanderi, Ashoknagar 07.08.2015 North 
37 Machau Bawri Chanderi, Ashoknagar 07.08.2015 North 
38 Hajira (Lal Bawri) Sarai Chanderi, Ashoknagar 07.08.2015 North 
39 Machala Bawri Chanderi, Ashoknagar 07.08.2015 North 
40 Rajmati Bawri Chanderi, Ashoknagar 07.08.2015 North 
41 Choti Battisi Bawri Chanderi, Ashoknagar 07.08.2015 North 
42 Futi Bawri Chanderi, Ashoknagar 07.08.2015 North 

Performance Audit on Management of Heritage Sites, Archives and Museums 
112 
S.N. Name of the Monument Place and District Date of taken 
under protection Zone 
43 Raja Bawri Chanderi, Ashoknagar 07.08.2015 North 
44 Prachin Bawri Jalgone, Barwani 21.11.1990 West 
45 Jain Mandir Jamner, Shujalpur 23.03.1990 West 
46 Prachin Mandir Siddheshwar 
Mahadeo Mandir Avantipur, Shujalpur 26.12.1990 West 
47 Ram Mandir Bijanagari, Agar 20.07.1990 West 
48 Karkaraji Mandir Lohariya, Agar 24.07.1990 West 
49 Shriram Mandir Dongargaon, Agar 24.07.1990 West 
50 Varah Mandir Varel Mata 
Mandir Barrai, Agar 22.11.1990 West 
51 Rock Shelter of Indragarh Indragarh, Mandsaur 13.12.2007 West 
52 Shiv Mandir No.1 Neemathur, Mandsaur August 2015 West 
53 Chaturbhuj Mandir Sandhara, Mandsaur August 2015 West 
54 Toran Barda Ghusai, Mandsaur 26.12.1990 West 
55 Chhatri Afjalpur, Mandsaur 17.09.1990 West 
56 Chandrawat ki Garhi and 
stone wall  Antralia, Mandsaur August 2015 West 
57 Jain Mandir Sandhara, Mandsaur August 2015 West 
58 Prachin Mandir Dewal Rai 
Aangan Khor, Neemuch 15.06.1987 West 
59 Dhaba Mata ka Mandir Nayagaon, Neemuch 12.11.1990 West 
60 Mandir (Right side of Panch 
Dewal Mandir) Jeeran, Neemuch 09.03.1990 West 
61 Shiv Mandir (Mandiri) Jeeran, Neemuch 03.09.1991 West 
62 Ratangarh ki Garhi Ratangarh, Neemuch 28.03.2019 West 
63 Jaleshwar Mandir Maheshwar, Khargone January 2014 West 
 
  

Annexures 
 
113 
Annexure 3.2 
(Reference: Paragraphs 3.3.1) 
List of Monuments where no-approach road was available 
 
S.N. Name of Monument Place and District Zone Type of Monument 
1 Prachin Masjid Bihar, Narsinghgarh, 
Rajgarh Central Religious Building 
2 Charbagh ki Chhatri Rajgarh Central Tomb / Maqbara 
3 Part of Old Fort  Jumerati, Hoshangabad Central Fort 
4 Rock Art Site Churnagundi, Hoshangabad Central Rock Art 
5 Semli Jagir Bawri  Lalbrh, Rajgarh Central Bawri 
6 Solah Khambi Vidisha Central Others 
7 Mahavir pahadi ka Hanuman 
mandir 
Sarbhanga, Manjhgawan, 
Satna East Religious Building 
8 Rock Cut Ganesh Pratima  
near mandir of Bramha 
kund and Chhatri, 
Sarbhanga, Manjhgawan, 
Satna 
East Rock Art 
9 Chowgan Ka Qila Narsinghpur East Fort 
10 Painted Rock shelter  Dhoulagiri, Bichhi, Singrouli East Rock Art 
11 Painted Rock shelter  Gora Pahad, Bichhi, 
Singrouli East Rock Art 
12 Painted Rock Shelter Gaddi, Rewa East Rock Art 
13 Rock Cut Chamunda  Sanvar Pahadi, Satna East Rock Art 
14 Prachin Bawri Sihora, Jabalpur East Bawri 
15 Patiyan Dai Mandir Satna East Religious Building 
16 Aasaf Khan ka Maqbara Bichhiya, Mandla East Tomb / Maqbara 
17 Teen Dasiyon ki Haveli Orcha,  Niwari North Others 
18 Chousath Yogini Mandir Mou, Nowgaon, Chhatarpur North Religious Building 
19 Ganesh Mandir Mou, Nowgaon, Chhatarpur North Religious Building 
20 Bhim Kund Temples of Group Mou, Nowgaon, Chhatarpur North Religious Building 
21 Panchmukhi Mahadev Mandir Orchha, Niwari North Religious Building 
22 Vanvasi Mandir Orchha, Niwari North Religious Building 
23 Radhika Bihari Mandir Orchha, Niwari North Religious Building 
24 Shiv Mandir Chorpura, Shivpuri North Religious Building 
25 Savai Singh ki Samadhi Suhaniya, Nowgaon, 
Chhatarpur North Tomb / Maqbara 
26 Sufi Sant ka Maqbara Chanderi, Ashoknagar North Tomb / Maqbara 
27 Garhi, Sumaoli Morena North Fort 

Performance Audit on Management of Heritage Sites, Archives and Museums 
114 
S.N. Name of Monument Place and District Zone Type of Monument 
28 Prachin Gadhi Kachhoa, Shivpuri North Fort 
29 Teeth with Rock Panting Chanderi, Ashoknagar North Rock Art 
30 Aaliya Bawri Ashoknagar North Bawri 
31 Shantinath Mandir (Jain Mandir) Chhatarpur North Religious Building 
32 Shiv Mandir  Qile Ke Andar, Orchha, 
Niwari North Religious Building 
33 Hanso ki Chhatri Chanderi, Ashoknagar North Tomb / Maqbara 
34 Yagyashala  Qila Parkota ke Andar Sthit 
Samrak, Orchha, Niwari North Tomb / Maqbara 
35 Jaleshwar Temple Maheshwar, Khargone West Religious Building 
36 Suraj Mandir Khilchipura, Mandsaur West Religious Building 
37 Panchdeval Mandir Jeeran, Neemuch West Religious Building 
38 Bhanu Tikait ki Chhatri Jeeran, Neemuch West Tomb / Maqbara 
39 Hinglajgarh Durg (Fort) Mandsaur West Fort 
40 Begum Mumtaz Mahal Tomb Burhanpur West Mahal 
41 Prachin Bawri (Old Step Well) Pansemal, Badwani, 
Khargone West Bawri 
42 Roshan Bagh Mahal Mandu, Dhar West Mahal 
43 Malcom Kothi Nalcha, Dhar West Others 
 
  

Annexures 
 
115 
Annexure 3.3 
(Reference: Paragraphs 3.3.2 (a)) 
List of Monuments where no sign board was available 
 
S.N. Name of Monument Place and District Zone Category 
1 Part of Old Fort Jumerati, Hoshangabad Central Fort 
2 Rock Art Site Churnagundi, Hoshangabad Central Rock Art 
3 Semli Jagir Bawri Lalbrh, Rajgarh Central Bawri 
4 Vishnu Temple Gopalpur, Vidisha Central Religious Building 
5 Maqbara Hajibali Ki Dargah Vidisha Central Tomb / Maqbara 
6 Solah Khambi Vidisha Central Others 
7 Astronomy Study Bhuritori, Vidisha Central Others 
8 Handi Rani ki Bawri Lalbarh, Rajgarh Central Bawri 
9 Fortification Wall Islamnagar, Bhopal Central Others 
10 Solah Khambi Bihar, Narsinghgarh, 
Rajgarh Central Others 
11 Satmarhi Badoh, Kurwai, Vidisha Central Others 
12 Hajiwali ki Dargah Bihar, Narsinghpur, Rajgarh Central Religious Building 
13 Prachin Masjid Bihar, Narsinghpur, Rajgarh Central Religious Building 
14 Narsinghdev ka Mandir Narsinghgarh, Rajgarh Central Religious Building 
15 Charbagh ki Chhatri Rajgarh Central Tomb / Maqbara 
16 Ruins of Fort Dindori East Fort 
17 Garhi (Fortress) Satna East Fort 
18 Painted Rock shelter  Dhoulagiri, Bichhi, Singrauli East Rock Art 
19 Painted Rock shelter  Gora Pahad, Bichhi, 
Singrauli East Rock Art 
20 Painted Rock Shelter Gaddi, Rewa East Rock Art 
21 Rock Cut Chamunda Sanvar 
Pahadi  
Sarbhanga, Manjhgawan, 
Satna East Rock Art 
22 Patiyan Dai Mandir Satna East Religious Building 
23 Ruins of Pranchin Mandir at 
Yagyavedi sthal 
Sarbhanga, Manjhgawan, 
Satna East Religious Building 
24 Mahavir pahadi ka Hanuman 
mandir 
Sarbhanga, Manjhgawan, 
Satna East Religious Building 
25 Prachin Shiv mandir  Sarbhanga, Manjhgawan, 
Satna East Religious Building 
26 Rock Cut Ganesh Pratima  Sarbhanga, Manjhgawan, 
Satna East Rock Art 
27 Garhi Sumaoli, Morena North Fort 
28 Prachin Gadhi Kachhoa, Shivpuri North Fort 
29 Ata ka Kila Atkanergarh, Sagar North Fort 
30 Motimahal Gwalior North Mahal 
31 Teeth with Rock Panting Chanderi, Ashok Nagar North Rock Art 
32 Aaliya Bawri Ashoknagar North Bawri 
33 Shantinath Mandir (Jain 
Mandir) Chhatarpur North Religious Building 

Performance Audit on Management of Heritage Sites, Archives and Museums 
116 
S.N. Name of Monument Place and District Zone Category 
34 Lalpir Ashoknagar North Religious Building 
35 Dhumeshwar Mahadev 
Mandir Gwalior North Religious Building 
36 Gusai ka Math Niwari North Religious Building 
37 Maharaja Kishore Singh ki 
patni ka maqbara Panna North Tomb / Maqbara 
38 Sufi Maqbara, Khankah 
Dargah 
Shah Vilayat Complex, 
Chanderi, Ashoknagar North Tomb / Maqbara 
39 Yagyashala  Qila Parkota ke Andar Sthit 
Samrak, Orchha, Niwari North Tomb / Maqbara 
40 Maharaj Pratap Singh Ki 
Chhatri 
Rajnagar, Khajuraho, 
Chhatarpur North Tomb / Maqbara 
41 Dharm Talaiya Kachhoa, Shivpuri North Others 
42 Ghudsal Sehopur North Others 
43 Chakla Bawri Chanderi, Ashoknagar North Bawri 
44 Sheetal Garhi Maheba, Chhatarpur North Fort 
45 Pichhore Fort Pichore, Shivpuri North Fort 
46 Dhubhela Mahal Dhubela, Chhatarpur North Mahal 
47 Hriday Shah Palace Mou, Nowgaon, Chhatarpur North Mahal 
48 Karn Mahal, Fort Gwalior North Mahal 
49 Supari Sav Mahal Orchha North Mahal 
50 Jauhar Kund and Ordnance 
Factory, fort Gwalior North Others 
51 Ladhedi Gate Gwalior North Others 
52 Sank River Bridge (Noorabad 
ka Pool) Noorabad, Morena North Others 
53 Ramnagar ka Darwaja Orchha, Niwari North Others 
54 Teen Dasiyon ki Haveli Orchha, Niwari North Others 
55 Tatya Tope Statue Shivpuri North Others 
56 Nag Mandir Mou, Nowgaon, Chhatarpur North Religious Building 
57 Chousath Yogini Mandir Mou, Nowgaon, Chhatarpur North Religious Building 
58 Ganesh Mandir Mou, Nowgaon, Chhatarpur North Religious Building 
59 Bhim Kund Temples of 
Group Mou, Nowgaon, Chhatarpur North Religious Building 
60 Alia Masjid Chanderi, Fatehabad, 
Ashoknagar North Religious Building 
61 Panchmukhi Mahadev 
Mandir Orchha, Niwari North Religious Building 
62 Vanvasi Mandir Orchha, Niwari North Religious Building 
63 Radhika Bihari Mandir Orchha, Niwari North Religious Building 
64 Shiv Mandir Chorpura, Shivpuri North Religious Building 
65 Savai Singh ki Samadhi Suhaniya, Nowgaon, 
Chhatarpur North Tomb / Maqbara 
66 Nayapura ki Chhatri Chanderi, Ashoknagar North Tomb / Maqbara 
67 Sufi Sant ka Maqbara Chanderi, Ashoknagar North Tomb / Maqbara 
68 Devi Singh ki Chhatri Chanderi, Ashoknagar North Tomb / Maqbara 
69 Anniruddha Singh ki Chhatri Chanderi, Ashoknagar North Tomb / Maqbara 

Annexures 
 
117 
S.N. Name of Monument Place and District Zone Category 
70 Kishore Singh ki Samadhi  Circuit House, Panna North Tomb / Maqbara 
71 Mirza Raja ka Maqbara Panna North Tomb / Maqbara 
72 Ganna Beghum ka Maqbara Noorabad, Morena North Tomb / Maqbara 
73 Raja Manohar Das avam 
Aniruddh Singh ki Chhatri Sheopur North Tomb / Maqbara 
74 Maharani Shahkarn ki 
Chhatri Datia North Tomb / Maqbara 
75 Rock Cut Caves and Temple 
Group Poladongar, Mandsaur West Rock Art 
76 Bawri No. 1 and 2  (Old Step 
Well) 
Chhoti Jam Khurd, Mau, 
Indore West Bawri 
77 Prachin Bawri (Old Step 
Well) 
Pansemal, Badwani, 
Khargone West Bawri 
78 Chaturbhuj Mandir Dhar West Religious Building 
79 Kaleshwar Temple Maheshwar, Khargone West Religious Building 
80 Shiva Temple Antarliya, Mandsaur West Religious Building 
81 Shrimant Maharaja Savai 
Yashvant Holkar ki Chhatri Indore West Others 
82 Bawri No. 3, (Step Well) Chhoti Jam Khurd,Mahu, 
Indore West Bawri 
83 Kila Sendhwa Sendhwa, Badwani West Fort 
84 Gadi of Chandravata Antraliya, Mandsaur West Fort 
85 Ancient Fort, Lunera Sarai Lunera, Dhar West Others 
86 Jaleshwar Temple Maheshwar, Khargone West Religious Building 
87 Prachin Mandir No.1 Barukheda, Neemuch West Religious Building 
88 Roshan Bagh Mahal Mandu, Dhar West Mahal 
89 Malcom Kothi Nalcha, Dhar West Others 
 
  

Performance Audit on Management of Heritage Sites, Archives and Museums 
118 
Annexure 3.4 
(Reference: Paragraphs 3.3.2 (b)) 
List of Monuments where penal sign board was not available  
 
S.N. Name of Monument Place and District Zone Type of 
Monument 
1 Part of Old Fort Jumerati, 
Hoshangabad Central Fort 
2 Rock Art Site Churnagundi, 
Hoshangabad Central Rock Art 
3 Semli Jagir Bawri Lalbrh, Rajgarh Central Bawri 
4 Mor Pipli Bawri Pipli, Rajgarh Central Bawri 
5 Vishnu Temple Gopalpur, Vidisha Central Religious Building 
6 Maqbara Hajibali Ki Dargah Vidisha Central Tomb / Maqbara 
7 Solah Khambi Vidisha Central Others 
8 Astronomy Study Bhuritori, Vidisha Central Others 
9 Handi Rani ki Bawri Lalbarh, Rajgarh Central Bawri 
10 Chaman Mahal Islamnagar, Bhopal Central Mahal 
11 Rani Mahal Islamnagar, Bhopal Central Mahal 
12 Fortification Wall Islamnagar, Bhopal Central Others 
13 Solah Khambi Bihar, Narsinghgarh, 
Rajgarh Central Others 
14 Satmarhi Badoh, Kurwai, 
Vidisha Central Others 
15 Hajiwali ki Dargah Bihar, Narsinghgarh, 
Rajgarh Central Religious Building 
16 Prachin Masjid  Bihar, Narsinghgarh, 
Rajgarh Central Religious Building 
17 Narsinghdev ka Mandir Narsinghgarh, Rajgarh Central Religious Building 
18 Charbagh ki Chhatri Rajgarh Central Tomb / Maqbara 
19 Sanka Shyam ki Chhatri Narsinghgarh, Sanka, 
Rajgarh Central Tomb / Maqbara 
20 Ruins of Fort Dindori East Fort 
21 Garhi (Fortress) Satna East Fort 
22 Painted Rock shelter  Dhoulagiri, Bichhi, 
Singrouli East Rock Art 
23 Painted Rock shelter  Gora Pahad, Bichhi, 
Singrouli East Rock Art 
24 Painted Rock Shelter Gaddi, Rewa East Rock Art 
25 Rock Cut Chamunda  Sanvar Pahadi, Satna East Rock Art 
26 Patiyan Dai Mandir Satna East Religious Building 
27 Prachin Garud Stambh Narsinghpur East Others 
28 Ruins of Pranchin Mandir at 
Yagyavedi sthal 
Sarbhanga, 
Manjhgawan, Satna East Religious Building 
29 Mahavir pahadi ka Hanuman 
mandir 
Sarbhanga, 
Manjhgawan, Satna East Religious Building 
30 Prachin Shiv mandir  Sarbhanga, 
Manjhgawan, Satna East Religious Building 

Annexures 
 
119 
S.N. Name of Monument Place and District Zone Type of 
Monument 
31 Rock Cut Ganesh Pratima  Sarbhanga, 
Manjhgawan, Satna East Rock Art 
32 Garhi Sumaoli, Morena North Fort 
33 Prachin Gadhi Kachhoa, Shivpuri North Fort 
34 Ata ka Quila Atkanergarh, Sagar North Fort 
35 Jujhar Singh Mahal Niwari North Mahal 
36 Gujri Mahal Gwalior North Mahal 
37 Motimahal Gwalior North Mahal 
38 Palki Mahal Niwari North Mahal 
39 Teeth with Rock Panting Chanderi, Ashok Nagar North Rock Art 
40 Aaliya Bawri Ashoknagar North Bawri 
41 Shantinath Mandir (Jain Mandir) Chhatarpur North Religious Building 
42 Shiv Mandir Bhind North Religious Building 
43 Lalpir Ashoknagar North Religious Building 
44 Surya Mandir Shivpuri North Religious Building 
45 Dhumeshwar Mahadev Mandir Gwalior North Religious Building 
46 Shiv Mandir  Qile Ke Andar, Niwari North Religious Building 
47 Bihariju Ka Mandir Chhatarpur North Religious Building 
48 Gusai ka Math Niwari North Religious Building 
49 Maharaja Shahkarna Ki Chhatri Datia North Tomb / Maqbara 
50 Chhatri Houj Khas Chanderi, Ashoknagar North Tomb / Maqbara 
51 Maharaja Kishore Singh ki patni 
ka maqbara Panna North Tomb / Maqbara 
52 Hanso ki Chhatri Chanderi, Ashoknagar North Tomb / Maqbara 
53 Bharat Shah ki Chhatri Chanderi, Ashoknagar North Tomb / Maqbara 
54 Sufi Maqbara, Khankah Dargah  Shah Vilayat Complex, 
Chanderi, Ashoknagar North Tomb / Maqbara 
55 Maharaja Parikshit Ki Chhatri Datia North Tomb / Maqbara 
56 Bhimsen Rana Ki Chhatri Gwalior North Tomb / Maqbara 
57 Yagyashala 
Qila parkota ke andar 
sthit samrak, Orchha, 
Niwari 
North Tomb / Maqbara 
58 Maharaj Pratap Singh Ki Chhatri Rajnagar, Khajuraho, 
Chhatarpur North Tomb / Maqbara 
59 Dharm Talaiya Kachhoa, Shivpuri North Others 
60 Naune Ju ki Haveli Niwari North Others 
61 Ghudsal Sehopur North Others 
62 Chakla Bawri Chanderi, Ashoknagar North Bawri 
63 Pracheen Bawri Aspatal Parisar, Datia North Bawri 

Performance Audit on Management of Heritage Sites, Archives and Museums 
120 
S.N. Name of Monument Place and District Zone Type of 
Monument 
64 Sheetal Garhi Maheba, Chhatarpur North Fort 
65 Narwar Fort Narwar, Shivpuri North Fort 
66 Pichhore Fort Pichhore, Shivpuri North Fort 
67 Dhubhela Mahal Dhubela, Chhatarpur North Mahal 
68 Hriday Shah Palace Mou, Nowgaon, 
Chhatarpur North Mahal 
69 Jahangir Mahal and Shahajahan 
Mahal, Fort Gwalior North Mahal 
70 Karn Mahal, Fort Gwalior North Mahal 
71 Vikaram Mahal, Fort Gwalior North Mahal 
72 Narsingh Mahal, Fort Sheopur North Mahal 
73 Supari Sav Mahal Orchha North Mahal 
74 Maheba Gate Maheba, Chhatarpur North Others 
75 Dilli Darwaja Chanderi, Ashoknagar North Others 
76 Purani Kachahari Chanderi, Ashoknagar North Others 
77 Jauhar Kund & Ordnance Factory, 
Fort Gwalior North Others 
78 Kila Burj, Hamamkhana, Fort Gwalior North Others 
79 Ladhedi Gate Gwalior North Others 
80 Sank River Bridge (Noorabad ka 
Pool) Noorabad, Morena North Others 
81 Ramnagar ka Darwaja Orchha North Others 
82 Teen Dasiyon ki Haveli Orchha North Others 
83 Tatya Tope Statue Shivpuri North Others 
84 Nag Mandir Mou, Nowgaon, 
Chhatarpur North Religious Building 
85 Chousath Yogini Mandir Mou, Nowgaon, 
Chhatarpur North Religious Building 
86 Ganesh Mandir Mou, Nowgaon, 
Chhatarpur North Religious Building 
87 Bhim Kund Temples of Group Mou, Nowgaon, 
Chhatarpur North Religious Building 
88 Surya Mandir Chhatarpur North Religious Building 
89 Alia Masjid Chanderi, Fatehabad, 
Ashoknagar North Religious Building 
90 Panchmukhi Mahadev Mandir Orchha North Religious Building 
91 Vanvasi Mandir Orchha North Religious Building 
92 Radhika Bihari Mandir Orchha North Religious Building 
93 Shiv Mandir Chorpura, Shivpuri North Religious Building 
94 Savai Singh ki Samadhi Suhaniya, Nowgaon, 
Chhatarpur North Tomb / Maqbara 
95 Rani Kamalapati ki Samadhi Mou, Nowgaon, 
Chhatarpur North Tomb / Maqbara 
96 Maharaja Chatrasal ki Samadhi Dhubela, Chhatarpur North Tomb / Maqbara 
97 Nayapura ki Chhatri Chanderi, Ashoknagar North Tomb / Maqbara 

Annexures 
 
121 
S.N. Name of Monument Place and District Zone Type of 
Monument 
98 Sufi Sant ka Maqbara Chanderi, Ashoknagar North Tomb / Maqbara 
99 Devi Singh ki Chhatri Chanderi, Ashoknagar North Tomb / Maqbara 
100 Anniruddha Singh ki Chhatri Chanderi, Ashoknagar North Tomb / Maqbara 
101 Kishore Singh ki Samadhi  Circuit House, Panna North Tomb / Maqbara 
102 Mirza Raja ka Maqbara Panna North Tomb / Maqbara 
103 Ganna Beghum ka Maqbara Noorabad, Morena North Tomb / Maqbara 
104 Raja Manohar Das avam 
Aniruddh Singh ki Chhatri Sheopur North Tomb / Maqbara 
105 
Shershah Suri ke Sipehsalar ka 
Maqbara, Sheopur (Tomb of 
Shershah Suri's General Mohd. 
Munnavar Alam Khan) 
Sheopur North Tomb / Maqbara 
106 Maharaja Bhawani Singh ki 
Chhatri Datia North Tomb / Maqbara 
107 Maharaja Indrajeet ki Chhatri Datia North Tomb / Maqbara 
108 Maharani Shahkarn ki Chhatri Datia North Tomb / Maqbara 
109 Begum Mumtaz Mahal Tomb Burhanpur West Mahal 
110 Kharbuja Mahal Dhar West Mahal 
111 Rock Cut Caves and Temple 
Group Poladongar, Mandsaur West Rock Art 
112 Bawri No. 1 and 2, (Old Step 
Well) 
Chhoti Jam Khurd, 
Mau, Indore West Bawri 
113 Prachin Bawri (Old Step Well) Pansemal, Badwani, 
Khargone West Bawri 
114 Chaturbhuj Mandir Dhar West Religious Building 
115 Kaleshwar Maheshwar, Khargone West Religious Building 
116 Shiva Temple Antarliya, Mandsaur West Religious Building 
117 Shrimant Maharaja Savai 
Yashvant Holkar ki Chhatri Indore West Others 
118 Baradari Burhanpur West Others 
119 Kothri Sarai Mandu, Dhar West Others 
120 Bawri No. 3, (Step Well) Chhoti Jam Khurd, 
Mahu, Indore West Bawri 
121 Kila Sendhwa, Sendhwa, Badwani West Fort 
122 Gadi of Chandravata Antraliya, Mandsaur West Fort 
123 Rao Ratan Mahal Burhanpur West Mahal 
124 Lalbag Palace and Champa Bawri Indore West Mahal 
125 Chhappan Mahal Mandu, Dhar West Mahal 
126 Jainabad ki Sarai and Masjid Burhanpur West Others 
127 Ancient Fort, Lunera Saray Lunera, Dhar West Others 
128 Jaleshwar Temple Maheshwar, Khargone West Religious Building 

Performance Audit on Management of Heritage Sites, Archives and Museums 
122 
S.N. Name of Monument Place and District Zone Type of 
Monument 
129 Keshav Temple Maheshwar, Khargone West Religious Building 
130 Prachin Mandir No.1 Barukheda, Neemuch West Religious Building 
131 Daulat Khan Lodhi ka Maqbara Burhanpur West Tomb / Maqbara 
132 Shahzada Parvez ka Maqbara Burhanpur West Tomb / Maqbara 
133 Roshan Bagh Mahal Mandu, Dhar West Mahal 
134 Malcom Kothi Nalcha, Dhar West Others 
 
  

Annexures 
 
123 
Annexure 3.5 
(Reference: Paragraphs 3.4.1) 
List of Monuments where Security Guards/ Caretakers were not found 
 
S.N. Name of Monument Place and District Zone Category 
1 Part of Old Fort Jumerati, Hoshangabad Central Fort 
2 Rock Art Site Churnagundi, 
Hoshangabad Central Rock Art 
3 Semli Jagir Bawri Lalbrh, Rajgarh Central Bawri 
4 Mor Pipli Bawri Pipli, Rajgarh Central Bawri 
5 Historical Dam Raisen Central Others 
6 Handi Rani ki Bawri Rajgarh Central Bawri 
7 Fortification Wall Islamnagar, Bhopal Central Others 
8 Solah Khambi Narsinghgarh, Rajgarh Central Others 
9 Hajiwali ki Dargah Narsinghgarh, Rajgarh Central Religious Building 
10 Prachin Masjid Narsinghgarh, Rajgarh Central Religious Building 
11 Narsinghdev ka Mandir Narsinghgarh, Rajgarh Central Religious Building 
12 Charbagh ki Chhatri Narsinghgarh, Rajgarh Central Tomb / Maqbara 
13 Sanka Shyam ki Chhatri Narsinghgarh, Rajgarh Central Tomb / Maqbara 
14 Ruins of Fort Dindori East Fort 
15 Garhi (Fortress) Satna East Fort 
16 Garhi (Fortress) Gurh, Rewa East Fort 
17 Painted Rock shelter  Dhoulagiri, Bichhi, 
Singrauli East Rock Art 
18 Painted Rock shelter  Gora Pahad, Bichhi, 
Singrauli East Rock Art 
19 Painted Rock Shelter, Gaddi, Rewa East Rock Art 
20 Rock Cut Chamunda  Sanvar Pahadi, Satna East Rock Art 
21 Prachin Bawri Sihora, Jabalpur East Bawri 
22 Patiyan Dai Mandir Satna East Religious Building 
23 Asif Khan ka Maqbara Bichhiya, Mandla East Tomb / Maqbara 
24 Ruins of Pranchin Mandir at 
Yagyavedi sthal Satna East Religious Building 
25 Mahavir pahadi ka Hanuman 
mandir Satna East Religious Building 
26 Prachin Shiv mandir behind old age 
home Satna East Religious Building 
27 MahaLaxmi Shaktipeeth 
(Pachmatha Mandir) Jabalpur East Religious Building 
28 Rock Cut Ganesh Pratima near 
mandir of Bramha kund and Chhatri Satna East Rock Art 
29 Garhi Sumaoli, Morena, 
Morena North Fort 
30 Prachin Gadhi, Kachhoa, Shivpuri North Fort 
31 Ata ka Kila Atkanergarh, Sagar North Fort 

Performance Audit on Management of Heritage Sites, Archives and Museums 
124 
S.N. Name of Monument Place and District Zone Category 
32 Jujhar Singh Mahal Orchha, Niwari North Mahal 
33 Palki Mahal Orchha, Niwari North Mahal 
34 Teeth with Rock Panting Chanderi, Ashok Nagar North Rock Art 
35 Aaliya Bawri Ashoknagar North Bawri 
36 Shantinath Mandir (Jain Mandir), 
Chhatarpur Chhatarpur North Religious Building 
37 Lalpir Ashoknagar North Religious Building 
38 Surya Mandir Shivpuri North Religious Building 
39 Shiv Mandir  Qile Ke Andar, Niwari North Religious Building 
40 Bihariju Ka Mandir Chhatarpur North Religious Building 
41 Gusai ka Math Niwari North Religious Building 
42 Chhatri Houj Khas Ashoknagar North Tomb / Maqbara 
43 Maharaja Kishore Singh ki patni ka 
maqbara Panna North Tomb / Maqbara 
44 Hanso ki Chhatri Chanderi, Ashoknagar North Tomb / Maqbara 
45 Bharat Shah ki Chhatri Chanderi, Ashoknagar North Tomb / Maqbara 
46 Sufi Maqbara, Khankah Dargah Shah Vilayat Complex, 
Chanderi, Ashoknagar North Tomb / Maqbara 
47 Bhimsen Rana Ki Chhatri Gwalior North Tomb / Maqbara 
48 Yagyashala  
Qila Parkota ke Andar 
Sthit Samrak, Orchha, 
Niwari 
North Tomb / Maqbara 
49 Maharaj Pratap Singh Ki Chhatri Rajnagar, Khajuraho, 
Chhatarpur North Tomb / Maqbara 
50 Raiman Dau Ki Kothi (Dauji Ki Kothi) Niwari North Others 
51 Dholiya Darwaja Kot Shaharpana Chanderi, Ashoknagar North Others 
52 Dharm Talaiya Kachhoa, Shivpuri North Others 
53 Hamamkhana Niwari North Others 
54 Naune Ju ki Haveli Niwari North Others 
55 Chandewa ki Bawadi (Bawri, 
Chakchandaiya) Datia North Bawri 
56 Pracheen Bawadi Datia North Bawri 
57 Pichhore Fort Shivpuri North Fort 
58 Maheba Gate Chhatarpur North Others 
59 Dilli Darwaja, Chanderi Ashoknagar North Others 
60 Ladhedi Gate Gwalior North Others 
61 Sank River Bridge (Noorabad ka 
Pool) Morena North Others 
62 Ramnagar ka Darwaja Orchha North Others 
63 Phool Bagh Orchha North Others 
64 Topkhana Orchha North Others 
65 UnthKhana Orchha North Others 
66 Teen Dasiyon ki Haveli Orchha North Others 

Annexures 
 
125 
S.N. Name of Monument Place and District Zone Category 
67 Tatya Tope Statue Shivpuri North Others 
68 Nag Mandir Chhatarpur North Religious Building 
69 Chousath Yogini Mandir Chhatarpur North Religious Building 
70 Ganesh Mandir Chhatarpur North Religious Building 
71 Bhim Kund Temples of Group Chhatarpur North Religious Building 
72 Surya Mandir Chhatarpur North Religious Building 
73 Alia Masjid Chanderi, Ashoknagar North Religious Building 
74 Panchmukhi Mahadev Mandir Orchha North Religious Building 
75 Vanvasi Mandir Orchha North Religious Building 
76 Radhika Bihari Mandir Orchha North Religious Building 
77 Shiv Mandir Shivpuri North Religious Building 
78 Savai Singh ki Samadhi Chhatarpur North Tomb / Maqbara 
79 Nayapura ki Chhatri Chanderi, Ashoknagar North Tomb / Maqbara 
80 Sufi Sant ka Maqbara Chanderi, Ashoknagar North Tomb / Maqbara 
81 Devi Singh ki Chhatri Chanderi, Ashoknagar North Tomb / Maqbara 
82 Anniruddha Singh ki Chhatri Chanderi, Ashoknagar North Tomb / Maqbara 
83 Kishore Singh ki Samadhi Panna North Tomb / Maqbara 
84 Mirza Raja ka Maqbara Panna North Tomb / Maqbara 
85 Raja Manohar Das avam Aniruddh 
Singh ki Chhatri Sheopur North Tomb / Maqbara 
86 Garhi of Thakur Chaman Singh Mandsaur West Fort 
87 Begum Mumtaz Mahal Tomb Burhanpur West Mahal 
88 Kharbuja Mahal Dhar West Mahal 
89 Bawri No. 1 and 2 ( Old Step Well) Chhoti Jam Khurd, Mau, 
Indore West Bawri 
90 Prachin Bawri (Old Step Well) Pansemal, Badwani, 
Khargone West Bawri 
91 Chaturbhuj Mandir Dhar West Religious Building 
92 Kaleshwar Maheshwar, Khargone West Religious Building 
93 Dholadiri Mahadev Temple Mandsaur West Religious Building 
94 Shiva Temple Antarliya, Mandsaur West Religious Building 
95 Shrimant Maharaja Savai Yashvant 
Holkar ki Chhatri Indore West Others 
96 Baradari Burhanpur West Others 
97 Kothri Sarai Dhar West Others 
98 Bawri No. 3, (Step Well) Chhoti Jam Khurd, Mau, 
Indore West Bawri 

Performance Audit on Management of Heritage Sites, Archives and Museums 
126 
S.N. Name of Monument Place and District Zone Category 
99 Jeeran Ki Garhi, Jeeran, Neemuch West Fort 
100 Gadi of Chandravata Antralia, Mandsaur West Fort 
101 Madankui Sarai Mandu, Dhar West Others 
102 Jaleshwar Temple Maheshwar, Khargone West Religious Building 
103 Keshav Temple Maheshwar, Khargone West Religious Building 
104 Suraj Mandir Khilchipura, Mandsaur West Religious Building 
105 Phuta Mandir Mandu, Dhar West Religious Building 

Annexures 
 
127 
Annexure 3.6 
(Reference: Paragraphs 3.4.2) 
List of Monuments where Security Fencing/ Protection Wall was not found 
 
S.N. Name of Monument Place and District Zone Type of Monument 
1 Rock Art Site Churnagundi, Hoshangabad Central Rock Art 
2 Semli Jagir Bawri Lalbrh, Rajgarh Central Bawri 
3 Mor Pipli Bawri Pipli, Rajgarh Central Bawri 
4 Astronomy Study Bhuritori, Vidisha Central Others 
5 Handi Rani ki Bawri Lalbarh, Rajgarh Central Bawri 
6 Hajiwali ki Dargah Bihar, Narsinghgarh, Rajgarh Central Religious Building 
7 Narsinghdev ka Mandir Narsinghgarh, Rajgarh Central Religious Building 
8 Ruins of Fort Dindori East Fort 
9 Painted Rock shelter  Dhoulagiri, Bichhi, Singrauli East Rock Art 
10 Painted Rock shelter  Gora Pahad, Bichhi, Singrauli East Rock Art 
11 Painted Rock Shelter Gaddi, Rewa East Rock Art 
12 Prachin Bawri Sihora, Jabalpur East Bawri 
13 Shri Garur Dev Temple Gararu, Narsingpur East Religious Building 
14 Patiyan Dai Mandir Satna East Religious Building 
15 Vishnu Varah Mandir Jabalpur East Religious Building 
16 Asif Khan ka Maqbara Bichhiya, Mandla East Tomb / Maqbara 
17 Ruins of Pranchin Mandir at 
Yagyavedi sthal 
Sarbhanga, Manjhgawan, 
Satna East Religious Building 
18 Mahavir pahadi ka Hanuman 
mandir 
Sarbhanga, Manjhgawan, 
Satna East Religious Building 
19 Prachin Shiv mandir behind old 
age home 
Sarbhanga, Manjhgawan, 
Satna East Religious Building 
20 Someshwar Mandir Barmankala, Kareli, 
Narsinghpur East Religious Building 
21 
Rock Cut Ganesh Pratima near 
mandir of Bramha kund and 
Chhatri 
Sarbhanga, Manjhgawan, 
Satna East Rock Art 
22 Garhi Sumaoli, Morena North Fort 
23 Prachin Gadhi Kachhoa, Shivpuri North Fort 
24 Jujhar Singh Mahal Niwari North Mahal 
25 Motimahal Gwalior North Mahal 
26 Palki Mahal Niwari North Mahal 
27 Teeth with Rock Panting Chanderi, Ashok Nagar North Rock Art 
28 Aaliya Bawri Ashoknagar North Bawri 
29 Shantinath Mandir (Jain Mandir) Chhatarpur North Religious Building 
30 Shiv Mandir Bhind North Religious Building 
31 Lalpir Ashoknagar North Religious Building 
32 Dhumeshwar Mahadev Mandir Gwalior North Religious Building 

Performance Audit on Management of Heritage Sites, Archives and Museums 
128 
S.N. Name of Monument Place and District Zone Type of Monument 
33 Shiv Mandir  Qile Ke Andar, Niwari North Religious Building 
34 Laxmi Mandir Niwari North Religious Building 
35 Gusai ka Math Niwari North Religious Building 
36 Chhatri Houj Khas Ashoknagar North Tomb / Maqbara 
37 Maharaja Kishore Singh ki patni 
ka maqbara Panna North Tomb / Maqbara 
38 Bharat Shah ki Chhatri Chanderi, Ashok Nagar North Tomb / Maqbara 
39 Raiman Dau Ki Kothi (Dauji Ki 
Kothi) Niwari North Others 
40 Dharm Talaiya Kachhoa, Shivpuri North Others 
41 Hamamkhana Niwari North Others 
42 Chandewa ki Bawri (Bawri, 
Chakchandaiya) Datia North Bawri 
43 Pracheen Bawri  Aspatal Parisar, Datia North Bawri 
44 Pichhore Fort Pichhore, Shivpuri North Fort 
45 Hriday Shah Palace Mou, Nowgaon, Chhatarpur North Mahal 
46 Maheba Gate Maheba, Chhatarpur North Others 
47 Dilli Darwaja Chanderi, Ashok Nagar North Others 
48 Ladhedi Gate Gwalior North Others 
49 Sank River Bridge (Noorabad ka 
Pool) Noorabad, Morena North Others 
50 Ramnagar ka Darwaja Orchha, Niwari North Others 
51 Topkhana Orchha, Niwari North Others 
52 UnthKhana Orchha, Niwari North Others 
53 Tatya Tope Statue Shivpuri North Others 
54 Nag Mandir Mou, Nowgaon, Chhatarpur North Religious Building 
55 Chousath Yogini Mandir Mou, Nowgaon, Chhatarpur North Religious Building 
56 Ganesh Mandir Mou, Nowgaon, Chhatarpur North Religious Building 
57 Bhim Kund Temples of Group Mou, Nowgaon, Chhatarpur North Religious Building 
58 Shiv Mandir Chorpura, Shivpuri North Religious Building 
59 Savai Singh ki Samadhi Suhaniya, Nowgaon, 
Chhatarpur North Tomb / Maqbara 
60 Nayapura ki Chhatri Chanderi, Ashok Nagar North Tomb / Maqbara 
61 Sufi Sant ka Maqbara Chanderi, Ashok Nagar North Tomb / Maqbara 
62 Kishore Singh ki Samadhi  Circuit House, Panna North Tomb / Maqbara 
63 Ganna Beghum ka Maqbara Noorabad, Morena North Tomb / Maqbara 
64 Raja Manohar Das avam 
Aniruddh Singh ki Chhatri Sheopur North Tomb / Maqbara 
65 Garhi of Thakur Chaman Singh Mandsaur West Fort 

Annexures 
 
129 
S.N. Name of Monument Place and District Zone Type of Monument 
66 Rock Cut Caves and Temple 
Group Poladongar, Mandsour West Rock Art 
67 Bawri No. 1 and 2, ( Old Step 
Well) 
Chhoti Jam Khurd, Mau, 
Indore West Bawri 
68 Prachin Bawri (Old Step Well) Pansemal, Badwani, 
Khargone West Bawri 
69 Chaturbhuj Mandir Dhar West Religious Building 
70 Shiva Temple Antarliya, Mandsaur West Religious Building 
71 Bawri No. 3, (Step Well) Chhoti Jam Khurd, Mahu, 
Indore West Bawri 
72 Gadi of Chandravata Antraliya, Mandsaur West Fort 
73 Rajvada Palace Indore West Mahal 
74 Madankui Sarai Mandu, Dhar West Others 
75 Suraj Mandir Khilchipura, Mandsaur West Religious Building 
76 Bhanu Tikait ki Chhatri Jeeran, Neemuch West Tomb / Maqbara 
77 Shahzada Parvez ka Maqbara Burhanpur West Tomb / Maqbara 
78 Roshan Bagh Mahal Mandu, Dhar West Mahal 
79 Malcom Kothi Nalcha, Dhar West Others 
  

Performance Audit on Management of Heritage Sites, Archives and Museums 
130 
Annexure 3.7 
(Reference: Paragraphs 3.4.3) 
List of Monuments where encroachments were noticed during Joint Physical Inspection 
 
S.N. Name of Monument Zone Observations 
1 Gaund Mahal, Islamnagar, 
Bhopal Central Surrounded by houses of local inhabitants. 
2 Semli Jagir Bawri, Lalbarh, 
Rajgarh Central Surrounded by houses of local inhabitants. 
3 Morpipli Bawri, Pipli, Rajgarh Central Surrounded by houses of local inhabitants. 
4 Narsinghdev ka Mandir, 
Narsinghgarh Central Surrounded by houses of local inhabitants. 
5 Raj Mahal of Old Gaund 
Period, Pithara, Narsinghpur East Surrounded by houses of local inhabitants. 
6 Garhi, Gurh-Rewa East Shop has been constructed in surrounding of Garhi  within 
100 meters and Govt. school is running inside the premises. 
7 Pandav Math, Noniya, 
Narsighpur East Surrounded by houses of local inhabitants. 
8 Vishnu Varah Mandir, Majholi, 
Jabalpur East 
The temple has been encroached by locals, a Gaushala was 
found in the temple and various shops were found in 
surrounding. 
9 Garur Stambh, Barman Kala, 
Narsinghpur East Surrounded by houses of local inhabitants. 
10 Ruin of Fort, Dindori East Surrounded by houses of local inhabitants. 
11 Asif khan ka Maqbara, Bichiya, 
Mandla East Surrounded by houses of local inhabitants. 
12 Prachin Shiv mandir behind old 
age home East The Monument was inside the campus of an old a 
13 Moti Mahal, Rajmahal, Mandla East Surrounded by houses of local inhabitants. 
14 Vishnu Mandir (Suraj Mandir), 
Rajmahal, Mandla East Surrounded by houses of local inhabitants. 
15 Someshwar Mandir, 
Barmankala, Narsinghpur East Surrounded by houses of local inhabitants. 
16 Pachmatha Temple, Singhpur, 
Sohagpur East New temple had been constructed inside the Monument 
campus. 
17 Palki Mahal, Orchha, Niwari North 
It is under the possession of Nagar Parishad, Orchha and its 
employees were using this Monument as residence. 
Adjoining to the Monument a local market was also being 
operated by the Nagar Parishad. 
18 Moti Mahal, Gwalior North 
Out of total  536 rooms, only five rooms are under the 
possession and protection of the Department. Rest of the 
building is used by different Departments for official 
purposes. 
19 Gujri Mahal, Gwalior North 
The Monument is used as the office of the Curator, Museum, 
Gwalior. Adjoining to the Monument, local residents  had 
constructed their houses. Smart City Corporation 
constructed poles within the Monument for flash lighting. 
20 Garhi, Sumaoli, Morena North Used as residence by locals. 
21 Shantinath Mandir, Jain 
Mandir North Surrounded by houses of local inhabitants. 
22 Shiv Mandir, Orcha, Niwari North Used by locals for storage of cattle feed. 
23 
Prachin Mandir (Sitamarhi 
Mahal Ke Pichhe), Orcha, 
Niwari 
North 
The main entrance of the temple has been encroached by 
local inhabitants. 
 

Annexures 
 
131 
S.N. Name of Monument Zone Observations 
24 Mahraja Pratap Singh ki 
Chhatri, Khajuraho North A Cafe is running inside the Monument and various shops 
also surround the Monument. 
25 Hamamkhana, Orcha, Niwari North Monument used as cattle shed. 
26 Dholiya Darwaja, Chanderi North Monument has been encroached by local shop keepers. 
27 Dhumeshwar Mahadev 
Mandir, Gwallior North Surrounded by shops and houses of local inhabitants. 
28 
 
Maharaja Kishore Singh ki 
Patni ka Maqbara, Panna North Surrounded by houses of local inhabitants. 
29 
Sufi Maqbara, Khankah, 
Dargah, Shah Vilayat Complex, 
Chanderi, Ashok Nagar 
North Surrounded by houses of local inhabitants. 
30 Gusai ka Math, Niwari North 
Shop was operative inside the Monument and the 
Monument was used as residence by staff of Nagar Parishad, 
Orchha. 
31 Nag Mandir, Mou, Naugaon, 
Chhatarpur North Surrounded by houses of local inhabitants. 
32 Surya Mandir, Chhatarpur North Surrounded by houses of local inhabitants. 
33 Dilli Darwaja, Chanderi North Shop was operative near the Monument and Monument was 
encroached by local vendors. 
34 Nayapura ki Chhatri, Chanderi North Shop was operative within 100 meters of the Monument. 
35 Devi Singh ki Chhatri, Chanderi North Encroached by local farmers. 
36 Purani Kachahari, Chanderi North Surrounded by houses of local inhabitants. 
37 Ladhedi Gate, Gwalior North Inside the campus, water tank was constructed by the Nagar 
Nigam, Gwalior. 
38 Sank River Bridge, Noorabad, 
Morena North 
Pipes for water supply were fixed at the Monument and 
pump house was noticed within 100 meters of the 
Monument. 
39 Ganna Beghum ka Maqbara, 
Noorabad, Morena North Encroached by local farmers. 
40 
Raja Manohar Das avam 
Aniruddh Singh ki Chhatri, 
Sheopur 
North Encroached by locals and used as residence. 
41 Chandewa ki Bawri, Datia North Encroached by locals and used as residence. 
42 Pracheen Bawri, Aspatal 
Parisar, Datia North A canteen / bhojnalaya was operative within the Monument. 
43 Chaturbhuj Temple, Orchha North Shops were constructed beside the Monument. 
44 Phool Bagh, Orchha North Shops were constructed beside the Monument. 
45 Supari Sav Mahal, Orchha, 
Niwari North Encroached by locals. 
46 Hathi Sav Mahal, Orchha, 
Niwari North Encroached by locals. 
47 Pichhore Fort, Pichhore, 
Shivpuri North Encroached by locals and used as residence. 
48 Kishore Singh ki Samadhi, 
Panna North Surrounded by houses of local inhabitants. 
49 Thakur Chaman Singh ki Garhi, 
Mandsaur West Local people are utilising it as a store of cattle feed. 
50 Prachin Bawri, 1 and 2 Choti 
Jam, Mahu, Indore West Covered the Bawri with Cement Concrete structure  and 
surrounding of Bawri had been used for parking. 
51 Chaturbhuj Mandir, Amjhera, 
Dhar West Surrounded by houses of local inhabitants. 

Performance Audit on Management of Heritage Sites, Archives and Museums 
132 
S.N. Name of Monument Zone Observations 
52 Shiv Mandir, Antralia, 
Mandsaur West Temple was encroached by local farmers. 
53 Hinglajgarh Durg, Mandsaur West Monument had been encroached by local shop keepers. 
54 Prachin Bawri, Pansemal, Dist 
Barwani West Encroached by local farmers. 
55 Keshav Temple, Maheshwar West Houses were noticed within 100 meters of the Monument. 
56 Suraj Mandir, Khilchipura, 
Mandsaur West Houses were noticed within 100 meters of the Monument. 
57 Shahzada Parvez ka Maqbara, 
Burhanpur West Shops were noticed within 100 meters of the Monument. 
58 Bule Sarkar ki Chattri, Indore West Houses were noticed within 100 meters of the Monument. 
59 Lalbag Palace and Champa 
Bawri, Indore West Un-used old vehicles were parked inside the Monument 
campus. 
60 Chattriyan of King of Udaji 
Pawar, Dhar West Monument was used as residence by locals. 
61 
Shaheed Bakhtawar Singh 
Smarak and Garhi, Amjhera, 
Dhar 
West School, Anganwadi wadi was operative within the 
Monument. Surrounded by shops and residence of locals. 
62 Ancient Fort Lunera ki Sarai, 
Lunera, Mandu, Dhar West Schools were operative within 100 meters of the Monument. 
63 Kila Sendhwa, Sendhwa West Various o ffices and shops were operative inside the 
Monument and the Monument was used as residence. 
64 Gadi of Chandravata, Antralia, 
Mandsaur West Surrounded by houses of local inhabitants. 
  

Annexures 
 
133 
Annexure 3.8 
(Reference: Paragraphs 3.7)  
Details of irregular expenditure incurred on unprotected Monuments  
                                                                                                                                                                                  (` in Lakhs) 
S.N. Name Of Monument Place And District Sanctioned 
Amount Expenditure 
1 Kartik Ghat Sironj, Vidhisha 14.50 14.48 
2 Sikandari Darwaja  Sadar Manzil, Bhopal 3.41 2.84 
3 Kala Darwaja Bhopal 4.00 3.88 
4 Prachin Darwaja and Dakhil 
Darwaja near Taj Mahal Bhopal 20.00 19.87 
5 Jumerati Darwaja Bhopal 3.00 2.95 
6 Tala Kunji Bawri Mahidpur, Ujjain 9.16 9.14 
7 Prachin Bawri Navin Nagar, Aishbag Bhopal 8.96 8.72 
8 Ginnore Garh ki Bawri Sehore 9.70 8.99 
9 Bade Bag ki Bawri Sehore 5.00 4.38 
10 Ajab Kuwar ki Bawri Rewa 8.50 8.31 
11 Prachin Bawri Kuwar Math Jaso, Satna 4.40 4.37 
12 Mastani Mahal Dhubela, Chhatarpur 12.86 8.74 
13 Sheetal Garhi Dhubela, Chhatarpur 82.45 73.01 
14 Pahalwan ka Maqbara Sarangpur, Rajgarh 12.62 7.96 
15 Bhuteshwar Mahadeo Mandir, 
Karadia Maharaj Neemuch 10.00 6.81 
16 Devnarayan Mandir Cheetakhera, Neemuch 10.00 6.80 
17 Bagra Tava ka Kila Babai, Hoshangabad 60.00 38.61 
 Total  278.56 229.86 
 