` 
 
Report of the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
on
Performance Audit of Conservation and Management of 
Coastal Ecosystems
 
Government of Gujarat 
Report No 03 of the year 2022
Performance Audit
©COMPTROLLER AND
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA
www.cag.gov.in
http://cag.gov.in/ag2/gujarat/en
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government of Gujarat- Report No. 03 of the year 2022 
Processed & Printed at Government Photo Litho Press, Ahmedabad
V-301 - 200-12-2022


 
 
Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
on 
Performance Audit of Conservation and Management of 
Coastal Ecosystems 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government of Gujarat 
 
Report No. 03 of the year 2022 
Performance Audit 

i 
Table of Contents 
 Reference to 
Paragraph Page 
Preface  iii 
Executive Summary  v-viii 
Chapter-1: Introduction 
Coastal Ecosystems 1.1 1 
Environment Acts and Notifications for conservation of 
coastal ecosystems 
1.2 2 
Institutional Mechanisms 1.3 3 
Coastal Regulation Zones and Clearance Process 1.4 4 
Integrated Coastal Zone Management Project 1.5 6 
Audit Objectives 1.6 7 
Audit Criteria 1.7 8 
Audit Scope 1.8 8 
Audit Methodology 1.9 8 
Audit Sampling 1.10 9 
Acknowledgement 1.11 9 
Chapter-2: Institutional and Regulatory Framework 
Formation of the Institutional Bodies      2.1 12 
Constitution and Functioning of the Institutional Bodies 2.2 12 
Sustainable Development Goal- 14 (Life Below Water) 2.3 19 
Chapter-3: Violations in the CRZ area 
Violations of the provisions of EPA and CRZ 
Notification 3.1 21 
Complaint redressal mechanism at GCZMA 3.2 22 
CRZ violation by Government Departments/ 
Autonomous bodies/ PSUs 3.3 23 
Large scale mangroves destruction 3.4 25 
Disposal of treated effluent in CRZ IB area 3.5 26 
Illegal construction of Bunds and Saltpans in 
Biologically active coastal areas 3.6 27 
Illegal construction in CRZ area at Varvala village 3.7 28 
Illegal construction in CRZ area at Okha 3.8 29 
CRZ violations by the salt manufacturer in Bharuch 
district 3.9 30 
Ship repairing activities carried out without obtaining 
CRZ clearance 3.10 31 
Impermissible activities in NDZ 3.11 32 
Construction without obtaining CRZ clearance 3.12 33 
Shortage of Sewage Treatment Plants (STPs) in Coastal 
Urban Local Bodies 3.13 33 

Performance Audit of Conservation and Management of Coastal Ecosystems  
ii 
Table of Contents 
 Reference to 
Paragraph Page 
Chapter-4: CRZ Clearance and Post Clearance Monitoring 
Technical vetting of the projects by the GCZMA and 
their final recommendation to SEIAA and MoEF&CC 4.1 38 
Accreditation of consultant for preparing EIA report 4.2 38 
Deficiencies observed in EIA report of the projects 4.3 40 
Specific issues on EIA reports of the projects 4.4 41 
Construction of Marine bridge between Beyt Dwarka and 
Okha 4.5 43 
Submission of compliance report by Project Proponent 4.6 44 
Post Clearance monitoring of the projects 4.7 45 
Disposal of treated wastewater through open channel in 
intertidal zone of the Gulf of Kachchh at Mithapur 4.8 45 
Development of tourist facilities and accommodation at 
Mandvi by Tourism Corporation of Gujarat Limited 4.9 47 
CRZ clearances for construction s of  less than 20,000 
Sqm area in CRZ II 4.10 49 
Chapter-5: Integrated Coastal Zone Management Project 
Project cost for Gujarat 5.1 51 
Implementation of phase I of ICZMP in Gujarat 5.2 52 
Smart Eco-Village Project  5.3 55 
 
List of Appendices 
Number Particulars Page 
1 Details of unauthorised construction without obtaining 
CRZ clearance 
69 
2 Sewage treatment availability vis -a-vis requirement in 
coastal ULBs 
71 
3 Projects recommended for clearance by GCZMA 73 
4 Accreditation of consultants preparing EIA/ EMP 75 
5 Submission of compliance reports by Project 
Proponents 
77 
6 Non-compliance to conditions of EC/ CRZ clearance by 
the Project Proponents 
79 
7 PEA-wise Activities carried out under ICZMP 83 
8 Activities executed under Smart Eco Villages project 85 
9 Comparison of activities envisaged in project proposal 
with procurement plan and actual execution 
87 
 
 

iii 
 
Preface 
This report for the year ended 31 March 20 20 has been prepared for 
submission to the Governor of the State of Gujarat under Article 151 of the 
Constitution of India for being laid before the State Legislature. 
The report contains significant results of the Performance Audit of 
“Conservation and Management of Coastal Ecosystems ” relating to Forests 
and Environment Department for the period from 2015-16 to 2019-20. The 
audit has been carried out under the provisions of the Comptroller and Auditor 
General’s (Duties, Powers and Conditions of Service) Act, 1971 and the 
Regulations on Audit and Accounts, 2007 (amended in 2020) issued 
thereunder by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
The Performance Audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing 
Standards issued by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
  

iv 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

v
 
Executive Summary 
Coastal areas comprise some of the most dynamic natural ecosystems of our 
planet.  Coastal ecosystems including marshes, mangroves, near -shore coral 
reefs, seagrass beds, sandy beaches and dunes provide numerous benefits like 
livelihood through fisheries, protection from sea surges/ cyclones  etc.  At the 
same time, Coastal ecosystems are subject to a variety of anthropogenic threats 
including pollution, climate change, habitat alteration and overexploitation.  
Demographic pressure on coastal resources has increased over the past several 
decades.  Sustainable Development Goal 14 (SDG 14) laid down by United 
Nations (UN) recognizes the significance of life under water and aims at 
conserving and sustainably using the oceans, seas and marine resources .  India 
has a coastline of about 7,516 Kms , of which Gujarat has about 1,600 Kms 
covering 16 coastal districts.   
Coastal Regulation Zone (CRZ) Notifications are issued from  time to time 
under the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 by the Ministry of Environment, 
Forest and Climate Change (MoEF&CC), Government of India  (GoI) for the 
purpose of zoning, regulation, and conservation of coasts.  The objectives of the 
Performance Audit (PA) were to review  existing institutional mechanism for 
implementation of the CRZ Notification, CRZ and Environmental clearances 
granted to projects and post clearance monitoring, activities carried out under 
the Integrated Coastal Zone Management Project (ICZMP) and achievements 
under SDG-14.  The PA covered the period from April 2015 to March 2020.  For 
the purpose of Audit, 13 projects were selected based on investment and sectors 
as well as recommendations of experts.  Further, all reported violation cases were 
selected for detailed scrutiny.  Field Audit included examination of the records 
at the Gujarat Coastal Zone Management Authority  (GCZMA), State 
Environmental Impact Assessment Authority (SEIAA), Gujarat Ecology 
Commission ( GEC), Project Executing Agencies  (PEAs) of ICZMP, and 
physical inspection of sites.   
Institutional and Regulatory Framework 
There were delays in reconstitution of GCZMA, which has been mandated to 
prevent, abate and control environmental pollution in the coasta l regulation 
zones of the State and to enquire into cases of the alleged violation of the 
provisions of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 and the CRZ Notification.  
Further, GCZMA failed to implement some of the important functions assigned 
to it.  There was no dedicated staff for GCZMA and this affected the time taken 
in issuing recommendations for CRZ clearances.  There was lack of 
transparency in displaying the requisite information on GCZMA’s website . 
District Level Committees (DLCs) formed to ensu re compliance of the CRZ 
Notification did not meet regularly. These committees also lacked guidance/ 
direction from GCZMA. The State Government attributed under performance 
of DLCs to limited awareness among the DLC members about provisions of 
CRZ Notifica tion.  Apart from  delays in finalisation of Coastal Zone 
Management Plans (CZMPs) for the coastal districts, these plans were also not 
prepared as per prescriptions of the CRZ Notification.  An outcome -based 

Performance Audit of Conservation and Management of Coastal Ecosystems 
vi 
budget aligned to SDGs had not yet been prepared  by the State Government.  
Moreover, data against the State specific indicators were not yet compiled and 
District Indicator Framework (DIF) was yet to be developed.  Considering the 
above deficiencies in the Institutional and Regulatory Framework, followi ng 
recommendations are made: 
Recommendation 1: The State Government may provide dedicated manpower 
to GCZMA for the effective management of the coastal environment. 
Recommendation 2: The State Government may consider framing effective 
monitoring and reporting mechanism for GCZMA and DLCs.  
Recommendation 3: The State Government may consider preparing 
Integrated Management Plan for the identified Critically Vulnerable Coastal 
Areas in the State.  
Recommendation 4: The State Government may prioritise formulation of 
District Indicator Framework and start preparing outcome-based budget for 
effective monitoring of the National and State indicators of SDGs. 
Violations in the CRZ area 
Out of the 32 reported violation s of provisions of the CRZ Notification / 
Environment (Protection) Act,  during the period covered in the PA, 14 cases 
remained to be resolved while four cases were sub-judice.  GCZMA had neither 
kept proper records of complaints received nor framed any Standard Operating 
Procedure (SOP) for timely disposal of such complaints.  Cases of violations of 
CRZ Notification of 2011 by Government departments/ municipal corporations/ 
autonomous bodies/ Public sector undertakings were noticed which included not 
obtaining CRZ clearan ces, mangroves destruction s, and non-permissible 
activities in the CRZ area.  This was indicative of the failure of GCZMA/ 
Government of Gujarat (GoG) to create awareness among various user 
departments regarding provisions of CRZ Notification.  Large scale destruction 
of mangroves in CRZ I areas by Salt Pan lessees was noticed posing threat of 
extinction to the unique breed of “Kharai” camels which depend on the 
mangroves for their food.  GCZMA had not evolved any robust mechanism to 
identify the illegal/ u nauthorised constructions and operation and proliferation 
of unauthorised salt pan units in the CRZ areas.  No mechanism exists in 
GCZMA for the periodic survey of coastline through remote sensing 
applications along with geo -referenced CZMP for identifying  CRZ violations.  
It also failed to remove the illegal constructions brought to its notice.  Untreated 
waste water was being discharged into the water bodies in the CRZ areas in 
contravention of the CRZ Notification 2011 due to shortage of sewage treatment 
capacity in the Urban Local Bodies.  Based on the reported cases of violations, 
lack of concrete action on such cases and cases of unauthorised construction 
noticed by Audi t through Google earth pro software, the following 
recommendations are made: 
Recommendation 5: The State Government may take appropriate action to 
preserve Mangroves to save the ‘Kharai’ breed of camels from extinction. 

Executive Summary 
vii 
Recommendation 6: The State Government may consider establishing expert 
cells at the GCZMA/ DLC level  to track activities along coasts through GIS 
tools.  Further, a mechanism may also be devised for timely removal of 
encroachments and disposal of violation cases in the CRZ areas so as to 
preserve the coastal ecosystems.  
Recommendation 7: The State Government may consider installing STPs 
across coastal ULBs of the State to ensure that untreated sewage is not 
released into water bodies. 
CRZ Clearance and Post Clearance Monitoring 
It was observed that in case of nine out of 13 projects selected under the PA, the 
Project Proponents (PPs) did not submit all pre -requisite documents.  Lack of 
adequate internal control resulted in recommendation of these projects for CRZ/ 
Environmental c learances.  Moreover, Environmental Impact Assessment  
(EIA)/ Environmental Management Plan (EMP) of certain projects were found 
to be  prepared by consultants who were not accredited by the  National 
Accreditation Board of Education and Training (NABET) for the given sector.  
Some of the EIA/ EMP were also  found not prepared as per the Terms of 
Reference (ToR) issued by MoEF&CC or State Expert Appraisal Committee 
(SEAC) and/ or the generic structure as prescribed in the EIA Notification, 
2006.  GCZMA also did not v erify compliance of the prescribed ToRs in EIA 
reports before recommending the projects for clearance.  The SEIAA/ GCZMA 
did not insist on the Environmental Clearance (EC) in respect of a project falling 
in Ecologically Sensitive Area (ESA).  Submission of half -yearly compliance 
reports in respect of the stipulated terms and conditions of the EC to the 
regulatory authority(s) concerned, was not ensured in all cases.  This would 
impair the ability of regulatory agencies to notice and take steps to mitigate any 
negative impact on the coastal ecosystems .  In view of deficiencies noticed in 
the process of recomme nding CRZ clearances and post clearance monitoring, 
the following recommendation is made: 
Recommendation 8: GCZMA  may strengthen the evaluation process of 
project proposals and EIA reports to ensure that they adhere to all 
necessary pre-requisites before giving recommendation/ clearance. 
Integrated Coastal Zone Management Project (ICZMP) 
The marine field stations of the Gujarat Ecological Education and Research 
(GEER) Foundation and laboratories of the Gujarat Pollution Control Board 
(GPCB), developed under Capacity Building component of ICZMP, were not 
put to optimal use.   
Third party evaluation was conducted for an area covering only 21 per cent of 
claimed mangroves plantation . This pointed out difference in the plantation 
claimed by the Project Executing Agencies (PEAs) and that observed through 
GIS technique.  Audit, through use of GIS technique, observed a shortfall of 
1,968.80 hectare in mangroves plantation out of reported plantation of 9,415 
hectare at 33 sites.   

Performance Audit of Conservation and Management of Coastal Ecosystems 
viii 
Bid evaluation and selection of contractors in the procurements for Green 
Schools under Smart Eco- Village project were not carried out as per laid down 
procedure.  
Optimal utilisation of the high cost Mobile Sea Water Treatment Vehicles 
(MSWTVs) could not be ensured due to absence of a concrete sustenance plan.  
In view of deficiencies noticed in the implementation of ICZMP and Smart Eco- 
Village project, the following recommendations are made:  
Recommendation 9: The State Government may fix responsibility of the 
agencies involved for the shortfall in mangroves plantation. 
Recommendation 10: The State Government may take immediate action to 
utilise/ revive the idle MSWTVs so as to avoid further deterioration of these 
vehicles, which may render the expenditure wasteful.  
Recommendation 11: The State Government may fix respons ibility for not 
ensuring economy in the award of contracts under Smart Eco-Village project. 
It may also strengthen its monitoring mechanism to ensure that works are 
executed and items procured as per the prescribed standards. 
The detailed audit observation s have been narrated in the relevant Chapters of 
this report.  
 

1 
Chapter-1 
Introduction 
 
1.1 Coastal Ecosystems 
Coastal areas comprise some of the most dynamic natural ecosystems of our 
planet, where three main components-the hydrosphere, the lithosphere, and the 
atmosphere-meet and interact, forming interconnected systems. Coastal 
ecosystems including marshes, mangroves, near -shore coral reefs, seagrass 
beds, sandy beaches and dunes provide numerous benefits like livelihood 
through fisheries, protection from sea surges/ cyclones etc.  These benefits have 
ensured that demographic pressure on coastal resources has increased over the 
past several decades. India has a coastline of about 7,516 Kms of which Gujarat 
has about 1,600 Kms covering 16 coastal districts.  
Figure 1.1: Coastline of the State of Gujarat 
 
Coastal ecosystems are subject to a variety of anthropogenic threats including 
pollution, climate change, habitat alteration and overexploitation.  Sustainable 
Development Goal 14 (SDG 14) laid down by United Nations (UN) recognizes 
the significance of life under water and aims at conserving and sustainably using 
the oceans, seas and marine resources.  The Ministry of Statistics  and 
Programme Implementation (MoSPI) has developed the National Indicator 
Framework (NIF) for measuring the progress of the SDGs and associated targets 
in India. 
Through this audit, an attempt had been made  to assess the i nstitutional 
mechanisms involved in the protection and management of coasts; extant 
regulations, and major initiatives in the State for the protection of the coastal 
environment and to analyse the major threats posed to the coastal ecosystems. 


Performance Audit of Conservation and Management of Coastal Ecosystems 
2 
1.2 Environment Acts and Notifications for conservation of 
coastal ecosystems 
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change (MoEF&CC) and 
Ministry of Earth Sciences (MoES) are the two nodal Ministries, which deal 
primarily with the coastal and ocean areas .  The important Acts/ Regulations 
that deal with the conservation and management of coastal ecosystems are as 
under: 
➢ The Environment (Protection) Act, 1986: It is an umbrella Act of all 
environmental Acts, Notifications, etc., containing provisions for protection, 
conservation, and management of the environment.  It has provisions for 
penalising violations of environmental norms prescribed under the Act.  
➢ The Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974: The Act 
was enacted to deal with water pollution and to prohibit the discharge of 
untreated wastewater into land and water bodies and marine waters with 
jurisdiction up to five kilometres in the sea. 
➢ Environment Impact Assessment (EIA) Notification , 2006 : This 
Notification primarily deals with the mandatory undertaking of environmental 
impact assessment and obtaining Environmental Clearance (EC)  for major 
infrastructural and service activities.  The schedule to this Notification contains 
a list of category ‘A’ and ‘B’ projects requiring prior environment clearance. 
➢ Coastal Regulation Zone (CRZ) Notification :  MoEF&CC under the 
Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 issued a Notification (February 1991) 
declaring the coastal stretches of the sea on the landward side, up to 500 meters 
from the High Tide Line (HTL), minimum of 100 meters width from HTL of 
tidally influenced bays, estuaries, creeks, rivers and backwaters and land 
between the Low Tide Line (LTL) and HTL as Coastal Regulation Zone (CRZ).  
The management of CRZ is through various Notifications issued and enforced 
by Coastal Zone Management Authorities both at the Central and State level .  
This CRZ Notification of 1991  was superseded by Notifications of 2011 and 
2019, respectively.  CRZ Notification is implemented through the preparation 
of district-wise Coastal Zone Management Plans (CZMPs) by the authorized 
agency1 and their approval by MoEF&CC .  In Gujarat, CZMPs as per 2011 
Notification were approved2 in the years 2019 and 2020.  Updating of CZMPs 
as per CRZ Notification 2019 was still pending  (August 2022).  Hence, CRZ 
Notification 2011 was adopted as audit criteria .  Three main activities under 
CRZ Notification 2011 viz. Zoning, Regulation, and Conservation are discussed 
in the subsequent paragraphs. 
 
1Eight agencies were authorised by MoEF&CC. 
2CZMPs of the 16 districts were approved by MoEF&CC in January 2019 and February 2020 and accepted 
by the State Government in January 2019 and July 2022.  

Chapter 1 
3 
1.3 Institutional Mechanisms 
1.3.1  Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change 
The Impact Assessment Division in MoEF&CC, Government of India (GoI) 
while implementing the provisions of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 
(EPA) regulates developmental activities in coastal areas falling within the 
CRZ.  The roles of the MoEF&CC are as follows: 
• Environmental appraisal of projects under the provisions of CRZ 
Notification and EIA Notification. 
• Review and approval of the CZMPs.  
• Constitution and s trengthening of S tate Coastal Zone Management 
Authorities. 
• Identification of ecologically sensitive areas and notifying those areas for 
their effective management and conservation. 
The Ministry has constituted a National Coastal Zone Management Authority 
(NCZMA) at the Central Level with its headquarters at MoEF&CC and 13 
Coastal Zone Management Authorities in the Coastal States/ Union Territories.  
The State Governments and the Union Territory Administration  are also 
required to constitute District Level Committees in each coastal district under 
the Chairmanship of the District Magistrate concerned, containing at least three 
representatives of local traditional coastal communities, especially from the 
fisher folk. 
1.3.2  State Environmental Impact Assessment Authority  
The State Environmental Impact Assessment Authority (SEIAA) reviews 
proposals of category ‘B’ projects for environment clearance and CRZ 
clearance recommended by the State Level Expert Appraisal Committee 
(SEAC) and Gujarat Coastal Zone Management Authority  (GCZMA) 
respectively.  It also grants composite clearance  involving both Environment 
Clearance (EC) and Coastal Regulatory Zone (CRZ) clearance.  
1.3.3 Gujarat Coastal Zone Management Authority  
GCZMA was constituted by MoEF&CC to take measures for the protection and 
improving the quality of the coastal environment and for preventing, abating, 
and controlling environmental pollution in the CRZ.  It considers CRZ clearance 
applications of Category ‘A’ and ‘B’ projects (As per EIA Notification, 2006) 
and forwards them for approval to MoEF&CC and SEIAA respectively. 
It also enquires into cases of alleged violation of the provisions of the EPA and 
CRZ Notification 2011 in the CRZ area.  
 

Performance Audit of Conservation and Management of Coastal Ecosystems 
4 
1.3.4 District Level Committees 
District Level Committees (DLCs) are required to be constituted in all coastal 
districts of the State under the Chairmanship of respective District Collectors. 
DLCs assist GCZMA and enquire into cases of alleged violations. 
1.3.5  Ministry of Earth Sciences 
Ministry of Earth Sciences (MoES) came into existence through a Presidential 
Notification dated 12 July 2006.  National Centre for Coastal Researc h, 
Chennai is an attached office of MoES which inter alia monitors the seawater 
quality along the country’s coastline.   
1.4 Coastal Regulation Zones and Clearance Process 
After examining various aspects of a project, MoEF&CC grants CRZ clearance 
subject to the implementation of the stipulated environmental safeguards.  The 
clearance process assigns specific roles to many of the institutions mentioned 
above.  Clarity on the zone of CRZ in which the project is implemented is 
critical in arriving at a correct recommendation under the Notification.  Zones 
given in the CRZ Notification 2011 are described below: 
1.4.1  Coastal Regulation Zones 
Under the CRZ Notification 2011, the coastal regulated areas are categorised 
under the following four categories:  
Figure 1.2: Coastal Regulation Zones 
CRZ I includes those areas which are ecologically sensitive and which form the 
geomorphological features and play a crucial role in maintaining the integrity 
of the coast. 


Chapter 1 
5 
CRZ II includes those areas within the existing municipal limits or other urban 
areas which are substantially built -up and have been provided with drainage, 
roads, and infrastructural facilities. 
CRZ III includes the areas that are relatively undisturbed, and whi ch do not 
belong to either CRZ I or II.  This includes coastal zones in the rural areas, areas 
within the existing municipal limits , or other urban areas which are not 
substantially built up. 
CRZ IV includes the area from LTL  to twelve nautical miles on the seaward 
side and inland waters influenced by the tide. 
Areas requiring special consideration: Such areas are identified to protect the 
critical coastal environment and difficulties faced by local communities .  CRZ 
areas of (i) Greater Mumbai Municipal limits (ii) Goa and (iii) Kerala and other 
Critically Vulnerable Coastal Areas (CVCAs) such as Sundarbans region of 
West Bengal and Gulf of Kachchh are identified as areas requiring special 
consideration under this Notification. 
1.4.2  CRZ clearance process 
The Project Proponent (PP) shall submit the project proposal to the State/ 
UT CZMA concerned along with all the relevant documents prescribed in the 
CRZ Notification. 
The State CZMA concerned shall examine the above documents as per the 
approved SCZMP and CRZ Notification and make recommendations within 
60 days from the date of submission of the documents to the relevant 
approving authority . The approving authorit ies prescribed by statute are 
shown in Table 1.1 below: 
Table 1.1: Category of projects and approving authority 
Category of projects Authority to which the 
proposal is required to 
be sent for CRZ 
clearance 
Category-A projects as per EIA Notification, 2006 
Projects mentioned in Clause 4 (ii) of CRZ Notification, 2011 
MoEF&CC 
Category-B Projects as per EIA Notification, 2006 SEIAA 
Projects in the CRZ II areas having less than 20,000 Sqm. 
construction area 
Town planning 
authorities 
Source: CRZ Notification, 2011  
MoEF&CC or the concerned State Government authority shall consider such 
projects based on the recommendations of the concerned State CZMA within 
60 days.  The CRZ clearance process flowchart is shown below: 

Performance Audit of Conservation and Management of Coastal Ecosystems 
6 
Figure 1.3: CRZ clearance process  
 
1.5 Integrated Coastal Zone Management Project 
Integrated Coastal Zone Management (ICZM) approach considers all the 
sectoral activities that affect the coast and its resources.  Further, it addresses 
environmental, economic, and social issues in an integrated manner .  The GoI 
acknowledged the necessity of adopting an integrated and coordinated approach 
to the management of the coastal zone.  An agreement was entered into by GoI 
with the World Bank, in 2010 for the ICZM project.  The objective of the project 
was to assist the MoEF&CC to build ca pacity for the implementation of a 


Chapter 1 
7 
comprehensive ICZM approach in the country .  For the pilot of the ICZM 
approach, three States viz. Gujarat, Odisha, and West Bengal were selected  by 
the GoI. 
Gujarat Ecology Commission (GEC) was selected as the State Proj ect 
Management Unit (SPMU) for Gujarat .  During 2010-20, ₹ 410.91 crore was 
incurred on the ICZM project in the State.  It was funded by the World Bank, 
Government of India, and Government of Gujarat (GoG) with a share of 77, 13, 
and 10 per cent respectively.  In the State, the following six agencies were 
selected as Project Executing Agency (PEA) for the ICZM Project: 
1) GEC - for socio -economic development of villages and mang roves 
restoration. 
2) Gujarat Pollution Control Board (GPCB)- for constructing a laboratory 
for monitoring coastal water pollution in the Gulf of Kachchh. 
3) Gujarat Ecological Education and Research (GEER) Foundation - for 
Capacity Building and Coral Plantation. 
4) Jamnagar Municipal Corporation - for constructing sewage treatment 
plant to reduce marine pollution. 
5) Forest Circle, Kachchh, and Marine National Park and Marine Sanctuary 
(MNP&MS), Jamnagar - for conservation and protection of coastal 
resources, mangroves, and coastal ecosystem. 
6) Bhaskaracharya Institute of Space Application and Geo -Informatics 
(BISAG)- for development of Gujarat Coastal Geo -Spatial Information 
system. 
1.6 Audit Objectives 
The Performance Audit of conservation and management of coastal ecosystems 
was conducted to assess whether: 
(i) an institutional mechanism exists in State to regulate the activities in 
CRZ areas as per the provisions of CRZ Notification 2011; 
(ii) CRZ clearances granted by the Government are as per due procedure 
and with due regard to the coastal environment and the post clearance 
monitoring mechanism is carried out effectively; 
(iii) the project development objectives under I ntegrated Coastal Zone 
Management Project (ICZMP) were successful; and 
(iv) the measures taken up by the Government towards achieving the targets 
under SDG-14 were effective. 

Performance Audit of Conservation and Management of Coastal Ecosystems 
8 
1.7 Audit Criteria 
The following were adopted as Audit criteria for the Performance Audit:  
• Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 and EIA Notification, 2006, 
• CRZ Notification of 1991, 2011 and district wise CZMPs, 
• General Financial Rules and World Bank Procurement Guidelines, 
• National Indicators developed by MoSPI for SDG 14, 
• Agenda and minutes of the meetings of GCZMA, SEIAA, and SEAC, 
• EC and CRZ Clearance recommendation s by GCZMA along with 
conditions, 
• EC and CRZ Clearance s granted by SEIAA/ MoEF&CC and conditions 
imposed therein, 
• Project-specific records, including Terms of References, Environmental  
Impact Assessment (EIA) and Environmental Management Plans 
(EMPs), and 
• Programme/ Project Reports in respect of ICZMP. 
1.8 Audit Scope 
The Performance Audit covered the period from April 2015 to March 2020 .  
During January 2021 to October 2021, Audit examined the CRZ and related 
environmental clearances granted, the CRZ violation cases reported, action 
taken against each one of them, implementation of ICZMP in the State along 
with achievement in capacity building as envisaged and progress achieved by 
the State concerning SDG-14. 
1.9 Audit Methodology 
An entry conference was held (January 2021) with the Additional Secretary, 
Forests & Environment Department (F&ED), Government of Gujarat; Principal 
Chief Conservator of Forest and Head of the Forest Force (PCCF&HoFF) and 
Member Secretary, GEC wherein the audit scope, methodology, and objectives 
were discussed .  Field Audit included examination of records at GCZMA, 
SEIAA, GEC, Other PEAs of ICZMP , and physical inspection of sites.  The 
Exit conference was held on 02 September 2022 at the level of Additional Chief 
Secretary, F&ED and Member Secretary, GEC. The replies of the Government 
and discussions of the Exit conference have been appropriately incorporated in 
the Report. 

Chapter 1 
9 
1.10 Audit Sampling 
During the period 2015 -20, ninety-two CRZ/ Composite clearances were 
recommended by GCZMA.  These included recommendations for 40 Category 
“A” projects to MoEF&CC, 33 Category “B” projects to SEIAA, and 19 
projects to the local town planning authorities .  Sample selected for audit is 
tabulated as below: 
Table 1.2: Details of CRZ recommendations made by GCZMA during 2015 -20 
Description Category A project Category B project Town 
planning 
authorities 
Total 
Clearance Only 
CRZ 
Clearance 
Composite 
Clearance 
Only 
CRZ 
Clearance 
Composite 
Clearance 
Total 25 15 17 16 19 92 
Sample 5 3 3 2 00 13 
Source: Information provided by GCZMA 
The projects ha d been selected based on investment and sectors as well as 
recommendations of experts.   
Further, d uring 2015 -20, 12 complaints of violation of provisions of the 
Environment (Protection) Act, 1986/ CRZ regulations were reported to 
GCZMA.  In addition to above , 20 complaints of violations were received 
directly by four3 DLCs.  These violation cases were inspected by GCZMA and/ 
or respective DLCs. All violation cases were selected for detailed scrutiny. 
1.11 Acknowledgement 
Audit acknowledges the cooperation and assistance extended by the F&ED, 
Gujarat Coastal Zone Management Authority, Gujarat Ecology Commission, 
and other project implementation agencies of ICZMP and staff at Secretariat 
and Regional Offices of Gujarat Pollution Control Board. 
  
 
3Bharuch, Devbhumi Dwarka, Kachchh and Surat. 

Performance Audit of Conservation and Management of Coastal Ecosystems 
10 
 

11 
Chapter-2 
Institutional and Regulatory Framework 
A Snapshot  
The institutional mechanism for the management of the coastal environment 
was brought into existence with wide-ranging mandate and powers.  Detailed 
guidelines were also issued by MoEF&CC regarding the composition of such 
authorities.  Audit observed that Gujarat Coastal Zone Management Authority 
(GCZMA) was not equipped with commensurate manpower for effective 
discharge of the responsibilities assigned to it.  District Level Committees (DLCs) 
were either constituted belatedly or were not regular in their meetings and 
furnishing of the stipulated reports/ information to the GCZMA.  
Coastal Zone Management Plans (CZMPs,) as a tool for the management of the 
developmental landscape, was not effective.  It took almost seven years for the 
State to come up with approved CZMPs and all that while earlier CZMPs from 
1991 were being relied upon for the management of the coastline.  Further, the 
cadastral level data, which is of utmost importance for local planning authorities 
to regulate land use in  their jurisdiction, was not prepared, r endering the 
micro-level management of developmental activities ineffective.  
There was an urgent need to monitor the  State Indicator Framework (SIF) 
against the fixed targets  under SDG-14, to be achieved by 2022 and 2030 at 
the State level.  The State was not  preparing an outcome -based budget 
aligned to SDGs and was yet to develop the District Indicator Framework 
(DIF). 
All these findings indicate d ineffective institutional mechanism, tasked with 
huge responsibilities but equipped with insufficient resources.  
Introduction 
The Environment (Protection) Act (EPA) of 1986 under Section 3(1) authorises 
Central Gove rnment to take all such measures as it deems necessary or 
expedient for protecting and improving the quality of  the environment and 
preventing, controlling, and abating environmental pollution.  Section 3(2)(v) 
of the Act further empowers the Government to notify areas wherein industries, 
operations or processes or class of industries, operations or  processes are 
restricted or permitted subject to certain safeguards .  Accordingly, Central 
Government promulgated the Coastal Reg ulation Zone (CRZ) Notification, 
1991 for regulating activities in coastal stretches. 
Clause 4 of the CRZ Notification, 1 991 stated that the MoEF and the 
Government of State or Union Territory and such other authorities at the State 
or Union Territory levels, as may be  designated for this purpose, shall be 
responsible for m onitoring and enforcement of the provisions of  the 
Notification within their respective jurisdictions. 

Performance Audit of Conservation and Management of Coastal Ecosystems 
12 
In view of the Supreme Court of India’s Order for setting up of National and 
State level Coastal Zone Management Authorities to ensure effective 
implementation of the Notification of 1991,  the MoEF&CC under powers 
conferred by Section 3 of the EPA had constituted National Coastal  Zone 
Management Authority (NCZMA) on 26 November 1998 for two years. After 
that NCZMA has been reconstituted from time to time till date1.  The authority 
was empowered to coordinate actions of the State Coastal Zone Management 
Authorities (SCZMAs) and Union Territory Coastal Zone Management Authorities 
(UTCZMAs) under the Act, examine proposal for change in classification of  
CRZ ar eas, a pprove CZMPs, review cases of violation under the relevant 
Sections of EPA and issue directions as well as take actions accordingly. 
Audit examined constitution of SCZMA in Gujarat, its  functioning with 
reference to the CRZ Notification and subsequent guidelines by the MoEF&CC 
along with its mandate for CZMPs preparation and management of violations.  
Audit observations on these aspects are given below: 
2.1 Formation of the Institutional Bodies 
In February 2005, the MoEF&CC issued detailed guidelines for the composition 
of the SCZMAs as  well as the inclusion of non-official members, their 
backgrounds, and desired experiences.  As per the guidelines, the SCZMAs 
would have one NGO, four expert members and 5-6 ex-officio members from 
various departments, such as pollution control boards, fisheries, environment, 
urban development etc.  The Chairman of the Authority would be the Secretary, 
Environment Department of the concerned State. 
Composition of District Level Committees (DLCs) is broadly governed in terms 
of Clause 6(C) of the CRZ Notification 2011, wherein, DLCs were to be 
established to assist SC ZMA in enforcing and monitoring the CRZ 
Notification.  The DLCs were to be formed under the Chairmanship of the 
District Magistrate concerned, consisting of at le ast three representatives of 
local traditional coastal communities and fisher folk. 
Audit examined the status of Gujarat Coastal Zone Management Authority 
(GCZMA) and 16 DLCs in Gujarat State.  Examination of issues related to the 
formation and composition of these institutional bodies (GCZMA and DLCs) 
revealed delays in formation of GCZMA, non-formation of DLCs and  non-
adherence to the prescribed composition for these institutional bodies, particularly 
with respect to experts, local communities, and key stakeholder departments. 
Consequences of such deviations are discussed in the succeeding paragraphs. 
2.2 Constitution and Functioning of the Institutional Bodies 
Audit examined the constitution and functioning of GCZMA and DLCs against 
the mandate and detailed observations are as given below: 
 
 
1 NCZMA was last reconstituted on 11 May 2022 for three years. 

Chapter 2 
13 
2.2.1 Constitution of GCZMA 
Gujarat Coastal Zone Management Authority (GCZMA) was constituted 
(26 November 1998) by the MoEF&CC  under the Environment (Protection) 
Act, 1986 to regulate and perform the functions in Gujarat as stipulated in CRZ 
Notification 1991.  It is normally re -constituted once every three years  as per 
prevailing CRZ Notification.  GCZMA was last reconstituted in Septe mber 
2019.  It consists of 15 members 2 including Chairman and Member Secretary .  
Sixteen DLCs3 under the Chairmanship of the concerned District Collectors 
were also constituted to assist the GCZMA. 
GCZMA has the mandate to take measures for protecting an d improving the 
quality of the coastal environment .  The mandate also includes preventing, 
abating and controlling environmental pollution in the coastal regulation zones 
of the State.  GCZMA is conferred with the powers to examine the proposals 
for change or modification in the classification of CRZ, enquire into cases of 
alleged violation of the provisions of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 
and review the cases involving violations of the provisions of CRZ Notification 
2011.  GCZMA is authorised to collect scrutiny fees from the project proponent.    
2.2.2 Delay in reconstitution of Gujarat Coastal Zone Management 
Authority 
The first Gujarat Coastal Zone Management Authority (GCZ MA) was 
constituted on 26 November 1998 for two years.  Audit reviewed the 
reconstitution of GCZMA from 01  April 2015 to June 2021 .  The dates of 
reconstitution of GCZMA and the delay in its reconstitution are shown in Table 
2.1 below: 
Table 2.1: Details of reconstitution of GCZMA during 2015-20 
Sl. 
No. 
Date of re-
constitution of 
GCZMA 
Validity Period Delay in 
reconstitution 
during 2015-20 
1 16 October 2012 16 October 2012 to 15 October 2015 Not applicable 
2 18 March 2016 18 March 2016 to 17 March 2019 154 days 
3 09 September 2019 09 September 2019 to 08 September 2022 175 days 
Source: Notification for reconstitution issued by the MoEF&CC 
It can be seen  from the above table that during 2015 -20, there were delays of 
154 days and 175 days respectively in reconstitution  of GCZMA.  Forests and 
Environment Department ( F&ED), GoG was required to submit its 
recommendations i .e., name of members to be included in proposed 
reconstituted GCZMA to the MoEF&CC in advance, so that the MoEF&CC 
 
2Additional Chief Secretary/ Principal Secretary/ Secretary (Forest s and Environment Department), 
Chairman; Principal Chief Conservator of Forest (Wild Life); Vice Chairman and Chief Executive 
Officer (Gujarat Maritime Board); Member Secretary (Gujarat Pollution Control Board); Industries 
Commissioner; Chief Executive Officer (Gujarat Disaster Management Authority); Chief Town Planner 
Gujarat State; Member Secretary (Gujarat Ecology Commission); Commissioner of Fisheries; four expert 
members; a member from NGO and Director (Environment) (Source: MoEF&CC order dated 09 
September 2019). 
3Ahmedabad, Amreli, Anand, Bharuch, Bhavnagar, Devbhumi Dwarka, Gir Somnath, Jamnagar, 
Junagadh, Kachchh, Morbi, Navsari, Porbandar, Surat, Vadodara and Valsad. 

Performance Audit of Conservation and Management of Coastal Ecosystems 
14 
could issue Notification for reconstitution before expiry of the existing term of 
the GCZMA.  
As GCZMA was not reconstituted between 16 October 2015 to 17 March 2016 
and 18 March 2019 to 08 September 2019, no project proposal could be 
recommended by GCZMA to SEIAA/ MoEF &CC for clearance  during that 
period. 
2.2.3 Functioning of GCZMA 
The status of implementation of some of the important functions of the GCZMA 
as of March 2022 are as follows: 
Table 2.2: Some important functions of GCZMA and their status as of March 2022 
Sl. 
No. 
Functions assigned to GCZMA Implementation Status 
1 To identify ecologically sensitive areas in the CRZ 
and formulate area -specific management plans for 
such identified areas. 
GCZMA is yet to formulate area -
specific management plans. 
2 To identify coastal areas highly vulnerable to 
erosion or degradation and formulate area -specific 
management plans for such identified areas. 
GCZMA has not yet formulated 
area-specific management plans 
for such identified areas. 
3 To furnish a report on its activities at least once in 
six months to the National Coastal Zone 
Management Authority. 
Information related to the 
periodical reports w as not 
available on record. 
4 To regularly review the functions of District Level 
Committees (DLCs). 
GCZMA has not reviewed the 
functioning of DLCs regularly. 
5 To Inquire into cases of alleged vi olations of the 
provisions of the EPA and/ or the rules made 
thereunder, and if found necessary in a specific case, 
issue directions under Section 5, fil e a complaint 
under Section 19 and take action under Section 10 
of the EPA. 
In many cases  (as discussed in 
Chapter 3 of this Report ), 
GCZMA failed to take effective 
actions against the violators. 
Source: Information provided by GCZMA 
2.2.4 Staffing pattern in the GCZMA 
MoEF&CC Notification (October 2012 and March 2016) for reconstitution of 
GCZMA stipulates that the State Government shall ensure that sufficient 
resources, manpower and funds are made available to GCZMA. 
It was observed that GCZMA functions from the office of Environment 
Secretariat in F&ED, Gandhinagar as it does not have a separate Secretariat .  
There was no dedicated staff for GCZMA and only one official from the 
Environment Secretariat was given additional responsibility for work related to 
GCZMA.  This affected the time taken in issuing recommendations for CRZ 
clearances as discussed in paragraph 2.2.5. 
Recommendation 1:  The State Government may provide dedicated manpower 
to GCZMA for the effective management of the coastal environment. 
2.2.5 Delay in issuing recommendations for CRZ clearances for the projects 
Clause 4.2(ii) of the CRZ Notification of 2011 states that the concerned CZMA 
shall examine the documents in accordance with the approved CZMP and 

Chapter 2 
15 
compliance with CRZ Notification and make recommendations within 60 days 
from the date of receipt of a complete application. 
Audit test checked 18 projects, which were recommended by GCZMA to 
SEIAA/ MoEF&CC for CRZ/ composite clearances during the period 2015-20. 
Delays were observed on the part of GCZMA in scrutinising/ processing the 
project files, and by project proponents in  submitting replies to queries and 
further documents to GCZMA as shown in Table 2.3 below: 
Table 2.3: Time taken by GCZMA and project proponents between application and 
recommendation 
Sl. 
No. 
Particulars Time taken from 
date of receipt of 
application to date 
of 
recommendation 
Time attributable to Delay attributable 
to GCZMA in 
excess of 60 days  
(Number of days) 
Project 
Proponents 
GCZMA 
A B C D E = (C-D) F = (E-60 days) 
1 03 Projects 40 to 55 days 0 days 40 to 55 
days 
No delay 
2 15 Projects 98 to 1200 days 24 to 664 
days 
74 to 536 
days 
14 to 476 days 
Source: Information compiled from concerned project files 
Thus, 15 out of 18 projects were recommended belatedly where the delay was 
attributable to GCZMA.  Of the time taken by GCZMA as mentioned in table 
above, 26 to 260 days were consumed in processing the files and forwarding the 
recommendations to MoEF&CC/ SEIAA. 
The GCZMA  stated (August 2022)  that delay was due to continuation of 
practice of submitting the  project proposals to the State Government for its 
approval as per the provisions of the erstwhile CRZ Notification 1991.  The 
Government further confirmed that as per the CRZ Notification, 2011 approval 
of the State Government was not required.   
Thus, the redundant practice of obtaining State Government approval on 
recommendations for CRZ clearance contributed to the delay in processing of 
applications. Further, the State Government/ GCZMA did not offer any remarks 
on the other reasons for delay i.e., delay in vetting of the project proposal, etc. 
2.2.6 Displaying or updating the information on the GCZMA Website  
Clause 4.2 (vi) of CRZ  Notification 2011 lays down that it shall be the 
responsibility of the CZMA to create a dedicated website and post on it the 
agenda, minutes, decisions taken, clearance letters, violations, action taken on 
the violations and court matters including the orders of the Court and the 
approved CZMPs of the respective State Government or Union territory. 
The GCZMA hosts a website i.e., www.gczma.org which is designed and 
developed by Gujarat Info Petro Limited.  GCZMA had conducted 59 meetings 
(till February 2022).  Audit noticed that as of 28 February 2022, agenda of 22nd 
to 39th meetings of GCZMA and Minutes of 2 2nd to 59th meetings of GCZMA 
held between 30 May  2014 and 17 February  2022 were displayed on the 
website.  Further, decisions taken by GCZMA, clearance letters, cases of CRZ 

Performance Audit of Conservation and Management of Coastal Ecosystems 
16 
violations, action taken on the violations and Court matters were not displayed 
on the website of GCZMA. 
Thus, the information displayed on GCZMA’s website was not according to the 
requirements mentioned in the CRZ Notification.  
The State Government/ GCZMA stated (August 2022) that website of GCZMA 
had been revamped for uploading the required information. 
Audit verified (September 2022) that the required details have still not been 
uploaded on the website of GCZMA. 
2.2.7 Functioning of the District Level Committees (DLCs)  
As per Clause 6(C) of CRZ Notification 2011, the DLCs were required to be 
established to assist GCZMA .  F&ED, GoG issued (14  October 2013) a 
Government R esolution (GR) for the constitution of DLCs in the coastal 
districts of Gujarat after the lapse of more than 33 months from the issuance of 
CRZ Notification 2011 (06 January 2011).   
a) As per the GR issued by GoG, DLCs should meet regularly to review 
the compliance of the CRZ Notification.  Audit reviewed the formation and 
functioning of DLCs in 16 coastal districts of Gujarat State with reference to the 
meetings held up to March 2021.  The details are tabulated as under: 
Table 2.4: Details of DLCs for 16 Coastal Districts 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
Coastal 
District 
Year of 
formatio
n of 
DLC 
Year of 
First 
Meeting 
Total 
meetings 
held till 
March 
2021 
Audit observation 
1 Vadodara 2021 2021 00 DLC was formed in November 2021 i.e., 
after seven years of issuance of the GR. 
2 Ahmedabad 2014 2014 01 Only one meeting of DLC (up to March 
2021) was held in these four Districts. 3 Anand 2015 2018 01 
4 Devbhumi 
Dwarka 
2014 2019 01 
5 Junagadh 2015 2015 01 
6 Amreli 2012 2013 05 From the date of GR to March 2021, on 
an average not even one meeting of DLC 
was held per year in these five districts. 
7 Bhavnagar 2012 2013 04 
8 Gir 
Somnath 
2014 2015 04 
9 Valsad 2014 2014 06 
10 Surat 2015 2015 03 
11 Jamnagar 2018 Nil Nil DLC was formed after lapse of five 
years from the date of issue of GR and 
no meeting was held till 31 March 2021. 
12 Kachchh 2015 2017 16 At least one meeting per year was held 
in these five districts. 13 Bharuch 2014 2014 07 
14 Morbi Not 
furnished 
2015 08 
15 Navsari Not 
furnished 
2013 10 
16 Porbandar 2014 2014 10 
Source: Information furnished by GCZMA 

Chapter 2 
17 
In addition to the above , Audit also noticed that three representatives of local 
traditional coastal communities and fisher  folk were not included in DLCs  of 
Surat and Jamnagar districts.  
b) The GR dated 14 October 2013 stipulates powers and functions of DLCs 
whereby GCZMA is required to provide guidance/ direction to DLCs, collect 
information from DLCs and monitor them .  However, no records relating to 
issuance of directions/  instructions by GCZMA to DLCs for effective 
implementation and monitoring of CRZ Notification were produced to audit .  
Further, the monthly report s and other reports prescribed in the GR viz. 
identification of violation in CRZ areas, areas identified by DLCs which need 
special conservation and protection measures, ecologically sensitive areas 
identified in CRZ by DLCs, reports of encroachments/ unauthorised structures 
in CRZ areas and action taken thereon etc., were also not available on record. 
The State Government/ GCZMA accepted the audit observation and stated 
(August 2022) that one of the reasons for under performance of DLCs was 
limited awarene ss among the DLC members about provisions of CRZ 
Notification.  It was further stated that the action plan was being framed to build 
capacity of DLCs for better implementation of CRZ Notification. However, 
GCZMA/ State Government did not provide any reasons for lack of monitoring 
of DLCs by GCZMA and non -submission of various reports by the DLC s to 
GCZMA.  
Recommendation 2: The State Government may consider framing  effective 
monitoring and reporting mechanism for GCZMA and DLCs.  
2.2.8  Delay in finalization of and deficiencies in Coastal Zone 
Management Plan 
CRZ area is delineated by the Coastal Zone Management Plan (CZMP) duly 
marked with High Tide Line (HTL), Low Tide Line (LTL), buffer zone, hazard 
line, zonation etc. of the coastal areas .  CRZ Notification 2011 (January 2011) 
stipulates a detailed procedure for preparation of CZMP and the pre-requisites 
of CZMP .  MoEF&CC authorised ( December 1999) seven 4 agencies for the 
preparation of CZMP .  The aforesaid 2011 Notification requires the coastal 
States and Union Territories to prepare CZMP by identifying and classifying 
the CRZ areas within the respective territories within 24 months from the issue 
of the Notification.  
a) Forests & Environment Department ( F&ED), Government of Gujarat 
(GoG) approached (between February 2012 and January 2014) these seven 
agencies to submit their proposals for preparation of CZMP but due to lack of 
response from six agencies and  quoting of higher fees by the remaining one 5, 
the F&ED could not carry out the  demarcation of HTL and preparation of 
CZMP for Gujarat.  Further, GoG requested MoEF&CC several times between 
 
41. Space Application Centre, Ahmedabad; 2. Centre for Earth Science Studies, Thiru vananthapuram; 3. 
Institute for Remote Sensing, Anna University, Chennai; 4. Institute for Wetland Management and 
Ecological Designs, Kolkata; 5. Naval Hydrographer’s office, Dehradun; 6. National Institute of 
Oceanography, Goa and 7. National Institute of Ocean Technology, Chennai. 
5Institute for Remote Sensing, Anna University, Chennai. 

Performance Audit of Conservation and Management of Coastal Ecosystems 
18 
December 2013 and September 2015 to authorise Bhaskaracharya Institute of 
Space Application and Geo -Informatics (BISAG), Gandhinagar for the 
preparation of CZMP , which was not responded by MoEF&CC .  In the 
meantime, in March 2014, MoEF&CC  authorised National Centre for 
Sustainable Coastal Management (NCSCM) as an agency for the preparation of 
CZMP.  
GoG awarded (August 2017) the work of preparing the CZMP for the State to 
NCSCM for ₹ six crore. The National Green Tribunal (NGT) directed 
(November 2017) all the States to submit draft CZMP to MoEF&CC by April 
2018 and not to issue CRZ/  Environment Clearances till that time .  
Subsequently, draft CZMPs were submitted between November 2018 and July 
2019 to MoEF&CC for approval .  CZMPs of 14 districts were approved by 
MoEF&CC in January/ February 2019 and accepted by State Government in the 
same month .  CZMPs for two districts  namely Kachchh and Morbi w ere 
approved by MoEF&CC in February 2020, and accepted by the GoG in July 
2022.  
Thus, instead of assigning work to one of the authorised agencies, GoG insisted 
on authorisation of a new agency by the MoEF&CC.  Though GoG was aware 
that NCSCM was declared as authorised agency in the year 2014, NCSCM was 
approached in 2016 and appointed only in 2017.  Delay in submission of CZMP 
resulted in  EC/ CRZ proposals for projects not getting approved between 
December 2017 and January 2019. 
b) In addition to the above, Audit also noticed certain deficiencies in the 
CZMP as given below: 
1. CRZ Notification 2011 requires marking of infrastructure facilities of 
local communities such as dispensaries, roads, and schools in CZMP on a scale 
of 1:25000.  It also stipulates marking of fishing zones in the water bodies and 
the fish breeding ar eas in the CZMPs .  However, as GoG did not provide raw 
data to NCSCM, the same were not marked.   
2. CRZ Notification 2011, also stipulates preparation of local level CZMP 
on a scale of 1:3960 for the use of local bodies and other agencies to facilitate 
implementation of CZMPs.  However, CZMPs prepared by the GoG on a scale 
of 1:25000 had not been converted (August 2022) to the scale of 1:3960 for use 
by local bodies and other agencies.  During the public hearing of CZMPs, some 
stakeholders submitted that they could not  understand the CZMP due to 
non-preparation of local level CZMP by the GoG.  As such, these stakeholders 
could not raise objections/ give suggestions on the CZMP.   
3. The 2011 Notification declared the Gulf of K achchh and Gulf of 
Khambhat as Critically Vulnerable Coastal Areas (CVCA).  CVCA is identified 
as an ecologically sensitive area that shall be managed through a process of 
consultation with local inhabitants who depend on its resources for their 
livelihood.  As per the Notification, Integrated Management Plans (IMPs) are 
to be prepared for such CVCAs keeping in view the conservation and 
management of mangroves and the needs of local communities .  The IMPs are 

Chapter 2 
19 
to be prepared in line with CZMP .  Audit observed that no such IMPs were 
available for the Gulf of Kachchh and Gulf of Khambhat as of August 2022. 
The State Government/ GCZMA stated (August 2022) that Gujarat has longest 
coastline among all other coastal States and has two gulf systems  and number 
of creeks.  In the absence of an authorised agency within the State, the State was 
dependent on NCSCM for preparation of CZMP.  
The reply is not acceptable as CRZ Notification 2011, envisaged preparation 
and submission of CZMP to the MoEF&CC within 30 months of date of 
Notification (06 January 2011).  The CZMPs of the State were approved by the 
MoEF&CC within 17 to 30 months from the date of assigning  (August 2017) 
the task to NCSCM.  Thus, delay was not on the part of NCSCM to prepare the 
CZMPs but was due to belated assignment of the task to NCSCM.   
Recommendation 3: The State Government may consider preparing 
Integrated Management Plan for the identified Critically Vulnerable Coastal 
Areas in the State.  
2.3 Sustainable Development Goal- 14 (Life Below Water) 
SDG 14- ‘Life below water’ aims to conserve 
and sustainably use the oceans, seas and 
marine resources for sustainable development.  
This goal has been divided into 10 targets, out 
of which seven are ‘outcome’ (circumstances 
to be attained) targets and three are ‘means of 
implementation’ targets.  
The Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation (MoSPI) developed 
the National Indicator Framework (NIF) for measuring the progress of SDGs 
and associated targets.  On the lines of NIF, stakeholder coastal States were 
required to develop their own State Indicator Framework (SIF) for SDG -14. 
2.3.1  Status of implementation of SDG-14 in the State 
GoG constituted seven Thematic Working Groups (TWG) in October 2016 and 
various committees and cells at State and district level in May 2019 to carry out 
the functions relating to SDGs.  The District Level SD G Cells are headed by 
District Planning Officers for implementing all works related to SDGs and 
providing data to the district and State authorities.   
(i) Out of the seven outcome targets , MoSPI developed 10 national 
indicators for five targets 6 while for th e remaining two targets 7 the indicators 
were yet to be developed (November 2021).  As the States were required to 
develop their own State Indicator Framework (SIF) , GoG finalised and 
published (July 2018) “Gujarat: Sustainable Vision 2030” for implementation 
of SDGs in the State.  The vision document customized S tate-specific 328 
indicators which were aligned with respective SDGs.  Gujarat ha d developed 
 
6 14.1, 14.2, 14.3, 14.4 and 14.5. 
7 14.6 and 14.7. 


Performance Audit of Conservation and Management of Coastal Ecosystems 
20 
eight State specific indicators for the same five targets of SDG 14 while for the 
remaining two targets8, State specific indicators were yet to be developed 
(November 2021). Thus, Gujarat  had already fixed targets to be achieved by 
2022 and 2030, however, data against thes e State specific indicators were not 
yet compiled by the State Government (December 2021) except the data 
regarding increase in mangroves plantation.  
(ii) The State has developed (February 2020) a web portal 
(gswift.gujarat.gov.in) consisting of a dynamic and interactive dashboard called 
G-SWIFT which covers all 26 Departments and 33 districts of the State.  
However, an outcome-based budget aligned to SDGs had not yet been prepared 
by the State Government (March 2022). 
(iii) As per NITI Aayog report ‘India Voluntary National Review 2020’, 
District Indicator Framework (DIF) would enable addressing local aspirations 
and capturing details of ground-level performance, with focused monitoring of 
indicators and goals at the grassroo ts.  Gujarat had not yet developed DIFs for 
SDGs.  However, there is only one indicator 9 for SDG 14 for which data is 
available at the district level in the State. 
(iv) Performance of Gujarat on indicators of SDG 14 - SDG 14 is related 
to marine ecosystems and therefore, it applies to nine coastal States only.  The 
SDG India Index 2.0 (2019 -20), published by NITI Aayog was the first report 
wherein the status of SDG 14 was reported.  Gujarat, with a score of 23 out of 
100, ranked last among nine coastal States implementing the SDG 14 and thus, 
stood at the bottom position in the aspirant category10.  As per SDG India Index 
3.0 (2020-21), Gujarat improved its performance from rank ninth to fourth with 
a score of 57 and was elevated to the Performer Category.  Gujarat improved its 
performance against three targets 11, against one target (14.1) the State was 
assessed for the first time during 2020 -21, while there are no identified 
indicators in the NIF for the remaining three targets 12 against which the 
performance of the State could be assessed.  
Thus, there was an im provement in 2020 -21 as compared to 2019 -20, in the 
performance of Gujarat in achieving the targets under SDG 14. 
Recommendation 4: The State Government may prioritise formulation of 
District Indicator Framework and start preparing outcome-based budget for 
effective monitoring of the National and State indicators of SDGs. 
 
8 14.6 and 14.7. 
9 Percentage change in area under Mangroves (Target-14.2). 
10 Achiever (score: 100), Front Runner (score: 65-99), Performer (Score: 50-64), Aspirant (Score: 0-49). 
11 Target 14.2, 14.3, and 14.7. 
12 Target 14.4, 14.5, and 14.6. 

21 
Chapter-3 
Violations in the CRZ area 
A Snapshot 
Effective management of the coastline is crucial for the protection of the coastal 
environment.  Audit came across situations where, the authorities solely relied 
on reported violation s, wherein a complaint was received, and subsequent 
action envisioned.  Even for these reported violations, there was no  effective 
follow-up and review by the concerned authorities with a large number of 
violation cases still awaiting disposal. 
There were many instances, where unauthorized developments had taken place 
in restricted CRZ areas (CRZ I  and No Development Zone) .  However, no 
control mechanism was evolved by GCZMA to identify and prohibit such 
irregular developments.  Further, there was a need to augment sewage 
treatment facilities in the coastal Urban Local Bodies (ULBs).   
Introduction  
GCZMA has the power to review cases of violation under the relevant Sections 
of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 (EPA) and issue directions as well 
as take action to regulate developmental activities in the CRZ area and enforce 
provisions of CRZ Notification.  Such review of cases of violation can be taken 
up by the GCZMA suo-moto or based on a complaint made by any individual, 
representative body, or organisation.  Audit sought the data from GCZMA on 
the number of violations reported during the audit period a nd action taken 
thereof a nd selected a  sample to examine in detail.  Audit also used GIS 
techniques to evaluate the extent and ground status of such violations.  For select 
cases, physical verification was conducted in the presence of relevant officials 
from GCZMA/ GPCB to ascertain the s tatus.  In addition to the r eported 
violations, Audit also i dentified cases that violate the provisions of  CRZ 
Notification.  For this purpose, Audit extracted approved CZMPs for the area 
and after geo-referencing the relevant frame from CZMP, the same had been 
overlaid on the last available ground scene.  Detailed observations on these 
violations are given below: 
3.1 Violations of the provisions of EPA and CRZ Notification 
GCZMA is empowered to inquire into cases of alleged violations of the 
provisions of the EPA and Rules made thereunder, or any other law related to 
objects of the said Act.  It is also empowered to (a) direct all concerned planning 
authorities, field agencies  and District Collectors to ensure compliance to the 
provisions of the CRZ Notification 2011 and (b) take suitable action in case of 
violation or non-compliance.  It can also levy scrutiny fees, as per the “polluter 
pays” principle in consultation with F&ED.  
Complaints of violations, received during 2015 -20, by GCZMA or concerned 
DLCs and their status as of 30 September 2021 are shown in Table 3.1 below: 

Performance Audit of Conservation and Management of Coastal Ecosystems 
22 
Table 3.1:  Details of complaints received during 2015-20 
Sl. 
No. 
Complaints 
received at 
Complaints 
received 
Complaints 
resolved 
Matter 
sub-
judice 
Matter 
unresolved 
Audit observation at 
Paragraph 
1 GCZMA 12 06 03 03 Paragraphs 3.3 and 
3.10 
2 DLC, 
Kachchh 
10 03 00 07 Paragraphs 3.4, 3.6 
and 3.11 
3 DLC, Surat 03 02 01 00 Nil 
4 DLC, Bharuch 05 03 00 02 Paragraphs 3.5 and 3.9 
5 DLC, 
Devbhumi 
Dwarka 
02 00 00 02 Paragraphs 3.7 and 3.8 
 Total 32 14 04 14  
Source: Information provided by GCZMA and DLCs 
Audit observations in respect of complaint redressal mechanism, unresolved 
complaints (except matters which are sub-judice) and role of GCZMA/ DLCs 
are discussed in the succeeding paragraphs: 
3.2  Complaint redressal mechanism at GCZMA 
The cases of violations of the CRZ Notification 2011/ EPA are reported by the 
complainants directly to GCZMA or the concerned DLCs .  Complaints 
regarding violations received by GPCB, State/ Central Government entities are 
also forwarded to GCZMA .  In the applications filed with the National Green 
Tribunal (NGT), usually , complainants make GCZMA a respondent and/  or 
NGT orders GCZMA to take action/ submit a report in the matter.  On receipt 
of complaints, GCZMA directs concerned DLC to take necessary action  and 
furnish action taken report .  The following general issues were noticed 
concerning the complaint redressal system in GCZMA. 
• No complaint register was maintained with GCZMA to record the details of 
the complaints received, forwarded to DLCs, replies re ceived from DLCs, 
replies provided to complainants and status of complaints.  
• No Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) was devised by GCZMA 
prescribing timelines for initiating action, issuance of direction to DLCs, 
obtaining timely compliance reports from DLCs, conveying the redressal to 
complainants, and concerned authorities. 
• No system of periodic review of complaints (quarterly/  six monthly/  
annually) was found at GCZMA.  
• GCZMA website did not have the feature to register and track down the 
complaint.  Though a tab dedicated to “complaints” was available on its 
website, no information was available under it. 
• No follow-up was done by GCZMA after notice was served to the violator 
by DLCs/ GPCB/ F&ED under EPA.  

Chapter 3 
23 
• No centralised database was maintained at GCZMA regarding complaints 
received by DLCs, action taken by them, and complaints forwarded to 
GCZMA for guidance, etc. 
3.3 CRZ violation by Government Departments/ Autonomous 
bodies/ PSUs 
Audit noticed that after the promulgation of CRZ Notification 2011, orientation 
programmes were organised by GCZMA/ Gujarat Ecology Commission (GEC) 
at the district level regarding the Notification.  Further, officials of important 
user departments/ entities such as Industries and Mines Department, Gujarat 
Maritime Board, Town Planning and Valuation Department  etc., are also 
ex-officio members of GCZMA.  However, during 2015-20, the following cases 
of violations of CRZ Notification of 2011 by Governme nt departments/ 
municipal corporations/ autonomous bodies/ Public sector undertakings were 
noticed during audit: 
Table 3.2: Details of CRZ violations by Government entities during 2015-20 
Sl. 
No. 
Subject Type of 
violation 
Violator Status as of August 2022 
1 Construction of 
bridge on Narmada 
River at Bharuch 
City 
Not 
obtaining 
CRZ 
clearance 
Roads and 
Buildings 
Department 
(R&B 
Department) 
Application for post facto  
clearance was pending with 
SEIAA. 
2 Construction of 
bridge on Tena River 
at Tena Village, 
district - Surat  
Not 
obtaining 
CRZ 
clearance 
and 
mangroves 
destruction 
Carried out compensatory 
afforestation in 2018 -19 based on 
recommendations of Committee 
formed after NGT order.   
Application for post facto  
clearance is pending with SEIAA. 
3 Construction of four 
bridges 
(Chandrasekhar 
Azad Bridge, Sardar 
Bridge, Cable-
Stayed Bridge and 
Pal-Umra Bridge) in 
Surat city 
Not 
obtaining 
CRZ 
clearance 
Surat 
Municipal 
Corporation 
(SMC) 
Post facto  CRZ clearance was 
granted for cable-stayed bridge by 
MoEF&CC. 
Post facto  CRZ clearance for the 
other three bridges were rejected 
(January 2020) by MoEF&CC.  
4 Construction of solid 
waste transfer 
station, Village 
Kadifaliya, district - 
Surat 
Not 
obtaining 
CRZ 
clearance/ 
carrying out 
non-
permissible 
activity in 
the CRZ 
area 
SMC stopped the remaining 
construction activity.  
5 Construction of salt 
pan/ destruction of 
mangroves at Nani -
Chirai-Moti Chirai 
and Jangi, Bhachau 
Taluka, district - 
Kachchh  
Not 
obtaining 
CRZ 
clearance 
Deendayal 
Port Trust 
(DPT)/ 
Revenue 
Department, 
GoG/lease 
holders 
Matter unresolved. Discussed in 
Paragraph 3.4 

Performance Audit of Conservation and Management of Coastal Ecosystems 
24 
Sl. 
No. 
Subject Type of 
violation 
Violator Status as of August 2022 
6 Substitution of a 
pipeline of CETP, 
Dahej-Vilayat 
Industrial Area, 
Bharuch 
Not 
obtaining 
CRZ 
clearance 
for laying of  
pipeline in 
CRZ area.    
Gujarat 
Industrial 
Development 
Corporation 
(GIDC) 
Matter unresolved. Discussed in 
Paragraph 3.5 
7 Construction of 
Tourist Resort, 
Mandvi Taluka, 
district- Kachchh 
Carrying out 
non-
permissible 
activity in 
the CRZ 
area 
Tourism 
Corporation of 
Gujarat 
Limited 
(TCGL) 
Matter unresolved. Discussed in 
Paragraph 4.9 
Source: Information provided by GCZMA and DLCs 
It can be observed from the above table that there were six bridges (Sl. No.1 to 
3) out of which two were constructed by the R&B Department and four bridges 
were constructed by SMC without obtaining CRZ clearances.  MoEF&CC made 
(06 March 2018) amendment in CRZ Notification 2011, wherein post facto  
CRZ clearance for permissible existing construction was allowed subject to 
receipt of such application on or before 30 June 2018.  R&B Department applied 
(June 2018) for regularisation of two bridges ( Sl. No.1 and 2) , which was 
pending with SEIAA (July 20 22).  SMC applied (August 2017) for post facto 
CRZ clearance for cable stayed bridge which was granted by MoEF&CC in 
March 2019.   In respect of the  other three  bridges, MoEF&CC delisted the 
applications of SMC, as they were not received before June 2018 with GCZMA 
recommendations. Subsequently, MoEF&CC issued (February 2021) Office 
Memorandum for post facto  CRZ clearance by undertaking compensatory 
activities suggested by the concerned authorities.  SMC, however, did not apply 
for regularisation as per the above OM of February 2021 as of August 2022. 
Audit visited (25 August 2021) the site of violation of Sl. No.  4 and found 
abandoned/ unfinished structure constructed in the CRZ area.  The SMC neither 
removed the structure nor applied for post facto CRZ clearance for carrying out 
permissible activity at that site.  Violations mentioned at Sl. No.5 to 7 remained 
unresolved and are discussed in subsequent paragraphs. 
Cases of non-compliance (Sl. No.1 to 6) were brought to the notice of GCZMA 
by the vigilant citizens.  The possibility of more cases of violations in the CRZ 
area by Government/ Private Entities in the remaining districts cannot be ruled 
out.  The above also indicates the failure of GCZMA/ GoG to create awareness 
among various user departments regarding provisions of CRZ Notification, 
2011.  Audit further observed that GCZMA did not have a n expert cell with 
personnel well versed in Geographical Information System (GIS) tools to 
regularly track  the changing landscape on the coastline a nd irregular 
developments. 

Chapter 3 
25 
3.4 Large scale mangroves destruction 
“Kharai” breed of camels 
popularly known as 
“swimming camels” are a 
unique species found 
only in the State of 
Gujarat that live in a dual 
ecosystem of land and 
coast.  Mangroves are a 
lifeline for this distinct  
breed and destruction of 
mangroves can threaten 
its existence. 
Figure 3.1: “Kharai” breed camels 
In February 2018, GCZMA received a complaint  from Kachchh Camel 
Breeders Association (KCBA), Bhuj regarding large -scale d estruction of 
mangroves at Nani-Chirai and Moti-Chirai areas of Bhachau Taluka, Kachchh 
by Salt Pan lessees.  Besides making a complaint to DLC, KCBA filed (March 
2018) an appeal before National Green Tribunal (NGT) regarding mangrove s 
destruction.  NGT passed an order directing (11  September 2019) F &ED to 
restore the mangroves within six months. It also directed F&ED, GCZMA and 
Revenue Department to inspect the site, remove obstruction, take action against 
the culprits by recovering cost of environmental damage and cost of restoration 
within one month f rom the order. GCZMA constituted a c ommittee which 
carried out (July 2020) the analysis of the sites.  The report of the committee 
revealed that 9, 511 meters of bunds had been constructed and nearly 117 
hectares of mangroves had been destroyed.  
Audit analysis revealed that F&ED/ GCZMA did not take any action on the 
orders of NGT including restoration of the mangroves.  The committee assessed 
the damage and recommended (July 2020) that GCZMA may issue directions 
to Deendayal Port Trust (DPT) and Revenue Department for removal of bunds.  
As such, no action for restoration of mangroves was taken even after nine 
months of NGT’s order .  An Execution Application 1 was filed (May 2020) 
before the NGT by KCBA on which NGT further ordered (September 2020) 
that restoration work be executed  expeditiously which may be overseen by a 
Joint Committee comprising F&ED and GCZMA.  Further, the Committee was 
also asked to file a compliance report with the Chief Secretary, Gujarat within 
three months, which was not filed till September 2021.  
Audit noticed that e ven against the new deadline of three months ending on 
15 December 2020, no concrete action had been taken by GCZMA and F&ED 
even after one year (September 2021) from the date of NGT’s order .  Further, 
although GCZMA directed DPT to carry out compensatory afforestation at the 
rate of three times of total mangroves destruction, nothing was found on record 
to indicate any action initiated for restoration of mangroves by F&ED/ 
 
1An application to the Court made in a pending execution petition, and includes an application of transfer 
of a decree. 


Performance Audit of Conservation and Management of Coastal Ecosystems 
26 
GCZMA/ DPT  (March 2022) .  This is indicative of lackadaisical efforts in 
ensuring compliance with NGT orders. 
The destruction of these mangroves in CRZ I areas not only prove s costly to 
ecosystems but also pose s a threat of extinction to unique breed of “Kharai” 
camels which are dependent on the mangroves for their food. 
Recommendation 5: The State Government may take appropriate action to 
preserve Mangroves to save the ‘Kharai’ breed of camels from extinction. 
3.5 Disposal of treated effluent in CRZ IB area 
Gujarat Industrial Development Corporation (GIDC) obtained (April 2005) 
environmental and CRZ Clearance from MoEF&CC for laying of pipeline for 
disposal of treated effluent of Dahej-Vilayat Industrial area in the deep sea at a 
disposal location suggested by National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) . 
Disposal was to be  through 9  kilometres onshore pipeline network and 
4.5 kilometres offshore sub-sea pipeline. 
A complaint was received (11  March 2020) by DLC, Bharuch where in it was 
mentioned that the 4.5 kilometres offshore disposa l pipeline was choked and a 
600 metre pipeline from sea-coast was laid by GIDC without obtaining EC and 
CRZ clearance. DLC, Bharuch conducted (27 May 2020) site inspection and 
found that 600 meter pipeline from sea coast was discharging the treated waste 
water in the CRZ IB area which was near to breeding ground of fish like Hilsa, 
M. Rosenbergii and Jinga species found in the Narmada estuary.  It was 
mentioned in the site inspection report that the disposal of effluent s affects the 
breeding ground and as per Rule 6(8)(f) of the Gujarat Fisheries Rules, 2003, 
such fish species should be protected for their unique biological characteristics. 
F&ED issued (July 2020) directions to GIDC to immediately stop  effluent 
discharge through 600 meter offshore pipeline in CRZ  IB area, and to start 
operation of 4.5 kilometres pipeline.  It also directed GIDC to submit a detailed 
time-bound action plan for corrective action within 15 days. 
Audit observed that GIDC submitted its action plan to F&ED on 16 September 
2021 i.e., after more than one year from the date of th e direction of F&ED.  It 
was observed from the action plan that, GIDC was still discharging effluents at 
the same location in the CRZ IB area through 600  meter pipeline.  GIDC also 
stated that it had issued tender for awarding contract for laying 1,200 met res 
onshore and 800 meter offshore pipeline with scheduled date of completion in 
May 2023.  Audit further observed that GIDC had not applied for EC and CRZ 
clearance (August 2022) for laying of the above new pipelines.  Further, no 
mention was found in the compliance report that the new location was selected 
based on a detailed study by NIO or any other competent expert agency. 
Thus, it was apparent that DLC and GCZMA did not take any corrective action 
even after directions from the F&ED.  Further, no assessment of damage in the 
marine ecosystems surrounding the present disposal point was conducted by 
DLC/ GCZMA.  Consequently, no action to mitigate/ compensate the damage 
was taken by DLC/ GCZMA. 

Chapter 3 
27 
3.6 Illegal construction of Bunds and Saltpans in Biologically 
active coastal areas 
Salt harvesting by solar evaporation of Sea Water is a permissible activity 
within the CRZ area including inter -tidal area (CRZ IB) and No Development 
Zone (NDZ) as per CRZ Notification, 2011.  However, it is not a  permissible 
activity in CRZ IA  area (containing mangroves, corals, dunes, biologically 
active mudflats etc.). 
In connection with an application for CRZ clearance for proposed salt 
production, the technical team of GCZMA visited (February 2015) Kukadsar 
Village of Kachchh district and noticed the existence of biologically active 
mudflats and sparse mangrove s plantation on the proposed site.  Though the 
proposed site was a potential area for mangroves, some of the land had already 
been converted into salt pans by the Project Proponent (PP) by creation of bund 
which blocked creeks and tidal water flow.  
GCZMA directed (March 2015) DLC to investigate the construction of bunds 
for salt pans without permission, identify the viol ators and take necessary 
action.  Regional Officer, GPCB, Kachchh (ex-officio Member Secretary, DLC, 
Kachchh) visited (April 2015) the area and re ported to GCZMA creation of 
various salt pans  by different parties  through bunds  which had resulted in 
depletion of the water in the area and damage to the mangroves.  In view of the 
large-scale violation of CRZ Notification, GPCB issued (April 2015) notice to 
the project proponent to carry out activities only after obtaining CRZ clearance 
and in the meanwhile to remove bunds and ensure free flow of water in the creek 
for the conservation of mangroves. However, no action was taken by the 
GCZMA/ GPCB/ F&ED/ DLC against the other salt pan units in the area 
(September 2021).  
Audit took satellite images with time series from Google earth pro software, of 
the violation area near Kukadsar - Bhadresar village during the month of May 
2015 and September 2022, which are shown below: 
 
Figure 3.2: Satellite image of the site as on May 2015 


Performance Audit of Conservation and Management of Coastal Ecosystems 
28 
 
Figure 3.3: Satellite image of the site as on September 2022 
Comparing both the satellite images it can be seen that salt pan area at the site 
increased from 580 ha in May 2015 to 800 ha in September 2022 (latest image 
available on Google earth pro).  Thus, additional salt pans were created in 
approximately 220 ha area at the site after May 2015. 
Audit did not find any application for CRZ clearance for salt pan during 2011-
2021 at GCZMA  i.e. after issuance of the CRZ Notification of 2011 .  Thus, 
existing salt pan units of 580  ha and new salt pan units of approximately 220 
hectare violated CRZ regulations and continued with the illegal activity. 
Though the Technical Committee of GCZMA had opined in 2015 that the area 
is having biologically active mudflats and mangroves potential areas which may 
render the area classifiable under CRZ IA zone but no records were found with 
GCZMA/ DLC showing a detailed survey of the area for CRZ zonation or for 
declaring it a non-CRZ area.  In the absence of detailed survey  by GCZMA/ 
DLC, cropping up of salt pans in this area is a matter of concern.  Thus, 
GCZMA/ DLC, Kachchh could not take appropriate action against the operation 
and proliferation of such salt pan units. 
3.7 Illegal construction in CRZ area at Varvala village 
A complainant made four complaints between October 2018 and July 2019 
regarding illegal construction within “No Development Zone”  (NDZ) at old 
survey numbers 61, 68 and 76 of Varvala village, Okhamandal taluka, 
Devbhumi Dwarka district. 
Site inspection by GPCB (July 2019) and committee formed by DLC (October 
2019) confirmed construction of a hotel building, residential plot, sheds and 
water tanks within CRZ limits or NDZ.  Audit observed that e ven after 
confirmation of illegal construction, DLC neither took any action under EPA 
nor did it submit its report to GCZMA .   Analysis of the site through Google 
earth pro software revealed that the illegal construction still existed as of August 
2022 which confirmed that no action to remove the illegal construction, noticed 
by the authorities in 2019, had been taken by the authorities as of August 2022. 


Chapter 3 
29 
3.8 Illegal construction in CRZ area at Okha 
The District Magistrate and Collector  (DM), Devbhumi Dwarka received 
(February 2017) a complaint regarding illegal construction in the CRZ area of 
Okhamandal taluka by one jetty owner.  A team constituted (February 2017) by 
the DM visited (04 May 2017) the site and confirmed the presence of an illegally 
constructed wall of limestone and sand on both sides of a small island ( tekari).  
The violator furnished (04 May 2017) an affidavit to the team stating that the 
illegal structure would be removed within 10 days, which was not done by him.   
The Complainant made (June 2018) further complaint on the same issue to 
GCZMA which in turn directed the DLC to take necessary action after 
verification.  GPCB officials visited (05 July 2018) the site and found the illegal 
construction of a 30 meter long jetty.  GPCB officials instructed the violator to 
remove the structure and not to undertake such activity without prior approval.  
Regional Officer, GPCB submitted (20 July 2018) inspection report to the 
GCZMA and DM regarding the site visit.  No further information regarding the 
case was available on the records of DLC or GCZMA .  Images of the site 
captured from Google Earth pro software are as under: 
 
Figure 3.4: Image is taken from Google earth pro (February 2016) 
 


Performance Audit of Conservation and Management of Coastal Ecosystems 
30 
 
Figure 3.5: Image is taken from Google earth pro (August 2022) 
Audit analysis of the images taken from Google Earth pro software revealed 
that one new jetty (Jetty 2) was constructed and two jetties (Shiv jetty and Jetty 
5) were expanded subsequent to February 2016 2, without any CRZ clearances 
and approval.  Further, the structures were still present on the site as on August 
2022.  
The State Government/ GCZMA stated (August 2022) that clarification had 
been sought on the above issue from concerned DLC.  Audit had pointed out 
the above violation in October 2021 . However, GCZMA did not take any 
effective action (August 2022) except seeking clarification from the DLC. 
3.9 CRZ violations by the salt manufacturer in Bharuch district 
MoEF&CC’s order dated 21 May 2002 and CRZ Notification 2011, permits salt 
works in CRZ  IB zone, inter-tidal and No Development Zone.  GCZMA also 
clarified (June 2015) that CRZ clearance is to be insisted only for the new salt 
works or expansion of salt works established after May 2002.  CRZ Notification 
2011 stipulates that groundwater shall not be tapped within 200 metre of the 
HTL.  Within 200-500-metre zone groundwater can be tapped only with the 
concurrence of the Central or State Ground Water Board.  
Office of the Collector, Bharuch allotted (August 2004) 1,098 acre land on lease 
to a unit for salt production at Khanpur village of Jambusar taluka. While 
disposing of a Special Civil Application to cancel the above lease agreement, 
High Court of Gujarat directed (February 2014) Collector, Bharuch to decide 
the case within four months.  The site visit by a team of Revenue Department 
and DLC officials under the directions of the Collector, Bharuch revealed that 
the unit had closed storm water drainage of the nearby villages by constructing 
a bund and had started production of salt in the leased land without valid CRZ 
 
2The nearest historical image of the site available (before February 2017) on Google Earth pro. 


Chapter 3 
31 
clearance.  The unit was also extracting underground water through 17 bore 
wells for the production of salt which were situated between LTL and HTL and 
fell under the prohibited CRZ IB zone. 
The Collector, Bharuch ordered (05 July 2014) the unit to remove bunds.   
However, the bunds were not removed by the unit even after three years of the 
order as observed by GPCB during its site visit in August 2017.  Further, it was 
also noticed during the site visit of 2017  that another 2.5 kilometre long bund 
was constructed on the leased land while a drainage rivulet was constructed for 
the drainage of storm  water.  No further record was available with the DLC, 
Bharuch regarding any action taken in this case (September 2021). 
Thus, despite violation of CRZ Notification by the unit; DLC, Bharuch did not 
take any action to prohibit the unauthorised activity. 
3.10 Ship repairing activities carried out without obtaining CRZ 
clearance 
Based on the inspection report (05 April 2018) of DLC , Kachchh in respect of 
complaint received against five plot holders of Deendayal Port Trust (DPT) for 
carrying out activities without obtaining CRZ clearance, GCZMA directed (04 
September 2018) DPT to take appropriate action in the matter and submit 
compliance report thereof. 
DPT submitted (03 November 2018) that the matter is sub-judice with NGT and 
it had instructed the plot holders to stop activities at the site.  Further, ACS, 
F&ED ordered (September 2018) for closure of these units and also directed 
electricity distribution company to disconnect power supply from these plots. 
Based on the action initiated in this case , NGT disposed of (December 2018) 
the matter. 
The complainant again made (26 December 2018) a complaint to GPCB as well 
as GCZMA that despite NGT’s order, barges were still beached towards seaside 
units and there were Diesel Generator sets and Welding Units installed at the 
plots.  GPCB forwarded the same to GCZMA in March 2019 .  However, no 
record showing action taken by GCZMA based on this complai nt was made 
available to audit .  In May 2019, one more complaint was received regarding 
this.  As per the Regional officer’s inspection report (26 July 2019) of the site, 
barges were beached towards the seaside of units and welding sets were also 
observed.  GPCB forwarded (03 September 2019) the inspection report to 
GCZMA for necessary action. 
Audit noticed that even after the inspection report was submitted (September 
2019) by GPCB to GCZMA, there was no record to suggest any action taken by 
GCZMA against such plot holders .  During joint physical verification (April 
2021) of the site by Audit  with DLC officials, no ship repairi ng activity was 
noticed in Plot no. 1  and 2, however, such activity was observed in Plot no. 3 
and 4 where Diesel Generator Sets were also being used .  Audit also observed 
that in plot number 5, construction activity was going on. 

Performance Audit of Conservation and Management of Coastal Ecosystems 
32 
Thus, despite NGT’s order and multiple inspections, GCZMA/ DLC could not 
take appropriate action to prohibit the plot holders from undertaking activities 
before obtaining CRZ clearance. 
The State Government/ GCZMA while accepting  (August 2022)  the audit 
observation stated that one case (plot no.1 and 2) had been recommended (June 
2022) by GCZMA to the MoEF&CC under MoEF&CC regulation of February 
2022 while other cases (plot 3 to 5) are under consideration with GCZMA.  The 
fact remains that  regularisation and clearance by MoEF&CC for Plot 1  and 2 
and suitable action by GCZMA for plot 3 to 5 were pending (August 2022).  
3.11  Impermissible activities in NDZ  
Annexure III of the CRZ Notification, 2011 stipulates conditions for the 
development of beach resorts and/  or hotels in designated areas of CRZ II and 
CRZ III.  Clause 1(a) of Annexure III stipulates that the project proponent shall 
not undertake any construction in NDZ i.e., within 200 metres in the landward 
side of the High Tide Line (HTL) and within the area between LTL and HTL in 
CRZ III.  
Sub-committee of DLC, Kachchh conducted site investigation (December 
2019) to verify complaints against three resorts constructed within the CRZ area 
in Mandvi and found that activities were going on without CRZ clearance as 
mentioned below: 
Table 3.3: Details of construction found during the site inspection on 20 December 2019 
by DLC, Kachchh 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
Entity 
Activity Construction observed 
1 Serena Beach 
Resort 
Resort 26 rooms, nine villas, one restaurant, one shop, two 
banquet halls, three offices, 15 staff rooms, one staff 
canteen and laundry room 
2 TCGL (Project 
2-discussed in 
detail under 
paragraph 4.9 
of Chapter 4) 
Resort Dining Hall, Kitchen, Office and 32 rooms  
3 HV Resorts Resort 11 rooms, four Bhunga rooms and one restaurant 
Source: Information taken from inspection report of DLC, Kachchh 
DLC issued (March 2020) notices to these entities under the EPA and instructed 
them to carry out activities only after obtaining CRZ clearance.  However, no 
further records were found at DLC or GCZMA regarding any CRZ clearance 
application by these entities.  Audit observed that all the activities mentioned in 
Table 3.3 fall under NDZ and are not permissible as per the CRZ Notification, 
2011.  As such, instead of directing these entities to obtain CRZ clearance, DLC 
was required to assess the construction carried out in NDZ and get it removed 
at the cost of entities. 

Chapter 3 
33 
3.12 Construction without obtaining CRZ clearance 
With the technology, it is possible to identify cases of violation, which had 
not been reported.  Audit took the help of GIS tools and benchmarked the latest 
available ground scene in select hot spots of the State with the approved CZMP 
for the area, after duly geo-referencing the file.   
Audit surveyed coastal areas of four districts viz. Kachchh, Porbandar, Surat, 
and Valsad through Google earth pro software.  Audit identified 12 buildings in 
the CRZ areas  (of three 3 districts), which were constructed after issuance of 
CRZ Notification, 2011. However, no CRZ clearances for the above buildings 
were found in the records of GCZMA .  Five out of these 12  buildings were 
constructed within the NDZ of CRZ III area, where construction is 
not-permitted.  Details of these 12 buildings are given in Appendix-1.  The cases 
identified and pointed out by Audit here are not exhaustive.  Audit observed that 
no mechanism exists in GCZMA for the periodic survey of coastline through 
remote sensing applications along with geo -referenced CZMP for identifying 
CRZ violations.  
The State Government/ GCZMA stated (August 2022) that GCZMA was in 
process of identification of violations using various methodolog ies and 
technologies.   
Recommendation 6: The State Government may consider establishing expert 
cells at the GCZMA/ DLC level to track activities along coasts through GIS 
tools.  Further, a mechanism may also be devised for timely removal of 
encroachments and disposal of violation cases in the CRZ areas so as to 
preserve the coastal ecosystems.  
3.13 Shortage of Sewage Treatment Plants  (STPs) in Coastal 
Urban Local Bodies 
The CRZ Notification, 2011 prohibits disposal of wastes and effluents into 
coastal waters  and any existing practice of discharging untreated waste and 
effluents was required to be phased out within a period not exceeding two years 
i.e. by January 2013.  Dumping of solid waste was required to be phased out 
within one year from the commencement of the Notification i.e. by January 
2012.  An Action Plan for dealing with pollution in coastal areas and waters is 
required to be made in a time-bound manner and submitted to MoEF&CC for 
technical and financial assistance. 
Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) published a report “National Inventory 
of Sewage Treatment Plants” in March 2021 wherein the rate of sewage 
generation was taken as 80  per cent of the water su pply. As per the report , 
sewage generation for the State of Gujarat was estimated at 5,013 Million Litres 
 
3Porbandar, Surat and Valsad. 

Performance Audit of Conservation and Management of Coastal Ecosystems 
34 
per Day (MLD) and total treatment capacity (including proposed) was estimated 
as 3,378 MLD of 70 STPs.  
Further, Centre for Environmental Planning and Technology (CEPT) 
University, Ahmedabad initiated (2009) “Performance Assessment System 
(PAS)” which is an  actionable research for developing tools, methods and 
processes for performance assessment and improvement of u rban water and 
sanitation.  PAS covers 6 States including Gujarat and is a major repository of 
urban water and sanitation database in India.  
Audit identified 33 Coastal Urban Local Bodies (21 ULBs as per CZMP 2011 
and 12 ULBs situated within 15 kilometres from CRZ limits) and gathered data 
of STPs (a) installed (b) under installation and (c) under planning stage from the 
Annual Reports of Gujarat Pollution Control Board.  Audit also obtained water 
supply data from the website of PAS and calculated sewage g eneration as 80 
per cent of water supplied as per the CPCB formula.  Summary of the estimated 
sewage generation and capacity of STPs of 33 coastal ULBs is tabulated as 
under: 
Table 3.4: Shortfall in sewage treatment capacity in coastal ULBs as of March 2021 
(in MLD) 
Sl. 
No. 
Status of STPs Number 
of ULBs 
Installed STP 
Capacity 
  
Wastewater 
Generation  
Shortfall in 
treatment 
capacity 
1 Installed (sufficient capacity) 4 110.70 58.48 0 
2 Installed (shortfall in 
capacity) 
4 1,157.50 1,321.52 164.02 
3 Not planned 17 0 119.12 119.12 
4 Under installation4 3 0 46.08 46.08 
5 Under Planning Stage5 5 0 33.20 33.20 
 Grand Total 33 1,268.2 1,578.4 362.42 
Source: Gujarat Pollution Control Board Report and PAS of CEPT 
It can be observed from the above table that out of 33 ULBs, only eight ULBs 
were having STPs installed as of March 2021.  Of these eight ULBs, four ULBs 
had shortfall in sewage treatment capacity of 164.02 MLD.  In 17 ULBs though 
there was a requirement of STPs of 119.12 MLD, neither any STP was installed 
nor planned to be installed.  In three ULBs, STPs with capacity of 40.22 MLD 
were under installation against the requirement of 46.08 MLD.  It implied that 
even after installation of the planned STPs in these ULBs, the facility will not 
be sufficient to treat the present estimated sewage and might not meet the future 
requirements.  In the remaining five ULBs, against the requirement of STPs of 
33.20 MLD capacity, STPs with capacity of 51.98 MLD were under planning 
stage.  Details of these 33 ULBs is given in Appendix-2. 
Thus, there was an overall shortage of sewage treatment capacity of 362.42 
MLD in 29 out of 33 Coastal ULBs of the State.  This leads to the discharge of 
untreated water in CRZ areas in con travention to the provisions of CRZ 
 
4Bharuch: 29.32 MLD, Bilimora: 8.30 MLD and Gandevi: 2.60 MLD (Total: 40.22 MLD). 
5Khambhat: 15 MLD, Mahuva: 16.50 MLD, Mandvi (Kachchh): 8.20 MLD, Talaja: 5.80 MLD, Umargam: 
6.48 MLD (Total: 51.98 MLD). 

Chapter 3 
35 
Notification, 2011, which adversely affects the coastal ecosystems and poses a 
threat to the aquatic animals due to depletion of oxygen in marine water and to 
human lives due to increased toxic elements in marine food. 
Recommendation 7: The State Government may consider installing STPs 
across coastal ULBs of the State to ensure that untreated sewage is not 
released into water bodies. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Performance Audit of Conservation and Management of Coastal Ecosystems 
36 
 
 
 

 
37 
Chapter-4 
CRZ Clearance and Post Clearance Monitoring 
A Snapshot 
Audit observed many instances where GCZMA solely relied on the information 
given by the Project Proponent (PP) for projects which led to non-evaluation 
of impacts and absence of mitigation measures thereon.  In many other projects, 
GCZMA left critical pre-requisites such as disaster management reports, risk 
assessment reports, NOC from GPCB etc., on the PP rather than making them 
a pre-condition before recommending for clearances.  The EIA reports were 
found deficient in various aspects related to the identification of environmental 
risk and required mi tigation measures.  There  were gaps in post-clearance 
monitoring by GCZMA and DLCs , in ensuring implementation of conditions 
stipulated in the clearance.  The post-clearance monitoring mechanism was 
not effective as PPs failed to submit the half-yearly compliance reports. 
Introduction 
As mentioned in paragraph 1.4.2 for obtaining the CRZ clearance for a project, 
the Project Proponent (PP) shall submit the project proposal along with the 
relevant documents to GCZMA for scrutiny and recommendation .  GCZMA, 
after vetting of the proposal by the technical committee and dis cussions in its 
meetings, recommends it to the authority as mentioned in the table below: 
Table 4.1: Classification of projects for CRZ clearances 
Category of projects Authority to which the 
proposal is required to be 
sent for CRZ clearance 
Category-A projects as per EIA Notification, 2006 
Projects mentioned in Clause 4 (ii) of CRZ Notification, 2011 
MoEF&CC 
Category-B Projects as per EIA Notification, 2006 SEIAA 
Projects in the CRZ II areas having less than 20,000 Sqm. 
construction area 
Town planning authorities 
Source: CRZ Notification 2011 
During the period 2015 -20, ninety -two CRZ/ Composite clearances were 
recommended by GCZMA  (40 to MoEF&CC, 33 to SEIAA and 19 to town 
planning authorities).  Audit selected 13 projects (as specified in Paragraph 
1.10 of this Report) for detailed scrutiny, the  description of which is given in 
Appendix-3. 
Audit observations related to the 13 projects are discussed in the succeeding 
paragraphs: 
 
 
 

Performance Audit of Conservation and Management of Coastal Ecosystems 
38 
4.1 Technical vetting of the projects by the GCZMA and their 
final recommendation to SEIAA and MoEF&CC 
CRZ Notification , 2011 stipulates that the PP shall apply to Coastal Zone 
Management Authority of the concerned State with the required documents1 for 
seeking prior clearance.  GCZMA scrutinises the project based on documents 
submitted, site visits, presentations by PP etc.  Audit verified the documents of 
the 13 Projects as submitted by the PPs to the GCZMA for seeking CRZ / 
composite clearance.  It can be seen from the Appendix-3 that nine out of 13 
PPs did not submit all pre -requisite documents, still their projects were 
recommended by the GCZMA for clearance.  This shows lack of adequate 
internal control which resulted in recommendation of projects without proper 
vetting at GCZMA level. 
The State Government/ GCZMA stated  (August 2022)  that the required 
documents might have been kept at some other place and not furnished to Audit.  
The reply is not acceptable as the GCZMA could not produce these documents 
to Audit. 
Recommendation 8: GCZMA may strengthen the evaluation process of 
project proposals and EIA reports to ensure that they adhere to all 
necessary pre-requisites before giving recommendation/ clearance. 
4.2 Accreditation of consultant for preparing EIA report 
CRZ Notification, 2011 stipulates submission of rapid/ comprehensive  
Environmental Impact Assessment  (EIA) report and Environmental 
Management Plan (EMP) by the PP along with Form 1 at the time of applying 
for CRZ clearance.  EIA Notification, 2006 also stipulates submission of EIA 
report, if the project falls under category ‘A’ and ‘B’.  MoEF decided 
(December 2009) that all the consultants working in the area of EIA/  EMP 
preparation would be required to get themselves registered w ith the National 
Accreditation Board of Education and Training (NABET)/ Quality Council of 
India (QCI) and EIA/ EMP prepared by non-accredited consultants shall not be 
considered after June 2010.  
Further, MoEF notified (18 March 2010) that (a) the Consult ants would be 
confined in their consultancy, only to the accredited sectors and parameters for 
bringing in more specificity in the EIA document and (b) after accreditation, the 
Consultants would need to include a certificate in this regard in the EIA/  EMP 
Reports prepared by them. 
Subsequently, Clause 13 was inserted in EIA Notification, 2006 through 
amendment (March 2016), which inter alia stipulated that a consultant shall be 
allowed to prepare EIA/ EMP in those sectors only for which it is accredited by 
 
1(i) Form 1 (ii) Environment Management Plan (iii) Project layout superimposed on CRZ map (iv) CRZ 
map covering 7 km radius around the project site (v) Rapid EIA report including marine and terrestrial 
component (vi) Disaster Management Report (vii) Risk Assessment Report ( viii) CRZ map with HTL 
and LTL marked (ix) Map with CRZ Zones and Ecologically sensitive areas (x) No objection certificate 
from GPCB. 

Chapter 4 
39 
NABET.  The status of accreditation of EIA / EMP  consultants for the 13 
projects is shown in Appendix-4.  Audit observed that: 
1. In five projects (Sl. No. 1 to 5), EIA/ EMP was prepared by consultants who 
were not accredited by the NABET.  
2. In one project ( Sl. No. 6), the consultant was not accredited for the given 
sector.  
3. In seven projects (Sl. No. 7 to 13), EIA/ EMP was prepared by the consultant 
accredited by the NABET.   However, in two projects ( Sl. No. 12 and 13) 
the consultant did not attach the accreditation certificate with the EIA/ EMP 
report. 
While reviewing the minutes of GCZMA meetings, it was observed that in two 
projects2, GCZMA deferred recommendation until t he PP submitted an EIA 
report prepared by consultant accredited by NABET.  However, in the six cases 
(Sl. No.1 to 6), GCZMA did not insist on accreditation of EIA consultants in 
the relevant sector with NABET.  
Thus, GCZMA could not ensure compliance to the MoEF&CC’s Notification 
regarding accreditation of consultants.  EIA and EMP report preparation by 
either non-accredited consultants or by the consultants not accredited in the 
relevant sector may lead to incorrect assessment of the negative environmental 
impact of the projects and may affect decision on relevant mitigation measures 
to be taken. 
The State Government/ GCZMA stated (August 2022) that during the 
presentation by PP, it was ascertained that each EIA report had been prepared 
by NABE T accredited consultant .  It further stated that requi site certificate 
might not be part of report at the time of submission of details and there are 
certain activities which attract only the provisions of CRZ Notification.  Hence, 
they may  not require NABET accreditation certificate.   However, the State 
Government/ GCZMA assured that accreditation of the Consultant with 
competent authority would be ensured during scrutiny of the projects in future.  
The reply is not acceptable as GCZMA recommends the project to MoEF&CC 
or SEIAA, based on the category of project as per EIA Notification, 2006.  EIA 
is also prepared as per the Notification.  Hence, MoEF&CC directions regarding 
EIA preparation are applicable to the above projects.  Further, Audit instead of 
relying solely upon attachment of certificate of NABET accreditation with EIA 
report, had independently verified accreditation of the Consultants at the time 
of submission of EIA report with the  list of NABET accredited Consultants 
published for that period.  
 
2Ship building and fabrication yard by Efforts India Limited (deferred in 14th meeting held on 27 February 
2012) and Desalination plant by Electrotherm (India) Limited (deferred in 15th meeting held on 30 March 
2012). 

Performance Audit of Conservation and Management of Coastal Ecosystems 
40 
4.3 Deficiencies observed in EIA report of the projects 
For projects involving both Environment and CRZ clearances, EIA submitted 
by the Project Proponent (PP) was compared with Terms of Reference (ToR) 
issued by MoEF&CC or State Expert Appraisal Committee ( SEAC) and the 
generic structure as prescribed in Appen dix III to EIA Notification, 2006.   In 
the case of Projects involving only CRZ clearance, as no ToR is issued, EIA 
submitted by PP was compared with the generic structure only.  The 
discrepancies in EIA, observed with reference to the generic structure , are as 
follows: 
Table 4.2: Discrepancies in EIA reports in the test-checked projects 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
Chapter  
Description of the 
details not 
incorporated in 
EIA Report 
Name of the project/ PP which were non-
compliant  
1 Introduction Scope of the study – 
details of regulatory 
scoping carried out 
as per ToR 
• Development of Petroleum, Chemical and 
Petro-Chemical Investment Region (PCPIR) 
at Dahej, District Bharuch by Gujarat 
Industrial Development Corporation. 
 
2 Project 
Description 
Proposed Schedule 
for approval and 
implementation 
• Common treated effluent disposal pipeline 
project at Vapi, district Valsad by Wel Treat 
Enviro Management Organization. 
• Laying of treated effluent disposal pipeline 
and diffuser system for disposal of treated 
wastewater at Marine outfall point in Gulf of 
Kachchh at Mithapur, Devbhumi Dwarka  by 
Tata Chemicals Limited. 
3 Anticipated 
environmental 
impacts and 
mitigation 
measures 
Mitigation measures • Construction of marine bridge between Beyt 
Dwarka and Okha by Roads and Buildings 
Department. 
4 Environment 
Monitoring 
Program 
Technical aspects of 
monitoring- the 
effectiveness of 
mitigation measures 
(including 
measurement 
methodologies, 
frequency, location, 
data analysis, 
reporting schedules , 
emergency 
procedures and 
detailed budget and 
procurement 
schedules) 
• Development of Petroleum, Chemical and 
Petro-Chemical Investment Region (PCPIR) 
at Dahej, District Bharuch by Gujarat 
Industrial Development Corporation. 
• Discharge of 10 MLD industrial effluent in 
Bhavnagar creek, Bhavn agar by Madhu 
Silica Private Limited.  
• Laying of treated effluent disposal pipeline 
and diffuser system for disposal of treated 
wastewater at Marine outfall point in Gulf of 
Kachchh at Mithapur, Devbhumi Dwarka by 
Tata Chemicals Limited. 
• Construction of marine bridge between Beyt 
Dwarka and Okha by Roads and Buildings 
Department. 
• Additional Saltworks (2,395.15 acres) 
located at village Kalatalav  and Narmad, 
taluka and district Bhavnagar by Nirma 
Limited. 
5 Summary and 
Conclusion 
Overall justification 
for the 
implementation of 
project and 
• Construction of marine bridge between Beyt 
Dwarka and Okha by Roads and Buildings 
Department. 
 

Chapter 4 
41 
explanation as to 
how adverse effects 
have been mitigated 
6 Disclosure of 
consultants 
engaged 
Names of the 
consultants engaged 
with their brief 
resume and nature of 
consultancy 
rendered 
• Discharge of 10 MLD industrial effluent in 
Bhavnagar creek, Bhavnagar by Madhu 
Silica Private Limited.  
• Additional Saltworks (2,395.15 acres) 
located at village Kal atalav and Narmad, 
taluka and district Bhavnagar by Nirma 
Limited. 
Source: Information taken from EIA Report of respective projects 
It can be seen from the above table that PP s did not incorporate the required 
details as per the generic Structure of the EIA document.   However, the above 
projects were recommended by GCZMA for CRZ clearance.   Observations 
related to non -preparation of EIA as per ToR are discussed in ensuing 
paragraphs. 
The State Government/ GCZMA while accepting the observation stated 
(August 2022) that GCZMA scrutinize d application prima facie considering 
CRZ aspects and did not look in much depth the other terrestrial EIA aspect due 
to limitation of manpower, infrastructure etc. The State Government/ GCZMA 
further assured to take care of this aspect in future.  
4.4 Specific issues on EIA reports of the projects 
Audit compared the EIA reports submitted by PP with various Notifications/ 
Orders issued by MoEF&CC.  Project- wise specific observations are discussed 
below: 
1. Expansion of Adani Petronet (Dahej) Port at Dahej, District 
Bharuch by Adani Petronet (Dahej) Port Private Limited 
The EMP did not contain details of post monitoring of sediment quality, 
phytoplanktons, zooplanktons and benthos in and around the project site. 
Environment policy approved by the Board of Directors and system of reporting 
of violations/ non-compliances by the Company to its Board of Directors and 
stakeholders at large were not incorporated in EIA Report. 
2. Development of Petroleum, Chemical and Petro -Chemical 
Investment Region, (PCPIR) at Dahej, District Bharuch by Gujarat 
Industrial Development Corporation 
Condition number (iv) of the ToR issued (December 2013) to PP for the project 
stipulated that the latest data should be used for the preparation of EIA studies.   
In this regard, the Office Memorandum issued (22 March 2010) by MoEF&CC 
stipulated that the EIA/ EMP Report should be submitted with primary data not 
older than three years.  However, the PP submitted data older than three years 
in EIA Report at various places 3.  Audit observed that GCZMA did not insist 
on the latest data while reviewing the EIA. 
 
3Chapter 3 of the EIA report (August 2015) of the project, viz. “Description of Environment” contained 
baseline data regarding Air Environment (for the year 2010, 2013 and 2014), Noise Environ ment (no 
period mentioned), Water Environment (the year 2010), Land Environment (no period mentioned) and 
Biological Environment (Horticulture: 2009-12 and fisheries: 2005-08). 

Performance Audit of Conservation and Management of Coastal Ecosystems 
42 
3. Laying of treated effluent disposal pipeline and diffuser system for 
disposal of treated wastewater at marine outfall point in Gulf of 
Kachchh at Mithapur , Devbhumi Dwarka  by Tata Chemicals 
Limited 
Mangroves near the project site were reported in the EIA.  However, the EIA 
did not mention the impact of the project on mangroves in terms of health and 
genetic biodiversity. 
EIA submitted in May 2016, contained data for the year 2009 -10 or older , 
however, GCZMA did not insist on the latest data. 
4. Modification of existing jetty and expansion of isolated storage 
facility at Dahej , Bharuch  by Gujarat Chemical Port Terminal 
Company Limited 
Conditions number 4 (project implementation schedule), 11 (berthing facility 
and vessels details), 24 (treated and untreated waste water), 27 (air pollution 
control measure), 57 and 58 (firefighting and prevention mechanism) and 64 
(green belt development) of the ToR issued in September 2014 by SEAC were 
not complied in EIA Report.  In spite of this, the  GCZMA did not insist on 
compliance with the above terms before recommending the project to SEIAA 
for clearance. 
5. Revival of existing jetty with liquid storage terminal, pipeline, road 
connectivity at Gandhidham, Kachchh, by Ahir Salt and Allied  
Product Private Limited 
Initial ToR for this project was issued by SEAC in May 2015.   SEAC asked 
(November 2015) the PP to also consider model T oRs mentioned in the 
MoEF&CC’s Technical Guidance Manual (TGM) for isolated storage and 
handling of hazardous chemicals (project category 6(b)) and Po rts and 
Harbours (project category 7(e)) besides ToR of May 2015 in the preparation 
of EIA report. 
Audit verified the EIA submitted by the PP with the TGMs of MoEF&CC and 
found that 94 and 145 points of the TGM for project categories 6(b) and 7(e) 
respectively were not included in EIA Report.  
GCZMA did not insist on the inclusion of the above points in the EIA report 
and recommended the project for CRZ clearance to SEIAA. 
 
4a) Technologies involved for design, construction, equipment and operation (b) Hydrographic charts of 
the offshore area giving general morphology of the coastal stretch to a scale of 1: 50000 (c) Bed Sediment 
Contamination (d) Sea Harbour Water Quality (e) Marine/  Coastal Ecology (f) Socio -Economic and 
Occupational Heal th Environment (g) Solid Waste Disposal Facilities (h)  Public Utilities and (i) 
Assessment of anticipated impact of the project construction/  operation on the coastal hydrology on 
account of port construction. 
5i) domino effects of storage tanks, ii) specif ic control equipment, iii) infrastructure facilities, iv) 
compliance to previous ECs, v) litigations against project, vi) air quality, vii) baseline monitoring 
network, viii) monitoring network, ix) leak detection programme, x) occupation safety and health  
protection, xi) monitoring agencies, xii) socio economic development activities, xiii) socio economic 
influence on local community and xiv) administrative and technical organizational structure for post 
project monitoring. 

Chapter 4 
43 
6. Construction of residential project ‘Sun city’ at Barbodhan village, 
Surat by Pramukh Organisers LLP 
EIA report was prepared by PP based on the ToR.  Audit noticed that point 
number 6 (project implementation schedule), 10 (service and commercial units 
and amenities), 30 (solid waste facilities), 35 (tree plantation/ removal/ 
transplantation), 40 (ground w ater recharge plan) and 47 (financial outlay for 
EMP) of the ToR were not included in the EIA report. 
Thus, EIA reports were not prepared by PPs as per the ToRs prescribed by 
MoEF&CC/ SEAC and GCZMA also did not verify compliance of the 
prescribed ToRs in EIA reports before recommending the project for clearance.  
This would impact the quality of EIA/ EMP report of the projects and weaken 
the process to conserve the coastal ecosystem. 
The State Government/  GCZMA stated (August 2022) that GCZMA 
scrutinized applications prima facie as per CRZ Notification and recommended 
them to MoEF&CC/ SEIAA for final CRZ clearance.  It was further stated that 
it was responsibility of MoEF&CC/ SEIAA to verify every aspect of procedures 
for preparing EIA report. 
The reply is not acceptable as MoEF&CC/ SEIAA considers projects for 
clearance based on the recommendation of GCZMA and it is the responsibility 
of GCZMA to verify the detailed aspects of EIA before recommendi ng it to 
MoEF&CC/ SEIAA.  
4.5 Construction of Marine bridge between Beyt Dwarka and 
Okha 
State Highway expansion projects in hilly terrain (more than 1,000 metre above 
Mean Sea Level) and/ or ecologically sensitive areas are classified as Category 
‘B’ Project s in EIA Notification, 2006.  The Notification prescribes  prior 
Environment Clearance (EC) for such projects .  Further, CRZ Notification of 
2011 classifies Marine Parks as an ecologically sensitive area.   
The project of construction of marine bridge between Beyt Dwarka and Okha 
was taken up by the Jamnagar Division of Roads and Buildings Department.  
The project being in an Ecologically Sensitive Area (ESA), required composite 
clearance i.e., CRZ as well as environment  clearance from SEIAA. However, 
the project proponent a pplied (June 2017) only for CRZ clearance instead of 
composite clearance.  EC is necessary for assessing the impact of the proposed 
projects on environment and people so that steps to mitigate such impact may 
be taken.  GCZMA recommended (August 2017) the project to SEIAA for CRZ 
clearance, which was granted on 24 August 2017.  The project was in-progress 
in August 2021.   
Thus, the SEIAA/  GCZMA did not insist on the EC though the project was 
falling in ESA.  
The State Government/ GCZMA stated (August 2022) that it is the 
responsibility of PP to obtain all regulatory clearances and GCZMA imposed a 

Performance Audit of Conservation and Management of Coastal Ecosystems 
44 
condition that PP shall obtain all necessary permission s from different 
departments/ authorities. 
The reply is not acceptable as GCZMA recommends the project to SEIAA/ 
MoEF&CC based on the category of the project mentioned in EIA Notification, 
2006 which prescribes for obtaining EC for the project falling under ESA.  Thus, 
before recommending the project for CRZ clearance, GCZMA should have 
ascertained the category of the project  and ensured that related statutory 
requirements were complied with.  Further, as the PP did not apply for the EC, 
the EIA was prepared without obtaining ToR from the SEAC.  GCZMA vetted 
the project details including EIA  considering it as normal CRZ clearance 
proposal without emphasizing on ESA status.   
4.6 Submission of compliance report by Project Proponent 
CRZ Notification 2011 requires the PP to submit half-yearly compliance reports 
in respect of the stipulated terms and conditions of the EC to the regulatory 
authority(s) concerned on 1 st June and 31 st December of each calendar year.  
Such compliance reports submitted by the PP are required to be published in the 
public domain  and displayed on the website of the concerned regulatory 
authority.  Further, SEIAA/ MoEF&CC also require the PP to display the 
compliance report in respect of all the clearances on its website.  Audit verified 
(September 2021) compliance to the above clauses/ conditions in respect of 12 
out of the 13 test-checked projects6 from the date of clearance of the project to 
September 2021. The findings are detailed in Appendix-5 and summarised as 
under: 
Table 4.3: Status of submission of Compliance Reports by PPs and display thereof on 
website as on 30 September 2021 
Particulars of Compliance 
Reports  
No. of reports 
required to be 
submitted/ 
uploaded  
No. of reports 
actually 
submitted/ 
uploaded 
No. of 
PPs 
Sl. No. of 
Appendix-5  
Status of  reports submitted 
All reports submitted  28 28 3 10 to 12 
No reports submitted  50 0 5 1 to 5 
Lesser number of Reports 
submitted  
39 30 4 6 to 9 
Status of  uploading of submitted reports on website of PPs 
Reports submitted and uploaded 
on website of the PP  
28 28 3 9,11 and 12 
Reports submitted but  not 
uploaded on website of the PP 
30 0 9 1 to 8 and 10 
Status of  uploading of received reports on website MoEF&CC and SEIAA 
Reports submitted but not 
uploaded on website of the 
MoEF&CC and/ or SEIAA 
58 0 12 1 to 12 
Source: Information provided by GCZMA/ PPs and websites of the MoEF&CC, SEIAA and 
the PPs 
Thus, five PPs (Sl. No. 1 to 5) were non-compliant and four PPs (Sl. No. 6 to 9) 
were partially compliant to the conditions related to submission of compliance 
 
6Out of the 13 selected projects, one project had been delisted after obtaining required clearance.  

Chapter 4 
45 
reports. Further, nine PPs (Sl. No. 1 to 8 and 10) did not upload the compliance 
reports submitted by them on their website. Non-compliance by PPs would 
impair the ability of regulatory agencies to notice and take steps to mitigate any 
negative impacts on the coastal ecosystems. 
The State Government/ GCZMA stated (August 2022) that  monitoring the 
compliance is primarily responsibility of the Integrated Regional Officer of 
MoEF&CC and GCZMA is only a recommending authority. 
The reply is not acceptable as CRZ Notification 2011 stipulates maintenance of 
half-yearly compliance reports by GCZMA and to provide a copy of the same 
to any person , on application to GCZMA.  Further, GCZMA also stipulates 
condition in its recommendation letter to  SEIAA/ MoEF&CC regarding 
submission of compliance report to GCZMA  by PP.  In every clearance letter 
issued by SEIAA/ MoEF&CC, it is mentioned that PP has also to comply with 
the condition stipulated by GCZMA in its recommendation letter. 
4.7 Post Clearance monitoring of the projects 
While recommending the project, GCZMA stipulates several conditions to be 
complied with by the PP before and during the construction and operational 
phase of the projects.  Similarly, MoEF&CC and SEIAA also stipulate several 
conditions in the clearance letter which are to be complied with by the PPs.   
Audit observed that out of 13 test checked projects, in seven projects, PPs did 
not comply with the conditions mentioned in the EC/ CRZ clearance granted by 
the regulatory authorit ies.  Observations related to non -compliance of 
conditions are mentioned in the  Appendix-6.  Non-compliance to these key 
conditions adverse ly impact the surrounding ecosystem s of the projects and 
indicate inefficient monitoring by regulatory authorities. 
The State Government/ GCZMA stated (August 2022) that as per EIA 
Notification and various Guidelines issued by MoEF&CC, Regional Office of 
MoEF&CC and State Pollution Control Board are nodal agencies to verify 
compliance of conditions prescribed by various authorities. 
The reply is not acceptable as Regional Officer s of GPCB  are member 
secretaries of concerned DLC and as per CRZ Notification, DLCs in the State 
were constituted to assist GCZMA.  Compliance reports are required to be sent 
to GCZMA as well as DLC by the PP.  On receipt of the compliance report from 
the PP, GCZMA can direct DLC s to verify  impact of  non-compliance of 
conditions by PP on the CRZ area.  
4.8 Disposal of treated wastewater through open channel in 
intertidal zone of the Gulf of Kachchh at Mithapur  
The chemical manufacturing plant of Tata Chemicals Limited (TCL) at 
Mithapur generates treated wastewater from its various processes which was 
being discharged (17 August 2021) into the Gulf of Kachchh through an open 
channel in the intertidal zone.  The above channel was passing through the 

Performance Audit of Conservation and Management of Coastal Ecosystems 
46 
eco-sensitive zone and releasing the effluents in Marine National Park and 
Marine Sanctuary (MNP&MS)7.  
In order to comply with the standards issued (June 2011) by MoEF&CC for 
releasing waste water from soda ash industries, TCL proposed laying discharge 
pipeline of 3,758 metres , out of which 2,504 metre s was passing through the 
MNP&MS and 362 metres through Eco-Sensitive Zone (ESZ).  The laying of 
pipeline in MNP&MS required use of 11.2680 ha of the MNP&MS Area, which 
required sanction under the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972.  TCL submitted 
the necessary proposal to the In-Charge, MNP&MS in January 2015 and the in-
principle Forest Clearance (Stage I ) was obtained (22 February 2019) from 
MoEF&CC. 
Meanwhile, TCL approached (05  May 2016) GCZMA for CRZ clearance for 
laying of treated effluent disposal pipeline and diffuser system for disposal of 
treated wastewater at marine outfall point in Gulf of Kachchh at Mithapur.  On 
recommendations of GCZMA (28  June 2016), MoEF&CC granted (10  July 
2017) the clearance.  
The CRZ clearanc e was subject to obtaining prior approval for diversion of 
forest land (mangroves) under the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 before the 
commencement of work.  During joint field visit by Audit with officials of DLC, 
Jamnagar on 17 August 2021, it was noticed that even though in-principle Forest 
Clearance (Stage I) was obtained in February 2019, the project was yet to be 
implemented due to non -receipt of Final Forest Clearance (Stage  II) fro m 
MoEF&CC. Audit noticed that due to non -implementation of the project, 
treated effluents were being discharged through an open channel by the PP as 
can be seen in the following image (taken on 17 August 2021).  
 
Figure 4.1: Treated wastewater being discharged through open channel at marine outfall 
point in Gulf of Kachchh at Mithapur 
 
7Situated along the southern coast of Gulf of Kachchh in Devbhumi Dwarka, Jamnagar and Morbi 
Districts. 


Chapter 4 
47 
It is pertinent to mention that in the management plan of MNP&MS for the 
period 2007-08 to 2016-17, it was mentioned that release of effluents by the PP 
in the MNP&MS through an open channel was causing heavy deposition, which 
is gradually turning the area difficult to reclaim.  While processing Stage I 
clearance, Chief Conservator of Forest (CCF), MNP&MS opined (February 
2015) that protected area in the Mithapur has se agrass vegetation which is a 
feeding ground for threatened species like Dugong and Sea Turtles.  He further 
mentioned that after implementation of the project, the effluents will be directly 
drained into the sea and the inter -tidal ecosystem will be protec ted. Audit 
observed that the mandate of GCZMA is also to conserve the marine ecosystem 
of the State.  However, after recommending (June 2016) the project to 
MoEF&CC for CRZ clearance the issue of pursuing Forest Clearance (Stage I 
and II) from MoEF&CC, was never discussed in  any of the 27 GCZMA 
meetings held between June 2016 and August 2021.  
The release of the treated effluents through an open channel in the MNP&MS 
area may drastically affect the inter-tidal organisms and the coastal ecosystem 
of MNP&MS. 
4.9 Development of tourist facilities and accommodation at 
Mandvi by Tourism Corporation of Gujarat Limited 
The Tourism Corporation of Gujarat Limited (TCGL), approached 
(09 July 2013) GCZMA for CRZ clearance for development of a beach resort 
(Project-1) with the facility of 80 cottages and supporting infrastructure at 
Mandvi, Kachchh . GCZMA recommended (29  January 2014) to the 
MoEF&CC to grant CRZ clearance.  MoEF&CC granted the clearance in March 
2015. 
During the joint site visit by Audit with the officials of DLC, Kachchh (October 
2021), Audit noticed that the proposed project activities were not being carried 
out as the project did not commence.  Further, Audit observed that another resort 
(Project-2) was functioning, approximately 500 meters on the west side of the 
site of Project-1.  Through satellite images on Google earth pro software, it was 
ascertained that this project (Project-2) was constructed after April 2017.  
Scrutiny of records of TCGL revealed that work order for Project-2 was issued 
in December 2016 and the  work was completed in April 2019.  The main 
components of the above work were (a) Construction of 32 tented 
accommodations (b) a Dining Hall (c) Other infrastructure and (d) Parking and 
pathway. 
CRZ Notification, 2011 restricts the  PP from undertaking any construction 
within 200 metres on the landward side of H TL and within the area between 
LTL and HTL i.e. No Development Zone (NDZ).  GCZMA while 
recommending (January 2014) Project-1 and MoEF&CC while granting CRZ 
clearance (March 2015) had banned TCGL from carrying out any construction 
activity in the NDZ.  TCGL had also furnished an undertaking for the same.   

Performance Audit of Conservation and Management of Coastal Ecosystems 
48 
The following Google earth pro images of Project-2 shows construction activity 
carried out after April 2017, status as of September 2022 and distance from the 
coastline. 
  
Figure 4.2: No structure at (22°49'22.84"N 69°21'28.80"E) location (April 2017) 
 
  
Figure 4.3: Structure of Project-2 constructed within 200-meter from the coastline at the 
location (22°49'22.84"N- 69°21'28.80"E) as of September 2022 
From the above images it was clear that Project-2 was constructed in the NDZ 
by TCGL.  Since Project -2 was not among the projects recommended by 
GCZMA for CRZ clearance, the activities carried out by TCGL in the project 
site, were without obtaining CRZ clearance.   Thus, carrying out a project 
without obtaining CRZ clearance and that too in the NDZ may adversely affect 
the coastal ecosystem. 
The State Government/ GCZMA stated (August 2022) that verification of 
violation was under progress and suitable action would be initiated. 


Chapter 4 
49 
4.10 CRZ clearances for construction s of  less than 20,000 Sqm 
area in CRZ II 
CRZ II area s are the areas that have been developed 8 up to or close to the 
shoreline.  In the earlier CZMP prepared as per CRZ Notification 1991, CRZ II 
areas were declared in three municipal areas  of Gujarat viz. Veraval, Bharuch 
and Porbandar. Any projects falling under CRZ II area of the above three 
municipal areas were vetted by GCZMA first and then recommended to the 
concerned local bodies for granting CRZ clearance. 
In pursuance of CRZ Notification 2011, district wise CZMPs (except Kachchh 
and Morbi districts) were approved by MoEF&CC and accepted by GoG in 
January/ February 2019.  As per these CZMPs, CRZ II areas were declared in 
additional 11 towns/ municipal areas 9.  However, GCZMA had not issued any 
instructions to these 11 local bodies to direct PPs to submit the proposal for 
vetting and recommendation for CRZ clearance. Hence, not a single CRZ 
clearance proposal was received at GCZMA  between March  2019 and 
September 2021 relating to development activities under these local bodies .  
Thus, possibility of unregulated development activities being carried out in the 
CRZ areas falling under above 11 local bodies cannot be ruled out.   
The State Government/ GCZMA stated (August 2022) that CZMP are published 
on the website of GCZMA and DLC in each coastal district had been formed.  
It further stated that based on the audit observation, GCZMA had issued (August 
2022) letters to all the concerned ULBs regarding prior requirement of CRZ 
clearance for carrying out construction activity in the  CRZ II area  of the se 
ULBs.  The fact remains that GCZMA informed the ULBs after more than three 
years from the approval of CZMP which implied that development activities 
comprising less than 20,000 Sqm in CRZ II areas remained unmonitored and 
unregulated by the GCZMA during this period.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8“Developed area” is referred to as that area within the existing municipal limits or in other existing legally 
designated urban areas which are substantially built -up and have been provided with drainage and 
approach roads and other infrastructural facilities, such as water supply and sewerage mains. 
91. Jafrabad (Amrel i) 2. Khambhat (Anand) 3. Bhavnagar 4. Dwarka (Devbhumi Dwarka) 5. Salaya 
(Devbhumi Dwarka) 6. Jamnagar 7. Mandvi (Kachchh) 8. Bilimora (Navsari) 9. Chhaya (Porbandar) 10. 
Surat 11. Umbergaon (Valsad). 

Performance Audit of Conservation and Management of Coastal Ecosystems 
50 
 

51 
Chapter-5 
Integrated Coastal Zone Management Project 
 
A Snapshot 
Instruments purchased for capacity building of GEER Foundation and GPCB 
were not put to optimum utilization.  There was vast difference in mangroves 
plantations claimed by the Project Executing Agencies (PEAs) and as observed 
through GIS by audit.  However, no third -party evaluation of the mangroves 
plantation was conducted by GEC for plantation carried out during 2012 -19.  
ICZMP activities were carried out without getting approval of Procurement 
Plan and activity schedule from the World Bank.   
There were deficiencies in planning of works, preparation of estimates, 
selection of contractors, and terms and conditions of the contract agreements 
during the process of awarding the respective contracts.  The works we re not 
executed as per the standards prescribed in the contracts and instances such as 
use of substandard materials, assets not being optimally utilised etc.  were 
noticed.  Monitoring by the GEC and TPI agency was found inadequate.  The 
GEC instead of gett ing substandard works set -right by the contractors simply 
made deductions for the same.  Further, no penal action was taken against the 
contractor for fraudulent claims.  
During joint inspection by audit team with the Department officials, cases of 
assets in dilapidated condition/ incomplete works/ non -execution of works as 
per contract etc. were noticed.  
Introduction 
Integrated Coastal Zone Management Project (ICZMP) addresses 
environmental, economic and social issues in an integrated manner.  A financing 
agreement for ICZMP was entered into by Government of India (GoI) with the 
World Bank in 2010. 
The objectives of ICZMP were capacity development in a sustainable coastal 
management approach for India's coastal zones and piloting integrated coastal  
zone management approaches in  three States, viz. Gujarat, Orissa and West 
Bengal. 
5.1 Project cost for Gujarat 
Gujarat Ecology Commission (GEC) was designated as the  State Project 
Management Unit (SPMU) for implementation of ICZMP in Gujarat.  The 
ICZMP phase I for Gujarat with World Bank assistance was approved  by the 
GoI in March 2010.  Additionally, on 5 March 2019, MoEF&CC approved the 
proposal for ‘Livelihood Improvement through Smart Eco Villages’ (SEV) 
under ICZMP (apart from Phase I), to be implemented by GEC.  The component 

Performance Audit of Conservation and Management of Coastal Ecosystems 
52 
wise details of outlay approved, expenditure incurred and availability of funds  
are as under:  
Table 5.1: ICZMP- Approved outlay, expenditure incurred and funds availability  
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
Component 
Outlay 
approved 
originally   
Revised 
approved 
outlay 
Expenditure 
incurred  
Funds received 
and available with 
the SPMU 
1 Phase I 298.34 387.17 336.62 336.62 
2 SEV -- 117 74.29 53.35 
 Total 298.34 504.17 410.91 389.971 
Source: Information provided by GEC 
Thus, SPMU had booked an expenditure of ₹ 410.91 crore as on 31 March 2020, 
when the Project was officially closed.  Against this, the funds actually available 
with the SPMU was only ₹ 389.97 crore. R emaining expenditure of 
₹ 20.94 crore was incurred under SEV without availability of funds, and was 
thus yet to be paid to the contractors (August 2022). 
5.2 Implementation of phase I of ICZMP in Gujarat 
A Detailed Project Report (DPR) was prepared (February 2009) by WAPCOS 
Limited for Phase I of the ICZMP for the Gulf of Kachchh  having four 
components2.  Memoranda of Understanding (MoU) were entered into (April 
2010) between SPMU and Project Executing Agencies (PEAs) i.e., Gujarat 
Ecological Education and Research ( GEER) Foundation, Gujarat Pollution 
Control Board (GPCB), Jamnagar Municipal Corporation (JMC) and Marine 
National Park and Marine Sanctuary (MNP&MS) for the activities to be carried 
out during the period from April 2010 to March 2015 which was extended up 
to March 2020.  Activities assigned and outcomes achieved by the SPMU and 
the four PEAs with expenditure incurred as of 30  September 2021, are shown 
in Appendix-7.  Audit found that most of the activities envisaged in the DPR  
had been carried out by the PEA s/ SPMU.  Out of these activities, Audit 
reviewed the capacity building and mangroves plantation activities carried out 
by the PEAs, and the SEV implemented by the SPMU. The audit observations 
are discussed in the succeeding paragraphs.  
 
1World Bank: ₹ 293.65 crore, GoI: ₹ 49.58 crore, GoG: ₹ 37.77 crore, Interest earnings: ₹ 8.97 crore  
2Component A- Coastal Resources Conservation and Management. 
Component B- Coastal Environment Monitoring and Conservation. 
Component C- Socio-Economic Development. 
Component D- Integration of Geo-Spatial Information. 

Chapter 5 
53 
5.2.1 Mangroves Plantation under ICZMP 
Mangroves form one of the most important ecosystems of coastal and marine 
areas.  The Mangrove s restoration would also lead to conserving marine 
biodiversity of the Gulf of Kachchh, especially Corals.  Under ICZMP; 19,551 
hectare mangroves were planted by various agencies as mentioned below: 
Table 5.2: Mangroves plantation done under ICZMP during 2010-2019  
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
District 
Period Name of Agency Mangroves 
Planted (in Ha) 
1 Jamnagar 2010-15 Marine National Park and Marine 
Sanctuary 
3,901 
2 Kachchh 2010-16 Forest Circle, Kachchh 12,500 
3 Rajkot 2013-14 Forest Department 500 
4 Bhavnagar 2013-14 1,000 
5 Bharuch 2018-19 Gujarat Ecology Commission  1,550 
6 Navsari 2011-12 100 
   Total 19,551 
Source: Information provided by GEC 
SPMU entrusted the task of evaluating the mangroves planted at 67 sites during 
2010-12 at Jamnagar and Kachchh coasts to Gujarat Institute of Desert Ecology 
(GUIDE).  GUIDE measured (January-June 2014) plantation at 62 out of 67 
sites using GIS techniques based on coordinates furnished by GEC.  GUIDE 
reported (December 2014) that against the 4,125.92 hectare plantation as per 
record, actual plantation was on ly 1,859.61 hectare.  GUIDE also carried out 
physical verification of all the 67 sites to assess survival rate of mangroves 
based on approved (December 2012) ICZM scale 3 and categorised 24 sites as 
‘Good’, 27 sites as ‘Average’ and 16 sites as ‘Poor’.  Thus, only 39 per cent of 
the 67 mangroves sites measured by GUIDE fell under ‘Good’ category.  
On reporting of the discrepancy between mangroves areas as per record and as 
measured by the GUIDE, the GEC instructed (October 2015) the jurisdictional 
Chief Conservator of Forest (CCF) , Kachchh  to reconcile the figures with 
GUIDE within one month.   However, neither any reconciliation report of the 
CCF nor any follow -up by GEC was found on record .  Subsequently, GEC 
asked (April 2017) the CCF, Kachchh to reconcile the discrepancy in GIS 
coordinates pointed by BISAG in its study report (conducted as per direction of 
GEC) on the mangroves plantation done between 2010 to 2016.  The CCF, 
Kachchh informed (December 2017) GEC that overlapping was found only on 
1.56 per cent of the claimed mangroves plantation (7,800 hectare) instead of 
9.22 per cent as reported by BISAG.   
Audit observed that the GEC ought to have reconciled the discrepancies 
reported by BISAG either on its own or through a third party evaluation.  
However, GEC accepted the  self-verification of the jurisdiction al CCF 
regarding correctness of the mangroves plantation done by itself. This involved 
conflict of interest  as the authority which did the plantation verified the 
discrepancies itself.  
 
3‘Good’ (More than 75 per cent otla (raised bed)  with a minimum of five surviving saplings), 'Average' 
(50 to 75 per cent otla with minimum five surviving saplings) and 'Poor' (less than 50 per cent otla with 
minimum five surviving saplings). 

Performance Audit of Conservation and Management of Coastal Ecosystems 
54 
Audit observed that GEC did not ma ke any efforts to reconcile the anomal ies 
reported by two different agencies.  Third party evaluation was conducted for 
an area covering only 21 per cent of claimed mangroves plantation which also 
pointed out difference in the plantation claimed by the PEAs and that observed 
through GIS technique.  However, no third-party evaluation was carried out by 
GEC to ascertain veracity of the claimed area of plantation or survival rate 
thereof for the remaining mangroves plantation. 
In view of  the above, Audit reviewed 13 ,522 hectare out of 14,116 hectare 
mangroves planted during 2012 -19, in 45 sites with an area of more than 100 
hectare, through GIS technique.  It was observed that there was no shortfall in 
the mangroves plantation on 4,107 hectare as reported at 12 sites; however there 
was a shortfall of 1 ,968.80 hectare in mangroves plantation out  of reported 
plantation of 9,415 hectare at 33 sites.  
The State Government/ GEC did not furnish any response on the anomalies 
pointed by audit in the area of mangrove s plantation and non-conduct of third 
party inspection.  However, during Exit Conference held on 02 September 2022 
the Member Secretary, GEC stated that there was a need to carry out third party 
inspection of the mangroves plantation.   
Recommendation 9: Th e State Government may fix responsibility of the 
agencies involved for the shortfall in mangroves plantation. 
5.2.2    Capacit
y building of instit
utions 
A project for capacity building of the GEER Foundation at an estimated cost 
of ₹ 15.74 crore was undertaken wherein a central laboratory and five marine 
field stations were established between July 2013 and June 2016 .  During the 
physical verification (Oct ober 2021) of two of the marine field stations at 
Mandvi and Jamnagar,  Audit observed that as against four 4 persons required 
to be deployed at each field station, only one person at Mandvi and two persons 
at Jamnagar field station were found on roll.  Fu rther, out of 25 instruments 
installed at Mandvi, 21 instruments were intermittently operated only for 
checking and calibration and were never used for the intended purpose i.e., to 
study the physio-chemical parameters of soil and water of the intertidal area of 
the Gulf of Kachchh.  Similarly, out of the 15 instruments provided at 
Jamnagar, 12 instruments remained unused after April 2019.  Thus, the marine 
field stations were not put to optimal use.  
The State Government/ GEC stated (August 2022) that due to non-availability 
of staff, the instruments could not be put to use.  However, the GEER 
Foundation was in the process of recruiting permanent staff for the field 
stations.   
Similarly, the laboratory infrastructure of the GPCB was to be enhanced by 
purchase of scientific analytical instruments.  GPCB developed one laboratory 
each at Gandhinagar, Bhuj, Jamnagar and Rajkot. GPCB procured 18 
instruments for Central Laboratory, Gandhinagar.  During the joint physical 
 
4Lab Technician/ JRF, Lab Assistant, Field Assistant and Watchman 

Chapter 5 
55 
verification (October 2021) of Central laboratory, Gandhinagar by Audit with 
the officials of GPCB,  it was observed that one instrument 5 costing 
₹ 0.74 crore was never used though procured in April 2017 . Similarly, 
HRGC-HRMS6 costing ₹ 2.52 crore was purchased in March 2015 but used 
only between January 2018 and June 2019. Similarly, X -Ray 
Diffractometer (XRD) costing ₹ 0.97 crore, purchased in March 2015, was 
used in 2016 -17 only.  The Comprehensive Maintenance Contracts (CMC) of 
HRGC-HRMS and XRD instruments had also lapsed in May 2019.  Thus, the 
instruments were not being optimally used rendering the expenditure incurred 
unfruitful.  
The State Government/ GEC stated (August 2022) that CMC of these 
instruments would be renewed.  No response was furnished for not using the 
instruments optimally.  
5.3 Smart Eco-Village Project  
The World Bank informed (October 2018) GEC regarding extension of ICZMP 
and investment of ₹ 120 crore to ₹ 140 crore on livelihood improvement in 112 
villages (Kachchh: 104, Navsari: 08).  The World Bank asked GEC to prepare 
project proposal depicting linkage of expected outcomes to the activities 
proposed, institutional arrangement for implementation and sustenance of the 
project and cost estimates.  The World Bank also asked to start conducting 
baseline survey simultaneously. 
Accordingly, GEC (which acted as both SPMU and PEA for the project) carried 
out a quick survey from 26 to 30 October 2018 for 112 villages  and divided 
them into seven clusters7.  GEC submitted (01 January 2019) project proposal 
to the World Bank for the “Livelihood Improvement through Smart Eco-Village 
project” ( SEV) w ith an outlay of ₹ 122 crore. Subsequently, MoEF&CC 
approved (05 March 2019) the smart eco -village project with an outlay of 
₹ 117 crore.  The activities envisaged and carried out in the 112 villages by GEC 
are shown in Appendix-8.   
5.3.1  Project proposal, procurement plan and actual project 
implementation  
The project proposal submitted (January 2019) by GEC consisted of four 
outcomes having seven outputs to be achieved through 32 activities 
(Appendix-9).  GEC sent (March 2019) procurement plan with an outlay of 
₹ 115 crore and implemented various activities under SEV between September 
2019 and March 2020.  Comparison of activities envisaged in the project 
proposal with procurement plan and actual execution is given in Appendix-9 
and summarized below: 
 
5Micro Digital Balance . 
6High Resolution Gas Chromatograph (HRGC)- High Resolution Mass Spectrometer (HRMS).  
7(i) Dayapar (Kachchh): 22 villages (ii) Naliya (Kachchh): 22 villages (iii)  Anjar (Kachchh): 17 villages 
(iv) Jamnagar: 11 villages (v) Morbi: 13 villages (vi) Dandi (Navsari): 08 villages and (vii) Dwarka 
(Devbhumi Dwarka): 19 villages. 

Performance Audit of Conservation and Management of Coastal Ecosystems 
56 
Table 5.3: Activity wise proposal, procurement plan and actual work executed under 
SEV as on (31 March 2020) 
(₹ in crore) 
Description of Activities Project proposal Procurement Plan Execution 
No of 
Activities 
Amount No of 
Activities 
Amount No of 
Activities 
Amount of 
Contract 
Awarded  
Amount 
of Work 
executed  
(A) Included in proposal, 
procurement plan and 
also executed 
13 79.76 10 69.26 11 43.11 35.22 
(B) Included in proposal 
but neither included 
in procurement plan 
nor executed 
15 37.18 00 00 00 00 00 
(C) Included in proposal 
and procurement plan 
but not executed 
4 5.06 02 10.00 00 00 00 
(D) Not included  in 
proposal but included 
in plan and executed   
00 00 04 21.60 04 31.66 30.88 
(E) Neither included  in 
proposal nor in 
procurement plan but 
was executed 
00 00 00 00 04 9.44 8.19 
(F) Not included in  
proposal but included 
in plan, however,  not 
executed   
00 00 04 14.14 00 00 00 
 Grand total 32 122.00 20 115.00 19 84.21 74.29 
Source: Project Proposal, Procurement Plan and other Information furnished by GEC 
As can be seen from the Table 5.3, against 32 activities envisaged in the project 
proposal, 20 activities were included in the procurement plan which were not as 
per the originally proposed activities.  
Further, the procurement plan was also not executed as proposed.  It can be 
observed from Table 5.3 that six activities (shown at (C) and (F)) which were 
envisaged in the procurement plan were not executed whereas four activities 
(shown at (E)) were executed without being envisaged in the project proposal 
or procurement plan.  In the case of 14 activities (shown at (A) and (D)) there 
was variation between procurement plan and execution. 
The GEC/ State Government did not furnish any remarks on the non-
synchronization between project proposal, procurement plan and actual 
execution.  However, during Exit Conference held on 02 September 2022, t he 
Member Secretary, GEC agreed that there were discrepancies in the 
procurement process.  
5.3.2 Not adhering to World Bank guidelines on procurement plan 
Procurement Manual (2013) for ICZMP issued by Society of Integrated Coastal 
Management8 (SICOM) stipulates that the World Bank’s Procurement 
Guidelines of January 2011 will be applicable for procurement under the 
 
8Society of Integrated Coastal Management (SICOM) is a registered society under the aegis of the 
MoEF&CC.  It  is the designated National Project Management Unit for planning, management, 
execution, monitoring and implementation of ICZMP. 

Chapter 5 
57 
project.  These guidelines emphasize  the need for preparation of a realistic 
Procurement Plan for a project which should include various aspects like a brief 
description of goods and works, proposed methods of procurement, time 
schedule for key procurement activities, etc. 
As per Procurement Manual, procurement action can be initiated after receipt 
of no objection from the W orld Bank to the  Procurement Plan  (PP) and 
Procurement Activity Schedule  (PAS) as submitted by the SPMU.  Any 
procurement done outside the PP will be ineligible for reimbursement.  
GEC sent (19 March 2019) a PP of ₹ 115 crore containing only broad items 
which was not as per the World Bank prescribed format.  Further, GEC did not 
submit PAS along with the PP.  Moreover, GEC without obtaining NOC from 
the World Bank for PP and PAS, awarded contracts worth ₹  84.21 crore and 
incurred expenditure of ₹ 74.29 crore for executing activities under SEV up  to 
31 March 2020.  The ICZMP (Phase I and SEV) was declared as closed by the 
World Bank on this date. 
MoEF&CC asked (28 December 2020) GEC to submit the final PP and cost 
table of the closed project which was submitted by GEC on 05 January 2021.  
As discussed in paragraph 5.1 , for phase I of ICZMP , GEC had funds of 
₹ 389.97 crore from which it incurred expenditure of  ₹ 336.62 cro
re and had 
unspent balance ₹  53.35 crore.  Under SEV,  GEC incurred expenditure of 
₹ 74.29 crore up to  31 March  2020.  GEC utilised the unspent balance of 
₹ 53.35 crore lying under Phase I of ICZMP to make payments for the 
expenditure incurred under SEV Project.  Even after routing the savings from 
Phase I of ICZMP to SEV Project, ₹  20.94 crore were yet to be paid to the 
contractors by GEC  as on the date of closure of ICZMP (31 March 2020).  
MoEF&CC informed (15 April 2021) GEC that shortfall of funds may be met 
from State Government funds as the ICZM Project is closed.   
The State Government/ GEC did not offer any remarks on the deficiencies in 
the submission of the PP and PAS and consequent possible burden on State 
exchequer due to non-receipt of funds from the World Bank. 
5.3.3 Adoption of different methods for awarding contracts 
Procurement Manual 2013 prescribes threshold limit (as revised in February 
2017) for adopting different methods of bidding whereby National Competitive 
Bidding9 (NCB) is to be adopted for procurement of  Goods and equipment  
valued between US $ one lakh and 30 lakh and for construction work between 
US $ two lakh and two crore.  In case, value of procurement/ work is below the 
bracket prescribed for NCB, Shopping Method (SM)10 can be adopted whereas 
for procurement/ work above the threshold prescribed for NCB, International 
 
9NCB is the competitive bidding procedure normally used for public procurement in the country and may 
be the most efficient and economical way of procuring goods or works, by their nature and scope.  The 
procedures shall provide for adequate competition to ensure reasonable prices.  The method to be used in 
the evaluation of tenders and the award of contracts shall be made known to all bidders and not be applied 
arbitrarily. 
10Shopping Method is a procurement method based on comparing quotations obtained from several 
national/ international suppliers/ contractors, usually at least three to ensure competitive prices. 

Performance Audit of Conservation and Management of Coastal Ecosystems 
58 
Competitive Bidding (ICB) 11 shall be adopted . Further, World Bank’s 
Procurement Guidelines (January 2011) stipulate that open competition is the 
basis for efficient public procurement allowing the borrowers to select the most 
appropriate method.  
GEC formed activity wise packages of villages and awarded 92 contracts worth 
₹ 74.84 crore under SEV.  Of the se 92 contracts, 33 contracts amounting to 
₹ 10.44 crore were having contract value lower than threshold limit of NCB .  
Details of remaining 59 contracts is given below: 
Table 5.4: Details of contracts awarded through NCB and SM under SEV during 
September 2019 to March 2020 
(₹ in crore) 
Activity Total No. of 
Contracts 
Total 
Contract 
Value 
SM applied NCB applied 
No. of 
Contracts 
Contract 
value 
No. of 
Contracts 
Contract 
value 
Alternative energy 
development activity 
4 4.35 3 0.47 1 3.88 
CCTV 12 5.87 5 3.00 7 2.87 
Clean and green village 
activities 
11 11.88 11 11.88 0 0.00 
Green School 11 8.84 11 8.84 0 0.00 
Public Address (PA)  
system 
4 1.73 4 1.73 0 0.00 
Recharge Well 5 2.17 0 0.00 5 2.17 
Roof rain water harvesting 
system (RRWHS) 
11 14.36 9 10.48 2 3.87 
Water desalination plant 1 14.91 0 0.00 1 14.91 
Total 59 64.11 43 36.40 16 27.70 
Source: Information furnished by GEC  
It can be seen from Table 5.4 that 16 contracts valuing ₹ 27.70 crore and 4 3 
contracts valuing ₹ 36.40 crore were awarded through NCB and SM  
respectively to multiple parties.  Considering the overall contract value of each 
activity, the GEC had the option to treat execution of the respective activity in 
all the selected villages as one item of procurement/ work and go for NCB . 
However, GEC preferred to award the contracts package wise and in the process 
opted for SM instead of NCB in majority of the cases. Audit observed that this 
was also inc onsistent with Central Vigilance Commission ’s guidelines that 
award of contract through open competitive bids should remain the most 
preferred mode of tendering.  Audit compared on test-check basis, the average 
rates received for procurement of two items through SM and NCB 
methodology, which revealed as under:   
 
11ICB is generally adopted where the supplies need import and/ or foreign firms are expected to participate.  

Chapter 5 
59 
Table 5.5: Comparison of items procured through SM and NCB 
(Amount in ₹) 
Item Contract awarded through SM Contract awarded through NCB  Difference 
in price of 
the item  No. of 
contracts 
Number 
of items 
Average 
rate 
No. of 
contracts 
Number 
of items 
Average 
rate 
CCTV 5 333 90,150 7 490 56,500 33,650 
RRWHS 9 1,675 62,600 2 695 55,720 6,880 
Source: Information furnished by GEC 
Audit analysis revealed that the above contracts were awarded by the  GEC 
between January-March 2020 and were similar/ same in nature and execution 
period.  Had the GEC adopted NCB  in all these packages or had considered 
activity of installing CCTV / RRWHS  as single package instead of different 
packages and adopted NCB, it could have saved approximately ₹ 2.26 crore12. 
Thus, awarding of contracts through SM method proved uneconomical.   
The State Government/ GEC stated (August 2022) that the procurement plan 
was prepared considering the geographical locations of villages, distance among 
the villages and accordingly contracts were split to make them commensurate 
with World Bank guidelines.  The State Government/ GEC asserted that this 
was done to ensure quality of the works and adhere to the time schedule.  It was 
further stated that the World Bank ha d also not objected to these splitting of 
contracts in its post-procurement assessment.  
The reply of the Government/ GEC is not convincing as no detailed 
procurement plan was prepared and quality of the works was not satisfactory as 
discussed in the subsequent paragraphs.  Thus, in spite of having knowledge of 
the threshold limits prescribed by the World Bank for procurement/ works, the 
GEC adopted procurement methods arbitrarily.   
During Exit conference (02 September 2022), the Government agreed with the 
audit observation and opined that there should be proper justification for  
awarding the contracts.   
5.3.4 Procurement of items for Green Schools 
The concept of Green School was introduced in Europe in the 1990s.  The World 
Summit on Sustainable Development (WSSD) in Johannesburg  in 2002 
catalysed the efforts to bring about a shift from ‘educating about  the 
environment’ to ‘educating for sustainability’.  A “Green School” is identified 
with those elements and practices that inculcate environmental sensitivity and 
promote environmen tal sustainability through various environment -friendly 
means that encourage judicious use of resources.  Establishment of smart 
(Green) schools was envisaged as one of the 19 activities under SEV.  The 
activity included procurement of 12 different items as detailed in the following 
table: 
 
12CCTV: ₹ 1.12 Crore (333 x ₹ 33,650) plus RRWHS: ₹ 1.15 crore (1,675 x ₹ 6,880 ). 

Performance Audit of Conservation and Management of Coastal Ecosystems 
60 
Table 5.6: Details of items procured under ‘Green School’ activity  
(₹ in lakh) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of item Numbers 
acquired 
Estimated 
cost  
Actual cost 
1 2MP CCTV Camera 278 51.43 81.82 
2 Water cooler- 150 Litres 28 21.00 32.56 
3 Fire Extinguisher for fire safety- 2KG 28 4.20 7.45 
4 Junior/ Senior Mathematical lab kit 28 21.00 21.21 
5 Rotary Drum Composter 28 21.00 20.53 
6 Children Play Area Equipment 28 124.60 127.07 
7 Solar LED Street Light of 12 W 85 15.89 12.75 
8 Basic outdoor PA Setup 114 27.29 32.97 
9 Classroom Projector 17 16.15 11.50 
10 HDPE Wastewater Container of 120 Ltr 108 4.86 4.62 
11 PV Solar Plant of 3KW 28 43.26 43.26 
12 Smart Auto Digital Board 16 82.40 76.20 
 Total  433.08 471.94 
The observations relating to procurements of items for Green Schools have been 
narrated in the succeeding paragraphs. 
5.3.4.1 Selection of contractors 
Twenty eight schools of 27 villages were conceptualised as ‘Green Schools’ for 
supply and installation of various items13 under eight packages. GEC identified 
six bidders arbitrarily and invited quotations under SM for the particular 
package from any three of them .  In the process, four bidders were awarded 
contracts for execution of the eight packages.  Audit observed that this was not 
justified as except one firm, all other three firms were engaged in landscaping 
and construction activities and did not have any experience in supplying all the 
above indented products. 
The t ender documents specified conditions for technical and financial 
qualification of bidders  including past experience .  However, it was observed 
that neither any  of the b idders provided documents  in support of past 
satisfactory performance of similar nature of works/ supplies nor bid evaluation 
reports were prepared by th e GEC.  Since the works/ goods were of different 
nature and technologies , no bidder could have possibly undertaken all the 
activities unless the bidder acts as an agent/ middleman for the goods . In 
absence of submission of required documents  and bid evaluation, it could not 
be established that the bidders were manufacturer/ authorised agency  for the 
respective items .  This might have resulted in quotations on higher side as 
detailed in the succeeding paragraph.  
 
 
 
13CCTV camera, water cooler, fire extinguisher, Mathematical lab, Children Play area, Public Address    
(PA) setup, Classroom Projector, Solar Plant etc. 

Chapter 5 
61 
5.3.4.2 Purchases made at higher rates 
GEC installed Public Address (PA) system in all 28 schools.  It was observed 
that in case of Morbi and Dandi clusters (11 schools), the estimates were 
prepared and contracts were awarded based on the number of speakers/ horns 
(97 numbers) to be provided in each classrooms with the PA Setup.  While in 
case of Dwarka and Jamnagar clusters (17 schools), common PA systems (17 
numbers) were installed in the school campus.  This implied that there was no 
standardisation of work in the schools based on the utility/ cost effectiveness of 
the individual PA system.  As a result, it was observed that the cost incurred for 
installation of PA system in  the schools at Morbi and Dandi clusters 
(₹ 24.07 lakh for 11 schools) was high as compared to the other two clusters 
(₹ 8.90 lakh for 17 schools).   
GEC informed (August 2022) that the estimates for items to be procured under 
‘Green School’ component were prepared by the consultant appointed by it . 
Audit ascertained market rates of ‘smart interactive display’ and ‘Rotary Drum 
Composter’ from Government e-Market place (GeM) portal on which GEC was 
registered.  Audit also obtained the rates of the supply and installation order in 
respect of children play area at Rampar Village, Kachchh Distri ct executed by 
GEC under “Smart Shala” work as part of ICZMP during the same period.  A 
comparison of work orders issued and market rates is shown below: 
Table 5.7: Comparative statement of work order rates viz.-a-viz. market rates obtained 
by Audit 
(₹ in lakh) 
Sl. 
No. 
Cluster Item supplied Brand Work 
order rate 
per item 
Rate 
compared 
with 
Rate for 
comparison 
1 Dandi  Smart interactive 
display 75 inch  
 
Techno 4.65 GEM 1.54 
2 Jamnagar  Techno 5.15 GEM 1.54 
3 Morbi  Newline 4.55 GEM 1.88  
4 Dandi, 
Morbi, 
Jamnagar 
and Dwarka 
200 Litres Rotary 
Drum Composter 
Spintech 0.60 to 
0.95 
GEM 0.09 to 0.21 
5 Children Play 
Area 
Generic 4.25 to 
5.00 
Concurrent 
purchase 
by GEC 
2.22 
Source: Information furnished by GEC  
As seen from the Table 5.7 , work order rates  of the above items were 
considerably higher in comparison to the rates on GeM and rates of concurrent 
procurement at other site.  GEC could have ensured economy in execution of 
these works had it opted for NCB instead of SM.  
The State Government/ GEC stated (August 2022) that the quotations were 
invited from bidders already identified as per previous experience of GEC 
during garden development work under other project.  
The reply of the State Government/ GEC is not convincing as the bidders were 
to be identified and properly evaluated as per requirements of the Green School 
component.  Further, the estimates prepared by the consultan t were also not 
conforming to the prevailing market rates.   

Performance Audit of Conservation and Management of Coastal Ecosystems 
62 
5.3.4.3 Grid connectivity of Solar plant  
Solar plants of 3 KW capacity  in each of the 28 Green Schools with average 
cost of ₹ 1.55 lakh (aggregating to ₹ 43.26 lakh) were installed in March 2020.  
Audit team carried out joint inspection at nine schools with officials of GEC in 
October 2021 and found that though the solar panels were installed in March 
2020, grid connectivity was not established as of 30 September 2021 in three 14 
schools and established belatedly i.e. after June 2021 in six 15 schools.  Hence, 
solar panels remained unutilised for want of grid connectivity in these nine 
inspected schools out of 28 schools.  
The GEC stated (August 2022) that out of 28 schools, 21 schools have been 
connected to grid.  
The reply of the GEC confirm ed that remaining seven schools were still to be 
connected to grid.  
5.3.5 Construction work at Green schools  
GEC awarded three contr acts (two in Dwarka, one in Jamnagar cluster) for 
construction work in 17 ‘ Green School s’ worth ₹ 411.83 lakh to a single 
contractor.  Tender conditions required use of material of relevant specification.  
The contractor was responsible to replace the defective material brought on site 
or materials used in the work being found defective at a later date.  The 
contractor submitted (March to June 2020) total claim of ₹ 410.63 lakh through 
Bills which was also certified (March to June 2020) by t he Third Party 
Inspection (TPI) agency.  However, while processing the Bills, GEC noticed 
(June 2020) that the Contractor had not executed the work as per specifications.  
For example, instead of installing 10,000 litre modular tank with precast 
structure ( costing ₹ 174.25 lakh), the contractor installed PVC tanks costing 
₹ 25.50 lakh only.  Hence, after further field inspection, GEC approved only 
₹ 219.61 lakh against the claim of ₹ 410.63 lakh.  This was not in order since as 
per contract conditions the contractor was re quired to set right the defective 
works at its own cost to ensure quality of work.  
Moreover, in spite of the established fact that the contractor had not executed 
works as per specification, and had raised fraudulent claim of ₹ 191.02 lakh in 
collusion with TPI , GEC did not take any legal/ penal action against the 
contractor as well as TPI.  
The State Government/ GEC stated (August 2022) that acting upon the audit 
observation, the TPI had been black -listed.  However, GEC did not offer any 
remarks regarding action taken against the contractor.  
5.3.6 Development of Gardens  
GEC developed 10 gardens (six in Dwarka, three in Jamnagar and one in Morbi 
cluster) under the SEV.   It was observed that against the projected cost of 
 
14Rasulnagar (Jamnagar district), Goriyali (Devbhumi Dwarka district) and Varshamedi (Morbi District). 
15Jangi Girls and  Boys school (Kachchh district), Balachadi and Khara -beraja (Jamnagar District) and  
Mojap and Tupani (Devbhumi Dwarka district). 

Chapter 5 
63 
₹ 2.74 crore as per the SoR issued by the Roads and Buildings (R&B) 
Department, GoG; gardening work was awarded by GEC at the cost of 
₹ 8.42 crore.  Further observations regard ing operation and maintenance of 
gardens have been discussed in the following paragraphs.  
5.3.6.1 Operation and Maintenance of the Gardens  
Of the 10 works of Garden development, six 16 work orders of Dwarka cluster 
included Operation and Maintenance (O&M) of landscape area of all 
plantations for six months for ₹ 94.18 lakh.  No such O&M conditions were 
incorporated in tenders of other four works relating to Jam nagar and Morbi 
clusters.  This indicated that GEC did not assess the requirement of maintenance 
for all the works and failed to adopt a uniform policy for O&M of the Gardens 
developed under the project. 
It was further observed that GEC made 90 per cent payment to the agency in 
advance (₹ 84.76 lakh) prior to completion of the six months O&M  period.  
Further, no agreement for handing over to and/ or maintenance of developed 
Garden by the concerned Gram Panchayat was found on record after completion 
of six-month period, to ensure sustenance of the developed gardens. 
The State Government/ GEC stated (August 2022) that the gardens were handed 
over to the concerned Gram Panchayat for future O&M as per Exit Plan.   
The reply is not convincing as no Exit Plan were found on record.  Further, no 
response was furnished regarding inflated O&M costs, authenticity of the O&M 
bills with regard to maintenance done by the contractor and non -inclusion of 
O&M clause in other four garden works. 
5.3.6.2 Joint inspection of Gardens 
Audit team visited (October 2021) eight gardens of Jamnagar (03) and 
Devbhumi Dwarka (05) district.  It was observed that most of the gardens were 
not well maintained, the lawns were damaged and unwanted weeds and plants 
had grown. The following photographs indicate the status of the gardens:  
 
16Tupani, Mojap, Shamlasar, Padli, Goriyali and Mulvel. 

Performance Audit of Conservation and Management of Coastal Ecosystems 
64 
Figure 5.1: Photographs (October 2021) of gardens developed under ICZMP at 
Balachadi and Khara-Beraja villages of Jamnagar cluster 
  
Though, work order of the five 17 gardens of Dwarka cluster included 
construction of boundary wall and installation of water tank.  Except village 
Mojap, no compound wall was observed during joint inspection and water tank 
was not observed in any of the gardens.  However, payment was made  to the 
contractor against these items.  This was a financial irregularity which remained 
unnoticed due to inadequate physical verification by the GEC.  Incidentally, the 
work of garden development was executed by the same contractor who had 
made fraudulent claim against modular tank with precast structure as discussed 
in paragraph 5.3.5. 
The State Government/ GEC stated (August 2022) that appropriate deductions 
had been made for the works which remained unexecuted.  
The facts remain that the  Audit scrutiny revealed that no amount had been 
deducted for these aspects from the bills raised by the contractor while making 
payments.  
5.3.7 Installation of CCTVs  
The work of installation of CCTVs through 12 packages was executed at a cost 
of ₹ 5.87 crore.  In six packages (Jamnagar package 1 and 2 and Morbi package 
1 to 4), the contractors changed the scope of work without approval of GEC and 
did overhead  wiring instead of stipulated underground cabling.  Overhead 
cables tend to get damaged  easily and are prone to theft  as compared to the 
underground cables. 
It was further noticed that work orders included providing and fixing of Poles 
in all packages except three packages 18.  In the absence of such provision in 
these three packages, the con tractors installed the CCTVs on the electricity 
poles without obtaining permission from the electricity distribution company.  
Apart from creating a legal situation regarding right to use, this also pose s risk 
to life during repairs and maintenance of these CCTVs. 
 
17Mojap, Tupani, Mulvel, Goriyali and Padli villages. 
18Package 1 to 3 of Kachchh cluster. 


Chapter 5 
65 
The GEC while accepting the audit observations stated (August  2022) that 
underground cabling could not be done due to RCC structures and amount paid 
to the contractors was adjusted accordingly.  
The reply of the GEC indicated that the scope of work was arrived at without 
conducting ground survey and analysing requirements of the specific sites.  
5.3.7.1 Joint inspection of CCTV Surveillance System 
Audit team carried out joint inspection (October 2021) of CCTVs with GEC 
officials in 10 villages 19 of four districts where 175 CCTVs were installed 
during January to March 2021.  During joint inspection it was noticed that 152 
out of these 175 cameras stopped working within a period of six to nine months 
of installation.  As reported by the villagers during joint inspection, of these 10 
villages, eight 20 had registered complaint s to the contractor; however, the 
CCTVs were not repaired/ replaced (October 2021).  It indicated that no proper 
exit p lan was in place for sustenance of the project. It was further observed 
during joint inspection (October 2021)  that underground cable laid (February 
2020) at Hamusar village of Jamangar Cluster, was damaged by another 
contractor of GEC during construction (March 2020) of Sewage Treatment Plan 
(STP).  Due to the above damage, CCTVs were not operational in Hamusar 
village a s well .  Thus, most of the CCTVs in above 11 villages were non  
operational. 
The State Government/ GEC stated (August 2022) that the CCTVs were handed 
over to the concerned Gram Panchayat for future O&M as per exit plan.   
The reply is not convincing as no Exit Plan was found on record.   
5.3.8 Mobile Sea Water Treatment Vehicles 
GEC awarded (September 2019) contract for providing  and operating seven 
Mobile Sea Water Treatment  Vehicle (MSWTV) for ₹ 12.56 crore through 
NCB for treatment of sea water into potable water .  The agency supplied 
MSWTVs during January to March 2020 which were commissioned in 
September 2020.  As per the contract, the purchase cost included operation and 
maintenance of the MSWTVs for a period of one year by the agency.  However, 
Audit noticed that in the contract , important conditions regarding performance 
such as (i) Quantity of water to be treated and supplied (ii) penalty provision for 
non/ under-supply of treated water, were not incorporated.  It was observed that 
against capacity to treat 20,000 to 80,000 litre water in a day per MSWTV, the 
agency had supplied 5,000 to 7,000 litre water per day per MSWTV.  Thus, due 
to non-incorporation of the quantity of treated water to be provided  in the 
contract agreement, optimal utilisation of the MSWTVs could not be ensured. 
The State Government/ GEC accepted (August 2022) the audit observation.  
 
19Jamnagar (Balachadi, Rasulnagar, Khara-beraja), Dwarka (Tupani, Goriyali, Padli, Mulvel, Khatumba), 
Morbi (Varshamedi) and Kachchh (Jangi). 
20Jamnagar (Balachadi, Rasulnagar, Khara-beraja), Dwarka (Tupani, Goriyali, Padli, Mulvel, Khatumba). 

Performance Audit of Conservation and Management of Coastal Ecosystems 
66 
5.3.8.1 Joint inspection of Mobile Sea Water Treatment Vehicles 
During joint inspection (October 
2021) of MSWTV at two 21 out of 
seven villages with GEC officials, it 
was noticed that the vehicles were 
lying idle.  Panchayat officials and 
operator confirmed that operation of 
vehicles was discontinued by the 
contractor after completion of O&M 
period of one year in September 
2021.   
Figure 5.2: MSWTV 
Audit further observed that as per procurement agreement (September 2019), 
three years Comprehensive Annual Maintenance Contract (CMC) for 
₹ 2.35 crore (to be paid on quarterly basis) for the seven MSWTV was to 
commence after one -year warranty and operation period (September 2021).   
However, GEC did not pay the CMC charges rendering GEC at the risk of 
bearing cost of repairs/ spare parts in the event of malfunctioning/ damage to 
the MSWTV. 
The State Government stated (August 2022) that GEC was planning to handover 
the MSWTV to the Corporates under C orporate Social Responsi bility (CSR) 
activities.   
The reply confirms that a concrete plan for the sustenance of the MSWTVs was 
yet to be chalked out which was required to be in place at the time of 
procurement of these high cost equipment.  
Recommendation 10: The State Government may take immediate action to 
utilise/ revive the idle MSWTVs so as to avoid further deterioration of these 
vehicles, which may render the expenditure wasteful.  
5.3.9 Roof Rain Water Harvesting System 
In 24 villages through 11 packages 2,257 RRWHS were constructed at a cost of 
₹ 9.91 crore.  Audit observed (October 2021) that in 21 villages hand pumps 
were not installed and in 18 out of the above 21 villages, waste water chambers 
were also not constructed .  Further, rain water harvesting filters (24 villages), 
pipes (15 villages), Cast Iron (CI) main holes (02 villages) and hand pumps (02 
villages) installed were of sub-standard quality.  However, instead of insisting 
upon replacement of sub-standard material as stipulated in the tender condition, 
GEC decided to deduct the cost difference for the sub -standard work while 
making payment to the contractors.  Mere deduction of cost difference was not 
sufficient as sub-standard items would compromise durability and utility of the 
RRWHS.  These deficiencies also highlighted that monitoring of on -going 
works by the GEC and TPI agency was inadequate to ensure quality of the work. 
 
21Rampar village of Kachchh district and Goriyali village of Devbhumi Dwarka district. 


Chapter 5 
67 
The State Government/ GEC stated (August 2022) that works remained 
incomplete due to closure of the project.  It was further stated that maintenance 
of the constructed assets was the responsibility of the individual households.  
Further, applicable deductions had been made from the bills of the contractors 
for inferior quality of works.  
The reply indicates that the works were not properly planned keeping in view 
the deadline of the ICZMP.  Moreover, no efforts were made to set right the 
inferior quality of works and ensure sustenance of the created assets.  
Recommendation 11: The State Government may fix responsibility for not 
ensuring economy in the award of contracts under Smart Eco-Village project. 
It may also strengthen its monitoring me chanism to ensure that works are 
executed and items procured as per the prescribed standards. 
 
  
 
                  (VIJAY N. KOTHARI) 
Ahmedabad    Accountant General (Audit-II), Gujarat 
The       
 
 
Countersigned 
 
 
 
 
       (GIRISH CHANDRA MURMU) 
New Delhi    Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
The 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Performance Audit of Conservation and Management of Coastal Ecosystems 
68 
 
 

Appendices 
69 
 
 
Appendix-1 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.12) 
Details of unauthorised construction without obtaining CRZ clearance 
Sl. 
No. 
District Description 
of assets 
Name of 
village 
Latitude and 
Longitude of 
assets 
Construction 
carried out 
between 
Approximate 
distance 
from the 
shoreline 
(in meter) 
1. Surat Unknown 
building 
Surat 21°7'7.44"N 
and 
72°42'24.52"E 
03/2015 to 
05/2018 
90* 
2. Porbandar Fern Leo 
Resort 
Madhavpur 21°15'46.32"N 
and 
69°57'5.89"E 
01/2017 to 
11/2018 
146 
3. Valsad 3 Multi 
Storied 
buildings 
Udwada 20°29'0.64"N 
and 
72°52'5.21"E 
12/2009 to 
11/2015 
365 
4. Marine 
Police 
Station  
Nargol 20°12'57.23"N 
and 
72°45'1.21"E 
04/2013 to 
11/2015 
386 
5. Seaview 
apartment 
Nargol 20°13'48.81"N 
and 
72°44'51.57"E 
04/2013 to 
11/2018 
375 
6. Unknown 
building 
Udavada 20°29'8.58"N 
and 
72°51'58.90"E 
11/2017 to 
02/2019 
66 
7. Unknown 
building 
Umarsadi 20°30'48.28"N 
and 
72°53'20.84"E 
01/2019 to 
02/2021 
340 
8. Taluka 
panchayat 
Umbargaon 20°11'32.12"N 
and 
72°44'58.12"E 
04/2016 to 
10/2017 
384 
9. Court Umargam 20°11'30.33"N 
and 
72°44'53.02"E 
10/2013 to 
10/2017 
233 
10. Unknown 
building 
Umbergaon 20° 9'42.31"N 
and 
72°44'39.48" E 
10/2013 to 
11/2017 
326 
11. Unknown 
bungalow 
Umbargaon 20° 9'41.30"N 
and 
72°44'31.09"E 
04/2016 to 
02/2021 
82 
12. Valsad 
bunglow-1 
Valsad 20°35'18.15"N 
and 
72°53'51.68"E 
11/2014 to 
11/2018 
120 
* Distance from the creek 
 
 
 
 
 

Performance Audit of Conservation and Management of Coastal Ecosystems 
70 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
71 
 
Appendices 
s 
Appendix-2 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.13) 
Sewage treatment availability vis-a-vis requirement in coastal ULBs 
(Figures in MLD) 
Sr. 
No. Name of ULB Coastal ULB as per CZMP or 
within 15 km from CRZ area Status of STP Capacity Water Supply as 
per PAS 
Estimated Waste water 
generation Shortfall 
1 Vapi 10 km Installed 63.53 35.50 28.40 0.00 
2 Dwarka Coastal ULB Installed 7.40 3.00 2.40 0.00 
3 Pardi Coastal ULB Installed 4.75 4.60 3.68 0.00 
4 Valsad Coastal ULB Installed 35.02 30.00 24.00 0.00 
 Total (A)     110.70 73.10 58.48 0.0 
1 Gandhidham Coastal ULB Installed 30 50.90 40.72 10.72 
2 Jamnagar Coastal ULB Installed 70 118.00 94.40 24.40 
3 Bhavnagar Coastal ULB Installed 75 165.00 132.00 57.00 
4 Surat Coastal ULB Installed 982.50 1318.00 1054.40 71.90 
 Total (B)     1157.50 1651.90 1321.52 164.02 
1 Mundra-Baroi 0 km Not planned 0 2.20 1.76 1.76 
2 Okha 0 km Not planned 0 3.00 2.40 2.40 
3 Bhachau 10 km Not planned 0 9.50 7.60 7.60 
4 Una 10 km Not planned 0 7.00 5.60 5.60 
5 Rajula 15 km Not planned 0 4.00 3.20 3.20 
6 Ranavav 15 km Not planned 0 3.40 2.72 2.72 
7 Kodinar 5 km Not planned 0 3.50 2.80 2.80 
8 Maliya-Miyana 5 km Not planned 0 7.40 5.92 5.92 
9 Veraval Patan Coastal ULB Not planned 0 30.00 24.00 24.00 
10 Chorvad Coastal ULB Not planned 0 2.80 2.24 2.24 
11 Jafrabad Coastal ULB Not planned 0 3.40 2.72 2.72 
12 Mangrol Coastal ULB Not planned 0 8.20 6.56 6.56 
13 Navsari-Vijalpor Coastal ULB Not planned 0 48.50 38.80 38.80 
14 Porbandar-Chhaya Coastal ULB Not planned 0 6.00 4.80 4.80 
15 Salaya Coastal ULB Not planned 0 4.50 3.60 3.60 

 
 
72 
Performance Audit of Conservation and Management of Coastal Ecosystems 
 Sr. 
No. Name of ULB Coastal ULB as per CZMP or 
within 15 km from CRZ area Status of STP Capacity Water Supply as 
per PAS 
Estimated Waste water 
generation Shortfall 
16 Sikka Coastal ULB Not planned 0 4.00 3.20 3.20 
17 Sutrapada Coastal ULB Not planned 0 1.50 1.20 1.20 
 Total (C)     0 148.90 119.12 119.12 
1 Gandevi 15 km Under installation 2.60 4.00 3.20 3.20 
2 Bharuch Coastal ULB Under installation 29.32 45.70 36.56 36.56 
3 Bilimora Coastal ULB Under installation 8.30 7.90 6.32 6.32 
 Total (D)     40.22 57.60 46.08 46.08 
1 Mahuva 10 km Under planning 16.50 13.80 11.04 11.04 
2 Talaja 13 km Under planning 5.80 3.50 2.80 2.80 
3 Khambhat Coastal ULB Under planning 15 14.00 11.20 11.20 
4 Mandvi (Kutch) Coastal ULB Under planning 8.20 9.00 7.20 7.20 
5 Umargam Coastal ULB Under planning 6.48 1.20 0.96 0.96 
 Total (E)     51.98 41.50 33.20 33.20 
 
  

 
 
73 
 
Appendices 
s 
Appendix-3 
(Reference: Introduction of Chapter 4 and Paragraph 4.1) 
Projects recommended for clearance by GCZMA 
 
Sl. No. Name of the Project  Date of 
Clearance 
Status of the 
Project (as of 
31 August 
2021) 
Rapid EIA1 Disaster 
Management 
Report 
Risk 
Assessment 
Report 
CRZ map 
with HTL 
and LTL 
marked 
Map with C RZ 
Zones and 
Ecologically 
sensitive areas  
NOC from 
GPCB Project Proponent 
Composite Clearance Category ‘A’ Projects (Clearance by MoEF&CC)  
1 Widening and improvement of the existing 
highway to 2-lanes paved shoulder/ 4 lane/ 
6 lane of Bhavnagar - Pipavav- Porbandar-
Dwarka Section of NH-8E  
25-Oct-16 Under 
construction 
phase.  
✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 
National Highways Authority of India 
2 Expansion of Adani Petronet (Dahej) Port 
Private Limited at Dahej, District Bharuch 
14-Oct-16 Under 
construction 
phase.  
✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ × 
Adani Petronet (Dahej) Port Private 
Limited 
3 Development of Petroleum, Chemical and 
Petro-Chemical Investment Region 
(PCPIR) at Dahej, District Bharuch 
14-Sep-17 Under 
construction 
phase.  
✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 
Gujarat Industrial Development 
Corporation 
CRZ Clearance Category ‘A’ Projects (Clearance by MoEF&CC) 
4 Development of Greenfield Beach Resort at 
Mandvi, Kachchh 
12-Mar-15 Not 
Commenced 
✓ × × × × × 
Tourism Corporation of Gujarat Limited 
5 Nuclear Power Plant, village Mithi Virdi, 
district Bhavnagar 
03-Mar-15 The project was 
delisted2 by 
MoEF (27 
March 2017) 
✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 
Nuclear Power Corporation of India 
Limited 
 
 
1 Including Marine and terrestrial component. 
2 Government of Gujarat had not started the Land acquisition process for this project despite the award of ToR in 2011 hence the application for grant of environmental clearance was delisted/ 
rejected in March 2017.  

 
 
74 
Performance Audit of Conservation and Management of Coastal Ecosystems 
 6 Discharge of 10 MLD industrial 
effluent in Bhavnagar creek, 
Bhavnagar 
29-Jun-15 Operational 
since May 
2017 
Submitted 
only Marine 
EIA 
✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 
Madhu Silica Private Limited 
7 Common treated effluent disposal 
pipeline project at Vapi, district 
Valsad 
05-Sep-16 Not 
Commenced 
✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ × ✓ 
M/s Wel Treat Enviro Management 
Organization 
8 Laying of treated effluent disposal 
pipeline and diffuse system for 
disposal of treated wastewater at 
Marine outfall point in Gulf of 
Kachchh at Mithapur, Devbhumi 
Dwarka 
10-Jul-17 Not 
Commenced 
Submitted 
only Marine 
EIA 
× ✓ × × ✓ 
Tata Chemicals Limited 
Composite Clearance Category ‘B’ Projects (Clearance by SEIAA) 
9 Modification of existing Jetty and 
expansion of isolated storage facility 
at Dahej, Bharuch 
27-Jan-16 Under 
construction 
phase.  
✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 
Gujarat Chemical Port Terminal 
Company Limited 
10 Revival of Existing Jetty with Liquid 
Storage Terminal, Pipeline Road 
Connectivity, Gandhidham, Kachchh 
01-May-17 Under 
construction 
phase.  
✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ × 
Ahir Salt and Allied Product Private 
Limited 
11 Construction of residential project 
‘Sun city’ at Barbodhan village, Surat 
01-May-17 Not 
Commenced 
✓ ✓ × ✓ ✓ × 
Pramukh Organisers LLP 
CRZ Clearance Category ‘B’ Projects (Clearance by SEIAA) 
12 Construction of marine bridge 
between Beyt Dwarka and Okha 
24-Aug-17 Under 
construction 
phase.  
Submitted 
only Marine 
EIA 
× × ✓ ✓ ✓ 
Road and Building Department 
13 Additional Saltworks (2,395.15 
acres) located at village Kalatalav and 
Narmad, taluka and district 
Bhavnagar 
28-Apr-17 Under 
construction 
phase.  
✓ × × × × ✓ 
Nirma Limited 
  

 
 
75 
 
Appendices 
s 
Appendix-4 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.2) 
Accreditation of consultants preparing EIA/ EMP  
Sl. 
No. 
Name of Project EIA consultant Period of 
EIA/ 
EMP 
EIA/ 
EMP 
Sector description Project 
activity and 
Category as 
per EIA 
Notification, 
2006 
Accreditation 
With 
NABET at 
the time of 
report 
submission 
Certificate 
attached 
with EIA/ 
EMP 
For the 
relevant 
sector 
A 
certificate 
with 
annexure 
mentioning 
sector 
1 Discharge of 10 MLD industrial 
effluent in Bhavnagar creek, 
Bhavnagar 
Indomer Coastal 
Hydraulics (P) 
Ltd., Chennai 
December 
2013 
Only 
Marine 
EIA 
36- Common Effluent 
Treatment Plant 
 Category B - 
7 (h) 
No No No No 
2 Nuclear Power Plant at village 
Mithivirdi, Dist Bhavnagar 
Engineers India 
Limited, Gurgaon 
June 2013 Both 5 - Nuclear power 
projects and processing 
of nuclear fuel 
Category A – 
1(e) 
No No No No 
3. Pipeline and Diffuser System for 
Disposal of Treated wastewater at 
Marine outfall point suggested by 
NIO, Mithapur, Okha, Devbhumi 
Dwarka 
CSIR-National 
Institute of 
Oceanography  
(CSIR-NIO) 
June 2012 Marine 
EIA 
only 
36- Common Effluent 
Treatment Plant 
 Category B - 
7 (h) 
No No No No 
4 Widening and improvement of the 
existing highway to 2 -lanes paved 
shoulder/ 4 lane/ 6 lane of 
Bhavnagar- Pipavav- Porbandar-
Dwarka Section of NH-8E  
STUP Consultant 
Pvt. Ltd., Kolkata 
December 
2012 
Both 34 - Highways, 
Railways, transport 
terminals, mass ra pid 
transport systems 
Category A -7 
(f) 
No No No No 
5 Additional Saltworks (2,395.15 
acres) located at village 
Kalatalav&Narmad, Ta. & Dist. 
Bhavnagar 
NIO December 
2011 
Marine 
EIA 
only 
14-Soda ash Industry Category B – 
4(e) 
No No No No 
6 Development of Petroleum, 
Chemical and Petro -Chemical 
Investment Region (PCPIR) at 
Dahej, Vagara, District Bharuch 
(Gujarat) 
CSIR- National 
Environmental 
Engineering 
Research Institute 
(NEERI), Nagpur 
August 
2015 
Both 31- Industrial estate/ 
area/ park 
38 – Building and 
construction project 
Category A – 
7(c) 
Category B – 
8 (a)  
Yes Yes No No 

 
 
76 
Performance Audit of Conservation and Management of Coastal Ecosystems 
 Sl. 
No. 
Name of Project EIA consultant Period of 
EIA/ 
EMP 
EIA/ 
EMP 
Sector description Project 
activity and 
Category as 
per EIA 
Notification, 
2006 
Accreditation 
With 
NABET at 
the time of 
report 
submission 
Certificate 
attached 
with EIA/ 
EMP 
For the 
relevant 
sector 
A 
certificate 
with 
annexure 
mentioning 
sector 
39 – Township and area 
development project 
Category B – 
8 (b) 
7 CETP along river Kolakupto deep 
sea via Kolak Estuary, Vapi 
Kadam 
Environment 
Consultant 
June 2013 Both 36- Common Effluent 
Treatment Plant 
Category B - 7 
(h) 
Yes Yes Yes No 
8 Modification of existing Jetty and 
expansion of isolated storage facility 
at Dahej, Bharuch 
Kadam 
Environment 
Consultant 
April 2015 Both 33- Ports, harbours, 
breakwaters and 
dredging 
 
Category A -7 
(e) 
Yes Yes Yes Yes 
9 Revival of Existing Jetty with Liquid 
Storage Terminal, Pipeline Road 
Connectivity, Gandhidham, Kutch 
Kadam 
Environment 
Consultant 
September 
2016 
Both 33- Ports, harbours, 
breakwaters and 
dredging 
28 - Isolated storage & 
handling of Hazardous 
chemicals 
Category A -7 
(e) 
Category B – 
6 (b) 
Yes Yes Yes Yes 
10 Residential (Subplot Type) purpose 
project ‘Sun city’ at Barbodhan 
Village, Olpad Taluka, Surat 
Kadam 
Environment 
Consultant 
October 
2016 
Both 39- Township and area 
development project 
Category B – 
8 (b) 
Yes Yes Yes Yes 
11 Expansion of Adani Petronet (Dahej) 
Port Private Limited Dahej, Bharuch 
District Gujarat 
Cholamandalam 
MS Risk Services 
Limited, Chennai 
March 
2015 
Both 33- Ports, harbours, 
breakwaters and 
dredging 
 
Category A -7 
(e) 
 
Yes Yes Yes Yes 
12 Construction of marine bridge 
between Beyt and Okha, Dwaraka 
Envision Enviro 
Technologies Pvt. 
Ltd., Surat 
June 2017 Marine 
EIA 
only 
38 – Building and 
construction project 
Category B – 
8 (a) 
Yes No Yes No 
13 Development of Greenfield Beach 
Resort at Mandvi, Distt. Kutch, 
Gujarat 
San 
EnvirotechPvt., 
Ahmedabad 
July 2013 Only 
EMP 
38 – Building and 
construction project 
39- Township and area 
development project 
Category B – 
8 (a)  
Category B – 
8 (b) 
Yes No Yes No 

 
 
77 
 
Appendices 
s 
Appendix-5 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.6) 
Submission of compliance reports by Project Proponents 
Sl. 
No 
Project Proponent Project Clearance 
Date 
No. of 
compliance 
reports due as of 
September 2021 
Compliance 
reports 
submitted 
Displayed on the 
website of 
PP SEIAA/ 
MoEF&CC 
1 National Highway Authority 
Limited 
Widening and improvement of the existing highway to 2 -
lanes paved shoulder/ 4 lane/ 6 lane of Bhavnagar- Pipavav- 
Porbandar-Dwarka Section of NH-8E 
25 October 
2016 
10 00 No No 
2 Tourism Corporation of Gujarat 
Limited 
CRZ clearance for the proposed development of Greenfield 
Beach Resort at Mandvi, Distt. Kutch, Gujarat 
12 March 2015 13 00 No No 
3 Weltreat Enviro Management 
Limited 
Common treated effluent disposal pipeline project along 
river Kolakupto deep sea via Kolak Estuary, Vapi 
05 September 
2016 
10 00 No 
Website 
No 
4 Pramukh Organisers LLP Residential (Subplot Type) purpose project ‘Sun city’ at 
Barbodhan Village, Olpad Taluka, Surat 
01 May 2017 09 00 No 
Website 
No 
5 R&B Department Construction of marine bridge between Beyt and Okha, 
Dwaraka 
24 August 2017 08 00 No No 
6 Gujarat Industrial Corporation 
Limited (PCPIR) 
Development of PCPIR at Dahej, Bharuch 14 September 
2017 
08 07 No No 
7 Madhu Silica limited Discharge of 10 MLD industrial effluent in Bhavnagar 
creek, Bhavnagar 
29 June 2015 12 09 No No 
8 Ahir Salts Limited Revival of Existing Jetty with Liquid Storage Terminal, 
Pipeline Road Connectivity, Gandhidham, Kutch 
01 May 2017 09 05 No 
website 
No 
9 Adani Petronet Limited Phase III expansion of Adani PetronetDahej Port Private 
Limited 
14 October 
2016 
10 09 Yes No 
10 Nirma Limited Additional Saltworks (2846.15 acres) located at village 
Kalatalav&Narmad, Ta. & Dist. Bhavnagar 
28 April 2017 09 09 No No 
11 Gujarat Chemical Port Company 
Limited 
Modification of existing Jetty and expansion of isolated 
storage facility at Dahej, Bharuch 
27 January 
2016 
11 11 Yes No 
12 
Tata Chemicals Limited Pipeline and Diffuser System for Disposal of Treated 
wastewater at Marine outfall point suggested by NIO, 
Mithapur, Okha, Devbhumi Dwarka 
10 July 2017 08 08 Yes No 
13 Nuclear Power Corporation of 
India Limited 
Mithivirdi Nuclear Power Plant at village Mithivirdi, Dist 
Bhavnagar 
03 March 2015 Project delisted 

 
 
78 
Performance Audit of Conservation and Management of Coastal Ecosystems 
  
 

Appendices 
79 
 
Appendix-6 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.7) 
Non-compliance to conditions of EC/ CRZ clearance by the Project 
Proponents 
1. Development of proposed Petroleum, Chemical and Petro -Chemical Special 
Investment Region (PCPIR) by Gujarat Industrial Development Corporation 
Requirement Status (September 2021) 
A firm and time -bound action plan for the 
conservation of mangroves and mudflats in the 
CRZ area, as a critical component of the EMP, 
shall be prepared through an identified institute 
of repute. 
(Condition no. 4. I (vii) of CRZ clearance) 
Though the clearance to this project was 
granted in September 2017, ToR for 
preparation of action plan was issued by 
PCPIR to identified institute in December 
2020 only. 
A detailed scientific study for Coastal 
Management Plan shall be prepared by an 
expert institution of repute and implemented by 
all the stakeholders. (Condition no. 4. I (ix) of 
CRZ clearance) 
Not prepared by PP. 
Preparation of environmental policy by the PP 
and its approval by its Board of Directors.   It 
also mentions broad contents to be included in 
the said environmental policy.  
(Condition no. 38 of CRZ clearance) 
Not prepared by the PP. 
2. Laying of treated effluent pipeline and disposal of effluent into Bhavnagar creek  
Requirement Status (September 2021) 
Online monitoring sensors shall be provided at 
an outlet in the industry and at the creek 
outfall.  
(Specific condition no.4 of CRZ clearance) 
No monitoring sensors were provided.  
PP has to carry out massive plantation 
including Mangrove s plantation in 25 -hectare 
land in consultation with GEC/  Forest 
Department and submit an action taken report 
in this regard to F&ED/ MoEF&CC. 
(Condition no.  5 of GCZMA 
recommendation letter) 
No plantation was carried out to date by the 
PP. 
3. Laying of pipeline a long the river Kolak up to deep sea for CETP in Village 
Morai, Vapi  
Requirement Status (September 2021) 
PP was required to set up a separate 
environmental management cell for effective 
implementation of the stipulated environmental 
safeguards under the supervision of a Senior 
Executive.  
(Special Condition no.  28 of the CRZ 
clearance) 
The PP did not set up the cell. 
4. Laying of treated effluent disposal pipeline and diffuse r system for disposal of 
treated wastewater at marine outfall point in Gulf of Kachchh at Mithapur  
Requirement Status (September 2021) 
A comprehensive EIA Report shall be prepared 
and submitted to GCZMA.  
(Condition no. 10 of GCZMA 
recommendation letter) 
Not submitted by PP. 

Performance Audit of Conservation and Management of Coastal Ecosystems 
80 
 
Submission of annual environment audit 
reports to GCZMA (Condition no. 19 of 
GCZMA recommendation letter) 
Not submitted by PP.  
Baseline data for Marine and coastal 
biodiversity of Poshitra Bay should be 
developed and monitored bi -annually with a 
specific focus on seagrass beds, and endemic 
species Sakura Eolis Gujaratica and 
Anteaeolidiella Poshitra.  
(Special condition no.  21 of the clearance 
letter) 
Baseline studies were not conducted by PP. 
5. Revival of existing jetty with liquid storage terminal, pipeline, road connectivity, 
railway line and sidings at Gandhidham, Kachchh 
Requirement Status (September 2021) 
PP had to obtain all necessary permissions 
from different Government Departments/ 
Agencies before commencing their activities.  
GPCB granted Consolidated Consent and 
Authorisation (CCA) for laying of  only five 
pipelines1,  
(Condition no. 5 of clearance letter) 
During the site visit, audit noticed that PP 
had laid six pipelines 2 each of 1 ,800 metre 
length.  
Thus, PP laid and operated an additional 
pipeline without obtaining CCA from 
GPCB. 
The PP has to carry out  mangroves plantation 
in a 50 -hectare area in consultation with the 
GEC/ F&ED within two years from the date of 
commencement of the project. 
(Condition no. 23 of the clearance letter) 
No plantation (August 2021) was carried out 
by the PP.  
PP shall take up massive green belt 
development activity in consultation with 
GEC/ F&ED/ GEER Foundation and submit a 
comprehensive plan to the Forest Department/ 
SEIAA. (Condition no.  22 of the clearance 
letter) 
PP neither consulted F &ED/ GEC/ GEER 
Foundation nor submitted any 
comprehensive plan. 
Amounts of ₹  20.67 lakh and ₹  2.51 lakh 
included as Capital cost and Maintenance cost 
respectively for green belt development as per 
EMP, were to be spent.  
(Paragraph 9.8 of EIA report submitted by 
the PP) 
It did not incur any expenditure for massive 
green belt development till date. 
6. Additional salt works (2,395.15 Acres) located at Village Kalatalav and Narmad, 
Bhavnagar  
Requirement Status (September 2021) 
Carrying out mangrove s plantation in 50 -
hectare area.  
(Condition No. 16 of GCZMA 
recommendation letter) 
PP shall carry out mangrove s plantation in an 
additional 50-hectare area.   
(Specific condition number 15 of clearance 
letter by SEIAA) 
PP has not complied with both the conditions 
till date . 
PP shall commission a comprehensive EIA 
through a reputed institute.  
(Condition no.10 of GCZMA 
recommendation letter) 
Not prepared 
                                                           
1  1 pipeline of 12”, 2 pipeline of 10”, 1 pipeline of 8” and 1 pipeline of 14” of 1 ,800 metre length out 
of 3,000 metre of each pipeline. 
2  2 pipeline of 12”, 2 pipeline of 10”, 1 pipeline of 8” and 1 pipeline of 14” of 1 ,800 metre length out 
of 3,000 metre of each pipeline. 

Appendices 
81 
PP shall regularly carry out studies on 
environmental surveillance covering the status 
of mangroves and other coastal and marine 
ecosystems in the vicinity through the reputed 
institute and submit the report every year to the 
F&ED.   
(Specific condition no. 7 of clearance letter) 
No such study was carried out by the PP. 
Submission of annual environmental audit 
report indicating the changes concerning the 
baseline environmental quality in the coastal 
and marine environment by the PP to FED and 
SEIAA.  (Other condition no.57 of clearance 
letter) 
Not complied by the PP till date (August 
2021).  
7. Construction of marine bridge between Beyt Dwarka and Okha by the Jamnagar 
Division of Roads and Buildings Department 
Requirement Status/ observations by audit during a 
joint site visit of Construction camp and 
project (August 2021) 
PP shall set up a separate environmental 
management cell with qualified personnel for 
environment monitoring and management 
during the construction and operational phases 
of the project.  
(Condition no. 55 of the CRZ clearance) 
No such cell was created by PP. 
Consent to Establish (CTE) and Consent to 
Operate (CTO) to be taken by the PP from 
GPCB.  
(Specific Condition no. 2 of CRZ Clearance) 
A Ready-Mix Concrete Plant was established 
at the construction camp by the PP without 
obtaining CTE or CTO. 
Permission for Non -agricultural use for the 
land to be obtained.  
(Condition no. 2 of CRZ clearance) 
Construction camp was established on 
agricultural land.  Permission for Non -
agricultural use was not obtained. 
Records related to the monitoring of fugitive 
emissions in the work area are required to be 
maintained. 
(Specific Condition no.  34 of CRZ 
Clearance) 
Such records were not maintained. 
Used oil to be sold to registered recyclers only. 
(Specific condition no. 39 of CRZ clearance) 
PP stated that  used oil was being sold to 
local vendors and not registered recyclers. 
Annual environment audit reports indicating 
changes, if any with respect to the baseline 
environmental quality in the coastal and marine 
environment to be submitted to F &ED by the 
PP.  
(Specific Condition no.  53 of CRZ 
Clearance) 
An annual environment audit after the 
commencement of construction was not 
carried out. 
Construction/ installation of settling ponds and 
oil receptors to prevent the entry of the surface 
runoff f rom fuel and other contaminants into 
the marine water and other surface water 
bodies along the corridor.  
(Special condition no. 6 of CRZ Clearance) 
No such settling ponds and/  or oil receptors 
were observed at the project site. 
Construction Camp shall be kept outside the 
CRZ area.  
(Specific Condition no.  16 of CRZ 
Clearance) 
Audit observed that part of the construction 
camp falls under CRZ III area as can be seen 
from the image of the construction camp 
shown below. 

Performance Audit of Conservation and Management of Coastal Ecosystems 
82 
 
 
Image of the construction camp,  (distance from Sea: 476 metre) as taken from Google 
Earth pro software (August 2021) 
8. Construction of Residential project ‘Sun City’ at Barbodhan village, Surat by 
Pramukh Organizers LLP 
PP submitted a CRZ map and superimposed the project site on this map.  Some parts of the 
construction area proposed by PP was falling within CRZ  III.  GCZMA did not insist for a 
revision in project layout and simply sought an undertaking from the PP regard ing not 
carrying out any construction activity in the CRZ  III.  The same condition was inserted by 
GCZMA in its recommendation letter to SEIAA. 
 
 


Appendices 
83 
 
Appendix-7 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.2) 
PEA-wise Activities carried out under ICZMP 
Name of 
PEA 
Activities to be carried out Status (September 2021) 
GEER 
Foundation 
Capacity Building of GEER 
Foundation 
GEER Foundation established a Central 
laboratory at Gandhinagar and five marine 
field stations 1.  Observation related to not 
utilising instruments optimally at Mandvi and 
Jamnagar Field Station are discussed at 
paragraph 5.2.1. 
Biophysical monitoring of Gulf 
of Kachchh (GoK) 
GEER Foundation carried out studies about 
the flora and faunal diversity in the GoK, 
Kachchh and submitted three reports (July 
2017, January 2018 and March 2019)  to 
SPMU. 
Carrying out experimental 
coral transplantation 
GEER Foundation carried out experimental 
coral transplantation of 852 fragments at four 
different locations 2 in the Marine National 
Park and Marine Sanctuary (MNP &MS) in 
the GoK in five phases during March 2012 to 
January 2015. 
Gujarat 
Pollution 
Control 
Board 
(GPCB) 
Capacity building of GPCB by 
providing Sophisticated 
Analytical Instruments 
GPCB developed the State of Art Laboratory 
(SARL) at Gandhinagar, Bhuj, Jamnagar and 
Rajkot and procured 18 sophisticated 
Scientific Analytical Instrume nts for the 
Central laboratory at Gandhinagar .  
Observation related to underutilisation of 
some of the instruments are discussed at 
paragraph 5.2.1. 
Monitoring of Physico -
chemical parameters of coastal 
water of Gulf of Kachchh 
GPCB carried out monitoring of Physico -
chemical parameters of coastal water of Gulf 
of Kachchh and submitted its reports to SPMU 
in July 2017 and March 2018. 
Jamnagar 
Municipal 
Corporation 
(JMC) 
Construction of Sewerage 
Treatment Plant (STP) at 
Jamnagar 
JMC engaged (October 2013) a firm on PPP 
basis to construct 70 MLD STP and operate 
and maintain it for a period of 15 years.  The 
STP was commissioned in August 2016.   
However, as the firm did not construct 
ancillary network within two years from the 
date o f commissioning, operation and 
maintenance of STP was transferred 
(December 2020) to Gujarat Water Supply 
and Sewerage Board (GWSSB).  JMC also 
forfeited (July 2021) the bank guarantee of the 
earlier firm. 
Marine 
National 
Park and 
Marine 
Sanctuary, 
Jamnagar 
(MNP&MS) 
Mangroves Plantation During the year 2010 -11 to 2014 -15, 
MNP&MS carried out a total of 3,900 -
hectares mangroves plantation (1,025 hectares 
on island and 2,875 hectares on coastal area) 
at a total of ₹ 659.38 crore. 
Coral Reef Restoration Total 927 fragments of Coral were 
transplanted between 2013 -14 to 2015 -16 at 
                                                           
1  Bhavnagar, Jamnagar, Mandvi (Kachchh), Mangrol (Gir Somnath), and Surat. 
2  Dedeka-Mundeka, Goose, Narara and Poshitra. 

Performance Audit of Conservation and Management of Coastal Ecosystems 
84 
Pirotan, Narara and Mithapur region of the 
Gulf of Kachchh.  Further, 4,540 samples of 
local coral species were also transplanted in 
the area of the Gulf of Kachchh.  As per report 
of Zoological Survey of India (July 2017), 
high survival rates of (more than 95  per cent) 
native coral species were recorded in all 
restoration sites. 
Eco-tourism Development Three activities 3 were supposed to be carried 
out.  Out of which Oceanarium development 
project did not materialise, as no party could 
be identified even after three attempts through 
international competitive bidding.  Further, 
the work of development of the Coral watch 
trail and Mangrove s canopy walk was n ot 
carried out by MNP &MS considering 
potential harm to coral and mangroves due to 
anthropogenic activities.  
Eco-Development in villages 
around the Gulf of Kachchh 
Entry-point eco -development activities like 
construction of individual toilets, internal 
roads, vented causeway, check dam, 
multipurpose cyclone relief centre, solar light 
etc., were carried out in the villages located 
near MNP&MS. 
Sea Turtle conservation 
programme 
One Hatchery already existed at Madhupur 
(Porbandar) from which 52,734 eggs were 
collected and 43,108 turtles (Hatching ratio 
82 per cent) were released between 2009 -10 
and 2020-21.  Further, a new turtle Hatchery 
was started (October 2012) at Okhamadhi 
(MNP&MS, Jamnagar) in which out of 
69,684 eggs collected, 5 5,749 turtles 
(Hatching ratio -80 per cent) were released 
between 2012-13 and 2020-21. 
Conservation awareness and 
education programme 
Total ₹ 5.42 crore was utilised for awareness 
materials. 
 
  
                                                           
3  (i) Oceanarium development (ii) Development of Coral watch trail (iii) Development of Mangrove s 
canopy walk. 

Appendices 
85 
 
Appendix-8 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.3)  
Activities executed under Smart Eco Villages project 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Type of work Total 
units 
No. of 
villages 
out of 
112 
villages 
Total 
contract 
value 
 
Total 
work 
done 
 
1 Alternative energy 
development activity 
2,757 98 4.35 4.25 
2 Animal husbandry 
activities 
108 75 3.27 2.66 
3 CCTV 841 67 6.12 5.14 
4 Clean and green village 
activities (Development of 
Gardens) 
1,022 22 12.74 12.86 
5 Construction for 
community development 
9 9 0.79 0.61 
6 Construction for water 
conservation 
22 22 2.48 2.30 
7 Consultancy work -- -- 4.39 3.37 
8 Development and 
establishment of L iquid 
Waste  management system 
2 2 1.43 1.40 
9 Development and 
establishment of S olid 
Waste management system 
3 3 0.95 0.30 
10 Development of fodder 
plots 
25 25 2.26 2.08 
11 Establishment of smart 
(Green) schools 
31 30 9.13 9.07 
12 Fishing sheds 8 8 0.71 0.67 
13 MSME units 27 10 0.81 0.81 
14 Public Address system 48 48 1.73 1.65 
15 Recharge well 102 37 2.30 1.20 
16 RO plant 9 9 0.79 0.79 
17 Roof rainwater harvesting 
System 
2,257 44 14.71 9.91 
18 Salinity prevention 
activities 
3 3 0.34 0.32 
19 Water desalination plant 7 7 14.91 14.90 
 Grand Total 7,281  84.21 74.29 
 
 
 

Performance Audit of Conservation and Management of Coastal Ecosystems 
86 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
87 
 
Appendices 
s 
Appendix-9 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.3.1) 
Comparison of activities envisaged in project proposal with procurement plan and actual execution 
(₹ in lakh) 
Outcome 
Number 
Outcome Output 
number 
Output Activity 
number 
Activity Outlay 
 
Mentioned in Procurement Plan Work 
done Procurement 
Plan Activity  
(PPA) Number  
Outlay Contract  
Amount 
1 Enhance the 
capacity of 
community to 
restore and manage 
the coastal natural 
resources for 
sustainable smart -
eco village 
development 
1.1 Development of 
Ecological Resources 
to sustain & manage 
the coastal natural 
resources for coming 
generations 
1.1.1 Identification and quick 
survey about the natural 
coastal resources of the 
village 
56 PPA 16 721 439.43 336.90 
1.1.2 Enhancement of natural 
resources of village 
336 PPA 7, 8, 12, 13 
and 19 
Included in 
1.1.2.1 to 
1.1.2.4 
Included in 
1.1.2.1 to 
1.1.2.4 
Included in 
1.1.2.1 to 
1.1.2.4 
1.1.2.1 Water conservation and 
management 
1,288 PPA 13 
PPA 19 
Not included in 
PP 
250 
1,000 
Nil 
229.50 
1,470.74 
247.81 
119.74 
991.52 
229.94 
1.1.2.2 Fodder development 784 PPA 12 420 226.30 208.04 
1.1.2.3 Salinity reduction and 
abatement 
672 PPA 8 1,250 33.74 31.71 
1.1.2.4 Other infrastructure 
development 
784 PPA 7 485 70.56 67.43 
1.1.3 Imparting technical skills to 
villagers for sustainable 
management of resources  
784 Not included in 
PP 
Nil Nil Nil 
1.2 Conservation & 
Long-Term 
Management of 
Coastal & natural 
1.2.1 Prepare long term 
management plan for 
coastal and natural 
resources of the villages - 
68 Not included in 
PP 
Nil Nil Nil 

 
 
88 
Performance Audit of Conservation and Management of Coastal Ecosystems 
 Outcome 
Number 
Outcome Output 
number 
Output Activity 
number 
Activity Outlay 
 
Mentioned in Procurement Plan Work 
done Procurement 
Plan Activity  
(PPA) Number  
Outlay Contract  
Amount 
resources of the 
village  
Implementation of long -
term management plant 
1.2.2 Creation of Corpus fund for 
management of coastal and 
other natural resources - 
Preparation of rules and 
regulation for use of Corpus 
546 Not included in 
PP 
Nil Nil Nil 
2 Build the capacity 
of communities to 
enhance their 
livelihood & socio -
economic status 
2.1 Develop skill to start 
up resources -based 
livelihood  
2.1.1 Identification of need for 
development of skill 
25 Not included in 
PP 
Nil Nil Nil 
2.1.2 Imparting need -based skill 
development trainings for 
the community to enhance 
their livelihood 
210 Not included in 
PP 
Nil Nil Nil 
2.1.3 Development of special 
skilled manpower 
considering nearby 
Industries requirement 
175 Not included in 
PP 
Nil Nil Nil 
2.1.4 Employment creation for 
skilled manpower 
140 Not included in 
PP 
Nil Nil Nil 
2.1.5 Skill development program 
for women to enhance or 
promote art and craft skill 
for enhancement of 
livelihood 
250 Not included in 
PP 
Nil Nil Nil 
2.1.6 Micro enterprise 
development for women in 
art and craft 
200 Not included in 
PP 
Nil Nil Nil 
2.2 Improvement of 
Education and IT 
infrastructure for 
2.2.1 Baseline assessment and 
need identification 
20  
 
PPA 1 
PPA 2 
 
 
104 
896 
Nil 
 
Nil 
 
2.2.2 Identifications of books and 
its procurement 
30 

 
 
89 
 
Appendices 
s 
Outcome 
Number 
Outcome Output 
number 
Output Activity 
number 
Activity Outlay 
 
Mentioned in Procurement Plan Work 
done Procurement 
Plan Activity  
(PPA) Number  
Outlay Contract  
Amount 
betterment of socio -
economic status 
2.2.3 Library infrastructure 
development including IT 
120 
2.2.4 Establishment of 
Information Technology 
Infrastructures within 
village for E governance 
system 
336 
3 Development of 
Coastal Clean & 
Green Villages to 
achieve Eco -Smart 
Village Concept 
3.1 Creation of Village 
Level Environment 
Infrastructure for 
clean village, clean 
Gujarat & Clean 
India concept 
3.1.1 Feasibility assessment of 
solid waste and liquid waste 
generation in the village 
116 PPA 9 800 94.80 29.88 
3.1.2 design and establishment of 
solid waste management 
infrastructure 
200 
3.1.3 distribution of waste bins 
and establishment of 
collection system 
200 Not included in 
PP 
Nil Nil Nil 
3.1.4 Collection, segregation and 
disposal mechanism 
development 
240 Not included in 
PP 
Nil Nil Nil 
3.1.5 design and establishment of 
liquid waste management 
infrastructure 
200 PPA 11 800 143.21 140.04 
3.1.6 maintenance of solid waste 
management and reuse of 
water 
280 Not included in 
PP 
Nil Nil Nil 
3.1.7 awareness creation and 
communication material 
development for clean and 
green villages 
300 Not included in 
PP 
Nil Nil Nil 
3.2 Development of 
Green Villages 
3.2.1 creation of plantation and 
Gardens within villages 
180 PPA 18 200 1,273.51 1,285.83 

 
 
90 
Performance Audit of Conservation and Management of Coastal Ecosystems 
 Outcome 
Number 
Outcome Output 
number 
Output Activity 
number 
Activity Outlay 
 
Mentioned in Procurement Plan Work 
done Procurement 
Plan Activity  
(PPA) Number  
Outlay Contract  
Amount 
with concept of carbon -
neutral villages 
3.2.2 maintenance of plantation 
and Gardens 
180 Not included in 
PP 
Nil Nil Nil 
3.2.3 creation of horticulture in 
village Cross-roads 
120 Not included in 
PP 
Nil Nil Nil 
4 Establishment of 
Micro-enterprises 
to build the smart 
villages pillars 
4.1 One Village One 
Entrepreneurship 
Development  
4.1.1 preparation of secondary 
research reports for creation 
of smart enterprises in 
village 
336 PPA 10 1,000 80.97 81.04 
4.1.2 Establishment of various 
micro-Enterprises 
2,240 PPA 10 
4.1.3 development of market 
linkages and fund 
generation for micro -
Enterprises 
784 PPA 10 
      12,200  7,926 4,310.57 3,522.07 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
©COMPTROLLER AND 
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA 
www.cag.gov.in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
http://cag.gov.in/ag2/gujarat/en 