©  COMPTROLLER AND
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA
www.cag.gov.in
Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
Union Government
Department of Revenue
 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax)
Report No.  3 of 2023
lR;eso t;rs
 Union Government Department of Revenue (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax)–Report No. 3 of 2023 IT Audit of CBIC ACES-GST Application


Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
 
 
 
IT Audit of CBIC ACES-GST Application 
 
Union Government 
Department of Revenue  
(Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
Report No. 3 of 2023 
 
Laid on the table of Lok Sabha/Rajya Sabha on ____________ 
Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
 
 
 
IT Audit of CBIC ACES-GST Application 
 
Union Government 
Department of Revenue  
(Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
Report No. 3 of 2023 
 
Laid on the table of Lok Sabha/Rajya Sabha on ____________ 
Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
 
 
 
IT Audit of CBIC ACES-GST Application 
 
Union Government 
Department of Revenue  
(Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
Report No. 3 of 2023 
 
Laid on the table of Lok Sabha/Rajya Sabha on ____________ 

Table of Contents 
Contents Page 
Preface i 
Executive Summary iii 
Chapter I: Overview 1 – 7 
1.1  About CBIC ACES-GST Application 2 
1.2  Audit Objectives 3 
1.3  Audit Criteria 3 
1.4  Audit Scope 3 
1.5  Audit Methodology 4 
1.6  Audit Constraints 4 
Chapter II: IT governance and IT security  9 – 42 
2.1  Inception of CBIC ACES-GST Application 9 
2.2  Acquisition and Procurement 10 
2.3  Technical requirements of the CBIC ACES-GST 
Application 
13 
2.4  Scope of work for Vendor 13 
2.5  IT Governance and Management 14 
2.6  Exit Management 26 
2.7  Service Level Agreement (SLA) and Liquidated Damages 26 
2.8  Change Management 37 
2.9  IT Security 40 
Chapter III: Implementation of functionalities 43 – 102 
3.1  Registration Module 44 

Contents Page 
3.2  Returns Module 71 
3.3  Payments Module 76 
3.4  Data Migration 79 
3.5  Refund Module 81 
3.6  Investigation Module 86 
3.7  Dispute Settlement and Resolution (DSR) module 88 
3.8  Export Module 97 
3.9  Audit module 98 
3.10  Taxpayer at Glance - TAG 98 
3.11  Mobile Application 99 
3.12  Cross Cutting issues 99 
Chapter IV: Interface with other IT applications 103 – 109 
4.1  Interface related issues which affected key decisions of 
the department 
103 
4.2  Interface with other IT applications 108 
Glossary 111 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
i
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
i 
Preface 
This Report has been prepared for submission to the President of India under 
Article 151 of the Constitution of India. 
The Report contains significant results of the Information Technology (IT) 
audit of the ACES-GST Application of Central Board of Indirect Taxes and 
Customs (CBIC) under the Department of Revenue. The report contains audit 
findings relating to IT governance and IT security, implementation of 
functionalities and interface with other IT applications. 
The instances mentioned in this Report are those, which came to notice in the 
course of test audit during the period December 2020 to April 2022. 
The audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards 
issued by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
  
Preface

iii
Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
iii 
Executive Summary 
The main objectives of this IT Audit of CBIC ACES-GST Application were to seek 
assurance whether:  
(i) IT governance and IT security is adequate and effective; 
(ii) The functionalities of the CBIC ACES-GST Application have been 
developed as envisaged and the intended benefits have been achieved 
including ease of tax administration; and 
(iii) The application has effective interfaces with other IT Applications. 
The audit covered the period from August 2015 to March 2021.  The scope of 
audit covered development of various modules and their functionalities, GSTN 
Interface and other Interfaces, acquisition of the CBIC ACES-GST Application, 
IT Governance, Change Management and Compliance with SLA Parameters. 
A summary of the major audit findings is listed below: 
Acquisition & Procurement 
A total of 12 prospective bidders purchased the RFP, but only one 
bidder participated in the bidding process for selection of Implementation 
Agency for development and maintenance of CBIC’s Indirect Tax Application 
(GST and ACES) and provision of Training and Helpdesk Services. Thus 
indicated lack of adequate competition from prospective bidders. In future, 
the Department should ensure adequate competition and minimize vendor 
lock-in by ensuring that more bidders participate in the bid for tendering for 
the next contract. This may be done by devising appropriate procedures to 
ensure a more level playing field between the prospective bidders and the 
existing System Integrator (SI). Also, this tender may be initiated well in time 
so that in the event of receipt of only one bid, the Department has sufficient 
time to retender, if felt necessary. The Ministry accepted the observation. 
IT Governance and Management 
Due to limited production of records, Audit could not comment as to 
whether the Project Management office and Steering Committee were 
functioning as envisaged.  The Department should ensure that the PMO and 
steering committee are functioning as envisaged, to monitor the progress of 
implementation of the project.  The Ministry during the exit conference 
stated that all available office records were furnished before the audit team 
and also stated to share the same with Audit again; however, the same was 
awaited (December 2022). 
There were certain statutory requirements in the Investigation and 
Registration modules which were not included in the SRS. The Department 
Executive Summary

iv
Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
iv 
should conduct a review to ensure that all the provisions laid down in 
Act/Rules/notifications, including the changes introduced at different times 
are accurately mapped and updated in the SRS for development of 
functionalities. The Ministry accepted the recommendation and stated that 
the suggested functionalities in these modules will be developed.           
Development and utilisation of modules 
Modules like Mobile Application, Export, Audit and Taxpayer at Glance 
were yet to be developed at the time of Audit. Functionalities of the modules 
for Adjudication, Investigation and Appeal were being used only to a limited 
extent. The Department should strengthen the IT Governance and 
Management mechanism to ensure that the project timelines are adhered 
to and rolled out modules are effectively used as envisaged.  The Ministry 
stated that the audit module has been rolled out on 1st April 2022 and all 
efforts were being made to accelerate the development and deployment of 
the remaining modules. 
Service Level Agreement (SLA) and Liquidated Damages (LD) 
Out of 32 parameters relating to five SLAs, the Department provided 
SLA records for only 14 parameters. Further, one important SLA parameter 
stated that the response time of 95% of business transactions was to be 
within the limit of two seconds at the Data Centre. Despite the System 
Integrator (SI) Vendor regularly informing the department regarding the same, 
it was not implemented as application baselining was pending on the part of 
the Application Vendor. In the absence of such baselining, neither Vendor is 
held accountable for failure to reach the targeted performance. The 
Department should actively coordinate with both the Vendors (SI and 
Application Vendors) for baselining of application performance of the CBIC 
ACES-GST application, at the earliest. The Ministry accepted the observation. 
In respect of the other SLA parameters for which records were 
provided, there were issues in handholding resource deployment and delay in 
submission of Helpdesk Operational Plan (Level-1) by the Vendor. Further, 
refund grievances data revealed that incidents were resolved after the 
respective prescribed time limits and many incidents remained unresolved. 
The Department should ensure that implementation of all aspects of SLA are 
effectively monitored; the Department and the Vendor perform their 
respective roles in accordance with the contractual provisions and non/late 
performance is effectively reviewed and resolved within the agreed time 
limit. The Ministry accepted the recommendation and stated that the 
Department has deducted the maximum LD of 20% in all the quarterly 
payments made up to July-September 2021. 

v
Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
v 
Registration Module 
Instances of deemed approval of registrations without mandatory 
Physical Verification (PV) of business premises where taxpayers did not 
authenticate their Aadhaar were observed in Audit. The Department should 
conduct post-physical verification of the premises for the cases where 
Aadhaar has not been authenticated. The CBIC ACES-GST system should 
have provision to not allow grant of registration without mandatory physical 
verification of taxpayers with unverified Aadhaar Status. The Department 
should make provision for generating exception reports for cases where 
Aadhaar Verification and Mandatory Physical Verification status of a 
taxpayer is flagged as ‘N’ for monitoring and taking appropriate action.  The 
Ministry, while accepting the para, stated that Aadhaar authentication was 
activated by GSTN from August 2020 and the same was implemented by CBIC 
from 5th October 2020 and the recommendation was being communicated to 
Policy wing. The fact remains that provision of physical verification in place of 
Aadhaar authentication should have been effective from 1st April 2020. 
Registrations were approved even in cases where the PV reports 
sought rejections of the registration applications. The Department should 
develop an alert by which the CPC officer can identify the Adverse/Negative 
remarks. It should also consider developing a MIS report of such cases.  The 
Ministry noted the recommendation for compliance.     
Registrations were approved in the case of applications filed through 
the MCA portal (SPICE-AGILE form) without mandatory physical verification 
where the taxpayers either opt out of Aadhaar Authentication or opted but 
Aadhaar authentication had failed. The Department should ensure that GST 
registration through MCA portal is not approved in the CBIC ACES-GST 
application unless the same is Aadhaar authenticated, or the physical 
verification is completed.  The Ministry noted the recommendation for 
compliance and stated that the decision as to whether physical verification is 
required or not for a given application is indicated and communicated by the 
GSTN system. The fact remains that a mechanism is required to avoid deemed 
registrations in case of registration applications through MCA portal. 
Certain applications for registration were neither approved nor 
rejected by the tax officer and approval of registration either by the tax officer 
or deemed approval in cases where no response is received to the queries 
raised by the tax officer through REG-03 were observed. The Ministry stated 
that Rule 9 does not provide any timeline for cases where the taxpayer has 
not responded and hence auto-rejection option is not built in the system. The 
Department may consider proposing an amendment to the provisions of 
Rule 9 of the CGST Rules, 2017 for clearly specifying a timeline for rejection 

vi
Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
vi 
of applications for registration where the applicant fails to respond to Form 
GST REG-03 within seven days.  
Suspension functionality in cases of application for cancellation of 
registration or suo-moto cancellation by the tax officer was not implemented. 
There was no mechanism to restrict such registered persons from making any 
taxable supplies and consequent passing on of credit during the period of 
suspension. The Department should ensure that the suspension functionality 
is implemented in the CBIC ACES-GST application in line with the CGST Rules. 
The Ministry accepted the para and stated that the effective date of 
suspension was to be communicated by GSTN through API and the same 
would be taken up for integration. In case of suo-moto cancellation, the 
enhancement would be taken up for implementation. 
Absence of mechanism to compute aggregate turnover under a single 
PAN in the case of Registered Persons opting under Composition Levy Scheme 
(CLS) was noticed. The Department should pursue the matter with GSTN to 
enforce the validation to compute the aggregate turnover from returns and 
to move such persons registered under the Composition Levy Scheme to 
normal taxpayer status after they cross the prescribed turnover threshold. 
An alert for the tax officer can also be included for such cases where the 
taxpayers cross the turnover threshold meant for the Composition Levy 
Scheme. The Department should identify all such past cases to bring them 
into the normal taxpayer category. The Ministry, while accepting the para, 
stated that the Department had already prioritised the GSTN CR of restricting 
composition option to taxpayers exceeding the threshold turnover. 
Validations for identifying multiple registrations with the same PAN 
registered under the Composite Levy Scheme (CLS) as well as Normal 
Taxpayers were not built in the application.  The Department should ensure 
that a validation is in place in the system so that the taxpayer under Normal 
Registration is not allowed for a Registration with the same PAN under the 
Composition Levy Scheme at the same time and vice versa. The Department 
should identify all such past cases to bring them into the normal taxpayer 
category. The Ministry, while accepting the para, noted the recommendation 
for compliance and stated that a reconciliation exercise of all the registration 
data base with the GSTN data base is undertaken for rectification. 
The delay in implementation of certain crucial forms relevant to 
Composition taxpayers and inadequate checks to validate the eligibility 
conditions to pay tax under Composition Levy scheme was noticed. This 
resulted in non-identification of ineligible taxpayers such as same PAN 
taxpayers existing as Composition and Normal Taxpayers. The Department 
should ensure early development of CMP-5, CMP-6 and CMP-7 forms and 

vii
Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
vii 
validation check alert enabling the proper officer to initiate the prescribed 
action against the taxpayers who no longer fulfil the eligibility conditions 
relevant to the CLS.  The Ministry noted the recommendation for compliance 
and stated that the Department has prioritised to implement the same. 
Regular taxpayers where the last filed GSTR 3B return was before 
January 2020 or where even a single GSTR 3B return has not been filed before 
January 2020 were found active. Suo-moto cancellation functionality is not 
effectively used resulting in many non-filers registrations remaining active. 
The Ministry stated that GSTN has implemented Centralised Bulk suspension 
(cancellation) of non-filers functionality. The Department should ensure that 
the Centralised Bulk suspension (cancellation) of non-filers functionality is 
being used effectively by GSTN.   
No action was taken against taxpayers who have not furnished bank 
account details within forty five days after obtaining GSTIN.  Further, there 
was no alert mechanism to enable tax officers to identify such taxpayers or to 
initiate cancellation proceedings in such cases. The Department should 
ensure compliance with Rule 10 and 10A of the CGST Rules, 2017 read with 
Rule 21 and 21A and consider providing an alert functionality at the Tax 
Officers Dashboard in the case of non-filing of Bank account details within 
the prescribed time limits. The Ministry stated that it will be implemented on 
priority basis. 
Where a taxpayer files returns in response to a Show Cause Notice 
(SCN) issued in REG-17 for non-filing of Returns, there is no provision in the 
CBIC ACES-GST application to alert the tax officer that the Returns have been 
filed.  Linkage between the Registration and the Returns Module was not 
provided. The Department should provide a linkage between the 
Registration and the Returns Module so that a Tax Officer is alerted when 
Returns are filed and taxes are paid in response to a notice in REG-17. Action 
may also be initiated to provide effective validation/alert in respect of the 
timelines as per the provisions of the CGST Rules.  The Ministry accepted the 
para and stated that the taxpayers are provided with an opportunity to 
respond to the notice and hence if they had filed, it can very well be informed 
to the proper officer. 
Due to absence of provision in the Act to amend the enrolment of GST 
Practitioner (GSTP), Form REG-14 meant for normal registrations, is being 
used for core amendment in the GST Practitioner registration. The Ministry 
stated that the feature is only a facilitative/enabling mechanism having no 
revenue implication. The Department should initiate necessary action to 
obtain the approval of the GST Council/GSTN Law Committee for the 
procedure for GSTP Amendments.  

viii
Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
viii 
Returns Module 
Form GSTR-4 was still not deployed in production even though the 
Board had notified the same in April 2019. The Department should ensure 
the availability of the amended Form GSTR-4.  The Ministry accepted that the 
development of the functionality had been delayed and stated that an 
addendum to the existing Contract has been signed with the Vendor on 17 
February 2022 as per which all the pending tasks would be undertaken on 
T&M (Time and Materials) basis under AGILE mode. 
Instances of mismatch of the Taxpayer Type were noticed; regular 
taxpayers were shown as Composition Taxpayers in the application. The 
Department should initiate corrective action to reconcile the data in the 
CBIC with the data in GSTN and map the correct Return type with the 
Registration Type.  The Ministry accepted the recommendation and stated a 
reconciliation exercise in respect of the Registration Database between GSTN 
and CBIC has been initiated and corrective action is being taken to rectify the 
same in the CBIC database. 
 “View Non-Filers” functionality was not enabled for Composition Non-
filers.  Even the Bulk suo-moto cancellation functionality was also not made 
applicable to the non-filers of GSTR-4 and CMP-08 returns. The Department 
should enable the issuance of GSTR-3A notices through the common portal 
to non-filers of all types of Returns including GSTR-04 and CMP-08.  The 
Ministry accepted the recommendation. 
Functionalities such as Scrutiny of Returns, Summary and Provisional 
Assessment, Risk Assessment Engine, Ledger Maintenance etc., have not been 
developed and the timelines for development had not been frozen. The 
Department should prescribe definite timelines for the development and 
deployment of functionalities for effective monitoring.  The Department 
should also ensure that important functionalities such as Scrutiny and 
Assessment, Risk Assessment Engine, Ledger Maintenance etc., are 
developed and deployed in a timely manner.  The Ministry stated that the 
functionalities are under development or will be taken up shortly under AGILE 
mode.  
Refund Module 
The functionality to process the refund applications filed by notified 
persons through CBIC ACES-GST application was kept on hold with the 
remarks “To be taken up in future”. The Department should pursue the 
matter with GSTN to develop the functionality for processing the refund 
applications of the UIN category meant for Notified Persons as envisaged in 
the SRS.  The Ministry, while accepting the para, stated that once GSTN 

ix
Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
ix 
develops this functionality at the frontend, the same will be developed at the 
backend also.  
The functionality for adjustment of outstanding demand under the Act 
or under any existing law in the Provisional Refund order (RFD-04) was neither 
included in the SRS nor developed though the Act provides for the same. Due 
to this there were risks to government revenue. The Department should 
pursue the matter with GSTN to  develop the functionality for either 
adjustment of outstanding demand or at least an alert about such 
outstanding demand to the Proper Officer at the time of sanctioning the 
provisional refund.  The Ministry, while accepting the para, stated if GSTN 
develops any functionality in the GSTN portal, the same will be developed in 
the backend also. 
There was no provision for recovery/adjustment of interest on 
payment of outstanding demand, interest from the date of demand raised 
(Demand ID date) to the date of amount adjusted from refund due, from the 
final refund. The Department should ensure by working with GSTN that such 
a functionality is developed and deployed in the system to ensure recovery 
of interest on outstanding demand.  The Ministry stated that a liability under 
interest minor head cannot be adjusted against the amount that is sanctioned 
under the Tax minor head. However, this issue was taken up with GSTN for 
necessary action as per the statutory provisions. The contention of Ministry is 
not acceptable. There is a provision to adjust outstanding interest liability 
against refund due in the refund order. However, there is no provision in the 
system to adjust the interest accrued on late adjustment of the outstanding 
demand for the period from the date of demand raised (Demand ID date) to 
the date of amount adjusted from final refund due.  
Dispute Settlement and Resolution (DSR) module 
Adjudication Module 
Non-development of Dispute Lifecycle Register envisaged as part of 
DSR module was observed which has an inherent risk exposure of data of 
cases accumulating in the system without a lifecycle view.  The Department 
should ensure the development of the dispute lifecycle register under the 
DSR (Adjudication) module. The Ministry while accepting the para stated that 
Dispute Life Cycle Register will be developed after the development of all 
functionalities in various modules. 
There was no in-built mechanism for modifying/updating due dates for 
filing of returns, including revision/extension mandated by law/GST Council. 
The Department should discuss the technical feasibility of development of a 
mechanism to modify/update the dates in integration with Returns module 

x
Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
x 
and develop a mechanism for same in the module. The Ministry accepted the 
para and stated that the technical feasibility for integrating DRC-01 
functionality with returns module for automating the due dates will be 
studied. 
Other Modules 
Development of Export module, Taxpayer at Glance and Mobile 
application had either not started or was in the initial stage of development. 
The Department should ensure the development and implementation of 
Export and Mobile modules in a timely manner.  The Ministry while noting 
the recommendation(s) for compliance stated that the necessity of TAG’s 
development would be reviewed as the ADVAIT project under DG (Systems) 
had already implemented a similar dashboard “Know your Taxpayer”.  
Cross-cutting issues 
The content of individual changes made in the forms at various levels 
of hierarchy in the draft stage are not being recorded and stored. The version 
control utility is found to be absent in the workflow activity. The Department 
should ensure that the portal can capture all the changes/alterations or at 
least the significant changes carried out by each user in the workflow as part 
of the user activity logs.  The Ministry, while accepting the para, replied that 
implementation of Version Control functionality as suggested would be taken 
up subject to technical feasibility. 
The digital signature/e-Verification code of the proper officer 
mandated by the Rules were not available on the Registration Certificates. 
Such Digital Signature/e-signature has not been incorporated and adopted in 
any of the modules. The Department should ensure the digital signature 
functionality incorporated and adopted in all modules proper for 
authentication of statutory documents by an individual officer in a non-
repudiable manner. 
There is no provision for automating the calculation of interest with 
the requisite details of tax payable, period and rate of interest being provided 
as inputs. Calculation of interest across all modules are designed for manual 
calculation, exposing it to risk of computation errors. The Department should 
expedite the development of functionality for automated calculation of 
interest as envisaged.  The Ministry accepted the para and stated that the 
issue was being taken up with GSTN. 
Interface with GSTN 
There was absence of a mechanism to link the Temporary Reference 
Number with the Jurisdiction.  There is no provision for a tax officer to 

xi
Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
xi 
monitor whether the suo-moto order has been complied with by the taxpayer. 
The Department should pursue the matter with GSTN and the Policy Wing, 
to devise a suitable mechanism to link the Jurisdiction with the TRN.  The 
Ministry stated that they have noted the recommendation for compliance.   
There were instances of mismatch of data between the GST common 
portal and the CBIC database. Also, the entries in Ledgers were not getting 
updated.  The mismatch of data raises concern on the reliability of data which 
further leads to inaccurate MIS Reporting. The Department should 
implement an End of Day reconciliation mechanism (interface based) for all 
the modules to ensure that the data in the CBIC database is always in sync 
with the GSTN database.  The Ministry stated that they have noted the 
recommendation for compliance.   
Discrepancies were noticed between the Permanent Account Numbers 
(PANs) available in the CBIC ACES-GST application and GSTN Portal. In certain 
cases, Legal Names available in CBIC database were not matching with the 
GSTIN.  The Department should take appropriate action to reconcile the 
cases of mismatch in PAN, existence of incorrect legal names in the RCs and 
the details of the correct PAN based on which RCs had been issued.  The 
Ministry stated that they have noted the recommendation for compliance.   
Interface with other IT applications 
The CBIC ACES-GST Application was intended to interface with various 
applications within CBIC and external agencies like ICEGATE, ACES, ICES, 
CPGRAMS, NSDL, RBI, MCA 21, State level applications etc.  Development of 
interface mechanisms with other external systems and agencies have not yet 
been initiated. The Department should initiate the development of interface 
of CBIC ACES-GST application with other applications.  The Ministry stated 
that they have noted the recommendation for compliance.    

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
1
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
1 
Chapter I: Overview 
Goods and Services Tax (GST) was rolled out from July 1, 2017 through the 
implementation of the 101st Amendment of the Constitution of India.  GST 
was not merely a simplification of the tax structure, but also a systemic 
reform with a focus on transparency, efficiency and speed in 
implementation and administration of taxes.  Technology was a major 
component of the solution devised to fulfil these objectives.  This could 
have been possible only when there was a strong IT Infrastructure and 
Service backbone which enabled capture, processing and exchange of 
information amongst the stakeholders.  For this, Goods and Services Tax 
Network (GSTN), a Special Purpose Vehicle, was created.  The GST portal 
developed by the GSTN is the front-end portal for the taxpayers for 
Registration, Returns, Payment and Refund modules. 
Central Board of Indirect Taxes and Customs (CBIC) and the State GST 
authorities were given the option either to develop their own IT systems 
and applications to process the registration, returns and payment data as a 
back-end process and provide facilities to the taxpayers for other business 
related activities namely Refund, Investigation, Audit, Exports, 
Adjudication/Appeal etc. or to avail of the services to be provided by the 
GSTN. 
A total of 27 States/Union Territories (UTs) had so far opted for the option 
of using GSTN system both for the front-end and back-end activities of 
their taxpayers and their tax officials (also known as Model - II states 1). On 
the other hand, CBIC and nine States/UTs opted for developing their own 
systems and applications (known as Model - I states 2) for their 
departmental tax officials for tax administration for processing the 
registration, returns and payment data as a back-end process and also to 
provide facilities to the taxpayers and its departmental officials for other 
business-related activities namely Refund, Investigation, Audit, Exports, 
Adjudication/Appeal etc.  
Thus, as far as CBIC is concerned, GSTN is a pass-through portal, which 
provides front-end facility for registration, returns and payment and after 
performing certain validations, GSTN shares the information and scanned 
images of documents uploaded on their system by the taxpayers or 
                                                           
1  Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Chandigarh, Chhattisgarh, Dadra 
and Nagar Haveli, Daman and Diu, Delhi, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, 
Jharkhand, Lakshadweep, Madhya Pradesh, Manipur, Mizoram, Nagaland, Odisha, Puducherry, 
Punjab, Rajasthan, Telangana, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand and West Bengal 
2  Andhra Pradesh, Goa, Haryana, Karnataka, Kerala, Maharashtra, Meghalaya, Sikkim and Tamil 
Nadu 
Chapter I: Overview

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
2
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
2 
received from other State tax administrations and stakeholders to the CBIC 
ACES-GST Application for further action. 
The Directorate General of Systems and Data Management (DG (Systems)), 
an attached office of the CBIC, is entrusted with the implementation of this 
back-end IT project. Overall, DG (Systems) is responsible for the design, 
development, programming, testing, implementation and maintenance of 
automated systems under CBIC, and for overseeing and managing the 
projects sanctioned by CBIC relating to information technology. 
1.1  About CBIC ACES-GST Application 
CBIC ACES-GST application is primarily meant for back-end processing of 
various GST functionalities like Refund, Investigation, Adjudication, etc., by 
the CBIC tax officers.  Relevant modules of Automation of Central Excise 
and Service Tax (ACES 3) Application (the erstwhile IT system for Central 
Excise/Service Tax) were incorporated into the application.  The final scope 
for this development was subject to the state of business processes 
applicable for Central Excise and Service Tax in the GST regime.   
The CBIC ACES-GST Application contains 11 modules viz. Access Control, 
Registration, Returns, Payment, Refund/Rebate, Exports, Audit, Dispute 
Settlement (Investigation, Adjudication and Appeal), Taxpayer at glance 
(TAG), ACES Migration, Mobile App. The CBIC ACES-GST Application 
intends to provide interface with other systems/applications both 
internally and externally. External interfaces are to be with GSTN, State 
Backend Systems, RBI, Banks, DGFT, MCA 21, CBDT, UIDAI, ICEGATE, ICES, 
RMS, ACES, EDW of CBIC etc.  Internally, the interface is to be within 
different modules of the application.   
Thus, the CBIC ACES-GST IT System is a new system implemented by CBIC 
for tax administration in GST regime.  Though primarily meant for back-
office processing by departmental officers in GST regime, it has some 
taxpayer interfaces primarily related to Central Excise taxpayers. 
                                                           
3ACES was rolled out in 2009 as a mission mode project of the Government of India under the 
National e-governance plan. It is a centralized web based and work-flow based system. It 
automates all the major business processes for administration of Central Excise and Service Tax.  
ACES has nine Modules of Central Excise and six modules of Service Tax for processing the day-to-
day activities of the Department and the taxpayers.  ACES interfaces with the following systems: i) 
Income Tax for Online Verification of PAN; ii) EASIEST for verification of Payment (Challans) from 
Banks; and iii) ICES for verification of IEC and Export Related processes. The functional modules of 
ACES were integrated with CBIC ACES-GST Application.  Under GST regime, the existing ACES 
system is to be continued for some years as there would be a requirement of the ACES system for 
certain commodities that remained outside the scope of the GST. Also, it is required by existing 
taxpayers for completing activities relating to the past periods/obligations viz. filing of past 
returns, payment of arrears, claiming refund, etc., Additionally, the system may be required for 
dispute settlements (past periods), etc. 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
3
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
3 
1.2  Audit Objectives 
The main objectives of this IT Audit of CBIC ACES-GST Application were to 
seek assurance whether:  
(i) IT governance and IT security is adequate and effective; 
(ii) The functionalities of CBIC ACES-GST Application have been 
developed as envisaged and the intended benefits have been 
achieved including ease of tax administration; and 
(iii) The application has effective interfaces with other IT Applications. 
1.3  Audit Criteria 
The following are the sources of audit criteria for this audit:  
(i) Central GST Act, 2017  
(ii) Central GST Rules, 2017 
(iii) Integrated GST Act, 2017 
(iv) Integrated GST Rules, 2017 
(v) Notification and circulars issued by CBIC 
(vi) Systems Requirement Specification (SRS) 
(vii) General Financial Rules, 2005 and 2017 
(viii) Request for Proposal (RFP)  
(ix) Master Service Agreement 
1.4  Audit Scope 
IT Audit of CBIC ACES-GST Application was conducted during December 
2020-April 2022. The audit covered the period from August 2015 to March 
2021.  The scope of Audit covered: 
(i) Development of Modules and their functionalities  
(ii) GSTN Interface and other Interfaces 
(iii) Acquisition and Procurement of the CBIC ACES-GST Application 
(iv) IT Governance 
(v) Change Management 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
4
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
4 
(vi) Compliance with SLA Parameters 
1.5  Audit Methodology 
The audit methodology to achieve the audit objectives was, in brief, as 
under: 
(i) Audit conducted an Entry Conference in November 2020. 
(ii) Walkthrough/presentations were shared by the Department. 
(iii) Review and analysis of SRS and other documents related to various 
Modules, Change Management was done by Audit. 
(iv) Testing was done in User Acceptance Testing (UAT) environment to 
check the validations/audit checks relating to functionalities of 
various Modules of the CBIC ACES-GST system. 
(v) Extraction of data by running queries through CBIC on the CBIC 
database and further analysis of such data. 
(vi) Review and analysis of SLA monitoring reports and consequential 
action thereon. 
(vii) Examining the CBIC ACES-GST application through the SSO IDs 
provided to the Audit Personnel. 
(viii) For the purpose of this audit, three field offices of the Comptroller 
and Auditor General of India (C&AG) i.e., Delhi, Chennai and 
Bengaluru had participated in conduct of audit at the respective 
branches of Directorate General of Systems (DG (Systems)).  
(ix) The draft Audit report containing Audit findings and 
recommendations was issued to the Ministry for comments on 13 
July 2022.  
(x) The Ministry’s replies on draft Audit report were received on 30 
August 2022.  
(xi) The Audit findings and recommendations of the draft Audit report 
was discussed with the Ministry during Exit Conference held on 2 
September 2022.  
(xii) The Ministry’s replies and submissions made during Exit 
Conference have been suitably incorporated in the report.  
1.6 Audit Constraints  
Access to testing environment and records production to audit was not up 
to the desired level. The audit opinion expressed in this report is limited to 
the extent of information provided, which was fragmented across the 
areas of audit undertaken.  
With respect to requisition of record for audit of areas like setting up and 
functioning of Project Management Office (PMO) and Steering Committee, 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
5
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
5 
Project timelines and milestones and its implementation, Change 
Management, the record production was partial.   Also, due to non-
providing of testing environment for almost half of the audit test check 
areas, Audit could not verify the development of functionalities across 
modules. Thus, Audit could not provide complete assurance regarding the 
development of the Application as envisaged. 
Topic-wise constraints are as mentioned below: 
1.6.1 IT Governance and Management 
Documents related to setting up of Project Management office and 
Steering Committee and their functioning and details of meetings were not 
produced to Audit. Hence, Audit could not give assurance on whether the 
IT Governance structure and the role/working of Boards/Committees to 
oversee the management of project were adequate and effective.  
As per RFP, an Incident Management Team was to be set up by the Vendor 
for monitoring the incidents, identification of vulnerable areas, 
performance testing and their timely resolution. However, due to non-
production of relevant documents, Audit could not ascertain whether such 
a team was set up and if not, how and by whom these responsibilities 
were performed. Further, there was a requirement of the risk 
management plan in RFP which was also not produced to audit and 
therefore, audit could not check whether risk management responsibilities 
were clearly defined, to whom the same were assigned and whether the 
Root Cause Analysis (RCA) reports were prepared and submitted by the 
Vendor and monitored and reviewed by the CBIC. 
1.6.2 Service Level Agreements 
Out of 32 parameters pertaining to 5 SLAs, Audit was provided 
documents pertaining to 14 SLA parameters only.   No documents were 
provided for any SLA parameter pertaining to Help Desk and Technical 
Support Incident/Ticket Resolution (L2 & L3) and Security (Vulnerability 
assessment & Penetration Testing). Audit could not derive any 
understanding to form an opinion on the functioning and service with 
regard to these parameters.  
1.6.3 Change Requests 
Apart from individual documents on a few change requests, Department 
did not provide records relating to establishment of Change Control Board 
(CAB), change control logs, development of backout process before any 
change request is implemented, Change Management procedures to 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
6
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
6 
control emergency changes to the system, change order documentation 
etc.  
1.6.4 Registration Module 
Due to non-provision of a testing environment, Audit could not check 
processes of advance tax paid by the Casual Taxable Person or NRTP and 
whether the same is equal to the estimated tax liability, functionality of 
change in Principal Place of business and erroneous cancellation of 
registration.  
1.6.5 Returns Module 
Audit could not verify the reasons for non-deployment of certain critical 
functionalities (Refer Paragraph 3.2 of this report) and whether the 
competent authority approvals for descoping/non-development of such 
functionalities was obtained. Further, correctness of the reports issued 
through 21 Advisories could not be checked as department did not provide 
the testing environment (UAT).  
1.6.6 Payment Module 
Audit could not verify whether the raw data of paid challans was 
transmitted by the GSTN on a real time basis as specified in the SRS due to 
non-facilitation of a walkthrough of the API. MIS Reports could not be 
checked due to non-facilitation of Testing environment. 
1.6.7 Data Migration Module 
Continuity of business for the products not subsumed under GST could not 
be checked in CBIC ACES - GST application due to non-facilitation of testing 
environment.  
1.6.8 Refund Module 
Audit could not check the process of issuance of Payment advice and 
various MIS reports as the department did not provide testing in the UAT 
environment for these aspects. Process of re-crediting of Input Tax Credits 
(ITC) to the ledger and R1 and R2 Reports which require integration with 
the other stakeholders (Bank, PFMS etc.) could also be not verified.   
1.6.9 Adjudication Module 
Six functionalities were under UAT when audit was underway, and these 
functionalities were later launched. Out of the six functionalities, Audit 
could verify two functionalities in UAT environment - ‘Issue of OIO’ in 
which we noticed that the approval function was not working in ‘Front-
end’ and ‘Issue of SCN for Anti-evasion’ in which we noticed that the 
record submitted in workflow in frontend was missing. Two functionalities 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
7
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
7 
- PH Recording and SCN for refund could not be tested due to non-
replication of the functionality in test environment at the GSTN end. The 
remaining two functionalities - DRC 08 and Call Book could not be tested 
due to non-working of the credentials given to Audit. 
Audit acknowledges the co-operation extended by CBIC and its officials 
during the conduct of this audit.    

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
9
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
8 
Chapter II: IT Governance and IT Security 
2.1  Inception of CBIC ACES-GST Application 
The Central Board of Indirect taxes and Customs (CBIC), Department of 
Revenue deals with the tasks of formulation of policy concerning levy and 
collection of Goods and Service Tax. The Directorate General of Systems 
and Data Management (DG (Systems)) has been entrusted with the 
implementation of the projects relating to Information and 
Communication Technology (ICT) in CBIC. 
Since at the time of envisaging and roll out of the CBIC ACES-GST 
Application, GST laws had not yet been enacted and the details of the 
business processes to be followed in the GST was not completely worked 
out, the RFP floated vide RFP No. IV (39)/4/RFP GST 01/2015 for 
“Appointment of Vendor for Development and Maintenance of CBIC’s 
Indirect Tax Applications (GST and ACES) and provision of Training and 
Helpdesk Services” provided a broad scope of the business processes that 
were likely to be followed in the GST regime. 
Taxation being a dynamic concept, it was understood that the business 
processes may undergo changes from time to time and need to be 
automated at the shortest possible time periods, by the Centre, the States 
and GSTN. This would require regular, timely and effective interaction with 
all the stakeholders and periodic modifications in the system, applications, 
additions of new functionalities and servicing new requirements that 
ensured a smooth transition to the new tax regime.  
Audit examined and sought assurance on the overall IT Governance 
and IT Security of the CBIC ACES-GST Application. Audit focus was 
on the acquisition process, role and working of 
Boards/Committees, Service Level Agreements, Change 
Management Process and IS Security.  
Scrutiny of the records revealed that a total of 12 prospective 
bidders purchased the RFP, but only a single bidder participated in 
the bid. Certain gaps were noticed during the scrutiny of SRS of 
different modules vis-à-vis the provisions given in the Act/Rules.  
The Exit management plan and Helpdesk operation plan were 
obtained from the vendor with a delay. There was levy of 
liquidated damages for non-achievement of SLAs.  
 
Chapter II: IT Governance and IT Security

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
10
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
9 
2.2  Acquisition & Procurement 
Chronology Chart - Timelines for Acquisition & Procurement of Vendor 
 
*The last date for submission of bid was extended to 28.10.2015, 18.11.2015, 26.11.2015 
and 10.12.2015. 
The erstwhile CBEC (current CBIC) had initiated a GST Pilot in 2011 and 
GSTN was formed in 2014. In April 2015, as part of deliberations on 
preparedness for GST, the Department proposed development of an 
application, separate from the GST portal that would serve as the back-
office solution for CBEC departmental users to process the registration, 
return and payment data captured by the GSTN portal. The planned 
timeline by the Department for development of the application & roll-out 
was from 10 th August 2015 - 1 st April 2016 and for maintenance between 
1st April 2016 and 31 st March 2021 for a period of five years. The proposal 
‘Preparedness for GST 01.04.2016’ for the development of this application 
was put up by CBEC to the Ministry of Finance on 10.04.2015.  
The proposal mentioned that PMU (M/s PwC) had prepared a Detailed 
Project Report and conducted a gap analysis based on a comparison of the 
‘As-Is’ capacity of CBEC’s existing IT infrastructure and the “To Be” state of 
the infrastructure, required to be in place by 2016.  PMU had prepared a 
Approval of Finance 
Minister for Tendering 
for CBIC-GST 
Application
(23-04-2015)
Invitation of Bids 
through Open 
Tendering 
(28-08-2015)
Pre-bid Activities
(Between 07-10-2015 
to 04-11-2015 )
Last date for online 
Bid/proposal 
submission*
(10-12-2015)
Post-bid activities & 
Evaluation 
(Between 10-12-2015 
to 17-02-2016 )
Publishing of Results 
of technical Evaluation 
on CPPP 
(17-02-2016) 
Commercial Bid 
opening on CPPP    
(18-02-2016)
Evaluation by IFU
(23-06-2016)
Publishing of Result of 
Commercial Bid 
Evaluation and name of 
successful  bidder on 
CPPP
(05-07-2016)
Letter of Award issued 
(29-07-2016)
Agreement Signed  
(12-08-2016)

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
11
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
10 
cost estimate for the project ranging between ₹ 163.58 crore and ₹ 202.44 
crore. 
On 23 April 2015, the Finance Minister approved the proposal to initiate 
tendering for the development of applications of GST.  
In August 2015, Directorate General of Systems (DG (Systems)) invited an 
open tender through RFP for selection of Implementation Agency for 
development and maintenance of CBIC’s Indirect Tax Application (GST and 
ACES) and provision of Training and Helpdesk Services. The Vendor was to 
be selected under Cost-Based Selection.  
A total of 12 prospective bidders had purchased the RFP. In September 
and October 2015, pre-bidding workshops were organized to address the 
queries of the prospective bidders. On requests of prospective bidders, the 
bid submission date was extended in four steps by 71 days i.e., from 30 
September to 10 December 2015 by the Department.  However, by the 
due date, only a single bid from M/s Wipro Ltd. was received even when 
12 prospective bidders had purchased the RFP and the date of submission 
of bid was extended on the request of the prospective bidders. Tender 
opening process began on 23 December 2015.  
Preliminary evaluation of the bid was conducted and Cover 1 (Integrity 
Pact, Authorization Letter and EMD) and Cover 2 (Pre-qualification Bid) 
were scrutinized during the evaluation process. 
Technical bid was evaluated in January 2016 and February 2016 by the 
Technical Evaluation Group (TEG) with assistance from PMU (GST) and DG 
Systems officials.  M/s Wipro Ltd. qualified this stage with a score of 80.6 
against the cut-off marks of 70 for this stage as detailed below.  
Table 2.1 - Preliminary evaluation of the bid 
Sl 
No. 
Evaluation criteria Total 
Marks 
Minimum cut-
off (60%) 
Marks 
obtained 
Qualification status  
1. Bidder’s Credentials  15 >=9 15 Qualified  
2. Approach & Methodology  10 >=6 7.6 Qualified  
3. Solution Architecture  23 >=14 16.1 Qualified  
4. Key Resources  40 >=24 32.9 Qualified  
5. Presentation & 
Demonstration  
12 >=7 9 Qualified  
Total  100 70 (70%) 80.6 Qualified  
After qualifying the technical bid stage, the Commercial bid was evaluated 
by two separate Price Evaluation Committees (PEC) constituted (March 
2016) to evaluate the reasonableness of the price quoted by the bidder. 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
12
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
11 
Both the committees found that the overall price quoted by the bidder in 
the original bid (₹ 190.17 crore) was quite close to the mean value (₹ 
183.01 crore) of the cost range estimated (₹ 163.58 crore to ₹ 202.44 
crore) by PGMA4 (earlier known as PMU 5).  However, the bidder suo-moto 
offered to reduce the bid amount to ₹ 184.00 crore plus taxes. 
DG (Systems) sent the original as well as revised commercial bid to IFU 6 on 
23 June 2016 for approval.  Revenue Secretary during the appraisal 
meeting (24 June 2016) of the Standing Finance Committee (SFC), 
Department of Revenue, suggested to get the reasonableness of price 
evaluated by an independent Price Evaluation Committee (PEC) comprising 
of officers from NIC, CBDT, DeitY and IFU.  The independent PEC submitted 
its report to DG (Systems) on 05 July 2016 and recommended the price of 
₹ 184 crore quoted by M/s. Wipro Ltd. as reasonable.  Administrative 
approval and financial sanction were received on 01 August 2016 from 
Finance Minister.  DG (Systems) issued the Letter of Award to M/s Wipro 
on 29 July 2016 and the Master Service Agreement was signed between 
DG (Systems) and Vendor on 12 August 2016.  
Audit noted that M/s Wipro Ltd. who was awarded this contract, was the 
developer and maintainer of the ACES legacy system and would have 
better familiarity with tax administration workflow vis-a-vis the other 11 
prospective bidders. The single bid contract of ₹ 184 crore was awarded to 
M/s Wipro Ltd., with the CBIC’s notings citing the validity of the due 
process followed and reasonableness of awarded value being mean value 
of the estimated price range, and also that retendering may not leave 
sufficient time to develop the necessary GST application and to take over 
the ACES system on the expiry of the existing contract. 
On this being pointed out by Audit (April 2022), the Ministry accepted 
(August 2022) the observation. 
Recommendation 1: In future, the Department should ensure adequate 
competition and minimize vendor lock-in by ensuring that more bidders 
participate in the bid for tendering for the next contract. This may be 
done by devising appropriate procedures to ensure a more level playing 
field between the prospective bidders and the existing System Integrator 
(SI). Also, this tender may be initiated well in time so that in the event of 
receipt of only one bid, the Department has sufficient time to retender, if 
felt necessary. 
                                                           
4 Programme Governance and Monitoring Agency; PwC Pvt Ltd. 
5 Programme Management Unit  
6 Integrated Financial Unit 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
13
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
12 
2.3  Technical requirements of the CBIC ACES-GST Application  
The Vendor was expected to design, develop and deploy the application in 
line with the high-level solution architecture and be able to deliver all the 
functionalities, technical and operational features as mentioned in the 
RFP, meeting the desired service levels. The application was envisaged to 
be highly decoupled, modular, scalable and integrated software 
application, deployed centrally at the Data Centre (DC) and Disaster 
Recovery Site of CBEC (now CBIC), having the necessary interfaces for all 
the stakeholders through appropriate channels. 
Application would be web-based and would integrate to a backend 
database with logical partitioning for effective data retrieval and storage. It 
was also proposed that the entire application should have flexible and 
scalable architecture with a well defined ‘Business Logic layer’ and ‘Data 
Access Layer’ to support the efficient handling of data and business logic 
between the ‘Application Layer’ and the ‘Database Layer’. The application 
would be supported by an ‘Enterprise Service Bus’, which would enable 
effective data exchange and interaction between various interfacing 
bodies. 
Given that the business requirements may remain fluid over the period of 
time, owing to the dynamic nature of the GST regulations, the 
functionalities and features of CBIC ACES-GST System were envisaged to 
be granular and modular enough for the administrators to enable or 
disable any particular functionality, at any given time, as per the 
requirement, without the need for a developer / code level change / 
custom UI change. While the key modules had been specified, it was a 
necessary requirement that the application should enable complete 
integration between different modules to enable building of workflows 
which may leverage information across the modules. 
2.4  Scope of work for Vendor 
The scope of work was to be carried out in multiple tracks: 
Track 1: Takeover and operations and maintenance of ACES 
Track 2: Design, development and implementation of CBIC ACES-GST 
System 
Track 3: Operations and maintenance of CBIC ACES-GST System 
Track 4: Training of CBIC officials 
Track 5: Helpdesk operations 
 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
14
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
13 
2.5  IT Governance and Management 
IT governance enables organizations to manage their IT risks effectively 
and ensure that it meets the needs of the business today and that it 
incorporates plans for future needs and growth. It is an integral part of 
enterprise governance and includes the organisational leadership, 
institutional structures and processes, and other mechanisms (reporting & 
feedback, enforcement, resources etc.) that ensure that IT systems sustain 
organisational goals and strategy while balancing risks and effectively 
managing resources. 
Table 2.2 - Summarised Audit Finding Matrix 
Sl. 
No. 
Sub-Objective Summary of Audit Checks Status Findings 
1 How does the 
organization identify 
and approve or reject 
new/old business 
requirements? 
Project management office  
 
Minimal 
record 
production 
2.5.1 
2.5.3 
 
2 How does the 
leadership direct and 
monitor the 
performance of 
project? 
Steering Committee, 
Fortnightly and 
monthly meetings, 
variations in cost, schedule 
and performance indicator 
from as planned, proper 
approvals, project milestones 
Minimal 
record 
production  
2.5.2 
2.5.4 
2.5.4.1 
2.5.4.2 
2.5.4.3 
2.5.5 
3 How does the CBIC 
monitor and manage 
their risks? 
Incident Management Team, 
Vulnerable areas, 
Performance Testing, Risk 
Management Plan, Risk 
mitigated, Root Cause 
Analysis (RCA)  
Scope 
restriction 
- 
To direct and monitor the performance of project, the RFP envisaged 
creation of a Project Management Office and a Steering Committee as 
detailed below: 
2.5.1  Project Management Office (PMO) 
A Project Management office with a designated full time Project Manager 
from the Vendor and key persons from other relevant stakeholders 
including officials from the Purchaser and other representatives by 
invitation, was to be set up during the start of the project. 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
15
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
14 
PMO was required to maintain weekly statuses, minutes of the meetings, 
weekly/monthly/project plans, etc. PMO was also to meet formally on a 
weekly basis covering, at a minimum, the following agenda items: 
 Project Progress 
 Issues and concerns 
 Unresolved and escalated issues 
 Change Management - Proposed changes, if any 
 Any other issues that either party wished to add to the agenda. 
Audit had requisitioned (July 2021) the documents related to setting up of 
project management office (PMO); however, the same were not provided. 
Based on the available documents provided by the Department, Audit 
could not find any mention of setting up of a Project Management Office 
which was to include a designated full time Project Manager from the 
Vendor and key persons from other relevant stakeholders including 
officials from the Purchaser and other representatives by invitation. 
2.5.2  Steering Committee 
The Steering Committee, envisaged as a forum for seeking and getting 
approval for project decisions on major changes was to consist of senior 
stakeholders from the Purchaser, its nominated agencies, consultants for 
the Purchaser and the Vendor. The Vendor had to participate in Steering 
Committee meetings and update the Steering Committee on Project 
progress, Risk parameters (if any), Resource deployment and plan, 
immediate tasks, and any obstacles in the project. During the development 
and implementation phase of the project, fortnightly Steering Committee 
meetings were to be held. During the operations and maintenance phase, 
the meetings were to be held at least once a month. 
Audit noted that the Steering Committee was constituted but its 
composition and details of its functioning were not provided to Audit to 
assess whether this committee functioned as envisaged in RFP.   
In this regard, audit observation was issued (April 2022) and the Ministry 
during the exit conference while noting the audit recommendation for 
compliance stated (September 2022) that all available office records were 
furnished before the audit team. PMO is functional and weekly/periodic 
review meetings are continuing since inception of project and also stated 
to share the same with audit again; however, the same was awaited 
(December 2022). 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
16
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
15 
Recommendation 2: The Department should ensure that the PMO and 
steering committee are functioning as envisaged, to monitor the 
progress of implementation of the project. 
 
2.5.3 Gaps in Software Requirement Specifications (SRS) 
The SRS were prepared for all modules, which formed the basis for 
development of the modules. Audit test checked the SRS of all the 
modules vis-à-vis the Act/Rules to evaluate whether all the provisions 
were considered while preparing the SRS.  Audit found that most of the 
provisions have been addressed in the SRS, subject to the following gaps.  
Table 2.3 - Module wise details of gaps in SRS  
Name of the 
module 
Validation provisions not included in SRS Reference 
Investigation 
 
Validating the condition of returning 
documents/books or things seized by 
authorized officer within thirty days after the 
issue of notice 
Section 67(3) of CGST Act 
Capturing the details of release of goods if No 
notice is issued pursuant to search 
Section 67(7) of CGST Act 
Ensuring time limits and extension of time 
limits for release of goods as mentioned in the 
Act 
Section 67(7) of CGST Act 
Registration 
 
Absence of Validation to compute Aggregate 
Turnover from the Returns filed 
Section 10 of the CGST Act, 2017 
read with Notification No. 
14/2019-Central Tax dated: 
07.03.2019 
Absence of provision in the SRS to alert the tax 
officer when all pending Returns have been 
filed by the taxpayer and full payments made 
within the prescribed period instead of 
replying to the SCN for non-filing of Returns. 
Rule 22(1), Proviso to Rule 22(4)  
of the CGST Rules, 2017 . 
Absence of provision in the SRS to ensure that 
deemed approved registrations are duly signed 
or verified through electronic verification code. 
Rule 10(5) read with Rule 9(5) of 
the CGST Rules, 2017.  
Absence of validation to ascertain the effective 
date of liability in respect of registrations 
obtained as a result of transfer, succession, 
demerger, amalgamation. 
Section 22(3), 22(4) of the CGST 
Act, 2017. 
Absence of Suspension functionality and 
validation to restrict the registered taxpayers 
Rule 21(A)(I) of the CGST Rules, 
2017 . 
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
15 
Recommendation 2: The Department should ensure that the PMO and 
steering committee are functioning as envisaged, to monitor the 
progress of implementation of the project. 
 
2.5.3 Gaps in Software Requirement Specifications (SRS) 
The SRS were prepared for all modules, which formed the basis for 
development of the modules. Audit test checked the SRS of all the 
modules vis-à-vis the Act/Rules to evaluate whether all the provisions 
were considered while preparing the SRS.  Audit found that most of the 
provisions have been addressed in the SRS, subject to the following gaps.  
Table 2.3 - Module wise details of gaps in SRS  
Name of the 
module 
Validation provisions not included in SRS Reference 
Investigation 
 
Validating the condition of returning 
documents/books or things seized by 
authorized officer within thirty days after the 
issue of notice 
Section 67(3) of CGST Act 
Capturing the details of release of goods if No 
notice is issued pursuant to search 
Section 67(7) of CGST Act 
Ensuring time limits and extension of time 
limits for release of goods as mentioned in the 
Act 
Section 67(7) of CGST Act 
Registration 
 
Absence of Validation to compute Aggregate 
Turnover from the Returns filed 
Section 10 of the CGST Act, 2017 
read with Notification No. 
14/2019-Central Tax dated: 
07.03.2019 
Absence of provision in the SRS to alert the tax 
officer when all pending Returns have been 
filed by the taxpayer and full payments made 
within the prescribed period instead of 
replying to the SCN for non-filing of Returns. 
Rule 22(1), Proviso to Rule 22(4)  
of the CGST Rules, 2017 . 
Absence of provision in the SRS to ensure that 
deemed approved registrations are duly signed 
or verified through electronic verification code. 
Rule 10(5) read with Rule 9(5) of 
the CGST Rules, 2017.  
Absence of validation to ascertain the effective 
date of liability in respect of registrations 
obtained as a result of transfer, succession, 
demerger, amalgamation. 
Section 22(3), 22(4) of the CGST 
Act, 2017. 
Absence of Suspension functionality and 
validation to restrict the registered taxpayers 
Rule 21(A)(I) of the CGST Rules, 
2017 . 
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
16 
from making taxable supplies and consequent 
passing of credit.  
Considering that these requirements are laid down in law, there needed to 
be a validation process built in the system to ensure compliance with the 
provisions of law. 
Recommendation 3: The Department should conduct a review to ensure 
that all the provisions laid down in Act/Rules/notifications, including the 
changes introduced at different times are accurately mapped and 
updated in the SRS for development of functionalities. 
On this being pointed out by Audit (September 2021), the Ministry 
accepted the recommendation and stated (August 2022) that the 
suggested functionalities in both the modules will be developed.  
2.5.4 Project Milestones   
As per RFP (Clause 9.1), project milestones were to be measured from the 
Project Start date (referred to as “T”7).  
During audit, to assess whether the project was developed and 
implemented as per the agreed plan and timelines, CBIC was asked to 
indicate the planned date and actual date for development and 
implementation of each module.  In response, the Department provided 
the information in respect of Registration, Returns, ACL, ACES GST 
Migration, Refund modules. For the remaining modules, the Department 
stated that the DSR (Adjudication, Recovery and Appeal), Investigation 
Modules were implemented through Change requests.  Mobile App and 
Audit Modules were in the SRS signoff stage as discussed in subsequent 
paras. Further, Taxpayer at Glance (TAG) and Export Modules were at 
discussion stage.   
2.5.4.1 Development and utilisation of modules 
The status of modules of CBIC ACES-GST Application after five years 
(September 2021) of the agreement was as under: 
Table 2.4 - Status of development of modules  
Name of the 
module 
Functionalities implemented Functionalities yet to be implemented 
Registration  View Taxpayers’ registration 
forms and supporting 
 Associated Risk (based on the no of cases 
registered against the PAN Holder)  
                                                           
7 Defined as the date of receipt of the Letter of Acceptance of Award or Seven (7) days after 
issuance of the Letter of Award by CBIC.   
 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
17
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
16 
from making taxable supplies and consequent 
passing of credit.  
Considering that these requirements are laid down in law, there needed to 
be a validation process built in the system to ensure compliance with the 
provisions of law. 
Recommendation 3: The Department should conduct a review to ensure 
that all the provisions laid down in Act/Rules/notifications, including the 
changes introduced at different times are accurately mapped and 
updated in the SRS for development of functionalities. 
On this being pointed out by Audit (September 2021), the Ministry 
accepted the recommendation and stated (August 2022) that the 
suggested functionalities in both the modules will be developed.  
2.5.4 Project Milestones   
As per RFP (Clause 9.1), project milestones were to be measured from the 
Project Start date (referred to as “T”7).  
During audit, to assess whether the project was developed and 
implemented as per the agreed plan and timelines, CBIC was asked to 
indicate the planned date and actual date for development and 
implementation of each module.  In response, the Department provided 
the information in respect of Registration, Returns, ACL, ACES GST 
Migration, Refund modules. For the remaining modules, the Department 
stated that the DSR (Adjudication, Recovery and Appeal), Investigation 
Modules were implemented through Change requests.  Mobile App and 
Audit Modules were in the SRS signoff stage as discussed in subsequent 
paras. Further, Taxpayer at Glance (TAG) and Export Modules were at 
discussion stage.   
2.5.4.1 Development and utilisation of modules 
The status of modules of CBIC ACES-GST Application after five years 
(September 2021) of the agreement was as under: 
Table 2.4 - Status of development of modules  
Name of the 
module 
Functionalities implemented Functionalities yet to be implemented 
Registration  View Taxpayers’ registration 
forms and supporting documents 
 Associated Risk (based on the no of cases 
registered against the PAN Holder)  
                                                           
7 Defined as the date of receipt of the Letter of Acceptance of Award or Seven (7) days after 
issuance of the Letter of Award by CBIC.   
 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
18
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
17 
Name of the 
module 
Functionalities implemented Functionalities yet to be implemented 
 Approve/Query/Reject 
Registrations for more 
information   
 Amendment of Registrations 
 Surrender of Registration 
 Cancellation of Registrations 
 Revoke Registration 
 Aadhaar linking and Physical 
Verification 
 Jurisdiction allocation logic (TCS 
and UIN) 
 Suspension functionality 
 Composition Forms and composition 
Validations 
 
 
 
Returns  View All Forms with  
Downloadable option 
 Transitional Provisions - 
functionality for Non Filers 
(Partially deployed)  
 
 Best Judgement Assessment  
 Scrutiny of Returns   
 Summary Assessment for forms relating 
to ASMT 01 TO ASMT 18  
 GSTR - 4 Annual Return 
 ITC-02A 
Payment  Payment Receipt  
 Acknowledgement generation 
(PMT- 01) 
 View Ledgers (ITC and Liability 
Registers) - Sync with GSTN 
 Transmission of reconciled data from 
Accounting Authorities  
 Verification of payment details 
 Synchronization report   
 Integration of data with other modules  
ACES Migration Not Applicable 
Export Export module was in discussion stage and was yet to be developed. The module 
was in the draft SRS stage. 
Tax Payer At 
Glance 
Discussion stage only. Draft SRS was awaited from the Vendor 
Refund  Refund Application  
 Acknowledgement 
 Deficiency Memo  
 Provisional Refund Order  
 Payment Order 
 Refund Sanction Order  
 Complete and Partial 
Adjustment of Liability  
 
 RFD-10 Application for refund of UIN  
 RFD-7 (Part-B) Order for withhold and 
release of Refund 
 RFD-01C Correction of mistake done in 
RFD-01B 
 Payment to CWF  
 RFD 10A CSD 
 RFD10B Duty Free Shop 
 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
19
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
18 
Name of the 
module 
Functionalities implemented Functionalities yet to be implemented 
 Notice for Rejection (SCN) 
 Reply of SCN view option    
 LUT (Letter of Undertaking) 
 
Investigation  Phase I completed- all 
investigation activities 
 Post investigation activities of Phase I  
 Phase II - Prosecution, compounding, 
interception of goods in transit 
Adjudication  Phase I- Issue of Show Cause 
Notices (SCNs) - for Refund and 
Anti-evasion, Adjudication 
processes  
 Issue of OIO (Forms DRC 01 and 
3 to 8)  
 Process of fixing personal 
hearing and transfer of cases 
to/from call book 
 DRC8 -02  
 Issue of SCNs  
 Summary assessment  
 Scrutiny of returns 
 Audit and Special Audit 
Appeal, Review 
and Revision 
 Phase I functionalities (Forms 
APL9 1 to 4) and  
 Review of Adjudication orders 
 Phase II functionalities - 21 use cases  
 Remand orders (Forms APL 5 to 8, RVN 
01) 
Recovery  Recovery of legacy arrears  
 Payment in instalments (Forms 
DRC 7A,8A, 20,21)  
 Recovery process emanating from other 
sources (DRC Forms 9 to 19, 22 to 25) 
and  
 Recovery Register  
E-Way Bill- 
Unblocking 
 Fully implemented  Nil 
Audit  SRS signed-Off  Development of the entire module 
Mobile 
Application 
 SRS - Phase I signed Off  SRS - Phase II and development of entire 
mobile application  
Apart from the unblocking functionality of E-Way Bill, which was fully 
developed, the modules for Registration, Payment, Refund, Investigation, 
Adjudication, Appeal, Review and Revision processes were substantially 
completed and were independently functional, though some 
functionalities were yet to be developed.  The Recovery module was only 
partially completed. The critical recovery register was not yet developed 
and the current stage of development covered only two segments of the 
                                                           
8 Demand and Recovery forms 
9 Appeal forms 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
20
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
19 
underlying workflow processes. The development of Export, Taxpayer at a 
glance and Mobile application modules were at a nascent stage.   
Against this backdrop, our review of the utilisation of the modules by field 
formations suggested that the functional portion of the modules for 
adjudication, investigation, appeal were being used only to a very limited 
extent. 
(i) As regards the adjudication module, the MIS reports for 2020-21 
for Bengaluru zone indicated that while payment against SCNs was 
made from the GST front-end and Form DRC-03 (Intimation of 
payment made by taxpayer) were filed in 29,527 cases during 
2020-21, no case was processed through the system.  The MIS 
reports indicated that DRC-05 (intimation of conclusion of 
proceedings) or DRC-07 (Summary of orders) had not been issued 
for any case. Where taxpayers had made voluntarily payment using 
DRC-03, acknowledgement of acceptance of payment was issued in 
Form DRC-04 only in 53 cases.  Similarly, on a pan India basis, a 
report for one month (July 2021) indicated that only 44 cases have 
been processed through the system by issuing DRC-07 and only 
3,029 cases had been cumulatively processed so far. 
(ii) The investigation module also was not being utilised. A visit to one 
Commissionerate (Bengaluru East) indicated that no cases had 
been processed through the system. The register for investigation 
cases (335J) was maintained manually. A review indicated that 
cases were being primarily processed through e-Office. 
(iii) In the absence of the Appeal Register (which was yet to be 
developed), the extent of usage of Appeal module could not be 
assessed.  Audit observed from Bengaluru-I Appeal 
Commissionerate that there were no cases in the appeal archive 
list of two ranges.  
In response to the audit observation (September 2021), the Department 
replied (December 2021) that various outreach measures were initiated, 
which included various communications being sent to CBIC officers, online 
training and familiarisation programs, organising workshop at the 
Commissioner level and instructions that using e-office was not a 
replacement to the CBIS GST application. It also stated that outreach and 
awareness programs were conducted not only on a regular basis but also 
on a need basis.  However, the issue of lack of usage was being pursued 
vigorously. 
 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
21
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
20 
2.5.4.2 Delay in development of Mobile Application module 
As per the MSA, Vendor had to develop a hybrid Mobile Application for 
Android, iOS and Windows platforms, to be accessible on Tablets and 
smartphones as part of Phase-I development of the CBIC ACES-GST 
application. It was to be designed to be platform independent and to work 
on both Online and Offline modes. The Mobile Application was to be 
extended to the Officers on field/site visits for creating and uploading their 
reports online on completion of physical verification etc., in addition to 
specific reports on revenue collected, returns filed, etc. All the 14 MIS 
Reports as available in the Web Application were to be considered for 
Mobile Application development.  
The indicative timeline as envisaged in the MSA for deployment of the 
Mobile App in production was 31 May 2017.  However, there was no 
progress on development of Mobile App until January 2019, when a 
Working Group consisting of 13 officers from CBIC was constituted to 
deliberate upon and to finalise the Business Requirements.  Initially, the 
mobile devices were intended to be provisioned by CBIC for all their 
24,612 officers but later, based on the hardware and software 
requirement discussions during March/April 2019, it was decided during 
May 2019, to adopt the Bring Your Own Device (BYOD) concept.   
The vendor committed (11 September 2019) to delivery of Mobile 
Application in two phases with the revised SRS Sign-Off date for Phase-I as 
30 September 2019 and Go-live as 30 November 2019. Phase-I was 
envisaged to cover MIS Reports as well as some modules and 
functionalities while the remaining was envisaged for Phase-II.  However, 
after iterations, the vendor shared (14 January 2020) the SRS Version 2.0 
without the Field Site Visit (FSV) dashboards and prototypes, which were 
to be submitted and vetted separately.  CBIC partially signed-off SRS 
Version 2.0 on 16 January 2020 without UI Screens (pending technical 
feasibility report of developing the MIS reports in Mobile application by 
M/s Wipro Ltd) and accorded final approval (February 2021) for SRS - 
Phase-I with all the Reports and the UI screens.  
As regards Phase-II of the Mobile Application, based on Working Group 
meetings and suggestions (June - July 2020) the Business Requirements 
Document (BRD) was finalised in December 2020 and there has been no 
further progress beyond the BRD finalisation. CBIC reviewed (November - 
December 2020) the progress status of the two Phases of Mobile 
Application and based on the bottlenecks identified, decided to put on 
hold further development until the Vendor deploys additional 
development resources and reverts on technical feasibility of developing 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
22
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
21 
MIS reports (with reference to volume of data, graphical representation 
and hyperlinks).  
Therefore, from a functional perspective, with substantial amount of time 
and effort expended, only the SRS for development of first phase of 
Mobile Application had been signed-off and initial screens were still being 
demonstrated. The development of the Mobile Application envisaged as 
phase I of the CBIC-GST application had already suffered a time over run of 
more than three years. Additionally, development of the Mobile 
Application in the manner envisaged seems unlikely, given that further 
development was on hold as technical feasibility of MIS functionalities was 
yet to be established and Vendor was unable to provide technical 
resources.  
On this being pointed out (September 2021), the Ministry, while accepting 
the para, stated (August 2022) that all efforts were being made to 
accelerate the development and deployment of the mobile application. 
2.5.4.3 Delay in development of Audit module 
As per the MSA, the vendor had to roll out an Audit Module for usage by 
Audit formations of CBIC by May 2017.  Processes significant for Audit 
module were identified, important among them being annual selection of 
units for audit, creation of Audit Planning Register, quarterly audit 
schedule and allocation, preliminary/desk review, data analysis, evaluation 
of internal controls, verification report, post verification and preparation 
of draft audit and final audit report. DG (Systems) identified that there was 
significant difficulty in converting business processes into system design 
and implementation due to technical/system limitation. The preparation 
of SRS commenced in May 2017 and underwent multiple revisions. The 
Department undertook extensive deliberations with Vendor for 
determining the scope of audit module and gaps in the SRS with reference 
to the RFP.  
Finally, DG (Systems) signed-off the Audit SRS in January 2020. However, 
the vendor stated that the following functionalities included in the signed 
off SRS, were not covered in the RFP and would be considered 'out of 
scope', i) Issue ADT-03 ii) Issue ADT-04 iii) Audit Register iv) Broadcast 
(bulletin board) v) Desk Review analytics. After deliberations, it was agreed 
that except for Broadcast (bulletin board), all other issues were part of 
scope.  
Thus, delay in defining and agreeing upon the scope of Audit module, 
delay in finalization of audit forms/processes for inclusion in SRS coupled 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
23
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
22 
with the delay in finalization of the GST Audit Manual (that came into 
existence in July 2019) contributed, largely, to the delay in the SRS signoff. 
In response to the audit observation (September 2021), Ministry, while 
accepting the para, stated (August 2022) that the Audit Module had been 
rolled out on 1st April 2022.  
The implementation of the Module will be reviewed in subsequent Audits.  
Recommendation 4: The Department should strengthen the IT 
Governance and Management mechanism to ensure that the project 
timelines are adhered to and rolled out modules are effectively used as 
envisaged.  
2.5.5 Payment Schedule  
RFP (Clause 9.2) defined the milestone wise payment schedule for 
payment of Application Development Cost, Payment of Operation & 
Maintenance Cost & Helpdesk Cost, and payment of Enhancement Cost & 
Training Cost. Payment for each activity was to be made as a percentage of 
total cost when the defined milestones for the afore-mentioned activities 
was reached. Based on the documents provided to Audit, the payments 
made against the different payment milestones for development of 
different modules, as summarised by Audit, is given below:  
Table 2.5- Details of payments made against each payment milestone 
 (Amount in ₹lakh) 
Sl. 
No. 
Payment 
Milestones 
Billed 
Amount 
(A) 
Descoped 
Amount 
(B) 
Claimed 
Amount 
(C) 
Amount 
Pending 
(D) 
Liquidated 
Damages 
(E) 
Actual 
Payment 
{F=A-
(B+C+D+E)} 
Registration Module 
1. SRS Signoff 
(10%) 
34.22 0 0 0 0 34.22 
2. UAT 
Deployment 
(20%) 
68.44 0 0 0 0 68.44 
3. UAT Signoff 
(50%) 
171.10 6.84 3.42 0 4.43 156.41 
4. Production 
Deployment 
(10%) 
34.22 1.36 0 0 0.06 32.8 
5. Go-Live (10%) 34.22 1.36 0 0 0 32.86 
 Total 342.2 9.56 3.42 0 4.49 324.73 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
24
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
23 
Sl. 
No. 
Payment 
Milestones 
Billed 
Amount 
(A) 
Descoped 
Amount 
(B) 
Claimed 
Amount 
(C) 
Amount 
Pending 
(D) 
Liquidated 
Damages 
(E) 
Actual 
Payment 
{F=A-
(B+C+D+E)} 
Returns Module 
1. SRS Signoff 
(10%) 
68.44 20.53 0 0 0 47.91 
2. UAT 
Deployment 
(20%) 
136.88 83.95 0 2.96 0 49.97 
3. UAT Signoff 
(50%) 
342.21 209.89 0 24.52 1.38 106.42 
4. Production 
Deployment 
(10%) 
68.44 41.97 0 5.58 0.006 20.88 
5. Go-Live (10%) 68.44 41.97 0 4.90 0 21.57 
 Total 684.41 398.31 0 37.96 1.38 246.75 
 Refund Module 
1. SRS Signoff 
(10%) 
17.11 0 0 0 0 17.11 
2. UAT 
Deployment 
(20%) 
34.22 1.71 0 1.71 3.42 27.38 
3. UAT Signoff 
(50%) 
85.55 11.40 0 10.83 0.83 62.49 
4. Production 
Deployment 
(10%) 
17.11 2.21 0 2.23 0 12.67 
5. Go-Live (10%) 17.11 1.82 0 3.39 0 11.9 
 Total 171.10 17.14 0 18.16 4.25 131.55 
ACL Module 
1. SRS Signoff 
(10%) 
34.22 0 0 0 0 34.22 
2. UAT 
Deployment 
(20%) 
68.44 0 0 0 0 68.44 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
25
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
24 
Sl. 
No. 
Payment 
Milestones 
Billed 
Amount 
(A) 
Descoped 
Amount 
(B) 
Claimed 
Amount 
(C) 
Amount 
Pending 
(D) 
Liquidated 
Damages 
(E) 
Actual 
Payment 
{F=A-
(B+C+D+E)} 
3. UAT Signoff 
(50%) 
171.10 0 0 0 9.41 161.69 
4. Production 
Deployment 
(10%) 
34.22 0 0 0 0 34.22 
5. Go-Live (10%) 34.22 0 0 0 0 34.22 
 Total 342.20  0 0 0 9.41 332.79 
ACES GST Migration Module 
1. SRS Signoff 
(10%) 
34.22 0 0 0 1.67 32.55 
2. UAT 
Deployment 
(20%) 
68.44 0 0 0 0.19 68.25 
3. UAT Signoff 
(50%) 
171.10 0 0 8.55 0.98 161.57 
4. Production 
Deployment 
(10%) 
34.22 0 0 1.71 0.11 32.4 
5. Go-Live (10%) 34.22 0 0 13.68 0 20.54 
 Total 342.20 0 0 23.94 2.95 315.31 
Source: Data provided by Department (as of March 2022) 
The remaining modules were developed either through change requests or 
were at planning/SRS stages.   
The total amount paid to the vendor (against original contract amount) till 
date has not been made available to Audit. During the Exit conference 
(September 2022), the Ministry stated that Project Budget files for 
consolidated expenditure and budget thereof were provided to the audit 
team at DG (Systems) Delhi and also stated that they would share the 
same with Audit again; however, the same was awaited (December 2022). 
 
 
 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
26
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
25 
2.6 Exit Management Plan (EMP)  
Table 2.6 - Summarised Audit Finding Matrix 
Sl. No. Sub-Objective Summary of Audit Checks Status Findings 
1.  Whether exit 
management 
policy/plan is 
established in 
accordance with 
the RFP 
Exit management plan within 90 days 
from the effective date of the 
agreement. Re-drafted the Exit 
Management Plan every six (6) months 
and kept up to date. 
Checked 2.6.1 
2.6.1  Exit Management plan not submitted by the Vendor 
As per RFP, the vendor was required to submit an Exit Management plan in 
writing to the Purchaser or its nominated agencies within 90 days from the 
effective date of the Agreement in relation to the various phases of the 
Project. The Exit Management plan needed to be re-drafted every six 
months to keep it up to date.  Each version of the Exit Management plan 
was to be approved by the Purchaser or its nominated agencies. As per 
RFP, in case of the Agreement being terminated, the Purchaser reserved 
the right to ask the Vendor to continue running the project operations for 
a period of 6 months after termination orders were issued and the Vendor 
should be obliged to provide such services for such period without any 
additional cost and expense to the Purchaser and without any impediment 
in the quality of services.   
During audit, it was noticed that the Vendor did not submit any Exit 
Management plan which was also confirmed by the DG (Systems).  In 
absence of an Exit Management plan, there was no assurance that the 
outgoing vendor would co-operate smoothly for effective continuity of the 
business. DG (Systems) did not provide reasons for non-submission of Exit 
Management plan by the Vendor and did not take any action for non-
fulfilling of necessary obligations of the agreement.   
When pointed out by Audit (April 2022), Ministry accepted the observation 
and stated (August 2022) that DG Systems had now obtained an Exit 
management Plan from the Vendor. The Ministry during the Exit 
Conference also indicated that they would (September 2022) share a copy 
of the plan with Audit; however, the same was awaited (December 2022). 
2.7  Service Level Agreement (SLA) and Liquidated Damages  
SLAs for CBIC application were designed on the basis that the Application 
Vendor would provide code of the application to be deployed in the 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
27
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
26 
production environment to the System Integrator (SI) team. The SI 10 was 
the sole owner of the production environment and responsible for 
managing the entire infrastructure including the DC/DR sites, DC/DR 
Infrastructure, LAN & WAN.  
CBIC was responsible for monitoring of overall timelines, SLAs and 
calculation of penalties/ liquidated damages. The Vendor was expected to 
accomplish the Scope of Work under the agreement as per the Timelines 
and as per the Service Levels mentioned in the RFP.  If the Vendor fails to 
achieve the Timelines or the Service Levels due to reasons attributable to 
the Vendor, the Vendor shall be liable to pay liquidated damages as per 
the percentage of capping provided in the RFP. 
Table 2.7 - Summarised Audit Finding Matrix 
Sl. 
No. 
Sub-Objective Summary of Audit 
Checks 
Status Findings 
1 SLAs were properly 
defined 
SLA parameters Partial record 
production 
2.7 
2 How SLAs are monitored Deviations from 
committed SLA and 
Adherence level 
Partial record 
production 
 
2.7.1.1 
2.7.1.2 
2.7.1.3 
2.7.2 
2.7.3 
 
3 Penalty (liquidated 
damages) provisions in 
case of non-compliance  
Liquidated damages 
4 Role of Project 
Management Consultants 
if any 
Incidents happening 
again and again 
Partial 
records 
production 
- 
Performance requirements by the Vendor as per the Service Level 
Agreement (SLA) were logically segregated into the following categories:  
 Project Implementation - These SLAs were applicable from the start 
of the project to the Go-Live of Phase II. These SLAs were for 
ensuring that the project went live as per the agreed timelines and 
quality 
 Operations and Maintenance  
 Call Centre (Helpdesk and technical support) 
 Training  
 Security 
                                                           
10 Consortium of Tata Consultancy Services, Tata Communications Limited and Hewlett Packard 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
28
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
27 
Against a total of 32 parameters pertaining to five SLAs, the Department 
provided SLA records for only 14 parameters as mentioned in the Table-2.8 
below: 
Table 2.8 - SLA Parameters 
Sl. 
No. 
SLA Category SLA Parameter Document Provided 
(Yes/No) 
1. Levels for 
implementation 
phase 
 
(i) Team mobilization and 
commencement of work 
No 
(ii) Key Resource Deployment No 
(iii) Key Resource Availability No 
(iv) Delay in achievement of 
implementation/ enhancement 
Milestones 
No 
(v) Data Migration No 
(vi) User Acceptance Testing during 
implementation/ enhancement 
No 
2. Service Levels for 
Operational and 
Maintenance 
Phase 
 
(i) Availability No 
(ii) Response Time No 
(iii) Change Requests / Enhancements Yes  
(vi) Enhancement team availability No 
(v) Handholding support Yes 
3. Help Desk and 
Technical Support  
Incident/Helpdesk 
(L1) 
(i) Availability of telephone line Yes 
(ii) Availability of Online complaint 
system 
Yes 
(iii) Call Wait Time Yes 
(iv) Call Abandonment Yes 
(v) Total hold time on call Yes 
(vi) Ticket acknowledgement Yes 
(vii) Calls forwarded for feedback Yes 
(viii) Call feedback rating Yes 
(ix) Assignment of tickets to the Yes 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
29
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
28 
Sl. 
No. 
SLA Category SLA Parameter Document Provided 
(Yes/No) 
concerned team for resolution 
(x) Correct assignment of severities to 
tickets 
Yes 
Help Desk and 
Technical Support 
Incident / Ticket 
Resolution 
(L2 & L3) 
(i) Helpdesk ticket/Incident Response 
time 
No 
(ii) Time to Resolve No 
(iii) Time to Resolve No 
(iv) Time to Resolve No 
(v) Percentage of reopened incidents No 
(vi) Submission of Root Cause Analysis 
(RCA) Report 
No 
(vii) Timely updation of KEDB No 
4. Training (i) On-time delivery of training as per 
training schedule agreed with CBIC 
Yes 
(ii) Training Quality Yes 
5. Security (i) Vulnerability assessment & 
Penetration Testing 
No 
(II) Vulnerability assessment & 
Penetration Testing 
No 
Recommendation 5: The Department should immediately provide 
records for all the 32 SLA parameters to Audit. 
Audit could not derive assurance regarding compliance to SLA due to lack 
of records. During scrutiny of the limited SLA records given to audit, the 
following observations were noticed: 
2.7.1  Service Levels for Operational and Maintenance Phase 
Out of the five SLA parameters under Operational and Maintenance Phase, 
Audit was provided documents in respect of two SLA parameters - 
Response time of application, Change Requests/Enhancements and 
Handholding support.  

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
30
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
29 
2.7.1.1  Response time of CBIC ACES-GST Application not implemented - 
Non-achievement of minimum target performance level 
As per the RFP (Clause 10.5.1 of Vol.-I), the response time of 95% business 
transactions should have been within the limit of 2 seconds at Data Centre.  
If the Application Vendor fails to adhere this limit, he is liable to pay the 
liquidated damages at the agreed percentage of the quarterly payments. 
Further, as per the SLA, the SI was expected to work in association with 
application Vendors to achieve the desired performance levels i.e., 
response time of the application should be less than 2 second for at least 
95% of all business transaction.  In case of any breach on SLA post the 
implementation, the SI should be liable for the applicable penalty. 
During test check of the structured data provided, it was noticed that the 
data relating to this SLA (Quality of Service) was not provided for the 
quarter (April to June 2020) which indicated that this SLA was not 
implemented.  The fact was also corroborated by the third party auditor’s 
remarks in the SLA data viz. “The SLA is not applicable as application 
baselining is pending. SI team have shared the emails for low response 
time”. Further, in case of non-achievement of the minimum targeted 
levels, Liquidated Damages should be invoked by the DG Systems, 
however, the same were not imposed against either the Application 
Vendor or SI Vendor.   
In response, the DG System (August 2021) provided copies of 
correspondence that took place between SI Vendor (Consortium of TCS, 
TCL and HP) and Application Vendor (M/s. Wipro Ltd.) wherein the SI 
Vendor had regularly informed Application Vendor and the CBIC about the 
response time of GST Service URL and RMS access log URL where it 
exceeded the prescribed limit of 2 seconds.  DG System further accepted 
(October 2021) that as per the process SI was sending regular emails to the 
application team for doing benchmarking of the application so that the SLA 
can be regularized and additional activities are done on the databases as 
well to ensure that there are no observations in application due to 
underlying infrastructure. 
It is evident that Department has not actively pursued baselining of 
application with the Vendors and without such baselining, response time 
related SLA cannot be enforced.  In absence of such baselining, neither the 
Application Vendor nor the SI Vendor is held accountable for failure to 
reach the targeted performance level (response time). 
When the observation was pointed out (July 2022), the Ministry accepted 
(August 2022) the observation. 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
31
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
30 
Recommendation 6: The Department should actively coordinate with 
both the Vendors (SI and Application Vendors) for baselining of 
application performance of the CBIC ACES-GST application, at the 
earliest. 
2.7.1.2 Change Requests / Enhancements 
As per the RFP (Clause  8.4 of RFP (Vol I)), all planned changes should be 
coordinated within the established change control process ensuring that 
appropriate communication on change required, approvals received, 
schedules adjusted etc.  For any changes to the software, the Vendor had 
to prepare detailed documentation including proposed changes, impact to 
the system in terms of functional outcomes/additional features added to 
the system etc.  Once a timeline had been agreed for implementation of a 
change request, then any delay from the planned timelines, reasons for 
which were solely attributable to the Vendor, would be penalized as 
mentioned in the Service Level RFP. 
During scrutiny of records, it was observed that the applications for an 
Amnesty Scheme, Sabka Vishwas Legacy Dispute Resolution (SVLDR) and E-
Way Bill module were developed as change requests. Audit noticed that 
there was delays (4 days to 60 days) in development of these change 
requests and the department imposed appropriate SLAs and LDs. 
2.7.1.3  Deployment Plan for Handholding Resources 
As per RFP (Clause 5.1.4 Sl. No. 14), the Vendor was required to train the 
resources on CBIC ACES-GST System application and deploy resources (111 
hand holders) at 79 locations across the country to act as handholding 
support for the department users. These resources were required to assist 
the department users in their day to day operations on CBIC ACES-GST 
System. The attendance of the handholding resources would be managed 
by the Local Commissionerates and Target service levels had been defined 
for the attendance of the resources in the Service Level Agreement 
Section. Further, as per Schedule-III (Delivery Schedule) of MSA, the 
Vendor was required to submit handholding resource deployment plan by 
01 September 2016 or 15 days after intimation from CBIC whichever was 
earlier.  
Audit sought (July 2021) the handholding resource deployment plan 
submitted by the Vendor and actual deployment of the handholding 
resources.  However, the Department did not provide the handholding 
resource deployment plan.  In the absence of this, Audit could not 
ascertain that the Vendor had submitted a deployment plan and the 
handholding services were provided as per Delivery Schedule of MSA.  

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
32
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
31 
However, scrutiny of the payment files revealed that Vendor started the 
service in May 2017 and till April 2018 there was consistent shortage in the 
deployment of handholding resources.  
2.7.2  SLA for Help Desk (L1)  
As per RFP (Clause 5.1.5 of RFP Vol.1), for Helpdesk services to be provided 
to CBIC, the Vendor was required to setup:  
 A National Call Centre (L1 Helpdesk) for handling queries from the 
departmental users as well as the dealers 
 A Technical support team (L2/L3 Helpdesk) for providing timely 
resolution to the queries that could not be resolved by L1 Helpdesk 
The L1 Helpdesk was set-up with an existing call Centre intended to 
provide 24/7 hours of support and enables both departmental users and 
dealers to register their complaints/suggestions. As per MSA, there are 10 
SLA parameters for L1 Helpdesk Services with Liquidated damages with 
20% of capping of the quarterly payments to be made to the Vendor for L1 
Helpdesk service.  If the liquidated damages cap was breached for two 
consecutive quarters, CBIC had the right to terminate the contract.   
During scrutiny of the payment files relating to Helpdesk services for the 
period from December 2016 to March 2020, the following observations 
were noticed: 
(i)  Delayed submission of Helpdesk Operational Plan  
As per Master Service Agreement (Delivery Schedule-III) dated 12 August 
2016, the Vendor was required to submit Helpdesk Operational Plan by 15 
September 2016 or 15 days after intimation from CBIC, whichever was 
earlier. The same was submitted to CBIC by a delay of one year on 
01.09.2017.  
On this being pointed out by Audit (July 2022), the Ministry accepted the 
para and stated (August 2022) that operation of the helpdesk was initiated 
as per contractual date and as the material period was very dynamic, the 
Vendor submitted the operational plan once the process got streamlined.  
(ii)  Non-achievement of SLAs  
As per Service Level Agreements, there are 10 parameters for L1 Helpdesk 
Services. During the period from December 2016 to June 2017, Vendor 
provided helpdesk services for only 5 SLA parameters. Similarly, during 
quarters July-Sept 2017 and Oct-Dec 2017, the Vendor provided services 
for eight and nine parameters respectively. Hence, it was evident that the 
Vendor had not been able to achieve the required level of performance in 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
33
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
32 
respect of helpdesk services for more than 12 months since the helpdesk 
went live in December 2016.  
On this being pointed out by Audit (July 2022), the Ministry accepted the 
para and stated (August 2022) that SLA report was vetted by the PGA and 
that the Contract had maximum capping of 20% imposable LD. As such, 
bills were cleared on the maximum applicable SLA of 20 %. DG (Systems) 
made continuous efforts to make the Vendor comply with the contract 
provisions. These efforts resulted in the Vendor submitting the remaining 
SLA parameter data in the earliest possible time. 
(iii)  Levy of Liquidated Damages 
As per RFP (Clause 10.2), the overall liquidated damages (LD) will be 
capped at 20% of the quarterly payment for call centre services for L1 
Helpdesk.   
The Helpdesk service went live in December 2016; the first invoice was 
submitted for the period from 07 December 2016 to February 2017 and 
thereafter invoices were submitted for subsequent quarters.  Audit 
scrutiny revealed that due to non-achievement of desired targets of 
services and non-providing of some services, liquidated damages were 
more than 20% for the period from December 2016 to September 2018 
(22 months) and ranged from 28.18% to 645%. However, due to capping of 
LD at 20% of the quarterly payment, the penalty was restricted.  
RFP (Clause 10.2) indicates that if the liquidated damages cap is breached 
for two consecutive quarters, CBIC has the right to terminate the contract. 
Audit scrutiny revealed that for 22 months between December 2016 and 
September 2018, the calculated Liquidated Damages persisted beyond 
20%.  
On this being pointed out (July 2022), the Ministry stated (August 2022) 
that pertinently the aforementioned 22 months were marked by lot of 
changes in the law and the subsequently the application. In such a 
situation of constant flux, even changing the Vendor would not have 
resulted in any significant change in the quality of service. 
Audit notes the reply of the Ministry. 
(iv)  Incident Management Performance short of target 
As per RFP (Clause 10.6.2), high severity incidents are those which have 
critical business impact and should be resolved within 30 minutes.  Average 
severity incidents are those which have a significant business impact and 
should be resolved within 4 hours whereas low severity incidents are those 
having minimal business impact and should be resolved within 16 hours 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
34
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
33 
from the time taken to troubleshoot and Helpdesk tickets from the time the 
call has been logged at the Helpdesk till the time the problem is 
resolved/fixed. Root Cause Analysis (RCA) for all High and Medium Severity 
incidents was to be prepared and submitted within 5 working days from the 
date of resolution of incidents and the Know Error Database (KEDB) had to 
be updated within 5 days of the resolution date. 
Scrutiny of refund grievances data revealed that 19,266 incidents of high 
and medium severity under refund module were created during the period 
from 2018 to 2021 (up to 7 August) as detailed below: 
Table 2.9 - Year wise refund incident severity status 
Year Severity Total 
number 
of 
Incident 
created 
Incidents 
where 
delay 
was 
noticed 
Incidents 
resolved 
within 
prescribed 
time frame 
Delay range  Incident still open 
 (Delays > 30 
minutes in High, 
Delays > 4 hours in 
Average, Delays> 
16 Hours in Low 
severity)  
2018 
High 9 8 1 
16 Hrs 23 Minutes 
to 37 Days 16 Hrs. 
52 Minutes 
0 
Average 191 186 5 
04 Hrs 50 Minutes 
to 94 Days 1 Hrs. 
19 Minutes 
0 
Low 173 164 9 
23 Hrs 53 Minutes 
to 64 Days 15 Hrs. 
44 Minutes 
0 
Blank 8 8 0 
1 Day 0Hrs. 54 
Minutes to 113 
days 15 Hrs. 09 
Minutes 
0 
2019 
High 1787 1780 7 01 Hrs.to 99 Days 
02 Hrs. 53 Minutes 0 
Average 
341 336 5 
4Hrs. 16 Minutes 
to 168 days 3 Hrs. 
57 Minutes 0 
Low 
1091 1061 30 
16 Hrs. 1 Minutes 
to 592 days 3 Hrs. 
26 Minutes 0 
Blank 10 9 1 22 Hrs. 42 Minutes 
to 89 days 13 Hrs. 0 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
35
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
34 
Year Severity Total 
number 
of 
Incident 
created 
Incidents 
where 
delay 
was 
noticed 
Incidents 
resolved 
within 
prescribed 
time frame 
Delay range  Incident still open 
 (Delays > 30 
minutes in High, 
Delays > 4 hours in 
Average, Delays> 
16 Hours in Low 
severity)  
7 Minutes 
2020 
High 
5918 5903 15 
31 Minutes to 249 
days 11 Hrs. 44 
Minutes 2 
Average 
120 119 1 
4 Hrs. 15 Minutes 
to 100 days 22 Hrs 
9 Minutes 1 
Low 
1879 1786 93 
16 Hrs. 1 Minutes 
to 267 days 4 Hrs. 
39 Minutes 0 
Blank 
16 16 0 
19 Hrs. 19 Minutes 
to 149 days 5o 
Minutes 1 
2021 
High 
7507 7492 15 
31 Minutes to 138 
days 19 Hrs. 22 
Minutes 800 
Average 
161 161 0 
21 Hrs. 24 Minutes 
to 98 days 1 Hrs. 6 
Minutes 4 
Low 
41 38 3 
19 Hrs. 50 Minutes 
to 56 days 23 Hrs. 
32 Minutes 3 
Blank 
14 14 0 
2 days 20 Hrs 39 
Minutes to 100 
days 1 Hrs 8 
Minutes 0 
Total  19266 19081 185 811 
Source: Data provided by Department (as of July 2021) 
It is evident from the above table that out of 15,221 incidents of high 
severity, 15,183 (99.75%) incidents were resolved after the prescribed limit 
of 30 minutes.  In the category of ‘average severity’ incidents, 802 (98.64%) 
out of 813 incidents were resolved after the prescribed time.  Similarly, in 
the category of ‘low severity’ incident 3,049 (95.76%) out of 3,184 incidents 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
36
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
35 
were resolved with a delay.  Audit also noticed that 48 incidents were not 
assigned under any severity and remained blank.  
This indicated overall delayed management of the incidents and inability to 
close them within the prescribed time.  
In response to the audit observation (September 2021), the Ministry 
stated (August 2022) that the Department has deducted maximum LD of 
20% in all the quarterly payment made up to July-September 2021.  
Recommendation 7: The Department needs to monitor and put constant 
pressure on the Vendor to resolve incidents within the prescribed 
timelines according to the incident category. Since LD is capped at a 
maximum of 20 percent this is not acting as an effective disincentive for 
the Vendor. 
2.7.3  SLA for Training 
As per RFP (Clause 5.1.4 Sl. No. 1), the Vendor was required to train the 
departmental users to enable them to effectively operate and perform 
relevant functions using the CBIC ACES-GST Application system. There are 
two service level parameters (i) ‘On-time delivery of training as per 
training schedule agreed with CBIC’ without delay and (ii) ‘Training Quality’ 
in terms of feedback to be taken from Nodal officer. The liquidated 
damages (LD) for not achieving training related timelines were capped at 
maximum of 20% of the training cost, which might be reviewed after six 
months from the Effective Date and at such intervals as might be decided 
by CBIC.  
As per Master Service Agreement (MSA), training for 200 batches (one 
batch each of 25) was planned to be conducted.  Further, as per Delivery 
Schedule-III, the Vendor was required to submit the Training Plan by 30 
September 2016 or 15 days after intimation from CBIC, whichever is 
earlier, and start the training sessions after the Training Plan was approved 
by CBIC. 
(i)  Non-achievement of SLA for providing training service 
Scrutiny of records revealed that training for 164 batches was conducted 
from January 2017 to September 2017 and 36 batches were pending for 
training till September 2021.  During the above period, the performance of 
the Vendor was not as per the required level and liquidated damages were 
imposed to the maximum (20%) capping limit, whereas the calculations 
done by the Project Governance and Monitoring Agency (PGMA) (M/s 
PWC) was above the 20% capping and ranged from 27% to 149%.  
However, the Department was bound to impose only 20% as capped 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
37
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
36 
liquidated damages despite the performance level being low by the 
Vendor.  
On being pointed out by Audit (July 2022), the Ministry stated (August 
2022) that the prevalent time had new tax regime change. Any new 
vendor would have had to be engaged in due lengthy RFP process and 
ultimately it would have faced the similar situations. Further, the 
Department also undertook an exercise to create a pool of master trainers 
from the available departmental officers who were further entrusted with 
training programmes. This effected in more numbers of training schedules 
being conducted by the CBIC officers and less dependency on the vendor.   
 (ii)  Non-revision of SLA definitions, target levels and liquidated 
damages 
As per RFP, SLA definitions, target levels and liquidated damages were to 
be reviewed after six months from the effective date and at such intervals 
as may be decided by the Purchaser.  However, Audit noticed that the 
Department did not review and revise the same. 
After being pointed out by Audit (July 2022), the Ministry, while accepting 
the para stated (August 2022) that CBIC had now reviewed the contract 
and SLAs. The competent authority had also approved an addendum to the 
RFP accordingly. 
Recommendation 8: The Department should ensure that implementation 
of all aspects of SLA are effectively monitored; the Department and the 
Vendor perform their respective roles in accordance with the contractual 
provisions and non/late performance is effectively reviewed and 
resolved within the agreed time limit.  
On this being pointed out by Audit (July 2022), the Ministry accepted the 
recommendation and stated (August 2022) the Department has deducted 
maximum L.D of 20% in all the quarterly payment made up to July-
September 2021. 
2.8  Change Management 
In IT organisations, a structured change management process is normally 
used to manage and control changes to assets, such as software, 
hardware, and related documentation. Change controls are needed to 
ensure that all changes to system configurations are authorised, tested, 
documented and controlled so that the systems continue to support 
business operations in the manner planned, and that there is an adequate 
trail/record of changes. 
 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
38
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
37 
Table 2.10 - Summarised Audit Finding Matrix 
Sl. 
No. 
Sub-Objective Summary of Audit Checks Status Findings 
1.  Whether 
appropriate 
communication 
between Vendor 
and CBIC on change 
required has taken 
place;  
CR Policy, Procedures for 
initiation, review and approval 
of CR, Change Control Board, 
Review of logs and Reports, 
Change Order timelines. 
Partial record 
production 
 
2.8 
2.8.1 
 
2.  Whether proper 
approvals have been 
received by the 
Vendor from CBIC; 
Change Order, Pre- and post-
change system and user 
documentation. 
 Scope restriction - 
3.  Whether schedules 
have been adjusted 
or re-prioritized to 
minimize impact on 
the production 
environment. 
Back up documents for the 
change order, Emergency 
change. 
Scope restriction - 
RFP has elaborated the procedures for initiation, review and approval for 
change along with mapping of responsibility for these tasks. As per RFP 
(Clause 8.4), the Vendor had to prepare detailed documentation including 
proposed changes, impact to the system in terms of functional 
outcomes/additional features added to the system etc. The Vendor shall 
obtain approval from CBIC for all the proposed changes before 
implementation of the same into production environment and such 
documentation is subject to review at the end of each quarter of 
operations and maintenance support.  
Once a timeline had been agreed for implementation of a change request, 
then any delay from the planned timelines, reasons for which were solely 
attributable to the Vendor, would be penalized as mentioned in the 
Service Level Agreement of the RFP.  In case of major changes, approval 
would be sought in the Steering Committee meetings.   
Audit requisitioned the records relating to establishment of Change 
Control Board (CAB), change control logs, development of back out 
process before any change request is implemented, Change Management 
procedures to control emergency changes to the system, change order 
documentation etc.  But the Department did not provide the documents 
against the requisitioned records and only provided the list of change 
requests (CRs) carried out in the system and expenditure incurred on these 
CRs which are given below:  

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
39
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
38 
2.8.1  Change Requests / Enhancements  
During scrutiny of the information provided by the Department, it was 
noticed that the department implemented 173 change requests valuing of 
₹ 16.62 crore during the period 2017-18 to 2020-21 under different 
modules as detailed in the table below.   
Table 2.11 - Change Requests 
(Amount in ₹ lakh) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
Module 
2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 
No. 
of 
CRs 
Value of 
CRs 
No. 
of 
CRs 
Value 
of CRs 
No. 
of 
CRs 
Value 
of CRs 
No. 
of 
CRs 
Value of 
CRs 
1.  Registration 7 31.18 1 10.47 12 155.36 7 94.55 
2.  Returns 10 47.02 15 81.44 19 377.67 9 55.38 
3.  Payment  - (*) 
4.  Refund 2 28.20 7 54.61 14 53.14 7 126.37 
5.  DSR 
(ADJ+REC+APL) 
- - - - 4 105.50 7 79.54 
6.  Investigation - - - - 3 46.70 1 4.65 
7.  Export (*) - (*) 
8.  ACES GST - (*) 2 21.63 12 12.56 3 7.53 
9.  Mobile App Mobile App is only at the SRS sign off stage. 
10.  Audit Audit modules is at the SRS sign off stage. 
11.  Taxpayers at 
Glance (*) - (*) 
12.  Access Control 
Logic - (*) 
13.  Common CRs 16 3.44 - - 1 7.87 - - 
14.  SVLDRS** - - 4 116.34 - - - - 
15.  E-way Bill - - - - 10 140.30 - - 
Total 35 109.86 29 284.51 75 899.15 34 368.06 
(*)CR Details not Available  
(**)SVLDRS was a new requirement which has been carried out through CR. 
 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
40
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
39 
2.9  IT Security 
IT security protects the integrity of information technologies like computer 
systems, networks, and data from attack, damage or unauthorized access. 
Table 2.12 - Summarised Audit Finding Matrix 
Sl. 
No. 
Sub-Objective Summary of Audit Checks Status Findings 
1. Whether Security 
of the IT system 
has been 
designed in an 
effective way? 
User Access Management Process Checked 2.9.1.1 
2.  Business 
Continuity and 
Disaster Recovery 
Business Impact Analysis, Risk 
Assessment Reports, Backing up data 
and programs, Patching compliance 
reports, Data replications scheduled, 
Resource requirements, Disaster 
Recovery (DR) Drill Plan, Crisis 
Management Team, Recover Point 
Objective (RPO) and Recovery Time 
Objective (RTO) 
Checked To be Covered 
separately in IT 
Audit of SI 
(Saksham) 
Project. 
2.9.1  Access Control 
Access Control Logic module (ACL) determines how the privileges are to be 
assigned to various users so that the business processes can be performed 
by the authorized users as prescribed. An ideal ACL should not only 
correctly assign the privileges to the proper officer, but should also provide 
required flexibilities for reassigning the roles, transfer the pending jobs 
etc., as desired.   
Access control ensures that only users with the process credentials have 
access to sensitive data.  Access to business information and data should 
be controlled in order to restrict the access to authorized users only. Any 
inappropriate access or unauthorized changes to application software, 
information or data must be restricted.  
2.9.1.1 User Access Management (UAM) 
User Access Management includes providing, maintaining and removing a 
user’s access to various components of CBIC infrastructure such as 
network, applications and network devices in a controlled manner. Audit 
observed that the Department has a clearly defined policy/framework for 
access control in the application. Access in the Application is based on RFP 
and SRS drawn. Within the Application, access is given by the 
Administrator (ACL Admin) of the formation based on posting of a User in a 
formation. The procedures for User Registration, User Modification,  
Personal information modification of an existing user, Designation 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
41
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
40 
Modification, Access for pending tasks in previous location, Additional 
Charge, Disable Request, Retired User, etc. are clearly delineated in the 
policy framework.  A broad outline of the procedure is mentioned below:  
SSO ID Creation - Nodal Officer initiates SSO ID creation request by filling 
SSO ID creation template and forwards the same from his/her official 
Icegate email ID / gov.in / nic.in ID to Saksham Seva.  
UAM Team Verification - On receiving the request, the UAM Team verifies 
the channel of request, correct and mandatory fields in template and 
relevant documents of the user for verifying name, DOB (Date of Birth), 
DOJ (Date of Joining), etc.  
Duplication Check - The  UAM Team also verifies if a duplicate SSOID 
already exists for the user. If no existing SSOID is found, the UAM Team 
proceeds for creation of SSO ID.  
Process post duplication check - The UAM Team sends email and the 
interaction to PMU Team for approval with observations of duplication 
check. PMU Team verifies the request and all attachments. After 
verification, the PMU Team forwards the request to UAM DOS11 for seeking 
approval.  
Maker Checker - The associate processing the request is designated as the 
Maker and the associate verifying the complete request is identified as the 
Checker. Post creation of SSO ID/Email ID, the Checker performs the 
validation check.  
A similar procedure is followed in case of modification, activation and de-
activation of user roles in the system. 
In the production environment, Audit examined one case each of 
designation modification, deactivation of SSOID of retiring officer/official 
and disabling of SSOID of Vendor’s staff. In these three test-checked cases, 
it was noticed that the procedures as per User Access Management were 
followed and no deviations were found.   
2.9.2  IT Service Continuity Management Plan 
CBIC came out with an IT Service Continuity Management (ITSCM) Plan 
(Version 2.3) dated November 2019 to ensure continuity of its business 
operations. The IT Service Continuity Plan (ITSCM Plan) outlines the 
contingency plans for business threatening emergencies, continuing 
business and complete recovery of its business applications in the event of 
a disaster at any of the data centers of CBIC. 
                                                           
11 Directorate of Systems 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
42
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
41 
CBIC released Information Security Policy (Version 2.3) dated July 2020 
which defines the overall framework for implementing and sustaining a 
compliant and effective security program. 
During the course of audit, the Department was asked to provide the 
information/documents relating to Information Security applied in the 
CBIC ACES-GST Application.  In response, the Department provided the 
Information Security Policy, Back up Policy etc.  Scrutiny of these 
documents revealed that: 
(i) Information Security Policy 
Scrutiny of the Information Security Policy revealed that the roles and 
responsibilities were clearly defined for protection of information assets 
within the IT Department. In the policy document, provisions for media 
handling (management of removal media, disposal of media, physical 
media transfer) are also covered.  
The first version of IT Security Policy was issued in June 2009 and the last 
updated version was issued in July 2020. 
(ii) Backup Policy 
As per the Backup Policy document, the data is categorized as critical data 
(core business application & data) and non-critical data (Non-core business 
application and data). This data is to be backed-up fully on weekly, monthly 
and yearly basis with data retention on monthly and yearly basis.  Back up 
of network devices is to be taken up on weekly basis and stored on local 
drive of a server/Physical Tape Cartridges. Configuration back up of data 
center core firewalls is manually taken on daily basis. Network devices logs 
is to be backed up through Arc sight logger server . 
Back up Policy has been updated periodically. The first version was issued 
in August 2009 and the latest updated version was issued in July 2020. 
Detailed audit of the above-mentioned aspects of IS Security would be 
taken up separately as part of a future audit of the Systems Integrator 
Saksham project.  
 
 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
43
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
42 
Chapter III: Implementation of functionalities   
 
Audit examined the mapping of business processes flowing from 
the GST Acts/Rules in the CBIC ACES-GST Application and sought to 
ascertain if they had been correctly implemented or not.  There 
were 11 modules envisaged in the application which were at 
various stages of development at the time of Audit. Four modules 
(Export, Taxpayer at Glance, Mobile Application and Audit) were in 
the initial stage of development and the remaining seven modules 
have been developed and rolled out to the production 
environment. 
In the registration module, certain deficiencies pertaining to 
validations in respect of functionalities relating to the approval 
process and adherence to timelines of New 
Registration/suspension/ cancellation of registration were noticed.   
Apart from delay in implementation/deployment of forms like CMP 
forms, GSTR-4 etc. in the Returns module, functionalities like 
Scrutiny of Returns & Risk Assessment Engine, Provisional 
Assessment, best Judgement Assessment, etc. were under 
development. 
In the Refund module, various functionalities like processing of 
refund to the notified person, adjustment of outstanding demand 
in Provisional Refund order, recovery of interest on adjustment of 
outstanding demand or withholding of refund were not developed. 
In the Dispute Settlement and Resolution (DSR) module, while 
appeals on refund order were being filed manually, the Dispute 
Lifecycle Register and mechanism for monitoring due dates were 
absent. 
It was further observed that Digital Signatures have not been 
incorporated and adopted in any of the modules, logs of individual 
changes made in the forms at various levels of hierarchy in the 
draft stage were not being recorded and absence of functionality 
for automated calculation of interest was also noticed. 
Chapter III: Implementation of functionalities

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
44
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
43 
3.1  Registration Module  
Registration of a business with the tax authorities implies obtaining a GST 
Identification Number (GSTIN) from the concerned tax authorities so that 
all operations and data relating to the business can be agglomerated and 
correlated. This is the fundamental requirement for identification of 
business for tax purposes or for having any compliance verification 
program. In the GST Regime, registration is fully electronic and any legal 
person wishing to register has to access the GSTN portal. The applicant will 
fill up all the required fields of the New Taxpayer Registration form in the 
GSTN Portal and submit the same for approval. The transactions and 
records submitted in the GSTN Portal are to be integrated smoothly in the 
CBIC ACES-GST application so that the records are available on the 
dashboard of the officers completely and on a timely basis.  
Table 3.1 - Summarised Audit Finding Matrix 
Sub-objectives Tested/Not 
tested 
Passed/ 
Failed/ 
Scope 
restriction 
Summary of Audit Checks Remarks 
(Audit 
Findings) 
To check whether 
alert / monitoring 
mechanisms is 
effective in 
critical areas of 
operations having 
revenue impact 
Tested (38) Passed 
(10) 
Compulsory registration, 
Separate Registration (SEZ Unit 
or developer), Provisions 
relating to casual taxable person 
and non-resident taxable 
person, Effective date of 
registration, Provisions relating 
to place and period of 
registration 
 - 
Failed (28) Deemed registration 
Aadhaar Authentication and 
conduct of Physical Verification 
related issues 
 
Suspension functionality 
Aggregate turnover  
Flagging mechanism 
Timely deployment of 
Composition Forms 
Effective date of registration in 
case of amalgamation 
 
 
3.1.1.1 
3.1.1.2  
3.1.1.3 
3.1.1.4 
 
3.1.1.6 
3.1.2.1 
3.1.2.2 
3.1.2.3 
 
3.1.2.4 
 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
45
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
44 
Sub-objectives Tested/Not 
tested 
Passed/ 
Failed/ 
Scope 
restriction 
Summary of Audit Checks Remarks 
(Audit 
Findings) 
Cancellation issues 
 
Mapping Issues 
Amendment of registration 
GSTP issues 
Mismatch between RFP and SRS 
Suo moto Registration 
 
3.1.2.5 
 3.1.2.6  
3.1.2.7 
 
3.1.2.9  
4.1.3 
3.1.3 
3.1.4 
4.1.2 
 
Not tested 
(2) 
Scope 
restriction 
(2) 
Estimation of tax liability, 
Amendment relating to change 
in principal place of business 
 - 
To assess if the 
functionalities 
offers ease of 
doing business 
Tested Failed (1) Adherence of time limit in case 
of new registration 
3.1.1.5 
Could not 
be checked 
Scope 
restriction 
(1) 
MIS reports  MIS Reports 
could not be 
checked due 
to non-
facilitation of 
Testing 
environment. 
Tested Passed Adherence of time limit in 
respect of development of 
functionalities in respect of 
Registration 
- 
Not tested Scope 
restriction 
(1) 
Erroneous cancellation of 
registration 
- 
To check 
effectiveness of 
integration with 
other modules 
Tested (3) Passed (1) Integration issues of GST portal - 
Failed (2) System alerts 3.1.2.8 
The Department developed 22 functionalities, covering the aspects of 
verification and approval process that was envisaged in the SRS signed off 
in 2016. Later, nine additional functionalities were developed through 
Change Requests (CRs) due to changes in the provisions of the law 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
46
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
45 
necessitating these modifications/additions. These changes were 
intimated in the form of advisories to all the stakeholders. The Department 
in a walkthrough stated (December 2020) that 24 Registration Forms were 
in production and four Forms were pending for development. 
During test-check of registration processes mapped in the Application, 
Audit noticed that functionalities like validity of registration in case of 
Casual Taxable Person or Non-Resident Taxable person (NRTP), effective 
date of registration, dates and timelines for various stages of new 
registration, trigger alerts in the tax-officer’s dashboard for new 
registration etc., were found in order. However, the following audit 
observations were noticed as a result of examination of SRS, output of 
data queries and functionalities which tested negative: 
3.1.1 Inadequate validations in respect of functionalities developed and 
deployed in production relating to the Approval process of New 
Registration  
Notifications 18/2020 and 19/2020 -Central Tax dated 23 March 2020, 
introduced Aadhaar authentication with effect from 01 April 2020, in 
respect of the following persons associated with an entity seeking GST 
registration:  
 Individual,  
 Authorized signatory of all types, 
 Managing and authorized partners of a partnership firm, and  
 Karta of HUF 
3.1.1.1 Mandatory physical verification of business premises was not 
conducted for unauthenticated Aadhaar Cases 
Sub-rule (4A) 12 of Rule 8 of CGST Rules 2017 read with Advisory No. 
19/2020/August 2020, Rule 9(1) and Rule 9(5) of CGST Rules, 2017 
together provide that where a person, other than those notified under 
sub-section (6D) of Section 25, fails to undergo authentication of Aadhaar 
number or does not opt for authentication of Aadhaar number, then with 
effect from 01 April 2020, the registration 13 shall be granted only after 
physical verification of the principal place of business in the presence of 
the said person, not later than sixty days from the date of application, in 
the manner provided under rule 25 and the provisions of deemed approval 
stated in Rule 9(5) ibid shall not be applicable in such cases.  
                                                           
12 Inserted vide Notification No. 16/2020-Central Tax 
13 Inserted vide Notification No.16/2020-Central Tax dt. 23.03.2020 and was substituted vide 
Notification No.62/2020-Central Tax dt. 20.08.2020 w.e.f 01.04.2020. 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
47
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
46 
Audit analysed data of 2,78,732 registration applications from CBIC 
database for the period 01 April 2020 to 20 August 2020 and found 34,227 
cases which have been deemed approved. Out of these 34,227 cases, 225 
randomly selected cases 14 were cross verified with the data in the GSTN 
Portal for the Aadhaar Verification Status and it was observed that in 208 
cases, the GSTN Portal showed Aadhaar Verification Status as ‘N’ implying 
that the Aadhaar was not verified and the tax officer was to mandatorily 
conduct the physical verification of the premises prior to grant of GSTIN 
and the application should not have been deemed approved for the said 
period. For these 208 records, the CBIC database also showed the 
‘Mandatory Physical Verification’ field as ‘ N’ reconfirming that these 
applications were deemed approved without conduct of physical 
verification of business premise, thereby deviating from the provisions of 
law for the said period. This means that the System allows the tax officers 
to grant registration without or prior to mandatory physical verification of 
premises in respect of taxpayers with unverified Aadhaar status. Not 
conducting PV in such cases means enhanced risk of registration obtained 
with intention to conduct fraudulent transactions.  
Recommendation 9: The Department should conduct post-physical 
verification of the premises for the cases where Aadhaar has not been 
authenticated. The CBIC ACES-GST system should have provision to not 
allow grant of registration without mandatory physical verification of 
taxpayers with unverified Aadhaar Status.  
Recommendation 10: The Department should make provision for 
generating exception reports for cases where Aadhaar Verification and 
Mandatory Physical Verification status of a taxpayer is flagged as ‘N’ for 
monitoring and taking appropriate action.   
In response to the Audit observation (November 2021), the Ministry while 
accepting the para stated (August 2022) that Aadhaar authentication was 
activated by GSTN from August 2020 and the same was implemented by 
CBIC from 5 th October 2020 and Audit’s recommendation to conduct post 
physical verification for the cases where Aadhaar has not been 
authenticated and the applications have been deemed approved is 
communicated to the Policy Wing. 
The fact remains that the legal provision of physical verification in place of 
Aadhaar authentication was effective from 1st April 2020. 
                                                           
14 Verified through the SSOID credentials of Chennai Zone provided to Audit team.  

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
48
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
47 
3.1.1.2 Incomplete exchange of information between the approving CPC 
officers and the jurisdictional officers impacting the decision on 
conduct of PV 
Where the registering taxpayers opt for Aadhaar authentication, the GSTN 
Portal forwards the link for Aadhaar verification via email. Based on the 
outcome of this process, the GSTN Portal will set the Aadhaar Status 
against each such person as ‘Verified’/‘Unsuccessful’. If all the persons 
validate their Aadhaar successfully, then there is no requirement for 
Physical verification. If any of them fails the Aadhaar verification, then 
Application Reference Number (ARN) is marked for PV by GSTN. Where the 
person does not opt for Aadhaar verification, PV becomes mandatory 
before granting Registration and in such cases too, ARN is marked for PV 
by GSTN. All cases which are marked for PV are pushed by the CPC of CBIC 
to the Jurisdictional Officers for conducting PV. 
The proper officer may, for reasons to be recorded in writing and with the 
approval of an officer not below the rank of Joint Commissioner, in lieu of 
the physical verification of the place of business, carry out the verification 
of such documents as he may deem fit in lieu of PV 15. This facility of 
granting approval on verification of documents without conducting 
Physical Verification was subsequently withdrawn 16. Also, by Advisory 19/ 
2020 dated 24 August 2020, the Department specified timelines (only 
indicative) to complete the whole process within the given 21 days; these 
timelines are only indicative to help the officers to complete the work 
without any delay at their end. 
An analysis of data of 28,775 cases from the CBIC database17 for the period 
from August 2020 to March 2021 where Aadhaar status is ‘N’ and 
Mandatory Field Visit is ‘Y’ revealed that in 13,665 cases, the date on 
which it was forwarded by the CPC officer to the Jurisdictional Officer for 
Physical Verification was blank and the date of submission of PV Report by 
the Jurisdictional Officer was also blank.  In the absence of critical 
information on the conduct of Physical Verification by the Jurisdictional 
Officer, the premise on which the CPC Tax Officer has approved the 
Registrations was not known. Blank value in the fields ‘Forwarded to PV 
on’ and the ‘Date of conduct of PV’ shows that there are issues in the flow 
of data from CPC to the Jurisdictional Officer and vice versa as a result of 
which audit could not gain an assurance on whether the PV was conducted 
for the cases highlighted.  
                                                           
15 as per Notification 62/2020 dated: 20.08.2020 
16 vide Notification 94/2020 dated 22.12.2020 
17 Data was shared by CBIC in a link to Antarang dated: 10.09.2021 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
49
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
48 
It is also pertinent to mention that the CBIC ACES-GST application did not 
provide a workflow to obtain approval of the Joint Commissioner in cases 
where the documents have been verified in lieu of physical verification and 
it could not be ascertained from the IT System whether documents were 
verified in lieu of Physical Verification for the period from 20.08.2020 to 
31.12.2020. On test-check of randomly selected 15 cases of the 
registrations approved by the tax officer, it was observed, that in 6 cases 18 
the tax officer had approved the registrations without conducting Physical 
Verification. 
Absence of crucial information viz. ‘Forwarded to PV on ___ ’and ‘Date of 
conduct of PV_____’ impacts the approval of Registration by the CPC 
officer.  
In response to audit observation (November 2021), the Ministry noted 
(August 2022) the observation for compliance and stated that in absence 
of the workflow the officer can obtain the approval offline and upload the 
remarks in the system and take action as deemed fit.  
Audit is of the view that transparency and accountability of decisions can 
be best maintained when the trail is built in the system and not offline.  
3.1.1.3 Irregular grant of Registrations which were recommended for 
rejection in the Physical Verification (PV) Report  
Audit noticed that in 883 cases (Pan India) where the Jurisdictional Range 
Officer had conducted the PV and specifically recommended for rejection 
in the PV report, the CBIC ACES-GST application had permitted approval of 
their registration as taxpayers and GSTINs were also generated. Audit 
further cross verified eight cases out of these 883 cases with the CBIC 
ACES-GST application using Audit SSOID credentials pertaining to Chennai 
Zone. It was noticed that the Range Officer indeed had recommended for 
rejection of registration application in his comments in the PV Report. 
In this connection, the procedures and processes detailed in the 
Advisory No. 26/2020 dated 12 October 2020 for processing of the 
Application Reference Numbers (ARNs) marked for PV in the CBIC ACES-
GST application were perused. On submission of a PV Report by the 
Range Officer /Superintendent, a ‘PV Report Received’ task is created on 
the dashboard of the Assistant Commissioner (AC)/Deputy Commissioner 
(DC) for verification of the PV Reports submitted. These officers, however, 
are provided with only the ‘Forward Report’ option and must necessarily 
forward the report to the CPC officer irrespective of their 
                                                           
18 Verified through the Audit SSOID credentials of Chennai Zone.  

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
50
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
49 
agreement/disagreement with the PV report after entering remarks in the 
‘Comments’ column. Further, these applications would be deemed 
approved if the CPC officer fails to act on these ARNs within the stipulated 21 
calendar days. 
Thus, lack of provision in CBIC application to alert the CPC Officer about 
adverse remarks in the PV Report has been resulting in approval of 
registration even in cases where the PV reports seek rejections of the 
registration application. The CPC seems to be allowing approval of 
registration without verifying adverse comments in the PV report as Audit 
could not verify the source of approval of the registrations which have been 
specifically recommended for rejection. Such overruling of rejections may 
lead to risk of creation of taxpayers not entitled to be registered.  
Recommendation 11: The Department should develop an alert by which 
the CPC officer can identify the Adverse/Negative remarks. It should 
also consider developing a MIS report of such cases. 
In response to the audit observation (November 2021), the Ministry 
noted (August 2022) the recommendation for compliance and stated that 
the Department was already considering to implement alert about the PV 
remarks to the CPC officers. 
3.1.1.4 Incorrect approval of Registrations without Aadhaar 
authentication/ physical verification in absence of relevant 
rule/provisions 
As per the Ministry of Corporate Affairs Notification, G.S.R 275 E dated 29 
March 2019, Rule 38(A) has been inserted in the Companies 
(Incorporation) Rules, 2014 enabling a company seeking incorporation in 
the MCA portal to simultaneously opt for GSTIN registration from the MCA 
portal through SPICE-AGILE form. This provision has been implemented by 
GSTN from 21 June 2019.  After successful processing of the GST 
application at the MCA portal, the CIN (Corporate Identification Number), 
DIN (Director Identification Number) and PAN are transmitted to the GST 
Portal for further processing. 
There is no specific exemption from Aadhaar authentication and Physical 
verification available in the CGST Act for ARNs filed through the MCA 
portal. On a cross verification of 19 cases randomly selected in Chennai 
Zone with the GSTN Portal, it was seen that in 15 cases, Aadhaar has not 
been authenticated and the CBIC ACES-GST application has allowed 
approval of the same in contradiction of the rule ibid.  
Further, on perusal of the minutes of the Change Advisory Board (CAB) 
meeting (09/2021) dated 15 March 2021, it was noticed that for the 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
51
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
50 
Applications filed by taxpayers (ARNs) through MCA portal, the Aadhaar 
flag and Physical Verification (PV) flag was transmitted as null in the json 
file. Since Aadhaar authentication for such ARNs is not implemented in 
GSTN, the Aadhaar details are blank and not allocated to the proper officer 
resulting in the ARNs getting deemed approved. To address the issue, a fix 
was put in place by Wipro on 21 December 2020 through a ‘Change 
Request (CR) 282- REG_01 ARNs - Aadhaar Exempted Cases (MCA)’, 
whereby all such ARNs filed through the MCA portal having the Aadhaar 
and PV details as blank were allotted to the proper officer for processing.  
In order to gain assurance on the effective implementation of Rule 9(1) of 
CGST Rules, 2017 which requires physical verification to be carried out for 
ARNs if Aadhaar is not opted for or Aadhaar authentication had failed, a 
pan-India extraction was made from the CBIC database of the ARNs filed 
between 21 August 2020 (Aadhaar functionality implementation date in CBIC 
ACES-GST application) and 31 March 2021, where the mandatory ‘Aadhaar 
Verification status’ field is either ‘Blank ‘ or ‘Unsuccessful’  but the 
registrations  have been approved by CBIC ACES-GST application without 
any Aadhaar authentication or Physical verification. Audit identified 1,130 
such MCA generated ARNs .  Out of these, 152 ARNs were filed after the 
implementation of the fix dated 21 December 2020. This means that 
despite the system fix enabling allotment of cases to the proper officer, 
the proper officer approved the cases without mandatory physical 
verification where the taxpayers either opt out of Aadhaar Authentication 
or opted but Aadhaar authentication had failed.  
The Department has been addressed to examine and initiate action on the 
cases highlighted under intimation to audit.  Further, clarifications have 
also been sought from the Department as to how post implementation of 
the fix, 152 ARNs having the Aadhaar Verification status’ as either ‘Blank’ 
or ‘Unsuccessful’ were approved by the CBIC ACES-GST application.  
Recommendation 12: The Department should ensure that GST 
registration through MCA portal is not approved in the CBIC ACES-GST 
application unless the same is Aadhaar authenticated, or the physical 
verification is completed.  
In response to the audit observation (November 2021), the Ministry noted 
(August 2022) the recommendation for compliance and stated that the 
decision as to whether physical verification is required or not for a given 
application is indicated and communicated by the GSTN system. As far as 
CR-282 is concerned it was implemented to allocate the ARNs filed 
through the MCA portal to the proper officer for processing and to prevent 
deemed approval. 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
52
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
51 
The fact remains that a mechanism is required to avoid deemed 
registrations in case of registration applications through the MCA portal. 
3.1.1.5 Inadequate validations resulting in non-adherence to time limits 
in processing of Registration applications 
As per Rule 9(2) of the CGST Rules, 2017, where an application submitted 
under Rule 8 is found to be deficient, either in terms of any information or 
any document required to be furnished under the said rule, or where the 
proper officer requires any clarification with regard to any information 
provided in the application or documents furnished therewith, the proper 
officer may issue a notice to the applicant electronically in Form GST REG-
03 within a period of seven working days from the date of submission of 
the application and the applicant shall furnish such clarification, 
information or documents electronically, in Form GST REG-04, within a 
period of seven working days from the date of the receipt of such notice.  
Further, Rule 9(3) stipulates that if the proper officer is satisfied with the 
clarification, information or documents furnished, the application for 
registration is required to be approved within a period of seven working 
days from the date of the receipt of such clarification or information or 
documents and Registration Certificate issued in Form GST REG-06. In 
case, the proper officer does not take any decision within seven days, 
registration of such cases shall be deemed to have been approved. 
However, where no reply is furnished by the applicant within the 
prescribed time limit of seven days in response to the notice issued under 
sub-rule (2), Rule 9(4) 19 requires the proper officer to reject such 
application after recording the reasons in writing and inform the applicant 
electronically in FORM GST REG-05 . Further, the SRS version 1.3 on 
Registration also clearly specifies that the CBIC ACES-GST application will 
be enabled with a functionality to auto reject the registration application if 
the taxpayer fails to respond within seven working days from the date of 
the receipt of notice. 
Data extracted on a pan-India basis from CBIC database revealed the 
following: 
(i) In 7,67,328 cases (SATQ_REG_SQ02, Period: 01.07.2017 to 
31.03.2021), the applications for registration have neither been 
approved nor rejected by the tax officer which is in contravention 
to the provisions of Rule 9 of the CGST Rules and indicates the 
                                                           
19 Rule 9(4) specifies that the proper officer has to reject the application, if a reply is not received to 
the notice issued or the officer is not satisfied by the reply, after recording the reasons in writing 
and inform the applicant electronically in FORM GST REG-05. The rule ibid is, however, silent on 
the timeline within which the proper officer has to reject the application.  

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
53
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
52 
absence of an effective validation mechanism in the CBIC ACES-GST 
application. 
(ii) In 72,955 cases (SATQ_REG_SQ05, period: 01.07.2017 to 
30.06.2021), where queries had been raised through Form REG-03 
but for which replies had not been furnished by the taxpayer (Form 
REG-04), the CBIC ACES-GST application had permitted the 
registration to be approved by the tax officer in 15,727 cases and 
deemed approved in 57,228 cases and certificate of registration 
(REG-06) was issued, which is not in accordance with the provisions 
of Rule 9 ibid. In all such cases where no reply has been received 
within the prescribed period, the CBIC ACES-GST application 
instead of rejecting the application had permitted issuance of 
Registration certificate. 
This clearly indicates ineffectiveness of the validation feature envisaged in 
SRS 1.3 to auto reject the registration application if the taxpayer fails to 
respond within seven working days from the date of the receipt of notice. 
The Department needs to examine the reasons for the failure of the 
aforementioned functionality. Also, the reasons as to how an ARN is 
neither approved or rejected needs to be examined and suitable action 
initiated.  
In response to the Audit observation (November 2021), Ministry partly 
accepted the para and stated (August 2022) that Rule 9 does not provide 
any timeline for cases where the taxpayer has not responded and hence 
auto- rejection option is not built in the system. It also stated that the 
57,228 cases were deemed approved because of integration failure with 
GSTN due to alert code failure. The technical team is working upon this 
issue. 
Recommendation 13: The Department may consider proposing an 
amendment to the provisions of Rule 9 of the CGST Rules, 2017 for 
clearly specifying a timeline for rejection of applications for registration 
where the applicant fails to respond to Form GST REG-03 within seven 
days. 
3.1.1.6 Delay in implementation of Suspension functionality resulting in 
ineffective monitoring 
As per Rule 21(A)(1) of CGST Rules, 2017, where a registered person has 
applied for cancellation of registration under Rule 20, the registration shall 
be deemed to be suspended from the date of submission of the 
application or the date from which the cancellation is sought, whichever is 
later, pending the completion of proceedings for cancellation of 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
54
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
53 
registration. Rule 21(A)(2) ibid provides that where the proper officer has 
reasons to believe that the registration of a person is liable to be 
cancelled, he may, after affording the said person a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard, suspend the registration of such person with 
effect from a date to be determined by him, pending the completion of the 
proceedings for cancellation. Further, Rule 21(A)(3) ibid specifies that a 
registered person, whose registration has been suspended under Rule 
21(A)(1) or Rule 21(A)(2) ibid, shall not make any taxable supply during the 
period of suspension and shall not be required to furnish any return under 
Section 39. All the above rule provisions are effective from 01 Feb 2019 
vide the CBIC Notification No. 03/2019-Central Tax dated 29 January 2019. 
On examination of the SRS documents, Departmental Advisories and based 
on the discussions held with the departmental officials, Audit noticed that 
the functionalities aligning with the above rules had not been fully 
implemented and the ‘Effective Date of Suspension’ was not captured in 
the CBIC ACES-GST application. Moreover, in the absence of a provision to 
capture the ‘Effective Date of Suspension’ in the CBIC ACES-GST 
application, it was observed that there was no mechanism to enforce the 
conditions stipulated under Rule 21(A)(3) ibid, restricting the registered 
persons from making any taxable supplies and consequent passing on of 
credit during the period of suspension. 
The Ministry accepted the para and stated (August 2022) that in case of 
cancellation applied by registered person, the effective date of suspension 
is to be communicated by GSTN through API and the same will be taken up 
for integration. In case of suo-moto cancellation, the date of suspension 
will be captured in the CBIC System. This enhancement will be taken up for 
implementation. 
Recommendation 14: The Department should ensure that the suspension 
functionality is implemented in the CBIC ACES-GST application in line 
with the CGST Rules. 
3.1.2  Inadequacies in certain validation controls resulting in 
contravention of provisions relating to Registration approvals and 
cancellations  
3.1.2.1 Absence of mechanism to compute aggregate Turnover under a 
single PAN in case of Registered Persons opting under the 
Composition Levy Scheme 
Section 10 of the CGST Act, 2017 read with Notification No. 14/2019-
Central Tax dated 07 March 2019 provides that a registered person, whose 
aggregate turnover in the preceding financial year did not exceed one 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
55
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
54 
crore and fifty lakh rupees 20 may opt to pay under the Composition Levy 
Scheme (CLS). Where the aggregate turnover under single PAN of the 
taxpayer in the preceding financial year exceeds the threshold, then the 
registered person is not eligible to continue to pay tax under the 
Composition Levy Scheme and he should have been moved to normal 
taxpayer for charging GST. 
The SRS signed off in 2016 based on the draft Model Law did not validate 
the aggregate turnover from the tax return values in the Returns Module 
and trigger an alert to the jurisdictional proper officer when the registered 
person’s turnover crosses the prescribed threshold limits so as to enable 
the tax officer to initiate action accordingly. Also, the application did not 
determine the turnover in the state to validate the rate of composition 
levy. As the tax regime for the normal taxpayers is different from that for 
the CLS taxpayers, such deficiency in the IT systems will have revenue 
implication to the exchequer and needs to be attended urgently. 
Recommendation 15: The Department should pursue the matter with 
GSTN to enforce the validation to compute the aggregate turnover from 
returns and to move such persons registered under the Composition Levy 
Scheme to normal taxpayer after they cross the prescribed turnover 
threshold. An alert for the tax officer can also be included for such cases 
where the taxpayers cross the turnover threshold meant for the 
Composition Levy Scheme. The Department should identify all such past 
cases to bring them into the normal taxpayer category. 
In response to the audit observation (November 2021), the Ministry, while 
accepting the para, stated (August 2022) that the Department had already 
prioritised the GSTN CR of restricting composition option to taxpayers 
exceeding the threshold turnover. 
3.1.2.2  Failure to validate same ‘PAN taxpayer type’ resulting in 
taxpayer with the same PAN existing as Composition and 
Normal Taxpayer 
The Proviso under Section 10(2) of CGST Act, 2017 provides that where 
more than one registered person is having the same Permanent Account 
Number, the registered person shall not be eligible to opt for the CLS 
unless all such registered persons opt to pay tax under the CLS. Also Rule 
6(1) of CGST Rules, 2017 provides that the option exercised by a registered 
person to pay tax under Section 10 ibid shall remain valid only as long as 
he satisfies all the conditions mentioned under the Section and Rules. 
                                                           
20 Aggregate Annual Turnover of preceding financial year limit prescribed for States specifically 
mentioned in Notification  No. 14/2019-Central Tax dated 07.03.2019 is Rupees Seventy-Five 
lakhs (₹75 lakhs). 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
56
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
55 
Where the proper Officer has reasons to believe that the registered person 
is not eligible to pay tax under Section 10, then he should issue a Notice 
for denial of option to pay tax under Section 10 ibid (CMP-5). 
Data extracted from the CBIC database for Composition approved 
taxpayers revealed that multiple registrations with the same PAN were 
found to be registered under CLS as well as Normal Taxpayers. Also, cases 
were identified where a Taxpayer had an existing Normal Registration and 
approval was granted by the Tax Officer, on a later date, for a Registration 
with the same PAN under the CLS, thereby deviating from the provisions of 
law (17 such instances out of 169 are observed).  
While approving a registration application, the tax officer is provided with 
a facility to ‘View Earlier Registration’. Under this tab the tax officer can 
view GSTIN, Registration Type (New Registration/Existing Registration), 
Legal Name, Jurisdiction, Registration Status (Active/Inactive), Cancellation 
Status (Cancelled/Proposed/Initiated), Cancellation Type (Suo-moto/by 
Taxpayer), Revocation raised, Supervision (Centre/State) and Reason for 
cancellation. This tab however did not provide information on whether the 
other registration with the same PAN has opted for CLS or normal status. 
As tax regime for the normal taxpayers is different from that for the CLS 
taxpayers, such deficiency in the IT systems will have revenue implication 
to the exchequer and needs to be attended urgently.  
Recommendation 16: The Department should ensure that a validation is 
in place in the system so that the taxpayer under Normal Registration is 
not allowed for a Registration with the same PAN under the Composition 
Levy Scheme at the same time and vice versa. The Department should 
identify all such past cases to bring them into the normal taxpayer 
category. 
In response to the audit observation (November 2021), the Ministry while 
accepting the para noted (August 2022) the recommendation for 
compliance and stated that a reconciliation exercise of all the registration 
data base with the GSTN data base is undertaken for rectification, if any. 
3.1.2.3 Delay in implementation of Composition (CMP) Forms 
Section 10 (2) of the CGST Act, 2017 read with Rule 6 of the CGST Rules, 
2017 provides that the option exercised by a registered person to pay tax 
under Section 10 shall remain valid only as long as he satisfies all the 
prescribed conditions.  As per Rule 6(4), where the proper officer has 
reasons to believe that the registered person was not eligible to pay tax 
under section 10, he may issue a notice to such person in CMP-05 to show 
cause as to why the option to pay tax under section 10 shall not be denied. 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
57
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
56 
Upon receipt of the reply (CMP-06) to the show cause notice, the proper 
officer should issue an order in CMP-07 within a period of thirty days of 
the receipt of such reply either accepting the reply or denying the option 
to pay tax under CLS from the date of event concerning such 
contravention.  
Audit noticed that the relevant CMP forms by which the proper officer can 
deny the option to pay tax under Section 10 were not implemented, 
thereby limiting the scope of action that can be initiated by the tax officer 
under the provisions. Moreover, there are no validation checks to alert the 
proper officer to identify the taxpayers who no longer fulfil the eligibility 
conditions relevant to the CLS.  
The delay in implementation of the crucial forms relevant to Composition 
taxpayers and inadequate checks to validate the eligibility conditions 
resulted in non-identification of ineligible taxpayers such as same PAN 
taxpayers existing as both Composition and Normal Taxpayers and failure 
on the part of the proper officers to initiate action for denial of option 
under the Scheme.  
Recommendation 17: The Department should ensure early development 
of CMP-5, CMP-6 and CMP-7 forms and validation check alert enabling 
the proper officer to initiate the prescribed action against the taxpayers 
who no longer fulfil the eligibility conditions relevant to the CLS. 
In response to the audit observation (November 2021), the Ministry noted 
(August 2022) the recommendation for compliance and stated that the 
Department has prioritised to implement the same. 
3.1.2.4 Inadequate validations to ascertain effective date of liability in 
case of registrations obtained as a result of transfer on account of 
Succession/Demerger/ Amalgamation 
Section 25 (1) of the CGST Act, 2017 read with rule 10 (2) and 10(3) of the 
CGST Rules, 2017 prescribes that a person shall apply for registration 
within thirty days from the date on which he becomes liable to registration 
and the registration shall be effective from the date on which the person 
becomes liable to registration and where the registration has been 
submitted after the expiry of thirty days from the date of his becoming 
liable to registration then the effective date of registration shall be the 
date of  grant of registration.  
As per Section 22 (3) of the CGST Act, 2017 where a registration is 
obtained on account of succession or otherwise to another person then 
the transferee or the successor shall be liable to be registered with effect 
from the date of such transfer or succession. In case of 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
58
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
57 
demerger/amalgamation of two or more companies pursuant to an order 
of the High Court the transferee shall be liable to be registered from the 
date on which the Certificate of Incorporation is issued by the Registrar of 
companies (Section 22 (4)). 
Analysis of data from CBIC database extracted for the period 01 April 2020 
to 31 March 2021 revealed that Normal Registrations are approved as per 
Rule ibid. Further analysis of registration data revealed that 3,290 cases 
were registered for reasons of Transfer/Demerger/Amalgamation. The 
Effective Date of Registration in all the cases was seen to fulfil the 
conditions provided in the Rule ibid and not as provided in Section 22 (3) 
or Section 22 (4) ibid.  Random check of 10 cases in Chennai Zone revealed 
that in 5 cases , the Effective Date of Registration was not the same as the 
date mentioned in Certificate of Incorporation/Partnership Deed. In the 
absence of provision in the CBIC application to capture the Date of 
Incorporation, department is not in a position to ascertain the effective 
date of liability/Registration of the transferee company.  
In this regard, audit observation (November 2021) was issued, and the 
Ministry stated that (August 2022) it would require integration from GSTN 
end with the Ministry of Corporate Affairs and hence was out of the scope 
for ACES-GST application. 
Recommendation 18: The Department may request GSTN to pursue the 
matter with Ministry of Corporate Affairs to capture the date of 
incorporation of the transferor company as a data element. 
3.1.2.5 Absence of validation to alert the tax officer in respect of 
cancellation of registration requested by the taxpayer 
Rule 22(3) of the CGST Rules, 2017 provides that where a person who has 
submitted an application for cancellation of his registration is no longer 
liable to be registered, the proper officer shall issue an order in FORM GST 
REG-19, within a period of thirty days from the date of application or, as 
the case may be, the date of the reply to any show cause issued, cancel the 
registration with effect from a date to be determined by him and notify 
the taxable person, directing him to pay arrears of any tax, interest or 
penalty including the amount liable to be paid under sub-section (5) of 
section 29 of the CGST ACT, 2017. 
Rule 20 of the CGST Rules, 2017 read with Circular No. 69/43/2018-GST 
provides that the taxpayer applying for cancellation of registration shall 
submit the application in Form GST REG-16 on the common portal within a 
period of 30 days of the “occurrence of the event warranting the 
cancellation”.  However, in view of the difficulty to exactly identify the day 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
59
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
58 
on which such an event occurs, the application may not be rejected 
because of the possible violation of the deadline. The proper officer should 
accept all such applications within a period of 30 days from the date of 
filing the application, except in those cases where the applications are 
incomplete or where the cancellation is applied by the taxpayer for 
reasons of transfer/succession or amalgamation and the successor entity 
had not obtained a new registration prior to cancellation of existing 
registration. The circular specifies that the application for cancellation of 
registration should be immediately accepted by the proper officer and the 
order for cancellation should be issued in FORM GST REG-19 with the 
effective date of cancellation being the same as the date from which the 
applicant has sought cancellation in FORM GST REG-16.   In any case, the 
effective date cannot be a date earlier to the date of application for the 
same. Further, the SRS v.1.3 para 2.1.6 provided the business process for 
surrender of GST Registration by the taxpayer (Approval, Raise Query, 
Response to Query Action by the Tax Officer). 
Data analysis of 2,27,327 taxpayers who applied for voluntary 
cancellations during the period from 01 January 2020 to 31 March 2021 
revealed the following deviations indicating inadequate validation checks 
while processing the application. 
(i) Ineffective alert system resulting in delayed approval of 
cancellations  
The validations/business rules in respect of Registration Dashboard laid 
down in SRS v1.3 provided that all the transactions should show Alert 
indicators based on the severity of the transactions.  Module-wise, 
transaction-wise alert timelines should be defined for each Alert Category 
(Low, Medium and High). 
Analysis of extracted data showed that 51,561 requests for cancellation 
were approved after 30 days of receipt of the application despite the fact 
that the tax officer did not raise any queries. However, it is observed that 
the alerts on the timelines are not effectively implemented and that may 
have contributed to delays in cancellations.  
On this being pointed out by Audit (November 2021), the Ministry stated 
(August 2022) that the law does not provide a timeline for approval of 
cancellation applications. The Ministry will however, examine the 
suggestion for implementation of an alert system. 
The reply of the Ministry is not acceptable as Rule 22(3) ibid clearly states 
that the proper officer shall issue an order in FORM GST REG-19, within a 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
60
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
59 
period of thirty days from the date of application or, as the case may be, 
the date of reply to any show cause noticed issued.  
(ii) Issues in the process flow of various stages of approval  
Data was extracted for the period from 01 January 2020 to 31 March 2021 
to review the process flow of various stages of Application Reference 
Numbers (ARNs) in respect of voluntary cancellation applications which 
have neither been approved nor rejected. The data output of 13,536 
records revealed that in 10,302 cases, the application status showed 
pending for approval.  Further, as specified in the RFP and SRS, the stage-
wise pendency and age-wise pendency Reports for view by the 
Jurisdictional officer and higher officers to initiate timely rectification 
process were not developed, leading to an ineffective monitoring 
mechanism.  In 2,883 cases, queries were raised but replies had not been 
received which indicated that auto rejection option is not implemented. In 
297 cases, though the taxpayers responded to the queries, the tax officer 
neither approved the cancellation nor rejected the same even after a 
median delay of 74 days.  
On this being pointed out by Audit (November 2021), the Ministry stated 
that the application for cancellation remains pending for action as 
automatic rejection functionality was not developed because there is no 
timeline fixed for rejection in respect of surrender application.   
(iii) Cancellation Order with effect from a retrospective date not in 
accordance with Circular instructions 
In 81,495 cases, registrations were cancelled by the tax officer with effect 
from dates requested by the taxpayers instead of application dates despite 
the facts that the requested dates were prior to the application date. This 
was not in accordance with the Rule 20 of the CGST Rules, 2017 read with 
Circular No. 69/43/2018-GST.  
On this being pointed out by Audit (November 2021), the Ministry stated 
that they will examine the suggestion for providing a validation to restrict 
cancellation prior to the date of surrender application. 
Recommendation 19: The Department should ensure that the necessary 
validations, alerts and effective dates of cancellation be deployed in the 
CBIC ACES-GST System as per the provisions of the Act and Rules. The 
MIS Reports envisaged in the SRS may be developed to enable an 
effective monitoring mechanism. The Ministry may also consider 
specifying a timeline for rejection of application for cancellation in case 
the applicant fails to respond to the SCN within seven working days.  

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
61
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
60 
3.1.2.6 Suo-moto cancellation functionality is not effectively used, 
resulting in many non-filers registrations remaining un-cancelled 
In terms of Registration Advisory No.38/2019 dated 20 December 2019, a 
new functionality "Bulk Suo-Moto Cancellation" was developed and 
deployed in production on 19 December 2019 to initiate bulk suo-moto 
cancellation against all non-filers of GSTR-3B returns for the period up to 
September 2019. Further, as per Section 29(2)(c) of the CGST Act, 2017, 
the proper officer may cancel the registration from such date, including 
any retrospective date, as he may deem fit, of any registered person, other 
than a person paying tax under Section 10, if returns are not furnished for 
a continuous period of six months. 
Audit extracted (September 2021) pan-India data of 2,70,536 cases from 
the CBIC database of all Regular taxpayers where the last filed GSTR-3B 
return was before January 2020 or where even a single GSTR-3B return has 
not been filed before January 2020 and found them still active. As per the 
ibid Rules, all these registrations should have been cancelled by carrying 
out the bulk suo-moto cancellation. Further analysis of these data revealed 
the following: 
(i) Out of 2,70,536 cases, in 2,34,486 cases not even a single GSTR-3B 
return was filed before January 2020 and in 36,050 cases the last 
GSTR-3B return filed was before January 2020. All these 
registrations were active as of 27 September 2021. 
(ii) On a random test check of 40 cases 21 pertaining to Tamil Nadu, it 
was observed that in 11 cases, GSTR-1 returns were being filed by 
the taxpayer for tax periods subsequent to the last filed GSTR-3B 
period.  Hence, the filing of GSTR-1 returns which indicates 
Outward Taxable Supply, without filing the GSTR-3B returns raises 
potential concerns over the possibility of passing on ineligible Input 
Tax Credit. 
On this being pointed out by Audit (November 2021), the Ministry stated 
(August 2022) that GSTN has implemented Centralised Bulk suspension of 
non-filers and it covers the period pointed out by Audit.  
Recommendation 20: The Department should ensure that the Centralised 
Bulk suspension (cancellation) of non-filers functionality is being used 
effectively by GSTN.  
 
                                                           
21 Verified through the Audit SSOID credentials of Chennai Zone.  

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
62
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
61 
3.1.2.7  Absence of alert mechanism to identify Taxpayers who have not 
furnished bank details after obtaining GSTIN 
Rule 10 and 10A of the CGST Rules, 2017 read with Rule 21 and 21A ibid 
provides that the registered taxpayer shall furnish the Bank Account 
details within forty-five days from the grant of registration or the due date 
of furnishing the return under section 39 of CGST Act, 2017 whichever is 
earlier, failing which the registration is liable to be cancelled.  
Data on new registrations extracted for the period from 01 April 2020 to 
30 June 2020 revealed that 5.22 lakh registrants had not filed their bank 
account details.  However, the tax officers had not issued show cause 
notices or suspended the Registration as required under the Rule. Audit 
noticed that there was no alert mechanism in the CBIC ACES-GST 
Application/Dashboard to enable the tax officers to identify the taxpayers 
who have not furnished the bank details and to initiate cancellation 
proceedings under Section 29(2) ibid.  
Recommendation 21: The Department should ensure compliance with 
Rule 10 and 10A of the CGST Rules, 2017 read with Rule 21 and 21A and 
consider providing an alert functionality at the Tax Officers Dashboard in 
the case of non-filing of Bank account details within the prescribed time 
limits. 
In response to the audit observation (November 2021), the Ministry, while 
accepting the para, stated (August 2022) that it will be implemented on 
priority basis. 
3.1.2.8 Inadequate validations in the suo-moto cancellation proceedings 
As per Rule 22(1) of the CGST Rules, 2017 where the proper officer has 
reasons to believe that the registration of a person is liable to be cancelled 
under Section 29, he shall issue a notice to such person, requiring him to 
show cause, within a period of seven working days from the date of the 
service of such notice, as to why his registration shall not be cancelled. 
Section 29(2)(b) and (c) states that if a person paying tax under Section 10 
has not furnished returns for three consecutive tax periods, or any 
registered person, other than a composition dealer, has not furnished 
returns for a continuous period of six months then the registration is liable 
to be cancelled. 
The reply to the show cause notice issued under Rule 22(1) should be 
furnished in FORM REG-18 within the period specified. The Proviso under 
Rule 22(4) states that where the person instead of replying to the notice, 
furnishes all the pending returns and makes full payment of the tax dues 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
63
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
62 
along with applicable interest and late fee, the proper officer shall drop 
the proceedings and pass an order in FORM GST-REG 20.  
As per the business rule stated in SRS - suo-moto Cancellation New 
Registration v0.6, registration cannot be cancelled without issuing a Show 
Cause Notice (SCN) to the taxpayer. The taxpayer will be informed and 
provided seven working days to reply to the SCN. In case of failure to 
furnish the reply within the prescribed time, the officer has only the option 
to cancel the registration.  
The functionality to cancel the registration suo-moto is in production with 
effect from 18 August 2018 (Advisory on suo-moto cancellation). As a 
facilitation measure, a feature was developed through a Change Request, 
wherein the officer can take up Bulk suo-moto cancellation for 20 
taxpayers in one go and the functionality was deployed in production on 
19 December 2020 (Advisory No 38/2019). This was a one-time approach 
to issue suo-Moto bulk notices to all GSTR 3B Non-Filers till the August 
2019 tax period. The SRS (V.06) has been signed off (July 2020) as per the 
actual functionality in production along with certain improvisation.   The 
following is the workflow for suo-moto cancellation: 
(i) Individual GSTIN suo-moto Cancellation Initiated: Tax Officer will 
navigate to Registration and under Active Registrations, the officer 
will select particular GSTIN for initiating the cancellation.  
(ii) Bulk GSTIN suo-moto Cancellation Initiation: Tax officer will 
navigate to “View Non-Filers”, wherein the click of the Toggle 
Button named ‘View GSTR-3A/suo-moto’ will produce the list of 
taxpayers against whom the GSTR 3A notices have been issued and 
from which the taxpayers liable for cancellation of registration can 
be selected. Once the taxpayers (maximum 20 at a time) are 
selected for cancellation, “Initiate Cancellation” button can be used 
for bulk suo-moto cancellation initiation.  
(iii) Once the Cancellation is initiated (for both individual and bulk 
initiation), the respective record will be moved to “Response 
Awaited” stage, after GSTIN response for the show cause notice, 
the record will be moved to “Response Query /SCN” stage in which 
the officer can perform Cancel Registration/Drop Proceedings.  
(iv) If the Reply is not received, the respective record will move to 
“Response Not Received” Stage, in which the officer can perform 
only “Cancel Registration”.  
Audit noticed that where a taxpayer has been issued a SCN in REG-17 for 
non-filing of Returns and he files the due Returns and makes full payment 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
64
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
63 
of taxes instead of replying to the show cause notice (SCN) as provided 
under proviso to Rule 22(4), there is no provision in the CBIC ACES-GST 
application to alert the tax officer that the Returns have been filed. Due to 
absence of link between the Returns and Registration Module, an 
appropriate notification message that ‘The Return has been filed in 
response to the SCN’, is not available to ensure that he does not proceed 
with the cancellation without taking into account the subsequent  filing of 
the required returns and payment of taxes/interest/tax under Rule 22 (4).  
Further, the walkthrough of the dashboard of the Tax Officers and the 
helpdesk tickets revealed that wherever the SCN has been issued, the 
validation in respect of timelines is not effective. This is also evident from 
the data extracted from CBIC Database that in 10,246 cases, even where 
the reply has not been received in REG-18 and Returns have not been filed 
within seven working days and response to SCN was awaited for 33 days to 
1,003 days, the Dashboard of the Tax Officer continued to show the status 
as ‘Response Awaited’ when the registration in such delayed cases should 
have been cancelled by the tax officers. 
In response to the Audit observation (November 2021), the Ministry while 
accepting the para stated (August 2022) that (i) The taxpayers are 
provided with opportunity to respond to the notice and hence if they had 
filed, it can very well be informed to the proper officer and (ii) for the issue 
raised by Audit that in certain cases where the reply has not been received 
in REG-18 and returns not filed, the dashboard of the tax officer continued 
to show as ‘response awaited’, the matter was examined and it is seen 
that the discrepancy occurred due to a BPM error and is taken up on 
priority.  
Recommendation 22: The Department should provide a linkage between 
the Registration and the Returns Module so that a Tax Officer is alerted 
when Returns are filed and taxes are paid in response to a notice in REG-
17. Action may also be initiated to provide effective validation/alert in 
respect of the timelines as per the provisions of the CGST Rules. 
3.1.2.9 Non-mapping of registrations of taxpayers (GSTINs) with any 
jurisdictional authority 
As per RFP (Clause 1.2(c)(iv)), the application for registration along with 
attached scanned documents is to be filed by the applicant on the GSTN 
portal and after validation of PAN, CIN, DIN etc. by GSTN, the same is to be 
sent by the GSTN System to the CBIC ACES-GST application. Thereafter, it is 
made available on the dashboard of the jurisdictional proper officer of 
CBIC, as defined under the GST Law. The GSTN System determines the 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
65
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
64 
provisional jurisdiction of the applicant for the levies administered by CBIC 
based on the principal place of business stated by the applicant in the 
registration application and the Jurisdiction Master and the allocation 
logic. 
Data extraction of 5,004 cases from the CBIC database in respect of 
Regular and Composition Taxpayers, however, showed that GSTINs were 
generated in these cases but the same were not allocated to any 
Jurisdiction. Out of the 5,004 cases, 4,933 cases were deemed approved 
and the remaining 71 cases were approved by the officer. 
Audit verified randomly selected 20 such GSTINs pertaining to Chennai 
Zone with the GSTN Portal and noticed that the GSTINs were available in 
the GSTN portal with all the relevant jurisdictional details and for all the 20 
cases, GSTR-1 and GSTR-3B Returns are being filed regularly. However, 
these 20 GSTINs22 have not been mapped in the CBIC ACES-GST application 
to any Jurisdictional authority till date. 
Non-mapping of GSTINs with the jurisdictional authority in the CBIC ACES-
GST application even though the jurisdictional details were available in the 
GSTN portal means that the CBIC IT application is not aligned to the extant 
requirements, thus inhibiting mapping of GSTINs with jurisdictional 
authority for proper tax administration.   
On this being pointed out by Audit (November 2021), the Ministry stated 
(August 2022) that when the automatic allocation logic is unable to 
allocate jurisdiction, the GSTIN is assigned to the Central Processing Centre 
of the zone to allocate jurisdiction manually based on the trade notices 
issued. GSTINs referred by Audit were verified, and it was found that all 
these GSTINs were assigned to CPC officers for manual allocation of 
jurisdiction. 
The reply of the Ministry is not acceptable as the details of some of the 
GSTINs are still not available in some modules of the application.   
Recommendation 23: The Department should examine the cases and 
initiate suitable action to ensure that the GSTINs are correctly mapped in 
all the modules with the jurisdictions as available in the GSTN portal. 
3.1.3  Designing of CBIC ACES-GST Application in respect of GST Tax 
Practitioners (GSTP) Amendment without adequate provisions in 
the Act 
Rule 19 of the CGST Rules, 2017  provides for amendments to any of the 
particulars furnished at the time of registration or as amended from time 
                                                           
22 Verified through the Audit SSOID credentials of Chennai Zone. 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
66
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
65 
to time. The category of persons who have obtained registration by 
making an application in the following forms and seeking amendment 
should submit, duly signed or verified through electronic verification code, 
the changes proposed to be made, in FORM GST REG-14, within a period of 
fifteen days of such change: 
 Form GST REG-01 (Normal Taxpayers)  
 Form GST REG-07 (TDS TCS) 
 Form GST REG-09 (Non-Resident Taxable Person) or  
 Form GST REG-10 (OIDAR) 
The Proviso under Rule 19 states that in case where the change relates to 
(i) legal name of business; (ii) address of the principal place of business or 
any additional place(s) of business; or (iii) addition, deletion or retirement 
of partners or directors, Karta, Managing Committee, Board of Trustees, 
Chief Executive Officer or equivalent, responsible for the day to day affairs 
of the business,  then the Proper Officer after due verification, approve the 
amendment within a period of fifteen working days from the date of the 
receipt of the application in FORM GST REG-14 and issue an order in FORM 
GST REG-15. Where the change relates to any particular other than those 
specified above, the certificate of registration shall stand amended upon 
submission of the application in FORM GST REG- 14 on the common portal.  
Section 48 of the CGST Act, 2017 provides for authorization of an eligible 
person to act as approved GST practitioners. A registered person may 
authorize an approved GST practitioner to furnish information, on his 
behalf, to the Government. The manner of approval of GSTP, their 
eligibility conditions, duties and obligations, manner of removal and other 
conditions relevant for their functioning have been prescribed in Rule 83 
of the CGST Rules, 2017. Standardized formats, GST PCT-1 to GST PCT-5, 
have been prescribed for making application for enrolment as GST 
practitioner, certificate of enrolment, show cause notice for 
disqualification, order of rejection of application of enrolment, 
authorization letter and withdrawal of authorization. The CGST Rules does 
not contain any provision for amendment of the particulars furnished in 
PCT-01 nor have they prescribed a Form to apply for such Amendment.    
A review of the Minutes of the Change Advisory Board (CAB) meeting 
(06/08/2019) and related correspondences for granting approval for the 
Change Request revealed that the Department had approved change order 
in respect of GSTP Non-core Amendment and Core Amendment and the 
same was deployed in June 2020 and June 2021 respectively. In the PMU 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
67
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
66 
vetting comments in the minutes of the CAB, it was stated that when there 
are changes relating to the application viz. PCT-01 submitted at the time of 
obtaining registration number, the GST Practitioner submits the core 
amendment application vide form REG-14 with necessary supporting 
documents and such amendment applications filed at the common Portal 
are pulled through an API at the backend and pushed to the designated 
Ranges for necessary verification and action to approve/reject as deemed 
fit by the concerned officer. The SRS in this respect is under preparation 
and has not been signed off.  
In light of the facts above, Audit observed that the rules for amendment of 
details in respect of GSTP enrolment data furnished in Form PCT-01, have 
not been provided in the GST Act/Rules and the tax officer does not have a 
formal mandate to approve the Core Amendments.  Form REG-14 is a 
prescribed form to be submitted by only those categories of taxpayers, 
who want to make changes to the particulars furnished in REG-01, REG-07, 
REG-09 and REG-10. To permit the GST Practitioner to apply for an 
amendment to the details in Form REG-14 which is not relevant to such 
amendments does not appear logical.  
To an Audit query, the Department replied (October 2021) that in the 
absence of any provisions or procedures to amend the enrolment of GST 
Practitioner (GSTP), the API released by GSTN was consumed and due to 
urgency to make it available to the users, Form REG-14 used for normal 
registrations, has been used for this purpose. The functionality was 
developed in accordance with Form REG-14 used for normal registrations. 
The reply is not acceptable since the API was released by GSTN in January 
2019 but the functionality without preparing SRS was deployed in June 
2021.  
On this being pointed out by Audit (November 2021), the Ministry stated 
(August 2022) that the feature is only a facilitative/enabling mechanism 
having no revenue implication and as GSTN had already rolled out the 
feature, the same is implemented by CBIC. 
Recommendation 24: The Department should initiate necessary action to 
obtain the approval of the GST Council/GSTN Law Committee for the 
procedure for GSTP Amendments. 
 
 
 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
68
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
67 
3.1.4 Requirements in the RFP not adequately traced to the signed off 
version of SRS and inadequacies were noted in certain 
functionalities developed by way of Change Request which were 
initially part of the original work under the RFP.  
As per the RFP (Clause 1.2(d) (iii)), the CBIC ACES-GST application will 
maintain PAN-based data of persons/entities, who were black-listed earlier 
or whose applications were rejected or registrations cancelled. When any 
application with such PAN is received by the CBIC ACES-GST application, 
this information should be made available to the jurisdictional proper 
officer as an alert while processing the application.  
The provisions in respect of the Change Order stipulate that the Change 
Order will be initiated only in case (i) the purchaser directs in writing the 
Vendor to include any addition to the scope of work covered under the 
Agreement or deletes any part of the scope of the work under the 
Agreement. 
SRS (V 1.3) did not provide the process flow for ‘View Earlier Registrations’ 
However, the Traceability Matrix in the SRS mentioned that the above 
requirement has been complied with in REG_Approve_01. The 
functionality to “View earlier Registrations” with the same PAN was, 
however, developed as a Change Request 177, at a cost of ₹ 13.72 lakh in 
July 2019 (PAN Validation) and the functionality was deployed in 
production with effect from 12 November 2019 (Advisory: 34 Dated 04 
December 2019). 
The delayed development of the functionality as a Change Request 
(December 2019) at an additional cost of ₹13.72 lakh even when the same 
has been mentioned in the scope of the RFP, is not proper.   
The Ministry stated (August 2022) that the Department is in the process of 
issuing demand notice(s) for recovery of the said amount.  
Based on the walkthrough of the approval process of a new registration 
application, where the earlier cancelled registration existed and also on 
perusal of the SRS document on PAN Validation, the following 
inadequacies were noticed in the functionality: 
(i) The approval process flow in SRS provided that in case of cancelled 
Registrations, there should be “View Returns” link enabled to verify 
Returns filed details of the earlier registrations. However, while 
observing the approval process in the walkthrough of the Central 
Processing Cell (CPC), the ‘View Returns’ tab is not enabled for the 
tax officer. Random check in the GSTN Portal for Inactive and 
Active registrations existing for the same PAN extracted from the 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
69
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
68 
CBIC database (SATQ_NewREG_GQ_10), showed that in nine cases, 
the taxpayers, while keeping the liability undischarged in respect of 
a cancelled GSTIN (suo-moto cancellation for non-filing of Returns), 
obtained a new registration to continue the business. Such new 
applications might have been made as the person may not have 
furnished requisite returns and not paid tax for the tax periods 
covered under the old/cancelled registration.  In some cases, it was 
also observed that the inactive GSTIN has filed GSTR-1 but not filed 
GSTR-3B. The information on the discrepancies in the tax filing 
periods of GSTR-1 and GSTR-3B is not available as an alert to the 
tax officer. 
On this being pointed out by Audit (April 2022), the Ministry stated 
(August 2022) that the facility to view returns under ‘View Returns 
Tab’ was deployed after due testing and the same was functional. 
However, non-functioning of the tab was being taken up for 
rectification. As regards discrepancy between GSTR-1 and GSTR-3B, 
possibility of alert would be examined and suitably acted upon.  
(ii) The “View Return” tab which makes available the Returns filed 
details of the earlier registrations is a critical information based on 
which the tax officer approves or rejects the new application in 
respect of registrations where the earlier registration is cancelled 
for non-filing of returns. It is pertinent to mention that the 
jurisdictional proper officer who has cancelled the registration may 
be different from the tax officer who is approving the new 
registration with the same PAN.  Hence, the approving officer 
should be provided with the complete Return filing data, to enable 
him to take a decision while approving or rejecting or raising a 
query on the new registration application. The Returns and 
Registration modules should be linked in such a way that the 
complete information on GSTR-1 filing tax periods and date of filing 
vis-a vis GSTR-3B filing details is grouped on the same PAN and the 
black listing details are available for view at a click of a button so 
that the approving officer (CPC officer) takes an informed decision 
prior to grant/reject of a new registration application. 
On this being pointed out by Audit (April 2022), the Ministry stated 
(August 2022) that technical issues with the ‘View Returns’ tab 
would be fixed to enable the tax officer to view the complete 
return filing data. Linking of Returns and Registration module 
would be examined, as advised by Audit. 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
70
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
69 
(iii) The information provided under the ‘View Earlier Registration’ is 
limited to Cancelled Registration. The application does not alert the 
approving tax officer when cancellation proceedings has been 
initiated against a defaulting GSTIN and it is suspended under Rule 
21A of the CGST Rules, 2017 and the same PAN holder applies for a 
new registration. On a random check of active and inactive cases, it 
was identified that a taxpayer with a suspended status has applied 
for a new registration and the same has been approved.  
On this being pointed out by Audit (April 2022), the Ministry stated 
(August 2022) that ‘View Earlier Registration’ was deployed to 
production during 2019 whereas suspension of GSTIN was 
implemented by GSTN during November 2020. Necessary 
modifications would be carried out to reflect suspended status.  
(iv) Where the Cancellation has been effected by the State Tax 
Authority, the Reasons for cancellation cannot be viewed by the tax 
officer. Due to lack of integration with the State Tax Authorities the 
non-filing of Returns/black listing details are not readily available 
impacting effective monitoring mechanism. 
On this being pointed out by Audit (April 2022), the Ministry stated 
(August 2022) that the issue would be taken up for integration.  
(v) The RFP (Clause 1.2(d) (iv)) has prescribed that the application 
should provide for maintaining a PAN-based data for offence cases 
for using the same as a risk parameter in various business 
processes. Despite being part of contractual obligation under RFP, 
this functionality had not been developed. 
On this being pointed out by Audit (April 2022), the Ministry stated 
(August 2022) that this functionality could not be taken up so far due to 
prioritisation of other urgent functionalities as also due to non-
readiness of the DSR module. Relevance of this feature would be 
examined and shall be taken up for development, if found necessary.   
(vi) The Department did not develop integration between modules and 
built-in validations to aid the tax officer in taking informed decisions. 
On this being pointed out by Audit, the Ministry stated (August 
2022) that going forward the same would be examined and taken up. 
Audit also could not check the process of advance tax paid by the Casual 
Taxable Person or NRTP and if the same is equal to the estimated tax liability; 
change in Principal Place of business is implemented; and erroneous 
cancellation of registration due to non-provision of a testing environment.  

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
71
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
70 
3.2 Returns Module 
A return is a statement of specified information relating to business 
activities undertaken by a taxable person during a prescribed period. A 
taxable person has certain legal obligations e.g.: 
 to declare his/her tax liability for a given period in the return by 
furnishing details of supply of goods and services including exports, 
description of goods/services, value, and rate of tax etc., 
 to furnish the details of input and input services received and the 
credit taken by them on these inputs and services, 
 to furnish details about the taxes paid, and 
 to furnish correct information, file the complete return within the 
stipulated time frame. 
Every registered person is required to file a return in electronic mode only 
for the prescribed tax period on the common portal. A return is to be filed 
even if there is no business activity i.e., Nil return during the period of the 
return. The submitted returns with fully paid tax liability are accepted by 
GSTN as Valid and forwarded to the tax authorities for further scrutiny.  
The return along with annexures, filed by the seller/purchaser is sent by 
the GSTN system to the CBIC ACES-GST application for subsequent 
processing by proper officers as per the business rules set by CBIC in this 
regard.  
Table 3.2 - Summarised Audit Finding Matrix 
Sub-objectives Tested/Not 
tested 
Passed/ 
Failed/ 
Scope 
restriction 
Summary of Audit Checks Remarks (Audit 
Findings) 
To review the 
monitoring 
mechanism 
with respect to  
compliance of 
Return Filing 
Procedures 
Tested (12) Passed (9) Return filing timelines, 
Identification of invalid returns, 
Non-filer issues, Consideration 
of extended data while 
generating non-filer report, 
Data consistency, Return filing 
issues 
- 
Failed (3) Timely deployment of GSTR 
Forms, Correct filing of returns, 
Flagging mechanism 
3.2.1.1, 3.2.1.2, 
3.2.1.3  
Not Tested 
(1) 
Scope 
Restriction 
(1) 
Availability of correct and 
complete Return Data for the 
Tax Officer 
- 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
72
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
71 
Sub-objectives Tested/Not 
tested 
Passed/ 
Failed/ 
Scope 
restriction 
Summary of Audit Checks Remarks (Audit 
Findings) 
To ensure the 
correctness of 
Payment of Tax 
Not Tested 
(2) 
Scope 
Restriction 
(2) 
Interest calculation, Late fee 
calculation 
- 
To review the 
working of the 
interfaces 
between 
modules 
Not Tested 
(3) 
Scope 
Restriction 
(3) 
Comparative mechanism 
between filing of GSTR-1 and 
GSTR-3B, Flag mechanism in 
context of refund, System 
testing and integration testing 
as per test plan 
- 
To Review the 
timelines of 
implementation 
of the module 
Not Tested 
(2) 
Scope 
Restriction 
(2) 
Implementation of timelines of 
SRS and RFP  in context of 
Returns, Assessment and 
Scrutiny of Returns module 
into live environment, 
Implementation of risk 
assessment engine 
3.2.2 
The functionalities like tracking of return filing timelines, identification of 
invalid returns, validation of periodicity of return, updation of pending task 
for non-filed return, population of non-filers report for normal taxpayers 
filing GSTR-3B returns etc., were found functional and in order.  Audit, 
however, noticed the following inadequacies: 
3.2.1  Inadequacies in Returns Module  
3.2.1.1 Non-deployment of GSTR-4 return 
The Board vide Notification No. 20/2019-Central Tax dated 23 April 2019 
had introduced the following amendments to the First proviso to Rule 62 
of the CGST Rules, 2017: 
 Form GSTR CMP-08 was introduced for furnishing a statement 
every quarter or, as the case may be, part thereof, containing the 
details of payment of self-assessed tax, till the 18th day of the 
month succeeding such quarter; 
 A new Form GSTR-4 was introduced for every registered person 
paying tax under Section 10 to furnish a return for every financial 
year or, as the case may be, part thereof till the 30 th of April 
following the end of such financial year. 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
73
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
72 
During audit, it was observed that the new Form GSTR-4 has still not been 
deployed in production even though the Board had notified the same in 
April 2019.  
In response to the Audit observation (November 2021), the Ministry stated 
(August 2022) that GSTR-4 Annual Return Form was not part of the RFP 
and was introduced with effect from April 2019. Hence, the development 
of the functionality had been delayed, due to resource crunch at the 
Vendor’s end.  
The Ministry further stated that to address the delay in development of 
the various functionalities in the ACES-GST application, an addendum to 
the existing Contract has been signed with the Vendor on 17/02/2022 as 
per which all the pending tasks would be undertaken on T&M (Time and 
Materials) basis under AGILE mode. Accordingly, the development and 
deployment of GSTR-4 Annual Return has been taken up on priority basis 
and is expected to be completed by October 2022. 
Recommendation 25: The Department should ensure the availability of 
the amended Form GSTR-4. 
3.2.1.2 Incorrect mapping of the ‘Type of Return filed’ with the ‘Type of 
Registration’ 
As per Rule 61(1) of CGST Rules 2017, every registered person other than 
the under mentioned persons shall furnish a return in Form GSTR-3B:  
 Person covered under Section 14 of the IGST Act, 2017 (person who 
is the representative of the overseas supplier in the taxable 
territory)  
 Input Service Distributor 
 Non-Resident Taxable Person 
 Person paying tax under section 10 (Composition Levy Scheme) 
 Person paying tax under Section 51 (Persons who deduct tax at 
Source)  
 Person paying tax under Section 52 (Tax Collection at Source by e-
commerce operator). 
Further, Rule 62 of the CGST Rules, 2017 provides that every registered 
person paying tax under Section 10 should furnish a statement every 
quarter containing the details of payment of self-assessed tax in Form GST  
CMP-08 and furnish a return in Form GSTR-4 for every financial year.   

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
74
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
73 
A random check in the Return Module (‘View Returns’) of the CBIC ACES-
GST application pertaining to three Ranges in Chennai showed that in 8 
cases23, persons who have opted for Composition Levy Scheme were filing 
GSTR-3B. When cross verified with the details in GSTN Portal, it was found 
that in 4 cases there was a mismatch of the Taxpayer Type as they were 
shown as normal taxpayers in the GSTN portal. The incorrect mapping of 
the ‘Type of Return filed’ with the ‘Type of Registration’ in the Return 
Module affects the reliability of the CBIC database.  
Recommendation 26: The Department should initiate corrective action to 
reconcile the data in the CBIC with the data in GSTN and map the correct 
Return type with the Registration Type. 
In response to the audit observation (November 2021), Ministry accepted 
the recommendation (August 2022) and stated that in some cases, the 
type of taxpayer is shown incorrectly as “Composition” in the CBIC 
backend Registration Database. A reconciliation exercise in respect of the 
Registration Database between GSTN and CBIC has been initiated and 
corrective action is being taken to rectify the same in the CBIC database. 
3.2.1.3 Functionality to ‘View Non-filer List’ not enabled for Composition 
Non-filers 
Section 46 of the CGST Act, 2017 read with Rule 68 of the CGST Rules, 
2017 requires issuance of a notice in FORM GSTR-3A to a registered person 
who fails to furnish return under Section 39 or Section 44 or Section 45 
(hereinafter referred to as the “defaulter”) requiring him to furnish such 
returns within fifteen days. Further, Section 62 provides for assessment of 
non-filers of return of registered persons who fails to furnish return under 
Section 39 or Section 45 even after service of notice under Section 46.  
An Advisory 28/2019 dated 18 November 2019 introduced a new 
functionality “View Non-Filers”, wherein the Range Officer can issue 
notices to the non-filers of Returns. Further, the officers at the higher 
formation can view the list of non-filers and GSTR-3A notices are sent to 
such taxpayers.  
Audit noticed that the “View Non-Filers” functionality had been enabled 
only to view non-filers of GSTR-1, GSTR-3B, GSTR-5, GSTR-5A, GSTR-6, 
GSTR-7, GSTR-8 returns. The functionality did not provide for viewing non-
filers of the quarterly returns filed by Composition taxpayers viz., GSTR-4 
(until March 2019) and CMP-08 (from April 2019) returns.  Even the Bulk 
Suo-moto cancellation functionality was also made applicable only to non-
                                                           
23 Verified through the Audit SSOID credentials of Chennai Zone. 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
75
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
74 
filers of GSTR-3B returns and not to the non-filers of GSTR-4 and CMP-08 
returns. As a result, the Range Officers have not initiated effective action 
against non-filers of GSTR-4 and CMP-08 returns as required under Section 
29(2)(b).  
In response to the audit observation (November 2021), the Ministry 
accepted the recommendation (August 2022) and stated that this was due 
to delay in implementation of the functionality, in the front-end by GSTN, 
to issue notice in Form GSTR-3A electronically, to a registered person who 
fails to furnish return. The functionality to “View Non-Filers” was 
developed by DG (Systems), Chennai as an interim measure to issue 
notices by the jurisdictional officers, directly to the taxpayer through email 
through the CBIC backend. However, GSTN implemented the said 
functionality and started issuing GSTR-3A notices directly to the taxpayers 
through the Common Portal to non-filers of GSTR-3B returns.  
Further, GSTN was requested vide mail dated 12/04/2022 to develop and 
deploy the functionality to issue GSTR-3A notices through the common 
portal to non-filers of all types of Returns, including for Composition Non-
filers at an early date. 
Recommendation 27: The Department should enable the issuance of 
GSTR-3A notices through the common portal to non-filers of all types of 
Returns including GSTR-04 and CMP-08. 
3.2.2 Status of Forms functionalities proposed to be developed 
through SRS and Change Requests (CRs) 
The Returns Module SRS v 1.9 was signed off on 12 January 2017. Audit 
was also provided with SRS v 9.2 which was a draft version of the updated 
first version of Returns. This version had undergone many iterations and is 
yet to be signed off.  Audit comments in this respect are as under: 
(i) On a perusal of the functionalities envisaged in signed off SRS V1.9  
vis-à-vis the status report on their implementation (December 
2021), the following is observed:  
 Three functionalities viz. View Functionality of the Forms, Tran-1 
and Tran-2 have been deployed as per the agreed timelines.  
 Three functionalities viz., View Non-Filers, Issue Notice to Non-
Filers (3A Notice) and MIS Reports have been partially deployed.  
 Nine functionalities viz., Defaulters and Non-Filers Workflow, 
Provisional Assessment, Summary Assessment, Assessment of Non 
-Registered users, Risk based Scrutiny, Cross verification of 
TDS/TCS, Filing of final Return and link up with REG-Cancellation 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
76
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
75 
Processes, Invoice matching 24 and Ledger Maintenance for cross 
verification (Cash, ITC, and Liability) have not been deployed in 
production. 
(ii)  SRS on GST_Returns_New_Requirements_V0.6 (signed off on 
7/7/2020), SRS - Return Assessment V.7.0 (signed off on 15/04/2020), 
Scrutiny of Returns V1.2 (signed off on 25.03.2019) and Provisional 
Assessment V0.5 (signed off on 25.03.2019) made available to Audit had 
not been taken up for development. It is pertinent to point out that these 
functionalities were already included in SRS V1.9 and were subsequently 
descoped. 
(iii) The Department developed 54 functionalities by issuing standalone 
Change Requests, out of which 52 are completed and two are Work in 
progress.  
As testing environment was not made available, the functionalities 
deployed in production through SRS and CRs could not be tested. 
Audit observed that certain important functionalities such as Scrutiny of 
Returns, Summary and Provisional Assessment, Risk Assessment Engine, 
Ledger Maintenance etc., had not been developed and the timelines for 
development had not been frozen. 
In response to the audit observation (April 2022), the Ministry stated 
(August 2022) that the functionalities are under development or will be 
taken up shortly under AGILE mode.  
Recommendation 28: Department should prescribe definite timelines for 
the development and deployment of functionalities for effective 
monitoring.  The Department should also ensure that important 
functionalities such as Scrutiny and Assessment, Risk Assessment Engine, 
Ledger Maintenance etc., are developed and deployed in a timely 
manner. 
3.3 Payment Module 
Under the GST regime, tax payments are accounted under the respective 
heads - CGST, SGST and IGST. Salient features of the payment system 
under GST regime are fully electronic, anytime anywhere mode of 
payment, logical tax collection data format, faster remittance, paperless 
transactions, speedy accounting, electronic reconciliation, simplified 
                                                           
24 The legal provisions (under Sections 42, 43 and 43A) relating to the development of a 
functionality for Invoice matching have been omitted from the CGST Act,2017 by Section 107 of 
the Finance Act, 2022 (notified vide Notification No.18/2022-Central Tax dated 28 September 
2022)   

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
77
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
76 
procedure for banks and warehousing of digital challan. The three modes 
of payments are:  
 Payment by taxpayers through internet banking through authorized 
banks and through credit and debit cards.  
 Over the counter (OTC) payment through authorized banks up to 
Rupees Ten Thousand only by challan. 
 Payment through RTGS/NEFT from any bank. 
Table 3.3 - Summarised Audit Finding Matrix 
Sub-objectives Tested/Not 
tested 
Passed/ 
Failed/ 
Scope 
restriction 
Summary of Audit 
Checks 
Remarks (Audit 
Findings) 
To assess the 
adequacy and 
efficacy of data 
transfer and data 
processing 
Tested (4) Passed (2) Issues in appropriate 
user privileges, Data 
consistency in details 
of transactions 
- 
Failed (2) Discrepancies 
noticed, Mismatches 
noticed 
To be covered 
separately in the IT 
Audit of ARPIT 
System 
Not tested 
(1) 
Scope 
restriction 
(1) 
Data transmitted on 
real time basis 
Audit could not 
verify whether the 
raw payment data 
is flowing through 
API 
To see whether the 
MIS reports are 
accurate and can be 
relied upon 
Not Tested 
(2) 
Scope 
restriction 
(2) 
Relevance of MIS 
reports, 
Authentication of 
reports generated 
MIS Reports could 
not be checked due 
to non-facilitation 
of Testing 
environment 
To ensure that 
functionalities and 
validations are in 
accordance with the 
provisions of law.  
Tested (1) Failed (1) Validations as per 
the provisions of Law 
3.3.1 
As per Payment SRS Version 4.4a, a total of 12 functionalities were to be 
deployed.  Audit found that the Department had not deployed certain 
major functionalities in production.  Further, it was noticed that the 
Department (August 2018) had initially deployed the functionality only to 
view the Ledgers and subsequently it provided (November 2018) an 
additional functionality (Advisory No. 3 dated 13 November 2018) “Sync 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
78
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
77 
with GSTN” as the existing functionality to view Ledgers was not getting 
updated, resulting in data gaps in the Ledgers. Through the “Sync with 
GSTN” functionality, the user would fetch the updated ledger details on 
real time basis from GSTN; as and when ’’Sync with GSTN” function is 
invoked as a result of which the Ledger details would be permanently 
updated and made available to the field formations. The working of the 
view and sync functionality were randomly checked through Audit SSOID 
and no deviations were noticed. Barring the above two, the remaining 
functionalities were not developed. 
The non-development of the functionalities envisaged in the SRS and an 
additional finding relating to validation failure in respect of Over the 
Counter (OTC) payments are detailed below: 
3.3.1 Removal of validation control without amending the CGST Rules: 
Inconsistencies in Over the Counter (OTC) Payment mode 
As per Rule 87(3) of CGST Rules, 2017 ibid, OTC payments through 
authorised banks can be made for deposits up to ten thousand rupees per 
challan per tax period, by cash, cheque or demand draft. The limit of ten 
thousand does not apply to deposits made by: 
 Government Departments or any other deposit to be made by 
persons as may be notified by the Commissioner in this behalf; 
 Proper officer or any other officer authorised to recover 
outstanding dues from any person, whether registered or not, 
including recovery made through attachment or sale of movable or 
immovable properties; 
 Proper officer or any other officer authorised for the amounts 
collected by way of cash, cheque or demand draft during any 
investigation or enforcement activity or any ad hoc deposit. 
Audit noticed that payments exceeding Rupees Ten thousand were 
allowed to be made through OTC payment mode by the taxpayers other 
than the permitted categories, which is in contravention to the provisions 
of the CGST Rules.  It was also noticed that the common portal is permitting 
generation of challans for deposits exceeding Rupees Ten Thousand 
through OTC Payment mode. 
Based on the audit findings, GSTN has complied with the provisions of the 
CGST Act, 2017 by restricting the OTC payments to Rupees Ten Thousand 
only. 
 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
79
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
78 
3.4 Data Migration from ACES 
As per SRS Technical Document Version 1.1 dated 12 June 2018 on ‘ACES 
to GST Migration’, the business objective of the data migration project was 
to move the dataset of interest from the source system (ACES) to the 
target system (ACES-GST), while improving data accuracy and maintaining 
business continuity. The Data Migration process involved the following 
steps viz., Analysis of Business Impact, Information Gathering, Mapping 
and Designing, Plan of Migration, Provisioning, Test Migration, Migration 
and Validation. The following were the tasks envisaged during the Data 
Migration process. 
 Tasks shown against the assesses under pre-GST (146 
Commissionerate) to be migrated to post-GST (107 
Commissionerate) setup. 
 Tasks pending under ACES Application at the time of ACES-Sunset 
to be carried forward under the Integrated CBIC ACES-GST 
Application intact. 
 Policy decision taken for deemed closure (i.e., backend closure) of 
certain pre-identified tasks (e.g., Single premises registration 
application pending as on 30th June 2017) to be implemented 
 Policy decision for online processing and closure (i.e., frontend 
closure) of certain identified tasks (e.g., centralized service tax 
registration pending with Commissioner as on 30th June 2017) 
 Scrutiny of CE and ST returns pending in respect of Pre-GST period 
to be carried forward and the Departmental user to be enabled to 
continue to attend to this task 
 List of pending tasks to be generated Module-wise, CDR-wise on 
one-time basis as on 30 June 2017 (in respect of pre-GST 
formations) and as on 30 June 2018 (in respect of post-GST 
formations) and to be shared with all 
Zones/Commissionerates/Divisions/Ranges authorities for 
expediting processing and completion of tasks.  
Table 3.4 - Summarised Audit Finding Matrix 
Sub-objectives Tested/Not 
tested 
Passed/ Failed/ 
Scope restriction 
Summary of 
Audit Checks 
Remarks 
(Audit 
Findings) 
To ensure that 
data is migrated 
Tested (7) Passed (1) Documents on 
policy decision 
- 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
80
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
79 
Sub-objectives Tested/Not 
tested 
Passed/ Failed/ 
Scope restriction 
Summary of 
Audit Checks 
Remarks 
(Audit 
Findings) 
completely Scope Restriction 
(6) 
Completion of 
data migration, 
Review of the 
table structures 
and Mapping of 
ACES and ACES - 
GST Table, MIS 
Reports, 
validation of the 
migrated data 
3.4 
Maintain the 
business 
continuity in 
ACES - CBIC GST 
application for 
the products 
not subsumed 
under GST 
Not tested (3) (Scope restriction) 
(3) 
Provisional 
assessment 
module, 
Payments, refund 
and Claims and 
intimations 
modules.  
 
In order to gain assurance on the correctness and completeness of the 
data migration process envisaged in the Technical Document, audit had 
requisitioned (09/02/2021) for reports and documents pertaining to the 
data migration viz., Data migration plan, Test Migration Reports, Validation 
and Completion Reports, Details of the commencement and completion of 
data migration, Error logs, etc.  
On an examination of the documents which were made available to audit, 
the following were noticed: 
As per SRS Technical Document Version 1.1 dated 12 June 2018 on ‘ACES 
to GST Migration’, the business objective of the data migration project was 
to move the dataset of interest from the source system (ACES) to the 
target system (ACES-GST), while improving data accuracy and maintaining 
business continuity.  
The Department had stated (May 2021) that 4,45,752 Central Excise (CE) 
and 37,12,710 Service Tax (ST) payers had been successfully migrated from 
ACES to ACES-GST application. The Department in its reply (March 2022) 
stated that the actual migration was carried out based on the detailed 
migration plan contained in the Technical Document which formed the 
basis for the work breakdown structure along with the timelines for 
monitoring purpose. The Department further stated that the data 
migration was accepted as complete, based on the data count of selected 
fields in the validation reports pertaining to the representative data of 4 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
81
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
80 
Zones viz., Chennai, Pune, Meerut, and Guwahati, in which no deviations 
were noticed in the data count.  
Audit observed that the four sample representative zones had been 
selected geographically across the field formations of CBIC. Data migration 
was validated to be complete relying entirely on the validation reports of 
these four sample representative zones. However, Audit could not 
independently verify the veracity of these reports as well as the business 
continuity in ACES-GST Application for notified, non-GST goods since the 
testing environment was not facilitated. 
 
3.5 Refund Module 
The GSTN Common Portal developed by GSTN acts as the front-end portal 
for the taxpayers for refund.  A taxpayer/dealer/firm applies to the GSTN 
common portal for refund and submits the refund claim in the formats 
prescribed along with the supporting documents. These are made 
available through API in the CBIC ACES-GST Application to the 
departmental officers to process the refund applications which they may 
approve/reject/ask for query related to the refund claims.  
Table 3.5 - Summarised Audit Finding Matrix 
Sub-objectives Tested/Not 
tested 
Passed/ 
Failed/ Scope 
restriction 
Summary of Audit Checks Remarks 
(Audit 
Findings) 
Whether the 
system 
displaying 
Taxpayer refund 
application in 
the Refund 
Module CBIC 
Backend  and 
providing option 
to Tax Officer to 
process refund 
request and the 
approval of the 
same 
Tested (35) Passed (33) Transmission of application data, 
Creation of tasks, Checking of 
refund application, RFD 02 and 
RFD 03, Colour coding flag, RFD 
06, Archive of Refund application, 
Issuance of show cause notice, 
Adjustment of liabilities, 
Sanctioning of provisional refund, 
Status of recovery, RFD 05, 
Navigation to details screen, 
Uploading of supportive 
documents, PMT-03, Option of 
“Convert ARN details to PDF” 
- 
Failed (2) Availability of adequate 
functionalities, Adjustment of 
Outstanding demand, Refund 
withhold functionality 
3.5.1 
3.5.2 
3.5.3 
3.5.4 
Not Tested 
(39) 
Scope 
Restriction 
Reallocation of application, Re-
credited of refund claim, 
Availability of RFD-09, Payment 
- 
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
80 
Zones viz., Chennai, Pune, Meerut, and Guwahati, in which no deviations 
were noticed in the data count.  
Audit observed that the four sample representative zones had been 
selected geographically across the field formations of CBIC. Data migration 
was validated to be complete relying entirely on the validation reports of 
these four sample representative zones. However, Audit could not 
independently verify the veracity of these reports as well as the business 
continuity in ACES-GST Application for notified, non-GST goods since the 
testing environment was not facilitated. 
 
3.5 Refund Module 
The GSTN Common Portal developed by GSTN acts as the front-end portal 
for the taxpayers for refund.  A taxpayer/dealer/firm applies to the GSTN 
common portal for refund and submits the refund claim in the formats 
prescribed along with the supporting documents. These are made 
available through API in the CBIC ACES-GST Application to the 
departmental officers to process the refund applications which they may 
approve/reject/ask for query related to the refund claims.  
Table 3.5 - Summarised Audit Finding Matrix 
Sub-objectives Tested/Not 
tested 
Passed/ 
Failed/ Scope 
restriction 
Summary of Audit Checks Remarks 
(Audit 
Findings) 
Whether the 
system 
displaying 
Taxpayer refund 
application in 
the Refund 
Module CBIC 
Backend  and 
providing option 
to Tax Officer to 
process refund 
request and the 
approval of the 
same 
Tested (35) Passed (33) Transmission of application data, 
Creation of tasks, Checking of 
refund application, RFD 02 and 
RFD 03, Colour coding flag, RFD 
06, Archive of Refund application, 
Issuance of show cause notice, 
Adjustment of liabilities, 
Sanctioning of provisional refund, 
Status of recovery, RFD 05, 
Navigation to details screen, 
Uploading of supportive 
documents, PMT-03, Option of 
“Convert ARN details to PDF” 
- 
Failed (2) Availability of adequate 
functionalities, Adjustment of 
Outstanding demand, Refund 
withhold functionality 
3.5.1 
3.5.2 
3.5.3 
3.5.4 
Not Tested 
(39) 
Scope 
Restriction 
Reallocation of application, Re-
credited of refund claim, 
Availability of RFD-09, Payment 
- 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
82
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
81 
Sub-objectives Tested/Not 
tested 
Passed/ 
Failed/ Scope 
restriction 
Summary of Audit Checks Remarks 
(Audit 
Findings) 
(39) disbursement workflow, E-
signature of tax officer, Payment 
Advice details, Updation of 
Ledgers, Error task list, 
Functionalities in Administrator 
screen, Assesse master table, 
Consideration of Original 
payment advice details, Alert 
notifications, Sending of assesse 
master data by GSTN, MIS 
Reports  
On examination of whether the functionalities of the refund module were 
developed as per requirement of law, audit noticed that the forms related 
to the processing of Refund applications i.e., Form- GST RFD-01 Online 
application for refund filed by the tax payer, Form- GST RFD-02- 
Acknowledgment, Form- GST RFD-03- Deficiency Memo, Form- GST RFD-04 
- Provisional Refund Order, Form- GST RFD-06- Refund Sanction/Rejection 
Order, Form GST RFD-05 Payment Order, Form- GST RFD-08- Notice for 
rejection of application for refund, Form- GST RFD-09-Reply to show cause 
notice, Form GST-PMT-03 Order for re-credit of the amount to cash or 
credit ledger on rejection of refund claim were mapped and were 
functioning in the application.  
Forms filed by the taxpayers on the GSTN Portal were being successfully 
transmitted to the CBIC ACES-GST portal for backend processing and 
properly landed on the dashboard of the Refund Processing Officer (RPO). 
The functionalities such as issuance of acknowledgement, Deficiency 
Memo, Show Cause Notice (SCN), etc., required for refund processing 
were found to be present and functioning. The functionalities for 
provisional refunds for eligible refund claims, and synchronization of ITC 
ledger and verification by RPO were developed and functioning. However, 
there were some deficiencies as noticed during examination of SRS, testing 
in UAT and output of data queries as reported in the succeeding 
paragraphs. 
3.5.1 Functionality for processing of refund to the notified person in 
CBIC ACES-GST Application was not developed 
As per sub-rule 1 of Rule 95 of CGST Rules, 2017 any person eligible to 
claim refund of tax paid by him (notified persons) on his inward supplies as 
per notification issued under Section 55 of the CGST Act, 2017 shall apply 
for refund once in every quarter electronically on the common GSTN 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
83
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
82 
portal, along with a statement of the inward supplies of goods or services 
or both.  Further, sub-rule 4 of Rule 95 provides that the provisions of Rule 
92 shall, mutatis mutandis, apply for the sanction and payment of refund 
under this rule.  
Scrutiny of SRS (Version 1.4) revealed that the CBIC made a provision to 
process the refund applications filed by notified persons but the same was 
kept on hold with the remarks “To be taken up in future”.  
On being pointed out by Audit (April 2022), the Ministry accepted the para 
and stated (August 2022) that the backend application has not been 
developed as GSTN is yet to share the API for online processing for this 
category of refund claims. Once GSTN develops this functionality at the 
frontend, the same will be developed at the backend also.  
Recommendation 29: The Department should pursue the matter with 
GSTN to develop the functionality for processing the refund applications 
of the UIN category meant for Notified Persons as envisaged in the SRS. 
3.5.2 Functionality for adjustment of outstanding demand under the 
Act or under any existing law in the Provisional Refund order 
(RFD-04) was not developed 
As per sub-section 6 of Section 54 of CGST Act, 2017 notwithstanding 
anything contained in sub-section (5), the proper officer may refund on 
account of zero-rated supply of goods or services or both in case of export 
and on account of supplies to SEZ unit or developer on a provisional basis 
ninety per cent of the total amount so claimed and thereafter make an 
order under sub-section (5) for final settlement of the refund claim after 
due verification of documents furnished by the applicant. 
Further sub-section 10 (b) of Section 54 of CGST Act, 2017 provides that 
the proper officer may deduct from the refund due, any tax, interest, 
penalty, fee or any other amount which the taxable person is liable to pay 
but which remains unpaid under this Act or under the existing law.  
However, in absence of mapping of these provisions of the CGST Act in the 
SRS, the CBIC IT system has not been designed to recover the dues pending 
in Liability Register-II from the refund due the taxpayer. As a result, 
provisional refund up to 90 percent of the refund claim was allowed 
without adjusting the demand. This fact was corroborated with output of 
data query (July 2021), for the period from 01 October 2019 to 31 March 
2021. In 552 cases, provisional refund was sanctioned without adjusting 
the outstanding demand lying pending for recovery in the Liability 
Register-II.   

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
84
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
83 
On being pointed out by Audit (April 2022), the Ministry accepted the para 
and stated (August 2022) that there is no facility for adjustment of liability 
while issuing a Provisional order because this provision is not made 
available in the attributes in the API released by GSTN. If GSTN develops 
any functionality in the GSTN portal, the same will be developed in the 
backend also. 
Recommendation 30: The Department should pursue the matter with 
GSTN to  develop the functionality for either adjustment of outstanding 
demand or at least an alert about such outstanding demand to the 
Proper Officer at the time of sanctioning the provisional refund. 
3.5.3  Functionality in the final refund order for recovery of interest on 
adjustment of outstanding demand under the Act or under any 
existing law was not developed 
Section 50 (1) of CGST Act, 2017 provides that every person who is liable to 
pay tax in accordance with the provisions of this Act or the rules made 
thereunder, but fails to pay the tax or any part thereof to the Government 
within the period prescribed, shall for the period for which the tax or any 
part thereof remains unpaid, pay, on his own, interest at such rate, not 
exceeding eighteen per cent, as may be notified by the Government on the 
recommendations of the Council. Further, Section 50 (2) ibid states that 
the interest under sub-section (1) shall be calculated, in such manner as 
may be prescribed, from the day succeeding the day on which such tax 
was due to be paid. 
During testing of refund backend processes in UAT environment, it was 
noticed that provision of the Act for making adjustment of outstanding 
demand was implemented at the stage of issue of final refund order.  
However, there was no provision for recovery/adjustment of interest on 
payment of outstanding demand (interest from the date of demand raised 
(Demand ID date) to the date of amount adjusted from refund due) from 
the final refund due to the taxpayers as this aspect was not considered 
while preparing the SRS.  This was corroborated with the outcome of the 
data query containing 170 cases for the period from 1 October 2019 to 31 
March 2021 where outstanding demand was adjusted from the final 
refund order (RFD-06) by Refund Processing Officer.  In 52 cases, the delay 
in adjustment of demand from refund sanctioned ranged from 1 to 601 
days.  However, interest for delayed period on the adjusted amount was 
not considered.  In 52 cases, an estimated amount of ₹ 43.05 lakh of 
interest on this account was not considered for levy.  In 61 cases, demand 
ID creation date were not provided while in the remaining 57 cases  the 
demand date and refund sanctioned date was same. 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
85
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
84 
Recommendation 31: The Department should ensure by working with 
GSTN that a functionality is developed and deployed in the system to 
ensure recovery of interest on outstanding demand. 
The Ministry accepted the observation and stated (August 2022) that as 
per the provisions of the existing API provided by GSTN, a liability under 
interest minor head cannot be adjusted against the amount that is 
sanctioned under the Tax minor head as the system disallows such 
adjustment. However, this issue was taken up with GSTN for necessary 
action as per the statutory provisions. 
The contention of Ministry is not acceptable. There is a provision to adjust 
outstanding interest liability against refund due in the refund order. 
However, there is no provision in the system to adjust the interest accrued 
on late adjustment of the outstanding demand for the period from the 
date of demand raised (Demand ID date) to the date of amount adjusted 
from final refund due.  
3.5.4 Refund withhold functionality not developed 
As per sub-section 10 of Section 54 of CGST Act, 2017 where any refund is 
due under sub-section (3) to a registered person who has defaulted in 
furnishing any return or who is required to pay any tax, interest or penalty, 
which has not been stayed by any court, Tribunal or Appellate Authority by 
the specified date, the proper officer may— 
 withhold payment of refund due until the said person has furnished 
the return or paid the tax, interest or penalty, as the case may be; 
 deduct from the refund due, any tax, interest, penalty, fee or any 
other amount which the taxable person is liable to pay but which 
remains unpaid under this Act or under the existing law.  
Further, Section 54 (11) provides that where an order giving rise to a 
refund is the subject matter of an appeal or further proceedings or where 
any other proceedings under this Act is pending and the Commissioner is 
of the opinion that grant of such refund is likely to adversely affect the 
revenue in the said appeal or other proceedings on account of 
malfeasance or fraud committed, he may withhold the refund till such 
time as he may determine. 
During scrutiny of SRS document provided by the Department, it was 
noticed that withhold functionality (RFD-07 Part B) for refund for violation 
of provisions of GST Act has not been implemented so for.  
Recommendation 32: The Department should ensure the development 
and deployment of refund withhold functionality without further delay. 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
86
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
85 
When the observation was pointed out (September 2021) by Audit, the 
Ministry stated (August 2022) that the Refund Withhold functionality had 
been deployed in production on 03.08.2022. 
Implementation of the same will be reviewed in subsequent Audits.    
3.6 Investigation Module  
Investigation was originally conceived as a part of DSR module as per RFP 
but has been developed as a separate module. The processes in the 
investigation module are designed for capturing and effecting the 
procedures from filing of information/intelligence, process of investigation 
and covers till issuance of the SCN and sanction for prosecution. The 
process gets linked to the DSR Module thereon for subsequent functions 
like adjudication of SCN, recovery of dues etc. The investigation module 
captures the procedures involved in investigation of cases by departmental 
officers, for use by Anti-evasion wing and Director General of GST 
Investigation. 
During Audit it was noticed that the development of investigation module 
was planned to be taken up in phases. Phase I comprised recording all the 
investigation activities starting from initiation of the investigation case. 
Investigation processes except Post Investigation, Payment and 
Quantification have been developed in the module. Phase II comprising 
prosecution, compounding, interception of goods in transit is under 
development. 
Table 3.6 - Summarised Audit Finding Matrix 
Sub-objectives Tested/Not 
tested 
Passed/ 
Failed/ 
Scope 
restriction 
Summary of Audit Checks Remarks 
(Audit 
Findings
) 
Whether SRS is 
prepared based 
on the GST Act, 
Rules, 
Notifications, 
Departmental 
Instructions 
and Circulars? 
Tested (24) Passed 
(20) 
Generation of GST INS-01 to 05, Safe 
upkeep of goods, Inventory of seized 
goods, Capturing the details of 
payment, bond/security,  Investigation 
register, Acceptance and Authorisation 
of Intelligence Information, System 
Reports, ACL , Workflow, Issuance of 
Incident/Offence/Investigation Report 
and SCN, 335J register 
- 
Failed (4) Validating the condition of returning 
document, Capturing the details if no 
notice is issued, Time-limits for release 
of goods, Special audit, Specific role 
matrix 
2.5.3 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
87
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
86 
Sub-objectives Tested/Not 
tested 
Passed/ 
Failed/ 
Scope 
restriction 
Summary of Audit Checks Remarks 
(Audit 
Findings
) 
Whether Forms 
and 
functionalities 
relating to 
Investigation 
are generated 
as per SRS? 
Tested (150) Passed 
(133) 
Uploading of the cases booked before 
go-live of the module, Investigation 
team, Communication with taxpayer, 
GSTI-01, Investigation admn, Setup of 
command chain officers,  Mandatory 
case lead, Additional officer in 
investigation module, To fill the fields 
"Source of Information" and 
"Command Chain", Higher authorities 
to approve/reject/clarify the 
investigating proposal, Updation of  
search and seizure results, Availability 
of historical data,  Authorisation and 
Revocation, Transfer of case and files, 
History of officers, Read-only access to 
the Grant/Revoke authorization page, 
Intelligence Officers, Allotment of a 
unique case number, Approval of 
offline cases, Uploading of documents, 
Pulling the information, Unique 
investigation case id, Alert mechanism, 
Forms GSTI-02, 05, 08, 09, Reply from 
the taxpayer, Information to GSTN 
through APIs, Manual mail dispatch, 
Uploading of documents multiple 
times, GSTI-10,   Details of summons, 
INS-01and 01A, Search forms and 
search proceedings, INS-02, 
Connection of seizure proceeding to 
search proceedings,  Details of 
execution, Mahazar, Recording, 
Prohibition proceedings, INS-03, 
Release Proceedings, Validation 
certificate, To close proceedings 
action, INS-04, INS-05A, Arrest 
proceedings, GSTI-11, 12, 15, 16, and 
26, Bail proceedings, GSTI-13, 14, 17, 
18 and 20, Pre-population of data, 
SCN, Authority to give instructions, 
Notifications, Investigation case quick 
overview, Auto-updation,  Closing the 
case file, Granting/revoking 
authorization facility to Investigation 
Admn, Transfering of files, To review 
the cases, Saving the review meetings,  
Initiating duplicate proposal for 
different GSTIN for the same case 
chain 
- 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
88
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
87 
Sub-objectives Tested/Not 
tested 
Passed/ 
Failed/ 
Scope 
restriction 
Summary of Audit Checks Remarks 
(Audit 
Findings
) 
Failed (17) Functions relating to reward, 
Prosecution and compounding 
offences, DRC-03, DRC-04, Accessing / 
viewing post investigation activities, 
Trigger mechanism of the summons 
proceeding,  Filling payments and 
quantifications, GSTI-19 Recovery 
Details, Closing of investigation, 
Capturing the information of SCN 
issued, GSTI-21, GSTI-22, 
Communications validated by digital 
signatures, Data retention 
2.5.4.1 
3.12.2 
 
Not Tested (9) Could not 
be verified 
(9) 
Transferring of Investigation cases, 
Remote Investigation task assignment, 
Assigning the task, Remote jurisdiction 
officer 
- 
Whether any 
interface 
mechanisms 
other than 
GSTN have 
been designed 
and 
implemented 
specific to 
Investigation 
Module? 
Tested (1) Failed (1) Interface with any other external 
system specifically related to 
investigation issues 
4.2 
 
3.7 Dispute Settlement and Resolution (DSR) module 
The processes in the DSR module were to be designed for capturing and 
effecting the procedures under the spectrum of activities involving the 
issue of SCNs/Statement of Demands (SODs), Adjudication of SCNs/SODs, 
Appeals, Review and Revision till the recovery of dues in the lifecycle of a 
dispute. 
3.7.1 Adjudication Module  
The adjudication module was required to capture the procedures involved 
in issuing notice for demand and adjudicating the same by departmental 
officers empowered for adjudication - Range Officers to Commissioner, 
Director General of GST Investigation, Anti-evasion and Audit wings.  
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
87 
Sub-objectives Tested/Not 
tested 
Passed/ 
Failed/ 
Scope 
restriction 
Summary of Audit Checks Remarks 
(Audit 
Findings
) 
Failed (17) Functions relating to reward, 
Prosecution and compounding 
offences, DRC-03, DRC-04, Accessing / 
viewing post investigation activities, 
Trigger mechanism of the summons 
proceeding,  Filling payments and 
quantifications, GSTI-19 Recovery 
Details, Closing of investigation, 
Capturing the information of SCN 
issued, GSTI-21, GSTI-22, 
Communications validated by digital 
signatures, Data retention 
2.5.4.1 
3.12.2 
 
Not Tested (9) Could not 
be verified 
(9) 
Transferring of Investigation cases, 
Remote Investigation task assignment, 
Assigning the task, Remote jurisdiction 
officer 
- 
Whether any 
interface 
mechanisms 
other than 
GSTN have 
been designed 
and 
implemented 
specific to 
Investigation 
Module? 
Tested (1) Failed (1) Interface with any other external 
system specifically related to 
investigation issues 
4.2 
 
3.7 Dispute Settlement and Resolution (DSR) module 
The processes in the DSR module were to be designed for capturing and 
effecting the procedures under the spectrum of activities involving the 
issue of SCNs/Statement of Demands (SODs), Adjudication of SCNs/SODs, 
Appeals, Review and Revision till the recovery of dues in the lifecycle of a 
dispute. 
3.7.1 Adjudication Module  
The adjudication module was required to capture the procedures involved 
in issuing notice for demand and adjudicating the same by departmental 
officers empowered for adjudication - Range Officers to Commissioner, 
Director General of GST Investigation, Anti-evasion and Audit wings.  

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
89
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
88 
The adjudication module comprises three parts - issue of SCNs, 
Adjudication and issue of OIO represented by forms DRC-01, DRC-02, DRC-
03, DRC-04, DRC-05, DRC-06, DRC-07 and DRC 08. 
While SCNs can arise out of summary assessment, scrutiny, audit including 
special audit, refund and anti-evasion, the functionality of issue of SCNs 
arising for Refund and Anti-evasion have only been rolled out. For issuance 
of OIO, all forms stated above, except DRC-02, have been rolled out. 
Additionally, the processes for fixing of Personal Hearing and transfer of 
cases in and out of Call book have also been rolled out. 
Table 3.7 - Summarised Audit Finding Matrix 
Sub-objectives Tested/Not 
tested 
Passed/ 
Failed/ 
Scope 
restriction 
Summary of Audit Checks Remarks 
(Audit 
Findings) 
Whether SRS is 
prepared based 
on the GST Act, 
Rules, 
Notifications, 
Departmental 
Instructions and 
Circulars? 
Tested (50) Passed (46) SCN related issues, Rectification of 
orders, Dispute Lifecycle Register, 
Unconfirmed Demand, Confirmed 
Demand, Recovery, Voluntary 
Payment, Appeals Registers, ACL, 
Delegation of powers, Liability 
Register Part-II, Personal Hearing 
Details, Generation of Form DRC-01, 
02, 04, 05, 07, 20, Extension of time 
for payment, Jurisdictional authority, 
Checking for the taxable person to 
be a defaulter, On-going recovery 
process 
 - 
Failed (4) Monthly Installments, DRC-21 with 
digital signatures  
3.7.3.1 
3.12.2 
Whether Forms 
and 
functionalities 
relating to 
Dispute 
Resolution are 
generated as per 
SRS? 
Tested 
(135) 
Passed (98) Drafting SCN, Delegation of powers, 
Submission for approval, Authority to 
approve/reject/modify the draft, 
Initiation of order/rectification, 
Rectification of order, Personal 
hearing details, Forwarding SCN to 
the GSTN, Unique reference number, 
DRC-01, Capturing of data on 
generation of SCN, Unconfirmed 
demand register, Entering the details 
of offline issue of SCN, Forwarding 
SCN to the adjudicating authority, 
 - 
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
88 
The adjudication module comprises three parts - issue of SCNs, 
Adjudication and issue of OIO represented by forms DRC-01, DRC-02, DRC-
03, DRC-04, DRC-05, DRC-06, DRC-07 and DRC 08. 
While SCNs can arise out of summary assessment, scrutiny, audit including 
special audit, refund and anti-evasion, the functionality of issue of SCNs 
arising for Refund and Anti-evasion have only been rolled out. For issuance 
of OIO, all forms stated above, except DRC-02, have been rolled out. 
Additionally, the processes for fixing of Personal Hearing and transfer of 
cases in and out of Call book have also been rolled out. 
Table 3.7 - Summarised Audit Finding Matrix 
Sub-objectives Tested/Not 
tested 
Passed/ 
Failed/ 
Scope 
restriction 
Summary of Audit Checks Remarks 
(Audit 
Findings) 
Whether SRS is 
prepared based 
on the GST Act, 
Rules, 
Notifications, 
Departmental 
Instructions and 
Circulars? 
Tested (50) Passed (46) SCN related issues, Rectification of 
orders, Dispute Lifecycle Register, 
Unconfirmed Demand, Confirmed 
Demand, Recovery, Voluntary 
Payment, Appeals Registers, ACL, 
Delegation of powers, Liability 
Register Part-II, Personal Hearing 
Details, Generation of Form DRC-01, 
02, 04, 05, 07, 20, Extension of time 
for payment, Jurisdictional authority, 
Checking for the taxable person to 
be a defaulter, On-going recovery 
process 
 - 
Failed (4) Monthly Installments, DRC-21 with 
digital signatures  
3.7.3.1 
3.12.2 
Whether Forms 
and 
functionalities 
relating to 
Dispute 
Resolution are 
generated as per 
SRS? 
Tested 
(135) 
Passed (98) Drafting SCN, Delegation of powers, 
Submission for approval, Authority to 
approve/reject/modify the draft, 
Initiation of order/rectification, 
Rectification of order, Personal 
hearing details, Forwarding SCN to 
the GSTN, Unique reference number, 
DRC-01, Capturing of data on 
generation of SCN, Unconfirmed 
demand register, Entering the details 
of offline issue of SCN, Forwarding 
SCN to the adjudicating authority, 
 - 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
90
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
89 
Sub-objectives Tested/Not 
tested 
Passed/ 
Failed/ 
Scope 
restriction 
Summary of Audit Checks Remarks 
(Audit 
Findings) 
DRC-03, Alert mechanism, DRC-06, 
Personal Hearing Number and data, 
Assigning Personal Hearing, 
Reminder mechanism, Liability 
register - II, DRC-03, DRC-04, DRC-05, 
Voluntary payment register, 
Concluding the proceedings, 
Confirmed Demand, DRC-07, 
Creation of an OIO, Communication 
with the taxpayer, DRC-02, Call Book, 
De novo adjudication procedures, 
Data retention for the requisite 
period 
Failed (37) Recovery Register, Dispute lifecycle 
register, Tax rates, Interest and 
penalty, Periodic issue of the SCN, 
DRC-02, Attachment of digital 
signature, Calculation of time limit 
for issuing of SCN, Getting the details 
of DRC-03 by audit admin, Updation 
of the recovery register, Attachment 
of Digital signature of the issuing 
authority with the OIO and DRC-07, 
Updation of demand on filing appeal, 
Calculation of interest and penalty by 
DRC-01, DRC-02 contains the details 
of GSTIN  
3.7.1.1 
3.7.1.2 
3.12.2 
3.12.3 
 
  
Not Tested 
(12) 
Scope 
Restriction 
(12) 
Limitation of 30 days for verification 
of DRC-03, Forwarding the DRC-04 
and DRC-05 to the GSTN, To pull case 
reference number for the DRC-05 
generated and pushed to the GSTN, 
Creation of one OIO based on 
multiple SCNs, Issuance of an OIO 
where DRC-06 is not received, 
Authority of approval to 
approve/modify/delete the OIO 
- 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
91
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
90 
Sub-objectives Tested/Not 
tested 
Passed/ 
Failed/ 
Scope 
restriction 
Summary of Audit Checks Remarks 
(Audit 
Findings) 
created, Enforcement of time limit of 
issuing OIO from the date of issuing 
SCNs 
During audit, the following observations were noticed: 
3.7.1.1 Absence of Dispute Lifecycle Register   
As per SRS, a Dispute Lifecycle Register was envisaged as part of the DSR 
module. It was to contain details of five registers: Unconfirmed Demand 
Register, Confirmed Demand Register, Appeal Register, Recovery Register 
and a Voluntary Payment Register.  
Audit observed that the Dispute Lifecycle Register was not developed till 
date and therefore the system presented a fragmented view of a dispute 
case. Currently, only isolated archive lists are maintained in Appeals and 
Recovery modules. It is also not clear whether data in these archive lists 
would be ported to the Dispute Lifecycle Register, when it is developed. 
The audit could not ascertain whether retrieval tests of data from archive 
lists were carried out. 
Continued delay in developing the Dispute Lifecycle Register has an 
inherent risk of data of cases accumulating in the system without a 
lifecycle view.  
Recommendation 33: The Department should ensure the development of 
the dispute lifecycle register under the DSR (Adjudication) module.  
When the observation was pointed out (September 2021) by Audit, the 
Ministry stated (August 2022) that the Dispute Life Cycle Register will be 
developed after the development of all functionalities in various modules. 
3.7.1.2 Absence of mechanism for monitoring due dates 
As per Section 73 and 74 of the CGST Act, 2017, adjudication order for tax 
not paid or short paid or erroneously refunded shall be issued within a 
period of three years from the due date of furnishing of annual return or 
date of erroneous refund, as may be applicable and in case of wilful 
misstatement, the period for issue of adjudication order extends to five 
years. The SCN in respect of these cases should be issued at least three 
months prior to the due date prescribed for the adjudication order. 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
92
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
91 
Further, the GST council can change the date of furnishing the annual 
return for the given financial year.  
Audit found that there was no in-built mechanism for modifying/updating 
these due dates, including revision/extension mandated by law/GST 
Council. A test check of data on grievance tickets pertaining to the period 
from January 2021 to July 2021 indicated that officers were not able to 
issue demand notices (in Form DRC-01) under Section 73 due to lack of this 
functionality. 
Recommendation 34: The Department should discuss the technical 
feasibility of development of a mechanism to modify/update the dates in 
integration with Returns module and develop a mechanism for same in 
the module. 
In response to the audit observation (September 2021), the Ministry 
stated (August 2022) that the tickets pertaining to the difficulty faced by 
the officer in generating DRC-01 during Jan 2021 to July 2021 was not due 
to non-availability of the functionality for modifying/updating the due 
dates. All the tickets have been resolved. Further, the technical feasibility 
for integrating DRC-01 functionality with returns module for automating 
the due dates will be studied. 
3.7.2 Appeal, Review and Revision module  
The Appeal module encompasses the processes of a) Review and Revision 
at the Commissionerate level for orders passed by Departmental officers 
b) filing of appeals before the Commissioner (Appeals) - either by the 
Department or by the taxpayer c) passing of Order in-Appeal by the 
Commissioner (Appeals) and adjunct procedure and d) capturing of details 
of appeals filed at the Appellate Tribunals, High Courts or the Supreme 
Court etc. 
The Appeal module was taken up in phases. Phase I functionalities related 
to work under First Appellate Authority (APL 01 to 04) and Review of 
Adjudication Orders have been rolled out. Phase II functionalities with 21 
Use Cases, Final Version - Revision process and remand instruction order 
(APL 05 to 08, RVN 01) are under development. 
Table 3.8 - Summarised Audit Finding Matrix 
Sub-objectives Tested/Not 
tested 
Passed/ 
Failed/ 
Scope 
restriction 
Summary of Audit Checks Remarks 
(Audit 
Findings) 
Whether SRS is Tested (12) Passed (12) Form GST APL 02, Appeal filed  - 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
93
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
92 
Sub-objectives Tested/Not 
tested 
Passed/ 
Failed/ 
Scope 
restriction 
Summary of Audit Checks Remarks 
(Audit 
Findings) 
prepared based on 
the GST Act, Rules, 
Notifications, 
Departmental 
Instructions and 
Circulars? 
treatment, prevalent 
conditions before filing an 
appeal, Revisional Authority 
process, Delegation of powers, 
FORM GST APL-04, Appeals 
Register to record 
chronological events in appeal, 
Adherence of timelines 
Whether Forms and 
functionalities 
relating to Appeals 
are generated as per 
SRS? 
Tested (12) Passed (5) Appeals module form a part of 
DSR Phase I (Priority 1), 
Functional requirement of 
Appeals, De-novo functionality 
from Appeals, Refunds 
integration, Data retention 
 - 
Failed (7) Recovery register, Mode of 
filing of appeal on refund 
order, Timeline for Review, 
Authority to view of UCD and 
CD Register and liability 
register. 
 
3.7.1.1 
3.7.2.1 
3.7.2.2 
 
During the course of audit, the following observations in respect of the 
Appeal, Review and Revision Module were noticed:  
3.7.2.1 Manual filing of appeal on refund order 
As per the SRS, based on the decision of the Commissioner (Review), the 
workflow involves two options that of accepting the order and filing an 
appeal. The envisaged workflow is functioning for review of demand 
orders, except in the case of review of refund orders, which requires 
manual intervention.  
During audit, it was noticed that the process of review of refund order is 
created online but after the review process, the officer has to file the 
appeal against refund orders manually, which is not consistent with the 
SRS provision. 
When the observation was pointed out (September 2021) by Audit, the 
Ministry stated (August 2022) that functionalities of (i) APL-03 and (ii) 
Filing of appeal against refund order had been rolled out. 
Implementation of the same will be reviewed in subsequent Audits. 
 
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
92 
Sub-objectives Tested/Not 
tested 
Passed/ 
Failed/ 
Scope 
restriction 
Summary of Audit Checks Remarks 
(Audit 
Findings) 
prepared based on 
the GST Act, Rules, 
Notifications, 
Departmental 
Instructions and 
Circulars? 
treatment, prevalent 
conditions before filing an 
appeal, Revisional Authority 
process, Delegation of powers, 
FORM GST APL-04, Appeals 
Register to record 
chronological events in appeal, 
Adherence of timelines 
Whether Forms and 
functionalities 
relating to Appeals 
are generated as per 
SRS? 
Tested (12) Passed (5) Appeals module form a part of 
DSR Phase I (Priority 1), 
Functional requirement of 
Appeals, De-novo functionality 
from Appeals, Refunds 
integration, Data retention 
 - 
Failed (7) Recovery register, Mode of 
filing of appeal on refund 
order, Timeline for Review, 
Authority to view of UCD and 
CD Register and liability 
register. 
 
3.7.1.1 
3.7.2.1 
3.7.2.2 
 
During the course of audit, the following observations in respect of the 
Appeal, Review and Revision Module were noticed:  
3.7.2.1 Manual filing of appeal on refund order 
As per the SRS, based on the decision of the Commissioner (Review), the 
workflow involves two options that of accepting the order and filing an 
appeal. The envisaged workflow is functioning for review of demand 
orders, except in the case of review of refund orders, which requires 
manual intervention.  
During audit, it was noticed that the process of review of refund order is 
created online but after the review process, the officer has to file the 
appeal against refund orders manually, which is not consistent with the 
SRS provision. 
When the observation was pointed out (September 2021) by Audit, the 
Ministry stated (August 2022) that functionalities of (i) APL-03 and (ii) 
Filing of appeal against refund order had been rolled out. 
Implementation of the same will be reviewed in subsequent Audits. 
 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
94
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
93 
3.7.2.2 Absence of timeline for Review  
As per sub-rule (A) of Rule 109 of CGST Rules, 2017, any person aggrieved 
by any decision or order passed under the Act has a time limit of three 
months to file an appeal. Similarly, the Department has a timeframe of six 
months to file an appeal.  
During audit, it was noticed that the Appeal module is developed as per 
provisions and in the way that taxpayer and departmental officers cannot 
file an appeal through the system after three months and six months 
respectively. However, there is no mechanism built in the system to alert 
the user to complete the prescribed process of Review, which has a 
potential risk exposure of delays in the review process that can impact the 
statutory timeline prescribed for appeal.  
In response to the audit observation (September 2021), the Department 
replied (December 2021) that the CGST ACT/Rules only prescribes timeline 
for filing appeals before appropriate appellate forums, which has been 
built in the application; however, no separate timeframe has been 
prescribed for review of adjudication or appeal orders. DG (Systems) 
Bengaluru further stated that the audit observation would be 
communicated to the GST policy wing for issuing uniform guidelines to all 
field formations regarding conduct of review in time. 
3.7.3 Recovery module 
Recovery module was to capture the procedures involved in recovery of 
the confirmed demand under GST and legacy regime, which would be used 
by departmental officers empowered for recovery - Range Officers to 
Commissioner, Director General of GST Investigation, Anti-evasion and 
Audit wings.  The process involves the recovery of tax that remains unpaid 
and is payable by the taxpayer on account of scrutiny, assessment, 
adjudication and appeals process. The tax authorities can initiate the 
recovery process by adopting various modes of recoveries as provided in 
the GST laws.  
Table 3.9 - Summarised Audit Finding Matrix 
Sub-
objectives 
Tested/Not 
tested 
Passed/ 
Failed/ 
Scope 
restriction 
Summary of Audit Checks Remarks 
(Audit 
Findings) 
DRC-20 and 
DRC-21 
Tested (39) Passed (22) Filling the Form DRC-20, Mechanism 
to address the jurisdictional 
authority,  Checking for installment 
amount less than twenty-five 
thousand rupees, Checking 
- 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
95
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
94 
Sub-
objectives 
Tested/Not 
tested 
Passed/ 
Failed/ 
Scope 
restriction 
Summary of Audit Checks Remarks 
(Audit 
Findings) 
authorised officer, Application for 
deferred payment / payment in 
installment lands at the CBIC - GST 
backend application, Valid 
credentials, Recovery status, Initiate 
the input of DRC-07A, Assignment of 
task, "Mark To" option, Drafting 
Jurisdictional report, Landing directly 
in to Jurisdiction report sub tab, 
Working of "PUT UP" functionality, 
Access to view the updated ledgers 
and register in instalment/Deferred 
payment, Availability of case history, 
Visibility of Archive list, View the 
complete details of each DRC-21 
order in Archive 
Failed (17) Suo-moto grants extension of time, 
Checking for authorised issue of 
DRC-21, Checking defaulter, In-built 
mechanism regarding recovery, 
Installment payment in the 
preceding financial year, Updation of 
recovery register, Displays the Work 
List, Viewing the complete order 
details  dispute life cycle, Adding 
new jurisdiction report, Enabling of 
verification report questionnaires, 
Access to view the returns, Demand 
history of the taxpayer, Adding of 
Additional folder “DRC-21” under 
Summary links section, DRC-21 
hyperlink, Trigger mechanism , 
Consideration of default in payment 
3.7.3.1 
Not Tested 
(2) 
Not verified 
(could not be 
verified) (2) 
Checking for monthly installments 
not exceeding twenty-four, Tax 
Payer able to log in GSTN Portal and 
submit Application for deferred 
payment / payment in instalments 
(DRC-20)  
- 
DRC-07A Tested (8) Passed (7) Procedure for recovery of dues 
under existing laws, Posting of 
demand of the order, Entering the 
data under the Legacy Arrears 
model, Initiating the input of DRC-
07A into system, Updating the 
Demand History and ECL, Integration 
of generated Demand ID/Recovery 
- 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
96
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
95 
Sub-
objectives 
Tested/Not 
tested 
Passed/ 
Failed/ 
Scope 
restriction 
Summary of Audit Checks Remarks 
(Audit 
Findings) 
ID to other modules like Appeals, 
Only recoverable demands shall be 
posted for recovery under GST laws 
Failed (1) Updation of Recovery Register 3.7.1.1 
DRC-08A Tested (6) Passed (6) Functionality for submitting the 
application forms DRC-08A into CBIC 
portal, Updating the Demand History 
and ECL, Integration of generated 
Demand ID/Recovery ID to other 
modules like Appeals, Amendment 
of the status through FORM GST 
DRC-08A, Uploading of summary on 
the common portal, Updation of 
Part II of Electronic Liability Register 
- 
Recovery module comprises of Recovery and Legacy Arrears represented 
by forms DRC-09 to DRC-25 and DRC-07A, DRC-08A. Functionalities for 
DRC-07A, DRC-08A, DRC-20 and DRC-21 representing two dimensions - 
recovery of legacy arrears (DRC 07A and 08A) and recovery of dues in 
instalments (DRC 20 and 21) had only been rolled out at the time of Audit.  
Integration was in progress for functionalities related to recovery of dues 
from other means - third party, sale of taxable goods, attachment of 
immovable and movable properties, recovery as fine etc., represented by 
forms DRC-9 to DRC-19, DRC-22 to DRC-25. The crucial Recovery register 
had not been developed, though it was envisaged in the SRS.  
When the observation was pointed out by Audit (September 2021), the 
Ministry while accepting the observation stated (August 2022) that 
Recovery process emanating from other sources (DRC Forms 9 to 19, 22 to 
25) had been deployed to production/implemented. The crucial Recovery 
Register would be developed as a part of MIS. 
Implementation of the same will be reviewed in subsequent Audits. 
3.7.3.1 Audit noticed the following gaps in implementation of the 
Recovery module: 
(i) The Demand History Tab had been provided without the hyperlinks 
as envisaged thereby not providing for the detailed: 
 DRC-20 status with instalment payment/deferred payment details 
for Demand ID   

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
97
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
96 
 DRC-21 status with the payment update status in the archive list 
for Demand ID 
 Total Demand, amount paid with balance payable as only Total 
Amount is mentioned 
(ii) Hyperlinks for the General Information of the Taxpayer had also 
not been developed in case of DRC-21  
 Functionality to see details of payments made by the taxpayer in 
instalments in case of DRC-21 had not been implemented  
 Option for creation of New Jurisdiction Report in case of DRC-21 
was not implemented  
 Colour coding to indicate age-wise pendency for processing DRC 20 
(Application for deferred payment/payment in instalments) on the 
worklist dashboard of every officer was not implemented  
In response to the audit observation (September 2021), the Ministry 
accepted (August 2022) the observation.  
3.8 Export Module 
Table 3.10 - Summarised Audit Finding Matrix 
Sub-objectives Tested/Not 
tested 
Passed/ 
Failed/ Scope 
restriction 
Summary of Audit Checks Remarks 
(Audit 
Findings) 
Whether 
functionalities of 
Exports are 
designed and 
implemented as 
envisaged 
Not tested 
(5) 
- Preparation of SRS as per 
Act/Rules/notifications, 
Adherence of timelines, 
SRS implication in forms 
and functionalities, GSTN 
and other interface 
Not 
developed 
yet 
Audit noticed that the development of Export module had not started and 
DG(Systems) was in the discussion stage with Wipro and ICEGATE/ICES 
regarding technical feasibility and process of transferring complete EXIM 
data.  
Recommendation 35: The Department should ensure the development 
and implementation of export module in a timely manner. 
When the observation was pointed out by Audit (April 2022), the Ministry 
stated (August 2022) that they have noted the recommendation for 
compliance.   
 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
98
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
97 
3.9  Audit module  
Table 3.11 - Summarised Audit Finding Matrix 
Sub-objectives Tested/Not 
tested 
Passed/ 
Failed/ Scope 
restriction 
Summary of Audit 
Checks 
Remarks 
(Audit 
Findings) 
Whether 
functionalities of 
Audit Module are 
designed and 
implemented as 
envisaged 
Tested (5) Passed (1) Preparation of SRS as per 
act/rules/notifications 
- 
Scope 
restriction (4) 
Adherence of timelines, 
SRS implication in forms 
and functionalities, GSTN 
and other interface 
3.9 
 
The preparation of SRS for Audit module commenced in May 2017 and the 
module was still under development at the time of Audit.  
When the observation was pointed out by Audit (April 2022), the Ministry 
stated that the Audit module had been rolled out on 1st April 2022.  
The same (Audit module) will be reviewed in subsequent Audits.  
3.10  Taxpayer at Glance - TAG 
Table 3.12 - Summarised Audit Finding Matrix 
Sub-objectives Tested/Not 
tested 
Passed/ 
Failed/ Scope 
restriction 
Summary of Audit Checks Remarks 
(Audit 
Findings) 
Whether 
functionalities of 
TAG module are 
designed and 
implemented as 
envisaged 
Not tested (5) - Preparation of SRS as per 
Act/Rules/notifications, 
Adherence of timelines, 
SRS implication in forms 
and functionalities, GSTN 
and other interface 
Not 
developed 
yet 
Audit noticed that the development of the module had not begun. The 
Department stated that the TAG requirements had been given to the 
Vendor in September 2020 for preparation of SRS. The draft SRS was yet to 
be submitted by the Vendor.  
On this being pointed out by Audit (April 2022), the Ministry while noting 
the recommendation for compliance stated (August 2022) that the 
necessity of TAG’s development would be reviewed as the ADVAIT project 
under DG Systems had already implemented a similar dashboard “Know 
your Taxpayer”. 
 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
99
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
98 
3.11 Mobile Application 
Table 3.13 - Summarised Audit Finding Matrix 
Sub-objectives Tested/Not 
tested 
Passed/ 
Failed/ Scope 
restriction 
Summary of Audit 
Checks 
Remarks 
(Audit 
Findings) 
Whether mobile 
app modules 
are designed 
and 
implemented as 
envisaged 
Tested (5) Passed (1) Preparation of SRS as per 
act/rules/notifications 
- 
Failed (4) Adherence of timelines, 
Coverage of the entire 
spectrum of operations, 
GSTN and other interface 
 
Under 
development 
During audit, it was noticed that the Mobile Application was under 
development. 
Recommendation 36: The Department should ensure the development 
and implementation of mobile application in a timely manner. 
On this being pointed out by Audit (April 2022), the Ministry stated 
(August 2022) that all efforts are being made to accelerate the 
development and deployment of mobile application. 
3.12 Cross-cutting issues 
3.12.1 User activity logs- across modules 
As per the RFP (Clause 7.1 (2 j)), the user activity logs as envisaged should 
provide support for a comprehensive audit trail features in the portal such 
as the following: 
 Daily activities log should be merged into the history log files  
 Date, time and user-stamped transaction checklist should be on-
line generated for different transactions  
 All transaction screens should display system information  
 Daily activity reports should be provided to highlight all the 
transactions being processed during the day  
Audit observed that while the trails of various forms were being 
maintained in the application, the content of individual changes made in 
the forms at various levels of hierarchy in the draft stage were not being 
recorded and stored. An input field ‘Remarks’ exists for recording 
comments at the time of submission/return/delegation of the draft. This 
field for remarks cannot be an alternate mechanism for version control.  

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
100
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
99 
Hence, only the contents of the final approval were recorded and updation 
(additions/deletions/alterations) by the officials preceding the 
approval/rejection of the form were neither mapped to their respective 
SSOID nor formed a part of the record. The version control utility was 
found to be absent in the workflow activity. 
In this regard, an audit observation (September 2021) was issued.  The 
Ministry accepted the para and replied (August 2022) that implementation 
of Version Control functionality as suggested would be taken up subject to 
technical feasibility. 
Recommendation 37: The Department should ensure that the portal can 
capture all changes/alterations or at least significant changes carried out 
by each user in the workflow as part of the user activity logs. 
3.12.2 Non-implementation of Digital signature/e-signature - across 
modules 
Digital Signatures are mandated as a means of authentication of any 
electronic record using an electronic method or procedure, in accordance 
with the provisions of Section 3, Information Technology Act, 2000.  The 
authentication process confirms the identity of a person or proving the 
integrity of information, resulting in non-repudiation - the inability to 
refute responsibility.  
As per Rule 26 (3) of CGST Rules, 2017, all notices, certificates and orders 
under the provisions of Chapter-III of CGST Rules, 2017 shall be issued 
electronically by the proper officer or any other officer authorized to issue 
such notices or certificates or orders, through digital signature certificate 
or through E-signature as specified under the provisions of the Information 
Technology Act, 2000 or verified by any other mode of signature or 
verification as notified by the Board in this behalf. 
Further, the contract concluded with the Vendor (Master Services 
Agreement - MSA) stipulated the following: 
 The technical requirement of Support security protocols, Digital 
Certificates and e-Sign for secure authentication for all the 
communication with the taxpayers are to be complied with (Para 
7.2 of MSA-Non-functional requirements of the solution). 
 The respective modules of the system enabling the use of Digital 
Signatures, for access by the registered taxpayers and 
Departmental users are to be built in the application software (Para 
1.1 (e) of MSA- salient features of ACL). 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
101
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
100 
During the course of Audit, it was observed that Digital Signatures have 
not been incorporated and adopted in any of the modules.  To establish 
this, Audit test checked registration certificates randomly and found that 
the signature/e-Verification code of the proper officer mandated by the 
Rules were not available on the Registration Certificates. Further, in 
respect of Registrations which were deemed approved, though the Proper 
Officer is mandatorily required to authenticate the certificates within three 
days after the stipulated period for deemed approval, there was no 
evidence of such authentication being done by the proper officer.  
In response to the audit observation (September 2021), the Department 
replied (December 2021) that currently server-based DSC is implemented 
and that the issue of digital signature is being worked out in respect of all 
modules and will be implemented soon.  However, in case of deemed 
registration, it was informed that no authentication was required, as they 
were not approved by the proper officer.  
In this connection, on receipt of reply (March 2021), Audit requisitioned 
(June 2021) for copy of the Board’s notification permitting the server level 
authentication/verification of the Registration certificate. However, the 
copy is yet to be made available to audit. 
Further, the Department’s contention that no authentication was required 
for RCs issued under Rule 10(5) is not tenable as the rule clearly specifies 
that registrations which are granted under sub-rule (5) of Rule 9 shall be 
duly signed or verified through electronic verification code and made 
available to the applicant on the common portal, within a period of three 
days after the expiry of the period specified in the rule.  Further, the reply 
that the Board had permitted server based DSC is not acceptable since it is 
not good enough for statutory documents and registration certificates. 
In this regard, the audit observation was issued (April 2022) and the 
Ministry during the exit conference stated (September 2022) that it would 
consider revising its reply (August 2022) “CBIC uses server level 
authentication using SSOID based login”; the same was awaited 
(December 2022). 
The fact remains that the IT Act 2000 and the contract concluded with the 
Vendor (Master Services Agreement - MSA) stipulated digital signature 
functionality or e-signature. Such a DSC or e-signature (typically Aadhaar 
based) confirms the identity of an individual officer in a non-repudiable, 
verifiable manner, which cannot be achieved through server based DSC.   
Recommendation 38: The Department should ensure that the digital 
signature functionality incorporated and adopted in all modules proper 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
102
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
101 
for authentication of statutory documents by an individual officer in a 
non-repudiable manner.  
3.12.3 Manual calculation of interest 
As per Section 73 and 74 read with Section 50 the CGST Act, 2017, interest 
is leviable on delayed payment of tax whenever the demand is recovered.  
Interest shall be calculated from the succeeding the day on which tax was 
due to be paid till the date of payment.  The notified interest rate is 18% 
with effect from 1 July 2017. 
Audit observed that calculation of interest across all modules was 
designed to be done manually exposing it to risk of computation errors.  
Considering that the tax payable is determined once the demand is 
confirmed and interest calculation is typically prone to errors, the best 
practice would have been to incorporate a feature for automating the 
calculation of interest with the requisite details of tax payable, period and 
rate of interest being provided as inputs.   
Recommendation 39: The Department should expedite the development 
of functionality for automated calculation of interest as envisaged. 
In response to the audit observation (September 2021), the Ministry while 
accepting the para stated (August 2022) that the issue was being taken up 
with GSTN. 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
103
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
102 
Chapter IV: Interface with other IT Applications 
The audit objective sought assurance as to whether the technology 
solutions for interfaces with other applications are functioning effectively 
and meeting the business requirements adequately as envisaged. The 
audit checks were devised for all dimensions in terms of documentation, 
effectiveness of integration and functionalities, security and audit trail. 
While visualizing the CBIC ACES-GST Application, it was envisaged that 
CBIC ACES-GST Application will provide interface with other 
systems/applications both internally and externally.  External interfaces 
are to be with GSTN, State Systems, RBI, Banks, DGFT, MCA 21, CBDT, 
UIDAI, ICEGATE, ICES, RMS, ACES, EDW etc.  Internally, the interface is to 
be within different modules of the application. 
4.1 Interface related issues which affected key decisions of the 
Department 
The primary interface of CBIC ACES-GST is with the GST System consumed 
through APIs developed by GSTN.  The data/information relating to a 
taxpayer viz. registration, tax payment, return filed etc., available on GST 
Common Portal will have to flow back and forth on real time basis.   
Based on the substantive testing during Audit using data analysis, interface 
related issues identified during such audits are detailed below: 
 
 
It was observed that the CBIC ACES-GST Application interface with 
GSTN has been established but development of interface mechanisms 
with other external systems and agencies like State Systems, RBI, 
Banks, DGFT, MCA 21, CBDT, UIDAI, ICEGATE, ICES, RMS, 
ACES, EDW etc. has not yet been initiated. 
During the course of Audit, it was observed that there were inadequate 
validation controls while accepting data from common portal in case 
of Aadhaar authentication and implementation of amendments in 
registrations.  
There were instances of mismatch of data between GST common 
portal and CBIC application due to lack of reconciliation.  
Chapter IV: Interface with other IT Applications
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
102 
Chapter IV: Interface with other IT Applications 
The audit objective sought assurance as to whether the technology 
solutions for interfaces with other applications are functioning effectively 
and meeting the business requirements adequately as envisaged. The 
audit checks were devised for all dimensions in terms of documentation, 
effectiveness of integration and functionalities, security and audit trail. 
While visualizing the CBIC ACES-GST Application, it was envisaged that 
CBIC ACES-GST Application will provide interface with other 
systems/applications both internally and externally.  External interfaces 
are to be with GSTN, State Systems, RBI, Banks, DGFT, MCA 21, CBDT, 
UIDAI, ICEGATE, ICES, RMS, ACES, EDW etc.  Internally, the interface is to 
be within different modules of the application. 
4.1 Interface related issues which affected key decisions of the 
Department 
The primary interface of CBIC ACES-GST is with the GST System consumed 
through APIs developed by GSTN.  The data/information relating to a 
taxpayer viz. registration, tax payment, return filed etc., available on GST 
Common Portal will have to flow back and forth on real time basis. 
Based on the substantive testing during Audit using data analysis, interface 
related issues identified during such audits are detailed below: 
 
 
It was observed that the CBIC ACES-GST Application interface with 
GSTN has been established but development of interface mechanisms 
with other external systems and agencies like State Systems, RBI, 
Banks, DGFT, MCA 21, CBDT, UIDAI, ICEGATE, ICES, RMS, 
ACES, EDW etc. has not yet been initiated. 
During the course of Audit, it was observed that there were inadequate 
validation controls while accepting data from common portal in case 
of Aadhaar authentication and implementation of amendments in 
registrations.  
There were instances of mismatch of data between GST common 
portal and CBIC application due to lack of reconciliation.  

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
104
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
103 
4.1.1 Inadequate validation controls resulting in mandatory fields 
displaying blank values  
The SRS Ver.1.0 on ‘Physical verification of Aadhaar linked Registration 
Applications’ specifies that the GST Portal, on the basis of Aadhaar 
verification, will send the registration information to CBIC ACES-GST 
application for further processing as per the scenarios listed below: 
Table 4.1 – Aadhaar Scenarios 
Opt for Aadhaar 
Verification 
Aadhaar Verification Status Mandatory Physical Verification 
Yes Verified No 
Yes Unsuccessful Yes 
No Not Applicable Yes 
Further, the SRS also specifies that the REG-01 New Registration 
applications with failed Aadhaar Verifications/not opted for Aadhaar 
verification will be marked for “Mandatory Physical Verification” at GST 
Portal and needs to be processed only after carrying out Physical 
verification of the premises. 
The above changes in rules were implemented by GSTN (21 August 2020). 
The changes in the API were consumed by CBIC ACES-GST application with 
immediate effect and the ARNs were shown in the dashboards of the CPC 
officers with their status as to whether these ARNs were marked for PV or 
not (DG System Advisory No. 26/2020 dated 12 October 2020). 
Audit examined pan-India data extracted from the CBIC database for 
applications (ARNs) filed between 21 August 2020 and 31 March 2021 for 
which registrations had been granted. In 25,864 cases out of 6,60,263 such 
cases, it was noticed that the mandatory ‘Aadhaar Verification Status’ field 
and the ‘Mandatory Physical Verification’ field displayed a blank value. On 
a test check of 75 cases relating to Chennai for ‘Aadhaar Verification 
Status’ from the GSTN portal, it was observed that in 35 cases the 
verification status was ‘Not Authenticated’ thereby implying mandatory 
physical verification in these cases as per the CGST Rules.  However, it was 
observed from the CBIC ACES-GST application that no mandatory physical 
verification had been carried out for these 35 cases. 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
105
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
104 
The acceptance of blank values by the CBIC ACES-GST application for fields 
marked as mandatory shows deficiencies in validation controls. This needs 
to be rectified. 
When the observation was pointed out (November 2021) by Audit, the 
Ministry stated (August 2022) that they have noted the observation for 
compliance.   
4.1.2 Absence of alert to Proper officers on generation of Temporary 
Registration Number (TRN) under Suo-Moto Registration 
As per Rule 16(1), where, pursuant to any survey, enquiry, inspection, 
search or any other proceedings under the Act, the proper officer finds 
that a person liable to registration under the Act has failed to apply for 
such registration, such officer may register the said person on a temporary 
basis and issue an order in REG-12. The person to whom such temporary 
registration has been granted should obtain regular registration by 
submitting REG-01 within a period of 90 days from the grant of temporary 
registration (Rule 16(3)). The effective date of Registration, in such cases, 
will be the date of the order granting temporary registration (Rule 16(5)). 
Audit review revealed that there was no provision to validate ARN of a 
new Registration, received pursuant to an order passed under Rule 16 ibid. 
Also, there was absence of mechanism to link the TRN with the Jurisdiction 
to enable the tax officer to monitor whether the suo-moto order has been 
complied with by the taxpayer.  
Further, in absence of adequate linkages, sanction of refund, if any, on an 
appeal against the suo-moto order may not be possible. The effective date 
of registration in cases of Suo-Moto registration has to be validated since 
the liability to GST arises from the date of issue of the order. 
Data extracted for suo-moto registrations for pan India showed that during 
the period 01 June 2019 to 31 May 2021 in 61 cases registration were 
granted on suo-moto basis.  
Recommendation 40: The Department should pursue the matter with 
GSTN and Policy Wing, to devise a suitable mechanism to link the 
Jurisdiction with the TRN.  

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
106
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
105 
When the observation was pointed out (November 2021) by Audit, the 
Ministry stated (August 2022) that they have noted the recommendation 
for compliance.   
4.1.3 Inadequate validation to implement amendments across 
registrations with the same PAN 
Section 28 of CGST Act, 2017 read with Rule 19(1)(a)(b) of CGST Rules, 
2017 prescribes for any change in any of the particulars furnished in the 
application for all types of registrations either at the time of obtaining 
registration or as amended from time to time. Proviso specifies that the 
change relating to Legal name of Business in any State or Union territory 
shall be applicable for all registrations of the registered person obtained 
on the same Permanent Account Number (PAN). 
A pan India data extraction of 32,152 cases was made for the period from 
01 July 2017 to 31 August 2021from the CBIC database involving different 
Legal Names for the GSTINs under the same PAN. On a random test check 
of 25 unique PANs, it was observed that in 10 cases an amendment to the 
Legal Name of Business in one of the registrations obtained under the 
same PAN had not been made applicable to all other registrations 
obtained on the same PAN.  
Recommendation 41: The Department should initiate action to 
implement the amendments made in the Legal name of Business to all 
other registrations under the same PAN. 
When the observation was pointed out (November 2021) by Audit, the 
Ministry stated (August 2022) that they have noted the recommendation 
for compliance.   
4.1.4 Instances of Mismatch of data between GST Common Portal and 
CBIC Database 
The Aadhaar Verification Status field, for 50 randomly selected cases 25 was 
compared with the Aadhaar verification data available in the GSTN Portal 
and it was observed that in 21 cases there was mismatch of data. Similarly, 
a comparison of the data contained in ‘Taxpayer Type’ field for 25 cases 
revealed mismatch of data in 15 cases.  Also, in Payments Advisory 3 it was 
stated that the entries in Ledgers are not getting updated and hence there 
                                                           
25Verified through the Audit SSOID credentials of Chennai Zone.  

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
107
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
106 
are data gaps in the Ledgers. Mismatch of data between the common 
portal and the CBIC database raises concern on the reliability of data which 
further leads to inaccurate MIS Reporting.  
Recommendation 42: The Department should implement an End of Day 
reconciliation mechanism (interface based) for all the modules to ensure 
that the data in the CBIC database is always in sync with the GSTN 
database. 
When the observation was pointed out (November 2021) by Audit, the 
Ministry stated (August 2022) that they have noted the recommendation 
for compliance.   
4.1.5 Discrepancies between the Permanent Account Numbers (PANs) 
available in the CBIC ACES-GST application and GSTN Portal 
As per the GSTN SRS V7.00 on Registration, a new applicant applying for 
registration is required to fill in Part-A of the Registration Form, which 
consists of Legal Name, Permanent Account Number (PAN), Email Address 
and Mobile Number along-with State and District. The GST Portal will 
validate whether PAN and Legal Name mentioned in Part-A matches with 
CBDT Database. On successful validation of the same, a Temporary 
Reference Number (TRN) is generated and sent to the applicant. The TRN 
is used to retrieve the application and to fill Part B of the Registration form 
for approval and generation of GSTIN. 
As per Rule 10 of the CGST Rules 2017, where the application for grant of 
registration has been approved under Rule 9, a certificate of registration in 
FORM GST REG-06 showing the principal place of business and additional 
place or places of business shall be made available to the applicant on the 
common portal and a Goods and Services Tax Identification Number 
(GSTIN) shall be assigned subject to the following characters, namely: 
 two characters for the State code 
 ten characters for the Permanent Account Number or the Tax 
Deduction 
 Collection Account Number 
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
107 
 two characters for the entity code 
 one checksum character 
A pan-India data extraction was made from the CBIC database involving 
mismatch of PAN in the GSTINs (3rd character up to the 12th character) 
with the PAN available in the CBIC database. A total of 57,693 GSTINs 
involving such mismatches were extracted for the period from 01 July 
2017 to 01 October 2021 from the CBIC database. Out of these 57,693 
cases, eight cases pertaining to Chennai were cross verified with the CBIC 
ACES-GST application by using the Audit SSOID and the mismatch between 
the PANs was confirmed. Further, examination of two out of eight cases 
with the details available in the GSTN portal, revealed that the Legal 
names were found to be incorrect and did not pertain to the GSTIN. 
The existence of two PANs in the CBIC ACES-GST application for the same 
GSTIN i.e., mismatch of PAN in the GSTINs (3rd character upto the 12th 
character) with the PAN number available in the CBIC database and the 
fact that the RCs (which are non-editable PDF documents populated into 
the CBIC database from the GSTN system) reflecting incorrect legal names 
vis-à-vis the GSTINs raises concerns about the reliability of the data 
available in the CBIC database. In the light of the aforesaid findings, it was 
not clear to Audit as to which PAN was actually validated in the CBDT 
database for approval and issuance of Registration Certificates. 
Recommendation 43: The Department should take appropriate action to 
reconcile the cases of mismatch in PAN, existence of incorrect legal 
names in the RCs and the details of the correct PAN based on which RCs 
had been issued. 
When the observation was pointed out (November 2021) by Audit, the 
Ministry stated (August 2022) that they have noted the recommendation 
for compliance.   
4.2 Interface with other IT applications 
Apart from GSTN, the CBIC ACES-GST Application was intended to interface 
with various applications within CBIC and external agencies through the 
Enterprise Service Bus layer by web services. Among the applications that 
would require integration with CBIC ACES-GST Application, the significant 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
108
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
107 
 two characters for the entity code 
 one checksum character 
A pan-India data extraction was made from the CBIC database involving 
mismatch of PAN in the GSTINs (3rd character up to the 12th character) 
with the PAN available in the CBIC database. A total of 57,693 GSTINs 
involving such mismatches were extracted for the period from 01 July 
2017 to 01 October 2021 from the CBIC database. Out of these 57,693 
cases, eight cases pertaining to Chennai were cross verified with the CBIC 
ACES-GST application by using the Audit SSOID and the mismatch between 
the PANs was confirmed. Further, examination of two out of eight cases 
with the details available in the GSTN portal, revealed that the Legal 
names were found to be incorrect and did not pertain to the GSTIN. 
The existence of two PANs in the CBIC ACES-GST application for the same 
GSTIN i.e., mismatch of PAN in the GSTINs (3rd character upto the 12th 
character) with the PAN number available in the CBIC database and the 
fact that the RCs (which are non-editable PDF documents populated into 
the CBIC database from the GSTN system) reflecting incorrect legal names 
vis-à-vis the GSTINs raises concerns about the reliability of the data 
available in the CBIC database. In the light of the aforesaid findings, it was 
not clear to Audit as to which PAN was actually validated in the CBDT 
database for approval and issuance of Registration Certificates. 
Recommendation 43: The Department should take appropriate action to 
reconcile the cases of mismatch in PAN, existence of incorrect legal 
names in the RCs and the details of the correct PAN based on which RCs 
had been issued. 
When the observation was pointed out (November 2021) by Audit, the 
Ministry stated (August 2022) that they have noted the recommendation 
for compliance.   
4.2 Interface with other IT applications 
Apart from GSTN, the CBIC ACES-GST Application was intended to interface 
with various applications within CBIC and external agencies through the 
Enterprise Service Bus layer by web services. Among the applications that 
would require integration with CBIC ACES-GST Application, the significant 
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
108 
ones are - ICEGATE, ACES, ICES, CPGRAMS, NSDL, RBI, MCA 21, State level 
applications. 
While it was clear at the tendering stage itself that the integration with 
GSTN would be through APIs published by GSTN, in respect of other 
applications, it was recognized that depending upon the level of maturity 
of the interfacing system, there may arise requirements to implement 
integration through file sharing, file transfer, DB sharing etc. as well.  
However, it was envisaged that all data exchanges would be done in a 
secured manner, SSL enabled secure exchange of data and messages will 
need to be performed. 
Audit observed that even though the interface with GSTN has been 
established, development of interface mechanisms with other external 
systems and agencies has not yet been initiated. 
Recommendation 44: The Department should initiate the development 
of interface of CBIC ACES-GST application with other applications. 
When the observation was pointed out (April 2022) by Audit, the Ministry 
stated (August 2022) that they have noted the recommendation for 
compliance.   
 
 
 
New Delhi (SIDDHARTHA BONDADE) 
Dated: Principal Director (Goods and Services Tax-I) 
 
 
 
Countersigned 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi (GIRISH CHANDRA MURMU) 
Dated: Comptroller and Auditor General of India 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
109
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
108 
ones are - ICEGATE, ACES, ICES, CPGRAMS, NSDL, RBI, MCA 21, State level 
applications. 
While it was clear at the tendering stage itself that the integration with 
GSTN would be through APIs published by GSTN, in respect of other 
applications, it was recognized that depending upon the level of maturity 
of the interfacing system, there may arise requirements to implement 
integration through file sharing, file transfer, DB sharing etc. as well.  
However, it was envisaged that all data exchanges would be done in a 
secured manner, SSL enabled secure exchange of data and messages will 
need to be performed. 
Audit observed that even though the interface with GSTN has been 
established, development of interface mechanisms with other external 
systems and agencies has not yet been initiated. 
Recommendation 44: The Department should initiate the development 
of interface of CBIC ACES-GST application with other applications. 
When the observation was pointed out (April 2022) by Audit, the Ministry 
stated (August 2022) that they have noted the recommendation for 
compliance.   
 
 
 
New Delhi (SIDDHARTHA BONDADE) 
Dated: Principal Director (Goods and Services Tax-I) 
 
 
 
Countersigned 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi (GIRISH CHANDRA MURMU) 
Dated: Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
108 
ones are - ICEGATE, ACES, ICES, CPGRAMS, NSDL, RBI, MCA 21, State level 
applications. 
While it was clear at the tendering stage itself that the integration with 
GSTN would be through APIs published by GSTN, in respect of other 
applications, it was recognized that depending upon the level of maturity 
of the interfacing system, there may arise requirements to implement 
integration through file sharing, file transfer, DB sharing etc. as well.  
However, it was envisaged that all data exchanges would be done in a 
secured manner, SSL enabled secure exchange of data and messages will 
need to be performed. 
Audit observed that even though the interface with GSTN has been 
established, development of interface mechanisms with other external 
systems and agencies has not yet been initiated. 
Recommendation 44: The Department should initiate the development 
of interface of CBIC ACES-GST application with other applications. 
When the observation was pointed out (April 2022) by Audit, the Ministry 
stated (August 2022) that they have noted the recommendation for 
compliance.   
 
 
 
New Delhi (SIDDHARTHA BONDADE) 
Dated: Principal Director (Goods and Services Tax-I) 
 
 
 
Countersigned 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi (GIRISH CHANDRA MURMU) 
Dated: Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
108 
ones are - ICEGATE, ACES, ICES, CPGRAMS, NSDL, RBI, MCA 21, State level 
applications. 
While it was clear at the tendering stage itself that the integration with 
GSTN would be through APIs published by GSTN, in respect of other 
applications, it was recognized that depending upon the level of maturity 
of the interfacing system, there may arise requirements to implement 
integration through file sharing, file transfer, DB sharing etc. as well.  
However, it was envisaged that all data exchanges would be done in a 
secured manner, SSL enabled secure exchange of data and messages will 
need to be performed. 
Audit observed that even though the interface with GSTN has been 
established, development of interface mechanisms with other external 
systems and agencies has not yet been initiated. 
Recommendation 44: The Department should initiate the development 
of interface of CBIC ACES-GST application with other applications. 
When the observation was pointed out (April 2022) by Audit, the Ministry 
stated (August 2022) that they have noted the recommendation for 
compliance.   
 
 
 
New Delhi (SIDDHARTHA BONDADE) 
Dated: Principal Director (Goods and Services Tax-I) 
 
 
 
Countersigned 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi (GIRISH CHANDRA MURMU) 
Dated: Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
01 March 2023
02 March 2023

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
e
GLOSSARY

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
f

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
111
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
108 
Glossary 
AC Assistant Commissioner 
ACES Automation of Central Excise and Service Tax 
ACL Access Control Logic 
ADVAIT Advanced Analytics in Indirect Taxation 
API Application Programming Interface 
APL Appeal Forms 
ARN Application Reference Number 
ASMT Assessment Forms 
BCP Business Continuity Plan 
BRD Business Requirements Document 
BYOD Bring Your Own Device 
CAB Change Advisory Board 
CBDT Central Board of Direct Taxes 
CBIC Central Board of Indirect Taxes and Customs 
CDR Commissionerate Division Range 
CE Central Excise 
CIN Corporate Identification Number 
CLS Composition Levy Scheme 
CMP Composition Forms 
CPC Central Processing Cell 
CPGRAMS Centralised Public Grievance Redress and Monitoring System 
CPPP Central Public Procurement Portal 
CR Change Request 
CSD Canteen Stores Department 
CWF Consumer Welfare Fund 
DC Data Centre 
DG 
(Systems) Directorate General of Systems and Data Management  
DIN Director Identification Number 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
112
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
109 
DOS Directorate of Systems 
DR Disaster Recovery 
DRC Demand and Recovery forms 
DSC Digital Signature Certificates 
DSR Dispute Settlement and Resolution 
EDW Enterprise Data Warehouse 
EMD Earnest Money Deposit 
EMP Exit Management Plan 
EXIM Export Import 
GST Goods and Service Tax 
GSTIN Goods and Service Tax Identification Number 
GSTN Goods and Services Tax Network 
GSTP Goods and Service Tax Practitioners 
GSTR Goods and Service Tax Returns 
HUF Hindu Undivided Family 
ICEGATE Indian Customs Electronic Gateway 
ICES Indian Customs EDI System 
ICT Information and Communication Technology 
IFU Integrated Financial Unit 
INS Investigation Forms 
IS Information Security 
IT Information Technology 
ITC Input Tax credit 
ITSCM IT Service Continuity Management 
KEDB Know Error Database 
LAN Local Area Network 
LD Liquidated Damages 
LUT Letter of Undertaking 
MCA Ministry of Corporate Affairs 
MIS Management Information System 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
113
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
112 
MSA Master Service Agreement 
NEFT National Electronic Funds Transfer 
NSDL National Securities Depository Limited 
OIO Order in Original 
OTC Over the Counter 
PAN Permanent Account Number 
PEC Price Evaluation Committees 
PFMS Public Financial Management System 
PGMA Project Governance and Monitoring Agency 
PH Physical Hearing 
PMO Project Management Unit 
PMU Project Management Office 
PV Physical Verification 
RBI Reserve Bank of India 
RC Registration Certificate 
RCA Root Cause Analysis 
RFD Refund Forms 
RFP Request For Proposal 
RTGS Real Time Gross Settlement 
SCN Show Cause Notice 
SEZ Special Economic Zone 
SFC Standing Finance Committee 
SI System Integrator 
SLA Service Level Agreement 
SRS Software Requirements Specification 
ST Service Tax 
TAG Taxpayer at Glance 
TDS Tax Deducted at Source 
TEG Technical Evaluation Group 
TRN Temporary Reference Number 

Report No. 3 of 2023 (IT Audit)
114
Report No 3 of 2023 (IT Audit) 
113 
UAM User Access Management 
UI User Interface 
UIDAI Unique Identification Authority of India 
UIN Unique Identification  Number 
URL Uniform Resource Locator 
VAPT Vulnerability Assessment and Penetration Testing 
WAN Wide Area Network 
XML Extensible Mark-up Language; XML is a file format 
ZCDR Zone Commissionerate Division Range 
 
 

©  COMPTROLLER AND
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA
www.cag.gov.in
Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
Union Government
Department of Revenue
 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax)
Report No.  3 of 2023
lR;eso t;rs
 Union Government Department of Revenue (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax)–Report No. 3 of 2023 IT Audit of CBIC ACES-GST Application
