 
 
 
 
Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
on 
  
Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitution  
Amendment Act, 1992  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government of Himachal Pradesh 
Report No. 1 of the year 2022  

i 
Table of Contents 
 
Paragraph 
Number Contents Page 
Number 
 Preface v 
 Executive Summary vii-xii 
Chapter – I   Introduction  
1.1 74 th  Constitutional Amendment 1 
1.2  Trend of urbanisation in Himachal Pradesh 1 
1.3   Profile of Urban Local Bodies in Himachal Pra desh 1 
1.4   Organisational Structure of Urban Governance in 
Himachal Pradesh 
2 
Chapter – II   Audit Framework  
2.1 Audit objectives 3 
2.2 Audit criteria 3 
2.3  Audit scope and methodology 3 
2.4  Acknowledgement 4 
2.5 Organisation of audit findings 4 
Chapter – III   Compliance with provisions of 74 th  CAA  
3.1 Comparison of State level legislations with 74 th  CAA 5 
Chapter – IV   Devolution of Functions & Empowerment of Urban 
Local Bodies 
 
4.1  Actual status of devolution of Functions 7 
4.1.1 Activity Mapping of Functions 12 
4.2 Institutional mechanisms for empowerment of Urb an 
Local Bodies  
13 
4.2.1   State Election Commission 13 
4.2.1.1 Composition of Municipalities 13 
4.2.1.2  Reservation of seats 14 
4.2.1.3 Status of elections and formation of counci ls 14 
4.2.1.4 Election of Mayor, Deputy Mayor and their t erm  14 
4.2.1.5 Election of President and Deputy President of Councils  15 
4.2.1.6 Frequency of meetings of ULBs 15 
4.2.2 Standing Committees in ULBs 15 
4.2.3 Formation of Ward Committees in ULBs 16 
4.2.4 Formation of District Planning Committee  17 
4.2.5 State Finance Commission  17 
4.2.5.1 Constitution of SFCs and implementation of 
recommendations 
17 
4.2.5.2 Response of the State Government to SFC 
recommendations  
18 
4.2.6 Property Tax Board  20 

ii 
Paragraph 
Number Contents Page 
Number 
4.3 Powers of the State Government over ULBs  21 
4.4 Parastatals, their functions and impact on Urba n Local 
Bodies  
23 
4.4.1 Shimla Jal Prabhandhan Nigam Limited 23 
4.4.2 Himachal Pradesh Housing and Urban Developmen t 
Authority (HIMUDA) 
24 
4.4.3 Himachal Pradesh State Industrial Development  
Corporation Limited (HPSIDC) 
24 
4.4.4 Smart City Mission 25 
4.5 Summary of Audit Findings 26 
4.6 Recommendations 27 
Chapter – V   Financial Resources of ULBs  
5.1 Sources of revenue  29 
5.2 Fiscal transfers to Urban Local Bodies 30 
5.2.1 State Finance Commission grants  30 
5.2.2 Central Finance Commission grants 31 
5.2.2.1 Allocation and release of CFC grants 31 
5.3 Assigned Revenue 33 
5.4 Own Revenue of Urban Local Bodies 34 
5.4.1 Property Tax (01 of 05 selected areas) 36 
5.4.1.1 Methods of calculating Property Tax in the Himachal 
Pradesh 
36 
5.4.1.2 Assessment of Property Tax 37 
5.4.1.3 Collection and Arrears of Property Tax 39 
5.4.1.4 Conservancy Tax 40 
5.4.2 Rent from commercial establishments 41 
5.4.3 Trade License Fee 42 
5.4.4 Advertisement Fee 43 
5.5 Water Supply (02 of 05 selected areas) 43 
5.6 Water Tax/Charges (03 of 05 selected areas) 44 
5.7 Public Health, Sanitation (04 of 05 selected ar eas) 
Conservancy and Solid Waste Management 
46 
5.7.1 Sewerage Management 47 
5.8 Solid Waste Management (05 of 05 selected areas ) 48 
5.8.1 Financial Management of Solid Waste Managemen t   48 
5.8.2 Collection of user charges  48 
5.9 Preparation of Budget 49 
5.9.1 Unrealistic budget exercise 50 
5.9.2 Non-preparation and non-presentation of budge t and 
accounts 
50 

iii 
Paragraph 
Number Contents Page 
Number 
5.10 Expenditure of Urban Local Bodies 51 
5.11 Resource-expenditure gap  51 
5.12 Extent of utilisation of funds  52 
5.13 Analysis of financial data of Urban Local Bodi es 52 
5.14 Financial powers of Urban Local Bodies  54 
5.14.1 Powers to accord Technical Sanction 54 
5.15 Summary of Audit Findings 55 
5.16 Recommendations 56 
Chapter – VI   Human Resources of ULBs  
6.1 Recruitment of staff 57 
6.2 Limited powers over manpower 58 
6.3 Assessment of staff in ULBs 58 
6.4 Staff position in Urban Local Bodies of Himacha l Pradesh  59 
6.4.1 Sanctioned strength of test-checked ULBs 60 
6.4.2 Persons-in-position of test-checked ULBs 61 
6.4.3 Staff position in test-checked ULBs 61 
6.5 Capacity Building 63 
6.6 Summary of Audit Findings 64 
6.7 Recommendations 65 
Chapter – VII   Conclusion 67 
 
Appendices 
Appendix No. Contents Page 
Number 
1.1  Organisational Structure in respect to functioning of 
ULBs in the State  
73 
1.2 List of parastatals and their functions 74 
2.1 List of selected ULBs 75 
4.1 Details of number of Meetings of Municipalities  held 
during 2015-20 
76 
4.2 Non/partial implementation of SFCs recommendati ons 77 
5.1(A) Service Level Benchmark indicators of 2017-1 8 for the 
Performance Grant of 2018-19  
80 
5.1(B) Service Level Benchmark indicators of 2018-1 9 for the 
Performance Grant of 2019-20 
81 
5.2 Detail of revenue receipts received in test-che cked ULBs 
during the period 2015-16 to 2019-20 
82 
5.3 Methods of calculation of property tax 86 

iv 
Appendix No. Contents Page 
Number 
5.4 Statement showing demand and collection of char ges 
against the water supply and expenditure on O&M 
incurred by the various agencies 
87 
5.5 Statement of collection of user charges, collec table user 
charges and revenue expenditure on Solid Waste 
Management 
88 
5.6 Statement showing variation in budget in each c ategory 
of ULB 
89 
6.1 Statement showing detailed position of vacancie s in 
various posts of the test-checked ULBs in the State 
91 
 

v 
 
 
 
 
Preface 
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
covering the period April 2015 to March 2020 has been prepared for 
submission to the Governor of the State of Himachal Pradesh under 
Article 151 (2) of the Constitution of India. 
The Report contains significant results of Performa nce Audit of 
“Efficacy of Implementation of the Constitution (Se venty-fourth 
Amendment) Act, 1992” conducted in terms of the Comptroller and 
Auditor General of India (Duties, Powers and Condit ions of 
Services) Act, 1971. 
The audit has been conducted in conformity with the  Auditing 
Standards issued (March 2002) by the Comptroller an d Auditor 
General of India. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Executive Summary 
  

vii 
Executive Summary 
This report contains significant results of the per formance audit on “Efficacy of 
implementation of the Constitution (Seventy-fourth Amendment) Act, 1992” covering 
the period from April 2015 to March 2020. 
Introduction  
The Constitution (Seventy-fourth Amendment) Act, 19 92 (74 th  CAA) was enacted, 
which came into force on 1 June 1993, to give Const itutional recognition to the Urban 
Local Bodies (ULBs) for decentralizing urban governance along with the Constitutional 
right to exist. The 74 th CAA authorized the State Government to enact laws to empower 
ULBs with powers and authority as may be necessary to enable them to function as 
institutions of self-government to transfer various responsibilities to Municipalities and 
to strengthen Municipal level governance. The Twelf th Schedule of the Constitution 
enumerates 18 specific functions to be devolved to ULBs. 
In the State of Himachal Pradesh, ULBs are categori zed into three types of 
Municipalities viz., Municipal Corporation, Municipal Councils and Nagar Panchayats 
on the basis of population and revenue generated by  local administration specified by 
Himachal Pradesh Municipal Act 1994. As of March 20 20, there were 54 ULBs in 
Himachal Pradesh. The Municipal Corporations and ot her Municipalities viz., 
Municipal Council and Nagar Panchayats are governed  by the Himachal Pradesh 
Municipal Corporation Act, 1994 (HPMC Act amended O ctober 2016) and the 
Himachal Pradesh Municipalities Act, 1994, (HPM Act amended September 2016). 
Audit framework 
The overall objective of this performance audit was  to ascertain whether ULBs have 
indeed been empowered in terms of funds, functions and functionaries to establish 
themselves as effective institutions of local self-government and whether the 74 
th  CAA 
has been effectively implemented in the State. The main objectives of performance 
audit were to assess adequacy in coverage of provis ions of 74 th  CAA in the State 
Legislation; whether ULBs in the State were empower ed to discharge their functions 
effectively through creation of appropriately desig ned institutions/institutional 
mechanisms and extent of devolution of functions by  the State Government; and 
whether ULBs have been empowered to access adequate financial resources and human 
resources for discharge of functions stated to be devolved to them. 
The audit findings, conclusions and recommendations  relating to each of the audit 
objectives have been reported in four distinct chapters viz., chapters III to VI. 
 
 

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitution Amendment Act, 1992 
viii 
Compliance with provisions of 74 th  CAA 
The State statutes complied with the provisions of the 74 th  CAA. However, compliance 
to the constitutional provisions by law does not guarantee effective decentralisation on 
ground, unless followed by effective implementation  of functions enlisted in Twelfth 
Schedule of Constitution. The legal provisions were  not backed by decisions and 
actions. This was especially true in case of provis ions pertaining to the devolution of 
functions.  
(Paragraph 3.1) 
Devolution of Functions & Empowerment of Urban Local Bodies  
Though the State Government carried out amendments in the State statutes viz., HPMC 
Act & HPM Act to comply with the provisions of 74 th  CAA, these amendments were 
not supported by firm action in terms of empowermen t of ULBs to discharge their 
functions freely and effectively. This defeated the  spirit of the Constitutional 
amendment, as is evident from the inconsistencies n oticed during the course of 
performance audit. 
The notification regarding devolution of functions had been issued (August 1994). Out 
of 18 functions, one function was not devolved to U LBs. In case of remaining 17 
functions, ULBs were solely responsible for five fu nctions; were mere implementing 
agencies for four functions; had limited role with overlapping jurisdiction of state 
departments/parastatals for six functions; and had no role for two functions. 
(Paragraph 4.1) 
Composition of municipalities in respect of test-checked ULBs was in accordance with 
the provisions. Seats for the direct elections were being reserved for SC/ST and women 
as per the prescribed norms and the seats of counci llors were being rotated as per the 
reservation policy for each election. The term of t he office of the Mayor and Deputy 
Mayor was not co-terminous with the duration of the House of Municipal Corporations. 
However, the term of offices of the Presidents and Vice Presidents of Municipal 
Councils and Nagar Panchayats were coterminous with the duration of Municipalities. 
(Paragraphs 4.2.1.1, 4.2.1.2, 4.2.1.4 & 4.2.1.5) 
Meetings of House of ULBs were not held regularly. The percentage of number of 
meetings of House of ULBs held when compared with mandatory number of meetings, 
ranged between 35 per cent  and 95 per cent  during 2015-20. 
(Paragraph 4.2.1.6) 
All three Standing Committees were formed in the te st-checked 14 ULBs. However, 
against prescribed number of 3640 meetings, only 17 3 meetings were held in three 
ULBs (MC Solan: 44, MC Nahan: 83 and NP Sunni: 46).  No meetings were held in 
remaining 11 selected ULBs.  
(Paragraph 4.2.2) 
 

Executive Summary 
ix 
Ward Committees (WCs) were not constituted in any of the test-checked ULBs except 
in Municipal Corporation Shimla. 
(Paragraph 4.2.3) 
District Planning Committees (DPC) were constituted in all the Districts of test-checked 
ULBs, however the ULBs had not prepared and submitt ed respective development 
plans to DPC. 
(Paragraph 4.2.4) 
There was delay in constitution of three SFCs (thir d, fourth & fifth) by 12, 24 and 06 
months from scheduled date. Further, there were delays in submission of reports to the 
State Government by 17, 25 and 21 months. 
(Paragraph 4.2.5.1) 
The State Government had overriding powers over the Urban Local Bodies in relation 
to various matters viz., power to frame Rules; power to cancel and suspend a resolution 
or decision taken by ULB; power to dissolve ULBs; c ancellation of bye-laws by 
Government; sanction to borrow money; sanction of regulations by Government; power 
in regard to taxes, budget estimates etc.  
(Paragraph 4.3) 
The parastatal bodies were being controlled by the Government and were having their 
own governing bodies which did not include adequate elected representatives of ULBs. 
SMC had limited control over the functioning of the  SJPNL, thereby defeating the 
purpose of devolution of functions. The power regar ding approval of building 
construction plan was being discharged by Himachal Pradesh Housing and Urban 
Development Authority (HIMUDA) for development of housing colonies without any 
involvement of ULBs except seeking NOC for use of l and. Further, there is no 
representation of ULBs in the Governing Body of HIM UDA. The function of ‘Urban 
planning including town planning' and 'Regulation o f land-use and construction of 
buildings' in industrial areas falling within jurisdiction of the ULBs is being performed 
by HPSIDC, even after devolution of the function to  ULBs vide notification of State 
Government in August 1994. 
      (Paragraphs 4.4, 4.4.1, 4.4.2 & 4.4.3) 
In Himachal Pradesh, two cities viz., Dharamshala a nd Shimla were selected to be 
covered under the Smart City Mission and two Special Purpose Vehicles (SPVs) were 
constituted under Company Act 2013 for Smart City D haramshala and Shimla. These 
SPVs were directly accountable to State Government than to ULBs, and the 
representatives of ULBs had only 25 per cent  (Dharamshala Smart City Limited) and 
17 per cent  (Shimla Smart City Limited) representation in the Board of Directors. 
Further, the functions devolved to ULB were being e xecuted by other agencies on 
direction of SPV.  
(Paragraph 4.4.4) 

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitution Amendment Act, 1992 
x 
Recommendations 
In the light of the audit findings the State Government may like to consider: 
• taking decisive action in order to translate the vi sion of decentralisation into 
reality, besides providing adequate degree of auton omy to ULBs in respect of 
functions assigned to them in line with the Constitutional provisions; 
• constituting requisite committees for effective planning and better execution at 
ULBs’ level; and 
• involving greater participation of ULBs in the functioning of various parastatals 
in the State. 
Financial Resources of Urban Local Bodies 
The 74 
th  CAA provided for fiscal transfers from the Central and State Governments to 
the ULBs besides empowering them to raise their own  revenue. However, the ULBs 
were having limited access to the financial resources. 
ULBs were largely dependent on fiscal transfers, wh ich constituted about 78 per cent  
of their total revenue and own revenue of ULBs cons tituted only 22 per cent  of their 
total revenue. 
(Paragraph 5.1) 
During 2015-16, funds of ₹ 4.08 crore were released in excess of the mandated  
devolution by the State Finance Commission, whereas  there was a shortfall in funds 
released to ULBs against mandated devolution by an extent of ₹ 6.07 crore during 
2016-17 to 2019-20. 
(Paragraph 5.2.1) 
Allocation of performance grants of ₹ 32.44 crore for the years 2017-18, 2018-19 & 
2019-20 was yet to be received. 
(Paragraph 5.2.2.1) 
The State laws revealed that while the authority to  collect certain taxes like property 
tax vested with ULBs but the powers pertaining to t he rates and revision thereof, 
method of assessment, exemptions vested with the State Government.  
(Paragraph 5.4) 
There was no uniformity in method of levying the pr operty tax. Surveys to enumerate 
the properties was not as per time schedule envisag ed. Digitizing property database 
using Geographic Information System (GIS) and automating   property tax calculations 
was not put in place for all the ULBs. Recovery on account of property tax 
(₹ 14.69 crore); conservancy tax ( ₹ 3.82 crore); rent from commercial establishments 
(₹ 10.66 crore) was outstanding thereby showing ineff ectiveness of ULBs in 
augmenting of their own revenue. 
 (Paragraphs 5.4.1.1, 5.4.1.2, 5.4.1.3, 5.4.1.4 & 5.4.2) 

Executive Summary 
xi 
Water supply management in the State was done by Ja l Shakti Vibhag except MC 
Shimla (SJPNL) and MCs Solan and Palampur. Supplyin g of bulk water to ULBs at 
higher rates resulted in accrued liability in the test-checked Municipalities (MC Shimla 
₹ 229.64 crore and MC Solan ₹ 78.67 crore). Non-Revenue Water ranged between 
34  per cent  and 47  per cent in MC Solan  during the period 2015-20. 
(Paragraphs 5.5 & 5.6) 
Sewerage management in the State was being done by Jal Shakti Vibhag, except ULBs 
Shimla, where this function is being discharged by Shimla Jal Prabhandan Nigam Ltd. 
and MC Solan where collection of sewerage charges w as the responsibility of MC. 
Non-levy of sewerage charges (MC Solan) resulted in revenue loss of ₹ 38.03 lakh. 
(Paragraphs 5.7 & 5.7.1) 
Budget exercise was flawed and resulted in preparat ion of unrealistic and unscientific 
budgets. Percentage variation in budgeted and actual receipt, and in budgeted and actual 
expenditure was more than 20 per cent, in the test-checked ULBs.  
 (Paragraph 5.9.1) 
The capital expenditure i.e. programme expenses and  expenses out of grants incurred 
by ULBs constituted about 43  per cent  of the total expenditure and revenue expenditure 
i.e. human resource expenses, general expenses and operation & maintenance and 
finance charges was about 57 per cent  of total expenditure. 
  (Paragraph 5.10) 
ULBs were able to utilise on an average about 63 per cent  of the available funds each 
year. 
  (Paragraph 5.12) 
The powers of ULBs were limited in respect of administrative approvals and technical 
sanctions. 
  (Paragraph 5.14) 
Recommendations  
In the light of the audit findings, the State Government may like to consider: 
• ensuring release of mandated share to the ULBs as p er the recommendations 
of State Finance Commission; 
• initiating action for meeting mandatory provision p rescribed for obtaining 
Performance Grant by the ULBs;  
• placing an effective mechanism for the recovery of outstanding dues by the 
ULBs to augment their own revenue;  
• GIS mapping of the properties within the jurisdicti on of the Municipalities 
needs to be made mandatory so that property tax man agement can be 
improved; 
• removing limitations on the ability of the ULBs to raise revenues through 
sources such as property tax, advertisement fee, solid waste management cess 
etc.; 

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitution Amendment Act, 1992 
xii 
• ensuring preparation of realistic budget estimates by ULBs in a scientific 
manner taking into account requirements of capital expenditure as well as a 
realistic projection of funds expected to be mobilised; and,  
• providing adequate powers and enhancing role of ULBs in administrative and 
executive spheres to enable them to function as an institution of self-
government. 
Human Resources of Urban Local Bodies 
The ULBs were having minimal control over human res ources and the number of 
employees as per requirements were inadequate, as is evident from the following: 
The State Government had the powers to regulate method of recruitment and condition 
of service, pay and allowances of ULBs. 
(Paragraphs 6.1, 6.2 & 6.3) 
The vacancy ranged from 35 per cent  to 57 per cent  among the various categories 
(except Group A) of all the ULBs. 
(Paragraph 6.4) 
In the test-checked ULBs the vacancy ranged from 13  per cent  to 67 per cent  among 
the various wings/sections, thereby hampering effective discharge of functions.  
(Paragraph 6.4.3) 
No mechanism of capacity building either in the ULB s or in the Directorate of UDD 
for enhancement of working quality of official was in place. 
(Paragraph 6.5) 
Recommendations  
In the light of the audit findings the State Government may like to consider: 
• entrusting the power of recruitment with the ULBs so that they can perform the 
function without any hurdle; 
• giving emphasis to fill all the vacant posts in the ULBs at the earliest; 
• revising the sanctioned strength in accordance with  the responsibilities and 
resources of the ULBs; and 
• initiating capacity building programmes at the ULBs  level as well as at 
Directorate level, as soon as possible. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter-I 
Introduction 
 
  

1 | P a g e  
 
 
 
 
 
1.1 74 th  Constitutional Amendment 
The Constitution (Seventy-fourth Amendment) Act, 1992 (74 th  CAA) which came into 
effect on 1 June 1993, introduced Part IX-A to the Constitution pertaining to the 
Municipalities. The Act provided a constitutional status to Urban Local Bodies (ULBs). 
Article 243W of the CAA authorised the State Legislatures to enact laws to endow local 
bodies with powers and authority as may be necessar y to enable them to function as 
institutions of self-government and make provisions  for devolution of powers and 
responsibilities. The Twelfth Schedule of the Const itution enumerates 18 specific 
functions to be devolved to ULBs as listed in Table 4.1 .  
1.2 Trend of urbanisation in Himachal Pradesh 
As per 2011 Census, out of the total population of 68.65 lakhs, about 6.89 lakhs live in 
urban areas accounting for 10.03 per cent  of the total population. The proportion of 
people living in the urban areas of Himachal Pradesh had increased from 9.80 per cent  
in 2001 to 10.03 per cent  in 2011. The growth rate of urban population in th e decades 
2001-2011 & 2011-2020 
1 was 15.61 per cent  and 9.92 per cent  respectively. Urban 
Himachal Pradesh faces multiple challenges, ranging from public health issues, poverty 
alleviation, waste management, depletion of natural  resources etc. In this scenario, 
ULBs have an important role to play, as most of the se issues are handled best at the 
local level.  
1.3  Profile of Urban Local Bodies in Himachal Prad esh 
ULBs are categorized on the basis of population, ge ographical features, economic 
status, local revenue generation and level of emplo yment within their jurisdiction. 
There are 54 ULBs as shown in Figure 1. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
1 Projected population in 2020 as per Directorate of  Economics and Statistics, Shimla HP.  
Introduction 
Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitution 
Amendment Act, 1992 
Chapter 1 

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitution Amendment Act, 1992 
2 | P a g e  
Figure-1: Criteria for formation of Municipalities in Himachal Pradesh 
 
Source: Annual Administration Report 2018-19 of UDD, Section 03 of respective Acts 
The Municipal Corporations are governed by the Hima chal Pradesh Municipal 
Corporations Act, 1994 (HPMC Act) and other ULBs ar e governed by the Himachal 
Pradesh Municipal Act, 1994 (HPM Act). Each Corpora tion/Municipal area has been 
divided into wards, which are determined and notified by the State Government for the 
purpose of election of Councillors. All ULBs have a n elected body comprising 
Councillors. 
1.4  Organisational Structure of Urban Governance i n Himachal Pradesh  
The Urban Development Department (UDD), headed by t he Secretary to the 
Government, is the nodal department for the governa nce of all ULBs. The Directorate 
of Urban Development Department (UDD) established i n the year 1985-86, functions 
as an interface between the State Government and ULBs. In accordance with the powers 
conferred under the HPMC/HPM Acts, the UDD monitors  these ULBs through direct 
reporting of the Commissioners /Executive Officers / Secretaries to the Director. The 
organisation structure with respect to functioning of ULBs in the State is indicated at 
Appendix 1.1 .  
In addition to ULBs, the UDD has key parastatal agencies that deliver or facilitate urban 
infrastructure and services such as Shimla Jal Prab andhan Nigam Ltd. (SJPNL) and 
Smart City (Shimla & Dharamshala) under its control . The other parastatals such as 
Himachal Pradesh Housing and Urban Development Auth ority (HIMUDA), and 
Himachal Pradesh State Industrial Development Corpo ration (HPSIDC) under the 
departments of Housing and Industries respectively also deliver urban services. The 
details of parastatals and their functions are in Appendix 1.2 . 
 
Municipal 
Corporation 
• 02 (Dharamshala & Shimla) 
• Population above 50,000 
• Likely revenue generated per annum ` 200.00 lakh 
Municipal 
Councils 
• 31 in number 
• Population above 5,000 
• Likely revenue generated per annum ` 10.00 lakh 
Nagar 
Panchayat 
• 21 in number 
• Population above 2,000 
• Likely revenue generated per annum ` 5.00 lakh 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter-II 
Audit Framework 
 
  

3 | P a g e  
 
 
2.1 Audit objectives  
The Performance Audit (PA) seeks to ascertain 
• Adequacy in coverage of provisions of 74 th  CAA in the State Legislation; 
• Empowerment of ULBs by the State Government to discharge their 
functions/responsibilities effectively through crea tion of appropriately designed 
institutions/institutional mechanisms and their fun ctions and extent of 
devolution of the functions to the ULBs by the State Government; 
• To assess whether the ULBs have been empowered to access adequate financial 
resources for discharge of functions stated to be devolved to them; and 
• To assess whether the ULBs have been empowered to access adequate human 
resources for discharge of functions stated to be devolved to them. 
2.2 Audit criteria  
The criteria for the PA were derived from the following:  
• Constitutional (74 th  Amendment) Act, 1992; 
• Himachal Pradesh Municipal Corporations Act, 1994; 
• Himachal Pradesh Municipal Act, 1994; 
• Himachal Pradesh Municipal Services Act, 1994; 
• Municipal Corporation / Councils Business Bye-Laws; 
• Central/State Finance Commission Reports; 
• Report of the Second Administrative Reforms Commission; and  
• State Government orders, notifications, circulars a nd instructions issued from 
time to time. 
2.3  Audit scope and methodology  
The Performance Audit covering the period April 2015 to March 2020 was carried out 
during the months of September 2020 to March 2021. Test-check of 14 ULBs out of 54 
ULBs across all tiers and selected 05 parastatals was done. ULBs were selected through 
simple random sampling, with population as per 2011 census as the size measure from 
each tier of ULBs. The list of ULBs selected is indicated in Appendix 2.1 . 
 
 
Audit Framework Chapter 2 

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitution Amendment Act, 1992 
4 | P a g e  
Apart from above, a test-check was done to assess t he ULBs efficacy and adequacy in 
management of the following five selected areas: 
(i)  Property Tax 
(ii)  Water Supply 
(iii)  Water Tax/Charges 
(iv)  Public Health and Sanitation 
(v)  Solid Waste Management 
An entry conference was held on 02 November 2020 with the Secretary, UD, in which 
the audit methodology, scope, objectives and criter ia were explained. Departmental 
replies wherever received have been factored into t he Report. The audit methodology 
involved document analysis and responses to audit queries. 
An exit conference was held on 13 January 2022 with  the Principal Secretary to 
Government of Himachal Pradesh, Urban Development D epartment wherein audit 
findings were discussed and deliberations of confer ence have been appropriately 
incorporated in the report. 
2.4  Acknowledgement  
Audit acknowledges the cooperation and assistance extended by the State Government, 
UDD, SJPNL, HPSIDC, HIMUDA, Smart City, and all the  test-checked ULBs in 
conducting the performance audit.  
2.5  Organisation of audit findings  
The audit observations relating to status of devolu tion of functions, funds and 
functionaries are presented in the following chapters: 
Chapter III – Compliance with provisions of 74 th  CAA 
Chapter IV – Devolution of Functions and Empowerment of Urban Local Bodies  
Chapter V – Financial Resources of ULBs 
Chapter VI– Human Resources of ULBs 
Chapter VII– Conclusion 
  
 
 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter-III 
Compliance with provisions of  
74 
th  CAA 
 
  

5 | P a g e  
 
 
3.1 Comparison of State level legislations with 74 th  CAA 
The 74 th CAA introduced certain provisions relating to Munic ipalities vide Article 
243Q to 243ZG. The State Government enacted the Him achal Pradesh Municipal 
Corporation Act (HPMC Act) and Himachal Pradesh Municipal Acts (HPM Act) on 18 
October 1994 with introduction of provisions corresponding to the CAA provisions as 
detailed in Table 3.1 .  
Table-3.1: Comparison of State level legislations with the provisions of 74 th  CAA 
Provision of 
Constitution 
of India  
Requirement as per provision of Constitution of India  Sections of 
HPMC and 
HPM Act, 1994 
HPMC  HPM 
Article 243Q  Constitution of Municipalitie s provides for three types of 
municipalities namely a Nagar Panchayat for transit ional 
area, a Municipal Council for a smaller urban area and a 
Municipal Corporation for a larger urban area. 
03  03 
Article 243R  Composition of Municipalities:  
All seats shall be filled by direct elections and by persons with 
special knowledge in municipal administration nominated by 
Government. The Legislature of a State may by law, provide 
for representation to the Municipality, Members of 
Parliament and Legislative Assembly whose constitue ncies 
lie within the municipal area and State Legislative  Council 
who are registered as electors within the city.  
04  10 
Article 243S  Constitution and composition of Ward Committee:  
This provides for constitution of Ward Committees i n all 
municipalities with a population of three lakh or more. 
44C 51C 
Article 243T  Reservation of seats:  
The seats to be reserved for Scheduled Caste (SC)/Scheduled 
Tribe (ST), Women and Backward classes for direct election.  
10 11 
Article 243U Duration of Municipalities:  
The municipality has a fixed tenure of 5 years from  the date 
of its first meeting and re-election to be held before the expiry 
of its term and within six months from the date of dissolution, 
if dissolved. 
05 14 
Article 243V Disqualifications for membership:  
A person shall be disqualified for a member of a 
Municipality-  
• If he is so disqualified by or under any law for th e time 
being in force for the purposes of elections of the  
Legislature of the State concerned.  
• If he is so disqualified by or under any law made b y the 
Legislature of the State.  
08 16 
Compliance with provisions of 74 th CAA Chapter 3 

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitution Amendment Act, 1992 
6 | P a g e  
Article 243W Powers, authority and responsibilities of the 
Municipalities:  
All municipalities would be empowered with such powers as 
may be necessary to enable them to function as effe ctive 
institutions of self-government. The State Governme nt shall 
entrust with such powers and authority to enable them to carry 
out the responsibilities in relation to the 12 
th  Schedule.  
42 48 
Article 243X Power to impose taxes by, and funds of the Municipalities:  
• Municipalities would be empowered to levy and collect the 
taxes, fees, duties etc. 
• Assign taxes, duties, tolls and fees levied and col lected by 
State Government.   
• Grant-in-aid would be given to the Municipalities from the 
Consolidated Fund of State.  
• Constitution of funds for crediting and withdrawal of 
money by Municipalities. 
84 & 85, 
79 (a-ii 
& iii) & 
69 
65 & 
66, 69, 
64 (a-ii 
& iii), 
52 
Article 243Y 
read with 
Article 243I 
Finance Commission:  
State Government shall constitute Finance Commission for  
• Review the financial position of the Municipaliti es and 
taking such steps that help in boosting the financi al 
condition of the Municipal bodies  
• Distributing between the State and the Municipalities of the 
net proceeds of the taxes, fees, tolls and duties t hat are 
charged by the State Government.  
•  Allotting the funds to the municipal bodies in the state from 
the consolidated fund of the State. 
79 64 
Article 243Z Audit of accounts of Municipalities:  
This provides provision for maintenance of accounts  by 
the Municipalities and the auditing of such accounts.  
161 252 & 
255 
Article 
243ZA read 
with Article 
243K 
Elections to the Municipalities:  
Superintendence, direction and control of all proce dure of 
election of the Municipalities shall be vested in t he State 
Election Commission (SEC). 
09 281 
Article 243 
ZD 
Committee for District Planning:  
• Constitution of District Planning Committee at district level. 
 
• Composition of District Planning Committee.  
• Preparation of draft development plan and forwarding to the 
Government. 
421 261 
The State statutes complied with the provisions of the 74 th  CAA. However, compliance 
to the constitutional provisions by law does not guarantee effective decentralisation on 
ground, unless the same is also followed by effecti ve implementation of functions 
enlisted in Twelfth Schedule of Constitution.  
Audit observed that the legal provisions were not b acked by decisive actions with 
regard to actual implementation, resulting in a situation in which the spirit of 74 
th  CAA 
was not completely upheld. This was especially true in case of provisions pertaining to 
the devolution of functions and creation of appropr iate institutional mechanisms for 
effective decentralisation, which have been discussed in the subsequent chapters. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter-IV 
Devolution of Functions & 
Empowerment of Urban Local Bodies 
 
  

7 | P a g e  
 
 
4.1 Actual status of devolution of Functions  
The 74 th  CAA sought to empower ULBs to perform functions and implement schemes 
in relation to 18 subjects specified in the 12 th  Schedule. Each State was expected to 
enact a legislation to implement the amendment.  
The State Government vide notification (August 1994 )  transferred 16 out of 18 
functions to ULBs. Subsequently, power to implement  the function of ‘Regulation of 
Land Use and Construction of Buildings’ were delegated to various ULBs by the Town 
& Country Planning Department vide notifications is sued from time to time. Fire 
Services was the only function that was not transferred.  
The Fourth SFC also made recommendations for full t ransfer of funds, functions and 
functionaries to ULBs, as per the notification (August 1994). However, several overlaps 
in discharge of the functions between ULBs and parastatals / government departments 
were observed.  
Out of 18 functions: 
1.  ULBs were solely responsible for five functions;  
2.  ULBs had no role in two functions;  
3.  ULBs were mere implementing agencies for four functions;  
4.  ULBs had limited role with overlapping jurisdiction  of state 
departments/parastatals for six functions;  
5.  One function not devolved to ULBs.  
The function-wise role of ULBs is depicted in Chart 4.1 : 
Chart-4.1: Function wise role of ULBs 
 
Devolution of Functions & 
Empowerment of Urban Local Bodies 
5
2
4
6
1
Solely responsible 
No Role 
Mere implementing agency 
Limited role with 
overlapping jurisdiction 
Not Devolved 
Chapter 4 

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitution Amendment Act, 1992 
8 | P a g e  
Table-4.1: Detail showing actual status of implementation of functions by the ULBs 
Sl. 
No. 
Functions 
Obligatory/ 
Discretionary 
Activities Actual status of implementation 
Authorities 
discharging 
functions 
Functions where ULBs were solely responsible  
1. Slum 
improvement 
and up-
gradation 
Identifying beneficiaries ULBs were wholly responsible for 
discharging this function through 
schemes like Integrated Housing 
& Slum Development Programme 
(IHSDP), Pradhan Mantri Awas 
Yojana- (Urban) (PMAY-U) etc. 
ULBs 
Affordable Housing 
Upgradation 
2. Urban poverty 
alleviation  
Identifying beneficiaries ULBs were wholly responsible for 
discharging this function through 
schemes like DAY-National 
Urban Livelihood Mission 
(NULM) and Street vendor 
scheme  etc.  
ULBs  
Livelihood and employment 
Street vendors 
3. Cattle pounds; 
prevention of 
cruelty to 
animals  
Catching and keeping strays ULBs were wholly responsible 
for discharging this function. 
 
ULBs  
Sterilisation and anti-rabies 
Ensuring animal safety 
4. Burials and 
burial grounds; 
cremations, 
cremation 
grounds  
Construction and O&M of 
crematoriums and burial 
grounds and electric 
crematoriums  
ULBs  were wholly responsible for 
discharging this function. 
ULBs 
5. Regulation of 
slaughterhouses 
and tanneries 
Ensuring quality of animals 
and meat 
ULBs were wholly responsible for 
discharging this function. 
ULBs 
Disposal of waste  
O & M of slaughterhouse  
Functions with no role for ULBs 
6. Water supply 
for domestic, 
industrial and 
commercial 
purposes 
Distribution of water Jal Shakti Vibhag was responsible 
for this function in 51 out of 54 
ULBs. In three ULBs namely 
Palampur, Solan and Shimla 
(Shimla Jal Prabhandhan Nigam 
Limited) this function was 
performed by the 
ULBs/Parastatal.  
(The details are given in Para  
5.5) 
Jal Shakti 
Vibhag Providing connections 
Operation & Maintenance 
(O&M) 
Collection of charges 
7. Urban forestry, 
protection of the 
environment 
and promotion 
of ecological 
aspects 
Afforestation Forest Department executes all the 
functions of urban forestry.  
Forest 
Department Greenification 
Awareness drives 
Protection of the 
environment and promotion 
of ecological aspects 
Maintenance of natural 
resources like water bodies 
etc. 

Chapter-IV: Devolution of Functions & Empowerment of Urban Local Bodies  
 
9 | P a g e  
Functions where ULBs were mere implementing agencies 
8. Urban planning 
including town 
planning 
Master 
Planning/Development 
Plans/Zonal Plans 
The Town & Country Planning 
Department  is primarily 
responsible for preparing 
Development plan and Sectoral 
plans, (HPTCP Rules 2016) . 
TCP 
Department  
Enforcing master planning 
regulations 
No Master Plans were prepared, 
and ULBs are only enforcing the 
regulations of the Development 
Plan, Sectoral Plan.  
ULBs 
Enforcing building bye-laws 
and licenses 
No building bye-laws were 
prepared by the ULBs except MC 
Shimla (1998). However, the 
Director, UDD (August 2015) had 
directed the MC Shimla to adopt / 
follow the TCP Rules, 2014.  
ULBs  
Group Housing, 
Development of Industrial 
areas 
Himachal Pradesh Housing and 
Urban Development Authority 
(HIMUDA) is responsible for 
planning & developing group 
housing schemes.  
(Discussed in detail in Para 
4.4.2)  
Himachal Pradesh State 
Industrial Development 
Corporation (HPSIDC)  is 
responsible for development of 
industrial areas / estates.  
(Discussed in detail in Para 
4.4.3)  
HIMUDA, 
HPSIDC 
9. Regulation of 
land-use and 
construction of 
buildings  
Regulating land use ULBs were responsible for 
regulation of construction and sub-
division of land up to 2500 sqm 
and the Director Town & Country 
Planning Department is 
responsible for areas more than 
2500 sqm . 
ULBs 
Approving building 
plans/high rises 
ULBs were only responsible for 
ensuring compliance to 
regulations prescribed in the 
Development Plans wrt 
construction of buildings/high rise 
buildings , except for Dalhousie & 
Manali where it was being 
executed by the field units of the 
TCP department under 
supervision of Deputy 
Commissioner of District.  
Further, checking of fire safety 
measures in high rise buildings 
was vested with Fire 
Department . 

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitution Amendment Act, 1992 
10 | P a g e  
Demolishing illegal 
buildings 
Section 253 of HPMC Act and 
section 211 of HPM Act 1994 
provides power to ULBs in respect 
of demolishing illegal building. 
This function was vested with 
ULBs.  
10. Planning for 
economic and 
social 
development 
Program implementation for 
economic activities 
ULBs:  Implementation of various 
welfare schemes in sectors such as 
Housing, Employment etc. as per 
scheme guidelines. 
Social Justice and 
Empowerment Department:  
Safeguarding welfare of SC/STs 
and other weaker sections. 
ULBs 
Policies for social 
development 
Social Justice 
and 
Empowerment 
Department  
11. Safeguarding 
the interests of 
weaker sections 
of society, 
including the 
handicapped 
and mentally 
retarded 
Identifying beneficiaries By ULBs ULBs 
Providing tools/benefits such 
as tricycles 
By Social Justice & 
Empowerment Department  
(SJ&ED) 
SJ&ED  
Housing programs ULBs through Centrally 
sponsored schemes– PMAY(U). 
ULBs 
Scholarships Various Centrally Sponsored 
scholarships schemes, State 
Government sponsored 
scholarships programs and 
Technical Education sponsored 
schemes were run by HP 
Education Department & Tribal 
Development  Department of HP 
and Technical Education 
Department of the State. 
ULBs had no role in this regard. 
Education & 
Tribal 
Development 
Department 
Functions with limited role of ULBs with overlapping jurisdiction 
12. Roads and 
bridges  
Construction and 
maintenance of roads 
ULBs: Construction and 
maintenance of Municipal roads 
along with bridges, drains, 
flyovers, and footpaths within the 
jurisdiction of ULBs. 
Himachal Pradesh Public 
Works Department (HPPWD):  
was responsible for road works 
including maintenance of Major 
District Roads, State Highways 
and National Highways within 
ULBs. 
ULBs and 
HPPWD 
Construction and 
maintenance of bridges, 
drains, flyovers and 
footpaths 
13. Vital statistics 
including birth 
and death 
registration  
Coordinating with hospitals / 
crematoriums etc.  for 
obtaining information 
No coordination of ULBs with 
hospitals as Hospitals were under 
control of Department of Health 
and Family Welfare. 
Crematoriums were under control 
of ULBs.  
ULBs & 
Health 
Department 
Maintaining and updating 
database 
ULBs  were responsible for 
maintaining and updating the data 

Chapter-IV: Devolution of Functions & Empowerment of Urban Local Bodies  
 
11  | P a g e  
of death and birth and issuance of 
certificate. Hospitals were also 
maintaining the data of death and 
birth and issuance of certificate. 
However, the birth and death 
reports are uploaded by the ULBs  
and Hospitals in the Civil 
Registration System which is a 
portal of Registrar General & 
Census Commissioner of India. 
14. Provision of 
urban amenities 
and facilities 
such as parks, 
gardens, 
playgrounds 
Creation of parks and 
gardens 
The State Government provides 
funds to  ULBs for construction of 
parks. Further, playgrounds were 
also being constructed by Youth & 
Sports Department of State. 
ULBs & 
Youth & 
Sports 
Department 
of State 
Operation and Maintenance By ULBs ULBs 
15. Public amenities 
including street 
lighting, parking 
lots, bus stops 
and public 
conveniences 
Installation and maintenance 
of streetlights 
Installation of street lights was 
being done by HP State Electricity 
Board Ltd. ( HPSEBL ) and 
maintenance of the streetlights 
was the responsibility of the 
ULBs. 
HPSEBL 
Deciding and operating bus 
routes 
The decisions regarding operating 
bus routes were taken by the 
Regional Transport Office, 
Transport Department. 
Transport 
Department 
Creation and maintenance of 
parking lots 
ULBs were responsible for 
creation and maintenance of 
parking within its jurisdiction. 
ULBs 
Creation and maintenance of 
public toilets 
By ULBs. ULBs  
16. Public health, 
sanitation 
conservancy   
and solid waste 
management 
Maintaining hospitals, 
dispensaries  
Maintenance of hospital and 
dispensaries in all the ULBs were 
being done by Health & Family 
Welfare Department (H&FWD) 
H&FWD 
Immunisation/Vaccination  The activity was being performed 
by H&FWD 
H&FWD  
Registration of births and 
deaths  
The activity was being performed 
by both H&FWD and ULBs 
H&FWD & 
ULBs  
Cleaning and disinfection of 
localities affected by 
infectious disease  
By ULBs ULBs  
Sewerage Management By Jal Shakti Vibhag in the State 
except for MC Shimla where 
Shimla Jal Prabhandhan Nigam 
Limited (SJPNL) is executing the 
function as discussed in para 
5.7.1 . 
JSV & 
SJPNL 
Solid-waste management By ULBs as discussed in  para 5.8  ULBs  

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitution Amendment Act, 1992 
12 | P a g e  
17. Promotion of 
cultural, 
educational and 
aesthetic aspects 
Schools and education This function was being 
performed by Education 
Department. 
Education 
Department 
Fairs and festivals Fairs and festivals were under the 
administrative control of District 
Administration. Further, various 
parts of functions have been 
devolved to various departments 
such as Department of Language, 
Art & Culture, ULBs, Jal Shakti 
Vibhag etc. 
Department 
of Language, 
Art & 
Culture, 
ULBs, Jal 
Shakti 
Vibhag etc. 
Cultural buildings / 
institutions 
Being performed by Department 
of Language, Art & Culture. 
Department 
of Language, 
Art & 
Culture 
Heritage Being performed by Department 
of Language, Art & Culture. 
Public space beautification By ULBs ULBs  
Function not devolved 
18. Fire Services Establishing and maintaining 
fire brigades 
This function was vested with Fire 
Department. 
Fire 
Department  
Providing fire NOC / 
approval certificate in respect 
of high-rise buildings 
It can be seen from the Tables 4.1  that out of 18 functions, one function was not 
devolved to ULBs. In case of remaining 17 functions , ULBs were solely responsible 
for five functions; were mere implementing agencies  for four functions; had limited 
role with overlapping jurisdiction of state departm ents / parastatals for six functions; 
and had no role for two functions.  
The State Government should cause to transfer the f unctions from the departments 
along with funds and functionaries to the ULBs. The objectives of the 74 
th  Constitution 
amendment could be achieved only by transferring fu nctions, funds and functionaries 
in letter and spirit. 
During the exit conference, the Government stated t hat five functions had been fully 
devolved and remaining functions were either partia lly devolved or un-devolved to 
ULBs. Further, the Government assured that the rema ining functions would be 
devolved fully in a phased manner. 
4.1.1  Activity Mapping of Functions 
Second Administrative Reforms Committee (ARC) in it s Sixth Report (Para 3.3.1.7) 
relating to Local Governance has recommended that t here should be a clear-cut 
delineation of functions at each level of local governance. This should not be a onetime 
exercise and should be done continuously while work ing out locally relevant socio-
economic programmes, restructuring organisations and framing subject matter laws. 
It was observed that mapping of the 18 functions li sted in 12 
th  Schedule into specific 
activities and assigning the responsibility for eac h activity was not done by the 
Government/ UDD. This had resulted in lack of clarity on roles and responsibilities of 
the ULBs. 

Chapter-IV: Devolution of Functions & Empowerment of Urban Local Bodies  
 
13  | P a g e  
Director UDD admitted (June 2021) the facts but did  not furnish reasons for not 
mapping the activities. 
During the exit conference, the State Government st ated that the action to map 18 
functions into specific activities and assigning the responsibility for each activity would 
be initiated. 
4.2  Institutional mechanisms for empowerment of Ur ban Local Bodies 
As already discussed above, the State Government ha d transferred 17 functions to 
ULBs. The discharge of these functions can be effec tive only when appropriate 
institutions are established and adequately empower ed. The 74 th  CAA provides for 
establishment of such institutional mechanisms as discussed in Table-3.1 . 
This section discusses the effectiveness of such institutional mechanisms. 
4.2.1  State Election Commission  
After the enactment of 74 th  amendment to the Constitution of India, the State Election 
Commission (SEC) was to be constituted under Articl e  243K and 243ZA for the 
superintendence, direction, and control of preparation of the electoral rolls and conduct 
of elections of Panchayats and Municipalities in th e State. The SEC of Himachal 
Pradesh came into existence on 23 rd  April 1994. 
It was noticed that SEC directs, under the provisio ns of Section 09 and 281 of HPMC 
and HPM Act, Deputy Commissioner of the District  to make proposals for delimitation 
of wards and publish the Draft Proposals for delimi tation. If objections or suggestions 
are received the same are disposed of by the Dy. Co mmissioner within 10 days from 
the receipt of objections. After removal of objecti on and suggestion, if any, final 
delimitation orders are issued and process for rese rvation and rotation of Wards are 
started. After finalization of orders of delimitati on and reservation of wards, orders of 
this effect is submitted by the Dy. Commissioner to Government for further submission 
to SEC. 
4.2.1.1 Composition of Municipalities  
Article 243R prescribes criteria for composition of  Municipalities. As per the HPMC 
and HPM Acts, the Corporations and Municipalities consist of following: 
• Elected Councillors/members,  
• Nominated Councillors/members (No voting power),  
• Member of State Legislative Assembly representing t he constituencies which 
comprise wholly or partly the Municipal area. 
The Mayor/President is elected amongst the Councill ors and is assisted by three 
Standing Committees 1. The Commissioner/Executive Officer/Secretary is the executive 
head of ULBs.  
                                                           
1 General Standing Committee, Finance, Audit and Pla nning Committee and Social Justice 
Committee. 

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitution Amendment Act, 1992 
14 | P a g e  
4.2.1.2 Reservation of seats  
Article 243T stipulates reservation of seats and se ction 10 & 11 of HPMC and HPM 
Acts also provide for reservation to SCs and STs, i n every municipal 
constituency/constituencies in proportion to their population. If total population of SCs 
or STs in a municipal area is less than five per cent  then no constituency shall be 
reserved. Fifty per cent  of seats shall be reserved for women out of total number of 
wards and within the seats reserved for SCs and STs . These reserved constituencies 
shall be rotated after every five years from the date of first election, based on percentage 
of population.  
It was observed that reservation of seats for SC, ST and Women were as per prescribed 
norms (Notification of reservation of ward 2015 and 2020) and rotation of the seats of 
Councillors/Members was being done as per reservation policy. 
4.2.1.3  Status of elections and formation of counc ils  
The election shall be conducted by SEC as per Secti on 09 of HPMC Act, 1994 and 
section 281 of HPM Act, 1994. Further, for implementation of the above provision, the 
State Government enacted HP Municipal Corporation E lection Rules, 2012 and 
Himachal Pradesh Municipalities Election Rules, 2015. 
Elections shall be completed before expiry of ULB’s  tenure. In case of dissolution, 
election shall be held within six months. Further, Article 243U of Constitution of India 
and provisions of the HPMC and HPM Acts, stipulate a fixed tenure of five years for 
the Councillors/Members of ULBs from the date of its first meeting. 
It was observed that elections in all the ULBs were  held, and councils were formed 
within stipulated time except in MC Shimla where election was held after a minor delay 
of 12 days which was due on 4 June 2017, but conducted on 16 June 2017. 
Status of elections held in the ULBs of the State is depicted in Table 4.2. 
Table-4.2: Status of elections and formation of councils in ULBs 
Category of 
Municipality 
Election due  Election 
Held on 
Delay/remarks if any 
Municipal 
Corporation Shimla 
04.06.2017 16.06.2017 12 days delay 
Municipal 
Corporation 
Dharamshala 
Not applicable as 
Dharamshala was upgraded 
from Council to Corporation 
on date 05.10.2015. 
27.03.2016 Nil 
Municipal Councils 10.01.2016 10.01.2016 31 Municipal Councils formed 
Nagar Panchayats 10.01.2016 10.01.2016 21 Nagar Panchayats formed 
4.2.1.4 Election of Mayor, Deputy Mayor and their t erm 
The Model Municipal Law 2003 circulated by the Ministry of Urban Development, GoI 
prescribes that the term of office of the Mayor/President shall be coterminous with the 
duration of the Municipality. 

Chapter-IV: Devolution of Functions & Empowerment of Urban Local Bodies  
 
15  | P a g e  
However, it was noticed that Section 36 of HPMC Act  provides that the Corporation 
shall at its first meeting and thereafter at the ex piration of every two and half years, 
elect one of its Councillors to be the Chairperson, to be known as the Mayor and another 
Councillor to be the Deputy Mayor of the Corporation. In Himachal Pradesh the tenure 
of the corporation is five years. 
It was observed that in 2010 vide an amendment in H PMC Act, Mayor and Deputy 
Mayor were to be elected directly for a tenure of f ive years, which was re-amended in 
2013 for two and half years and Mayor and Deputy Ma yor were to be elected from 
amongst the elected Councillors of the Corporation.  Thus, the terms of municipality 
and Mayor/Deputy Mayor were not coterminous and the section 36 of HPMC Act, was 
not in consonance with Model Municipal Law, 2003 of GoI. 
4.2.1.5  Election of President and Deputy President  of Councils 
Section 22 of HPM Act provides that every Municipal  Council or Nagar Panchayat 
shall elect President and Vice-President from amongst elected members. Section 23 of 
HPM Act provides for a fixed tenure of five years or the residue of the term , whichever 
is less for President/Vice President. 
In test-checked ULBs it was observed that the elect ions of President and Deputy 
President were held as per norms, and tenure of fiv e years was followed which was in 
consonance with the directions of Municipal Model Law 2003 of GoI. 
4.2.1.6 Frequency of meetings of ULBs 
Section 53 & 28 of the HPMC and HPM Act respectivel y provides that municipalities 
shall ordinarily hold at least one meeting in every  month for the transaction of its 
business. 
It was observed that in all the 14 test-checked ULBs, meetings of ULBs were not held 
regularly. The percentage of number of meetings of ULBs held, ranged between 
35  per cent and 95  per cent  during 2015-20 (as detailed in Appendix 4.1). 
During the exit conference, the Government stated that instructions would be issued to 
the ULBs to ensure conduct of requisite meetings and the matter will be taken up at the 
Govt. level for amendment of the Act to provide penal provision/feasible measures for 
not adhering the prescribed schedule of meetings by the ULBs. 
4.2.2  Standing Committees in ULBs 
Section 40 and section 49 of the HPMC and HPM Act p rovide for constitution of the 
standing committees along with their functions, which are detailed in Table 4.3 : 
  

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitution Amendment Act, 1992 
16 | P a g e  
Table-4.3: Functions of Standing Committees in ULBs 
Name of committee Functions 
General Standing 
Committee 
 
Functions relating to establishment matters, commun ications, buildings, 
urban housing, relief against natural calamities, water supply etc. 
Finance, Audit and 
Planning Committee 
 
Functions relating to the finance of the municipali ty, framing of budgets, 
scrutinizing proposals for increase of revenue, examination of receipts and 
expenditure statements, consideration of all propos als affecting the 
finances of the municipality etc.  
Social Justice 
Committee 
 
Functions relating to promotion of education, econo mic, social, cultural 
interest of weaker sections  
It was observed that all the three Standing Committ ees were constituted in the test-
checked ULBs. However, against prescribed 2 3640 meetings (260 x 14), only 173 
meetings were held in three ULBs (MC Solan: 44, MC Nahan: 83 and NP Sunni: 46). 
No meetings were held in remaining 11 selected ULBs.  
Thus, in 11 ULBs the standing committees remained a lmost non-functional during 
2015-20 and the requisite number of meetings were not conducted. 
4.2.3 Formation of Ward Committees in ULBs 
Section 51-C of HPM Act and Section 44-C of HPMC Ac t, 1994 provide that there 
shall be a Ward Committee (WC) for each ward in the Corporation / municipality to be 
constituted 
3 within six months of the constitution of Corporation / municipality. It shall 
be duty of the President to conduct meetings of the WC at least once in two months for 
discussing developmental issues and plans of the ward concerned. The WCs were to act 
as a bridge between the municipal government and ci tizens. They were to perform 
duties such as preparation and submission of ward development schemes for allotment 
of funds, ensure proper utilisation of allotted funds, maintenance of public utilities and 
safeguarding the assets of the corporation. 
It was noticed that WCs were not constituted in any  of the test-checked ULBs except 
in MC Shimla (SMC), where WCs were constituted in 3 0 out of 34 Wards as on date 
of audit. It was further noticed that against the r equired 505 meetings (July 2017 to 
November 2020) only one meeting was held in each WC. 
The Commissioners/Executive officers/Secretaries of  municipalities stated 
(October 2020-March 2021) that due to lack of knowl edge, less population of wards 
and unavailability of list of community personnel, the Ward Committees could not be 
constituted. 
 
                                                           
2 As per HP Municipal Business Bye Laws, 2006 every standing committee shall meet once a 
week on day as initially determined by the Standing Committee. 
3 Each WC shall consist of a President (elected memb er of the ward) and not more than nine 
eminent members, to be nominated by the Ward Sabha. 

Chapter-IV: Devolution of Functions & Empowerment of Urban Local Bodies  
 
17  | P a g e  
During the exit conference, the Government stated that instructions would be issued to 
the ULBs to ensure constitution of ward committees for discharge of assigned functions 
smoothly. 
4.2.4  Formation of District Planning Committee  
Article 243ZD of the Constitution and Section 421 &  261 of HPMC and HPM Acts, 
1994 mandated for constitution of a District Planni ng Committee (DPC)  for 
consolidation of plans prepared by panchayats and municipalities. The fourth SFC had 
also recommended the formation of DPC in the State.  The DPC was to prepare a 
comprehensive District Development Plan (DDP) about  matters of common interest 4 
between panchayats and municipalities. The Chairman  of DPC, as approved by the 
committee was to forward the DDP to the State Gover nment for integration into the 
State plan. 
It was noticed that the DPCs were constituted in al l the Districts. Further, the test-
checked ULBs had not prepared and submitted respect ive development plans to DPC 
as they were not aware about existence of DPC. In the absence of which the DPCs could 
not consolidate DDPs of the districts for further integration with State plan. 
Non-preparation of development plans by ULBs had re sulted in non-preparation of 
comprehensive plans of districts as a whole and int egrated development plan of the 
State. This had also resulted in lack of effective implementation of devolved functions. 
The Commissioners /Executive Officers /Secretaries stated (September 2020 to 
March 2021) that ULBs had not prepared and submitte d any DDP. However, specific 
reasons for non-preparation of development plans were not furnished. 
During the exit conference, the State Government as sured to strengthen the District 
Planning Committee and prepare Development Plans by ULBs. 
4.2.5  State Finance Commission  
Article 243-I of the Constitution of India makes it mandatory for the State Government 
to constitute a Finance Commission (FC) within one year of the commencement of the 
CAA and reconstitution after every five years. Stat e Finance Commission (SFC) is to 
review financial position of the local bodies and t o make recommendations for 
devolution of funds. Provision for constitution of SFC was also made in the HPMC and 
HPM Acts.  
4.2.5.1 Constitution of SFCs and implementation of recommendations 
Details regarding constitution and status of recomm endations of the five SFCs 
constituted in the State are given in Table-4.4. 
  
                                                           
4 Spatial planning; sharing of water and other physi cal and natural resources; integrated 
development of infrastructure and environment conse rvation and extent and type of available 
resources, whether financial or otherwise.  

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitution Amendment Act, 1992 
18 | P a g e  
Table-4.4: Statement showing the delay in constitution of SFC and implementation of 
recommendations 
SFC 
To be 
constituted 
as per 
Constitution 
To be re-
constituted 
after every 
five years 
Actually 
constituted 
Delay 
in 
months 
(4-3) 
Date of 
submission 
of SFC 
Report 
Date of 
submission 
of Report 
as per 
TOR 
Date of 
accept-
ance of the 
Report by 
Govt. 
Delay in 
months 
(6-7) 
Period 
covered 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 
First By 31 May 
1994 
-- April 1994 -- Nov 1996 Timeline 
not fixed 
April 1997 - 1996-97 to 
2000-01 
Second 1999-2000 May1999 25.05.1998 -- Oct 2002 Timeline 
not fixed 
March 
2003 
- 2002-03 to 
2006-07 
Third 2004-05 May 2004 26.05.2005 12 Nov 2007 July 2006 A pril 2008 17 2007-08 to 
2011-12 
Fourth 2009-10 May 2009 20.05.2011 24 Jan 2014 Dec 2011 Fe b 2014 25 2012-13 to 
2016-17 
Fifth 2014-15 May 2014 19.11.2014 06 Jan 2018 April 2016 Aug 2018 21 2017-18 to 
2021-22 
Recommendations of the fourth and fifth FCs were applicable during the period covered 
under Audit. It can be seen from the table above that: 
• There was delay in constitution of three SFCs (third, fourth & fifth) by 12, 24 and 
06 months from scheduled date, and there was furthe r delay in submission of 
reports to the State Government by 17, 25 and 21 months. 
• Delay of 24 months in constitution of 4 th  SFC was due to delay in granting 
approval for engagement of secretarial and supporti ng technical staff for 
Commission.  As a result the Commission had to submit Interim Reports (IR) for 
the years 2012-13 and 2013-14. 
• Fifth  SFC was to submit its report by April 2016. However , delay of 21 months 
in submitting report was due to non-receiving of pr imary data from ULBs. As a 
result, the SFC submitted IRs for the year 2017-18 and 2018-19 based on trend 
analysis of 4 th  FC by recommending 10 per cent enhancement.  
Thus, there were delays in constitution of SFCs, su bmission of reports to the State 
Government and interim report of one SFC was given on the basis of previous SFC 
reports instead of recommendation of funds on the basis of actual analysis. 
During the exit conference, the State Government assured that matter regarding timely 
release of mandated shares of the ULBs would be tak en up with the Additional Chief 
Secretary (Finance), Government of Himachal Pradesh. 
4.2.5.2 Response of the State Government to SFC rec ommendations 
The State Government may accept the recommendations of the SFC in totality or with 
certain modifications. It was observed that the Sta te Government had accepted some 
recommendations with few modifications, and action had not been initiated on other 
recommendations. 
• Financial Recommendations of SFCs:  
The SFC-wise recommendations regarding transfer of funds and the amounts released 
by the State Government are given in Table-4.5 . 

Chapter-IV: Devolution of Functions & Empowerment of Urban Local Bodies  
 
19  | P a g e  
Table-4.5: SFC-wise recommended devolution of financial resources  
(₹ in crore)  
Tenure of State Finance Commission 
Amount 
recommended 
by SFC 
Amount 
released by the 
State Govt. 
Excess(+)/ 
Short (-) 
First State Finance Commission (1996-2001)  74.55  83.97  +9.42 
Second State Finance Commission (2002-2007)  159.46  133.66  -25.80 
Third State Finance Commission (2007-2012)  223.02  212.05  -10.97 
Fourth State Finance Commission (2012-17)  382.44  382.51  +0.07 
Fifth State Finance Commission (2017-22) 680.76 
 
365.00 against 
recommended  
₹ 369.10  
(2017-2020) 
-4.10 
Source: Report of 5 th  State Finance Commission 
It could be seen from the table above that there we re variations in funds actually 
allocated and as recommended by the SFCs. 
• Other recommendations: 
Besides recommendations on financial devolution, th e SFCs have also recommended 
several institutional measures for strengthening of ULBs in long term (Appendix 4.2 ). 
Some of the recommendations where action is yet to be taken are detailed below.  
1.  Recommendations of SFCs on revenue enhancements: 
• First SFC recommended that ULBs should mandatorily raise statutory 
resources by levying rates and taxes within their p urview, as some of the 
ULBs were not levying statutory 5 rates and taxes.  
 It was observed in 14 test-checked ULBs, two ULBs (Nerchowk and Solan) 
were not levying the statutory property tax as disc ussed in detail in the 
Para 5.4.1 . 
• Third SFC recommended for differential taxation for  urban properties 
according to their geographical location.  
 It was observed that the recommendation has been partially implemented as 
only 17 out of 54 ULBs were levying property tax as per Unit Area Method, 
which is differential taxation of property based on  geographical location. 
(Detail in the Para 5.4.1 .) 
2.  Recommendation of SFC on creation of institutional mechanism: 
• Third SFC as well as 13 th FC recommended for setting up of permanent 
institutional arrangement for collection and compil ation of financial data of 
Local Bodies on regular basis and to track implemen tation of the 
recommendation of SFCs and CFCs.  
                                                           
5 The HPMC and HPM Act, Section 84 and 65 mandatoril y provide for levy of property tax on 
land and building, other taxes, user charges and fees are optional for the ULBs.  

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitution Amendment Act, 1992 
20 | P a g e  
 It was observed that the recommendation has not be en implemented. Non 
setting up of permanent institutional arrangement h as resulted in delayed 
constitution of the State Finance Commission and im plementation of 
recommendations as discussed in Para 4.2.5 . 
• Fifth SFC recommended for creation of a Centralized Pension Fund to meet 
out pensionary liabilities of ULBs’ employees.  
It was noticed that Centralized Pension Fund was not constituted. 
3.  General recommendation:  
• The first SFC recommended for resorting to negotiat ed loans from the 
national funding agencies by the ULBs.  
 It was noticed in Audit that HPM Act 1994 was not amended to provide for 
raising of loans from the national funding agencies . Thus, the Municipal 
Councils and Nagar Panchayats are not in position t o raise loans from the 
national funding agencies. 
 
Implementation of the above recommendations would have contributed significantly in 
realisation of objectives of the 74 th  CAA and decentralization in real sense. 
4.2.6  Property Tax Board  
The 13 
th  Finance Commission mandated constitution of a Property Tax Board (Board) 
for availing Performance Grant, on the lines of Wes t Bengal Valuation Board 
constituted in 1980. The State Level Property Tax B oard 6 (Board) was constituted 
(March 2011) by the State Government to assist the ULBs to put in place an 
independent and transparent mechanism for assessing property tax. Further, the Board 
was to make suitable recommendations on Property Ta x for at least 25 per cent  of the 
aggregate number of estimated properties across all  Municipal Corporations and 
municipalities in the State by 31  March, 2015 and to make a work plan indicating how 
the targets would be covered. 
The following were observed during audit: 
• The board was initially constituted for a period of  five years
, however, it was 
observed that the Board was not reconstituted till date. 
• Property Tax Board had prepared and notified work plan (March 2011) in which 
timelines were fixed for putting in place an indepe ndent and transparent 
mechanism for assessing Property Tax. Four meetings  were held till 2013. No 
meeting was held after 2013. Neither the recommenda tions nor the records 
relating to recommendations provided by the Board t o the ULBs were produced 
to Audit. 
                                                           
6 (1) Principal Secretary (UD) to the Govt. of HP: C hairman, (2) Director, Land Record: Member, 
(3) Director, UD H.P: Member Secretary (4) Any other Consultant/Expert/Special invitee to be 
co-opted as per need.  

Chapter-IV: Devolution of Functions & Empowerment of Urban Local Bodies  
 
21  | P a g e  
Therefore, in the absence of assistance and recomme ndations by the Board, ULBs 
lacked technical guidance for assessment and revision of property tax. It was noted that 
a uniform system for assessment of property tax has  not been implemented across all 
the ULBs. Findings regarding the lack of uniformity  in assessing property tax in the 
various test-checked ULBs are discussed in Para 5.4.1 . 
In the absence of the Board, the Urban Development Department decided to prepare 
Request for Proposal (RFP) documents for inviting proposals from eligible consultancy 
firms for preparation of GIS based Property Tax Man agement System. This RFP 
document was circulated (2015) to all the ULBs to invite the tenders for preparation of 
GIS based Property Tax Management System for their municipality.  
Director, UDD stated (April 2021) that at present 17 ULBs have implemented unit area 
method for collection of property tax and in the re maining ULBs process of inviting 
tender is in progress. 
During the exit conference, the State Government assured that the efforts would be made 
to reconstitute the Property Tax Board, to give recommendations for improvement in the 
Property Tax Management System. 
4.3 Powers of the State Government over ULBs  
Audit observed that the State Government had overri ding powers over ULBs, which 
was against the spirit of the 74 
th  Constitutional Amendment. A few provisions are 
indicated in Table-4.6. 
Table-4.6: Statement showing overriding powers of the State Government over ULBs 
Sl. 
No. Subject Provisions  
1. Power to frame 
Rules  
The State Government may by notification in the Gaz ette, frame rules 
for the HPMC/HPM after approval of the State Legisl ature (Section 
393(2) of HPMC Act and Section 279 of HPM Act).  
2. Power to cancel 
and suspend a 
resolution or 
decision taken 
by ULBs 
Section 418 of HPMC Act provides that the State Gov ernment may 
cancel a resolution or decision taken by ULBs, if t he State Government 
is of the opinion that it is in contravention of or  in excess of powers 
conferred by the Act or of any other law for the time being in force or is 
likely to lead to breach of peace or cause injury and/or annoyance to the 
public or any class or body of persons. The Government or the Director 
under intimation to the Government, may, suspend ex ecution of such 
resolution or order, or prohibit the doing of any such act. Section 263 of 
HPM Act also provides for the same. 
3. Power to 
dissolve ULBs 
Section 404 of the HPMC Act and section 271 of HPM Act provide that 
the State Government shall, by notification in the Gazette, dissolve the 
ULBs, if ULBs fail to perform or default in the per formance of any of 
the duties imposed on them, after giving reasonable  opportunity. The 
order of dissolution of ULBs shall be laid before t he House of State 
Legislature with a statement of reasons thereof.  
4. Cancellation of 
bye laws by 
Government 
Section 397 of HPMC Act and section 217 of HPM Act provide that any 
power to make bye-laws conferred by this Act is conferred, after having 
been published in Official Gazette for inviting pub lic objections 

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitution Amendment Act, 1992 
22 | P a g e  
Sl. 
No. Subject Provisions  
provided that State Government may cancel any such bye-law if found 
contrary to the provisions of the Act or the rules made there under and 
thereupon the bye-law shall cease to have effect. 
5. Sanction to 
borrow money 
Section 144 of HPMC Act allowed municipal corporati ons to borrow 
money, but only after prior sanction from the Gover nment. No 
corresponding provision available in HPM Act. 
6. Sanction of 
Regulations by 
Government 
Section 394 of HPMC Act provides that any regulatio n which the 
Corporation under this Act, may make with the approval of Government, 
may be altered, or rescinded by the Corporation with the approval of the 
Government in the exercise of its powers under this  Act. No regulation 
made by the Corporation under this Act shall have effect until it has been 
published in the Official Gazette by the Government. No corresponding 
provision available in HPM Act. 
7. Power of State 
Government to 
give directions 
for 
compounding 
deviations from 
sanctioned plan 
The Government may, from time to time, give such sp ecial or general 
directions in the matters of policy in relation to the compounding of the 
cases involving deviations from the sanctioned plans as in its opinion are 
required to be followed by the Commissioner for com pounding such 
cases (Section 255 of HPMC Act & Sec 211 (3) of HPM Act). 
8. Budget 
Estimates 
The Budget estimates received by the Govt. under su b-section (2) of 
Section 80 of HPMC Act are to be returned to the Co rporation before 
31 st  March after approval without any modification or w ith such 
modification as the government may deem fit. Further, every increase in 
a budget grant and every additional budget grant made in any year under 
sub-section (1) of Section 81 of HPMC Act shall be made with the prior 
approval of the Government and after such approval shall be deemed to 
be included in the budget estimate finally adopted for that year. 
In the case of Municipal Councils and Nagar Panchay ats the budget as 
passed by the municipality is sent, through the Deputy Commissioner to 
the Director UDD, beside such may be fixed by the D irector UDD. The 
Director shall approve the budget with or without a ny modification 
(Section 249(2) & (5) of HPM Act). 
9. Taxes etc. to be 
imposed by 
Corporation / 
Municipality 
under this Act 
and 
arrangement of 
certain taxes 
collected by 
Government 
The Corporation / Municipality shall, for the purpo ses of this Act, levy 
the following taxes:- 
(a) taxes on buildings and lands; 
(b) such other taxes, at such rates as the State Government may, 
by notification, in each case direct: 
(Section 84(1) of HPMC and section 65 of HPM Act)   
10. Power of 
Government in 
regard to taxes 
The Government may by order exempt in whole or in p art from the 
payment of any tax any person or class of persons o r any property or 
description of property. (Section 143 of HPMC Act &  section 80 of 
HPM Act) 
From the above it is clear that the State Government had overriding powers over ULBs. 

Chapter-IV: Devolution of Functions & Empowerment of Urban Local Bodies  
 
23  | P a g e  
4.4 Parastatals, their functions and impact on Urba n Local Bodies 
The objective of the 74 th  CAA was to entrust delivery of major civic functions to ULBs. 
However, services such as water supply & sanitation  and development of housing 
colonies, continue to be delivered by parastatals as indicated in Table 4.1 . 
These parastatals were controlled by the State Gove rnment and have their own 
governing bodies which do not include adequate elec ted representatives of ULBs. 
These parastatals are directly accountable to the S tate Government rather than ULBs. 
The role of parastatals and their impact on the dev olved functions is discussed in the 
subsequent paragraphs. 
4.4.1  Shimla Jal Prabhandhan Nigam Limited 
Shimla Jal Prabandhan Nigam Limited (SJPNL) was con stituted in Shimla for 
management of water supply and sewerage system for Greater Shimla Planning Area 
only, whereas in the State these functions were per formed by the Jal Shakti Vibhag of 
State Government. 
Shimla Jal Prabandhan Nigam Limited (SJPNL) has been incorporated as public limited 
company on 19 June 2018. The shareholding of the company is distributed between the 
Municipal Corporation, Shimla (SMC) and the State G overnment in the ratio of 51:49 
respectively. The objective of the company is to ca rry out water and wastewater 
management in Greater Shimla Planning Area. 
The company has been set up by the SMC and State Go vernment to work as a single 
nodal agency for undertaking all water and sewerage  activities in Shimla, from the 
funds to be provided by the State Government. 
 
The function of ‘Water Supply and Sewage Management’ was stated to be devolved to 
ULBs. However, it was noticed that: 
• In 14 test-checked ULBs the function of Water Supply and Sewage Management 
was vested with Jal Shakti Vibhag except Shimla MC where SJPNL was 
responsible for execution of Water Supply and Sewag e Management and MC 
Solan where the function of distribution of water is being performed by the MC. 
• The SMC had 51 per cent  share in the company, however out of 09 Board of 
Directors (BoD) the SMC had only three representatives. 
• As per the notification (June 2018) issued by the S MC, SJPNL was to submit 
quarterly reports with regard to works/steps taken by the Company. However, it 
was noted that the company is not submitting its st atus/progress report  of 
working to the SMC. 
• Control over MD-cum-CEO of the company had been kep t out of the purview 
of the SMC by the BoD. 
From the above, it is evident that the SMC had limited control over the functioning of 
the SJPNL thereby defeating the purpose of devolution of functions.  

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitution Amendment Act, 1992 
24 | P a g e  
During the exit conference, the State Government stated that SJPNL is created to avail 
the World Bank loan for water and sewerage system amounting to ₹ 1,100 crore. Due 
to limited capacity of the MC Shimla to handle larg e projects, and involvement of 
multiple agencies, the separate company was created  for timely completion of the 
project. However, proper representation in the BoD and accountability towards MC 
Shimla will be ensured by directing officials of SJPNL to attend House meetings and 
address the concerns of the councilors. Further accountability regarding quality control 
and distribution of water issues will be strengthened. 
4.4.2  Himachal Pradesh Housing and Urban Developme nt Authority 
(HIMUDA) 
HIMUDA was established under HP Housing and Urban D evelopment Authority Act, 
2004 to plan and develop land and create infrastructure, to meet with the housing needs 
of different income groups. The HIMUDA had notified  its own regulations, after the 
approval of State Government, and have prepared bye -laws for construction of 
buildings and collects development fee, license fee s to undertake a scheme etc. 
HIMUDA creates the infrastructure such as developme nt of plots and construction of 
colonies for lease and sale to the public. It was n oticed that the power regarding 
approval of building construction plan was being di scharged by HIMUDA for 
development of housing colonies without any involve ment of ULBs except seeking 
NOC for use of land. Further, there is no representation of ULBs in the Governing Body 
of HIMUDA. This is indicative of the fact that the transfer of function was only in letter 
and not in spirit. 
Senior Architect, HIMUDA stated (June 2021) that before implementing any Housing 
Scheme, HIMUDA obtained approval of the Town and Co untry Planning Department 
and Municipality concerned. It was further stated that elected representatives were not 
involved during the construction/improvement/creating infrastructure. 
During the exit conference, the State Government stated that NOC is obtained by these 
Authorities for the development of housing colonies and industrial units and thereafter 
these areas are developed by these authorities at t heir own. The reply is not tenable as 
the ULBs have no other role except to issue NOC, impacting the autonomy of ULBs as 
this is a devolved function. 
4.4.3  Himachal Pradesh State Industrial Developmen t Corporation Limited 
(HPSIDC) 
The function of ‘Urban planning including town planning’ and ‘Regulation of land-use 
and construction of buildings’ within industrial ar eas is being performed by HPSIDC. 
It is the major agency in the State to promote sett ing up of small, medium and large-
scale industrial units. It is also a major State level financial institution and provides long 
terms loans for industrial projects. 
It was observed that even after devolution of the function to ULBs vide notification of 
State Government in August 1994, the same is being executed by HPSIDC within the 

Chapter-IV: Devolution of Functions & Empowerment of Urban Local Bodies  
 
25  | P a g e  
industrial area falling within jurisdiction of the ULBs. Hence, the transfer of the 
function was only in letter and not in spirit. 
The Corporation stated (July 2021) that ULBs had no  role in the development of 
Industrial area (IA) and further stated after devel opment of IA, the Industrial Area 
Development Agency looks after the O&M of civic amenities. 
4.4.4  Smart City Mission 
The Ministry of Urban Development (MoUD), GoI launched (June 2015) Smart Cities 
Mission (SCM) with aim to cover 100 cities during t he period of five years i.e., up to 
June 2020. The objective of the Mission is to promo te cities that provide core 
infrastructure and give a decent quality of life to  its citizens, a clean and sustainable 
environment and application of ‘Smart’ Solutions.  The focus is on sustainable and 
inclusive development and the idea is to look at co mpact areas, create a replicable 
model, which will act like a light house to other aspiring cities.  The implementation of 
Mission at city level would be done by Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) promoted by the 
State Government.   
The SPV will be a limited Company incorporated unde r Company Act 2013. The 
resolution will be passed by casting votes in the Board of Directors. 
Section 03 of Annexure-5 of Mission Statement & Gui delines of Smart City provides 
that the Board of Directors will have representativ es of Central Government, State 
Government, ULB and Independent Directors, in addit ion to the Chief Executive 
Officer (CEO) and Functional Directors. Additional Directors (such as representative 
of parastatal) may be taken on the Board, as consid ered necessary. The Company and 
shareholders will voluntarily comply with the provi sion of the Companies Act 2013 
with respect to induction of independent directors. Below, are given the broad terms of 
appointment and role of the SPV Board:  
1.  The Chairperson of the SPV will be the Divisional C ommissioner/ 
Collector/Municipal Commissioner/Chief Executive of  the Urban Development 
Authority as decided by the State Government.  
2.  The representative of the Central Government will be a Director on the Board of 
the SPV and will be appointed by the MoUD. 
3.  The CEO of the SPV will be appointed with the approval of the MoUD. 
4.  The Independent Directors will be selected from the  data bank(s) maintained by 
the Ministry of Corporate Affairs and preference will be given to those who have 
served as independent directors in the Board of Com panies fulfilling Clause 49 
of the listing agreement of Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI). 
In Himachal Pradesh, two cities viz., Dharamshala a nd Shimla were selected to be 
covered under the Mission and two companies (SPVs) were constituted under Company 
Act 2013 for Smart City Dharamshala and Shimla. 
However, it was noticed that in Dharamshala Smart C ity Limited (DSCL), 03 out of 
12 members of BoD were from MC Dharamshala and in S himla Smart City Limited 

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitution Amendment Act, 1992 
26 | P a g e  
(SSCL), 02 out of 12 members of BoD were from MC Shimla. Thus, representation of 
Municipal Corporations in the BoDs of these two SPV s varied between 25 per cent  
(DSCL) and 17 per cent  (SSCL), however, the stake holding power was 50:50 between 
State Government and ULB (share given by GoI).  
The Status of projects under the Smart City Mission as of March 2021 is given below: 
(₹ in crore) 
Status of Project 
DSCL SSCL Total 
Projects  Cost  Projects  Cost  Project  Cost  
Total Projects sanctioned 68  561.38  137  542.50  205  1103.88  
Completed 19  115.64  07  8.84  26  124.48  
Under progress 32  200.23  56  198.31  88  398.54  
Yet to be started 07  39.95  25  54.69  32  94.64  
Projects at planning stage 10  205.56  49  280.66  59  486.22  
In Smart City Mission, the Special Purpose Vehicle ( Dharamshala Smart City 
Limited (DSCL) & Shimla Smart City Limited (SSCL) ) was preparing the plans for 
retrofitting, redevelopment, Greenfield Development  and Pan City initiative, which 
were being either executed by themselves or through  the line departments of the State 
Government / agencies. In this process, some of the  devolved functions/works such as 
upgradations and maintenance of roads, streets, Ski ll Development Centre, 
underground bins, e-toilets of the Municipal Corpor ations were being executed by the 
line departments or other agencies instead of Municipal Corporations. 
These SPVs were directly accountable to State Gover nment than to ULBs, and the 
representatives of ULBs had only 25 per cent  (DSCL) and 17 per cent  (SSCL) 
representation in the Board of Director. Further, t he functions devolved to ULB were 
being executed by other agencies on direction of SPV. 
During the exit conference, the State Government stated that projects under Smart City 
Mission in Dharamshala and Shimla were entrusted to Special Purpose Vehicles created 
under the Chairmanship of Chief Secretary for prope r coordination with various 
Departments to complete projects in mission mode. T he execution by the ULBs is not 
possible due to involvement of multiple agencies and the limited capacity of the ULB. 
The reply is not tenable because the capacity build ing of ULBs had to be done by 
transferring funds and functionaries in order to execute the functions devolved to them 
with complete autonomy. Moreover, some of the work devolved to ULB was also being 
executed by the Special Purpose vehicles. 
4.5 Summary of Audit Findings 
• Tenure of Mayor/Deputy Mayor in the MCs was 2 and ½  years which was not 
coterminous with the term of the Corporation affecting long term planning. 
• Ward Committees were not constituted in any of the ULBs except SMC. Even 
in SMC required meetings were not held leading to l ack of participation of the 
public in development works. 

Chapter-IV: Devolution of Functions & Empowerment of Urban Local Bodies  
 
27  | P a g e  
• District Planning Committees (DPC) were constituted  in all the Districts of 
test-checked ULBs, however envisaged functioned were not carried out by them 
in the absence of receipt of DDPs from the ULBs concerned. This had resulted 
in non-preparation of district plans and non-integration of the same in the State 
plan. 
• Delay in constitution of SFCs and subsequent delay in submission of final 
reports to the State Government had led to submission of interim reports based 
on trend of previous reports. 
• Existence of parastatals had significantly eroded a utonomy of the ULBs in 
implementation of functions such as urban planning and regulation of land use 
and water supply and sanitation. 
4.6 Recommendations 
In light of the audit findings, the State Government may like to consider: 
(i)  taking decisive action in order to translate the vi sion of decentralisation into 
reality, besides providing adequate degree of auton omy to ULBs in respect of 
functions assigned to them in line with the Constitutional provisions; 
(ii)  constituting requisite committees for effective planning and better execution at 
ULBs’ level; and 
(iii)  involving greater participation of ULBs in the functioning of various parastatals 
in the State. 
 

Chapter-V 
Financial Resources of ULBs 

29  | P a g e  
 
Sustainable financing is paramount to ensure discha rge of any function. The devolved 
functions can be carried out effectively by 14ULBs only when they are supported with 
sufficient financial resources. Such financial reso urces could take the form of 
predictable fiscal transfers or access to own reven ue streams that are buoyant and 
commensurate with the expenditure obligations, acco mpanied by appropriate 
expenditure powers. Predictable fiscal transfers to ULBs need to be ensured through a 
robust State Finance Commission mechanism and compl iance with State and Central 
Finance Commission recommendations. Access to own s ources of revenue would 
include both the power to levy and collect from specific revenue streams. Expenditure 
powers refer to reasonable delegation limits that allow the ULB to utilise their financial 
resources. 
5.1 Sources of revenue 
The details of revenues of ULBs in the State during the period 2015-16 to 2019-20 are 
indicated in Table-5.1 .  
Table 5.1: Details of revenues of all the ULBs during the period 2015-16 to 2019-20 
(₹ in crore) 
Particulars 2015-16 2016-17  2017-18  2018-19  2019-20  Total 
Central Government (Central FC) 24.55 34.87 30.98 1 7.92 42.13 150.45 
Finance Commission (FC) grants (State 
Government (State FC)) 85.51 99.45 111.36 120.74 132.90 549.96 
GoI grants for CSS 159.64 372.98 53.38 145.62 150.8 5 882.47 
State Government grants for State 
scheme 67.15 75.08 76.62 221.94 216.44 657.23 
Own Revenue 114.50 143.83 128.26 130.85 122.96 640. 40 
Assigned Revenue 5.17 3.81 5.77 5.84 6.08 26.67 
Total Revenue 456.52 730.02 406.37 642.91 671.36 2, 907.18 
Percentage of own revenue to total 
revenue 25 20 32 20 18 22 
Source: Information provided by UDD of all 54 ULBs in HP  
Shares of various sources of funds of ULBs for the period 2015-20 in percentage are 
shown in the Chart 5.1 . 
Financial Resources of ULBs Chapter 5  

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitution Amendment Act, 1992 
30  | P a g e  
Chart-5.1: Percentage share of various sources of funds (2015-20) 
 
As depicted above, percentage of own revenue to total revenue for the period 2015-16 
to 2019-20 varied between 18 per cent to 32 per cent  and overall percentage was only 
22 per cent of total income. The major share of income is being  met through SFC 
Grants, Centrally Sponsored Schemes and State Sponsored Schemes. 
During the exit conference, the State Government assured to take effective steps for the 
improvement and generation of own revenue of the ULBs. 
5.2 Fiscal transfers to Urban Local Bodies 
Funds were devolved to ULBs through transfer by the  Central and State Government 
in the form of grants (Table 5.1 ). Fiscal transfers from Government formed the majo r 
portion of the revenue (averaging 78 per cent ) of ULBs in the State during the period 
2015-16 to 2019-20.  
There were, however, certain shortcomings under fiscal transfers as discussed below: 
5.2.1  State Finance Commission grants  
One of the major constituents of financial resource s of ULBs comprised grants 
recommended by SFC. Timely constitution of SFC and acceptance of its 
recommendations have a bearing on the assured transfer of funds to ULBs. 
Short release of funds under SFC 
The details of funds recommended by SFC and actuall y released by the State 
Government to ULBs during the period 2015-16 to 2019-20 are given in Table-5.2 . 
Table-5.2: Details of grants due and released under SFC during 2015-16 to 2019-20 
(₹ in crore) 
Year Recommendation by the 
SFC 
Actual release by the State 
Govt. Excess/ short release 
2015-16 81.43 85.51 +4.08 
2016-17 101.41 99.45 -1.96 
2017-18 111.55 111.35 -0.20 
2018-19 122.65 120.74 -1.91 
2019-20 134.90 132.90 -2.00 
TOTAL 551.94 549.95 -1.99 
Source: Figures furnished by the UDD 
5%
19%
30%23%
22%
1%
FC Grant 
State FC grants 
GoI grants for CSS 
State Sponsored Scheme 
Own Revenue 
Assigned Revenue 

Chapter-V: Financial Resources of ULBs  
31  | P a g e  
Audit observed that during the period 2015-16 to 2019-20, an amount of ₹ 549.95 crore 
was released against the mandated devolution of ₹ 551.94 crore. It was further noted 
that except for the year 2015-16, there was a short fall in the amounts released for the 
period 2016-17 to 2019-20. During 2015-16, funds of  ₹ 4.08 crore were released in 
excess of the mandated devolution, whereas there wa s a shortfall in funds released to 
ULBs against the mandated devolution by an extent o f ₹ 6.07 crore during 2016-17 to 
2019-20. 
5.2.2 Central Finance Commission grants 
Article 280(3)(C) of the Constitution mandates the Central Finance Commission (CFC) 
to recommend measures to augment the Consolidated F und of a State to supplement 
the resource of Municipalities based on the recomme ndations of the respective SFCs. 
The 13 
th  Finance Commission and 14 th Finance Commission recommended basic grant 
and performance grant to ULBs as a percentage of di visible pool account. The grant 
was divided in basic and performance grant in the ratio 80:20. 
5.2.2.1 Allocation and release of CFC grants 
Fourteenth Finance Commission (CFC) recommended a t otal allocation of 
₹ 201.76 
crore. Out of which ₹ 161.41 crore under basic grants for the period 201 5-20 and 
₹ 40.35 crore under performance grants for the perio d 2016-20 for the State of 
Himachal Pradesh. 
Basic Grant 
The Chart-5.2 depicts the allocation and release of CFC basic gr ant during the period 
2015-16 to 2019-20.
 
Chart-5.2: Allocation and release of CFC basic grants during the period 2015-16 to 2019-20 
 
Source:  Allocation/release of basic grant (14 th  FC) 
 
The above chart shows that CFC had allocated basic grant of 
₹ 161.41 crore to the ULBs 
of the State of HP for the period 2015-20. Against the allocated basic grant, an amount 
of ₹ 137.20 crore was released, besides interest of ₹ 0.22 crore (2015-16: ₹ 0.07 crore 
and 2016-17: ₹ 0.15 crore) on delayed release of basic grant was also released.  
The basic grant and performance grant is released in two installments. It was observed 
that there was delay in release of grant of ₹ 17.92 crore (2 nd  installment) for the year 
19.36 
26.81 30.98 
35.84 
48.42 
19.43 
26.96 
30.98 
17.92 
42.13 
0
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 
₹ in crore 
Allocation and release of Basic Grant during 2015-20 
Allocation Release 

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitution Amendment Act, 1992 
32  | P a g e  
2018-19, which was released during the year 2019-20 . Similarly, the grant of 
₹ 42.13 crore i.e., ₹ 17.92 crore (2 nd  installment of 2018-19) and ₹ 24.21 crore 
(1 st  installment of 2019-20) was released during 2019-2 0. The 2 nd  installment of basic 
grant of ₹ 24.21 crore for the year 2019-20 was released during the year 2020-21. Thus, 
there was delay in release of 2 nd  installment of basic grants for the year 2018-19 a nd 
2019-20.  
Performance Grant (PG) 
Performance grant was designed to serve the purpose  of ensuring reliable audited 
accounts and data of receipts and expenditure, to e ncourage ULBs to generate own 
revenues and to improve the quality of basic servic es they deliver. The improvements 
in the quality of basic services are likely to lead to increase in the willingness of citizens 
to pay for the services. 
The weightage for transformative urban reforms 
The 14 
th  FC laid down three mandatory conditions for ULBs t o avail the performance 
grants. The mandatory conditions and their weightage are given in the Table 5.3. 
Table 5.3: Detail of mandatory condition and their weightage 
Sl. No.  Reform Weightage 
1. Audit of Annual Accounts 10 
2. Increase in Own Revenue Sources 40 
3. Publishing of Service Level Benchmarks  50 
Total (1+ 2 + 3) 100 
ULBs getting a score of 60 and above in a year (per formance year) would be eligible 
for the Performance Grant to be released in the subsequent financial year (release year). 
The ULBs getting a score of less than 60 will not be eligible for the Performance Grant. 
In case of ULBs of Northeastern States and Hill Sta tes (Himachal Pradesh), a score of 
50 and above would make them eligible for the Performance Grant. 
Allocation and Release of Performance grant 
Audit observed that GoI had released performance grant of 
₹ 7.91 crore unconditionally 
for the year 2016-17 (release year) and PG of ₹ 32.44 crore for the subsequent years 
(2017-20) was not released out of total allocation of ₹ 40.35 crore to the Govt. of HP 
for the period 2016-20. 
In 14 test-checked ULBs, the records in respect of the achievement of three mandatory 
conditions for PG for performance year 2016-17 was not produced to audit. 
 However, 
as per the records made available for the performance year 2017-18 and 2018-19, it was 
observed that seven out of 14 test-checked ULBs scored 50 marks during 2017-18 and 
nine scored 50 marks during 2018-19 for release year 2018-19 & 2019-20 respectively, 
as detailed in the Appendix-5.1 (A & B) .  
Thus, as per benchmarks, the aforementioned test-checked ULBs were eligible for the 
performance grant for the release year 2018-19 and 2019-20. However, the correctness 
of the SLBs reported by ULBs was based on the data reported by ULBs. However, 

Chapter-V: Financial Resources of ULBs  
33  | P a g e  
Performance Grants for all the three years i.e., 2017-18 to 2019-20 was not released to 
State Government.  
Role of State Government in release of Performance Grant 
Although, it was the duty of each ULB to self-evalu ate and submit its claim for 
performance grant to the State Govt. not later than 30 September of each year for which 
the performance grant is being claimed in the presc ribed format. As per prescribed 
guideline in the para 04 of the Toolkit of Performa nce Grant, the State Governments 
are expected to send their consolidated report and claim of the performance grant after 
evaluation of performance of the ULBs and due verification, not later than 30 th  October 
of each year to Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs (MoHUA) by uploading the data 
in SMARTNET, a website of MoHUA. 
As per the claims submitted by State Government to MoHUA, it was noticed that 16, 
12, 28 out of 54 ULBs had qualified for PG for rele ase year 2017-18, 2018-19 & 
2019-20, respectively. However, scrutiny of records  on SMARTNET, revealed that 
data for all the years were not accessible, hence authenticity/correctness of the data and 
claims could not be verified. 
The Director UDD stated (July 2021) that on receipt of necessary claims for the release 
of performance grant for the years 2017-18 to 2019-20, the same were submitted by the 
department to GoI online through SMARTNET. However,  neither the PG amounting 
to 
₹ 8.95 crore, ₹ 10.17 crore and ₹ 13.32 crore for the years 2017-18 to 2019-20 
respectively, nor any clarification regarding non e ligibility of ULBs of HP for the 
performance grant was received from the MoHUA.  
The reply is not tenable as according to the letter  from Secretary to GoI, MoHUA 
(12 June 2018), it was stated that even though the State of Himachal Pradesh had 
submitted claims for 16 ULBs for the year 2017-18 ( eligible as per State Govt), these 
ULBs did not fulfil the mandatory conditions for th e PG for the release year 2017-18. 
Thus, the PG for the year 2017-18 could not be rele ased to the State Government. 
However, correspondences from MoHUA to State Govern ment regarding release year 
2018-19 and 2019-20 were not produced to audit. 
The State Government should have made necessary eff orts to pursue the proposal for 
the release of Performance Grants for eligible ULBs. 
During the exit conference, the Government confirme d the facts and stated that the 
delayed receipt of Basic grant will be looked into and action for timely/ mandated 
release of share will be initiated and further, ass ured to inquire about the issue of 
non-release of Performance Grant and take it up with the Central Government. 
5.3  Assigned Revenue 
The term “assigned revenue” is used to refer to var ious tax/duty/cess/surcharge/levy 
etc. proceeds of which are collected by State Gover nment on behalf of ULBs and 
subsequently assigned to ULBs. 

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitution Amendment Act, 1992 
34  | P a g e  
Section 69 of HPM Act, provides that State Governme nt may, by notification, 
determine a tax on consumption of electricity at the rate not exceeding twenty paise per 
unit, for electricity consumed by any person within  the limits of the municipal area, 
which shall be collected by the Himachal Pradesh St ate Electricity Board. Although 
analogous provision of HPMC Act 1994 was omitted by  the State Government, vide 
HP Act No. 32 of 2011, the tax was being collected by the HPSEB and provided to 
Municipal Corporations.  
The State Government notifies Excise Policy every year. HP Excise Policy for the year 
2015-16 to 2019-20 provides that out of additional retail excise duty on liquor an 
amount of 
₹ 2 per bottle sold within MC area shall be allocated to ULBs. 
The position of assigned revenue in the test-checke d ULBs and in all the ULBs of the 
State is as per Table-5.4. 
Table-5.4: Statement showing status of Assigned Revenue (AR) 
(₹ in crore) 
Year AR of Test-checked ULBs AR of all the ULBs 
2015-16 3.99 5.17 
2016-17 2.27 3.81 
2017-18 3.46 5.77 
2018-19 4.45 5.84 
2019-20 3.86 6.08 
The following observations were made during audit: 
• It was observed that HP State Electricity Board Ltd . (HPSEBL) levies and 
collects tax on consumption of  energy at the rate 2 paisa for every unit of  
electricity within the Municipality on behalf of ULBs. However, HPSEBL while 
making payments to Municipalities did not provide d etails of units of 
consumption of electricity to ULBs. 
• Similarly, in case of Liquor Cess, the details of the units of bottles of liquor sold 
within the ULB was not provided and therefore, it cannot be ascertained that the 
releases of assigned revenue to ULBs were commensur ate to sales made in the 
respective ULBs. 
Commissioners/Executive Officers/Secretaries stated (September 2020 – March 2021) 
that units of consumption of electricity and number of bottles sold would be asked from 
the Board and Department. 
During the exit conference, the Government assured that instructions will be issued for 
providing records pertaining to assigned revenue fr om the HPSEBL and State Excise 
& Taxation Department to ULBs. 
5.4 Own Revenue of Urban Local Bodies  
ULBs do not have a large independent tax domain. Th e property tax on land and 
buildings is the mainstay of ULB’s own revenue. The  own non-tax revenue of ULBs 

Chapter-V: Financial Resources of ULBs  
35  | P a g e  
comprises water charges, rent from commercial estab lishments, trade license, fee for 
sanction of plans/mutations, etc.  
The State laws revealed that while the authority to  collect certain taxes like property 
tax, advertisement fee vested with ULBs, the powers pertaining to the rates and revision 
thereof (advertisement fee), procedure of collectio n (property tax), method of 
assessment, exemptions, concessions (property tax, advertisement fee) etc., vested with 
the State Government. 
The ULBs, thus, lacked complete autonomy in generat ing own revenue. The share of 
average own revenue (plus assigned revenue) to tota l revenue of all the ULBs for the 
period 2015-16 to 2019-20 was only 23 per cent  as depicted in the Chart 5.1 . Details 
of total revenue and its various components of test -checked ULBs is given in 
Appendix-5.2 . Further, percentage of own revenue to the total revenue in test-checked 
ULBs for the period 2015-20 is given in the Chart 5.3 and bifurcation of own revenue 
of test-checked ULBs is given in the Chart 5.4. 
Chart-5.3: Percentage of own revenue to total revenue in test-checked ULBs(2015-20) 
 
Chart-5.4: Position of different sources of Own Revenue in the test-checked ULBs 
 
16%
31%
12%
32% 39%
62%
31%
19%
32%
56% 49%
14%
24% 23%
0% 
10% 
20% 
30% 
40% 
50% 
60% 
70% 
80% 
90% 
100% 
Own Revenue to Total Revenue in Test-Checked ULBs 
4%
24%
4%
3%
9%
6%2%9%
2%
19%
18%
Bifurcation of Own Revenue of ULBs 
Assigned Revenue 
Property Tax 
Building Plan fee 
Conservation tax 
Interest 
Muck Deposition fee 
Parking Fee 
Rent 
Sewerage charges 
Water Charges 
Misc. charges 

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitution Amendment Act, 1992 
36  | P a g e  
The constraints/deficiencies in realisation of own revenue in the test-checked 14 ULBs 
are discussed in the following paragraphs: 
5.4.1 Property Tax (01 of 05 selected areas) 
The ULBs were empowered to levy property tax every year on all buildings or lands or 
both situated within their jurisdiction under Secti ons 84 and 65 of HPMC/HPM Acts. 
This shall be between one per cent  to 25 per cent of the rateable value of land and 
building, as may be determined by the municipality from time to time. The range of 
rates of Property Tax is decided by the State Gover nment through statute. Further, the 
rate of Property Tax is decided by the ULBs. Property Tax is one of the major sources 
of own revenue to ULBs as depicted in the Table 5.5. 
Table-5.5: Percentage of Property tax to own revenue and total revenue in test-checked ULBs 
(₹ in crore) 
Year Property tax collection  
made during the year  Own Revenue % of property Tax to 
own revenue 
2015-16 30.54 81.55 37 
2016-17 16.94 93.95 18 
2017-18 19.00 85.80 22 
2018-19 19.88 83.25 24 
2019-20 16.90 75.96 22 
Total 103.26 420.51 25 
As can be seen from above table the share of proper ty tax revenue in own revenue of 
the test-checked ULBs was 25 per cent  during the period 2015-20. 
5.4.1.1 Methods of calculating Property Tax in the Himachal Pradesh 
In Himachal Pradesh, prior to amendment in HPMC/HPM  Acts, 1994 (2011), ULBs 
followed Annual Rental Value System or Rateable Val ue System (ARV). After the 
amendment (2011) in the HPMC/HPM Act, 1994 Unit Area Value Method (UAV) was 
to be followed. The determination of rateable value  of lands and buildings assessable 
to property tax under ARV method and UAV method is given in the Appendix-5.3. 
The Unit Area Value method is based on the expected  returns from the property 
depending on the five factors i.e., location, age, use, structure and occupancy of the 
property. The ARV of a property is gross annual rent at which the building or land may 
reasonably be expected to let. This assessment proc ess was unscientific as there were 
no firm factors/guidelines to reach at reasonable rental value and brings in considerable 
discretion in the assessment of property tax. Thus,  there are more chances of under 
reporting or under assessing of market rates in ARV Method. Status of methods adopted 
for determination of rateable value of property and  assessment of property tax in 
14 test-checked ULBs is as under: 
ARV Method  UAV Method Other than ARV & 
UAV Method 
Arki, Bhuntar, Dharamshala, Hamirpur, 
Manali, Poanta  Sahib, Rampur & Sunni 
Bilaspur, Jawalamukhi 
& Shimla 
Nahan 

Chapter-V: Financial Resources of ULBs  
37  | P a g e  
• Property tax was not being levied in two test-check ed ULBs i.e., MC Solan and  
MC Nerchowk.  
• As can be seen from the above table there is no uni formity among the ULBs in 
adopting the methods for calculating property tax. Out of 14 test-checked ULBs, 
eight ULBs followed Annual Rental Value Method (ARV), three ULBs followed 
Unit Area Value Method (UAV), MC Nahan followed a s eparate method other 
than these methods and two ULBs have not levied property tax. Whereas, as per 
the provisions contained in the Section 65 and 88 o f HPM & HPMC Act, 1994 
(Amendment Act 2011) made it mandatory for all ULBs  to levy and collect 
property tax under Unit Area Value Method.  
• In MC Nahan, instead of deriving the property tax a s per the provision of the 
HPM Act, the property tax was being derived by just multiplying the covered area 
with prescribed rate of property tax. Thus, MC Naha n was following its own 
method instead of UAV method prescribed in the provisions of HPM Act 1994. 
• In NP Sunni, ausat rate 1 of land fixed by revenue department was taken for 
calculating Annual Rental Value of the land, agains t the new provision of circle 
rates adopted after 2011, which is revised on yearl y basis by the Deputy 
Commissioner of District. Further, the cost of erection of building was arrived at 
simple estimation of cost erection. Thus, NP Sunni was following ARV method 
using ausat  rate instead of UAV method, which was prescribed in the provisions 
of HPM Act 1994. 
5.4.1.2 Assessment of Property Tax 
Section 77 of the HPM Act and Section 97 of the HPMC Act provide that it shall be in 
the discretion of the ULB to prepare new assessment  list every year or to adopt the 
valuation and assessment contained in the list for any year, and it shall not be adopted 
for a period exceeding five years.  
• Para 03 of Municipal Corporation Shimla (Property T axation) bye-laws 2015 
provides that Commissioner shall keep a book to be called as the " Assessment 
List " in which the following shall be entered in ‘Form-A: (i) A list of all units of 
the lands and Buildings, distinguishing each, eithe r by name or number and 
containing such particulars regarding the location or nature of each, which shall 
be sufficient for identification thereof. (ii) The rateable value of each unit of the 
lands and Buildings. (iii) The name of the person primarily liable for payment of 
property tax and rateable value as well as property tax demand on his/her unit of 
land or Building. (iv) Other details; if any. 
• In MC Shimla, assessment of properties for the prop erty tax, were based on 
returns filed by the owners in form E (as prescribe d in bye-laws for Self-
assessment of Property Tax). Based on number of For m E received, Form-A 
                                                           
1 Ausat  rate is the average rate of sale consideration (annually) of all the land within the NP Area.  

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitution Amendment Act, 1992 
38  | P a g e  
(Assessment list) was prepared by MC Shimla, withou t doing physical surveys. 
Further, register containing assessment of properties was also not maintained. 
The Corporation stated (October 2020) that Form A was being prepared by conducting 
regular inspections of the properties and 30  per cent  of the assessment of properties on 
Form-A had been prepared and will be completed within two years. 
• The details about year of last surveys conducted to  maintain ‘ Assessment List ’ 
in the 14 test-checked ULBs is given below:  
Sr. 
No. Name of ULBs Year of last survey for PT 
1. Bhunter, Dharamshala, 
Manali, Nahan, Poanta Sahib 
& Sunni 
 (6 ULBs) 
1964 to 2013 
2. Arki, Bilaspur, Jawalamukhi, 
Hamirpur & Rampur (5 ULBs) 
Survey was conducted in recent past after 2015 
3. Nerchowk & Solan Property Tax was not levied in both ULBs 
4. MC Shimla Date of survey was not made available to audit 
further; the UAV was being implemented without 
conducting GIS survey as Property Tax was being 
levied on basis of self-assessment of property 
submitted by the owner as discussed in above 
paragraph. 
• No regular updation of assessment list was being done by these ULBs.  
As the assessment list was not regularly updated, t he levy of property tax was being 
done on old-assessed value of properties, which entails the risk of short levy of property 
tax.  
• Digitizing property database using Geographic Infor mation System (GIS) 
and automating property tax calculations: 
 The 13 th  Finance Commission in its report stated that absen ce of a formal count 
of properties in municipalities is one of the major handicaps in exploiting the true 
potential of property tax in India. The States shou ld institute a GIS system for 
mapping all properties in cities, which will result in increased coverage. 
 GIS was also a mandatory reform under Jawaharlal N ehru National Urban 
Renewal Mission scheme of Central Government wherei n the ULBs and 
Parastatal agencies would undertake a proper mappin g of properties using GIS, 
so that collection efficiency reaches at least 85 per cent of property tax demand. 
It was observed that the GIS survey was conducted or was being conducted in six 2 out 
of 14 test-checked ULBs. The status of GIS surveys and use of the surveyed data for 
assessment of property tax is as given below:  
• In MC Dharamshala  final report from the firm was awaited and in MC Pa onta 
Sahib the final approval of Director UDD on the report was awaited. 
                                                           
2 Bilaspur, Dharamshala, Jawalamukhi, Nahan, Paonta Sahib and Rampur. 

Chapter-V: Financial Resources of ULBs  
39  | P a g e  
• In two ULBs (Jawalamukhi & Nahan) final report of G IS survey was prepared 
and submitted but surveyed data was not being used for assessing of property tax. 
• In MC Bilaspur the report was being used for assessment of property tax. 
• In MC Rampur the GIS survey was completed and deman d notices of property 
tax, on the basis of survey, for 2020-21 was issued. 
• In MC Nahan, GIS based survey and development of so ftware/application for 
assessment of Property Tax was prepared for MC Naha n in 2019. The 
software/application generated a demand of ₹ 121.25 lakh on account of property 
tax for 2019-20. But due to non-adoption of GIS sur vey report by the 
Municipality, a manual demand of ₹ 37.71 lakh (2019-20) based on the 
assessment register could only be raised against th e ₹ 121.25 lakh, resulting in 
short assessment of ₹ 83.54 lakh ( ₹ 121.25 lakh - ₹ 37.71 lakh). However, reasons 
for non-adoption of GIS survey report were not furnished to the audit.  
Director UDD stated (April 2021) that an online GIS -based property tax management 
system under the Urban Development Department has b een made functional for 
17 municipalities out of 54 ULBs. 
5.4.1.3 Collection and Arrears of Property Tax 
Property tax was not being levied in two test-check ed ULBs i.e., MC Solan and MC 
Nerchowk. In case of MC Paonta Sahib, no records of  demand and collection of 
property tax were being maintained by the ULB.  
The Collection and Arrears of Property Tax of the 14 test-checked ULBs are shown in 
Table  5.6. 
Table 5.6: Detail of collection and arrears of property tax of 14 test-checked ULBs 
during period 2015-20 
(₹ in lakh) 
Name of ULBs  Demand Collection Rebate Arrear % of collection* 
NP Arki 71. 00  32.96 0 38.04 46 
NP Bhutar 95.16 51.99 0 43.17 55 
NP Sunni 97.07 34.72 0 62.35 36 
MC Bilaspur 157.58 38.36 0 119.22 24 
MC Jawalamukhi 192.38 52.65 0 139.73 27 
MC Hamirpur 673.96 539.74 0 134.22 80 
MC Manali 506.15 421.39 0 84.76 83 
MC Nahan 381.81 195.84 0 185.97 51 
MC Rampur 361.16 260.34 1.97 98.85 73 
M Corp. Dharamshala 1,125.48 878.30 0 247.18 78 
M Corp. Shimla 8,691.95 7,821.61 554.91 315.43 96 
MC Solan NA NA NA NA NA  
MC Nerchowk  NA  NA  NA  NA  NA  
MC Paonta Sahib  NA  NA  NA  NA  NA  
Total 12,353.70 10,327.90 556.88 1,468.92  
*-inclusive of rebate 
• As can be seen from the above chart, the collection  of property tax for 14 
test-checked ULBs was ₹ 108.85 crore (including rebate of ₹ 5.57 crore) against 
the demand of ₹ 123.54 crore (including opening balance of 2015-16) , thereby 
resulting in total property tax arrears of ₹ 14.69 crore during 2015-20. 

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitution Amendment Act, 1992 
40  | P a g e  
• In 11 ULBs 3 , the per cent  of collection to demand raised ranged between 
24 per cent (MC Bilaspur) and 96 per cent (MC Shimla). 
• The recovery of arrears had been marred by the non- sanctioning of post of Tax 
Inspectors who could have helped in better realization of Property Tax. 
• MC Bilaspur had not imposed property tax prior to 2 017-18, however during 
2017-18 & 2018-19 they had raised a demand of ₹ 50.49 lakh annually. 
During the exit conference, the State Government as sured for adoption of Unit Area 
Method for assessment of property tax in remaining ULBs and assured that all other 
observations regarding property tax will be looked into. 
5.4.1.4 Conservancy Tax 
In pursuance of notification (July 1964) based on p rovision of sub section (6a) of 
section 62 of Punjab Municipal Act, 1911, as applie d to HP, MC Solan imposed 
conservancy tax at the rate of five per cent  on the assessed annual rental value of the 
property with effect from 1
st  November 1964. Subsequently, the State Government had 
ordered (2003) all the ULBs to impose Property tax within their jurisdiction. The matter 
was discussed in the House of MC Solan, but the same was rejected, with the plea that 
conservancy charges / sanitary tax at the rate of f ive  per cent  of annual rateable value 
was already being charged in pursuance to the notification issued in July 1964.  
However, all resolutions passed for imposing conser vancy tax against property tax by 
the House were rejected by the Director (UD) with the direction to impose Property tax 
as, it was binding on ULBs as per HPM Act, 1994. 
Method of calculation of property tax and conservancy tax is as under:  
Property tax - (10 per cent  of cost of 
construction of Building and Land – 
10 per cent  rebate on repair & maintenance of 
building) * Rate (7.5 to 12.5 per cent ) 
Conservancy tax - (10 per cent  of 
cost of construction of Building and 
Land – 10 per 
 cent  rebate by 
Municipality) * Rate (five per cent ) 
1.  Short levy of tax due to difference in rates of property and conservancy tax:  
The rate of property tax for ARV method varied betw een 7.5 to 12.5 per cent  and rate 
of conservancy tax was five per cent,  thus there was a difference of 2.5 per cent to 
7.5 per cent in the rates of property tax and conservancy tax. Even after calculating the 
property tax at the minimum rate of 7.5 per cent  of the annual rental value of properties, 
and comparing the same with rate of conservancy tax  at rate of five per cent , it was 
noticed that there was revenue loss of ₹ 9.51 crore during 2015-20 due to non-
imposition of property tax. The calculation of reve nue loss on account of non-levy of 
property tax is depicted in Table 5.7. 
                                                           
3 Arki, Bhunter, Bilaspur, Dharamshala, Hamirpur, Ja walamukhi, Manali, Nahan, Rampur, 
Shimla & Sunni. 

Chapter-V: Financial Resources of ULBs  
41  | P a g e  
Table-5.7: Detail showing short levy of tax due to difference in rates 
(₹ in lakh) 
Year No. of household Conservancy tax 
demand raised 
Probable demand of 
Property tax  Difference 
1 2 3 4 (4-3) 
2015-16 9,230 338.90 508.35 169.45 
2016-17 9,310 385.34 578.01 192.67 
2017-18 9,782 390.08 585.12 195.04 
2018-19 10,023 392.25 588.37 196.12 
2019-20 10,273 395.10 592.65 197.55 
Total  1,901.67 2,852.50 950.83 
Calculation of probable property tax = Demand * 100 /5(conservancy rate)*7.5/100(minimum rate of 
property tax). 
2.  Non-recovery of arrears of ₹ 3.82 crore: 
The status of conservancy tax collection and arrears during 2015-16 to 2019-20 is given 
in the Table 5.8: 
Table-5.8: Status of conservancy tax collected and arrears of MC, Solan 
(₹ in lakh) 
Year No. of 
households 
Opening 
Balance 
Demand 
raised 
Total 
demand Collection Arrear 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
2015-16 9,230 103.37 338.90 442.26 236.13 206.13 
2016-17 9,310 206.13 385.34 591.49 325.44 266.04 
2017-18 9,782 266.04 390.08 656.12 336.93 319.19 
2018-19 10,023 319.19 392.25 711.44 351.08 360.36 
2019-20 10,273 360.36 395.10 755.46 373.19 382.27 
Total   1,901.67  1,622.77  
• The total arrears as of March 2020 was ₹ 382.27 lakh. Further, as can be seen 
from the above table, there is increasing trend in the arrears of conservancy tax 
to be collected, which is clearly indicative of ineffectiveness of the Municipality 
in collecting their own revenue.  
5.4.2 Rent from commercial establishments  
The ULBs were empowered to collect rent from own bu ildings let out to private 
agencies and the rent was to be revised periodically.  
The following observations were made during audit: 
• Rent amounting to 
₹ 32.20 crore were collected by the 14 test-checked ULBs 
(2015-20) and ₹ 10.66 crore was in arrears at the end of March 2020.  
• Audit observed that there was no standard protocol for entering into agreements 
with the tenants stipulating the terms and conditio ns including revision of rent. 
The rates of revision of rent varied amongst the different test-checked ULBs i.e., 

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitution Amendment Act, 1992 
42  | P a g e  
rent to be increased either five  per cent  per annum, 10  per cent  after three years, 
10  per cent  after five years etc. 
During the exit conference, the State Government as sured to take  requisite action for 
adoption of standard protocol in respect of rent fr om commercial establishment and 
take initiatives for collection of arrears. 
5.4.3 Trade License Fee 4 
Section 324 of the HPMC Act provides that (1) No person shall use or permit to be used 
any premises for any of the following purposes without or otherwise than in conformity 
with the terms of a license issued by the Commissioner in this behalf, namely:- (a) any 
of the purposes specified in Part-I of the Schedule  I;(b) any purpose which is, in the 
opinion of the Commissioner, dangerous to life, health or property or is likely to create 
a nuisance; (c) keeping horses, cattle or other qua druped animals or birds for 
transportation, sale or hire or for sale of the pro duce there of; or (d) storing any of the 
articles specified in Part II of the Schedule-I exc ept for domestic use of those articles. 
Similarly, provisions 5 of HPM Act provide that no place within a municipa l area shall 
be used for offensive & dangerous trade, establishi ng new factories/workshops and 
cinematographs and dramatic performances except und er a license, obtained by the 
owner or occupier from the municipality which shall be renewable annually. 
Section 85 of the HPMC and Section 66 of the HPM Act provide that the Municipality 
may levy a fee and user charges for the services provided by it at such rates and in such 
manner as may be determined by the municipality from time to time. 
The following observations were made during audit: 
• Survey regarding trade license had not been conducted by any of the test-checked 
ULBs, hence, data regarding number of people running trade within the ULB was 
not available, hence, outstanding amount could not be ascertained.  
• Seven 6 out of 14 test-checked ULBs had collected amount of ₹ 21.74 lakh during 
2015-20, which was due to suo moto  registration of trader and thereafter 
deposition of the trade license fee. Further, ULBs had no control over registration 
and renewal of licenses of traders. Even in these seven ULBs, records relating to 
total number of assessees were not maintained. This  entails a risk of business 
establishments functioning without valid licenses.  
The Commissioners/Executive Officers/Secretaries st ated that the survey regarding 
running of commercial establishments within Municipal area could not conducted due 
to shortage of staff. The executing authorities further stated efforts are being made for 
the proper assessment and collection of trade licen se fee. Commissioner, Municipal 
Corporation, Dharamshala stated that since the bye- laws were not notified, hence fees 
could not be charged. The bye-laws have been notified now (April 2021). 
                                                           
4 A trade license is document / certificate that giv es the permission to an applicant to commence 
a particular trade or business in particular area/locations. 
5 Section 125, 126 and 127 of HPM Act. 
6 Bhunter, Jawalaji, Hamirpur, Nahan, Paonta Sahib, Shimla and Solan. 

Chapter-V: Financial Resources of ULBs  
43  | P a g e  
During the exit conference, the State Government as sured to take proper action in the 
matter and to devise mechanism to monitor the regis tration and renewal of Trade 
License fee. 
5.4.4 Advertisement Fee  
Section 115 of HPMC Act provides for fees on advert isements. Every person, who 
erects, exhibits, fixes any advertisement, shall pa y for every advertisement a fee 
calculated at such rates, as may from time to time, be specified by the Corporation.  No 
similar provision has been incorporated in the HPM Act. However, Section 66 of HPM 
Act provides that municipality may impose fee, toll s and user charges for the services 
provided by it at such rate and in such manner as may be determined by the municipality 
from time to time.  
The following observations were made  during audit: 
• Out of two 
7 test-checked Municipal Corporations, MC Shimla had  collected 
₹ 496.33 lakh by letting out the Advertisement sites  during 2015-20. However, 
MC Dharamshala has neither levied nor collected adv ertisement fee during the 
audit period. 
• Further, seven 8  test-checked Municipalities had also allocated adv ertisement 
sites, for  which fee of ₹ 57.82 lakh was collected during 2015-20. 
• However, none of the above test-checked ULBs conduc ted any new survey for 
levy of advertisement fee. Therefore, potential ear ning of revenue could not be 
quantified. 
During the exit conference, the State Government ag reed with the observation and 
assured to conduct survey and levy Advertisement fee for increasing potential earnings 
and revenue of the ULBs. 
5.5 Water Supply (02 of 05 selected areas)  
As per Article 243W of the 74 th  Constitutional Amendment the function of providing  
water supply for domestic, industrial and commercial purposes was one of the functions 
mandated to be performed by the ULBs. However, in the State function of water supply 
is carried out pre-dominantly by other executing bodies, as given below: 
Functions Body 
executing  
No . of 
ULBs 
Work of execution, augmentation and further distrib ution of water, 
Operation &  Maintenance  and collection of user charges  
Jal Shakti 
Vibhag (JSV)  
51 ULBs  
Distribution of water,  Operation &  Maintenance  and collection of user 
charges  
MC Solan and 
Palampur  
2 ULBs  
Work of execution, augmentation and further distrib ution of water, 
Operation &  Maintenance and collection of user charges  
SJPNL  MC 
Shimla  
Besides, several projects of Water supply approved under AMRUT are  being executed by SJPNL and 
Jal Shakti Vibhag in respect of MC Shimla and MC Ku llu (non-selected), respectively . Thus, both the 
ULBs are only providing the funds received under AM RUT to these agencies for execution of capital 
work s within their jurisdiction.  
Similarly , some projects of water supply approved under smart city mission in MC Dharmashala are 
being executed by Dharamshala Smart City Limited.  
                                                           
7 MC Dharamshala and Shimla. 
8 Bilaspur, Hamirpur, Manali, Nahan, Poanta Sahib, R ampur & Solan. 

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitution Amendment Act, 1992 
44  | P a g e  
5.6  Water Tax/Charges (03 of 05 selected areas)  
Section 5 of Himachal Pradesh Water Supply Act 1968, (HPWS) provides that the State 
Government shall levy a charge for water supplied t o a consumer, by a water supply 
scheme managed directly by the Government or by the beneficiary to whom the scheme 
may be entrusted, at such rates as may be specified  by the State Government , by 
notification published in the Official Gazette, from time to time.    
In exercise of powers vested under Section 5 of HPWS Act 1968, the State Government 
notified (June 2005) the rates of Water Supply by t he Irrigation and Public Health 
Department, (Now Jal Shakti Vibhag) to the rural ar eas, all the Nagar Panchayats and 
Municipalities except Municipal Corporation Shimla,  MC Solan & Palampur. 
Similarly, for the Municipalities i.e., Municipal C orporation Shimla, Municipal 
Council, Solan & Palampur where the powers of JSV h as been delegated 
completely/partially to these ULBs as stated in the  Para 5.5, the  rates for bulk water 
supply  to these  ULBs got notified (June 2005). 
The notification further states that rates will increase by 10 per cent  on the 1 
st  of April 
every year. In pursuance of this notification the JSV prescribes the rates of water supply 
every year by enhancing it 10 per cent  every year. 
Similarly, the ULBs to which bulk water is supplied by JSV, decide and revise the rates 
of water supply by passing it in their General House. These ULBs were also enhancing 
the rates of water supply by 10 per cent  each year. 
The following audit observation was made during the audit of the test-checked ULBs. 
1.  MC Solan: 
a.  Charging of domestic/commercial rates for the comme rcial bulk water 
supplied by JSV resulting in accrued liability 
As stated above, in MC Solan, the distribution of w ater, operation and 
maintenance, and collection of user charges was del egated to MC Solan by Jal 
Shakti Vibhag. It was noticed that Jal Shakti Divison, Solan provided bulk water 
supply to MC Solan   at the rates between ₹ 20.82 9 and ₹ 30.48 per kilolitre (KL) 
during 2015-16 to 2019-20, for which JSV (Solan Div ision) raised total bill of  
₹ 41.76 crore. However, MC Solan made distribution o f water to consumers at 
two different rates i.e., domestic ₹ 13.50 to 20.00 per KL and commercial 
₹ 19.97 to 29.24 per KL during 2015-16 to 2019-20. Majority of the connections 
(90 per cent ) were domestic 10 . MC Solan had raised a demand of ₹ 15.47 crore 
from the consumers, thus leading to accrued liabili ty of ₹ 26.29 crore 
(₹ 41.76 crore - ₹ 15.47 crore) towards JS Division, Solan (March 202 0). The 
charging of domestic rates from the consumers, wher e the supply was at 
                                                           
9 ₹ 20.82, ₹ 22.90, ₹ 25.19, ₹ 27.71, and ₹ 30.48 per kilolitre for the years 2015-16, 2016-17 , 
2017-18, 2018-19 and 2019-20. 
10  Information provided by MC Solan. 

Chapter-V: Financial Resources of ULBs  
45  | P a g e  
commercial rates, will eventually lead to unsound financial health of Municipal 
Council Solan. 
It was also noticed that even the commercial rates charged by the MC Solan 
from the commercial consumers was charged were appr oximately less by one 
rupee and was not commensurate with the rates of Jal Shakti Division. 
b.  Loss due to lack of active leakage control in MC Solan 
The Jal Shakti Vibhag supplied bulk water to three main water storage tanks of 
MC Solan from two sources i.e., Ashwani Khad and Gi ripul during the period 
2015-20 which was further distributed to the households within the MC area by 
Municipality.  
Audit observed that there was huge difference between water received from the 
JSV and further distributed to the households by th e Municipality. The bulk 
water supply bills generated by JSV and the consume rs ledger (water) 
maintained by the MC Solan revealed difference between water supplied by JSV 
and actual distribution made by MC Solan to consumers, which ranged between 
34.05 per cent  and 47.33 per cent.  As per the manual of Water Supply and 
Treatment of Central Public Health and Environmenta l Engineering 
Organisation (CPHEEO), as followed by both the Jal Shakti Vibhag and ULB, 
wastage upto 10 per cent  in water supply is considered as low and remedial 
action is needed when wastage is above 10 per cent . Details of non-revenue 
water after allowing deduction of 10 per cent  leakage in water supply for 
calculation of revenue loss is depicted in Table 5.9. 
Table-5.9: Status of water received and distributed and percentage of non-revenue water 
Year 
Water 
supplied 
by the Jal 
Shakti 
Vibhag  
(ML) 
Quantity 
after 
relaxation of 
10 per cent  
distribution 
loss (ML)* 
Water 
supplied 
to users 
by MC 
(ML) 
Difference 
(ML) 
Minimum 
rates of 
water 
(KL) 
Amount 
calculated 
(in Rs. 
lakh) 
Per cent 
  A B C D=B-C E F=D*E/100 G=(A-C)/A 
2015-16 2,826.61 2,543.95 1,488.67 1,055.28 13.5 142.46 47.33 
2016-17 2,732.47 2,459.22 1,553.77 905.45 15 135.82 43.14 
2017-18 2,648.72 2,383.85 1,746.92 636.93 16.5 105.09 34.05 
2018-19 3,192.26 2,873.03 1,776.89 1,096.14 18.5 202.79 44.34 
2019-20 3,408.75 3,067.88 1,832.74 1,235.14 20 247.03 46.23 
  14,808.81 13,327.93 8,398.99 4,928.94   833.19 43.28 
Note:  ML (Million Litres) & KL (Kilo Litres). 
* As per sec 10.10.2 (a) of CPHEEO in respect to Wa ter Supply and Treatment provides that 10 per 
cent  of leakage in water supply is satisfactory.  

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitution Amendment Act, 1992 
46  | P a g e  
Even considering the lowest rate of water charges ( domestic water charges) on yearly 
basis for the quantities of Non-Revenue Water, it was noticed that the Municipality had 
incurred probable revenue loss of at least ₹ 8.33 crore (2015-20). 
2.  Comparative analysis of revenue collection against the water charges 
demand raised by MC Solan, SJPNL & Jal Shakti Divisions 
The comparative analysis of revenue collection agai nst the demand made by the MC 
Solan, SJPNL & Jal Shakti Divisions is given in the Chart 5.5.  
Chart-5.5 Comparative analysis of collection made against the demand raised 
 
As can be seen from above, the effectiveness of col lection of Water charges against 
total demand raised by the MC Solan was 93 per cent , MC Shimla was 79 per cent , 
SJPNL was 49 per cent  and Jal Shakti Divisions, it was 87 per cent  during 2015-16 to 
2019-20. The year-wise details of water charges dem and raised, and collection made 
during 2015-20 are given in Appendix-5.4 . Thus, collection efficiency of water charges 
was better in MC Solan in comparison to the line department/corporation.  
3.  Liability of ULBs to Jal Shakti Vibhag 
Audit further observed that there was huge liabilit y on account of bulk water supply 
payment to be paid to the JSV by ULBs as detailed below: 
Name of ULB Liability to Department Liability on account off  Amount in crore 
MC Shimla Jal Shakti Vibhag Bulk water supply ₹ 229.64 
MC Solan Jal Shakti Vibhag Bulk water supply ₹ 78.67 
As evident from above table liability of ₹ 308.31 crore on account of bulk water supply 
is lying pending to be paid to JSV by these ULBs as  of date. The liability was due to 
charging of commercial rates on bulk water supply m ade by the JSV from ULBs, 
whereas the ULBs were charging two different traffic rates of water i.e., domestic and 
commercial. 
5.7  Public Health, Sanitation (04 of 05 selected a reas) Conservancy and Solid 
Waste Management  
The function “Public Health, Sanitation Conservancy and Solid Waste Management”  
is divided into six sub-activities. In two i.e., Ma intaining Hospitals, Dispensaries & 
Immunization/Vaccination the ULBs had no role, in two i.e., Registration of birth and 
74 
71 67 
67 59 
73 
77 
48 
72 77 
20 
42 
66 64 
55 
0
20 
40 
60 
80 
100 
2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 
Per  cent 
Jal Shakti Vibhag 
MC Solan 
 SJPNL 
MC Shimla 

Chapter-V: Financial Resources of ULBs  
47  | P a g e  
death & Sewerage management it had partial/dual rol e and in two i.e., cleaning and 
disinfection of localities effected by infectious diseases and Solid waste management 
ULBs were solely responsible. 
In Sewerage Management, JSV was planning and execut ing new schemes, 
undertaking operation and maintenance of existing s chemes and collecting sewerage 
charges except ULBs Shimla, where this function is being discharged by Shimla Jal 
Prabhandan Nigam Ltd. and MC Solan where collection of sewerage charges was the 
responsibility of MC, which are discussed in succeeding paragraphs. 
5.7.1 Sewerage Management  
As discussed in preceding paragraphs the distributi on of water and collection of water 
charges were vested with MC Solan, therefore, the levying and collection of sewerage 
charges along with the water charges at the rate of 50 per cent  of water bills was to be 
discharged by MC Solan.  
Non levy of sewerage charges resulting in revenue loss ₹ 38.30 lakh 
Under section 5 of Himachal Pradesh Water Supply Ac t, 1968, the State Government 
notified (June 2005), the tariff structure for sewe rage disposal effective from 
01.06.2005. According to the above Act, monthly sew erage charges at the rate of 
50 per cent of water billing per month were recoverable from th e domestic and 
commercial consumers. 
The following observations were made during the audit of MC Solan: 
• MC Solan had not levied sewerage charges since commissioning of the sewerage 
scheme (December 2009), thus depriving itself of an important source of revenue. 
• Further, resolution on non-levying of sewerage char ges had not been passed by 
the House of MC Solan.  
• JSV (Solan Division) had released connection to 456  number of users, out of 
which MC Solan had provided NOC to 303 connections, however, water charges 
were being charged from 241 connection by the MC So lan and thus, sewerage 
charges were also to be collected from these connections. 
• After working out the amount of sewerage charges to be collected against eligible 
connections at the rate of 50 per cent  of water charges made available by MC 
Solan (01 April 2016), it was noticed that an amoun t of 
₹ 38.03 lakh was due to 
be collected. 
Collection of charges was commented upon in previou s report 11  of C&AG of India, 
however, the State Government had not taken any rem edial action in this regard as 
irregularities were persisting in MC Solan. 
 
                                                           
11  Para 2.2.6.6 of the Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India for the year ended 
31 March 2018 (Report No. 4 of the year 2019), Government of Himachal Pradesh. 

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitution Amendment Act, 1992 
48  | P a g e  
5.8 Solid Waste Management (05 of 05 selected areas ) 
Solid Waste Management is sub-activity of the funct ion ‘Public Health, Sanitation, 
Conservancy and Solid Waste Management’ under section 42 (b (vi)) of HPMC and 48 
(ii (6)) of HPM Act. The sub-activity was devolved fully(August 1994) to ULBs in the 
State. The ULBs are involved in planning and execut ion of Municipal Solid Waste 
Management.  
The sub-activity had been outsourced by the ULBs mainly due to shortage in manpower 
and machineries, further the ULBs are monitoring an d providing technical assistance 
through some of its technical staffs. 
5.8.1  Financial Management of Solid Waste Manageme nt   
The recurring expenditure for management of Solid Waste is being done from the grants 
received from the Finance Commission and State Fina nce Commission. The Basic 
Grant in 14 th  FC recommends utilization of grant for support and  strengthening the 
delivery of basic civic services including solid wa ste management and storm water 
drainage. Similarly, the State Finance Commission grants were also released with same 
condition of expenditure as in 14 th  FC. 
During 2015-16 to 2019-20 the ULBs (Hamirpur  & Solan), had raised demand for cost 
extensive machineries and equipment needed for mana gement of Solid waste such as 
Trammel, Shedder etc. In response to demand the Sta te Government released (July 
2019) an amount of ₹ 468.30 lakh to all ULBs for construction of compost pits, Material 
Recovery Facility Centre, Kiosks for Domestic Hazar dous waste & e-waste and 
management of Legacy Waste within the jurisdiction. 
5.8.2 Collection of user charges 
The bye-laws provide that primary collection of Municipal Solid Waste from each and 
every house in the city/town should be done through  door to door collection of waste. 
For the services rendered, user charges have been defined in the bye-laws. The rates of 
user charges have been defined according to size of property, usability of properties etc. 
which varied between ₹ 50 and ₹ 15,000. 
Methodology adopted for arriving at Collectible amount 
Various categories of properties are multiplied by the rates as specified in the bye-laws, 
which is multiplied by the number of months for calculation of applicable charges. The 
data regarding various categories of properties were collated by Audit from Solid waste 
Action Plan of ULBs, GIS surveys conducted by ULBs for property tax, Electricity 
Department records, Tourism Department. 
The following observation was made during the audit: 
• The collection of user charges by test-checked ULBs  varied between 1 per cent  
and 60 per cent of amount collectible i.e., amount collected ₹ 21.85 crore (36  per 
cent ), against amount collectible ₹ 60.43 crore.  
• Collection was between 01 per cent and 58 per cent  of the revenue expenditure 
on the Door-to-Door Collection of Solid Waste.  

Chapter-V: Financial Resources of ULBs  
49  | P a g e  
• The main reason was non-survey of properties/households within the jurisdiction 
of ULBs and non-maintenance of database/Individual ledgers of users. 
Details of collection of user charges and revenue e xpenditure incurred on Solid Waste 
Management are given in the Appendix-5.5 . 
Other observation noticed in the test-checked ULBs are as under: 
• Seven 12  out of 14 test-checked ULBs were unaware of number  of service users 
within their jurisdiction as they had not conducted  any survey which resulted in 
collection of user charges from few of the households/service users. 
• 13 13  out of 14 test-checked ULBs had not maintained any  record/register/ 
individual ledger for collection of user charges. 
• Good practices: 
Nagar Panchayat, Sunni had conducted house to house  survey and prepared 
register/records and prepared ledger for collection  of user charges with effect 
from January 2019 and raised demand for the year 2019-20 amounting to 
₹ 11.56 
lakh against which an amount of ₹ 2.78 lakh had been collected. Thus, it was the 
only ULB out of the 14 test-checked ULBs, where exact amount of user charges 
applicable and the arrears of user charges could be worked out. 
The Commissioners/Executive Officers/Secretaries of  the ULBs 14  accepted the facts 
and stated that shortage of collection of user charges was mainly due to non-support of 
public, not knowing of households which were handing over the waste and because of  
pandemic situation created by the Covid-19. The ULB s attributed non-preparation of 
individual ledger for user charges of door-to-door collection to shortage of staff. 
During the exit conference, the State Government as sured that the matter would be 
looked into and all the observations raised would be considered on priority basis. 
5.9 Preparation of Budget 
In accordance with the provisions of Sections 80 of  HPMC Act and 249 of HPM Act, 
the Corporation/Finance, Audit and Planning Committ ee of the Council shall prepare 
the budget estimates indicating the receipt of fund s from various sources and allocate 
the resources to various activities undertaken by i t and present it to the Governing 
Council for approval. After the approval by the Gov erning Council, ULBs have to 
forward the budget through the Deputy Commissioner to the Government (in respect 
of Corporation) and Director (in respect of Municip al Councils & Nagar Panchayats), 
Urban Development for approval. This shows that the  HPMC and HPM Acts, are not 
in consonance with the provisions of the 74 
th  CAA, as the Constitution provisions are 
                                                           
12  Arki, Bilaspur, Jawalamukhi, Manali, Nerchwok, Shi mla and Solan. 
13     Arki, Bhunter, Bilsapur, Dharamshala, Hamirpur,  Jawalamukhi, Manali, Nahan Nerchowk, 
Poanta Sahib, Rampur, Shimla & Solan.  
14  Arki, Bhunter, Bilaspur, Dharamshala, Hamirpur, Ja walamukhi, Manali, Nerchowk, Poanta 
Sahib, Rampur, Solan, Sunni. 

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitution Amendment Act, 1992 
50  | P a g e  
silent about the approval of the budget, while both the Acts specifically mention role of 
the State Government in sanctioning/modifying the budget. 
5.9.1 Unrealistic budget exercise  
Expenditure estimation depends on services to be pr ovided by the local government 
and the costs associated with the provision of thes e services. Para 33.4 of National 
Municipal Accounts Manual prepared by Ministry of Urban Development in November 
2004 provide that “the objective of the budgeting s ystem of an ULB is to arrive at a 
scientific basis for building linkage between the n ature of receipt or payment with the 
functions / services or other Budget control centres”. Budget shall reflect the principles 
and programmes of the ULB. The details of budget estimates vis-à-vis actuals in respect 
of receipts and expenditure of the 14 test-checked ULBs is depicted in the 
Appendix-5.6 . 
• Audit observed that in two 15  test-checked Municipal Corporations, the variation  
in actual receipts vis-à-vis budget estimate ranged between 28 and 403 per cent  
during the period 2015-20. On the other hand, varia tion in expenditure vis-à-vis 
budget estimate ranged between 25 and 274 per cent during the period 2015-20. 
• Similarly, in eight 16  test-checked Municipal Councils, variation in actual receipts 
vis-à-vis budget estimates ranged between 21 and 260 per cent  during the period 
2015-20 whereas variation in actual expenditure vis-à-vis budget estimate ranged 
between 22 and 189 per cent . 
• In two 17  test-checked Nagar Panchayats, variation in actual  receipts vis-à-vis 
budget estimate ranged between 76 and 146 per cent during the period 2015-20 
whereas variation in actual expenditure vis-à-vis budget estimate ranged between 
57 and 112  per cent . 
5.9.2 Non-preparation, non-presentation of budget a nd accounts 
The following observations were made during the cou rse of audit in the test-checked 
ULBs’ budget documents: 
• Two ULBs Nerchowk and Bhuntar had not prepared budg et for the years 2015-
16 to 2020-21. In the absence of Budget it could not be ascertained whether there 
were adequate and suitable provisions for such serv ices, as required for the 
fulfillment of the several duties imposed on the municipality by the HPM Act. 
The Section 161 of HPMC and Section 252 & 255 of HP M Act provides for 
maintenance of accounts by the Municipalities and auditing of such accounts. 
• Audit observed that none of test-checked ULBs (exce pt MC Shimla till the year 
2017-18) had prepared annual accounts i.e., Receipt  and Payment Accounts, 
Income and Expenditure Account and Balance Sheet fo r any of the financial 
years.  
                                                           
15   Municipal Corporation Dharmashala & Shimla. 
16   Bilaspur, Jawalamukhi, Hamirpur, Manali, Nahan, P aonta Sahib, Rampur & Solan. 
17   Arki and Sunni.  

Chapter-V: Financial Resources of ULBs  
51  | P a g e  
• There was no institutional arrangement for certification of accounts of ULBs. 
The Executive Officer, Nerchowk stated (January 202 1) that Nerchowk was a newly 
constituted Council and it lacked staff whereas Sec retary Bhunter stated (February 
2021) that there was no expert staff dealing with a ccounts, hence annual budget could 
not be prepared. 
During the exit conference, the State Government as sured that instructions would be 
issued to the ULBs that budget would be vetted from  the Standing Committee and the 
proceeding of the Committee would be enclosed with the budget. Instructions would be 
issued to ULBs for the preparation of accounts as per accounting system as well. 
5.10 Expenditure of Urban Local Bodies 
The expenditure of ULBs can be categorised into fiv e major categories such as 
programme expenses, operations and maintenance, gen eral expenses, human resource 
expenses and interest and finance charges. The detail of expenditure incurred by ULBs 
in the State for the period 2015-16 to 2019-20 is exhibited in Table-5.10 . 
Table-5.10: Details of expenditure incurred by all the ULBs 
(₹ in crore) 
Year 
Human 
Resources 
Expenses 
General 
Expenses 
Operation & 
maintenance 
Interest/ 
finance 
charges 
Programmes/ 
scheme/Grants 
expenses 
Total 
expenditure 
2015-16 104.94 11.62 22.65 3.93 127.69 270.83 
2016-17 128.42 19.30 72.36 2.04 159.12 381.24 
2017-18 133.61 14.45 79.38 1.73 176.10 405.27 
2018-19 132.19 17.50 61.97 1.89 152.64 366.19 
2019-20 127.79 17.42 79.68 0.32 171.04 396.25 
Total 626.95 80.29 316.04 9.91 786.59 1,819.78 
Per cent  of 
Total 
Expenditure 
35 4 17 1 43  
Source: Information furnished by UDD for all ULBs 
The capital expenditure i.e., programme expenses an d expenses out of grants incurred 
by ULBs constituted about 43  per cent  of the total expenditure followed by revenue 
expenditure i.e., human resource expenses, General expenses and Operation & 
maintenance and finance charges, which was about 57 per cent  of all ULBs.  
5.11 Resource-expenditure gap  
During the period 2015-16 to 2019-20, the ULBs were  able to meet only about 62 
per cent  of the revenue expenditure from its own revenue re sources. A comparison of 
the own revenue to revenue expenditure showed large  gaps as depicted in Chart 5.6 
which needs to be addressed by ULBs. 

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitution Amendment Act, 1992 
52  | P a g e  
Chart 5.6: Resource-Expenditure gap in all the ULBs 
 
5.12 Extent of utilisation of funds  
A comparison of the total expenditure with total re venue for the period 2015-16 to 
2019-20 showed that ULBs were able to utilise on an average about 63 per cent  of the 
available funds each year as depicted in Chart 5.7. 
Chart-5.7:  Extent of utilisation of funds 
 
The constraints in utilisation of funds could be attributed to the following: 
 The restrictions/limitations on financial and admin istrative powers of ULBs as 
discussed subsequently in Para 5.14.  
 The large number of vacancies in various cadres, as discussed in the Para 6.4. 
5.13 Analysis of financial data of Urban Local Bodi es 
The revenue and expenditure of the test-checked ULB s for the period 2015-16 to 
2019-20 were analysed to study the fiscal autonomy in the ULBs.  
The following four ratios were considered to establish the fiscal autonomy in ULBs. 
1.  Local fiscal autonomy:  This is the share of own revenue to the total revenue of the 
ULB.  
114.5 
143.83 
128.26 130.85 122.96 
143.14 
222.12 229.17 
213.55 225.2 
0
50 
100 
150 
200 
250 
2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 
` ` ` ` in crore 
Own Revenue vs Revenue Expenditure 
Own Revenue Revenue expeniture 
456.52 
730.02 
406.37 
642.91 671.1 
270.83 
381.24 405.27 366.19 396.25 
0
100 
200 
300 
400 
500 
600 
700 
800 
2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 
```` in crore 
Total revenue v/s Total Expenditure 
Total revenue Total expenditure 

Chapter-V: Financial Resources of ULBs  
53  | P a g e  
2.  Local dependency on fiscal transfer:  This is the share of Central Finance 
Commission (CFC) and State Finance Commission (SFC)  grants to the total 
revenue of the ULBs.  
3.  Coverage of revenue expenditure from own revenu e sources (self-reliance):  
This is the proportion of revenue expenditures that  are covered through the own 
revenue sources.  
4. Quality of expenditure:  This is the share of Operation and Maintenance (O& M) 
expenditure in total revenue expenditure. 
Local fiscal autonomy and local dependency on fisca l transfer are inversely 
proportional to each other. Higher the fiscal autonomy lesser is the dependency on fiscal 
transfer. 
The ratio-wise performance of ULBs for the year 201 9-20 has been depicted in 
Chart-5.8: 
Chart-5.8: Ratio-wise performance of ULBs for 2019-20 
 
• As can be seen from above chart, in four 18  ULBs the share of own revenue was 
50 to 75 per cent  of the total revenue. They therefore, were less de pendent on 
fiscal transfers. In seven 19  ULBs the share of own revenue to total revenue was  
less than 25 per cent  Therefore, these were heavily dependent on fiscal transfers. 
• In nine 20  ULBs the dependency on Central Finance Commission (CFC) and State 
Finance Commission (SFC) grants ranged between 25  per cent  and 50 per cent   
and in three 21  ULBs the dependency was 50 to 75 per cent. 
• In five 22   ULBs, the coverage of revenue expenditure from own revenue sources 
was above 75 per cent , MC Nahan had coverage between 50 per cent  and 
75 per cent , seven 23  ULBs had coverage between 25 per cent  and 50 per cent  and 
Bilaspur ULB had coverage of less than 25 per cent .  
                                                           
18  Jawalmukhi, Hamirpur, Manali, and Solan. 
19  Arki, Bilaspur, Bhuntar, Dharamshala, Nerchowk, Sh imla and Sunni. 
20  Arki, Bhuntar, Dharamshala, Hamirpur, Nahan, Rampu r, Shimla, Solan and Sunni. 
21  Bilaspur,Nerchowk and Paonta Sahib. 
22  Jawalamukhi, Hamirpur, Manali, Rampur and Solan.  
23  Arki, Bhuntar, Dharamshala, Nerchowk, Paonta Sahib , Shimla and Sunni. 
7
2 1
5
3
9
7
6
4 3
1
25
1
0
2
4
6
8
10 
12 
14 
Local Fiscal 
autonomy 
Dependancy on 
fiscal transfer (CFC 
& SFC) 
Coverage of 
revenue expdt. from 
own revenue 
Quality of 
Expenditure 
Number of test-checked ULBs 
> 75 
>50 ≤ 75 
> 25 ≤ 50 
≤25 

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitution Amendment Act, 1992 
54  | P a g e  
• In three 24 ULBs the quality of expenditure i.e., expenditure on O&M, was above 
50 per cent , in six 25  ULBs the expenditure was between 25 per cent  and 
50 per cent  and in five 26  ULBs less than or equal to 25 per cent . 
5.14 Financial powers of Urban Local Bodies 
Fiscal autonomy can be complete only when supported by decentralisation of financial 
and administrative powers. Decentralisation provides for: 
 Creating an efficient and reliable administration, 
 Intensify and improve local governance, 
 Enhances accountability and responsiveness. 
The administrative approval powers for undertaking basic infrastructure works are as 
per Table 5.11 . 
Table-5.11 : Statement showing administrative approval powers for ULBs 
(₹ in Lakh) 
Category of ULB 
Commissioner/ 
Executive Officer/ 
Secretary 
House Director UDD State 
Government 
Municipal Corporation <10.00 >10.00 -- -- 
Municipal Council -- <5.00 >5.00 and <100.00 >100.00 Nagar Panchayat -- 
• The administrative approval for work costing ₹ 10 lakh is accorded by the 
Commissioner and above ₹ 10 lakh is accorded by House for Municipal 
Corporation. 
• The administrative approval for work costing upto ₹ 5 lakh is accorded by the 
Council, between ₹ 5 lakh to ₹ 100 lakh is accorded by Director, UDD and above 
₹ 100 lakh is accorded by State Government for Munic ipal Council & Nagar 
Panchayat. 
5.14.1 Powers to accord Technical Sanction   
As regards the powers for according to technical sa nction to estimates the powers are 
given Figure 2 . 
Figure-2: Powers to accord technical sanction in ULBs  
 
                                                           
24  Dharamshala, Nerchowk and Sunni. 
25  Bhuntar, Jawalamukhi, Hamirpur, Manali, Paonta Sah ib and Shimla. 
26  Arki, Bilaspur, Nahan, Rampur, and Solan. 
Chief Engineer ( ₹ 50 lakh and above) of HPPWD or CEO 
of HIMUDA 
Executive Engineer ( ₹ 10 lakh to ₹ 50 lakh) 
Assistant Engineer (Upto ₹ 10 lakh) 
Municipal Service 
Junior Engineer 
(Upto ₹ 3 lakh) Municipal Service 

Chapter-V: Financial Resources of ULBs  
55  | P a g e  
The technical sanction for work costing up to ₹ 3 lakh is accorded by the Junior 
Engineer of Municipality, up to ₹ 10 lakh is accorded by the Assistant Engineer of 
Municipality, between ₹ 10 lakh to ₹ 50 lakh is accorded by the Executive Engineer 
and above ₹ 50 lakh is accorded by Chief Engineer of HPPWD or CEO of HIMUDA. 
5.15 Summary of Audit Findings 
• ULBs were largely dependent on fiscal transfers, wh ich constituted about 
78 per cent  of their total revenue.  
• There was a shortfall of ₹ 1.99 crore in fiscal transfers during the period 2015-16 
to 2019-20 vis-à-vis the recommendations of the SFC.  
• Allocation of performance grants of ₹ 32.44 crore for the year 2017-18, 2018-19 
& 2019-20 was yet to be received, the reasons for w hich was mainly due to 
non-achievement of the target fixed by the ULBs.  
• Adhoc payment of assigned revenue had been noticed in all test-checked ULBs.  
• Own revenue of ULBs constituted only 22 per cent  of their total revenue. 
• The State laws did not provide complete autonomy to ULBs in generating their 
own revenue. Omissions attributable to ULBs such as  absence of reliable 
database, non-revision of rates etc., also contribu ted to lesser revenue 
generation. 
• Budget exercise was flawed and resulted in preparat ion of unrealistic and 
unscientific budgets.  
• ULBs had spent on an average about 63 per cent  of the funds available with 
them.  
• The State Government limited the financial and administrative powers of ULBs 
which hampered the utilisation of funds. 
• None of the ULBs except MC Palampur, Solan and Muni cipal Corporation, 
Shimla (SJPNL) had been devolved with function of water supply.  
• Non-Revenue Water ranging between 34 per cent  and 47 per cent in a test-
checked unit i.e., MC Solan. 
• Supplying of bulk water from source to ULB’s tanks at the rate charged for 
commercial activity resulted in accrued liability on Municipalities. 
• Sewerage management in the State totally performed by Jal Shakti Vibhag 
except MC Shimla (GWSSC/SJPNL) and MC Solan (where providing of 
sewerage connection and collection of user charge lies with the MC). 
• Non-levy of sewerage charges (MC Solan) resulting in revenue loss of ₹ 38.30 
lakh. 
• Collection of user charges for door-to-door collection of garbage varied between 
01 per cent  and 60 per cent  of amount collectible in test-checked ULBs. 

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitution Amendment Act, 1992 
56  | P a g e  
• The powers of ULBs were limited in respect of admin istrative approvals and 
technical sanctions. 
5.16 Recommendations  
In the light of the audit findings, the State Government may like to consider: 
(i)  ensuring release of mandated share to the ULBs as per the recommendations of 
State Finance Commission; 
(ii)  initiating action for meeting mandatory provision p rescribed for obtaining 
Performance Grant by the ULBs;  
(iii)  placing an effective mechanism for the recovery of outstanding dues by the 
ULBs to augment their own revenue;  
(iv)  GIS mapping of the properties within the jurisdicti on of the Municipalities 
needs to be made mandatory so that property tax management can be improved; 
(v)  removing limitations on the ability of the ULBs to raise revenues through 
sources such as property tax, advertisement fee, so lid waste management cess 
etc.; 
(vi)  ensuring preparation of realistic budget estimates by ULBs in a scientific 
manner taking into account requirements of capital expenditure as well as a 
realistic projection of funds expected to be mobilised; and,  
(vii)  providing adequate powers and enhancing role of ULB s in administrative and 
executive spheres to enable them to function as an institution of self-
government.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter-VI 
Human Resources of ULBs  
 
  

57  | P a g e  
 
6.1  Recruitment of staff  
The Himachal Pradesh Municipalities Executive Offic er/Secretary (Recruitment, 
Promotion and other Condition of Services) Rules, 2019, Common Recruitment Rules, 
2011, Department of Personnel, Govt. of HP, and Him achal Pradesh Ministerial/Non-
Ministerial, Municipal Level Services Recruitment &  Promotion and other conditions 
of Services Rules, 2005 list out the Appointing Aut horities for various categories of 
posts as indicated below: 
Table 6.1: Statement showing the appointing authorities for recruitment 
Category of post  Authority 
Group A State Government  
Group B (For Executive 
Officer and Secretary) 
Secretary, (Urban Development) to the Govt. of HP 
Group B, C & D Schedule-I- On the recommendation of  the service selection 
committee 1 constituted at the State level by the State Government.  
Schedule-II- Appointing Authority (Council) on the 
recommendation of selection committee 
2  constituted by the 
Director of UDD. 
The method of recruitment of official and staff of ULBs is as shown in the flow chart 
below: 
 
                                                           
1 1. Director, Urban Bodies, Himachal Pradesh  
 2. Representative of Secretary (LSG) to the Member . Chairman. Government of Himachal 
Pradesh. 
 3. Joint Director/Deputy Director, Urban Local Bod ies, Himachal Pradesh, Member. 
2 Director shall from time to time constitute a sele ction committee consisting of at least three 
members with the approval of Government. 
Human Resources of ULBs 
Composition of Municipal Services 
Commissioner / 
Joint 
Commissioner 
Class 'I' officer 
having service of 
10 years for term 
of three years 
Appointed by 
State Government 
HP Municipalities 
Executive 
Officer/Secretary 
(Recruitment, Promotion 
& Other condition of 
Services) Rule 2019 
50 % direct recruitment 
HPPSC and 50 % by 
promotions 
Appointed by the Secretary 
UD to Govt of HP 
HP Ministrial/Non-Ministrial-
State Municipal Services 
(Recruitment, Promotion & 
Other condition of Services) 
Rule 1997 (Schedule-I) 
Direct examination or 
promotion or deputation / 
secondment on recommendation 
of Service Selection Committee 
Appointed by Director, 
UDD 
HP Ministrial/Non-Ministrial-
Municipal Level Services 
(Recruitment, Promotion & Other 
condition of Services) Rule 2005 
(Schedule-II) 
Direct recruitment through 
employment exchange on 
recommendation of service selection 
committee or promotion  (post wise) 
Appointed by MC or NP 
after approval of State 
Government 
Chapter 6 

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitution Amendment Act, 1992 
58 | P a g e  
6.2 Limited powers over manpower 
Adequate and qualified manpower is a sine qua non  for the empowerment of ULBs. 
The broad framework of functions carried out by ULBs is depicted in Table-6.2 below: 
Table-6.2: Status of wings/sections with functions in ULBs 
Municipal Corporation 
Sl. No. Wing/Section  Functions 
1.  Administration  General administration, including meetings of council and committees  
2.  Revenue  Assessment and collection of various taxes, rent, a dvertisements and 
other property related activities  
3.  Accounts  Preparation and maintenance of accounts, preparation of budget etc.  
4.  Public health  Sanitation, street sweeping, solid waste management  and other public 
health related activities  
5. Engineering Construction / O & M of roads, drain s, buildings, parks, playgrounds, 
water supply and street lighting etc. 
6. Town Planning  Town planning activities such as issue of sanctions to building plans and 
issue of ‘No Objection Certificate’ for the release of electricity, water and 
sewerage connections etc. 
7. Welfare  Implementation of schemes relating to S ocial and economic development 
The State Government had following powers regarding manpower of ULBs: 
• Schedule I & II of the HP Municipal Services Act, 1 994 stipulates various 
categories 3 of employees required for execution of functions devolved by the State 
Government. However, the HP Municipal Service Act, 1994 did not define the 
wing/section wise category of employees. State Gove rnment may make rules for 
carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
• As per Section 03 of HP Municipal Services Act, 199 4, addition and deletion to 
Municipal State Level Services shall be as prescribed by the State Government. 
• Further, the State Government had framed Rules like  Himachal Pradesh 
Municipalities Executive Officer/ Secretary (Recrui tment, Promotion and other 
Condition of Services) Rules, 2019, and Himachal Pr adesh Ministerial/Non-
Ministerial, Municipal Level Services Recruitment &  Promotion and other 
conditions of Services Rules, 2005 to regulate cond itions of service of Municipal 
Staff. 
Thus, the ULBs had no powers to recruit the required staff.  
6.3 Assessment of staff in ULBs 
The 2 
nd  Administrative Reforms Committee opined that the c ity government should 
have the power to appoint all officials including the Commissioner in accordance with 
                                                           
3 Schedule-I:- Assistant Engineer, Junior Engineer; Superintendent  Grade-II, Sanitary 
Inspectors. 
Schedule-II:- Health Officer, Executive Engineers, Market Superin tendents, Draughtsman, 
Asstt. Draughtsman, Patwaries, Divisional Forest Of ficers, Range Officers, Deputy Forest 
Rangers, Forest Guards, Asstt/Accountants, Tax Insp ectors, Surveyors, Laboratory 
Technicians, Sanitary Supervisors & Clerks.
 

Chapter-VI: Human Resources of ULBs  
59 | P a g e  
specified procedures and conditions of appointment.  However, it was observed that 
ULBs had no power to recruit staff and all the recr uitments are to be made only after 
obtaining the approval of the Government. It was also observed that approval of filling 
of posts/sanctioning new posts were made by Governm ent without considering the 
actual assessments of ULBs.  
The assessment of requirement of staff made by thre e out of 14 test-checked ULBs 
namely Municipal Corporation Shimla, Dharamshala and Municipal Council, Rampur 
and sanction accorded by the Government are discussed as below: 
Sr. 
No.  Name of ULB Staff demand raised by ULBs Sanction received from 
State Govt. 
1. MC Shimla 212 vacant posts;  
720 new posts 
35 vacant posts;  
20 new posts 
2. MC Dharamshala 10 additional posts Nil 
3. MC Rampur 17 vacant posts Nil 
As is evident, the approval by the State Government for filling of posts/sanctioning new 
posts was not in consonance with the actual demands  raised by MC, Shimla. Further, 
in case of Dharamshala and Rampur, the Government d id not even respond to 
assessment of additional requirement made by ULBs. The non-filling up of required 
staff may have affected the basic services in the U LBs besides implementing various 
schemes and programmes of the Govt. effectively.  
6.4 Staff position in Urban Local Bodies of Himacha l Pradesh  
Sanctioned strength and persons-in-position of vari ous categories in 54 ULBs of the 
State is given in Table below:  
Table-6.3: Staff position of ULBs in the State  
Category  Sanctioned 
Strength 
Working Strength  
Vacancy 
percentage  Regular  Daily 
wages Contract 
Outsourced 
(JE & Sanitary 
supervisor) 
Vacant  
Group A 16 15 -- -- -- 1 6 
Group B 86 37 -- -- -- 49 57 
Group C 861 439 1 45 38* 376 44 
Group D 2,768 1,715 67 26 -- 960 35 
 3,731 2,206 68 71 38 1,386 37 
* shown as vacant post. 
As can be seen from the table above that vacancy ra nged from 35 per cent  to 57 per 
cent  among the various categories (except Group A), the reby hampering effective 
discharge of functions. Significant percentage of v acancies in the key posts are 
discussed as under: 
• The Commissioner, Executive Officer and Secretary are the executive heads of ULBs. 
It was observed that 48 per cent  of post of Executive Officers 57  per cent  post of 
Secretary and 100 per cent  posts of Administrative Officer and Superintendent   

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitution Amendment Act, 1992 
60 | P a g e  
Grade-II were lying vacant affecting the delivery of public services and development 
works. The Sub Divisional Officers and Tehsildars have been given the additional 
charge of the Municipal Councils/Nagar Panchayats. 
• The vacancies in technical posts such as Assistant Engineer, Junior Engineer and 
draughtsman ranged between 30 per cent  and 40 per cent , which affected the 
execution of various development works of the Munic ipality besides resulting in 
poor utilisation of funds. 
• Audit also observed that vacancies to the extent of  75  per cent  in the posts of 
Revenue Officer (Patwari) and 100  per cent  in the posts of Chief 
Accountant/Accountant affected the collection of re venue/arrears resulting in 
lesser realisation of own revenue as discussed in Para 5.4 . besides affecting proper 
accounting and maintenance of records.  
6.4.1 Sanctioned strength of test-checked ULBs 
The urban population of 14 test-checked ULBs which was 3.74 lakh as per 2011 census 
was projected at 4.25 lakh as of 2020. Analysis showed that the sanctioned strength was 
not commensurate with the population. In the test-c hecked ULBs, the sanctioned 
strength of ULBs per 1000 population varied from 03  to 11.7 employees per 1000 
population (as per 2001 census). This ratio fell to  0.5 to 10.4 employees per 1000 
population (as per 2011 census). As per the projected population in 2020, the sanctioned 
strength of ULBs per 1000 population would further fall down to 0.3 to 9.5 employees 
per 1000 projected population (2020). Comparative a nalysis of number of employees 
per 1000 population against sanctioned strength in 2001 census with 2011 census and 
2020 (projected) is depicted in Chart 6.1 : 
Chart-6.1: Employees per 1,000 population as per sanction strength for census 2001, 2011 and 
2020 (projected) in 14 test-checked ULBs 
 
It can be seen from Chart 6.1  that sanctioned strength of ULB officials per 1000  
population is decreasing. This may be attributed to  the sanctioned strength not being 
commensurate with the increasing population of the concerned ULBs. 
7.2 
8.8 
5.3 
4.3 
11.4 
9.9 
6.6 
0.0 
2.9 
8.7 
6.0 
8.7 
5.4 
11.8 
4.5 
7.4 
5.1 
4.2 
10.4 
7.7 
6.0 
0.5 
2.2 
5.3 
5.2 
8.2 
5.1 
6.9 
4.1 
6.7 
4.6 
3.8 
9.5 
7.0 
5.4 
0.3 
2.0 
3.2 
4.8 
7.5 
4.7 
6.3 
0.0 
2.0 
4.0 
6.0 
8.0 
10.0 
12.0 
14.0 Number of employees 
Per 1000 population 2001 census (sanction strength) Per 1000 population 2011 census (sanction strength) 
Per 1000 population 2020 projected pop.(sanction strength) 

Chapter-VI: Human Resources of ULBs  
61 | P a g e  
6.4.2 Persons-in-position of test-checked ULBs 
Scrutiny of 14 test-checked ULBs revealed huge vari ation in person-in-position per 
1000 population (2020 – projected). Comparative chart is depicted below: 
Chart-6.2: Number of Employees per 1000 population as current working strength 
against the projected population for the year 2020 
 
As indicated above, 07 test-checked ULBs had 2.9 or below employees for per thousand 
population, 04 ULBs had between 3 and 4 employees a nd 03 ULBs had more than 
4 employees. Evidently, the ULBs lacked adequate ma npower to carry out efficient 
delivery of services. 
6.4.3 Staff position in test-checked ULBs  
Sanctioned strength and persons-in-position of vari ous wings/sections in test-checked 
ULBs is given in Table 6.4  and detailed post wise position of vacancies is gi ven in 
Appendix-6.1 : 
Table-6.4: Staff position in the 14  test-checked ULBs 
Sl. 
No. Wing/sections Sanctioned Regular Daily 
wages Contract Vacant % Of 
vacancy 
1. Administration  39 19 0 0 20 51 
2. Accounts/ Revenue  264 151 0 10 103 39 
3. Sanitation Public 
health  884 490 8 6 380 43 
4. Engineering 794 676 8 7 103 13 
5. Town Planning  3 1 0 0 2 67 
6. Law  6 3 0 0 3 50 
7. Forest 5 2 0 0 3 60 
8. General Staff 217 135 8 1 73 34 
 Total 2,212 1,477 24 24 687 31 
As can be seen from the table above that vacancy ra nged from 13 per cent  to  
67 per cent  among the various wings/sections (March 2021).  
3.4 
4.7 
2.6 2.3 
4.2 
5.2 
3.9 
0.1 
1.3 2.0 
3.5 3.3 2.8 2.4 
0.0 
1.0 
2.0 
3.0 
4.0 
5.0 
6.0 
7.0 
8.0 
9.0 
10.0 
Number of employees per 1000 population 

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitution Amendment Act, 1992 
62 | P a g e  
• In nine test-checked Municipal Councils and three N agar Panchayats, it was 
observed that 33 per cent  post of Executive Officers and 100 per cent  post of 
Secretary were lying vacant thereby affecting the d elivery of public services and 
development works. 
Further, human resources aspects relating to five f unctions discussed in Chapter 5 , is 
discussed below:  
1.  Property Tax: 
As per Schedule-II of the HP Municipal Service Act,  there must be a post of Tax 
Inspector in the ULBs. But in all the ULBs no post of Tax Inspector had been 
sanctioned.  
In test-checked ULBs except MC Shimla generally a c lerk/accountant/beldar/mason 
was assigned with the work of preparation of assess ment list, property tax assessment 
and further billing and collection of property Tax. 
Thus, non-sanctioning of post of Tax Inspector resu lted in improper assessments and 
shortage of collection of the property tax in the U LBs. Performing the work through 
untrained staff for the assessment of property tax had compromised the quality of 
assessment and collection of taxes. Shortcomings in  maintenance of records, 
preparation of assessment list, assessment and coll ection of property tax has been 
discussed in the Paras 5.4.1 to  5.4.1.4 .  
2.  Water supply (Water Tax/Charges): 
The vacancy position in water supply wing of the MC  Solan shown in the table given 
below: 
Table 6.5: Detail of manpower in water supply wing of MC Solan 
Name of Post Sanction Strength  Person in position  Percentage of 
vacancy  
Assistant Engineer  01 01 Nil 
Junior Engineer 03 01+01 (contract) 33 
Accountant/clerk 13 12 08 
Fitter 02 Nil 100 
Meter Reader 03 03 Nil 
Meter Mechanic 01 Nil 100 
Keymen 12 03 75 
Bill Distributer 02 02 Nil 
As can be seen from  above table, 33 per cent  of post of Junior Engineer, 100 per cent  
post of Fitter, 100 per cent  post of Meter Mechanic and 75 per cent  post of Keyman 
was lying vacant in the MC. This has resulted in the huge non-revenue water and short 
collection of water tax/charges as discussed in the Para 5.6. 
3.  Solid Waste Management:  
The status of manpower sanctioned and engaged for management of Solid Waste in the 
14 th   test-checked ULBs is given in the table below: 

Chapter-VI: Human Resources of ULBs  
63 | P a g e  
Table 6.6: Detail of manpower in Solid Waste Management of test-checked ULBs 
Name of Post Sanction Strength  Person in position  Percentage of 
vacancy  
Health Officer  02 01 50 
Veterinary H.O.  01 01 00 
Sanitary Inspector  20 05 75 
Sanitary Supervisor  29 21 28 
Safai Karamchari  788 446 43 
Sanitary/Safai Jamadar  42 40 05 
• In all the 14 test-checked ULBs, only an employee e ither Sanitary Supervisor or 
Junior Engineer or Safai Jamadar or Peon was handli ng the SWM in the 
municipality except for MC Shimla and Rampur.  
• As evident from above table against the sanctioned 20 4 posts of sanitary inspectors 
only five 5 were in position (vacancy was 75 per cent ) and against 29 6 sanctioned 
post of Sanitary Supervisors only 21 7 were in position (vacancy was 28 per cent ).  
• In two 8 ULBs, the work of Solid Waste Management was being  supervised by 
Junior Engineers, in MC Hamirpur the work was being supervised by the Peon and 
in MC Bilaspur by the Safai Jamadar.  
• Out of 788 sanctioned posts of Safari Karamchari, 4 46 (421 (regular), 19 (daily 
wages) and 06 (contract)) were in position in the t est checked ULBs. Thus, the 
per cent  of vacancy of Safai Karamchari was 43 per cent.  
Thus, non-filling up of the vacant posts resulted in inadequate Solid Waste Management 
in the ULBs. 
During the exit conference, the State Government st ated that due to poor financial 
position of the ULBs, department is hiring the serv ices on outsource basis so that 
efficiency of the private sector will be brought in  the working of ULBs. Only those 
posts which are critical and cannot be outsourced w ill be filled up for the smooth 
functioning. The reply is not tenable as most of th e critical posts required for smooth 
functioning of ULBs were still lying vacant. 
6.5 Capacity Building 
In an organization the capacity enhancement is a co ntinuous process by which 
individuals obtain, improve, and retain the skills,  knowledge and other resources 
                                                           
4 Bilaspur:1, Dharamshala:1, Hamirpur:1, Jawalamukhi :1, Manali:1, Nahan:2, Nerchowk:1, 
Paonta Sahib:1, Rampur:1, Shimla:9 & Solan:1. 
5 Rampur:1, Shimla:4. 
6 Arki:1, Bhunter:1, Dharamshala:3, Jawalamukhi:1, M anali:1, Nahan:1, Nerchowk:1, Paonta:1, 
Solan:1, Shimla:17  & Sunni:1. 
7 Dhramshala:2, Nahan:1, Shimla:17 & Sunni:1. 
8 Bhunter and Jawalamukhi. 

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitution Amendment Act, 1992 
64 | P a g e  
needed to do their jobs competently and efficiently . It allows individuals and 
organizations to perform at the utmost capacity. Ca pacity building is important for 
strengthening the capabilities of personnel and for equipping them with advanced skills 
to deliver better services. This would also include training needs assessment to identify 
areas of improvement. Establishment of Local Government Training Institution which 
would enable ULBs in the State for capacity buildin g of all the stakeholders of Urban 
Development and functionaries & Elected Representatives of ULBs.  
During the audit of UDD, it was noticed that there is no State Institute of Urban 
Development in the State, as it existed for Panchayati Raj Institution i.e., State Institute 
of Rural Development. As a result no short term / l ong term training programmes for 
the officials and non-officials engaged in ULBs cou ld be conducted. Further, 
Directorate of UDD had conducted only two 9 trainings for the officials of ULBs during 
the period 2015-20.  
In course of audit, following observations were noticed in all the test-checked ULBs:- 
• ULBs had not organized any training schedule for th e enhancement of capacity of 
its employees in the areas of Office Procedure and Financial Administration, 
Service Rules, Revenue Administration, Computer Awa reness and Urban 
Development etc. during the period 2015-20.  
• It was also noticed that staff are not recruited re gularly against either the existing 
vacancies or the additional vacancies created due to superannuation of the staff. The 
existing staff, by virtue of promotion often change s position, post and level 
irrespective of their service capacity. 
Thus, mechanism for capacity development/enhancemen t at regular intervals of the 
employees to educate them of their roles and responsibilities, was not present either in 
the ULBs or in the Directorate of UDD. 
During the exit conference, the State Government assured that the matter will be looked 
into. 
6.6 Summary of Audit Findings 
• Powers for recruitment of personnel for the ULBs wa s vested with the State 
Government. 
• Powers to regulate classification, method of recrui tment, conditions of service, 
pay and allowances, initiate disciplinary action on  staff of ULBs, transfer staff 
across ULBs or to other Government departments, are  with the State 
Government.  
• The sanctioned strength of ULBs per 1000 population  varied from 03 to 11.7 
employees per 1,000 population (as per 2001 census) . This ratio fell to 0.5 to 
                                                           
9 (i) ‘Transparency and Accountability in Government  Financial Management’ in October 2019; 
(ii) ‘Implementation of PFMS’ in October 2019. 

Chapter-VI: Human Resources of ULBs  
65 | P a g e  
10.4 employees per 1,000 population (as per 2011 ce nsus) in the test-checked 
ULBs. Revision in the sanctioned strength was not d one in proportion to the 
increase in population. 
• Huge vacancies across all cadres specifically in crucial technical posts resulted 
in absence of adequate manpower adversely impacting  the delivery of citizen 
services. 
• No mechanism of capacity building either in the ULB s or in the Directorate of 
UDD for enhancement of working quality of official. 
6.7 Recommendations  
In the light of the audit findings, the State Government may like to consider: 
(i)  entrusting the power of recruitment with the ULBs so that they can perform the 
function without any hurdle; 
(ii)  giving emphasis to fill all the vacant posts in the ULBs at the earliest; 
(iii)  revising the sanctioned strength in accordance with  the responsibilities and 
resources of the ULBs; and, 
(iv)  initiating capacity building programmes at the ULBs  level as well as at 
Directorate level, as soon as possible. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter-VII 
Conclusion  
  

67 | P a g e  
 
The 74 th  Amendment introduced Part IX A (the Municipalities ) containing Articles 
243P to 243ZG in the Constitution. This amendment which came into effect on 1 June 
1993 authorised State Legislatures to enact laws to endow local bodies with powers and 
authority as may be necessary to enable them to fun ction as institutions of 
self-government and make provisions for devolution of powers and responsibilities 
(Article 243W). The 12 th  Schedule lists out the 18 functions to be carried out by ULBs. 
 The first  objective of PA was to check adequacy in coverage of provisions of 
74 th  CAA in the State Legislation.  
• The State statutes (HPMC & HPM Acts 1994) complied with the provisions 
of the 74 th  CAA, however, the legal provisions were not backed  by decisive 
actions with regard to actual implementation resulting in a situation in which 
the spirit of 74 th  CAA was not completely upheld. This was especially true in 
case of provisions pertaining to the devolution of functions and creation of 
appropriate institutional mechanisms for effective decentralisation.  
 The second  objective of the PA was to check the  ‘Empowerment of ULBs by the 
State Government to discharge their functions/respo nsibilities effectively through 
creation of appropriately designed institutions/ins titutional mechanisms and their 
functions and extent of devolution of the functions to the ULBs by the State 
Government’. 
The observations in respect of this objective are as under:  
• Formation of Councils: Elections in all the ULBs in the State were held and 
councils formed in due time except in MC Shimla whe re election was held 
after a delay of 12 days only. Thereby, the democra tic process was followed 
by the ULBs. 
• Mayoral tenure: In the State, the term of office of Mayor and Deputy Mayor 
was two and a half years from the date of election while the term of the 
President and Vice President in the case of other ULBs was for a period of five 
years from the date of their election. Thus, the te nure of Mayor and Deputy 
Mayor was not coterminous with the duration of the Municipality.  
Conclusion Chapter 7  

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitution Amendment Act, 1992 
68 | P a g e  
• Frequency of meetings of ULBs: Meetings of ULBs were not held regularly. 
The percentage of number of meetings of ULBs held, ranged between 
35  per cent and 95  per cent  during 2015-20.   
• Standing Committees:   All the three Standing Committees were though 
formed in all the test-checked ULBs, no meetings were held by these standing 
committees in 11 ULBs and in three ULBs the require d number of meetings 
were not held. Thus, these standing committees larg ely remained non-
functional. 
• Ward Committees  were not constituted in any of the test-checked UL Bs 
except MC Shimla.  
• District Planning Committee  though found constituted in all the districts, but 
the consolidated Draft Development Plans, involving  matters of common 
interest between the panchayats and the municipalit ies, for the district were 
not prepared in any of the test-checked 14 ULBs.  
• State Finance Commission:  There were delays of 12, 24 & 06 months in 
constitution of 3 rd , 4 th  & 5 th  SFC which further resulted in delay of submission 
of report by 17, 25 & 21 months by 3 rd , 4 th  & 5 th  SFC. The State Government 
had not implemented many of the recommendations of SFC and undertook 
modifications of recommendations relating to fiscal  devolution. This was a 
setback to the process of strengthening ULBs. 
• Property Tax Board: State Level Property Tax Board was constituted by the 
State Government to assist the ULBs to put in place  an independent and 
transparent procedure for assessing property tax bu t no recommendation was 
given by the Board. 
• Impact of parastatals on ULBs:  The functions of water supply & sewerage 
services in MC Shimla (SJPNL), development of infra structure, provisioning 
the housing needs of underprivileged citizens (HIMU DA), infrastructure 
development in Industrial area (HPSIDC) and Area Ba sed Development 
Projects (Smart City Mission) were discharged by th ese Parastatals. These 
parastatals (SJPNL and Smart City) had their own governing bodies which do 
include elected representative of ULBs but are not directly accountable to 
ULBs. The State did not amend the statutes to make the parastatals 
accountable to ULBs. This arrangement infringed on the ability of ULBs to 

Chapter-VII: Conclusion 
69 | P a g e  
discharge their mandated functions and undermined t he objective of 
accountability to the people. 
• Extent of devolution of the functions to the ULBs b y the State 
Government : It was observed that the State Government transferred 17 out of 
the 18 functions. Fire Services was not transferred . Out of the 17 functions, 
ULBs were solely responsible for only five functions. They had no role in two 
functions and had limited role/dual role in six functions. While the ULBs were 
mere implementing agencies for four functions.  
 The third  objective of the PA was to assess whether the ULBs  have been 
empowered to access adequate financial resources for discharge of functions 
stated to be devolved to them. 
• The fiscal transfers constituted about 78 per cent  of the revenue of ULBs 
during the period 2015-16 to 2019-20. However, there was shortfall in release 
of the committed funds by the State Government. As against 
₹ 551.94 crore 
to be released to ULBs as per SFC recommendations, ₹ 549.95 crore was 
released during the period 2015-16 to 2019-20. 
• The share of own revenue to total revenue of ULBs for the period 2015-16 to 
2019-20 was only 22 per cent . The ULBs lacked autonomy in generating their 
own revenue. The authority to collect certain taxes  like property tax, 
advertisement fee vested with ULBs, powers pertaini ng to the rates and 
revision thereof (advertisement fee), procedure of collection (property tax), 
method of assessment, exemptions, concessions (property tax, advertisement 
fee) etc., were vested with the State Government. Besides, omissions such as 
non-conducting of regular surveys, deficiencies in maintenance of demand, 
collection and balance registers, and non-maintenan ce of records regarding 
user charges of municipal Solid waste, huge non-rev enue water and non-
collection of sewerage charges (MC Solan) hampered the revenue generation 
of ULBs. 
• None of the ULBs except MC Palampur, Solan and Muni cipal Corporation, 
Shimla (SJPNL) had been devolved with function of water supply.  
• Non-Revenue Water ranging between 34 per cent  and 47 per cent  was noticed 
in MC Solan.  
 

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitution Amendment Act, 1992 
70 | P a g e  
• Further, Jal Shakti Vibhag charged the MC Solan for  supplying bulk water 
from source to tanks of ULB at commercial rates whe reas the MC Solan 
distributed the water to consumers at two different  rates i.e., domestic & 
commercial rates resulted in accrued liability of ₹ 26.29 crore during 2015-20 
to MC Solan. 
• Sewerage management in the State was completely vested with the Jal Shakti 
Vibhag except MC Shimla (SJPNL) & MC Solan (devolved with function of 
only collecting sewerage charge).  
• Collection of user charges for door-to-door collect ion of garbage varied 
between 01 per cent and 60 per cent  of amount collectible i.e., amount 
collected ₹ 21.85 crore (36 per cent ) against amount collectible ₹ 60.43 crore. 
• Budget preparation exercise was flawed and unrealistic. Scientific estimation 
of cost of each municipal service was not carried o ut, leading to huge 
variations between estimates and actuals.  
• ULBs were able to generate own resources to the ext ent of only 62 per cent  
of revenue expenditure and had utilised on an average about 63 per cent  of the 
total available funds.  
• The powers of ULBs were limited in respect of admin istrative approvals and 
technical sanctions. 
 The fourth  objective of the PA was to assess whether the ULBs  have been 
empowered to access adequate human resources for discharge of functions stated 
to be devolved to them. 
• The powers for recruitment of personnel for ULBs ve sted with the State 
Government.  
• The State had the powers to regulate method of recr uitment, conditions of 
service, pay and allowances across ULBs.  
• Revision in the sanctioned strength of ULBs were no t done in proportion to 
the increase in population. 
 
 

Chapter-VII: Conclusion 
71 | P a g e  
• The ULBs lacked adequate manpower as there were substantial vacancies 
across all cadres affecting efficient delivery of services.  
• No mechanism for capacity building of ULBs was in existence.  
Shimla 
Date
d: 
(Ritu Dhillon) 
Principal Accountant General (Audit) 
Himachal Pradesh 
Countersigned 
New Delhi 
Date
d: 
(Girish Chandra Murmu) 
Comp
troller and Auditor General of India 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendices 
 
 

73 | P a g e  
APPENDICES 
Appendix-1.1 
(Reference: Paragraph 1.4, page 2) 
Organisational Structure in respect to functioning of ULBs in the State 
 
 
  
Administrative Secretary 
Director, Urban Development 
Municipal Corporations (02) 
 Nagar Panchayats (21) 
Executive Officer 
 Secretary 
Commissioner  
Elected Body head 
“Mayor”  
Elected Body 
head “President”  
Elected Body head 
“President ” 
Municipal Councils (31) 

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitution Amendment Act, 1992 
74 | P a g e  
Appendix-1.2 
(Reference: Paragraph 1.4, page 2) 
List of parastatals and their functions 
Sl. 
No. Parastatal Functions 
1. Shimla Jal Prabhadhan 
Nigam Ltd. 
Water supply and sewerage system management 
in Shimla city 
2. Himachal Pradesh Housing 
and Urban Development 
Authority (HIMUDA) 
To plan and develop land and create infrastructure 
to meet with the housing needs of different income 
groups.  
3. Himachal Pradesh State 
Industrial Development 
Corporation Ltd. (HPSIDC) 
Major agency in the State to promote and setting 
up of Small, Medium & Large scale Industrial 
units in the state. 
4. Smart City Dharamshala and 
Shimla 
To promote sustainable and inclusive cities that 
provide core infrastructure and give a decent 
quality of life to its citizen. 
 
  

Appendices  
75 | P a g e  
Appendix-2.1 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.3, page 3) 
List of selected ULBs 
Sl. No. Name of the 
District Name of ULB Category of Municipality 
1.   Bilaspur Bilaspur Municipal Council 
2.   Hamirpur Hamirpur Municipal Council 
3.   
Kangra 
Dharamshala Municipal Corporation 
4.   Jawalamukhi Municipal Council 
5.   
Kullu 
Bhuntar Nagar Panchayat 
6.   Manali Municipal Council 
7.   Mandi Nerchowk Municipal Council 
8.   
Shimla 
Shimla Municipal Corporation 
9.   Rampur Municipal Council 
10.   Sunni Nagar Panchayat 
11.   
Sirmour 
Nahan Municipal Council 
12.   Paonta Sahib Municipal Council 
13.   
Solan 
Arki Nagar Panchayat 
14.   Solan Municipal Council 
 
  

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitution Amendment Act, 1992 
76 | P a g e  
Appendix-4.1 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.2.1.6, Page 15) 
Details of number of Meetings of Municipalities held during 2015-20 
Sr. 
No. Name of the ULB 
No. of 
meetings 
to be held 
No. of 
meetings held 
during 2015-20  
%  of 
meetings 
held 
1. NP Arki 60 39 65 
2. NP Bhuntar 60 35 58 
3. MC Bilaspur 60 41 68 
4. Municipal Corporation 
Dharamshala (New MC 
constituted on April 2016) 
48 24 50 
5. MC Jawalmukhi 60 41 68 
6. MC Hamirpur 60 29 48 
7. MC Nerchowk 60 23 38 
8. MC Nahan 60 45 75 
9. MC Paonta Sahib 60 47 78 
10. MC Rampur 60 37 62 
11. Municipal Corporation, Shimla 60 55 92 
12. MC Solan 60 21 35 
13. NP Sunni 60 57 95 

Appendices  
77 | P a g e  
Appendix 4.2   
(Reference: Paragraph 4.2.5.2, Page 19) 
Non/partial implementation of SFCs recommendations  
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
the SFC/ 
Para No. 
Content of recommendation Action taken report Status of implementation 
1 First/19.1 Some of the local government bodies are 
not levying the rates and taxes which 
should be statutorily levied by them. It 
should be mandatory for all to raise 
resources within their purview. The 
Commission feels that in case some local 
government bodies do not collect the 
statutory levies, the resources transfers 
recommended through this report of the 
Commission should not be released. 
Compliance to collect taxes at the local 
level should only qualify these bodies for 
availing the resource transfers from the 
consolidated fund of the State.  
All the municipalities 
have been directed by the 
Government. to get 
house tax compulsorily 
imposed. Whereas the 
Government. has not 
accepted the 
recommendation of 
Commission stating that 
the withholding of grants 
will not be a desirable 
step. 
 
Partially implemented. 
 MC Solan and 
Nerchowk are not 
levying Property Tax, 
seven 
1  ULBs levying 
property tax on the Old 
method i.e., Annual 
Rental Value, four 
2 
with the New Unit Area 
method and MC Nahan 
was levying tax as per 
his own method. 
 Property Tax has been 
discussed in detail in 
Paragraph 5.4.1 
2 First/19.1 In developing and expanding the civic 
infrastructure, the Urban Local Bodies 
should increasingly resort to negotiated 
loans from the national funding agencies.  
 
HPMC Act allows the 
corporation to raise loans 
but there is no such 
provision in the HPM 
Act. Steps are being 
taken to amend the HPM 
Act. 
 
Not implemented . 
HPM Act, 1994 not 
amended yet, as a result the 
MCs and NPs are not in a 
position to raise loans from 
the national funding 
agencies. 
3 Third 
14.20-22 
The Commission has recommended 
differential taxation for urban properties 
according to their geographical location 
within a town on the same lines as was 
recommended by the Second State 
Finance Commission. The details of this 
design are contained in paragraphs 14.20 
to 14.22 and the State Government may 
consider setting up a study group to go 
into the suggestions made and amend the 
statutes on these lines subsequently as 
such a suggestion has also been made 
under the National Urban Renewal 
Mission. 
The Property Tax Board 
has been constituted to 
review the present 
property tax system in 
the municipalities 
including adoption of 
Unit area Method and 
flexibility of rates. 
Amendments under 
Section 65 and 86 of 
HPM and HPMC Act has 
been done. 
 
Partially implemented . 
 Out of 14 test-checked 
ULB, only four 
3 ULBs 
were levying property 
tax as per New Unit 
Area Method.  
The number of ULBs that 
have adopted unit area 
method has been discussed 
in Paragraph 
5.4.1.2.  
                                                           
1 Annual rental value: NP Bhuntar, Sunni, MC Hamirpu r, Manali, Poanta Sahib, Rampur 
M/Corporation Dharamsala. 
2 NP Arki, MC Bilaspur, Jawalamukhi and M/Corporatio n Shimla.  
3 NP Arki, MC Bilaspur, Jawalamukhi and M/Corporatio n Shimla.  

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitution Amendment Act, 1992 
78 | P a g e  
4 Third  
16.17 
The need for continuity of an institutional 
mechanism to track the implementation of 
the recommendation made by the SFCs 
&CFCs and to collect and compile the 
financial data relating to the local 
government institutions on a regular basis 
needs no over-emphasis. The Fourth 
Finance Commission also reiterated the 
permanent institutional arrangement.  The 
13 
th  FC also recommend for the same. 
The Government. stated 
that work relating to the 
SFCs will be carried out 
without any additional 
creation of posts as 
permanent staff will lead 
a heavy financial burden 
on the State Government. 
exchequer. 
Not implemented.   
This has resulted delayed in 
constitution of the State 
Finance Commission and 
implementation of 
recommendations as 
discussed in Paragraph 
4.2.5.1 
5 Fourth 
13.11(10) 
The Commission observed that the 
District Planning Committees have been 
constituted in all districts, however, DPCs 
are fully functional only in two Districts 
viz., Chamba and Sirmour and preparing 
draft development plan. Efforts may be 
made to implement District Planning 
Committees in all Districts and to provide 
more teeth to the District Planning 
Committee. The State Government may 
consider merging the functions assigned 
to the District Planning, Development and 
20 Point Programme Revised Committee, 
constituted by Planning Department 
Himachal Pradesh with the functions of 
the District Planning Committee. 
Action Taken Report 
(ATR) awaited 
Not implemented. 
The Draft Development 
Plan (DDP) regarding to 
matters of common interest 
between the panchayats 
and the municipalities was 
not prepared by any of 
municipalities as discussed 
in Paragraph 4.2.4. 
(Formation of Distt. 
Planning Committees)  
6 Fourth 
11.18 
The Commission was of the view that the 
users of the urban areas could well afford 
to pay extra money for more improvement 
supply of street lighting. Therefore, the 
commission of the view that the rate of 
electricity tax could be increased from the 
existing rate of 2 paisa per unit to a 5 paisa 
per unit specially in the case of 
municipalities to liquidates the pending 
arrear on account of street lighting. 
ATR Awaited Not implemented .  
The electricity tax is being 
levied at the existing rate of 
2 paisa per unit in all the 
test-checked ULBs  
7 Fourth 
13.11(9) 
The Commission observed that most of 
the departments have not transferred 
funds, functions and functionaries as per 
the notification made by the UDD. To 
meet the constitutional obligations and to 
empower local bodies the State 
Government. should Constitute a High-
Powered Committee of Secretaries of the 
concerned line departments under the 
Chairmanship of Chief Secretary to 
GoHP. To oversee the entire process of 
delegation /devolution of funds, functions 
and functionaries to the ULBs to 
strengthen the local governance system 
ATR Awaited N o such High-Powered 
Committee was 
constituted. No real effort 
was made to transfer funds, 
functions, and 
functionaries. Last such 
effort was made in the year 
2004, under the 
chairmanship of Principal 
Secretary to Government. 
of HP (September 2004).  

Appendices  
79 | P a g e  
8 Fifth (R-5) The Commission has also recommended 
creation of a Centralized Pension Fund to 
meet the pensionary benefits of the State 
Cadre Officers retired from the Urban 
Local Bodies who are eligible for 
pensions by taking contribution from such 
municipal bodies where such offices have 
worked. This is essential because, 
otherwise, the burden of pensionary 
benefits falls on the Urban Local Body 
where from the person retires. 
Action Taken Report 
awaited 
Centralized Pension and 
Gratuity Fund has not been 
created. The Municipalities 
are maintaining Pension 
and Gratuity Fund at their 
own level.  
 
 

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitution Amendment Act, 1992 
80 | P a g e  
Appendix-5.1(A) 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.2.2.1, Page 32) 
Service Level Benchmark indicators of 2017-18 for the Performance Grant of 2018-19 
Sl. 
No. Name of the ULB Audit of 
Accounts 
Covering 
Establishment 
Cost and O&M 
Cost from own 
Income 
Capital 
Expenditure 
as a part of 
Total 
Expenditure 
Water 
Supply 
Coverage 
Reduction 
in Non-
Revenue 
Water 
Coverage of 
Water Supply 
of Public & 
Community 
Toilets 
Percentage of 
waste being 
processed 
scientifically 
Total 
Score 
1 Arki 0 0 20 15 15 0 0 50 
2 Bilaspur 0 0 20 15 15 0 0 50 
3 Bhuntar 0 0 20 0 0 0 0 20 
4 Dharamshala 0 0 20 15 10 0 0 45 
5 Jawalamukhi 0 15 20 15 15 0 0 65 
6 Hamirpur 0 0 20 15 15 0 0 50 
7 Manali 0 20 20 0 0 10 0 50 
8 Nahan 0 0 20 15 15 0 5 55 
9 Nerchowk 0 0 0 5 15 0 0 20 
10 Paonta Sahib 0 0 20 0 0 0 0 20 
11 Rampur 0 20 20 0 0 0 0 40 
12 Shimla 0 0 10 10 10 0 0 30 
13 Solan 0 20 20 15 15 0 0 70 
14 Sunni 0 0 20 10 15 0 0 45 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Appendices  
81 | P a g e  
Appendix-5.1(B) 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.2.2.1, Page 32) 
Service Level Benchmark indicators of the year 2018-19 for the Performance Grant of 2019-20  
Sl. No. Name of the 
ULB 
Audit of 
Accounts 
Covering 
Establishment 
Cost and O&M 
Cost from own 
Income 
Capital 
Expenditure 
as a part of 
Total 
Expenditure 
Water Supply 
Coverage 
Reduction in 
Non-Revenue 
Water 
Coverage of 
Water 
Supply of 
Public & 
Community 
Toilets 
Percentage of 
waste being 
processed 
scientifically 
Total 
Score 
1 Arki 0 0 20 15 15 0 0 50 
2 Bilaspur 0 0 10 15 15 0 0 40 
3 Bhuntar 0 0 20 0 0 0 0 20 
4 Dharamshala 0 10 20 15 15 0 0 60 
5 Jawalamukhi 0 15 20 15 15 0 0 65 
6 Hamirpur 0 0 20 15 15 0 0 50 
7 Manali 0 20 20 0 0 10 0 50 
8 Nahan 0 15 20 15 10 0 5 65 
9 Nerchowk 0 0 0 5 15 0 0 20 
10 Paonta Sahib 0 0 20 0 0 0 0 20 
11 Rampur 0 20 20 10 10 0 0 60 
12 Shimla 0 0 15 10 10 0 0 35 
13 Solan 0 20 20 15 15 0 0 70 
14 Sunni 0 15 20 10 15 0 0 60 

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitution Amendment Act, 1992 
82 | P a g e  
Appendix-5.2 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.4, Page 35) 
Detail of revenue receipts received in the test-checked ULBs during the period 
2015-16 to 2019-20 
Sources of Revenue of Test-Checked ULBS for the period 2015-20  
Year: 2015-16 (₹ in lakh)  
Sr. 
No.  
Name of 
the ULB 
Grants 
own 
revenue  
Assi-
gned 
reve-
nue 
 
Total 
 
Total 
Revenue 
% of 
own 
reve-
nue 
to 
total 
reve-
nue 
Central 
sponso-
red 
schemes 
CFC Total 
State 
spons-
ored 
sche-
mes 
SFC Total 
1 Arki 22.21  7.42  29.63  7.15  44.8  51.95  15.99  2.84  18.83  100.41  16  
2 Bilaspur 13.39  57.58  70.97  12.48  180.32  192.8  30.54  4.15  34.69  298.46  10  
3 Bhuntar 1.06  17.6  18.66  11.43  57.62  69.05  33.81  4.98  38.79  126.5  27  
4 Dharam-
shala 652.12  89.51  741.63  1,623.43  298.79  1,922.22  341.09  15.91  357  3,020.85  11  
5 Jawala-
mukhi 427.94  22.92  450.86  29.65  70.8  100.45  94.84  5.06  99.9  651.21  15  
6 Hamirpur 59.89  67.16  127.05  84.01  232.48  316.49  168.74  11.35  180.09  623.63  27  
7 Manali 1.99  19.02  21.01  109.27  119.32  228.59  456.37  20.1  476.47  726.07  63  
8 Nahan 0  21.61  21.61  83.9  372.21  456.11  143.29  2.21  145.5  623.22  23  
9 Nerchowk 0  0 0 0 100  100  17.5  0 17.5  117.5  15  
10 Paonta 
Sahib 7.79  94.65  102.44  13.8  332.57  346.37  354.44  10.61  365.05  813.86  44  
11 Rampur 132.87  91.99  224.86  45.4  4.55  49.95  304.29  4.08  308.37  583.18  52  
12 Shimla 2,397.05  631.29  3,028.34  1,352.51  2,546.42  3,898.93  5,418.49  279.76  5,698.25  12,625.52  43  
13 Solan 277.7  144.6  422.3  19.44  518.43  537.87  760.51  33.03  793.54  1,753.71  43  
14 Sunni 4.32  7.93  12.25  4.73  35.56  40.29  15.24  5.16  20.4  72.94  21  
 Total 3,998.33  1,273.28  5,271.61  3,397.2  4,913.87  8,311.07  8,155.14  399.24  8,554.38  22,137.06   
  

Appendices  
83 | P a g e  
Year: 2016-17 (₹ in lakh)  
Sr. 
No. 
Name of the 
ULB 
Grants 
Total 
own 
reven-
ue 
 
Assig-
ned 
reve-
nue 
 
Total 
 
Total 
Reve-
nue 
 
% 
of 
own 
reve 
-nue 
to 
total 
reve 
-nue 
 
Central 
sponsor 
-ed 
schemes 
CFC Total 
State 
sponsor 
-ed 
schemes 
SFC 
1 Arki 50.1 15.09 65.19 7.41 42.41 49.82 22.06 0 22.0 6  137.07  16 
2 Bilaspur 228.72 70.89 299.61 156.92 190.49 347.41 46 .02 13.08 59.1  706.12  7 
3 Bhuntar 1.39 23.48 24.87 53.72 62.43 116.15 37.94 0 37.94  178.96  21 
4 Dharamshala 1,610.87 253.03 1,863.9 450.17 746.99 1 ,197.16 421.68 2.08 423.76  3,484.82  12 
5 Jawalamukhi 55.69 28.1 83.79 199.93 74.79 274.72 15 4.15 5.3 159.45  517.96  30 
6 Hamirpur 30.19 84.91 115.1 243.34 245.6 488.94 209. 18 0 209.18  813.22  26 
7 Manali 0 39.5 39.5 25.38 112.95 138.33 423.68 1.4 4 25.08  602.91  70 
8 Nahan 38.39 94.07 132.46 550.15 0 550.15 704.77 6.2 7 711.04  1,393.65  51 
9 Nerchowk 3.66 86 89.66 80.67 227.48 308.15 145.29 0  145.29  543.1  27 
10 Paonta Sahib 106.08 119.92 226 15.5 351.33 366.83 2 57.3 0 257.3  850.13  30 
11 Rampur 83.62 17.58 101.2 24 155.36 179.36 503.08 3.8 5 506.93  787.49  64 
12 Shimla 1,896.16 803.95 2,700.11 5,917.43 2,665.83 8 ,583.26 5,493.71 190.61 5,684.32  16,967.69  32 
13 Solan 101.24 184.27 285.51 416.55 547.68 964.23 954 .27 0.73 955  2,204.74  43 
14 Sunni 95.37 13.27 108.64 2.45 36.15 38.6 22.02 3.32  25.34  172.58  13 
 Total 4,301.48  1,834.06  6,135.54  8,143.62  5,459.49  13,603.11  9,395.15  226.64  9,621.79  29,360.44   
 
Year: 2017-18 (₹ in lakh)  
Sr. 
No. 
Name of the 
ULB 
Grants 
Total own 
revenue 
Assign-
ed 
revenue  
 
Total 
 
Total 
Revenue  
 
% of 
own 
revenue 
to total 
revenue  
Central 
sponsored 
schemes 
CFC Total 
State 
sponso-
red 
schemes  
SFC 
1 Arki 32.68  13.51  46.19  38.91  46.65  85.56  17.78  5.87  23.65  155.4  11  
2 Bilaspur 238.07  65.28  303.35  33.92  209.54  243.46  47.92  4.86  52.78  599.59  8 
3 Bhuntar 0  19.74  19.74  29.45  68.68  98.13  36.98  0 36.98  154.85  24  
4 Dharamshala 1,267.92  260.69  1,528.61  423.27  821.69  1,244.96  556.29  19.99  576.28  3,349.85  17  
5 Jawalamukhi 56.85  26.02  82.87  108.73  82.27  191  164.93  5.11  170.04  443.91  37  
6 Hamirpur 58.53  74.73  133.26  183.03  270.16  453.19  216.74  14.21  230.95  817.4  27  
7 Manali 1.1  35.02  36.12  119.37  124.24  243.6  475.33  0.78  476.11  755.83  63  
8 Nahan 196.41  144  340.41  252  662.04  914.04  410.65  14.9  425.55  1680  24  
9 Nerchowk 2.78  79.91  82.69  52  250.22  302.22  82.59  5.07  87.66  472.57  17  
10 Paonta Sahib 512.05  105.44  617.49  15.5  386.46  401.96  290.72  22.95  313.67  1,333.12  22  
11 Rampur 121.64  38.47  160.11  111.74  141.78  253.52  494.27  3.49  497.76  911.39  54  
12 Shimla 2,756.86  699.58  3,456.44  1,997.82  2,902.42  4,900.24  4,772.82  188.86  4,961.66  13,318.34  36  
13 Solan 55.03  160.5  215.53  29.6  602.44  632.04  993.5  57.89  1,051.39  1,898.96  52  
14 Sunni 1.82  12.35  14.17  14.4  39.76  54.16  19.56  2.29  21.85  90.18  22  
 Total 5,301.74  1,735.24  7,036.98  3,409.74  6,608.35  10,018.08  8,580.08  346.27  8,926.33  25,981.39   
      
 
       

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitution Amendment Act, 1992 
84 | P a g e  
Year:2018-19 (₹ in lakh)  
Sr. 
No. 
Name of the 
ULB 
Grants 
Total 
 
own 
revenue  
 
Assigned 
revenue Total Total 
Revenue  
% of 
own 
revenue 
to total 
revenue  
Central 
sponsored 
schemes 
CFC Total 
State 
sponsored 
schemes 
SFC 
1 Arki 59.94  7.8  67.74  2.4  51.47  53.87  17.37  2.54  19.91  141.52  12  
2 Bilaspur 28.67  70.34  99.01  30.34  231.18  261.52  82.82  2.94  85.76  446.29  19  
3 Bhuntar 36.34  11.41  47.75  67.89  75.77  143.66  60.56  0 60.56  251.97  24  
4 Dharamshala 1,176.71  127.99  1,304.7  524.26  906.57  1,430.83  758.18  39.58  797.76  3,533.29  21  
5 Jawalamukhi 113.07  15.03  128.1  6.7  90.77  96.47  165.96  2.59  168.55  393.12  42  
6 Hamirpur 55.17  43.2  98.37  162.5  298.06  460.56  218.25  12.6  230.85  789.78  28  
7 Manali 6.75  94.72  101.47  355.59  137.08  492.67  426.41  1.98  428.39  1,022.53  42  
8 Nahan 205.28  172.8  378.08  932.37  794.88  1,727.25  955.77  17.8  973.57  3,078.9  31  
9 Nerchowk 274.4  46.14  320.54  39.25  276.06  315.31  99.16  5.15  104.31  740.16  13  
10 Paonta Sahib 125.35  60.95  186.3  15.46  426.38  441.84  301.76  6.4  308.16  936.3  32  
11 Rampur 85.46  22.24  107.7  11.96  156.43  168.39  435.72  0.41  436.13  712.22  61  
12 Shimla 3,184.24  404.49  3,588.7  2,728.6  3,171.21  5,899.81  3,729.43  316.71  4,046.14  13,534.65  28  
13 Solan 5.77  92.8  98.57  81.5  664.67  746.17  1,038.93  35.38  1,074.31  1,919.05  54  
14 Sunni 8.42  6.99  15.41  14.44  43.87  58.31  35.13  0.88  36.01  109.73  32  
 Total 5,365.57  1,176.9  6,542.44  4,973.26  7,324.4  12,296.66  8,325.45  444.96  8,770.41  27,609.51   
 
Year: 2019-20 (₹ in lakh)  
Sr. 
No.  
 
Name of 
the ULB 
 
Grants 
Total 
own 
reven-
ue 
Assi-
gned 
reve-
nue 
Total 
 
Total 
Reven-
ue 
 
% 
of 
own 
reve 
-nue 
to 
total 
reve 
-nue 
Central 
sponsored 
schemes 
CFC Total 
State 
spon-
sored 
schem-es 
SFC 
1 Arki 31.74 14.96 46.7 24.02 60.01 84.03 22.68 3.9 8 26.66 157.39 14 
2 Bilaspur 93.49 37.7 131.19 24.12 264.93 289.05 69. 58 4.6 74.18 494.42 14 
3 Bhuntar 3.2 27.38 30.58 62.16 71.5 133.65 53.22 0 53.22 217.45 24 
4 Dharam-
shala 626.58 363.68 990.26 227.98 1,159.77 1,387.75 617.0 7 50.52 667.59 3,045.6 20 
5 Jawala-
mukhi 31.32 3.85 35.17 17.7 119.42 137.12 388.13 2.84 390 .97 563.26 69 
6 Hamirpur 37 101.23 138.23 55.22 298.04 353.26 563 .97 13.23 577.2 1,068.69 53 
7 Manali 6.74 47.42 54.16 29.2 139.57 168.77 510.62  0.59 511.21 734.14 70 
8 Nahan 236.07 198.72 434.79 1,072.24 914.11 1,986. 35 929.76 20.56 950.32 3,371.46 28 
9 Nerchowk 37.43 107.78 145.21 38.78 338.78 377.56 151.44 5.74 157.18 679.95 22 
10 Paonta 
Sahib 62.66 142.88 205.54 55 427.26 482.26 292.49 9.58 30 2.07 989.87 30 
11 Rampur 50.66 52.14 102.8 1.5 174.31 175.81 244.76  0 244.76 523.37 47 
12 Shimla 6,968.75 943.49 7,912.24 1,116.54 3,101.5 8 4,218.12 2,625.34 233.09 2,858.43 14,988.79 18 
13 Solan 46.12 217.67 263.79 37.37 688.3 725.67 1,0 97.16 40.9 1,138.06 2,127.52 52 
14 Sunni 15.32 16.5 31.82 14 42.58 56.58 29.48 0 29 .48 117.88 25 
 Total 8,247.08  2,275.4  10,522.48  2,775.83  7,800.16  10,575.98  7,595.7  385.63  7,981.33  29,079.79   
             

Appendices  
85 | P a g e  
Revenue from all sources of the Test-Checked ULBs for the period 2015-20 
(₹ in lakh) 
 
             
Sr. 
No.  
Name of the 
ULB 
Grants 
Total own 
revenue  
Assigned 
revenue Total 
Total 
Revenue 
(3+6+9) 
% 
of 
own 
rev-
enue 
to 
total 
reve 
-nue  
Central 
spons-
ored 
schemes  
CFC Total 
State 
sponsor-
ed 
schemes  
SFC 
   1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9   
1 Arki 196.67  58.78  255.45  79.89  245.34  325.23  95.88  15.23  111.11  691.79  14  
2 Bilaspur 602.34  301.79  904.13  257.78  1,076.46  1,334.24  276.88  29.63  306.51  2,544.88  12  
3 Bhuntar 41.99  99.61  141.6  224.65  336  560.64  222.51  4.98  227.49  929.73  24  
4 Dharamshala 5,334.2  1,094.9  6,429.1  3,249.11  3,933.81  7,182.92  2,694.31  128.08  2,822.39  16,434.41  16  
5 Jawalamukhi 684.87  95.92  780.79  362.71  438.05  799.76  968.01  20.9  988.91  2,569.46  39  
6 Hamirpur 240.78  371.23  612.01  728.1  1,344.34  2,072.44  1,376.88  51.39  1,428.27  4,112.72  32  
7 Manali 16.58  235.68  252.26  638.81  633.16  1,271.96  2,292.41  24.85  2,317.26  3,841.48  62  
8 Nahan 676.15  631.2  1,307.35  2,890.66  2,743.24  5,633.9  3,144.24  61.74  3,205.98  10,147.23  31  
9 Nerchowk 318.27  319.83  638.1  210.7  1,192.54  1,403.24  495.98  15.96  511.94  2,553.28  19  
10 Paonta Sahib 813.93  523.84  1,337.77  115.26  1,924  2,039.26  1,496.71  49.54  1,546.25  4,923.28  32  
11 Rampur 474.25  222.42  696.67  194.6  632.43  827.03  1,982.12  11.83  1,993.95  3,517.65  56  
12 Shimla 17,203.06  3,482.8  20,685.83  13,112.9  14,387.46  27,500.36  22,039.77  1,209.03  23,248.8  71,434.99  31  
13 Solan 485.86  799.84  1,285.7  584.46  3,021.52  3,605.98  4,844.37  167.93  5,012.3  9,903.98  49  
14 Sunni 125.25  57.04  182.29  50.02  197.92  247.94  121.43  11.65  133.08  563.31  23  
 Total  27,215.2  8,296.88  35,512.05  22,703.65  32,111.27  54,810.9  42,058.5  1,810.74  43,863.24  1,34,168.2  32  
 
  

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitution Amendment Act, 1992 
86 | P a g e  
Appendix-5.3 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.4.1.1, Page 36) 
Methods of calculation of property tax  
ARV (Rate of tax 7.5% to 12.5%) UAV (Rate of tax 01% to 
25%) 
Land i)  fair rent fixed under the law relating to rent 
restriction for the time being in force; or  
ii)  where no fair rent referred in item (i) is fixed, at 
which it is expected to be let or it is actually le t, 
whichever is greater; or 10% of the cost of land 
(if gross annual rent of land could not be 
determined in (i) and (ii) 
Actual area of land (Sqm) x 
location factor for the 
particular zone 
House 
or 
Building 
 
i)  On which the building or house is let or 
ii)  If gross annual rent cannot be determined as 
referred in item (i) then 10 per cent  of the sum 
of the cost of erection of the building and cost 
of land 
iii)  Deduction of 10 per cent  for cost of repairs and 
for other expenses necessary to maintain the 
building. 
(Annual rental value = Monthly rental value x 12-
10%) 
i)  Per square metre of plinth 
area) x location factor x 
age factor x use factor x 
structure factor x 
occupancy prescribed for 
the particular zone 
ii)  Deduction of 10 per cent  
for cost of repairs and for 
other expenses necessary 
to maintain the building.  
iii)  Method for calculation of 
ratable value and Rate of 
property tax on the ratable 
value of the unit of lands 
and Buildings shall be 
prescribed by the Bye-
Laws 
 
  

Appendices  
87 | P a g e  
Appendix-5.4   
(Reference: Paragraph 5.6, Page 46) 
Statement showing demand and collection of charges against the water supply and 
expenditure on O&M incurred by the various agencies 
1.  MC Solan 
(₹ in lakh) 
Year 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 Total  
Opening Balance 74.74 80.26 84.00 106.37 124.89 74.74  
Demand raised 223.57 286.18 311.14 347.77 378.44 1,547.10  
Total Demand 298.31 366.44 595.14 454.13 503.33 1,621.84  
Collection 218.05 282.44 288.77 329.24 390.08 1,508.58  
Closing Balance 80.26 84.00 106.37 124.89 113.25 113.25  
O&M Cost 234.71 241.82 297.14 324.76 288.80  
Collection against Demand 73 77 48 72 77 93 
2.  MC Shimla & SJPNL 
(₹ in lakh) 
Year 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 Total  2018-19 2019-20 Total  
Opening Balance 783.05 994.54 1,203.19 783.05  575.26 2,338.10 575.26  
Demand raised 2,123.54 2,370.87 2,371.79 6,866.20  2,213.48 1,751.90 3,965.38  
Total Demand 2,906.59 3,365.41 3,574.98 7,649.25  2,788.74 3,990.00 4,540.64  
Total Collection 1,912.05 2,162.22 1,983.44 6,057.71  550.63 1,685.13 2,235.76  
Closing Balance 994.54 1,203.19 1,591.54 1,591.94  2,238.10 2,304.87 2,304.87  
O&M Cost 65.60 121.36 1,963.15  569.44 1,486.64  
Collection against 
Demand (%) 66 64 55 79 20 42 49 
Note: As per the information supplied by the MC Shim la an amount of ₹ 1591.54 lakh was the CB (31.03.2018), 
however, SJPNL had shown OB (01.04.2018) ₹575.26 lakh, which resulted in difference in OB of ₹ 1016.28 lakh. 
3.  Jal Shakti Vibhag 
Perusal of information received from the four Jal S hakti Divisions 4 in the test-checked 
ULBs revealed that average collection of water char ges was 87 per cent  against the 
demand raised (2015-16 to 2019-20). 
(₹ in lakh) 
Year 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 Total  
Opening Balance 43.43 59.09 87.89 105.13 113.91 43.43  
Demand raised 181.55 248.18 229.18 239.66 284.50 1,183.07  
Total Demand 224.98 307.27 317.08 344.79 398.41 1,226.5  
Total Collection 165.89 219.38 211.95 230.88 235.71  1,063.81  
Closing Balance 59.09 87.89 105.13 113.91 162.70 162.69  
O&M Cost 185.76 117.99 202.74 202.03 305.77  
Collection against Demand (%) 74 71 67 67 59 87 
  
                                                           
4 Arki, Dharamshala, Hamirpur and Kullu (Bhuntar).  

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitution Amendment Act, 1992 
88 | P a g e  
Appendix-5.5 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.8.2, Page 49) 
 Statement of collection of user charges, collectable user charges and 
revenue expenditure on Solid Waste Management  
(₹ in Lakh) 
Sl. 
No. Name of ULB Period of 
collection 
Amount 
Collectible* 
Amount 
collected Difference 
Percentage 
amount 
collected to 
collectible 
Revenue 
Expd. on 
SWM is 
for same 
period 
Percentage 
of collection 
to 
Expenditure  
1 Municipal 
Corporation, 
Dharamshala 
Sept 2019 to 
Jan 2021 207.65 18.43 189.21 9 561.75 3 
2 Municipal 
Corporation, 
Shimla 
April 2015 to 
March 2020 4,855.77* 1,940.57 2,915.20 40 3,585.08 54 
3 Municipal Council, 
Bilaspur 
Feb 2020 to 
Dec 2020 27.97 16.70 11.27 60 28.54 58 
4 Municipal Council, 
Hamirpur 
April 2018 to 
Mar 2020 65.46 29.87 35.59 46 172.44 17 
5 Municipal Council, 
Jawalamukhi 
Jan 2019 to 
Jan 2021 36.25 0.37 35.88 1 34.00 1 
6 Municipal Council, 
Manali 
April 2015 to 
March 2020 90.26 45.82 44.44 51 401.37 11 
7 Municipal Council, 
Nahan 
June 2019 to 
Nov 2020 175.20 25.85 149.35 15 NA NA 
8 Municipal Council, 
Nerchowk 
April 2018 to 
Mar 2020 74.40 2.49 71.93 3 135.94 2 
9 Municipal Council, 
Poanta Sahib 
Nov 2019 to 
Nov 2020 59.65 1.69 57.96 3 144.89 1 
10 Municipal Council, 
Rampur 
May 2018 to 
March 2020 82.95 15.39 67.56 19 80.32 19 
11 Municipal Council, 
Solan 
April 2015 to 
March 2020 297.26 76.03 221.23 26 306.66 25 
12 Nagar Panchayat, 
Arki 
April 2019 to 
Dec 2020 17.69 4.59 13.09 26 16.23 28 
13 Nagar Panchayat, 
Bhuntar 
April 2015 to 
March 2020 29.65 1.26 28.38 4 88.76 1 
14 Nagar Panchayat, 
Sunni 
April 2019 to 
Jan 2021 23.12 6.14 16.98 27 26.32 23 
* Calculation of amount collectible (Various categories of properties * different rates as specified in the Bye-laws * No of 
months taken for calculation). 
In case of MC Shimla, number of domestic, commercia l and industrial establishments was arrived on the basis of number 
of electricity connections from HP Electricity Board and number of hotels taken from Deptt. of Tourism & Civil Aviation. 
Amount collectible calculated by multiplying minimu m user charges in respect of domestic, commercial a nd industrial 
establishments paying MC Tax and allowing 10 per cent rebate for probable un-occupancy every year. 
  

Appendices  
89 | P a g e  
Appendix-5.6   
(Reference: Paragraph 5.9.1, Page 50) 
Statement showing variation in budget in each category of ULB 
(₹ in lakh) 
 
Category of 
ULB 
Name of the 
ULB Year 
Receipts Expenditure 
Budgeted Actuals 
Percentage 
of actual to 
budget (%) 
Budgeted Actuals 
Percentage 
of actual to 
budget (%) 
Corporation Shimla 2015-16 12,172.3 12,625.52 103 1 6,612.3 11,722.43 71 
2016-17 18,196.6 16,966.69 93 21,517.52 13,388.5 62  
2017-18 40,167.27 13,318.34 33 35,713.77 14,946.28 42 
2018-19 35,505.1 13,534.68 38 34,323 13,584.09 40 
2019-20 29,752.59 14,988.79 50 29,623.22 13,580.94 46 
Dharamshala 2015-16 748.12 3,020.83 403 744.74 2,04 4.5 274 
2016-17 1,739.98 3,484.82 200 1,272.57 2,269.5 178 
2017-18 12,300.8 3,404.85 28 13,572 3,401.1 25 
2018-19 5,965.85 3,533.29 59 7,348.51 2,951.06 40 
2019-20 7325.44 3,045.6 42 7,565.15 2,992.71 40 
Councils Bilaspur 2015-16 316.09 307.43 97 772.64 4 22.76 55 
2016-17 380.11 529.89 139 762.79 553.61 72 
2017-18 397.51 495.74 124 803.08 600.85 75 
2018-19 525.12 461.01 88 793.74 526.22 66 
2019-20 494.35 495 100 726.58 495.51 68 
Jawalamukhi 2015-16 302.1 651.73 215 286.99 454.23 158 
2016-17 356.29 523.5 146 347.51 524.13 150 
2017-18 442.7 444.49 100 420.57 343.74 81 
2018-19 546.21 391.14 71 516.06 349.53 68 
2019-20 573.13 427.49 75 560.7 438.22 78 
Hamirpur 2015-16 786.38 587.56 74 793.38 855.51 107  
2016-17 865.02 617.53 71 907.89 514.87 57 
2017-18 987.51 635.37 64 998.64 398.6 40 
2018-19 1,078.75 623.85 58 1,077.5 780.17 72 
2019-20 1,186.63 640.68 54 1,185.24 520.41 44 
Manali 2015-16 545.5 726.07 133 468.92 630.96 134 
2016-17 552.37 1,438.06 260 487.21 725.61 148 
2017-18 612.87 755.83 123 552.67 726.9 131 
2018-19 677.65 1,022.5 150 625.32 742.89 118 
2019-20 833.65 743.14 89 790.27 684.47 87 
Nahan 2015-16 1,040.54 621.96 60 1,051.35 756.51 72  
2016-17 1,248.64 781.3 63 1,209.05 1,089.18 90 
2017-18 1,498.37 916.61 61 1,450.86 1,488.65 102 
2018-19 3,079.05 1,055.87 34 2,924.04 5,521.7 189 
2019-20 3,540.9 3,371.51 95 3,386.58 3,279.62 97 

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitution Amendment Act, 1992 
90 | P a g e  
  
Paonta Sahib 2015-16 550.97 682.31 123 1,088.35 925 .05 85 
2016-17 515.29 851.13 165 1,085.68 661.35 61 
2017-18 630.88 1,333.25 211 1,114.24 919.81 83 
2018-19 655.83 936.32 142 1,406.1 1,373.21 98 
2019-20 661.46 989.87 150 1,553.26 1,116.97 72 
Rampur 2015-16 1,654.95 583.3 35 1,665.91 722.48 44  
2016-17 1,913.15 1,787.51 94 1,809.99 1,433.41 79 
2017-18 1,515.25 911.42 60 1,878.65 1,202.57 64 
2018-19 1,973.8 712.23 37 1,830.98 927.97 51 
2019-20 1,871.5 523.39 28 1,963.7 607.19 31 
Solan 2015-16 5,683.95 1,908.47 34 5,961.56 1,693.0 7 29 
2016-17 6,099.56 2,293.43 38 6,463.19 2,399.06 37 
2017-18 8,026.4 2,381.84 30 8,457.08 2,434.7 29 
2018-19 9,117 1,991.06 21 9,031.52 2,269.01 25 
2019-20 9,270.5 2,127.52 23 9,324 2,104.57 22 
NP Arki 2015-16 113.09 100.96 89 100.07 99.34 99 
2016-17 156.41 137.61 88 141.24 91.53 65 
2017-18 195.64 155.83 80 176.57 169.86 97 
2018-19 210.25 170.58 81 210.7 192.02 91 
2019-20 241.1 182.72 76 244.87 140.87 57 
Sunni 2015-16 47.2 69.25 146 82.47 65.83 80 
2016-17 77.2 79.13 102 82.47 92.9 112 
2017-18 77.2 91.19 118 108.67 79.1 73 
2018-19 77.2 112.78 146 120.67 73.08 60 
2019-20 94.2 125.44 134 120.67 90.73 75 

Appendices  
91 | P a g e  
Appendix-6.1 
(Reference: Paragraph 6.4.3, Page 61) 
 Statement showing detailed position of vacancies in various posts of the 
test-checked ULBs in the State  
Sr. 
No. Name of Post Sanction Regular Daily 
Wages Contract Vacant % of 
vacancy 
1 Executive Officer 9 6 0 0 3 33 
2 Assistant Engineer 8 5 0 0 3 38 
3 Superintendent Gr-II 10 0 0 0 10 100 
4 Junior Engineer 46 32 0 7 7 15 
5 Senior Assistant 44 42 0 0 2 5 
6 Statistic Assistant 6 2 0 1 3 50 
7 Draughtsman 8 5 0 0 3 38 
8 Sanitary Inspector 20 5 0 0 15 76 
9 Clerk/JAO 169 75 0 9 85 50 
10 Sanitary Supervisor 29 21 0 0 8 28 
11 Community Org. 11 2 0 0 9 82 
12 Record Keeper 1 0 0 0 1 100 
13 Safai Karamchari 788 421 10 6 351 43 
14 Peon/chowkidar 101 67 8 0 26 26 
15 Secretary 3 0 0 0 3 100 
16 Work Supervisor 27 25 0 0 2 7 
17 Beldar 232 208 5 0 19 9 
18 Driver 60 43 0 0 17 28 
19 Mason 28 21 1 0 6 21 
20 Labour 323 323 0 0 0 0 
21 Toll Guard 15 4 0 0 11 73 
22 Patwari 2 1 0 0 1 50 
23 Mali 27 11 0 1 15 56 
24 Daftri 8 7 0 0 1 13 
25 Bhisti 2 2 0 0 0 0 
26 Electrician foremen 10 2 0 0 8 80 
27 Dy. Forest Ranger 1 0 0 0 1 100 
28 Forest Guard 4 2 0 0 2 50 
29 Carpenter 8 2 0 0 6 75 
30 Mate 22 21 0 0 1 05 
31 Fitter 39 14 0 0 25 64 
32 Sanitary/Safai Jamadar 42 40 0 0 2 05 
33 Helper 4 3 0 0 1 25 
34 Cattle pound Attendent 1 0 0 0 1 100 
35 Plumber 1 0 0 0 1 100 
36 Meter reader 4 3 0 0 1 25 
37 Keymen 12 3 0 0 9 75 
38 Bill Distributer 2 2 0 0 0 0 

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitution Amendment Act, 1992 
92 | P a g e  
39 Pump Operater 9 1 0 0 8 89 
40 Executive Engineer 4 4 0 0 0 0 
41 Commissioner 2 2 0 0 0 0 
42 Assistant Commissioner 1 1 0 0 0 0 
43 Additional Commissioner 2 2 0 0 0 0 
44 Administrative Officer 1 0 0 0 1 100 
45 Health Officer 2 1 0 0 1 50 
46 Vetenary H.O. 1 1 0 0 0 0 
47 Architect Planner 3 1 0 0 2 67 
48 Deputy Controller 2 2 0 0 0 0 
49 PA/PS 5 3 0 0 2 40 
50 Superintendent General 1 1 0 0 0 0 
51 Chief Accountant/ 
Accountant 4 0 0 0 4 100 
52 DEO 24 24 0 0 0 0 
53 Steno 2 1 0 0 1 50 
54 Computer Asst. 3 3 0 0 0 0 
55 Surveyor 2 0 0 0 2 100 
56 Health Worker 2 1 0 0 1 50 
57 Notice Server 3 3 0 0 0 0 
58 Raneo operator 1 1 0 0 0 0 
59 Lab. Technician 2 1 0 0 1 50 
60 Ferro Printer 1 0 0 0 1 100 
61 Tailoring Teacher 1 0 0 0 1 100 
62 Project Coordinator 1 1 0 0 0 0 
63 Boiler Man 1 0 0 0 1 100 
64 Blacksmith 1 1 0 0 0 0 
65 Kanoungo 1 0 0 0 1 100 
66 N. Tehsildar 1 0 0 0 1 100 
67 Tree Officer 1 1 0 0 0 0 
68 Law Officer 1 1 0 0 0 0 
Total 2,212 1,477 24 24 687 31 
 
 