 
 
Report of the Comptroller and 
Auditor General of India 
on 
Social, Economic and Revenue Sectors 
for the year ended 31 March 2020 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GOVERNMENT OF TRIPURA 
 
 
Report No. 2 of 2022 

 

i 
TABLE OF CONTENTS  
Particulars Paragraph(s)  Page(s)  
Preface   iii 
Overview   v 
CHAPTER I: INTRODUCTION 
About this Report 1.1 1 
Authority for Audit 1.2 1 
Planning and Conduct of Audit 1.3 2 
Significant Audit Observations 1.4 3 
CHAPTER II: SOCIAL SECTOR 
Introduction 2.1 5 
PERFORMANCE AUDIT  
URBAN DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT  
Efficacy of implementation of 74 th  Constitutional 
Amendment Act 
2.2 6 
CHAPTER III: ECONOMIC SECTOR  
Introduction 3.1 31 
PERFORMANCE AUDIT  
AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS’ WELFARE DEPARTMENT  
Development and Promotion of Horticulture in Tripura 3.2 32 
PUBLIC WORKS (ROADS & BUILDINGS) DEPARTMENT 
Unauthorised expenditure 3.3 65 
Extra expenditure 3.4 66 
FOREST DEPARTMENT  
Unfruitful expenditure 3.5 68 
CHAPTER IV: ECONOMIC SECTOR 
(State Public Sector Undertakings) 
Functioning of State Public Sector Undertakings 4.1  71 
Introduction 4.1.1 71 
Investment in PSUs 4.1.2 71 
Reconciliation with Finance Accounts 4.1.3 73 
Special support and guarantees to PSUs during the year 4.1.4 74 
Accountability framework 4.1.5 75 
Arrears in finalisation of accounts 4.1.6 75 

ii  
Particulars Paragraph(s)  Page(s)  
Placement of Separate Audit Reports 4.1.7 76 
Investments made by State Government in SPSUs whose  
accounts are in arrears 4.1.8 77 
Performance of PSUs as per their latest finalised accounts 4.1.9 78 
Return on Investment on the basis of Present Value of 
Investment 4.1.10 81 
Winding up of non-working PSUs 4.1.11 82 
Impact of Audit Comments on Annual Accounts of PSUs 4.1.12 82 
Follow up action on Audit Reports 4.1.13 84 
PERFORMANCE AUDIT 
POWER DEPARTMENT 
Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Gram Jyoti Yojana (DDUGJY) and 
Pradhan Mantri Sahaj Bijli Har Ghar Yojana (Saubhag ya) 
Schemes 
4.2 86 
CHAPTER V: REVENUE SECTOR  
General  5.1 125 
Trend of Revenue Receipts 5.1.1 125 
Revenue and return filling trends 5.1.2 128 
Analysis of arrears of revenue 5.1.3 131 
Evasion of tax detected by the department 5.1.4 132  
Pendency of refund cases 5.1.5 132 
Analysis of the mechanism for dealing with the issues 
raised by audit 5.1.6 133 
Action taken on the recommendations accepted by the  
departments/ Government 5.1.7 134 
Results of Audit 5.1.8 135 
FINANCE DEPARTMENT  
Subject Specific Compliance Audit on ‘Processing of 
Refund claims under GST in Tripura’ 5.2 136 
CHAPTER VI: FOLLOW UP OF AUDIT OBSERVATIONS  
Follow up action on earlier Audit Reports 6.1 141 
Monitoring 6.2 143 
Outstanding Inspection Reports 6.3 143 
Departmental Audit Committee Meetings  6.4 144 
Response of the Government/departments towards 
audit 6.5 144 
APPENDICES  
Appendices  -- 147-210  
 

 
iii 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. This Report for the year ended March 2020 has been prepared for submission 
to the Governor of Tripura under Article 151 of the Constitution of India. 
2. This Report contains significant results of the performance and compliance 
audit of the departments of the Government of Tripu ra under Social, 
Economic and Revenue Sectors including the departme nts of Urban 
Development, Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare, Power, Finance, Public Works 
(Roads & Buildings) and Forest Departments. 
3. The cases mentioned in this Report are those whi ch came to notice in the 
course of test audit during the year 2019-20 as wel l as those which came to 
notice in earlier years but could not be dealt with  in the previous Reports. 
Matters relating to the period subsequent to 2019-2 0 have also been included, 
wherever necessary. 
4. The audits have been conducted in conformity wit h the Auditing Standards 
issued by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
PREFACE 

OVERVIEW 

v 
OVERVIEW 
 
Chapter-I  
Introduction 
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India (C&AG) relates to 
matters arising from the performance audits and tes t audit of transactions of various 
departments of the Government of Tripura pertaining  to Social, Economic and 
Revenue Sectors. The primary purpose of this Report  is to bring to the notice of the 
State Legislature, significant results of audit. 
During 2019-20, total 186 auditee units out of 1,68 0 units, were planned for audit 
after carrying out risk assessment and keeping in v iew the available manpower, of 
which 63 units were actually audited during 2019-20 . This Report inter alia contains 
three Performance Audits titled “Efficacy of Implem entation of 74 
th  Constitutional 
Amendment Act”, “Development and Promotion of Horti culture in Tripura” and 
“Deen Dayal Upadhyay Gram Jyoti Yojana (DDUGJY) and  Pradhan Mantri Sahaj 
Bijli Har Ghar Yojana (Saubhagya) schemes”, one Sub ject Specific Compliance 
Audit on “Processing of Refund claims under GST in Tripura” and three Compliance 
Audit paragraphs. 
Chapter-II 
Social Sector 
Performance Audit  
Urban Development Department 
Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act  
The 74 th  Constitutional Amendment came into effect on 1 Jun e 1993 and empowered 
Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) to perform 18 functions l isted in the 12 th  Schedule of the 
Constitution of India. The Government of Tripura th rough enactment of Tripura 
Municipal Act, 1994 transferred all the 18 function s to ULBs. In practice, functions 
like fire service, creation and maintenance of wate r supply were discharged by the 
State Government departments. Non-functioning of Wa rd Committees and District 
Planning Committees affected the effective implemen tation of devolved functions by 
ULBs.  
Although the State Property Tax Board was constitut ed, it remained non-functional. 
The ULBs, thus, lacked technical guidance for asses sment and revision of Property 
Tax. They also lacked adequate manpower to carry ou t efficient delivery of services. 
Vacancies ranging from 14 per cent  to 57 per cent  among the various categories 
affected the functioning of the ULBs. Non-constitut ion of second SFC, 
non-submission of the third SFC report and non-acce ptance of fourth SFC report by 
the State Government was a constraint in strengthening ULBs which also defeated the 
very purpose of the institution. 

Overview  
vi  
The ULBs lacked adequate resources of their own whi ch affected service delivery to 
the citizens. Powers pertaining to the rates and re vision of taxes thereof, procedure of 
collection and method of assessment were vested wit h the State Government, which 
eroded the autonomy of ULBs in generating their own revenue.  
Paragraph 2.2  
Chapter-III 
Economic Sector 
 
Performance Audit  
Agriculture and Farmers’ Welfare Department  
Development and Promotion of Horticulture in Tripura  
Horticulture is defined as the science of growing a nd management of fruits, 
vegetables including tubers, ornamental, aromatic a nd medicinal crops, spices, 
plantation crops and their processing, value additi on and marketing. The horticulture 
crops include fruits, vegetables, spices, plantatio n crops and flowers. Crops like 
mushroom, bamboo and bee keeping (helps in improvin g crop productivity) are also 
important components of horticultural development. Over the past two decades, the 
horticulture sector has emerged as a prominent sect or in the Indian agricultural 
scenario contributing to the overall economic growt h. Besides providing nutritional 
and health benefits, this sector has given wide var iety of products that are available 
round the year. The sector also provides a wide ran ge of options for sustainable rural 
economy through diversification. In order to provid e impetus to horticulture sector, 
Government of India has undertaken several initiati ves. The Major scheme – Mission 
for Integrated Development of Horticulture (MIDH) i s being implemented in the 
country by adopting an end to end approach for incr easing production of horticulture 
crops and reducing post-harvest losses.  
Tripura is characterised by hilly terrain consistin g of parallel hills and ridges 
alternated with narrow valleys, deep fertile soil, sub-tropical humid climate with 
abundance of rainfall, offering immense scope for development of horticultural sector. 
In the State, the area under horticultural crops ha s declined from 1,23,268 ha in 
2015-16 to 1,21,160 ha in 2019-20 with marginally i ncrease in production from 
14,55,215 MT to 14,58,245 MT.  
The Directorate of Horticulture & Soil Conservation  is implementing an umbrella of 
schemes for development of horticulture in the Stat e. Mission for Integrated 
Development of Horticulture (MIDH) was the biggest scheme among all the schemes. 
The State Horticulture Mission (SHM) and the district level Missions were constituted 
under the MIDH in 2014 and the MIDH programme has b een implemented in the 
State from 2014-15. Audit noticed that Annual Actio n Plans (AAPs) for 2015-16 to 
2019-20 were prepared without following the bottom up approach contrary to GoI 

Overview 
vii 
guidelines. Audit noticed that a major supply of se edlings and plants were made from 
private nurseries. Production of quality planting m aterial was not ensured by the 
Department before distribution to the beneficiaries . The area under cultivation in 
respect of vegetables, fruits, nuts, spices and potato declined marginally in 2019-20 as 
compared to 2015-16 whereas there was a marginal in crease in production during the 
same period.  
There was substantial shortfall in creation of Wate r Harvesting Structures, Integrated 
Nutrient Management (INM), Integrated Pest Manageme nt (IPM) activities and 
creation of marketing infrastructure. Initiatives u nder post harvest management aimed 
at reducing post harvesting losses and improving marketability of horticulture produce 
were largely ineffective as creation of cold storag e facilities were very limited and 
these were mostly non-functional. Establishment of food processing industry in the 
State was also not very impressive as only seven un its came up during 2015-20. 
Monitoring activities were inadequate and independe nt impact evaluation was not 
done by the Department. Further, despite creation o f separate wing of Horticulture 
under the Department of Agriculture and Farmers’ We lfare way back in 1985, 
full-fledged infrastructure is yet to be developed for horticulture in the State.  
Paragraph 3.2 
Compliance Audit Paragraphs 
 
PUBLIC WORKS (Roads and Building) DEPARTMENT  
 
Unauthorised expenditure 
The Department unauthorisedly utilised Central Road  Fund of 
₹ 2.43 crore on an 
unapproved road project in violation of Central Roa d Fund (State Roads) Rules, 2014 
and also falsely reported to Government of India ab out utilisation of Central Road 
Fund. 
Paragraph 3.3 
Extra expenditure 
The Department incurred extra expenditure of 
₹ 0.68 crore towards payment of price 
variation due to delay in handing over clear site to the construction agency.  
Paragraph 3.4 
FOREST DEPARTMENT 
Unfruitful expenditure 
There was unfruitful expenditure of 
₹ 2.36 crore on creation of eco-park under 
MGNREGS funds as the park was lying unused due to n on-availability of funds for 
maintenance. 
Paragraph 3.5 

Overview  
viii  
Chapter-IV 
Economic Sector (State Public Sector Undertakings) 
 
Functioning of Public Sector Undertakings 
As on 31 March 2020, the State of Tripura had 16 PS Us (15 working and 1 
non-working). Out of 15 working PSUs, 14 are Govern ment companies and one is 
Statutory Corporation. As on 31 March 2020, the inv estment of the State Government 
(capital and long-term loans) in 16 PSUs was ₹ 1,714.35 crore consisting of 87.96 
per cent (₹ 1,508.00 crore) towards capital and 12.04 per cent (₹ 206.35 crore) 
towards long-term loans. 
Paragraph 4.1.1 and 4.1.2 
As per the information furnished by the PSUs, durin g 2019-20 the State Government 
provided budgetary support of ₹ 133.71 crore in the form of capital ( ₹ 49.89 crore) 
and grants/ subsidy ( ₹ 83.82 crore). 
Paragraph 4.1.4 
As per the latest finalised accounts of PSUs as on 30 September 2020, the 
accumulated losses ( net of free reserves) of four out of 15 working PSUs 
(₹ 429.76 crore) had completely eroded their paid-up capital ( ₹ 290.79 crore). During 
the year 2019-20, out of 15 working PSUs, six PSUs earned an aggregate profit of 
₹ 20.65  crore, while nine PSUs incurred loss of ₹ 95.60 crore as per their latest 
finalised accounts. 
Paragraph 4.1.9.2 
Performance Audit  
Power Department 
Deen Dayal Upadhyay Gram Joyti Yojana (DDUGJY)/ Saubhagya 
 
Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Gram Jyoti Yojana  
With a view to address the problem of inadequate an d unreliable power supply, 
strengthening of distribution network in rural area s and to complete the ongoing 
works of rural electrification under erstwhile Raji v Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran 
Yojana (RGGVY) (launched in March 2005), Government  of India (GoI) launched 
(December 2014) “Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Gram Jyoti Yo jana (DDUGJY)” 
subsuming the targets laid down under XII Five Year  Plan (XII FYP 2012-17) for 
erstwhile RGGVY as a separate rural electrification  sub-component by carrying 
forward the approved outlay for the RGGVY to the DDUGJY.  
Performance Audit of Implementation of the RGGVY and DDUGJY revealed that 
the schemes were  characterised by several instances of non-adherence  to the 
scheme guidelines. RGGVY  projects were planned without adequate survey work as 
DPRs were prepared on the basis of old data and had  many discrepancies. There 

Overview 
ix 
were instances of inefficiencies in contract  management, execution of works and 
violation of provisions of tripartite agreement by the  State Government. 
The materialisation of desired objectives of RGGVY,  DDUGJY, Saubhagya  had 
failed at the planning stage. To limit the expenditure within the sanctioned cost  of 
Government of India (GoI), Tripura State Electricity Corporation Limited  (TSECL) 
had to reduce the estimates. Due to reduction in sc ope of works various parameters 
had been reduced significantly ranging from two per cent  to 83 per cent , which 
resulted in shortfall in laying of lines, construction of sub-s tations, augmentation of 
existing sub-stations, non-providing of electric co nnection in public places and 
shortfall in providing service connection to BPL ho useholds. Consequently, the actual 
need of the State could not be fulfilled. 
Further, DPRs of Saubhagya scheme were deficient in incorporating th e status of 
electrification of urban household, number of econo mically poor urban household as 
per Socio Economic Caste Census (SECC), 2011 data f or providing service 
connection under the scheme. In absence of information on these essential parame ters 
in the DPRs desired objective of the schemes and pr ogress of Physical and Financial 
milestones could not be monitored periodically whic h resulted in time and cost 
overrun of various works undertaken under different RE schemes. 
Project implementation was beset with slow executio n of works, idle investments, 
weak monitoring, delays in award of contracts and n on-handing over/ charging of 
completed works. Lack of diligence was observed in management of financial 
resources. TSECL failed to lodge the claim to State Government for reimbursement of 
taxes paid from the scheme fund. Apart from that, n on- preparation of audited 
accounts and Bank Reconciliation Statement, delay i n furnishing of Utilisation 
Certificates, discrepancies in the audited accounts  and fund utilisation reports 
revealed a weak internal control mechanism. 
Against 7,96,000 Rural households as on October 201 7, 1,06,635 (13.40 per cent ) 
Rural households remained un-electrified in the Sta te as on 31 March 2020. So, the 
objective of providing last mile connectivity and e lectricity connection to Rural 
households under the Saubhagya scheme could not be achieved. 
Paragraph 4.2 
Chapter-V 
Revenue Sector 
General 
During the year 2019-20, the revenue raised by the State Government was ₹ 2,373.44 
crore which was 21.57 per cent  of the total Revenue Receipts. The balance 
78.43 per cent  of the Revenue Receipts during 2019-20 was receive d from the GoI in 
the form of State share of Union Taxes and Duties a nd Grants-in-Aid.  The rate of 
growth of own revenue of the State declined during 2019-20 to 11.01 per cent 
compared to 11.62 per cent  during 2018-19. The total Revenue Receipts of the State 

Overview  
x 
also decreased by 8.56 per cent from ₹ 12,030.89 crore in 2018-19 to ₹ 11,001.59 
crore in 2019-20 due to less receipts of Grants-in-aid from GoI during 2019-20.  
Paragraph 5.1.1 
The actual collection of revenue from SGST over the  last three years from 2017-18 to 
2019-20 was short of target as projected in the Rev ised Estimates for the respective 
years.  
Paragraph 5.1.2(i) 
The arrear of revenue increased from ₹ 34.17 crore at the end of March 2019 to 
₹ 67.62 crore at the end of March 2020. The arrear o f revenue outstanding for more 
than five years also increased from ₹ 18.86 crore to ₹ 42.34 crore during the same 
period.  
Paragraph 5.1.3 
During the last ten years, 25 paragraphs involving ₹ 54.20 crore featured in the Audit 
Reports, of which 22 paragraphs involving ₹ 47.76 crore had been accepted by the 
State Government. Out of this, only ₹ 1.93 crore (3.56 per cent ) has been recovered 
(December 2020).  
Paragraph 5.1.6.2 
 
FINANCE DEPARTMENT 
Subject Specific Compliance Audit on ‘Processing of Refund claims under GST 
in Tripura’ 
Taxes and Excise Organisation functioning under the  Finance Department, 
Government of Tripura plays a very important and cr ucial role in mobilisation of 
financial resources in the State. The Commissioner of Taxes is responsible for 
administration of taxation measures and for general  control and supervision over the 
implementation of Tax laws throughout the State. Th e introduction of Goods and 
Services Tax (GST) consolidates multiple taxes into one with effect from 1 July 2017. 
The levy and collection of GST is governed through the Sales Tax Charges (15) 
spread across the State. The charges are headed by the Superintendents of Taxes (ST).  
Timely refund mechanism constitutes a crucial compo nent of tax administration as it 
facilitates trade through release of blocked funds for working capital, expansion and 
modernisation of existing businesses. Goods and Ser vices Tax (GST) laws aimed to 
streamline and standardise the refund procedures wi th the claim and sanctioning 
procedures contemplated to be completely online. Au dit noticed certain cases where 
the Department did not adhere to the prescribed tim elines leading to instances of 
delay in issuing of acknowledgement, sanction of re fund orders and communicating 
refund orders to counterpart tax authority. In addi tion, issues such as non-conducting 
of post audit of refund claims and non-production of records, were also noticed. 
Paragraph 5.2 
 
 

Overview 
xi 
Chapter-VI 
Follow up of Audit observations 
As of November 2020, 14 out of 17 departments did n ot submit explanatory notes on 
65 Paragraphs (47 Paragraphs and 18 Performance Aud it) out of 89 Paragraphs 
(63 paragraphs and 26 Performance Audits) of Audit Reports awaiting discussion by 
Public Accounts Committee (PAC) relating to the Aud it Reports from the years 
2001-02 and 2004-05 to 2017-18. 
Paragraph 6.1.1(a) 
As of November 2020, three departments did not subm it explanatory notes on 
10 paragraphs (seven paragraphs and three performan ce audits) out of 17 paragraphs 
(12 paragraphs and five performance audits) of Audi t Reports awaiting discussion by 
Committee on Public Undertakings (COPU) relating to  the Audit Reports from the 
years 2009-10 to 2017-18. 
Paragraph 6.1.1(b) 
Analysis of the position of outstanding IRs showed that 4,373 paragraphs included in 
684 Inspection Reports (IRs) issued during the last  five years up to 2019-20 were 
pending for settlement as of September 2020 of thes e, even the first reply had not 
been received in respect of 167 IRs in spite of repeated reminders. 
Paragraph 6.3 
There are 4,373 paragraphs involving ₹ 2,954.01 crore relating to 684 IRs issued 
during the last five years 2015-16 to 2019-20 which  remained outstanding at the end 
of 30 September 2020 under Social, Economic, Revenue and General Sectors. 
Paragraph 6.5 
  

CHAPTER I: INTRODUCTION 

Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura 
  1 
CHAPTER I: INTRODUCTION 
1.1 About this Report 
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India (C&AG) relates to 
matters arising from the performance audits and tes t audit of transactions of various 
departments of the Government of Tripura pertaining  to Social, Economic and 
Revenue Sectors. 
The primary purpose of this Report is to bring to t he notice of the State Legislature, 
significant results of audit. Auditing standards re quire that the materiality level for 
reporting should be commensurate with the nature, v olume and magnitude of 
transactions. The findings of audit are expected to  enable the Executive to take 
corrective action, to frame appropriate policies as  well as to issue directives that will 
lead to improved financial management and contribute to better governance.  
This chapter in addition to explaining the planning  and coverage of audit, provides a 
synopsis of significant instances of non-compliance  with applicable laws, rules, 
regulations, various orders and instructions issued by competent authorities.  
1.2 Authority for Audit  
This office functioned as a Branch Office of the Ac countant General, Assam from 
1967. Since 18  November 1974, it has been functioning as an indepe ndent office. 
Following a restructuring of cadres in 1984, the au dit functions were entrusted to the 
office of the Accountant General (Audit), Tripura a nd the Accounts and Entitlement 
functions were entrusted to the Accountant General (A&E), Tripura. 
Under the directions of C&AG, the Office of the Pri ncipal Accountant General 
(Audit), Tripura conducts audit of government depar tments, Public Sector 
Undertakings, Autonomous Bodies and other Instituti ons 1 under Social, Economic, 
Revenue and General Sectors, which are spread all o ver the State. The Accountant 
General (Audit) is assisted by two Deputy Accountants General. 
The authority for audit is derived from Article 149  and 151 of the Constitution of 
India and the Comptroller and Auditor General’s (Du ties, Powers and Conditions of 
Service) Act, 1971 (C & AG’s (DPC) Act). Under Sect ion 13 of the C & AG’s (DPC) 
Act the Office of the Principal Accountant General (Audit) has been entrusted with 
the audit of all expenditure incurred from the Cons olidated Fund of Government of 
Tripura. This office conducts audit of revenue rece ipts of Government of Tripura 
under Section 16 of the C & AG’s (DPC) Act. This of fice conducts supplementary 
audit of the Balance Sheet of all State Government companies under Section 
143 (6) (a) of the Companies Act, 2013. This office  is responsible for audit of 
accounts of autonomous bodies and authorities falling under Section 14, 15, 19 (2), 19 
(3) and 20 (1) of C & AG’s (DPC) Act.  
                                                           
1 Audit of World Bank assisted projects, Asian Devel opment Bank assisted projects, etc . 

Chapter I: Introduction  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura 
 2 
Besides these, this office is also responsible for audit of accounts of Tripura Tribal 
Areas Autonomous District Council (TTAADC) constitu ted under the provision of 
Sixth Schedule of the Constitution. The Audit Repor t on the accounts of the Council 
is prepared separately for laying before the Counci l . The C&AG  prescribes  the 
principles and methodologies for various audits in the Auditing Standards and the 
Regulations on Audit and Accounts (Amendments), 2020. 
1.3 Planning and conduct of Audit  
Audit process commences with the assessment of risk of the departments based on the 
expenditure incurred, criticality/complexity of act ivities, priority accorded for the 
activity by the Government, level of delegated fina ncial powers, assessment of 
internal controls, concerns of stakeholders, previo us audit findings, etc . Based on this 
risk assessment, frequency and extent of audit are decided and an annual audit plan is 
formulated to conduct audit.  
After completion of each audit, Inspection Report ( IR) containing audit findings is 
issued to the Head of the unit with a request to fu rnish replies within one month of 
receipt of the IR. Wherever replies are received, a udit findings are either settled or 
further action for compliance is advised. Significa nt audit observations pointed out in 
these IRs, which require attention at the highest l evel in the Government, are 
processed for inclusion in the Audit Report which a re submitted to the Governor of 
Tripura under Article 151 of the Constitution of In dia for causing them to be laid on 
the Table of the State Legislature. 
Audit Plan is prepared in such a way that it fits into the long term and short term goals 
of audit in consonance with the overall “Vision and  Mission” of the Indian Audit & 
Accounts Department. It has been prepared after car rying out risk assessment and 
keeping in view the available manpower. Elements of  the Audit Quality Management 
Framework (AQMF) viz . materiality, inputs from Voucher Level Computeris ation 
(VLC), financial size of the units, data from vario us e-governance initiatives taken by 
government, flagship programme undertaken by audite es, press criticism/ electronic 
media coverage, expected audit impact and continuou s improvement based on past 
experience, etc . were taken into account to the extent possible wh ile framing out the 
plan. A sector wise analysis of government spending , investment policy of the 
government in infrastructure development, industria lisation and socio-economic 
activities alongwith due consideration of possible audit impact were taken into 
account in prioritising auditee units for preparing the audit plan. 
Considering the availability of resources, focus ha s been given in areas of high 
financial risk than to thinly spreading out the res ources throughout the Government 
activities. This would have better socio-economic i mpact and add value to  
 
 

Chapter I: Introduction  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura 
 3 
governance. Out of 1,680 audittee units 2, 186 units 3 were planned for audit during 
2019-20 after carrying out risk assessment and keep ing in view the available 
manpower, of which 63 units 4 were actually audited during 2019-20. 
1.4 Significant Audit Observations 
During the year 2019-20, the State Government had i ncurred an expenditure of 
₹ 15,052.70 crore against the budget provision of ₹ 19,925.00 crore under Social, 
Economic and General Sectors. Sector wise expenditu re is depicted in the Charts 1.1  
and 1.2 . 
  
Source : Appropriation Accounts 2019-20 
This Report inter alia contains three Performance Audits titled “Efficacy of 
Implementation of 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act”, “Development and 
Promotion of Horticulture in Tripura” and “Deen Dayal Upadhyay Gram Jyoti Yojana 
(DDUGJY) and Pradhan Mantri Sahaj Bijli Har Ghar Yo jana (Saubhagya) schemes”, 
one Subject Specific Compliance Audit on “Processin g of Refund claims under GST 
in Tripura” and three Compliance Audit paragraphs o n major findings of audit from 
test check of the transactions of 63 units in the S ocial, Economic, Revenue and 
General Sectors involving an expenditure of ₹ 10,443.73 crore 5. Significant audit 
findings are discussed in the respective succeeding chapters. 
                                                           
2 As on 31 March 2020 {excluding Local Bodies (PRIs and ULBs), units under Central Government 
and Banks} 
3 Social Sector: 38 units, Economic Sector: 70 units , Economic Sector (PSU): four units, Revenue 
Sector: 36 units and General Sector: 38 units 
4 Social Sector: 21 units, Economic Sector: 10 units , Economic Sector (PSU): six units, Revenue 
Sector: 18 units and General Sector: eight units 
5 Social Sector: ₹ 4,729.04 crore, Economic Sector: ₹ 258.88 crore, Economic Sector (PSU): 
₹ 4,890.11 crore, Revenue Sector: ₹ 219.84 crore and General Sector: ₹ 345.86 crore 
10505.34 
2800.44 
6619.22 
Chart 1.1: Sector-wise Budget 
Estimates ( ₹ in crore )
Social Sector Economic Sector 
General Sector 
6958.50 
1848.08 
6246.12 
Chart  1.2: Sector-wise 
expenditure ( ₹ in crore )
Social Sector Economic Sector 
General Sector 

CHAPTER II: SOCIAL SECTOR 

Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura 
 5 
CHAPTER II: SOCIAL SECTOR 
2.1 Introduction 
This Chapter of the Audit Report deals with the fin dings of audit of Government units 
under Social Sector. 
The total budget allocation and expenditure of the departments under Social Sector 
during the year 2019-20 are given in Table 2.1.1 . 
Table: 2.1.1: Details of allocation and expenditure under Social Sector 
(₹ in crore) 
Name of the Department Budget 
allocation Expenditure  
Education (Higher)  247.12 204.69  
Education (School)  1712.51 1542.16 
Education (Social)  953.97 812.20  
Elementary Education  924.32  852.22  
Education (Youth Affairs and Sports)  75.03  68.91 
Food, Civil Supplies and Consumer Affairs  145.14  70.26 
Family Welfare and Preventive Medicine  490.32  445.69  
Health  572.13 467.88 
Labour Organisation  13.21  12.60  
Panchayati Raj  361.50  329.90  
Public Works (Drinking Water and Sanitation)  556.7 7 367.38  
Relief and Rehabilitation  36.04  28.23 
Rural Development  2726.20  796.57  
Tribal Welfare (Research)  8.71  2.92  
Kokborok and other Languages  0.89  0.79 
Tribal Welfare 501.35  435.19  
Tribal Rehabilitation in Plantation and Particularl y 
Vulnerable Tribal 36.99  23.93  
Urban Development 882.72  411.57  
Welfare of Scheduled Castes 103.65  37.35  
Welfare of Minorities 78.03  19.60  
OBC Welfare 41.96  18.62  
Skill Development 36.78  9.84 
Total number of departments = 22 10505.34  6958.50  
Source : Appropriation Accounts 2019-20 
We audited 21 auditee units under this Sector cover ing expenditure of ₹ 4,729.04 
crore (including of the previous year). This Chapte r contains one Performance Audit 
titled “ Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act ” under 
the Urban Development Department.  

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 6 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT 
 
2.2 Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation  of 74 th  Constitutional 
Amendment Act 
 
2.2.1 Introduction 
The Constitution (Seventy Fourth Amendment) Act, 19 92 (74 
th  CAA) provides a 
constitutional status to Urban Local Bodies (ULBs).  Article 243W of the Constitution 
authorises the State Legislatures to enact laws to endow local bodies with powers and 
authority to enable them to function as institution s of self-government and make 
provisions for devolution of powers and responsibil ities. The Amendment empowers 
ULBs to function independently and to deliver servi ces for economic development 
and social justice regarding 18 subjects listed in the twelfth Schedule of the 
Constitution of India ( Appendix 2.2.1 ). The Government of Tripura enacted the 
Tripura Municipal Act, 1994 empowering ULBs to func tion as institutions of 
self-government to accelerate economic development in urban areas. 
2.2.2 Profile of Urban Local Bodies in Tripura 
Under Article 243 (M) of Constitution of India, the  Scheduled areas referred to in 
clause (1), and the tribal areas referred to in cla use (2), of Article 244 are exempted 
from Municipal areas. 
In Tripura, there is one Municipal Corporation, 13 Municipal Councils and six Nagar 
Panchayats as of November 2021. The ULBs are govern ed by the Tripura Municipal 
Act, 1994. Each Municipal area has been divided int o wards for the purpose of 
election of Councillors. The names of ULBs, area, p opulation, etc.  are shown in 
Appendix 2.2.2 . 
2.2.3 Organisational set-up of Urban Local Bodies 
The Urban Development Department (UDD), headed by S ecretary to the Government 
of Tripura is the nodal department for the governan ce of all ULBs in the State. The 
organisational structure with respect to functionin g of ULBs in the State is shown in 
Chart 2.2.1 . 
  

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 7 
Chart 2.2.1: Organisational structure of Urban Development Department 
 
Organisational structure of elected members of ULBs 
 
2.2.4 Scope of Audit 
The Performance Audit (PA) covered the period from April 2015 to March 2020. The 
UDD, Government of Tripura being the nodal departme nt was selected for scrutiny of 
records. Out of 20 ULBs in the State, 11 ULBs 
6 were selected through Simple 
Random Sampling Without Replacement (SRSWOR). 
2.2.5 Audit objectives 
The Performance Audit was conducted with the following Audit Objectives;- 
 assess whether the ULBs have been empowered by the State Government to 
discharge their functions/ responsibilities effecti vely through creation of 
                                                           
6  i. Out of 13 Municipal Councils, seven Councils w ere selected (about 50 per cent).  
   ii. Out of six Nagar Panchayats, three Nagar Pan chayats were selected (50 per cent). 
   iii. Agartala Municipal Corporation (AMC), being  the lone Corporation in the State was selected. 
Secretary to the Government of Tripura, UDD 
Director, UDD 
Municipal 
Commissioner, 
Agartala Municipal 
Corporation 
Chief Executive 
Officers, 
Municipal 
Councils 
Executive 
Officers, Nagar 
Panchayats 
Agartala Municipal 
Corporation 
Mayor 
Deputy Mayor 
Councillors 
Municipal Council 
Chairperson 
Vice Chairperson 
Councillors 
Nagar Panchayat 
Chairperson 
Vice Chairperson 
Members 

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 8 
appropriately designed institutions/ institutional mechanisms and their function; 
 evaluate the effectiveness of the functions stated to have been devolved ; 
 assess whether the ULBs were empowered to access adequate resources including 
sufficient resources for discharge of functions stated to be devolved to them. 
2.2.6 Audit criteria 
The following sources of audit criteria were adopted for the PA: 
• Constitutional (74 
th ) Amendment Act, 1992; 
• Tripura Municipal Act, 1994; 
• Tripura Municipal (Procedure and Conduct of Business) Rules, 1996; 
• Tripura Municipal Accounting Manual, June 2011; 
• Municipal (Water Supply, Levy and Collection of Water Charges) Rules, 2019; 
• Tripura Property Tax Rules, 2016; 
• Tripura Building Rules, 2017; 
• Tripura Municipal (Delimitation of Constituencies) Rules, 1994; 
• Central/ State Finance Commission Reports; 
• Report of the Second Administrative Reforms Commission; and 
• State Government’s orders, notifications, circulars  and instructions issued from 
time to time. 
2.2.7 Audit methodology 
The Performance Audit commenced with an Entry Confe rence held on 4 December 
2020 with the Secretary, UDD and other officers of the UDD in which the audit 
methodology, scope, objectives and criteria were ex plained. This was followed by 
collection of relevant information through replies to audit queries/ memos, 
questionnaires and scrutiny of records. Draft audit  findings were issued to the 
Government in August 2021 for response. Significant  findings were discussed 
(13 August 2021) with the Secretary, UDD in an Exit  Conference. The views and 
responses of the Government were duly incorporated appropriately.  
2.2.8 Audit Findings 
 
Audit Objective 1: To assess whether the ULBs have been empowered by the State 
Government to discharge their functions/ responsibi lities effectively through 
creation of appropriately designed institutions/ institutional mechanisms and their 
function 
 
2.2.8.1 Comparison with State level legislations wi th 74 th  CAA 
The 74 th  CAA introduced certain provisions relating to muni cipalities vide  Articles 
243Q to 243ZG of the Constitution of India. The Sta te Government vide Tripura 
Municipal Act, 1994 (TM Act) introduced provisions corresponding to the CAA 
provisions as indicated in Table 2.2.1 . 
 

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 9 
Table 2.2.1: Comparison of State level legislations with the provisions of 74 th  CAA 
Provision of 
Constitution 
of India 
Requirement as per provision of Constitution of India Provision of 
TM Act 
Article 243Q 
Constitution of Municipalities :  
It provides for constitution of three types of muni cipalities 
namely a Nagar Panchayat for transitional area, a Municipal 
Council for a smaller urban area and a Municipal 
Corporation for a larger urban area. 
Section 10 of 
TM Act 
Article 243R 
Composition of Municipalities:  
All the seats in a Municipality shall be filled by direct 
elections and by persons with special knowledge in 
municipal administration nominated by Government. The 
Legislature of a State may by law, provide for repr esentation 
to the Municipality, Members of Parliament and Legislative 
Assembly whose constituencies lie within the municipal area 
and Members of the Council of States and State Legi slative 
Council who are registered as electors within the city. 
Sections 11 
and 12 of TM 
Act 
Article 243S 
Constitution and composition of Wards Committees:   
This provides for constitution of Wards Committees in all 
municipalities with a population of three lakh or more 
Section 13 of 
TM Act 
Article 243T 
Reservation of seats:  
The seats to be reserved for Scheduled Cas 
te (SC)/ 
Scheduled Tribe (ST), Women and Backward classes for 
direct election. 
Section 18 of 
TM Act 
Article 243U 
Duration of Municipalities:  
The 
municipality has a fixed tenure of five years from the 
date of its first meeting and re-election to be hel d within the 
six months of end of tenure.  
Section 19 of 
TM Act 
Article 243V 
Disqualifications for membership:  
A Person shall be disqualified for a member of a 
Municipality- 
If he is so disqualified by or under any law for the time being 
in force for the purposes of elections of the Legislature of the 
State concerned. 
If he is so disqualified by or under any law made b y the 
Legislature of the State. 
Sections 20 
and 21 of TM 
Act 
Article 243W 
Powers, authority and responsibilities of the 
Municipalities:  
All municipalities would be 
empowered with such powers as 
may be necessary to enable them to function as effective 
institutions of self- government. The State Government shall 
entrust with such powers and authority to enable th em to 
carry out the responsibilities in relation to the twelfth 
Schedule. 
Section 96 to 
Section 139 
of TM Act 

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 10 
Provision of 
Constitution 
of India 
Requirement as per provision of Constitution of India Provision of 
TM Act 
Article 243X 
Power to impose taxes by, and funds of the 
Municipalities: 
Municipalities would be empowered to levy and colle ct 
the 
taxes, fees, duties, etc . 
Grant-in-Aid would be given to the Municipalities from the 
State Constitution of funds for crediting and withdrawal of 
moneys by the Municipality 
Section 192 
of TM Act 
Sections 85, 
86, 87, 88 and 
89 of TM Act.  
Article 243Y 
read with 
Article 243I 
Finance Commission:  
State Government shall constitute Finance Commission for  
• reviewing the financial position of the 
Municipalities 
and taking such steps that help in boosting the financial 
condition of the Municipal bodies; 
• distributing between the State and the Municipaliti es of 
the net proceeds of the taxes, fees, tolls and duties that 
are charged by the State Government; 
• allotting the funds to the municipal bodies in the State 
from the consolidated fund of the State. 
Section 269 
of TM Act 
Article 243Z 
Audit of accounts of Municipalities : 
This provides provision for maintenance of accounts  by the 
Municipalities and the auditing of such accounts. 
Section 264 
of TM Act 
Article 243ZA 
read with 
Article 243K 
Elections to the Municipalities: 
The superintendence 
, direction and control of all procedure 
of election of the Municipalities shall be vested i n the State 
Election Commission (SEC). 
Sections 49 to 
71 of TM Act  
Article 243ZD  
Committee for District Planning: 
• Constituti 
on of District Planning Committee at district 
level.  
• Composition of District Planning Committee.  
• Preparation of draft development plan and forwarded  to 
the Government.  
Section 270 
of TM Act 
Article 243ZE  
Committee for Metropolitan Planning: 
Provision for constitution of 
Metropolitan Planning 
Committee (MPC) in every Metropolitan area with a 
population of 10 lakhs or more to prepare a draft 
development plan for the metropolitan area as a whole. 
There is no 
Metropolitan 
city in 
Tripura. 
Table 2.2.1 shows that the statutes are complied with the provi sions of the 74 th  CAA. 
However, audit observed that the legal provisions w ere not backed by decisive action 
in which the spirit of the 74 th  CAA has not fructified. This was especially true i n case 
of provisions pertaining to the devolution of functions and creation and functioning of 
appropriate institutional mechanisms for effective decentralisation, which are 
discussed in the subsequent paragraphs. 
2.2.8.2 Actual status of devolution of functions 
The 74 
th  CAA sought to empower ULBs to perform functions and implement schemes 
in relation to 18 subjects specified in the twelfth Schedule of the Constitution of India. 

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 11 
The Government of Tripura through enactment of TM Act, 1994 transferred all the 18 
functions to ULBs. However, in practice, functions like fire services and water supply 
are still under the control of the State Government departments.  
In the Exit Conference, the Department stated (Augu st 2021) that due to lack of 
capacity of the municipalities, the function of fir e service was being done by the 
Tripura Fire and Emergency Services. The function o f water supply was being done 
by the State Public Works Department (Drinking Wate r and Sanitation), Government  
of Tripura. 
Second Administrative Reforms Commission recommende d (2009) that a process of 
activity mapping similar to the PRIs should be carr ied out for all ULBs. Activity 
mapping of functions by applying the principle of s ubsidiary is pre-requisite for 
comprehensive devolution. There should be correspon ding funds and functionaries to 
make the process of decentralisation effective.  
Audit noticed that there was no activity mapping in  respect of different functions of 
ULBs. As a result, the devolved functions had overl apping areas between ULBs and 
the line departments/ agencies of the State Governm ent. Although, the basic services 
viz.  water supply, drainage, sanitation, solid waste ma nagement, construction and 
maintenance of roads are in the domain of ULBs as p er the Constitutional mandate, 
the same were discharged by the line departments li ke Public Works Department, 
Urban Development Department, Forest Department, Ed ucation Department, Rural 
Development Department, etc.  and the agency like Tripura Urban Development 
Authority. These line departments/ agencies were no t accountable to the ULBs rather 
they were accountable to the State Government. Out of 18 functions, ULBs had full 
authority on four functions only; had no role in fo ur functions; had limited role in six 
functions; they were mere implementing agencies in three functions; and in respect of 
one function, they had dual role with the State Pub lic Works Department (PWD). 
Even Agartala Municipal Corporation was not given f ull powers as per the 74 
th  CAA.  
The function-wise role of ULBs is depicted in Chart 2.2.2 and  Table 2.2.2 . 
Chart 2.2.2: Function-wise role of ULBs 
 
The basic functions as prescribed under the Act of Municipalities exert tremendous 
pressure on the finances of the ULBs. An assessment  of the status of such functions/ 
services by the various authorities and the overlap  in discharge of the functions are 
Solely 
Responsible, 4
No Role, 4
Limited Role, 6
Implementing 
Agency, 3
Dual Role, 1

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 12 
detailed in Table 2.2.2. 
Table 2.2.2: Statement showing the actual status of implementation of functions 
Sl. 
No.  Functions Activities Actual status of implementation 
Functions where ULB has full jurisdiction  
1 Burials and 
burial grounds; 
cremations, 
cremation 
grounds  
Construction, operation and 
maintenance (O & M) of 
crematoriums and burial 
grounds and electric 
crematoriums  
ULBs were wholly responsible for 
discharging this function. 
2 Vital statistics 
including birth 
and death 
registrations 
Coordinating with hospitals/ 
crematoriums etc. for 
obtaining information  
ULBs maintained database of births 
and deaths. ULBs registered and 
issued certificates of birth and death. 
Maintaining and updating 
database  
3 Provision of 
urban amenities 
and facilities 
such as parks, 
gardens, 
playgrounds  
Creation of parks and 
gardens 
This function was done by ULBs.  
Creation and O&M of parks, gardens, 
playgrounds, installation of play and 
gymnasium equipment in parks were 
done by the ULBs.  
Operation and Maintenance  
(O & M) 
4 Urban poverty 
alleviation 
Identifying beneficiaries  Selection of beneficiaries was done by 
the ULBs. 
Livelihood and employment  Livelihood and employment were 
provided through Deendayal 
Antyodaya Yojana- National Urban 
Livelihoods Mission (DAY- NULM) 
and Tripura Urban Employment 
Programme (TUEP). 
Street vendors  ULBs were wholly responsible for 
discharging this activity.  
Functions with no role for ULBs  
5 Cattle pounds; 
prevention of 
cruelty to 
animals  
Catching and keeping strays  The ULBs had no cattle pounds and 
the activities under this function were 
not implemented by the ULBs. 
Sterilisation and anti -rabies  
Ensuring animal safety  
6 Regulation of 
slaughter 
houses and 
tanneries 
Ensuring quality  of animals 
and meat  
The ULBs had no slaughter house. 
The goats, chickens, etc . were 
slaughtered in open places. Disposal of waste  
O&M of slaughter houses  
7 Slum 
improvement 
and upgradation 
 
Identifying beneficiaries  The slum improvement and 
upgradation was done by the Urban 
Development Department. 
The role of ULBs was limited to 
identification of beneficiaries only.  
Affordable housing  
Upgradation  
ULBs as mere implementing agencies or limited role  
8 Urban planning 
including town 
planning 
Master planning/ 
Development Plans/ Zonal 
Plans 
Tripura Urban Development 
Authority 7 (TUDA) was entrusted t o 
prepare master plans. Master p lan was 
not been prepared by TUDA for any 
ULB.  
Enforcing master planning Enforcement was done  by TUDA.  
                                                           
7 a parastatal agency 

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 13 
Sl. 
No.  Functions Activities Actual status of implementation 
regulations  
Enforcing building bye -laws 
and licenses 
Enforcement was done by the UDD. 
ULBs role was limited to issue and 
renewal of building licenses.  
Group housing, 
Development of industrial 
areas  
ULBs role was to identify the 
beneficiaries for group housing only. 
9 Planning for 
economic and 
social 
development 
Programme implementation 
for economic activities  
Only selection of beneficiaries was 
done by the ULBs and the beneficiary 
list was furnished to the State 
Government departments/ offices. 
Policies for social 
development  
10  Safeguarding 
the interests of 
weaker sections 
of society, 
including the 
handicapped 
and mentally 
retarded 
Identifying beneficiaries  Only Selection of beneficiaries was 
done by the ULBs and the beneficiary 
list was furnished to the State 
Government departments like SC 
welfare, OBC welfare, etc.  Further, the 
State Government departments 
provided services to the weaker 
sections of society on the basis of the 
beneficiary list.  
Providing tools/ benefits 
such as tricycles 
Scholarships  
Housing programmes  One centrally sponsored housing 
scheme named ‘ Pradhan Mantri Awas 
Yojana (PMAY)’ and one State 
sponsored scheme named ‘Tripura 
State Government Housing Scheme 
(TSGHS)’ were implemented by the 
ULBs.  
Functions with dual role  
11  Roads and 
bridges 
Construction and 
maintenance of roads  
Municipal roads were being 
constructed and maintained by the 
ULBs. Major roads in ULBs were 
being constructed by the State PWD 
(Roads & Buildings) {PWD (R&B)}. 
Construction and 
maintenance of bridges, 
drains, flyovers and 
footpaths  
Functions with minimal role and/ or having overlapping jurisdictions with the State 
Government departments and/ or parastatals  
12  Regulation of 
land-use and 
construction of 
buildings 
Regulating land use  This was being done by TUDA.  
Approving building plans/ 
high rises  
This was done by the ULBs.  
Demolishing illegal 
buildings  
13  Water supply 
for domestic, 
industrial and 
commercial 
purposes 
Distribution of water  This was done by State PWD 
(Drinking Water & Sanitation) {PWD 
(DWS)}. 
Providing connections  
Operation & Maintenance 
(O&M) 
Collection of charges  Water charges were collected by the 
ULBs.  
14  Public health, 
sanitation 
conservancy 
and solid waste 
management 
Maintaining hospitals, 
dispensaries  
There was no hospital under the 
control of ULBs. State Health and 
Family Welfare Department (H & 
FWD) maintained hospitals and 
dispensaries and also undertake 
immuni sation/ vaccination.  
Immunisation/ Vaccination  
Registration of births and 
deaths  
Registration of births and deaths was 
done by the ULBs.  

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 14 
Sl. 
No.  Functions Activities Actual status of implementation 
Cleaning and disinfection of 
localities affected by 
infectious disease  
The ULBs were responsible for 
cleaning and disinfection of localities 
affected by infectious disease, solid 
waste management and control and 
supervision of public markets. 
Solid waste management  
Control and supervision of 
public markets  
15  Urban forestry, 
protection of the 
environment 
and promotion 
of ecological 
aspects 
Afforestation  ULB had no role in urban forestry.  
Road side plantation of trees, bamboos 
and beautification of roads were done 
by the Forest Department. 
Greenification  
Awareness drives  
Protection of the 
environment and promotion 
of ecological aspects  
Maintenance of natural 
resources like water bodies, 
etc.  
ULBs discharged this function.  
16  Promotion of 
cultural, 
educational and 
aesthetic 
aspects 
Schools and education  The Government of Tripura devolved 
(June 2007) powers, functions and 
functionaries of the primary education 
and literacy/ child welfare and pension 
to the ULBs. In practice, primary 
education was  handled by the State 
Education (Elementary) Department. 
Lite racy, child welfare and social 
pension were handled by the State 
Education (Social Welfare & Social 
Education) Department. There was no 
school under the jurisdiction of the 
ULBs in Tripura (except only one 
school which was functioning under 
the jurisdictio n of Agartala Municipal 
Corporation). ULBs along with the 
State Government departments such as 
Information and Cultural Affairs 
Department undertook activities allied 
with public space beautification, 
organising fairs and festivals.  
Fairs and festivals  
Cultural buildings/ 
institutions  
Heritage  
Public space beautification  
17  Public 
amenities 
including street 
lighting, 
parking lots, 
bus stops and 
public 
conveniences 
Installation and maintenance 
of street lights 
This was done by the ULBs through 
Energy Efficiency Services Limited 
(EESL) 8. 
Creation and maintenance of 
parking lots  
This was done by ULBs.  
Creation and maintenance of 
public toilets  
These were implemented by the ULBs.  
Construction of Bus Stop  This was done by the State Transport 
Department.  
Function devolved but not implemented  
18  Fire Services  Establishing and maintaining 
fire brigades 
This function was vested with the 
State Fire and Emergency Services 
Department. Providing fire No Objection 
Certificate / approval 
certificate in respect of high 
rise buildings  
                                                           
8 A Joint Venture Company of PSUs under the Ministry  of Power, Government of India 

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 15 
Recommendation: The State Government needs to take adequate steps to ensure 
that the ULBs enjoy full autonomy in respect of the functions assigned to them. 
2.2.8.3 Institutional mechanisms for empowerment of  urban local bodies 
As already discussed, the State Government stated t o have transferred all 18 functions 
to the ULBs through enactment of TM Act, 1994. Howe ver, the discharge of these 
functions could be effective only when appropriate institutions were established and 
adequately empowered. The 74 th  CAA provides for establishment of such institutional 
mechanisms as can be seen from Table 2.2.1. The effectiveness of such institutional 
mechanisms are discussed in the succeeding paragraphs. 
2.2.8.3 (i) Composition of Municipalities 
Article 243R stipulates the composition of Municipa lities. Section 11(1) of the TM 
Act, 1994 stipulates that all the seats in a Munici pality shall be filled by persons 
chosen by direct election from the territorial constituencies in the Municipal area. 
(2) Each Municipality may consist of- 
(a) the members elected under sub-section (1); 
(b) the persons having special knowledge or experie nce in Municipal Administration 
as may be nominated by the Governor: 
Thus, Municipalities consist of elected Councillors  and nominated Councillors. The 
nominated members do not have voting power. The May or/ Chairperson is elected 
from amongst the Councillors and is assisted by the  Standing Committees. The 
councils of the ULBs were dissolved on completion o f five years tenure in December 
2020. The election of the Municipalities was held o n 26 November 2021 i.e. after 12 
months from the date of dissolution of elected bodies of the Municipalities. Therefore, 
in absence of elected body, the involvement of publ ic representatives in decision 
making and implementation process was missing during this period. 
2.2.8.3 (ii) Chairperson/ Mayor 
Under Section 24(3), 32(3) and 40(4) of TM Act, the  Chairpersons and Mayor are 
empowered to preside over every meeting of Council and Mayor-in-Council. The 
Chairperson/ Mayor should be the Chief Executive of  a city or urban government and 
the city government should have the power to appoin t all officials including the 
Commissioner and accountable to ULBs. However, the ULBs were not empowered to 
appoint all officials including the Commissioner, C hief Executive Officers, etc . 
Creation and abolition of posts were vested with the State Government. 
The Government stated (August 2021) that empowering  Municipalities to appoint all 
officials including Commissioner would create some administrative problems as well 
as financial burden to the State exchequer. 
The reply is not acceptable as ULBs were still depr ived of power to appoint all 
officials as per provisions of TM Act and also deprived of financial autonomy. 

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 16 
2.2.8.3 (iii)  Ward Committees 
As per Section 13 of TM Act, 1994, Ward Committees shall be constituted with one 
or more wards within the territorial area of a Muni cipality having population of three 
lakhs or more. Further, Second Administrative Refor ms Commission as accepted by 
GoI, opined that Ward Committee members must have r egular meetings with the 
citizens they represent, through Area Sabhas, to re view programmes, their planning 
and implementation. There must also be regular meet ings of the Committee with 
elected members from Area Sabhas. 
Audit observed that Wards Committees were constitut ed only in six ULBs out of 11 
sampled ULBs. The Committees were to discuss the de velopmental plans of the 
wards and to monitor implementation of different ec onomic and social welfare 
programmes. This was not being followed in true spi rit since they were not functional 
and except 67 meetings held in AMC no meetings were  held in other five ULBs 
during 2015-20. 
The Government accepted (August 2021) the audit observations. 
Recommendation: The Ward Committees should convene regular meetings to 
facilitate community participation in decentralised governance. 
2.2.8.3 (iv)  District Planning Committee 
Article 243 ZD of the Constitution mandates the est ablishment of a District Planning 
Committee (DPC) to consolidate the plans prepared by the Panchayats and Municipalities 
in the district and to prepare a draft development plan for the district as a whole. 
Section 270 of TM Act, 1994 also provides for const itution of a DPC. The DPC was 
to prepare a comprehensive District Development Pla n (DDP). The DDP was to be 
forwarded to the State Government through the Decen tralised Planning and 
Development Committee (DPDC) for integration into the State plan. 
Audit observed that the Government of Tripura const ituted DPC in all the four 
districts 
9 in September 2008. In February 2012, State Governm ent decided that the 
existing DPCs should also have jurisdiction over th e newly created (January 2012) 
four districts. Audit noticed that the State Govern ment did not re-constitute the DPCs 
for each district and did not make it an effective institution for development planning 
in local bodies.  
The Government accepted the fact (August 2021). 
Recommendation: The State Government should constit ute DPC in each district to 
ensure preparation of consolidated District Plan fo r effective decentralised 
governance. 
2.2.8.3(v) Property Tax Board 
As per para 10.161 (vii) of the Thirteenth Finance Commission (TFC) Report, State 
Governments must put in place a State Level Propert y Tax Board for availing 
                                                           
9 West Tripura, South Tripura, Dhalai and North Trip ura 

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 17 
performance grants under TFC (i.e. during  2010-15 ).  The Board, inter-alia, shall 
review the property tax system in ULBs and provide them technical guidance for 
assessment and revision of property tax . Government of Tripura constituted Property 
Tax Board in May 2011.  Audit noticed that the Boar d remained non-functional. In 
terms of Rule 6 Tripura Municipal (Assessment and C ollection of Property Tax) 
Rules, 2016, State Property Tax Board was formed in  August 2018. However, the 
Board remained non-functional since its formation i n August 2018 as no 
recommendation of the Board was found on record. It  was, thus, evident that the 
Property Tax Board was constituted only to fulfil t he conditions for obtaining 
performance grants under Central Finance Commission ’s award and the purpose for 
which the Property Tax Board was constituted, had been defeated. 
The Government replied (August 2021) that on the ba sis of the recommendations of 
the Property Tax Board Board, base rate of circle v alue had been increased from ₹ 50 
to ₹ 60 vide notification dated 28 August 2019 issued by the UDD.  
The reply is not acceptable as the above notificati on was not in accordance with 
recommendation of Property Tax Board because it was  an executive order of the 
UDD. 
Audit Objective 2: To evaluate the effectiveness of  the functions stated to have 
been devolved 
 
2.2.8.4 Parastatals, their role and functions  
The objective of the 74 
th  CAA was to entrust delivery of major civic functio ns to 
ULBs. But, functions such as urban/ town planning, regulation of land use, water 
supply & sanitation and slum development continue t o be delivered by parastatals as 
already indicated in Table 2.2.2 . These parastatals were controlled by the State 
Government and had their own governing bodies which  did not include elected 
representatives of the ULBs.  They were directly accountable to the State Government 
rather than ULBs. The system of assignment of funct ions to parastatals undermines 
the accountability to the people. 
The role of parastatals and their functions are discussed in the subsequent paragraphs. 
2.2.8.4 (i) Limited Role of Agartala Municipal Corp oration in implementation 
of Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation  
The primary objectives under Atal Mission for Rejuv enation and Urban 
Transformation (AMRUT) are to provide basic service s viz. water supply, sewerage, 
urban transport to households and build amenities i n cities which will improve the 
quality of life for all, especially the poor and the disadvantaged.  
Ministry of Urban Development, Government of India selected the capital city i.e  
Agartala in the State for implementation of AMRUT.  
As per para 8.1 of AMRUT guidelines, the projects s hould be implemented by the 
ULBs. In case the ULBs do not have adequate capacit y to handle the projects, the 

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 18 
State Government may recommend in State Level Actio n Plan (SAAP), upon 
resolution passed by the ULBs, for execution of the  projects by specialised parastatal 
agencies of the State or Central Governments. Such arrangements should necessarily 
be executed by way of a tripartite Memorandum of un derstanding (MoU) amongst the 
State Government, the specialised parastatal agencies and the concerned Municipality. 
It was noticed in audit that no tripartite MoU amon gst the State Government, the 
parastatal agencies and the AMC had been made.  
It was also seen in audit that major works (98 per cent ) under AMRUT were being 
implemented by the UDD and State PWD (Drinking Wate r and Sanitation) and only a 
few minor works were being executed by AMC. The det ails status of implementation 
of the projects are shown in Appendix 2.2.3 . 
Thus, the major works were being executed by UDD an d State PWD (DWS) without 
tripartite MoU in violation of AMRUT guidelines.  
2.2.8.5 Human Resources of ULBs 
 
2.2.8.5 (i) Recruitment of staff 
As per Section 75(3) of TM Act 1994, the officers a nd employees of a Municipality 
shall be appointed by the Mayor or, as the case may  be, by the Chairperson in such 
manner, on such terms and conditions including thei r conduct, discipline and control, 
as may be prescribed. However, it was noticed in au dit that no appointment had been 
made by the ULBs in the regular post during 2015-16 to 2019-20. Further, the Second 
Administrative Reforms Commission recommended that the city government should 
have the power to appoint all officials including t he Commissioner. It was noticed in 
audit that the State Government had accorded the ap proval to the creation of post of 
Ward Secretary and System Analyst in AMC during 201 5 and 2016 though no 
appointment was made there against.  Thus, the power of creation of post was retained 
by the State Government. Thus, the ULBs lacked autonomy in creation of post despite 
having provision in TM Act. This was also not in ac cordance with the 
recommendation of the Second Administrative Reforms  Commission as accepted by 
the Government of India. 
The Government while accepting (August 2021) the audit observations, stated that the 
above system might be continued to regulate financial discipline. 
2.2.8.5 (ii) Insufficient staff in urban local bodi es 
The discharge of functions by the ULBs would be eff ective with an adequate staff 
position. Scrutiny of staff position of 11 sampled ULBs revealed vacancies ranging 
from 55 per cent  (Group C) to 57 per cent  (Group D) among the various categories as 
shown in Table 2.2.3. 
 
 
 

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 19 
Table 2.2.3: Statement showing the staff position in 11 ULBs 
Name of 
ULB 
Category 
(A/B/C/D)  
Sanctioned 
strength 
Working strength 
Vacancy Percentage 
of vacancy  Appointment  Deputation  Total 
Agartala 
Municipal 
Corporation  
A 9 3 6 9 0 0 
B 39 20 4 24 15 38 
C 364 163 1 164 200 55 
D 366 316 0 316 50 14 
Municipal 
Councils 
A 14 2 10 12 2 14 
B 9 9 0 9 0 0 
C 108 65 1 66 42 39 
D 110 66 1 67 43 39 
Nagar 
Panchayats  
A 6 0 6 6 0 0 
B 2 1 1 2 0 0 
C 35 30 0 30 5 14 
D 83 34 2 36 47 57 
 Total 1145 709 32 741 404 35 
Source:  Information furnished by ULBs 
It can be seen from Table 2.2.3  that there was overall shortage of 404 staff 
(35 per cent ) against the sanctioned strength of 1,145 staff in  all the ULBs in the 
State. In AMC there were 38 per cent  and 55 per cent  vacancies under group B and C 
respectively. In MCs there was 39 per cent vacancies noticed under group C and D. 
Under NPs there was 57 per cent  vacancies under Group D.  
Analysis of available manpower in the 11 sampled UL Bs revealed that the number of 
employees of ULBs per 1,000 population ranged betwe en 0.65 and 6.53 as indicated 
in Chart 2.2.3. 
 
It can be seen from Chart 2.2.3  that the ULBs of Melaghar, Ambassa, Santirbazar 
and Jirania had less than one employee per 1,000 po pulation under their jurisdiction. 
Further, the ULBs namely AMC, Kailashahar MC, Telia mura MC, Kumarghat MC 
1.01 1.14 
1.76 
5.05 
0.65 0.80 0.92 
1.78 
6.53 
2.02 
0.94 
0.00 
1.00 
2.00 
3.00 
4.00 
5.00 
6.00 
7.00 
Chart 2.2.3: Number of employees per 1000 population 
Employees per 1000 population 

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 20 
and Amarpur NP had between one and two employees fo r every 1,000 population. 
Evidently, the ULBs lacked adequate manpower to car ry out efficient delivery of 
service. The Government stated (August 2021) that a ction was being taken for 
providing necessary manpower for implementation of Centrally Sponsored Schemes 
(CSS) through outsourcing.  
Recommendation: Adequate manpower should be provided to ULBs for discharging 
functions effectively. 
Audit Objective 3: To assess whether the ULBs were empowered to access 
adequate resources including sufficient resources f or discharge of functions 
stated to be devolved to them. 
 
2.2.8.6 Financial resources of Urban Local bodies 
Sustainable financing is paramount to ensure discha rge of any function. The devolved 
functions can be carried out effectively by the ULB s only when they are supported 
with sufficient financial resources. Predictable fi scal transfers to ULBs need to be 
ensured through a robust State Finance Commission m echanism and compliance with 
State and Central Finance Commissions’ recommendati ons. Access to own sources of 
revenue includes both the power to levy and collect from specific revenue streams.  
2.2.8.6 (i) Estimation of requirements of funds/ ex penditure 
Section 260 of TM Act, 1994 provides that the budge t estimates of a Municipality for 
a year should be prepared in the prescribed form an d presented before a meeting of 
the Municipality, specially convened for the purpos e, not later than the tenth day of 
March every year and shall be adopted after discuss ion within two weeks of 
presentation and a copy of the budget estimates ado pted by the Municipality should 
be sent to the State Government. 
Scrutiny of records revealed that out of 11 sampled  ULBs, only AMC had prepared 
Performance Budget and Outcome Budget during 2015-1 6 to 2019-20. The other 
ULBs incurred expenditure of 
₹ 310.32 crore during 2015-16 to 2019-20 without any  
budget estimates.  
The Government while accepting (August 2021) the au dit observations, stated that on 
formation of new Municipal authorities, the matter would be brought to the notice of 
respective Municipalities. 
2.2.8.6 (ii) Source of revenue 
The details of revenue of ULBs in the State during the period from 2015-16 to 
2019-20 is indicated in Table 2.2.4. 
 
 
 
 

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 21 
Table 2.2.4: Details of revenues of ULBs during the period 2015-16 to 2019-20 
(₹ in crore) 
Year Grants Own 
Revenue 
Assigned Revenue as 
recommended by the 
SFC 
Total 
Revenue 
Percentage of own 
revenue to total 
revenue 
2015-16 259.64  38.78  Nil 298.42  13 
2016-17 655.70  37.64  Nil 693.34  6 
2017-18 352.88  28.93  Nil 381.81  8 
2018-19 517.76  36.64  Nil 554.40  7 
2019-20 404.89  42.04  Nil 446.93  10 
Total 2190.87  184.03  Nil 2374.90 8 
Source: Information furnished by UDD  
It can be seen from Table 2.2.4 that the percentage of own revenue to total revenu e 
during 2015-16 to 2019-20 ranged between six per cent  (2016-17) to 13 per cent  
(2015-16). The major source of revenue of ULBs in t he State was grants from the 
State Government.  The First State Finance Commission recommended for sharing of 
taxes/ assigned revenue between the State and ULBs, but these were not implemented. 
Thus, the ULBs did not receive any assigned revenue. 
The Government accepted (August 2021) the fact and stated that necessary initiative 
would be taken up with the newly elected body of ea ch Municipality after general 
elections to the Municipalities. 
Recommendation: The ULBs need to increase their own revenue for self-reliance to 
the extent possible and State Government should sha re some portion of assigned 
revenue with the ULBs.  
2.2.8.6 (iii) Devolution of funds to different ULBs   
State Government devolved funds to ULBs during 2015 -16 to 2019-20 based on the 
recommendation of Fourteenth Central Finance Commis sion in terms of population 
and area at the ratio of 90:10 as presented in Appendix 2.2.4 . 
It can be seen from Appendix 2.2.4 that overall devolution of Central and State 
scheme funds to the ULBs in 2017-18 and 2019-20 dec reased consecutively as 
compared to 2016-17 and 2018-19. 
2.2.8.6 (iv) Central Finance Commission grants 
Article 280(3) (C) of the Constitution mandates the  Central Finance Commission 
(CFC) to recommend measures to augment the Consolid ated Fund of a State to 
supplement the resource of Municipalities based on the recommendations of the 
respective State Finance Commissions. The Fourteent h Finance Commission (FFC) 
recommended basic grant and performance grant to UL Bs as a percentage of divisible 
pool account. 
Chart 2.2.4 depicts the allocation and release of CFC grants d uring the period from 
2015-16 to 2019-20. 
 
 

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 22 
 
Source : Urban Development Department 
It can be seen from Chart 2.2.4 that the FFC recommended a total allocation of 
₹ 179.72 crore under basic grants for the period 201 5-20 and ₹ 44.61 crore under 
performance grants for the period 2016-20 for ULBs in the State. The State received 
the complete allocation of basic grants of ₹ 179.72 crore for the period 2015-20. It 
was observed that the State Government received the  performance grants of ₹ 9.90 
crore only out ₹ 44.61 crore. Thus, there was short receipt of perf ormance grants of 
₹ 34.71 crore inter-alia  due to non-fulfilment of the following conditions as envisaged 
in the paragraph 13 of FFC guidelines; 
(i) The ULBs will have to submit audited accounts t hat relate to year not earlier 
than two years preceding the year in which the ULBs  seek to claim the 
performance grant.  
(ii) The ULBs will have to show an increase in thei r own revenues over the 
preceding year as reflected in the audited accounts. 
Audit observed that due to non-preparation of annua l accounts for the year 2013-14, 
the ULBs did not receive performance grants in 2015 -16. Similarly, the ULBs did not 
receive performance grants in 2016-17, 2017-18 and 2018-19 due to non-preparation 
of annual accounts. 
The Government accepted (August 2021) the audit observations. 
2.2.8.6 (v) State Finance Commission 
Article 243 I of the Constitution of India makes it  mandatory for the State 
Government to constitute a Finance Commission withi n one year of the 
commencement of the Act and thereafter on expiry of  every five years. The mandate 
of the State Finance Commission (SFC) is to review the financial position of the local 
bodies, to make recommendations to the Governor for  devolution of funds and to 
suggest measures needed to improve the financial position of the local bodies. Section 
269 of TM Act, 1994 provides for constitution of the SFC. 
2.2.8.7 Status of constitution of the State Finance  Commission  
The State Government had constituted four State Fin ance Commissions. But, there 
were delays in constitution of SFCs as detailed in Table 2.2.5. 
22.65 
29.65 
34.25 
39.63 
53.54 
22.65 
29.65 
34.25 
39.63 
53.54 
0.00 
8.75 
9.90 
11.24 
14.72 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
9.90 
0.00 
20.00 
40.00 
60.00 
2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 
(₹ in crore) 
Chart 2.2.4: Allocation and release of CFC Grants 
Basic Grant Allocated Basic Grant Released 
Performance Grant Allocated Performance Grant Released 

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 23 
Table 2.2.5: Statement showing the delay in constitution of SFCs, etc.  
SFC 
To be 
constituted as 
per 
Constitutional 
Amendment 
Act  
Actually 
constituted  
Delay in 
constitution 
(in days) 
Date of 
submission 
of reports 
by the 
SFCs 
Date of 
acceptance  
of reports  
by the State 
Government  
Delay in 
acceptance 
(in days) 
Period 
covered 
1st  
SFC 
By 31 May 
1994 
19 
November 
1998  
1633 
17 
September 
1999  
27 
November 
2000  
437 1998-99 to 
2002-03 
2nd  
SFC  1999-2000 Not 
constituted  _ _ _ _ 2005 -06 to 
2009 -10  
3rd  
SFC  2004-05 27 January 
2011  788 Not 
submitted  _ _ 2012 -13 to 
2016 -17  
4th  
SFC  2009-10 20 March 
2013  _ 11 January 
2018  
Not 
accepted  _ 2017 -18 to 
2020 -21  
5th  
SFC 2014-15 4 June 
2020 796 8 February 
2021 
Under 
consideration 
of the 
Government  
_ 2021-22 to 
2025-26 
Source:  UDD, Government of Tripura 
The Government accepted the fact of delay in consti tution of SFCs. However, it 
remained silent on non-constitution of second SFC, non-submission of the third SFC 
report and non-acceptance of fourth SFC report. 
Recommendation: Delay in constitution of SFCs shoul d be avoided and the 
accepted recommendations of SFCs should be fully implemented . 
2.2.8.8 Own revenue of urban local bodies 
ULBs do not have a large independent tax domain. Th e property tax on land and 
buildings is the mainstay of ULB’s own revenue. The  own non-tax revenue of ULBs 
comprises water charges, rent from commercial estab lishments, trade licences, fee for 
sanction of plans/ mutations, etc . The collection of own revenue of ULBs for the 
period 2015-16 to 2019-20 is shown in Appendix 2.2.5 . 
Section 192 of TM Act, 1994 stipulates that while t he authority to levy, collect and 
appropriate certain taxes like property tax, advert isement tax, etc.  vested with the 
ULBs; the extent, assessment and collection of such  taxes shall be governed by the 
Acts and Rules made thereunder by the State Government. 
It was noticed in audit that the powers pertaining to fixing the rates and revision 
thereof (Advertisement Tax), procedure of collectio n (Property Tax), method of 
assessment, exemptions, concessions (Property Tax, Advertisement Tax), etc.  were 
vested with the State Government. The ULBs, thus, l acked complete autonomy in 
generating own revenue. Year-wise collection of tax  revenue and non-tax revenue by 
the ULBs is shown in Table 2.2.6. 
Table 2.2.6: Year-wise collection of tax revenue and non-tax revenue by the ULBs  
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. No.  Tax/ Non -tax Revenue  2015 -16  2016 -17  2017 -18  2018 -19  2019 -20  
1 Tax Revenue  9.95  11.70  10.89  14.55  15.23  
2 Non -tax Revenue  28.83  25.94  18.04  22.09  26.81  
3 Total  38.78  37.64  28.93  36.64  42.04  
Source:  Urban Development Department 

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 24 
The major source of revenue was Property Tax. Durin g 2015-16 to 2019-20, the tax 
revenue increased marginally (except 2017-18). The sources of non-tax revenue are 
trade license, rent, etc . From Table 2.2.6, it can be seen that the non-tax revenue has 
decreased during 2016-17 to 2019-20 as compared to 2015-16. It was noticed in audit 
that the ULBs did not take any action against the d efaulters for not depositing the 
property tax, trade license fees and outstanding rent from market stalls.  
The Government accepted (August 2021) the fact. 
2.2.8.8 (i) Property tax  
The ULBs were empowered to levy property tax every year on land and buildings 
within their jurisdiction under section 193 of the TM Act. The notification issued in 
March 2016 by the Urban Development Department, Government of Tripura provides 
the rate of property tax on the basis of Annual Pro perty Value effective from April 
2016. The following shortcomings were noticed with regard to realisation of 
property tax: 
• Annual Property Value system 10  was introduced by the Urban Development 
Department in April 2016. It was observed that the system was not adopted by 
Sonamura Nagar Panchayat (April 2021). Amarpur Naga r Panchayat and 
Satirbazar Municipal Council introduced the system after three years of issuance 
of the notification i.e.  in April 2019 and in August 2019 respectively; 
• Survey of properties was not conducted by any of the sampled ULBs; 
• All Central Finance Commissions have recognised the  need to augment property 
tax revenue to improve municipal finances. The elev enth, twelfth and thirteenth 
Finance Commissions encouraged the use of Geographi c Information System 
(GIS) in digitalise environment to improve property  tax administration. Audit 
observed that GIS based system for mapping of prope rties was not introduced in 
any ULB (March 2021); 
• Property Tax on telecommunication towers was not co llected by any sampled 
ULB; 
• Arrears in collection of property tax and non-maint enance of Demand, Collection 
and Balance (DCB) statements were noticed in the sa mpled ULBs. The 
accumulated arrears of property tax in 11 ULBs as o f March 2020 was ₹ 127.23 
lakh as shown in Table 2.2.7. 
 
 
                                                           
10  As per Letter No. F.14(2)-UDD/DUD/2013/10916-37 da ted 16/03/2016, a Guidelines on 
implementation of Tripura Municipal (Assessment and  Collection of Property Tax) Rules, 2016 
was circulated by the Directorate of Urban Developm ent for implementation in all Municipalities 
existed in Tripura. Subsequently a notification was  issued by the Urban Development Department, 
Government of Tripura for the computation of the tax from 1 April 2016. 

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 25 
Table 2.2.7: Statement showing accumulated arrears of property tax in 11 ULBs 
Sl. No.  Name of ULB Accumulated arrears of property tax in the ULBs at 
the end of March 2020 ( ₹ in lakh) 
1 Agartala Muncipal Corporation 58.16  
2 Kailashahar MC 2.94  
3 Teliamura MC 1.01  
4 Belonia MC 2.06  
5 Melaghar MC 2.03  
6 Ambassa MC 0.77  
7 Santirbazar MC 9.54  
8 Kumarghat MC 41.24  
9 Sonamura NP  3.18  
10 Amarpur NP  1.76  
11 Jirania NP  4.54  
 Total 127.23  
Source: 11 sampled ULBs 
The Government accepted (August 2021) the audit obs ervations and stated that this 
was noted for guidance. 
2.2.8.8 (ii) Rent from market stalls  
Section 183 of Tripura Municipal Act 1994 empowers the Municipalities to charge 
premium, stallage, rent or fee as may, from time to time, be fixed in this behalf for the 
occupation or use of any stall, shop, stand, shed o r open space in Municipal markets 
or Municipal slaughter houses. 
Scrutiny of records revealed that rent amounting to  
₹ 6.91 crore was in arrears at the 
end of March 2020 in 11 sampled ULBs, which is shown in Table 2.2.8. 
Table 2.2.8: Statement showing outstanding stall rents in 11 ULBs 
Sl. No.  Name of the ULB 
Total 
number of 
markets 
Total 
number of 
Market 
stall Holder  
No. of 
stalls 
renewed 
Total 
collection of 
stalls rent as 
of 31 March 
2020 (₹ in 
lakh) 
Outstanding 
amount of 
stall rent as of 
31 March 
2020  
(₹ in lakh) 
1 AMC, Central Zone 14 3824 0 134.52  540.38  
2 AMC, East Zone 1 141 0 5.16  1.76  
3 AMC, North Zone 2 105 0 1.89  17.34  
4 AMC, South Zone 4 223 0 2.12  1.37  
5 Jirania Nagar Panchayat 3 112 0 1.62  1.11  
6 Ambassa Municipal Council 11 171 117 6.67  1.08  
7 Kailashahar Municipal Council  17 266 0 6.02  80.75  
8 Kumarghat Municipal Council  3 231 0 13.81  10.84  
9 Teliamura Municipal Council 2 162 0 3.47  10.63  
10 Melaghar Municipal Council 5 46 0 0.39  0.75  
11 Belonia Municipal Council 17 583 2 20.29  1.96  
12 Amarpur Nagar Panchayat 16 326 2 17.15  17.76  
13 Santirbazar Nagar Panchayat 5 65 0 3.21  4.47  
14 Sonamura Nagar Panchayat 10 398 2 6.75  0.58  
Total 110 6653 123 223.07  690.78  
Source : 11 sampled ULBs 
No stringent actions were taken by the ULBs to real ise the outstanding rent. It was 
noticed in audit that the ULBs did not maintain Dem and Registers. Though the 

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 26 
Collection Registers were maintained, but details r egarding total number of stalls, 
number of stalls allotted, serial number of stalls,  date of agreement, expiry date of 
agreement, etc . were not maintained in the Collection Registers. 
Audit observed that no standard protocol was set by  the ULBs for entering into 
agreements with the tenants stipulating the terms a nd conditions including conditions 
for revision of rent. Agreements were not renewed i n 6,530 out of 6,653 cases in six 
ULBs out of 11 sampled ULBs and the shop keepers we re running their businesses 
without renewal fees. The Government accepted (August 2021) the audit observations 
and stated that this was noted for guidance. 
2.2.8.8 (iii) Trade license 
As per Section 201 of TM Act, 1994 the amount of fe es on licence and permits issued 
by a Municipality under this Act, shall be determin ed by the Municipality from time 
to time with the approval of the State Government. Such fees are to be paid at the time 
of obtaining or renewing licence or permits. Any profession, trade and employment or 
any other gainful activity in the Municipality area  which require a licence or a permit 
under any other law shall also require a Municipal licence or permit to be obtained 
and renewal in such manner as may be provided in the regulation. 
Scrutiny of the records showed that arrears in collection of trade licence fees of 
₹ 6.01 
crore and total number of trade licences due for renewal was 21,175 as of March 2020 
in 11 sampled ULBs, which is shown in Table 2.2.9.  
Table 2.2.9: Statement showing outstanding stall rents in 10 ULBs 
Sl. 
No.  
Name of the 
ULB 
Total number 
of trade 
license (TL) 
issued (upto 
31.03.2020) 
Total 
number of 
TL due for 
renewal as of 
31.03.2020 
Total amount 
of TL fees 
due as of 
31.03.2020  
(₹ in lakh) 
Total amount  
of TL fees  
collected  
during 2019-20 
(₹ in lakh) 
Outstanding 
amount of 
TL fees as of 
31.03.2020 
(₹ in lakh) 
1 
Agartala 
Municipal 
Corporation 
24207 15616 760.26 211.10 549.16 
2 Jirania NP 1004 376 3.06 3.04 0.02 
3 Santirbazar MC 763 389 6.06 1.95 4.11 
4 Kumarghat MC 1964 1413 38.76 4.90 33.86 
5 Kailashahar MC  1428 338 3.75 2.91 0.84 
6 Ambassa MC 1353 803 6.52 4.07 2.45 
7 Amarpur NP 395 127 2.65 1.89 0.76 
8 Melaghar MC 657 259 7.04 4.73 2.31 
9 Belonia MC 2009 637 7.56 3.38 4.18 
10 Teliamura MC 2947 761 10.13 7.84 2.29 
11 Sonamura NP 698 456 4.92 3.87 1.05 
Total 37425 21175 850.71 249.68 601.03 
Source : 10 sampled ULBs 
No mechanism existed for monitoring the renewal of trade licences and failure to 
renew trade licences resulted in an approximate los s of revenue of ₹ 6.01 crore to the 
11 sampled ULBs. 
The Government accepted (August 2021) the audit observations. 

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 27 
Recommendation: The ULBs should be vested with comp lete autonomy in 
generating own revenue through amendment of TM Act, 1994. 
2.2.8.8 (iv) Imposition of penalties/ fines under S olid Waste Management Rules 
Solid Waste Management (SWM) is one of the key functions of the ULBs. In exercise 
of the power conferred on UDD by Rule 6(24) and Rul e 7(8.1) of the Tripura 
Municipal Solid Waste (Management and Handling) Cle anliness and Sanitation 
Rules, 2019, UDD notified (July 2019) the rates of penalties/ fines to be imposed by 
ULBs for violation of the said Rules as shown in Appendix 2.2.6 . 
Audit observed that AMC had implemented Rule 5(8) o f the Tripura Municipal Solid 
Waste (Management and Handling) Cleanliness and San itation Rules, 2019 on 
demolition waste only. The other sampled ULBs did n ot implement any of the said 
Rules . Thus, the purpose for framing the Rules for mainte nance of cleanliness and 
sanitation, had been defeated. On the other hand, t he ULBs could have generated 
potential revenue had the Rules been implemented. 
The Government accepted (August 2021) the audit observations. 
2.2.8.8 (v) Tapping of various sources of revenue b y ULBs 
The ULBs levied and collected non-tax revenue such as building plan fees, fees on 
licence and permits, trade licence, rent from shops / markets/ commercial 
establishments, etc . But the following sources of non-tax revenue were  not tapped in 
spite of having provisions in Tripura Municipal (TM ) Act, 1994 as shown in 
Table 2.2.10 . 
Table 2.2.10: Statement showing revenue sources not tapped by the ULBs 
Sl. No. Source of revenue Provision in TM Act 
1 Tolls from bridges Section 200 
2 Entry fee on passenger vehicles Section 206 
3 Levy on congregation Section 207 
4 Levy of surcharge on property tax for commercial, 
industrial or such other non-residential purposes Section 208 
The Government accepted (August 2021) the fact. 
2.2.8.9 Expenditure pattern of urban local bodies  
The expenditure of ULBs can be categorised into fiv e major categories such as 
expenses on human resources, administrative expense s, operation and maintenance 
expenses, interest and finance expenses and expense s on implementation of 
programmes. The details of expenditure incurred by 20 ULBs in the State during the 
period from 2015-16 to 2019-20 are exhibited in Table 2.2.11 . 
  

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 28 
Table 2.2.11: Details of expenditure incurred by 20 ULBs in the State 
(₹ in crore) 
Year 2015-16  2016-17  2017-18  2018-19  2019-20  Total 
expenditure  
Expenditure 
in per cent  
Expenses on human 
resources 17.28 
 22.83  18.57  19.58  18.74  97.00  9.79 
Administrative 
expenses 15.98 
 21.34  14.02  9.54  10.38  71.26  7.19 
Operation and 
maintenance expenses 14.16 
 15.71  11.96  9.45  6.47  57.75  5.83 
Interest & Finance 
expenses 0.29 
 0.67  0.06  0.23  0.20  1.45  0.15 
Expenses on 
implementation of 
programmes/ schemes 
188.02 
 166.28  155.16  151.45  102.10  763.01  77.03 
Total 235.73  226.83  199.77  190.25  137.89  990.47   
Source:  Information furnished by ULBs 
The overall operation and maintenance expenses and interest & finance charges 
constituted about 5.83 per cent and 0.15 per cent respectively of the total expenditure. 
A major portion of expenses was incurred on human r esources and administrative 
expenses i.e. 17 per cent. 
The Government accepted (August 2021) the fact and stated that the matter would be 
brought to the notice of the newly elected body of each Municipality after the general 
elections to Municipalities. 
2.2.8.10 Resource-expenditure gap 
The ULBs were able to generate own resources only to the extent of 35 per cent  of the 
revenue expenditure during the period from 2015-16 to 2019-20. A comparison of the 
own revenue to revenue expenditure showed large gap s as depicted in Chart 2.2.5, 
which needs to be addressed by ULBs. 
Chart 2.2.5: Resource-expenditure gap in ULBs 
 
Source : Urban Development Department and Urban Local Bodies 
The major portion of Grants-in-aid and funds transf erred for implementation of 
schemes were utilised under revenue expenditure. 
The Government accepted (August 2021) the fact. 
38.78 37.64 28.93 36.64 42.04 
111.78 114.95 108.94 
58.33 
135.98 
0
50 
100 
150 
2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 
₹ in crore 
Own Revenue Vs Revenue Expenditure 
Own Revenue Revenue Expenditure 

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 29 
2.2.8.11 Extent of utilisation of funds 
A comparison of the total expenditure with total re venue for the period from 2015-16 
to 2019-20 showed that ULBs had been able to utilise on an average about 61 per cent  
of the available funds each year as depicted in Chart 2.2.6. 
Chart 2.2.6: Extent of utilisation of funds 
 
Source:  Urban Development Department and Urban Local Bodies 
From Chart 2.2.6 , it can be seen that the ULBs were able to utilise 35 per cent  to 88 per 
cent  of the available funds only during 2015-16 to 2019 -20 due to non-preparation of 
annual action plan, non-execution of various development works owing to site dispute, 
shortfall in generation of man-days in implementation of works under TUEP, etc .  
The Government accepted (August 2021) the above facts. 
2.2.8.12 Accounting reforms 
Based on the recommendations of Eleventh Finance Co mmission, the Ministry of 
Urban Development, Government of India (GoI) in consultation with Comptroller and 
Auditor General of India developed the National Mun icipal Accounts Manual 
(NMAM) which was based on double entry accrual base d system of accounting. The 
Urban Development Department (UDD), Government of T ripura had drafted (June 
2010) the ‘Tripura Municipal Accounting Manual’ bas ed on the NMAM. The Manual 
was finalised in 2011.  
The UDD instructed all ULBs to switch over to the a ccrual based double entry 
accounting system from April 2011. The accrual base d double entry accounting 
system was being implemented in AMC. However, the o ther Municipal Councils and 
Nagar Panchayats had not introduced the same due to lack of expertise. 
Thus, due to non-maintenance/ irregular maintenance  of accounts, the true and fair 
annual position of the ULBs could not be ascertained.  
2.2.13 Conclusion  
The Government of Tripura through enactment of Trip ura Municipal Act, 1994 
transferred all the 18 functions to ULBs. In practi ce, functions like fire service, 
creation and maintenance of water supply were disch arged by the State Government 
departments. Non-functioning of Ward Committees and District Planning Committees 
affected the effective implementation of devolved functions by ULBs.  
298.42 
693.34 
381.80 
554.40 
446.93 
263.96 243.12 252.27 293.55 270.43 
88% 
35% 
66% 
53% 
61% 
0.00 
20.00 
40.00 
60.00 
80.00 
100.00 
0.00 
100.00 
200.00 
300.00 
400.00 
500.00 
600.00 
700.00 
800.00 
Perentage 
₹ in crore 
Total Revenue Total Expenditure Percentage of expenditure 

Chapter II: Social Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 30 
Although the State Property Tax Board was constitut ed, it remained non-functional. 
The ULBs, thus, lacked technical guidance for asses sment and revision of Property 
Tax. They also lacked adequate manpower to carry ou t efficient delivery of services. 
Vacancies ranging from 14 per cent  to 57 per cent  among the various categories 
affected the functioning of the ULBs. Non-constitut ion of second SFC, 
non-submission of the third SFC report and non-acce ptance of fourth SFC report by 
the State Government was a constraint in strengthening ULBs which also defeated the 
very purpose of the institution. 
The ULBs lacked adequate resources of their own whi ch affected service delivery to 
the citizens. Powers pertaining to the rates and re vision of taxes thereof, procedure of 
collection and method of assessment were vested wit h the State Government, which 
eroded the autonomy of ULBs in generating their own revenue.  
2.2.14 Recommendations  
The following recommendations are proposed; 
1.  State Government should devolve all 18 functions li sted in the twelfth Schedule 
of the Constitution of India to all Urban Local Bodies in the State; 
2.  Ward Committee should convene regular meetings to f acilitate community 
participation; 
3.  State Government should check the violation of prov isions on implementation 
of Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban Transfor mation (AMRUT) and 
strictly follow the GoI guidelines on implementation of the scheme;  
4.  State Property Tax Board needs to be made functiona l to provide technical 
guidance to the ULBs for assessment and periodical revision of property tax; 
5.  ULBs need to increase their own revenue for self-reliance to the extent possible 
and take action to recover arrears of revenue;  
6.  Delay in constitution of SFCs should be avoided and  the accepted 
recommendations of SFCs should be fully implemented; 
7.  All ULBs in the State should switch over to accrual  based accounting system as 
per the Tripura Municipal Accounting Manual. 

CHAPTER III: ECONOMIC SECTOR 

Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
  31 
CHAPTER III: ECONOMIC SECTOR 
 
3.1 Introduction 
This Chapter deals with the findings of audit on th e State Government units under 
Economic Sector. 
The details of the total budget allocation and expe nditure of the Departments under 
Economic Sector during the year 2019-20 are given in Table 3.1.1 . 
Table 3.1.1: Details of allocation and expenditure under Economic Sector (Non-PSUs)  
(₹ in crore) 
Name of the Department Total budget 
allocation Expenditure  
Co-operation  35.88 32.08 
Public Works (Roads & Buildings)  1068.54  652.66  
Power  136.84  136.45 
Public Works (Water Resource)  197.80  100.14  
Information and Cultural Affairs  44.01  42.39 
Industries & Commerce  121.10  104.50  
Industries & Commerce (Handloom, Handicrafts & 
Sericulture)  
42.07 
 33.98 
Fisheries 87.68  72.83 
Agriculture  566.95 335.13 
Horticulture  155.55  90.71 
Animal Resources Development  124.98  104.81  
Forest  188.56 123.30  
Science, Technology and Environment  6.82  5.73  
Factories and Boilers Organisation  3.06  2.97 
Information Technology  16.60  6.73  
Tourism  4.00  3.67 
Total number of Departments = 16 2800.44 1848.08 
Source : Appropriation Accounts, 2019-20 
We audited 10 units under this Sector, covering exp enditure of ₹ 258.88 crore 
(including expenditure of the previous year). 
This Chapter contains one Performance Audit titled “ Development and Promotion 
of Horticulture in Tripura ” relating to the Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare 
Development Department and three Compliance Audit p aragraphs under Public 
Works (Roads & Building) and Forest Department invo lving money value of 
₹ 5.47 
crore. 
  

Chapter III: Economic Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 32 
Agriculture and Farmers’ Welfare Department 
 
3.2  Performance Audit on Development and Promotion of H orticulture in 
Tripura 
 
3.2.1 Introduction  
Horticulture is defined as the science of growing a nd management of fruits, 
vegetables including tubers, ornamental, aromatic a nd medicinal crops, spices, 
plantation crops and their processing, value additi on and marketing. The horticulture 
crops include fruits, vegetables, spices, plantatio n crops and flowers. Crops like 
mushroom, bamboo and bee keeping (helps in improvin g crop productivity) are also 
important components of horticultural development. Over the past two decades, the 
horticulture sector has emerged as a prominent sect or in the Indian agricultural 
scenario contributing to the overall economic growt h. Besides providing nutritional 
and health benefits, this sector has given wide var iety of products that are available 
round the year. The sector also provides a wide ran ge of options for sustainable rural 
economy through diversification. In order to provid e impetus to horticulture sector, 
Government of India has undertaken several initiati ves. The Major scheme – Mission 
for Integrated Development of Horticulture (MIDH) i s being implemented in the 
country by adopting an end to end approach for incr easing production of horticulture 
crops and reducing post-harvest losses.  
Tripura 
 is characterised by hilly  terrain  consisting of parallel hills and ridges 
alternated with narrow valleys, deep fertile soil, sub-tropical humid climate with 
abundance of rainfall, offering 
immense scope for development 
of horticultural sector. In the State, 
the area under horticultural crops 
has declined from 1,23,268 ha in 
2015-16 to 1,21,160 ha in 2019-20 
with marginally increase in 
production from 14,55,215 MT to 
14,58,245 MT. Status of 
horticultural crops in Tripura at 
the end of 2019-20 
11  are given in Appendix 3.2.1 . 
In the State, South Tripura District is leading in vegetable production in terms of 
production and Khowai District leads in productivit y while Dhalai District leads in 
production and productivity of fruits and North Tripura in production and productivity 
of nuts. Detail position is given in Table 3.2.1. 
                                                 
11  Horticulture Area Production Information System (H APIS) data for the year 2019-20 provided by 
the Directorate of Health & Soil Conservation (DH&SC), Government of Tripura. 


Chapter III: Economic Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 33 
Table 3.2.1: Production and productivity rank of district of different horticulture items 
in the State during 2015-16 to 2019-20 
Sl. 
No. Particulars of Horticulture Products Highest producing 
district Highest productivity  
1. Vegetables South Tripura Khowai 
2. Fruits Dhalai  Dhalai  
3. Nuts North Tripura North Tripura 
4. Spices South Tripura North Tripura 
5. Potato  South Tripura North Tripura 
Source:  Five years data on horticulture area and productio n from 2015-16 to 2019-20 provided by the 
Directorate of Horticulture and Soil Conservation, Government of Tripura (details shown in  
Appendix 3.2.2) 
Production of vegetables, fruits, nuts and spices i n Tripura during 2015-16 and 
2019-20 is given in Table 3.2.2. 
Table 3.2.2: Production of different horticulture items in the State during 2015-16 and 
2019-20 
Sl.  
No. Name of the product Production during (in thousand MT) 
2015-16 2019-20 
1 Vegetables 765.51 776.50 
2 Fruits 552.77 543.77 
3 Nuts 35.19 37.55 
4 Spices 33.40 32.70 
Source:  Horticulture production data for Tripura 2015-16 a nd 2019-20  provided by the Directorate of 
Horticulture and Soil Conservation, Government of Tripura  
3.2.2 Organisational set-up 
The Directorate of Horticulture and Soil Conservati on (H&SC) at the State level is a 
wing under the Agriculture and Farmers’ Welfare Dep artment, Government of 
Tripura, which is headed by the Principal Secretary . Directorate of H&SC is assisted 
at the district level by eight Deputy Director leve l officers. At the sub-divisional level 
36 Superintendent of Agriculture/ Horticulture are implementing the departmental 
programmes and the schemes. Below the Superintenden t of Agriculture/ Horticulture, 
the field level functionaries like Agri. Sector Off icers (ASO) and Village Level 
Workers (VLWs) work at Agri Circle and Gaon Panchay at/ Village Council levels, 
respectively. Tripura Horticulture Corporation Limi ted (THCL) 
12  procures power 
tillers, seeds, seedlings, manures, etc.  on behalf of the Directorate while the College 
of Agriculture, Tripura (CAT) and Tripura Khadi and  Village Industries Board 
(TKVIB) implement programmes 13  for the Directorate. 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
12  A government owned corporation 
13  Implemented programmes under National Bee Board fu nds 

Chapter III: Economic Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 34 
Chart 3.2.1: Organisational Set- up 
 
 
3.2.3 Audit objectives  
The Performance Audit was conducted to ascertain whether: 
a.  effective planning process was in place fixing prio rities for the State/ different 
districts/ regions in consonance with the diverse a gro climatic features and 
various schemes/ projects for increase of productio n area as well as productivity 
of horticulture crops were planned effectively; 
b.  implementation of the schemes/ projects and provisi on and utilisation of funds 
was efficient and effective and had resulted in inc reased acreage of horticultural 
crops and diversification of horticultural production as envisaged; 
c.  the promotion of technology, extension, post-harves t management, processing 
and marketing for holistic growth of horticulture s ector in consonance with 
comparative advantage each State/ region; 
d.  the skills of the local youth had been developed to  create employment 
opportunities in the horticulture sector; and 
e.  monitoring and evaluation system including internal  controls were adequate and 
effective. 
Principal Secretary 
Director (Horticulture and Soil 
Conservation) 
Soil and Water 
Conservation Wing 
 Horticulture Wing 
Research Wing 
Sr. Horticulturist, 
Horticulture Research 
Complex, Agartala 
Development 
Wing 
Addl. Director/ 
Jt. Director 
Dy. Director of 
Horticulture (Eight 
districts) 
Superintendent of 
Agriculture (Looking after 
Horticulture and Soil 
Conservation works), 29 Nos. 
Superintendent of 
Horticulture and Soil 
Conservation (Eight Nos.) 
Tripura Horticulture 
Corporation Ltd. 

Chapter III: Economic Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 35 
3.2.4 Audit Scope and methodology  
Audit covered the period from 2015-16 to 2019-20 an d examined the expansion of 
coverage (both in terms of area and productivity), rejuvenation, production of seeds 
and planting materials, creation of infrastructure,  capacity building, undertaking of 
innovative projects in the area of horticulture dev elopment, post-harvest management, 
processing and marketing and skill development.  
Performance Audit (PA) covered all the components o f works under Mission for 
Integrated Development of Horticulture (MIDH), impl ementation of works with spill 
over funds of erstwhile Technology Mission (TM), Ho rticulture Mission for North 
East and Himalayan States (HMNEH), funds received f rom National Bee Board 
(NBB), National Bamboo Mission (NBM), Special Centr al Assistance (SCA) to 
Tribal Sub Scheme (TSS) funds, funds from Coconut D evelopment Board (CDB) and 
State Plan funds utilised by the State Horticulture  Mission 
14  (SHM) and the 
Directorate of H&SC under the Department of Agricul ture and Farmers’ Welfare, 
Government of Tripura during the period from 2015-1 6 to 2019-20. Entry Conference 
was held on 2 December 2020 with the Secretary, Dep artment of Agriculture and 
Farmers’ Welfare, Government of Tripura wherein aud it objectives, scope, criteria 
and methodology of Performance Audit were discussed . Samples 15  were selected on 
Simple Random Sampling Without Replacement (SRSWOR)  method. Physical 
verification was undertaken where funds had been sp ent on creation or acquisition of 
asset(s) to assess the actual benefits. Exit Confer ence was held with the Secretary to 
Government of Tripura, Agriculture and Farmers’ Wel fare Department on 
6 December 2021 where audit findings were discussed . Replies (January 2022) of the 
Government and views expressed during Exit Conferen ce were suitably incorporated 
in the PA at appropriate places.  
3.2.5 Audit criteria 
Audit findings were benchmarked against the criteri a derived from the following 
sources:  
a.  Operational Guidelines of MIDH and other relevant scheme/project guidelines; 
b.  Annual Action Plans, Outcome Budget; 
c.  Central Treasury Rules (CTR); Delegation of Financi al Power Rules, 
Government of Tripura (DFPRT); 2017 (Amended in 2019). 
d.  Tripura Horticultural Nurseries (Regulation) Act, 2013; 
e.  Departmental Manual/ Rules/ Policies, etc.;  
                                                 
14  State Horticulture Mission (SHM), Tripura was resp onsible for implementation of programmes 
under the MIDH scheme where Director of H&SC acts a s State Mission Director (SMD) and the 
Deputy Directors in the districts act as District Mission Director (DMDs). 
15  Superintendants of Agriculture (SAs), Dukli, Jiran ia, Mandwi, Mohanpur and Hezamara of West 
Tripura District; SAs, Ambassa and Salema and Super intendent of Horticulture (SH), Manu in 
Dhalai District; SH, Kumarghat in Unakoti District;  Deputy Director (Vegetable), Horticulture 
Research Complex (HRC), Nagichera 

Chapter III: Economic Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 36 
f.  Guiding Manual of Horticultural Crop Statistics for  the Field Staff, Government 
of Tripura; 
g.  Guidelines, Circulars, Notifications and various or ders issued by the Government 
of India (GoI)/ State Government from time to time. 
Acknowledgement 
Audit acknowledges the co-operation and assistance extended by the Agriculture and 
Farmers’ Welfare Department as well by its field of fices during the conduct of the 
Performance Audit. 
Audit findings 
 
3.2.6 Planning 
As per Mission for Integrated Development of Hortic ulture (MIDH) guidelines, 
there shall be a State Horticulture Mission (SHM) i n every State which shall 
prepare perspective/ strategic plan and road map fo r overall development of 
horticulture in the State. This will form the basis  for preparing Annual Action 
Plans. SHM shall also organise baseline survey in d istricts to determine status of 
horticulture production, potential and demand, so a s to arrive at the assistance 
required and incorporate the same in the Action  plans. 
The SHM in the State was formed and registered as a  Society under the Societies 
Registration Act, 1860 in November 2014. Except for  the MIDH and State Plan 
funds, no plan document was prepared by the Departm ent for other components 
of funds 16 . Audit noticed the following deficiencies in plann ing for 
implementation of the programme.  
3.2.6.1 Perspective Plans 
Mission for Integrated Development of Horticulture (MIDH) guidelines (para 5.1) 
stipulate that State level agency shall prepare Str ategic/ Perspective and annual 
State Level Action Plan (SLAP) in consonance with M ission’s goals and 
objectives in close co-ordination with Technical Su pport Group (TSG), State 
Agriculture Universities (SAUs), ICAR institutes and oversee its implementation. 
Audit noticed that SHM, Tripura did not prepare a P erspective Plan for the 
horticulture development in the State as was envisaged in the Guidelines.  
The Government stated (January 2022) that the Depar tment had formulated a 
three-year Action Plan 2020-21 to 2022-23 for the o verall development of 
horticulture sector in Tripura and the Annual Actio n Plan of MIDH had been 
framed to fulfil the targets of the three-year Perspective Plan. 
 
  
                                                 
16  Special Central Assistance to Tribal Sub Plan Sche me, National Bamboo Mission, National Bee 
Board Fund, Coconut Development Board Fund and Un-s pent funds under Technology Mission 
and Horticulture mission 

Chapter III: Economic Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 37 
3.2.6.2 Annual Action Plans 
According to para 5.3 of the MIDH guidelines, for p reparation of annual plan and 
activities, the Ministry of Agriculture will commun icate the tentative outlay for the 
year to each State which in turn, will indicate sec tor-wise/ district-wise allocation. 
The district level agencies 
17  will prepare Annual Action Plan (AAP) keeping in v iew 
their priority and potential and submit the plan to  State Horticulture Mission. State 
Horticulture Mission (SHM) in turn will prepare a consolidated proposal for State as a 
whole, get it vetted by the respective Board of Man agement and submit the same to 
Ministry of Agriculture (MoA), Government of India (GoI) for consideration by 
National Level Executive Committee (EC).  
Audit noticed that on receipt of tentative allocati on from the MoA, GoI, SHM itself 
prepared the AAP in contravention of what was envis aged in the scheme guidelines. 
Therefore, the bottom-up approach of planning was n ot followed and need based 
targets as per local demand were not set. It was al so noticed that the AAP prepared by 
SHM was not placed before the Board of Management o f the Society 
18  for approval 
during 2015-16 to 2019-20 rather sent directly to Government of India. No meeting of 
the Board was convened during the audit period thou gh as per the mandate 19 , the 
Board of Management was to meet at least once in a quarter to discuss  inter alia  the 
Annual Budget and Work Plan of the Society, issue g uidelines for implementation of 
various activities and programmes, consider and approve Annual Reports, etc . 
While accepting the fact, Government stated (Januar y 2022) that Annual Action Plans 
were sent to the Government of India without approval of the Board. 
3.2.7 Financial management 
 
3.2.7.1 Sources and application of funds 
The Department received funds from nine different  sources for horticulture 
development in the State, which includes funds from  Coconut Development Board 
(CDB), National Bee Board (NBB), National Bamboo Mi ssion (NBM), Special 
Central Assistance to Tribal Sub Schemes (SCA to TS S), Mahatma Gandhi National 
Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS), Missio n for Integrated 
Development of Horticulture (MIDH), State Plan fund s, and spill over funds of 
Technology Mission (TM) 
20  and Horticulture Mission for North East and Himala yan 
States (HMNEH) 21 . The salary and other regular establishment expenditure are met by 
the State Government while scheme related administr ative expenditure are met from 
the MIDH under the ‘Mission  Management’ component. 
                                                 
17  District Horticulture Mission offices as per the M IDH guidelines 
18  As per the Bye-Laws of the Tripura State Horticult ure Mission (SHM), there is no State Level 
Executive Committee (SLEC), rather Board of Managem ent exists which consists of 13 members 
under the Minister of Agriculture, who is the President of the Mission. 
19  Articles of Association of the SHM, Tripura 
20  Technology Mission was launched by the Government of India in 1987 with five basic objectives 
of immunisation of pregnant women and children, imp rovement in telecommunication services, 
literacy, oil seed production and drinking water facility. 
21  HMNEH is a part of MIDH scheme which was implement ed for overall development of 
horticulture in NE and Himalayan States. 

Chapter III: Economic Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 38 
The funds from the CDB, NBB and NBM were meant for specific intervention for 
horticultural development in terms of coconut plant ation and programmes, bamboo 
plantation and rearing of bees and bee hives for he lping the farmers in artificial 
pollination as well as income generation from honey . The funds under the SCA to 
TSS and MGNREGS were mainly the funds by the Tribal  Welfare and the Rural 
Development Departments, Government of Tripura resp ectively, for implementation 
of plantation programmes in the fields of selected beneficiaries. The MIDH funds 
were the main source of funds in the sharing patter n of 90:10 between the Central and 
the State Governments which catered to, apart from the plantation activities, 
horticulture mechanisation, human resource developm ent, integrated post-harvest 
management, establishment of marketing infrastructu re, etc . Audit noticed that the 
Directorate of H&SC had spill over funds of ₹ 25.61 crore and ₹ 2.24 crore under the 
erstwhile programmes of TM and HMNEH respectively a t the beginning of 2015-16. 
Total receipts and expenditure for horticulture dev elopment in the State during 
2015-16 to 2019-20 is given in Table 3.2.3. 
Table 3.2.3 Fund availability and expenditure for horticulture programme in the State 
during 2015-16 to 2019-20 
(₹ in crore) 
Year Opening 
Balance Receipts  Other 
receipts 22  
Total 
funds Expenditure  
Closing balance 
(per cent  to Total 
Funds) 
2015-16 14.87  62.05  14.14  91.06  54.43  36.63 (40)  
2016-17 36.63  55.04  4.15  95.82  42.54  53.28 (56)  
2017-18 53.28  25.87  22.97  102.12  37.52  64.60 (63)  
2018-19 64.60  18.39  3.89  86.88  52.36  34.52 (40)  
2019-20 34.52  36.61  11.98  83.11  51.38  31.73 (38)  
Total  197.96  57.13  238.23   
Source : Directorate of Horticulture and Soil Conservation. 
It could be seen from Table 3.2.3 that  year wise unspent funds varied from 
38 per cent  to 63 per cent . Audit also noticed that out of ₹ 122.55 crore of MIDH 
funds, ₹ 43 crore 23  were released in March by the Government of India that also 
formed a major part of the unspent balance with the Directorate of H&SC.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
22  Interest and refunds 
23  ₹ 14 crore in 2015-16, ₹ 7 crore in 2016-17, ₹ 12 crore in 2018-19 and ₹ 10 crore in 2019-20. 

Chapter III: Economic Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 39 
Chart 3.2.2: Fund position with percentage during 2015-16 to 2019-20 
 
It can be seen from Chart 3.2.2 that total expenditure for horticulture development  in 
the State during 2015-16 to 2019-20 was ₹ 238.23 crore while the MIDH alone 
accounted for ₹ 122.55 crore (51  per cent ) while State plan funds had a share of 
11 per cent . Details of receipts are given in Appendices 3.2.3 to  3.2.10 . 
3.2.7.2 Delay in release of MIDH funds  
According to Rule 6.1 of the MIDH guidelines, funds  will be released to the State 
Governments by GoI. State Government will release f unds to the SHMs/ State Level 
Implementing Agencies, who in turn will make funds available to District Mission 
Committees (DMCs)/ District Implementing Agencies. The detail fund position is 
given in Table 3.2.4. 
Table 3.2.4: Fund position of MIDH during 2015-16 to 2019-20 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No. Year Share details 1st  Instalment 2nd  Instalment  Total 
Amount 
1. 2015-16 GoI 18.75  14.00  32.75  
2. State 1.88  1.76  3.64  
3. 2016-17 GoI 16.50  7.00  23.50  
4. State 1.83  0.78  2.61  
5. 2017-18 GoI 10.00  0.00  10.00  
6. State 1.11  0.00  1.11  
7. 2018-19 GoI 12.00  0.00  12.00  
8. State 1.33  0.00  1.33  
9. 2019-20 GoI 10.00  10.00  20.00  
10. State 1.11  1.11  2.22  
Total 74.51  34.65  109.16  
Source: Departmental figures and fund sanction memos  
Audit noticed that during 2017-18, the first instal ment of fund from GoI was received 
in September 2017 and during 2018-19, the first ins talment was received in 
CDB 
2.09 
1% 
MIDH 
122.55 
51% TM 
32.62 
14% 
HMNEH 
0.76 
0% 
MGNREGA 
45.48 
19% 
NBB 
0.99 
0% 
Bamboo 
2
1% 
SCA-TSS 
6.07 
3% 
State Plan 
25.67 
11% 
Chart 3.2.2: Horticulture Expdenditure  in the State during 2015-16 
to 2019-20 
CDB MIDH TM HMNEH MGNREGA NBB Bamboo SCA-TSS State Plan 


Chapter III: Economic Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 40 
March 2019. There was delay 24  in release of Central share by the State Governmen t 
which ranged from seven days to 49 days during 2015 -16 to 2019-20. As regards the 
release of State Share, the delay ranged from 17 days to 160 days (Appendix 3.2.11 ). 
The Government stated (January 2022) that the delay  occurred as the State Finance 
Department required some time for processing of rel ease of funds which had been 
minimised since 2017-18. The Government assured tha t maximum efforts would be 
taken, henceforth, for reducing any avoidable delay  for release of Central share and 
corresponding State share by State Government. 
3.2.7.3 Receipt of 2 nd  instalment of funds 
The financial sanction under the MIDH is guided by the conditions that the grants 
shall be utilised and disbursed in accordance with the MIDH operational guidelines, 
approved Annual Action Plan, maintenance of proper accounts of the expenditure 
incurred and submission of audited accounts and utilisation certificates in time. 
It can be seen from Table 3.2.4  that the State did not get the second instalment o f 
funds on two successive occasions during 2017-18 an d 2018-19. It was seen from the 
records that the Department sent the proposal for 2 nd  instalment of funds for 2017-18 
only in the month of March 2018 25  after receiving a reminder from the Ministry of 
Agriculture, Government of India. Non- submission o f Utilisation Certificates for the 
previous year and delayed submission of proposals f or the current year led to 
non-receipt of 2 nd  instalment of funds under MIDH during 2017-18 and 2018-19. 
Non-receipt of funds were ₹ 23.00 26  crore in 2017-18 and ₹ 32.00 27  crore in 2018-19, 
respectively.   
The Government accepted the facts and stated (Janua ry 2022) that delay in 
submission of Utilisation Certificates and Audited statements, non-submission of 
proposals in time which were the major impediments in timely release of Central 
assistance, had been taken care of and expenditure had been geared up.  
3.2.7.4 Non-maintenance of records 
As per Rule 77(ii) of the Central Treasury Rules (CTR), as adopted by Government of 
Tripura, all monetary transactions shall be entered in the Cash Book as soon as they occur 
and shall be attested by the Head of Office in token of check. During 2015-16 to 2019-20, 
an expenditure of 
₹ 238.23 crore was incurred for horticulture development in the State. 
Audit noticed the following discrepancies on non-ma intenances of records by the 
sampled offices including the Directorate of H&SC. 28 : 
i)  Cash Book was not maintained properly as expenditur e of ₹ 45.48 crore 
incurred during 2015-16 to 2019-20 under Mahatma Ga ndhi National Rural 
                                                 
24  Delay was calculated from the date of release by t he GoI to the date of release by the State Finance 
Department after allowing seven days normal transaction time. 
25  6 March 2018 
26  The proposal was for ₹ 33.00 crore and fund receipt was ₹ 10.00 crore 
27  The proposal was for ₹ 44.00 crore and fund receipt was ₹ 12.00 crore 
28  Directorate implemented the commercial floricultur e project and provided assistance for 
post-harvest management activities. 

Chapter III: Economic Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 41 
Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS) was not enter ed in the Cash 
Book; 
ii)  Consolidated records were not maintained by the sam pled offices. As a result, 
work-wise and component-wise release of funds and achievements there against 
could not be verified in audit; 
iii)  Master Data file for keeping the recommendations of  Panchayati Raj 
Institutions (PRIs) against the selected beneficiaries were not maintained. 
Thus, due to non-maintenance of vital records by th e sampled offices, timely and 
proper implementation of the programme and resultan t target and achievement report 
submitted by the respective offices remained un-verified in audit.  
The Government accepted (January 2022) the facts an d stated that all the offices 
under the Department were instructed to maintain project registers henceforth. 
3.2.7.5 Erratic use of photographic evidences for r eleasing assistance to the 
beneficiary 
Execution of intermediary works like land preparati on, sowing of seeds or planting of 
saplings, weeding, mulching and related expenditure  thereof by the beneficiary for 
claiming assistance from the Government under the h orticultural schemes, could not 
be verified in audit as the Department did not fix any specific criteria for release of 
assistance to the beneficiaries under the horticultural schemes. On many occasions, no 
photographs were used but on some occasions, a sing le stage photograph at the 
completion stage was used for release of payments t o the beneficiaries. It is pertinent 
to mention that under the scheme guidelines of MGNR EGS, three stage photographs 
are mandated to prevent the risk of fraudulent drawal of scheme benefits . 
No reply was received from the Government (March 2022). 
3.2.7.6 Irregularities in raising of credit bills a gainst the Government 
To facilitate implementation of Area Expansion Prog ramme of Vegetables under 
Government approved schemes including MIDH during 2 019-20, the farmers in the 
State were allowed to procure seeds as per their ch oice from the licensed vegetable 
seed supplier/ distributors/ dealers in the State. Bills were to be raised by the agencies 
against the supply of seed to the farmers which wer e to be settled as per the 
certification by the farmers and concerned field of ficials. Related payment was to be 
made directly to the account of the supplier.  
Test check of records of the sampled units under Di rectorate of H&SC, Government 
of Tripura revealed that the Department 
 accepted and settled bills amounting to ₹ 2.94 
crore 29  during 2019-20 in favour of the seeds’ suppliers a nd nursery owners which 
were raised by the firms on the certification by th e field level officials of the 
Department.  
                                                 
29  Deputy Director of Horticulture (DDH), Unakoti: ₹ 12.79 lakh; SA, Salema: ₹ 15.00 lakh; SH, 
Kumarghat: ₹ 90.54 lakh; SH, Manu: ₹ 44.59 lakh, SA, Mohanpur: ₹ 61.80 lakh; SA, Mandwi: 
₹ 9.30 lakh; SA, Jirania: ₹ 24.00 lakh; SA, Hezamara: ₹ 12.27 lakh; SA, Dukli: ₹ 15.21 lakh and 
SA, Ambassa: ₹ 8.91  lakh 

Chapter III: Economic Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 42 
Scrutiny of the vouchers revealed that (i) name, fa ther’s/ husband’s name and address 
of the farmers were not properly recorded for prope r identification of the farmer 
(ii) multiple payments were released to the firm in  a single voucher/ invoice with the 
legend ‘ only one farmer and 5 others ’, ‘ only one farmer and 4 others ’, etc . and all 
these invoices were certified by the departmental o fficers and payments were 
released. Thus, the entire expenditure was doubtful  due to non-availability of details 
in the vouchers. 
The Department failed to take adequate measures in the order to safeguard fraudulent 
raising of credit bill by the firms which resulted in submission and acceptance of bill 
without the farmers’ details, claim for multiple pa yments in a single invoice without 
even recording the name of farmers, etc.  
No specific reply was received from the Government (March 2022).  
3.2.7.7 Idle fund under NMMI Scheme  
National Mission on Micro Irrigation (NMMI) was a C entrally Sponsored Scheme for 
implementation of drip irrigation system in respect  of small and marginal farmers. 
The expenditure of the scheme would be in the ratio  50:10:40 between Central 
Government, State Government and the beneficiary. T hough, the scheme was to be 
implemented in the State from the year 2010-11, wor k orders were issued for 
installation of drip irrigation system in the orchards of 254 beneficiaries under Deputy 
Director of Horticulture (DDH), West Tripura in March 2014. 
Records related to NMMI scheme under DDH, West Trip ura revealed that the office 
had received funds amounting to ₹ 428.25 lakh as Central Share, State Share from the  
State Government in instalments during the period f rom 2010-11 to 2014-15. Out of 
254 beneficiaries (314.62 hectares) for which work orders were issued, works 
pertaining to only 62 beneficiaries (102.02 hectare s) were completed with an 
expenditure of ₹ 52.22 lakh. Interest amounting to ₹ 88.27 lakh was accrued (upto 
February 2021) on the un-utilised fund of ₹ 374.54 lakh. Implementation of the 
scheme was stopped and no expenditure was incurred after January 2018. NMMI 
Scheme fund amounting to ₹ 462.81 lakh along with interest was lying idle in the 
bank as on February 2021.  
The Government stated (January 2022) that delay/ no n-implementation of NMMI 
scheme fund in the State was mainly due to reluctan ce by the beneficiaries to 
contribute high rate of beneficiaries’ share which was nearly 50 per cent  as per the 
schematic norms. Presently, a number of schemes wer e available where farmers’ 
share had come down between 12 per cent and 15 per cent . It was also stated that, 
Department was in contact and seeking approval from  the Government for diversion 
of NMMI scheme into useful devices/implements for i rrigation like pump sets/solar 
pumps. 
The Government should return the unutilised fund to  Government of India or to take 
approval to use the fund for implementation of other scheme.  

Chapter III: Economic Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 43 
3.2.8 Programme implementation 
 
3.2.8.1 Non-availability of farmers’ database 
Audit noticed that farmers’ database with their name, address, name of the village and 
land holding, class of land viz. Khas land, Allotted land, Jote land, etc.  falling under 
the jurisdiction of the offices were not maintained  by the Department. As such, 
assistance made under different horticulture scheme s to the eligible farmers on the 
basis of the land area of the respective crops rema ined un-verified.  The beneficiaries 
were selected on the basis of the recommendation of  the Panchayati Raj Institutions 
(PRIs).  
The Government accepted the fact and stated (Januar y 2022) that beneficiary 
management system (BMS) had been introduced for all  major schemes like MIDH 
only from 2020-21 onwards where the legacy data of the beneficiaries like name, 
address, AADHAR number, ration card number, area an d schematic assistance were 
uploaded in the Government portal from the base yea r 2018-19. Presently the 
uploading of beneficiary legacy data was under process.  
3.2.8.2 Infrastructure development 
 
3.2.8.2 (i) Establishment of Nurseries 
Para 7.5 of the MIDH guidelines stipulates that pro duction and distribution of good 
quality seeds and planting material will receive to p priority. States will have a 
network of nurseries for producing planting materia l, which was established through 
Central or State assistance. To meet the requiremen t of planting material (for bringing 
additional area under improved varieties of horticu ltural crops and for rejuvenation 
programme for old/ senile plantations), assistance will be provided for setting up of 
new hi-tech nurseries and small nurseries under the  public as well as private sectors. 
Assistance to be given for public sector was 100 per cent and 50 per cent for 
private sector. SHM was required to assess the area -wise requirement of planting 
materials taking into account the availability, add itional requirement in view of 
area expansion, rejuvenation, etc.  and sanction new nurseries.  
As per the target and achievement report of MIDH du ring 2015-16 to 2019-20, the 
Department established eight small nurseries and si x high-tech nurseries in the public 
sector. Though the Department established eight nur series during 2018-19 and 
2019-20 at the cost of ₹ 1.20 crore (@ ₹ 15 lakh per nursery), Audit noticed that 
major supply of seedling and plants were made by pr ivate nurseries as discussed in 
Paragraph 3.2.8.2(ii) . Physical verification of the plants and seedlings  supplied by 
the private nurseries revealed that specifications 30  of the plants and seedlings were not 
complied with by the private nurseries and distribu ted to the beneficiaries. 
Photographs 3.2.1 and  3.2.2 will substantiate the audit observation. 
                                                 
30  Minimum 90 cm height, age-12 to 18 months having m ore than five good leaves or branches with 
live shoots 

Chapter III: Economic Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 44 
  
Photograph 3.2.1 Photograph 3.2.2 
Photographs 3.2.1 and 3.2.2: Seedlings and plants of same species of plants in different size 
supplied by private nurseries kept in the Bhagabann agar Sub-Seed Store under Unakoti 
District for distribution to the beneficiaries  
The Government stated (January 2022) that only eigh t nurseries had been assisted 
under MIDH programme and additional six high tech n urseries were shown wrongly 
in the target and achievement report. The Governmen t stated that the production level 
of these orchards had been raised significantly but  their impact could not be 
ascertained due to non-maintenance of proper records by the orchard in charge.  
However, no reply was furnished regarding non-adher ence to the specifications of 
plants and seedlings by the private nurseries while  supplying to the Horticulture 
Offices (March 2022). 
3.2.8.2 (ii) Status of private nurseries in the Sta te 
Tripura Horticultural Nurseries (Regulation) Act, 2 013, which came into force in 
October 2013, stipulates that the owner of every ho rticultural nursery and every 
person carrying on business or sale of horticultura l plants should obtain license under 
the Act and follow the rules and regulations formulated therein.  
There were 87 private nurseries in the State during  the audit period. It was noticed 
that the Superintendent of Horticulture and Superin tendent of Agriculture (SH and 
SA) offices in the sampled districts purchased seed lings/ plantlets for ₹ 2.84 crore 
during the audit period from the private nurseries while seedlings/ plantlets valuing 
₹ 7.07 lakh were purchased from Government orchards during 2015-20. The details of 
seeds and seedlings/plantlets purchased from privat e firms and government nursery is 
given in Appendix 3.2.12 . 
Verification of eight 31  private licensed nurseries in the sampled district s revealed that 
none of the nursery followed the prescribed stipula tions regarding maintenance of 
source records of root stock and scion used for pro pagation, plant protection 
operation, number of plants raised and sold, perfor mance of the crop, sale records, 
cash memos, inspection of the nursery by the Licens ing Authority, etc . as per the 
                                                 
31  SA Salema-Prantar SHG; SH-Kumarghat-Parwine Nurser y; SA Hezamara-Mailuma Nursery and 
Radha Madhab Nursery, SA Jirania-Chakraborty Nurser y & Biotech, SA Mohanpur- Baba Agro, 
Sriza Small Nursery and New Green Park Nursery. 


Chapter III: Economic Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 45 
licensing conditions. The officials of the Departme nt did not adequately inspect the 
nurseries to either enforce the licensing condition s or to cancel the license. Thus, 
availability of quality plants and seedlings by the  licensed private nurseries in the 
State were not ensured. 
No reply was received from the Government (March 2022). 
3.2.8.2 (iii) Seed infrastructure in the State 
Tripura is not suited for quality vegetable seed pr oduction due to prevalence of high 
humidity and high acidic nature of the soil. Thus, the State has no seed production 
infrastructure and no target for production of seed s was kept in the AAP of MIDH 
during 2015-16 to 2019-20. The seeds were mostly pr ocured from private seed firms 
on the basis of the approved seed list by the Depar tment which was prepared on the 
basis of seed trial for adaptability, production an d productivity of the seeds by the 
State Horticulture Research Complex, Agartala. A nu mber of deficiencies were 
noticed in the seed trial process in audit, particu larly with regard to, identity of seed 
producing firm which should have been kept a secret  for an independent and fair trial. 
However, at the instance of audit the procedure was  modified and sealed cover 
procedure was adopted. 
It was noticed that firms supplied seeds to the Dep artment without mentioning the 
batch number, packaging date and the best before da te, as required under the terms 
and conditions of the supply order.  The Department  accepted the supply in violation 
of the conditions of the supply order and distribut ed such seeds among the farmers in 
the State. It was noticed that seeds valuing 
₹ 9.02 crore were purchased from private 
nurseries while seeds valuing ₹ 7.60 lakh were purchased from Government orchards 
during 2015-20 by the SA and SH offices in the sampled districts (Appendix 3.2.12) .  
The sampled units released full amount of the suppl iers’ bill without retaining 
20 per cent as reserve till receipt of performance report from field and germination 
report from the Seed Testing Laboratory. Thus, dist ribution of seeds to the farmers 
with good germination status and performance parameter was not ensured in audit. 
The Government while accepting the facts, stated th at in future complete information 
regarding the batch number, manufacturing/ packagin g date and the expiry date of 
seeds as mentioned in the supply order would be properly recorded.  
3.2.8.2 (iv) Status of Government orchards  
There are 47 orchards (Appendix 3.2.13)  under the administrative control of the 
Directorate of H & SC, Government of Tripura. These  orchards were developed for 
demonstration of new technologies and introduction of new crops/ varieties to the 
farmers for improvement in production and productiv ity. The State Government has 
decided (April 2020) to constitute ‘Tripura Farms &  Orchards Research and 
Demonstration Society’ with six large Agricultural Firms and nine Orchards declaring 
them as of ‘State importance’ for efficient farm ma nagement and improvement of 
effectiveness in the field.  

Chapter III: Economic Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 46 
Audit noticed that except for the Mushroom Spawn Pr oduction and True Potato Seeds 
(TPS) Production Units under Horticulture Research Complex (HRC), Nagicheera 
which was the biggest State level Research Complex,  no other production units could 
achieve the annual production target during 2015-16  to 2019-20. The reasons for 
non-achievement of the target were attributed by th e Department to non-availbility of 
adequate number of mother plants, lack of pure gene tic materials for initiation and 
multiplication, old plantation and high rate of mor tality.  The basis for fixing the 
annual target was also not available on record. Sho rtfall in achievement is given in 
Table 3.2.5. 
Table 3.2.5: Non-achievement of targets by the Horticulture Research Centre, 
Nagicheera 
(in numbers) 
Sl. 
No. Name of the Unit  Name of the Crop Target for 
Production  Achievement  Shortfall 
(in per cent ) 
1. Tissue Culture 
Unit Banana Sucker 94,500 6,258 93 
2. Tissue Culture 
Unit TPS Parental Lines 1,65,000 95,394 42 
3. Cashew Nut Unit Cashew Nut Plantlets 45,000 13,9 40 69 
4. Spices Unit Spices Plantlets and Rhizomes  25,000 17,200 31 
Source : Information furnished by the HRC, Nagicheera. 
It can be seen from Table 3.2.5  that Government orchard could not provide the 
desired outputs in providing seedlings and plantlet s to the farmers in the State for 
horticulture development and promotion.  
Verification of the records of sampled selected orc hard 
32  records revealed that there 
were 1.92 lakh 33  damaged or over-aged seedlings which could not be utilised for 
plantation works. Detail position is given in Appendix 3.2.14 . 
The Government while accepting the facts, stated (J anuary 2022) that necessary steps 
had been undertaken to gear up the production and u tilisation of planting material in 
Government orchards. Regarding damaged or over-aged  seedling, the Government 
stated that lack of fencing and source of irrigatio n, lack of infrastructure, less strength 
of labourer, etc . had contributed to such damages of the said plant ing materials. From 
the replies it appears that the Department failed t o take adequate measures to prevent 
seedling from damage in selected Government orchards.  
3.2.8.3 Establishment of new gardens and plantation s 
 
3.2.8.3 (i) Target and achievement at the State lev el under MIDH Scheme 
Para 7.18 of the MIDH guidelines envisages coverage  of area under improved 
varieties of horticultural crops. Area expansion wi ll be done in conjunction with 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS) 
under which cost on labour component of work such as digging, fencing, etc.  could be 
                                                 
32  Gurupada Government orchard, Balaram Government Or chard, Tarabancheera Government 
Orchard, Karamcheera Government Orchard. 
33  1,91,897 

Chapter III: Economic Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 47 
met with. Cost of raising new plantations varies from crop to crop which will be taken 
into consideration while providing assistance to th e beneficiary. Assistance for 
creation of new plantations under the MIDH was prov ided to the beneficiaries for 
creation of new gardens under the components of fru its, vegetables, setting up of 
mushroom spawn units, flowers, spices, etc.  subject to the cost limits under the 
Scheme. The beneficiaries were selected by PRIs.  
Audit noticed that the State could not achieve the target for creation of new 
plantations under the components of fruits, vegetab les, flowers, spices, costal 
plantations, setting up of mushroom spawn units, etc.  during 2015-20 and the shortfall 
ranged from 29 per cent  to 100 per cent.   
The detail position of target and achievement for c reation of new plantations in the 
State and maintenance/ rejuvenation of old and seni le plantations during 2015-16 to 
2019-20 in the State is given in Table 3.2.6. 
Table 3.2.6: State level target and achievement for creation, maintenance and 
rejuvenation of new gardens under MIDH during 2015-16 to 2019-20  
Sl. 
No.  Name of item  Unit 
2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 Shortfall 
of 2015-16 
to 2019-20 
(per cent ) T A T A T A T A T A 
Creation of New Plantation under MIDH scheme during 2015-16 to 2019-20 
1. Fruit Ha 1595  534 0 0 788 524 815 460 252  212  1720 (50)  
2. Vegetables Ha 3751  1791  2000  2000  1560  1060  2270  2035  5057  3557  4195 (29)  
3. Mushroom No. 4 1 1 1 0 0 3 0 16 10 12 
(50) 
4. Flowers Ha 289 64 107 107 179 139 148 105 288  268  328 
(33) 
5. Spices Ha 360 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 564  244  680 
(74) 
6. Costal 
Horticulture 
34  Ha 0 0 0 0 0 0 1004  4 0 0 1000 
(100) 
Maintenance of plantation under MIDH scheme during 2015-16 to 2019-20 
7. Fruit Ha 977 0 0  0 0 0 1000  500 261 191  1547 
(69) 
8. Costal 
Horticulture Ha 0  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1000 
 400  600 
(60) 
T-Target and A-Achievement 
Source:  State level target and achievement report 
Note:  The data include the achievement with the spill over funds too in respect of annual targets 
As regards the utilisation of funds, the Department  could not utilise 42 per cent  of the 
available funds on establishment of new gardens. Analysis of reasons for shortfall was 
not done by the Department. 
The situation in the three selected districts mirro red the above position and the 
shortfall ranged from 20 per cent  to 100 per cent .  
The Government stated (January 2022) that during 20 15-16, the shortage in Area 
Expansion Programme under MIDH was due to simultane ous implementation of 
                                                 
34  Cashew Nut is included under Costal Horticulture 

Chapter III: Economic Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 48 
programme under MGNREGS where the entire cost of cu ltivation was covered and 
farmers were benefited more. The Government attribu ted the shortfall in achievement 
against physical target to non-receipt of 2 nd  instalment during 2017-18 and 2018-19.  
The reply is not acceptable as the Department faile d to submit Utilisation Certificates 
for previous year and submit proposals on time whic h led to non-receipt of 2 nd  
instalment of funds for the year 2017-18 and 2018-19. 
3.2.8.4 Status of horticulture mechanisation in the  State 
Para 7.43 of the MIDH guidelines provides for horti culture mechanisation which is 
aimed to improve farm efficiency and reduce drudgery of farm work force. Assistance 
in horticulture mechanisation is for activities suc h as procurement of power operated 
machines & tools, besides import of new machines an d is available to grower 
associations, farmer groups, self help groups, wome n farmer groups having at least 
10 members, who are engaged in cultivation of horticultural crops.  
In Tripura, the component ‘Horticulture Mechanisation’ under the MIDH, was mainly 
implemented by distribution of power tillers (8 bhp 35  and above) to the selected 
beneficiaries at the subsidised rate. A subsidy of ₹ 0.75 lakh per beneficiary was 
provided from the MIDH while balance amount for pro curement of power tiller was 
borne by the beneficiary. Beneficiaries were selected by the PRIs. 
State level target and achievement as well the stat us for the sampled districts in 
distribution of power tillers are given in Table 3.2.7. 
Table 3.2.7: The target and achievement for distribution of power tillers during 2015-16 
to 2019-20 
Name of the Unit  
Target and Achievement 
Target Achievement (Shortfall in per cent ) 
Physical (in Nos.) Financial 
(₹ in lakh)  Physical (in Nos.) Financial 
(₹ in lakh) 
State 5901  4425.75 4701 (20)  3525.75 (20) 
West Tripura 871  653.25 722 (17)  534.75 (18) 
Dhalai 342  132.75 151 (56)  74.25 (44) 
Unakoti 437  264 154 (65)  18 (93) 
Source:  Target and achievement report submitted by the State and the sampled district offices  
It can be seen from Table 3.2.7  that 20 per cent  of the targeted distribution of power 
tillers could not be achieved by the State during 2 015-16 to 2019-20 while the 
shortfall in the sampled districts varied between 1 7 per cent and  65  per cent, with the 
major non-achiever being the Unakoti District. Fina ncial achievement in Unakoti 
District was only seven per cent  in comparison to the Physical achievement of 
35 per cent  which indicates that either achievement was exagge rated or payment of 
subsidy to the Power Tiller firms was not released.  
Scrutiny of the records of the units at the sampled districts revealed that: 
                                                 
35  bhp- brake horse power 

Chapter III: Economic Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 49 
i.  Land records of the beneficiaries were not obtained  by the offices before 
distribution of Government subsidised power tiller.  Physical verification of the 
power tillers distributed to the beneficiaries was not done by the offices at 
regular interval.  
ii.  Record indicating in details about the beneficiary,  model name and brand name 
of the power tiller, date of sanction of power till er and payment of the subsidy, 
engine number and chassis number of the power tille r was not maintained by 
any of the sampled offices. 
iii.  DDH, Dhalai made payment to Private Firms 36  for an amount of ₹ 2.15 crore as 
Government Subsidy component for purchase of Power Tillers by the farmers 
during 2015-20. However, DDH, Dhalai could produce the vouchers for 
₹ 1.73 crore and vouchers for balance amount of ₹ 42.00 lakh was not produced 
to Audit.  Scrutiny of vouchers revealed a number o f irregularities viz,  payment 
of subsidy bills without the copies of delivery cha llan, payment of bills on the 
photocopy of delivery challans, non-matching of eng ine number and chassis 
number with the bill copy and challan copy, etc.  Detail position is given in the 
Appendix 3.2.15 . 
The Government stated (January 2022) that the reaso ns for less physical and financial 
achievements not been commensurate with physical ac hievement under Unakoti 
District would be investigated and the factual repo rt would be submitted. Regarding 
distribution of power tillers, Government assured that land records of the beneficiaries 
are to be ensured at the time of submission of appl ication.  However, the Government 
has not furnished reply for non-production of vouch ers for payment of subsidy of 
₹ 42 lakh for purchase of power tillers by the Deputy  Director of Horticulture, Dhalai 
District. Moreover, irregularities noticed during s crutiny of vouchers were also not 
addressed (March 2022). 
3.2.8.5 Creation of water harvesting structure 
According to para 7.23 of the MIDH guidelines, assi stance will be provided for 
creating water sources through construction of comm unity tanks, farm 
ponds/reservoirs with plastic/ RCC lining to ensure  life saving irrigation to 
horticulture crops. Further, para 7.24 of the MIDH guidelines  provides that assistance 
will also be provided for creating water source thr ough construction of farm ponds/ 
tube wells/ dug wells for individuals. Maintenance of the asset will be the 
responsibility of the beneficiaries. 
The physical and financial target for creation of water resources in the State as well as 
in the sampled districts are given in Tables 3.2.8. 
                                                 
36  M/s Balaji Enterprise, M/s Dutta Machinery Stores,  M/s J-Deep Chemicals & Fertilizer, 
M/s Krishi Shilpa Udyog, Agartala, M/s Tapas Chakra borty, Bengal Tools Ltd, Agt, M/s MB 
Agriculture & Machinery and Shri Nikunja Debnath 

Chapter III: Economic Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 50 
Table 3.2.8: The physical target and achievement for creation of water sources during 
2015-16 to 2019-20 in the State and selected districts 
(in numbers) 
Name of the Unit 
Target and Achievement 
Target Achievement 
(Shortfall in per cent )  
Physical 
(in Nos. ) 
Financial 
(₹ in lakh ) 
Physical 
(in Nos. ) 
Financial 
(₹ in lakh ) 
State 250  225 141 (44)  127 (56) 
West Tripura 40  36 15 (63)  14 (38) 
Dhalai 20  18 10 (50)  9 (50) 
Unakoti 20  18 11 (45)  10 (56) 
Source:  Target and achievement report submitted by the State and the selected district offices 
It can be seen from Table 3.2.8 that 44 per cent  of the targeted works could not be 
achieved by the State during the audit period. As r egards the performance of the 
sampled districts, shortfall ranged between 45  per cent  to 63 per cent .  
The Government stated (January 2022) that during 20 16-19, no target for creation of 
Water Harvesting Structure (WHS) was fixed for hort iculture purposes by 
Government of India. In 2015-16, though target was fixed for 235 WHS but no funds 
were placed, thus target could not be achieved. It was also stated that the target fixed 
for 2019-20 was achieved during 2019-20 and 2020-21. 
The reply is not acceptable as the State Government  had sufficient funds for creation 
of water sources during 2015-20. 
3.2.8.5 Non- execution of community tanks at sample d districts 
The Superintendent of Horticulture (SH), Manu place d funds amounting to ₹ 6.30 
lakh in December 2015 to the Executive Engineer (EE ) (Agriculture), Dharmanagar, 
North Tripura for excavation of seven community tan ks with the instruction to submit 
Utilisation Certificates (UCs) at an early date. It was, however, noticed (August 2021) 
that Executive Engineer did not submit UCs in this regard to SH, Manu. No record 
regarding completion of work was available with the  SH, Manu though five years and 
seven months had elapsed from the date of placement of funds. 
It was further noticed that office of the DDH, Dhalai placed ₹ 76.75 lakh 37  to the (EE) 
(Agriculture), Dharmanagar, North Tripura and DDH, West placed ₹ 75.00 lakh 38  to 
EE (Agriculture), West District for construction of  seven water sources through 
construction of community tanks, farm ponds/ reserv oirs with plastic/ RCC lining to 
ensure irrigation to horticulture crops at differen t places but no work status report, 
completion report, utilisation certificate/ adjustment was found in records and without 
these documents construction of community tanks could not be ensured by Audit. 
                                                 
37  ₹ 25 lakh vide Cheque No. 111792 dt. 30.12.2015, ₹ 34.50 lakh vide Cheque No. 364479 
dt. 31.12.2015 and ₹ 17.25 lakh vide Cheque No. 426810 dt. 14.11.2019 
38  ₹ 50.00 lakh in December 2015 and  ₹ 25 lakh in October 2018 

Chapter III: Economic Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 51 
During beneficiary survey in the Mainama Village Co uncil 39  under SH, Manu, it was 
stated by all 10 beneficiaries that they faced a lo t of hardship in growing up of plants 
due to scarcity of water and had to depend on rain water only. Beneficiaries also 
stated that many seedlings received from the Depart ment had died due to scarcity of 
water. 
Thus, it was observed that community tanks were not  constructed on time and the 
ensuing benefits, to generate more resources for th eir livelihood, could not be availed 
by the communities. 
No reply has been furnished by the Government (March 2022).  
3.2.8.6 Observation on promotion of Integrated Nutr ient Management 
(INM) and  Integrated Pest Management (IPM)  
With a view to discourage indiscriminate use of nut rients and pesticides by 
farmers, component of ‘promotion of INM and IPM’ wa s implemented  through 
technology dissemination. Assistance was also given  for developing of 
vermin-compost facilities. 
Audit noticed that only 55 per cent  of the targeted area could be achieved by the Stat e 
during 2015-16 to 2019-20. 
The situation in the sampled districts was very gri m, no work was carried in the 
sampled districts and the achievement was ‘Nil’ tho ugh targets of covering of 100 ha, 
550 ha and 375 ha was fixed in the districts of Wes t Tripura, Dhalai and Unakoti 
Districts, respectively during 2015-16 to 2019-20. 
No analysis of shortfall was done either at the State or the district level.  
The Government stated (January 2022) that the targe t for 2019-20 could not be 
achieved due to release of funds at the fag end of the financial year by the GoI.  
3.2.8.7 Creation of plantations under MGNREGA Schem e 
Chapter 7 of the Operational Guidelines of the MGNR EGA, 2013 provides a list of 
permissible works, the work drought proofing including afforestation and tree 
plantation is a permissible work under the list. Th e guidelines further stipulate that 
priority of work shall be determined by each Gram P anchayat. The Project 
Implementing Agencies (PIA) can be line departments  of the Central or State 
Governments. For implementation of horticultural pr ogrammes under the 
MGNREGS, administrative approval and work sanction are done by the District 
Programme Coordinator 40  and works are executed by respective Superintenden t of 
Horticultures (SH) and Superintendent of Agriculture (SA) in the districts. At the time 
of sanction of work, funds allocation are communica ted to the SAs/ SHs and 
payments are made by the SAs/ SHs using Fund Transfer Order (FTO). 
Detail position of targets and achievement under MGNREGS works in the State under 
the horticulture component during 2015-16 to 2019-20 are given in Table 3.2.9. 
                                                 
39  The village and the beneficiaries were selected on  random basis. 
40  District Magistrate and Collector of the District  

Chapter III: Economic Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 52 
Table 3.2.9: State level physical and financial achievements under MG-NREGA 
Sl. 
No 
Financial 
Year 
Physical 
Target 
(Ha) 
Physical 
Achieve-
ment (Ha)  
Shortfall 
(in Ha) 
(per cent ) 
Financial 
Target 
(₹    in lakh) 
Financial 
Achieve-
ment 
(₹ in lakh) 
Shortfall  
(₹ in lakh) 
(per cent ) 
1. 2015-16 NA * 41  NA 3929  1723  2206 (56)  
2. 2016-17 2696 2424 272 (10) 4214  1234  2980 (71)  
3. 2017-18 588 395 193 (33) 4214  2007  2207 (52)  
4. 2018-19 2166 1474 692 (32) 2480  808  1672 (67)  
5. 2019-20 1763 1311 452 (26) 6067  1114  4953 (82)  
Total 42  7213 5604 1609 (22)  20904  6886  14018 (67)  
Source:  Data provided by the Directorate of H&SC, Government of Tripura 
NA-Not available  
The Physical and Financial targets were not achieve d. While the shortfall in Physical 
achievement ranged from 10 per cent to 33 per cent during 2016-17 to 2019-20, the 
Financial achievement fell short by 52 per cent  to 82 per cent  during 2015-20. 
Audit noticed that none of the sampled implementing  units maintained any Project 
Register recording in details of the works so under taken, date of sanction, date of 
commencement, date of completion, area coverage, etc.  Thus, target and achievement 
at the SA/ SH level remained un-verified in audit. 
Audit further noticed that none of the sampled unit s recorded the MGNREGS 
expenditure in Cash Book of the office in violation  of the Rule 77(ii) of the Central 
Treasury Rules (CTR) which provides that all moneta ry transactions should be 
entered in the Cash Book as soon as they occur and attested by the Head of Office in 
token of check.  
Test check of the completed works ( Photographs  3.2.3 and  3.2.4 downloaded from 
the MGNREGS Website as specimen photographs) reveal ed that no plantation was 
visible against two arecanut plantation works under taken in the Unakoti Village 
Council during 2018-19 at the cost of 
₹ 1.29 lakh each. Similar status of mango 
plantation work undertaken in the Bhagaban Nagar Ga on Panchayat during 2017-18 
was noticed. Thus, the Department failed to impleme nt the works under MGNREGS 
in true spirit for the benefit of the beneficiary. 
 
                                                 
41  Physical achievement was 2128 Ha but the target co uld not be submitted by the DH&SC. 
42  Only four year figures have been taken into consid eration since full data for 2015-16 was not 
available. 

Chapter III: Economic Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 53 
 
 
Photograph 3.2.3  Photograph 3.2.4 
Photographs 3.2.3 and 3.2.4 shows arecanut plantati on in the Unakoti Village under 
Unakoti District. However, no arecanut plantation is visible in both the photographs. 
The Government stated (January 2022) that in few ca ses, poor maintenance of created 
plantation under MGNREGS from 2 nd  year onwards by the farmers was the main 
constraint in horticulture plantation.  
The reply of Government was not acceptable as the p hotographs were downloaded 
from MGNREGA website which appeared to be newly created plantations only. 
3.2.8.8 Execution of works under SCA to TSS and Nat ional Bamboo Mission 
The Department received ₹ 6.07 crore and ₹ 2.50 crore from the Tribal Welfare 
Department, Government of Tripura under SCA to TSS and the Tripura Bamboo 
Mission, respectively during 2018-19 and 2019-20.  
The funds under the SCA to TSS component were place d for implementation of 
horticulture based programme for the Scheduled Trib e (ST) beneficiaries in the State 
while the funds from the Bamboo Mission were placed  for creation of High Density 
Bamboo plantations in 2019-20. 
No progress and achievement report was available wi th the Directorate of H&SC for 
both the schemes. No Register of Works was maintain ed by the field level units, as 
such implementation of these schemes at field level  also could not be assessed and 
verified. 
Audit physically verified (August 2021) three Gover nment Orchards at Durgacherra, 
Karamcherra and Balaram. Verification of Durgacherr a and Karamcherra 
43  Orchards 
revealed that both the orchards were stated to have  raised bamboo plantations with 
12,000 bamboo seedlings, at the cost of ₹ 12.98 lakh during 2019-20 and 2020-21. 
However, no bamboo plantation was found during phys ical verification 
(August 2021) at Karamcherra Orchard while in Durga cherra Orchard, it was noticed 
that only few bamboo plants were available and thos e were covered by dense bushes 
and other plants. The In-charge of the Karamcherra Orchard stated (August 2021) that 
the plants were destroyed by cattle. In Balaram Orc hard, out of 2,500 bamboo 
seedlings which were raised at the cost of ₹ 2.09 lakh, only six seedlings were found 
                                                 
43  Durgacherra Tribal Colony Orchard and Karamcherra Tribal Colony Orchard 


Chapter III: Economic Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 54 
during physical verification (February 2021). An ex penditure of ₹ one lakh was 
incurred for procurement of plantation guard but de spite incurring expenditure, the 
bamboo seedlings were destroyed. 
Audit observations have been substantiated with Photographs 3.2.5 and 3.2.6. 
Photograph 3.2.5: Karamcherra Orchard Photograph 3. 2.6: Durgacherra Orchard 
The reasons for non-availability/ less availability  of bamboo plantations in the 
Karamcherra, Balaram and Durgacherra Orchards during physical verification in audit 
were not stated (January 2022) by the Government (March 2022).  
3.2.8.9 Programme execution under National Bee Boar d funds 
In order to make available the infrastructure needed for integrated development of bee 
keeping in the State of Tripura, particularly at th e farmers level, the facilities 
including availability of bee hives and other equip ment, quality queen bees, bee 
colonies, honey processing facilities, etc. a proposal for setting up of Integrated 
Beekeeping Development Centre (IBDC) was prepared ( July 2017) with the project 
cost of ₹ 2.30 crore by the College of Agriculture, Governme nt of Tripura (CAT) and 
sent to the National Bee Board, Government of India  with the objective of (i) Queen 
Bee Multiplication and Nucleus Stock Development, ( ii) Setting up of Information 
Centre, (iii) Honey Bee Disease diagnostic laborato ry, (iv) Testing of Quality Control 
of Honey and Hive Products and (v) Establishment of Bee Garden. 
The National Bee Board, Government of India release d and placed (March 2018) 
funds of ₹ 1.15 crore to the Director of H&SC in 2017-18. The  funds were placed 
with the implementing agencies 44  by the Directorate in September 2018 with the delay 
of nearly five months.  
Audit noticed that, a large chunk of funds 
45  remained unutilised with the Directorate 
of H&SC while no expenditure was made by the Tripura Khadi and Village Industries 
Board (TKVIB) till the end of March 2020. The expenditure (upto September 2021) at 
the CAT stood at ₹ 60.94 lakh with the balance fund of ₹ 20.06 lakh. Thus, due to 
delay utilisation of funds the project objectives were frustrated.  
                                                 
44  ₹ 81.00 lakh to the College of Agriculture, Tripura (CAT), ₹ 15.00 lakh to the Tripura Khadi and 
Village Industries Board (TKVIB) and ₹ 19.00 lakh to the Director of H&SC, Government of 
Tripura 
45  ₹ 15.73 lakh out of ₹ 19.00 lakh 


Chapter III: Economic Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 55 
The Government stated that slow progress of work and under-utilisation of funds were 
mainly attributed to Covid-19 pandemic situation by  the CAT. Non-utilisation of the 
first instalment of funds also led to non-release o f second instalment by the National 
Bee Board. 
The reason attributed by the CAT is not acceptable as the funds were placed with the 
unit in September 2018 which is 18 months before the Covid-19 lockdown. 
No specific reply was received from the Government 
 (March 2022).  
3.2.8.10 Programme execution with the spill over fu nds of Technology Mission 
(TM) and HMNEH 
Objective of Technology Mission (TM) launched by th e Government of India in 1987 
inter alia  includes oil seed production and drinking water fa cility while HMNEH is a 
part of MIDH scheme which was implemented for overa ll development of 
horticulture in NE and Himalayan States. After laun ch of MIDH in 2014-15, no funds 
under TM were released by Government of India. 
Audit noticed that the Department had spill over fu nds of 
₹ 35.39 crore under TM 
during 2015-20. The major activities undertaken wit h the funds include 
(i) commercial floriculture in the State, (ii) sett ing up of Cold Storage, (iii) initiative 
for organic farming in the State and (iv) setting u p of Centre of Excellence at 
Horticulture Research Centre at Nagicherra, Agartal a. Apart from these, regular 
plantation activities were also undertaken from the se two schemes but no target and 
achievement report was prepared by the Directorate and also could not be made 
available to Audit.  
The Government stated (January 2022) that the unspe nt balance funds had been 
utilised under various beneficiary oriented program mes. Without divulging the 
details, it was stated that the compiled report on progress of various plantation 
activities undertaken with HMNEH fund with effect f rom 2015-16 was maintained at 
the State level.  
Reply of the Government was not acceptable as at th e end of 2019-20, the spill over 
funds of TM stood 
₹ 10.79 crore which should have been refunded.  
3.2.8.11 Implementation of commercial floriculture project 
Considering the huge demand for assistance under ex otic flower component, the 
Department, with the approval of the State Supply A dvisory Board (SAB) 46 , had 
undertaken execution of exotic flower under the com ponent of Commercial 
Floriculture in protected poly/ shade net structure mode, during 2016-17 at the project 
cost of ₹ 14.17 47  crore.  Anthurium (114 units), Orchid (111 units) and Gerbera (102 
units) plants were selected by the Department for i mplementation in the field of the 
selected beneficiaries with the 100 per cent  assistance from the Government. The 
                                                 
46  SAB is the highest body in the State to consider a nd approve the purchase proposals made by the 
Government Departments in the State. 
47  122 units of Anthurium: ₹ 5.19 crore, 25 units of Orchid: ₹ 1.04 crore and 180 units of  Gerbera: 
₹ 7.94 crore.  

Chapter III: Economic Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 56 
projects were implemented by engaging firms 48  which dealt with such type of works 
and selection was done through invitation of tender . The projects were centrally 
implemented by the Directorate of H&SC, Tripura. 
Verification of the records relating to execution of the works revealed that: 
The Directorate did not maintain any Project Regist er containing the detail 
information of all the projects, with the name of t he beneficiary, date of selection, 
progress of work at different stages with the date of commencement and date of 
completion and release of payments to the executing firms. 
Each project work was to be executed in Turn-key Mo de by the selected firm and to 
be handed over to the selected beneficiary. However , copy of the work order, which 
contained the details of works to be done by the fi rm and supplies to be made or 
successful completion of each project, were not sha red with the beneficiaries which 
was required as per terms and conditions of the con tract with the firms. As a result, 
the beneficiaries were not aware of the project details and the projects were taken over 
by them without knowing the full details of the pro ject. No formal selection letter was 
also issued by the Department in favour of the selected beneficiaries. 
The firms were paid interest free advance of 
₹ 4.25 crore as 30 per cent  of the total 
project cost as per the terms and conditions of the  agreement. Agreements were 
signed with the respective firms in September 2016 and in May 2017 and the projects 
were supposed to be completed within nine months fr om the date of agreement. 
However, 11 projects remained incomplete despite an  expenditure of ₹ 11.19 crore 
(December 2020). Project wise completion details we re not available with the 
Department and could not be verified in audit. 
Total 37 projects in the field of beneficiaries wer e selected on random basis and 
verified in audit (August/ September 2021). On verification, it is noticed that in 14 out 
of 37 projects, most of the seedlings were damaged,  beneficiaries could not be traced 
out, marketing infrastructure were not available, etc . Details are given in 
Appendix 3.2.16.  
Government stated (January 2022) that the project r egister would be maintained 
henceforth and copy of the work order and the items  of the projects would be made 
available to the beneficiaries. It was also stated that the respective firms had executed 
handing-over memos with the beneficiaries, thus the y were aware of the project 
details. 
 The Government further stated that implementing pro cess of 327 units could 
not be completed in time due to repeated changes in  the list of beneficiaries from the 
field level, rejection of beneficiaries due to tech nical problems, etc . Regarding 
non-utilisation of floriculture projects by the beneficiaries, the Government stated that 
the average life span of these projects is three ye ars and most of the projects had 
already crossed their economic life span. As a resu lt, instances of non-utilisation of 
floriculture projects in the field were noticed. It  was also stated that the farmers 
earned good income from the projects during peak season.  
                                                 
48  Florance Flora, Bangalore (218 projects) and North  Bengal Floritech, Siliguri (109 projects) 

Chapter III: Economic Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 57 
However, the fact remains that basic aim of the pro jects to provide sustainable source 
of income to the farmers and make them self-reliant  by cultivation of exotic 
commercial floriculture remained frustrated due to non-availability of marketing 
infrastructure and the floriculture cultivation could not be sustained. 
3.2.8.12 Failure in implementation of Centre of Exc ellence for fruits at 
Horticulture Research Centre, Nagicherra 
In accordance with the approval of the Government, Directorate of H & SC had 
submitted (January 2014) an additional action plan of ₹ 19.16 crore to the Ministry of 
Horticulture, Government of India (GoI) under HMNEH  programme for the year 
2013-14. With a target to develop Citrus and Mango fruits for their good prospects in 
the State, a Centre of Excellence for Fruits (CEF) was proposed in the additional 
action plan. A stretch of land of 12 hectare (Ha) h ad also been identified (March 
2015) for this purpose in the Horticulture Research  Complex (HRC), Nagicherra. 
Ministry of Agriculture, GoI had conveyed (24 March 2014) Administrative Approval 
& Expenditure Sanction of ₹ 15.79 crore for implementation of the project. 
Mission Director, HMNEH released 49  the funds of ₹ five crore in favour of the 
Deputy Director of Horticulture, West Tripura in tw o instalments for implementation 
of CEF. However, the funds were kept un-utilised. R eason for not-taking up the work 
was not available on record. 
The Government stated (January 2022) that funds ear marked for CEF at Horticulture 
Research Complex, Nagicherra were being utilised fo r Centre of Excellence for 
vegetables at Birchandra Manu after necessary approval from the Chairman, SLEC and 
Government. Funds were being utilised for horticult ural components only, taking into 
consideration the cultivation of vegetables as a po tential tool to support livelihood 
support system of Tripura’s farmers. The project was under implementation.  
Despite the Government reply, the fact remains that the Centre of excellence for fruits 
which was conceptualised at the Horticulture Resear ch Complex, Nagicherra to 
develop Citrus and Mango fruits in the State remained unachieved.  
3.2.8.13 Failure in adoption and certification of o rganic farming 
Department of Agriculture and Farmers’ Welfare, Gov ernment of Tripura decided to 
set up organic farming of Horticulture Crops with t he estimated cost of ₹ 20.00 crore 
for 10,000 ha in the State from 2014-15. 
Accordingly, the Director of H&SC invited (July 201 4) Notice Inviting Tender (NIT) 
for adoption and certification of organic farming w ith market linkage and facilitation 
of export and domestic retail chain in fruits like pineapple, citrus, banana, etc.  and 
vegetables of Tripura at farmers’ level and related  activity with the available funds 
under the HMNEH for the same component. The Sikkim State Co-operative Supply & 
Marketing Federation Limited (SIMFED), Gangtok was selected (April 2015) for 
execution of the work at an estimated cost of 
₹ one crore and a Work Order was 
issued (15 March 2016) in favour of SIMFED. SIMFED was allotted 500 ha area in 
                                                 
49  In March and April 2014 

Chapter III: Economic Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 58 
Hezamara Block of West Tripura District and Nalchar  Block of Sepahijala District 
covering 250 ha area each for adoption of organic f arming of fruits, vegetables and 
spices in Tripura, at the rate of ₹ 9,555 per hectare. According to the terms of the 
MoU, the SIMFED was paid ₹ 19.11 lakh being 1 st  instalment in September 2017 on 
completion of 1 st  phase i.e.  selection of beneficiaries, etc . SIMFED had submitted 
monthly progress reports up to June 2017 and therea fter no progress reports were 
submitted till date (August 2021). As a result, in absence of progress reports and other 
records, status of the project could not be ascertained. 
The Government accepted the fact and stated (January 2022) that overlapping of areas 
was observed due to introduction of Mission Organic  Value Chain Development 
(MOVCD) scheme for organic farming of vegetables le d to an observation on 
technical infeasibility due to transfer of chemical s from the field which was not under 
organic certification process. Thus, earlier scheme was considered non-feasible.  
Thus, improper planning and lack of proper sensitis ation among the farmers about the 
benefit of organic farming led to wastage of Government money of ₹ 19.11 lakh. 
3.2.9 Impact of the Horticulture Development Scheme s in the State 
Horticulture cultivation area, production and produ ctivity in the State during 
2015-20 were shown in Table 3.2.10 . The total cropped area of the State in 
2015-16 was 1.23 lakh ha which decreased to 1.21 la kh ha in 2019-20. Nearly 77 
per cent of the cropped area was under vegetable and fruits in the State during 
2015-20.  
Table 3.2.10: Area, production and productivity of selected crops in the State 
Name of the 
crop 
Status in 2015-16 Status in 2019-20 
Area (Ha)  Production 
(MT) 
Productivity 
(MT/Ha) 
Area (Ha)  Production 
(MT) 
Productivity 
(MT/Ha) 
Vegetable  39201  683837  17.44  39119  688268  17.59  
Fruits 55570  552768  9.95  54160  543774  10.04  
Nuts 12708  35183  2.77  12468  37545  3.01  
Spices 8105  44915  5.54  7363  42792  5.81  
Potato 7684  138512  18.03  8050  145866  18.12  
Total 123268  1455215   121160  1458245   
Source:  Records of Directorate of H&SC and SHM 
The areas under cultivation declined marginally in 2019-20 as compared to 2015-
16 whereas there was marginal increase in the produ ctivity during 2019-20 as 
compared to 2015-16.  
The situation in the State is mirrored in selected districts also as shown in 
Table 3.2.11.  
  

Chapter III: Economic Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 59 
Table 3.2.11: Areas under cultivation in the three sampled districts 
(in Ha) 
Name of the 
crop 
West Tripura Dhalai Unakoti Total 
2015-16  2019-20 2015-16  2019-20 2015-16  2019-20  2015-16 2019-20  
Vegetable  5849  5769  4835  4639  2921  2820  13605  13228  
Fruits 6598  6392  11716  11543  3452  3704  21766  21639  
Nuts 1355  1329  1898  1975  781  908  4034  4212  
Spices 980  834  1283  1184  484  454  2747  2472  
Potato 422  377  1037  996  575  1083  2034  2456  
Total 15204  14701  20769  20337  8213  8969  44186  44007  
Source : Horticulture Area Production Information System ( HAPIS) data, Ministry of Agriculture, 
Government of India 
In West Tripura and Dhalai Districts the area under  cultivation decreased while in 
Unakoti District the area under cultivation increas ed during 2019-20 as compared 
to 2015-16. 
Impact on production of horticultural crops in the sampled districts has been 
discussed in 
Table 3.2.12. 
Table 3.2.12: Total production in the three sampled districts 
(in MT) 
Name of the 
crop 
West Tripura Dhalai Unakoti Total 
2015-16  2019-20 2015-16  2019-20 2015-16  2019-20  2015-16 2019-20  
Vegetable  97940  95813  83157  78906  53659  50617  234756  225336  
Fruits 61165  59545  124497  124887  36051  38926  221713  223358  
Nuts 4041  4018  6144  6374  2361  2892  12546  13284  
Spices 5564  4943  5140  6423  3120  2873  13824  14239  
Potato 7580  6831  18666  18048  10400  19624  36646  44503  
Total  176290  171150  237604  234638  105591  114932  519485  520720  
Source : Horticulture Area Production Information System ( HAPIS) data, Ministry of Agriculture, 
Government of India 
It can be seen from Table 3.2.12  that the production decreased in the West Tripura 
and Dhalai Districts during 2019-20. At the same ti me, production increased in 
Unakoti District. 
3.2.10 Non-maintenance of source records for hortic ultural crop statistics in the 
State 
The Directorate of H&SC under the Department of Agriculture and Farmer’s Welfare, 
Government of Tripura published (August 2016) the ‘ Guiding Manual for 
Horticultural Crop Statistics for the Field Staff’.  While giving the detail procedure for 
collection and verification of data of horticultura l area in the field and the quantum of 
production, the manual impressed upon the need for reliable statistics about the area 
and production for setting realistic target for pro duction and its achievement. 
Guidelines further stipulates that it is the foremo st duty of the staff/ officers working 
in the field of Horticulture to collect reliable da ta, record it properly and analyse it 
systematically to get an authentic picture with res pect to assessing horticultural area, 
production and productivity of the State. 
In order to verify the district level Horticulture Crop Statistics data submitted by the 
DDH, West Tripura and Unakoti Districts, audit requisitioned the basic records for the 

Chapter III: Economic Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 60 
statistical data as mentioned in the guidelines. Ho wever, both the offices could not 
submit any basic records for data compilation by th e VLWs/ AAs and verification of 
the records prepared by the VLWs/ AAs at the respective level of ASO, SH and DDH. 
Thus, authenticity of the horticulture statistics data could not be verified in audit. 
The Government stated (January 2022) that basic rec ords for horticulture statistics 
data (area and production) were compiled by the vil lage level workers/ agri assistant 
at field level. However, concerned Superintendents of Horticulture/ Superintendents 
of Agriculture (SH/SA) had been instructed to keep the basic records for horticulture 
statistics data (area and production).  
3.2.11 Post-harvest management 
Post-harvest management includes packing, grading, transportation, curing, ripening 
of horticulture produce and setting up of cold stor age units. These facilities are 
essential for increasing the marketability of agric ulture products adding value to the 
produce, increasing profitability and reducing loss es. The State Horticulture Mission 
(SHM) provides subsidy of 50 per cent  of the estimated cost for post-harvest 
management activities as per the provisions under the MIDH. 
3.2.11.1 Marketing infrastructure 
The marketing programmes under the MIDH include str engthening of existing 
markets and investment from the private and co-oper ative sectors in the development 
of market infrastructure. Audit noticed that 94 per cent  of 
marketing infrastructure 
works  could not be completed in the State. Out of the ta rgeted 156 marketing 
infrastructure, only 10 works were completed. State  incurred only ₹ 1.50 lakh out of 
the earmarked funds of ₹ 7.74 crore during 2015-16 to 2019-20. Thus, it was observed 
that there was a serious mismatch between the planning and the execution at the field.  
No reply has been furnished by the Government (March 2022). 
3.2.11.2 Setting up of cold storage units and Integ rated Pack House 
 
(a) Wasteful expenditure  
Para 7.46 of the MIDH guidelines provides for setti ng up of cold storage units under 
the component of post-harvest management, which inc ludes projects relating to 
establishment of pre-cooling units @ ₹ 25.00 lakh/ unit with capacity of six MT. 
Audit noticed that the Department set up three solar power operated cold storage units 
under the public sector with the capacity of six MT  each at three districts 50  at the cost 
of ₹ 56.16 lakh 51  during 2019-20. 
Joint physical verification (September 2021) of two  cold storage units and scrutiny of 
records of the Directorate of H&SC revealed that the cold storage unit at West Tripura 
District at Horticulture Research Complex (HRC), Na gicheera commissioned in 
May 2019, functioned only for a brief period and  remained non-functional from 
                                                 
50  West Tripura, Dhalai and Gomati Districts. The Gom ati District was not in the sample, thus not 
visited in audit. 
51  At the rate of ₹ 18.72 lakh each 

Chapter III: Economic Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 61 
November 2020 i.e.  after expiry of warranty 52  period and the cold storage 53  unit at the 
Dhalai District at Bilashcheera, Kamalpur Sub Divis ion commissioned in September 
2019 was located at nearly five Km away from the nearest market with only access by 
village roads and no regular transport system, henc e it also remained non-functional. 
Thus, the entire expenditure of ₹ 37.44 lakh ( ₹ 18.72 lakh per unit) on construction of 
two cold storage units at Nagicheera and Bilashcheera was wasteful.  
The Government stated (January 2022) that the Solar  Based Cold Chamber was 
operational at Horticulture Research Centre, Nagich erra after necessary measures 
taken up by the executing firm. Government further stated that appropriate measures 
were being taken in regards to Cold Chamber at Bilashcherra.  
(b ) Integrated Pack House  
The Department initiated action for setting up of a n Integrated Pack House at the 
Horticulture Research Complex (HRC) at Nagicheera, Agartala during 2018-19. After 
completion of initial works viz. , feasibility study, preparation of Detailed Projec t 
Report (DPR), invitation of tender, selection of su itable agency, etc.  the work for 
establishment of Integrated Pack House at HRC, Nagi cheera was awarded to a firm in 
August 2020 at the tendered cost of ₹ 2.73 crore. The work was in progress 
(October 2021).  
3.2.11.3 Setting up of food processing unit 
It was seen that the Department regularly invited e xpression of interest (EoI) through 
open advertisement during 2015-16 to 2019-20 from t he interested entrepreneurs of 
the State and outside the State for setting up of f ood processing industries in the State 
utilising the horticultural produces in the State a nd by availing of the subsidy 
component under the MIDH. Audit noticed that, in re sponse of the EoI, only seven 
entrepreneurs expressed their willingness during 20 15-16 to 2019-20 and all the cases 
were considered by the Department and provided subs idy under MIDH 
(Appendix 3.2.17) for setting up of food processing units.  Audit no ticed that all the 
units were operational during the period of audit. 
3.2.12 Delay in formulation of strategy to implemen t Agriculture Export Policy 
Government of India introduced a comprehensive Agri culture Export Policy (AEP) in 
December 2018, with the following objectives: 
i.  to diversify our export basket, destinations and bo ost high value and value 
added agricultural exports, including focus on perishables; 
ii.  to promote novel, indigenous, organic, ethnic, trad itional and non-traditional 
agri products exports; 
iii.  to provide an institutional mechanism for pursuing market access, tackling 
barriers and dealing with sanitary and phyto sanitary issues; 
iv.  to strive to double India’s share in world agri-exp orts by integrating with 
global value chains; and 
                                                 
52  Commissioned in May 2019 and the warranty expired in April 2020 
53  Commissioned in September 2019 

Chapter III: Economic Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 62 
v.  enable farmers to get benefit of export opportunities in overseas market. 
The Government of India requested (December 2018) t he State to initiate action as 
envisaged in the Agri Export Policy. The State Gove rnment declared (August 2020) 
the Directorate of H&SC, as the Nodal Agency and th e Director of H&SC as the 
Nodal Officer for the State Agriculture Export Poli cy nearly after a delay of two 
years.  
Audit noticed that State Level Monitoring Committee  was constituted in December 
2020 and the strategy to implement Agriculture Expo rt Policy (AEP) in Tripura, 
approved by the State Government, was sent to the G overnment of India in August 
2021. Thus, there was inordinate delay in formulati on of Export Policy of the State. 
Reason for the delay was not found on record. Due t o delay in formulation of AEP 
creation of export oriented infrastructure viz.  creation of cold chain set-up, setting up 
of export oriented linkage through road, railway an d airway network, packaging 
establishment, capacity building of farmers through  training and exposure visits, etc . 
were delayed as were envisaged in the AEP.  
Audit further noticed that horticultural exports of  890.04 MT valued 
₹ 70.63 lakh 
during 2017-18 to 2019-20 (Appendix 3.2.18)  to Bangladesh was recorded in the 
Agri Export Policy of the State.  
The Government stated (January 2022) that draft pol icy jointly prepared by 
Directorate of H&SC and APEDA, New Delhi, had been submitted to APEDA during 
August 2021 after necessary approval from State Government.  
3.2.13 Capacity building 
As per para 7.33 of the MIDH guidelines, under the HRD programme, training of 
farmers, entrepreneurs, field level workers and off icers will be taken up. Programme 
for providing appropriate training to farmers for a doption of high yielding varieties of 
crops and farming system at State level and outside  the State. Programme for training 
of officials concerned with implementation field le vel workers who will in turn train/ 
guide farmers will also be taken up. 
SHM did not utilise the opportunities available und er the MIDH for training of 
farmers as well as for the departmental officials during 2015-16 to 2019-20.  
As against a target of 7,849 farmers and gardeners,  training was provided to 2,669 
farmers/ gardeners during 2015-20. The shortfall in  training of farmers stood at 
66 per cent, utilising 
₹ 48.29 lakh against the target of ₹ 2.32 crore. Similarly, as 
against the target of 1,380 officials to be trained  during 2015-20, SHM imparted 
training to only 480 members (35 per cent ) indicating lack of focus on training of 
staff too with ₹ 3.05 lakh was spent against the target of ₹ 47.20 lakh. 
As regards development of skills of local youths, n o information was furnished by the 
Directorate of H&SC. 
No reply was received from the Government (March 2022). 
 

Chapter III: Economic Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 63 
3.2.14 Monitoring and Evaluation 
According to paragraphs 4.8 and 4.9 of the MIDH gui delines, the State Level 
Executive Committee (SLEC) and the District Level C ommittees were to review and 
monitor the implementation of the programmes at the  State and district levels. The 
Technical Support Group (TSG) of the Mission was to  carry out concurrent 
monitoring of programmes. Further, as per the Memor andum of Association, the 
SHM should hold the General Body Meeting of all its  members at least once in every 
year and the Board of Management (BoM) of the Socie ty should meet at least once in 
a quarter.  
However, it was noticed in audit that neither the S HM at the State level nor the DHM 
at the district level maintained any consolidated r ecords viz. Meeting Register to 
arrange the agenda notes with the minutes of the meetings in chronological manner. 
As a result, exact number of meetings held at the r espective levels could not be 
ascertained. Except the first meeting of the Genera l Body after formation of the 
Society 
54 , held in November 2014, no record regarding holdin g of subsequent 
meetings was made available to audit. Similarly, no  record regarding holding of BoM 
meeting was made available to audit. 
This indicates absence of proper monitoring at the State and district levels, which 
resulted in 
non-implementation or delays in completion of proje cts and inclusion 
of non-viable schemes in successive annual plans.  
Further, the Department did not undertake an evalua tion study during 2015-20 by 
engaging an independent agency to assess the impact  of implementation of 
different horticulture programmes in the State. 
No reply was received from the Government (March 2022). 
3.2.15 Conclusion 
The Directorate of Horticulture & Soil Conservation  is implementing an umbrella of 
schemes for development of horticulture in the Stat e. Mission for Integrated 
Development of Horticulture (MIDH) was the biggest scheme among all the schemes. 
The State Horticulture Mission (SHM) and the district level Missions were constituted 
under the MIDH in 2014 and the MIDH programme has b een implemented in the 
State from 2014-15. Audit noticed that Annual Actio n Plans (AAPs) for 2015-16 to 
2019-20 were prepared without following the bottom up approach contrary to GoI 
guidelines. Audit noticed that a major supply of se edlings and plants were made from 
private nurseries. Production of quality planting m aterial was not ensured by the 
Department before distribution to the beneficiaries . The area under cultivation in 
respect of vegetables, fruits, nuts, spices and potato declined marginally in 2019-20 as 
compared to 2015-16 whereas there was a marginal in crease in production during the 
same period.  
                                                 
54  Society was registered on 7 November 2014 

Chapter III: Economic Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 64 
There was substantial shortfall in creation of Wate r Harvesting Structures, Integrated 
Nutrient Management (INM), Integrated Pest Manageme nt (IPM) activities and 
creation of marketing infrastructure. Initiatives u nder post harvest management aimed 
at reducing post harvesting losses and improving marketability of horticulture produce 
were largely ineffective as creation of cold storag e facilities were very limited and 
these were mostly non-functional. Establishment of food processing industry in the 
State was also not very impressive as only seven un its came up during 2015-20. 
Monitoring activities were inadequate and independe nt impact evaluation was not 
done by the Department. Further, despite creation o f separate wing of Horticulture 
under the Department of Agriculture and Farmers’ We lfare way back in 1985, 
full-fledged infrastructure is yet to be developed for horticulture in the State.  
3.2.16 Recommendations 
1.  State Government may consider to prepare Perspectiv e Plan and prepare 
Annual Action Plans as per the guidelines of the MI DH. 
2.  Department should take initiatives to increase prod uction of seedlings in 
government orchards and ensure availability of qual ity planting material 
from State owned orchards and private nurseries. It  should enforce the 
provisions of Tripura Horticultural Nurseries (Regu lations) Act, 2013 
strictly. 
3.  Department should ensure to increase areas under cu ltivation and 
rejuvenation of old and senile plantations in the S tate to increase 
production and productivity. 
4.  Monitoring of programme implementation may be stren gthened and 
independent evaluation study may be considered to a ssess the 
implementation of horticulture programmes in the St ate. 
  

Chapter III: Economic Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 65 
PUBLIC WORKS (Roads and Building) DEPARTMENT 
 
3.3 Unauthorised expenditure 
 
The Department unauthorisedly utilised Central Road  Fund of ₹ 2.43 crore on 
an unapproved road project in violation of Central Road Fund (State Roads) 
Rules, 2014 and also falsely reported to Government  of India about utilisation 
of Central Road Fund . 
As per Rule 7 and 8 of Central Road Fund (State Roa d Rules) 2014, the Central 
Government shall accord administrative approval of the identified individual works 
on the basis of proposal forwarded by the State Gov ernment. There shall not be any 
change in scope of work from those as per administr ative approval. The revised 
estimates shall not be considered by the Central Government.  
Ministry of Road Transport and Highway (MoRTH), Gov ernment of India (GoI) 
accorded (January 2015) administrative approval of ₹ 6.47 crore for the work 
‘Improvement and upgradation of the road from Chand rapur to Chaturdas Devata 
Temple 55  via  Baldakhal (Length=3.831 Km.)’ under Central Road Fund (CRF).  
Test check (August-September 2019) of records of th e Executive Engineer (EE), 
Jirania Division, Public Works Department (Roads an d Building) {PWD (R&B)} 
revealed that the location of the road work propose d under CRF had already been 
proposed (February 2013) under Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY). The 
road work under PMGSY was started in February 2015 and completed in July 2019 at 
the cost of ₹ 3.42 crore. 
Though the same stretch of road work was under exec ution from PMGSY, the 
Department ignored the fact and invited (May 2015) tender for the road work under 
CRF. With the approval (November 2015) of Work Advisory Board (WAB), the work 
under CRF was awarded (November 2015) to the lowest  tenderer 56  at his tendered 
value of ₹ 5.28 crore (i.e. 14.69 per cent  below the estimated cost of ₹ 6.19 crore) 
with the stipulated completion time of 12 months. A s the road work at the location 
approved by MoRTH was already executed under PMGSY,  the Department decided 
(February 2016) to execute another road work 57  from the funds sanctioned by the 
MoRTH, GoI for road project approved under CRF. The  Department assigned the 
work at the new location to the same contractor who  was awarded the work approved 
under CRF, without preparation of fresh estimates f or the work at the new location 
and calling of tender. The Department had only obta ined an undertaking from the 
contractor that he would execute the work at the ra te approved by the WAB against 
the agreement for the work sanctioned by MoRTH, GoI  under CRF. The road work 
(length-2.631 Km) at new location 58  commenced in May 2016 and was completed in 
March 2019. Beyond that, no further execution was m ade due to non-availability of 
                                                 
55  Situated at old Agartala, 6 (six) Km. away from th e capital city, Agartala 
56  Sri Arun Kumar Dey 
57  Bypass to Assam para Railway bridge (Length=3.831K m.) 
58  Bypass to Tolakona Panchayat Office (Length= 2.631  Km.) 

Chapter III: Economic Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 66 
land. The two road works at the approved and change d locations are shown in 
Appendix 3.3.1 . 
The contractor was paid (upto March 2019) ₹ 2.43 crore from the CRF against the 
total value of work done for ₹ 2.84 crore up to third Running Account (RA) and Fi nal 
bill. 
Thus, the Department in violation of Rule 7 of CRF (State Roads) Rules, 2014 
executed another road work 
59  from the funds sanctioned by MoRTH, GoI for road 
project approved under CRF. Moreover, while furnish ing the proposal to MoRTH for 
funding of the road work under CRF, the Department falsely certified that the project 
had not been proposed for funding under any other s ource/ Centrally Sponsored 
Schemes. Further, while furnishing (January 2017, M arch 2017, October 2017 and 
January 2020) the UCs and progress reports to the M oRTH, GoI, the Department 
concealed the diversion and did not inform about th e execution of another road from 
CRF instead of originally approved work ‘Improvemen t and upgradation of the road 
from Chandrapur to Chaturdas Devata Temple 60  via  Baldakhal (Lenghth=3.831Km.)’. 
Therefore, the Department had not only unauthorised ly utilised Central Road Fund of 
₹ 2.43 crore on an unapproved road project in violat ion of Central Road Fund (State 
Roads) Rules, 2014 but also falsely reported to the  Government of India about 
utilisation of CRF. 
On being pointed out by audit, the Department admit ted (March 2021) that the CRF 
had been utilised on a road at another location as the road work at the location 
approved by the MoRTH, GoI under CRF, had already been taken up under PMGSY. 
The matter was reported to the State Government (Ju ly 2021); reply had not 
been received (March 2022) . 
PUBLIC WORKS (Roads and Building) DEPARTMENT 
 
3.4 Extra expenditure 
 
The Department incurred extra expenditure of ₹    0.68 crore towards payment 
of price variation due to delay in handing over cle ar site to the construction 
agency.  
Paragraph 15.1 (2) of CPWD Works Manual, 2007 as ad opted by the State PWD 
provides that before approval of Notice Inviting Te nder (NIT), availability of clear 
site, structural drawings and lay out plan, etc. were desirable. 
Mention was made in paragraph 4.5.11.4 (i) under th e Performance Audit of  
“Utilisation of Thirteenth and Fourteenth Finance C ommission” of the Report  of 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India Report on Social, Economic and Revenue 
Sector, Government of Tripura for the year 2017-18 (Report No.2 of 2019) regarding 
                                                 
59  Bypass to Assam para Railway bridge (Length=3.831 Km.) 
60  Situated at old Agartala, 6 (six) Km away from the  capital city, Agartala 

Chapter III: Economic Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 67 
failure of the Public Works Department to complete construction of 8 th  Tripura State 
Rifles Headquarters even after a lapse of nine year s from the date of commencement 
(January 2010) of the work due to delay in handing over of clear site to the 
construction agency 61 . 
Further, scrutiny (July-August 2019) of the records  of the Executive Engineer, 
Longtharai Valley Division, Public Works Department  (Roads and Buildings) (EE) 
revealed that the project ‘Construction of the 8 th  BN Tripura State Rifles Headquarter 
at Lalcherra comprising of 14 work components 62 ’ was awarded (January 2009) to the 
agency on cost plus percentage basis (at the rate o f 23.69 per cent  above the Tripura 
Schedule of Rates (TSR), 2008). A Memorandum of Und erstanding (MoU) was also 
concluded (January 2009) between the EE and the age ncy to complete the works of 
the project within the stipulated completion time o f 24 months from the date of 
approval of Detailed Project Report or handing over  of clear site, whichever is later. 
Clause 16 of MoU provides that, if during the progr ess of the works the price of 
construction materials and/or wages of labour incre ases and if such increase exceeds 
10 per cent  of the price and/or wages of the quoted rate ( i.e  23.69 per cent  above the 
TSR, 2008) and the agency pays in respect of that m aterial such increased price and/ 
or in respect of labour engaged on execution of the  work such increased wages then 
the amount of the contract shall accordingly be var ied, provided that any increase so 
payable is not attributable to delay in execution o f the contract within the control of 
the agency.  
The agency commenced the project in January 2010 wi th construction of the 
boundary wall. However, after completion of 3,240 m etre (out of 3,423 metre) of 
boundary wall, the work was stopped (June 2010) by the Forest Department as the 
proposed location of the project falls under forest  land. The work of boundary wall 
resumed after the Department handed over (June 2014 ) clear site to the agency and 
eight 
63  out of the remaining 13 components 64  (excluding boundary wall) also 
commenced between July 2014 to October 2015. Out of  nine components being 
executed by the agency as stated above, only seven 65  components were completed 
(between March 2017 and September 2019) and executi on of the remaining two 
components ( i.e ., Admn. Building and 100 men Barrack-I) were in pr ogress (March 
2021). Five components of the project ( viz.,  Commandant’s quarter, wireless centre, 
store building, watch tower and officer’s mess) wer e not started (March 2021) even 
after lapse of more than 10 years from the date of award of the project in spite of 
                                                 
61  M/s National Projects Construction Corporation Lim ited, a Central Public Sector Undertaking 
62  Boundary wall, Magazine building, MT Office, MT Ga rage, 100 men Barrack-I, 100 men Barrack-
II, Quarter guard, Admn. Building, Wireless centre,  Store building, Watch Tower, Officer’s Mess, 
SOS Mess and Commandant’s quarter 
63  Magazine building, MT Office, MT Garage, 100 men B arrack-I, 100 men Barrack-II, Quarter 
guard, Admn. Building and SOS mess 
64  Magazine building, MT Office, MT Garage, 100 men B arrack-I, 100 men Barrack-II, Quarter 
guard, Admn. Building, Wireless centre, Store build ing, Watch Tower, Officer’s Mess, SOS Mess 
and Commandant’s quarter 
65  Boundary wall, Magazine building, MT Office, MT Ga rage, 100 men Barrack-II, Quarter guard, 
and SOS mess 

Chapter III: Economic Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 68 
availability of fund in the Division. The agency wa s paid ₹ 11.04 crore (upto March 
2021) against the total value of work done for ₹ 11.10 crore. 
In addition to the above payment, the agency claime d (March 2017) price variation of 
₹ 0.99 crore as per clause 16 of MoU due to hike in price of the materials 66  utilised in 
seven components 67  of the project which had been taken up during July  2014 to 
January 2017. Against the agency’s claim, the Depar tment had paid ₹ 0.68 crore as 
the price escalation cost to the agency (upto March 2021).  
The awarding of work without ensuring the clear sit e, commencement of various 
components of the project were delayed and for that , the Department had borne extra 
expenditure of ₹ 0.68 crore towards price variation on the seven com ponents which 
were executed after more than four years from the s cheduled commencement dates of 
these components. The possibilities of further extr a expenditure on price variation 
could not be ruled out as the work of five componen ts had not been started and two 
components were in progress 68  (March 2021). 
While admitting the fact, the EE stated (27 August 2019) that due to non-diversion of 
forest land, work could not be started and therefor e, price variation had been paid 
beyond the stipulated time frame of the work. 
The matter was reported to the Government (July 202 1); reply is awaited 
(March 2022) . 
FOREST DEPARTMENT 
3.5 Unfruitful expenditure  
 
There was unfruitful expenditure of ₹ 2.36 crore on creation of eco-park under 
MGNREGS funds as the park was lying unused due to n on-availability of 
funds for maintenance. 
The Ramchandra Para Joint Forest Management Committ ee (JFMC), in its general 
meeting held on 2 January 2015, had decided to crea te an eco-park in Ramchandra 
Para under MGNREGS through Forest Department.  
The Chief Executive Officer 
69 , Gomati Forest Development Agency (DFO 70 , Gomati) 
had accorded (in December 2015, February 2016 and M ay 2016) administrative 
approval and expenditure sanction (AA & ES) under Mahatma Gandhi National Rural 
Employment Guarantee scheme (MGNREGS) fund for crea tion of different assets 
(detail in Annexure 3.5.1 ) of ₹ 1.60 crore against Action Plan of Operation (APO) of 
                                                 
66  TMT bar, Labour, reinforcement and cement 
67  MT Garage, MT Office,Admn. Building,100 men Barrac k-I, 100 men barrack II, quarter guard 
and SOS mess 
68  Due to fund constraints as reported by the EE 
69  Chief Executive Officer (CEO) is the head of the S tate Employment Guarantee Mission (SEGM) 
established by the State Government with adequate o perational flexibility and autonomy to 
support the Panchayati Raj Institutions and other implementing agencies. 
70  District Forest Officer 

Chapter III: Economic Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 69 
2015-16 and ₹ 0.76 crore against APO of 2016-17 at Ramchandra Pa ra under East 
Manikya Dewan ADC Village and Lebachara ADC Village  under Karbook range of 
Karbook RD Block. 
Accordingly, the SDFO 
71 , Karbook had incurred expenditure of ₹ 1.60 crore during 
2015-16 and 2016-17 on 10 72  components of works against the APO of 2015-16 and  
₹ 0.76 crore on eight 73  components of works against the APO of 2016-17 as detailed in 
Appendix 3.5.1 . The execution of works for creation of eco-park commenced between 
May 2015 and April 2016 and were completed by March 2016 and March 2017.  
Scrutiny (November 2019) of records 74  of the SDFO, Karbook and joint physical 
verification (on 31 October 2019 and 15 November 20 19) with the departmental 
officers, it was noticed that the park was lying cl osed and abandoned. The complete 
park was covered with weeds, rose garden, ornamenta l plantation, floriculture 
plantation, hedge plantation and palm plantation cr eated at a cost of ₹ 57.45 lakh as 
shown in Appendix 3.5.1  were found almost damaged. Further, the remaining assets 
constructed at a cost of ₹ 1.79 crore were lying unused. The park was not ina ugurated 
till July 2021 though an expenditure of ₹ 2.36 crore was incurred. Reason for not 
opening the park for public use was not found on record.  
On being pointed out in audit, SDFO, Karbook stated  (November 2019) that no fund 
had been received for maintenance of the park. As a  result, park was covered with 
weeds. The reply was not acceptable as the SDFO had  not sent any proposal to the 
Department seeking fund for maintenance work.  
On the issue of opening the eco-park for the public , the SDFO has not furnished any 
specific reply (March 2022). 
Therefore, the infrastructure created for creation of eco-park under MGNREGS was 
also lying unused due to non-availability of funds for maintenance. Thus, the park was 
not opened for public use and the whole plantations  in the park were covered with 
weeds due to non-maintenance. This resulted in unfruitful expenditure of 
₹ 2.36 crore. 
The Department should take initiative to open the p ark for public use and allocate 
funds for its maintenance. 
The matter was reported (September 2021) to the Sta te Government; reply is 
awaited (March 2022) . 
                                                 
71  Sub-Divisional Forest Officer 
72  (i) Construction of boundary fencing 1,500 mtr., ( ii) Construction of one approach gate, 
(iii) Construction of chequered tiles soling, (iv) Construction of five passenger shed, 
(v) Construction of toilet block, (vi) Construction  of brick soiling: 450 mtr., (vii) Construction of 
tree protection guard structure, (viii) Constructio n of pipe line connection over 2,500 mtr., 
(ix) Construction of five labour shed and (x) Construction of check dam. 
73  (i) Construction of overhead tank, (ii) Constructi on of two submersible pump, (iii) Construction of 
one storehouse, (iv) Creation of rose garden planta tion, (v) Creation of ornamental plantation, 
(vi) Creation of floriculture plantation, (vii) Cre ation of hedge plantation and (viii) Creation of 
plum plantation 
74  Sanction Order, Work Order, Fund Transfer Order re gister, MGNREGA website and adjustments 
submitted by the IOs 

CHAPTER IV: ECONOMIC SECTOR 
(State Public Sector Undertakings) 

Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 71 
CHAPTER IV: ECONOMIC SECTOR 
(STATE PUBLIC SECTOR UNDERTAKINGs) 
4.1  Functioning of State Public Sector Undertakings 
 
4.1.1 Introduction 
The State Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs) consist of State Government Companies 
and Statutory Corporations. The PSUs are establishe d to carry out activities of 
commercial nature and occupy an important place in the State economy. As on 
31 March 2020, there were 16 PSUs in Tripura. The d etails of the PSUs in Tripura as 
on 31 March 2020 are given in Table 4.1.1 . 
Table 4.1.1: Total number of PSUs  as on 31 March 2020 
Type of PSUs  Working 
PSUs  
Non-working 
PSUs 75  Total 
Government Companies 76  14 1 15 
Statutory Corporations 1 - 1 
Total 15 1 16 
Source : Finance Accounts 2019-20, Statement -19 
None of these PSUs were listed on the Stock Exchang e. During the year 2019-20, one 
new PSU – Tripura Power Generation Limited 77  was included, and no existing PSU 
was closed down. 
4.1.2 Investment in PSUs 
 
4.1.2.1 State Government’s investment in PSUs 
The State’s investment in its PSUs was by way of sh are capital/ loans and special 
financial support by way of revenue grants.  
As on 31 March 2020, the investment of the State Go vernment (capital and long-term 
loans) in 16 PSUs was 
₹ 1,714.35 crore 78  as per details given in Table 4.1.2 .  
Table 4.1.2: Details of State’s investment in PSUs 
(₹ in crore) 
Year Equity Capital Long term Loans Total 
2019-20 1508.00 206.35 1714.35 
2015-16 1285.85 129.71 1415.56 
The State Government investment as on 31 March 2020  consisted of 87.96 per cent  
towards capital, 12.04 per cent  in long-term loans as against 90.84 per cent (capital) 
and 9.16 per cent (long-term loans) as on 31 March 2016. A graphical presentation of 
                                                           
75  Non-working PSUs are those which have ceased to ca rry on their operations. 
76  Government companies include Other Companies refer red to in Section 139(5) and 139(7) of the 
Companies Act, 2013. 
77  Incorporated on 28 January 2015 
78  Investment figures are provisional and as provided  by the PSUs excepting two PSUs (Sl. No. A.6 
and A.14 of Appendix 4.1.1 ), investment figures for which have been adopted f rom their finalised 
accounts for 2019-20. 

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Undertakings)  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 72 
State Government investment in PSUs during last five years (2015-16 to 2019-20) has 
been given in Chart 4.1.1 . 
 
As can be seen from Chart 4.1.1  that, the State Government’s investment in PSUs 
during last five years showed an increasing trend. The State’s investment grew by 
21.11 per cent from ₹ 1,415.56 crore in 2015-16 to ₹ 1,714.35 crore in 2019-20. 
During 2019-20, out of 14 79  working PSUs where State Government had made direc t 
investment, nine PSUs incurred loss and only five P SUs earned profit ( ₹ 2.03 crore) 
as per their latest finalised accounts ( Appendix 4.1.1 ). None of the five profit making 
PSUs had declared any dividend. There was no record ed information about the 
existence of any specific policy of the State Gover nment regarding payment of 
minimum dividend by the PSUs. 
The State Government’s investment (historical value ) in PSUs had eroded by 
3.58 per cent  in 2019-20, and the losses ( net of free reserves) of four PSUs 
(accumulated losses of 
₹ 429.76 crore) had completely eroded the State’s in vestment 
in their paid-up capital ( ₹ 290.79 crore), as per their latest finalised accounts. 
4.1.2.2 Total Sector-wise investment in PSUs 
Total investment of State Government and Other Stak eholders (Central Government, 
Holding Companies, Banks, Financial Institutions, etc. ) in PSUs under various 
important sectors at the end of 31 March 2016 and 3 1 March 2020 has been given in 
Table 4.1.3 .  
 
 
 
 
                                                           
79  Excluding Tripura Natural Gas Company Limited, whi ch had no direct investment from the State 
Government. 
1415.56 
1555.09 1597.54 1675.55 1714.35 
500.00 
800.00 
1100.00 
1400.00 
1700.00 
2000.00 
2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 
(₹ in crore) 
Chart No. 4.1.1: State's total investment in PSUs 
Investment (Capital and Long-term loans) 

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Undertakings)  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 73 
Table 4.1.3: Sector-wise details of total investments in PSUs 
(₹ in crore) 
Name of Sector 
Government/ Other 
Companies 
Statutory 
Corporations Total Investment 
2015-16 2019-20 2015-16 2019-20 2015-16 2019-20 
Power 665.75  1078.78  0.00  0.00  665.75  1078.78  
Manufacturing 297.02  427.04  0.00  0.00  297.02  427.04  
Financing 144.62  144.62  0.00  0.00  144.62  144.62  
Service 88.09  161.39  160.01  163.85  248.10  325.24  
Agriculture & Allied 61.37  76.25  0.00  0.00  61.37  76.25  
Miscellaneous 14.77  30.00  0.00  0.00  14.77  30.00  
Total 1271.62  1918.08  160.01  163.85  1431.63  2081.93  
Source : PSUs data 
It can be seen from Table 4.1.3 that as compared to 2015-16, the combined 
investment of State Government and Other Stakeholde rs increased significantly 
during 2019-20 in the Power sector ( ₹ 413.03 crore), Manufacturing sector 
(₹ 130.02 crore) and Service sector ( ₹ 77.14 crore). 
The increase in investment under the Power sector w as mostly due to loan availed 
from various sources ( ₹ 412.82  crore 80 ). In Manufacturing sector, the increase in 
investment was mainly due to equity contribution of  ₹ 130.02  crore provided by the 
State Government to Tripura Jute Mills Limited ( ₹ 113.12  crore) and Tripura Small 
Industries Corporation Limited ( ₹ 16.90  crore) over the period of four years (2015-
19). In Service sector, the increase in investment was mainly due to equity 
contribution of ₹ 73.20  crore provided by the State Government to Tripura H andloom 
and Handicrafts Development Corporation Limited ( ₹ 61.03  crore) and Tripura 
Tourism Development Corporation Limited ( ₹ 12.17  crore).  
4.1.3 Reconciliation with Finance Accounts 
The figures in respect of equity and loans provided  by the State Government as per 
the records of PSUs should agree with the correspon ding figures appearing in the 
Finance Accounts of the State. In case of differenc es in the figures, the PSUs 
concerned and the Finance Department should carry o ut reconciliation of differences. 
The position in this regard as on 31 March 2020 is given in Table 4.1.4 . 
Table 4.1.4: Equity, loans, guarantees outstanding as per the Finance Accounts vis-à-vis 
records of PSUs 
(₹ in crore) 
Outstanding in respect of Amount as per 
Finance Accounts 
Amount as per 
records of PSUs Difference  
Equity 1439.13  1508.00  68.87  
Loans 56.75  206.35  149.60  
Guarantee 359.57 81  200.00  159.57  
Source : Finance Accounts 2019-20 and PSUs records  
                                                           
80  State Government = ₹ 76.59 crore, Central Government = ₹ 242.79 crore and Others = ₹ 93.44 
crore 
81  This represented the Guarantees outstanding agains t the Loans availed by Tripura State Electricity 
Corporation Limited ( ₹ 159.57 crore) and Agartala Smart City Limited ( ₹ 200.00 crore). 

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Undertakings)  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 74 
As on 31 March 2020, there were unreconciled differ ences in the figures of equity 
(₹ 68.87 crore), loan ( ₹ 149.60 crore) and guarantee ( ₹ 159.57 crore) as per two sets 
of records. The differences in equity occurred in r espect of 12 PSUs 82  (three PSUs 
under the Agriculture and Allied sector, four PSUs under the Service sector, two 
PSUs each under the Manufacturing sector and Power sector and one PSU under the 
Finance respectively). The difference in guarantee figures related to Tripura State 
Electricity Corporation Limited.  
As regards Loan figures, the Finance Department dis burses the loans to various 
Departments of the State Government for different s ectoral activities and booked the 
amount sector-wise in the Finance Accounts. In turn , the Departments disburse these 
loans to respective PSUs functioning under their ad ministrative control. Hence, 
PSU-wise figures of State Government loans provided  to various PSUs not available 
in the State Finance Accounts. The State Government  loan figure ( ₹ 56.75 crore) 
booked in the Finance Accounts pertained to one power sector PSU 83 . 
Though the Principal Secretary, Finance Department,  Government of Tripura as well 
as the Management of the PSUs concerned were apprai sed regularly about the 
differences impressing upon the need for early reco nciliation, no significant progress 
was noticed in this regard.  
The State Government and the PSUs concerned may tak e concrete steps to 
reconcile the differences in a time-bound manner. T he Government should correct 
the system of financing the PSUs and the Finance Accounts be updated. 
4.1.4 Special support and guarantees to PSUs during  the year 
The State Government provides financial support to PSUs in various forms through 
annual budgetary allocations. The summarised detail s of budgetary outgo towards 
equity, loans and grants/ subsidies in respect of P SUs for the three years ended 
2019-20 are given in Table 4.1.5 . 
Table 4.1.5: Details regarding budgetary support to PSUs 
(₹ in crore) 
Particulars 
2017 -18  2018 -19  2019 -20  
No. of 
PSUs Amount No. of 
PSUs Amount No. of 
PSUs Amount 
Equity capital outgo from 
budget 5 30.53 4 34.81 5 49.89 
Loans given from budget - - - - - - 
Grants/ subsidy from 
budget 5 77.35 3 70.77 4 83.82 
Total Outgo 84  9 107.88  7 105.58  9 133.71  
Guarantees issued - - 1 200.00  - - 
Guarantee commitment - - - - - - 
Source : PSUs records  
                                                           
82  PSUs at Sl. Nos. A.1, A.2 and A.4 to A.12 and B.1 of Appendix 4.1.1  
83  Tripura State Electricity Corporation Limited 
84  Actual number of PSUs, which received equity, loan s, grants/subsidies from the State Government 

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Undertakings)  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 75 
It can be seen from Table 4.1.5  that, the budgetary support provided by State 
Government to PSUs increased from ₹ 107.88 crore in 2017-18 to ₹ 133.71 crore in 
2019-20. The major beneficiaries of budgetary outgo  during 2019-20 were Agartala 
Smart City Limited (grant/ subsidy: ₹ 50.00 crore), Tripura Jute Mills Limited 
(equity: ₹ 29.80 crore), Tripura State Electricity Corporatio n Limited (grant/subsidy: 
₹ 19.25 crore), Tripura Road Transport Corporation ( grant/ subsidy: ₹ 13.29 crore) 
and Tripura Handloom and Handicrafts Development Co rporation Limited (equity: 
₹ 12.45 crore). 
4.1.5 Accountability framework 
The audit of the financial statements of a Company in respect of financial years 
commencing on or after 1 April 2014 is governed by the provisions of the Companies 
Act, 2013 (Act) and audit of the financial statemen ts in respect of financial years that 
commenced earlier than 1 April 2014 continued to be  governed by the Companies 
Act, 1956. The new Act has brought about increased Regulatory Framework, wider 
Management responsibility and higher Professional Accountability. 
4.1.5.1 Statutory Audit/ Supplementary Audit 
Statutory Auditors appointed by the Comptroller and  Auditor General of India 
(C&AG), audit the financial statements of a Governm ent Company. In addition, 
C&AG conducts the Supplementary Audit of these fina ncial statements under the 
provisions of Section 143 (6) of the Act.  
Audit of Statutory Corporations is governed by thei r respective Legislations. The 
State of Tripura had only one Statutory Corporation  (Tripura Road Transport 
Corporation), which was working. The C&AG is the sole auditor for this Corporation.  
4.1.5.2 Role of Government and Legislature 
The State Government exercises control over the aff airs of these PSUs through its 
administrative departments. The Government appoints  the Chief Executive and 
Directors on the Board of these PSUs.  
The State Legislature also monitors the accounting and utilisation of State 
Government investment in the PSUs. For this purpose , the Annual Reports of State 
Government Companies together with the Statutory Au ditors’ Reports and comments 
of the C&AG thereon are to be placed before the Leg islature under Section 394 of the 
Act. Similarly, the Annual Reports of Statutory Cor porations along with the Separate 
Audit Reports of C&AG are required to be placed bef ore the Legislature as per the 
stipulations made under their respective governing Acts. The Audit Reports of C&AG 
are submitted to the Government under Section 19A o f the C&AG’s (Duties, Powers 
and Conditions of Service) Act, 1971. 
4.1.6 Arrears in finalisation of accounts 
Financial statements of the Companies are required to be finalised within six months 
from the end of the relevant financial year  i.e.  by end of September in accordance 
with the provisions of Section 96 (1) of the Compan ies Act. Failure to do so may 

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Undertakings)  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 76 
attract penal provisions under Section 99 of the Ac t. Similarly, the accounts of 
Statutory Corporations, are to be finalised, audite d and presented to the Legislature as 
per the provisions of their respective Acts. 
Timely finalisation of accounts is important for th e State Government to assess the 
financial health of the PSUs and to avoid financial  misappropriation and 
mismanagement. Persistent delay in finalisation of accounts is fraught with the risk of 
fraud and leakage of public money going undetected apart from violation of the 
provision of the Companies Act, 2013. 
Table 4.1.6 provides the details relating to finalisation of ac counts by working PSUs 
as of 30 September 2020. 
Table 4.1.6: Position relating to finalisation of Accounts of working PSUs  
The accounts of only two 89  out of 15 working PSUs were up-to-date as on 
30 September 2020. Remaining 13 working PSUs had a backlog of 24 accounts for 
periods ranging from one to four years. The oldest Accounts in arrears was since 
2016-17 (four Accounts), which related to ‘Tripura Horticulture Corporation Limited’ 
as detailed in Appendix 4.1.1 . 
The administrative departments concerned have the r esponsibility to oversee the 
activities of these entities and to ensure that the  accounts are finalised and adopted by 
the PSUs within the stipulated period.  
The Accountant General (Audit), Tripura had been taking up the matter regularly with 
the Chief Secretary and the administrative departme nts concerned for liquidating the 
arrears of accounts of PSUs. However, the State Government and the PSUs concerned 
could not address the issue to clear pendency of ac counts of the PSUs in a time bound 
manner. 
4.1.7 Placement of Separate Audit Reports 
Timely placement of SARs in the State Legislature i s important to ensure timely 
reporting on the functioning of the Corporation to the stakeholders and fix 
accountability of the Management for its performance.  
                                                           
85  Includes Agartala Smart City Limited which was inc orporated on 18 November 2016 
86  Includes Tripura Power Generation Limited which wa s incorporated on 28 January 2015 
87  Includes four accounts of Tripura Power Generation  Limited (2015-16 to 2018-19) 
88  Includes two accounts of Agartala Smart City Limit ed (2016-17 and 2017-18) 
89  Tripura Natural Gas Company Limited and Tripura Ju te Mills Limited 
Sl. 
No.  Particulars 2015-16  2016-17  2017-18  2018-19  2019-20  
1.  Number of working PSUs  13  13  14 85  14  15 86  
2.  Number of Accounts finalised 
during the year  16 13 12 16 16 87  
3.  Number of Accounts in arrears  20  20  23 88  21  24  
4.  Number of Working PSUs  with 
arrears in Accounts  12 11 13 12 13 
5.  Extent of arrears (number in 
years)  
1 to 2 
years  
1 to 3 
years  
1 to 4 
years  
1 to 4 
years  
1 to 4 
years  

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Undertakings)  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 77 
Tripura Road Transport Corporation (TRTC)  was the only Statutory Corporation. 
Separate Audit Reports (SARs) of the C&AG on their accounts was issued upto 
2016-17 (as on 30 September 2020) which was placed in the State Legislature 
(23 March 2020).  
Recommendations: 
a.  The State Government may set up a special cell to o versee the clearance of 
arrears of accounts and set the targets for individ ual PSUs, which may be 
monitored by the cell; 
b.  The State Government may ensure that existing vacan cies in the accounts 
department of PSUs are timely filled up with person s having domain expertise 
and experience; and 
c.  The PSUs may get the figures of equity and loans re conciled with the State 
Government Departments and arrear of accounts are cleared. 
4.1.8 Investments made by State Government in PSUs whose accounts are in 
arrears 
The State Government had invested ₹ 27.00 crore in four PSUs (equity: ₹ 27.00 crore 
and loans: Nil) during the years for which these PS Us had not finalised their accounts 
as detailed in Table 4.1.7 . 
Table 4.1.7: Investment by State Government in PSUs having accounts in arrears 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No. Name of PSU 
Accounts 
finalised 
upto 
Accounts 
pending 
finalisation 
Investment by State 
Government during the 
period of arrears 
Equity Loans 
1 Tripura Horticulture 
Corporation Limited 2015-16 2016-17 to 
2019-20 3.15 0.00 
2 Tripura Tea Development 
Corporation Limited 2018-19 2019-20 3.00 0.00 
3 Tripura Small Industries 
Corporation Limited 2016-17 2017-18 to 
2019-20 8.40 0.00 
4 
Tripura Handloom and 
Handicrafts Development 
Corporation Limited 
2016-17 2017-18 to 
2019-20 12.45 0.00 
Total  27.00 0.00 
In the absence of accounts and their subsequent aud it, it could not be verified if the 
investments made and the expenditure incurred have been properly accounted for and 
the purpose for which the amount was invested was achieved or not.  
The Government may consider not giving further fina ncial assistance to the PSUs 
having backlog of Accounts until the accounts are made as current as possible. 
The Government may consider setting up a special ce ll under the Finance 
Department to oversee the expeditious clearance of arrears of accounts of PSUs. 
Where there is lack of staff expertise, Government may consider outsourcing the 

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Undertakings)  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 78 
work relating to preparation of accounts and take p unitive action against Company 
Management responsible for arrears of accounts.  
4.1.9 Performance of PSUs as per their latest final ised accounts 
The financial position and working results of worki ng PSUs as per their latest 
finalised accounts as on 30 September 2020 are deta iled in Appendix 4.1.1 . 
Table 4.1.8 provides the comparative details of working PSUs tu rnover and State 
GSDP for a period of five-year ending 2019-20. 
Table 4.1.8: Details of working PSUs -turnover vis-à-vis  GSDP  
(₹ in crore) 
As can be seen from Table 4.1.8 , the turnover of the working PSUs showed a 
continuous growth during 2015-16 to 2019-20. Except  during 2018-19, the year-wise 
percentage of State PSU-turnover to GSDP had also a ppreciated in all years during 
2015-20. The contribution of PSU-turnover to GSDP d uring 2018-19 decreased as the 
growth of the PSU-turnover was not commensurate wit h the pace of increase in the 
GSDP during 2018-19. The increase in State PSU-turn over during 2016-17 
(₹ 162.88 crore), 2017-18 ( ₹ 142.24 crore) and 2019-20 ( ₹ 264.94 crore) was mainly 
driven by the corresponding growth in the turnover of the power sector company 
(TSECL) during 2016-17 ( ₹ 167.85 crore), 2017-18 ( ₹ 110.43 crore) and 2019-20 
(₹ 215.32 crore).  
4.1.9.1 Key parameters  
Some other key parameters of PSUs performance as pe r their latest finalised accounts 
as on 30 September of the respective year are given in Table 4.1.9 . 
Table 4.1.9: Key Parameters of PSUs 
(₹ in crore) 
Particulars 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 
Debt 350.86 296.73 298.96 299.50 491.01 
Turnover 92  706.39 869.27 1011.51 1,024.88 1289.82 
Debt/ Turnover Ratio 0.50:1 0.34:1 0.30:1 0.29:1 0. 38:1 
Interest Payments 0.69 1.62 1.43 1.21 6.97 
Accumulated losses 762.48 773.39 969.73 1,028.84 11 20.93 
 
                                                           
90  Turnover of working PSUs as per their latest final ised accounts as on 30 September of respective 
year 
91   GSDP figures as released by the Ministry of Stati stics and Programme Implementation (MoSPI) 
92  Turnover of working PSUs as per their latest final ised accounts as on 30 September of the 
respective year 
Particulars 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 
Turnover 90  706.39 869.27 1011.51 1,024.88 1289.82 
GSDP 91  35,938 39,479 43,716 49,845 55,358 
Percentage of Turnover 
to GSDP 1.97 2.20 2.31 2.06 2.33 

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Undertakings)  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 79 
Debt-Turnover Ratio 
A low debt-to-turnover ratio (DTR) demonstrates a g ood balance between debt and 
income. Conversely, a high DTR can signal of having  too much of debt against the 
income of PSUs from core activities. Thus, the PSUs  having lower DTR are more 
likely to comfortably manage their debt servicing and repayments.  
PSU Debt 
During the period from 2015-19, the PSUs debt had r egistered an overall decrease of 
₹ 51.36 crore (14.64 per cent ) from ₹ 350.86 crore (2015-16) to ₹ 299.50 crore 
(2018-19). However, during 2019-20, the outstanding  debts of PSUs increased by 
63.94 per cent  as compared to previous year (2018-19). This was m ainly due to 
increase in the debts of Tripura State Electricity Corporation Limited by ₹ 196.60 
crore. Major portion of PSU debts during 2019-20 (9 8.84 per cent ) pertained to 
Tripura State Electricity Corporation Limited ( ₹ 356.88 crore) and Tripura Industrial 
Development Corporation Limited ( ₹ 128.41 crore). 
From Table 4.1.9 , it can be seen that during 2015-19, the PSU Turno ver had 
registered a growth of ₹ 318.49 crore (45.09 per cent ) from ₹ 706.39 crore (2015-16) 
to ₹ 1,024.88 crore (2018-19). As a result, the DTR had  shown a decreasing trend 
during the period from 2015-19. However, during 2019-20, due to significant increase 
(122.66 per cent ) in the debt position of Tripura State Electricity Corporation Limited, 
the overall DTR had increased to 0.38:1, which indi cated that the position of PSUs to 
service their long-term debts had deteriorated as compared to previous years. 
The accumulated losses of PSUs had registered an ov erall increase of 47.01 per cent  
(₹ 358.45 crore) from ₹ 762.48 crore (2015-16) to ₹ 1,120.93 crore (2019-20) mainly 
due to increase of ₹ 269.90 crore in the accumulated losses of two PSUs 93  during the 
same period.  
4.1.9.2 Erosion of capital due to losses 
The aggregate paid-up capital and accumulated losse s of 15 working PSUs as per 
their latest finalised accounts as on 30 September 2020 were 
₹ 1,475.76 crore and 
₹ 1,120.93 crore respectively (Appendix 4.1.1).  
Analysis of investment and accumulated losses of th ese PSUs revealed that the 
accumulated losses ( net of free reserves) of four working PSUs ( ₹ 429.76 crore) had 
completely eroded their paid-up capital ( ₹ 290.79 crore) as detailed in the 
Table 4.1.10 . 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
93  Tripura State Electricity Corporation Limited ( ₹ 131.99 crore) and Tripura Jute Mills Limited 
(₹ 137.91 crore). 

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Undertakings)  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 80 
Table 4.1.10: PSUs with erosion of paid up capital 
(₹ in crore) 
Name of PSU Latest finalised 
accounts 
Paid up 
capital 
Accumulated 
losses* 
Tripura Rehabilitation Plantation 
Corporation Limited 
2018-19 4.58 10.58 
Tripura Industrial Development Corporation 
Limited  
2018-19  16.17  25.71  
Tripura Handloom and Handicrafts 
Development Corporation Limited 
2016-17 107.09 120.02 
Tripura Road Transport Corporation 2016-17 162.95 2 73.45 
Total  290.79 429.76 
*net after adjusting ‘free reserves’ 
Accumulation of huge losses by these PSUs had erode d public wealth, which is a 
cause of serious concern and the State Government n eeds to review the working of 
these PSUs to either improve their profitability or close their operations . 
The overall position of losses 94  incurred by working PSUs during 2015-16 to 2019-20  
are depicted in Chart 4.1.2 . 
 
(Figures in brackets show the number of working PSUs in respective years) 
From Chart 4.1.2 , it can be seen that the working PSUs incurred los ses during all the 
five years under reference. These losses of working  PSUs during the period from 
2015-19 were mainly attributable to heavy losses in curred by the power sector PSU 
during these years, which ranged between ₹ 79.96 crore (2016-17) and ₹ 156.96 crore 
(2018-19). Compared to previous year, during 2019-2 0 the losses of working PSUs 
decreased significantly (64.62 per cent ) mainly due to decrease of ₹ 133.25 crore 
(84.89 per cent ) in the loss incurred by the power sector PSUs fro m ₹ 156.96 crore 
(2018-19) to ₹ 23.71 crore (2019-20). 
                                                           
94   As per the latest finalised accounts of working P SUs as on 30 September of the respective year 
211.86 (14) 
74.95 (15 ) 
139.05 (13) 
118.09 (13) 
190.30 (14) 
0
50 
100 
150 
200 
250 
2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 
(₹ in crore )
Chart  4.1.2: Overall position of Losses of working PSUs (No. of  working 
PSUs) 
Overall Losses incurred by working PSUs during last five years 

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Undertakings)  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 81 
During the year 2019-20, out of 15 working PSUs, si x PSUs earned an aggregate 
profit of ₹ 20.65  crore, while nine PSUs incurred loss of ₹ 95.60 crore. The details of 
major contributors to overall profits and losses of  working PSUs are given in 
Table 4.1.11 . 
Table 4.1.11: Major contributors to profits and losses of working PSUs 
(₹ in crore) 
Name of PSU Latest finalised 
accounts 
Profit (+)/ loss (-) 
Tripura Natural Gas Company Limited 2019-20  (+) 18.62  
Tripura Jute Mills Limited 2019-20  (-) 31.62  
Tripura State Electricity Corporation Limited 2016-17  (-) 23.71  
Tripura Industrial Development Corporation Limited  2018-19  (-) 15.23  
4.1.9.3  Return on Capital Employed 
Return on Capital Employed (ROCE) is a profitabilit y metric that measures the long 
term profitability and efficiency of the total capi tal employed by a company. 
Companies create value when they generate returns on the capital employed. ROCE is 
an important decision metric for long term lenders.  ROCE is calculated by dividing a 
company’s earnings before interest and taxes (EBIT) by the capital employed 
95 .  
During 2019-20, the overall Capital Employed in 15 working PSUs as per their latest 
accounts was ₹ 919.80 crore while the ROCE of the PSUs ranged from   
(-) 1082.88 per cent (Tripura Jute Mills Limited) to (+) 19.07 per cent (Tripura 
Natural Gas Company Limited) . Further, out of 15 working PSUs, Only five PSUs 96  
had positive ROCE (Appendix 4.1.1) . 
4.1.10 Return on Investment on the basis of Present  Value of Investment 
The Rate of Real Return (RORR) measures the profitability and efficiency with which 
equity and similar non-interest bearing capital hav e been employed, after adjusting 
them for the time value. To determine the Rate of R eal Return on Government 
Investment (RORR), the investment of State Governme nt 97  in the form of equity, 
interest free loans and grants/ subsidies given by the State Government for operational 
and management expenses less  disinvestments (if any) has been considered, and 
indexed to their Present Value (PV) and summated. T he RORR is then calculated by 
dividing the ‘profit after tax’ (PAT) by the sum of  the PV of the Government 
investment. 
During 2019-20, out of 15 working PSUs, 9 PSUs incu rred loss ( 
₹ 95.60 crore) and 
only six PSUs earned profits 98  (₹ 20.65 crore) (Appendix 4.1.1) . On the basis of 
return on historical value, the State Government in vestment eroded by 3.58 per cent  
during 2019-20. On the other hand, the Rate of Real  Return where the present value 
                                                           
95  Capital employed = Paid up share capital + free re serves and surplus + long term loans – 
accumulated losses - deferred revenue expenditure 
96  PSUs at Sl. No. A.1., A.2., A.11., A.12. and A.14.  of Appendix 4.1.1  
97  As per the records of PSUs 
98  As per the latest finalised accounts of working PS Us as on 30 September 2019 

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Undertakings)  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 82 
of investment is considered, the State Government investment eroded by 1.47 per cent 
as shown in Appendix 4.1.2 . This difference in the percentage of investment ero sion 
was on account of adjustments made in the investmen t amount for the time value of 
money. 
4.1.11 Winding up of non-working PSUs 
As on 31 March 2020, there was only one non-working  PSU ( viz. Tripura State Bank 
Limited), which had been non-functional since 1971. The said PSU was in the process 
of liquidation under Section 248 of the Companies A ct, 2013. Since the non-working 
PSU was neither contributing to the State economy n or meeting the intended 
objectives, the liquidation process to wind up this PSU needs to be expedited. 
Recommendations 
In view of the facts above on accumulated losses, e rosion of capital and negative 
return on capital employed, the State Government ne eds to either revamp the 
working of these PSUs or wind them up in public interest. 
4.1.12 Impact of Audit Comments on Annual Accounts of PSUs 
During October 2019 to September 2020, 11 working C ompanies had forwarded 16 
accounts to the Accountant General (Audit), Tripura . 14 accounts of 10 Companies 
were selected for Supplementary Audit during the ye ar. Non-Review Certificates 
(NRC) were issued against remaining two accounts of  two Companies. The audit 
reports of Statutory Auditors appointed by the C&AG  and the Supplementary Audit 
conducted by the C&AG indicated that the quality of  maintenance of State PSU 
accounts needs to be improved substantially. The de tails of aggregate money value of 
comments of Statutory Auditors and the C&AG are given in Table 4.1.12. 
Table 4.1.12: Impact of audit comments on working Companies 
(₹    in crore) 
Sl. 
No.  Particulars 
2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 
No. of 
accounts Amount  No. of 
accounts  Amount  No. of 
accounts  Amount 
1. Decrease in profit 1 4.64 1 11.01 0 0.00 
2. Increase in loss 3 2.84 2 18.85 3 4.25 
3. Non-disclosure of 
material facts 3 32.85 0 0.00 0 0.00 
4. Errors of 
classification 1 0.29 2 41.72 2 217.51 
During the year, the Statutory Auditors had given q ualified certificates on all 16 
accounts. The compliance of companies with the Acco unting Standards (AS) 
remained poor as there were four instances of non-c ompliance with the Accounting 
Standards in four accounts during the year. The audit comments were based mainly on 
the non-compliance with AS-2 (Valuation of inventor ies), AS-5 (Net Profit or Loss 
for the Period, Prior Period Items and Changes in A ccounting Policies), AS-15 
(Employee Benefits), AS-22 (Accounting for taxes on  income) and IND AS-116 
(Leases).  

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Undertakings)  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 83 
The only Statutory Corporation in the State ( viz.  Tripura Road Transport Corporation) 
for which the C&AG is the sole auditor, had not for warded any accounts during the 
reporting period to Principal Accountant General (A udit), Tripura. The Accounts of 
the Corporation have been audited and Separate Audi t Report (SAR) issued for the 
accounting year upto 2016-17. 
4.1.12.1  Gist of some of the important comments of the statutory auditors and CAG in 
respect of accounts of the PSUs are as under: 
Tripura Jute Mills Limited (2018-19) 
 Tripura Industrial Development Corporation Limited (TIDC) (another State PSE) 
constructed 20 Staff Quarters on the Land owned by the Company and handed 
over to the Company for resettlement of the occupan ts of the Dormitories, which 
were demolished by TIDC for construction of ‘Agarta la International Fair Ground 
and Exhibition Centre’. The above transaction, whic h was effected between TIDC 
and the Company without any financial consideration , remained unaccounted in 
the books of the Company and TIDC.  
The monetary impact of this transaction on the valu e of the Fixed Assets of the 
Company could not be quantified in absence of prope r documentation and 
non-maintenance of Fixed Assets Register by the Company. 
Tripura Urban Transport Company Limited (2018-19) 
 The Company has not accounted the outstanding bills  of ₹ 1.98 crore payable 
against the supply orders (June 2014) placed on Sup pliers for delivery of 100 
Buses under JNNURM. The bills remained unpaid due t o shortage of JNNURM 
funds and non-release of Additional Central Assista nce from the Government. 
This has resulted in understatement of ‘Other Curre nt Liabilities’ and ‘Fixed 
Assets’ by ₹ 1.98 crore each.  
Tripura State Electricity Corporation Limited (2016-17) 
 The Company wrongly capitalised the expenditure of revenue nature ( ₹ 2.80 
crore) relating to IT billing system under ‘Capital  Works in Progress (CWIP)’, 
resulting in overstatement of ‘CWIP’ and understatement of ‘Loss for the year’ by 
₹ 2.80 crore each.  
 The Company wrongly accounted the value of complete d projects amounting to 
₹ 70.10 crore (including project assets costing ₹ 67.66 crore partially financed out 
of Government Grants) under ‘Capital Work-in-Progre ss’ instead of the ‘Tangible 
Assets’ (Property, Plant and Equipment). Non-chargi ng of depreciation on 
completed assets resulted in understatement of ‘Dep reciation’ by ₹ 4.80 crore, 
understatement of ‘Other Income’ (Adjustment of Dep reciation for Grant Assets) 
and overstatement of ‘Reserves and Surplus’ (Capita l Grant) by ₹ 3.83 crore each 
with corresponding understatement of ‘Loss for the year’ by ₹ 0.97 crore. 
 

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Undertakings)  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 84 
Tripura Industrial Development Corporation Limited (2018-19) 
 The Company did not account for the expenses ( ₹ 0.39 crore) incurred during the 
year towards Operation and Maintenance of ‘Common E ffluent Treatment Plant’ 
(₹ 0.30 crore) and Security & Hiring of vehicles ( ₹ 0.09 crore) resulting in 
understatement of ‘Other Current Liabilities’ as we ll as ‘Loss for the year’ to the 
same extent.  
 The Company did not account lease rent receivable f rom 78 Industrial Units (IUs) 
for the year 2018-19 resulting in overstatement of ‘Loss for the year’ by 
₹ 0.99 crore with corresponding  understatement of ‘current assets’ (trade 
receivables) to the same extent. 
4.1.13 Follow up action on Audit Reports 
 
4.1.13.1 Submission of Explanatory notes 
The Reports of the C&AG represent the culmination o f the process of audit scrutiny. 
It is, therefore, necessary that they elicit approp riate and timely response from the 
executive. The Finance Department, Government of Tr ipura issued (July 1993) 
instructions to all administrative departments to s ubmit replies/ explanatory notes to 
paragraphs/ performance audits included in the Audi t Reports of the C&AG within a 
period of three months of their presentation to the  Legislature, in the prescribed 
format without waiting for any questionnaires from the Committee on Public 
Undertakings (COPU). The position of receipt of rep lies/ explanatory notes to 
paragraphs/ performance audits pending to be receiv ed from the State Government/ 
administrative departments concerned is given in Table 4.1.13 . 
Table 4.1.13: Explanatory notes not received (as on 30 September 2020) 
Year of the 
Audit Report 
(Commercial/ 
PSUs) 
Date of 
placement of 
Audit Report in 
the State 
Legislature 
Total performance audits 
and paragraphs included in 
the Audit Report 
Number of performance 
audits/paragraphs for which 
explanatory notes were not 
received 
Performance 
audits Paragraphs Performance 
audits Paragraphs 
2014-15 23-03-2016 1 2 Nil 2 
2015-16 15-03-2017 1 Nil 1 Nil 
2016-17 23-11-2018 1 1 1 1 
2017-18 30-08-2019 1 4 1 4 
Total 4 7 3 7 
From Table 4.1.13 , it can be seen that out of 11 paragraphs/ perform ance audits, 
explanatory notes to 10 paragraphs/ performance aud its in respect of three 
departments, which were commented upon, were awaited (September 2020). 
4.1.13.2 Discussion of Audit Reports by COPU 
The status as on 30 September 2020 of performance a udits and paragraphs relating to 
PSUs that appeared in the State Audit Reports and d iscussed by the COPU was as 
given in Table 4.1.14 . 
 

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Undertakings)  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 85 
Table 4.1.14: Performance audits/ paragraphs featured in State Audit Reports vis-à-vis 
discussed by COPU as on 30 September 2020  
4.1.13.3 Compliance to Reports of COPU 
Action Taken Notes (ATNs) to 49 recommendations per taining to latest ten reports of 
the COPU presented to the State Legislature between  November 2010 and February 
2015 have not been received (September 2020) as indicated in Table 4.1.15 . 
Table 4.1.15: Compliance to COPU reports 
Sl. No. 
COPU 
Report 
Number 
Date of 
Placement 
in the State 
Assembly 
Based on Audit 
Report for the 
year 
Total no. of 
recommendations 
in COPU report 
No. of 
recommendations 
where ATNs not 
received 
1 41 
01.11.2010 
2000-01 5 5 
2 42 2006-07 3 3 
3 43 2002-03 8 8 
4 44 1989-90 9 - 
5 45 
06.03.2012 
2006-07 8 8 
6 46 2007-08 5 5 
7 47 2007-08 1 1 
8 48 
On spot study tour 
by COPU at 
TFDPC 
5 5 
9 49 25.02.2014 2008-09 10 10 
10 50 20.02.2015 2004-05 4 4 
Total 10   58 49 
The above reports of COPU contained recommendations  in respect of compliance 
audit paragraphs pertaining to five departments of the State Government, which 
appeared in the reports of the CAG for the years 1989-90 to 2008-09. 
Recommendations  
State Government should review and revamp the mecha nism of responding to audit 
observations. It may ensure that explanatory notes to audit paragraphs/ 
performance audits and ATNs on the recommendations of COPU are provided as 
per the prescribed time schedule and the loss/outst anding advances/ overpayments 
flagged in audit recovered within the prescribed pe riod to enable accountability for 
public finances. 
Period of 
Audit 
Report 
Number of performance audits/paragraphs 
Appeared in Audit Reports Paragraphs discussed 
Performance 
audits Paragraphs Performance 
audits Paragraphs 
2012-13 1 3 1 2 
2013-14 1 3 Nil Nil 
2014-15 1 2 Nil Nil 
2015-16 1 Nil Nil Nil 
2016-17 1 1 Nil Nil 
2017-18 1 4 Nil Nil 
Total 6 13 1 2 

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Undertakings)  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 86 
POWER DEPARTMENT 
4.2  Performance Audit of Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Gram Jyot i Yojana 
(DDUGJY) and Pradhan Mantri Sahaj Bijli Har Ghar Yo jana 
(Saubhagya) Schemes 
 
4.2.1 Introduction 
 
(a)  Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Gram Jyoti Yojana/ Saubhagya schemes   
With a view to address the problem of inadequate an d unreliable power supply in 
rural areas and strengthening the distribution netw ork in rural areas and to complete 
the ongoing work of rural electrification under ers twhile Rajiv Gandhi Grameen 
Vidyutikaran Yojana (RGGVY) (launched in March 2005 ), Government of India 
(GoI) launched (December 2014) “Deen Dayal Upadhyay a Gram Jyoti Yojana 
(DDUGJY)” subsuming the targets laid down under XII  Five Year Plan (XII FYP 
2012-17) for erstwhile RGGVY as a separate rural el ectrification sub-component by 
carrying forward the approved outlay for the RGGVY to the DDUGJY. Two 
additional objectives were framed, viz ., (i) separation of agriculture and 
non-agriculture feeders, and (ii) strengthening and  augmenting the sub-transmission 
and distribution infrastructure in rural areas, inc luding metering at distribution 
transformers, and at feeders and consumers’ end. As  far as implementation of 
Schemes/projects sanctioned prior to launch of DDUG JY are concerned; the 
operational guidelines/ standard documents/ procedu res of RGGVY shall continue to 
prevail. 
As per definition adopted by the Ministry of Power (MoP) (revised in 2004), a village 
was considered as electrified only if:  
 ‘Basic infrastructure such as distribution transfor mer and distribution lines were 
provided in the inhabited locality as well as the d alit-basti/ hamlet where it 
exists. (For electrification through non-convention al energy sources, a 
distribution transformer may not be necessary); 
 Electricity was provided to public places like scho ols, panchayat offices, health 
centres, dispensaries, community centres, etc ; and 
 The number of households electrified was at least 10 per cent  of the total number 
of the households in the villages.’ 
There were 9.33 lakh consumer in the State. Out of this 89 per cent  of the consumer 
are categorised as domestic consumer. Though DDUGJY  (New) emphasised on 
segregation of agricultural and non-agricultural fe eders, but there was no segregation 
of agricultural and non-agricultural feeders in the  State as there was no large-scale 
dependence on electricity for agricultural irrigati on (less than one per cent ), rather, 
the irrigation was mainly carried out through natur al downhill streams, rainwater and 
minor irrigation canals. The category-wise consumer  in Tripura is shown in 
Chart 4.2.1 . 

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Undertakings)  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 87 
 
(b) Saubhagya Scheme  
Keeping in view the role of electricity in the huma n and socio-economic 
development, GoI launched (October 2017) “Pradhan M antri Sahaj Bijli Har Ghar 
Yojana” (Saubhagya) to achieve universal household electrification in the country. 
The objective of the Saubhagya Scheme is: 
• Providing last mile connectivity and electricity co nnections to all un-electrified 
households in rural areas; 
• Providing Solar Photovoltaic (SPV) based standalone  system for un-electrified 
households located in remote and inaccessible villa ges/ habitations where grid 
extension is not feasible or cost effective; and 
• Providing last mile connectivity and electricity co nnections to all remaining 
economically poor un-electrified households in urba n areas. Non-poor urban 
households are excluded from this scheme. 
4.2.2 Implementing Agencies  
In Tripura, the erstwhile RGGVY was implemented by Tripura Sate Electricity 
Corporation Limited (TSECL) being the State PSU in six districts 
99  and by North 
Eastern Electric Power Corporation (NEEPCO) in two districts 100  while DDUGJY 
was implemented by TSECL in all eight districts. TS ECL implemented the 
Saubhagya scheme in six districts and in remaining two districts (Sepahijala and 
South Tripura) the scheme was being implemented by NEEPCO being the Central 
PSU utility. 
4.2.3 Funding pattern for the schemes  
For implementation of the RGGVY Scheme, the Government of India (GoI) grant was 
90 per cent  of the eligible project cost. The remaining 10 per cent  of the project cost 
                                                           
99  West Tripura, Dhalai, Gomoti, North Tripura, Unako ti and Khowai 
100  Sepahijala and South Tripura 
832221 
74568 
7268 
5816 1268 
11574 
Chart  4.2.1: Category-wise consumer profile in Tripura 
Domestic Commercial Irrigation Industrial Bulk Supply Others 

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Undertakings)  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 88 
would be contributed by the State Governments from their own resources (or) by availing 
loan from financial institutions including Rural Electrification Corporation (REC). 
In DDUGJY and Saubhagya schemes, the GoI grant was 85 per cent of the total 
outlay, while State Government contribution and loa n components were pegged at 
five and 10 per cent respectively. The DISCOM (TSECL) was eligible to re ceive an 
additional grant of 50 per cent of loan component ( i.e.  conversion of five per cent of 
the total outlay from loan to grant) from GoI on ac hievement of prescribed 
milestones. The loan component would be provided by  REC or by other Financial 
Institutions (FIs)/ Banks. 
4.2.4 Role of major stakeholders 
The role of various authorities in formulation, app roval and implementation of the 
Scheme are shown in Table 4.2.1 . 
Table 4.2.1 
Authorities Roles 
Ministry of Power 
(MoP), Government of 
India (GoI) 
• Formulation and approval of Scheme. 
• Formulation of Scheme guidelines. 
• Appointment of REC (February 2013) as Nodal Agency for 
implementation of the Scheme.  
Rural Electrification 
Corporation (REC) 
• Responsible for overall implementation of Scheme. 
• Scrutinising the Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) re ceived 
from the Project Implementing Agency (Company) as 
recommended by the State Level Standing Committee f or 
final approval of the Monitoring Committee of MoP, 
Government of India. 
• Monitoring of Scheme implementation. 
• Release of funds on behalf of GoI. 
Government of 
Tripura (GoT) 
• Appointment of the Company as Scheme Implementing 
Agency 
• To provide the land required for Scheme works 
 
(e.g . construction of sub-stations, etc .) and facilitate obtaining 
statutory clearances (right of way issues, forest c learances, 
etc .) 
• Setting up of State Level Committee to examine DPRs  
prepared by the implementing agency. 
• Setting up of Higher Tender Committee to oversee th e 
tendering process for Scheme works. 
 Utilities {Tripura 
State Electricity 
Corporation Limited 
(TSECL) and North 
Eastern Electric Power 
Corporation Limited 
(NEEPCO)} 
• Preparing DPRs based on detailed survey. 
• Submission of DPRs for the approval of GoM and also to GoI 
through REC for final approval. 
• To execute works of electrification as per the appr oved DPRs 
and guidelines. 
 

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Undertakings)  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 89 
4.2.5 Audit objective 
The Performance audit was undertaken to ascertain whether: 
(i)  electrification of complete village was carried out as per the scheme guidelines; 
Sub-objectives: 
(a)  Strengthening and augmentation of sub-transmission and distribution system 
in rural areas including metering of distribution t ransformer/ feeders/ 
consumers were achieved. 
(ii)  electrification of households was achieved as per the scheme guidelines; and 
Sub-objectives: 
(a)  Providing last mile connectivity and electricity co nnections including free 
connections to all remaining economically poor un-e lectrified households was 
achieved; 
(b)  Providing Solar Photo Voltaic (SPV) based standalon e systems for 
un-electrified households located in remote and ina ccessible villages/ 
habitations where grid extension is not feasible or cost effective, were installed.  
(iii) households connected with power were in a pos ition to use it and derive the 
benefits of development. 
4.2.6 Audit Scope and methodology 
The performance audit was carried out covering the period 2014-15 to 2019-20 to 
review the implementation of DDUGJY and Saubhagya i n the State. Audit scope 
covered the examination of records of Tripura Sate Electricity Corporation Limited 
(TSECL) being the State PSU/ Utility, NEEPCO being the Central PSU/ Utility and 
Project Divisions. Out of eight districts/ projects in the State, four districts 
101 / projects 
were selected for audit scrutiny. A total of nine b locks were selected from these four 
selected districts/ projects. 
Records of the TSECL were scrutinised at the Corpor ate Office and Division levels 
while beneficiary survey was carried out in village s in at least five villages per block 
were selected for beneficiary survey. Only in case of two blocks (Lefunga and 
Tepania), the total number of existing villages were less than five in which case all the 
existing villages were selected for beneficiary sur vey. A total of 46 villages were 
selected by this method from the nine selected bloc ks. A total of 460 beneficiaries 
were selected for survey taking 10 from each sampled village. 
4.2.7 Audit criteria 
The main sources of audit criteria for the performance audit were: 
 Electricity Act 2003; 
 Rural Electrification Policy 2006; 
                                                           
101  West Tripura, Dhalai, Gomati and Sepahijala 

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Undertakings)  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 90 
 Scheme guidelines issued by Ministry and additional  guidelines issued by Rural 
Electrification Corporation (REC) regarding Quality  control and Procurement of 
Goods and services, etc. ; 
 Bipartite/ Tripartite/ Quadripartite agreement amon g REC, State Government, 
State Power Utilities and Central Public Sector Undertakings (CPSUs); 
 Minutes of the Monitoring Committee (MC) meetings; 
 Sanctions for payment of capital subsidy of Ministr y of Power (MoP) along with 
Utilisation Certificates; 
 Instructions/ circulars/ orders issued by MoP and REC regarding the scheme; 
 Approved Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) along with vetting comments in REC; 
 Applicable General Financial Rules (GFR), etc. ; and 
 Contract Agreements. 
4.2.8 Acknowledgement 
The Audit acknowledges the co-operation and assista nce extended by the officials of 
the Company at the Corporate Headquarter as well as  at their field offices during the 
conduct of the Performance Audit. 
Audit findings 
 
4.2.9 Deficiencies in planning 
Audit observed the following deficiencies in planning: 
4.2.9.1 Non- preparation of Need Assessment Documen t 
As per RGGVY guidelines, utilities were to prepare Need Assessment Documents 
(NADs) to substantiate the proposed work and cost e stimates. Audit observed that 
TSECL did not prepare NADs for implementation of the RGGVY. 
TSECL in its reply (November 2021) accepted the fai lure for submission of NAD 
during submission of DPR to REC. 
4.2.9.2 Deficiencies in Detailed Project Reports  
Audit observed the following deficiencies in prepar ation of the Detailed Project 
Reports (DPRs): 
 All eight DPRs 102  in respect of RGGVY and DDUGJY were not prepared o n the 
basis of detailed field survey; 
 In case of all eight projects under RGGVY and DDUGJ Y, consultation with 
public representatives including members of parliam ent and certification were not 
done while preparing the DPRs; 
 Details of the dedicated team for implementation of  projects were not included in 
the DPRs for RGGVY and DDUGJY;  
                                                           
102  DPRs for four sampled Districts i.e.  West Tripura, Dhalai, Gomati and Sepahijala  

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Undertakings)  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 91 
 No single line diagram of each village showing all habitations with existing and 
proposed infrastructure was submitted along with the project proposals; and 
 Augmentation of two number of existing sub-stations  in Gomati District and 
Dhalai District out of four sampled districts were proposed in the DPRs under 
RGGVY; for which no justification was included in the DPRs. 
TSECL in its reply (November 2021) stated that deta iled field survey was not 
conducted before preparation of DPR. The DPR was pr epared by collecting the 
information from district level offices which were sent to Headquarter office i.e to 
TSECL corporate office where the data were compiled before submission of DPR. 
Regarding deficiencies in preparation of DPRs again st RGGVY, TSECL in its reply 
(October 2021) stated that: (i) Single line diagram s of each village of each district 
showing existing and proposed electrical infrastruc tures were submitted to REC in 
hard copies in the form of spirally bound books. Th ese were hand-made diagrams and 
therefore, no copy could be made available to audit ; (ii) Regarding justification for 
augmentation of substations, it was submitted as pe r provision of the DPR only i.e as 
per the prescribed format provided for online submission. 
The reply is not acceptable since TSECL could not p roduce any records (February 
2022) in support of their reply though called for (January 2022). 
4.2.10 Financial management  
As per the fund disbursement guidelines of DDUGJY i ssued by the REC, the pattern 
of release of capital subsidy to implementing agenc ies by REC is given in 
Table 4.2.2 . 
Table 4.2.2: Pattern of release of capital subsidy to implementing agencies by REC 
Instalment 
No.  Condition for release  Release of grant component 
of GoI (in per cent ) 
1 
(i) Approval of Projects by the Monitoring 
Committee  
(ii) Bipartite/Tripartite agreement amongst 
Utilities, State Government & REC (on 
behalf of MoP)  
10 
2 Placement of Letter of Award (LoA) by the 
Utility  20 
3 
Utilisation of 90 per cent  of 1st & 2nd 
installment and 100 per cent  release of 
Utility contribution  
60 
4 After completion of works  10 
Total 100 
The date of completion as mentioned in the Project Completion Certificate shall be 
within the execution period of 24 months from date of award in case of turn-key 
execution and 30 months from date of communication of sanction in case of partial 
turn-key/ departmental execution, or as extended by  the Monitoring Committee to 
become qualified for the release of final tranche o f 10 per cent . The expenditure as 
per the Project Completion Certificate or award cos t or the cost approved by the 

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Undertakings)  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 92 
Monitoring Committee whichever is lower shall be co nsidered as the final cost of the 
project for the release of the last installment of 10 per cent , after adjusting any excess 
release made earlier (to limit the subsidy amount t o 60 per cent  of the completed 
project cost).  
In case of timely completion of the project, utilit ies shall submit all the documents 
and information in the prescribed format for availi ng additional grant as per the 
DDUGJY guidelines.  
Summary of fund sanctioned to the State, fund relea sed to the State and expenditure 
up to 31 March 2020 under RGGVY and DDUGJY is detailed in Table 4.2.3 . 
Table 4.2.3: Position of fund sanctioned, released and expenditure under RGGVY and 
DDUGJY and as on 31 March 2020 
(₹ in crore ) 
Year 
Sanctioned project cost Released under 
RGGVY 
Released under 
DDUGJY 
Expenditure 
incurred 
RGGVY  DDUGJY GoI State  Total  GoI State  Loan 
(REC)  Total  RGGVY DDUGJY  
2014-15  
316.16  
₹ 73.75 
(Excluding the 
Project 
Management 
Agency (PMA) 
charge of ₹ 0.37 
crore) 
48.19  0.00  48.19  0.00  0.00  0.00  0.00  0 0 
2015-16  42.99  7.77  50.76  0.00  0.00  0.00  0.00  67.19  0 
2016-17  77.63  4.80  82.43 0.00  0.00  0.00  0.00  80.08  0 
2017-18  55.51  8.60  64.11  6.31  0.00  0.00  6.31  111.53  4.09  
2018-19  21.82  1.89  23.71  7.79  3.71  0.00  11.49  29.96  12.80 
2019-20  0.00  6.27  6.27  13.23  0.00  3.56  16.80  7.50  11.60 
Total 246.14  29.33  275.47  27.33  3.71  3.56  34.60  296.26  28.49  
Source : Data from TSECL and NEEPCO 
From the above table it can be seen that during 201 4-15 to 2019-20 the GoI released 
₹ 246.14 crore and the State Government released ₹ 29.33 crore under RGGVY. 
Against the total release of ₹ 275.47 crore an expenditure of ₹ 296.26 crore was 
incurred for implementation of the scheme up to 31 March 2020. 
Under DDUGJY the GoI released ₹ 27.33 crore and the State Government released 
₹ 3.71 crore during the 2017-18 to 2019-20. The Stat e Government contribution was 
‘Nil’ under DDUGJY during 2017-18 and 2019-20. An e xpenditure of ₹ 28.49 crore 
was incurred for implementation of the scheme during the same period. 
Monitoring Committee, Ministry of Power (MoP), Gove rnment of India, sanctioned 
₹ 417.53 crore for implementation of Saubhagya in th e State. The scheme was 
implemented in all the eight districts 103  of the State by the two Programme 
Implementing Agencies (PIA), TSECL and North Easter n Electric Power Corporation 
Limited (NEEPCO) being the Central PSU. The detail of the fund released by the 
REC/ MoP during 2018-20 is given in Table 4.2.4 .  
 
 
                                                           
103  By TSECL- West Tripura, North Tripura, Dhalai, Una koti, Khowai and Gomati; 
By NEEPCO- Sepahijala and South Tripura  

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Undertakings)  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 93 
Table 4.2.4: Fund position under Saubhagya  
(₹ in crore) 
TSECL 
Year Opening 
Balance 
Funds Received from Total fund 
received 
during the 
year 
Total fund 
available 
during the 
year 
Fund 
Utilised  
Unspent/ 
closing 
Balance GoI State REC 
(Loan) 
2018-19 0.00 69.70 0.00 0.00 69.70 69.70 37.83 31.8 7 
2019-20 31.87 0.00 13.92 0.00 13.92 45.79 45.42 0.3 7 
Total  69.70 13.92 0.00 83.62  83.25 0.37 
NEEPCO 
2018-19  0.00  51.26  0.00  0.00  51.26  51.26  27.61  23.65  
2019-20  23.65  8.10  3.02  0.00  11.12  34.77  34.52  0.25  
Total  59.36 3.02 0.00 62.38  62.13 0.25 
Apart from the above during 2018-19, REC also relea sed ₹ 115.70 crore to Rural 
Electrification Corporation Power Development and C onsultancy Ltd. (RECPDCL) 
for the supply of materials out of which ₹ 115.34 crore was utilised. 
Therefore, during 2018-2020, REC released total amo unt of ₹ 244.76 crore and 
₹ 16.94 crore was contributed by the State as State share. An amount of ₹ 260.73 
crore was utilised against the available fund. 
4.2.10.1 Advance payment booked as utilised under S aubhagya scheme 
Audit noticed that TSECL paid ₹ 3.41 crore to different Electrical Divisions (EDs)  
from 2018-19 to 2019-20 as advance for providing se rvice connection to beneficiaries 
under Saubhagya scheme. The entire amount of ₹ 3.41 crore booked against divisions 
had been shown as utilised in the Utlisation Certif icates sent to the Government of 
India for the years 2018-19 and 2019-20. 
Scrutiny of records revealed that out of the total advance of 
₹ 3.41 crore, an amount of 
₹ 0.60 crore had only been utilised for providing se rvice connection under Saubhagya 
scheme. However, no adjustment for the balance amou nt of ₹ 2.81 crore had been 
submitted by ED-Ambassa, ED-Bishalgarh and ED- Amarpur till August 2021. It was 
noticed that Deputy General Manager (DGM), Commerci al & Tarrif (C&T), West 
Tripura could not utlilise the fund of ₹ 1.10 crore and refunded the entire amount to 
TSECL. As a result, total amount of ₹ 2.81 crore had been lying unutilised. Details of 
advance given to different EDs are given in Table 4.2.5 . 
Table 4.2.5: Details of Advance and actual Utilisation  
(₹ in lakh) 
Electrical Division Name of the 
District 
Advance booked 
against ED 
Actual amount 
utilised 
Unspent 
balance 
DGM, ED-Ambassa Dhalai 80 0 80 
DGM, ED-Bishalgarh Sepahijala 40 0 40 
DGM, Commercial &Tarrif 
(C&T), TSECL West Tripura 60.60 60.02 0.58 
DGM, ED-Amarpur Gomati 50 0 50 
DGM, C&T, TSECL West Tripura 110.28 0 110.28 104  
Total 340.88 60.02 280.86 
                                                           
104  Refunded to TSECL and lying unspent with TSECL 

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Undertakings)  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 94 
TSECL in its reply (February 2022) stated that the advance was made for payment to 
petty agencies for providing service connections. T he reply of the TSECL is not 
acceptable as the fact remained that an amount of ₹ 0.60 crore only was utilised for 
providing service connections and the ₹ 1.10 crore was refunded by DGM, C&T, 
TSECL. 
4.2.10.2 Other financial management issues   
 
4.2.10.2 (a) Utilisation Certificates  
As per para 7 of Chapter IV of DDUGJY guidelines  and para 5 of Chapter V of the 
Saubhagya scheme guidelines , utility shall submit Utilisation Certificates (UCs)  for 
the fund released during the financial year and uti lisation thereof  in the prescribed 
format latest by 30 April of succeeding year. The U C shall provide the physical 
progress/ achievements also apart from the financia l utilisation. Release of further 
fund will be subject to submission of UCs in prescribed format. Audit observed that in 
respect of eight projects, UCs were not submitted b y the PIAs as of 30 April 2020 for 
two years (2018-19 and 2019-20). However, expenditu re statement of progress of 
work were not accompanied with the UCs submitted. 
Audit noticed that there were delays ranging from 2 2 days to 479 days in submission 
of UCs in respect of funds released under the scheme  
TSECL stated in its reply (April 2021) that the del ay in submission of UCs was due to 
slow progress of work and the UCs for 2018-19 and 2 019-20 were not submitted as 
the closure proposals were pending.  
The reply is not acceptable as submission of UCs is  a time bound process as per the 
guidelines. 
4.2.10.2 (b) Audited Accounts relating to receipts of funds 
Guidelines stipulate that utility will ensure audit  of funds received by the utility from 
REC and expenditure incurred there against during t he financial year by an 
independent Chartered Accountant (CA) and furnish a report to REC latest by 30 June 
of succeeding year. Audit observed that utilities had not submitted the Audit reports to 
REC in respect of RGGVY XII 105  Plan projects for four years (2014-15, 2015-16, 
2018-19 and 2019-20). It was also noticed that the accounts under Saubhagya scheme 
had been audited by the CAs, however, audited accou nts were not submitted to the 
REC as required under para 5 of Chapter V of the Saubhagya guidelines. 
TSECL in its reply (April 2021) stated that the aud ited Receipts and Payments 
accounts would be submitted to Audit, but the same were yet to be received (February 
2022). In respect of Saubhagya scheme, TSECL and NE EPCO stated that audit of 
accounts of Saubhagya had been carried out and forwarded to REC as and when asked 
for submission. However, the documents in support o f forwarding the audited 
accounts to REC were not produced to audit. 
                                                           
105  Same criteria for RGGVY is mentioned in the ‘Guide lines for release of funds for 12 th Plan 
projects’ 

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Undertakings)  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 95 
Thus, the TSECL violated the provision of the schem e guidelines by not submitting 
the accounts to REC. 
4.2.10.2 (c) Loss of interest due to non-availing C LTD facility  
Para 6 of Chapter V of RGGVY guidelines and para 2. 3.2 of Chapter IV of DDUGJY 
guidelines stipulate that utility shall enter into tripartite agreement to fix the roles and 
responsibility of Bank. The guidelines envisaged th at the bank should ensure that all 
fund exceeding ₹ five lakh in programme account shall automatically be transferred to 
fixed deposit at the prevailing rate of interest. 
Further, para 2.3.2 of Chapter IV of DDUGJY guidelines stipulate that the utility shall 
open a separate dedicated bank account in a nationa lised bank and the nature of the 
account shall be current account with CLTD facility . Similar provision is also 
provided under Saubhagya guidelines. 
Audit observed that TSECL did not avail the CLTD fa cility in the different bank 
accounts operating for implementation of RGGVY, DDU GJY and Saubhagya 
schemes for the period July 2015 to March 2020. As a result, TSECL had to incur loss 
of interest of 
₹ 2.26 crore as detailed in Table 4.2.6 .  
Table 4.2.6: Loss of interest due to non-opening of a separate dedicated bank account 
with CLTD facility 
(₹ in crore) 
Name of bank Account no. of bank account Period for which CLTD 
could not be availed  
Interest  
Lost*  
State Bank of 
India 
xxxxxxxx459 (RGGVY – 
Programme A/c) April 2015 to March 2020 1.61  
Canara Bank  xxxxxxxxxx195 (DDUGJY )  July 2017 to March 2020  0.26  
Canara Bank  xxxxxxxxxx277 (Saubhagya)  October 2018 to March 2020  0.39  
Total    2.26  
*Source : https://sbi.co.in/web/interest-rates/interest-rates/old-interest-rates-last-10-years  
TSECL in its reply (April 2021) stated that it did not have any proper instruction from 
REC, GoI, for availing the CLTD facility. The reply  is not acceptable since the 
guidelines, inter alia, were clear on availing CLTD facility for better fun d 
management by PIA. 
4.2.10.2 (d) Deduction of tax at source by the bank s on interest earned 
Para 5 of Chapter V of RGGVY guidelines and para 6. 4 of Chapter IV of DDUGJY 
guidelines  require that utilities have to take necessary steps  to seek exemption from 
Income Tax Department (ITD) regarding deduction of Tax at Source by the bank on 
interest accrued on balance fund under DDUGJY. Simi lar provision was also 
provided under Saubhagya guidelines. Audit observed that TSECL did not take up the 
matter with the ITD for exemption from TDS on the i nterest earned on the subsidy 
funds resulting in TDS of ₹ 0.08 crore during 2018-19 to 2019-20. Further, TSE CL 
did not file claim for refund with the ITD. 
TSECL in its reply (October 2021) accepted the audi t observation and stated it would 
approach the ITD to claim refund of TDS already ded ucted by the bank and seek 
exemption from TDS. 

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Undertakings)  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 96 
4.2.10.2 (e) Unclaimed State taxes/local taxes 
As per scheme guidelines, the State and Local Taxes  are not admissible under 
RGGVY, DDUGJY and Saubhagya and to be borne by the State Government. Audit 
observed that while making payments to the contract ors from Scheme funds, TSECL 
deducted and deposited Tripura Value Added Tax (TVA T), State GST (SGST), and 
Work Contract Tax (WCT) to the tune of 
₹ 10.78 crore to Government of Tripura 
during 2014-20. Out of this amount, TSECL had lodged claim for ₹ 0.86 crore towards 
the reimbursement of SGST only from the State Gover nment. Details are given in 
Table 4.2.7 . 
Table 4.2.7: Local Tax due to be reimbursed from State Government 
(₹ in crore)  
TSECL accepted (June 2021) the audit observation an d assured to claim the 
unclaimed State taxes. In respect of reimbursement of WCT, TSECL replied that 
WCT was not eligible for re-imbursement.  
The reply is not acceptable since the guidelines sp ell out that the State taxes and 
duties are to be borne by the State Government and WCT is a part of State taxes.  
4.2.11 Implementation of RGGVY and DDUGJY 
During 2014-15 to 2019-20 numerous works were propo sed for electrification in the 
State under RGGVY and DDUGJY schemes. Summary of th e item-wise estimated 
cost approved under different works/ heads is detailed in  Table 4.2.8  
Table 4.2.8: Summary of estimated cost 
Sl. 
No. Items of works proposed Number of items Amount 
(₹ in crore) 
RGGVY (XII Plan) 
1 Feeder Separation/ new feeder Nil  Nil  
2 33 KV/ 66 KV line (CKM) 131.70  9.79  
3 Sub-station works (33 KV/ 66 KV) New substation 1 3  29.23  
4 Sub-station works (33 KV/ 66 KV) augmentation of 
existing substation 
4
 4.49  
5 Distribution Transformers (DTRs) 2256  30.23  
6 11 KV lines (new) 2287.87  103.86  
7 LT Infrastructure works 3116.28  97.22  
8 Metering at feeders, Distribution Transformers and 
consumers end 
Nil 
 Nil  
9 Establishing Missing Link of optic fiber Nil  Nil  
10 PMA charges  Nil  Nil 
 Sub-Total   274.82  
Name of the Scheme Local Tax due to be reimbursed from State Government 
SGST  WCT  Total 
RGGVY  2.03 1.54 3.57 
DDUGJY  1.78 NA 1.78 
Saubhagya 4.57 NA 4.57 
Total 8.38 1.54 9.92 

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Undertakings)  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 97 
Sl. 
No. Items of works proposed Number of items Amount 
(₹ in crore) 
11 Cost of electrifying villages including one 
habitation  Not available with PIA/ 
DISCOM  
12 Cost of electrifying habitations above 100 
population  
13 Cost of providing free connections to BPL house 
holds   
89604 
 26.88  
14 Cost of DDG Projects in XII plan    
15 Agency charges 1 14.46  
 Sub-Total  41.34  
 Total   316.16  
DDUGJY  
1 Feeder Separation/ new feeder Nil  Nil  
2 33 KV/ 66 KV line (CKM) Nil  Nil  
3 Sub-station works (33 KV/ 66 KV) New substation N il  Nil  
4 Sub-station works (33 KV/ 66 KV) augmentation of 
existing substation 
Nil 
 Nil  
5 11 KV line DTRs 144  4.51  
6 11 KV lines 95.82  6.71  
7 11/22 kv lines augmentation 236.55  8.53  
8 LT Infrastructure works 215.10  16.57  
9 Metering at feeders, Distribution Transformers and 
consumers end 
165414 
 36.59  
10 Establishing Missing Link of optic fiber Nil  Nil  
11 PMA charges  1 0.37  
 Sub-Total   73.28  
12 Cost of electrifying villages including one 
habitation Not available with PIA/ 
DISCOM 
13 Cost of electrifying habitations above 100 
population 
14 Cost of providing free connections to BPL house 
holds  
2816 
 0.84  
15 Cost of DDG Projects in XII plan  Nil  Nil  
16 Agency charges Nil  Nil  
 Sub-Total  0.84  
 Total   74.12  
4.2.11.1 Time overrun  
RGGVY and DDGUJY guidelines  stipulate that in case of turn-key implementation, the 
project shall be completed within 24 months from th e date of issue of letter of award 
(LoA) by the utility. Whereas in case of partial tu rn-key/departmental basis, approved 
by the Monitoring Committee (MC), project shall be completed within 30 months (24 
months for implementation and six months for placem ent of awards for supply and 
services i.e. erection) from date of communication of the approval by the MC. 
Audit observed that there were delays ranging from one day to 792 days in 
completion of 46 works 106  under RGGVY in four sampled districts as detailed 
                                                           
106  Total 61 LoAs were issued to different contractors  for execution of works in three districts (except 
Sepahijala District). Execution of RGGVY (XII Plan)  in Sepahijala District was entrusted to 
NEEPCO and separate LoA was issued to the turn-key contractor. 

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Undertakings)  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 98 
(Appendix 4.2.1) . Details of completion of RGGVY and DDUGJY works 107  in 
sampled districts are given in Table 4.2.9 .  
Table 4.2.9: Details of completion of RGGVY and DDUGJY works  
Name of 
District 
Date of award 
of Project  
Target date of 
completion of 
Project 108  
Actual Date of 
Completion 
(mentioned in the 
Project Completion 
Certificate)*  
Delay in 
completion of 
work (in months)  
RGGVY  
West Tripura 30.08.2014 14.09.2016 27.09.2018 109  24 
Dhalai 22.12.2015 06.07.2018 13.04.2018 110  Nil 
Gomati 22.12.2015 06.07.2018 01.01.2021 29 
Sepahijala 18.09.2014 03.10.2016 18.08.2017 10 
DDUGJY  
West Tripura 04.07.2017 19.01.2020 31.01.2019 Nil 
Dhalai 04.07.2017 19.01.2020 07.02.2019 Nil 
Gomati 04.07.2017 19.01.2020 07.08.2018 Nil 
Sepahijala 04.07.2017 19.01.2020 06.02.2019 Nil 
*The dates of completion of the projects are excluding the metering part. Metering for all the eight 
projects was completed on 28.02.2021. 
Due to delay incompletion of projects the beneficia ries were deprived of the intended 
benefits of the scheme. 
TSECL in its reply (February 2022) accepted the fac t that there was considerable 
delay in completion of the various works under RGGVY scheme.  
4.2.11.2 Status of Electrification of Villages unde r RGGVY and DDUGJY  
In Tripura, total number of villages as per 2011 ce nsus was 901 out of which 26 
villages were unelectrified (UE) and 875 villages w ere Partially Electrified (PE). GoI 
sanctioned 26 UE villages for electrification and 7 86 Partially Electrified (PE) 
villages for further intensive electrification for implementation of RGGVY under 12 th  
plan (2012-17). The status of rural electrification in Tripura such as number of UE/PE 
villages as on 31 December 2014, prior to the launch of the RGGVY scheme and after 
implementation of the scheme is tabulated in Table 4.2.10 . 
 
 
                                                           
107  Total nine NITs were invited and four LoAs were is sued to different contractors for execution of 
erection works in four districts and four LoAs were  issued for procurement of materials. One 
contract was cancelled due to failure in quality inspection. 
108  24 months from the date of award of Project and 30  months from award in case of partial turn-key/ 
departmental execution) 
109  As per Project Completion Report 
110  As Project Completion Report was not available for  any project except RGGVY (XII Plan) – West 
Tripura, so the date of completion of the last work  was considered as the completion date of 
project for the other seven projects. 

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Undertakings)  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 99 
Table 4.2.10: Number of UE and PE villages sanctioned and electrified under RGGVY 
Total 
Villages 
as per 
2011 
census 
Number  
of UE 
villages as 
on 
December 
2014 
Number of 
PE Village 
as on 
December 
2014 
Number  
of UE 
Village 
sanctioned 
under 
RGGVY 
Number of 
PE  Village 
Sanctioned 
under 
RGGVY 
for 
intensive 
electrifica-
tion 
Total 
villages 
sanctioned 
under 
RGGVY  
Balance 
Number  
of UE 
villages 
partially 
electrified 
as on  
31 st  March 
2020 
Total 
number 
of PE 
village 
as on 
31 st 
March 
2020 
901  26  875  26  786  812 89 26  901  
Source : Departmental records  
For implementation of RGGVY, TSECL prepared DPRs wi th an estimated cost of 
₹ 556.00 crore and submitted to REC for approval. Ho wever, REC curtailed the 
estimates by 43 per cent  and sanctioned ₹ 316.16 crore. Consequently, TSECL had to 
revise the DPR to limit the estimates within the sa nctioned cost by reducing the scope 
of work. Due to reduction of scope of work none of the PE village was fully 
electrified under RGGVY. 
The works sanctioned under RGGVY could not be compl eted within the stipulated 
time 
111  and got several extensions and finally it was exte nded upto October 2020. 
TSECL and NEEPCO could complete the project only in  six districts 112  as on date of 
audit (August 2021). As on 31 st  March 2020, all the 901 villages in the State were  
converted into PE villages. 
GoI rolled out DDUGJY project for strengthening and  augmentation of 
sub-transmission & distribution (ST&D) infrastructu re in rural areas, including 
metering at distribution transformers, feeders and consumers end. Out of the 901 PE 
villages, GoI sanctioned 251 villages for implement ation of DDUGJY scheme out of 
which 245 villages spilled over from RGGVY and six villages were freshly 
sanctioned from remaining 89 villages which were no t covered under RGGVY. 
Details are given in Table 4.2.11 . 
Table 4.2.11: Number of UE and PE villages sanctioned and electrified under DDUGJY 
Total 
Villages as 
per 2011 
census 
Number of 
PE Villages 
sanctioned 
under 
DDUGJY 
spilled over 
from 
RGGVY 
scheme 
Number of PE  
Village freshly 
Sanctioned 
under 
DDUGJY 
scheme 
Total PE 
villages 
sanctioned 
under 
DDUGJY 
scheme 
Total 
villages 
covered 
under 
RGGVY 
Total 
villages 
covered 
under 
RGGVY and 
DDUGJY 
Villages 
not 
covered 
under 
RGGVY 
and 
DDUGJY  
901 245  6 251 812 818 83 
 
                                                           
111  24 months from the date of sanction (January 2014)  in case of turnkey contract and 36 months in 
case of Departmental execution 
112  Closure report submitted for Sepahijala and South Tripura- January 2019 (implemented by PIA 
NEEPCO) and West Tripura-September 2019, Dhalai RGG VY (12 th  Plan) project -June 2020, 
North Tripura and Khowai-August 2020 

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Undertakings)  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 100 
Under DDUGJY, TSECL submitted DPR for ₹ 903.02 crore. However, REC 
sanctioned only ₹ 74.12 crore. Accordingly, TSECL reduced different parameters and 
some of the works like augmentation of 11 KV line/ LT line/ distribution 
Transformer, construction of 33/11 KV Sub-station, etc . could not be taken up. As a 
result, none of the PE villages could be fully electrified. 
4.2.11.3 Strengthening and augmentation of sub-tran smission and distribution 
system in rural areas including metering of distribution transformers 
Strengthening and augmentation of sub-transmission and distribution infrastructure 
along with adequate metering arrangements are essen tial components to ensure 
reliable and quality power supply in rural areas an d to complete the process of village 
electrification. The summary of requirements of the  State, sanctions accorded by 
Ministry of Power (MoP) against the requirements an d achievements of the State 
against each component are detailed in Table 4.2.12 . 
Table 4.2.12:  Summary of requirement, MoP’s sanction and achievements against each 
component 
Name of component 
Requirements of States as 
per DPR/State Plan 
(RGGVY and DDUGJY)  
Sanctioned 
by MoP 
under 
RGGVY 
Achievement  
Shortfall 
against the 
sanction 
(per cent ) 
Laying of 33 KV/ 66 KV 
lines (Ckm) 265.70 
113  135.70 54.77 59.64 
Construction of new sub-
stations (Nos.) 22 
114  13 5 61.53 
Augmentation of existing 
sub-stations (Nos.) 21 
115  4 2 50 
Metering (Nos.) 165414 116  165414 161728 2.23 
From Table 4.2.12 , it can be seen that the GoI sanctioned for laying of 135.70 Ckm of 
33/66 KV lines, construction of 13 new substations, augmentation of four sub-stations 
under RGGVY. Audit noticed that the State could lay  only 54.77 Ckm of 33/66 KV 
lines, construct five sub-stations, carry out augme ntation of two existing sub-stations 
and install 1,61,728 meters. Thus, the State could not achieve the target sanctioned by 
MoP under RGGVY and there was shortfall ranging fro m 2.23 per cent  to 
61.53 per cent  reasons for which has been discussed in Paragraph 4.2.11.5 . 
Under-achievement of the planned targets was attrib utable to various inadequacies in 
planning, implementation, monitoring.  
4.2.11.4 Non-providing of connectivity in public pl aces 
RGGVY guidelines proposed for connectivity of publi c places like schools, 
panchayats, hospitals, etc.  Scrutiny of closure report revealed that no public  places 
were provided connectivity under the schemes though  proposed in the DPRs as 
detailed in Table 4.2.13 . 
                                                           
113  For all eight districts: RGGVY – 135.70 Ckm; DDUGJ Y– 130 Ckm 
114  For all eight districts: RGGVY – 13; DDUGJY– 9 
115  For all eight districts: RGGVY – 4; DDUGJY– 17 
116  Consumer Meter-1,62,628 plus  DTR Meter-2,786 

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Undertakings)  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 101 
Table 4.2.13: Public places where electricity connection provided under the scheme 
District  
Number of public places 
proposed to be given access 
to electricity under the 
scheme  
Number of public places where 
electricity connection provided under 
the scheme  
West Tripura 1047 Nil 
Sepahijala 1038 Nil 
Gomati 655 Nil 
Dhalai 519 Nil 
Total  3259  Nil  
It can be seen from Table 4.2.13  that electricity connections could not be provided  in 
3,259 public places (1,195 Schools, 276 Panchayats,  167 Health centres and 1,621 
others) despite having provisions under the RGGVY scheme. 
TSECL in its reply (October 2021) stated that, due to curtailment of project cost 
estimated in the DPRs as well as non-receiving the sanction for the same from REC, 
the proposed connectivity to the public places coul d not be provided under the 
RGGVY. 
4.2.11.5 Implementation of RGGVY . 
As discussed in  Paragraph 4.2.11.3 , the actual implementation of laying of lines/ 
construction of sub-stations, household connection,  installation DTR meters, 
construction of new sub-station and augmentation of  sub-stations fell short of targets 
by 2.23 per cent  to 61.53 per cent in the State under RGGVY.  
The inadequacies noticed in implementation of RGGVY in four sampled districts, viz. 
West Tripura, Sepahijala, Gomati and Dhalai are dis cussed in the subsequent 
paragraphs. 
4.2.11.5 (a) Inadequacy in implementation of RGGVY  
For implementation of RGGVY, TSECL prepared DPRs wi th an estimated cost of 
₹ 556 crore based on Tripura Schedule of Rates (SoR) , 2013 and submitted (January 
2014) to REC for its appraisal. The DPR includes 1, 03,217 BPL household electricity 
connections and creation of infrastructure like lay ing of 3,257.65 Ckm new 11 KV 
line, 4,100.31 Ckm new LT line, 135.70 Ckm new 33 K V line, installation of 3,223 
DTRs, construction of 13 new 33/11 KV sub-stations and augmentation of four 
existing 33/11 KV sub-stations. 
It was noticed that REC curtailed the estimated cos t of 
₹ 556 crore by 43 per cent  and 
sanctioned ₹ 316.16 crore. The amount sanctioned by REC did not  adhere to the 
estimates which was prepared by TSECL based on Sche dule of Rates (SoR), 2013. 
However, the REC directed the State to limit the ex penditure within the sanctioned 
cost.  
The original and sanctioned DPR cost of four sample d districts is given in  
Table 4.2.14 .  
 
 

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Undertakings)  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 102 
Table 4.2.14: Original and sanctioned DPR cost of four sampled districts 
(₹ in crore)  
Name of the District  Original DPR Cost  Sanctioned By REC  
West Tripura ₹ 57.52 ₹ 33.66 
Dhalai ₹ 84.45 ₹ 48.33 
Gomati ₹ 52.88 ₹ 31.28 
Sepahijala ₹ 74.46 ₹ 40.84 
The electrification works under RGGVY include const ruction of new 
sub-transmission and distribution network including  service connections to BPL 
households and construction of 33/11 KV sub-station s with double storied control 
room cum office building, equipment foundation, bou ndary wall and land 
development for rural electricity infrastructure and rural household electrification. 
Out of the four sampled RGGVY projects/ districts, TSECL awarded the 
electrification works of Sepahijala District and We st Tripura District to two 
contractors 117  on turn-key basis. For implementation of RGGVY in remaining two 
sampled projects viz.  Dhalai and Gomati Districts, no responsive bidders  were 
available for electrification works despite invitin g of tenders repeatedly. Thus, with 
the approval (August 2015) of REC, TSECL decided to  execute the electrification 
work departmentally wherein TSECL procured major ma terials and awarded erection 
works through open tender. 
The irregularities noticed in implementation of the  departmentally executed project 
are discussed in subsequent paragaraphs. 
4.2.11.5 (b) Reduction in the scope of work  
As per RGGVY guidelines, the GoI sanction shall be restricted to 90 per cent  of the 
sanctioned cost and under no circumstances, there w ill be upward revision of GoI 
grant component as approved by the Monitoring Commi ttee. In case upward variation 
of project cost is necessary, the State Government may use its own resources or 
approach the REC for additional loan. In case, the State Government is not willing to 
utilise its own resources or take additional loan f rom REC, then it may recast the 
DPRs by reducing the scope of work (Bill of Quantities) and restricting the award cost 
within the sanctioned cost. The State Government ma y reduce the coverage, if, it 
becomes absolutely necessary. In this case the Stat e Government would have to bear 
the responsibility to cover left out villages/ habi tations and BPL households in future 
at its own cost. 
Scrutiny of records 118  revealed that TSECL prepared estimates (February 2 014) of 
₹ 32.17 crore, ₹ 46.18 crore and ₹ 29.97 crore for West Tripura District, Dhalai 
District and Gomati District respectively by reduci ng scope of work to limit the DPR 
                                                           
117  M/s Everest Infra Pvt. Ltd and M/s Bhattacherjee C onstruction in Sepahijala and West Tripura 
respectively 
118  The tendering process for the RGGVY works in respe ct of Sepahijala District could not be 
checked as records pertaining to the tendering proc ess could not be made available to audit by 
NEEPCO. 

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Undertakings)  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 103 
cost within the sanctioned cost approved by REC. Au dit noticed that the lowest prices 
offered by bidders in response to the tender were 4 2  per cent  to 83 per cent above the 
estimated cost put to tender. TSECL further, reduce d estimates of the three projects 
by 40 per cent  to 42 per cent  and prepared (August 2014) fresh estimates for ₹ 19.30 
crore. ₹ 27.71 crore, ₹ 18.73 crore for West Tripura, Dhalai and Gomati Di stricts 
respectively to limit the overall expenditure within the sanction of GoI.  
Due to reduction of estimates various parameters ha d been reduced significantly 
ranging from two per cent  to 83 per cent . Further, some major works like construction 
of new 33/11 KV sub-stations 119 , laying of 10 Ckm new 33 & 66 KV lines, 
augmentation of 33/11 KV existing sub-stations 120 , laying of 11 KV feeder lines were 
excluded by TSECL while awarding the works. Due to reduction of scope of work 
there was adverse effect on implementation of the s cheme like shortfall in laying of 
lines, construction of sub-stations, augmentation o f existing sub-stations, non 
providing of electric connection in public places a nd shortfall in providing service 
connection to BPL households as discussed at Paragraphs 4.2.11.2, 4.2.11.3 , 
4.2.11.4 and  4.2.11.5 (c ). Details of sanctioned and awarded components are  given in 
Appendix 4.2.2 . 
Audit observed that the State had shown the high de pendency on central grants in 
implementation of scheme. The State did not utilise  its own resources to complete the 
left out works as envisaged in the guidelines. Further, in spite of having provisions for 
availing loan from REC with extended relaxations 121 , the State Government did not 
avail the loan. Thus, the State did not fulfil its requirement in providing improved 
electricity infrastructure so as to avoid the additional financial burden on it.  
TSECL in its reply (October 2021) accepted the audi t observation and stated that 
Tripura being a small State was unable to bear the additional financial burden that 
would have come upon if the same was regularised. E ven taking loan from any 
financial institution or REC as per provision seeme d to be tough as repayment had to 
be done for the same in crores. TSECL than became bound to reduce the scope further 
so that the quoted rates of bidders did not exceed the sanctioned values to avoid the 
additional financial burden which resulted shortfal l in electrification of villages under 
the scheme as discussed at Paragraph 4.2.11.2 . 
4.2.11.5 (c) Shortfall in providing service connect ion  
As a result of curtailment of estimated cost of the  projects as stated in 
Paragraph 4.2.11.5 (a) , scope of works for providing service connection t o BPL 
household was reduced by 13  per cent  to 42 per cent. Details are given in 
Table 4.2.15 .  
                                                           
119  Construction of new sub-stations at Durgachowmuhan i in Dhalai District and at Tepania in Gomati 
District 
120  at Salema in Dhalai District and Kakraban (Rani) i n Gomati District. Construction of 33/11 KV 
sub-station at Tepania had been carried out by sepa rate work order through turkey contract but 
could not be completed as on March 2020. 
121  like minimum interest and long repayment tenure wi th five years moratorium facilities on the 
principal amount 

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Undertakings)  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 104 
Table 4.2.15: BPL connections provided under RGGVY scheme 
(in Number ) 
District/ 
Project Actual as per DPR  Achievement Shortfall Shortfall 
(in per cent ) 
West Tripura 8620 6500 2120 25 
Dhalai 14226 12416 1810 13 
Gomati 15328 8871 6457 42 
Sepahijala 11924 7462 4462 37 
Total 50098 35249 14849 30 
TSECL in its reply (October 2021) accepted the obse rvation and stated that due to 
curtailment of sanctioned cost by the GoI, TSECL ha d to reduce the scope of work 
which resulted in shortfall of achievement of target set in the recast DPRs. 
4.2.11.5 (d) Villages left out without sufficient r easons 
Scrutiny of closure report of RGGVY submitted to RE C revealed that one village 122  
in West Tripura District and 11 villages 123  in Dhalai District that were left out during 
execution of work without any reasons. Consequently , 1,214 rural households 124  were 
deprived of electrification and 352 BPL households 125  did not get electricity 
connections in West Tripura District and Dhalai Dis trict though the amount was 
sanctioned for electrification of those villages. A s per agreement, the State 
Government had to bear the responsibility to cover left out villages/ habitations and 
BPL households in future at its own cost, electrifi cation of these villages had not been 
carried out till September 2021. 
TSECL in its reply (October 2021) accepted the audi t observation and stated that the 
electrification work of those villages could not be  taken up due to interior terrain 
location, however, it would be covered under DDUGJY (Addl infra) scheme. 
4.2.11.6 Inadequacy in implementation of DDUGJY  
TSECL acted as the PIA in all the eight districts o f Tripura. The works were awarded 
district-wise to contractors on partial turn-key ba sis. TSECL decided to procure the 
major/ high-value materials like DTRs, Aluminium Conductor Steel-Reinforced 
(ACSR) cables, LT Aerial Bunched (AB) cables, etc . in a centralised manner through 
the Materials Management Division (MMD), while all the other materials were to be 
procured by the partial turn-key contractors. The w orks were awarded to the 
contractors in July 2017 with a stipulated completion time of 24 months. 
The irregularities noticed in implementation of the  scheme are discussed in the 
subsequent paragraphs. 
                                                           
122  Dumrakari Dak 
123  Lalchhara, Kanchanpur, Srirampur, Duraichhara, Bis hnupur, Ultachhara, Mainama, Ghagrachhara, 
Sonapur, Sadhujan Para, Purba Nalichhara (Total 701 rural households and 233 BPL households) 
124  513 rural household in West Tripura District and 7 01 households in Dhalai District 
125  119 BPL households in West Tripura District and 23 3 BPL households in Dhalai District 

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Undertakings)  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 105 
4.2.11.6 (a) Probable loss of additional grant  
Aggregate Technical and Commercial (AT&C) loss is o ne single key performance 
indicator that reveals the efficiency level of the DISCOM at a glance. AT&C losses is 
a combination of energy loss (technical loss plus theft plus  inefficiency in billings) 
and commercial loss (default in payment plus  inefficiency in collection). AT&C 
losses means ratio between quantum of power the Com pany injects into the supply 
area in given period and the quantum of power it ma nages to raise bill for (denoted as 
billing efficiency) and the ratio of amount the Com pany is able to collect from the 
supply area with respect to the amount billed for a  given period (denoted as collection 
efficiency). Expressed as a formula, it denotes: 
{1 minus (Billing Efficiency X Collection Efficiency)} X 100 
Source : National Power Portal  
The quantum of power is measured in million units ( MU) where unit denotes one kilo 
watt hour (kwh). 
As per the DDUGJY guidelines, the DISCOM was requir ed to prioritise the scope of 
work to ensure reduction of AT&C losses as per the DISCOM wise trajectory 
finalised by the MoP in consultation with the States. The release of additional grant of 
50 per cent of loan component under the scheme ( i.e.  five per cent of total outlay) was 
also contingent upon achievement of this AT&C loss reduction trajectory.   
The year-wise AT&C loss targets set by the MoP in c onsultation with the State 
Government, and actual AT&C loss figures from 2014- 15 to 2019-20 is given in 
Table 4.2.16 . 
Table 4.2.16: Year-wise AT&C loss targets and actual AT&C loss 
(in percentage) 
Year  Targets (maximum 
admissible loss)  
Actual AT&C loss at the 
end of the year  Shortfall  
2014-15  27.35  36.23  8.88  
2015-16  24.85  32.68  7.83  
2016-17  22.35  29.20  6.85  
2017-18  20.85  30.31  9.46  
2018-19  20.00  35.48  15.48  
2019-20  18.00  39.53  21.53  
Source : Targets - DDUGJY guidelines; Achievement – Power Finance Corporation (PFC) data (for 
2014-15 to 2018-19), TSECL data (for 2019-20) 
It can be seen from Table 4.2.16 that, TSECL did not achieve the year-wise AT&C 
targets during 2014-15 to 2019-20. Although the los ses came down marginally during 
2014-15 to 2016-17, it has been on an upward trajec tory since then and the gap 
between the AT&C loss targets and the actual losses  has been widening every year as 
detailed in Chart 4.2.2 .  
 
 
 

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Undertakings)  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 106 
Chart 4.2.2: Aggregate Technical and Commercial loss targets and achievement  
(in percentage ) 
 
Thus, the implementation of the scheme did not brin g out the desired outcomes in 
terms of reduction in AT&C losses which was envisag ed as one of the major 
objectives for implementation of the scheme. This may lead to loss of additional grant 
of ₹ 3.69 crore (five per cent of project cost of ₹ 73.75 crore). 
In reply (October 2021), TSECL accepted the audit o bservation and stated that to 
reduce the AT&C losses, considerable amount of reno vation/ augmentation/up-
gradation of the existing infrastructure was requir ed. Further, due to insufficiency of 
fund under the scheme for strengthening of system, it could not go as per the plan to 
strengthen the electrical system of the State to reduce the AT&C losses. 
4.2.11.6 (b) Probable loss of final tranche due to discontinuation of Project 
 Management Agency  
As per para 1.2 of the guidelines of DDUGJY, Project Management Agency (PMA) is 
to be appointed to assist PIA in project formulatio n, bidding process, monitoring the 
physical and financial progress of the scheme. The main function of the PMA is to 
assist utility in project management and ensure tim ely implementation of the project. 
Appointment of PMA is a pre-requisite for release of funds from Nodal Agency under 
the scheme. As per para 2.4.4 of the scheme guideli nes, recommendation of the PMA 
regarding achievement of stipulated objectives is m andatory to avail final tranche 
(10 per cent ) of the eligible grant. The tenure of PMA shall be  33 months 126 . In case, 
the works under the project is executed beyond 24 m onths, the services of PMA shall 
be suitably extended by the utility. However, the extent of grant shall be limited as per 
the provision. GoI will provide 100 per cent  financial assistance towards expenditure 
incurred on engagement of PMA subject to 0.5 per cent of approved project cost or 
award cost, whichever is lower. The utility has to bear any cost beyond the provision 
from its own resources for deployment of PMA. 
TSECL was allocated an amount of ₹ 0.37 crore (0.5 per cent  of sanctioned project 
cost of ₹ 74.12 crore) for engagement of PMA. Accordingly, T SECL engaged 
M/s N-Arch consultancy, a Delhi based firm, as PMA for DDUGJY with a contract 
                                                           
126  Six months for completion of bidding process, 24 m onths for completion of works and three 
months for associated activities after completion of the works 
27.35 24.85 22.35 20.85 20.00 
18.00 
36.23 
32.68 
29.20 30.31 35.48 
39.53 
15.00 
20.00 
25.00 
30.00 
35.00 
40.00 
45.00 
2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 
Target Achievement 

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Undertakings)  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 107 
value of ₹ 0.52 crore ( i.e.  40.54 per cent  higher than sanctioned cost of 
₹ 0.37 crore 127 ). However, the contract value was revised to ₹ 0.59 crore after 
implementation of GST. 
As per agreement with PMA, the contract period was from March 2016 to 
March 2019. However, the project was not completed within the stipulated period and 
extended upto March 2020 due to non-installation/ r eplacement of energy meters. The 
services of the PMA which was required to be extend ed as per the scheme guidelines, 
was not extended by TSECL. 
Due to discontinuation of the engagement of PMA bef ore completion of the projects, 
the recommendation of PMA on the achievement of sti pulated objectives was not 
available in the closure report of the projects. Th e absence of PMA recommendation 
may deprive TSECL of the final tranche of ₹ 7.41 crore (10 per cent  of the eligible 
grant of ₹ 74.12 crore). 
TSECL in its reply (August 2021) accepted the audit observation and stated that it had 
discontinued the service of PMA due to fund constra ins and to avoid additional 
financial burden on State. It also stated that the PMA had completed most of the 
works as per agreement except the “Metering” portio n. However, TSECL approached 
the REC for getting additional fund to complete the  left-out work, however, REC did 
not respond. TSECL again approached to REC (Septemb er 2020) for getting 
exemption of PMA service for the left out work so t hat the release of final tranche 
could not be hampered. 
4.2.12 Irregularities pertaining to Contract Audit under RGGVY and DDUGJY  
Audit observed following irregularities in the implementation of contracts: 
4.2.12.1 Delay in award of the projects 
As per RGGVY guidelines, works shall be awarded wit hin 90 days from sanction of 
the project. Similarly, DDGUJY guidelines  stipulate that works shall be awarded 
within six months (180 days) from the date of commu nication of the approval by the 
Monitoring Committee. 
Out of the four sampled districts in the State, works for implementation of RGGVY in 
West Tripura and Sepahijala projects were awarded o n turn-key basis. Whereas in 
Dhalai District and Gomati District, the works were  executed departmentally wherein 
TSECL procured the major materials through open ten der and supplied to the project 
divisions and erection works were carried out on pa rtial turn-key mode. Total 63 
LoAs were issued to different contractors for execu tion of works in three districts 
(except Sepahijala District). In Sepahijala Distric t execution of RGGVY was 
entrusted to NEEPCO and separate LoA was issued to the turn-key contractor. 
Similarly, DDUGJY works in four sampled districts w ere carried out on partial 
turn-key basis wherein major materials were procured by TSECL through open tender 
and supplied to the project divisions and erection works were carried out on partial 
                                                           
127  0.5 per cent  of sanctioned cost of ₹ 74.12 crore 

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Undertakings)  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 108 
turn-key mode. Total four LoAs were issued to diffe rent contractors for execution of 
erection works in four districts and four LoAs were  issued for procurement of 
materials.  
Audit observed delays in award of projects in the s ampled districts as detailed in 
Table 4.2.17 . 
Table 4.2.17: Details of approval, award of the projects 
Sl. 
No.  
Name of the 
Project  
Date of approval of DPR 
by MC  
Total Number of 
LoA  issued  
Date of award of the 
Project by PIA  
RGGVY  
1 West Tripura  10.01.2014  1 30.08.2014  
2  Dhalai  10.01.2014  32  22.12.2015 128  
3 Gomati  10.01.2014  27  22.12.2015 129  
4 Sepahijala  10.01.2014  1 18.09.2014  
DDUGJY  
5 West Tripura  17.09.2015  1 03.06.2017  
6 Dhalai  17.09.2015  1 03.06.2017  
7 Gomati  17.09.2015  1 03.06.2017  
8 Sepahijala  17.09.2015  1 03.06.2017  
Audit observed that out of 61 works awarded under R GGVY, 19 works were awarded 
with the delays ranging between 94 days and 297 day s, beyond 90 days from the 
stipulated completion date ( i.e. 180 days) as detailed in Appendix 4.2.3 . 
In respect of DDUGJY scheme, there was delay in awa rding ranging from 310 to 312 
days beyond 180 days in all the four sampled projects as detailed in Appendix 4.2.3 . 
TSECL stated (February 2022) that the award of work s in respect of RGGVY scheme 
was delayed due to lengthy tendering process. In respect of works related to DDUGJY 
scheme, TSECL contended that there was delay only i n case of metering works. 
However, the reply is not tenable as the delay in a ward has been calculated on award 
of supply and erection works.  
4.2.12.2 Violation in award of contracts under DDUG JY 
As per para 8 of chapter II of DDUGJY guidelines, a ward of contracts by PIAs was 
required to be as per Standard Bidding Documents (S BD) and technical specification 
provided by REC, contract award manual/ policy of P IA, etc . Audit observed 
deficiencies in appointment of Third-Party Inspecti on Agency and undue benefit in 
awarding of contracts. 
Rule 184 of the General Financial Rules (GFR), 2005  and Rule 204 of the GFR, 2017 
envisage that engagement of an agency for outsourci ng of job through nomination by 
choice is allowed only in the exceptional circumsta nces. Further, Central Vigilance 
Commission (CVC) guidelines suggested that tenderin g process or public auction is a 
basic requirement for the award of contract by any Government agency as any other 
method, especially award of contract on nomination basis, would amount to a breach 
of fairness and equal opportunity, which implies ri ght to equality to all interested 
parties. 
                                                           
128  Date of issue of 1 st  LoA 
129  Date of issue of 1 st  LoA 

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Undertakings)  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 109 
Scheme guidelines did not have any provision for engagement of Project Management 
Consultancy  ( PMC). However, TSECL engaged Rural Electrification Corporation 
Power Development and Consultancy Ltd. (RECPDCL) 130  as PMC in three districts 
namely Dhalai District, Unakoti District and Gomati  District without inviting any 
tender for assisting in various stages of rural ele ctrification works like preparation of 
DPRs and bid documents, uploading and evaluation of  tender documents, preparation 
of LoA, monitoring of delivery and erection schedul e, project supervision, etc . The 
work was awarded (August 2015) to RECPDCL for 30 mo nths (i.e. up to 
February 2018) at the cost of ₹ 1.66 crore plus  14 per cent service charge.  
Scheme guidelines stipulate that the DISCOM require s to deploy Third-Party 
Inspection Agency (TPIA) through outsourcing by ten dering process for carrying out 
Tier-I of Quality Assurance (QA) inspection. It was  also noticed in audit that TSECL 
again engaged (January 2017) RECPDCL on nomination basis for conducting Tier-I 
stage of quality monitoring without inviting any tender.  
Apart from that, TSECL extended the contract period  of RECPDCL on several 
occasions 131  upto March 2020 with the extension 132  of project completion date of the 
RGGVY. The RECPDCL enhanced its rate by 10 per cent  due to price escalation 133  
on fixed monthly fees on existing agreement value o f ₹ 1.66 crore. As such, the final 
contract price was increased to ₹ 2.88 crore. RECPDCL was paid ₹ 2.82 crore (up to 
38 th  RA Bill, September 2020). 
Thus, in violation of the financial rules and CVC g uidelines, TSECL irregularly 
engaged RECPDCL on nomination basis. Thus, TSECL al so denied market access to 
other consultancy services provider like Power Grid  Corporation of India Ltd, 
National Thermal Power Corporation (NTPC), Electric  Supply Company Ltd. and 
National Hydro Power Corporation Ltd. etc .  
TSECL in its reply (June 2021) did not furnish any specific reason on engagement of 
PMC in violation of scheme guidelines  
4.2.12.3 Avoidable expenditure  
TSECL decided to execute the rural electrification work in Gomati District 
departmentally under RGGVY scheme. The Monitoring C ommittee (MC) has also 
allowed (August 2015) TSECL to execute the work dep artmentally in Gomati 
District. As per guidelines, the award of contract was required to be completed within 
90 days from the date of sanction of the project.  
                                                           
130  RECPDCL, a wholly owned subsidiary of REC, was inc orporated with the objectives of 
(i) promoting, developing, constructing, owning, op erating, distributing and maintaining 66 KV 
and below voltage class electrification/ distributi on electric supply lines/ distribution systems; 
(ii) promoting, developing, constructing, owning an d managing Decentralised Distributed 
Generation and associated distribution systems; and  (iii) facilitating consultancy/ execution of the 
above for other agencies/ government bodies in India and abroad. 
131  1 st  extension- March 2018 to June 2018, 2 nd  extension-July 2018 to December 2018, 3 rd  extension- 
January 2019 to June 2019, 4 th  extension- July 2019 to December 2019, 5 th  extension- January 
2020 to March 2020 
132  RGGVY was extended up to December 2020. 
133  1 st  escalation @10 per cent  from July 18 (from 23 rd  RA bill), 2 nd  escalation @10 per cent  from 
January 2020 (36 th  RA bill) 

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Undertakings)  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 110 
After introduction of GST, Excise duty, CST and loc al Sales Tax has been subsumed 
and replaced by GST. GST on Freight and Insurance a nd Erection work (in case of 
composite work) has been imposed at the rate of 18 per cent . 
Audit noticed that while preparing the estimates of  work under RGGVY, the TSECL 
excluded  the construction work of 33/11 KV sub-station at Te pania block in Gomati 
District. It was further noticed in audit that NIT for construction of 33/11 KV 
sub-station work was floated in March 2017 i.e. 19 months after approval of the MC 
and the work was awarded (December 2017) to M/s Ele ctric House 134 . In the 
meantime, GST was rolled out (July 2017) and the Bi ll of Quantities (BOQ) quoted 
by the contractor increased from ₹ 4.82 crore 135  to ₹ 5.10 crore due to imposition of 
GST on Freight and Insurance and Erection work. Thi s resulted in extra financial 
burden of ₹ 28 lakh to TSECL which would have been avoided if the work had been 
taken up earlier. 
TSECL accepted (June 2021) the audit observation.  
4.2.12.4 Excess expenditure on  service connections 
As per RGGVY guidelines, cost of providing free ele ctricity to BPL households in 
village and habitation was ₹ 3,000 per connection. 
The electrification works for Dhalai District was c arried out departmentally which 
involved procurement of materials and execution of erection works through separate 
tenders. Scrutiny of closure proposal submitted by Dhalai District revealed that 
electricity connection to 12,416 BPL households was  provided at a cost of ₹ 6.54 
crore instead of sanctioned cost of ₹ 3.72 crore 136 . This resulted in extra expenditure 
of ₹ 2.82 crore in providing service connections to 12,416 BPL households.  
Audit noticed that REC also did not allow the excess expenditure of ₹ 2.82 crore in its 
approval of closure proposal for Dhalai District an d communicated (April 2020) that 
extra expenditure of ₹ 2.82 crore would have to be borne by the State. 
TSECL accepted (June 2021) the audit observation. 
4.2.12.5 Extra expenditure due to excess consumptio n of materials  
As per REC guidelines, contractor was directed to m ake every effort to minimise the 
breakage, losses and wastage of line materials (not  exceeding one per cent  against 
each item) supplied by the DISCOM during execution of erection works.  
Electrification work in Dhalai District under RGGVY  was carried out departmentally 
by TSECL wherein supply of major materials was done  by TSECL itself and 
execution of erection works was taken up separately  through tendering. Execution of 
erection work of HT lines and LT lines, installatio n of distribution sub-station and 
providing of BPL service connection at Ambassa Bloc k in Dhalai District was 
                                                           
134  Stood as L1 bidder 
135  including Excise Duty (ED), CST, Freight and Insur ance (F&I) and Tripura VAT as extra 
136  ₹ 3,000 per BPL service connection 

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Undertakings)  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 111 
awarded (July 2016) to a contractor 137 . TSECL procured the major materials like 
ACSR conductor, AB cables, etc.  centrally for supplying materials to contractors f or 
execution of erection work in different blocks.  
Scrutiny of records revealed that against the requi rement of 1,328.70 138  Km 
conductors, the contractor consumed 1,632.52 Km conductors . This resulted in excess 
consumption of 303.82 Km conductors as detailed in Table 4.2.18 . 
Table 4.2.18: Excess expenditure due to excess consumption of materials 
Excess consumption of materials used under RGGVY in  Dhalai District 
Materials  
Line 
erected  
(in 
Kms) 
Conductor 
required 
as per line 
erected 
(in Kms) 
Allowed 
unaccountable 
wastage  
(1 per cent) 
Total 
requirement 
of 
conductor 
(Km) 
Conductor 
used  
(in Kms) 
Excess 
consumption  
(in Kms) 
Unit 
cost of 
material  
(in ₹) 
Total 
cost of 
excess 
material  
(₹ in 
lakh) 
New 11 
Kv line on 
ACSR 
weasel  
348.62 
 1045.86 10.46 1056.32 1241.26 184.94 19859.60  36.73  
New LT 
line 1 ph 
AB cable 
72.52 72.52 0.73 73.25 76.78 3.53 79922.70  2.82  
New LT 
line 3 Ph 4 
wire 
ACSR/ 
AB cable 
49.29 197.16 1.97 
199.13 314.48 115.35 19888.40  22.94  
Total 470.43  1315.54 13.16 1328.70 1632.52 303.82   62.49  
It can be seen from Table 4.2.20 that due to excess consumption of 303.82 Km 
conductors, there was excess expenditure of ₹ 62.49 lakh on execution of work of HT 
lines and LT lines. 
TSECL in its reply (June 2021) accepted the audit o bservation and stated that during 
the approval of closure proposal, Monitoring Commit tee, GoI curtailed the total 
expenditure and allowed the expenditure as per approved unit cost only. 
From the reply, it is evident that the State would have to bear the additional liability 
of 
₹ 62.49 lakh. 
4.2.12.6 Undue benefit to contractor  
As per clause 4 of LoA, 50 per cent  performance security (15 per cent  of total 
contract price) shall be deposited in the shape of Bank Guarantee (BG) as per the 
format of bidding document in favour of TSECL in an y nationalised bank and the 
balance 50 per cent  performance security amount shall be deducted from running bills 
on pro-rata basis from each bill till full realisat ion of Contract Performance Guarantee  
(CPG) i.e  100 per cent. In addition to performance guarantee, 50 per cent additional 
performance security amount (15 per cent  of total cost of meter and transformer) shall 
                                                           
137  M/s Sri Sudhansu Bhattacharjee 
138  required quantity after allowing the unaccountable  wastage of one per cent  

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Undertakings)  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 112 
be deposited in the shape of Bank Guarantee (BG) as  per the format of bidding 
document in favour of TSECL on any nationalised ban k and balance 50 per cent  
performance security amount shall be deducted from running bills on pro-rata basis 
from each bill till full realisation of CPG, i.e. 100 per cent.  
The electrification works of West Tripura District under RGGVY was awarded 
(August 2014) to a contractor 139 , on turn-key basis with the agreement value of 
₹ 27.12 crore. 
Accordingly, the contractor submitted (December 201 4) the CPG of ₹ 2.03 crore and 
furnished (January 2015) additional performance sec urity of ₹ 57.16 lakh. Both the 
CPG and additional performance security were valid up to November 2017. 
Audit noticed that the work under RGGVY in West Tri pura District commenced in 
August 2014 and was completed in September 2018 and  accordingly, defect liability 
period was required to be extended up October 2019.  But the contractor did not 
extend the CPG and Additional Performance Security after November 2017 and was 
allowed to carry out the work without any performance security.  
TSECL accepted the fact and stated that the contrac tor would not escape the liability 
to rectify any defects that may arise within the de fect liability period since TSECL 
had held up 50 per cent  of the CPG and additional CPG from RA bills.  
This had resulted in dilution of the CPG clause as the full amount of CPG was not 
available with TSECL as mandated by the agreement clause. 
4.2.12.7 Avoidable expenditure due to lack of due d iligence by PIA 
As per the scheme guidelines, single contract is to  be awarded in each district for 
execution of RGGVY work. In case of award of more t han one contract is inevitable, 
then for proper accounting of project same bill of quantities, same rates and terms and 
conditions are to be used for all the contracts so awarded. 
Comparative analysis of the rates of six major item s supplied by the contractors under 
the RGGVY in two districts 140  with the LoA issued to the contractors for procurement 
of those items by the company revealed the following irregularities: 
a.  Different ex-factory rate on same items within the same district: In Gomati 
District different ex-factory rates (excluding frei ght and insurance) were allowed 
for supply of the same materials with identical spe cification in all packages to 
different contractors. Justifications for accepting  different rates on items with the 
same specification from different contractor were n ot found on record. The 
difference in unit rate went up to nearly seven per cent to 13 per cent with a total 
financial impact of ₹ 17.93 lakh as detailed in Appendix 4.2.4(a) . 
 
 
                                                           
139  M/s Bhattacharjee Construction 
140  Dhalai and Gomati Districts 

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Undertakings)  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 113 
b.  Different rate-different contractors-neighbouring d istrict : Comparative 
analysis of the rates of three major items 141  supplied by contractors under the 
RGGVY in two districts 142  with the LoA issued to the contractors for procurement 
of these items revealed that, while finalising the tender, TSECL did not compare 
the rates of standard items with the same capacity and specification quoted by 
different tenderers for similar works in the neighb oring district. As a result, the 
rates allowed to the contractors under the LoA for supply of six major items were 
significantly higher than rates of those items allo wed to the contractors of the 
neighbouring districts. The higher price allowed on three major items ranged from 
one per cent  to 39 per cent  and resulted in avoidable expenditure of ₹ 76.16 lakh 
as detailed in Appendix 4.2.4(b) . 
Thus, absence of proper analysis on cost of the mat erials put to tender, led to 
avoidable expenditure of ₹ 94.09 lakh on procurement of material under the scheme. 
c.  Unreasonable price variations in similar erection w orks under DDUGJY 
scheme: Scrutiny revealed that the rates quoted for the sam e item of erection 
work in sampled districts varied appreciably even t hough the works were 
awarded on the same day, as detailed in the Appendix 4.2.5 . This resulted in 
avoidable extra expenditure of ₹ 85.95 lakh. The justifications for wide variation 
in cost of similar erection works between adjacent districts were not found on 
record. TSECL had also not performed any exercise t o rationalise the rates 
quoted for different work components.  
TSECL in its reply (October 2021) accepted the audi t observation and stated the 
variation of rates for supplying of different items  and to different locations and 
execution of erection works in different locations was due to remote and terrain 
locations of the places. The reply is not acceptabl e since audit considered the 
ex-factory rate only while calculating the price variations.  
4.2.12.8 Procurement of materials from un-authorise d/un-approved vendors  
Rural electrification works under RGGVY scheme for West Tripura District was 
awarded to a contractor 143  on turn-key basis. Scrutiny of record revealed tha t the 
agency procured various materials including Village  Electricity Infrastructure (VEI) 
materials like Distribution Transformer, Overhead C onductor, PVC cable amounting 
to ₹ 4.25 crore from unauthorised vendors which were no t included in the approved 
vendor list of TSECL. Details are given in Appendix 4.2.6 . 
Thus, the procedure followed by TSECL did not follo w the vendor approval policy 
stipulated in the guidelines to ensure the level-ze ro Quality Assurance Mechanism 
(QAM) during course of the project execution. 
 
                                                           
141  ASCR wheasel conductor 6/1/2.59, Steel Tubular Pol es, 8 mtr. long (IS Designation 410 SP-15) 
ISS: 2713 (P-I, P-II), 1980 and Steel Tubular Poles, 9 mtr. long (IS Designation 410 SP-32) ISS: 
2713 (P-I, P-II), 1980 
142  Dhalai and Gomati Districts 
143  M/s Bhattacherjee Construction 

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Undertakings)  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 114 
TSECL in its reply (August 2021) accepted the fact and said that it did not have any 
approved vendor list for supplying of materials in different RE schemes.  
4.2.13 Providing last mile connectivity and electri city connection to rural 
households under Saubhagya  
As per the information furnished by the by the Stat e to the Ministry of Power (MoP), 
Government of India (October 2017), total 2.16 lakh  rural and 0.20 lakh urban 
households were un-electrified in the State. Howeve r, only 1,41,623 rural households 
were proposed to be electrified under Saubhagya Scheme by the State, which included 
1,38,024 rural grid and 3,599 rural off grid connec tions. Further, Audit noticed that 
0.20 lakh urban households were also electrified un der Saubhagya Scheme. However, 
there was no projection for providing connections t o the urban households in the DPR 
submitted by the State Government for implementatio n of the scheme. Details of 
household electrification in the State under Saubha gya from 11 October 2017 to 
31 March 2020 is stipulated in Table 4.2.19 .  
Table 4.2.19: Details of household electrification under Saubhagya/ DDUGJY  
(in Number)  
Total Rural 
Households 
as on 
10.10.2017  
as per  
details given 
by the   
State  
Electrified 
Rural 
Households 
as on 10 
October  
2017  
Balance 
Unelectr- 
ified Rural 
Households 
as on 
10 October 
2017  
Rural 
Household 
electrified  
from 10 
October 2017 
to 31  
December  
2018 (when 
saturation  
was reported  
by the State)  
(a)  
Additional 
Rural 
Households 
electrified  
from 1st 
January 2019 
onwards due  
to special 
campaign till  
31 March  
2020  
(b)  
Total 
Progress 
(a+b)  
Balance  
Un-
electrified 
Rural 
House- 
holds 
Rural 
Household 
not  
electrified  
as on 
31.03.2020  
(in 
percentage)  
7,96,000 5,80,000 2,16,000 1,06,683 2,682 1,09,365 144  1,06,635  13.40 
It is evident from Table 4.2.19  that out of total 7,96,000 rural households as on 
10 October 2017, 1,06,635 households (13.40 per cent ) remained un-electrified in the 
State as on 31 March 2020. However, it was noticed that the State furnished 
(November 2018) the saturation certificate regarding 100 per cent  electrification of all 
the households to REC/ MoP. 
In reply, TSECL stated (February 2022) that the bal ance un-electrified household as 
on 10 October 2017 was not based on any survey figu re of that period. However, the 
actual scenario of the un-electrified households in the State was clarified after detailed 
foot survey conducted in the State during 2017-18 i n the State.  It further stated that 
the figures of approved guidelines of MoP is not re flecting the actual figure of 
un-electrified households.  
The reply is not acceptable. As per the approved gu idelines of the Saubhgya Scheme, 
status of un-electrified household as of 10 October  2017 was furnished to the MoP by 
the respective States. Any correspondence/ corrigen dum issued by the MoP regarding 
                                                           
144  Grid – 1,05,764; Off-grid – 3,601 

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Undertakings)  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 115 
acceptance of change in number of figures of un-ele ctrified households was not 
available on record and were not furnished by the TSECL with the reply.  
Further, the TSECL did not furnish specific reasons  for declaring the State as 
100 per cent  electrified despite shortfall in achievement. 
Under-achievement of the planned targets was attrib utable to inadequacies in 
planning, implementation, monitoring as discussed in subsequent paragraphs. 
4.2.13.1 Inadequacies in Planning  
 
4.2.13.1 (a) Non-documentation of detailed field su rvey before preparation of 
 DPR 
Saubhagya Scheme guidelines envisage that, during i mplementation of the projects, 
implementing agencies shall carry out field survey for identification of beneficiaries 
and village-wise/ habitation-wise details of househ olds. Scheme guidelines also 
envisage for proper documentation of base line data , background papers like field 
survey report for identification of intended benefi ciaries, Need Assessment Document 
in the Ministry’s prescribed format, basis of estim ation {Schedule of Rates (SOR)} 
and Programme Evaluation and Review Technique (PERT ) chart. Documentation of 
base line data will help in assessing the broad sco pe of works as well as formulating a 
Detailed Project Report (DPR).  
Audit observed that no survey was conducted as per the guidelines before preparation 
of DPR.  
TSECL in its reply (August 2021) stated that district level officers collected data from 
field as well as from blocks and panchayats and sen t to TSECL Corporate office, 
Agartala after compilation. The reply is not acceptable as TSECL Corporate office did 
not furnish the compiled data/ survey report receiv ed from the district level offices to 
Audit. 
4.2.13.1 (b) Delay in submission of DPRs on Saubhag ya DPR portal 
As per para 11 of Chapter II of Saubhagya Scheme guidelines, States were required to 
submit DPRs by 6 November 2017. Audit observed that  TSECL submitted DPRs for 
eight districts/ projects on 7 April 2018 after the delay of 152 days. 
Reasons for delay in submission of DPRs on Saubhagy a DPR portal were not 
furnished by the TSECL, though called for (December 2021) in audit. 
4.2.13.1 (c) Submission of DPRs without approval of  State Level Standing 
 Committee  
As per para 5 of Chapter II of Saubhagya guidelines , DPRs were to be approved by 
the State Level Standing Committee (SLSC) before se nding to REC/ MoP. Audit 
observed that DPRs in respect of four sampled proje cts 145  in the State were submitted 
to REC without the approval of SLSC. 
 
                                                           
145  Gomati, Khowai, Dhalai and North Tripura Projects 

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Undertakings)  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 116 
TSECL while replying (February 2022) accepted the a udit observation and stated that 
approval of SLSC was not taken prior to the submiss ion of DPR due to the urgency 
and emergency in submission of DPR. 
Therefore, TSECL violated the provisions of the guidelines.  
4.2.14 Implementation of Saubhagya 
Audit noticed the several deficiencies in implement ation of Saubhagya scheme in the 
State which are discussed in subsequent paragraphs. 
4.2.14.1 Shortfall in achievement of electrificatio n of economically poor 
households 
As per the DPRs submitted by the TSECL to REC/ MoP,  72,770 Below Poverty Line 
(BPL) households were to be provided free electrici ty connections by 31 December 
2019 in the State. Details of electrification of BPL households is given in Table 4.2.20 . 
Table 4.2.20: Details of electrification of BPL households  
(in number ) 
Households Planned for 
electricity connections 
through grid as per DPR  
Households sanctioned by 
Monitoring Committee for 
providing electricity 
connection through grid  
Households actually 
electrified by 31 March 
2019  
72,770 67,044 61,651 
It can be seen from Table 4.2.20  that the Monitoring Committee, MoP sanctioned 
67,044 BPL households for electrification against 7 2,770 BPL households proposed 
by the State. Further, the State provided electrici ty connections to 61,651 BPL 
households against the sanction of 67,044 resulting  in shortfall of 5,393 
(eight per cent ) households. Thus, TSECL failed to provide househo ld connections to 
all BPL families within the target date as approved by the Monitoring Committee. 
Reasons for shortfall in providing electricity conn ections to BPL households were not 
furnished by the TSECL, though called for (February 2022).  
4.2.14.2 Delay in completion of the projects by TSE CL 
As per the Saubhagya Scheme guidelines, if the Stat e completes 100 per cent 
electrification by 31 December 2018, the State was eligible for additional grant of five 
per cent i.e. 50 per cent of loan component was convertible to grant. Due to 
non-completion of the work, the REC extended the de adline for completion of work 
in the State to 31 December 2020. The works were co mpleted in December 2020. 
However, TSECL submitted the closure proposal of th e scheme only in August 2021. 
Therefore, there was a delay of 21 months in comple tion of eight projects from the 
deadline stipulated in the scheme guidelines as detailed in Table 4.2.21 . 

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Undertakings)  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 117 
Table 4.2.21: Delay in completion of projects  
District Date of award 
of Project 
Actual target date of 
completion of Project 
(31 March 2019) 
Actual Date of 
Completion  
Delay in 
completion 
of projects 
(in months ) 
West Tripura 15-10-2018 31-03-2019 
31-12-2020 21 
North Tripura 31-08-2018 31-03-2019 
Dhalai 20-09-2018 31-03-2019 
Unakoti 31-08-2018 31-03-2019 
Gomati 31-08-2018 31-03-2019 
Khowai 20-09-2018 31-03-2019 
Sepahijala 27-07-2018 31-03-2019 
South Tripura 27-07-2018 31-03-2019 
TSECL stated (February 2021) that the delay was due  to rain/ stormy weather Right 
of Way (ROW), poor road connectivity in interior areas and communication and other 
local issues. 
The delay in completion of the projects may lead to  loss of 
₹ 20.87 crore being 
five per cent  of loan component as additional grant as described in Paragraph 4.2.16 . 
4.2.14.3 Shortfall in achievement of additional inf rastructure works  
Saubhagya scheme had the components of additional i nfrastructure comprising of 
DTRs, LT and 11 KV lines. The achievement of these components under the scheme 
is detailed in Table 4.2.22 . 
Table 4.2.22: Component wise details of requirement, sanction and achievement of 
works executed under Saubhagya  
Components 
of works Unit  
Requirement 
as per 
Saubhagya 
DPR 
Sanctioned  Achievement  
Shortfall in 
achievement 
of work 
against 
sanction 
Shortfall 
in 
percentage  
DTR (New) Nos 2991 742 629 113 15.23 
LT line (New) Ckm  6214.98 3305.39 3139.19 166.20 5.03 
11 KV line 
(New) Ckm 
 2809.70 573.13 405.26 167.87 29.29 
It can be seen from Table 4.2.22  that there was shortfall of 15.23 per cent  in 
installation of DTRs, 5.03 per cent  in laying of LT lines and 29.29 per cent  in laying 
of 11 KV lines. The shortfall in creation of infras tructure resulted in delay in 
providing electricity to all rural households within the target date. 
TSECL accepted (February 2022) the fact of shortfall in achievement. 
4.2.15 Irregularities pertaining to Contract Audit  
Audit observed following irregularities in the implementation of contracts:  
4.2.15.1 Wasteful expenditure on Distribution Trans formers due to improper 
storage  
RECPDCL placed supply orders between August 2018 an d November 2018 to 
Absolute Projects India Ltd., GEPDEC Infratech Ltd,  Power Tech Engineers and 

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Undertakings)  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 118 
UPRNNL 146  for procuring and supplying 16 KVA, 25 KVA and 63 KVA and 100 
KVA Distribution Transformers to TSECL under Saubha gya in six districts. As per 
supply orders, the DTRs were to be supplied during November 2018 to January 2019 
with warranty period of 18 months from the date of supply. Accordingly, the warranty 
period would end between June 2020 and July 2020. 
Scrutiny of records revealed that RECPDCL supplied total 1,318 DTRs valued at 
₹ 17.03 crore to the two District stores i.e.  Ambassa (Dhalai District) and Jirania 
(West Tripura District). It was noticed that out of  1,318 DTRs of different capacities, 
261 DTRs were found defective as those were not able to transfer the current and load 
due to low insulation resistance. Further, TSECL co mmunicated the matter to 
RECPDCL within the warranty period regarding poor q uality and poor functioning of 
the transformers and requested RECPDCL for rectific ation of defects.  However, 
suppliers rectified only 49 DTRs and denied to rect ify the remaining 212 DTRs citing 
poor storage conditions and improper handling of transformers at stores. 
As per the tripartite agreement between TSECL, REC and RECPDCL, TSECL was 
responsible for proper stacking and storage of the material safely with all necessary 
measures to protect them from external factors such  as rain, storm, theft, etc . 
However, Audit noticed that the DTRs were not store d properly as per the agreement. 
Photograph 4.2.1  depicts the poor storage and stacking of DTRs. 
Photograph 4.2.1: Poor storage and stacking of DTRs 
 
 
Transformers lying at open space, muddy surface, covered with bushes at Ambassa 
Store yard in Dhalai District  
Thus, due to improper storage of DTRs, the warranty  services could not be availed of 
from the concerned suppliers and expenditure on 212  DTRs valued ₹ 2.74 147  crore 
became wasteful as shown in Appendix 4.2.7 . 
 
                                                           
146  Uttar Pradesh Rajkiya Nirman Nigam Limited 
147  average value calculated since the Divisions did n ot furnish the capacity wise different DTRs 


Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Undertakings)  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 119 
TSECL in its reply (October 2021) accepted the audi t observation and stated that due 
to lack of infrastructure the transformers were sta cked over one another. The seepage 
of moisture further led to deterioration of the tra nsformers. In its reply, TSECL stated 
that electricity is being ensured by sharing load from existing DTRs. From the reply it 
appears that overloading of the existing DTRs would  have adversely affected the 
voltage of the service areas. 
4.2.15.2 Idle expenditure on procurement of materia ls  
TSECL engaged RECPDCL during 2018-19 to procure and  supply the required 
material against fresh erection contracts for six d istricts 148 . As per the supply orders, 
RECPDCL would supply material at two stores located  under West Project Division 
and Dhalai Project Division for further distribution to different work sites.  
It was noticed in audit that out of the total mater ial received amounting to ₹ 69.82 
crore during 2018-19, material valued ₹ 37.18 crore was only utilised for execution of 
work under Saubhagya. Remaining material valued ₹ 32.64 crore was lying idle in the 
store yard at Dhalai Project Division, Ambassa as on August 2021. 
Test check of records relating to consumption of so me major materials like 
Transformers, single and three phase AB cables, LT Distribution Boxes, AB Cable 
Tie, Polymer Pin Insulator, etc.  revealed that utilisation of these materials was l ess 
than 90 per cent  which led to blockade of fund of ₹ 32.64 crore as detailed in the 
Appendix 4.2.8 . Reasons for material remaining unutilised were not found on record. 
The TSECL in its reply stated that the materials we re procured in anticipation of 
utilising the same in DDUGJY scheme. 
4.2.15.3 Idle expenditure on providing of service c onnections kits  
Service connection kit is one of the major material  which is required for providing 
service connections to the un-electrified household s. It includes various items like 
meter board, switch board, holder and other accessories. 
Scrutiny of records and information furnished by We st Tripura and Dhalai project 
divisions revealed that TSECL had procured a total of 40,000 service connection kits 
valued ₹ 4.89 crore 149  through open tender from two different agencies. It was noticed 
that different materials and accessories valued at ₹ one crore were not utilised by the 
project divisions in the two sampled districts (Dha lai and West Tripura) and were 
lying idle in the stores though the works had been completed. Details are given in 
Appendix 4.2.9 . 
TSECL accepted the audit observation and stated (Oc tober 2021) that the service 
connection kits were procured for providing service  connections against the partial 
turn key LoAs issued by fresh tendering. However, l ess connections were provided 
under the fresh contracts than the targeted ones, t herefore, some of the material 
procured by TSECL as part of the service connection kits, remain un-utilised. 
                                                           
148  Khowai, West Tripura, Gomati, Unakoti, North Tripu ra and Dhalai 
149  West Tripura – ₹ 2.42 crore, Dhalai District - ₹ 2.47 crore 

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Undertakings)  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 120 
4.2.16 Probable loss of additional grant  
As per para 2.5.9 of the Saubhagya Guidelines, ther e was a scope to convert 
five per cent 150  loan component 151  to grant by GoI subject to achievement of 
100 per cent  household electrification of all willing households by 31 December 2018. 
Monitoring Committee sanctioned ₹ 417.53 crore for implementation of Saubhagya in 
Tripura out of which ₹ 41.75 crore (10 per cent of  the total project cost of ₹ 417.53 
crore) was loan component which was availed by TSEC L (December 2019) from 
REC. As per guidelines, there was a scope of conver sion of loan component of 
₹ 20.87 crore (50 per cent of loan amount) as grant from GoI subject to comple tion of 
the project in all respect within the stipulated time. 
TSECL could not provide 100 per cent  service connections even after due date of 
completion (December 2018) and there was shortfall of 24.63 per cent  against 
1,41,623 connections sanctioned by REC as on March 2019 which led to loss of 
additional grant of ₹ 20.87 crore from GoI by the way of conversion of t he loan 
component. 
TSECL in its reply (August 2021) stated that all el igible households were given 
service connection under the scheme, on the basis o f which Government of Tripura 
declared the State as 100 per cent  electrified on 27 November 2018. Accordingly, 
they had communicated the matter to REC in December  2018, however, no formal 
approval had been received from REC in this regard. 
Regarding loss of grant, TSECL replied that it had made claim for the fourth and 
subsequent instalment by proposing 90 per cent  of the total fund received, as subsidy, 
against the criteria of 85 per cent  as per guidelines, and REC had released the fund 
accordingly. 
It was further stated that the loan of 
₹ 41.75 crore (@ 10 per cent ) had been 
sanctioned by REC against which an amount of ₹ 32.65 crore had already been 
released by REC, whereas actual requirement of loan  was five per cent i.e.  
₹ 20.87 crore and balance ₹ 9.10 crore will be adjusted in final closure of the scheme.  
The reply is not acceptable being purely presumptive as no approval for conversion of 
50 per cent  loan component to subsidy had been given by REC (S eptember 2021). 
Further, TSECL could not achieve the target of 100 per cent  service connections 
within the stipulated time (December 2018).  
 
 
                                                           
150  five per cent  for special category State and 15 per cent  for other category of States 
151  As per funding pattern of the scheme 85 per cent  of the approved project cost is to be provided as 
grant from Government of India (GOI), five per cent  of the approved project cost is to be provided 
by the State Government and balance 10 per cent  of the approved project cost is to be arranged by 
the DISCOM/ utility as Loan from Financial Institut ions. Guidelines also provide the scope of 
conversion 50 per cent  loan component as grant subject to achievement of 100 per cent  household 
electrification of all willing households by 31 December 2018. 

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Undertakings)  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 121 
4.2.17 Inadequacies in Monitoring and Evaluation 
 
4.2.17.1 Deficiencies in monitoring under RGGVY  
As per guidelines of RGGVY, projects shall have thr ee tiers Quality Assurance 
Mechanism (QAM). Under tier I monitoring, Third Par ty Inspection Agency (TPIA) 
would carry out inspection of 50 per cent  of the villages covered in the projects in two 
stages. Under tier II monitoring, REC will carry ou t inspection through outsourced 
independent agencies. Under tier III of monitoring, Ministry of Power, Government of 
India shall enforce QAM. 
Audit noticed irregularities in engagement of TPIA without inviting tender which is 
discussed at Paragraph 4.2.12.2 . Further, the agency did not verify RGGVY works 
in 50 per cent villages in Gomati and Dhalai Districts. The detail s is given in 
Appendix  4.2.10 . In eight projects Project Implementing Agency (PI A) did not 
prepare comprehensive Quality Assurance Plan as required under RGGVY guidelines. 
4.2.17.2 Ineffective/ defective quality assurance m echanism under DDUGJY 
and Saubhagya  
As per guidelines of DDUGJY and Saubhagya, the PIA shall be solely responsible 
and accountable for assuring quality of work. Audit  noticed that PIA did not 
formulate comprehensive quality assurance plan. Man agement Information Systems 
(MIS) data prepared by TSECL and uploaded on the MI S portal of REC did not 
contain complete details pertaining to physical and  financial progress of the projects 
and other fields as required as per DDUDJY guidelines.  
Para 5 of the chapter IV of the Saubhgya guidelines  stipulates that the State Level 
Standing Committee (SLSC) under the Chief Secretary  of the State constituted under 
the DDUGJY, shall also monitor implementation of th e scheme regularly and resolve 
issues impeding the progress of implementation of t he schemes. Audit observed that 
State Level Standing Committee (SLSC) met only once in May 2018. Therefore, SLSC 
was not involved in regular monitoring of implementation of sanctioned projects under 
Saubhagya viz.  allocation of land for sub stations, right of way, forest clearance, railway 
clearance, safety clearance, etc.  which indicates ineffectiveness of SLSC. 
Saubhagya Scheme guidelines envisage that the monitoring mechanism as followed in 
DDUGJY shall be followed. The guidelines envisage that PIA and Turnkey Contractor 
shall strictly ensure QA checks during the day-to-day course of project execution.  
Scrutiny of records revealed that M/s Everest Infra  Energy Limited issued 
Notification of Award (NOA) to TPS Electro Links, K olkata for supplying of 124 
Nos. 25 KVA three phase DTRs for use in Saubhagya project in Sepahijala District. 
As per guidelines, the PIA was required to carry out pre-dispatch inspection for all the 
124 DTRs. Audit noticed that out of 124 transformer s, NEEPCO authorities inspected 
72 transformers before dispatch and did not carry o ut pre-dispatch inspection of 52 
DTRs since General Manager (GM), Electrical and Mec hanical, NEEPCO, 
Monarchak waived the condition for pre-dispatch inspection for the same.  

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Undertakings)  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 122 
NEEPCO while replying to audit (September 2021) sta ted that the pre-dispatch 
inspection was waived considering the urgency of completion of work . 
The reply is not acceptable as by waiving the condi tion, the GM, Electrical and 
Mechanical, NEEPCO, Monarchak violated the provisio ns of the guidelines of 
Quality Assurance. 
4.2.18 Beneficiary Survey 
Audit conducted beneficiary survey in the 46 villages under the four sampled projects/ 
districts to ascertain the extension of benefit of rural electrification schemes to the 
targeted beneficiaries, impact on the society and changes on their social and economic 
life. The findings of the beneficiary survey are detailed in subsequent paragraphs. 
As per para 2.4 of Saubhagya guidelines, the electr icity connection includes provision 
of service line cable, energy meter, single point w iring,  Light Emitting Diode  (LED) 
lamp and erection of pole.  
Households’ survey conducted by Audit revealed that  49 
152  beneficiaries out of 460 
sampled beneficiaries were not provided energy mete r and 41 153  beneficiaries were 
not provided LED/ Compact Fluorescent Lamps  (CFL). 
Only four 154  out of 460 beneficiaries stated that there was red uction in the monthly 
expenditure due to reduction in the use of diesel g enerator sets, diesel pumps, etc.  All 
the 460 beneficiaries surveyed stated that they wer e using consumer durables like 
television, fridge, fan, etc . 
337 155  out of 460 beneficiaries were not able to get exte nded study hours due to 
non-availability of continuous power supply in evening or at night. 
Survey of the 46 sampled villages revealed that the re was no significant improvement 
in mobility/ security at night because streetlights  were either not installed or 
non-functional. Only 18 156  out of 460 beneficiaries stated that there was imp rovement 
in mobility/ security at night. During survey, no household reported that power supply 
was erratic and for less than 12 hours per day. 
4.2.19 Conclusion 
Implementation of the ‘
Rajiv Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana (RGGVY)’ a nd 
‘Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Gram Jyoti Yojana (DDUGJY)’ schemes were  characterised 
by several instances of non-adherence to the scheme  guidelines. RGGVY  projects 
were planned without adequate survey work as DPRs w ere prepared on the basis of 
old data and had many discrepancies. There were ins tances of inefficiencies in 
contract  management, execution of works and violation of pro visions of tripartite 
agreement by the  State Government.  
                                                           
152  West Tripura – 43; Dhalai – 5; Sepahijala – 1 
153  West Tripura – 27; Dhalai – 1; Gomati – 2; Sepahij ala – 11 
154  West Tripura District 
155  West Tripura – 88; Dhalai – 119; Gomati – 55; Sepa hijala – 75 
156  West Tripura District 

Chapter IV: Economic Sector (State Public Sector Undertakings)  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 123 
The materialisation of desired objectives of RGGVY,  DDUGJY, Saubhagya  had 
failed at the planning stage. To limit the expenditure within the sanctioned cost  of 
Government of India (GoI), Tripura State Electricity Corporation Limited  ( TSECL) 
had to reduce the estimates. Due to reduction in sc ope of works various parameters 
had been reduced significantly ranging from two per cent  to 83 per cent , which 
resulted in shortfall in laying of lines, construction of sub-s tations, augmentation of 
existing sub-stations, non-providing of electric co nnection in public places and 
shortfall in providing service connection to BPL ho useholds. Consequently, the actual 
need of the State could not be fulfilled.  
Further, DPRs of Saubhagya scheme were deficient in incorporating th e status of 
electrification of urban household, number of econo mically poor urban household as 
per Socio Economic Caste Census (SECC), 2011 data f or providing service 
connection under the scheme. In absence of information on these essential parame ters 
in the DPRs desired objective of the schemes and pr ogress of physical and financial 
milestones could not be monitored periodically whic h resulted in time and cost 
overrun of various works undertaken under different RE schemes. 
Project implementation was beset with slow executio n of works, idle investments, 
weak  monitoring, delays in award of contracts and non-ha nding over /charging of 
completed works.  Lack of diligence was observed in management of fi nancial 
resources. TSECL failed to lodge the claim to State Government for reimbursement of 
taxes paid from the scheme fund. Apart from that, n on-preparation of audited 
accounts and Bank Reconciliation Statement, delay i n furnishing of Utilisation 
Certificates, discrepancies in the audited accounts  and fund utilisation reports 
revealed a weak internal control mechanism. 
Against 7,96,000 Rural households as on October 201 7, 1,06,635 (13.40 per cent ) 
Rural households remained un-electrified in the Sta te as on 31 March 2020. So, the 
objective of providing last mile connectivity and e lectricity connection to Rural 
households under the Saubhagya scheme could not be achieved.  
4.2.20  Recommendations 
1.  Tripura State Electricity Corporation Limited  (TSECL)  needs to carry out 
extensive field surveys before preparation of DPR t o target the economically 
poor and BPL households, as also to measure the inf rastructure facilities 
required to be created for providing electricity connections;  
2.  State should manage its financial resources effecti vely for funding its share for 
implementation of scheme;  
3.  State needs to exercise greater control over scope of work and related estimates 
by devising suitable formats of Monitoring Reports which would help ensure 
that projects are being implemented keeping pace wi th the framed timelines and 
financial estimates.  
4.  State needs to take necessary action to rectify the  deficiencies in monitoring the 
implementation of  the scheme . 

CHAPTER V: REVENUE SECTOR  

Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 125 
CHAPTER V: REVENUE SECTOR 
 
5.1 GENERAL 
 
5.1.1 Trend of Revenue Receipts 
The Tax and Non-tax Revenue raised by Government of  Tripura during the year 
2019-20, the net proceeds of State’s share of Union  Taxes and Duties assigned to the 
State and Grants-in-aid received from the Governmen t of India (GoI) during the year 
and the corresponding figures for the preceding four years are given in Table 5.1.1 . 
Table 5.1.1: Trend of revenue receipts 
(₹    in crore) 
Sl. 
No. Particulars 2015-16 2016-17  2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 
I. Revenue raised by the State Government 
Tax Revenue 1,332.25  1,422.01  1,422.02  1,765.91  2101.79  
Non-tax Revenue 262.60  218.85  493.48  372.20  271.65  
Total 1,594.85  1,640.86  1,915.50  2,138.11  2373.44  
Increase over previous year (%) 16.42  2.88  16.74  11.62  11.01 
II. Receipts from the GoI 
Net proceeds of State Share of 
Union Taxes and Duties 3,266.02 
 3,909.12  4,322.08  4,888.95  4211.78  
Grants-in-aid  4,565.87  4,095.48  3,830.37  5,003.83  4416.37  
Total 7,831.89  8,004.60  8,152.45  9,892.78  8628.15  
III. Total Revenue Receipts of the 
State Government (I and II) 9,426.74  9,645.46  10,067.95  12,030.89  11001.59  
IV. Percentage of I to III 16.92  17.01  19.03  17.77  21.57  
Source : Finance Accounts 
 
Table 5.1.1  and Chart 5.1.1 indicates that during the year 2019-20, the revenue  
raised by the State Government was ₹ 2,373.44 crore which was 21.57 per cent  of the 
total Revenue Receipts. The balance 78.43 per cent  of the revenue receipts during 
7831.89 8004.60 8152.45 
9892.78 
8628.15 
1594.85 1640.86 1915.50 2138.11 2373.44 
83.08 82.99 80.97 82.23 78.43 
16.92 17.01 19.03 17.77 21.57 
0.00 
10.00 
20.00 
30.00 
40.00 
50.00 
60.00 
70.00 
80.00 
90.00 
0.00 
2000.00 
4000.00 
6000.00 
8000.00 
10000.00 
12000.00 
2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 
(in per cent) 
(₹ in crore) 
Chart 5.1.1: State and Central share in total revenue 
Revenue from GoI 
State's own revenue 
Share of revenue from GoI to total revenue 
Share of State's own revenue to total revenue 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 126 
2019-20 was received from the GoI in the form of St ate share of Union Taxes and 
Duties and Grants-in-Aid. The rate of growth of own  revenue of the State declined 
during 2019-20 to 11.01 per cent (₹ 235.33  crore) compared to 11.62 per cent  during 
2018-19 over the previous year. The total Revenue R eceipts of the State also 
decreased by 8.56 per cent from ₹ 12,030.89 crore in 2018-19 to ₹ 11,001.59 crore in 
2019-20 due to less receipts of Grants-in-aid from GoI during 2019-20. 
5.1.1 (a) Tax Revenue  
The details of the Tax Revenue raised during the pe riod 2015-20 are given in 
Table 5.1.2 . 
Table 5.1.2: Components of Own Tax Revenue during 2015-20 
(₹    in crore) 
Sl. 
No. Head of revenue 2015-16  2016-17  2017-18  2018-19  2019-20  
Increase (+) or 
decrease (-) of 
actual in 2019-20  
over 2018-19 
(per cent ) 
1 Sales Tax/ Value 
Added Tax (VAT) 1,058.48  1,112.89  611.88  361.95  435.88  (+) 20.43 
2 Goods and Service 
Tax 157  --  --  479.71  977.44  1026.63  (+) 5.03 
3 State Excise  143.57  163.19  186.96  214.35  231.70  (+)  8.09  
4 Stamps and 
Registration Fees 42.49  41.83  40.16  51.32  61.67  (+) 20.17 
5 Taxes on Vehicles  37.62  43.6 0 54.38  83.50  97.14  (+)  16.34  
6 
Other Taxes on 
Income and 
Expenditure  
39.67  41.96  42.20  43.87  43.59  (-) 0.64 
7 Land Revenue  5.97  13.32  4.46  5.29  12.98  (+)  145.37  
8 
Other Taxes and 
Duties on 
Commodities and 
Services  
4.29  3.32  2.17  27.93  161.58  (+) 478.52 
9 Others 158  0.16  1.90  0.10  0.26  30.62  (+)  11676.92  
Total  1,332.25  1,422.01  1,422.02  1,765.91  2101.79  (+)  19.02  
Source : Finance Accounts 
Goods and Service Tax (GST):- The reason attributed by the Finance (Excise & 
Taxation) Department for increase of collection of GST (5.03 per cent ) over previous 
year was due to higher collection of SGST, IGST and  advance IGST as compared to 
the previous year. 
State Excise :-The reason attributed by the Finance (Excise & Ta xation) Department 
for increase of collection of State Excise (8.09 per cent ) was due to introduction of 
Maximum Retail Price (MRP) based Advalorem Excise Duty. 
Land Revenue:- The reason attributed by the Revenue Department for  increase of 
collection of Land Revenue (145.37 per cent) was due to collection of more premium 
(Nazar). 
                                                 
157  Goods and Service Tax Act was passed in the Parlia ment on 29th March 2017 and came into effect 
on 1 July 2017 
158  Tax on Agriculture Income ( ₹ 0.08 crore), Taxes & Duties on Electricity ( ₹ 30.54 crore) 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 127 
Other Taxes and Duties on Commodities and Services: - The increase in collection 
under Other Taxes on Income and Expenditure by 478. 52 per cent  over the previous 
was stated to be mainly due to revision of rate of Tripura Road Development Cess on 
Natural Gas from three per cent  to 15.5 per cent  during the year 2019-20. 
Others:- The increase in collection under ‘Others’ by 11,676 .92 per cent  over the 
previous year was stated to be mainly due to collec tion of ₹ 30.39 crore after the 
implementation the Tripura Electricity Duty from 4 October 2019 under Tripura 
Electricity Duty Act, 2019.  
The other departments (indicated in Table 5.1.2 ), despite being requested 
(October 2020), did not furnish the reasons for variations in Tax Receipts with respect 
to the previous year (February 2022). 
5.1.1 (b) Non-tax Revenue 
During 2019-20 collection of Non-tax revenue is dec reased by 
₹ 100.55 crore 
(27.02 per cent ) over the previous year. The details of the Non-Ta x Revenue raised 
during the period 2015-16 to 2019-20 are indicated in Table 5.1.3 . 
Table 5.1.3: Components of Non-tax Revenue during 2015-20 
(₹    in crore) 
Sl. 
No.  Head of revenue 2015-16  2016-17  2017-18  2018-19  2019-20  
Increase (+) 
or decrease 
(-) of actual 
in 2019-20 
over 2017-18  
(per cent ) 
1 Interest Receipts 55.24  37.07  276.99  146.11  19.25  (-) 86.82  
2 Industries 96.41  80.36  87.36  92.81  100.27  (+) 8.04  
3 Police 40.50  48.07  60.11  71.77  65.13 (-) 9.25 
4 Public Works 8.15  8.08  8.51  5.06  4.95  (-) 2.17  
5 Forestry and Wildlife 11.86  11.01  9.76  11.96  13.82  (+) 15.55  
6 Water Supply and 
Sanitation  1.76  2.45  2.36  1.88  1.25  (-) 33.51  
7 Misc. General Services 6.48  7.25  8.88  6.18  20.44  (+) 230.74  
8 Other Administrative 
Services 6.84  6.12  5.60  4.71  8.29  (+) 76.00  
9 Medical and Public Health 6.01  2.42  1.51  3.97  8.94 (+) 125.19  
10 Crop Husbandry 3.61  2.60  2.71  3.56  2.98  (-) 16.29  
11 Animal Husbandry 2.42  1.84  1.79  2.07  2.05  (-) 0.97  
12 Housing 1.82  1.85  2.08  2.07  2.16  (+) 4.35  
13 Education, Sports, Art and 
Culture 2.30 
 2.29  1.48  1.78  1.05  (-) 41.01  
14 Stationery and Printing 1.16  1.10  0.81  2.00  2.15  (+) 7.50  
15 Others 159  18.04  6.34  23.53  16.27  18.92  (-) 16.29  
Total 262.60 218.85  493.48  372.20 271.65  (-) 27.02  
Source : Finance Accounts 
Crop Husbandry : The reason attributed by the Agriculture and Farm ers Welfare 
Department for decrease (16.29 per cent ) in collection of taxes over the previous year 
                                                 
159  Comprising 19 Major Heads including dividends and profits 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 128 
was mainly due to less collection of sale proceeds of Agri Farms/ Cold storage & 
selling of tender forms due to Pandemic in 2019-20.  
The other departments (indicated in Table 5.1.3 ), despite being requested (October 
2020), did not furnish the reasons for variations i n Non-tax Revenue Receipts with 
respect to the previous year (February 2022). 
5.1.2 Revenue and return filling trends 
 
5.1.2 (i) GST Revenue of Government of Tripura: Com parison between 
 budget estimates and actual receipts 
The comparison of budget estimates and the correspo nding actual collection of Goods 
and Service Tax (GST) during the period from 2017-1 8 to 2019-20 are shown in 
Table 5.1.4 . 
Table 5.1.4: Revenue from GST during 2017-18, 2018-19 and 2019-20 
(₹    in crore)  
Year  Budget Estimates (BE)  Revised Estimates (RE)  Actuals  
State GST  State GST  State GST  
2017-18 160  - 504.00  479.71  
2018-19  630.00  1008.54  977.44 
2019-20  1149.74  1149.74  1026.63  
Source : Information furnished by office of the Accountant General (A&E), Tripura  
It could be seen from Table 5.1.4  that, the actual collection of revenue from SGST 
over the last three years from 2017-18 to 2019-20 w as short of the target as projected 
in the revised estimates for the respective years. 
5.1.2 (ii) Bi-monthly compensation received from Un ion Government 
The bi-monthly compensation received from Union Gov ernment under GST 
(Compensation to States) Act, 2017 161  for the year 2019-20 is given in Table 5.1.5 . 
Table 5.1.5: Bi-monthly compensation received from Union Government for the year 
2019-20  
(₹ in crore) 
Month  Provisional Compensation  Shortfall (+)/ Excess (-), if 
any  Due  Received  
April-May  47.71  22.00  (+) 25.71  
June-July  44.06  46.00  (-)1.94  
August-September  68.98  66.00  (+) 2.98  
October-November  67.69  67.00  (+) 0.69  
December - February  81.62  77.79  (+) 3.83  
March 15.70  14.21  (+) 1.49  
Total 325.76  293.00  (+) 32.76  
Source: Information furnished by the Finance (Excise & Taxation) Department. 
                                                 
160  GST data on Budget Estimates for the Financial yea r 2017-18 is not applicable as GST was 
implemented from July 2017 
161  An act to provide compensation to the States for t he loss of revenue arising on account of 
implementation of the GST in pursuance of the 101 Constitutional Amendment Act, 2016. 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 129 
From Tables 5.1.5 , it can be seen that there was overall shortfall i n release of 
₹ 32.76 crore compensation of SGST from the GoI for the year 2019-20. 
5.1.2 (iii) Trends of Integrated GST apportionment to the State and its cross 
 utilisation 
The Integrated GST (IGST) collected will be apporti oned between the Centre and the 
State where the goods or services are consumed. The  revenue will be apportioned to 
the Centre at the CGST rate, and the remaining amou nt will be apportioned to the 
consuming State. 
The trends of IGST apportionment to the State and i ts cross utilisation are given in 
Table 5.1.6. 
Table 5.1.6: Integrated Goods and Services Tax 
(₹ in crore)  
IGST component  2017-18  2018-19  2019-20  
IGST 162  apportioned to the State as per 
Section 17 of IGST Act, 2017  23.18  40.73  15.30  
IGST provisionally/ ad-hoc apportioned to 
the State 
 35.00  128.07  32.52  
IGST cross utilised between  
 
SGST 163  as IGST  (-)13.41  (-)36.36  (-)30.90  
IGST as SGST  (+)271.67  (+)549.45  (+)644.58  
Source: Information furnished by office of the Accountant General (A & E), Tripura  
5.1.2 (iv) Registration under GST   
The total registration under GST as on 31 March 202 0 were 19,978, of which normal 
taxpayers were 17,623 which accounted for 88.21 per cent  and composition taxpayers 
were 1,234 which accounted for 6.18 per cent . The category wise registrations under 
GST is given in Table 5.1.7. 
Table 5.1.7: Details of GST registrations upto 31 March 2020 
Category of Registrant  No. of Registrants  Percentage of total  
Normal taxpayers  17,623  88.21  
Composition taxpayers  1,234  6.18  
Tax Deductors at Source  915  4.58  
Tax Collectors at Source  199  1.00  
Input Service Distributors  - - 
Others (Casual, NRTP, OIDAR)  7 0.03  
Total Registrants  19,978  100.00  
Source: Information furnished by the Finance (Excise & Taxation) Department 
                                                 
162  IGST: It is a tax collected by the Central Governm ent for an inter-State sale 
163  SGST: It is a tax collected by the State Governmen t for an intra-State sale 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 130 
5.1.2 (v) GST Return filling pattern of GSTR-1 and GSTR-3B  
The trends of filling of GSTR-1 164  and GSTR-3B 165  as on 31 March 2020 for the 
period from April 2019 to March 2020, as compiled f rom the summary reports shared 
by GSTN, have been depicted in the Table 5.1.8. 
The filling of GSTR-3B for April 2019 was 80 per cent while that of March 2020 was 
only 11 per cent . It was noticed that on an average 73.14 per cent  tax payers filed 
their GSTR-3B returns during 2019-20. However, the GSTR-3B returns were being 
filed within the due date on an average of 56.82 per cent  taxpayers while the 
remaining 16.32 per cent  filed the returns after due date. GSTR-3B returns filed by 
the due date range between 54.99 per cent  and 71 per cent  during April 2019 to 
February 2020, while it was only 8.99 per cent  in March 2020. Thus, while it was 
expected that compliance would improve as the syste m would stabilise with passage 
of time. 
Table 5.1.8: Details of return filing (GSTR-1 and GSTR-3B) during 2019-20  
Return Type  GSTR-1 GSTR-3B 
Months* Due for 
filing 
Return 
filed 
Return 
filing per 
cent  
Due for 
filing 
Returns 
filed as on 
31 March 
2020 
Return 
filing per 
cent  
Returns 
filed by 
due date  
Percen-
tage of 
returns  
filed by 
due date  
April 2019 23557  6628  28.14 23557  18902  80.24  12956  54.99 
May 2019 23734  6664  28.08 23734  18979  79.97  14003  58.99 
June 2019 24026  18730  77.96 24026  19080  79.41  14656  61.00 
July 2019 24393  6767  27.74 24393  19264  78.97  15855  64.99 
August 2019 24459  6818  27.88 24459  19375  79.21  14186  57.99 
September 
2019 24530 
 19206  78.30 24530  19467  79.36  13492  55.00 
October 2019 24644  6907  28.03 24644  19481  79.05  15033  61.00 
November 
2019 24638 
 6970  28.29 24638  19507  79.17  15522  63.00 
December 
2019 24481 
 19176  78.33 24481  19490  79.61  13954  57.00 
January 2020 24312  6957  28.62 24312  19217  79.04  17262  71.00 
February 
2020 23986 
 6814  28.41 23986  17333  72.26  16310  67.99 
March 2020 24205  18289  75.56 24205  2763  11.41  2178  8.99 
Source: Information furnished by the Finance (Excise & Taxation) Department  
5.1.2 (vi) Revenue earning from top 10 commodities/  services  
The details of the revenue earning from top 10 comm odities/ services during 2019-20 
are given in the Table 5.1.9. 
 
                                                 
164  GSTR-1: It is a sales return that is required to b e filed by every GST registered person 
165  GSTR-3B: It is a self-declared consolidated summar y return of inward and outward supplies which 
is required to be filed by a registered person electronically on the GST common portal 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 131 
Table 5.1.9: Revenue from top 10 commodities/ services during 2019-20  
(₹ in crore)  
Sl. 
No.  Name of commodity  SGST collections  
Total  Ranking  
1 Automobiles  22.82  1 
2 Cement & Cement Products 22.02  2 
3 Tobacco & Tobacco Products 21.96  3 
4 Electrical Energy  19.58  4 
5 Food Item  9.95  5 
6 Iron & Steel  8.44  6 
7 Petroleum Products  6.73  7 
8 Pharmaceutical & Medicine  5.98  8 
9 Tyres & Tube  5.67  9 
10  Rubber  3.73  10  
Sl. 
No. Name of Services  Total  Ranking  
1 Works Contract  25.09  1 
2 Insurance  8.66  2 
3 Telecommunication & Postal/ Courier Services  5.28  3 
4 Banking & financial Institutions 2.67  4 
5 Health/Health Care  1.79  5 
6 Entertainment  1.14  6 
7 Manpower  1.10  7 
8 Construction Services  0.87  8 
9 Education & Related Services  0.84  9 
10  Consultancy  0.78  10  
Source: Information furnished by the Finance (Excise & Taxation) Department  
5.1.3 Analysis of arrears of revenue 
The arrears of revenue as on 31 
 March 2020 on account of Taxes/VAT and GST stood 
at ₹ 67.62 crore, of which, ₹ 42.34 crore was outstanding for more than five yea rs, as 
detailed in Table 5.1.10. 
Table 5.1.10: Arrears of revenue 
(₹    in crore) 
Sl. 
No.  Head of revenue 
Total amount 
outstanding as on 31  
March 
Amount outstanding 
for more than five 
years as on 31March  
2019 2020 2019 2020 
1 Taxes/ VAT 33.72  65.49  18.86  42.34  
2 GST 0.45  2.13  - - 
Total 34.17  67.62  18.86  42.34  
Source : Information furnished by the Finance (Excise& Taxation) Department.  
It can be seen from Table 5.1.10 that arrear of revenue increased from ₹ 34.17 crore 
at the end of March 2019 to ₹ 67.62 crore at the end of March 2020.  The arrear of 
revenue outstanding for more than five years also i ncreased from ₹ 18.86 crore to 
₹ 42.34 crore during the same period. 
 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 132 
5.1.4 Evasion of tax detected by the department 
The details of cases of evasion of tax detected by the Finance (Excise & Taxation) 
Department, cases finalised and the demands for add itional tax raised as reported by 
the Department are given in Table 5.1.11. 
Table 5.1.11: Evasion of tax 
Source : Information furnished by the Finance (Excise & Taxation) Department  
As on 31  March 2019, 1,000 cases of evasion of tax/VAT were outstanding.  During 
2019-20, 964 cases of evasion of tax had been detec ted under Sections 67 and 68 of 
Tripura VAT Act, 2004, taking the total pending cases to 1,964. Of these, assessments/ 
investigation of 905 (46.08 per cent ) cases were completed and additional demand 
including penalty, etc . amounting to ₹ 15.28 crore was raised during the year 2019-20. 
Consequently, 1,059 cases were pending as on 31  March 2020. 
Government should put in place a mechanism to exped ite the disposal of cases 
pending for finalisation. 
5.1.5 Pendency of refund cases 
The details of the claims for refund received and r efund made under GST, Sales Tax 
(VAT) & State Excise are shown in Table 5.1.12. 
Table 5.1.12: Details of pendency of refund cases 
(₹    in crore) 
Sl. 
No.  Particulars 
GST Sales tax / VAT  State Excise Total 
No. of 
Cases Amount  No. of 
cases Amount  No. of 
cases Amount  No. of 
cases Amount  
1 Claims 
outstanding at the 
beginning of the 
year 
- -
 - -  - -  - -  
2 Claims received 
during the year - -  - -  3 0.21  3 0.21  
3 Refunds made 
during the year 48 0.08  7 2.17  3 0.21  58 2.46  
Source : Information furnished by the Finance (Excise & Taxation) Department  
During 2019-20, the State Government refund ₹ 2.46 crore under GST, Sales Tax & 
State Excise in 58 cases. As per information receiv ed from the Commissioner of 
Taxes, it was seen that, 48 cases of GST amounting to ₹ 0.08 crore and seven cases of 
Sales Tax (VAT) involving ₹ 2.17 crore have been refunded during the year 2019- 20 
though no claim was received from the dealers conce rned. However, three claims 
involving ₹ 0.21 crore in respect of State Excise were received  & refunded during the 
year 2019-20. 
Head of 
revenue 
Cases 
pending 
as on 31  
March 
2019 
Cases 
detected 
during 
2019-20 
Total 
Number of cases in which 
assessment/ investigation 
completed and additional 
demand with penalty, etc . 
raised 
Number of 
cases pending 
for finalisation 
as on 31  March 
2019 No. of cases (₹    in crore ) 
Tax/ VAT  1,000 964 1,964 905 15.28  1,059 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 133 
5.1.6 Analysis of the mechanism for dealing with th e issues raised by Audit 
In order to analyse the effectiveness of the depart ments/ Government in addressing 
the issues highlighted in the IRs/ Audit Reports, t he action taken on the paragraphs 
and performance audits featured in the Audit Report s of the last ten years by the 
Finance (Excise & Taxation) Department has been evaluated. The results are included 
in this Audit Report. 
The succeeding Paragraphs 5.1.6.1 and  5.1.6.2 explain the performance of the 
Finance (Excise & Taxation) Department with referen ce to cases detected in the 
course of local audit during the last ten years and  the cases included in the Audit 
Reports for the years 2008-09 to 2017-18. 
5.1.6.1 Position of Inspection Reports 
The summarised position of the outstanding IRs duri ng the last ten years, paragraphs 
included in those reports and their status as on 30
 June 2020 in respect of Finance 
(Excise & Taxation) Department are tabulated in Table 5.1.13. 
Table 5.1.13: Position of IRs 
(₹    in crore) 
Year  Inspection Report  Para graphs  Money Value  
2010 -11  6 17  0.85  
2011 -12  9 14 3.94  
2012 -13  5 13  0.48  
2013 -14  14  46  3.5 6 
2014 -15  13  64  12.58  
2015 -16  17  48  8. 48  
2016 -17  14  77 6. 45  
2017 -18  11  60 6.78  
2018 -19 13  52 7.03  
2019 -20  10  62  5.76  
Total  112  453  55.91  
The age-wise break up of outstanding IRs and Paragr aphs for 2010-11 to 2019-20 as 
on 30 June 2020 is shown in Table 5.1.14. 
Table 5.1.14: Age wise break up of outstanding IRs 
(₹ in crore) 
Years  Inspection Report  Para graphs  Money value  
0-3 years  34  17 4 19.5 7 
4-6 years  44  189  27.51  
7-9 years  28  73 7.9 8 
10 years  6 17  0.85  
Total  112  453  55.91  
It is evident from Table 5.1.14 that between a range of zero to three years, 34 IRs  and 
174 paras remained outstanding, between four to six  years, 44 IRs and 189 paras and 
between seven to nine years, 28 IRs and 73 paragrap hs remained outstanding and six 
IRs and 17 paragraphs remained outstanding for more  than 10 years as on 
30 June 2020.  This indicates the fact that the eff orts taken by the Department for 
settlement of the outstanding IRs are rather slow a nd inadequate.  Necessary steps 
may be taken to increase the pace of settlement in this regard. 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 134 
5.1.6.2 Recovery in accepted cases 
The position of paragraphs included in the Audit Re ports of the last ten years, those 
accepted by the Department and the amount recovered  during the year 2019-20 and 
the cumulative position of recovery of accepted cases as on 31 March 2020 are shown 
in Table 5.1.15. 
Table 5.1.15: Position of recovery of accepted Audit paragraphs of Audit Reports  
(₹    in crore) 
Year of 
Audit 
Report 
Number of 
paragraphs 
included 
Money 
value of the 
paragraphs  
Number of 
paragraphs 
accepted 
including 
money value  
Money 
value of 
accepted 
paragraphs  
Amount 
recovered 
during 
2019-20 
Position of 
recovery of 
accepted 
cases as of 
31 March 
2020 
2009-10 3 1.74  2 1.16  Nil  0.60  
2010-11 3 166  3.12  3 3.12  Nil  0.44  
2011-12 1 0.87  1 0.87  Nil  0.07  
2012-13 1 1.51  1 1.51  Nil  0.22  
2013-14 3 167  11.17  3 6.06  Nil  0.24  
2014-15 2 0.39  2 0.39  Nil  0.28  
2015-16 2 0.46  2 0.46  Nil  Nil  
2016-17 4 168  31.87  3 31.73  Nil  0.01  
2017-18 3 1.77  3 1.77  Nil  0.01  
2018-19 3 1.30  2 0.69  0.06  0.06  
Total 25 54.20  22 47.76  0.06  1.93  
It is evident from Table 5.1.15 that the progress of recovery even in accepted case s 
was very slow.  During the last ten years, 25 parag raphs involving ₹ 54.20 crore 
featured in the Audit Reports, of which 22 paragrap hs involving ₹ 47.76 crore had 
been accepted by the State Government. Out of this,  only ₹ 1.93 crore (3.56 per cent ) 
was recovered (December 2020).  
The Department should pursue and monitor prompt rec overy of the dues involved in 
accepted cases within a specified timeframe, since it would not only enable better 
compliance with relevant rules, but would also augment Government coffers.   
5.1.7 Action taken on the recommendations accepted by the departments/ 
Government 
The draft Performance Audits (PAs) conducted by Acc ountant General (Audit) are 
forwarded to the concerned departments with a reque st to furnish the replies. These 
Performance Audits are also discussed in Exit Conference and the departments’ views 
are incorporated/ considered while finalising the Audit Report. 
Four performance audits on Finance (Excise & Taxati on) Department, Transport 
Department and Revenue Department have featured in the last five years Audit 
Reports during 2014-15 to 2018-19. The number of re commendations and their status 
is given in Table 5.1.16. 
                                                 
166  Including one Performance Audit 
167  Including one Performance Audit 
168  Including one Performance Audit 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 135 
Table 5.1.16: Details of recommendations of PAs and their status 
Year of 
Report 
Name of the performance 
audit 
No. of 
recommendations  
Status (as on December 
2020) 
2014-15 
IT Audit on 
Computerisation of Land 
Records. 
3 
The PA had not been 
discussed in PAC 
2015-16 
Collection of Revenue from 
outsourced Activities in 
Motor Vehicle Tax. 
4 
The PA had not been 
discussed in PAC 
2016-17 
System and Procedures in 
force in the Taxes and 
Excise Organisation 
regarding Excise Duty 
3 
The PA had not been 
discussed in PAC  
Border Area Development 
Programme (BADP) 3 The PA had no t been 
discussed in PAC 
Table 5.1.16 indicates that discussion of Performance Audits ha d not been made in 
PAC in timely manner which led to loss of importanc e of audit observations with the 
passage of time. 
5.1.8 Results of audit  
 
Position of local audit conducted during the year 
Test-check of the records of 12 units of Sales Tax/ VAT, State Excise, Registration, 
Professional Tax, Land Revenue, Forest, Motor Vehic les and other departmental 
offices conducted during the year 2019-20 revealed under-assessment/ short levy/ loss 
of revenue/ non-realisation of outstanding revenue aggregating 
₹ 5.81 crore in 
66 cases.  Of these, the departments recovered ₹ 0.01 crore involving one case.  
During the year 2019-20, the departments concerned accepted under-assessment and 
other deficiencies of ₹ 5.81 crore involved in 66 cases which had been poi nted out in 
audit. 
  

Chapter V: Revenue Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 136 
FINANCE DEPARTMENT 
5.2 Subject Specific Compliance Audit on ‘Processin g of Refund claims under 
GST in Tripura’ 
 
5.2.1 Introduction 
Taxes and Excise Organisation functioning under the  Finance Department, 
Government of Tripura plays a very important and cr ucial role in mobilisation of 
financial resources in the State. The Commissioner of Taxes is responsible for 
administration of taxation measures and for general  control and supervision over the 
implementation of Tax laws throughout the State. Th e introduction of Goods and 
Services Tax (GST) consolidates multiple taxes into one with effect from 1 July 2017. 
The levy and collection of GST is governed through the Sales Tax Charges (15) 
169  
spread across the State. The charges are headed by the Superintendents of Taxes (ST).  
Timely refund mechanism constitutes a crucial compo nent of tax administration as it 
facilitates trade through release of blocked funds for working capital, expansion and 
modernisation of existing businesses. Goods and Ser vices Tax (GST) laws aimed to 
streamline and standardise the refund procedures wi th the claim and sanctioning 
procedures contemplated to be completely online. Ho wever, in the initial phase of 
GST implementation, due to unavailability of electr onic refund module on the GST 
Network (GSTN) portal, a temporary mechanism was fo llowed where the applicants 
were required to file the refund applications in Fo rm GST RFD-01A, take a printout 
of the same and submit it physically to the jurisdi ctional tax officer along with all the 
supporting documents. The procedure for the subsequ ent processing of the refund 
application by the Commercial Taxes Department continued to be manual. 
Some of the circumstances where the GST refund case s arise include excess payment 
of tax made due to mistake or omission, dealer expo rting goods/ services under claim 
of rebate or refund, ITC accumulation due to output  being tax exempt or nil-rated, tax 
refund for international tourists, excess balance in Electronic Cash Ledger, etc.   
The Electronic refund procedure came into effect fr om 26 September 2019, wherein 
submission and processing of refund claims under GST were brought online. 
5.2.2 Audit objectives 
Audit of refund cases under GST regime was conducte d (December 2020-March 
2021) to assess:  
(i) The adequacy of Act, Rules, notifications, circ ulars, etc.  issued in relation to 
grant of refund; 
(ii) The compliance of extant provisions by the tax  authorities and the efficacy of 
the systems in place to ensure compliance by taxpayers; 
                                                 
169  Charge-I, Charge-II, Charge-III, Charge-IV, Charge -V, Charge-VI, Charge-VII, Charge-VIII 
Agartala, Bishalgarh Charge, Udaipur Charge, Beloni a Charge, Teliamura Charge, Ambassa 
Charge, Dharmanagar Charge and Kailashahar Charge. 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 137 
(iii) Whether effective internal control mechanism exists to check the performance 
of the departmental officials in disposing the refund applications. 
5.2.3 Audit scope and sample selection 
Pan-India refund data was obtained from GSTN and ou t of the total 288 refund cases 
processed involving an amount of 
₹ 5.75 crore, 84 refund cases 170  involving an 
amount of ₹ 2.85 crore during the period from July 2017 to Jul y 2020 were selected 
for detailed examination by audit. 
Prior to the commencement of audit, an Entry Conference was held on 7 January 2021 
with the Commissioner of taxes and Excise, Government of Tripura (CT), wherein the 
objectives and scope of the audit were discussed. A fter the conclusion of the audit, an 
Exit Conference was held on 13 August 2021 with the  CT, wherein audit findings 
were discussed. The draft Report was also sent (Dec ember 2021) to the Secretary, 
Finance Department for furnishing the views of the Government. The views of the 
Taxes and Excise Organisation and the State Governm ent were obtained and 
incorporated in the report, wherever appropriate. 
5.2.4 Audit criteria 
The performance of the Taxes Organisation was bench marked against the following 
audit criteria: 
(i)  Central Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017 
(ii)  Tripura State Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017 
(iii)  Tripura State Goods and Services Tax Rules, 2017 
(iv)  Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017 
5.2.5 Audit findings 
Table 5.2.1  brings out the extent of deficiencies noted during  the audit of refund 
cases, selected for detailed audit.  
Table 5.2.1: Extent of deficiencies noted during the audit 
Nature of Audit Findings  Audit Sample  
Number of 
deficiencies 
noticed  
Deficiencies as 
percentage of 
Sample 
Delay in sanction of refund orders 72 13 18.05 
Delay in issue of acknowledgment  72 16 22.22 
Delay in communicating refund 
orders to counterpart tax authority 31 13 41.94 
Non-conducting of post audit of 
refund claims 84 84 100 
Audit findings are included in the subsequent paragraphs: 
 
                                                 
170  43 cases pertain to pre-automation period wherein file records relating to 12 cases could not be 
produced to audit and 41 cases pertain to post-automation period. 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 138 
5.2.5.1 Refund orders not sanctioned in time 
Section 54(7) of Tripura SGST Act, 2017 stipulates that the proper officer shall issue 
the order under Sub-Section (5) within sixty days f rom the date of receipt of 
application complete in all respects. Further, Sect ion 56 of the Act ibid  provides that, 
if any tax ordered to be refunded under Sub-Section (5) of Section 54 to any applicant 
is not refunded within sixty days from the date of receipt of application under 
sub-Section (1) of that section, interest at such r ate not exceeding six per cent  as may 
be specified in the notification issued by the Gove rnment on the recommendations of 
the Council shall be payable in respect of such ref und from the date immediately after 
the expiry of sixty days from the date of receipt o f application under the said 
sub-section till the date of refund of such tax. 
Audit observed that in 13 refund cases 
171 , out of 84 cases 172 , there was delay in 
sanction of refunds ranging from six days to 191 da ys. Further, the Department did 
not pay interest amounting to ₹ 0.12 lakh [₹ 0.04 lakh {Appendix 5.2.1(a)}  pertaining 
to the pre automation period and ₹ 0.08 lakh {Appendix 5.2.1(b)} pertaining to the 
post automation period].  
The Commissioner of Taxes and Excise replied (Decem ber 2021) that sanction orders 
could not be issued on time as required documents w ere not submitted by the 
taxpayers within the stipulated time. 
The Government replied (February 2022) that delay i n processing of refund in certain 
cases were unavoidable due to non-co-operation of the taxpayers. 
The replies are not acceptable as the officers conc erned were required to serve the 
deficiency memos to the applicants on time; but eit her deficiency memos were not 
served or served with delay to the applicants {Appendix 5.2.1(c)} .  
5.2.5.2 Delay in issue of acknowledgment 
Rule 90(1) and (2) of Tripura SGST Rules, 2017 stip ulate that the acknowledgment 
shall be issued by the proper officer within fifteen days of filing of refund claim, if the 
application is found complete in all respects.    
Out of selected 84 refund cases, it was noticed tha t there was delay in issue of 
acknowledgement in 16 cases (19.04 per cent ) from three days to 233 days. Thus, the 
Department failed to adhere to the timelines for is suing acknowledgements as 
prescribed in the rules ibid {Appendices 5.2.2(a) & 5.2.2(b)} .  
The Commissioner of Taxes and Excise replied (Decem ber 2021) that 
acknowledgements could not be issued on time as req uired documents were not 
submitted by the taxpayers within the stipulated time.  
The Government replied (February 2022) that delay i n processing of 
acknowledgements in certain cases were unavoidable due to non-co-operation of the 
taxpayers. 
                                                 
171  Five cases pertain to pre-automation period and ei ght cases pertain to post automation period 
172  43 cases pertain to pre-automation period and 41 c ases pertain to post automation period 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 139 
The replies are not acceptable as the officers conc erned were required to serve the 
deficiency memos to the applicants on time; but eit her deficiency memos were not 
served or served with delay to the applicants. 
5.2.5.3 Delay in communicating refund orders to Cou nterpart Tax Authority 
As per CBIC Circular No. 24/24/2017 GST dated 21 December 2017 as endorsed vide  
Office of the Chief Commissioner of Taxes, Governme nt of Tripura Circular 
No.4/2018-GST (State), dated 28 March 2018, refund order issued either by Central 
Tax Authority or State tax/UT tax authority shall b e communicated to the Counterpart 
Tax Authority concerned within seven working days f or the purpose of payment of 
relevant sanctioned amount of tax or cess as the ca se may be. It was also reiterated to 
ensure adherence to the timeline specified under Se ction 54(7) and rule 91(2) of 
SGST Act and Rules respectively for sanction of refund orders. 
While verifying the records of transmission of refu nd sanction orders, it was observed 
that 13 refund orders were forwarded to the Central  Tax Authority (CTA) with delays 
ranging from one day to 114 days (Appendix 5.2.3) . 
The Commissioner of Taxes and Excise replied (Decem ber 2021) that delays in 
communicating refund orders to the CTA were due to non-submission or delayed 
submission of proper documents by the applicants. 
The reply is not acceptable as the officers concern ed were required to serve the 
deficiency memos to the applicants on time; but eit her deficiency memos were not 
served or served with delay to the applicants. 
The Government did not furnish any specific reply to the audit observation. 
5.2.5.4 Post audit of refund claims not conducted 
The CBEC circular No. 17/17/2017-GST dated 15 Novem ber 2017 as endorsed vide  
Office of the Chief Commissioner of Taxes, Governme nt of Tripura Circular 
No.4/2018-GST (State) dated 28 March 2018, elaborately laid down the procedure for 
manual processing of refunds of zero rated supplies . The circular inter alia , stipulates 
that, the pre-audit of manually processed refund ap plications is not required till 
separate detailed guidelines are issued by the Boar d, irrespective of amount involved. 
However, it was clarified that the post audit of re fund order shall be continued as per 
the extant guidelines. 
Audit noticed that none of the cases out of selecte d 84 refund cases was sent for post 
audit of refund claims. Thus, non-adherence to circ ular might also lead to possible 
loss of revenue to exchequer {Appendices 5.2.4(a), 5.2.4(b) and  5.2.5} .  
The Commissioner of Taxes and Excise did not furnis h any reply to the audit 
observation. However, the Government replied (Febru ary 2022) that post audit had 
not been conducted due to non-constitution of the I nternal Audit wing in the Taxes 
Organisation during that period. 
 

Chapter V: Revenue Sector  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 140 
5.2.5.5 Absence of Internal Audit Wing 
Internal audit is an important Departmental/ Organi sational control that helps to 
provide assurance that demands/ refunds are process ed accurately through correct 
application of provisions of the Act and Rules.  
Audit noticed that the Department did not have any internal audit wing of its own. 
The internal audit was being conducted by audit tea m deputed from the Directorate of 
Audit, Finance Department, Government of Tripura. The deputed team predominantly 
concentrated on subsidiary/ support functions viz.  DDO functions, establishment, 
stocks, vehicle hiring, etc.  rather than the core function of the Taxes Organis ation and 
had not pointed out any observation related to GST refund cases.  
The Commissioner of Taxes and Excise, while admitti ng the observation, intimated 
(August 2021) that Internal Audit Wing had been constituted (August 2021). 
5.2.5.6 Non-production of records 
During audit, the records relating to 12 (Appendix 5.2.5)  out of 43 refund cases 
relating to pre-automation period could not be prod uced and hence, could not be 
examined. Moreover, date of actual credit of refund  amount into the taxpayers’ Bank 
accounts could not be furnished to audit.  
Neither did the Commissioner of Taxes and Excise no r the Government furnish the 
reply to the audit observation. 
5.2.5.7 Conclusion 
Audit noticed certain cases where the Department di d not adhere to the prescribed 
timelines leading to instances of delay in issuing of acknowledgement, sanction of 
refund orders and communicating refund orders to co unterpart tax authority. In 
addition, issues such as non-conducting of post aud it of refund claims and 
non-production of records, were also noticed. 
5.2.5.8 Recommendations 
Apart from the requisite action on the irregulariti es brought out by Audit as 
highlighted in the preceding paragraphs, the Depart ment needs to take proactive 
steps to ensure that similar instances are not repe ated in other cases. Moreover, the 
issues concerning conduct of post audit of refund claims and production of relevant 
records to audit need to be addressed.  

CHAPTER VI:  
FOLLOW UP OF AUDIT OBSERVATIONS 

Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura 
  141 
CHAPTER VI 
FOLLOW UP OF AUDIT OBSERVATIONS 
6.1 Follow-up action on earlier Audit Reports 
 
6.1.1 Explanatory notes not submitted 
Finance Department of the Government of Tripura issued instructions (July 1993), to the 
Administrative Departments to initiate, suo motu, positive and concrete action in all audit 
paragraphs and reviews featuring in the Audit Reports of C&AG of India regardless of 
whether the cases are taken up for examination by Public Accounts Committee (PAC)/ 
Committee on Public Undertakings (COPU) or not and to furnish detailed notes 
indicating the corrective/ remedial action taken or proposed to be taken by them within a 
period of three months of the presentation of Audit Reports to the Legislature. 
Serious irregularities noticed in audit are include d in the Report of the Comptroller 
and Auditor General of India (C&AG) and presented to the State Legislature. 
(a) Public Accounts Committee  
As of November 2020, 14 out of 17 departments did n ot submit explanatory notes on 
65 paragraphs (47 paragraphs and 18 Performance aud its) out of 89 Paragraphs 
(63 paragraphs and 26 Performance Audits) of Audit Reports awaiting discussion by 
Public Accounts Committee (PAC) relating to the Aud it Reports from the years 
2001-02 and 2004-05 to 2017-18 173 . The position of pendency of receipt of suo motu  
replies on paragraphs/ performance audits awaiting discussion by PAC during the last 
five years is shown in Table 6.1.1 . 
Table 6.1.1: Position of pending suo motu replies on paragraphs/ performance audits 
of Audit Reports awaiting discussion by PAC 
Years Total paragraphs/ performance 
audits awaiting discussion 
Suo-motu reply 
received Suo-motu reply not received  
2013-14 4 2 2 
2014-15 13 3 10 
2015-16 7 - 7 
2016-17 10 1 9 
2017-18 13 1 12 
Table 6.1.1  presents the position of suo motu replies received/ not received pertaining 
to paragraphs/ performance audits of Audit Reports pending discussion by PAC for 
the period from 2013-14 to 2017-18.  The department s largely responsible for not 
submitting explanatory notes were Public Works (Roa ds & Buildings) Department 
(19), Agriculture and Farmers’ Welfare Department ( 6), Finance Department (9), 
Public Works (Water Resource) Department (3), Rural  Development Department (4) 
and Transport Department (8) amongst others. 
The issue of pendency of furnishing of suo motu  replies to audit paras was taken up 
(June 2018) with the Chairman, PAC, Tripura Legisla tive Assembly and Finance 
                                                           
173   Audit Report for the year 2018-19 was forwarded t o the State Government on 1 April 2021, and 
the same is placed in the Legislature in March 2022.  

Chapter VI: Follow Up of Audit Observations  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura 
 142 
Department, Government of Tripura with the request to take steps so that the 
departments concerned furnish the suo motu  replies and pendency can be reduced. 
This issue was again taken up (November 2021) with the Chairman, Public Accounts 
Committee, Tripura Legislative Assembly. 
(b) Committee on Public Undertakings 
As of November 2020, three departments did not subm it explanatory notes on 
10 paragraphs (seven paragraphs and three performan ce audits) out of 17 paragraphs 
(12 paragraphs and five performance audits) of Audi t Reports awaiting discussion by 
Committee on Public Undertakings (COPU) relating to  the Audit Reports from the 
years 2009-10 to 2017-18. The departments largely r esponsible for not submitting 
explanatory notes on paragraphs were Power Departme nt (3), Industries and 
Commerce Department (6), Forest Department (1) and Performance Audits were 
Industries & Commerce Department (2) and Power Department (1).  
The issue of pendency of furnishing of suo motu  replies to audit paras was taken up 
(June 2018) with the Chairman, Committee on Public Undertakings (COPU), Tripura 
Legislative Assembly and Finance Department, Govern ment of Tripura with the 
request to take steps so that the departments conce rned furnish the suo motu  replies 
and the pendency can be reduced.  
6.1.2 Action taken on the recommendations of the Pu blic Accounts Committee 
(PAC)/ Committee on Public Undertakings (COPU) 
The Administrative Departments were required to tak e suitable action on the 
recommendations made in the Reports of the PAC/ COP U presented to the State 
Legislature. Following the circulation of the Repor ts of the PAC/ COPU, Heads of 
Departments were to prepare comments on action take n or proposed to be taken on 
the recommendations of the PAC/ COPU and submit the  same to the State Assembly 
Secretariat.  
(a) Public Accounts Committee 
As of November 2020, Action Taken Notes (ATNs) on 1 47 recommendations of the 
PAC made between 2010-11 and 2018-19 were awaited f rom the administrative 
departments concerned, of which, 54 pertained to Fi nance (Excise & Taxation) 
Department, 19 to Public Works (Roads & Building) D epartment, 11 to Social 
Welfare and Social Education Department, nine to Ur ban Development Department,  
six each to Education (Higher) Department, Industri es & Commerce Department, 
Public Works (Drinking Water & Sanitation) Departme nt and Education (School) 
Department, five to Health & Family Welfare Departm ent, four to Fisheries 
Department and 21 ATNs to other departments.  All t hese departments are required to 
expedite submission of ATNs to the PAC without further delays.  
(b) Committee on Public Undertakings 
As of November 2020 ATNs on 28 recommendations of t he COPU made between 
2011-12 and 2015-16 were awaited from the administr ative departments concerned, 
of which, 13 pertained to Power Department (Tripura  State Electricity Corporation 
Limited), 10 to Industries and Commerce Department (Tripura Jute Mills Limited: 
six, Tripura Small Industries Corporation Limited: four), three to Forest Department 
(Tripura Forest Development & Plantation Corporatio n Limited), and one each to 

Chapter VI: Follow Up of Audit Observations  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura 
 143 
Transport Department (Tripura Road Transport Corpor ation) and Tribal Welfare 
(Tribal Rehabilitation in Plantation & Particularly  Vulnerable Tribal Group) 
Department.  There is need for all these department s/ companies to submit ATNs 
without further delays to take the things to their logical end. 
6.2 Monitoring 
The following committees had been formed at the Gov ernment level to monitor the 
follow up action on Audit Reports and PAC/ COPU recommendations. 
6.2.1 Departmental Monitoring Committee 
Departmental Monitoring Committees (DMCs) had been formed (April 2002) by all 
departments of the Government under the chairmanshi p of the departmental 
Secretaries to monitor the follow up action on Audi t Reports and PAC/ COPU 
recommendations.  The DMCs were to hold monthly mee tings and to send progress 
reports on the issue every month to the Finance Department. 
Details about meetings of the DMCs during 2019-20, though called for (September 
2020), had not been furnished (November 2021) by the Finance Department. 
6.2.2 Apex Committee 
An Apex Committee was formed (April 2002) at the St ate level under the 
chairmanship of the Chief Secretary to monitor the follow up action on Audit Reports 
and PAC/ COPU recommendations. 
Details about meetings of the Apex Committee during  2018-19, though called for 
(September 2019), had not been furnished (November 2021) by the Finance Department. 
6.3 Outstanding Inspection Reports 
The Principal Accountant General (Audit), Tripura c onducts periodical inspections of 
Government Departments to test-check transactions a nd verify the maintenance of 
accounts and other records according to prescribed rules and procedures. Audit 
observations on financial irregularities and defici encies in maintenance of initial 
accounts noticed during local audit and not settled  on the spot are communicated to 
the audited entities and to the higher authorities through Inspection Reports (IRs). The 
more serious irregularities are reported to the Gov ernment. The Government had 
instructed (July 1993) that the first reply to the IRs should be furnished within one 
month from the date of receipt of IR. 
Analysis of the position of outstanding IRs showed that 4,373 paragraphs included in 
684 IRs issued during the last five years up to 201 9-20 were pending for settlement as 
of September 2020 of these, even the first reply ha d not been received in respect of 
167 IRs in spite of repeated reminders. The year-wi se break-up of the outstanding IRs 
and the position of response thereto is given in Table 6.3.1 . 
Table 6.3.1: Position of Outstanding IRs where first reply have not been received  
Years No. of outstanding No. of IRs for which even 1st reply had 
not been received IR Paras 
2015-16 156 828 23 
2016-17 173 1037 37 
2017-18 144 949 35 
2018-19 125 857 35 
2019-20  86 702 37 
Total 684 4373 167 

Chapter VI: Follow Up of Audit Observations  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura 
 144 
As a result, the following important irregularities  commented upon in those IRs had 
not been addressed as of September 2020. 
Table 6.3.2: Irregularities not addressed 
Nature of irregularities Number of 
cases 
Amount involved  
(`` `` in crore ) 
Excess/ Irregular/ Avoidable/ Unfruitful/ Wasteful/  
Unauthorised/ Idle expenditure  
385 303.98  
Blocking of funds 133 314.68  
Non-recovery of excess payments/ overpayments 115 4 5.67  
Under assessment 198 25.51  
Loss of Revenue 193 195.12  
Misappropriation/ Suspected misappropriation 38 1.5 6  
Others 3840 1865.08  
Total 4902 2751.60  
It is evident from Table 6.3.2  that 4,902 cases for ₹ 2,751.60 crore involving audit 
observations on loss of revenue, overpayments, excess payments, under assessment, etc . 
remained unaddressed by the departments concerned, which is a matter of serious 
concern. 
6.4 Departmental Audit Committee Meetings 
As per the Office Memorandum dated 14 July 1993 iss ued by the Government of 
Tripura the Departmental Audit Committees (DACs) ar e required to be constituted by 
each Department with the Secretary of the Departmen t as Chairman, Head of the 
Department as Member and one Officer of the rank of  Deputy Secretary from the 
Finance Department as Member and Deputy Accountant General, Tripura as 
Convenor. The DACs were to monitor the progress in disposal of the outstanding 
audit paras and Inspection Reports issued by the Accountant General (Audit), Tripura. 
Five Audit Committee Meetings were held during 2019 -20 wherein 10 IRs and 83 
paragraphs were discussed and 34 paragraphs were settled. 
6.5 Response of the Government/ departments towards  audit 
The Principal Accountant General (Audit), Tripura c onducts periodical inspection of 
the government departments to test-check the transa ctions and verify the maintenance 
of important accounts and other records as prescrib ed in the rules and procedures.  
These inspections are followed up with Inspection R eports (IRs) incorporating 
irregularities detected during the inspection and n ot settled on the spot, which are 
issued to the heads of the offices inspected, with copies to the next higher authorities 
for taking prompt corrective action. The heads of t he offices/ Government are 
required to promptly comply with the observations c ontained in the IRs, rectify the 
defects and omissions and report compliance through  initial reply to the Principal 
Accountant General (Audit) within one month from th e date of issue of the IRs.  
Serious financial irregularities are reported to th e heads of the departments and the 
Government. 
There are 4,373 paragraphs involving 
₹ 2,954.01 crore relating to 684 IRs issued 
during the last five years 2015-16 to 2019-20 which  remained outstanding at the end 

Chapter VI: Follow Up of Audit Observations 
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura 
 145 
of 30 September 2020 under Social, Economic, Revenu e and General Sectors.  Year-
wise position of outstanding IRs, paragraphs and mo ney value involved for the last 
five years as on 30 September 2020 are given in Table 6.5.1. 
Table 6.5.1: Details of pending IRs 
Position of IRs Outstanding as of September 2020 Total 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 
Number of IRs pending for settlement 156 173 144 125 86 684 
Number of outstanding audit 
observations 828 1,037 949 857 702 4,373 
Money value involved (₹ in crore) 498.28  827.72 516.08 530.43 581.50 2,954.01 
The details in Table 6.5.1  indicates that the departments were not serious in  taking 
necessary action for final settlement of such cases. 
It is recommended that the Government may review th e matter and ensure that an 
effective system exists for sending replies to Audit within the prescribed time frame. 
Agartala     (BIVASH RANJAN MONDAL) 
The                       Principal Accountant Gene ral (Audit), Tripura 
Countersigned 
New Delhi     (GIRISH CHANDRA MURMU) 
The         Comptroller and Auditor General of Indi a 

APPENDICES 

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 147 
Appendix 2.2.1 
Statement showing the 18 functions  
(Reference: Paragraph 2.2.1) 
1.  Urban planning including town planning; 
2.  Regulation of land-use and construction of buildings; 
3.  Planning for economic and social development; 
4.  Roads and bridges; 
5.  Water supply for domestic, industrial and commercial purposes; 
6.  Public health, sanitation conservancy and solid waste management; 
7.  Fire services; 
8.  Urban forestry, protection of the environment and promotion of ecological aspects; 
9.  Safeguarding the interests of weaker sections of so ciety, including the handicapped 
and mentally retarded; 
10.  Slum improvement and upgradation; 
11.  Urban poverty alleviation; 
12.  Provision of urban amenities and facilities such as parks, gardens, playgrounds; 
13.  Promotion of cultural, educational and aesthetic aspects; 
14.  Burials and burial grounds; cremations, cremation grounds; 
15.  Cattle pounds; prevention of cruelty to animals; 
16.  Vital statistics including birth and death registration; 
17.  Public amenities including street lighting, parking  lots, bus stops and public 
conveniences; and 
18.  Regulation of slaughter houses and tanneries. 
  

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 148 
Appendix 2.2.2 
Statement showing name of ULBs along with areas, population, etc. 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.2.2) 
Sl. No.  Name of ULBs Area (in 
Sq. Km.) 
Families 
as on 
31.03.2020  
Population 
as per 
ROR 174  of 
ULBs as on  
31-03-2020 
No. of 
Wards  
Number of 
Slums 
Pockets 
Slum 
Population  
1 Agartala Municipal 
Corporation 76.50 122992 539302 49 74 50071 
2 Dharmanagar Municipal 
Council 10.69 9952 47891 23 12 9461 
3 Udaipur Municipal 
Council 6.10 7171 38917 21 0 0 
4 Bishalgarh Municipal 
Council 9.15 5597 22152 15 16 6434 
5 Kailashahar Municipal 
Council 6.19 5811 23751 15 11 8511 
6 Teliamura Municipal 
Council 3.75 5108 23350 15 20 7222 
7 Khowai Municipal 
Council 5.82 5080 21652 15 24 6283 
8 Belonia Municipal 
Council 5.74 5965 21376 15 8 9998 
9 Melaghar Municipal 
Council 17.93 4673 19944 13 0 0 
10 Mohanpur Municipal 
Council 18.05 4310 18549 13 0 0 
11 Ambassa Municipal 
Council 14.77 3915 16215 13 0 0 
12 Santirbazar Municipal 
Council 26.94 3549 15285 13 0 0 
13 Kumarghat Municipal 
Council 3.50 3267 15189 13 13 4613 
14 Ranirbazar Municipal 
Council 2.80 3955 16153 13 8 4125 
15 Sonamura Nagar 
Panchayat 4.13 3011 13166 11 14 6004 
16 Amarpur Nagar 
Panchayat 8.55 3481 11887 11 6 4090 
17 Jirania Nagar Panchayat 4.00 2451 12745 11 0 0 
18 Kamalpur Nagar 
Panchayat 10.16 2952 12096 11 7 3010 
19 Panisagar Nagar 
Panchayat 3.00 1958 11073 11 0 0 
20 Sabroom Nagar 
Panchayat 5.06 2147 6844 9 6 1996 
Total 242.83 207345 907537 310 219 121818 
Source:  Urban Development Department 
                                                           
174  Register of Ordinary Residents (list of family mem bers) 

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 149 
Appendix 2.2.3 
Statement showing status of implementation of the projects under AMRUT as of 
December 2020 
{Reference: Paragraph 2.2.8.4(i)} 
(₹ in crore ) 
Sl. No.  Name of project Implementing 
Agency  
Project 
Cost  Expenditure  Present 
Status 
1 
Construction of Sewerage Treatment 
plant at Agartala/ Laying of 
Sewerage pipeline including lifting 
and pumping station, etc.  complete 
for uncovered area of North Zone 
(Old Ward No. 1 & 2) at Agartala 
Chief Engineer, 
UDD 11.42  8.10  Work is in 
progress 
2 
Construction of park and open space 
along with water bodies, Sathlakhi 
pond near Melarmath 
Executive 
Engineer, 
Division IV, 
AMC 
1.23  1.08  Work 
completed. 
 
3 
Improvement and beautification of 
Bodhjung Girls' school pond along 
with open space 
Executive 
Engineer, 
Division IV, 
AMC 
0.95  0.84  Work 
completed. 
 
4 Improvement and beautification of 
Kamarpukur pond 
Executive 
Engineer, 
Division IV, 
AMC 
1.52  1.35  Work in 
progress. 
5 
Drinking water projects comprising 
water treatment plant, overhead tank, 
deep tube Well and pipelines at 
Panchamukh in South Agartala 
Chief Engineer, 
UDD 59.55  5.11  Work in 
progress. 
6 
Drinking water projects comprising 
water treatment plant, overhead tank, 
deep tube Well and pipelines at 
Ushabazar in North Agartala 
Chief Engineer, 
UDD 78.04  6.11  Work in 
progress. 
7 
Sinking and commissioning of deep 
tube wells with pump houses in the 
premises of Chandrapur J.B. School 
and Sangeeta AWC Centre (Nandan 
Nagar) in AMC area 
Executive 
Engineer, PWD 
(DWS), 
Division I, 
Agartala 
0.80  0.71  Work 
completed 
8 
Sinking and commissioning of deep 
tube wells at Charipara, Deb Tilla , 
Netaji palli, Dilippalli and 
Vivekananda palli 
Executive 
Engineer, PWD 
(DWS), 
Division I, 
Agartala 
2.00  1.80  Work is in 
progress. 
  

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 150 
Appendix 2.2.3 (Concld.) 
Statement showing status of implementation of the projects under AMRUT as of 
December 2020 
{Reference: Paragraph 2.2.8.4(i)} 
(₹ in crore ) 
Sl. No.  Name of project 
 
Implementing 
Agency  
Project 
Cost Expenditure Present 
Status 
9 
Sinking and commissioning of 
Deep tube wells at Ushabazar, 
South Narayanpur, Roy para, 
Panchayat Para, Majumder 
Para, Pashchim Bhubanban, at 
the site of WTP (Paschim  
Bhubanban Acharjee Para), 
Chinaihani 
Executive 
Engineer, PWD 
(DWS), Division 
I, Agartala 
3.20  0.70  Work is in 
progress. 
10 
Sinking and commissioning of 
Deep tube wells at Karaimura, 
Adaesha Para, Shayma Palli, at 
the site of the Panchamukh 
WTP 
Executive 
Engineer, PWD 
(DWS), Division 
I, Agartala 
1.60  0.88  Work is in 
progress. 
Total 160.31  26.68   
  

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 151 
Appendix 2.2.4 
Statement showing scheme-wise devolution of funds to 20 ULBs during 2015-16 to 
2019-20 
{Reference: Paragraph 2.2.8.6(iii)} 
(₹ in lakh) 
Sl. 
No.  Particulars of receipts 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 
1 Share of Taxes 6500  6500  5503.22  6000  7000  
2 Tripura Urban Employment 
Programme 4827 
 8250  7950  4395.23  3304.77  
3 Urban Development Works 3188  490  638.02  0 0 
4 Urban Housing Schemes 0  0 51.30 0 0 
5 Grants for creation of Capital Assets 0  0 0 727.46  334.87  
6 Land Acquisition 207.70  0 0 0 0 
Central Share      1 14th FC/ 15th FC 2265.20  2965  1712.50 5675.50 6344  
2 
North Eastern Region Urban 
Development Programme 
(NERUDP) 
0
 3978.17  4886.03  7269.03  3914.57  
3 
Deendayal Antyodaya Yojana-
National Urban Livelihoods Mission 
(DAY-NULM) 
0
 0 300  593.10 1421.08  
4 10 per cent  Lumpsum 655.96  3030.08  0 807.90 0 
5 Swachh Bharat Mission - Urban 
(SBM-U) 0
 777.72  0 965  956.71  
6 Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana – 
Urban (PMAY-U) 0
 25808.72  5641.90 15900.45  11512.68  
7 Rajiv Awas Yojana (RAY) 2996.88  2996.88  0 0 0 
8 Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and 
Urban Transformation (AMRUT) 545.61 
 1196.39  73  1226.21  0 
9 Smart City Mission 200  6300  0 7700  0 
10 Non- Lapsable Central Pool 
Resources (NLCPR) 0
 0 281.37  0 0 
11 State Plan Assistance 300  350  350  0 0 
12 Special Central Assistance 601  0 0 0 0 
13 Special development Scheme 2103.10  2203  920.65  0 0 
State Share      1 National Urban Livelihoods Mission 43.22  0 33.33  65.90 70.36  
2 Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and 
Urban Transformation (AMRUT) 0
 171.89  0 0 144.30 
3 Swachh Bharat Mission - Urban 
(SBM-U) 0
 0 0 33.16  454.19  
  

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 152 
Appendix 2.2.4 (Concld.) 
Statement showing scheme-wise devolution of funds to 20 ULBs during 2015-16 to 
2019-20 
{Reference: Paragraph 2.2.8.6(iii)} 
(₹ in lakh) 
Sl. 
No.  Particulars of receipts 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 
4 Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana – 
Urban (PMAY-U) 0
 218.04  6939  0 0 
5 Non- Lapsable Central Pool 
Resources (NLCPR) 0
 0 7.47  0 31.26  
6 Rajiv Awas Yojana (RAY) 361.675  334.19  0 416.84  0 
7 State Plan Assistance 805.87  0 0 0 0 
8 10 per cent  Lumpsum 361.675  0 0 0 0 
9 Smart City Mission 0  0 0 0 5000  
  Total 25962.89  65570.08  35287.79  51775.78  40488.79  
Source:  Urban Development Department 
  

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 153 
Appendix 2.2.5 
Statement showing collection of own revenue of ULBs during 2015-16 to 2019-20 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.2.8.8) 
(₹ in lakh) 
Sl. 
No.  Name of UBLs 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 
1 Agartala Municipal Corporation 3035.87  2824.61  1966.45  2577.26  2884.82  
2 Dharmanagar Municipal Council 95.06  119.67  109.72  146.25  179.40  
3 Kailashahar Minicipal Council 61.61  80.91  59.10  65.69  83.78  
4 Kumarghat Municipal Council 66.32  55.31  60.74  51.53  82.40  
5 Ambassa Miunicipal Council 32.723  33.27  32.87  44.48  46.83  
6 Khowai Municipal Council 72.83  71.47  103.04  73.61  112.96  
7 Teliamura Municipal Council  25.27  28.46  50.05  56.11  63.52  
8 Ranirbagar Municipal Council 25.48  25.47  19.10  30.56  45.22  
9 Mohanpur Municipal Council 19.87  17.98  16.87  24.71  41.72  
10 Bishalgarh Municipal Council 16.44  30.47  19.40  34.97  50.16  
11 Melaghar Municipal Council 4.25  7.59  12.76  16.89  38.23  
12 Udaipur Municipal Council 131.03  155.77  145.37  178.23  179.54  
13 Santirbagar Municipal Council 32.86  37.90  35.95  38.43  44.17  
14 Belonia Municipal Council 110.00  103.15  85.45  112.06  115.84  
15 Panisagar Nagar Panchayat 4.90  5.01  9.17  6.94  8.12  
16 Kamalpur Nagar Panchayat 19.14  28.63  31.36  28.79  29.26  
17 Jirania Nagar Panchayat  5.14  11.14  11.78  14.46  27.61  
18 Sonamura Nagar Panchayat 41.05  49.43  42.08  49.49  50.39  
19 Amarpur Nagar Panchayat  49.70  51.66  54.02  70.75  74.12  
20 Subroom Nagar Panchayat 28.59  26.13  27.35  43.05  45.69  
Total 3878.493  3764.03  2892.63  3664.25  4203.78  
Source:  Urban Development Department  
  

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 154 
Appendix 2.2.6 
Rate (s) of penalties/ fines to be imposed by ULBs for contravention of the Rules 
{Reference: Paragraph 2.2.8.8(iv)} 
(in  ₹) 
Rule No Description of Rules  Municipal 
Corporation  
Municipal 
Councils  
Nagar 
Panchayats  
4.1 to 4.4 Littering on roads/  
streets 200  200  200  
4.4 
Spiting 100  100  100  
Urinating 200  200  200  
Defecating in open 
space 500  500  500  
5.1 and 5.2 
For delivering waste 
that is not segregated 
and not stored in 
separate bins: 
Individual 
Bulk  
 
 
 
100  
500  
 
 
 
100  
500  
 
 
 
100  
500  
5.8 
For not storing & 
delivering 
construction and 
demolition waste in 
segregated manner 
1000  1000  1000  
5.11 For burning waste 500  500  500  
7.3 
For a vendor/ hawker 
without a container/  
waste basket 
200  200  200  
For a vendor/hawker 
who does not deliver 
waste in a segregated 
manner as specified 
100  100  100  
7.5 
For littering/  
defecation by pet/  
owned animals 
500  500  500  
7.6 
For not cleaning- up 
after public gathering/ 
event within 4 hours 
5000  5000  5000  
  

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 155 
Appendix 3.2.1 
Statement showing the status of horticultural crops in Tripura at the end of 2019-20 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.2.1)  
Sl. No.  Name of the Crop Area in Ha. Production in MT 
Fruits 
 Mango 10272 52284 
 Pineapple 9785 142665 
 Orange 4763 21319 
 Jackfruit 5487 133154 
 Banana 10658 110204 
 Litchi 933 3219 
 Lime/Lemon 4965 23931 
 Papaya 3139 31704 
 Sapota 128 809 
 Musambi 1184 2392 
 Guava 665 3119 
 Minor Fruits 2181 18975 
Total of A 54160 543774 
 Nuts   
 Coconut 4612 12711 
 Arecanut 7173 24568 
 Cashew nut 683 266 
Total of B 12468 37545 
 Spices   
 Ginger 1875 15938 
 Turmeric 1680 10231 
 Chilly 2812 6664 
 Black Pepper 223 615 
 Onion 163 1048 
 Betel Vine 610 8296 
Total of C 7363 42792 
 Vegetables   
 Summer Vegetables 19129 290762 
 Winter Vegetables 19990 397506 
Total of D 39119 688268 
 Potato 8050 145866 
Grand Total  121160 1458245 
Source : Horticulture Area Production Information System ( HAPIS) data for the year 2019-20 provided by the 
Directorate of H&SC, Government of Tripura.  
 

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 156 
Appendix 3.2.2 
District wise average area coverage, production and productivity details for five years period from 2015-16 to 2019-20 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.2.1)  
Category of 
Horticulture 
crops 
South Gomati Sepahijala West 
Area (Ha) Production 
(MT) 
Productivity 
(MT/Ha) Area (Ha) Production 
(MT) 
Productivity 
(MT/Ha) Area (Ha) Production 
(MT) 
Productivity 
(MT/Ha) Area (Ha) Production 
(MT) 
Productivity  
(MT/Ha) 
Vegetable 6166  101061  16.39  5338  95179  17.83  5558  100053  18  5794  96697  16.67  
Fruits 7847  78051  9.95  7019  68901  9.82  5262  40661  7.73  6489  60360  9.34  
Nuts 2895  6521  2.25  1511  4392  2.91  986  2941  2.98  1325  3980  3.00  
Spices 1688  9936  5.89  1366  7941  5.81  751  4283  5.70  905  5226  5.77  
Potato 1957  35452  18.11  1246  22592  18.13  1119  20194  18.05  430  7752  18.03  
 
Category of 
Horticulture 
crops 
Khowai Dhalai Unakoti North 
Area (Ha) Production 
(MT) 
Productivity 
(MT/Ha) Area (Ha) Production 
(MT) 
Productivity 
(MT/Ha) Area (Ha) Production 
(MT) 
Productivity 
(MT/Ha) Area (Ha) Production 
(MT) 
Productivity  
(MT/Ha) 
Vegetable 4678  86906  18.58  4698  80643  17.16  2866  52023  18.15  3947  70800  17.93  
Fruits 4265  39997  9.38  11558  123749  10.71  3582  37487  10.47  8684  88236  10.16  
Nuts 811  2333  2.88  1891  6130  3.24  816  2525  3.09  2032  6656  3.28  
Spices 646  3624  5.61  1224  5663  4.63  467  3017  6.46  611  4098  6.71  
Potato 604  10814  17.91  982  17724  18.05  967  17519  18.12  630  11438  18.16  
 

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 157 
Appendix 3.2.3 
Statement showing the year-wise Opening Balance, Fund Received, Expenditure & 
Closing Balance under SCA to TSS Scheme during the year 2015-16 to 2019-20 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.2.7.1) 
(in ₹) 
Sl. 
No. Year  Opening 
Balance  
Received  Total fund 
availability Expenditure  Closing 
Balance  Fund  Interest and 
refund 
1. 2018-19 0  4,78,10,000  0 4,78,10,000  0 4,78,10,000  
2. 2019-20 4,78,10,000  1,30,50,000  6,22,285  6,14,82,285  6,07,37,890  7,44,395  
Total 6,08,60,000  6,22,285   6,07,37,890  7,44,395  
Source : Departmental Records. No funds were placed during 2015-16 to 2017-18 
Appendix 3.2.4 
Statement showing the year-wise Opening Balance, Fund Received, Expenditure & 
Closing Balance under National Bamboo Mission Scheme during the year 2015-16 to 
2019-20 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.2.7.1)  
(in ₹) 
Sl. 
No. Year  Opening 
Balance  
Received  Total fund 
availability Expenditure  Closing 
Balance  Fund  Interest 
and refund  
1. 2018-19 0  2,50,00,000  0 2,50,00,000  0 2,50,00,000  
2. 2019-20 2,50,00,000  0 5,61,863  2,55,61,863  2,00,00,000  55,61,863  
Total 2,50,00,000 5,61,863   2,00,00,000  55,61,863  
Source : Departmental Records. No funds were placed during 2015-16 to 2017-18 
Appendix 3.2.5 
Statement showing the year-wise Opening Balance, Fund Received, Expenditure & 
Closing Balance under National Bee Board Fund during the year 2015-16 to 2019-20 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.2.7.1) 
(in ₹) 
Sl. 
No. Year  Opening 
Balance  
Received  Total fund 
availability Expenditure  Closing 
Balance  Fund  Interest 
and refund  
1. 2017-18 0  1,15,00,000  0 1,15,00,000  0 1,15,00,000  
2. 2018-19 1,15,00,000  0  2,64,576  1,17,64,576  96,00,000  21,64,576  
3. 2019-20 21,64,576  0 5,086  21,69,662  3,31,777  18,37,885  
Total 1,15,00,000.00  2,69,662   99,31,777  18,37,885  
Source : Departmental Records. No funds were placed during 2015-16 and 2016-17 
  

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 158 
Appendix 3.2.6 
Statement showing the year-wise Opening Balance, Fu nd Received, Expenditure & 
Closing Balance under Coconut Development Board during the year 2015-16 to 2019-20 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.2.7.1) 
(in ₹) 
Sl. 
No.  Year  Opening 
Balance  
Received  Total fund 
availability Expenditure  Closing 
Balance  Fund  Interest 
and refund  
1. 2015-16 37,47,339  19,07,500  0 56,54,839  36,29,244  20,25,595  
2. 2016-17 20,25,595  36,17,500  0 56,43,095  49,04,079  7,39,016  
3. 2017-18 7,39,016  0 0 7,39,016  0 7,39,016  
4. 2018-19 7,39,016  1,19,60,205  0 1,26,99,221  1,08,99,230  17,99,991  
5. 2019-20 17,99,991  14,10,000  0 32,09,991  14,19,971  17,90,020  
Total 1,88,95,205  0  2,08,52,524  17,90,020  
Source : Departmental Records 
 
Appendix 3.2.7 
Statement showing the year-wise Opening Balance, Fund Received, Expenditure & 
Closing Balance under MIDH during the year 2015-16 to 2019-20 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.2.7.1) 
(in ₹) 
Sl. 
No.  Year  Opening 
Balance  
Received  Total fund 
availability Expenditure  Closing 
Balance  Fund  Interest and 
refund 
1. 2015-16 4,31,69,777  30,62,50,000  1,37,08,428  36,31,28,205  20,84,63,397  15,46,64,808  
2. 2016-17 15,46,64,808  41,23,42,333  1,19,45,872  57,89,53,013  19,19,63,247  38,69,89,766  
3. 2017-18 38,69,89,766  18,88,88,000  5,21,85,783  62,80,63,549  23,20,85,243  39,59,78,306  
4. 2018-19 39,59,78,306  0 2,26,62,157  41,86,40,463  31,46,14,606  10,40,25,857  
5. 2019-20 10,40,25,857  24,44,44,000  11,00,57,915  45,85,27,772  27,84,05,403  18,01,22,369  
Total 115,19,24,333  21,05,60,155   122,55,31,897  18,01,22,368  
Source : Departmental Records 
 
Appendix 3.2.8 
Statement showing the year-wise Opening Balance, Fund Received, Expenditure & 
Closing Balance under HMNEH during the year 2015-16 to 2019-20 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.2.7.1) 
(in ₹) 
Sl. 
No. Year  Opening 
Balance  
Received  Total fund 
availability Expenditure Balance  Fund  Interest and 
refund 
1. 2015-16 2,15,96,766  0 8,72,509  2,24,69,275  0 2,24,69,275  
2. 2016-17 2,24,69,275  0 17,25,534  2,41,94,809  6,23,264  2,35,71,545  
3. 2017-18 2,35,71,545  0 10,89,092  2,46,60,637  22,38,399  2,24,22,238  
4. 2018-19 2,24,22,238  0 9,49,677  2,33,71,915  13,01,381  2,20,70,534  
5. 2019-20 2,20,70,534  0 7,97,063  2,28,67,597  34,79,800  1,93,87,797  
Total 0 54,33,875   76,42,844  1,93,87,797  
Source : Departmental Records  
  

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 159 
Appendix 3.2.9 
Statement showing the year-wise Opening Balance, Fund Received, Expenditure & 
Closing Balance under Technology Mission (TM) during the year 2015-16 to 2019-20 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.2.7.1) 
(in ₹) 
Sl. 
No. Year  Opening 
Balance  
Received  Total fund 
availability Expenditure  Closing 
Balance  Fund  Interest and 
refund 
1. 2015-16 8,01,79,502  0 12,67,99,344  25,60,78,846  1,98,42,373  18,71,36,473  
2. 2016-17 18,71,36,473  0 2,77,95,623  21,49,32,096  9,34,44,218  12,14,87,878  
3. 2017-18 12,14,87,878  0 17,64,92,486  29,79,80,364  8,25,88,507  21,53,91,857  
4. 2018-19 21,53,91,857  0 1,50,22,654  23,04,14,511  8,80,94,689  14,23,19,822  
5. 2019-20 14,23,19,822  0 77,92,105  15,01,11,927  4,22,00,436  10,79,11,491  
Total 0 35,39,02,212   32,61,70,223  10,79,11,491  
Source : Departmental Records 
 
Appendix 3.2.10 
Statement showing the year-wise Opening Balance, Fund Received, Expenditure & 
Closing Balance under MGNREGA Funds  during the year 2015-16 to 2019-20 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.2.7.1) 
(in ₹) 
Sl. 
No. Year  Opening 
Balance  
Received  Total fund 
availability Expenditure  Closing 
Balance  Fund  Interest and 
refund 
1. 2015-16 0.00 17,23,08,900  0.00 17,23,08,900  17,23,08,900  0.00 
2. 2016-17 0.00 12,33,59,600  0.00 12,33,59,600  12,33,59,600  0.00 
3. 2017-18 0.00 2,26,86,000  0.00 2,26,86,000  2,26,86,000  0.00 
4. 2018-19 0.00 5,72,99,000  0.00 5,72,99,000  5,72,99,000  0.00 
5. 2019-20 0.00 7,91,01,000  0.00 7,91,01,000  7,91,01,000  0.00 
Total 45,47,54,500  0.00  45,47,54,500  0 
Source : Departmental Records 
  

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 160 
Appendix 3.2.11 
Statement showing delay in release of Central and State share by the State Government 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.2.7.2) 
(₹ in lakh) 
Year 
Particulars 
of the 
Share 
Date of 
release by 
the GoI 
Date of 
release by 
the State 
Finance 
Deptt. 
Amount  
Delay in release of 
Central Share by 
GoT* 
Delay in release of 
State Share by 
GoT* 
2015-16 
Central 22.06.2015  25.07.2015  581.25  26 days   
Central 22.06.2015  25.07.2015  1293.75  26 days   
State     187.50     
Central 29.02.2016  05.04.2016  800  29 days    
Central 29.02.2016  05.04.2016  250  29 days    
Central 14.03.2016  05.04.2016  350  15 days   
2016-17 
State   03.09.2016  176.39    160 days 
Central 27.09.2016  23.11.2016  858  49 days   
Central 27.09.2016  23.11.2016  511.50 49 days   
Central 27.09.2016  23.11.2016  280.50 49 days   
State   23.11.2016  183.33    49 days 
Central 10.03.2017  24.03.2017  580  7 days   
Central 10.03.2017  24.03.2017  120  7 days   
2017-18 
State   18.08.2017  77.77    151 days 
Central 26.09.2017  23.10.2017  310  20 days   
Central 26.09.2017  23.10.2017  170  20 days   
Central 26.09.2017  23.10.2017  520  20 days   
State   23.10.2017  111.11    20 days 
2018-19 
Central 13.03.2019  06.04.2019  204  17 days   
Central 13.03.2019  06.04.2019  372  17 days   
State   06.04.2019  64    17 days 
Central 25.03.2019  07.05.2019  624  36 days   
2019-20 
State   07.05.2019  69.33    36 days 
Central 13.11.2019  20.12.2019  520  30 days   
Central 13.11.2019  20.12.2019  310  30 days   
Central 13.11.2019  20.12.2019  170  30 days   
State   20.12.2019  111.11    30 days 
Central 28.03.2020  27.04.2020  131  23 days   
Central 28.03.2020  27.04.2020  264  23 days   
Central 28.03.2020  27.04.2020  605  23 days   
State   27.04.2020  111.11    23 days 
Note: *  Delay in release of the Central/ State share has b een calculated by taking into account the dates of 
release by GoI with that of by GoT after allowing seven days time for normal transaction period. 
  

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 161 
Appendix 3.2.12 
A.  Statement showing the purchase of seeds and seedlings/ plantlets by the selected SAs 
and SHs during 2015-16 to 2019-20 from Private Firms and Nursery 
{Reference: Paragraph 3.2.8.2 (ii) & (iii)} 
(in ₹)  
Sl. 
No. Name of unit Seed Seedling 
1. SA, Salema 22,22,625  80,000  
2. SH, Kumarghat 90,54,276  42,680  
3. SH, Manu 44,29,615  5,43,000  
4. DDH, Unakoti 99,61,223  31,76,498  
5. SA, Ambassa 9,28,611  9,11,800  
6. SA, Dukli 22,64,717   
7. SA, Hezamara 6,03,838  6,23,420  
8. SA, Jirania 29,34,144  3,77,768  
9. SA, Mandwi 30,28,032  14,21,524  
10. SA, Mohanpur 50,81,977  11,82,961  
11. DDH, Dhalai 1,79,48,860  63,60,380  
12. DDH, West 3,17,34,238  1,36,46,650  
Total 9,01,92,156  2,83,66,681  
 
B.  Purchase of seedling/plantlets from Government orchard/ Nursery   
(in ₹) 
Sl. 
No. Name of the Unit Seed Seedling 
1. SA, Salema - 3,12,393  
2. DDH, Unakoti 7,60,000  64,610  
3. DDH, West - 2,59,030  
4. DDH, Dhalai - 60,000  
5. SA, Ambassa - 2,000  
6. SA, Hezamara - 3,000  
7. SA, Jirania - 6,324  
Total 7,60,000  7,07,357  
  

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 162 
Appendix 3.2.13  
Statement showing the number of Government Orchards and Area under the 
Directorate of Horticulture in the State 
{Reference: Paragraph 3.2.8.2 (iv)}  
Sl. No. Name of 
District Name of Agri/ Horti Sub-Division Name of the Orchard Area (Ha) 
1 
Khowai 
Tulashikhar West Karangicherra CPC 23.50  
2 Takchaya SCO 17.63  
3 Teliamura North Gokulnagar SCO 70.82  
4 Ramkrishnapur TCO 25.00  
5 
West Tripura 
Mohanpur Lembucherra Orchard 44.15  
6 Hezamara Hezamara MO 15.00  
7 Dukli Badharghat PO 5.84  
8 HRC Nagicherra 42.00  
9 
Jirania 
Gurupada SCO 92.56  
10 Tulakona BCO 5.20  
11 Belbari TCO 27.30  
12 
Sepahijala 
Kathalia Microsapra TCO 100.00  
13 Paharpur ASDF 16.18  
14 
Mohanbhog 
Jumerdepa GO 36.50  
15 Taibandal TCO 14.00  
16 Bishramganj TCO 0.69  
17 
South Tripura 
Bagafa 
Kalashi MO 62.25  
18 R.K.Ganj SCO 73.20  
19 Kathaliacherra MO 68.50  
20 
Belonia 
Bashpadua CPC 183.17  
21 Sarasima RTCP 12.00  
22 Regional Spices Garden 17.85  
23 Maicherra VSPF 19.50  
24 Ratanpur TCO 26.00  
25 Rajnagar Radhanagar TCO 76.80  
26 Satchand Kaladepa MO 60.07  
27 Rupaichari Uttar Bijoypur SCO 24.50  
28 
Gomati 
Karbook Shilachari TCO 21.24  
29 Lebacherra TCO 74.60  
30 Ompi Taidu SCO 57.60  
31 Udaipur Fulkumari TCO 4.00  
32 Udaipur PO 2.36  
33 Unakoti Kumarghat Chantail MO 19.00  
34 Pabiacherra TC/DC 8.44  
35 
North Tripura Kanchanpur 
Tuisama MO 46.33  
36 Nabincherra MO 24.70  
37 Jampui Spices Centre 5.00  
38 Kadamtala Churaibari SCO 3.36  
39 
Dhalai 
Manu 
Nalkata MO 30.49  
40 Lalcherra MO 69.40  
41 Tarabancherra TCO 52.00  
42 Karamcherra SCO 28.00  
43 Durgacherra TCO 115.00  
44 Salema Mendi TCO 80.00  
45 Balaram SCO 49.40  
46 Gandacherra J.B.Para MO 120.00  
47 Ambassa Harincherra TCO 21.64  
Total 1992.77  
  

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 163 
Appendix 3.2.14 
Statement showing the damaged seedlings and plantlets in the Government Orchard 
during 2015-16 to 2019-20 
{Reference: Paragraph 3.2.8.2 (iv)} 
Sl. 
No.  
Name of the 
orchard 
Name of the 
component 
Number of 
seedlings/ 
plantlets could 
not be utilised  
Remarks 
1. Gurupada 
Government Orchard 
 Jackfruit seedling 24900 Due to cow and goat grazing all 
the seedlings damaged 
2. Gurupada 
Government Orchard 
 
Black Pepper 
seedling 19950 
Due to cow and goat grazing all 
the seedlings damaged 
3. Gurupada 
Government Orchard 
 Scented Lemon 81 Due to cow and goat grazing all 
the seedlings damaged 
4. Gurupada 
Government Orchard 
 
Assam lemon 
seedling 7488 
Due to cow and goat grazing all 
the seedlings damaged 
5. Gurupada 
Government Orchard 
 Lime lemon cutting 4500 Due to cow and goat grazing all 
the seedlings damaged 
6. Balaram Government 
Orchard Lemon Stamp cutting 
 3000 
No supply order was made to be 
supplied, therefore the seedling 
matured during the course of 
time and damaged 
7. Durgacherra 
Government Orchard 
 Drumstick  1000 All the seedlings destroyed by 
the termites 
8. Tarabancherra 
Government Orchard 
 Scented Lemon 118000 All the seedlings died due to 
water scarcity  
9. Tarabancherra 
Government Orchard 
 Arecanut Seedling 4560 All the seedlings overaged and 
died 
10. Karamcherra 
Government Orchard 
 Banana Sabri 8000 All the seedlings overaged and 
died 
11. Karamcherra 
Government Orchard 
 Lichi Gottee 300 All the seedlings overaged and 
died 
12. Karamcherra 
Government Orchard 
 Musambi 100 All the seedlings overaged and 
died 
Total 1,91,879  
  

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 164 
Appendix 3.2.15 
Statement showing the irregularities in purchase of power tillers by the DDH, Dhalai 
District during 2015-16 to 2019-20 
(Reference Paragraph 3.2.8.4) 
Sl. 
No.  
Challan No. and date 
as mentioned in the 
Bill copy 
Purchased from Delivered to Remarks 
1. 605 dated 12-01-2016 M/s Dutta Machinery 
Stores, Agartala 
SH, Manu Challan was not found 
enclosed 
2. 606 dated 12-01-2016 M/s Dutta Machinery 
Stores, Agartala 
SH, Manu -do- 
3. 601 dated 13-01-2016 M/s Dutta Machinery 
Stores, Agartala 
SH, Manu -do- 
4. 980 dated nil M/s Dutta Machinery 
Stores, Agartala 
SH, Manu -do- 
5. 1702 dated 02-11-2018 M/s Balaji Enterprise SA, 
Durgachowmuhani  
-do- 
6. 218 dated nil M/s Dutta Machinery 
Stores, Agartala 
SA, Gandacherra -do- 
7. 217 dated nil M/s Dutta Machinery 
Stores, Agartala 
SA, Gandacherra -do- 
8. 674 dated 17-12-2015 M/s Dutta Machinery 
Stores, Agartala 
SA, Gandacherra -do- 
9. 109 dated 19-05-2017 M/s Krishi Shilpa  
Udyog, Agartala 
SA, 
Durgachowmuhani 
 
-do- 
10. 982 dated 30-03-2016 M/s Dutta Machinery 
Stores, Agartala 
SH, Manu Original copy of 
challan was not found 
and the bill was paid on 
photocopy of the 
challan. 
11. 979 dated 29-03-2016 M/s Dutta Machinery 
Stores, Agartala 
SH, Manu -do- 
12. 973 dated 30-03-2016 M/s Dutta Machinery 
Stores, Agartala 
SH, Manu -do- 
13. 974 dated 30-03-2016 M/s Dutta Machinery 
Stores, Agartala 
SH, Manu -do- 
14. 975 dated 30-03-2016 M/s Dutta Machinery 
Stores, Agartala 
SH, Manu -do- 
15. 976 dated 30-03-2016 M/s Dutta Machinery 
Stores, Agartala 
SH, Manu -do- 
16. 977 dated 30-03-2016 M/s Dutta Machinery 
Stores, Agartala 
SH, Manu -do- 
17. 978 dated 30-03-2016 M/s Dutta Machinery 
Stores, Agartala 
SH, Manu -do- 
18. 981 dated 29-03-2016 M/s Dutta Machinery 
Stores, Agartala 
SH, Manu -do- 
19. 963 dated 22-01-2016 M/s Dutta Machinery 
Stores, Agartala 
SH, Manu -do- 
  

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 165 
Appendix 3.2.15 (Concld.) 
Statement showing the irregularities in purchase of power tillers by the DDH, Dhalai 
District during 2015-16 to 2019-20 
(Reference Paragraph 3.2.8.4) 
Sl. 
No.  
Challan No. and date 
as mentioned in the 
Bill copy 
Purchased from Delivered to Remarks 
20. 959 dated nil M/s Dutta Machinery 
Stores, Agartala 
SH, Manu Original copy of challan was 
not found and the bill was 
paid on photocopy of the 
challan. 
21. 962 dated 22-01-2016  M/s Dutta Machinery 
Stores, Agartala 
SH, Manu -do- 
22. 961 dated 22-01-2016  M/s Dutta Machinery 
Stores, Agartala 
SH, Manu -do- 
23. 683 dated 21-03-2016  M/s Dutta Machinery 
Stores, Agartala 
SA, Gandacherra -do- 
24. 682 dated 21-03-2016  M/s Dutta Machinery 
Stores, Agartala 
SA, Gandacherra -do- 
25. 677 dated 21-03-2016  M/s Dutta Machinery 
Stores, Agartala 
SA, Gandacherra -do- 
26. 678 dated 21-03-2016  M/s Dutta Machinery 
Stores, Agartala 
SA, Gandacherra -do- 
27. 679 dated 21-03-2016  M/s Dutta Machinery 
Stores, Agartala 
SA, Gandacherra -do- 
28. 680 dated 21-03-2016  M/s Dutta Machinery 
Stores, Agartala 
SA, Gandacherra -do- 
29. 681 dated 21-03-2016  M/s Dutta Machinery 
Stores, Agartala 
SA, Gandacherra -do- 
30.  39 dated 30-10-2015 M/s Dutta Machinery 
Stores, Agartala. 
NA Engine number and Chasis 
number did not match with 
the bill and the delivery 
challan. 
  

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 166 
Appendix 3.2.16 
Audit observation on physical verification of construction of Shade Net Protected Structure at beneficiaries’ land 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.2.8.11) 
Sl. 
No. Name of the SA  Name of the 
beneficiary Father's name Address 
Year of 
receipt of 
assistance 
Category of 
flower in which 
assistance is 
received 
Audit observation 
1 
SA, Jirania 
Kaushik Debnath  Dayaram Debnath Uttar Majlishpur 2016-17 Gerbera 
Most of the seedlings were found  
damaged due to not giving fertiliser by 
the firm. 
2 Mantu Das Manoranjan Das Brajanagar, 
Majlishpur 2016-17 Orchid 
Most of the seedlings were found  
damaged due to not giving fertiliser by 
the firm. 
3 Rupesh Saha Late Ratan Lal Saha  Ranirbazar 2016-17 Anthurium 
During physical verification at the 
location, the beneficiary could not be 
traced out. 
4 Nihar Chandra 
Chakraborty 
Nagendra 
Chakraborty 
Nalgaria, 
Ranirbazar 2016-17 Gerbera 
During physical verification it was 
noticed that the beneficiary cultivated 
radish inside the Shade Net protected 
structure. 
5 SA, Mandwi Ajit Debbarma Raj Kumar 
Debbarma RK Para VC 2016-17 Gerbera 
Most of the seedlings were found 
damaged due to not giving fertiliser by 
the firm. 
6 
SA, Hezamara 
Nabakanya 
Debbarma Rabindra Debbarma  Chandpur ADC, 
Chachu Bazar 2016-17 Orchid 
The beneficiary stated that due to lack 
of marketing infrastructure the 
floriculture cultivation could not be 
sustained. Hence, the orchid 
cultivation could not be successful. 
7 Anil Debbarma Debendra 
Debbarma Daldali, Megliban 2016-17 Anthurium 
The beneficiary stated that due to lack 
of marketing infrastructure the 
floriculture cultivation could not be 
sustained. Hence, the orchid 
cultivation could not be successful. 
  

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 167 
Appendix 3.2.16 (Contd.) 
Audit observation on physical verification of construction of Shade Net Protected Structure at beneficiaries’ land 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.2.8.11) 
Sl. 
No. Name of the SA  Name of the 
beneficiary Father's name Address 
Year of 
receipt of 
assistance 
Category of 
flower in which 
assistance is 
received 
Audit observation 
8 
SA, Mohanpur 
Ranjan Sarkar Late Sati Chandra 
Sarkar Lankamura 2016-17 Anthurium 
All the planting materials were found 
destroyed due to non- maintenance by 
the beneficiary. The beneficiary stated 
that due to lack of marketing 
infrastructure the floriculture 
cultivation could not be sustained. 
9 Sanjit Biswas Late Jogendra 
Chandra Biswas Madhya Bhubanban  2016-17 Gerbera 
Fertiliser/ PPC expiry date, 
manufacturing date, brand name were 
found missing. 
10 
SA, Dukli 
Nirupam Sarkar Nitai Sarkar Paschim 
Anandanagar 2016-17 Gerbera 
(1) UV film were torn apart in many 
areas. (2) Wiring was not in good 
condition due to which rust occurred 
and the shade net lost the strength. (3) 
Fertiliser/ PPC expiry date, 
manufacturing date, brand name were 
found missing. 
11 Nirmal Debnath Late Jagadish 
Debnath 
Paschim 
Anandanagar 2016-17 Orchid 
The structure was not found in the  
site. The beneficiary stated that the 
structure was demolished by him and 
sold to the relative @ ₹ 10,000/-. 
12 Manikanchan 
Debnath Bimal Debnath Paschim 
Anandanagar 2016-17 Anthurium 
The structure was not found in site. 
The beneficiary stated that the 
structure was demolished by him and 
sold to the other @ ₹ 50,000/- for 
mushroom cultivation. 
  

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 168 
Appendix 3.2.16 (Concld.) 
Audit observation on physical verification of construction of Shade Net Protected Structure at beneficiaries’ land 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.2.8.11) 
Sl. 
No. Name of the SA  Name of the 
beneficiary Father's name Address 
Year of 
receipt of 
assistance 
Category of 
flower in which 
assistance is 
received 
Audit observation 
13 
SH, Unakoti 
Chiranjit Sinha Lt. Kamalkanta 
Sinha Mashauli 2016-17 Gerbera 
Structure was available but no flower 
plants were available. Beneficiary 
stated that the life span of the flower 
plants was three years and after that no 
new plantation was done by him. 
14 Sanjib Sinha Lt. Mamalbabu 
Sinha  Nedebi, MC Ward 2017-18 Gerbera 
Structure was not found, no pla ntation 
was also found. Beneficiary stated that 
structure was destroyed in flood. 
Beneficiary did not furnish any report 
to the fund sanctioning authority.  

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 169 
Appendix 3.2.17 
Subsidy provided to entrepreneurs for setting up of food processing unit 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.2.11.3) 
Sl. 
No.  
Number of 
request 
received 
during the 
audit 
period 
Total subsidy released 
Name of units Total subsidy 
released (in ₹) 
Total project 
cost ( ₹    in lakh ) 
Present 
status 
1 
7 Nos. 
Mother Food Product, 
Nagicherra, Anandanagar 8,03,490.00 
 19.916  Operational 
2 Jyotsna Food Products, 
Anandanagar, Agartala 13,75,000.00 
 137.000  Operational 
3 Mahabir Food Products, 
Jogendranagar, Agartala 11,18,950.00 
 26.630 Operational 
4 Munna Industries, 
Moloynagar, Agartala 
1,99,00,000.00 
 
1,99,00,000.00  1645.420 Operational 
5 M/s Paste & Roasted, 
Teliamura 34,625.00 
 0.692  Operational 
6 
Das Food Processing, 
Jogendranagar 50,000.00 
 
4.590 
(old unit 
upgradation)  
Operational 
7 Apurba Achar, Ranirbazar 19,950.00  0.399  Operational 
Total 4,32,02,015.00    
  

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 170 
Appendix 3.2.18 
Statement showing the Horticulture Exports to Bangladesh 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.2.12) 
Sl. 
No. Year Crop Quantity/ MT/ Nos.  Values ( in ₹) 
1 2017-18 
Wood Apple 110.040 339300.00  
Tamarind 118.000 1008520.00  
Total 228.040 1347820.00  
2 2018-19 
Wood Apple 370.000 1219466.00  
Chilli 20.000 1586000.00  
Tamarind 70.000 741754.00  
Fresh Fruits 38.000 758200.00  
Betel Lives 7.000 79672.00  
Ginger 30.000 617100.00  
Total 535.000 5002192.00  
3 2019-20 
Wood Apple 80.000 345335.00  
Pineapple 40.000 203094.00  
Bottle leaves 7.000 164670.00  
Total 127.000 713099.00  
Grand Total 890.040 70,63,111.00  

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 171 
Appendix 3.3.1 
Index map showing two road works at the approved and changed locations 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.3) 
 
Index Map No.1: Improvement and upgradation of road from Chandrapur to Chaturdas Devta Temple via Baldakhal (i.e the approved location, A-B) 
and Bypass to Assam Para Railway Bridge  (length=3.831 Km) (new location, C-D)  


Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 172 
Appendix 3.5.1 
Statement showing works undertaken for creation of different assets at Ramchandra Para, Lebachara ADC Villages under under 
MGNREGA scheme and Forest Department under Karbook Range, Karbook Forest Sub-Division during 2015-16 and 2016-17 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.5) 
Sl. No.  Work order No Date Location of work Name of work Year 
Expenditure 
incurred 
(₹ in lakh ) 
1 
5768-772, 5773-777, 5778- 782, 
5783-787, 5788-792, 5793- 797, 
5798-802, 5803-807, 5808- 812, 
5813-817, 5818-822, 5823- 827, 
5828-832, 5833-837, 5838-842 
31/12/2015 Ramchandra Para, Lebachara ADC 
Village 
Construction of boundary 
fencing with barbed wire over 
100 mtr (Part – 1 to 15)  
2015-16 
 54.86  54.86  
2 5683-687 and 7298-7302 31/12/2015and 
01/03/2016 
Ramchandra Para, Lebachara ADC 
Village 
Construction of two approach 
gate  2015-16 
 5.60  
123.99  
3 7303-7307, 7313-7317 01/03/2016 Ramchandra Para, Lebachara ADC 
Village 
Construction of 100 mtr. 
chequered tiles soling  2015-16 
 5.15  
4 6500-504, 6505-509, 6510- 514, 
6515-519, 6520-524 31/12/2015 Ramchandra Para, Lebachara ADC 
Village 
Construction of one passenger 
shed (Part-II to V)  2015-16 
 9.63  
5 7796-7799, 7800-7803, 7804-
7807, 7808-7811  16/07/2016 
Ramchandra Para of Bairagi Dokan 
Beat, East Manikya Dewan ADC 
Village 
Construction of overhead tank 
(Part- 1 & 2)  2016-17 
 8.64  
6 5648-652, 5653-657 31/12/2015 Ramchandra Para of Bairagi Dokan 
Beat, Lebachara ADC Village 
Construction of toilet block 
(Part- I & II)  2015-16 
 6.70  
7 
6555-559, 5608-612, 5613- 617, 
6536-539, 6540-544, 6545- 549, 
6550-554, 6530-534  
31/12/2015 Ramchandra Para, Lebachara ADC 
Village 
Construction of brick soling 
over 450 mtr  2015-16 
 34.33  
8 5658-662, 5663-667  31/12/2015 Ramchandra Para, Lebachara ADC 
Village 
Construction of tree protection 
guard structure (Part- I & II) 
(Circle Platform)  
2015-16 
 4.51  
9 5688-692, 5693-697, 5698- 702, 
5703-707  31/12/2015 Ramchandra Para of Bairagi Dokan 
Beat, Lebachara ADC Village 
Construction of pipe line 
connection over 2500 mtr  2015-16 
 13.11  
  

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 173 
Appendix 3.5.1 (concld.) 
Statement showing works undertaken for creation of different assets at Ramchandra Para, Lebachara ADC Villages under under 
MGNREGA scheme and Forest Department under Karbook Range, Karbook Forest Sub-Division during 2015-16 and 2016-17 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.5) 
Sl. 
No. Work order No  Date Location of work Name of work Year 
Expenditure 
incurred 
(₹ in lakh ) 
10 7820-7823, 7824-7827 16/07/2016 
Ramchandra Para of Bairagi Dokan 
Beat, East Manikya Dewan ADC 
Village 
Construction of two 
submersible pump  2016-17 
 5.43  
 11 5668-672, 5673-677, 5678-682  31/12/2015 Ramchandra Para, Lebachara ADC 
Village 
Construction of five labour 
shed  2015-16 
 9.66  
12 7812-7815, 7816-7819  16/07/2016 Ramchandra Para, East Manikya 
Dewan ADC Village 
Construction of store house 
(Part-A & B)  2016-17 
 4.83  
13 5618-622, 5623-627, 5628- 632, 
5633-637, 5638-642, 5643-647  31/12/2015 Ramchandra Para, Lebachara ADC 
Village 
Construction of check dam 
(Part- I to III)  2015-16 
 16.40  
14 7792-95, 7788-91, 7784-87  16/07/2016 Ramchandra Para, East Manikya 
Dewan ADC Village 
Creation of rose garden  
(Part - 1, 2 & 3)  2016-17 
 10.42  
57.45  
15 2380-2384, 2385-2389, 2390- 2394, 
2395-2399, 2400-2404, 2405-2409  11/05/2016 Ramchandra Para JFMC area, East 
Manikya Dewan ADC Village 
Construction of 1 km 
ornamental plantation  
(Part-A, B, C, D, E & F)  
2016-17 
 21.78  
16 2454-2459, 2460-2464, 2465-2469  11/05/2016 Ramchandra Para JFMC area, East 
Manikya Dewan ADC Village 
Creation of 700 mtr. 
floriculture plantation  
(Part- A to C)  
2016-17 
 10.63  
17 2360-2364, 2365-2369, 2370- 2374, 
2375-2379  11/05/2016 Ramchandra Para JFMC area, East 
Manikya Dewan ADC Village 
Creation of 1000 mtr. hedge 
plantation (Part- A to D)  2016-17 
 9.13  
18 2445-2449, 2450-2454  11/05/2016 Ramchandra Para JFMC area, East 
Manikya Dewan ADC Village 
Creation of palm plantation 
over 0.05 hac (Part- A & B)  2016-17 
 5.49  
    Total:  236.30 236.30 
 
  

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 174 
Appendix 4.1.1 
Summarised financial position and working results of Government companies and Statutory Corporations as per their latest finalised financial 
statements/accounts 
(Reference: Paragraphs 4.1.2.1, 4.1.6, 4.1.9, 4.1.9.2, 4.1.9.3, 4.1.10) 
(Figures in columns (5) to (12) are ₹ in crore)  
Sl. 
No.  
Sector / name of the 
Company 
Period of 
Accounts  
Year in 
which 
accounts 
finalised  
Paid-
up 
Capital                                
@ 
Loans 
outstanding 
at the end 
of year 
Accumulated 
Profit (+) / 
Loss (-) 
Free 
Reserves 
& 
Surplus 
Turnover  
Net  
profit (+)/ 
loss (-) 
Net impact 
of Audit 
Comments  
Capital 
Employed 175  
Return on 
capital 
employed 176  
Percentage 
return on 
capital 
employed 
Manpower  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 
A. Working Government Companies                      
AGRICULTURE & ALLIED                        
1 Tripura Forest 
Development & 
Plantation 
Corporation Limited 
 
2018-19 2020-21 9.20 0.00 113.47 0.00 50.52 0.71 0. 00 122.67 0.71 0.58 174 
2 Tripura Horticulture 
Corporation Limited  
2015-16 2020-21 4.74 0.00 -3.85 0.00 41.28 0.08 4.4 1 0.89 0.08 8.99 75 
3 Tripura Tea 
Development 
Corporation Limited 
 
2018-19 2019-20 47.31 0.00 -26.17 0.00 5.46 -1.36 0 .00 21.14 -1.36 -6.43 632 
4 Tripura 
Rehabilitation 
Plantation 
Corporation Limited 
 
2018-19 2019-20 4.58 0.00 -10.70 0.12 23.74 -4.88 0 .00 -6.00 -4.88 Not workable  145 
Sector wise total   65.83 0.00 72.75 0.12 121.00 -5.45 4.41 138.70 -5.45 -3.93 1026 
FINANCING                          
5 Tripura Industrial 
Development 
Corporation Limited 
 
2018-19 2020-21 16.17 128.41 -25.71 0.00 4.23 -15.2 3 0.68 118.87 -11.59 -9.75 48 
Sector wise total   16.17 128.41 -25.71 0.00 4.23 -15.23 0.68 118.87 -11.59 -9.75 48 
                                                           
175  Capital employed = Paid up share capital + free re serves and surplus + long term loans – accumulated losses - deferred revenue expenditure. 
176  ROCE =Earnings before interest and taxes (EBIT) / Capital Employed. 

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 175 
Appendix 4.1.1 (Contd..) 
Summarised financial position and working results of Government companies and Statutory Corporations as per their latest finalised financial 
statements/accounts 
(Reference: Paragraphs 4.1.2.1, 4.1.6, 4.1.9, 4.1.9.2, 4.1.9.3, 4.1.10) 
(Figures in columns (5) to (12) are ₹ in crore)  
Sl. 
No.  
Sector / name 
of the 
Company 
Period of 
Accounts  
Year in 
which 
accounts 
finalised 
Paid-up 
Capital                                
@ 
Loans 
outstanding 
at the end of 
year 
Accumulated 
Profit (+) / 
Loss (-) 
Free 
Reserves 
& 
Surplus 
Turnover  
Net  
profit (+)/ 
loss (-) 
Net impact 
of Audit 
Comments  
Capital 
Employed  
Return on 
capital 
employed 
Percentage 
return on 
capital 
employed 
Manpower  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 
MANUFACTURING                        
6 Tripura Jute 
Mills Limited  
2019-20 2020-21 354.03 1.05 -352.16 0.00 3.12 -31.6 2 213.19 2.92 -31.62 -1082.88 325 
7 Tripura Small 
Industries 
Corporation 
Limited  
2016-17 2019-20 59.56 0.15 -46.53 0.00 17.97 -6.60 -11.62 13.18 -6.58 -49.92 111 
Sector wise total   413.59 1.20 -398.69 0.00 21.09 -38.22 201.57 16.10 -38.20 -237.26 436 
POWER                          
8 Tripura State 
Electricity 
Corporation 
Limited  
2016-17 2020-21 665.76 356.88 -468.84 61.08 1014.06  -23.71 -3.77 614.88 -18.04 -2.93 3659 
9 Tripura Power 
Generation 
Limited 
2018-19 2020-21 0.10 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.11 0.00 0.00 0 
Sector wise total   665.86 356.88 -468.83 61.08 1014.06 -23.71 -3.77 614.99 -18.04 -2.93 3659 
  

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 176 
Appendix 4.1.1 (Contd..) 
Summarised financial position and working results of Government companies and Statutory Corporations as per their latest finalised financial 
statements/accounts 
(Reference: Paragraphs 4.1.2.1, 4.1.6, 4.1.9, 4.1.9.2, 4.1.9.3, 4.1.10) 
(Figures in columns (5) to (12) are ₹ in crore)  
Sl. 
No.  
Sector / name of 
the Company 
Period of 
Accounts  
Year in 
which 
accounts 
finalised  
Paid-up 
Capital                                
@ 
Loans 
outstanding 
at the end 
of year 
Accumulated 
Profit (+) / 
Loss (-) 
Free 
Reserves 
& 
Surplus 
Turnover  
Net  
profit (+)/      
loss (-) 
Net impact 
of Audit 
Comments  
Capital 
Employed  
Return 
on capital 
employed  
Percentage 
return on 
capital 
employed 
Manpower  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 
SERVICES                          
10 Tripura Handloom 
and Handicrafts 
Development 
Corporation Limited 
 
2016-17 2019-20 107.09 4.27 177  -121.59 1.57 4.72 -12.17 -10.14 -8.66 -12.17 Not w orkable  221 
11 Tripura Urban 
Transport Company 
Limited  
2018-19 2020-21 0.90 0.00 1.53 0.00 1.09 0.26 0.00 2.43 0.34 13.99 6 
12 Tripura Tourism 
Development 
Corporation Limited 
 
2018-19 2020-21 13.27 0.00 -0.41 0.00 3.06 0.62 0.0 0 12.86 0.83 6.45 20 
13 Agartala Smart City 
Limited 
2018-19 2019-20 0.10 0.00 -0.03 0.00 0.00 -0.03 0.0 0 0.07 -0.03 -42.86 20 
Sector wise total   121.36 4.27 -120.50 1.57 8.87 -11.32 -10.14 6.70 -11.03 -164.63 267 
MISCELLANEOUS                        
14 Tripura Natural Gas 
Company Limited 
2019-20 2020-21 30.00 0.00 104.69 0.00 118.31 18.62  0.00 134.69 25.69 19.07 22 
Sector wise total   30.00 0.00 104.69 0.00 118.31 18.62 0.00 134.69 25.69 19.07 22 
Total A (All sector wise working 
Government companies) 
  1312.81  490.76 -836.29 62.77 1287.56 -75.31 192.75 1030.05 -58.62 -5.69 5458 
  
                                                           
177  This includes Interest accrued on loan amounting t o ₹ 1.71 crore shown as part of outstanding long term borrowing as per the finalised accounts. 

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 177 
Appendix 4.1.1 (Concld.) 
Summarised financial position and working results of Government companies and Statutory Corporations as per their latest finalised financial 
statements/accounts 
(Reference: Paragraphs 4.1.2.1, 4.1.6, 4.1.9, 4.1.9.2, 4.1.9.3, 4.1.10) 
(Figures in columns (5) to (12) are ₹ in crore)  
Sl. 
No.  
Sector / name 
of the 
Company 
Period of 
Accounts  
Year in 
which 
accounts 
finalised 
Paid-up 
Capital                                
@ 
Loans 
outstanding 
at the end of 
year 
Accumulated 
Profit (+) / 
Loss (-) 
Free 
Reserves 
& 
Surplus 
Turnover 
Net  
profit (+)/  
loss (-) 
Net impact 
of Audit 
Comments  
Capital 
Employed  
Return on 
capital 
employed  
Percentage 
return on 
capital 
employed 
Manpower  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 
B. Working Statutory corporation                      
SERVICES                          
1 Tripura Road 
Transport 
Corporation 
2016-17 2019-20 162.95 0.25 -284.64 11.19 2.26 0.36  0.00 -110.25 0.36 Not workable 
 222 
Sector wise total   162.95 0.25 -284.64 11.19 2.26 0.36 0.00 -110.25 0.36 Not workable  222 
Total B (All sector wise 
working Statutory 
Corporation) 
  162.95 0.25 -284.64 11.19 2.26 0.36 0.00 -110.25 0.36 Not workable  222 
Grand Total (A+B)   1475.76  491.01 -1120.93 73.96 1289.82 -74.95 192.75 919.80 -58.26 -6.33 5680 
C. Non working Government companies            
FINANCING                          
1 Tripura State 
Bank Limited 
Non functional and in the process of liquidation  
Sector wise total   0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0 
Total C (All sector wise  
non working Government 
company) 
  0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0 
Grand Total (A+B+C)   1475.76  491.01 -1120.93 73.96 1289.82 -74.95 192.75 919.80 -58.26 -6.33 5680 
@ Paid up capital includes share application money 
  

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 178 
Appendix 4.1.2 
Statement showing Rate of Real Return on Government Investment 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.1.10) 
(₹ in crore) 
Financial Year 
Present value of 
total investment 
at the beginning 
of the year 
Equity 
infused by 
the State 
government 
during the 
year 
Net interest 
free loan 
given by the 
State 
Government 
during the 
year 
Interest 
free loan 
converted 
into equity 
during the 
year 
Grants/ subsidies 
given by the State 
government for 
operational and 
administrative 
expenditure 
Disinvestment 
by the State 
Government 
during the 
year at face 
value 
Total 
investment 
during the 
year 
Total 
investment 
at the end 
of the year 
Average 
rate of 
interest 
Present value of 
total investment 
at the end of the 
year 
Minimum 
expected return 
to recover cost  
of funds for the 
year 
Total 
earnings/ 
profit after 
tax (PAT) for 
the year 
A B C D E F G H I J K= I x (1+J/100)  L= I xJ/100 M 
Upto 1999-2000 0.00  156.02  2.58  0.00  0.00  0.00  158.60  158.60  12.25  178.03  19.43  -10.90  
2000-01 178.03  20.44  0.00  0.00  0.00  0.00  20.44  198.47  10.82  219.95  21.47  -11.00  
2001-02 219.95  25.33  0.00  0.00  0.00  0.00  25.33  245.28  10.35  270.66  25.39  -25.62  
2002-03 270.66  15.53  9.13  0.00  0.00  0.00  24.66  295.32  7.08  316.22  20.91  -8.52  
2003-04 316.22  18.35  0.00  0.00  0.00  0.00  18.35  334.57  9.92  367.76  33.19  -8.45  
2004-05 367.76  22.99  0.00  0.00  0.00  0.00  22.99  390.75  9.17  426.58  35.83  -18.99  
2005-06 426.58  23.40  0.00  0.00  0.00  0.00  23.40  449.98  8.56  488.50  38.52  -19.11  
2006-07 488.50  36.22  11.04  0.00  45.00  0.00  92.26  580.76  8.46  629.90  49.13  -16.33  
2007-08 629.90  29.07  4.78  0.00  50.00  0.00  83.85  713.75  8.27  772.78  59.03  -9.50  
2008-09 772.78  31.13  30.50  0.00  28.06  0.00  89.69  862.47  8.00  931.47  69.00  -19.84  
2009-10 931.47  25.79  16.50  0.00  139.56  0.00  181.85  1113.32  7.98  1202.16  88.84  -1.97  
2010-11 1202.16  13.27  0.00  0.00  108.94  0.00  122.21  1324.37  8.88  1441.97  117.60  -4.36  
2011-12 1441.97  27.29  75.85  0.00  64.05  0.00  167.19  1609.16  8.41  1744.49  135.33  -104.98  
2012-13 1744.49  30.94  0.00  0.00  63.43  0.00  94.37  1838.86  8.44  1994.06  155.20  -98.74  
2013-14 1994.06  41.27  0.00  0.00  110.09  0.00  151.36  2145.42  8.53  2328.43  183.00  -137.51  
2014-15 2328.43  38.88  12.00  0.00  128.31  0.00  179.19  2507.62  13.18  2838.12  330.50  -126.63  
2015-16 2838.12  38.48  0.00  0.00  88.79  0.00  127.27  2965.39  12.95  3349.41  384.02  -139.05  
2016-17 3349.41  60.74  13.25  0.00  87.28  0.00  161.27  3510.68  7.50  3773.98  263.30  -118.09  
2017-18 3773.98  30.53  0.00  0.00  77.35  0.00  107.88  3881.86  7.50  4173.00  291.14  -190.30  
2018-19 4173.00  34.81  0.00  0.00  70.77  0.00  105.58  4278.58  7.16  4584.93  306.35  -211.86  
2019-20 4584.93 49.89 0.00 0.00 83.82 0.00 133.71 4718.64 7 .89 5090.94 372.30 -74.95 
TOTAL       2091.45      
 
Year Total earnings/ 
loss in 2018-19 
Investment by the State 
Government as per total of the 
column H above 
Return on State Government 
investment on the basis of 
historical value 
Present value of State 
Government investment at 
the end of 2018-19 
Real return on State Government 
investment considering the 
present value of investments 
 A B C D E 
2019-20 -74.95 2091.45 -3.58 5090.94 -1.47 
  

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 179 
Appendix 4.2.1 
Delay in completion of works under RGGVY (XII Plan) 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.2.11.1) 
Sl. 
No. Scheme District Name of Work 
Scheduled 
date of 
completion  
Actual Date 
of 
completion  
Delay in 
completion  
1 RGGVY  
(XII Plan) West Tripura 
 Implementation of Rural Electrification Works of We st Tripura District in Tripura under 
RE-DDUGJY (Erstwhile RGGVY 12th Plan) 30-08-2016  31-10-2018  792 
2 RGGVY  
(XII Plan) Gomati REDB Works (33 KV Level) in Connection with Rural E lectrification works of 
Gomati District 
in Tripura under RE-DDUGJY (12th Plan) 31-12-2018  01-01-2021  732 
3 RGGVY  
(XII Plan) Dhalai Supply of ACSR Conductor for implementation of RE-
DDUGJY 12th Plan scheme in Dhalai 
District (Package - II) 16-12-2016  13-04-2018  483 
4 RGGVY  
(XII Plan) Dhalai Supply of ACSR Conductor for implementation of RE-
DDUGJY 12th Plan scheme in Dhalai 
District (Package - II) 16-12-2016  13-04-2018  483 
5 RGGVY  
(XII Plan) Dhalai Supply of PVC Cable for implementation of RE -DDUGJY 12th Plan scheme in Dhalai District 01-12-2 016 
 27-03-2018  481 
6 RGGVY  
(XII Plan) Dhalai Execution of H.T L.T line, Installation of Sub-
Station & Providing BPL Service Connection at 
Raisyabari Block in Dhalai District under Re-DDUGJY Project in Tripura State 16-12-2017  18-03-2018  92 
7 RGGVY 
 (XII Plan) Dhalai Execution of H.T L.T line, Installation of Sub-
Station & Providing BPL Service Connection at 
Manu Block in Dhalai District under Re-DDUGJY Project in Tripura State 16-01-2018  18-03-2018  61 
8 RGGVY 
(XII Plan) Gomati Execution of H.T L.T line, Installation of Sub-
Station & Providing BPL Service Connection at 
Tepania Block in Gomati District under Re-DDUGJY Project in Tripura State 09-11-2017  29-12-2018  415 
9 RGGVY  
(XII Plan) Dhalai Execution of H.T L.T line, Installation of Sub-
Station & Providing BPL Service Connection at 
Ambassa Block in Dhalai District under Re-DDUGJY Project in Tripura State 16-01-2018  18-03-2018  61 
10 RGGVY  
(XII Plan) Gomati Execution of H.T L.T line, Installation of Sub-
Station & Providing BPL Service Connection at 
Karbook Block in Gomati District under Re-DDUGJY Project in Tripura State 16-12-2017  02-10-2018  290 
  

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 180 
Appendix 4.2.1 (contd.) 
Delay in completion of works under RGGVY (XII Plan) 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.2.11.1)  
Sl. No.  Scheme District Name of Work 
Scheduled 
date of 
completion  
Actual Date 
of 
completion  
Delay in 
completion  
11 RGGVY  
(XII Plan) Dhalai 
Execution of H.T L.T line, Installation of Sub-Stat ion & Providing BPL Service 
Connection at Salema Block in Dhalai District under  Re- DDUGJY Project in Tripura 
State 
16-12-2017  16-03-2018  90 
12 RGGVY  
(XII Plan) Gomati 
Execution of H.T L.T line, Installation of Sub- Station & Providing BPL Service 
Connection at Silachari Block in Gomati District un der Re-DDUGJY Project in Tripura 
State 
16-12-2017  11-06-2018  177 
13 RGGVY  
(XII Plan) Gomati 
Execution of H.T L.T line, Installation of Sub- Station & Providing BPL Service 
Connection at Amarpur Block in Gomati District unde r Re-DDUGJY Project in Tripura 
State 
16-12-2017  07-06-2018  173 
14 RGGVY  
(XII Plan) Dhalai Supply of PVC Cable for implementation of RE- DDUGJY 12th Plan scheme in Dhalai 
District 01-12-2016  14-02-2018  440 
15 RGGVY  
(XII Plan) Gomati 
Execution of H.T L.T line, Installation of Sub- Station & Providing BPL Service 
Connection at Ompi Block in Gomati District under R e-DDUGJY Project in Tripura 
State 
06-12-2017  24-05-2018  169 
16 RGGVY  
(XII Plan) Gomati 
Execution of H.T L.T line, Installation of Sub- Station & Providing BPL Service 
Connection at Killa Block in Gomati District under Re-DDUGJY Project in Tripura 
State  
09-11-2017  10-05-2018  182 
17 RGGVY  
(XII Plan) Dhalai Supply of ACSR Conductor for implementation of RE- DDUGJY 12th Plan scheme in 
Dhalai District (Package - I) 18-07-2016  16-01-2018  547 
18 RGGVY  
(XII Plan) Gomati 
Execution of H.T L.T line, Installation of Sub- Station & Providing BPL Service 
Connection at Matabari Block in Gomati District und er Re-DDUGJY Project in Tripura 
State 
09-11-2017  10-05-2018  182 
19 RGGVY  
(XII Plan) Dhalai Supply of ACSR Conductor for implementation of RE- DDUGJY 12th Plan scheme in 
Dhalai District (Package - I) 18-07-2016  16-01-2018  547 
20 RGGVY  
(XII Plan) Gomati 
Execution of H.T L.T line, Installation of Sub- Station & Providing BPL Service 
Connection at Kakraban Block in Gomati District und er Re-DDUGJY Project in Tripura 
State 
09-11-2017  10-05-2018  182 
  

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 181 
Appendix 4.2.1 (contd.) 
Delay in completion of works under RGGVY (XII Plan) 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.2.11.1)  
Sl. No.  Scheme District Name of Work 
Scheduled 
date of 
completion  
Actual Date 
of 
completion  
Delay in 
completion  
21 RGGVY  
(XII Plan) Gomati Supply of ACSR Conductor for implementation of RE- DDUGJY 12th Plan scheme in 
Gomati District (Package - II)  16-12-2016  23-03-2018  462 
22 RGGVY  
(XII Plan) Gomati Supply of PVC Cable for implementation of RE- DDUGJY 12th Plan scheme in Gomati 
District  09-11-2016  26-02-2018  474 
23 RGGVY  
(XII Plan) Gomati Supply of ACSR Conductor for implementation of RE- DDUGJY 12th Plan scheme in 
Gomati District (Package - II) 16-12-2016  03-02-2018  414 
24 RGGVY  
(XII Plan) Gomati Supply of PCC Poles for implementation of RE- DDUGJY 12th Plan scheme in Gomati 
District (Package - II) 08-01-2017  30-01-2018  387 
25 RGGVY  
(XII Plan) Dhalai Supply of Steel Tubular Poles for implementation of  RE-DDUGJY 12th Plan scheme in 
Dhalai District (Package - B) 28-02-2017  04-01-2018  310 
26 RGGVY  
(XII Plan) Dhalai Supply of Galvanised Steel Sanction for implementat ion of RE- DDUGJY 12th Plan 
scheme in Dhalai District (Package -II) 01-12-2016  28-12-2017  392 
27 RGGVY  
(XII Plan) Gomati Supply of Three Ph DTR (25&63KVA) and Single Ph DTR (10 &16KVA) for 
implementation of RE-DDUGJY 12th Plan scheme in Gomati District 06-12-2016  26-09-2017  294 
28 RGGVY  
(XII Plan) Gomati Supply of Hardware Fittings for implementation of R E-DDUGJY 12th Plan scheme in 
Gomati District 07-08-2016  02-06-2017  299 
29 RGGVY  
(XII Plan) Gomati Supply of Galvanised Steel Sanction for implementat ion of RE- DDUGJY 12th Plan 
scheme in Gomati District (Package -II) 20-05-2016  27-04-2017  342 
30 RGGVY  
(XII Plan) Dhalai Supply of Galvanised Steel Sanction for implementat ion of RE- DDUGJY 12th Plan 
scheme in Dhalai District (Package -III)  01-12-2016  28-12-2017  392 
31 RGGVY  
(XII Plan) Dhalai Supply of Galvanised Steel Sanction for implementat ion of RE- DDUGJY 12th Plan 
scheme in Dhalai District (Package -IV) 01-12-2016  28-12-2017  392 
32 RGGVY  
(XII Plan) Dhalai Supply of Galvanised Steel Sanction for implementat ion of RE- DDUGJY 12th Plan 
scheme in Dhalai District (Package -I) 01-12-2016  14-12-2017  378 
33 RGGVY  
(XII Plan) Gomati Supply of Steel Tubular Poles for implementation of  RE-DDUGJY 12th Plan scheme in 
Gomati District (Package - II) 24-01-2017  05-04-2017  71 
34 RGGVY  
(XII Plan) Gomati Supply of Steel Tubular Poles for implementation of  RE-DDUGJY 12th Plan scheme in 
Gomati District (Package - III)  24-01-2017  29-03-2017  64 
  

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 182 
Appendix 4.2.1 (concld.) 
Delay in completion of works under RGGVY (XII Plan) 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.2.11.1)  
Sl. No.  Scheme District Name of Work Scheduled date 
of completion 
Actual Date of 
completion 
Delay in 
completion 
35 RGGVY 
(XII Plan)  Gomati Supply of Galvanised Steel Sanction for implementat ion of RE- DDUGJY 12th Plan 
scheme in Gomati District (Package -I)  20-05-2016 28-03-2017 312 
36 RGGVY 
(XII Plan)  Gomati Supply of G.I Wire, Barbed Wire & Stay Wire for imp lementation of RE- DDUGJY 12th 
Plan scheme in Gomati District  07-08-2016 22-02-2017 199 
37 RGGVY 
(XII Plan)  Gomati Supply of PCC Poles for implementation of RE- DDUGJY 12th Plan scheme in Gomati 
District (Package - I) 07-08-2016 04-11-2016 89 
38 RGGVY 
(XII Plan)  Gomati Supply of 11 KV G.O.F & G.O.F for implementation of  RE-DDUGJY 12th Plan scheme 
in Gomati District 03-08-2016 05-10-2016 63 
39 RGGVY 
(XII Plan)  Dhalai Supply of Hardware Fittings for implementation of R E-DDUGJY 12th Plan scheme in 
Dhalai District 07-08-2016 03-08-2017 361 
40 RGGVY 
(XII Plan)  Dhalai Supply of Three Ph DTR (25&63KVA) and Single Ph DTR  (10 & 16KVA) for 
implementation of RE-DDUGJY 12th Plan scheme in Dhalai District  16-01-2017 04-07-2017 169 
41 RGGVY 
(XII Plan)  Dhalai Supply of 11 KV G.O.F & G.O.F for implementation of  RE-DDUGJY 12th Plan scheme 
in Dhalai District 03-08-2016 15-05-2017 285 
42 RGGVY 
(XII Plan)  Dhalai Supply of Steel Tubular Poles for implementation of  RE-DDUGJY 12th Plan scheme in 
Dhalai District (Package - I)  18-07-2016 09-01-2017 175 
43 RGGVY 
(XII Plan)  Dhalai Supply of AB Cable & Assesories for implementation of RE-DDUGJY 12th Plan scheme 
in Dhalai District  31-10-2016 01-11-2016 1 
44 RGGVY 
(XII Plan)  Dhalai Supply of G.I Wire, Barbed Wire & Stay Wire for imp lementation of RE- DDUGJY 12th 
Plan scheme in Dhalai District 03-08-2016 26-09-2016 54 
45 RGGVY 
(XII Plan)  Dhalai Supply of Porceline insulator for implementation of  RE- DDUGJY 12th Plan scheme in 
Dhalai District  04-07-2016 06-08-2016 33 
46 RGGVY 
(XII Plan)  Gomati Supply of Porceline insulator for implementation of  RE- DDUGJY 12th Plan scheme in 
Gomati District 04-07-2016 05-08-2016 32 
  

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 183 
Appendix 4.2.2 
Details of sanctioned and awarded parameters under RGGVY XII Plan 
{Reference: Paragraph 4.2.11.5(b)} 
Components 
West Dhalai Gomati Sepahijala Total Reduction 
of scope 
of work 
against 
sanction 
(in per 
cent )  
Actual Sanction  Award  Achieve  Actual Sanction  Award Achieve  Actual Sanction  Award Achieve  Actual  Sanction  Award Achieve  Actual Sanction  Award Achieve  
Service connections (Nos) 8620 7523 6500 6500 14226  12416 12416 12416 15328 13379 13379 8871 11924 100 96 10096 7462 50098 43414 42391 35249 2.36 
DTR (Nos) 267 195 161 161 528 380 248 275 374 271 2 71 264 417 310 310 310 1586 1156 990 1010 14.36 
DTR Aug. (Nos) 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0.00 
LT lines (CKm) 485.21 368.8 278.26  319.11 456.56 347 254.38 346.62 426.47 324.1 322.93  408.39 655.17  497.9 424 478.87 2023.41 1537.8 1279.57 1552.99  16.79 
LT lines (CKm) - Aug. 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0  0 0 0 0 0 0.00 
11 KV lines (CKm) 291.14 211.39 160 140.99 699.8 50 1.4 377.57 348.62 230 167.6 171.67 197.12 264.02  195.6 162.33 158.33 1484.96 1075.99 871.57 845.06 1 9.00 
11/22 KV lines (CKm) - Aug. 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0.00 
33 & 66 KV lines (CKm) 20 20 0 0 10 10 0 0 12 12 12 .33 13.1 9.5 9.5 0 0 51.5 51.5 12.33 13.1 76.06 
Energy meters: Consumers (Nos) 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0.00 
Energy meters: DTR(Nos) 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0  0 0 0 0 0 0 0.00 
33/11 KV Sub-station - New (Nos) 2 2 0 0 1 1 0 0 1 1 1 1 2 2 0 0 6 6 1 1 83.33 
33/11 KV Sub-station - Aug. (Nos) 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 1  1 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 2 0 0 100.00 
11 KV feeder (km) 40 30.4 0 0 7.02 5.34 0 0 31.5 23 .94 0 0 37.5 17.63 0 0 116.02 77.31 0 0 100.00 
Renovation of DTR SS earthing (Nos)  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0.00 
33 KV line Augmentation (km) 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0.00 
  

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 184 
Appendix 4.2.3 
Delays in award of works sanctioned under RGGVY (XII plan) and DDUGJY  
(Reference: Paragraph 4.2.12.1.) 
Sl. 
No. District Name of Work NIT Date LOA Date Delay 
(in Nos) 
Delay in excess 
of 90 days 
RGGVY (XII Plan) 
1 West Tripura  
Implementation of Rural Electrification Works of West Tripura 
District in Tripura under RE- DDUGJY (Erstwhile RGGVY 12th 
Plan) 
24-02-2014 30-08-2014 187 97 
2 Gomati 
REDB Works (33 KV Level) in Connection with Rural 
Electrification works of Gomati District in Tripura  under 
RE-DDUGJY (12th Plan) 
30-03-2017 07-12-2017 252 162 
3 Dhalai Supply of ACSR Conductor for implementation of RE- DDUGJY 
12th Plan scheme in Dhalai District (Package - II)  14-10-2015 04-06-2016 234 144 
4 Dhalai Supply of ACSR Conductor for implementation of RE- DDUGJY 
12th Plan scheme in Dhalai District (Package - II) 14-10-2015 04-06-2016 234 144 
5 Gomati Supply of ACSR Conductor for implementation of RE- DDUGJY 
12th Plan scheme in Gomati District (Package - II) 15-10-2015 04-06-2016 233 143 
6 Gomati Supply of ACSR Conductor for implementation of RE- DDUGJY 
12th Plan scheme in Gomati District (Package - II) 15-10-2015 04-06-2016 233 143 
7 Gomati Supply of PCC Poles for implementation of RE-DDUGJY 12th Plan 
scheme in Gomati District (Package - II) 27-10-2015 27-06-2016 244 154 
8 Gomati Supply of Hardware Fittings for implementation of R E-DDUGJY 
12th Plan scheme in Gomati District  03-01-2015 25-01-2016 387 297 
9 Gomati Supply of Steel Tubular Poles for implementation of  RE-DDUGJY 
12th Plan scheme in Gomati District (Package - II) 16-10-2015 13-07-2016 271 181 
10 Gomati Supply of Steel Tubular Poles for implementation of  RE-DDUGJY 
12th Plan scheme in Gomati District (Package - III) 16-10-2015 13-07-2016 271 181 
11 Gomati Supply of ACSR Conductor for implementation of RE- DDUGJY 
12th Plan scheme in Gomati District (Package - II)  15-10-2015 04-06-2016 233 143 
  

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 185 
Appendix 4.2.3 (concld.) 
Delays in award of works sanctioned under RGGVY (XII plan) and DDUGJY  
(Reference: Paragraph 4.2.12.1.) 
Sl. 
No. District Name of Work NIT Date LOA Date Delay 
(in Nos) 
Delay in excess 
of 90 days 
12 Dhalai Supply of Hardware Fittings for implementation of R E-DDUGJY 
12th Plan scheme in Dhalai District 03-01-2015 25-01-2016 387 297 
13 Dhalai 
Supply of Three Ph DTR (25&63KVA) and Single Ph DTR  (10 
&16KVA) for implementation of RE-DDUGJY 12th Plan scheme in 
Dhalai District 
02-01-2016 05-07-2016 185 95 
14 Dhalai Supply of Polymeric insulator for implementation of RE-DDUGJY 
12th Plan scheme in Dhalai District 31-10-2015 02-05-2016 184 94 
15 Dhalai Supply of PCC Poles for implementation of RE-DDUGJY 12th Plan 
scheme in Dhalai District (Package - II) 27-10-2015 27-06-2016 244 154 
16 Dhalai Supply of ACSR Conductor for implementation of RE-DDUGJY 
12th Plan scheme in Dhalai District (Package - II) 14-10-2015 04-06-2016 234 144 
17 Dhalai Supply of ACSR Conductor for implementation of RE-DDUGJY 
12th Plan scheme in Dhalai District (Package - III)  15-10-2015 04-06-2016 233 143 
18 Dhalai Supply of ACSR Conductor for implementation of RE-DDUGJY 
12th Plan scheme in Dhalai District (Package - II) 14-10-2015 04-06-2016 234 144 
19 Dhalai Supply of ACSR Conductor for implementation of RE-DDUGJY 
12th Plan scheme in Dhalai District (Package - III) 14-10-2015 04-06-2016 234 144 
DDUGJY  
1 Gomati Supply & Erection of Rural Electrification works in Gomati District 
under DDUGJY Project in Tripura State  01-03-2017 04-07-2018 490 310 
2 Dhalai Supply & Erection of Rural Electrification works in  Dhalai District 
under DDUGJY Project in Tripura State  01-03-2017 04-07-2018 490 310 
3 West Tripura  Supply & Erection of Rural Electrification works in  West Tripura 
District under DDUGJY Project in Tripura State  27-02-2017 04-07-2018 492 312 
4 Sipahijala Supply & Erection of Rural Electrification works in  Sipahijala  
District under DDUGJY Project in Tripura State 28-02-2017 04-07-2018 491 311 
  

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 186 
Appendix 4.2.4 (a) 
Procurement of same materials for same district and neighbouring district at different ex-factory rates 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.2.12.7) 
Scheme Items of works District  Package  
LOA 
rate (Ex-
factory 
rate) 
LOA 
quantity  Unit 
Lowest 
Price 
(in ₹) 
Difference 
of rates 
(in ₹) 
Excess 
Expenditure  
(in ₹) 
% of 
price 
difference  
Name of 
supplier LOA No Date 
Procurement of same materials for same district at different ex-factory rates  
RGGVY 
(XII Plan)  
ACSR Rabbit 
Conductor 6/1/3.35  Gomati  1 27882 40 Km 24600 3282 131280 13.34 
Himachal 
Aluminium & 
Conductors 
No.F.AGM/DP&C/RE-
DDUGJY/LOA/ACSR/ 
Gomati/1077-83 
02-03-2016 
 
RGGVY 
(XII Plan)  
ACSR Rabbit 
Conductor 6/1/3.35  
Gomati  
2 24600 14 Km 24600 0 0 0.00 
Gupta Power 
Infrastructure 
Ltd. 
No.F.AGM/DP&C/RE-
DDUGJY/LOA/ACSR/ 
Gomati/568-74 
05-01-2016 
 
RGGVY 
(XII Plan)  
ACSR Rabbit 
Conductor 6/1/3.35  
Gomati  
2 26381 10.5 Km 24600 1781 18700.5 7.24 Trip Con 
No.F.AGM/DP&C/RE-
DDUGJY/LOA/ACSR/ 
Gomati/603-09 
04-06-2016 
 
RGGVY 
(XII Plan)  
ACSR Rabbit 
Conductor 6/1/3.35  
Gomati  
2 26381 10.5 Km 24600 1781 18700.5 7.24 Abhinandan 
Enterprise 
No.F.AGM/DP&C/RE-
DDUGJY/LOA/ACSR/ 
Gomati/610-16 
04-06-2016 
 
RGGVY 
(XII Plan)  
ASCR wheasel 
conductor 6/1/2.59 
Gomati  
1 16600 620 Km 14700 1900 1178000 12.93 
Himachal 
Aluminium & 
Conductors 
No.F.AGM/DP&C/RE-
DDUGJY/LOA/ACSR/ 
Gomati/1077-83 
02-03-2016 
 
RGGVY 
(XII Plan)  
ASCR wheasel 
conductor 6/1/2.59 
Gomati  
2 14700 280 Km 14700 0 0 0.00 
Gupta Power 
Infrastructure 
Ltd. 
No.F.AGM/DP&C/RE-
DDUGJY/LOA/ACSR/ 
Gomati/568-74 
04-06-2016 
 
RGGVY 
(XII Plan)  
ASCR wheasel 
conductor 6/1/2.59 
Gomati  
2 15764 210 Km 14700 1064 223440 7.24 Trip Con 
No.F.AGM/DP&C/RE-
DDUGJY/LOA/ACSR/ 
Gomati/603-09 
04-06-2016 
 
RGGVY 
(XII Plan)  
ASCR wheasel 
conductor 6/1/2.59 
Gomati  
2 15764 210 Km 14700 1064 223440 7.24 Abhinandan 
Enterprise 
No.F.AGM/DP&C/RE-
DDUGJY/LOA/ACSR/ 
Gomati/610-16 
04-06-2016 
 
 Total (A) 17,93,561       

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 187 
Appendix 4.2.4 (b)  
Procurement of same materials for same district and neighbouring district at different ex-factory rates 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.2.12.7) 
Scheme Items of works District  Package  
LOA rate 
(Ex-factory 
rate) 
LOA 
quantity  Unit  
Lowest 
Price 
(in ₹) 
Difference 
of rates 
(in ₹) 
Excess 
Expenditure  
(in ₹) 
% of 
price 
difference  
Name of 
supplier LOA No Date 
Procurement of same materials for neighbouring district at different ex-factory rates  
RGGVY 
(XII Plan) 8 mtr long PCC Pole  Dhalai 1 3200 1500 Nos  3200 0 0 0.00 M/S K B 
Industries 
No.F.AGM/DP&C/RE-
DDUGJY/LOA/STP/ 
Dhala/89-95 
07-04-2016  
RGGVY 
(XII Plan) 8 mtr long PCC Pole  Dhalai 2 3200 1500 Nos  3200 0 0 0.00 M/S K B 
Industries 
No.F.AGM/DP&C/RE-
DDUGJY/LOA/STP/ 
Dhala/699-705 
27-06-2016  
RGGVY 
(XII Plan) 8 mtr long PCC Pole  Dhalai 3 3200 1512 Nos  3200 0 0 0.00 M/S K B 
Industries 
No.F.AGM/DP&C/RE-
DDUGJY/LOA/STP/ 
Dhala/61-67 
05-01-2016  
RGGVY 
(XII Plan) 8 mtr long PCC Pole  Gomati  1 3225 3000 Nos  3200 25 75000 0.78 
M/S Eastern 
Engineering & 
Builders 
No.F.AGM/DP&C/RE-
DDUGJY/LOA/STP/ 
Gomoti/1048-54 
25-01-2016  
RGGVY 
(XII Plan) 8 mtr long PCC Pole  Gomati  2 3225 1214 Nos  3200 25 30350 0.78 
M/S Eastern 
Engineering & 
Builders 
No.F.AGM/DP&C/RE-
DDUGJY/LOA/STP/ 
Gomoti/685-91 
27-06-2016  
RGGVY 
(XII Plan) 9 mtr long PCC Pole  Dhalai 1 3900 3000 Nos  3900 0 0 0.00 M/S K B 
Industries 
No.F.AGM/DP&C/RE-
DDUGJY/LOA/STP/ 
Dhala/89-95 
07-04-2016  
RGGVY 
(XII Plan) 9 mtr long PCC Pole  Dhalai 2 3900 3000 Nos  3900 0 0 0.00 M/S K B 
Industries 
No.F.AGM/DP&C/RE-
DDUGJY/LOA/STP 
/Dhala/699-705 
27-06-2016  
RGGVY 
(XII Plan) 9 mtr long PCC Pole  Dhalai 3 3900 2615 Nos  3900 0 0 0.00 M/S K B 
Industries 
No.F.AGM/DP&C/RE-
DDUGJY/LOA/STP 
/Dhala/61-67 
05-01-2016  
RGGVY 
(XII Plan) 9 mtr long PCC Pole  Gomati  1 3950 1700 Nos  3900 50 85000 1.28 
M/S Eastern 
Engineering & 
Builders 
No.F.AGM/DP&C/RE-
DDUGJY/LOA/STP/ 
Gomoti/1048-54 
25-01-2016  
  

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 188 
Appendix 4.2.4 (b) (Contd.) 
Procurement of same materials for same district and neighbouring district at different ex-factory rates 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.2.12.7) 
Scheme Items of works District  Package  
LOA rate 
(Ex-factory 
rate) 
LOA 
quantity Unit 
Lowest 
Price 
(in ₹) 
Difference 
of rates 
(in ₹) 
Excess 
Expenditure  
(in ₹) 
% of price 
difference 
Name of 
supplier LOA No Date 
Procurement of same materials for neighbouring district at different ex-factory rates  
RGGVY 
(XII Plan)  
9 mtr long PCC 
Pole Gomati  2 3950 1556 Nos 3900 50 
77800 
1.28 
M/S Eastern 
Engineering & 
Builders 
No.F.AGM/DP&C/RE-
DDUGJY/LOA/STP/ 
Gomoti/685-91 
27-06-2016  
RGGVY 
(XII Plan)  
ACSR Rabbit 
Conductor 
6/1/3.35 
Dhalai 1 24600 9 Km 24600 0 
0 
0.00 Abhinandan 
Enterprize 
No.F.AGM/DP&C/RE-
DDUGJY/LOA/ACSR/ 
 
Dhalai/47-53 
05-01-2016  
RGGVY 
(XII Plan)  
ASCR wheasel 
conductor 
6/1/2.59 
Dhalai 1 14700 375 Km 14700 0 
0 
0.00 
Gupta Power 
Infrastructure 
Ltd. 
No.F.AGM/DP&C/RE-
DDUGJY/LOA/ACSR  
/Dhalai/40-46 
05-01-2016  
RGGVY 
(XII Plan)  
ASCR wheasel 
conductor 
6/1/2.59 
Dhalai 2 14700 350 Km 14700 0 
0 
0.00 
Gupta Power 
Infrastructure 
Ltd. 
No.F.AGM/DP&C/RE-
DDUGJY/LOA/ACSR/ 
 
Dhalai/554-60 
04-06-2016  
RGGVY 
(XII Plan)  
ASCR wheasel 
conductor 
6/1/2.59 
Dhalai 2 15764 265 Km 14700 1064 
281960 
7.24 
Basant Cables 
& Conductors 
(P) Ltd. 
No.F.AGM/DP&C/RE-
DDUGJY/LOA/ACSR/ 
 
Dhalai/575-81 
04-06-2016  
RGGVY 
(XII Plan)  
ASCR wheasel 
conductor 
6/1/2.59 
Dhalai 2 15764 265 Km 14700 1064 
281960 
7.24 Maharishi 
Udyog 
No.F.AGM/DP&C/RE-
DDUGJY/LOA/ACSR/ 
 
Dhalai/589-95 
04-06-2016  
RGGVY 
(XII Plan)  
ASCR wheasel 
conductor 
6/1/2.59 
Dhalai 3 15764 259.5 Km 14700 1064 
276108 
7.24 Trip Con 
No.F.AGM/DP&C/RE-
DDUGJY/LOA/ACSR/ 
 
Dhalai/596-602 
04-06-2016  
RGGVY 
(XII Plan)  
ASCR wheasel 
conductor 
6/1/2.59 
Dhalai 3 15764 259.5 Km 14700 1064 
276108 
7.24 
Basant Cables 
& Conductors 
(P) Ltd. 
No.F.AGM/DP&C/RE-
DDUGJY/LOA/ACSR/ 
 
Dhalai/582-88 
04-06-2016  
RGGVY 
(XII Plan)  
ASCR wheasel 
conductor 
6/1/2.59 
Dhalai 3 14700 346 Km 14700 0 
0 
0.00 
Gupta Power 
Infrastructure 
Ltd. 
No.F.AGM/DP&C/RE-
DDUGJY/LOA/ACSR/ 
 
Dhalai/603-609 
04-06-2016  
  

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 189 
Appendix 4.2.4 (b) (Contd.) 
Procurement of same materials for same district and neighbouring district at different ex-factory rates 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.2.12.7) 
Scheme Items of works District  Package  
LOA rate 
(Ex-factory 
rate) 
LOA 
quantity  Unit 
Lowest 
Price 
(in ₹) 
Difference 
of rates 
(in ₹) 
Excess 
Expenditure  
(in ₹) 
% of 
price 
difference  
Name of 
supplier LOA No Date 
Procurement of same materials for neighbouring district at different ex-factory rates  
RGGVY 
(XII Plan)  
Steel Tubular Poles, 
8 mtr long (IS 
Designation 410 SP-
15) ISS: 2713 (P-I, 
P-II), 1980 
Dhalai A 4750 950 Nos 4165 585 555750 14.05 Tripura 
Power 
No.F.AGM/DP&C/RE 
-DDUGJY/LOA/STP/ 
Dhalai/1698-1705 
16-08-2016  
RGGVY 
(XII Plan)  
Steel Tubular Poles, 
8 mtr long (IS 
Designation 410 SP-
15) ISS: 2713 (P-I, 
P-II), 1980 
Dhalai B 4750 950 Nos 4165 585 555750 14.05 
Rnagamayee 
Structural 
Products 
No.F.AGM/DP&C/RE 
-DDUGJY/LOA/STP/ 
Dhalai/1613-20 
16-08-2016  
RGGVY 
(XII Plan)  
Steel Tubular Poles, 
8 mtr long (IS 
Designation 410 SP-
15) ISS: 2713 (P-I, 
P-II), 1980 
Dhalai 1 4750 920 Nos 4165 585 538200 14.05 
Electro Poles 
Products 
Pvt., Ltd 
No.F.AGM/DP&C/RE 
-DDUGJY/LOA/STP/ 
Dhalai/19-25 
05-01-2016  
RGGVY 
(XII Plan)  
Steel Tubular Poles, 
8 mtr long (IS 
Designation 410 SP-
15) ISS: 2713 (P-I, 
P-II), 1980 
Gomati 2 4165 1290 Nos 4165 0 0 0.00 
BST 
Infratech 
Ltd. 
No.F.AGM/DP&C/RE 
-DDUGJY/LOA/STP 
/Gomoti/799-804 
13-07-2016  
RGGVY 
(XII Plan)  
Steel Tubular Poles, 
8 mtr long (IS 
Designation 410 SP-
15) ISS: 2713 (P-I, 
P-II), 1980 
Gomati 2 4165 1290 Nos 4165 0 0 0.00 
BST 
Infratech 
Ltd. 
No.F.AGM/DP&C/RE 
-DDUGJY/LOA/STP/ 
Gomoti/799-804 
13-07-2016  
  

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 190 
Appendix 4.2.4 (b) (Concld.) 
Procurement of same materials for same district and neighbouring district at different ex-factory rates 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.2.12.7) 
Scheme Items of works District  Package  
LOA rate 
(Ex-factory 
rate) 
LOA 
quantity  Unit 
Lowest 
Price 
(in ₹) 
Difference 
of rates 
(in ₹) 
Excess 
Expenditure  
(in ₹) 
% of 
price 
difference  
Name of 
supplier LOA No Date 
Procurement of same materials for neighbouring district at different ex-factory rates  
RGGVY 
(XII Plan)  
Steel Tubular Poles, 9 
mtr long (IS 
Designation 410 SP-
32) ISS: 2713 (P-I, P-
II), 1980 
Dhalai A 7495 950 Nos 5390 2105 1999750 39.05 Tripu ra Power  
No.F.AGM/DP&C/ 
RE-DDUGJY/ 
LOA/STP 
/Dhalai/1698-1705  
26-08-2016 
RGGVY 
(XII Plan)  
Steel Tubular Poles, 9 
mtr long (IS 
Designation 410 SP-
32) ISS: 2713 (P-I, P-
II), 1980 
Dhalai B 7495 950 Nos 5390 2105 1999750 39.05 
Rnagamayee 
Structural 
Products 
No.F.AGM/DP&C/ 
RE-DDUGJY/ 
LOA/STP/ 
Dhalai/1613-20 
16-08-2016 
RGGVY 
(XII Plan)  
Steel Tubular Poles, 9 
mtr long (IS 
Designation 410 SP-
32) ISS: 2713 (P-I, P-
II), 1980 
Dhalai 1 6100 820 Nos 5390 710 582200 13.17 
Electro Poles 
Products Pvt., 
Ltd 
No.F.AGM/DP&C/ 
RE-DDUGJY/ 
LOA/STP/Dhalai/1 
9-25 
05-01-2016 
RGGVY 
(XII Plan)  
Steel Tubular Poles, 9 
mtr long (IS 
Designation 410 SP-
32) ISS: 2713 (P-I, P-
II), 1980 
Gomati  2 5390 540 Nos 5390 0 0 0.00 BST infratech 
Ltd. 
No.F.AGM/DP&C/ 
RE-DDUGJY/ 
LOA/STP/Gomoti/ 
799-804 
13-07-2016 
RGGVY 
(XII Plan)  
Steel Tubular Poles, 9 
mtr long (IS 
Designation 410 SP-
32) ISS: 2713 (P-I, P-
II), 1980 
Gomati   5390 540 Nos 5390 0 0 0.00 BST infratech 
Ltd. 
No.F.AGM/DP&C/ 
RE-DDUGJY/ 
LOA/STP/Gomoti/ 
799-804 
13-07-2016 
 
Total (B) 76,15,686     Grand Total (A+B) 94,09,247     

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 191 
Appendix 4.2.5 
Unreasonable price variations in similar erection works under DDUGJY scheme 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.2.12.7) 
Sl. No.  Items of work 
Ex-works price/ unit 
Excess 
expenditure 
(in ₹) 
West Dhalai Gomati Sepahijala  
Rate 
(in ₹) Qty Rate 
(in ₹) Qty Rate 
(in ₹) Qty Rate 
(in ₹) Qty  
Erection, testing & commissioning of new 11 KV lines  
1 
Survey, route alignment and pole spotting, 
preparation of survey report and uploading in the web 
portal 
5,800 9.43 7,500 18 6,000 8 10,331 11.78 85,575 
Excavation of pole pit (of depth 1/6th of pole length) in normal soil  
2 9 mtr long PCC poles 1,000 160 800 306 800 136 1,082 200 88,400 
Erection of poles for 11 KV overhead lines  
3 9 mtr long PCC poles with RCC base plate/ pad 
including refilling by brick ballast/ stone bolder 4,500 160 2,800 306 1,700 136 4,231 200 12,90,800 
4 9 mtr long ST poles with welded steel base plate -  
cement concreting 0.5 cm 5,300 66 4,000 126 2,200 56 4,428 82 6,14,096 
5 Erection, testing & commissioning of pre- fabricated 
steel items 20,000 6.932  10,000 13.106 5,000 5.865 24,600 8.612 3,38,305 
6 Excavation, erection, testing & commissioning of 40  
mm dia, 3,000 mm long GI pipe earth electrode 2,900 47 1,500 90 1,000 40 2,854 59 2,43,686 
7 Erection of 8 SWG GI wire for earthing and guardi ng  12,000 2.65 10,000 4.62 30,000 1.848 14,759 2.7212 55,210 
Excavation of stay pit  
8 Erection of complete stay set 1,500 132 900 252 800 112 1,574 165 2,45,310 
Erection of poles for 11/0.4 KV Distribution Transformer Sub-station  
9 9 mtr long ST poles with welded steel base plate -  
cement concreting 0.5 cm 5,100 40 4,500 36 2,200 34 4,428 44 2,96,832 
  

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 192 
Appendix 4.2.5 (contd.) 
Unreasonable price variations in similar erection works under DDUGJY scheme 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.2.12.7) 
Sl. No.  Items of work 
Ex-works price/ unit 
Excess 
expenditure 
(in ₹) 
West Dhalai Gomati Sepahijala  
Rate 
(in ₹) Qty Rate 
(in ₹) Qty Rate 
(in ₹) Qty Rate 
(in ₹) Qty  
Excavation of stay pit  
10 Erection, testing & commissioning of pre- fabricated 
steel items 20,000 6.537 10,000 5.884 40,000 5.557 24,600 7.191 3,37,069 
Erection, testing & commissioning of outdoor mounting type Distribution box  
11 
Erection, testing & commissioning of 3 Nos. pipe 
earthing using 40 mm dia GI pipe 3,000 mm long, 
etc . 
2,400 60 1,500 54 3,000 51 2,854 66 2,19,864 
Erection LT line  
12 
Survey, route alignment and pole spotting, 
preparation of survey report and uploading in the 
web portal. 
5,000 26.58 7,500 19.61 5,000 28.66 6,298 31.64 90,094 
Erection of poles for LT overhead lines  
13 8 mtr long PCC poles - cement concreting 0.5 cm 2,500 452 3,000 334 1,700 488 3,050 538 15,22,100 
14 8 mtr long ST poles with welded steel base plate  3,500 212 3,500 157 2,200 253 3,838 253 8,94,114 
Excavation of stay pit  
15 Erection of galvanised stay set with 50 x 8 mm stay 
clamp, etc . 1,500 373 900 275 800 401 1,574 443 6,31,482 
  

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 193 
Appendix 4.2.5 (concld.) 
Unreasonable price variations in similar erection works under DDUGJY scheme 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.2.12.7) 
Sl. No.  Items of work 
Ex-works price/ unit Excess 
expenditure 
(in ₹) 
West Dhalai Gomati Sepahijala 
Rate 
(in ₹) Qty Rate 
(in ₹) Qty Rate 
(in ₹) Qty Rate 
(in ₹) Qty 
Erection of poles for 11 KV overhead lines  
16 9 mtr long PCC poles with RCC base plate/pad 
including refilling by brick ballast/ stone bolder 4,500 85 2,800 68 1,700 187 4,231 86 5,30,466 
17 9 mtr long ST poles with welded steel base plate -  
cement concreting 0.5 cm 5,100 57 4,000 46 2,200 124 4,428 57 3,75,096 
Earthing arrangement as per technical specifications  
18 Excavation, erection, testing & commissioning of 40  
mm dia, 3,000 mm long GI pipe earth electrode 2,400 141 2,000 40 800 311 2,700 143 5,45,300 
19 Erection of 8 SWG GI wire for earthing and guard ing  12,000 6.466  10,000 5.355 21,000 13.572 14,500 6.523 1,91,578 
Total 85,95,377 
Note: The lowest rates for each item of work are shown in “bold” typeface.  
 

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 194 
Appendix 4.2.6 
Details of Materials procured from unauthorised manufacturers/suppliers 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.2.12.8) 
Name of works and 
description of Item 
Agreement 
Qty. 
Deviated / 
Extra 
Item qnty.  
Total 
supplied 
materials  
Unit  Total 
(in ₹) 
Name of 
Supplier/Manufacturer  
Installation of 10 KVA, 16 KVA & 25 KVA Distribution Transformer on Steel Tubular Pole 
10 KVA Transformer 
11/0.23 Kv (2/1971) 
46 0 16 No 7,60,000.00 M/s Siliguri Electric 
Works, West Bengal 
16 KVA Transformer 
11/0.23 Kv (2/1971) 
60 0 20 No 12,64,000.00 M/s Siliguri Electric 
Works, West Bengal 
25 KVA Transformer 
11/0.4 Kv (2/1971) 
55 0 16 No 14,92,800.00 M/s Siliguri Electric 
Works, West Bengal 
ACSR Conductor 
(6/1/2.59 mm) 
(1/1971) 
8.050 0 4.000 Km 1,22,000.00 
M/s Cabcon India Pvt. 
Ltd. Howrah, West 
Bengal 
U clamp (made of 50 x  
6 mm M.S. flat) duly 
galvanised as per 
relevant I.S. 
1932 0 1932 No 1,70,016.00 Nation Power Lines, 
Howrah, West Bengal 
Construction of 160.0 ckm 3-Phase 11 KV Line on PCC & Steel Tubular Pole With ACSR WEASEL 
Conductor (6/1/2.59 mm) 
ACSR conductor 
(6/1/2.59 mm) 494.400 0 435.664 Km 1,34,83,437.35 
M/s Cabcon India Pvt. 
Ltd. Howrah, West 
Bengal 
Construction of 14.26 ckm 3-Phase 4-Wire LT Line on PCC & Steel Tubular Pole With ACSR WEASEL 
Conductor (6/1/2.59 mm) 
ACSR conductor 
(6/1/2.59mm) 59.00 0 55.320    17,09,964.96 
M/s Cabcon India Pvt. 
Ltd. Howrah, West 
Bengal 
U clamp (made of 50 x  
6 mm M.S. flat) duly 
galvanised as per 
relevant I.S. 
713 692 1405 No 1,25,702.64 Nation Power Lines, 
Howrah, West Bengal 
Construction of 264.0 ckm 1-Ph 2-Wire on PCC & Steel Tubular Pole With ACSR WEASEL Conductor 
(6/1/2.59 mm) 
ACSR Conductor 
(6/1/2.59 mm) 
(1/1971) 
543.500 85 628.315 Km 1,94,41,554.15 
M/s Cabcon India Pvt. 
Ltd. Howrah, West 
Bengal 
Providing of 6500 Nos. Domestic BPL Service Connection 
1.1 KV 2.5 Sqmm 2 
Core or 1 Core PVC 
Cable (Service Wire) 
195000 0 195000 Mtr 
31,16,448.00 
Barasat Cable and 
Manufacture Co, West 
Bengal 
Retrofit LED Lamp 9 
Watts 
6500 0 6500 No 7,80,000.00 
Dewlinte industries, 
Parwanoo, Himachal 
Prodesh 
Total 4,24,65,923.10    
 

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 195 
Appendix 4.2.7 
Statement showing cost of Distribution Transformers purchased under Saubhagya scheme 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.2.15.1) 
DTR 
capacity 
West Tripura District Dhalai District Total Total 
defective 
transformers 
remaining 
Unit cost of 
DTR 
(in ₹) 
Total cost 
(in ₹) 
Average cost 
of per DTR 
(in ₹) 
Total cost of 
212defective 
DTRs 
(in ₹) 
Received  Defective  Repaired  Received  Defective  Repaired  Received  Defective  Repaired  
16 KVA 
1-Ph (10 
KVA) 
11 0 0 18 
138 
0 29 
261 
0   58616.93  1699890.97  
129184.40 27387094.60 
16 KVA 
3-Ph 72 2 0 94 1 166 1   92891.30  15419955.80 
25 KVA 
3-Ph 250 91 11 585 23 835 34   111852.30  93396662.15  
63 KVA 
3-Ph 131 30 6 144 8 275 14   204147.50  56140573.50 
100 KVA 
3-Ph 4 0 0 9 0 13 0 212 277536.00  3607968.00  
Total 468 123 17 850 138 32 1318 261 49     170265050.40   

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 196 
Appendix 4.2.8 
Statement showing cost of material lying idle in Dhalai storeyard under Saubhagya scheme 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.2.15.2) 
Sl. 
No. Item Unit Unit cost Received Issued Balance 
Total cost of 
material 
received 
(in ₹) 
Total cost of 
balance item  
(in ₹) 
Percentage 
Utilisation  
1 8 Mtr. steel pole Nos. 10296.93  19678 15101 4577 202622988.5  47129048.61  76.74 
2 16 KVA DTR (3-Phase)  Nos. 92891.30 64 40 24 5945043.2  2229391.181  62.5 
3 25 KVA Transformer (3-Phase) Nos. 111852.29  585 178 407 65433589.65  45523883.82  30.43 
4 63 KVA Transformer (3-Phase) Nos. 204147.55  94 34 60 19189869.7  12248853.12  36.17 
5 100 KVA Transformer (3-Phase) Nos. 277536.00  9 2 7 2497824  1942752  22.22 
6 LT AB Cable (3-Phase) Km. 164935.68  184.861 130 54.861 30490174.74  9048536.34  70.32 
7 LT AB Cable (1-Phase) Km. 64758.40 947.211 769 178.211 61339868.82  11540659.22  81.19 
8 Suspension clamp Nos. 545.82  33600 19038 14562 18339552  7948242.49  56.66 
9 Anchor clamp/Assembly Nos. 573.57  28000 7232 20768 16059960  11911993.14  25.83 
10 Dead end clamp Nos. 573.57  28000 16447 11553 16059960  6626505.043  58.74 
11 Pre insulated Bi-Metallic socket Nos. 416.30 35001 7830 27171 14570916.3  11311395.98  22.37 
12 AB cable end cap Nos. 18.50 350 300 50 6475  925.12  85.71 
13 AB cable tie with adjustable locking 
arrangement Nos. 9.25  35000 9450 25550 323750  236368.16  27 
14 Insulation Piercing Connector Nos 153.31  35000 14949 20051 5365850  3073930.586  42.71 
15 Service Clamp Nos 360.8  35000 5950 29050 12628000  10481147.04  17 
16 Jointing Sleeves Nos 185.02  13701 3758 9943 2534959.02  1839693.632  27.43 
17 4-Way LT Distribution Box Nos 1784.16  24350 12213 12137 43444296  21654349.92  50.16 
18 LT Distribution Box 16 KVA (1-Phase)  Nos 13366.66  14 0 14 187133.24  187133.2736  0 
19 LT Distribution Box 16 KVA (3-Phase)  Nos 23807.3  71 34 37 1690318.3  880870.1888  47.89 
20 LT Distribution Box 25 KVA (3-Phase)  Nos 28678.72  585 30 555 16777051.2  15916689.6  5.13 
  

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 197 
Appendix 4.2.8 (concld.) 
Statement showing cost of material lying idle in Dhalai storeyard under Saubhagya scheme 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.2.15.2) 
Sl. 
No. Item Unit Unit cost Received Issued Balance 
Total cost of 
material 
received 
(in ₹) 
Total cost of 
balance item  
(in ₹) 
Percentage 
Utilisation 
21 LT Distribition Box 63 KVA (3-Phase) Nos. 69384.00  80 18 62 5550720  4301808  22.5 
22 LT Distribition Box 100 KVA (3-Phase) Nos. 77710.08  9 2 7 699390.72  543970.56  22.22 
23 1-Phase XLPE Cable 16 SQ.MM. Mtr. 66.08  1750 783 967 115640  63899.36  44.74 
24 1-Phase XLPE Cable 50 SQ.MM. Mtr. 116.30 3500 880 2620 407050  304708.096  25.14 
25 11 KV Pin Insulator Nos. 915.87  42000 7416 34584 38466540  31674406.58  17.66 
26 11 KV Disc Insulator With Disc Fittings Nos. 749.35  21000 7325 13675 15736350  10247322.96  34.88 
27 9 KV LA Nos. 5180.67  585 294 291 3030691.95  1507575.552  50.26 
28 11 KV GOS (3-Phase) Set 20260.13  210 107 103 4254627.3  2086793.184  50.95 
29 11 KV DOF (3-Phase) Set 9991.30 210 106 104 2098173  1039094.784  50.48 
30 Spike ROD Nos. 852.43  5600 3911 1689 4773608  1439757.648  69.84 
31 8 SWG GI Wire Mt. 115269.95  350 98.887 251.113 40344482.5  28945783.46  28.25 
32 HT Stay Set  Set 1174.90 25900 14985 10915 30429910  12824059.7  57.86 
33 GI Stay Wire Mt. 119895.55  140.031 59.598 80.433 16789093.76  9643558.934  42.56 
Total 69,82,03,857  32,63,55,107     

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 198 
Appendix 4.2.9 
Statement showing the cost of service connection material lying idle under Saubhagya Scheme 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.2.15.3) 
 West Tripura Dhalai 
Grand Total  
(in ₹) Sl. 
No.  Description of item Unit  Total 
received  
Total 
Issue Balance  
Unit 
Price 
(in ₹) 
Total 
Cost 
(in ₹) 
Total 
received  
Total 
Issue Balance  
Unit 
Price 
(in ₹) 
Total 
Cost 
(in ₹) 
1 Supply of Polycarbonate 
Meter Board (8x12) Inch No. 40000 30588 9412 69  649428  40000 26943 13057 110  1436270  2085698  
2 Supply of polycarbonate 
board for switch (6x4) inch No. 20000 19294 706 42  29652  20000 14307 5693 60  341580  371232  
3 Supply of polycarbonate 
board for holder (4x4) inch No. 20000 18294 1706 26  44356  20000 15892 4108 40  164320  208676  
4 
Supply of Wooden Plank (1 
Mtr Long X 10 Inch Breadth 
X 1 Inch Thickness) 
No. 14272 14272 0 385  0 20000 10942 9058 251  2273558  2273558  
5 
Supply of 16 Amp DP Ma in 
Switch (Make-Ssk, Havels , 
Hpl) 
No. 17000 11310 5690 260  1479400  20000 16484 3516 260  914160  2393560  
6 
Supply of 5 Amp 1 Awy 
Piano Switch (ISI ) Marked 
Reputed Brand 
No. 40000 39588 412 11  4532  40000 27578 12422 11  136642  141174  
7 Supply of Angle Holder ( ISI 
Marked Reputed Brand) No. 20000 20000 0 16.5  0 20000 16269 3731 19  70889  70889  
8 Supply of PVC pipe 20 mm 
dia ISI marked Mtr.  59900 44525 15375 23  353625  60000 60000 0 12  0 353625  
9 
Supply of stranded wire two 
core (round flexibl e) 1.5 sq. 
mm. cupper cable finolex 
Mtr.  100000 91470 8530 10.5  89565  100030 97374 2656 25  66400  155965  
  

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 199 
Appendix 4.2.9 (concld.) 
Statement showing the cost of service connection material lying idle under Saubhagya Scheme 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.2.15.3) 
 West Tripura Dhalai 
Grand Total  
(in ₹) Sl. 
No.  Description of item Unit  Total 
received  
Total 
Issue Balance  
Unit 
Price 
(in ₹) 
Total 
Cost 
(in ₹) 
Total 
received  
Total 
Issue Balance  
Unit 
Price 
(in ₹) 
Total 
Cost 
(in ₹) 
10 Supply of reel insulator No. 400000 230380  169620  0.7  118734  400500 101000  299500  0.75  224625  343359  
11 Supply of 9 Watt Pin Type 
Led Lamp  No. 20000 18294 1706 73  124538  20000 15154 4846 72  348912  473450  
12 Supply of Galvanised Screw 
(Size one and half Inch) Pkt. 2500 1351 1149 82  94218  2500 1359 1141 68  77588  171806  
13 Supply of Galvanised Screw 
(Size one Inch)  Pkt. 2500 1074 1426 82  116932  2500 784 1716 64  109824  226756  
14 Supply Of Galvanised Screw 
(Half Inch) Pkt. 2500 1106 1394 82  114308  2500 310 2190 97  212430  326738  
15 Supply of 16 Amp cut out No. 20000 18294 1706 24  40944  20000 17237 2763 25  69075  110019  
16 1/2 Cassing – 6 ft length 
(Half inch) No. 20000 20000 0 43  0 20000 12769 7231 35  253085  253085  
17 Supply of 6 Amp Plug ( 5 
Pin) No. 20000 20000 0 16.5  0 20000 17054 2946 24.5  72177  72177  
Total Amount 32,60,232    67,71,535  1,00,31,767  
  

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 200 
Appendix 4.2.10 
Details Tier-I inspection (TPIA) in four sampled districts 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.2.17.1) 
Stage of 
inspection District 
Total 
number of 
villages 
covered 
under the 
scheme 
Inspection of villages Inspection of sub-station 
Balance  
Scope (No. 
of villages 
to be 
inspected)  
No. of 
villages 
actually 
Inspected  
short 
fall 
No. of 
defects 
observed  
No. of 
defects 
rectified  
Balance  
Scope  
(No of SS 
to be 
inspected)  
No of SS 
actually 
Inspected  
Short 
fall 
No of 
defects 
observed  
No. of 
defects 
rectified  
Stage-I  
(10 per cent  
of total 
villages) 
West Trpura  78 8 8 0 42 42 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Gomati 131 13 13 0 295 295 0 1 1 0 4 0 4 
Sepahijala 108 11 12 0 148 148 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Dhalai 133 13 11 2 107 107 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Total 450 45 44 2 592 592 0 1 1 0 4 0 4 
Stage-II (50 
per cent  of 
total villages 
including 
100 per cent   
re-inspection 
of villages 
inspected at 
stage-I) 
West Trpura  78 39 39 0 106 106 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Gomati 131 66 0 66 0 0 0 1 0 1 0 0 0 
Sepahijala 108 54 59 0 1073 1073 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Dhalai 133 67 0 67 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Total 450 226 98 133 1179 1179 0 1 0 1 0 0 0 
 
  

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 201 
Appendix 5.2.1(a) 
List of refund cases in which deficiency noticed (Interest due-paid/not paid) pre-automation 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.2.5.1)  
Sl 
No. 
Name of 
Division 
Name of the 
Commissionerate  
Name of the 
assessee 
Goods and 
Services Tax 
Identification 
Number  
(GSTIN)  
Application 
Reference Number 
(ARN)  
Date of 
filing 
Refund 
Application 
in case of 
manual 
filing 
Date of 
order in 
Form GST 
RFD-06 
Refund 
amount 
claimed 
(in ₹) 
Refund 
amount 
sanctioned 
(in ₹) 
Period 
of delay  
(in 
days)  
Reasons for delay  
Interest 
due paid 
(in ₹) 
Interest 
due not 
paid 
(in ₹) 
1 Charge-II Commissioner of 
Taxes, Tripura 
Joy Ram 
Enterprise 16BJRPS5449G1ZK AA160119000781K     17-01-2019 25-09-2019 15000  15000  191 
The taxpayer 
failed to submit all 
the required 
documents within 
stipulated time.  
0 470.96 
 
2 Charge-II Commissioner of 
Taxes, Tripura Hind Agencies  16AGNPR4007R1ZQ  AA160219000746C    16-02-2019 30-05-2019 170000  46000  43 Do 0 325.15  
3 Charge-II Commissioner of 
Taxes, Tripura 
Basana 
Enterprise 16ADOPR7177A1Z9  AA1605190006294    14-05-2019 25-09-2019 88922  88922  74 Do 0 1081.68  
4 Charge-V Commissioner of 
Taxes, Tripura Sanjib Saha 16BCRPS2344P1ZS AA160119000713N    17-01-2019 31-05-2019 397546  198773  74 
The taxpayers 
delayed in 
submission of 
proper documents 
related to the 
refund claimed and 
due to technical 
glitches also the 
proper officer 
could not able to 
process the refund 
case in time 
0 2417.95 
 
5 Bishalgarh Commissioner of 
Taxes, Tripura 
M/s Joy Ram 
Milk Producers 
Co-Operative 
Society Limited  
16AAEAJ6372P1Z2 AA160919001311I    25-09-2019 30-11-2019 17400  8700  6 
The said taxpayer 
did not submit 
necessary 
documents, related 
with refund, in 
time. 
0 8.58 
 
Total  357395     4304.32  
 
  

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 202 
Appendix 5.2.1(b) 
List of refund cases in which deficiency noticed (Applications not disposed within time Interest due-paid/not paid) post-automation 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.2.5.1)  
Sl. 
No.  
Name 
of 
Division  
Name of the 
assessee GSTIN ARN  
Date of filing 
Application 
(ARN Date) 
Date of order 
in Form GST 
RFD-06 
Refund 
amount 
claimed  
(in ₹) 
Refund 
amount 
sanctioned  
(in ₹) 
Period 
of 
delay 
(in 
days) 
Reasons 
for delay 
 
Interest 
due 
paid 
(in ₹) 
Interest 
due not 
paid 
(in ₹) 
1 Ch-II Ajoy Saha 16AVLPS3580K2ZX AA161019000204X  09-10-2019 18-12-2019 12800  12800  10 
Documents 
not 
submitted 
in time. 
Nil 21.04  
2 Ch-II 
Kim 
Industries Co 
Hari 
16AAJFM3850D2ZF AA161019000334S  12-10-2019 18-12-2019 22800  22800  7 -do-  Nil 26.24  
3 Ch-II P B Sanitary 16ABTPD7616H1ZG AA161019000214 W  09-10-2019 18-12-2019 1800000  1800000  10 -do-  Nil 2958.90  
4 Ch-II Sudhangshu 
Bhattacharjee  16ACSPB1527H1ZR AA1609190014471  29-09-2019 18-12-2019 18800  18800  21 -do-  Nil 64.90  
5 Ch-VII 
Namita 
Purkayastha 
Nandy 
16AJOPP5526F2ZY AA160320000624Z  14-03-2020 28-05-2020 20800  20800  15 -do-  Nil 51.29  
6 Ch-VIII  Arati Debnath  16AGKPD3122A1Z8 AA161019000208P  09-10-2019 01-01-2020 3800  3800  24 -do-  Nil 14.99  
7 Ch-VIII  Sanjoy Shaw 16BOFPS2897F1ZI AA161219000425L  07-12-2019 07-03-2020 880533  880533  31 -do-  Nil 4487.10  
8 Udaipur  
Bajrang 
Transport and 
Constructions  
16AATFB149C1ZD AA160220001140G  22-02-2020 11-05-2020 36000  36000  19 -do-  Nil 112.44  
Total 2795533     7736.90 

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 203 
Appendix 5.2.1 (c) 
List and status of deficiency memo (eight cases) during post-automation period 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.2.5.1)  
Under 
jurisdiction  
Name of 
dealers GSTIN ARN ARN date 
Date of issue 
of deficiencies 
memo 
Delay 
in 
days 
Ch-II Ajoy Saha 16AVLPS3580K2ZX  AA161019000204X  09-10-2019  Not issued - 
Ch-II 
KM 
Industries Co 
Hari 
16AAJFM3850D2ZF  AA161019000334S  12-10-2019  Not issued - 
Ch-II P. B Sanitary  16ABTPD7616H1ZG  AA161019000214W  09-10-2019  Not issued - 
Ch-II Sudhangshu 
Bhattacharjee  16ACSPB1527H1ZR  AA1609190014471  28-09-2019  Not issued - 
Ch-VII 
Namita 
Purkayastha 
Nandy 
16AJOPP5526F2ZY  AA160320000624Z  14-03-2020  29-04-2020 31 
Ch-VIII Arati 
Debnath 16AGKPD3122A1Z8  AA161019000208P  09-10-2019  07-12-2019 44 
Ch-VIII Sanjoy Shaw  16BOFPS2897F1ZI AA161219000425L  07-12-2019  03-02-2020 43 
Udaipur 
Bajrang 
Transport 
and 
Constructions  
16AATFB6149C1ZD  AA160220001140G  22-02-2020  18-03-2020 10 
 

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 204 
Appendix 5.2.2(a) 
List of refund cases in which deficiency noticed (Delay in acknowledgement of applications) (pre-automation) 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.2.5.2)  
Sr. 
No.  
Name of 
Division 
Name of the 
Commissionerate  Name of the assessee  GSTIN ARN  
Date of 
filing 
Refund 
Application  
Date of issue of 
acknowledgment 
in Form GST 
RFD-02 
Refund 
amount 
claimed  
(in ₹) 
Period 
of 
delay  
(days)  
Reasons for delay 
1 Charge-I Commissioner of 
Taxes, Tripura 
Tripura State 
Electricity 
Corporation Ltd. 
16AACCT2964M1ZY  AA160319001125P  20-03-2019  20-09-2019 3974141  169 
Taxpayer failed to submit all 
the required documents within 
stipulated time. 
2 Charge-I Commissioner of 
Taxes, Tripura 
VKB Illuminators 
LLP 16AAOFV1218K1ZX  AA160919001211K  23-09-2019  28-05-2020 57724 233 Do 
3 Charge-III  Commissioner of 
Taxes, Tripura 
Shekhar Chandra 
Podder 16AEYPP1732Q1ZL  AA160619000867Y  20-04-2019  11-07-2019 5000 67 
The taxpayer submitted 
required documents such as 
RFD-
1A, beneficiary details in 
late, thus the acknowledgement 
was issued late. 
4 Charge-IV  Commissioner of 
Taxes, Tripura Kamala Medical Hall  16AHPPS4799G2ZG  AA1605190009537  20-05-2019  09-01-2020 120860  219 
The taxpayer submitted 
required documents in late. 
Moreover, a wrong beneficiary 
details had been submitted and 
after communication via email 
and over telephone correct 
beneficiary code had been 
submitted and finally the refund 
order had been sanctioned. 
5 Charge-IV  Commissioner of 
Taxes, Tripura Tirupathi IT Solution  16AXWPR5355A1Z4  AA160619000813B  20-06-2019  21-09-2019 75000 78 
As the taxpayer submitted 
beneficiary details not in time, 
thus the acknowledgement was 
issued late. 
6 Charge-VI  Commissioner of 
Taxes, Tripura 
General 
Administration 
Department Printing 
& Stationery 
16AAAGG0518A1Z8  AA160319000208K  05-03-2019  03-05-2019 9688 44 
The dealer was late to appear 
with all the relevant documents 
asked for. 
7 Charge-
VIII 
Commissioner of 
Taxes, Tripura 
Joy Dayamoy 
Varieties 16DQKPS7973F1Z4 AA1605190006369  14-05-2019  20-09-2019 6000 114 
As the necessary documents 
were not submitted by the 
concerned taxpayers in time. 
8 Charge-
VIII 
Commissioner of 
Taxes, Tripura Expert Drillers 16AEVPJ9257M1ZI AA160719002004M 31- 07-2019  02-09-2019 89250 18 Do 
Total 4337663    

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 205 
Appendix 5.2.2(b) 
List of refund cases in which deficiency noticed (Delay in acknowledgement of applications) post-automation 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.2.5.2)  
Sl. 
No.  
Name of 
Division  
Name of the 
Commissionerate  
Name of the 
assessee GSTIN ARN & Date 
Date of issue of 
acknowledgment 
in Form GST 
RFD-02 
Refund 
amount 
claimed 
(in ₹) 
Period of 
delay 
(in days)  
Reasons for 
delay 
1 Ch-II Commissioner of 
Taxes  
KM Industries 
Co Hari  
16AAJFM3850D2ZF AA161019000334S 
12-10-2019 
18-12-2019 22800 
 52 
Applicant did 
not submit 
documents in 
time. 
2 Ch-II -do- P B Sanitary 16ABTPD7616H1ZG  AA161019000214W  
09-10-2019 
18-12-2019  1800000  55 -do- 
3 Ch-II -do- Sudhangshu 
Bhattacharjeee 
 
16ACSPB1527H1ZR AA1609190014471 
28-09-2019 
18-12-2019 18800  66 -do- 
4 Ch-V -do- 
M/s Siva 
Loknath 
Candle 
Factory 
16DOLPS0050C1Z7 AA160220001488Q 
 
28-02-2020 
30-03-2020 32337  16 -do- 
5 Ch-V -do- Union Bank 
of India 
16AAACU0564G1ZK 
 AA1604200002039 
21-04-2020 
11-05-2020 16095  5 -do- 
6 Ch-VI -do- 
Indian 
Council of 
Forestry 
Research and 
Education  
16AAAAI1708G1Z4 AA161019000678A  
17-10-2019 
14-11-2019 1044  13 -do- 
7 Ch-VII -do- Syndicate 
Bank 
16AACCS4699E1Z4 AA160120001872X 
 
31-01-2020 
18-02-2020 17364  3 -do-  
8 Udaipur -do-  Tapas 
Chandra Saha 
16AIEPS4358M2ZO AA161219001084O 
 
19-12-2019 
21-01-2020 25492  18 -do-  
Total 1933932      

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 206 
Appendix 5.2.3 
Data in respect of refund orders received from State Tax Authority  (Abnormal delay in communicating refund orders to Counterpart 
Tax Authority) relating to IGST/CGST 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.2.5.3)  
Sr. 
No. 
Name of the 
Commissionerate 
Name of the 
assessees GSTIN ARN & Date 
Date of issue 
of Refund 
Sanction 
Order in 
Form GST - 
RFD-06 
Total amount of refund 
sanctioned (in ₹) Date of receipt of 
refund order from 
the State nodal 
office to the 
Central nodal 
officer 
Delay in 
forwarding from 
the State nodal 
officer to the 
counterpart tax 
authority 
(in days) 
IGST CGST Cess 
1 Commissioner of 
Taxes, Tripura 
M/s Isha Rubber 
Company 16AHLPG3806C1ZR AA160819000431H & 
07-08-2019 17-09-2019 0 2510 0 10-10-2019 16 
2 Commissioner of 
Taxes, Tripura 
M/s Saradamoani 
Bastralaya 16ADEPP0856E1ZP AA160819000333F & 
06-08-2019 19-09-2019 0 16093 0 10-10-2019 14 
3 Commissioner of 
Taxes, Tripura 
M/s North Estern 
Electronic Power 
Corporation Ltd. 
16AAACN9991Z1ZV AA160519000069C & 
02-05-2019 18-06-2019 5364 0 0 26-06-2019 1 
4 Commissioner of 
Taxes, Tripura 
M/s Joy Ram 
Enterprise 16BJRPS5449G1ZK AA160119000781K & 
17-01-2019 25-09-2019 15000 0 0 08-11-2019 37 
5 Commissioner of 
Taxes, Tripura M/s Super Drillers 16AACPJ0754E1Z6 AA160719002006I & 
31-07-2019 25-09-2019 0 54297 0 08-11-2019 37 
6 Commissioner of 
Taxes, Tripura 
M/s Bashana 
Enterprise 16ADOPR7177A1Z9 AA1605190006294 & 
14-05-2019 25-09-2019 88922 0 0 08-11-2019 37 
  

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 207 
Appendix 5.2.3 (Concld.) 
Data in respect of refund orders received from State Tax Authority  (Abnormal delay in communicating refund orders to the 
Counterpart Tax Authority) relating to IGST/CGST 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.2.5.3) 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of the 
Commissionerate 
Name of the 
assessees GSTIN ARN & Date 
Date of issue 
of Refund 
Sanction 
Order in 
Form GST - 
RFD-06 
Total amount of refund 
sanctioned (in ₹) 
Date of receipt of 
refund order from 
the State nodal 
office to the 
Central nodal 
officer 
Delay in 
forwarding from 
the State nodal 
officer to the 
counterpart tax 
authority 
(days) IGST CGST Cess 
7 Commissioner of 
Taxes, Tripura M/s Hind Agencies 16AGNPR4007R1ZQ AA160219000746C & 
16-02-2019 30-05-2019 0 46000 0 10-06-2019 4 
8 Commissioner of 
Taxes, Tripura 
M/s Shekhar Ch. 
Podder 16AEYPP1732Q1ZL AA160619000867Y& 
21-6-2019 11-07-2019 5000 0 0 20-07-2019 2 
9 Commissioner of 
Taxes, Tripura M/s Sanjib Saha 16BCRPS2344P1ZS AA160119000713N & 
17-01-2019 31-05-2019 0 198773 0 10-06-2019 3 
10 Commissioner of 
Taxes, Tripura M/s ML Traders 16AJMPS2422D1ZD AA160819000778T & 
14-08-2019 31-10-2019 0 18953 0 04-12-2019 27 
11 Commissioner of 
Taxes, Tripura 
M/s Printing & 
Stationery 16AAAGG0518A1Z8 AA160319000208K & 
05-03-2019 20-05-2019 0 4844 0 18-09-2019 114 
12 Commissioner of 
Taxes, Tripura 
M/s Joy Doyamoy 
Varieties 16DQKPS7973F1Z4 AA1605190006369 & 
14-5-2019 20-09-2019 0 3000 0 02-11-2019 36 
13 Commissioner of 
Taxes, Tripura M/s Expert Drillers 16AEVPJ9257M1ZI AA160719002004M & 
31-07-2019 20-09-2019 0 44625 0 02-11-2019 36 
Total  114286 389095 0  
  

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 208 
Appendix 5.2.4(a) 
Non-conduct of post audit of refund claims (for all type of refunds) pre-automation 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.2.5.4)  
Name of Division Name of the 
Commissionerate 
Total No. of pre-
automation 
refund 
applications 
processed 
No. of refund 
applications 
examined by 
Audit 
No. of refund cases 
which were sent for 
post audit after lapse 
of one week 
Period of delay 
(in days) Reason for delay 
Charge-I Commissioner of 
Taxes, Tripura 16 4 Nil NA NA 
Charge-II Commissioner of 
Taxes, Tripura 23 5 Nil NA NA 
Charge-III Commissioner of 
Taxes, Tripura 18 2 Nil NA NA 
Charge-IV Commissioner of 
Taxes, Tripura 22 4 Nil NA NA 
Charge-V Commissioner of 
Taxes, Tripura 10 4 Nil NA NA 
Charge-VI Commissioner of 
Taxes, Tripura 11 4 Nil NA NA 
Charge-VII Commissioner of 
Taxes, Tripura 7 0 Nil NA NA 
Charge-VIII Commissioner of 
Taxes, Tripura 13 2 Nil NA NA 
Udaipur Commissioner of 
Taxes, Tripura 18 1 Nil NA NA 
Bishalgarh Commissioner of 
Taxes, Tripura 11 5 Nil NA NA 
Total 149 31    NA : Not Applicable   

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 209 
Appendix 5.2.4(b) 
Non-conduct of post audit of refund claims (for all type of refunds) post-automation 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.2.5.4)  
Name of 
Division 
Name of the 
Commissionerate 
Total No. of 
post-automation 
refund applications 
processed 
No. of refund 
applications 
examined by 
Audit 
No. of refund cases 
which were sent for post 
audit after lapse of one 
week 
Period of delay 
(days) Reason for delay 
Charge-I Commissioner of Taxes, 
Tripura 6 2 Nil NA NA 
Charge-II Commissioner of Taxes, 
Tripura 11 10 Nil NA NA 
Charge-III Commissioner of Taxes, 
Tripura 2 2 Nil NA NA 
Charge-IV Commissioner of Taxes, 
Tripura 6 4 Nil NA NA 
Charge-V Commissioner of Taxes, 
Tripura 5 5 Nil NA NA 
Charge-VI Commissioner of Taxes, 
Tripura 13 7 Nil NA NA 
Charge-VII Commissioner of Taxes, 
Tripura 6 3 Nil NA NA 
Charge-VIII Commissioner of Taxes, 
Tripura 12 2 Nil NA NA 
Udaipur Commissioner of Taxes, 
Tripura 8 2 Nil NA NA 
Bishalgarh Commissioner of Taxes, 
Tripura 7 4 Nil NA NA 
Total 76 41    NA : Not Applicable 
[Note : Appendix 5.2.4(a) : 31 cases plus  Appendix 5.2.4(b) : 41 cases plus  Appendix 5.2.5 : 12 cases = 84 refund cases]  
 

Appendices  
Audit Report for the year 2019-20, Government of Tripura  
 210 
Appendix 5.2.5 
List of refund cases (pre-automation) not produced to audit 
(Reference: Paragraphs 5.2.5.4 & 5.2.5.6)  
Sl. 
No.  NAME GSTIN ARN 
Refund 
claimed  
(in ₹) 
Jurisdiction  
1 Biplab Debnath 16AIRPD7479B1Z2 AA161018000655K  5,866  Bishalgarh 
2 Maa Mani 
Handicrafts Products 16AHNPR0544G1Z9 
 AA160919001061J 4,814  Bishalgarh 
3 Ms Km Industries Co  16AAJFM3850D2ZF  AA160919000894V  22,800  Charge -II 
4 
Tripura Tea 
Development 
Corporation Ltd. 
16AACCT0914D1ZV 
 AA161218000544L 16,680  Charge - V 
5 Anjana Swift Service  16BBNPD2563E1ZV  AA1602190000402 68,864  Charge - V 
6 Jay Cee Punching 
Solutions Pvt. Ltd. 16AABCJ9229Q1ZX 
 AA160219000222W  2,880  Charge - V 
7 Madan Gopal 
Corporation 16AGGPS7209H1Z7 
 AA1608180016257 2,00,000  Charge - V 
8 Piplu Kumar Saha 16AZUPS8755R1ZS AA1602190006985 2,150  Charge - V 
9 Majumder Enterprise  16CEXPM3019L1ZX  AA160519001232O  1,261  Charge - VII 
10 Debraj Enterprises 16BWMPR1431F1ZK  AA1602190008965 7,200  Udaipur 
11 Diganta Saha 16AXVPS5984K2Z7  AA1606190008660 12,910  Udaipur 
12 Benulal Dey 16AGJPD2736R2ZZ AA160119000292R 9,88 0  Central 
Total 3,55,305   
 