Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
on Performance Audit of 
Implementation of Rights of Persons with 
Disabilities Act, 2016 
SUPREME AUDIT INSTITUTION OF INDIA 
cllct>~dl~ tir~Pttdl 
Dedicated to Truth in Public Interest 
Government of Rajasthan 
Report No.1 of the year 2023 

Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
on 
Performance Audit of 
Implementation of Rights of Persons with 
Disabilities Act, 2016 
Government of Rajasthan 
Report No. 1 of the year 2023 
https://cag.gov.in 

Table of Contents 
Paragraph Subject Page 
Preface 
Executive Summary 
Chapter I - Introduction 
1.1 
2.5 
Enabling proVIsions pertaining to Persons with 
Disabilities 
Institutional mechanisms for implementation of the 
Act 
Chapter III- Social Security and Rehabilitation 
3.1 Social Security 
3.2 Rehabilitation of Specially Abled Persons 
3.3 Schemes for welfare of SAPs 
3.4 Social Audit of Schemes & Pro es 
iii 
V-Vll 
1 
2 
3 
3 
3 
7 
11 
13 
17 
22 
Chapter IV- Issue of Disability Certificates and Welfare of SAPs 
4.1 Identification of SAPs and issue of Disability 
Details of units selected for test check 
Appendix-IT Details of 12 schemes implemented by the 
Directorate of Specially Abled Person during 2016 
-21 
Appendix-ill 
A 
Details of sanctioned and working strength of 
manpower deployed in boys and women wing of 
Government MR. Home during 2016-21 
23 
28 
40 
Performance Audit of 'Implementation of 
Rights ofPersons with Disabilities Act, 2016' 

Table of Contents 
Paragraph I Subject I Page 
Appendix-ill Details of total sanctioned and working strength of 40 
B manpower including Medical Staff in MR. Homes 
operated by NGOs as of March 2021 
Appendix-N Details of time taken in issue of new registration 41 
certificate to NGOs 
Appendix-V Details of time taken in issue of renewal certificate 42 
toNGOs 
Appendix-VI Details of grant paid to Badhir Kalyan Samiti, 43 
Jodhpur during 2016-17 to 2019-20 
Perfonnance Audit of'Implementation of ii 
Rights ofPersons with Disabilities Act, 2016' 

Preface 
This Report has been prepared for submission to the Governor of Rajasthan under 
Article 151 of the Constitution of India. 
This Report contains the results of Performance Audit of 'Implementation of 
Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016' for the period 2016-21. This 
performance audit assesses the status of implementation of provisions for specially 
abled persons in Rajasthan and examines the steps taken by the State Government 
departments for their welfare, upliftment and empowerment in accordance with the 
Act. 
The Performance Audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing 
Standards issued by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
iii Performance Audit of 'Implementation of 
Rights ofPersons with Disabilities Act, 2016' 

Performance Audit of'Implementation of iv 
Rights ofPersons with Disabilities Act, 2016' 

Executive Summary 
Article 41 of the Constitution of India mandates the State to make 
effective provisions for securing the right to work, to education and to 
public assistance for people affected by disability. The Rights of 
Persons with Disabilities (RPwD) Act, 2016 was enacted to give 
effect to these benefits. 
As per Census 2011, Rajasthan had 15.64 lakh persons with 
disabilities, which was 2.28 per cent of the total population (6.85 
crore) of the State. Rajasthan had the sixth largest population of 
PwDs which constituted 5.83 per cent of total PwDs in the country. 
This Performance Audit is an assessment of the implementation of 
Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 in the state of 
Rajasthan. It examined whether Government of Rajasthan took 
adequate measures to ensure the rights and entitlements of Specially 
Abled Persons (SAPs), provide adequate social security, education 
and employment. The Performance Audit covered the period 
2016-21. 
Audit observed significant delay by the Government of Rajasthan in 
providing rights and entitlements to the physically challenged. 
Provisions for reservation in promotion, relaxation in upper age limit 
and concession in marks were notified in October 2021, four years 
after the enactment of the RPwD Act, 2016. State Government may 
ensure that reservation in jobs and promotions are made for the SAPs 
as per the RPwD Act. 
Equal Opportunity Policy is yet to be approved by the Government. 
State Government may take necessary steps for early adoption of 
Equal Opportunity Policy for the protection of rights of the SAPs. 
The Rajasthan State Policy on Disabilities, 2012 is yet to be revised 
in accordance with RPwD Act, 2016. 
There was significant delay in issue of Disability Certificates to the 
disabled as 31 per cent of the 9.85 lakh applications were pending for 
more than one year. State Government may undertake special 
campaigns to enhance the coverage of SAPs for issue of disability 
certificates and prescribe norms regarding time limits for various 
stages of processing of applications. 
When it came to social security, only 5.77 lakh specially abled 
persons (3 7 per cent) were getting disability pension as of March 
2021. 
Enrolment of children with special needs in schools reduced by 
almost 30 per cent from 2016-17 to 2020-21. State Government may 
v Performance Audit of 'Implementation of 
Rights ofPersons with Disabilities Act, 2016' 

Executive Summary 
make all efforts to enhance the enrolment and retention of Children 
with Special Needs in the educational institutions in the State. 
Mentally Retarded homes for persons having intellectual disabilities 
were not adequate in the state and the existing MR homes suffered 
from shortage of staff and the amenities. State Government may 
establish adequate number of Government/NGO run MR. Homes and 
ensure availability of adequate infrastructure and human resources 
as per prescribed norms. 
Financial assistance was provided to SAPs without obtaining 
required documents like Income Certificate, Marriage Card, 
Domicile, Disability Certificate and receipt of Aids & Devices under 
Vishesh Yogyajan Sukhad Dampatya Jeevan Yojana and Sanyukt 
Sahayata Anudan Yojana. Further, subsidy was released without 
ascertaining the actual disbursement of full loan and there was 
irregular disbursal of subsidy to ineligible people under 
Mukhyamantri Vishesh Yogyajan Swarojgar Yojana. The State 
Government may ensure that there is no diversion of benefits meant 
for PwDs to ineligible persons. Responsibility may be fixed for 
diversion of benefits to ineligible persons. 
DSAP did not conduct social audit of all programmes and schemes 
for the PwDs from time to time. State Government may undertake 
social audits periodically which would help them in monitoring the 
progress as well as improving the implementation of schemes and 
programmes run for the welfare of the SAPs. 
DSAP took excess time in granting new registration and renewal of 
certificates of NGOs. State Government may make all efforts to 
facilitate NGOs through timely grant of registrations and their 
renewal and prepare proper database for effective monitoring of 
NGOs. 
State Commissioner did not have any mechanism to monitor the 
action taken on complaints received from aggrieved specially abled 
persons. State Advisory Board required to oversee the effective 
implementation of the Act had not yet been constituted. State 
Government may set up the institutional mechanisms envisioned in 
the Act for effective implementation of the Act for the welfare of the 
SAPs. 
There was no dedicated staff of DSAP at the district or lower levels 
though a separate Directorate for SAPs was established in October 
2011 for focused intervention for welfare of SAPs. State Government 
may establish separate SAP offices with adequate manpower at 
district/block level for effective implementation of the provisions of 
the Act and schemes/programmes. 
District officers did not conduct quarterly/monthly inspections of 
NGOs and instead conducted inspections on a half yearly basis at the 
Perfonnance Audit of'Implementation of vi 
Rights ofPersons with Disabilities Act, 2016' 

Executive Summary 
time of making recommendation to DSAP for releasing grants. State 
Government may emure effective Internal Controls by emuring 
robust institutional mechanisms as envisaged in the Act and 
availability of timely and accurate information. 
In the eight test checked districts, many Government buildings were 
not fully accessible for SAPs as the ramps, railings and accessible 
toilets had not been constructed. 
vii Performance Audit of 'Implementation of 
Rights ofPersons with Disabilities Act, 2016' 

Performance Audit of'Implementation of viii 
Rights ofPersons with Disabilities Act, 2016' 

Chapter-I 
Introduction 
1.1 Enabling provisions pertaining to Persons with Disabilities 
The Constitution of India ensures equality, freedom, justice and dignity of all 
individuals and implicitly mandates an inclusive society for all, including 
Persons with Disabilities (PwDs). Article 41 of the Constitution of India 
mandates the State to make effective provisions for securing the right to work, 
to education and to public assistance for people affected by disability within 
the limit of its economic capacity and development. In line with this, the 
Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full 
Participation) (PwD) Act, 1995, was enacted by Government of India (Gol). 
The Rights of Persons with Disabilities (RPwD) Act, 2016 which came into 
force from April2017 replaced the existing PwD Act, 1995 and was enacted to 
give effect to the principles adopted by the United Nations Convention1 on the 
Rights of Persons with Disabilities 2006. The salient features of the RPwD Act, 
2016 are as under: 
• The Act prescribes 21 types2 of disabilities whereas the existing Act of 
1995 had only 7 categories under its umbrella. 
• This Act provides for various rights and entitlements for PwDs like 
equality and non-discrimination, community life, protection against 
cruelty and inhuman treatment, access to justice, legal capacity, etc. 
• The Governments are required to make existing public buildings and 
infrastructure accessible within five years and provide barrier free 
environment for PwDs. 
• The benefits of schemes implemented by Goi/State Governments are 
related to 'persons with benchmark disability' i.e., not less than 40 per 
cent disability as certified by a certifying authority. 
As per Census 2011, Rajasthan had 15.64lakh persons with disabilities, which 
was 2.28 per cent of the total population (6.85 crore) of the State. Rajasthan 
had the sixth largest population of PwDs which constituted 5.83 per cent of 
total Pw Ds in the country. The category wise proportion of Pw Ds is depicted in 
Chart 1: 
1 India ratified the Convention in October 2007. 
2 (i) Blindness (ii) Low-Vision (iii) Leprosy Cured Persons (iv) Hearing Impairment (deaf 
and hard of hearing) (v) Locomotor Disability (vi) Dwarfism (vii) Intellectual Disability 
(viii) Mental illness (ix) Autism Spectrum Disorder (x) Cerebral Palsy (xi) Muscular 
Dystrophy (xii) Chronic Neurological Conditions (xiii) Specific Learning Disabilities 
(xiv) Multiple Sclerosis (xv) Speech and Language Disability (xvi) Thalassemia (xvii) 
Haemophilia (xviii) Sickle Cell Disease (xix) Multiple Disabilities including Deaf 
Blindness (xx) Acid Attack Victims and (xxi) Parkinson's Disease. 
1 Performance Audit of 'Implementation of 
Rights ofPersons with Disabilities Act, 2016' 

Chapter - I Introduction 
Chart 1: Category-wise percentage of PwDs in Rajasthan as per Census 
2011 
Mental D1ness (3) 
Mental Retardation 
(5) 
Movement (27) 
(14) 
• Visual 
• Speech 
• Hearing 
• Movement 
• Mental Retardation 
• Mental Illness 
Cl Multiple Disability 
c Anyother 
Source: 'Persons with Disabilities (Divyangjan) in India- A Statistical Profile: 2021 ' 
published by Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation, Go!. 
1.2 Organizational Set-up 
With the objective of giving benefits of various schemes, provisions, Act and 
Rules governing the welfare of the disabled persons in a dedicated manner, a 
separate Directorate for Disabled Persons was established (October 2011) in 
the State. Subsequently, the Directorate was renamed as Directorate of 
Specially Abled Person (DSAP), from March 2012 and the persons with 
disabilities were termed as "Specially Abled Persons" (SAP) in the State. 
The Principal Secretary, Social Justice and Empowerment Department (SJED) 
Government of Rajasthan (GoR), is the administrative head of the Department 
and is assisted by Director-cum-Special Secretary, SAP who heads DSAP and 
is responsible for overall planning, implementation of various schemes and 
monitoring the utilization of the funds disbursed by Goi!GoR against various 
schemes3 implemented for the benefit of SAPs, by coordinating with different 
departments of the State Government. Deputy/ Assistant Directors i.e., District 
Level Officers (DLO) of SJED at District Level and Block Social Security 
Officers (BSSOs) of SJED at Block level assist in administration and 
implementation of schemes. As of March 2021, there were 35 Mentally 
Retarded (MR) homes and 101 Residential and Non-Residential schools being 
run by Non Governmental Organisations (NGOs) for SAPs in Rajasthan which 
were receiving grants from DSAP. In addition, one Government Mentally 
Retarded Women and Child Welfare Rehabilitation Home, Jamdoli (Jaipur) is 
functioning under the control of DSAP. 
3 Examples include (i) Mukhyamantri Vishesh Yogyajan Swarojgar Yojana; (ii) Vishesh 
Yogyajan Sukhad Dampatya Jeevan Yojana; (iii) Sanyukt Sahayata Anudan Yojana; (iv) 
Vishesh Yogyajan Scholarship Yojana; (v) Vishesh Yogyajan Anupriti Yojana; (vi) 
Vishesh Yogyajan Identification Yojana; (vii) Astha Yojana; (viii) Vishesh Yogyajan 
Sports Yojana; (ix) Vishesh Yogyajan State Level Award Yojana; (x) Polio Correction 
Camp; (xi) One time financial assistance to pension holder SAPs for self-Business 
Yojana; and (xii) Vishesh Yogyajan Self-Employment and Training Yojana. 
Perfonnance Audit of'Implementation of 2 
Rights ofPersons with Disabilities Act, 2016' 

Chapter - I Introduction 
In addition, an independent office of the State Commissioner, SAP was 
established under Section 79 of the RPwD Act, 2016. The State Commissioner, 
SAP is responsible to monitor the implementation of schemes, programmes 
and provisions of the RPwD Act besides inquiring into the complaints relating 
to deprivation of rights of SAP etc. 
1.3 Audit Objectives 
The Performance Audit was carried out to examine whether: 
(i) government took adequate measures to effectively ensure the rights 
and entitlements of SAPs, including dignity, equality, non­
discrimination, individual autonomy, independence and accessibility; 
(ii) societal participation, inclusion and acceptance was ensured through 
adequate social security and effective rehabilitation and recreational 
measures; 
(iii) health services, education, skill development and employment 
opportunities were adequately and effectively provided in a non­
discriminatory manner ensuring equality of opportunity; and 
(iv) effective system of governance including effective financial 
management, monitoring and internal control was in place. 
1.4 Audit Criteria 
The Performance Audit was benchmarked against the criteria derived from the 
following sources: 
• The Rights of Persons with Disabilities (RPwD) Act, 2016; 
• Rajasthan State Policy on Disabilities, 2012; 
• Annual Reports of the State Commissioner for SAPs; 
• The Rajasthan Rights ofPersons with Disabilities {RRPwD) Rules, 2018; 
and 
• Guidelines of the respective schemes, Government orders and circulars 
issued by the Goi/GoR. 
1.5 Audit Scope and Methodology 
The Performance Audit covering the period 2016-21, commenced in July 2021 
with an Entry Conference (July 2021) with Secretary, SJED wherein audit 
objectives, audit criteria, selection of units, audit methodology and scope of 
Performance Audit were discussed. Records of office of the Director-cum­
Special Secretary, SAP as well as the Office of the State Commissioner, SAP 
were examined. 
3 Performance Audit of 'Implementation of 
Rights ofPersons with Disabilities Act, 2016' 

Chapter - I Introduction 
Audit selected eight Deputy Director (DD)/Assistant Director (AD) offices of 
SJED at district level and 16 Block Social Security Offices (BSSOs) of SJED 
at block level. In addition to the Government Mentally Retarded Women and 
Child Welfare Rehabilitation Home, Jamdoli (Jaipur), out of the 13 MR Homes 
run by NGOs in the eight selected districts, eight MR homes were selected. 
Further, out of 33 Residential/Non-Residential Schools run by NGOs in the 
eight test checked districts, 11 were selected. All these selections were done 
through Simple Random Sampling using IDEA software. Apart from this, five 
Special Schools under Deendayal Disability Rehabilitation Scheme (DDRS), 
one District Disability Rehabilitation Centre (DDRC) and three centres under 
Assistance to Disabled Persons for Purchasing/Fitting of Aids/ Appliances 
(ADIP) Scheme run by NGOs through central grants, were also selected for 
audit, in selected eight districts. Details of selected units are given in 
Appendix-L 
Audit fmdings were discussed with the Secretary, SJED and officers of the 
implementing agencies in an Exit Conference held on 11 April 2022. Replies 
of GoR and views of GoR expressed in the Exit Conference have been 
appropriately incorporated in the Report. 
1.6 Acknowledgement 
Audit acknowledges the cooperation of GoR including Secretary, SJED and 
State Commissioner, SAP during the conduct of the Performance Audit. Audit 
also appreciates the assistance provided by the field functionaries of concerned 
departments for smooth conduct of the audit. However, certain important 
information4 has not been provided by SJED due to which Audit could not 
conduct a more comprehensive and in-depth analysis of various steps taken by 
the department for successful implementation of the Act. 
4 Such as State level consolidated data of all schemes, State level information of NGOs 
(registered/renewed/cancelled/closed/inspections conducted etc.); State/district level 
information about SAPs (category wise); State level data of distribution of Astha cards; 
State level information about Palanhaar Scheme; State level information about legal 
guardianship given under National Trust Act; Financial information about DDRC, DDRS 
and ADIP centres; Information about grievance redressal system (complaints 
received/resolved etc.). 
Perfonnance Audit of'Implementation of 4 
Rights ofPersons with Disabilities Act, 2016' 

Chapter- II 
Rights and Entitlements 
Rajasthan State Policy on Disabilities, 2012 had not been revised even after 
promulgation of the RPwD Act, 2016. The Rajasthan Rights of Persons with 
Disabilities Rules,2018 were implemented with delay of more than one year 
and eight months. Reservation to SAPs was not adequately provided by the 
departments and SAP employees were deprived of reservation in promotion 
for more than four years since the enactment of RPwD Act. 
State Commissioner office lacked the mechanism for follow up on compliance 
of its orders and directions. The issues relating to non-constitution of State 
Advisory Board, State Committee for Research on Disability, State Fund and 
Assessment Boards in the State, even after lapse of four years of 
implementation of the Act indicate severe deficiencies in establishing the 
institutional mechanisms envisioned in the Act. 
RPwD Act, 2016 provides various rights and entitlements which include 
equality and non-discrimination, community life, protection against cruelty 
and inhuman treatment, reproductive rights, accessibility in voting, access to 
justice, legal capacity, etc. 
Efforts made by the various departments for effective implementation of the 
RPwD Act, 2016 and the establishment of institutional mechanisms are 
discussed in the following paragraphs. 
2.1 Formulation of new State Policy 
The State Advisory Board was mandated under Section 71 (2) ofRPwD Act to 
develop State policy and advise the State Government on policies, 
programmes, legislation and projects with respect to disability and review and 
coordinate the activities of all Departments and other Governmental/Non­
Governmental Organizations in the State dealing with matters relating to 
PwDs, recommend steps to ensure accessibility, non-discrimination for PwDs 
and monitor and evaluate the impact of laws, policies and programmes 
designed to achieve full participation of PwDs. 
Audit observed that the Rajasthan State Policy on Disabilities, 2012 had not 
been revised as of October 2022, even after promulgation of the RPwD Act, 
2016. 
Regarding the lack of revision of the Policy, GoR stated (November 2022) that 
action would be taken after formulation of new policy by Gol in compliance of 
the RPwD Act and important aspects of that policy would be included in new 
State Policy. The reply of the State Government is not acceptable as the Policy 
is required to be revised so that a contemporary policy in line with the latest 
national and global impetus on inclusion, including the focus on welfare and 
empowerment of SAPs, is in place for guiding the actions of the State 
Government in this regard. 
5 Performance Audit of 'Implementation of 
Rights ofPersons with Disabilities Act, 2016' 

Chapter- II Rights and Entitlements 
2.2 Implementation of Rajasthan Rights of Persons with Disabilities 
Rules, 2018 
As per Section 101 of the RPwD Act 2016, the State Government was 
required to frame rules for carrying out the provisions of the Act, not later than 
six months from the date of commencement (April 2017) of this Act. In 
Rajasthan, the Rajasthan Rights of Persons with Disabilities (RRPwD) Rules, 
2018 were implemented in January 2019 after lapse of one year and eight 
months from the commencement of the Act. 
Audit observed that due to delay in implementation of the Rajasthan Rights of 
Persons with Disabilities Rules, 2018 in the State, some of the important 
mechanisms, as mandated in the Act highlighted in Paragraph 2.5 were either 
not established or established with delays due to which the beneficiaries were 
deprived of their rights and entitlements. GoR accepted the facts (November 
2022). 
2.3 Providing reservation to SAPs 
Section 34 of the RPwD Act provided for four per cenf reservation in 
government and public sector jobs to SAPs. The one per cent increase (as 
compared to the provision in PwD Act, 1995) in the present Act was for 
persons with intellectual disabilities6, mental illness, multiple disabilities, 
autism and specific learning disabilities. Further, Sections 34(1) and (3) of the 
RPwD Act provide for reservation in promotion and relaxation of upper age 
limit for employment. 
Audit observed (July-August 2021) that after the RRPwD Rules, 2018 were 
notified (January 2019), Department of Personnel took further six months to 
issue the relevant orders (August 2019) regarding reservation to SAPs. 
Information regarding compliance of these orders at State level was sought for 
from Department of Personnel, GoR (July 2021). The required information has 
not been made available to audit (December 2022). 
Audit observed that the provisions relating to reservation in promotion, 
relaxation in upper age limit and concession in marks were notified (October 
2021) in the State four years after the enactment of the RPwD Act. GoR 
accepted the facts (November 2022). 
Recommendation 1: The State Government may ensure that reservation in 
jobs and promotions are made for the SAPs as per the RPwD Act. 
5 Four per cent: one per cent each for locomotor disability, visual disability and hearing 
disability and one per cent for intellectual disabilities, mental illness, autism, specific 
learning disabilities and multiple disabilities. 
6 Intellectual disability, a condition characterised by significant limitation both in intellectual 
functioning (reasoning, learning, problem solving) and in adaptive behaviour which covers 
a range of every day, social and practical skills including 'specific learning disabilities' 
and 'autism spectrum disorder'. 
Perfonnance Audit of'Implementation of 6 
Rights ofPersons with Disabilities Act, 2016' 

Chapter -II Rights and Entitlements 
2.4 Policy for Equal Opportunity 
Section 20 of the RPwD Act provided that no Government establishment 
should discriminate against any PwD in any matter relating to employment 
and the Government may frame policies for posting and transfer of employees 
with disabilities. Further, as per Section 21 of the RPwD Act, every 
establishment was to notify Equal Opportunity Policy detailing measures 7 
proposed to be taken by it in pursuance of relevant provisions of Chapter-IV 
(Skill Development and Employment) of the RPwD Act, 2016 in the manner 
as may be prescribed by the Central Government and every establishment was 
to register a copy of the said policy with the State Commissioner. 
Audit observed (July-August 2021) that Equal Opportunity Policy had not 
been implemented in the State as the same is yet to be approved by the GoR. 
GoR accepted the facts (November 2022). GoR however, did not furnish 
reasons for non-approval of the Equal Opportunity Policy. 
Recommendlltion 2: GoR may take necessary steps for early adoption of 
Equal Opportunity Policy for the protection of rights of the SAPs. 
2.5 Institutional mechanisms for implementation of the Act 
2.5.1 Constitution of Assessment Board 
Section 38 of the RPwD Act provided that any person with benchmark 
disability, who considered himself to be in need of High Support8, or any 
person or organisation on his or her behalf, may apply to an authority to be 
notified by the appropriate government, for requesting to provide High 
Support. An application for need of High Support was to be certified by an 
Assessment Board at district level. 
Audit observed (July 2021-January 2022) that the State Government had issued 
the order to constitute the Assessment Boards at district level in September 
2021, more than four years after the enactment of the RPwD Act, 2016. GoR 
accepted the facts (November 2022). 
2.5.2 Constitution of State CommiUeefor Research on Disability 
Rule 3 ofRRPwD Rules, 2018 provided that the State Committee for Research 
on Disability at State level should be constituted under the chairmanship of an 
7 Regarding accessibility, post identified suitable for SAPs, post recruitment induction and 
promotion training, transfer and posting policies etc. 
8 High support means an intensive support, physical, psychological and otherwise, which 
may be required by a person with benchmark disability for daily activities (such as 
brushing, combing, dressing, toilet hygiene, etc.), to take independent and informed 
decision to access facilities and participating in all areas of life including education, 
employment, family and community life and treatment and therapy. 
7 Performance Audit of 'Implementation of 
Rights ofPersons with Disabilities Act, 2016' 

Chapter- II Rights and Entitlements 
eminent person having vast experience in the field of Science and Medical 
Research and other members9. 
Audit scrutiny (July-August 2021) of records ofDirectorate, SAP revealed that 
the Committee for Research on Disability at State level was not constituted in 
the State (March 2021) even after lapse of four years of the enactment of the 
RPwD Act, 2016. 
GoR accepted the facts and stated (November 2022) that the process regarding 
constitution of the State Committee for Research on Disability was under 
consideration at appropriate level. 
2.5.3 Formation of State Fund 
Section 88(1) of the RPwD Act provided that a fund should be constituted by 
the State Government to be called as the State Fund for PwD. Rule 35 of 
RRPwD Rules, 2018 prescribed utilization of the State Fund for purposes such 
as welfare, training, education, rehabilitation, direction, counselling and social 
upliftment of the PwDs etc. in the State. 
Audit observed that even after the lapse of four years of enactment of the Act, 
the State Fund for the SAPs was not constituted in the State as of September 
2022. GoR stated (November 2022) that budget allotted for SAPs was to be 
treated as State Fund. The reply is not acceptable as creation of a special 
purpose fund is totally different from budgetary allotment. 
2.5.4 State Commissioner for SAPs 
The office of the State Commissioner, SAPs was setup in the State under 
Section 60 of the PwD Act, 1995 and was envisaged to play a crucial role in 
implementing and enforcing the provisions of the PwD Act, 1995 as well as 
under Section 79 ofRPwD Act, 2016. 
Section 80 (b) of the RPwD Act provided that the State Commissioner should 
inquire, suo motu or otherwise, in matters relating to deprivation of rights of 
PwDs and safeguards available to them and take up the matter with appropriate 
authorities for corrective action. The RPwD Act provided that the State 
Commissioner shall, for the purpose of discharging the functions under this 
Act, have the powers of a civil court10 while trying a suit related to deprivation 
of rights of SAPs. 
During 2016-21, 61 cases11 (including one case on suo motu basis) related to 
deprivation of rights of SAPs were registered in the Court of State 
Commissioner, ofwhich 57 cases were decided and orders were issued (during 
2016-21) for compliance to the concerned departments. 
9 Director, Department of Medical and Health, Director, SAP and five members from SAPs 
or registered state level organisation representing each of five groups of specified 
disabilities. 
10 as are vested in a court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. 
11 61 cases: 2016-17: 11; 2017-18: 20; 2018-19: 08; 2019-20:18 and2020-21:4. 
Perfonnance Audit of'Implementation of 8 
Rights ofPersons with Disabilities Act, 2016' 

Chapter -II Rights and Entitlements 
Audit observed (July-August 2021) that the office of the State Commissioner 
did not have any mechanism to monitor the action taken on complaints from 
the aggrieved SAPs. 
Deputy Commissioner SAP accepted the facts and stated (August 2021) that if 
the aggrieved petitioner is not satisfied with the solution on his complaint, he 
submits a re-appeal and action is taken thereafter and the records of 
complaints were not prepared due to non-availability of technical staff. 
2.5.5 Constitution of State Advisory Board 
As per proVlstons contained in Section 66 of RPwD Act, the State 
Government was required to constitute a State Advisory Board (SAB) on 
disability under the chairmanship of Minister in charge of the Department 12• 
Audit observed (July-August 2021) that this important mechanism required for 
the effective implementation of the Act had not been constituted by the State 
Government even after lapse of four years of implementation of the Act. GoR 
accepted the fact (November 2022). 
The issues brought out in paragraphs 2.5.1 to 2.5.5 indicate severe deficiencies in 
setting up the institutional mechanisms envisioned in the Act for an effective 
implementation of the Act. This has contributed to deficient implementation of 
the RPwD Act, 2016 in the State which has deprived 2.28 per cent population of 
the State of their legal rights and benefits. 
Reco.,endlltion 3: The State Government may set up the institutional 
mechanisms envisioned in the Act for effictive implementation of the Act for 
the welfare of the SAPs. 
12 and also consisting of Secretaries of various Departments, three Members of the State 
Legislature and 23 Members to be nominated by the State Government 
9 Performance Audit of 'Implementation of 
Rights ofPersons with Disabilities Act, 2016' 

Performance Audit of'Implementation of 10 
Rights ofPersons with Disabilities Act, 2016' 

Chapter- III 
Social Security 
and Rehabilitation 

Chapter-ill 
Social Security and Rehabilitation 
The inadequate coverage of the SAPs under social security net was evident 
from the fact that out of 15.64 lakh, only 5. 77 lakh (36.89 per cent) SAPs were 
being provided disability pension. Further, 14 categories of SAPs added under 
RPwD Act, 2016 were covered for pension with inordinate delay. 
Rehabilitation service could not be made available as District Disability 
Rehabilitation Centres were not established in all the districts. The MR. homes 
for SAPs having intellectual disabilities were not adequate in the State and the 
functional MR. homes suffered from deficiencies such as non/short deployment 
of human resources. 
Financial assistance was provided to SAPs without obtaining required 
documents like Income Certificate, Marriage Card, Domicile , Disability 
Certificate and receipt of Aids & Devices under V'zshesh Yogyajan Sukhad 
Dampatya Jeevan Yojana and Sanyukt Sahayata Anudan Yojana. Under V'zshesh 
Yogyajan Sukhad Dampatya Jeevan Yojana, 34 per cent cases were disposed off 
with delays. Record of SAPs provided with aids and devices through Sanyukt 
Sahayata Anudan Yojana, ADIP scheme, ALIMCO and also through NGOs and 
MPLADIMLALAD schemes, was not maintained by the Department . 
Mukhyamantri Vishesh Yogyajan Swarojgar Yojanafor self-employment ofSAPs 
was not effectively executed in the State as special rebate in interest was not 
provided to any beneficiary for timely repayment of loan. Further, subsidy was 
released without ascertaining the actual disbursement of full loan and there was 
irregular disbursal of subsidy to ineligible people under Mukhyamantri V'zshesh 
Yogyajan Swarojgar Yojana. Efforts at making the buildings of the department in 
the districts fully accessible to the SAPs were inadequate. 
3.1 Social Security 
Section 24 (1) of the RPwD Act provides that the Government shall formulate 
necessary schemes and programmes to safeguard and promote the right of 
PwDs for adequate standard of living to enable them to live independently or 
in the community. The State Government has implemented several schemes 
for the welfare, social security and rehabilitation of SAPs. 
Details of benefits and entitlements available in 12 schemes being 
implemented in the State and their eligibility criteria are given in Appendix- II. 
3.1.1 Chief Minister Disability Pension Scheme and Indira Gandhi National 
Disability Pension Scheme 
Section 24 (3) of the RPwD Act provides for facility of disability pension 
for social security of PwDs. To implement this provision, Chief 
11 Performance Audit of 'Implementation of 
Rights ofPersons with Disabilities Act, 2016' 

Chapter- III Social Security and Rehabilitation 
Minister Disability Pension Scheme (CMDPS)13 of GoR and the 
Centrally sponsored Indira Gandhi National Disability Pension Scheme 
(IGNDPS)14 are being implemented in the state. Both the pensions are 
disbursed by SJED through RajSSP porta115. 
Audit scrutiny (July 2021-January 2022) revealed shortcomings in the 
implementation of these schemes: 
(i) Co'Verage of pension: As per Census 2011~ there were 15.64 1akh 
disabled persons in Rajasthan. Audit observed that out ofthis, only 5.77 
lakh16 SAPs (36.89 per cent) were getting disability pension as of 
March2021. 
The Deputy Director~ SAP accepted (April 2022) the facts and stated 
that SAPs having more than 40 per cent disability were eligible for 
pension and at present 6.50 lakh SAPs were getting pension in the 
State. He also stated that all the SAPs, whether they suffered 40 per 
cent disability or less~ were covered in the census whereas the pension 
was to be provided to those which suffered from more than 40 per cent 
disability. 
The reply is not acceptable as the Statistical information published by 
Gol identified disabled persons on the basis of more than 40 per cent 
disability. The reply also needs to be viewed in light of the fact that 
more than three lakh applications were pending at various levels in the 
State for issue of disability certificates (detailed in paragraph 4.1), 
timely processing of which could have enabled many more SAPs to 
avail disability pension. 
(ii) Status of applications: Audit observed that 4.84 lakh applications were 
received from SAPs for pension during the period October 2017 to 
March 2021, ofwhich 0.74 lakh applications had been pending for nine 
months to more than three years17 as of December 2021. Information 
for the period April 2016 to September 2017 was not provided by the 
Department. Reasons for pendency of the applications were also not 
provided by the Department (December 2022). 
13 CMDPS: The scheme envisages payment of pension oH750 per month (pm) to SAP who 
is less than 58 years (men) I 55 (women) years of age; ~ 1,000 pm who attains the age of 
58 years (men) /55 (women) years but less than 75 years and~ 1,250 pm for SAPs who has 
attained the age of75 years. 
14 IGNDPS: The scheme envisages payment of pension of ~ 750 pm to SAP (resident of 
Rajasthan) who is more than 18 years but less than 58 years (men) I 55(women) years of 
age;~ 1,000 pm for SAPs who attain the age of 58 years (men) /55 (women) years but less 
than 75years and~1,250 pm for SAPs who attain the age of75 years. Gol reimburse payment 
amount~ 300 pm upto 80 years and ~ 500 pm after attaining the age of 80 years per SAP. 
15 RajSSP Portal has been developed (02 October 2017) by NIC for SJED and is utilized by 
SJED for the implementation of Social Security Pension schemes. 
16 CMDPS: 5.5llakh and IGNDPS: 0.26lakh. 
17 2,001 applications were pending for more than three years, 31,576 applications were 
pending for one to three years and 40,475 applications were pending for upto one year. 
Perfonnance Audit of'Implementation of 12 
Rights ofPersons with Disabilities Act, 2016' 

Chapter - III Social Security and Rehabilitation 
GoR accepted the facts and stated (November 2022) that information would be 
made available after receiving the information from departmental units. 
3.1.2 Pension benefits to additional categories 
Section 24 of the RPwD Act provides the facility of disability pension for 
social security of PwDs. The PwD Act, 1995 included seven categories of 
disabilities within its ambit whereas Section 2 (zc) of RPwD Act, 2016 
specified 21 categories of disabilities. 
Audit observed (August 2021) that the Secretary, SJED issued the order to 
extend the pension benefits to the additional categories of disabilities in 
October 2021 i.e. after a lapse of more than four years since the 
implementation of the Act. 
3.1.3 Facilities to Astha Card Holders 
The objective of Astha Yojana was to alleviate the fmancial strain of families 
having two or more members who were disabled. The notified families were 
to receive an 'Astha Card' from the Directorate, SAP. Under the scheme, all 
institutions providing benefits to BPL families were to extend the same 
benefits to the families having Astha Card. 
As of March 2021, 17,786 cards were issued by the DSAP to district offices of 
SJED for distribution to the concerned families. 
Audit observed (August 2021-January 2022) that in three test checked 
districts18, 1,037 Astha cards19 were received in district offices for distribution 
during 2016-21, out of which 508 Astha cards20 (48.99 per cent) were not 
distributed even after a lapse of nine to 17 months. 
GoR accepted the facts and stated (November 2022) thatAstha cards have been 
distributed to beneficiaries in all test checked eight districts. However, 
corroborative evidence in support of this claim and reasons for delay were not 
provided by the Department (December 2022). 
3.2 Rehabilitation of Specially Abled Persons 
Section 27 of the RPwD Act provided that the Government was to undertake 
programmes of rehabilitation, particularly in the areas of health, education and 
employment for all PwDs. Rehabilitation is a process which aims at ensuring 
that persons with disabilities achieve the best possible level of functioning in 
all aspects of their being- physical, social, sensory, intellectual, psychological 
and environmental. 
18 Banner, Tonk, Bikaner. 
19 1,037 cards: (Banner: 289, Tonk: 413 and Bikaner: 335). 
20 508 cards: (Banner: 270, Tonk: 109 and Bikaner: 129). 
13 Performance Audit of 'Implementation of 
Rights ofPersons with Disabilities Act, 2016' 

Chapter- III Social Security and Rehabilitation 
3.2.1 District Disability Rehabilitation Centre (DDRC) 
In order to facilitate creation of infrastructure and capacity building at district 
level for awareness generation, rehabilitation, training and guidance of 
rehabilitation professionals, the Department of Empowerment of Persons with 
Disabilities (DEPwD), Gol sponsored the setting up ofDDRCs 21 to be run by 
NGOs and supervised by the District Management Team22 with a view to 
provide comprehensive services to the PwDs. 
Audit observed (July-August 2021) that against the 17 DDRCs23 approved by 
the Gol (1999) for Rajasthan, only three DDRCs24 were functional as of March 
2021. Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, Gol had suggested 
(November 2019) the Government of Rajasthan for setting up of atleast one 
DDRC in each district but no progress had been made in this regard as of 
March 2021. Among the three functional DDRCs, Audit observed (September 
2021) that in DDRC Udaipur, only one meeting of the District Management 
Team had been held (20 17) against the mandated 20 meetings during 2016-21. 
GoR stated (November 2022) that proposals for setting up six DDRCs were 
sent to Gol in 2020-21 and for three DDRCs were sent in 2021-22 and the 
approval from Gol in these cases was awaited. 
3.2.2 Management of Mentally Retarded Rehabilitation Homes 
The Mentally Retarded Rehabilitation (MR) Homes were established with the 
aim of providing residential accommodation to mentally retarded persons 
along with provision of food, clothing, medical facilities etc. GoR established 
(1983) a MR. Home25 at Jamdoli, Jaipur having residential facility for 250 
persons26• This MR home functions under the supervision and control of 
DSAP. In addition, 35 MR Homes with intake capacity of 2,100 SAPs were 
being operated by NGOs in 26 districts of Rajasthan as of March 2021. 
Audit scrutiny (August 2021-January 2022) of records of Government MR 
Home Jamdoli and selected eight MR. Homes (run by NGOs) in the eight test 
checked districts revealed the following: 
21 Fully funded by Gol. 
22 Headed by District Collector. 
23 Ajmer, Jodhpur, Tonk, Bikaner, Jaisalmer, Jalore, Pali, Udaipur, Alwar, Bharatpur, 
Bhilwara, Chittorgarh, Jhunjhunu, Sikar, Nagaur, Banner and Banswara. 
24 Udaipur, Jalore, Chittorgarh. 
25 Government Mentally Retarded Women and Child Welfare Rehabilitation Home. 
26 Boys: 125 and Women: 125. 
Perfonnance Audit of'Implementation of 14 
Rights ofPersons with Disabilities Act, 2016' 

Chapter- m Social Security and Rehabilitation 
(i) Establishment ofMR Homes 
As per Chief Minister's Budget announcements made during the years 
2010-14, MR. Homes were to be established in all the districts27 with intake 
capacity of 50-250 mentally retarded SAPs. 
Audit noticed (July-August 2021) that 42 MR homes had been established 
through NGOs up to 2015-16 covering all the districts of the State. However, 
during 2016-19, seven of these MR. bomes28 were closed due to which no MR. 
home was functional in seven districts of the State as of March 2021. 
GoR stated (November 2022) that 38 MR. Homes were functional with 2275 
SAPs in the State (November 2022). It was further stated that MR. Homes bad 
been closed due to irregularities or lack of beneficiaries noticed during 
inspection of some homes. 
The Government reply needs to be viewed in light of the fact that three NGO 
run MR Homes29 had 523 residents against the total designated capacity of 350 
and the Government MR. Home, Jamdoli (Jaipur) had 323 residents against the 
capacity of 250. Further, in Ashadham Ashram Society (MR Home), Udaipur 
adequate space was not available for SAPs, as shown in the images below: 
Mentally Retarded SAPs sitting in gallery and sleeping on the floor due to shortage of space and 
essential facilities in Ashadham Ashram 202 
27 Budget announcements 2010-11: Jaipur and Jodhpur with capacity of 250 in each MR. 
Home, 2011-12: Ajmer, Bikaner, Udaipur, Kota and Bba.ratpur with capacity of 50 in 
each MR. Home, 2012-13: Baran, Barm.er, Churu, Jalore, Pali, Rajsamand, Tonk, 
Jhalawar, Jhunjhunu, Bhilwara, Sawaimadhopur, Chittorgarh and Sikar with capacity of 
50 in each MR. Home, 2013-14: Alwar, Banswara, Bundi, Dausa, Dholpur, Dungarpur, 
Sriganganagar, Jaisalmer, Nagaur, Sirohi, Karauli, Hanumangarh and Pratapgarh with 
capacity of 50 in each MR. Home. 
28 Seven MR. homes (2016-17: Bhilwara, Chittorgarh, Sriganganagar, Rajsamand, 
Hanumangarh, 2017-18: Dholpur and 2018-19: Dausa). 
29 (i) Ashadham Ashram Society, Udaipur (ii) Maa Madhuri Brij V aris Sewa Sadan, K.ota, 
and (iii) Society to Uplift Rural Economy (SURE). Banner. 
15 Performance Audit of 'Implementation of 
Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016' 

Chapter- III Social Security and Rehabilitation 
Audit is of the view that some of the SAPs could have been shifted to the MR. 
homes with less number of SAPs which would not only have led to better 
living conditions in the overcrowded MR. homes but would also allow for MR. 
homes to remain functional in more number of districts. 
GoR stated (November 2022) that approval has been given for construction of 
separate building for 125 boys in Government MR Home. It further stated that 
new building of Ashadham Ashram Society is under construction and excess 
beneficiaries would be shifted after completion of new building work. 
(ii) Human Resources in MR homes 
(a) Government MR Home Jamdoli: Vacancies ranged between 33.93 per 
cent to 60.71 per cent in boys wing and between 57.89 per cent to 66.67 per 
cent in women wing during the period 2016-21. It was observed that against 
the sanctioned posts, some important posts such as those of therapists, 
educators, physiologists, etc. had been vacant3° during the period 2016-21. 
(b) NGO run MR Homes: Against the norms established by the State 
Government, manpower shortages, including that of medical staff, were 
noticed in all the selected eight MR Homes against sanctioned strength31, 
ranging between 11.90 per cent to 71.23 per cent as of March 2021. 
Details of the sanctioned and working strength of manpower deployed in 
Government MR Home during 2016-21 and MR homes operated by NGOs as 
of March 2021 are provided in Appendix III (A) and (B). 
GoR accepted the facts and stated (November 2022) that regular 
correspondence was made with DSAP and other departments for filling up of 
vacant posts in Government MR Home. For NGO run MR Homes, instruction 
has been issued to concerned DLOs for providing updated information. 
Huge vacancies in the MR. homes adversely impacts the facilities and care 
provided to MR SAPs. 
Recommendlltion 4: The State Government may establish adequate number of 
Govemment/NGO run MR. Homes and ensure availability of adequate 
infrastructure and human resources as per prescribed norms. 
30 Posts of Counsellor Junior Specialist ( 1 ), Clinical Physiologist ( 1 ), Occupational Therapist 
(1), Special Educator (9) were continuously vacant since March!April2016 in boys wing. 
Similarly, posts of Psychiatrist Junior Specialist (1), Vocational Therapist (1), Clinical 
Physiologist (1), Special Educator (10), Hostel Superintendent (16) were continuously 
vacant since March 2016 in women wing. 
31 As per order issued (September 2011) by State Government: Project Supervisor (1); 
Caretaker (3 for three shifts); Cook (2); Attendant (15 for three shifts); Part time doctor 
{1); Nurse (6) and watchman (3) should be deployed by the NGO for running of MR 
Home with intake capacity of 50 SAPs. 
Perfonnance Audit of'Implementation of 16 
Rights ofPersons with Disabilities Act, 2016' 

Chapter - III Social Security and Rehabilitation 
(iii) Disability certificate for Mentally Retarded Specially Abled Persons 
As per Rule 5(3) of Rajasthan MR Home Operational Rules 2015, disability 
certificate would be kept in the personal file of the concerned SAP and the 
grant would not be sanctioned to NGOs for SAPs in case of non-availability of 
disability certificate. It was also mandated that the NGO receiving grant would 
be responsible for getting the MR SAP medically tested within three days of 
admission to MR home for issuing of the Disability Certificate. 
Audit examination (August 2021-January 2022) revealed that disability 
certificates were not available for the MR SAPs admitted to MR homes as 
detailed below: 
Government MR Home Jamdoli: Out of 323 SAPs, only 28 SAPs32 (8.66 per 
cent) had disability certificates as of March 2021. 
NGO run MR Homes: Disability certificates of only 584 SAPs (70.53 per 
cent) out of828 SAPs were available as ofMarch 2021. 
GoR accepted the facts and stated (November 2022) that SAPs were admitted 
on the basis of prima facie disability and thereafter necessary action was taken 
for preparation of disability certificate. It further added that disability 
certificates of 44 SAPs have been made available in the Government MR 
Home and preparation of disability certificates of admitted inmates is under 
process. 
Issuing of disability certificates for all the MR SAPs admitted to MR homes as 
required under the provisions of Rajasthan MR Home Operational Rules 2015 
would enable capturing and maintenance of information related to MR SAPs 
for providing them all the requisite benefits and serve as an input for the 
planning and execution of the welfare activities and schemes related to them. 
3.3 Schemes for welfare of SAPs 
3.3.1 Vishesh Yogyajan Sukhad Dampatya Jeevan Yojana 
GoR launched (1997) 'Sukhad Dampatya Jeevan Yojana' for providing 
assistance to the SAPs at the time of their marriage. Under this scheme, 
financial assistance33 was to be provided to SAPs34 after marriage. For availing 
the benefits, the SAPs were required to submit their application for grant of 
assistance to the BSSO office within six months from the date of marriage with 
required documents like marriage certificate, disability certificate, birth 
certificate and income certificate etc. The attested documents were to be 
verified by the dealing staff and approved by the BSSO within three months 
from the date of application. The Scheme was implemented at the level of 
32 Boys: 9 and Women:19. 
33 on 25,000 upto May 2017 and thereafter~ 50,000. 
34 Condition: Income limit ~ 0.50 lakh per annum and thereafter w.e.f. 10 May 2018 
Income limit revised ~ 2.50 lakh per annum of guardian/parent of SAPs. 
17 Performance Audit of 'Implementation of 
Rights ofPersons with Disabilities Act, 2016' 

Chapter- III Social Security and Rehabilitation 
District Offices (upto April2018) and thereafter Block Social Security Offices. 
Out of 369 applications sanctioned 35 in the eight test checked districts during 
2016-21; audit analysed (July 2021-January 2022) 205 sanctioned 
applications 36 • It was noticed that the applications were sanctioned without the 
required documents like income certificate (in 15 cases); marriage card (in 35 
cases) and Domicile Certificate (in 22 cases). The risk of diversion of assistance 
to ineligible persons cannot be ruled out in these cases. 
In 70 cases (34 per cent); there were delays of upto 733 days37 in disposal of 
applications. 
GoR stated (November 2022) that letters have been issued to concerned DLOs 
for sending report in this matter and reply would be furnished accordingly. 
3.3.2 Sanyukt Sahayata Anudan Yojana 
As per Chief Minister's Budget announcement for the year 2011-12; for the 
rehabilitation of SAPs aids and devices to all the SAPs were to be provided as 
per their requirement within three years. These devices included Baisakhi, 
artificial leg, tricycle, wheelchairs, hearing aids; etc. 
GoR implemented (January 2016) Sanyukt Sahayata Anudan Yojana to 
provide financial assistance to SAPs upto ~ 7 ;000 for the purchase of aids and 
devices and for self-employment. This amount was revised in May 2017 to 
~ 10;000. 
Audit observed (July 2021-January 2022) lacunae in the implementation of the 
scheme during the scrutiny of records of DSAP and eight test checked districts 
offices. 
a) Test check of 252 sanctioned applications 38 in the eight test checked 
districts revealed that applications had been accepted despite irregularities 
such as lack of attestation of forms as well as income certificate by Gazetted 
Officer (203 cases), non-receipt of disability certificate with recommendation 
of Medical Officer ( 17 4 cases) and absence of acknowledgement of receipt 
of aids and devices from beneficiaries (166 cases). The risk of diversion of 
assistance to ineligible persons cannot be ruled out in these cases. 
b) Even after two to three years of procurement; 212 aids and devices39 in 
four districts offices were lying in the storeroom/hostels/open area of district 
offices; as shown in the following images: 
35 District offices: 303 cases and BSSO offices: 66 cases. 
36 District offices: 139 cases and BSSO offices: 66 cases. 
37 Calculated from the lapse of three months within which the application was required to be 
processed as per citizen's charter. 
38 252 Applications: Jodhpur (43); Bikaner (36); Kota (60); Dungarpur (38); Barmer (50) 
and Udaipur (25). 
39 212 Aids & Devices: (Kota: 16; Sawaimadhopur: 65; Jodhpur: 25 and Bikaner: 106). 
Perfonnance Audit of'Implementation of 18 
Rights ofPersons with Disabilities Act, 2016' 

Chapter - III Social Security and Rehabilitation 
Tricycles lying unutilized (in scrap condition) in the open area of SJED 
District Office, Sawaimadhopur (20 October 2021). 
Audit found that Aids and devices were being distributed to the SAPs through 
Sanyukt Sahayata Anudan Yojana of GoR, ADIP40 scheme of Gol, ALIMC0 41 
under Gol, and also through NGOs and MPLAD/MLALAD schemes. 
However, a consolidated record of SAPs provided with aids and devices 
through these schemes/agencies, linked with Disability Certificate/ Aadhaar/ 
Jan-Aadhaar42 was not maintained by the Department. Maintenance of such an 
information would help keep a track of the assistance provided and would 
prevent duplication of assistance and identification of actually deprived SAPs. 
GoR accepted the facts and stated (November 2022) that required documents 
were not enclosed and signatures were not put on application forms due to 
applications being received in camps in huge numbers and that shortcomings 
in applications are being rectified. 
40 Assistance to Disabled Persons for Purchase/ Fitting of Aids and Appliances. 
41 Artificial Limbs Manufacturing Corporation of India is a Central Public Sector Enterprise. 
42 Jan -Aadhaar number is the single/unique identifier of a family and also an individual 
issued by Government of Rajasthan. 
19 Performance Audit of 'Implementation of 
Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016' 

Chapter- m Social Security and Rehabilitation 
3.3.3 Self-employment loans to SAPs 
Under Mukhyamantri Vishesh Yogyajan Swarojgar Yojana, loan upto 
~ 5.00 lakh was to be provided to such SAPs for self-employment whose parents/ 
guardian's and self-income did not exceed ~ 2.00 lakh per annum. 
Government was to provide subsidy of ~ 50,000 or 50 per cent amount of 
loan, whichever was less. As per guidelines, benefit of special rebate of five 
per cent interest rate was to be provided for timely repayment of loan. 
Test check of records of Directorate SAP and DDs/ADs of selected eight 
districts revealed several deficiencies in the implementation of the scheme. 
(i) Benefit of special rebate of five per cent interest rate was not provided in all 
test checked districts during 2016-21 to the SAPs who repaid the loan 
instalments timely. 
(ii) As per scheme guidelines, the amount of subsidy was to be transferred by the 
district/block offices of SJED to the bank after disbursement of full loan to the 
beneficiary. It was noticed that the district/block offices of 
SJED released the subsidy (aggregating to ~ 21.21 lakh) to the bank on the 
basis of letter received from the bank, without ascertaining the actual 
disbursement of full loan in 65 cases. 
(iii) As per scheme guidelines, the amount of subsidy was to be disbursed in two 
instalments i.e. frrst instalment of subsidy would be disbursed at the time of 
sanction of loan and subsequently second instalment would be disbursed 
within two months after releasing of first instalment. It was noticed that upto 
March 2021 there was non-disbursal/delayed disbursal of the second 
instalment of subsidy in 457 cases. Delay in these cases ranged from two to 36 
months from the date of release of first instalment of subsidy. 
(iv) Under the scheme, the benefit was to be provided to the SAPs aged between 
18 to 55 years. It was noticed that BSSO K.handar had released the subsidy in 
10 cases in which SAPs were more than 55 years old, resulting in irregular 
payment aggregating to~ 5.00 lak.h. 
GoR stated (November 2022) that letters have been issued to concerned DLOs 
for sending report and reply would be furnished after receipt from DLOs. 
Necessary action for special rebate of five per cent interest rate would be 
taken after coordinating with banks. 
Recommendation 5: The State Government may ensure that there is no 
diversion of benefits meant for PwDs to ineligible persons. Responsibility 
m be ed or diversion o ben ts to ineli 'b/e ersons. 
3.3.4 Accessible India Campaign/Sugamya Bharat Abhiyan 
Gol launched (December 2015) Accessible India Campaign for achieving 
universal accessibility for PwDs and to create an enabling and barrier free 
environment. Chief Secretary, GoR instructed (May 20 16) all the departments 
Perfonnance Audit of'Implementation of 20 
Rights ofPersons with Disabilities Act, 2016' 

Chapter- III Social Security and Rehabilitation 
to make provision of ramps, special toilets and wheelchairs for PwDs in all 
their buildings. 
Section 45 of the RPwD Act provides that all existing public buildings should 
be made accessible43 within a period not exceeding five years from the date of 
notification of the Rules. Further, the act also mandated that the State 
Government should formulate and publish an action plan based on 
prioritization, for providing accessibility in all their buildings and spaces 
providing essential services such as all primary health centres, civil hospitals, 
schools, railway stations and bus stops. 
(i) In the eight test checked districts, Audit noticed (August 2021-January 
2022) that even the SJED district offices were not fully accessible for 
SAPs as the ramps, railings, and accessible toilet had not been 
constructed due to which SAPs were facing accessibility problems as 
shown in the following images: 
SAP climbing stairs in district SJED office Udaipur (1 September 2021) and SAP facing 
problems without ramps and wheelchair in District office Kota (24 September 2021 ). 
(ii) Audit examined accessibility in the offices of CM&HO, RSRTC44, 
Rajasthan SC ST Finance & Development Cooperative Corporation 
Limited and eight Regional/District Offices of Employment Department 
in the eight test checked districts. The concerned departments45 informed 
that only ramps had been constructed for easy accessibility of SAPs. 
However, other facilities such as accessible toilets, wheelchairs, signage 
etc., were not available in these buildings as required under the scheme 
guidelines. 
(iii) Analysis of information provided (August 2021) by Commissionerate, 
43 Accessible means that disabled persons can approach, enter, pass to and from, and make 
use of a built environment without undue difficulties or outside assistance. 
44 Rajasthan State Road Transport Corporation. 
45 Four departments: (Eight test checked CM&HO, RSRTC, Rajasthan SC ST Finance 
& Development Cooperative Corporation Limited and eight Regional/District Offices 
of Employment Department). 
21 Performance Audit of 'Implementation of 
Rights ofPersons with Disabilities Act, 2016' 

Chapter- III Social Security and Rehabilitation 
College Education, Jaipur revealed that out of 328 government colleges 
in the State, facilities of ramp, special toilets and wheelchairs were not 
available in 53, 63 and 251 colleges respectively. Department of Higher 
Education, GoR stated (July 2022) that Government colleges had been 
instructed to make a provision for construction of ramps, special toilets 
and provision of wheelchairs. 
Thus, the State Government has not made adequate efforts to enhance 
accessibility of the buildings in State, hampering the inclusion and 
participation of SAPs in public life. 
3.4 Social Audit of Schemes & Programmes 
Section 48 of the RPwD Act provided that the State Government should 
undertake Social Audit of all general schemes and programmes involving the 
PwDs to ensure that the schemes and programmes do not have an adverse 
impact upon the PwDs and address the requirements and concerns ofPwDs. 
It was noticed that DSAP informed (September 2021) the State Commissioner 
SAP that the office of the Accountant General conducted audit of all 
programmes and schemes for the PwDs from time to time. 
This reflects a clear lack of understanding of the concept of Social Audit and 
the requirement under the provision of the RPwD Act ibid. 
GoR stated (November 2022) that instructions/other data of schemes 
implemented by Directorate SAP were displayed at departmental portal/Jan 
Soochna46 portal for public for Social Audit and necessary rectification is 
carried out after receiving necessary suggestions. 
The reply is not acceptable as the provision of information does not fulfil the 
requirement of Social Audit. 
Recommendation 6: The State Government may undertake social audits 
periodically which would help them in monitoring the progress as well as 
improving the implementation of schemes and programmes run for the 
welfare qf the SAPs. 
46 Jan Soochna portal was launched in 2019 with the purpose to make information about 
schemes and their beneficiaries available to the common people. 
Perfonnance Audit of'Implementation of 22 
Rights ofPersons with Disabilities Act, 2016' 

Chapter- IV 
Issue of Disability 
Certificates and 
Welfare of SAPs 

Chapter- IV 
Issue ofDisability Certificates and Welfare of SAPs 
Shortfall in the issue of Disability Certificates was more than 50 per cent in 
Sawaimadhopur and Udaipur districts. Significant number of applications for 
Disability Certificates were pending at various levels of Medical and Health 
department. 
Rajasthan was ranked second lowest (34'h rank out of 35) in SAP literacy rate 
(40.16 per cent). Children with Special Needs who enrolled for school 
education decreased from 1.07 lakh in 2016-17 to 0.75 lakh in 2020-21, a 
reduction of 30 per cent. There was shortage of essential human resources as 
posts of teachers in Government Special Schools (38.10 per cent) and 357 
Resource Persons (56.22 per cent) at Resource Centres were vacant. 
Non-engagement of Speech Therapist/Audiologist/Physiotherapist for SAPs 
was noticed in NGO run Residential/Non-Residential schools. There were 
inordinate delays in registration/renewal of certificates of NGOs working for 
the welfare of SAPs by the Directorate SAP. 
Section 2 (s) ofRPwD Act, 2016 provides that person with disability means 
a person with long term physical, mental, intellectual or sensory impairment 
which, in interaction with barriers, hinders his full and effective participation 
in society equally with others. Further, Section 2 (r) of RPwD Act, 2016 
provides that person with benchmark disability means a person with not less 
than forty per cent of a specified disability. 
The RPwD Act, 2016 makes provisions for education of children with 
disabilities and provides for measures that the Government and local 
authorities must take for maintaining a system of inclusive education. The Act 
mandates that every child with disability must be admitted to these schools 
without any discrimination. 
4.1 Identification of SAPs and issue of disability certificates 
All the rights and entitlements of PwDs and benefits of the schemes being 
implemented by Goi/GoR are available to the persons with benchmark 
disability for which a disability certificate issued by certifying authority is 
required. The process of issue of disability certificate and Unique Disability 
Identification (UDID)47 Card, which is valid throughout the country, has the 
steps as depicted in Chart 2. 
47 The Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities, Gol implemented the 
UDID Project with a view to create a national database for PwDs and also to issue unique 
ID cards to each SAP. 
23 Performance Audit of 'Implementation of 
Rights ofPersons with Disabilities Act, 2016' 

Chapter -IV Issue of Disability Certificates and Welfare of SAPs 
Chart 2: Process of issue of disability certificate and Unique Disability 
Identification Card 
• Free registration through e-Mitra portal. 
• If disability is found to be less than 40 per cent, application cancelled. 
• If disability is found to be more than 40 per cent, application 
forwarded to Chief Medical & Health Officer (CM&HO). 
• Non-availability of doctor of concerned disability-(Application 
forwarded to Medical College and after testing by Medical College 
application forwarded to CM&HO). 
• Disability certificate issued by Chief Medical and Health Officer. 
•The data is migrated to Gol for issumg ofUDID Card. 
(i) Audit scrutiny (July-August 2021) revealed that in Rajasthan, 15.64 lakh 
SAPs were identified in Census 2011 against which 11.17 lakh (71.42 per 
cent) bad been registered as of March 2021. The position in the eight test 
checked districts in this regard is shown in the Table 1 below: 
Table 1 
Performance Audit of 'Implementation of 24 
Rights ofPerson.t1 with Disabilities .ru:t, 2016' 

Chapter- IV Issue of Disability Certificates and Welfare of SAPs 
It can be seen that there was shortfall of more than 50 per cent in 
Sawaimadhopur and Udaipur districts. While the seriousness of the issue was 
acknowledged by the State Government as evident from the instructions of the 
Chief Secretary, GoR (November 2017) for special focus in districts with less 
than 50 per cent registrations, little was done by the Department in this regard 
as no special campaign was organised in the State after the campaign of 
Pandit Deen Dayal Upadhyay Specially Abled Persons Camps held in 
2017-18. 
(ii) Further, examination of records and analysis of information provided by the 
Department revealed significant pendency in the processing of applications 
registered with the Department. The details of applications registered for 
issue of disability certificate, disability certificates issued, rejected 
applications and pending applications during 2017-21 are given in Table 2 
below: 
Tablel 
Year I ApplkatiODI I DlsabHity I ApplkatiODI rdiag with BCMO~ 
registered certificates rejected MOs/ Medical coUeges/ 
issued MHOs for diagnosis 
2017-18 48 9,54,850 2,42,489 Information 5,46,041 
not available 
2018-19 10,12 969 3,17,606 1,11,846 4,46,566 
2019-20 10 64 540 3,58,943 1,23,435 410,362 
2020-21 11,17,160 3,94,496 1,32,054 3,05,557 
Source: Information provided by the Medical and Health Department and Directorate SAP. Figures in 
the table are progressive figures. 
Information pertaining to 2016-17 was not provided by the Department (July 
2021-January 2022). 
It can be seen from the table that out of the 11,17,160 applications registered 
for issue of disability certificates, I ,32,054 applications were rejected as of 
March 2021. Of the remaining 9,85,106 applications, only 3,94,496 disability 
certificates (40.05 per cent) were issued to SAPs in the State. More 
importantly, 3,05,557 applications (31.01 per cent) were pending with the 
BCMOs (1,72,710), PMOs (36,351), Medical Colleges (94,232) and 
CM&HOs (2,264) for diagnosis due to which they could not be processed for 
issue of disability certificates. While the pendency of applications came down 
during the period 2017-21, the rate of processing of applications was not 
adequate as reflected in the significant pendency as of March 2021. Detail of 
applications on which objections had been raised were not furnished by the 
department. 
GoR accepted the facts and stated (November 2022) that concerned applicants 
were informed through message on mobile, but they did not take interest and 
these applications were kept on hold. 
48 Position as on 21 March 2018. 
25 Performance Audit of 'Implementation of 
Rights ofPersons with Disabilities Act, 2016' 

Chapter- IV Issue of Disability Certificates and Welfare of SAPs 
In the absence of timely processing of applications, a significant number of 
SAPs could not be issued disability certificates and thus were deprived of 
various benefits for long periods of time. 
Recommendation 7: The State Government may undertake special campaigns 
to enhance the coverage of SAPs for issue of disability certificates and 
prescribe norms regarding time limits for various stages of processing of 
applications. 
4.2 Education 
Disability may act as a major hindrance in formal education. Educational 
attainment of SAPs is important in improving their living condition and 
enhancing their participation in the public life with dignity. 
(i) Enrolment of SAP children in educational institutions 
Section 16 of RPwD Act, 2016 provided that the State Government should 
endeavour that all educational institutions funded or recognised by them 
provide inclusive education to the children with disabilities. Section 31 of 
RPwD Act, 2016 mandated that every child with benchmark disability 
between the age of six to eighteen years should have the right to free education 
in a neighbourhood school, or in a special school of her/his choice. 
Audit scrutiny (July-August 2021) revealed significant deficiency in the 
educational attainment of Children with Special Needs (CwSN) in the State. 
As per Census 2011, there were 3,06,750 disabled children in the age group of 
5-19 years in Rajasthan. Rajasthan Council of School Education (RCSE) 
informed (August 2021) the State Commissioner, SAP that only 75,495 
Children with Special Needs (CwSN) were enrolled in schools (Private, 
Government and Government aided) during the session 2020-21. This shows 
that a significant number of CwSN have not been enrolled in educational 
institutions in the State. In fact, the enrolment of CwSN has been declining 
during the period 2016-21 as depicted in Chart 3: 
Chart 3: Number of CwSN students enrolled in the school during session 
2016-21 
120,000 
.::::: 
"t:l 100,000 J!! 
0 80,000 ... 
.:::::.,!!! 
CIJ Q 
z Q 60,000 Vl..s::::: 
~ :;! 40,000 .... Q 
ci 20,000 
z 
0 
2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 
Year 
Source: Informatkm provided by Rajasthan Council of School Education, Jaipur. 
Performance Audit of 'Implementation of 26 
Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016' 

Chapter- IV Issue of Disability Certificates and Welfare of SAPs 
The chart depicts that enrolment of CwSN students decreased from 1,07,299 
in 2016-17 to 75,495 in 2020-21, a reduction of30 percent. 
Deficient enrolment of CwSN in schools has resulted in poor literacy status 
among SAPs in the State. According to the report Persons with Disabilities 
(Divyangjan) in India- A Statistical Profile: 2021 published by Gol, 
Rajasthan was ranked second lowest (34th rank out of 35) in literacy rate of 
SAPs (40.16 per cent) in the country. Literacy among SAPs in Rajasthan is 
given in Chart 4: 
Chart 4: Literacy status of SAPs by gender in Rajasthan as per Census 2011 
1000000 935759 
900000 
800000 
700000 
600000 
500000 
400000 
300000 
200000 
100000 
0 
Total Male Female 
• literate • illiterate 
Saurce: Persons with Disabilities (Divyangjan) in India- A Statistical Profile: 2021 published by 
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation, Go!. 
The chart depicts that in Rajasthan, 59.84 per cent SAPs were not literate. 
Further, among the female SAPs, 74.96 per cent (5,36,263) were not literate as 
compared to 47.09 per cent (3,99,496) male SAPs who were illiterate. 
GoR stated (November 2022) that action is being taken for compliance of this 
section through Inclusive Education Campaign. Further, SAPs could avail free 
education under Right to Education Act and 110 special schools were running 
in the State through NGOs for providing free education to SAPs. 
Reco111mendlltion 8: The State Government may make all efforts to enhance 
the enrolment and retention of Children with Special Needs in the educational 
institutions in the State. 
27 Performance Audit of 'Implementation of 
Rights ofPersons with Disabilities Act, 2016' 

Chapter- IV Issue of Disability Certificates and Welfare of SAPs 
(ii) Availability of teachers and Resource Persons 
Section 17 of RPwD Act provided that State Government should take 
measures to promote and facilitate Inclusive Education like conducting survey 
of school going childrent establishing adequate number of resource centres 
and teacher training institutionst train and employ teachers, etc. 
It was observed that the State Government was operating seven Government 
Special Schools 49 having special teachers 50 in six districts to promote 
education of CwSN. In addition, Resource Centres have also been developed 
in the State with suitably trained Resource Persons to provide necessary 
educational and therapeutic support to the special needs boys and girls of the 
State to develop their inherent abilities. 
Audit examination (August 2021-January 2022) revealed that these Special 
Schools and Resource Centres were not suitably staffed to cater to the needs of 
CwSN. It was observed that: 
a. Only 65 teachers (61.90 per cent) were working against sanctioned 105 
posts of teachers in the seven Government Special Schools with 1,131 
students in 2020-21 session. 
b. Against 635 posts 51 of Resource Personst 357 posts (56.22 per cent) were 
vacant in the State as of March 2021. In the eight test checked districts, 
against the sanctioned 234 Resource Persons, 149 posts (63.67 per cent) 
were vacant as of March 2021 with vacancies ranging from 22.22 per 
cent in Tonk to 92.16 per cent in Udaipur. 
In the absence of adequate number of Special Teachers and Resource Personst 
the requisite educational and therapeutic support to CwSN could not be 
provided. 
4.3 Functioning of Residential/Non-Residential Schools for SAPs 
In Rajasthant 101 Special Schools (Residential/Non-Residential schools) were 
established in 31 districts as of March 2021. The remuneration is provided by 
GoR to the NGOs for sanctioned/actual stafP 2 (whichever is less) in these 
Residential/Non-Residential schools. Similarly, Mess allowance is provided 
by the GoR to NGOs on the basis of inmates residing in the Residential 
schools. 
49 Deaf and Dumb schools: 03 and Blind Schools: 04. 
50 A special teacher is a teacher who works with children of all ages who have cognitive, 
emotional or physical special needs. 
51 District level: 33 and Block level: 602. 
52 Norms for deployment of staff by NGOs are prescribed by the Directorate SAP. IfNGO 
deploys less than the norms, the Directorate SAP release the grant according to staff 
deployed by the NGOs. 
Performance Audit of 'Implementation of 28 
Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016' 

Chapter- IV Issue of Disability Certificates and Welfare of SAPs 
4.3.1 Providing quality education to Children with Special Needs 
As per condition of grants released to the Special Schools run by NGOs by the 
DSAP, Special Educators should be qualified according to norms of 
Rehabilitation Council of India (RCD and in case of Special Educators not 
being properly qualified, the payment made to these Special Educators was 
recoverable from the institution. Further, the teacher student ratio prescribed 
by the department (in 2006) was 1:15 for Special Schools with visual 
impairment and hearing impairment students and 1:8 in Special Schools for 
the Mentally Retarded. 
Audit scrutiny (August 2021-January 2022) of records of 11 NGOs run 
Special Schools in the eight test checked districts revealed that: 
(i) Special Educators registered with RCI were not deployed in two Special 
Schools run by two NGOs53• However, these NGOs were receiving grants 
from DSAP. On being pointed out, both the NGOs accepted the facts. Out of 
these, one NG0 54, stated (September 2021) that it did not deploy RCI 
registered teachers as qualified teacher demanded high salary which could not 
be borne by the NGO. 
Lack of proper qualification of Educators may have an adverse impact on the 
quality of education being provided to the Children with Special Needs in 
Special Schools. 
(ii) Speech Therapist/ Audiologist/Physiotherapist55 were not engaged by six 
NGOs56 during 2016-21. GoR stated (November 2022) that medical specialist 
were not deployed due to non-availability in the district and due to less 
honorarium (Bikaner and Dungarpur). 
These instances reflect lack of effective monitoring by the Department to 
ensure proper utilization of grants released to NGOs for the education and 
well-being ofthe Children with Special Needs. 
4.4 Registration of institutions 
Section 49 of RPwD Act provided that the State Government should appoint 
an authority to be a competent authority for the purposes of registration of 
institutions for PwD and giving grants to such institutions. As per Rule 7 of 
RRPwD Rules, 2018, the Director, DSAP should be the competent authority 
for the registration of institution. Accordingly, GoR appointed (June 2018) 
53 Sucheta Kriplani Shiksha Niketan Manklav, Jodhpur and Viklang Kalyan Samiti, Udaipur. 
54 Viklang Kalyan Samiti, Udaipur. 
55 Commissioner cum Secretmy, SJED issued orders (April 2011) for engagement of 
services of one Speech Therapist/ Audiologist/Physiotherapist/Braille Teacher/Yoga 
Teacher/Psychologist having specialization in the subject in the Special School 
according to the category of school. 
56 (i) Vik/ang Kalyan Samiti, Udaipur (ii) Welfare India Society, Kota (iii) Tapas Shekshik 
Punervash evam Anusandhan Sansthan, Dungarpur (iv) Society to Uplift Rural Economy 
(SURE), Banner (v) Saur Chetna evam Urja Vigyan Shodh Sansthan, Bikaner (vi) 
Yogesh Shekshik Punervash evam Shodh Sansthan, Niwai, Tonk. 
29 Performance Audit of 'Implementation of 
Rights ofPersons with Disabilities Act, 2016' 

Chapter- IV Issue of Disability Certificates and Welfare of SAPs 
Director DSAP as the competent authority. District Collector was authorized 
for issuing certificate of registration/renewal to NGOs upto May 2018. 
Audit scrutiny (July-August 2021) of records of DSAP revealed that 184 
NGOs were registered for five years by the DSAP during the period July 2018 
to March 2021. 
(i) Granting of new registration- Section 51 (2) of RPwD Act; 2016 
provided that on receipt of an application from the NGO; the competent 
authority should grant a certificate of registration to the applicant within a 
period of ninety days of receipt of application. Audit scrutiny of 23 
applications received for new registration of NGOs during September 
2019 to March 2021 by DSAP revealed that 109 days to 526 days were 
taken in granting of 22 registration certificates from the submission date 
/date of sending by District Officer (Details in Appendix-IV). 
(ii) Granting of renewal of registration- Director; DSAP issued (July 2018) 
orders that on receipt of an application from the NGO for the renewal of 
certificate of registration, the competent authority should grant renewal 
certificate to the applicant within a period of sixty days of receipt of 
application. Audit scrutiny of 23 cases of renewal of registration of N GOs 
revealed that in 17 cases, DSAP took 78 days to 529 days for renewal of 
registration certificates from the date of receipt of the application during 
2018-21 (Details inAppendix-V). 
GoR stated (November 2022) that registration certificates are issued after the 
required documents are provided and timely issuance of registration 
certificates may be hindered by the lack of required documents. The reply also 
stated that making the process online is under consideration. 
Recommendation 9: The State Government may make all efforts to facilitate 
NGOs through timely grant of registrations and their renewal and prepare 
proper database for effective monitoring ofNGOs. 
Performance Audit of 'Implementation of 30 
Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016' 

Chapter-V 
Financial 
Management and 
Internal control 

2019-20 
2020-21 
Chapter-V 
Financial Management and Internal Control 
The utilization of budgetary funds for the welfare of SAPs was found to be 
inadequate, especially in the schemes being run for SAPs in the State. The 
Directorate of SAPs lacked adequate dedicated staff which hampered its 
effective functioning with regard to programs and activities related to the 
SAPs. 
District officers did not conduct quarterly/monthly inspection ofNGOs. 
5.1 Financial Management 
During 2016-21, an amount of~ 286.79 crores (Gol: ~ 84.93 crore and GoR: 
~ 201.86 crore) was allotted through budget to Directorate, SAP under various 
schemes and programmes for welfare of SAPs. Out of this, it was found that 
the Directorate had utilized ~ 246.46 crore (85.94 per cent). The details of 
budget allotment and expenditure incurred during 2016-21 are shown in the 
Table3: 
Table 3 
11.94 46.12 58.06 4.14 44.25 
11.58 48.81 60.39 8.63 47.70 
Total I 84.93 I 201.86 I 286.79 I S4.47 I 191.99 I 246.46 (85.94) 
Source: Information provided by DSAP. 
The table indicates deficient utilization of funds for the welfare of SAPs as the 
savings exceeded 10 per cent in four out of five years during the period 
2016-21. 
Utilization of funds during 2016-21 in the schemes being run by the State 
Government through DSAP was also examined by Audit. The details are given 
in Table 4 below: 
57 From 2017-18, the classification of Plan/Non-Plan has been abolished. 
31 Performance Audit of 'Implementation of 
Rights ofPersons with Disabilities Act, 2016' 

Chapter- V Financial Management and Internal Control 
Table4 
s. I Name of Scheme I Budget I Actual 
I 
Savings 
No. allotment expenditure 
1 Sanyukt Sahayata Anudan Yojana 27.06 22.81 4.25 
2 Vishesh YoJ?Yaian Scholarship Yojana 0.63 0.44 0.19 
3 Mukhyamantri VJShesh Yogyajan 25.17 23.32 1.85 
Swarojgar Yojana 
4 Vishesh Yogyajan Sukhad Dampatya 6.03 5.64 0.39 
Jeevan Yojana 
5 Vishesh Yogyajan Identification 5.78 4.42 1.36 
Yojana 
6 One-time financial assistance to 0.0058 0.00 58 0.00 
Pension Holders for self-Business 
7 Vishesh YoJ!Vaian Anupriti Yoiana 0.18 0.13 0.05 
8 Astha Yqjana 0.09 0.04 0.05 
9 Vishesh Yogyajan State Level Award 0.43 0.43 0.00 
Yojana 
10 Polio Correction Camps 0.00 0.00 0.00 
11 Vishesh Yogyajan Self Employment 0.00 0.00 0.00 
and Training scheme 
12 Vishesh YoJ?Yaian Sports Yojana 0.50 0.24 0.26 
Source: Information provzded by DSAP. 
It can be seen from the table that no expenditure was incurred during 2016-21 
on the following two schemes being run by the GoR 
a. Polio Correction Camps 
b. Vishesh Yogyajan Self Employment and Training scheme 
Further, only nominal expenditure was incurred in 
c. One-time financial assistance to Pension Holders for self-Business 
(~ 0.15lakh during 2016-17) 
d. Astha Yojana (~ 3.67lakh during 2020-21). 
GoR accepted the facts and stated (November 2022) that no expenditure was 
incurred on schemes due to non-receipt of application forms from the SAPs. 
The reply is not acceptable as the Department needs to make more efforts to 
increase awareness among the SAPs regarding the schemes and enhance 
coverage of SAPs within the government schemes through awareness 
campaign. 
Poor utilization of funds is also evident from the fact that the funds received 
from Goi for specific purposes were also not adequately utilized by DSAP. 
Two instances are given below: 
(a) Goi released~ 0.12 crore during 2017-18 towards IT infrastructure for the 
certification of disability of SAPs which was further released by GoR to 
58 t 0.15lakh incurred during 2016-17. 
Performance Audit of 'Implementation of 32 
Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016' 

Chapter- V Financial Management and Internal Control 
12 districts of the state. However, Audit noticed that the Utilization 
Certificate (UC) of this amount had not been sent to Golas of March 2021 
i.e. more than three years after the release of the grant. 
State Government accepted the facts and stated (November 2022) that 
instructions have been issued for submission of UCs to concerned districts 
and UCs were received only from three districts Dungarpur, Jalore and 
Banner. 
(b) Gol released~ 0.21 crore to Rajasthan Residential Educational Institutions 
Society (RREIS), Jaipur in January 2019 for procurement of IT 
infrastructure for the purpose of certification of disability of SAPs. GoR 
was required to release this amount to 21 districts of the state. However, 
Audit noticed that the funds had not been released to the districts and 
instead were lying in the RREIS bank account as of March 2021 i.e. even 
after the lapse of more than two years. Further scrutiny of records revealed 
that the Department was making efforts to seek the bank details of the 
concerned authorities in the district for transferring the amount. 
Deputy Director DSAP accepted the facts and stated (April 2022) that plan 
would be prepared for incurring expenditure on procurement of IT 
infrastructure funds received from Gol. 
5.2 Human Resource Management 
Clause 11 of the Rajasthan State Policy on Disabilities 2012, provided that one 
officer with adequate support staff trained in Rehabilitation Management 
would be deployed at district level for implementation of welfare schemes 
related to SAPs. 
Audit scrutiny of records of Directorate SAP and test checked eight districts 
revealed that: 
(i) For the execution of work relating to SAPs like implementation of 
provisions of Rights of persons with Disabilities Act and various schemes for 
welfare of SAPs of Gol and GoR, etc. there was no dedicated staff of DSAP at 
the district or lower levels. For these purposes, DSAP is dependent on the 
district offices of SJED which are already understaffed as vacancies in these 
district offices ranged from 18.18 per cent to 47.06 per cent in the eight test 
checked districts. This needs to be viewed in light of the fact that a separate 
Directorate for SAPs was established in October 2011 for focused intervention 
in the 'vast field for welfare of specially abled people, 59• 
Lack of dedicated and adequate staff at the ground level defeats the purpose of 
setting up a distinct Directorate and hampers the special focus needed for the 
welfare of SAPs. 
(ii) SJED established the office of Block Social Security Officers (BSSO) 
(January 2018) at Block level and assigned (April2018) the work related to the 
59 https://dsap.rajasthan.gov .in/home.aspx 
33 Performance Audit of 'Implementation of 
Rights ofPersons with Disabilities Act, 2016' 

Chapter- V Financial Management and Internal Control 
implementation of six schemes including two schemes related to SAPs viz. 
Mukhyamantri Vishesh Yogyajan Swarojgar Yojana and Vishesh Yogyajan 
Sukhad Dampatya Jeevan Yojana to BSSOs. Audit examination of the 
information received from Additional Director SJED (November 2021) 
revealed that against 295 sanctioned posts of BSSOs, only 129 BSSOs (43.73 
per cent) were deployed as of March 2021. It was further noticed that not a 
single BSSO was deployed in four districts60 while only one BSSO was 
deployed in 10 districts61 of the state as of March 2021. 
Audit scrutiny in the selected 16 blocks of eight test checked districts revealed 
that blocks in which post of BSSO was vacant were additionally allotted to 
other BSSOs of the concerned district and these blocks were geographically far 
apart, with distances ranging from 30 kms to 40 kms. Therefore, the SAPs of 
such blocks had to travel long distances to BSSOs holding additional charge to 
apply for these schemes or get their grievances resolved. Considering the 
difficulties in commute faced by SAPs, huge vacancy of BSSOs results in 
undue hardships to them to get their grievances resolved. 
GoR accepted the facts (November 2022). 
Recommendation 10: The State Government may establish separate SAP 
offzces with adequate manpower at district/block level for effective 
implementation of the provisions of the Act and schemes/programmes. 
5.3 Internal Control Mechanism 
Internal control is an important management tool and comprises methods and 
procedures adopted to assist in achieving the Department's objective of 
ensuring orderly and efficient conduct of its schemes, including adherence to 
policies and safeguarding of assets. Monitoring through inspections and reports 
is a critical component of an effective Internal Control Mechanism. 
5.3.1 Inspections 
GoR issued (June 2015) order for inspection of NGOs working for SAPs 
receiving grants from the State Government on a quarterly basis. Thereafter, 
Additional Chief Secretary, SJED and DSAP instructed (July 2018, May 2019 
and August 2020) the district officers for conducting inspection of activities of 
institutions managed by NGOs receiving grants on a monthly basis themselves 
or through District Probation and Social Welfare Officer or BSSOs. 
Audit scrutiny of records in the selected eight districts revealed that the district 
officers did not conduct quarterly/monthly inspection of NGOs and instead 
conducted inspections on a half yearly basis at the time of making 
60 Rajsamand, Kota, Jalore, and Baran. 
61 Bhilwara, Bundi, Chittorgarh, Dholpur, Hanumangarh, Jaisalmer, Jhalawar, Karauli, 
Sirohi and Tonk. 
Performance Audit of 'Implementation of 34 
Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016' 

Chapter- V Financial Management and Internal Control 
recommendation to the Directorate SAP for releasing grants. The test checked 
19 NGOs, who managed MR Homes and Residential/Non-Residential schools, 
accepted the facts and stated {August 2021-January 2022) that 
monthly/quarterly inspections were not being done by the district officers. 
GoR accepted the facts and stated {November 2022) that joint inspections of 
NGOs have been carried out by District Officer and a representative of District 
Collector. It further added that now monthly inspections of institutions are 
conducted by the officers of various levels. However, no corroborative 
evidence in support of this reply was furnished by the Department {December 
2022). 
Lack of effective monitoring and deficient due diligence in preparation of half 
yearly inspection reports is also illustrated by the fact that the NGOs received 
donation/other income as reflected in the annual accounts prepared by the 
NGOs {certified by the Chartered Accountant) but nil information in this 
regard was shown in the half yearly inspection report submitted by district 
office to DSAP. It is pertinent to mention here that Rule 7 (a and b) of Grant in 
Aid (GIA) to NGOs Rules, 1972 as amended in May 1992 provided that since 
the GIA released to the NGOs by the State Government is on the basis of their 
sanctioned expenditure, the sum of GIA and the own income ofNGOs should 
not exceed the sanctioned expenditure. In other words, the own income should 
be deducted from the GIA to be provided by the State Government. However, 
in the absence of proper reflection in the half yearly report, the State 
Government released excess GIA on the basis of half yearly report in case of 
one NGO as detailed in Appendix-VI. 
GoR stated {November 2022) that action would be taken as per rules after 
obtaining of report from the DLOs. 
In addition to the lack of prescribed inspections of the NGOs receiving grants 
and lack of due diligence in preparation of the inspection reports of NGOs, the 
Internal Control Mechanism was found to be weak as highlighted in 
paragraphs 2.3, 2.5.4, 3.1.3, 3.3.2 and 3.3.3. 
There were also several lapses in critical institutional mechanisms through 
which the Internal Control Mechanism of the Department was required to 
function as highlighted in paragraphs 2.5.1 to 2.5.5. 
35 Performance Audit of 'Implementation of 
Rights ofPersons with Disabilities Act, 2016' 

Chapter- V Financial Management and Internal Control 
Thus, the Internal Control Mechanism of the Department regarding 
implementation of the provisions of RPwD Act was found to be ad-hoc and 
deficient in multiple aspects. Proper and effective implementation of the 
provisions of the RPwD Act requires plugging these loopholes for efficient 
execution of the schemes and activities envisaged under the Act and their 
regular and effective monitoring. 
Recommendation 11: The State Government may ensure effective Internal 
Controls by ensuring robust institutional mechanisms as envisaged in the Act 
and availability of timely and accurate information. 
JAIP~ 
The 17 March, 2023 
(K. SUBRAMANIAM) 
Principal Accountant General 
(Audit- I), Rajasthan 
Countenigned 
NEWDELm, 
The 20 March, 2023 
Performance Audit of 'Implementation of 
Rights of Persons with Disabilities .ru:t, 2016' 
(GIRISH CHANDRA MURMU) 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
36 

Appendix- I 
(Refer Paragraph 1.5) 
Details of units selected for test check 
Panchu, Bikaner 
2 Bik:aner 
3 I Dungarpur 1 Aspur, Galiyakot 
Bapini, Shergarh 
4 Jodhpur 
Ladpura, Itawa 
5 Kota 
Bamanwas, 
6 I Sawai Khan dar 
madhopur 
7 I Tonk Uniyara, Malpura 
Kurabad, 
8 I Udaipur I Gogunda 
Kalyan 
Gramin Uthan 
Manav Sansthan, 
Bikaner 
Niketan I Marudhara Bal 
Shikshan Sansthan, 
Samiti, I Jodhpur 
Maa Madhuri Brij Varis Sewa I Shivika Welfare Society, Kota 
Sadan, Kota Welfare India Society, Kota 
Shikhar Society 
the Welfare 
Mentally 
Yash Viklang evam Mandhbuddhi Y ash Viklang evam Mandbudhi Sewa I Prayas Sans than, 
Seva Sansthan, Sawaimadhopur Sansthan, Sawaimadhopur Sawaimadhopur. 
Mercy Rehabilitation Society, 
Sawaimadhopur 
Manav Dharam Viklang Seva Yorzesh Shekshik Punervash evam 
Sansthan, Tonk 
Ashadham Ashram Society, Viklang Kalyan Samiti, Udaipur Narayan Seva Narayan 
Udaipur Sansthan, Udaipur Sansthan, 
37 
Seva Narayan Seva 
Sansthan, Udaipur 
Bhagwan Mahaveer 
Vik/ang Sahayata 
Samiti, Jaipur 
Gyana Ram 
Jhamman Lal Saini 
Manav Sewa Samiti, 

Appendix- II 
(Refer Paragraph 3.1) 
Details of 12 schemes implemented by the Directorate of SAP during 2016-21 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
Sanyukt Sahayata I Special Abled Persons provided fmancial assistance for self-employment 
Anudan Yojana and artificial limbs/devices up to UO,OOO/-to meet the physical deficiency. 
(1986) 
Mukhyamantri 
Vishesh Yogyajan 
Swarojgar Yojana 
(2013-14) 
An amount of up to ~5.00 lakhs is made available through various banks in 
the form of loans for self-employment, on which 50 per cent of the loan 
amount or maximum ~ 50,000 whichever is less is provided as a grant 
• Domicile of Rajasthan 
• Disability certificate (not less than 40 per cent) 
• The familv should not be income tax 
• Applicant should be a native of Rajasthan. 
• Applicant's age should be between 18 to 55. 
• The annual income of the applicant's family from all sources should not 
exceed ~ 2.00 lakhs. 
Vishesh Yogyajan Financial assistance of~ 50,000 per couple is provided to specially abled • Applicant should be a native of Rajasthan. 
Sukhad Dampatya youths/girls to lead a happy married life after marriage. • The age of the groom should not be less than 21 and that of the bride should 
Jeevan Yojana not be less than 18. 
(1997) • The annual income of the applicant's family from all sources should not 
exceed ~ 2.50 lakhs. 
Vishesh Yogyajan I The survey work of 40 per cent and more disabled people with disabilities I • Special Abled Person should be domiciled in Rajasthan. 
Identification is organised and disability certificates are issued to the specially abled 
40 ver cent or more ~;~-\..;,; ... 
Vishesh Yogyajan I Under the Scheme ~ 40 per month will be payable from class 1 to 4 and 
Scholarship Yojana BO per month from class 5 to 8. 
(1981) 
Vishesh Yogyajan Grant is sanctioned in the form of incentive amount after passing Rajasthan 
Anupriti Yojana State and Subordinate Services (Direct Recruitment), All India Civil 
(2011-12) Services Examination and after taking admission in professional, technical 
courses. 
On passing and taking admission at various levels, grant amount on 5,000 
to~ 65 
38 
• The student should be studying regularly in a government/recognized school. 
• The annual income of the guardian should not exceed~ 2.00 lakh per annum. 
• The student must have passed in the previous year's class. 
• Domicile of Rajasthan 
-r.."--'-"'~- certificate 
• Candidate should be domiciled in Rajasthan. 
• The family income including the income of the candidate should not exceed 
~ 2.50 lakhs. 
• The candidate must have passed the entrance examination and taken 
admission in the listed educational institutions. 

Vishesh Yogyajan Every year on International Day of Persons with Disabilities on 3 • Applicant should be a native of Rajasthan. 
State Level Award December, 2 categories such as best qualified persons, voluntary • Selection by State Level Selection Committee. 
7 Yojana (1984-85) organizations, offices, agencies and others are awarded by the directorate, 
in which ~ 10,000 to 15,000 per person/ organization is given cash prize 
orovided. 
Vishesh Yogyajan The main objective of the sports scheme is to increase the skill and ability • Applicant should be a native of Rajasthan. 
8 Sports Yojana of the specially abled people through sports competitions so that the • Candidate must be a special qualified person. 
(1996 amended in specially abled people can connect with the main stream of the society. 
2014) 
One-time fmancial If a SAP pensioner wants to do his business with the aim of becoming self- • Applicant should be a native of Rajasthan. 
assistance to reliant, then provided a lump sum amount of~ 15,000 by stopping the • The applicant should be a specially qualified person pensioner from the 
9 Pension Holders for monthly pension. Treasury Office. 
self-Business 
(2007-08) 
Astha Yojana Such families in which two or more persons have more than 40 per cent • Such families in which two or more members are specially abled and the 
10 disability, Aastha cards are issued to those families, from which facilities annual income of that family does not exceed ~ 1.20 lakhs. 
are provided to these families at par with BPL. 
Polio Correction A grant of~ 5,000 per operation is sanctioned to voluntary organizations to • Any polio affected person from the state of Rajasthan 
11 Camps (2000) make them physically capable by conducting free polio correction 
operations for the polio patients. 
Vishesh Yogyajan To provide education and training to the specially abled persons like other • Domicile of Rajasthan 
12 Self Employment persons, to provide them equal opportunities in the society and to • Disability Certificate 
and Training rehabilitate them for living. 
scheme (2012-13) 
39 

Appendices 
Appendix-DI 
(Refer paragraph 3.2.2 (ii)) 
(A) Details of sanctioned and working strength of manpower deployed in boys and women wing of 
Government MR. Home during 2016-21 
(B) Details of total sanctioned and working strength of manpower including Medical Staff in MR. 
Homes operated by NGOs as of March 2021 
Society to Uplift Rural Economy 
Banner 
6 Saur Chetana evam Urja Vigyan shodh 
Bikaner 
7 Tapas Shekshik Punervash 
Anusandhan 
8 Manav Dharam 
Tonk 
Performance Audit of 'Implementation of 
Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016' 
evam 
Seva 
42 23 19 45.24 
30 19 11 36.67 
42 37 05 11.90 
40 

Appendices 
Appendix-IV 
(Refer to paragraph 4.4 (i)) 
Details of time taken in issue of new registration certificate to NGOs 
03.03.21 15.03.21 
25.02.21 10.03.21 
16.07.20 20.07.20 
29.11.19 02.12.19 
NA 02.10.19 
17.09.19 10.10.19 
17.09.19 09.10.19 
07.07.20 12.07.20 
ki Ummid ki NA 16.10.19 
05.08.20 25.08.20 
05.08.20 25.08.20 
NA 27.02.20 
* NotAvailab1e. 
41 
16.03.21 07.07.21 126 
16.03.21 24.06.21 119 
20.07.20 06.07.21 355 
02.12.19 17.03.21 474 
04.10.19 25.06.20 267 
10.10.19 22.01.20 127 
10.10.19 22.01.20 127 
28.07.20 07.12.20 153 
31.10.19 02.12.20 413 
21.09.20 17.03.21 224 
21.09.20 17.03.21 224 
27.02.20 31.12.20 308 
Performance Audit of 'Implementation of 
Rights ofPersons with Disabilities Act, 2016' 

Appendices 
Appendix-V 
(Refer to paragraph 4.4 (ii)) 
Details of time taken in issue of renewal certificate to NGOs 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
24.04.2020 
20.03.2021 
16.02.2020 
Seva 28.09.2019 
26.11.2019 
15.03.2019 
17.03.2020 
26.01.2021 
25.10.2020 
07.01.2020 
13.02.2020 
19.01.2021 
03.10.2020 
21.10.2019 
05.10.2020 
09.11.2020 
08.12.2019 
28.06.2020 
14.10.2019 
Maa Madhuri Brij Varia Sewa 03.12.2019 
Sadan Apna Ghar Sanstha, 
*Not Available. 
Performance Audit of 'Implementation of 
Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016' 
NA 19.02.2020 
NA 01.02.2021 
15.01.2020 21.01.2020 
27.06.2019 02.07.2019 
14.09.2019 17.09.2019 
12.02.2019 15.03.2019 
NA 04.03.2020 
13.10.2020 04.03.2021 
25.08.2020 15.09.2020 
NA 24.12.2020 
27.12.2019 18.02.2020 
NA 22.11.2020 
14.09.2020 16.09.2020 
05.09.2019 03.10.2019 
NA 18.09.2020 
02.09.2020 07.10.2020 
22.10.2019 15.11.2019 
02.06.2020 03.06.2020 
14.08.2019 09.01.2020 
26.09.2019 01.11.2019 
42 
08.09.2020 202 
26.02.2021 25 
04.09.2020 233 
20.08.2019 54 
22.01.2020 130 
30.05.2019 107 
19.06.2020 107 
15.04.2021 184 
13.10.2020 49 
15.03.2021 81 
13.10.2020 291 
10.02.2021 80 
22.10.2020 38 
29.11.2019 85 
27.10.2020 39 
14.10.2020 42 
27.01.2020 97 
19.08.2020 78 
10.11.2020 454 
27.02.2020 154 

Appendix- VI 
(Refer paragraph 5.3.1) 
Details of grant paid to Badhir Kalyan Samiti, Jodhpur during 2016-17 to 2019-20 
43 

© COMPTROLLER AND 
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA 
https://cag.gov .in 
https://cag.gov Jn/agl/rajasthanlen 