Report of the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India

for the year ended 31 March 2020

IT Audit of STAR 2.0 Application in the
Registration Department, Tamil Nadu

लोकहितार्थ सत्यनिष्ठा

Dedicated to Truth in Public Interest

Government of Tamil Nadu
Report No. 4 of 2022



Report of the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India

IT Audit of STAR 2.0 Application in the
Registration Department, Tamil Nadu

for the year ended 31 March 2020

Government of Tamil Nadu

Report No. 4 of 2022


Table of Contents

Number. Gout Number
Preface v
Overview vii
1.1 Introduction 1
1.2 Organisational Setup 1
1.3 Audit Objectives 2
1.4 Audit Criteria 2
1.5 Scope and methodology 2
1.6 Acknowledgement 3
Chapter II — Planning and implementation of STAR 2.0 Application
21 Planning 5
2.2 Document Registration Module | 6 |
2.2.1 Non-development of Interface for verification of Identity os
Cards
2.2.2 Incomplete Special Deputy Collector (Stamps) segment 0
2.2.3 Incomplete PWD segment 1
224 Incorrect provision of Aadhar consent window in back 2
office interface
2.2.5 Inefficient provision for matching patta details 3
2.2.6 Deficiencies in services with regard to patta transfer
2.2.7 Absence of process history to Sub Registrar 4
228 Absence of classifications and deficiencies in data 5
capturing
23 Issuance of Certified Copies Module 6
231 Incorrect disclosure of personally identifiable 6
information
2.3.2 Delayed issuance of certified copy 6
2.3.3 Issuance of certified copies of will 7



IT Audit of STAR 2.0 Application in the Registration Department, Tamil Nadu

"Number उपाए Number
2.3.4 Non-availability of documents 18
24 Issuance of encumbrance certificate module 18

Conclusion 19
Recommendations 20
ap P) ation Di 1
3.1 Lack of data integrity 24
3.2 Document identities 24
3.3 Personal identities 28
3.3.1 Incomplete citizen credentials 28
3.3.2 Lack of authentication checks 29
3.3.3 Capture of poor quality of thumb impressions 30
3.3.4 Capture of poor quality of facial images 31
3.4 Processing details 31
3.4.1 Non-implementation of fingerprint matching 31
3.42 Multiple mutations of documents with same previous 32
document
3.43 Non-restriction of documents engaged by Revenue 33
Authorities/Court
3.4.4 Incomplete process flow — e-Stamping procedure 34
3.5 Non-compliance to quality assurance guidelines 34
3.5.1 Quality testing procedures 35
3.6 Delayed and partial conduct of Third Party Audit 36
3.7 Non-mapping of Business Rules 37
3.7.1 Unauthorised modifications in Account ‘A’ 37
372 Incorrect online payment system/Incorrect acceptance of 39
payment challans
3.7.3 Inefficient processing of refund applications 40
3.7.4 Absence of functionalities for reconciliation 40
3.75 Absence of provision to create document in any 41
language
Conclusion 42
Recommendations 42

ii



Table of contents

Paragraph

Number

Contents

Chapter IV — Resource Management and cont.

Migration of existing data

Page
Number

42 Delayed completion of support requests 44

43 Index corrections 44

44 Deficiencies in MIS reporting 45

4.5 Concurrent user login in multiple systems 46
Absence of facility to upload periodical report to Income

| | 47
Tax Department

47 Non-inclusion/migration of provision to upload legacy 47

. revenue arrears

48 Non-availability of Inventory Register 48
Conclusion | 48 |
Recommendations 48

Chapter V - Conclusion and Recommendations

Conclusion and Recommendations 49
Annexure Annexures Page
Number Number
Pi | Details of Modules developed and yet to be developed 55
by the System Integrator and the brief description of the
Modules
2 Details of PAN mismatch 57
3 Certified copies of will issued to applicant other than the 59
executant
4 Support requests relating to EC generation pending for 60
more than 30 days
5 Details of documents having poor quality of facial 65
images
[6 | Documents engaged by revenue authorities | 66 |
7 Details of defect found during functional testing | 68 |
| | Details of observations noticed during user acceptance 72
testing by Audit
| 9 | Details of Release notes released by the Department 77
10 Details of MIS reports yet to be developed 78
Link Annexures (1 to 14) 79
Glossary | 80 |

iii


Preface

Report for the year ended March 2020 has been prepared fo:
to the Governor of Tamil Nadu under Article 151(2) of the Constitution of
India.

The Report contai: ignificant results of the IT Audit of STAR 2.0
Application in the Registration Department, Tamil Nadu.

The instances mentioned in this Report are those, which came to notice in
the course of test audit for the period 2013-20

The audit was conducted in conformi ith the Auditing Standards issued
by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.



Overview

The primary function of the Registration Department (Department) is to register
documents. The project STAR 2.0 Application (online registration activities) was
sanctioned in November 2012 at a cost of = 117.34 crore and was awarded to M/s Tata
Consultancy Services (2013) with a target to Go-Live by November 2014. However, the
department announced ‘Go-Live’ of the STAR 2.0 project on 12 February 2018. Further,
the project cost was enhanced (October 2019) to हैं 215.32 crore due to deployment of
additional data entry operators and help desk operators.

[ Paragraph 1.1]

Lut Planning and Implementation of S 2.0 Application

The Department had not developed interface for verification of Identity Cards, which is
the primary attribute to ensure that the document registered is not disputable, thereby
exposing the department to fraudulent registration of documents through impersonation.
Audit analysis revealed that the PAN, Aadhaar details & Driving licences in respect of
1,55,726 cases were found incorrect.

[ Paragraph 2.2.1 ]

Incomplete Special Deputy Collector (Stamps) Segment and Public Works Department
Segment of Document Registration Module led to incomplete data capturing of Value of
the document and the Demand, Collection and Remittances of Stamp Duty/Registration
Fee, Also, same payment receipts (referred by transaction ID) were used against Stamp
Duty/Registration Fee charges of more than one document besides non fulfilment of
objective of seamless flow of citizen’s service.

[ Paragraphs 2.2.2 and 2.2.3 ]

Inefficient system for matching patta details wherein, 18,378 ‘invalid survey number’
responses received from the Revenue Department were linked to documents registered.
Thus, the system allows completion of document registration despite mismatches in patta
details leading to registration of disputable documents.

[ Paragraph 2.2.5 ]

vii


IT Audit of STAR 2.0 Application in the Registration Department, Tamil Nadu

Out of 16,00,145 requests sent for transfer of ownership of property, in 1,24,304 cases,
the requests were returned with ‘Null’ and ‘Failed’ status with responses such as
Government lands, Land under Anadheenam, blocked for transaction etc., The
department did not take any corrective action in respect of the above cases, wherein the
risk of fraudulent registration of Government land is high.

[ Paragraph 2.2.6 |

Absence of classifications and deficiencies in data capturing in respect of various types of
deeds/documents would result in short levy of duty, fees and adoption of manual
procedure besides incomplete data capture.

Paragraph 2.2.8 |

While issuing Certified copy of a document, Audit noticed that the personal
data/information relating to parties of a specific document, viz, fingerprints, facial photo,
photo ID cards (Aadhaar, PAN, efc.) were also shared with any third party.

Paragraph 2.3.1 |

Audit noticed in one District Registrar office that 531 volumes were fully damaged, and
1,784 volumes were partially damaged. Further, 32 photo volumes were fully damaged,
and 91 photo volumes were partially damaged. Non-availability of these documents for
inspection/issuance of certified copies would hamper customer service delivery
envisaged by the department.

Paragraph 2.3.4 |

During data analysis, audit noticed 192 support requests relating to EC generation were
pending for more than 30 days. These requests were raised on issues such as missing
document number, error in survey number, change in SR office jurisdiction, non-
reflection of court attachment, etc.

[ Paragraph 2.4 ]

n Development

A user has to compulsorily select the survey number of the land parcel that has to be
registered and if not available, the user is allowed to enter any value for the survey
number by choosing ‘Others’ option and continue with the registration process. This
leads to registration of any parcel of land despite non-availability of survey numbers in
the application. Audit undertook a comparative study of survey number of 10,811
documents in one village which revealed that 832 documents had invalid survey numbers
and 308 records had survey numbers categorized as ‘Government land’ in that village.

[ Paragraph 3.2(a) ]

viii


Overview

Audit noticed that there were 16,777 documents without identity proofs of
executants/claimants, 38,878 documents without contact number and 59,423 documents
without email ID.

[ Paragraph 3.3.1 ]

Audit noticed capturing of poor quality of thumb impressions and facial images which do
not commensurate with the standards prescribed.

[ Paragraphs 3.3.3 & 3.3.4 |

Audit noticed that the application allowed initiation of multiple transactions from a single
document by linking any of the previous documents of a property, though the previous
documents are to be archived and used only for reference and verification of lineage of
transaction/document.

[ Paragraph 3.4.2 |

Audit noticed that security testing in respect of nine modules was last conducted during
2018 but no security testing was conducted thereafter. Further, release notes listing 371
enhancements / error fixations had been furnished by the SI during the period from
January 2019 to July 2019 without security testing.

[ Paragraph 3.5.1(c) |

Audit analysis of Account ‘A’ table of registration database revealed reuse of challans in
864 cases. Further, the application allows modification of status of the receipts as
‘inactive’ even after return of the document, thereby bringing them available for re-use or
for claiming refund.

[ Paragraph 3.7.1 ]

Audit observed that the application did not have a reconciliation functionality. As per the
office of the Accountant General (A&E), Tamil Nadu that there is a credit difference of
₹ 1,175 crore (as on 31 January 2020) between the State Books and Central Accounts
Section of RBI, Nagpur. Further the department did not reconcile the online receipt
figures with that of AG(A&E), Tamil Nadu from April 2019.

[ Paragraph 3.7.4 ]

Audit verification of the status of data migration revealed that 99.98 per cent of records
out of six crore records relating to Index II register of STAR was successfully migrated
by the department and 37 per cent of records pertaining to pre-computerisation period
were yet to be uploaded and integrated with the new application. Further Account
details, viz, Accounts ‘A’ to ‘H’ prior to February 2018 were not migrated into STAR
2.0.

[ Paragraph 4.1 ]



IT Audit of STAR 2.0 Application in the Registration Department, Tamil Nadu

Audit noticed that 11 out of 58 MIS reports are yet to be developed and the reporting
module enabled generation of MIS only after office hours. Further, the MIS report on
surcharge can be downloaded only for the selected month and not on quarterly basis.

[ Paragraph 4.4 ]
Audit noticed that the SR screen could be accessed by various methods, viz, recovering
previous SR login history, use of function keys, efc. and concurrent SR login in multiple

systems were also noticed.

[ Paragraph 4.5 ]



Chapter I - Introduction

1.1 Introduction

The computerisation of the activities of the Registration Department started during the
year 2000. An application, named ‘STAR’ (Simple and Transparent Administration of
Registration) was designed and developed by the department with the assistance of
National Informatics Centre (NIC). The STAR covered registration related activities
through REGiNET! network (since 2003) wherein the registrants had to visit the
respective Sub-Registrar Office (SRO) to initiate and avail the services. Payments of
Stamp Duty (SD) and Registration Fees (RF) for registration and other services were
accepted in both Physical (Demand Drafts) and online modes and accounted for in the
respective field offices. In this application certain processes viz, preparation of Books,
Indexes, generation of Encumbrance Certificates (EC) etc., were computerised.

The project STAR 2.0 was sanctioned? at a cost of = 117.34 crore (November 2012)
and was awarded to M/s Tata Consultancy Services (2013) with a target to Go-Live by
November 2014 at the contract value of = 176.44 crore which was subsequently
approved by Government in 20157, However, the department announced ‘Go-Live’ of
the STAR 2.0 project on 12 February 2018. Further, the project cost was enhanced*
(October 2019) to ¥ 215.32 crore due to deployment of additional data entry operators
and help desk operators.

1.2 Orga tional setup

The Inspector General of Registration (IGR) is the head of the department and functions
under the control of the Principal Secretary, Commercial Taxes and Registration
Department at the Government level. The hierarchical structure is as follows:

Inspector General of Registration

(७. IG
=<

(=I fea
[scum Deputy [rmx Registrar
Collector Stamps (A Superintendent
of stamps

Dedicated Local Area Network of the Registration Department.
GO Ms.143 dated 20 November 2012

GO Ms. No. 20 dated 5 February 2015

GO.Ms. 174 dated 31 October 2019



IT Audit of STAR 2.0 Application in the Registration Department, Tamil Nadu

The objective of the audit is to ascertain whether:

> Planning and implementation of the application was effective to meet the
objectives of the computerisation of the Department and application and
controls are adequate to ensure confidentiality, integrity and availability of the
data.

> The measures planned by the department to improve citizen service delivery
were effectively implemented and appropriate mechanism existed to ensure
legality, reliability and effective usage of third-party data.

> Internal monitoring and control mechanism are functioning effectively.

1... Audit criteria

Audit criteria for this Performance Audit were sourced from the following:

¢ Information Technology Act, 2000 and Information Technology policy of
Tamil Nadu, 2010.

e Indian Stamps (IS) Act, 1899 and the rules made thereunder and Indian
Registration Act, 1908 and the rules made thereunder.

e Income Tax Act, 1961 and Rules made thereunder.

e RFP (Request for Proposal) document of STAR 2.0 Application.
e SLA (Service Level Agreement) of STAR 2.0 Application.

e IGR circulars in connection with web based online registration.

1.5 Scope and methodology

The announcement for the development of a new application for the Registration
department was made in August 2011 and was commenced in 2013. Therefore, in
respect of planning and implementation, records pertaining to the period from April
2013 to March 2020 were taken up for audit scrutiny.

Various modules of the project became operational over a period from 12 February
2018 to 10 December 2018. Therefore, the processes of registration of documents and
other online service deliveries were covered from their respective dates of
implementation. The registration data dump for the period from February 2018 to
February 2020 was provided by the department (March 2020). Further the database
provided by the Transport Department was also analysed. After analysis of data dump,
field visits were taken up from January to June 2021 in the offices of the IGR, District
Registrar (DR) (South and Central) and SRO, Pallavaram. The Directorate of Survey
and Settlement under Department of Revenue was also visited for scrutiny of land
records.

An Entry conference was held with the Secretary to Government, Commercial Taxes
and Registration Department on 6 August 2019 in which audit objectives, scope and
methodology was explained.



Chapter I - Introduction

After completion of the audit, the Exit conference was held on 16 December 2021 in
which the Deputy Secretary to the Government of Tamil Nadu (GoTN)/Registration
Department and IGR have participated. The Government also gave its reply
(21 December 2021) for the Audit observations. The views expressed by the
Government in the Exit conference and the Government’s further reply (January 2022)
have been considered and incorporated in the report wherever found necessary.

1.6 Acknowledgement

Audit acknowledges the co-operation extended by the IGR, Additional IGR, Deputy
IGR, District Registrars (DR) and Sub Registrars (SR) and other officials of the
Registration Department in the smooth conduct of the audit.



2.1

Chapter - IT

Planning and Implementation of STAR 2.0 Application

Planning|

The STAR 2.0, was envisaged as a centralised system with web-based architecture to
provide:

i. end-to-end integration of registration processes.
ii. biometric based document registration.
iii. e-payment of duties, fees and charges.
iv. workflow based operations with comprehensive audit trail.
v. online verification of revenue records.
vi. online issue of Certified Copies with digital signature.

vii. uniform upgradation of software throughout the State.

However, Audit scrutiny revealed that the Functional Requirements under new web-
based software as envisaged were not implemented as detailed below:

As per Agreement, the System Integrator (SI) had agreed to develop 18 modules
and five sub-modules. Till date, development of 15 modules and two sub-
modules were fully completed. However, despite a lapse of three years after
the date of completion, three modules were partially completed and three sub-
modules were yet to be developed! as detailed in Annexure 1.

The Government replied in the Exit conference that the modules pertaining to Audit,
Appeal, Vendor, and Inventory Management have since been completed and the
modules relating to Human Resource and Guidelines revision are under progress.

Interface facilities with Income Tax Department and Unique Identification
Authority of India (UIDAT) were envisaged in STAR 2.0 application to ensure
the correct identity of persons who are availing the services of the department.
However, it was noticed that the same was not implemented resulting in use of
incorrect Permanent Account Number (PAN)/Aadhaar identity details for
registration and consequently the department being exposed to fraudulent
transactions as discussed in detail in Paragraph 2.2.1.

As an integrated system, it was important to integrate the various segments
involved in the registration process viz., Correct valuation of land and buildings
and the additional payment made thereon should be mapped with the original
entries. However, valuations made by the Special Deputy Collector (SDC)
(Stamps) and Assistant Executive Engineers/PWD were not mapped with the
original entries in the system resulting in the correct valuation (generated
subsequently) not being reflected in the ECs as detailed in Paragraph 2.2.2 and
2.2.3.

Department's reply in November 2019



IT Audit of STAR 2.0 Application in the Registration Department, Tamil Nadu

e The STAR 2.0 application has provision for matching of land database records
before registration to avoid any registration based on fraudulent documents.
However, it was observed that the application allowed registration of documents
despite mismatches responses of survey numbers, efc received from the
database of Revenue Department as detailed in Paragraph 2.2.5 and 3.2 (a) &
(b).

e The Stock Holding Corporation of India Limited (SHCIL) requested for
Application Programming Interface (API) gateway for updation of its records
on usage of e-stamps, but it was not yet developed as detailed in Paragraph
3.4.4,

¢ Only 47 out of 58 MIS reports envisaged were developed as detailed in
Paragraph 4.4.
Thus, due to lack of planning, the objective of end-to-end integration of registration
process, effective monitoring and provision of seamless and transparent services to the
citizens was not fully achieved.

2.2 Document Reg! 101 Module

The Document Registration Module (DRM) covers the processes from receipt of
registration application request from a citizen and return of document to the same
citizen after registration. During this process, the module interacts with other modules
of this application like Online processing module, Pending documents module, Field
Inspection module and Accounts and Challan module.

The time taken for completion of the registration process is one day and the
Government stated that 70 per cent of the documents are returned to the registrants on
the same day of registration.

Analysis of data relating to the Sub-Registrar office, Pallavaram revealed that out of
22,176 documents registered during the period from 12 February 2018 to 6 February
2020, the registration process was completed in 17,737 cases (80 per cent) within one
day.

The deficiencies noticed in the operation of the Document Registration Module are
detailed below:

2.2.1 Non-development of Interface for verification of Identity Cards

According to Section 34 of Indian Registration Act, 1908, the Registering Authority
shall, before registration of a document, satisfy himself about the identity of persons
appearing before him. PAN, Aadhaar, Driving license, Electoral Photo Identity Card
(Voter IDs) are some of the identity proofs accepted in the registration process.

The Special Investigation Team (SIT) on Black Money” has emphasised the need for
establishment of central KYC Registry and need for interconnection between different
databases for proofs of identities viz., PAN, Aadhaar, Driving licence, Passport, etc.,
to assist identifying multiple transaction by one person with different identities.

Section 139A(5) Clause (c) of Income Tax Act, 1961 (as amended in 1995) read with
Rule 114B Income Tax Rules (as amended with effect from 1 January 2016) stipulates

2 Constituted from 27 May 2014.



Chapter II -Planning and Implementation of STAR 2.0 Application

that every person should quote PAN in all documents pertaining to sale or purchase of
any immovable property exceeding € 10 lakh with effect from 1 January 2016 or valued
by stamp valuation authority referred to in Section SOC of the Act at an amount
exceeding हैं 10 lakh.

As per Functional Requirement (FR) 042 of STAR 2.0 Application, the system should
be capable of searching external databases and verify identities, such as PAN, Voter
ID, Driving license, Ration Card, Passport, etc. As per clause 6(xi) of Request for
Proposal (RFP) (volume I), the system has to interface with external systems/agencies
to allow exchange of data and communication. An indicative list of 15°
departments/agencies has been provided in the RFP. Income Tax Department and
Unique Identification Authority of India are two primary agencies listed.

Identity of users and parties to instruments executed is the primary attribute to ensure
that the document registered is not disputable. However, audit found that acceptance
of wrong PAN/Aadhaar number and absence of facility to verify identities from issuing
authorities has compromised data integrity of the STAR 2.0 Application as detailed
below:

In STAR 2.0 Application interface in respect of only two departments, viz, Income Tax
Department and Revenue department had been created and also found that a total of
70,24,185 number of identity details (PAN/Aadhaar/Driving Licence) pertaining to
documents registered (during the period from February 2018 to February 2020) were
uploaded in the database.

Audit verification during March 2021 revealed that the STAR 2.0 Application did not
carry out PAN verification with the Income Tax department. Audit had conducted an
independent data analysis of the identity details with two primary aspects in the
structure of PAN and Aadhaar numbers which are as below:

* The fourth character of PAN represents the status of the PAN holder and
would be from the group of (P,C,H,A,B,G,J,L,F,T) and none other.

¥ 12" digit of the Aadhaar number is a checksum associated with Verhoeff
Algorithm‘. Validity of an Aadhaar number can be instantly verified by
calculating the last digit related to the 11 digits entered.

Apart from the above two tests, Audit also cross verified the Driving license details
with the database (SARATHI) obtained from Transport department.

Data analysis revealed that the PAN/Aadhaar details/Driving licences in respect of
1,55,726 cases were found incorrect as detailed below:

2,307 out of 17,58,725 PAN numbers were not valid.

61,291 out of 3,16,984 Driving licenses were not valid.

iii. 92,128 out of 49,48,476 Aadhaar number were not valid.

i) Common Service Centers (CSC) and other citizen service delivery projects such as e-District,
ii) Corporation and Municipality Database, iii) Courts, iv) Election Commission of India, v) Food
and Civil Supplies Department, vi) Income Tax, vii) MEA database - passport, viii) MSDG -
Mobile Service Delivery Gateway, ix) RBI - for verification of Bank details, x) Revenue
Department — patta, xi) Road Transport Corporation, xii) State Portal and State Service Delivery
Gateway (SSDG), xiii) Survey and Settlement Department, xiv) Tamil Nadu Electricity Board
and xv) Unique Identification Authority of India

An algorithm used for calculating a single decimal digit as checksum. Algorithm is a set of rules
/ formulas. In Aadhaar, Verhoeff algorithm is used to calculate the 12" digit.

7


ITAi

of STAR 2.0 Ap)

the Registration Department,

Audit noted that the National Securities Depository Ltd (NSDL) responses in respect
of 16 lakh executants/claimants, received during the said period was available in the
database. Test check of 6,131 number of NSDL’s PAN responses revealed that even
though there were instances of mismatches in 394 records relating to
executant/claimants name, yet the process of registration was completed. Moreover,
the provision to validate PAN numbers with NSDL which was available in the
application (March 2020) was subsequently disabled.

The Government replied that at present Aadhaar authentication is enabled in 209 Sub
Registrar offices across the State and Aadhaar is verified properly with UIDAI and it
will be extended to rest of the State. The audit point is taken well and to eliminate
impersonation Aadhaar verification with UIDAI will be enabled in all offices in future.
In respect of PAN, Government replied that basic format validation for PAN have been
enabled. As a fourth character, only English alphabets are allowed. If it has to allow
only certain alphabets, it will be added in future.

Audit selected SRO, Pallavaram for detailed analysis of PAN furnished
(executants/claimants) which revealed mismatch in the category of the holder in 65
cases (Annexure 2) out of 65,083 numbers. The 4" character did not match with the
category of executant / claimant. PAN numbers of individuals were furnished in case
of registrations involving companies, firms, etc and vice versa.

Due to these incorrect PAN identity details, Government will not be in a position to
identify the illegitimate transactions. Further, Registration Department also failed to
send the complete Statement of Financial Transactions in prescribed format to IT
Department under Section 285BA of IT Act, 1961 readwith Rule 114 E of IT Rule,
1962 (more detailed in Para 4.6 of the report).

Thus, verification of PAN will help to create an Audit trail of all high-value transactions
by one particular individual and help the tax department to determine any illegitimate
transaction. This will also help the Government to widen its tax base and curb the
circulation of black money.

Failure of the Department to ensure correctness and completeness of personal identity
has led to cases of impersonation/frauds as detailed below:

Illustration 1:

Original Transaction — Year:1991

Mr. Mohan

Void Transactions — Year:2019 ]

Mr. Mohan

(Impersonator) Mr. Kamraj

Power Agent
Doe no : 642/2019



Chapter II -Planning and Implementation of STAR 2.0 Application

Shri Mohan was owner of a parcel of land described by Survey No.112/1E, with an area
of 2,079 sq.ft. at Madhanandhapuram, Kundrathur. However, an individual assuming
the identity of Shri Mohan, effected transfer of ownership of the above property to
Shri Ravi in 2019, by registering a Deed of Settlement. Shri Ravi further extended the
incorrect transaction chain by registering a deed of Power of Attorney in 2019 to
Shri Kamraj. The above facts of impersonation and attempts to take over the property
was noticed by the department only after receipt of complaint from the owner of the
property.

Audit conducted validity checks of the Aadhaar numbers used in the fraudulent
transactions and found that the Aadhaar number furnished by the impersonator during
registration in 2019 was invalid. Further, the Aadhaar number furnished by Shri. Ravi
was also found to be invalid. Had the department implemented interface facility to
check Aadhaar identity with UIDAI as envisaged in STAR 2.0 application, this
fraudulent transaction could have been detected by the department.

The above facts of impersonation and attempts to take over the property was noticed by
the department only after receipt of complaint from the owner of the property.

Illustration 2:

Original Transaction — Year: 2012

Void Transactions — Years: 2018 & 2019

=-2-8-8

Shri N. Chokkalingam was owner of a parcel of land described by Survey No.73/3, Plot
No.584, Area 4800 sq.ft. at Madipakkam. However, an individual assuming the
identity of Shri Chokkalingam, effected transaction in the property by registering a
Deed of Power of Attorney in 2018 (authorising Shri Gomez). The Voter ID furnished
by Shri Chokkalingam was verified by audit in the National Voter Service portal and
found to be invalid. Shri Gomez continued the incorrect transaction chain by
registering a deed of Sale in 2019 in favour of Shri. Muthuvel. Shri. Muthuvel had
borrowed % 1.92 crore against the property by registering deed of Memorandum of
Deposit of Title vide 21/2019 and 618/2019 from Indian Bank.

9


ITAi

of STAR 2.0 Ap)

the Registration Department,

All the above incorrect transactions were rendered void by the DR, South vide
proceedings No.1205/E2/2019 dated 15 July 2019, leaving the loan amount unpaid.

The above attempts of impersonation and registration of disputable documents could
have been identified and prevented by the department by verifying Aadhaar numbers
and other personal identities as envisaged in STAR 2.0 application.

2.2.2 Incomplete Special Deputy Collector (Stamps) segment

According to Section 47-A of Indian Stamps Act, 1899, if the registering authority is
of the opinion that market value of the property transacted in the document has not been
truly set forth in the instrument, he may refer the same to SDC(Stamps) for
determination of market value and stamp duty.

The work at the office of the SDC(Stamps) involves receipt of documents for valuation,
issue of notice, issue of order finalising value of the property, calculation of SD,
Collection, Endorsement in the document, Return of the document to the Registering
Authority. There are 115 SDC (Stamps) under Revenue department for valuation of
properties referred to them. Tahsildars deputed under each SDC(Stamps) are
responsible for field inspection and valuation of properties in their respective districts.

As per the document registration process under clause 1.12 of RFP, the SDC segment
should have facility to finalise and report the determined value of the document referred
and to collect deficit stamp duty. However, during verification, audit noticed the
following deficiencies in STAR 2.0 application:

i. The module did not facilitate online payment of deficit stamp duty and the
registrant was required to pay manually at the designated banks and submit
paid challans to SDC (stamps) in person (physical form).

ii. After issue of valuation order, online challan for the deficit stamp duty was
generated by the application. However, this online challan could not be
used for offline payments at treasury branches of banks as it was not
generated with appropriate temporary challan IDs. Therefore, the registrant
had to make payments through TNTC® 9 forms provided by SDC(Stamps).
In this process, the system generated online challans were left orphaned
without appropriate closing entry.

iii. Revised value of the document and additional demand raised were not
mapped with the original entry in Account-A’.

iv. Segregation of duties as per jurisdiction of Tahsildars was not implemented.
Therefore, data entry work pertaining to all districts were entered through
SDC login only.

yv. Without established workflow between Tahsildar and SDC, all work items
were done through physical files and data entry in respect of the same were
done subsequently.

Chennai, Coimbatore, Cuddalore, Kanchipuram, Madurai, Salem, Thanjavur, Tiruchirappalli,
Tirunelveli, Vellore, Virudhunagar,
Tamil Nadu Treasury Code

Account-A: Account of daily registrations, Stamp Duty/Registration Fee realised

10


Chapter II -Planning and Implementation of STAR 2.0 Application

The above discrepancies resulted in incomplete data capturing for reconciliation of
Value of the property, Demand, Collection and Remittances. Audit observed that even
manual method of reconciliation as per serial number 8 of E-payment module in RFP
Volume 2 was not carried out from October 2019 to March 2021 (as of March 2021)
which may lead to misclassification of revenue receipts under different heads. Further,
the goal of seamless flow of citizen’s service was defeated.

The Government has assured to implement the audit suggestion and stated that SRs are
adding the revised value in ‘A’ account and in future, revised value of the document
and additional demand raised will be automatically included in the Account ‘A’. The
Government further stated that it will be considered to add workflow between Tahsildar
and SDC (Stamps).

2.2.3 Incomplete PWD segment

According to IGR circular No.40164/3 dated 26 June 2018, a sale deed for land and
building for a value of more than हैं 50 lakh should be referred to the Assistant Executive
Engineer (AEE) of Public Works Department for ascertaining value of the building.
23,973 such documents were referred between February 2018 to February 2020.

As per clause 1.1, Item No.24 of RFP (Volume II), if the Registering Authority
approves field verification values and if the same resulted in dues to be collected, then
the system must send notices through email/short messaging service (SMS).

Audit noticed that the AEE, Chennai communicated to the SI, the following
deficiencies in the software to the department (August 2019):

no provision to calculate the value of the special buildings,
no provision to preview/edit/save options before forwarding,
iii. no specific provision to value the big industrial complexes to the department.

However, no action has been taken to create the provisions in the application. Further,
audit check of the PWD Segment revealed that:

i. Queuing of the works to be verified was not arranged in the system (155 out of
422 documents in SR Pallavaram).
ii. Street/Area/district -wise grouping of items was not available for the AEE to
attend all building inspections in a particular area during their inspection.
iii. The interface was not used for online preparation and submission of Inspection
Reports. Inspection report in Form 1-C was prepared and sent to the Registering
Authority in physical files.

The Government replied that preview option is provided and edit/save option will be
given in future. The Street/Area/District wise grouping will also be given. Further a
circular was issued to carry out the Building inspection and its valuation through this
application.

Further, the department noticed fraudulent use of payment receipts during December
2020 wherein same payment receipts (referred by transaction ID) were used against two
SD/RF charges and registration of two documents. Audit took up these cases for cause
analysis and found the following weakness in the system:

ll


IT Audit of STAR 2.0 Application in the Registration Department, Tamil Nadu

> Due to manual preparation of Building Inspection Report, revised value
was not reported in the digital form.

> Demand for deficit stamp duty for revised value of the property was not
raised against the document in the system.

> Payment challans submitted by the registrant for payment of deficit SD and
RF were mapped against the document with original charges. However, the
revised value and the demand was not mapped in the system thereby
creating a scenario where, even cancellation of additional payment did not
flag the document as ‘Not duly stamped’ since it had only one value which
is the original value of the document and did not include the additional or
the revised value.

As per circular dated June 2018, the time limit fixed for field inspection of building by
AEE is 10 days. However, analysis of data revealed that the period of delay in
conducting of inspection was ranging from 31 days to 691 days as detailed below:

Table 1 — Delay in conduct of inspection

S.No. Period of delay (in days

1 31-90 44,621
2 91-150 8,295
3 151-210 3,057
4 211-270 1,412
5 271-330 880

; 6 | 331-365 372

7 More than a year | 1,900 |

Thus, the department did not adhere to the timeline for inspection in as much as 60,597

cases (Link Annexure 1). Out of these cases in respect of 1,960 cases the delay in
conduct of inspection was more than one year.

2.2.4 Incorrect provision of Aadhaar consent window in back office interface

Aadhaar is a personal and confidential information. As per Rule 4 of the Tamil Nadu
egistration (Identity verification for registration of documents) Rules, 2018, the
registering authority should obtain explicit consent of the person in electronic or paper
format for use in the consent based Aadhaar authentication.

However, audit noticed that the window meant for giving consent by the citizen has a

rovision for edition/access in the back office interface. This implied that consent
furnished through the Junior Assistant (JA) login in the SRO may create disputable
circumstances.

The Government replied that since it was a consent based Aadhaar authentication edit
rovision was provided. But the fact, however, remained that availability of edit option
in the back office interface may create disputable circumstances.



Chapter II -Planning and Implementation of STAR 2.0 Application

2.2.5 Inefficient provision for matching patta details

As per Chapter 3 of RFP (Volume 1), the application should have compatibility with
the National Land Records Modernisation Program (NLRMP) of Revenue Department
and fetch property/ownership details of the patta numbers being processed.

On a data analysis it was noticed that out of 53,63,061 patta verification (previous
document) requests sent during February 2018 to February 2020, in 1,85,249 requests
the response was ‘Invalid survey number’. Despite the above invalid survey number
tesponses, audit found that 18,378 requests (Link Annexure 2) were linked to
documents registered.

During real time testing of back office interface, audit noticed that the SR interface for
patta verification shows results of name comparison only. Other mismatch results, viz,
invalid / non-existing survey numbers, efc., were not shown to SR for necessary action.
In respect of name match results also, irrespective of the percentage match reported by
the system, the toggle button under ‘Match’ option is selected as ‘Yes’ by default and
the window did not have provision for the SR to record reasons for overriding the
mismatch result.

Thus, the system allows completion of document registration despite mismatches in
patta details resulting in the possibility of registering disputable documents.

The Government replied that the mismatch in survey number was on account of non-
updation of revenue database in cases of Natham® lands, inherited properties, sub-
divisions of a survey number. The software cannot restrict registration if a survey
number is not found in revenue database (Tamil Nilam). The reply is not tenable as
authority for creation, maintenance and updation of land records lies with the Revenue
Department. Hence, details of the land parcel as maintained by Registration
Department should match with that of Revenue Department. In case of mismatches, the
application should capture justification of SR.

2.2.6 Deficiencies in services with regard to patta transfer

Analysis by audit revealed that in respect of 16,00,145 number of Form 6 requests sent
to Revenue Department for transfer of ownership of property during the period
February 2018 to February 2020, in 68,917 requests the response was ‘Null’ and in
55,387 requests the response was with ‘Failed’ status. Details of the failed requests is
given below:

8 Natham is defined in law lexicon as a land upon which houses can be built in a village.

13


the Registration Department, Ta

Table 2 — Details of Failed Requests

scription No of documents

Schema Failure 28,124

Invalid Input format 10,772

Invalid District Code/ Taluk Code 9,671

Form 6 number already exists 4,927

Invalid Survey number 892

Land Pending for A-Register Correction 622

Land is under CLR 197

Land is under Anadheenam 76

Not available in the tables 54

Government Lands Involved 35

Blocked for transaction 17

Total 55,387
In this regard, audit observed that the incorrect capturing and transferring of property
details resulted in failure of delivery of citizen’s service despite collecting patta transfer
fee. The department did not take any corrective action in respect of the above cases,
especially with respect to the cases relating to ‘Invalid survey number’, ‘Land under
Anadheenam’, ‘Government land involved’ {discussed in Para 3.2(a)} etc, wherein the
risk of fraudulent registration of Government land is high.

The Government replied that all the cases pointed out by Audit has been sorted out and
the failed cases have been resent to the Revenue Department. Further, database of
Revenue and Registration Department in respect of survey numbers is being
synchronised and at present there is no error occurred. The Government further replied
that the Revenue Department is creating notations for Anadheenam and Natham lands
and the registration of such land would be completely blocked once the notation is
shared by the Revenue Department with the Registration Department.

2.2.7 Absence of process history to Sub Registrar

For data integrity and better monitoring a workflow Information Technology
management should exhibit all proposals, changes made at every step of execution of a
process to the subsequent higher levels of hierarchy. STAR 2.0, being a workflow
management application should record and exhibit changes made at all levels.

During real time testing and walk through, audit noticed that any changes made on the
original entries by the Junior Assistant of a SR office were not available in the SR
screen. Therefore, application did not give efficient oversight facility to the SR as he
would not be aware of the changes made by his subordinates.

The Government accepted that there is no provision in the software for SR to view the
entries as such functionality would spoil the user friendliness in the screen. The
Government’s reply is not tenable as supervisory officers cannot check the changes
made by JA/Assistant which weakens supervisory control mechanism.



Chapter II -Planning and Implementation of STAR 2.0 Application

2.2.8 Absence of classifications and deficiencies in data capturing

The levy of SD and RF is based on the classification of documents. The rates differ
based on the nature of documents. Hence, the system should have provision to list out
various type of deeds and the data on classification of the document to levy the
appropriate SD and RF. However, audit noticed that:

‘Cancellation of sale agreements where possession was given’ was not
identified as a distinct classification under Entry 1(0) of Table of Fees under
Registration Act. Also, provision was not given to capture value of total
consideration and to calculate appropriate RF, thus bringing in manual
processing of the document.

The application did not identify “Certificate of Sale’ as a classification distinct
from conveyance as listed in Article 18(c) of the Indian Stamp Act. Thus,
registrant would be forced to select the option as conveyance and to pay the
stamp duty at seven per cent (i.e.) inclusive of surcharge at two per cent
resulting in excess payment of stamp duty by the registrants.

“Mortgage deeds for securing debentures’ was not classified as distinct from
Simple mortgage as notified in GO Ms. No. 60 dated 16 March 2020.

“Release between family members who constitute the partnership’ was not
identified as distinct from ‘Release among family members’ as classified under
Articles 55 A & 55 D (i) of Schedule I to Indian Stamp Act.

The instrument, ‘Power of Attorney (POA) - Given for a consideration’ was not
identified as a distinct instrument under Article 48. Treating it as POA-without
consideration would result in short-levy of SD/RF.

Components that constitute value of the document, viz, rent, period of lease,
premium, security deposit, enhancements, efc. as stipulated under Article 35 of
Indian Stamp Act, 1899 were not captured. Only consolidated lease value is
entered to be verified physically by the SR.

In case of new developments on the leased property, the application did not have
provision to capture value of developments in respect of the instrument,
“Surrender of Lease Deed’ and calculate RF accordingly under Entry 1(p) of
Table of fees under Registration Act.

Residential status of the claimant was not captured to validate transactions under
para 4 of Foreign Exchange Management (Acquisition and Transfer of
Immovable Property in India) Regulation, 2018,

Invalid drop-down options for Identity type, viz, Driving license, Pensioners ID
card, Freedom fighters card, etc was shown and accepted while entering details
for a minor.

In respect of the instrument of Settlement or Release among family members,
the field for entering father’s name was not made mandatory. The application
allowed to select the relationship option as ‘among family members’ (defining
instrument category) even for different parent’s names without prompting any
further details.

15


IT Audit of STAR 2.0 Application in the Registration Department, Tamil Nadu

Thus, non-availability of provision of capturing the above important data may result in
short levy of duty, fees, adoption of manual procedure and incomplete data capture.

The Government replied that if each classification is provided, it would be a
cumbersome process for citizen to enter more data. Also, all the specific classifications
pointed out by Audit will be introduced and the “Mortgage deeds for securing
debentures” is not required as the volume of such transaction is very meagre. The
Government’s reply is not acceptable as every classification should be provided
separately to the user for payment of right amount of fees and stamp duty, generation
of MIS reports etc.

The Issuance of Certified Copies (CC) Module covers the back-office processes from
receipt of application for issuance of CC from a citizen to return of printed copy of the
document. During the process, the module interacts with the databases for search of
document by number.

2.3.1 Incorrect disclosure of personally identifiable information

According to Rule 2(b) read with 2(i) and 3 of Information Technology (Reasonable
security practices and procedures and sensitive personal data or information) Rules,
2011, data relating to fingerprints and facial pattern of a natural person forms part of
sensitive personal data or information under Information Technology Act, 2000.

As per Rule 6 ibid, disclosure of personal data by a body corporate to any third party
shall require prior permission from the provider of such information.

During walk through and real time testing, audit noticed that certified copies of scanned
documents issued by the department contained personal data/information relating to
parties of a specific document, viz, fingerprints, facial image, photo ID cards (Aadhaar,
PAN, efc.). The above sensitive personal information is shared with any third party
without requisite prior permission from the individual, as CC can be generated by any
person and not necessarily by the individuals involved in the document registration.

The Government replied that the Registration Act, 1908, permits to provide for supply
of scanned documents to the citizens as certified copies. The reply is not acceptable as
sharing of personal data like fingerprints, facial image, identity proof details (Aadhaar
Number) is prohibited under Information Technology Act, 2000. The Department need
to ensure that while furnishing such certified copies, personal information like Aadhaar
number, fingerprint, ec should be concealed.

2.3.2 Delayed issuance of certified copy

The department introduced the scheme of issuance of Quick Response (QR) coded
digitally certified EC and CC. IGR vide circular No.42407/C1/96 dated 29 May 1997
and Standing order 1024, prescribed a time limit of five days excluding date of
production of stamp papers for preparation of certified copies of documents and
miscellaneous records. The digitalised certified copies relating to Book I could be
obtained through online.

16


Chapter II -Planning and Implementation of STAR 2.0 Application

Analysis of data revealed belated issue of CC in 94,773 out of 15,97,344 applications
received during the period from February 2018 to February 2020. The delay ranged
from 30 to 697 days. Out of the above 94,773 cases, 92,692 CCs (Link Annexure 3)
were returned to the citizen and 2,081 (February 2021) were still pending with
department.

Delay in issuance of CC was primarily due to non-availability of digitalised copies of
document. It was noted that 37 per cent of documents pertaining to pre-computerisation
period were yet to be uploaded into the application (detailed further in Para 4.1). Thus,
non-availability of documents impacts the timely issuance of CC to the Citizens.

The Government attributed the space constraint as a reason for non-uploading of
documents relating to pre-computerisation period and in case of manual processing of
CC, the date of issue was not entered in the database and hence the delay. The fact
remains that due to non-uploading of documents of pre-computerisation period in
database, such documents are being searched manually and the delay occurs, which
defeats the objective of seamless delivery of citizen services.

2.3.3 Issuance of certified copies of will

According to Section 51 of the Registration Act, the following are the books that shall
be maintained in the offices:

Book 1: Register of non-testamentary documents relating to immovable property
Book 2: Record of reasons for refusal to register

Book 3: Register of Wills and authorities to adopt and

Book 4: Miscellaneous Register.

According to Section 57(1) of the Registration Act, the Book Nos | and 2 and the
indexes relating to Book No.1 shall be at all times open to inspection by any person
applying to inspect and as per section 62, copies of entries in such books shall be given
to all persons applying for. According to Section 57(2) of the Registration Act, copies
of entries in book number 3 and the Index relating thereto shall be given only to the
persons executing the documents, and after the death of the executants (but not before)
to any person applying for such copies.

Audit noticed that the application allowed any citizen to apply for certified copy of
wills. During the period (from February 2018 to February 2020) 21,174 certified copies
of wills were issued by the department. Test check in SRO, Pallavaram revealed that
out of 27 number of certified copies of will issued, in eight cases (Annexure 3) it was
issued to persons other than the executants. Due to absence of space in the interface
for recording the reasons for the same, the veracity of such issuance could not be
ensured.

The application did not include provision to capture details of the applicant and also it
did not have the space for entering the status of the executant. It was further noticed
that the provision to apply for certified copies of documents under Book 3 was disabled
in the department’s portal subsequently. Thus, the above aspects defeated the goal of
seamless flow of citizen’s service.

17


IT Audit of STAR 2.0 Application in the Registration Department, Tamil Nadu

Though the Government stated that there was no provision in the portal to apply for
Book III and Book IV documents, data analysis by Audit revealed that the same were
issued in as much as 21,174 cases for which the applications were received through
online. The risk of document falling into wrong hands and exposing it to misuse could
not be ruled out.

2.3.4 Non-availability of documents

During the scrutiny of records pertaining to issuance of CC at SRO, Pallavaram, audit
noticed that application for CC for the period from 1960 to 1965 were rejected stating
that the volumes were damaged.

Scrutiny of records in the office of the District Registrar (South) revealed that 531
volumes were fully damaged and 1,784 volumes were partially damaged. Further, 32
photo volumes were fully damaged and 91 photo volumes were partially damaged.

Non-availability of these documents for inspection/issuance of certified copies would
hamper customer service delivery envisaged by the department.

The Government replied that a circular had been issued to recopy the records of the
damaged volume and the scanning works are being undertaken to avoid further
damages and the works are nearing completion.

2.4 Issuance of encumbrance cert! ite module}

The Issuance of EC Module has two blocks-viz, (i) EC-Online block where the citizen
searches and generates EC and (ii) EC block where search is carried out at the SRO and
the citizen gets EC approved by the SRO.

The following discrepancies were noticed in generation and issuance of EC:

i. The service of online generation of EC is available for documents registered
after 1975. For the period prior to 1975, the applicant had to visit the SR office
and obtain the EC copy manually.

ii. In SR Pallavaram, out of 716 documents (pertaining to four survey numbers),
in respect of 177 documents, the previous document number was not
displayed despite availability of the same in the database.

iii. The fact of referral to SDC(Stamps) /AEE, PWD was not automatically
fetched from process log. It was captured only through individual data entry
at the SROs. In case of omission of data entry, the same would not be
displayed in EC

iv. Revised value of the property, arrived after referral to SDC (stamps)/
AEE(PWD), was not reflected in EC.

v. During data analysis, audit noticed 192 (Annexure 4) support requests?
relating to EC generation were pending for more than 30 days. These requests
were raised on issues such as missing document number, error in survey
number, change in SR office jurisdiction, non-reflection of court attachment,
etc.

Support requests are help desk tickets for raising request with the SI

18


Chapter If -Planning and Implementation of STAR 2.0 Application

vi. Index of registration records were mapped to registering offices, resulting in
field office wise generation of EC. In case of transfer of jurisdiction of a
village to a different field office, EC generated by a user would show only the
transactions registered in the selected field office and not all transactions
relating to the property.

vii. Analysis of data revealed belated issue of EC in 7,73,486 (25.30 per cent) out
of 30,57,157 applications received during the period from February 2018 to
February 2020. The delay ranged from 31 to 723 days. Out of the above
7,73,486 cases, 8,345 (Link Annexure 4) were still pending with department.

viii. Audit observed from the records of the DR South, the Director of Snake Park
Trust had made a complaint that the sale made to them by
Smt. Nagarathinammal in the year 1980 though reflected in the EC generated
in the year 2007 but was not reflected in the EC generated in the year 2018.
However, the EC search by Audit is detailed below:

D

D. . Seller | Purchaser | Dateof | Document | Seller | Purchaser | Date of
CaS registration number registration
Cl Smt. Snake Park | 2 June 1980 Chennai. Shanthi | | 2 June 1980
ahennal Sout Nagarathi |. Trust South Joint II
T/Book1/1722/1980 | nammal Rees)

EC is used as primary document of evidence of free title and provides a true picture of
transactions in an immovable property. Incorrect generation of EC adversely impacts
the goal of improved citizen’s service delivery experience.

The Government attributed the above lapses to clerical errors that pertained to the
transactions prior to digitalisation period. The Government, in its reply, added that the
initial issues were sorted out and the EC modules is working well. Further discrepancy
in mapping of hamlet villages between Revenue and Registration Departments resulted
for non-generation of single EC in respect of a survey number. Outsourced data entry
error may lead to omission in EC and necessary correction based on analysis will be
carried out. However, during the data analysis, Audit found that in addition to the errors
committed prior to the digitalisation period, there were recurrence of deficiencies as
pointed out in the above paragraph which requires immediate corrective action by the
department.

‘Conclusion|

In STAR 2.0 application, the interface with the ID issuing authorities is not
developed/enabled for verification of identities, which may lead to non-identification
of illegitimate transactions, if any. In respect of documents referred to SDC (Stamps)
and AEE (PWD) for the determination of market value of property, there was no
provision in the application for online submission of their reports. The revised value
of property along with the additional demand of stamp duty were also not mapped with
the original document entry in Account A. The system allows document registration
despite mismatches in patta details resulting in the possibility of registering disputable
documents.

Absence of classification in respect of certain documents viz., Cancellation of sale
agreements where possession was given, Mortgage deeds for securing debentures, efc.

19


‘he Registration Department,

was noticed in the application which may lead to short collection of stamp duty. While
issuance of certified copies, the application allowed inclusion of personal data viz.,
photo IDs, Aadhaar/PAN ezc. also in contravention to the rules. Instances of full/partial
damage of physical as well as photo volumes were noticed which would result in non-
availability of these documents for inspection/issue of certified copies. The application
provided for issuance of certified copy of will to persons other than executants in some
cases without recording the reasons for the same.

Discrepancies were noticed in generation of Encumbrance certificates with respect to
property / valuation details. Registration records are mapped to the registering offices
in the application. This leads to a situation wherein, in case of transfer of
jurisdiction/creation of registering offices, EC generated by a user would show only the
transactions registered in the selected registering office rather than showing all the
transactions pertaining to the property.

IRecommenda' ||

a. Verification of Identity Cards:

The department may integrate STAR 2.0 with all ID issuing Government
departments / Agencies (PAN, Aadhaar, Driving Licence etc.,) for verification of
identities of persons and properties in respect of service sought through the
application so as to capture correct information which may be useful to detect
illegitimate transactions, if any.

b. SDC segment:

i. Online payment facility may be developed by sending payment link / online
challans to the registrant.

ii, The process of creation of demand at SDC(Stamps) may be matched with
payment details.

iii. Increase in the value of document as per SDC valuation may be mapped with
the document alongwith demand / payments.

iv. Segregation of duties may be enforced with record-based permission
alongwith review/oversight management by Supervising Officer.

c. PWD segment:
i. Queue system of documents alongwith automatic grouping of work
items (based on area / street) may be enforced.

ii. Online payment of SD/RF, in respect of the revised value may be ensured by
sending payment link / online challan.

iii. Increase in the value of document based on field inspection may be mapped
with the document alongwith demand / payment.

20


Chapter II -Planning and Implementation of STAR 2.0 Application

Patta matching and patta transfer process

i.

ii.

Patta mismatch report may be allowed for processing only after recording
of reasons by the registering authority.

Correctness and completeness of property details furnished to Revenue
department may be ensured. In case of error response from NLRMP, the
citizen service requests for patta transfer may be completed by either
rectifying the error responses or informing the deficiencies to the claimant.

Classification and valuation of instruments

i

ii.

Dataset on classification of instruments may be updated to include all
instruments specified under the Indian Stamp Act, 1899, and the Registration
Act, 1908, as amended.

Provision may be included to capture all the personal, property and
document details under necessary input controls.

Issuance of Certified Copies

i

ii.

Inclusion of personally identifiable information, viz, photo, thumb
impression, ID proofs, PAN/Aadhaar numbers, etc in the generation of
Certified Copies may be restricted. Display of personally identifiable
information to other users should be restricted.

Necessary steps may be taken to digitalise all the documents registered with
the department. Recovery and digitalisation of damaged copies with the help
of appropriate technologies may be implemented.

Issuance of Encumbrance Certificates

i

ii.

iii.

iv.

Steps may be taken to digitalise index records of all the documents registered
with the department.

Correctness and completeness of index table in terms of property identities,
viz, survey number, may be ensured for generation of correct and complete
EC.

Engagements of the property with court or revenue recovery authorities may
be recorded as a mutation in the Index table to restrict further transaction.

Display of all necessary details, viz, previous document, referral to
SDC/AEE, revised document value, etc in the EC may be ensured.

EC based on document number, may include the complete transaction
lineage as on date.

21


Chapter - III

Application Development

Primary steps involved in the process of online registration of documents is the creation
of user credentials with the scope of submission of application and other documents for
services alongwith the payments of fees so that the Registrar can approve the user. The
detailed steps are depicted in the flow chart as shown below:

OF ONLIN

IV Creation of
.. executant/claimant/
Witness/Presenter

TI. Creation of
user credentials

VIL. Presentation
of documents /
> proof of identity
before the

a
>
Registrar

VT

IX. Field
inspection /
Verification of
details furnished /
Reference to SDC

The above processes go through all or some of the following integrated modules of the
application:

Citizen Profile
Management Module

IT

Issuance of Certified Appeal Management
copies Module Process Sub Module



IT Audit of STAR 2.0 Application in the Registration Department, Tamil Nadu

The observations noticed by Audit in the development of the application is discussed
in the subsequent paras.

Data integrity refers to the completeness, accuracy and reliability of data obtained,
processed and preserved in a database. Any database management system should
ensure data integrity through various validations / restrictions, viz, authentication, input
controls, process controls, non-repudiation, etc.

Due to the cost of acquisition and its impact on socio-economic growth of a household,
ownership of an immovable property plays a very important role in the livelihood of an
individual. It is often used as collateral for gaining capital/liquidity for major
agricultural / household expenditures.

In India, ownership to a property is primarily established through registered documents
of sale deed and other documents of transfer of rights. In view of this, maintaining
correct and reliable details of a citizen’s ownership to a property and preventing
registrations of incorrect/disputable documents is the primary responsibility of the
department.

Processing of documents for registration consists of the following three major
components, correctness of which would ensure integrity of the registration database:

Figure 2— Components of Processing of documents for Registration

= Date of Birth,
Identification

document number,

Phone no, Email ID
ete,

= number,

Survey number,
Dimensions, Schedule
etc.,

= of the
document, Ownership
to a property etc.,

Audit took up testing of user and back office interface and conducted data analysis to
assess the integrity of the registration data. The observation made on the three major
components are discussed in the subsequent paragraphs.

3.2 Document identities

As per Section 54 of Registration Act, 1908, every office wherein the books of
registration are kept, shall prepare current index of contents of the books, immediately
after the registering authority filled the memorandum of documents.

According to Rule 119 Tamil Nadu Registration Rules, 1967, read with Appendix VI,
every registering office shall prepare indexes containing particulars such as Names of
the parties, location of property, Nature of property, Transaction value, Date of
Execution / presentation / registration, etc.

Depending upon the type of document, four types of Indexes are prepared in the
Registration Department. Indexes I & II are prepared for instruments relating to

24


Chapter II -Application Development

transfer of immovable properties. Index III is prepared for instruments relating to Will
and Index IV is for Miscellaneous instruments.

In STAR 2.0 application, though initial inputs are received from the registrants,
ensuring its correctness lies with the department.

a) Registration of land categorised as Government land

Land records are being created and maintained by the Directorate of Survey and
Settlement under the Revenue department. Land record information comprises of
primary components like District, City/Town/Village, Ward, Block, Survey number,
Sub-division number, Resurvey number, Town Survey number, Patta, efc. Each
attribute represents a distinct, but interrelated identity of the property and cannot be
interchanged. Combination of ward/block number and survey number (or any
equivalent identity) is unique for a land parcel.

In the A-Register, maintained by the Revenue Department two types of survey numbers
are given:

e¢ Government - Survey numbers of all Government Lands

e Ryotwari— Survey numbers of all other lands

While entering document details for registration, a user has to select the survey number
from drop down menu. Survey numbers classified as ‘Ryotwari’ in the A-Register of
Revenue Department alone would be loaded and those classified as ‘Government’
would not be loaded for selection.

Audit scrutiny revealed the following system deficiencies while performing a document
registration:

i. The user interface did not capture land details under distinct attributes, viz,
Survey number, Resurvey number, Town Survey number, etc.

ii. A user has to compulsorily select, from the dropdown menu, the survey number
the land parcel that has to be registered. However, in the case of non-
availability of a specific number under the ‘Survey number’ drop down menu,
the user is allowed to enter any value for the survey number by choosing
‘Others’ option and continue with the registration process.

°

iii. The above invalid values entered by the user are incorrectly stored under the
attribute ‘Survey number’.

This leads to a situation wherein a user can register any parcel of land despite non-
availability of survey numbers in the application. Audit undertook a comparative study
of survey numbers of 10,811 documents! by obtaining survey number database of the
village and verified them with that of the document registrations. The findings are
detailed in Chart I given below:

1 Registered in Katchur Village in Thiruvallur district during the period from February 2018 to
February 2020

25


IT Audit of STAR 2.0 Application in the Registration Department, Tamil Nadu

Chart -1 — Details of registrations with invalid/incorrect
survey numbers in a village

e= - 10,811 DOCUMENTS

Documents with valid survey
numbers

Documents with Invalid survey
numbers - valuing % 3.32 crore

Documents with survey
numbers of Government land -
valuing % 3.56 crore

The breakup of documents with survey numbers of Government land is detailed below:

Table 3 — Break-up details of survey numbers of Government land

Re r Number of

Anadheenam Puncey (Dry land 2
Grama Natham Porampoke 274

Tax Assessed 16
Medu

Porampoke 16

Though Government lands can be given to citizens through means such as land for
landless etc., and subsequent transactions in those land are allowed, proper verification
needs to be done before processing any land wherein the survey number is not displayed
in the application. Provision of ‘Others’ option in the application for registering land
with any survey number allows registration of Government land and other disputable
lands.

The department may verify the 832 registrations with invalid survey numbers and 308
records (Link Annexure 5) with survey numbers categorised as Government Lands in
Katchur village in Tiruvallur District and ensure genuineness of the registrations.
Department should also check similar cases in other villages also.

Processing of registration other than those categorised as ‘Ryotwari’ through ‘Others’
option in the application has affected integrity of the database as well. Requirement of
verification with Revenue authorities and Survey authorities in cases of lands other than
‘Ryotwari’ was not envisaged in the application.

26


Chapter II -Application Development

The Government replied that the above data analysis result might be due to registration
of Natham lands categorised under Government land which is not yet digitalised. Audit
reiterated that in respect of land parcels other than ‘Ryotwari’, application should
include workflow to capture further details on Natham land like Government orders
and decision/justification of SR to proceed with the registration. It is further reiterated
that registration of Natham land to private individuals was test checked in only one
village. Therefore, the department may carry out the above analysis for all the villages
in the State for necessary corrective action and to safeguard the Government Lands and
put in place necessary verification mechanism for registration of such lands.

b) Registration of land categorised as temple land

As per section 22-A(1)(ii) of the Registration Act, 1908, the registering officer shall
refuse to register instruments belonging to, or given or endowed for the purpose of, any
religious institution to which the Tamil Nadu Hindu Religious and Charitable
Endowments (TN HR & CE) Act, 1959 is applicable, unless a sanction in this regard is
issued by the competent authority as provided under the relevant Act.

During scrutiny of files/database provided by the Department, audit noticed that the
department did not have any centralised mechanism to update these details, viz,
endowments to institutions / trust, leaving the above properties open for further
transaction.

Failure to ensure correctness and completeness of document identity details has made
the process prone to fraudulent transactions. One such illustration whereby temple land
was conveyed as private property is given below.

Illustration:

A deed of settlement, transferring the title to a land parcel described by Survey
No.183/1, Area 11,298 sq.ft at Zamin Pallavaram by Shri Sivakumar to his son
Shri Hari, was registered in January 2018 vide Doc.No.SRO Pallavaram /169/2018.
The recitals of the document specify that the property was donated to his great
grandfather as inam land for being trustee of Anjaneyar temple and claimed title to the
property through unregistered Will. The document was registered at SRO, Pallavaram
without referring the case to TN HR&CE department and obtaining sanction from
appropriate authority as required under Section 22-A(1)(ii) of the Registration Act.
Subsequently the following transactions continued by other registered documents as
detailed below:

27


IT Audit of STAR 2.0 Application in the Registration Department, Tamil Nadu

Original Transaction

* Sanction from the Commissioner /HR&CE
Department was not obtained.

Land owned by + Special Tahsildar had stated that the
Trustee of Anjaneyar Temple was not listed in the
Anjaneyar Temple, HR&CE Website.
Pallavaram — 11,298 * On verification, Audit found that Anjaneyar
Temple was listed in serial number 586 in
HR & CE website.

Son cS
Doc No. POA >
5611/2018

The Government replied that a separate notation for temple land is being created in the
Revenue Department which will be shared with the Registration department and post
sharing of the notations, such transactions of temple lands will be completely blocked.

3.3 Personal identities|

3.3.1 Incomplete citizen credentials

Name, Age, Gender, Address, Contact number, Email ID, Identity proof details are
some of the credentials against which a user ID is generated. Similar credentials are
captured in respect of Executant, Claimant, Presenter and Witnesses while creating/
drafting a document for registration as explained in Figure - 1.

However, these important fields were made mandatory only while creating User ID.
While creating Executant / Claimant / Presenter / Witnesses, the fields for entering
Contact number, Email ID, Identity proof details were not made mandatory. This
resulted in creation of incomplete / incorrect personal information which are necessary
to maintain uniqueness of details of parties to the instrument.

Audit noticed that in SR _ Pallavaram, 59,661 records of executant/
claimant/presenter/receiver and 3,42,245 User IDs were created during the period
between February 2018 and February 2020. Audit analysis of the data of the records
revealed the following,

28


Chapter II -Application Development

Chart 2 - Incomplete and Multiple creation of USER IDs

INCOMPLETE EXECUTANT/ CREATION OF MULTIPLE USER
CLAIMANT DETAILS 195
350000 342245
60000. 59661 59423 300000
250000
40000 सपा 200000
150000 a
20000 poTZZ 100000
50000 3187
CL] |] >
——S—EEEEE
»
s
बढ रा
किस
$
s हि
a की

Out of the 82,692 cases pertaining to repeated Email ID, Audit analysis of 1,000 cases
revealed that one email ID was repeatedly used for 94 times despite having different
ersonal details. Further, analysis of another 1,000 cases revealed that 122 mobile
numbers were used repeatedly.

Non-capturing of important details and not ensuring uniqueness of personal information
in the application software leads to entry of wrong information and poor data integrity.

The Government replied that contact number and identity proof details are made
mandatory for all executants. Although it is not restricted during initial time of
implementation, later, creation of user login with same mobile number has been
restricted. The Government further replied that Audit point will be taken up and
creation of user login with same email id will also be restricted.

3.3.2 Lack of authentication checks

Authentication is a data integrity mechanism to ensure that users are the persons they
claim to be. Such authentication was carried out only, at the time of creation of user
IDs alone. It is pertinent to mention that in STAR 2.0 application it was envisaged to
verify the authenticity by sending SMS. However, no authentication, by sending one
time password (OTP), was taken up at the time of capturing details of persons involved
in execution of a document.

Analysis of data relating to SRO, Pallavaram revealed that out of 20,783, there were
five dummy mobile numbers (viz., 1234567890, 9876543210, etc.) involving seven
cases relating to executants/claimants.

29


IT Audit of STAR 2.0 Application in the Registration Department, Tamil Nadu

Non-authentication of personal details of executant / claimant affects data integrity in
as much as the system did not check and filter unintended, typographical mistakes.

The Government replied that most of the documents are created by document writers
and advocates. They are not able to get claimant mobile number in time. So, in order
to avoid the cumbersome process in entering OTP and on considering the expiry time,
they entered OTP of their employees or nearby persons. So, to encourage to enter the
mobile number of original claimant, the OTP provision was removed. Now, it is
encouraged the citizen to provide their contact numbers and notice boards have been
placed in this regard in all Sub-Registrar’s offices.

The reply is not acceptable since removal of authentication had adversely affected data
integrity without which department cannot provide seamless service delivery (SMS
alerts and e-mails) as envisaged in Clause 5 of RFP Volume I.

3.3.3 Capture of poor quality of thumb impressions

As per clause 7 (xxxiv)(b) of RFP, thumb impression is being captured and stored, as
mandated by the department as a system of capturing identification of parties to the
document registered.

As per para 5.3 of Fingerprint Image and Minutiae Data Standard for e-Governance
Applications in India, issued by Department of Information Technology, Ministry of
Communications and Information Technology, fingerprint image captured must be
checked for quality before storage/minutiae extraction. Fingerprint images captured
with NFIQ (NIST Fingerprint Image Quality) value of 1, 2 and 3 qualify for acceptable
quality. NFIQ levels 4 and 5 are poor quality images for minutiae data creation and are
discouraged from use for enrolment/verification/identification purposes. The picture of
good quality thumb impression is given under:

Clear Thumb Impression

Left Thumb

Left Thumb

Test check by audit revealed that the STAR 2.0 application accepted attempts of any
incorrect placement of finger on the platen and captured image. Fingerprint images
without proper coverage of core, ridges were also accepted by the application. Poor
quality data would affect data integrity, thus defeating the goal to match bio-metric data
for subsequent registrations.

30


Chapter II -Application Development

Execution admitted by 1 Left Thumb
Left Thumb

The Government replied that some of the persons are having eroded fingerprint due to
their nature of work. So, quality is getting reduced. If the percentage of capturing is
enhanced the fingerprint of those persons could not be captured. This will be analysed
and best practices will be implemented.

3.3.4 Capture of poor quality of facial images

As per clause 7 (xxxiv) (b) of RFP, photo of executants and claimants should be
captured and stored as mandated by the department for identification of parties to the
document.

As per para 6.1 of Face Image Data Standard for e-Governance Applications in India
issued by Department of Information Technology, Ministry of Communications and
Information Technology, the vendor (SI) should certify the quality of face image by
filling check list provided therein. A quality check list (which includes 20 parameters
and prescriptive values), as per the specification and best practices is provided at para
6.2 of the said standard.

Test check by audit revealed that the interface for capturing images did not provide any
quality check list. Audit test checked 120 documents (registered during the period from
February 2018 to February 2020) pertaining to the SRO, Pallavaram with reference to
the above check list and noticed poor image quality in 20 cases (Annexure 5). Thus,
capturing of poor quality of facial images would make it difficult for the department to
match the image for future transactions.

The Government replied that the Face Image Data Standard will be studied and
applicable recommendations will be implemented.

4 Processing details}
3.4.1 Non-implementation of fingerprint matching

As per Section 7 of Transfer of Property Act, 1882, every person, entitled to the
property or authorised to dispose the property not his own, is empowered to execute
transfer of a property. According to rule 60 (i) of the Registration Rules, the executant
and claimant (in case of instrument of sale) or only the executant shall be required to
affix his/her left-hand thumb impression in both the register of thumb impressions (as
prescribed in Appendix IV) and in the endorsement on the document.

31


IT Audit of STAR 2.0 Application in the Registration Department, Tamil Nadu

Hence, thumb impression of owner or power of attorney who has right to execute the
document of transfer in respect of every property is available with the department.
However, Audit observed that despite availability of thumb impressions with the
department, it was not used to match for subsequent transactions to avoid fraudulent
transactions and safeguard public interest.

Audit further observed that fraudulent activities in property transactions were identified
y the department only on receipt of complaint from owner or any other concerned
ersons.

Audit scrutiny of 478 complaints and subsequent orders passed by the DRs during the
period from February 2018 to February 2020 revealed impersonation of owner of the
roperty. It is to be noted that the above transaction involved consideration value of
% 51.59 crore which reflects loss to the purchasers. Thus, implementing fingerprint
matching procedure could have avoided registration of fraudulent transactions and
safeguarded public interest.

The Government stated that the digitised fingerprint is not available for the older period
and so is not possible to match the fingerprint of those documents. The Government
further replied that it will be ensured in the software. The fact however remained that
the comparison of fingerprint was not being made even in respect of fingerprints already
available in the department which would have been a deterrent to fraudulent
transactions.

3.4.2 Multiple mutations of documents with same previous document

As per section 7 of Transfer of Property Act, 1882, every person, entitled to the property
or authorised to dispose the property not his own, is empowered to execute transfer of
a property.

When an instrument is executed, entitlement to/authorisation to handle the property
passes on to the claimant/authorised person. Thereafter, executants of the
present/previous transactions are prohibited from transacting in that property. In this
regard the last transaction in respect of a property only is to be considered live and open
for further transaction. All other previous transactions in records of the department are
to be archived only for reference and verification of lineage of transaction/document.

However, during walk through and real time testing, audit noticed that the application
allowed multiple transactions to be initiated by linking the same previous document in
respect of the same property. It indicates that mechanism to ensure
entitlement/authority to transact in the property, viz, automatic updation of document
status or entitlement/ authorisation status was not envisaged in the application.

Failure to ensure previous document status or entitlement to the property as archived,
has exposed the department process to register disputable documents. An illustration
of multiple registrations citing the same previous document, conveying the same
property is given below.

32


Chapter III -Application Development

Illustration:

==

This illustration depicts that even after the mutation of document (277/1983) in 2014

itself, persons other than the owners were al
document in the current fraudulent transacti

This happened since the application did n
document or title to the property after com

le to refer the 1983 document as previous
on.

ot capture the updated status of previous
pletion of a registration process. This has

resulted in poor data integrity in respect of transaction / document lineage, resulting in
registration of disputable documents.

The Government replied that it will be considered to provide an alert to SR, if the same
citizen sells the same property again to a different citizen. The Government further
replied that if the full field of a survey number is sold out in the same documents or
with various documents, further registration will be blocked. However, the fact remains
that at present this application allowed multiple transactions to be initiated by linking
the same previous documents in respect of the same property.

3.4.3 Non-restriction of documents engaged by Revenue Authorities /Court

As per Section 89 of Registration Act, 1908, every court granting a certificate of sale,
every revenue officer granting a certificate of sale, every officer granting agricultural /
land improvement loan, every officer granting an assignment of land by the government
shall send a copy to the registering officer.

In cases of Mortgage, Engagements with court and revenue recovery authorities,
Attachments by Enforcement Directorate (ED), ec, the claimant in the previous
document is barred from transacting in the said property.

Audit performed walk through and real time testing with the simulated circumstances
of mortgage, attachment by court efc., and found that the application allowed
transaction to be initiated from any of the previous documents. The events of mortgage,
court or revenue attachments were only captured as remarks and not used in restricting
unauthentic transactions. Also, department did not have any centralised mechanism to
update these details, the details were received and updated at individual field offices.

33


IT Audit of STAR 2.0 Application in the Registration Department, Tamil Nadu

Further, it was also noticed that the ED had notified (April 2021)? attachment of
properties scheduled in 51 documents registered in eight SR Offices. Out of the above,
entries have been made in 40 cases only, leaving the other 11 (Annexure 6) properties
vulnerable for further transaction.

Thus, lack of effective IT validation in STAR 2.0 application would result in
transactions on those documents which were barred by revenue authorities/courts.

The Government accepted the audit observation and stated that an alert would be
provided for further registration of the attached property in viable cases.

3.4.4. Incomplete process flow — e-Stamping procedure

As per clause 1.19.5 of RFP (Vol II), the e-Stamping module of software should have
provision to verify genuineness of the e-Stamp paper and to lock the same, before
completing the registration process. Stock Holding Corporation of India Limited
(SHCIL) has requested to provide Application Programming Interface (API) gateway
for updation of its records on usage of e-stamps.

The aspect of not locking the E-stamps was also commented in the Performance Audit
report on STAR application, featured in the CAG’s audit report on Revenue Sector,
Tamil Nadu for the year ending March 2013 titled ‘Implementation of Computerisation
in Registration Department’.

However, audit noticed that despite a lapse of six years after commented in Audit
eport, the API gateway as required by SHCIL was not yet developed in the application
defeating the goal of end-to-end integration.

The Government replied that the API integration would be provided to SHCIL for
ocking at their end.

As per para 2.4 of the Guidelines for Software Development and Re-engineering
ublished by the Department of Electronics & IT, Ministry of Communication &
Information Technology, Gol, every e-Governance project would be required to qualify
the following three tests by Standardisation Testing and Quality Certification (STQC)
irectorate or other empanelled agencies:

. Functional testing - Functional or User Acceptance Testing (UAT) is a
technique used to verify compliance of an application to the functional
requirements furnished to the SI.

. Performance testing — Performance or Load testing is a technique to verify
processing capacity in terms of speed, responsiveness and stability of the
application to the intended load.

. Security testing — Security or Vulnerability Assessment and Penetration
Testing is a technique used to identify vulnerabilities in the system that
threatens possible unauthorised access.

2 F.No.ECIR/CEZ)-1/03/2019 dated 8 April 2021.

34


Chapter II -Application Development

Further, as per clause 7 of RFP, after the configuration of the SLA reports by the SI and
setting up the software for roll-out, the application should be audited by a third-party
software auditor before the launch of the application.

3.5.1 Quality testing procedures

As per clause 6(xii) and (xx) of RFP (vol I), which elaborates on the conditions to be
fulfilled by the SI before launch of the application, the SI should develop test cases and
should rectify the defects reported by the department after user testing. The application
should be tested for performance assessment, vulnerability and security by any
Computer Emergency Response Team — India (CERT-IN) empanelled agency. Only on
successful clearance through a compliance audit done by the SI, the application should
be deemed ready for Go-Live by the SI.

During scrutiny of records, audit noticed the following deficiencies:
a. Functional testing

The department conducted Functional testing (User Acceptance Testing) with the
assistance of Technical Consultant during March 2017. Out of 50 number of test cases
developed by the department with the technical consultant, 326 number of defects were
raised. Out of which 117 number of defects remained unrectified (as on April 2017).
Test check of 24 defects (Annexure 7) in June 2021 (out of 117) revealed that 19
defects (79 per cent) were rectified fully, one partially rectified and four were pending.

Audit conducted independent User Acceptance testing of selected functionalities under
the UAT environment* provided (February 2021) by the department and noticed 30
observations (Annexure 8). Some of the observations are elaborated in para 2.2.8 in
this report.

The Government replied that all critical observations are rectified and some are under
fixing. Further unrectified test cases would be scrutinised and if required will be
rectified.

b. Performance testing

The department had not ensured the conduct any performance testing by the SI before
the launch of the application. During scrutiny of files relating to launch of application,
Audit observed that the application suffered from technical glitches immediately after
launch of the 1‘ module (Document Registration Module) on 12 February 2018 and
that the application was not accessible by public upto 14 February 2018. The
department officials had to resort to ‘Online linked Offline method’, wherein the staff
would have to enter necessary index details in back office system causing hardship to
users and departmental officers. The system was restored with the help of Indian
Institute of Technology, Madras (IIT-M) who came as Third Party Auditor (TPA).

The Government stated that Performance testing has been carried out by IIT, Madras,
and the suggestions pointed out by them were implemented.

Internal-user credentials, mapping the roles of Sub-Registrar and Junior Assistant were created
for audit to navigate and process test records in a non-production server.

35


IT Audit of STAR 2.0 Application in the Registration Department, Tamil Nadu

c. Security Testing

As per clause (xx) of Chapter 6 and Chapter 7 of RFP (Volume I), the application should
be tested for vulnerability assessment and security testing on yearly basis and till the
end of contract during the Operation and Maintenance phase by any CERT-IN
empanelled agency.

As per the NIC-CERT, Ministry of Information Technology guidelines for vendors and
other stakeholders involved in development, administration and management of
websites, every website should be security audited and obtain security clearance
certificate from a CERT-IN empanelled agency before hosting in production
environment and as and when changes are done to the source code.

Audit noticed that security testing in respect of nine modules was last conducted during
2018 and no security testing was conducted thereafter. Further, 371 release notes
(Annexure 9) had been furnished by the Department during the period from January
2019 to July 2019 without security testing.

In the absence of conduct of Security testing, the possibility of security threats could
not be ruled out.

The Government stated that security testing was completed and will be done before any
major release to avoid any security lapse.

3.6 Delayed and partial conduct of Third Party Audi

Audit observed that the department did not perform the mandatory third party audit as
per the RFP before the launch of the application. As neither the Performance testing
nor the third party audit was conducted, the stability of the application remained
untested. As a result, the application crashed immediately after the launch on 12
February 2018 and remained inaccessible up to 14 February 2018. IIT-M was brought
in by the department to rectify the issues and stabilise the application after the crash.

Though TPA was not conducted before the launch of the Application, in order to
identify performance issues and bring performance stability to the application, the
department appointed IIT-M as TPA in April 2018 (i.e.) two months after ‘Go-live’.
The recommendations of the TPA after completion of performance audit are as below:

a) To conduct load test before any major release
b) To upgrade database framework
c) To continuously monitor performance measure

In this regard, the following observations were made:

i. As per Clause 7 of RFP, the performance audit of the application was to be
carried out by the Third Party Agency. However, the SI did not give the back-
office build’ to the TPA team till completion of the Third party Audit in
January 2019. The department concluded the contract without conducting

A software segment relating to departmental activities, viz, processing, administration,
accounting, efc. to be carried out by departmental officials.

36


Chapter II -Application Development

performance audit of back office application for all the modules thus partially
utilising the services of the TPA. The payment was also released in full despite
partial completion of the audit by the TPA.

ii. Audit noticed that, after the conclusion of TPA’s performance audit, the SI
has released eight more modules and issued 23 (Annexure 9) release notes?
for changes in software. However, the SI did not take up any further
performance testing even after recommendation of the TPA.

The failure in conduct of testing affected the assurance of quality of the application.

The Government replied that RFP is not mandating third party audit and the decision
lies with Department. The IIT, Madras has done the third party audit on the request of
the Department. The Government further stated that due to lack of environment
resources, SI was not able to provide the environment immediately for testing even after
implementation. The reply is not tenable since as per Clause 7 of RFP, the application
should be audited by the third party approved by the department and the department
had not conducted before the ‘Go live” and the back office application was also not
given for third party audit.

ing of Business Rules}

3.7.1 Unauthorised modifications in Account ‘A’

As per Rule 7 of the Tamil Nadu Treasury rules, all money received by or tendered to
Government servants in their official capacity shall be, without delay, paid in full into
the Bank.

As per Rule 98 of Registration Rules, the registering authority should grant receipt for
every fee or fine levied by him.

According to Rule 27 of Tamil Nadu Treasury rules, the government servant
responsible for maintenance of departmental accounts with original receipt entry shall
prepare a bill for drawing money on account of refund of revenue. Every such refund
shall be noted against the original receipt entry in the accounts.

Order number 1453 (h) (iii) of the Registration Manual (Part II) stipulates that in case
of refund of fee, a note, with the date of refund shall be entered under the initials of the
registering officer.

As per serial number 10 of e-payment module of clause 1.18 of RFP (Vol-II), after the
challan is presented with the document, i.e., after adding certificate under section 41 of
ISA, 1899, any refund of the amount can be refunded as per Tamil Nadu Stamp Rules.

It is clear from the above rule/manual provisions that in no case, registering officer has
a situation to cancel/modify receipts issued in respect of a payment made into
government account. Any error in depiction can be rectified through correction entries
or excess payments can be refunded through sanction order of competent authority. In

Department’s notice on enhancements/error fixations made by the SI.

37


IT Audit of STAR 2.0 Application in the Registration Department, Tamil Nadu

both the cases, further entries should be made against the original entry under the initials
of registering authority.

Under the web-based environment established, online-payment challans, containing
unique transaction IDs were submitted along with the documents presented for
registration. After verification of payment confirmation from the bank, the same is
accepted for payment of SD/RF by the registering authority. A receipt, mapping the
payment challans presented, is issued in favour of the registrant. The registered
document is returned to the claimant/receiver on production of the receipt. Collection
of SD and RF are automatically accounted under the corresponding head of accounts in
the respective field office. Receipts are mapped with the relevant document number
with receipt status as ‘active’.

During data analysis of Account ‘A’® maintained in the system, audit noticed
modifications in the status of receipts to ‘inactive’. Audit noticed modification even
after return of the document to the receiver/claimant. Changing the status of receipts to
‘Inactive’, brings the under-linked challans to ‘Unutilised’ status. These challans
(Transaction IDs) could either be used for payment of stamp duty for any other
document or for claiming refund of the amount. In case of reuse, the departmental
accounts (Account ‘A’) would show registration of two instruments as against the
actual receipt of one payment into government account.

Audit analysis of Account ‘A’ table of registration database revealed reuse / refund of
payments after generation of receipts has been detailed in the Chart below: (Link
Annexure 6)

Chart 3 - Audit Anal Reuse of Receipts/Refund of Payments

Total Number of Receipts in ‘A’ Account — 53,81,766 (Feb 2018 to Feb 2020)

Status of modified receipts
(SD & RF involyed- & in lakh)
7557 (4,491.60)
8000
7000
6000
5000
4000 864
707
ELD (233.78) (122.63)
2000 13 (6.76)
1000 न
0
Receipts flagged Challans reused Receipts in respect of _ Receipts rendered
inactive which refund _ inactive after return
applications were —_of the document
made

Account of daily registrations, Fee/Stamp duty realised thereon.

38


Chapter II -Application Development

The Government replied that cancellation option of receipt provided in the independent
payment module has been misused in some offices. So, the option has been blocked
and the misappropriated amount has been collected. The Government further stated
that audit observation regarding cancellation details in ‘A’ Account will be taken into
account and implemented and further modifications/cancellation of receipts will not be
permitted after registering authority certified the documents.

3.7.2 Incorrect online payment system/Incorrect acceptance of payment challans

Chapter II C of Indian Stamp Act, 1899 stipulates the time of stamping instruments.
Instruments executed in India are to be stamped before or at the time of execution.
Instruments executed out of India may be stamped within three months after it has been
first received in India.

As per Section 23 of Registration Act, 1908, documents other than a Will can be
accepted for registration within four months from the date of its execution.

Chapter IV of Indian Stamp Act 1899 lays down procedure for processing instruments
not duly stamped and collection of deficit stamp duty.

Any payment to the department would be made by a user, only against registration of a
specific document or against services offered / certificates issued by the department for
which individual application are to be submitted. Hence, a situation of making payment
of duty / fee into government account without any cause for it, does not arise.

As per clause 1.1 for Online Document Registration process map, the payment event
comes after completion of model form for the transaction type and uploading of scanned
proof documents.

However, IGR issued circular’ (January 2015) in which it was stated that production of
e-payments receipts in the name of the parties to the instruments should not be insisted.

During walk through/real time testing and data analysis of payment system, it was
noticed that a user can make payments towards SD, RF and other fees without any
resent/future dues, i.e., the payments need not have any linked document/application
for processing, viz, temporary number, application number, efc.

The open system of payment and the IGR’s circular cited, permitting utilisation of
ayment made on behalf of one registrant (‘Applicant’ as named in the receipt) by
another, led to a situation of repeated use of the same payment receipt in more than one
registration as detailed below:

Data analysis of payments in respect of SRO, Pallavaram and Tiruppur Joint I revealed
that 25,540 independent payments were made during the period from February 2018 to
February 2020. Out of the above, in respect of 1,076 payments (Link Annexure 7) of
SD/RF for % 5.29 crore, the payment receipts (transaction IDs) of applicants other than
the registrant of the document were utilised.

epeated usage of same payment challans and thereby completing the registration
rocess was noticed in four cases® out of 1,076 payments, resulting in short payment of
SD/RF of %1,22,700.

7 Circular 5642/CS/12 DT 7 January 2015.
8 Transaction IDs : REG201809040817212, REG201806280535868, REG201812241350150
and REG201910097038838

39


IT Audit of STAR 2.0 Application in the Registration Department, Tamil Nadu

On further data analysis of payments, it was noticed that the department had collected
fees of हैं 82.94 crore (Link Annexure 8) during the period from 2018-2020 in respect
of the services to be rendered to the citizens such as furnishing the certified copies,
encumbrance certificates, etc. However, the department had not rendered these services
to the citizen subsequently resulting in collection of amount by the department without
offering services.

The Government replied that (i) online payments once used for generation of receipt
would be locked and the application would not accept the same for another service. (ii)
payments made by persons other than the Registrant is allowable under manual system.
Similarly, to make the payment process user friendly, e-payment made by any person
is accepted in the application. The Government reply is not tenable since the audit
observation was on the incorrect procedure of independent payment without any
underlying service request and not payment by any person.

3.7.3 Inefficient processing of refund applications

Under the web-based environment in the department, payments made by the users was
in two stages, viz, (i) challans not yet presented for registration (ii) challans used, i.e.,
presented with the documents for registration in respect of which receipt is issued by
the registering authority. The payments processed by the registering authorities are
accounted in their respective Account ‘A’.

During walk through, the following inadequacies were noticed:

i. Online system for refund of challans, i.e., payments accounted for in the
Account ‘A’ of a registering authority was not developed. Physical copy of
requisitions for refund were to be submitted by the applicants at the respective
registering offices. The processing in respect of these applications were also
handled through physical files.

ii. Due to the above manual processing, required note of refund were not made
against the original payment receipts in the Account ‘A’.

iii. The application did not have a reconciliation mechanism. Hence, every
individual challan was sent to the Pay and Accounts Office (PAO) for
remittance verification. PAO in turn verifies the remittance ID with the
tespective agency banks, resulting in delayed processing of refund requests.

The Government replied that refund in respect of used challans was being processed
through physical files since the same requires certificate from the PAO. However, Audit
observation is about non-availability of online system for application for refund for
used challan. Further, though the reconciliation with PAO is to be done, the refund of
the excess amount through online system has not been envisaged in the STAR 2.0
application. The reply is silent about linking the refund with the original payment entry
in Account ‘A’ and its subsequent reconciliation.

3.7.4 Absence of functionalities for reconciliation

According to Order No.1469 of the Registration Manual (Part II), an extract (form 50)
of remittances during the month in respect of each district should be forwarded to the
treasury officer for verification. Discrepancies, if any, with the treasury accounts
should be rectified and a report in this regard be sent to Inspector-General.

40


Chapter II -Application Development

As per order No.1853 ibid, the District Registrar should consolidate fees realised and
remitted into treasuries and have the figures verified at the treasuries. A certificate of
reconciliation is submitted to the IGR on 20" of the following month.

As per item No.8 of e-payment module in RFP (Vol 1), the system should compare
payments made through the portal with the treasury scroll to ensure transfer of receipts
into government account.

Following observations are made in this regard:

i. Accounting head-wise reconciliation of departmental receipts with the monthly
accounts prepared by the Treasury/PAO was not envisaged.
ii. Reconciliation of outstanding amounts in the pooling accounts of IGR held in
different agency banks was not envisaged.
iii. Nosystem of reconciliation for remittance into government account as proposed
in RFP was developed.

Further, as per the office of the Accountant General (A&E), Chennai that there is a
credit difference of = 1,175 crore, since February 2018 (as on 31 January 2020) between
the State Books and Central Accounts Section of RBI, Nagpur. Further the department
did not reconcile the online receipt figures with that of AG(A&E) from April 2019.

Without dedicated reconciliation module, department could not review its balances in
the pooling account, remittance of all online payments into government account and
verification of payment in respect of a challan before processing refund.

The Government replied that banks were uploading the scroll to RBI portal only but
not in Registration department’s portal. The same has been requested from RBI for
reconciliation.

3.7.5. Absence of provision to create document in any language

As per Section 19 of the Registration Act, 1908, a document for registration can be
presented in any language provided a true translation of it in a language commonly used
in the District is enclosed.

As per Chapter V of the Registration Rules, Tamil and English shall be used in all the
districts and Telugu, Malayalam, Kannada and Urdu shall be commonly used in the
notified? district and sub-districts. The documents can be presented in the native
language of notified district/sub district.

During Walk through/real time testing, audit noticed that the application had provision
to capture registration details and create draft deed in only English and Tamil. Absence
of other commonly used languages is depriving the citizens of notified districts from
using website and register documents in their native languages.

The Government replied that since the documents are presented for registration either
in English or Tamil, there is no provision for registration in rest of the languages.
However, the fact remained that the above system was not in conformity with the
provisions of the Registration Act, 1908.

° Kannada — Selected sub-districts of Dharmapuri, Coimbatore, Erode
Telugu — erstwhile North Arcot, Dharmapuri, Madras, Ramanathapuram, Coimbatore, Madurai,
Erode

Malayalam - Kanyakumari, Coimbatore
Urdu - erstwhile North Arcot

41


IT Audit of STAR 2.0 Application in the Registration Department, Tamil Nadu

clusion]

The application did not capture the distinct attributes of land details and allowed
registration of Government land and temple lands in certain cases, by selecting ‘others’
option in the application. Personal identity fields were not made mandatory for
registrations resulting in non-availability of contact numbers, email IDs of executants
and claimants. Use of dummy mobile numbers were also noticed in certain cases. Non-
capturing of important details and not ensuring uniqueness of personal information in
the application leads to poor data integrity. Capturing of poor quality thumb
impressions and facial images in the application were noticed. Non-implementation of
fingerprint matching in the subsequent transactions would compromise the safety of
transaction and may lead to fraudulent transactions.

While registration, the application did not ensure the status of previous documents and
allowed multiple mutation of documents without verifying the entitlements of the
property. This may result in registration of disputable documents. Lack of effective IT
validation in STAR 2.0 application would result in transactions of those documents
which were barred by revenue authorities/courts. Quality assurance testing like
functional, performance and security testing were not conducted as per the procedures
laid down.

There were instances of unauthorized modification of status of challan in Account ‘A’
(active to inactive) post registration, non-mapping of document value with the
demand/collection of applicable duty/fee and acceptance of challans from persons other
than the executants. This led to multiple use of same e-payment challan against
registration of different documents. Further online system for refund of used challans
was not developed. There was no reconciliation module for the payments received
towards duty and fees.

Recommendations

The Government may:

a. ensure completion of quality assurance testing periodically and before every major
release, as per requirement.

b. complete citizen identity management system wherein personal details of citizen
obtaining services through the system is verified, accepted, stored and managed for
further use.

c. fix the standards for capturing fingerprint and facial data.

ensure fingerprint matching /SMS notification procedure for registration of
documents with previous registered document available with the department.

e. capture and update the value of document status in respect of every property and
archive all previous documents, denying further transaction in them.

ff capture and maintain land record details in consistent with that in NLRMP
database

g. ensure complete mapping of value/revised value of the document, demand raised
and payments made.

h. include online refund application and payment procedure in respect of unutilised
challans also.

i. develop a dedicated reconciliation module.

42


Chapter —IV — Resource Management and

Controls

In connection with the development and administration of STAR 2.0 application,
resources viz., IT resources, human skill, financial sanctions, digitalised data, efc are
placed at the disposal of the Department for effective and efficient utilisation.

4.1 M

ion of datal

Any data migration process would include (i) digitalisation of physical records / data
extraction from existing system, (ii) verification of validations as per data integrity rules
of the target system and (iii) integration.

Legacy data of the Registration department are from two categories:

i. Data pertaining to the pre-computerisation era (Non-digital data) which were
in the form of physical records, viz, Documents, Register of thumb
impressions, etc.

ii. Data generated in digital form after computerisation of the department
through introduction of STAR software in 2000, consisting of scanned
documents, datasets relating to persons and properties including bio-metric
data captured during registration of a document.

For non-digital data, GoTN accorded! (August 2018) administrative sanction of = 89.17
crore for scanning documents registered from 1865 to 2009.

For the digital data, Clause 6 (xiii) of RFP entrusted the responsibility to SI for
migration and integration of the data available in STAR and the digitalised data of pre-
computerised era.

Audit verification of the status of data migration revealed the following:

i. 99.98 per cent of records out of six crore records relating to Index II’ register
of STAR was successfully migrated by the department.

ii. 37 per cent of records pertaining to pre-computerisation period were yet to be
uploaded and integrated with the new application.

iii, Account details, viz, Accounts ‘A’ to ‘H’ prior to February 2018 were not
migrated into STAR 2.0

1 GO Ms.No.126 dated 24 September 2018
Abstract of documents registered in a field office. Details of property, parties to the document,
Date of execution, document number, efc are recorded.

43


IT Audit of STAR 2.0 Application in the Registration Department, Tamil Nadu

Audit took up one attribute of migrated data, viz, document number for validation
control and gaps in sequential numbers and noticed the following defects:

a. In respect of the 2,43,122 documents/cases pertaining to the period from 1975
to 2021, the date of registration was incorrectly displayed in the user interface
for Certified Copy. In 1,23,037 (Link Annexure 9) out of 2,43,122 cases, (50
to 60 per cent) where the registration date ranges from 1975 to 13 September
2002, the same was displayed as 8 October 2020.

b. On analysis of documents registered in the SRO, Pallavaram, it was noticed that
there were 4,872 (Link Annexure 10) gaps in the document running number
for the period from 1975 to 2017.

c. Data was migrated without input/validation controls. Audit noticed that in
1,30,787 (Link Annexure 11) out of 6,85,92,178 number of registration records
migrated, document number and date of registration did not match. Further it
was also noticed that out of 6,38,22,696 records in Bookl, 5,227 (Link
Annexure 12) number of records has invalid years in document numbers, viz,
7592, 8097, 8002.

The Government replied that the audit point is noted and the data cleansing would be
carried out.

4.2 Delayed completion of support requests

Support requests are raised through email/fax/calls both by citizens and departmental
officials facing difficulties in using the application. While time limit for resolving the
issues, according to levels of difficulties, was not fixed by the department the maximum
acceptable timeline as per the performance metric is 24 hours.

During audit it was noticed that no mechanism, viz, Management Information System
(MIS) reports, was put in place to monitor time taken for resolving issues raised.

Analysis of data relating to Support requests revealed that 14 per cent of cases (20,918
out of 1,47,284 closed cases) were resolved after a period of 30 days. With 25 per cent
(5,158) (Link Annexure 13) of issues raised on core functions, viz, EC generation,
correction in index, online payments, issue of certified copies, return of documents efc.,
belated resolving of issues affects timely delivery of citizen’s service.

The Government replied that the delay was in respect of online payment issues which
required third party support. The reply is not acceptable as the delay pointed out by
audit was not only in respect of the online payment issues but also in other issues such
as EC generation, index correction etc., which affected the delivery of the citizen
services.

3 Index corrections

According to Rule 119 of Tamil Nadu Registration Rules,1983 read with Appendix VI,
every registering office shall prepare indexes containing particulars such as Names of
the parties, location/boundary of property, Nature of property, Transaction value,
Market value, Date of registration, etc.

44


Chapter IV -Resource Management and Controls

As per Section 54 of Registration Act 1908, every office wherein the books of
registration are kept, shall prepare current indexes of contents of the books,
immediately after the registering authority filled the memorandum of documents.

Audit test checked 53,78,191 number of documents registered during the period from
February 2018 to February 2020 and noticed that 11,773 (Link Annexure 14) index
correction petitions relating to 9,388 documents were received. Out of the above, 8,465
petitions were approved, 2,321 petitions were rejected and 987 petitions were pending.
Occurrence of error / corrections in the index reflects weakness in internal contro
mechanism. One such case is illustrated below:

Document number

document
SRO Pallavaram / E Vincent Polamma 372/ 1AIA1 372/ LAIAL
5079/2015 (Seller) (Purchaser)
SRO Pallavaram/ Polamma S Riyaz Ahmed 372/ 1AIAL 372/ 1A1A1
2422/2019 (Seller) (Purchaser)
SRO Pallavaram / S Riyaz Ahmed | Nasreen Farah 372/ 1AIAL 372/1A1 Al &
8385/2020 (Settlor) (Settlee) 143/33

Representation of Shri Riyaz Ahmed for transfer of patta was not accepted by Revenue
Authority stating that the plot under consideration covered two survey numbers, viz,
372/1A1A1 and 143/33. But the Sale deed (2242/2019) included only 372/1A1A1.
The property description in the document had to be corrected only by registering a Deed
of Rectification. However, the department accepted the application for Index correction
and changes made in Index were reflected in EC.

No workflow was provided for making index corrections in respect of name of the
claimant, consideration, etc. After approval of District Registrar in manual records,
details of corrections were forwarded to the Support Cell of SI which would make
changes in the index. Index is one of the important government record wherein the
power to access and update lies with government authorities, viz, DR/SR. Thus, index
correction by SI support cell exposes the breach of vulnerability of the data by officers
not authorised.

The Government replied that the corrections that were made to rectify the errors were
approved by the Additional Inspector General and were carried out through backend
query. Suitable module will be implemented to carry out the corrections through the
application. The fact however remains that till provisions are made in the application,
carrying out the rectifications at the back end was vulnerable for manipulation and
would escape audit trail.

As per FRs 2.2 of RFP (volume.2), SI should provide for generation of 58 MIS reports
out of which, 47 reports had been developed and 11 (Annexure 10) were yet to be
developed. 15 out of 47 MIS reports for the period 2019-2020 were test checked and
the following deficiencies noticed:

i. The reporting module enabled generation of MIS only after office hours, viz,
05.30 pm. This implied that department cannot generate any MIS report during
office hours.

45


IT Audit of STAR 2.0 Application in the Registration Department, Tamil Nadu

ii. Periodicity of all reports were fixed as one month only. Therefore, Annual,
Quarterly or any selected period reports could be generated only by repeated
attempts, filtering and consolidation by departmental officials.

iii. In respect of Document Registration Summary and Deed-wise registration
summary, no data/details were loaded. The window displayed only blank
reports.

iv. The MIS report on surcharge can be downloaded only for the selected month and
not on quarterly basis. The field offices send quarterly statements to the
concerned District Registrar and the same is forwarded to the Office of the IGR,
Chennai. The quarterly statements received are consolidated manually and the
allocation is being done to the concerned local bodies.

The Government in its reply stated that the issue would be rectified once the server and
storage are procured.

Concurrent user login in multiple systems|

Access management process of the application has two layers, viz, user ID / password
and thumb impression. Encumbrance Certificate, Patta and Identity verifications,
verification of presence of reserved words, certification of Index data are some of the
mandatory and critical steps of a SR in the online processing of document registration.
Hence, access management policy should sufficiently protect access to SR login screen.

As per para 3.1.1.4 of Password Policy set by the Ministry of Electronics and
Information Technology, Government of India, passwords shall not be stored in
readable form in batch files, internet browsers or any other location where unauthorised
access is possible.

During data analysis and real time testing of the back-office system, audit noticed that
SR screen could be accessed by various methods, viz, recovering previous SR login
history, use of function keys, efc. Further, analysis of the table for login sessions
revealed concurrent SR login in multiple systems as detailed below:

Table 1 — Login Sessions of SR Login

Lack of effective access control may leave the application vulnerable to unauthorised
access / activities through SR login.

The Government replied that the deficiencies pointed out by the audit were sorted out.
The login of every employee can be opened by entering password as well as comparing
their fingerprint. It reduced unauthorised access. Further, the back office application
runs MPLS-VPN which cannot be opened outside the office. Password policy set by
Ministry of Electronics and IT were enabled. The access of SR login using function

46


Chapter IV -Resource Management and Controls

‘ey, recovering previous login history etc were blocked. Opening of concurrent SR
login in multiple systems also disabled now.

4.6 Absence of facility to u

As per Section 285 BA of Income Tax Act,1961 read with Rule 114 E of IT Rules,
962, every registering authority should furnish Statement of Financial Transactions of
value more than %30 lakh (in Form 614A) to the IT authority. Comma Separated Value
(CSV) format for generation of such report is provided in the reporting portal (Insight)
of the Income Tax department.

During test check at SR, Pallavaram, Audit noticed that 1,540 transactions were due to
e reported to the IT Department for the period from 1 April 2018 to 31 March 2019.
Out of the above 55 number of reports with 269 transactions were furnished to ITD and
all the reports/transactions had been returned by IT department citing data quality
errors. Some of the errors reported in Data Quality Report of IT department are:
Absence of PAN or Incorrect / Invalid PAN

Absence of buyer / transferee details

Blank father’s name

No PAN

Failed mobile number / contact details

Failed identification Type / Number for no PAN case

Failed Date of Birth / Incorporation

Failed Date of Birth range

Failed Address type / postal code

j. Failed form 60 acknowledgement number for no PAN case

k. Inconsistent aggregate transaction amount

roe mo 9० ge

In this regard, audit observed that:

i. The errors were manually verified and corrected in the individual records being
uploaded in the Income Tax portal without rectifying errors in the departmental
records.

ii. The department did not envisage the above reporting requirement in STAR 2.0
application. Without provision for automated generation of data quality
compliant report, the Registering authorities are burdened with manual
generation of reports. The above failure led to generation of incomplete reports
making the exercise futile.

The Government replied that a facility to enter the Form 61 and 61A details during
document/abstract creation by public themselves were created and the system validates
some of the details automatically. As such the remark pointed out by audit has been
implemented.

Arrears of revenue of the department to the end of March 2020 is € 386.46 Crore with
the earliest year of outstanding revenue being 2010-11. Out of the above % 334.96 crore
was outstanding for more than five years.

However, migration of document / registrant-wise arrear details and integration of the
same with the current DCB was not envisaged, defeating the goal of generation of MIS
under computerised environment.

47


IT Audit of STAR 2.0 Application in the Registration Department, Tamil Nadu

4.8 Non-availability of Inventory Register

Para 2.1 of E-security policy 2010 of GoTN, prescribes that each department shall build
an inventory of its IT assets and ensure the physical and environmental security of them.

However, audit noticed that the application did not have provision to maintain and
update inventory register for IT assets. MIS report on the Model / make, Date of issue
/ receipt in the office, Date of installation / repair, maintenance cycles, etc., would help
the department in efficient resource management.

The Government replied that the application is having an inventory register for IT
assets. However, audit verification revealed that the same was not maintained and
updated to reveal the real time information.

‘onclusion|

Data was migrated from STAR to STAR 2.0 application without input/validation
controls which resulted in instances such as incorrect document registration date, gaps
in the document running number etc., Support request from citizen with reference to
the STAR 2.0 Application were resolved with delay.

No workflow was provided in the STAR 2.0 Application for making index correction
in respect of name of the claimant, consideration, etc. In the absence of workflow in
application, index corrections were made by System Integrator in the database through
back-end which makes the application vulnerable for manipulation and it would escape
audit trail also.

Generation of MIS reports was not enabled during office hours and instances of
concurrent usage of SR logins in multiple systems were also noticed. The STAR 2.0
Application did not envisage the furnishing of the Financial Transactions details of the
properties that are to be reported to the Income Tax department in the prescribed format
under IT Act, 1961 and the rules made thereunder.

Recommend: ns}

The Government may

(a) Ensure data cleansing and complete data migration process at the earliest, to
ensure data integrity and complete document trail.

(b) Develop a robust mechanism to monitor the support requests from citizens for
their early disposal.

(c) Ensure, that no index corrections should be carried out through back end and
develop a suitable module to carry out corrections through the application only

(d) Develop a user-friendly MIS Report to ensure better co-ordination and
reporting

(e) Ensure a suitable automated mechanism for furnishing complete and correct
periodical reports/transactions to IT Department and also develop the
mechanism to review the returned reports by IT Department promptly for
corrective actions.

48


Chapter - V

Conclusion and Recommendations

Conclusion|

The computerisation of the activities of the Registration Department started
during the year 2000. An application, named ‘STAR’ was designed and
developed by the department with the assistance of National Informatics Centre
(NIC). In order to further enhance the citizen’s service delivery experience the
Registration Department had taken up new initiative STAR 2.0 in the year 2012
with the assistance of M/s.Tata Consultancy Services for comprehensive
coverage of all registration related services through web-based service delivery.

In STAR 2.0 application, the interface with the ID issuing authorities is not
developed / enabled for verification of identities, which may lead to non-
identification of illegitimate transactions, if any. In respect of documents
referred to SDC (Stamps) and AEE (PWD) for the determination of market
value of property, there was no provision in the application for online
submission of their reports. The revised value of property along with the
additional demand of stamp duty were also not mapped with the original
document entry in Account A. The system allows document registration despite
mismatches in patta details resulting in the possibility of registering disputable
documents.

Absence of classification in respect of certain documents viz., Cancellation of
sale agreements where possession was given, Mortgage deeds for securing
lebentures, etc. was noticed in the application which may lead to short
collection of stamp duty. While issuance of certified copies, the application
allowed inclusion of personal data viz., photo IDs, Aadhaar/PAN etc. also in
contravention to the rules. Instances of full/partial damage of physical as well
as photo volumes were noticed which would result in non-availability of these
documents for inspection/issue of certified copies. The application provided for
issuance of certified copy of will to persons other than executants in some cases
without recording the reasons for the same.

Discrepancies were noticed in generation of Encumbrance certificates with
respect to property / valuation details. Registration records are mapped to the
registering offices in the application. This leads to a situation wherein, in case
of transfer of jurisdiction/creation of registering offices, EC generated by a user
would show only the transactions registered in the selected registering office
rather than showing all the transactions pertaining to the property.

The application did not capture the distinct attributes of land details and allowed
registration of Government land and temple lands in certain cases, by selecting
‘others’ option in the application. Personal identity fields were not made
mandatory for registrations resulting in non-availability of contact numbers,
email IDs of executants and claimants. Use of dummy mobile numbers were
also noticed in certain cases. Non-capturing of important details and not
ensuring uniqueness of personal information in the application leads to poor
data integrity. Capturing of poor quality thumb impressions and facial images
in the application were noticed. Non-implementation of fingerprint matching in

49


IT Audit of STAR 2.0 Application in the Registration Department, Tamil Nadu

the subsequent transactions would compromise the safety of transaction and
may lead to fraudulent transactions.

While registration, the application did not ensure the status of previous
documents and allowed multiple mutation of documents without verifying the
entitlements of the property. This may result in registration of disputable
documents. Lack of effective IT validation in STAR 2.0 application would
result in transactions of those documents which were barred by revenue
authorities/courts. Quality assurance testing like functional, performance and
security testing were not conducted as per the procedures laid down.

There were instances of unauthorized modification of status of challan in
Account ‘A’ (active to inactive) post registration, non-mapping of document
value with the demand / collection of applicable duty / fee and acceptance of
challans from persons other than the executants. This led to multiple use of same
e-payment challan against registration of different documents. Further online
system for refund of used challans was not developed. There was no
reconciliation module for the payments received towards duty and fees.

Data was migrated from STAR to STAR 2.0 application without
input/validation controls which resulted in instances such as incorrect document
registration date, gaps in the document running number etc., Support request
from citizen with reference to the STAR 2.0 Application were resolved with
delay.

No workflow was provided in the STAR 2.0 Application for making index
correction in respect of name of the claimant, consideration, etc. In the absence
of workflow in application, index corrections were made by System Integrator
in the database through back-end which makes the application vulnerable for
manipulation and it would escape audit trail also.

Generation of MIS reports was not enabled during office hours and instances of
concurrent usage of SR logins in multiple systems were also noticed. The STAR
2.0 Application did not envisage the furnishing of the Financial Transactions
details of the properties that are to be reported to the Income Tax department in
the prescribed format under IT Act, 1961 and the rules made thereunder.

Addressing the above deficiencies would help the department in achieving its
goal of enhanced citizen service delivery, prevention of fraudulent registrations
and in improving system of revenue administration.

‘ions|

A Planning and Implementation of STAR 2.0 Application

Verification of Identity Cards:
The department may integrate STAR 2.0 with all ID issuing Government
departments / Agencies (PAN, Aadhaar, Driving Licence efc.,) for
verification of identities of persons and properties in respect of service
sought through the application so as to capture correct information which
may be useful to detect illegitimate transactions, if any.

[ Paragraph 2.2.1]

iRecommendat

SDC segment:

i. Online payment facility may be developed by sending payment
link/online challans to the registrant.

50


Chapter V— Conclusion and Recommendations

iii.

iv.

The process of creation of demand at SDC(Stamps) may be matched
with payment details.
Increase in the value of document as per SDC valuation may be
mapped with the document alongwith demand / payments.
Segregation of duties may be enforced with record-based permission
alongwith review/oversight management by Supervising Officer.

| Paragraph 2.2.2 |

PWD segment

i.

ii.

Queue system of documents alongwith automatic grouping of
work items (based on area / street) may be enforced.
Online payment of SD/RF, in respect of the revised value may be
ensured by sending payment link / online challan.
Increase in the value of document based on field inspection may be
mapped with the document alongwith demand / payment.

[ Paragraph 2.2.3 |

Patta matching and patta transfer process

1.

ii.

Patta mismatch report may be allowed for processing only after
recording of reasons by the registering authority.

Correctness and completeness of property details furnished to
Revenue department may be ensured. In case of error response from
NLRMP, the citizen service requests for patta transfer may be
completed by either rectifying the error responses or informing the
deficiencies to the claimant.

[ Paragraphs 2.2.5 & 2.2.6 |

Classification and valuation of instruments

ii.

Dataset on classification of instruments may be updated to include all
instruments specified under the Indian Stamp Act, 1899, and the
Registration Act, 1908, as amended.
Provision may be included to capture all the personal, property and
document details under necessary input controls.

[ Paragraph 2.2.8 |

Issuance of Certified Copies

Inclusion of personally identifiable information, viz, photo, thumb
impression, ID proofs, PAN/Aadhaar numbers, etc in the generation
of Certified Copies may be restricted. Display of personally
identifiable information to other users should be restricted.
Necessary steps may be taken to digitalise all the documents
registered with the department. Recovery and digitalisation of
damaged copies with the help of appropriate technologies may be
implemented.

[ Paragraphs 2.3.1 & 2.3.4]

Issuance of Encumbrance Certificates

il.

Steps may be taken to digitalise index records of all the documents
registered with the department.

Correctness and completeness of index table in terms of property
identities, viz, survey number, may be ensured for generation of
correct and complete EC.

51


IT Audit of STAR 2.0 Application in the Registration Department, Tamil Nadu

iii. Engagements of the property with court or revenue recovery
authorities may be recorded as a mutation in the Index table to restrict
further transaction.

iv. Display of all necessary details, viz, previous document, referral to
SDC/AEE, revised document value, efc in the EC may be ensured.

v. EC based on document number, may include the complete transaction
lineage as on date.
[ Paragraph 2.4 |
B Application Development
The Government may:
i. ensure completion of quality assurance testing periodically and before
every major release, as per requirement.
[ Paragraph 3.5.1(c) ]

ii. complete citizen identity management system wherein personal details of
citizen obtaining services through the system is verified, accepted, stored
and managed for further use.

[ Paragraph 3.3.1 |

iii. fix the standards for capturing fingerprint and facial data.
[ Paragraphs 3.3.3 & 3.3.4]

iv ensure fingerprint matching /SMS notification procedure for registration
of documents with previous registered document available with the
department.

[ Paragraph 3.4.1 |

v capture and update the value of document status in respect of every
property and archive all previous documents, denying further transaction
in them.

[ Paragraph 3.4.2 |

vi capture and maintain land record details in consistent with that in
NLRMP database.

[ Paragraph 3.2 (a)& (b) ]

vii ensure complete mapping of value/revised value of the document,
demand raised and payments made.

[ Paragraph 3.7.1 |

viii include online refund application and payment procedure in respect of
unutilised challans also.

[ Paragraph 3.7.3 |

ix develop a dedicated reconciliation module.
[ Paragraph 3.7.4 ]

Cc Resource Management and Controls
The Government may
i. Ensure data cleansing and complete data migration process at the
earliest, to ensure data integrity and complete document trail.
[ Paragraph 4.1 ]

52


Chapter V— Conclusion and Recommendations

iii.

Develop a robust mechanism to monitor the support requests from
citizens for their early disposal.

| Paragraph 4.2 |
Ensure, that no index corrections should be carried out through back end
and develop a suitable module to carry out corrections through the
application only.

[ Paragraph 4.3 |
iv. Develop a user-friendly MIS Report to ensure better co-ordination and
reporting
[ Paragraph 4.4 ]
v. Ensure a suitable automated mechanism for furnishing complete and
correct periodical reports/transactions to IT Department and also
develop the mechanism to review the returned reports by IT Department
promptly for corrective actions.
| Paragraph 4.6 |
(Brom —
५
Chennai (K. P. ANAND)
The 08 June 2022 Principal Accountant General (Audit-I])
Tamil Nadu and Puducherry
Countersigned
New Delhi (GIRISH CHANDRA MURMU)
The 20 June 2022 Comptroller and Auditor General of India

53


ANNEXURES


Annexure-1

Referred to in Paragraph 2.1

Details of Modules developed and yet to be developed by the System Integrator and the
brief description of the Modules

No.

Name of the Modul:

Completed modules

1 | Document Registration | The document registration module covers the process of creation
Module of document/index in the portal and subsequent registration
process in the field office till the return of the document.
2. | Issuance of Certified The certified copy of a document can be applied through online
copies and the copy would be forwarded to the applicant's email id
3 Issuance of EC EC is an important property document that provides references to
any liabilities in the form of a mortgage or a loan against the
property, that has not been cleared. EC can be applied through
online for the period commencing from 1975 to till date after
paying the requisite application and search fees. The EC generated
would be forwarded to the email id of the applicant
4 | Hold Document Module | This module is also otherwise known as Pending Document
process. A document is classified as a Hold document due to some
issues while registering a document. Some of the reasons for
pendency are extra evaluation time is required by SR,
disagreement in nature of deed and case is referred to DR. This
module speaks about the pendency and process of subsequent
clearance
5 | Societies Registration Application along with required documents submitted by the
Module Society’s representative triggers the processes of this module
6 | Chit Funds Registration | Chit funds can apply and obtain prior sanction order. Second phase
Module is certificate of commencement.
7 ‘| Filing of minutes for After each draw meeting of an operational chit fund is conducted,
Chit Funds the minutes can be filed through online. On successful filing of
minutes, prescribed fee had to be paid through online.
8 | Firm Registration This module deals with three phases: (i) Registration of a firm (ii)
Module Filing of annual declaration (iii) Dissolution of the firm
a Marriage Registration This module facilitates registration of marriages under (i) Hindu
Module Marriage Act, (ii)Tamil Nadu Marriage Registration Act, (iii)
Special Marriage Registration Act (iv) Christian Marriage Act
10 | Issue of Birth and Death | Module facilitates applying for issue of birth/death certificates in
Extract the prescribed format and forwarding the same through online to
the applicant
11 | Refund of Stamp duty This module enables refund of stamp duty through online for
which there are three phases: (i) Details of stamp papers in
electronic form (ii) Verification request from the Tahsildar and
(iii) Data on stamp paper details and legal stamp vendors
12 | MIS and Reporting This module generates all the MIS reports required by the

Module

department

55



IT Audit of STAR 2.0 Application in the Registration Department, Tamil Nadu

Name of the Module

Field Inspection Module

Description

A document for registration after scanning would automatically
come to the field verification queue where in the SR/AEE conducts
field verification and inspection report is uploaded. Based on the
verification report, the deficit Stamp duty and registration fee
would be collected from the registrant

14

Accounts and Challan
Module

This module tracks and generate the revenue generated in the field
offices. Collection of stamp duty and registration fees under
several accounting heads is recorded in this module

15

Online Services Module

It provides an interface to interact with the department through
internet. The modules of issue of EC. CC, chits, firms, societies
registration modules will be available partially/fully on the internet

16

E Stamping sub-module

This module enables the SR to verify the authenticity of the E
stamp paper by citing the unique E stamp number presented to him
for registration of a document

17

Citizen profile
maintenance sub-module

The details of citizen who receives a service from the department
is stored in the database

Partially completed modules

Appeal

Issues relating to undervaluation of the property are resolved
through this module. When the disagreement arises between the
SR and the registrant, the document is kept pending and is
processed through appeal module till it reaches a finali

Audit

Documents that have completed the registration process with a
regular registration number are eligible for audit and queries are to
be raised through this module. However, as on date, the document
viewing facility is only available

Human Resource

Module covers the details of the employees of the registration
department. The date of joining of an official in the department,
pay and allowances, promotion, transfers and training are
generally covered

Pending Development Sub-modules

1 Vendor Management | Vendor management module should help the department to
manage all its procurement requirements and the subsequent
contract management would be facilitated in this module

2 Inventory Inventory management module should manage the inventory

Management database and track all the incoming and outgoing inventories
3 Guideline revision Guideline register is revised by the department periodically or

through State Government Directive. This module should be used
by a suitable authority to fix and update the guideline values

56


Annexure-2

Referred to in Paragraph 2.2.1
Details of PAN mismatch

Sl.
No. Document Number Registration date Document type

[1 | R/Pallavaram/Book 1/1314/2018 22-02-2018 00:00 | Sale deed

2 | RvPallavaram/Book 1/2314/2018 05-04-2018 00:00 | Sale deed

3. | RvPallavaram/Book 1/2668/2018 19-04-2018 00:00 | Sale deed

4 | R/Pallavaram/Book 1/3172/2018 07-05-2018 00:00 | Sale deed

5 | RvPallavaram/Book 1/3174/2018 07-05-2018 00:00 | Sale deed

6 | R’Pallavaram/Book 1/5498/2019 17-06-2019 00:00 | Sale deed

7 | R/Pallavaram/Book 1/5499/2019 17-06-2019 00:00 | Deposit Of Title Deeds

[8 | R/Pallavaram/Book 1/8774/2019 04-10-2019 00:00 | Sale deed

[>| R/Pallavarany/Book1/10115/2016 01-12-2016 00:00 | Power of Attomey relating to Immovable Property
[10 | R/Pallavaram/Book1/11396/2015 28-12-2015 00:00 | Deposit of Title Deeds If loan is repayable on demand
11 | R/Pallavaram/Book1/3637/2017 12-05-2017 00:00 | Conveyance Metro(UA

12. | RvPallavaram/Book1/4110/2008 18-09-2008 00:00 | Conveyance Metro/UA

13 | RyPallavaram/Book1/428/2018 19-01-2018 00:00 | Conveyance Metro/UA

14. | R/Pallavaram/Book1/4730/2017 19-06-2017 00:00 | Agreement-construction Metro/UA
1S | R/Pallavaram/Book1/4731/2017 19-06-2017 00:00 | Conveyance Metro/UA

16 | R/Pallavaram/Book1/4732/2017 19-06-2017 00:00 | Deposit of Title Deeds If loan is repayable on demand
17 | RyPallavaram/Book1/5164/2015 10-06-2015 00:00 | Agreement-construction Metro/UA
[1s | R/Pallavaram/Book1/5165/2015 10-06-2015 00:00 | Conveyance Metro/(UA

[19 | RyPallavarany/Book1/5935/2017 27-07-2017 00:00 | Rectification Deed

20 | RyPallavaram/Book|/7108/2017 05-09-2017 00:00 | Conveyance Metro/UA

21 | R/Pallavaram/Book1/7804/2017 27-09-2017 00:00 | Conveyance Metro/UA

22 | R/Pallavaram/Book1/7905/2017 04-10-2017 00:00 | Conveyance Metro/UA

23 | RvPallavaram/Book1/797/2007 15-02-2007 00:00 | Conveyance Metro/UA

24 | RyPallavaram/Book1/9095/2017 10-11-2017 00:00 | Agreement

25 | RyPallavaram/Book1/9096/2017 10-11-2017 00:00 | Agreement

26 | RvPallavaram/Book1/9097/2017 10-11-2017 00:00 | Agreement

27 | RyPallavaram/Book|/9098/2017 10-11-2017 00:00 | Agreement

28 R/Pallavaram/Book1/9099/2017 10-11-2017 00:00 | Agreement

29 | R/Pallavaram/Book1/9100/2017 10-11-2017 00:00 | Agreement

30 | RvPallavaram/Book1/9159/2017 15-11-2017 00:00 | Agreement-construction Metro/UA
31. | RyPallavaram/Book1/9160/2017 15-11-2017 00:00 | Conveyance Metro/UA

32 | RyPallavaram/Book1/9611/2017 30-11-2017 00:00 | Agreement-construction Metro/UA
33. | RvPallavaram/Book1/9612/2017 30-11-2017 00:00 | Agreement-construction Metro/UA.
34° | RyPallavaram/Book1/9668/2017 01-12-2017 00:00 | Conveyance Metro/UA

35__| R/Pallavaram/Book1/9678/2015 26-10-2015 00:00 | Agreement-construction Metro/UA
36 | R/Pallavaram/Book1/9679/2015 26-10-2015 00:00 | Conveyance Metro/UA

37 | RyPallavaram/Book1/3347/2009 11-09-2009 00:00 | Conveyance Metro/UA

38 | RyPallavaram/Book1/1641/2017 09-03-2017 00:00 | Agreement-construction Metro/UA

57


IT Audit of STAR 2.0 Application in the Registration Department, Tamil Nadu

Document Number Registration date ॥

39. | R/Pallavaram/Book1/1642/2017 09-03-2017 00:00 | Conveyance Metro/UA

40 | RvPallavaram/Book|/6832/2014 14-08-2014 00:00 | Conveyance Metro/UA

[4 | R/Pallavaramy/Book1/370/2017 23-01-2017 00:00 | Conveyance Metro/UA

42 | R/Pallavaram/Book1/372/2017 23-01-2017 00:00 | Conveyance Metro/UA

43. | RvPallavaram/Book1/3879/2017 23-05-2017 00:00 | Deposit of Title Deeds If loan is repayable on demand
[44 | R/Pallavaram/Book 1/8824/2017 03-11-2017 00:00 | Conveyance Metro(JA

45 | R/Pallavaram/Book1/10115/2017 04-10-2017 00:00 | Conveyance Metro/UA

46 | R/Pallavaram/Book1/10114/2017 14-12-2017 00:00 | Agreement-construction Metro/UA

47. | RyPallavaram/Book1/10117/2017 14-12-2017 00:00 | Conveyance Metro/UA

[48 | R/Pallavaram/Book|/8779/2017 02-11-2017 00:00 | Conveyance Metro/UA

49 | RY/Pallavaram/Book 1/7894/2018 27-09-2018 00:00 | (General) Power of Attomey deed

50 | R/Pallavaram/Book 1/9062/2018 13-11-2018 00:00 | (General) Power of Attorney deed

51 | R/Pallavaram/Book 1/9523/2018 28-11-2018 00:00 | Sale deed

52 | R/Pallavaram/Book 1/4448/2019 20-05-2019 00:00 | (General) Power of Attomey deed

33. | R/Pallavaram/Book 1/9343/2019 30-10-2019 00:00 [sueded  ss—‘—sSCidY deed

54 | R/Pallavaram/Book1/8500/2017 25-10-2017 00:00 wet without possession for every Rs.100 or part thereof
55 | RvPallavaram/Book1/1083/2018 06-02-2018 00:00 | Mortgage without possession If it exceeds Rs.1000
56 | RyPallavaram/Book /6452/2006 01-12-2006 00:00 | Conveyance Metro/UA

57 | R/Pallavaram/Book 1/1934/2018 20-03-2018 00:00 | Deed of Receipt

58 | R/Pallavaram/Book1/4810/2007 17-09-2007 00:00 | Conveyance Metro/UA

39. | R/Pallavaram/Book1/465/2017 27-01-2017 00:00 | Conveyance Metro/UA

[60 | R/Pallavaram/Book1/804/2017 09-02-2017 00:00 | Conveyance Metro/JA

[61 | R/Pallavaram/Book1/10442/2016 09-12-2016 00:00 | Conveyance Metro/UA

62 | R/Pallavaram/Book1/390/2017 23-01-2017 00:00 | Conveyance Metro/UA

63 | RvPallavaram/Book1/743/2017 06-02-2017 00:00 | Conveyance Metro/UA

[६4 | R/Pallavaram/Book1/10342/2016 09-12-2016 00:00 | Conveyance Metro/UA

65 | R/Pallavaram/Book1/1073/2018 06-02-2018 00:00 | Receipt

58



Annexure-3

Referred to in Paragraph 2.3.3

Annexures

Certified copies of will issued to applicant other than the executant

Document No
R/Pallavaram/Book3/41/2010 | CCA/Pallavaram/1099/2019 09-05-2019 09-05-2019
R/Pallavaram/Book3/78/2004 CCA/Pallavaram/1805/2019 25-07-2019 25-07-2019
RvPallavaram/Book3/66/2008 CCA/Pallavaram/244/2019 07-02-2019 07-02-2019
R/Pallavaram/Book3/10/2013 CCA/Pallavaram/245 1/2019 27-09-2019 27-09-2019
R/Pallavaram/Book3/74/2006 | CCA/Pallavaram/3212/2018 24-07-2018 25-07-2018
R/Pallavaram/Book3/144/2007_ | CCA/Pallavaram/3277/2019 24-12-2019 24-12-2019
R/Pallavaram/Book3/115/2014 | CCA/Pallavaram/3288/2019 24-12-2019 24-12-2019
R/Pallavaram/Book3/122/2016 | CCA/Pallavaram/609/2019 19-03-2019 19-03-2019
CCA/Pallavaram/610/2019 19-03-2019 19-03-2019

59


IT Audit of STAR 2.0 Application in the Registration Department, Tamil Nadu

Annexure-4
Referred to in Paragraph 2.4

Support requests relating to EC generation pending for more than 30 days

SRO name s st No. Request initiated Support request statu:
date

[3 | ‘Adayar SR/ACK/4422868 20-12-2019 | Clarification Required
2 | Kullanchavadi SR/ACK/4404028 19-12-2019 | Clarification Required
3. Nagal nayakkampatti SR/ACK/441 1588 19-12-2019 | In Progress

4 | Kunrathur SRIACK/4365508 16-12-2019 | In Progress

3 | Kunrathur SRIACK/4365548 16-12-2019 | In Progress

[6 | Thackala SR/ACK/4189108 28-11-2019 | In Progress

7 | Melapalayam SR/ACK/3707988 20-09-2019 | Clarification Required
| $ | SR/ACK/3662708 16-09-2019 | Clarification Required
9 | Melakarur SRYACK/3642068 12-09-2019 | Clarification Required
10 | Thiruvidaimarudhur SRYACK/3613508 06-09-2019 | Clarification Required
[1 | Purasaivakkam SR/ACK/3541748 28-08-2019 | Clarification Required
12 | Moolakaraipatti SR/ACK/3518188 26-08-2019 | Clarification Required
13, | Walajabad SR/ACK/3463388 16-08-2019 | Clarification Required
14 | Thirvarumpur SRYACK/3421668 08-08-2019 | Clarification Required
15 | Mylapore SRYACK/3362708 01-08-2019 | Clarification Required
16 | Anniyur SR/ACK/3339148 30-07-2019 | Clarification Required
[7 | Uthiramerur SR/ACK/3274828 23-07-2019 | Clarification Required
| 18 | Marakkanam SR/ACK/3 147829 06-07-2019 | Clarification Required
[19 | Coimbatore Joint T SR/ACK/3071269 26-06-2019 | Clarification Required
20 | Vada madurai SR/ACK/3046428 24-06-2019 | Clarification Required
21 | Trichy Joint I SR/ACK/2858508 31-05-2019 | Clarification Required
22. | Kalasapakkam SR/ACK/2690628 14-05-2019 | Clarification Required
23. | Suramangalam SRYACK/2507229 24-04-2019 | Clarification Required
24 | Vellakovil SR/ACK/1729309 28-01-2019 | On Hold

25 | Walajabad SR/ACK/4498388 30-12-2019 | Clarification Required
26 SR/ACK/4493668 30-12-2019 | Clarification Required
27_| Kanchipuram Joint 1V SR/ACK/4401348 19-12-2019 | Clarification Required
28 | Kalayarkoil SR/ACK/4406188 19-12-2019 | Clarification Required
29 | Pallavaram SR/ACK/4388988 18-12-2019 | Clarification Required
30. | Perungalur SR/ACK/4392548 18-12-2019 | Clarification Required
31 | Pallavaram SR/ACK/4388948 18-12-2019 | Clarification Required

32 | Padappai 18-12-2019 | Clarification Required

18-12-2019 | In Progress

33 | Madurandakam

34 Cheyyur SR/ACK/4376308 17-12-2019 | In Progress
35 Avadi SR/ACK/4385668 17-12-2019 | In Progress
36 | Pappireddypatti SRIACK/4369829 16-12-2019 | In Progress
37 Thiruchengode SR/ACK/4355588 13-12-2019 | Clarification Required
38 Trichy Joint I SR/ACK/4335588 12-12-2019 | Clarification Required
39 Panagudi SR/ACK/43 14228 10-12-2019 | Clarification Required
40 Urayur SR/ACK/4003268 08-11-2019 | In Progress
41 AnnaNagar SR/ACK/3857988 15-10-2019 | Clarification Required
42 Erode Joint I SR/ACK/3837948 11-10-2019 | Clarification Required
43 Pallavaram SR/ACK/3489788 20-08-2019 | Clarification Required

60


Annexures

Support request No. Request initiated Support request status
date

44 | Coimbatore Joint IT SR/ACK/2682668 13-05-2019 | Clarification Required
व5 | Villivakkam SR/ACK/2620108 06-05-2019 | Clarification Required
46 | Arcot SRIACK/2249428 19-03-2019 | Clarification Required
47_| Kodaikanal SR/ACK/4278908 06-12-2019 | Clarification Required
B SR/ACK/4278868 06-12-2019 | Clarification Required
49 | Pollachi SR/ACK/4279308 06-12-2019 | Clarification Required
50 SR/ACK/4271348 05-12-2019 | Clarification Required
31_| Coimbatore Joint I SRYACK/4263268 05-12-2019 | In Progress

32. | Krishnagiri Joint T SR/ACK/4254471 04-12-2019 | Clarification Required
53. | Padappai SRIACK/4253909 04-12-2019 | Clarification Required
34 | Kunrathur SR/ACK/4247668 04-12-2019 | In Progress

उ5 | Pallipattu SR/ACK/4244868 03-12-2019 | Clarification Required
356 | Villupuram Joint IT SR/ACK/4183228 27-11-2019 | Clarification Required
37 | Palani Joint I SR/ACK/4168952, 26-11-2019 | In Progress

38 | Paramakudi SR/ACK/4174828 26-11-2019 | Clarification Required
39 | Tuticorin Joint I SR/ACK/4165628 26-11-2019 | Clarification Required
60 | Mclapalayam SR/ACK/4148788 25-11-2019 | In Progress

61 | Suramangalam SRYACK/4150510 25-11-2019 | Clarification Required
62 SRYACK/4146188 23-11-2019 | Clarification Required
63_| Chengleput Joint TT SR/ACK/4111588 19-11-2019 | Clarification Required
64 | Trichi Joint IIT SR/ACK/4075268 15-11-2019 | Clarification Required
65 | Udumalpettai SR/ACK/4031948 13-11-2019 | Clarification Required
66 | Mettur SR/ACK/4023788 12-11-2019 | In Progress

हा. Nellikuppam SRIACK/3576909 03-09-2019 | Clarification Required
| 68 | Meitupalayam SR/ACK/1965708 18-02-2019 | In Progress

69. | Thigaraya Nagar SRYACK/3973029 05-11-2019 | Clarification Required
70 | Kalayarkoil SR/ACK/3978428 05-11-2019 | Clarification Required
71 | Adayar SR/ACK/3947948 31-10-2019 | Clarification Required
72 | Madurai South Joint 1V SR/ACK/3941148 30-10-2019 | Clarification Required
73 | Pappireddypatti SR/ACK/3933828 29-10-2019 | In Progress

74 SR/ACK/3933668 29-10-2019 | Clarification Required
75. | Suramangalam SR/ACK/3937268 29-10-2019 | Clarification Required
76 | Thiruttani SR/ACK/3903668 22-10-2019 | Clarification Required
77 | Sembiam SR/ACK/3909028 22-10-2019 | Clarification Required
78 | Madurandakam SR/ACK/3909788 22-10-2019 | Clarification Required
79 | Melakarur SR/ACK/3896309 21-10-2019 | Clarification Required
80 | Poonamallee SR/ACK/3876509 17-10-2019 | Clarification Required
[| Padappai SR/ACK/3869508 16-10-2019 | Clarification Required
82 | Karakudi Joint I SR/ACK/3864828 16-10-2019 | Clarification Required
83 SRIACK/3868068 16-10-2019 | Clarification Required
84 | Arakonam Joint IT SR/ACK/3859348 15-10-2019 | Clarification Required
85. | Thiruvannamalai Joint II SR/ACK/3844828 14-10-2019 | Clarification Required
86 | Kodavasal SR/ACK/3850828 14-10-2019 | Clarification Required
87 | Veerachozhan SR/ACK/3837148 11-10-2019 | Clarification Required
[_ 88 | Thivage thorgam SR/ACK/2206988 14-03-2019 | Clarification Required

61


IT Audit of STAR 2.0 Application in the Registration Department, Tamil Nadu

SRO name Support request No. Request initiated Support request status
date
89] Trichy Joint I SR/ACK/2054308 27-02-2019 | Clarification Required
90 | Nagal nayakkampatti SR/ACK/2036788 25-02-2019 | Clarification Required
91 Trichi Joint वा SR/ACK/38 10668 09-10-2019 | Clarification Required
92 | Kalayarkoil SR/ACK/3813188 09-10-2019 | Clarification Required

93 | Mettupalayam SR/ACK/3813228 09-10-2019 | Clarification Required
94 Trichi Joint वा 3810988 09-10-2019 | Clarification Required

95 | Madurandakam 3798428 03-10-2019 | Clarification Required
96 | Suramangalam SR/ACK/3790468 03-10-2019 | Clarification Required
97 | Valliyur SR/ACK/3767508 30-09-2019 | Clarification Required
98 | Avadi SR/ACK/3760789 27-09-2019 | Clarification Required
|? | Pallavaram| SR/ACK/3756388 26-09-2019 | Clarification Required
100 | Perundurai SR/ACK/3755268 26-09-2019 | Clarification Required
101 | Sivagangai Joint IT SR/ACK/3741828 25-09-2019 | Clarification Required
102 SR/ACK/3724268 24-09-2019 | On Hold

103 | Bhavani SR/ACK/3722829 24-09-2019 | Clarification Required
104 | Erode Joint I SR/ACK/3717388 23-09-2019 | Clarification Required
105 | Manamelkudi SR/ACK/3716828 23-09-2019 | Clarification Required
106 | Avalpoondurai SR/ACK/3714829 23-09-2019 | Clarification Required
107 | Avalpoondurai SR/ACK/3715708 23-09-2019 | Clarification Required
108 | Manamelkudi SR/ACK/3716628 23-09-2019 | Clarification Required
109 | Avalpoondurai SR/ACK/3715468 23-09-2019 | Clarification Required
110 | Erode Joint I 3717588 23-09-2019 | Clarification Required
111 | Kaniyur /3701389 20-09-2019 | Clarification Required
112 | Uthukuli SR/ACK/3695708 19-09-2019 | Clarification Required
113 | Chennai Central Joint I SR/ACK/3695788 19-09-2019 | Clarification Required
114 SR/ACK/3688548 18-09-2019 | Clarification Required
115 | Devakkottai SR/ACK/3648508 12-09-2019 | Clarification Required
116 | Cheyyur SR/ACK/3615909 09-09-2019 | Clarification Required
117 | Cheyyur SR/ACK/3618628 09-09-2019 | Clarification Required
118 | Sulur SR/ACK/3628428 09-09-2019 | Clarification Required
119 | Thiruvidaimarudhur SR/ACK/3593748 05-09-2019 | Clarification Required
120 | Kodambakkam SR/ACK/3576628 03-09-2019 | Clarification Required
121 | Cheyyur SR/ACK/3581068 03-09-2019 | In Progress

122 | Cheyyur SR/ACK/3573428 31-08-2019 | Clarification Required
123 | Cheyyur SR/ACK/3573308 31-08-2019 | Clarification Required
124 | Cheyyur SR/ACK/3573508 31-08-2019 | Clarification Required
125 | Urayur SR/ACK/3569509 30-08-2019 | Clarification Required
126 | Chengleput Joint I SR/ACK/3566868 30-08-2019 | Clarification Required
127 | Bhavani SR/ACK/3527348 27-08-2019 | Clarification Required
128 | Thirumuttam SR/ACK/3532068 27-08-2019 | Clarification Required
129 | Suramangalam SR/ACK/3525628 26-08-2019 | Clarification Required
130 | Salem West Joint IIT SR/ACK/3516108 26-08-2019 | Clarification Required
131 | Thiruporur SR/ACK/3501388 22-08-2019 | In Progress

132 | Chengleput Joint II SR/ACK/3479988 20-08-2019 | Clarification Required
133 | Chengleput Joint IT SR/ACK/3478708 20-08-2019 | Clarification Required

62


Annexures

Support request No. Request initiated Support request status
date

134 | Srivaikundam SR/ACK/3478670 20-08-2019 | In Progress
135. | Chennai Central Joint T SRIACK/3473068 19-08-2019 | Clarification Required
136 | Chengleput Joint IT 475988 19-08-2019 | Clarification Required
137 | Chengleput Joint It SR/ACK/3473548 19-08-2019 | Clarification Required
138 | Avadi SR/ACK/3465028 17-08-2019 | Clarification Required
139 | Ayyampalayam SR/ACK/3457908 16-08-2019 | Clarification Required
140 | Pochampalli SR/ACK/3457308 16-08-2019 | Clarification Required
141_ | Papanasam SRIACK/3433468 10-08-2019 | Clarification Required
142 | Trichi Joint IIT SRIACK/3423229 09-08-2019 | Clarification Required
143 | Kumbakonam Joint I SR/ACK/3427068 09-08-2019 | Clarification Required
144 | Ambattur SR/ACK/3430869 09-08-2019 | Clarification Required
145 | Mannarkudi SR/ACK/3417148 08-08-2019 | Clarification Required
146 | Sankaranainarkoil SRYACK/3404948 07-08-2019 | Clarification Required
147 | Coimbatore Joint TT SR/ACK/3401108 06-08-2019 | Clarification Required

148 | Kunrathur

06-08-2019 | Clarification Required

149 | Cheranmadevi Joint T SR/ACK/3384948 05-08-2019 | Clarification Required
150 | Dharapuram SR/ACK/3369708 02-08-2019 | Clarification Required
151 | Chengleput Joint IT SR/ACK/3344668 31-07-2019 | Clarification Required
152 | Chengleput Joint IT SR/ACK/3350708 31-07-2019 | Clarification Required

153 | Udumalpettai SR/ACK/3342748 31-07-2019 | Clarification Required

154 | Tambaram 30-07-2019 | Clarification Required

30-07-2019 | Clarification Required

155 | Periyanayakkan Palayam

156 | Sethur SR/ACK/3330188 30-07-2019 | Clarification Required
157 | Perundurai SR/ACK/3328509 29-07-2019 | Clarification Required
158 | Thittakudi SR/ACK/3311308 26-07-2019 | Clarification Required
159 | Sembiam SR/ACK/3306469 26-07-2019 | Clarification Required
160 | Triplicane SR/ACK/3278788 24-07-2019 | Clarification Required
161 | Thakkattur SR/ACK/3274108 23-07-2019 | Clarification Required
162 | Gobichettipalayam JointI | SR/ACK/3255308 22-07-2019 | Clarification Required
163 | Thiruvidaimarudhur SR/ACK/3247028 19-07-2019 | Clarification Required
164 | Alwarthirunagari SR/ACK/3246668 19-07-2019 | In Progress

165 | Srivaikundam 3243388 18-07-2019 | Submitted

166 | Coimbatore Joint IT °K/3232230 17-07-2019 | Clarification Required
167 | Pernampattu SR/ACK/3224148 16-07-2019 | Clarification Required
168 | Chengleput Joint IT SR/ACK/3225988 16-07-2019 | Clarification Required
169 | Tambaram SR/ACK/3211348 15-07-2019 | Clarification Required
170 | Periamet SR/ACK/3215708 15-07-2019 | Clarification Required
[71 | Neclankarai SR/ACK/3205628 12-07-2019 | Clarification Required
172 | AnnaNagar SR/ACK/3 187628 11-07-2019 | Clarification Required
173 | Tambaram SR/ACK/3 195188 11-07-2019 | Clarification Required
174 | Ashok Nagar SR/ACK/3180708 10-07-2019 | Clarification Required
175 | Tharamangalam SR/ACK/3163628 09-07-2019 | Clarification Required
176 | Velur SR/ACK/3150548 06-07-2019 | Clarification Required
177 | Ashok Nagar SR/ACK/3 139828 05-07-2019 | Clarification Required
178 | Keeranur SR/ACK/3 125388 03-07-2019 | Clarification Required
179 | Avalpoondurai SR/ACK/3101869 01-07-2019 | Clarification Required

63


IT Audit of STAR 2.0 Application in the Registration Department, Tamil Nadu

Support request No.

Request initiated

date

Support request statu:

| 180 | Poonamallee SR/ACK/3049948 24-06-2019 | Clarification Required
181 | Theni SR/ACK/2944868 11-06-2019 | Clarification Required
182 | Poonamallee SR/ACK/2732188 17-05-2019 | Clarification Required
183 | Parangi pettai SR/ACK/2711748 16-05-2019 [Suemited sd

[184 | Virugambakkam SR/ACK/2427988 09-04-2019 | Clarification Required
185 | Avadi SRYACK/2371108 01-04-2019 | Clarification Required
[ 18 | Virugambakkam SR/ACK/2320628 27-03-2019 | Clarification Required
187 | Virugambakkam SR/ACK/2192948 13-03-2019 | Clarification Required
| 188 | Virugambakkam SR/ACK/2183228 12-03-2019 | On Hold

189 | Pethanayakanpalayam SRYACK/2143108 07-03-2019 [Submited sd

| 190 | Nazareth SR/ACK/2053908 27-02-2019 | In Progress

191 | Kodambakkam_ SR/ACK/1617068 11-01-2019 [| क्रागठ॒_....्[प

192 | Nagoor SR/ACK/1591428 10-01-2019 [ome Hold

64



Annexures

Annexure-5

Referred to in Paragraph 3.3.4

Details of documents having poor quality of facial images

Document number Registration year
1 101 2018 11
2 268 2019 |. 6... ।
3 नि रा 2018 17
4 703 2018 5&17
5 950 2018 17
| 6| 1293 2019 7
7 1538 2019 7
| 8| 2294 2019 12
| 9| 2748 2019 7
[10] 3253 2018 7
11 3505 2018 17
12 3746 2019 7
13 4594 2018 S&17
14 5238 2018 5
15 6657 2018 17
| 16 | 7407 2018 5,8&17
17 9252 2018 5&18
[18 | 9658 2019 po
[19 10411 2018 12
20 1539 2020 1,12,13

65


IT Audit of STAR 2.0 Application in the Registration Department, Tamil Nadu

Annexure-6
Referred to in Paragraph 3.4.3

Documents engaged by revenue authorities

Document Whether remarks reflected in EC

1 1986 1702 Tiruvottiyur yes

2 1986 1622 Tiruvottiyur yes

3 1986 1712 Tiruvottiyur yes

4 2003 851 Arani_chennai_north yes

5 2003 852 Arani_chennai_north yes

; 6 | 2003 844 Arani_chennai_north yes

7 2003 845 Arani_chennai_north yes

[| 8 | 2003 846 Arani_chennai_north yes

9 2008 2379 Periamet yes

| 10 | 0 2005 216 Kodambakkam yes

11 2005 583 Anna Nagar no remarks
12 2009 2649 Neelankarai no remarks
13 2010 711 Periamet yes

14 2010 2298 Periamet yes

15 2011 4075 Gummidipoondi yes

16 2011 4076 Gummidipoondi yes

17 2011 4077 Gummidipoondi yes
[18 | 8 2011 4078 Gummidipoondi yes

; 9 | 2011 4079 Gummidipoondi yes
20 2011 4080 Gummidipoondi yes
21 2011 4081 Gummidipoondi yes
22 2011 4082 Gummidipoondi yes
23 2011 4083 Gummidipoondi yes
24 2011 4084 Gummidipoondi yes
25 2011 4085 Gummidipoondi yes
26 2011 4086 Gummidipoondi yes
27 2011 4087 Gummidipoondi yes
28 2011 4088 Gummidipoondi no remarks
29 2011 4089 Gummidipoondi no remarks
30 2011 4090 Gummidipoondi no remarks
31 2011 4091 Gummidipoondi no remarks
32 2011 4092 Gummidipoondi no remarks
33 2011 3447 Gummidipoondi yes
34 2012 5520 Pammal yes
35 2012 6485 Thiruvottiyur yes
36 2013 5509 Gummidipoondi no remarks

66


Annexures

Document _ SR offi

No
37 2013 5508 Gummidipoondi no remarks
38 2013 5510 Gummidipoondi no remarks
39 2013 3222 pammal yes
40 2013 3223 pammal yes
41 2014 3384 Gummidipoondi no remarks
42 2014 3385 Gummidipoondi yes
43 2014 4584 Gummidipoondi yes
44 2015 3178 Gummidipoondi yes
45 2015 3179 Gummidipoondi yes
46 2015 3180 Gummidipoondi yes
47 2016 1941 Gummidipoondi yes
48 2017 1139 Gummidipoondi yes
49 2017 1140 Gummidipoondi yes
50 2018 3110 Periamet yes
51 2018 3109 Periamet yes

67


IT Audit of STAR 2.0 Application in the Registration Department, Tamil Nadu

Annexure-7
Referred to in Paragraph 3.5.1 (a)

Details of defect found during functional testing

Description rtal/ Application Si rity Remarks

| | ‘Adayar Book 1- 563/2016 on | Portal Document Settlement | Linking | High Only data in | Partially
Copy Party from PR Registration | deed PR tamil font is | Completed
document, data not document copied.
copied.

2 | Adayar In case of UDS property | Portal Document Settlement | Linear High Entering the | Completed
(Plot with Building, Registration | deed Measurem Linear
Flats), Linear ent measurement
Measurement is not details can be
mandatory. But system skipped

is mandating to enter
Linear Measurements

3 | Adayar | In case if Settlee not | Portal Document Settlement | Represent - Representati_ | Pending
executing the Document, Registration deed ative ve is
Representative is not details mandatory in
mandatory for the case if the
Settlee. But when Settlee settle is
added with age 16. minor.

System is mandating to
enter Representative-

Minor
Guardian

| ‘Adayar | In the deed print out, | Portal Document Settlement | Deed High Settlor Completed
before the Witness Registration | deed printout signature

details provision for
signature of the Settlor is
not available.

5 Adayar Witness should not come | Portal Document Settlement Deed High Witness Completed
in separate screen, It Registration | deed printout details are
should be displayed available in
along with a Document the deed as
content. running
pages only. It
is not
displayed
separately,
|| Adayar [In the Print details | Portal Document All deeds Print Tow No “Action” | Completed
Screen, in the grid to add Registration details bution is
the Stamp details, the displayed in
last column name the screen.

"Action" button should
be displayed in a single
line. Word wrap should

not happen
7 | Adayar [In the Document | Portal Document All deeds Document | Medium | Option of | Completed
valuation screen, after Registration valuation entering the
entering the Stamp stamp details
details, the Amount is not
payable and Final available in
‘Amount payable is not the document
same. Amount payable valuation
displays value after sereen, There
deducting the Stamp isno Amount
details. But in the Final payable and
amount, the stamp Final
details paid is not Amount
deducted. payable
column
separately.

68


SI
No

SRO

scription

Sub
Application/
Deed

Screen
Name

Priority

है Mylapore | By default, for Tamil | Portal ‘Common Party Details | Common | Low Correction | Completed
fields typewriting mode executed in
should be set to Tamil the portal
typewriter for
Government and
Company
Party Type. For
Individual Party Type it
is working properly.
; Mylapore [In case of multiple | Portal ‘Common Document Deed Medium | Correction ‘Completed
executants, if we have Creation Printout executed in
added representative for the portal
each executant then in
PDF print out for Ist
executant 1)". should
come and for 2nd "2)"
should come but in PDF
for Ist nothing is coming
and for 2nd executant
"1)" is coming in the
representative details
section
10 Mylapore In case of Non-Family | Portal Document Release Deed High Correction Completed
Release, in deed_ print Registration | Deed Printout executed. in
out after text "The the portal.
Releasee of the
document is related to
Releasor as" nothing is
coming.
11 | Mylapore [In Deed print out for | Portal Document Release Deed High Correction | Completed
"Total Market Value of Registration | Deed Printout executed in
the release property is the portal
Rs." line the value
should come as per
Released Share and not
total market value
12 | Guduvan- | Sale deed print out: | Portal Document Sale deed PDF Print | High Error Completed
cheri Blank page is coming registration rectified.
12279
13 | Guduvan- | Token Print out (tamil | Portal Document Token Token | Token is | Completed
cheri and english) alignment is registration print generated
not there. only in Tamil
14 Guduvan- | Token print out -In | Portal Document Token Token Medium Correction Completed
cheri Applicant details: Sub registration print executed in
Registrar office should the portal
come instead of sub
registrar
15 | Guduvan- | Token printout (Tamil) - | Portal Document Token Token High Correction ‘Completed
cheri print out should come registration print executed in
only in single page, but the portal.
in generated print two
pages are coming
16 | Guduvan- | Token print out (Tamil)- | Portal Document Token Token High The date of | Completed
cheri varugaipurihalukkaana registration print registration
naal - space should be and date of
given "varugai appointment
purithalukkaana _naal" is mentioned
‘And in appointment only in
date "Month" - instead numeric.
of Tamil month
(chithirai) 1. should
come in English month
onl
17 | Adayar | Linked PR- 563/2016 in | Portal Document Rectification | Copy High Party details | Completed
Rectification deed. Registration | deed Party copied only

When trying to copy
party Party displayed
twice. On copy no
details are copied. Same
party name displayed

once

69



IT Audit of STAR 2.0 Application in the Registration Department, Tamil Nadu

twice; this issue occurs

Application

Remarks.

in all PRs linked

18 | Adayar | In the Boundary details, | Portal Document All deeds Boundary | High System Completed
Special Registration details accepting
Character’ & ' should be special
accepted characters

like 8.

19 | Adayar | Inlease deed, linked 510 | Portal Document Tease deed | Linking | High ‘Able to link | Completed
12017 when linked Registration PR the document
displayed as Invalid link document
document

20 | Adayar [In the Lease details, | Portal Document Tease deed | Lease High Provision to | Pending
Total lease period given Registration details mention the
as 10 years and lease period
Incremental duration ie, — lease
given as 6 years. In start date and
Back office, alert lease end
displayed as Lease date is
period and Increment available.
duration should be However, the
equal. But no validation provision of
done in Portal. incremental

duration — is
itself not
available in
the portal to
mention the
same period
in both the
places.

2 Tn Lease details, given | Portal Document Tease deed | Lease High Provision to | Pending
Lease period as 10 years. Registration details mention the
Incremental lease period
per cent is 10. Three ie, — lease
year after for the start date and
duration of Six years, lease end
After that 20 per cent date is
increment. But the available.

Lease amount is However, the

calculated wrongly provision of
incremental
duration is
not available
in the portal
to mention
the same
period in
both the
places.

22 | Mylapore [In boundary Details | Portal Document Common Boundary | Low Correction | Completed
section for language Registration Details executed in
culture in Tamil, label the portal
should have (in Tamil).

Currently it is displayed
(in English) it is
displaying.

3 | Guduvan [Sale Agreement. In | Portal Document Sale Boundary P| Correction | Completed

cheri boundary details screen, Registration | Agreement | details executed. in
what is in the north the portal.

(street) label is not
required

70



SI SRO scription Sub

No ack Application/
Deed

24 | Guduvan | In advance — search | Portal Document All deeds
cheri option, in portal ‘The Registration
status should change

based on the new flow

My
documents

Priority

-

In the
advanced
search under
my
documents
the status
should be
selected from

Pending

71



IT Audit of STAR 2.0 Application in the Registration Department, Tamil Nadu

Annexure-8

Referred to in Paragraph 3.5.1 (a)

Details of observations noticed during user acceptance testing by Audit

Module
No name

Test
scenari

Audit findings

‘New User New User | A user (Citizen-Individual) can | There is mo check on the
registration Registratio | create multiple login credentials | combination of the key details
nin Portal | in the TNReginet site with same | (name, dob, identity no. etc.) to
personal details except for the | avoid an individual to create
phone no. which was the only | multiple ids. A valid PAN. or the
unique field. Aadhaar number which is unique
can be used for creating user
credentials so multiple id
creation for the same person can
be avoided.
2 Document | Portal/Citizen | Portal Create a The system allows linking of | The system should not allow to | High
Registration | Login sale document just by selecting any | link the previous document for
document | SR Office and entering a random | further draft creation. The system
by linking | document number and year. The | should send an alert to the
previous | details of id proofs, property and | executant's registered _ phone
document | names of the party details are | number. For this purpose, the
available | available for viewing department should make the
under Book mobile details column mandatory
1 for the executant and claimant,
3 | Document | Portal/Citizen | Portal Create a The data of the linked document | The system should not allow to | High
Registration | Login sale can be copied by enabling the | link the previous document for
document | check box available. After the | further draft creation. The system
by linking | data is copied the system shows a | should send an alert to the
previous pop-up message "Please verify | executant’s registered phone
document — | the copied migrated data". number. For this purpose, the
available department should make the
under Book mobile details column mandatory
Land for the executant and claimant.
copying the
data
| Document | Portal/Citizen | Portal Enter a The system accepts the id | The system should verify the | Medium
Registration | Login valid id number, a valid PAN even | PAN details with the database
proof ofa | though it does not belong to the | and in case of mismatch it should
different | guardian. not proceed further to the next
person sereen.
under the
guardian
details.
3 | Document | Portal/Citizen | Portal Select PAN | The system does not validate the |The system should verify the | Medium
Registration | Login asincome | PAN entered under the | PAN details with the database
proof under | supporting details column. The | and in case of mismatch it should
supporting | system does not verify the match | not proceed further to the next
details and _| between the PAN with that of the | screen.
add any name of the parties.
PAN
| Document | Sale deed Portal Sale deed [A sale deed was created by | PAN should be verified with | Medium
Registration | creation in creation by | linking a previous document | PAN database.
portal linking where the Claimant had given
previous | PAN as identity proof. The
document. | system allows to edit the PAN
under identity no. :e,, it allows to
enter any valid PAN and
proceeds.
7 | Document | Sale deed Portal Saledeed | The property details can be High
Registration | creation in creation by | fetched just by clicking on the
portal linking check box "linked survey". The
previous | complete details of the property
document. | appears in the property remarks
which is editable.

72


Sl.
No

Module
name

Test
scenario

Audit findings

Annexure:

Priority

| | Document | Sale deed Portal Saledeed | In case of a property linked from High
Registration | creation in creation by | previous document the system
portal linking allows to make changes in the
previous boundary details, street name.
document.
| Document Sale deed Portal Sale deed The system allows the same High
Registration | creation in creation executant to create a sale deed for
portal after the same property after executing
execution | a settlement deed. The system
of does not show any error message.
settlement.
| Document Token Back Tnitiate a A token was initiated for the | The drafts created should be | Medium
Registration | system/BO office token and | temporary document number for | available in the JA login only
check the | the date 01.03.2021 at 15.00 to | during the token time and further.
same in 15.30hrs. The system allows the
JAISR token to be pulled before the
Login scheduled time at the JA login
and process the document
| Document | Sale deed Portal Sale deed The system allows adding the | There should be a provision in | High
Registration | creation in creation by | executant of the previous | the system that the claimant of
portal linking document as executant in the | the previous transaction should
मजा current sale also, even after the | be the executor in the current
andsclecting | OWnership is completely | transaction by default, The
the previous | transferred to the claimant (new | system should freeze the
executant as__| transactions). The system also | claimant name from the previous
the current | allows entering the construction | documents executant of the new
executant agreement number pertaining to | transaction.
evenafter the | the previous transaction while
full हे
hipis | teating this sale deed.
ownership
transferred.
12 Document Sale deed Portal Sale deed A token was initiated for the | The system should not allow to | High
Registration | creation creation temporary document number at | generate two tokens for the same
and tokens | 15.00 to 15.30hrs and another | document which is unnecessarily
taken for | token was initiated at 13.00 to | blocking as the tokens per day are
two 13.30hrs in the Citizen login. | limited.
different | Two temporary registration
time slots. | numbers were generated and the
system also allows initiating
token for both.
13 | Document | Sale deed Portal Saledeed | The NRI cannot purchase an | The system should ask for the | Medium
Registration | creation in the creation agricultural property as per the | resident status of the citizen
portal where an | Foreign Exchange Management | mandatorily.
NRI (Acquisition and Transfer of
purchases | Immovable Property in India)
agricultural | Regulations, 2018, But while
property. | creating a draft of sale deed the
system ask if the individual
(Claimant) is an NRI or not
however this option is available
in the Hindu marriage
registration and Tamil Nadu
Marriage registration. Hence,
any person who has an Indian id
proof can submit the same and
purchase an agricultural land in
India without disclosing their tax
status.
14 | Document | Construction | Portal Con- While filling up the address of | The option “others” should be | Low
Registration | deed creation struction | the village details after filling up | replaced with the list of all the
in the portal agreement | the Taluk option, a dropdown of | village names.
creation. the villages available in that

particular taluk is listed, In the
dropdown menu there is an
option “other”. This shows that
not all the village names are
uploaded into the systems.

73



IT Audit of STAR 2.0 Application in the Registration Department, Tamil Nadu

Si.
No

Module
name

Deed nam
process name

Test
scenario

Audit findings

Remarks.

15 | Document | Construction | Portal Con- Representative details to be | A provision to upload a scanned | Low
Registration | deed creation struction | mandatorily filled up in this type | GPOA can be introduced in the
in the portal agreement | of document (Second party - | site for cases where GPOA is
creation. Government) where the | registered outside Tamil Nadu.
purchaser/allottee/owner should | The GPOA document so
select the representation from the | uploaded should be verified in
dropdown list. (SPOA,Guardian, | the concerned office where it was
GPOA, Court Appointed | registered.
curator.) If we select the General
power of attorney under the
representation by details, any
general power of _attomey
document pertaining to any SRO
(Within Tamil Nadu) can be
linked, If we try to enter a general
power of attorney registered
outside Tamil Nadu, the system
does not ask for anything beyond
document number, date of
registration and document type.
| Document | Construction | Portal Con- Under survey details column Medium
Registration | deed creation struction | there is an option called “Not
in the portal agreement | available” under survey number
creation. dropdown. After selecting this
option any number can be
mentioned thereafter in the
survey no (i.e) even survey
numbers relating to government
land can be given as input.
17 | Document | Construction | Portal Con- Under Building construction | Minimum limit of builtup area | Low
Registration | deed creation struction | details, the built-up area is | can be set in the system.
in the portal agreement | mandatory column where any
creation. value above 0/is accepted. (58.1).
| Document | Settlement Portal Create a The system does not prompt for Medium
Registration | deed settlement | any error it accepted different
deed father name in the place of father
among details.
three sons,
with one
sons’ father
name
different.
| Document — | Partnership Back- Modificatio | The token was scheduled | The drafts created should be | High
Registration | deed office कर्ण between 12.00hrs and 1300 hrs | available in the JA login only
Partnership | which was viewed/edited before | during the token time and further.
deed inJA | the scheduled time allotted | The trail of changes made by JA
Login. (11.33hrs.) The JA modified the | should be made available for SR
contribution amount of party 1 to | to view
Rs.200000 from the earlier
amount of Rs.100000.
20 | Document | Deposit of Portal Entertheage | The age of the mortgagor was Low
Registration | Title deeds of the entered as 30 and the identity
Mortgagor as | proof was selected as Pensioners
30and select | F हें
the identity identity card and the identity
proof as number was entered. The system
Pensioners did not prompt any error.
identity card
21 | Document | Release deed- | Back- Creation of | A release deed was created by Medium
Registration | Portal/Back | office Release entering a random PAN number
Office deed and —_| for the releasor and token was
processing | initiated. In the JA Login under
in JA login. | the section supporting documents
by clicking on “Click here to
Bulk PAN Approval” the PAN
submitted can be verified. The
PAN details were fetched, and
the details of the PAN holder
appear in a new dialog box. The
name in the PAN card database
does not match with the pat

74



Sl.
No

Module
name

Test
scenario

Audit findings

Annexure:

Priority

name but even then the system
allows proceeding to next step.
22 | Document | Will deed Portal Creation of | The system prompts for entering Medium
Registration draft will | the presenter’s mobile number
deed only in the presenter/retum to
party details. Mobile no. is not a
mandatory column in the testator
or beneficiary details.
23 | Document | Will deed Portal Creation of | The Aadhaar number is not a part Low
Registration draft will | of the identification type in
deed supporting details.
24 | Document | Gift Back Create gift | When we tried rejecting the | Creation and authorisation | High
Registration | deed/Back office deed where document in the JA Login the | should be implemented like
Officer Father is system allows selecting all the | maker checker concept.
tindeed te | Teieetion reasons from the list of
ind in faveur | Teasons provided. The refusal
of his son. does not go to the SR for
The Donor | approval, but the SR can only
and the view the refusal slip in his login.
guardian of
the Donee
are one and
the same.
25 | Document | Gift deed Portal Create gift. | The minor cannot be a donor ina High
Registration deed where | gift deed as he is not eligible to
son (minor) | contract so they cannot transfer
is executing | property as a gift. If the donor is
agiftdeed | a minor then the gift deed
toandin | becomes invalid. There is no
favour of | restriction in the system in the
his mother. | home screen while creating a gift
deed.
26 | Document | Gift deed Portal Create gift | The system allows the minor | Age restrictions can be added to | Low
Registration deed where | details to be filled under donor | the type of identity proof as per
son (minor) | details and — while the ‘| the eligibility. (Example Voter id
is executing | representative details should be | card can be enabled only is the
agifideed | mandatorily filled as the donor is | applicant is 18 years old.)
toandin | minor, (Minor Guardian) details
favour of | When the identity type was
his mother. | selected as Driving licence for a
12 year old minor; the system
does not prompt any error.
27 ६ Document | Other deed Portal Create a Under the first party details the [The validity of the identity | Medium
Registration lease deed | Driving licence was given as | number entered should be cross
under other | identity proof where any random | verified.
deed number is accepted by the system
as identification no. Similarly,
under the second party details the
freedom fighter’s identity card
alpha numeric characters were
entered in the identification no.
and the system accepted the
same.
28 | Document | Portal/Citizen | Portal Fill the The system accepts any random | The system can verily the email | Low
Registration | Login email idof | email id (for example system | id by sending an verification link
Executant | accepts the —email_—_id | by clicking which the user will be
and “ashokkumars@nun.ka” to be | allowed to proceed further in
Claimant | entered. It does not check for the | creating the document.
for validity.
receiving
the
information

75


IT Audit of STAR 2.0 Application in the Registration Department, Tamil Nadu

Module
name

Document
Registration

Test
scenario

Witness
details

Audit findings

To create a document, 2
execution witness and 2
identification witness. are
mandatory. In the identity type of
identification witness, all ids are
listed whereas while proceeding
to next screen an error message
appears stating '2 identification
witness with Aadhaar is
mandatory’. It accepts only
‘Aadhaar as id proof even when
other ids are listed in the type

Priority

30

Document
Registration

Portal/Citizen
Login-
Creation of a
document

Portal

Enter the
claimant as
“minor”.

The claimant age has been
entered as "1" year and also the
marital status was stated as
married. The system allows
adding details of the minor in the
claimant details column even
without asking for the proof of
identity.

Proof of identity and age should
be made mandatory in case of
minor.

Low

76


Annexures

Annexure-9
Referred to in Paragraph 3.5.1 (c) and 3.6 (ii)

Details of Release notes released by the Department

SI. No. Date of Phase I Phase II

[1 | 12-Mar-19 ; 6 | 0 |
2 29-Apr-19 12 10
3 04-Mar-19 ; 8 [| | 6 |
4 27-Mar-19 4 13 17
5 07-May-19 14 7 21
6 25-Jan-19 13 3 | 16 |
7 21-Jan-19 20 ; 65 | 26
| 8 | 05-Feb-19 5 11 16
[9 | 07-Jan-19 | 9 [| | 6 | 15
10 18-Feb-19 7 ; 8 [| 15
1] 11-Feb-19 5 ; 6 | 1]
12 19-Mar-19 7 5 12
13 16-Apr-19 5 18 23
14 12-Jun-19 5 ; 9 | 14
15 02-Jul-19 ; 6 ; 8 [| 14
16 01-Apr-19 | 9 [| 14
17 09-Apr-19 po 15 24
[18 | 28-May-19 ; 6 ; 6 | 12
19 22-May-19 | 0 [| | 9 | | 9 |
20 16-Jul-19 5 | 0 | 5
21 14-May-19 5 13 | 18 |
22 10-Jul-19 9 ; 8 [| 17
23 06-Jun-19 10 20 30
Total 179 192 371

77


IT Audit of STAR 2.0 Applic

the Registration Department, Tam

Annexure-10
Referred to in Paragraph 4.4
Details of MIS reports yet to be developed

[15 Reports not developed

Particulars of local audit paras for which final orders passed but pending collection of
amount

Year wise pendency of audit paras

Details of AG(A)report for which reply is to be sent

Details of AAG(A) paras involving money value

Year wise pendency of AG (A) Paras

Paras raised during Annual Inspection by DIG/DR/AIG - Final orders passed but
pending collection of amount

Number of chit arbitration cases

Details of Inspection for societies and filing of returns

Performance evaluation of DRs(Admin)

10

Registration of firms

11

Details of Impounded documents

78


Annexures

LINK ANNEXURES

Link Annexure Paragraph Lin
Reference

2.2.3 https://cag.gov.in/uploads/media/Link-Annexure-1-
062399ec26412a0-81787331.pdf

2 2.2.5 https://cag.gov.in/uploads/media/Link-Annexure-2-
062399f185123c9-90510465.pdf

3 2.3.2 https://cag.gov.in/uploads/media/Link-Annexure-3-
062399f4a05ba34-14255163.pdf

4 24 https://cag.gov.in/uploads/media/Link-Annexure-4-
06239bdc4533e24-39332175.pdf

5 3.2 (a) https://cag.gov.in/uploads/media/Link-Annexure-5-
06239b4e6bf4322-37977843.pdf

| | 3.7.1 https://cag.gov.in/uploads/media/Link-Annexure-6-
06239b51c7b37d8-85327454.pdf

7 3.7.2 https://cag.gov.in/uploads/media/Link-Annexure-7-
06239b53f586f24-05608783.pdf

| | 3.7.2 https://cag.gov.in/uploads/media/Link-Annexure-8-
06239b56a13f244-10269790.pdf

|? | https://cag.gov.in/uploads/media/Link-Annexure-9-
06239b5c4084c20-61821931.pdf

10 https://cag.gov.in/uploads/media/Link-Annexure-10-
41 06239b5eb4c5867-78232074.pdf

11 ह https://cag.gov.in/uploads/media/Link-Annexure-11-
06239b6433aa5e4-38820613.pdf

12 https://cag.gov.in/uploads/media/Link-Annexure-12-
06239b66dc014d6-10424991.pdf

13 4.2 https://cag.gov.in/uploads/media/Link-Annexure-13-
06239b692c7c3c6-67137761.pdf

14 43 https://cag.gov.in/uploads/media/Link-Annexure-14-

06239b6bae76bf9-02227650.pdf

79


Glossary

AEE Assistant Executive Engineer

cc Certified Copies

CERT-IN Indian Computer Emergency Response Team.
DCB Demand, Collection and Balance

DRM Document Registration Module

EC Encumbrance Certificate

GoTN Government of Tamil Nadu

IGR Inspector General of Registration

IS Indian Stamp Act, 1899

MIS Management Information System

NFIQ NIST Fingerprint Image Quality

NIC National Informatics Centre

NLRMP National Land Records Modernization Program
NSDL National Securities Depository Ltd

NSIPL M/s. Nine Starts Information Technologies Pvt. Ltd.
O&M Operation and Maintenance

PAN Permanent Account Number

PAO Pay and Accounts Office

POA Power of Attorney

PWD Public Works Department

९ ऑिि Quick Response

RF Registration Fee

RFP Request for proposal

SD Stamp Duty

SDC Special Deputy Collector

SHCIL Stock Holding Corporation of India Limited

SI System Integrator

SLA Service Level Agreement

SRO Sub Registrar Office

SRS System Requirement Specification

STAR Simple and Transparent Administration of Registration
STQC Standardisation Testing and Quality Certification
TNTC Tamil Nadu Treasury Challan

TPA Third Party Auditor

UAT User Acceptance Testing

WBSL M/s. Writers Business Services Ltd.

80



© COMPTROLLER AND
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA
www.cag.gov.in

http://www.agtn.cag.gov.in