 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor 
General of India 
 
 
 
 
 
IT Audit of Indian Customs Electronic Data 
Interchange System (ICES) 1.5 
 
Union Government 
Department of Revenue-Indirect Taxes (Customs) 
No. 14 of 2023 
 
 
                                                                     Laid on the table of Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha …………….  

                    Report No. 14 of 2023 – Union Government (Indirect Taxes – Customs) 
 
  
 
Contents  Pages 
Preface  i 
Executive Summary  iii 
Recommendations   vi 
Glossary  ix 
Chapter 1: Indian Customs EDI System (ICES): 
An overview 
1 
Chapter 2 Audit findings: Core ICES 17 
Chapter 3: Interfaces with other applications 37 
Chapter 4: IT Governance and Management 47 
Annexure  59 
 
 
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 
i 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Report has been prepared for submission to the President of India under 
Article 151(1) of the Constitution of India. 
The Report contains significant results of the Information Technology ( IT) 
Audit of Indian Customs Electronic Data Interchange System (ICES 1.5).  
The instances included mentioned in this Report are those which came to 
notice in the course of test audit conducted during December 2020 to May 
2022 covering the period 2015-16 to 2019-20. 
The audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards 
issued by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
Audit wishes to acknowledge the co-operation received from the Ministry of 
Finance, Department of Revenue and the Ministry of Commerce and 
Industry, Department of Commerce, and its field formations at each stage of 
the audit process. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
PREFACE 
Report No. 14 of 2023 – Union Government (Indirect Taxes – Customs) 

 
iii 
 
 
About the IT Audit 
The Customs Computerisation project was started in 1992, at a number of 
Customs Houses throughout the country with the assistance of National 
Informatics Centre (NIC), a Government of India entity, when after a detailed 
study, the requirement of Electronic Data Interchange (EDI) was felt.  The 
pilot project was launched in the year 1994-95 at Delhi Customs House which 
included EDI as a key element for connecting all the players involved in 
international trade with Customs House electronically. After the successful 
implementation at Delhi Customs House, the Customs Department decided 
to extend the service to other Customs Houses in a phased manner since 
1997-98. 
ICES was developed as the core Information & Communication Technology 
system through which import and export documents viz. Bills of Entry (BsE), 
Shipping Bills (SBs), Import General Ma nifests (IGMs) and Export General 
Manifests (EGMs) were to be processed. It receives and processes all 
incoming messages and generates all outgoing messages automatically at 
the appropriate stage of the clearance process. 
ICES has been developed with the help of NIC since its inception and it is also 
responsible for its maintenance. The Directorate General of Systems and 
Data Management (DG Systems) at New Delhi has been entrusted with the 
implementation of ICES. Initially, ICES 1.0 application was developed and 
implemented in distributed environment (separate servers at various 
locations).  During 2009 -10, ICES 1.0 application was migrated from a host 
based architecture to a three tier architecture. This version is referred  to as 
ICES 1.5 and is deployed in the current centralised architecture under the 
database consolidation of Central Board of Ind irect Taxes and Customs 
(CBIC). 
Accordingly, Customs ICT systems and the ICES application have been 
modified from time to time i n accordance with the operational 
requirements of Department and changes in the Customs Act and allied 
Acts, Rules and Regulations. Although the core ICES application has been 
migrated from decentralised to centralised environment from the year 
2009-10, subsequently, there were several changes in the underlying ICT 
infrastructure, work flow, data transfer and storage, security, etc. 
The IT Audit of ICES 1.5 application was conducted during December 2020 to 
May 2022  covering the period 2015 -16 to 2019 -2020.  The a udit scope 
intended to examine the functionalities of import and export modules, 
interface with other IT applications viz. DGFT, SEZ, Bank, RBI etc. and IT 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
 
Report No. 14 of 2023 – Union Government (Indirect Taxes – Customs) 

 
iv 
 
Governance issues such as  - Organisation and management, IT governance 
and management, and effectiveness of Change Management.  
For the examination of functionalities, the audit focus was more on major 
changes/new functionalities added in the ICES application during 2015 to 
2020. 
Action taken on the previous audit findings reported in the CAG’s Report on 
ICES 1.5 (No. 11 of 2014) was re-examined in this audit and it was noticed 
that the Department had taken remedial action to address many of the 
earlier audit observations/recommendations. Audit also noticed that some of 
the previous audit findings/recommendations had lost their relevance and 
thus rendered redundant due to change in the Customs Act and allied Acts, 
Rules and Regulations.    
(i) Audit reviewed the Customs EDI System for the first time in the 
year 2000 -01 (Report No. 10 of 2002 -Customs). The review was 
focused on procurement and software development.  
(ii) ICES 1.0 was again reviewed in the year 2008 (PA Report No. 24 of 
2009-10 Customs), primarily to verify whether it had mapped the 
processes &  provisions of the Customs Act and allied rules & 
regulations effectively.  
(iii) ICES 1.5, an upgraded version of the original ICES 1.0 was rolled 
out in a phased manner across various C ustoms locations from 
June 2009. The audit of the upgraded version i.e., IC ES 1.5 was 
done in 2013 and its finding reported in CAG’s Report No.11 of 
2014 (Performance Audit).    
The previous audits pointed out some systemic issues and issues involving 
deficiencies in designing various business rules in the system, as per the 
rules/Acts in force at that time.  
The details of previous audit findings with the action taken/current status are 
given in Annexure I. 
Structure of the Report 
This report is divided into four chapters. Chapter 1 present an overview of 
Indian Customs EDI System (ICES) and indicates the audit objectives, scope, 
sample, audit criteria and audit methodology used for conduct of this ‘IT 
Audit of ICES 1.5’ . Chapters 2 , 3 and 4 cover the audit findings, conclusions 
and recommendations pertaining  to this IT Audit. This report contains 24 
audit observations, including sub -paragraphs, and 16 recommendations. 
Responses were received for 20 observations, out of  which 15 have been 
Report No. 14 of 2023 – Union Government (Indirect Taxes – Customs) 

 
v 
 
fully/partially accepted and five have not been accepted.  No response was 
received in respect of four audit observations.  
Summary of Audit Findings 
Chapter 2: Core ICES 
Audit noticed that: 
(a) Lack of certain validation controls in ICES Import module resulted in (i) Late 
fee wrongly levied, collected and waived off , (ii) Short/excess levy of duty 
under Notification 46/2011 -Customs, (iii)  Working of Risk Management 
System for Import, (iv) Lack of control in ICES regarding levy of duty in the 
case of BE filed prior to date of entry inwards and (v) Country of Origin not 
identical at BE level and Item level, 
(b) Lack of validation in ICES Export module caused (i) Non  - alignment of DBK 
Serial number with RITC (Export validation) (ii) Acceptance of negative FOB 
value of exported goods, 
(c) Partial automation of Shipping Bills and drawback claims under Section 74 
of the Customs Act 1962, 
(d) Delay in implementation of Post Clearance Audit for RMS Export module, 
(e) Non-Automation of closure of IGM, 
(f) Non-automation of Refund process, 
(g) Non- auto reversal of duty in case of double payment, 
(h) Responses on the status of the implementation of the recommendations of 
the Time Release Study (TRS) Committee Report 2022 were awaited. 
Chapter 3: Interfaces with other applications 
The Interfaces of ICES with other stake holders IT applications is not fully 
implemented to address their requirements with regard to Linking of ICES 
with Banks , Sharing of RBI Export Outstanding Statement (XOS) data/ 
Caution list with ICES and Integration of SEZ Online with Customs ICES. 
Chapter 4: IT Governance and Management 
Audit noticed gaps in the governance and management of the ICES 
application especially (i) updation of Software Requirements Specification 
(SRS) and Software Design Document (SDD), (ii) Non -updation of User 
Manuals, (iii) Directory Change Management, (iv ) Structural Change 
Management and (v) Help desk and end-user support system. 
  
Report No. 14 of 2023 – Union Government (Indirect Taxes – Customs) 

Report No. 14 of 2023 – Union Government (Indirect Taxes – Customs) 
vi 
 
 
 
1. The Ministry should ensure that necessary validation checks in ICES 
regarding levying, collection and wavier of late fees are implemented, 
duly mapped and functioning correctly. It may also be ensured that in 
case of wavier of late fees, the reasons are also recorded. 
(Paragraph 2.2.1) 
2. The Ministry should ensure necessary validation checks in ICES so that 
Customs duty rates are correctly reflected based on Country codes read 
with exemption notifications, and not solely based on self-declaration. 
(Paragraph 2.2.2) 
3. The Ministry should ensure proper validation in ICES that in cases 
wherein a Bill of Entry is taken up for examination by the Risk 
Management System, the field relating to examination report should not 
be null. 
(Paragraph 2.2.3) 
4. The Ministry should ensure that the notifications are updated in a timely 
manner and invariably before the effective date.  The delay in updation 
by DMS sites should be viewed seriously and necessary action taken in 
cases of delay. DMS sites must comply with the existing SOP and this 
should be verified and ensured by DG (System). 
(Paragraph 2.2.4) 
5. The Ministry should ensure necessary validation in ICES export module 
so that the FOB value after deducting insurance and freight is not 
negative. 
(Paragraph 2.3.2) 
6. RMS for exports for selection of Shipping Bills for Post Clearance Audit 
(PCA) should be made operational at the earliest for increased 
transparency and targeting using a risk based approach. 
(Paragraph 2.5) 
7. The module for daily updating of exchange rate may be made 
operational at the earliest. 
(Paragraph 2.6) 
8. The Ministry may take necessary steps so that the IGMs filed in ICES are 
closed electronically and all goods are duly accounted for. Efforts may 
also be made to manually close all the open IGMs. Ministry should also 
RECOMMENDATIONS 

                    Report No. 14 of 2023 – Union Government (Indirect Taxes – Customs) 
vii 
 
decide and prescribe a time limit for th e closure of IGMs  as undue 
delay/non-reconciliation is fraught with the risk of revenue leakage. 
(Paragraph 2.7) 
9. The Ministry may consider having online workflow for capturing and 
processing refund s on the lines of the GSTN System  so that the 
Department is able to electronically keep track of BEs against which 
refund has been applied for. This would make the monitoring of refund 
cases more efficient, effective and transparent. 
(Paragraph 2.8) 
10. Ministry may expedite the development of APIs for sharing of 
challans/warehouse details between ICES and ICEGATE in a time bound 
manner. 
(Paragraph 3.2) 
11. Ministry may explore mapping/cross -verifying of RBI XOS data with 
caution list maintained by CBIC for identifying default cases for effective 
monitoring of export proceeds realisation. 
(Paragraph 3.3) 
12. Ministry should integrate SEZ Online with ICES at the earliest for better 
monitoring of SEZ operations (both EXIM and DTA transactions) and for 
ease of doing business in SEZs. 
(Paragraph 3.4) 
13. In addition to immediate updating of SRS and SDD, the Ministry should 
also ensure that SRS and SDD is kept up to date at regular intervals to 
factor all the important changes made in the application. 
(Paragraph 4.1.1) 
14. The updating of user manuals consistent with changes should be 
regularly carried out in a time bound manner to avoid accumulation of 
requirements. 
(Paragraph 4.1.2) 
15. Ministry must ensure that protocols are properly and completely 
followed at the time of sig n off of any change management. They must 
ensure that all changes including testing and approval of such changes 
are properly documented. 
(Paragraph 4.2.2) 
16. Ministry may prescribe: 
(a) Time limits for resolving or escalating the complaints, 
(b) Average time, for resolution with useful/suitable details of tickets 
which take unduly long time be captured and monitored. 
(Paragraph 4.3) 
  

 
ix 
 
 
Abbreviation Expanded form 
ACC Air Cargo Complex 
ADG Additional Director General 
ADD Anti-Dumping Duty 
API Application Programming Interface 
BCD Basic Customs Duty 
BsE Bills of Entry 
BRC Bank Realisation Certificate 
CBIC Central Board of Indirect Taxes and Customs 
CCR Compulsory Compliance Requirements 
CETH Central Excise Tariff Heading 
CGM Consol General Manifest 
CHA Customs House Agent 
CIF Cost, Insurance, Freight 
CIS Customs Integrated System 
CRCL Central Revenues Control Laboratory 
CA Customs Act, 1962 
COO Country of Origin 
CTH Customs Tariff Heading 
CVD Counter Vailing Duty 
DGARM Directorate General of Analytics and Risk Management 
DGCIS Directorate General of Central Intelligence and Statistics 
DGoS/DG Systems Directorate General of Systems and Data Management 
DGFT Director General of Foreign Trade 
DGoV Director General of Valuation 
DMS Directory Management Site 
DoC Department of Commerce 
DoR Department of Revenue 
DRI Directorate of Revenue Intelligence 
DTR Module Daily Trade Return 
DBK Duty Drawback 
EDI Electronic Data Interchange 
EGMs Export General Manifests 
EDPMS Export Data Processing and Monitoring System 
EDD Extra Duty Deposit 
EODC Export Obligation Discharge 
FOB Free on Board 
FTA Foreign Trade Agreement 
GSTN Goods and Services Tax Network 
ICES Indian Customs EDI System 
ICD Inland Container Depot 
ICEGATE Indian Customs Electronic Gateway 
IEC Importer Exporter Code 
IGST Integrated Goods & Service Tax 
IGMs Import General Manifests 
GLOSSARY OF TERMS AND ABBREVIATIONS 
Report No. 14 of 2023 – Union Government (Indirect Taxes – Customs) 

 
x 
 
LEO Let Export Order 
MCD Manifest Clearing Department 
MoU Memorandum of Understanding 
MEIS/SEIS Merchandise/Service Exports from India Scheme 
NCTF National Committee on Trade Facilitation 
NIC National Informatics Centre 
NICSI National Informatics Centre Service Incorporated 
NACIN National Academy of Customs, Indirect Taxes & Narcotics 
NCH New Customs House 
OOC Out of Charge 
PAO Pay & Accounts Office 
PA Performance Audit 
PGA Partner Government Agency 
PRS Peer Review Site 
Pr.CCA Principal Chief Controller of Accounts 
PCCC Personal customs clearance code  
RBI Reserve Bank of India 
RMS Risk Management System 
RoSL Rebate of State Levies 
RITC Revised Indian Trade Classification 
SCMTR Sea Cargo Manifest and Transhipment Regulations 
SRS Software Requirements Specification 
SDD Software Design Document 
SoP Standard Operating Procedures 
SEZ Special Economic Zone 
SBs Shipping Bills 
SION Standard Input Output Norms 
SQL Structured Query Language 
TRS Time Release Study 
UAT User Acceptance Test 
UTIITSL UTI Infrastructure Technology and Services Limited 
WH Warehouse 
XOS Export Outstanding Statement 
 
Report No. 14 of 2023 – Union Government (Indirect Taxes – Customs) 

                     Report No. 14 of 2023 – Union Government (Indirect Taxes – Customs)  
1 
 
Chapter 1 
Indian Customs EDI System (ICES): An overview 
 
1. Introduction 
The Customs Computerisation project was started in 1992 , at a number of 
Customs Houses throughout the country with the assistance of National 
Informatics Centre (NIC), a Government of India entity, when after a detailed 
study, the requirement of Electronic Data Interchange (EDI) was felt.  The 
pilot project was launched in the year 1994-95 at Delhi Customs House which 
included EDI as a key element for connecting a ll the players involved in 
international trade with Customs House electronically. After the successful 
implementation at Delhi Customs House, the Customs Department decided 
to extend the service to other Customs Houses in a phased manner from 
1997-98. 
1.1 Indian Custom automation has three major Systems as 
components: 
1.1.1 The Indian Customs EDI System (ICES) 
ICES was developed as the core Information & Communication Technology 
system through which import and export documents viz. Bills of Entry (BsE), 
Shipping Bills (SBs), Import General Manifests (IGMs) and Export General 
Manifests (EGMs) were to be processed. It receives and processes all 
incoming messages and generates all outgoing messages automatically at 
the appropriate stage of the clearance process. 
ICES has been developed with the help of NIC since its inception and  NIC is 
also responsible for its maintenance. The Directorate General of Systems and 
Data Management (DG (Systems)) in the Central Board of Indirect Taxes and 
Customs (CBIC) at New Delhi has been entrusted with the implementation of 
ICES. Initially, ICES 1.0 application was developed and implement ed in a 
distributed environment (separate serve rs at various locations).  During 
2009-10, ICES 1.0 application was migrated from a host based architecture 
to a three tier architecture. This version is referred to as ICES 1.5 and is 
deployed in the current centralised architecture under the database 
consolidation of CBIC. 
In June 2012, a new tripartite M emorandum of Understanding (MoU) was 
agreed amongst CBIC, NIC  and National Informatics Centre Service 
Incorporated (NICSI - a Government of India entity). As per the 2012 MoU, 
National Informatics Centre Service Incorporated (NICSI) was to handle 
administrative aspects related to deployment of hired personnel so that NIC 
could focus on software related issues. 
 

 Report No. 14 of 2023 – Union Government (Indirect Taxes – Customs) 
2 
 
The scope of work to be carried out under the MoU inter-alia included: 
• Requirement study and preparation of Software Requirement 
Specifications (SRS) for new modules for ICES; Design and development 
of application as per the approved SRS. 
• Maintenance of ICES application by providing software updates along 
with installation scripts for the existing ICES modules and Change 
Management policy agreed between NIC and CBIC. 
• Documentation for the ICES including the requirement specifications, 
technical documents, user manuals and test cases. 
• Establishing application level linkages between ICES and any other in -
house application being developed by CBIC through any vendor. 
• Design of EDI m essages in consultation with the stakeholders for 
integration with ICES, preparation of detailed Message 
Implementation guidelines for ICEGATE and stakeholders. 
• Provide Level-2 and Level-3 support to the ICES users for resolution of 
problems escalated by the Level-1 Helpdesk team. 
• Place technical manpower at the Customs locations for support to the 
ICES users. 
• Conduct training programs and workshops for ICES Users. 
• Design/development and maintenance of remote EDI System 
packages. 
• Maintain version control of ICES version 1.5 application. 
ICES is currently running at 262 Custom sites on pan-India basis and handles 
more than 99  per cent of Customs Revenue. The main features of the ICES 
1.5, which runs in a consolidated environment as a centralised application, 
are as follows: 
a. Multi-location functionality 
b. Single database with partitions for users to access data only for their 
location 
c. Centralized maintenance and updating of software  
d. Faster and better communication with external stakeholders, Banks, 
DGFT, etc. 
e. Integration with ICEGATE in central environment leading to better 
response times in case troubleshooting is required. 
1.1.2  The Indian Customs Electronic Gateway (ICEGATE) 
ICEGATE application has been functioning since 2007 for providing various 
online e-services to the trade.  ICEGATE is the front-end interface of ICES with 
the external world which caters to different stakeholders in the export and 
import trade to file BsE and SBs, C ustoms manifests and declarations, track 

                     Report No. 14 of 2023 – Union Government (Indirect Taxes – Customs) 
3 
 
and trace documents, online payment of duties and interfaces with all other 
concerned agencies like Director General of Foreign Trade (DGFT),  Director 
General of Valuation (DGoV), Special Economic Zone (SEZ), Bank s, Reserve 
Bank of India (RBI) , Central Revenues Control Laboratory (CRCL), Pay & 
Accounts Office (PAO) etc. The ICEGATE contract was awarded to M/S Wipro 
Limited in June 2008 and till 2019 , M/S Wipro  Limited was providing its 
services to CBIC.  
In 2018, CBIC decided to implement Customs Integrated System (CIS) with 
the intention to update and revamp the three applications of ICES, ICEGATE 
and RMS.  As part of (CIS) Phase I im plementation, ICEGATE 1.0 was to be 
revamped to ICEGATE 2.0 with a range of new services and features.  The 
focus of ICEGATE 2.0 was on building an ecosystem for efficient, transparent, 
contactless and paperless trade. 
Request for Proposal (RFP) for CIS Phase I was issued in January 2019.  After 
conducting pre-bid workshop, technical bid, financial bid evaluation and 
commercial bid processes (during January 2019 to December 2019) etc. , 
administrative approval and financial sanction were issued in February 2020. 
After issuance of Letter of Award in March 2020, the Board signed the Master 
Service Level Agreement in May 2020 with M/s Infosys Limited for designing 
and development of Customs Integration System Phase I.  
The process of vendor selectio n could not be fully examined now, as only 
partial records were provided to Audit.  This will be taken up as a separate 
Audit. 
1.1.3  Risk Management System (RMS) 
RMS is the third component of Indian Custom automation which facilitates 
compliant trade, segregating  using a risk based approach , with certain 
transactions requiring deeper scrutiny by Customs officers. It profiles risk and 
paves the way for facilitation towards clearance through green and red 
channels. RMS is functioning under the Directorate General of Analytics and 
Risk Management (DGARM) wing of CBIC. 
The c ontract for the software development, maintenance and support of 
RMS was awarded to M/s Birlasoft Limited in August 2004 . RMS for import 
and export mo dules were implemented in December 2005 and July 2013 
respectively.  From June 2016, M/s UTI Infrastructure Technology  and 
Services Limited  (UTIITSL) has bee n associated with CBIC for the s oftware 
development, maintenance and support of RMS. 
The following diagram provides a view of the ICES system and its interactions 
with the various internal/external stakeholders: 
 

Report No. 14 of 2023 – Union Government (Indirect Taxes – Customs) 
4
Diagram 1
Source: SRS (Version 1.0-2010)
According to the Ministry 1 RMS does not carry out assessment of imports 
and so there is no provision for mapping all the conditions of a plethora of 
levy and exemption notifications. If RMS or ICES considers validating each 
condition of several notifications claimed in a Bill of Entry, it will significantly 
increase the interdiction level and processing time of bills. RMS is a targeting 
system that interdicts risky bills based on a host of dynamic risk parameters. 
It adopts a multi-layered process that includes the following (but not limited 
to):
• Selection of containers for scanning, based on risk criteria, utilising IGM 
declaration for examination of suspicious containers,
• interdiction of risky bills on the submission of a bill of entry for the 
verification by an officer, based on th e self -assessed declaration data 
contained therein,
• providing decision support in the form of appraising and examining 
instructions, as well as past bills of entry for identical consignments,
• raising live alerts in respect of high-risky bills,
• issuing comp ulsory compliance requirement for each bill regardless of 
facilitation status, based on CTH, IEC and Notifications etc. for the 
verification prior to OOC, and
• selection of bills (largely from the facilitation pool) for post clearance audit.
1 Submitted by the Ministry during the study visit of the Public Accounts Committee (2022-
23) to Raipur and Hyderabad from 26 th to 30th August 2022 for discussion on the subject 
“Non-compliance to Provisions of Customs Act, Customs Tariff Notifications” the following 
was submitted by the Ministry with regards to RMS.


                     Report No. 14 of 2023 – Union Government (Indirect Taxes – Customs) 
5 
 
Thus, interdiction of the Bill of Entry by RMS for verification by an assessing 
officer is only one layer of the risk identification and mitigation process. 
Given the increased focus of the Government on ease of doing business and 
enhanced trade facilitation, a small percentage of bills of entry are marked 
to assessing officers for verification in a live processing environment. 
However, risk identification and compliance verification is a continued 
process until out -of-charge and even thereafter through post -clearance 
audit. 
CBIC has taken several measures, post audit period 2017 -18, to further 
strengthen compliance management including risk -based selection of bills 
for verification by officers. Some of the main measures are outlined below: 
• RMS/RMCC has been upgraded to Na tional Customs Targeting Centre 
(NCTC) as of 1st January, 2020, with enhanced capabilities and 
technological tools. 
• Machine learning enabled of interdictions of risky importer consignment 
was introduced in 2019/2020. This has enhanced the precision and 
accuracy of interdictions for effectively tackling risk related to 
classification, value, rate of duty, exemption notifications, anti -dumping 
duty, safeguard duty and IGST, by utilising historical database of 
identical/similar goods. 
• Automated risk management  through predictive modelling has been 
introduced; it utilises various data sources across the supply chain 
continuum, including those from other government agencies. 
• Risk rules and targets are refined regularly based on data analysis, 
feedback from field formations and outcomes/observations of Audit. 
• In addition to RMS targeting, the Bills of Entry, related documents and 
associated entities in the supply chain are analysed by NCTC officers in  a 
real time environment to raise specific alerts in respect of highly risky bills 
(2021). 
  

 Report No. 14 of 2023 – Union Government (Indirect Taxes – Customs) 
6 
 
1.1.4 Information on transactions handled by ICES 
A summary of the numbers of Bills of Entry 2 (BsE), Shipping Bills 3 (SBs), 
Import General Manifest 4 (IGM), Export General Manifest 5 (EGM), Consol  
General Manifest 6 (CGM) filed, Duty Collected, Drawback/Rebate of State 
Levies7 (RoSL)/Integrated Goods & Service Tax8 (IGST) disbursed etc., during 
the period from 2015-16 to 2019-20 through ICES are as under: 
Table No. 1.1: Average transactions handled by ICES 
(Amount in ` crore) 
Period No. of 
BsE filed 
No. of 
IGM 
filed 
No. of 
CGMs 
filed 
Amount 
of Duty 
Collected  
No. of SBs 
filed 
No. of 
EGMs 
filed 
Amount 
of 
Drawback 
disbursed  
Amount 
of RoSL 
Disbursed 
Amount of 
IGST 
Disbursed 
2015-16 3970261 337588 ... 214758 7045363 351725 31919 .... ... 
2016-17 4333342 373926 ... 228231 7366681 401586 30891 614 ... 
2017-18 4202592 306269 62465 331347 7612039 307376 15612 3062 9583 
2018-19 4307097 312572 66576 414468 7648051 298278 11198 2280 56200 
2019-20 4490063 352379 59624 384300 7336468 260275 17908 ... 59965 
Total 21303355 1682734 188665 1573104 37008602 1619240 107528 5956 125748 
 
Source: ICEGATE Annual Reports available on the CBIC website. 
From the above, Audit noted that on an average 31 ,952 consignments 
(Import and Export) and 1 ,981 IGM/EGM/CGM were handled daily by ICES 
during the period from 2015-16 to 2019-20. Besides, on an average, Customs 
 
2A bill of entry is a legal document that is filed by importers or Customs clearance agents on 
or before the arrival of imported goods. It is submitted to the Customs department as a part 
of the Customs clearance procedure. Once this is done, the importer w ill be able to claim 
Input Tax Credit (ITC) on the goods. 
3The Shipping Bill is  an essential document issued by the Customs Service Centre  after the 
exporter applies to acquire this bill. This bill facilitates the exporter to get Customs 
clearance, load the goods, and claim duty drawback etc. 
4The IGM helps ensure that all the import cargo carried by a vessel has been reported, the 
carrier has followed all statutory requirements, and that the ship is carrying all required and 
complete documents for import. 
5Export General Manifest is a mandatory legal document to be filed by the carrier of goods 
with the Customs Department . This document is used by government authorities as proof 
of export. The Customs officials certify proof of export on shipping documents to exporters 
on the basis of EGM. 
6Consol Import General Manifest is filed by the consol agent who acts as carrier of cargo . If 
any cargo is co -loaded with a freight forwarder, he needs to file consol manifest with 
Customs on arrival of goods. Based on suc h consol manifest, the importer files import 
documents for clearance procedures to take delivery of goods. 
7In the ROSL scheme, the Central Govt. provided rebate of State levies comprising of State 
VAT/CST on inputs including packaging, fuel, duty on elect ricity generation and duties and 
charges on purchase of grid power, as accumulated through the stages of production from 
yarn to finished garments. The scheme has since been discontinued from March 2019. 
8Integrated goods and services tax (IGST) means  the tax levied under the IGST Act on the 
supply of any goods and / or services by the Central Government and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto in the course of inter -state trade or commerce . Integrated 
GST also applies to import of goods and services into India. 

                      Report No. 14 of 2023 – Union Government (Indirect Taxes – Customs) 
7 
 
Duty amounting to ` 861.97 crore w as collected and Duty Drawback 
amounting to ` 58.92 crore, IGST amounting to ` 125.37 crore and RoSL 
amounting to ` 6.52 crore were disbursed daily by ICES during the 
corresponding period. 
1.2. Audit Objectives 
The IT Audit of ICES 1.5 has been conducted to gain an assurance that:  
i. The functionalities of ICES have been developed as envisaged and 
the intended benefits have been achieved , including ease of tax 
administration; 
ii. ICES has effective interfaces with other IT Applications  
iii.       IT governance is adequate and effective. 
1.3. Audit Criteria 
The following are the sources of criteria for this audit:  
• The Customs Act, 1962, 
• Customs Tariff Act, 1975 
• Customs Manual 
• Various Customs Rules and Regulations 
• Circulars and notifications of CBIC which were issued from time to 
time and are effective during the period of audit 
• MoU signed amongst CBIC, NIC and NICSI  
• Software Requirements Specification (SRS), Software Design 
Document (SDD)and User Manuals 
• Contract/agreement made with various vendors 
1.4. Audit scope 
The IT Audit of ICES 1.5 application was conducted during December 2020 to 
May 2022 covering the period 2015 -16 to 2019 -2020.  The a udit scope 
intended to examine the functionalities of import and export modules, 
interface with other IT applications viz.  DGFT, DGoV, SEZ, Bank, RBI, CRCL, 
PAO etc. and IT Governance issues such as - Organisation and management, 
IT governance and management and effectiveness of Change Management. 
For the examination of functionalities, the audit focus was more on major 
changes/new functionalities added in  the ICES application during 2015 to 
2020, especially the following: 
(i) Project Import module 
(ii) Module for Provisional Assessment 
(iii) Automated out of charge of BsE 

 Report No. 14 of 2023 – Union Government (Indirect Taxes – Customs) 
8 
 
(iv) Manual BE/SB Module 
(v) GST related changes after introduction of GST 
(vi) Deferred payment module 
(vii) Implementation of the RMS module for export 
(viii) Changes due to levy of Social Welfare Surcharge in lieu of education 
cess 
(ix) Changes due to introduction of new State codes 
(x) Changes due to uploading of documents of import and export through 
e-Sanchit 
(xi) Changes on account of flow of data of paperless licences of Advance 
Authorisation and EPCG schemes. 
The IT Audit did not cover a detailed examination of RMS or of ICEGATE. 
1.5. Audit Methodology 
The audit methodology was broadly as follows: 
• Review of Documents related to rollout of the ICES application; 
• Review and analysis of Software Requirement Specifications (SRS s), 
Software Design Documents (SDDs) and other documents related to 
the design and implementation of ICES with reference to the 
provisions of Act/Rules/notification as amended; 
• Testing in User A cceptance Test environment (UAT) and auditee 
assisted production environment , where necessary , to check the 
validations/audit checks relating to functionalities of ICES; 
• Extraction of data by querying on ICES database and further analysis 
of such data; 
• Discussion and structured interviews with Stakeholders and replies 
from DG (Systems), CBIC. 
1.6. Previous Audit Reports 
The Customs ICT systems and the ICES application have been modified 
from time to time in accordance with the operational requirements of 
Department and changes in the Customs Act and allied Acts, Rules and 
Regulations. Although the core ICES application ha s been migrated from 
decentralised to centralised environment from the year 2009 -10, 
subsequently, there were several changes in the underlying ICT 
infrastructure, work flow, data transfer and storage, security, etc. 
Action taken on the previous audit findings reported in the CAG’s Report on 
ICES 1.5 (No. 11 of 2014) was re-examined in this audit and  it was noticed 
that the Department had taken remedial action to address many of the 
earlier audit observations/recommendations. Audit also noticed that some of 

                     Report No. 14 of 2023 – Union Government (Indirect Taxes – Customs) 
9 
 
the previous audit findings/recommendations had lost their relevance and 
thus rendered redundant, due to change in the Customs Act and allied Acts, 
Rules and Regulations.    
(i) Audit reviewed the Customs EDI System for the first time in the 
year 2000-01 (Report No. 10 of 2002 -Customs). The review was 
focused on procurement and software development.  
(ii) ICES 1.0 was again reviewed in the year 2008 (PA Report No. 24 of 
2009-10 Customs), primarily to verify whether it had mapped the 
processes & provisio ns of the Customs Act and allied rules & 
regulations effectively.  
(iii) ICES 1.5, an upgraded version of the original ICES 1.0 was rolled 
out in a phased manner across various C ustoms locations from 
June 2009. The audit of the upgraded version i.e. , ICES 1.5 wa s 
done in 2013 and its finding reported in CAG’s Report No.11 of 
2014 (Performance Audit).    
The previous audits pointed out some systemic issues and issues involving 
deficiencies in designing various business rules in the system, as per  the 
rules/Acts in force at that time.  
The details of previous audit findings with the action taken/current status are 
given in Annexure I. 
  

 Report No. 14 of 2023 – Union Government (Indirect Taxes – Customs) 
10 
 
1.7. Understanding the process flow for Import and Export in ICES 
Application  
1.7.1. Process Flow for Imports: 
Flow Chart 1 
 
  


                     Report No. 14 of 2023 – Union Government (Indirect Taxes – Customs) 
11 
 
1.7.2. Process Flow for Exports: 
Flow Chart 2
 
1.8. Constraints faced by Audit 
1.8.1 Non-updation of documents 
Basic documents like SRSs and SDDs provided to Audit were dating back to 
2010 and the same were not updated thereafter. SDDs in respect of only 9 
stakeholders out of 16 (Sea line/Ports, Air/Airline-console, DGFT, DGoV, SEZ, 
Bank, RBI, CRCL, PAO, ICD, CHA, Pr.CCA, DRI, DGCIS, e -Sanchit & PGA) have 
been received from DG (Systems) till date. The H andbook for Customs 
officers, published in August 2013, which gives details of how to operate the 
ICES system and acts as a guide/manual for Customs Officers has also not 
been updated since August 2013 , even though substantial changes 
happened in duty structure and process flow, particularly after the 
introduction (July 2017) of GST regime in India.  
Further, the SDDs provided to Audit, have only structural information of data 
tables and control tables for various messages. The detailed description of 
the fields for the tables and features and functionality of each of the 
messages and the specific requirement for the messages were not available 
in the given SDDs.  


 Report No. 14 of 2023 – Union Government (Indirect Taxes – Customs)  
12 
 
Consequently, this constrained the conduct of this Audit and findings arising 
therefrom. 
On being pointed out (August 2022), the Ministry stated (November 2022) 
that the issue has already been taken up with NIC for early completion of the 
documentation, in terms of the MoU. Action has been initiated for hiring 
team of competent resources to complete the said task. As and when 
documents are completed, the same will be shared. 
1.8.2 Non-availability of documentation of new modules/functionalities 
Regarding rec ords related to whole development cycle for each 
change/module including details of testing by Department etc., it was stated 
by the DG (Systems) that communication amongst stakeholders i.e.,  DG 
(Systems), NIC, technical team and operation team etc. is bei ng done using 
e-mails and hence no physical records is available.  However, even  the trail 
of mails has also not been made available to Audit. In the absence of SRSs 
and SDDs of new modules and functionalities added in ICES and records 
relating to the various stages of whole development of these changes, Audit 
was constrained. 
On being pointed out (August 2022), the Ministry stated (November 2022 ) 
that the point is noted for compliance. 
1.8.3 Non-furnishing of records relating to updating of directories 
Records related to updating of directories consequent upon the issue of 
various notifications relating to change of duty/exemption and exchange 
rate etc. by Data Management Sites (DMS) and peer reviews done by Peer 
Review Sites were not provided to Audit.  Hence, to check the timely 
updation of change of duty/exemption and exchange rate, Audit issued data 
queries relating to a few notifications. 
On being pointed out (August 2022), the Ministry stated (November 2022) 
that as already submitted, role of DG (Systems) comes into play when DMS 
finds any technical difficulties in updation of the Notification due to system 
error. Inaccuracy in updation of Notification is communicat ed by Peer 
Review Site ( PRS) to DMS for necessary action at their end. Remedial 
measures in case of delay / inaccuracy in updation of the Notification are 
carried out by the System Manager (DMS). 
The Ministry has furnished only a list of notification with date of notification 
and date on which these notifications entered in ICES but records of e-mails 
related to updation of directories by Directory Management Sites and review 
done by Peer Review Sites was not provided to Audit as per the stipulated 
SoP. This constrained the conduct of this Audit. 

                    Report No. 14 of 2023 – Union Government (Indirect Taxes – Customs) 
13 
 
1.8.4 Non-furnishing of records relating to grievances/problems faced by 
ICES users and stakeholders 
No physical records relating to suggestions/problems received from Customs 
House Agents, Importers, Exporters, Customs Officers and stakeholders 
which are the end users of ICES application and action taken on the same by 
DG (Systems)/Board were made available to Audit. 
On being pointed out (August 2022), the Ministry furnished details of 
number of tickets raised, number of tickets resolved, number of tickets 
escalated to next level and average time taken for resolution. 
However, the Ministry did not furnish details/parameters fixed for time 
prescribed for resolutions of ticket raised under L1, L2 and L3 supports. In the 
absence of this, Audit cannot verify the efficiency of help desk and user 
support system. 
1.8.5 Constraints relating to furnishing of data dump and slow execution 
of data queries 
In the entry conference (July 2020), it was clearly stated by Audit that Data 
dump (at least of one-year duration) would be crucial for checking contro ls 
and validations and unless data is provided, audit may not progress much.   
In response,  ADG (Systems) stated that there might be some issues in 
providing data dump.  In such situation it was decided that Audit w ould 
provide the data queries in simple E nglish and the same will be run on  the 
whole data (on PAN India basis) in the presence of audit personnel and 
results of the queries provided to audit. 
Audit issued 81 data queries to DG (Systems), results/replies to 55 queries 
were provided as of June 2022. Audit could cross verify the results of BsE/SBs 
of only those Customs sites for which they have access as the audit team had 
no access to view the SBs/BsE  for all locations and was completely 
dependent on DG (Systems)  to verify such records.  Results/replies to 26 
queries (which were not run in the presence of audit)  were provided in 
September 2022.  Analysis of responses to 26 queries is indicated in 
Annexure II. The final resolution of the queries could not be completed by 
Audit at the time of finalisation of this audit, and will be pursued through 
subsequent audits. 
The data log, which would have helped us to study/analyse the data flow 
between the stakehol ders and enable us to highlight the lacunae of the 
transmission mechanism with the various stakeholders, w as not available, 
either at the local level, with the Customs Department, nor with the various 
stakeholders.  Sample of data related to message exchange for the month of 

 Report No. 14 of 2023 – Union Government (Indirect Taxes – Customs) 
14 
 
March 2021 exchanged between ICES and all stakeholders was called for, but 
not provided. 
1.8.6 Limitation in User Acceptance Testing (UAT) environment 
To check the various validations and controls relating to filing of BsE and SBs 
the DG (Systems)  provided Single Sign -On IDs (SSOIDs) in the UAT 
environment which is pre-production environment for testing purpose. The 
validations were tested as per the 201 0 version of SRS and SDD on pre -
production environment. 
However, the filing of BE and SB processes could not be completed on the 
pre-production environment due to the following constraints: 
• IGM filed for BE and EGM filed for SB in UAT is not being accepted by 
the system.  
• Absence of E-Sanchit documents (digitally signed documents). 
Further, modules related to sea-ports were also test checked in ICEGATE with 
required inputs.  However, BEs of seaport could not be checked due to error 
in the first stage itself  (Incorrect Terminal Operator Code – F7 for list). i.e., 
the list of Terminal operator code could not be generated, due to which 
further process of filing of BsE could not be carried out.  Besides, the 
following modules of BsE were also not made available: 
(i) Item_Export – containing IGM Airlines, Status Date, SION group, ITC HS 
Code, etc. 
(ii) Item_Import – containing License details, IGM Airlines, Status Date, ITC 
HS Code, etc. 
(iii) Supporting Manufacturers – containing Status date, Manufacturer 
details, etc. 
Documents relating to application/module to capture basic data of manual 
BsE, which is required for validation with GSTN on imports , were not 
provided to Audit. 
Moreover, Data dictionary related to available Tables and various fields of 
ICES database was not furnished to audit.  In the absence of these documents 
and constraints faced , Audit could only furnish limited assurance regarding 
validation controls at the time of filing BE/SB. 
On being pointed out (August 2022), the Ministry stated (November 2022) 
that the issue has already been taken up with NIC for early completion of the 
documentation, in terms of the MoU. Action has been initiated for hiring 
team of competent resources to complete the said task. As and when 
documents are completed, the same will be shared. 
Ministry’s reply is not relevant as the stated constraint is about limitation in 
User Acceptance Testing (UAT) environment provided to audit during the 
course of audit.

                     Report No. 14 of 2023 – Union Government (Indirect Taxes – Customs) 
15 
 
 
1.8.7 Slow pace in providing replies/records to Audit Requisitions 
Pace of providing replies/records to Audit Requisitions was very slow. Audit 
issued 81 data queries to DG (Systems), results/replies to 55 queries were 
provided as of June 2022. Audit could cross verify the results of BsE/SBs of 
only those Customs sites for which they h ave access as the audit team had 
no access to view the SBs/BsE for all locations and was completely 
dependent on DG (Systems) to verify such records. 
Audit from time to time issued various communications and held meetings 
with the DG (Systems) regarding furnishing of r ecords/replies at various 
level; however, even after repeated pursuance, response to our requests 
was not satisfactory. After protracted pursuance , results/replies to the 
remaining 26 queries (which were not run in the presence of audit) were 
provided only in September 2022. 
On being pointed out (August 2022), the Ministry stated (November 2022) 
that they are taking up the matter with other verticals such as NIC, ICEGATE, 
System Integration etc to fetch the required data. Therefore,  all the 
remaining Audit requisitions are either at different stages of 
completion/under process. This office is in constant touch on priority basis 
with the respective verticals/agency to get the desired data for finalising the 
audit requisitions. 
1.8.8 Constraints relating to furnishing of records related to ICEGATE 
Records related to ICEGATE project , selection of new vendor (M/s. Infosys 
Ltd.) starting from proposal to change of vendor, issue of RFP till finalisation 
of Vendor for ICEGATE were requisitioned, but not furnished to audit. 
The Department, though, furnished (Novemb er 2022) copy of RFP (CIS 
Phase I - ICEGATE RFP Vol 1, 2 and 3). However, related records viz Master 
Level Service Agreement of M/s Wipro Limited, document s related to sign-
off on the successful knowledge transition between the vendors which 
include knowledge transfer, class room training on system and applications, 
hands on training, handing over application documentation, hand -holding 
during transition phase etc. have not been furnished. 
  

                     Report No. 14 of 2023 – Union Government (Indirect Taxes – Customs) 
17 
 
Chapter 2 
Audit Findings: Core ICES 
2.1 Audit examination of functionalities/modules of ICES 
To examine and understand the functionalities/modules currently 
functioning in ICES 1.5, Data Dump (at least of one year duration) was 
requisitioned (July 2020) from DG (Systems). The same was not provided to 
Audit.  In February 2021, the Department provided a list of changes made in 
ICES 1.5 application along with advisories issued between 2017 to 2020, and 
in October 2021 the list of patches (however, with very little description for 
the changes) implemented in the application during the period 2015 to 2016.  
However, no corresponding and latest SRSs and SDDs were made available 
to Audit till date. The base documents - SRSs and SDDs, provided to Audit 
were dating back to 2010. Also, the UAT environment (NACEN Training 
Module), which is a p re-production environment, provided to Audit by the 
DG (Systems) did not contain any test data.  
Hence, to test the validation controls/functionalities of ICES, test data was 
created by Audit by filing a few test Shipping Bills for Export and Bills of Entry 
for Import based on data fields of SRS 2010. This study was thus limited and 
based on the available information, as the data dictionary and structures of 
the fields to be captured in the latest ICES version, were not provided to 
Audit. 
To check that the ICES application prompts at appropriate instances to 
facilitate data entry and minimize errors, various validations available and 
already existing in ICES for Export/Import were checked using UAT 
environment and Audit noticed that without input of mandator y fields and 
proper validations, the system does not allow the user to proceed further. 
It was further noticed that on entering CTH inputs, Unit Price, Customs Tariff 
Notification details, Quantity, Unit Quantity Code, the system automatically 
and correctly picked the correct rate of Basic Customs Duty (BCD) IGST, Anti-
Dumping Duty etc., in case of Import and RITC (Revised Indian Trade 
Classification), Drawback Serial Number, Scheme Code, Invoice Value etc. in 
case of Export same. Further, the mandatory documents viz. invoice, packing 
list etc. are being uploaded in the system with digital signature through 
ICEGATE and the checks for validity of digital signature quality of scanned/ 
PDF documents are automatically checked in e -Sanchit (e -Storage and 
Computerised Handling of Indirect Tax Documents) application. 
It was also noticed through UAT environment (NACEN Training Module), that 
all the roles and functionalities allotted to various Customs officers viz. 
relating to Appraising, Examination, Stuffing, Drawback processing, Customs 

 Report No. 14 of 2023 – Union Government (Indirect Taxes – Customs)  
18 
 
Duty calculation, BRC operations, DTR Module to record duty paid through 
manual challans etc. and Paperless Licenses  / Authorizations through All 
India License View were functioning. 
For validations related to processing whi ch could not be checked through 
UAT environment or to re -confirm the process controls, 81 data queries 
related to Export and Import in simple English were also issued (February -
June 2021) to DG (Systems).  DG (Systems), in turn forwarded these data 
queries to NIC for making queries in SQL format and the queries were run by 
the Department on the system available at Data Centre of CBIC. 
Results/replies to 55 queries were provided of June 2022. Audit could cross 
verify the results of BsE/SBs of only those Customs sites for which they have 
access as the audit team had no access to view the SBs/BsE for all locations 
and was completely dependent on DG (Systems) to verify such records.  
Results/replies to 26 queries (which were not run in the presence of audit) 
were provided in September 2022. 
Audit also requisitioned (December 2020) the records for the period 2015 -
2020 relating to suggestions/problems received from Customs House 
Agents, Importers, Exporters and Customs Officers who are the end users of 
ICES application and action taken on the same by DG (Systems) /Board. 
Records were not made available for the same to audit. 
In the absence of updated documents of SRSs/SDDs, non -availability of 
SRSs/SDDs of new modules and functionalities added or removed in ICES 
after 2010, non-availability of sufficient data in UAT environment and non-
furnishing of records related to suggestions / problems received from ICES 
application users etc, Audit was constrained. 
2.2. Audit Findings 
Lack of certain validation controls constrained in ICES Import module 
2.2.1 Late fee wrongly levied, collected and waived off 
As per the extant rules, the authorized person shall file the BE before the end 
of the next day following the day (excluding holidays) on which the aircraft 
or vessel or vehicle carrying the goods arrives at a Customs station at which 
such goods are to be cleared for home consumption or warehousing. Where 
the BE is not filed within the time specified and the proper officer of Customs 
is satisfied that there was no sufficient cause for such delay, the importer 
shall be liable to pay charges for late presentation of the BE under Section 46 
(3) of the Customs Act, 1962.  Further, as per para 4 (3) of Notification 
36/2018 dated 11.05.2018, late fee charges are leviable @ ` 5,000/- per day 
for the initial three days of default and @ ` 10,000 per day for each day of 
default thereafter, provided that where the proper officer is satisfied with 

                     Report No. 14 of 2023 – Union Government (Indirect Taxes – Customs) 
19 
 
the reasons for delay, he may waive the charges referred to in the second 
proviso to sub-Section (3) of Section 46. 
Further, the late presentation charges in respect of any BE shall not exceed 
the duty payable in respect of that particular BE and where the duty or any 
other charges in respect of any BE are not payable for any reason like 
exemption or otherwise, the late presentation charges shall not exceed 
` 50,000/-. 
Import data query was sought for the period from 1 October 2019 to 31  
March 2020  for late filing of BsE for which Department furnished data of 
83,884 records. On an analysis of the said data, the following observations 
are made: 
(a) In respect of 1,354 BEs, data shows that an amount of ` 19.29 crore 
was levied as late fee out of which ` 3.39 crore was paid by importers 
and ` 15.90 crore was waived off.  Similarly, i n respect of 3,659 BsE, 
an amount of ` 9.55 crore was levied as late fee and the entire 
amount of late fee was waived off.   Audit noticed that  the reasons 
for waiver were not recorded under the “REASON” field of data and 
only “BE Late filed” was mentioned there.  
(b) In respect of 854 B sE,  Audit noticed that though the total duty paid 
was Nil (which may be on account of exemption or otherwise) , ICES 
has levied late fee in excess of ` 50,000/ contrary to the provisions 
mentioned above. In respect of 854 BsE, the amount / range of extant 
of late fees levied was between ₹ 55,000 and ₹ 20,95,000. 
(c) In respect of 3,507 BEs,  it was noticed that late fee has been collected 
in excess of the duty contrary to the provision as the late fee cannot 
be more than the duty payable. Such excess late fee was collected to 
the extent of ₹ 6.47 crore. 
(d) In five cases (BE Nos. 6340683 dated 3 January 2020, 5641358 dated 
11 November 2019, 7366935 dated 28  March 2020, 7367077 dated 
28 March 2020 and BE No 7363793 dated 27 March 2020) where late 
fee was levied amounting to ` 11,323/-, the field relating to reasons 
was found empty.  
This indicates deficiencies in certain validations in the ICES Import Module 
for levy of late fee. 
Late fee is being calculated by the ICES system and the reasons for waiver 
are to be entered in the system and approved by an officer not below the 
rank of Joint Commissioner/ Additional Commissioner of Customs. If 
necessary validation controls as pointed out above are inserted, they are 
likely to reduce the chances of errors. Lack of proper validations may lead to 

 Report No. 14 of 2023 – Union Government (Indirect Taxes – Customs)  
20 
 
unnecessary difficulties and harassment for importers and exporters, and 
possibilities of delay in processing of the documents and locking up of funds. 
Specifically, BE should not be processed further until the reason for waiver 
of late fee in case of such waiver is entered by the competent officer. 
On being pointed out ( August 2022), the Ministry stated (November 2022) 
that its t echnical team is working on development of necessary checks / 
validation on the issue and shortly Audit will be updated on the issue. 
Recommendation 1: The Ministry should ensure that necessary validation 
checks in ICES regarding levying, collection and wavier of late fees are 
implemented, duly mapped and functioning correctly. It may also be 
ensured that in case of wavier of late fees, the reasons are also recorded. 
2.2.2 Short/excess levy of duty under Notification 46/2011 
As per Notification No.46 of 2011 dated 1 June 2011, as amended from time 
to time, goods imported from the countries listed in Appendix I (viz. 
Malaysia, Singapore, Indonesia, Vietnam etc.) of the notification are 
exempted from so much of duty of Customs leviable thereon in excess of the 
amount calculated at the rate specified in column (4) of the table in the 
notification and goods imported from Philippines, which is listed in Appendix 
II of the notification, are exempted from so much duty of Customs leviable 
thereon as is in excess of the amount calculated at the rate specified in 
column (5) of the table in the notification.  
From analysis of data for the period 2019 -20, on the goods imported under 
Notification 46/2011, Audit observed that: 
(a) 18 items (vide six consignments), having assessable value of 
` 1.86 crore, were imported from Philippines and assessed to BCD at 
the rate mentioned in column (4) instead of column (5) of the 
notification ibid which resulted in short levy of duty. 
(b) 15 items (vide six consignments), having assessable value of 
` 1.40 crore, were imported from Indonesia and Vietnam and 
assessed BCD at the rate mentioned in column (5) instead of column 
(4) of the notification ibid which resulted in excess levy of duty. 
The above cases indicate deficiencies in validation controls in ICES regarding 
levying of Customs duty under Notification No. 46/2011 , resulting in 
short/excess levy of duty. 
On being pointed out (August 2022), the Ministry stated (November 2022) 
that as per Customs  Act, 1962, l evy of duty is based on self -declaration of 
importer and the exemption Notification(s) claimed, during self -declaration 

                     Report No. 14 of 2023 – Union Government (Indirect Taxes – Customs) 
21 
 
is subject to verification as envisaged in Section 17 of Customs Act, 1962. 
ICES transaction is based on the extant legal provisions. 
The reply is not tenable as t he difference in levy of duty arises only due to 
Country of import. The countries are specified via codes in ICES. Accordingly, 
the rate should have been applied based on Country codes read with 
exemption notification rather than relying solely on self-declaration. If such 
checks are not incorporated in the system , there will be possibilities of 
incorrect levy of duties. 
Recommendation 2: The Ministry should ensure necessary validation 
checks in ICES so that Cu stoms duty rates are correctly reflected based on 
Country codes read with exemption notifications, and not solely based on 
self-declaration. 
2.2.3 Working of Risk Management System for Import 
As per Board’s (CBIC) Circulars 43/2005 dated 24  November 2005 regarding 
Introduction of Risk Management System (RMS) in Imports, BsE and IGMs 
filed electronically into ICES through the Service Centre or ICEGATE will be 
transmitted by ICES to the RMS.  The RMS will process the data through a 
series of steps and p roduce an electronic output for ICES. This output will 
determine whether the BE will be taken -up for action (appraisement or 
examination or both) or be cleared after payment of duty and Out of Charge 
directly, without any assessment and examination. Also, where necessary, 
RMS will provide instructions for  the Appraising Officer, the Examining 
Officer or the Out-of-Charge Officer. It needs to be noted that the decisions 
communicated by the RMS on the need for assessment and/or examination 
and the appraising and examination instructions communicated by the RMS 
have been complied with by the field formations. 
This implies that, if the BE is selected by RMS for examination, the field 
relating to examination report should not be null. 
Import data query was sought for the period from 1 October 2019 to 31  
March 2020 for BsE selected by RMS for examination and where the field 
relating to examination report is null.  The Department furnished data of six 
records for this query.  The details of these six BsE are as under: 
Table No.2.1: Details of BsE selected for examination but examination 
report is null 
Sl No CUS_SITE BE_NO BE_DT TYPE TOT_ASS_VAL (in `.) TOT_DUTY (in `.) 
1 INWFD6 5179475 04.10.2019 H 34532686 19393556 
2 INFBD6 5337697 17.10.2019 H 1388036 581769 
3 INCCU1 5500992 31.10.2019 H 13084625 833797 
4 INPAV1 6114210 17.12.2019 H 8738633 1572954 

 Report No. 14 of 2023 – Union Government (Indirect Taxes – Customs) 
22 
 
Source: Data furnished by DG (Systems) 
The cases mentioned in the above table indicate lack of validation in ICES 
relating to essentiality of examination report if the BE is selected by RMS for 
examination. 
On being pointed out (August 2022), the Ministry stated (November 2022)  
that it is confirmed by the technical team that check exists in the system if 
examination report is not entered in the system in view of RMS instruction, 
the BE will not move forward to the next officer’s queue. The technical team 
is assigned to check the cause of irregular movement and rectify the same. 
Recommendation 3: The Ministry should ensure proper validation in ICES 
that in cases wherein a Bill of Entry is taken up for examination by the Risk 
Management System, the field relating to examination report should not 
be null. 
2.2.4 Lack of control in ICES regarding levy of duty in the case of BE filed 
prior to the date of entry inwards 
As per  Section 15 of Customs Act 1962, the rate of duty and tariff valuation, 
if any, applicable to any imported goods, shall be the rate and valuation in 
force, in the case of goods entered for home consumption under Section 46, 
on the date on which a bill of entry in respect of such goods is presented 
under that section; provided that if a bill of entry has been presented before 
the date of entry inwards of the vessel or the arrival of the aircraft by which 
the goods are imported, the bill of entry shall be deemed to have been 
presented on the date of such entry inwards or the arrival, as the case may 
be. 
Notification 50/2017 -Customs, dated 30  June 2017, was amended vide 
Notification No.17/2019-Customs, dated 15 June 2019, where in three new 
serial numbers (24AA, 32B and 177A) related to goods originating in or 
exported from the United States of America (USA) were inserted.  The 
notification was effective from 16 June 2019. 
Import data  query was sought for the period from 13  June 2019 to 17 June 
2019 r elated to goods imported under C ustoms notification No.17/2019 
dated 15 June 2019 and where the country of origin was USA for which the 
Department furnished data of 345 records. On an analysis of the said data, 
Audit noticed that  six importers imported 33 items under CTH 08081000 
from USA vide 9 BsE.  These BsE were filed during 12  June 2019 to 15 June 
2019 and entry inward date of these BsE was between 16 June 2019 and 19 
Sl No CUS_SITE BE_NO BE_DT TYPE TOT_ASS_VAL (in `.) TOT_DUTY (in `.) 
5 INCBDB 7124340 05.03.2020 H 2196673 263601 
6 INNSA1 7142830 06.03.2020 H 8290376 0 

                      Report No. 14 of 2023 – Union Government (Indirect Taxes – Customs) 
23 
 
June 2019.  As per the proviso of Section 15 of Customs Act these BsE are 
deemed to be presented during 16  June 2019 to 19 June 2019 and BCD on 
these goods was to be levied @ 70  per cent {as per Sl. No.32B of Customs 
notification No.17/2019 dated 15 June 2019} instead of at the rate of 50 per 
cent which resulted in short levy of duty of ` 38.17 lakh. 
Further, the above cases also indicate that there is lack of control in ICES 
regarding levy of duty in the case of BE filed prior to the entry inward date. 
If such checks are not incorporated in the system, there will be a possibility 
of incorrect levy of duties. In the instant case, the Department levied duty at 
50 per cent instead of 70 per cent. The delay in updation by DMS sites should 
be viewed seriously and necessary action taken. 
On being pointed out (August 2022), the Ministry stated (November 2022) 
that the logic exists in the ICES system for prior BE whenever there is a 
change in levy of duty due to notification, the BE is moved for re-assessment. 
However, if inadvertently the N otification updating takes place after the 
effective date then the earlier duty structure before updation of Notification 
will apply. The concerned DMS sites have been sensitized to follow the SOP. 
The Department has not furnished the actual date of updation of Notification 
No.17/2019-Customs, dated 15 June 2019 and action taken on the cases 
(Nine BsE) pointed out by Audit. 
Recommendation 4: The Ministry should ensure that the notifications are 
updated in a timely manner and invariably before the effective date. The 
delay in updation by DMS sites should be viewed seriously and necessary 
action taken in cases of delay. DMS sites must comply with the existing SOP 
and this should be verified and ensured by DG (System). 
2.2.5 Country of Origin is not identical at BE Level and Item level 
For Bill of Entry (BE) which contains single invoice and having single item , 
logically both fields, Country of Origin at the BE level and Country of Origin 
at the item level, should be identical. 
Import data  query was sought for the period from 1 October 2019 to 31  
March 2020 (6 months) related to goods imported  where there is single 
invoice having single item and where country of origin differs at the BE level 
and Item, for which the Department furnished data of 38,930 records.  On 
an analysis of the said data, the following observations are made: 
(a) Out of these 38,930 BsE, in respect of 28,758 BsE having single invoice 
and single item, the Country of Origin at the BE level and Country of 
Origin at the item level are different. 

 Report No. 14 of 2023 – Union Government (Indirect Taxes – Customs) 
24 
 
(b) In respect of the other 10,172 BsE, the country of origin at t he item 
level was found “blank”. 
This indicates lack of validation in the ICES where the data fields for capturing 
the same data viz. Country of origin in separate tables are holding different 
data, leading to scope for incorrect availing of concessions under the various 
Country of Origin based exemption notifications or non-levy of anti-dumping 
duty. 
A s imilar observation relating to mismatch of “ Country-of-origin” data in 
different ICES table was earlier reported in Pa ragraph 3.11.4 of the 
Performance Audit Report No.24 of 2009-10 and in Paragraph 3.9 of the 
Performance Audit Report No.11 of 2014.  
On being pointed out (August 2022), the Ministry stated (November 2022)  
that as per Customs Act, 1962, levy of duty is based on self -declaration of 
importer, which is subject to verification as envisaged in Section 17 of 
Customs Act, 1962.  ICES transaction is based on the extant legal provisions. 
Patch no. 113 dated 07-10-2022 has been implemented in the system in case 
of a single item of BE. This will be reviewed in future audits. 
If the Country of Origin is not captured correctly there could be a risk of non-
levy of Anti Dumping Duty due to mismatch of ‘Country of Origin’ in different  
ICES tables. Also, there could be scope for incorrect availing of concession 
under various country of origin based exemption notifications. 
2.3 Lack of validation in ICES Export module 
2.3.1 Non-alignment of DBK Serial number with RITC (Export validation) 
The Government of India from time to time determines the All Industry Rates 
of duty drawback of various exported goods by issuing Drawback Schedule.  
The tariff items and descriptions of goods in the Drawback Schedule are 
aligned with the tariff items and descriptions o f goods with the Revised 
Indian Trade Classification (RITC) of First Schedule to the Customs Tariff Act, 
1975 (51 of 1975) at the four-digit level only. The descriptions of goods given 
at the six digit or eight digit or modified six or eight digits in the said Schedule 
are in several cases not aligned with the descriptions of goods given in the 
First Schedule to the Customs Tariff Act, 1975. 
During test check of regular compliance audit of SBs at Customs ports, it was 
observed that there were cases where  Drawback Sr. No. as per drawback 
schedule of the goods exported did not match with the RITC as per First 
Schedule to the Customs Tariff Act, 1975 (51 of 1975) up to four -digit level, 
though they were matching up to two-digit level. 
This indicates that the ICES 1.5 application lacked input controls/validations 
to ensure matching of declaration of Drawback serial number  as per 

                     Report No. 14 of 2023 – Union Government (Indirect Taxes – Customs) 
25 
 
drawback schedule with the tariff items and descriptions of goods in the First 
Schedule to the Customs Tariff Act, 1975 (51 of 1975) u p to the four -digit 
level. This may lead to incorrect calculation of duty drawback and 
short/excess payment of duty drawback to exporters. 
These facts were communicated (September 2020 and May 2021) to the 
DG (Systems) and data was requisitioned for cases of SBs in which Drawback 
Sr. No. does not match with RITC code up to the four-digit level for the period 
from 2015 -16 to 2019 -20.  Department furnished (March 2022) data of 
3,25,005 records in which Drawback Sr. No. does not match with RITC code 
up to the four-digit level. 
On being pointed out (August 2022), the Ministry stated (November 2022) 
that alignment of both RITC and DBK Serial No. upto  four digits has been 
enabled on 07-01-2022 in the ICES system. 
2.3.2 Acceptance of negative FOB value of exported goods 
For claims under Section 75 of Customs Act 1962, drawback is allowed on ad 
valorem basis on the FOB value of exported goods.  Wherever transa ction 
value is inclusive of freight and insurance cost, the freight and insurance 
component is reduced from the transaction value and drawback is paid on 
the FOB value.  Further, the FOB value could only be a positive figure as items 
exported would definitely have some value.   
A data  query was sought for the period from 01 .10.2019 to 31.03.2020 for 
SBs where the FOB value of the exported goods is zero or negative . The 
DG (Systems) furnished (September 2021) d ata of 14 records for the same. 
The details are as under: 
Table No.2.2: Details of SBs having negative FOB value 
SB No. SB Date IEC Exporter Name Port code FOB Value 
in  `. 
7408006 05.10.2019 388215747 M/s A Silk Mills Limited INBOM4 -1,530.79 
7420634 05.10.2019 397015283 M/s B International Pvt. Ltd. INVTZ1 -8,27,083 
7520298 11.10.2019 588107760 M/s C Ferro Alloys LLP INVTZ1 -1,74,152 
7634052 16.10.2019 314065458 M/s D Fine Foods LLP INVTZ1 -2,15,647 
7758461 22.10.2019 314065458 M/s D Fine Foods LLP INVTZ1 -4,32,284 
7750743 22.10.2019 899007473 M/s E Chemical INSBI6 -5,996.76 
7893762 26.10.2019 388066415 M/s F Industries Ltd. INSBI6 -72,021.9 
7945429 31.10.2019 593046765 M/s G Biotec Ltd. INDEL4 -7,031.76 
8500488 25.11.2019 2214005889 M/s H Life Science Pvt.Ltd. INDEL4 -81,800.70 
9407439 03.01.2020 391146670 M/s I Exports ( India) Pvt Ltd INLKO4 -60,669.30 
9721763 17.01.2020 488025702 M/s J Marine Products Pv.t Ltd. INTUT1 -1,39,890 
1662444 25.02.2020 888038241 M/s K Pharmaceuticals Ltd. INDEL4 -3,57,983 
1715839 27.02.2020 388061111 M/s L Natural Fibre & Fabrics India 
Pvt.Ltd. 
INBOM4 -5,453.01 
1799897 29.02.2020 DLGPA1579G M/s M Imports and Exports INCJB4 -2,412.30 
Source: Data furnished by DG (Systems) 

 Report No. 14 of 2023 – Union Government (Indirect Taxes – Customs) 
26 
 
Out of the above mentioned 14 cases in the table , Audit verified three SBs 
pertaining to the port INDEL4 and it was noticed that the terms of invoice in 
these SBs were CIF. The reasons for the negative value of FOB was that the 
exporters declared the freight value in two SBs at 97 per cent and 98 per cent 
of the CIF value and Insurance value in one SB which is more than CIF value 
of exported goods, consequently resulting in nil drawback to the exporters. 
Acceptance of negative FOB value of the exported goods indicates that 
there is lack of control in ICES regarding calculation of FOB value. 
On being pointed out (August 2022), the Ministry stated (November 2022) 
that basic formulation has been stated in the earlier reply “where the invoice 
is on the CIF basis, such FOB value is calculated by deriving it  by deducting 
the amount of freight and insurance cost from the invoice value. Drawback, 
where it is allowed on an ad valorem basis, is also calculated similarly on the 
FOB value of exported goods. This is consistent with the policy provisions”. 
It cannot be inferred that as aforesaid formulation will not apply to 14 cases 
under reference, in so far as, design of ICES transactional design is 
concerned. 
The reply is not tenable as the FOB value cannot be negative after deducting 
the amount of freight and insurance cost from the invoice value which is on 
CIF basis. Proper validation should be done in ICES so that negative FOB value 
are brought to the notice of Customs officers for detailed examination to 
safeguard revenue implications . Acceptance of negativ e FOB value of 
exported goods may deprive exporters of the benefits of various export 
promotion schemes. If any Duty Drawback has been given in any such case, 
necessary action may be taken. 
Recommendation 5: The Ministry should ensure necessary validation in 
ICES export module so that the FOB value after deducting insurance and 
freight is not negative. 
2.4 Partial automation of Shipping Bills and drawback claims under 
Section 74 
As per Annexure -F of the Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) amongst 
CBIC, NIC and NICSI, which was signed on 21 December 2018, automation of 
Shipping Bills and claims under Section 74 of CA 1962 (Re-export) was one of 
the expected modules for development and implementation during t he 
period of the MoU. 
Audit noticed that the Shipping Bills along with drawback claims under 
Section 74 of CA 1962 (Re-export) are being filed electronically through ICES 
under Scheme code 19 with drawback Sr. No. 9801 by furnishing details of 
import, such as Bill of Entry No. and date, quantity imported, value, duty paid 

                    Report No. 14 of 2023 – Union Government (Indirect Taxes – Customs) 
27 
 
etc. in the field “item details” of Shipping Bills (refer to Facilitation No. 
09/2019 dated 3 September 2019 issued by ACC (Export)/NCH New Delhi).   
Audit noticed that after electronically filing the Shipping Bill under Section 
74, settlement of drawback is being processed manually.  Hence, complete 
Workflow automation of Shipping Bills and processing of drawback claims 
under Section 74 has not taken place. This indicates lack  of adequate 
automation of Shipping Bills in ICES 1.5. 
DG (Systems) replied (January 2022 ) that automation of SBs under Section 
74 cannot be done like the automatic grant of drawback with respect to Duty 
Drawback Schedule and Brand rate fixed by the authority , as no rate 
schedule is prescribed for Section 74 as the two processes are legally distinct. 
The SB processed under Section 74 of The Customs Act, 1962 resides in the 
database and does not show, " Duty Drawback is still pend ing". In fact, like 
any other post c learance action, the processed SBs are taken up for refund 
claims under Section 74 of the Customs Act , 1962 following the graded 
system for grant of drawback  in such cases depending on the period for 
which goods have been used , whether goods are used or unused etc . 
Additionally, as informed, determination of the depreciated value of the  
goods is to be done by the Government approved valuer for which a general 
logic cannot be applied in the system. 
The reply is not tenable as the Department has not prepared a separate 
Workflow automation module for claiming and processing of Duty Drawback 
under Section 74 by mapping all the fields related to used/unused goods, 
period of use, deprec iated value etc. Claims are being filed electronically 
through ICES under Scheme code 19 with drawback Sr. No.  9801 by 
furnishing details of import, such as Bill of Entry No. and date, quantity 
imported, value, duty paid etc. in the field “item details” of Shipping Bills 
which is specifically framed for claiming drawback of exported goods under 
Section 75. But, processing of claims is being manually handled. 
On being pointed out (August 2022), the Ministry stated (November 2022) 
that the processing for such scenario is enabled on the ICES transactional 
platform. The audit observation for a separate module will be examined. 
2.5 Working of Risk Management System for Export 
Department of Revenue, CBIC vide Circular No.23/2013 -Customs dated 24  
June 2013 had introduced Risk Management Systems (RMS) in Export. With 
the introduction of the RMS in exports, the practice of routine verification of 
self-assessment and examination of SBs was discontinued and the focus is on 
quality assessment, examination and Post Clearance Audit (PCA) of SBs 
selected by the Risk Management System.  

 Report No. 14 of 2023 – Union Government (Indirect Taxes – Customs) 
28 
 
As per ibid circular, the Board had decided to implement RMS in export in 
two phases. In the first phase, the RMS would process the data and provide 
the output to ICES only up to goods examination stage. In the second phase, 
the RMS would also process the Shipping Bill data after the Exp ort General 
Manifest (EGM) is filed electronically and provide output to ICES for selection 
of Shipping Bills for Drawback scrutiny and Post Clearance Audit (PCA). 
To know the effectiveness of RMS Export Module introduced by Board in 
2013, Audit requisitioned the information relating to details of Customs sites 
at wh ich RMS for Exports is operational, Pan -India based number of RMS 
facilitated SBs, related targets  fixed by Board to facilitate SBs and 
study/analysis, if any conducted to analyze the efficiency of RMS for Exports. 
The information related to RMS facilitated SBs, related targets fixed by Board 
to facilitate SBs and study/analysis were not furnished to Audit. 
DG (Systems) stated (June 2021) that out of 252 EDI operational Customs 
Sites, in 250 Customs Sites, RMS for export was functioning. 
Further, DG (Systems) also stated that the development of the second phase 
of the RMS Export is completed for processing of Drawback and is under 
testing between RMS and ICES. Once the same is implemented, development 
work for Export PCA will be initiated in coordination with RMS and added 
that RMS is a different app lication and maintained by a different entity or 
team. Details of study/analysis for efficiency of the RMS for Export are not 
available.  
On being pointed out (August 2021), D GoS stated (July 2022) that RMS in 
exports is available at all EDI sites except f or two sites (PCCC, Mumbai – 
INPDC4 and Surat Hira Bourse -INHIR6) where RMS is not enabled. These two 
sites handle precious cargo, and such precious cargo is assessed and 
examined under different norms as per policy, hence, at present, RMS 
Exports is not launched at these sites. Regarding development/progress of 
the second phase of RMS which was under testing stage between RMS and 
ICES, DGoS did not furnish any information. 
However, Audit noticed that processing of Duty Drawback Claims, which was 
part of the second phase, had been implemented through RMS in July 2021. 
Thus, after lapse of more than eight years from the decision taken by the 
Board, the second phase of RMS regarding selection of Shipping Bills for 
Drawback scrutiny was implemented. However, Post Clearance Audit (PCA) 
for Exports has not been implemented. 
On being pointed out (August 2022), the Ministry stated (November 2022) 
that RMS for  Exports is enabled for Shipping Bill processing and Drawback 

                     Report No. 14 of 2023 – Union Government (Indirect Taxes – Customs) 
29 
 
processing and based on the output of RMS akin to Import  PCA, Export PCA 
will function. 
Generally, in the absence of RMS based selection for exports, there is lack of 
transparency and arbitrariness through manually selection for PCA. 
Recommendation 6: RMS for exports for selection of Shipping Bills for Post 
Clearance Audit (PCA) should be made operational at the earliest for 
increased transparency and targeting using a risk based approach. 
2.6 Inordinate delay in implementation of module for daily updation of 
exchange rate 
In response to Para 3.4 of CAG’s Audit Report No. 11 of 2014  - Performance 
Audit on Customs EDI system, the Board stated (February 2014) that testing 
of a module for daily update of exchange rate through message exchange 
with State Bank of India (SBI) had been completed and commissioning of the 
same can be decided onl y after the technical issues with the State B ank of 
India (SBI) get resolved. 
On being pointed out (August 2022), the Ministry stated (November 2022) 
that as directed by the Board, ICEGATE developed the module for secure and 
automatic update of the exchange rate directory in the ICES and 
CBIC/ICEGATE website. A demonstration of the module was made before the 
Board on 27 July 2021. The Board suggested some changes and directed the 
redesign of the module. Accordingly, the module has been redesigned.  As 
per current status the UAT testing has been completed for both API 1 9 and 
API 210. Final Go-Live prerequisites are being completed by SBI. 
The C BIC determines th e rate of exchange of conversion of major 
transactional foreign currencies generally after every 14 days on a regular 
basis and issues Notifications (Non -Tariff).  Based on these Exchange Rate 
Notifications, the Directory Officer after getting the approval  of Directory 
Manager of Directory Management Site (which is ICD, Patparganj) makes 
changes in ICES. 
If import and export are made at rates other than the foreign currencies 
mentioned in the Notification, then importer/exporter has to produce 
certificate of exchange rate on the day filing of BE/SB from the Bank (SBI). 
Implementation of a system which captures daily fluctuation in the exchange 
rate, will minimise the undue benefit or loss to importers and exporters and 
correspondingly to the Department. 
 
9 Exchange rates are pushed by SBI to ICEGATE for Imports and Exports 
10 Exchange rates received through API 1 shall be fetched by ICES for rounding -off and 
subsequently updating ICEGATE website and ICES directory 

 Report No. 14 of 2023 – Union Government (Indirect Taxes – Customs) 
30 
 
Recommendation 7: The module for daily updati ng of exchange rate may 
be made operational at the earliest. 
2.7 Non-Automation of closure of IGM 
Import General Manifest (IGM) required to be filed under Section 30 of the 
Customs Act 1962 is a statutory declaration and every Vessel or Aircraft or a 
vehicle, which enters Indian territory with the intention of discharging cargo, 
the person -in-charge or any other person as specified by the Central 
Government is bound to deliver this document. The purpose of filing IGM is 
to ensure that all imported goods brought in the carrier have been duly 
accounted for. A person filing declaration under this section has to declare 
the truthfulness of contents as it has legal consequences, wh ich bind the 
carrier. Any mis-declaration in this document will attract the penal provisions 
of Section 111 (f) and Section 112. The carrier / shipping lines are required 
to declare details of cargo, shipper, consignee, number of packages, kind of 
packages, description of goods, bill of lading number and date, vessel details 
etc. in the IGM. 
Further, as per Standing Order No.2/2018 dated 30.1.2018 issued by the 
Office of the Pr. Commissionerate of Customs (Import), NCH, New Delhi, the 
custodian will provide  details of IGMs (Import General Manifests) of 
imported goods, which may contain one or more than one lines, within 7 
days of filing to the Manifest Clearing Department (MCD) Section. According 
to this order the following cases may arise with respect to imported goods: 
Table No.2.3: Details regarding action required in respect of IGM 
Sl. 
No. 
Case Action required to be taken 
(i) Where BsE  have been filed 
against line Nos. of IGM and 
goods were cleared in full 
manifested quantity. 
The respective line No. of the IGM may be 
treated as closed. 
(ii) Where BsE  have been filed 
against line Nos. of IGM and 
goods were cleared in part 
of manifested quantity. 
The appropriate reasons and break-up for 
the same may be ascertained and 
amendment in IGM or action as per 
Section 45 (3) or Section 116 of the 
Customs Act, 19 62 for pilferage of goods 
after arrival or short landed goods 
respectively may be taken.  
(iii) Where BsE have been filed, 
but goods remained un -
cleared for home 
consumption. 
Necessary action as per Section 48 of the 
Customs Act, 1962 to be taken by 
custodian for disposal of goods after 
obtaining NOC from Customs. (iv) Where no BE has been filed 
and goods remained un -
cleared. 

                     Report No. 14 of 2023 – Union Government (Indirect Taxes – Customs) 
31 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Case Action required to be taken 
(v) Where Warehouse (WH) BE 
has been filed. 
Verify the details of ex -bond BE with 
reference to WH BE from Bond Section of 
the Customs House . If the whole 
manifested quantity as mentioned in WH 
BE is accounted for , the relevant line no. 
shall be treated as closed. 
(vi) Where transhipment of 
goods has been allowed. 
The line nos., which are referred as 
transhipped by the custodian, shall be 
treated as closed. 
Source: Standing Order No.2/2018 dated 30.1.2018 issued by the Office of the Pr. 
Commissionerate of Customs (Import), NCH, New Delhi 
Once all the Line Nos. of IGMs are accounted for, the Inspector (MCD) shall 
make necessary endorsement of closure of IGM and put up the same to the 
Supdt./Appraiser (MCD), who after scrutinizing the same, shall put up the 
case to Assistant Commissioner/Dy. Commissioner (MCD) f or approval of 
closure of IGM. 
Audit observed that even though the ICES application of Customs introduced 
in 1998 provided for the facility to file IGM electronically, the ICES application 
did not have the functionality for closure of IGM electronically and the same 
was being done manually during the audit period 2015-16 to 2019-20. 
Audit noticed that 16,82,734 IGMs were filed in Pan-India during the period 
from 2015-16 to 2019-20. DG (Systems) was requisitioned in January 2021 to 
arrange to provide the details  of IGMs filed during this period on P an-India 
basis against which IGMs are still to be closed but no details were furnished 
to Audit. 
On being pointed out (August 2022), the Ministry stated (November 2022) 
that the details of IGMs closed against the IGMs filed is a jurisdictional matter 
since in the current module, IGM closure does not get a perfect match with 
IGM filed on account of complexity of the movement of goods covered in the 
IGM. It is gathered that action related to monitoring and closure is currently 
undertaken by the IGM Cell or Depar tment of Commissionerate. The 
Department is seized of the issue and on implementation of the above 
mentioned module as well as Sea Cargo Manifest and Transshipment 
Regulations (SCMTR), the desired objective of correctly matching is hoped to 
be achieved. 
The purpose of closure of IGM is to ensure that all imported goods brought 
through the carrier have been duly accounted for and applicable duties have 
been levied. Non automation of closure of IGM leads to lack of proper 
reconciliation and accounting for all imported goods brought through the 
carrier and a built up of pendency which will be difficult to resolve as time 

 Report No. 14 of 2023 – Union Government (Indirect Taxes – Customs) 
32 
 
goes by. There is no compulsion on the jurisdictional officers to close all the 
IGMs. 
Recommendation 8: The Ministry may take necessary steps so that the 
IGMs filed in ICES are closed electronically and all goods are duly accounted 
for.  Efforts may also be made to manually close all the open IGMs. Ministry 
should also decide and prescribe a time limit  for the closure of IGMs  as 
undue delay/non-reconciliation is fraught with the risk of revenue leakage. 
2.8 Non-automation of Refund process 
According to Customs Act, 1962 (CA) any person who has paid Customs duty 
or paid any interest, could claim for its refund in the following circumstances: 
(a) When the goods are exported after payment of the export duty/cess 
and the exported goods are returned to the exporter otherwise than 
by way of resale and the goods are re -imported within one year 
(Section 26 of CA). 
(b) When the imported goods are found to be defective or otherwise not 
in conformity with the specification agreed upon between the 
importer and t he supplier of goods and the imported goods are 
exported as such (Section 26A of CA). 
(c) Any person who has paid duty on assessment of imported goods and 
applies for refund of duty consequent on (i) remission /abatement of 
duty due to pilferage of goods, dama ge of goods, and deterioration 
in the value of goods, goods lost or destroyed, (ii) finalization of 
provisional assessment where the duty is refundable (iii) cash 
Security Deposit on the finalization of project import,(iv) modification 
of an adjudication order or decision of lower authority in an appeal 
case or revision,(v) reduction of duty on reassessment due to wrong 
application of rate of duty, incorrect classification, adoption of higher 
valuation (Section 27 of CA). 
Audit observed that t hough the ICES application of Customs introduced in 
1998, provided for the facility to file and process BsE and SBs electronically 
but till date , the ICES application does not have functionality for refund of 
Customs duty and the same is being done manually. 
On being enquired whether any need/requests have been received from 
Customs field formation regarding electronic processing and refund of 
Customs duty, DG (Systems) stated (June 2021) that as per available records, 
no such request seems to have been received from Customs field formations 
and added that the requirement of enabling online refund under Customs 
law is a policy matter.  

                     Report No. 14 of 2023 – Union Government (Indirect Taxes – Customs) 
33 
 
Further, ICES presently has also no provisions for capturing data regarding 
details of refund of Customs duty made against particular BE/SBs. 
Audit is of the view that incorporation of module for refund of Customs duty 
for processing refunds electronically through ICES would eliminate the need 
to file a copy of BE with refund application as well as help the Department in 
keeping record of BEs against which refund has been granted and would 
make the monitoring mechanism of refund cases more efficient.  Further, it 
would increase transparency in the refund process. 
On being pointed out (August 2022), the Ministry stated (November 2022) 
that the ICES transactional platform is designed for linear processing in a time 
stamp manner and the current design is not suited to back and forth 
movement of a Bill of Entry after Out of Charge. It is reiterated that the 
refund process cannot be automated as processing of refund may be related 
to post -adjudication, post -Appeal etc. and amount may be reduced or be 
sanctioned to Consumer Protection Welfare Fund, if there is unjust 
enrichment etc. 
The reply is not tenable as refund is mostly associated with a partic ular BE 
and at least online workflow automation of refund process could lead to 
more optimal automation with increased transparency. 
In Audit’s opinion, the w ork flow related to capturing and processing of 
refund claims needs to be automated  on the lines of the G STN System. 
Decision of refund taking into considerations various factors like post -
adjudication, post-Appeal, double duty refund, refund due to re-assessment 
of duty etc could be taken by the competent authority online, with work flow 
automation. This will lead to effective monitoring and increase transparency. 
Recommendation 9: The Ministry may consider having online workflow for 
capturing and processing refunds on the lines of the GSTN System  so that 
the Department is able to electronically keep track of BEs against which 
refund has been applied for . This would make the monitoring of refund 
cases more efficient, effective and transparent. 
2.9 Non-auto reversal of duty in case of double payment  
ICEGATE is internally linked with multiple partner agencies including RBI, 
Banks, DGFT, DGCIS, Ministry of Steel, Directorate of Valuation and other 
various Partner Government Agencies involved in EXIM trade enabling faster 
Customs clearance. All electronic documents / messages being handled by 
ICEGATE are processed at the Customs' end by the Indian Customs EDI 
System (ICES).  Any person having net banking facility in the designated bank 
can proceed for the payment of Customs Duty through ICEGATE. 

 Report No. 14 of 2023 – Union Government (Indirect Taxes – Customs) 
34 
 
It was observed during audit of refund claims,  that several times due to 
technical error at the time of payment of duty, the duty amount gets debited 
but the same does not get reflected on ICEGATE. Under such circumstances, 
the party has to make duty payment agai n, which results in payment of 
Customs duty twice.  
Audit noticed that the ICEGATE/ICES does not refund the duty automatically 
to the importer’s bank account from which the duty was erroneously paid 
and the importer has to manually claim refund of duty pai d twice as the 
refund module is still not automated.  Further, the double duty payment 
does not get reflected in ICES for which confirmation of double duty payment 
is sought from e-PAO office. 
Hence, manual process of refund of double duty and its cross ch ecking of 
with e-PAO office requires extra amount of resources besides blockage of 
capital of importers. 
Audit inquired from the Department in January 2021 to arrange to furnish 
the reasons for non -reflection of double duty in ICES/ICEGATE and total 
number of cases related to double payment of Customs duty due to technical 
error during the period from 2015 -16 to 2019-20 but no reply was received 
as of June 2021. 
On being pointed out (August 2022), the Ministry stated (November 2022) a 
functionality is being developed in API based Customs duty payment module 
for ICEGATE to avoid double duty payment. The process is as under:  
(i) Once a payment has been initiated through Net banking, the selected 
challan(s) will be locked for initiation of another transaction for a 
period of 2 hours. After the period of 2 hours, the lock on the challan 
will be lifted and the user can initiate a fresh transaction with the same 
set of unpaid challans or a new group of challans.  
(ii) After every transaction, a Double verification API will be invoked to 
reconfirm the transaction status before updating the transaction 
details at ICEGATE. The response of double verification API will be 
treated as the final and valid response.  
(iii) These transactions are completed in real time. After the completion of 
browser based request and Double Verification API , the transactions 
are considered complete. 
This will be verified in future audits. 
2.10 Dwell Time 
Dwell time is the measure of the time elapsed from the time the cargo arrives 
in the port to the time the goods leave the port premises after all permits 

                     Report No. 14 of 2023 – Union Government (Indirect Taxes – Customs) 
35 
 
and clearances have been obtained. To examine the same (dwell time of 
export and import consignments),  Audit called for (September 2020) 
information relating to year-wise Time Release data for Import Cargo and 
Export Cargo of various categories of BsE and SBs for the period from 2015 -
16 to 2019-20 mentioning various stages of consignments.  However, related 
information was also not made available to Audit.  
DGoS replied (June 2022) that the Time Release Study (TRS) is conducted by 
National Committee on Trade Facilitation (NCTF) Secretariat as mandated by 
Board. DGoS provides data in respect of 15 ports to National Committee and 
data as requested by Audit in the format sent is being extracted in 
consultation with NIC.  
Audit further called for Pan India information relating to year -wise Time 
Release data for Import Cargo and Export Cargo of various categories of BsE 
and SBs for the period from 2015 -16 to 2019-20 mentioning various stages 
of consignments. However, related period information was not made 
available to Audit.  
Department has provided a copy of report of National Committee on Trade 
Facilitation (NCTF) Secretariat conducts the Time Release Study (TRS) for the 
year 2022. This study covers the B ills of Entry (for import) and Shipping 
documents (exports) filed during the first week of January  2022 for cargo 
clearance through 15 major Customs formations, which were tracked till 
February 7, 2022. 
Audit noticed that the Committee on TRS for the year 2022 had made 
following recommendations: 
i. NTRS 2022 had identified two ‘impact dissipating’ actions namely, delays 
in payment of duty after assessment and increase in Bills of Entry 
involving amendment that need to be resolved through appropriate mix 
of Policy cum administrative actions which need to be addressed in a 
multi-pronged initiative for achievement of the NTFAP targets in a time 
bound manner (sub-para 12.3 of TRS). 
ii. The study has also highlighted further examination of lack of appetite by 
the trade for Authorised Economic Operator (AEO) programme in terms 
of share of Bills of Entry filed, despit e clear evidence of its benefits in 
terms of higher facilitation and lower average release time taking into 
account granular data at the IEC level (sub-para 12.4 of TRS). 
iii. Further streamlining of faceless assessments to minimise the time taken 
at the assessment stage, which has been noted to have increased from 
NTRS 2021 to NTRS 2022 (sub-para 12.5 of TRS). 
iv. It is felt that it is possible to use TRS tool for assessing the performance 
of various custodians, including private terminal operators, ICDs and 
CFSs using more sophisticated tools. Such a quantitative analysis would 

Report No. 14 of 2023 – Union Government (Indirect Taxes – Customs) 
36 
 
enable the government to draw up an evidence -based plan to 
incentivise cum nudge the concerned stakeholders to enhance their 
trade facilitation performance (sub-para 12.6 of TRS). 
v. On the export front, even as the sample size for the study has increased 
considerably collating the data from the Customs automated system and 
the concerned custodians, issues relating to data insufficiency and 
reconciliation were found in case of many Shipping B ills. This has 
resulted in a large number of Shipping Bills to be excluded from the 
sample. It is expected that these issues would be further ironed out 
before the conduct of next NTRS (sub-para 12.7 of TRS). 
vi. As regards the average export release time, there is a need to focus on 
the larger logistics issues that take considerable time after the grant of 
LEO, which continues to remain high despite compression of the time 
taken in regulatory clearance, as reflected in reduction in the time taken 
from arrival of the cargo to grant of LEO (sub-para 12.8 of TRS). 
vii. Strengthening the infrastructure and manpower, along with setting up 
of more and modern testing labs across the country and closer to 
seaports, ICDs and specifically Inland Customs Ports (ICPs)  would go a 
long way in facilitating export cargo (sub-para 12.9 of TRS). 
Responses from the Ministry/CBIC/DGFT on the current status of the 
implementation of the recommendations made by the TRS Committee 2022 
were awaited (January 2023). 
 
  

                     Report No. 14 of 2023 – Union Government (Indirect Taxes – Customs) 
37 
 
Chapter 3 
Interfaces with other applications 
 
3. Interfaces with other applications 
ICES captures data related to exports and imports. Various other IT 
applications interact with ICES on a periodic basis. The audit scope here was 
to seek assurance on the effectiveness of the interface of ICES with the other 
applications of various stakeho lders.  Software Design Documents ( SDDs), 
which were of 2010 version, in respect of only 9 out of 16  stakeholders11 
were received from DG (Systems) .  However, related Functional 
Requirement Specification (FRS)/SRSs and Service Level Agreements and the 
latest user manuals for testing of message exchange between ICES and all 
stakeholders were not made available to Audit. 
Further, the SDDs provided to Audit have only structural information of data 
tables and control tables for various messages. The detailed  description of 
the fields for the tables and features & functionality of each of the messages, 
the specific requirement for the messages were not available in the given 
SDDs.  
Sample Data log, which might help us to study/analyse the data flow 
between the  stakeholders and enable us to highlight the lacunae of the 
transmission mechanism with the various stakeholders, were not available, 
either at the local level, with the Customs Department, or with the various 
stakeholders.   
Sample of data related to mess age exchange for the month of March 2021 
exchanged between ICES and all stakeholders was called for , but not 
provided. 
The details of interactions with major stakeholders are given below: 
3.1 Message exchange between Customs and DGFT 
DGFT is under the Ministry of Commerce and Industry. The Regional Offices 
of DGFT collect the data from offices under their jurisdiction and transmit it 
centrally to Customs through ICEGATE. The messages are then integrat ed 
with ICES 1.5.  The data exchange between the ICES and DGFT applications 
are crucial in the implementation and monitoring of all DGFT export 
promotion schemes. The SDD, Vol. VI -Part 6  (EDI.DGFT, Version 1.0  
 
11Sealine/Ports, Air/Airline -console, DGFT, DGoV, SEZ, Bank, RBI, CRCL, PAO, Inland 
Container Depot (ICD), Customs House Agent (CHA), Principal Chief Controller of Accounts 
(Pr.CCA), Directorate of Revenue Intelligence (DRI), Directorate General of Central 
Intelligence and Statistics (DGCIS), e-Sanchit & Partner Government Agency (PGA) 

 Report No. 14 of 2023 – Union Government (Indirect Taxes – Customs) 
38 
 
September 2010) outlined a total number of 13 messages to be exchanged 
between ICES 1.5 and DGFT through EDI. 
Out of 13 number of messages listed to be exchanged between ICES and 
DGFT, DG (Systems)  confirmed (March 2021)  that only 5 numbers of 
messages, as enumerated bel ow, were operational/ functional during the 
year 2019-20:  
Table No.  3.1: Messages in operation between ICES and DGFT 
Sl. No. Message Description From  To  
1. IE (Importer/Exporter) Code Directory DGFT  Customs  
2. IE Code Acknowledgement Customs  DGFT  
3. License Information DGFT  Customs  
4. License Acknowledgement Customs  DGFT  
5 Shipping Bill Data Customs  DGFT  
Source: SDD, Vol. VI -Part 6 (EDI.DGFT, Version 1.0, September 2010) 
A total of eight message exchanges, between the ICES and DGFT, were not 
operational/functional during the year 2019-20, as enumerated below: 
Table No. 3.2: Messages not in operation between ICES and DGFT 
Sl. No. Message Description From To 
1. Notification Directory Customs DGFT 
2. Export Obligation Discharge (EODC) Certificate DGFT Customs 
3. Acknowledgement of EODC Certificate  Customs DGFT 
4. SB Acknowledgement DGFT Customs 
5. Non receipt of SB  message Customs DGFT 
6. Non receipt of acknowledgement from DGFT Customs DGFT 
7. Bill of Entry Data Customs DGFT 
8. BE Acknowledgement DGFT Customs 
Source: SDD, Vol. VI -Part 6  (EDI.DGFT, Version 1.0, September 2010 ) and 
DG (Systems) reply 
The following were envisaged as the key advantages in ICES 1.5: 
i) Centralized Directory Management, Centralized License and Bond 
Management, reduced interface between officers and trade, 
ii) Reduction in manual administrative processes, resulting in f ewer 
errors and no duplication, 
iii) SMS/ Email based update on status of document to 
Importers/Exporters etc. 
Automated transmission of SB, BE data and its acknowledgements are 
necessary for timely issue of l icenses, calculation of export obligations on 
basis of duty exemptions and automated message transmission of EODC will 
make the recovery of duty from  defaulters timely and ensure better 
coordination between DGFT and Customs.  

                     Report No. 14 of 2023 – Union Government (Indirect Taxes – Customs) 
39 
 
Absence of Notification Directory may lead to irregular benefits to traders, 
and manual discharge of Export Obligation Discharge Certificate may result 
in undue delay in recovery of duty from defaulters.  Further, if all messages 
are operational or functional , there will be better coordination between 
Customs and DGFT. 
It needs to be highlighted that in the absence of necessary documents such 
as SLA, SRS, FRS, any sample data of me ssages exchange between ICES and 
DGFT applications and due to non -possibility of verifying the exchange of 
messages through UAT, assurance could not be derived on the effectiveness 
of message exchanges. 
The e arlier Audit Reports /Paras that mentioned non -integration with 
Customs EDI systems are summarised below: 
i) Performance Audit Report No. 13 of 2015 mentioned non-integration 
of the various stakeholders EDI applications viz., ICES, DGFT EDI 
System, SEZ Online, wherein it was recommended to improve 
interconnectivity with other agencies and the Department replied 
that online EODC work is underway with DGFT to finalize the message 
format for online receipt of EODC from DGFT , but results are yet to 
be observed.  
ii) Para 2.3 of the same Report revealed that the exchange rates were 
incorrectly adopted which was a result of delay in updation of 
notifications. 
iii) In Para 2.1.2 of the Performance Audit Report on MEIS/SEIS No. 5 of 
2020, Audit observed that most of the delay in issue of the scrips was 
due to non-integration of SEZ exports module with the Customs ICES 
network. The non -integration resulted in non -receipt of SB data of 
SEZs in the DGFT Shipping Bill Repository. 
iv) Para 2.1.2 of the Compliance Audit Report No.4 1 of 2017 revealed 
that irregular registration of licence for imports without Standard 
Input Output (SION) norms had resulted in loss of revenue. 
v) Similarly, Para 4.1 of Compliance Audit Report No.1 of 2017 revealed 
excess utilization of duty credit in resp ect of instruments issued 
under Chapter 3 of Foreign Trade Policy through manipulation of 
registration of scrip/use of scrip. A robust EDI communication 
between DGFT and Customs might have prevented huge loss of 
revenue to Government exchequer. 
On being pointed out (August 2022), the Ministry stated (November 2022) in 
respect of N otification Directory that API was not to be developed , as 
discussed in the meeting held with DGFT on 11.12.2020 and Notification 

 Report No. 14 of 2023 – Union Government (Indirect Taxes – Customs) 
40 
 
Directory shall be shared on email within the Depa rtments. On Export 
Obligation Discharge (EODC) Certificate and ACK , API has been made live 
through which EODC details are received by DGFT since December 2020. On 
SB Acknowledgement, the Ministry stated that SB API is live between DGFT 
and Customs and ACK for the same is shared as response from DGFT for the 
SB API since December 2020. 
With regards to non -receipt APIs, it was stated that it was not part of the 
Technical Document Phase 1 or 2. For Bill of Entry API and ACK, API has been 
made live where Cu stoms shares BE list for Licenses issued till T -1 day 
through post BE API and DGFT calls get BE API with BE number to fetch BE 
details for any particular BE. 
DGFT, New Delhi , in response regarding the status of message exchanges 
between Customs and DGFT wh ich were specified by the DG (Systems) to 
have been made live, stated (March 2023) that out of 17 message exchanges 
including four 12 additional messages, 14 are active except the remaining 
three messages {(i) Notification Directory, (ii) Non-Receipt of SB Message and 
(iii) Non-receipt of Acknowledgement from DGFT}. However, DGFT further 
stated (March 2023) that there were issues in respect of six active messages 
detailed below: 
Table 3.3: Issues faced by the DGFT with existing Messages 
Sl. 
No.  
Message 
Description 
From  To  Issue 
1 Shipping Bill 
Data 
Customs DGFT 1. Old records are still being set through 
MFTP. 
2. Records are not transmitted to DGFT 
but shown on Public enquiry that the 
data has been sent. 
3. Amendment of shipping bill not 
transmitted to DGFT. It is issued in 
physical letter, which is then updated 
in DGFT systems manually. 
2 Get 
Shipping Bill 
Data 
Customs DGFT API does not give output to records more 
than two weeks old. 
3 Bill of Entry 
Data 
Customs  DGFT 1. Duty saved value is not coming in 
case of EPCG licenses. 
2. Item wise ITCHS code is not available 
for debited item. 
3. Debit for TRQ licenses is exceeding 
allowed quantity. 
4. Online Debit of Post Export EPCG not 
happening for EDI ports 
 
12 Four additional message exchanges  (i) Port Details, (ii) EDPMS Data (iii) Get Bill of Entry 
and (iv) Get Shipping Bill 

                     Report No. 14 of 2023 – Union Government (Indirect Taxes – Customs) 
41 
 
Sl. 
No.  
Message 
Description 
From  To  Issue 
5. Bill of Entry quantity is found to be 
missing in get Bill of Entry API for TRQ 
schemes 
4 Port Details Customs DGFT EDI/Non- EDI ports are shared but SEZ 
ports are not  shared as part of this 
message exchange. 
5 Licence 
information 
DGFT Customs SEIS and MEIS are still being sent through 
file based method rather than API. 
6 EODC DGFT Customs Public enquiry portal is not available at 
ICEGATE; hence it becomes tough for 
exporters to show EODC status to Port 
officer. 
Source: Ministry of Commerce and Industry, DGFT, New Delhi letter dated 27 March 2023 
3.2 Linking of ICES with Banks 
Options for e -payment and payment through any designated bank branch 
are available through the Customs EDI System.   The Importer/Exporter can 
make the duty/ cess payment through the designated bank branches or -
payment through any of the designated bank branches. After the assessment 
of the BE/SB, the challan information is made available to the Bank, the 
Customs House and at the EDI System. The SDD, Vol. VI -Part 5 (EDI-Bank, 
Version 1.0 September 2010) outlined a total number of 13 messages to be 
exchanged between Customs and Banks through EDI (ICES 1.5). 
Out of the 13 messages mentioned to have been exchanged between the 
Bank and ICES, DG (Systems), stated (December 2020) that only five numbers 
of messages are exchanged between ICES and Bank as detailed below. It was 
noted that an additional two number of messages (Sl. No 6 and 7), other than 
those mentioned in SDD, were being exchanged between ICES and Bank. 
Table No. 3.4: Messages in operation between ICES and Bank 
Sl. 
No. Message Description  From  To  
1. Challan Message  Customs Bank 
2. Challan Message after receipt of Duty Bank  Customs 
3. Challan Summary Statement at the End of Day Bank Customs 
4. End-of-day Challan summary Message Customs  Bank 
5. Drawback Scrolls Customs Bank 
6. Cess Challan Message Customs Bank 
7. Receipt of Cess payments  Bank Customs 
Source: SDD, Vol. VI -Part 5 (EDI. Bank, Version 1.0, September 2010) 
A total of eight message exchanges, between the ICES and Banks, were not 
operational/functional during the year 2019-20, as enumerated below: 
 

Report No. 14 of 2023 – Union Government (Indirect Taxes – Customs)  
42 
 
Table No. 3.5: Messages not in operation between ICES and Bank 
Sl. No. Message Description From To 
1. End-of-day Cess summary message Customs  Bank 
2. IE Code information   Customs  Bank 
3. Non - receipt of Challan Information by bank Customs  Bank 
4. Confirmation of non-payment of Duty Bank Customs 
5. Scroll after remittance of Drawback proceeds Bank Customs 
6. Non - acceptance of Scroll Bank Customs 
7. Non - credit of Drawback Bank Customs 
8. Allotment of Account Number Bank Customs 
Source: SDD, Vol. VI -Part 5 (EDI.Bank, Version 1.0, September 2010)  and DG 
(Systems) reply. 
Messages such as ‘scroll after remittance of drawback proceeds’, ‘non-credit 
of drawback’, IEC, confirmation on non -payment of duty  etc. are not 
exchanged through ICES. This calls for manual administrative processes for 
manual checking of required documents resulting in increased risk of error, 
delayed proces sing, deficient interaction between exporters and 
government agencies etc. which were all designed to be mitigated through 
ICES.  This may also lead to incorrect calculation of drawback, short/excess 
payment of duty drawback to exporters and non -recovery of export benefit 
granted to defaulter exporters and thereby revenue loss to the Government 
exchequer. 
It needs to be highlighted that in the absence of necessary documents such 
as SLA, SRS, FRS, any sample data of messages exchange between ICES and 
Banks applications and due to non-possibility of verifying the exchange of 
messages through UAT, assurance could not be derived on the effectiveness 
of message exchanges. 
On being pointed out (August 20 22), the Ministry stated (November 2022) 
that ICES shall share challan/transaction details with ICEGATE through APIs 
which shall be on real time basis. These APIs are to be developed by ICES and 
ICEGATE and the same are under discussion. 
Recommendation 10: Ministry may expedite the development of APIs for 
sharing of challans/warehouse details between ICES and ICEGATE in a time 
bound manner. 
3.3 Sharing of RBI Export Outstanding Statement (XOS) data/caution 
list with ICES 
Export Data Processing and Monitoring System (EDPMS) is an online system, 
launched by RBI, on March 1, 2014, for monitoring all export activities in 
India. With this system, all banks have come on a single platform, thus 
bringing uniformity in the modus operandi on exports related transactions in 

                     Report No. 14 of 2023 – Union Government (Indirect Taxes – Customs) 
43 
 
India.  One of the benefits of EDPMS is integration of banks with the RBI 
system, giving ease of the following: 
a. Handling of Shipping Bills 
b. Unravelling delayed utilisation of advance received for exports 
c. Detect Export Outstanding Statement (XOS)/Caution (Export 
Outstanding ) list 
d. Simplifying overall process as everything is online. 
SB data/BE data is matched with the data on inward remittance of export 
proceeds from the exporters so as to immediately track  the status of each 
consignment exported with all instruments and also allows exporters to 
claim benefits faster. RBI stipulates that exporters whose data are not 
captured by the software will figure in a Caution List and shall be denied 
packing credit whi ch hampers their exports and it also leads to non -
negotiation of ‘non-letter of credit bills’. So even if the goods reach the buyer 
on time, the banking documents get delayed which will lead to extra cost and 
demurrage charges to be paid by the exporters. 
There are seven message exchanges between Customs and the Reserve Bank 
of India (RBI) in ICES which are functional/operational as shown below. 
Table No. 3.6: Messages in operation between ICES and RBI 
S. No. Message ID Description 
1 CHRBE01 SB information on Let Export Order (LEO) 
2 RBCHE01A SB – Acknowledgement 
3 CHRBE02 SB Cancellation 
4 RBCHE02A SB Cancellation -Acknowledgement 
5 RBCHE03 FE Realization Report 
6 CHRBE03A FE Realization Report .-Acknowledgement 
7 CHRBI01 BE Information 
Source: Reply received from DG (Systems) in reference to AR No.11 of 2014 
There is no message exchange with ICES relating to generation of XOS 
data/information and caution list maintained by RBI. 
Thus, ICES is incapable of flagging further exports/imports by 
exporter/importer included in XOS information/caution list maintained b y 
RBI, and to detect Defaulter Exporters who have not realised the export 
proceedings within stipulated time allotted in RBI Guidelines resulting in 
non-recovery of export benefits granted. 
On being pointed out (August 2022), the Ministry stated (November 2022) 
that in respect of message exchange with ICES relating to generation of XOS 
data/information and caution list maintained by RBI, the prospects will be 
explored in consultation with RBI. 

Report No. 14 of 2023 – Union Government (Indirect Taxes – Customs) 
44 
 
Recommendation 11: Ministry may explore mapping/cross-verifying of RBI 
XOS data with caution list maintained by CBIC for identifying default cases 
for effective monitoring of export proceeds realisation. 
3.4 Integration of Special Economic Zones (SEZ) online with Customs 
ICES 
Special Economic Zones (SEZs) are significant for the Customs Department 
because they promote exports of goods and services and generate 
employment opportunities for the population. There are various benefits of 
SEZs viz. they create an e conomic enclave to cater to overseas markets, 
promote investment, both domestic and foreign, help earn significant 
Foreign Exchange through exports and can help develop world class 
infrastructure facilities. 
With the combined efforts of the Ministry of Commerce and Industries and 
Ministry of Finance, an initiative ha d been taken from August 2015, to 
integrate SEZ Online System with EDI System of CB IC commissioned at 
Airports and Sea Ports across India so as to facilitate smoother clearance of 
cargo for SEZ Units, reducing manual interface, automatic acknowledgement 
of receipt of cargo at SEZ, System based Closure of IGM lines and marking of 
shipment success etc. and thereby developing  co-ordination and controls 
over movement of goods between SEZ and Custom Ports. Also with the 
automated process of generation of EGM in EDI System, which provide the 
EGM information for SEZ Exports to SEZ Online system, the need for manual 
process of bringing EGM from Port, submitting shipment status to Customs 
for verification and verification of proof of export by Customs c ould be 
dispensed with. 
It was also noted that data in respect of BsE in the SEZ Online system are not 
correlated with IGM data. As was confirmed (March 2021) by DG (Systems), 
5,90,253 number of IGM data were transmitted to SEZ Online from ICES but 
only 2,13,699 numbers of BsE were integrated with IGM data transmitted to 
ICES for the period 2019-20. 
ICES application also does not have  the functionality for closure of IGM 
electronically and the same is being done manually, which otherwise could 
have enhanced the effectiveness of the System . Manual intervention may 
result in non -timely closure of IGM which may lead to non -recovery of 
duty/charges from importers who have filed BEs beyond permissible time. 
DG (Systems) also mentioned that there were no data transmission for SBs 
and ‘Let Export Order’ (LEO) in ICES 1.5. i.e., there were no message 
exchanges in respect of SB data, from SEZ Online to ICES. 

  Report No. 14 of 2023 – Union Government (Indirect Taxes – Customs) 
45 
 
The absence of automated transmission of SBs from SEZ, may result in delay 
in export procedure i.e., delay in the process of cargo release, increase in 
processing time, increased error possibilities and lead to increase of export 
cost in form of demurrage charges, rent and rates charged by the port 
authority. Manual administrative processes may also lead to delayed 
payment of Duty Drawback to exporters.  
In Para 2.1.2 of Performance Audit Report No. 5 of 2020 on MEIS/SEIS, Audit 
observed that most of the delay in issue of the scrips was due to non -
integration of SEZ exports module with the Customs ICES network. 
Further in Para 1.20. 1 of Compliance Audit Report No.5  of 2016,  it was 
mentioned that audit of the SEZ online system application revealed that the 
data captured was incomplete, inconsistent and at times incorrect without a 
linkage with the ICES system of the CB IC. DoC and D evelopment 
Commissioners of SEZ also could not avail of the system as its Dashboard and 
MIS.  
Though the Department committed to rectify the deficiencies/lacuna in the 
system, the follow up audits revealed that the deficiencies still persist. 
On being pointed out (August 2022), the Ministry stated (November 2022) 
that migration of SEZ operations to Customs has been proposed to be done. 
Registration module for SEZ Units has been developed and is under testing. 
Audit had inter -alia recommended in PA No. 19 of 2022 – ‘Working of 
Customs Bonded warehouse and Free Trade Warehous ing Zones’ about 
having a time bound plan for devising an IT strategy for 
integration/reconciliation of ICES with SEZ online. 
Recommendation 12: Ministry should integrate SEZ Online with ICES at the 
earliest for better monitoring of SEZ operations (both EXIM and DTA 
transactions) and for the ease of doing business in SEZs. 
  

                                                                       Report No. 14 of 2023 – Union Government (Indirect Taxes – Customs) 
47 
 
Chapter 4 
IT Governance and Management 
4.1 System documentation of ICES project 
As per para 3 of Part A of the MoU, the scope of work under the project of 
ICES clearly states the documentation for the ICES which includes requirement 
specifications, technical documents, user manuals and test cases.  Accordingly, 
the scope of work included preparation o f Software Requirements 
Specification (SRS), Software Design Document (SDD) and User Manuals for 
the following Customs functional areas: 
(i) Service Centre (Import and Export); 
(ii) Imports Declaration Processing; 
(iii) Exports Declaration Processing; 
(iv) Information / Message interchange between internal and external 
stakeholders (DGFT, CHA, Banks, RBI, Custodian, DGCIS, etc.); 
(v) Interface requirements with external applications (ICEGATE, RMS) 
Audit observations on this aspect are as under: 
4.1.1 Updation of SRS and SDD 
The Software Requirements Specification (SRS) provides detailed mapping of 
the Customs business processes through various modules / functionalities of 
software application  - ICES. Similarly, Software Design Document (SDD) 
describes the architecture and system design of the ICES and User Manual 
describes information on 'how to use a product' to end-users. 
Audit scrutiny revealed that the SRS and SDDs were last documented in 2010. 
These documents were not updated even though many changes had taken 
place since then. The documentation of such changes at regular intervals in 
the main document is crucial to run the IT project smoothly as envisaged in 
MoU. 
On being pointed out (August 2022), the Ministry stated (November 2022) 
that the issue has already been taken up with NIC for early completion of the 
documentation, in terms of the MoU. Action has been initiated  for hiring 
team of competent resources to complete the said task. As and when 
documents are completed, the same will be shared. 
As per para 3 of Part A of the MoU, the scope of work under the project of ICES 
clearly states the documentation for ICES which  includes requirement 
specifications, technical documents, user manuals and test cases. 

 Report No. 14 of 2023 – Union Government (Indirect Taxes – Customs) 
48 
 
Further, in terms of Para 2 of point no. 11 of clause A read with point no. 12 
of Clause B of the 2012 MoU, NIC is responsible for preparing/updating the 
documentation of SRSs, SDDs etc. and NICSI is entrusted with the 
responsibility for providing the skilled technical resources under the 
guidance of NIC development team for documentation assignment. 
Updated and complete documentation helps keep track of all aspects of the 
application and helps in identifying and tracking the changes in the software. 
Recommendation 13: In addition to immediate updating of SRS and SDD, 
the Ministry should also ensure that SRS and SDD is kept up to date at 
regular intervals to factor all the important changes made in the 
application. 
4.1.2 Non-updation of User Manuals 
Similarly, User Manuals of ICES published in 2010 to 2013, were not updated 
thereafter, even though there were substantial changes that occurred in the 
structure of the database and duty component, particularly after the 
introduction (July 2017) of GST regime in India.   The details of these manuals 
are as under: - 
Table No. 4.1: List of user manuals & their latest date of publication 
Sl. 
No. 
User Manual Last Published Purpose  
1. ICES Service 
Centre – Imports 
Version 1.1 
1st June 2013 This document describes the process of entering/ 
modifying documents related to imports namely 
Bill of Entry (BE), Import General Manifest (IGM) 
and Console Manifest. 
2. ICES Service 
Centre – Exports 
Version 1.1 
1st June 2013 This document describes the process of 
entering/modifying documents related to 
Exports. 
3. ICES Primary 
Processing – 
Imports Version 
1.1 
11th May 2013 This document describes the process of entering 
/ modifying documents related to imports 
namely BE, Import General Manifest (IGM) an d 
Console Manifest. 
4. ICES Primary 
Processing – 
Exports Version 
1.1 
15th July, 2011 The purpose of this document is to describe the 
process of entering / modifying documents 
related to Exports namely Shipping Bill (SB) and 
Export General Manifest (EGM). 
5. Directory 
Management 
Version 1.0 
20th 
November, 
2010 
The purpose of this document is to describe the 
process of Directory Management. 
Source: Users-Manual provided by DG (Systems) 
On being pointed out by Audit, DG (Systems) stated (March 2021) that these 
documents (SRS, SDD and Manuals)  were prepared when the entire ICES 
application was going through an overhaul and migration from 1.0 to 1.5 
version. All the subsequent changes are documented in the patch file, patch 

                     Report No. 14 of 2023 – Union Government (Indirect Taxes – Customs) 
49 
 
mail as well as in a detailed Patch Tracker, even if the terminology as SDD or 
SRS is not used as such. However, details of the said patch file/patch mail and 
related records has not been made available to Audit. 
DG (Systems) informed (June 2021) Audit, while confirming that these are 
the latest version of SRSs, SDDs and User Manuals, that in terms of para 2 of 
point no. 11 of clause A read with point no. 12 of Clause B of MoU , NIC is 
responsible for preparing/updating the documentation of SRSs, SDD s etc. 
and NICSI is entrusted with the responsibility for providing the skilled 
technical resources under the guidance of NIC development team for 
documentation assignment. 
For a vast and critical application like ICES 1.5, which deals with massive 
information on a daily basis, updation of document of SRSs, SDDs and User 
Manuals is a must. The presence of updated documentation helps keep track 
of all aspects of the application and helps in identifying the changes in the 
quality of a software product.  Successful documentation will make 
information easily accessible, help new users learn quickly, simplify the 
product and help cut support costs. 
Updated user manuals also provide details of changes in the ICES application 
to users and guides them to use the application in a secure manner. 
On being pointed out (August 2022), the Ministry stated (November 2022) 
that the issue has already been taken up with NIC for early completion of the 
documentation, in terms of the MoU. Action has been initiated for hiring 
team of competent resources to complete the said task. As and when 
documents are completed, the same will be shared. 
Recommendation 14: The updating of user manuals consistent with 
changes, should be regularly carried out in a time bound manner to avoid 
accumulation of requirements. 
4.2 Change Management 
In ICES application, changes can be categorized into: 
(i) Routine changes due to issuance of Notifications relating to changes 
in duty rates of BCD, IGST, Antidumping duty, Cess etc. (Directory Change 
Management) 
(ii) Structural change in ICES application due to introduction of new 
modules and functionalities added in it. (Structural Change Management) 
4.2.1 Directory Change Management 
The master data information is common to various modules of ICES ; hence 
there are separate tables referred to as Directories.  All applications 
implemented on the centralized system of CBIC, namely – ICES, Automation 

 Report No. 14 of 2023 – Union Government (Indirect Taxes – Customs) 
50 
 
of Central Excise and Service Tax (ACES) and RMS access these Directories for 
its processing.  Directory management can be summarized as follows: 
(i) National System Manager (NSM) at the highest level assigns 
directories to different sites which are responsible for maintenance 
of these Directories. 
(ii) System Manager at each site assigns the roles of Directory Offic er 
(DIROFF) and Directory Manager (DIRMGR) to the users to perform 
operations on the Directories assigned to their site.  
(iii) DIROFF: Directory Officer has the privilege to make new entries in the 
directories assigned for the role, modify these entries, genera te 
checklist and submit these entries to the Directory Manager for 
approval. 
(iv) DIRMGR: Directory Manager has the privilege to approve the entries 
thereby making them available to external users, reverting entries to 
DIROFF in case the entries are not correct , and modify the entries if 
required. 
The Board has issued (June 2015) a Standard Operating Procedure to 
Directory Management Site (DMS) for updation of directories pursuant to 
any changes and has also approved (March 2017) a system of Peer Review of 
Directory updation after appointing nodal officers for such review.  As per 
this SOP, the nodal officer of the concerned Peer Review Site (PRS) shall 
review the directory to ensure that the notification has been updated 
correctly and in time. E -mail intimation to this effect shall be sent to the 
nodal officer in the Board, National System Manager, DG (Systems) and the 
DMS. 
In case the PRS identifies any inaccuracy in the updation of the notification, 
the nodal office shall contact the DMS immediately to resolve the issue. In 
case the issue remains unresolved, the same shall be brought to the notice 
of NSM, DG (Systems) and nodal officer in Board. 
In case of delay in updation, the PRS shall follow the same procedure and 
further advise the DMS to inform System Managers regarding the delay so 
that the latter can take rectification action. 
Whenever there is a delay/inaccuracy in updation of ICES directory for any  
reasons, the list of the affected BsE/SBs are taken immediately after 
updation and circulated to Customs sites for recovery of shortfall of revenue, 
if any. 

                     Report No. 14 of 2023 – Union Government (Indirect Taxes – Customs) 
51 
 
Details of various directories assigned to different sites by National System 
Manager for updation , modification and removal of entries etc. , are as 
under: 
Table No. 4.2: Details of Directory Management Site (DMS) and Peer 
Review Site (PRS) 
DMS Name of Directories PRS 
Chennai Customs 
House 
(INMAA1) 
Antidumping Directory, 
Tariff Value, Notification 
Directory, Safeguard Duty, 
RITC (HS) Directory 
Vishakhapatnam Custom 
House 
(INVTZ1) 
JNCH, Nhava Sheva 
(INNSA1) 
BCD Directory, Custom 
Cess, CVD Directory, CE 
Cess, RSP Directory 
ACC, Delhi 
(INDEL4) 
ICD, Patparganj 
(INPPG6) 
Cess Directory, Exchange 
Rate Directory, Drawback 
Directory 
Bengaluru Custom House 
(INBLR4) 
Source: Reply furnished by DG (Systems) 
In response to an audit query (December 2020) , DG (Systems)  informed 
(March 2021) that all Customs Notifications, related to General Exemptions, 
FTAs and Export Promotion Schemes, ADD and Safeguards are mapped in the 
ICES and there is no delay and no inaccuracy communicat ed by PRS in 
updation of exchange rate/Customs/IGST/Central Excise Exemption 
notifications and duty rate directories etc.  
Audit called (March 2021) for the records of e -mails related to updation of 
Directories by DMSs and review done by PRSs but the same was not provided 
to Audit.  To verify the claim of DG (Systems) that there were no delay and 
no inaccuracy in updation of various types of Directories, Audit requisitioned 
the data dump of at least one year, which was not provided to Audit. 
On being pointed out (August 2022), the Ministry furnished only the list of 
notifications with date of notification and date on which these notifications 
were entered in ICES (November 2022). 
However, records of e-mails related to updation of directories by Directory 
Management Sites and review done by Peer Review Sites was not provided 
to Audit as per the stipulated SoP. In the absence of the same, Audit cannot 
derive assurance as to the timely and correct updation of Directories. 
  

 Report No. 14 of 2023 – Union Government (Indirect Taxes – Customs) 
52 
 
4.2.2 Structural Change Management 
As per Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) between CBIC, NIC and NICSI 
dated 21.12.2018, vide clause ‘A’ Scope of work to be carried under the 
project, (under para 2), the ICES application is required to be maintained by 
providing software updates along with installation scripts for the existing ICES 
modules as per the specifications received from CBIC and Ch ange 
Management Policy agreed between NIC and CBIC. 
Further, as per para 5 (D) of ibid MoU, it is the responsibility of the 
Department to get  the application audit done through a third party for all 
aspects of ICES and software updates and analyse the recommendations and 
communicate to NIC in writing for implementation of the recommendations. 
On being asked (February 2021) regarding Change Management Procedure 
Document, DG (Systems) informed (March 2021) that ICES application has 
been designed, developed and maintained as per the tripartite MoU signed 
amongst CBIC, NIC and NICSI and explained the detailed procedure followed 
from the stage of design of the module, development, testing , and 
implementation in the system . However, the Change Management 
Procedure Document was not provided to Audit. The stages of the same, as 
detailed by DG (Systems) are as under: 
Stage 1:  Whenever there is a requirement of adding or changing any 
functionality in the ICES as per the evolving legal mandate such as Customs 
Act/ Notifications / Regulations / Circulars /Instructions, it is discussed with 
the development team. Depending on the merit of the case and depending 
on the complexity, the development team is given an approach paper either 
through email or an approach paper describing the software requirements.  
Stage 2:  Accordingly, the changes/modifications are undertaken by the 
development team. The changes are given in the form of a software patch. 
The development team does not have any rights or access to execute the 
patch either in pre -production or in production environment. Only the 
development environment is available to them. The software patch is 
uploaded by the Development team on FTP to be executed by the Operations 
Team. Each patch file also has a readme document which enlists the changes 
being done by the patch. 
Stage 3:  Once the software patch incorporating the required changes is 
uploaded by the Development team on the FTP, an email is s ent to 
DG (Systems) officers for approval. The approval is given by the DG (Systems) 
officers (of the rank of Assistant Director or above) to the Operation Team to 
download the patch file from FTP and execute it.  

                     Report No. 14 of 2023 – Union Government (Indirect Taxes – Customs) 
53 
 
Stage 4: The patches are applied in pre -production first and are tested by 
some ICES users in test environment. Subsequently, the approval is given for 
executing in production. 
Hence, DG (Systems) implements the changes through patch files and have 
no SRS/SDDs of the structural changes/modificatio ns made in the ICES 
Application after 2010. 
DG (Systems) also stated (March 2021) that currently the development team 
of ICES comprises of NIC scientists and NICSI resources engaged as per the 
tripartite MoU signed amongst CBIC, NIC and NICSI. Further, there is a robust 
mechanism with defined responsibilities a nd role-based access to carry out 
any change in the ICES application which has stood the test of time.  It would 
be incorrect to infer that the essence of having an 'SRS/SDDs' is not being 
applied and followed.  DG (Systems)  stated that the SRS/SDD documen ts 
already shared with Audit were prepared when the entire ICES application 
was going through an overhaul and migration from 1.0 to 1.5 version.  All the 
subsequent changes are documented in the patch file, patch mail as well as 
in a detailed Patch Tracker, even if the terminology as SDD or SRS is not used 
as such. No patch can be applied in pre -production and production without 
the express approval of DG (Systems) officers. Each patch approval and its 
execution by the Operations team is recorded in the Patch Tracker shared by 
the Operation team on a daily basis with the DG (Systems) officers and the 
Development Team.  ICES is an extremely dynamic application where most 
changes that were required came with pressing timelines.  The above 
process ensures a tra ck of all the changes along with their approvals while 
also helping in timely and quick delivery. 
Audit requisitioned (August 2020 and January 2021) to arrange to provide 
details/records related to the whole development cycle of new 
functionalities/module added in ICES during the period from 2015 -16 to 
2019-20 with details of application audit done through a third party on all 
aspects of ICES and software updates along with  records of expected 
modules for development and implementation (i.e. currently in pipeline) and 
their present status. 
With regards to structural changes, DG (Systems) provided (February 2021) 
an ‘Index of Advisories issued by Directorate of Systems with respect to ICES’ 
during 2017-20 in which 16 changes13 were shown. 
 
13 These included Implementation of ROSL Scrolls, Implementation of changes in ICES for 
late fees, Alignment of State Codes of ICES with GSTN, Changes in BE/SB, IGST refund for 
non EDI sites, IGST Refunds for EDI sites in ICES, New Cess applied, Goods Registration online 
on ICEGATE, UQC, SCMTR, Turant Customs, Border Crossing Report at LCSs for Transshipped 
Cargo, Project Import, Custodian Code Warehouse Mapping, e -Sanchit and Container 
Scanning Module. 

 Report No. 14 of 2023 – Union Government (Indirect Taxes – Customs)  
54 
 
DG (Systems) also provided (October 2021) a list of ICES patch tracker which 
included 10 changes in the import module and 10 changes in the export 
module. 
But no records relating to development cycle of new module/functionalities 
added. Further, the details provided do not have details of the stages of the 
Change Management Procedure as indicated by DG (Systems).   Moreover, 
the trail of mails has also not been made available to Audit. The Department 
has also not provided details of  third party audit of ICES and software 
updates. 
On being pointed out (August 2022), the Ministry stated (November 2022) 
the issue has already been taken up with NIC for early completion of the 
documentation, in terms of the MoU. Action has been initiated for hir ing 
team of competent resources to complete the said task. As and when 
documents are completed, the same will be shared. 
Recommendation 15: Ministry must ensure that protocols are properly and 
completely followed at the time of sign off of any change manag ement. 
They must ensure that all changes including testing and approval of such 
changes are properly documented. 
4.3 Help desk and end-user support system 
A help desk is an important component and a multi -dimensional resource, 
designated to  help in reducing downtime in IT  services and functions and 
making them available for maximum time. It is specially focused on end user 
functionality, and, thus, is responsible for quick resolution of immediate 
needs, incidents and technical issues of end users. 
Further, as per Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) dated 21.12.2018, 
vide clause  A (7), the scope of work to be carried out under the project 
relating to help desk and end user support system is to provide Level -2 
(provided by Regional Centers Teams regarding  the ICES related problems 
forwarded by Level -1 help desk)  and Level-3(provided by NIC team of ICES 
for the modifications of applications as suggested by Level -2 team and 
approved by CBIC team) support to the ICES users for resolution of problems 
escalated by Level -1 (refers to  the helpdesk managed by the System 
Integrator to provide first level technical support to the user) support team. 
Audit requisitioned (December 2020) from DG (Systems) details regarding:  
(i) Number of tickets raised for technical support forwarded by L -1 
service desk to L -2 support team and for technical support requests 
forwarded by L -2 support team to L -3 support team, number of 
tickets resolved and average time taken for resolution, 

                      Report No. 14 of 2023 – Union Government (Indirect Taxes – Customs) 
55 
 
(ii) Details of modification of ICES application carried out by L-3 support 
team as suggested by L-2 support team, and, 
(iii) The list of all tickets raised from 1st October 2019 to 31stMarch 2020 
on ICES, 
(iv) How does DG (Systems) monitor the problems escalated by Level -1 
Support team till its resolution etc? 
On being pointed out (August 2022), the Ministry furnished details of 
number of tickets raised, number of tickets resolved, and number of tickets 
escalated to next level and average time taken for resolution. 
However, the Ministry did not furnish details/parameters fixed for time 
prescribed for resolutions of ticket raised under L1, L2 and L3 supports.  In 
the absence of which Audit cannot comment on the efficiency of help desk 
and user support system. 
Delay by L1, L2 and L3 support  teams in resolving incidents may result in 
delay in import/export procedures i.e. delay in the process of cargo release, 
increase in processing time and could lead to increase of export/import cost 
in the form of demurrage charges, rent and rates charged by the port 
authority/Custodian etc. 
Recommendation 16: Ministry may prescribe: 
(a) Time limits for resolving or escalating the complaints, 
(b) Average time, for resolution with useful/suitable details of tickets 
which take unduly long time be captured and monitored. 
4.4 Internal audit 
In response to Audit observation relating to lack of Internal Audit system in 
ICES 1.5 (Para no. 2.6 of Audit Report no. 11 of 2014), DGoS replied that a 
Working Group has been constituted comprising Officers of the Directorate 
of Audit and field formations to conduct audit on the functioning of ICES 1.5 
for detecting deficiencies and suggesting improvement in the application. 
Audit requisitioned (December 2020) from DG (Systems) about the details of 
Audit carried out by the “Working Group” constituted as above on the 
functioning of ICES during the period 2015 -2020 along with the Working 
Group’s fact finding reports, action taken on deficiencies noticed or 
suggestions made for its improvement. 
On being pointed out (August 2022), the Ministry furnished (November 
2022): 
a) Audit report of the Working Group 
b) Action taken on deficiency noticed by the Working Group 

 Report No. 14 of 2023 – Union Government (Indirect Taxes – Customs) 
56 
 
The Working Group Audit report stated that it had studied how to do audit 
of applications of IT system for detecting deficiencies with an aim to suggest 
improvements in the ICES application. The previous CAG reports were taken 
as basic back ground material for the study and recommendations. 
On the deficiencies noticed by Wo rking Group, an Action Taken rep ort was 
sent (August 2018) to CBIC. 
It has been noticed from the DG (Systems)  response of August 2018 that 
against some of the areas pointed by the Working Group, it was mentioned 
that these are polic y issues which require further discussion  or that these 
issues pertains to the ICEGATE. 
Audit requested DG (Systems) /CBIC that the current status of the action 
taken on the following issues may be provided. Their response was awaited 
(January 2023). 
 
Deficiencies noticed by Working Group ATN Status (August 
2018) 
Adequacy of Business processes 
i.  OOC for a BE from a CFS  should be cleared by 
officer from that CFS only 
These are p olicy issue s 
which requires further 
discussion ii.  Currently CFS code is given at IGM level against 
Bill of lading only, not in BE include CFS code at 
BE level also 
iii.  No effective message exchange with Custodian 
iv.  Duty reflection on ICEGATE  portal is late and 
sometimes lead to Double duty payment. 
Reflection of Duty on ICEGATE portal should be 
on real time basis. 
Issue pertains to 
ICEGATE 
v.  Timely updation of Notifications: It is suggested 
that authorities in Board may be asked to 
directly upload the notification in ICES directory. 
A mechanism may be implemented by Systems 
for updating and cross verification of Directory 
updating. 
It is a policy issue 
Improvement and Additional functionalities  
vi.  License related issues: In many cases, especially 
involving amendments in licences, old data is 
transmitted, even after transmission of correct 
data from DGFT. This creates problem for trade 
as well as for the Department. 
Pertains to ICEGATE 
vii.  One more UQC should be allowed irrespective 
of the standard UQC provided in the Tariff. 
Policy issue may be 
taken up with Board 
viii.  In-bond sales to the SEZ units are not processed 
in the ICES 1.5 till date. 
Need further discussions 

                    Report No. 14 of 2023 – Union Government (Indirect Taxes – Customs) 
57
Deficiencies noticed by Working Group ATN Status (August 
2018)
Adequacy of Business processes
ix. Identifiers for BsE under investigation. Policy issue may be 
taken up with Board
x. There is no provision in export module for 
electron  filing of SBs.
Development is under 
process
New Delhi                      (Kartikaye Mathur)
Dated:                                Principal Director (Customs)
Countersigned
New Delhi            (Girish Chandra Murmu)
Dated:           Comptroller and Auditor General of India


  

                     Report No. 14 of 2023 – Union Government (Indirect Taxes – Customs) 
59 
 
Annexure I 
Previous audit findings on ICES and action taken/current status 
(Refer Para 1.6) 
 
CAG's Report on ICES 1.5  No.11 of 2014 
S 
No. 
Para 
No. 
Audit Findings Action Taken/Current Status 
1 2.1 IS Strategic Plan was not 
long term 
A High Powered Committee (HPC) was set 
up in February 2014 for the  same with the 
approval of the Hon’ble Finance Minister, 
for defining an IT strategy for CBIC 
(Government of India, Ministry of Finance, 
Department of Revenue, Office 
Memorandum issued vide  F. No. 
296/33/2014.Cx.9 dated 27.02.2014 
constituted Committee.)IT road map of 
CBIC and the recommendation of the 
DRISHTI (Driving Information Systems for 
Holistic Tax Initiatives) related to various IT 
projects and their implementation is being 
monitored by the Board. 
2 2.2 Improper monitoring by 
Senior Management 
DG (Systems)  adopted 25 key indicators 
from system monitoring perspective, some 
of which are compliance indicators and 
others are numeric/percentage indicators.  
These cover availability, incidents, changes, 
security, user access and business 
continuity.  
3 2.3 There was no strategic plan 
for selection, recruitment 
and retention of personnel 
for its ICT Systems 
Ministry (DoR) stated that DG (Systems)  is 
providing necessary backup for 
development of in -house technical 
expertise for CBIC's IT management.  
Whenever requi red and seems necessary 
for work exigencies the workforce for IT 
related work is being outsourced by the 
Department.   IS management through 
recruitment may create cadre related 
problems of promotion, absorption etc.  
4 2.4 Department has not 
imparted any  periodic 
training on Information 
Security to CBIC users after 
2010 
CBIC stated that training is being imparted 
to the users from time to time, However, no 
records were furnished to audit at that 
time. 
5 2.5 Some features of 
operational password policy 
were different from the 
documented password 
policy  
The password policy related to all verticals 
of DG (Systems)  including ICES was last 
reviewed in August 2019 and then again in 
August 2020. Hence , DG (Systems)  is 
updating/reviewing the password policy on 
yearly basis. 
6 2.6 Internal control and audit Ministry replied that a Working Group has 
been constituted comprising Officers of the 

 Report No. 14 of 2023 – Union Government (Indirect Taxes – Customs) 
60 
 
Directorate of Audit and field formations to 
conduct audit on the functioning of ICES 1.5 
for detecting deficiencies and suggesting 
improvement in the application. Ministry 
added that a working group constituted in 
this regard had submitted  a report which 
was under examination. 
7 2.7 CRA module was not 
according to the 
requirements of Audit 
The Department is undertaking changes in 
CRA module from time to time . However,  
still the reports available are not according 
to requirements of Audit. 
8 2.8 SSOIDs  activity  was  not  
being  monitored by the 
System Manager 
The CBIC, in its reply (February 2014) stated 
that an electronic User Access Management 
(UAM) tool has been developed and is being 
used by the Systems Managers of all field 
formations. 
9 2.9 No RMS export module in 
ICES 
From July 2013 , RMS export module was 
implemented. Presently, it is running in 250 
out of 252 EDI Customs sites.  
10 2.10 Poor functioning of Post 
Clearance Audit (PCA) wings 
of the Commissionerate 
Ministry stated that Field Formations have 
been asked to review the performance of 
Post Clearanc e Audit and Special 
Investigation and Intelligence Branch (SIIB) 
and post additional staff after taking into 
account of overall vacancy position.  From 
April 2018 , a new Audit Commissionerate 
was created, which is responsible to 
conduct Post Clearance Audi t of the BsE 
cleared through RMS Import. 
11 2.11 Audit observed poor 
functioning of LRM at 
almost all locations in 
discharging its function to 
monitor the performance of 
RMS and PCA 
CBIC in its reply (February 2014) stated that 
there will be a local Risk Management 
System catering to the needs of the 
Customs Houses. The local Risk 
Management  System will carry out the live 
processing of the BEs and IGMs etc. 
12 3.1 There is an error in the  
‘program  for  the  
calculation  of  WH  Interest’  
in  ICES  1.5  application, 
which, if not rectified, will 
result in continued short 
levies of WH interest 
Para was not accepted by the Department 
as the interest calculated as per the 
contention of the Department is tallying 
with the actual interest collected.  Since 
audit has applied direct formula from the 
interest per day calculated backwards from 
the duty amount without any rounding off, 
hence the shortfall.  This formula of reverse 
calculation by audit is erroneous and 
produces misleading results. PAC also in its 
50th Report stated not pursue this para , in 
view of the reply submitted by the Ministry. 
13 3.2 Absence of RSP validations 
to enforce RSP declaration 
for imports attracting RSP 
based assessment 
CBIC in its reply (January 2014), while not 
accepting the observation stated that that 
RSP notification is not purely based on 
Customs Tariff Heading (CTH) Or Central 
Excise Tariff Heading (CETH), i.e., in most 

                     Report No. 14 of 2023 – Union Government (Indirect Taxes – Customs) 
61 
 
cases the goods description under the 
description column is also relevant.  The 
goods description , being a non -structured 
field, cannot be used for validations in an 
automated system. After introduction of 
GST, RSP based assessment is abolished. 
Hence this issue is not relevant in the 
present context. 
14 3.3 Absence of validation to 
check mis -declaration of 
RSP 
CBIC in its reply stated (January 2014) that 
there are no legal provisions empowering 
the Customs authorities to mandatorily 
disallow lower RSP based assessment vis -a-
vis transaction value based assessment. 
Selling goods at a price lower than the cost 
may be a purely commercial decision.  After 
introduction of GST, RSP based assessment 
is abolished.  Hence this issue is not relevant 
in present context. 
15 3.4 Acceptance of multiple rate 
of exchange rates by the 
application 
It was stated (February 2014) that testing of 
a module for daily update of exchange rate 
through message exchange with State Bank 
of India (SBI) had been completed and 
commissioning of the same can be decided 
only after the technical issues with State 
bank of India (SBI) get resolved. DG 
(Systems) replied in March 2021 that 
development of the updation of exchange 
rate through message exchange with SBI is 
under advance stage of development 
16 3.5 Failure/Delay  to  update  
the  Central excise/ 
Customs/ Special Additional 
Duty (SAD) Exemption 
notifications and  duty  rate  
directories  
The Board has issued (June 2015) Standard 
Operating Procedure (SOP) to Directory 
Management Site (DMS) for updation of 
directories in pursuant to any changes and 
has also approved (March 2017) a system of 
Peer Review of Directory updation after 
appointing nodal officers for such review. 
As per this SOP, the nodal officer of the 
concerned Peer Review Site shall review the 
directory to ensure that the notification has 
been updated corr ectly and in time. E -mail 
intimation to this effect shall be sent to the 
nodal officer in the Board, National System 
Manager, DG (Systems) and the DMS. 
17 3.6 Absence of validations to 
ensure declaration of 
unique IEC/PAN 
CBIC in its reply stated (January 2014) that 
DGFT is the owner of the IEC data and the 
responsibility of its accuracy and validity 
rests with them and the same was sent by 
CBIC to DGFT for correction at their end.  
18 3.7 Absence of validations to 
ensure declaration of same 
CTH and CETH  
CBIC while accepting the recommendation 
stated (January 2014 and February 2014) 
that validations are yet to be built in to 
ensure declaration of same CTH and CETH.  

 Report No. 14 of 2023 – Union Government (Indirect Taxes – Customs)  
62 
 
After introduction of GST from July 2017, 
CETH are not re quired. Hence this issue is 
not relevant in present context. 
19 3.8 Absence of validations to 
ensure declaration of goods 
imported under chapter 98 
of Customs Tariff with 
corresponding CETH and 
there is no facility to 
generate report based on 
CETHs 
CBIC in its reply stated (January 2014) that 
the present request to generate report 
based on CETHs from audit will be examined 
for consideration.  After introduction of GST 
from July 2017, CETH are not required. 
Hence this issue is not relevant in present 
context. 
20 3.9 Country of Origin at the BE 
level and Country of Origin 
at the item level were 
different 
CBIC stated that before March 2013, direct 
linkage between the country codes and the 
preferential tariff notifications were not 
built in the system due to absence of facility 
in the directory for such linkage.  System 
was facilitating capture of Country of Origin 
for anti -dumping notifications only and 
validating the same with the COO provided 
against the relevant item of the Bill of Entry.  
Since 1st March 2013, such linkage has been 
provided for all Country of Origin based 
notifications.  A para regarding the same 
has been issued as such discrepancy 
continues to exist in the system. 
21 3.10 Details of producer of goods 
not captured in ICES for levy 
of ADD 
The field related to name of 
Producer/Manufacturer details is being 
displayed in ICES.  
22 3.11 In ICES, there  were  no  
validations  or  mapping  of  
CTH with  the  serial  
numbers  of  the  
notification,  either  for  
conditional  or  for 
unconditional  exemptions 
CBIC in its reply stated that the exemption 
notifications apply BCD rates against CTHs 
qualified by description, serial no. and the 
list of conditions.  Both the list of conditions, 
as well as the description are unstructured 
fields, and are n ot conducive to 
automation.  Correct availment could be 
validated in the system only if the 
exemption notification was defined on the 
basis of the CTH.  However, as neither the 
conditions, nor the description can be 
quantified/ structured, it is not possib le to 
build 100 per cent validations with regard to 
the CTH and the notification duty rates.  It is 
informed that mapping of tariff items with 
exemption notifications to the extent 
possible has been built in the notification 
directory since 1st March 2013.  
23 3.12 In ICES, there  was  no  
validation  or  mapping  of 
CTH with  the  serial  number  
of  the  notification  in  the  
ICES  1.5  application,  to 
ensure that exemptions 
After i ntroduction of GST from July 2017 
IGST is being levied instead of CVD and 
Additional Customs Duty. Hence this issue is 
not relevant in present context. 

                     Report No. 14 of 2023 – Union Government (Indirect Taxes – Customs) 
63 
 
from CVD allowable under 
the said notification were 
correctly  claimed 
24 3.13 The goods were cleared and 
given OOC on payment of 
lesser duty. There were not 
checks in the system  
CBIC while not accepting the observation 
stated (January 2014) that duty can be paid 
through cash payment, as well as through 
scrips and the cases highligh ted by audit 
were those where duty debit was made 
through scrips.  
25 3.14 Import documents (BEs) as 
well as export documents 
(SBs) are  filed manually 
instead of electronically 
(through EDI system) 
Ministry stated that the percentage of 
manually filed BsE and SBs are quite low and 
steps are being taken to remove the 
constraints and further increase the EDI 
filing to the extent possible. Further, Board 
has devised Manual BE Module and Manual 
SB Module in June 2017 and necessary 
changes have been made in ICES 1.5. Hence, 
manual filing of BsE/SBs are also being fed 
in the ICES application through these 
modules. Audit noticed that total BsE and 
SBs processed manually during the period 
2017-18 to 2019-20 was 0.086 per cent and 
0.126 per cent  of the total BsE and SBs 
processed through EDI.  
26 3.15 Absence of linkage with 
‘sezonline’ portal of MoC  
Accepted by the Govt. {Ref: ATR (2015 -16) 
50th Report at page no. 01}.With the 
combined efforts of Ministry of Commerce 
& Industries and Ministry of Finance, an 
initiative has been taken from August 2015, 
to integrate SEZ Online System with EDI 
System of CBIC.  However, IGM data not yet 
correlated with Bills of Entry data in SEZ 
online and there is no data transmission for 
Shipping Bill and Let Expo rt Order in ICES 
1.5. 
27 3.16 ICES  1.5  does  not  have  
any  mechanism  to  monitor  
goods  released  on 
transhipment 
CBIC stated that in ICES 1.5, the module for 
transhipment of goods from Gateway Sea 
Ports to Inland Container Depots (ICDs) is 
already functional since the last few years. 
The Sea to Sea transhipment module has 
been launched on 7 February 2014. 
28 3.17 Absence of integration of 
NIDB and ECDB data with 
ICES  
There is no interaction between any active 
server of ICES and Server of DGoV and NIDB 
and ECDB are standalone databases and not 
integrated with ICES 1.5. No development 
as of yet. 
29 3.18 Details of ‘i mport against 
essentiality certificate for 
project not captured in ICES 
Ministry has rolled out a Project Import 
Module in ICES vide Circular No 27/2019 -
Customs dated 3rd September 2019.   
30 3.19.1 The information related to 
Export obligation fulfilment 
is not collated and utilised 
As per reply of DG (Systems)  (September 
2021) ICES is able to generate licence -wise 

 Report No. 14 of 2023 – Union Government (Indirect Taxes – Customs)  
64 
 
by department through any 
module/report in the 
application 
information under "All lndia License View" 
role 
31 3.19.2 No information on 
finalization of provisional 
assessments 
DG (Systems)  had launched a module for 
finalization of PA Bills of Entry in ICES 1.5 in 
April 2014 for online finalization of 
provisionally assessed bills and to monitor 
the pendency in finalization of provisionally 
assessed BsE/SBs.  For the finalization of 
provisionally assessed BEs two new roles 
viz. FAO for Assessing Officers and FOC for 
group Asstt./Dy. Commissioner are created. 
32 3.19.3 No information on action 
taken in short levy cases 
Board in its reply (January 2014) stated that 
the EDI system already provides the facility 
to capture the details of fine and penalty in 
their respective columns till the OOC of the 
BE.  Reference to the file no., show cause 
notice no. and details of  the  adjudication  
order  are  captured  in  the  departmental 
comments  of  the  BE. 
33 3.19.4 Wherever duty is debited 
through manual challans, 
information about such 
payments is not uploaded 
into the system 
The Department in their reply (January 
2014) stated that in ICES, pr ovision is there 
to capture payments made against manual 
BEs in the manual DTR module which is 
available with all EDI sites. 
34 3.19.5 There is no facility to levy 
and collect EDD through 
ICES application, due to 
which it has to be collected 
separately manually 
The calculation of EDD was integrated in 
ICES from 1st August 2015. However, Levy of 
EDD has been discontinued vide Customs 
circular 05/2016. Hence this issue is not 
relevant in present context. 
35 4.1 Under-utilization of Thin 
Client terminals 
Ministry stated that DG (Systems) has been 
informed that new procurement should be 
commensurate with the actual requirement 
and manpower availability.  Further, all 
Chief Commissionerates are directed to 
ensure that all thin clients are put use. 
36 4.2 Protection of EDI Hardware, 
software and Staff from 
lightning strikes at ICD, 
Pithampur 
CBIC stated (2014) that in terms of the 
extant instructions site preparation is the 
responsibility of the custodian.  The action 
taken to resolv e the position will be 
informed to Audit. Final outcome is not 
known 
37 4.3 Limited power back up for 
working of the EDI system at 
ICD, Mandideep (Bhopal)  
 CBIC stated (2014) that under the Local 
Area Network project only power back up 
has been provided.   However, site specific 
requirements will be examined and 
appropriate action as considered necessary 
will be taken. Final outcome is not known. 
38 4.4 Details of manually filed bills 
were not entered in the ICES 
CBIC in its reply (January 2014) stated that a 
utility for entering such data is available. 
Further, through DTR module manual BE/SB 
can be entered in ICES. 

                     Report No. 14 of 2023 – Union Government (Indirect Taxes – Customs) 
65 
 
CAG Report No.24 of 2009-10 
1 3.11.1 Lack of provision to 
calculate/classify export 
duty 
The software has since been modified and 
the export duty/cess is being levied 
correctly by the system. 
2 3.11.2 Non-availability of 
collections of extra duty 
deposit (EDD) 
The calculation of EDD was integrated in 
ICES from1st August 2015. Further, Levy of 
EDD has been discontinued vide C ustoms 
circular 05/2016. Hence this issue is not 
relevant in present context. 
3 3.11.3 Incomplete capture of the 
parameters and manual 
intervention leading to 
short levy of BCD 
The Ministry informed that the design 
deficiency pointed out by audit regarding 
system using pre -amended data has been 
rectified, post audit, through a software 
patch. 
4 3.11.4 Data regarding country of 
origin 
The Ministry informed that the system has 
been properly designed by capturing 
‘country of origin’ at two places and using 
the value at the ‘item’ level for levy of ADD. 
Accordingly, any short levy pointed out by 
audit could be on account of assessment 
lapse. 
5 3.11.5 SBs not matched with 
export general manifest 
(EGM) on DEPB items 
The ministry in its reply informed that even 
after correcting the EGM error, the current 
status of the SB continued to be shown as 
mismatched in the system, which was 
subsequently rectified by NIC. 
6 3.11.6 Currency of packing charges The Ministry in its reply agreed to make 
provision in the system for capturing 
packing charges in Indian Rupees. Test 
check of Shipping Bills revealed that system 
is capturing packing charges 
7 3.11.7 Items imported against 
licences not checked with 
revised Indian trade 
classification code (RITC) 
Data is being transmitted 
online/electronically by DGFT containing 
RITC. However, Department stated that 
validation relating to matching of RITC in 
license and in BE will create hardship to the 
trade. 
8 3.11.8 Interest on goods cleared 
from the warehouse was 
not built into the system 
Calculation and collection of interest in 
respect of warehouse goods are being done 
in ICES 1.5. 
9 3.12.1 Agency Commission was not 
restricted to 12.5 per cent of 
the value of goods 
The agency commission is being restricted 
by the System upto 12.5 per cent. 
10 3.12.2 No amount of drawback 
shall be allowed, if the 
amount or rate of drawback 
is less than one per cent of 
the FOB value 
The Ministry in its reply assured that the 
necessary corrections in the logic built in 
the system will be done. Further, this 
restriction has been removed in drawback 
schedule from 2017 onwards. 
11 3.12.3 Abatement of CVD in 
respect of impor ted 
footwear was not mapped 
correctly in the system 
RSP calculation has been abolished since 
the introduction of GST. Hence this issue is 
not relevant in present context. 

 Report No. 14 of 2023 – Union Government (Indirect Taxes – Customs) 
66 
 
12 3.13.1
.1.i 
Incorrect computation of 
assessable value. 
Acceptance of zero or null 
values in respect of 
freight/insurance  
The Ministry, while agreeing with the 
observation, informed that the defect has 
since been rectified by implementation of a 
software patch. 
13 3.13.1
.1.ii 
Acceptance of lesser 
percentage values against 
freight /insurance 
The Ministry stated that, there was no bar 
in accepting lesser percentage of 
freight/insurance, if documentary evidence 
to that effect exists and these documents 
are subject to verification by the Customs 
officers. 
14 3.13.1
.2 
Benefits of notification Ministry stated that 100% validation with 
regard to Notification/CTH, CETH not  
possible. 
15 3.13.1
.3 
Debiting of licences under 
multiple schemes 
Ministry stated that the validation is now 
done of scheme code instead of scheme 
codes grouping by implementation of 
software patch. 
16 3.13.1
.4 
Grant of exemption of 
special CVD 
Special CVD has been abolished since 
introduction of GST. Hence this issue is not 
relevant in present context. 
17 3.13.1
.5 
CVD based on RSP RSP based assessment has been abolished 
since introduction of GST. Hence this issue 
is not relevant in present context. 
18 3.14.1 Change management 
control- Non-matching of 
the CTH and CETH 
CETH has been abolished since introduction 
of GST. Hence this issue is not relevant in 
present context. 
19 3.14.2 Non-updating of 
notification master tables 
This issue has been addressed in ICES 1.5. 
All directories are updated centrally and are 
available to all sites immediately. 
20 3.14.3 Incorrect updating of 
drawback schedule 
The Ministry in its reply agreed that due to 
the large number of the entries in the 
drawback schedule some discrepancies may 
creep in during updation and these 
discrepancies are rectified on such 
discrepancies being reported. Test check 
revealed that the system is fetching the 
details of drawback schedule rates as 
prescribed. 
21 3.15.1 Difference between the 
assessment and collection 
files  
The Ministry stated that it was possible that 
the amount collected was less (upto rupees 
nine) than the duty assessed, as the system 
accepts duty payment, if the amount paid is 
matching upto ‘tens’ level. It further stated 
that duty can be recalculated for BEs taken 
up for post clearance audit, etc. However, 
the inconsistency is not due to any design 
deficiency. 
22 3.15.2 In Ex -bond BE, the interest 
for delayed payment of duty  
was not calculated by the 
system 
This para was settled by Audit in November 
2009. Moreover, the interest is being 
calculated by the system. 

                     Report No. 14 of 2023 – Union Government (Indirect Taxes – Customs) 
67 
 
23 3.15.3 Calculation of duty foregone 
item-wise was in negative 
figure 
The problem was rectified by the 
department. 
24 3.16.i Database not utilised to its 
potential - Maintenance of 
bond register 
Bond registers are being maintained in ICES 
1.5. Whenever, audit sought data in respect 
of Bonds, the reports are generated and 
furnished. 
25 3.16.ii Levy of bond interest for 
delayed clearance of goods 
was calculated and 
collected manually 
The levy of interest, calculation and 
collection are being processed through ICES 
1.5. 
26 3.16.iii Finalisation of the 
provisional assessment 
were being finalised 
manually 
Module has been added in ICES for 
finalization of Provisional Assessment. 
27 3.17 Non updation of 
documentation 
SRS/SDD was last updated in 2010 and 
Customs user manual was also last updated 
2013. These are the latest versions available 
with the Department.  
28 3.18 Business Continuity 
Planning 
The Ministry in its reply stated that 
instructions for safe keeping of backup 
tapes/cartridges to field formations would 
be reiterated. It further informed that a 
data centre at Delhi and disaster recovery 
centre at Chennai have been set up and 
gradually the existing ICES locations will 
migrate to the data centre. Further, it  is a 
part of the System Integrator’s work and is 
being done by SI Contract Audit team. 
 
  

Report No. 14 of 2023 – Union Government (Indirect Taxes – Customs) 
68 
 
Annexure II 
Constraints relating to furnishing of data dump and slow execution of 
data queries     (Refer Para 1.8.5) 

                     Report No. 14 of 2023 – Union Government (Indirect Taxes – Customs) 
69 
 
Sl.
No Description of Data Query 
Whether 
data 
received 
from DG 
(Systems)  
Details in brief 
6 Details  of Shipping Bills in which 
sample was drawn and EGM was 
given without/before entering test 
report during the period  from 
01/10/2019 to 31/03/2020 (six 
months) 
Yes Passed DG (Systems) furnished 456 records.  
On analysis, it was found that date of 
sampled data was correctly entered 
before date of EGM. 
7 Report the electronically amended 
IGM cases where fees are not paid 
from 01/10/2019 to 31/03/2020 (six 
months) 
Query 
could not 
developed
 
Not 
Applicable 
Department intimated that no such fee 
was levied in ICEGATE for electronically 
amended IGM cases w here fees were 
not paid. 
8 For all import c ases to be reported 
where field relating to 'BE Selected by 
RMS' is null from 01/10/2019 to 
31/03/2020 (six months) 
Yes Failed Audit observation was issued in 
respect of 10,309 records (March 
2023); response of the Department is 
awaited. This will be pursued in future 
audits. 
9 Details of Home consumption BE data 
where rate of duty / Tariff value is not 
equal to rate of duty/ Tariff value 
prevailing on BE filing date from 
01/10/2019 to 31/03/2020 (six 
months) 
Yes Failed Audit observation was issued in 
respect of 2,352 BEs (March 2023); 
response of the Department is 
awaited. This will be pursued in future 
audits. 
10 Details of Ex-bond BE data cleared 
under Section 68 where rate of duty / 
Tariff value is not equal to rate of 
duty/ Tariff value prevailing on Ex -
Bond BE date from 01/10/2019 to 
31/03/2020 (six months) 
Yes Failed Audit observation was issued in 
respect of 151 records  (March 2023); 
response of the Department is 
awaited. This will be pursued in future 
audits. 
11 Details of cases of Advance/Prior BEs 
filed where tariff  value is different on 
the date of filing BE and date of entry 
inwards of the goods in respect of 
from 01/10/2019 to 31/03/2020 ( six 
months) 
Yes Passed No cases were noticed. 
12 Details of Warehousing BE data and 
corresponding Ex-Bond BE where the 
total item wise quantity is not equal 
to item wise Warehousing BE 
Yes Passed On an analysis no discrepancy 
observed in the data provided. 

 Report No. 14 of 2023 – Union Government (Indirect Taxes – Customs) 
70 
 
Sl.
No Description of Data Query 
Whether 
data 
received 
from DG 
(Systems)  
Details in brief 
Quantity from 01/10/2019 to 
31/03/2020 (six months) 
13 Detail of SBs where commission 
added in FOB value is  more than 12.5 
per cent  of invoice value for the 
period 01/03/2020 to 31/03/2020 
Yes Not 
Applicable 
To know details of SBs where 
commission added in FOB value is 
more than 12.5  per cent  of invoice 
value, a query was run by the 
department and 159 records were 
retrieved. On analysis, it was found 
that the columns FOB value in foreign 
currency, FOB value in INR and 
Drawback paid were not available. 
14 Detail of SBs where drawback paid is 
more than drawback calculated on 
drawback cap per unit for the period 
01/03/2020 to 31/03/2020 
Yes Not 
Applicable 
A query was run by the Department 
and 5 ,88,210 records were retrieved.  
On analysis, it was found that data was 
furnished at SB level instead of item 
level. 
15 Detail of SBs where net weight is 
more than gross weight for the 
period 01/03/2020 to 31/03/2020 
Yes Passed A query was run by the Department 
and 12 records were retrieved. On 
analysis, it was noticed that these 
Shipping Bills were amended Shipping 
Bills. Accordingly, there was no 
observation. 
16 Details of goods imported under 
Customs Notification No. 16/2019 
(dated 15/06/2019) with CTH 0713 
40 00, 2810 00 20  and 3822 00 90 
from 13/06/2019 to 17/06/2019 
Yes Not 
Applicable 
Data was provided for Out of charge 
date instead of BE date . Further, the 
data provided was of BE date prior to 
date of notification (15 June 2019). 
17 Details of goods imported under 
Customs Notification No. 02/2019 
(dated 29/01/2019) with CTH 8507 
60 00, 8517 62 90 and 8517 69 90 
from 28/01/2019 to 01/02/2019 
Yes Passed Data was provided of Out of charge 
date instead of BsE date. Data of 530 
records was  furnished. Fourteen 
records were checked and found 
correct. 
18 Details of goods imported under 
Customs Notification No. 36/2001 
(Customs – NT) as amended 
01/10/2019 to 31/03/2020 (six 
months) 
No Not 
Applicable 
Data was not received. 

                     Report No. 14 of 2023 – Union Government (Indirect Taxes – Customs) 
71 
 
Sl.
No Description of Data Query 
Whether 
data 
received 
from DG 
(Systems)  
Details in brief 
19 Details of goods imported where 
Anti-Dumping Duty/Safe Guard Duty 
has been levied 01/10/2019 to 
31/03/2020 (six months) 
No Not 
Applicable 
Data was not received. 
20 Details of  cases in which Out of 
Charge BEs which are ordered for 
examination (FIRST CHECK) from 
01/10/2019 to 31/03/2020 (6 
months).  
No Not 
Applicable 
Data was not received. 
21 Details of BEs where duty were paid 
after one day (excluding holidays)  of 
the assessment for the period 
01/11/2019 to 31/03/2020 ( five 
months) 
Yes Failed Audit observation was issued (March 
2023); response of the Department is 
awaited. This will be pursued in future 
audits. 
22 To check that RMS Exports is not 
selecting SBs for examination where 
the Exports Goods are factory stuffed 
under the supervision of Central 
Excise Officers. Details of SB  where  
goods are factory stuffed and RMS 
marked for examination during the 
period from 01/10/2019 to 
31/03/2020 (six months) 
Yes Passed DG (System) furnished 1 ,000 records 
related to 18 SBs.  On analysis, it came 
to notice that Factory stuffed 
consignments were also being selected 
by RMS. 
23 Details in respect of Amended Bill of 
Entries from 01/10/2019 to 
31/03/2020 (six months) 
Yes Not 
Applicable 
Data furnished could not be examined, 
because of format issues. 
24 Details in respect of Bill of Entries 
where duty paid is   less than the duty 
assessed/payable from 01/10/2019 
to 31/03/2020 (six months). 
Yes Failed Audit observation was issued in 
respect of 11,214 records (March 
2023); response of the Department is 
awaited. This will be pursued in future 
audits. 
25 Details of Warehousing and 
corresponding ex -bond BE data for 
the period 01 /04/2018 to 
31/03/2020 to verify the correctness 
of the web ledger of the goods 
Yes Not 
Applicable 
Only sample data has been given. 
Less than 90 days - 631 
More than 90 days - 363 
 
The Department has given only 
sample data of 1,000 each at WBE 

 Report No. 14 of 2023 – Union Government (Indirect Taxes – Customs) 
72 
 
Sl.
No Description of Data Query 
Whether 
data 
received 
from DG 
(Systems)  
Details in brief 
imported and cleared thereon along 
with interest levied/paid 
Item level and Ex-BE level in respect of 
three ports (INAKV6 - Ankaleshwar 
(Gujarat), INAPL6 - Dadri-ACPL CFS, 
INAMD4 - Ahmedabad). 
Whether the interest was calculated, 
levied and collected correctly could 
not be ascertained, since the details of 
duty are not captured in the data. 
26 Data in respect of  Re-export BEs and 
corresponding SBs to verify whether 
conditions prescribed in the various 
re-export Notifications are fulfilled or 
not for the period 01 /04/2018 to 
31/03/2020 
Yes Failed Audit observation was issued (March 
2023); response of the Department is 
awaited. This will be pursued in future 
audits. 
 