Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
on
Swadesh Darshan Scheme
Union Government
Ministry of Tourism
No. 17 of 2023
(Performance Audit)


 
Report of the  
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
on 
Swadesh Darshan Scheme  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Union Government  
Ministry of Tourism 
No. 17 of 2023 
(Performance Audit) 
 
 
 
Laid on the table of Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha on……………… 

i 
 
 
 
Chapter/ 
Paragraph 
Subject Page No. 
 Preface v 
 Executive Summary vii 
 
Chapter-I Introduction 1-8 
1.1 Background 1 
1.2 Swadesh Darshan Scheme 1 
1.3 Scheme objectives 1 
1.4 Institutional mechanism for project approval 2 
1.5 Process of approval of projects 3 
1.6 Financial outlay 4 
1.7 Audit objectives 4 
1.8 Audit scope and sampling 4 
1.9 Sources of Audit criteria 7 
1.10 Audit methodology 8 
1.11 Acknowledgement 8 
 
Chapter-II Formulation of the Scheme 9-32 
2.1 Launching of new Central Sector Scheme despite objection by 
Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance 
9 
2.2 Non-conduct of feasibility study prior to formulation of the 
Scheme 
10 
2.3 Sanction of project funds without the approval of the Cabinet 11 
2.4 Implementation of Scheme without any effective roadmap or 
long-term vision 
12 
2.5 Frequent change in Scheme guidelines/modalities of projects 14 
2.6 Negligence of Rural Tourism under the Scheme 16 
2.7 Deviation from definition of tourist circuit 17 
2.8 Methodology for identification and selection of tourist 
circuits/destinations 
19 
2.9 Selection of large number of sites and components under 
circuits 
24 
2.10 Lack of convergence with other Schemes 27 
CONTENTS 

ii 
 
Chapter/ 
Paragraph 
Subject Page No. 
2.11 Returning of the project proposals after inordinate delay 29 
2.12 Preparation of Detailed Project Reports by States 30 
2.13 Summing up 31 
  
Chapter-III Financial Management 33-56 
3.1 Unrealistic budgeting under the Scheme 33 
3.2 Non-refund of excess funds released to the States/UTs 35 
3.3 Maintenance of a separate bank account s for projects by the 
States and refund of interest 
36 
3.4 Delay/non-submission of Utilisation Certificates 38 
3.5 Irregular payment of consultancy and contingency charges 41 
3.6 Wasteful/excess and inadmissible expenditure 43 
3.7 Undue benefit to contractors 52 
3.8 Recovery at the instance of Audit 55 
3.9 Summing up 56 
 
Chapter-IV Implementation of the Scheme 57-80 
4.1 Delay in completion of projects 57 
4.2 Sanction of projects without ensuring availability of 
encumbrance free land and necessary clearances 
58 
4.3 Delay in award of works under projects by the States 62 
4.4 Tendering process for award of work 63 
4.5 Execution of project components on the land/property owned 
by private individuals or Trusts 
64 
4.6 Deviation/extra items and change in scope of work 67 
4.7 Operation and maintenance of created assets 72 
4.8 Non-handing over and leasing out of created infrastructure for 
operation and maintenance 
78 
4.9 Summing up 80 
 
Chapter-V Monitoring and Impact Assessment 81-105 
5.1 Monitoring of Scheme by the Ministry of Tourism 82 
5.2 Monitoring by Programme Management Consultant 85 
5.3 Delay in formation of State Level Monitoring Committee 89 
5.4 Annual survey for impact assessment 92 

iii 
 
Chapter/ 
Paragraph 
Subject Page No. 
5.5 Non-conducting of capacity development/Information 
Education and Communication programmes 
92 
5.6 Online Presence of the Scheme and Management Information 
System 
94 
5.7 Analysis of Progress Reports of the States 95 
5.8 Non-maintenance of data about employment generation under 
the Scheme 
97 
5.9 Evaluation/Impact Assessment of the Scheme by National 
Productivity Council 
98 
5.10 No action upon recommendations of Parliamentary 
Committees and Expenditure Finance Committee 
100 
5.11 Achievement of Vision, Mission and Objective of the Scheme 103 
5.12 Summing up 104 
   
 Annexures 107-183 
Annexure-I Details of all 76 Projects sanctioned by Ministry of Tourism 
under Swadesh Darshan Scheme 
107-119 
Annexure-II Audit findings in respect of 14 sampled projects 120-173 
Annexure-III Overlapping of objectives of Swadesh Darshan Scheme with 
other ongoing schemes of the Ministry 
174-176 
Annexure-IV Details of components dropped and added in the project 
‘Integrated Development of Himalayan Circuit, Himachal 
Pradesh’ 
177-181 
Annexure-V Gist of observations of National Productivity Council Report 
2019 on Impact Assessment Study of Swadesh Darshan 
Scheme 
182 
Annexure-VI Gist of the observations and recommendations of the 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and 
Culture 
183 
 

v 
 
Preface 
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India has been prepared for 
submission to the President of India under Article 151 of the Constitution. It contains the 
results of Performance Audit of Swadesh Darshan Scheme  implemented by the Ministry 
of Tourism. 
The Swadesh Darshan Scheme is a 100 per cent Central Sector flagship scheme launched 
(January 2015) by the Ministry of Tourism for the development of tourism infrastructure 
in the country. The Ministry identified 15  tourist circuits for development under the 
Scheme and a total of 76 projects were sanctioned under the Scheme since its inception. 
The Performance Audit, covering the period from the Scheme’s inception in January 
2015 to March 2022, was conducted to derive an assurance that t he tourist circuits were 
identified, prioritised and planned as per the Scheme design and objectives ; the identified 
projects in the t ourist circuits were executed in an efficient, effective and coordinated 
manner; and there was proper monitoring and impact assessment of the Scheme. 
The Performance Audit was conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards issued 
by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
vii 
 
 
Executive Summary 
The Swadesh Darshan Scheme , launched in January 2015 with an initial outlay of `500 
crore, is a Central Sector flagship scheme of the Ministry of Tourism for the development 
of tourism infrastructure in the country. The Ministry identified 15  tourist circuits for 
development under the Scheme, namely Himalayan circuit, North East circuit, Krishna 
circuit, Buddhist circuit, Coastal circuit, Desert circuit, Tribal circuit, Eco circuit, Wildlife 
circuit, Rural circuit, Spiritual circuit, Ramayana circuit, Heritage circuit, Tirthankar circuit 
and Sufi circuit. The Ministry sanctioned a total of 76 projects (15 circuits) during the 
period from 2014-15 to 2018-19 at a sanctioned cost of `5,455.69 crore. 
Performance Audit of the Scheme covered the period from the Scheme's inception (2014-
15) to March 2022 with the objectives to assess whether: 
(a) The tourist circuits were identified, prioriti sed and planned as per the Scheme 
design and objectives, to increase tourist potential at the sites; 
(b) The identified projects in the tourist circuits were executed in an efficient, 
effective and coordinated manner, to achieve integrated development of quality 
(world-class) infrastructure, and 
(c) There was proper monitoring and whether mechanisms were established towards 
impact assessment of the Scheme, in terms of achievement of its objectives viz., 
sustainable tourism, enhancement of tourist potential, employment generation, 
generating livelihoods, community-based development etc. 
Performance Audit covered planning, implementation and monitoring of the Scheme by 
the Ministry and respective States. The relevant records were examined in the Ministry and 
offices of the selected States and the implementing agencies. A sample of 14 projects 
(related to 10 tourist circuits) from 13 States out of a total of 76 projects (15 circuits) was 
selected for detailed examination. 
The main audit findings are as under: 
Formulation of the Scheme  
The Ministry launched the Scheme despite objection of the Planning Commission/Ministry 
of Finance and did not act upon the recommendation of the Standing Finance Committee 
to formulate an Umbrella scheme by merging the schemes having overlapping objectives. 
As a result, there was overlapping of scope across various schemes implemented by  the 
Ministry. Most of these schemes were still ongoing in 2021-22. Thus, the objective of the 
Government to contain the proliferation and rationalisation of schemes was not achieved.  
(Para 2.1) 
 
 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
viii 
 
The Ministry formulated the S cheme without conducting any feasibility study . Non-
preparation of the feasibility report resulted in poor identification of sites and deficiencies 
in execution of projects, such as delay in completion of the projects and non-utilisation of 
funds. 
(Para 2.2) 
After launching the Scheme with an initial outlay of `500 crore, the Ministry continued to 
sanction projects and the amount sanctioned  had exceeded `4,000 crore by 2016 -17. The 
Ministry sanctioned funds without obtaining approval of the Cabinet, which was necessary 
for sanctioning projects costing above `1,000 crore. 
(Para 2.3) 
There was lack of proper planning on the part of the Ministry as it did not ensure preparation 
of National or State level Plan before launching the Scheme. After the launch of the Scheme 
also, it did not ensure preparation of Detailed Perspective Plans (DPP) for 14 out of 15 
tourist circuits/themes, which were to form the basis of selection of projects and preparation 
of Detailed Project Reports . Thus, the Ministry did not have any long -term vision/policy 
for implementing the Scheme. Further, frequent changes were made in the modalities of 
the Scheme and a total of 15 revisions were made till August 2020, thus impacting effective 
implementation by the State Governments/Implementing Agencies. 
(Paras 2.4 and 2.5) 
The Ministry did not pay adequate attention to the development of the Rural circuit. As on 
31 March 2022, the total expenditure incurred under Rural circuit was only `30.84 crore, 
which constituted only 0.73 per cent of the total expenditure incurred under the Scheme.  
(Para 2.6) 
The Ministry did not play an active role in the identification of projects and relied on the 
State Governments for identification of projects and preparation  of D etailed Project 
Reports. However, many project  proposals were submitted by the State Governments  
without any proper identification criteria or prioritisation. Instances were noticed where the 
projects did not meet the criteria of a tourist circuit. 
(Paras 2.7 and 2.8) 
A large number of sites and components had been chosen for the implementation of the 
Scheme. There were 910 sites and 6,898 components in 243 districts under 76 projects 
sanctioned under the Scheme, despite dropping of a large number of components. As a 
result, the Ministry/State Governments could not pay adequate attention to all the sites, 
resulting in delay in obtaining timely clearances and award of works, lack of adequate 
monitoring, site inspection and change/dropping of components etc. 
(Para 2.9) 
 
 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
ix 
 
The Scheme guidelines envisaged convergence with other schemes of Central 
Government/Ministries and State/UT Governments. The Ministry, however, did not 
formulate guidelines for convergence of projects with other schemes. In the selected 14 
projects, Audit found that there was no convergence/synergy with other schemes. 
(Para 2.10) 
The Ministry did not develop a formal mechanism for evaluation and approval of projects. 
While 18 months to 36 months had been given to the State Governments/UTs to complete 
the projects, the Ministry itself kept the project proposals pending for up to six years in few 
cases without any action as it did not have a defined timeline  for approval or rejection of 
project proposals. 
(Para 2.11) 
In a ll the 14 selected projects, there were deficiencies in the Detailed Project Reports 
(DPRs), such as preparation of DPR without site survey, inclusion of sites without land and 
other clearances, tourist traffic survey, infrastructure gap analysis, detailed  estimates and 
bills of quantities, operation and maintenance plan etc. Thus, the Ministry did not ensure 
preparation of DPRs based on gap analysis in tourist amenities and fund requirements. This 
resulted in hindrances in smooth execution, delays and deviations, time overrun and 
dropping of components. 
(Para 2.12) 
With reference to the Audit findings on formulation of the Scheme, Audit recommends 
that: 
1. The Ministry may consider undertaking a review of its ongoing schemes to  ensure 
that there is no overlapping of activities/objectives proposed under various schemes 
and rationalise the schemes by suitably merging them to avoid overlapping of 
objectives. 
2. The Ministry may formulate long-term vision for development of tourism sector and 
ensure its inter-linkage with National Tourism Policy, Perspective Plans and other 
plans prepared for projects/destinations.  
3. The Ministry may ensure convergence of the Scheme with other schemes of the 
Government of India/State Governmen ts and may consider formulation of 
convergence guidelines incorporating components where funding is being provided 
by other Ministries/Departments. 
4. The Ministry may prescribe a timeline for taking prompt decision on the project 
proposals submitted by the S tates/UTs and may ensure that the deficiencies in the 
proposals are communicated to them within a stipulated time frame. 
  

Report No. 17 of 2023 
x 
 
Financial Management  
There were large variations between the Budget Estimates and Revised Estimates for the 
Scheme, which was indicative of inefficient budgeting and unrealistic estimation. The 
Ministry had reduced the Budget at Revised Estimates stage in five out of eight years during 
2014-15 to 2021-22. 
(Para 3.1) 
The Ministry dropped/merged components where the work had not been commenced or the 
clearances were pending . As a result, costs in many projects were revised , which led to 
excess amounts with the S tate Governments/Implementing agencies. The excess amount 
was required to be refunded by S tate Governments. However, the Ministry did not make 
concerted efforts for recovery of excess amount from the States. 
(Para 3.2) 
The Ministry did not issue instructions to the States for opening of separate bank accounts 
for more than five and half years since the launch of the Scheme. As a result, many State 
Governments did not open interest -bearing accounts, thus causing loss of interest to th e 
exchequer. Further, 10 out of the 13 selected States did not remit the interest of `50.06 
crore earned on the Scheme funds to the Ministry. Also, there was delay/non-submission 
of Utilisation Certificates by the State Governments in 47 out of total 76 projects. 
(Paras 3.3 and 3.4) 
In four out of 14 selected projects, the State Governments  incurred irregular expenditure 
against consultancy and contingency charges  such as for purchase of vehicles and other 
inadmissible expenditure. 
(Para 3.5.1) 
There was undue benefit to contractors amounting to `19.73 crore on account of irregular 
payment to contractors and grant of mobilisation advance. Further, the State Governments 
incurred wasteful/excess/unfruit ful/inadmissible expenditure of `51.56 crore from the 
Scheme funds. 
(Paras 3.6 and 3.7) 
With reference to Audit findings on Financial Management, Audit recommends that: 
5. The Ministry may prepare the b udget estimates for  seeking funds from the 
Parliament on a realistic basis after proper assessment of the requirement of funds. 
6. The Ministry may ensure timely submission of Utilisation Certificates  by the 
States/UTs in respect of funds released to them under the Scheme, and remittance 
of interest earned by them on the Scheme funds to the Ministry.  
7. The Ministry may take action to recover the excess expenditure incurred by the 
States/UTs without prior approval of the Ministry as well as the inadmissible 
expenditure incurred by them. 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
xi 
 
Implementation of the Scheme 
Out of 76 projects sanctioned by the M inistry, no project was completed within the 
stipulated time frame. In selected 14 projects, it was noticed that eight projects were 
completed with delays ranging from 22 months to 47 months and six projects were yet to 
be completed, despite considerable delay. 
(Para 4.1) 
The Ministry sanctioned projects and released funds to the concerned State  Governments 
based on an undertaking given by the m in the Detailed Project Reports  to provide 
encumbrance-free land. However, actual availability of land was not ensured before release 
of funds . As a result,  in 13 of the 14 selected projects, the Ministry had to drop 149 
components (15.07 per cent) after 35 months to 69 months from the date of sanction. 
(Para 4.2) 
There were delays ranging from 11 months to 58 months in the award of works by the State 
Governments in the  selected 14 projects. Further, there were irregularities  in award of 
works by the State Governments, such as award of work without relevant sanctions, award 
of work without tendering, or on nomination basis. Deviation/extra items and change in 
scope of work from the approved Detailed Project Report were found in six out of selected 
14 projects. 
(Paras 4.3, 4.4, 4.5 and 4.6) 
The Ministry did not take necessary steps to ensure that the State Governments carried out 
proper operation and maintenance of created assets in a sustainable manner.  Site inspection 
revealed that no arrangements for effective upkeep and maintenance of assets  were made. 
There were instances of created facilities not being put into operation, deterioration of 
infrastructure due to lack of proper maintenance and other irregularities. 
(Para 4.7) 
With reference to Audit findings on Implementation of Scheme, Audit recommends that: 
8. Instead of relying only on the undertaking given by the States regarding availability 
of encumbrance free  land and other clearances, the Ministry may devise an 
institutional mechanism in coordination with the States and the concerned 
Ministries so that necessary clearances can be obtained in a time bound manner  
prior to release of funds under future Schemes of the Ministry. 
9. The Ministry may strengthen the mechanism to address the issues such as deviation 
from and changes in the scope of work in order to ensure that proper justification is 
provided by the States/UTs for such deviations and the approval of the M inistry 
thereof is invariably obtained. 
10. The Ministry may take necessary steps to ensure that the State Governments carry 
out proper operation and maintenance of the assets created in a sustainable manner. 
The State Level Monitoring Committee may be asked t o regularly monitor the 
operation and maintenance by the State Governments. 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
xii 
 
Monitoring and Impact Assessment  
The Scheme g uidelines provided for overall monitoring through the National Steering 
Committee (headed by Minister, Tourism), Central Sanctioning and Monitoring Committee 
(headed by Secretary, Tourism)  and M ission Directorate (headed by Joint 
Secretary/Additional Director General, Tourism). However, only six meetings of the 
National Steering Committee were held since inception (January 2015) of the Scheme till 
March 2022  as against 29 meetings required to be held . Thus, the Ministry did not 
effectively utilise the apex forum of the National Steering Committee, as envisaged during 
the formulation of the Scheme, for its effective implementation and monitoring. As there 
were bottlenecks during the project implementation phase  due to non -receipt of timely 
clearances from various authorities , National Steering Committee could have played an 
important role in resolving these issues.  
(Para 5.1.1) 
There was a significant time gap between the meetings  of Central Sanctioning and 
Monitoring Committee and the Mission Directorate. No meeting of the Central Sanctioning 
and Monitoring Committee and the Mission Directorate was held after November 2018 and 
October 2019 respectively. Effective monitoring of the progress of the projects at a higher 
level got necessitated after 2018 -19 as all the projects were delayed. However, no n-
convening of meetings of the Centra l Sanctioning and Monitoring Committee  and the 
Mission Directorate  during this period made the monitoring ineffective at these levels . 
Further, the Zonal Officers (Joint Secretary level) appointed by the Ministry for monitoring 
did not play any role in monitoring of the projects. 
(Paras 5.1.2 and 5.1.3) 
The appointment and extensions of M/s Ernst & Young as the Programme Management 
Consultant (PMC) for the Scheme were irregular. The Ministry incurred an avoidable 
expenditure of `2.39 crore due to not following the process of open tendering for selection 
of PMC . More importantly, the PMC did not perform the duties defined in the 
guidelines/scope of the work i.e., preparation of Detailed Perspective Plan, DPRs, creation 
of shelf of projects, assistance in financial closure  of projects , assistance to M ission 
Directorate in capacity building and I nformation, Education and Communication  
initiatives. The Ministry had to incur additional expenditure for preparing DPRs through 
the State Governments as the PMC did not prepare the same. 
(Para 5.2) 
There was delay in the formation of the State Level Monitoring Committee s, and its 
meetings were also not being held by the States at regular intervals. This  impacted the 
timely completion of the projects, besides poor monitoring of projects at the State level. 
Thus, the mechanism of State Level Monitoring Committee did not fulfil its intended 
purpose. 
(Para 5.3) 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
xiii 
 
Conducting an annual survey to measure  the achievement of the objective of tourist 
satisfaction and the impact of the Scheme on the growth of local economy was a critical 
component of the Scheme. However, the Ministry did not conduct any  annual survey to 
measure the outcome indicators. Thus, the Ministry did not develop a mechanism for 
evaluating the impact of the Scheme. Similarly, generation of employment was one of the 
major focus areas . However, the Ministry did not develop any outcom e framework for 
measuring employment creation.  
(Paras 5.4 and 5.8) 
Capacity/skill development was one of the main focus areas of the Scheme. For this, up to  
10 per cent of funds were earmarked for Information, Education and Communication (IEC) 
components such as workshops, seminars, publications, stakeholder outreach, skill 
development, etc. However, the Ministry did not conduct any capacity development/IEC 
programme under the Scheme and incurred expenditure of only `10.70 lakh (0.02 per cent) 
on IEC out of `546 crore required to be incurred on IEC. 
(Para 5.5) 
There was no mechanism in the Ministry to ensure the correctness of project data submitted 
by the State Governments/Implementing Agencies . Audit noticed instances of 
incorrect/inflated Utilisation Certificates, wrong progress shown in the monthly progress 
reports and wrong depiction of facilities  created under the Scheme . Further, the Scheme 
dashboard did not have critical data related to employment generation, tourist traffic data, 
revenue generation, private investment etc., as envisaged in the Scheme. Thus, the objective 
of the Ministry to have an online presence of the Scheme could not be fully achieved. 
(Paras 5.6 and 5.7) 
The evaluation of the Scheme by the National Productivity Council was not comprehensive 
due to selection of a limited sample and a lack of baseline data. As a result, even after two 
evaluations by National Productivity Council, detailed impact assessment of the Scheme 
could not be conducted and the National Productivity Council did not evaluate tourist 
footfall, employment generation and income generation for the local population, which 
were the major focus areas of the Scheme. Thus, the Ministry did not exercise due diligence 
for evaluation/impact assessment of the Scheme. 
(Para 5.9) 
 
The Ministry did not act upon the recommendations of the Department -Related 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture made from time to 
time relating to the Scheme. Further, the Ministry agreed upon the recommendations of 
Expenditure Finance Committee on the Scheme  but did not comply with the same. As a 
result, the issues raised by the Committees persisted. 
(Para 5.10) 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
xiv 
 
The Ministry had launched the Scheme to develop theme -based tourist circuits on the 
principles of high tourist value, competitiveness and sustainability in an integrated manner 
to enrich the tourist experience and enhance employment opportunities with a vision 
statement, mission and objective. However, there was no clear roadmap or strategy for the 
achievement of these objectives . As a result, even after seven years of launch of the 
Scheme, these objectives were yet to be fully achieved. 
(Para 5.11) 
With reference to Audit findings on Monitoring and Impact Assessment , Audit 
recommends that: 
11. Mission Directorate (Programme Division) may convene the meetings of 
Monitoring Committees formed under the Scheme regularly, rather than on need 
basis, along with proper agenda, to ensure proper monitoring of implementation 
of the Scheme. 
12. The Ministry may ensure pro per performance of duties by the Programme 
Management Consultant as per the scope of work/work order and may link terms 
of payment based on fi xed milestones. Further, payment should be released  only 
after certification by the Consultancy Monitoring Committee. 
13. The Ministry may monitor formation of State Steering Committee s by the States 
by a prescribed date  under future Schemes . The Ministry may also nominate its 
representatives of suitable rank to attend these meetings and keep a watch on 
holding regular meetings of these Committees. 
14. The Ministry may take appropriate action to de sign capacity deve lopment 
programmes under the Scheme in consultation with concerned stakeholders. 
15. The Ministry may expedite the process of making online presence of the Scheme 
by developing a website for disseminating information about initiatives taken and 
facilities provided under the Scheme.  
16. The Ministry may formulate a mechanism to capture baseline d ata (employment 
generation, tourist footfall etc.) so as to measure impact of the Scheme/initiative s 
taken there against. 
 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
1 
 
Chapter-I 
Introduction 
 
1.1 Background  
India’s rich cultural, historical, religious and natural heritage provides a huge potential for 
development of tourism and job creation in the country.  Tourism sector holds strategic 
importance in the economy of a nation. It provides several socio-economic benefits such as 
employment, income and foreign exchange earnings and also plays a part in the 
development or expansion of other industries such as agriculture, construction, handicrafts 
etc. Tourism is a major source o f employment because of its labour -intensive nature and 
the significant multiplier effect on employment in related sectors.  
The erstwhile Planning Commission (superseded by NITI Aayog) had identified tourism 
as the second largest sector in the country in terms of providing employment opportunities 
for low-skilled and semi-skilled workers.  
1.2 Swadesh Darshan Scheme 
The Swadesh Darshan Scheme is a 100 per cent Central Sector flagship scheme of the 
Ministry of Tourism for the development of tourism infrastructure in the country. Pursuant 
to the Union Government budget announcements for the year 2014 -15, the Ministry 
launched this Scheme in January 2015 with an outlay of `500 crore after its approval by 
the Standing Finance Committee. As per the approved Scheme guidelines of January 2015, 
the Scheme was proposed to be implemented during the period 2012-17 and beyond. 
The Scheme was formulated for integrated development of theme -based tourist circuits. 
The Ministry identified 15 tourist circuits for development und er the Scheme, namely 
Himalayan circuit, North East circuit, Krishna circuit, Buddhist circuit, Coastal circuit, 
Desert circuit, Tribal circuit, Eco circuit, Wildlife circuit, Rural circuit, Spiritual circuit, 
Ramayana circuit, Heritage circuit, Tirthankar  circuit and Sufi circuit. The Ministry 
obtained the approval of the Cabinet  in February 2019 for continuation of the Scheme 
during 14 th Finance Commission period (2015 -20) and beyond.  The Scheme guidelines, 
originally issued in January 2015, were revised by the Ministry from time to time. 
A total of 76 projects comprising 910 sites and 6 ,898 components in 243 districts  were 
sanctioned by the Ministry of Tourism under the Scheme since its inception in the year 
2014-15 up to the year 2018-19. No new projects were sanctioned after the year 2018-19. 
1.3 Scheme objectives 
The Scheme objectives included, inter-alia, the following: 
(i) Positioning tourism as a major engine of economic growth and job creation. 
(ii) Developing circuits having tourist potential in a planned and prioritised manner. 
 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
2 
 
(iii) Promoting cultural and heritage value of the country to generate livelihood in the 
identified regions. 
(iv) Enhancing the tourist attr activeness in a sustainable manner by developing world 
class infrastructure in the circuits/destinations. 
(v) Creating employment through active involvement of local communities. 
(vi) Developing tourist facilitation services to enhance visitor experience/satisfaction. 
1.4 Institutional mechanism for project approval  
1.4.1 National Steering Committee 
The N ational Steering Committ ee was chaired by the Minister of Tourism and was 
entrusted with the following key responsibilities:  
• Enunciation of the vision and chalking out the road map for the Scheme and 
providing a platform for the exchange of ideas; 
• Overseeing all operations, stee ring, reviewing and monitoring the overall 
performance of the Scheme and providing guidance on specific issues relating to 
the Scheme; 
• Recommending mid-course corrections in the implementation tools; and 
• Carrying out periodical oversight and review of proposed/ongoing projects 
1.4.2 Central Sanctioning and Monitoring Committee 
The Ministry of Tourism  constituted a Central Sanctioning and Monitoring Committee  
under the chairmanship of the Secretary (Tourism), which was responsible for sanctioning 
the projects submitted by the Mission Directorate and regular monitoring of the progress 
of implementation. 
1.4.3 Mission Directorate 
The Ministry of Tourism constituted a Mission Directorate under the chairmanship of the 
Joint Secretary/Additional Director General (Tourism). Key responsibilities of the Mission 
Directorate included: 
• Identification of projects in consultation with the State/U nion Territory  
Governments and other stakeholders; 
• Appointment of the P rogramme Management Consultant  and identification of 
implementing agencies for the project; 
• Ensuring coordination with the State/U nion Territory  Governments and other 
stakeholders, Implementing Agencies, etc;  
• Seeking approvals for the identified projects from the Central Sanctioning and 
Monitoring Committee and reporting th e progress of implementation to the said 
Committee at regular intervals;  
• Sanction of projects and release of funds to the identified agencies; and  

Report No. 17 of 2023 
3 
 
• Capacity development of States/U nion Territories  and other implementing 
agencies. 
1.4.4 Programme Management Consultant 
The Programme Management Consultant (PMC) was a national level consultant appointed 
by the Mission Directorate  to provide technical support for the implementation of the 
Scheme. Key responsibilities of the PMC included: 
• Preparation of Detailed Perspective Plans for the identified circuits, identifying the 
gaps in infrastructural amenities and related skills. The PMC could suggest suitable 
agencies for addressing the skill gaps;  
• Identification of projects in the circuits on the basis of site visits and consultations 
with the respective S tate/Union Territory Governments , local bodies and other 
stakeholders; 
• Preparation of  comprehensive Detailed Project Reports (DPR) for each circuit 
after consultation with respective State/Union Territory Government, local bodies 
and other stakeholders;  
• Vetting of comprehensive DPRs prepared by the State/U nion Territory/Ministry 
of Tourism  for circuits proposed under the Scheme (as per revised guidelines 
2017);  
• Liaison with States/Union Territories/other stakeholders on a periodic basis; 
• Maintenance of both online and offline systems (M anagement Information 
System) for the Scheme; and 
• Submission of periodical progress report to the Mission Directorate for monitoring 
of the projects. 
1.5 Process of approval of projects 
The proposal for approval of a project involved the following steps: 
(i) Concept presentation by the agency proposing the project to the Ministry of Tourism 
highlighting the potential, need and impact of the project; 
(ii) After in-principle approval by the Ministry, site evaluation to be done and conceptual 
DPR to be prepared by the State Government; 
(iii) Submission of DPR to the Ministry by the State Government; 
(iv) Review and recommendation of DPR by the Mission Directorate; 
(v) Approval of project by the Central Sanctioning and Monitoring Committee; and 
(vi) Release of the first instalment of project cost with approval letter of the Ministry.  
The implementing/executing agency (generally the Touris m Department of the State 
Government) was responsible for timely implementation of the project/work. 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
4 
 
1.6 Financial outlay 
The Ministry of Tourism sanctioned a total of 76 projects (15 circuits) during the period 
from 2014-15 to 2018-19 at a sanctioned cost of `5,455.69 crore. The year-wise Budget 
Estimates, Revised Estimates and Actual Expenditure incurred by the Ministry for the years 
2014-15 to 2021-22 were as under:  
 
Table 1.1: Budget Estimates and Actual Expenditure 
(` in crore) 
Year Budget Estimates Revised Estimates Actual Expenditure1 
2014-15 500 20 20 
2015-16 600 310 310 
2016-17 706 972 971 
2017-18 960 950 944 
2018-19 1,100 1,100 1,101 
2019-20 1,106 566 566 
2020-21 1,200 600 561 
2021-22 630 262 261 
Total 6,802 4,780 4,734 
(Source: Ministry of Tourism) 
1.7 Audit objectives  
The Performance Audit was conducted with a view to ascertain whether: 
(i) The tourist circuits were identified, prioriti sed and planned as per the Scheme 
design and objectives, to increase tourist potential at the sites; 
(ii) The identified projects in the tourist circuits were executed in an efficient, 
effective and coordinated manner, to achieve integrated development of quality 
(world-class) infrastructure, and 
(iii) There was proper monitoring and whether mechanisms were established towards 
impact assessment of the Scheme, in terms  of achievement of its objectives v iz., 
sustainable tourism, enhancement of tourist potential, employment generation, 
generating livelihoods, community-based development etc. 
1.8 Audit scope and sampling 
Performance Audit covered planning, implementation and monitoring by the Ministry of 
Tourism and respective State Governments from the period of the Scheme's inception to 
March 2022. The relevant records were examined in the Ministry of Tourism, New Delhi 
and offices of the selected States as well as the implementing agencies.  
                                                           
1  The total expenditure of `4,734 crore incurred by the Ministry up  to 31 March 2022 included 
expenditure on projects sanctioned under the Scheme, expenditure on professional services (such as 
fee for project man agement consultancy  and third party evaluation of the Scheme),  administrative 
expenditure on conduct of meetings related to the Scheme, etc . 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
5 
 
A total of 76 projects were sanctioned under the Scheme and details such as sanctioned 
project cost, amount released, physical progress etc., of these 76 projects are given in 
Annexure-I. 
The sampling technique adopted for the selection of projects for detailed audit was based 
on the broad criteria of sanctioned cost, amount released and physical progress of the 
projects. Accordingly, 14 projects (related to 10 tourist circuits) from 13 States out of 76 
projects (15 circuits) were selected, as depicted in the table below: 
Table 1.2: Details of the sample selected for Audit out of 76 projects  
(` in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
State/UT 
(Circuit) 
Project Implementing 
Agency 
Sanctioned 
cost  
Amount 
released 
1 Bihar 
(Spiritual) 
Integrated Development of 
Kanwaria route: Sultanganj-
Deoghar  
Bihar State 
Tourism 
Development 
Corporation 
44.76 42.52 
2     Chhattisgarh 
(Tribal) 
 
 
Development of Jashpur- 
Kunkuri- Mainpat- 
Ambikapur- Maheshpur -
Ratanpur- Kurdar- 
Sarodadadar Gangrel- 
Kondagaon – 
Nathyanawagaon- 
Jagdalpur Chitrakoot - 
Tirthgarh in Chhattisgarh. 
Chhattisgarh 
Tourism Board 
96.10 84.81 
3 Goa 
(Coastal) 
Development of Sinquerim-
Baga, Anjuna-Vagator, 
Morjim-Khund, Aguada 
Fort and Aguada Jail 
Goa Tourism 
Development 
Corporation 
97.65 92.76 
4 Gujarat 
(Heritage) 
Development of 
Ahmedabad-Rajkot-
Porbandar-Bardoli-Dandi 
Tourism 
Corporation of 
Gujarat Ltd 
58.42 56.21 
5 Himachal 
Pradesh 
(Himalayan) 
Integrated Development of 
Kiarighat-Shimla-Hatkoti-
Manali-Kangra-
Dharamshala-Bir-
Palampur-Chamba 
Himachal 
Pradesh 
Tourism 
Development 
Board 
80.63 64.55 
6 Jammu & 
Kashmir 
(Himalayan) 
Integrated Development of 
Jammu-Srinagar-Pahalgam-
Bhagwati Nagar-Anantnag-
Salamabad Uri-Kargil-Leh 
Jammu & 
Kashmir 
Tourism 
Development 
Corporation 
77.33 60.47 
7 Madhya 
Pradesh 
(Buddhist) 
Development of Sanchi-
Satna-Rewa-Mandsaur-
Dhar 
Madhya 
Pradesh State 
Tourism 
74.02 69.08 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
6 
 
Sl. 
No. 
State/UT 
(Circuit) 
Project Implementing 
Agency 
Sanctioned 
cost  
Amount 
released 
Development 
Corporation 
8 Puducherry 
(Coastal) 
Development of 
Dubrayapet, Arikamedu, 
Manapet and Yanam 
Department of 
Tourism, 
Government of 
Puducherry 
58.44 61.82 
9 Rajasthan 
(Desert) 
Development of 
Shakambari Mata Temple-
Sambhar Salt Complex-
Devyani Kund- Sharmistha 
Sarover- Naliasar and other 
destinations 
Rajasthan 
Tourism 
Development 
Corporation 
50.01 51.17 
10 Sikkim 
(North-East)  
Development of circuit 
linking Rangpo (entry)-
Rorathang-Aritar-
Phadamchen- Nathang- 
Sherathan-Singtam (exit) 
 
Department of 
Tourism, 
Government of 
Sikkim 
98.05 92.77 
11 Telangana 
(Heritage) 
Development of Qutub 
Shahi Heritage Park-Paigah 
Tombs-Hayat Bakshi 
Mosque-Raymond’s Tomb 
Telangana 
State Tourism 
Development 
Corporation 
96.90 70.61 
12 Telangana 
(Tribal) 
Integrated development of 
Mulugu -Laknavaram- 
Medaram- Tadvai- 
Damaravai –Mallur – 
Bogatha Waterfalls as 
Tribal circuit in Telangana 
Telangana 
State Tourism 
Development 
Corporation 
79.87 75.88 
13 Uttar Pradesh  
(Ramayana) 
Development of Ayodhya Uttar Pradesh 
State Tourism 
Development 
Corporation 
127.21 115.46 
14 Uttarakhand 
(Eco-
Tourism) 
Development of circuit at 
Tehri–Chamba-Sirain 
around Tehri lake 
Uttarakhand 
Tourism 
Development 
Board 
69.17 65.71 
   Total 1,108.56 1,003.82 
(Source: Scheme Dashboard data of the Ministry as of March 2022) 
The comparative position of sanctioned project cost, amount released and physical progress 
of the projects in respect of the selected sample vis-a-vis the total population of 76 projects 
is given in Chart 1.1.  
 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
7 
 
Chart 1.1: Selected projects vis-a-vis all projects 
 
As may be seen from the chart above, the total sanctioned project cost of the selected 14 
projects was `1,109 crore, which constituted 20 per cent of the total sanctioned cost  
(`5,456 crore) of all the 76 projects. The amount released for the 14 selected projects was 
`1,004 crore, which constituted 22 per cent of the total amount released (`4,517 crore) for 
all the projects. Further, the physical progress of 30 out of the total 76 projects was 100 per 
cent, out of which the audit sample comprised nine such projects. 
1.9 Sources of Audit criteria 
The primary sources of Audit criteria for the Performance Audit were: 
• Cabinet Note/Minutes of meeting s of Standing Finance Committee /Minutes of 
meetings of Expenditure Finance Committee  
• Scheme guidelines/instructions/circulars issued by the Ministry of Tourism and 
conditions of the sanctions accorded to the projects 
• Instructions/circulars issued by the concerned State/implementing agency 
• Minutes of the meetings of National Steering Committee, Central Sanctioning and 
Monitoring Committee and Mission Directorate  
• General Financial Rules 
• Office Memoranda/Circulars issued by the Ministry of Finance 
• Third-party Impact Assessment Report by the National Productivity Council 
• CPWD/PWD Works Manual. 
15
76
54.56
45.17
30
10
14 11.09 10.04 9
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Themes
(Circuits)
No. of projects Sanctioned Project 
Cost (₹ in 100 cr)
Amount released (₹ 
in 100 cr)
Physical progress
100%
Total Sample Selection
Sanctioned Project 
Cost  (` in 100 Cr)
Amount Released 
in (` 100 Cr)

Report No. 17 of 2023 
8 
 
1.10 Audit methodology  
The Performance Audit commenced with an Entry Conference with the Ministry of 
Tourism on 13 October 2021. Similarly, Entry conferences were also held with  the 
concerned State Governments and implementing agencies. Thereafter, examination of 
records of the Ministry , State Governments and implementing agencies was taken up. 
Besides, joint physical inspections of the site s selected from sampled cases w ere also 
carried out in coordination with the audited entities.  
The draft Performance Audit Report containing audit findings was issued to the  Ministry 
on 2 August 2022 seeking response of the Ministry. The response of the Ministry was 
received on 9 September 2022. Audit findings were also discussed with the Ministry in an 
Exit Conference held on 12 September 2022. Responses of the Ministry on the draft Audit 
Report have been considered and suitably incorporated while finalising the Audit Report.  
The detailed audit findings based on the examination of records have been brought out in 
Chapter II to Chapter V of th is Audit Report. Additional details on audit findings of 
individual selected projects (State/circuit-wise) are given in Annexure-II. 
1.11 Acknowledgement  
Audit acknowledges the cooperation extended by the Ministry of Tourism and concerned 
State Governments and implementing agencies during the audit. 
  

Report No. 17 of 2023 
9 
 
Chapter-II 
Formulation of the Scheme 
 
2.1 Launching of new Central Sector Schem e despite objection from Planning 
Commission/Ministry of Finance  
The Ministry of Tourism was implementing the Product/Infrastructure Development for 
Destination and Circuits (PIDDC) Scheme from 10th Five-Year Plan (2002-07) which was 
a centrally sponsored scheme for the development of tourist circuits and destinations. The 
Planning Commission in mid-term evaluation of PIDDC had recommended (July 2013) to 
continue it in the 12th Five-Year Plan. 
As per the Budget speech (10 July 2014) of the then Finance Minister, an amount of `500 
crore was earmarked for the creation of five tourist circuits around specified themes for the 
year 2014-15. The outlay of the Scheme being `500 crore, it required appraisal by  the 
Standing Finance Committee 2 chaired by the Secretar y of Administrative Ministry/ 
Department and approval of the Minister of Administrative Ministry/Department. The 
Ministry of Tourism prepared (December 2014) the Note for Standing Finance Committee 
and submitted it to the Ministry of Finance  and Planning C ommission for comments/in -
principle approval. In view of the Government’s decision to contain the proliferation of a 
number of central sector schemes , Planning Commission objected to the proposal for 
formulation of a new Central Plan Scheme a nd requested the Ministry to consider the 
proposal of Finance Minister’s speech (2014-15) in any of 13 ongoing central sector 
schemes of the Ministry  and suitably modify the Scheme guidelines. Similarly, the 
Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance also objected to the proposal stressing that 
there was already an existing/continuing scheme viz., PIDDC with similar objectives and 
requested the Ministry to ensure that there was no overlapping of activities/objectives 
proposed under various schemes to av oid duplicatio n in costs. The Integrated Finance 
Division of the Ministry also raised the same issue at the time of initiation of the Standing 
Finance Committee proposal.    
The Standing Finance Committee chaired by the Secretary (Tourism) , in its meeting held 
on 18 Dec ember 2014 while recommending the Swadesh Darshan Scheme proposal, 
discussed the above matter and recommended to merge the Swadesh Darshan Scheme with 
the existing PIDDC Scheme. It recommended to form a new umbrella sector scheme, along 
other schemes of the Ministry such as Pilgrimage Rejuvenation and Spiritual Augmentation 
Drive (PRASAD), National Rural Tourism Mission and PIDDC and complete the exercise 
within the next financial year i.e. 2015-16.  
Audit, however, noticed that the Ministry did not initiat e or formulate such an umbrella 
scheme as recommended by the Standing Finance Committee and all these schemes were 
continued to run separately. As a result, the Ministry was implementing various schemes 
                                                           
2  In terms of the instructions of Ministry of Finance, the Standing Finance Committee is chaired by the 
Secretary of the Administrative Ministry/Department with Joint Secretary and Financial Advisor from 
the concerned Ministry and representatives of NITI Aayog and Ministry of Finance as members. 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
10 
 
related to the Tourism sector, which had overlapping objectives with Swadesh Darshan 
Scheme. Most of these schemes were still ongoing in 2021 -22 (details are given in 
Annexure-III). Thus, the objective of the Government to contain the proliferation of 
Schemes and to rationalise the Schemes was not achieved. 
The Ministry, while noting the observation of Audit, stated (September 2022) that the 
Scheme was announced as a Central Sector Scheme after approval of the Standing Finance 
Committee.   
The reply of the Ministry was silent on non-formulation of the umbrella scheme merging 
all schemes with similar objectives as envisaged by the S tanding Finance Committee to 
avoid overlapping of schemes. 
Recommendation No. 1 
The Ministry may consider undert aking a review of its ongoing schemes to ensure that 
there is no overlapping of activities/objectives proposed under various schemes and 
rationalise the schemes by suitably merging them to avoid overlapping of objectives. 
2.2 Non-conduct of feasibility study prior to formulation of the Scheme 
For the formulation of Central Plan Schemes, the Ministry of Finance  had laid down a 
procedure3, which required preparation of a project feasibility report by the Administrative 
Ministry. The feasibility report should focus on an analysis of the existing situation, nature 
and magnitude of the problems to be addressed, need and justification for the project in the 
context of national priorities, alternative strategies, initial environmental and social impact 
analysis, preliminary site investigations, stakeholders ’ commitment and risk factors. The 
Administrative Ministry was to send the feasibility report to the Planning Commission for 
‘in-principle’ approval, to enable the project to be included in the Plan of the Ministry. 
Audit observed that the Ministry of Tourism did not prepare any feasibility report before 
formulating the Swadesh Darshan Scheme. The same was also confirmed (December 2021) 
by the Ministry. Thus, the Ministry did not identify the gaps and address challenges for 
promoting tourism in a structured manner.  
Non-preparation of the feasibility report resulted in poor identification of sites and 
deficiencies in execution of projects such as delay in completion of the projects  and non-
utilisation of funds, as discussed in succeeding paragraphs of the Report  (para 2.8 and 
paras 4.1 to 4.8). 
The Ministry stated (September 2022) that the Scheme was announced as a Central Sector 
Scheme in January 2015 after approval of the Standing Finance Committee.   
The reply of the Ministry did not address the issue of non-preparation of feasibility report, 
which was a pre -requisite before launching of schemes and submission of proposals for 
approval.  
 
                                                           
3  vide Department of Expenditure, O.M. No.1(2)-PF-II/03 dated 7 May 2003 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
11 
 
2.3 Sanction of project funds without the approval of the Cabinet  
As per Office Memorandum dated 29 August 2014 issued by the Ministry of Finance, any 
scheme/project with a cost of `100 crore to `500 crore was to be appraised by the Standing 
Finance Committee chaired by the Secretary of the Administrative Department and 
approved by the Minister -in-Charge of the Administrative Ministry/Department. Further , 
project/scheme costing above `500 crore was to be appraised by E xpenditure Finance 
Committee chaired by the Secretary (Expenditure) and approved by the Minister-in-Charge 
of the Administrative Ministry/Department and the Finance Minister (in case of 
project/scheme costing above `500 crore and up to `1,000 crore), and by the 
Cabinet/Cabinet Committee (in case of project/scheme costing above `1,000 crore). 
In pursuance of the Union Government budget announcements for the year 2014 -15, the 
Ministry of Tourism launched the Swadesh Darshan Scheme in January 2015 with a scheme 
outlay of `500 crore after its appraisal ( December 2014) by the Standing Finance 
Committee and approval (December 2014) by the Minister (Tourism).  
During 2014-15, the Ministry sanctioned two projects costing `117.61 crore. However, in 
2015-16, the Ministry sanctioned 17 projects costing `1,304.74 crore under the Scheme, 
thus exceeding the approval limit  of the Minister (Tourism) . The year -wise details of 
projects sanctioned by the Ministry along with project costs are given below: 
Table 2.1: Cost of Projects sanctioned under Swadesh Darshan Scheme 
Financial year Number of projects 
sanctioned during the 
year 
Cost of projects 
sanctioned during the 
year 
 (` in crore) 
Cumulative cost of 
total projects 
sanctioned  
(` in crore) 
2014-15 2 117.61 117.61 
2015-16 17 1,304.74 1,422.35 
2016-17 36 2,779.84 4,202.19 
2017-18 11 719.03 4,921.22 
2018-19 10 534.47 5,455.69 
2019-20 Nil Nil 5,455.69 
2020-21 Nil Nil 5,455.69 
2021-22 Nil Nil 5,455.69 
Total 76 5,455.69  
It may be seen from the above table that the total sanctioned amount for the financial years 
2014-15 and 2015-16 was `1,422.35 crore, which was above `1,000 crore and therefore, 
required appraisal by  the Expenditure Finance Committee and approval by the 
Cabinet/Cabinet Committee. 
Audit, however, observed that the Ministry neither got appraisal of the Expenditure Finance 
Committee nor approval of the Cabinet before sanctioning the projects beyond `1,000 
crore. Rather, it continued to sanction projects and the total amount exceeded `4,000 crores 
up to the year 2016-17. The Ministry later got the Scheme appraised from the Expenditure 
Finance Committee in October 2017 and obtained the approval of the Cabinet (February 
2019) for continuation of the Scheme during the 14 th Finance Commission period (2015 -

Report No. 17 of 2023 
12 
 
20) and for the committed liability in respect of projects already sanctioned . However, it 
did not seek approval for the expenditure of `4,065.28 crore already incurred by that time. 
Thus, the Ministry in excess of its  mandate, sanctioned projects and incurred expenditure 
above `1,000 crore without the approval of the Cabinet. 
The Ministry , while noting the audit observation, stated (September 2022) that while 
sending Notes for the Cabinet/Expenditure Finance Committee, it always informed about 
the total outlay of the sanctioned projects including the expenditure already made. As 
Expenditure Finance Committee/Cabinet approved the committed liabilities, it was evident 
that the expenditure made under the Scheme was taken into cognisance by them.  
It is clear from the above response that the Ministry did not seek approval of the Cabinet 
explicitly before sanctioning of funds beyond `1,000 crore. Further, the Ministry sought 
approval of committed liabilities only and not the expenditure already incurred.  
2.4 Implementation of Scheme without any effective roadmap or long-term vision  
The erstwhile Planning commission (now NITI Aayog) had formed a working group under 
the chairmanship of the Secretary (Tourism) in 2 011 to review and recommend an outlay 
for the 12th Plan Period (2012-17) for the tourism sector. The group emphasised that earlier 
the focus on tourist destinations and circuits achieved only limited success and 
recommended for identification of tourist c ircuits/destinations through professional 
agencies to  identify gaps in infrastructure/amenities, assess investment r equirement 
including sources of funds , to evolve business models for investment and operations and 
capacity augmentation of States through se tting up of Project Monitoring Units for 
undertaking various activities. The Ministry of Tourism was to bear the cost of preparation 
of Detailed Project Reports by the States/UTs and the setting up of Project Monitoring Unit 
for States/UTs.  As per recommen dations, the tourist destinations/circuits were to be 
selected based on their tourism potential and significance at tached to the sites.  The 
perspective plans, vision plans and the tourism policy of the States were to form the basis 
for prioritising the tourist circuits.  
It was observed that the Ministry of Tourism had last prepared the ‘National Level Tourism 
Policy’ for tourism sector nearly two decades ago in 2002, which emphasised on the need 
for creating world class tourism infrastructure by identifying integrated travel circuits and 
developing them as international standard destinations. Later, in 2015-16, recognising that 
the potential of the existing policy of 2002 was not fully used and to meet the dynamic 
challenges including technological and glob al competitiveness, the Ministry prepared the 
draft National Tourism Policy , 2015. However, the same could n ot be notified. The 
Ministry, yet again released a draft National Tourism Policy in November 2021, which was 
yet to be approved (June 2022). Absence of a comprehensive Tourism Policy indicates lack 
of vision and road map for developing India’s tourism potential.  
Audit further observed that the Ministry had got prepared draft State Perspective Plans in 
the year 2003 by engaging consultants . However, a pproval of the same by the State 
Governments or the Ministry was not available in records. 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
13 
 
Further, for the development of theme -based tourist circuits, the Ministry identified the 
need for preparation of Detailed Perspective Plan in the Scheme Guidelines for identified 
themes by engaging consultant. However, the Ministry did not ensure preparation of such 
Plans for any of the tourist circuits (discussed in para 2.4.1). 
Thus, the Ministry did not prepare any vision plan  and State Perspective Plans before 
implementation of Scheme and selection of projects  which shows that the scheme lacked 
an effective long-term vision/policy.    
The Ministry stated (September 2022) that the Scheme has now been revamped as Swadesh 
Darshan Scheme 2.0 and a format has been circulated (April 2022) to the State 
Governments for preparation of their State Perspective Plans. The Ministry has also made 
an online arrangement for the States for facilitating this submission.   
The Ministry did not respond on the status of approval of National Tourism Policy and its 
inter-linkage with State Perspective Plans and D etailed Perspective Plans . Further, in 
Swadesh Darshan Scheme 2.0, no timeframe has been prescribed by the Ministry  for 
preparation of above plans so that these  plans can be fruit fully utilised while identifying 
and prioritising the projects.   
2.4.1 Non-preparation of Detailed Perspective Plans 
As per the Scheme Guidelines of 2015 and 2017, Detailed Perspective Plans were to be 
prepared for the tourist circuits. The Detailed Perspective Plans were to cover identification 
of gaps in infrastructure , amenities and related skills, assessment of the funds required, 
including sources of funds and evolving of business models for investment and operations 
and convergence between the differ ent schemes of the Central Ministries, the State/UT 
Governments and other agencies.  
The Perspective Plans, Vision Plans and the Tourism Policy of the States were to form the 
base for prioritising the tourist circuits. Thus, the Detailed Perspective Plans were to play 
a very important role in the selection of projects and successful implementation of the 
Scheme. For the preparation of Detailed Perspective Plan s, M/s Ernst & Young was 
appointed as Programme Management Consultant ( PMC) by the Ministry of Tour ism in 
June 2015. 
It was noticed that the Ministry identified 15 theme -based tourist circuits under the 
Swadesh Darshan Scheme. Thus, Detailed Perspective Plan for each tourist circuit was to 
be prepared by the PMC and the same was also included in the sco pe of work of PMC by 
the Ministry. However, the Ministry did not ensure preparation of Detailed Perspective 
Plans for these tourist circuits/themes before launching of the Scheme. 
It was noticed that later PMC prepared the Detailed Perspective Plan only for the Buddhist 
circuit. However, date of submission of the said Plan to the Ministry and date of its approval 
by the Ministry were not available in records. During scrutiny of the Detailed Perspective 
Plan of the Buddhist circuit, it was noticed that the Plan had included sites of Buddhist 
heritage in India and the categorisation of sites based on importance and also included 
situational analysis, footfall projection, shelf of projects, SWOT analysis, gap analysis, etc., 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
14 
 
which could have been useful if such Plans had been prepared before selection of projects 
and preparation of Detailed Project Reports. 
Detailed Perspective Plans for the remaining 14 tourist circuits were not prepared by the 
PMC and projects were sanctioned without having such Plans. 
The Nat ional Productivity Council (NPC) , in its mid-term evaluation of the Scheme , 
observed (June 2017) non-availability of Detailed Perspective Plans and recommended that 
the Mission Directorate/PMC should provide the Detailed Perspective Plan while sending 
the communication letter to State for preparing the concept plan. 
During the Exit Conference, the Ministry stated (September 2022) that it was not feasible 
for the PMC to prepare the Detailed Perspective Plans and Detailed Project Reports and to 
perform all duties, and that the Ministry had now decided to engage professional consultant 
for preparation of Detailed Perspective Plans. 
Thus, it is evident that the projects were identified and sanctioned without D etailed 
Perspective Plans which were essential for identification of infrastructural gap, skill gap, 
convergence and funding mechanism. 
 
Recommendation No. 2 
The Ministry may formulate long -term vision for development of tourism sector and 
ensure its inter-linkage with National Tourism Policy, Perspective Plans and other plans 
prepared for projects/destinations. 
2.5 Frequent changes in Scheme guidelines/modalities of projects  
The Ministry of Tourism launched Swadesh Darshan Scheme as new Central Sector 
Scheme in January 2015. While proposing this Scheme in addition to the already ongoing 
Product/Infrastructure Development for Destination and Circuits  (PIDDC) Scheme , the 
Ministry had proposed that: 
(i) The new Scheme would be implemented in Mission mode unlike PIDDC Scheme.  
(ii) A Mission Directorate headed by Joint Secre tary/Additional Director General 
would be set-up which would be responsible for overall implementation of project 
and reporting progress to the Central Sanctioning and Monitoring Committee at 
regular intervals.  
(iii) Projects identified under the Scheme would b e implemented only through 
Government agencies identified by the National Steering Committee, in 
consultation with the State Government/UT. 
(iv) There would be a Programme Management Consultant (PMC) who would be 
appointed by the Ministry for purpose of identif ication, preparation of the 
Perspective Plans , D etailed Project Report s (DPRs), liaison with States and 
monitoring of projects, which was a special feature of the Scheme. 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
15 
 
(v) State Gov ernments would execute Memorandum of Understanding with the 
Government of In dia indicating their commitment to the S cheme by ensuring 
operation and maintenance of identified and developed projects as well as providing 
of required land for execution of the project. 
However, Audit observed that after launching of the Scheme (January 2015), the Ministry 
made frequent changes in modalities of the Scheme and a total of 15 revisions were made 
till August 2020. Out of these, nine changes had been made by the Ministry before the 
Scheme was got appraised by the Expenditure Finance Committee (October 2017).  
Some of the major revisions were as under: 
(i) The role of the Ministry in identification of projects was relaxed and the State 
Governments were asked to submit projects to the Ministry for consideration  
(December 2015); 
(ii) For implementation of projects on Mission mode, PMC appointed by the Ministry 
was to prepare Detailed Perspective Plan for each tourist circuit and DPRs for each 
project. However, the Ministry prepared a DPR toolkit and asked the States to send 
proposals as per the toolkit (February 2016); 
(iii) The Ministry removed Golf Course and Convention Centres from the list of 
admissible components for funding under the Scheme (October 2017); 
(iv) The Ministry  issued instructions for maintenance of separate in terest-bearing 
accounts for the Scheme funds only in August 2020. 
The Ministry initially allowed (January 2015) construction of golf courses and convention 
centres ( in the projects of Mizoram, Bihar, H imachal Pradesh) under admissible 
components from the Scheme funds. Audit observed that these were mainly for high -end 
tourists and were not useful for common tourists. Later, in 2017, these were made 
inadmissible components. 
Thus, the Ministry did not deliberate or have clarity on the implementation mechanism of 
the Scheme before its launch. As a result, it kept modifying guidelines from time to time, 
thus impacting effective implementation by the State Government/Implementing Agencies.  
The Ministry, while noting the au dit observation , stated (September 2022) that said 
modifications were operation al guidelines, which were changed considering 
experiences/learnings made from time to time. Modification in the guidelines/processes 
were done with the approval of competent authority with no specific change in the spirit of 
the Scheme. 
The response of the Ministry that no specific change in the spirit of the Scheme was made 
may be viewed in the light of the fact that the role of the Ministry/PMC in identification of 
circuits/projects and preparation of DPRs  was passed on to the State Governments . It 
negated the very purpose of launching the new Central Sector Scheme and its 
implementation in Mission Mode. 
 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
16 
 
2.6 Negligence of Rural Tourism under the Scheme 
One of the major features of the Scheme was development of theme-based tourist circuits, 
which were to be identified on the basis of pre-dominant tourist themes considering factors 
such as current tourist traffic, connectivity, potential and significance attached to the sites. 
Accordingly, the Ministry identified Rural Circuit as one of the 15 thematic circuits for 
developing tourism infrastructure in the rural areas with the objective to develop facilities 
and provide better experience to the tourists at t hese sites. It was expected that better 
infrastructure would result in increased tourist footfall, which in turn would create better 
employment opportunities for the local community. 
Audit noticed that the Ministry sanctioned 76 projects under 15 themes/circuits. However, 
the Ministry did not pay adequate attention for development of Rural Circuit. Out of total 
eight projects proposed by the State Governments under Rural Circuit, the Ministry 
returned six proposals and took up only two projects 4 with cost of `125.02 crore (i.e. 2.29 
per cent of total cost of projects sanctioned). As on 31 March 20 22, the total expenditure 
incurred under Rural Circuit was only `30.84 crore, which constituted 0.73 per cent of the 
total expenditure incurred (`4,239 crore) under the Scheme. The percentage of projects 
sanctioned under Rural Circuit against total projects under the Scheme is given below: 
Chart 2.1: Projects under Rural Circuit against total projects under the Scheme 
 
(Source: Scheme Dashboard data of the Ministry as on 31 March 2022) 
Audit further observed that one of the aforesaid two projects i.e., ‘Development of Malanad 
Malabar Cruise Tourism in Kerala’, which was sanctioned in September 2018, had been 
stuck due to pending Coastal Regulation Zone (CRZ) clearance at multiple destinations and 
stay order issued for few components sanctioned at Thayyam, Kerala. On the request of the 
State Government, the Ministry of Tourism had requested (August 2021) the Ministry of 
Environment, Forest and Climate Change for expediting CRZ clearance. However, no 
                                                           
4  Development of Gandhi circuit , Bihar  (June 2017) and Development of Malanad Malabar Cruise 
Tourism, Kerala (September 2018) 
2.29%
1.32%
0.62%
0.73%
0.00%
0.50%
1.00%
1.50%
2.00%
2.50%
Sanctioned Amount Released Amount UC Amount Expenditure Incurred

Report No. 17 of 2023 
17 
 
progress in this regard was found in the records and the entire amount released (i.e., `4.83 
crore) remained unutilised (March 2022).  
It may be noted that the Department -Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Transport, Tourism and Culture in its Report No. 275 (presented in Parliament in March 
2020) recommended that for better promotion of rural tourism, more rural circuit proj ects 
may be sanctioned and implemented for promotion of niche tourism and more funds may 
be earmarked for rural circuits under the Scheme. However, the Ministry neither sanctioned 
more projects nor ear marked more funds under rural circuit. Thus, the Ministry accorded 
low priority to rural tourism in the Scheme. 
The Ministry stated (September 2022) that the themes under which a particular project is 
sanctioned are not very independent in nature and interdependency is often observed. The 
Ministry has sanctioned various projects under different other thematic nomenclatures such 
as Himalayan, North-East, Coastal, Tribal, Wildlife, Eco etc., which are closely linked to 
rural destinations, lifestyle and experiences. Therefore, it may not be appropriate to say that 
the Ministry did not focus on rural aspects of the country in order to promote tourism in 
such areas while sanctioning the projects.    
The reply needs to be viewed in light of the fact that the audit  observation highlight s 
sanction of only two projects (out of 76 projects) under the Rural circuit which had been 
identified as a distinct thematic circuit under th e Swadesh Darshan Scheme . The fact 
remains that only 2.29 per cent of the total cost of projects was sanctioned in respect of the 
projects under Rural circuit. 
2.7 Deviation from definition of tourist circuit  
As per Scheme guidelines, a tourist circuit was a route on which at least three major tourist 
destinations were located such that none of those were in the same town, village, or city. 
At the same time, it was to be ensured that they were not separated by a long distance. It 
should have well defined entry and exit points. A tourist, who entered the circuit should be 
motivated to visit all the places identified on the circuit. 
It was seen that the Ministry of Tourism returned one proposal received from Bihar, namely 
Development of Valmiki Tiger Reserve under Eco circuit on the ground that the Scheme 
was for development of thematic tourist circuits and standalone destinations were not 
covered under the Scheme. Audit, however, observed that the Ministry did not follow the 
above criteria of development of tourist circuits uniformly. The Ministry sanctioned eight 
such projects which did not meet the criteria as discussed below:  
a) The Ministry approved the following five projects covering less than three major 
destinations:  
 
 
 
 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
18 
 
Table 2.2: Projects with less than three major destinations 
S. No. Name of the Project Circuit State Number of 
major 
destinations 
covered 
1. Development of Circuit at 
Imphal-Khongjom 
North-East Manipur 2 
2. Integrated Development of 
Tourist facilities at Mantalai & 
Sudhmahadev 
Himalayan Jammu & 
Kashmir 
2 
3. Construction of Convention 
Centre at Bodhgaya 
Buddhist Bihar 1 
4. Development of Ayodhya Ramayana Uttar Pradesh 1 
5. Development of Chitrakoot 
and Shringverpur 
Ramayana Uttar Pradesh 2 
As a result, the objective of the Scheme to develop tourist circuits for motivating tourists 
to visit at least three tourist destinations was not achieved. 
(b) In three projects, there were no well-defined entry and exit points and the destination 
sites were scattered:  
• In case of Integrated Development of Himalayan circuit, Himachal Pradesh, the 
destination sites were scattered and spread across 781 kms (i.e. separated by long 
distance), with no clear entry and exit points. 
 
Map 2.1: Himalayan circuit map, Himachal Pradesh 


Report No. 17 of 2023 
19 
 
• Buddhist circuit Sanchi-Dhar, Madhya Pradesh was selected without defined entry 
and exit points. All major tourist destinations of Buddhist circuit were located in 
different parts of the State and were separated by long distance (approximately 1,200 
kms; Rewa-Dhar) 
 
Map 2.2: Buddhist Circuit map, Madhya Pradesh 
• In case of Development around Tehri Lake (Eco circuit, Uttarakhand), most of the 
components were found to be scattered at different places like New Tehri, Chamba, and 
around Tehri Lake which cannot be considered as one tourist circuit. 
Selection of projects separated by long distances without well-defined entry and exit points 
was in deviation with Scheme objectives. Further, tourists would not be motivated to travel 
such long distances. 
The Ministry, while agreeing to audit observation of selection of less than three 
destinations, stated (September 2022) that the destinations selected for development were 
part of travel circuits. For instance, Bodhgaya, Sanchi, etc., were part of Buddhist circuit; 
Chitrakoot, Shringverpur & Ayodhya were part of Ramayana circuit; etc. Similarly, Tehri 
was located in Himalayan ecological region and was a major attraction for the tourists and 
was also connected with the other eco-tourism destinations in the vicinity.  
However, the fact remains that the Ministry did not follow the criteria of development of 
tourist circuits uniformly, as it returned one project of Eco-circuit in Bihar, which could 
have been linked with other circuits. Further, projects/circuits separated by very long 
distance without well-defined entry and exit points would not motivate tourists to travel 
such long distances. 
2.8 Methodology for identification and selection of tourist circuits/destinations 
As per the Scheme guidelines (January 2015), the tourist circuits/destinations were to be 
identified by the Ministry of Tourism  in consultation with the stakeholders and the States 
based on a pre-dominant tourism theme, considering factors such as current tourist traffic, 
connectivity potential and significance attached to the sites, holistic tourist experience, etc. 
The theme was to include religion, culture, heritage, nature, leisure or any other theme. 


Report No. 17 of 2023 
20 
 
The Central Sanctioning and Monitoring Committee/Mission Directorate constituted under 
the Scheme was to recommend the list of thematic Tourist circuits/destinations to be taken 
up for integrated infrastructure development for approval of the National Steering 
Committee. A she lf of projec ts was to be prepar ed by the Programme Management 
Consultant appointed by the Ministry.  
Further, as per revised guidelines (October 2017), it was decided that the projects and 
proposals could flow from three levels i.e., Ministry, Central Agencies and State 
Governments/UTs. A concept presentation was to be made to the Ministry by the Agency 
proposing the project, highlighting the potential, need and impact of the project and its 
alignment to Detailed Perspective Plan prepared by the Ministry. After in-principle 
approval, site evaluation was to be carried out by the States and conceptual DPRs were to 
be prepared.  
However, Audit observed that all selected 14 projects were proposed by the State 
Governments, whereas the Ministry (or any other Central agency) did not play any role in 
the identification of circuit/destination. Audit reviewed the mechanism adopted by States 
in identification and selection of circuits/projects/sites/components and found that only in 
six projects5 out of selected 14 projects, the mechanism for identification of projects was 
followed while in the following eight  projects, there were no criteria for identification and 
selection by the States, as discussed below:  
• Integrated Development of Kanwaria Route (Spiritual circuit, Bihar): In the month 
of Shravan (Monsoon), countless devotees undertake a rigorous pilgrimage on feet from 
Sultanganj (Bihar) to offer holy water to the famous Baba Baidyanath Temple at 
Deoghar (Jharkhand). The distance from Sultanganj (Bihar) to Deoghar (Jharkhand) is 
105 kms (approximately).  
Audit noticed that the Bihar State Government planned the integrated development of 
Kanwaria route only upto Inarawaran, Banka (Bihar), which was also approved by the 
Ministry without any objection/comment. No facilities, such as rain shelters, sitting 
shelters, cafeteria, etc, were planned and developed in the remaining distance of 
approximately 27 kms (13 kms up to Bihar border and 14 kms of Jharkhand) from 
Inarawaran (Banka) to Deoghar. Hence, development of the Kanwaria route was not 
planned for a notable distance of 27 kms upto Deoghar, the main temple, thus defeating 
the purpose of this circuit.  
                                                           
5  (a) Development of Sinquerim-Baga, Anjuna-Vagator, Morjim-Khind, Aguada Fort and Aguada Jail 
(Goa), (b) Development of Ahmed abad-Rajkot-Porbandar-Bardoli-Dandi (Gujarat), (c) Integrated 
Development of Kiarighat -Shimla-Hatkoti-Manali-Kangra-Dharamshala-Bir-Palampur-Chamba 
(Himachal Pradesh), (d) Development of Sanchi-Satna-Rewa-Mandsaur-Dhar (Madhya Pradesh), (e)  
Development of  Dubrayapet, Arikamedu, Manapet and Yanam (Puducherry) and  (f) 
Development of Ayodhya (Uttar Pradesh) 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
21 
 
 
Map 2.3: Kanwaria route not planned for a distance of 27 kms (shown in red) 
• Tribal Tourist circuit (Chhattisgarh): Initially the project had 14 destinations, 
including Mehtapoint (Mainpat), Ambikapur and Ratanpur. These three destinations 
were important tribal tourist places having beautiful springs surrounded by mountains 
(Mehtapoint), hot water springs and sacred spots (Ambikapur) and Mahamaya and 
Kalbhairava temple (Ratanpur). However, due to non-availability of land, all 
components for the above three destinations were shifted to Kamleshwarpur (Mainpat) 
as 46 acres of land was available there. The revised cost of Kamleshwarpur was 
equivalent to the total cost of three destinations. This indicates that the major driving 
force for the revised selection of the projects/components was availability of land and 
the intent to avoid lapse of funds, rather than tourist traffic and development of tourism 
in the region. 
• Integrated Development of Jammu - Bhagwati Nagar - Kargil - Leh under 
Himalayan circuit in Jammu and Kashmir: No identification criteria were indicated 
in the DPR for the projects planned and executed. The project was taken up from 
existing developed tourist destinations and included the selection of sites not suitable 
for attracting tourism as stated below: 
o Suchetgarh was situated in a sensitive border location and despite knowing this 
fact, the site was included in the project and it was approved. As a result, after 
completion of the work, the site was occupied and used by the Border Security 
Force (BSF) for their operational purposes. 
o Salamabad-Uri is situated quite far away from major tourist destinations i.e., 
Srinagar, Gulmarg, etc. Further, this place is situated at a border location. The 
project was taken up without ensuring availability of land.  


Report No. 17 of 2023 
22 
 
o Land identified for Amusement Park -Tattoo Ground (Srinagar) was already under 
the occupation of the Armed Forces for long and the area is highly sensitive in 
terms of security.  
o The components Applewood Resort at Chenni Wuddur, wayside amenities 
(shopping arcade), Bijbehara (Anantnag) and Ice-Skating Rink at Pahalgam were 
planned without considering factors such as current tourist traffic, connectivity 
potential, stakeholder consultation and significance attached to the sites, holistic 
tourist experience, etc. 
• Desert circuit (Rajasthan): As per the 20 years Perspective Plan for Sustainable 
Tourism in the State, the Desert circuit was identified within Jodhpur-Jaisalmer-
Bikaner-Barmer districts.  
However, development of Sambhar Lake Town and other destinations (Jaipur district) 
was approved (September 2015) as a tourist destination under the Desert circuit in 
deviation from the State Perspective Plan. Further, the above project did not fall within 
the desert, thus, defeating the purpose of developing desert circuit.  
 
The State Government accepted the facts (February 2022) and stated that the 
development of the Sambhar Lake Town project was selected by the Ministry as per 
policy decision. 
The fact remains that the project site approved was different from identified desert 
circuit under 20-year Perspective Plan and identification criteria were not based on 
identified theme. 
The project consisted of development of destinations such as Shakambari Mata Temple, 
Sambhar Salt Complex, Devyani Kund, Sharmistha Sarovar, Naliasar and Naraina 
around Sambhar Lake Town which was famous for cultural, religious and historical 
tourism. It was noticed that Naliasar, one of these destinations, was selected for its 
archeological and cultural value, as there were 10 excavated trenches displaying 
Map 2.4: Proposed Desert circuit: Green; Approved Desert circuit: Red 


Report No. 17 of 2023 
23 
 
dwelling of different time periods and styles. There were possibilities of sighting spotted 
deer and Nilgai also. However, the same was not developed due to non-availability of 
land at Naliasar, and the components were shifted (June 2018) to Sambhar Lake Town 
and other sites without the approval of the Ministry.  
• Rangpo-Singtam (North-East circuit, Sikkim): The State Government did not 
provide records regarding the basis for selection of the project/component to Audit. 
From the limited records available, Audit observed that the components were not 
integrated into a tourist circuit and not connected with any tourist destination.  
• Heritage circuit and Tribal circuit (Telangana): Audit observed that the State 
Government had not prepared any Tourism Policy for the State or long-term action plan 
for promotion of tourism in the State. In the absence of this,  the project selection was 
not based on any criteria such as prioriti sation, stakeholder consultation and 
convergence with other schemes for livelihood/employment generation.  
• Integrated Development around Tehri Lake (Uttarakhand): All the destinations 
taken under the circui t (Sirrain, New Tehri, Chamba) we re located around the Tehri 
Lake. Audit observed that the development of Tehri Lake and its surroundings had been 
major focus of the State Government since 2011 and subsequent plans. The destination 
taken under the Scheme was also selected under the erstwhile PIDDC Scheme under the 
projects ‘Development of Eco -Tourism at Back Waters of Tehri Lake ’ and 
‘Development of Dhanolti-Chamba-Narendra Nagar  tourist circuit’ . Hence, the 
rationale for selecting the destinations again under the Swadesh Darshan Scheme  was 
not found. 
The State Government stated that it wanted to make Tehri Lake an international level 
destination in the form of water sports/adventure tourism and hence, it select ed the 
project under the Swadesh Darshan Scheme, which was approved by the Ministry.  
However, Audit observed that the State had no comprehensive roadmap for 
development of Tehri Lake as an international level destination.  
The above instances indicate that the Ministry did not adopt any methodology for 
identification and selection of Tourist circuits/destinations. The role of the Ministry in the 
identification and selection of projects was minimal. Further, the States submitted projects 
without any proper identification criteria or prioritisation. It was also seen that there were 
deviations from Perspective Plans, and tourist traffic surveys and stakeholder consultations 
were not done. As a result, facilities created were lying idle at many places in the absence 
of tourist footfall, as discussed in the subsequent paragraphs. 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
24 
 
Case Study 2.1: Selection of Project at Suchetgarh, Jammu and Kashmir in a 
sensitive location 
Suchetgarh (Jammu) is situated in a sensitive border location. Despite knowing this fact, 
the State Government selected this location for the execution a project under the 
Himalayan circuit in Jammu & Kashmir and completed it by incurring an expenditure of 
`3.71 crore.  
During the site visit, it was noticed that the project completed under the Scheme is 
occupied and used by the Border Security Force (BSF) for their operational purposes, 
hence defeating the very purpose of the project. 
             
The Ministry stated (September 2022) that it had  referred the matter to the State 
Governments of Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Goa, J ammu and Kashmir, Rajasthan, Sikkim, 
Uttarakhand and Telangana for comments. However, the comments were  awaited.  The 
reply indicated that the Ministry had not appraised the projects and their progress 
adequately as it had to refer the matter to the respective State Governments. 
2.9 Selection of large number of sites and components under circuits 
It was observed that a large number of sites and components had been chosen for 
implementation of the Scheme . There were 910 sites 6 and 6 ,898 components 7 in 243 
districts under 76 projects pertaining to the Scheme, despite dropping of a large number of 
components. The average number of sites and components per project were 12 and 91, 
respectively. Projects like ‘Development of Spiritual circuit II: Bijnor-Bhadohi in UP’ and 
‘Development of Anandpur-Patiala in Punjab’ comprised more than 30 sites and more than 
300 components. Some of the projects having large number of sites and components are 
given below: 
  
                                                           
6  Sites refer to places of tourist attractions at a tourist destination 
7  Components refer to items of work that are carried out to enhance tourism potential at a site, such as 
construction of tourist facilitation center, parking, cafeteria, illumination of monuments etc. 
Picture 2.1: Infrastructure created at Suchetgarh, J&K occupied by BSF 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
25 
 
Table 2.3: Projects having large number of sites/components 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
Circuit/Project and 
State 
Number 
of Sites 
Number of 
Components 
Sanctioned 
cost  
(` in 
crore) 
Average 
cost per 
site  
(` in 
crore) 
Average 
cost per 
component 
(` in 
crore) 
1.  Development of 
Spiritual circuit II: 
Bijnor-Bhadohi, 
Uttar Pradesh 
39 364 67.51 1.73 0.18 
2.  Heritage circuit, 
Development of 
Anandpur-Patiala, 
Punjab 
31 301 91.55 2.95 0.30 
3.  Himalayan circuit, 
Development of 
Tourist Facilities at 
Gulmarg-Leh, 
Jammu and Kashmir 
31 197 91.84 2.96 0.47 
4.  North East circuit, 
Development of 
Yomcha, Arunachal 
Pradesh 
29 174 96.72 3.34 0.55 
5.  Integrated 
Development of 
Jammu-Srinagar-
Pahalgam-Leh, 
Jammu and Kashmir 
27 175 84.46 3.13 0.48 
6.  Heritage circuit, 
Development of 
Gwalior-Mandu, 
Madhya Pradesh 
26 194 88.77 3.41 0.46 
7.  Himalayan circuit, 
Construction of 
Assets in lieu of 
those Destroyed in 
Floods in 2014 
under PM 
Development 
Package for Jammu 
and Kashmir 
24 101 90.43 3.77 0.89 
8.  North-East circuit, 
Development of 
circuit linking 
24 76 98.04 4.09 1.29 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
26 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
Circuit/Project and 
State 
Number 
of Sites 
Number of 
Components 
Sanctioned 
cost  
(` in 
crore) 
Average 
cost per 
site  
(` in 
crore) 
Average 
cost per 
component 
(` in 
crore) 
Rangpo-Singtam, 
Sikkim 
9.  Himalayan circuit, 
Integrated 
Development of 
Tourist Facilities at 
Anantnag- Ranjit 
Sagar Dam, Jammu 
and Kashmir 
23 147 86.44 3.76 0.59 
10.  Eco circuit, 
Development of 
Gandhisagar Dam- 
Ken River, Madhya 
Pradesh 
17 259 94.61 5.57 0.36 
From the above table, it can be seen that average cost per site of above projects varied from 
`1.73 crore to `5.57 crore, which was further reduced to `0.18 crore to `1.29 crore taking 
component-wise cost. 
In their comments on the Note for Expenditure Finance Committee for continuation of the 
Scheme during the 14th Finance Commission cycle, the Department of Expenditure noted 
the large number of sites/components  and recommended (August 2017) having big ticket 
projects instead of large number of small size d projects with thin spread of resources , to 
have maximum impact of tourism projects on income and employment. The Ministry of 
Tourism, though having agreed (August 20 17) to the recommendation of the Department 
of Expenditure , did not act o n the same. Durin g review of the Scheme  by the Prime 
Minister’s O ffice, the Ministry admitted (April 2020) that having a large number of 
destinations and components under one project was one of the weaknesses of the Scheme. 
Selection of large number of sites/components had  an adverse impact on the 
implementation of proj ects as the Ministry /State Government could not pay adequate 
attention to all the sites, resulting in delay in obtaining timely clearances , delay in awards 
of works, inadequate monitoring and site inspection, change/dropping of components, etc. 
For instance, the change/dropping of components in respect of one of the selected projects 
viz., Integrated Development of Himalayan Circuit, Himachal Pradesh  is shown at 
Annexure-IV.  
While agreeing with Audit, the Ministry stated (September 2022) that after taking into 
consideration the learnings of Swadesh Darshan Scheme 1.0, the Ministry had now 
revamped the Scheme as Swadesh Darshan Scheme 2.0 with the objective of following a 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
27 
 
tourist and destination centric approach. The Ministry will select 2-3 destinations of the 
State for development based on the State Perspective Plan and availability of funds. 
The fact remains that selection of large number of sites/components adversely affected 
implementation of the Scheme as large number of components were dropped due to lack of 
clearances from various authorities. 
2.10 Lack of convergence with other Schemes 
The Scheme guidelines  envisaged convergence8 with different schemes of Central 
Government/Ministries and State/UT Governments.  
It was noticed that at the time of approval of the Scheme in December 2014, the Ministries 
like Shipping, Road Transport  and Highways, Railways, Culture, Water Resources and 
Rural Development had suggested convergence of the Scheme with programmes of their 
Ministries/Departments.  
Further, a National  Steering Committee  was constituted in January 2015 under the 
Chairmanship of Minister (Tourism) for better implementation of the Scheme, wherein 
representatives from Ministries of Culture, Urban Development, Civil Aviation, 
Environment and Forest, Rural D evelopment, Skill Development, Road Transport and 
Highways, Shipping, Power  and Water Resources, River Development and Ganga 
Rejuvenation were members. They repeatedly stressed on the need for synergy between 
different Central Ministries for development and growth of t ourism sector in the country. 
The areas identified by the National Steering Committee for convergence with the Scheme 
were as follows: 
Table 2.4: Work/scheme identified for synergy/convergence with  
Swadesh Darshan Scheme 
Name of Ministry/Department Work/scheme identified for synergy/convergence  
Road Transport and Highways Last mile connectivity and way side amenities on 
highways 
Ministry of Shipping Cruise Tourism 
Culture/Archaeological Survey of 
India (ASI) 
Work of ASI Monuments, Projects under Heritage circuit, 
Development of amenities and other services  like 
illumination, beautification of the lawns/gardens, 
community participation etc. 
Rural Development Rejuvenation of water bodies and other works through  
MNREGA, development of rural circuit 
Ministry of Housing and Urban 
Poverty Alleviation and Ministry 
of Urban Development (now 
Ministry of Housing and Urban 
Affairs) 
Swadesh Darshan Scheme  and schemes of Ministry of 
Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation, Swachh Bharat 
Mission, Solid Waste Management, Toilets   
Civil Aviation Helipads  
                                                           
8 Convergence is a strategy to ensure optimal results with support from related Government programmes 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
28 
 
Name of Ministry/Department Work/scheme identified for synergy/convergence  
Development of North Eastern 
Region 
Projects under other Ministries for North-East Region, 12 
thematic circuits being developed under North Eastern 
Tourism Development Council (NETDC) for tourism 
development in North East Region. 
Power Under Ground Cabling 
Skill Development Skill Development training  
Inland Waterways Authority of 
India 
Jetties 
It may be seen that the Ministry of Rur al Development, Ministry of Wome n and Child 
Development, Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs have framed g uidelines for 
convergence of their schemes with schemes of other Ministries/Departments. For example, 
convergence of MNREGA (by the Ministry of Rural D evelopment), Poshan Abhiyan (by 
the Ministry of Women and Child De velopment) with other schemes, Swachh Bharat 
Mission with National Urban Livelihoods Mission scheme (by the Ministry of Housing and 
Urban Affairs). 
However, Audit observed that the Ministry of Tourism  did not have clear guidelines for 
convergence of Swadesh Darshan Scheme with other schemes. The DPR toolkit9 prepared 
by the Ministry for submission of project proposals by the States only mentioned details of 
funding sought f rom other Ministries/States, apart fro m the Ministry of Tourism . In the 
selected 14 projects, Audit found no funding details or convergence/synergy in the States 
as per the DPRs. At no stage during implementation of the Scheme this was pointed out by 
the National Steering Committee , which was constituted for the purpose of chalk ing out 
roadmap for the Scheme.  
The Ministry stated (September 2022) that in order to ensure convergence, in Swadesh 
Darshan Scheme 2.0, the Committees (National Steering Committee, Central Sanctioning 
and Monitoring Committee, Mission Directorate) will include memb ers from other line 
Ministries. In addition, the projects under the Scheme  will also be mapped on PM Gati 
Shakti portal in order to ensure convergence and better co-ordination with the line 
Ministries. 
During the Exit Conference, the Secretary (Tourism), while agreeing to  the Audit 
observation, stressed upon the need of convergence at both the Ministry  and States level 
and assured that a mechani sm would be devised in this reg ard during implementation of 
Swadesh Darshan Scheme 2.0. 
Recommendation No. 3 
The Ministry may ensure  convergence of the Scheme with other schemes of the 
Government of India/State Governments and may consider formulation of convergence 
guidelines incorporating components where funding is being provided by other 
Ministries/Departments. 
                                                           
9 DPR toolkit refers to the format for preparation and submission of DPRs by the States 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
29 
 
2.11 Returning of the project proposals after inordinate delay  
Mission Directorate of the Ministry  of T ourism was, inter alia, responsible for seeking 
approval of the Central Sanctioning and Monitoring Committee  for the project proposals 
submitted by the State Governments. 
It was observed that the Ministry did not have any definite timeline for approval or rejection 
of proposals submitted by the State Governments. The Ministry returned 202 project  
proposals to the States without approving the same with delay s ranging from one year to 
six years. A total of 71 project proposals pertaining to the years 2015 to 2019 were returned 
by the Ministry  between August 2019 and October 2019 with the request to submit the 
proposal in line with the Scheme guidelines of October  2017 and prioriti se one or two 
projects due to limited availability of funds. Further, 131 project  proposals were returned 
(November 2021) on the ground that the Scheme was under review. 
Audit analysed the date of submission of these project proposals by the State Governments. 
From the available10 details of 96 project proposals out of 202 projects, it was noticed that 
the Ministry took up to six years to review and return the proposals of States, as given 
below:  
Chart 2.2: Number of years for which project proposals were held by Ministry 
before returning to States
  
Thus, the Ministry kept 43 proposals pending for three years or mor e without taking any 
action, and nine of these proposals were returned after five to six years of submission.  
It was also not iced that in case  of 71 proposals returned by the Ministry  in 2019, the 
Ministry took 22 months after issue of revised guidelines to highlight that the evaluation 
report in accordance with guidelines of October 2017 were not enclosed  and returned the 
proposal to State s/UTs for compliance. From the furnished records, Audi t could not 
ascertain whether State s/UTs came back with  these proposals as asked by the Ministry . 
However, none of these projects w ere approved for implementation under the Scheme . 
Further, instances were seen where the States11 had sent only one or two project proposals 
                                                           
10  106 proposals where date of submission of  proposal was not made available by the Ministry  and the 
proposals returned in same year of submission have been excluded. 
11  One project of Tamil Nadu and two projects of Uttarakhand 
6
3
10
24 23
30
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
6 years 5 years 4 years 3 year 2 years 1 years
No. of Projects

Report No. 17 of 2023 
30 
 
for approval but the Ministry returned those projects proposals also and asked the States to 
prioritise one or two projects. 
It is important to note that the Department -Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Transport, Tourism and Culture in its Report No. 275 had observed (March 2020) that 
several proposals sent by the State Go vernments for inclusion under the Scheme were 
pending approval by the Ministry.  
While the Ministry had given 18 to 36 months to the State s/UTs to complete the projects, 
the Ministry itself kept the project proposals pending for up to six years without any action, 
as it did not have a defined timeline for approval of project proposals. It did not develop an 
effective mechanism for evaluation/approval of projects and conveying deficiencies within 
a definite timeframe.  
The Ministry stated (September 2022) that sanctioning of projects was done on a number 
of paramete rs and only limited projects could  be taken up for sanctioning subject to 
availability of funds, submission of suitable DPRs, adherence to Scheme guidelines and 
utilisation of funds released earlier, etc. The Ministry did not approve any project under the 
Scheme after 2018-19 since sanctioning of new projects was under review and proposals 
submitted by the  State Governments/UTs/ Central Implementing Agencies  for 
consideration and approval were deemed returned.  
The reply of the Ministry  may be seen in light of the fact that the proposal of States 
(pertaining to 2015 to 2019) were kept pending by the Ministry for a period ranging up to 
six years , which  shows lack of a n effective mechanism for evaluation and approval of 
projects.  
Recommendation No. 4 
The Ministry may prescribe a timeline for taki ng prompt decision on the project 
proposals submitted by the States/UTs and may ensure that the deficiencies in the 
proposals are communicated to them within a stipulated time frame. 
2.12 Preparation of Detailed Project Reports by States 
As per the Scheme guidelines, comprehensive Detailed Project Reports ( DPRs) for each 
project were to be prepared by the Programme Management Consultant ( PMC), after 
consultation with respective State Government/UT administration, local bodies, other 
stakeholders. However, PMC did not prepare the DPRs despite this being within their scope 
of work. Later, the Ministry asked (February 2016) the States to prepare and submit DPRs 
to the Ministry  for consideration. As a result, DPRs were prepared by the States by 
engaging consultants (at a fee of `7.54 crore in 10 projects 12 out of 14 selected projects) 
and the PMC was responsible for vetting of DPRs submitted by the State Governments with 
respect to fulfilment of evaluation criteria as specified in the Scheme, technical details, etc. 
                                                           
12  Bihar (`70.52 lakh), Goa (`79.54 lakh), Gujarat (`48 lakh), Himachal Pradesh (`1.01 crore), Madhya 
Pradesh (`1.72 lakh), Puducherry ( `1.11 crore), Rajasthan ( `93.98 lakh), Telangana ( `25 lakh for 
Tribal circuit), Uttarakhand (`1.07 crore) and U.P. (`1.16 crore). 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
31 
 
Audit observed that in all the 14 selected projects, there were deficiencies in DPRs like 
preparation of DPR without site survey, inclusion of sites without land and other clearances, 
tourist traffic survey, infrastructure gap analysis, detaile d estimates and bill of quantities , 
operation and maintenance plan, etc.  
The Scheme guidelines provided that the Implementing Agency would observe all codal 
formalities while awarding contracts for works/material/equipment procurement and 
ensure complete transparency i n its transaction s. However, scrutiny of records revealed 
irregularities (awarding of work without relevant sanctions, improper tendering, tendering 
on nomination basis , etc.) in selection of consultants for preparation of DPR s in seven 
projects13 out of 14 selected projects. Instances were also noticed (Chhattisgarh, Goa and 
Puducherry) where higher consultancy charges ranging between 2.85 per cent and six per 
cent of the project cost  were paid to the consultants , whereas the sanction letters of the 
projects stipulated payment of consultancy charges at the rate of two per cent of the project 
cost.  
Thus, the Ministry did not ensure preparation of DPRs based on actual ground realities in 
terms of gaps in tourist amenities and fund requirement. This resulted i n hindrance to 
smooth execution, delays and deviations, time overrun, dropping of components etc. 
The Ministry, while noting the audit observation, stated (September 2022) that it had sought 
comments from the States where gaps have been observed by Audit. Further, the Ministry 
has now revamped the Scheme as Swadesh Darshan Scheme  2.0 and on the basis of 
destination master plan, DPRs would be prepared for each destination as per toolkit of the 
Ministry. 
2.13 Summing up 
There was lack of proper  planning on the par t of the Ministry in formulation of Swadesh 
Darshan Scheme. It formulated the Scheme without conducting any feasibility study which 
was required for analysis of the existing situation, nature and magnitude of the problems to 
be addressed, need and justific ation for the project in the context of national priorities, 
alternative strategies, initial environmental and social impact analysis, preliminary site 
investigations, stakeholders’ commitment and risk factors.  
The Ministry launched the Scheme despite objection of Planning Commission/Ministry of 
Finance on formulation of a new Central Plan Scheme despite 13 ongoing central sector 
schemes and did not act upon recommendation of the Standing Finance Committee to 
formulate an Umbrella scheme merging all the schemes having overlapping objectives. As 
a result, there was overlapping of scope in various schemes implemented by the Ministry. 
Further, contrary to Scheme guide lines and recommendations of the National Steering 
Committee, the Ministry made n o efforts for  convergence of the Scheme  with other 
Central/State schemes.  
After launching the Scheme with an initial outlay of `500 crore, the Ministry continued to 
sanction projects and the outlay exceeded `4,000 crore  by 2016 -17. The Mini stry 
                                                           
13  Chhattisgarh, Goa, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Puducherry, Uttarakhand and Uttar Pradesh  
 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
32 
 
sanctioned funds withou t obtaining approval of the Cabinet, which was necessary for 
sanctioning projects above `1,000 crore and same was not regularised. 
Further, the Ministry sanctioned projects without any  National or State level Perspective 
Plans. After launch of the Scheme also, it did not ensure preparation of Detailed Perspective 
Plans for circuits, which were to form basis for selection of projects a nd preparation of 
DPRs under the Scheme. Further, frequent revisions were made in guidelines of the Scheme 
such as relaxation  in the role of the Ministry in identification of projects, changes in 
admissibility of components for funding under the Scheme, issue of instructions for 
maintenance of separate interest-bearing accounts for Scheme funds etc.   
The Ministry did not play a ctive role in identification of projects and relied on States for 
implementation and other roles including preparation of DPRs. Further, it did not have any 
definite timelin e for approval or rejection of project proposals submit ted by the State 
Governments. As a result, it kept proposals received from the States pending up to six years 
and later returned those proposals without approval. 
  

Report No. 17 of 2023 
33 
 
Chapter-III 
Financial Management 
  
3.1  Unrealistic budgeting under the Scheme 
Planning and preparation of budget are impor tant for sound public expenditure 
management. Budget preparation is the principal mechanism for achieving efficient 
delivery of public services. Effective financial management ensures that decisions taken at 
the policy level are implemented successfully at  the administrative level without wastage 
or diversion of funds.  
The Budget Estimate s, Revised Estimates and Actual Expenditure  for the period from 
2014-15 to 2021-22 under the Scheme are given below: 
Chart 3.1: Budget Estimates, Revised Estimates and Actual Expenditure 
(` in crore) 
 
In 2014-15, there was drastic cut in the Revised Estimates. It was noticed that an amount 
of `500 crore was set aside for 2014-15 for creation of five tourist circuits around specified 
themes, after the budget speech (10 July 2014) of the then Finance Minister. However, the 
Ministry of Tourism prepared and submitted the Note for the Standing Finance Committee 
only on 2 December 2014 and launched14 the Scheme in January 2015.   
As a result, `500 crore allocated for creation of f ive theme-based tourist circuits for that 
year could not be utilised as the Ministry could sanction only two projects during 2014-15 
and released `20 crore to concerned States at the fag end of the financial year 2014-15, 
while surrendering the remaining amount of `480 crore. Similar instances of reduction of 
                                                           
14 Approved by the Standing Finance Committee on 18 December 2014  
500
600
706
960
1100 1106
1200
630
20
310
972 950
1100
566 600
262
20
310
971 944
1101
566 561
261
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22
BE RE Actual

Report No. 17 of 2023 
34 
 
budget at the Revised Estimates stage were noticed during subsequent years, as shown 
below: 
Table 3.1: Budget figures at Budget Estimates and Revised Estimates stage 
(` in crore) 
Year Budget 
Estimates 
Revised 
Estimates 
Actuals Savings Percentage 
savings against 
Budget 
Estimates 
2014-15 500 20 20 480 96 
2015-16 600 310 310 290 48 
2016-17 706 972 971 - - 
2017-18 960 950 944 16 2 
2018-19 1100 1100 1100 - - 
2019-20 1106 566 566 540 49 
2020-21 1200 600 561 639 53 
2021-22 630 262 262 368 58 
 
From the above, it may be seen that out of eight years from 2014-15 to 2021-22, there was 
large reduction of budget at the Revised Estimates stage in five years (i.e., 2014-15, 2015-
16, 2019-20, 2020-21 and 2021-22). 
During 2015-16, against the Budget Estimate of `600 crore, only 19 per cent of the budget 
could be spent during the first six months (April to September) on account of reasons like 
process of making guidelines, forming committees, delay in receipt of p roposals from the 
State Governments, which led to a reduction at Revised Estimates stage. Similarly, in 2019-
20, 2020-21 and 2021-22 there was a substantial reduction in the Revised Estimates as the 
Scheme was under review by the Prime Minister’s Office and new projects were not being 
sanctioned since January 2019. Accordingly, alloc ation was used mainly for funding the 
ongoing projects. Although the Ministry was aware that the Scheme was under review, it 
did not assess the requirement realistically and sought higher budgetary allocations. Actual 
expenditure during 2019 -20 and 2020 -21 was only around 50 per cent  of the actual 
expenditure of 2018-19.  
It is pertinent to mention that the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee 
on Transport, Tourism  and Culture in its 284 th Report (February 2021) observed that the 
approach of the Ministry was casual and routine in nature. The manner in which the Budget 
Estimates were being prepared showed that the Ministry was not very serious about the 
activities to be undertaken by them. 
Thus, there were large variations in the Budget Estimat es and Revised Estimates which is 
indicative of poor budgeting and unrealistic estimation by  the Ministry. As a result, there 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
35 
 
were persistent savings during the years 2014-15, 2015-16, 2019-20, 2020-21 and 2021-22 
under the Scheme. 
The Ministry agreed (September 2022) with the audit observation on reduction of budget 
at Revised Estimates stage and stated that during 2014-15, the projects could be sanctioned 
only in the last quarter. Further, since review of the Scheme was ongoing in the years 2019-
20 and 2020 -21, the Ministry could spen d the budget only on account of the projects 
sanctioned earlier and no new project was sanctioned in those two years. 
Recommendation No. 5 
The Ministry may prepare the b udget estimates for seeking funds from the Parliament 
on a realistic basis after proper assessment of the requirement of funds. 
3.2 Non-refund of excess funds released to the States/UTs  
As per the Scheme guidelines, after release of the 4th instalment i.e., 95 per cent of the total 
project cost, the physical completion certificate of the project was to be submitted, and final 
cost of the project was to be frozen along with refund of the excess amount, if any, to the 
Ministry. The remaining five per cent of the total grant was to be released after successful 
operation and maintenance of toilet, tourist facilitation centre and cafeteria facilities for one 
year as certified by an independent agency.  
Audit observed that the Ministry of Tourism dropped/merged components, where work was 
not commenced or clearances were pending, based on the review of progress of projects in 
regional review meetings held during January -July 2020 under the chairmanship of the 
Secretary (Tourism). As a result , costs in many projects were revised.  Cost revision s led 
to excess funds being with the States/UTs as the grants had already been released as per the 
original sanctioned cost.  
It was noticed that t he released amount, in excess of the final cost, was required to be 
refunded by the States/UTs in the following four cases, amounting to `16.93 crore: 
Table 3.2: Non-refund of excess release of funds 
(` in crore) 
S. 
No 
Project Name Original 
Sanctioned 
cost 
Revised 
Sanctioned 
Cost 
95 % of 
Sanctioned 
Cost (A) 
Released 
Amount 
(B) 
Difference 
(B) – (A) 
1. Coastal 
circuit, 
Puducherry  
85.28 58.44 55.51 61.82 6.31 
2. Development 
of Sambhar 
Salt Complex, 
Rajasthan 
 
63.96 50.01 47.51 51.17 3.66 
3. Development 
of Buddhist 
52.34 24.14 22.93 26.17 3.24 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
36 
 
S. 
No 
Project Name Original 
Sanctioned 
cost 
Revised 
Sanctioned 
Cost 
95 % of 
Sanctioned 
Cost (A) 
Released 
Amount 
(B) 
Difference 
(B) – (A) 
circuit, 
Andhra 
Pradesh 
4. Development 
of Beach 
circuit, Henry 
Island, West 
Bengal 
85.39 67.99 64.59 68.31 3.72 
Total 286.97 200.58 190.54 207.47 16.93 
The Ministry requested (between June 2021 and  January 2022) the concerned States to 
refund the excess release.  However, it made no concerted efforts thereafter, and the same 
was yet to be realised from the States.  
The Ministry stated (September 2022) that it had consistently taken up the matter with the 
States and had also conveyed that non-refund of unspent balance was a financial irregularity 
and action would be taken against the concerned officials. 
The fact, however, remains that excess release has not yet been refunded by the concerned 
States. 
Case Study 3.1: Non-surrender of savings by Gujarat and Uttar Pradesh 
In case of Heritage circuit, Gujarat , Audit observed that the State Government  was 
required to surrender `13.99 crore to the Ministry due to non-execution of components, 
execution of inadmissible components, execution of component not included in DPR and 
difference between actual and sanctioned cost. However, the same had not been 
surrendered (March 2022).  
In case of Ramayana circuit, Ayodhya (Uttar Pradesh), executing agencies viz., Uttar 
Pradesh Rajkiya Nirman Nigam (12 works) and Irrigation Department (4 works) 
completed and handed over the projects to the Department of Tourism at cost lesser than 
the sanctioned cost. Audit observed that there were savings amounting to `8.20 crore 
against these works, but the same was not refunded to the Ministry.  
The Ministry stated (September 2022) that it had referred the concerned matter to the 
Governments of Gujarat and Uttar Pradesh for comments. 
3.3 Maintenance of separate bank accounts for projects by the States and refund 
of interest 
As per Rule 230(8) of General Financial Rules, 2017, all interest or other earnings against 
grant or other advances should be mandatorily remitted to Consolidated Fund of India. In 
this regard, additional guidelines were issued by the Ministry of Tourism in August 2020, 
which stipulated that the State implementing agencies had to open a separate bank account 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
37 
 
for each project and the interest earned on the funds was to be refunded to the Ministry at 
the end of financial year.  
However, as the above provision was introduced only during August 2020 and was not 
there in the original guidelines, no instructions were issued to the States by the Ministry for 
opening of separate bank account for more than five and half years since launch of the 
Scheme (January 2015).  
As a result, the following issues were observed by Audit:  
• Separate Account for each project was not opened by Bihar, Gujarat, Himachal 
Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Rajasthan, Puducherry, Uttarakhand and Uttar Pradesh 
and funds of other projects were kept in the existing saving bank account. This made 
it difficult to monitor the utilisation of funds released under Swadesh Darshan 
Scheme and calculation of interest earned on such funds.  
• Current Account was maintained by Goa, Madhya Pradesh and Telangana 
(Heritage), due to which interest could not be earned on the funds, resulting in loss 
to the exchequer. 
• There was delay of two years in opening of a separate bank account by Sikkim. 
Further, in 10 States15 out of 13 selected States, interest amounting to `50.06 crore was not 
remitted to the Ministry by implementing agencies. In fact, the interest amount was utilised 
by some of the States without approval of the Ministry, as discussed below: 
• In Himachal Pradesh, interest of `3.10 crore was earned on Scheme funds by the 
State Government. Instead of refunding the interest to the Ministry, the State 
Government incurred an expenditure of `1.14 crore.  
• In Sikkim, instead of refunding the interest of `6.73 crore earned on Scheme funds 
received from the Ministry, an expenditure of `5.32 crore for purpose other than 
the Scheme was made which resulted in irregular utilisation of interest. 
Audit also observed that:  
• In Rajasthan and Goa, interest amounting to `2.21 crore earned on Fixed Deposit 
Receipts  made from the Scheme funds was not remitted to the Ministry. 
• In Uttarakhand, only one Bank account was operated for two circuits under the 
Scheme (Heritage and Eco circuits) and an amount of `1.68 crore had accrued as 
interest. Instead of returning it to the Ministry, the State Tourism Board 
(Implementing Agency) deposited interest of `75.97 lakh in the State Treasury and 
remaining interest was lying with it. In addition to this, an amount of `47.95 lakh 
of accrued interest on released project funds was lying with the executing agency 
(Uttar Pradesh Rajkiya Nirman Nigam).  
                                                           
15  Chhattisgarh (`2.52 crore), Goa ( `0.84 crore), H imachal Pradesh (`3.10 crore), J ammu & Kashmir 
(`14.66 crore), Puducherry ( `1.22 crore), Rajasthan ( `1.37 crore), Tribal circuit, Telangana  
(`16.18 crore), Sikkim (`6.73 crore), Uttarakhand (`2.16 crore) and Uttar Pradesh (`1.28 crore) 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
38 
 
Thus, due to non-accounting of interest, the Ministry could not utilise the funds properly 
leading to irregular utilisation and idling of funds by the State Governments.  
The Ministry stated (September 2022) that it had consistently taken up the matter of refund 
of interest earned by the States. The States had again been requested (May 2022 and June 
2022) to deposit interest amount in the Consolidated Fund of India.  
The fact remains that interest earned was not refunded by the concerned State Governments. 
Further, the Ministry’s reply was silent on delay in issuance of instructions to the States for 
opening of separate bank account resulting in loss of interest to the Government exchequer. 
3.4 Delay/non-submission of Utilisation Certificates 
Administrative approval and financial sanction accorded by the Ministry of Tourism for 
projects under Swadesh Darshan Scheme stipulated that the Implementing Agency would 
not keep the amount released by the Central Government unutilised for more than six 
months. In case funds could not be utilised by such time, the same were to be surrendered 
to the Ministry with interest or formal approval should be taken to transfer/adjust the 
amount against other Central financially assisted projects. 
Audit observed that (as on 31 March 2022) in 47 out of total 76 projects, there was either 
delay in submission of Utilisation Certificates (UCs) or the UCs were not submitted despite 
lapse of more than six months, as shown below: 
Chart 3.2 : Time taken in submission of Utilisation Certificates 
 
(Source: Scheme Dashboard data of the Ministry of Tourism) 
 
 
 
More than 3 years More than 2 but less 3
years
More than 1 but less 2
years
More than 6 months
but less than 12
months
No. of projects 4 7 27 9
4
7
27
9
0
5
10
15
20
25
30

Report No. 17 of 2023 
39 
 
Audit observed the following:  
i. Utilisation Certificates submitted with delay: In 36 out of 47 projects, Implementing 
Agencies submitted UCs after taking more than six months from the date of release of 
funds. Out of these, UCs in respect of 4 projects 16 were received after three years of 
release of instalment. 
ii. Utilisation Certificates  not submitted:  In respect of 11 projects, I mplementing 
Agencies did not submit UCs even after more than six months of release of last 
instalment. Out of these, in 10 projec ts, UCs were not received despite a lapse of more 
than 12 months. It is pertinent to mention that in one proje ct17, UC had not been 
submitted even after lapse of 23 months.  
On being asked, the Ministry stated (December 2021) that only `27.65 crore unutilised in 
three projects had been surrendered by the Implementing Agencies.  
Audit further observed that out of 14 selected projects, in seven18 projects, the States did 
not submit UCs or submitted with delays which ranged from one month to 33 months. 
However, despite pending UCs for long duration, the Ministry neither insisted on States to 
send UCs timely nor made any effort to get refund from the States. 
iii. Incorrect/inflated UCs: Audit compared the Utilisation Certificates furnished by the 
States with the actual status of works and expenditure incurred thereon and it was found 
that out of the 14 selected projects  in 13 States, in the following five States, 
incorrect/inflated UCs amounting to `76.38 crore  had been submitted by the States: 
Table 3.3: Incorrect/Inflated Utilisation Certificates submitted by the State 
Governments  
S.  No  Name of the State Amount of Inflated UCs  
1.  Rajasthan19 `44.49 crore 
2.  Telangana `21.67 crore 
3.  Uttar Pradesh `85.82 lakh 
4.  Uttarakhand `1.64 crore 
5.  Gujarat `7.72 crore 
Thus, the Ministry did not enforce the condition provided in the sanction order that in case 
of funds remaining unutilised for more than six months, the same were to be surrendered 
to the Ministry with interest.  
                                                           
16  Development of Vaishali -Champapuri-Bihar, Bhalukpong -Bomdila & Tawang circuit -Arunachal 
Pradesh, PM Development Package 2014 for Jammu & Kashmir and Development of Karaikal, Yanam 
and Puducherry  
17  Malanad Malabar Cruise Tourism, Kerala   
18  Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Himachal Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Puducherry, Sikkim and Telangana 
19  Four UCs were submitted. First UC inflated by `11.51 crore, second by `20.85 crore, third by `4.14 
crore and fourth by `7.99 crore. Running Account Bill of one component viz., Development of Naraina 
was not made available 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
40 
 
In this context, the Department -Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture in its 298 th report had also recommended (August 2021) th at the 
Ministry should develop an effective and efficient mechanism for timely submission of 
UCs. This would not only speed up execution of all the proje cts well within the approved 
cost, but also help in prevention of cost overruns in the projects.  
Thus, the Ministry did not have a proper mechanism in place for ensuring timely 
submission of UCs and for refund of unutilised funds. In absence of UCs, it could not be 
ascertained how the Ministry was obtaining assurance on the regularity of expenditure.  
The Ministry stated (September 2022) that it had revised the procedure for release of funds 
and tracking of utilisation of funds through Central Nodal Agency. The Ministry would 
further take up the matter with the State Governments of Rajasthan, Telangana, Uttar 
Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Gujarat and Himachal Pradesh on the audit observations.  
While the Ministry did not give status of surrender of unspent funds lying with the State 
Governments, the fact remains that timely submission of UCs and refund of unutilised 
funds was not ensured by the Ministry. 
Case Study 3.2: Himachal Pradesh- False undertaking about non-pendency of UC 
As per conditions of the sanction letter issued under Swadesh Darshan Scheme, the State 
Government had given an undertaking that no utili sation certificate was pending in 
respect of grant-in-aid released by Central Government in respect of all the 
schemes/projects/programmes of the Ministry of Tourism.  
It was noticed that in the project ‘Integrated Development of Solan District ’ under 
Product/Infrastructure Development for Destination and Circuits Scheme , the M inistry 
had sanctioned (August 2008) `1.60 crore for Kiarighat and released `1.28 crore to the 
Department of Tourism, Himachal Pradesh. The above amount was not utilised by the 
State Go vernment, as the work could not b e started due to non -availability of land. 
However, the State Government  had shown above amount as utilised in the utilisation 
certificate submitted to the Ministry (January 2013).  
Later under S wadesh Darshan Scheme, the M inistry sanctioned (March 2017) a 
component viz., construction of Convention Centre at Kiarighat at the same location for 
`25 crore. It was noticed that the Department of Tourism, Himachal Pradesh transferred 
`1.28 crore (of Integrated Development of Solan District) lying with it, for the project at 
Kiarighat as additional funds.  
This shows that the State had given false undertaking about non -pendency of any 
utilisation certificate at the time of seeking funds under Swadesh Darshan Scheme.  
The Department of Tourism, Government of Himachal Pradesh did not furnish the 
reasons for the lapse. 
The Ministry  stated (September 2022) that it w ould take up the matter with the 
Government of Himachal Pradesh. 
 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
41 
 
Recommendation No. 6 
The Ministry may ensure timely submission of Utilisation Certificates by the States/UTs 
in respect of funds released to them under the Scheme, and remittance of interest earned 
by them on the Scheme funds to the Ministry. 
3.5 Irregular payment of consultancy and contingency charges   
The Ministry of Tourism,  in the guidelines for  Swadesh Darshan Scheme 2.0, approved 
(April 2022) five per cent of funds for consultancy and contingency charges (renamed as 
Professional, Administrative and Office Expenses) for States/Implementing Agencies. The 
amount would be utilised for the purpose of: 
• Hiring of Project Development and Supervision Consultants, other professionals, and 
support teams on contract  basis to support the implementation of Mission at 
State/destination levels after following fair and transparent procedures. 
• Institutional arrangements that support Mission Implementation. 
• However, the funds were  not to be used for purchase of vehicles, construction and 
maintenance of buildings, creations of posts, payment of existing staff and purchase of 
furniture and fixtures, etc.  
Audit observed that there was no mention/approval of consultancy and contingency fee for 
States/Implementing agencies in the approval (January 2015)  of Standing Finance 
Committee, the approved Notes of Expenditure Finance Committee/Cabinet Notes 
(October 2017 and February/December 2019) or in the original Scheme guidelines issued 
by the Ministry. However, implementing agencies of S wadesh Darshan Scheme projects 
were paid consultancy and contingency charges  of `225.84 crore at the rat e of five per 
cent20 of project cost for implementation of projects up to March 2022.  
The Ministry stated (September 2022) that sanctioning of consultancy and contingency 
charges was approved by the Central Sanctioning and Monitoring Committee. In the 
guidelines for Swadesh Darshan Scheme 2.0 , provision for three per cent  funds for 
professional, administrative and office expenses by the Ministry and five per cent funds for 
States/Implementing agencies has been approved.  
The reply of the Ministry that consultancy and contingency charges were approved by the 
Central Sanctioning and Monitoring Committee is not tenable as there was no specific 
approval in the Scheme or guidelines  for the above charges by S tanding Finance 
Committee/Expenditure Finance Committee/Cabinet or any other Committee under 
Swadesh Darshan Scheme i.e., National Steering Committee, C entral Sanctioning and 
Monitoring Committee or Mission Directorate. Moreover, the Integrated Finance Wing of 
the Ministry had also raised issue of above charges  not being part of Scheme guidelines. 
                                                           
20  The Ministry of Tourism was paying centage charges up  to seven per cent (inclusive of contingency 
and service taxes) for CPSUs implementing the projects under S wadesh Darshan Scheme. However, 
centage charges at the rate of five per cent have been taken for calculation. 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
42 
 
However, the Ministry had stated in its response that it was paying these charges as per 
norms. 
Audit, however, noted the remedial action taken by the Ministry by incorporating the above 
charges in the guidelines for Swadesh Darshan Scheme 2.0.  
3.5.1 Irregular expenditure against consultancy and contingency charges by States 
While launching the Swadesh Darshan Scheme in January 2015, t he Ministry had not 
defined the purposes for which consultancy and contingency charges coul d be utilised by 
State Implementing agencies. However, as per para 3.1.1.3 (3) of CPWD Works Manual, 
2019, contingencies could be utilised for construction of site office, enga gement of watch 
and ward staff, job works, hiring of inspection vehicle and any other field requirements 
directly related to work. Further, in the guidelines for Swadesh Darshan Scheme 2.0, it was 
stated that the consultancy and contingency charges shall n ot be used for purchase of 
vehicles, construction and maintenance of buildings, creations of posts, payment of existing 
staff and purchase of furniture and fixtures, etc. 
Considering the above criteria, Audit observed that in four out of 14 selected projects, State 
Governments incurred irregular expenditure against consultancy and contingency charges, 
as given below:  
• In case of North-East circuit, covering Rangpo -Singtam, Sikkim, I mplementing 
Agency procured 10 vehicles from contingency charges for an amount of `1.28 crore21 
for use of officials of State Tourism Department.  
• In case of  Tribal circuit project, Telangana, the Implementing Agency procured 2 
vehicles for an amount of `57.55 lakh from contingency charges for use of officials of 
State Tourism Department.  
• In case of Heritage circuit project, Telangana, the Implementing Agency utilised an 
amount of `54 lakh out of contingency charges  towards non -plan/operation and 
maintenance expenditure. 
• In case of Coastal circuit, Puducherry, the Implementing Agency booked `38.16 lakh 
from contingency charges on operation and maintenance  and office expenses, even 
though operation and maintenance was the responsibility of State Government. 
Thus, due to not defining  the purpose of contingency and consultancy charges by the  
Ministry, irregular expenditure amounting to `1.96 crore was incurred by the S tate 
implementing agencies from the Scheme funds.  
The Ministry stated (September 2022) that settlement of bills of sub -agencies was the 
responsibility of S tate Government/Implementing Agencies. Therefore, the Ministry was 
seeking comments from concerned State Governments. 
The reply is not tenable as in addition to the responsibility of the State implementing 
agencies, the Ministry was also responsible for pointing out the incorrect/ineligible 
                                                           
21  Incurred from contingency provision of two projects of Swadesh Darshan Scheme, out of which `46.29 
lakh was incurred from selected project. 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
43 
 
expenditure shown in the U tilisation Certificates submitted  by t he State implementing 
agencies. However, the Ministry did not point out the said incorrect/ineligible expenditure. 
Case Study 3.3: Undue benefit to Hindustan Prefab Limited due to award of 
contract on lumpsum basis 
The Ministry awarded (June 2018) the  project of ‘Development of wayside amenities’ to  
Hindustan Prefab Limited, New Delhi (HPL), at six sites of NH-2/NH-28 in Buddhist and 
Ramayana circuits in Bihar and Uttar Pradesh. The project cost was `18.10 crore (including 
centage22  charge of `1.57 crore for HPL), which was later revised  (June 2019) to `17.93 
crore (including centage charge of `1.57 crore).  
Audit observed that the Ministry was paying centage charges (including consultancy and 
contingency) of five per cent of the project cost. However, in the instant case, instead of 
the rates already being paid to other Central Public Sector Undertakings, the Ministry used 
Rule 133(3) of G eneral Financial Rules, 2017 (awarding contract on lumpsum basis) and 
awarded the work to HPL on lump sum centage charge of `1.57 crore (9.60 per cent of the 
project cost of `16.36 crore), which was on the higher side. Audit found no justification for 
awarding contract with lumpsum charges in this case. 
Audit further observed that later, the Ministry  dropped three sites  (January 2022) and 
revised the project cost to `13.50 crore. However, it did not reduce centage charges of HPL 
proportionally. As a result, centage charges came out to 11.63 per cent of the revised project 
cost.  
The Ministry stated (September 2022) that since centage charges in this case w ere fixed, 
the same were not revised.  
Thus, due to non-following of uniform criteria and  awarding of contract to HPL on 
fixed/lump sum service/centage charges, the Ministry had to incur avoidable expenditure 
of `89.50 lakh23. 
 
3.6 Wasteful/excess and inadmissible expenditure 
During execution of projects by the State Governments, Audit observed the following:  
(a) Instances of wasteful/excess expenditure of `30.50 crore in implementation of 7 out of 
14 selected projects were observed, as shown in the table below: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
22  Centage charges are percentage charges (on estimated cost) paid to Central Public Sector Undertakings 
for execution of work/project.  
23 `1.57 crore – 5% of `13.50 crore = `89.50 lakh 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
44 
 
Table 3.4 Wasteful/excess expenditure 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Circuit/ State 
Brief of irregularities noticed Amount  
(` in crore) 
1.  Himalayan 
Circuit, 
Himachal 
Pradesh  
After incurring expenditure of `97 lakh on components 
Saurav Kalia Van Vihar (Palampur) and Dal lake 
(Dharmshala), these were dropped by the Ministry due to 
faulty planning and bottlenecks by the State Government 
resulting in wasteful expenditure. 
0.97 
2. Coastal Circuit, 
Puducherry 
The Ministry sanctioned ( December 2015) a project f or 
development of tourism amenities at Island No.5 at 
Yanam. The selected site was situated in a flood prone 
area. Government of Andhra Pradesh objected to the 
work since it was obstructing free flow of the Godavari 
River and approval for construction activities had also not 
been obtained from the Yanam Planning Authority. 
Subsequently, the amenities created were washed away in 
flood resulting in unfruitful expenditure of `5.26 crore in 
Yanam due to injudicious planning. 
(Refer Case Study 3.4) 
5.26 
3. Coastal Circuit, 
Goa 
(i) The work of supplying , installing  and 
commissioning of Sound and Light Show at Aguada 
Jail, Goa was awarded for `3.94 crore in June 2017 
with date of completion of July 2018 . Later, it was 
decided (September 2018) to shift the equipment of 
Sound and Light Show to another site, Baga Beach 
(not approved under the Scheme), until the work at 
Aguada Jail project was completed. However, 
instead of shifting the Sound and Light Show 
equipment back to Aguada Jail after comp letion of 
work, the Implementing Agency again procured 
new Sound and Light Show equipment at Aguada 
Jail for `3.25 crore in February 2021 . The Sound 
and Light show equipment purchased for Aguada 
Jail, however, remained idle up to the year 2022 and 
it was only in the year 2023 that the Show was made 
operational as observed (May 2023) during the Joint 
physical inspection of site.  It was further observed 
during the joint inspection that the Sound and Light 
Show at Baga was still lying unutilised  resulting in 
unfruitful expenditure of `3.94 crore. 
(ii) Four buses purchased at a cost of `99.27 lakh for 
circuiting around Fort Aguada, Aguada Jail, and 
Tourist Information Centre, were not utilised for 
tourist purpose but for plying staff and for private 
6.58 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
45 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Circuit/ State 
Brief of irregularities noticed Amount  
(` in crore) 
bookings (such as plying school students, wedding 
functions etc.).  
(iii) Tourist Information Centre (TIC) along with public 
amenities were constructed at a cost of `1.65 crore 
at Terek hol Fort which was not among  the site s 
approved in the DPR for construction of TIC . The 
TIC was constructed behind Terekhol Fort and was 
not even visible while entering the Fort. No 
signages were found either for the TIC or public 
amenities to indicate the  presence of the facilit y 
there. As a result, the facility created was closed and 
not in use. Thus, it did not serve any purpose leading 
to wasteful expenditure of `1.65 crore.  
  
4.  Himalayan 
circuit, Jammu 
& Kashmir 
 
(i) Eco Log Multipurpose Hall with Cafeteria and 
Souvenir Kiosks was executed at a cost of `1.83 crore at 
Apple Resort Chen ni W uddur, A nantnag. The project 
was completed in August 2018 and shops and cafeteria 
were outsourced in 2019.  
However, till date 24 (November 2022), no allottee had 
started business there and thus the project could not be 
put to use, rendering the expenditure unfruitful.  
(ii) Expenditure of `1.50 crore was incurred on 
construction of an Ice -skating Rink at Nunwan -
Pahalgam. However, the facilities could not be used as 
the detailed project report did not have the essential 
elements i.e. water freezing arrangements, b oundary 
railing, rooftop, sitting place for spectators and yet the 
State Government went ahead with the project execution 
and presently, only a cemented platform has been  
3.33 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
24  The cafeteria was gutted in fire in the year 2020 and the same was reconstructed by the Tourism 
Department of the State. 
Picture 3.1: Deserted Terekhol TIC, Goa 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
46 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Circuit/ State 
Brief of irregularities noticed Amount  
(` in crore) 
constructed at site, which does not serve the intended 
purpose. 
 
5. Tribal circuit, 
Telangana 
The component for upgradation of trekking pathways up 
to Megalithic burial at Mallur (sanctioned cost: `2.20 
crore) was dropped (January 2020) by the Ministry of 
Tourism due to non-obtaining of forest clearance by the 
State. However, the State Government had incurred `1 
crore on laying of gravel road without ensuring forest 
clearance, thus making the expenditure unfruitful. 
1.00 
 
 
6. Development of 
circuit around 
Tehri, Eco 
circuit, 
Uttarakhand 
(i) Three approach roads (costing `4.34 crore) remained 
unutilised as parts of the roads remained submerged in 
water during increase in the water level of the lake 
(February 2022) due to which the ultimate benefit could 
not be delivered to the tourists. 
(ii) Adventure climbing wall (`79.74 lakh) constructed 
for tourists was being occupied by ITBP to train their staff 
(Refer Case Study 4.13). 
5.14 
Picture 3.2: Ice Skating Rink cemented platform, 
Pahalgam, J&K 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
47 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Circuit/ State 
Brief of irregularities noticed Amount  
(` in crore) 
7. Development of 
Ayodhya, 
Ramayana 
circuit, Uttar 
Pradesh 
(i) The State Government failed to exercise due care in 
assessment of actual amount payable  towards centage, 
GST and Labour cess. Thus, excess amount of `6.07 crore 
was sanctioned due to considering incorrect cost 
(estimated cost instead of actual cost) of the works carried 
out by I mplementing Agencies and out of this,  `3.98 
crore was also relea sed (Irrigation Department : `1.18 
crore and U ttar Pradesh Rajkiya Nirman Nigam: `2.80 
crore), resulting in excess payment.  
(ii) Executing agency ( Uttar Pradesh Rajkiya Nirman 
Nigam) did not reduce the cost of the works by five per 
cent towards departmental savings in the estimates being 
Government work in terms of State Government orders. 
Thus, the sanctioned cost of the works was found 
overestimated by `3.86 crore.  
(iii) 900 tree guards amounting to `37.70 lakh purchased 
in April 2021 for plantation work s proposed at Guptar 
Ghat, Ayodhya were lying unutilised in open area 
(January 2022), as the trees were not planted (sanctioned 
in May 2021). 
 
8.22 
 
  Total 30.50 
 
The Ministry, while noting the audit observations, stated (September 2022) that it w ould   
seek comments from concerned State Governments in this respect.   
(b) Inadmissible expenditure of `21.06 crore was incurred in eight out of 14 selected 
projects, as shown in the table below: 
  
Picture 3.3: Tree guards lying unutilised at Guptar Ghat, 
Ayodhya 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
48 
 
Table 3.5:  Irregular/Inadmissible expenditure 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Project/State 
(theme) 
Brief of irregularities noticed Amount  
( ` in 
crore) 
1. Kanwaria route, 
Bihar 
(Spiritual) 
i) Granular Sub-base with graded material not included 
in B ill of Quantities  was booked in the Measurement 
book25 and `94.50 lakh paid to the contractor in deviation 
from approved items resulting in irregular payment.  
ii) The consultant engaged for DPR preparation was paid 
service tax of `9.20 lakh without provision in the sanction 
letter. Though State Government had agreed to recoup it 
from the consultant, the same was not yet done. 
1.04 
2.  Himalayan 
circuit, 
Himachal 
Pradesh  
Expenditure on operation and maintenance of Light and 
Sound show at Shimla (`95 lakh), external electrification 
and external water supply at Art and Craft Centre, 
Chamba (`13 lakh), renovation of existing temple at 
Dharamshala, demolition and dismantling expenses on 
existing structure at Kiarighat, foundation stone 
ceremony etc., (`23.72 lakh) were incurred by the State 
from Scheme funds. However, as per scheme guidelines, 
expenditure on the above works was to be borne by State 
Government from its own funds. 
1.32 
3. Coastal circuit, 
Puducherry 
(i) Expenditure of `52 lakh was incurred on external 
electrification (Chinnaveerampattinam and Arikkamedu 
beaches), which is an inadmissible expenditure and to be 
borne by the State/UT Government. 
(ii) Water sports equipment, Boat jetty and Beach Safety 
equipment sanctioned with cost of `61.41 lakh for 
Chinnaveerampattinam Beach and Manapet Beach were 
diverted to a boat house (Chun nambar), which was not 
covered under the Scheme. 
1.13 
4. Development of 
circuit linking 
Rangpo-
Singtam, North-
East circuit, 
Sikkim 
(i) Construction of approach road (`3.22 crore), external 
electrifications, external water supply and sewerage lines, 
furniture, etc. (`0.71 crore)  were undertaken from 
Scheme funds instead of being borne by the State 
Government out of its own funds.  
(ii) Instead of constructing wayside amenity for tourist s, 
a p avilion and a building in the gumpa complex were 
constructed at a total cost of `1.67 crore and used as 
hostel for nuns of the Gumpa, which was not related to 
tourism. Expenditure of  `79 lakh was incurred on 
 
6.95 
                                                           
25  In components- Rain Shelter at Suiya and Lulha Shivlok, Cafeteria at Chihutjor, W ay-side amenities 
at Suiya and Jilebia, Bihar 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
49 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Project/State 
(theme) 
Brief of irregularities noticed Amount  
( ` in 
crore) 
boundary/fencing of Jurassic Park at Makha, away  from 
tourist infrastructure and not covered under the Scheme. 
(iii) S tate Government  utilised `56 lakh on restoration 
and maintenance of Tourist Infrastructure developed 
under the Scheme from interest accrued on Scheme funds 
which was inadmissible  as the S cheme guidelines 
stipulates that the maintenance of the created a ssets was 
to be done by State Government from its own funds. 
5. Heritage circuit, 
Telangana 
An amount of `6.26 lakh was paid towards maintenance 
of lawns, individual shrubs etc., at Hayat Bakshi Mosque 
and at Raymond’s Tomb from Scheme funds, which was 
an inadmissible expenditure and  was to be borne by the 
State Government.   
0.06 
6. Tribal circuit, 
Telangana 
(i) Expenditure of `61.01 lakh was incurred  (January 
2021) on repairs and renovation works relating to old 
suspension bridge to Island -1 at La knavaram (Mulugu) 
and `3.35 crore on items ( such as purchase of vehicles, 
car hire charges of employees), which were inadmissible. 
(ii) Even after the component ‘Upgradation of trekking 
path up to Megalithic Burials’ was dropped (January 
2020) by the Minis try, a n amount of `68.71 lakh was 
incurred by the State Government on approach road, 
septic tank etc., which was inadmissible. 
4.65 
 
7. Development of 
Sambhar Lake 
and other 
destinations in 
Desert circuit, 
Rajasthan 
Mini Desert Night Safari (`1.59 crore) and approach road 
along the bicycle track ( `2.58 crore) were not found 
constructed (originally to be constructed at Naliasar) at 
Sambhar Lake during joint physical verification of sites  
along with the State Government officials though the 
State Government had shown utilisation of funds on the 
same.  
 
4.17 
8. Integrated 
Development of 
Theme based 
tourist circuit in 
Gujarat 
(i) Under the component ‘Development of activity centre 
on south-east side of campus at Kochrab Ashram’, 10 
rooms on second floor of the activity centre for the 
purpose of accommodation were constructed from the 
Scheme funds, which was inadmissible as per the Scheme 
guidelines.  Implementing Agency did not provide the 
exact expenditure incurred for the inadmissible activity. 
(ii) Implementing Agency utilised `13.34 lakh for 
external electrification and `94.50 lakh for approach road 
from Scheme funds instead of State Government funds.  
1.74 
 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
50 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Project/State 
(theme) 
Brief of irregularities noticed Amount  
( ` in 
crore) 
(iii) Implementing Agency constructed another approach 
road at a cost of `1.29 crore from the savings of 
`65.89 lakh of Scheme funds and the remaining 
`63.11 lakh from State funds. 
  Total 21.06 
 
The Ministry, while noting the audit observations, stated (September 2022) that it w ould 
seek comments from the concerned S tate Governments in this respect. In respect of 
Rajasthan, the Ministry endorsed (November 2022) the reply of the State Government 
which stated that due to non -availability of land at Naliasar, the Night Safari was 
constructed at another site. 
The reply of State Government of Rajasthan is no t acceptable since the project closure 
report of July 2021 had shown the utilisation of funds at Naliasar. 
 Case Study 3.4: Development of Tourism amenities at Yanam (Coastal circuit, 
Puducherry) - Unfruitful expenditure of `5.26 crore 
 
The DPR for development of tourism amenities at Island No. 5 at Yanam, as submitted by 
the Department of Tourism, Puducherry, was sanctioned (December 2015) by the Ministry 
under the project ‘Development of UT of Puducherry as Tourist circuit’. The selected site 
was situated  on a sand dune in mid -stream at the junction point of Coringa river and 
Gowthami Godavari river in Yanam. This was in flood prone area and highest flood  level 
was faced in Yanam in August 2013. Government of Andhra Pradesh objected to the work 
since it was obstructing free flow of the Godavari River. Also, approval for construction 
activities was not obtained from the Yanam Planning Authority. 
Despite the above fact, the project was commenced after Ministry’s sanction (December 
2015). Works were awarded between March 2017 and June 2018 and expenditure of `5.26 
crore was incurred by Puducherry Tourism Department on components of walkway, 
fencing, bamboo house, rainwater shelter, solar lights etc.  
However, during the flood in August 2018, amenities created o n the site i.e. , walkway, 
fencing, RCC benches, water body, bamboo house, stage and solar lights (valued at `1.33 
crore) were damaged and another flood in August 2020 washed away the remaining 
structures (valued at `3.93 crore) completely. 
  

Report No. 17 of 2023 
51 
 
Picture 3.4: Infrastructure washed away at Yanam, Puducherry 
  
Infrastructure (before floods): 
Stage before submerging in water 
Infrastructure (after floods): 
Stage submerged in water 
  
Infrastructure (before floods): 
Bamboo house 
Infrastructure (after floods): 
Bamboo house washed away 
Audit observed that the Ministry did not make any effort to assess feasibility and ground 
reality before sanctioning the project. The Programme Management Consultant visited the 
site only in December 2018, when works had already been executed and washed away in 
August 2018. 
Thus, despite being aware of the  fact that the island was  flood-prone, infrastructure was 
created thereon, which was washed away in flood , thereby  resulting in unfruitful 
expenditure of `5.26 crore. 
The Ministry, while noting the audit observations, stated (September 2022) that it w ould 
seek comments from Government of Puducherry in this regard.   
 


Report No. 17 of 2023 
52 
 
Recommendation No. 7 
The Ministry may take action to recover the excess expenditure incurred by the 
States/UTs without prior approval of the Ministry as well as the inadmissible expenditure 
incurred by them. 
3.7 Undue benefit to contractors 
Audit observed instances where undue benefit of `19.73 crore was made to contractors in 
six projects/circuits, as given below:  
(a) Development of Ayodhya, Uttar Pradesh: 
• The contractor engaged by the Implementing Agency viz., Uttar Pradesh Rajkiya 
Nirman Nigam was required to submit performance guarantee at the rate of five per cent 
of the contract price of `62.17 crore which worked out `3.11 crore. However, the contractor 
submitted lesser amount of performance guarantee i.e., `1.86 crore only, at the time of its 
renewal (September 2021) without citing any reason on record. 
• Work at Guptar Ghat, Ayodhya was split into 14 lots of equal sizes and works were 
awarded to different private contractors . However, the Executing Agency (Irrigation 
Department) did not take due care in making comparative analysis of the financial 
bids/rates offered by the contractors and awarded works of similar natur e and sanctioned 
costs to the same contractors but at varying rates resulting in failure to save `19.13 lakh26. 
• GST registrations of three contractors were cancelled by the State Government suo-
motu after awarding of works to them. Thus, they were no more registered contractors and 
were not entitled to collect GST. However, a total of `19.57 lakh was irregula rly paid to 
one contractor against his GST registration and in case of other two contractors , it was 
pending for payment, whereas full amount of GST was liable to be deducted and deposited 
by the Executing Agency (Irrigation Department) itself. 
Case Study 3.5: Irregular payment to contractors for works not executed 
(Guptar Ghat, Ayodhya, Uttar Pradesh) 
The work of development of the Guptar Ghat included work of 23,767 sq.mtr ‘supplying 
and fixing of stone patia’ at the rate of `1,447.50 per sq.mtr. This work included cost of 
MS clamp (supply and fixing) at `216.88 per sq.mtr. (`136.88 for supply and `80.00 for 
fixing). The work was executed and payment was made to the private contractors at the 
rates quoted by them in their respective agreements.  
 
 
 
 
                                                           
26  Calculated on the basis of difference between the rate at which the contract was awarded to a contractor 
and lowest of the rates offered by the same contractor for all similar nature of works. 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
53 
 
Picture 3.5:MS Clamps not fixed at Guptar Ghat, Ayodhya, U.P. 
 
During site inspection, it was observed that no MS clamps were fixed. However, work was 
measured including supply and fixing of MS clamps against which an amount of `51.55 
lakh (excluding GST at 12 per cent) was paid to the contractors. Since no work of supply 
and fixing of MS clamps was done at site, the cost of the same should have been deducted 
from the bills of the contractors. Thus, non-deduction thereof resulted in excess payment 
of `57.73 lakh (including GST at 12 per cent) to contractors in the final bill. 
During the Exit Conference held (July 2022) with the Tourism Department and Irrigation 
Department (executing agency), Government of Uttar Pradesh, the State Tourism 
Department accepted the audit observation and directed the executing agency to initiate 
recovery of excess payment. 
(b) Development of Sinquerim-Aguada Jail, Goa: Labour Welfare Cess amounting to  
`15.65 lakh was not deducted from bills of contractor in respect of three sites (Anjuna, 
Terakhol and Calangute) in violation of Goa Build ing and other Construction Workers’ 
(Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Service) Rules, 200 8. On being pointed 
out by Audit, the State Government stated (March 2022) that it has recovered `6.33 lakh 
from running account bills of the contractors and  the remaining amount of `9.32 lakh 
would be recovered from next running account bills. 
(c) Himalayan circuit, HP: In five works, performance guarantee of `1.99 crore was not 
obtained (in three cases, performance guarantee was not obtained from the contractors, 
and in two cases the performance guarantee was not extended after its expiry).  
Further, in o ne case 27, though the Request for Proposal  contained provision for 10 per 
cent performance security, the State Government, in letter of award, fixed performance 
security at the rate of 5 per cent, resulting in short receipt of `0.38 crore. The Department 
of Tourism, while accepting the audit observation, stated (January 2022) that remaining 
5 per cent performance security would be deducted from running bill of the contractor. 
(d) Heritage circuit,  Telangana: Though the Scheme guidelines d id not envisage 
payment of advance to the contractor, the State Gov ernment, without approval of the 
Ministry, granted (July 2021) advance of `4.99 crore to contractors, which not  only 
                                                           
27 Light and Sound Show project at Shimla 


Report No. 17 of 2023 
54 
 
resulted in deviation from the Scheme guidelines but also in losing the opportunity of 
getting interest of `13.31 lakh28. 
(e) Development of Rangpo -Singtam, Sikkim: The Department did not deduct 5 per 
cent storage charges from the Running Account Bills/Final Bills of any of the contractors 
till the date of Audit (January 2022) though State Works Manual and approval by S tate 
Government envisaged it, thereby causing undue benefit to the contractors and loss of 
`0.28 crore. 
Case study 3.6: Irregular expenditure and undue benefit to contractor 
(Buddhist circuit, Madhya Pradesh) 
The work ‘Construction of approach road to Sonari’ was undertaken (April 2013) by the 
State under deposit work from  the funds provided by the State Archaeology Department 
under 13th Finance Commission. 
Audit observed that a work ‘last mile connectivity’ was proposed (July 2016) on the same 
site (Sonari Stupa) for `1 crore in Buddhist circuit under the Swadesh Darshan Scheme and 
the work was allotted (March 2017) to the same contractor who was implementing the 
earlier project, only on the basis of a consent letter from him, without any tendering. During 
site visit, it was seen that there was only one approach road to Sonari. However, an amount 
of `1.73 crore (`73 lakh more than the original sanction) was charged on Scheme funds.  
Although the work of ‘last mile connectivity’ was already in progress, the same work was 
again awarded to the same contractor  without tend ering process, resulting in irregular  
expenditure out of the Scheme funds. Further, undue favour to contractor could not be ruled 
out. 
The Ministry, while noting the audit observation, stated (September 2022) that it had sought 
comments from the States. 
Further, in four States29, there were irregularities amounting to `7.25 crore in the grant of 
mobilisation advance, as stated below: 
• Development of Rangpo-Singtam, Sikkim: The State Government, vide its 
decision of February 2016, had withdrawn the practice of grant of mobilisation 
advance to the contractors. Ho wever, contrary to this, mobilisation advance 
amounting to `5.76 crore was granted by the State Government. 
• Development of Ayodhya, Uttar Pradesh: Interest amounting to `36.51 lakh 
was recovered by the State Government on the mobilisation advance amounting 
to `3.10 crore granted to the contractor , but the same was treated by the State 
Government as its own income instead of refunding to the Ministry. 
                                                           
28  Calculated at the rate of 4 per cent simple interest for eight months from August 2021 to March 2022  
29  Sikkim (`5.76 crore), Goa (`41.96 lakh), Bihar (`70.62 lakh) and Uttar Pradesh (`36.51 lakh) 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
55 
 
• Development of Sinquerium-Aguada Jail,  Goa: The State Government 
recovered interest amounting to `41.96 lakh on mobilisation advance granted to 
the contractor but did not refund the same to the Ministry.  
• Integrated Development  of Kanwariya route,  Bihar: Mobilisation advance 
amounting to `70.62 lakh was not recovered by the State Government from the 
contractor. 
The Ministry while noting the audit observation, stated (September 2022) that it ha d 
sought comments from concerned State Governments. 
3.8 Recovery at the instance of Audit 
Recovery of `71.16 lakh was made by State Government in Goa at the instance of Audit, 
in respect of three items under the project ‘Development of Sinquerim-Baga, Anjuna 
Vagator, Morjim Keri Aguada Fort and Aguada Jail’ in Goa, as given below: 
Table 3.6: Recovery at the instance of Audit 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
item 
Brief particulars of the issue Amount 
Recovered  
(` lakh) 
1 Centrifugally 
cast, ductile 
iron pressure 
pipes with 
cement 
mortar 
The rate of the said item  as per Goa Schedule 
of Rates, 2012  was `2,443 per meter  and 
payment was approved by the Department at 
the rate of `2,333.85 per meter whereas actual 
payment was made at `24,443 per me ter for 
this item resulting in excess payment of `65.22 
lakh.  
On this being pointed out , the Department 
made recovery of `65.22 lakh in December 
2021. 
65.22 
2 Water ATM 
plant installed 
at Baga 
parking, Baga 
Titos and 
Anjuna 
Said item (3 Nos) at Baga parking, Baga Titos 
and Anjuna was procured for `9,53,348 (each), 
whereas same item  (1 No .) was installed at 
Candolim for `12,11,040.  Adopting of two 
different rates for same item resulted in excess 
payment of `2.58 lakh. 
On this being pointed out , the Department 
recovered `2.58 lakh from the contractor. 
2.58 
3 Split type 
room AC unit  
Eight Nos. of the said item earlier executed at  
`48,693.67 (each) were executed as extra items 
at higher rates of `75,465 (11 Nos)  by same 
contractor. This resulted in excess payment of 
`2.94 lakh. 
On this being pointed out , the Department 
admitted the audit observation (December 
3.36 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
56 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
item 
Brief particulars of the issue Amount 
Recovered  
(` lakh) 
2021) and recovered `3.36 lakh from the 
contractor along with interest. 
Total 71.16 
 
Audit acknowledges the prompt action taken by the State Government. 
3.9 Summing up 
There were large variations in the Budget Estimates and Revised Estimates of the Scheme 
which is indicative of inefficient budgeting and unrealistic estimation  as the Ministry had 
reduced the Budget at R evised Estimates stage in five out of eight years. Besides, as the 
Ministry did not is sue instructions to the States for opening of separate bank account for 
more than five and half years since launch of the Scheme, many State Governments did not 
open interest-bearing accounts, thus causing loss of interest to the exchequer. Further, nine 
States did not remit interest amounting to `50.06 crore to the Ministry. There was delay in 
submission or non-submission of Utilisation Certificates (UCs) by the State Governments 
in 47 out of total 76 projects as on 31 March 2022.  
The Ministry had not def ined the purpose of utilisation of consultancy and contingency 
charges released by it to the State Implementing agencies. In four out of 14 selected 
projects, State Governments incurred irregular expenditure such as purchase of vehicles or 
other inadmissible expenditure against contingency charges. There was undue benefit of 
`19.13 crore to contractors on account of irregular payment s and  grant of mobilisation 
advance. Further, S tate Government s incurred wasteful/excess/  unfruitful/ inadmissible 
expenditure of `51.56 crore from the Scheme funds. 
 
 
 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
57 
 
Chapter-IV 
Implementation of the Scheme 
 
4.1 Delay in completion of projects  
After launching of the Scheme in January 2015, the Ministry of Tourism sanctioned a total 
of 76 Projects based on 15 tourism themes under S wadesh Darshan Scheme during  
2014-15 to 2018-19. No project was sanctioned after 2018 -19. All these 76 projects were 
to be completed on or before September 2021. However, no project was completed within 
the stipulated time frame. As of March 2022, only 30 out of 76 projects had been completed 
and 46 projects were still ongoing. The physical progress of projects (March 2022) is given 
below: 
Chart 4.1: Project-wise physical progress (as of March 2022) 
 
Audit analysed the delay in respect of 30 completed and 46 ongoing projects, which is 
given below: 
Chart 4.2: Delay in completion of projects
 
30
33
5
4 4
Completed 75-100 % 50-75 % 25-50 % <25 %
2
6
12
9
1
3
10
19
11
3
1-12 MONTHS
13-24 MONTHS
25-36 MONTHS
37-48 MONTHS
MORE THAN 48 MONTHSDelay 
1-12 months 13-24 Months 25-36 Months 37-48 Months more than 48
months
Ongoing Projects 3 10 19 11 3
Completed Project 2 6 12 9 1

Report No. 17 of 2023 
58 
 
From the above, it may be seen that: 
 Even after taking considerable time, only 30 projects were completed as of March 
2022 and the delay in completion of these projects ranged from  7 months to  
53 months.  
 There was inordinate delay in remaining 46 ongoing projects. As of March 2022, 
delay from the scheduled date of completion ranged from 6 months to 54 months.  
Audit observed that eight 30 out of the 14 selected projects were completed with delay s 
ranging from 22 months to 47 months. Remaining six projects were yet to be completed, 
despite considerable delay of 21 months to 42 months. The major reasons for delay were 
delay in availability o f encumbrance free land and clearance s, delay in finalisation of 
tenders and commencement of work, etc., as discussed in the subsequent paragraphs.  
The National Productivity Council (NPC) in its mid-term evaluation of the Scheme in July 
2019 also pointed out the delays in completion of projects. Further, the Department related 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture in its 298 th report 
(August 2021), not being satisfied with the progress of projects under S wadesh Darshan 
Scheme, stated that the Scheme had not shown remarkable achievements due to delay in 
completion of projects. The Committee recommended t o take  stringent measures for 
expediting the completion of projects in a time-bound manner. However, no effective steps 
were taken by the Ministry in this regard. 
The Ministry, while  agreeing to the issue of delay in implementation of project s, stated 
(September 2022) that Covid-19 pandemic, non -availability of labour, floods and other 
natural calamities, non-availability of permissions, etc., were some of the reasons for delay 
in completion of projects. Various steps were being taken for completion of projects such 
as regular review meetings, regular communication with S tate Gove rnments and 
monitoring through dashboard. Further, in Swadesh Darshan Scheme 2.0, all clearances 
would mandatorily be part of the Detailed Project Reports. 
4.2 Sanction of projects without ensuring availability of encumbrance free land and 
necessary clearances 
As per the Scheme guidelines, the implementing agency was to ensure that land to be used 
for the project must be free from all encroachments. The funds were to be released only 
after submission of all the necessary clearances from various agencies (viz., Forest, 
Archaeological Survey of India and local bodies etc.) and issuance of work orders. 
Audit observed that the Ministry of Tourism sanctioned projects and released funds to the 
concerned States, based on undertaking given by the S tate Governments in the DPRs to 
provide encumbrance free land, without ensuring actual availability of land. 
In the 14 selected projects, the Ministry sanctioned 982 components at a cost of  
`1,150.15 crore. Audit observed that in 13 out of the 14 selected projects, the Ministry had 
to drop 149 components (15 per cent) with a sanctioned cost of `146 crore (13 per cent), 
                                                           
30 Chhattisgarh, Sikkim, Gujarat, Telangana (Tribal), Goa, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan  and 
Uttarakhand 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
59 
 
after 35 months to 69 months from the date of sanction. The reasons were non-availability 
of land or lack of clearances from different authorities (Forest, Archaeological Survey of 
India, Coastal Regulatory Zone). In addition, in eight 31 selected projects, land/clearances 
were made available with significant delay in many components, resulting in cascading 
delay in commencement and completion of projects. 
The Ministry, while noting the audit observation, stated (September 2022) that they ha d 
referred the observations pertaining to the States for their inputs. It was further stated that 
ensuring availability of encumbrance free land as well as necessary clearances is the 
responsibility of the concerned State Governments. The components where such hindrances 
were observed were dropped from the projects. 
The reply is not tenable as the Ministry did not devise any mechanism for ensuring 
encumbrance free land and other clearances before release of funds but relied on the 
undertaking given by the State Governments, which resulted in delay in completion of 
works and other hindrances.  Further, dropping of components due to hindrances resulted 
in only partial completion of the projects sanctioned under the Scheme.  
Case Study- 4.1: Unfruitful expenditure due to non-ensuring availability of land at 
Salamabad-Uri (Jammu & Kashmir) 
The component ‘Integrated Development of Border Tourism at Salamabad -Uri’ under 
Swadesh Darshan Scheme was entrusted to J&K Projects Construction Corporation 
(JKPCC) by State Tourism Department. The land belonged to National Hydro Electric 
Power Corporation (NHPC) and despite knowing this fact, the Implementing Agency went 
ahead with project execution.  During physical inspection, it was seen that NHPC had 
constructed a wall around the land and work 32 had been stopped after incurring an 
expenditure of `1.27 crore for earthwork for basement and foundation columns, etc., which 
thus proved to be unfruitful. 
 
                                                           
31  Bihar Kanwaria route (29 months), Coastal circuit, Goa (33 months), Himalayan circuit , Himachal 
Pradesh (8 months), Development of Sanchi -Satna-Rewa-Mandsaur-Dhar, M adhya Pradesh (11 
months to 37 months), Coastal circuit , Puducherry (2 months), Sambhar Lake Desert circuit , 
Rajasthan, Tribal circuit, Telangana (5 months) and Development of Tehri-Uttarakhand (18 months) 
32  A Multipurpose hall with cafeteria, gender -based toilets, pa rking, airconditioned amphitheatre, 
security cabin etc., were to be constructed at the site. 
Picture 4.1: Component executed on the land belonging to NHPC at Salamabaad -Uri, J&K, hence 
the work was stopped and boundary wall was constructed by NHPC 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
60 
 
Case Study 4.2: Selection of destination site without ensuring forest clearance 
resulting to non-development of tourist amenities at Megalithic Burials, Damar avai, 
Telangana  
The Ministry of Tourism approved (June 2016) development of site of Megalithic Burials 
at Damaravai, Telangana under Tribal Circuit of the S wadesh Darshan Scheme, as these 
burials stand testimony to existence of pre -historic men here 10,000 years ago. As per 
approval, 11 components covering cultural interpretation centre, pathways around burials, 
gazebo, solar lighting, sitting benches, drinking water, solid waste collection bins, public 
convenience etc., were to be executed at the site for convenience of tourists.  
Audit observed that despite the land being in forest area, no clearances were obtained from 
the Ministry of Environment Forest and Climate Change. As permission for development 
was not given by Forest department, State failed to commence work at the site and could 
only partially execute the sub-base road of one component i.e., last mile connectivity of 1.5 
kms with two culverts (sanctioned cost: `2.93 crore), with expenditure of `75 lakh. In view 
of non-progress, the Ministry of Tourism in its Regional Review Meeting held in January 
2020, dropped the remaining 10 components.   
As a result, tourist amenities as proposed could not be developed at megalithic burials, thus 
defeating the purpose of inclusion of the site under Tribal circuit. 
  
Picture 4.2: Due to lack of forest clearance, no work was executed at Megalithic Burials at Damaravai, 
Telangana 
The Tourism Department stated (March 2022) that during the Regional Review Meeting 
held in January 2020, the cost of the last mile connectivity was reduced to `75 lakh as 
incurred by the Corporation. 
However, reply of the Management was silent about the re asons for selecting the 
destination site in Reserve Forest area without obtaining permission for development from 
Forest Department. 
 
Case Study 4.3: Wasteful expenditure of `12.41 crore due to improper planning 
The Ministry sanctioned (March 2017) a project ‘Development of Eco -Adventure circuit 
covering Aizawl - Hmuifang’ for `99.07 crore in Mizoram on Eco circuit theme after site 
visit conducted by P rogramme Management Consultant (October 2016). The project 
consisted of 10 sites and Durtlang was one of major tourist destination s on the circuit due 


Report No. 17 of 2023 
61 
 
to its strategic advantage, which inter-alia comprised cable car component from Durtlang 
to Chaltlang with cost of `24.82 crore. It was envisaged that proposed cable car would 
provide the memorable experience of the natural bounty that Mizoram has to offer. It was 
also to cater tourists and other locals to commute between Durtlang and Chaltlang as both 
locations were very close to Aizawl and the connectivity via road took longer time. 
The State Government of Mizoram informed ( August 2018) the Ministry  that five high 
tension cables belonging to the Power Grid Corporation of India Limited (PGCIL) existed 
at the site of the cable car between Durtlang & Chaltlang and PGCIL did not give clearance 
for removal of cables. The S tate Government proposed that stations for the cable car may 
be shifted between Hmuifang Peak and Hmuifang Tourist Resort. However, the Ministry 
did not agree (December 2018) to shift the site on the grounds that the proposed new site 
at Hmuifang was 60 kms away from Aizawl and received very low tourist footfall.  
Later, the Ministry dropped (November 2019) the originally approved cable car from 
Durtlang to Chaltlang due to the S tate Government having initiated the work without 
necessary clearance from PGCIL and directed the State Government to bear the expenditure 
incurred. However, the State Government informed (May 2020) the Ministry that it had 
already released 50 per cent of the sanctioned amount i.e. , `12.41 crore to the contractor 
and the said amount had already been utilised for the initial works. The State expressed its 
inability to bear the above cost.   
Audit observed that the Ministry did not ensure encumbrance -free land before releasing 
funds as the Programme Management Consultant of the Ministry did not point out existence 
of cables belonging to PGCIL at the site of cable car at the time of site visit in October 
2016. 
The Ministry replied (September 2022) that the State Government had utilised `12.41 crore 
without getting the clearance  for shifting of high-tension wires. Therefore, the Ministry 
dropped the component and the expenditure incurred was to be borne by the S tate 
Government and amount utilised on this component was not included by the State in the 
utilisation certificate  being submitted to the  Ministry. Further, the Ministry endorsed 
(October 2022) the reply of the State Government which stated that the State Government 
took all possible initiatives with due diligence including consultation with Mizoram Power 
and Electricity Department and PGCIL for making  the sites available for the project with 
necessary clearances. 
However, the fact remains that the State Government utilised `12.41 crore without getting 
the clearance for shifting of high-tension wires which was a pre-requisite for setting up of 
cable car. 
Thus, not only the expenditure of `12.41 crore was wasteful and not recovered from the 
State Government, but the tourists and locals were deprived of the benefits arising from 
that cable car. 
 
 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
62 
 
Recommendation No. 8 
Instead of relying only on the undertaking given by the States regarding  availability of 
encumbrance free land and other clearances, the Ministry may devise an institutional 
mechanism in coordination with the States and the concerned Ministries so that 
necessary clearances can be obtain ed in a time bound manner  prior to release of funds 
under future Schemes of the Ministry. 
4.3 Delay in award of works under projects by the States 
For timely completion of projects, work contracts for projects needed to be awarded within 
the stipulated time frame. As per the Scheme guidelines, invitation and finali sation of all 
tenders for the project s was to be completed by the States, within three months from the 
date of sanction of the project.  
Audit observed that the prescribed timelines were not adhered to by the State Governments 
and there was delay in award of works ranging from 11 months to 5 8 months in all 14 
selected projects, as depicted below: 
Chart 4.3: Delay in award of works under the projects (in months) 
 
While noting  the audit observation, the Ministry  stated (September 2022) that it was 
seeking comments of the respective States. 
34
49
27
42
14
30
30
50
34
58
53
24
38
11
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70
Kanwaria route, Bihar
Tribal Circuit, Chhattisgarh
Himalayan circuit, HP
Coastal Circuit, Puducherry
Circuit linking Rangpo- Singtam, Sikkim
Heritage Circuit, Telangana
Tribal Circuit, Telangana
Heritage Circuit, Gujarat
Coastal Circuit, Goa
Himalayan circuit, J&K
Sanchi-Satna-Dhar, Buddhist Circuit, MP
Sambar  lake,  Desert Circuit, Rajasthan
Tehri-Chamba-Sarain, Eco Circuit, Uttarakhand
Ayodhya, Ramayana Circuit, UP
Delay in award  (in months)

Report No. 17 of 2023 
63 
 
4.4 Tendering process for award of work  
Audit observed issues in process of tendering such as award of work without relevant 
sanctions, improper tendering, award of work on nomination basis, etc., as given below: 
Table 4.1: Irregularities in tendering and award of works 
Irregularities States 
Works awarded without A dministrative 
Approval/Expenditure Sanction/Technical Sanction   
Himachal Pradesh, Puducherry, 
Rajasthan, Sikkim, Uttarakhand 
Works awarded without tendering Gujarat, Rajasthan33, Madhya 
Pradesh34, Sikkim, Uttarakhand 
Award on nomination basis without proper justification Madhya Pradesh, Telangana35 
Selection of Architect through draw system Gujarat36 
Non-entering into Agreement  Gujarat 
Delay in execution of agreement after issue of letter of 
acceptance 
Madhya Pradesh 
 
Case Study 4.4:  Development of Rangpo-Singtam, Sikkim 
Splitting of work to avoid sanction from higher authority and e-tendering 
State Government vide its notification (July 2015) stipulated that tenders for civil work 
valuing up to `2 crore can be awarded by Gram Panchayat without calling of tenders and 
work above `2 crore and up to `7 crore within the district would be awarded by 
Divisional Engineer/Superintending Engineer through e-tendering. 
It was noticed that Tourism Department split the work ‘Development of Eco Log Huts 
(6 Nos .) at Aritar ’ with sanctione d cost of `5.78 crore under Aritar -Rhenock-Rongli 
component in three parts , i.e. (i) Construction of 3 Nos . of Log Huts : `2.63 crore, (ii) 
Construction of 2 Nos. of Log Huts: `1.75 crore and (iii) Construction of 1 Log Hut & 
Staff accommodation : `1.45 cror e. The works were awarded through the Gram 
Panchayat which awarded all the three works to a single contractor.  
It is pertinent to mention that even after splitting, the cost of one work was `2.63 crore. 
However, all three works were awarded at the Gram Panchayat level instead of e -
tendering by the appropriate authority.  
Thus, the works were split to evade financial sanction by higher authorities as well as the 
process of e-tendering. 
 
                                                           
33  Solar Street lighting work at Naraina and Naliasar 
34  Additional components amounting to `12.40 crore 
35  Three works valued  at `36.38 lakh (Heritage circuit) and Bogatha waterfall valued at `2.36 crore 
(Tribal circuit) 
36  Implementing Agency randomly allocated 12 projects among six Architects by drawing chits.   

Report No. 17 of 2023 
64 
 
The Ministry, while replying that undertaking tendering for the works is the responsibility 
of the Implementing Agency, stated (September 2022) that it had invited comments of the 
concerned States/UTs on the audit observation. 
4.5 Execution of project components on the land/property owned by private 
individuals or Trusts  
As per the Scheme guidelines, one of the conditions for sanction of the projects was that 
no portion of the sanctioned project should be executed/implemented on the land/property 
owned by a private individual or Trust.  
The Ministry, however,  approved projects without ensuring ownersh ip of land/property. 
Audit observed that: 
(i) Out of selected 14 projects, four projects were executed on land belonging to 
Trusts/Temple/Church, as shown in the table below: 
Table 4.2: Projects executed on Trust land 
Thus, the expenditure incurred on the above projects was inadmissible. 
Case Study 4.5: Interpretation Centre at Qutub Shahi Heritage Park, Telangana 
The Ministry sanctioned (June 2017) 14 components valued at `82.43 crore at Qutub Shahi 
Heritage Park (QSHP), out of which construction of Entrance Plaza and Building and 
Interpretation Centre were some of the important components. QSHP was on the tentative 
list of UNESCO’s World Heritage Sites. The work of design and construction of Entrance 
Plaza and Building and Interpretation Centre was awarded for `40.03 crore. However, due 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the Project Ownership of the 
land 
Expenditure 
incurred  
(date) 
Status of the 
Project 
1.  Development of Sinquerim -
Aguada Jail, Goa 
Shri Devi Morjai and 
Affiliates Devalaya 
(Temple Committee) 
`6.48 crore 
(till 
05.04.2022) 
Completed 
2.  Development of Porbandar -
Dandi, Gujarat 
Trust/Gujarat 
Vidyapeeth 
 
`9.20 crore 
(till 
03.01.2022) 
Completed 
3.  Development of Ayodhya, 
Uttar Pradesh (Digambar 
Akhada) 
Trust       `3.06 crore 
(till 
05.05.2022) 
 
Completed 
4.  Development of Qutub 
Shahi Heritage Park, 
Telangana 
Waqf Board had 
claimed ownership. The 
matter was sub-judice 
since 2007 
`9.01 crore 
(till 
30.05.2022) 
Work was 
halted  

Report No. 17 of 2023 
65 
 
to litigation, the work had to be stopped (23 January 2021) after incurring expenditure of 
`9.01 crore, on the  orders passed by the Telangana Waq f Tribunal (January 2021) 
restraining any construction. 
 
Audit observed that the site selected for execution of this component was under litigation 
since 2007 as Waq f Board had laid claim to this parcel of land. The S tate Government 
selected this component despite knowing that the matter was sub -judice. Thus, an amount 
of `9.01 crore spent for execution of these works had become unfruitful. 
Since the QSHP is also on the tentative list of UNESCO’s World Heritage Sites, the sites 
offer immense potential for tourists. Stopping of the works midway had serious impact on 
this destination getting the tag of UNESCO’s World Heritage Site. 
Case Study 4.6: Development of tourist amenities at Morjim Khind 
(Coastal circuit, Goa) 
The Ministry sanctioned (June 2016) development of tourist amenities at Morjim Khind, 
Goa for `6.48 crore  consisting of development of parking area, cycle track, cafeteria, 
seating, toilet, landscaping, etc. Audit observed that the component was carried out on the 
land belonging to a Trust (Devi Morjai Devasthan & Affiliates Devalaya, Pernem Taluka, 
Goa) and State Government had no ownership rights of the said land. The Trust had given 
No-Objection Certificate (April 2015) on the condition of no change/alteration in the 
original title of the property in favour of the lessee  and after expiry of lease period of 20 
years, the structure with fixture s would stand transferred to the Dev alaya without any 
compensation. Further, as per agreement (July 2019) between the Temple Committee and 
Goa Tourism Development Corporation (GTDC), the Committee was entitled to receive 40 
per cent  share of the monthly rent on leasing out the premises for operation and 
maintenance for a period of 20 years till the year 2039 and GTDC was to bear all the 
existing and future taxes and all other financial liabilities  including paying electricity 
charges, water charges and payment of other taxes.  However, no revenue has been 
generated from the site (January 2022) and GTDC was bearing all liabilities. 
Picture 4.3: Work of Interpretation Centre stopped due to Court case on land title, Qutub Shahi 
Heritage Park, Telangana 


Report No. 17 of 2023 
66 
 
(ii) Scrutiny of projects under Spiritual circuit revealed that out of 13 projects under the 
Spiritual circuit, four projects were executed on land owned by private trust/temples, 
as given below:  
Table 4.3: Work executed on private land in spiritual circuit 
Thus, the Ministry did not adhere to its own guidelines that no portion of the sanctioned 
project should be executed/implemented on the land/property owned by a private individual 
or trust. It did not carry out due verification and only relied on undertaking given by the 
State Governments, which resulted in irregular expenditure/blockade of funds.  
The Ministry, while noting the audit observation, stated (September 2022) that despite the 
land not being State owned in some cases, the asset was open for public and was put in use 
for the general visitors and tourists. Furthermore, providing land for development of   
projects was the responsibility of the S tate Governments. Further, clarifications ha d been 
sought from the States on the audit observations.  
The reply of the Ministry is not acceptable as the Scheme guidelines and sanction letter s 
for the projects clearly mention ed that no portion of the sanctioned project should be 
executed/implemented on the land/property owned by a private individual or Trust.  
Execution of sanctioned projects on private land resulted in irregular expenditure/blockage 
of funds.  
 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the Project Ownership 
of the land 
Expenditure 
incurred till 
April 2022 
(` in crore) 
Status of the 
Project 
1.  Development of Spiritual circuit, 
Puducherry 
Church 2.06 Completed 
2.  Development of Gorakhnath 
Temple (Gorakhpur), Devipattan 
Temple (Balrampur) and Vatvashni 
under Spiritual circuit, Uttar 
Pradesh 
Trust 11.46 Work in 
progress 
3.  Development of Jewar - Dadri- 
Sikandrabad- Noida- Khurja- 
Banda in Uttar Pradesh under 
Spiritual circuit theme under 
Spiritual circuit, Uttar Pradesh 
Temple 2.38 
4.  Development of Waki - Adasa- 
Dhapewada- Paradsingha- Chota 
Taj Bagh - Telankhandi- Girad 
under Spiritual circuit, Maharashtra 
Temple/ 
Trust 
22.44 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
67 
 
4.6 Deviation/extra items and changes in scope of work  
Audit observed that in six out of 14 selected projects, there were deviation/extra items and 
changes in scope of work from the approved DPRs, as briefly discussed below: 
(i) Himalayan circuit, H imachal Pradesh: During physical verification, Audit 
observed that I mplementing Agency executed less work 37 in many components. 
However, it claimed full sanctioned amount by showing all the work as completed as 
per scope.  
(ii) Development of Sinquerim -Aguada Jail, Goa:  State Government  constructed 
Public Amenities -toilet blocks at 5 locations with cost of `14.21 cr ore including 
additional unapproved earth work, repair and illumination  against approved 10 
locations with cost of `14.58 crore, resulting in cost overrun of `6.92 crore. The   
expenditure on unapproved work incurred from Scheme funds was to be borne by the 
State Government. 
(iii) Development of Rangpo -Singtam, Sikkim : Works amounting to `47.70 lakh 
(Electrical Power Sub -station at Singhik , Car Park ing and Jhora Training work), 
though not included in sanctioned project , were executed from Scheme funds. 
Further, scope of work was changed by Executing Agency without approval of the 
Ministry of Tourism (expenditure on approach road of `32.43 lakh against approved 
`7.30 lakh, construction of two  traditional eco log huts against sanctioned four log 
huts, incurring of less expenditure on work relating to way-side amenities). 
(iv) Buddhist circuit, M adhya Pradesh : Instead of Tourist Reception Centre, a 
‘Conference Hall and Additional Rooms with Toilets’ was constructed in Vindhya 
Retreat at Rewa at a cost of `2.39 crore.  
Case Study 4.7:  Buddhist circuit, Madhya Pradesh: Inadmissible expenditure 
of `10.69 crore on components not sanctioned under the Scheme 
As per sanction orders, funds released by the Ministry under the Scheme was to be 
utilised only for the purpose for which these were released. It was observed that 
Implementing Agency executed 15 wo rks/components38 amounting to `10.69 
crore under the Buddhist circuit, which were not part of the sanctioned DPR under 
the Scheme. 
  
                                                           
37  Cafeteria at Heliport, Shimla (a small pantry of 3.15 sq .m. against 45.59 sq .m. approved in DPR), 
Convention Center at Kiarighat (infrastructure capacity of only 350 persons against  capacity of 1,000 
persons and parking capacity of 90 vehicles against 200 vehicles), Development of Art & Craft Centre 
at Bhalei (parking area of only 144.30 sq.m. against 500 sq.m.). 
38   Development work of Jataka Van and Chandravatika at Sanchi, Construction of additional rooms and 
toilets for Tourist Reception Centre at Rewa , Construction of conference hall and internal  
electrification work at Tourist Reception Centre, Rewa 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
68 
 
  
Picture 4.4: Jataka Van Sanchi, Madhya 
Pradesh, not part of Scheme but 
constructed from Scheme funds 
Picture 4.5: Hall at Tourist Reception 
Center, Rewa, Madhya Pradesh, not part of 
Scheme but constructed from Scheme funds 
 
The Madhya Pradesh State Tourism Development Corporation stated (February 
2022) that as per the requirement, re -appropriation of funds had been m ade and 
work had been completed as required. 
However, the fact remains that fund s were used in the projects/components other 
than those sanctioned under the Scheme by the Ministry. 
(v) Tribal circuit, Telangana: As per the sanction order, amounts of `4.25 crore for 
cottages at Medaram; `5.94 crore for eco-friendly log-huts at Laknavaram; `4.14 
crore for Tree top tribal huts at Tadvai and `5.09 crore for eco-friendly log-huts at 
Bogatha Waterfalls were earmarked. However, the Company entered into agreements 
with the contractors for building the log-huts and cottages with Reinforced Cement 
Concrete (RCC). 
  
Picture 4.6: Tadvai- RCC Cottages in place of 
Tree top tribal huts 
Picture 4.7: Bogatha- RCC cottage in place 
of eco-friendly Log-huts 
Further, against approval of 146 seating benches made of cement concrete at the rate 
of `12,000 per bench and 330 solid waste collection bins made up of fibre reinforced 
plastic at the rate of `2,888 per bin, Implementing Agency procured only 76 seating 
benches (wood composite material) at `22,327.50 per bench and 60 bins (jute 
composite) at `14,000 per bin. As a result of these increased costs, less er number of 
benches (52 per cent) and bins (18 per cent) were actually installed. 


Report No. 17 of 2023 
69 
 
Audit also observed that against 30 numbers of water fleets for Laknavaram  
(`6.14 crore), only seven fleets ( `1.13 crore) were delivered at Laknavaram and  
23 fleets (`5.01 crore) were diverted to other locations not covered under the Scheme.  
 
 
Similarly, against nine fleets for Bogatha Waterfalls ( `77.19 lakh), no fleet was 
delivered. Thus, the S tate Government diverted 32 water fleets amounting to `5.78  
crore received for Swadesh Darshan destinations for other purposes, which was 
irregular.  
(vi) Desert circuit, Rajasthan:  In the component of cycle track, site inspection 
conducted (January 2022) revealed that against sanctioned length of 15.75 kms, only 
4.1 kms of bicycle track was developed, which was also not in usable condition. 
 
 
In response, State Tourism Department stated (May 2022) that work was executed up 
to the extent of availability of sanctioned amount and was handed over to Sambhar 
Salt Limited, Rajasthan. 
Picture 4.8: Fleets delivered at Laknavaram, Telangana, against sanctioned 30 fleets 
 
 
––––––
 
 
 
A B 
C 
D E 
JHAPOK 
GUDHA 
N 
Picture 4.9: Track constructed: shown in Green colour, and Track not constructed: shown 
in Red colour 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
70 
 
The reply is not tenable as according to the project closure report (July 2021) of State 
Government as approved by the Ministry, the Bicycle Track was shown as developed 
up to 15.75 kms. 
Case Study 4.8: Non-functioning of Salt Train at Sambhar Salt Complex, 
Rajasthan 
The Ministry of Tourism approved (September 2015) upgradation of railway track (27 
kms) going around main reservoir area, over Jhapok Dam,  procurement of coaches, 
maintenance depot and signaling, communication and precautionary devices along with 
other components at Sambhar Salt Complex at a total expenditure of `19.37 crore (later 
revised to `20.51 crore).  
It was observed that the railway track was constructed/upgraded from Sambhar Salt 
Complex to Jhapok Dam having a length of approximately 10 kms.  
Further, Site inspection revealed an outdoor shade structure, which had been created in 
place of maintenance depot. Moreover, the train was also not found functional. 
 
 
 Picture 4.10: Outdoor shade structure erected in place of Maintenance Depot 
 
In addition to the above, it was observed that following items which were part of the 
sanctioned projects were not executed by the Implementing Agencies: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Report No. 17 of 2023 
71 
 
Table 4.4: Items not executed by the Implementing Agency  
Project Items not executed (Site/Component) 
Himalayan 
circuit, 
Himachal 
Pradesh 
Parking39 and Gazebo (Convention Centre at Kiarighat), hangar for the 
Helicopter and baggage/luggage room (Heliport at Shimla), museum & 
village bazaar (Art and Craft Center at Bhalei, Chamba), Landscaping work 
(Bhalei and Kangra), Open Air theatre (Village Haat, Kangra) 
Buddhist 
circuit, Madhya 
Pradesh 
Entrance Gate Signage -Overhead Signage (Marshal House at Sanchi), Eight 
sit outs, solar illumination work (Development of Approach road at Sanchi), 
Cultural centre (Buddhist Theme Park at Sanchi) 
 
Case Study 4.9: Tribal circuit, Telangana  
As per sanction order, six Gazebos (eight-seater capacity) with cost of `44.79 lakh were 
to be built at Gattamma, - Mulugu. However, during physical verification of the site 
(December 2021), only three Gazebos were found at site. Interestingly, one Gazebo was 
found built at the camp office of the District Collector, Mulugu which was to be built at 
the destination site at Gattamma, Mulugu.  
 
Picture 4.11: Gazebo constructed at Mulugu District Collector’s Camp office in place of 
Gattamma, Mulugu, Telangana 
 
The Ministry of Tourism, while noting the audit observation, stated (September 2022) that 
comments had been sought from the concerned States. 
Recommendation No. 9 
The Ministry may strengthen the mechanism to address the issues such as deviation from 
and changes in the scope of work in order to ensure that proper justification is provided 
by the States/UTs for such deviations and the approval of the Ministry  thereof is 
invariably obtained.  
                                                           
39  Against capacity of 200 vehicles, capacity for only 90 vehicles constructed  


Report No. 17 of 2023 
72 
 
4.7 Operation and maintenance of created assets 
State Governments were responsible for operation and maintenance (O&M) of the projects 
directly or by appointing an agency and were to bear  or be responsible for all operational 
expenditure. A special purpose vehicle was to be created for the purpose wherever feasible. 
The tentative O&M cost of the projects was to be worked out by the P rogramme 
Management Consultant at time of preparation of DPR. The emphasis was to be on 
sustainable operation and maintenance models through innovative revenue generation 
options, to minimise the budgetary commitment on the part of State Governments for O&M 
services.   
The Ministry of Tourism approved the projects on the basis of undertaking given by States 
that they would be responsible for sustainable O&M of identified/developed projects under 
the Scheme and w ould have necessary arrangements/agreements with public/private 
agencies for the sa me. However, apart from the undertaking given by the States, the 
Ministry did not ensure putting up of a mechanism in place by the States for O&M. This 
issue was also raised by the Department of Expenditure at the time of appraisal of the 
Scheme by the Expenditure Finance Committee in the year 2017. The Ministry had assured 
(August 2017) that they had proposed changes in the Scheme guidelines and now 5 per 
cent of project cost would be released to the implementing agencies only after successful 
O&M for one year after completion of the project and its evaluation by third parties. 
However, in Scheme guidelines (October 2017), in place of O&M of all assets/facilities 
created under the Scheme, the Ministry made provision for O&M of only of toilets, tourist 
facilitation centres and cafeteria for one year after completion of project and stipulated that 
5 per cent of the project cost would be released after successful O&M. Thus, the Ministry 
did not make any guidelines/provision for ensuring proper O&M of the assets created under 
the Scheme in a sustainable manner. 
Thus, no arrangements were made by the States for effective upkeep and maintenance of 
the facilities created under  the Scheme . During physical verification of sites/projects, 
instances of facil ities created but not put to operation, leasing out of facilities without 
approval, deterioration of infrastructure due to lack of proper maintenance, etc . were 
observed. Some of the instances are shown in the photographs below:  
  
Picture 4.1 2: Rajasthan Desert circuit: Non 
maintenance of Bicycle Track 
Picture 4.1 3: Changing rooms for changing 
clothes at Ajgaivinath, Bihar constructed far 
away from the ghat and near a crematory which 
were encroached by the locals for personal use 


Report No. 17 of 2023 
73 
 
  
Picture 4.1 4: Damaged Gents' toilet (mobile 
toilet) at Keri, Goa 
Picture 4.1 5: Sanitary fittings broken in the 
toilets provided at amphitheatre at Medaram, 
Tribal circuit, Telangana 
Further, in Coastal circuit, Goa, the Helipad at old Goa was completed in May 2020 (at a 
cost of `3.43 crore). However, facilities were not properly maintained. During site 
inspection of helipad  (November 2021), it was found that surface of vacuum dewatered 
flooring40 (VDF) was uneven and had cracks at many places and the main landing area of 
the helipad had water logging even in light rain, due to lack of O&M. 
 
Picture 4.16: Water logging and crack (VDF surface), Helipad, Goa 
 
The Ministry, while noting the audit observation, stated (September 2022) that the matter 
regarding O&M of the assets developed under Swadesh Darshan Scheme has also been 
flagged at the highest level. The Ministry has followed up the matter at highest level with 
the State Governments. 
It is evident from the above that in the absence of proper O&M arrangements, the facilities 
created were deteriorating.  
                                                           
40  Vacuum Dewatered Flooring (VDF) is special technique to do the concrete flooring to increase the 
compressive strength, tensile strength and abrasion resistance. 


Report No. 17 of 2023 
74 
 
4.7.1 Developed facilities not properly utilised 
Audit also observed that developed facilities were not properly utilised by the State 
Governments, as discussed below: 
(i) Tribal circuit, Chhattisgarh: Ethnic cafeteria, reception-cum-facilitation Centre 
constructed at Sarodadadar were not found in usable condition as cafeteria did not 
have kitchen/cooking platform and water supply. Further, reception centre did not 
have tourist facilitation, water supply, drinking water facility, etc. The log-huts, 
wooden cafeteria, artisan centre, viewpoints, souvenir shops, etc. were damaged 
due to absence of regular maintenance. Also, artisan centres constructed at Jashpur 
and Sarodadadar were being used as accommodation for tourists. 
 
 
 
Picture 4.1 7: Ethnic Cafeteria not in 
usable condition at Sarodadadar, Tribal 
Circuit, Chhattisgarh 
Picture 4. 18: Artisan Center rooms being 
used for tourist accommodation. at Jashpur, 
Chhattisgarh 
 
(ii) Himalayan circuit, Himachal Pradesh: DPR of the component ‘Light and Sound 
Show’ comprised provision of `7.56 crore for Audio Hardware ( `2.35 crore), 
Video Hardware (`1.42 crore), Interiors cabling and poles for mounting projectors 
and speakers ( `0.25 crore) and  creative section ( `3.54 crore). During joint 
physical verification, it was found that these items were procured (June 2021) by 
the executing agency and stored in the control room of the project but not installed 
and made operational. 
(iii) Heritage circuit, Telangana:  An amount of `55.16 lakh  was earmarked for 
creation of  visitor amenities (toilet blocks) with ticket counters at Raymond ’s 
Tomb, Hyderabad.  It was, however, observed that the facility of toilet block 
created was not put  to use. Further, despite availability of funds,  ticket counters 
had not been constructed. 
(iv) Tribal circuit, Telangana: Wayside amenities (`3.15 crore) built at Mallur had 
not been put to use. The property was also not being maintained and there was no 
security, as gate and chain link fencing were also not provided.  


Report No. 17 of 2023 
75 
 
  
Picture 4.19: Wayside amenity not put to use 
at Mallur, Telangana 
Picture 4.20: No gate to secure the property at 
Mallur, Telangana 
 
(v) North-East circuit, Sikkim: Developed Infrastructure 41 with sanctioned cost of 
`13.43 crore were lying idle, resulting in encroachment or deterioration of some 
of the assets.  
 
Picture 4.21: Log hut illegally occupied at 
Dhanbari, Sikkim 
Picture 4.22: Top floor of Craft Haat, Zero 
Point, Gangtok occupied by Tourism and 
Police Departments 
 
                                                           
41  Namrang Dhunga and Dhanbari (log huts), Enchey monastery (tourist meditation centre, log huts), 
Zero Point, Gangtok (c raft haats), Bakthang Falls (cafeteria), Rhenock-Aritar-Rongli (flower 
exhibition and interpretation centre, adventure tourism at Hatti Valley), Makha (cafeteria cum 
souvenir shop), Rorathang (way-side amenities) 


Report No. 17 of 2023 
76 
 
Case Study 4.10: Restricted entry to facilities created in Tribal circuit, Telangana 
A major portion of the expenditure incurred under the Scheme at Mulugu, Medaram, 
Tadvai, Mallur and Bogatha  was towards construction of restaurant/wayside 
amenities/cottages (branded as Haritha Hotels/Resorts and Restaurants). The O&M of 
above infrastructures was leased out to a private company (M/s Lallooji & Sons). While 
in majority of the sites, amenities ha d been constructed, other facilities such as seating 
benches, gazebos, landscaping etc., were constructed inside the area leased out to lessee. 
Access to these facilities was restricted to only those tourists who had booked 
accommodation, while other tourists faced difficulty in accessing these facilities. 
 
 
Picture 4.23: Restricted entry to facilities created in Tribal circuit, Telangana 
Case Study 4.11: Himalayan Circuit, Jammu and Kashmir 
Cruise-cum-floating Restaurant and Musical fountain with multimedia laser and 
video show, at Sher-i-Kashmir International Convention Centre (SKICC), Srinagar  
Cruise-cum-floating Restaurant completed with tendered cost of `1.83 crore was handed 
over to J&K Tourist Department in August 2021. However, the jetty constructed in 
SKICC/Centaur Lake View Hotel premises could not be utilised by tourists due to highly 
restricted entry in SKICC/Centaur premises being guarded round the clock by the CRPF.  
Similarly, musical fountain with multimedia laser and video show on water screen at 
SKICC, Srinagar adjacent to Centaur Lake View Hotel premises completed at a cost of `8 
crore in August 2017, could not be used regularly for tourists due to frequent events  held 
for high ranking officers and dignitaries in SKICC/Centaur premises. 


Report No. 17 of 2023 
77 
 
 
 
Picture 4.24: Cruise-cum-floating Restaurant, 
SKICC, Srinagar 
Picture 4.25: Musical Fountain with 
Multimedia Laser and Video Show, SKICC 
 
In response, Tourist Department, J&K stated that despite VVIP movements and the 
fountain remaining closed, the fountain show had attracted tourists. For cafeteria, it stated 
that initially the cruise was supposed to operate from the banks of Chaar Chinaari Ghat to 
Nehru Park Ghat and as such two jetties along with rescue boats and ambulance boats were 
provided to the cruise. The jetties were portable and could be dragged in water to the place 
of choice. 
The fact remains that facilities were not being utilis ed by tourists due to highly restricted 
entry in SKICC/Centaur hotel premises. 
Case Study 4.12: Poor project planning and non-utilisation of assets created in 
respect of Development of Cruise in river Jhelum in Srinagar 
Implementing Agency had procured two cruise boats valuing `1.40 crore in April 2017. 
As per the initial studies conducted by M/s Hyderabad Boat Builders, the cruise could not 
pass under most of the bridges of the Srinagar city, thus making the project quite unviable. 
Despite this, the I mplementing Agency went ahead with the execution of the project.  
These boats remained docked in the Jhelum River in Srinagar and could not be utilised for 
want of floating jetties. As the work of installation and commissioning of jetties was given 
to Irrigation & Flood Control Department only in April 2021, the cruise boats remained 
idle for more than five years. The entire project is now completed at a total cost of `6 
crore. However, the cruise has not been made functional and is lying idle, thus making the 
entire investment of `6 crore unfruitful. 
 


Report No. 17 of 2023 
78 
 
  
Picture 4.26: Cruise boat docked in the Jhelum River, Srinagar and lying un-utilised  
The Implementing Agency replied (February 2022) that they were trying to get the boats 
operational through Srinagar Smart City Limited. 
The reply is not tenable as these boats remained parked  for more than five years in river 
Jhelum and as on date the cruise boats were still not operational. In the absence of being 
functional, deterioration of assets cannot be ruled out. 
 
The Ministry of Tourism, while noting the audit observation, stated (September 2022) that 
comments had been sought from the concerned States. 
Recommendation No. 10 
The Ministry may take necessary steps to ensure that the State Governments carry out 
proper operation and maintenance of the assets created in a sustainable manner. The 
State Level Monitoring Committee may be asked to regularly monitor the operation and 
maintenance by the State Governments. 
4.8 Non-handing over and leasing out of created infrastructure for operation and 
maintenance 
State Governments were responsible for O&M of the projects directly or by appointing an 
agency and were to bear  or be responsible for all operational expenditure . However, 
instances of non-compliance were observed in six projects out of 14 projects by the States, 
as given below: 
Table 4.5: Non-handing over/leasing out of created infrastructure for O&M 
Name of  Project/States Irregularities noticed 
Himalayan circuit, 
Himachal Pradesh 
Village Haat at Kangra completed on 30 September 2020 at a cost of 
`3.67 crore had not been handed over for O&M (December 2021). 
Art & Craft Centre at Bhalei completed in September 2021 at an 
expenditure of `4.65 crore was leased out (November 2021) for 
O&M without entering into any MoU. Further, no physical 
completion certificate was submitted to the Ministry of Tourism. 


Report No. 17 of 2023 
79 
 
Name of  Project/States Irregularities noticed 
Coastal circuit, 
Puducherry 
i. The component ‘ Beach development at Manapet ’ completed in 
January 2020 at cost of `4.39 crore was lying idle for more than two 
years (March  2022) without being handed o ver for O&M . The  
infrastructure was deteriorating due to lack of maintenance as noticed 
during Joint Inspection conducted in March 2022. 
Heritage circuit, Gujarat O&M of Dandi Memorial in Heritage Circuit (connecting different 
historical attractions closely associated with Mahatma Gandhi), was 
the responsibility of Implementing Agency. However, no agency for 
the same was appointed and other developed assets were handed over 
to respective  private trusts, Government Departments and 
Municipality. Implementing Agency  did not enter into any 
agreement stipulating terms and conditions of O&M for these assets.   
North East circuit, 
Sikkim 
Out of 77 components, 31  components were handed over for O&M 
with delays ranging between 3 months to 3 years.  
Eco circuit, Uttarakhand ii. Mountain Biking Track from Khand to Ganoli ( `3.67 crore) 
remained unutilised (February 2022) with no handover to any agency 
for O&M. 
Ramayana circuit, Uttar 
Pradesh 
Assets were either not handed over to the concerned nodal agencies 
designated for O&M or mere on-paper transfer was done. As a result, 
the assets created were lying without any watch and ward/security 
and being stolen/mishandled or lying un-operational. 
 
The Ministry of Tourism, while noting the audit observation, stated (September 2022) that 
comments had been sought from the concerned States. 
Case Study 4.13: Unfruitful expenditure on Adventure Tourism Climbing Wall at 
Koti, Uttarakhand 
An adventure climbing wall was completed in March 2020 at  a cost of `79.74 lakh. 
During site inspection (February 2022), Audit found that the wall had been constructed 
inside the area provided to ITBP and is primarily being used by ITBP to train their staff. 
The area is restricted to entry of general tourists thereby defeating the objective of 
expenditure.  

Report No. 17 of 2023 
80 
 
 
Picture 4.27: Adventure climbing wall inside ITBP Campus at Koti, Uttarakhand 
In response, State Government stated that the climbing wall was constructed inside ITBP 
premises since ITBP is an authorised agency to award certificates to the adventure 
trainees. Although it was a prohibited area, the Department c ould allow adventure 
tourists, if they contacted them. 
 
 
4.9 Summing up 
Out of 76 projects sanctioned by the Ministry of Tourism, no project was completed within 
the stipulated time frame with delays ranging from 6 months to 54 months . In selected 14 
projects, it was noticed that eight project s were completed with delay s ranging from 22 
months to 47 months and six projects were yet to be completed, despite considerable delay. 
There w ere delays ranging from 11 months to 58  months in award of works by S tate 
Governments in the 14 selected projects. Irregularities were also noticed in tendering 
process by S tate Governments like awarding of work without relevant sanctions, award 
without tendering or  on nomination basis. D eviation/extra items and change in scope of 
work from approved DPR s was found in six out of selected 14 projects  test checked by 
Audit. 
The Ministry did not take necessary steps to ensure that the S tate Governments carry out 
proper O&M of the assets created in a sustainable manner . Further, in the Scheme 
guidelines of October 2017, the Ministry  made provision for O&M of toilet s, tourist 
facilitation centres and cafeterias only, in place of O&M of all assets/facilities created under 
the Scheme. Site inspections revealed that no arrangements were made for effective upkeep 
and maintenance of created assets as there were instances of created facilities not put to 
operation or leased out without approval and deterioration of infrastructure due to lack of 
proper maintenance.  Thus, monitoring mechanism of the Ministry for safeguarding the 
assets created after incurring expenditure of `4,239 crore under the Scheme was weak. 
 


Report No. 17 of 2023 
81 
 
Chapter-V 
Monitoring and Impact Assessment 
Monitoring plays an important role for proper implementation and continuance of a 
programme. Effective monitoring ensures timely decision making, resolution of challenges 
besides aiding course correction. This acquires greater importance in programmes wher e 
the focus is on expediting progress of works and ensuring completion within stipulated 
timelines.  
The Scheme guidelines provided detailed framework for monitoring of the Scheme which 
is depicted in the chart below: 
Chart 5.1: Monitoring Framework for Swadesh Darshan Scheme 
 
In addition, while approving the Scheme, the Minister (Tourism) had directed (December 
2014) to nominate a designated officer at the level of Ministry of Tourism /States for 
monitoring of projects/destinations with dedicated timelines and fixing responsibilities on 
officers who do not adhere to the guidelines. The above was to be ensured by the M ission 
Directorate while implementing the Scheme.  
 
 
National 
Steering 
Committee
(chaired by 
Minister, Tourism)
Central Sanctioning 
and Monitoring 
Committee
(chaired by Secretary, 
Tourism)
Mission Directorate
(chaired by Joint Secretary/ 
Additional Director General, 
Tourism)
Programme Management Consultant
(appointed by Mission Directorate)
State Level Monitoring Committees
(headed by Principal Secretary, Tourism of the State 
Government with a representative from the Ministry of 
Tourism)

Report No. 17 of 2023 
82 
 
5.1 Monitoring of Scheme by the Ministry of Tourism 
 
5.1.1 Monitoring by the National Steering Committee 
The Scheme guidelines provided for overall monitoring of the Scheme through National 
Steering Committee chaired by the Minister (Tourism) with participation of important 
Central Ministries as well as the  Archaeological Survey of India. The National Steering 
Committee was entrusted with the following responsibilities: 
• Enunciate the vision and chalk out the road map for the Scheme and provide a 
platform for exchange of ideas; 
• Oversee all operations, steer, review and monitor overall performance of the 
Scheme and provide guidance on specific issues relating to the Scheme; 
• Identification of the projects/circuits; 
• Recommend mid-course corrections in the implementation tools; 
• Periodical oversight and review of proposed/ongoing projects. 
Thus, the National Steering Committee being the apex Committee had a very significant 
role in successful and timely implementation of the projects. However, scrutiny of records 
revealed: 
(a) Poor frequency of meetings: The Scheme guidelines did not lay down the frequency 
of meetings of National Steering Committee for monitoring of the Scheme. In the first 
meeting of the Committee (January 2015), it was decided that the meetings would be 
held on quarterly basis. However, the meetings were held after long gaps and since 
its formation in January 2015, only six 42 out of the required 2 9 meetings of the 
Committee were held up to March 2022.  
Audit noticed (February 2022) that the gap between the meetings ranged from  8 
months to 21 months. No meeting of NSC was held since July 2020 i.e. f or the last 
19 months. Lack of regular/periodical meetings of the Committee led to poor 
monitoring/coordination resulting in inordinate delays and lack of convergence 
amongst other schemes and stakeholders.  
(b) Identification of Projects/ circuits: One of the major responsibilities of N ational 
Steering Committee was identification of the projects/circuits after recommendation 
of C entral Sanctioning and Monitoring Committee/Mission Directorate. However, 
scrutiny of the minutes of meetings of the Committee revealed that identification of 
the projects/circuits under the Scheme was never discussed by the Committee. Later, 
the responsibility of the Committee for identification of the projects/circuits was 
removed in the revised Guidelines of October 2017. 
(c) Other Coordination issues: National Steering Committee was envisaged to play a 
pivotal role as it brought major Ministries/Departments ( e.g., Ministry of 
Environment, Forests and Climate Change, Archaeological Survey of India,  etc.) at 
one place to discuss the issues related to project implementation. Audit observed that 
                                                           
42  14 January 2015, 24 September 2015, 26 July 2016, 16 March 2017, 12 September 2018 and 8 July 2020 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
83 
 
there were issues related to various clearances (environmental  clearance, forest  
clearance, Coastal Regulation Zone clearance, clearance from Archaeological Survey 
of India, etc.) during project implementation phase, which led to delay in execution 
of projects by the States. However, the Committee did not coordinate with the State 
Governments to oversee implementation, bring about convergence and resolve issues 
related to clearances pertaining to Ministries/organisations like Ministry of 
Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Archaeological Survey of India etc., which 
were already part of the Committee. 
The Ministry of Tourism stated  (September 2022) that meetin gs of the National Steering 
Committee were organised based on the requirements.  Further, due to Corona Pandemic, 
regular meetings of the Committee could not be  organised during  two year’s period.  
Further, in Swadesh Darshan Scheme 2.0, the Ministry had formulated a governance system 
including constitution of National Steering Committee with representation from various 
Ministries.  
The fact remains that the Ministry did not effectively utilise the apex forum of the National 
Steering Commi ttee, as envisaged during formulation of the Scheme for its effective 
implementation and monitoring. As there were bottlenecks during project implementation 
phase due to non-receipt of timely clearances from various authorities, the Committee could 
have pl ayed an important role to resolve these issues. Further, the mechanism of 
constitution of the Committee with representation from various Ministries was already in 
existence in Swadesh Darshan Scheme 1.0, but it did not coordinate to bring about synergy 
amongst various government schemes.  
5.1.2 Monitoring by C entral Sanctioning and Monitoring Committee/Mission 
Directorate  
The Central Sanctioning and Monitoring Committee (chaired by the Secretary, Tourism) 
was responsible for sanctioning projects submitted by the Mission Directorate and regular 
monitoring of the progress of implementation of the Scheme. The M ission Directorate 
chaired by the Joint Secretary/Additional Director General (Tourism) was responsible for 
seeking approval for identified projects from the C entral Sanctioning and Monitoring 
Committee, coordination and effective implementation of Scheme in a time-bound manner 
and reporting progress of implementation to the C entral Sanctioning and Monitoring 
Committee at regular intervals.  
The Ministry of Tourism  constituted the Mission Directorate in January 2015 and the 
Central Sanctioning and Monitoring Committee in June 2015. The Scheme guidelines did 
not prescribe the frequency of meetings of these Committees. As a result, meetings of the 
Central Sanctioning and Monitoring Committee  and the Mission Directorate were not 
convened regularly by the Ministry, as shown in the table below: 
  

Report No. 17 of 2023 
84 
 
Table 5.1: Year-wise meetings of Central Sanctioning and Monitoring Committee 
and Mission Directorate 
Financial Year Number of meetings held 
Central Sanctioning and 
Monitoring Committee 
Mission Directorate 
2014-15 0 1 
2015-16 6 10 
2016-17 10 10 
2017-18 2 2 
2018-19 5 6 
2019-20 0 1 
2020-21 0 0 
2021-22 0 0 
Total 23 30 
 
Thus, the Ministry  convened 23 meetings of the Central Sanctioning and Monitoring 
Committee and 30 meetings of the Mission Directorate up to March 2022. There were 
significant time gap s between the meetings. No meeting of the Central Sanctioning and 
Monitoring Committee and the Mission Directorate was held after November 2018 and 
October 2019 respectively. Most of the projects were sanct ioned during 2015 -16 and  
2016-17, with scheduled completion during 2018-19 and 2019-20. Effective monitoring of 
progress of projects at higher level got necessitated after 2018 -19 as all the projects were 
delayed. However, non-convening of meetings of the Central Sanctioning and Monitoring 
Committee and the Mission Directorate during this period made the monitoring ineffective 
at these levels . Apart from this, as discussed in para 2.11, the Ministry kept the project 
proposals submitted by the States pending with it for periods ranging between one year and 
six years , which also indicates ineffective functioning of the Central Sanctioning and 
Monitoring Committee and the Mission Directorate.  
Audit observed that the Ministry held Regional Review Meetings during January-July 2020 
with the concerned States under the chairmanship of the Secretary (Tourism). After review 
of projects, proposals were approved for dropping/deletion of the components in the States 
where work had not commenced or was having negligible progress. However, the above 
modifications were not ratified by the Central Sanctioning and Monitoring Committee as 
its meetings were not held. 
The Ministry stated  (September 2022) that since no new project was sanct ioned post  
2018-19, regular meetings of the Central Sanctioning and Monitoring Committee and the 
Mission Directorate were not held. However, the Ministry organised Regional Review 
meetings in 2019 -20 and 2020-21. Since 2021 -22, the Ministry further enhanc ed its 
monitoring mechanism and organised regular review meetings with the State Governments 
at senior levels to regularly monitor the progress of the projects and their early completion 
post pandemic. In the guidelines for Swadesh Darshan Scheme 2.0, the Ministry had 
constituted a detailed monitoring mechanism.  

Report No. 17 of 2023 
85 
 
The reply of the Ministry shows that the role of the Central Sanctioning and Monitoring 
Committee and the Mission Directorate was limited to sanctioning of projects. However, 
as per Scheme guidelines, these Committees were also responsible for coordination and 
effective implementation of the Scheme in a time -bound manner and the Mission 
Directorate was further responsible for reporting progress of the implementation to the 
Central Sanctioning and Monitoring Committee at regular intervals.  
5.1.3 Monitoring by zonal officers nominated by the Ministry 
The Ministry of Tourism  had allocated (January 2016) the monitoring of progress of the 
Scheme to Joint Secretary level officers of  the Ministry, designated as Zonal -In-Charge, 
with responsibility of: 
• Monitoring of progress of works and timely completion of projects. 
• Coordination with Tourism Department of respective States/UTs including visits 
and meetings for matters relating to touris m development in the State s falling in 
their zones.  
• The task of monitoring progress and  achievement of timelines was to commence 
after the sanction letter for project was issued by the Ministry and first instalment 
of grant-in-aid was released to the concerned States/UTs. 
The Ministry did not make available information related to monitoring by these officials to 
Audit. However, Audit observed from the records made available that no monitoring of 
projects or site visits were conducted by these officials. As a result, the purpose of allocating 
responsibility for monitoring of projects to Joint Secretary level officers was not served. 
Thus, monitoring of the Scheme by the Ministry was ineffective. This led to poor selection 
of projects , dropping of many important tourist sites and lack of coordination among 
stakeholders, State Governments and the Ministry. 
Recommendation No. 11 
Mission Directorate (Programme Division) may convene the meetings of Monitoring 
Committees formed under the Scheme regularly, rather than on need basis, along with 
proper agenda, to ensure proper monitoring of implementation of the Scheme. 
5.2 Monitoring by Programme Management Consultant  
The Scheme guidelines (January 2015 and October 2017) provided for appointment of a 
Programme Management Consultant by the Mission Directorate at the Central level to 
provide technical support for the implementation of the Scheme. The Ministry appointed 
M/s Ernst &Young as the Programme Management Consultant for the Swadesh Darshan 
Scheme in June 2015.  
5.2.1  Appointment of Programme Management Consultant without open tendering 
Rule 168(ii) of the General Financial Rules (GFR) , 2005 and Rule 183(ii) of GFR , 2017 
stipulate that where the estimated cost of the work or service is above Rupees twenty -five 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
86 
 
lakh, an enquiry for seeking ‘Expression of Interest’ from consultants should be published 
in at least one national daily and the Ministry’s website. 
For appointment of P rogramme Management Consultant for the Scheme, the Ministry of 
Tourism shortlisted four agencie s empanelled with National Informatics Centre Services 
Inc., (NICSI) a company under National Informatics Centre (NIC) for e -Governance 
Projects/Services in the area of Information and Communication Technology . The 
proposals from these agencies were invite d on 3/4 June 2015 at the price determined by 
NICSI. 
The three agencies (PwC, KPMG and Ernst & Young), who had submitted the proposals, 
were called for interaction meeting/interview. Based on the presentation made by the 
agencies and evaluation done by an Evaluation Committee chaired by Secretary (Tourism), 
the Ministry appointed M/s Ernst & Young as the Programme Management Consultant for 
the Scheme on 29 June 2015 for a period of one year (1 July 2015 to 30 June 2016). The 
cost was `10.43 lakh per month for four personnel (subsequently modified to `31.31 lakh 
per month for 10 personnel).  
Audit observed that though E rnst & Young was initially appointed as the Programme 
Management Consultant for one year, period of the ir services was extended from time to 
time and a total extension of 17 months was granted, without provision of extension clause 
in the appointment letter. 
After completion of the extens ion period of the existing P rogramme Management 
Consultant, the Ministry invited proposal in 2017 again from NICSI empanelled agencies 
and two empanelled agencies submitted their proposal. Based on process adopted earlier, 
the Ministry again appointed E rnst & Young as the P rogramme Management Consultant 
for a further period of 28 months i.e. from December 2017 to March 2020 at the rates fixed 
by NICSI. 
Audit observed that the Ministry sought proposals from agencies empanelled by NICSI for 
e-Governance/Information and Communication Technology projects, which was not a 
prudent action in view of scope of work of the Programme Management Consultant. As 
this was not an Information and Communication Technology project, the Ministry should 
have invited technical and financial bids instead of relying on the rates devised by NICSI 
uniform for all empanelled agencies.  
Thus, appointment of P rogramme Management Consultant  (2015 and 2017) was not fair 
and transparent as it restricted the numbers of bidders and the reasonableness of price could 
not be ascertained. The total payment made to the Programme Management Consultant 
from July 2015 to January 2022 was `22.96 crore. 
It is pertinent to mention that in April 2021, when the Ministry invited proposals through 
open tender for selection of consultant for same skillset for setting up of National 
Programme Management Unit (NPMU), the same agency Ernst & Young was identified as 
the lowest bidder (L -1) on the basis of open tendering and was awarded (February 2022) 
contract at the rate of `5.46 crore plus GST for a period of two years (i.e. `26.84 lakh per 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
87 
 
month). Thus, the Ministry had to incur avoidable expendi ture of `2.39 crore due to not 
following the process of open tendering for earlier selection.  
The Ministry stated  (September 2022) that justification for using NICSI panel was 
concurred by the Financial Advisor and approved by the Secretary (Tourism). As the 
request was not routed through NICSI and empanelment agencies were approached directly 
for interview, no agency commission was  paid to NICSI and the Ministry saved on its 
account. The Ministry further stated that the costs were identified during different periods, 
which were years apart and by different agencies. The amount quoted by L1 agency in 
2021-22 was in the present scenario and it may not be appropriate to compare with previous 
years.  
The reply of the Ministry is not tenable as due to non-invitation of open tender in 2015 and 
2017, the reasonableness of price could not be ascertained. Further, the Ministry’s 
assumption that new rates in 2021-22 were in the present scenario is also not correct, as the 
same agency (Ernst & Young) which was earlier selected through NICSI route had quoted 
reduced rate in 2021-22, compared to earlier rates. If inflation is factored in, the difference 
of amount paid would be even higher.  
5.2.2 Ineffective Role  of Programme Management Consultant  
The Scheme guidelines envisaged appointment of Programme Management Consultant to 
provide technical support for implementation of the Scheme. Audit reviewed key 
responsibilities of the Programme Management Consultant and noticed that:  
• Programme Management Consultant prepared  Detailed Perspective Plan  only for 
the Buddhist circuit and not for other 14 out of 15 tourist circuits (refer para 2.4). 
• Programme Management Consultant  did not play any role in identification of 
projects. 
• Programme Management Consultant  did not prepare the Detailed Project Reports  
even though it was in the scope of its work. The Detailed Project Reports were 
prepared by the States/UTs at additional costs. 
• No assistance for financial closure of projects for P ublic-Private Partnership and 
other projects was provided by the Programme Management Consultant. 
• Programme Management Consultant did not prepare a shelf of projects in each 
destination/circuit which would have enabled the Ministry to prioritise and assign 
funds to the projects accordingly. 
In addition to the above, the Programme Management Consultant was also required to assist 
the Mission Directorate in capacity building programmes through workshops and training 
programmes and in conducting I nformation, Education and Communication  initiative 
including social media presence, portal development and mobile application, etc. However, 
Audit did not find any documents/records which indicate that the Programme Management 
Consultant had performed its role relating to capacity development activities. 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
88 
 
Thus, it is evident from the above that the P rogramme Management Consultant did not 
perform the duties defined in the Scheme guidelines/scope of the work i.e., preparation of 
Detailed Perspective Plans  and D etailed Project Reports, creation of shelf of projects, 
assistance in financial closure, assistance to M ission Directorate in capacity building and 
Information, Education and Communication  initiatives, etc. This led to haphazard 
implementation of the Scheme and consequently the expenditure of `22.96 crore towards 
consultancy fee paid to the Programme Management Consultant from J uly 2015 up to 
January 2022 proved to be unfruitful.  
Moreover, as per Rule 195 of General Financial Rules , 2017, the Ministry/Department 
should be involved throughout in the conduct of consultancy, preferably by taking a task 
force approach and continuous ly monitoring the performance of the consultant(s) so that 
the output of the consultancy is in line with the Ministry/Department’s objectives.  As per 
the Manual of Policies and Procedure s of Employment of Consultants issued by the 
Department of E xpenditure, Ministry of Finance , after award of contract, a Consultancy 
Monitoring Committee needs to be formed for the same and procedure adopted for review 
of the consultancy was to be declared and adhered to.  
Audit observed that no C onsultancy Monitoring Committee was formed by the M inistry, 
and as a result, performance of the consultancy was not reviewed, which resulted in 
deviation from its scope of work by the Programme Management Consultant, as discussed 
above. 
While noting the audit observation, the Ministry stated (September 2022) that work order 
had been issued to the Programme Management Consultant in November 2017, which 
included the works pointed out by Audit under its scope of work. Most of the projects had 
been sanctioned by 2018-19 and thereafter, the Scheme was under review . However, the 
Programme Management Consultant assisted the Ministry  as per requirement in 
implementation and monitoring of the Scheme.  
The reply of the Ministry is not correct, as M/s E rnst & Young was appointed as the 
Programme Management Consultant in June 2015. The work order issued in June 2015 also 
included the above stated responsibilities to be performed by the Programme Management 
Consultant which were, however, not discharged by it.  
On the issue of monitoring of work of P rogramme Management Consultant by a 
Consultancy Monitoring Committee, the Ministry, while agreeing to the Audit observation, 
stated (September 2022) that a C onsultancy Monitoring Committee had now been 
constituted to review performance of N ational Programme Management Unit under 
Swadesh Darshan Scheme 2.0. 
  

Report No. 17 of 2023 
89 
 
Case study 5.1: Additional expenditure due to non-preparation of Detailed Project 
Reports by M/s Ernst & Young  
The Ministry of Tourism had appointed (June 2015) M/s Ernst & Young as the Programme 
Management Consultant for Swadesh Darshan Scheme and their scope of work included , 
inter alia, preparation of comprehensive Detailed Project Reports in consultation with the 
respective State Governments/UTs/other stakeholders. However, M/s Ernst & Young did 
not prepare Detailed Project Reports. 
Due to non -preparation of D etailed Project Reports by the P rogramme Management 
Consultant, the State Governments had to prepare D etailed Project Reports by engaging 
consultants. Audit observed that in 10 projects out of the selected 14 projects, S tate 
Governments incurred an expenditure of `7.53 crore on preparation of D etailed Project 
Reports, which was reimbursed from the Scheme funds by the Ministry. 
In fact, it was noticed that in Gujarat, M/s Ernst & Young itself was engaged (23 November 
2015) as consultant for preparation of D etailed Project Reports by the State Government  
with a fee of `48 lakh for Buddhist and Gandhi circuits in the State. This resulted in extra 
payment of consultancy fee to M/s Ernst & Young. 
Thus, the Ministry did not ensure preparation of D etailed Project Reports through the 
Programme Management Consultant. As a result, it had to incur additional expenditure of 
`7.53 crore from the Scheme funds. 
Recommendation No. 12 
The Ministry may ensure proper performance of duties by the Programme Management 
Consultant as per the scope of work/work order and may link terms of payment based on 
fixed milestones. Further, payment should be released  only after certification by the 
Consultancy Monitoring Committee. 
5.3 Delay in formation of State Level Monitoring Committee  
As per the Scheme guidelines as well as sanction letters issued by the Ministry of Tourism, 
each State was instructed to set up a State Level Monitoring Committee  with a member 
from the Ministry of Tourism for monitoring physical and financial progress and timely 
implementation of the projects sanctioned under the Scheme . Further, the State Level 
Monitoring Committee was also required to submit progress report to the Ministry on 
quarterly basis. 
Audit however, noticed that in 11 out of 13 selected States, there was inordinate time taken 
in formation of State Level Monitoring Committee by the State Government, which ranged 
from 3 months to 53 months, as given below:  
  

Report No. 17 of 2023 
90 
 
Table 5.2: State-wise formation of State Level Monitoring Committee and number of its 
meetings held 
S. 
No. 
Name of 
the States 
Date of 
approval 
(first project 
in State) by 
the Ministry 
Date of 
formation of 
State Level 
Monitoring 
Committee 
Time 
taken 
(in 
months) 
Number of meeting s 
held 
1 Bihar March 2015 August 2019 53 No meeting held so far. 
2 Chhattisgarh February 
2016 
September 
2017 
19 The first and only meeting 
was held on 12 October 
2017. 
3 Goa March 2016 August 2017 17 No records relating to the 
meetings were produced 
by the State. 
4 Gujarat September 
2016 
April 2017 7  Only three meetings were 
held since formation  of 
the Committee. 
5 Himachal 
Pradesh 
March 2017 July 2017 4 Only three meetings were 
held since formation  of 
the Committee. 
6 Jammu & 
Kashmir 
June 2016 September 
2016 
3 No records relating to the 
meetings were produced 
by the State. 
7 Madhya 
Pradesh 
December 
2015 
October 2017 22 Eight meetings were held. 
8 Rajasthan September 
2015 
August 2019 47 First meeting was held on 
16 August 2019, 
thereafter, no records 
were produced by  the 
State. 
9 Sikkim  June 2015 February 2016 7 No records relating to 
meeting produced by 
State. 
10 Telangana* December 
2015 
February 2015 - Details of meetings were 
not produced by the State. 
11 Uttarakhand September 
2015 
August 2019 47 No meeting held so far. 
12 Uttar 
Pradesh 
September 
2016 
August 2019 35 Only one meeting was 
held. 
* Government of Telangana had constituted a common State Level Monitoring Committee for all 
tourism infrastructural projects funded through Central Financial Assistance. 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
91 
 
In may be seen from the table above that there was considerable delay in formation of State 
Level Monitoring Committee, especially in Bihar, Chhattisgarh, M adhya Pradesh , 
Rajasthan, Uttarakhand and Uttar Pradesh. It was also observed that: 
• No member was nominated by the Ministry in any of the States though the sanction 
letter envisaged inclusion of a member from the Ministry in the Committee.  
• The Ministry  did not prescribe periodicity of meeting s of the Committee . As a 
result, meetings were not held regularly by the States. Further, from the records 
produced, Audit did not find any evidence that the Ministry even asked the States 
to hold meetings of the Committee regularly.   
The Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture (Report No. 
267) also observed weak monitoring at State Level due to absence of State Level 
Monitoring Committee  in many States  and stated that the formulation of State Level 
Monitoring Committees was only in theory and was yet to be put into action. The 
Committee reiterated its emphasis on the importance of a Centre- State body to monitor the 
timely completion of projects and recommended that the State Level Monitoring 
Committee must be constituted at the earliest to ensure improved Centre-State co-operation 
for the development of Tourism in the country.  
The delay in the formation of State Level Monitoring Committees by the States impacted 
timely completion of the projects besides poor monitoring of projects at the State le vel. 
Thus, the mechanism of State Level Monitoring Committee did not fulfil its purpose.  
The Ministry, while accepting the audit observation, stated (September 2022) that Swadesh 
Darshan Scheme 2.0 envisages constitution of a State Steering Committee unde r the 
chairmanship of Chief Secretary . The Committee would provide overall vision and 
guidance at State level, recommend  Detailed Project Reports to Central Government , 
review the progress of implementation in the State, provide synergy with other schemes of 
Central/State Governments and review Operation & Maintenance Plans.   
The reply needs to be viewed in light of the fact that mechanism of State Level Monitoring 
Committee was already in existence in S wadesh Darshan Scheme 1.0. However, 
considerable delay in formation  of the Committee  and non-holding of regular meetings 
affected the monitoring of the Scheme at the State level. Further, the Ministry was silent 
on the issue of nominati on of members from the Ministry in the State Level Monit oring 
Committees. 
Recommendation No. 13 
The Ministry may monitor formation of State Steering Committee s by the States by a 
prescribed date  under future Schemes . The Ministry may also nominate its 
representatives of suitable rank to attend these meetings and keep a watch on h olding 
regular meetings of these Committees. 
  

Report No. 17 of 2023 
92 
 
5.4 Annual survey for impact assessment  
Conducting an annual survey for measuring achievement of the objectives of tourist 
satisfaction and impact of the Scheme on growth of local economy was a critical component 
of S wadesh Darshan Scheme . The Expenditure Finance Committee recommended (13 
October 2017) to conduct an annual survey on every project to measure outcome indicators 
including tourist satisfaction and growth of local economy as a measure of the project 
outcome. The survey results were to be published in the form of ranking of tourist spo ts 
which would create a competitive environment among States.  
The Ministry of Tourism  stated in the Action taken Report on the recommendation of 
Expenditure Finance Committee that the recommendation relating to conducting of annual 
survey was noted for compliance in future.   
However, the Ministry stated that no such annual survey has been conducted to measure 
the outcome indicators. Thus, while the Ministry did not fulfil the commitment made to the 
Expenditure Finance Committee , it also did not develop a mechanism for evaluating the 
impact of the Scheme. 
The survey could have provided feedback to the Ministry to analyse the gaps in 
infrastructure, amenities, facilities etc., and address them in a timely manner. 
The Ministry stated (September 2022) that as the projects were not completed earlier, it 
was not feasible to conduct surveys. However , the Ministry regularly organi sed review 
meetings at senior level to review progress of the projects . Also, a study on Integrated 
Development of new Eco-Tourism under Swadesh Darshan North-East circuit at Thenzawl 
and South Zote, District Serchhi p and Reiek, Mizoram was undertaken in 2022 . The 
guidelines for Swadesh Darshan Scheme 2.0 envisages regular evaluation and survey/study 
by independent agency to measure the impact and outcome of the Scheme on various 
parameters.  
The reply is not tenable as the Ministry did not conduct an annual survey due to which the 
gaps in execution of projects and other issues viz. , non-availability of land and clearances 
from various departments, dropping of components at later stage and measuring impact of 
the Scheme could not be addressed timely. 
5.5 Non-conducting of capacity development/Information , Education and 
Communication programmes   
The Ministry of Tourism had launched Swadesh Darshan Scheme as a new scheme on the 
ground that apart from development of theme -based tourist circuits, the Scheme would 
include other aspects of development such as capacity building, skill development, 
promotion of local art, craft & cuisine , creating awareness amon g the local people , etc. 
Therefore, unlike the previous scheme i.e. P roduct/Infrastructure Development for 
Destinations and Circuits which was related to infrastructure development, capacity/skill 
development was one of the main focus areas of the Swadesh Darshan Scheme. 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
93 
 
Accordingly, in  the Scheme  guidelines, capacity development of States/UTs and other 
implementing agencies for undertaking various activities relating to identified circuits and 
destinations was recognised as one of the major component. 
Under I nformation, Education and Communication  (IEC), the following activities were 
included: 
• Special courses to address the skill gap at the destinations covered under the 
Scheme.  
• Short duration skill development training program s in association with other 
Schemes of GoI. 
• Workshops, Seminars, Publications and Stakeholder outreach, etc 
One of the outcome parameters of the S wadesh Darshan Scheme was enhancement of 
awareness and development of skills and capacity to augment tourism with value added 
services. For this, up to 10  per cent of funds was earmarked for IEC components (like 
workshops, seminars, publications, stakeholder outreach, skill development, etc.). 
As 76 projects were approved under different themes with cost of `5,455.69 crore during 
2014-15 to 2021 -22 under the Scheme and considering 10 per cent  of the funds to be 
earmarked for IEC (i.e., `546 crore), the Ministry incurred expenditure of only `10.70 lakh 
on IEC.  
Audit observed that the Ministry did not conduct any IEC activities viz. , workshops, 
seminars and skill development programmes, etc. Funds were allocated for IEC component 
in the budget estimates, however, the same were re-appropriated and could not be utilised 
as no workshops/capacity development programmes were conducted under the Scheme. 
In February 2016,  the Ministry decided to conduct the training programme for S wadesh 
Darshan Scheme under Hunar Se Rozgar Tak Scheme and all the concerned States/UTs 
were asked for identification of fields and destination s where they wanted to conduct the 
capacity development programme s. However, no response was received from the 
concerned States/UTs and no further progress was made in the matter. It was also noticed 
that no expenditure was incurred under IEC  component of Swadesh Darshan Scheme  for 
the skill development programme conducted in Hunar Se Rozgar Tak Scheme. 
During scrutiny of the sanction letter s for execution of projects in States/UTs,  it was also 
seen that no provision was kept for IEC related activities due to which no IEC related 
programmes were conducted at the level of States/UTs.  
Thus, the Ministry did not conduct any capacity development/IEC programme under  the 
Scheme, even though it was an important component for augmenting tourism. As a result, 
its outcome in term s of employment generation and economic development could not be 
achieved. 
While accepting the audit observation, the Ministry stated (September 2022) that various 
projects were sanctioned during the period 2014-15 to 2018-19 under which primary focus 
was given to infrastructure development. Further, due to Covid pandemic, no physical 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
94 
 
activities could be done during 2020  and 2021. However, destination -based skill 
programmes can also be explored through the existing schemes of the Ministry. In Swadesh 
Darshan Scheme 2.0, objective of the Scheme includes enhancement of skills of local youth 
in tourism and hospitality.  Further, Detailed Project Report of the destination also includes 
the component of skill development.   
The issue was also discussed during the Exit Conference (September 2022),  wherein the 
Ministry admitted the audit observation and stated that initiative should have been taken at 
the level of the Ministry and the State Governments and agreed to address these issues and 
devise a mechanism thereof. 
Recommendation No. 14 
The Ministry may take appropriate action to de sign capacity development programmes 
under the Scheme in consultation with concerned stakeholders. 
5.6 Online Presence of the Scheme and Management Information System 
As per  the Scheme guidelines, one of the features of the Scheme  was to have online 
presence through:  
• GIS based tourism inventory management,  
• GIS based website development and mobile applications providing location -based 
services and contents, booking facilities  through e -commerce applications,  and 
support dashboards for tourists and operators, 
• Project Management system tracking progress  through online submission of 
Utilisation Certificates , tracking procurement through e -procurement system , 
tracking completion of milestones and tracking issues of escalations and variations, 
• Permission based knowledge portal, 
• Data analysis and reporting 
It was noticed that a website swadeshdarshan.gov.in was developed by the Ministry of 
Tourism in December 2017. However, the website was not accessible to public a nd was 
only used as dashboard by the Ministry for tracking progress of the projects and generating 
Project Level Reports.  
State Governments/Implementing Agencies submitted information/progress report to the 
Ministry through the dashboard. Audit observed t hat there was no mechanism in the 
Ministry to ensure correctness of the submitted data. Audit noticed instances of 
incorrect/inflated Utilisation Certificates, wrong progress reported in the Monthly Progress 
Reports and wrong depiction of project facilities. 
Audit further observed that apart from tracking progress, other functions, such as GIS based 
tourism inventory management, GIS based website development and mobile applications 
providing location-based services, contents, booking facilities and support dashboards for 
tourists and operators, project procurement management, permission based knowledge 
portal, were not made operational by the Ministry. Further, the dashboard did not have other 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
95 
 
critical data related to employment generation, tourist traffic d ata, revenue generation, 
private investment etc., as envisaged in the Scheme. 
Hence, no awareness was being generated on the S cheme, destinations , circuits and 
facilities therein. Thus, objective of the Ministry to have online presence of the Scheme 
could not be fully achieved.   
The Ministry admitted the audit observation during Exit Conference and stated (September 
2022) that earlier consultant had made a website but that  was not functional. Now, they 
were taking action in this regard with the assistance of NIC for re-designing the website.  
Recommendation No. 15 
The Ministry may expedite the process of making online presence of the Scheme by 
developing a website for disseminating information about initiatives taken and facilities 
provided under the Scheme. 
5.7 Analysis of Progress Reports of the States 
All States were to submit monthly progress reports giving physical and financial progress 
to the Ministry of Tourism for review of progress of the projects.  
Scrutiny of records available in States and monthly progress reports submitted by States to 
the Ministry revealed discrepancies like variation in figures of expenditure, incorrect 
reporting of progress and incomplete works being shown as completed, in five projects43 
out of the selected 14 projects. This indicated misrepresentation of facts to the Ministry 
with regard to the components of actual execution and expenditure incurred there against. 
Monthly progress report was a vital source for monitoring of the project. However, Audit 
observed that the Ministry had not devised any mechanism to ensure correctness of figures 
submitted by States/Implementing Agencies.  It was further observed that there was lack of 
any authentication of monthly progress reports by the State Level Monitoring Committees, 
verification of figures by field visits after receipt of monthly progress reports from the State 
Governments to the Ministry and provision of mandatory validation of data of monthly 
progress reports at the time of inspection by the Programme Management Consultant. As a 
result, the Ministry was relying solely on the monthly progress reports received from the 
States without any examination of the same. Thus, progress of projects shown by the 
Ministry was not based on authentic figures and ground realities. 
  
                                                           
43 Goa, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Sikkim and Uttar Pradesh 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
96 
 
Case study 5.2: Kanwaria Route, Bihar: Discrepancy in monthly progress report 
Rain Shelter at Suiya was shown as complete in monthly progress report (MPR) of 
October 2021. However, during joint physical verification (December 2021), the same 
was found incomplete.  
Many deficiencies were observed during joint physical verification viz., electric work 
was incomplete, urinals were without sensors, main entrance gate was not built, 
landscaping work improperly done, etc. 
State Government stated (June 2022) that due to heavy rain and natural drainage, the 
paver blocks were scattered and rectification work was undergoing during the joint 
physical verification and hence paver block was seen stacked. 
The reply is not tenable as during the joint physical verification, it was found that the 
premises was filled with shrubs and landscaping was not done properly. Paver blocks 
were kept for paving and no initial paving was found.  
The Ministry stated (September 2022) that it had sought clarification from Bihar 
Government in this regard.  
 
Picture 5.1: Construction of Paver Block under progress at Rain Shelter, Suiya, Bihar, which was 
however shown as completed in monthly progress report 
 
The Ministry stated (September 2022) that it was responsibility of the State Government s 
to ensure correct reporting to the Government of India and take appropriate action in case 
of wrong reporting. Due to corona pandemic and travel restrictions, no physical inspections 
could be carried out.  


Report No. 17 of 2023 
97 
 
The fact remains that the Ministry did not have any mechanism  to ensure correctness of 
data shown in the monthly progress reports, thereby adversely affecting overall monitoring 
of the Scheme. 
5.8 Non-maintenance of data about employment generation under the Scheme 
Tourism sector provides employment to wide spectrum of job seekers from the unskilled 
to the speciali sed and makes significant contribution to the national economy by 
stimulating other econom ic factors. It is a multi -sectoral labour-intensive industry and a 
major source of employment. Creation of employment was o ne of the main objectives of 
Swadesh Darshan Scheme. 
As per the Department of Expenditure OM dated 5 August 2016, measurable outcomes  
need to be defined for each scheme over the medium -term while physical and financial 
outputs need to be targeted on year -to-year basis in such a manner that it aggregates to 
achieve the measurable outcomes over the medium -term. Further, baseline data should be 
available against which success of the project would be assessed at the end of the project. 
The matter was also discussed (July 2017) in the Ministry, wherein the Market Research 
Division of the Ministry of Tourism had advised Swadesh Darshan Divisio n to develop 
mechanism for capturing data on employment generated through the Scheme. 
The Department of Expenditure  suggested (October 2017) , inter alia, in the  meeting of 
Expenditure Finance Committee to develop outcome framework for measuring impact of 
the Scheme with outcome i ndicators like tourist footfall , jobs created, etc. The Ministry 
informed that the observation of Department of Expenditure  was noted and it was already 
working on outcome framework. The Ministry mentioned in the approved Cabinet N ote 
(February 2019) that the Scheme wa s expected to create approximately 44 lakh  jobs 
including both direct and indirect. 
Thus, generation of employment was on e of the major focus areas under the Scheme . 
However, Audit observed that the Ministry  did not develop any outcome framework for 
measuring creation of employment. The Ministry admitted (August 2021) in its reply to a 
Parliamentary question that the data pertaining to total emp loyment generated in t he 
identified circuits under the Scheme was not maintained by the Ministry.  
In response, the Ministry stated (February 2022) that no separate study was undertaken to 
measure the impact on job creation and economic growth . However, th e National 
Productivity Council, in its report (July 2019) on third party impact assessment of Swadesh 
Darshan Scheme, found that the Scheme was able to fillip livelihood opportunities and 
created employment. The Ministry further stated (September 2022) th at National 
Productivity Council had reported (July 2019) that employment had been generated during 
the project construction/development phase for the va rious components  and the 
contribution of this Scheme towards continual employment generation among the local 
communities could be ascertained only after the tourist footfall picks up except for tourism 
developed States.  
The response of the Ministry is not borne out of facts as creation of employment generation 
through tourism wa s one of major focus area of the Scheme . However, there was no 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
98 
 
baseline data with the Ministry against which progress could have been measured. This fact 
was also raised by National Productivity Council in its said evaluation report, as discussed 
in su cceeding paragraph. Further, National Productivity Council  did not make any 
quantitative study of employment generation. It also did not comment on comparison of 
employment generation between pre and post launch of the Scheme. 
In the absence of data, the Ministry could not measure whether creation of jobs/employment 
under the Scheme was achieved as assured to the Cabinet. Thus, creation of employment, 
one of the main objectives of the Scheme, was not ensured. 
Recommendation No. 16 
The Ministry may formulate a mechanism to capture baseline d ata (employment 
generation, tourist footfall etc.) so as to measure impact of the Scheme/initiative s taken 
there against. 
5.9 Evaluation/Impact Assessment of the Scheme by National Productivity 
Council 
As per the Ministry of Finance OM ( August 2016) on formulation of public funded 
schemes, all Ministries/Department s were to prepare an output -outcome framework for 
each Central Sector Scheme and Centrally Sponsored Scheme with the approval of Chief 
Executive Officer,  NITI Aayog. Success criteria to assess whether the development 
objectives had been achieved was needed to be spelt out in measurable terms. Baseline data 
was required to be maintained by the concerned Ministry/Department, against which 
success of the project was to be assessed at the end of the project (im pact assessment). 
Extension of schemes from one Finance Commission c ycle to another was contingent on 
the result of such an evaluation exercise. 
Accordingly, the Ministry of Finance  vide its OM dated February 2017 conveyed to all 
Ministries that all existing schemes which were to be continued beyond 12th Five-Year Plan 
were required to undergo process of appraisal and approval coinciding with the 14th Finance 
Commission cycle.  
For evaluation of Swadesh Darshan Scheme in terms of the above instruction, the Ministry 
of Tourism approached the National Productivity Council, an organisation under the 
Ministry of Commerce and Industry. National Productivity Council, after discussion with 
the Ministry, agreed (April 2017) to  undertake evaluation at a cost of `23 lakh including 
15 per cent service tax.  
National Productivity Council agreed to conduct evaluation in two phases. First phase of 
evaluation study comprised detailed desk research where information/data pertaining to 
Scheme implementation including physical and financial targets and milestones achieved 
based on Detailed Project Reports for all 56 projects during 12th Plan period as well as the 
reports of Central Sanctioning and Monitoring Committee/Programme Management  
Consultant were to be covered. Second phase of evaluation study focused on detailed field 
interactions with various stakeholders. Field survey was to be conducted through selected 
questionnaire/checklist at selected project sites. 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
99 
 
Audit observed that: 
• The Ministry did not lay down any measurable indicator for evaluation of the Scheme 
in terms of the instructions of Ministry of Finance. No baseline data was available with 
the Ministry on tourist traffic, employment generation etc., against which performance 
of the Scheme could have been evaluated.  
• National Productivity Council  submitted its re port in June 2 017 wherein it  made 
recommendations on formation of S tate Level Monitoring Committee by the States, 
monitoring by Programme Management Consultant, monthly review of Scheme by the 
Mission Directorate/Programme Management Consultant, convergence of Scheme 
with Swachh Bharat Abhiyan, preparation of O peration & Maintenance manual with 
standard operating procedure for operation and maintenance of assets etc. 
• National Productivity Council admitted that due to undertaking review within a very 
short period of 15 days at Pan -India level, field surveys had to be restricted to only 
seven theme-based circuits. Thus, it had to rely mainly on secondary sources of data 
and material which were readi ly available besides the field level information from 
selected circuits. National Productivity Council  had recommended to undertak e a 
comprehensive review of implementation of all the 56 projects sanctioned till the 
period of evaluation.  
Audit observed th at above evaluation in terms of the  instructions of Ministry of Finance  
was not comprehensive, as no analysis or evaluation of comprehensive area development, 
better tourist i nfrastructure, tourist footfall , employment and income generation for the 
local population was conducted by the National Productivity Council. Further, the Ministry 
did not take any effective remedial action on major observations such as monitoring by the 
Ministry, Detailed Perspective Plans , formation of S tate Level Monitoring Committees, 
convergence with other Central/State schemes and Operation & Maintenance manual.  
In the Cabinet Note (February 2019) for continuation of the Scheme, the Ministry intimated 
that it would undertake detailed impact assessment of the Scheme. However, for detailed 
impact assessment of the Scheme, the Ministry  again awarded (April 2019) contract to 
National Productivity Council on nomination basis for total cost of `29.38 lakh including 
GST. The National Productivity Council  proposed and used the same methodology for 
undertaking the study i.e. , in two phases (detailed desk research of all projects and field 
visit of selected 10 projects), which was agreed to by the Ministry. 
Audit observed that:  
• National Productivity Council submitted its report in July 2019 (recommendations 
given in  Annexure-V) and reiterated its earlier conclusion that due to time 
constraints and data issues, only 10 projects were selected and there was a need to 
undertake a comprehensive review of implementation of all the 76 projects in terms 
of providing comprehensive area development, better tourist i nfrastructure, tourist 
footfall, employment and income generation for the local population.  

Report No. 17 of 2023 
100 
 
• The sample size selected by the National Productivity Council was again very less 
(seven against 56 projects during first evaluation study and 10 out of 77 projects44 
during the second time). National Productivity Council did not cover all circuits in 
its study and only covered seven circuits out of 15 theme -based ci rcuits. Some 
important circuits like Buddhist, Tribal, Himalayan, Rural, R amayana were not 
taken up by the National Productivity Council. 
The above shows that in both the evaluation studies, evaluation conducted by the National 
Productivity Council was not comprehensive. The Ministry did not exercise due diligence 
for evaluation/impact assessment of the Scheme . As a result, even after two evaluations 
and incurring expenditure of `52.38 lakh, detailed impact assessment of the Scheme could 
not be conducted. Further, due to absence of baseline data, National Productivity Council  
could not evaluate tourist footfall , employment generation and income generation for the 
local population, which were major focus areas of the Scheme.  
In addition to the above, due to not following the provisions under Rule 183 of GFR, 2017 
for selection of consultants, the Ministry  lost opportunity to call proposals/expertise from 
other agencies and had to rely upon the proposal of National Productivity Council , thus 
lacking reasonableness and competitiveness of price. The evaluation was very limited in 
nature and the Ministry did not assess capability of the Council  for conducting the review 
as per its requirement.  
The Ministry stated (September 2022) that Nat ional Productivity Council  was selected 
being an autonomous organi sation under Depart ment for Promotion of Industry and  
Internal Trade, Ministry of Commerce and Industry, Government of India. Besides 
undertaking research in the area of pro ductivity, National Productivity Council  has been 
providing consultancy and training services in various areas to the Government.   
The Ministry did not give any response for incomprehensive evaluation by the National 
Productivity Council even after conducting two evaluations.  
5.10 No a ction upon recommendations of Parliamentary Committee and 
Expenditure Finance Committee 
The Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and 
Culture in its various reports had given its observati ons on implementation of the Scheme 
and given recommendations (Annexure-VI) from time to time for improvement of the 
Scheme.  
Audit observed that the Ministry of Tourism did not act on many recommendations. Some 
of the important ones are given below:  
• The Committee in its Report No. 275 (March 2020) observed that several proposals 
sent by the State Governments for inclusion under the Scheme were pending 
                                                           
44  Out of 77 projects mentioned in the report of National Productivity Council, one project in Kerala had 
been dropped by the Ministry of Tourism in May 2020. Therefore, the total number of projects 
considered in this Audit Report are 76. 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
101 
 
approval by the Ministry . It had r ecommended that approval to such pending 
projects should be expedited.  
Audit observed that the Ministry did not take action on the recommendation of the 
Committee. The Ministry  kept the proposals of State Governments  pending for 
periods up to six years and later returned the projects without any action (as 
discussed in para 2.11). It did not develop a formal mechanism for evaluation and 
approval of projects.  
• Further, in the same report, the Committee had recommended that for better 
promotion of rural tourism, more Rural circuit projects may be sanctioned and 
implemented for promotion of niche tourism and more funds may be earmarked for 
Rural circuits under the Scheme. 
Audit observed that the Ministry did not pay adequate attention for development of 
Rural circuit. Out of total eight projects proposed by the State Governments under 
Rural circuit, the Ministry took up only two projects with cost of `125.02 crore (i.e. 
two per cent  of tot al projects sanctioned under the Scheme ) and returned six 
proposals. The total expenditure incurred under Rural circuit was only 0.73 per cent 
of the total expenditure under the Scheme (as discussed in para 2.6). 
• The Committee in its Report No. 284 (February 2021) had o bserved that the 
approach of the Ministry for preparing the Budget Estimates was casual and routine 
in nature. The manner in which the Budget Estimates were being prepared showed 
that the Ministry was not very serious about the activities to be undertaken by them. 
Therefore, the C ommittee had recommended  to the Ministry  to have the entire 
requirement of funds realistically assessed after collecting timely information on 
requirement of funds from the State Governments and other stakeholders and take 
steps to rectify and improve upon the exi sting system of assessing requirement of 
funds.  
Audit observed that there were large variations in the Budget Estimates and Revised 
Estimates which is indicative of the inefficient budgeting and unrealistic estimation 
on the part of the Ministry as discussed in para 3.1. 
• The Committee in its Report No. 298 ( August 2021) had recommended to the 
Ministry to develop an effective and efficient mechanism for timely submission of 
Utilisation Certificates. This would not only speed up execution of all the projects 
well within the approved cost but also help in prevention of  cost overruns in the 
projects. 
Audit observed that the Ministry  did not have mechanism in place for ensuring 
timely submission of Utilisation Certificates and remittance of unutilised funds.  In 
the absence of Utilisation Certificates, it could not be ascertained how the Ministry 
was deriving assurance on the regularity of expenditure (discussed in para 3.4). 
• The Committee in its Report No. 298 (August 2021) had also observed that th e 
progress of projects under the Scheme was not satisfactory. It had recommended to 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
102 
 
the Ministry to take stringent measures for expediting the completion of the projects 
in a time bound manner. 
Audit observed that no effec tive steps were taken by the Ministry  for timely 
completion of the projects and no project was completed within the stipulated time 
frame (discussed in para 4.1). 
Audit further noticed that the Expenditure Finance Committee/Ministry of Finance, at the 
time of appraisal of the Scheme for further continuation had recommended to: 
• have big ticket projects instead of large number of small size d projects with thin 
spread of resources to have maximum impact of tourism projects on income and 
employment. 
Audit observed that the Ministry , though having agreed (August 20 17) to the 
recommendation of Department of Expenditure  on the Note for Expenditure 
Finance Committee, did not act on the same (discussed in para 2.9). 
• conduct an annual survey on every project to measure outcome indicators including 
tourist satisfaction and growth of local economy as a measure of the project 
outcome. Publishing these surveys were to be in the form of ranking of tourist spots 
which might have created a competitive environment among the S tates. The 
Ministry stated in the Action taken Report on recommend ation of Expenditure 
Finance Committee  that the recommendation relating to conducting of annual 
survey was noted for compliance in future. 
Audit observed that despite agreeing to the recommendation for compliance, the 
Ministry did not conduct such annual survey to measure the outcome indica tors 
(discussed in para 5.5). 
• develop outcome framework for measuring impact of the Scheme with outcome 
indicators like tourist footfall, jobs created etc. 
Audit observed that despite agreeing to the recommendation and informing that it 
was already working on outcome framework, the Ministry did not maintain any data 
pertaining to employment generation, tourist footfall etc., in the identified circuits 
under the Scheme (discussed in para 5.9). 
Thus, the Ministry  did not act upon the advisory recommendations of the Department -
Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture made from 
time to time. Further, the Ministry,  though agreed  upon the recommendatio ns of 
Expenditure Finance Committee, did not comply with the same. As such, the deficiencies 
continued to exist as evident from the audit findings. 
During Exit Conference, the Ministry stated (September 2022) that 52 projects had been 
completed as on date. Further, they were now focusing on the big-ticket projects limited to 
only 50 destinations in Swadesh Darshan Scheme 2.0. 
 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
103 
 
5.11 Achievement of Vision, Mission and Objectives of the Scheme  
The Ministry of Tourism had launched the Scheme to develop theme-based tourist circuits 
on the principles of high tourist value, competitiveness and sustainability in an integrated 
manner to enrich tourist experience an d enhance employment opportunities  with vision 
statement and mission objective. However, for achievement of these objectives, Audit did 
not find any roadmap and strategy, as given below: 
i. To position tourism as a major engine of economic growth:  Audit observed that 
the Ministry had not conducted any study on impac t of th e Scheme on economic 
growth. The Ministry  also confirmed ( February 2022 ) that no separate study was 
undertaken to measure the impact on job creation and economic growth. 
ii. Develop circuits having tourist potential in a planned and prioritised manner:  
Audit observed that tourist circuits were not planned and prioritised, as discussed in 
para 2.8. 
iii. Enhancing tourist attractiveness in a sustainable manner by developing world 
class infrastructure in the circuit/destination: Audit observed that the Ministry did 
not frame any benchmark for world class infrastructure. During physical inspection, 
many of the developed facilities were found in dilapidated condition due to lack of 
operation and maintenance, which cannot be termed as world class infrastructure. 
iv. Creating awareness among the local communities about the importance of 
tourism for them in terms of increased source of income, improved living 
standards and overall development of area: Audit observed that the Ministry 
though earmarked 10 per cent  of projects for capacity development/Information, 
Education and Communication programme (IEC), it did not conduct any IEC 
activities viz. workshops, seminars, skill development programme s, as discussed in 
para 5.5. 
v. Ability to attract investment from private sector/public private partnership- The 
Ministry did not furnish any records showing investment of private sector/public 
private partnership under the Scheme, which indicates that the Ministry did not have 
any information on this aspect. 
vi. To create employment through active involvement of local communities: Audit 
observed that the Ministry  did not develop any outcome framework for measuring 
creation of employment. In the absence of data, the Ministry could not measur e 
creation of jobs/employment under the Scheme, as discussed in paragraph 5.9. 
vii. Robust O peration & Maintenance plan as per pre -agreed service standards 
evaluated periodically by an independent agency: Due to absence of arrangements 
for O peration & Maintenance by the Ministry , it was noticed during physical 
verification of sites/projects that poor arrangements were made for effective upkeep 
and maintenance of the facilities created under the Scheme as there were instances of 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
104 
 
created facilities not put to oper ation, leasing out of facilities without approval, 
deterioration of infrastructure due to lack of proper maintenance, etc. 
viii. Increased tourist footfall: The Ministry did not provide information/data related to 
tourist footfall under the Scheme . However, it was observed that the Ministry  had 
replied (December 2019) to a Rajya Sabha question that the Ministry did not maintain 
circuit-wise data of tourist visitation of sites developed under the Scheme. 
As a result, even after seven years of launch of the Scheme, these objectives were yet to be 
fully achieved. 
5.12 Summing up 
The Scheme guidelines had provided for overall m onitoring of the Scheme through 
National Steering Committee, Central Sanctioning and Monitoring Committee and Mission 
Directorate level. However, only six meetings of the National Steering Committee were 
held since inception (January 2015) of the Scheme till March 2022 as against 29 meetings 
required to be held.  Further, t here was a significant time gap between the meeting s of 
Central Sanctioning and Monitoring Committee and the Mission Directorate . No meeting 
of the Central Sanctioning and Monitoring Committee and the Mission Directorate was 
held after November 2018 and October 2019 respectively. The Joint Secretary level officers 
appointed by the Ministry for monitoring did not play any role in monitoring of the projects. 
At the State level, there w ere delays in formation of State Level Monitoring Committee s 
and its meetings were also not being held by States at regular interval s, thus making the 
Committee redundant.  
The appointment and extensions of the Programme Management Consultant was irregular. 
More importantly, the Consultant did not perform the duties defined in the guidelines/scope 
of the work i.e. , preparation of Detailed Perspective Plans , D etailed Project Reports, 
creation of shelf of projects, assistance in financial closure, assistan ce to Mission 
Directorate in capacity building and Information, Education and Communication initiative. 
The Ministry  had to incur additional ex penditure for preparation of Detailed Project 
Reports through State Governments as the Consultant did not prepare the same.  
The Ministry  did not undertake any activities for c apacity building, employment 
generation, maintenance of data pertaining to employment generation despite sig nificant 
budget allocation for t ourism promotion activities.  The objective of the Ministry  to have 
online presence of the Scheme could not be achieved. 
Evaluation of the Scheme by National Productivity Council was not comprehensive due to 
selection of limited sample and lack of baseline data. As a result, even after two evaluations 
by the Council, detailed impact assessment of the Scheme could not be conducted and the 
Council did not evaluate tourist footfall, employment generation and income generation for 
the local population, which were major focus areas of the Scheme . Thus, the Ministry did 
not exercise due diligence for evaluation/impact assessment of the Scheme. 
 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
105 
 
The Ministry  did not act upon the recommendations of the Department -Related 
Parliamentary Standing Committee and the Expenditure Finance Committee. As a result, 
even after seven years of its launch, objectives of the Scheme were not fully achieved, and 
the recommendations of the Committees remained unaddressed. 
 
 
 
 
 
Countersigned 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi (Girish Chandra Murmu) 
Dated: 18 July 2023               Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (R G Viswanathan) 
New Delhi Deputy Comptroller and Auditor General 
Dated: 18 July 2023 and Chairman, Audit Board 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annexures 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
107 
 
Annexure-I 
(Referred to in Para 1.8) 
Details of all 76 Projects sanctioned by Ministry of Tourism under Swadesh Darshan Scheme 
   (in ` crore) 
Sl. 
No 
Project Name Theme State Sanction 
Date 
Sanctioned 
Cost  
Released 
Amount  
Expenditure 
Incurred  
Physical 
Progress 
(%) 
1.  Development Of Bhalukpong -Bomdila & 
Tawang Circuit under North East Theme 
North East Arunachal 
Pradesh 
30-Mar-15 49.77 39.81 39.53 100 
2.  Development of Kakinada Hope Island 
Konaseema as World Class Coastal & Eco 
Tourism Circuit in Andhra Pradesh 
Coastal Andhra 
Pradesh 
31-Mar-15 67.84 67.84 67.83 100 
3.  Development of Imphal – Khongjom North East Manipur 29-Jun-15 72.23 61.32 63.72 100 
4.  Development of Circuit linking Rangpo 
(entry) - Rorathang - Aritar - Phadamchen - 
Nathang - Sherathang - Tsongmo - Gangtok 
- Phodong - Mangan - Lachung - Yumthang 
- Lachen - Thangu - Gurudongmer - Mangan 
- Tamil - Tumin Lingee - Singtam (exit) 
North East Sikkim 30-Jun-15 98.05 92.77 92.77 100 
5.  Development of Sambhar Lake Town and 
Other Destinations in Jaipur District, 
Rajasthan 
Desert Rajasthan 30-Sep-15 50.01 51.17 50.01 100 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
108 
 
Sl. 
No 
Project Name Theme State Sanction 
Date 
Sanctioned 
Cost  
Released 
Amount  
Expenditure 
Incurred  
Physical 
Progress 
(%) 
6.  Integrated Development of Eco -Tourism, 
Adventure Sports, and Associated Tourism 
Related Infrastructure for Development of 
Tehri Lake & Surroundings as New 
Destination-District Tehri 
Eco Uttarakhand 30-Sep-15 69.17 65.71 69.17 100 
7.  Development of Peren - Kohima – Wokha Tribal Nagaland 16-Nov-15 97.36 92.49 81.07 100 
8.  Development of Circuit in Mahaboobnagar 
districts (Somasila, Singotam, 
Kadalaivanam, Akkamahadevi, 
Egalanpanta, Farahabad, Uma 
Maheshwaram, Mallelatheertham) 
Eco Telangana 4-Dec-15 91.62 87.03 91.62 100 
9.  Development of Coastal Tourism Circuit in 
Sri Potti Sriramalu Nellore in Andhra 
Pradesh 
Coastal Andhra 
Pradesh 
4-Dec-15 49.55 47.76 49.55 100 
10.  Development of Panna - Mukundpur - 
Sanjay - Dubri - Bandhavgarh - Kanha - 
Mukki - Pench  
Wildlife Madhya 
Pradesh 
7-Dec-15 92.1 81.15 86.31 100 
11.  Development of Pathanamthitta - Gavi- 
Vagamon- Thekkady as Eco Tourism Circuit 
in Kerala  
Eco Kerala 15-Dec-15 76.55 61.24 60.24 91.82 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
109 
 
Sl. 
No 
Project Name Theme State Sanction 
Date 
Sanctioned 
Cost  
Released 
Amount  
Expenditure 
Incurred  
Physical 
Progress 
(%) 
12.  Integrated Development of New Eco 
Tourism under Swadesh Darshan - North 
East Circuit at Thenzawl & South Zote, 
District Serchhip and Reiek, Mizoram. 
North East Mizoram 15-Dec-15 92.26 87.65 90.24 100 
13.  Manas - Pobitora - Nameri - Kaziranga - 
Dibru  Saikhowa as Wild Life Circuit in 
Assam. 
Wildlife Assam 22-Dec-15 94.68 89.94 84.91 100 
14.  Development of Dubrayapet, Arikamedu 
China Veerampattinam, Chunnabmar, 
Nallavadu, Manapet, Kalapet, French 
Quarter, Tamil Quarter and Yanam (Coastal) 
Coastal Puducherry 28-Dec-15 58.44 61.82 54.53 100 
15.  Development of Beach Circuit: Udaipur - 
Digha- Shankarpur- Tajpur- Mandarmani- 
Fraserganj-Bakkhlai-Henry Island 
Coastal West 
Bengal 
29-Dec-15 67.99 68.31 64.96 95.19 
16.  Development of Jirigaon - Nafra - Seppa - 
Pappu - Pasa - Pakke Valleys - Lumdung - 
Lafang Sohung Lake - Taro Yar - New 
Sagalee - Ziro – Yomcha 
North East Arunachal 
Pradesh 
29-Dec-15 96.72 84.24 83.72 99.35 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
110 
 
Sl. 
No 
Project Name Theme State Sanction 
Date 
Sanctioned 
Cost  
Released 
Amount  
Expenditure 
Incurred  
Physical 
Progress 
(%) 
17.  Development of North East Circuit : 
Agartala - Sipahijala - Melaghar - Udaipur - 
Amarpur - Tirthamukh - Mandirghat - 
Dumboor - Narikel Kunja - Gandachara – 
Ambassa 
North East Tripura 29-Dec-15 82.85 68.58 67.17 79.96 
18.  Development of Jashpur- Kunkuri- Mainpat- 
Ambikapur- Maheshpur -Ratanpur- Kurdar-
Sarodadadar- Gangrel- Kondagaonâ€“ 
NathiyaNawagaon- Jagdalpur- Chitrakoot- 
Tirthgarh 
Tribal Chhattisgarh 18-Feb-16 96.1 84.81 92.14 100 
19.  Development of Sindhudurg Coastal Circuit 
(Shiroda Beach, Sagareshwar, Tarkarli, 
Vijaydurg (Beach & Creek), Devgad (Fort & 
Beach), Mitbhav, Tondavali,  Mochemad 
and Nivati Fort) 
Coastal Maharashtra 1-Mar-16 19.06 18.11 16.45 91.7 
20.  Development of Coastal (Sinquerim -Baga, 
Anjuna-Vagator, Morjim-Keri, Aguada Fort 
and Aguada Jail)  
Coastal Goa 1-Jun-16 97.65 92.76 92.76 100 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
111 
 
Sl. 
No 
Project Name Theme State Sanction 
Date 
Sanctioned 
Cost  
Released 
Amount  
Expenditure 
Incurred  
Physical 
Progress 
(%) 
21.  Integrated Development of  Jammu  - 
Srinagar - Pahalgam - Bhagwati Nagar - 
Anantnag - Salamabad Uri -Kargil – Leh 
Himalayan Jammu 
Kashmir 
15-Jun-16 77.33 60.47 53.31 92.57 
22.  Integrated Development of Mulugu -
Laknavaram- Medaram- Tadvai- 
Damaravai- Mallur- Bogatha Waterfalls.                                                                                        
Tribal Telangana 30-Jun-16 79.87 75.88 79.87 100 
23.  Development of Umiam (Lake View) - U 
Lum Sohpetbneng -  Mawdiangdiang- 
Orchid Lake Resort, Meghalaya under North 
East Circuit of Swadesh Darshan Scheme 
North East Meghalaya 1-Jul-16 99.13 94.14 85.81 100 
24.  Development of Sanchi-Satna-Rewa-
Mandsaur-Dhar 
Buddhist Madhya 
Pradesh 
18-Jul-16 74.02 69.08 69.31 100 
25.  Development of Shri Govindajee temple - 
Shri Bijoy Govindajee Temple - Shri 
Gopinath Temple - Shri Bungshibodon 
Temple - Shri Kaina Temple 
Spiritual Manipur 25-Jul-16 53.8 43.04 42.5 100 
26.  Development of Sabarimala - Erumeli-
Pampa- Sannidhanam.as Spiritual Circuit in 
Kerala 
Spiritual Kerala 27-Jul-16 106.42 20 8.22 24.46 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
112 
 
Sl. 
No 
Project Name Theme State Sanction 
Date 
Sanctioned 
Cost  
Released 
Amount  
Expenditure 
Incurred  
Physical 
Progress 
(%) 
27.  Development of Ahmedabad - Rajkot- 
Porbandar - Bardoli- Dandi 
Heritage Gujarat 9-Sep-16 58.42 56.21 52.14 100 
28.  Haryana Tourism Infrastructures At Places 
Related To Mahabharata In Kurukshetra 
Krishna Haryana 9-Sep-16 79.19 77.88 69.69 73.08 
29.  Development of Tourist  Circuit  Linking - 
Singtam - Makha - Temi - Bermoik Tokal - 
Phongla - Namchi - Jorethang - Okharey - 
Sombaria - Daramdin - Jorethang - Melli  
(exit) in Sikkim under North East India 
Circuit  
North East Sikkim 16-Sep-16 95.32 85.18 76.25 100 
30.  Integrated Development of Govind Dev ji 
temple (Jaipur),  Khatu Shyam Ji (Sikar) and  
Nathdwara (Rajsamand) in Rajasthan  
Krishna Rajasthan 16-Sep-16 75.8 70.29 67.30 68.47 
31.  Development of Gopalpur, Barkul, Satapada 
and Tampara 
Coastal Odisha 19-Sep-16 70.82 63.56 52.95 75.35 
32.  Development of Gwalior - Orchha - 
Khajuraho - Chanderi - Bhimbetka - Mandu 
Heritage Madhya 
Pradesh 
19-Sep-16 88.77 85.33 87.97 99.95 
33.  Development of Sree Padmanabha - 
Aranamula-Sabrimala as Spiritual Circuit in 
Kerala  
Spiritual Kerala 19-Sep-16 78.08 73.77 68.28 98.39 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
113 
 
Sl. 
No 
Project Name Theme State Sanction 
Date 
Sanctioned 
Cost  
Released 
Amount  
Expenditure 
Incurred  
Physical 
Progress 
(%) 
34.  Development of Vaishali - Arrah- Masad- 
Patna- Rajgir- Pawapuri- Champapuri. 
Tirthankar Bihar 19-Sep-16 34.36 26.19 26.20 82.93 
35.  Integrated Development of Kanwaria Route: 
Sultanganj- Mojma- Banka. 
Spiritual Bihar 19-Sep-16 44.76 42.52 39.77 96.66 
36.  Development of Tribal Circuit Mokokchung 
- Tuensang - Mon in Nagaland under 
Swadesh Darshan Scheme  
Tribal Nagaland 26-Sep-16 98.14 93.24 88.06 100 
37.  Integrated Development in Kumaon region 
Katarmal-Jageshwar-Baijnath-Devidhura 
Heritage Uttarakhand 26-Sep-16 76.32 67.62 68.91 100 
38.  Development of  Srawasti, Kushinagar & 
Kapilvastu in Uttar Pradesh 
Buddhist Uttar 
Pradesh 
29-Sep-16 87.89 72.56 67.83 86.65 
39.  Development of Chitrakoot and 
Shringverpur under Ramayana Circuit 
Ramayana Uttar 
Pradesh 
29-Sep-16 69.45 64.09 58.17 100 
40.  Development of Tourist Facilities at 
Gulmarg - Baramulla - Kupwara - Kargil – 
Leh 
Himalayan Jammu 
Kashmir 
29-Sep-16 91.84 58.46 44.69 49.68 
41.  Integrated Development of Tourist Facilities 
at Anantnag- Kishtwar- Pahalgam - Daksum 
- Ranjit Sagar Dam 
Himalayan Jammu 
Kashmir 
29-Sep-16 86.44 69.95 56.87 88.29 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
114 
 
Sl. 
No 
Project Name Theme State Sanction 
Date 
Sanctioned 
Cost  
Released 
Amount  
Expenditure 
Incurred  
Physical 
Progress 
(%) 
42.  Integrated Development of Tourist Facilities 
at Jammu-Rajouri-Shopian-Pulwama 
Himalayan Jammu 
Kashmir 
29-Sep-16 84.46 67.35 58.16 90.31 
43.  Integrated Development of Tourist facilities 
at Mantalai & Sudhmahadev 
Himalayan Jammu 
Kashmir 
29-Sep-16 90.85 84.56 75.22 92.58 
44.  Integrated Development of Tourist Facilities 
under the Construction of Assets in lieu of 
those Destroyed in Floods in 2014 under PM 
Development Package for J&K 
Himalayan Jammu 
Kashmir 
30-Sep-16 90.43 74.7 64.20 100 
45.  Development of Coastal Circuit (Chennai-
Mamamallapuram-Rameshwaram-
Manpadu-Kanyakumari) In Tamil Nadu 
Coastal Tamil Nadu 18-Nov-16 73.13 69.48 65.43 100 
46.  Development of Long Island - Ross Smith 
Island - Neil Island - Havelock Island - 
Baratang Island - Port Blair 
Coastal Andaman 
Nicobar 
18-Nov-16 27.57 13.46 12.29 79.2 
47.  Development of  Ahar -Aligarh-Kasganj-
Sarosi (Unnao) -Pratapgarh- Kausambi-
Mirzapur-Gorakhpur-Domariyaganj-Basti-
Barabanki-Azamgarh-Kairana-Baghpat- 
Shahjahanpur in Uttar Pradesh (TCIL) 
Spiritual Uttar 
Pradesh 
23-Nov-16 71.91 68.32 66.86 97.81 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
115 
 
Sl. 
No 
Project Name Theme State Sanction 
Date 
Sanctioned 
Cost  
Released 
Amount  
Expenditure 
Incurred  
Physical 
Progress 
(%) 
48.  Development of Heritage Circuit (Kalinjar 
Fort) Banda - Marhar Dham, Sant Kabir 
Nagar- Chauri Chaura, Shaheed Sthal, 
Fatehpu-  Mavahar Sthal Ghosi - Shaheed 
Smarak, Meerut in Uttar Pradesh  
(WAPCOS) 
Heritage Uttar 
Pradesh 
20-Dec-16 33.97 32.27 28.01 78.17 
49.  Development of Spiritual Circuit  II Bijnor - 
Meerut- Kanpur- Kanpur Dehat - Banda- 
Ghazipur- Salempur- Ghosi- Balia- 
Ambedkar Nagar - Aligarh- Fatehpur- 
Deoria- (Mahoba)- Sonbhadra- Chandauli- 
Mishrikh- Bhadohi in Uttar Pradesh (NPCC) 
Spiritual Uttar 
Pradesh 
20-Dec-16 67.51 64.14 63.58 100 
50.  Development of Eco -Adventure Circuit 
Aizawl - Rawpuichhip - Khawhphawp - 
Lengpui - Chatlang - Sakawrhmuituaitlang -  
Muthee - Beratlawng - Tuirial Airfield – 
Hmuifang 
Eco Mizoram 27-Mar-17 66.37 49.53 36.5 44.01 
51.  Development of Kiarighat - Shimla - Hatkoti 
- Manali - Kangra - Dharamshala - Bir - 
Palampur – Chamba 
Himalayan Himachal 
Pradesh 
27-Mar-17 80.63 64.55 59.56 78.17 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
116 
 
Sl. 
No 
Project Name Theme State Sanction 
Date 
Sanctioned 
Cost  
Released 
Amount  
Expenditure 
Incurred  
Physical 
Progress 
(%) 
52.  Development of Tezpur - Majuli - Sibsagar Heritage Assam 27-Mar-17 90.98 72.78 72.78 80.78 
53.  Development of Convention Centre at 
Bodhgaya 
Buddhist Bihar 29-Mar-17 98.73 93.22 97.27 99.67 
54.  Development of Churu - Jaipur  - Alwar - 
Viratnagar - Bharatpur - Dholpur - 
Mehandipur Balaji – Chittorgarh 
Spiritual Rajasthan 30-Mar-17 88.36 68.24 64.31 90.13 
55.  Gujarat Heritage Circuit: Vadnagar - 
Modhera And Patan 
Heritage Gujarat 31-Mar-17 91.12 87.25 82.25 100 
56.  Development of Coastal II: Rua De Orum 
Creek - Don Paula -Colva - Benaulim  
Coastal Goa 20-Jun-17 99.35 94.38 88.61 92.61 
57.  Development of Heritage Circuit: Qutub 
Shahi Heritage Park - Paigah Tombs- Hayat 
Bakshi Mosque- Raymond's Tomb 
Heritage Telangana 27-Jun-17 96.9 70.61 51.14 64.45 
58.  Development of  Rajsamand -  Jaipur - Alwar 
- Sawai  Madhopur  - Jhalawar - Chittorgarh 
-  Jaisalmer  -Hanumangarh  -  Jalore - 
Udaipur - Dholpur  - Nagaur  in Rajasthan  
Heritage Rajasthan 28-Jun-17 70.64 56.57 55.04 96.46 
59.  Development of Franco - Tamil Village, 
Karaikal, Mahe and Yanam (Heritage)  
Heritage Puducherry 28-Jun-17 54.91 43.93 41.25 84.11 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
117 
 
Sl. 
No 
Project Name Theme State Sanction 
Date 
Sanctioned 
Cost  
Released 
Amount  
Expenditure 
Incurred  
Physical 
Progress 
(%) 
60.  Development of Gandhi Circuit: Bhitiharwa- 
Chandrahia- Turkaulia 
Rural Bihar 28-Jun-17 44.65 35.72 20.84 78.08 
61.  Development of Karaikal, Yanam and 
Puducherry (Spiritual)  
Spiritual Puducherry 28-Jun-17 34.96 30.94 26.19 90.09 
62.  Development Of  Junagadh- Gir Somnath - 
Bharuch-kutch- Bhavnagar- Rajkot- 
Mehsana 
Buddhist Gujarat 28-Jul-17 26.68 22.28 18.73 100 
63.  Development of Gandhisagar Dam - 
Mandleshwar Dam - Omkareshwar Dam - 
Indira Sagar Dam- Tawa Dam- Bargi Dam- 
Bheda Ghat- Bansagar Dam- Ken River 
Eco Madhya 
Pradesh 
20-Sep-17 94.61 79.7 79.39 88.8 
64.  Development of Mandar Hill & Ang Pradesh Spiritual Bihar 20-Sep-17 44.98 38.02 39.19 90.05 
65.  Development of Buddhist Circuit: 
Shalihundam-Thotlakonda- Bavikonda-
Bojjanakonda-Amravati-Anupu in Andhra 
Pradesh 
Buddhist Andhra 
Pradesh 
25-Sep-17 24.14 26.17 24.14 100 
66.  Development of Ayodhya under Ramayana 
Circuit in Uttar Pradesh 
Ramayana Uttar 
Pradesh 
27-Sep-17 127.21 115.46 111.94 97.3 
67.  Development of Waki- Adasa- Dhapewada- 
Paradsingha- Telankhandi- Girad 
Spiritual Maharashtra 4-May-18 47.53 24 22.14 36.99 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
118 
 
Sl. 
No 
Project Name Theme State Sanction 
Date 
Sanctioned 
Cost  
Released 
Amount  
Expenditure 
Incurred  
Physical 
Progress 
(%) 
68.  Uttar Pradesh/ Bihar Wayside Amenities 
(HPL) 
Buddhist Uttar 
Pradesh 
2-Jun-18 15.07 12.29 12.68 93.08 
69.  Development of Spiritual iii (Jewar) -Dadri-
Sikandrabad-Noida-Khurja-Banda in Uttar 
Pradesh 
Spiritual Uttar 
Pradesh 
27-Jul-18 12.03 9.63 9.10 81.13 
70.  Development of Dalma - Chandil - Getalsud- 
Betla National park - Mirchaiya – Netarhat 
Eco Jharkhand 27-Aug-18 52.72 15.07 13.66 27.98 
71.  Development of Surma Cherra - Unakoti- 
Jampui Hills - Gunabati-Bhunaneshwari- 
Matabari- Neermahal- Boxanagar- Chotta 
khola- Pilak- Avangchaarra in Tripura under 
North East circuit of Swadesh Darshan 
North East Tripura 30-Aug-18 65 10.1 2.59 18.13 
72.  Development of Anandpur Sahib - Fatehgarh 
Sahib - Chamkaur Sahib - Ferozpur - 
Amritsar - Khatkar Kalan - Kalanour - 
Patiala in Punjab  
Heritage Punjab 31-Aug-18 91.55 61.89 43.43 55.39 
73.  Development of Rural Circuit Malanad 
Malabar Cruise Tourism Project in Kerala  
Rural Kerala 6-Sep-18 80.37 23.77 10.00 21.55 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
119 
 
Sl. 
No 
Project Name Theme State Sanction 
Date 
Sanctioned 
Cost  
Released 
Amount  
Expenditure 
Incurred  
Physical 
Progress 
(%) 
74.  Development of Spiritual Circuit: Sivagiri 
Sree Narayana Guru Ashram-  Arruvipuram- 
Kunnumpara Sree Subrahmania - 
Chembazhanthi Sree Narayana  Gurukulam 
in Kerala. 
Spiritual Kerala 3-Jan-19 69.47 3.88 7.51 10.27 
75.  Development of Spiritual Circuit IV - 
Gorakhnath Temple(Gorakhpur), Devipattan 
Temple (Balrampur) and Vatvashni Temple 
(Domariyagunj) 
Spiritual Uttar 
Pradesh 
15-Jan-19 15.76 12.61 11.80 79.4 
76.  Development of West Khasi Hills 
(Nongkhlaw - Krem Tirot - Khudoi & 
Kohmang Falls - Khri River - 
Mawthadraishan - Shillong)  - Jaintia Hills 
(Krang Suri Falls- Shyrmang- Iooksi)  - Garo 
Hills (Nokrek Reserve  -  Katta Beel  - Siju 
Caves)  
North East Meghalaya 15-Jan-19 84.97 45.98 40.69 65.34 
 Total    5455.69 4516.82 4239.28  
   (Source: Dashboard data of Ministry as on 31 March 2022) 
 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
120 
 
Annexure-II 
(Referred to in para 1.10) 
Audit findings in respect of 14 sampled projects 
(Position as on 31 March 2022) 
(1) Bihar: Integrated Development of Kanwaria Route: Sultanganj to Deoghar 
Theme/Circuit Spiritual Circuit 
Date of recommendation by the Mission 
Directorate 
22 August 2016 
Date of approval by the Central Sanctioning 
and Monitoring Committee 
5 September 2016 
Date of conveying approval by the Ministry of 
Tourism 
19 September 2016 
Date of award of works by the State 
Government 
March 2017- October 2019 
Date of completion of the project Not completed (two components pending) 
Sanctioned Cost of Project `44.76 crore 
Amount released by the Ministry of Tourism `42.52 crore 
Physical progress 96 per cent 
Financial progress 89 per cent 
 


Report No. 17 of 2023 
121 
 
Significance of the circuit In month of Shravan (Monsoon), one of the 
largest congregation of devotees takes place 
annually at Sultanganj (Bihar). From here, 
devotees visit Deoghar (Jharkhand) by 
undertaking a rigorous pilgrimage on foot to offer 
the holy water to Baba Baidyanath Temple, 
Deoghar (Jharkhand). 
Audit Observations 
i. Planning of Kanwaria Route by the State Government was incomplete as per the definition 
of tourist circuit under the Swadesh Darshan Scheme , as the route was planned only up to 
Inarawaran, Banka (Bihar). No facilities such as rain shelters, cafeteria  etc., were planned 
and developed in the remaining distance of 27 kms (13 kms up to Bihar border and 14 kms 
in Jharkhand) from Inarawaran (Banka) to Deoghar. Hence, development of the Kanwaria 
Route was not properly planned up to Deoghar, the main temple, thus depriving the 
devotees/pilgrims of the envisaged facilit ies for 27 kms.  Site selection for execution of 
facilities for tourists/devotees under the project was n ot proper. A complex for changing 
clothes for pilgrims after taking bath in River Ganga proposed at Ajgaivinath Ghat, 
Sultanganj was built far away from the Ghat and near a crematory, which led to its non -
utilisation and encroachment. Similarly, a sitting shelter at Suiya was proposed to be built 
approximately two kms away from the proposed wayside amenities at Suiya to provide 
facilities to devotees at regular distance on the route. However, while executing the project, 
the sitting shelter was also constructed along with the wayside amenities at the same place 
at Suiya, which deprived the pilgrims of the facility at desired location. 
ii. As per the Scheme guidelines, invitation and finalisation of all tenders for the project was 
to be completed by the States, w ithin three months from date of sanction of the project. 
However, the Implementing Agency invited tenders for all the 18 components with delays 
ranging from 3 months to 34 months, which result ed in delay in completion of the project 
by 42 months. 
iii. The State Government was to ensure that land to be used for the project must be free from 
all encumbrances. However, t he State Tourism Department wrongly provided Land 
Availability Certificate while submitting the proposal for construction of Rain Shelter at 
Dhani Belari. On the basis of that, the project was sanctioned. However, there was delay of 
29 months in availability of land by the S tate Government  at the time of actual 
implementation (land was made available in November 2019 against work order award ed 
in June 2017), which resulted in delay in completion of above component. 
iv. There were instances of undue benefit to contractors such as  irregular payment of service 
tax to consultant (`9.20 lakh) without provision of the same in sanction letter and irregular 
payment (`94.50 lakh) on account of material not included in the approved Bill of Quantities 
but booked in the Measurement Books of Rain Shelter at Suiya and Lulha Shivlok, Cafeteria 
at Chihutjor, wayside amenities at Suiya and Jilebia. This was includ ed without any 
supplementary agreement which was in contravention of the Bihar Public Works 
Department Manual.   

Report No. 17 of 2023 
122 
 
v. As per contract agreement, mobilisation advance and simple interest thereon should be 
recovered from the contractors running account bill. The entire advance was to be recovered 
before execution of 80 per cent of gross value of contract and paid together with interest due 
on the entire outstanding amount. However, the Implementing Agency neither recovered 
mobilisation advance of `38.41 lakh given for construction of Rain Shelter at Dhani Belari 
nor deducted interest of `11.21 lakh from the contractor’s running account bills by the time 
80 per cent  of the gross value of the contract was executed and paid  for. Also, for 
construction of Rain Shelter at Suiya and Lulha Shivlok, I mplementing Agency  only 
recovered `79 lakh against `1 crore despite payment of final  bills, in contravention to the 
General Conditions of Contract. 
vi. State Government did not open separate interest-bearing account for funds released for the 
project till November 2021 even after issue of additional guidelines in August 2020 by the 
Ministry of Tourism ( MoT) but kept  the funds of various projects in its existing bank 
account. As a result, interest earned on received funds could not be ascertained and refunded 
to MoT. 
vii. As per guidelines, the S tate Government  was not to keep the amount released by MoT 
unutilised for more tha n six months. In case funds could  not be utilised by such time, the 
same were to be surrendered to MoT with interest or their formal approval was be taken to 
transfer/adjust the amount against other Central Financial Assistance. However, S tate 
Government submitted utilisation certificate for an amount of `7.86 crore in September 
2017 i.e., after 12 months from the date of release of first installment of `10.47 crore i.e., 
September 2016. Further, out of funds released in August 2020, `3.39 crore was unutilised 
by the State Government as of February 2022 even after 18 months of release, without any 
formal approval or surrender to MoT. 
viii. As per sanction letter for the project, the State Government  was to set up a Monitoring 
Committee headed by Secretary (Tourism), Bihar to monitor physical and financial progress 
of the sanctioned project and submit the progress report to MoT on quarterly basis. However, 
the State Government constituted the State Level Monitoring Committee (SLMC) in August 
2019 after a delay of three years from date of sanction of project. Further, no meeting of 
SLMC was convened by the State. As a result, monitoring envisaged at State level was not 
ensured by the State Government.  
ix. As per S cheme guidelines, the State Government was to ensure proper O peration & 
Maintenance (O&M) after completion of project. However, no O&M plan was implemented 
by the State Government/Implementing Agency.  Lack of O&M was causing great harm to 
the assets created under the Scheme, like missing/stolen/damaged facilities as noticed during 
the joint physical verification. 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
123 
 
 
 
Picture A.1: Broken RCC Bench nearby Rain Shelter, Lulha Shivlok, Bihar 
  
Picture A.2: Stolen Solar Panel of a Solar Street 
Light near Rain Shelter, Mojma, Bihar 
Picture A.3: Stolen Solar Panel of a Solar Street 
Light near Mini Cafeteria, Tankeshwar, Bihar  
 
 
  


Report No. 17 of 2023 
124 
 
(2) Chhattisgarh: Development of Tribal Tourism Circuit in Jashpur - Kunkuri- 
Mainpat- Kamleshwarpur- Maheshpur- Kurdar- Sarodhadadar- Gangrel- 
Kondagaon- Nathiya Nawagaon- Jagdalpur- Chitrakote- Tirathgarh   
 
Theme/Circuit Tribal Circuit 
Date of recommendation by the Mission 
Directorate 
3 December 2015 
Date of approval by the Central Sanctioning 
and Monitoring Committee 
10 December 2015 
Date of conveying approval by the Ministry 
of Tourism 
18 February 2016 
Date of award of works by the State 
Government 
March 2016- June 2020 
Date of completion of the project 31 December 2021 
Sanctioned Cost of Project `96.10 crore  
Amount released by the Ministry of Tourism `84.81 crore  
Physical progress  100 per cent 
Financial progress  95.87 per cent 
 
Significance of the circuit Chhattisgarh has always been synonymous 
with tribes and tribal culture. The circuit was 
approved for development of tribal circuit 
for access to enthusiasts, travel lers and 
academicians to the living, art and culture, 
faith, traditions and heritage of different rare 
tribal communities of Chhattisgarh, living in 
thicky forested areas of the region. 


Report No. 17 of 2023 
125 
 
Audit Observations 
i. As per the Scheme guidelines, tourist circuits/destinations were to be identified 
considering factors such as current tourist traffic, connectivity potential and significance 
attached to the site, holistic tourist experience. However, it was observed that there were 
no proper criteria for selection of destination by the State and site verification and land 
availability were the only criteria adopted by the State Government for selection of the 
project. Stakeholders’ consultation and traffic survey was not found. As a result, it was 
noticed that:   
• Selection of Lamni Park, Jagdalpur as Ethnic Destination did not fulfil the logic 
and design of a tribal circuit destination as only two components (Craft Haat-
cafeteria and Parking) were proposed at the destination. It was noticed that 
construction of cafeteria was only capacity extension of an existing restaurant at 
the site which was a simple concrete structure and no ethnic flavor was added to it. 
• Ethnic Tourist (Village) Destination viz., Kondagaon with a cost of `10.92 crore 
was constructed just in front of the Tourism Motel, a pre-existing site owned by 
Tourism Department. Since site verification report had no mention about the 
existing Motel, it seems that the Motel was not taken into consideration during site 
selection. Even though it is on the way to world famous tourist destination i.e., 
Chitrakote and tribal craft hub of Chhattisgarh i.e Bastar, this destination failed to 
attract tourists during last two years. 
• Wayside amenities at Maheshpur in Ambikapur on Bilaspur highway (NH-130) at 
48 kms from Ambikapur were constructed 10 kms away from the Highway in deep 
forest. The approach road to the site was under the jurisdiction of the Forest 
Department and not maintained. In the name of wayside amenities, only a two-
room cottage was constructed without any basic facilities like drinking water, own 
electricity, peripheral lighting, water supply to the toilets, telephone connection, 
restaurant and guard room, etc. Further, the surrounding area of the site is notified 
as ‘Elephant Movement Area’ by the State Forest Department. Since Elephant riot 
is very frequent in some parts of Chhattisgarh, negligible public movement was 
found in this area. Thus, the objective of wayside amenities to provide tourist 
amenities on the highway was defeated. 
• Kamleshwarpur, a picnic spot in Mainpat was chosen for development with a day 
shelter at a cost of `4.04 crore. However, due to the non-availability of land, all 
components for other destinations viz., Mehtapoint (Mainpat), Ambikapur and 
Ratanpur were also shifted to Kamleshwarpur as 46 acres of land was available 
there. The project cost of Kamleshwarpur was revised to the total cost of other three 
destinations. This indicates that the major driving force for selection of 
Kamleshwarpur was availability of land and the intent to avoid lapse of funds 
sanctioned for other locations, rather than tourist traffic and development of 
tourism in the region. 
ii. As per the Scheme guidelines, implementing agencies were required to follow all the 
codal formalities while awarding the contracts. However, it was observed that no tender 
was floated for selection of consultant/executing agencies for execution of projects. 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
126 
 
Hindustan Prefab Limited (HPL) and Telecommunications Consultants India Limited 
(TCIL) were appointed as consultants for preparation of individual DPRs and execution 
of works because these agencies were engaged for execution of similar schemes in some 
other States and were Government of India Enterprises. Contracts for execution of the 
project were awarded to the executing agencies with delays of 2 months to 49 months 
by the State Tourism Board.   
iii. As per sanction order issued (February 2016) by the Ministry, the project was to be 
completed and commissioned within 48 months i.e., February 2020. There was delay in 
completion of project by 22 months due to extensions given as a result of dropping of 
site/components and revision of estimates. 
iv. There was change in components or deviation from DPRs. For instance, instead of Day-
shelter, a two-room cottage was constructed at three sites at Mainpat. Further, four 
wayside amenities (Ratanpur, Kunkuri, Nathiya Nawagaon and Maheshpur) were 
proposed but no proper analysis for preparation of cost estimates was done as cost 
estimates of all the wayside amenities was almost the same, despite the fact that three 
out of four wayside amenities were new destinations and were different in terms of their 
geographical location, strata and area. Audit noticed that cost estimates were prepared 
without visiting the sites and components/facilities proposed were not as per site 
requirement but as per cost limitation. 
v. As per guidelines, the State Government was not to keep the amount released by the 
Ministry of Tourism (MoT) unutilised for more than six months. In case, funds could 
not be utilised by such time, the same was to be surrendered to MoT with interest or 
their formal approval was to be taken to transfer/adjust the amount against other Central 
Financial Assistance. However, there was idling of fund (`19.99 crore for five months 
and `14.99 crore for 11 months) by the State. Further, interest of `2.52 crore (till 31 
December 2021) was not refunded to MoT.  
vi. As per Scheme guidelines, the State Government was to ensure proper Operation & 
Maintenance (O&M) after completion of project. However, there was no proper O&M 
of projects by the State Government/Implementing Agency, even though 5 months to 
54 months had elapsed since the properties were taken over by the State Tourism Board. 
For instance, Gangrel Dam in Dhamtari, Chhattisgarh, was developed as Eco-ethnic 
destination under the scheme. After its completion in December 2018, Implementing 
Agency leased out (June 2019) the property on O&M for 10 years to M/s Enchanting 
Tales Hotels and Resorts Pvt. Ltd.  The Company (lessee) did not take any insurance 
covering the properties at site, which is a serious lapse on the part of the Implementing 
Agency. Without proper insurance, public property had been put at risk for a period of 
30 months. No third-party audit for wayside amenities had been conducted.  
vii. Souvenir shops constructed at Jashpur (`33.01 lakh) and Sarodadadar (`49.60 lakh) 
were not used for a period ranging from 15 months to 41 months. Ethnic cafeteria, 
reception-cum-facilitation center and parking were constructed at Sarodadadar for `1.55 
crore. However, the cafeteria did not have kitchen/cooking platform and water supply 
and the reception center did not have tourist facilitation like seating arrangement, toilet, 
water supply, drinking water facility, etc. Parking was not in use since it was behind the 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
127 
 
guard room and not visible from the main gate. Hence, the cafeteria and reception center 
were not found in usable condition and vehicles were found parked randomly. 
viii. Artisans centers and souvenir shops constructed at Jashpur, Sarodadadar and 
Kondagaon were being utilised as accommodation for tourists, instead of the intended 
purpose of enabling local craftsmen for practising crafts at these tourist destinations. 
ix. As per sanction letter , the State Government was to set up a Monitoring Committee 
headed by Secretary (Tourism) to monitor physical and financial progress of the 
sanctioned project and submit the progress report to MoT on quarterly basis. However, 
the State Government constituted the State Level Monitoring Committee (SLMC) in 
September 2017 after delay of 19 months and only one meeting of the SLMC was held 
in October 2017. Further, there was no documentary evidence for any meeting between 
the SLMC and executing agencies or for any rev iew meeting for analysis of work 
progress. 
 
  

Report No. 17 of 2023 
128 
 
(3) Goa: Development of Coastal Circuit – Sinquerim-Baga, Anjuna -Vagator, 
Morjim-Keri, Aguada Fort and Aguada Jail, Goa 
Theme/Circuit Coastal 
Date of recommendation by the Mission 
Directorate 
17 February 2016 
Date of approval by the Central Sanctioning 
and Monitoring Committee 
18 March 2016 
Date of conveying approval by the Ministry 
of Tourism 
01 June 2016 
Date of award of works by the State 
Government 
September 2016 - 
March 2018 
Date of completion of the project 24 August 2021 
Sanctioned Cost of the Project `97.65 crore 
Amount released by the Ministry of Tourism `92.76 crore 
Physical progress  100 per cent  
Financial progress  100 per cent  
 
Significance of the circuit Goa with a coastline of 115 kms is one of the 
major tourist destination s of the country and 
has a certain potential for development of 
vibrant promenades and waterfronts, catering 
to both international and domestic tourist s. 
The circuit align s current aspiration of the 
State to develop  itself into a world class 
destination for tourists. 


Report No. 17 of 2023 
129 
 
Audit Observations 
i. As per the S cheme guidelines, tourist circuits/destinations were to be identified 
considering factors such as current tourist traffic, connectivity potential and significance 
attached to the site, holistic tourist experience etc. However, it was observed that: 
• There were no proper criteria for selection of destination by the State. The stakeholders 
such as local bodies or departments were not consulte d before preparation of the 
Detailed Project Report (DPR) for the circuit.   
• The prepared DPR consisted of items mainly for basic infrastructure development like 
public toilets, parking, Tourist Information Center, etc. spread across North Goa 
coastal line as per the need and availability of land without proper planning and were 
not integrated into a tourist circuit. For instance, old helipad at Aguada Fort proposed 
(March 2016) for upgradation at a cost of `3.43 crore was shifted (April 2019) to a 
land parcel at Old Goa due to opposition from locals. It was stated by Goa Tourism 
Development Corporation (GTDC) i.e., Implementing Agency, that the land parcel in 
Old Goa belonged to GTDC and the site was approved and notified by the Government 
as a helipad. The Ministry of Tourism (MoT) approved the change of site on request 
from GTDC without considering the tourist potential at the relocated site. 
ii. As per the Scheme guidelines, implementing agencies were required to follow all codal 
formalities while awarding the contracts. However, it was observed that throughout the 
process of preparation of DPR, too many consultants were hired by the State Government. 
First, consultants were hired for preparation of DPRs for individual components, then a 
lead consultant was hired for consolidation of DPRs prepared by these consultants. This 
also delayed the process of preparation of DPR. The consultancy charges ranged from 
0.80 per cent to 4.30 per cent as against 2 per cent sanctioned by the Ministry. 
Considering the quantu m of work, the issue of consultants was also objected to by the 
National Productivity Council in its Third-Party Impact Assessment Report of 2019. 
iii. The State Government did not ensure necessary clearances before submission of proposal. 
As a result, there was delay in commencement of project, which also led to delay in 
completion. For instance, there was delay in the receipt of No-Objection Certificate 
(NOC) from the Archaeological Survey of India for the component ‘Development of 
Aguada Jail’ for more than two years which consequently led to delayed receipt of NOCs 
from the Coastal Regulation Zone, Town and Country Planning, National Monument 
Authority, etc. This delayed the commencement of the project (March 2019 against the 
date of sanction by MoT viz., June 2016). 
iv. Irregularities such as execution on a leased land, diversion of funds, excess payment to 
contractor, procuring of items at significantly higher rates than its previous procurement 
rate, procuring equipment before completion of necessary infrastructure, dropping of 
components of a project etc., were seen during the execution of the projects in the circuit, 
as briefly given below: 
• Eight works ( Watch Towers with equipment, T ourist Information Centre , 
Souvenir shop, Ticket counter, Toilet, Parking, Solar Garbage Collection and 
Rainwater Harvesting) for Development of Aguada Jail as a Tourist Destination 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
130 
 
were not executed by  the Implementing Agency. However, the amount released 
for the non-executed components was not returned by the State Government. 
• Sanctioned components (coffee shops, to ilet blocks, reception) at helipad 
constructed at Old Goa were not constructed and instead two porta cabins were 
put in its place.  
• Expenditure of `6.48 crore was incurred on land for which Government/GTDC 
did not have ownership rights, as it was owned by a private Trust (Shri Morjai 
Devasthan and Affiliates Devalaya). As per agreement (July 2019) , the S tate 
Government was entitled to receive 60 per cent share of monthly rent on leasing 
out the premises for Operation & Maintenance for a period of 20 years till the year 
2039.  However, no revenue had been generated from the site (January 2022) and 
GTDC was bearing all liabilities. 
• The work for procurement of Sound and Light show equipment at Aguada Jail 
was awarded (June 2017) for `3.94 crore before completion of other works at site. 
As a result, equipment were shifted to another site at Baga to avoid idling. 
However, instead of using the same equipment procured in June  2017, the State 
Government purchased (February 2021) new equipment at Aguada jail for `3.25 
crore. The Sound and Light show equipment purchased for Aguada Jail, however, 
remained idle up to the year 2022 and it was only in the year 2023 that the Show 
was made operational as observed (May 2023) during the Joint physical 
inspection of site. It was further observed during the joint inspection that the 
Sound and Light Show at Baga was still lying unutilised resulting in unfruitful 
expenditure of `3.94 crore.  
• Wasteful expenditure of `1.65 crore was incurred on construction of Tourist 
Information Center at a remote location at Terakhol as facilities created there had 
been closed and not in use since its inception.  
• Against awarded work for 10 toilet blocks at different locations in North Goa for 
`14.58 crore, the toilet blocks were cons tructed at only five locations utili sing 
almost the full amount ( `14.21 crore). Further, Buses purchased for circuiting 
tourists between Aguada Fort, Aguada Jail and Tourist Information Centre were 
used for purposes other than the intended purpose (such as plying school students, 
using for wedding functions etc.).  
• Funds amounting to `0.93 crore were diverted to other works (at Candolim and 
Baga Food Court), which were neither sanctioned components nor approval of the 
MoT was sought for their execution. 
v. The State Government paid excess amount of `71.16 lakh to contractor in respect of three 
items under the project ‘Development of Sinquerim-Baga, Anjuna-Vagator, Morjim-Keri, 
Aguada Fort and Aguada Jail’. On being pointed out by Audit, the State Governm ent 
intimated that it had recovered the amount from the contractor.  

Report No. 17 of 2023 
131 
 
vi. The State Government did not open separate interest-bearing account for funds released 
for the project but kept the funds in Current Account or Fixed Deposits. Further, interest 
of `84.37 lakh earned on Fixed Deposits was not remitted to the MoT.  
vii. As per sanction letter, the State Government  was to set up a Monitoring Committee 
headed by the Secretary (Tourism) to monitor physical and financial progress of the 
sanctioned project and submit  the progress report to MoT on quarterly basis. However, 
the State Government constituted State Level Monitoring Committee (SLMC) in August 
2017. Further, no records of meetings of the State Level Monitoring Committee were 
available.  The monthly progress reports submitted by the State Government to the MoT 
did not show the actual progress of work and the components which were not executed 
were also shown as being completed like watch tower in Aguada Jail, Amphitheater and 
cultural centre at Anjuna Beach. 
viii. The State Government  was to ensure proper O peration & Maintenance (O&M) after 
completion of project. However, no proper O&M of created assets was ensured by the 
State Government. Most of the infrastructure developed was lying in an abandoned state 
without any operation and maintenance plan and without revenue or employment 
generation. For instance, during the site visit, the parking lot at Anjuna, public amenities 
in North Goa, facilities created at Morjim Khind were lying unutilised and found in poor 
condition.  
 
  

Report No. 17 of 2023 
132 
 
(4) Gujarat Heritage Circuit, Ahmedabad -Rajkot-Porbandar-Bardoli-Dandi, 
Gujarat 
Theme/Circuit Heritage Circuit 
Date of recommendation by the Mission 
Directorate 
18 July 2016 
Date of approval by the Central Sanctioning 
and Monitoring Committee 
19 July 2016 
Date of conveying approval by the Ministry 
of Tourism 
9 September 2016 
Date of award of works by the State 
Government 
May 2017- January 2021 
Date of completion of the project 27 December 2021 
Sanctioned Cost of Project `58.42 crore  
Amount released by the Ministry of Tourism `56.21 crore 
Physical progress  100 per cent 
Financial progress  97.24 per cent  
 
Significance of the circuit The circuit covers destinations of different 
historical attractions closely associated with 
Mahatma Gandhi such as ashrams, statues, 
museums, and other sites imbibing Gandhian 
philosophy and principles. It w ould help 
tourists to know about Gandhiji's various 
stages of life in the State of Gujarat. The 
infrastructure along with proper connectivity 
would be important to attract more tourists and 
encourage them to stay for longer period. 


Report No. 17 of 2023 
133 
 
Audit Observations 
i. As per  the Scheme guidelines, tourist circuits/destinations were to be identified 
considering factors such as current tourist traffic, connectivity potential and 
significance attached to the site, holistic tourist experience. However, it was observed 
that identification of components of the project was deficient, as various components 
were dropped, added, revised/modified indicating that requirement of the component 
was not analy sed in detail. Originally sanctioned project cost was `89.03 crore, 
however, the sanctioned cost was later reduced to `55.63 crore.   
ii. The DPR was at variance with DPR toolkit of the Ministry of Tourism (MoT). Many 
contents of the toolkit were omitted from the DPR. DPR also included the 
inadmissible components viz. , improvement/investment in an asset owned by a 
private entity/Trust. 
iii. As per the Scheme guidelines, no portion of sanction ed project cost should be 
executed/implemented on land/property owned by a private individual or a Trust. 
However, execution of works on land/properties owned by private individuals/Trusts 
was noticed at five destinations. Further , expenditure of `1.76 crore on construction 
of facilities for accommodation and expenditure of `1.80 crore on Street development 
(approach road, external electrification, external water supply, sewage, etc.) was done 
out of Scheme funds, which was to be funded by the State Government. 
iv. The Implementing Agency passed undue benefit of `48 lakh to M/s Ernst & Young 
by appointing it as consultant for preparation of DPR without following the mandatory 
codal formalities of Scheme guidelines and even though the Ministry had already 
appointed M/s Ernst & Young as the Programme Management Consultant for the 
preparation of comprehensive DPRs of identified projects. 
v. As per sanction order issued (September 2016) by the Ministry, the project was to be 
completed and commissioned within 36 months i.e., August 2019. There was delay in 
award of works by the I mplementing Agency ranging from 8 months to 50 months 
which led to delay in completion of works and the project could be completed only in 
December 2021. 
vi. As per the Scheme guidelines, implementing agencies were required to follow all 
codal formalities while awarding the contracts. The Implementing Agency awarded 
the work  order for different components/works without following tendering 
process/e-tendering. It was noticed that consultants for different works were selected 
by drawing chits.  
vii. During execution, irregularities like execution of project on a leased land, diversion 
of funds, excess payment to contractors, dropping of components of the project were 
seen, as briefly given below: 
• There were instances of non-execution of sanctioned components for `27.42 lakh. 
Further, works amounting to `24.34 lakh for Kaba Gandhi No Delo Museum and 
Rashtriyashala were executed by the Implementing Agency  which was not 
approved in the DPR. Against received fund of `56.21 crore (February 2022), the 
State Government was liable to surrender `13.99 crore on account of non -

Report No. 17 of 2023 
134 
 
execution of the components, execution of the inadmissible component, execution 
of component not included in the DPR and execution of components on lesser cost 
as compared to sanctioned cost, etc. 
• Works were foreclosed by the State Government without completing all the 
approved components at Kocharab Ashram, Sabarmati Ashram  and Dandi 
Memorial. As a result, facilities as envisaged could not be provided to the tourists.  
• Inadmissible expenditure was incurr ed on construction of 10 rooms for 
accommodation from the Scheme funds at Kocharab Ashram, Ahmedabad. 
Further, as per DPR toolkit, works related to approach road and external 
electrification was to be executed through State funds. However, the Implementing 
Agency incurred expenditure on external electrification ( `13.34 lakh) and 
construction of approach road ( `94.50 lakh) at Kirti Mandir, Porbandar and 
construction of approach road of Wayside Amenity, Sayala (`65.89 lakh) from the 
Scheme funds without approval of MoT.  
• The Implementing Agency completed the construction of wayside amenities at  
Bharuch in March 2019 and handed it over for Operation and Maintenance (O&M) 
to a private firm under PPP model for a period of ten years on pa yment of annual 
premium of `32.09 lakh without prior approval of the MoT.  During joint 
verification of wayside amenities, it was noticed that O&M operator undertook 
major modifications in the newly constructed wayside amenities. As a result, the 
expenditure incurred for the construction of wayside amenities was wasteful. 
• As per sanction order, the executing agency was to put in place mandatory facilities 
for barrier free access to physically disabled persons. However, the State 
Government did not ensure des igning and execution in compliance with barrier -
free access to disabled viz. , construction of ramps, passages , etc. in the toilets at 
all the destinations. 
viii. The Implementing Agency did not open a separate account for the Scheme funds and 
kept the fund s in the single account maintained for all schemes. Further, Tourism 
Corporation of Gujarat Limited (TCGL) did not refund interest of `20.10 lakh earned 
on Scheme funds.  
ix. The State Government was to set up a Monitoring Committee headed by the Secretary 
(Tourism) to monitor physical and financial progress of the sanctioned project and 
submit the progress report to MoT on quarterly basis. Thought the State Level 
Monitoring Committee  was constituted in April 2017, during 2017 -21, only three 
meetings (in 2019) o f the Committee were convened and more than half of the 
members remained absent in all the three meetings, which indicates poor monitoring 
of the project at the State level. 
x. As per sanction letter, the State Government was to regularly furnish the statement of 
progress of work and expenditure incurred to the Ministry of Tourism. Audit observed 
that the monthly progress reports submitted by the State Government were not in 
agreement with the actual progress as per records. Without correct reporting s ystem, 
the Ministry could not take course correction measures. 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
135 
 
xi. The State Government was to ensure proper O&M after completion of project. 
However, as of April 2022, out of nine sites and two wayside amenities developed 
under the Scheme , the State Governmen t identified agencies for O&M only for 
wayside amenities and Alfred High school. For O&M of Dandi Memorial, no agency 
was appointed till date. The remaining seven sites were handed over to respective 
private Trusts, Departments, etc.  The Implementing Agency has not entered into any 
agreement stipulating terms and conditions of O&M for these seven assets.   
xii. Wayside amenities  at Sayla had been  completed in October 2020 . However, the 
Implementing Agency awarded O&M in December 2021 after a lapse of more than 
14 months. Similarly, wayside amenities at Bharuch were completed in March 2019. 
However, the Implementing Agency awarded O&M contract in August 2021 after a 
lapse of 29 months. No feasibility study was conducted for the wayside amenities 
proposed in the DPR.  The wayside amenities were awarded at a negligible premium 
and major modifications were undertaken that rendered the expenditure on the newly 
constructed wayside amenities unfruitful.   
 
  

Report No. 17 of 2023 
136 
 
(5) Himachal Pradesh:  Integrated development of Himalayan Circuit  
Theme/Circuit Himalayan Circuit  
Date of recommendation by the Mission 
Directorate 
14 December 2016 
Date of approval by the Central Sanctioning 
and Monitoring Committee 
14 February 2017 
Date of conveying approval by the Ministry 
of Tourism 
27 March 2017 
Date of award of works by  the State 
Government 
July 2018 – November 2020 
Date of completion of the project Not Completed 
Sanctioned Cost of Project `80.69 crore 
Amount released by the Ministry of Tourism `64.55 crore 
Physical progress  78.17 per cent 
Financial progress  73.87 per cent 
 
Significance of the Circuit The circuit consists some of the important 
tourist places like Shimla, Manali  and 
Dharmshala. Sites included in this circuit are 
endowed with trekking routes having 
beautiful sites all around. Many ancient 
temples are spread around these sites which 
are having very special significance. The 
sites of Himalayan Circuit have architectural 
monuments of historic and mythological 
importance. 


Report No. 17 of 2023 
137 
 
Audit Observations 
i. As per the Scheme guidelines, tourist circuits/destinations were to be identified 
considering factors such as current tourist traffic, connectivity potential and 
significance attached to the site, holistic tourist experience. However, Audit observed 
that the circuit was spread across 781 kms (separated by long distances) with no clear 
entry and exit points. It did not constitute a circuit as the sites were scattered to the 
West (Kiarighat), East (Hatkoti), North-East (Manali) and North-West (Kangra, 
Dharamshala, Bir and Bhalei) areas and did not have definite interlinkages between 
them. The Development Plan in the DPR was made without consultation with the 
local community. 
ii. Enhancement of income and employment opportunities was one of the main 
objectives of the Scheme. However, no detail s/documents in respect of 
enhancement of income and employment opportunities was found. 
iii. As per guidelines of the Scheme, funds were to be released only after submission 
of all applicable clearances. The State Government was also t o ensure that land to 
be used for the project must be free from all encroachments. However,  the State 
Government did not ensure necessary clearances before submission of proposal. It 
resulted in delay in handing over of sites in two works (Paragliding cent er at Bir 
and Heliport at Shimla) for 8 months to 13 months, which resulted in cascading 
delay in commencement and completion of projects.  
iv. In one component (Ice-Skating Rink at Shimla), due to non-obtaining of necessary 
No-Objection Certificates  from different departments, the component had to be 
dropped, which rendered the expenditure of `25.69 lakh incurred on preparation of 
DPR/work estimates and advertisements unfruitful . Though the component was 
dropped, the Department of Tourism  had not recovered the consultancy fee of 
`22.58 lakh paid to Shimla Smart City Limited. 
v. As per the Scheme guidelines, implementing agencies were required to follow all 
codal formalities while awarding the contracts. However, t he Himachal Pradesh 
Tourism D evelopment Board (HPTDB) had allotted the work of preparation of 
DPR of six components to a consultant for `1.11 crore without inviting advertised 
tender. 
vi. The Ministry of Tourism ( MoT) had sanctioned a project at Kiarighat under 
Product/Infrastructure Deve lopment for Destinations and Circuits (PIDDC) 
Scheme. It was noticed that `1.28 crore was lying unutilised from PIDDC Scheme 
with it. However, the State Government had shown above amount as utilised in the 
Utilisation Certificate submitted to MoT. Further, the State Government submitted 
an undertaking stating that there was no pendency of Utilisation Certificate in 
respect of grant -in-aid released by Central Government for all the schemes of 
Ministry of Tourism. Later, under the Swadesh Darshan Scheme, MoT sanctioned 
a component ‘Construction of Convention Centre at Kiarighat’ at the same location 
for `25 crore. The State Government transferred the said amount of `1.28 crore for 
the project at Kiarighat under Swadesh Darshan Scheme as additional funds. This 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
138 
 
shows that the State had given false undertaking regarding non -pendency of 
Utilisation Certificates at the time of seeking funds under the Scheme.  
vii. There were delays of 272 days to 804 days in the finali sation of tenders/awarding 
of contracts. Further, there was delay of 270 days in preparation of work estimates 
for Saurav Van Vihar, Palampur from the Forest Department and delay of 372 days 
in release of funds to  the Impleme nting Agency  which resulted in delay in 
completion of work due to which MoT dropped the work from the Scheme.   
viii. During joint physical inspection, instances of execution of less work against 
approved DPR were observed, as given below: 
• At Heliport Shimla, Pantry instead of Cafeteria had been constructed. 
• At K iarighat Convention Centre, capacity for only 350 persons against the 
envisaged 1,000 persons was constructed. 
• Against a parking capacity of 200 vehicles at Kiarighat, parking for on ly 90 
vehicles was constructed.   
• At the Art and Craft Centre, Bhalei, against provision of construction of 500 
sq.m. parking area, only 144.30 sq.m. parking area was constructed.  
• Some of the works viz., Rain Shelter at Hatkoti, Open-Air Theatre at Village 
Haat Kangra, landscaping and beautification of Dal Lake were not executed.  
• Provision of ‘Paragliding equipment at Bir’ was not made even though 
sanctioned by MoT.  
• No solar illumination light and S ewage Treatment Plant  were found 
installed/constructed in Convention Centre, Kiarighat and Paragliding Centre 
at Bir.  
• Against 25 solar lights to be installed at Heliport at Shimla, the Department of 
Tourism had installed 19 streetlights. 
ix.    During execution, it was noticed that in some instances, few components had been 
dropped or less amount of work had been executed by the Implementing Agency. 
However, the State Government did not refund the unutilised amount, as mentioned 
below: 
• The Department of Tourism released `1.15 crore to the District Tourism 
Development Office (DTDO), Dharamshala for execution of the Saurav Kalia 
Van Vihar (SVV) by the State Forest Department. The I mplementing Agency 
incurred expenditure of `0.18 crore but the provision for protection wall was not 
made in the work estimates before development work. Due to a cloud burst on 
23 September 2018, Neugal river destroyed SVV work completely which 
rendered the expenditure of `0.18 crore unfruitful. Finally, the component was 
dropped, but DTDO had not refunded the unutilised amount of `0.97 crore.  
• For Artificial Climbing Wall at Manali, against sanctioned cost of `3 crore, 
`2.80 crore was released by MoT. However, components amounting to `2.15 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
139 
 
crore wer e dropped by MoT and remaining amount of `1.95 crore was not 
refunded by the State Government. 
x. In four components (Kiarighat, Shimla, Bhalei and Manali), against sanctioned cost 
of `41.98 crore, the executing agencies had incurred expenditure of `56.35 crore. 
This resulted in excess expenditure of `14.37 crore for which the approval of MoT 
was not obtained. For the component ‘development of Dal Lake ’, the issue of 
leakage of water was not resolved due to which  the component was dropped 
resulting in wasteful expenditure of `79.34 lakh 
xi. Fund management was not efficient and effective as there were instances of non -
submission of Utilisation Certificates. Interest amounting to `3.10 crore earned on 
unspent funds was also not refunded to MoT, rather an amount of `1.14 crore (out 
of `3.10 crore) had been utilised by the State. 
xii. Expenditure on Operation & Maintenance (O&M) of the assets created under the 
Scheme was to be borne by the State Government. However, an agreement was 
executed for O&M of Light and Sound show at a cost of `0.95 lakh from the 
Scheme funds, which was inadmissible. Further, the Department of Tourism 
incurred `23.72 lakh on other inadmissible components like renovation of temple, 
cutting of trees, foundation stone ceremony etc.  
xiii. DPR of Light and Sound Show component included provision of `7.56 crore for 
components of audio hardware, video hardware, interior cabling and poles for 
mounting projectors and speakers and components of creative section. During joint 
physical verification, it was found that these items were procured by the executing 
agency and stored in the control room but not installed and made operational. 
xiv. There was a delay of about 4 months in formation of State Level Monitoring 
Committee. Further, it did not conduct any meetings. Besides, no quarterly physical 
and financial progress reports for the period from April 2017 to June 2020 were 
sent to MoT. Thus, monitoring of the project by the State Government was not 
adequate. 
 
  

Report No. 17 of 2023 
140 
 
(6) J&K- Integrated Development of Jammu - Srinagar - Pahalgam - Bhagwati 
Nagar - Anantnag - Salamabad Uri-Kargil – Leh in J&K 
Theme/Circuit Himalayan Circuit 
Date of recommendation by the Mission 
Directorate 
3 December 2015 
Date of approval by the Central Sanctioning 
and Monitoring Committee 
10 December 2015 
Date of conveying approval by the Ministry 
of Tourism 
15 June 2016 
Date of award of works by the State 
Government 
June 2016 - March 2021 
Date of completion of the project, if 
completed. 
Not completed 
Sanctioned Cost of Project `77.33 crore 
Amount released by the Ministry of Tourism `60.47 crore 
Physical progress  92 per cent  
Financial progress  68.94 per cent 
 
Significance of the circuit  The project was among six projects approved 
in 2016 as part of Development Package of 
Prime Minister Reconstruction Plan for 
integrated development of tourism in Jammu 
and Kashmir.  


Report No. 17 of 2023 
141 
 
Audit Observations 
                                                           
45  Ice skating rink at Pahalgam, Apple resort at Chenni Wuddur, Anantnag and wayside amenities at 
Bijbehara. 
i. As per the Scheme guidelines, tourist circuits/destinations were to be identified 
considering factors such as current tourist traffic, connectivity potential and significance 
attached to the site, holistic tourist experience. However, identification criteria for the 
components planned and executed under the project was not mentioned in the respective 
DPRs. The projects were picked up from existing developed tourist destinations or 
unviable sites were selected. It was noticed that three projects45 were planned without 
considering factors such as current tourist traffic, connectivity potential, stakeholder 
consultation. The project at Suchetgarh was situated in a sensitive border location and 
the project at Salamabad-Uri was also situated in border area and at remote location i.e., 
quite far away from major tourist destinations.  
ii. As per the Scheme guidelines, the tourist circuits/destinations were to be identified in 
consultation with the stakeholders. However, there was absence of stakeholder 
consultations by the State Tourism Department with the local bodies or other 
departments to decide the projects and their prioritisation. No feasibility study was 
conducted before executing the projects.  
iii. As per the Scheme guidelines, the State Government was required to obtain necessary 
clearances/No-Objection Certificate from various departments/local bodies before 
execution of the projects. However, the State Government, without ensuring the 
availability of land, proposed the project and got funding from the Ministry of Tourism 
(MoT).  For instance, the project at Salamabad-Uri was taken up on land belonging to 
NHPC Limited. After incurring an expenditure of `1.27 crore under the Scheme, NHPC 
Limited constructed a boundary wall there and work had to be abandoned. Similarly, 
land of Amusement Park at Tattoo Ground, Srinagar was in occupation by the Armed 
Forces. Without ensuring land availability, work was taken up and an expenditure of 
`0.16 crore was incurred. Later, Armed Forces did not allow construction and work was 
stopped. Thus, due to poor planning, the project turned out to be a total loss and got 
dropped. 
iv. As per sanction order issued (June 2016) by the Ministry, the project was to be completed 
and commissioned within 36 months i.e., May 2019. Director (Tourism), Jammu & 
Srinagar being the major implementing agency for the projects under the Scheme had 
awarded tenders/works at various sites in Jammu & Kashmir region. Audit scrutiny of 
tenders awarded by Director (Tourism) Jammu revealed that all the projects were delayed 
considerably and delay ranged between 6 months to more than 4 years. No 
documents/details were maintained by the Directorate office in respect of reasons for 
delay and the action taken against the defaulting contractors, etc.  
v. There were irregularities in execution of projects. For instance, two approved 
components (wayside amenities at Bijbehara and Apple Resort, Chenni Wuddur, 
Anantnag) valuing `0.23 crore were dropped without taking approvals from competent 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
142 
 
authority. However, in the Utilisation Certificates, these works were shown as 
completed.  
vi. No separate bank accounts were maintained by the Implementing Agency viz., Jammu 
and Kashmir State Cable Car Corporation Limited, Srinagar (JKCCL). It earned an 
amount of `14.66 crore towards interest on unspent balances out of total `300.48 crore 
received during 2015-16 to 2021-22 for projects under Swadesh Darshan Scheme and 
Pilgrimage Rejuvenation and Spiritual Augmentation Drive (PRASAD) Scheme (as 
funds were kept in single account) which was neither intimated to MoT nor refunded.  
vii. The State Government was to ensure proper Operation & Maintenance (O&M) after 
completion of project. However, no proper O&M of created assets was ensured by the 
State Government. Most of the infrastructure developed was lying in abandoned state 
without any O&M plan and without revenue or employment generation, as:  
• The Director (Tourism), Srinagar leased out 25 shops at Shopping Arcade, 
Bijbehara and Applewood Resort Chenni Wuddur and one cafeteria at 
Applewood Resort, whereas Director Sher-i-Kashmir International Convention 
Centre (SKICC) leased out Sound and Light Show at SKICC, Dal Lake. 
However, contrary to the terms of the allotment, lessee had not taken insurance 
of the properties. 
• Director (Tourism), Jammu executed the work of development of Border tourism 
at Suchetgarh (Jammu). The work was started in 2016 and finally completed in 
September 2021. However, after the completion of the said work (`3.71 crore), 
the site was occupied by the BSF for their operational purposes, hence defeating 
the very purpose of the project. 
• J&K Tourism Development Corporation had procured two cruise boats valuing 
`1.40 crore in April 2017 and ever since these boats remained docked in the 
Jhelum river at Srinagar. Audit observed that as per the initial studies conducted 
by M/s Hyderabad Boat Builders, the cruise could not pass under many bridges 
hence making the project quite unviable. The cruise had not been made 
functional and was lying idle, thus making the entire investment of `6 crore idle. 
• The completed project eco log cafeteria at Katra was completed in May 2020 
after incurring expenditure of `1.12 crore but the same was still lying idle and 
could not be used for the last two years.  
• Expenditure of `1.50 crore was incurred on construction of an Ice-skating Rink 
at Nunwan-Pahalgam. The facilities could not be used as the detailed project 
report did not have the essential elements i.e., water freezing arrangements, 
boundary railing, rooftop, sitting place for spectators.  However, the State 
Government went ahead with the project execution and presently, only a 
cemented platform has been constructed at site, which does not serve the 
intended purpose. 
• The work of Multipurpose Hall with Cafeteria and Souvenir Kiosks at Apple 
Resort, Chenni Wuddur, Anantnag was executed at a total cost of `1.83 crore. 
The cafeteria was given on rent in May 2019 but was gutted in fire on 14 July 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
143 
 
 
  
2020. As per the terms and conditions of agreement, the lessee had not insured 
the hired premises and hence the cost of repair amounting to `0.21 crore had to 
be borne by the Government due to non-enforcement of contractual provisions 
related to insurance. As on date, the project was closed/unutilised and was lying 
idle. Hence, the investment of `1.83 crore proved to be idle/unfruitful. 
• The work of Musical Fountain with Multimedia Laser and Video Show on Water 
Screen and a boat cum floating jetty was executed in SKICC/Centaur Lake View 
Hotel premises. Due to various important meetings/seminars of high-ranking 
officers and dignitaries in the premises, both the components could not be used 
for tourists during such events. Further, the area being a high security area 
rendered the project quite inaccessible to the general public at large. As a result, 
the project created with an expenditure of `9.83 crore could not be utilised 
properly. 
viii. Data related to increase in tourist footfall and employment generation was not maintained 
at all and there was no mechanism for measuring community-based development and 
sustainable tourism.   

Report No. 17 of 2023 
144 
 
(7) Madhya Pradesh: Integrated development of Buddhist Circuit in Madhya Pradesh 
Theme/Circuit Buddhist Circuit 
Date of recommendation by the Mission 
Directorate 
17 February 2016 
Date of approval by the Central Sanctioning 
and Monitoring Committee 
17 May 2016 
Date of conveying approval by the Ministry 
of Tourism 
18 July 2016 
Date of award of works by the State 
Government 
August 2016- December 2020 
Date of completion of project. 15 July 2021 
Sanctioned Cost of Project `74.02 crore 
Amount released by the Ministry of Tourism `69.08 crore 
Physical progress  100 per cent 
Financial progress  93.32 per cent 
 
Significance of the Circuit The circuit  includes eight sites which ha ve 
the same significance as Sanchi. The 
development of these site s would provide 
visitors more insights into Bud dhism. The 
development of Buddhist sites would enhance 
the visits of not only national tourists but also 
international tourists. 


Report No. 17 of 2023 
145 
 
Audit Observations 
i. As per the Scheme guidelines, a tourist circuit was a route on which at least three major 
tourist destinations were located such that none of those were in the same town, village, 
or city. At the same time, it was to be ensured that they were not separated by a long 
distance. It should have well defined entry and exit points. The Buddhist circuit Sanchi-
Satna-Rewa-Mandsaur-Dhar had been selected without defined entry and exit points, 
which was in deviation from the definition of a tourist circuit. Further, all destinations of 
the circuit were in different geographical part s of the State and were separated by long 
distance of approximately 1,200 kms (Rewa-Dhar). Selection of projects spread across 
long distance s without well -defined entry and exit po ints defeated the purpose of 
development of circuit, as the tourist s would not be motivated to travel such long 
distances. 
ii. Despite the undertaking given by the Implementing Agency during submission of DPR 
that encumbrance-free adequate land was in possession of the State Government, seven 
components were only partially completed due to lack of co -ordination with the 
Archaeological Survey of India ( ASI) and non-granting of permissions/No-Objection 
Certificate by ASI. Four components were dropped and sub -components of one 
component were shifted to other component due to absence of permissions/No-Objection 
Certificates from ASI. For 10 components, permissions/No-Objection Certificates were 
granted by ASI with delay s ranging from 339 days to 1115 days and land was handed 
over to the M adhya Pradesh State Tourism Development Corporation (MPSTDC) by 
Madhya Pradesh Public Works Department with a delay of 771 days. As a result, 
components could not be executed within the stipulated  time and  comprehensive 
development of the circuit could not be done. 
iii. As per the Scheme guidelines, implementing agencies were required to follow all codal 
formalities while awarding the contracts. However,  consultant for the preparation of 
DPR of Buddhist  circuit was engaged without signing of any agreement. DPR was 
submitted to the Ministry of Tourism ( MoT) without detailed estimates and Bills of 
Quantities which resulted in variation in the estimates during execution of the project. 
iv. As per sanction order issued (July 2016) by the Ministry, the project was to be completed 
and commissioned within 24 months i.e., July 2018. There was delay in award of work, 
as only three out of 65 works were awarded within stipulated time of three months which 
was due to delay in grant of N o-Objection Certificate by the ASI, delays in process of 
transfer of land and interdependency on other works, which further resulted in delay in 
completion of the remaining works. As a result, only 12 out of 65 works were completed 
within scheduled time i.e., 24 months. Due to this, intended benefits could not be 
delivered to the end users timely. 
v. During execution, irregularities were noticed such as:  
• In five components, expenditure on w orks was increased which ranged from 
10.48 per cent  to 533.66 per cent . In other five components, expenditure 
decreased ranging from 31.97 per cent to 77.50 per cent against sanctioned cost 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
146 
 
estimates given in the DPR which indicates that the estimates were  prepared 
without detailed analysis. 
• For execution of a component, single tender was accepted without any 
justification, which was against CVC guidelines and provision s of State PWD 
Manual. In nine works, the MPSTDC allotted additional components amounting 
to `12.40 crore to existing contractors at the same rates/terms and conditions 
without adopting tendering process.  
• There was duplication/overlap of works with other schemes noticed in case of 
construction of approach road  at Sonari which was already in progress with 
estimated cost of `88.00 lakh funded by State Archeology Department. The same 
work was again proposed  under the Swadesh Darshan Scheme  and got 
sanctioned for `100.00 lakh resulting in duplication/overlap of works with other 
schemes. 
• Unrealistic estimation of work was noticed in 21 out of 65 works and the 
expenditure on the work increased by 16.21 per cent to 330.94 per cent from 
their contract amount. Diversion of funds was also noticed (expenditure of `1.44 
crore was made for ‘Construction of Convention Centre at Sanchi’ which was 
earlier approved in the year 2013-14 under Mega Circuit Project and was not part 
of Buddhist circuit under t he Scheme, amount of `19.54 lakh was charged on 
contingencies on Buddhist circuit whereas incurred on other than Buddhist 
circuit work, construction of Conference Hall and additional rooms with toilets 
in Vindhya Retreat at Rewa instead of Tourist Reception Centre at Rewa with a 
cost of `2.39 crore).  
• As per sanction order, funds released by the Ministry under the Scheme was to 
be utilised only for the purpose for which these were released. It was observed 
that Implementing Agency executed 15 works/components amounting to `10.69 
crore under the Buddhist circuit, which were not the part of the sanctioned DPR 
under the Scheme. This resulted in improper utilisation of funds.  
• In DPR, provision for plantation and solar illumination was made in view of 
environmental impact. However, the same ha d not been executed fully due to 
which the intended objective could not be achieved. 
vi. The Implementing Agency  had maintained current account for all centrally assisted 
funds instead of separate bank account for the Scheme funds due to which interest could 
not be earned. Out of `14.99 crore, expenditure of only `1.34 crore was incurred within 
specified time period of six months, and the unutilised amount of `13.65 crore was not 
surrendered to MoT.  
vii. As per sanction letter, the State Government  was to set up a Monitoring Committee 
headed by the Secretary (Tourism) to monitor physical and financial progress of the 
sanctioned project and submit the progress report to MoT on quarterly basis. However, 
the State Government constituted State Level Monitoring Committee (SLMC) after lapse 
of 22 months from the date of sanction of the  first project in the State.  As a result, 
adequate monitoring at higher level was not ensured by the State Government. 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
147 
 
viii. The State Government was to ensure proper Operation & Maintenance after completion 
of project. Four wayside amenities were leased out without the permission of MoT. The 
provision of emergency vehicle breakdown, repair and refueling facilities was not made 
as part of wayside amenities due to which basic amenities could not be provided to the 
tourists. 
  

Report No. 17 of 2023 
148 
 
(8) Development of Union Territory of Puducherry as Tourist Circuit (Coastal 
Circuit) 
Theme/Circuit Coastal Circuit 
Date of recommendation by the Mission 
Directorate 
4 November 2015 
Date of approval by the Central Sanctioning 
and Monitoring Committee 
23 November 2015 
Date of conveying approval by the Ministry 
of Tourism 
28 December 2015 
Date of award of works by the State 
Government 
June 2016- September 2019 
Date of completion of project Not completed 
Sanctioned Cost of the Project `58.44 crore 
Amount released by the Ministry of Tourism `61.82 crore 
Physical progress  100 per cent 
Financial progress  93.31 per cent 
 
Significance of Circuit  The lifeline of Puducherry tourism is its 
beaches whose potential is yet to be explored. 
Through Swadesh Darshan Scheme, it was 
proposed to create world class facilities to 
attract more tourists and to develop 
Puducherry as a standalone destination. 


Report No. 17 of 2023 
149 
 
Audit observations 
i. The State Government was to ensure that land to be used for the project must be free 
from all encumbrances. However, audit observed that the Tourism Department of 
Puducherry, sent proposals for development of Beach at Narambai/Nallavadu and 
Kalapet in Puducherry without ensuring availability of land,. The land identified for 
Narambai/Nallavadu beach belonged to the Indian Reserve Battalion (Home 
Department) and the Tourism Department had not obtained No -Objection Certificate 
from them. Finally, both the components had to be dropped. Thus, improper planning 
in identification of site and non-obtaining of No-Objection Certificate prior to 
preparation of DPR resulted in non-development of beaches besides non-achievement 
of the intended objectives. 
ii. Even though the Ministry of Tourism (MoT) sanctioned the project in December 2015, 
Tourist Department obtained expenditure sanction for implementation of the 
development work at Arikamedu Beach in Puducherry only in February 2017, after 
delay of 13 months and thereafter approached Pondicherry Coastal Zone Management 
Authority for the Coastal Regulation Zone (CRZ) clearance. This had a cascading 
effect in finali sation of tender  for award of works . Consequently, the completion of 
work suffered an overall delay of 22 months. 
iii. As per the Scheme guidelines, implementing agencies were required to follow all codal 
formalities while awarding the contracts. However, it was observed that  the 
consultancy work for preparation of DPR was awarded to two consultants , who had 
submitted their quotations, after dividing the works. Awarding of work to both 
consultants, instead of lowest bidder was in violation of CPWD Manual and it resulted 
in avoidable expenditure of `27.93 lakh. 
iv. As per the Scheme guidelines, f inalisation of all tenders for the project was to be 
completed within three months from the date of sanction of the project by MoT. 
However, there was inordinate delay in award of work s ranging from 3 months to 42 
months.  
v. As per sanction order of MoT (December 2015), the project was to be completed and 
commissioned within 36 months.  However, due to non -selection/identification of 
clear sites, non-conduct of proper survey and absence of proper approach road to the 
project site, etc., development works at four beaches were completed with abnormal 
delays of 258 days to 643 days. Due to this, the intended benefits could not be provided 
to the end users timely. 
vi. Failure to identify clear site before entrusting the work to PWD led to dropping of the 
development work of Beach at Nallavadu/Narambai. Components amounting to 
`26.06 crore had to be dropped due to non -commencement of works within the 
scheduled time resulting in non-development of potential tourist spots.  
vii. As per sanction order, th e executing agency was not to keep the amount released by 
MoT unutilised for more than six months. The first installment of `17.06 crore was 
released in January 2016 but the U tilisation Certificate  for only `12.84 crore was 
submitted in May 2017 after dela y of 9 months which indicates that funds were not 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
150 
 
utilised in a time bound manner. Central Financial Assistance amounting to `20 crore 
was kept in Fixed Deposit with Bank since October 2019 and not surrendered to MoT. 
The Directorate of Tourism did not rem it bank interest of `1.22 crore (July 2018 to 
September 2021) earned on the Scheme funds to MoT.  
viii. The State Government was to ensure proper O peration & Maintenance (O&M) after 
completion of project. However, it was noticed that: 
• Beach developed at Manapet in Puducherry District at a cost of `4.39 crore 
(completed in January 2020) ha d not been outsourced for O&M, due to non -
availability of proper approach road.  
• Despite being aware of the possibilities of flood and given the previous flood 
levels and the ground level of the island, infrastructure was developed at flood 
prone Island No.5 of Yanam for a value of `5.26 crore which was subsequently 
washed away by floods resulting in unfruitful expenditure. 
• The equipment purchased  under the Scheme at a cost of `61.41 lakh for 
Chinnaveerampattinam/Manapet Beach, Puducherry were diverted to its own 
Chunnambar Boat House not covered under the Scheme. 
• Irregular expenditure of `38.16 lakh was incurred under contingent charges on 
O&M. 
ix. As per sanction letter, the State Government was to regularly furnish the quarterly 
statement of progress of work and expenditure incurred to the Ministry of Tourism. 
Audit observed that there was a noticeable mismatch between physical and financial 
progress in the Monthly Progress Report submitted to MoT which indicates poor 
monitoring on the part of MoT and the State Government.  
 
  

Report No. 17 of 2023 
151 
 
(9) Rajasthan: Development of Sambhar Lake Town and Other Destinations under 
Desert Circuit  
Theme/Circuit Desert Circuit 
Date of recommendation by the Mission 
Directorate 
30 July 2015 
Date of approval by the Central Sanctioning 
and Monitoring Committee 
10 September 2015 
Date of conveying approval by the Ministry 
of Tourism 
30 September 2015 
Date of award of work by the State 
Government 
October 2016 - January 2018 
Date of completion of project 23 September 2019 
Sanctioned Cost of Project `50.01 crore 
Amount released by the Ministry of Tourism `51.17 crore 
Physical progress  100 per cent  
Financial progress  100 per cent 
 
Significant of the circuit The circuit is having beautiful sites and 
religious places. It consisted of development 
of destinations such as Shakambari Mata 
Temple, Samb har Salt Complex, Devyani 
Kund, Sharmistha Sarovar around Sambhar 
Lake Town famous for cultural, religious and 
historical tourism. 


Report No. 17 of 2023 
152 
 
Audit observations 
i. As per the sanction order issued (September 2015) by the Ministry of Tourism (MoT), 
three sites i.e. Sambhar Lake Town, Naliasar and Naraina projects were to be 
developed out of which Naliasar could not be developed due to non -availability of 
land and components of Naliasar were shifted (Feb ruary 2018) to Sambhar Lake 
Town. Thus, due to poor planning, important site of Naliasar which is having 
significant archeological and cultural value was not developed under the Scheme . 
Thus, Desert circuit did not meet the definition of the Tourist Circuit as only two major 
destinations were developed in the circuit in place of three. 
ii. Construction of Sewage Treatment Plant (STP) at Naraina (estimated cost of `3.44 
crore) was sanctioned by MoT but the Implementing Agency sent a proposal to drop 
the work of STP due to non -availability of sewage line in the area and the same was 
approved by MoT.  Thus, STP was included in DPR without site visits and 
consultations with the local bodies. 
iii. ‘Development of Sambhar Lake Town and other destin ations’ in Jaipur district was 
selected under Desert circuit instead of desert areas like Jodhpur, Jaisalmer, Barmer 
and Bikaner Districts as provided in 20 Years ’ Perspective Plan for Sustainable 
Tourism in Rajasthan. The selected destination did not fall within the desert. Thus, the 
purpose of developing Desert circuit was defeated. 
iv. The State Government  submitted (September 2015) proposal for ‘Sambhar Lake 
Town and other destinations’ project to MoT under Desert circuit in the Scheme. Audit 
observed that grant for the project had already been received (December 2013) from 
Planning Commission for the same project , which reveals that the Department of 
Tourism, Government of Rajasthan submitted (September 2015) the same project to 
MoT under Desert circuit in Swadesh Darshan Scheme, which was inadmissible. 
v. As per the Scheme guidelines, invitation and finalisation of all tenders for the project 
was to be completed by the States, within three months from date of sanction of the 
project by MoT. However, there was inordinate delay ranging from 301 days to 735 
days in award of work s for the project.  12 tenders were processed (October 2016 -
January 2018) without preparati on of technical sanction in contravention of the 
provisions of Public Works Financial & Accounting Rules. 
vi. As per sanction order issued (September 2015) by the Ministry, the project was to be 
completed and commissioned within 24 months i.e., September 2017. However, it was 
observed that there was delay in completion of work s ranging between 112 days and 
467 days.  
vii. Irregularities were noticed in execution of projects, as given below: 
• As per the Scheme guidelines, implementing agencies were required to follow all 
codal formalities while awarding the contracts. However, it was observed that 
installation of solar street lighting works was executed without inviting tender. 
Also, the work order issued to the contractor was not as per the DPR in terms of 
number and requisite wattage of the lights. 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
153 
 
• Additional/excess works up to 55 per cent and extra works up to 165 per cent 
were executed by Rajasthan Tourism Development Corporation (RTDC) in eight 
components for which prior permission of MoT was not obtained. 
• As per the sanction order issued (September 2015) by MoT, any cost escalation 
on account of delay etc., would be met by the State Government. However, during 
audit, it was observed that e xcess expenditure amounting to `2.89 crore to be 
borne by the State Government was booked from Scheme funds. Additionally, in 
contravention of the Public Works Financial and Accounting Rules , financial 
sanction of competent authority was not taken for the excess expenditure. 
• MoT sanctioned (September 2015) `4.00 crore for execution of Light and Sound 
Show to develop tourism activities . However, the Light and Sound Show 
component was not executed due to lack of interest by the tenderer and was shown 
as “dropped” in project closure report (June 2021). Further, MoT sanctioned 
`3.74 crore for 15.75 kms long Bicycle Track (adventure sports) with solar street 
lighting, approach road, admin istrative block, wayside amenities, etc. Physical 
verification revealed that only 4.1 kms of bicycle track was developed, and other 
components were not developed. 
• MoT sanctioned `4.84 crore for construction of tents/camping, tourist amenities 
and log huts at Naliasar. However, due to non -availability of land at Naliasar, 
works of camping site were shifted to Sambhar Lake. Physical verification 
revealed that tents, tourism amenities and log huts were not constructed at the 
camping site and only four platforms for the erection of tents were constructed . 
Eight huts were constructed at locations other than the camping site in 
contravention to the approved sanction. 
• Clause 9 of the Public Works Financial & Accounting Rules of Government of 
Rajasthan stipulates that the contractor should submit all the bills in printed form. 
However, it was observed that hand-written bills amounting to `26.44 crore were 
submitted by the contractors in contravention of the aforesaid rules. 
• Due to non-availability of land at Naliasar, approach road work was proposed to 
be executed at identified site along the bicycle track at Sambhar Salt complex. 
During physical verification, no approach road was found constructed along the 
bicycle track.  
viii. Rajasthan Tourism Development Corporation ( RTDC) was the executing agency for 
Swadesh Darshan Scheme as well as PRASAD Scheme of MoT. RTDC operated one 
bank account for funds received under both the Schemes. RTDC invested (2016) 
`30.48 crore in Fixed Deposi t Receipts out of the  funds received from MoT for 
Swadesh Darshan Scheme with the approval of State Government and earned interest 
of `1.37 crore but did not remit the interest to MoT. 
ix. The State Government was to ensure proper Operation & Maintenance (O&M) after 
completion of project. However, O&M of assets was not being carried out. Assets 
handed over to Sambhar Salt Limited (SSL) and Nagar Palika, Sambhar Lake were 
found locked. During physical verification, some  of the assets  were found to be in 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
154 
 
dilapidated condition. Salt Train could not be operated as it lack ed Safety Clearance 
Certificate. Further, the work of Mini Desert Night Safari at Naliasar was shifted to 
Sambhar Salt Complex along the bicycle track. During the joint physical verification, 
work relating to Mini Desert Night Safari was also not found along the bicycle track. 
x. As per the sanction letter issued by the Ministry, the State Government was to set up 
monitoring committee headed by Principal Secretary (Tourism). However, the  State 
Level Monitoring Committee was constituted in August 2019 after a delay of almost 
four years, which had an adverse impact on the monitoring of sanctioned project. 
Further, the State Government  was to submit Monthly Progress Report s in the 
prescribed formats giving physical and financial progress to the MoT. However, no 
records relating to Monthly Progress Reports were found during the Audit. 
 
  

Report No. 17 of 2023 
155 
 
(10) Sikkim: Development of Tourist Circuit linking - Rangpo (entry)- Rorathang - 
Aritar - Phadamchen - Nathang - Sherathang- Tsongmo - Gangtok - Phodong - 
Mangan - Lachung -Yumthang - Lachen - Thangu - Gurudongmer - Mangan -
Gangtok - Tumin Lingee - Singtam (exit) 
Theme/Circuit North-East Circuit 
Date of recommendation by the Mission 
Directorate 
10 June 2015 
Date of approval by the Central Sanctioning 
and Monitoring Committee 
26 June 2015 
Date of conveying approval by the Ministry 
of Tourism 
30 June 2015 
Date of award of works by the State 
Government 
February 2016 - November 2016 
Date of completion of project 31 December 2019 
Sanctioned cost  `98.05 crore 
Amount released by the Ministry of Tourism `92.77 crore 
Physical progress  100 per cent 
Financial progress 95 per cent 
 
Significance of the circuit The places selected in the circuit were 
endowed with natural splendor and were 
easily accessible to tourist s. Basic 
infrastructure for the tourism activity required 
urgent augmentation  which would boost 
tourism in the State in eco-friendly manner.   


Report No. 17 of 2023 
156 
 
Audit observations 
i. As per the S cheme guidelines, tourist circuits/destinations were to be identified 
considering factors such as current tourist traffic, connectivity potential and 
significance attached to the site, holistic tourist experience. However, it was 
observed that  the circuit was selected without any proper detailed study and the 
components were not integrated into a touri st circuit and were not connected with 
any tourist destination. A s a result, out of 78 components in 13 destinations, 70 
components were lying unutilised and 8 components were used for other purposes. 
ii. As per the Scheme guidelines, invitation and finalisation of all tenders for the project 
was to be completed by the States, within three months from date of sanction of the 
project. However, it was observed that there was delay in award of works ranging 
from 139 days to 419 days which resulted in delay in completion of the components. 
All the works were delayed ranging from 4 months to 22 months from the stipulated 
date of completion citing various reasons.  Due to this, the intended benefits could 
not be delivered to the end users in a timely manner. 
iii. As per clause 2.5 of CPWD Manual , "technical sanction" amounts to a guarantee 
that the proposals are technically sound, and that the estimates are accurately 
prepared and are based on adequate data. However, Audit observed that tenders of 
all the projects had been called before the technical sanction was accorded  due to 
which the authenticity of the estimate s could not be ensure d. Further, the Scheme 
guidelines stipulated that the implementing agencies were requi red to follow all 
codal formalities while awarding the contracts. However, it was observed that t he 
work ‘Development of Eco Log Huts (6 Nos .) at Aritar ’ with sanctioned cost of 
`5.78 crore was awarded to contractor on Gram Panchayat Unit (GPU) level instead 
of e-tendering within the district which resulted in limiting the chance of availing 
more bids for the work. 
iv. As per order of State Government of Sikkim, five per cent storage charges were to 
be recovered. However, five per cent storage charges were not found deducted from 
the Running Account Bills/Final Bills of the contractors.  Non-deduction of storage 
charges not only led to undue benefit to the contractors but also loss of Government 
revenue to the tune of `0.28 crore. Further, the Department gr anted mobilisation 
advances amounting to `5.76 crore to seven contractors in contravention of 
Government of Sikkim notification (February 2016) for withdrawing the practice of 
grant of such advances.   
v. As per the Scheme guidelines, if there is any escalation/variation from approved 
DPR, the State Government must inform the Ministry and seek its approval before 
commencing the works. However, there were variations from the approved DPR for 
which approval of the Ministry was not obtained.  This not only indicates irregular 
execution of work but also depicts that the DPR was prepared without proper survey 
and investigation. 
vi. Separate Bank Account for the two Scheme projects in the State was opened only in 
June 2017 and total expenditure of `19.6 crore was made directly through State Pay 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
157 
 
& Accounts  office. This resulted in violation of Scheme g uidelines and loss of 
interest. Further, the Department utilised the interest component of the fund, which 
resulted in irregular utilisation of interest amounting to `5.32 crore. 
vii. As per clause 3.1.1.3 (3) of CPWD Works Manual, 2019, contingencies could be 
utilised for construction of site office, engagement of watch and ward staff, job 
works, hiring of inspection vehicle and any other field requirements directly related 
to work. However, contingency provisions amounting to `1.28 crore were diverted 
for procurement of vehicles which was neither specified in the Scheme guidelines 
nor any approval sought from the Ministry of Tourism (MoT). The restoration and 
maintenance work was done by the Department from Central Financial Ass istance 
(interest) instead of State funds, which led to irregular expenditure of `0.56 crore. 
viii. In contravention of the Scheme guidelines and breach of the undertaking given by 
the State Government, the Department constructed six approach roads from Central 
Assistance amounting to `3.22 crore as well as expenditure of `71.11 lakh on 
external electrification, external water supply, sewerage, furniture, and other items 
from the Scheme funds in five places although the same was to be borne by the State 
Government. 
ix. As per guidelines, the S tate Government was not to keep the amount released by 
MoT unutilised for more than six months. However, the State Government could not 
utilise the amount released by the Central Government under the Scheme within the 
stipulated time. Utilisation Certificates were submitted with delays ranging from one 
month to seven months.   
x. As per the Scheme guidelines, the State Government was to ensure proper Operation 
& Maintenance (O&M) after completion of project. However, t here was no proper 
O&M of created assets. As a result, assets created were not utilised/leased out/rented 
which led to failure of the objective of the Scheme. Details are given below: 
• Infrastructure created at Namrang Dhunga was in dilapidated condition.  
• Infrastructure created in Dhanbari was used for domestic purpose by the 
landowner without being leased out or rented.  
• Infrastructure at Gangtok consisted of five sub-components, out of which three 
were partially utilised (Ani gumpa, Zero point and Enchey Monastery), one was 
not utilised (Bakthang Falls) and only one sub-component (Gonang Monastery) 
was fully utilised. 
• Various sub-components of infrastructure at Rhenock, Aritar, Rongli were not 
put to use and were lying idle. Further, the work ‘terracing and land 
development for flower cultivation’ was in poor condition as the terracing was 
surrounded by wild grass.  
• The tourist infrastructure at Makha was lying idle for two and half years from 
the date of completion (September 2019) as of February 2022.  
• Even after 32 months of completion, wayside amenities  at Rorathang  were 
neither in operation nor leased out by the Department. 17 signages were not 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
158 
 
available at the site and some of the signages were found damaged at the site 
with the total cost amounting to `8.62 lakh.  
xi. As per sanction letter, the State Government was t o regularly furnish the monthly 
statement of progress of work and expenditure incurred to the MoT. Audit observed 
that monthly Progress Reports (MPR) sent by the State Government to MoT showed 
inflated progress and expenditure as the actual expenditure at Rangpo approach road, 
wayside amenity, approach road at Singhik showed discrepancies with the MPR 
data. Thus, MPRs were not based on facts and figures which indicates poor 
monitoring on the part of the MoT and the State Government. 
xii. As per sanction letter, the State Government was to set up a Monitoring Committee 
headed by Secretary (Tourism) to monitor physical and financial progress of the 
sanctioned project and submit the progress report to MoT on quarterly basis. 
However, the S tate Government constituted State Level Monitor ing Committee 
(SLMC) with a delay of 7 months from sanction of the project. No documents were 
found indicating any monthly, quarterly, half-yearly, and yearly committee meetings 
held by the Committee to review progress of works and remedial measures thereon. 
  
  

Report No. 17 of 2023 
159 
 
(11) Telangana: Integrated Development of Mulugu-Laknavaram-Medaram-Tadvai-
Damaravai-Mallur-Bogatha waterfalls as Tribal Circuit 
Theme/Circuit Tribal Circuit 
Date of recommendation by the Mission 
Directorate 
3 December 2015 
Date of approval by the Central Sanctioning 
and Monitoring Committee 
10 December 2015 
Date of conveying approval by the Ministry 
of Tourism 
30 June 2016 
Date of award of works by the State 
Government  
February 2017 - September 2018 
Date of completion of project 31 December 2021 
Sanctioned Cost of the project `79.87 crore 
Amount released by the Ministry of Tourism `75.88 crore 
Physical progress  100 per cent 
Financial progress 100 per cent 
 
Significance of the circuit  Taking into consideration scenic beauty, 
tribal economic growth potential and tourist 
potential of the region, the circuit was 
selected to provide better tribal culture cum 
wildlife experience to tourists visiting the 
region. 


Report No. 17 of 2023 
160 
 
Audit Observations 
i. The State Government had not prepared any long-term plan or action plan for 
promotion of tourism in the State. There was no Tourism Policy for the State of 
Telangana and as a result, no specific physical targets were fixed for the development 
of tourism in the State. Thus, the Project selection was not based on any 
prioritisation. Additionally, stakeholder consultation and convergence with other 
schemes were also not done resulting in selection of the circuit randomly. 
ii. Destinations were selected without feasibility or field survey. As a result, the State 
Government could not identify issues of non-availability of land or need for 
permission of Forest authorities. All the sites that were proposed in Tribal Circuit 
were under reserve forest area and hence required the specific permission of the 
Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change before undertaking any work 
in those areas. Resultantly, the State Government could not execute 17 components 
of destination sites at Damaravai, Bogatha, Tadvai and Mallur due to lack of land 
availability or forest clearances, and these had to be dropped later. 
iii. There were delays in handing over of the sites to contractors ranging between 44 
days and 157 days. This was primarily due to change of identified sites repeatedly.  
Further, the delays in handing over of the identified sites was due to lack of co-
ordination between the Projects wing and Estate wing of Telangana State Tourism 
Development Corporation that resulted in proposing of sites located in reserve forest 
areas at destination sites (except Medaram). This necessitated change of sites 
multiple times at Mulugu and Bogatha Waterfalls resulting in delay in execution of 
works, cost escalations and dropping of some of the components proposed in the 
circuit.  
iv. As per the Scheme guidelines, finalisation of all tenders for the project was to be 
completed within three months from the date of sanction of the project by the 
Ministry of Tourism (MoT). However, there was an inordinate delay in finalising the 
tenders ranging from 128 days to 728 days, which also resulted in delay in 
completion of works with delays ranging from 288 days to 902 days. Thus, the 
intended benefits could not be delivered to the tourists timely. 
v. Irregularities were noticed during execution of projects, such as:  
• As per the Scheme guidelines, the State Government was to ensure that land to 
be used for the project must be free from all encumbrances. However, it was 
observed that t he Management did not h ave the possession of the land which 
was taken over by it only in March 2018. Due to  this, the project site was 
changed twice at Gattamma, Mulugu, and tenders were also cancelled two times 
(April 2017 and August 2017). When tender s were invited third time (August 
2018) after possession of land, the Standard Schedule of Rates ( SSR) were 
changed from 2016-17 to SSR of 2018-19.  Consequently, the third time work 
was awarded at higher rates resulting in cost overrun of `1.49 crore and delayed 
execution of works. 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
161 
 
• As per para 4.4 (2) of the Scheme guidelines, DPR was to be prepared with 
focus on use of eco-friendly materials and equipment, and recycling and reuse 
was to be promoted. Further, DPR of the project stipulated that the 
accommodation shall be constructed  with eco-friendly material like bamboo, 
etc. However, t he I mplementing Agency  entered into agreements with the 
contractors for building the log -huts and cottages with Reinforced Cement 
Concrete (Laknavaram, Bogatha, Medaram and Tadvai) instead of eco-friendly 
material and sought permission from MoT. The permission from MoT was also 
not found in records. Thus, the construction was done neglecting using of eco-
friendly sustainable material.   
• As per guidelines of the Scheme, funds were to be released only after 
submission of all applicable clearances. Audit observed that t he work of 
providing tourist amenities at Megalithic burials at Damar avai, which were 
located on top of the hillock in the reserve forest area, was dropped as clearance 
was not received from the Ministry of Environment , Forests and Climate 
Change.  Hence, expenditure of `75 lakh on last mile connectivity, which was 
also part of the project, did not serve the purpose for which the road was laid. 
• As against 30 numbers of water fleet (`6.14 crore), only seven fleet amounting 
to `1.13 crore were delivered at Laknavaram and remaining 23 numbers valuing 
`5.01 crore were delivered at locations other than  the designated ones . 
Similarly, at Bog atha waterfalls, out of seven numbers of water fleet valu ing 
`77.19 lakh, none of the fleet was delivered at the desired destination. Thus, the 
amount could not be utilised for the purpose it was sanctioned. 
• Despite the expenditure of `63.94 lakh , major work of installing electro -
mechanical equipment of S ewage Treatment Plant was still not completed at 
Laknavaram, though physical completion certificate for the same had already 
been submitted to MoT (13 January 2022). 
• The expenditure on account of maintenance of the assets created was to be 
borne by the State. However, a n amount of `4.10 lakh was spent on 
maintenance of landscaping out of Scheme funds which was an inadmissible 
expenditure.  
• During physical verif ication of the site at Mulugu,  out of six Gazebos 
sanctioned, only three Gazebos were found at site. Interestingly , one Gazebo 
was found built at the camp office of the District Collector, Mulugu which did 
not serve any purpose. 
• As per the bid documents of the works, liquidated damages at the rate of 10 per 
cent was to be deducted if the contractor fails to complete whole of the work or 
any part thereof within the stipulated time. However, it was noticed that undue 
benefit of `4.05 crore was extended to the contractor by not deducting 
liquidated damages (10 per cent  of the total contract value) for delay in 
completion on the part of the contractor. 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
162 
 
• As per the Scheme guidelines, any extra/excess expenditure was to be borne by 
the State Government. However, the I mplementing Agency had spent an 
amount of `34.30 lakh in excess of sanctioned amount without obtaining the 
approval of MoT. Similarly, expenditure `61.01 lakh for repairs and renovation 
of the old suspension bridge at Lakna varam and payment of `3.35 crore made 
on items other than the approved items was met from the Scheme funds, which 
were inadmissible.  Hence, the funds were not utilised for the intended purpose. 
vi. As per the Scheme guidelines , the State implementing agency was to refund the 
interest earned on Scheme funds to the Ministry at the year end. Audit noticed that 
the Implementing Agency had not refunded the interest of `16.18 crore46 (calculated 
by Audit) on the Scheme funds parked in bank account which is in violation of the 
Scheme guidelines and could have been utilised by MoT for some other projects. 
vii. As per the Scheme guidelines, the State Government was to ensure proper Operation 
& Maintenance (O&M) after completion of project. Howe ver, irregularities were 
noticed during physical verification of sites.  For instance, though an amount of `5.43 
crore was spent for development of Mallur, the wayside amenities built were not put 
to use till date (December 2021). The property was also not  being maintained and 
there was no security as gate and chain link fencing were missing, thus rendering the 
expenditure unfruitful.  
viii. Third party quality check at Medaram revealed serious quality issues viz. , non-
conduct of mandatory quality tests, cracks in plastering and use of different materials 
which was not specified in  the agreement. However, these issues remained 
unattended.  
ix. A major portion of the expenditure incurred from Scheme funds w as towards 
construction of re staurant/wayside amenities/cottages  (branded as Haritha 
Hotels/Resorts and Restaurants) . Since the  O&M of the  constructed 
restaurant/wayside amenities/cottages were leased out to a private firm, the access to 
facilities which were created in the leased out  area was restricted to those tourists 
who booked accommodation , thus  defeating the objective of community -based 
development and pro-poor tourism approach. 
x. Directional signages were not found, which were proposed at every 20 kms from 
Hyderabad and at the destination sites. This indicated that adequate attention was not 
paid to publicity/information. 
 
  
                                                           
46  Interest has been calculated by audit from 2016-17 to 2021-22 at four per cent per annum. 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
163 
 
(12) Telangana: Development of Qutub Shahi Heritage Park – Paigah Tombs – Hayat 
Bakshi Mosque – Raymond’s Tomb as Heritage Circuit 
Theme/Circuit Heritage Circuit 
Date of recommendation by the Mission 
Directorate 
30 January 2017 
Date of approval by the Central Sanctioning 
and Monitoring Committee 
14 February 2017 
Date of conveying approval by the Ministry of 
Tourism 
27 June 2017 
Date of award of works by the State 
Government 
December 2017- March 2020 
Date of completion of project Not Completed 
Sanctioned Cost of Project `96.90 crore 
Amount released by the Ministry of Tourism `70.61 crore  
Physical progress  64 per cent 
Financial progress  53 per cent 
 


Report No. 17 of 2023 
164 
 
Significance of the circuit The Circuit includes four heritage sites (Qutub 
Shahi Heritage Park, Paigah Tombs, Hayat 
Bakshi Begum Mosque and Raymond’s 
Tomb) o f Hyderabad. The Qutub Shahi 
Heritage Park and Hayat Bakshi Begum 
Mosque belong to the Qutub Shahi period of 
the Deccan region. The Paigah Tombs and 
Raymond’s Tomb are landmark sites of the 
rich and glorious Nizam period of Hyderabad. 
Audit Observations 
i. There was no Tourism Policy and Long-term tourism plan for the State. Feasibility 
study was not conducted resulting in dropping of seven components in Paigah tombs. 
Project selection was not based on any prioritisation. DPR prepared did not have the 
requisite sanctity as deviations were observed. Due to this, the overall execution of 
the project was affected and issues such as delay in completion and unfruitful 
expenditure occurred. 
ii. Destinations were selected without feasibility or field survey. As a result, the State 
Government could not identify issues of non-availability of land or need for 
permission of authorities such as the Archaeological Survey of India, as all the 
proposed sites were heritage sites. Resultantly, due to litigation, the Implementing 
Agency/State Government expressed its inability in execution of components and 
subsequently the MoT had to drop many important works. MoT had to drop seven 
out of ten components of destination site at Paigah Tombs and two components at 
Hayat Bakshi Mosque due to litigation at the identified land. Although a civil suit 
was pending in the court of law, construction of Entrance Plaza and Building and 
Interpretation Centre at Qutub Shahi Heritage Park (QSHP) at Deccan Park/Aqua 
Park was proposed and taken up. Due to injunction from court, the work had to be 
stopped after incurring unfruitful expenditure of `9.01 crore. This indicates poor 
planning and selection of the components.  
iii. As per the Scheme guidelines, f inalisation of all tenders for the project wer e to be 
completed within three months from the date of sanction of the project. However, 
there was inordinate delay in finalising the tenders (ranging from 71 days to 895 
days). Further, there was delay in handing over of sites to the contractor up to 159 
days. This also resulted in delay in completion of works which ranged from 6 months 
to 37 months. Even after extension of time, 20 out of 36 projects remained 
incomplete. Due to this, the intended benefit could not be delivered to the tourists in 
a timely manner. 
iv. As per the Scheme guidelines , the State implementing agency was to refund the 
interest earned on S cheme funds to the Ministry at the year end. Audit noticed that  
the State Government had parked the Scheme funds in separate savings bank account 
with sweep facility for earning interest on unutilised funds. Interest of `6.36 crore 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
165 
 
calculated on money parked in separate bank account was not refunded to the 
Ministry of Tourism.  
v. An amount of `4.99 crore was given to M/s AKTC (contractor) towards advance 
payment on 27 July 2021 and left unadjusted by the end of March 2022.  However, 
the Scheme guidelines did not envisage payment of advance to any 
contractor/agency. Thus, p ayment of advance to a third -party agency had not only 
resulted in deviation from the Scheme guidelines but also resulted in losing the 
opportunity of getting interest of `13.31 lakh. 
vi. No separate bank account was maintained by the executing agency viz., He ritage 
Department as envisaged in the Scheme guidelines. Rather, funds were operated 
through two current accounts maintained by the Department along with other 
schemes.  As a result, the State Government lost opportunity to earn interest of `1.23 
crore.  Further, an amount of `20.31 crore was lying unutilised with the Department 
(`15.32 crore) and with the contractor M/s AKTC (`4.99 crore as advance payment) 
since October 2021. This indicates poor execution and inadequate utilisation of funds. 
vii. There was an instance of submission of inflated Utilisation Certificate for `51.14 
crore by the State Government, as actual expenditure incurred was `29.47 crore only. 
viii. As per provisions of the sanction, Operation & Maintenance (O&M) expenditure was 
to be borne by the S tate Government.  However, it was observed that an amount of 
`54.10 lakh was utilised from contingencies towards non-plan/O&M expenditure by 
the Heritage Department  which was in deviation from the S cheme guidelines. 
Besides, `6.26 lakh was paid towards maintenance of lawns, individual shrubs , etc. 
in violation of the Scheme guidelines. 
ix. As per the Scheme guidelines, the State Government was to ensure proper O&M after 
completion of project. However, irregularities were noticed during physical 
verification of sites. There was improper maintenance of the landscaping at Hayat 
Bakshi Mosque and Raymond’s Tomb (developed at a cost of `33.38 lakh and `29.08 
lakh). Visitor amenities i.e., toilet block and ticket counters, were to be developed at 
Raymond’s Tomb at a sanctioned cost of `55.16 lakh. However, ticket counters had 
not been constructed and toilet block though constructed was not put to use. 
 
  

Report No. 17 of 2023 
166 
 
(13) Uttarakhand: Integrated development of Eco -Tourism, Adventure Sports, 
Associated Tourism related infrastructure for Development of Tehri Lake & 
surroundings 
Theme/Circuit Eco Circuit 
Date of recommendation by the Mission 
Directorate 
19 August 2015 
Date of approval by the Central 
Sanctioning and Monitoring Committee 
10 September 2015 
Date of conveying approval by the 
Ministry of Tourism 
30 September 2015 
Date of award of works by the State 
Government 
October 2015 – May 2018 
Date of completion of project 7 January 2021 
Sanctioned Cost of Project `69.16 crore 
Amount released by the Ministry of 
Tourism 
`65.71 crore 
Physical progress  100 per cent 
Financial progress  95 per cent 
 
Significance of the circuit The project involves development of Tehri Lake 
which is Asia’s largest manmade lake. The lake 
has tremendous potential to become a national hub 
for eco-tourism and adventure tourism including 
water sports activities, mountaineering, 
paragliding, etc.   


Report No. 17 of 2023 
167 
 
Audit Observations 
i. As per the Scheme guidelines, a tourist circuit was a route on which at least three 
major tourist destinations were located such that none of those were in the same town, 
village, or city. At the same time, it was to be ensured that they were not separated by 
a long distance. It should have well defined entry and exit points.  The eco -circuit 
deviated from the definition of Tourist Circuit, as t he work was executed mainly at 
two sites namely Koti and Sirain located few kilometers apart, on the edge of Tehri 
Lake. Other components were found to be scattered at different places like New Tehri, 
Chamba and around Tehri Lake which cannot be considered  as tourist destination in 
view of the Scheme guidelines. Thus, most of the work was executed at one destination 
viz., Tehri Lake and surroundings, with some components scattered at different places. 
As a result, purpose of the Scheme to develop a circuit covering at least three tourist 
destinations with well-defined entry and exit points was defeated.  
ii. As per the S cheme guidelines, tourist circuits/destinations were to be identified 
considering factors such as current tourist traffic, connectivity potential and 
significance attached to the site, holistic tourist experience. However, no document 
regarding basis for selection of the project was found in the records produced to Audit. 
It shows that the project was selected without following any criteria. Out of 40 
approved sub-components, four components were completely dropped and one was 
partially completed due to which comprehensive development of the circuit could not 
be done.   
iii. Despite undertaking given by the Implementing Agency  during submission of DPR 
that encumbrance-free adequate land was in possession of the State Government, land 
for one component i.e. construction of Multi level parking and interpretation center at 
Burari, New Tehri was made available (April 2017) to the e xecuting agency after 18 
months of sanction of the project (September 2015) which delayed its construction. 
Further, three sub-components (Development of Eco-Park at Ranichauri, Construction 
of gazebo (five numbers) and Raulakot approach road) had to be dropped due to lack 
of forest clearance and land dispute. 
iv. As per the Scheme guidelines, implementing agencies were required to follow all 
codal formalities while awarding the contracts. However, it was observed that the 
consultant hired for preparation of DP R, detailed estimate s, drawing s, etc. was 
selected without floating tenders, as the consultant was engaged previously with 
Product/Infrastructure Development for Destinations and Circuits (PI DDC) Scheme, 
and his services were continued by the Tourism Department under Swadesh Darshan 
Scheme also. Further, no agreement was signed with the consultant even though 
previous agreement of consultant for PIDDC project was to end in November 2016 
and no project specific clauses/terms and conditions were added to the previous 
agreement. The DPR of the project submitted to the Ministry of Tourism (MoT) was 
not according to the DPR submission toolkit of MoT and there was no mention of 
circuit description and map, details of tourist destinations and sites etc.  
v. As per the Scheme guidelines, finalisation of all tenders was to be completed within 
three months from date of sanction of the project. However, there was inordinate delay 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
168 
 
(24 months to 38 months) in award of work in three components due to which  those 
components could not be executed within stipulated time. 
vi. There were irregularities in execution of project, such as: 
• Unfruitful expenditure on account of dropping of one approach road due to land 
disputes with locals, though floating jetty of `29.56 lakh had already been 
purchased.  
• Three approach roads (costing `4.34 crore) remained unutili sed as parts of the 
roads remained submerged in water during increase in the water level of the lake 
(February 2022) due to which the ultimate benefit could not be delivered to the 
tourists.  
• The Adventure Climbing wall was constructed inside the area provided to ITBP. 
The area was res tricted to  the entry of general tourists thereby defeating the 
objective of creation of the component. 
• Expenditure of `9.45 lakh was incurred on repair and maintenance  which was 
inadmissible since as per the Scheme guidelines, expenditure on account of 
maintenance was to be borne by the State Government. 
• A gender-based toilet block at Chamba was constructed for `29.43 lakh in 
parking area, which was being built under State funded project. As per the DPR 
of the parking project, toilets were already provided in the project itself . This 
resulted in diversion of Scheme funds. 
vii. As per the Scheme guidelines , the State implementing agency was to refund the 
interest earned on Scheme funds to the Ministry at the year end. Audit noticed that an 
amount of `1.68 crore 47 had accrued as interest on Scheme funds. However, 
Uttarakhand Tourism Development Board deposited `75.97 lakh in the State Treasury 
and the remaining `92.39 lakh was lying with them. Consequently, interest could not 
be earned on the amount deposited in the Treasury. In addition to this , an amount of 
`47.95 lakh of accrued interest on released project funds was lying with the executing 
agency (viz., Uttar Pradesh Rajkiya Nirman Nigam).  
viii. As per the Scheme guidelines, the State Government was to ensure proper Operation 
& Maintenance ( O&M) after completion of project. However, irregularities were 
noticed during ph ysical verification of sites. As a result, components amounting to 
`3.96 crore (Mountain biking track from Khand to Ganoli : `3.67 crore and Gender -
based toilet block at Chamba: `29.43 lakh) remained unutilised due to faulty planning 
and lax approach of the State Government on O&M. Further, the Project Engineer for 
site at Sirain was not appointed even after a lapse of 24 months from the agreement 
due to which review and monitoring of the activities under the project could not be 
undertaken effectively.  
ix. As per the Scheme guidelines, t he State Government was to appoint a State Level 
Monitoring Committee (SLMC) for monitoring and timely implementation of the 
                                                           
47  This amount includes interest earned on another Swadesh Darshan project (Heritage circuit) of the 
State, as the bank account of both the projects was same. 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
169 
 
project. However, the Committee  was formed (August 201 9) after a lapse of 47 
months from the date of sanction of the project. Further, no meeting of the said 
Committee has been held so far. Thus, non -formation of the State Level Monitoring 
Committee affected overall monitoring of the project. 
 
  

Report No. 17 of 2023 
170 
 
(14) Uttar Pradesh: Development of Ayodhya under Ramayana Circuit 
Theme/Circuit Ramayana Circuit II 
Date of recommendation by the Mission 
Directorate 
02 August 2017 
Date of approval by the Central Sanctioning 
and Monitoring Committee 
21 August 2017 
Date of conveying approval by the Ministry 
of Tourism 
27 September 2017 
Date of award of work  by the State 
Government 
April 2018-November 2018 
Date of completion of project In progress 
Sanctioned Cost of the Project `127.21 crore 
Amount released by the Ministry of Tourism `115.46 crore 
Physical progress  97 per cent 
Financial progress  88 per cent 
 
Significance of the circuit Ayodhya is an ancient city associated with 
Lord Rama. The project would enhance the 
future prospects of turning the Ramayana 
circuit into a pilgrimage destination leading to 
an improved economy, better revenue 
generation, employment opportunities and 
skill development. 


Report No. 17 of 2023 
171 
 
Audit Observations 
i. As per instruction issued by the Ministry, t he DPR for the project was to be prepared 
as per the toolkit. However, the DPR prepared by the State Government was not in line 
with the said DPR toolkit of the Ministry. Further, no feasibility study/survey of the 
projects or concurrent data was found collected for proposal and selection of the 
projects. As per the Scheme guidelines, the Detailed Perspective Plan (DPP) was to be 
prepared for the identified circui ts to identify the gaps in infrastructure amenities and 
related skills. However, DPP  for Ramayana Circuit was not prepared. These resulted 
in delay in the overall execution such as delay in completion of the projects and non -
utilisation of infrastructure. 
ii. Despite an undertaking given during submission of DPR that encumbrance -free 
adequate land was in possession of the State Government, construction of Toilet and 
Parking at Pateshwari Devi Temple was started without obtaining prior permission 
from Cantonment Board. Later, the work was dropped and thus, expenditure of `2.10 
lakh became infructuous due to faulty planning. 
iii. In contravention to the provisions of the General Financial Rules and CVC guidelines, 
selection of consultant for preparation of DPRs was don e on nomination basis which 
restricted competitive and fair bidding.  
iv. As per sanction order issued (September 2017) by the Ministry, the project was to be 
completed and commissioned within 36 months i.e., August 2020. There w ere 
inordinate delays of 90-322 days in award of works, which resulted in overall delay in 
execution and completion of the project.  
v. During execution, irregularities were noticed such as: 
• Undue benefit to the contractors due to irregular measurement of work at Guptar Ghat 
resulting in payment of `57.73 lakh, execution of similar nature of work at same place 
at different rates resulting in avoidable excess payment of `19.13 lakh, irregular 
payment towards GST of `19.58 lakh to contractors having GST registration cancelled, 
reduction of pe rformance bank guarantee of contractor ( `1.86 crore against `3.11 
crore). 
• As per policy decision of the State Government , five per cent departmental discount 
was to be reduced w hile formulating project estimates . However, State Government 
did not reduce th e same, which resulted in increase in project cost by `3.86 crore. 
Further, infructuous expenditure of `26.14 lakh was incurred due to replacing of 
already executed work of laying of granite cobble stone by cement concrete  roads 
which indicates faulty planning.  
• Department of Tourism failed to exercise due care in assessment of actual amount 
payable towards centage, GST and labour cess and sanctioned/released excess amount 
due to considering incorrect cost (estimated instead of actual) of the works carried out 
by the executing agencies. As a result, excess payment of `6.07 crore towards centage, 
GST and labour cess was made, as estimated cost was taken into account instead of 
actual cost and the recovery of the excess payment made is still pending. 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
172 
 
• Out of 100 numbe r of shelters to be constructed at Panchkosi Parikrama Marg, 56 
shelters (eight under construction) were constructed at the Choudahkosi Parikrama 
Marg. Thus, adequate shelters on whole Parikrama Marg were not constructed. Further, 
the shelters were found constructed in multiple numbers (3 to 13) at one place together 
instead of one shelter each at 100 different locations, thus depriving the intended 
facilities to the tourists/visitors at other places. 
• Procurement of items valuing `37.70 lakh was made without requirement. Further, in 
contravention to the Scheme guidelines that no portion of sanctioned project cost 
should be executed/implemented on land/property owned by a private individual or a 
Trust,  an expenditure of `3.06 crore was incurred by State Government on construction 
of a multipurpose hall on the land owned by the Trust of Digambar Akhada. 
• As per instructions issued by the State Government, cost towards centage and GST was 
to be borne by the State Government itself. However, it was noticed that centage and 
GST amounting to `85.82 lakh was included in the Utilisation Certificate submitted to 
MoT against the Scheme funds which resulted in submission of inflated Utilisation 
Certificate. Further, the Executing Agency submitted the requirement of `42.24 crore 
for the works  (relating to development of ghats)  to the State Government. However, 
State Government released `43.38 crore to the agency which was in excess by `1.14 
crore. 
vi. Uttar Pradesh State Tourism Development Corporation Limited (UPSTDC) did not 
open separate bank account for the project but kept the funds in savings bank account 
common for all centrally funded schemes. Further, as per the Scheme guidelines , the 
State implementing agency was to refund the interest earned on S cheme funds to the 
Ministry at the year end. However, it was observed that it did not remit interest of  
`34.56 lakh on Scheme funds earned from that account. Similarly, Uttar Pradesh 
Rajkiya Nirman Nigam also earned interest of `93.65 lakh which was not refunded to 
MoT. In addition to the above, the State Government did not remit the interest of `36.51 
lakh to MoT, which was earned on mobilisation advance.   
vii. Executing Agencies (viz., Uttar Pradesh Rajkiya Nirman Nigam and Irrigation 
Department) had executed the work at cost lesser than sanctioned cost. As a result, 
there was saving of `8.20 crore, which was not refunded to the MoT, which could have 
been utilised by MoT in other ongoing/new projects under the Scheme. 
viii. As per sanction letter, the State Government was to regularl y furnish the quarterly 
statement of progress of work and expenditure incurred to the Ministry of Tourism. 
Audit observed that the progress reports submitted by the State Government contained 
expenditure towards consultancy and contingency  charges at `1.29 crore and `1.94 
crore respectively. However, no amount had been released by the State Government to 
the executing agencies under these heads.   
ix. As per the Scheme guidelines, t he State Government was to ensure proper Operation 
and Maintenance (O&M) after completion of project. However, irregularities were 
noticed during physical verification of sites. For instance, against provision of three 
stone benches in each Gazebo at Tulsi Udhyan, no stone bench was found in two 
Gazebos; Drinking water kiosks constructed at Tulsi Udhyan and Ram ki Paidi were 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
173 
 
found non-operational and water taps were found missing and the power connection 
required for running the water machines was not taken yet; Public Toilets were found 
locked and not in operation; batteries of the installed solar lights were found stolen; 
steel dustbins installed under Solid Waste Management were found missing at certain 
places. Due to poor O&M, the facilities created remained non -operational and were 
lying in dilapidated  condition thereby depriving the tourists from their intended 
benefits. 
x. As per the Scheme guidelines, t he State Government was to appoint a State Level 
Monitoring Committee (SLMC) for monitoring and timely implementation of the 
project. However, the Committee was formed (August 2019) after delay of two years 
from date of sanction of the project. Further, no progress report was sent to MoT prior 
to February 2021 and even after that  financial and physical progress reports were n ot 
sent on monthly basis to MoT  indicating inadequate monitoring by the State 
Government.   
 
******* 
  

Report No. 17 of 2023 
174 
 
Annexure-III 
(Referred to in para 2.1) 
Overlapping of objectives of Swadesh Darshan Scheme with other ongoing schemes of 
the Ministry 
Scheme Type Objectives 
Product/Infrastructure 
Development for 
Destination and 
Circuits (PIDDC)  
Centrally 
Sponsored 
Scheme  
• Improvement of existing tourism products and 
development of new tourism products to world 
standards 
• Integrated Infrastructure development of new 
tourism sites including the development of: 
i. Improvement of the surrounding s of the 
destination, which would include activities like 
landscaping, development of parks, fencing, 
compounding wall, etc. 
ii. Illumination of tourist destination and  the area 
around, and Sound and Light shows, etc. 
iii. Providing for improvement in solid waste 
management and sewerage management, public 
conveniences, etc.  
iv. Improvement of road connectivity leading to the 
tourist sites, especially from the National 
Highways/State Highways and other  entry 
points. 
v. Construction of wayside public conveniences  
vi. Construction of budget accommodation, 
restaurants and wayside amenities including 
one-time assistance for its air -conditioning and 
furnishings (only in selected places of Jammu & 
Kashmir and all N orth-East States and Eco -
tourism project s, where private sector 
investment is not forthcoming or not possible) 
vii. Procurement of equipment directly related to  
tourism, like water sports, adventure sports, eco-
friendly modes of transport for moving within 
the tourism zones and equipment for cleaning of 
the tourist destinations 
viii. Refurbishment of the monuments 
ix. Signages and display boards 
x. Tourist arrival centres, reception centres, 
interpretation centres 
xi. Improvement of municipal services directly 
related to tourism 
xii. Other works/activities directly related to 
tourism. 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
175 
 
Scheme Type Objectives 
National Mission on 
Pilgrimage 
Rejuvenation and 
Spiritual 
Augmentation Drive 
(PRASAD) 
Central 
Sector 
Scheme 
• Integrated development of identified pilgrimage 
and heritage destinations.  
• Infrastructure development such as 
development/upgradation of destination entry 
points viz., passenger terminals (of road, rail and 
water transport), basic conveniences like tourism 
information/interpretation centres, improvement 
of road connectivity, procurement of equipment 
for eco -friendly modes of transport and 
equipment for tourist activities. 
• Shoreline development & rejuvenation of natural 
water bodies. 
Assistance for Large 
Revenue Generating 
Projects 
Central 
Sector 
Scheme 
• Ensure public sector and private sector 
partnership in the development of tourism 
infrastructure in the country by attracting techno-
managerial efficiencies and resources of the 
private sector and providing congenial and 
conducive atmosphere with liberalised policies by 
the public sector.  
• Promote large revenue generating projects like 
Tourist Trains, Cruise Vessels, Convention 
Centres, Golf Courses, Health and Rejuvenation 
facilities and last mile connectivi ty to tourist 
destinations (air and cruis e including heli 
tourism), etc. in public private partnerships. 
Domestic Promotion 
and Publicity 
including Hospitality 
Central 
Sector 
Scheme 
• Activities for promotion of domestic tourism and 
spread of social awareness messages. Campaigns 
through electronic and print media  to promote 
important tourist products of the country.  
• Financial Assistance to various 
organisations/stakeholders to organise training 
programmes, workshops, etc. on tourism  related 
topics. 
Overseas promotion 
and publicity 
including Market 
Development 
Assistance  
Central 
Sector 
Scheme 
Publicity and marketing campaign s with the a im to 
position India globally as the most favoured 
destination, marketing of brand Incredible India. 
Capacity Building for 
Service Providers 
Central 
Sector 
Scheme 
Under the Scheme, a programme ‘Hunar Se Rozgar 
Tak’ was launched to train youth to meet the skilled 
manpower requirement of the sector and to reach out 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
176 
 
Scheme Type Objectives 
to the  poor in the society to give them  employable 
skills. 
Market Research 
including 20 Years 
Perspective Plan 
Central 
Sector 
Scheme 
Undertaking various studies and surveys relating to 
tourism. Preparation of Perspective Plans and Master 
Plans for different regions/ destinations and D etailed 
Project Reports for destinations.  
Computerisation and 
Information 
Technology 
Central 
Sector 
Scheme 
Financial Assistance to States to upgrade their 
tourism related co mputer facilities, innovative 
Information Technology  projects o f S tate 
Governments relating to tourism 
Assistance to Central 
Agencies for Tourism 
Infrastructure 
Development  
Central 
Sector 
Scheme 
To ensure tourism infrastructure development 
through Central Financial Assistance and successful 
project implementation, proper maintenance  and 
management of the  illumination/preservation of 
monuments, development of cruise terminals, etc. by 
the concerned central agencies like A rchaeological 
Survey of India , Port Trust  of India, India Tourism 
Development Corporation, Ministry of Railways, etc.  
 
  

Report No. 17 of 2023 
177 
 
Annexure-IV 
(Referred to in para 2.9) 
Details of components dropped and added in the project ‘Integrated Development of 
Himalayan Circuit, Himachal Pradesh’ 
Sl. 
No. 
Components of the Project Remarks 
1. Convention Centre at Kiarighat: 
(i) Reception/Lobby 
(ii) Convention Hall 
(iii) Auditorium 
(iv) Conference Rooms 
(v) Restaurant 
(vi) Covered Parking 
(vii) Open Parking  
(viii) Open Air Theatre 
(ix) Gazebo 
(x) Landscaping 
(xi) Solar Illumination 
(xii) Water Tank and Sewage Treatment 
Plant 
In the Regional Review Meeting 
held on 18 January 2020, three 
components viz., Open Parking, 
Open Air Theatre and Gazebo  
were dropped by the Ministry of 
Tourism as no work had been started 
by the State Government on these 
components. 
2. Ice Skating Rink at Shimla: 
(i) Development of Rink 
(ii) Cafeteria 
(iii) Public Toilets 
(iv) Changing Room 
(v) Waiting Hall 
(vi) Open Parking 
(vii) Path/Walkway 
(viii) Refrigeration Equipment 
(ix) Solar Illumination 
Since permission/clearance from 
National Green Tribunal was not 
received, a ll the components 
relating to ‘Ice Skating Rink at 
Shimla’ were dropped by the 
Ministry of Tourism in its Regional 
Review Meeting held on 18 January 
2020. 
3. Heliport at Shimla: 
(i) Development of Heliport 
(ii) Reception 
(iii) Waiting Hall 
(iv) Cafeteria 
(v) Retaining Wall 
(vi) Open Parking 
(vii) Landscaping 
(viii) Toilets 
(ix) Development of Road 
(x) Solar Illumination 
No change in components 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
178 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Components of the Project Remarks 
4. Water Sports Centre in Sunni Area: 
(i) Water Sports Centre 
(ii) Platform for Tents 
(iii) Open Parking 
(iv) Landscaping 
(v) Walkway 
(vi) Riverside Decks 
All the components were dropped 
(February 2019) due to non -
availability of forest clearance. 
4(a). Water Sports Equipment at Sunni: 
(i) Speed Boat 
(ii) Sailing Boats 
(iii) Paddle Boat 
(iv) Water Scooters 
(v) Life Jackets 
All the components were dropped 
(February 2019) due to non -
availability of forest clearance. 
5. Wayside Amenities at Tipra near 
Parwanoo: 
(i) Tourist Reception Area 
(ii) Cafeteria 
(iii) Souvenir Shops 
(iv) Public Toilets 
(v) Parking 
(vi) Landscaping & Solar Street Lights 
All the components were dropped 
(February 2019) due to non -
availability of forest clearance. 
6. Multi-Level Parking with Cafeteria and 
TRC at Manali: 
(i) Multi-Level Parking 
(ii) Cafeteria 
(iii) Tourist Reception Area 
(iv) Meeting Room 
(v) Exhibition Room 
(vi) Equipment Room 
(vii) Landscaping 
(viii) Open Parking 
(ix) Sewage Treatment Plant 
(x) Solar Street Lights 
All the components were dropped  
(February 2019)  due to non -
availability of forest clearance. 
7. International Standard Free -Standing 
Artificial Climbing Wall: 
(i) Development of Artificial Cl imbing 
Wall 
(ii) Climbing Gym 
(iii) Training Boards 
(iv) Zip Line Equipment 
(v) Body Zorbs 
In the Regional Review Meeting 
held on 18 January 2020, five 
components viz., Climbing Gym, 
Training Boards, Zip Line 
Equipment, Body Zorbs and Solar 
Illumination were dropped by the 
Ministry of Tourism as no work had 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
179 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Components of the Project Remarks 
(vi) Solar Illumination been started by the State 
Government on these components. 
8. Development and Beautification of Dal 
Lake at Dharamshala: 
(i) Cafeteria 
(ii) Landscaping 
(iii) Development of Path/Walkway 
(iv) Installation of Benches 
(v) Open Parking 
(vi) Solar Street Lights 
No change in components 
9. Paragliding Centre at Bir: 
(i) Tourist Reception Area 
(ii) Equipment Room 
(iii) First Aid Room 
(iv) Office 
(v) Cafeteria 
(vi) Kitchen 
(vii) Staff Room 
(viii) Store Rooms 
(ix) Public Toilets 
In the Regional Review Meeting 
held on 18 January 2020, all the 
components were dropped by the 
Ministry of Tourism as no work had 
been started by the State 
Government on these components. 
9(a). Paragliding Equipment: 
(i) Paragliders 
(ii) Helmet 
(iii) Safety 
(iv) Harness 
(v) Parachutes 
(vi) GPS 
(vii) Radio Set 
In the Regional Review Meeting 
held on 18 January 2020, all the 
components were dropped by the 
Ministry of Tourism as no work had 
been started by the State 
Government on these components. 
10. Wayside Amenities cum Rafting Centre at 
Nadaun: 
(i) Rafting Centre 
(ii) Souvenir Shop 
(iii) Café 
(iv) Waiting Area 
(v) Cloak Room 
(vi) Public Toilets 
(vii) Open Parking 
(viii) Landscaping 
(ix) Water Sports Equipment like Rafts, 
Life Jackets, Helmets and Paddle 
All the components were dropped 
(February 2019) due to non -
availability of forest clearance. 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
180 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Components of the Project Remarks 
11. Light and Sound Show at Shimla Two new components at Sl. Nos. 
(11) and (12) viz., Light and Sound 
Show at Shimla and Development 
of Maa Hateshwari Temple  at 
Hatkoti at Hatkoti were added 
(February 2019) in place of the 
dropped components mentioned at 
Sl. Nos. (4), 4 (a), (5), (6) and (10). 
Later, in the Regional Review 
Meeting held on 18 January 2020, 
the newly added component 
‘Development of Maa Hateshwari 
Temple at Hatkoti’ was also 
dropped as no work had been started 
by the State Government thereon. 
12. Development of Maa Hateshwari Temple 
at Hatkoti: 
(i) Improvement of Pathway and drains 
around the temple area 
(ii) Sitting Benches (30 nos.) 
(iii) Dustbins (10 nos.) 
(iv) Street Lights 
(v) Construction of Rain Shelters 
(vi) Illumination of Temple Area 
(vii) Construction of Parking Area 
13. Saurav Kalia Van Vihar: 
(i) Landscaping  
(ii) Gazebos 
(iii) Solar Lights 
(iv) Public Toilets 
In the Regional Review Meeting 
held on 18 January 2020, all the 
components were dropped by the 
Ministry of Tourism as the 
construction work done by the State 
Government was washed away by 
the flash floods. 
14. Village Haat at Kangra: 
(i) Haat 
(ii) Cafeteria 
(iii) Public Toilets 
(iv) Open Air Theatre 
(v) Landscaping 
(vi) Solar Street Lights 
(vii) Open Parking 
No change in components 
15. Art & Craft Centre at Bhalei Mata, 
Chamba: 
(i) Cafeteria 
(ii) Craft Rooms 
(iii) Open Air Theatre 
(iv) Landscaping 
(v) Toilets Parking 
(vi) Solar Street Lights 
No change in components 

Report No. 17 of 2023 
181 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Components of the Project Remarks 
16. Signages, Gantries, CCTV and WIFI for 
the entire circuit 
No change in components 
  

Report No. 17 of 2023 
182 
 
Annexure-V 
(Referred to in Para 5.9) 
Gist of observations of National Productivity Council Report 2019 on Impact 
Assessment Study of Swadesh Darshan Scheme 
The Impact Assessment study  by National Productivity Council  (NPC) included detailed 
field studies of 10 projects selected in consultation with the Ministry of Tourism. The NPC 
observed that: 
• None of the projects could adhere to the timelines as per milestones specified for 
completion of the project. Deviations were found in all the projects in the range of 
10-30 per cent. During the field visit by NPC team, it was observed that a lot remains 
to be done in terms of the upkeep, operation and maintenance of the developed sites/ 
components. There are major connectivity issues within the various sites (intra) in the 
entire circuit. So me components lack basic facilities like water/electricity/security 
that are critical to the success of the project. 
• Delays were observed in most of the projects with respect to timely implementation.  
All the stakeholders particularly the Mission Directora te, Project Implementing 
Agencies including their Consultants, Construction/Executing Agencies and Central 
Project Management Consultant need to work in tandem as per the sanctioned project 
timelines for the timely completion, quality adherence and local tourism development 
for achieving the objectives of the “Swadesh Darshan” Scheme.  
• In the case of Arunachal Pradesh and Sikkim, the project components were thinly 
spread across in a very wide area. It is suggested that the number of Project sites 
should be restricted to 5-6 with intensive development of well-conceived areas rather 
than spreading it all around.  
• There were major deviations found in the project on Integrated Development of New 
Adventure Tourism in Arunachal Pradesh wherein component of adventu re sports 
which was the base of the project theme was not taken up as specified in DPR and 
land leveling and kaccha road of 7 Km s was made under the component which was 
actually meant for Adventure sports based equipment component.  
• Tendering issues, lack of competence of contractors, unsatisfactory work from 
contractors, lack of proper conceptuali sation of DPR at the inception stage, 
unavailability of technical drawings, lack of technical support and management of the 
project progress by Central Project Management Consultant, etc. have been found as 
major issues that need to be addressed.  
• Coordination among State Tourism Department, Other Departments and District 
Authorities need to be strengthened. The promotion & publicity component of all the 
10 locations was found lacking. There is an urgent need to undertake promotion and 
awareness campaigns to ensure the project viability and making these locations 
known to the tourists.  
  

Report No. 17 of 2023 
183 
 
Annexure-VI 
(Referred to in Para 5.10) 
Gist of the observations and recommendations of the Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture 
Sr. 
No. 
Report No. (Date) Gist of Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
1. 275 (March 2020) The Committee observed that several proposals sent by the State 
Governments for inclusion under the Scheme were pending 
approval by the Ministry . It had r ecommended that approval to 
such pending projects should be expedited. 
The Committee also recommended that for bette r promotion of 
rural tourism, more Rural circuit projects may be sanctioned and 
implemented for promotion of niche tourism and more funds 
may be earmarked for Rural circuits under the Scheme. 
2. 284 (February 
2021) 
The Committee observed that the approach of the Ministry for 
preparing the Budget Estimates was casual and routine in nature. 
The manner, in which the Budget Estimates were being prepared 
showed that the Ministry was not very serious about the 
activities to be undertake n by them. Therefore, the Committee 
had recommended the Ministry to have the entire requirement of 
funds realistically assessed after collecting timely information 
on requirement of funds from the State Governments and other 
stakeholders and take steps to rectify and improve upon the 
existing system of assessing requirement of funds.  
3. 298 (August 2021) The Committee recommended the Ministry  to develop an 
effective and efficient mechanism for timely submission of 
Utilisation Certificates. This would not only speed up execution 
of all the projects well within the approved cost, but also help in 
prevention of cost overruns in the projects. 
The Committee observed that the progress of projects under the 
Scheme was not satisfactory. It had recommended the Mini stry 
to take stringent measures for expediting the completion of the 
projects in a time bound manner. 
 
 

© COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA
www.cag.gov.in