 
 
 
 
 
REPORT OF THE                           
COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR            
GENERAL OF INDIA 
 
  
on  
 
Performance Audit on Direct Benefit Transfer 
of  
Social Security Pension Schemes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government of Kerala 
Report No. 7 of the year 2022 
 

 
 
 

 
(i) 
Table of contents 
 
Particulars Paragraph Page 
Preface  (v) 
Highlights  (vii) 
Key Facts  (ix) 
CHAPTER–I  
Introduction 
Direct Benefit Transfer 1.1 1 
Application Software 1.2 5 
Audit Objectives 1.3 5 
Sources of Audit Criteria 1.4 6 
Scope and Methodology of Audit 1.5 6 
Disclaimer 1.6 7 
Acknowledgement 1.7 7 
CHAPTER–II  
Implementation and Management of Direct Benefit Transfer  
in SSP Schemes   
Functioning of State DBT Cell 2.1 10 
Deficiencies in Verification 2.2 11 
Laxity in verification process and ineffective system 2.3 13 
Delay in approval of SSPs by Secretaries of LSGIs 2.4 14 
Irregular approval of beneficiaries 2.5 15 
Approval of second SSP 2.5.1 15 
Approval and Disbursement of two pensions (IGNWP 
and UMWP) to single beneficiary 2.5.2 15 
Approval of SSPs without production of required 
certificates along with the application 2.5.3 16 
Beneficiaries added to a local body without submitting 
application 2.5.4 17 
Beneficiaries included during Welfare Standing 
Committee meetings held prior to their application 
date 
2.5.5 18 
Ineligible approval/ payment of SSPs noticed during 
Beneficiary Survey 2.5.6 18 
Irregular sanction of SSPs 2.6 19 
Sanction of SSPs to Government Servants/ Service 2.6.1 19 

 
(ii) 
Particulars Paragraph Page 
Pensioners/  Temporary Employees 
Disbursement of SSPs to Government Servants/ 
Service Pensioners/  Temporary Employees even after 
their suspension from beneficiary list 
2.6.2 20 
Poor accounting practices and resultant deviations in 
the accounts 2.7 21 
Non-maintenance of books of accounts 2.7.1 21 
Kerala Social Security Pension Limited •  21 
DBT Cell in the Directorate of Panchayats •  22 
Allocation and usage of Funds for SSPs 2.7.2 23 
Non-reconciliation of funds for the disbursement of 
SSPs 2.7.3 24 
Deficiencies in tracking the undisbursed amount and 
refund 2.7.4 25 
Non-adherence to the timely disbursement of SSPs 2.8 26 
Denial of pension to elig ible beneficiaries due to 
erroneous bill processing 2.9 26 
Payment by ‘Direct to Home’ mode does not qualify as 
Direct Benefit Transfer 2.10 27 
Irregular disbursement of SSPs 2.11 28 
Irregular payment of Widow Pension 2.11.1 28 
Disbursement of same pension more than once to a 
beneficiary 2.11.2 28 
Irregular disbursement of SSPs to those who were 
reported deceased as per the Register of Deaths 2.11.3 29 
Irregular transfer of funds in respect of cases reported 
as deceased 2.12 30 
Disbursement of SSPs to in eligible persons who were 
suspended from the beneficiary list 2.13 31 
Ineligible disbursement of Indira Gandhi National Old 
Age Pension at enhanced rate 2.14 33 
Irregular transfer of amount to PACS due to non-
suspension/  non-removal of remarried beneficiaries of 
IGNWP and UMWP from the SSP beneficiary list 
2.15 33 
Non-deployment of Performa nce Audit Supervisors in 
LSGIs 2.16 34 
Conclusion 2.17 35 
Recommendations 2.18 36 

 
(iii) 
Particulars Paragraph Page 
CHAPTER–III  
Effectiveness of Sevana Pension software 
Lack of preparedness in automation of DBT 3.1 40 
Documentation Deficiencies 3.2 40 
Absence of System Study Documents 3.2 (a) 40 
Documentation and testing of changes in the Software 3.2 (b) 41 
Inadequate training, awareness of security 3.3 41 
Deficiencies in integration of essential criteria for 
beneficiary approval and pension payment 
3.4 42 
Deficiencies in Input Controls 3.5 42 
Lapses in information security and monitoring 3.6 43 
Hosting of web application without Security Audit 
Certificate 
3.6.1 44 
Lapses in monitoring of user activities 3.6.2 45 
Inconsistencies in Beneficiary addition 3.6.3 46 
Other security lapses 3.6.4 46 
Inconsistency in Master data files 3.6.5 47 
Improper involvement of the Developer in data 
processing and reporting 
3.7 49 
Discrepancies in outputs 3.8 50 
Susceptibility of Sevana Pension Software to fraud 3.9 53 
Conclusion 3.10 53 
Recommendations 3.11 54 
CHAPTER–IV 
Conclusion and Summary of Recommendations  
Conclusion and Summary of Recommendations  53 
 
Appendix  61 
Glossary of Abbreviations  187 
 
 

 
(v) 
Preface 
 
This Report of the Comptroller and Aud itor General of India is prepared for 
submission to the Governor under Articl e 151 (2) of the Constitution of India 
for being laid before the State Legislature.  
The Report contains significant results of the Performance Audit on ‘Direct 
Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes’ under the Government 
of Kerala from 2017-18 to 2020-21. 
The instances mentioned in this Report are those which came into notice in the 
course of audit during March to December 2021. 
Audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards issued by 
the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.  
 

 
(vii) 
Highlights 
 
 
Highlights Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Secu rity Pension Schemes in Government 
of Kerala 
Why CAG did this Audit 
Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) is an 
enterprise by the Government of India 
to confirm timely and appropriate 
benefits directly to the beneficiaries. It 
symbolises a remarkable change in the 
model for delivering benefits by 
removing intermediary levels, leakages 
and pilferages. Government of Kerala 
implemented DBT in the State for 
various Schemes including Social 
Security Pension (SSP) Schemes. 
Given that SSPs are being distributed 
to the most deprived elderly/ widowed/ 
disabled people in society who have no 
other income and involves the highest 
expenditure among the DBT Schemes 
in the State, this Performance Audit 
attempted to examine whether (i) The 
DBT programme of the State has been 
effective in providing timely and 
appropriate pensionary benefits directly 
to the beneficiaries; and (ii) The 
Sevana Pension software (web based 
application for the ex ecution of Social 
Security pensionary benefits)  has been 
effective in bringing accuracy, 
transparency and effectiveness to the 
process of Direct Benefit Transfer. 
What CAG found 
During the period from 2017-18 to 2020-21, the Government had paid ₹29,622.67 
crore as Social Security Pensions (SSPs) to 47.97 lakh beneficiaries in the State. 
There were laxities in the application stag e, its verification and approval at the 
Local Self Government Institutions (LSG Is). Two different pensions (except 
disability pension) were irregularly approv ed to single beneficiaries and pensions 
were often approved without production of mandatory certificates due to absence 
of input controls in the Scheme Management Software (Sevana Pension) and 
proper monitoring by the Secretaries of LSGIs. Disc repancies in beneficiary 
addition were also noticed, indicative of lack of control in the system. A joint 
beneficiary survey disclosed 20 per cent  ineligible beneficiaries among the 
sample. 
The chief fund raiser and co-ordinator  of SSP Schemes, viz. Kerala Social 
Security Pension Limited (KSSPL), is not  maintaining the accounts properly and 
has not done the reconciliation of accounts during the entire audit period. 
KSSPL’s activities in fund raising and utilisation has not been transparent. 
SSPs were disbursed in batches of months and not monthly, which defeated the 
very purpose of timely disbursement of SSP. Eligible beneficiaries were denied 
pension due to erroneous bill processing. The payments in cash through Primary 
Agricultural Credit Societies (PACS) in Di rect to Home mode did not qualify as 
Direct Benefit Transfer, as it was not done directly to beneficiaries and did not 
minimise intermediary levels. There we re instances of irregular payment of 
widow pension and disbursement of same pension more than once to a 
beneficiary.  
Substantial amount of funds were transf erred to PACS on account of deceased 
beneficiaries who were al ready reported as deceased, resulting in unnecessary 
liability of interest and pointing towards possible fraud. Government Servants and 
Service Pensioners were irregularly gr anted SSPs. Moreover, even after their 
suspension from the list, pension was paid to ineligible beneficiaries which 
indicates poor verification and monito ring mechanism in the Department 
concerned. Performance Audit Supervisors were not deployed in any of the 
LSGIs and the State DBT Cell was not performing as prescribed in the guidelines. 
There was lack of planning of the automation process as evident in the absence of 
system design documents and lack of documentation. There were control lapses in 
the Sevana Pension software, from beneficiary addition to disbursement of SSPs. 
The integrity and consistency of the data also could not be guaranteed. 
Information Kerala Mission (IKM), the developer of Sevana Pension software, 
continued to run it even after its implementation rather than the User Department. 
The software could not generate any of the vital reports. Even IKM was 
generating the reports through the backend by Stored Procedures, which required 
frequent modifications as well. The User Department was not able to monitor 
either the user activities at LSGIs or the activities performed by IKM. Further, 
there was no effective mechanism for en suring the receipt of the SSPs by the 
intended recipient. 
What CAG recommends 
1. The entire system of DBT may 
strictly adhere to norms already in 
place, right from the stage of entry 
of pension applications in the 
system to the final disbursement 
stage, to bring in greater 
effectiveness; 
2. Sevana Pension software may be 
revamped to automate all activities 
from receipt of application to the 
payment and acknowledgment of 
SSPs, and to enable the User 
Department to operate it 
independently from the Developer. 
The Government/ Department has 
generally accepted the 
recommendations. 

 
 
 
Key Facts 

 
(ix) 
Key Facts 
Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
Key facts  
Direct Benefit Transfer 
(DBT) 
Aimed at reforming Governme nt delivery system by re-
engineering the existing process in welfare schemes for 
transparent and timely transfer of funds to the right persons. 
Social Security Pension 
Schemes (SSP Schemes) 
Five Social Security Pensions (SSPs) under DBT:  
• Indira Gandhi National Old Age Pension (IGNOAP). 
• Indira Gandhi National Widow Pension (IGNWP). 
• Indira Gandhi National Disability Pension (IGNDP). 
• Pension for Unmarried Women above 50 years 
(UMWP). 
• Agriculture Labour Pension (ALP). 
The Government of India (GoI) funding is also available for 
first three Pensions. 
DBT in SSP Schemes • The responsibility of implementation of SSP 
Schemes is vested with the Local Self Government 
Department.  
• The Directorate of Panchayats is the nodal office for 
SSP Schemes.  
• The DBT Cell under Director of Panchayats co-
ordinates all the activities relating to SSP Schemes. 
• Beneficiary management is done at Local Self 
Government Institutions. 
• Funds are sanctioned by Finance Department and 
periodic disbursement is  done by DBT Cell in the 
Directorate of Panchayats. These activities are 
managed using Sevana Pension software. 
• The Government had paid ₹29622.67 crore as Social 
Security Pensions (SSPs) to 47.97 lakh beneficiaries 
in the State during 2017-18 to 2020-21. 
• Of these 48 lakh beneficiaries, 50.79 per cent   
receive pension directly to their bank accounts and 
49.21 per cent receive pension, in cash, at their home 
through Primary Agricultural Credit Societies 
(PACS). 
 

 
(x) 
Implementation and Management of Direct Benefit Transfer in SSP 
Schemes 
Findings 
Subject Findings 
Performance of State DBT Cell 
in the State 
(Paragraph 2.1; Page 10) 
• State DBT Cell is not functioning as envisaged by GoI. 
Deficiencies in processing of 
applications 
(Paragraphs 2.2; Page 11, 2.3; 
Page 13 and 2.4; Page 14) 
• Initial applications are not being recorded in the system. 
• Verification process and its report lacks clarity. 
• There are inordinate delay in approval of beneficiaries. 
Irregular approval of 
beneficiaries 
(Paragraphs 2.5.1 to 2.5.6; 
Page 15 to 18 and 2.6; Page 
19) 
• More than one SSPs granted to single beneficiary. 
• Beneficiaries approved without mandatory certificates. 
• Beneficiaries added even without submitting an 
application. 
• Service Pensioners and Government employees received 
SSPs (`39.27 crore). 
Poor accounting practices 
(Paragraphs 2.7.1 to 2.7.4; 
Page 21 to 25) 
• Non-maintenance of books of accounts at Kerala Social 
Security Pension Ltd. (KSSPL) and at DBT Cell in 
Directorate of Panchayats. 
• Excess loans raised by KSSPL. 
• KSSPL and the Directorate of Panchayats have 
conflicting figures due to non-reconciliation of accounts. 
Erroneous bill processing 
resulted in irregular pension 
payments 
(Paragraphs 2.9; Page 26, 2.13; 
Page 31, 2.14; Page 33) 
• SSP payments were denied to more than 25,000 eligible 
beneficiaries. 
• Payment made to suspended beneficiaries, which has not 
been recovered (`4.08 crore). 
• Pension at enhanced rate disbursed to beneficiaries 
before attaining 75 years of age (`10.11 crore). 
Direct to Home payment by 
agents 
(Paragraph 2.10; Page 27) 
• 48.31 per cent of total amount of SSPs for the years from 
2017-18 to 2020-21 were disbursed through agents at the 
home of the beneficiaries through Primary Agricultural 
Credit Societies (PACS). 
• The intermediary levels involved hence do not qualify as 
Direct Benefit Transfer. 
Irregular disbursement of SSPs 
(Paragraphs 2.11; Page 28, 
2.12; Page 30 and 2.15; Page 
33) 
• Irregular disbursement of IGNWP to legally divorced, 
deserted and re-married beneficiaries (`180.16 lakh). 
• Irregular transfer of funds to PACS on account of 
deceased beneficiaries. 

(xi) 
Effectiveness of Sevana Pension Software 
Key facts  
Sevana Pension software The software was developed for the automation of 
disbursement of SSPs. It was developed by Information 
Kerala Mission (IKM) and was intended to streamline the 
disbursement of SSPs with a transparent mechanism. 
Findings 
Subject Findings 
Lack of preparedness in 
Automation  
(Paragraphs 3.1; Page 40 and 
3.2; Page 40) 
• No documents available in respect of the initiation of 
automation of SSP Schemes. 
• IKM had not prepared system design documents such 
as User Requirement Specification and System 
Requirement Specifications. 
Lack of data validation 
during data entry 
(Paragraphs 3.4; Page 42 and 
3.5; Page 42) 
• All eligibility criteria are not mapped in the software. 
• The software lacks basic data entry validation. 
Lack of Information Security 
and Monitoring 
(Paragraphs 3.6.1 to 3.6.4; 
Page 44 to 46) 
• Web application is hosted without clearing Security 
Audit. 
• Mandatory periodic security audit is not done. 
• Instances of sharing of credentials resulted in irregular 
addition of beneficiaries. 
Inconsistencies in Master 
Data Files 
(Paragraph 3.6.5; Page 47) 
• Inconsistent data in master files which prevent accurate 
calculation, monitoring of user activities, etc. 
Improper involvement of 
Developer  
(Paragraphs 3.7; Page 49) 
• IKM continues to run the application. 
• Bill Generation is done by IKM at back end. 
Discrepancies in outputs 
(Paragraph 3.8; Page 50) 
• Essential reports generate d from the software shows 
erroneous figures, which forced the User Department to 
depend on the developer. 
Susceptibility of Sevana 
Pension software to fraud 
(Paragraph 3.9; Page 53) 
• Beneficiary-wise acknowledgement of receipt of 
amount is not recorded in the software. 
• Absence of such system make the software susceptible 
to fraud. 
 
 

 
Chapter – I 
 
 
 Introduction 

1 
 
CHAPTER – I 
Introduction 
1 Introduction 
1.1 Direct Benefit Transfer  
Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) is a majo r reform initiative of the Government 
of India (GoI) to ensure better and timely delivery of benefits to the people. This 
marks a paradigm shift in the process of delivering Government benefits like 
wage payments, fuel subsidies, food grain subsidies, etc. directly into the bank 
accounts of beneficiaries, removing leakages and enhancing financial inclusion. 
The Government of Kerala (GoK) had introduced the DBT system for Social 
Security Pensions (SSPs) from May 2015, crediting the amounts directly to the 
Bank/ Post Office Savings Accounts of beneficiaries, through Electronic Money 
Order and Direct to Home (DTH) of the beneficiaries. At present, there are two 
modes of payment: 
1. Crediting the amount to Bank account of the beneficiaries, and 
2. Disbursement of pension in DTH m ode through Primary Agricultural 
Credit Societies (PACS).  
The Government of India issued directions 1 to set up DBT Cell in the State 
which would act as a focal point for implementation of DBT schemes of both 
Government of India and States. In Kerala, State DBT Cell is constituted2 with 
Additional Chief Secretary (Finance) as Chairman. 
Among the DBT schemes in the State, the expenditure by the State Government 
is the highest in respect of SSPs. The responsibility for implementation of Social 
Security Pension Schemes (SSP Sche mes), including those under National 
Social Assistance Programme (NSAP) in the State, are vested with the Local 
Self Government Department (LSGD). The Director of Panchayats is the Nodal 
Officer for SSPs. The DB T Cell functioning under the Director of Panchayats 
co-ordinates all the activ ities relating to the SSP Sc hemes. The Schemes are 
managed using Sevana Pension software  developed by the Information Kerala 
Mission (IKM). The software is depl oyed in the Local Self Government 
Institutions (LSGIs) within the State of Kerala. Applications for SSPs are 
submitted in the LSGIs and the initial verification and selection of beneficiaries 
and their enrolment in Sevana Pensi on software are carried out by LSGIs. 
 
1 Vide DO No. I-11011/145/2015-DBT-Cab dated 25 May 2016 from Secretary to 
Government of India.   
2  Government of Kerala vide GO(P) No. 108/2016/ Fin dated 29  July 2016 constituted State 
DBT Cell in Finance Department. 

 
2 
 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes  
Periodical disbursement of pension is initiated at the DBT Cell and 
disbursements are done through Banks and PACS. 
The Government of Kerala constituted a wholly owned Government Company, 
viz. Kerala Social Security Pens ion Limited (KSSPL), under the Finance 
Department with the objective of improving the disbursement of various SSPs, 
including welfare pensions in the State. The State Government had issued orders 
in June 2018 to transfer credit the KSSPL Account with the funds earmarked in 
State Budget every year for the purpose . The KSSPL was also allowed by the 
State Government to raise funds from Public, Public Sector Undertakings 
(PSUs) and other instituti ons through suitable financ ial instruments including 
deposits and loans to meet the differential funds needed to fulfil the expenditure 
requirements.  
During 2018-19 to 2020-21, KSSPL had availed loans amounting to ₹22,266.66 
crore from various entities 3 for the disbursement of SSPs. However, loan 
amounting to ₹19,472.14 crore was availed by th e KSSPL in excess of the 
requirement for that period. In spite of that, out of the loan amount raised by 
KSSPL for SSPs, the KSSPL released ₹4,478.85 crore less than what was 
disbursed by the DBT Cell as SSPs. Th e KSSPL also incurred expenditure 
amounting to ₹1,596.34 crore as repayment liabili ties on account of the loan 
raised. The KSSPL has thus not been fi scally prudent, and some of its other 
deficiencies have also been commente d at Paragraphs 2.7.1 to 2.7.4 of this 
Report. 
The entire borrowings by KSSPL as above for the periods 2018-19, 2019-20 
and 2020-21 have not been reflected in the budget of the State Government for 
those respective years and hence remained  outside the Legislative control. A 
paragraph on the off-budget borrowings by KSSPL during 2019-20 have 
already appeared as Paragraph 2.6.2 in the Kerala State Finance Audit Report 
of the C&AG of India for the year ended 31st March 2020. 
The process of fund disbursement for SSPs is depicted below in Figure 1.1. 
  
 
3  Primary Co-operative Societies Consortium for Social Security Pension, Kerala State 
Financial Enterprises, Kerala State Beverages Corporation and Kerala Motor Transport 
Workers Welfare Fund Board. 

 
3 
 
Chapter I : Introduction 
Figure 1.1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Request sanction & 
funds for SSP along 
with the details of 
available funds with 
them 
Direct to Home 
Requests fund 
requirement for 
SSPs 
Kerala State 
Co-operative 
Bank Account 
of KSSPL 
Beneficiary 
Finance 
Department 
KSSPL 
(STSB Account 
in Treasury) 
KSFE, KSBC, 
KMTWWFB, 
PCSCSSP 
Bank Account of 
the Director of 
Panchayats in 
SBI 
Raise balance 
of funds 
required 
through loans 
Accords 
sanction 
for 
funds 
for SSPs 
DBT Cell in 
the Directorate 
of Panchayats 
Transfer 
funds 
Transfer 
Funds 
Undisbursed 
amount 
 
Provides fund 
requirement for    
SSPs  
Bank account 
STSB Account 
of the Director 
of Panchayats in 
Sub Treasury 
IKM 
Pension Treasury 
Accounts of Joint 
Registrar of Co-
operative Societies 
of 14 Districts 
 
PACS 
Undisbursed 
amount 

 
4 
 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes  
The DBT Cell in the Directorate of Panchayats communicates the fund 
requirement of SSPs for a pa rticular month along with the details of available 
balance funds with them to the Finan ce Department of the State Government. 
The Finance Department accords sanction for the entire funds required for the 
disbursement of SSPs for that month a nd directs KSSPL to transfer credit the 
differential funds for meeting the required expenditure to the Bank account and 
Treasury account maintained by the Director of Panchayats. The KSSPL then 
transfer credits the funds required for disbursement of SSPs to the Bank account 
of the Director of Panchayats maintained in the State Bank of India.  
The funds required for disbursement through DTH mode is transfer credited by 
KSSPL to the Special Treasury Savings  Bank Account of the Director of 
Panchayats maintained in the Sub Treasury. The Director of Panchayats 
transfers the amount to the Bank accounts of the beneficiaries and transfer 
credits the amount to the Pension Treasur y Accounts of the Jo int Registrar of 
Co-operative Societies in the 14 Districts for disbursement to DTH beneficiaries 
through PACS.  
The number of beneficiaries under the five SSP Schemes and total amount 
disbursed between 2017-18 and 2020-21 are as detailed in Table 1.1 below: 
Table 1.1 
Details of scheme-wise number of beneficiaries and amount disbursed 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the Scheme No. of Beneficiaries Amount disbursed 
(₹ in crore) 
2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 
1 Indira Gandhi 
National Old Age 
Pension (IGNOAP) 
20,77,492 22,18,254 22,67,911 25,66,332 2,653.54 4,002.32 3,196.81 5,259.09 
2 Indira Gandhi 
National Widow 
Pension (IGNWP) 
12,35,399 12,91,647 12,72,733 13,37,271 1,467.20 2,285.01 1,799.91 2,927.69 
3 Agriculture Labour 
Pension (ALP) 
4,66,962 4,59,019 4,06,790 4,15,172 572.83 849.95 589.38 920.49 
4 Indira Gandhi 
National Disability 
Pension (IGNDP) 
3,56,956 3,84,236 3,77,108 3,94,243 432.10 706.07 545.44 882.82 
5 Pension for Unmarried 
Women above 50 
years (UMWP) 
76,264 81,029 79,980 84,210 92.11 143.57 113.01 183.33 
 
Total 42,13,073 44,34,185 44,04,522 47,97,228 5,217.78 7,986.92 6,244.55 10,173.42 
Total Amount disbursed ₹29,622.67 crore 
(Information furnished by DBT Cell) 
Of the above five pension schemes, three schemes come under National Social 
Assistance Programme (NSAP) and are being funded additionally by the State 
Government. As per the de tails furnished by the DBT Cell, the number of 
beneficiaries who are receiving IGNOAP, IGNWP and IGNDP coming under 
NSAP is 6,88,329. During the period under audit, 50.79 per cent of beneficiaries 

 
5 
 
Chapter I : Introduction 
are availing DBT in their Bank account and for the remaining 49.21 per cent of 
beneficiaries, the amount was disbursed through the DTH mode. 
1.2 Application Software 
The Sevana Pension software is the we b-based application developed by IKM 
and deployed in the LSGIs within the State of Kerala to automate the internal 
processes from registration of beneficiaries to disbur sement of pension under 
DBT. The intention was to provide effi cient and transparent mechanism in the 
social security services executed through it in order to improve the effectiveness 
and service delivery of LSGIs in this  sphere. The primary objective of the 
Sevana Pension software were: 
• To streamline the disbursement of social welfare benefits to the poorest 
of the poor in the society, and  
• To provide efficient and transparent mechanism in the delivery of social 
security services. 
The Sevana Pension software manages SSPs in the State of Kerala, which 
includes registration of beneficiaries and its management at LSGIs, fund 
estimation, bill generation and Bank pa yment file generation by IKM for the 
DBT Cell in the Directorate of Panchayats. 
The Sevana Pension software was developed in the .NET framework 2.0 with 
SQL Server 2014 as back-end database. The application is hosted in State Data 
Centre-2 and is availabl e through internet. LSGIs use KSWAN (Kerala State 
Wide Area Network), NOFN (National Optical Fibre Network) and BSNL 
FTTH (Fibre to the Home) for accessing the software.  
The Sevana Pension softwa re can be initiated using the link available in 
‘Welfare Pension’ portal (https://wel farepension.lsgkerala.gov.in). The portal 
also contains a ‘Reports’ page which gives statistical data relating to SSPs and 
a ‘Search’ page to view the payment details of a particular beneficiary by giving 
the Pensioner ID. Since it is a web a pplication available through internet, end 
users can access it using their personal computers. 
1.3 Audit Objectives 
The broad objectives of this Performance Audit were to assess whether: 
1. The DBT programme of the State has been effective in providing timely 
and appropriate pensionary benefits directly to the beneficiaries; and 
2. The Sevana Pension software has been instrumental in bringing 
accuracy, transparency and effectiveness to the process of DBT. 

 
6 
 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes  
1.4 Sources of Audit Criteria 
The following Guidelines, Circulars, Orders, etc. and their provisions were the 
sources of criteria for this Performance Audit: 
• Guidelines of Schemes on process of identification and authentication 
of beneficiaries and payments,  
• Standard Operating Procedures, Handbook on DBT and Guidelines for 
State DBT Cell issued by DBT Mission, 
• Documents, Circulars, Orders, Instru ctions and Notifications issued by 
DBT Mission, Central Ministries and State Government, 
• Instructions regarding maintenance of database, generation of various 
reports of IT controls and Govern ment Orders (GOs), Circulars and 
Guidelines issued by GoK and IKM, Handbook on IT Audit by 
INTOSAI Working Group on IT Audit (WGITA) and IT Audit Manual 
issued by CAG of India, and 
• General Financial Rules (GFR), 2017. 
1.5 Scope and Methodology of Audit 
The Performance Audit was conducted c overing the period from 2017-18 to 
2020-21. Audit examined the records in the State DBT Cell, Finance 
Department in the Government Secretariat, Directorate of Panchayats including 
the DBT Cell under it, IKM, KSSPL and 37 LSGIs.  
The five SSP Schemes implemented by the Local Self Government Department 
(LSGD) were selected for audit as detailed below: 
1. Indira Gandhi National Old Age Pension (IGNOAP) (NSAP4),  
2. Indira Gandhi National Widow Pension (IGNWP) (NSAP),  
3. Indira Gandhi National Disability Pension (IGNDP) (NSAP),  
4. Pension for Unmarried Women a bove 50 years (UMWP) (State 
Scheme5) and  
5. Agriculture Labour Pension (ALP) (State Scheme) 
 
4 Funded by Government of India and Government of Kerala. 
5 Funded only by the Government of Kerala. 

 
7 
 
Chapter I : Introduction 
Five6 out of 14 districts and 37 7 out of 389 LSG Offices in the five selected 
Districts were selected for audi t by Simple Random Sampling Without 
Replacement method using IDEA software. 
An Entry Conference was held on 08 March 2021 with th e Additional Chief 
Secretary to LSGD, Officers of Finance Department, Directorate of Panchayats 
and IKM in which the A udit Objectives, Criteria  and Methodology of this 
Performance Audit were explained. 
Audit also test-checked the files and records available with the State DBT Cell, 
Finance Department in the Government Secretariat, Directorate of Panchayats, 
IKM, KSSPL, selected LSGIs and co rresponding PACS in the selected 
Districts. 
An Exit Conference was held on 10 January 2022 with the Secretary 
(Expenditure) of Finance De partment, Director of Panchayats and officers of 
the Finance Department. The Governme nt and the Department accepted the 
audit findings and stated that they would correct the system based on the Audit 
recommendations. 
1.6 Disclaimer  
The observations featuring in this Audit Report are a result of test-check in the 
selected offices. Government may initiate checks of the database/ records across 
the State and rectify the defects. 
1.7 Acknowledgement 
Audit acknowledges the co-operation and assistance extended by the Additional 
Chief Secretary (Finance), Principal Secretary (LSGD), Director of Panchayats, 
Executive Director (IKM), Di strict and field level f unctionaries of selected 
districts during the course of the Performance Audit. 
 
 
6 Idukki, Malappuram, Pathanamthitta, Thiruvananthapuram and Thrissur. 
7 Corporations – Thiruvananthapuram and Thrissur.  
 Municipalities – Chalakkudy, Chavakkad, Ka ttappana, Manjeri, Nedumangad, Pandalam, 
Pathanamthitta, Tanur, Thodupuzha and Varkala. 
 Grama Panchayats – Alakkode, Anad, Athavanad, Ay iroor, Chemmaruthy, Irimbiliyam, 
Kadavallur, Keezhattur, Koipuram, Kotta nad, Kunnathukal, Manamboor, Muttom, 
Naranganam, Nenmanikkara, Omallur, Pallivasal, Poovachal, Santhanpara, 
Varandarappilly, Vatanappally, Vazhakkad, Vazhikkadavu, Vellangallur and 
Velliyamattom. 

 
Chapter – II 
   
 Implementation and 
Management of Direct 
Benefit Transfer  
in SSP Schemes 

 
9 
 
CHAPTER - II 
Implementation and Management of Direct Benefit Transfer  
in SSP Schemes 
2 Implementation and Management 
One of the objectives of Audit was to verify the effectiveness in providing 
timely and appropriate pensionary benefits directly to the beneficiaries of Social 
Security Pension Schemes under Direct Benefit Transfer programme.   
Under the ambit of DBT, the State DBT Cell, constituted under the instructions 
of GoI, is the nodal agency for all DBT Programmes in the State. However, for 
the purpose of SSPs, a DBT Ce ll in the Directorate of Panchayats is the nodal 
office for co-ordinating all activities related to disbursement of SSPs. The 
applications for SSPs are received and pr ocessed in LSGIs and the beneficiary 
list of SSPs and the funds received for the disbursement of SSPs are managed 
by this DBT Cell in the Directorate of Panchayats. Funds required for the 
disbursement of SSPs are being mana ged by KSSPL separately through the 
funds received from GoK and additionally through the loans raised from various 
entities within the State. 
In order to verify the effectiveness of the DBT programme, Audit test-checked 
the process of approval of applica tions and management of SSP Scheme 
beneficiaries in selected LSGIs and DBT Cell, and anal ysed back-end data of 
Sevana Pension software obtained from IK M. In spite of the limitations in the 
availability of data regarding fund arra ngement and its uti lisation, Audit also 
scrutinised the accounting of funds for SSPs by KSSPL.   
On test-check of files and on analysis of data in the selected LSGIs, Audit 
noticed deficiencies in the process of verification and approval of applications 
for SSPs, like: 
• Irregular approval/ payment of IGNWP to those legally divorced,  
• Sanction of SSPs to Government Em ployees and Service Pensioners 
who are ineligible for SSPs,  
• Irregular disbursement of SSPs to those who were reported deceased as 
per the Register of Deaths,  
• Disbursement of two pensions to single beneficiaries,  
• Payment to the beneficiaries who were suspended by the LSGIs,  
• Ineligible disbursement of Old Age Pension at enhanced rate, etc. 
In the accounting of funds for SSP Sc hemes in KSSPL and DBT Cell, Audit 
noticed non-maintenance of books of accounts, non-reconciliation of funds for 
the disbursement of SSPs, deficiencies in tracking the undisbursed amount and 

 
10 
 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
refund, etc.  
These and other deficiencies noticed duri ng audit are discussed in detail in the 
succeeding paragraphs.   
2.1 Functioning of State DBT Cell 
The Government of India issued directions 8 to set up DBT Cell in the State 
which would act as a focal point for implementation of DBT schemes of both 
Government of India and States. The State DBT Cell was to be set up to ensure 
coordination between the Central Minist ries and States which would enable 
faster decision-making, el iminate duplication of efforts and smoothen out 
differences, if any, hence fostering an easier transition of schemes on to DBT. 
In Kerala, State DBT Cell was constituted in July 2016 with the Additional 
Chief Secretary (Finance) as Chairman. 
Scrutiny of records relating to the DB T Schemes and replies to the Audit 
requisitions revealed certain shortcomings in the functioning of State DBT Cell, 
as given below: 
1. There is no coordination among the State DBT Cell and various 
Departments operating DBT schemes.  No Advisory Board has been 
constituted in the State till date. State DBT Coordinator and 
Implementation Support layer too were not constituted in the State; 
2. The State DBT Cell has so far been inactive except for the creation of 
scheme code to Centrally Sponsored Schemes in DBT Bharat portal and 
uploading the monthly transaction details and connected matters. A core 
DBT application for coordinating th e activities of DBT schemes is 
absent in the State DBT Cell. No sp ecific/ consistent protocols were 
established and followed for validati on and verification of beneficiary 
database. No specific Informa tion and Communication Technology 
(ICT) applications were developed to capture the data for DBT transfers; 
3. The details of current status of DBT schemes implemented in the State, 
such as setting up of goals, deadli nes for on-boarding of schemes on 
DBT, monitoring the progress against the targets, collating and 
analysing the data points and prep aring progress report of the State 
pertaining to each Department/ Scheme, were not readily available with 
the State DBT Cell; 
4. Various attributes such as manpower , hardware, connectivity, training 
for capacity building and implementation of various DBT schemes have 
not yet been assessed by the State DBT Cell;   
 
8 Vide DO No. I-11011/145/2015-DBT-Cab dated 25 May 2016 from Secretary to 
Government of India. Accordingly, Government of Kerala, vide GO(P) No. 108/2016/ Fin 
dated 29 July 2016, constituted State DBT Cell in Finance Department. 

 
11 
 
Chapter II : Implementation and Management of DBT in SSP Schemes 
5. No training was provided for skill development in the area of digitising 
beneficiary records, understanding end-to-end processes and Frequently 
Asked Questions (FAQs) and acqua inting with troubleshooting guides 
for performing the duties in an efficient and error-free manner; 
6. Details as to the procedure of docum entation in respect of beneficiary 
identification and enrolment, benefi ciary validation/ registration and 
generation and processing of payment file were not readily available 
with the State DBT Cell; 
7. No specific guidelines/ norms/ instructions were issued by the State 
DBT Cell for classifying a scheme as DBT scheme. The State DBT Cell 
did not have a list of all the schemes where DBT was applicable in the 
State;  
8. The details of threshold for ac ceptance and non-acceptance of 
beneficiaries fixed by the Departments concerned are not available with 
the State DBT Cell. The Cell also does not have the details as to how the 
guidelines for wrong inclusion a nd erroneous exclusion of the 
beneficiaries are define d and documented and whet her it is followed 
scrupulously. The State DBT Cell stated that the above details would be 
furnished only after the receipt of the same from the implementing 
Departments;   
9. The Sevana Pension software is not integrated with payment module for 
seamless updation of data on the St ate DBT portal. The data on State 
DBT portal is not displayed in real -time and not even periodically 
updated. The State DBT Cell collect s the expenditure details from 
Budget Allocation and Monitoring System (BAMS) and uploads it 
manually to State DBT portal. No system has yet been framed to upload 
the data in the DBT Bharat portal;  
The Government replied (May 2022) that necessary steps will be taken to ensure 
that the State DBT Cell, being the nodal agency in the State, is functioning as 
per the required norms
. 
2.2 Deficiencies in Verification  
The Government had given instruction 9 that the Verifying Officers 10 shall 
conduct a detailed verification about the eligibility for SSPs and submit the same 
to the Welfare Standing Committee. The eligibility criteria and various 
guidelines issued by the Government of Kerala for the verification process of 
five SSP Schemes implemented by the State are as detailed in Appendix – I. 
 
9  Vide GO (MS) No. 483/2017/Fin dated 06 November 2017 and GO (MS) No.97/2020/Fin. 
dated 23 September 2020. 
10  For IGNOAP  - Village Extension Officer/ Revenue Inspector,  IGNWP – Integrated Child 
Development Services (ICDS) Supervisor, IG NDP – Health Inspector, ALP – Agriculture 
Officer, UMWP - ICDS Supervisor. 

 
12 
 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
Audit scrutinised (March 2021 to November 2021) a total of 38,797 out of the 
1,04,727 applications (37.05 per cent ) received in the sample LSGIs. It was 
noted that in the case of  11,667 applications, instead of a detailed verification 
report, the Verifying Officer had only  mentioned whether the applicant was 
‘eligible’ or ‘ineligible’.  There was thus no assurance that the Welfare Standing 
Committee had based their decisions on the actual circumstances of the 
applicant. 
It was also noted that 513 (2.97 per cent ) of the 17,285 applicants whose 
applications were rejected earlier on various grounds were subsequently 
approved as fresh applications. Of the above, 511 applicants did not go for the 
appeal process as mandated  in the Government order
11. The system does not 
record details relating to the rejected  applications. This enabled these 511 
applicants to go for second applications instead of appealing, as directed in the 
Government orders, thereby subverting the mandated process of approving the 
pensions. Two of the 513 applicants got approval as fresh applications in spite 
of the fact that their appeals had already been rejected. 
The irregular approval of SSPs by the S ecretaries of the LSGIs without re-
verification of eligibility criteria by a Committee consisting of the Chairman of 
Development Affairs Committee, Secretary of the LSGI and a Gazetted Officer 
of the LSGI resulted in potential irre gular payment of pension to these 513 
beneficiaries upto April 2021. 
Box No.1 
Audit observed in two cases 12 relating to Thrissur Corporation that the 
applications were rejected by the Verifying Officers stating that the applicants 
were in better financial position. The applicants filed appeal before the 
Regional Joint Director, Urban Affair s, Kochi which were subsequently 
rejected stating the same reason. In contravention to the orders of the 
appellate authority, the Welfare Standing Committee still approved the fresh 
applications filed by these two applicants and the Secretary of Thrissur 
Corporation sanctioned the pension in December 2020 and March 2021. 
On this being pointed out, the Secretar y of Thrissur Corporation stated that 
the SSPs were sanctioned to the applican ts on the basis of favourable report 
of the Verifying Officer concerned on the new application. The reply is not 
acceptable as sanctioning of SSPs to the applicants, whose applications were 
rejected by the Secretary of the LSGI  and the Appellate Authority after 
verification, were not in order. 
The Government replied (May 2022) that a new proforma covering all relevant 
details as pointed out by the Audit w ill be introduced. Regarding applicants 
 
11 Vide GO (MS) No.427/2019/Fin. dated 20 November 2019 and guidelines to apply for SSPs 
available in the website of LSGD. 
12 Pensioner ID No.101700223793 and Pensioner ID No.101700224247 . 

 
13 
 
Chapter II : Implementation and Management of DBT in SSP Schemes 
whose first applications were rejected on various grounds and who later 
received approval on their second applications, the Government also stated that 
the Finance Wing (District Finance Insp ection Squad) has been entrusted to 
examine the cases.  
The Government may expedite the rectif ication process to avoid payments to 
ineligible persons. 
2.3 Laxity in verification process and ineffective system  
As per the Guidelines13 issued by GoK, persons who are having better physical 
circumstances, like income exceeding one lakh rupees, family having vehicle 
above 1000cc capacity, etc. are not eligible for SSPs.  
Audit verified (November 2021) the rejected SSP applications and noticed that 
five beneficiaries who were already r eceiving pension have again applied for 
SSPs. However, this could not be identified by the Verifying Officer. These five 
second applications were rejected not because of their duplication but because 
of various other reasons, such as better financial condition, family have vehicle 
above 1000cc capacity, etc. as  reported by the Verify ing Officers in their 
reports. On cross-verification in the Se vana Pension software, it was noticed 
that these persons were already included  in the active beneficiary list and had 
received various SSPs prior to the app lication dates of th e recently rejected 
application, as detailed in Appendix II. As these beneficiaries are having better 
financial conditions as revealed in th e verification reports of the Verifying 
Officers while scru tinising the second applicati ons, the SSPs already being 
drawn by these beneficiaries are also lia ble for stoppage. Lack of such input 
controls, as mentioned in Paragraph 3.5, will lead to erroneous approval of 
second application by a beneficiary. 
The Government replied (May 2022) that periodical monitoring has not yet been 
decided by the Government. Since Aadhaar  number is mandatory to apply for 
SSP, the software checks the new applicants with the existing pensioners.  
While the reply appears to be sound on the surface, the re ality on the ground 
shows none of the second applications  were cancelled on account of Aadhaar 
numbers being repeated. Instead, the appl ications were rejected due to better 
financial condition of the applicants, as  brought out in the reports of the 
Verifying Officer. Moreover, the reply lacks merit as a new application finds 
place in the system only after it is a pproved, which means that control checks 
to weed out ineligible applicants are already redundant by that stage.   
Lack of proper verification and monitoring process has given undue advantage 
of SSP to otherwise ineligible beneficiaries. 
 
13   Vide GO (MS) No.97/2020/Fin. dated 23 September 2020. 

 
14 
 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
2.4 Delay in approval of SSPs by Secretaries of LSGIs 
The Government of Kerala directed14 LSGIs that SSPs are to be approved within 
40 days of receipt of the application. 
Audit verified (September 2021) the data  in Sevana Pension software (data 
dump) and noticed that in the cases already sanctioned by the LSGIs, the 
approval of SSPs for 5,73,406 persons out of the 54,56,498 persons included in 
the data dump were delaye d beyond the envisaged time line of 40 days, i.e. a 
delay for 10.51 per cent  of total approved applicants. In respect of selected 
LSGIs, there was a delay in approval of SSP in 37,459 cases, as detailed in 
Appendix III and as shown in Table 2.1 below: 
Table 2.1 
Delay in approval of SSPs in the selected Districts 
District 
No of 
applications 
approved 
with delay 
Maximum 
delay in 
months 
Range of Delay 
1 to 10 
days 
11 days 
to 1 
month 
1 month 
to 1 year 
More 
than 1 
year 
Idukki 3,328 18 72 369 2,870 17 
Malappuram 5,137 20 74 414 4,601 48 
Pathanamthitta 3,866 24 63 288 3,409 106 
Thiruvananthapuram 16,314 27 80 392 15,017 825 
Thrissur 8,814 25 130 587 7,854 243 
Total 37,459  419 2,050 33,751 1,239 
(Source: Sevana Pension Database) 
Out of the 86,675 applications approved in  the LSGIs of selected districts, 
37,459 applications, i.e. 43.22 per cent, were approved beyond the stipulated 
timeline of 40 days, causing hardship to the applicants and impeding the pace 
of inclusion. Therefore,  non-compliance by the Secr etaries of LSGIs on the 
process timeline prescribed by the G overnment had resu lted in delay in 
approval/ payments to the SSP beneficiaries. 
The Government replied (May 2022) that the Director of Panchayats has been 
directed to issue instructions reit erating the position in processing the 
application for SSPs.  
As SSPs are given to those who do not have any other source for their basic 
needs, swift action by the Government would ensure that benefits are delivered 
to those in due time. 
 
14  Vide Circular dated 28 September 2019. 

 
15 
 
Chapter II : Implementation and Management of DBT in SSP Schemes 
2.5 Irregular approval of beneficiaries 
2.5.1 Approval of second SSP 
As per Government order15, two SSPs for one individual are admissible only in 
the cases of beneficiaries of Disability Pension.  
The cross-verification of the data for double pension with the help of Aadhaar 
number revealed that 3,990 individuals are receiving ineligible second pension, 
out of which 13 are cases where the same individuals got approved as 
beneficiaries of Widow Pe nsion and Unmarried Women Pension at the same 
time, as pointed out in detail in Paragraph 2.5.2. However, there were also 
beneficiaries whose Aadhaar numbers were not recorded in the database. Hence, 
Audit did a cross-verification using ‘Nam e’ and ‘Address’ fields to check for 
‘Disbursement of same pe nsion more than once to  a beneficiary’, which 
disclosed irregular payment of SSPs to  823 beneficiaries, as detailed in 
Paragraph 2.11.2. 
The existence of ineligible double pension indicates that the Software is not able 
to perform basic validation to identify duplication in Aadhaar number or similar 
data such as Electoral Card number. 
The Government replied that from 6 February 2017 onwards, only one pension 
is permissible. The Sevana Pension soft ware has been modified in such a way 
that entry of a second pension will lead to suspension of SSP.   
The reply is not acceptabl e as Audit noticed instan ces of irregular double 
pensions even after 6 February 2017, wh ich shows that the modification in the 
Software is not effective and has not  been tested rigor ously before its 
deployment. 
2.5.2 Approval and Disbursement of two pensions (IGNWP and UMWP) 
to single beneficiary 
An analysis of the list of benefici aries of IGNWP and UMWP of Sevana 
Pension software with Aadhaar numbers revealed that 13 women were 
irregularly entitled for both pensions, as detailed in Appendix IV.  
Out of the above 13, five women are ‘Active’ in both pensions and received 
both pensions as on August 2021. Among the above five women, three women 
applied for IGNWP first and later fo r UMWP. In another case date of 
application and approval of pension was one and the same. In yet another five 
cases, both the SSPs are ‘Active’ and both pensions were disbursed till July/ 
November 2019 and the second pension was seen to be withheld thereafter for 
mustering. Out of the remaining three ca ses, in two cases, one pension was 
 
15  Vide GO (MS) No.282/2016/Fin dated 15.07.2016 of GoK. 
 

 
16 
 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
active and the other one suspended, it was seen that in the third case, with 
different names with same Aadhaar Number, both the SSPs are suspended. 
The failure to provide input  controls in the Scheme Management software had 
resulted in loss to the Government and inclusion of ineligible persons as 
beneficiaries. Moreover, lack of proper monitoring by the Secretaries of LSGIs 
as stipulated in the orders issued by the Government requires urgent disciplinary 
action against the officials. 
Box No.2 
An applicant applied for SSP under I GNOAP on March 2017 in Vazhakkad 
Grama Panchayat (GP) and attached a request for cancellation of widow 
pension due to remarriage. The IGNOA P application was rejected by the 
Secretary, Vazhakkad GP due to non-attaining of the age of 60 years. Audit 
verified (October 2021) the Sevana Pens ion software, and noticed that the 
applicant is included in the active beneficiary list (Pension 
ID:109200600232) and has received widow pension from April 2015 to June 
2021. Non-cancellation of widow pension even after the intimation of the 
remarriage had resulted in unauthoris ed payment of pension amounting to 
₹0.54 lakh. 
The Government replied (May 2022) that the Director of Panchayats has been 
instructed to recover the amount and to take action against erring officials.  The 
Government has already di rected to link Sevana Ci vil Registration software 
with Sevana Pension software.  
In the case of SSP Schemes, the Government may make the submission of 
Aadhaar number mandatory and also fix responsibility for lax monitoring, and 
ensure recovery of the amount. 
2.5.3 Approval of SSPs without production of required certificates along 
with the application 
Applications for each category of SSP Schemes need to be submitted along with 
the respective certificates 16 from the authorities concerned proving their 
eligibility for SSPs. 
Out of 86,675 applications for SSPs approved in the selected LSGIs during the 
audit period, 21,512 applications were test -checked. It was seen that in 278 
cases, SSPs were sanctioned without production of mandatory certificates, viz. 
income certificate, death/ missing certifi cate from Village Officers and self-
attested non-remarriage certificate. This resulted in irregular payment of 
pension up to ₹0.68 crore to ineligible beneficiaries till April 2021. The district-
wise details are given in Appendix V.  
 
16  Income certificate for all SSPs, Non-remarr iage certificate for IGNWP and UMWP from 
Village Officers and Death Certificate for IGNWP from LSGIs. 

 
17 
 
Chapter II : Implementation and Management of DBT in SSP Schemes 
The Government replied (May 2022) that compliance/ verification of eligibility 
criteria can be strictly adhered to as and when action is taken.  
Since SSPs are largely dependent on borrowed funds, the Government may 
expedite compliance for better financial management. 
2.5.4 Beneficiaries added to a local body without submitting application 
The applications for SSP Schemes are verified by the Verifying Officer of 
LSGIs and confirmation of eligibility of the applicant is reported to the 
Secretaries of LSGIs. The Secretaries of LSGIs shall accept the application only 
after cross-examination of the report. The verified cases, together with the report 
of the Verifying Officer, are placed before the Welfare Standing Committee for 
approval, which finally sanctions pension to the beneficiaries. 
The details of initial data entry of the beneficiaries are stored in the database in 
a table named TR_WebPensionDataEntry. The table contains the User IDs of 
those who made the data entry and the approver of the beneficiary. From the 
User IDs, it is possible to identify the LSGI to which the user belongs. The first 
five digits of the User ID is the code of the local body. 
An analysis of the data available in the table revealed that in 25 cases, 
beneficiaries added by a user of one LS GI are approved by the user of another 
LSGI, i.e. beneficiaries have been added from one LSGI to another LSGI. Audit 
physically verified (September 2021) two cases, which were in Kunnathukal GP 
and Chathannoor GP and confirmed that neither  any application had been 
received at these GPs where these beneficiaries have been added nor their 
verification done. 
The need for annual verifi cation of beneficiaries fo r ensuring the continued 
fulfilment of eligibility criteria, st rengthening of disb ursement monitoring 
mechanism, linkage of Aadhaar number with beneficiary accounts, weeding out 
of ghost/ duplicate benefi ciaries, etc. were reco mmended (as detailed in 
Appendix VI) in the Report of the CAG of India on Performance Audit of SSP 
schemes (Report No.6 of the year 2016). However, the non-compliance of these 
recommendations has led to the repetition of such incidences, as pointed out in 
Paragraphs 2.5.1, 2.5.2, 2.11.2 and 2.11.3 of this Report. 
The Government replied (May 2022) that the Director of Panchayats is looking 
into the matter and that the Finance Inspection Wing will also conduct enquiry 
in this regard.  
Since the issue involves process subver sion, the Government  may issue strict 
directions in this regard to avoid future recurrence. 

 
18 
 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
2.5.5 Beneficiaries included during Welfare Standing Committee 
meetings held prior to their application date 
Applications received for SSPs are scrutinised and the list of eligible individuals 
approved by the Welfare Standing Committee. In the Sevana Pension software, 
the Welfare Standing Committee details are recorded as ‘Council’ details. After 
the approval, the Council details, the to tal number of beneficiaries considered 
by the Council and the number of bene ficiaries approved  by the Welfare 
Standing Committee, are entered in the system. Subsequently, the details of 
approved beneficiaries are entered. During data entry of beneficiaries, the year 
is selected first, and the required Counc il is selected from the list of Councils 
for that year. After selecting a Council,  beneficiary details are added to that 
Council, which is limited to the number of approved beneficiaries approved by 
the Council and already recorded.  
A scrutiny of the data available in  the tables TR_PensionWebFormEntry 
(containing details of initial data entry), TR_Pension (master file of all approved 
beneficiaries) and TR_RegistrationFW (details of Councils) revealed that in 953 
cases, beneficiary details were recorded against Councils held prior to their date 
of application and an amount of ₹6.10 crore  have been paid to these 
beneficiaries. It was found in the database that slots were left vacant in many of 
the Councils, to which erroneous addition of beneficiaries are possible.  
On examining the process of addition of  beneficiary, it was noticed that the 
chance of accidental addition to an incorrect Council is remote, meaning thereby 
that the chance of malafide in these 953 cases is very strong. 
The Government replied (May 2022) that a beneficiary is added only if he/ she 
satisfies all prescribed eligibility conditions. These conditions are scrutinised by 
the Secretary of the LSGI concerned. The LSGI Secretary and the Verifying 
Officer will be liable for any financial loss due to the sanction of pension for 
ineligible persons without following the guidelines issued by the Government.  
As the reply is not specific to the point raised by Audit, subject specific remarks 
are awaited (October 2022). 
2.5.6 Ineligible approval/ payment of SSPs noticed during Beneficiary 
Survey 
A Beneficiary Survey was conducted by a joint team of Audit and LSGI’s 
representatives. A total num ber of 772 households in the selected LSGIs were 
randomly selected for the survey whic h revealed that beneficiaries were 
ineligible in 152 cases (19.69 per cent), as detailed in Appendix VII. 
The Government replied (May 2022) that the cases would be examined.  

 
19 
 
Chapter II : Implementation and Management of DBT in SSP Schemes 
Since almost 20 per cent sample of the test-checked cases revealed ineligible 
beneficiaries, the matter may be given top priority as in eligibility on this scale 
leads to enormous outflow of funds which is completely unwarranted. 
2.6 Irregular sanction of SSPs 
2.6.1 Sanction of SSPs to Government Servants/ Service Pensioners/  
Temporary Employees  
The Government stipulates 17 that the applicant should not be a recipient of 
salary/ pension/ family pension fro m Central Government/ other State 
Governments, should not be a retiree from Central/ State Public Sector 
Undertakings and a recipient of Pension/ Family Pension, and should not be an 
Income Tax Payer. In the following cases, concealing the fact that they are 
Government Employees, Service Pensi oners or Temporary Employees, they 
were irregularly entered as  beneficiaries and several thousands of them were 
receiving SSPs. 
The Government of Kerala informed
18 the Director of Panchayats that Service 
Pensioners and Government em ployees who were receiving SSPs  have been 
removed from the beneficiary list. 
On verification of individual payment de tails available in the Sevana Pension 
Portal, it was found that pa yment to these beneficiaries had been discontinued 
from July 2019. 
Audit obtained (February 2021) the data regarding list of sanctioned SSPs to 
Government Servants/ Service Pensi oners/ Temporary Employees from the 
DBT Cell in the Directorate of Panchayats and compared it with the data of 
Sevana Pension software and noticed that a total numb er of 9,201 Service 
Pensioners and Government employees  irregularly received SSPs. The total 
amount thus disbursed as SSPs to these ineligible persons for the three-year 
period from 2017-18 to 2019-20 works out to ₹39.27 crore,  as detailed in 
Appendix VIII. 
It was noticed (April 2021) by Audit th at there were Government employees 
and Service/ Family Pensioners who were receiving SSPs from the year 2000 
itself.  If the irregular payments of SSPs from the year 2000 are also to be taken 
into account, the loss to the Government would be huge. 
In respect of the selected districts,  Audit observed irregular payments 
amounting to ₹3.70 crore in 835 cases on this account, as detailed in Appendix 
IX. 
 
17 Vide GO (MS) 483/2017/Fin dated 06 November 2017 and GO (MS) No.97/2020/Fin. dated 
23 September 2020. 
18  Vide letter No.1447197/SFC-B2/2020/Fin dated 07 October 2020.  

 
20 
 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
Lack of proper verification of the eligib ility conditions of the applications and 
identification of beneficiaries had resulted in irregular disbursement of SSPs to 
ineligible persons and consequent loss to the Government. The irregular 
payments have not yet been recove red. Moreover, concealing the facts 
regarding receipt of pensi on by Service/ Family pensioners and Government 
employees by defrauding the Government should have attracted disciplinary 
action. However, neither any action nor any enquiry has been initiated till now 
(October 2022).  
As SSPs are to be given only to thos e who have no other means for their 
livelihood, the issue highlighted here is of grave concern. 
2.6.2 Disbursement of SSPs to Government Servants/ Service Pensioners/  
Temporary Employees even after their suspension from beneficiary 
list 
On a test-check and analysis of data , it was observed that, SSPs were again 
irregularly disbursed to 400 Governme nt employees, out of the 9,201 Service 
Pensioners and Government employees  who received SSPs as mentioned in 
Paragraph 2.6.1 above, under 403 transactions even after their removal from the 
list of those receiving SSPs, as detailed in Appendix X.  In 399 cases, SSPs 
were disbursed for two months, i.e.  August and September 2019 batches
19. In 
respect of one case, viz. SSP ID No.109500400174, pension was disbursed even 
after permanently removing it in July 2019 from receiving the SSP, in four 
batches, as detailed in Appendix XI. 
In all the 400 cases, the transactions were “Successful”.  Pensions were credited 
to the Bank Accounts for 319 persons and for 81 persons it was disbursed 
through DTH mode. Absence of proper control in the Sevana Pension software 
to check such ineligible beneficiaries during generation of bills and the laxity in 
proper verification and monitoring by the DBT Cell had resulted in loss of ₹0.10 
crore to the Government. More importantl y, the absence of proper control in 
the software opens up the possibility of many more such cases occurring in 
future and escaping the Government’s notice, leading to more such expenditure 
towards ineligible beneficiaries. 
The Government replied (May 2022) that the matter will be looked into.  
The Government may rectify this on prio rity as it involves Service pensioners 
and Government employees who are already having regular sources of income 
and who should be acted against for committing such gross irregularities. 
 
19  Instead of monthly disbursement, SSPs were disbursed in three to nine batches with each 
batch comprising of two to five months of pending instalments during the audit period. 

 
21 
 
Chapter II : Implementation and Management of DBT in SSP Schemes 
2.7 Poor accounting practices and resultant deviations in the 
accounts  
The role of KSSPL (hereinafter referred to as the Company) in generation of 
funds starts at the stage when the Fi nance Department accords sanction for the 
total fund requirement to meet the disbursement of  SSPs and simultaneously 
directing the Company to transfer credit the funds at the designated Treasury/ 
Bank Accounts. The direction/ sanction from the Finance Department is on the 
basis of a communication received from the DBT Cell in the Directorate of 
Panchayats regarding fund requirement for a particular month. The Company 
already will be having some amount at its  disposal which have been received 
from GoK
20 for the disbursement of SSPs. Th e differential amount to meet the 
requirement of DBT Cell will be arrived at by the Company and that amount is 
to be raised as loans by the Company. After meeting the fund requirement, the 
Company transfer credits the required f unds to the designated Bank/ Treasury 
Accounts. 
Audit noticed serious procedural/ control lapses, with respect to accounting, on 
the part of the Company/ DBT Cell, such as non-maintenance of accounts, non-
reconciliation of accounts, excess availing of loans, its irregular repayment, etc., 
as detailed below: 
2.7.1 Non-maintenance of books of accounts 
As per Section 128 (1) of the Companies Act 2013, every Company shall 
prepare and keep at its registered o ffice books of account and other relevant 
books and papers and financial statement for every financial year which give a 
true and fair view of the state of the affairs of the Company. Section 2 (13) (i) 
of the Act states that books of account include records maintained in respect of 
all sums of money received and expended by a Company and matters in relation 
to which the receipts and expenditure take place. 
• Kerala Social Security Pension Limited 
The Company maintains accounts with the State Bank of India (SBI), Special 
Treasury Savings Bank, State Co-operative Bank and Union Bank and 
numerous cash transactions take place every day. Except for Bank Pass Books, 
the Company is not maintaining any ledgers/ registers in the prescribed format. 
As the Company is not maintaining se parate cash books or any subsidiary 
accounts, the details of funds received from the Government of India/ State, 
funds raised from public/ PSUs and other institutions, funds transfer credited to 
Banks for beneficiaries, and funds if any repaid on account of loans, etc. are not 
available on records. As such, Audit is not in a position to ascertain the true and 
fair picture of the transactions of the Company. Non-maintenance of Cash 
 
20   Government of India funds are transferred di rectly to the DBT Cell in the Directorate of 
Panchayats. 

 
22 
 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
Books and non-entry of monetary transacti ons in it or in any other subsidiary 
registers is indicative of weak contro l mechanism over financial reporting and 
may lead to financial irregularities and cases of misappropriation. 
Further, the Company produced an a udited accounts for th e year 2018-19 to 
Audit in December 2021, which had been finalised only in October 2021, after 
a delay of more than two years. The audited accounts for the years 2019-20 and 
2020-21 are yet to be finalised (October 2022).  
The Statutory Auditor
21 had given Qualified Opini ons in the audited accounts 
for the year 2018-19, and comm ented that due to absence of documents, they 
were unable to verify and comment on the correctness of the transactions, check 
the pension disbursed and amount held back by PACS, and check and verify the 
end use of the pension payments. The opinion also states that due to non-
provision of supporting documents for Gove rnment grant receivable out of the 
total grant receivable, they were una ble to comment on its correctness. The 
audited accounts also state that even though the Company has received `1,000 
crore from M/s Kerala Stat e Beverages Corporation during the year 2018-19, 
due to the absence of any information or explanation, the transactions could not 
be verified to express an opinion thereon. 
• DBT Cell in the Directorate of Panchayats 
The DBT Cell maintains account s with SBI for disbursement of pensions and 
for receiving the refund of the undis bursed pensions. The DBT Cell did not 
maintain cash book relating to the transactions during the period covered under 
audit. Due to non-maintenance of cash book and subsidiary accounts in proper 
form, Audit could not ascertain and verify the bank balance.  Non-maintenance 
and non-entry of monetary transactions in the cash book is indicative of weak 
control mechanism over financial reporting. 
The Government replied (May 2022) that several meetings were held with the 
Company, Director of Panchayats, Registrar of Co-operative Societies, etc. for 
formulating an efficient reconciliation process for the fund allotted to the 
Company towards disbursement of SSPs . The Government had directed the 
Administrative Department to instruct the Company to provide details required 
by the Audit. Regarding the qualified opi nion of the Auditor, the Government 
replied that the Administrative Department  has been directed to instruct the 
Company to take necessary corrective action in the matter.  In the case of DBT 
Cell in the Directorate of Panchayats, Government replied that instructions had 
been given to the Director of Panchayats to keep cash book and subsidiary 
books. 
Since substantial funds, specifically borrowed funds, are involved in the SSPs, 
non-maintenance of even the mi nimum books of accounts and non-
reconciliation of accounts point out to serious dereliction of duties by officials 
 
21  RRM & Associates LLP, Chartered Accountants, Thiruvananthapuram. 

 
23 
 
Chapter II : Implementation and Management of DBT in SSP Schemes 
concerned and potential for financial misuse, misappropriation and fraud.  
Hence, the Government may compulsorily ensure the upkeep of accounts and 
its reconciliation to avoid possible misuse and misappropriation of funds. 
2.7.2 Allocation and usage of Funds for SSPs 
As per the details furnished by the DBT Cell and the Company, the funds 
received from the Government of India/  Government of Kerala/ Director of 
Panchayats, loans raised by the Company to fulfil the requirements of SSPs, 
and the funds transfer credited to the Director of Panchayats during the period 
from 2017-18 to 2020-21 are as detailed in Appendix XII.  
Audit noticed that during the ye ars 2018-19 and 2020-21, the Company was 
having sufficient funds amounting to ₹5,579.28 crore and ₹11,924.14 crore in 
their accounts against the requirements of ₹4,654.96 crore  and ₹10,226.56 
crore respectively. In spite of having adequate funds, the Company still 
needlessly raised excess loans amounting to ₹6,818.82 crore  and ₹8,604.19 
crore respectively for those years. In re spect of the year 2019-20, while the 
requirement for the year was greate r than the amount in the account by 
₹2,794.52 crore, the Company went ahead with borrowing ₹6,843.65 crore. In 
short therefore, loans amounting to ₹4,049.13
 crore were raised by the 
Company in excess of the final disbur sement for 2019-20. Audit had enquired 
about the reason for availing ex cess loan to the tune of ₹19,472.14 crore for 
these three years but no reply has been received till date (October 2022). 
The Company had paid interest amounting to ₹1,596.34 crore during the period 
from 2018-19 to 2020-21 from the loan amount  raised for the disbursement of 
SSPs, which was in violatio n of the Government orde rs and the Memorandum 
of Association, which stipul ates that the liability of  the loan availed by the 
Company for the disbursement of SSPs shall rest with the Government. An 
amount of ₹10,848.61 crore  is outstanding against loans availed by KSSPL 
from various institutions as on 31 March 2021. When this loan amount is repaid 
from the Consolidated Fund, the revenue expenditure of the State will increase 
accordingly. 
Audit noticed (November 2021) that th ere were differences in the amount 
received by DBT Cell and th at disbursed by them dur ing the years 2018-19 to 
2020-21, as detailed in Table 2.2 below. 
Table 2.2 
Details of excess amount disbursed during the period 2018-19 to 2020-21 
   (₹ in crore) 
Year Particulars 
Amount credited as 
stated by KSSPL 
Amount disbursed 
as SSPs by DBT Cell 
Difference in 
Amount disbursed 
2018-19 4,654.96 7,986.92 (-)3,331.9622 
2019-20 5,044.52 6,244.55 (-)1,200.03 
 
22   The negative figure indicates excess spending by DBT Cell. 

 
24 
 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
Year Particulars 
Amount credited as 
stated by KSSPL 
Amount disbursed 
as SSPs by DBT Cell 
Difference in 
Amount disbursed 
2020-21 10,226.56 10,173.42 53.14 
Total (-)4478.85 
      (Source: Information furnished by DBT Cell and KSSPL) 
The reasons for the difference in funds and the source through which the excess 
fund requirement was met could not be explained by the Company or the DBT 
Cell as the reconcili ation of funds was not done. This has been explained in 
detail in Paragraph 2.7.3 below. 
The Government replied (May 2022) that  the difference was due to erroneous 
taking of a part of the amount disbursed in 2018-19 to 2019-20. The reply is not 
acceptable to Audit as the difference of `4,478.85 crore between total amount 
received and disbursed for the three y ears from 2018-19 to 2020-21 could not 
be clarified by the Government.  
2.7.3 Non-reconciliation of funds for the disbursement of SSPs  
As per Rule 93(bb) (4) of the Kerala Treasury Code, in whatever manner the 
accounts are maintained, the official concerned should reconcile the accounts 
periodically at least once in a month with the accounts kept by the Treasury and 
prepare a reconciliation st atement at the end of each month and see that the 
closing balance of the month agrees with the balance in the account kept by the 
Treasury. This rule is also applicable in the case of money deposited in a Bank 
Account.  
The Company stated th at a total amount of ₹19,926.04 crore availed as loan 
was transfer credited to the Directorate of Panchayats for disbursement of SSPs 
from 2018-19 to 2020-21 whereas the Directorate of Panchayats stated that an 
amount of ₹21,314.65 crore was received from the Company for disbursement 
of SSPs for these periods as shown in Table 2.3.  
Table 2.3 
Details of amount transfer credited by KSSPL to the Director of Panchayats for 
disbursement of SSPs 
 (₹ in crore) 
Year Amount furnished by 
KSSPL  Directorate of 
Panchayats  
2018-19 4,654.96 5,269.23 
2019-20 5,044.52 5,818.86 
2020-21 10,226.56 10,226.56 
Total 19,926.04 21,314.65 
  (Source: Information furnished by DBT Cell and KSSPL) 

 
25 
 
Chapter II : Implementation and Management of DBT in SSP Schemes 
Difference in amount transferred to the tune of ₹1,388.61 crore was noticed for 
the periods 2018-19 and 2019-20 and this was not seen to be reconciled. When 
this was pointed out, the Company reiterated that the amount transferred to the 
Directorate of Panchayats was only ₹9,699.48 crore for the periods 2018-19 
and 2019-20. 
The Government replied (May 2022) that the Director of Panchayats and the 
Company have been directed  to take urgent steps to  reconcile accounts as 
pointed out by Audit.  
Since periodical reconciliation of accounts is not only an important exercise in 
financial prudence but also a safe and best practice to keep the accounts safe 
from misuse and malpractices, the Gove rnment may strictly ensure its 
compliance. 
2.7.4 Deficiencies in tracking the undisbursed amount and refund 
In all pension sanctioning orders issued by the Government, directions were also 
issued to refund the undisbursed pension amount to the Company’s account.   
Audit noticed (November 2021) that  though the amount required for 
disbursement of SSPs were transfer credited by the Company to the Director of 
Panchayats for disbursement to beneficiar ies, the refund of the undisbursed 
pension of beneficiaries were credit ed back by the PACS/ Banks concerned 
partially to the Company account and pa rtially to the Bank Account of the 
Director of Panchayats. Hence, the Company was not aware of the actual 
volume of undisbursed amount. 
On this being pointed out,  the Company replied that it had received a number 
of amounts in its account throughout the month as undisbursed pension most of 
which were remitted by the PACS and some by Banks, GPs and even 
individuals. The Company stated that it was not able to identify the remitter or 
account from which the amounts were remitted.  Besides, the data regarding the 
actual undisbursed pension with the Ba nks and with the PACS, who are the 
distributors of SSPs, is not with the Co mpany and hence it was not possible to 
make reconciliation of the account. 
Though the Department/ the Compa ny is handling huge amount for 
disbursement of SSPs every month, no syst em exists to monitor the utilisation 
of the amount transferred, the amount  disbursed as pension, the amount 
undisbursed and the amount credited bac k. Moreover, the Government is also 
not exercising any control over the Co mpany or the DBT Cell, even though 
substantial amount of Government fund is involved in the SSPs. This may lead 
to the potential risk of misappropriation and fraud without getting noticed. 
The Government replied (May 2022) that several meetings were held with the 
Company, Director of Panchayats (DBT Cell), Registrar of Co-operative 

 
26 
 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
Societies, etc. for formulating an effi cient reconciliation process for their fund 
allotted to the Company towards disbursement of SSPs.  
The weakness in systems and procedures is a serious threat to fund management 
and needs to be rectified immediately in view of the high risks outlined above. 
2.8 Non-adherence to the timely disbursement of SSPs 
The NSAP guidelines envisage mont hly disbursement of SSPs to the 
beneficiaries.  To ensure the monthly disbursement of SSPs, the central share 
for disbursement of three NSAP Schemes, i.e. IGNOAP, IGNWP and IGNDP, 
are released twice in a y ear. The SSPs are given to t hose who have no regular 
means of subsistence.  To ensure their daily sustenance, SSPs are to be disbursed 
monthly. 
On an analysis of the disbursement of  SSPs during the audit period from April 
2017 to March 2021, it was noticed that SSPs were not being disbursed monthly. 
Instead, SSPs were disbursed in three to nine batches with each batch 
comprising of two to five months of pending instalments during the above audit 
period. Non-disbursement of SSPs as mont hly payments leads to hardship for 
the beneficiaries who have no other means of livelihood. The frequency of 
disbursement is as shown in Table 2.4. 
Table 2.4 
Frequency in disbursement of SSPs 
Year Frequency of 
disbursement in batches 
2017-18 4 
2018-19 3 
2019-20 4 
2020-21 9 
(Source: Data from Sevana Pension site) 
This irregularity in timely payment of  pension had been poi nted out by Audit 
(April 2022) for which no reply has been received (October 2022). 
The above aspect had already been repor ted as Paragraph 4.2 of the Report of 
the CAG of India on Performance Aud it of SSP Schemes (Report No.6 of the 
year 2016) for the GoK. However, the issue is still persisting. 
2.9 Denial of pension to eligible beneficiaries due to erroneous bill 
processing 
Beneficiaries of IGNWP and UMWP are required to submit ‘Non-Remarriage 
Certificate’ every year. Beneficiaries above 60 years are exempted from 
submitting non-remarriage certificate. 

 
27 
 
Chapter II : Implementation and Management of DBT in SSP Schemes 
The Finance Department had directed that the beneficiaries of IGNWP and 
UMWP should be authorised pension for July and August 2021 regardless of 
their submission of ‘Non-remarriage Certificate’, i.e. no one should be excluded 
due to non-submission of the said certificate. 
A scrutiny of the conditions applied in the Stored Procedure (SP)23 revealed that 
IGNWP and UMWP were restricted to  those who have submitted the Non-
remarriage Certificate, as detailed in Appendix XIII. On analysis of data, it was 
found that 26,950 beneficiaries were excluded from the pension payment for the 
months of July and August 2021.  
The omission occurred due to the neglig ence on the part of IKM in modifying 
the procedures run at the back-end for bill processing as per the new 
Government order and lack of contro l of DBT Cell on IKM. Similar omission 
by IKM resulted in erroneous payment to  beneficiaries who are suspended by 
the LSGIs leading to loss of `4.08 crore, as mentioned in Paragraph 2.13 of this 
Report. 
Changes in the software modules n eed to be done with proper Change 
Management system, including documentati on, testing, acceptance, etc. This 
applies to changes made in the SPs also which are executed separately for data 
processing related to the software. Lack of proper Change Management 
procedure is the main reason for occurrences of such errors in processing which 
lead to denial of benefit to the beneficiaries or huge loss to Government.  
The controlling Department is not able to  verify the correctness of activities 
performed by IKM. Automated bill ge neration, with option for DBT Cell to 
select the categories of beneficiaries to be included or excluded for authorisation 
of pension, would have eliminated the scope of such omissions. 
The Government replied (May 2022) that IKM has been directed to rectify the 
defects pointed out by Audit.  
The Government may direct IKM, the developer, for an automated bill 
generation process with option for the DBT Cell to select the categories of 
beneficiaries to be included or excluded for authorisation of pension and to stay 
themselves away from its administration.  
2.10 Payment by ‘Direct to Home’ mode does not qualify as Direct 
Benefit Transfer  
DBT, as elaborated in Rule 87 of  General Financial Rules (GFR), 2017 
stipulates that transfer of benefits should be done directly to beneficiaries under 
various Government Schemes and Progr ammes using ICT. Necessary process 
reengineering to minimise intermediary levels and to reduce delay in payments 
 
23  An independent software module which contain instructions which would be executed when 
it is run on the back-end database. 

 
28 
 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
to intended beneficiaries with the objective of minimi sing pilferage and 
duplication should be done for all Government Schemes and Programmes. 
During the audit period 2017-18 to 2020-21, a total amount of ₹29,622.67 crore 
was disbursed for the five SSPs.  Out of this, ₹15,312.33 crore (51.69 per cent) 
was transferred direct to the Bank Accounts of the beneficiaries and ₹14,310.34 
crore (48.31 per cent ) was paid in cash Direct to Home of the beneficiaries 
through PACS agents. The payment in cash through the PACS does not qualify 
as DBT, as it is not done directly to beneficiaries and does not minimise 
intermediary levels. Further, in re spect of DTH disbursements, only the 
signature/ thumb impression of the beneficiaries are obtained as 
acknowledgement by the agent which is kept in the PACS concerned.  
Absence of an automated beneficiary-wi se acknowledgement had resulted in 
possibility of fraud in disbursement th rough DTH mode as illustrated in Box 
No.3 below Paragraph 2.11.3 of the Report. 
This was pointed out to the Government in June 2022 for which a reply has not 
been received yet. 
2.11 Irregular disbursement of SSPs 
2.11.1 Irregular payment of Widow Pension  
As per Government Circular 24, legally divorced women and women deserted 
from husband are not eligible for IGNWP.  
Audit verified (March 2021 to Dece mber 2021) a total of 14,924 sanctioned 
applications of IGNWP in selected  LSGIs and noticed that IGNWP was 
irregularly sanctioned to 165 applicants who were legally divorced and to 420 
applicants who were deserted by their husbands. Irregular payment of pension 
to legally divorced persons and persons deserted by husbands resulted in loss of 
₹0.52 crore and ₹1.28 crore respectively. The district-wise details are given in 
Appendix XIV.  
The Government replied (May 2022) that necessary directions have been issued 
to suspend/ weed out ineligible persons  from Sevana Pension software and to 
recover the amount already disbursed.  
Since substantial amount is involved in these cases, Government may expedite 
the recovery. 
2.11.2 Disbursement of same pension more than once to a beneficiary 
As per Government Order 25, under no circumstances can the same type of 
pension be allowed as a second pension. 
 
24  Circular No.97/2019/Fin dated 11 December 2019 of GoK. 
25  GO (MS) No.67/2017/Fin dated 06 February 2017 of GoK. 

 
29 
 
Chapter II : Implementation and Management of DBT in SSP Schemes 
Analysis of data revealed that the same pensions were disbursed more than once 
to 823 beneficiaries in 1,703 Pensioner IDs during the period 2017-18, 2018-19 
and 2019-20. Irregular disbursement of  pension during th e period from April 
2017 to March 2020 resulted in a loss of ₹3.83 crore to Government as detailed 
in Appendix XV.  The above loss has been cal culated excluding the one SSP 
for which the beneficiaries are eligible for. 
Failure on the part of the LSGIs to ensure adequate verification before payment, 
along with the lack of monitoring by the DBT Cell and inadequate controls in 
Sevana Pension software had resulted in the irregular payment of same pension 
to a beneficiary more than once and consequent loss to Government. 
The Government replied (May 2022) that the DBT Cell has been instructed to 
monitor properly.  
The Government may monitor the action taken by the DBT Cell to ensure that 
the issues are sorted out at the earliest. 
2.11.3 Irregular disbursement of SSP s to those who were reported 
deceased as per the Register of Deaths  
To avoid misuse of SSPs by the legal heirs of the deceased persons, the 
Government had instructed 26 all the Secretaries of LSGIs to take immediate 
action to suspend the deceased from the Sevana Pension software. In the case 
of DTH, the PACS after every disbursement should report the cases of deceased 
to the LSGIs. The Secretaries of the LS GIs, after enquiry, shall remove the 
deceased from the beneficiary list. The LSGIs across the State maintain the list 
of deaths occurred within the jurisdiction of the LSGI concerned in the Register 
of Deaths. 
On cross-verification of beneficiary list with Register of Deaths, Audit noticed 
(March 2021 to November 2021) that  out of 3,08,843 beneficiaries, 4,039 
beneficiaries were deceased and their deat hs had been registered in the same 
LSGI which had to remove the name of the beneficiary from the database.  
The SSPs were paid in 1,698 out of these 4,039 cases, resulting in irregular 
payment amounting to ₹2.63 crore.  The district-wise details are given in 
Appendix XVI. 
Box No. 3 
Out of the 4,039 cases, in six cases in Varkala Municipality, pension was paid 
as DTH even after the date of death of the beneficiary. This had resulted in 
irregular payment of SSPs amounting to ₹0.01 crore. 
After being pointed out by Audit, th e Secretary submitted the collection 
particulars in respect of the beneficiaries as detailed in Appendix XVII. 
 
26  Vide Circular No.69/2018/Fin dated 26 July 2018 of GoK. 

 
30 
 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
On receipt of reply to the Audit observation, Audit visited the Varkala Service 
Co-operative Bank and scrutinised  the acknowledgements of the SSP 
beneficiaries. In respect of these bene ficiaries, different types of signatures 
and thumb impression were recorded against the acknowledgment column of 
the same person.  It was also noticed th at most of the amount were remitted 
by the same person. Under these circumstances, Audit suspects the possibility 
of fraud in respect of these transactions.  
The Varkala Municipality then followed the same method of Audit and found 
out that SSPs amounting to ₹0.03 crore were paid to 38 beneficiaries (with 
the help of Aadhaar number attached with the death details) as DTH after 
death. In these cases too, recovery is in progress and the Secretary has assured 
to give the detailed list of the collection particulars in this regard. 
Almost 50 per cent of the beneficiaries are paid through DTH mode by PACS 
for which the only assurance is the ac knowledgement through a signature or 
a thumb impression in the form given by the agent. This is incongruous with 
the DBT, which requires Aadhaar enabled verification. 
The need for a system to provide mobi le alerts to beneficiaries about the 
payments credited to their accounts wa s recommended to Government (as 
detailed in Appendix VI) in the Report of CAG of India on Performance Audit 
of SSP Schemes (Report No.6 of 2016 of GoK). The effective implementation 
of such a system in the case of DTH would have helped the Government in 
detecting such malpractices. 
The Government replied (May 2022) that IKM has been instructed several times 
to link Sevana Pension software with Sevana Civil Registration portal and to 
weed out the beneficiaries on their deaths .  As the details of Aadhaar have not 
been seeded in the Sevana Civil Registration portal, there is difficulty in 
obtaining complete information of d eath cases.  Regarding fraudulent 
transactions in the Varkala Municipali ty, the Government replied that the 
Secretary of the Varkala Municipality has been instructed to take steps to 
recover the amount of pension disbursed af ter the death of beneficiaries.  The 
Director of Panchayats has been instructed to conduct internal audit.  
While the Government may bring in the n ecessary internal controls to ensure 
such instances do not take place, ac tion may also be taken to recover the 
payments and fix responsibility on the officials concerned as this is a case of 
potential misappropriation. 
2.12 Irregular transfer of funds in respect of cases reported as 
deceased  
The Government instructed 27  that the PACS after every disbursement should 
 
27  Vide Circular No.69/2018/Fin. dated 26 July 2018 of Finance (SFC-B) Department, GoK. 

 
31 
 
Chapter II : Implementation and Management of DBT in SSP Schemes 
report the cases of deceased beneficiaries to the local bodies. The Secretaries of 
the local bodies after enquiry should re move the deceased beneficiaries from 
the beneficiary list.  
On an analysis of SSP disbursement data  table of Sevana Pension software for 
the period from 2017-18 to 2020-21, it was noticed that funds were transferred 
to PACS in 6,79,585 transactions to 96,285 beneficiaries, though these 
beneficiaries were reported as deceased by PACS two to 20 months earlier, as 
detailed in Appendix - XVIII.   A cross-verification of these details with the 
DBT disbursement details available in the online site of LSGD revealed that due 
to non-removal of deceased beneficiaries from the list by the Secretaries of 
LSGIs as instructed by the Government, the DBT Cell unnecessarily transferred 
funds to PACS for disbursement to those beneficiaries who were already 
reported as “Deceased” by PACS. The total amount transferred on this account 
up to April 2021 works out to ₹118.16 crore. Due to the transfer of funds to 
PACS in the name of beneficiaries who were decease d, the Government 
incurred a loss of ₹0.87 crore  towards payment of interest. The irregular 
transfer of the funds in respect of cases reported as deceased is of grave concern 
as it could lead to potential fraud and misappropriation.  
In respect of the selected districts, Audit noticed (March 2021 to November 
2021) the transfer of funds amounting to ₹5.93 crore to PACS for disbursing 
SSP in respect of the 4,701 cases who were already reported as deceased. This 
resulted in loss of ₹0.04 crore to the Government towards payment of interest. 
The district-wise details are as shown in Appendix - XIX. It was observed by 
Audit that neither any verification wa s done by the Secretaries of LSGIs to 
check the facts reported by PACS nor any action taken to suspend the undue 
payments, both of which necessitate strict disciplinary action against the erring 
officials.   
This was pointed out to the Government  in December 2021 for which a reply 
has not been received yet. Specific re plies/ action-taken had been requested 
(February 2022 and March 2022) for which a response has not been received 
yet (October 2022).  
The Government may take action to  plug such leakages and also fix 
responsibility on the erring officials. 
2.13 Disbursement of SSPs to in eligible persons who were 
suspended from the beneficiary list  
The batch wise DBT status report, such as initiated records, transferred records, 
success records and failed records pertaini ng to all the five SSPs are available 
for the public in LSGD website Sevana Pension Social Security System 
(https://welfarepension.lsgkerala.gov.in/DBTStatusRpt.aspx) under the tab 
“DBT – Appropriation Information”. Indi vidual disbursement details are also 
available in the same Sevana Pension website. 

 
32 
 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
On verification of the TR_Expenditure Table 28 of Sevana Pension software 
made available to Audit, it was noticed that five batch-wise DBT Reference 
numbers were captured in the Table against the year 2018 and transactions 
amounting to ₹4.08 crore , disbursed vide these DBT Reference numbers in 
10,406 transactions, were recorded as  “Successful”, as detailed in Appendix 
XX.  However, the details relating to thes e transactions were not available in 
the ‘DBT – Appropriation Information’ in the Sevana Pens ion website. The 
disbursements relating to these batches were also not found in the individual 
disbursement details available through the “Search” option on the website. 
On a cross-verification of the TR_PensionerBillDBTFinal Table, it was noticed 
that these DBT Reference numbers pertain to disbursements for the period from 
December 2018 to April 2019. 
The matter was verified (September 2021) in the files available in DBT Cell and 
it was observed that in a Note dated 26 April 2019, it was stated that the DBT 
Cell had noticed erroneous disbursement of pensions to some ineligible persons, 
such as suspended persons. This fact was confirmed by IKM too. The matter 
was referred to a higher level from the DBT Cell and the Government
29 ordered 
the Director of Panchayats to stop the payments and to recover the amount 
already paid.  However, the amount thus  paid has not been recovered so far 
(October 2022). 
The district-wise details furnished by  the DBT Cell regarding the number of 
beneficiaries and the amount disbursed in  respect of five SSPs during the year 
2018-19 were 44,43,185 and ₹7,986.93 crore respectively. On an analysis, it 
was noticed that the disclosed amount of ₹7,986.93 crore was arrived at by 
deducting ₹4.08 crore from the original transaction amount of ₹7,991.01 crore 
that was captured in the TR_Expenditure Table. The irregular payment was thus 
concealed from the details furnished to Audit and also from the reports that are 
available on the website for the public. 
An application software is deployed in order to provide efficient and transparent 
mechanism in the management of such  SSPs executed through them.  In the 
instant case, the disbursements were made to ineligible persons who are 
suspended from receiving SSPs. Thus, it is evident that absence of proper 
controls in the Sevana Pension software to check such ineligible beneficiaries 
during initiation of bills and also due to the lack of proper verification and 
monitoring by the DBT Cell, had resulted in a loss of ₹4.08 crore to the 
Government. 
The Government replied (May 2022) that in structions have been issued to the 
DBT Cell and the IKM to recover the am ount. The Government also stated 
 
28 Local body-wise and DBT reference-wise details of successful and failed amount of SSP 
beneficiaries of Sevana Pension software. 
29 Vide letter no. 1170386/SFC B2/18/Fin dated 30 April 2019. 

 
33 
 
Chapter II : Implementation and Management of DBT in SSP Schemes 
about examining the matter of giving  DBT Cell proper control over Sevana 
Pension software.  
Since the delay in rectification process may lead to recurrence of the issue, this 
may be rectified at the earliest. 
2.14 Ineligible disbursement of In dira Gandhi National Old Age 
Pension at enhanced rate 
Beneficiaries of IGNOAP on attaining th e age of 75 years are eligible for 
enhanced rate  of pension at the rate of `1,500 per month with effect from April 
201630. 
An analysis of the data in relation to  the Date of Birth and Pension Payment 
details in the Sevana Pension software revealed that 1,60,950 beneficiaries were 
ineligibly disbursed pension in 2,15,497 instances at the enhanced rate of ₹1,500 
per month. The excess payment was done fo r these beneficiaries for one to 27 
months before attaining the age of 75 years, resulting in a loss of ₹10.11 crore 
to the Government as detailed in Appendix - XXI. 
Failure in providing proper controls in  the Sevana Pension software and non-
verification of elig ibility criteria regarding pa yment of IGNOAP at enhanced 
rate before generation and sanction of the bill for payment of pension by IKM/ 
DBT Cell had resulted in this excess disbursement of SSP and consequent loss 
to Government.  
The Government replied (May 2022) that  they will examine the case and take 
remedial action. This may be done without any further delay. 
2.15 Irregular transfer of amount to PACS due to non-suspension/  
non-removal of remarried beneficiaries of IGNWP and 
UMWP from the SSP beneficiary list 
LSGI Secretaries were instructed 31 to collect the information of death/ 
remarriage of beneficiaries through Anganwadi/ ASHA Workers32 and exclude 
them from the database in the respective month. 
Analysis of IGNWP and UMWP bene ficiary data disclosed that 399 
beneficiaries who were below 60 years of age out of 6,57,577 DTH beneficiaries 
were reported by PACS 15 to 24 months ago as being remarried but continued 
 
30  Vide GO (MS) No.24/2016/Ord dated 01 March 2016 of GoK.  
31    Vide Circular No.69/2018/Fin. dated 26 July 2018 of Finance (SFC-B) Department, GoK. 
32   Anganwadi Worker means a women employed to provide additional and supplementary 
health care and nutritional services to childre n and pregnant women under the Integrated 
Child Development Services Scheme. Accredited Social Health Activist (ASHA) Worker is 
a trained female community health activist, selected from the community itself under the 
National Health Mission. ASHA worker will work as an interface between the community 
and the Public Health System. 

 
34 
 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
to be in the beneficiary list as their names were not removed after verification 
by the LSGIs concerned. Out of the 399, for 368 beneficiaries, no fund was 
transferred to PACS for disbursement of their pension as detailed in Appendix 
XXII. For the remaining 31 cases as detailed in Appendix XXIII, the DBT Cell 
continued to transfer funds to PACS totalling ₹0.08 crore till June 2021, for 
disbursement of pension. However, PACS, being aware of the status, refunded 
the amount. 
The inaction by LSGD in verifying the status of the women resulted in irregular 
transfer of funds to PACS for inelig ible beneficiaries. All such women 
continued to be on the active beneficiar ies list though their names should have 
been removed immediately upon information that the status had changed. 
The Government replied (May 2022) that  PACS and LSGIs have already been 
issued guidelines for strict complian ce and currently PACS are reporting the 
death/ remarriage cases without delay through Se vana Pension software. 
Further, regarding remarried cases, the Director of Panchayats and the Director 
of Urban Affairs have also been instructed to look into the matter. 
The reply shows that compliance by the Secretaries of LSGIs to the Government 
Circular33 was not strictly done. Detailed inst ructions were given in the said 
order to gather monthly details of deceased/ remarried beneficiaries through 
Anganwadi/ ASHA Workers and remove them from the database. Since the 
Secretaries of LSGIs were  not adhering to the above  Circular, it led to the 
unnecessary transfer of large amounts to PACS. The inaction on the part of the 
Secretaries of the LSGIs calls for strict administrative action.   
2.16 Non-deployment of Performance Audit Supervisors in LSGIs 
The Director of Panchayats vide instructions 34 regarding deployment of 
Performance Audit Supervisors, pr oposes that the Performance Audit 
Supervisors in LSGIs ensure every mont h that the instruct ions given therein 
were being complied with by the LS GIs concerned and the non-compliances 
were reported without any delay. 
Audit noticed (November 2021) that in any of the selected LSGIs, the envisaged 
Performance Audit Supervisors were not seen deployed to monitor the 
compliance of Government instructions and to report its non-compliance. 
The Government replied (May 2022) that the Director of Panchayats has been 
instructed to look into the matter. In the absence of these Supervisors, it would 
be difficult to monitor the scheme. Th erefore, the Government may do the 
needful at the earliest. 
 
33  Vide Circular No.69/2018/Fin. dated 26 July 2018. 
34 Circular dated 28 September 2019 of the Director of Panchayats regarding deployment of 
Performance Audit Supervisors in LSGIs. 

 
35 
 
Chapter II : Implementation and Management of DBT in SSP Schemes 
2.17 Conclusion 
Audit found that the effectiveness of DBT in SSPs were plagued with various 
inefficiencies and other lacunae, whic h were impacting its success. Moreover, 
only around 51 per cent beneficiaries could be tec hnically held as availing of 
DBT, while the remaining 49 per cent were receiving their pensions in a 
roundabout way which would not qualify as “Direct” Benefit Transfer. Some of 
the important issues noticed in this regard are highlighted as hereunder: 
• There is no coordination betw een the State DBT Cell and the 
Departments operating various schemes in the State. The State DBT Cell 
has not constituted the Advisory Board and the State DBT Coordinator 
and Implementation Support layer as directed in the guidelines. The 
details of State DBT schemes were not readily available with the State 
DBT Cell as the same were not centrally monitored by them; 
• Non-adherence of the application pro cess timeline led to delays in the 
approval and consequent payment of SSPs, causing hardship to the 
applicants; 
• Absence of a system for identifying applications once rejected resulted 
in inclusion of ineligible applicants  subsequently as beneficiaries, by 
accepting fresh applications from them; 
• Lack of control in the LSGIs for verifying the financial condition/ status 
of the beneficiaries led to approval and continuous disbursement of SSP 
to ineligible beneficiaries; 
• The LSGIs lack proper mechanism to cross-verify the new applications 
with active beneficiary list to identify the persons who are applying for 
a second time; 
• Improper verification of applications for SSPs by the Verifying Officers 
and the Secretaries of LSGIs led to irregular sanction of SSPs to 
Government Employees/ Service Pensioners and Temporary Employees 
and consequent loss of money to the Government; 
• Failure to adhere to the provisions/  instructions regarding maintenance 
of even basic accounts, and non-reconciliation of accounts by KSSPL 
and DBT Cell in the Directorate of Panchayats not only results in lack 
of transparency in booking of receipts and expenditure in the accounts, 
but also defeats the very objective of budgetary process. These may also 
lead to fraud and misappropriation, thereby putting additional burden on 
the exchequer which is already starved of funds; 
• The KSSPL raised loans in excess of the requirement and paid interest 
from the loan amount so raised. Reas ons for the same have not been 
shared with Audit; 
• Neither KSSPL nor the Directorate of Panchayats have done the 
reconciliation of funds for the disbursement of SSP; 

 
36 
 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
• There is no effective mechanism for ensuring the receipt of the SSP by 
the intended recipient; 
• To the extent that SSP payments are made through the PACS (referred 
to as “Direct to Home”), such pa yments can be considered only as 
Benefit Transfers, and not as DBT in the opinion of Audit. DBT, as 
elaborated in Rule 87 of GFR, 2017 indicates that “Transfer of benefits 
should be done directly to benefi ciaries under various Government 
schemes and Programmes using ICT. Necessary process reengineering 
to minimise intermediary levels and to reduce delay in payments to 
intended beneficiaries with the obj ective of minimising pilferage and 
duplication should be done for all Government Schemes and 
Programmes.” Therefore, payment in cash through the PACS does not 
amount to Direct Benefit Transfer , as it is not done directly to 
beneficiaries and does not minimise intermediary levels; 
• Non-integration of Sevana Pension software with Register of Death and 
failure of the LSGI authorities in cross-verification of payment details 
with the Register of Deaths in the same LSGI had led to irregular 
payment of SSPs in the name of the deceased leading to suspected 
embezzlement of money and consequent loss to the Government; 
• Non-verification of deceased cases  reported by PACS to the LSGIs 
resulted in repeated unnecessary tran sfer of SSPs to PACS leading to 
blockage of funds and consequent  loss to the Government towards 
payment of interest. 
2.18 Recommendations 
In view of the Audit findings above, the Government may consider: 
• Directing the State DBT Cell to c onstitute an Advisory Board, State 
DBT Coordinator and Implementati on Support layer. Efforts may be 
made for coordination among vari ous Departments operating DBT 
Schemes by implementing specific ICT applications and real-time 
communication, and also through m onitoring and the periodical 
updating of data in the State DBT portal; 
• Fixing responsibility for the proc ess of dereliction of duties and 
responsibilities by the officials concerned in the approval of SSPs; 
• Ensuring that applications opting for payment of SSPs through DTH 
mode is strictly limited to most deserving beneficiaries who are unable 
to avail the banking facilities on their own, after conducting detailed 
verification and ascertaining the ge nuineness of the condition of the 
applicant; 
 

 
37 
 
Chapter II : Implementation and Management of DBT in SSP Schemes 
• Fixing responsibility on the officials concerned who erred in sanctioning 
SSP at enhanced rate before the beneficiary attained the age of 75 years; 
• Taking necessary action to include the details of all applications 
received for SSPs, irrespective of th eir approval or rejection, in the 
database to avoid future approval to ineligible applicants; 
• Preparing a detailed proforma for providing the outcome on the 
verification of applications against the eligibility criteria, financial 
conditions/ physical circumstances; 
• Ensuring that the LSGIs cross-verify all new applications with the active 
beneficiary list to avoid duplication of payment; 
• Ensuring that the validation of data is done 100 per cent in order to weed 
out duplicate/ ineligible beneficiaries and to avoid errors; 
• Issuing strict directions to fix respon sibilities in the cases of irregular 
sanction of SSPs to Government employees/ Service pensioners and take 
strict and necessary action to rectify the deficiencies pointed out; 
• Ensuring strict compliance for the maintenance of books of accounts, 
other relevant books and papers, and the financial stat ement for every 
financial year which give a true and fa ir view of the state of affairs of 
the Company, as required under Section 128(1) of the Companies Act 
2013; 
• Initiating immediate steps to set ri ght the financial statements and 
transactions of KSSPL;  
• Accepting the responsibility for the repayment liabilities of KSSPL and 
may exercise essential financial control over KSSPL; 
• Issuing strict directions to KSSPL and Directorate of Panchayats to do 
the reconciliation of funds for the disbursement of SSPs and to monitor 
them; 
• Linking the Sevana Pension software with the available database in the 
LSGIs for effective and essential correlation of facts relating to the 
beneficiaries and to plug irregular and ineligible disbursements. The 
database should also be cleaned re gularly to weed out inconsistent 
entries; 
• Fixing responsibilities on the LSGI authorities for the irregular transfer 
of funds to PACS due to non-verification of deceased cases reported by 
PACS; 

 
38 
 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
• That disbursement of pension and its acknowledgement be done using 
automated or technology-enabled sy stem like Aadhaar, rather than 
physical methods, like signature or thumb impression on receipts. 
 

 
Chapter – III 
 
 
 Effectiveness of 
Sevana Pension 
software 

 
39 
 
CHAPTER - III 
Effectiveness of Sevana Pension software 
3 Effectiveness of Sevana Pension software 
Through a close examination of the Sevana Pension software, Audit wanted to 
evaluate whether the Software has b een effective in bringing accuracy, 
transparency and effectiveness in th e execution of the SSP Schemes under the 
Direct Benefit Transfer programme. 
The Sevana Pension software was developed for the automation of 
disbursement of SSPs. It was developed by IKM and was intended to streamline 
the disbursement of SSPs with a transp arent mechanism. The software and the 
database were hosted in the server at State Data Centre (SDC) and was made 
available to all stakeholders, viz. the DBT Cell in the Directorate of Panchayats, 
the LSGIs across the State and the PACS  distributing pension in DTH mode. 
The whole responsibility of execution of  Sevana Pension software for the 
management of SSPs lies with DBT Cell in the Directorate of Panchayats. 
Registration and management  of beneficiaries in the software are done by the 
LSGIs. Fund estimation, bill processing and amount disbursement are the 
responsibility of the DBT Cell. The Fina nce Department of GoK sanctions the 
amount for periodical disbursement and provides necessary directions regarding 
selection of beneficiaries and payment of SSPs which are to be incorporated in 
the software.  
Audit verified the user interface of the software at the DBT Cell, selected LSGIs 
and corresponding PACS. Audit also ve rified the records relating to the 
software development and management of  SSPs, as available at the DBT Cell 
and the Finance Department. The processes performed by IKM on behalf of the 
DBT Cell were also checked and physically verified.  
On verification of the database, user interface, records and processes, Audit 
noticed discrepancies in the Software, right from its design and documentation 
stages. Lack of proper planning and study of the system is evident and glaring 
in the form of the defici encies in the Software. I nput control deficiencies 
resulted in erroneous and inconsistent data which makes it impossible to ensure 
accuracy in pension calculation.  
The critical data relating to nearly fift y lakh beneficiaries are placed at risk by 
hosting the Software with identified vulnerabilities. The processing errors in the 
Software forced the Department to seek the assistance of the Developer for 
disbursement of SSPs. With no option to monitor and control the user activities, 
the User Department became a spectat or on each occurrence of erroneous 
transaction and irregular disbursement.  
The deficiencies noticed by Audit are di scussed in detail in the following 
paragraphs. 

 
40 
 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
3.1 Lack of preparedness in automation of DBT 
Automation of a system involves syst em study and design, development and 
testing of software, installation of the so ftware and ensuring its availability to 
all stakeholders. The responsibility of automation of the system should be 
entrusted to an entity by a competent authority, ideally by executing an 
agreement or by passing an order, enumerating the roles and responsibilities of 
all stakeholders. 
The Finance Department or the DBT Cell could not furnish any such document 
relating to initiation of the automation of execution of SSP Schemes.  
3.2 Documentation Deficiencies 
Development of a software requires a systematic planning which includes study 
of existing system and user requirements, which are to be properly documented. 
User Requirement Specification (URS) is an important docume nt required in 
the planning stage of software devel opment. The URS describes the business 
needs and what the users at all levels require from the system. A deficient URS 
may ultimately lead to the development of a deficient system. An approved URS 
ensures that the requirement of the entity  has clearly been stated and the same 
has been passed on to the developer.  
The System Requirement Specification or Software Requirement Specification 
(SRS) is prepared by the developer after understanding all the user requirements 
specified in the URS. This would enable  both the client an d the developer to 
ensure that the software being developed is able to meet all the requirements of 
the client. The client n eeds to accept the SRS after ensuring that all the 
requirements are clearly mapped in the system. These documents are important 
at the stage of testing the software.  
Similar system study and documentation is required  while modifications are 
made in the system. Organisations should follow a defined Change Management 
procedure that requires approval from a competent authority before being 
implemented into the operational environment.  
a) Absence of System Study Documents 
IKM, the software developer, did no t prepare the URS and SRS documents 
before software developm ent. IKM furnished (16 March 2021) an unsigned 
document purported to be the SRS of Sevana Pension software Version 1.0. The 
document however describes features of the latest version of the software where 
recent Government instructions have been incorporated. The ‘References’ in the 
document enlists Government orders and Circulars upto August 2020, which 
indicates that the document was prepar ed after August 2020. Further, many of 
the requirements listed in the document furnishe d by IKM were not seen 
incorporated in the software.  

 
41 
 
Chapter III : Effectiveness of Sevana Pension software 
Absence of design documents show that proper system study was either absent 
or deficient during the development of this software, which, had they been there 
would have eliminated the design deficien cies such as non-recording of initial 
application, which resulted in irregular approval of beneficiaries as described in 
Paragraphs 2.2, 2.5.4 and 2.5.5 ante. 
b) Documentation and testing of changes in the Software 
Audit observed (August 2021) that proper Change Management procedure is 
absent in Sevana Pension software. Requests/ directions for changes required in 
the software are communicated to the Developer from DBT Cell or Finance 
Department. Government Or ders are also considered  for making the changes. 
None of these are documented by the Deve loper. There is no system of User 
Acceptance for the changes in the so ftware. Though IKM claim that these 
changes are tested before deploying, no documentation of the same is available. 
The fact that certain modifications ar e not effective has already been brought 
out in Para 2.5.1 ante.  
There is also no system available for the User Department to confirm that 
required changes have been made by the Developer. Omission on the part of the 
User Department in this regard led to denial of pension to eligible beneficiaries 
as detailed in Paragraph 2.9 ante. 
Audit also observed (August 2021) that  no formal/ documented system for 
complaint reporting exists in the Software. System deficiencies/ faults are 
reported through telephone calls. Whenever bugs ar e observed, users would 
lodge complaints through telephone calls and the De veloper would make the 
changes in the application. These requests, modifications and testing are neither 
documented nor being monitored.  
On these being pointed out, IKM stated that the changes in the Software are 
made according to the Government orde rs issued and directions from the 
Finance/ DBT Cell, which are received  by email. But IKM could not produce 
any documentation relating to any of th e modification done in the past. The 
reply is not acceptable as the changes ar e supposed to be tested by the testing 
team of IKM and it was admitted by IKM that the documentation regarding 
changes and test reports are not being maintained.  
These were pointed out to Government in December 2021 fo r which no reply 
has been furnished by the Government (October 2022). 
3.3 Inadequate training, awareness of security 
It is essential to define the roles and responsibilities of various personnel within 
the organisation as well as the skill deve lopment or training to carry out their 
duties. It is also required to create awar eness on their responsibility in respect 
of information system security. Awareness on security of the information assets 

 
42 
 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
including software/ hardware, data and basic knowledge about the features of 
the software are primary requirement for a user in a software system. 
Audit conducted a survey among the LSGI data entry users and found that there 
is lack of proper training among the users. The details are given in Appendix - 
XXIV.  
The Government replied (M ay 2022) that IKM, in c oordination with the DBT 
Cell, would arrange another round of trai ning to the users of the Software and 
that the security requirements and implications would be stressed in the 
upcoming training programmes. 
3.4 Deficiencies in integration of essential criteria for beneficiary 
approval and pension payment  
All the essential criteria regarding beneficiary addition should have been 
integrated in the Software. In the case of the Sevana Pension software, it should 
only have allowed the registration of those who fulfils the criteria stipulated for 
each SSP. For example, registration of an individual below 60 years, as a 
beneficiary of IGNOAP, should not have been allowed by the Software. 
A report generated through the Software  itself shows th at there are 604  
IGNOAP beneficiaries below the age of 60 years. Absence of proper in-built 
validation resulted in irregular regist ration of beneficiar y and erroneous and 
conflicting values in date columns, su ch as Date of Application, Date of 
Approval, Date of Digital Signature, Date of Birth and Age. There is no 
provision in the system to endorse certain eligibility conditions also. 
Lack of mapping the criteria in the software and the absence of proper 
monitoring by the DBT Cell in respect of  necessary modifications done in the 
software by IKM, to incorporate the latest directions of the Government, has led 
to irregular approval of beneficiaries as mentioned in Paragraphs 2.5.1 to 2.5.3 
ante and erroneous bill generation as described in Paragraph 2.9 and 2.13 ante. 
The Government replied (May 2022) that IKM has already been instructed to 
look into the matter.  
Since data inconsistency is a matter  of serious concern, Government may 
expedite the matter with IKM. 
3.5 Deficiencies in Input Controls 
Input controls are methods that mitigat e the possible errors and omissions in 
data entry. This includes va lidation of data at the time  of entry by the system 
itself and manual verification of data by a different user . Authorisation of data 
by a different user and segr egation of these duties are key to successful data 
validation. These input control mechanisms  ensure that accurate, reliable and 
complete data is accepted by the applic ation. In the absence of proper input 

 
43 
 
Chapter III : Effectiveness of Sevana Pension software 
controls there is always a chance of entering erroneous or fraudulent data in the 
system and failure of the application to deliver business objectives. 
The Sevana Pension software lacked basic input validation during data entry of 
beneficiary details, which resulted in inconsistency in data, erroneous inclusion 
of beneficiaries and ineligible payment of pension. 
Lack of validation in ‘Age’ and ‘Date of birth’ caused discrepancies in date of 
birth and age values as mentioned in  Paragraph 3.6.5 below. Lack of cross-
checking of date of application, date of approval and Council date led to 
inclusion of beneficiaries in wrong Welfare Standing Committees, as described 
in Paragraph 2.5.5 ante. 
Due to the absence of details of rejected applications as mentioned in Paragraph 
2.2 ante, the software is not able to id entify and flag subsequent fresh 
application by the same individual. In eligible second pension to same 
individuals, as mentioned in Paragraphs 2.5.1, 2.5.2 and 2.11.2 ante could have 
been completely avoided if proper validation was built in for crucial unique 
identification fields, like Aadhaar number and electoral ID card number. 
The User ID of LSGI staff consists of a number representing the LSGI where 
the official is posted. Data entry of the approved beneficiary should have been 
restricted to the users of the same LSGI to which the beneficiary is being added. 
Lack of such input cont rol led to fraudulent or  erroneous addition of 
beneficiaries as mentioned in Paragraph No.2.5.4 ante. 
3.6 Lapses in information security and monitoring  
The fundamental aspect of IT governance is  the security of the information to 
ensure its availability, confidentiality and integrity on which everything else 
depends. Information Security is the ability of a syst em to protect information 
and system resources with respect to conf identiality and integrity. It allows an 
organisation to protect its Information System infrastructure from unauthorised 
users. It deals with the protection of  information and information systems 
against unauthorised access or modificati on, whether in storage, processing or 
transit, and against denial of service to authorised users. And it includes those 
measures necessary to detect, document and counter such threats.  
Information Security is increasingly becoming more important for the 
Government Institutions as the interconn ection of public and private networks 
and the sharing of information resources increase the complexity of controlling 
access and preserving the confidentiality, integrity and availability of data. 

 
44 
 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
3.6.1 Hosting of web application without Security Audit Certificate 
The Government of Kerala had stipulated 35 that ‘Safe to Host’ Security Audit 
Certificate is mandatory for any website  to be hosted at the SDC. Periodic 
Security Audit, once in every two years, is necessary for the websites. The GoK 
further reiterated36 the requirement of ‘Safe to Host’ Security Audit Certificate 
for all e-governance applications from Indian Computer Emergency Response 
Team, an empanelled security auditing agency. It also stipulated that all 
websites/ applications hosted at the SDC would have to go through a complete 
security audit process before they can be hosted or whenever an alteration/ 
addition is made to the application.  
The security audit of Sevana Pensi on software was done by the Computer 
Emergency Response Team-Kerala (CERT- K) in 2016 and the report of the 
security audit was made avai lable to Audit. The report is in fact the result of 
‘Phase-I Vulnerability Assessmen t’ done by CERT-K which enlists 
vulnerabilities classified on the basis of OWASP
37 Top 10 categories. The 
vulnerabilities reported by CERT-K are detailed in Appendix -XXV. 
CERT-K provided recommendations on each vulnerability noticed and advised 
IKM to fix the vulnerabilities in the a pplication as per the recommendations 
given and to submit corrected application for a subsequent round of auditing. It 
was stated by CERT-K that approval to host the application will be issued only 
after final confirmation by CERT-K th at application is free from any 
vulnerability.  
In respect of ‘Login Password Gue ssing Attack’ vulnerability, the 
recommendation was to implement some type of account lockout after a defined 
number of incorrect password attempts and Captcha Settings and to use strong 
credentials. Audit checked the login pro cess of Sevana Pension software and 
found that there is no restriction to th e number of incorrect password attempts. 
The status of other vulnerabilities repor ted can be verified only by a certified 
security auditor. 
It is also noticed that periodic security audits as stipulated was also not done on 
Sevana Pension software. The Sevana Pe nsion software and the valuable data, 
including personal details of the beneficiaries, are exposed to risk by hosting the 
web application in SDC  without clearing security audit and ‘Safe to Host’ 
certificate. 
The Government replied (May 2022)  that IKM has already fixed the 
vulnerabilities as per the advice of CERT -K before hosting the application at 
 
35 Vide GO(MS) No.43/2015/ITD dated 01 October 2015. 
36 Vide GO(MS) No.8/2019/ITD dated 22 October 2019. 
37 Open Web Application Security Project (OWASP) is a non-profit foundation dedicated to 
improving software security. OWASP Top 10 is a book/referential document outlining the 
ten most critical security concerns for web application security. 

 
45 
 
Chapter III : Effectiveness of Sevana Pension software 
SDC. The reply is not tenable as manda tory security audit was not seen done 
and the software is not certified as ‘Safe-to-Host’. Further, CERT-K, in its letter 
dated 30 January 2021, stated that they have not issued ‘Safe-to-Host’ certificate 
in Security Audit Phase-I and subsequent audit was not done. Audit also found 
that vulnerabilities reported by CERT-K still exists in the present version of the 
software. 
3.6.2 Lapses in monitoring of user activities  
In a Government environment, access control is important because many 
Government entities process sensitive data and security of such vital data is of 
utmost importance. It should be ensured that only users w ith the authorised 
credentials have access to these sensitive data. 
Access control is being given least importance in the Sevana Pension software. 
In an incident of erroneous addition of  a beneficiary at Thrissur Corporation, 
IKM officials reported that the addition was done from Wadakkanchery 
Municipality and the error occurred as a result of using the login IDs of Thrissur 
Corporation and Wadakkanchery Municipality simultaneously in one computer. 
This shows that there is a practice of using login id of one local body in another.  
Sharing of credentials is taken lightly  and such incidents are not followed up 
and actions, as stipulated38 in the guidelines for usage of passwords are not seen 
initiated. 
User login details are not recorded pr operly in the system, which could later 
have been used to monitor the user activities by the User Department. IKM 
stated that user log is availabl e in the Table ‘TR_Web_UserLog’. On 
verification of the Table, Audit no ticed (November 2021 ) that it does not 
contain the login-logout details of user and the details of all activities performed 
in the database. Further, it was noticed th at transaction details available in the 
Table were not complete. 
Audit even found passwords in unencrypted form in a Table named TR_Login 
history, available in the database. The Table contains login details of users 
which are incomplete. Lack of login detail s and record of user activities make 
it impossible to trace the user vis-à-vis the activities. 
Record of important activities, like a pplication by individuals, their approval 
and digital signing, were f ound overwritten during subse quent process, due to 
possible flaws in the Software. Such ove rwriting of data resulted in loss of 
important information, like date of application, date  of digital signing of 
approval, etc.  
The DBT Cell is not able to monitor the active users of Sevana Pension 
software. Absence of such monitoring lead to misuse of User IDs such as login 
 
38  Vide Circular no PAN/2444/2020-D3(DP) dated 6 February 2021. 

 
46 
 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
at one local body with the User ID of another local body. Irregular addition of 
users in the Software could have been avoided with better monitoring of user 
activities. 
Even though the matter was reported to the Government (December 2021), the 
Government’s reply is still awaited (October 2022). 
3.6.3 Inconsistencies in Beneficiary addition  
The Sevana Pension software was closed during the period from February 2017 
to June 2018. Data entry of new benefi ciaries were also not done during this 
period of 17 months, as stated by the DBT Cell, in reply to a complaint regarding 
delay in approving SSP to an applicant. 
On analysing the database of Sevana Pension software made available to Audit, 
it is found that 3,27,863 beneficiaries were  added to the database during the 
period from February 2017 to June 2018 when the website was closed. The DBT 
Cell does not have any information about the addition of such a large number 
of beneficiaries when da ta entry was not possible through LSGIs. IKM stated 
that LSGIs were doing the data entry in the local server, which was later ported 
to the centralised server maintained in SDC.  
However, the LSGIs visited by Audit reporte d that they were not able to enter 
the details of beneficiaries approved by the Welfare Standing Committee during 
the said period. On verifying the data, Audit noticed that out of the 3,27,863 
beneficiaries added, a total of 2,99,427 received pension during the period. 
While some applicants we re denied their right to  receive SSPs on account of 
modification of application, others were able to get into the beneficiary list and 
received pension. Pension payments of eligible individuals whose applications 
were not processed due to the blocking up of data entry in Sevana Pension 
software were delayed upt o 18 months.  The criter ia or method by which 
3,27,863 beneficiaries were added, when LS GIs were not able to make data 
entry, could not be clarif ied by the DBT Cell. The reason for the discrepancy 
has been requested for from the Depart ment, for which a re ply has not been 
received yet (October 2022).  
The Government replied (May 2022) that the Director of Panchayats is looking 
into the matter and that the Finance Inspection Wing will also conduct enquiry 
in this regard.  
The Government may direct the Department to furnish the reasons for the 
discrepancy and its rectification. 
3.6.4 Other security lapses 
Audit observed the following security lapses in the Sevana Pension software: 

 
47 
 
Chapter III : Effectiveness of Sevana Pension software 
a) It was noticed (August 2021) that crit ical information relating to SSPs 
are being transmitted between the Us er Department and the developer 
through their ‘gmail’ accounts, even  though the entities have ‘gov.in’ 
mail accounts; 
b) While examining the Sevana Pension software at LSGIs, it was noticed 
(February 2021) that ‘State Level Reports’, which are intended for DBT 
Cell, are accessible to Data Entry Us ers. The Data Entry User at LSGI 
is able to open ‘State Level’ MIS reports which is not even permitted to 
be accessed by the LSGI Secretaries. 
The application software should have been more robust and secured with 
facilities to monitor and control the user activities effectively. 
This was pointed out (December 2021) to  the Government, for which it was 
replied (May 2022) that use of gmail accounts has now been discontinued and 
access to reports are now restricted to  authorised users only. The details 
regarding compliance are yet to be furnished. 
3.6.5 Inconsistency in Master data files 
Master files containing Beneficiary details, Pension scheme details, Local Body 
details, etc. should be accurate and authoritative, permanent or semi-permanent 
computerised information, required for the computerised business process. It is 
essential to ensure the correctness, reliability and integrity of the data in Master 
Files as it can significantly affect the accuracy of the process and output.  
a) Beneficiary Master (TR_Pension) 
TR_Pension is the most important Mast er Table in the application, which 
contains all the information regarding beneficiaries. All the activities in Sevena 
Pension software depends on the inform ation inside TR_Pen sion Table. Date 
values are critical in distribution of SSP. A scrutiny of the date values available 
in this Table revealed the following points: 
i) Inaccurate Date of Birth entries in respect of active beneficiaries 
Age is a crucial data relating to the beneficiaries of IGNOAP, ALP and UMWP. 
Enhanced pension given to the benefici aries was also dependent on the age of 
the beneficiary. Age of the beneficiary is decisive in the case of IGNWP and 
UMWP since beneficiaries above 60 y ears need not furnis h Non-Remarriage 
Certificate. Also beneficiaries above 80 are exempted from furnishing Aadhaar. 
Incorrect values in ‘Age’ field can affect the payment of pension to 
beneficiaries. ‘Date of Birth’ is therefore one of the most important data for the 
accurate estimation of SSP. 
On verification of the SPs executed dur ing bill generation process, Audit 
noticed that the date of birth value is  used in many of the Structured Query 

 
48 
 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
Language (SQL) statements in the procedures. From the values available in the 
date of birth column, the following statis tics is generated in respect of active 
beneficiaries and as detailed in Appendix – XXVI. 
The age of the beneficiaries ranged from (-)1,298 to 267. Since the main criteria 
for pension calculation is the age of beneficiary, incorrect values of date of birth 
would lead to erroneous data processing and corresponding output. This would 
affect the estimation of pension amount and will have a huge impact both on the 
State exchequer as well as the benefi ciaries. Cases of excess payment on 
account of irregular disbur sement of enhanced pension as described in 
Paragraph 2.14 ante could have been avoided if the database contained correct 
date of birth values and were properly used in the software. 
On a test-check of applications/ files produced to Audit in three 39 LSGIs with 
the Sevana Pension Database, it was noticed that in respect of date of birth of 
1,015 applications test-checked, date of birth was entered in the database as the 
first day of the year in 44 applications which is different from that recorded by 
the applicant in the app lication and the documents produced along with it. 
Further, in nine applications  instead of the date of bi rth only year of birth is 
provided by the applicants. Some illustrative cases are given in Appendix - 
XXVII. 
It was observed that prope r cross-verification of data entered with the 
application is not done by the authorities  concerned, leading to incorrect entry 
of date of birth of the beneficiaries, where the date of birth/ age is the main 
deciding criteria for the eligibility of an applicant. 
The Government replied (May 2022) that at present, provision has been enabled 
in the Sevana Pension software so that correct format of date of birth is entered 
by the LSGIs.  
The Government may direct the Department to furnish the details regarding the 
enabling of such provisions in the Sevana Pension software. 
ii) Inconsistency in other date fields 
The date values in the columns dtApp lication, dtApproved, dtDigitalSign and 
dtDistributionStart are im portant since these values affect the various MIS 
Reports and many decisions taken during bill processing. Scrutiny of the values 
in the above date fields shows that there are cases where pension payment 
started before approval and even before application. Audit verified (April 2021) 
the details of beneficiaries approved after 2016, since input of these details are 
done through the revamped Sevana Pension software. The discrepancies noticed 
(September 2021) in 2,86,842 cases  are as detailed in Appendix – XXVIII, 
which account for 18.98 per cent of the total beneficiaries approved during the 
period. 
 
39 Thrissur Corporation, Nedumangadu Municipality, Kunnathukal GP. 

 
49 
 
Chapter III : Effectiveness of Sevana Pension software 
The above discrepancies indicate that the data available in the crucial Master 
Table are inconsistent and unreliable.  
b) Pension type Master file (GM_PensionType) 
A data Table containing details of SSP t ypes is available in  the database. The 
Table contains fields showing Pension type ID, Name of Pension and minimum 
age limit for each pension, along with many other relevant details. This data is 
one of the most important Master Data required for the processing of SSP. The 
data extracted from the said Table are detailed in Appendix – XXIX. 
Lower age limit for ALP, IGNOAP and UM WP are recorded as 18, 18 and 19 
respectively, which does not confor m to the norms specified by the 
Government. With proper data, this Master file could have been used for proper 
validation during data entry. 
The Government replied (May 2022) that strict controls have been incorporated 
in the Software. Records with incorrect data shall be rectified by the DBT Cell 
and steps will be taken to keep the data in master files updated.  
The Government may furnish the details regarding the controls being 
incorporated in the Software and the action taken to rectify the data deficiencies.  
3.7 Improper involvement of the Developer in data processing and 
reporting  
Segregation of duties is a fundamental control requirement as it reduces the risk 
of error and fraud. A software devel oper should not have access to the live 
computing environment to carry out the job assigned. Access to the live data at 
back end can lead to unintended cha nges which may not conform with the 
business rules set in the application, which in turn result in threat to data 
integrity, erroneous/irregular disbursement of SSPs, etc. There is a high chance 
of errors and omissions during manual intervention in data processing when it 
is done through procedures requiring editing during each execution, some of 
which have been identified by Audit. Such an error/omission during pension 
processing can cause huge loss to th e Government. Execution of back-end 
process for each SSP payment during e ach payment cycle will leave the 
Department unable to trace the cause of any such errors. 
In the case of SSP, actions pertaini ng to beneficiary management, fund 
estimation, disbursement, reconciliation, et c. are to be performed through the 
Sevana Pension software. The software a pplication should be able to generate 
all reports required by the User Department. However, it was noticed (February 
2021) that the majority of the processi ng and report generation intended to be 
done by the DBT Cell are actually performed by the Developer, IKM. 
Fund estimation and bill preparation are done by IKM at back-end using 
independent SPs. The Government decisions relating to payment of SSPs need 

 
50 
 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
to be incorporated in the SPs. Modifications in the SPs done by IKM are neither 
tested nor documented. Uploading of pa yment files to Bank server, receipt of 
payment status from Bank and reconcilia tion of the payment status are also 
performed by IKM, which are not completely automated. There were lapses/ 
discrepancies in these processes which led to excess payments and denial of 
benefit to beneficiaries as desc ribed in Paragraphs 2.9 and 2.13 ante 
respectively. The DBT Cell is not even ab le to identify such discrepancies due 
to lack of essential reports. 
IKM, the Developer of Sevana Pension software intended for the management 
of SSPs in Kerala, continues to run th e application rather  than the User 
Department. The application cannot ge nerate essential reports like fund 
requirement, disbursement, reconcilia tion, etc. Audit ex amined the SRS 
furnished by IKM and found that detailed design specification is not available 
in the SRS. Requirements identified by the Developer are given in the SRS but 
many of these requirements are not seen mapped in the Software. The 
requirements which are not incorporated in the software by the Developer are 
given in Appendix - XXX.  
The monthly generation of bills should be done by the User Department through 
the User Interface of the Sevana Pens ion software. There should be clear 
segregation of duties between the entities/ persons responsible for development 
and maintenance of the IT system, and those responsible fo r and with control 
over the transactions processed through the IT system. However, that is not the 
case on the ground in this case. There is extensive involvement of IKM for the 
monthly generation of bills, amongst ot hers. Use of SPs for such activities, 
especially monthly generation of bills, appear to indicate that SPs may be used 
as a substitute for timely and proper Ch ange Management, in keeping with the 
changes in functional requirements. This is not proper.  
The Government replied (May 2022) that IKM will take necessary steps to make 
the process fully automatic.  
The Government may strictly monitor and ensure that there is adequate 
segregation of duties and the Developer is not involved in data processing and 
reporting. 
3.8 Discrepancies in outputs 
Output from a software is the end product which should be accurate and should 
be available at any point of time . The reliability of outputs including 
Management Information System (MIS ) reports is vital for management 
decisions and for the effective distribution of SSPs. 
While checking the reports available in Sevana Pension software, Audit noticed 
(February 2021) discrepancies in some of the reports as detailed below. 

 
51 
 
Chapter III : Effectiveness of Sevana Pension software 
a) Report – ‘State level Monthly Disbursement Amount’  
The report shows the number of benefici aries under each pension scheme, the 
rate of pension and the total amount required for pension payment. A screenshot 
of the report screen is given below. 
Report of State level monthly disbursement amount 
 
(Source: Report generated from Sevana Pension software) 
i) Outdated rate of pension adopted 
As per the report generated in March 2021, the State share and Central share are 
₹400 and ₹200 respectively in respect of Old Age Pension and ₹500 and ₹300 
respectively in the case of Disability Pension. These rates existed during the 
period from 1 April 2014 to 1 June 2016. The revised rates have not been 
incorporated in the system. 
ii) Mismatch in calculated value 
As per the report, the values in the column for State share and Central share are 
not tallying with the value in the column for total amount i.e. State and Central 
share of Old Age Pension are ₹400 and ₹200 respectively but the ‘Total 
Amount’ is shown as ₹1,500. 
iii) Incorrect criteria applied 
The report erroneously disp lays that the enhanced pension is eligible for 
beneficiaries above 80 years instead of the correct age of 75 years. This presents 
an incorrect number of eligible benefici aries and deflates the amount required 
for enhanced pension, also depriving those between 75 and 80 years from the 
benefits of the Scheme. 


 
52 
 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
Audit observed that an evident procedural / logical error exists in the internal 
process of this report. The report of  ‘State level Monthly Disbursement 
Amount’, which could be used by th e DBT Cell for estimating the amount 
required for disbursement at any point of time gives inconsistent, erroneous and 
misleading figures. As a result of this, the DBT Cell is not using this report and 
the estimation of funds required for SSPs is being done through IKM every 
month. Instances of erroneous calcula tion of enhanced pension by IKM are 
detailed in Paragraph 2.14 ante, which could have been  avoided if the report 
generated through the software was accurate.  
b) Report – ‘Statewise Incentive Details’ in DBT module  
The report of ‘Statewise Incentive Deta ils’ shows the pension-type wise 
incentive amount due, incentive amount disbursed and balance amount to be 
disbursed. The report shows pending incentive amount in many of the pension 
payment periods. Sample reports showing incentive payments of April 2017 and 
August 2019 shows nil payment of incentive amount in some payment periods. 
However, the statement received from DBT cell reveals that incentive amount 
has been completely disbursed for the period from 2017-18 to 2019-20. As such 
the information given in the report ‘Statewise Incentive Details’ is incorrect. 
c) Non-working of reports 
Many of the reports available in Sevana Pension software do not work properly. 
On selecting these reports error screen is displayed. The screenshots of some of 
the reports which do not work properly are detailed in Appendix XXXI. 
d) Reports available in public portal 
The ‘Reports’ page
40 of Sevana Pension software presents various statistical 
data relating to the number of benefi ciaries of SSPs. The statistics given are 
intended to provide valuable Mana gement Information System (MIS) 
information for departmental authorities as well as general public. The detailed 
statistics gives the count of pensioners on the basis of various parameters, such 
as Pension type, Payment mode, Gender,  Pensioner categor y, type of Local 
Body, Aadhaar seeding, etc. The report provides State-wide count and District-
wise count.   
On a scrutiny (February 2021) of the figures provided in the Reports page (last 
updated on 11 May 2021/7:31 PM), there are significant differences in the total 
number of beneficiaries under some parameters.  
Aggregate of Pensioner category-wise count does not match with the given total 
number of pensioners. The difference is 68,658. Difference in the total of 
gender-wise count is 149. There is a huge difference of 21,46,671 in the 
 
40 https://welfarepension.lsgkerala.gov.in/Web_Report_en.aspx. 

 
53 
 
Chapter III : Effectiveness of Sevana Pension software 
aggregate of Local Body type-wise count . The difference in values indicates 
some serious error in the data or in the Reports module of the application.  
The Government replied (May 2022) that problems in the reports in the public 
portal have been rectified and all the necessary reports will be verified and 
updated in the live site. The changes in th e portal is yet to be verified. The 
Government may furnish the details regarding the action taken to rectify, verify 
and update the necessary reports in the public portal.  
3.9 Susceptibility of Sevana Pension software to fraud 
Once the beneficiaries of SSPs are approved by the competent authorities and 
all relevant details are captured in the Sevana Pension software, the monthly bill 
generation, including detailed beneficiary-wise payment, should be done using 
an automated process available in th e software. The Fund Transfer Orders, 
detailing beneficiary-wise payments  and pushing payments to individual 
beneficiary-wise bank accounts, should be initiated directly from the software, 
followed by automated beneficiary-wise responses, i.e. acknowledgement of 
receipt. This response should be pushed back as a reverse feedback loop to the 
Sevana Pension software for tracking actual beneficiary-wise receipt or non-
receipt. In the case of DTH, such ac knowledgement should be obtained using 
electronic means, such as Aadhaar base d finger-print reader. Such a reverse 
feedback loop would enable tracking of actual beneficiary-wise transfer of SSP 
and consequently avoid pilferage and misappropriation of money. Audit noticed 
that automated reverse feedback loop for acknowledgement is absent in Sevana 
Pension software. Absence of such a syst em makes the software susceptible to 
fraud and misappropriation, as illustrated in Box No.3 below Paragraph 2.11.3 
ante.  
3.10 Conclusion  
Due to various issues as summarised be low, the Sevana Pe nsion software has 
not been able to become fully eff ective in improving the accuracy and 
transparency in the DBT programmes: 
• There is lack of proper planning of the automati on process. No system 
design documents were seen prepared  prior to the development of the 
Software, including efficiencies in input controls and correctness of 
outputs.  This has led to serious deficiencies in the Software.  There is 
no practice of documenting the software changes either; 
• Security Audit has not been conducte d to get ‘Safe to Host’ certificate 
before hosting the Software. Th e Software was hosted without 
addressing the vulnerabilitie s identified in the first phase of security 
audit performed by CERT-K; 

 
54 
 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
• There is control lapse in Sevana Pension software from beneficiary 
addition to disbursement of SSPs. Controls in Sevana Pension software 
are not adequate and effective and hence lacks robustness. The integrity 
and consistency of the data also cannot be guaranteed. The Directorate 
of Panchayats is not able to perform the functions which are entrusted 
to them due to snags in the Softwa re and are completely dependent on 
the Developer for all essential activities; 
• IKM, the Developer of the Sevana Pension software, continues to run it 
rather than the User Department . The application cannot generate 
essential reports like funds require ment, disbursement, reconciliation, 
etc. IKM is generating these repor ts through backend through stored 
procedures, which require frequent  modifications as well. Use of 
independent stored procedures for bill generation, without proper 
monitoring mechanism, instead of tested and certified built-in software 
modules, is not appropriate; 
• The User Department is not able to monitor either the user activities at 
LSGIs or the activities performed by IKM. Further, there is no effective 
mechanism for ensuring the receipt of the SSP by the intended recipient. 
3.11 Recommendations 
In view of the Audit finding above, the Government may consider the following:  
• The IT system may be revamped to address the findings highlighted by 
Audit. It may be ensured that the revamped system has adequate controls 
to ensure data integrity and consistency with all the eligibility criteria of 
the SSPs properly incorporated in it.  The monthly bill generation and 
fund transfer may be automated, so  that the User Department may 
operate it independently. The benefi ciary-wise payments are to be 
pushed to the bank accounts and followed by recording the 
acknowledgement of the beneficiary, which can then be pushed back to 
the Software for tracking transfer of benefit; 
• The role of the Software Developer needs to be restricted to 
development and maintenance of the IT system, with no responsibility 
or control over the transactions and activities processed through the 
system. The administrative responsibili ties of the IT System, such as 
database administration, is to be with an entity or team completely 
segregated from the development and maintenance entity; 
• The DBT Cell needs to be provided with total access and control on the 
system and all requirements such as bill processing, fund requisition, 
beneficiary details, fund releasi ng, report extracti on, etc. are done 
exclusively by the Cell without any kind of intervention by IKM; 

 
55 
 
Chapter III : Effectiveness of Sevana Pension software 
• The application software may be linke d with the available databases in 
the LSGIs for effective a nd essential correlation of facts relating to the 
beneficiaries and to plug irregular and ineligible disbursements. The 
data may be verified regularly to weed out inconsistent entries;  
• Acknowledgment of disbursement through DTH mode may be done 
using technology-enabled systems lik e Aadhaar, rather than physical 
methods like signature or thumb impression on receipts.    

 
Chapter – IV 
  
Conclusion and 
Summary of 
Recommendations 

 
57 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
Conclusion and Summary of Recommendations 
Any Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) programme should be aimed at 
disbursement of benefits with a transparent process for transfer of funds at the 
right time to the right person. Out of th e DBT Schemes in the State of Kerala, 
the Social Security Pension Schemes (SSP Schemes) constitute the largest 
component of all DBT programmes in the State, both in terms of the number of 
beneficiaries being impacted, as well as the amount of money being disbursed. 
The Directorate of Panchayats is responsible for carrying out the SSP Schemes, 
which is done through the DBT Cell under it.  
Through this Performance Audit of the DBT of SSP Schemes, it was attempted 
to assess to what extent the DBT Progr amme relating to di sbursement of SSP 
Schemes has succeeded in the State and how far the Sevana Pension software, 
the application software which is the backbone of this DBT Pension 
programme, has been effective in making the DBT process a success. 
It was seen that while nearly 51 per cent of all disbursements under the SSP 
Schemes were now being undertaken unde r the DBT programme, the other 49 
per cent  was being disbursed through the DTH mode, which involved 
intermediaries and was consequently not a direct transfer of benefits. Therefore, 
the State needs to make efforts to include more beneficiaries under its DBT 
umbrella. 
Various lacunae were noticed both in  the planning for the DBT programme, 
particularly in its application soft ware component, as  well as in the 
implementation parts of it, which have been  dealt with in detail in this Report. 
Many of these lacunae arose from the fact that the entire process has still not 
been computerised and many of the imp ortant initial and final steps, like 
registering of applications for pensions and ensuring a feedback loop regarding 
the acknowledgement of receipts after final disbursements respectively, have 
not been brought under the ambit of the software. Therefore, many mistakes 
(including possible frauds) which could easily have been avoided by putting 
strong controls and checks in the so ftware, were now being regularly 
committed, often without the express know ledge of the DBT Cell itself. Audit 
feels that unless plugged immediately, such lack of controls can affect both the 
performance of the Software, as well as the success of the programme, 
significantly and cause attendant drain on the exchequer. 

 
58 
 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
Moreover, in a worrying sign, it was seen that IKM, the Developer of the 
application software, continued to be the manager of the application database. 
The DBT Cell under the Directorate of Panchayats, which was the Nodal 
authority to implement this DBT programme and should naturally have been the 
authorised custodian of all data, was therefore either clueless about how to use 
the data available with it (there bein g no set of important Reports within the 
software which could be regularly a nd routinely generated using variable 
parameters) or at the mercy of IKM to f eed them with requisite information as 
and when required. This raised an issue of both conflict of interest with respect 
to IKM, as well as reduced administra tive competence for the DBT Cell, both 
of which need to be rectified at the earliest. 
Various issues directly relating to the beneficiaries were noticed, like delayed 
payments of pension, payment of more  than one pension to beneficiaries 
(excluding Disability Pens ion), payment of Social Security Pensions to 
ineligible beneficiaries including government servants, erroneous bill 
processing leading to ineligible payments , etc. were also noticed in varying 
numbers during the period covered under audit. Since these issues arose out of 
control failures per se, and not always out of detectable and deliberate malafide 
intentions, it is all the more important  to plug these gaps in the system and 
software so as to ensure that there is no further drain to the exchequer in terms 
of amounts disbursed wrongly and also to make the programme succeed by 
weeding out ineligible and mischievous applicants. However, in some areas, 
like addition of beneficiaries for selection by the Welfare Standing Committee 
before even applying, where Audit felt that the controls in the system were 
strong but subversions occurred noneth eless, Audit can not discount the 
possibility of deliberate malafide inte ntions by the officials concerned and 
illegitimate activities arising out of the same.  
Keeping in view the above , Audit broadly recommends  that the Government 
may consider: 
• A more robust role by the DBT Cell under the Directorate of Panchayats 
to actively monitor and control the functions of disbursement under the 
SSP Schemes; 
• Ensuring that a system is in place to send SMS alerts regarding payment 
of pension to the beneficiaries; 
• Modification of the Sevana Pension software to provide all functionality 
required for proper execution of the activities related to SSP Schemes; 
• Strictly restricting the role of the Developer of the Software to the 
development and maintenance of the IT system only, while the DBT 
Cell should develop capacities to manage the data and use it for various 
MIS purposes; 

 
 59 
 
Chapter IV : Conclusion and Summary of Recommendations  
• Linking the Sevana Pension software with the other databases in the 
Local Self Government Institutions, for effective correlation of essential 
facts relating to the beneficiaries and to plug irregular and ineligible 
disbursements, and 
• Addressing all the granular Audit fi ndings already indi cated in this 
Report, while modifying the software. 
 
Thiruvananthapuram,                                       (Dr. BIJU JACOB) 
The                             Principal Accountant General 
                                                               (Audit II) 
 Countersigned 
New Delhi,      (G IRISH CHANDRA MURMU) 
The            Comptroller and Auditor General of India  
 
 


 
 
Appendix 

61 
 
Appendix – I 
(Ref : Paragraph 2.2 – Page No. 11) 
Eligibility criteria of the five SSP schemes implemented by the State 
Pension General conditions Specific conditions 
Old Age Pension (IGNOAP) 1. Annual Family  Income ceiling 
should not exceed Rupees one lakh. 
Income certificates issued by 
Village Officer is necessary. 
2. Physical circumstance of the 
applicant - Plinth area 1,200 Sq.ft 
up to February 2019. From 
February 2019 the condition in 
plinth area of residence was 
omitted. From November 2019 
onwards the physical 
circumstances of the applicant 
were revised.  The minimum area 
of residence was raised to 2000 sq. 
ft without air-conditioned.   
3. Should not be a recipient of 
salary/ pension/ family pension 
from Central Government/ other 
State Governments, should not be a 
retiree from Central/ State Public 
Sector Undertakings and a 
recipient of Pension/ Family 
Pension, the applicant is not an 
income tax payer and a self-
declaration to that effect is to be 
submitted. 
4. The applicant/ family should not 
own more than two acres. 
(Scheduled tribe is excluded). 
5. Applicant should not own/ in 
family non-taxi, four or more 
wheeled vehicles (except 
Ambassador car) with engine 
capacity of more than 1000 cc 
6. No person shall be eligible if he/ 
she resorts to habitual begging. 
7. Applicant is not eligible if the 
person is admitted to a poor home. 
 
1)    Age - 60 years and above 
2)   Continuous period of residency - Past 
three years 
Widow Pension (IGNWP) 1)    Age – Nil 
2) Continuous period of residency - Past 
two years 
3) Should not be legally divorced. 
4. Should not be deserted from husband. 
5. Death certificate of husband issued by 
LSGIs is necessary. 
6. Non-remarriage certificate issued by 
Village Officer is n ecessary. Should also 
produce non-remarriage certificate issued 
by Village Officer/ Gazetted officer during 
the month of December every year. 
7. Self-declaration to the effect that she has 
not been remarried after the death of her 
husband is necessary. 
8. Applicants whose husband is 
absconding for more than seven years, 
applicants deserted by their husbands for 
more than seven years and above 50 years 
of age are eligible. The applicants should 
not be remarried persons. (from April 2020 
onwards) 
 
Disability pension (IGNDP) 1) Age – Nil 
2) Continuous period of residency - Past 
two years 
Pension for Unmarried Women 
(UMWP) 
1) Age - 50 years and above 
2) Continuous period of residency - 
Permanent resident 
Agriculture Labour Pension (ALP) 1) Age - 60 years and above 
2) Continuous period of residency - Past 
ten years 
 
 

 
62 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
Guidelines issued by the Government of Kerala for the verification process of five SSP schemes 
implemented by the State 
Sl.No G O No. Gist 
1 GO(MS) No.483/2017/Fin dated 06.11.2017 The applications for SSP after entered in an Application 
Register in the LSGIs are handed over to the Verifying 
Officer1 for verification and confirmation of eligibility of the 
applicant. A comprehensive enquiry on the physical 
circumstances is to be conducted and the officer conducting 
the enquiry shall submit a report to the Secretary of the 
respective Local Self Government Institution (LSGI). The 
Secretary of the LSGI, after cross examination of the enquiry 
report from Verifying Officer and income certificate from the 
Village Officer, verifies the ph ysical circumstances of the 
applicant and after satisfying himself that the applicant is 
eligible for SSP submits the application before the Welfare 
Standing Committee of the LSGI which is the final authority 
for giving approval.  The data entry of the accepted cases is 
made thereafter at the LSGI and digitally signed by the 
Secretary of LSGI. The applicant is eligible for pension from 
the date on which it is digitally signed by the Secretary of the 
concerned LSGI. Presently, the DBT Cell in the Directorate 
of Panchayats directs the IKM to prepare the final bill for 
pension and Finance department gives sanction for 
disbursement.  
The applicant should not be a recipient of pension and the 
applicant should not be an income taxpayer. 
2 Circular dated 28 September 2019 The timeline for sanction or rejection of application from the 
date of receipt of application in LSGIs should not exceed 40 
days and shall be communicated in writing to the applicant. 
3 Circular No.SFC-B2/47/2017/Fin dated 31/03/2018 The report of the Verifying Officer is considered as the basis 
for determining the eligibility of the applicants and for 
considering sanction of pension. In cases where the Verifying 
Officer finds that the person is not eligible for SSP, the 
Welfare Standing Committee of LSGIs could reverse the 
recommendation of Verifying Officer only if the Welfare 
Standing Committee is of the opinion that the finding of the 
Verifying Officer is incorrect.  Government clarified that such 
cases should be re-verified by a committee consisting of the 
Chairman of the Development Affairs Committee, Secretary 
of the LSGI and a Gazetted officer from the LSGI. 
4 GO(MS) No97/2020/Fin dated 23.09.2020. Indira Gandhi National Widow Pension (IGNWP) is to be 
sanctioned on the basis of death certificates issued by LSGIs 
and non-remarriage/ income cer tificates issued by Village 
Officer. Further, it was stated th at income certificates issued 
by Village Officer is necessary for all type of pensions.  
The general eligibility criteria of the five social security 
pension schemes implemented b y the State. The applicant 
 
1 For IGNOAPS  - Village Extension Officer/ Revenue In spector,  IGNWP – ICDS supervisor, IGNDP – Health 
Inspector, ALP – Agriculture Officer, UMWP - ICDS Supervisor. 

 
  63   
Appendix 
Sl.No G O No. Gist 
should not be a recipient of salary/ pension/ family pension 
from Central Government/ other State Governments, should 
not be a retiree from Cent ral/ State Public Sector 
Undertakings and a recipient of Pension/ Family Pension, the 
applicant should not be an income taxpayer. For Widow 
Pension, persons who are below 60 years of age and who have 
not submitted their non-remarriage certificate should be 
suspended/ removed from the list of beneficiaries after 
examining the case. 
5 GO(MS)No. 35/2012/SWD dated 04 June 2012 The applicants for Indira Gandhi National Widow Pension 
(IGNWP) are to submit self-declaration to the effect that she 
has not been remarried after the death of her husband.   
6 GO(MS) No.88/2019/Fin dated 15 February 2019 The applicants for IGNWP should produce non-remarriage 
certificate issued by Village Officer/ Gazetted officer during 
the month of December every year. 
7 Circular dated 28.09.2019 of the Director of 
Panchayats 
The enquiring officers and th e Secretaries of the LSGIs 
concerned should ensure the eligibility of the beneficiary for 
receipt of pension and that they would be held responsible for 
any loss incurred in such cases. Issued various instructions to 
LSGIs for strict compliance.  Performance Audit Supervisors 
of LSGIs had been entrusted to examine the compliance of 
instructions every month by LSGIs and the non-compliance 
to be reported to the Director of Panchayats without any 
delay.  The NSAP guidelines also stipulates periodical review 
of the scheme. 
8 GONo.97/2019/Fin dated 11.12.2019 Legally divorced women are not eligible for Indira Gandhi 
National Widow Pension (IGNWP).  Government in the said 
circular also ordered that women deserted from husband is not 
eligible for Indira Gandhi National Widow Pension 
(IGNWP). 
9 Circular No.17/2020/Fin dated 31stMarch 2020 In addition to the aforementione d criteria, applicants whose 
husband is absconding for more than seven years, applicants 
deserted by their husbands for more than seven years and 
above 50 years of age are e ligible for widow pension The 
applicants should not be remarried persons. 
10 G.O. (MS) No.24/2016/Ord dated 01.03.2016. Old-age persons after attaining the age of 75 years would get 
old age pension at an increased rate of ₹1,500, with effect 
from 1 April 2016. 
11 GO (MS)No.67/2017/Fin dated 06.02.2017 Under any circumstances same type of pension shall not be 
allowed as second pension. 
12 Circular No.69/2018/Fin dated 26/07/2018 
(Finance SFC-B Department). 
Instructions to all the Secretaries of LSGIs to take immediate 
action to suspend the deceased beneficiaries from the Sevana 
Pension software. The PACS after every disbursement should 
report the cases of deceased beneficiaries to the local bodies. 
The Secretaries of the local bodies after enquiry should 
remove the deceased beneficiaries from the list.   
13 GO (MS)No.251/2019/Fin dated 03.07.2019 Beneficiaries above 60 years are exempted from submitting 
non-remarriage certificate. 

 
64 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
Sl.No G O No. Gist 
14 Letter No.189907/SFCB.2/2020-Fin dated 
26.07.2021 of Finance Department, Govt. of 
Kerala 
Direction to the Director of Panchayats, Director of Urban 
Affairs and Executive Director, IKM that the beneficiaries of 
IGNWP and Pension for Unmarried Women above 50 years 
should be authorised pension for July and August 2021 
regardless of their submission of ‘Non-remarriage 
Certificate’. i.e. no one should be excluded due to non-
submission of the said certificate. 
 
  

 
  65   
Appendix 
Appendix –II 
(Ref : Paragraph 2.3 – Page No. 13) 
Irregular payment of SSP to ineligible applicants prior to new applications 
Sl 
No 
District, Name of the 
applicant 
Date of 
rejected 
application 
Reason for 
rejection 
Pensioner ID 
already allotted 
Type of 
Pension 
received 
Period 
of 
Payment Local Body 
1 Thrissur, Chandran T. K 28.05. 21 Better 
financial 
condition 
1072102 03359 IGNOAP Jul-20 to 
Apr-21 Kadavallur 
2 Thrissur, R Gopinathan 
Pillai 
14.07. 20 Vehicle above 
1000cc. As per 
ration card 
monthly 
income 
₹30,000. 
1072102 03007 IGNOAP Feb-19 
to Jul-19 
Kadavallur 
3 Thrissur, Remani 
Ramachandran 
28.05. 21 Better 
financial 
condition. 
Vehicle above 
1000cc 
1072102 03419 IGNOAP Oct-20 
to Apr-
21 
Kadavallur 
4 Malappuram, Kunhali 09.02. 21 Vehicle above 
1000cc 
109000400286 IGNDP Apr-15 
to Apr-
21 Vazhikkadavu 
5 Pathanamthitta  Aleyamma 
Philip 
30.03.21 Not residing 
with in the 
jurisdiction of 
LSGD 
10396021379 IGNOAP Feb-19 
to Jul-19 
Naranganam 
 
 
  

 
66 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
Appendix – III 
(Ref : Paragraph 2.4 – Page No. 14) 
Delay in approval of applications for Social Security Pensions 
Sl. 
No. 
District Local Body Pension type No. of  
cases 
Minimum 
delay in 
Days 
Maximum 
delay in 
Months 
1 Idukki Alakkode Agricultural Labour 
Pension 
206 6 10 
2 Idukki Kattappana Agricultural Labour 
Pension 
927 6 18 
3 Idukki Muttom Agricultural Labour 
Pension 
171 8 15 
4 Idukki Pallivasal Agricultural Labour 
Pension 
384 6 10 
5 Idukki Santhanpara Indira Gandhi National 
Old Age Pension 
Scheme 
271 7 10 
6 Idukki Thodupuzha Agricultural Labour 
Pension 
859 6 9 
7 Idukki Velliyamattom Indira Gandhi National 
Old Age Pension 
Scheme 
510 6 7 
8 Malappuram Athavanad Indira Gandhi National 
Old Age Pension 
Scheme 
551 8 19 
9 Malappuram Irimbiliyam Agricultural Labour 
Pension 
300 7 13 
10 Malappuram Keezhattur Agricultural Labour 
Pension 
478 6 16 
11 Malappuram Manjeri Agricultural Labour 
Pension 
1623 6 14 
12 Malappuram Tanur Agricultural Labour 
Pension 
822 17 16 
13 Malappuram Vazhakkad Agricultural Labour 
Pension 
457 6 14 
14 Malappuram Vazhikkadavu Agricultural Labour 
Pension 
906 6 20 
15 Pathanamthitta Ayiroor Agricultural Labour 
Pension 
603 7 17 
16 Pathanamthitta Koipuram Agricultural Labour 
Pension 
584 7 19 
17 Pathanamthitta Kottanadu Agricultural Labour 
Pension 
347 7 12 
18 Pathanamthitta Naranganam Agricultural Labour 
Pension 
356 6 10 
19 Pathanamthitta Omallur Agricultural Labour 
Pension 
319 15 14 
20 Pathanamthitta Pandalam Agricultural Labour 
Pension 
875 6 21 
21 Pathanamthitta Pathanamthitta Agricultural Labour 
Pension 
782 8 24 

 
  67   
Appendix 
Sl. 
No. 
District Local Body Pension type No. of  
cases 
Minimum 
delay in 
Days 
Maximum 
delay in 
Months 
22 Thiruvananthapuram Anad Agricultural Labour 
Pension 
564 6 21 
23 Thiruvananthapuram Chemmaruthy Agricultural Labour 
Pension 
480 6 12 
24 Thiruvananthapuram Kunnathukal Agricultural Labour 
Pension 
923 6 13 
25 Thiruvananthapuram Manamboor Indira Gandhi National 
Old Age Pension 
Scheme 
501 6 24 
26 Thiruvananthapuram Nedumangad Agricultural Labour 
Pension 
1029 6 17 
27 Thiruvananthapuram Poovachal Agricultural Labour 
Pension 
856 6 19 
28 Thiruvananthapuram Thiruvananthapuram Agricultural Labour 
Pension 
11,092 8 27 
29 Thiruvananthapuram Varkala Indira Gandhi National 
Old Age Pension 
Scheme 
869 31 25 
30 Thrissur Chalakkudy Agricultural Labour 
Pension 
961 6 17 
31 Thrissur Chavakkad Indira Gandhi National 
Old Age Pension 
Scheme 
839 8 24 
32 Thrissur Kadavallur Agricultural Labour 
Pension 
703 6 17 
33 Thrissur Nenmanikkara Indira Gandhi National 
Widow Pension 
Scheme 
326 6 14 
34 Thrissur Thrissur Agricultural Labour 
Pension 
3,901 8 25 
35 Thrissur Varandarappilly Agricultural Labour 
Pension 
762 6 17 
36 Thrissur Vatanappilly Agricultural Labour 
Pension 
612 6 15 
37 Thrissur Vellangallur Indira Gandhi National 
Old Age Pension 
Scheme 
710 6 19 
Total 37,459 
  
 (Information furnished by DBT Cell) 

 
68 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
Appendix – IV 
(Ref : Paragraph 2.5.2 – Page No. 15) 
Irregular disbursement of IGNWP and UMWP to same persons 
Sl. 
No. 
District Local Body Pensioner ID Pensioner 
Name 
Aadhaar No. Date of 
Birth 
Pension 
type 
Date 
of 
applic
ation 
Date 
of 
appro
val 
Status Distribu
tion 
start 
Pension 
disburs
ed up to 
Account 
mode 
Remarks 
1 Malappura
m 
Pulikkal 109210500021 Sulochana xxxxxxxx1974 1/1/1959 UMWP 10/07/
2013 
09/09/
2013 
Active Feb-15 Aug-
21 
Bank Disbur
sed 
2 Malappura
m 
Pulikkal 109210601149 Sulojana xxxxxxxx 
1974 
1/1/1973 IGNWP 12/11/
2013 
24/03/
2014 
Active Feb-15 Aug-
21 
D to H Disbur
sed 
3 Ernakulam Chellanam 106650500185 Rocili xxxxxxxx 
2444 
1/1/1962 UMWP 26/12/
2014 
21/03/
2015 
Active Feb-15 Aug-
21 
Bank Disbur
sed 
4 Ernakulam Chellanam 106650601059 Rocili xxxxxxxx 
2444 
1/1/1962 IGNWP 26/12/
2014 
21/03/
2015 
Active Feb-15 Aug-
21 
D to H Disbur
sed 
5 Kollam Kollam 101680500047 Yesoda  T. xxxxxxxx 
1323 
1/1/1952 UMWP 06/03/
2007 
29/03/
2008 
Active Apr-15 Aug-
21 
Bank Disbur
sed 
6 Kollam Kollam 101680602923 Yashoda  T. xxxxxxxx 
1323 
1/1/1957 IGNWP 27/11/
2006 
13/02/
2008 
Active Feb-15 Aug-
21 
Bank Disbur
sed 
7 Thrissur Kunnamkul
am 
102040500441 Kanjirappara
mbil 
Raghavan 
Jalaja 
xxxxxxxx 
8388 
1/1/1965 UMWP 01/11/
2019 
08/04/
2020 
Active May-20 Aug-
21 
D to H Disbur
sed 
8 Thrissur Kunnamkul
am 
102040602320 Kanjirappara
mbil 
Raghavan 
Jalaja 
xxxxxxxx 
8388 
1/1/1966 IGNWP 09/06/
2017 
06/10/
2018 
Active Nov-18 Aug-
21 
D to H Disbur
sed 
9 Wayanad Nenmeni 110790500021 Saradha xxxxxxxx 
4405 
1/1/1958 UMWP 30/12/
2013 
01/09/
2014 
Active Feb-15 Aug-
21 
Bank Disbur
sed 
10 Wayanad Nenmeni 110790601711 Saradha xxxxxxxx 
4405 
1/1/1961 IGNWP 22/06/
2013 
27/08/
2014 
Active Feb-15 Aug-
21 
D to H Disbur
sed 
 
 

 
 69   
Appendix 
Receiving one pension currently and the other pension which were disbursed till July 2019/November 2019 is seen withheld for non-mustering 
Sl. 
No. 
District Local Body Pensioner ID Pensioner 
Name 
Aadhaar No. Date of 
Birth 
Pension 
type 
Status Distributio
n start 
Pension 
disbursed 
up to 
Account 
mode 
Remarks 
1 Ernakulam Thrikkakara 112450500004 Girija C K xxxxxxxx 6480 1/1/1958 UMWP Active Apr-15 Aug-21 Bank Disbursed 
2 Ernakulam Thrikkakara 112450610834 Girija C K xxxxxxxx 6480 1/1/1956 IGNWP Active Feb-15 Jul-19 Bank Withheld 
for non-
mustering 
as on Aug 
2021 
3 Ernakulam Malayattoor 
Neeleswaram 
106420500081 Aleyamma xxxxxxxx 7797 1/1/1957 UMWP Active Jul-16 Aug-21 Bank Disbursed 
4 Ernakulam Malayattoor 
Neeleswaram 
106420601015 Elyamma xxxxxxxx 7797 1/1/1957 IGNWP Active Jul-16  Jul-19 Bank Withheld 
for non-
mustering 
as on Aug 
2021 
5 Kannur Kunnathu 
paramba 
111590500061 AYISU xxxxxxxx 9367 1/1/1940 UMWP Active Oct-16 Jul-19 D to H Withheld 
for non-
mustering 
as on Aug 
2021 
6 Kannur Kunnathu 
paramba 
111590600921 Ayisha xxxxxxxx 9367 1/1/1963 IGNWP Active Feb-15 Aug-21 Bank Disbursed 
7 Palakkad Kappur 108060500058 Kali xxxxxxxx 2504 1/1/1960 UMWP Active Feb-15 Jul-19 Bank Withheld 
for non-
mustering 
as on Aug 
2021 
8 Palakkad Kappur 108060600671 Kali xxxxxxxx 2504 1/1/1954 IGNWP Active Feb-15 Aug-21 D to H Disbursed 
9 Thiruvananth
apuram 
Maranalloor 102780500032 Chandrika.s xxxxxxxx 5628 1/1/1928 UMWP Active Feb-15 Nov-19 D to H Withheld 
for non-
mustering 
as on Aug 
2021 
10 Thiruvananth
apuram 
Maranalloor 102780601460 Chandrika.S xxxxxxxx 5628 1/1/1957 IGNWP Active Feb-15 Aug-21 Bank Disbursed 

 
70 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
One pension is active and the other one was suspended 
Sl. 
No. 
District Local 
Body 
Pensioner ID Pensioner 
Name 
Aadhaar 
No. 
Date of 
Birth 
Pension 
type 
Status Distribution 
start 
Pension 
disbursed 
up to 
Account 
mode 
Remarks 
1     110340500021 Kumudam xxxxxxxx 
2016 
20/4/1954  UMWP Suspended -       
2 Kozhikkode Panangad 110340600021 Mallika xxxxxxxx 
2016 
1/1/1944 IGNWP Active Feb-15 Aug-21 D to H Disbursed 
3     101760600075 Janamma xxxxxxxx 
3994 
5/6/1943 IGNWP Suspended -       
4 Kollam Paravoor 101760500022 K Janamma xxxxxxxx 
3994 
1/1/1935 UMWP Active Mar-16 Aug-21 D to H Disbursed 
Both the SSPs have been suspended. In this case, the name is different but the Aadhaar ID is one 
Sl. 
No. 
District Local 
Body 
Pensioner ID Pensioner 
Name 
Aadhaar No. Date of 
Birth 
Pension 
type 
Status Distribution 
start 
Pension 
disbursed 
up to 
Account 
mode 
Remarks 
1     101850600036 Lekshmi    K xxxxxxxx 
0604   IGNWP Suspended -       
2 Alappuzha Alappuzha 101850500036 Kamalamma   
C. 
xxxxxxxx 
0604 1/1/1930 UMWP Suspended - Jun-21 Bank   
 
 
 

 
 71   
Appendix 
Appendix – V 
(Ref : Paragraph 2.5.3 – Page No. 16) 
Irregular approval of SSPs without certificate in selected Districts 
 
District No. of cases Amount 
(₹ in lakh) 
Percentage 
of cases 
Percentage 
of amount 
Idukki 17 0.96 6.12 1.41 
Malappuram 137 37.99 49.28 55.91 
Pathanamthitta 14 0.53 5.03 0.78 
Thiruvananthapuram 64 15.11 23.02 22.24 
Thrissur 46 13.36 16.55 19.66 
Total 278 67.95 100.00 100.00 
(Information furnished by LSGIs) 
  

 
72 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
Appendix – VI 
(Ref : Paragraph 2.5.4 & 2.11.3 – Page No. 17 & 30) 
The audit recommendations of the Report of CAG of India on PA of Social Security 
Pension Schemes 
1. State Government should address the syst emic deficiencies in augmentation and 
disbursement of funds and ensure regul ar monthly pension disbursements to 
beneficiaries. 
 
2. Local bodies need to institute a process of annual verification of beneficiaries to ensure 
continued fulfilment of eligibility criteria. Technology could be leveraged to the extent 
possible. Disbursement monitoring mechanism needs to be strengthened. 
 
3. Linkage of Aadhaar with beneficiary accounts needs to be expeditiously completed and 
duplicate/ ghost beneficiaries need to be weeded out on priority. Procedural issues 
leading to failure in crediting social security pensions to beneficiary accounts through 
Direct Benefit Transfer need to be addressed and resolved. 
 
4. A system of providing mobile alerts to beneficiaries could be introduced to inform the 
beneficiaries of the payment credited to  their accounts to enhance beneficiary 
convenience. Local Self Government could also harness the full potential of technology 
in enhancing the quality of service delivery and consider introducing mobile payments 
or payments through business correspondents. 
 
  

 
 73   
Appendix 
Appendix – VII 
(Ref : Paragraph 2.5.6 – Page No. 18) 
District wise details of irregular payment of SSPs noticed during Beneficiary Survey 
District No. of household 
where Beneficiary 
Survey conducted 
No. of cases 
where 
irregularities 
noticed 
Idukki 159 23 
Malappuram 184 25 
Pathanamthitta 175 50 
Thiruvananthapuram 52 22 
Thrissur 202 32 
Total 772 152 
(Information collected during Beneficiary survey) 
  

 
74 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
Appendix – VIII 
(Ref : Paragraph 2.6.1 – Page No. 19) 
Irregular sanction of SSPs to Government Servants/ Service Pensioners/ Temporary 
Employees 
Sl 
No 
District Name of Local Bodies No. of cases Amount  
₹ 
1 Alappuzha Ala GP 4 1,73,200 
2 Alappuzha Alappuzha Mplty 185 79,08,900 
3 Alappuzha Ambalapuzha North GP 16 6,54,200 
4 Alappuzha Ambalapuzha South GP 21 8,94,000 
5 Alappuzha Arattupuzha GP 13 4,93,200 
6 Alappuzha Arookutty GP 3 1,45,500 
7 Alappuzha Aroor GP 20 7,79,900 
8 Alappuzha Aryad GP 36 15,11,400 
9 Alappuzha Bharanikavu GP 12 5,62,800 
10 Alappuzha Budhanur GP 8 3,36,800 
11 Alappuzha Champakulam GP 5 2,07,100 
12 Alappuzha Chengannoor Mplty 7 3,21,500 
13 Alappuzha Chennampallippuram GP 6 2,26,100 
14 Alappuzha Chennithala Thriperumthura GP 19 7,45,000 
15 Alappuzha Cheppad GP 11 4,80,100 
16 Alappuzha Cheriyanad GP 9 4,12,500 
17 Alappuzha Cherthala Mplty 13 5,51,400 
18 Alappuzha Cherthala South GP 12 4,23,000 
19 Alappuzha Cheruthana GP 10 4,00,300 
20 Alappuzha Chettikulangara GP 22 9,96,000 
21 Alappuzha Chingoli GP 9 4,22,000 
22 Alappuzha Chunakkara GP 28 11,48,000 
23 Alappuzha Devikulangara GP 8 3,25,600 
24 Alappuzha Edathua GP 7 3,39,500 
25 Alappuzha Haripad Mplty 13 5,99,200 
26 Alappuzha Kadakkarappally GP 3 1,26,300 
27 Alappuzha Kainakary GP 14 5,54,500 
28 Alappuzha Kandalloor GP 13 5,01,100 
29 Alappuzha Kanjikuzhi GP 21 8,06,000 
30 Alappuzha Karthikappally GP 10 4,56,800 
31 Alappuzha Karuvatta GP 12 5,51,000 
32 Alappuzha Kavalam GP 5 2,23,900 
33 Alappuzha Kayamkulam Mplty 29 13,06,400 
34 Alappuzha Kodamthuruthu GP 8 3,25,500 

 
 75   
Appendix 
Sl 
No 
District Name of Local Bodies No. of cases Amount  
₹ 
35 Alappuzha Krishnapuram GP 19 8,49,800 
36 Alappuzha Kumarapuram GP 11 4,91,900 
37 Alappuzha Kuthiathodu GP 4 1,72,400 
38 Alappuzha Mannanchery GP 69 28,86,700 
39 Alappuzha Mannar GP 23 9,56,100 
40 Alappuzha Mararikulam North GP 3 1,07,300 
41 Alappuzha Mararikulam South GP 42 17,95,800 
42 Alappuzha Mavelikara Thamarakulam GP 16 6,98,600 
43 Alappuzha Mavelikkara Mplty 16 6,52,800 
44 Alappuzha Mavelikkara Thekkekara GP 16 7,90,500 
45 Alappuzha Muhamma GP 10 3,81,900 
46 Alappuzha Mulakuzha GP 10 4,32,200 
47 Alappuzha Muthukulam GP 5 2,11,300 
48 Alappuzha Muttar GP 4 1,92,200 
49 Alappuzha Nedumudi GP 15 6,59,500 
50 Alappuzha Neelamperoor GP 3 97,500 
51 Alappuzha Nooranad GP 13 5,50,400 
52 Alappuzha Palamel GP 11 3,98,700 
53 Alappuzha Pallippad GP 6 2,72,100 
54 Alappuzha Panavally GP 9 3,90,000 
55 Alappuzha Pandanad GP 8 3,63,400 
56 Alappuzha Pathiyoor GP 16 6,83,900 
57 Alappuzha Pattanakkad GP 16 5,70,900 
58 Alappuzha Perumbalam GP 4 1,68,800 
59 Alappuzha Pulinkunnu GP 9 3,75,700 
60 Alappuzha Puliyoor GP 4 1,46,400 
61 Alappuzha Punnapra North GP 32 13,36,000 
62 Alappuzha Punnapra South GP 21 8,50,300 
63 Alappuzha Purakkad GP 10 4,16,500 
64 Alappuzha Ramankari GP 4 1,93,200 
65 Alappuzha Thaicattussery GP 9 4,15,300 
66 Alappuzha Thakazhi GP 6 2,62,600 
67 Alappuzha Thalavadi GP 13 5,75,700 
68 Alappuzha Thanneermukkam GP 11 4,57,800 
69 Alappuzha Thazhakara GP 27 11,82,500 
70 Alappuzha Thiruvanvandur GP 5 2,11,500 
71 Alappuzha Thrikkunnapuzha GP 7 2,77,100 
72 Alappuzha Thuravoor GP 12 4,94,900 
73 Alappuzha Vallikunnam GP 11 4,45,500 
74 Alappuzha Vayalar GP 8 3,02,900 

 
76 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
Sl 
No 
District Name of Local Bodies No. of cases Amount  
₹ 
75 Alappuzha Veeyapuram GP 7 2,94,700 
76 Alappuzha Veliyanad GP 11 4,74,100 
77 Alappuzha Venmony GP 6 2,64,500 
78 Ernakulam Aikaranad GP 3 1,39,900 
79 Ernakulam Alangad GP 5 2,17,500 
80 Ernakulam Aluva Mplty 6 3,02,400 
81 Ernakulam Amballur GP 6 2,59,600 
82 Ernakulam Angamali Mplty 13 5,00,000 
83 Ernakulam Arakuzha GP 5 2,26,800 
84 Ernakulam Asamannoor GP 18 7,37,500 
85 Ernakulam Avoly GP 2 52,600 
86 Ernakulam Ayavana GP 1 42,100 
87 Ernakulam Chellanam GP 3 1,44,100 
88 Ernakulam Chendamangalam GP 10 4,22,400 
89 Ernakulam Chengamanad GP 3 1,28,300 
90 Ernakulam Cheranallur GP 16 7,16,700 
91 Ernakulam Chittattukara GP 8 3,34,600 
92 Ernakulam Choornikkara GP 6 2,63,900 
93 Ernakulam Chottanikkara GP 3 1,35,800 
94 Ernakulam Cochin Corp 70 31,03,900 
95 Ernakulam Edakkattuvayal GP 11 4,35,300 
96 Ernakulam Edathala GP 4 1,68,800 
97 Ernakulam Edavanakkad GP 9 3,86,300 
98 Ernakulam Elamkunnapuzha GP 20 8,51,100 
99 Ernakulam Elanji GP 2 84,200 
100 Ernakulam Eloor Mplty 10 4,68,600 
101 Ernakulam Ezhikkara GP 7 3,08,500 
102 Ernakulam Kadamakudy GP 2 84,200 
103 Ernakulam Kadungallur GP 15 5,48,200 
104 Ernakulam Kalady GP 11 4,53,600 
105 Ernakulam Kalamassery Mplty 10 4,44,200 
106 Ernakulam Kalloorkkad GP 1 40,100 
107 Ernakulam Kanjoor GP 4 1,39,800 
108 Ernakulam Karukutty GP 3 1,35,300 
109 Ernakulam Karumalloor GP 10 4,21,900 
110 Ernakulam Kavalangad GP 6 2,90,400 
111 Ernakulam Keerampara GP 3 1,09,700 
112 Ernakulam Keezhmad GP 5 2,01,400 
113 Ernakulam Kizhakkambalam GP 4 1,70,400 
114 Ernakulam Koovappady GP 16 7,17,600 

 
 77   
Appendix 
Sl 
No 
District Name of Local Bodies No. of cases Amount  
₹ 
115 Ernakulam Kothamangalam Mplty 4 1,42,200 
116 Ernakulam Kottappady GP 4 1,41,000 
117 Ernakulam Kottuvally GP 10 3,96,400 
118 Ernakulam Kumbalam GP 7 2,73,300 
119 Ernakulam Kumbalangy GP 8 3,58,900 
120 Ernakulam Kunnathunad GP 7 2,86,200 
121 Ernakulam Kunnukara GP 5 2,16,900 
122 Ernakulam Kuttampuzha GP 5 2,24,500 
123 Ernakulam Kuzhuppilly GP 4 1,88,200 
124 Ernakulam Malayattoor Neeleswaram GP 4 1,68,400 
125 Ernakulam Maneed GP 4 1,68,800 
126 Ernakulam Manjalloor GP 3 1,55,200 
127 Ernakulam Manjapra GP 3 1,14,200 
128 Ernakulam Maradu Mplty 14 6,39,200 
129 Ernakulam Marady GP 1 46,100 
130 Ernakulam Mazhuvannoor GP 10 4,21,000 
131 Ernakulam Mookkannur GP 1 55,500 
132 Ernakulam Mudakuzha GP 7 3,01,400 
133 Ernakulam Mulavukad GP 6 2,29,300 
134 Ernakulam Mulumthuruthy GP 10 3,93,600 
135 Ernakulam Muvattupuzha Mplty 8 3,57,200 
136 Ernakulam Nayarambalam GP 9 3,95,300 
137 Ernakulam Nedumbassery GP 9 3,65,500 
138 Ernakulam Nellikkuzhi GP 17 7,27,800 
139 Ernakulam Njarakkal GP 7 3,00,700 
140 Ernakulam North Paravur Mplty 8 3,90,200 
141 Ernakulam Okkal GP 10 3,45,000 
142 Ernakulam Paingottur GP 3 1,26,300 
143 Ernakulam Paipra GP 11 4,32,700 
144 Ernakulam Palakuzha GP 5 2,23,900 
145 Ernakulam Pallarimangalam GP 2 87,600 
146 Ernakulam Pallippuram GP 15 6,73,400 
147 Ernakulam Pampakuda GP 3 1,47,200 
148 Ernakulam Parakkadavu GP 5 2,27,600 
149 Ernakulam Perumbavoor Mplty 14 6,95,900 
150 Ernakulam Pindimana GP 9 4,01,700 
151 Ernakulam Piravom Mplty 16 6,87,500 
152 Ernakulam Poothrika GP 1 42,100 
153 Ernakulam Pothanikkad GP 2 84,200 
154 Ernakulam Puthenvelikara GP 10 4,50,100 

 
78 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
Sl 
No 
District Name of Local Bodies No. of cases Amount  
₹ 
155 Ernakulam Ramamangalam GP 4 163,700 
156 Ernakulam Rayamangalam GP 9 3,67,800 
157 Ernakulam Sreemoolanagaram GP 7 2,50,000 
158 Ernakulam Thirumarady GP 4 1,99,200 
159 Ernakulam Thiruvaniyoor GP 6 2,54,600 
160 Ernakulam Thrikkakara Mplty 13 6,43,100 
161 Ernakulam Thuravoor GP 5 2,23,600 
162 Ernakulam Tripunithura Mplty 37 15,72,200 
163 Ernakulam Udayamperur GP 19 7,89,900 
164 Ernakulam Vadakkekara GP 11 4,71,200 
165 Ernakulam Vadavucode Puthen Cruz GP 3 1,29,300 
166 Ernakulam Valakom GP 3 1,29,300 
167 Ernakulam Varappetty GP 4 1,52,100 
168 Ernakulam Varapuzha GP 3 1,26,300 
169 Ernakulam Vazhakkulam GP 3 72,100 
170 Ernakulam Vengola GP 8 3,36,400 
171 Ernakulam Vengoor GP 13 6,23,500 
172 Idukki Adimaly GP 3 96,600 
173 Idukki Alakkode GP 1 42,100 
174 Idukki Arakulam GP 7 3,04,700 
175 Idukki Ayyappancoil GP 1 31,200 
176 Idukki BisonvalleyGP 1 42,100 
177 Idukki Chakkupallam GP 2 99,600 
178 Idukki Devikulam GP 7 3,24,500 
179 Idukki Edavetty GP 3 1,46,400 
180 Idukki Elappara GP 3 1,03,200 
181 Idukki Erattayar GP 6 2,63,400 
182 Idukki Idukki Kanjikuzhy GP 2 46,700 
183 Idukki Kamakshy GP 2 95,400 
184 Idukki Kanchiyar GP 3 1,08,500 
185 Idukki Kanthalloor GP 1 53,300 
186 Idukki Karimannoor GP 1 64,500 
187 Idukki Karimkunnam GP 2 84,200 
188 Idukki Karunapuram GP 2 87,200 
189 Idukki Kattappana Mplty 16 6,81,300 
190 Idukki Kokkayar GP 1 44,100 
191 Idukki Konnathady GP 4 1,78,900 
192 Idukki Kudayathoor GP 1 42,100 
193 Idukki Kumaramangalam GP 4 1,51,300 
194 Idukki Kumily GP 7 2,42,900 

 
 79   
Appendix 
Sl 
No 
District Name of Local Bodies No. of cases Amount  
₹ 
195 Idukki Manakkad GP 1 42,100 
196 Idukki Marayoor GP 4 1,83,800 
197 Idukki Mariyapuram GP 2 97,600 
198 Idukki Munnar GP 7 2,63,500 
199 Idukki Muttom GP 5 1,75,700 
200 Idukki Nedumkandam GP 2 86,200 
201 Idukki Pampadumpara GP 7 3,20,300 
202 Idukki Peerumedu GP 3 1,26,700 
203 Idukki Peruvanthanam GP 3 1,42,700 
204 Idukki Purapuzha GP 3 1,43,700 
205 Idukki Rajakkad GP 4 1,54,800 
206 Idukki Senapathy GP 1 42,100 
207 Idukki Thodupuzha Mplty 15 6,86,900 
208 Idukki Udumbanoor GP 2 91,200 
209 Idukki Upputhara GP 7 2,85,500 
210 Idukki Vandanmedu GP 3 87,600 
211 Idukki Vandiperiyar GP 6 1,99,600 
212 Idukki Vannappuram GP 2 89,500 
213 Idukki Vathikudy GP 1 42,100 
214 Idukki Vazhathope GP 5 2,30,100 
215 Idukki Velliyamattom GP 2 97,600 
216 Kannur Alakode GP 7 3,57,500 
217 Kannur Ancharakandy GP 18 7,67,500 
218 Kannur Anthoor Mplty 17 7,09,600 
219 Kannur Aralam GP 5 1,95,300 
220 Kannur Ayyankunnu GP 2 84,200 
221 Kannur Azhikode GP 14 5,89,500 
222 Kannur Chapparapadavu GP 8 3,51,000 
223 Kannur Chembilode GP 9 4,15,600 
224 Kannur Chengalai GP 3 1,18,400 
225 Kannur Cherukunnu GP 5 2,35,500 
226 Kannur Cherupuzha GP 6 2,47,700 
227 Kannur Cheruthazham GP 12 5,38,300 
228 Kannur Chirakkal GP 27 11,92,300 
229 Kannur Chittariparamba GP 3 1,46,700 
230 Kannur Chokli GP 5 2,03,900 
231 Kannur Dharmadom GP 18 8,14,600 
232 Kannur Eramam Kuttur GP 5 2,06,900 
233 Kannur Eramholi GP 8 3,50,400 
234 Kannur Eruvassey GP 5 2,04,400 

 
80 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
Sl 
No 
District Name of Local Bodies No. of cases Amount  
₹ 
235 Kannur Ezhome GP 2 95,200 
236 Kannur Irikkur GP 1 42,100 
237 Kannur Iritty Mplty 4 1,68,400 
238 Kannur Kadambur GP 9 3,72,300 
239 Kannur Kadannapally Panapuzha GP 4 1,48,800 
240 Kannur Kadirur GP 7 2,91,900 
241 Kannur Kalliasseri GP 7 3,20,100 
242 Kannur Kangole Alapadamba GP 10 3,61,000 
243 Kannur Kanichar GP 1 45,100 
244 Kannur Kannapuram GP 7 3,21,500 
245 Kannur KannurCorp 102 44,41,800 
246 Kannur Karivellur Peralam GP 8 2,94,600 
247 Kannur Keezhallur GP 4 1,73,500 
248 Kannur Kelakom GP 6 2,49,400 
249 Kannur Kolacherry GP 10 4,04,200 
250 Kannur Kolayad GP 2 95,400 
251 Kannur Koodali GP 3 1,26,300 
252 Kannur Koothuparamba Mplty 6 2,79,200 
253 Kannur Kottayam GP 3 1,41,500 
254 Kannur Kottiyoor GP 2 76,100 
255 Kannur Kunhimangalam GP 6 2,88,800 
256 Kannur Kunnathuparamba GP 3 1,22,000 
257 Kannur Kurumathur GP 23 9,92,200 
258 Kannur Kuttiattur GP 7 3,19,900 
259 Kannur Madayi GP 8 3,34,800 
260 Kannur Malapattom GP 3 1,42,100 
261 Kannur Malur GP 1 53,300 
262 Kannur Mangattidam GP 9 4,08,300 
263 Kannur Mattannur Mplty 9 3,92,900 
264 Kannur Mattool GP 6 1,78,800 
265 Kannur Mayyil GP 19 8,47,000 
266 Kannur Munderi GP 4 1,41,200 
267 Kannur Muzhakkunnu GP 3 1,30,200 
268 Kannur Muzhappilangad GP 5 1,82,100 
269 Kannur Naduvil GP 3 1,26,300 
270 Kannur Narath GP 4 1,41,200 
271 Kannur New Mahi GP 2 55,400 
272 Kannur Padiyur kalliad GP 3 95,500 
273 Kannur Panniyannur GP 10 3,36,400 
274 Kannur PanoorMplty 7 2,96,700 

 
 81   
Appendix 
Sl 
No 
District Name of Local Bodies No. of cases Amount  
₹ 
275 Kannur Pappinisseri GP 7 3,39,500 
276 Kannur Pariyaram GP 4 1,74,800 
277 Kannur Pattiam GP 11 4,79,000 
278 Kannur Pattuvam GP 3 1,35,300 
279 Kannur Payam GP 3 1,36,600 
280 Kannur Payyannur Mplty 32 12,49,900 
281 Kannur Payyavoor GP 1 48,100 
282 Kannur Peralasseri GP 6 2,71,900 
283 Kannur Peravoor GP 4 1,71,400 
284 Kannur Peringome Vayakkara GP 5 2,28,400 
285 Kannur Pinarayi GP 10 4,05,100 
286 Kannur Ramanthali GP 2 1,03,600 
287 Kannur Sreekandapuram Mplty 4 1,68,400 
288 Kannur TaliparambaMplty 18 8,02,800 
289 Kannur Thalassery Mplty 24 10,40,400 
290 Kannur Thilankeri GP 2 88,200 
291 Kannur Triprangottur GP 1 42,100 
292 Kannur Ulikkal GP 3 1,37,300 
293 Kannur Valapattanam GP 3 1,26,300 
294 Kannur Vengad GP 17 7,22,700 
295 Kasaragod Ajanoor GP 6 1,97,800 
296 Kasaragod Badiyadka GP 8 3,76,900 
297 Kasaragod Bedaduka GP 4 1,79,600 
298 Kasaragod Belloor GP 4 1,70,400 
299 Kasaragod Chemnad GP 4 1,60,400 
300 Kasaragod Chengala GP 1 42,100 
301 Kasaragod Cheruvathur GP 11 4,79,100 
302 Kasaragod East Eleri GP 2 97,400 
303 Kasaragod Enmakaje GP 1 42,100 
304 Kasaragod Kallar GP 1 42,100 
305 Kasaragod Kanjhangad Mplty 19 7,39,300 
306 Kasaragod Karadka GP 5 1,82,900 
307 Kasaragod Kasaragod Mplty 11 4,58,300 
308 Kasaragod Kayyur Cheemeni GP 6 2,56,700 
309 Kasaragod Kinanoor Karinthalam GP 4 1,68,800 
310 Kasaragod Kodombellur GP 8 3,19,200 
311 Kasaragod Kumbadaje GP 1 44,100 
312 Kasaragod Kumbala GP 4 1,57,400 
313 Kasaragod Kutikkol GP 3 1,00,800 
314 Kasaragod Madhur GP 12 4,82,600 

 
82 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
Sl 
No 
District Name of Local Bodies No. of cases Amount  
₹ 
315 Kasaragod Madikkai GP 7 3,05,500 
316 Kasaragod Mangalpady GP 1 45,100 
317 Kasaragod Manjewswaram GP 1 42,100 
318 Kasaragod Meenja GP 6 2,77,200 
319 Kasaragod Mogral Puthur GP 2 84,600 
320 Kasaragod Muliyar GP 2 89,600 
321 Kasaragod Nileshwararam Mplty 29 12,90,300 
322 Kasaragod Padne GP 9 3,79,100 
323 Kasaragod Paivalike GP 3 1,15,400 
324 Kasaragod Pallikkara GP 2 84,200 
325 Kasaragod Panathady GP 3 1,26,300 
326 Kasaragod Pilicode GP 6 2,56,800 
327 Kasaragod Pullurperiya GP 12 5,90,500 
328 Kasaragod Puthige GP 1 42,100 
329 Kasaragod TrikaripurGP 8 3,37,800 
330 Kasaragod Udma GP 4 1,61,400 
331 Kasaragod Valiyaparamba GP 2 87,200 
332 Kasaragod Vorkady GP 2 84,200 
333 Kasaragod West Eleri GP 2 90,700 
334 Kollam Adichanalloor GP 15 6,46,700 
335 Kollam Alappad GP 7 2,87,200 
336 Kollam Alayamon GP 2 89,600 
337 Kollam Anchal GP 7 2,61,100 
338 Kollam Chadayamangalam GP 13 5,33,400 
339 Kollam Chathannur GP 14 5,75,100 
340 Kollam Chavara GP 14 5,56,800 
341 Kollam Chirakkara GP 9 2,83,800 
342 Kollam Chithara GP 11 4,74,200 
343 Kollam Clappana GP 7 2,59,600 
344 Kollam Edamulakkal GP 11 4,37,900 
345 Kollam Elamadu GP 10 4,06,500 
346 Kollam Elampalloor GP 3 1,15,300 
347 Kollam Ezhukone GP 20 7,73,500 
348 Kollam Ittiva GP 16 5,73,000 
349 Kollam Kadakkal GP 17 6,61,100 
350 Kollam Kalluvathukkal GP 20 9,22,800 
351 Kollam Karavaloor GP 5 2,05,200 
352 Kollam Kareepra GP 20 8,38,300 
353 Kollam Karunagappally Mplty 17 7,37,200 
354 Kollam Kizhakkekallada GP 15 5,70,100 

 
 83   
Appendix 
Sl 
No 
District Name of Local Bodies No. of cases Amount  
₹ 
355 Kollam Kollam Corp 75 30,11,500 
356 Kollam Kottamkara GP 8 2,91,600 
357 Kollam Kottarakara Mplty 30 12,51,700 
358 Kollam Kulakkada GP 15 6,85,100 
359 Kollam Kulasekharapuram GP 12 4,71,500 
360 Kollam Kulathupuzha GP 6 2,01,600 
361 Kollam Kummil GP 5 2,10,500 
362 Kollam Kundara GP 6 2,32,900 
363 Kollam Kunnathur GP 6 2,47,600 
364 Kollam Mayyanad GP 23 10,26,100 
365 Kollam Melila GP 12 4,61,300 
366 Kollam Muntrothuruthu GP 3 1,44,300 
367 Kollam Mylam GP 9 3,94,400 
368 Kollam Mynagappally GP 21 8,50,600 
369 Kollam Nedumpana GP 14 5,44,200 
370 Kollam Neduvathur GP 28 11,64,200 
371 Kollam Neendakara GP 3 1,27,000 
372 Kollam Nilamel GP 5 2,10,500 
373 Kollam Oachira GP 11 4,67,500 
374 Kollam Panayam GP 18 6,76,100 
375 Kollam Panmana GP 14 5,84,000 
376 Kollam Paravoor Mplty 19 8,83,200 
377 Kollam Pathanapuram GP 3 1,43,100 
378 Kollam Pattazhi GP 2 68,400 
379 Kollam Pavithreswaram GP 29 12,18,200 
380 Kollam Perayam GP 18 7,55,900 
381 Kollam Perinad GP 14 4,68,200 
382 Kollam Piravanthur GP 10 4,28,100 
383 Kollam Poothakkulam GP 10 4,01,600 
384 Kollam Pooyappally GP 7 2,57,200 
385 Kollam Poruvazhy GP 4 1,60,700 
386 Kollam Punaloor Mplty 18 7,95,600 
387 Kollam Sasthamcotta GP 8 3,29,500 
388 Kollam Sooranad North GP 14 5,53,500 
389 Kollam Sooranad South GP 11 4,23,700 
390 Kollam Thalavoor GP 7 3,09,100 
391 Kollam Thazhava GP 11 4,20,200 
392 Kollam Thekkumbhagom GP 11 4,37,700 
393 Kollam Thenmala GP 7 2,59,600 
394 Kollam Thevalakkara GP 11 4,11,900 

 
84 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
Sl 
No 
District Name of Local Bodies No. of cases Amount  
₹ 
395 Kollam Thodiyoor GP 22 9,84,100 
396 Kollam Thrikkaruva GP 13 5,28,300 
397 Kollam Thrikkovilvattom GP 26 10,19,100 
398 Kollam Ummannur GP 8 3,43,500 
399 Kollam Velinallur GP 6 2,89,400 
400 Kollam Veliyam GP 15 5,10,400 
401 Kollam Vettikkavala GP 17 7,35,800 
402 Kollam Vilakudy GP 3 1,09,000 
403 Kollam West Kallada GP 8 3,44,800 
404 Kollam Yeroor GP 8 3,73,300 
405 Kottayam Aimanam GP 11 5,04,300 
406 Kottayam Akalakunnam GP 3 1,37,500 
407 Kottayam Arpookara GP 5 2,02,000 
408 Kottayam Athirampuzha GP 8 3,49,200 
409 Kottayam Ayarkkunnam GP 12 4,97,400 
410 Kottayam Bharananganam GP 2 84,200 
411 Kottayam Changanassery Mplty 13 5,89,500 
412 Kottayam Chempu GP 8 2,92,300 
413 Kottayam Chirakkadavu GP 5 1,71,000 
414 Kottayam Elikulam GP 1 53,300 
415 Kottayam Erattupetta Mplty 2 84,200 
416 Kottayam Erumeli GP 7 3,06,300 
417 Kottayam Ettumanoor Mplty 6 2,85,600 
418 Kottayam Kadanad GP 4 1,68,400 
419 Kottayam Kadaplamattom GP 2 84,200 
420 Kottayam Kaduthuruthy GP 18 7,78,000 
421 Kottayam Kallara GP 15 6,47,900 
422 Kottayam Kanakkari GP 9 3,62,200 
423 Kottayam Kangazha GP 7 2,65,000 
424 Kottayam Kanjirappally GP 5 2,53,200 
425 Kottayam Karoor GP 11 4,99,300 
426 Kottayam Karukachal GP 5 2,02,000 
427 Kottayam Kidangoor GP 9 4,40,400 
428 Kottayam Kooroppada GP 6 3,00,700 
429 Kottayam Koottickal GP 7 2,73,600 
430 Kottayam Koruthode GP 1 20,100 
431 Kottayam Kottayam Mplty 43 18,73,600 
432 Kottayam Kozhuvanal GP 3 1,29,300 
433 Kottayam Kumarakom GP 10 3,65,300 
434 Kottayam Kuravilangad GP 12 5,63,400 

 
 85   
Appendix 
Sl 
No 
District Name of Local Bodies No. of cases Amount  
₹ 
435 Kottayam Kurichy GP 7 2,95,400 
436 Kottayam Madappally GP 9 3,95,300 
437 Kottayam ManarcadGP 6 2,64,900 
438 Kottayam Manimala GP 2 84,200 
439 Kottayam Manjoor GP 11 4,60,000 
440 Kottayam Marangattupally GP 3 1,59,100 
441 Kottayam Maravanthuruthu GP 6 2,57,200 
442 Kottayam Meenachil GP 1 42,100 
443 Kottayam Meenadom GP 4 1,75,800 
444 Kottayam Melukavu GP 1 42,100 
445 Kottayam Mulakulam GP 9 3,92,900 
446 Kottayam Mundakayam GP 6 2,59,000 
447 Kottayam Mutholy GP 2 84,200 
448 Kottayam Nedumkunnam GP 11 4,88,000 
449 Kottayam Neendoor GP 7 3,00,700 
450 Kottayam Njeezhoor GP 3 1,18,200 
451 Kottayam Paippad GP 4 1,45,300 
452 Kottayam Pala Mplty 10 5,04,600 
453 Kottayam Pallikkathode GP 6 2,72,000 
454 Kottayam Pampady GP 5 2,15,300 
455 Kottayam Panachikkad GP 22 9,91,000 
456 Kottayam Parathode GP 4 1,78,400 
457 Kottayam Poonjar GP 1 27,100 
458 Kottayam Poonjar Thekkekara GP 2 84,200 
459 Kottayam Puthuppally GP 2 93,800 
460 Kottayam Ramapuram GP 5 2,50,400 
461 Kottayam Thalanad GP 2 97,400 
462 Kottayam Thalappalam GP 3 1,57,600 
463 Kottayam Thalayazham GP 12 5,18,100 
464 Kottayam Thalayolaparambu GP 8 2,94,200 
465 Kottayam Thidanad GP 1 34,400 
466 Kottayam Thiruvarpu GP 12 5,45,100 
467 Kottayam Thrikkodithanam GP 9 3,90,300 
468 Kottayam TV Puram GP 4 1,84,900 
469 Kottayam Udayanapuram GP 22 9,22,800 
470 Kottayam Uzhavoor GP 2 1,00,800 
471 Kottayam Vaikom Mplty 9 3,80,100 
472 Kottayam Vakathanam GP 13 5,37,400 
473 Kottayam Vazhappally GP 2 84,200 
474 Kottayam Vazhoor GP 8 3,10,900 

 
86 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
Sl 
No 
District Name of Local Bodies No. of cases Amount  
₹ 
475 Kottayam Vechoor GP 8 3,18,800 
476 Kottayam Veliyannoor GP 2 84,200 
477 Kottayam Vellavoor GP 2 85,100 
478 Kottayam Velloor GP 7 3,08,600 
479 Kottayam Vijayapuram GP 4 1,68,400 
480 Kozhikkode Arikulam GP 8 3,59,200 
481 Kozhikkode Atholi GP 14 6,44,900 
482 Kozhikkode Ayancheri GP 3 1,19,800 
483 Kozhikkode Azhiyur GP 7 3,22,500 
484 Kozhikkode Balusseri GP 15 5,93,900 
485 Kozhikkode Chakittapara GP 5 1,97,900 
486 Kozhikkode Changaroth GP 7 3,28,400 
487 Kozhikkode Chathamangalam GP 12 5,13,900 
488 Kozhikkode Chekkiad GP 2 92,300 
489 Kozhikkode Chelannur GP 21 9,35,700 
490 Kozhikkode Chemanachery GP 5 1,66,700 
491 Kozhikkode Chengottukavu GP 4 1,80,000 
492 Kozhikkode Cheruvannur GP 6 2,27,400 
493 Kozhikkode Chorode GP 5 1,93,800 
494 Kozhikkode Edacheri GP 1 10,900 
495 Kozhikkode Eramala GP 14 5,35,200 
496 Kozhikkode Feroke Mplty 3 1,30,000 
497 Kozhikkode Kadalundi GP 7 2,51,900 
498 Kozhikkode Kakkodi GP 14 5,68,500 
499 Kozhikkode Kakkur GP 9 3,96,100 
500 Kozhikkode Karasseri GP 7 3,21,300 
501 Kozhikkode Kayanna GP 5 1,90,600 
502 Kozhikkode Keezhariyur GP 2 86,200 
503 Kozhikkode Kizhakkoth GP 3 1,04,500 
504 Kozhikkode Kodencheri GP 5 2,11,900 
505 Kozhikkode Kodiyathur GP 6 2,32,300 
506 Kozhikkode Koduvally Mplty 6 2,60,000 
507 Kozhikkode Koothali GP 5 2,12,900 
508 Kozhikkode Kottur GP 5 2,48,500 
509 Kozhikkode Kozhikkode Corp 169 77,05,600 
510 Kozhikkode Kunnamangalam GP 13 5,77,100 
511 Kozhikkode Kunnumal GP 2 84,200 
512 Kozhikkode Kuruvattur GP 17 6,73,400 
513 Kozhikkode Madavoor GP 4 1,72,000 
514 Kozhikkode Maniyur GP 11 4,81,100 

 
 87   
Appendix 
Sl 
No 
District Name of Local Bodies No. of cases Amount  
₹ 
515 Kozhikkode Mavoor GP 9 3,85,900 
516 Kozhikkode Meppayur GP 2 86,600 
517 Kozhikkode Moodadi GP 8 3,21,400 
518 Kozhikkode Mukkam Mplty 11 4,99,900 
519 Kozhikkode Nadapuram GP 4 1,45,200 
520 Kozhikkode Nanmanda GP 8 3,42,700 
521 Kozhikkode Narikunni GP 5 2,11,300 
522 Kozhikkode Naripetta GP 3 1,04,500 
523 Kozhikkode Nochad GP 16 7,31,200 
524 Kozhikkode Olavanna GP 11 4,86,900 
525 Kozhikkode Omassery GP 2 58,900 
526 Kozhikkode Onchiyam GP 7 3,18,100 
527 Kozhikkode Panangad GP 4 1,60,900 
528 Kozhikkode Payyoli Mplty 5 2,32,800 
529 Kozhikkode Perambra GP 8 3,65,000 
530 Kozhikkode Perumanna GP 4 1,67,800 
531 Kozhikkode Peruvayal GP 10 4,24,400 
532 Kozhikkode Purameri GP 2 97,600 
533 Kozhikkode Puthuppady GP 2 81,400 
534 Kozhikkode Quilandy Mplty 16 6,51,100 
535 Kozhikkode Ramanattukara Mplty 5 1,90,300 
536 Kozhikkode Thalakulathur GP 15 6,23,800 
537 Kozhikkode Thamarasseri GP 4 1,68,400 
538 Kozhikkode Thikkodi GP 2 84,200 
539 Kozhikkode Thiruvallur GP 4 1,50,000 
540 Kozhikkode Thiruvambadi GP 2 78,100 
541 Kozhikkode Thurayur GP 3 1,31,700 
542 Kozhikkode Ulliyeri GP 5 1,91,100 
543 Kozhikkode Unnikulum GP 7 2,98,000 
544 Kozhikkode Vadakara Mplty 11 4,20,900 
545 Kozhikkode Valayam GP 2 70,900 
546 Kozhikkode Vanimel GP 2 87,200 
547 Kozhikkode Velom GP 4 1,73,500 
548 Kozhikkode Villiyappally GP 6 2,83,700 
549 Malappuram Alamcode GP 6 2,98,800 
550 Malappuram Aliparamba GP 2 90,300 
551 Malappuram Amarambalam GP 2 62,200 
552 Malappuram Anakkayam GP 5 2,16,500 
553 Malappuram Angadipuram GP 7 2,83,500 
554 Malappuram Areacode GP 3 1,41,100 

 
88 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
Sl 
No 
District Name of Local Bodies No. of cases Amount  
₹ 
555 Malappuram Athavanad GP 2 93,600 
556 Malappuram Chekkode GP 2 91,200 
557 Malappuram Chelembra GP 9 3,88,900 
558 Malappuram Cherukavu GP 12 5,31,800 
559 Malappuram Chokkad GP 4 1,63,300 
560 Malappuram Chungathara GP 7 2,94,700 
561 Malappuram Edakkara GP 3 1,28,300 
562 Malappuram Edappal GP 9 3,92,300 
563 Malappuram Edappatta GP 1 48,100 
564 Malappuram Edarikode GP 1 45,100 
565 Malappuram Edavanna GP 5 2,46,000 
566 Malappuram Edayoor GP 3 95,100 
567 Malappuram Elamkulam GP 4 1,85,200 
568 Malappuram Irimbiliyam GP 6 2,64,900 
569 Malappuram Kalady GP 5 2,36,000 
570 Malappuram Kalikavu GP 5 2,37,100 
571 Malappuram Kalpakancheri GP 3 1,04,100 
572 Malappuram Kannamangalam GP 3 1,34,700 
573 Malappuram Karulai GP 1 42,100 
574 Malappuram Karuvarakundu GP 5 2,42,100 
575 Malappuram Keezhattur GP 4 1,83,600 
576 Malappuram Kodur GP 4 1,68,400 
577 Malappuram KondottyMplty 12 5,31,800 
578 Malappuram Koottilangadi GP 4 1,87,600 
579 Malappuram Kottakkal Mplty 10 4,68,900 
580 Malappuram Kuruva GP 4 1,65,000 
581 Malappuram Kuttippuram GP 6 2,67,000 
582 Malappuram Kuzhimanna GP 5 2,32,900 
583 Malappuram Makkaraparamba GP 4 1,68,400 
584 Malappuram Malappuram Mplty 29 12,67,700 
585 Malappuram Mampad GP 6 2,70,800 
586 Malappuram Mangalam GP 2 93,200 
587 Malappuram Manjeri Mplty 22 9,57,300 
588 Malappuram Mankada GP 2 84,200 
589 Malappuram Marakkara GP 2 1,18,500 
590 Malappuram Maranchery GP 4 1,49,800 
591 Malappuram Melattur GP 4 1,49,100 
592 Malappuram Moonniyur GP 3 1,29,300 
593 Malappuram Moorkkanad GP 4 1,81,800 
594 Malappuram Moothedam GP 1 46,500 

 
 89   
Appendix 
Sl 
No 
District Name of Local Bodies No. of cases Amount  
₹ 
595 Malappuram Morayur GP 6 2,57,400 
596 Malappuram Muthuvallur GP 1 55,500 
597 Malappuram Nannambra GP 1 42,100 
598 Malappuram Nannamukku GP 3 1,26,700 
599 Malappuram Nilambur Mplty 14 6,30,600 
600 Malappuram Niramaruthoor GP 1 42,100 
601 Malappuram Othukkungal GP 2 84,200 
602 Malappuram Ozhur GP 5 2,11,600 
603 Malappuram Pallical GP 6 2,56,600 
604 Malappuram Pandikkad GP 11 4,42,800 
605 Malappuram Parappanangadi Mplty 17 7,15,000 
606 Malappuram Parappur GP 3 1,11,800 
607 Malappuram Perinthalmanna Mplty 8 3,13,200 
608 Malappuram Perumanna KlariGP 2 72,100 
609 Malappuram Perumpadappu GP 3 1,33,300 
610 Malappuram Peruvallur GP 1 46,100 
611 Malappuram Ponmala GP 7 2,96,600 
612 Malappuram Ponnani Mplty 17 6,02,800 
613 Malappuram Pookkottur GP 8 3,25,700 
614 Malappuram Pothukkal GP 10 4,12,900 
615 Malappuram Pulamanthole GP 2 1,07,800 
616 Malappuram Pulikkal GP 2 85,200 
617 Malappuram Pulpatta GP 4 2,06,400 
618 Malappuram Purathur GP 1 46,100 
619 Malappuram Puzhakkattiri GP 2 58,900 
620 Malappuram Tanalur GP 2 87,200 
621 Malappuram Tanur Mplty 10 4,37,400 
622 Malappuram Tavanur GP 5 2,38,400 
623 Malappuram Thazhekode GP 1 42,100 
624 Malappuram Thenhippalam GP 4 1,93,400 
625 Malappuram Thennala GP 1 42,100 
626 Malappuram Thirunavaya GP 6 2,05,800 
627 Malappuram Thirur Mplty 10 4,75,200 
628 Malappuram Thiruvali GP 5 2,31,900 
629 Malappuram Thuvvur GP 6 2,65,800 
630 Malappuram Tirurangadi Mplty 4 1,83,400 
631 Malappuram Trikkalangode GP 6 2,48,100 
632 Malappuram Triprangode GP 9 3,90,400 
633 Malappuram Urangattiri GP 1 42,100 
634 Malappuram Valavannur GP 1 53,300 

 
90 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
Sl 
No 
District Name of Local Bodies No. of cases Amount  
₹ 
635 Malappuram Vallikkunnu GP 19 7,28,200 
636 Malappuram Vattamkulam GP 9 3,90,700 
637 Malappuram Vazhakkad GP 8 3,42,600 
638 Malappuram Vazhayur GP 12 5,42,900 
639 Malappuram Vazhikkadavu GP 2 66,600 
640 Malappuram Veliyancode GP 5 2,04,000 
641 Malappuram Vengara GP 2 91,600 
642 Malappuram Vettathur GP 4 1,93,000 
643 Malappuram Wandoor GP 12 4,74,300 
644 Palakkad Agali GP 12 4,93,500 
645 Palakkad Akathethara GP 4 1,59,800 
646 Palakkad Alanallur GP 5 2,21,700 
647 Palakkad Alathur GP 25 11,42,900 
648 Palakkad Ambalapara GP 6 2,31,100 
649 Palakkad Anakkara GP 5 2,37,300 
650 Palakkad Ananganadi GP 4 2,16,700 
651 Palakkad Ayiloor GP 5 2,14,900 
652 Palakkad Chalavara GP 2 49,000 
653 Palakkad Chalisseri GP 3 1,26,300 
654 Palakkad Cherpulassery Mplty 14 6,37,200 
655 Palakkad Chittoor Thathamangalam 
Mplty 28 10,76,100 
656 Palakkad Elappully GP 3 1,21,600 
657 Palakkad Elavancherry GP 2 67,200 
658 Palakkad Erimayur GP 11 4,31,200 
659 Palakkad Eruthempathy GP 3 1,31,700 
660 Palakkad Kadampazhipuram GP 3 1,26,300 
661 Palakkad Kanjirapuzha GP 10 4,38,200 
662 Palakkad Kannadi GP 2 97,600 
663 Palakkad Kannambra GP 5 2,20,600 
664 Palakkad Kappur GP 5 2,05,900 
665 Palakkad Karakurissi GP 3 1,30,300 
666 Palakkad Karimba GP 5 2,12,500 
667 Palakkad Karimpuzha GP 4 1,85,200 
668 Palakkad Kavassery GP 11 4,76,200 
669 Palakkad Keralassery GP 1 23,400 
670 Palakkad Kizhakkancherry GP 6 2,27,100 
671 Palakkad Kodumba GP 7 2,92,400 
672 Palakkad Koduvayur GP 5 2,16,500 
673 Palakkad Kollengode GP 5 2,25,400 

 
 91   
Appendix 
Sl 
No 
District Name of Local Bodies No. of cases Amount  
₹ 
674 Palakkad Kongad GP 4 1,68,800 
675 Palakkad Koppam GP 4 1,87,800 
676 Palakkad Kottappadam GP 4 1,88,600 
677 Palakkad Kottayi GP 11 4,62,900 
678 Palakkad Kozhinjampara GP 5 2,26,700 
679 Palakkad Kulukkallur GP 5 2,35,100 
680 Palakkad Kumaramputhur GP 5 2,20,800 
681 Palakkad Kuthanoor GP 6 2,64,400 
682 Palakkad Kuzhalmannam GP 13 5,45,100 
683 Palakkad Lakkidi-perur GP 8 3,75,700 
684 Palakkad Malampuzha GP 22 9,99,000 
685 Palakkad Mankara GP 5 2,18,600 
686 Palakkad Mannarkad Mplty 3 1,34,300 
687 Palakkad Mannur GP 3 1,16,600 
688 Palakkad Marutharode GP 11 4,66,200 
689 Palakkad Mathur GP 11 4,59,400 
690 Palakkad Melarcode GP 6 2,87,400 
691 Palakkad Mundur GP 1 42,100 
692 Palakkad Muthalamada GP 9 3,29,800 
693 Palakkad Muthuthala GP 7 2,86,200 
694 Palakkad Nagalassery GP 3 1,34,200 
695 Palakkad Nalleppilly GP 11 4,39,600 
696 Palakkad Nellaya GP 7 3,16,100 
697 Palakkad Nelliampathy GP 1 16,900 
698 Palakkad Nemmara GP 18 7,57,900 
699 Palakkad Ongallur GP 1 43,100 
700 Palakkad Ottappalam Mplty 18 7,35,100 
701 Palakkad Palakkad Mplty 42 19,30,700 
702 Palakkad Pallassana GP 3 1,32,300 
703 Palakkad Parali GP 9 3,78,900 
704 Palakkad Paruthur GP 1 46,100 
705 Palakkad Pattambi Mplty 7 2,76,900 
706 Palakkad Pattencherry GP 4 1,71,400 
707 Palakkad Pattithara GP 2 79,300 
708 Palakkad Peringottukurissi GP 2 64,300 
709 Palakkad Perumatty GP 2 97,600 
710 Palakkad Peruvemba GP 2 84,200 
711 Palakkad Pirayiri GP 9 4,20,400 
712 Palakkad Polpully GP 7 2,84,500 
713 Palakkad Pookkottukavu GP 2 84,200 

 
92 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
Sl 
No 
District Name of Local Bodies No. of cases Amount  
₹ 
714 Palakkad Puducode GP 3 1,26,300 
715 Palakkad Puduppariyaram GP 6 2,59,000 
716 Palakkad Pudur GP 3 1,55,100 
717 Palakkad Pudusseri GP 10 4,38,000 
718 Palakkad Puthunagaram GP 7 2,76,900 
719 Palakkad SholayurGP 3 91,500 
720 Palakkad Shornur Mplty 8 3,40,700 
721 Palakkad Sreekrishnapuram GP 5 2,09,600 
722 Palakkad Tachampara GP 4 1,79,600 
723 Palakkad Tarur GP 7 2,90,200 
724 Palakkad Thachanattukara GP 3 1,46,100 
725 Palakkad Thenkara GP 4 1,57,700 
726 Palakkad Thenkurissi GP 11 5,31,100 
727 Palakkad Thiruvegapura GP 1 70,500 
728 Palakkad Thrikkadeeri GP 2 84,200 
729 Palakkad Thrithala GP 7 3,13,900 
730 Palakkad Vadakarapathy GP 1 42,100 
731 Palakkad Vadakkancheri GP 12 5,06,200 
732 Palakkad Vadavannur GP 5 1,91,800 
733 Palakkad Vallapuzha GP 2 74,600 
734 Palakkad Vandazhy GP 6 2,61,700 
735 Palakkad Vaniamkulam GP 5 1,95,300 
736 Palakkad Vellinezhi GP 2 87,200 
737 Palakkad Vilayur GP 1 42,100 
738 Pathanamthitta Adoor Mplty 9 3,25,600 
739 Pathanamthitta Anicadu GP 4 2,06,700 
740 Pathanamthitta Aranmula GP 23 10,63,000 
741 Pathanamthitta Aruvapulam GP 2 62,400 
742 Pathanamthitta Ayiroor GP 7 3,37,400 
743 Pathanamthitta Chenneerkara GP 7 2,62,800 
744 Pathanamthitta Cherukole GP 3 1,26,300 
745 Pathanamthitta Chittar GP 6 1,79,700 
746 Pathanamthitta Elanthoor GP 2 94,200 
747 Pathanamthitta Enadimangalam GP 8 3,55,800 
748 Pathanamthitta Erathu GP 13 5,42,800 
749 Pathanamthitta Eraviperoor GP 17 7,68,200 
750 Pathanamthitta Ezhamkulam GP 10 4,42,000 
751 Pathanamthitta Ezhumattoor GP 5 1,91,500 
752 Pathanamthitta Kadampanadu GP 6 2,53,100 
753 Pathanamthitta Kadapra GP 9 3,55,600 

 
 93   
Appendix 
Sl 
No 
District Name of Local Bodies No. of cases Amount  
₹ 
754 Pathanamthitta Kalanjoor GP 8 3,40,300 
755 Pathanamthitta Kallooppara GP 2 93,600 
756 Pathanamthitta Kaviyoor GP 2 74,300 
757 Pathanamthitta Kodumon GP 11 5,40,200 
758 Pathanamthitta Koipuram GP 9 3,32,400 
759 Pathanamthitta Konni GP 5 2,26,000 
760 Pathanamthitta Kottanadu GP 2 67,600 
761 Pathanamthitta Kottangal GP 3 1,04,500 
762 Pathanamthitta Kulanada GP 3 1,35,300 
763 Pathanamthitta Kunnathanam GP 3 1,07,600 
764 Pathanamthitta Kuttoor GP 5 1,97,200 
765 Pathanamthitta Malayalapuzha GP 2 65,500 
766 Pathanamthitta Mallappally GP 3 1,34,200 
767 Pathanamthitta Mallapuzhassery GP 2 67,600 
768 Pathanamthitta Mezhuveli GP 1 36,000 
769 Pathanamthitta Mylapra GP 1 42,100 
770 Pathanamthitta Naranammoozhy GP 2 44,300 
771 Pathanamthitta Naranganam GP 5 2,26,500 
772 Pathanamthitta Nedumpuram GP 2 85,200 
773 Pathanamthitta Niranam GP 1 43,100 
774 Pathanamthitta Omallur GP 5 2,34,400 
775 Pathanamthitta Pallickal GP 17 6,84,700 
776 Pathanamthitta Pandalam Mplty 21 8,77,900 
777 Pathanamthitta Pandalam Thekkekara GP 10 4,48,600 
778 Pathanamthitta Pathanamthitta Mplty 34 15,74,000 
779 Pathanamthitta Peringara GP 5 2,27,900 
780 Pathanamthitta Pramadom GP 14 5,69,400 
781 Pathanamthitta Puramattom GP 6 2,31,700 
782 Pathanamthitta Ranni Angadi GP 4 1,71,400 
783 Pathanamthitta Ranni GP 3 1,15,200 
784 Pathanamthitta Ranni Pazhavangadi GP 6 2,54,700 
785 Pathanamthitta Ranni Perunad GP 5 2,59,900 
786 Pathanamthitta Seethathodu GP 3 1,36,500 
787 Pathanamthitta Thannithodu GP 4 1,70,800 
788 Pathanamthitta Thiruvalla Mplty 13 5,76,000 
789 Pathanamthitta Thottapuzhassery GP 3 1,58,200 
790 Pathanamthitta Thumpamon GP 2 85,200 
791 Pathanamthitta Vadasserikkara GP 3 1,36,400 
792 Pathanamthitta Vallicode GP 13 5,30,500 
793 Pathanamthitta Vechuchira GP 2 84,200 

 
94 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
Sl 
No 
District Name of Local Bodies No. of cases Amount  
₹ 
794 Thiruvananthapuram Amboori GP 10 4,00,900 
795 Thiruvananthapuram Anad GP 9 3,69,000 
796 Thiruvananthapuram Andoorkonam GP 11 4,64,800 
797 Thiruvananthapuram Anjuthengu GP 21 9,66,900 
798 Thiruvananthapuram Aruvikkara GP 20 8,77,200 
799 Thiruvananthapuram Aryanad GP 14 6,17,700 
800 Thiruvananthapuram Aryancode GP 11 4,62,700 
801 Thiruvananthapuram Athiyannoor GP 31 1388,900 
802 Thiruvananthapuram Attingal Mplty 19 8,77,000 
803 Thiruvananthapuram Azhoor GP 18 7,81,700 
804 Thiruvananthapuram Balaramapuram GP 25 11,35,100 
805 Thiruvananthapuram Chemmaruthy GP 12 4,60,000 
806 Thiruvananthapuram Chenkal GP 46 18,54,000 
807 Thiruvananthapuram Cherunniyoor GP 10 4,62,700 
808 Thiruvananthapuram Chirayinkeezhu GP 17 7,76,900 
809 Thiruvananthapuram Edava GP 6 2,21,300 
810 Thiruvananthapuram Ilakamon GP 11 4,58,700 
811 Thiruvananthapuram Kadakkavoor GP 12 4,61,800 
812 Thiruvananthapuram Kadinamkulam GP 13 5,53,200 
813 Thiruvananthapuram Kallara GP 10 4,38,400 
814 Thiruvananthapuram Kallikkadu GP 8 3,35,800 
815 Thiruvananthapuram Kalliyoor GP 17 7,04,900 
816 Thiruvananthapuram Kanjiramkulam GP 21 9,26,300 
817 Thiruvananthapuram Karakulam GP 27 11,86,500 
818 Thiruvananthapuram Karavaram GP 15 6,97,500 
819 Thiruvananthapuram Karode GP 19 7,86,000 
820 Thiruvananthapuram Karumkulam GP 17 7,39,300 
821 Thiruvananthapuram Kattakkada GP 25 10,99,800 
822 Thiruvananthapuram Kilimanoor GP 15 6,44,500 
823 Thiruvananthapuram Kizhuvilam GP 24 11,40,600 
824 Thiruvananthapuram Kollayil GP 23 9,98,000 
825 Thiruvananthapuram Kottukal GP 35 15,52,800 
826 Thiruvananthapuram Kulathoor GP 40 16,75,700 
827 Thiruvananthapuram Kunnathukal GP 15 6,42,600 
828 Thiruvananthapuram Kuttichal GP 17 6,83,800 
829 Thiruvananthapuram Madavoor GP 8 3,29,700 
830 Thiruvananthapuram Malayinkeezh GP 21 9,02,000 
831 Thiruvananthapuram Manamboor GP 10 4,42,600 
832 Thiruvananthapuram Mangalapuram GP 13 5,12,300 
833 Thiruvananthapuram Manickal GP 14 6,15,000 

 
 95   
Appendix 
Sl 
No 
District Name of Local Bodies No. of cases Amount  
₹ 
834 Thiruvananthapuram Maranalloor GP 21 8,40,500 
835 Thiruvananthapuram Mudakkal GP 6 2,30,600 
836 Thiruvananthapuram Nagaroor GP 8 3,44,400 
837 Thiruvananthapuram Nanniyode GP 20 8,35,600 
838 Thiruvananthapuram Navaikulam GP 21 8,63,600 
839 Thiruvananthapuram Nedumangad Mplty 40 18,47,100 
840 Thiruvananthapuram Nellanad GP 13 5,07,200 
841 Thiruvananthapuram Neyyattinkara Mplty 68 28,12,800 
842 Thiruvananthapuram Ottasekharamangalam GP 9 3,90,200 
843 Thiruvananthapuram Ottoor GP 6 2,55,700 
844 Thiruvananthapuram Pallichal GP 35 14,56,400 
845 Thiruvananthapuram Pallickal GP 2 1,01,600 
846 Thiruvananthapuram Panavoor GP 4 1,76,400 
847 Thiruvananthapuram Pangode GP 10 4,31,200 
848 Thiruvananthapuram Parassala GP 34 14,62,100 
849 Thiruvananthapuram Pazhayakunnummel GP 13 6,06,500 
850 Thiruvananthapuram Peringammala GP 15 6,62,600 
851 Thiruvananthapuram Perumkadavila GP 16 7,16,700 
852 Thiruvananthapuram Poovachal GP 26 11,58,000 
853 Thiruvananthapuram Poovar GP 13 5,29,000 
854 Thiruvananthapuram Pothencode GP 13 6,02,100 
855 Thiruvananthapuram Pulimath GP 7 2,63,400 
856 Thiruvananthapuram Pullampara GP 3 1,31,400 
857 Thiruvananthapuram Thirupuram GP 39 16,65,400 
858 Thiruvananthapuram Thiruvananthapuram Corp 347 1,53,12,100 
859 Thiruvananthapuram Tholicode GP 6 2,55,400 
860 Thiruvananthapuram Uzhamalakkal GP 14 5,85,100 
861 Thiruvananthapuram Vakkom GP 23 9,54,500 
862 Thiruvananthapuram Vamanapuram GP 7 2,18,700 
863 Thiruvananthapuram Varkala Mplty 16 8,24,800 
864 Thiruvananthapuram Vellanad GP 21 9,36,500 
865 Thiruvananthapuram Vellarada GP 23 10,35,400 
866 Thiruvananthapuram Vembayam GP 18 7,55,600 
867 Thiruvananthapuram Venganoor GP 14 6,00,200 
868 Thiruvananthapuram Vettoor GP 8 3,00,700 
869 Thiruvananthapuram Vilappil GP 18 8,39,100 
870 Thiruvananthapuram Vilavoorkkal GP 24 10,22,600 
871 Thiruvananthapuram Vithura GP 8 3,33,000 
872 Thrissur Adat GP 15 6,70,300 
873 Thrissur Alagappa Nagar GP 9 4,14,700 

 
96 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
Sl 
No 
District Name of Local Bodies No. of cases Amount  
₹ 
874 Thrissur Alur GP 9 4,04,900 
875 Thrissur Annamanada GP 7 3,25,400 
876 Thrissur Anthikkad GP 7 3,00,300 
877 Thrissur Arimpoor GP 18 7,69,400 
878 Thrissur Athirappilli GP 1 42,100 
879 Thrissur Avanur GP 6 2,35,800 
880 Thrissur AvinisseryGP 1 42,100 
881 Thrissur Chalakkudy Mplty 26 11,70,200 
882 Thrissur Chavakkad Mplty 11 5,44,300 
883 Thrissur Chazhoor GP 6 2,71,400 
884 Thrissur Chelakkara GP 7 2,96,000 
885 Thrissur Cherpu GP 10 4,17,800 
886 Thrissur Choondal GP 3 1,09,300 
887 Thrissur Desamangalam GP 2 84,200 
888 Thrissur Edathiruthy GP 5 2,06,300 
889 Thrissur Edavilangu GP 2 1,00,600 
890 Thrissur Elavally GP 6 2,52,600 
891 Thrissur Engandiyur GP 10 4,21,100 
892 Thrissur Eriyad GP 8 3,21,700 
893 Thrissur Erumapetty GP 8 2,98,500 
894 Thrissur Guruvayoor Mplty 14 6,14,900 
895 Thrissur Irinjalakuda Mplty 19 8,46,500 
896 Thrissur Kadangode GP 6 2,53,000 
897 Thrissur Kadappuram GP 3 1,15,800 
898 Thrissur Kadavallur GP 2 84,200 
899 Thrissur Kadukutty GP 11 4,79,100 
900 Thrissur Kaiparamb GP 5 1,60,200 
901 Thrissur Kandanassery GP 4 1,83,600 
902 Thrissur Karalam GP 1 22,200 
903 Thrissur Kattakampal GP 4 1,68,400 
904 Thrissur Kattur GP 1 42,100 
905 Thrissur Kodakara GP 10 4,73,000 
906 Thrissur Kodassery GP 10 4,36,400 
907 Thrissur Kodungalloor Mplty 19 8,01,300 
908 Thrissur Kolazhy GP 14 5,86,900 
909 Thrissur Kondazhy GP 4 1,70,800 
910 Thrissur Koratty GP 11 4,75,000 
911 Thrissur Kunnamkulam Mplty 9 4,06,200 
912 Thrissur Kuzhur GP 7 3,23,400 
913 Thrissur Madakkathara GP 6 1,95,700 

 
 97   
Appendix 
Sl 
No 
District Name of Local Bodies No. of cases Amount  
₹ 
914 Thrissur Mala GP 5 2,38,900 
915 Thrissur Manalur GP 14 6,04,100 
916 Thrissur Mathilakam GP 1 42,100 
917 Thrissur Mattathur GP 11 4,47,700 
918 Thrissur Melur GP 5 2,38,100 
919 Thrissur Mulakunnathukavu GP 10 4,41,400 
920 Thrissur Mullassery GP 6 2,68,200 
921 Thrissur Mullurkara GP 3 1,29,300 
922 Thrissur Muriyad GP 8 2,55,300 
923 Thrissur Nadathara GP 11 4,96,100 
924 Thrissur Nattika GP 12 5,22,100 
925 Thrissur Nenmanikkara GP 9 3,36,700 
926 Thrissur Orumanayur GP 1 42,100 
927 Thrissur Padiyur GP 3 1,28,800 
928 Thrissur Pananchery GP 17 7,47,100 
929 Thrissur Panjal GP 4 1,68,400 
930 Thrissur Paralam GP 8 3,30,700 
931 Thrissur Parappukkara GP 10 4,23,700 
932 Thrissur Pavaratty GP 7 3,27,800 
933 Thrissur Pazhayannur GP 11 5,09,900 
934 Thrissur Perinjanam GP 1 43,200 
935 Thrissur Poomangalam GP 2 84,200 
936 Thrissur Porkulam GP 4 1,79,600 
937 Thrissur Poyya GP 3 1,18,300 
938 Thrissur Pudukkad GP 4 1,90,200 
939 Thrissur Punnayur GP 6 2,57,600 
940 Thrissur Punnayurkulam GP 3 1,32,300 
941 Thrissur Puthur GP 14 5,63,500 
942 Thrissur Sree Narayanapuram GP 5 2,44,100 
943 Thrissur Talikulam GP 5 2,27,700 
944 Thrissur Thanniyam GP 8 3,41,200 
945 Thrissur Thekkumkara GP 11 4,11,400 
946 Thrissur Thirssur Corp 102 47,12,000 
947 Thrissur Thiruvilwamala GP 3 1,06,900 
948 Thrissur Tholur GP 1 42,100 
949 Thrissur Trikkur GP 3 1,31,300 
950 Thrissur Vadekkekad GP 2 87,600 
951 Thrissur Valappad GP 2 86,600 
952 Thrissur Vallachira GP 4 1,84,400 
953 Thrissur Vallathol Nagar GP 6 2,74,200 

 
98 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
Sl 
No 
District Name of Local Bodies No. of cases Amount  
₹ 
954 Thrissur Varandarappilly GP 21 8,45,900 
955 Thrissur Varavoor GP 2 75,700 
956 Thrissur Vatanappilly GP 7 2,87,600 
957 Thrissur Vellangallur GP 6 2,49,400 
958 Thrissur Velukara GP 10 4,51,800 
959 Thrissur Velur GP 8 3,32,000 
960 Thrissur Venkitangu GP 8 2,65,700 
961 Thrissur WadakancheryMplty 28 12,19,800 
962 Wayanad Ambalavayal GP 6 2,52,000 
963 Wayanad Edavaka GP 6 2,62,500 
964 Wayanad Kalpetta Mplty 14 6,20,000 
965 Wayanad Kaniambetta GP 5 1,53,000 
966 Wayanad Mananthavady Mplty 15 6,00,400 
967 Wayanad Meenangadi GP 10 3,94,200 
968 Wayanad Meppadi GP 3 1,50,600 
969 Wayanad Mutil GP 4 1,84,600 
970 Wayanad Nenmeni GP 8 3,04,100 
971 Wayanad Noolpuzha GP 5 1,91,200 
972 Wayanad Padinharethara GP 5 2,14,500 
973 Wayanad Panamaram GP 16 6,63,400 
974 Wayanad Poothadi GP 7 3,32,300 
975 Wayanad Pozhuthana GP 1 36,000 
976 Wayanad Pulpally GP 5 1,99,600 
977 Wayanad Sulthan Bathery Mplty 9 3,65,500 
978 Wayanad Thariyode GP 1 51,100 
979 Wayanad Thavinhal GP 5 2,25,300 
980 Wayanad Thirunelly GP 4 1,68,400 
981 Wayanad Thondernad GP 3 1,37,500 
982 Wayanad Vellamunda GP 3 1,20,600 
983 Wayanad Vengappally GP 5 1,98,100 
984 Wayanad Vythiri GP 3 1,32,300 
Total 9,201 39,27,06,500 
 
  

 
 99   
Appendix 
Appendix – IX 
(Ref : Paragraph 2.6.1 – Page No. 19) 
Payment of SSPs to Government Employees, Service/ Family Pensioners in selected districts 
    
District No. of cases Amount 
(₹ in lakh) 
Percentage 
of cases 
Percentage 
of amount 
Idukki 39 16.84 4.67 4.55 
Malappuram 54 23.46 6.47 6.36 
Pathanamthitta 83 36.50 9.93 9.87 
Thiruvananthapuram 475 210.56 56.89 56.96 
Thrissur 184 82.30 22.04 22.26 
Total 835 369.66 100.00 100.00 
(Information furnished by DBT Cell) 
 
 
 

 
 100 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
Appendix –X 
(Ref : Paragraph 2.6.2  – Page No. 20) 
Irregular transfer of SSP to Government employees after permanently removing them from receiving SSPs 
Sl. 
No. 
District Local Body Pensioner ID Pensioner Name Date from Date to Pension 
Type 
Accoun
t Mode 
DBT 
Reference 
No. 
Remarks Amount 
(in ₹) 
1 Alappuzha Alappuzha Mplty 101850601245 Lathika 
Sreekumar 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
2 Alappuzha Alappuzha Mplty 101850600997 Minimol    P 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP D to H 201906003 Success 2,400 
3 Alappuzha Arattupuzha GP 104960601448 Eanet Josephine 
Lobo 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
4 Alappuzha Budhanur GP 104690600980 Alice Yohannan 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
5 Alappuzha Chennampallippura
m GP 
104270400057 Nanda 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
6 Alappuzha Chennithala 
Thriperumthura GP 
104840201969 Vikramakurup S 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNOAP D to H 201902003 Success 2,400 
7 Alappuzha Cheppad GP 104940500049 Vasundaradevi P 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 UMWP Bank 201905003 Success 2,400 
8 Alappuzha Cheriyanad GP 104660600849 Azeena    K.  I. 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
9 Alappuzha Cherthala South GP 104430400030 Rosamma 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
10 Alappuzha Cherthala South GP 104430600496 Ajitha.K 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
11 Alappuzha Chettikulangara GP 104830601015 Latha 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
12 Alappuzha Haripad Mplty 104780600194 Padminiammal 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
13 Alappuzha Kadakkarappally GP 104310400151 Kalavathy.K.B 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
14 Alappuzha Kandalloor GP 104930400173 Sheeja.S 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP D to H 201903003 Success 2,400 
15 Alappuzha Kanjikuzhi GP 104400400125 Usha Ct 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
16 Alappuzha Kanjikuzhi GP 104400400177 Ambika S 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
17 Alappuzha Kanjikuzhi GP 104400400466 Swayadevi C 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
18 Alappuzha Kanjikuzhi GP 104400600587 Jameela.Abdulasees 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
19 Alappuzha Karthikappally GP 104740400100 Mini    P.  A. 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP D to H 201903003 Success 2,400 
20 Alappuzha Kayamkulam Mplty 101840600518 Jubariyaisack 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
21 Alappuzha Kodamthuruthu GP 104360600663 Valsala 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
22 Alappuzha Krishnapuram GP 104970600469 Rasilath 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP D to H 201906003 Success 2,400 

 
 101  
Appendix 
Sl. 
No. 
District Local Body Pensioner ID Pensioner Name Date from Date to Pension 
Type 
Accoun
t Mode 
DBT 
Reference 
No. 
Remarks Amount 
(in ₹) 
23 Alappuzha Kumarapuram GP 104760400257 Vishnu 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
24 Alappuzha Kumarapuram GP 104760400063 Sujatha 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP D to H 201903003 Success 2,400 
25 Alappuzha Kumarapuram GP 104760400250 Prasannan 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP D to H 201903003 Success 2,400 
26 Alappuzha Kumarapuram GP 104760600096 Retnamma 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP D to H 201906003 Success 2,400 
27 Alappuzha Mannar GP 104700400083 Sreekala    A. 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
28 Alappuzha Mararikulam South 
GP 
104460400551 Sajikumar 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
29 Alappuzha Muhamma GP 104420600718 Usha 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 1,200 
30 Alappuzha Nedumudi GP 104550600058 Sheejammakunjac
han 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
31 Alappuzha Panavally GP 104280400168 Sajimon 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
32 Alappuzha Pathiyoor GP 104920400256 Georgevarghese 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
33 Alappuzha Pulinkunnu GP 104620600067 Bijimol Paul 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
34 Alappuzha Punnapra North GP 104510600628 Mayadevi 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
35 Alappuzha Punnapra North GP 104510601073 Geetha 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
36 Alappuzha Thakazhi GP 104540400219 Thankachan 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
37 Alappuzha Thakazhi GP 104540600427 Fousiya 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
38 Alappuzha Thalavadi GP 104520600621 Radhamani 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
39 Alappuzha Vallikunnam GP 104870601059 Raseena.A 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
40 Alappuzha Vallikunnam GP 104870400398 Sunitha C 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP D to H 201903003 Success 2,400 
41 Alappuzha Veeyapuram GP 104810600154 Umayamma 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
42 Ernakulam Asamannoor GP 106430600021 Latha.A.K. 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
43 Ernakulam Ayavana GP 107090400054 Sindhu Kunjan 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
44 Ernakulam Chendamangalam 
GP 
106240600154 Suseela 
Lakshmikkutty 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
45 Ernakulam Chengamanad GP 107000600786 Maimunath 
Abdulassis 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
46 Ernakulam Cheranallur GP 106560400218 Rocky    M.  R. 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP D to H 201903003 Success 2,400 
47 Ernakulam Cochin Corp 101690401101 Venugopal   M 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
48 Ernakulam Cochin Corp 101690600012 Asha 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
49 Ernakulam Cochin Corp 101690606306 Lalitha Prakash 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 

 
 102 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
Sl. 
No. 
District Local Body Pensioner ID Pensioner Name Date from Date to Pension 
Type 
Accoun
t Mode 
DBT 
Reference 
No. 
Remarks Amount 
(in ₹) 
50 Ernakulam Cochin Corp 101690400717 Usha   R 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP D to H 201903003 Success 2,400 
51 Ernakulam Elamkunnapuzha GP 106620602225 Geetha 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
52 Ernakulam Eloor Mplty 112460202595 Philominasenselav
os 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNOAP Bank 201902003 Success 2,400 
53 Ernakulam Eloor Mplty 106320400022 Kaulath V A 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP D to H 201903003 Success 2,600 
54 Ernakulam Kalady GP 106410600949 Jancy Rokey 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP D to H 201906003 Success 2,400 
55 Ernakulam Kizhakkambalam GP 106510400036 Aliyar F/O 
Haneefa 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP D to H 201903003 Success 2,400 
56 Ernakulam Kottappady GP 106840400194 Shaji M. C 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
57 Ernakulam Kottuvally GP 106250600567 Ushadevi 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
58 Ernakulam Kottuvally GP 106250601153 M.K Girija 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
59 Ernakulam Kottuvally GP 106250601488 Rosily N S 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP D to H 201906003 Success 2,400 
60 Ernakulam Kumbalam GP 106680600954 Sindhu T P 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP D to H 201906003 Success 2,400 
61 Ernakulam Kunnathunad GP 106800400131 T. Rajeeshkumar 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
62 Ernakulam Kunnathunad GP 106800400137 E.V. Anira 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
63 Ernakulam Kuttampuzha GP 106900611024 Soji Binu 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
64 Ernakulam Manjalloor GP 107100600236 Kavitha 
Anilkumar 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
65 Ernakulam Manjapra GP 106360400113 Silja Shaiju 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
66 Ernakulam Maradu Mplty 106670600203 Raji A 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
67 Ernakulam Mazhuvannoor GP 106780600211 Lissy Elias 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
68 Ernakulam Mazhuvannoor GP 106780601384 Suma Vijayan 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
69 Ernakulam Mudakuzha GP 106440400171 Mohanan.A.M 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
70 Ernakulam Mudakuzha GP 106440600749 Indira M V 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
71 Ernakulam Mulavukad GP 106580600134 Mymuna(Abu) 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
72 Ernakulam Mulavukad GP 106580600656 Sudhina 
Jyothibasu 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
73 Ernakulam Nayarambalam GP 106600600558 Sunitha . R 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP D to H 201906003 Success 2,400 
74 Ernakulam Nellikkuzhi GP 106820400316 Maitheen P B 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
75 Ernakulam Nellikkuzhi GP 106820601425 Kamalam 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
76 Ernakulam Okkal GP 106480201863 Kunjumuhammed 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNOAP Bank 201902003 Success 2,400 

 
 103  
Appendix 
Sl. 
No. 
District Local Body Pensioner ID Pensioner Name Date from Date to Pension 
Type 
Accoun
t Mode 
DBT 
Reference 
No. 
Remarks Amount 
(in ₹) 
77 Ernakulam Okkal GP 106480600315 Yamuna.Ajikumar 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
78 Ernakulam Okkal GP 106480600644 Annies.Jose 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
79 Ernakulam Paipra GP 107070400291 Shamsudheen.K.
M 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP D to H 201903003 Success 2,400 
80 Ernakulam Pallippuram GP 106630400074 Jobi.O.T. 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
81 Ernakulam Pampakuda GP 106970400217 Jithu John 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
82 Ernakulam Pindimana GP 106830400065 Hassena N M 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
83 Ernakulam Poothrika GP 106750400091 Alex  K U 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
84 Ernakulam Thiruvaniyoor GP 106760600875 Omana 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
85 Ernakulam Thrikkakara Mplty 106570400034 T. H. Aliyar(R A 
Subaida) 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
86 Ernakulam Udayamperur GP 106690601292 Nirmala C K 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
87 Ernakulam Valakom GP 107060400038 Jobin George 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
88 Ernakulam Varapuzha GP 106300400132 Anil.K.John 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
89 Idukki Arakulam GP 106010400010 Saritha 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
90 Idukki Arakulam GP 106010600209 Ramani.Aravind 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
91 Idukki Kattappana Mplty 106050400218 Biju Mathew 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
92 Idukki Kattappana Mplty 106050601044 Sindhumol Em 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
93 Idukki Kokkayar GP 106200400112 Sumesh O.V. 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
94 Idukki Kumily GP 106190600227 Santhamma Revi 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
95 Idukki Marayoor GP 105780400086 Mekhala 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
96 Idukki Mariyapuram GP 106040400049 Amala Augustine 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
97 Idukki Rajakkad GP 105880400157 Bindhu Raghu 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
98 Idukki Rajakkad GP 105880600355 Sherina Salim 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
99 Idukki Vathikudy GP 106000400293 Vishnu K.U 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
100 Kannur Alakode GP 111200601024 Omana A 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
101 Kannur Ancharakandy GP 111360400054 Kanakavalli K V 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP D to H 201903003 Success 2,400 
102 Kannur Anthoor Mplty 102180601660 Mini    P.  V. 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
103 Kannur Dharmadom GP 111450601263 Rasija Km 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
104 Kannur Dharmadom GP 111450600271 P.Renjini 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP D to H 201906003 Success 1,200 
105 Kannur Eramholi GP 111460600185 Shaji  C  K 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 

 
 104 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
Sl. 
No. 
District Local Body Pensioner ID Pensioner Name Date from Date to Pension 
Type 
Accoun
t Mode 
DBT 
Reference 
No. 
Remarks Amount 
(in ₹) 
106 Kannur Irikkur GP 111220400058 Chanthrathil 
Suneesh 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
107 Kannur Iritty Mplty 111690400025 P. Shyamala 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
108 Kannur Kalliasseri GP 111100600380 V.V.Santha 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
109 Kannur KannurCorp 112590201630 Shobhanamoopara
kath 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNOAP Bank 201902003 Success 2,400 
110 Kannur KannurCorp 111370400271 Rajila.A 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP D to H 201903003 Success 2,400 
111 Kannur Kottiyoor GP 111720400040 Tintu Augastian 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,600 
112 Kannur Kurumathur GP 111140400067 Shyju 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,600 
113 Kannur Kurumathur GP 111140600641 Vanaja.I.V 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
114 Kannur Madayi GP 110990601027 Anitha E 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
115 Kannur Mangattidam GP 111600600088 Bhargavi  K  V 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
116 Kannur Mattool GP 111000400225 Hamza K 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
117 Kannur Muzhakkunnu GP 111730600086 Makkoth Sumathi 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
118 Kannur Naduvil GP 111180400278 Phalgunan T 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
119 Kannur Narath GP 111160600188 Parvathi Pittan 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
120 Kannur Pariyaram GP 111150400179 Kesavan 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP D to H 201903003 Success 2,400 
121 Kannur Peringome 
Vayakkara GP 
111060600024 Cheruttaru Veettil 
Padminikkutti 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
122 Kannur Vengad GP 111620600494 Shylaja P 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP D to H 201906003 Success 2,400 
123 Kasaragod Badiyadka GP 111870600098 Devaki 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
124 Kasaragod Bedaduka GP 111930400025 Divakaran 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
125 Kasaragod Bedaduka GP 111930400027 Thankamani    C 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
126 Kasaragod Bedaduka GP 111930400339 Suchithra.T 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
127 Kasaragod Belloor GP 111770400157 Rekha.K.A 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
128 Kasaragod Chengala GP 111910601373 Sharada K 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
129 Kasaragod Kanjhangad Mplty 102230603431 A Susheela 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP D to H 201906003 Success 2,400 
130 Kasaragod Kasaragod Mplty 102240602184 Rajeswari.N 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
131 Kasaragod Kayyur Cheemeni 
GP 
112070600977 Usha T P 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP D to H 201906003 Success 2,400 
132 Kasaragod Madhur GP 111940601058 Bhavani 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 

 
 105  
Appendix 
Sl. 
No. 
District Local Body Pensioner ID Pensioner Name Date from Date to Pension 
Type 
Accoun
t Mode 
DBT 
Reference 
No. 
Remarks Amount 
(in ₹) 
133 Kasaragod Madikkai GP 112010600156 Rohini    K. 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
134 Kasaragod Pullurperiya GP 112040600279 Geetha P. 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
135 Kasaragod Pullurperiya GP 112040400367 Ranjith V 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP D to H 201903003 Success 2,400 
136 Kasaragod TrikaripurGP 112130400107 Latha.K 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
137 Kasaragod Valiyaparamba GP 112150400162 Simon.K.J 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
138 Kasaragod Valiyaparamba GP 112150600113 Shobha.K.V 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
139 Kasaragod Vorkady GP 111800400049 Muhammed 
Asharaf 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP D to H 201903003 Success 2,400 
140 Kollam Elampalloor GP 103590400342 Haseem.B 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
141 Kollam Ittiva GP 103680601213 Sindhu.A 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
142 Kollam Kollam Corp 101680400457 Sanu Chandran    
C 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
143 Kollam Kollam Corp 101680400950 Ajikumari.S. 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
144 Kollam Kollam Corp 101680402448 Sofiya.R 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
145 Kollam Kollam Corp 101680601473 Rethnavalli 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
146 Kollam Kollam Corp 101680602852 Indira 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
147 Kollam Kollam Corp 101680603019 Lathika 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
148 Kollam Kollam Corp 103540600925 Vijayamma 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 1,200 
149 Kollam Kottamkara GP 103580602008 Rajeena.K 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
150 Kollam Kottarakara Mplty 103420601353 Saradha Mohanan 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
151 Kollam Mayyanad GP 103560600064 Majitha 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
152 Kollam Mynagappally GP 103070600831 Rasheeda 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 1,200 
153 Kollam Neduvathur GP 103410600433 Ushakumary    G. 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
154 Kollam Sooranad South GP 103130400282 Radhakrishnan 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
155 Kollam Sooranad South GP 103130600661 Rathi 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
156 Kollam Thenmala GP 103350400378 Saiju Mon  C 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
157 Kollam Thrikkaruva GP 103550400351 Harsha.L 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
158 Kottayam Akalakunnam GP 105410600060 Usha Kumari 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
159 Kottayam Changanassery 
Mplty 
101880601593 Neethu Allias 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
160 Kottayam Erattupetta Mplty 105350600041 Aisha K.S 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 

 
 106 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
Sl. 
No. 
District Local Body Pensioner ID Pensioner Name Date from Date to Pension 
Type 
Accoun
t Mode 
DBT 
Reference 
No. 
Remarks Amount 
(in ₹) 
161 Kottayam Kallara GP 105060600071 Indirakuttiyamma 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
162 Kottayam Kallara GP 105060600341 Sheela Sunny 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
163 Kottayam Kanakkari GP 105200600116 Jayasree V B 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP D to H 201906003 Success 2,400 
164 Kottayam Kanjirappally GP 105680400188 Shanavas Bijili 
(Shanaz Bigily) 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
165 Kottayam Karoor GP 105270600509 Bindu.Snair 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
166 Kottayam Karukachal GP 105550600073 C. G. Nirmala 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
167 Kottayam Kozhuvanal GP 105280600379 Sheeba Babu 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
168 Kottayam Kumarakom GP 105480400100 Reena Joseph 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
169 Kottayam Madappally GP 105570600460 Valsamma George 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
170 Kottayam Manjoor GP 105070600104 Sheela Vijayan 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
171 Kottayam Maravanthuruthu GP 105010400191 Risana.M.S. 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
172 Kottayam Maravanthuruthu GP 105010202089 Santhakumari 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNOAP Bank 201902003 Success 2,400 
173 Kottayam Panachikkad GP 105510600591 Kunjumol Roy 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
174 Kottayam Thalanad GP 105390500015 Mariathumma K K 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 UMWP Bank 201905003 Success 2,400 
175 Kottayam Thiruvarpu GP 105520400299 Midhunraj 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP D to H 201903003 Success 2,400 
176 Kottayam Udayanapuram GP 105040600900 Saraswathy A P 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
177 Kottayam Vakathanam GP 105600600335 Mereena Joseph 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
178 Kottayam Vechoor GP 105030400293 Anupama 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP D to H 201903003 Success 2,400 
179 Kottayam Velloor GP 105110600633 Shanimol.S 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
180 Kozhikkode Arikulam GP 110370600658 Thahira T K 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP D to H 201906003 Success 2,400 
181 Kozhikkode Atholi GP 110300600032 Anitha    C    K 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
182 Kozhikkode Ayancheri GP 110120400152 Rajeevan.E.M. 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP D to H 201903003 Success 2,400 
183 Kozhikkode Balusseri GP 110280601190 Suganthi 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
184 Kozhikkode Eramala GP 109960600962 Preetha 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP D to H 201906003 Success 2,400 
185 Kozhikkode Kakkur GP 110420600157 Radhamani    K    P 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
186 Kozhikkode Kakkur GP 110420400208 Usha.E 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP D to H 201903003 Success 2,400 
187 Kozhikkode Kodiyathur GP 110550400189 Shafna K K 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP D to H 201903003 Success 2,400 
188 Kozhikkode Koduvally Mplty 110510400194 Suresh.N. 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP D to H 201903003 Success 2,400 
189 Kozhikkode Kozhikkode Corp 101710402002 Faiju    S.  P. 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 

 
 107  
Appendix 
Sl. 
No. 
District Local Body Pensioner ID Pensioner Name Date from Date to Pension 
Type 
Accoun
t Mode 
DBT 
Reference 
No. 
Remarks Amount 
(in ₹) 
190 Kozhikkode Kozhikkode Corp 110680400469 Shilpa Prasad. P 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
191 Kozhikkode Kozhikkode Corp 101710602261 Mymoona.T. 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
192 Kozhikkode Kunnamangalam GP 110590602141 Bindu.V.P 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
193 Kozhikkode Moodadi GP 110380600654 Meera.Vm. 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
194 Kozhikkode Mukkam Mplty 110610600072 Kamala Alias 
Komala.P. 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP D to H 201906003 Success 2,400 
195 Kozhikkode Nochad GP 110220400111 Priyesh 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP D to H 201903003 Success 2,400 
196 Kozhikkode Ramanattukara 
Mplty 
112800201296 Sarojini  K 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNOAP D to H 201902003 Success 2,400 
197 Kozhikkode Thalakulathur GP 110460601224 Dhanamma C 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
198 Kozhikkode Thiruvallur GP 110150400113 Subaida 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
199 Kozhikkode Unnikulum GP 110330400374 Mini.N.K 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
200 Kozhikkode Unnikulum GP 110330601895 Rabiya 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP D to H 201906003 Success 2,400 
201 Kozhikkode Vadakara Mplty 102140400663 Vijitha P 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP D to H 201903003 Success 2,400 
202 Kozhikkode Vadakara Mplty 102140603397 Sheeba K 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP D to H 201906003 Success 2,400 
203 Kozhikkode Vanimel GP 110030600291 Sindhu.M.A 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP D to H 201906003 Success 2,400 
204 Kozhikkode Velom GP 110100400314 Sheethal 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
205 Malappuram Alamcode GP 109890600863 Lakshmi W/O 
Suryachandran 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
206 Malappuram Amarambalam GP 108950400547 Aneesh K 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
207 Malappuram Angadipuram GP 109500400174 Ramla Beegam.P 1/10/2019 1/11/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903005 Success 1,200 
208 Malappuram Angadipuram GP 109500400174 Ramla Beegam.P 1/12/2019 30/4/2020 IGNDP Bank 202003001 Success 6,100 
209 Malappuram Angadipuram GP 109500400174 Ramla Beegam.P 1/7/2020 1/8/2020 IGNDP Bank 202003004 Success 2,600 
210 Malappuram Angadipuram GP 109500400174 Ramla Beegam.P 1/9/2020 30/9/2020 IGNDP Bank 202003005 Success 1,400 
211 Malappuram Chekkode GP 109260400284 Kunjuttan 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
212 Malappuram Edavanna GP 109080601444 Aleemakutty.T 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
213 Malappuram Kodur GP 109490400027 Ashraf 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
214 Malappuram KondottyMplty 109160300011 Thencheeri 
Mohamed 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
215 Malappuram KondottyMplty 109160600270 Ummukulsu 
Pottammal 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 

 
 108 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
Sl. 
No. 
District Local Body Pensioner ID Pensioner Name Date from Date to Pension 
Type 
Accoun
t Mode 
DBT 
Reference 
No. 
Remarks Amount 
(in ₹) 
216 Malappuram Kottakkal Mplty 112480400106 Prajeesh.K 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
217 Malappuram Manjeri Mplty 102110400753 Shahina 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
218 Malappuram Melattur GP 109380600759 Ramani 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
219 Malappuram Moorkkanad GP 109460601765 Raji 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP D to H 201906003 Success 2,400 
220 Malappuram Ozhur GP 109730400094 Mohanan 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
221 Malappuram Perumanna KlariGP 109790400270 Ramlath Pullat 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
222 Malappuram Ponnani Mplty 102100602596 Indira 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP D to H 201906003 Success 2,400 
223 Malappuram Ponnani Mplty 102100603295 Sulaikha.K.V 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP D to H 201906003 Success 2,400 
224 Malappuram Pothukkal GP 109030400108 Prasad 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP D to H 201903003 Success 2,400 
225 Malappuram Tanur Mplty 109760601857 Divya.K 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
226 Malappuram Thennala GP 109610400067 Anil 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
227 Malappuram Thirunavaya GP 109840400060 Kunjimalu 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
228 Malappuram Thuvvur GP 109120601288 Valsala 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
229 Malappuram Vengara GP 109620400535 Muhammedbasheer 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
230 Malappuram Wandoor GP 109130400146 Shakheela 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
231 Malappuram Wandoor GP 109130601146 Sheeja 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
232 Palakkad Agali GP 108420601147 Vijayakumari 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
233 Palakkad Cherpulassery Mplty 108310600813 Latha N 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
234 Palakkad Kanjirapuzha GP 108380600604 Santhakumari 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP D to H 201906003 Success 2,400 
235 Palakkad Kannambra GP 108850400033 Noushad 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP D to H 201903003 Success 2,400 
236 Palakkad Karimba GP 108350400090 Shanti.E.P. 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP D to H 201903003 Success 2,400 
237 Palakkad Karimba GP 108350400157 C.P.Muhammed 
Basher 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP D to H 201903003 Success 2,400 
238 Palakkad Kodumba GP 108450600405 Santha 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
239 Palakkad Kumaramputhur GP 108370400407 Meenu K 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP D to H 201903003 Success 2,400 
240 Palakkad Kuzhalmannam GP 108550600663 Vijayakumari 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP D to H 201906003 Success 2,400 
241 Palakkad Malampuzha GP 108870600465 Mayadevi 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
242 Palakkad Muthuthala GP 108130600914 Rasiya P 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP D to H 201906003 Success 2,400 
243 Palakkad Palakkad Mplty 102080400085 Nisha.M. 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,600 
244 Palakkad Palakkad Mplty 102080604204 Savithry    R. 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 

 
 109  
Appendix 
Sl. 
No. 
District Local Body Pensioner ID Pensioner Name Date from Date to Pension 
Type 
Accoun
t Mode 
DBT 
Reference 
No. 
Remarks Amount 
(in ₹) 
245 Palakkad Pattencherry GP 108630400162 Fauna 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
246 Palakkad Peruvemba GP 108900600162 Omana 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
247 Palakkad Pudusseri GP 108910400388 Leena.R 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
248 Palakkad Puthunagaram GP 108690400103 Ajith K 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
249 Palakkad Puthunagaram GP 108690400107 Fareeda 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
250 Pathanamthitta Aranmula GP 104230600845 Omanaraju 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
251 Pathanamthitta Ayiroor GP 103840600118 Geetha Kumari 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
252 Pathanamthitta Chenneerkara GP 103910600117 Deenammajose 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
253 Pathanamthitta Erathu GP 104170600256 Ambili 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
254 Pathanamthitta Ezhamkulam GP 104180400295 Shiny. R 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
255 Pathanamthitta Ezhumattoor GP 103880600097 Ushakumari 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
256 Pathanamthitta Kadampanadu GP 104190400231 Shalu.P.V 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
257 Pathanamthitta Kadapra GP 103790300007 Benu Vargehse.P. 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
258 Pathanamthitta Naranganam GP 103960400130 Santhoshkumar.C.D 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
259 Pathanamthitta Niranam GP 103810600109 Pushpamma 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
260 Pathanamthitta Pallickal GP 104220400109 Subaidammal 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
261 Pathanamthitta Pathanamthitta Mplty 101800400022 Shibu George 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
262 Pathanamthitta Pathanamthitta Mplty 101800601591 Litty C Paulose 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
263 Pathanamthitta Ranni Perunad GP 104000600169 Girija.G. 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
264 Pathanamthitta Seethathodu GP 104030400074 Jessyjohn 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP D to H 201903003 Success 2,400 
265 Pathanamthitta Vadasserikkara GP 104010400159 Sumesh M.S 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
266 Thiruvanantha
puram 
Anjuthengu GP 102410400093 Anu S 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
267 Thiruvananth
apuram 
Anjuthengu GP 102410600250 Sujinakumari S 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
268 Thiruvananth
apuram 
Aruvikkara GP 102640601228 Sulochana S 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
269 Thiruvananth
apuram 
Aryanad GP 102550601780 Anu    V.  S. 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
270 Thiruvananth
apuram 
Aryanad GP 102550600530 Sukumary    P. 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP D to H 201906003 Success 2,400 

 
 110 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
Sl. 
No. 
District Local Body Pensioner ID Pensioner Name Date from Date to Pension 
Type 
Accoun
t Mode 
DBT 
Reference 
No. 
Remarks Amount 
(in ₹) 
271 Thiruvananth
apuram 
Aryancode GP 102860400006 Vineeth    S   .  S   
. 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
272 Thiruvananth
apuram 
Athiyannoor GP 102910600027 Prassannakumaria
mma 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP D to H 201906003 Success 2,400 
273 Thiruvananth
apuram 
Balaramapuram GP 102760400012 R.Krishnankutty 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
274 Thiruvananth
apuram 
Chirayinkeezhu GP 102430601597 Sumam.P 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
275 Thiruvananth
apuram 
Chirayinkeezhu GP 102430601637 Priya.S 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
276 Thiruvananth
apuram 
Kadinamkulam GP 102690601907 Valsamma 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 1,200 
277 Thiruvananth
apuram 
Kallara GP 102470600314 Sakunthala 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
278 Thiruvananth
apuram 
Kallikkadu GP 102870600514 Sreekala    R. 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP D to H 201906003 Success 2,400 
279 Thiruvananth
apuram 
Kalliyoor GP 102820400253 Anil Kumar S 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
280 Thiruvananth
apuram 
Karakulam GP 102660400254 Mohanakumar K 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
281 Thiruvananth
apuram 
Karakulam GP 102660400402 Thankamony 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
282 Thiruvananth
apuram 
Karakulam GP 102660602190 Valsala 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
283 Thiruvananth
apuram 
Karakulam GP 102660400171 Pushpamma R 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP D to H 201903003 Success 2,400 
284 Thiruvananth
apuram 
Karakulam GP 102660400201 Aswathy M S 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP D to H 201903003 Success 2,600 
285 Thiruvananth
apuram 
Karakulam GP 102660602183 Saralakumari S 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP D to H 201906003 Success 2,400 
286 Thiruvananth
apuram 
Karode GP 102980400621 Rajam 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
287 Thiruvananth
apuram 
Kizhuvilam GP 102440601046 Shylajabeevi.M 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 

 
 111  
Appendix 
Sl. 
No. 
District Local Body Pensioner ID Pensioner Name Date from Date to Pension 
Type 
Accoun
t Mode 
DBT 
Reference 
No. 
Remarks Amount 
(in ₹) 
288 Thiruvananth
apuram 
Kottukal GP 102940400270 Greeshma. K.S 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
289 Thiruvananth
apuram 
Kottukal GP 102940601078 Sobhanakumari.L 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
290 Thiruvananth
apuram 
Malayinkeezh GP 102790300017 Shimitha.N.R 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
291 Thiruvananth
apuram 
Malayinkeezh GP 102790300132 Rejith Revi 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
292 Thiruvananth
apuram 
Manamboor GP 102280400079 Princy    N. 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
293 Thiruvananth
apuram 
Mangalapuram GP 102710600217 Nirmala    A. 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
294 Thiruvananth
apuram 
Mangalapuram GP 102710601862 Sajna N 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
295 Thiruvananth
apuram 
Manickal GP 102540602074 Saraswathy T 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
296 Thiruvananth
apuram 
Maranalloor GP 102780600331 G.S.Rekha 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
297 Thiruvananth
apuram 
Nedumangad Mplty 101740600706 Reji    G. 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP D to H 201906003 Success 2,400 
298 Thiruvananth
apuram 
Neyyattinkara Mplty 101750600826 Sujatha Kumari   
P 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
299 Thiruvananth
apuram 
Neyyattinkara Mplty 101750601421 Vanaja 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
300 Thiruvananth
apuram 
Neyyattinkara Mplty 101750601294 Lekha    T. 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP D to H 201906003 Success 2,400 
301 Thiruvananth
apuram 
Neyyattinkara Mplty 101750602002 Sushama.D 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP D to H 201906003 Success 2,400 
302 Thiruvananth
apuram 
Pallichal GP 102770400613 S.Nirmala 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP D to H 201903003 Success 2,400 
303 Thiruvananth
apuram 
Panavoor GP 102650400200 Ishakk    A.  S. 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
304 Thiruvananth
apuram 
Parassala GP 103000602130 Jayasree.I 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 

 
 112 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
Sl. 
No. 
District Local Body Pensioner ID Pensioner Name Date from Date to Pension 
Type 
Accoun
t Mode 
DBT 
Reference 
No. 
Remarks Amount 
(in ₹) 
305 Thiruvananth
apuram 
Pazhayakunnummel 
GP 
102330601517 Prasi J 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
306 Thiruvananth
apuram 
Poovar GP 103020400302 Thaheer 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,600 
307 Thiruvananth
apuram 
Thirupuram GP 103010600244 Sheela S 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
308 Thiruvananth
apuram 
Thiruvananthapuram 
Corp 
101670402919 Sindhu    M 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
309 Thiruvananth
apuram 
Thiruvananthapuram 
Corp 
101670405792 Lijimol B 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
310 Thiruvananth
apuram 
Thiruvananthapuram 
Corp 
101670406187 Faizal    A.  L. 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
311 Thiruvananth
apuram 
Thiruvananthapuram 
Corp 
101670406464 Bindhu    S. 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
312 Thiruvananth
apuram 
Thiruvananthapuram 
Corp 
101670406716 Aneesha    N. 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
313 Thiruvananth
apuram 
Thiruvananthapuram 
Corp 
102700400024 Nizamudeen 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
314 Thiruvananth
apuram 
Thiruvananthapuram 
Corp 
101670601394 Gomathy 
Amma.S. 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
315 Thiruvananth
apuram 
Thiruvananthapuram 
Corp 
101670605014 Sobhana Kumari   
K 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
316 Thiruvananth
apuram 
Thiruvananthapuram 
Corp 
101670605929 Kumari 
Bhagavathy.K.V. 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
317 Thiruvananth
apuram 
Thiruvananthapuram 
Corp 
101670610302 Jayakumari    A 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
318 Thiruvananth
apuram 
Thiruvananthapuram 
Corp 
101670610829 Girija    A 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
319 Thiruvananth
apuram 
Thiruvananthapuram 
Corp 
101670613288 Usha Kumari 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
320 Thiruvananth
apuram 
Thiruvananthapuram 
Corp 
101670615435 Chithra Devi N 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 

 
 113  
Appendix 
Sl. 
No. 
District Local Body Pensioner ID Pensioner Name Date from Date to Pension 
Type 
Accoun
t Mode 
DBT 
Reference 
No. 
Remarks Amount 
(in ₹) 
321 Thiruvananth
apuram 
Thiruvananthapuram 
Corp 
101670616191 Usha Kumari B 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
322 Thiruvananth
apuram 
Thiruvananthapuram 
Corp 
101670618037 Rajeswari M 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
323 Thiruvananth
apuram 
Thiruvananthapuram 
Corp 
101670619210 Gracy Bai 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
324 Thiruvananth
apuram 
Thiruvananthapuram 
Corp 
101670620604 Rajila Beevi S 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
325 Thiruvananth
apuram 
Thiruvananthapuram 
Corp 
101670623592 Bellamary 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
326 Thiruvananth
apuram 
Thiruvananthapuram 
Corp 
102730600896 J Valsalakumari 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
327 Thiruvananth
apuram 
Thiruvananthapuram 
Corp 
102740600094 Lali B 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
328 Thiruvananth
apuram 
Thiruvananthapuram 
Corp 
102950600695 Sumathy 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
329 Thiruvananth
apuram 
Tholicode GP 102610600509 P.Sheelakumari 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
330 Thiruvananth
apuram 
Tholicode GP 102610600643 Laila V 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
331 Thiruvananth
apuram 
Uzhamalakkal GP 102590600266 Vasantha Kumary   
K. 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
332 Thiruvananth
apuram 
Uzhamalakkal GP 102590600751 Omana 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
333 Thiruvananth
apuram 
Vakkom GP 102420600852 Noorjahan 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 1,200 
334 Thiruvananth
apuram 
Vamanapuram GP 102500600648 Prasanna    S. 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
335 Thiruvananth
apuram 
Venganoor GP 102960601310 Chandramathi V 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
336 Thiruvananth
apuram 
Vilappil GP 102800400073 P.Nirmala 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 

 
 114 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
Sl. 
No. 
District Local Body Pensioner ID Pensioner Name Date from Date to Pension 
Type 
Accoun
t Mode 
DBT 
Reference 
No. 
Remarks Amount 
(in ₹) 
337 Thiruvananth
apuram 
Vilappil GP 102800601528 Sobhanakumari.B 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
338 Thiruvananth
apuram 
Vilavoorkkal GP 102810400175 Sudha.P. 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP D to H 201903003 Success 2,400 
339 Thrissur Alagappa Nagar GP 107680400304 Shijo Km 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
340 Thrissur Alur GP 107930400111 Sandya    C    V 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
341 Thrissur Annamanada GP 107940601351 Haseena 
Aboobacker 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
342 Thrissur Chelakkara GP 107340400124 Sunithakku  
Veandi   Chathan 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
343 Thrissur Chelakkara GP 107340601872 Sheeba 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
344 Thrissur Chelakkara GP 107340601936 Chandrika.P.N 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
345 Thrissur Chelakkara GP 107340601947 Ajitha.K.S 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
346 Thrissur Cherpu GP 107650400085 Vinesh    K    V 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,600 
347 Thrissur Cherpu GP 107650400213 Indu O.V 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
348 Thrissur Cherpu GP 107650600496 Suprabha 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
349 Thrissur Elavally GP 107510601062 Ajitha 
Subramanniyan 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
350 Thrissur Eriyad GP 107910400442 Maneesha Tv 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP D to H 201903003 Success 2,400 
351 Thrissur Guruvayoor Mplty 101990600240 Anithachandrahas
an 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
352 Thrissur Irinjalakuda Mplty 102030600454 Kanchana 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP D to H 201906003 Success 2,400 
353 Thrissur Irinjalakuda Mplty 102030601732 Sheeja T.R 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP D to H 201906003 Success 2,400 
354 Thrissur Kandanassery GP 107220600932 Sindu.N.G 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP D to H 201906003 Success 2,400 
355 Thrissur Kattakampal GP 107230400282 Rincyandroos 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
356 Thrissur Kattakampal GP 107230601166 Jessy Zacharia 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
357 Thrissur Kodungalloor Mplty 102010601510 Sindhu Narayanan 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
358 Thrissur Koratty GP 108000600499 Lisa Shaju 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
359 Thrissur Koratty GP 108000600809 Sheela Vinod 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP D to H 201906003 Success 2,400 
360 Thrissur Kuzhur GP 107950400278 Sheela Shaju 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,600 
361 Thrissur Madakkathara GP 107410601410 Lathika K V 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 

 
 115  
Appendix 
Sl. 
No. 
District Local Body Pensioner ID Pensioner Name Date from Date to Pension 
Type 
Accoun
t Mode 
DBT 
Reference 
No. 
Remarks Amount 
(in ₹) 
362 Thrissur Manalur GP 107630400409 Shiji N U 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
363 Thrissur Mathilakam GP 107870600637 Seenath 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
364 Thrissur Mattathur GP 107700400579 Rohini K R 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
365 Thrissur Mattathur GP 107700600697 Rajeswarymanoha
ran 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
366 Thrissur Mattathur GP 107700601939 Renuka M C 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
367 Thrissur Mattathur GP 107700400053 C.P.Shajan 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP D to H 201903003 Success 2,400 
368 Thrissur Melur GP 108010400245 Subramanian K P 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
369 Thrissur Mulakunnathukavu 
GP 
107490600747 Rejany K B 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
370 Thrissur Mullurkara GP 107290600261 Kausalia 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
371 Thrissur Nadathara GP 107420400300 Hima P S 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
372 Thrissur Nadathara GP 107420601526 Lalitha Krishnan 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
373 Thrissur Nenmanikkara GP 107710600753 Usha 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP D to H 201906003 Success 2,400 
374 Thrissur Pananchery GP 107430601446 Jayaramakrishnan 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
375 Thrissur Pananchery GP 107430601528 Noorjahansaidhu 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
376 Thrissur Paralam GP 107660400175 Rajesh K.R. 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
377 Thrissur Pavaratty GP 107530400162 Saijo K S 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
378 Thrissur Pazhayannur GP 107380400494 Syammohan 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
379 Thrissur Porkulam GP 107240400029 Vahitha 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
380 Thrissur Pudukkad GP 107720400223 Sowmya Antony A 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
381 Thrissur Sree Narayanapuram 
GP 
107890400238 Sunila 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP D to H 201903003 Success 2,400 
382 Thrissur Talikulam GP 107570601225 Sujatha 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
383 Thrissur Thanniyam GP 107610601261 Sindhu C V 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
384 Thrissur Thanniyam GP 107610202411 Philomina Antony 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNOAP D to H 201902003 Success 2,400 
385 Thrissur Thekkumkara GP 107300400489 Biraj K 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
386 Thrissur Thekkumkara GP 107300601524 Princy Sabu 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP D to H 201906003 Success 2,400 
387 Thrissur Thirssur Corp 101700600970 Savithri    K 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
388 Thrissur Thirssur Corp 101700601753 Sathy 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
389 Thrissur Thirssur Corp 101700606883 Latha 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 

 
 116 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
Sl. 
No. 
District Local Body Pensioner ID Pensioner Name Date from Date to Pension 
Type 
Accoun
t Mode 
DBT 
Reference 
No. 
Remarks Amount 
(in ₹) 
390 Thrissur Thirssur Corp 101700610028 Preetha Sasi 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP D to H 201906003 Success 2,400 
391 Thrissur Trikkur GP 107730600715 Dhanya Antu 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP D to H 201906003 Success 2,400 
392 Thrissur Vallathol Nagar GP 107350600804 Udaya 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP D to H 201906003 Success 2,400 
393 Thrissur Vatanappilly GP 107560400194 Shakhil.R.S 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
394 Thrissur Venkitangu GP 107540601140 Dancy 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
395 Thrissur Wadakanchery 
Mplty 
107280600728 Philomina    P.  G. 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP D to H 201906003 Success 2,400 
396 Wayanad Mananthavady 
Mplty 
110710601514 Thresiakutty R M 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
397 Wayanad Meenangadi GP 110780601301 Valli Chandran 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
398 Wayanad Meenangadi GP 110780601561 Geetha 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
399 Wayanad Padinharethara GP 110920600903 Sheeja.A.M 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
400 Wayanad Panamaram GP 110770400398 Arifa.V 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP D to H 201903003 Success 2,400 
401 Wayanad Sulthan Bathery 
Mplty 
110820601257 Shyni 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNWP Bank 201906003 Success 2,400 
402 Wayanad Thavinhal GP 110760202171 Thomas Sebastian 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNOAP Bank 201902003 Success 1,200 
403 Wayanad Thirunelly GP 110730400088 Vipin Krishnan 1/8/2019 1/9/2019 IGNDP Bank 201903003 Success 2,400 
Total 9,62,100 
 
 

 
 117   
Appendix 
Appendix – XI 
(Ref : Paragraph 2.6.2 – Page No. 20) 
Details of Pension disbursed in respect of SSP ID -109500400174 
SSP ID DBT 
Reference No 
Pension disbursed months Amount 
disbursed 
₹ 
109500400174 201903005 October, November 2019 1,200 
202003001 December 2019, January, February, 
March, April 2020 
6,100 
202003004 July, August 2020 2,600 
202003005 September 2020 1,400 
 
  

 
118 
 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
Appendix – XII 
(Ref: Paragraph 2.7.2 – Page No. 23) 
Details of source of funds for the period 2017-18 to 2020-21 
(₹ in crore) 
Source of fund 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 
Amount received from 
Government of Kerala2 
5,000.26  5,579.28 2,100.00 11,924.14 
Amount received from 
Government of India3 
217.51 222.00 225.66 173.98 
Amount received from 
Director of Panchayats to 
KSSPL 
0 0 150.00 0 
Fund raised by KSSPL for 
disbursement of SSPs4 
0 6,818.82 
 
6,843.65 8,604.19 
Total 5,217.77 12,620.10 9,319.31 20,702.31 
Total (excluding amount 
received from GoI) 
5,000.26 12,398.10 
 
9,093.65 20,528.33 
Amount transfer credited to 
the Director of Panchayats for 
disbursement of SSPs (as 
stated by KSSPL) 
0 4,654.96 5,044.52 10,226.56 
Excess loan availed by 
KSSPL 
0 6,818.82 4,049.13 8,604.19 
 
 
  
 
2 For the year 2017-18 the Government of Kerala released  their funds directly to the DBT Cell, Directorate of 
Panchayats and for the remaining years the funds were released to KSSPL. 
3 Government of India funds were released to DBT Cell, Directorate of Panchayats. 
4 The fund raised by KSSPL is used for disbursing SSPs,  Welfare Pension, repayment of the monthly interest 
and principal of loan raised by KSSPL. 

 
119 
Appendix 
Appendix – XIII 
(Ref : Paragraph 2.9 – Page No. 27) 
Denial of pension to eligible beneficiaries due to erroneous bill processing  
Beneficiaries of ‘Widow Pension’ and ‘Pension for Unmarried Women above 50 years’ are required to submit 
‘Non-Remarriage Certificate’ every year. Finance Department, Govt. of Kerala, vide letter 
No.189907/SFCB.2/2020-Fin dated 26.07.2021 intimated Director of Panchayats, Urban Affairs Director and 
Executive Director, IKM that the date for submitting and uploading the certificate has been extended and those 
who completed 60 years on 31.12.2020 need not submit the certificate. It is also directed that July & August 2021 
pension should also be authorised to those who could not submit ‘Non-remarriage Certificate’.  i.e. no one should 
be excluded due to non-submission of the said certificate. 
On examining the Stored Procedure ‘Billgeneration_ 3.sql’ furnished to Audit it is found that the 
following statements mark beneficiaries as ‘Non-rema rriage certificate not submitted’ except those satisfying 
some given conditions. 
 
(In the above sql statements Pension type 5 and 6 are Widow Pension and Unmarried women pension 
respectively. ‘dtRemarriage’ is date of submission  of Non-remarriage certificate. ‘dtDOB’ is date of 
birth of beneficiary, ‘getdate()’ function gives the current date, TR_July_2015 is a table containing 
pensioner-IDs of 701642 beneficiaries) 
The above sql statment select Widow Pension and Unmarried Women pension beneficiaries satisfying 
the following conditions 
1. Those who have submitted ‘Non-Remarriage Certificate’  
[ select numPensionerID FRom TR_Pension where tnyPensionTypeID in(5,6) and dtRemarriage is not 
null ] 
2. Those beneficiaries whose pension distribution started after 31/12/2019 and ‘Non-Remarriage 
Certificate’ not submitted.  
[ select numPensionerID FRom TR_Pension where tnyPensionTypeID in(5,6)and 
dtDistributionStart>'2019-12-31' and dtRemarriage is  null ] 
3. Those beneficiaries who are 60 years or more on the date of processing, 26.07.2021 in this case. 
[ select numPensionerID FRom TR_Pension where tnyPensionTypeID in(5,6) and 
(datediff(mm,TR_Pension.dtDOB,getdate())/12)  >=60 and dtRemarriage is  null ] 


 
 120 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
4. Those beneficiaries whose beneficiary IDs are enlisted in the table TR_July_2015 
[ select numUniqueReferenceNo FRom TR_July_2015 ] 
On verifying the data made available to audit and the above section of stored procedure, Audit observed 
the following 
1. Eligble beneficiaries excluded from payment list 
From TR_Pension table audit collected the following data 
Total number of Widow Pension and Unmarried women Pension beneficiareis, who have not 
been suspended and eligble for payment of pension. 
selectcount(*) from TR_Pension tp 
where (tnyPermanentSusp=0or tnyPermanentSusp isnull) AND tnyPensionTypeID  in (5,6)  
1474588 
From the above, number of beneficiaries exempted from marking as ‘Non-remarriage certificate 
not submitted’ as per the statements in the SP, on 26.06.2021 (the date of execution of the SP) 
selectcount(*) from TR_Pension tp 
where (tnyPermanentSusp=0or tnyPermanentSusp isnull) AND tnyPensionTypeID  in (5,6)  
AND  numpensionerID in(  
select numPensionerID FRom TR_Pension where tnyPensionTypeID in(5,6) and 
dtRemarriage isnotnull 
unionall 
select numPensionerID FRom TR_Pension where tnyPensionTypeID in(5,6)and 
dtDistributionStart>'2019-12-31'and dtRemarriage isnull 
unionall 
select numPensionerID FRom TR_Pension where tnyPensionTypeID in(5,6)and 
(datediff(mm,TR_Pension.dtDOB,'2021-07-26')/12)  >=60and dtRemarriage isnull 
unionall 
select numUniqueReferenceNo FRom TR_July_2015) 
1447638 
Number of beneficiaries denied pension for the months of July, August 2021, deviating from the 
Government direction 
selectcount(*) 
from TR_Pension tp 
where (tnyPermanentSusp=0or tnyPermanentSusp isnull) AND tnyPensionTypeID  in (5,6) 
AND 
 numpensionerID notin( 
select numPensionerID FRom TR_Pension where tnyPensionTypeID in(5,6) and 
dtRemarriage isnotnull 
unionall 
select numPensionerID FRom TR_Pension where tnyPensionTypeID in(5,6)and 
dtDistributionStart>'2019-12-31'and dtRemarriage isnull 
unionall 
select numPensionerID FRom TR_Pension where tnyPensionTypeID in(5,6)and 
(datediff(mm,TR_Pension.dtDOB,'2021-07-26')/12)  >=60and dtRemarriage isnull 
unionall 
select numUniqueReferenceNo FRom TR_July_2015)  
26950 
26950 eligible beneficiaries, as per the directions of Government in respect of payment of July, 
August 2021, were denied pension due to non application of proper conditions. It is a deviation from 
Government directions.  
Total monthly pension required for 26950 beneficiaries (@Rs.1600 per month) ₹.4,31,20,000.  
Total amount required for July and August payment ₹.8,62,40,000 

 
 121   
Appendix 
Appendix – XIV 
(Ref : Paragraph 2.11.1 – Page No. 28) 
Sanction and disbursement of Widow Pension to legally divorced women and women 
who were deserted by their husbands in selected districts 
 
District No. of cases Amount 
(₹ in lakh) 
Total 
Amount    
(₹ in lakh) Legally 
divorced 
Deserted Legally 
divorced 
Deserted 
Idukki 17 55 4.29 12.54 16.83 
Malappuram 83 90 28.24 29.84 58.08 
Pathanamthitta 9 31 2.53 8.65 11.18 
Thiruvananthapuram 32 160 9.63 51.93 61.56 
Thrissur 24 84 7.18 25.33 32.51 
Total 165 420 51.87 128.29 180.16 
    (Information furnished by LSGIs) 
 
  

 
122 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
Appendix – XV 
(Ref : Paragraph 2.11.2 – Page No. 29) 
Details regarding irregular disbursement of SSPs in different Pensioner IDs 
 
Particulars No. of 
Beneficiaries 
No. of 
Pension ID 
Ineligible 
amount payment 
(₹ in lakh) 
Still receiving more than one pension 611 1,264  288.60 
In the case of deceased recorded in 
one Pension ID 
194 403 86.23 
In the case of deceased beneficiary 14 28 4.80 
Payment of more than one pension to 
ineligible person 
4 8 3.25 
Total 823 1,703  382.88 
(Information furnished by DBT Cell) 
  

 
 123   
Appendix 
Appendix – XVI 
(Ref : Paragraph 2.11.3 – Page No. 29) 
Details of irregular disbursement of SSPs in the name of deceased beneficiaries 
(₹ in lakh) 
District No. of death 
cases 
registered 
Payment made to 
Bank account 
Payment made 
through Direct to 
home 
Total cases of 
payment made 
No. of 
cases 
Amount No. of 
cases 
Amount No. of 
cases 
Amount 
Idukki 429 191 38.76 15 0.45 206 39.21 
Malappuram 613 106 16.12 37 1.64 143 17.76 
Pathanamthitta 454 284 59.99 20 2.00 304 61.99 
Thiruvananthapuram 1,187 470 70.92 52 4.07 522 74.99 
Thrissur 1,356 478 67.01 45 1.92 523 68.93 
Total 4,039 1,529 252.80 169 10.08 1,698 262.88 
(Information furnished by LSGIs) 
 
  

 
124 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
Appendix – XVII 
(Ref : Paragraph 2.11.3 – Page No. 29) 
Collection particulars in respect of beneficiaries  
Sl 
No. 
Pension 
type 
Pensioner ID Pensioner 
Name 
Reg No. 
as per 
death 
register 
Date of 
death 
Period 
of 
Pension 
paid 
after 
death 
Amount 
paid 
after 
death in 
₹ 
Remarks 
1 IGNOAP 101720202974 Hakkim N 85/2017 28/01/2017 Jan-17 to 
Jul-19 
57,000 Refunded 
on 
09.07.2021  
2 IGNOAP 101720202873 Khadeeja 
Beevi 
275/2018 18/06/2018 Jun-18 to 
Jul-19 
21,000 Refunded 
on 
12.07.2021  
3 IGNOAP 101720202972 Devadas S 267/2018 07/08/2018 Aug-18 
to Jul-19 
18,000 Refunded 
on 
16.07.2021  
4 IGNOAP 101720203565 Pathumma 
Beevi S 
290/2019 31/10/2018 Oct-18 
to Jul-19 
15,000 Not 
refunded 
so far 
5 IGNOAP 101720203320 Sathyan 
Chettiyar V 
46/2019 11/01/2019 Jan-19 to 
Apr-19 
8,000 Refunded 
₹ 5600 on 
07.08.2021  
6 IGNWP 101720602048 Thankammal 219/2019 28/05/2019 May-19 
to Jul-19 
3,600 Refunded 
on 
05.08.2021  
Total 1,22,600 ₹ 1,05,200 
totally 
collected 
 
  

 
 125   
Appendix 
Appendix – XVIII 
(Ref : Paragraph 2.12 – Page No. 31) 
Unnecessary transfer of funds to PACS for disbursing SSPs in respect of cases reported as 
deceased 
Sl. 
No. 
District Name of the Local 
Body 
No.of 
Benefic
iaries 
No. of 
cases 
Amount 
Transferred    
₹ 
Interest     
₹ 
1 Alappuzha Ala 42 333 570,900 4,187 
2 Alappuzha Alappuzha 478 3,815 61,42,700 45,047 
3 Alappuzha Ambalapuzha North 110 854 13,40,200 9,828 
4 Alappuzha Ambalapuzha South 72 609 10,80,300 7,922 
5 Alappuzha Arattupuzha 129 982 14,68,400 10,768 
6 Alappuzha Arookutty 49 360 6,06,100 4,445 
7 Alappuzha Aroor 132 902 15,24,800 11,182 
8 Alappuzha Aryad 28 191 2,54,500 1,866 
9 Alappuzha Bharanikavu 198 1,605 28,33,400 20,778 
10 Alappuzha Budhanur 50 243 4,05,400 2,973 
11 Alappuzha Champakulam 36 220 3,85,200 2,825 
12 Alappuzha Chengannoor 46 134 2,40,600 1,764 
13 Alappuzha Chennampallippuram 127 927 12,16,500 8,921 
14 Alappuzha Chennithala 
Thriperumthura 
172 1,477 26,44,200 19,391 
15 Alappuzha Cheppad 68 457 7,16,800 5,257 
16 Alappuzha Cheriyanad 80 596 10,77,500 7,902 
17 Alappuzha Cherthala 93 607 11,09,500 8,136 
18 Alappuzha Cherthala South 94 543 8,42,100 6,175 
19 Alappuzha Cheruthana 26 190 3,09,400 2,269 
20 Alappuzha Chettikulangara 159 824 13,83,000 10,142 
21 Alappuzha Chingoli 69 407 7,26,500 5,328 
22 Alappuzha Devikulangara 43 342 5,66,800 4,157 
23 Alappuzha Edathua 51 359 6,13,500 4,499 
24 Alappuzha Ezhupunna 65 584 10,36,600 7,602 
25 Alappuzha Haripad 72 544 8,86,300 6,500 
26 Alappuzha Kadakkarappally 56 327 5,22,400 3,831 
27 Alappuzha Kainakary 98 674 11,63,500 8,532 
28 Alappuzha Kandalloor 77 628 10,24,600 7,514 
29 Alappuzha Kanjikuzhi 131 1052 15,20,000 11,147 
30 Alappuzha Karthikappally 72 609 10,35,700 7,595 
31 Alappuzha Karuvatta 71 566 9,54,300 6,998 
32 Alappuzha Kavalam 52 410 6,96,300 5,106 

 
126 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
Sl. 
No. 
District Name of the Local 
Body 
No.of 
Benefic
iaries 
No. of 
cases 
Amount 
Transferred    
₹ 
Interest     
₹ 
33 Alappuzha Kayamkulam 241 1,783 31,15,000 22,843 
34 Alappuzha Kodamthuruthu 87 666 11,20,700 8,219 
35 Alappuzha Krishnapuram 114 964 15,77,900 11,571 
36 Alappuzha Kumarapuram 122 1,004 16,93,600 12,420 
37 Alappuzha Kuthiathodu 87 484 7,66,900 5,624 
38 Alappuzha Mannanchery 95 640 9,92,600 7,279 
39 Alappuzha Mannar 84 544 9,94,600 7,294 
40 Alappuzha Mararikulam North 75 485 7,82,700 5,740 
41 Alappuzha Mararikulam South 141 1,074 13,74,800 10,082 
42 Alappuzha Mavelikara 
Thamarakulam 
135 1,039 17,62,600 12,926 
43 Alappuzha Mavelikkara 117 868 15,10,800 11,079 
44 Alappuzha Mavelikkara 
Thekkekara 
88 607 10,99,900 8,066 
45 Alappuzha Muhamma 104 814 10,98,700 8,057 
46 Alappuzha Mulakuzha 153 1,259 23,25,300 17,052 
47 Alappuzha Muthukulam 84 634 10,43,100 7,649 
48 Alappuzha Muttar 39 293 5,30,800 3,893 
49 Alappuzha Nedumudi 58 459 7,83,100 5,743 
50 Alappuzha Neelamperoor 65 524 9,22,700 6,767 
51 Alappuzha Nooranad 164 1,075 18,77,100 13,765 
52 Alappuzha Palamel 152 1,110 18,39,300 13,488 
53 Alappuzha Pallippad 99 365 5,89,300 4,322 
54 Alappuzha Panavally 107 897 14,78,400 10,842 
55 Alappuzha Pandanad 53 322 5,83,400 4,278 
56 Alappuzha Pathiyoor 100 724 12,68,800 9,305 
57 Alappuzha Pattanakkad 153 1,129 16,49,900 12,099 
58 Alappuzha Perumbalam 35 274 4,09,700 3,004 
59 Alappuzha Pulinkunnu 80 618 10,34,400 7,586 
60 Alappuzha Puliyoor 34 74 1,13,600 833 
61 Alappuzha Punnapra North 62 507 8,64,100 6,337 
62 Alappuzha Punnapra South 103 775 11,41,100 8,368 
63 Alappuzha Purakkad 148 1,323 22,14,000 16,236 
64 Alappuzha Ramankari 58 343 6,70,000 4,913 
65 Alappuzha Thaicattussery 66 404 6,18,100 4,533 
66 Alappuzha Thakazhi 131 1,069 17,77,500 13,035 
67 Alappuzha Thalavadi 116 941 16,63,100 12,196 
68 Alappuzha Thanneermukkam 96 629 11,24,400 8,246 

 
 127   
Appendix 
Sl. 
No. 
District Name of the Local 
Body 
No.of 
Benefic
iaries 
No. of 
cases 
Amount 
Transferred    
₹ 
Interest     
₹ 
69 Alappuzha Thazhakara 130 587 10,96,200 8,039 
70 Alappuzha Thiruvanvandur 36 299 5,49,800 4,032 
71 Alappuzha Thrikkunnapuzha 123 888 13,53,900 9,929 
72 Alappuzha Thuravoor 173 919 14,88,000 10,912 
73 Alappuzha Vallikunnam 135 1,095 19,32,100 14,169 
74 Alappuzha Vayalar 95 791 12,14,200 8,904 
75 Alappuzha Veeyapuram 59 471 8,05,400 5,906 
76 Alappuzha Veliyanad 77 616 10,99,200 8,061 
77 Alappuzha Venmony 50 124 1,99,600 1,464 
78 Ernakulam Aikaranad 58 474 8,53,200 6,257 
79 Ernakulam Alangad 182 1,566 27,73,700 20,341 
80 Ernakulam Aluva 28 245 4,24,600 3,114 
81 Ernakulam Amballur 62 286 5,03,500 3,692 
82 Ernakulam Angamali 157 577 10,32,700 7,573 
83 Ernakulam Arakuzha 19 62 97,400 714 
84 Ernakulam Asamannoor 29 210 3,69,500 2,710 
85 Ernakulam Avoly 33 281 5,03,400 3,692 
86 Ernakulam Ayavana 5 39 81,800 600 
87 Ernakulam Ayyampuzha 67 333 5,60,500 4,110 
88 Ernakulam Chellanam 146 1,026 16,78,200 12,307 
89 Ernakulam Chendamangalam 89 458 7,68,400 5,635 
90 Ernakulam Chengamanad 80 612 11,09,300 8,135 
91 Ernakulam Cheranallur 105 846 15,15,800 11,116 
92 Ernakulam Chittattukara 89 710 11,62,300 8,524 
93 Ernakulam Choornikkara 64 144 2,79,300 2,048 
94 Ernakulam Chottanikkara 36 266 4,81,900 3,534 
95 Ernakulam Cochin 710 5,557 97,81,800 71,733 
96 Ernakulam Edakkattuvayal 26 176 3,12,400 2,291 
97 Ernakulam Edathala 32 248 4,28,800 3,145 
98 Ernakulam Edavanakkad 57 544 9,03,100 6,623 
99 Ernakulam Elamkunnapuzha 87 561 9,90,700 7,265 
100 Ernakulam Elanji 7 50 94,600 694 
101 Ernakulam Eloor 82 663 12,04,400 8,832 
102 Ernakulam Ezhikkara 53 342 5,83,800 4,281 
103 Ernakulam Kadamakudy 7 43 64,400 472 
104 Ernakulam Kadungallur 21 132 2,26,400 1,660 
105 Ernakulam Kalady 192 1,254 23,47,400 17,214 
106 Ernakulam Kalamassery 155 1,224 22,20,200 16,282 

 
128 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
Sl. 
No. 
District Name of the Local 
Body 
No.of 
Benefic
iaries 
No. of 
cases 
Amount 
Transferred    
₹ 
Interest     
₹ 
107 Ernakulam Kalloorkkad 14 115 2,10,700 1,545 
108 Ernakulam Kanjoor 59 407 6,72,400 4,931 
109 Ernakulam Karukutty 51 444 8,12,600 5,959 
110 Ernakulam Karumalloor 124 506 9,43,500 6,919 
111 Ernakulam Kavalangad 34 161 2,78,400 2,042 
112 Ernakulam Keerampara 39 266 4,55,300 3,339 
113 Ernakulam Keezhmad 57 378 6,60,900 4,847 
114 Ernakulam Kizhakkambalam 69 280 4,63,400 3,398 
115 Ernakulam Koothattukulam 55 289 5,87,900 4,311 
116 Ernakulam Koovappady 93 732 12,85,200 9,425 
117 Ernakulam Kothamangalam 162 1,246 21,72,100 15,929 
118 Ernakulam Kottappady 23 140 2,19,400 1,609 
119 Ernakulam Kottuvally 163 1,130 18,90,400 13,863 
120 Ernakulam Kumbalam 109 877 15,47,200 11,346 
121 Ernakulam Kumbalangy 55 395 6,63,300 4,864 
122 Ernakulam Kunnathunad 62 190 3,43,500 2,519 
123 Ernakulam Kunnukara 30 187 2,88,800 2,118 
124 Ernakulam Kuttampuzha 80 530 9,42,300 6,910 
125 Ernakulam Kuzhuppilly 20 150 2,63,500 1,932 
126 Ernakulam Malayattoor 
Neeleswaram 
53 413 6,68,600 4,903 
127 Ernakulam Maneed 43 325 6,01,800 4,413 
128 Ernakulam Manjalloor 2 4 19,000 139 
129 Ernakulam Manjapra 31 109 1,77,500 1,302 
130 Ernakulam Maradu 55 310 5,61,800 4,120 
131 Ernakulam Marady 35 225 3,90,300 2,862 
132 Ernakulam Mazhuvannoor 30 233 3,90,800 2,866 
133 Ernakulam Mookkannur 65 520 9,54,800 7,002 
134 Ernakulam Mudakuzha 37 262 4,32,400 3,171 
135 Ernakulam Mulavukad 9 44 77,200 566 
136 Ernakulam Mulumthuruthy 46 371 6,63,100 4,863 
137 Ernakulam Muvattupuzha 92 681 12,05,500 8,840 
138 Ernakulam Nayarambalam 115 916 16,06,400 11,780 
139 Ernakulam Nedumbassery 85 699 12,56,700 9,216 
140 Ernakulam Nellikkuzhi 135 1,135 20,51,700 15,046 
141 Ernakulam Njarakkal 46 306 5,37,600 3,942 
142 Ernakulam North Paravur 77 318 5,02,400 3,684 
143 Ernakulam Okkal 38 310 5,54,600 4,067 

 
 129   
Appendix 
Sl. 
No. 
District Name of the Local 
Body 
No.of 
Benefic
iaries 
No. of 
cases 
Amount 
Transferred    
₹ 
Interest     
₹ 
144 Ernakulam Paingottur 45 179 3,28,900 2,412 
145 Ernakulam Paipra 108 762 14,00,500 10,270 
146 Ernakulam Palakuzha 49 227 4,03,600 2,960 
147 Ernakulam Pallarimangalam 18 99 1,72,800 1,267 
148 Ernakulam Pallippuram 167 1,265 21,49,900 15,766 
149 Ernakulam Pampakuda 51 276 5,04,000 3,696 
150 Ernakulam Parakkadavu 56 306 5,88,500 4,316 
151 Ernakulam Perumbavoor 74 611 11,30,500 8,290 
152 Ernakulam Pindimana 29 241 3,93,700 2,887 
153 Ernakulam Piravom 81 450 8,39,300 6,155 
154 Ernakulam Poothrika 49 339 6,08,100 4,459 
155 Ernakulam Pothanikkad 18 65 1,22,500 898 
156 Ernakulam Puthenvelikara 25 141 2,48,100 1,819 
157 Ernakulam Ramamangalam 56 423 7,32,300 5,370 
158 Ernakulam Rayamangalam 86 678 12,16,700 8,923 
159 Ernakulam Sreemoolanagaram 55 434 7,36,500 5,401 
160 Ernakulam Thirumarady 65 421 7,27,700 5,336 
161 Ernakulam Thiruvaniyoor 64 566 10,47,500 7,682 
162 Ernakulam Thrikkakara 117 886 15,74,200 11,544 
163 Ernakulam Tripunithura 105 838 15,14,400 11,106 
164 Ernakulam Udayamperur 56 474 8,46,800 6,210 
165 Ernakulam Vadakkekara 120 886 12,98,300 9,521 
166 Ernakulam Vadavucode Puthen 
Cruz 
56 225 3,66,200 2,686 
167 Ernakulam Valakom 53 426 7,76,400 5,694 
168 Ernakulam Varappetty 41 263 4,07,100 2,985 
169 Ernakulam Varapuzha 41 146 2,58,900 1,899 
170 Ernakulam Vazhakkulam 141 1,075 18,75,500 13,754 
171 Ernakulam Vengola 130 1,016 18,13,000 13,295 
172 Ernakulam Vengoor 58 433 7,78,000 5,705 
173 Idukki Adimaly 19 95 1,64,600 1,207 
174 Idukki Alakkode 18 108 1,95,200 1,431 
175 Idukki Arakulam 22 156 3,11,900 2,287 
176 Idukki Ayyappancoil 3 7 13,600 100 
177 Idukki Bisonvalley 24 181 3,02,000 2,215 
178 Idukki Chinnakanal 10 87 1,63,000 1,195 
179 Idukki Devikulam 13 90 1,66,900 1,224 
180 Idukki Edamalakudi 6 42 80,100 587 

 
130 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
Sl. 
No. 
District Name of the Local 
Body 
No.of 
Benefic
iaries 
No. of 
cases 
Amount 
Transferred    
₹ 
Interest     
₹ 
181 Idukki Edavetty 12 102 1,92,700 1,413 
182 Idukki Elappara 16 108 1,89,600 1,390 
183 Idukki Erattayar 57 389 6,90,600 5,064 
184 Idukki Idukki Kanjikuzhy 15 98 1,71,700 1,259 
185 Idukki Kamakshy 29 200 3,41,900 2,507 
186 Idukki Kanchiyar 54 254 4,23,800 3,108 
187 Idukki Kanthalloor 59 506 8,94,200 6,558 
188 Idukki Karimannoor 37 148 2,38,200 1,747 
189 Idukki Karimkunnam 21 169 3,02,800 2,221 
190 Idukki Karunapuram 42 338 5,91,200 4,335 
191 Idukki Kattappana 75 555 9,91,400 7,270 
192 Idukki Kodikulam 16 115 2,25,200 1,651 
193 Idukki Kokkayar 13 40 67,200 493 
194 Idukki Konnathady 71 528 9,09,300 6,668 
195 Idukki Kudayathoor 15 98 1,57,100 1,152 
196 Idukki Kumaramangalam 28 206 3,68,100 2,699 
197 Idukki Kumily 18 111 1,90,000 1,393 
198 Idukki Manakkad 27 98 1,79,200 1,314 
199 Idukki Mankulam 25 208 3,67,200 2,693 
200 Idukki Marayoor 11 84 1,60,700 1,178 
201 Idukki Mariyapuram 16 128 2,29,400 1,682 
202 Idukki Munnar 2 6 9,200 67 
203 Idukki Muttom 17 108 1,93,100 1,416 
204 Idukki Nedumkandam 41 337 6,25,500 4,587 
205 Idukki Pallivasal 25 209 3,51,400 2,577 
206 Idukki Pampadumpara 44 351 6,52,300 4,784 
207 Idukki Peerumedu 46 335 5,55,900 4,077 
208 Idukki Peruvanthanam 50 397 6,92,900 5,081 
209 Idukki Purapuzha 5 10 15,500 114 
210 Idukki Rajakkad 17 139 2,42,500 1,778 
211 Idukki Rajakumari 20 129 2,07,200 1,519 
212 Idukki Santhanpara 13 89 1,51,000 1,107 
213 Idukki Senapathy 13 110 2,09,800 1,539 
214 Idukki Thodupuzha 148 1,140 20,53,300 15,058 
215 Idukki Udumbanchola 13 108 2,17,000 1,591 
216 Idukki Udumbanoor 16 53 85,800 629 
217 Idukki Upputhara 28 200 3,62,400 2,658 
218 Idukki Vandanmedu 16 110 2,09,100 1,533 

 
 131   
Appendix 
Sl. 
No. 
District Name of the Local 
Body 
No.of 
Benefic
iaries 
No. of 
cases 
Amount 
Transferred    
₹ 
Interest     
₹ 
219 Idukki Vandiperiyar 42 224 4,05,300 2,972 
220 Idukki Vannappuram 26 114 2,62,000 1,921 
221 Idukki Vathikudy 3 26 43,900 322 
222 Idukki Vattavada 3 6 15,100 111 
223 Idukki Vazhathope 35 286 5,24,600 3,847 
224 Idukki Vellathooval 24 131 2,42,600 1,779 
225 Idukki Velliyamattom 16 108 1,82,000 1,335 
226 Kannur Alakode 55 140 2,51,900 1,847 
227 Kannur Ancharakandy 115 469 8,09,500 5,936 
228 Kannur Anthoor 136 1,058 17,87,800 13,111 
229 Kannur Aralam 84 286 5,12,500 3,758 
230 Kannur Ayyankunnu 65 508 9,09,600 6,670 
231 Kannur Azhikode 82 556 8,20,200 6,015 
232 Kannur Chapparapadavu 88 627 11,03,000 8,089 
233 Kannur Chembilode 172 1,329 22,52,000 16,515 
234 Kannur Chengalai 101 697 11,95,000 8,763 
235 Kannur Cherukunnu 53 379 5,91,000 4,334 
236 Kannur Cherupuzha 93 739 13,06,500 9,581 
237 Kannur Cheruthazham 47 312 5,76,400 4,227 
238 Kannur Chirakkal 171 910 16,15,300 11,846 
239 Kannur Chittariparamba 96 480 8,40,200 6,162 
240 Kannur Chokli 67 248 4,43,300 3,251 
241 Kannur Dharmadom 100 671 10,96,900 8,044 
242 Kannur Eramam Kuttur 110 570 10,23,100 7,503 
243 Kannur Eramholi 108 458 7,00,000 5,133 
244 Kannur Eruvassey 66 525 9,29,200 6,814 
245 Kannur Ezhome 74 444 7,87,500 5,775 
246 Kannur Irikkur 16 112 2,01,600 1,478 
247 Kannur Iritty 125 966 16,28,000 11,939 
248 Kannur Kadambur 89 524 8,66,600 6,355 
249 Kannur Kadannapally 
Panapuzha 
58 251 3,96,100 2,905 
250 Kannur Kadirur 145 554 10,70,600 7,851 
251 Kannur Kalliasseri 101 628 11,18,200 8,200 
252 Kannur Kangole Alapadamba 41 259 4,23,800 3,108 
253 Kannur Kanichar 48 310 5,65,500 4,147 
254 Kannur Kannapuram 83 748 13,59,600 9,970 
255 Kannur Kannur 754 5,632 101,96,500 74,775 

 
132 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
Sl. 
No. 
District Name of the Local 
Body 
No.of 
Benefic
iaries 
No. of 
cases 
Amount 
Transferred    
₹ 
Interest     
₹ 
256 Kannur Karivellur Peralam 44 176 2,79,600 2,050 
257 Kannur Keezhallur 64 197 3,25,200 2,385 
258 Kannur Kelakom 39 198 3,58,600 2,630 
259 Kannur Kolacherry 71 289 4,61,700 3,386 
260 Kannur Kolayad 88 738 13,24,900 9,716 
261 Kannur Koodali 55 264 5,34,600 3,920 
262 Kannur Koothuparamba 131 1,050 18,69,700 13,711 
263 Kannur Kottiyoor 41 153 2,20,400 1,616 
264 Kannur Kunhimangalam 88 614 10,48,900 7,692 
265 Kannur Kunnathuparamba 110 625 9,96,100 7,305 
266 Kannur Kurumathur 115 938 16,68,100 12,233 
267 Kannur Kuttiattur 119 535 9,48,900 6,959 
268 Kannur Madayi 78 588 10,21,600 7,492 
269 Kannur Malapattom 40 343 5,52,300 4,050 
270 Kannur Malur 73 562 9,76,800 7,163 
271 Kannur Mangattidam 174 1,076 19,58,000 14,359 
272 Kannur Mattannur 181 1,422 25,20,400 18,483 
273 Kannur Mattool 74 583 10,06,500 7,381 
274 Kannur Mayyil 127 950 16,67,700 12,230 
275 Kannur Mokeri 44 132 2,33,500 1,712 
276 Kannur Munderi 130 771 11,83,600 8,680 
277 Kannur Muzhakkunnu 86 507 8,90,500 6,530 
278 Kannur Muzhappilangad 64 229 3,74,900 2,749 
279 Kannur Naduvil 121 679 13,20,500 9,684 
280 Kannur Narath 115 610 10,89,200 7,988 
281 Kannur New Mahi 42 282 4,84,100 3,550 
282 Kannur Padiyur kalliad 89 755 13,44,900 9,863 
283 Kannur Panniyannur 84 636 10,93,200 8,017 
284 Kannur Panoor 186 1,131 19,67,000 14,425 
285 Kannur Pappinisseri 56 260 4,71,800 3,460 
286 Kannur Pattiam 103 798 13,39,100 9,820 
287 Kannur Pattuvam 40 244 4,19,500 3,076 
288 Kannur Payam 40 224 3,60,100 2,641 
289 Kannur Payyannur 408 3,348 57,01,600 41,812 
290 Kannur Payyavoor 62 208 3,71,600 2,725 
291 Kannur Peralasseri 74 303 4,50,800 3,306 
292 Kannur Peravoor 94 725 12,86,400 9,434 

 
 133   
Appendix 
Sl. 
No. 
District Name of the Local 
Body 
No.of 
Benefic
iaries 
No. of 
cases 
Amount 
Transferred    
₹ 
Interest     
₹ 
293 Kannur Peringome 
Vayakkara 
53 322 5,67,500 4,162 
294 Kannur Pinarayi 125 705 12,36,000 9,064 
295 Kannur Ramanthali 58 355 5,42,500 3,978 
296 Kannur Sreekandapuram 111 654 11,75,700 8,622 
297 Kannur Taliparamba 135 1,030 18,26,900 13,397 
298 Kannur Thalassery 328 2,547 44,67,600 32,763 
299 Kannur Thilankeri 40 163 2,96,800 2,177 
300 Kannur Triprangottur 130 879 15,80,200 11,588 
301 Kannur Udayagiri 12 32 64,000 469 
302 Kannur Ulikkal 89 502 8,30,800 6,093 
303 Kannur Valapattanam 27 116 1,89,800 1,392 
304 Kannur Vengad 85 583 10,67,500 7,828 
305 Kasaragod Ajanoor 162 1,216 21,00,000 15,400 
306 Kasaragod Badiyadka 109 794 14,41,300 10,570 
307 Kasaragod Balal 91 746 13,51,700 9,913 
308 Kasaragod Bedaduka 123 940 16,43,700 12,054 
309 Kasaragod Belloor 38 327 567,400 4,161 
310 Kasaragod Chemnad 226 1,905 34,21,700 25,093 
311 Kasaragod Chengala 151 1,236 21,65,400 15,880 
312 Kasaragod Cheruvathur 103 552 9,31,300 6,830 
313 Kasaragod Delampady 78 385 6,12,300 4,490 
314 Kasaragod East Eleri 28 105 1,84,700 1,354 
315 Kasaragod Enmakaje 77 623 11,48,500 8,422 
316 Kasaragod Kallar 59 394 6,28,400 4,608 
317 Kasaragod Kanjhangad 280 2,174 36,98,300 27,121 
318 Kasaragod Karadka 59 496 8,86,800 6,503 
319 Kasaragod Kasaragod 98 736 12,71,600 9,325 
320 Kasaragod Kayyur Cheemeni 116 707 12,72,300 9,330 
321 Kasaragod Kinanoor 
Karinthalam 
79 655 11,42,100 8,375 
322 Kasaragod Kodombellur 109 712 13,24,800 9,715 
323 Kasaragod Kumbadaje 34 281 4,96,900 3,644 
324 Kasaragod Kumbala 98 645 11,79,900 8,653 
325 Kasaragod Kutikkol 78 602 10,91,200 8,002 
326 Kasaragod Madhur 96 659 11,61,600 8,518 
327 Kasaragod Madikkai 101 844 15,38,300 11,281 
328 Kasaragod Mangalpady 190 1,486 25,14,600 18,441 

 
134 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
Sl. 
No. 
District Name of the Local 
Body 
No.of 
Benefic
iaries 
No. of 
cases 
Amount 
Transferred    
₹ 
Interest     
₹ 
329 Kasaragod Manjewswaram 53 425 7,89,400 5,789 
330 Kasaragod Meenja 80 393 6,50,900 4,773 
331 Kasaragod Mogral Puthur 34 198 3,32,400 2,438 
332 Kasaragod Muliyar 62 456 8,88,500 6,516 
333 Kasaragod Nileshwararam 162 1,064 18,51,000 13,574 
334 Kasaragod Padne 87 622 10,05,400 7,373 
335 Kasaragod Paivalike 79 550 8,79,000 6,446 
336 Kasaragod Pallikkara 144 990 17,79,200 13,048 
337 Kasaragod Panathady 86 635 11,27,700 8,270 
338 Kasaragod Pilicode 111 799 13,92,500 10,212 
339 Kasaragod Pullurperiya 132 960 17,80,300 13,056 
340 Kasaragod Puthige 73 598 11,07,000 8,118 
341 Kasaragod Trikaripur 162 1,218 21,05,700 15,442 
342 Kasaragod Udma 108 823 14,61,200 10,716 
343 Kasaragod Valiyaparamba 60 369 6,28,400 4,608 
344 Kasaragod Vorkady 99 818 14,57,800 10,691 
345 Kasaragod West Eleri 66 414 5,84,200 4,284 
346 Kollam Adichanalloor 84 648 10,66,100 7,818 
347 Kollam Alappad 23 138 2,58,200 1,893 
348 Kollam Alayamon 55 421 7,25,100 5,317 
349 Kollam Anchal 141 1,060 18,69,300 13,708 
350 Kollam Ariencavu 27 152 2,51,600 1,845 
351 Kollam Chadayamangalam 163 881 16,35,600 11,995 
352 Kollam Chathannur 33 258 3,97,200 2,913 
353 Kollam Chavara 86 563 8,62,500 6,325 
354 Kollam Chirakkara 69 281 4,60,800 3,379 
355 Kollam Chithara 175 990 15,38,800 11,285 
356 Kollam Clappana 93 753 12,33,800 9,048 
357 Kollam Edamulakkal 75 293 4,95,600 3,634 
358 Kollam Elamadu 112 803 11,89,100 8,720 
359 Kollam Elampalloor 36 134 1,63,700 1,200 
360 Kollam Ezhukone 74 672 9,81,700 7,199 
361 Kollam Ittiva 205 1,266 23,00,500 16,870 
362 Kollam Kadakkal 3 9 32,000 235 
363 Kollam Kalluvathukkal 94 735 12,48,300 9,154 
364 Kollam Karavaloor 87 290 5,28,700 3,877 
365 Kollam Kareepra 60 443 6,44,800 4,729 
366 Kollam Karunagappally 187 800 12,41,400 9,104 

 
 135   
Appendix 
Sl. 
No. 
District Name of the Local 
Body 
No.of 
Benefic
iaries 
No. of 
cases 
Amount 
Transferred    
₹ 
Interest     
₹ 
367 Kollam Kizhakkekallada 89 699 10,40,200 7,628 
368 Kollam Kollam 272 1,164 20,09,500 14,736 
369 Kollam Kottamkara 52 303 4,50,900 3,307 
370 Kollam Kottarakara 94 734 12,00,200 8,802 
371 Kollam Kulakkada 164 1,380 22,44,900 16,463 
372 Kollam Kulasekharapuram 191 1,413 22,71,700 16,659 
373 Kollam Kulathupuzha 52 322 5,15,400 3,780 
374 Kollam Kummil 2 6 20,200 148 
375 Kollam Kundara 45 163 258,200 1,893 
376 Kollam Kunnathur 74 599 9,77,500 7,168 
377 Kollam Mayyanad 81 553 8,68,700 6,370 
378 Kollam Melila 32 166 2,78,000 2,039 
379 Kollam Muntrothuruthu 19 57 90,500 664 
380 Kollam Mylam 46 256 4,39,200 3,221 
381 Kollam Mynagappally 99 853 13,66,600 10,022 
382 Kollam Nedumpana 175 1,222 18,42,500 13,512 
383 Kollam Neduvathur 62 441 6,63,000 4,862 
384 Kollam Neendakara 24 161 3,07,100 2,252 
385 Kollam Nilamel 76 595 10,59,900 7,773 
386 Kollam Oachira 135 1,109 18,70,900 13,720 
387 Kollam Panayam 89 546 8,07,100 5,919 
388 Kollam Panmana 70 595 10,53,600 7,726 
389 Kollam Paravoor 91 710 10,68,900 7,839 
390 Kollam Pathanapuram 56 411 7,56,200 5,545 
391 Kollam Pattazhi 19 74 1,21,100 888 
392 Kollam Pattazhi Vadakkekara 84 692 11,73,500 8,606 
393 Kollam Pavithreswaram 127 1,017 14,80,300 10,856 
394 Kollam Perayam 72 487 7,77,500 5,702 
395 Kollam Perinad 72 413 5,90,300 4,329 
396 Kollam Piravanthur 144 1,192 21,74,200 15,944 
397 Kollam Poothakkulam 107 803 13,12,200 9,623 
398 Kollam Pooyappally 63 477 8,02,100 5,882 
399 Kollam Poruvazhy 44 259 4,16,000 3,051 
400 Kollam Punaloor 226 1,450 26,59,900 19,506 
401 Kollam Sasthamcotta 75 324 4,36,300 3,200 
402 Kollam Sooranad North 130 994 15,80,500 11,590 
403 Kollam Sooranad South 48 176 2,49,000 1,826 
404 Kollam Thalavoor 66 542 9,10,400 6,676 

 
136 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
Sl. 
No. 
District Name of the Local 
Body 
No.of 
Benefic
iaries 
No. of 
cases 
Amount 
Transferred    
₹ 
Interest     
₹ 
405 Kollam Thazhava 142 1,003 16,06,400 11,780 
406 Kollam Thekkumbhagom 23 176 2,97,100 2,179 
407 Kollam Thenmala 45 285 4,91,700 3,606 
408 Kollam Thevalakkara 54 230 3,42,600 2,512 
409 Kollam Thodiyoor 180 1,643 27,21,500 19,958 
410 Kollam Thrikkaruva 76 590 9,46,800 6,943 
411 Kollam Thrikkovilvattom 169 1,337 19,50,800 14,306 
412 Kollam Ummannur 75 533 8,79,600 6,450 
413 Kollam Velinallur 96 695 11,35,100 8,324 
414 Kollam Veliyam 108 666 11,67,000 8,558 
415 Kollam Vettikkavala 155 1,039 15,83,300 11,611 
416 Kollam Vilakudy 47 369 6,24,300 4,578 
417 Kollam West Kallada 101 825 13,84,600 10,154 
418 Kollam Yeroor 169 1,335 22,78,800 16,711 
419 Kottayam Aimanam 100 801 13,94,900 10,229 
420 Kottayam Akalakunnam 24 201 3,74,400 2,746 
421 Kottayam Arpookara 53 305 6,01,300 4,410 
422 Kottayam Athirampuzha 53 423 7,24,000 5,309 
423 Kottayam Ayarkkunnam 40 337 5,99,500 4,396 
424 Kottayam Bharananganam 20 106 1,88,300 1,381 
425 Kottayam Changanassery 114 798 14,99,500 10,996 
426 Kottayam Chempu 50 405 6,80,200 4,988 
427 Kottayam Chirakkadavu 80 697 12,77,100 9,365 
428 Kottayam Elikulam 45 371 6,11,800 4,487 
429 Kottayam Erattupetta 79 580 10,50,000 7,700 
430 Kottayam Erumeli 111 818 14,34,600 10,520 
431 Kottayam Ettumanoor 68 441 7,94,700 5,828 
432 Kottayam Kadanad 28 134 2,46,300 1,806 
433 Kottayam Kadaplamattom 28 213 3,59,700 2,638 
434 Kottayam Kaduthuruthy 81 611 11,42,900 8,381 
435 Kottayam Kanakkari 95 749 14,07,300 10,320 
436 Kottayam Kangazha 69 267 5,01,600 3,678 
437 Kottayam Kanjirappally 55 361 6,84,600 5,020 
438 Kottayam Karoor 54 393 6,86,200 5,032 
439 Kottayam Karukachal 49 384 6,58,200 4,827 
440 Kottayam Kidangoor 44 258 4,13,700 3,034 
441 Kottayam Kooroppada 52 384 6,60,500 4,844 
442 Kottayam Koottickal 36 166 2,89,900 2,126 

 
 137   
Appendix 
Sl. 
No. 
District Name of the Local 
Body 
No.of 
Benefic
iaries 
No. of 
cases 
Amount 
Transferred    
₹ 
Interest     
₹ 
443 Kottayam Koruthode 48 193 3,40,800 2,499 
444 Kottayam Kottayam 214 1,499 26,30,300 19,289 
445 Kottayam Kozhuvanal 24 176 3,12,900 2,295 
446 Kottayam Kumarakom 111 630 11,26,000 8,257 
447 Kottayam Kuravilangad 30 155 2,99,100 2,193 
448 Kottayam Kurichy 111 749 14,14,000 10,369 
449 Kottayam Madappally 54 388 6,31,900 4,634 
450 Kottayam Manarcad 68 442 7,72,100 5,662 
451 Kottayam Manimala 56 382 6,93,700 5,087 
452 Kottayam Manjoor 93 729 13,06,900 9,584 
453 Kottayam Marangattupally 34 251 4,45,100 3,264 
454 Kottayam Maravanthuruthu 51 390 6,03,900 4,429 
455 Kottayam Meenachil 19 143 2,46,400 1,807 
456 Kottayam Meenadom 23 183 3,04,500 2,233 
457 Kottayam Melukavu 1 13 31,600 232 
458 Kottayam Moonilavu 7 49 86,000 631 
459 Kottayam Mulakulam 88 384 6,01,800 4,413 
460 Kottayam Mundakayam 33 216 3,72,800 2,734 
461 Kottayam Mutholy 20 151 2,68,700 1,970 
462 Kottayam Nedumkunnam 19 120 2,00,500 1,470 
463 Kottayam Njeezhoor 71 580 9,95,800 7,303 
464 Kottayam Paippad 28 167 3,23,800 2,375 
465 Kottayam Pala 28 213 3,76,100 2,758 
466 Kottayam Pallikkathode 33 264 4,72,000 3,461 
467 Kottayam Pampady 73 566 9,57,100 7,019 
468 Kottayam Panachikkad 139 1,105 19,41,600 14,238 
469 Kottayam Parathode 100 850 15,47,300 11,347 
470 Kottayam Poonjar 12 65 1,05,500 774 
471 Kottayam Poonjar Thekkekara 24 184 3,09,400 2,269 
472 Kottayam Puthuppally 21 122 2,15,000 1,577 
473 Kottayam Ramapuram 39 302 5,19,400 3,809 
474 Kottayam TV Puram 104 840 13,24,800 9,715 
475 Kottayam Teekoy 25 251 4,81,700 3,532 
476 Kottayam Thalanad 1 12 28,600 210 
477 Kottayam Thalappalam 17 153 2,81,100 2,061 
478 Kottayam Thalayazham 104 829 14,71,400 10,790 
479 Kottayam Thalayolaparambu 60 472 8,20,200 6,015 
480 Kottayam Thidanad 23 63 1,07,200 786 

 
138 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
Sl. 
No. 
District Name of the Local 
Body 
No.of 
Benefic
iaries 
No. of 
cases 
Amount 
Transferred    
₹ 
Interest     
₹ 
481 Kottayam Thiruvarpu 147 1,194 21,12,400 15,491 
482 Kottayam Thrikkodithanam 113 852 13,85,400 10,160 
483 Kottayam Udayanapuram 91 703 11,46,800 8,410 
484 Kottayam Uzhavoor 39 331 5,79,400 4,249 
485 Kottayam Vaikom 68 572 9,52,700 6,987 
486 Kottayam Vakathanam 103 383 6,99,900 5,133 
487 Kottayam Vazhappally 100 677 12,33,600 9,046 
488 Kottayam Vazhoor 43 299 4,99,200 3,661 
489 Kottayam Vechoor 63 159 2,75,000 2,017 
490 Kottayam Veliyannoor 18 72 1,26,900 931 
491 Kottayam Vellavoor 40 299 5,14,200 3,771 
492 Kottayam Velloor 22 144 2,79,600 2,050 
493 Kottayam Vijayapuram 30 109 1,90,400 1,396 
494 Kozhikkode Arikulam 81 727 12,68,400 9,302 
495 Kozhikkode Atholi 118 981 16,44,600 12,060 
496 Kozhikkode Ayancheri 92 643 10,83,700 7,947 
497 Kozhikkode Azhiyur 149 1,198 20,69,100 15,173 
498 Kozhikkode Balusseri 103 839 14,50,000 10,633 
499 Kozhikkode Chakittapara 54 448 7,35,200 5,391 
500 Kozhikkode Changaroth 154 1,383 24,82,700 18,207 
501 Kozhikkode Chathamangalam 186 1,517 25,36,000 18,597 
502 Kozhikkode Chekkiad 92 827 15,45,600 11,334 
503 Kozhikkode Chelannur 149 1,342 23,68,800 17,371 
504 Kozhikkode Chemanachery 68 379 6,24,800 4,582 
505 Kozhikkode Chengottukavu 74 469 7,52,200 5,516 
506 Kozhikkode Cheruvannur 114 676 11,50,200 8,435 
507 Kozhikkode Chorode 172 1,387 23,23,200 17,037 
508 Kozhikkode Edacheri 115 945 16,10,500 11,810 
509 Kozhikkode Eramala 137 1,053 17,53,800 12,861 
510 Kozhikkode Feroke 184 1,492 26,04,000 19,096 
511 Kozhikkode Kadalundi 62 383 6,56,800 4,817 
512 Kozhikkode Kakkodi 118 796 13,99,100 10,260 
513 Kozhikkode Kakkur 93 749 12,89,500 9,456 
514 Kozhikkode Karasseri 140 1,125 19,74,200 14,478 
515 Kozhikkode Kattippara 109 882 14,55,100 10,671 
516 Kozhikkode Kavilumpara 67 213 3,83,300 2,811 
517 Kozhikkode Kayakkodi 96 524 9,37,200 6,873 
518 Kozhikkode Kayanna 58 199 3,42,200 2,509 

 
 139   
Appendix 
Sl. 
No. 
District Name of the Local 
Body 
No.of 
Benefic
iaries 
No. of 
cases 
Amount 
Transferred    
₹ 
Interest     
₹ 
519 Kozhikkode Keezhariyur 79 655 11,39,700 8,358 
520 Kozhikkode Kizhakkoth 88 701 12,78,400 9,375 
521 Kozhikkode Kodencheri 113 840 13,72,300 10,064 
522 Kozhikkode Kodiyathur 112 885 15,26,500 11,194 
523 Kozhikkode Koduvally 185 1,522 26,88,200 19,714 
524 Kozhikkode Koodaranji 53 410 7,27,900 5,338 
525 Kozhikkode Koorachundu 35 219 3,30,300 2,422 
526 Kozhikkode Koothali 55 212 3,81,100 2,795 
527 Kozhikkode Kottur 179 903 15,23,100 11,169 
528 Kozhikkode Kozhikkode 1,248 9,896 1,74,40,600 1,27,898 
529 Kozhikkode Kunnamangalam 171 1,369 23,75,900 17,423 
530 Kozhikkode Kunnumal 49 405 6,74,200 4,944 
531 Kozhikkode Kuruvattur 127 972 17,01,900 12,481 
532 Kozhikkode Kuttiadi 66 542 9,22,800 6,767 
533 Kozhikkode Maniyur 124 1,021 16,87,700 12,377 
534 Kozhikkode Maruthomkara 111 912 15,79,100 11,580 
535 Kozhikkode Mavoor 84 695 12,13,500 8,899 
536 Kozhikkode Meppayur 129 944 17,23,700 12,641 
537 Kozhikkode Moodadi 81 461 7,93,400 5,818 
538 Kozhikkode Mukkam 170 1,336 23,02,100 16,882 
539 Kozhikkode Nadapuram 145 1,130 19,16,400 14,054 
540 Kozhikkode Naduvannur 67 265 4,00,500 2,937 
541 Kozhikkode Nanmanda 120 429 7,55,700 5,542 
542 Kozhikkode Narikunni 95 772 13,83,300 10,144 
543 Kozhikkode Naripetta 111 924 15,87,900 11,645 
544 Kozhikkode Nochad 140 1,090 18,79,800 13,785 
545 Kozhikkode Olavanna 209 1,679 28,47,300 20,880 
546 Kozhikkode Omassery 128 959 16,51,300 12,110 
547 Kozhikkode Onchiyam 91 700 11,34,000 8,316 
548 Kozhikkode Panangad 137 1,120 19,60,200 14,375 
549 Kozhikkode Payyoli 94 796 13,69,300 10,042 
550 Kozhikkode Perambra 87 423 7,09,400 5,202 
551 Kozhikkode Perumanna 80 422 6,49,200 4,761 
552 Kozhikkode Peruvayal 154 995 16,60,000 12,173 
553 Kozhikkode Purameri 114 670 12,40,300 9,096 
554 Kozhikkode Puthuppady 160 1,249 21,24,200 15,578 
555 Kozhikkode Quilandy 223 1,791 29,63,600 21,733 
556 Kozhikkode Ramanattukara 148 1,188 20,33,200 14,910 

 
140 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
Sl. 
No. 
District Name of the Local 
Body 
No.of 
Benefic
iaries 
No. of 
cases 
Amount 
Transferred    
₹ 
Interest     
₹ 
557 Kozhikkode Thalakulathur 134 925 15,12,400 11,091 
558 Kozhikkode Thamarasseri 87 674 12,06,400 8,847 
559 Kozhikkode Thikkodi 123 999 17,50,600 12,838 
560 Kozhikkode Thiruvallur 127 987 17,62,000 12,921 
561 Kozhikkode Thiruvambadi 66 529 8,69,100 6,373 
562 Kozhikkode Thuneri 94 687 12,95,500 9,500 
563 Kozhikkode Thurayur 70 455 7,51,400 5,510 
564 Kozhikkode Ulliyeri 126 717 12,69,300 9,308 
565 Kozhikkode Unnikulum 153 1,197 21,18,800 15,538 
566 Kozhikkode Vadakara 218 940 15,74,000 11,543 
567 Kozhikkode Valayam 72 536 8,83,200 6,477 
568 Kozhikkode Vanimel 73 614 10,39,900 7,626 
569 Kozhikkode Velom 123 1,001 17,61,800 12,920 
570 Kozhikkode Villiyappally 153 1,264 22,41,600 16,438 
571 Malappuram Abdul Rahiman 
Nagar 
187 1,624 29,86,900 21,904 
572 Malappuram Alamcode 125 953 16,52,000 12,115 
573 Malappuram Aliparamba 136 1,030 17,89,500 13,123 
574 Malappuram Amarambalam 135 1,137 19,60,900 14,380 
575 Malappuram Anakkayam 167 1,325 22,87,900 16,778 
576 Malappuram Angadipuram 205 1,528 26,66,200 19,552 
577 Malappuram Areacode 87 551 9,79,900 7,186 
578 Malappuram Athavanad 141 1,157 20,53,600 15,060 
579 Malappuram Chaliyar 74 250 4,16,800 3,057 
580 Malappuram Chekkode 92 679 12,12,200 8,890 
581 Malappuram Chelembra 100 778 13,45,700 9,869 
582 Malappuram Cheriyamundam 106 881 15,47,800 11,351 
583 Malappuram Cherukavu 97 746 13,10,900 9,613 
584 Malappuram Chokkad 117 850 15,01,800 11,013 
585 Malappuram Chungathara 182 1,495 26,11,600 19,152 
586 Malappuram Edakkara 113 913 15,80,500 11,590 
587 Malappuram Edappal 146 955 17,05,600 12,508 
588 Malappuram Edappatta 64 277 4,53,800 3,328 
589 Malappuram Edarikode 84 691 12,14,000 8,903 
590 Malappuram Edavanna 137 922 14,81,400 10,864 
591 Malappuram Edayoor 140 1,117 20,68,400 15,168 
592 Malappuram Elamkulam 66 213 4,06,900 2,984 
593 Malappuram Irimbiliyam 135 1,178 21,31,000 15,627 

 
 141   
Appendix 
Sl. 
No. 
District Name of the Local 
Body 
No.of 
Benefic
iaries 
No. of 
cases 
Amount 
Transferred    
₹ 
Interest     
₹ 
594 Malappuram Kalikavu 128 1,020 18,05,700 13,242 
595 Malappuram Kalpakancheri 91 730 13,21,000 9,687 
596 Malappuram Kannamangalam 101 833 15,34,300 11,252 
597 Malappuram Karulai 50 134 2,57,400 1,888 
598 Malappuram Karuvarakundu 128 862 15,05,500 11,040 
599 Malappuram Kavannur 135 950 15,93,400 11,685 
600 Malappuram Keezhattur 33 119 2,06,700 1,516 
601 Malappuram Keezhuparamba 72 622 11,36,400 8,334 
602 Malappuram Kodur 95 730 13,04,400 9,566 
603 Malappuram Kondotty 180 1,237 22,52,800 16,521 
604 Malappuram Koottilangadi 95 258 5,32,300 3,904 
605 Malappuram Kottakkal 133 988 17,42,900 12,781 
606 Malappuram Kuruva 180 1,394 24,79,000 18,179 
607 Malappuram Kuttippuram 125 1,103 20,21,800 14,827 
608 Malappuram Kuzhimanna 119 946 16,57,100 12,152 
609 Malappuram Makkaraparamba 54 460 8,02,300 5,884 
610 Malappuram Malappuram 177 1,522 27,89,200 20,454 
611 Malappuram Mampad 126 911 16,76,300 12,293 
612 Malappuram Mangalam 119 979 17,73,600 13,006 
613 Malappuram Manjeri 358 2,756 48,84,000 35,816 
614 Malappuram Mankada 92 678 11,56,100 8,478 
615 Malappuram Marakkara 131 1,044 18,79,200 13,781 
616 Malappuram Maranchery 68 353 6,32,900 4,641 
617 Malappuram Melattur 88 741 13,60,900 9,980 
618 Malappuram Moonniyur 140 440 8,01,200 5,876 
619 Malappuram Moorkkanad 76 589 10,41,400 7,637 
620 Malappuram Moothedam 113 908 15,48,000 11,352 
621 Malappuram Morayur 90 661 11,50,500 8,437 
622 Malappuram Muthuvallur 69 546 10,08,800 7,398 
623 Malappuram Nannambra 128 1,054 18,83,000 13,809 
624 Malappuram Nannamukku 94 675 11,14,100 8,170 
625 Malappuram Nilambur 133 1,096 19,60,700 14,379 
626 Malappuram Niramaruthoor 69 404 7,61,900 5,587 
627 Malappuram Othukkungal 106 751 12,97,300 9,514 
628 Malappuram Ozhur 112 814 15,02,200 11,016 
629 Malappuram Pallical 122 952 17,23,700 12,641 
630 Malappuram Pandikkad 218 1,742 31,45,700 23,069 
631 Malappuram Parappanangadi 188 1,521 26,34,300 19,318 

 
142 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
Sl. 
No. 
District Name of the Local 
Body 
No.of 
Benefic
iaries 
No. of 
cases 
Amount 
Transferred    
₹ 
Interest     
₹ 
632 Malappuram Parappur 109 867 15,41,000 11,301 
633 Malappuram Perinthalmanna 147 1,145 20,12,600 14,759 
634 Malappuram Perumanna Klari 81 601 10,39,700 7,624 
635 Malappuram Perumpadappu 133 1,085 18,88,700 13,851 
636 Malappuram Peruvallur 99 592 11,02,400 8,084 
637 Malappuram Ponmala 102 693 13,30,600 9,758 
638 Malappuram Ponmundam 64 284 5,49,800 4,032 
639 Malappuram Ponnani 424 3,215 56,23,300 41,238 
640 Malappuram Pookkottur 97 734 12,73,700 9,341 
641 Malappuram Porur 94 392 6,65,500 4,880 
642 Malappuram Pothukkal 91 518 10,20,200 7,482 
643 Malappuram Pulamanthole 79 504 8,99,200 6,594 
644 Malappuram Pulikkal 85 719 13,37,300 9,807 
645 Malappuram Pulpatta 124 756 12,97,400 9,514 
646 Malappuram Purathur 123 958 16,13,500 11,832 
647 Malappuram Puzhakkattiri 48 257 4,80,600 3,524 
648 Malappuram Tanalur 142 716 12,98,800 9,525 
649 Malappuram Tanur 222 1,470 23,97,600 17,582 
650 Malappuram Tavanur 119 929 15,85,800 11,629 
651 Malappuram Thalakkad 166 1,390 24,81,300 18,196 
652 Malappuram Thazhekode 111 868 15,45,600 11,334 
653 Malappuram Thenhippalam 120 962 16,83,900 12,349 
654 Malappuram Thennala 56 390 6,52,100 4,782 
655 Malappuram Thirunavaya 95 561 9,88,900 7,252 
656 Malappuram Thirur 111 890 16,10,500 11,810 
657 Malappuram Thiruvali 98 755 12,65,500 9,280 
658 Malappuram Thuvvur 98 548 10,54,200 7,731 
659 Malappuram Tirurangadi 140 1,023 18,14,800 13,309 
660 Malappuram Trikkalangode 44 171 2,72,300 1,997 
661 Malappuram Triprangode 161 1,105 19,97,500 14,648 
662 Malappuram Uragam 60 319 5,56,500 4,081 
663 Malappuram Urangattiri 58 178 3,03,700 2,227 
664 Malappuram Valanchery 69 394 7,11,500 5,218 
665 Malappuram Valavannur 117 943 17,20,400 12,616 
666 Malappuram Vallikkunnu 102 825 14,50,200 10,635 
667 Malappuram Vattamkulam 132 1,095 19,87,400 14,574 
668 Malappuram Vazhakkad 99 592 10,72,500 7,865 
669 Malappuram Vazhayur 116 963 17,22,900 12,635 

 
 143   
Appendix 
Sl. 
No. 
District Name of the Local 
Body 
No.of 
Benefic
iaries 
No. of 
cases 
Amount 
Transferred    
₹ 
Interest     
₹ 
670 Malappuram Vazhikkadavu 209 823 14,21,200 10,422 
671 Malappuram Veliyancode 122 952 16,71,100 12,255 
672 Malappuram Vengara 164 1,291 23,00,000 16,867 
673 Malappuram Vettathur 64 580 10,90,600 7,998 
674 Malappuram Vettom 74 343 5,21,600 3,825 
675 Malappuram Wandoor 186 1,515 26,60,200 19,508 
676 Palakkad Agali 96 598 10,23,400 7,505 
677 Palakkad Akathethara 39 136 2,14,100 1,570 
678 Palakkad Alanallur 174 1,465 26,02,600 19,086 
679 Palakkad Alathur 116 881 15,53,300 11,391 
680 Palakkad Ambalapara 191 1,289 22,52,000 16,515 
681 Palakkad Anakkara 94 756 13,06,100 9,578 
682 Palakkad Ananganadi 112 883 16,04,300 11,765 
683 Palakkad Ayiloor 137 945 15,93,700 11,687 
684 Palakkad Chalavara 66 134 2,91,700 2,139 
685 Palakkad Chalisseri 105 849 14,91,800 10,940 
686 Palakkad Cherpulassery 169 1,332 23,85,200 17,492 
687 Palakkad Chittoor 
Thathamangalam 
153 1,067 18,90,200 13,862 
688 Palakkad Elappully 152 458 7,90,400 5,796 
689 Palakkad Elavancherry 51 169 2,65,800 1,949 
690 Palakkad Erimayur 156 1,143 19,28,900 14,145 
691 Palakkad Eruthempathy 85 463 8,48,300 6,221 
692 Palakkad Kadampazhipuram 163 1,244 20,34,600 14,920 
693 Palakkad Kanjirapuzha 133 873 15,09,000 11,066 
694 Palakkad Kannadi 131 848 15,18,000 11,132 
695 Palakkad Kannambra 97 404 6,54,300 4,798 
696 Palakkad Kappur 62 150 2,57,900 1,891 
697 Palakkad Karakurissi 87 468 7,87,900 5,778 
698 Palakkad Karimba 111 609 10,69,900 7,846 
699 Palakkad Karimpuzha 152 882 16,40,800 12,033 
700 Palakkad Kavassery 197 1,679 29,75,600 21,821 
701 Palakkad Keralassery 69 318 5,43,600 3,986 
702 Palakkad Kizhakkancherry 262 2,126 37,62,700 27,593 
703 Palakkad Kodumba 96 745 13,39,500 9,823 
704 Palakkad Koduvayur 111 771 13,13,300 9,631 
705 Palakkad Kollengode 120 430 7,21,100 5,288 
706 Palakkad Kongad 166 948 17,09,200 12,534 

 
144 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
Sl. 
No. 
District Name of the Local 
Body 
No.of 
Benefic
iaries 
No. of 
cases 
Amount 
Transferred    
₹ 
Interest     
₹ 
707 Palakkad Koppam 122 960 17,32,100 12,702 
708 Palakkad Kottappadam 167 1,372 24,68,900 18,105 
709 Palakkad Kottayi 151 1,165 20,12,100 14,755 
710 Palakkad Kozhinjampara 119 841 14,70,200 10,782 
711 Palakkad Kulukkallur 137 1,015 18,15,900 13,317 
712 Palakkad Kumaramputhur 140 996 17,26,900 12,664 
713 Palakkad Kuthanoor 152 1,196 19,84,700 14,555 
714 Palakkad Kuzhalmannam 165 1,347 23,30,000 17,087 
715 Palakkad Lakkidi-perur 109 877 15,91,500 11,671 
716 Palakkad Malampuzha 15 47 1,57,900 1,158 
717 Palakkad Mankara 58 349 6,07,100 4,452 
718 Palakkad Mannarkad 112 813 14,44,800 10,595 
719 Palakkad Mannur 106 828 14,50,000 10,633 
720 Palakkad Marutharode 95 741 12,85,300 9,426 
721 Palakkad Mathur 155 1,241 20,37,000 14,938 
722 Palakkad Melarcode 148 1,186 21,05,000 15,437 
723 Palakkad Mundur 31 69 1,15,200 845 
724 Palakkad Muthalamada 226 1,789 32,18,400 23,602 
725 Palakkad Muthuthala 128 1,057 19,46,600 14,275 
726 Palakkad Nagalassery 94 399 6,54,600 4,800 
727 Palakkad Nalleppilly 92 501 8,00,900 5,873 
728 Palakkad Nellaya 171 1,368 24,50,300 17,969 
729 Palakkad Nelliampathy 11 87 1,62,400 1,191 
730 Palakkad Nemmara 197 1,460 24,85,100 18,224 
731 Palakkad Ongallur 203 1,743 31,48,700 23,091 
732 Palakkad Ottappalam 212 1,538 25,25,000 18,517 
733 Palakkad Palakkad 138 1,115 19,53,700 14,327 
734 Palakkad Pallassana 152 1,169 20,52,200 15,050 
735 Palakkad Parali 131 487 8,19,300 6,008 
736 Palakkad Paruthur 137 1,123 19,63,800 14,401 
737 Palakkad Pattambi 67 547 9,87,700 7,243 
738 Palakkad Pattencherry 109 805 13,69,100 10,040 
739 Palakkad Pattithara 138 852 16,68,000 12,232 
740 Palakkad Peringottukurissi 153 788 12,77,400 9,368 
741 Palakkad Perumatty 94 474 8,03,200 5,890 
742 Palakkad Peruvemba 98 757 12,71,000 9,321 
743 Palakkad Pirayiri 146 1,029 18,17,900 13,331 
744 Palakkad Polpully 81 629 10,27,300 7,534 

 
 145   
Appendix 
Sl. 
No. 
District Name of the Local 
Body 
No.of 
Benefic
iaries 
No. of 
cases 
Amount 
Transferred    
₹ 
Interest     
₹ 
745 Palakkad Pookkottukavu 61 435 7,12,200 5,223 
746 Palakkad Puducode 93 305 5,30,100 3,887 
747 Palakkad Puduppariyaram 105 766 13,15,200 9,645 
748 Palakkad Pudur 21 142 2,46,400 1,807 
749 Palakkad Pudusseri 237 1,970 35,66,800 26,157 
750 Palakkad Puthunagaram 53 378 6,07,000 4,451 
751 Palakkad Sholayur 83 613 10,36,900 7,604 
752 Palakkad Shornur 168 1,351 23,60,500 17,310 
753 Palakkad Sreekrishnapuram 113 364 6,40,200 4,695 
754 Palakkad Tachampara 71 595 11,15,300 8,179 
755 Palakkad Tarur 81 390 7,31,100 5,361 
756 Palakkad Thachanattukara 53 362 7,03,200 5,157 
757 Palakkad Thenkara 131 940 16,28,400 11,942 
758 Palakkad Thenkurissi 194 1,506 26,85,500 19,694 
759 Palakkad Thirumittacode 124 1,009 18,22,900 13,368 
760 Palakkad Thiruvegapura 161 1,261 22,77,600 16,702 
761 Palakkad Thrikkadeeri 114 371 6,45,100 4,731 
762 Palakkad Thrithala 86 624 10,30,100 7,554 
763 Palakkad Vadakarapathy 143 1,015 18,49,400 13,562 
764 Palakkad Vadakkancheri 172 1,299 23,12,100 16,955 
765 Palakkad Vadavannur 31 130 2,84,700 2,088 
766 Palakkad Vallapuzha 117 931 16,84,900 12,356 
767 Palakkad Vandazhy 159 1,252 21,53,500 15,792 
768 Palakkad Vellinezhi 52 246 4,05,200 2,971 
769 Palakkad Vilayur 100 601 11,68,300 8,568 
770 Pathanamthitta Adoor 76 608 10,32,900 7,575 
771 Pathanamthitta Anicadu 16 126 2,12,900 1,561 
772 Pathanamthitta Aranmula 64 492 8,66,000 6,351 
773 Pathanamthitta Aruvapulam 48 312 5,32,000 3,901 
774 Pathanamthitta Ayiroor 17 115 2,08,100 1,526 
775 Pathanamthitta Chenneerkara 17 93 1,46,700 1,076 
776 Pathanamthitta Cherukole 19 160 2,91,200 2,135 
777 Pathanamthitta Chittar 20 144 2,44,800 1,795 
778 Pathanamthitta Elanthoor 39 286 5,06,600 3,715 
779 Pathanamthitta Enadimangalam 55 361 5,88,100 4,313 
780 Pathanamthitta Erathu 49 381 6,65,600 4,881 
781 Pathanamthitta Eraviperoor 74 563 9,50,800 6,973 
782 Pathanamthitta Ezhamkulam 116 924 15,77,300 11,567 

 
146 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
Sl. 
No. 
District Name of the Local 
Body 
No.of 
Benefic
iaries 
No. of 
cases 
Amount 
Transferred    
₹ 
Interest     
₹ 
783 Pathanamthitta Ezhumattoor 42 345 6,43,200 4,717 
784 Pathanamthitta Kadampanadu 83 676 10,44,800 7,662 
785 Pathanamthitta Kadapra 103 802 14,36,200 10,532 
786 Pathanamthitta Kalanjoor 93 765 13,44,800 9,862 
787 Pathanamthitta Kallooppara 18 139 2,40,700 1,765 
788 Pathanamthitta Kaviyoor 35 228 3,82,800 2,807 
789 Pathanamthitta Kodumon 111 354 6,80,300 4,989 
790 Pathanamthitta Koipuram 39 260 5,04,300 3,698 
791 Pathanamthitta Konni 68 435 7,27,600 5,336 
792 Pathanamthitta Kottanadu 15 94 1,57,100 1,152 
793 Pathanamthitta Kottangal 31 251 4,44,600 3,260 
794 Pathanamthitta Kozhencherry 7 22 37,500 275 
795 Pathanamthitta Kulanada 42 329 5,83,800 4,281 
796 Pathanamthitta Kunnathanam 26 209 3,58,100 2,626 
797 Pathanamthitta Kuttoor 23 189 3,34,500 2,453 
798 Pathanamthitta Mallappally 16 92 1,87,700 1,376 
799 Pathanamthitta Mallapuzhassery 9 50 90,600 664 
800 Pathanamthitta Mezhuveli 24 79 1,44,400 1,059 
801 Pathanamthitta Mylapra 12 103 1,82,800 1,341 
802 Pathanamthitta Naranammoozhy 17 83 1,36,000 ,997 
803 Pathanamthitta Naranganam 32 239 4,01,900 2,947 
804 Pathanamthitta Nedumpuram 15 79 1,33,300 978 
805 Pathanamthitta Niranam 39 292 5,32,000 3,901 
806 Pathanamthitta Omallur 48 302 5,00,400 3,670 
807 Pathanamthitta Pandalam 136 1,039 17,95,700 13,169 
808 Pathanamthitta Pandalam 
Thekkekara 
59 376 6,87,400 5,041 
809 Pathanamthitta Pathanamthitta 83 691 12,68,600 9,303 
810 Pathanamthitta Peringara 65 481 8,41,200 6,169 
811 Pathanamthitta Pramadom 81 453 7,84,000 5,749 
812 Pathanamthitta Puramattom 23 186 2,97,900 2,185 
813 Pathanamthitta Ranni 9 58 90,200 661 
814 Pathanamthitta Ranni Angadi 14 107 1,75,800 1,289 
815 Pathanamthitta Ranni Pazhavangadi 46 223 4,09,800 3,005 
816 Pathanamthitta Ranni Perunad 51 335 5,33,700 3,914 
817 Pathanamthitta Seethathodu 2 5 18,600 136 
818 Pathanamthitta Thannithodu 47 263 4,97,400 3,648 
819 Pathanamthitta Thiruvalla 75 464 8,12,500 5,958 

 
 147   
Appendix 
Sl. 
No. 
District Name of the Local 
Body 
No.of 
Benefic
iaries 
No. of 
cases 
Amount 
Transferred    
₹ 
Interest     
₹ 
820 Pathanamthitta Thottapuzhassery 7 42 70,800 519 
821 Pathanamthitta Thumpamon 32 113 2,02,000 1,481 
822 Pathanamthitta Vadasserikkara 27 142 2,27,800 1,671 
823 Pathanamthitta Vallicode 87 752 13,91,800 10,207 
824 Pathanamthitta Vechuchira 26 164 2,89,400 2,122 
825 Thiruvananthapuram Amboori 93 578 10,56,100 7,745 
826 Thiruvananthapuram Anad 87 715 11,95,700 8,769 
827 Thiruvananthapuram Andoorkonam 79 412 6,82,500 5,005 
828 Thiruvananthapuram Anjuthengu 65 418 7,12,500 5,225 
829 Thiruvananthapuram Aruvikkara 140 1,012 17,75,600 13,021 
830 Thiruvananthapuram Aryanad 93 753 12,94,700 9,495 
831 Thiruvananthapuram Aryancode 48 153 5,24,200 3,844 
832 Thiruvananthapuram Athiyannoor 119 965 16,81,900 12,334 
833 Thiruvananthapuram Attingal 96 451 8,68,800 6,371 
834 Thiruvananthapuram Azhoor 75 347 5,20,600 3,818 
835 Thiruvananthapuram Balaramapuram 159 938 15,97,400 11,714 
836 Thiruvananthapuram Chemmaruthy 97 642 9,70,000 7,113 
837 Thiruvananthapuram Chenkal 182 1,375 23,05,100 16,904 
838 Thiruvananthapuram Cherunniyoor 25 197 3,12,700 2,293 
839 Thiruvananthapuram Edava 65 250 4,16,900 3,057 
840 Thiruvananthapuram Ilakamon 88 715 11,86,700 8,702 
841 Thiruvananthapuram Kadakkavoor 88 616 10,46,500 7,674 
842 Thiruvananthapuram Kadinamkulam 46 285 5,09,700 3,738 
843 Thiruvananthapuram Kallara 79 549 9,59,800 7,039 
844 Thiruvananthapuram Kallikkadu 63 510 8,60,300 6,309 
845 Thiruvananthapuram Kalliyoor 133 470 8,46,000 6,204 
846 Thiruvananthapuram Kanjiramkulam 93 737 13,04,400 9,566 
847 Thiruvananthapuram Karakulam 120 831 15,03,600 11,026 
848 Thiruvananthapuram Karavaram 67 417 7,45,100 5,464 
849 Thiruvananthapuram Karode 175 1,368 23,33,200 17,110 
850 Thiruvananthapuram Karumkulam 167 1,115 15,69,100 11,507 
851 Thiruvananthapuram Kattakkada 90 600 9,41,700 6,906 
852 Thiruvananthapuram Kilimanoor 95 279 4,77,000 3,498 
853 Thiruvananthapuram Kizhuvilam 112 894 14,68,600 10,770 
854 Thiruvananthapuram Kollayil 124 574 9,86,500 7,234 
855 Thiruvananthapuram Kottukal 96 539 9,06,900 6,651 
856 Thiruvananthapuram Kulathoor 154 1,081 16,35,400 11,993 
857 Thiruvananthapuram Kunnathukal 199 1,142 20,66,000 15,151 

 
148 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
Sl. 
No. 
District Name of the Local 
Body 
No.of 
Benefic
iaries 
No. of 
cases 
Amount 
Transferred    
₹ 
Interest     
₹ 
858 Thiruvananthapuram Kuttichal 33 294 5,49,500 4,030 
859 Thiruvananthapuram Madavoor 151 1,074 18,92,100 13,875 
860 Thiruvananthapuram Malayinkeezh 119 734 13,35,200 9,792 
861 Thiruvananthapuram Manamboor 73 597 10,57,900 7,758 
862 Thiruvananthapuram Mangalapuram 173 1,325 22,59,200 16,568 
863 Thiruvananthapuram Manickal 128 608 10,57,500 7,755 
864 Thiruvananthapuram Maranalloor 105 758 13,65,000 10,010 
865 Thiruvananthapuram Mudakkal 122 944 16,08,200 11,794 
866 Thiruvananthapuram Nagaroor 91 515 7,61,200 5,582 
867 Thiruvananthapuram Nanniyode 151 1,141 20,28,300 14,874 
868 Thiruvananthapuram Navaikulam 94 718 11,43,400 8,385 
869 Thiruvananthapuram Nellanad 71 589 10,55,000 7,737 
870 Thiruvananthapuram Neyyattinkara 264 1,754 28,15,600 20,648 
871 Thiruvananthapuram Ottasekharamangalam 42 319 5,46,000 4,004 
872 Thiruvananthapuram Ottoor 60 524 9,52,200 6,983 
873 Thiruvananthapuram Pallichal 176 1,311 22,44,700 16,461 
874 Thiruvananthapuram Pallickal 187 1,416 25,37,200 18,606 
875 Thiruvananthapuram Panavoor 87 288 5,21,500 3,824 
876 Thiruvananthapuram Pangode 129 954 16,21,800 11,893 
877 Thiruvananthapuram Parassala 180 1,210 22,15,200 16,245 
878 Thiruvananthapuram Pazhayakunnummel 83 435 8,33,700 6,114 
879 Thiruvananthapuram Peringammala 107 767 13,37,200 9,806 
880 Thiruvananthapuram Perumkadavila 98 429 7,67,100 5,625 
881 Thiruvananthapuram Poovachal 122 1,011 18,06,100 13,245 
882 Thiruvananthapuram Poovar 1 4 6,100 45 
883 Thiruvananthapuram Pothencode 142 1,107 19,24,000 14,109 
884 Thiruvananthapuram Pulimath 149 690 12,26,800 8,997 
885 Thiruvananthapuram Pullampara 18 43 76,600 562 
886 Thiruvananthapuram Thirupuram 61 450 7,68,900 5,639 
887 Thiruvananthapuram Thiruvananthapuram 496 3,927 68,39,100 50,154 
888 Thiruvananthapuram Tholicode 69 489 8,73,800 6,408 
889 Thiruvananthapuram Uzhamalakkal 117 671 11,38,900 8,352 
890 Thiruvananthapuram Vakkom 48 262 3,86,700 2,836 
891 Thiruvananthapuram Vamanapuram 24 63 1,25,300 919 
892 Thiruvananthapuram Varkala 137 833 15,17,100 11,125 
893 Thiruvananthapuram Vellanad 124 652 12,42,200 9,110 
894 Thiruvananthapuram Vellarada 168 1,293 21,19,000 15,539 
895 Thiruvananthapuram Vembayam 168 1,200 21,12,900 15,495 

 
 149   
Appendix 
Sl. 
No. 
District Name of the Local 
Body 
No.of 
Benefic
iaries 
No. of 
cases 
Amount 
Transferred    
₹ 
Interest     
₹ 
896 Thiruvananthapuram Venganoor 112 913 15,78,200 11,574 
897 Thiruvananthapuram Vettoor 64 573 9,54,600 7,000 
898 Thiruvananthapuram Vilappil 114 927 16,75,500 12,287 
899 Thiruvananthapuram Vilavoorkkal 91 638 9,89,000 7,253 
900 Thiruvananthapuram Vithura 122 583 10,07,600 7,389 
901 Thrissur Adat 92 679 12,26,600 8,995 
902 Thrissur Alagappa Nagar 76 410 6,52,600 4,786 
903 Thrissur Alur 153 1,205 21,76,800 15,963 
904 Thrissur Annamanada 166 1,270 21,35,000 15,657 
905 Thrissur Anthikkad 84 445 7,48,000 5,485 
906 Thrissur Arimpoor 131 1,064 18,96,800 13,910 
907 Thrissur Athirappilli 29 249 4,71,200 3,455 
908 Thrissur Avanur 43 465 8,65,600 6,348 
909 Thrissur Avinissery 53 505 9,01,400 6,610 
910 Thrissur Chalakkudy 176 1,027 19,41,700 14,239 
911 Thrissur Chavakkad 203 1,774 31,68,600 23,237 
912 Thrissur Chazhoor 106 790 13,74,000 10,076 
913 Thrissur Chelakkara 207 1,764 32,18,500 23,602 
914 Thrissur Cherpu 38 302 5,48,100 4,019 
915 Thrissur Choondal 172 824 16,40,700 12,032 
916 Thrissur Chowwannur 64 192 3,76,500 2,761 
917 Thrissur Desamangalam 48 515 9,93,700 7,287 
918 Thrissur Edathiruthy 45 131 2,41,000 1,767 
919 Thrissur Edavilangu 90 386 6,16,100 4,518 
920 Thrissur Elavally 96 581 10,97,800 8,051 
921 Thrissur Engandiyur 95 861 15,78,400 11,575 
922 Thrissur Eriyad 241 1,755 29,50,300 21,636 
923 Thrissur Erumapetty 99 750 11,53,300 8,458 
924 Thrissur Guruvayoor 278 2,399 45,66,300 33,486 
925 Thrissur Irinjalakuda 288 1,417 25,82,400 18,938 
926 Thrissur Kadangode 173 1,362 24,22,000 17,761 
927 Thrissur Kadappuram 61 336 5,19,200 3,807 
928 Thrissur Kadavallur 119 364 7,01,200 5,142 
929 Thrissur Kadukutty 35 215 3,35,000 2,457 
930 Thrissur Kaipamangalam 193 1,601 28,03,500 20,559 
931 Thrissur Kaiparamb 30 218 3,82,300 2,804 
932 Thrissur Kandanassery 65 335 5,95,400 4,366 
933 Thrissur Karalam 92 701 12,61,700 9,253 

 
150 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
Sl. 
No. 
District Name of the Local 
Body 
No.of 
Benefic
iaries 
No. of 
cases 
Amount 
Transferred    
₹ 
Interest     
₹ 
934 Thrissur Kattakampal 93 871 16,67,500 12,228 
935 Thrissur Kattur 67 577 10,38,900 7,619 
936 Thrissur Kodakara 120 1,082 19,36,300 14,200 
937 Thrissur Kodassery 142 573 9,50,800 6,973 
938 Thrissur Kodungalloor 306 2,358 39,50,200 28,968 
939 Thrissur Kolazhy 58 216 3,82,400 2,804 
940 Thrissur Kondazhy 104 918 16,68,700 12,237 
941 Thrissur Koratty 88 581 10,52,700 7,720 
942 Thrissur Kunnamkulam 241 1,908 34,55,600 25,341 
943 Thrissur Kuzhur 80 683 12,39,800 9,092 
944 Thrissur Madakkathara 103 857 15,62,500 11,458 
945 Thrissur Mala 86 703 12,61,900 9,254 
946 Thrissur Manalur 68 587 10,32,200 7,570 
947 Thrissur Mathilakam 85 701 12,52,400 9,184 
948 Thrissur Mattathur 138 836 16,48,400 12,088 
949 Thrissur Melur 142 1,168 20,35,000 14,923 
950 Thrissur Mulakunnathukavu 56 390 7,21,700 5,293 
951 Thrissur Mullassery 109 987 18,43,900 13,522 
952 Thrissur Mullurkara 49 358 6,57,100 4,819 
953 Thrissur Muriyad 125 887 15,54,300 11,398 
954 Thrissur Nadathara 89 414 7,17,200 5,260 
955 Thrissur Nattika 67 619 10,92,900 8,015 
956 Thrissur Nenmanikkara 61 450 7,28,100 5,339 
957 Thrissur Orumanayur 50 250 3,92,300 2,877 
958 Thrissur Padiyur 46 399 6,98,100 5,119 
959 Thrissur Pananchery 130 1,075 18,67,000 13,691 
960 Thrissur Panjal 38 311 5,60,300 4,109 
961 Thrissur Paralam 70 617 11,48,000 8,419 
962 Thrissur Parappukkara 123 928 16,58,000 12,159 
963 Thrissur Pariyaram 150 627 10,87,900 7,978 
964 Thrissur Pavaratty 20 136 2,07,600 1,522 
965 Thrissur Pazhayannur 199 1,763 29,99,400 21,996 
966 Thrissur Perinjanam 81 192 3,59,400 2,636 
967 Thrissur Poomangalam 61 416 7,65,000 5,610 
968 Thrissur Porkulam 23 70 1,21,400 890 
969 Thrissur Poyya 76 621 11,69,100 8,573 
970 Thrissur Pudukkad 71 305 5,42,600 3,979 
971 Thrissur Punnayur 53 301 5,94,200 4,357 

 
 151   
Appendix 
Sl. 
No. 
District Name of the Local 
Body 
No.of 
Benefic
iaries 
No. of 
cases 
Amount 
Transferred    
₹ 
Interest     
₹ 
972 Thrissur Punnayurkulam 92 794 13,84,600 10,154 
973 Thrissur Puthenchira 61 404 7,04,500 5,166 
974 Thrissur Puthur 106 899 15,52,300 11,384 
975 Thrissur Sree Narayanapuram 175 1,408 24,13,300 17,698 
976 Thrissur Talikulam 67 184 3,99,400 2,929 
977 Thrissur Thanniyam 130 1,088 18,99,800 13,932 
978 Thrissur Thekkumkara 176 1,208 21,61,400 15,850 
979 Thrissur Thirssur 596 4,871 87,98,800 64,525 
980 Thrissur Thiruvilwamala 140 1,111 19,62,200 14,390 
981 Thrissur Tholur 54 532 9,66,200 7,086 
982 Thrissur Trikkur 81 361 6,87,000 5,038 
983 Thrissur Vadekkekad 33 270 5,06,500 3,714 
984 Thrissur Valappad 165 1,364 23,48,600 17,223 
985 Thrissur Vallachira 59 410 6,86,200 5,032 
986 Thrissur Vallathol Nagar 71 396 6,39,300 4,688 
987 Thrissur Varandarappilly 146 1,220 22,33,700 16,381 
988 Thrissur Varavoor 95 844 15,18,800 11,138 
989 Thrissur Vatanappilly 131 632 12,27,200 9,000 
990 Thrissur Vellangallur 179 1,046 19,51,400 14,310 
991 Thrissur Velukara 134 917 16,54,200 12,131 
992 Thrissur Velur 122 1,012 17,96,300 13,173 
993 Thrissur Wadakanchery 323 2,792 50,14,200 36,771 
994 Wayanad Ambalavayal 99 814 14,48,500 10,622 
995 Wayanad Edavaka 66 583 10,66,400 7,820 
996 Wayanad Kalpetta 51 357 6,03,100 4,423 
997 Wayanad Kaniambetta 104 370 6,23,400 4,572 
998 Wayanad Kottathara 76 620 10,90,100 7,994 
999 Wayanad Mananthavady 86 677 11,85,400 8,693 
1000 Wayanad Meppadi 86 726 12,53,400 9,192 
1001 Wayanad Mullamkolly 36 268 4,49,900 3,299 
1002 Wayanad Muppainadu 45 308 5,26,600 3,862 
1003 Wayanad Mutil 52 298 4,86,900 3,571 
1004 Wayanad Nenmeni 134 1,097 19,32,700 14,173 
1005 Wayanad Noolpuzha 91 727 11,84,500 8,686 
1006 Wayanad Panamaram 55 461 8,40,800 6,166 
1007 Wayanad Pozhuthana 29 149 2,46,600 1,808 
1008 Wayanad Pulpally 111 915 15,59,600 11,437 
1009 Wayanad Sulthan Bathery 37 256 4,29,500 3,150 

 
152 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
Sl. 
No. 
District Name of the Local 
Body 
No.of 
Benefic
iaries 
No. of 
cases 
Amount 
Transferred    
₹ 
Interest     
₹ 
1010 Wayanad Thariyode 35 292 5,30,200 3,888 
1011 Wayanad Thavinhal 85 602 10,42,700 7,646 
1012 Wayanad Thirunelly 125 920 15,75,100 11,551 
1013 Wayanad Thondernad 38 328 5,62,000 4,121 
1014 Wayanad Vellamunda 117 1,000 17,99,000 13,193 
1015 Wayanad Vengappally 43 354 6,47,800 4,751 
1016 Wayanad Vythiri 42 204 3,54,400 2,599 
Total 96,285 6,79,585 1,18,15,64,600 86,64,843 
  

 
 153   
Appendix 
Appendix – XIX 
(Ref : Paragraph 2.12 – Page No. 31) 
Unnecessary transfer of funds to PACS for disbursement of SSPs to persons reported deceased 
    
District No. of 
cases 
Amount 
transferred 
(₹ in lakh) 
Interest 
paid5 
(₹ in lakh) 
 
Percentage 
of cases 
Percentage 
in interest 
amount 
(₹ in lakh) 
Idukki 312 41.17 0.30 6.64 6.89 
Malappuram 1,197 141.67 1.04 25.46 23.91 
Pathanamthitta 370 48.36 0.36 7.87 8.28 
Thiruvananthapuram 1,211 154.52 1.13 25.76 25.98 
Thrissur 1,611 207.51 1.52 34.27 34.94 
Total 4,701 593.23 4.35 100.00 100.00 
(Information furnished by DBT Cell) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 Interest paid = (Amount *8.8%)/12 for each transaction. 

 
154 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
Appendix – XX 
(Ref : Paragraph 2.13 – Page No. 32) 
Missing DBT Reference Numbers and details of transactions 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Pension type DBT Reference 
No. 
Total 
transactions 
Amount 
(₹ in lakh) 
1 ALP 201801008 428 17.01 
2 IGNOAPS 201802008 7,160 288.12 
3 IGNDPS 201803008 722 28.98 
4 UMWPS 201805008 81 2.50 
5 IGNWPS 201806008 2,015 70.91 
Total  10,406 407.52 
 
  

 
 155   
Appendix 
Appendix – XXI 
(Ref : Paragraph 2.14 – Page No. 33) 
Ineligible disbursement of Old age pension at enhanced rate to beneficiaries before 
attaining the age of 75 years  
 
Sl. 
No. 
Date of birth on No. of 
Beneficiaries 
No. of instances 
of ineligible 
payment at 
enhanced rate 
No. of months, 
before 
attaining the 
age of 75 
Excess 
Payment of 
SSP 
 (₹ in lakh) 
1 1st January of 1943, 1944 
&1945 
1,40,606 1,92,881 1 to 5 months 829.78 
2 After the date of 1st January 
of 1943, 1944 & 1945 
20,344 22,616 1 to 27 months 181.09 
Total 1,60,950 2,15,497  1,010.87 
(Information furnished by DBT Cell) 

 
156 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
Appendix – XXII 
(Ref : Paragraph 2.15 – Page No. 34) 
IGNWP and UMWP beneficiaries reported remarried but still retained as active beneficiaries          
Sl. 
No. 
District Local Body Pensioner ID Pensioner Name Penion 
Type 
Status Remarks of 
PACS 
Status of 
disbursement 
Batch in which 
remarried reported 
Date of 
Birth 
1 Ernakulam Cochin 101690612156 Sabira Rasheed A IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld Dec-2018, 
Jan,Feb,Mar,April-2019 01/01/1969 
2 Ernakulam Cochin 101690613535 Bensy Shan IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1984 
3 Ernakulam Cochin 101690614610 Asha C.H IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld Dec-2018, 
Jan,Feb,Mar,April-2019 01/01/1980 
4 Ernakulam Cochin 101690615609 Fousi Koya IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld Dec-2018, 
Jan,Feb,Mar,April-2019 01/01/1988 
5 Ernakulam Cochin 101690615800 Sajeenath P.S IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1984 
6 Thrissur Thirssur 101700609985 Shani Chalakkal IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1993 
7 Thrissur Thirssur 101700610387 Raji E M IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1991 
8 Kozhikkode Kozhikkode 101710616300 Fasilath IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1978 
9 Kozhikkode Kozhikkode 101710619436 Suma IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1967 
10 Kozhikkode Kozhikkode 101710620604 Latha    K. IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1967 
11 Kozhikkode Kozhikkode 101710621157 Sheeba    K. IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld Dec-2018, 
Jan,Feb,Mar,April-2019 01/01/1974 
12 Kozhikkode Kozhikkode 101710622423 Prasannakumari.A IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1968 
13 Kozhikkode Kozhikkode 101710623955 Savithri R IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1975 
14 Thiruvananthapuram Varkala 101720601921 Remya R IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1988 
15 Kollam Punaloor 101770601681 Lalitha IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld Dec-2018, 
Jan,Feb,Mar,April-2019 01/01/1984 
16 Kollam Punaloor 101770603544 Minimol S IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 20/05/1980 
17 Ernakulam Angamali 101930601153 Ambily Binoj IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 30/05/1988 
18 Ernakulam Angamali 101930601418 Beena Jose IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1967 
19 Thrissur Guruvayoor 101990602243 Lalithambika IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld July-2019 26/07/1978 

 
 157   
Appendix 
Sl. 
No. 
District Local Body Pensioner ID Pensioner Name Penion 
Type 
Status Remarks of 
PACS 
Status of 
disbursement 
Batch in which 
remarried reported 
Date of 
Birth 
20 Thrissur Chavakkad 102000601885 Sumitha P IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1977 
21 Malappuram Perinthalmanna 102090601330 Kunjamina IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1986 
22 Malappuram Perinthalmanna 102090601945 Fathimabi IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1972 
23 Malappuram Ponnani 102100602499 Sulaikha IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld August_September_2019 01/01/1977 
24 Malappuram Manjeri 102110601908 Bindhu IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1977 
25 Malappuram Manjeri 102110601981 Nadeerapariyarath IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld October_November_2019 01/01/1982 
26 Malappuram Manjeri 102110602474 Rubeena IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1987 
27 Malappuram Manjeri 102110603237 Ayishabi IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1970 
28 Malappuram Manjeri 102110603386 Maimoona.P.K IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld October_November_2019 01/01/1981 
29 Malappuram Manjeri 102110603437 Habeeba IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1980 
30 Malappuram Manjeri 102110603446 Fzsmiya.P IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1985 
31 Malappuram Manjeri 102110603806 Khadeeja IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 08/11/1973 
32 Malappuram Manjeri 102110604062 Jamsheena K IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld October_November_2019 01/01/1985 
33 Malappuram Manjeri 102110604151 Jameela IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1972 
34 Malappuram Malappuram 102130600338 Subaida    K IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1974 
35 Malappuram Malappuram 102130600705 Ramlachathanchira IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1976 
36 Malappuram Malappuram 102130601616 Khadeejamanathal
akkal 
IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1972 
37 Malappuram Malappuram 102130601637 Jamsheeda IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1989 
38 Kannur Mattannur 102170602083 Noufeena P IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld Dec-2018, 
Jan,Feb,Mar,April-2019 01/01/1991 
39 Kannur Mattannur 102170602132 Veena P V IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld Dec-2018, 
Jan,Feb,Mar,April-2019 01/01/1980 
40 Thiruvananthapuram Peringammala 102530600157 Sudha    R. IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld Dec-2018, 
Jan,Feb,Mar,April-2019 01/01/1963 
41 Thiruvananthapuram Peringammala 102530601636 Mallika IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld Dec-2018, 
Jan,Feb,Mar,April-2019 01/01/1980 
42 Thiruvananthapuram Andoorkonam 102680601148 Safeela S IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1984 

 
158 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
Sl. 
No. 
District Local Body Pensioner ID Pensioner Name Penion 
Type 
Status Remarks of 
PACS 
Status of 
disbursement 
Batch in which 
remarried reported 
Date of 
Birth 
43 Thiruvananthapuram Mangalapuram 102710601960 Priya S IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1986 
44 Thiruvananthapuram Malayinkeezh 102790601602 Hima V.R IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld October_November_2019 01/01/1988 
45 Thiruvananthapuram Kottukal 102940601400 Pushpam.R IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 17/06/1981 
46 Thiruvananthapuram Kulathoor 102990601198 Shyni IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 14/05/1990 
47 Thiruvananthapuram Parassala 103000602160 Shiny.P IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1987 
48 Thiruvananthapuram Parassala 103000602448 Seema IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1986 
49 Kollam Kulasekharapuram 103040601076 Vathsala IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1964 
50 Kollam Clappana 103050600971 Anitha IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld Dec-2018, 
Jan,Feb,Mar,April-2019 01/01/1979 
51 Kollam Thazhava 103060601602 Sheela IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1975 
52 Kollam Thazhava 103060601700 Suni IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1975 
53 Kollam Mynagappally 103070601202 Sreedevi IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld Dec-2018, 
Jan,Feb,Mar,April-2019 01/01/1979 
54 Kollam Kulakkada 103210601226 Radhika IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1986 
55 Kollam Veliyam 103370600302 Nirmmala IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 25/06/1966 
56 Kollam Veliyam 103370601407 Sreedevi IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld October_November_2019 01/01/1981 
57 Kollam Pooyappally 103380601288 Preetha Kumari P K IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 28/04/1979 
58 Kollam Kundara 103440601021 Anila.A IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1983 
59 Kollam Thrikkaruva 103550601227 Anooja Beegam IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 07/09/1988 
60 Kollam Thrikkovilvattom 103570601901 Ajitha IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld Dec-2018, 
Jan,Feb,Mar,April-2019 01/01/1987 
61 Kollam Thrikkovilvattom 103570602921 Sudha IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld Dec-2018, 
Jan,Feb,Mar,April-2019 01/01/1985 
62 Kollam Thrikkovilvattom 103570603106 Vineetha.A IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1991 
63 Kollam Thrikkovilvattom 103570603238 Maya.K IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1990 
64 Kollam Poothakkulam 103600600450 Sheelakumari IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1973 
65 Kollam Poothakkulam 103600601213 Sukumari IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld October_November_2019 01/01/1978 
66 Kollam Chithara 103650603404 Prathibha.P IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/11/1983 

 
 159   
Appendix 
Sl. 
No. 
District Local Body Pensioner ID Pensioner Name Penion 
Type 
Status Remarks of 
PACS 
Status of 
disbursement 
Batch in which 
remarried reported 
Date of 
Birth 
67 Kollam Kadakkal 103660601528 Shylabeevi IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1970 
68 Kollam Kadakkal 103660601914 Semeena IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1975 
69 Kollam Kadakkal 103660602126 Ambika IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1977 
70 Pathanamthitta Kalanjoor 104200601470 Mini IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld Dec-2018, 
Jan,Feb,Mar,April-2019 01/01/1974 
71 Pathanamthitta Kodumon 104210601269 Girija.B IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 02/04/1976 
72 Alappuzha Chennampallippuram 104270600801 Mariya IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 08/07/1970 
73 Alappuzha Panavally 104280600727 Seenathu IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1973 
74 Alappuzha Thanneermukkam 104410601076 Geethu IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1988 
75 Alappuzha Purakkad 104470600626 Liji L IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1981 
76 Alappuzha Purakkad 104470600759 Shainymol IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1987 
77 Alappuzha Kavalam 104610600375 Rosammakuruvila IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1980 
78 Alappuzha Ala 104670600553 Akhila Yesodaran IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1991 
79 Alappuzha Pallippad 104790600741 Ajithagnair IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1975 
80 Alappuzha Chettikulangara 104830600843 Subhasumesh IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 06/10/1982 
81 Alappuzha Chettikulangara 104830601624 Smitha IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1983 
82 Alappuzha Chettikulangara 104830601748 Bindhu Bhaskaran IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1981 
83 Alappuzha Pathiyoor 104920600753 S.Minimol IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1970 
84 Alappuzha Pathiyoor 104920600832 Kochambili.O IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1981 
85 Alappuzha Krishnapuram 104970600393 Sumayya IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld Dec-2018, 
Jan,Feb,Mar,April-2019 01/01/1982 
86 Alappuzha Krishnapuram 104970600892 Beena IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1981 
87 Kottayam Kanakkari 105200600584 Anu A IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 14/04/1986 
88 Kottayam Panachikkad 105510600976 Rema IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1969 
89 Kottayam Vakathanam 105600600946 Suma Bhaskaran IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld October_November_2019 01/01/1963 
90 Ernakulam Kottuvally 106250601566 Suhara. P.M IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld Dec-2018, 
Jan,Feb,Mar,April-2019 01/01/1973 

 
160 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
Sl. 
No. 
District Local Body Pensioner ID Pensioner Name Penion 
Type 
Status Remarks of 
PACS 
Status of 
disbursement 
Batch in which 
remarried reported 
Date of 
Birth 
91 Ernakulam Alangad 106310600459 Shanthi.K.S. IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 06/08/1965 
92 Ernakulam Cheranallur 106560600702 Vrinda K.J IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1980 
93 Ernakulam Nayarambalam 106600611228 Mini IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1973 
94 Ernakulam Pallippuram 106630601464 Deepa Vinod IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1983 
95 Ernakulam Pallippuram 106630602605 Jenny IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld October_November_2019 31/05/1982 
96 Ernakulam Paingottur 106810600436 Omana Surendran IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1973 
97 Ernakulam Nellikkuzhi 106820601416 Nachi IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld Dec-2018, 
Jan,Feb,Mar,April-2019 01/01/1963 
98 Ernakulam Paipra 107070601399 Raihanath IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1976 
99 Thrissur Desamangalam 107250600298 Sukkainath IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1977 
100 Thrissur Desamangalam 107250601051 Sindhu IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 30/05/1990 
101 Thrissur Desamangalam 107250601439 Jameela P IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 10/03/1983 
102 Thrissur Wadakanchery 107330601136 Saraswathy T.R IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld Dec-2018, 
Jan,Feb,Mar,April-2019 26/01/1979 
103 Thrissur Wadakanchery 107330601276 Nebeesa T.M IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld Dec-2018, 
Jan,Feb,Mar,April-2019 14/04/1963 
104 Thrissur Wadakanchery 107330601396 Stella P.J IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld Dec-2018, 
Jan,Feb,Mar,April-2019 13/02/1969 
105 Thrissur Wadakanchery 107330601640 Suni K.A IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1987 
106 Thrissur Thiruvilwamala 107390600639 Ponnamma IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1977 
107 Thrissur Thiruvilwamala 107390601093 Vijayalakshmi IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1984 
108 Thrissur Thiruvilwamala 107390601461 Sabitha R IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld Dec-2018, 
Jan,Feb,Mar,April-2019 01/01/1989 
109 Thrissur Avanur 107470600849 Reneesha IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1993 
110 Thrissur Karalam 107750600738 Jibitha IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld October_November_2019 20/05/1992 
111 Thrissur Parappukkara 107780601130 Girija 
Subramuniyan 
IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1966 
112 Thrissur Edavilangu 107900600946 Ramla IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1982 
113 Palakkad Kappur 108060600230 Rukkiya IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1978 

 
 161   
Appendix 
Sl. 
No. 
District Local Body Pensioner ID Pensioner Name Penion 
Type 
Status Remarks of 
PACS 
Status of 
disbursement 
Batch in which 
remarried reported 
Date of 
Birth 
114 Palakkad Thrithala 108100600123 Mariya IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1965 
115 Palakkad Koppam 108110601075 Radhamani.A.P. IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/12/1975 
116 Palakkad Muthuthala 108130601150 Jameela M K IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1970 
117 Palakkad Nellaya 108140601258 Bushara.O.K IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld October_November_2019 01/01/1979 
118 Palakkad Ongallur 108150600819 Fathimmathsuhara IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1969 
119 Palakkad Ongallur 108150601154 Amina IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 05/05/1985 
120 Palakkad Pattambi 108160601010 Mariyakutty.K.P. IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1968 
121 Palakkad Paruthur 108170600699 Sulaikha IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1970 
122 Palakkad Paruthur 108170600842 Safiya Kv IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1980 
123 Palakkad Paruthur 108170600943 Geetha IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld Dec-2018, 
Jan,Feb,Mar,April-2019 01/01/1973 
124 Palakkad Paruthur 108170601026 Haseena.Pt IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1980 
125 Palakkad Paruthur 108170601094 Radha P P IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld Dec-2018, 
Jan,Feb,Mar,April-2019 01/01/1979 
126 Palakkad Paruthur 108170601113 Ayisha U IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1972 
127 Palakkad Vilayur 108200600927 Aisha IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1972 
128 Palakkad Ambalapara 108210601466 Prameela IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld August_September_2019 01/01/1975 
129 Palakkad Ambalapara 108210601814 Omana.K IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1978 
130 Palakkad Cherpulassery 108260600213 Sreeja(Leela) IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1971 
131 Palakkad Karimpuzha 108280601162 Sarafunneesa IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1984 
132 Palakkad Alanallur 108330601229 Rajitha IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 14/07/1987 
133 Palakkad Karakurissi 108340601073 Fathima C IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1982 
134 Palakkad Karimba 108350601074 Vaheeda IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1986 
135 Palakkad Kottappadam 108360601190 Kadeeja IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld August_September_2019 01/01/1987 
136 Palakkad Kottappadam 108360601775 Athikka.K IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 06/05/1980 
137 Palakkad Agali 108420601321 Swapna IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld Dec-2018, 
Jan,Feb,Mar,April-2019 01/01/1984 
138 Palakkad Kongad 108470601358 Lakshmidevi IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1978 

 
162 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
Sl. 
No. 
District Local Body Pensioner ID Pensioner Name Penion 
Type 
Status Remarks of 
PACS 
Status of 
disbursement 
Batch in which 
remarried reported 
Date of 
Birth 
139 Palakkad Mundur 108500601030 Thankam IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1967 
140 Palakkad Thenkurissi 108580600903 Parvathi IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1979 
141 Palakkad Perumatty 108640600986 Praseetha IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 10/05/1987 
142 Palakkad Muthalamada 108680602212 Chithrakala 
W/Omayavan(Lat
e) 
IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 
01/01/1987 
143 Palakkad Ayiloor 108710601248 Krishna Priya IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1983 
144 Palakkad Nemmara 108760601360 Sajitha.C IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 10/06/1983 
145 Palakkad Nemmara 108760601570 Snehaja IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1981 
146 Palakkad Kavassery 108790601039 Badharuneesa IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1970 
147 Palakkad Kavassery 108790601285 Ambujam.T IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1963 
148 Palakkad Kizhakkancherry 108800601134 Sathyabhama 
Kunju 
IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld August_September_2019 01/01/1971 
149 Palakkad Kizhakkancherry 108800601297 Arifa IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1974 
150 Palakkad Kizhakkancherry 108800601820 Lekha IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1990 
151 Palakkad Puducode 108810600759 Vinitha.N IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld Dec-2018, 
Jan,Feb,Mar,April-2019 01/01/1988 
152 Palakkad Tarur 108820600921 Praseetha IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1993 
153 Palakkad Vadakkancheri 108840600742 Rosili IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld Dec-2018, 
Jan,Feb,Mar,April-2019 01/01/1966 
154 Palakkad Puduppariyaram 108890601602 Fathima A M IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld October_November_2019 01/01/1984 
155 Palakkad Pudusseri 108910602395 Vijitha C IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld October_November_2019 01/01/1986 
156 Malappuram Amarambalam 108950601210 Ummachu IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld October_November_2019 01/01/1964 
157 Malappuram Amarambalam 108950601287 Devayani IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld Dec-2018, 
Jan,Feb,Mar,April-2019 01/01/1966 
158 Malappuram Chungathara 108970601597 Maimoonath IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1962 
159 Malappuram Chungathara 108970601647 Shifna P.A IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1987 
160 Malappuram Chungathara 108970601737 Subeera IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1982 
161 Malappuram Chungathara 108970601853 Ramlath K IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1983 

 
 163   
Appendix 
Sl. 
No. 
District Local Body Pensioner ID Pensioner Name Penion 
Type 
Status Remarks of 
PACS 
Status of 
disbursement 
Batch in which 
remarried reported 
Date of 
Birth 
162 Malappuram Moothedam 108990600466 Saritha IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1988 
163 Malappuram Moothedam 108990600812 Amina IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 05/11/1969 
164 Malappuram Moothedam 108990601066 Rubeena IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 06/01/1982 
165 Malappuram Moothedam 108990601096 Jameela IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1972 
166 Malappuram Vazhikkadavu 109000600787 Subaida IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1971 
167 Malappuram Vazhikkadavu 109000601049 Phathima IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1965 
168 Malappuram Vazhikkadavu 109000602058 Amina IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1984 
169 Malappuram Chokkad 109040600351 Anitha. N IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld Dec-2018, 
Jan,Feb,Mar,April-2019 01/01/1972 
170 Malappuram Mampad 109050601129 Shobana IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 16/05/1979 
171 Malappuram Mampad 109050601256 Pathumma IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1968 
172 Malappuram Mampad 109050601308 Ramlatthu IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 23/03/1963 
173 Malappuram Mampad 109050601447 Rubeena IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1988 
174 Malappuram Mampad 109050601551 Haseena.P 
Parengal 
Naduvakkad 
Mampad 
IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 
01/01/1981 
175 Malappuram Mampad 109050601688 Rubeena IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1986 
176 Malappuram Karuvarakundu 109060601218 Lailkhamar IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1975 
177 Malappuram Karuvarakundu 109060601700 Sharada T.P IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld Dec-2018, 
Jan,Feb,Mar,April-2019 01/01/1980 
178 Malappuram Karuvarakundu 109060601777 Sarojini IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1975 
179 Malappuram Karuvarakundu 109060601876 Safiya IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld Dec-2018, 
Jan,Feb,Mar,April-2019 01/01/1979 
180 Malappuram Pandikkad 109070600361 Pathumma IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1965 
181 Malappuram Pandikkad 109070601047 Subaitha 
Uchappalli 
IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 18/04/1963 
182 Malappuram Pandikkad 109070601589 Kadheeja IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1975 
183 Malappuram Pandikkad 109070601681 Fathimabeevi. A IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1983 

 
164 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
Sl. 
No. 
District Local Body Pensioner ID Pensioner Name Penion 
Type 
Status Remarks of 
PACS 
Status of 
disbursement 
Batch in which 
remarried reported 
Date of 
Birth 
184 Malappuram Pandikkad 109070601768 Kadeeja M.M IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld Dec-2018, 
Jan,Feb,Mar,April-2019 01/01/1973 
185 Malappuram Pandikkad 109070601843 Ayisha IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1982 
186 Malappuram Pandikkad 109070602260 Rukkiya.M IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1963 
187 Malappuram Pandikkad 109070602388 Umaiba IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1985 
188 Malappuram Edavanna 109080600494 Sakkeena. 
Alangadan 
IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1979 
189 Malappuram Edavanna 109080601314 Nafeesa    M.  K. IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1971 
190 Malappuram Edavanna 109080601319 Rafeeath Vp IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 15/04/1986 
191 Malappuram Edavanna 109080601388 Haseena.K.V IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1984 
192 Malappuram Edavanna 109080601590 Amina IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1978 
193 Malappuram Thuvvur 109120600786 Saleena IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1970 
194 Malappuram Wandoor 109130602103 Shamla IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1990 
195 Malappuram Pallical 109180600156 Abida IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1979 
196 Malappuram Pallical 109180601331 Naseera IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1987 
197 Malappuram Vazhayur 109190600156 Sreedevi    V    P IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld Dec-2018, 
Jan,Feb,Mar,April-2019 01/01/1963 
198 Malappuram Vazhayur 109190600234 Asiya    M    C IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1962 
199 Malappuram Vazhayur 109190600358 Subaida    P IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1970 
200 Malappuram Vazhayur 109190600489 Sajitha.C IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1972 
201 Malappuram Vazhayur 109190600881 Suharabi.K.T IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/04/1981 
202 Malappuram Vazhayur 109190600886 Naseera. IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 18/10/1979 
203 Malappuram Vazhayur 109190600961 Sajira.A IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld Dec-2018, 
Jan,Feb,Mar,April-2019 30/05/1980 
204 Malappuram Vazhayur 109190601031 Khadeeja.C IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 03/04/1973 
205 Malappuram Pulikkal 109210600274 Perumbilai 
Chenneeri 
Subaida 
IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 
01/01/1963 
206 Malappuram Pulikkal 109210601624 Silsalath A V IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 05/08/1990 

 
 165   
Appendix 
Sl. 
No. 
District Local Body Pensioner ID Pensioner Name Penion 
Type 
Status Remarks of 
PACS 
Status of 
disbursement 
Batch in which 
remarried reported 
Date of 
Birth 
207 Malappuram Pulpatta 109250600689 Rajeena.P IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 12/02/1981 
208 Malappuram Pulpatta 109250601199 Subaida P IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 12/03/1987 
209 Malappuram Pulpatta 109250601263 Sakkeena P K IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 05/05/1988 
210 Malappuram Kuzhimanna 109270600745 Kadeeja Paloli IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld Dec-2018, 
Jan,Feb,Mar,April-2019 01/01/1968 
211 Malappuram Areacode 109280600984 Praseena K IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1974 
212 Malappuram Anakkayam 109300601423 Soudath K IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld Dec-2018, 
Jan,Feb,Mar,April-2019 01/01/1975 
213 Malappuram Morayur 109310601011 Faseela K IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld October_November_2019 01/01/1988 
214 Malappuram Aliparamba 109350600799 Sulaika.P.K IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1970 
215 Malappuram Aliparamba 109350601455 Kadeeja,V.P IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1984 
216 Malappuram Aliparamba 109350601944 Jamsheera IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1989 
217 Malappuram Aliparamba 109350602030 Ramseena.T.K IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld October_November_2019 31/03/1987 
218 Malappuram Edappatta 109360600203 Ayisha IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1973 
219 Malappuram Melattur 109380600682 Ummusalma IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld Dec-2018, 
Jan,Feb,Mar,April-2019 01/01/1976 
220 Malappuram Thazhekode 109400601305 Sulaika IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1977 
221 Malappuram Vettathur 109410601149 Suhara A IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1979 
222 Malappuram Moorkkanad 109460601790 Rasiya.K IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld October_November_2019 01/01/1988 
223 Malappuram Koottilangadi 109470600451 Safiya IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld Dec-2018, 
Jan,Feb,Mar,April-2019 01/01/1974 
224 Malappuram Angadipuram 109500602149 Rahiyanath IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1977 
225 Malappuram Athavanad 109510600993 Maimoona IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1978 
226 Malappuram Athavanad 109510601082 Amina IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1981 
227 Malappuram Edayoor 109520601274 Ramlath IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1977 
228 Malappuram Edayoor 109520601445 Khadeeja IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1983 
229 Malappuram Edayoor 109520601474 Shereefa 
Cherichiyil 
IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1981 

 
166 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
Sl. 
No. 
District Local Body Pensioner ID Pensioner Name Penion 
Type 
Status Remarks of 
PACS 
Status of 
disbursement 
Batch in which 
remarried reported 
Date of 
Birth 
230 Malappuram Edayoor 109520601476 Pushpa IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1984 
231 Malappuram Edayoor 109520601504 Sajitha IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1988 
232 Malappuram Edayoor 109520601566 Ayisha Beevi V T S IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld June_July_2019 01/01/1983 
233 Malappuram Marakkara 109540600841 Nafeesa.E IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1972 
234 Malappuram Marakkara 109540600914 Iyyathummu IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1981 
235 Malappuram Valanchery 109560600908 Fathimasuhara.T IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1977 
236 Malappuram Abdul Rahiman 
Nagar 
109570600699 Suhra Chukkan IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1976 
237 Malappuram Abdul Rahiman 
Nagar 
109570600782 Sakeena K IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1980 
238 Malappuram Abdul Rahiman 
Nagar 
109570600851 Sainaba 
Kongasseri 
IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1987 
239 Malappuram Abdul Rahiman 
Nagar 
109570600905 Sameera 
Karuvankunnan 
IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1983 
240 Malappuram Edarikode 109580600095 Asya IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1963 
241 Malappuram Edarikode 109580600582 Sainaba P IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld Dec-
2018,Jan,Feb,Mar,April-
2019 
01/01/1974 
242 Malappuram Othukkungal 109590601224 Mariyamu M P IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld October_November_2019 01/01/1975 
243 Malappuram Vengara 109620601721 Bushra 
Moottaparamban 
IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1982 
244 Malappuram Kannamangalam 109630600849 Sabira IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1979 
245 Malappuram Vallikkunnu 109670601052 Maimmoona IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 18/10/1983 
246 Malappuram Moonniyur 109680601576 Safiya Mattathur IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld Dec-2018, 
Jan,Feb,Mar,April-2019 01/01/1978 
247 Malappuram Nannambra 109690601198 Sulaikha IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld August_September_2019 01/01/1966 
248 Malappuram Peruvallur 109700601117 Bushra.Pc IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1981 
249 Malappuram Cheriyamundam 109710600861 Sulaikha IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1979 
250 Malappuram Kalpakancheri 109720600382 Khirunnisa IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1980 
251 Malappuram Kalpakancheri 109720600575 Fathimathsuhara IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1987 

 
 167   
Appendix 
Sl. 
No. 
District Local Body Pensioner ID Pensioner Name Penion 
Type 
Status Remarks of 
PACS 
Status of 
disbursement 
Batch in which 
remarried reported 
Date of 
Birth 
252 Malappuram Kalpakancheri 109720600674 Nafeesa IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1968 
253 Malappuram Kalpakancheri 109720600844 Kadeeja IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1981 
254 Malappuram Kalpakancheri 109720600932 Pathummakkutty IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 04/08/1971 
255 Malappuram Kalpakancheri 109720600968 Hajara IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1964 
256 Malappuram Ozhur 109730601412 Fathimakutty IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1983 
257 Malappuram Ozhur 109730601418 Safiya IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld Dec-2018, 
Jan,Feb,Mar,April-2019 01/01/1978 
258 Malappuram Valavannur 109750600476 Subaida IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1974 
259 Malappuram Valavannur 109750600724 Muthubeevi 
Pulasseri 
IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1973 
260 Malappuram Valavannur 109750601369 Ummusalmabi IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 06/11/1981 
261 Malappuram Perumanna Klari 109790600539 Maimoona 
D/Okuttu 
Chomayil 
IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld Dec-2018, 
Jan,Feb,Mar,April-2019 13/07/1975 
262 Malappuram Thalakkad 109810600717 Girija IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld Dec-2018, 
Jan,Feb,Mar,April-2019 01/01/1980 
263 Malappuram Thalakkad 109810600915 Ruksana IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld Dec-2018, 
Jan,Feb,Mar,April-2019 01/01/1983 
264 Malappuram Thalakkad 109810600943 Sheeja IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1980 
265 Malappuram Triprangode 109820601056 Pathummu IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1978 
266 Malappuram Triprangode 109820601076 Safiya IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1981 
267 Malappuram Thirunavaya 109840601549 Kunhayisha IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1968 
268 Malappuram Tavanur 109860601402 Sulaikha C P IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld October_November_2019 01/01/1975 
269 Malappuram Edappal 109880601451 Balkees N P IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1981 
270 Malappuram Alamcode 109890600197 Rukkiya IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld Dec-2018, 
Jan,Feb,Mar,April-2019 01/01/1962 
271 Malappuram Alamcode 109890600476 Ayisha IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/10/1983 
272 Malappuram Perumpadappu 109920600931 Sainaba IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 07/08/1979 
273 Malappuram Perumpadappu 109920601507 Rashida K P IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 27/04/1990 

 
168 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
Sl. 
No. 
District Local Body Pensioner ID Pensioner Name Penion 
Type 
Status Remarks of 
PACS 
Status of 
disbursement 
Batch in which 
remarried reported 
Date of 
Birth 
274 Kozhikkode Eramala 109960601316 Soudha IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 12/02/1980 
275 Kozhikkode Purameri 110000601293 Sulaikha IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1974 
276 Kozhikkode Vanimel 110030600937 Rasiya IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 07/10/1985 
277 Kozhikkode Villiyappally 110130601539 Nedeera K IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 25/11/1984 
278 Kozhikkode Villiyappally 110130601624 Kamala IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 04/10/1962 
279 Kozhikkode Maniyur 110140601169 Santha.M.P IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld Dec-2018, 
Jan,Feb,Mar,April-2019 31/05/1969 
280 Kozhikkode Thikkodi 110180600247 Pushpa IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1968 
281 Kozhikkode Payyoli 110190602025 Fousiya IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1970 
282 Kozhikkode Cheruvannur 110210600993 Hafsath C IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 31/01/1989 
283 Kozhikkode Cheruvannur 110210601009 Nafeesa IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld October_November_2019 01/01/1966 
284 Kozhikkode Atholi 110300600602 Prema.P.M IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1962 
285 Kozhikkode Atholi 110300601290 Salini IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1987 
286 Kozhikkode Ulliyeri 110310601075 Pathumma IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld Dec-2018, 
Jan,Feb,Mar,April-2019 01/01/1965 
287 Kozhikkode Ulliyeri 110310601415 Semeera IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld October_November_2019 11/04/1981 
288 Kozhikkode Moodadi 110380601349 Sheela C P IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1964 
289 Kozhikkode Chelannur 110410601393 Sajini IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1975 
290 Kozhikkode Kizhakkoth 110490600806 Geetha IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 28/05/1972 
291 Kozhikkode Kizhakkoth 110490600840 Nimisha IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 10/07/1990 
292 Kozhikkode Puthuppady 110520601515 Hajara IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld October_November_2019 13/05/1975 
293 Kozhikkode Puthuppady 110520602135 Diya.M.S IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1988 
294 Kozhikkode Puthuppady 110520602188 Soumya IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1985 
295 Kozhikkode Omassery 110540601105 Sainaba IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 04/04/1974 
296 Kozhikkode Omassery 110540601206 Sainaba IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 11/06/1965 
297 Kozhikkode Kuruvattur 110560601480 Mini P V IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1978 
298 Kozhikkode Mavoor 110570601306 Nithya IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1985 

 
 169   
Appendix 
Sl. 
No. 
District Local Body Pensioner ID Pensioner Name Penion 
Type 
Status Remarks of 
PACS 
Status of 
disbursement 
Batch in which 
remarried reported 
Date of 
Birth 
299 Kozhikkode Kunnamangalam 110590601808 Ramla.K.P IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1974 
300 Kozhikkode Chathamangalam 110600601687 Saleena IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1989 
301 Kozhikkode Kodencheri 110620600937 Saraswathy IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1967 
302 Kozhikkode Feroke 110690601484 Sumayya IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1984 
303 Kozhikkode Olavanna 110700602437 Bindu P IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1974 
304 Kozhikkode Olavanna 110700602829 Shareefa IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld Dec-2018, 
Jan,Feb,Mar,April-2019 01/01/1978 
305 Wayanad Vellamunda 110720601183 Fousiya IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1977 
306 Wayanad Panamaram 110770601467 Jisha.K IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 17/09/1987 
307 Wayanad Sulthan Bathery 110820600879 Biyyutty IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld Dec-2018, 
Jan,Feb,Mar,April-2019 01/01/1966 
308 Wayanad Kottathara 110860600806 Pushpa K IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1978 
309 Kannur Cherupuzha 111070600092 Nalini.P. IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1968 
310 Kannur Kurumathur 111140600563 Reena.V.V IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld October_November_2019 05/04/1978 
311 Kannur Kurumathur 111140601192 Sameera.S IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1983 
312 Kannur Pariyaram 111150601315 Latha Prasanth IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1984 
313 Kannur Naduvil 111180600593 Aayisha IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 02/11/1976 
314 Kannur Naduvil 111180601132 Sameera P P IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld August_September_2019 31/12/1982 
315 Kannur Alakode 111200600775 Lenis Antony IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 09/10/1963 
316 Kannur Muzhappilangad 111400600996 Sulaikha IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1976 
317 Kannur Chembilode 111420601119 Seema.A IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 25/08/1979 
318 Kannur Pattiam 111610600982 Priya K K IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/05/1986 
319 Kannur Kolayad 111740600799 Jeena V IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 02/05/1983 
320 Kannur Kolayad 111740600820 Madhavi V IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 15/08/1965 
321 Kasaragod Puthige 111810600943 Shailaja IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1985 
322 Kasaragod Chemnad 111920602016 Noorunneesa IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1979 
323 Kasaragod Chemnad 111920602374 Kamarunnisa K M IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1985 

 
170 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
Sl. 
No. 
District Local Body Pensioner ID Pensioner Name Penion 
Type 
Status Remarks of 
PACS 
Status of 
disbursement 
Batch in which 
remarried reported 
Date of 
Birth 
324 Kasaragod Bedaduka 111930601443 Meenakshi IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld Dec-2018, 
Jan,Feb,Mar,April-2019 01/01/1971 
325 Kasaragod Bedaduka 111930601483 Kawleth Beevi B 
L 
IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld August_September_2019 01/01/1989 
326 Kasaragod Madhur 111940601494 Mariyambi    K.  H. IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1974 
327 Kasaragod Udma 111970600892 Suma V K IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld Dec-2018, 
Jan,Feb,Mar,April-2019 01/01/1983 
328 Kasaragod Balal 111990600703 Lissy IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1976 
329 Kasaragod Kodombellur 112000601073 Ramaganesan IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1990 
330 Kasaragod Kodombellur 112000601145 Bindu IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1982 
331 Kasaragod Panathady 112030600859 Patti IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld October_November_2019 01/01/1966 
332 Kasaragod Panathady 112030600959 Solly Thomas IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1976 
333 Kasaragod Panathady 112030601218 Dani Shaji IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1975 
334 Kasaragod Kallar 112050600600 Ponnamma.K.S IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1974 
335 Kasaragod Pilicode 112100601017 Seenath M K IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld Dec-2018, 
Jan,Feb,Mar,April-2019 20/05/1983 
336 Kasaragod Kinanoor 
Karinthalam 
112120601091 Neethu Baiju IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1987 
337 Palakkad Thenkara 112200601238 Amina IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1982 
338 Malappuram Kalady 112220600430 Anitha IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 02/08/1986 
339 Kozhikkode Kattippara 112230600599 Ayisha M.K IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld Dec-2018, 
Jan,Feb,Mar,April-2019 01/01/1966 
340 Kozhikkode Kattippara 112230600864 Maimoona.B.K IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld Dec-2018, 
Jan,Feb,Mar,April-2019 01/01/1977 
341 Kozhikkode Kattippara 112230600978 Sulaikha P S IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld Dec-2018, 
Jan,Feb,Mar,April-2019 01/01/1972 
342 Malappuram Kottakkal 112480600134 Suharakizhakkech
alil 
IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1986 
343 Malappuram Kottakkal 112480600680 Sajina IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1987 
344 Kannur Kannur 112590600189 Santhi K M IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 28/11/1990 

 
 171   
Appendix 
Sl. 
No. 
District Local Body Pensioner ID Pensioner Name Penion 
Type 
Status Remarks of 
PACS 
Status of 
disbursement 
Batch in which 
remarried reported 
Date of 
Birth 
345 Kollam Kottarakara 112600600033 Dhanujarani IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld October_November_2019 30/06/1987 
346 Thrissur Wadakanchery 112680600013 Sherinbabu.K.A IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 15/05/1991 
347 Malappuram Valanchery 112730600215 Ayisha IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1972 
348 Kozhikkode Koduvally 112780600163 Shareefa IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1974 
349 Kozhikkode Koduvally 112780600170 Subaida IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1970 
350 Kozhikkode Koduvally 112780600236 Nafeesa C V IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1967 
351 Kozhikkode Mukkam 112790600133 Shabna.T.K IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld Dec-2018, 
Jan,Feb,Mar,April-2019 21/07/1991 
352 Kozhikkode Ramanattukara 112800600205 Shijitha C IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1990 
353 Kozhikkode Feroke 112810600042 Rajana.K IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1985 
354 Kannur Iritty 112860600252 Sreena A IGNWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 25/05/1983 
355 Kozhikkode Kozhikkode 101710502844 Vijaya UMWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1965 
356 Palakkad Chittoor 
Thathamangalam 
102070500108 Pankajam K UMWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 23/08/1964 
357 Malappuram Manjeri 102110500099 Geetha.V UMWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1962 
358 Thrissur Paralam 107660500085 Indira K.K. UMWP Active Re-Married Withheld October_November_2019 01/01/1963 
359 Thrissur Parappukkara 107780500077 Rosy M V UMWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1962 
360 Palakkad Koppam 108110500123 Leela UMWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1963 
361 Palakkad Paruthur 108170500108 Sainaba E.P UMWP Active Re-Married Withheld Dec-2018, 
Jan,Feb,Mar,April-2019 01/01/1964 
362 Palakkad Paruthur 108170500109 Savithri UMWP Active Re-Married Withheld October_November_2019 01/01/1963 
363 Palakkad Ambalapara 108210500184 Safiya UMWP Active Re-Married Withheld August_September_2019 01/01/1963 
364 Palakkad Kadampazhipuram 108270500185 Panchali UMWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1967 
365 Malappuram Pandikkad 109070500147 Geetha UMWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1966 
366 Malappuram Thiruvali 109110500077 Vijayalakshmi UMWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 01/01/1967 
367 Kannur Chirakkal 111310500392 Geetha K UMWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 03/01/1963 
368 Kannur Kannur 112590500100 Usha P.P UMWP Active Re-Married Withheld May_June_July_2019 21/05/1965 
  

 
172 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
Appendix – XXIII 
(Ref : Paragraph 2.15 – Page No. 34) 
Transfer of funds to PACS for disbursement of IGNWP and UMWP whose status are recorded as remarried 
Sl. 
No. 
District Local Body Pensioner ID Pensioner 
Name 
Penion 
Type 
ChvRemarks Distributed month in 
which remarried 
reported 
Month upto 
which SSP 
disbursed 
Amount 
₹ 
Interest 
₹ 
1 Malappuram Veliyancode 109930500058 Subaida.K UMWP Re-Married October, November-2019, 
Dec-2019, Jan, Feb, 
March, April-2020 
Jun-21 26,000 191 
2 Kozhikkode Kadalundi 110650500303 Yasodhara M UMWP Re-Married Dec-2019, Jan, Feb, 
March, April-2020 
Jun-21 26,200 192 
3 Kasaragod Kasaragod 102240601283 Sreelatha.K.M IGNWP Re-Married Dec-2019, Jan, Feb, 
March, April-2020 
Jun-21 26,200 192 
4 Kannur Eramholi 111460600905 Asha O IGNWP Re-Married October, November-2019 Jun-21 28,600 210 
5 Malappuram Vettathur 109410600943 Sainaba.P IGNWP Re-Married August, September-2019 Jun-21 31,000 227 
6 Palakkad Vallapuzha 108190601182 Nabeesa.E IGNWP Re-Married October, November-2019, 
Dec-2019, Jan, feb, 
March, April-2020 
Jun-21 17,800 131 
7 Malappuram Kottakkal 112480600322 Aziya IGNWP Re-Married Dec-2019, Jan, Feb, 
March, April-2020 
Jun-21 26,200 192 
8 Kasaragod Pilicode 112100600908 Anitha A IGNWP Re-Married October, November-2019 Jun-21 28,600 210 
9 Palakkad Ananganadi 108220601118 Mariya IGNWP Re-Married Dec-2019, Jan, Feb, 
March, April-2020 
Jun-21 26,200 192 
10 Thrissur Velur 107320600990 N.A.Ayish IGNWP Re-Married October, November-2019 Jun-21 28,600 210 
11 Malappuram Kottakkal 112480600919 Salmath IGNWP Re-Married October, November-2019 Jun-21 28,600 210 
12 Malappuram Abdul Rahiman 
Nagar 
109570601519 Sulaikha IGNWP Re-Married October, November-2019 Jun-21 28,600 210 
13 Palakkad Kizhakkancherry 108800601127 Hajara IGNWP Re-Married August, September-2019 Jun-21 31,000 227 
14 Thrissur Cherpu 107650600265 Geetha IGNWP Re-Married October, November-2019 Jun-21 28,600 210 
15 Kasaragod Chengala 111910602505 Asmabi IGNWP Re-Married June, July-2019 Jun-21 10,200 75 

 
 173   
Appendix 
Sl. 
No. 
District Local Body Pensioner ID Pensioner 
Name 
Penion 
Type 
ChvRemarks Distributed month in 
which remarried 
reported 
Month upto 
which SSP 
disbursed 
Amount 
₹ 
Interest 
₹ 
16 Palakkad Kavassery 108790601395 K Kavitha IGNWP Re-Married October, November-2019, 
Dec-2019, Jan, Feb, 
March, April-2020 
Jun-21 28,600 210 
17 Thrissur Sree 
Narayanapuram 
107890601242 Sindhu.C.G IGNWP Re-Married Dec-2019, Jan, Feb, 
March, April-2020 
Jun-21 26,200 192 
18 Thrissur Desamangalam 107250601265 Nafeesa IGNWP Re-Married Dec-2019, Jan, Feb, 
March, April-2020 
Jun-21 26,200 192 
19 Palakkad Pallassana 108740600941 Sumathi.E IGNWP Re-Married October, November-2019 Jun-21 28,600 210 
20 Kozhikkode Velom 110100601121 Sheeja IGNWP Re-Married October, November-2019, 
Dec-2019, Jan, Feb, 
March, April-2020 
Jun-21 28,600 210 
21 Kozhikkode Chathamangalam 110600600554 Sabeena IGNWP Re-Married Dec-2019, Jan, Feb, 
March, April-2020 
Jun-21 26,200 192 
22 Palakkad Ongallur 108150601788 Haseena C P IGNWP Re-Married October, November-2019 Jun-21 28,600 210 
23 Malappuram Chelembra 109140500090 Vilasini UMWP Re-Married October, November-2019 Jun-21 28,600 210 
24 Kozhikkode Karasseri 110580600642 Ayisha.K.P IGNWP Re-Married October, November-2019, 
Dec-2019, Jan, Feb, 
March, April-2020 
Jun-21 28,600 210 
25 Pathanamthitta Kadapra 103790600362 Lakshmi 
Haridas 
IGNWP Re-Married October, November-2019 Jun-21 28,600 210 
26 Thrissur Kodakara 107690601506 Latha IGNWP Re-Married October, November-2019 Jun-21 28,600 210 
27 Malappuram Kondotty 109170600797 Mangalassery 
Amina 
IGNWP Re-Married October, November-2019 Jun-21 28,600 210 
28 Thrissur Kunnamkulam 102040601876 Misiriya IGNWP Re-Married October, November-2019 Jun-21 28,600 210 
29 Ernakulam Kalamassery 101910601784 Prabha IGNWP Re-Married October, November-2019 Jun-21 28,600 210 
30 Palakkad Paruthur 108170601049 Pushpa.Np IGNWP Re-Married October, November-2019, 
Dec-2019, Jan, Feb, 
March, April-2020 
Jun-21 17,800 131 
31 Palakkad Peringottukurissi 108570601472 Sheeba S IGNWP Re-Married Dec-2019, Jan, Feb, 
March, April-2020 
Jun-21 26,200 192 
Total 8,29,600 6,088 
 

 
174 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
Appendix – XXIV  
(Ref : Paragraph 3.3 – Page No. 42) 
Inadequate training, awareness of security 
A) Format of Questionnaire 
1) How long have you been using the Sevana Pension software? 
2) Give the user IDs through which you login to Sevana-Pension. The purpose (data 
entry, authorization etc.) of each user ID may also be mentioned.  
User ID-1 : UserID-2 : UserID-3:  
Purpose : Purpose : Purpose : 
3) How long have you been using the same password for accessing the Sevana 
Pension software? 
4) If there are operational or technical issues in using the Sevana Pension software, 
to whom do you report and how long does it take to rectify the issue? 
5) Have you ever attended any training in Sevana Pension software? 
6) Has it ever occurred that all the approved applicants by the Council were not 
entered for receiving pension in the Sevana Pension software and if so why? 
7) Are you able to view/ download any report of deceased persons after the pension 
distribution by PACCs is completed and have you promptly suspended the 
deceased persons from the database? 
Name of LSG Institution : 
Name of User : 
Designation : 
 
B) Findings of the survey 
34 clerical users out of 37 LSG institutions have answered that they have not received any 
training in the usage of Sevana Pension software. When the users were asked whether they 
have suspended the deceased beneficiaries after downloading any reports, 3 of them 
replied that no such report was available in th e software. 21 users re plied that they have 
not taken any such report and have not suspended any deceased beneficiaries based on the 
report. Hence 24 out of 37 users (64.86%) are not aware of the batchwise report which can 
be generated through the menu option DBT Reports. This is due to lack of proper training 
of the users as 91.89% of users have not rece ived any training in using Sevana Pension 
software. Further, the users were not aware of the necessity of periodical change of 
password. 
 
 
 

 
 175   
Appendix 
Appendix – XXV 
(Ref : Paragraph 3.6.1 – Page No. 44) 
Details of vulnerabilities reported during security audit 
Sl No Vulnerability Risk Severity 
1 Blind SQL Injection High 
2. Cross Site Scripting High 
3. Sensitive data exposure 
1. Crackjacking:X-frame-Options header 
missing 
2. Cookie without HttpOnly flag set 
3. ASP.NET version disclosure 
4. Options method is enabled 
Low 
4 Using components of known vulnerability 
- Vulnerable Javascript library 
Medium 
5 Security Misconfiguration 
- Login page password-guessing attack 
Low 
 
  

 
176 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
Appendix – XXVI 
(Ref : Paragraph 3.6.5 (a ) (i) – Page No. 48) 
Discrepancy in age of beneficiaries 
Particulars Number of 
cases 
Number of beneficiaries with negative age (future date entered as 
date of birth) 
101 
Number of beneficiaries whose date of birth is not recorded  96,445 
 
  

 
 177   
Appendix 
Appendix – XXVII 
(Ref : Paragraph 3.6.5 (a) (i) – Page No. 48) 
Discrepancy in Date of Birth 
Sl. 
No. 
Pensioner ID Date of Birth in the 
Application/ Documents 
submitted for SSP 
Pensioner 
Name 
Date of Birth in 
the Sevana 
Pension software 
Name of Local Body 
1 101700221883 02.05.1957 Appunny 1/1/1957 Thrissur Corporation 
2 101700221884 16.11.1957 Gopi I K 1/1/1957 Thrissur Corporation 
3 101700221885 07.11.1957 Sobhana V A 1/1/1958 Thrissur Corporation 
4 101700221886 20.10.1958 Rajan C K 1/1/1958 Thrissur Corporation 
5 101700221887 08.12.1956 Saraswathy A P 1/1/1956 Thrissur Corporation 
6 101700221888 17.08.1955 Mohanan A A 1/1/1955 Thrissur Corporation 
7 101700221890 27.02.1949 Dasan 1/1/1949 Thrissur Corporation 
8 101700221892 30.11.1954 Surendran 1/1/1954 Thrissur Corporation 
9 101700221893 17.10.1936 Parukutty 1/1/1936 Thrissur Corporation 
10 101700221894 20.12.1952 Gouri Sankar K 1/1/1952 Thrissur Corporation 
11 101700221895 15.03.1958 Sudha 1/1/1958 Thrissur Corporation 
12 101700221896 17.05.1954 Puliparambil 
Achuthan Rajan 
1/1/1954 Thrissur Corporation 
13 101700221897 05.11.1958 Chinnamma Jose 1/1/1958 Thrissur Corporation 
14 101700221899 25.02.1952 Rosa 1/1/1952 Thrissur Corporation 
15 101700221900 04.02.1959 Asokan N M 1/1/1959 Thrissur Corporation 
16 101700221901 04.02.1949 Janardanan 1/1/1959 Thrissur Corporation 
17 101700221902 17.07.1958 Vasudevan 1/1/1958 Thrissur Corporation 
18 101700221903 16.08.1950 Kunjannam 1/1/1950 Thrissur Corporation 
19 101700221904 04.10.1958 Saraswathy K P 1/1/1958 Thrissur Corporation 
20 101700221905 12.05.1956 K A Varghese 1/1/1957 Thrissur Corporation 
21 101700221906 18.09.1952 Mary Devassy 1/1/1952 Thrissur Corporation 
22 101700221923 10.03.1954 Vasu  M P 1/1/1954 Thrissur Corporation 
23 101700221925 30.06.1952 Subramanian 1/1/1952 Thrissur Corporation 
24 101700221926 08.11.1956 Sali P S 1/1/1957 Thrissur Corporation 
25 101700221927 14.05.1958 Antony P P 1/1/1958 Thrissur Corporation 
26 101700221928 22.08.1945 Vasantha 1/1/1945 Thrissur Corporation 
27 101700222869 15.05.1958 Inasu K L 1/1/1960 Thrissur Corporation 
28 102880203562 Date of birth not given 
in application 
Omana K 1/1/1957 Kunnathukal  Grama 
Panchayat 
29 102880203563 Date of birth not given 
in application 
Soman T 1/1/1957 Kunnathukal  Grama 
Panchayat 
30 102880203568 Date of birth not given 
in application 
Mary L 1/1/1957 Kunnathukal  Grama 
Panchayat 
31 102880203573 Date of birth not given 
in application 
Madhusoodanan 
K 
1/1/1958 Kunnathukal  Grama 
Panchayat 
32 102880203579 Date of birth not given 
in application 
Bharathi G 1/1/1956 Kunnathukal  Grama 
Panchayat 
33 102880203586 01.01.1958 George P 1/1/1957 Kunnathukal  Grama 
Panchayat 

 
178 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
Sl. 
No. 
Pensioner ID Date of Birth in the 
Application/ Documents 
submitted for SSP 
Pensioner 
Name 
Date of Birth in 
the Sevana 
Pension software 
Name of Local Body 
34 102880203587 14.06.1957 Sathyabhama 1/1/1957 Kunnathukal  Grama 
Panchayat 
35 101740205591 27.03.1957 Babu J P 1/1/1957 Nedumangadu 
Muncipality 
36 101740205604 Date of birth not given 
in application 
Ratnadas 1/1/1957 Nedumangadu 
Muncipality 
37 101740205602 11.04.1958 Raju 1/1/1959 Nedumangadu 
Muncipality 
38 101740205601 Date of birth not given 
in application 
Abdul Kharim 1/1/1958 Nedumangadu 
Muncipality 
39 101740205666 Date of birth not given 
in application 
Nazeema Beevi 1/1/1957 Nedumangadu 
Muncipality 
40 101740205636 Date of birth not given 
in application 
Sakunthala K 1/1/1956 Nedumangadu 
Muncipality 
41 101740205639 01.01.1958 Ambikakumari 1/1/1957 Nedumangadu 
Muncipality 
42 101740205241 30.05.1958 Wilson N 1/1/1958 Nedumangadu 
Muncipality 
43 101740205600 24.04.1956 Abdul Salam 1/1/1956 Nedumangadu 
Muncipality 
44 101740205593 12.09.1958 Selvan D 1/1/1958 Nedumangadu 
Muncipality 
 
  

 
 179   
Appendix 
Appendix – XXVIII 
(Ref : Paragraph 3.6.5 (a) (ii) – Page No. 48) 
Discrepancy noticed in applications 
Discrepancy noticed Number of 
cases 
Distribution started before Application date 16,409 
Distribution started before Approval date (after receiving application) 2,70,433 
Total 2,86,842 
 
  

 
180 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
Appendix – XXIX 
(Ref : Paragraph 3.6.5 (b)  – Page No. 49) 
Details of data extracted from Master file (GM_PensionType) 
tnyPensionTypeID chvPensionNameEnglish tnyLowerAgeLimit 
1 Agricultural Labour Pension 18 
2 Indira Gandhi National Old Age 
Pension 18 
3 Pension for the Mentally challenged 18 
4 Pension for the Physically 
challenged 18 
5 Pension for the Unmarried Women 
above 50 years 19 
6 Widow Pension 20 
7 Unemployment Wages 20 
 
  

 
 181   
Appendix 
Appendix – XXX 
(Ref : Paragraph 3.7 – Page No. 50) 
Requirements not incorporated in the software 
User requirements Audit Remarks 
Clerk login 
Need provision for entering details of manually submitted 
application at front office 
Software does not provide for data entry of application at 
front office. 
LSGI Secretary (Approver) 
Need option for digital signature for approval, correction, 
suspension, revoking etc for validating records 
There are no independent digital signatures for approval, 
correction, suspension, revoki ng etc for validating records. 
Presently, these digital signatures and its date are overwritten 
during each process which lead to loss of critical information, 
useful for tracing user activities.  
DBT Cell 
There shall be provision to prepare requisition on the basis 
of conditions laid down by finance department 
 
At present it is done by IKM at back end using stored 
procedure 
Need provision for bill generation process (like file 
generation, despatch etc,) 
There shall be provision for generating pension type wise 
payment file 
During physical verification of billing process, it is noticed 
that the file generation is not automated. IKM need to push 
the files to make it downloadable by DBT Cell. 
Despatch of digitally certif ied payment files are done 
manually through email, to  IKM and IKM upload them 
manually to the bank server 
Need provision for reconciliation IKM stated that reconciliation is partially automated. 
However, it is noticed on physical verification that 
reconciliation is done by IKM using some back-end 
processes. 
Need provision to mark the status (fund return/ success) -do- 
System Features requirements  
Application for social security pension can be submitted 
through front office 
 
Application at front office is not entered in the system 
software. 
There shall be provision in the software to validate 
Aadhaar number of the applicant to avoid duplication. 
Aadhaar validation is not being done properly. There are 
beneficiaries with same Aadhaar number and different names. 
Eligibility criteria6  
General Eligibility Criteria 
Applicant should not be a service pensioner/ family 
pensioner 
 
Service pensioners are made beneficiaries. 
Applicant should not own non-taxi, four or more wheeled 
vehicles (Except Ambassodor car) with engine capacity of 
more than 1000 cc 
The condition of ‘Ambassador car’ is not incorporated 
ALP 
 Age of 60 years or higher 
 
 
6  Vide GO(MS) No. 97/2020/Finance dated 23 September 2020. 

 
182 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
OAP 
 Age of 60 years or higher 
UMWP 
 Age should be 50 years and above 
Audit noticed that age and date of birth values are not 
validated during input. 
Non-functional requirements7  
Security and privacy 
Security 
 
Easy provision for backing up sevana pension data by 
providing a menu option for each local body. 
 
No backup option available in the software. 
 
Data shall be maintained within the database in an 
encrypted format. 
 
Data not in encrypted form. Even the user passwords are 
available in non-encrypted form. Aadhaar number is made 
encrypted recently, after a udit comments during a meeting 
with technical personnel from IKM. 
Privacy  
Access to the software by use preferably by thumb scan 
device. 
 
Fingerprint scan is not made available for user authentication. 
 
Data approval shall be done by the Secretary only by 
digital signature & thumb scan. 
Fingerprint scan is not made available for approval. 
 
Quality 
Data quality ensured by Local Body 
 
The developer transfers the responsibility of data quality to 
the user department, instead of applying proper data 
validation within the software. 
Reliability 
Reliability is the probability that the system processes 
work correctly and completely without being aborted. The 
harm that can result from failure of this application is as 
follows: 
 
• Social security pension disbursement will come to a 
halt. 
• Amount to be disbursed cannot be calculated to an exact 
amount, thereby hindering the Finance department in 
allocating funds. 
•  Revenue loss will occur  
• Employee's productivity will be held up. 
• Accountability will be lost. 
 
In respect of reliability, Audit noticed the following: 
 
Data available are not reliable and this lead to erroneous 
computation and distribution of SSP on multiple occasions.  
 
Lack of reliability in data processing was also noticed by 
Audit, in bill processing performed by IKM, where there is 
excessive manual intervention. 
 
  
 
7  WGITA – IDI Handbook on IT Aud it for Supreme Audit Institutions.  

 
 183   
Appendix 
Appendix – XXXI 
(Ref : Paragraph 3.8 (c) – Page No. 52) 
Screenshots of the reports which do not work properly 
State Level Bank wise Beneficiary Count 
 
 
Local body type wise – Local body wise Beneficiary Count 
 
 
 
 
  


 
184 
Report on Direct Benefit Transfer of Social Security Pension Schemes 
DBT Reports-Expenditure Report 
 
 
DBT Reports-Fund Transfer Report 
 
 
 
 
  


 
 185   
Appendix 
DBT Reports-Status Pending List 
 
 
 
DBT Reports-Cheque Return Status 
 
 
DBT Reports-Affidavit Entry Status-2 
 
 
 
 


 
 
Glossary of 
Abbreviations 

 
187  
 
Glossary of Abbreviations 
 
1 ALP Agriculture Labour Pension 
2 BAMS Budget Allocation & Monitoring System 
3 DBT Direct Benefit Transfer 
4 DTH Direct To Home  
5 GoI Government of India 
6 GoK Government of Kerala 
7 ICT Information and Communication Technology applications 
8 IGNDP Indira Gandhi National Disability Pension 
9 IGNOAP Indira Gandhi National Old Age Pension 
10 IGNWP Indira Gandhi National Widow Pension 
11 IKM Information Kerala Mission 
12 KSSPL Kerala Social Security Pension Limited 
13 LSGIs Local Self Government Institutions 
14 NSAP National Social Assistance Programme 
15 PACS Primary Agricultural Co-operative Societies 
16 SBI State Bank of India 
17 SDC State Data Centre 
18 SP Stored Procedure 
19 SPV Special Purpose Vehicle 
20 SRS System Requirement Specifi cation or Software Requirement 
Specification 
21 SSPs Social Security Pensions  
22 STSB Special Treasury Savings Bank 
23 UMWP Pension for Unmarried Women above 50 years 
24 URS User Requirement Specification 
25 VOs Village Officers 
26 WGITA Working Group on IT Audit 
27 XML Extensible Markup Language 
 