 
 
 
 
 
 
Report of the  
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
 
 
Performance Audit 
of 
Rural and Urban Water Supply Schemes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government of Haryana 
Report No. 3 of the year 2023 
 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Particulars Reference to 
Paragraphs Page 
Preface  v 
Executive Summary  vii-x 
Chapter-1 
Introduction 
Introduction 1.1 1 
Rural Water Supply 1.2 2-3 
Urban Water Supply 1.3 3-4 
Department/Entities involved in Water Supply 1.4 4-6 
Audit Objective 1.5 6 
Audit Criteria 1.6 6-7 
Audit scope and methodology 1.7 7 
Organisation of Audit findings 1.8 7 
Chapter-II 
Inadequate Planning  
Formulation of policies/plans in line with National Water 
Policy 
2.1 9-10 
Preparation of Annual Action Plan under NRDWP 2.2 11 
Planning in urban areas 2.3 11-12 
Non-assessment of requirement of water for institutions 
under urban areas 
2.4 12 
Preparation of Operation and Maintenance Plan 2.5 12-13 
Preparation of Water Security Action Plan 2.6 13-14 
Achievement against the planned/set targets 2.7 14-17 
Non-functional schemes due to non -obtaining of electric 
connection for the water works 
2.8 18 
Chapter-III 
Improper Financial Management 
Overview of finances 3.1 19 
Budget and Expenditure 3.2 19-21 
Lack of departmental efforts in making schemes self -
sustainable 
3.3 21-22 
Non-recovery of water charges amounting ₹ 278.20 crore 3.4 22-24 
Collection of community contribution 3.5 24 
Late release of State share 3.6 24-25 
Release and utilisation of Central and State funds in 
NRDWP/JJM 
3.7 25-26 
Non-completion of work within time frame leads to extra 
liability on the State Government 
3.8 27 
Chapter-IV 
Inadequate Supply of Water  
Assessment of quantity of water supplied 4.1 29 
Status of Water supply to consumers in PHED 4.2 30-32 
Case study of Rewari town 4.3 32-33 

ii 
Particulars Reference to 
Paragraphs Page 
Some specific systemic issues 4.4 34-35 
Provision of metered connection 4.5 35-37 
Conduct of Water Audit 4.6 37 
Leakage in distribution system leading to generation of 
non-revenue water 
4.7 37-38 
Non-maintenance of records related to history sheets of 
pumping machinery 
4.8 38-39 
Chapter-V 
Poor Quality of water supplied 
Assessment of quality of water supplied 5.1 41-44 
Analysis of water samples tested at various laboratories of 
PHED 
5.2 44-45 
Lack of mechanism for re-testing of failed sample 5.3 45-46 
Testing of source prior to commissioning of schemes 5.4 46 
Laboratory infrastructure 5.5 46-50 
Non-testing of water sample as per Uniform Drinking 
Water Quality Monitoring Protocol’s parameters 
5.6 50-51 
Non-fixation of targets in respect of water sampling 5.7 51-52 
Shortage of manpower in laboratory 5.8 52-53 
Shortcomings in utilisation to Field Testing Kits (FTKs) 5.9 53-55 
Lack of testing facilities to detect presence of Uranium and 
non- testing of water samples for heavy metals in areas 
where water supply is ground based 
5.10 55-56 
Non-installation of Community Water Purification Plants 
(CWPP) resulted in depriving the habitants of potable 
water 
5.11 56-57 
Delay in commissioning of conversion of tube well based 
scheme to canal based scheme 
5.12 57-58 
Regular Cleaning of Over Head Tanks (OHTs)/Clear 
Water Tanks (CWTs) not done 
5.13 58 
Chapter-VI 
Deficient emphasis on Sustainability and insufficient Monitoring 
Non-preparation/implementation of sustainability 
measures 
6.1 61 
Lack of departmental efforts to reduce dependency on 
Ground Water 
6.2 61-62 
Non-conducting of awareness programme 6.3 62-63 
Public Grievances/Complaints 6.4 63 
Water Quality Monitoring and Surveillance (WQM&S) 6.5 64 
Delay in completion of Swaran Jayanti Mahagram Yojana 
works 
6.6 64 
Delay in completion of work 6.7 65 
Absence of Management Information System (MIS) in 
ULBs and HSVP 
6.8 66 
 
  

iii 
APPENDICES 
Appendix Description Reference to 
Paragraph Page 
1 Details of Rural and Urban Water Supply Schemes 1.2 & 1.3 69-70 
2 Details of towns and areas under PHED, ULB and HSVP 1.3 71 
3 Organisation structure of implementing agencies 1.4 (III) 72 
4 Detailed Audit Methodology 1.7 73-74 
5 Details of villages covered for survey under MGGBY 2.7 (b) 75 
6 Details of non -functional tube -wells due to pending 
electric connections 
2.8 76 
7 Details of outstanding water charges 3.4.1, 3.4.2 
& 3.4.3 
77 
8 Details of Community Contribution Collection 3.5 78 
9 Assessment of quantity of water supplied by installing 
flow meters 
4.1 79-80 
10 Audit Methodology for assessment of sanctioned 
discharge by I&WRD and storage tank capacity 
4.2 & 4.2.2 81 
11 Water works/Cases with less sanctioned discharge 
against the water requirement of 55 LPCD 
4.2.1 82 
12 Water works/Cases with less sanctioned discharge 
against the water requirement of 70 LPCD 
4.2.1 83-85 
13 Cases with less capacity of Storage and Sedimentation 
Tanks where water requirement is 55 LPCD 
4.2.2 86 
14 Cases with less capacity of Storage and Sedimentation 
Tanks where water requirement is 70 LPCD 
4.2.2 87-89 
15 Details of water connections in HSVP 4.5.1 90 
16 Adverse bacteriological examination reports (Total 
Coliform Bacteria) by PHED and SRI laboratory 
5.1.1 91 
17 Adverse physical & chemical water sampling report by 
PHED laboratory 
5.1.1 92-93 
18 Comparison of common parameter tested in both the 
laboratories 
5.1.1 94-99 
19 Details of water samples tested in selected districts  5.2 100 
20 Staff position at District Level Water Testing Laboratories 5.8 101 
21 Details of quality affected habitations 5.11 102 
22 Fluoride affected habitation with their installation and 
result of water testing 
5.12 103 
23 Delayed schemes relating to shifting of source 5.12 104 
24 Details of Public Grievances/complaints attended by 
PHE Department 
6.4 105 
25 Details of source testing in rural areas 6.5 106 
26 Division wise status of works (PHED) 6.7.1 107 
27 Status of works of selected divisions of Urban Local 
Bodies Department, Haryana 
6.7.2 108 
28 Division-wise status of delayed works (selected HSVP 
& MCs) 
6.7.2 109 
 

v 
PREFACE 
This Report of the Comptroller and Audit General of India has been prepared 
for submission to the Governor of the State of Haryana under Article 151(2) of 
the Constitution of India.  
The Report covering the period 2016 -17 to 2020 -21 contains the results of 
Performance Audit of “Rural and Urban Water Supply  Schemes in Haryana” 
conducted in terms of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India (Duties, 
Powers and Conditions of Services) Act, 1971. 
The Audit has been conducted in conformity with Auditing Standards issued by 
the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
  

 
 

Executive Summary 
  

 

 
Executive Summary 
National Water Policy  emphasizes on addressing important issues regarding 
availability of minimum quantity of potable water to all citizens and its fair 
pricing, improved water supply in rural area with proper sewerage facilities, 
efforts to provide water supply preferably from surface water in conjunction 
with ground water and rainwater. Besides these, it also emphasizes on 
management of ground water under public trust doctrine, publishing water 
accounts and water audit reports indicating leakage and pilferages, undertaking 
artificial recharging projects and rainwater harvesting. 
Rural and Urban Water Supply in Haryana is financed through various Centrally 
Sponsored and State Schemes namely National Rural Drinking Water 
Programme (now Jal Jeevan Mission), Augmentation Rural Water Supply 
Programme, National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development 
(NABARD), Swaran Jayanti Mahagram Yojana Rural Water Supply, Mahatma 
Gandhi Gramin Basti Yojana  (MGGBY), Atal Mission for Rej uvenation and 
Urban Transformation ( AMRUT), Urban Water Supply State Plan and Urban 
NCR (Water Supply).  
In the State of Haryana, Rural Water Supply is under the jurisdiction of Public 
Health Engineering Department (PHED) which caters to water supply requirement 
of 1.65 crore rural population (as per census 2011). The norms of drinking water 
supply in rural areas are designed as per Jal Jeevan Mission (Centrally Sponsored 
Scheme) guidelines at 55 litre per capita per day (LPCD) for non-desert areas and 
70 LPCD for desert areas/NABARD funded projects. There were 1,737 water 
deficient habitations (below 55 LPCD norm) in rural areas as on July 2022. Water 
Supply in Urban areas is maintained and implemented by three departments viz. 
Public Health Engineering Department (PHED), Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) and 
Haryana Shehri Vikas Pradhikaran (HSVP).  As per census 2011, the Urban 
Population of Haryana is 0.89 crore. The PHED, ULBs and HSVP assess the total 
requirement of drinking water supply for urban areas on the basis of prospective 
population for next 30 years by taking into consideration the water allowance of 
135 LPCD as per Central Public Health & Environmental Engineering 
Organisation (CPHEEO) Manual 1999.  As on March 2021, nine out of 89 towns 
were water deficient (below 135 LPCD norm). 
Keeping in view the significance of providing adequate and potable water in 
rural and urban areas,  a Performance Audit on Rural and Urban Water Supply 
Schemes in Haryana was conducted for the period 2016-21. 
The objective of the performance audit was to ascertain whether (i) Proper 
policies/ plans in line with National Water Policy were formulated, based on 
assessment of requirement and availability of water to provide safe and adequate 
quantity of drinking water to rural and urban population as per norms;   

viii 
(ii) Financial management was effective and funds were provided in a timely 
manner and schemes were executed and implemented within the stipulated 
time and cost; (iii) Adequate attention was accorded to ensure sustainability 
of water sources and environmental issues were suitably addressed; 
(iv) Repairs and maintenance of the existing water supply assets were effective 
for ensuring uninterrupted water supply; and (v) Mechanism for monitoring of 
quality of water supply and surveillance was adequate and effective. 
Performance audit was conducted covering Rural and Urban Water Supply in 
Haryana for the period 2016-21. The field study was conducted in eight districts 
out of 2 2 districts. Audit was conducted at 36 offi ces of Public Health 
Engineering Department, Urban Local Bodies (Municipal Corporations) and 
Haryana Shehri Vikas Prad hikaran during field study. As part of this audit, 
dump data of PHED as available with the department was analysed in detail. 
Further, to verify the coverage, survey was conducted in MGGBY bastis in 
villages of selected districts. In addition to this, some locations were selected in 
these districts for assessment of (i) Quantity of water supplied by installation of 
flow meters and sub -meters for a month, (ii) Quality of water by jointly 
collecting samples with departmental representatives and sending the samples 
to privately hired lab (third party) as well as to State Water Testing Laboratory 
of PHED at Karnal. (iii) Quantity and quality of water by conducting beneficiary 
survey of selected locations.  
The State Rural and Urban Water Policies notified (March and June 2012) in 
Haryana on the directions of Hon’ble Punjab and Haryana High Court were not 
revised in line with National Water Policy.  
The main objective of the existing State Water Policies to bill the consumers on 
the basis of volumetric consumption of water instead of flat rates was not 
achieved. In rural areas, water billing was done on flat rates and metered 
connections were not provided.  
No consolidated  action plans were prepared for futuristic planning. The 
divisional offices were following the practice of preparing habitation wise 
estimates instead of a consolidated plan for the district. There was no 
arrangement made by PHED in 39 per cent (17 out of 44 test-checked villages) 
villages to provide water supply under Mahatma Gandhi Gramin Basti Yojana 
as assessed by audit during physical verification. 
There was no prescribed procedure of preparing annual Operation and 
Maintenance (O&M) plan in Haryana S hehri Vikas Pradhikaran and in Urban 
Local Bodies. Involvement of Panchay ati Raj Institutions (PRIs) and local 
communities in O&M of rural water supply was not found satisfactory. 
The financial management was not effective as savings were noticed under Central 
and State schemes. There was lack of departmental efforts in making schemes 

ix 
financially self-sustainable. The revenue collection was only one per cent of the 
overall maintenance expenditure for rural areas and in case of urban area, it was 
overall 15 per cent of maintenance expenditure for the period 2016 -21. Water 
charges of ` 278.20 crore was not received from consumers as of March 2021 in 
the test checked departments/divisions. There was short-realisation/ collection of 
` 69.36 crore on account of community contribution by the Gram Panchayats. 
There was no metering mechanism in rural areas. No flow meter/bulk meter at 
supply points existed for knowing the actual water losses during transmission 
in the state. At 23 locations  in the selected districts , where quantity of water 
supply was checked using flow meters, water supply in terms of LPCD was 
found to be less than the norms. In 72 out of 604 test -checked cases, the 
discharge of raw water by Irrigation department was found to be less than actual 
requirement. The storage capacity of storage and sedimentation tanks in 63 out 
of 604 cases was found to be less than the actual requirement.  Against the norm 
of 135 LPCD, PHED and HSVP were providing 111 LPCD  and 86 LPCD 
respectively to the inhabitants of Rewari town.  There were instances of 
unmetered connections and illegal connections in the test checked division of 
Haryana Shehri Vikas Pradhikaran and Urban Local Bodies. 
Water quality was found affected at some selected locations due to presence of 
coliforms, physical and chemical parameters found beyond permissible limits. 
There was shortage of manpower in the State, District and sub -divisional 
Laboratories. Resultantly, shortfalls in water sample testing at the District/Sub-
divisional laboratories were noticed in the selected districts. Audit could not 
ascertain follow-up on the samples found unfit during testing as no record for 
the purpose was maintained by the PHED. Sho rtcomings were noticed in 
functioning of Laboratories (State, District and Sub -divisional) against the 
Uniform Drinking Water Monitoring Protocol. There was no facility for testing 
Uranium contamination in the State Laboratory. 
Field testing kits were not used judiciously as neither the record related to 
procurement and distributions of kits was maintained nor were the unfit samples 
found by using FTKs sent to nearby laboratories for further examination. Cases 
of delay in commissioning of conversion of grou nd water-based schemes to 
surface water-based schemes were noticed thereby compromising with the 
quality of water supplied in these habitations.  
There was non-achievement of target for construction of sustainability structures 
like rainwater harvesting systems, water recharging systems under NRDWP. 
During the period 2016 -21, the ratio of newly commissioned canal-based 
schemes to newly commissioned tube -wells kept on decreasing indicating that 
lack of efforts to reduce dependency on ground water. Though tim elines were 
fixed by the departments (PHED, ULBs & HSVP) for resolving grievances/  

x 
complaints, but the basis of categorization of the complaints was non -existent.  
Resultantly, the monitoring of the grievance redressal remains lax. 
The department should pr epare AAP with community participation to ensure 
that schemes are aligned to community requirements and ensure optimum and 
sustainable utili sation of water resources. The State Government should 
prepare a detailed sector programme for the next ten years pe riod for smooth 
water supply in terms of coverage of water supply connections and per capita 
supply of water. The department/concerned entities should make efforts for 
recovery of arrears of water charges, collection of community contributions for 
making the schemes self-sustainable. Periodic assessment for upgrading water 
supply infrastructure must be done by preparation of half-yearly/yearly returns. 
Metering should be made mandatory for effective water management so that 
leakage/wastage of water could be avoided and fines be imposed on consumers 
having unmetered and illegal connections. To assess total water availability for 
distribution, the department should explore option of capturing realtime based 
data/IoT (Internet of Things) based data at source/wa ter works so that proper 
monitoring may be done at any time and at any level. The department should 
focus on improving testing facilities by upgrading laboratories infrastructure 
and deploying manpower as per requirement. FTKs being an important 
detecting tool for initial screening of contamination, the department should 
ensure its usage judiciously and as per extant instructions. Timely and 
appropriate remedial measure are required to be taken by the department for 
detection of Uranium and heavy metals so as prevent the chances of people 
getting exposed to the contaminated underground water.  The Department 
should prioritise timely completion of water supply projects in the quality 
affected habitations to ensure that potable water supply is available to the  
inhabitants. The Department should ensure construction of sustainability 
structures as envisaged and explore options for reducing dependence on ground 
water in the overexploited blocks.  The Departments/entities should ensure 
proper planning for timely ex ecution and completion of works/projects for 
benefit of the inhabitants. The Department should strengthen its monitoring 
mechanism and proper documentation should be done for each and every 
activity viz. awareness program me, complaints, survey reports, pro curement 
data so that proper monitoring may be ensured at each level. It is recommended 
that a common portal may be devised for State level capturing of data. 

Chapter-I 
Introduction 

 

1 
CHAPTER-I 
1.1 Introduction 
National Water Policy emphasizes on addressing important issues regarding 
availability of minimum quantity of potable water to all citizens and its fair 
pricing, improved water supply in rural area with proper sewerage facilities, 
efforts to provide water supply preferably from surface water in conjunction 
with ground water and  rainwater. Besides these, it  also emphasizes on 
management of ground water under public trust doctrine, publishing water 
accounts and water audit reports indicating leakage and pilferages, undertaking 
artificial recharging projects and rainwater harvesting. 
Keeping in view the significance of the National Water Policy for providing 
adequate and potable water to all citizens, a Performance Audit of Rural and 
Urban Water Supply Schemes in the State of Haryana was conducted covering 
the period 2016-21. 
Haryana is an agriculture State with approximately 81 per cent of the area 
(36,2001 Sq.Km out of a total of 44,212 Sq. Km.) under cultivation. Town area 
is spread in an area of 1,6532 Sq. Km. (approx. four per cent) leaving a balance 
of 5,999 Sq. Km. of rural area (excluding 360 Sq. Km forest area). 
 
As per Census 2011, population of Haryana is 2.54 crore out of which Rural 
population is 1.65 crore and Urban population is 0.89 crore. 
 
 
1  Figures taken from Statistical Survey of Haryana 2018 -19 issued by Department of 
Economic and Statistical Analysis, Haryana 
2  Figures taken from State Annual Action Plan prepared under Atal Mission for 
Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation (AMRUT) scheme by Urban Local Bodies. 
360 Sq. Km. 
(1 per cent)
36,200 Sq. Km.  
(81 per cent)
1,653 Sq. Km. 
(4 per cent)
5,999 Sq. Km. 
(14 per cent)
Total Area of Haryana (as per 2011 Census): 44212 Sq. Km. 
Forest
Cultivable
Town
Rural

Performance Audit of Rural and Urban Water Supply Schemes 
2 
1.2 Rural Water Supply 
In the State of Haryana, Rural Water Supply is under the jurisdiction of Public 
Health Engineering Department (PHED)  which caters to water supply 
requirement of 1.65 crore rural population (as per census 2011) . The norms of 
drinking water supply in rural areas are designed as per Jal Jeevan Mission 
(Centrally Sponsored Scheme) guidelines at 55 litre per capita per day (LPCD) 
for non-desert areas3 and 70 LPCD for desert areas4  and in NABARD5 funded 
projects.  
The position of water deficient habitations (below norms of 55 litre per capita 
per day (LPCD) is as under:  
Table 1.1: Status of water deficient habitations 
Sr. No. Status as on Total Habitations Total Water deficient habitations 
1. April 2016 7,948 1,878 
2. July 2022 7,336 1,737 
Source: Information supplied by PHED 
In Haryana, water supply is based on three main sources i.e. canal based, tube 
well based and ranney well6 based. The status of different sources in respect of 
rural water supply as on May 2021 is as under: 
 
  
 
3 Non-DDP areas: Ambala, Faridabad, Jind, Kaithal, Karnal, Kurukhestra, Panipat, 
Gurugram, Sonipat, Mewat, Yamuna Nagar, Panchkula, Rohtak and Palwal. 
4 DDP areas: Hisar, Fatehabad, Sirsa, Bhiwani, Jhajjar, Mahendr agarh, Rewar i and 
Charkhi Dadri. 
5  National Bank for Agricultural and Rural Development. 
6 Ranney well means a water well or collection system including a central chamber with 
horizontal perforated pipes extending out into an aquifer. The perforated pipes may 
extend out under a surface water body such as a lake or river. 
2,391 (32 per cent)
4,353 (59 per cent)
672 (9 per cent)
Bifurcation of habitations on the basis of source
Canal based
Tube well based
Ranney well

Chapter-I Introduction  
3 
Rural Water Supply Schemes 
Rural Water Supply is financed through various Centrally Sponsored Schemes 
and State Schemes, the details are given in Table 1.2: 
Table 1.2: Rural Water Supply Schemes 
Scheme Department Funding 
Centrally Sponsored Schemes 
National Rural Drinking Water Programme 
(NRDWP) now renamed as Jal Jeevan Mission (JJM) 
PHED Funding shared by Centre 
and State in the ratio of 
50:50 (JJM) 
National Institution for Transforming India (NITI) 
Aayog Assistance/Scheme. 
PHED A one-time assistance 100 
per cent centrally sponsored. 
State Plan Schemes 
Augmentation Rural Water Supply Programme PHED 100 per cent State funded 
National Bank for Agriculture and Rural 
Development (NABARD) Aided Projects/schemes 
PHED 85 per cent loan from 
NABARD and 15 per cent 
from State  
Special Component Sub Plan (SCSP) (Rural) PHED State funded 
Swaran Jayanti Maha Gram Yojana Rural Water 
Supply 
PHED 100 per cent State funded 
Mahatma Gandhi Gramin Basti Yojana (MGGBY) PHED 100 per cent State funded 
The details of these schemes are given in Appendix 1. 
1.3 Urban Water Supply 
Water Supply in Urban areas is maintained and implemented by: 
1. Public Health Engineering Department (PHED) 
2. Municipal Corporations (ULBs) 
3. Haryana Shehri Vikas Pradhikaran (HSVP). 
The details of towns and area of their jurisdiction is given in Appendix 2. 
As per census 2011, the Urban Population of Haryana is 0.89 crore. The PHED, 
ULBs and HSVP assess the total requirement of drinking water supply for Urban 
Areas on the basis of prospective population for next 30 years by taking into 
consideration the water allowance of 135 LPCD as per Central Public Health & 
Environmental Engineering Organisation (CPHEEO) Manual 1999. 
The position of water deficient towns (below norms of 135 LPCD) is as under:  
Table 1.3: Status of water deficient towns under the jurisdiction of PHED  
Sr. No. Status as on Total towns Total Water deficient towns (below norms 
of 135 LPCD) 
1. April 2016 87 9 
2. March 2021 89 97 
Source: Information provided by PHED 
As on August 2022, there are 96 towns in Haryana and water supply is based on 
three main sources i.e. canal based, tube well based and Ranney well based. The 
 
7 No. of towns with water supply < 110 LPCD: 5 
 No. of towns with water supply > 110 LPCD < 135 LPCD: 4 

Performance Audit of Rural and Urban Water Supply Schemes 
4 
status of different sources in respect of Urban Water Supply as on August 2022 
is as under: 
 
Urban Water Supply schemes 
Urban water supply is financed through various Centrally Sponsored Schemes 
and State Schemes, the details of various schemes are as follows: 
Table 1.4: Urban Water Supply Schemes 
Scheme Department Funding 
Centrally Sponsored Schemes 
Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and 
Urban Transformation (AMRUT) 
ULBs 1/3rd and 1/2nd of project cost as grant from 
centre for cities with population of above 10 
lakh and upto 10 lakh respectively 
State Sponsored Schemes 
Urban Water Supply State Plan PHED 100 per cent State funded 
Urban NCR (Water Supply) PHED 75 per cent loan and 25 per cent from State  
The details of these schemes are given in Appendix 1 
Other funding components 
1. In Urban Local Bodies, the expenditure incurred on water supply 
services by Municipal Corporations Karnal, Faridabad, Gurugram and Sonepat 
are met from their own resources viz. property tax, water charges, development 
charges, stamp duty etc. 
2. The expenditure incurred on water supply including operation and 
maintenance under Haryana Shehri Vikas Pradhikaran (HSVP) is met from its 
own resources ( sale of plots ) and  grants received from Town and Country 
Planning Department. 
The financial management of Rural and Urban water supply schemes is 
discussed in Chapter III. 
1.4 Departments/Entities involved in Water Supply 
There are three departments/entities involved in providing water supply services 
in the state of Haryana which are as follows:  
50 (52 per cent)45 (47 per cent)
1 (1 per cent)
Bifurcation of towns on the basis of source
Canal Based Tubewell Based Ranney Well Based

Chapter-I Introduction  
5 
I.  Public Health Engineering Department 
The functions/activities of the PHED are: 
• To plan, implement and monitor all Central and State funded 
programmes and schemes for safe drinking water in rural and urban 
areas, 
• Construction & maintenance of Water Works, Boosting Stations and 
laying of pipe distribution system in the rural and urban areas, 
• Recognizing and awarding Panchayats and organi sations for excellent 
work in rural water supply sector,  
• Providing inputs to other Departments/Ministries for formulation of 
policies impacting water issues. 
Organisational Structure of Public Health Engineering Department  
The Additional Chief Secretary to Government of Haryana (ACS), PHED is the 
administrative head at Government level and is responsible for implementation 
of policies, programmes and schemes. The Organisational structure is as under: 
 
II.  Urban Local Bodies (i.e. Municipal Corporations) 
Section 277 -A8 of HM Act, 1973 provides that the State Government may 
entrust the duties and responsibilit ies relating to water supply and sewerage in 
municipal area to PHED. Accordingly, the State Government transferred (April 
1993) the core functions of municipalities related to water supply and sewerage 
to PHED except Municipal Corporation, Faridabad. Subsequently, the State 
Government transferred the core functions of water supply and sewerage back 
to three other Municipal Corporations i.e. Gurugram (w.e.f. 2013), Ka rnal and 
Sonepat (w.e.f. 2018). Thus, presently four out of 92 ULBs are performing 
water supply and sewerage activities in their respective municipal areas and in 
rest of the municipalities, these activities including collection of water and 
sewerage charges are performed by PHED. 
 
8  Inserted by Haryana Municipal Act 6 of 1993. 
Executive Engineer (Head office: 7; Field: 57)
Superintending Engineer (Head office: 5; Field: 15)
Chief Engineer (Total nos. 7)
Engineer-in-Chief (Controlling Officer)
Additional Chief Secretary (Administrative Head)

Performance Audit of Rural and Urban Water Supply Schemes 
6 
III.  Haryana Shehri Vikas Pradhikaran (HSVP) 
The main functions of the HSVP are to promote and secure development of 
urban areas (including municipal areas) by acquiring undeveloped land. Water 
supply is being maintained by HSVP in the sector/area maintained by them. 
The organisational structure of ULBs/HSVP is given at Appendix 3. 
In addition to above, the a uthorities/agencies involved in planning/decision 
making and for conservation, management and regulation activities are as  
under: 
1. Haryana State Water Supply and Sewerage Board ( WSSB), under the 
Chairmanship of the Chief Minister (CM), accords approval for 
sewerage and water supply schemes and provides funds for their 
implementation. 
2. Haryana Water Resources (Conservation, Regulation and Management) 
Authority notified in December 2020. 
1.5 Audit Objective 
Performance audit was taken to assess whether: 
i. Proper policies/ plans in line with National Water Policy were 
formulated, based on assessment of requirement and availability of 
water to provide safe and adequate quantity of drinking water to rural 
and urban population as per norms;  
ii. Financial management was effective and funds were provided in a 
timely manner and schemes were executed and implemented within 
the stipulated time and cost; 
iii. Adequate attention was accorded to ensure sustainability of water 
sources and environmental issues were suitably addressed;  
iv. Repairs and maintenance of the existing water supply assets were 
effective for ensuring uninterrupted water supply; and 
v. Mechanism for monitoring of quality of water supply and surveillance 
was adequate and effective. 
1.6 Audit Criteria 
Audit criteria were derived from the following sources: 
• Guidelines for implementation of the scheme/programme - National 
Rural Drinking Water Programme (NRDWP), Jal Jeevan Mission (JJM), 
Uniform Drinking Water Quality Monitoring Protocol (UDWQMP), 
Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation (AMRUT), 
Mahatma Gandhi Gramin Basti Yojana (MGGBY), Mahagram Yojana. 

Chapter-I Introduction  
7 
• Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) and Feasibility Study Reports (FSRs) 
of various projects. 
• Haryana Public Works Department Code (PWD Code). 
• Central Public Health &  Environmental Engineering Organisation 
(CPHEEO) Manual on Water Supply and Treatment, 1999 and 
CPHEEO Manual on Operation and Maintenance, 2013. 
• National Water Policy 2012 , Haryana State Rural and Urban Water 
Policy 2012. 
• Other orders and Instructions of Centre/State Government. 
1.7 Audit scope and methodology 
Performance audit was conducted covering Rural and Urban Water Supply in 
Haryana for the period 2016-21. The field study was conducted in eight districts 
out of 22 districts. The detailed methodology of the audit and offices visited are 
detailed in Appendix 4. 
Entry conference was held in May 2022 under the chairmanship of Additional 
Chief Secretary, Finance & Planning Department along with representatives of 
PHED, Town and Country Planning Department (TCPD), Urban Local Bodies 
Department (ULB) wherein the audit objectives, c riteria and selection of units 
were discussed. The exit conference was held in November 2022 under the 
chairmanship of Special Secretary Finance & Planning Department along with 
representatives of PHED, TCPD & ULB wherein audit observations were 
discussed in detail. The deliberations of exit conference have been appropriately 
incorporated in the report. 
1.8 Organisation of Audit findings  
The audit was conducted keeping above stated audit objectives in mind. 
However, while compiling the audit findings, it emerged that th ese findings 
conversed broadly under these areas viz. Planning, Financial management, 
Inadequacy and Poor Quality of water, deficient emphasis on Sustainability and 
insufficient monitoring . Therefore, the audit observations are presented in 
following chapters:  
Chapter-II-  Inadequate Planning 
Chapter-III-  Improper Financial Management  
Chapter-IV-  Inadequate Supply of Water  
Chapter-V-  Poor Quality of Water Supplied 
Chapter-VI-  Deficient emphasis on Sustainability and insufficient 
Monitoring. 

Chapter-II 
Inadequate Planning 
  

 

9 
CHAPTER-II 
Inadequate Planning 
The State Rural and Urban Water Policies have not been revised in line 
with National  Water Policy. The objective of the existing State Water 
Policies to bill the consumers on the basis of volumetric consumption of 
water instead of flat rates remained unachieved. In rural areas, water 
billing was done on flat rates and metered connections were not provided. 
No detailed action plan for the next ten years had been prepared in the state 
for urban area. No Water Security Action Plan  was prepared under Jal 
Jeevan Mission. There was no prescribed procedure of preparing annual 
Operation and Mainte nance plan both in Haryana Shehri Vikas 
Pradhikaran and in Urban Local Bodies. Involvement of Panchayati Raj 
Institutions (PRIs) and local communities in O peration and Maintenance 
of rural water supply was not found satisfactory. The timelines set for 
different activities under JJM remained unachieved. The PHED failed to 
provide water supply infrastructure under Mahatma Gandhi Gramin Basti 
Yojana even after a lapse of 13 years from the launch of the scheme. Under 
AMRUT, total households were not considered for service connections in 
selected districts. 
2.1 Formulation of policies/plans in line with National Water Policy 
The State Water Policies were required to be drafted/ revised in accordance with 
the National Water Po licy, 2012. However, the State Rural and Urban Water 
Policies which were already notified (March and June 2012) in Haryana on the 
direction of Hon’ble Punjab and Haryana High Court were not revised in line 
with National Water Policy.  
Moreover, shortcomings were noticed in the implementation of the existing 
State Water Policies which are as follows: 
2.1.1 Shortcomings in implementation of State Water Policies 
1. Metered connection: - The main objective of the existing State Water 
Policies is to bill the consumers on the basis of volumetric consumption 
of water instead of flat rates. Thus, the policies emphasize on converting 
all the existing unmetered connections into metered connections within 
a period of one year from the date of notification of policy in case of 
Urban areas. In case of Rural areas, 50 per cent of rural households were 
to be provided metered connection by the end of 12th Five-year plan i.e. 
up to March 2017. Contrary to the policy, water billing was done on flat 
rates in rural areas and metered connections were not provided.  In case 

Performance Audit of Rural and Urban Water Supply Schemes 
10 
of urban areas, domestic consumers have been given the option1 of either 
metered or unmetered connection (flat rate). However, during scrutiny 
of records in selected offices of HSVP and ULBs, large number of 
unmetered and illegal connections was noticed as discussed in Paragraph 
4.4. 
2. Insanitary connection : As per policy, any insanitary connection  
(connections which are enough to endanger health),  if detected, by the 
department was to be disconnected immediately without giving any 
notice and should be restored only  after necessary rectification by 
consumers. Insanitary connections2 were found during household survey 
conducted by PHED under Jal Jeevan Mission in rural areas. But, 
documentary evidence to verify action taken by department on these 
insanitary connections was not made available. 
3. Jurisdiction of Police Stations: The State Water Policies emphasize on 
setting up of Water Thana and Power Thana across the State whose 
domain includes enforcement of law for implementation of this policy 
but no such practice is in existence in the State. 
4. Role of Village Water and Sanitation Committee (VWSC):  The 
revenue collected through water charges was to be given to the 
Panchayats for development works and for carrying effective 
maintenance of the schemes. Revenue collection is being done by PHED 
officials and the same has been kept deposited in the revenue head of the 
department. During 2016 -21, ₹ 30.25 cr ore had been collected as 
receipts from rural water supply consumers ( As discussed in paragraph 
3.3) but the same was not transferred to VWSC. Resultantly, neither 
maintenance estimates were made as per recommendations of VWSCs 
nor was revenue collection provided to Panchayats for development 
works for effective maintenance of schemes.  
During exit conference (November 2022), the departments 3 admitted the audit 
observation. PHED stated that department has been charging flat rate of water 
charges as per Government notification issued in April 2017. PHED is focusing 
on providing Functional Household Tap C onnection to each and every 
household in the first instance under JJM and later on shall move towards 
metering of connections. The reply is not acceptable as the department could 
not ensure 50 per cent metered connections in rural areas as envisaged under 
State Water Policy i.e. by the end of March 2017.  
 
1  Notification issued (August 2018) by Urban Local Bodies Department, Govt. of 
Haryana regarding revision of water tariff in urban areas. 
2  4,88,979 Insanitary connections as per information available on departmental website 
as on February 2022. 
3   PHED, HSVP and ULB. 

Chapter-II Inadequate Planning 
11 
2.2. Preparation of Annual Action Plan under NRDWP 
Para 14 of National Rural Drinking Water Programme (NRDWP) guidelines 
required States to prepare their Annual Action Plans (AAPs) detailing activities 
proposed to be taken up during the year.   
During scrutiny of records in the office of Engineer -in-Chief, PHED, Haryana 
and selected divisions, it was observed that inputs while formulating schemes 
were not taken from various levels viz. village, district or State as a whole. 
AAPs prepared under NRDWP neither had any input from the village/GP nor 
detailed Strength Weakness Opportunities and Threat (SWOT) analysis was 
found on record . It indicates that the Department prepared the AAPs without 
involving various stakeholders and SWOT analysis based on needs, resources 
and challenges of rural areas was not conducted.   
The department admitted (June 2022) that no scientific or systematic SWOT 
analysis was carried out but engineers were very well conversant with thes e 
attributes which would be introduced during preparation of future projects. The 
reply is an acceptance of the fact that the inputs from various stakeholders were 
not taken and SWOT analysis was not undertaken before preparation of AAPs.  
During exit conference (November 2022), PHED stated that annual action plans 
were prepared and  the same were uploaded on Integrated Management 
Information System (IMIS). Moreover, all the agendas related to yearly 
planning of works to be executed are approved in the meeting of Water Supply 
and Sewerage Board (WSSB) . The reply is not acceptable as t he basic 
information for preparation of AAP was lacking. 
2.3 Planning in urban areas 
Ministry of Urban Development, Government of India issued an advisory note 
(April 2012) for improving urban water supply and sanitation services. States 
were advised to pr epare detailed action plan for next ten years for the Urban 
Water Supply and Sanitation sector. 
During scrutiny of records 4, it was seen that no such detailed action plan for 
next 10 years as prescribed in the advisory note for futuristic planning was made 
in the state of Haryana for improving urban water supply services. PHE D was 
approving works relating to urban areas in the meeting of Water Supply and 
Sewerage Board (WSSB) yearly without any proper planning whereas in 
Haryana Shehri Vikas Pradhikaran (H SVP) and Urban Local Bodies (ULBs), 
no concrete planning existed. HSVP and ULBs continue to focus on individual 
projects/works. Even the adhoc committee 5 on water supply to look after the 
 
4  EIC(PHED); Director (ULB); Chief Administrator (HSVP). 
5 Consisting of elected members of ULB  and experts for discharge of any particular 
function or providing advice on any matter. 

Performance Audit of Rural and Urban Water Supply Schemes 
12 
water supply affairs was not formed in ULBs. There is absence of a systematic 
planning in these departments. In the absence of detail action plan, overall 
futuristic planning remained unaddressed. 
During exit conference (November 2022), the departments6 admitted that there 
was no long term planning, but yearly planning procedure was followed in 
HSVP jurisdiction. For this purpose, annual estimate has been framed for 
continuity of water supply in urban areas and gave assurance for compliance in 
future. ULB admitted the facts and assured for compliance in future. 
2.4 Non-assessment of requirement  of water for institutions under  
urban areas 
Norms for institutional requirement of water are laid down  in the CPHEEO 
Manual, prepared by Ministry of Urban and Housing Affairs (MoU&HA).  
During scrutiny of records for the period 2016-21, it was noticed that the PHED, 
ULBs and HSVP assess the total requirement for domestic consumers of urban 
areas on the basis of prospective population for next 30 years by taking into 
consideration the water allowance of 135 LPCD as per Central Public Health & 
Environmental Engineering Organisation (CPHEEO) Manual 1999. However, 
while assessing the total requirement, the institutional 7 requirements are not 
considered by the PHED and ULB in the manual stated ibid. 
2.5 Preparation of Operation and Maintenance Plan 
(a) According to CPHEEO Operation & Maintenance manual  2013, 
a comprehensive operation and maintenance 8 plan (O&M plan) shall be 
prepared to cover all the facilities. The objective is to provide safe and clean 
drinking water in adequate quantity and desired quality, at adequate pressure at 
convenient location and time and as economically as possible on a sustaina ble 
basis. In urban areas, ULBs have been entrusted the task of O&M work of water 
supply in four towns i.e. Gurugram, Faridabad, Sonepat & Karnal and in 
Panchkula town, it is done by HSVP. In rest of the towns and rural areas, O&M 
work of water supply falls under the jurisdiction of PHED.  
During scrutiny of records for the period 2016-21, it was observed that: 
• In PHED, yearly scheme wise maintenance estimates were being 
prepared and approved by competent authority. 
 
6  HSVP and ULB. 
7 For hospitals: 340 to 450 LPCD (per bed), hostels and boarding schools/colleges: 135 
LPCD, day schools/colleges: 45 LPCD, restaurants: 70 LPCD (per seat) and for cinema 
and theatre: 15 LPCD. 
8  Maintenance is defined as the art of keeping the plant, equipment, structures and other 
related facilities in optimum working order. It i ncludes preventive maintenance or 
corrective maintenance, mechanical  adjustments, repairs and corrective action and 
planned maintenance. 

Chapter-II Inadequate Planning 
13 
• In HSVP9 as well as in ULBs (MC Faridaba d and Karnal), O &M plan 
was not being prepared at any level. There was no prescribed procedure 
of preparing annual O&M plan in any of the two departments.  
During exit conference (November 2022), HSVP stated that annual planning for 
operation and maintenance of water supply is being done . The reply is not 
acceptable as no such record was found maintained during audit. Further, HSVP 
and ULB gave assurance for compliance in future.  
(b) Handing over O&M to VWSC : Engineer -in-Chief (EIC), PHED, 
Haryana directed (December 2019) all Superintending Engineers, PHED that 
payment to contractor (of works under Jal Jeevan Mission (JJM) through 
running bills was to be made  by Village Water and Sanitation Committees 
(VWSCs). For this, VWSCs need to open bank account for receipt and 
expenditure of funds for incurring expenses on O&M. However, during scrutiny 
of records in EIC, PHED, it was found that 1 ,413 VWSCs had submitted  
resolution for taking over O&M but none of these VWSCs/Gram Panchayats 
had been handed over O&M work till 24 February 2022.  
Further, payment to contractors for the works executed under JJM was being 
done by PHED through treasury instead of the bank accounts maintained by 
VWSC. Thus, involvement of Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) and local 
communities was not satisfactory.  
During exit conference (November 2022) PHED stated that Government of 
India had directed to open single account under PFMS under JJ M but due to 
non-constitution of new VWSCs (due to non-conduction of Panchayat elections 
and dissolution of earlier Gram Panchayats), handing over of O&M to VWSCs 
could not be done. 
2.6 Preparation of Water Security Action Plan  
According to the Jal Jeevan Mission, all villages are supposed to prepare a 
Village Water Security Plan (VWSP) to ensure sustainability of the drinking 
water sources and optimize the usage of the available resourc es. The VWSPs 
are to be consolidated into District action plans (DAP) at the district level and 
into State action plans (SAP) at the state level. It was observed during audit that 
no Water Security Action Plan has been prepared by the PHED. The divisional 
offices were following the practice of preparing habitation wise estimates 
instead of a consolidated plan for the district. The Water Supply and Sewerage 
Board allocated work-wise funds under JJM in its annual meetings.   
On being pointed out by Audit, PHE D stated (December 2021) that Water 
Security Action Plan had not been prepared.  Instead, drinking water supply 
 
9  Chief administrator, HSVP. 

Performance Audit of Rural and Urban Water Supply Schemes 
14 
schemes were conceived before preparation of the project estimates on the basis 
of a comprehensive field survey. The reply is not convincing as preparation of 
estimates should be done on the basis of a long-term plan.  
The State of Haryana had notified (December 2020) Haryana Water Resources 
(Conservation, Regulation and Management) Authority (HWRA) for 
conservation, management and regulation of water resources (ground water and 
surface water) within the State of Haryana.  Its main function is preparation of 
an Integrated State Water Plan based on water plans prepared for every block. 
However, HWRA is still in its initial phase of working on its ob jectives like 
preparation of Integrated State Water Plan, State Ground water and Surface 
water plan, State Water Security Plan, etc. 
Audit observed that HWRA had assessed in its draft report that against the 
demand of 40.70 billion cubic meter (BCM), state has water availability of only 
22.26 BCM  (55 per cent ), based on the groundwater level data  thereby 
highlighting a water gap of 45 per cent. It becomes even more pertinent in the 
said circumstances to have a long-term plan for water security in the state.  
Further, the State Water Policies are not inclusive of the measures meant for 
effective water management  (as discussed in Paragraph 2.1), as  these are not 
aligned with the National Water Policy, 2012.  
During exit conference (November 2022), PHED agreed to the observation of 
audit and assured for compliance in future. As such, the issues related to water 
management and water security remain unaddressed. 
2.7  Achievement against the planned/set targets 
During 2016 -21, Target and Achievement in respect of Rural/Urban Water 
Supply Schemes where targets were fixed by Centre/State Government was 
given in Table 2.1. 
Table 2.1: Target vis-à-vis achievement 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of scheme Target Achievement 
1. Jal Jeevan Mission 100 per cent  Functional 
Household Tap Connection 
(FHTC) by the year 2022 
The department claimed 100 per cent FHTC in rural 
household. The shortcomings noticed in achieving 
the targets is discussed in succeeding paragraph. 
2. Mahagram Yojana In first phase, work in 20 
villages was to be completed 
by 31 March 2021 
Work was completed in only two villages up to 
March 2021 as discussed in paragraph 6.6. 
3. AMRUT Completion of project up to 
March 2020 
15.89 per cent households not considered for service 
connections in selected districts  as discussed in 
paragraph 2.7 (c). 
For other schemes, the Central/State Government did not fix separate targets.  
  

Chapter-II Inadequate Planning 
15 
(a) Jal Jeevan Mission 
Jal Jeevan Mission ( JJM) is intended to provide safe and adequate drinking 
water through individual household tap connections by 2022 in rural Haryana 
area. To implement the scheme in Haryana, instructions were issued by 
Engineer-in-Chief (EIC), PHED to all the Superintending Eng ineers of PHED 
circles, Haryana (December 2019) and timeline given for various activities was 
as under in Table 2.2. 
Table 2.2: Timelines prescribed for implementation of Jal Jeevan Mission in Haryana  
in PHED 
Sr. No. Tasks Last date for all categories of habitations 
1. Administrative Approval 30 September 2020 
2. Procurement of material 31 December 2020 
3. Work allotment 31 December 2020 
It was seen in audit that: 
• PHED had accorded administrative approval to 45 per  cent works 
(2,992 works out of total 6,678 works) after the stipulated timeline i.e. 
after 30 September 2020.  
• Similarly, there were 1 ,070 works (as per data dump provided in 
October 2021) where tenders were not allotted till December 2020 
indicating that these works were not allotted and hence not commenced.  
• Furthermore, department was issuing supply orders for the procurement 
of pipes for the works required to be executed under JJM even after the 
deadline of 31 December 2020. Total length of the pipeline purchased 
upto 31 December 2020 by PHED was only 11.18 per cent against the 
required length. The details are given in Table 2.3. 
Table 2.3: Status of pipelines procured/to be procured under JJM as on August 2022 
Total 
requirement 
(km) of 
pipeline for 
works in JJM 
Coverage  
(a) 
Budget 
required for 
procurement 
of ‘a’  
(` in crore) 
Total 
pipeline (km) 
purchased 
by PHED  
(b) 
Total 
pipeline (km) 
received by 
divisional 
offices  
Total 
expenditure 
(₹ in crore) 
incurred on 
purchase of 
pipeline  
Total pipeline 
(km) procured and 
received after  
31 December 2020 
till August 2022  
(c) 
Total 
expenditure 
on purchase 
of ‘c’  
(` in crore) 
Balance 
pipeline (km) 
which is to be 
procured 
after August 
2022  
d = a-(b+c) 
Budget 
required  
(₹ in crore) 
for this 
balance 
length 
till 31 December 2020 
11,161 1,363.11 1,248 1,248 143 5,594 620.11 4,319 600 
Source: Information provided by PHED  
The department set the deadlines without assessing the requirement of works to 
be executed or requirement of funds for the implementation of scheme . Due to 
this, progress of the department in executing works under JJM was not as per 
the committed timelines.  
As mentioned earlier, no consolidated action plans were prepared for futuristic 
planning. Instead, the Water Supply & Sewerage Board allocates funds work -
wise. The divisional offices were following the practice of preparing habitation 
wise estimates instead of a consolidated plan for the district. 

Performance Audit of Rural and Urban Water Supply Schemes 
16 
During exit conference (November 2022), PHED stated that the State had 
achieved the target under JJM for providing 100 per cent Functional Household 
Tap Connection (FHTC) i n April 2022. It was also stated that creation/up -
gradation of infrastructure was being done in a phased manner under JJM and 
the target could not be achieved as per timelines  due to COVID-19. The reply 
is not tenable as providing of FHTC cannot be termed as functional in the event 
of non-creation of infrastructure. 
(b) Mahatma Gandhi Gramin Basti Yojana 
Government of Haryana launched (2008) a scheme titled Mahatma Gandhi 
Gramin Basti Yojana (MGGBY) to allot 100 square yards residential plots (free 
of cost) to the eligible Below Poverty Line, Scheduled Caste and Backward 
Classes (Category-A) families in the villages.  Under this scheme, the work of 
providing drinking water was entrusted to the PHED as  a deposit work of 
Development & Panchayat Department.  
The department claimed 100 per cent  FHTC (functional household tap 
connection) in rural household. However, during scrutiny of the records 10, the 
following observation was made:  
Thus, it was observe d that no work was approved  in 13 per cent villages and 
10.12 per cent works in 10 per cent villages are still in progress. Moreover, the 
department failed to provide a list of the villages where no work was approved.  
  
 
10 EIC, PHED Haryana. 
Total villages to be covered
1,067
Works which got administrative approval 
(1,023 works in 931 villages)
Completed works 
(912 works in total 823 villages)
Works in Progress 
(111 works in 108 villages)
Villages where no work 
was approved 
(136)

Chapter-II Inadequate Planning 
17 
Survey results:  To verify the status of coverage of water supply services  
in MGGBY bastis, physical verification was conducted in 44 villages 11 
(Appendix 5).  During verification, it was found that in 39 per cent (17 out of 
44) villages, no arrangement has been made by PHED to provide water supply 
to the habitants of these bastis till date .  The inhabitants of all these bastis 
manage their drinking water needs from nearby fields/Panchayati hand pumps.  
During exit conference (November 2022), PHED stated that coverage would 
now be done under JJM. The fact remains that the department failed to provide 
water supply infrastructure in MGGBY bastis till August 2022 even after a lapse 
of 13 years. 
(c) Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation 
As per the guidelines issued by Ministry of Urban Development (MoUD), the 
primary purpose of the Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban 
Transformation (AMRUT) scheme is to cover all households with water supply 
and sewerage.  
During scrutiny of records in  selected Municipal Corporations, works 12 
estimates for ₹ 278.33  crore (work allotted between  October 2018 and 
December 2018) were prepared by ULBs to provide new water supply pipelines 
in newly approved colonies, replacement of old and worn-out pipeline f alling 
under missing links. The details of household covered before and after 
implementation of project are given in Table 2.4. 
Table 2.4: Details of household connections 
Sr. 
No 
Name of ULB Total 
household 
(a) 
Household 
covered before 
execution of 
project  
(b) 
Household 
to be 
covered in 
this project 
(c) 
Total no. 
Households covered 
after project 
implementation 
(d=b+c) 
Remaining 
household with no 
tap connection after 
project completion 
(e=a-d) 
Percentage 
of household 
remaining 
(e/a*100) 
1 MC Hisar 74,731 46,996 7,000 53,996 20,735 27.75 
2 MC Faridabad 2,24,575 1,45,110 56,076 2,01,186 23,389 10.41 
3 MC Rewari 28,702 23,597 1,909 25,506 3,196 11.14 
4 MC Rohtak 1,08,644 82,174 22,508 1,04,682 3,962 3.65 
5 MC Karnal 72,093 36,220 6,297 42,517 29,576 41.02 
Total 5,08,745 3,34,097 93,790 4,27,887 80,858 15.89 
It was observed that enough provisions were not made to cover all households 
and hence, 15.89 per cent  households (80,858 out of 5 ,08,745) were not 
considered for service connection and people were deprived of the benefit of 
getting potable water even afte r implementation of project despite the scheme 
emphasizing on providing every household access to a tap with assured supply 
of water.  
 
11 As pilot study, six villages in Rewari district were manually selected and thereafter 
selection was done by Computer Assisted Audit Techniques (CAAT).  
12 Providing water supply system for Civic Amenities and infrastructure deficient areas 
including villages in selected district along with Operation & Maintenance under 
AMRUT programme. 

Performance Audit of Rural and Urban Water Supply Schemes 
18 
2.8. Non-functional schemes due to non-obtaining of electric connection 
for the water works 
As per information made available to audit by PHED Ground Water Inspection 
(GWI) division13, Rewari, six tube-wells drilled for water supply were not made 
functional (May 2022) as shown in Appendix 6 due to non-obtaining of electric 
connection by divisional offices. 
The reasons for pending electric connection was not found on record. In the 
absence of electric connection, it is assessed that the schemes of installation o f 
tube-wells remained non-functional. 
During exit conference (November 2022), PHED stated that two tubewell 
schemes have been energized and balance will be energized soon.  
Conclusion 
The State Rural and Urban Water Policies have not been revised in line with 
National Water Policy. The objective of the existing State Water Policies to bill 
the consumers on the basis of volumetric consumption of water instead of flat 
rates remained unachieved. In rural areas, water billing was done on flat rates and 
metered connections were not provided. Detailed action plan for the next ten years 
had not been prepared in the state for urban area. No Water Security Action Plan 
was prepared under Jal Jeevan Mission. There was no prescribed procedure of 
preparing annual Operation and Maintenance  plan in Haryana Shehri Vikas 
Pradhikaran and in Urban Local Bodies. Involvement of Panchayati Raj 
Institutions (PRIs) and local communities in O&M of rural water supply was not 
found satisfactory. The timelines set for different activities under JJM remained 
unachieved. The PHED failed to provide water supply infrastructure under 
Mahatma Gandhi Gramin Basti Yojana till August 2022 even after a lapse of 
13 years from the launch of the scheme. Under AMRUT, total households were 
not considered for service connections in selected districts. 
Recommendations  
In view of the above audit observations: 
1. The department should prepare AAP with community participation to 
ensure that schemes are aligned to community requirements and ensure 
optimum and sustainable utilisation of water resources. 
2. The State Government should prepare a detailed sector programme for 
the next ten years period for smooth water supply in terms of coverage 
of water supply connections and per capita supply of water. 
 
13 EE, PHED, Kosli, Rewari divisions are under EE , PHED (GWI), Rewari and other 
units are under other GWI divisions which was not in selection. 

Chapter-III 
Improper Financial Management  

 

19 
Chapter-III 
Improper Financial Management 
Financial management was not effective  as savings were noticed under 
Central and S tate schemes. There was lack  of departmental efforts in 
making schemes financially self -sustainable as the revenue collection was 
very poor. Water charges of ` 278.20 crore was not received from 
consumers as of March 2021 in the test checked departments/divisions. 
There was short -realisation/collection of ` 69.36 crore on account of 
community contribution by the Gram Panchayats. 
3.1  Overview of finances 
Gross State Domestic Product (GSDP) is the value of all the goods and services 
produced within the boundaries of the State in a give n period of time. The 
expenditure incurred by the state of Haryana on water supply vis -à-vis GSDP 
during 2016-17 to 2020-21 is given in Table 3.1 below: 
Table 3.1: Comparative expenditure on water supply vis-à-vis GSDP 
Year Expenditure 
on water 
supply 
(PHED)  
(` in crore) 
Expenditure on 
water supply 
(ULBs)  
(` in crore) 
Expenditure 
on water 
supply (HSVP)  
(` in crore) 
Total 
expenditure 
on water 
supply 
(` in crore) 
GSDP of 
Haryana 
State  
(` in crore) 
Expenditure 
on water 
supply as a 
percentage of 
GSDP   
2016-17 675.00 50.48 188.16 913.64 5,61,424 0.16 
2017-18 777.77 26.20 255.09 1,059.06 6,44,963 0.16 
2018-19 1,040.69 101.74 213.55 1,355.98 7,04,957 0.19 
2019-20 930.20 229.04 117.86 1,277.10 7,80,612 0.16 
2020-21 742.53 273.13 98.47 1,114.13 7,64,872 0.15 
From the above table, it can be seen that expenditure  incurred by the state on 
water supply as a percentage of GSDP of the State (at current price) ranged 
between 0.15 to 0.19 per cent during the five years period of 2016-17 to 2020-21. 
3.2 Budget and Expenditure 
The funding under water supply component during 2016-2021 is as under:  
Rural Water Supply 
Funds/budget are being received from various Central and State sponsored 
schemes. The budget provision and expenditure there against for different Rural 
Water Supply Schemes during 2016-21 is shown in Table 3.2 (a).  
  

Performance Audit of Rural and Urban Water Supply Schemes 
20 
Table 3.2 (a): Details of Budget and Expenditure from 2016-17 to 2020-21 
(` in crore) 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of scheme Budget Provision Expenditure Savings Percentage of 
savings 
1. NRDWP or JJM 1,524.35 1,026.30 498.05 32.67 
2. NITI Aayog* 2.66 2.66 -- -- 
3. Rural Augmentation 1,595.00 1,464.34 130.66 8.19 
4. NABARD 965.09 855.65 109.44 11.34 
5. SCSP 73.50 47.27 26.23 35.69 
6. MahagramYojana 92.57 81.79 10.78 11.65 
7. MGGBY1 66.00 54.01 11.99 18.17 
 Total 4,319.17 3,532.02 787.15 18.22 
*NITI Aayog assistance was a one-time assistance. 
From the above, it is evident that underutili sation of the funds ranged between 
8.19 to 35.69 per cent during 2016-21.  
The year-wise detail of budget and expenditure during the period from 2016-17 
to 2020-21 under major schemes/programmes is as follows: 
Name of 
scheme 
 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 Total 
NRDWP/JJM Budget (₹ in crore) 383.84 343.14 227.27 280.60 289.50 1,524.35 
Expenditure  
(₹ in crore) 
299.23 162.05 176.68 140.31 248.03 1,026.30 
Savings  84.61 
(22.04) 
181.09 
(52.77) 
50.59 
(22.26) 
140.29 
(50.00) 
41.47 
(14.32) 
498.05 
(32.67) 
Rural 
Augmentation 
Budget (₹ in crore) 225.00 350.00 398.00 397.00 225.00 1,595.00 
Expenditure  
(₹ in crore) 
167.55 313.87 390.22 368.71 223.99 1,464.34 
Savings 57.45 
(25.53) 
36.13 
(10.32) 
7.78 
(1.95) 
28.29 
(7.13) 
1.01 
(0.45) 
130.66 
(8.19) 
NABARD Budget (₹ in crore) 50.00 130.00 315.09 300.00 170.00 965.09 
Expenditure  
(₹ in crore) 
44.85 112.87 289.43 258.67 149.83 855.65 
Savings 5.15 
(10.30) 
17.13 
(13.18) 
25.66 
(8.14) 
41.33 
(13.78) 
20.17 
(11.86) 
109.44 
(11.34) 
Note:  Figures in parenthesis show percentage of savings. 
As is evident from the above, there were persistent savings ranging between 
0.45 and 52.77 per cent in all  three major schemes/programmes during the 
period 2016-17 to 2020-2021 
Urban Water Supply 
The budget allotment/Grant and expenditure there against for different Urban 
Water Supply Schemes is shown in Table 3.2 (b). 
  
 
1 MGGBY was a deposit work for PHED and an amount of ₹ 66 crore had been deposited 
by Development & Panchayat Department from October 2015 to March 2020. An 
amount of ₹ 54.01 crore had been spent up to July 2022. 

Chapter-III Improper Financial Management 
21 
Table 3.2 (b): Details of budget and expenditure from 2016-17 to 2020-21 
(` in crore) 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of scheme Budget 
allotted 
Expenditure 
incurred 
Savings Percentage 
of savings 
1.  Urban Augmentation 844.01 759.09 84.92 10.06 
2.  Urban NCR 114.50 87.13 27.37 23.90 
3.  AMRUT 1,462.81 420.89 1041.92 71.23 
4.  Fund earmarked for water supply in ULB 545.80 259.70 286.10 52.42 
5.  Expenditure done by HSVP 1,321.86 873.13 448.73 33.95 
The percentage of saving ranged between 10 to 71 per cent during 2016-21. 
The year-wise detail of budget and expenditure of Urban Water Supply Schemes 
is detailed below:  
Name of scheme  2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 Total 
Urban 
Augmentation 
Budget (₹ in crore) 305.38 204.00 122.63 140.00 72.00 844.01 
Expenditure  
(₹ in crore) 
292.63 166.73 115.35 114.43 69.95 759.09 
Savings 12.75 
(4.18) 
37.27  
(18.27) 
7.28 
 (5.94) 
25.57 ( 
18.26) 
2.05  
(2.85) 
84.92  
(10.06) 
Urban NCR Budget (₹ in crore) 55.00 25.00 15.00 10.00 9.50 114.50 
Expenditure  
(₹ in crore) 
41.34 15.46 13.26 8.37 8.70 87.13 
Savings 13.66 
(24.84) 
9.54 
 (38.16) 
1.74  
(11.60) 
1.63 
 (16.30) 
0.80  
(8.42) 
27.37 
 (23.90) 
Other funding 
(ULB) 
Budget (₹ in crore) 90.25 36.04 67.20 86.74 265.58 545.81 
Expenditure  
(₹ in crore) 
50.48 20.03 51.25 68.26 69.68 259.70 
Savings 39.77 
(44.07) 
16.01  
(44.42) 
15.95  
(23.74) 
18.48 
 (21.31) 
195.90  
(73.76) 
286.11 
(52.42) 
Other funding 
(HSVP) 
Budget (₹ in crore) 373.43 285.38 306.86 184.57 171.60 1,321.84 
Expenditure  
(₹ in crore) 
188.16 255.08 213.55 117.86 98.47 873.12 
Savings 185.27 
(49.61) 
30.30  
(10.62) 
93.31  
(30.41) 
66.71  
(36.14) 
73.13  
(42.62) 
448.72 
(33.95) 
AMRUT Budget (₹ in crore) 136.75 130.25 75.70 500.52 619.59 1,462.81 
Expenditure  
(₹ in crore) 
0 6.17 50.49 160.78 203.45 420.89 
Savings 136.75 
(100) 
124.08  
(95.26) 
25.21  
(33.30) 
339.74  
(67.88) 
416.14  
(67.16) 
1,041.92 
(71.23) 
Note:  Figures in parenthesis show percentage of savings. 
As is evident from the above, there were persistent savings ranging between 
2.85 and 100 per cent in all Urban Water Supply schemes during the period 
2016-17 to 2020-2021.  
3.3 Lack of departmental efforts in making schemes self-sustainable 
As per para 2.3 of JJM guidelines, the 14 thFinance Commission (2015 -2020) 
recognized health, education, drinking water and sanitation as public services 
of national importance and defined the sustainable dr inking water supply 
systems as ‘those being operated under a formal management model, have 100 
per cent household meters installed and whose net revenues from wate r tariffs 
and subsidies are sufficient to cover at least the  Operation & Maintenance 
(O&M) costs of the system’. It has also recommended 100 per cent metering of 
individual connections in both rural and urban households, commercial 
establishments and insti tutions and individual connections be provided only 

Performance Audit of Rural and Urban Water Supply Schemes 
22 
when functional water meters are installed. During scrutiny of records in PHED, 
following shortcomings were noticed: 
1. Department had not initiated any steps for installation of metered 
connection rather  focus of the department is on providing household 
connection instead of metered connections. 
2. Audit analysed the data (department website) of O&M expenditure vis-
à-vis receipts generated from rural and urban water supply schemes and 
the revenue collection worked out to merely one per cent of the overall 
maintenance expenditure for rural areas and in case of urban area, it was 
overall 15 per cent of maintenance expenditure for the period 2016 -17 
to 2020-21 as shown in Table 3.3. 
Table 3.3: Operation & Maintenance expenditure vis-a-vis Receipts  
(₹ in crore) 
Year Operation & 
Maintenance 
expenditure in 
rural areas  
Receipts from 
Rural Water 
supply 
Per cent of 
receipts to 
O&M 
Operation & 
Maintenance 
expenditure in 
urban areas  
Receipts from 
urban water 
supply 
Per cent of 
receipts to 
O&M 
2016-17 566.90 3.13 0.55 270.78 51.97 19.19 
2017-18 558.93 11.37 2.03 265.38 48.31 18.20 
2018-19 616.76 8.07 1.31 298.15 37.03 12.42 
2019-20 605.03 4.57 0.76 279.95 38.54 13.77 
2020-21 888.51 3.12 0.35 378.58 42.98 11.35 
Total 3,236.14 30.25 0.93 1,492.84 218.83 14.66 
This indicated that the revenue generated was not adequate to cover the O&M 
function of the water supply system thereby making operation of the schemes 
financially unsustainable. 
During exit conference (November 2022), PHED stated that in rural areas, water 
charges were taken on flat rate as per Government notification. Resultantly there 
was a gap in revenue generation/collection to meet the O&M cost. Further, it 
was briefed that a proposal of involving Panchayat and Self Help Groups for 
collection of outstanding water charges was under consideration which would 
improve the revenue collection  to meet the O&M cost.  
Water Charges and Arrears 
3.4 Non-recovery of water charges amounting ₹ 278.20 crore 
Public Health Engineering Department 
3.4.1 Government of Haryana notified (April 2017) rates on tariff of water 
charges for General category beneficiaries as ₹ 40 per month and Scheduled Caste 
(SC) category beneficiaries as ₹ 20 per month in villages which are not f alling 
under any Municipal area. Scrutiny of records2 revealed that water user charges 
to the tune of ₹ 263.64 crore (Rural: ₹ 128.17 crore; Urban: ₹ 135.47 crore) was 
 
2 Selected divisions of PHED. 

Chapter-III Improper Financial Management 
23 
to be collected from consumers during April 2016 to March 2021 whereas only 
an amount of ₹ 76.30 crore (28.94 per cent) had been collected during the period 
by divisional offices leaving a balance of ₹ 187.34 crore (Rural: ₹ 119.29 crore; 
Urban: ₹ 68.05 crore) (Appendix 7) as water charges arrears in respect of selected 
divisions of PHED. The details are represented in the Chart 3.1(a) &(b). 
Chart 3.1 (a): Collection of Water Charges in Rural Areas (2016-2021) 
Chart 3.1 (b): Collection of Water Charges in Urban Areas (2016 -2021) 
This indicated absence of efforts by the department towards revenue collection 
especially in rural areas where only seven per cent  water charges were 
collected/realized during 2016-21. 
Haryana Shehri Vikas Pradhikaran  
3.4.2 Rule 13 (iii) of the HUDA (now renamed as HSVP) Water Regulation 
2001emphasized that a consumer who fails to pay water charges by the due date 
shall be liable to pay penalty thereon @ 10 per cent of the amount of water 
charges due from him within 15 days from the date of default failing which his 
water connection shall be disconnected after giving him a notice of seven days. 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
24.85
32.69
4.32
17.26
14.23
2.33
6.93 7.84
1.23
10.98
2.37 3.141.10 0.87 0.54 1.02
1.24
0.86
1.04
1.45 0.17 0.44
0.02
0.13
Rural, PHED 
Total revenue which was to be realized (₹  in crore) Total Revenue realized (₹  in crore)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
10.40
15.53
5.29 3.34
10.22
45.81
4.41 3.59
10.67
17.55
3.76 1.97 2.93
2.06
13.44
4.79 0.14
6.14 13.72
3.29
3.07
5.94
11.84
1.55 0.19
1.25
Urban, PHED 
Total revenue which was to be realized (₹ in crore) Total Revenue realized (₹ in crore)

Performance Audit of Rural and Urban Water Supply Schemes 
24 
During scrutiny of the records in selected divisions of HSVP, it was noticed that 
₹ 19.18 crore water charges were outstanding as on 31 March 2021 which were 
to be recovered from consumers in selected districts but no action as per rules 
had been taken by concerned offices. Details of outstanding water charges in 
selected divisions of HSVP is given in Appendix 7. 
Urban Local Bodies department  
3.4.3 ULB Department, Government of Haryana notified the revised water 
user charges in August 2018. During scrutiny of the records in selected districts 
of ULB Department, Haryana, it was noticed that  in two MCs namely 
Faridabad3 and Karnal, water u ser charges amounting to ₹  71.68 crore were 
outstanding as on 31 March 2021  (Appendix 7). There was no mechanism in 
the ULB for monitoring the recovery of water user charges. 
It is assessed that non -assessment of revenue is a lapse on the part of the 
authorities viz. PHED, ULB & HSVP. It also indicates absence or lack of 
accountability mechanism on the part of higher formations viz. EIC/Director/  
CE/SE, etc.  
During exit confer ence (November 2022), departments assured for taking 
necessary action on the matter. 
3.5 Collection of community contribution 
Para 6.1.2 of JJM guidelines stipulated that for in -village piped water supply 
infrastructure and related source development to be  implemented by G ram 
Panchayats and/or its sub-committee, i.e. Village Water & Sanitation Committee 
(VWSC)/Panni Samiti/User Group, etc; communities would contribute 10 per 
cent of the capital cost in cash and/or kind and/or labour and would be paid to 
agency/vendor as decided by District Water & Sanitation Mission (DWSM).  
During scrutiny of records4, it was revealed that 6,129 GPs (Appendix 8) were 
required to deposit community contribution amounting to ₹  69.76 crore during 
2016-21 but only ₹  0.39 crore were deposited with the department till August 
2022. Thus, there was short realisation/collection of ₹ 69.36 crore. 
During exit conference (November 2022), PHED admitted the facts and assured 
for future compliance. 
3.6 Late release of State share 
In 2017-18, demand for funds under NRDWP was sent (April 2017) to Finance 
Department (FD), Haryana by PHED ( Central share of ₹ 26.06 crore plus 
 
3  Faridabad, Division 1 2016-21, Division no. 3 & 5 2019-21, Division no. 2 & 4 did not 
provide related information. 
4 EIC, PHED, Haryana. 

Chapter-III Improper Financial Management 
25 
₹ 19.74 crore as matching State share).  The Letter of Credit (LOC) of ₹ 26.06 
crore as Central share was released (19 May 2017) by Finance Department but 
corresponding State share was not released. The said matching State share of 
₹ 19.74 crore was released only in October 2017 by Finance Department, 
Haryana. As per instructions, State share was to be released to the implementing 
agency within 15 days of receipt of Central share . Thus, there was lack of 
coordination between departments as there was a delay of more than five months 
in release of State share. 
3.7 Release and utilisation of Central and State funds in NRDWP/JJM 
As per the Utilisation certificates furnished by the PHED, Haryana to Ministry of 
Drinking Water and Sanitation (MDWS) for the year from 2016-17 to 2020-21, 
the release and utilisation of Central and States share of funds for implementation 
of NRDWP/JJM during 2016-21 is detailed in Table 3.4.  
Table 3.4: Funds and Expenditure under NRDWP/JJM during 2016-2021 (` in crore) 
Year Total available funds  Expenditure Savings  Percentage of 
savings against 
available funds 
2016-17 383.84 299.23 84.61 22.04 
2017-18 343.14 162.05 181.09 52.77 
2018-19 227.27 176.68 50.59 22.26 
2019-20 280.60 140.31 140.29 50.00 
2020-21 289.50 248.03 41.47 14.32 
Total 1,524.35 1,026.30 498.05 32.67 
As seen from the table, the percentage of savings ranged between 14.32 per cent 
and 5 2.77 per cent during 2016 -17 to 2020 -21. Overall funds amounting to 
` 498.05 crore remained unutilised as of March 2021. 
The component-wise position of funds available and expenditure incurred under 
NRDWP/JJM during 2016-21 is detailed in the Tables 3.5, 3.6 and 3.7 below:  
Coverage: The funds under this component were to  be utilised for providing 
safe and adequate drinking water supply to uncovered, partially covered and 
slipped back habitations (in NRDWP) and under JJM for infrastructure for Har 
Ghar Jal (in terms of FHTCs provided to rural households). 
O&M: The funds under this component were to  be utilised for expenditure on 
running, repair and replacement costs of drinking water supply projects. 
Water quality : The funds under this component were to be utilised for 
providing safe drinking water to water quality affected habitations. 
Sustainability: The funds under this component were to be utilised for 
encouraging states to achieve drinking water security at the local level through 
sustainability of sources and systems. 
  

Performance Audit of Rural and Urban Water Supply Schemes 
26 
Table 3.5: Expenditure incurred on Coverage, Water Quality, Sustainability, O& M 
components during 2016-2021 
(` in crore) 
Year Total available funds  Expenditure Percentage utilisation of 
available funds 
2016-17 373.76 293.06 78.41 
2017-18 333.09 155.95 46.82 
2018-19 209.52 168.84 80.58 
2019-20 260.26 131.46 50.51 
2020-21 269.34 234.09 86.91 
Support Activities: 
Support activities include (i) engagement of consultants by Water and Sanitation 
Support Organization and District Water and Sanitation Mission, (ii) setting up 
and running of BRCs5, (iii) supporting awareness creation and training activities, 
(iv) giving hardware and software support at district and sub -divisional level, 
(v) research and development activities relevant to the State, etc.  
Table 3.6: Expenditure incurred on Support Activities component during 2016 -2021 
(` in crore) 
Year Total available funds  Expenditure Percentage utilization of 
available funds 
2016-17 5.99 3.79 63.27 
2017-18 6.34 3.86 60.88 
2018-19 9.11 4.97 54.56 
2019-20 12.03 5.20 43.23 
2020-21 11.78 6.72 57.05 
Water Quality Monitoring and Surveillance (WQM&S): 
The funds under this component are to be used for monitoring and surveillance 
of water quality in habitations at field level and for setting up and upgrading 
water quality testing laboratories at State, district and sub-district levels.  
Table 3.7: Expenditure incurred on Water Quality Monitoring and Surveillance 
(WQM&S) component during 2016-2021 
(` in crore) 
Year Total available funds  Expenditure Percentage utilization of 
available funds 
2016-17 4.09 2.38 58.19 
2017-18 3.71 2.24 60.38 
2018-19 8.64 2.87 33.22 
2019-20 8.31 3.65 43.92 
2020-21 8.38 7.22 86.16 
It is evident that funds under the main components viz. Coverage, Water 
Quality, Sustainability and O&M remained unutili sed to the extent of 13.09 to 
53.18 per cent. Under Support activities, short-utilization of funds was between 
36.73 to 56.7 7 per cent. Under-utilization in WQM&S related activities was 
ranging between 13.84 to 66.78 per cent. 
 
5  Block Resource Coordinators. 

Chapter-III Improper Financial Management 
27 
3.8 Non-completion of work within time frame leads to extra liability 
on the State Government 
Augmentation of water supply scheme, Hisar Town was proposed (2013) for 
execution at estimated cost of ₹ 79.58 crore under 13th Finance Commission 
(TFC) Urban6 (Shivalik and Southern Haryana). The project was scheduled for 
completion by 31 March 2016 to avoid lapse of funds under TFC. The work7 was 
allotted (October 2013) with a completion time of 18 months. But due to site 
dispute and department’s negligence, the work did not start on time and 
resultantly could not be completed within stipulated time period. Meanwhile, the 
central assistance provided under TFC scheme lapsed on 31 March 2016, the 
department could utilize only ₹ 48.54 crore from the grant of TFC till the time. 
To complete the project, the department prepared supplementary estimate 
(approved July 2016) amounting to ₹ 31.04 crore and spent an amount of 
₹ 31.04 crore from State Plan (Urban Augmentation scheme). Had the w ork 
been completed in time, extra burden on state exchequer could have been 
avoided. In response to audit observation, the dep artment replied (September 
2021) that TFC grant could not be utili sed due to delay in possession of land 
and late approval of design and drawing. The fact, however, is that timely action 
by the department would have avoided the liability. 
During exit conference (November 2022), PHED stated that detailed reply will be 
conveyed to audit after examining the matter. Reply is awaited (December 2022). 
Conclusion 
Financial management was not effective as persistent savings were noticed 
under Central and State schemes. There was lack of departmental effort  in 
making schemes financially self-sustainable as the revenue collection was very 
poor. Water charges of ` 278.20 crore was not received from consumers as of 
March 2021 in the test checked dep artments/divisions. There was short -
realisation/collection of ` 69.36 crore on account of community contribution by 
the Gram Panchayats. 
Recommendation 
3. The department/concerned entities should make efforts for recovery of 
arrears of water charges, collecti on of community contributions for 
making the schemes self-sustainable. 
 
6 Scheme meant for urban areas and funded under central assistance from 13th Finance 
Commission by creating head P-01-38-4215-01-101-99-97. 
7 Augmentation Water supply scheme Hisar Town, Designing, constructing, testing and 
commissioning of Programmable Logic Controller (PLC). Const. of RCC, NP3 pipe 
inlet channel and other connected works and all other works contingent thereto” 
complete in cluding operation and maintenance for five years after trial run of three 
months. 

Chapter-IV 
Inadequate Supply of Water 

 

29 
CHAPTER-IV 
Inadequate Supply of Water 
Flow meters were installed at 32 locations against the requirement of 
58 locations. Out of these 32 locations, water supply in terms of LPCD 
found less than the norms at 23 locations. It was observed that in 72 out of 
604 test-checked cases, the discharge of raw water by Irrigation and Water 
Resources Department was lesser than  actual requirement  whereas the 
storage capacity of Storage and Sedimentation tanks in 63 out of 604 cases 
was found to be less than the actual requirement. In urban area, 48 per cent 
of 3.16 lakh connections were unmetered. Records related to history of 
pumping machinery were not found maintained. 
4.1 Assessment of quantity of water supplied 
Assessment of quantity of water being supplied was one of the objectives of this 
Performance Audit. During audit, it was observed that elaborate data regarding 
operational hours of water motors/tubewells and machinery details viz. Brake 
Horse Power (BHP), Litre per minute (LPM) etc. was not available in divisions.  
Hence, to determine actual quantity of water supplied, 58 locations were 
selected where the concerned departments (i.e. PHED, HSVP, ULBs) agreed to 
install flow meters at water works. The details are given in Table 4.1 below: 
Table 4.1: Status of installation of flow meter 
Name of 
department 
No. of locations 
where flow meter 
was to be installed 
No. of locations where either flow 
meter was not installed/related 
record not provided to audit 
No. of locations where water 
supplied was found less than 
the prescribed norms 
PHED 15 3   8 
HSVP 31 11 15 
ULB 12 12 -- 
Total 58 26 23 out of 32 
From the above, it can be assessed that out of 12 locations of PHED , water 
supply in respect of 8 locations and out of 20 locations of HSVP , water supply 
in respect of 15 locations was below the prescribed norms. The details are given 
in Appendix 9.  Thus, the departments failed to provide water supply to the 
inhabitants as per prescribed norms. 
Beneficiary survey: 95 out of 608 beneficiaries (16  per cent) stated that water 
supply was available after gap of one or more than one day whereas 125 out of 
608 beneficiaries (21 per cent) stated that there was shortage of water supply in 
summer season. However, people met their needs through tankers (either 
departmental or private).  
 
 

Performance Audit of Rural and Urban Water Supply Schemes 
30 
4.2 Status of Water supply to consumers in PHED 
PHED has adopted norms of water s upply for the Rural as 55 LPCD in Non -
DDP areas and 70 LPCD for Desert Development Programme (DDP) areas. As 
per the CPHEEO manual published in May 1999, the project components viz. 
water treatment units and clear water reservoirs and balancing tanks are 
designed by taking design period of 15 years.  Components viz. raw water and 
clear water conveying mains and distribution systems are designed by taking 
design period of 30 years. The data dump related to water supply and its related 
components available on  departmental website was provided by the Office of 
the EIC, PHED, Haryana. The dump data of eight selected districts was analysed 
as per methodology detailed in Appendix 10.  
The results of analysis revealed the following: 
4.2.1 Sanctioned discharge for water works less than required discharge 
In surface water supply schemes, Irrigation department sanctions outlet at any 
particular location. Raw water is taken from Irrigation department from 
sanctioned outlet and is stored in Storage and Sedimentation tank  for fulfilling 
the water requirement/demand during canal closure. While sanctioning size of 
outlet, several components are taken in consideration like futuristic prospective 
population considering two per cent  increase per year, canal closure, canal 
running period. The sanctioned discharge may be revised by Irrigation an d 
Water Resources Department due to change in canal running and closure period. 
To calculate the required discharge 1 of raw water from Irrigation department, 
audit worked out the actual status by taking prospective population for the year 
2021, canal running days, canal closure days, 55 LPCD requirement for Non DDP 
areas and 70 LPCD requirement for DDP areas (Appendices 11 and 12).  It was 
noticed that in 12 per cent cases2 (72 out of 604 cases) in selected districts, actual 
sanctioned discharge was much lesser than the required discharge, with maximum 
number of cases having a shortage in discharge of 26 per cent to 50 per cent as 
given in Table 4.2 (a) and 4.2 (b).  
  
 
1 Total requirement of water in litre: Total Population * LPCD (55/70) + 15 per cent 
evaporation losses. 
2 There were 58  cases in DDP areas and 14 cases in non -DDP areas where discharge 
sanction was less than required sanction. 

Chapter-IV Inadequate Supply of Water 
31 
Table 4.2 (a): District-wise number of water works/cases where sanctioned discharge was 
less than the requirement 
Name of District Hisar Fatehabad Karnal Rewari Rohtak 
Total water works for which outlet 
sanctioned by Irrigation department 
259 120 1 86 138 
Cases where sanctioned discharge was less 
than the required discharge 
53 4 0 1 14 
Cases in terms of percentage 20 3 -- -- 10 
Table 4.2 (b): Bifurcation of water works/cases on the basis of shortage  
in terms of percentage 
District/Range 0-10 per cent  11-25 per cent 26-50 per cent 51-75 per cent 76-100 per cent 
Hisar 5 7 20 14 7 
Fatehabad 0 1 1 2 0 
Rewari 0 0 0 0 1 
Rohtak 3 4 6 1 0 
Total cases 8 12 27 17 8 
Thus, it is assessed that Litre Per Capita per Day (LPCD) as per norms is 
unlikely to be achieved due to lesser sanctioned discharge than the required 
discharge. 
4.2.2 Less Storage capacity of Storage and Sedimentation (S&S) tank 
For the required capacity of S&S tank during the closure period of canal, audit 
worked (Appendix 10) out the requirement by taking prospective population for 
the year 2021, canal running days, canal closure days, S&S tank capacity, 
evaporation losses @ 15 per cent, 55 LPCD requirement for Non DDP areas 
and 70 LPCD requirement for DDP areas.  
It was observed that in selected districts where water is supplied through canal 
water supply, the storage capacity of S&S tanks in 11 per cent cases3 (63 out of 
604 cases) was found to be less than the actual requirement of population during 
closure period of canal as indicated in Table 4.3 (a) & 4.3  (b). The details can 
be seen in Appendices 13 and 14. 
Table 4.3 (a): District wise cases where storage capacity of S&S tank was less as per 
requirement 
Name of District Hisar Fatehabad Karnal Rewari Rohtak 
Total storage & sedimentation tanks 259 120 1 86 138 
Cases where storage capacity was less than the 
required 
47 12 0 2 2 
Cases in terms of percentage 18 10 -- -- -- 
Table 4.3 (b): Bifurcation of cases on the basis of shortage in terms of percentage 
District/Range 0-10  
per cent 
11-25  
per cent 
26-50  
per cent 
51-75  
per cent 
76-100  
per cent 
Hisar 15 15 5 8 4 
Fatehabad 2 2 3 3 2 
Rewari 0 1 0 1 0 
Rohtak 0 0 1 1 0 
Total cases 17 18 9 13 6 
 
3 In DDP area, 61 cases where water requirement is 70 LPCD whereas in non-DDP areas 
where water requirement is 55 LPCD, two cases were detected. 

Performance Audit of Rural and Urban Water Supply Schemes 
32 
Thus, it is assessed that in the absence of full storage capacity of water during 
canal closure period, department is unlikely to provide 55/70 LPCD for the 
habitants. 
4.3 Case study of Rewari town 
A case study of Rewari town was carried out to assess the performance towards 
supply of water in the town against the requirement and efficiency in revenue 
collection of water charges.  The result of the case study is as under: 
In Rewari town, the main source of water supply is canal based (JLN Feeder)  
and tube w ells have also been installed to meet the requirement  during canal 
closure period . The following agencies are responsible for providing and  
up-gradation of structures related to water supply in Rewari town: 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of 
agency 
Population 
served (till 2021) 
Jurisdiction/Area  Actual water 
supply against 
135 LPCD 
Capacity of Water 
Treatment Plant (WTP) 
under the jurisdiction 
1. PHED 1,79,001 Entire town area 
(except HSVP sectors)  
111 30 MLD 
(168 LPCD) 
2. HSVP 43,966 Sector areas of HSVP 86 7 MLD 
(159 LPCD) 
As is evident from the above, adequate capacity of water treatment plants were 
available to treat the drinking water in Rewari Town. 
The status of water supply under the jurisdiction of the agencies is as under: 
• Areas under the jurisdiction of PHED: There are two canal based 
water-works (one is situated at Kalaka and another at Lisana) to provide 
water supply to the inhabitants residing in Rewari town under the 
jurisdiction of PHED. Apart from these, there are two tube-wells which 
are installed to meet the requirement. The storage capacity of 
sedimentation tanks (636.87 million litres) was found less than the 
requirement (1,039.10 million litres). Due to insufficient storage 
capacity, as against the requirement of water supply of 135 LPCD, 
PHED could supply only 111 LPCD.  
To provide water supply as per norms, the work of construction of 
additional storage tank and other allied works was administratively 
approved in June 2019. Till March 2021, an amount of ` 20.62 crore 
(2019-20: ` 7.94 crore, ` 2020-21: ₹ 12.68 crore) had been allocated for 
execution of the above said project. Due to delay in finalization of land, 
the construction work of additional storage tank could not be started. 
Thus, despite availability of funds and raw water, construction work of 
additional storage tank was not started thereby depriving the citizens to 
intended benefit of the facility.  

Chapter-IV Inadequate Supply of Water 
33 
• Areas under the jurisdiction of HSVP: As per information provided 
by Divisional Office, HSVP, it was noticed that people were getting 86 
LPCD water as against the requirement of 135 LPCD. 
• Areas under the jurisdiction of MC: The main objective of the 
AMRUT scheme to provide household tap connection to every citizen 
in town area remained unachieved as nearly 11.14 per cent households 
were not considered for providing tap connection even in approved 
Detailed Project Report of Rewari town under AMRUT. The details are 
as follows: 
Total 
households  
Households 
covered before 
execution of 
project  
Households 
proposed to be 
covered in this 
project  
Total no. 
Households covered 
after project 
implementation  
Remaining 
households with no 
tap connection after 
project completion  
Percentage of 
households 
remaining  
(a) (b) (c) (d) = (b) + (c) (e) = (a) – (d) (f) = (e)*100/(a) 
28,702 23,597 1,909 25,506 3,196 11.14 
Other issues regarding water supply in Rewari Town 
• During scrutiny of records for the period 2016 -21, it was noticed that 
PHED assess the total requirement for domestic consumers of Urban 
Areas on the basis of prospective population for next 30 years by taking 
into consideration the water allowance of 135 LPCD as per CPHEEO 
Manual. However, while assessing the total water requirement for Rewari 
town, the institutional4 requirements were not considered by the PHED. 
• No record was maintained by PHED for maintenance of pum ps and 
motors to ascertain the efficiency of machinery.  
• Log-books were not maintained in PHED where O&M was done by 
outsourcing staff.  
Efficiency in Revenue collection 
During the period 2016-21, an amount of ₹ 20.70 crore (PHED: ` 17.55 crore + 
HSVP: ₹ 3.15 crore) was to be collected from the consumers of Rewari Town as 
water charges. Out of this, ₹ 6.50 crore (PHED:  ` 5.71 crore + HSVP: ₹ 0.79 
crore) was pending from consumers as on 31 March 2021. However, an 
expenditure of ` 47.93 crore (PHED: ` 32.02 crore + HSVP: ` 15.91 crore) had 
been incurred by both these departments on Operation & Maintenance of water 
supply component during 2016-21. Thus, revenue generated was not adequate to 
cover the O&M expenditure of the water supply system. 
 
 
 
4 For hospitals: 340 to 450 LPCD (per bed), hostels and boarding schools/colleges: 135 
LPCD, day schools/colleges: 45 LPCD, restaurants: 70 LPCD (per seat) and for cinema 
and theatre: 15 LPCD. 

Performance Audit of Rural and Urban Water Supply Schemes 
34 
4.4 Some specific systemic issues 
For the canal based water supply, the running and closure period is modified by 
the Irrigation and Water Resources Department based on the availability of 
water in the canals. Audit observed delays in works planned/undertaken by the 
PHED for providing water supply during the closure period due to improper 
planning, the details are as under:  
4.4.1  Lack of planning leading to delay in construction of additional 
storage tank 
Scrutiny of records5 revealed that the work “Augmentation of raw water storage 
capacity by construction pumping station and new S &S tanks at Pataudi Road 
and Lisana (W/W) Renovation and updating of structures of Lisana (W/W) for 
Rewari Town District Rewari” was given administrative approval (June 2019) by 
Water Supply and Sanitation Board for the year 2019-20 under “Augmentation 
Urban Water Supply”. The estimate amounting to ₹ 50.58 crore was framed to 
cover the cost of Construction of new S&S tanks at Pataudi Road & Lisana WW, 
renovation & updating of structures of existing WW Lisana for Rewari town.  
Scrutiny revealed that despite administrative approval, detailed estimate of the 
project had not been approved till date. Till date, an amount of ₹ 20.62 crore 
(2019-20: ₹ 7.94 crore; 2020-21: ₹ 12.68 crore) had been allocated for execution 
of the said project but  divisional office failed to commence the project. Storage 
capacity of both the tanks was 636.87 million litres and tube wells were installed 
to meet out the balance requirement, which on an average ran 8 hours daily per 
day as per information furnished by divisional office. Audit worked out the 
quantity of net water provided (LPCD) during the canal closure of 24 days as  
given in Table 4.4.  
Table 4.4: Quantity of water provided during canal closure 
1.  Capacity of raw water tanks 636.87 million  litre 
2.  Water available from tube wells (considering 100 per cent efficiency 
factor) 
2.3 million litre6 
3.  Total water available 639.17 million litre 
4.  Deducting 25 per cent evaporation loss 159.79 million litre 
5.  Net water available for distribution for 24 days 479.38 million litre 
6.  Population of Rewari town as per 2011 census 1,43,201 
7.  Considering 2.5 per cent increase per year (2021) 1,79,001 
8.  Net water provided per day per person 479.38 million litre/(1,79,0017 x24) =  
111 LPCD 
From the above, i t was assessed  that department was providing 111 LPCD to 
the inhabitants of Rewari town as against the norms of 135 LPCD. Thus, despite 
availability of funds and availability of raw water, divisional office was not able 
 
5  EE, PHED-1, Rewari. 
6 8 hours x 60 x 200 LPM x 24 days. 
7 Population of the town as per 2011 census plus 2.5 per cent increase per year till 2021 
(1,43,201+35,800=1,79,001). 

Chapter-IV Inadequate Supply of Water 
35 
to start the work (delay in constructing additiona l storage tank) due to lack of 
planning (delay in finalization of land) thereby depriving the citizens to access 
to required quantity of potable water. 
4.4.2  Planning failure l eading to non -provision of  water supply as per 
norms 
Para 6.5.5 of Haryana Publ ic Works Department code provides that the 
divisional officer shall keep on record complete plans of works (i.e. plans of 
roads, canals, distributaries, drains, sewers, water supply lines etc.) under his 
charge as actually constructed, with any subsequent alteration.  
Scrutiny of records of Executive Engineer, Public Health Engineering Division, 
Fatehabad, it was seen that work of Augmentation of Canal based WW in Bhuna 
could not be made operational as the work of Inlet channel  could not be 
completed on time, the details are given in Table 4.5. 
Table 4.5: Status of work Augmentation of canal based water works in Bhuna town 
Sr. 
No 
Name of 
work 
Name of 
agency 
Date of start of 
work 
Scheduled 
completion of 
work 
Status of 
work as on 
May 2022 
Remarks 
1. Augmentation 
of canal based 
WW in Bhuna 
Maha Laxmi 
Construction 
Company 
19 December 2017 18 March 2019 In progress Two different agreements 
(mains and inlet channel) 
were made to complete 
work. The work of Inlet 
Channel could not be 
completed due to non -
availability of land. 
Sunder Lal 
Sharma 
Contractor 
19 December 2017 18 December 2018 Completed  
The department was lifting raw water from minor 8 through Syphon for storing 
water in Storage tanks as a temporary arrangement. Despite availability of 
sanctioned raw water (5.33 cusec) for this project and even after incurring an 
expenditure of ₹ 21.09 crore against the estimated cost of ₹ 24.76 crore o n this 
work, required LPCD water supply to the inhabitants could not be possible. 
Further, possibility of water losses due to the temporary arrangement cannot be 
ruled out.  
During exit conference (November 2022), PHED stated that reply would be 
conveyed after verification of the details. Reply is awaited as of December 2022.  
4.5. Provision of metered connection 
Haryana State Rural Water Policy 2012 emphasizes on providing individual 
household metered connections to 50 per cent rural populations by the end  of 
12th Five Year Plan (2012-17) i.e. up to year 2017.  
 
8  Channel taking off from the main canal or distributary with head discharge of less than 
one cumec. 

Performance Audit of Rural and Urban Water Supply Schemes 
36 
During scrutiny of records9, it was observed that department is collecting water 
charges on flat rate basis (by following the notification 10 dated 03 April 2017 
according to which tariff charges for General category beneficiaries and SC 
category beneficiaries is ₹ 40 per and ₹ 20 per month respectively in villages 
which are not falling under any MC areas instead of billing as per meter reading. 
Thus, the department failed to achieve desired target of covering 50 per cent 
rural population under metered connections. 
4.5.1 Haryana Shehri Vikas Pradhikaran 
HUDA (now renamed as HSVP) vide notification (19 April 2017) has clearly 
indicated that no wa ter supply services will be provided to Institutional, 
Industrial, Commercial etc. consumers having no metered connection.  
During scrutiny, audit observed that amongst  domestic beneficiar ies, 37 per 
cent unmetered and 0.7 per cent illegal connections were found. Similarly, in 
case of other than domestic beneficiaries 32 per cent unmetered and 1.4 per cent 
illegal connections were found (Appendix 15). 
Till date, no action has been taken (nor any penalty imposed) by the HSVP 
authorities on these unmetered as well as illegal connection holders. 
4.5.2 Urban Local Bodies Department 
Urban Local Bodies Department notified (August 2018) that if the water meter 
is not working then it will be treated as unmetered connection and the users will 
be charged on flat rate basis depending upon the size of the plot. However, no 
unmetered water supply connections shall be allowed in the Institutional/ 
Commercial/Industrial establishment in future. Even for the existing water 
supply, unmetered connections shall be converted to metered ones by the 
occupants in a period of three months from the date of order otherwise rate of 
bill charges shall be minimum ₹ 2,000 per month. 
Amongst domestic beneficiaries in MC divisions11, 53 per cent unmetered and 
22 per cent  illegal connection s were found. Similarly, in case of other than 
domestic benefici aries 41 per cent  unmetered and 18 per cent  illegal 
connections were found as detailed in Table 4.6. 
  
 
9 Public Health Engineering Department 
10 The notification provides details of water tariff to be collected from each category of 
consumers along with rate per Kilolitre for metered supply and flat rate for unmetered 
supply. 
11  MC-Faridabad & Karnal. The figures are provided by concerned MCs and there are 
mismatch in the data provided by both MCs as number of total consumers is not 
matching with the total number of connections (domestic as well as other than domestic 
beneficiary). 

Chapter-IV Inadequate Supply of Water 
37 
Table 4.6: Details of water connection in MCs 
Name of 
District 
Total 
Consumer 
Domestic Beneficiary Other than Domestic Beneficiary 
No. of 
Connections 
Metered 
Connections 
Unmetered 
Connections 
Illegal 
Connections 
No. of 
Connections 
Metered 
Connections 
Unmetered 
Connections 
Illegal 
Connections 
Faridabad 1,91,711 1,34,625 27,598 1,07,027 49,932 5,629 2,277 3,352 1,525 
Karnal 38,671 37,516 27,070 10,446 0 1,155 1,064 91 0 
Total 2,30,382 1,72,141 54,668 1,17,473 49,932 6,784 3,341 3,443 1,525 
Till date, no action has been taken (nor any penalty imposed) by the MC 
authorities on these unmetered as well as illegal connections holders.  
4.5.3 Public Health Engineering Department 
The information related to unmetered connection in other  than domestic 
(Institutional, Commercial, Industrial, etc.) beneficiaries was not furnished. 
4.6 Conduct of Water Audit 
As per Central Public Health & Environmental Engineering Organisation 
(CPHEEO) Operation & Maintenance Manual (Chapter -15), water audit of 
Water Supply  Schemes is defined as the assessment of the capacity of total 
water produced by the authority and the actual quantity of water distributed 
throughout the area of service of the authority, thus leading to an estimation of 
the losses.  
During scrutiny of re cords, it was noticed that both the departments viz. 
Haryana Shehri Vikas Pradhikaran and Urban Local Bodies had not conducted 
any water audit as ibid in the manual. No such exercise to detect estimated water 
losses by calculating water availability and fu rther distribution to consumers 
had ever been conducted by these departments. In the absence of water audit, 
estimation of water losses is not possible, which is a cause of concern. 
4.7 Leakage in distribution system leading to generation of non-revenue 
water 
Chapter-15 of O&M Manual for Rural Water Supply defines Non -Revenue 
Water/ Un-accounted for Water (NRW/UFW) as the expression used for the 
difference between the quantity of water produced and the quantity of water 
billed or accounted for.  
NRW/ UFW = Quantity of water produced – Quantity of water billed/ accounted for  
In surface water supply sch emes, Irrigation department sanctions outlet at any 
particular location. From this outlet, raw water is carried through Inlet channel 
and ultimately the water gets stored in storage & sedimentation tank for further 
supply to inhabitants. Scrutiny of records in EIC, PHED for the period 2016-21, 
it was seen that the bulk flow meters were not installed at production points to 
quantify the raw water availability from Irrigation department. In rural areas  
also, the water meters did not exist. In absence of the m etering systems, 

Performance Audit of Rural and Urban Water Supply Schemes 
38 
department was not having the data regarding total availability of raw water and 
total water distributed to consumers. 
Similarly, in tube well based supply, no such metering mechanism was available 
to know the exact quantity of water extracted from tube wells (for further supply 
to inhabitants). In absence of proper metering of the water supplied, audit could 
not ascertain the actual loss of water in the distribution system. 
In response to audit query, the department stated (December 2021) that size of 
the outlet was used as measuring tool to quantity the raw water supplied. 
Similarly, in case of tube well based supply, the quantity of water extracted was 
measured by considering the actual pumping hours and capacity of pumping set.  
The reply of the department is not acceptable as the facts as stated were not 
supported by any documentary evidence. It was also noticed that log books of 
the installed pumping sets were not maintained at places where contractual staff 
was hired for the purpose.   
Thus, department had no sound mechanism to assess the quantity of water 
available with department for supply (either received from I&WRD 12 or by 
pumping out ground water from tube wells) vis-à-vis quantity of water actually 
being supplied to the consumer. 
The department (June 2022) while agreeing to the audit observation stated that 
a detailed action plan would be unveiled and posed to the Government for 
additional financial support so that an in -built mechanism of measurement of 
flow is maintained for each scheme which would be beneficial in effective water 
management.  
Beneficiary survey: 118 out of 564 beneficiaries (21 per cent) complained about 
leakage of water whereas 211 out of 564 beneficiaries (37 per cent) complained 
about low pressure of water. 
4.8 Non-maintenance of records related to history sheets of pumping 
machinery 
Para 11.3 of O&M Manual for Rural Water Supplies published by Ministry of 
Drinking Water & Sanitation, Government of India (May 2013) provides details 
regarding pumping machinery maintenance.  As per Para 11.3.2, a history sheet 
of pump and motor should be maintained indicating its specifications, date of 
installation/commissioning, records of periodical maintenance, repairs, 
inspections and tests. 
Scrutiny of records13 revealed that no such record was maintained by divisional 
offices related to pumps and motors. In the absence of the record related to 
 
12  Irrigation & Water Resources Department. 
13 PHED: Rewari, Fatehabad, Kosli, Tohana, Bawal, Faridabad, No.1 & 2 : Rohtak. 

Chapter-IV Inadequate Supply of Water 
39 
maintenance of the pumps and motors , audit could not ascertain the efficiency 
of the operation and maintenance of the machinery.  
Conclusion 
At 23 locations, where quantity of water supply was checked using flow meters, 
water supply in terms of LPCD was found less than the norms. It was observed 
that in 72 out of 604 test-checked cases, the discharge of raw water by Irrigation 
department was lesser than actual requirement whereas the storage capacity of 
Storage and Sedimentation tanks in 63 out of 604 cases was found to be less 
than the actual requirement. Department is collecting water charges on flat rate 
basis in rural areas which was against the provisions of Haryana State Rural 
Water Policy 2012. In urban areas, 48 per cent of 3.16 lakh connections were 
unmetered. Records related to history of pumping machinery were not found 
maintained 
Recommendations 
In view of the above audit observations:  
4 Periodic assessment for upgrading water supply infrastructure must be 
done by preparation of half-yearly/yearly returns. 
5 Metering should be made mandatory for effective water management so 
that leakage/wastage of precious water could be avoided and fines be 
imposed on consumers having unmetered and illegal connections. 
6 To assess total water availability for distribution, the department should 
explore option of capturing realtime based data/IoT (Internet of Things) 
based data at source/water works so that proper monitoring may be 
done at any time and at any level. 

Chapter-V 
Poor Quality of water supplied 

 

 
CHAPTER-V 
Poor Quality of water supplied 
Water quality was found affected at some selected locations due to presence 
of coliforms and physical and chemical parameters beyond permissible 
limits. There was shortage of manpower in the State, District and Sub -
divisional laboratories. Resultantly, shortfalls in water sample testing at 
the District/Sub -divisional laboratories were noticed in the selected 
districts. Audit could not ascertain follow -up on the samples found unfit 
during testing as no record for the purpose was maintained by the PHED. 
Shortcomings were noticed in functioning of laboratories (State, District/ 
Sub-divisional). There was no facility for testing Uranium contamination 
and only one facility existed for testing of hea vy metals in the State. Field 
testing kits were not used judiciously as neither the record related to 
procurement and distributions of kits was maintained nor were the unfit 
samples found by using FTKs sent to nearby laboratories for further 
examination. 
Uniform Drinking Water Quality Monitoring Protocol (UDWQMP) issued by 
the Ministry (February 2013 and revised in March 2019) lays down specific 
requirements for monitoring drinking water quality by establishing water 
quality testing laboratories in the Stat es. The parameters for these laboratories 
are also specified in terms of infrastructure, manpower and water quality testing 
facilities. 
Audit observed that the laboratories i.e. State laboratory, District laboratories 
and sub -divisional laboratories were u nder the jurisdiction of PHE D. No 
laboratory testing facilities/infrastructure was available in other entities 
responsible for water supply i.e. ULBs and HSVP, which led to non-fixation as 
well as non-achievement of targets for testing water samples as req uired under 
CPHEEO manual as illustrated in subsequent paragraphs.  
5.1 Assessment of quality of water supplied 
Water Treatment Plants (WTPs) were installed on canal based schemes in Urban 
Areas.  In case of urban areas, where tube -well based supply is in existence, 
disinfection is done by way of chlorination before supply of water to the 
consumers. There are 108 1 WTPs under the jurisdiction of PHED, HSVP and 
ULBs in Urban areas. In six2 out of the eight selected districts, though 38 WTPs 
were installed audit observed deficiencies in the quality of water being supplied 
as discussed below:  
 
1  PHED: 87, HSVP: 18 and ULB: 3. 
2  Karnal: 1, Fatehabad: 5, Hisar: 12, Panchkula: 4, Rewari: 2 and Rohtak: 14 . 

Performance Audit of Rural and Urban Water Supply Schemes 
42 
To assess quality of water being supplied by PHED, ULB and HSVP, joint 
sampling (water sample collected for testing) was carried out on 25 locations 3 
from consumer end in collaboration with the departmental representatives. 
Further, to cross check the results of various parameters4 of water samples, one 
set of water sample was sent to State Level Water Testing Laboratory of PHED 
at Karnal and another set of same sample was send to Shri Ram Institute of 
Industrial Research (SRI) 5, New Delhi for analysis. Bacteriological analysis 
(including presence of residual chlorine) and Physical & Chemical analysis of 
various parameters were carried out in both the laboratories. 
Audit observed the following while collecting the water samples and 
physical verification of various sites:  
1. Chlorination: It was observed that at 12 locations  (out of selected 25 
locations), chlorination was not detected in the water samples. The 
chlorination testing was done on site by chemists of PHED by using 
Orthotolidine (OT) kits. At 11 locations chlorination was found to be 
more than the prescribed limit (maximum value of three parts per million 
(PPM) as against the requirement of 0.2 PPM) and at two locations6 
Chlorination was found within permissible limit. However, when these 
25 samples were analyzed at SRI, chlorination was found slightly above 
permissible limit in two samples and in rest of the 23 samples, 
chlorination was not detected at all. 
2. At all 25 location s, it was observed that no record related to dosing of 
chlorination was maintained. In its absence, it is assessed that water 
pump operato rs/J.E.s were negligent about proper dosing for 
chlorination.  
3. Cleanliness: Out of 25 locations, at seven locations Clear Water Tank 
(CWT)/ Over Head Service Reservoir (OHSR) were in use and at three 
locations, cleaning status of CWT/OHSR was not satisf actory 
(formation of algae inside CWT in Katesra, frogs in CWT in Sahu, CWT 
without cover in Kabrel), growth of sarkanda in SS tank at Khijuri  as 
evident from the picture given below: 
 
3  PHED-13, ULB-8 and HSVP-4. 
4  Uranium parameter has been analysed at five locations only. 
5  Third party laboratory hired by this office. 
6  1. Kalwa (PHED-Kurukshetra); 2. Khaleta (PHED-Bawal, Rewari). 

Chapter-V Poor Quality of Water Supplied 
43 
 
 
Katesra (07 September 2022)  Sahu (08 September 2022)  
 
 
Kabrel (08 September 2022)  Khijuri (07 September 2022)  
5.1.1 Results of water samples analyzed at both laboratories: 
1. Bacteriological analysis: In bacteriological analysis of water sample, 
presence of Coliforms confirms that water was not potable. It was 
observed that presence of Coliforms (Appendix 16) was detected in 
19 samples (76 per cent  water samples) out of 25 samples, as per 
analysis done at PHED laboratory. However, as per analysis at SRI 
laboratory, the same was detected only in five samples (20 per cent  
water samples). Thus, water supplied was found as not potable as 
presence of Coliforms was detected (Appendix 16). 
2. Physical & Chemical analysis: In respect of physical & chemical 
parameters, test reports/results indicate that situation was not 
encouraging in Municipal Corporation, Faridabad. Total eight locations 
were selected in MC, Faridabad. At seven locations, various parameters 
(as detailed in Appendix 17) were found beyond permissible limit as per 
analysis done at PHED laboratory. Even analysis at SRI laboratory had 


Performance Audit of Rural and Urban Water Supply Schemes 
44 
detected the range of various parameters beyond permissible limit in 
respect of five locations.  
Further, for the sake of consistency, Audit made a comparison between 
results of common parameter s7 tested in both the laboratories. Results 
of some of the common parameters are given in Appendix 18. Test result 
of water samples clearly indicates that the department failed to supply 
potable water supply to the inhabitants. 
During 2016-21, 2901 cases of water borne diseases and 14 deaths related to 
these cases were reported as per information furnished by Health Department. 
In four8 out of eight selected districts, 1,382 cases of water borne diseases and 
12 death cases against these cases w ere noticed during 2016-21. It is pertinent 
to mention that 10 WTPs (Karnal -1, Fatehabad-5 and Panchkula 4 WTPs) were 
installed in these districts on the canal based water supply under the jurisdiction 
of PHED/HSVP and for tube/ranney well based water supply, chlorination was 
being done in these districts for areas under ULBs.  
Beneficiary survey:  50 out of 564 beneficiaries 9 (nine per cent ) complained 
about bad quality of water. Out of these 50 beneficiaries, 44 beneficiaries were 
from Faridabad district. 
5.2 Analysis of water samples tested at various laboratories of PHED 
As per 4.1 of UDWQMP, 2019 Water Q uality laboratories are the backbone 
of water quality monitoring. Provision of safe drinking water necessitates a 
strong well located and well equipped laboratory network within the state for 
water quality assessment. Audit analysis in respect of water sample reports  
(Appendix 19) for the year 2016 -21 are as follows:  
• During the period 2016-17 to 2020-21, samples found unfit for Physical 
and Chemical testing ranged between 0.12 per cent to 25.57 per cent.  
• During the period 2016-17 to 2020 -21, samples found unfit for 
Bacteriological samples testing ranged between 0.17 per cent to 14.50 per 
cent. 1,382 cases of various water borne diseases and 12 death cases were 
noticed in four 10 selected districts as per information furnished by the 
Health Department , Haryana. 
 
7  Colour, Odour, pH, Turbidity, Total Dissolved Solids, Total Hardness , Calcium, 
Chloride, Fluoride, Iron, Magnesium  Manganese, Nitrate, Sulphate, Total Alkalinity, 
Zinc, Lead, Total Arsenic, Residual Chlorine and Total Coliform. 
8  Fatehabad, Karnal, Kurukshetra and Panchkula. 
9  Beneficiaries have been selected from  20 locations selected randomly from the 
58 locations which was already selected for installation of flow meter selected through 
Computer Assisted Audit Technique. 
10  Fatehabad, Karnal, Kuruksehtra and Panchkula. 

Chapter-V Poor Quality of Water Supplied 
45 
• There was no facility of Physical and Chemical testing in respect of Kalka, 
Assandh, Indri and Hansi Sub Divisional Water Testing laboratories. 
In selected districts, a total of eight district laboratories and seven sub divisional 
laboratories were there. As per guidelines, there was target of 3000 water 
samples fixed for each laboratory. The shortfall in achievement of targets by 
different district/sub-divisional labs is given in Table 5.1.  
Table 5.1: Shortfall in achievement of targets in District/Sub-divisional Laboratory  
Year 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 
Laboratory A S A S A S A S A S 
Sub-divisional laboratory, Hansi 2,832 168 2,626 374 1,791 1,209 2,267 733 3,595 0 
Sub-divisional laboratory, Assandh 1,898 1,102 3,018 0 2,581 419 2,378 622 1,920 1,080 
Sub-divisional laboratory, Indri 0 3,000 509 2,491 1,378 1,622 1,460 1,540 1,621 1,379 
Sub-divisional laboratory, Kosli  3,203 0 3,007 0 2,978 22 1,253 1,747 3,098 0 
District laboratory, Rewari 4,200 0 3,340 0 3,000 0 1,968 1,032 2,796 204 
District laboratory, Faridabad 3,012 0 3,933 0 3,126 0 2,958 42 3,196 0 
District laboratory, Fatehabad 3,285 0 3,868 0 3,454 0 2,832 168 3,345 0 
Sub-divisional laboratory, Pehowa 4,353 0 3,774 0 3,628 0 3,598 0 2,761 239 
A: Achievement, S: Shortfall  
During 2020-21, there was improvement in achievement of target s for testing 
by the district/sub -divisional laboratories over 2019 -20. T esting below the 
prescribed norms was carried out by four (50 per cent) out eight district/sub-
divisional laboratories as against seven out of eight district/sub-divisional 
laboratories in 2019-20.  
5.3 Lack of mechanism for re-testing of failed sample 
Scrutiny of records in selected P HED Divisions revealed that there was no 
practice of record maintenance for follow up of failed samples/samples found 
unfit. As per data provided by divisional offices regarding testing of water 
samples, it was noticed that a total of 2,64,025 water samples were tested during 
the period April 2016 to March 2021 out of which 18 ,104 samples (6.86 per 
cent) were found unfit. The details are given in Table 5.2. 
Table 5.2: Total number of samples tested for the period 2016-17 to 2020-21 
Year Total samples tested Fit samples Unfit samples Percentage unfit samples 
2016-17 51,637 48,291 3,346 6.48 
2017-18 60,601 57,394 3,207 5.29 
2018-19 54,430 51,093 3,337 6.13 
2019-20 47,422 43,694 3,728 7.86 
2020-21 49,935 45,449 4,486 8.98 
Total 2,64,025 2,45,921 18,104 6.86 
Audit enquired (August 2021 to May 2022) follow up action of the department 
on the unfit samples, the divisions failed to provide the relevant record. In 
absence of record related to action taken on failed sample, audit could not 
ascertain whether timely action was carried out by the Department to ensure 
safe and potable drinking water for the inhabitants of areas where water sample 
were found unfit. 

Performance Audit of Rural and Urban Water Supply Schemes 
46 
During exit conference (November 2022), the department/ entities assured that 
suitable steps would be taken to improve the quality of water. 
5.4 Testing of source prior to commissioning of schemes 
As per Clause 6.0 of the Inspection and Testing Plan for Certific ation of 
Drinking Water as per IS 10500:2012 under scheme IV of BIS (Conformity 
Assessment), Regulations 2018, the source water used in production of 
Drinking Water shall be initially tested for Organoleptic and physical 
parameters, Chemical requirement, a nd all microbiological requirements 
possible to be tested in house. Further as per clause 6.3, as and when there is 
change in source water or addition of new source of raw water, it shall be 
intimated to BIS. The raw water collected from the new source sha ll be tested 
in accordance with Clause 6 and the treated water produced from such source 
water shall be tested for conformity to IS 10500 before commissioning for 
regular production. Marking and records of the same should be maintained.  
During scrutiny of  records11, it was noticed that various tube -well based 
schemes were in operation under the divisional offices of PHED, HSVP and 
ULB/MCs to provide water supply to the inhabitants. But no such practice was 
prevalent in the state of Haryana as all the concerned departments/ entities failed 
to provide any documents regarding request to BIS for change of source or new 
source of raw water as per the Regulations 2018 mentioned ibid. In case of 
PHED, only regular testing was being done for those parameters for which 
testing facilities were available in the local PHED laboratories whereas the other 
department viz. HSVP and ULB/MCs are not even doing the routine testing.  
During exit conference (November 2022), PHED stated that all the sources are 
tested before commissioning. The reply is not acceptable as record/supporting 
documents were not furnished by divisional offices during field visit. 
5.5. Laboratory infrastructure 
Para 9.8.3 of CPHEEO manual states that water quality laboratory is the main 
backbone of water quality su rveillance. A well -located and well -equipped 
analytical laboratory with competent staff is very essential to evaluate the 
efficiency of water utility services in terms of water quality. 
The State of Haryana is equipped with 4312 water testing laboratories besides a 
mobile water testing van. During physical verification of laboratories (August 
2021 to May 2022), various shortcomings were noticed which are as under: 
 
11 EE, PHED, (Fatehabad, Faridabad, No.  1 & No.  2, Karnal, Kurukshetra); HSVP 
Divisions-Faridabad, Rohtak, Rewari, Karnal; MC Faridabad & Karnal 
12  State Level Water Testing laboratory at Karnal-1, Zonal level water testing laboratory 
at Sirsa -1, District level water testing laboratory -20 and block/sub -divisional water 
testing laboratory-21. 

Chapter-V Poor Quality of Water Supplied 
47 
5.5.1 Shortcomings in functioning of Laboratories as per Uniform 
Drinking Water Quality Monitoring Protocol (UDWQMP) 2019 
(i) State Level Water Testing Laboratory  
Chapter 5 of UDWQMP 2019 elaborates the functioning of state water testing 
laboratories who is headed by Chief Chemist. The roles and responsibilities of 
Chief Chemist are given in Chapter 8 of UDW QMP 2019. He is overall in -
charge of the drinking water quality testing laboratories set up in the State. 
During physical verification of state laboratory (May 2022), it was noticed that 
very little  attention was paid towards implementation of these functions. 
Deficiencies noticed are detailed in Table 5.3: 
Table 5.3: Functions envisaged vis-à-vis Functions in practice in the State Laboratory 
Sr. 
No. 
What was envisaged What is prevalent 
1. Act as a referral institute to analyze specific or 
new/emerging water quality problems. 
No referred samples were ever received from 
any of the departmental/inter-departmental labs.   
2. Preparation of State and district annual action plans, 
identification of newly emerging contaminants, 
instruments/equipments required and approval in 
State Level Scheme Sanctioning Committee 
(SLSSC). 
The state laboratory was working like a routine 
district laboratory with no invol vement in 
preparation of action plan for effective 
WQM&S.  
3. To monitor the performance of district, Sub -
divisional/block/ mobile laboratories and ensure 
Quality Assurance & Quality Control (QA & QC) in 
these laboratories. 
There was no practice prevalent  to monitor the 
performance of other laboratories which was 
one of the main functions to guide and ensure 
the Quality Assurance & Quality Control. 
4. Ensure proper AMC/CAMC/calibration of all 
instruments/equipments using Certified Reference 
Material (CRM) as per “IS/ISO/IEC 17025:2017”. 
The AMC/CAMC was done in respect of only 
two equipments viz. Atomic Absorption 
Spectrophotometer i.e. AAS (for testing of 
heavy metals) and GC -MS/MS (for testing 
Pesticide residue) whereas protocol emphasises 
on doing AMC/C AMC for all instruments. In 
rest of the Haryana, no AMC/CAMC was done 
in respect of available instruments/equipments 
available in concerned laboratories. 
5. Analysis of targeted samples of State laboratories 
including the positively tested samples of dist rict, 
sub-divisional/block/mobile laboratories. 
District/sub-divisional laboratories had never 
referred positive samples to State Laboratory. 
Even, State laboratory had not asked either from 
concerned laboratories to refer positively 
detected samples. 
6. Preparation of documents/manuals related to water 
quality testing and monitoring. 
No such practice was prevalent in State 
laboratory. 
7. Data analysis and follow -up corrective action for 
ensuring safe drinking water. 
No such practice was prevalent in State 
laboratory. 
8. Coordination with similar laboratories of other 
departments in the State and to establish a 
mechanism for cross verification of test results 
carried out by different labs. 
No such co-ordination was ever made. 
9. Ensuring supervision and monitoring of results 
carried out by Gram Panchayats (GPs)/VWSCs 
using Field Test Kit, sanitary surveillance and 
strengthening community in water quality 
monitoring and surveillance. 
There was no monitoring done by state 
laboratory in resp ect of samples tested by GPs 
and VWSCs by using FTK, sanitary 
surveillance. Even the District consultant at 
Karnal and Chief Chemist, State laboratory had 
no coordination with each other for 
strengthening the community in water quality 
monitoring and surveillance.  

Performance Audit of Rural and Urban Water Supply Schemes 
48 
Sr. 
No. 
What was envisaged What is prevalent 
10. Networking and coordination with Department of 
Atomic Energy (DAE) approved laboratories 
/NABL accredited laboratories for monitoring 
radioactive and virological parameters. 
State laboratory had not made any 
correspondence with DAE approved 
laboratories for monitoring of radioactive and 
virological parameters despite the fact that 
presence of Uranium contamination was pointed 
out by CGWB in its report (2020) at some places 
in Haryana.  
11. Para 9.1 of the UDWQMP, 2019 states that the State 
level laboratory should concentrate on analysis of 
specific parameters of local importance like 
pesticides, toxic substances, microbiological and 
virological parameters, Poly Aromatic 
Hydrocarbons (PAH), Poly Chlorinated Biphenyls 
(PCB) and Disinfection byproducts like Tri Chloro 
Methane (TCM) etc.  
In respect of specific parameters, state 
laboratory had started testing only Pesticide 
residue and that too from year 2022 onwards and 
none of the other specific parameters as 
mentioned in the protocol were tested at all.  
12. Para 7.2 of UDW QMP, 2019 states that the 
performance of laboratory at all levels should be one 
of the factors for evaluation in the annual 
performance appraisal reports of concerned 
engineers and laboratory personnel.  
The performance of laboratories was not part of 
evaluation in APAR of the concerned chemists 
and engineers. 
Had the department considered the performance of laboratories as the criteria 
for evaluation of annual performance appraisal reports of concerned engineers 
and laboratory personnel (as defined in prot ocol) the concerned engineers and 
chief chemist would have paid special attention towards lab functioning. But in 
the absence of such criteria, the State laboratory was not performing functions 
which are required to be performed as per UDWQM Protocol, 2019. 
(ii) District and Sub-Divisional Water Testing Laboratory 
Chapter 5 of UDW QMP 2019 elaborates functioning of district and sub -
divisional water testing laboratories. District laboratory headed by Chemist and 
sub-divisional laboratory by Junior Chemist. Executive Engineer of the district 
and the Chemist of the district laboratory are responsible for the performance of 
the laboratories in their jurisdiction. The functions of these laboratories besides 
water quality testing, monitoring and surveillance of the water sources is 
strengthening of community participation in the activities of monitoring and 
surveillance. 
During scrutiny of selected seven13 district level and  seven14 sub-divisional 
laboratories, it was observed that: 
• Only regular testing of selected parameters of which testing facility was 
available was being done in these la boratories and results of water 
testing were sent to concerned Sub-Divisional Engineers.  
• There was no practice prevalent in the department for intimation of 
results to Zila Parishad and Gram Panchayat for corrective action.  
 
13 District laboratory - Hisar, Kurukshetra, Rewari, Fatehabad, Rohtak, Faridabad and 
Panchkula. 
14  Sub-divisional laboratory- Assandh, Indri, Hansi, Kosli, Kalka, Pehowa and Tohana. 

Chapter-V Poor Quality of Water Supplied 
49 
In order to assess the factual  position of the infrastructure available as well as 
working of these laboratories, joint physical verification was done with 
departmental officials. Shortcomings noticed during physical verification are 
shown in Table 5.4 (a) and 5.4 (b). 
Table 5.4 (a): Infrastructure status of District Laboratories 
District 
laboratory/ 
category 
Fatehabad Faridabad Panchkula Rewari 
1. Space 
2. Storage facility 
3. Equipment/kits 
1. No sample collection room 
because Bill branch was running 
in store room of laboratory. 
Nephelometer 
(turbidimeter) & 
Bacteriological 
incubator were 
not in working 
condition 
No space for Bacteriological 
testing. Storage facility for 
Glassware/Equipment/ 
Chemical was not available. 
No space for 
Bacteriological 
testing. 
2. One Laminar Flow15 amounting 
to ₹ 0.5 0 lakh was lying 
unutilized since October 2020 
(date of purchase) and Arsenic 
FTK-500 was found unutilized.  
3. One bacteriological instrument 
amounting to ₹ 6.25 lakh was 
lying abandoned since February 
2021 (date of purchase). 
4.  E. Coli/Coliform Test Kit (25 
test) amounting to ₹ 0.28 lakh 
got expired without being used. 
*NABL accreditation of District Water testi ng Laboratory, Fatehabad (PHED) has been suspended w.e.f. 
08 May 2022. 
Table 5.4 (b): Infrastructure status of Sub Divisional Laboratories 
Sub-divisional 
lab/ category 
Indri Hansi Kosli Tohana 
1. NABL 
Accreditation 
2. Space 
3. Storage facility 
4. Equipment/kits 
1. NABL n ot 
accredited 
2. Space not as 
per 
UDWQMP, 
2019 
3. Computer, 
Internet 
facility was 
not 
available. 
1. NABL 
not 
accredited 
1. Space available 
was not as per 
UDWQMP,2019 
1. NABL not accredited. 
2. One room is occupied by WSSO. 
3. One Voltas refrigerator (570 litre) 
supplied of different specification was 
lying unutilised since February 2022. 
(iii) Non completion of laboratory buildings 
During scrutiny of records 16, it was noticed that the civil work of upgradation 
of laboratory buildings at Panchkula, Kalka and Hansi was completed (April 
2019- March 2020) but these could not be made operational (March 2022). The 
details are given in Table 5.5. 
  
 
15  Laminar Flow is an enclosed bench designed to maintain a working area devoid of 
contaminants. 
16 EE, Hansi and Panchkula. 

Performance Audit of Rural and Urban Water Supply Schemes 
50 
Table 5.5: Status of various laboratory buildings 
Name of 
Laboratory 
Status 
District 
Laboratory, 
Panchkula 
• The civil work of upgradation of laboratory building was completed in April 2019, 
but balance work (construction of stairs, plastering, flooring, painting) which was 
allotted in February2021 was not completed till date (March 2022). 
• The laboratory was running in old building.  
Sub divisional 
laboratory, 
Kalka 
• The civil work of up gradation of laboratory building was completed in April 2019. 
• Due to non-installation of infrastructure, the sub divisional laboratory was not 
operational for doing Physical and Chemical testing and laboratory was running in 
old building. 
Sub-divisional 
laboratory, 
Hansi 
• The works for “Renovation & Up -gradation of Laborato ry” and “Supplying & 
Fixing AC, Fan, Solar lighting, etc .” were allotted in March 2020 and these works 
were required to be completed up to June 2020.  
• The building work was physically completed but the infrastructure such as AC, Fan, 
Solar Lighting, Fire Extinguishers, Modular Laboratory Furniture , etc. were not 
installed till July 2022. The work was delayed by more than 14 months from the 
schedule completion date of laboratory.  
• The laboratory work operates from a single room and no proper infrastructure was 
available in the room as required under UDWQMP.  
5.6 Non-testing of water sample as per Uniform Drinking Water 
Quality Monitoring Protocol’s parameters 
As per UDWQMP, the State Level Water Testing Laboratory should have the 
capability a nd facilities for testing 73 parameters, the District Level Water 
Testing Laboratory should have the capability and facilities for testing 32 
parameters and the Sub -divisional/block Level Water Testing Laboratory 
should have the capability and facilities f or testing 19 parameters. Further, 
Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation, Government of India also 
directed (December 2021) for ensuring NABL accreditation of various level 
laboratories. 
During scrutiny of records of selected district and sub-divisional laboratories it 
was noticed that the laboratories were not testing parameters as per UDWQMP 
as detailed in Table 5.6 below: 
Table 5.6: Details of parameter tested at various laboratories of PHED  
Laboratory Location Norms of 
parameters 
as per 
UDWQMP 
No. of  parameters 
(Physical & Chemical) 
tested by April- May 2022 
Shortfall No. of 
parameter 
NABL 
accredited 
State Level  Karnal 73 43 30 15 
District Hisar 32 15 17 06 
Kurukshetra 12 20 09 
Panchkula 15 17 07 
Fatehabad 11 21 06 
Rewari 15 17 15 
Faridabad 11 21 11 
Rohtak 11 21 07 
Sub-Divisional  Asandh 19 00 19 -- 
Indri 00 19 -- 
Hansi 00 19 -- 
Pehowa 15 04 11 
Kalka 00 19 -- 
Tohana 15 04 -- 
Kosli 15 04 11 

Chapter-V Poor Quality of Water Supplied 
51 
From above table, it can be concluded that there were shortfalls in terms of 
number of parameters tested and NABL accreditation was not sought for all the 
parameters. This is indicative of absence of monitoring mechanism for 
compliance to the UDWQMP  and government instruction for ensuring supply 
of safe drinking water to the inhabitants. 
5.7 Non-fixation of targets in respect of water sampling 
Para 15.3.4 of Central Public Health & Environmental Engineering 
Organisation (CPHEEO) manual provide details about frequency  of water 
sample testing. It is necessary to collect samples of both raw and treated water 
for the examination of toxic substances at least every three months. For 
bacteriological sampling, the samples should be taken from the different points 
on each occa sion to enable overall assessment. The minimum number of 
samples to be collected from a distribution system is given in Table 5.7. 
Table 5.7: Norms of testing of water quality in urban areas 
Population Served Maximum Intervals between 
successive sampling 
Minimum no. of samples to be taken from 
entire distribution system 
Upto 20,000 One month One sample per 5,000 of population per month 
20,000-50,000 Two weeks 
50,001 – 1,00,000 Four days 
More than 1,00,000 One day One sample per 10,000 of population per month 
During scrutiny of records, it was seen that the departments i.e. PHED (regular 
water testing is being conducted) and  ULB did not have readily available data 
on population pertaining to the areas under their jurisdiction which hamper ed 
fixing of targets. Thus, fixation of targets was left to the discretion of divisional 
officer to conduct and test without any scientific analysis. The situation was not 
encouraging in Urban Local Bodies department as scrutiny in selected offices17 
revealed that the department had not followed any mechanism regarding 
fixation of targets for test sampling. Neither had any instructions been issued at 
higher level nor were the tests conducted by the department despite provisions 
in the CPHEEO manual. T he department failed to provide the relevant record 
as to how many tests had been conducted during the audit period. In absence of 
records, audit could not comment on the quality aspect of the water supplied by 
the selected divisions/ offices. 
Scrutiny of records in selected divisions of HSVP revealed that divisional 
offices were conducting tests without fixing any targets. The details of tests 
conducted by HSVP divisional offices during 2016-21 in different laboratories 
of other department/private laboratories are detailed in Table 5.8. 
  
 
17 MC, Karnal and Faridabad. 

Performance Audit of Rural and Urban Water Supply Schemes 
52 
Table 5.8: Details of water samples tested by selected HSVP divisions during 2016 -21 
Unit Name Norms as per CPHEEO Manual 
(One sample per 10000 of 
Population per month) 
Total no. of sample 
Tested under water 
works 
Unfit Sample 
Town and Country Planning Department 
HSVP I, Panchkula 2,711 2,638 0 
HSVP-II Panchkula 1,314 427 14 
HSVP, Karnal 975 2,371 0 
HSVP, Kalaka, Rewari 477 270 0 
HSVP I, Faridabad 470 11 0 
HSVP III, Faridabad 87 5 0 
HSVP I, Hisar 1,200 3 0 
HSVP II, Hisar 600 29 0 
Total 7,834 5,754 14 
From the above, it can be seen that selected divisional offices had conducted 
5,754 water tests against requirement of 7,834 water tests. There was a shortfall 
of 26 per cent as against the norm/requirement. 
5.8 Shortage of manpower in laboratory 
UDWQMP 2019 provides a suggestive staffing pattern for Sub -Divisional/ 
Block Level Water Quality Testing Laboratory. Information o n the sanctioned 
strength of laboratories personnel was not provided by the PHE Department. 
The shortage of manpower in the State laboratory, district laboratories and sub-
divisional laboratories was assessed during audit using the UDWQMP norms 
(State Leve l laboratory at Karnal; District laboratories and sub -divisional 
laboratories). The shortage of manpower  in respect of State Water Testing 
Laboratory, Karnal, ranged between 67 per cent and 100 per cent under different 
category of posts, are shown in Table 5.9.  
Table 5.9: Staff position at State Water Testing Laboratory, Karnal 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of post As per 
UDWQMP 
Karnal State lab Percentage of 
shortage Actual position Shortage 
1 Chief Chemist/Chief Water analyst 1 1 0 - 
2 Senior Chemist/Senior Water Analyst 1 0 1 100 
3 Chemist/ Water Analyst 2 0 2 100 
4 Microbiologist/Bacteriologist 1 0 1 100 
5 Laboratory Assistant 3 1 2 67 
6 Lab Attendant 2 0 2 100 
7 Data Entry Operator 2 1 (RME staff 
posted) 
2 100 
8 Field Assistant (task/need based field staff) 2 0 2 100 
During audit, it was noticed that the shortage of manpower in respect of District 
laboratories ranged between 50 per cent and 100 per cent and in respect of sub-
divisional laboratories, it was upto 100 per cent (Appendix 20). 
Audit analysis of the data related to staff required and positioned  (including 
contractual staff) in the laboratories during 2016-2021 revealed the following: 
• In State Laboratory, against the requirement of 14, average 10 posts 
remained vacant during 2016-2021. 
• In selected seven district laboratories, against the requirement of eight 

Chapter-V Poor Quality of Water Supplied 
53 
posts in each district laboratory, posts ranging between two and six 
remained vacant during 2016-21.  
• In selected seven sub-divisional laboratories, against the requirement of 
six posts in each sub -divisional laboratory, posts ranging between one 
and five remained vacant during 2016-21.  
As is evident from the above, during 2016-21, adequate staff was not deployed 
in all the laboratories.  
Thus, shortage of staff is hampering the activities of the laboratory resulting in 
non-achievement of target of  water sampling (Paragraph 5.2) and  less number 
of parameters being tested (Paragraph 5.6).  
5.9 Shortcomings in utilisation to Field Testing Kits (FTKs) 
5.9.1 In-judicious expenditure on procurement of FTKs valuing ₹ 0.78 lakh 
Para 4.2 of UDWQMP states that the FTK for examination of physico-chemical 
contamination not only serves the purpose of initial screening of contamination 
but also is an effective tool for generating awareness amongst the community to 
consume safe drinking water. This multi parameter field test kit can carry out 
100 tests. For bacteriological examination, a simple Pres ence/Absence (P/A) 
water test kit is also available which indicates the presence/ absence of 
Coliforms in water samples.  
During test check of records 18, it was seen that 31 chemical kits (Rewari -8, 
Rohtak-23) which were capable of testing 11 parameters were procured at a cost 
of ₹ 0.78 lakh during the year 2016 -17 to 2020 -21. It was observed that the 
divisional offices tested only one to five parameters (Rewari-two parameters 
and Rohtak-one to five parameters) leading to injudicious use of these kits. The 
details are shown in Table 5.10. 
Table 5.10: Information relating to Chemical kits (FTK) 
Name of 
District 
Year No. of chemical kits 
procured/purchased/received 
Rate (per kit) 
in ₹ 
No. of 
parameters 
tested 
Expenditure 
incurred 
Rewari 2016-17 No Kit Procured 
2017-18 
2018-19 
2019-20 8 2,500 2 parameters 20,000 
2020-21 No Kit Procured 
Rohtak 2016-17 13 2,500 1 to 5 parameters 57,500 
2017-18 0 - 
2018-19 5 2,500 
2019-20 5 2,500 
2020-21 0 - 
Further, it was observed that the other divisions did not maintain record related 
to purchase, distribution, sample testing from FTKs. In response to audit 
 
18 EE, PHED, Rewari and EE, PHED-2, Rohtak. 

Performance Audit of Rural and Urban Water Supply Schemes 
54 
enquiry, District Consultants 19 failed to produce stock register of FTKs which 
were procured and dis tributed by WSSO staff. In the absence of record, the 
authenticity of information furnished by the divisional office could not be 
ascertained.  
Neither the controlling authorities at headquarters office nor the divisional 
officer ever examined the stock re gister related to FTK in disregard to Punjab 
Financial Rules (PFR).  This was indicative of lack of monitoring mechanism 
which led to non -maintenance of records of procurement and distribution of 
FTKs. 
5.9.2 Non-referring of unfit samples found through FTK s to nearby 
laboratories 
As per Chapter 10 of JJM guidelines, the water quality surveillance activities 
include use of FTKs at GP level to know the extent of contamination and refer 
the positively tested samples to the nearby water quality testing laborato ry for 
confirmation. 
During scrutiny of records/analysis of data furnished by the WSSO staff in the 
selected divisions20, it was noticed that contrary to the guidelines, none of the 
failed FTK samples were ever referred to nearby laboratory. 
5.9.3 Non-uploading of detailed test results of FTKs on Integrated 
Management Information System (IMIS) website 
As per JJM guidelines, the JJM IMIS portal will capture the following:  
• Water quality monitoring through laboratory tests at all levels as per the 
frequency; 
• Water quality surveillance undertaken by community through FTKs in 
all villages as per the frequency of testing. 
During scrutiny of records21, it was noticed that details of FTKs test reports were 
not uploaded on website during the period 2016 -17 to 2020 -21. As a routine 
practice, test results were kept separately in files without uploading the results 
on portal. The uploading of results of unfit samples detected by using FTKs on 
portal could have helped the department in identifying the source of 
contamination for corrective action. Thus, the envisaged objective of ensuring 
Water quality surveillance through the portal  was defeated as neither the results 
 
19  District Consultants are hired by PHED as WSSO staff for providing support for 
awareness creation (IEC) and training activities (HRD) and work under the supervision 
of State Consultant and overall supervision is done by Director (WSSO). 
20 Rewari, Fatehabad, Rohtak-2, Karnal-1, Hisar, Kurukshetra, Panchkula and Faridabad. 
21 EE, PHED, Fatehabad, Rewari & No.  2: Rohtak, Karnal, Hisar, Kurukshetra, 
Panchkula and Faridabad. 

Chapter-V Poor Quality of Water Supplied 
55 
were uploaded nor were the samples found unfit by using FTKs referred to 
nearby laboratories for detailed analysis. 
5.10 Lack of testing facilities to detect presence of Uranium and non - 
testing of water samples for heavy metals in areas where water 
supply is ground based 
Uranium 
As per report (June 2020) of Central Ground Water Board, Ministry of Jal 
Shakti, Department of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga 
Rejuvenation on “Uranium Occurrence in Shallow Aquifers in India”, there 
were 19.5 per cent  samples (88 out of total 450 samples ) analysed where 
Uranium concentration was found more than 30 ppb 22 (permissible limit for 
drinking water prescribed by World Health Organization) in state of Haryana 
with maximum value observed as 131.4 par ts per billion (detected in Sahu 
village of Hisar district). The d istricts which were partly affected by high 
Uranium in ground water were - Ambala, Bhiwani, Faridabad, Fatehabad, 
Gurugram, Hisar, Jhajjar, Jind, Kaithal, Karnal, Kurukshetra, Mahendergarh, 
Palwal, Panipat, Rohtak, Sirsa, Sonipat and Yamuna Nagar.  
It was observed that there was no testing facility for testing uranium 
contamination in the State laboratory situated at Karnal. No efforts had ever 
been made to tie up with other laboratories for checking the presence of uranium 
in ground water in the areas where tube well based water supply was in practice 
whereas UDWQMP, 2019 emphasizes that state laboratories should coordinate 
with Department of Atomic Energy (DAE) approved laboratories /NABL 
accredited laboratories for monitoring radioactive and virological parameters.  
The Department stated (April 2022) that contamination of Uranium in drinking 
water drawn from shallow tube wells would have given rise to kidney diseases in 
that segment/ region which would have been easily captured through an 
epidemiological survey but no such evidence has ever been reported across the 
State. Audit is of the view that timely and appropriate remedial measure was 
required to be taken in respect of Uranium contamination so as to timely restrict 
the chances of people getting exposed to the contaminated underground water as 
traces of Uranium presence (though within permissible limit) have been detected 
at three out23 of five randomly selected locations during sampling exercise. 
Heavy Metal 
EIC, PHED issued instructions  ( December 2017) to the sub -ordinate officers  
for testing chemical contamination for every ground water source i.e. tube well 
and spring based sources and were directed to submit samples of ground water 
 
22  Parts per billion. 
23  Locations: Thana (Kurukshetra), Moond (Karnal) and Ballabgarh. 

Performance Audit of Rural and Urban Water Supply Schemes 
56 
sources to the State Water Testing Laboratory, Karnal. Each test report was 
required to be scrutinized by concerned Executive Engineer for failed samples 
and remedial measures were required to be taken on priority. For the purpose, 
Atomic Absorption Spectr ophotometer (AAS) had been installed (October 
2016) in the State Water Testing Laboratory, Karnal which had the capacity to 
test presence of heavy metals in drinking water.  As per data provided by the 
department, it was noticed that 2,835 deep tube wells (2,480-Rural, 355-Urban) 
and 268 (244 -Rural, 24 -Urban) shallow tube wells were operated by PHED 
Haryana in selected divisions. Year wise number of samples received in State 
laboratory from selected divisional offices and percentage of source tested is 
shown in Table 5.11 below: 
Table 5.11: Year-wise number of sources tested for heavy metals at State Lab, Karnal 
Sr. 
no. 
Name of division Total 
number 
of 
sources 
to be 
tested 
(as on 
May 
2022) 
No. of 
sample 
received 
Percentage 
of sources 
actually 
tested  
No. of 
sample 
received 
Percentage 
of sources 
actually 
tested  
No. of 
sample 
received 
percentage 
of sources 
actually 
tested  
No. of 
sample 
received 
Percentage 
of sources 
actually 
tested  
2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 
1. PHED Hansi 44 30 68 01 2 0 0 11 25 
2. PHED 
Kurukshetra 
789 154 20 282 36 12 2 0 0 
3. PHED, Panchkula 248 67 27 159 64 0 0 0 0 
4. PHED Rewari 104 0 0 20 19 0 0 0 0 
5. PHED Bawal 287 25 9 118 41 0 0 0 0 
6. PHED Kosli 183 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
7. PHED Fatehabad 85 11 13 42 49 15 18 0 0 
8. PHED Tohana 145 22 15 58 40 58 40 0 0 
9. PHED 1 Karnal 393 601 153 288 73 406 103 530 135 
10. PHED 2 Karnal 370 152 41 314 85 169 46 607 164 
11. PHED 1 Rohtak 64 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
12. PHED 2 Rohtak 42 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
13. PHED Faridabad 349 89 26 40 11 0 0 35 10 
 Total 3,103 1,151 37 1,336 43 660 21 1,183 38 
From the above, it can be seen that during 2017-21, PHED division 1, Karnal had 
got water samples tested for heavy metals more than the number of sources but no 
data in this regard was available to confirm whether all the sources had actually 
been tested or not. Therefore, audit cannot comment on 100 per cent coverage of 
sources. Whereas in case of other divisions percentage of source tested was ranging 
from zero to 68 per cent during 2017-21. Thus, instructions of higher authorities to 
test all sources for chemical contamination was not adhered to as the divisional 
offices had not sent samples for all the sources under their jurisdiction.  
5.11 Non-installation of Community Water Purification Plants (CWPP) 
resulted in depriving the habitants of potable water  
As per IMIS of Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitations, there were 128 quality 
affected habitations (April 2017) in state of Haryana. In this regard EIC, PHED had 
informed (April 2017) all the SEs that out of these above 128 habitations, 
90 habitations had been taken up for coverage under various projects and there were 

Chapter-V Poor Quality of Water Supplied 
57 
still 38 habitations which were not taken  up under any projects for providing 
alternate safe source. EIC, PHED directed to all SEs to submit project for coverage 
of balance these 38 quality affected habitations by January 2018. 
During scrutiny of records/website (IMIS of Ministry of Drinking Wate r and 
Sanitations) data (February 2022) it was seen that the department had not installed 
any CWPP as an interim measure in the selected districts despite detecting water 
quality affected habitations continuously from 2016-17 to 2020-21 as shown in 
Table 5.12 below:  
Table 5.12: Details of quality affected habitations detected year-wise 
District 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 
Hisar -- -- 11 15 16 
Rewari 36 25 0 2 19 
Panchkula -- -- -- -- 2 
Further it was observed that habitations from the above districts remained 
quality affected for two or more consecutive years (Appendix 21). 
It was observed that in Hisar, eight habitations of the district remained quality 
affected habitation (Fluoride and Total Dissolved Solid) continuously from 
2018-19 to 2020-21. In Rewari, eight habitations of the district were found as 
quality affected habitation (Fluoride) for two consecutive years during the 
period of 2016-17 to 2017-18. Besides this, in Panchkula, two habitation namely 
Baladwal and Dunga  were found fluoride affected during chemical testing in 
the year 2020-21 and 2021-22.  
The department did not install any CWPPs in these habitations and the 
inhabitants were forced to consume non -potable water. Superintending 
Engineer, PHE circle, Hisar (December 2021) admitted that to cater to the needs 
of inhabitants during shortage of canal -based water, shallow tube wells were 
installed. The reply confirms the audit observation.  
5.12 Delay in commissioning of conversion of tube well based scheme to 
canal based scheme 
During scrutiny of the records24, it was noticed that tube well based water supply 
was provided in nine habitations/colonies ( Appendix-22) where ground water 
had been detected with fluoride contamination25.  
Out of these nine26 locations of tubew ell supply, the department had planned 
(2018-21) to shift water supply from tubewell based to canal based at four 27 
 
24 EE, PHED, Fatehabad. 
25 Source: PHED laboratory reports. 
26 1. Ajeet Nagar, Aherwan; 2. Majra; 3. Noorki Ahli; 4. Daulatpur (two installation as per 
electricity account number); 5. Dhani Binja Lamba; 6. Hanspur; 7. Chanderwal; 8. Hans 
Colony; 9. Kairan. 
27  1. Aherwan, 2. Majra, 3. Noorki Ahli and 4. Daulatpur. 

Performance Audit of Rural and Urban Water Supply Schemes 
58 
habitations. Out of these four habitations, work for only one habitation had been 
physically completed in 2021 and other three works were still in progress (May 
2022). No interim measures had been taken by the department for providing 
safe drinking water. These habitations continued to consume non-potable water 
as is evident from electric meter bill showing the tube wells to be operative. 
Audit observed delays in other projects/schemes related to conversion of tube 
well based supply to canal based supply, the details are shown in Appendix 23.  
5.13 Regular Cleaning of Over Head Tanks (OHTs)/Clear Water Tanks 
(CWTs) not done 
As per CPHEEO O&M Manual, OHTs/reservoirs are to be cleaned at regular 
interval (at least once in six months) and sample of water and silt/mud 
accumulated in the tank is to be collected for biological analysis to see the 
presence of snails and worms.  
It w as observed in selected divisions 28 that records were not maintained to 
substantiate that periodic cleaning of OHTs/reserviors was being done at 
divisional level. This indicated non -compliance to the extant instructions/ 
guidelines. In absence of the records, cleanliness of water supplied to inhabitants 
could not be ascertained in audit.  
Conclusion 
Water quality was found affected at some selected locations due to presence of 
coliforms, physical and chemical parameters found beyond permissible limits.  
There was shortage of manpower in the State, District and sub -divisional 
Laboratories. Resultantly, shortfalls in water sample testing at the District/Sub-
divisional laboratories were noticed in the selected districts. Audit could not 
ascertain follow-up on the samples found unfit during testi ng as no record for 
the purpose was maintained by the PHED. Shortcomings were noticed in 
functioning of Laboratories (State, District and Sub -divisional) against the 
Uniform Drinking Water Quality Monitoring Protocol. There was no facility for 
testing Uranium contamination and only one facility existed for testing of heavy 
metals in the State. Field testing kits were not used judiciously as neither the 
record related to procurement and distributions of kits was maintained nor were 
the unfit samples found by  using FTKs sent to nearby laboratories for further 
examination. In some quality affected areas, Community Water Purific ation 
Plants were not installed and delays were noticed in conversion of ground water 
based scheme to canal based scheme in the quality affected habitations.  
 
 
28 EE ( PHED, No.1&2, Rohtak, Faridabad, Kosli ), EE (HSVP, No.1&2, Panchkula, 
Rewari, No.1 &3, Faridabad), MC (Karnal). 

Chapter-V Poor Quality of Water Supplied 
59 
Recommendations 
In view of the above audit observation it is recommended that 
7. The department should focus on improving testing facilities by 
upgrading laboratories infrastructure and deploying manpower as per 
requirement. 
8. FTKs being  an important detecting tool for initial screening of 
contamination, the department should ensure its usage judiciously and 
as per extant instructions. 
9. Timely and appropriate remedial measure are required to be taken by 
the department for detection of Uranium and heavy metals so as prevent 
the chances of people getting exposed to the contaminated underground 
water. 
10. The Department should prioritise timely completion of water supply 
projects in the quality affected habitations to ensure that potable water 
supply is available to the inhabitants. 

Chapter-VI 
Deficient emphasis on 
Sustainability and insufficient 
Monitoring 

 

 
Chapter-VI 
Deficient emphasis on Sustainability and insufficient Monitoring 
Target set for construction of  sustainability structures , rain water 
harvesting systems, water recharging systems under NRDWP  remained 
unachieved. There was lack of efforts by the department to reduce 
dependency on ground water.  Monitoring mechanism was poor as delays 
were noticed in completion of water supply works, non -maintenance of 
record related to consumer complaints.  
6.1 Non-preparation/implementation of sustainability measures 
Para 3 under Guidelines for implementation of Sustainability (NRDWP 
guidelines) states that sustainability of drinking water sources ensures safe 
drinking water even during distress periods throug h conjunctive use of 
groundwater, surface water and roof water harvesting. This is achieved through 
construction of sustainability structures such as water harvesting systems, water 
recharging systems and surface water impounding systems aimed at improving 
rural drinking water supply.  
During scrutiny of records 1, it was noticed that PHED set target 2 for 
construction of sustainability structures such as harvesting systems, water 
recharging systems and surface water impounding system etc. under NRDWP  
with water works which were unachieved. The department closed seven works 
which were administratively approved (May 2015) for amount of ₹ 111.81 lakh 
without incurring any expenditure. The reasons for closing the work was not 
furnished to audit. 
Audit is of the view that sustainability structure should be incorporated for 
sustainability of water and sustainability plan should be made accordingly by 
the department in addition to adopting watershed principles for source 
recharging by convergence with other schemes.  
6.2 Lack of departmental efforts to reduce dependency on Ground Water 
NRDWP guidelines identified reduction in dependence on ground water and 
shift to surface water sources and conjunctive use of water from different 
sources as a critical issue to be addressed during the 12 th plan period. The aim 
was to reduce pressure on ground water extraction and ensure potability of 
water. Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation (MDWS), Government of 
India also advised (February 2016) all states to take up more and more number 
of surface water based schemes in the interest of sustainability of service 
 
1 EIC, PHED. 
2  2015-16: 3 and 2016-17: 10. 

Performance Audit of Rural and Urban Water Supply Schemes 
62 
delivery and in preference to ground water based scheme. However, it was 
observed that PHED continues to launch more ground water based schemes as 
compared to canal water based schemes. It was observed that during the period 
2016-17 to 2020-21, the ratio of newly commissioned canal based schemes to 
the number of newly commissioned tube -wells was continuously decreasing. 
Further, it was observed that the number of the new commissioned canal based 
schemes kept on decreasing from 2018 -19 to 2020 -21.  The details are given 
in Table 6.1 below: 
Table 6.1: Details of Canal based and Tube well based schemes taken up during last five 
years 
Year Canal based schemes T/well commissioned Per cent of canal based water 
works to tubewells 
2016-17 34 497 6.84 
2017-18 28 412 6.80 
2018-19 35 525 6.67 
2019-20 24 528 4.55 
2020-21 13 405 3.21 
Total 134 2,367 5.66 
In areas where water supply is solely ground water based viz. in Karnal, 
Kurukshetra, Panchkula, Faridabad (in four districts out of total eight selected 
districts)  the department replied (May 2022) that no alternate options had ever 
been explored in prev ious five years (Karnal, Kurukshetra and Faridabad 
district). Panchkula divisional office did not respond despite issuing reminders. 
According to Block Wise Ground Water Resource assessment 2020 (available 
on website of CGWB as on July 2022), there were 16  over-exploited blocks in 
these four districts. 
During exit conference (November 2022), PHED stated that at most of the 
places, ground water was sweet and people also preferred ground water based 
schemes. Further it was stated that a detailed reply would be furnished to audit. 
Reply is awaited as of December 2022. 
6.3 Non-conducting of awareness programme 
According to para 9.8.1 of CPHEEO Manual on O&M of Water Supply System 
published by Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs (MoHUA), Community 
participation is an essential component of the monitoring and surveillance 
framework.  
As per information provided by ULB and HSVP (April -May 2022) no such 
awareness programme had been organized by the entities.  
Though the PHE department is stated to have carried out various support 
activities viz. training of VWSC members, Mass media programmes and 
activities, IEC in schools, targeted sampling etc. but no such annual calendar of 
organising the event and timing was available with the department. The 
department was issuing instructions to field offices as and when the said events 

Chapter VI: Deficient emphasis on Sustainability and insufficient Monitoring 
63 
were to be organized. Thus, departments failed to generate awareness among 
public regarding good practices and surveillance activities. 
6.4 Public Grievances/Complaints  
PHE department and HSVP department had issued a toll free number for the 
citizens to lodge complaints related to water supply. Citizens can, however, lodge 
complaints on other platforms also viz. CM window, Twitter etc. The details of the 
complaints received and attended by the departments is shown in Appendix 24. 
It was observed that 20451 complaints (13 per cent) were attended between 24 and 
72 hours, 1,12,257 complaints (71 per cent) were attended beyond 72 hours by 
the PHED . The Department failed to produce relevant/supporting records in 
respect of these complaints. Audit could not ascertain the reasons/status of 2,403 
unattended complaints due to non-maintenance of records.  
In HSVP, it was observed that 1,898 complaints (58  per cent) were resolved 
within 24 hours to 72 hours and 141 complaints ( four per cent) were resolved 
beyond 72 hours. It was noticed that no reasons were placed on record for 
attending 141 complaints beyond three days. The data indicating full details are 
not available on the online portal. In absence of full details, actual time taken to 
resolve the complaints could not be verified in audit. 
In MCs3 (Appendix 24), it was noticed that all complaints were shown resolved 
within time period of 24 hours to 72 hours but no record was maintained to 
ascertain the actual time taken by the divisional office to resolve the complaints. 
Though, timeline was fixed for resolving complain ts based on their category, 
however, there was no basis/system in place for categorisation of the received 
complaints with the departments/entities. In absence of categorisation of 
complaints and relevant record, audit could not verify the authenticity of the 
data provided by the department/entities.  
Beneficiary survey: Only 66 out of 685 beneficiaries (10  per cent) submitted 
their grievances on toll free numbers. 96 out of 541 beneficiaries (17  per cent) 
stated that their complaints were resolved after a gap of three or more than three 
days. Three beneficiaries replied that their complaints were not attended by 
departmental representatives. 
 
 
 
 
 
3 MC Divisions- Faridabad and Karnal. 

Performance Audit of Rural and Urban Water Supply Schemes 
64 
6.5 Water Quality Monitoring and Surveillance (WQM&S)  
According to para 4.5 read with Para 10.1 of JJM guidelines GP and/ or its sub-
committee, i.e. VWSC/Paani Samiti/User Group, etc. will ensure to test 100 per 
cent drinking water sources including private sources and sanitary inspection 4 
under its jurisdiction using FTK s. The provision for sanitary inspection and 
testing of water sources by FTKs were also mentioned in NRDWP guidelines.  
During scrutiny of records in the office of the EIC, PHED, Haryana, Panchkula 
for the period 2016-17 to 2020-21 following observations were noticed: 
1. Sanitary Inspection: No sanitary inspection had been carried out during 
2016-21. No reasons were placed on record for not carrying out Sanitary 
Inspection.  
2. Non-coverage of all the sources : It was observed that  source testing 
ranged between 10.84 per cent to 35.33 per cent (Appendix 25). Thus, 
department failed to adhere to the guidelines of 100 per cent  source 
testing. In this way, providing potable water to every household could 
not be ensured.  
6.6 Delay in completion of Swaran Jayanti Mahagram Yojana works 
Government of Haryana initiated (November 2015) a new scheme “Swaran 
Jayanti Maha Gram Vikas Yojana” for the planned development of the villages 
having population of 10,000 or more as per census. From the financial year 
2018-19 onwards, provision of budget for this scheme has been made in the 
budget of PHE Department by the Finance Department. Total 132 villages 
having population of around 10,000 persons were planned to be provided with 
water supply and sewerage facility at par  with urban area by PHED (WSSB). 
Under this scheme water supply @ 135 LPCD is to be provided in the selected 
villages. This was to be done in three phases. 
As per information furnished by PHED (August 2022) it was noticed that out 
of 20 villages of Phase -1 (target completion date of 31 st March 2021) work of 
providing water supply and sewerage facility was completed in only two 
villages (Sotai-Faridabad, Naharpur -Gurugram). Of the remaining 18 villages 
of Phase-1, in 16 villages works were in progress, in on e village tendering of 
work was in progress as on August 2022. In one village, it was declared that 
work was not feasible. This indicated delays in passing on the benefits of water 
supply to the to the villages.  
 
 
4 A sanitary inspection is an on-site inspection of a water supply facility to identify actual 
and potential sources of microbiological contamination for evaluation of the physical 
structure and operation of the system and external environmental factors. 

Chapter VI: Deficient emphasis on Sustainability and insufficient Monitoring 
65 
6.7 Delay in completion of work 
Para 16.37.1 of Haryana PWD code states that time over runs is likely to result 
in higher projects cost, contractual claims, delay in the use of facility and 
possible loss of revenue. Further Para 16.38.1 stipulates that cost over-runs can 
be avoided to a large extent by proper planning, commitment and ingenuity.  
6.7.1 Scrutiny of records of selected water supply works (10 per cent of total 
2236 works in these selected divisions) pertaining to the period 2016 to 2021  
from data dump of PHED revealed that t here were delays in completion of 
works/projects. Out of 221 selected works, only 60 works (27 per cent) were 
completed on time. The delays in completion were ranging between one month 
to 37 months as detailed in Appendix 26. 
From the above, it could be se en that works got delayed due to which actual 
benefit from these schemes could not transferred to the inhabitants of these 
areas.  
6.7.2 During scrutiny of records in divisions of HSVP and ULBs for the 
period 2016-2021, it was seen that there were delays in completion of 17 works/ 
projects (Appendices 27 & 28).  
The delay of works in PHED was mainly due to wrong selection of site, non -
availability of pipes etc. whereas in HSVP and MCs, the works got delayed due 
to non-availability of clear land for laying p ipe lines, issue of payments, non -
obtaining of No Objection Certificates from concerned departments, delayed 
supply of material etc. Thus, delay in completion of work is indicative of poor 
planning and lack of monitoring mechanism for timely completion of 
projects/work which leads to non-providing of envisaged benefits to the public. 
60, 27 per cent
31, 14 per cent
32, 14 per cent
15, 7 per cent
10, 5 per cent
54, 24 per cent
17, 
8 per cent
2, 1 per cent
Consolidated status of works (PHED)
No. of works completed without delay No. of works delayed upto 6 months
No. of works delayed from 7 to 12 months No. of works delayed from 13 to 24 months
No. of works delayed above 24 months No. of works  in progress
No. of works where work not started No. of works where record not furnished

Performance Audit of Rural and Urban Water Supply Schemes 
66 
6.8 Absence of Management Information System (MIS) in ULBs and 
HSVP 
Management Information System (MIS)  is defined as a formal system of 
making available to the management accurate, timely, sufficient and relevant 
information to facilitate the decision making process to enable the organisation 
to carry out the specific function effectively and efficiently in  the tune with 
organisation’s objectives. As far as water supply system is concerned, the 
performance of the system depends upon reducing and controlling leakage, 
undertake measurement of flows and pressure and ensuring the quality control 
of water supply system. It is the responsibility of operational management to 
generate data on MIS from subordinate offices for processing. As per Central 
Public Health & Environmental Engineering Organisation (CPHEEO), it is 
essential to develop information system in this regard. 
It was observed that PHED had maintained the data on different modules on 
their departmental website.  
However, during  scrutiny of records in selected offices of HSVP and ULBs 
department, it was observed that the information system related to hum an 
resources, training profile of the staff at divisional level, data related to leakage 
detection and attended, routine operation maintenance, e - information, regular 
check of data related to water test reports w as not in existence. Resultantly, 
management control as well as outcomes of efficient and effective water supply 
system could not be assessed.  
Conclusion 
Target set for construction of  sustainability  structures, rain water harvesting 
systems, water recharging systems under NRDWP remained unachieved. There 
was lack of efforts by the department to reduce dependency on ground water.  
Monitoring mechanism was poor as delays were noticed in completion of water 
supply works, non-maintenance of record related to consumer complaints.  
Recommendations 
In view of the above findings  
11. The Department should ensure construction of sustainability structures 
as envisaged and explore options for reducing dependence on ground 
water in the overexploited blocks. 
12. The Departments/entities should ensure proper planning for timely 
execution and completion of works/projects for benefit of the 
inhabitants. 

Chapter VI: Deficient emphasis on Sustainability and insufficient Monitoring 
67 
13. The Department should strengthen its monitoring mechanism and 
proper documentation should be done for each and every activity viz. 
awareness programme, complaints, survey reports, procurement data 
so that proper monitoring may be ensured at each level. 
14. It is recommended that a common portal may be devised for State level 
capturing of data. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chandigarh 
Dated:28 April 2023 
(NAVNEET GUPTA) 
Principal Accountant General (Audit), Haryana 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Countersigned 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi 
Dated:04 May 2023 
 
(GIRISH CHANDRA MURMU) 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 


Appendices 

 

Appendix-1 
(Reference: Paragraphs 1.2 & 1.3; Page 3, 4) 
Details of Rural and Urban Water Supply Schemes  
Rural Water Supply Schemes: 
Rural Water Supply Schemes are financed through State Schemes and Centrally 
Sponsored Schemes on the basis of their funding pattern. 
Centrally Sponsored Scheme  
(i) National Rural Drinking Water Programme (NRDWP) now 
renamed as Jal Jeevan Mission (JJM):  
NRDWP was renamed as JJM w.e .f. 15 th August 2019.  JJM, is intended to 
provide safe and adequate drinking water through individual household tap 
connection by 2022 in rural Haryana area. JJM has three main components viz. 
Coverage, Support Activities & WQMS. The funding pattern for C overage is 
50:50 whereas for Support Activities and WQMS it is 60:40 as Central and State 
share respectively.  
(ii) National Institution for Transforming India (NITI) Aayog 
Assistance/Scheme: To tackle the Quality Affected Habitations (QAH) and to 
provide immediate intermediate solution in form of Community Water 
Purification Plants (CWPP) to quality affected habitations, NITI Aayog 
provided one time (March 2016) central assistance out of its own fund. 
State Plan Schemes 
(i) Augmentation Rural Water Supply Programme: This is a 100 per 
cent State Sector scheme. Under this programme, the existing drinking water 
supply facilities are improved / strengthened in the villages by undertaking an 
array of activities which amongst other  include Drilling additional tubewells, 
Augmentation of existing canal based schemes, Creating new canal based water 
works, Constructing boosting stations, Strengthening of existing distribution 
system. 
(ii) National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD) 
Aided Schemes: In order to accelerate the implementation of augmentation of 
major rural drinking water supply schemes, the State has been availing funding 
from NABARD since 2000-2001 against various projects. NABARD has been 
partnering the State Government in the creation of an extensive infrastructure 
in the rural areas. The funding pattern is 85:15 with 85 per cent coming from 
NABARD as a loan component whereas 15 per cent is contribution of the State. 
(iii) Special Component Sub Plan (SCSP) (Rural): Under the Special 
Component Sub Plan, drinking water facility is provided/ upgraded in the 
villages/habitations predominantly inhabited by scheduled caste households. 
The funds allocated under SCSP are to be exclusively utilised for the welfare of 

Performance Audit of Rural and Urban Water Supply Schemes 
70 
the Scheduled Castes and other disadvantaged section of the society towards 
objective of ensuring equity and empowerment, particularly of women. 
(iv) Swaran Jayanti Mahagram Yojana Rural Water Supply: Under this 
scheme, 132 villages having population of around 10,000 persons were planned 
to be provided with water supply and sewerage facility in three phases at par 
with urban area. Under this scheme water supply @ 135 LPCD is to be provided 
in the selected villages. 
(v) Mahatma Gandhi Gramin Basti Yojana (M GGBY): Mahatma 
Gandhi Gramin Basti Yojana (MGGBY) was launched in the State of Haryana 
during the year 2008-09 for the benefit of poorer sections of the society. Under 
this scheme, the State Government allotted free residential plots to the 
beneficiaries and the work of laying of water supply pipelines was to be done 
by the PHED as a deposit work of the Development and Panchayat Department. 
Urban Water Supply Schemes 
For water supply in urban areas, various Centrally Sponsored schemes and State 
schemes are implemented, the details are as follows:  
Centrally Sponsored Schemes 
(i)  AMRUT: The Government of India, Ministry of Urban Development 
launched a scheme namely Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban 
Transformation (AMRUT) in June, 2015 with the objective to ensure that every 
household has access to a tap with assured supply of water and a sewerage 
connection. The scope of work under the water supply component in AMRUT 
is to ensure that every household has access to a tap with assured supply of 
water, aug mentation/rehabilitation of existing water supply schemes, water 
treatment Plants and universal metering. 
State Sponsored Schemes 
(i)  Urban Water Supply State Plan : This scheme/programme is being 
operated in all 87 towns (83 notified and 4 de -notified) which are under the 
jurisdiction of PHED. Under this programme, the existing drinking water supply 
facilities are being improved/ strengthened in the urban areas. 
(ii) Urban NCR (Water Supply) : This scheme/programme is being 
operated in National Capital Regi on (NCR) towns falling in eight districts of 
the state viz. Gurugram, Mewat, Rohtak, Sonipat, Rewari, Jhajjar, Panipat and 
Palwal. 
  

Appendices 
71 
Appendix-2 
(Reference: Paragraph 1.3; Page 3) 
Details of towns and areas under PHED, ULB and HSVP 
Name of towns which are under jurisdiction of PHED 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of Town Sr. No. Name of Town Sr. No. Name of Town 
Notified Towns 
1.  Ambala City 2.  Jhajjar 3.  Pinjore 
4.  Assandh 5.  Jind 6.  Pundri 
7.  Ateli Mandi 8.  Julana 9.  Punhana 
10.  Bahadurgarh 11.  Kaithal 12.  Radaur 
13.  Barara 14.  Kalanaur 15.  Rania 
16.  Barwala 17.  Kalanwali 18.  Ratia 
19.  Bawal 20.  Kalayat 21.  Rewari 
22.  Bawani Khera 23.  Kalka  24.  Rohtak 
25.  Beri 26.  Kanina 27.  Safidon 
28.  Bhiwani 29.  Kharkhoda 30.  Samalkha 
31.  Charkhi Dadri 32.  Kurukshetra 33.  Sampla 
34.  Cheeka 35.  Ladwa 36.  Shahbad 
37.  Dharuhera 38.  Loharu 39.  Sirsa 
40.  Ellenabad 41.  Mahendragarh 42.  Siwani 
43.  F. P. Zhirka 44.  Mandi Dabwali 45.  Sohna 
46.  Farukh Nagar 47.  Meham 48.  Taoru 
49.  Fatehabad 50.  Naraingarh 51.  Taraori 
52.  Ganaur 53.  Nangal Chaudhary 54.  Tohana 
55.  Gharaunda 56.  Narnaul 57.  Uchana 
58.  Gohana 59.  Narnaund 60.  Yamuna Nagar   
61.  Haily Mandi 62.  Narwana 63.  Uklana Mandi 
64.  Hansi 65.  Nilokheri 66.  Bass 
67.  Hathin 68.  Nissing 69.  Bhuna 
70.  Hisar 71.  Nuh 72.  Ismaliabad 
73.  Hodel 74.  Palwal 75.  Rajound 
76.  Indri 77.  Panipat 78.  Sadhuara 
79.  Jagdhari 80.  Pataudi 81.  Sisai 
82.  Jakhal 83.  Pehowa   
Denotified Towns 
1. Chhachrauli 2. Tosham 3. Hassanpur 
4. Kosli     
Name of towns under jurisdiction of ULB 
1. Karnal 2. Sonepat 3. Faridabad 
4. Gurugram     
Name of town under jurisdiction of HSVP 
1. Panchkula     
* In all towns, where sectors have been developed by HSVP, water supply is maintained by HSVP. 
** Notified town are towns those notified under law by the concerned state and have local bodies like 
Municipal Corporations/Councils/Committees irrespective of their demographic characteristics. 
***De-notified towns are towns those which were previously falls under the category of notified towns 
but due to any reason as of now they are not falling under the category of notified town. 
  

Performance Audit of Rural and Urban Water Supply Schemes 
72 
Appendix-3 
(Reference: Paragraph 1.4 (III); Page 6) 
Organisation structure of implementing agencies 
Organisational structure of Haryana Shehri Vikas Pradhikaran 
Chief Administrator at the Headquarters is the overall in charge and responsible 
for discharging the functions of the Authority. He is assisted by five Zonal 
Administrators, posted at Faridabad, Gur ugram, Hisar, Panchkula and Rohtak 
and one Administrator at Headquarters. The CA is guided by the policies framed 
by the Authority headed by the Minister-in-charge (designated as the Chairman 
of the Authority) of the Town & Country Planning Department (TCPD). 
Organisational structure of Urban Local Bodies 
The ULBs Department, headed by the Additional Chief Secretary, is the nodal 
department for the governance of all ULBs. The Directorate of Urban Local 
Bodies (DULB) function s as an interface between the State Government and 
ULBs. In accordance with the powers conferred under the HM Act, 1973 and 
HMC Act, 1994, the DULB administers, facilitates, co -ordinates and monitors 
the ULBs. 
  
Executive Engineer
Superintending Engineer
Chief Engineer
Zonal Administrator
Chief Administrator
Additional Chief Secretary 
Executive Engineer
Superintending Engineer
Chief Engineer
Municipal Commissioner
Director
Additional Chief Secretary 

Appendices 
73 
Appendix-4 
(Reference: Paragraph 1.7; Page 7) 
Detailed Audit Methodology 
Out of 2 2 districts, 20 districts were divided in two equal categories/strata 
(10 district in each group) after arranging the districts in decreasing order of 
total weightage based on expenditure, area, rural and urban population, average 
rainfall & over exploited blocks. Thereafter, random sampling was done 
through Computer Assisted Audit Techniques (CAAT) and total seven districts 
were selected from both the strata. One additional district, Panchkula was 
selected as water supply in Panchkula town is being maintained by Haryana 
Shehri Vikas Pradhikaran (HSVP).  As part of this audit, dump data of PHED 
as available with the department was analysed in detail. Audit was conducted at 
36 offices including offices at dire ctorate level during field study. Further, to 
verify the coverage, survey was conducted in MGGBY bastis in villages of 
selected districts. In addition to this, some locations were selected in these 
districts for assessment of: 
(i) Quantity of water supplied by installation of flow meters and sub-meters and 
noting down their one month reading and applying mathematical calculations. 
(ii) Quality of water by jointly collecting samples with departmental 
representatives and sending the samples to privately hired lab (third party) as 
well as to State Water Testing Laboratory of PHED at Karnal.  
(iii) Quantity and quality of water by conducting beneficiary survey. Beneficiary 
survey was conducted from 3 August 2022 to 8 August 2022. A total of 20 
locations were selected and 30 beneficiaries from each location were chosen 
depending upon availability. Overall, 617 beneficiaries (PHED: 243; MCs: 254 
& HSVP: 120) were surveyed. 
Offices covered during Field Study 
Sr. 
No. 
District Name of office Number 
of 
offices 
1. Hisar Executive Engineer, Public Health Engineering Divisions No.1, 
No.2 No.3 and Hansi 
7 
Municipal Corporation 
Executive Engineer, Haryana Shehri Vikas Pradhikaran 
Divisions No.1 & No.2 
2. Kurukshetra Executive Engineer, Public Health Engineering Division 2 
Executive Engineer, Haryana Shehri Vikas Pradhikaran  
Division, Ambala (Sub-division Kurukshetra) 

Performance Audit of Rural and Urban Water Supply Schemes 
74 
Sr. 
No. 
District Name of office Number 
of 
offices 
3. Panchkula Engineer-in-Chief, PHED 7 
Director, Urban Local Bodies 
Municipal Corporation 
Chief Administrator, HSVP 
Executive Engineer, PHED 
Executive Engineer, HSVP Divisions No.1 & No. 2 
4. Rewari Executive Engineer, PHED (Rewari, Bawal, Kosli) 5 
Executive Engineer, HSVP Division 
Municipal Council 
5. Fatehebad* Executive Engineer, PHED, Fatehebad and Tohana 2 
6. Karnal Executive Engineer, PHE Division No.1 & No. 2  4 
Municipal Corporation 
Executive Engineer, HSVP Division 
7. Rohtak Executive Engineer, PHE Division No.1 & No. 2  5 
Municipal Corporation 
Executive Engineer, HSVP Division No.1 & No. 2 
8. Faridabad Executive Engineer, PHE Division,  4 
Municipal Corporation 
Executive Engineer, HSVP Divisions No.1 & No. 3 
Total 36 
* HSVP area of Fatehabad district falls under the jurisdiction of HSVP Division no. 2, Hisar. 

Appendices 
75 
Appendix-5 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.7 (b); Page 17) 
Details of villages covered for survey under MGGBY 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of 
District 
Name of 
Block 
Name of 
Village 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of 
District 
Name of 
Block 
Name of 
Village 
1 Faridabad Ballabgarh Atali 23 Kurukshetra Ismailabad Dhangali 
2 Faridabad Ballabgarh Malerna 24 Kurukshetra Ismailabad Mandi 
3 Faridabad Ballabgarh Samaipur 25 Kurukshetra Pehowa Arnaicha 
4 Faridabad Faridabad Bhainsrawali 26 Kurukshetra Pehowa Chanalheri 
5 Faridabad Faridabad Kheri Kalan 27 Kurukshetra Pehowa Saina Saidan 
6 Faridabad Faridabad Tajupur 28 Panchkula Pinjore Khokhra 
7 Fatehabad Fatehabad Badopal 29 Panchkula Pinjore Patter 
8 Fatehabad Fatehabad Dariyapur 30 Panchkula Pinjore Tibbi 
9 Fatehabad Fatehabad Nagpur 31 Panchkula Raipur Rani Naraynpur 
10 Fatehabad Ratia Alipur Barota 32 Panchkula Raipur Rani Natwal 
11 Fatehabad Ratia Hukmawali 33 Panchkula Raipur Rani Raipur Rani 
12 Fatehabad Ratia Rozanwali 34 Rewari Dharuhera Asiyaki 
Tappa Jarthal 
13 Hisar Barwala Behbalpur 35 Rewari Bawal Jaliawas 
14 Hisar Barwala Kheri Barki 36 Rewari Bawal Bolni 
15 Hisar Barwala Bhada Khera 37 Rewari Bawal Khandola 
16 Hisar Hisar-1 Mirkan 38 Rewari Rewari Gendokher 
17 Karnal Nilokheri Barani 
Khalsa 
39 Rewari Rewari Kishangarh 
18 Karnal Nilokheri Kurak Jagir 40 Rewari Rewari Nand 
Rampurpass 
19 Karnal Nilokheri Sohlon 41 Rohtak Lakhan Majra Sunderpur 
20 Karnal Indri Patehra 42 Rohtak Rohtak Dobh 
21 Karnal Indri Butan Kheri 43 Rohtak Rohtak Kabulpur 
22 Kurukshetra Ismailabad Bhusthala 44 Rohtak Rohtak Taja Majra 
Status of water supply during physical verification MGGBY 
Total 
village 
selected 
Villages where 
water supply service 
was available 
Villages where water supply 
service was not made available 
Percentage of villages not 
having water supply services 
44 27 17 39 

Appendices 
77 
Appendix-7 
(Reference: Paragraphs 3.4.1, 3.4.2 & 3.4.3; Page 23, 24) 
Details of outstanding water charges  
(a) Outstanding water charges in PHED  
(₹ in crore) 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of Division Rural  Urban 
Total revenue 
which was to 
be realized  
Total Revenue 
realized 
Balance Total revenue 
which was to 
be realized  
Total Revenue 
realized 
Balance 
1 No. 1, Hisar 24.85 1.10 23.75 10.40 2.06 8.34 
2 No.2, Hisar 32.69 0.87 31.82 15.53 13.44 2.09 
3 Hansi Not provided 5.29 4.79 0.50 
4 Fatehabad 4.32 0.54 3.78 3.34 0.14 3.20 
5 Tohana 17.26 1.02 16.24 10.22 6.14 4.08 
6 Kurukshetra 14.23 1.24 12.99 45.81 13.72 32.09 
7 No.1, Karnal 2.33 0.86 1.47 4.41 3.29 1.12 
8 No.2, Karnal 6.93 1.04 5.89 3.59 3.07 0.52 
9 Panchkula 7.84 1.45 6.39 10.67 5.94 4.73 
10 Rewari 1.23 0.17 1.06 17.55 11.84 5.71 
11 Bawal 10.98 0.44 10.54 3.76 1.55 2.21 
12 Kosli 2.37 0.02 2.35 1.97 0.19 1.78 
13 Faridabad 3.14 0.13 3.01 NA 
14 No.1, Rohtak Not provided 2.93 1.25 1.68 
15 No.2, Rohtak Not provided Not provided 
  Total 128.17 8.88 119.29 135.47 67.42 68.05 
Data of rural areas in Hansi and non-domestic connection in Tohana was not provided. 
In Kosli, data is available from 08/2019 onwards.  
(b) Outstanding water charges in HSVP 
Sr. No. Name of Divisional Office Amount 
Outstanding  
(₹ in crore) 
1 Executive Engineer, Haryana Shehri Vikas Pradhikaran No 2, Hisar 0.95 
2 Executive Engineer, Haryana Shehri Vikas Pradhikaran No 1, Panchkula 2.16 
3 Executive Engineer, Haryana Shehri Vikas Pradhikaran No 2, Panchkula 0.29 
4 Executive Engineer, Haryana Shehri Vikas Pradhikaran, Faridabad 3.23 
5 Executive Engineer, Haryana Shehri Vikas Pradhikaran, Rewari 0.79 
6 Executive Engineer, Haryana Shehri Vikas Pradhikaran, Rohtak 7.16 
7 Executive Engineer, Haryana Shehri Vikas Pradhikaran, Karnal 4.2 
8. Executive Engineer, Haryana Shehri Vikas Pradhikaran, Ambala (Sub-
division Kurukshetra) 
0.40 
Total 19.18 
(c) Outstanding water charges in MCs 
Sr. No. Name of Unit Amount Outstanding as on 31 March 2021 
(₹ in crore) 
1 Municipal Corporation, Faridabad 30.04 
2 Municipal Corporation, Karnal 41.64 
Total 71.68 
 
  

Performance Audit of Rural and Urban Water Supply Schemes 
78 
Appendix-8 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.5; Page 24) 
Details of Community Contribution Collection 
Sr. 
No. 
District Total No. of 
Gram 
Panchayats 
under the 
jurisdiction of 
the department 
10 per cent  
community 
contribution 
amount to be 
collected from 
Gram 
Panchayats  
(` in lakh) 
10 per cent  
community 
contribution 
amount 
collected from 
Gram 
Panchayats  
(` in lakh) 
Balance amount 
of community 
contribution to be 
collected from 
Gram 
Panchayats  
(` in lakh) 
1. Panipat 175 162.07 8.30 153.77 
2. Mahendragarh 341 21.50 0.70 20.80 
3. Karnal 379 560.18 15.80 544.38 
4. Fatehabad 256 750.10 8.20 741.90 
5. Ambala 397 354.85 2.20 352.65 
6. Jhajjar 247 384.31 1.70 382.61 
7. Yamunanagar 471 386.86 1.60 385.26 
8. Kurukshetra 392 363.62 0.80 362.82 
9. Kaithal 277 478.56 0 478.56 
10. Sonipat 311 455.76 0 455.76 
11. Rohtak 139 479.45 0 479.45 
12. Faridabad 116 163.69 0 163.69 
13. Gurugram 162 137.05 0 137.05 
14. Rewari 358 417.92 0 417.92 
15. Palwal 259 115.37 0 115.37 
16. Charkhi Dadri 166 10.42 0 10.42 
17. Nuh 317 699.57 0 699.57 
18. Bhiwani 304 57.16 0 57.16 
19. Jind 297 430.58 0 430.58 
20. Hisar 299 78.14 0 78.14 
21. Sirsa 338 277.19 0 277.19 
22. Panchkula 128 191.92 0 191.92 
 Total 6,129 6,976.27 39.30 6,936.97 
 

Performance Audit of Rural and Urban Water Supply Schemes 
94 
Appendix-18 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.1.1; Page 44) 
Comparison of common parameter tested in both the laboratories  
Each location depicted in Paragraph 5.1.1 has been denoted by a lphabets in 
following charts: 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of location Alphabet 
1.  T/w no. S-6, HSVP, Panchkula A 
2.  T/w no. KV-5, HSVP, Panchkula B 
3.  Thana, PHED, Kurukshetra C 
4.  Kalwa, PHED, Kurukshetra D 
5.  Sector-2, T/w no. 1, HSVP, Kurukshetra E 
6.  Meham, PHED, Rohtak F 
7.  Katesra, PHED, Rohtak G 
8.  Sahu, PHED, Hisar H 
9.  Kabrel, PHED, Hisar I 
10.  Kot Khurd, PHED, Hansi J 
11.  Mound, PHED, Karnal K 
12.  Kalsora, PHED, Karnal L 
13.  Sector-4 TN, T/w no. 1, HSVP, Karnal M 
14.  Godipur Phatak, SDO, Public Health, M.C. 
Karnal 
N 
15.  Khaleta, PHED, Rewari O 
16.  Karandi, PHED, Fatehabad P 
17.  Bara Gaon (Kasturba Sewa Sadan), PHED, 
Faridabad 
Q 
18.  Khijuri, PHED, Rewari R 
19.  Vill. Anagpur Near Manoj Bhdana Office, Ward 
no. 18, MC Faridabad 
S 
20.  3 B-Park, MC Faridabad T 
21.  T/w no. 18/16, Labour Chowk, MC Faridabad U 
22.  Geeta Bhawan, Ashoka-1, MC Faridabad V 
23.  Bhagat Singh Colony, BLB, MC Faridabad W 
24.  Chauhan Chakki, Jawahar Colony, Khand, MC 
Faridabad 
X 
25.  15 B, 2 NIT, Industrial Area Road Mujeshar, 
Ward-2, Rajiv Gandhi Colony, MC Faridabad 
Y 
 
  

Appendices 
95 
 
 
 
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y
Value (mg/l)
Calcium (CA)
PHED SRI Acceptable Limit Permissible Limit
0
1,000
2,000
3,000
4,000
5,000
6,000
7,000
8,000
9,000
A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y
Value (mg/l)
Total Dissolve Solids
PHED SRI Acceptable Limit Permissible Limit
0.00
0.10
0.20
0.30
0.40
A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y
Value (mg/l)
Manganese (Mn)
PHED SRI Acceptable Limit Permissible Limit

Performance Audit of Rural and Urban Water Supply Schemes 
96 
 
 
 
0
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
2,500
3,000
3,500
4,000
A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y
Value (mg/l)
Chloride (Cl)
PHED SRI Acceptable Limit Permissible Limit
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00
1.20
1.40
1.60
1.80
2.00
A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y
Value (mg/l)
Fluoride (F)
PHED SRI Acceptable Limit Permissible Limit
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y
Value (mg/l)
Iron (Fe)
PHED SRI Acceptable Limit Permissible Limit

Appendices 
97 
 
 
 
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y
Value (mg/l)
Nitrate (NO3)
PHED SRI Acceptable Limit Permissible Limit
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y
Value (mg/l)
Sulphate (SO4)
PHED SRI Acceptable Limit Permissible Limit
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.14
0.16
A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y
Value (mg/l)
Zinc (Zn)
PHED SRI Acceptable Limit Permissible Limit

Performance Audit of Rural and Urban Water Supply Schemes 
98 
 
 
 
0
90
180
270
360
450
A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y
Value (mg/l)
Magnesium (Mg)
PHED SRI Acceptable Limit Permissible Limit
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y
Value (mg/l)
Turbidity
PHED SRI Acceptable Limit Permissible Limit
0
2
4
6
8
10
A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y
Value (mg/l)
pH 
PHED SRI Acceptable Limit Permissible Limit

Appendices 
99 
 
 
 
  
0
200
400
600
800
1,000
1,200
A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y
Value (mg/l)
Total Coliform
Acceptable Limit & Permissible Limit: Not detectable
PHED SRI
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y
Value (mg/l)
Total Arsenic
PHED SRI Acceptable Limit Permissible Limit

Performance Audit of Rural and Urban Water Supply Schemes 
100 
Appendix-19 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.2; Page 44) 
Details of water samples tested in selected districts 
Name of laboratory Physical & Chemical water sample 
testing for the year 2016-17 to 2020-21 
Bacteriological water sample testing 
for the year 2016-17 to 2020-21 
Total 
sample 
tested 
Fit 
sample 
Unfit 
sample 
Per cent 
of unfit 
sample 
Total 
sample 
tested 
Fit 
sample 
Unfit 
sample 
Per cent 
of unfit 
sample 
State lab Karnal 10,101 10,062 39 0.39 17,100 14,983 2,117 12.38 
Sub-divisional lab 
Assandh 
-- -- -- -- 11,795 11,080 715 6.06 
Sub-divisional lab Indri -- -- -- -- 4,968 4,619 349 7.02 
District lab Panchkula 2,345 2,340 5 0.21 21,667 20,987 680 3.14 
Sub-divisional lab, Kalka -- -- -- -- 22,728 22,278 450 1.98 
District lab Fatehabad 461 430 31 6.72 16,323 15,504 819 5.02 
Sub-divisional lab, 
Tohana 
1,430 1,401 29 2.03 18,131 17,820 311 1.72 
District lab, Rewari 2,293 1,943 350 15.26 13,011 12,720 291 2.24 
Sub-divisional lab, Kosli 527 522 5 0.95 13,012 12,990 22 0.17 
District lab, Faridabad 5,049 4,388 661 13.09 11,176 9,877 1,299 11.62 
District lab, Rohtak 1,060 789 271 25.57 18,182 16,083 2,099 11.54 
District lab, Hisar 559 424 135 24.15 20,081 17,169 2,912 14.50 
Sub-divisional lab, Hansi -- -- -- -- 13,111 11,620 1,491 11.37 
District lab, Kurukshetra 4,173 4,168 5 0.12 16,628 14,947 1,681 10.11 
Sub-divisional lab, 
Pehowa 
2,385 2,385 0 0 15,729 14,392 1,337 9.29 
 
  

Appendices 
101 
Appendix-20 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.8; Page 52) 
Staff position at District Level Water Testing Laboratories 
Name of post Name of District 
Hisar Kurukshetra Rewari Fatehabad Rohtak Faridabad Panchkula Total 
position 
Chemist/Water 
Analyst 
Actual 1 1 0 1 1 1 1 6 
Shortage 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 1 
Percentage 
of shortage 
- - 100 - - - -  
Microbiologist Actual 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Shortage 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 7 
Percentage 
of shortage 
100 100 100 100 100 100 100  
Laboratory 
Assistant 
Actual 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 2 
Shortage 1 2 2 2 1 2 2 12 
Percentage 
of shortage 
50 100 100 100 50 100 100  
Lab Attendant Actual 0 0 0 0 1 0 1 2 
Shortage 1 1 1 1 0 1 0 5 
Percentage 
of shortage 
100 100 100 100 - 100 -  
Data Entry 
Operator 
Actual 0 0 1 0 1 0 0 2 
Shortage 1 1 0 1 0 1 1 5 
Percentage 
of shortage 
100 100 - 100 - 100 100  
Field Assistant 
(task/need 
based field staff) 
Actual 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Shortage 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 14 
Percentage 
of shortage 
100 100 100 100 100 100 100  
Staff position at Sub Divisional Level Water Testing Laboratories 
Name of post Sub-divisional labs situated at 
Assandh Indri Hansi Kosli Kalka Pehowa Tohana Total 
position 
Junior Chemist Actual 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Shortage 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 7 
Percentage of 
shortage 
100 100 100 100 100 100 100  
Junior Microbiologist Actual 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Shortage 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 7 
Percentage of 
shortage 
100 100 100 100 100 100 100  
Laboratory Assistant Actual 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 
Shortage 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 6 
Percentage of 
shortage 
100 100 100 100 100 100 -  
Lab Attendant Actual 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Shortage 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 7 
Percentage of 
shortage 
100 100 100 100 100 100 100  
Data Entry Operator Actual 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Shortage 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 7 
Percentage of 
shortage 
100 100 100 100 100 100 100  
Field Assistant 
(task/need based field 
staff) 
Actual 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Shortage 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 7 
Percentage of 
shortage 
100 100 100 100 100 100 100  
Note: Additional charge given to various official has not been considered as regular 
posting, hence shown as shortage. 
  

Performance Audit of Rural and Urban Water Supply Schemes 
102 
Appendix-21 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.11; Page 57) 
Details of quality affected habitations  
Name of 
District 
Name of 
Block 
Name of 
Habitation  
Parameter 
Name 
Contaminated in year  
Hisar Adampur Adampur Fluoride 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 
Adampur Kabrel TDS - 2019-20 2020-21 
Adampur Kohli Fluoride - 2019-20 2020-21 
Adampur MandiAdampur Fluoride 2018-19 2019-20 - 
Adampur Telanwali Fluoride - 2019-20 2020-21 
Hansi-1 Muzadpur Fluoride 2018-19 2019-20 - 
Narnaund Kagsar Fluoride 2018-19 2019-20 - 
Hansi-II Bhaklana Fluoride - 2019-20 2020-21 
Rewari Bawal Banipur Fluoride 2016-17 2017-18 - - - 
Bhagwanpur Fluoride 2016-17 2017-18 - - - 
Lalpur Fluoride 2016-17 - - - 2020-21 
Mohmadpur Fluoride 2016-17 2017-18 - - - 
Sahapur Fluoride 2016-17 2017-18 - - - 
Shekhpur Fluoride 2016-17 2017-18 - - - 
Suba Sheri Fluoride 2016-17 2017-18 - - - 
GujarMajri Fluoride - 2017-18 - - 2020-21 
Mangleshwar Fluoride - 2017-18 - - 2020-21 
Khol at 
Rewari 
Dehlawas Fluoride 2016-17 2017-18 - - - 
Nandha Fluoride 2016-17 - - - 2020-21 
Rewari Bariawas Fluoride 2016-17 - - - 2020-21 
Konsiwas Fluoride 2016-17 - - - 2020-21 
Nayagaon Fluoride 2016-17 2017-18 - - - 
Padianwas Fluoride 2016-17 - - - 2020-21 
Saharanwas Fluoride 2016-17 - - - 2020-21 
Jatusana Sihas Fluoride - 2017-18 - 2019-20 - 
  

Appendices 
103 
Appendix-22 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.12; Page 57) 
Fluoride affected habitation with their installation and  
result of water testing 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of installation Date of sample Result Electricity 
meter account 
no. 
Electricity bill attached 
for the month of  
1 T/W at Ajeet Nagar, 
Aherwan 
16 February 2017 2.4 AHPW-0004-A March 2020, March 
2017, March 2019 
T/W at Ajeet Nagar, 
Aherwan 
16 February 2018 2.4 AHPW-0004 
New acc no. 
769466100 
March 2022 
2 T/W at Majra and D/Majra 26 February 2018 2.3 MJPW-0003-A March 2020, March 
2016, March 2017, 
March 2019, March 
2022 
T/W at Majra 29 April 2019 2.01 MJPW-0002-A March 2017, March 
2019, March 2022 
3 T/W at Noorki Ahli 18 June 2018 2.49 NFPW-0002-P March 2020, Feb 2021, 
March 2022 
T/W at Noorki Ahli 21 May 2021 1.6 NFPW-0001-A March 2020, Feb 2021, 
March 2016, March 
2022 
4 T/W at Boosting Station, 
Daulatpur 
27 November 2019 2.4 DAPH-0001-A March 2020, March 
2016, March 2017, 
March 2019 March 2022 
DAPH-0002-A March 2020, March 
2016, March 2017, 
March 2019, March 
2022  
5 T/W Dhani Binja Lamba 13 April 2020 1.92 JVPW-0004-L March 2020, Feb 2021, 
March 2017, March 
2022 
T/W Dhani BinjaLamba 15 June 2020 1.94 JVPW-0002 March 2022 
6 T/W at Hanspur 21 June2018 1.88 BVPW-0002 February 2020, February 
2021, May 2022 
T/W at Hanspur 04 June 2020 2.12 BVPW-0003 Information not 
provided. 
T/W at Hanspur Main Tube 
Well 
21 May2021 2.1 BVPW-0004 Information not 
provided. 
7 T/W Chanderwal Main Tube 
Well 
16 June 2021 2.52 JAPH-0004A May 2022 
21 June 2021 2.52 JAPH-0004A 
22 June 2021 2.52 JAPH-0004A 
8 T/W Hans Colony  09 April 2021 2.5 MAPH-0003A March 2022 
04 October 2021 1.95 MAPH-0003A 
12 October 2021 2.9 MAPH-0003A 
9 T/W Karian 18 June 2018 1.8 HKPW0002-A March 2019, March 
2020, March 2021, 
March 2022 
Source: Laboratory reports 
* Fluoride (acceptable limit: 1.0 mg/l and cause for rejection: 1.5 mg/l) 
  

Performance Audit of Rural and Urban Water Supply Schemes 
104 
Appendix-23 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.12; Page 58) 
Delayed schemes relating to shifting of source 
Name of project Status as on 
April-May 2022 
Brief summary 
Estimate for 
providing canal 
based water works 
at village Palsar 
for Group of 3 
nos. villages 
In progress Scrutiny of records in EE, PHED, Fatehabad, it was seen that the said work was related to 
providing canal based water supply to the inhabitants as the tube well based supply was not 
found potable as per sample testing in May 2018 and again in  December 2018. The work 
was allotted to agency on August 2019 with scheduled completion date of April 2020.  The 
said work was still in progress as on May 2022 and these villages were given tube w ell 
based supply till date despite the fact that the ground water had already been declared non-
potable by divisional laboratories. 
Providing 
Independent canal 
based water works 
Bhunderwas 
In progress Scrutiny of records1, it was seen that the estimate for the work “Providing Independent 
canal based water works Bhunderwas” was administratively approved (February 2019) for 
₹ 329.61 lakh. The village was provided tube well based supply and the estimate was 
framed to provide canal based water supply to the inhabitants of the village. The work was 
allotted (August 2019) for an amount of ₹154.42 lakh with date of commencement of 8 
August 2019 to be completed in 12 months (7 August 2020).   It was observed that the work 
was not complete even after laps e of more than 21 months from the scheduled date of 
completion and after incurring an expenditure of ₹ 90.02 lakh (21 st RA bill). Thus, the 
inhabitants are deprived of the benefits of getting canal based water supply and instead of 
tube well based water supply. 
Providing canal 
based water 
supply scheme 
Ibrahimpur group 
of 17 nos. villages 
in district Rewari 
In progress Para 12.3.2 states that divisional officer immediately after taking over the land shall get it 
mutated in favour of the department and get the entry made in jamabandi also. During 
scrutiny of records2, it was seen that an estimate amounting to ₹ 36.02 crore was prepared 
for “Providing canal based water supply scheme Ibrahimpur group of 17 nos. villages in 
district Rewari” which was administratively approved in April 2018. The work was allotted 
(October 2018) for ₹ 11.71 crore with a scheduled completion date of October 2019 (12 
months from date of start). Audit observed that the 65 per cent work was completed by 
February 2021 and ₹ 5.30 crore had been paid to the agency (November 2021).   
The reasons for delay was that the land on which main water works were to be constructed 
were relocated from proposed site of Ibrahimpur to Kheri Murar which also could not be 
taken on board as the land given by Panchayat in the year 2005 for construction of water 
works was not got mutated timely by PHED in favour of department. Resultantly the 
Panchayat objected and demanded to free the Panchayat land from PHED. Thus due to 
lackadaisical approach of the department canal based water supply could not be provided 
to habitants of these 17 villages despite incurring an expenditure of ₹ 5.30 crore. 
Behbalpur village In Progress Principal Secretary to GoH, Development and Panchayats Department, Chandigarh 
instructed (January 2013) the Deputy Commissioners that Gair Mumkin Johars or water 
bodies were not to be diverted to any other use and should be, protected, cleaned and 
recharged. Scrutiny of records3, it was seen that the Behbalpur village was a water quality 
affected area and the underground water of tube well was found not potable (brackish) as 
per water sample report as of February 2016. The supply to the village was tube well based 
and to convert tube well based supply into canal based supply, the Gram Panchayat 
Behbalpur agreed to provide land free of cost to PHED. As per land record, the said land 
was Gair mumkin Johar which as per instructions was not to be transferred for any other 
use. The estimate was sent (July 2017) to Member Secretary, WSSB for arranging its 
administrative approval for ₹ 318.50 lakh. The tender for the said work was allotted 
(October 2018) with stipulated completion date of October 2019. Audit observ ed that 
agency could not start the work as the land on which work was to be done was not suitable 
and no other land was available with the Gram Panchayat. Till date, no land is available 
with the department where the said construction could be carried out. Had the department 
planned effectively and ensured availability of land for timely completion of work, safe and 
potable water would have been available to the inhabitants. Further it was seen that 
department kept on providing non-potable water supply to the inhabitants (June 2020) as 
the villagers/Sarpanch, GP, Behbalpur complained to the authorities about supply of non-
potable water.  
 
 
1 EE, PHED, Tohana. 
2 EE, PHED, Rewari. 
3 EE, PHED, Fatehabad. 

Performance Audit of Rural and Urban Water Supply Schemes 
106 
Appendix-25 
(Reference: Paragraph 6.5; Page 64) 
Details of source testing in rural areas 
Year Total number of water 
sources in rural areas  
Source 
tested 
Percentage of source 
tested 
2016-17 1,00,886 16,533 16.38 
2017-18 1,00,886 10,931 10.84 
2018-19 1,00,886 14,617 14.49 
2019-20 1,00,886 15,456 15.32 
2020-21 1,00,886 35,647 35.33 
Source: E 20 format of e-jalshakti 
  

Appendices 
107 
Appendix-26 
(Reference: Paragraph 6.7.1; Page 65) 
Division wise status of works (PHED) 
Name of 
Division 
Total works 
selected 
Work 
completed 
on time 
Total 
delayed 
works 
Minimum 
delay (in 
months) 
Maximum 
delay (in 
months) 
Remarks 
No.1, Hisar 8 2 6 10 31 -- 
No.2, Hisar 18 5 7 2 42 4 works in progress and 2 works 
not started. 
Hansi 14 3 7 2 37 2 works not started, no record in 
respect of 1 work and nominal 
delay in one work. 
Fatehabad 6 1 5 0 24 -- 
Tohana 6 0 6 10 17 -- 
No.1, Rohtak 9 2 6 6 26 One work in progress schedule 
completion in July 2022. 
No.2, Rohtak 10 7 3 -- -- All work in progress 
Rewari 9 4 4 3 19 One work could not be started 
due to wrong site selection. 
Bawal 20 13 7 2 29 -- 
Kosli 18 0 17 6 14 One work schedule completion 
is in September 2022. 
Faridabad 11 6 4 2 9 No record provided in respect of 
1 work. 
Kurukshetra 35 7 20 1 18 8 works not started due to site 
dispute, non -availability of 
pipes. 
No.1, Karnal 20 2 15 2 15 Three works not started due to 
non-availability of pipes. 
No.2, Karnal 18 2 16 3 14 -- 
Panchkula 19 6 8 4 12 4 works in progress and one 
agreement is wrongly uploaded. 
Total 221 60 131    
 
 

Appendices 
109 
Appendix-28 
(Reference: Paragraph 6.7.2; Page 65) 
Division-wise status of delayed works (selected HSVP & MCs) 
Name of Districts No of 
works 
Delay in months Status 
MC-Hisar,  1 Work in progress Incomplete 
MC-Panchkula 1 Work in progress Incomplete 
MC-Faridabad 5 Min. 1 month to a max. of 24 months Incomplete-1, 
Complete-4 
MC-Rewari 1 Work in progress Incomplete 
MC-Rohtak 1 Work in progress Incomplete 
MC-Karnal 1 17 Complete 
HSVP-Divisions 
HSVP-Hisar, 
Panchkula, Rohtak 
and Rewari 
7 Min. 7 months to a max. of 19 months Incomplete-2, 
Complete-5 
 