 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Government of Kerala 
Report No. 9 of the year 2022 
REPORT OF THE COMPTROLLER AND 
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA 
ON  
WASTE MANAGEMENT IN 
 URBAN LOCAL BODIES 


Presented to the Legislature  
on 14 September 2023  
 
REPORT OF THE  
COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR 
GENERAL OF INDIA  
 
 
ON 
 
WASTE MANAGEMENT IN                      
URBAN LOCAL BODIES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GOVERNMENT OF KERALA 
Report No. 9 of the year 2022 

i 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Para 
No. Description Page No. 
 Preface iii 
 Executive Summary v-ix 
 Chapter I - Introduction  
1.1 Solid Waste Management in Kerala 1 
1.2 Organisational set up 1 
1.3 Audit Objectives 3 
1.4 Audit criteria 3 
1.5 Audit scope, methodology and sampling 4 
1.6 Acknowledgement 4 
 Chapter II - Planning and Financial Management  
2.1 Strategy and Planning for Waste Management 5 
2.2 Financial Management 15 
 Chapter III – Segregation, Collection and Transportation 
of Waste  
3.1 Segregation 21 
3.2 Collection 25 
3.3 Transportation 31 
 Chapter IV– Processing and Disposal of Waste  
4.1 Processing and Treatment 35 
4.2 Disposal 46 
 
Chapter V – Management of Plastic Waste, Bio -Medical 
Waste, E -Waste and Construction and 
Demolition Waste 
 
5.1 Plastic waste 52 
5.2 Bio-medical waste 58 
5.3 E-waste 64 
5.4 Construction and Demolition Waste 66 
 Chapter VI– Monitoring  
6.1 Monitoring by Suchitwa Mission 71 
6.2 Monitoring by Pollution Control Board 72 
6.3 Monitoring by Urban Local Bodies 73 
 
 

Performance Audit of ‘Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies’ 
ii 
Appendices Pages 
Appendix 1: Service Level Benchmarking performance indicators 
and benchmarks pertaining to S olid Waste 
Management 
77 
Appendix 2:   Allocation and Expenditure of various funds for waste 
management in test-checked ULBs 82 
Appendix 3:    Statement showing potential revenue out of User fee 83 
Appendix 4: Segregation of waste at source by Households,  
Government Institutions and Commercial 
establishments  
84 
Appendix 5: Inadequate infrastructure for managing household 
biodegradable waste 85 
Appendix 6:  Details of Thumboormuzhi units installed in test - 
checked ULBs 86 
Appendix 7:  Details of community level biogas plants installed in  
test-checked ULBs 87 
Appendix 8:    Details of dumpsites in selected ULBs 88 
Appendix 9:  Status of compliance of ULBs to Rules relating to 
Plastic Waste Management 89 
Appendix 10: Table showing details of disposal of plastic waste as  
rejects 92 
Appendix 11:  Details of inspections conducted and penalty imposed 
by test-checked ULBs during the period 2016-2021 
 
93 
 
 

 
iii 
  
PREFACE 
 
1. This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India for the year ended 
31 March 2021 has been prepared for submission to the Governor of the State 
of Kerala under Article 151(2) of the Constitution of India  for being placed in 
the State Legislature. 
2. The Report covering the period 2016 -21 contains the results of Performance 
Audit of ‘Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies’. 
3. The audit was conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards issued by 
the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
 
 

 
 
 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

 
V 
 
Executive Summary 
Municipal Solid Waste Management in urban areas has emerged as one of the 
biggest challenges the country faces today. Rapid urbanization has aggravated the 
complexities of the situation. Inadequate management of waste would have  
significant negative impact on public health and environmental outcomes.  
Considering the significance of waste management in urban areas, the Comptroller 
and Auditor General of India took up this performance audit, covering the period 
2016-2021, with an objective to assess whether the strategy and planning of waste 
management in ULBs was in accordance with extant provisions and supported by 
adequate institutional mechanism. Audit also proposed to analyse whether the tasks 
and projects associated with management of waste ( all through the stages of 
segregation, collection, transportation, processing and disposal) in ULBs were 
planned, implemented and maintained in an effective manner. Care was also taken 
to examine  the extent to which the risks to environment posed by waste were 
identified and minimised. 
The 22 test-checked ULBs adopted per capita estimates of waste generation without 
conducting any survey, during the audit period 2016-2021. We observed that this 
method had low level of reliability. No scientific study has so far been conducted 
to assess the quantity, composition and physical and chemical characteristics of the 
waste generated in the State.   
There was delay of over  two years in the preparation of the State Policy and over 
four years in the formulation of State Strategy on waste management.  The test-
checked ULBs did not prepare short term or long-term plans. Byelaws were either 
not prepared or not approved by Government.  
Preparation of several Detailed Project Reports over a very short period without 
proper gap analysis of institutional capacity resulted in non -incorporation of 
comprehensive data regarding the existing waste management system. Due to non-
preparation/delay in preparation of DPRs by eleven  ULBs in the State, ULBs lost 
Central assistance to the tune of ₹ 45.82 crore.  
Audit noticed r ampant use of banned plastic carry bags  in all test -checked ULBs 
and low utilization of shredded plastic in road construction works. Material 
Collection Facilities and Resource Recovery Facilities were either not installed or 
non-functional in the ULBs. Informal waste collectors/waste pickers were not seen 
integrated into the formal waste management system.  
Implementation of Solid waste management projects in ULBs was undertaken 
utilising funds received from Central/ State Governments as well as  Own funds. 
Test-checked ULBs utili sed only 0.48 to 1.66 per cent of Development fund for 
waste management , which was much lower than the prescribed 10 -15 per cent. 
While fourteen ULBs did not utilise Own funds for implementing any SWM project 

Performance Audit of ‘Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies’ 
 
vi 
 
during the five -year audit period , the percentage of utili sation by the remaining 
eight was only upto 5.34 per cent.  
Low priority was accorded to Information, E ducation and Communication 
activities as reflected in absence of Strategy/Plan/targets at State/District/ULB 
level, besides poor utilisation of funds. 
Incomplete segregation of waste at source and secondary levels resulted in flow of 
mixed waste to processing sites. Colour coded bins were not provided to households 
in all test-checked ULBs. Disposal of huge quantity of rejects by ULBs was noticed 
due to improper segregation at source level and secondary stage. Very few 
restaurants/community halls in test -checked ULBs had source level treatment 
facilities. Though installation of source level treatment facility was mandatory in 
apartments, only 52 per cent (286 out of 548) of apartments had the facility. Only 
three test-checked ULBs had a system for collection of poultry waste , and food 
waste was seen disposed by restaurants to pig farms . The test-checked ULBs did 
not have a system for collection of domestic hazardous waste, sanitary waste and 
horticulture waste. Test-checked ULBs were far from achieving 100 per cent door-
to-door collection of waste. Besides, t he State has no landfill facility for disposal 
of waste. The only landfill site in the State at Ambalamedu for disposal of hazardous 
waste is being used for disposal of mixed/ non-hazardous waste. 
The ULBs used open vehicles or vehicles without partition for waste transportation, 
which was against the Rules . In Kochi and Thiruvananthapuram Corporations, 
vehicles owned by the local bodies were off the road for want of timely repair and 
receipt of fitness certificates, while private vehicles continued to be hired for waste 
transportation.  
Audit observed huge accumulation of wastes in the Centralised processing plant of 
Kochi Corporation at Brahmapuram  which has been functioning without the 
authorisation of Pollution Control Board for several years. Leachate treatment plant 
was non -functional at the processing f acilities in Brahmapuram and 
Njaliyanparamba. Out of the 14 dumpsites  in test -checked ULBs , remediation 
works had not commenced in any of the Municipalities.   
The absence of proper segregation of waste led to mixing of solid waste with plastic 
waste, bio -medical waste and e -waste. Several Healthcare institutions were 
functioning without authorisation and resorting to unauthorised means of disposal 
of bio-medical waste, thereby endangering the environment . Though bio-medical 
waste is to be treated and disposed within 48 hours, there was a huge backlog at the 
IMAGE facility at Palakkad due to insufficient disposal capacity. The KEIL facility 
on the other hand, handled only 6.2 tonnes, despite capacity to handle 16 tonnes per 
day.   
Test-checked ULBs did not collect or channelise e -waste to authori sed 
dismantlers/recyclers and e -waste was found mixed with municipal solid waste. 

Executive Summary 
 
  
 
vii 
 
None of the test -checked ULBs had a system in place for accounting , collecting 
and disposing Construction and Demolition waste.  
Recommendations 
I Planning and Financial Management 
 Government must ensure that scientific estimation of quantity and 
composition of waste generated in Urban Local Bodies are taken up on 
priority basis to establish adequate treatment and disposal facilities of all 
categories of waste. Waste moving through the system needs to be 
quantified at multiple locations in different seasons, to assess the actual 
quantities of waste available for processing and disposal, so as to identify 
and plan for innovative and efficient treatment technologies. 
(Recommendation 1) 
 Government must ensure that Urban Local Bodies formulate Municipal 
Solid Waste Management Plans and have approved Byelaws in place for 
effective management of waste. The waste management plans formulated 
may also provide for integration of informal waste pickers into the formal 
system of waste management. 
(Recommendation 2) 
 Government must promote Information, Education and Communication 
(IEC) campaign by ULBs in a sustained manner by formulating yearly 
plans and targets for effective utilisation of available funds. Government 
must undertake IEC campaign through its Public Relations wings and 
other agencies, to create public awareness among waste generators on the 
need to minimise waste generation, re -use waste to the extent possible, 
practise segregation of waste and desist from littering in public spaces. 
(Recommendation 3) 
 Government must ensure that U LBs enhance the extent of utilis ation of 
Central/State funds and Own Revenue allocated for waste management. 
They may take earnest efforts to step up collection of Service Cess and 
User fee, so as to contribute to expenditure on waste management 
activities.  
(Recommendation 4) 
 Government must con sider fixing a mandatory minimum percentage of 
expenditure to be incurred exclusively on solid waste management by the 
Local Self Government Institutions.   
(Recommendation 5) 
 
 

Performance Audit of ‘Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies’ 
 
viii 
 
II SEGREGATION, COLLECTION AND TRANSPORTATION OF 
WASTE 
 Government must ensure that ULBs adopt effective strategies for 
segregation of waste at various levels, viz. source/ household, centrali sed 
sorting facility and waste processing sites, door -to-door collection of 
domestic hazardous waste and sanitary waste and provid ing separate 
colour coded bins at public places to enable effective segregation and 
collection of waste. 
(Recommendation 6) 
 Government/ULBs must ensure that a realistic assessment of vehicles 
used by ULBs for transportation of waste is undertaken . Urgent action 
needs to be initiated for executing maintenance/repair works of vehicles 
to limit hiring of vehicles while keeping own vehicles off the road for 
prolonged periods. 
(Recommendation 7) 
III PROCESSING AND DISPOSAL OF WASTE 
 Government/ULBs must ensure adequate resources to implement source 
level treatment facilities for processing of biodegradable waste and 
handhold households/institutions for effective utili sation of the facilities 
provided. Government must also set up adequ ate number of community 
level facilities for processing spillover waste from all sources. 
(Recommendation 8) 
 Government must ensure that mixed waste generated gets segregated at 
source points itself and biodegradable waste alone reach the Centralised  
processing plants at Brahmapuram and Njaliyanparamba.  Government 
must also urge the Corporations to set up Leachate treatment plants to 
treat the leachate generated, thereby preventing pollution of nearby water 
bodies and farmlands. 
(Recommendation 9) 
IV MANAGEMENT OF PLASTIC WASTE, BIO -MEDICAL WASTE, 
E-WASTE AND CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WASTE 
 Government must direct State Pollution Control Board to establish a 
mechanism by which Producers, Importers and Brand owners of products 
fulfill their Extended Producer Responsibility (EPR) obligation under 
Plastic Waste and E-waste Management Rules 2016. 
(Recommendation 10) 
 With a view to maximise the possibility of reduction, reuse and recycling 
(3R strategy) of waste generated, Government must ensure that ULBs 
effectively implement ban on single use plastic, promote substitutes for 

Executive Summary 
 
  
 
ix 
 
plastic carry bags, use non -recyclable shredded plastic in roads,  
operationalise Waste-to-energy plants, etc. 
(Recommendation 11) 
 Government must ensure that ULBs set up Material Collection Facilities 
(MCF) in all wards to facilitate proper segregation of recyclable portion 
of plastic waste. 
(Recommendation 12) 
 Government must initiate urgent steps for establishing Common Bio -
medical Waste Management Facilities at regional level to ensure disposal 
of bio-medical waste within the time limit and distance specified in the 
Rules.  Government and the State Pollution Control B oard must oversee 
that Health care facilities (HCFs) are functioning with proper 
authorisation and that solid/liquid bio -medical waste generated in these 
HCFs are treated effectively. 
(Recommendation 13) 
 ULBs must place appropriate containers for collection of Construction 
and Demolition (C&D) waste and identify land for establishing 
processing plant for C&D waste generated within their jurisdiction. 
(Recommendation 14) 
V MONITORING 
 Government and the State Pollution Control Board must jointly establish 
an effective mechanism for monitoring the performance of solid waste 
management system, complying with extant Rules. Government must also 
operationalise computerised Management Information System (MIS) and 
resort to stringent action to curb instances of violation of Waste 
Management Rules. 
(Recommendation 15) 
 
 

 
CHAPTER I 
INTRODUCTION 
Brahmapuram dumpsite, 
Kochi Corporation 
November 2021 

 
 
1 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
INTRODUCTION 
Waste comprise of materials which a generator has no further use of in 
production, transformation or consumption, and which is required to be 
disposed of. Wastes are generally classified as Municipal Solid Waste (MSW), 
Bio-medical W aste (BMW), Construction and Demolition  (C&D) waste, E -
waste, Plastic waste and H azardous waste by virtue of their nature. They are 
also classified as biodegradable, non-biodegradable, combustible, dry and inert 
based on their characteristics.  Proper waste management presents an 
opportunity not only to avoid the detrimental impacts associated with waste, but 
also to recover resources, realise environmental, economic and social benefits 
and take a step on the road to a sustainable future. Scientific disposal of solid 
waste through segregation, collection , transportation, processing a nd disposal 
in an environmentally acceptable manner minimises its adverse impact on 
public health and environment.  
1.1 Solid Waste Management in Kerala 
Kerala, with a total population of 3. 34 crore1, urban population of 1.59 crore 
(47.70 per cent) and annual urban population growth of 6.50 per cent, has been 
urbanizing at a rapid pace. The total solid waste genera tion in Kerala is 
estimated at 3.70 million tonnes annually, of which 2.17 million tonnes (59 per 
cent) are contributed by Urban Local Bodies  (ULBs). Of the total waste 
generated in the State, the share of biodegradable and non-biodegradable waste 
is at 69 per cent and 31 per cent respectively. The scientific processing and 
disposal of waste including  the development of infrastructure for collection, 
storage, segregation, transportation, processing and disposal of MSW is an 
obligatory duty of the U LBs. Currently, the waste management system in the 
State focuses on the citizens’ responsibility to manage biodegradable waste at 
source, under the campaign ‘My waste, my responsibility’, thereby instilling a 
sense of ownership and duty with regard to waste management.  
1.2 Organisational set up 
The Additional Chief Secretary, Local Self Government Department is the head 
of the administrative department of ULBs. The Municipal Secretary of each 
Corporation/Municipality is the administrative head of the ULB and is assisted 
by the Health Officer/Health Supervisor /Health Inspector in the management 
of MSW.  
1.2.1 Responsibilities of different departments and agencies 
The Kerala Municipality Act, 1994 (KM Act), promulgated in line with the 74th 
Constitution Amendment, pro vides the legal framework which enables the 
ULBs to function as the third tier of Government. ULBs are thus empowered to 
perform functions and implement schemes in relation to 18 subjects specified 
in the Twelfth s chedule, which includes Solid Waste Manag ement. The 
departments and agencies involved in waste  management in the State and the 
roles assigned to them are represented in Table 1.1: 
                                                 
1 As per 2011 census 

Performance Audit of ‘Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies’ 
 
2 
 
Table 1.1: Departments and agencies involved in waste management in 
the State and the roles assigned to them 
Department / Agency Roles 
Local Self-Government 
Department (LSGD) 
 
Formulation of policies, overseeing of various 
service delivery and regulatory agencies 
associated with decentrali sed governance, 
monitoring of performance of local 
governments in their regulatory and service 
delivery functions, standardisation of planning 
processes, technical norms and financial 
integrity through guidelines issued from time 
to time. 
Environment Department  
 
 
Nodal department for planning, promotion, 
coordination, and overseeing the 
implementation of Central/State 
environmental protection and conservation 
policies/programmes and issue of directions to 
implement the Plastic Waste Management 
Rules, 2016.  
Kerala State Pollution 
Control Board (KSPCB) 
 
 
Implementation of various rules in the State 
under Environment (Protection) Act, 1986. 
The principal agency for monitoring a nd 
controlling waste management,  enforces the 
Solid Waste Management Rules, 2016  and 
related rules, monitors compliance of 
Extended Producer Responsibility for E-waste 
and environmental standards , with strict 
adherence to the conditions specified for waste 
processing and disposal sites. 
Suchitwa Mission (SM) 
 
 
Technical Support Group in the waste 
management sector under LSGD. Responsible 
for providing technical and managerial support 
to Local Self Governments of the State. 
Haritha Keralam Mission 
(HKM) 
 
 
An umbrella mission combining three 
subsidiary missions of hygienic waste 
management, water conservation and 
agricultural development.  
Clean Kerala Company 
Limited (CKCL) 
 
 
Comprehensive management of all harmful 
rejections in the state, management of plastic 
waste and e -waste, establishing Material 
Collection Facility (MCF) and Resource 
Recovery Facility (RRF) in ULBs by 

 
Chapter I - Introduction 
 
3 
 
Department / Agency Roles 
arranging shredding machines, ba iling 
machines etc. and their maintenance.    
(Source: Official websites of the Departments/Agencies) 
Chart 1.1 depicts the authorities at different levels in the management of MSW 
in the State. 
Chart 1.1: Various authorities involved in the management of Municipal 
Solid Waste  
 
 
1.3 Audit Objectives 
The Performance Audit was conducted to assess whether: 
 the strategy and planning of waste management in ULBs was in accordance 
with extant provisions and supported by an adequate institutional 
mechanism   
 the tasks and projects associated with waste management (segregation, 
collection, transportation, processing and disposal ) in ULBs were planned, 
implemented and maintained in an effective, efficient and financially 
sustainable manner and were adequate to meet the requirements of the ULBs 
and 
  the risks to environment posed by waste were identified and minimised. 
1.4 Audit Criteria 
The observations in the report were benchmarked against criteria derived from:  
 Kerala Municipality Act and Rules, 1994 
 Solid Waste Management Rules, 2016  
 Manual of Municipal Solid Waste Management, 2016 


Performance Audit of ‘Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies’ 
 
4 
 
 State Policy on Solid Waste Management, 2018 
 Waste Management Rules , 2016 w ith respect to  E-waste, Plastic waste, 
Construction and Demolition waste and Bio-medical waste  
 The Environment (Protection) Act and Rules, 1986  
 Orders/judgements of National Green Tribunal 
 Instructions, guidelines  and policies issued by Central Pollution Control 
Board, Kerala State Pollution Control Board, Government of 
India/Government of Kerala, various parastatal agencies, etc. on solid waste 
management from time to time. 
1.5 Audit Scope, Methodology and Sampling  
A Performance Audit (PA) on Solid Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
was included in the Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India on 
Local Self-Government Institutions for the year ended  31 March 2010, which 
was discussed (January 2022) by the Local Fund Accounts Committee. The 
recommendations of the Committee are awaited. The present PA examined the 
efficacy of system of management of waste including solid waste, Plastic waste, 
Bio-medical waste, E-waste and C&D waste in the selected ULBs, covering the 
period from 2016-17 to 2020-21. The Entry conference of the PA was held on 
23 June 2021 with the Additional Chief Secretary, Local Self Government 
Department (ACS LSGD), in which the audit methodology, scope,  objectives 
and criteria were explained and agreed upon. The Exit Conference was held on 
12 May 2022 with ACS LSGD, wherein the audit findings in the PA report were 
discussed in detail . The audit methodology involved  scrutiny of records, 
analysis of responses to audit queries, joint physical verifications  with 
municipal staff and collection of photographic/videographic evidence. 
For selection of units, the 14 districts in the State were ranked based on the risk 
criteria viz., expenditure incurred by the ULBs for waste management activities, 
population of ULBs and quantity of waste generated. Three districts from high-
risk category and two from low -risk category were sele cted to get a 
representative sample of five districts, by simple random sampling methodology 
using IDEA software . The districts selected were Thiruvananthapuram, 
Alappuzha, Ernakul am, Malappuram and Kozhikode. All the Municipal 
Corporations in the selected  districts, viz., Thiruvananthapuram, Kochi and 
Kozhikode Corporations and 40 per cent of the Municipalities in the selected 
districts (19 Municipalities2) were selected for audit based on simple random 
sampling using IDEA Software.  
1.6 Acknowledgement 
Audit acknowledges the cooperation and assistance extended by the Local Self-
Government Department, Government of Kerala, Directorate of Urban Affairs, 
Suchitwa Mission and all test-checked ULBs in the smooth conduct of the PA. 
                                                 
2  Thiruvananthapuram - Neyyattinkara, Nedumangad;  
Alappuzha - Alappuzha, Kayamkulam, Mavelikkara;  
Ernakulam - Angamaly, Muvattupuzha , Aluva, Eloor, Kothamangalam, Maradu;  
Malappuram - Malappuram , Parappanangadi, Perinthalmanna, Nilambur, Manjeri;                      
Kozhikode - Koyilandy, Feroke, Vadakara 

 
 
CHAPTER II 
PLANNING AND FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 
Palayam Market,  
Thiruvananthapuram Corporation 
July 2021 

 
 
5 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
PLANNING AND FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 
The quantity and composition of Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) generated in 
the ULB determine the collection, processing and disposal options that could be 
adopted for waste management. ULBs did not conduct any survey to assess the 
quantity of waste generated in its jurisdictional area. They did not maintain data 
on quantum of various categories of waste generated within their jurisdiction.  
The ULBs adopted per capita generation/  population estimation method for 
assessing the extent of waste generated. Comparison of details of composition 
of solid waste as per three different sources of data revealed significant 
variations in the share of components involved.    
The ULBs did not prepare Solid Waste Management (SWM) Plans, 
Contingency Plans and Byelaws as prescribed in the SWM Rules. There were 
many deficiencies in the Detailed Project Reports prepared by the test-checked 
ULBs, which necessitated their revision. Eleven ULBs did not receive Central 
share worth ₹45.82 crore, due to non -preparation and timely submission of 
DPRs. The ULBs did not conduct a realistic assessment of performance against 
Service Level Benchmarks. The Information, Education and Communication 
activities undertaken by ULBs were n ot adequate to ensure sustained 
behavioural change in the local population towards waste management.   
The financial management of ULBs with respect to SWM indicates scope for 
improvement in utilisation of Own funds, Development (General) fund, SBM-
Urban fund and Service Cess. The ULBs also need to ensure collection of User 
fee from public/institutions, for services rendered through Haritha Karma Sena. 
The ULBs need to attend on priority basis, to the issue of effective estimation 
of quantity of waste generated. IEC activities need to be strengthened and 
financial management made more effective, to ensure efficient utilisation of  
available sources of funds. 
2.1 Strategy and Planning for Waste Management 
2.1.1 Generation and assessment of waste 
The Municipal Solid Waste Management (MSWM) Manual lays down that the 
quantity and composition of Municipal Solid Waste ( MSW) generated in the 
ULB determines the collection, processing  and disposal options that could be 
adopted for waste management . For the purpose of long term planning, the 
average amount of waste disposed by a specific class of generators may be 
estimated only by averaging data from several samples to be collected 
continuously over seven days at mu ltiple representative locations, in summer, 
winter and rainy season s. Waste should be aggregated over the seven -day 
period, weighed and averaged3.  
                                                 
3 For short term planning, waste generated in at least 100 representative sampling locations per 
1,00,000 population were to be collected to assess the waste composition. The figures were to 
be extrapolated to the entire ULB and divided by the population to arrive at the per capita waste 
generation rates. 

Performance Audit of ‘Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies’ 
 
6 
 
Details of MSW generated in all 93 ULBs in the State and test-checked 22 ULBs 
during 2016-17 to 2020-21 are given below: 
Table 2.1: Solid waste generation in ULBs 
(Weight in tonnes) 
 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 
Quantity of waste generated in 93 
ULBs  
Certified 
data not 
furnished 
3831.55 3903.02 3521.00 3543.00 
Quantity of waste generated in 22 
test-checked ULBs (SPCB data) 
Certified 
data not 
furnished 
1584.03 1684.74 1610.00 1564.00 
Quantity of waste generated in 22 
test-checked ULBs (as reported by 
ULBs)  
 
1278.04 
 
1286.65 1293.75 1298.79 1307.10 
 
Audit scrutiny revealed that the ULBs did not conduct any survey to assess the 
quantity of waste generated in its jurisdictional area. They did not maintain data 
on quantum of E-waste, Bio -medical waste, Construction and Demolition 
(C&D) waste and domestic hazardous waste generated. The ULBs adopted per 
capita generation/population estimation method for assessing the extent of 
waste generated. The per capita generation of waste reckoned by Local Self-
Government Institutions (LSGIs) was 240-350 grams/day and 300-400 
grams/day for Municipalities and Corporations respectively. However, based on 
the survey conducted (1999-2000) by the Central Pollution Control Board 
(CPCB), per capita generation  of waste was  assumed in 2018-19 as 500g in 
Million Plus cities4 and 400 g in Class I towns5, whereas the Report on Strategic 
Environmental Assessment of Waste Management in Kerala prepared by 
Suchitwa Mission for Kerala Solid Waste Management Project (KSWMP) 
estimated (2020) per capita waste generated in Municipalities and Municipal 
Corporations as 419 and 545 g/day respectively.  
Audit observed that none of the ULBs had followed a systematic procedure of 
estimation of average amount of waste generated based on samples collected in 
seven days each in three seasons from multiple representative locations. In the 
absence of a scientific estimation of waste generation as prescribed in MSWM 
Manual, the current planning in SWM was not  adequate. Further, u nder-
estimation of quantum of waste generated may lead to construction of facilities 
with inadequate capacities to meet performance standards. 
Composition of solid waste  
Composition of waste would  determine the applicability of waste processing 
technology. None of the test-checked ULBs assessed composition of solid waste 
generated. Audit attempted a comparison of details of composition of solid 
waste as per WSP 6-SWM sector assessment Report (2007), State Policy on 
SWM (2018) and KSWMP Report (2020) as shown in Table 2.2:      
 
  
                                                 
4 Cities with population of one million and above 
5 Towns with population of one lakh and more  
6 Water and Sanitation Programme of World Bank 

 
Chapter II – Planning and Financial Management 
 
7 
 
Table 2.2: Details of composition of solid waste as per WSP -SWM sector                                                              
assessment report, KSWMP report and State Policy 
Type of solid waste 
Percentage as per 
WSP - SWM 
Sector Assessment 
Report 
Percentage as per 
KSWMP Report 
Percentage as per 
State Policy 
Organic waste 62 79 77 
Plastics 8.69 11 4 
Paper 6.94 4 6 
Rag/cloth 6.73 Not mentioned Not mentioned 
Glass 3.25 0 1 
Metals 2.2 0 1 
Other waste 10.10 6 6 
Inert Not mentioned Not mentioned 5 
Unless a scientific assessment undertaken during a period of seven days at 
multiple representative locations in each of the three main seasons  is adopted, 
inconsistencies in estimation of composition of waste would continue.     
Physical and chemical characteristics of waste  
Critical parameters for selecting the appropriate processing technology are 
quantity and characteristics viz., density, moisture, calorific value, toxicity, etc. 
of waste. Bio -chemical characteristics of waste determine the suitability of 
specific treatment processes. The calorific value of garbage will help to select 
the treatment technologies like Waste -to-Energy and other thermal processes. 
However, the 22  test-checked ULBs have not assessed the physical a nd 
chemical characteristics of waste generated  by them. Even Suchitwa Mission, 
the State nodal agency for SWM, vested with the responsibility to extend 
technical and financial assistance to Local Bodies for handling sol id/special 
waste, has not conducted  any study so far , to assess the quantity as well as 
physical and chemical characteristics of waste generated in the State. 
Accepting the observation, Government replied (May 2022) that  though 
Suchitwa Mission entered into agreement with the Socio Economic Unit 
Foundation (SEUF) in December 2019 to conduct such a study, the study has 
been put on hold due to outbreak of COVID-19 pandemic.  
2.1.2 Delay in preparation of State Policy and strategy  
The Secretary, Urban Development Department was to prepare a Policy and a 
Solid Waste Management Strategy within one year from the date of notification 
of SWM Rules7. The Hon’ble Supreme Court imposed (July 2018) a penalty of 
₹1,00,000 on Government of Kerala (G oK) for failure in framing the State 
Policy. Subsequently, GoK notified the State Policy in September 2018. Delay 
also occurred in the formulation of Solid Waste Management Strategy , issued 
in May 2020. Delayed formulation of  Policy (2018) and Strategy  (2020) 
adversely impacted the efficacy in planning process, as detailed below:  
 
 
                                                 
7As per Rule 11(a) of SWM Rules, 2016 issued by Ministry of Environment, Forests and 
Climate Change 

Performance Audit of ‘Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies’ 
 
8 
 
2.1.2.1 Preparation of Municipal Solid Waste Management plan 
Every ULB is to prepare a Solid Waste Management Plan8, within six months 
from the date of notification of State policy . The Manual also emphasised the 
need to prepare a detailed SWM plan comprising long term plans of 25 years 
which are divided into short term plan periods of five years.9 
The test-checked ULBs did not prepare SWM plans in the manner prescribed in 
the Rules. In the absence of long term/short term action plans specifying goals 
to be achieved, the ULBs were implementing waste management projects to 
address a scenario prevailing at a particular point of time or issues demanding 
short term remedial measures. Despite the existence of a technical support 
agency Suchitwa Mission , to handhold and assist ULBs in evolving a well -
formulated SWM plan, the test-checked ULBs failed to formulate SWM plan to 
provide a framework for implementation of appropriate systems and 
technologies for processing and disposal of waste. 
The Manual also stipulated that ULBs were to prepare contingency plans for 
appropriate storage of waste, to tide  over situations of non -performance of 
processing/treatment/disposal facilities. None of the tes t-checked ULBs ha d 
prepared a contingency plan so far. 
Government replied (May 2022) that analysis of the existing waste management 
system was being done based on a scientific study so as to identify the gaps in  
collection, storage, transportation, processing, disposal, vehicles, Operation and 
Maintenance, etc. It was also stated that a ll ULBs had approved the SWM 
Action Plan by the respective Councils and that SWM Action Plan and approved 
time schedule were being reviewed by district committees. However, no records 
pertaining to the scientific study were  furnished to Audit. Further, t he test-
checked ULBs replied to Audit that no long term/ short term SWM plans have 
been prepared by them so far (March 2021).  
2.1.2.2 Preparation of Byelaws on waste management 
It is the duty of the local authority to frame Byelaws10 incorporating provisions 
of Waste Management Rules within one year from the date of notification of 
the Rules. Local authorities were to prescribe criteria for levying spot fine and 
delegate powers to officers or local bodies to levy spot fines on violators. Also, 
all waste generators shall pay such user fee for solid waste management as 
specified in the Byelaws of local bodies.    
As per Section 572 of KM Act, 1994, no Byelaw shall have effec t without 
Governmental confirmation11. Thirteen out of the 22 test-checked ULBs did not 
frame Byelaws.  Five ULBs framed integrated Byelaw on solid and plastic waste 
management. Four ULBs framed separate Bye laws on solid and plastic waste 
                                                 
8  As per Rule 15 of the SWM Rules, 2016 
9 The five year short term plan was to be broken up into specific action plans covering aspects 
of institutional strengthening, community mobilisation, waste minimisation initiatives, waste 
collection and transportation, treatment and disposal, financial out lay, etc. to facilitate 
achievement of targets in the long term plan. The short term plan was to be reviewed every 
two or three years, to ensure mid-course correction and ease of implementation.  
10vide Rule 15 of Solid Waste Management Rules, 2016, Rule 6.4 of Plastic Waste Management 
Rules, 2016 and Rule 4(3) of SWM Rules  
11 the Byelaw shall come into operation on the date of its publication in the Gazette 

 
Chapter II – Planning and Financial Management 
 
9 
 
management. Three12 ULBs forwarded the Byelaws to Government for 
approval, which is still awaited (March 2022). As such, the delay in issuing 
model Byelaws13/ approving the Byelaws by Government would contribute to 
the inability of ULBs in enforcing rates of penalty prescribed in the Byelaws, 
and their timely revision . Further, the penalty  even if imposed, had no legal 
validity.   
Government replied  (May 2022) that 40 and 60 ULBs have a pproved Solid 
Waste and Plastic Waste Management Byelaws respectively. Further, ₹49.97 
lakh has been collected as spot fine (2020-21) and 120 cases registered against 
violators. However, t he reply did not indicate Government approv al/ gazette 
publication of the Byelaws. 
Delayed/ Defective preparation of Detailed Project Reports  
Government of India (GoI) launched Swachh Bharat Mission-Urban (SBM-U) 
in October 2014 ; SWM was one of its components. ULBs were to prepare 
Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) 14 for SWM in consultation with the State 
Government. The Government would handhold UL Bs in preparing DPRs 
without delay , by shortlisting/identifying private or government agencies.  
Suchitwa Mission was the nodal agency for implementation of the scheme in 
the State. Audit observed the following deficiencies in the process of 
formulation of DPRs:   
 The State High Power ed Committee (SHPC) 15was constituted in October 
2015, one year after issue of SBM-U Guidelines. The first SHPC (February 
2016) decided in favour of  individual DPRs. The State Level Empowered 
Committee (SLEC)16 constituted in March 2017 entrusted Suchitwa Mission 
with the task of technical and economic appraisal of DPRs for SWM, before 
submission to SLEC. DPRs approved by SLEC were to be recommended to 
MoHUA17. Only five meetings were  held for approving DPRs.  The first 
SLEC convened  in July 2017 decided to invest GoI funds in common 
infrastructure18 for ULBs  and entrusted Suchitwa Mission with the 
preparation of DPRs for setting up sanitary landfill in four districts. Based 
on the feedback from districts 19, it was decided to prepare DP Rs for 
individual projects so as to avoid lapse of funds; the first batch of 57 DPRs 
were approved by SLEC in April 2018 20, following which the first 
instalment of funds was released  (June 2018 ) by GoI . Thus, there was  
procedural delay of over three years i n formulation/approval of DPRs of 
SWM projects.    
                                                 
12 Thiruvananthapuram, Kozhikode Corporations, Nedumangad Municipality  
13  Model byelaw on SWM Rules 2016 approved by GoK in April 2022 
14 As per Paragraph 7.2 of SBM-U Guidelines 
15 vested with the responsibility to evaluate, scrutinise and approve DPRs 
16 SLEC was designated as the State High Powered Committee in January 2017  
17 Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs 
18 like sanitary landfill and recycling industries 
19 which revealed that the process of identification of land for sanitary landfill and execution of 
infrastructure required time and might not be completed during the Mission period  
20 The preparation of DPRs commenced only in January 2018  

Performance Audit of ‘Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies’ 
 
10 
 
 Eighty six out of 93 ULBs prepared their DPRs and got them approved by 
SLEC during the period 2018-2021. Of these, 82 DPRs received funds from 
GoI. Thus, 11 ULBs did not receive Central share worth ₹45.82 crore21.  
 Preparation of DPRs within short duration  (12 DPRs prepared by single 
agency22 in 50 days)  resulted in non-adherence to preparation of 
comprehensive data regarding the existing source level waste processing 
facilities in ULBs, quantification of waste in three different seasons, 
analysis of physical and chemical characteristics of waste generated , etc. 
envisaged in the SWM Rules and Manual, besides necessitating revision of 
31 DPRs (out of 86 DPRs approved by SLEC). 
 An important step in planning process is the critical assessment of current 
scenario of waste management in the ULB and identification of gaps that 
need to be bridged. Gaps with respect to human resources, institutional 
capacity, infrastructure, financial resources, availability of essential data, 
land availability, stakeholder willingness as well as Information, Education 
and Communication (IEC) needs of the community were to be identified 
and addressed. 
Audit observed that the test -checked ULBs had not assessed the existing 
waste management system to identify the above gaps. Though GoI issued 
(November 2017) a separate template for gap analysis for detecting lacunae 
in existing system of waste management,  Suchitwa Mission did not issue 
instructions to the empanelled agencies to adhere to  the template , while 
preparing DPRs. Audit scrutiny of DPRs of test-checked ULBs revealed 
deficiencies such as non-preparation of comprehensive data regarding the 
existing source level waste processing facilities in ULBs, non -conduct of 
gap analysis in institutional capacity, infrastructure, IEC , etc. Assessment 
of generation of C&D waste, domestic hazardous  waste, etc. was not 
included in the DPRs. 
The DPRs of Eloor and Ang amali Municipalities had exactly similar data for 
road length and beat allocation of sweeping staff.  Even the name of the former 
Municipality was seen printed in place of the latter in its DPR. Kayamkulam 
Municipality included eight projects for construction of Thumboormuzhi23 units 
in its DPR whereas these projects had already been completed in previous years. 
Such instances strongly suggest that the DPRs were hastily prepared without 
gap analysis, possibly to avoid lapse of funds earmarked.  
 Though guidel ines for preparation of DPR issued by Suchitwa Mission 
envisaged identification of suitable land for setting up infrastructure units 
like Material Collection Facility (MCF), Material Recovery Facility (MRF), 
decentralised waste treatment units, Thumboormuzhi model aerobic bins, 
etc. at the time of  formulation of DPRs, DPRs were approved  by SLEC 
without ensuring land availability. Thiruvananthapuram Corporation’s 
project for the construction of 154 Thumboormuzhi aerobic bin  units and 
                                                 
21 Loss of funds to seven ULBs was on account of non-preparation of DPRs. In the case of four 
ULBs delay in preparation of DPRs resulted in GoI declining payment and directing to submit 
fresh proposals under SBM-U 2.0, to be launched in October 2021  
22 Socio Economic Unit Foundation (SEUF) 
23 Aerobic compost unit known after the name of the place Thumboormuzhi in Thrissur district 

 
Chapter II – Planning and Financial Management 
 
11 
 
Kayamkulam Muni cipality’s project for MCF, aerobic compost and 
windrow compost included in the DPR without ensuring the availability of 
land could not be proceeded with , as no land was identified ( November 
2021).  
 As per SBM -U Guidelines, litter control interventions and dumpsite 
remediation and Operation and Maintenance arrangements should 
necessarily be integrated in the DPR. However, these were not included in 
the DPRs prepared by 2024 test-checked ULBs. Though Kayamkulam 
Municipality included project for dumpsite remediation in the DPR, no 
detailed plan was prepared and action initiated so far (January 2022). Eight 
community level biogas plants installed by Thiruvananthapuram 
Corporation turned defunct as O&M arrangements were not taken care of.   
 Though District Level Monitoring and Review Committees (DLMRCs) 
were constituted (December 2015), the Committees in the five districts25 in 
which test -checked ULBs were located , never met. Key r esponsibilities 
entrusted viz., ensuring the implementation of programmes in accordance 
with the guidelines, monitoring of physical / financial progress, reviewing 
bottlenecks and suggesting solutions, etc. remained unattended.  
Government responded (May 2022) that owing to the need for early submission 
of DPRs, ULBs prepared DPRs on the assumption that they could 
identify/purchase land within the mission period. However, several roadblocks 
occurred which resulted in non -implementation of such projects. The reply is 
suggestive of the  lax approach of the ULBs and Suchitwa Mission in timely 
preparation of DPRs. Undue delay reflected adversely upon timely discharge of 
core tasks from segregation till disposal of waste.  Government also informed 
that O&M arrangements as required in all projects would be followed up and 
incorporated in new DPRs.  
2.1.3 Institutional setup 
2.1.3.1 Non-constitution of SWM Cell 
For planning an effective and advanced Municipal SWM system, it is essential 
to have an efficient institutional structure along with adequate infrastructure and 
equipment. Section 1.4.5.4 of MSWM Manual, 2016 strongly recommends that 
ULBs should have SWM Department/Cell having staff with technical and 
managerial skills specific to Municipal SWM.  
Contrary to the above, none of the test -checked ULBs had a dedicated  SWM 
Department/Cell with staff possessing technical and managerial skills specific 
to MSW management. In all the ULBs, the Health wing, headed by the Health 
Officer who was a Doctor/Health Supervisor/Health Inspector managed SWM 
activities, over and above the health related responsibilities assigned to him .  
Though Thiruvananthapuram and Kochi Corporations ha d engaged an 
Environmental Engineer each on contract basis, they were not  assigned 
managerial function s. An exclusive SWM Cell endowed with adequate staff 
                                                 
24 Kochi and Kozhikode Corporations did not prepare DPRs 
25 Thiruvananthapuram, Alappuzha, Ernakulam, Malappuram, Kozhikode 

Performance Audit of ‘Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies’ 
 
12 
 
skilled in SWM, could attend to the functions and responsibilities wrt. 
implementation of waste management in a professional and obligated manner. 
Government replied (May 2022) that KSWMP wou ld provide qualified waste 
management professionals in every ULB. 
2.1.3.2 Service level benchmarks 
The Ministry of Urban Development (MoUD), Government of India, launched 
(2008) the Service Level Benchmarking (SLB) initiative covering water supply, 
waste water, SWM and storm water drainage.  A common minimum framework 
was prescribed for monitoring and reporting on performance indicators, of 
which eight performance indicators pertained to SWM. Analysis of SLB 
declarations (2018 -19) by 22 test -checked ULBs vis-à-vis targets and 
benchmarks in respect of these performance indicators and assessment by Audit 
on the basis of details furnished by ULBs (2020-21) are shown in Appendix 1. 
The results flowing from the above analysis were as follows: 
 In accordance with the Sta te policy of source level treatment of waste , the 
test-checked ULBs26  did not collect biodegradable waste from households. 
They declared their SLBs on daily door-to-door collection and efficiency of 
collection of Municipal Solid Waste on the basis of extent of collection of 
plastic waste from households. Audit observed that actual door -to-door 
collection of plastic waste and efficiency of collection in respect of most of 
the ULBs were significantly low compared to their declared levels. 
 Though SLB on extent of segregation of waste  were declared by test -
checked ULBs, Audit noticed that these ULBs did not record the quantum 
of waste segregated.  
 Despite the State not possessing scientific landfill to dispose the inert waste, 
the test-checked ULBs declared SLB on the disposal of waste in landfills. 
 The test-checked ULBs declared to have achieved 70 to 100 per cent target 
against SLB on complaint redressal. However, Audit observed that only 
Thiruvananthapuram Corporation had a n online system in place to rece ive 
complaints. The remaining ULBs did not even maintain separate registers 
to record the complaints relating to waste management.   
As such, there was no verifiable data to substantiate the SLB scores recorded by 
ULBs, raising concerns regarding the veracity of scores assigned. During the 
exit conference (May 2022), it was stated that Government have taken note of 
the discrepancy in SLB declarations by ULBs, for rectification.  
2.1.4 Role of informal waste collectors in waste management 
The MSWM Manual, 2016 and SWM Rules, 2016 acknowledged the primary 
role played by the informal sector of waste pickers, waste collectors and 
recycling industry in reducing waste.  The State Policy (2018) stipulated that 
LSGIs shall establish a system to recognise organisations of waste pickers or 
informal waste collectors and provide for integration of these workers into the 
formal SWM system , to enable reductio n of overall system costs, provide 
support to the local recycling industry, and create new job opportunities. 
                                                 
26 Other than Kochi and Kozhikode Corporations, Perinthalmanna and Aluva Municipalities  

 
Chapter II – Planning and Financial Management 
 
13 
 
However, Audit observed that the State Government has neither addressed the 
need for integrating the informal sector with waste management system in the 
Strategy document issued in 2020, nor issued any guidelines in this regard till 
date.   
The following observations were made by Audit on the functioning of the 
informal system of waste collection:  
 There was no system in place to monitor the quantity and type of waste 
handled by scrap dealers or to ensure  their proper storage and disposal.  
During joint physical verifications  in 42 scrap shops in 15 test-checked 
ULBs, Audit noticed that 31 unauthorised scrap dealers were functioning in 
eight27 ULBs, and that the ULBs could not furnish any details regarding the 
nature of waste collected by them, mode of transportation and disposal sites. 
As the waste collected by these scrap dealers include hazardous objects and 
harmful elements whi ch are not environment -friendly, negligence in their 
mode of storage and disposal m ay cause health hazards. Further, Audit also 
noticed instances of scrap material collected by the scrap dealers  being 
transported out of the State, which was not being monitored by ULBs.  
 Implementation Guidelines for E-waste (Management) Rules, 2016 state that 
loading, transportation, unloading and storage of end of life product should 
be carried out without any damage to health, environment and to the product 
itself.28 However, joint physical verification with officials of ULBs at scrap 
dealer sh ops in Thiruvananthapuram and Kozhikode Corporations and 
Koyilandy, Kayamkulam, Mavelikkara, Angamaly, Aluva and Vadakara 
Municipalities revealed e-waste requiring careful handling such as computer 
monitors, television sets, 
refrigerators, electricity 
cable/wires, etc. lying scattered 
in the open  among collected 
scrap items , without any 
environmental or health 
safeguards. An adverse impact 
of collected  e-waste/hazardous 
waste left exposed without 
mandated safeguards   
at Killippalam in 
Thiruvananthapuram 
Corporation was that , the 
accumulated quantity of 
plastic/hazardous waste by 
unauthorized scrap dealer led to 
a fire outbreak in January 2022.  
                                                 
27 Vadakara, Koyilandy, Malappuram, Neyyattinkara and Feroke Municipalities and Kozhikode, Kochi, 
Thiruvananthapuram Corporations 
28 The collection centres were to ensure that the e -waste collected by them was stored in a secured     
manner till it was sent to authorised dismantler or recycler. Cathode Ray Tubes, LCD/LED/ Plasma 
Televisions, Air Conditioners, fluorescent and other mercury containing lamps needed to be handled 
with special care to avoid breakage. Further, no damage was to be caused to the environment during 
storage and transportation of e-waste.   
Debris of plastic/hazardous waste after a fire 
outbreak in January 2022 at an unauthori sed 
collection centre of a scrap dealer at 
Thiruvananthapuram Corporation (April 2022) 

Performance Audit of ‘Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies’ 
 
14 
 
 While issuing Dangerous and Offensive ( D&O) trade  licence to scrap 
dealers, the test-checked ULBs did not specify the nature of waste the dealers 
were authorised to collect, nor ensure that they had a formal agreement with 
an authorised recycler/dismantler/refurbisher. The ULB or Pollution Control 
Board did not prohibit scrap dealers from collecting e-waste which led to 
these dealers collecting and storing e-waste without authorisation of PCB and 
in violation of E-Waste Management Rules, 2016. Suchitwa Mission/ ULBs/ 
PCB did not take any action to prevent illegal scrap dealing and transporting 
and to organise the scrap dealers under the SWM system, to ensure scientific 
management of waste. 
During the exit conference (May 2022) Government informed that it had taken 
note of the audit finding , and decided to initiate the process of registration of 
informal sector and to bring into effect, regulatory intervention. 
2.1.5 Information, Education and Communication activities 
In accordance with the provisions of SWM Rules, 2016 and Manual on MSWM, 
2016, Information, Education and Communication (IEC) activities were to be 
undertaken by Government/ULBs to make people understand the concept and 
need for segregation and storage at source, role of citizens in primary collection 
and handing over  of waste for reuse, recycle or recover, need for paying user 
fee for collection/disposal services and mitigating the impact of solid waste on 
public health and environment. The State policy envisage d for preparation of 
IEC plan at the State, district and LSGI level, towards educating the citizens on 
areas of key behavioural change . However, the State/district/ULB level IEC 
strategy or plan has not been prepared so far.  
Under SBM-U, Suchitwa Mission transferred ₹1.57 crore to 22 test-checked 
ULBs during the period from 2015-16 to 2019-20, for conducting IEC activities. 
However, test-checked ULBs spent only ₹64.49 lakh (41 per cent) till March 
2021, indicating the low priority assigned to IEC activities. 
Audit noticed the following deficiencies in IEC activities in test-checked ULBs: 
 Thirteen out of 22 test -checked ULBs have not conducted any I EC 
activity on importance of source level segregation and source level 
processing of biodegradable waste.  
 Test-checked ULBs neither notified nor publicised the list of domestic 
hazardous waste which included both toxic and bio-medical waste.  
 No specific IEC activities were planned or conducted on e -waste 
segregation or Extended Producer Responsibility (EPR) by test-checked 
ULBs. This resulted in e-waste reaching the processing facilities/hands 
of scrap dealers and consequent unauthorised dismantling of the same. 
 Seventeen test-checked ULBs did not create awareness on provisions 
regarding levy of penalty 29 for littering/dumping of waste in public 
places and water bodies.  
 No IEC activities enlightening the public on the hazards of burning and 
burying solid waste were seen undertaken by 15 out of 22 test-checked 
ULBs. 
                                                 
29 Section 334 of KM Act, 1994 and Executive Directive No.9/2016 of the Police Department 
issued on 04 November 2016 

 
Chapter II – Planning and Financial Management 
 
15 
 
Good Practices 
Eloor and Parappanangadi Municipalities promoted awareness on not to 
burn, not to litter through murals and advertisements exhibited on the body 
of buses 
  
 
Government replied (May 2022) that all ULBs have conducted IEC activities 
by direct intervention through ward level sanitation committees, people’s 
campaign, seminars, video programmes , signboards, advertisement s in bus 
shelters, etc.  
However, Audit observed that the State had not set any targets for IEC, either 
in terms of activities to be undertaken or allotment of funds. IEC campaign is 
not to be restricted to a single time activity, as constant communication with the 
community and all relevant stakeholders is necessary to bring about a sustained 
behavioural change among the citizens in  managing their waste. Rampant use 
of banned plastic carry bags, burning of waste even by ULB staff, littering and 
dumping of waste in public places, poor segregation of w aste, etc. underscore 
the need to intensify IEC activities. 
2.2 Financial Management  
2.2.1 Source of funds for waste management 
The resource base of LSGIs consists of Own revenues, Central Finance 
Commission (CFC) grants, Central Government grants and funds devolved by 
State Government for traditional functions (General Purpose Fund), 
maintenance of assets (Maintenance Fund) and development purposes 
(Development Fund) as per the recommendation s of State Finance 
Commissions. Various sources of funding for Waste management in ULBs are 
depicted in Chart 2.1: 


Performance Audit of ‘Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies’ 
 
16 
 
Chart 2.1: Sources of funding for Waste Management in ULBs 
 
Scrutiny of financial statements of 22 test-checked ULBs revealed that ULBs 
depended mostly on Government grants for meeting their expenditure on waste 
management with respect to cost of land, Plant and machinery, daily expenses 
on MSWM, Operation and Maintenance  cost, refurbishment c ost, contingent 
expenditure, etc. The dependency on Government  grants to meet expenses on 
waste management ranged from 94 to 100 per cent (Appendix 2).  
2.2.2 Expenditure on Waste Management by test-checked ULBs 
Allocation and expenditure of various funds for SWM during 2016-2021 are 
depicted in Chart 2.2: 
Chart 2.2: Allocation and expenditure incurred by test-checked ULBs on Waste 
Management during 2016-2021 (₹ in lakh) 
 
It is evident that ULBs are completely dependent on Central and State assistance 
for executing the mandatory functions relating to Solid Waste Man agement 
(SWM). The spending efficiency out of central and state assistance was 30.79 
per cent only, which was significantly low . Of ₹ 244.68 crore of CFC grant 
allocated during 2016 -21, only ₹ 76.01 crore (31.07 per cent) could be spent. 
There is an urgent need for ULBs to step up the utilisation of Central/State funds 
and own funds allotted for waste management activities. 
 
 
Sources of fund
Central
Central  Finance 
Commission 
Grants
Swachh Bharat 
Mission (Urban) 
funds
State
Development 
Fund
Suchitwa 
Keralam (Urban) 
Fund
Own Fund
Tax, Non tax 
Revenue
Sale of 
recyclables, 
compost, etc.
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
Development
Fund
(General)
Suchitwa
Keralam
Urban
CFC Grant SBM (U) Fund Own Fund
6464.17
210.77
24467.71
2896.58 3930.622073.58
127.21
7600.7
679.59 185.17
Allocation Expenditure

 
Chapter II – Planning and Financial Management 
 
17 
 
2.2.3 Allocation and Utilisation of funds for SWM 
2.2.3.1 Development fund 
Government of Kerala issued orders (June 2016) for mandatory allocation of 10 
per cent  of Development Fund (General) for waste management activities. 
However, the Government lifted (April 2017) the mandatory clause and directed 
local bodies to allocate 15 per cent of Development Fund (General) to Haritha 
Keralam Mission projects , by assigning priority to  waste management . In 
February 2018, ULBs were further directed to mandatorily allocate 20 per cent 
of Development Fund (General) for LIFE30 Mission projects and at least 15 per 
cent of the remaining fund for  Haritha Kerala m Mission projects  for waste 
management and water conservation. 
Actual expenditure incurred  (2016-21) on waste management by the test -
checked ULBs was very low, as against the above stipulations of Government, 
the details of which are shown in Table 2.3: 
Table 2.3: Expenditure for waste management by test-checked ULBs out of 
Development fund (General) during 2016-2021 
(Source: Data from test-checked ULBs) 
Against the mandatory utilisation of 10-15 per cent of funds, test-checked ULBs 
utilised only 0.48-1.66 per cent for waste management. The number of ULBs 
with zero allocation of Development fund (General) ranged from one to six each 
year. The meagre amount expended on a core function devolved to UL Bs is 
indicative of the reluctance of ULBs to take up  new projects for waste 
management.  
2.2.3.2 Utilisation of SBM (Urban) fund 
During the period 2018-21, 22 test-checked ULBs received fund amounting to 
₹28.97 crore as first instalment for implementation of projects under SBM-U. 
Utilisation by test-checked ULBs are detailed in Table 2.4: 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
30 Livelihood Inclusion and Financial Empowerment, the flagship housing project of 
Government of Kerala 
Year 
Total 
Development 
fund 
(General) 
available    
(₹ in lakh) 
Percentage to 
be expended 
on waste 
management 
Fund to be 
allocated  
(₹ in lakh) 
 
Actual 
allocation 
(₹ in lakh) 
Actual 
expenditure 
incurred  
(₹ in lakh) 
Percenta
ge of 
actual 
expendit
ure out of 
total fund 
available 
2016-17 31365.17 10 3136.52 1630.26 198.04 0.63 
2017-18 35858.52 15 5378.78 1560.30 498.82 1.39 
2018-19 41437.45 12 4972.49 1351.07 325.28 0.78 
2019-20 30780.39 12 3693.65 568.87 146.65 0.48 
2020-21 54412.87 12 6529.54 1353.67 904.79 1.66 

Performance Audit of ‘Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies’ 
 
18 
 
Table 2.4: Receipt and utilisation of SBM-U Fund during 2018-21 
 (₹ in lakh) 
Year 
Amount received 
Corresp
-onding 
ULB 
share 
(41.7%) 
 
Total 
Receipt 
Expenditure out of 
Central 
share 
(35%) 
State 
share 
(23.3%) 
Total 
Central 
and 
State 
share 
(58.3%) 
Centr
al 
share 
State 
Share 
Total 
Central 
and State 
share 
ULB 
share 
Total 
Expendit
ure 
2018-19 665.4 442.97 1108.37 792.78 1901.15 2.55 1.69 4.24 3.01 7.25 
2019-20 111.81 74.43 186.24 133.21 319.45 64.15 94.4 158.55 41.49 200.04 
2020-21 961.74 640.24 1601.98 1145.84 2747.82 317.31 199.49 516.8 708.59 1225.39 
Total 1738.95 1157.64 2896.59 2071.83 4968.42 384.01 295.58 679.59 753.09 1432.68 
(Source: Data from test-checked ULBs) 
Though SBM-U guidelines envisaged preparation of DPRs and availing funds 
for implementation of DPR components  within the Mission period 31, ULBs 
could spend only 23.46 per cent32 of the State and Central share, as of 31 March 
2021. Lapses in timely preparation and approval of DPRs  which eventually 
resulted in loss of central assistance of ₹ 45.82 crore have been commented upon 
in this Report. As the projects approved were mainly capital in nature, reduced 
expenditure and delayed implementation of projects would adversely affect 
long term sustainable solutions for SWM.   
2.2.3.3 Meagre Utilisation of Own funds for SWM Projects 
Own funds consist of tax and non -tax revenue collected by ULBs as per 
provisions of Kerala Municipality Act, 1994 and allied Rules. Of the total Own 
funds amounting to ₹ 39.31 crore allocated for SWM during the audit period, 
the test-checked ULBs utilised ₹ 1.85 crore only, which was a meagre 4.71 per 
cent. Audit observed that the t est-checked Municipalities 33 had Own fund 
balance above ₹ one crore  whereas test-checked Corporations had Own funds 
ranging from ₹13.75 crore to ₹259.26 crore during the audit period. However, 
14 ULBs did not utili se any amount from their Own funds for implementing 
SWM projects during the audit period. Percentage of utilisation of the remaining 
eight ULBs34 was only up to 5.34. Despite being endowed with sufficient own 
funds, these ULBs were lackadaisical in allocating and utilising enhanced share 
of funds for effective management of waste.  
2.2.3.4 Poor utilisation of Service Cess 
Rule 27 of Kerala Municipality (Property Tax, Service Cess and Surcharge) 
Rules, 2011 allows Council of the Municipality to levy four per cent Service 
Cess on property tax for providing services including general sanitation and safe 
removal of solid waste such as rubbish, carcasses of animals, etc. provided the 
buildings assessed were not otherwise exempted under section 235 of KM Act. 
It was seen that only 14 ULBs collected Service Cess for SWM among the test-
checked ULBs. The ULBs di d not maintain separate account for depositing 
                                                 
31 ending on 02 October 2019 
32 679.59/2896.59 
33 Other than Aluva 
34Thiruvananthapuram Corporation, Nedumangad, Eloor, Maradu, Parappanangadi, 
Perinthalmanna, Nilambur, Feroke Municipalities 

 
Chapter II – Planning and Financial Management 
 
19 
 
Service Cess collected and deposited the amount in its Own fund account along 
with other receipts. Audit observed that even the extent of utili sation of Own 
fund for SWM projects was significantly lowe r than t he amount collected as 
Service Cess, during the audit period.  
The extent of utilisation of Own funds for SWM projects as against Service Cess 
collected by 14 test-checked ULBs is shown in Table 2.5: 
Table 2.5: Collection and utilisation of Own Funds as against Service Cess 
collected by 14 test-checked ULBs 
Year Service Cess collected 
for sanitation and waste 
management (4 per cent 
of property tax) 
(₹ in lakh) 
Own fund utilised 
for SWM 
(₹ in lakh) 
Percentage of 
utilisation of Own 
fund for SWM as 
against Service 
Cess collected  
2016-17 78.80 0.98 1.24 
2017-18 103.74 0.01 0.01 
2018-19 421.99 1.38 0.33 
2019-20 396.82 86.88 21.89 
2020-21 444.73 95.93 21.57 
Total 1446.08 185.18 12.81 
(Source: Data from 14 test-checked ULBs) 
As against the Service Cess amounting to ₹14.46 crore collected by 14 ULBs 
towards general sanitation and waste management during the audit period, the 
total expenditure on SWM projects out of Own fund s was ₹1.85 crore (12.81 
per cent) only. The remaining eight ULBs35 did not even collect Service C ess. 
This indicates the lack of priority given to tapping of additional funds for waste 
management by ULBs. 
2.2.3.5 User fee  
The MSWM Manual defines user fee as a fee imposed through a Byelaw by the 
ULB on the waste generator. Haritha Karma Sena (HKS) 36 was entrusted with 
the responsibility of collecting user fee from individual households/institutions 
for the services offered to them. The LSGI, in consultation with the Community 
Development Society (CDS) of Kudumbashree, was to fix the rate of user fee 
to be collected by HKS. The fee  was to be deposited in HKS Consortium 
account and used along with other funds37, for meeting expenses in connection 
with various activities undertaken, including collection of bio/non - 
biodegradable waste, beautification of premises, etc.  It was observed that HKS 
in test-checked ULBs did not collect user fee on a regular basis from households 
and institutions in their jurisdiction. The percentage of collection of user fee in 
these ULBs ranged from zero38 to 35.8939 only.   
                                                 
35 Kochi, Kozhikode Corporations and Angamali, Malappuram, Koyiland y, Kothamangalam,  
Manjeri, Feroke Municipalities 
36 formed (July 2017) by Government of Kerala as a decentrali sed solution to the problem of 
waste management 
37Income generated from sale of non -biodegradable waste to agencies, conduct of 
festivals/celebrations, sale of bio compost, kitchen bins, etc. 
38 Mavelikkara Municipality 
39 Feroke Municipality 

Performance Audit of ‘Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies’ 
 
20 
 
Audit attempted to roughly estimate the potential revenue that could be 
generated, if ULBs ensured collection of user fee as directed by Government 
(Appendix 3). It was observed that, in prompt collection of user fee at 
prescribed rates lay a major untapped source of funds for  execution of waste 
management activities.   
Government stated in the exit conference (May 2022) that it was intervening 
significantly in this area by providing Viability Gap Funding to ensure that the 
waste collectors in field were able to sustain themselves. Government have also 
conducted an assessment of how much income was generated on a monthly 
basis by HKS and observed mixed results with respect to revenue collection. It 
was also informed that there  were many instances wherein people refused to 
pay user fee even when waste was being collected from them . The reply of 
Government underscores the need to instill favourable attitude in public towards 
payment of user fee for services availed.   
Recommendation 1: Government must ensure that s cientific estimation of 
quantity and composition of waste generated in Urban Local Bodies are taken 
up on priority basis to establish adequate treatment and disposal facilities of 
all categories of waste.  Waste moving through the system needs to  be 
quantified at multiple locations in different seasons , to assess the actual 
quantities of waste available for processing and disposal, so as to identify and 
plan for innovative and efficient treatment technologies. 
Recommendation 2: Government must ensure that Urban Local Bodies 
formulate Municipal Solid Waste Management Plans and have approved 
Byelaws in place for effective management of waste. The waste management 
plans formulated may also provide for integration o f informal waste pickers 
into the formal system of waste management.    
Recommendation 3: Government must promote Information, Education and 
Communication (IEC) campaign by ULBs  in a sustained manner  by 
formulating yearly plans and targets for effective ut ilisation of available 
funds. Government must undertake IEC campaign through its Public 
Relations wings and other agencies, to create public awareness among waste 
generators on  the need to minimise waste generation, re -use waste to the 
extent possible, pra ctise segregation of waste, desist from littering in public 
spaces, etc.   
Recommendation 4: Government must ensure that ULBs enhance the extent 
of utili sation of Central/State  funds and Own Revenue allocated for waste 
management. They may take earnest efforts to step up collection of Service 
Cess and User fee, so as to contribute to expenditure on waste management 
activities.  
Recommendation 5: Government must consider fixing a mandatory minimum 
percentage of expenditure to be incurred exclusively on solid waste 
management by the Local Self Government Institutions.   

 
 
CHAPTER III 
SEGREGATION, COLLECTION AND 
TRANSPORTATION OF WASTE 
Windrow Composting Unit, 
Kothamangalam Municipality 
September 2021 
 

21 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
SEGREGATION, COLLECTION AND TRANSPORTATION 
OF WASTE 
ULBs did not have  an effective mechanism to check whether the waste 
generators segregated waste into biodegradable, non -biodegradable, sa nitary 
and domestic hazardous categories. We observed that c olour coded bins were 
not provided by ULBs to households or placed at Government Offices and 
hospitals visited, as a preliminary step in segregation of waste generated. Non-
adherence to extant provisions resulted in  unsegregated waste reaching 
processing sites and landfills meant for hazardous waste. Extent of door-to-door 
collection of waste from households  and from restaurants and chicken stalls/  
meat stalls in selected ULBs ranged from 16.13 per cent to 54.72 per cent. Food 
waste and poultry waste was collected by unauthorised agencies and disposed 
as feed to pigs. As collection of biodegradable waste from households was not 
effective, waste generated was dumped in water  bodies, public places, road  
sides, etc. The ULBs could not ensure segregation of waste by waste generators 
due to which biodegradable waste mixed with non-biodegradable waste reached 
processing sites.  
The system of segregation and collection of waste was not functioning as 
envisaged and needed to be strengthened. Open vehicles and vehicles without 
partition were used for waste transportation. In the test-checked Corporations, 
we noticed that own vehicles purchased were idling, yet private vehicles were 
hired and utilised for waste transportation. Delay occurred in conducting timely 
repair and maintenance of vehicles purchased by the Corporation.  
The waste generated in a ULB pass through various stages, viz., segregation, 
collection, transportation, processing and disposal. The overall functioning of 
the system of waste management in a ULB could be termed satisfactory, only if 
each of these tasks is performed in a scientific and sustainable manner. Audit 
analysed the effectiveness of field level execution of various municipal tasks 
associated with waste management. 
3.1 Segregation 
Segregation refers to the process of separation of municipal solid waste into four 
groups - organic, inorganic, recyclables and hazardous waste. Segregation is a 
critical requirement since it enables reuse, recycling, treatment and scientific 
disposal of different components of waste.  Segregation takes place at different 
levels such as source/household, centrali sed sorting facility and waste 
processing sites and leads to minimisation of waste and reduction in landfill 
space for final disposal.  
3.1.1 Inadequate segregation of waste at source  
As per SWM Rules, 2016, every waste generator was to segregate and store the 
waste generated by him in separate streams, viz., biodegradable, non -
biodegradable and domestic hazardous waste in suitable bins and hand over to 
authorised waste collectors.  Used sanitary waste like diapers and sanitary pads 
as well as Construction and Demolition waste and Horticulture and garden 

Performance Audit of ‘Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies’ 
 
22 
 
waste were to be stored separately by the waste generator and disposed of as per 
direction of local bodies.    
The details of  segregation of waste by households, Government offices and 
commercial establishments in test-checked ULBs, are presented in Table 3.1.    
Table 3.1: Segregation of waste by households, Government offices and 
commercial establishments in 21 test-checked ULBs40 
Type of waste generator Households Government 
offices 
Commercial 
establishments 
Total number 1075820 2426 180130 
Number of waste 
generators segregating  
waste at source as claimed 
by ULB 
507470 1468 61607 
Percentage of waste 
generators segregating 
waste at source 
47.17 60.51 34.20 
(Source: Data furnished by test-checked ULBs) 
Though the ULBs furnished number of households and institutions wherein 
waste was stated as segregated at source, Audit observed that the ULBs were 
accepting the number of households/institutions as furnished by Haritha Karma 
Sena, which collected waste from these units. The ULBs did not have any 
mechanism to check whether the waste generators  segregated waste into 
prescribed streams of biodegradable, no n-biodegradable, sanit ary, domestic 
hazardous, etc. Thus, the data provided by the ULBs did not inspire confidence 
regarding the exact number of waste generators segregating waste at source, as 
envisaged in SWM Rules/Manual. The ULBs, through periodic inspections, 
need to gathe r reliable data regarding the actual number of units segregating 
waste into stipulated streams. 
Audit analysed the details of segregation of waste as furnished by 21 test -
checked ULBs (Appendix 4). Except one ULB (Alappuzha), the percentage of 
segregation of the remaining 20 ULBs ranged between 0. 41 and 72.72. Non-
adoption of effective methods of segregation at source contributed to substantial 
amount of mixed waste reaching centrali sed waste processing facili ties, 
resulting in components of waste being classified as ‘rejects’. 
3.1.2 Issue of Bins 
Swachh Bharat Mission (Urban) Guidelines envisaged ULBs to distribute two 
colour coded bins, one in green and the other in blue per household, such that 
waste is segregated  into wet ( biodegradable) and dry ( non-biodegradable) 
respectively, at source itself.  Audit observed that none of the test -checked 
ULBs provided colour coded bins to households for segregation of waste.  
Koyilandy Municipality was the only test-checked ULB which provided litter 
bins in public places. Thiruvananthapuram Corporation had set up Dry waste 
                                                 
40One test -checked ULB, Perinthalmanna Municipality , had entrusted SWM to an agency 
named Jeevanam solutions. The agency had not furnished the details of status of execution 
to the ULB. Despite Audit seeking details directly from the agency, the agency did not furnish 
the same  

 
Chapter III – Segregation, Collection and Transportation of Waste 
 
23 
 
segregated collection hubs at various locations for collection of non -
biodegradable waste.  
Segregation of household waste into biodegradable and non-biodegradable at 
source using bins would reduce the extent of secondary segregation at Material 
Recovery Facility (MRF) where secondary storage and sorting of recyclable 
materials are done.  Lack of effective IEC activity on importance of segregation 
of waste at source might have contributed to low segregation of waste by 
households.  
During joint physical verification  (JPV) at Government offices and hospitals, 
Audit observed that separate bins were not allotted and all the waste were 
collected in single bins as mixed waste, making segregation difficult and time 
consuming. Instances of burning mixed waste were noticed in four Government 
offices41 and seven Government hospitals 42 which would cause hazardous 
impact on human health and environment. 
, 
 
Burning of Mixed Waste at Cheruvannur CHC, 
Kozhikode Corporation (October 2021) 
Open burning of plastic waste at Municipal 
office, Aluva (July 2021) 
3.1.3 Segregation of Domestic hazardous waste 
Domestic hazardous waste such as used batteries, expired medicines, discarded 
paint drums, CFL bulbs , etc. required special handling and disposal. None of 
the test-checked ULBs published the list of domestic hazardous waste and 18 
ULBs did not conduct any IEC programme, so as to make public aware of the 
types of domestic hazardous waste likely to be generated by them and the need 
for segregation of such waste. During JPV at Kochi Corporation, Audit noticed 
that non-segregation of waste resulted in mixing of domestic hazardous waste 
                                                 
41Civil Station, Kozhikode, Mi ni Civil Station , Kayamkulam, Taluk Office, Ambalapuzha, 
Aluva Municipal Office 
42Taluk hospital, Feroke, ESI dispensary , Eranhipalam, ESI Hospital, Thiruvananthapuram, 
District Hospital, Nedumangad, General Hospital, Neyyattinkara , CHC Cheruvannur and 
District Hospital,Vadakara 


Performance Audit of ‘Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies’ 
 
24 
 
 
with other waste which reached the processing site. This resulted in 
accumulation of rejects containing such waste at processing sites, which would 
necessitate additional financial commitment for segregation and disposal.  
3.1.4 Segregation of Sanitary Waste 
The SWM Rules, 2016 stipulated that waste generators shall wrap the used 
sanitary waste like diapers, sanitary pads, etc. securely in pouches provided by 
the manufacturers/brand owners of these products and place the m in the bin 
meant for non -biodegradable waste.  However, in 16 test -checked ULBs, 
sanitary waste was seen mixed with other non -biodegradable waste, thereby 
contributing to the  reluctance of ULB staff to segregate them manually.  
Instances of ULB staff themselves burning mixed waste containing sanitary 
waste were noticed in Thiruvananthapuram Corporation, which was hazardous 
to environment and public health. In 115 households visited, 75 households in 
16 ULBs reported that they burnt san itary waste generated within their 
premises. 
 
Kochi Corporation - Mixed waste dumped as rejects at the Brahmapuram processing site 
 (November 2021) 
Government stated (May 2022) that a pilot project for disposal of household 
sanitary waste, bio-medical waste and hazardous waste has been taken up by the 
State with the support of KEIL 43 and that in the initial phase it is proposed to 
implement the project in seven ULBs located in the vicinity of KEIL.  
                                                 
43 Kerala Enviro-Infrastructure Limited, the only Hazardous Waste landfill facility in the State 
at Ambalamedu, Kochi. 
Burning of Waste by Thumboormuzhi workers in Thiruvananthapuram Corporation (August 2021) 


 
Chapter III – Segregation, Collection and Transportation of Waste 
 
25 
 
Audit observed that defective source segregation in test-checked ULBs resulted 
in ineffectual utilisation of centralised and decentralised processing facilities as 
detailed in subsequent paragraphs. 
3.1.5 Segregation of waste at processing site 
As the ULBs could not ensure segregation of waste by waste generat ors, 
biodegradable waste mixed with non -biodegradable waste reached the 
processing site. Audit noticed that nine44 out of 22  test-checked ULBs had 
centralised/community level  facilities45 for processing bio degradable waste.   
However, JPV conducted in these nine facilities revealed that only p artial 
segregation was performed at four46 sites. As such, recovery of recyclable items 
became difficult which also affected the quality of compost produced. For want 
of effective segregation at source, ULBs had to incur substantial amount for 
disposal of waste generated in their jurisdiction.   
Four ULBs47 disposed 1313.21 tonnes of mixed waste as rejects during         
2020-21 through Clean Kerala Company Ltd. (CKCL) to KEIL for land filling, 
thereby committing payment of  ₹156.14 lakh . Thiruvananthapuram 
Corporation as part of converting dumping yard at Erumakkuzhi into a garden, 
transferred (October 2020) 62.61 tonnes of unsegregated waste to KEIL. As per 
SWM Rules, 2016, only the non -usable, non -recyclable, non-biodegradable, 
non-combustible and non -reactive inert waste and pre -processing rejects and 
residues from waste processing facilities were to be sent to sanitary landfill . 
Audit observed that ULBs/CKCL violated these Rules by sending unsegregated 
waste to landfill. 
During the exit conference (May 2022), Government accepted that mixed waste 
generation was indicative of failure of ULBs in ensuring proper segregation and 
that once mixed waste was generated, the sole option was to treat it as inert 
waste and dispose of in scientific landfills. Further, the efforts of the State to 
purchase land to set up landfill facility have not succeeded yet, due to which 
mixed waste had to be disposed of in the hazardous waste landfill facility of 
KEIL.  
The reply is not acceptable as waste management should necessarily be made a 
part of urban planning and suitable methods of segregation evolved, to minimise 
mixed waste generated. Utilising hazardous waste landfill facility for disposing 
solid waste whenever mixed waste is generated, is not a viable solution. 
3.2 Collection 
Collection of segregated waste  was essential  to ensure that waste stored at 
source was not disposed of in streets, drains, water bodies, etc. The ULBs were 
to arrange for door -to-door collection of segregated solid waste from all 
                                                 
44Kochi, Kozhikode, Thiruvananthapuram Corporations and Perinthalmanna, Kothamangalam, 
Alappuzha, Eloor, Neyyattinkara, Nedumangad Municipalities 
45Facilities adopting aerobic composting ( windrow, thumboormuzhi), vermi composting, bio -
methanation technologies for processing biodegradable waste 
46 Kochi, Kozhikode,Thiruvananthapuram Corporations and Neyyattinkara Municipality  
47 Thiruvananthapuram Corporation and Alappuzha, Malappuram, Kayamkulam Municipalities 

Performance Audit of ‘Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies’ 
 
26 
 
households including slums and informal settlements, commercial, institutional 
and other non-residential premises48.  
3.2.1 Collection of Biodegradable waste 
The SWM Rules encourage households to process biodegradable waste at 
source. However, ULB s are  mandated to collect biodegradable waste in a 
segregated manner and set up common processing facilities, so as to treat spill 
over waste from establishments and households where there is  no available 
space for setting up individual processing units.  
Audit observed that among the test-checked 22 ULBs, 13 ULBs did not collect 
biodegradable waste from generating units as the State policy advocated source 
level processing of such waste. Five49 ULBs collected biodegradable waste from 
households and markets. The extent of door -to-door collection of waste from 
households, restaurants and chicken stalls/meat stalls in these ULBs  ranged 
from 16.13 per cent to 54.72 per cent. The remaining f our ULBs 50 collected 
market waste and deposited in thumboormuzhi bins.  
Quantity of biodegradable waste generated and collected in test-checked ULBs 
is shown in Table 3.2 below: 
Table 3.2: Table showing quantity of biodegradable waste generated and 
collected in 18 test-checked ULBs51 
 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 
Generated  
(tonne) 2,97,615.28 3,04,634.17 3,12,051.82 3,17,848.10 3,03,507.05 
Collected 
(tonne) 1,20,297.58 1,24,696.97 1,30,114.37 1,31,906.35 1,16,097.30 
Percentage of 
collection 40.42 40.93 41.70 41.50 38.25 
Percentage of 
waste not 
collected 
59.58 59.07 58.30 58.50 61.75 
(Source: Data furnished by test-checked ULBs) 
On an average, 58 to 62 per cent of bio degradable waste generated was not 
being collected in 18 test-checked ULBs. There was no system in place for the 
assessment of generation and collection of horticulture/garden waste generated 
in the ULBs. 
As substantial quantity of biodegradable waste was to be segregated at source, 
the ULBs had the responsibility to ensure that t he individual waste generating 
units managed their waste at source itself and that dumping/littering in public 
places, water bodies , etc. is avoided at all costs. However, Audit observed 
biodegradable as well as non -biodegradable waste being dumped in public 
                                                 
48 According to Rule 15 (b) of SWM Rules, 2016 
49 Kochi, Kozhikode Corporations and Kothamangalam, Perinthalmanna (data not available) , 
Aluva Municipalities 
50 Nedumangad, Neyyattinkara, Feroke and Vadakara Municipalities 
51 Four ULBs (Maradu, Mavelikkara, Kayamkulam and Perinthalmanna Municipalities) did not 
furnish details 

 
Chapter III – Segregation, Collection and Transportation of Waste 
 
27 
 
places52, road  sides53, water bodies 54, etc. as evident from photographs 
presented below. 
Littering/dumping of waste in water bodies 
  
Aamayizhanjan thodu near KSRTC Central bus stand, Thiruvananthapuram Corporation (July 2021) 
 
Killi River, Thiruvananthapuram Corporation (August 2021) 
The Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 11.6 prescribed reduction in adverse 
per capita environmental impact of cities by paying special attention to air 
quality and municipal and other waste management by the year 2030. One of 
the targets to be achieved to attain the above goal was 100 per cent door-to-door 
collection of waste. Instances as revealed above, in addition to distancing the 
State from achiev ing the SDG goals, raise serious concern regarding the 
efficacy of ground level execution of the State campaign ‘ My Waste My 
Responsibility’.  
3.2.1.1   Collection of waste from Community halls, restaurants, etc. 
Government of Kerala instructed (July 2017 ) ULBs to issue directions to 
establishments generating biodegradable waste such as community halls, hotels, 
restaurants, etc. to set up suitable facilities like biobin, aerobin, biogas plant, 
etc. for processing biodegradable waste at source , before 15 September 2017. 
However, 18 test-checked ULBs had not  complied with the above order . Of 
3131 restaurants/ community halls in 21 test-checked ULBs, only 292 (9.32 per 
cent) possessed source level treatment facilities. Audit conducted JPV in 171 
                                                 
52Thiruvananthapuram, Kochi Corporations  and Aluva, Alappuzha, Perinthalmanna 
Municipalities 
53 Mavelikkara, Aluva, Muvattupuzha, Kayamkulam Municipalities and Kochi Corporation 
54 Thiruvananthapuram, Kochi Corporations and Kayamkulam, Mavelikkara Municipalities 


Performance Audit of ‘Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies’ 
 
28 
 
restaurants which revealed that 154 restaurants (90 per cent) did not have source 
level treatment system. Waste from restaurants were collected by unauthorized 
agencies and transferred to pig f arms in 2055 out of 22 ULBs. It is pertinent to 
note that disposal of waste as feed to pigs is not an authorized method of waste 
disposal as per SWM Rules, 2016 and as per Section 435 of KM Act.  
Joint physical verification with municipal staff revealed that 139 of the 171 test-
checked restaurants (81 per cent) did not have facility to treat waste water and 
resultantly, the waste water 
generated was routed to drains 
in the vicinity. Audit observed 
that 14 ULBs ha d not 
conducted inspections in the 
establishments periodically or 
during renewal of licence , to 
ensure proper disposal of 
solid/liquid waste by these 
establishments. During 
December 2020 to Ma rch 
2021, the District Pollution 
Control Board (DPCB) , 
Kozhikode issued notic es to  
51 establishments (29 hotels) which discharged untreated water to common 
drain causing pollution of Canoli canal in Kozhikode city. However, no follow 
up action was taken by DPCB Kozhikode to ensure that the establishments 
resorted to corrective action.  
Government stated in the exit conference (May 2022) that it would ensure that 
the institutions responsible for managing waste execute their functions and open 
drain discharge gets regulated and checked through stern action. 
3.2.1.2 Collection of waste from Poultry stalls/Slaughter houses 
As per SWM Rules 2016, daily collection of poultry waste was the 
responsibility of local bodies . However it was observed that only three test-
checked ULBs56 had a system in place for collection and disposal of poultry 
waste. During JPV conducted in 25 poultry stalls, 14 meat stalls and two 
slaughter houses, Audit noticed that poultry waste was given to private 
agencies/pig farms in 13 ULBs57. In three ULBs, the collection of poultry waste 
by authorized agencies was only up to 50-60 per cent of daily generation. Rest 
of the poultry waste w as either collected unauthorisedly by  pig farms or was 
being dumped in public places or water bodies. Audi t scrutiny of log books of 
JCBs owned by Thiruvananthapuram Corporation revealed that poultry waste 
dumped in public places were buried at the spot using JCBs, in 49  instances 
during 2020-21. This would degrade the environment and cause health hazards 
                                                 
55Thiruvananthapuram, Kozhikode, Kochi Corporations, Kayamkulam, Mavelikkara, 
Neyyattinkara, Vadakara, Koyiland y, Angamaly, Aluva, Maradu, Kothamangalam, Eloor, 
Muvattupuzha, Manjeri, Malappuram, Parappanangadi, Nilambur, Nedumangad and Feroke 
Municipalities 
56 Thiruvananthapuram and Kozhikode Corporations and Feroke Municipality   
57Kayamkulam, Mavelikkara, Parappanan gadi, Nilambur, Manjeri, Eloor, Angamaly, Aluva, 
Kothamangalam, Maradu, Muvattupuzha, Neyyattinkara, Nedumangad 
Waste dumped in open drain alongside National Highway in 
Thiruvananthapuram Corporation (August 2022) 

 
Chapter III – Segregation, Collection and Transportation of Waste 
 
29 
 
to residents in the vicinity. Further, supply of waste containing untreated meat 
products to pigs could result in creating potential health hazards to the animals 
as well as risk of transmission of foreign animal diseases and other pathogens 
to human beings.  
Though Government stated in reply (May 2022) that arrangements with animal 
farms, fish food manufacturing units, chicken rendering plants, etc . have been 
made to remove biodegradable waste in the case of markets without composting 
facilities, no documentary evidence for the same was furnished to Audit by the 
selected ULBs. 
Defective monitoring of functioning of poultry stalls by Pollution 
Control Board 
As per the guidelines issued (October 2021) by GoK for licensing of poultry 
stalls, p oultry/meat stalls s hall enter into a greement with licensed/authori sed 
rendering plants58 existing within the district or in the nearby district , if plants 
are not available in the district.    
Audit noticed that District PCBs, while granting consent to operate chicken 
stalls did not ensure that the occupier has valid agreement with licensed 
rendering plants. The poultry units were classed under orange category of 
classification of Industrial sectors, which made it mandatory for PCB to conduct 
inspection of these units at least once in a year .  The PCB, without conducting 
any periodical inspection to ascertain the quality of waste disposal mechanism 
in these poultry stalls, renewed their consent f or five years. During JPV in 16 
ULBs, in the absence of liquid waste treatment facility, untreated liquid waste 
was seen discharged directly to soil and nearby public drains. Such instances of 
unhygienic disposal of poultry waste could have been arrested b y timely 
interventions of authorities.   
At present, there are only 12 rendering units in the State, with an overall capacity 
of 372 TPD, which is sufficient to process only 34 per cent of total poultry waste 
generated.   
Government accepted the audit observations and  informed during the exit 
conference (May 2022) that strict instructions have been given to local bodies 
to insist that poultry stalls enter into agreement with rendering plants . It was 
also stated that action was afoot to set up rendering plants in all districts. 
Slaughter house waste  
Rule 3(1) of Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (Slaughter  house) Rules, 2001, 
stipulates that no person shall slaughter any animal within a Municipal area 
except in a slaughterhouse recogni zed by the authority  concerned. The Kerala 
Municipality Act stipulates that every Municipality shall provide sufficient 
number of places for Municipal slaughter houses and make necessary 
arrangements to maintain the municipal slaughter houses in hygienic manner.  
                                                 
58 Anaerobic digestion of poultry related waste consume time and some waste materials like 
feathers could not be processed in the system.  Rendering is the approved technology for 
processing slaughter waste and poultry waste including feathers. 

Performance Audit of ‘Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies’ 
 
30 
 
As per data furnished by the 
District Animal Husbandry 
Officers, there were 72 
slaughter houses in the 22 
test-checked ULBs, of which 
none had authori sation of 
PCB to fun ction. Average 
production of slaughter 
waste in the test-checked 
ULBs was 6.12 tonnes per 
day. Absence of authori sed 
slaughterhouses in the ULBs 
would provide scope for 
illegal slaughtering in unhygienic manner within the urban limits.  
3.2.2 Collection of domestic hazardous waste 
As per Rule 15(i) of SWM Rules, ULBs shall establish waste deposition centres 
for domestic hazardous waste 59 and issue direction to waste generators to 
deposit domestic hazardous waste at these centres to enable their safe disposal. 
Bio-medical Waste Management Rules, 2016 stipulate that ULBs shall have tie 
up with the Common Bio-medical Waste Treatment and Disposal Facility to 
collect domestic hazardous waste from waste deposition centres/Material 
Recovery Facility (MRF) or directly from the households for final disposal. 
 It was noticed that local bodies render palliative home care services to 
persons with complex, chronic or acute, life-threatening/life-limiting health 
conditions as well as bedridden persons. During the period 2016-2021, test-
checked ULBs spent ₹13.50 crore towards implementation of palliative care 
projects for 14185 patients, which included purchase of equipment and 
medicines, disposable items such as catheters, urine bags, syringes, gloves, 
ryles tubes, etc. As such ULBs were aware of the significant load of bio-
medical waste generated in palliative care households. However, no action 
was seen  taken by 13 test-checked ULBs60 to collect bio -medical waste 
generated from such households. The remaining ULBs replied to Audit that 
they handed over such waste to hospitals in the vicinity for onward 
transmission to processing sites. 
 The test-checked ULBs did not establish waste depositing points/centres to 
enable deposit ing and collection of domestic hazardous was te. 
Consequently, instances of dumping of domestic hazardous waste on road 
sides and public places were noticed during  JPVs in test-checked ULBs61, 
which contributed to environmental and health hazards. 
 
                                                 
59Domestic hazardous waste  includes discarded paint drums, pesticide cans, CFL bulbs, tube 
lights, expired medicines, broken mercury thermometers, used batteries, used needles and 
syringes, contaminated gauze, etc. generated at the household level. 
60Kozhikode, Thiruvananthapuram Co rporations, Va dakara, Eloor, Aluva, Maradu, 
Kothamangalam, Angamaly, Muvattupuzha, Mavelikkara,  Kayamkulam, Nedumangad and 
Neyyattinkara Municipalities 
61 Kochi Corporation and Neyyattinkara, Eloor, Aluva Municipalities 
Visceral waste from slaughterhouse discharged into drains in 
Neyyattinkara Municipality (September 2021) 

 
Chapter III – Segregation, Collection and Transportation of Waste 
 
31 
 
3.2.3 Collection of sanitary waste 
Sanitary waste comprises of used diapers, sanitary towels or napkins, tampons, 
condoms, incontinence sheets and any other waste of similar nature. Audit 
observed that the test-checked ULBs did not collect sanitary waste  or set up 
community level disposal facility for sanitary waste. In the absence of a system 
in place for regular collection of sanitary waste, instances of mixing of sanitary 
waste with solid waste occurred, which made  segregation extremely difficult, 
besides contributing to open burning of plastic and sanitary wast e, which was 
environmentally hazardous. 
During the exit conference (May 2022), Government accepted the audit finding 
and stated that at present there is no system  or strategy for management, 
collection and disposal of domestic hazardous waste and sanitary waste. A pilot 
study has been conducted in some panchayats in and around Ernakulam, based 
on which guidelines for collection and disposal of domestic bio -medical waste 
including sanitary waste have been issued (May 2022).  
Urgent action needs to be initiat ed to facilitate collection and disposal of 
sanitary waste in ULBs. 
Environmental pollution due to non -collection of waste from Railway 
Station 
Thiruvananthapuram Central Railway Station entered  (September 2020) into 
Memorandum of Understanding with CKCL for operation and maintenance of 
Resource Recovery Facility for waste treatment and disposal at the railway 
station. As the bio -composter machine was not functional, the segregated 
biodegradable waste was bundled and dumped outside the Facility, which led to 
foul smell and oozing of leachate from the heap ed waste. The Railway 
authorities stated that these biodegradable waste would be lifted and transferred 
to the landfill of KEIL by CKCL. However, verification of records in CKCL 
revealed that the waste was buried by CKCL in private lands  at Paliyode in 
Thiruvananthapuram district62. The agency which was entrusted with effective 
management of waste itself resorting to such unscientific methods of disposal , 
was not justifiable. 
Further, Audit observed that the work of the Effluent treatment plant to process 
the liquid waste generated in the railway station and depot area  has not been 
completed. As the plant has not been made functional yet, liquid waste 
generated is being drained into the Amayizhanjan Thodu, a canal  passing 
underneath the Railway compound . The draining of liquid waste along  with 
plastic waste thrown into the canal, has polluted the water body, besides  posing 
risk of urban flooding during rainy season. 
3.3 Transportation 
The MSWM Manual stipulates a well synchronized primary and secondary 
collection and transportation system, with regular and well communicated 
                                                 
62 The MSWM Manual requires the Municipal authorities to direct waste generators not to 
litter/throw/dispose any waste or burn or bury waste on streets, open public spaces, drains, 
etc. and to segregate waste at source and hand over segregated waste to authorised waste 
pickers/waste collectors 

Performance Audit of ‘Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies’ 
 
32 
 
intervals of operation to avoid overflow and littering of waste. Further, the 
vehicles for transport are to be  easy to maintain and compatible with the 
equipment design at the waste storage depot and capable of transporting 
segregated waste. Audit observed that as the ULBs did not attempt a scientific 
assessment of generation and collection of waste , no realistic asse ssment of 
requirement of vehicles could be made by the ULBs. 
The vehicles used for transportation were to be covered and waste not made 
visible to public. Proper care should be taken  to prevent spillage of waste and 
leachate en-route to the processing or disposal facility. Depending on the local 
conditions and location of processing site, ULBs use different types of vehicles 
such as pushcarts, auto tippers, tipper trucks and compactors for collection and 
transportation of waste. 
3.3.1 Use of vehicles without partition/open vehicles  
Source segregation would be successful only when the segregated streams of 
waste do not mix with each other  at any stage of transportation , while being 
taken to the respective processing or disposal facility. In test -checked ULBs, 
open vehicles were used for transporting waste in seven ULBs 63, leading to 
spillage and littering en -route. Out of the different types of vehicles used for 
waste transportation in the selected ULBs, only 35.24 per cent of vehicles had 
partition and 58.13 per cent of vehicles were not in operation due to various 
reasons such as repair works, loss of fitness, etc.   
In reply, Government stated (May 2022) that existing open vehicles were being 
replaced with covered vehicles and that availability of GPS will be  ensured in 
vehicles engaged in transportation of waste. 
3.3.2 Idling of own vehicles and hiring of private vehicles for 
transportation of waste 
 Kochi Corporation is in possession of 97 vehicles for waste removal. Of 
these, 66 vehicles64 were kept off road during the five year period covered 
in Audit. The prime reason for the idling of vehicles was delay in obtaining 
fitness certificates, which ranged from four to 74 months. Audit observed 
that in addition to procedural delays, there was considerable time lag in 
receiving approval from Health Standing Committee/Council of the ULBs, 
rectification of defects by the contractor, etc. As of March 2022, the period 
of delay in the case of Covered tippers ranged upto 15 months, Compactors 
upto 23 months, JCB upto 41 months, Mini JCB upto 6 2 months and Ape 
trucks upto 74 months.  These vehicles still continue to be off road for want 
of clearance regarding fitness. The Corporation incurred ₹27.53 crore during 
2017-2021, towards hiring of vehicles for waste transportation.  
Concurrently, the Corporation hired on an average 44 vehicles until July 
2020, by executing agreement for payment ranging from ₹450/tonne to  
₹2100/tonne for solid/plastic waste. The agreement was modified with 
                                                 
63Kochi, Thiruvananthapuram Corporation s and  Aluva, Kothamangalam, Muvattupuzha, 
Nedumangad, Neyyattinkara Municipalities  
64 Nine compactors, three JCBs, 14 Covered tippers, 37 Ape trucks, one Open tipper and two 
Vans 

 
Chapter III – Segregation, Collection and Transportation of Waste 
 
33 
 
effect from  July 2020 and each vehicle was hired by paying upto                  
₹4850/vehicle/day. 
Government replied (May 2022) that procedure s adopted for obtaining 
fitness such as approval of Standing Committee/Council, inviting quotation 
for repair of vehicles, obtaining approval of Committee and C ouncil for 
making payment, etc. resulted in the delay in obtaining fitness  clearance. 
The reply is not justifiable as Corporation could have proactively intervened 
to minimise procedural delays, which resulted in keepin g vehicles off the 
road for a considerable period. Also, ULBs incurring substantial amount of 
funds for hiring vehicles while their own vehicles were kept off the road due 
to avoidable administrative delay is not an acceptable trend. 
 Thiruvananthapuram Corporation owned 120 vehicles, of which 107 
vehicles were purchased during the period from 2006 to 2010  for door-to-
door collection and transport of biodegradable waste to Vilappilsala 
windrow composting plant. Since the closing down of the plant in December 
2011, the Corporation promoted source level processing of biodegradable 
waste and utilised vehicular transport only for street sweepings and littered 
waste and for shifting plastic waste from MCFs to RRFs . Audit observed 
that of the 29 tipper lorries p urchased by the Corporation within five years 
of closure of Vilappilsala plant , 13 tippers were not utilised from March 
2015 till March 2022.  Of the remaining 16 tippers, only three were utilised 
regularly, thereby leading to nil/underutilisation of 26 vehicles. Of these, 13 
vehicles were not used for a period of seven to 10 years. The average yearly 
utilisation of the remaining vehicles ranged from seven to 44 days during 
the five-year audit period. The Corporation conducted (April 2022) auction 
of 12 tippers of which only eight tippers could be disposed of , fetching 
around ₹ two lakh/tipper.  
The Corporation, instead of retaining nearly 26 vehicles without actual use, 
could have handed over these vehicles to ULBs like Kochi Corporation , 
where 40-50 tippers were being hired per day . This would have avoided 
idling of vehicles and loss of public money. 
Recommendation 6: Government must ensure that ULBs adopt effective 
strategies for segregation of waste at various levels, viz., source/ household, 
centralised sorting facility and waste processing sites, door-to-door collection 
of domestic hazardous waste and sanitary waste and provide separate colour 
coded bins at public places to enable effective segregation and collection of 
waste. 
Recommendation 7: Government/ULBs must ensure that a realistic 
assessment of vehicles used by ULBs for transportation of waste  is 
undertaken. Urgent action needs to  be initiated for executing 
maintenance/repair works of vehicles, to limit hiring of vehicles while keeping 
own vehicles off the road for prolonged periods. 
 

 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 PROCESSING AND DISPOSAL OF WASTE 
Thumboormuzhi unit,  
Nedumangad Municipality 
September 2021 
 

 
 
35 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
PROCESSING AND DISPOSAL OF WASTE 
There was gap  in coverage among the households provided with 
biodegradable waste management facilities , which ranged  from 59. 79 per 
cent to 99.94 per cent. Waste processing units supplied  to households were 
not utilised effectively in many places. Infructuous expenditure on purchase 
and distribution of bio -composter bins due to inadequate utilisation by 
beneficiaries resulted in unfruitful  expenditure of ₹3.35 crore. S ource level 
treatment facilities were not provided in all apartments visited. Incinerators/ 
burners were installed in apartments  without authorisation of Pollution 
Control Board. 
The bio -methanation units installed in markets were defective  and Liquid 
waste treatment facility was not installed in any of the markets visited. 
Thumboormuzhi units and bio-gas plants installed were not functional due to 
improper maintenance. 
We noticed that 3.86 lakh tonnes of waste reached the centralised processing 
plant at Brahmapuram in Kochi Corporation during 2016-2021. As the plant 
had a capacity to process only 250 tonnes/day of biodegradable waste, around 
2.85 lakh tonnes became rejects. Leachate treatment plant was not installed 
which led to oozing leachate polluting nearby water bodies. An unjustifiable 
clause in the agreement between the local body and contractor, linking 
payment of tipping fee to the total quantum of waste brought into the 
treatment plant resulted in e xcess payment of ₹11.72 crore  by the 
Corporation. In Kozhikode Corporation, the work of Leachate treatment plant 
at Njaliyanparamba was not yet completed, resulting in mixing of leachate 
with rain water, which flowed into drains. 
Of the 14 dumpsites in the test-checked ULBs, unsegregated mixed waste was 
still being dumped in five sites and remediation work had commenced only 
in three Corporations. Sanitary landfill for disposal of rejects/residual waste 
was not set up in the State till date. 
The source level processing units installed in households were not functioning 
effectively, leading to unscientific methods of processing of waste. We 
observed deficiencies in t he functioning of processing plants at Kochi and 
Kozhikode Corporations. Scientific remediation of dumpsites was n ot 
undertaken by ULBs on priority. 
4.1 Processing and Treatment 
According to Rule 15 (v) of the Solid Waste Management Rules, 2016, ULBs 
shall facilitate construction, operation and maintenance of solid waste 
processing facilities and associated infrastructure for optimum utilisation of 
various components of solid waste .  The ULBs were to adopt  suitable 
technology such as bio -methanation65, microbial composting, vermin -
composting, anaerobic digestion or any other appropriate processing 
technology for bio-stabilisation of biodegradable waste.  
                                                 
65 Process entailing enzymatic decomposition of organic matter by microbial action to produce 
methane rich biogas 

Performance Audit of ‘Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies’ 
 
36 
 
4.1.1 Status of processing of biodegradable waste 
The biodegradable waste shall be processed, treated and disposed of through 
composting or bio -methanation within the premises as far as possible by 
resident welfare and market associations, apartments, hotels and restaurants. As 
part of promoting decentralised system of waste management, the State policy 
issued in September 2018 prescribed source level processing of biodegradable 
waste. Details of biodegradable waste generated, collected and processed in the 
State during the audit period are shown in Table 4.1: 
Table 4.1: Details of biodegradable waste generated, collected and 
processed by test-checked ULBs during 2016-2021 
 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 
Generated  
(tonne/day) 2,97,615.28 3,04,634.17 3,12,051.82 3,17,848.10 3,03,507.05 
Collected 
(tonne/day) 1,20,297.58 1,24,696.97 1,30,114.37 1,31,906.35 1,16,097.30 
Processed 1,18,710.20 1,29,748.10 1,39,808.40 1,53,879.50 1,50,329.30 
Percentage of  
processing 39.89 42.59 44.80 48.41 49.53 
(Source: Data from test-checked ULBs)  
As biodegradable waste processed through  source level processing facilitie s were also 
considered, the total quantity of processing outweighed that of collection. 
In test-checked ULBs, the percentage of biodegradable waste processed ranged 
from 39.89 to 49.53 only. Audit observed that inadequate infrastructure, low 
utilization of available infrastructure, etc. led to non -processing/inadequate 
processing of waste collected, as detailed in subsequent paragraphs: 
4.1.1.1 Inadequate infrastructure for managing household 
biodegradable waste 
With the exception of Kochi Corporation  where household biodegradable 
waste was collected an d transported to disposal site , the test-checked ULBs 
provided various systems like pipe composting, bio bins, biogas, kitchen 
compost, etc. to ensure source level processing of waste by households.  
Audit observed inadequate infrastructure contributing to significant gap in 
coverage ranging from 59.79 per cent to 99.94 per cent among the households 
provided with biodegradable waste management technologies in the 21 test -
checked ULBs 66 (Appendix 5). Joint physical verification was conducted at  
five67 randomly selected households supplied with decentralis ed processing 
technologies in each test-checked ULB. Of the 1 07 households visited, only 
54.24 per cent  of waste processing units were b eing utilised effectively . 
Reasons for poor utilisation included improper technology (in the case of pipe 
compost), lack of awareness regarding usage  of processing facilities, 
inadequate service by agencies of biogas plants, irregular/ lack of  supply of 
inoculum68 for treatment of waste in kitchen bin, irregular service by HKS, etc. 
It was seen  that no other ULB except Thiruvananthapuram Corporation 
supplied inoculum to households. However, the extent of supply of inoculum 
in this ULB ranged from 3.69 to 17.33 per cent only, which is suggestive of the 
                                                 
66Except Kochi Corporation which transported biodegradable waste to Brahmapuram 
67The covid  restrictions then prevailing in the State did not permit extensive coverage of 
households by audit team 
68 Population of micro-organisms introduced into a suitable medium 

 
Chapter IV – Processing and Disposal of Waste 
37 
 
probability of non-functioning of 82 to 96 per cent household waste processing 
facilities. Despite GoK designating HKS to visit each household and impart 
awareness in  using waste processing facilities, the pe rcentage of facilities 
supplied and put to use by households was observed to be low, as presented in 
Table 4.2. 
Table 4.2: Status of utilisation of waste processing facilities supplied in 
test-checked ULBs 
Total 
number of 
households 
Number of 
households 
provided 
with 
facilities   
Percentage of 
households 
provided with 
facilities 
Number 
of 
facilities 
actually 
in use 
Percentage 
of facilities 
in use  
Percentage 
of 
households 
processing 
waste at 
source 
1107006 206535 18.66 81674 39.54 7.38 
(Source: Data from test-checked ULBs) 
Low source level treatment clubbed with low door -to-door collection of 
biodegradable waste resulted in littering of waste in public places, water bodies, 
etc. Further , instance of private agencies collecting waste from  households 
which were already provided with facilities was also noticed. 
Infructuous expenditure on purchase and distribution of bio -composter 
bins in Thiruvananthapuram Corporation 
As part of decentralised waste management, Thiruvananthapuram 
Corporation purchased and distributed 46 ,492 bio -composter kitchen bin 
units at ₹1800/unit in two phases (15 ,833 bins in the first phase and 30 ,659 
bins in the second phase) during the period from 2016 -17 to 2020 -21. The 
expenditure incurred (until December 2022) by the ULB amounted to ₹5.96 
crore, with a committed liability of ₹8.37 crore. As per Corporation records 
furnished to Audit, 14 ,505 beneficiaries (31.2 per cent ) were using bio -
composter bins for processing of waste (October 2021).  
The status of utilization furnished by the ULB could not be regarded as true 
to facts, as Audit observed that only an average of 3627 bags of inoculum 
were supplied to the households per month in 2020 -21. Further, private 
agencies entrusted with the collection of non-biodegradable waste collected 
biodegradable waste unauthorisedly even from households supplied with 
bio-composter bins. This resulted in non -utilisation of bio-composter bins 
supplied to the beneficiaries. Thus unauthorised collection of biodegradable 
waste by service providers, absence of regular supply of inoculum and lack 
of monitoring by the Corporation contributed to idling of 70 per cent of bins 
distributed. This would tantamount to unfruitful expenditure of atleast ₹ 3.35 
crore.  
Accepting the observation, Government stated in the exit conference (May 
2022) that shortage of inoculum and improper management had led to non -
usage of source level composting facilities. As regards non -usage of bio -
composter bins leading to infructuous expendit ure by Thiruvananthapuram 
Corporation, it was stated that the ULB had relied on service providers and 
monitoring and supervision had been an issue . Government assured that s teps 
have been taken to assess the functioning of existing household waste 
processing systems through site verification by HKS. 

Performance Audit of ‘Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies’ 
 
38 
 
4.1.1.2      Source level treatment of waste in Apartments 
Apartments and houses having floor area 400 m 2 or above should establish 
necessary facilities for treatment and disposal of waste at source. It was 
mandatory to include waste processing facilities in buildings at the time of 
construction itself and within one year, for existing buildings. The Secretary of 
the U LB was to cancel t he licence of buildings which did  not have such 
facilities and those who violated the Rule were to be penalised by levying fine 
not below ₹ 10,000 or imprisonment upto six months, or both. It was observed 
that only 286 (52.19 per cent) of 548 apartments in test -checked ULBs had 
source level treatment facilit ies. During JPV in 21 apartments in five 69 test-
checked ULBs, it was seen that  source level treatment facilities were not 
provided in 11 apartments . In 14 apartments, incinerators/burners were 
installed without authorisation of PCB.   
4.1.1.3 Inadequate Source level treatment of waste in markets and 
other places 
According to SWM Rules, 2016, the local bodies were to set up  decentralised 
compost plant or bio-methanation plant in markets and other suitable locations 
for processing the waste generated, ensuring hygienic conditions. As per data 
furnished by ULBs, of the 118 markets in 2070 test-checked ULBs, 33 markets 
(28 per cent ) had source level waste treatment facilities. J oint Physical 
Verification conducted by Audit in 23 of these markets revealed that 
composting/ bio-methanation units to treat market waste were installed only in 
19 markets, of which 11 were functioning.  Liquid waste treatment facility was 
not installed in any of the markets visited by Audit. 
Audit observed that the source level treatment facility installed in the markets 
and other locations in test-checked ULBs had deficiencies as detailed below: 
 Aerobic Bin (thumboormuzhi) units 
Thumboormuzhi is a type of Aerobic Bin Composting unit for converting 
biodegradable waste into compost using inoculum. Usage of inoculum is 
essential for providing bacterial consortium for aerobic composting. Equal 
layers of biodegradable waste and dry lea ves are placed with the help of 
wooden frame and inoculum is sprayed on top. Composting takes place in a 
period of 90 days. Details of thumboormuzhi units installed in test-checked 
ULBs are given in Appendix 6. The following deficiencies were noticed: 
 Thiruvananthapuram Corporation employed 350 -396 workers (with two 
persons per location for fixed units and one person per location for portable 
units) for managing thumboormuzhi units at 9971 locations. This resulted in 
employing an additional 252-298 workers against the actual requirement of 
98 workers72, which led to extra expenditure of ₹ 41.28 lakh per month. 
Interestingly, despite employing excess personnel, only 73 per cent of units 
installed remained functional. Fifty three workers were engaged in two 
circles and Main office where no thumboormuzhi units were installed. In 
                                                 
69 Thiruvananthapuram, Kochi Corporations and Mavelikkara, Aluva, Maradu Municipalities 
70 No markets function in Eloor and Mavelikkara Municipalities 
71 52 (fixed units) and 47 (portable units) 
72 Manpower required in 99 locations  (151) – Manpower allotted to non -functional units and 
Main office (53) = 98 

 
Chapter IV – Processing and Disposal of Waste 
39 
 
13 locations though the units were defunct the workers continued to be 
engaged.  
 Two hundred and seventy three thumboormuzhi units in six ULBs73 were 
not functional due to improper maintenance and short supply of inoculum.  
The non-functional units 
were used for storing 
plastic waste in some 
places. Audit also 
observed the units in 
poorly maintained and 
unhygienic conditions 
converting the area into 
breeding ground for 
black soldier larvae and 
rodents. The manure 
produced from the units 
was not regularly sold/disposed which resulted in accumulation of manure 
and non-use of the units.  
 No leachate treatment facilities were provided in the units which led to 
untreated slurry contaminating the soil. During JPV in 10 locations at 
Alappuzha Municipality, Audit noticed that leachate collection tanks were 
not provided, causing leachate generated to seep into the ground. 
  
Koyilandy Municiapality: Thumboormuzhi units not 
functional and filled with plastic waste (July 2021) 
Thumboormuzhi aerobic compost unit at Civil 
station Koyilandy Municipality (July 2021) 
 
The Chairman, KSPCB stated (June 2022) that periodic inspections were not 
possible due to shortage of technical staff and that inspections were conducted 
on receipt of complaints and necessary action taken. Government  informed 
(May 2022) that Thiruvananthapuram Corporation has approved an estimate to 
revive all thumboormuzhi units.  
 
 
 
                                                 
73 Thiruvananthapuram, Kozhikode Corporations and Nedumangad, Alappuzha , Koyilandy , 
Vadakara Municipalities 
Thumboormuzhi unit stacked with plastic and other waste in 
Thiruvananthapuram Corporation (July 2021) 


Performance Audit of ‘Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies’ 
 
40 
 
 Non-functioning of Community Level Biogas plants 
Seven test-checked ULBs 74 installed biogas plants for treatment of waste in 
markets and of the 16 plants installed, 14 were found non-functional due to  
improper maintenance, technical reasons, etc. (Appendix 7). Audit observed 
that community level biogas plants require dedicated manpower for their proper 
management and Annual Maintenance Contracts (AMC) so that non -
degradable waste do not get fed into the plants.   
Unfruitful expenditure on a biogas plant   
Manjeri Municipality formulated (2010-11) a project for installation of a 1000 
kg capacity biogas plant at market premise s. The Municipality entrusted  
(March 2010) the works relating to design, supply, erection and commissioning 
of the plant to M/s Integrated Rural Technology Centre (IRTC) Palakkad at a 
cost of ₹19.88 lakh with the stipulation to complete the work within six months. 
However, the agency completed the work only in  December 2016, after a 
prolonged interval of six years, reportedly due to public protest. Though the 
Municipality took over the plant from IRTC in February 2018, it did not ensure 
fruitful utilisation of gas generated in the market premises. Moreover, the slurry 
accumulated in the plant could not be removed which led to the closing down 
of the plant within days after taking over of the plant. This led to  inability to 
dispose of market wastes at source level, thereby defeating the purpose of 
installation of the biogas plant, in addition to  unfruitful expenditure of ₹19.88 
lakh.  
Government informed (May 2022) that Manjeri Municipality has given strict 
directions to IRTC to carry out the maintenance works without delay. However, 
JPV conducted by Audit in  August 2022  revealed that the biogas plant 
remained dysfunctional and removal of biodegradable waste was entrusted to a 
private agency.   
Infructuous expenditure on Annual Maintenance Contracts 
Thiruvananthapuram Corporation installed 10 community level biogas plants 
having capacity of one or two  tonnes per day in public markets during the 
period from 2011 -12 to 2015 -16. Audit observed that though the ULB spent 
₹19.50 lakh for the maintenance of five75 community level biogas plants and 
₹11.31 lakh towards AMC for five plants76 during 2019-20 and 2020-21, eight 
out of the 10 biogas plants were not functioning (October 2021). In Manacaud 
market, which was a dedicated market for sale of bananas, the biogas plant 
installed remained underutilised as little bio-waste was produced and fed to the 
plant. Audit observed that non -engagement of dedicated personnel/absence of 
regular awarding of AMC for management of the biogas plants resulted in 
closing down of the plants. In Vallakkadavu market, plastic waste was fed into 
the plant leading to its closing down. The Health and Engineering wings 
awarded AMC without assessing the requirements to make a plant functional , 
                                                 
74Thiruvananthapuram, Kozhikode Corporations, Nedumangad, Neyyatti nkara, Nilambur, 
Parappanangadi and Manjeri Municipalities 
75 In markets at Palayam, Manacaud, Kalladimughom, Perunelli and Sreekandeswaram 
76 In markets at Vattiyoorkavu, Vallakkadavu, Perunelli, Women and Child Hospital, Thycaud 
and Main office of Thiruvananthapuram Corporation 

 
Chapter IV – Processing and Disposal of Waste 
41 
 
which resulted in failure in operationali sing the plant within the AMC period. 
This led to infructuous expenditure and resultant loss to the exchequer.  
In the exit conference (May 2022), Government assured to take corrective 
action with respect to the absence of source level treatment facilities in 
apartments and markets and non-functioning of biogas plants. 
4.1.2 Functioning of Centralised processing plants 
Of the 22 test -checked ULBs, Kochi and Kozhikode Corporations and 
Perinthalmanna Municipality had centralized processing facilities. Audit 
analysed the functioning of these plants and noted deficiencies in the 
working of the plants at Kochi and Kozhikode Corporations as detailed below: 
4.1.2.1 Faulty operation of Brahmapuram centralised processing    
facility 
Kochi Corporation executed agreement ( January 2012 ) with M/s. Environ 
Green for O&M of solid waste disposal facility at Brahmapuram.  As per the 
agreement, the contractor had to procure all materials and equipment required 
for composting and also meet the requisi te charges for supply of electricity, 
water, etc. The following shortcomings were noticed in the operation of 
Brahmapuram plant:  
 The agreement between the Corporation and contractor stipulated that both 
the parties should jointly fix the permissible amount of rejects in the 
collected waste, every three months. However, no such fixing of quantity 
was done during the audit period.  Of the 3,85,555 tonnes of waste which 
reached the Brahmapuram processing site during 2016-17 to 2020-21, only 
1,00,138 tonnes were processed. Unprocessed quantity of 2,85,417 tonnes 
turned into rejects.  
The agreement executed by Kochi Corporation with the neighbouring local 
bodies specified that only biodegradable waste were to be transported to 
Brahmapuram. However, the local bodies  transported 79,996 tonnes of 
unsegregated mixed waste to the facility. Had the local bodies effectively 
segregated waste at source point itself, there would have been considerable 
drop in the quantum of rejects which reached the centralised facility. 
 Audit observed that leachate oozed underground from the waste heaped in 
plant premises, polluting nearby  water bodies like Kadamb rayar and 
Chitrapuzha. The failure of the Corporation to install leachate treatment 
plant for treatment of leachate generated, led to KSPCB assessing the 
Environmental compensation amounting to ₹1.12 crore on the Corporation 
from 22 Nov ember 2018 to 30 November 2019. The leachate treatment 
plant has not been made functional yet.  
 As per clause in the agreement executed, the Corporation had to pay tipping 
fee to the contractor @ ₹550 per tonne of solid waste (biodegradable and 
RDF77) except plastic waste received in the plant. Though the plant claimed 
to have capacity to process 250 tonne s of waste per day and received 211 
tonnes/day, the contractor processed only  around 69 tonne s/day. The 
dilapidated windrow composting plant was the root c ause of 
                                                 
77 Refuse Derived Fuel 
Scan the QR code to 
view 

Performance Audit of ‘Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies’ 
 
42 
 
malfunctioning of the waste management facility. Inadequate spot 
treatment of fresh biodegradable waste brought in to the plant led to its 
accumulation over and above the deposited legacy waste. Though the 
contractor processed  only 33 per ce nt of the waste, Corporation made 
payment for the entire quantity of waste reaching the plant.  Despite the 
agency having no role in transportation of waste from the ULBs to the 
treatment plant, payment of tipping fee was linked in the contract to the 
total quantum of waste brought into the treatment plant and not to the waste 
processed by agency.  Excess payment attributable to this unjustifiable 
clause amounted to ₹11.72 crore. 
 Government directed (November 2015) all departments and local bodies to 
adhere to e-tender procedure while awarding works with estimated cost of 
₹ five lakh and above. In violation of the above, Kochi Corporation selected 
the same contractor from 2012 till 2021, by extending the period of contract 
and not uploading e-tenders. Audit observed that e -tender was conducted 
only thrice during the period from 2015 to 2021.  The action of the 
Corporation in awarding work to the same contractor who failed to work in 
the best interest of the Corporation was objectionable. 
 The National Institute of Technology, Kozhikode (June 2021) estimated the 
quantity of legacy waste at Brahmapuram as 325816 cu.m above ground 
level and 226087 cu.m below ground level.  The Corporation had a 
committed liability of ₹55 crore to remove the huge volume of legacy waste 
in the plant premises. 
 The Brahmapuram plant has been functioning without authorisation of 
State PCB since 2010. Though PCB issued notice to Kochi Corporation 
(July 2021), the plant continues to function without authorisation. 
In r eply, Government stated (May 2022) that issues related to dilapidated 
condition of the existing windrow compost plant have resulted in reducing the 
processing of bio waste into compost at Brahmapuram. Chairman , KSPCB 
replied to  Audit (June 2022) that the T echnical Committee meeting for 
finalising the implementation of Bio-mining held in January 2022 had observed 
that the contractors were unable to dig and carry out clearing of deposited waste 
due to water interference and that the total quantum of legacy wa ste assessed 
did not include the waste deposited in the dilapidated windrow sheds. In the 
exit conference (May 2022), Government assured to look into specific issues 
such as faulty agreement conditions, non-functioning of leachate treatment 
plant, etc. 
4.1.2.2 Shortfalls in processing of biodegradable waste at 
Njaliyanparamba Treatment plant in Kozhikode Corporation 
Biodegradable waste generated in Kozhikode Corporation w as collected by 
sanitary workers/Kudumbas hree members and transported to the treatment 
plant at Njaliyanparamba. As per agreement executed (June 2008) for O&M 
service of the plant with M/s. IL&FS Environmental Infrastructure and Services 
Ltd., the firm had to meet the running cost of the plant and remit royalty amount 
of ₹ 48,400 to the Corporation. The agreement also stipulated that the agency 
shall ensure an overall compost recovery rate of 20 -25 per cent. Citing low 
level of achievement in production of compost and non-payment of royalty, the 

 
Chapter IV – Processing and Disposal of Waste 
43 
 
Corporation terminated the agreement with the Company (July 2019) and took 
over the management of the plant. As of March 2022, the firm was obliged to 
pay ₹ 17 lakh to the Corporation. 
The following shortcomings were noticed in the functioning of the plant during 
the audit period: 
 During 2017 -2021, against the total quantity of 84317.7 0 MT waste 
reaching the plant, the total compost production was 5233.17 MT (6.2 per 
cent). The MSWM Manual, 2016 stipulates typical efficiency of 18-20 per 
cent for organic solid waste input and 10-15 per cent for mixed waste input 
for a windrow compost plant. Reckoning compost production at 15 per cent, 
total biodegradable waste processed would be 34887.73 MT.  As such, only 
41 per cent  of waste brought to the plant was being  
processed. 
 
Kozhikode Corporation - Mixed waste processed at treatment plant, Njaliyanparamba 
 Reduced processing resulted in accumulation 3000 MT of backlog waste at 
the plant site. Low processing of waste also resulted in approximate revenue 
loss to the tune of ₹48.69 lakh , which would have accrued from sale of 
compost during 2019-20 and 2020-21. 
 The Audit Report of Comptroller and Auditor General of India for the year 
ended March 2010 had pointed out the need for installing leachate treatment 
plant at Njaliyanparamba. Even after passage of 12 years, the situation has 
not changed. The Project Manager, KSUDP entered into an agreement 
(January 2016) with Ionex Envirotech Pvt. Limited for the construction of 
leachate treatment plant of capacity 75 cu .m per day in Kozhikod e 
Corporation. The Chief Environmental Engineer, KSPCB Regional Office, 
Kozhikode inspected the treatment plant (October 2016) and reported that 
the majestic flow meter for the measurement of flow was not installed, 
anaerobic reactor was found open with ae ration and sludge drying beds 
were not constructed. Though the ULB incurred an expenditure of ₹54.96 
lakh on the plant, the plant has not been commissioned yet.   
 Due to failure in completion of all items of work specified in the agreement, 
KSPCB did not grant Consent To Operate to the plant.   
 During JPV (March 2022), Audit noticed that leachate generated in the 
compost plant got mixed with rainwater and was discharged into nearby 
drains. The K SPCB conducted site verification and r eported (November 


Performance Audit of ‘Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies’ 
 
44 
 
2019 and June 2022) that untreated leachate mixed with rain water flowed 
into the nearby stormwater drainage and farmlands.  
 The KSPCB collected and tested (October 2021) well water samples in the 
area and found that the leachate content reduced the potability of well water. 
Government replied (May 2022) that due to inefficiency and non -functional 
machinery, processing of biodegradable waste dumped in the windrow compost 
has been reduced and compost production decreased to seven tonnes per day. 
Regarding non -functioning of Leachate treatment plant, it was stated that 
Corporation has initiated legal action against the contractor. It was also 
informed that the Corporation has entered into an agreement to establish a 
Waste to Energy Plant at Njaliyanparamba, on completion of which all the 
problems related to leachate flow, water quality in the region, etc. w ould be 
permanently solved.   
4.1.3 Street sweeping/street cleaning 
As per SWM Rules, 2016, it is the responsibility of local authorities to collect 
sweeping waste separately on alternate days or twice a week depending on the 
density of population, commercial activity and local situation. The MSWM 
Manual prescribed that in small towns and medium cities, one sweeper per 300-
350 running meters of  road length was required  for sweeping high density 
roads. Likewise, in the case of medium density roads, one person per 500 
running meters of road length and in l ow density roads,  one person per 750 -
1000 meters of road length was mandated for street sweep ing. An analysis of 
the length of road required to be swept daily as against the manpower available 
for street sweeping in the test -checked ULBs revealed that the existing staff 
could cover only 888 km out of 7692 km length of road per day. The distance 
to be swept daily by a sweeper ranged from one km to 23 km  in test-checked 
ULBs, due to which cleaning and sweeping of streets could not be undertaken 
effectively. There was an urgent need to increase the strength of the sweeping 
staff in ULBs to attend to the collection and processing of sweeping waste. 
4.1.3.1 Processing of sweeping waste   
Street sweeping waste predominantly comprises horticulture type waste 
(leaves, twigs), inert materials (sand and grit), and bio degradable and non -
biodegradable waste from littering. As per SWM Rules, 2016, it is the duty of 
local authorities to direct street sweepers not to burn tree leaves collected from 
streets and to set up covered secondary storage facility for temporary storage 
of street sweepings and silt removed from surface drains , wherever direct 
collection of such waste into transport vehicles is not convenient. However, 21 
of 22 test-checked ULBs have not provided temporary storage facility for street 
sweepings. Thiruvananthapuram Corporation  which generated 71 tonnes of 
sweeping waste daily , had temporary storage facility for one tonne of waste 
only, w hereas in the absence of storage facility , Kochi and Kozhikode 
Corporations and Aluva and Angamaly Municipalities transported the 
sweeping waste to Brahmapuram. 
As per the MSWM Manual, street sweeping waste and silt derived from drains 
are to be separated from household waste streams, since street sweeping and 
drain silt could be infiltrated with significant amount of toxic substances and 
may contaminate waste streams envisaged for composting and recycling. 

 
Chapter IV – Processing and Disposal of Waste 
45 
 
Therefore, street sweepings and silt from the drains are to be landfilled. 
However, in the absence of landfills, 12 of the test -checked ULBs deposited 
sweeping/drain waste in dumping yards. Burning of sweeping waste was 
noticed in Thiruvananthapuram and Kochi Corporations. Three ULBs78 utilised 
the sweeping waste  for processing  of food/biodegradable waste in 
thumboormuzhi units, violating Rules.   
Government replied (May 2022) that there was shortage of workers to cover 
the entire urban area on daily basis and that proposal for engaging Self help 
groups/ Non-Governmental Organisations/agencies for street sweeping was 
under consideration. As regards disposal of sweeping waste, it was stated that 
the collected waste would be categorized and only dry leaves would go to 
thumboormuzhi. 
4.1.3.2 Infructuous expenditure on purchase of Mechanised Road 
Sweeping machine79 
Thiruvananthapuram Corporation purchased a road sweeping machine in 2010 
from M/s Roots Multi Clean Company Limited, Coimbatore  (Company), 
incurring ₹ 73.50 lakh.  As the Corporation lacked technical expertise to operate 
the machine, its O&M was entrusted to the same company for three years , for 
which an additional ₹ 99.69 lakh was paid. Though the Company submitted 
proposal for renewal of O&M in September 2013, O&M was not renewed by 
the Corporation.  The machine was left idling  since the expiry of O&M 
agreement (June 2013), at the garage of the Corporation.  
In August 2021, the Corporation requested the Company to inspect the machine 
and prepare an estimate for necessary repairs to make it functional. However, 
the Company, after inspecting the machine, reported ( November 2021) that as 
the machine was kept idle for over eight years, its parts had got rusted and 
damaged and technology turned obsolete. The repair of the machine would not 
be economical as its parts were to be imported from abroad. Further, RTO 
norms have been changed and currently, public vehicles were to adhere to BS-
VI standards.  
Audit observed that the laxity on the part of Thiruvananthapuram Corporation 
to renew O&M or impart technical expertise to personnel during the three 
operational years, led to the idling and consequent damage of the machine since 
2013, not to mention the infructuous expenditure of ₹  73.50 lakh, for which 
responsibility needs to be fixed.    
Government stated that the Corporation has requested (January 2022) the 
Mechanical wing of Public Works Department  to ascertain the feasibility of 
utilising the chassis of the vehicle after removing sweeping kit. The reply does 
not provide any assurance regarding the scope of utilisation of the machine for 
the purpose envisaged. 
4.1.4 Authorisation of Urban Local Bodies    
As per Rule 15 of SWM Rules, local bodies shall make an application to the 
KSPCB or the Pollution Control Committee for grant of authorisation for 
                                                 
78 Thiruvananthapuram Corporation, Alappuzha and Eloor Municipalities 
79 The irregularity was pointed out in the Audit Report 2013 -14 of Kerala State Audit 
Department. Audit has updated the present status of utilisation of the machine in this report 

Performance Audit of ‘Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies’ 
 
46 
 
setting up waste processing, treatment or disposal facility, if the volume of 
waste exceeds five metric tonnes per day , including sanitary landfills. The  
KSPCB was to examine the proposal received from local bodies , make 
necessary inquiries and issue authorisation within a period of sixty days.  
On scrutiny of records at KSPCB to check extent of compliance of the above, 
it was seen that of the 22 test-checked ULBs, only one Corporation (Kozhikode 
Corporation) and five Municipalities80 have received authorisation of KSPCB.  
Five ULBs81 had submitted applications for receipt of authorisation, which 
were under scrutiny. The KSPCB had issued show cause notices to five ULBs82 
for not complying with the provisions of SWM Rules, 2016. Though directions 
were issued to six ULBs83 to apply  for authori sation, the ULBs have not 
responded favourably. Audit noticed that the instructions of KSPCB were not 
complied with and no pro -active action initiated by the ULBs to secure 
authorisation.    
Audit also observed that KSPCB issued notices on the basis of Environment 
Protection Act, 1986 and directions of National Green Tribunal and worked out 
Environmental Compensation for non -compliance with the provisions of the 
Act to Thiruvananthapuram Corporation (₹14.59 crore), Aluva Munici pality 
(₹2.13 crore) and Kochi Corporation (₹14.92 crore). Thiruvananthapuram and 
Kochi Corporations obtained stay from Hon’ble High Court against the levy of 
Environmental Compensation whereas Aluva Municipality has not initiated 
any action so far.   
The KSPCB, in the process of issuing authorisation to local bodies, ensures that 
the waste management mechanism adopted by local bodies is in compliance 
with accepted health and environmental standards. Therefore, local bodies need 
to assign priority to secure authorisation from KSPCB.  
Government accepted the observations and replied (May 2022) that necessary 
directions have been issued to local bodies to obtain authorisation from 
KSPCB.  
4.2  Disposal 
4.2.1 Status of Dumping Yards 
A Dumpsite is a land utili sed by the local body for disposal of solid waste 
without following the principles of sanitary land filling. The SWM Rules, 2016 
stipulate that bio-remediation or capping of old and abandoned dump sites is to 
be done within five years from the date of notification of the Rules.   
Remediation work on all other dumpsites was to be commenced from 01 
November 2019 and completed preferably within six months and in no case 
beyond one year.  
As per r ecords in KSPCB /ULBs, there are 43 dumpsites in the ULBs in the 
State, of which eight are in Municipal Corporations and 3 5 in Municipalities. 
Status of dumpsites in selected ULBs is given in Appendix 8. It was seen that 
of the 14 dumpsites in the test-checked ULBs, unsegregated mixed waste was 
                                                 
80 Neyyattinkara, Alappuzha, Mavelikkara, Kayamkulam, Vadakara  
81 Malappuram, Manjeri, Parappanangadi, Perinthalmanna, Feroke Municipalities 
82 Thiruvananthapuram and Kochi Corporations, Aluva, Angamali, Maradu Municipalities 
83 Kothamangalam, Muvattupuzha, Eloor, Nedumangad, Nilambur, Koyilandy Municipalities 

 
Chapter IV – Processing and Disposal of Waste 
47 
 
still being dumped in five sites84 and remediation work has commenced only in 
Thiruvananthapuram, Kochi and Kozhikode Corporations. It was evident that 
the test-checked local bodies were yet to investigate and analyse all old open 
dumpsites and existing operational dumpsites for their potential of biomining 
and bio-remediation, and to undertake necessary action wherever feasible. 
It is perturbing to note that despite the passage of five years since the 
notification of SWM Rules and National Green Tribunal’s  ultimatum for 
completion of remediation work within a year, the test -checked ULBs had not 
bestowed attention on the closing/rehabilitation of existent dumpsites to evade 
potential risks of environmental hazards. 
Government replied (May 2022) that remediation of 34 dumpsites would be 
undertaken through KSWMP. 
 
Legacy waste dumped at Njaliyanparamba dumping site (October 2021) 
 
Brahmapuram dumpsite at Kochi Corporation (November 2021) 
4.2.2 Status of Landfills    
Sanitary landfilling is the final and safe disposal of residual solid waste and 
inert waste in a facility designed with protective measures against pollution of 
ground water, surface water and fugitive air dust, fire hazard, animal menace, 
greenhouse gas emissions, etc. The SWM Rules, 2016 mandated that only the 
non-usable, non -recyclable, non -biodegradable, non -combustible and non -
                                                 
84 Kozhikode, Kochi Corporations, Kayamkulam, Mavelikkara, Muvattupuzha Municipalities  


Performance Audit of ‘Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies’ 
 
48 
 
reactive inert waste and pre -processing rejects and residues from waste 
processing facilities, were to be sent to sanitary landfill.  
Audit observed that sanitary landfill for disposal of rejects/residual waste has 
not been set up in the State so far. In the absence of sanitary landfill, test-
checked ULBs dumped rejects and street sweepings at the dumpsites  and 
centralised/community level processing facilities. Instances of dumping inert 
sweeping waste and drain silt in private lands and land owned by the ULB were 
noticed in Thiruvananthapuram and Kozhikode Corporations. Mixed waste 
including plastic bottles, e-waste, etc. were sent by local bodies to the landfill 
facility of KEIL. Imprudent utilisation of the only hazardous landfill facility in 
the State for disposing unsegregated and non -hazardous waste would lead to 
dearth of space for hazardous waste disposal in future.  
Government informed in the exit conference (May 2022) that efforts of the 
State to purchase land to set up landfill facility have not yet succeeded, due to 
the difficulty in identifying suitable land for the purpose, on account of the 
density and spread of population in the State. The reply is not acceptable as the 
delay in identification of land to establish scientific landfills atleast at regional 
levels, would contribute to unscientific and non -sustainable disposal of waste 
as observed by Audit.  
                   Unsegregated waste dumped at processing centre 
 
Brahmapuram (November 2021) 
 
Erumakuzhy, Thiruvananthapuram (July 2021) 
Recommendation 8: Government/ULBs must ensure to provide adequate 
resources to implement source level treatment facilities for processing of 
biodegradable waste and handhold households/institutions for effective 
utilisation of the facilities provided. Government m ust also set up adequate 


 
Chapter IV – Processing and Disposal of Waste 
49 
 
number of community level facilities for processing spill over waste from all 
sources. 
Recommendation 9: Government m ust ensure that mixed waste generated 
gets segregated at source points itself and biodegradable waste alone reach  
the Centralised processing plants at Brahmapuram and Nj aliyanparamba.  
Government must also urge the Corporations to set up Leachate treatment 
plants to treat the leachate generated, thereby preventing pollution of nearby 
water bodies and farmlands.    

 
 
CHAPTER V 
MANAGEMENT OF PLASTIC WASTE, BIO-MEDICAL 
WASTE, E-WASTE AND CONSTRUCTION AND 
DEMOLITION WASTE 
Maradu Municipality 
January 2020 
 

51 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
MANAGEMENT OF PLASTIC WASTE, BIO-MEDICAL 
WASTE, E-WASTE AND CONSTRUCTION AND 
DEMOLITION WASTE  
Special waste comprises of any solid waste that requires special handling and 
disposal because of its quantity, concentration, physical and chemical 
characteristics or biological properties, in order to protect human health  and 
environment. Plastic Waste, Bio-medical waste, E-waste, etc.  fall under the 
category of Special waste. Audit analysed the efficacy in management of the 
above Special wastes and Construction and Demolition waste  in test-checked 
ULBs.  
Insufficient collection of plastic waste from households, institutions and 
commercial establishments resulted in burning of plastic waste and dumping 
in public places.  Shredding machines and bailing machines were not  
functional in several ULBs. Poor segregation of recyclable waste resulted in 
disposal of plastic waste as rejects.  There were incidents of fire outbreaks 
caused by i mproper management and o pen burning of pla stic waste.  
Extended Producer Responsibility  (EPR) based plastic waste management 
system was yet to be established in  test-checked ULBs. Kochi Corporation 
incurred an expenditure of ₹14.16 crore for transportation of 1,69,293 tonnes 
of plastic waste towards hiring charges of tipper lorries/JCBs etc.  
The Corporation incurred an expenditure of ₹836 towards transportation of 
one tonne of plastic waste . We also noticed an instance of Kozhikode 
Corporation entrust ing a Haritha Sahaya Sthapana m with the  disposal of 
rejects, without even ensuring the mode or site of disposal chosen by the 
agency. The ULBs in the State were yet to achieve the target  of utilising 
shredded plastic i n 30 per cent  of roads constructed in their jurisdiction.  
Rampant usage of banned single use plastic carry bags were noticed in test-
checked ULBs  as well as f ailure in implementation of projects on 
manufacturing substitutes for plastic carry bags.  
Bio-medical waste reaching the IMAGE plant was much in excess of its 
processing capacity and resulted in accumulation of highly infectious waste 
which was left exposed without any safeguards in the plant premises.  Lack 
of adequate Governmental intervention in distributing the load of bio-
medical waste  among the two common bio -medical trea tment facilities, 
IMAGE and KEIL, resulted in underutilisation of capacity of one plant and 
inability to process the overload of waste in the other plant.   
Medical College Hospital, Institute of Maternal and Child Health and 
Institute of  Chest Diseases, at Kozhikode  liquid waste generated drained  
directly to ground , polluting nearby  water bodies. As regards e-waste 
management, there was no mechanism in place to ensure EPR, and records 
relating to  waste generation were not seen maintained. Facility for 
processing, recycling and disposing Construction and Demolition waste was 
not established. The Government and ULBs need to  comply with extant 
Rules/Manual provisions to ensure proper implementation of waste  
management at various stages and for each category of waste generated.  

Performance Audit of ‘Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies’ 
52 
 
5.1 Plastic Waste 
The Plastic Waste Management Rules, 2016 (PWM Rules, 2016) stipulated that 
every local body shall be responsible for development and setting up of 
infrastructure for segregation, collection, storage, transportation, processing and 
disposal of plastic waste either on its own or by engaging agencies or producers. 
According to Annual Report 2018 of Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB), 
approximately 9.4 million tonnes per annum (TPA) of plastic waste was 
generated in the country, which amount ed to 26000 tonnes per day (TPD). As 
per the Annual report  2019-20 of Kerala State P ollution Control Board 
(KSPCB), 360 TPD of plastic waste is generated in the State. 
5.1.1 Status of compliance with Rules on Plastic Waste 
Management  
Clauses 5 and 6 of PWM Rules, 2016, State Policy, SWM Rules, 2016, etc. spell 
out the responsibility of the local bodies for plastic waste management. The 
status of compliance to the provisions related to plastic waste management by 
the test-checked ULBs is shown in Appendix 9. 
5.1.2 Transportation, processing and disposal 
According to PWM Rules, 2016, plastic waste, which can be recycled, shall be 
channelised to registered plastic waste recycler. As per the SWM Strategy 
issued by GoK, the non-recyclable plastic waste from the transfer stations shall 
either be shredded and used for road construction or be bailed and sent to cement 
plants for heat recovery. It can also be converted to Refuse-derived fuel along 
with other flammable waste and sold to cement plants or such other places for 
use as alternative fuel. It is the responsibility of Haritha Karma Sena (HKS) to 
sort and store the non -biodegradable waste in Material Collection Facilities 
(MCF) and hand over the segregated non-biodegradable waste to CKCL or other 
authorised agencies for disposal. However, it was seen that in the absence of 
proper segregation by HKS, 25 to 100 per cent of plastic waste collected was 
mixed up with other waste and was disposed as rejects (Appendix 10).   
Audit observed the following with regard to management of plastic waste in the 
test-checked ULBs: 
 Kochi Corporation is incurring huge expenditure towards hiring charges of 
tipper lorries, Hitach i/JCB, etc. for the transportation of plastic waste.  
Quantity of plastic waste collected , expenditure borne by the Corporation 
towards hiring charges and revenue fetched during the period 2017-2021 are 
shown in Table 5.1: 
Table 5.1: Expenditure borne by Kochi Corporation for transportation of 
plastic waste and revenue earned 
(in Rupees) 
Year 
Tipper lorry 
rent (West 
zone) 
Tipper Lorry 
rent (East 
zone) 
Hitachi 
Hiring 
charges 
Total amount  
Amount 
received 
through sale 
of recyclable 
plastic 
2017-18 87,04,589 1,58,68,814 35,25,400 2,80,98,803 4,48,803 
2018-19 1,65,15,873 2,24,54,219 1,03,79,320 4,93,49,412 3,92,433 

Chapter V – Management of Plastic Waste, Bio-medical Waste, E-Waste and Construction 
and Demolition Waste 
 
53 
 
Year 
Tipper lorry 
rent (West 
zone) 
Tipper Lorry 
rent (East 
zone) 
Hitachi 
Hiring 
charges 
Total amount  
Amount 
received 
through sale 
of recyclable 
plastic 
2019-20 1,77,00,497 2,32,46,896 70,33,286 4,79,80,679 3,12,667 
2020-21* 34,33,645 35,79,336 91,18,038 1,61,31,019 Not furnished 
Total 4,63,54,604 6,51,49,265 3,00,56,044 14,15,59,913 11,53,903 
*Until June 2020 
 (Source: Data segregated by Audit on the basis of recordings in registers maintained by Kochi 
Corporation) 
 As per the data extracted by Audit from the registers maintained at 
Brahmapuram processing facility, the total quantity of plastic waste 
collected and transported to Brahmapuram plan t during 2017 -2021 was 
1,69,293 tonnes. The total expenditure incurred towards transportation and 
hiring of Hitachi/ JCB was ₹14.16 crore. Among the unloaded plastic waste, 
recyclable plastic waste was sold by the Corporation @ ₹1.50 per kg to a 
contractor. However, only 769.3 tonnes (0.45 per cent) of recyclable plastic 
were recovered and revenue to the tune of ₹11.54 lakh alone fetched during 
the above period. Thus, on one tonne of plastic waste colle cted, the 
Corporation was incurring an expenditure of ₹ 836 towards transportation 
and hiring charges.  The remaining waste was dumped at the site as rejects. 
During JPV of the site with the municipal staff, Audit observed that the total 
quantity of waste u nloaded at the site was not properly segregated and 
included other waste such as leather, clothes, e-waste, etc.   
Government responded (May 2022) that strict instructions would be given 
to the Corporation to ensure that segregation of waste takes place before 
transporting waste to the processing facility at Brahmapuram. 
 Kozhikode Corporation (Corporation) entrusted (April 2017) Niravu, a  
Haritha Sahaya Sthapanam (HSS)85, with the disposal of rejects collected at 
various wards of the Corporation under monthly agreements.  But while 
executing the agreement, the Corporation did not ensure the mode of 
disposal of waste by Niravu.  As per Corporation records, the rejects 
collected from Corporation wards were stated to have been removed to the 
processing plant of Niravu at Mandya in Karnataka. However, the 
Corporation stated to Audit that there was no such approved plant for Niravu 
at Mandya.  Incidentally, Karnataka PCB wrote (January  2020) to Kerala 
PCB that there was illegal inter -state transportation of mixed solid waste 
from Kerala to Karnataka. 
Despite the above, the Corporation further executed (June 2020) agreement 
with Niravu for a validity period of 36 months for the disposal of plastic 
waste collected from the Nj aliyanparamba MCF. As per agreement 
conditions, plastic waste was to be sold to Niravu at the rate of ₹ four per kg 
and the reject waste to be taken away on payment of ₹4.90 per kg by the 
ULB.  Accordingly, the Corporation handed over 31.13 tonnes of non -
recyclable waste during the period from July 2020 to December 2021 to 
Niravu, with a financial commitment of ₹152.52 lakh, of which ₹55 lakh 
was paid till December 2021. Thus, the Corporation had incurred expenses 
                                                 
85Agency to provide technical assistance to HKS in waste management activities 
Scan the QR code to 
view 

Performance Audit of ‘Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies’ 
54 
 
for the disposal of waste in another State, without even ensuring the mode 
or site of disposal chosen by the agency entrusted with the task.  
 Audit observed that higher percentage of rejects was due to improper 
secondary segregation of waste. Huge quantiti es of rejects lying heaped at 
processing facilities resulting in fire outbreaks in three ULBs, viz., Kochi 
Corporation (2019, 2020, 2021), Perinthalmanna Municipality (2019) and 
Alappuzha Municipality (202 2). Had effective segregation taken place at 
source/MCF/MRF/processing sites, such enormous quantity of mixed waste 
including recyclable plastic would not have accumulated at the facility. 
Government stated (May 2022) in the exit conference that directions have been 
issued to strictly regulate interstate t ransfer of waste and to use GPS86 enabled 
vehicles for transportation of waste and for tracking the movement of waste. 
Regarding fire outbreaks, it was stated that ULBs have now been directed to  
obtain Fire NOC87 for MCFs.  
5.1.3 Usage of shredded plastic in road work 
In line with the Guidelines issued by Government of India88 encouraging use of 
plastic waste in the construction of rural roads, G oK directed 89 LSGIs to use 
shredded plastic along with bitumen in the works relating to 30 per cent of the 
roads constructed in their jurisdiction. As per data furnished by CKCL, the State 
Public Works Department utilized 877.32 tonnes of plastic waste and 
constructed 877.32 km length of road. The Local Self-Government Institutions 
in the State constructed 2801.68 km of roads using 1120.69 tonnes of plastic 
waste during the period from 2016 -17 to 2020 -21. It was seen that the test-
checked ULBs utilized 37.24 tonnes of plastic in constructing 93.09 km of road 
during the audit period . Seven90 ULBs did not use any quantity of shredded 
plastic for road works during the period.  
The details of quantity of plastic waste utilised and length of road constructed in 
test-checked ULBs are given in Table 5.2.  
Table 5.2:  Details of usage of plastic waste in construction of roads in                          
test-checked ULBs during 2016-2021 
Year Quantity of plastic 
waste used (tonne) 
Length of road 
constructed (km) 
2016-17 0.48 1.19 
2017-18 1.81 4.53 
2018-19 2.46 6.15 
2019-20 5.11 12.77 
2020-21 27.38 68.45 
Total 37.24 93.09 
(Source: Data from Clean Kerala Company Limited) 
                                                 
86 Global Positioning System 
87 No-Objection Certificate 
88 National Rural Roads Development Agency, Ministry of Rural Development  
89 2016-17 and 2017-18:10 per cent, 2018-19:25 per cent, 2019-20:20 per cent, 2020-21:30 per 
cent 
90Kochi Corporation, Mavelikkara, Muvattupuzha, Aluva, Maradu, Parappanangadi and 
Koyilandy Municipalities 

Chapter V – Management of Plastic Waste, Bio-medical Waste, E-Waste and Construction 
and Demolition Waste 
 
55 
 
Audit noticed that ULBs started using shredded plastic in road works only when 
its usage was made mandatory (2020 -21) by Government in re -construction of 
roads affected by the great flood in 2018.   
The efforts of State G overnment towards utili sation of plastic waste for road 
construction is commendable. However, ULBs in the State are yet to achieve 
the target of utilising shredded plastic in 30 per cent of roads constructed in their 
areas of jurisdiction.    
5.1.4 Usage of banned plastic 
As per PWM Rules, 2016, carry bag s made of virgin or recycled plastic shall 
not be less than 50 microns in thickness.  Government of India imposed 
prohibition on usage of carry bags below 50 microns from 2016 onwards  and 
GoK banned91 single use plastic items from January 2020. The violators were 
to be fined ₹10,000, ₹25,000 and ₹50,000 in the first, second and third instances 
respectively and their licences cancelled in subsequent violations. 
Audit observed that the test -checked ULBs conducted only 6638 inspections 
during the audit period (2016-2021) to detect violation of the above instructions. 
Considering the fact that there were 2,54,491 shops/hotels/restaurants in the 
test-checked ULBs, it was evident that only six to seven shops had been 
inspected in a month on an average, which was grossly insufficient. An amount 
of ₹ 24.44 lakh was seen collected as fine towards non-compliance. During JPV 
in 20 test-checked ULBs, it was noticed that plastics with thickness below 50 
microns were being rampantly used in shops , hotels, markets, fish /vegetable 
stalls, etc. Banned plastic waste collected and deposited in bulk at the 
MCF/MRF in the 22 test-checked ULBs reflects the laxity on the part of ULBs 
to implement the ban.  Plastic waste left scattered without organised collection  
methods cause fa tality among cattle and other animals which consume them.  
As per the status report furnished by the Directorate of Animal Husbandry, of 
the 143 cattle died due to consumption of waste during 2016-2021 in the State, 
47 had devoured plastic waste. 
5.1.5 Extended Producer Responsibility 
According to Rule 9 of PWM Rules, 2016 , the p rimary responsibility for 
collection of used multi-layered plastic sachet or pouches or packaging is of the 
Producers, Importers and Brand Owners who introduce the products in the 
market. They need to establish a system for collecting back the plastic waste 
generated on account of their products. This plan of collection is to be submitted 
to the KSPCB while applying for Consent to Establish or Operate or Renewal. 
Government directed (2018) Suchitwa Mission to facilitate local governments 
to implement Extended Producer Responsibility ( EPR) for applicable special 
waste in consultation with KSPCB. However, the State has not implemented 
EPR so far. 
Audit noticed that companies who obtained registration from Central PCB have 
not furnished quarterly or annual progress reports on collection of plastic waste 
from the State to KSPCB. Consequently, KSPCB was unable to assess the 
                                                 
91 Ban on the manufacture, storage, transport and sale of single use plastic items viz., plastic 
carry bags (irrespective of thickness), plastic sheets, cups, plates, flex, PET bottles of drinking 
water less than 300 ml, etc. 

Performance Audit of ‘Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies’ 
56 
 
quantity of plastic waste taken back by the brand owners or verify an y system 
for collection arranged by brand owners. Government replied (May 2022) that 
steps were being taken for the implementation of EPR in accordance with the 
Guidelines issued by GoI. 
5.1.6     Strategy for implementation of 3R approach 
The Integrated Solid Waste Management (ISWM) aims at maximising resource 
conservation and resource efficiency, while reducing the amount of waste being 
disposed. It is closely linked to the 3R (Reduce, Reuse and Recycle) approach, 
which helps to reduce the quantity of waste, co st associated with its handling 
and its environmental impacts. One of the objectives of State policy too, was to 
maximize the possibility of reduction, reuse and recycling of waste generated.  
Audit analysed the extent of compliance of ULBs to the above ap proach as 
shown in Table 5.3:  
Table 5.3: 3R strategy adopted and shortcomings noticed 
 
3R strategy adopted 
by the State 
Deficiencies noticed in 
implementation 
 
Ban on plastic carry bags 
below 50 microns from 
2016 and ban on single 
use plastic from 01 
January 2020 
Rampant usage of banned single use 
plastic carry bags noticed during JPV 
in shops  and markets  in all test -
checked ULBs and usage of plastic 
carry bags below 50 microns, in 20 
test-checked ULBs.  
 
Promotion of substitutes 
for plastic carry bags 
Thiruvananthapuram Corporation 
incurred ₹45.06 lakh on construction, 
maintenance and purchase of raw 
materials for five cloth/paper bag 
manufacturing units during 2017 -
2021. Though the units commenced 
operation and manufactured 96,814 
cloth bags, they  were closed down 
(April 2020) in the Covid scenario. 
The Corporation stated that units were 
not revived till date, as they could not 
be run as business model. 
 
Utilisation of non-
recyclable shredded 
plastic in roads to 
promote reuse of plastic. 
Seven out of 22 test-checked ULBs did 
not utilise non-recyclable shredded 
plastic in roads during the audit period. 
 
Energy recovery from 
waste 
Of the  two Waste to Energy ( WtE) 
projects proposed  (June 2018) in the 
test-checked ULBs , no project has  
been initiated so far  (March 2022).  
Though Perinthalmanna Municipality 


Chapter V – Management of Plastic Waste, Bio-medical Waste, E-Waste and Construction 
and Demolition Waste 
 
57 
 
 
3R strategy adopted 
by the State 
Deficiencies noticed in 
implementation 
constructed (January 2021) Bioshakthi 
biomethanation plant to generate 
electricity from bio -waste, the p lant 
could not be made functional due to 
inadequacy of waste brought in for 
energy recovery.   
 
Construction of  
Resource Recovery 
Facility (RRFs) with 
shredding and bailing 
machines for recovery of 
plastic 
Sixteen out of 22 ULBs constructed 
RRFs with shredding /bailing 
machines, of which  eight ULBs92 
failed to utilise the facilities because of 
non-availability of electricity, delay in 
repairing machinery, etc.  
 
Conduct IEC activity for 
waste minimization 
through 3R concept  
Nineteen test-checked ULBs have not 
prepared specific action plan for  
implementation of 3R strategy and 18 
ULBs did not conduct any IEC activity 
for creating awareness on the 
importance of 3R concept.  
 
State designated 
Suchitwa Mission as a 
scientific advisory for 
technical and financial 
assistance for managing 
special waste  
Suchitwa Mission did not offer  
assistance to ULBs in managing 
special waste other than plastic. 
 
 
Implementation of E PR 
based plastic waste 
management 
The State has not  implemented EPR 
system.  
(Source: SWM Rule, State Policy, Government orders) 
The National indicators of Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 12.5 aims to 
substantially reduce waste generation through prevention, reduction, recycling 
and reuse by the year 2030. For the year 2020-21 the target set for the quantity 
of plastic waste to be generated per 1000 population is 1.27 tonnes per annum. 
As per KSPCB data  pertaining to 2021 , plastic waste generated per 1000 
population in State was 3.5 tonnes per annum. In the test-checked ULBs, plastic 
waste generated ranged between 5.1593 and 68.1294 tonnes per annum for 1000 
population. The trend is not appreciative, as it indicates that the efforts towards 
reduction of plastic waste in the State were not adequate enough to help the 
State achieve the SDG by 2030.  
Government informed in the exit conference (May 2022) that  the State had 
achieved considerable progress in prohibiting the usage of banned plastic carry 
                                                 
92Thiruvananthapuram Corporation, Nedumangad, Kayamkulam, Mavelikkara, Muvattupuzha, 
Eloor, Angamaly and Vadakara Municipalities 
93 Neyyattinkara Municipality 
94 Kochi Corporation 


Performance Audit of ‘Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies’ 
58 
 
bags during the second half of 2019 and that Covid had undone all progress 
attained until then. The reply is not convincing because even as the usage of 
plastic below 50 microns was banned by GoI in 2016 itself, Audit had noticed 
rampant usage of plastic carry bags of  the banned category du ring field 
verifications in 2021-22. This points to the insufficiency of action taken by GoK 
over the years to prohibit the manufacture, transport, storage and sale of banned 
carry bags.  
Accepting the audit observation on non-functioning of cloth bag manufacturing 
units in Thiruvananthapuram Corporation, Government replied (May 2022) that 
the ULB Council has decided to revive all the defunct units. Government also 
stated that steps are being taken for the implementation of EPR. 
5.2 Bio-medical waste 
Bio-medical waste (BMW) includes any waste, which is generated during the 
diagnosis, treatment or immunisation of human beings or animals , or research 
activities pertaining thereto, or in the production or testing of biological or in 
health camps. The KSPCB is the authority designated for implementation of the 
provisions of these rules in the State.  
Kerala has the highest number (about 27  per cent ) of health care facilities 
(HCF)/institutions in India and the total bed strength of hospitals in Kerala is 
1,19,762. However, there are only two Common Bio-medical Waste Treatment 
and Disposal Facilities (CBWTF) in the State, viz., IMAGE95 having installed 
capacity of 55.8 tonnes/day and KEIL with an  installed capacity of 16 
tonnes/day. Also, 51 HCFs are having captive facility for processing BMW, 
with an installed capacity of 3.4 tonnes/day.  
Audit analysed the issues associated with the management of BMW in test -
checked ULBs.  
5.2.1 Non assessment of quantity of Bio-medical waste generated 
In order to implement and enforce Bio-medical Waste Management Rules, 2016 
effectively, authentic and accurate data of BMW generated in the State is 
necessary. However, KSPCB has not so far assessed the quantity of BMW 
generated in the State. It was seen that KSPCB depended on the annual reports 
furnished by HCFs  for assessing waste generated in a year in the State.  
However, all HCFs did not submit annual reports regularly to KSPCB. Of the 
17,122 HCFs in the State, only 2 ,487 HCFs had submitted annual reports  to 
KSPCB during 2020. The quantity of BMW generated in the State during the 
period from 2016-17 to 2020-21 as estimated by KSPCB ranged from 37.81 to 
42.93 tonnes/day. In the absence of regular submission of annual reports by 
HCFs to KSPCB, Audit could not ascertain the veracity of the estimated value 
of generation of BMW in the State.  
5.2.2 Status of authorisation of Health Care Establishments in the 
State 
According to Rule 10 of BM W Management Rules, 2016 , every occupier or 
operator handling BMW shall make an application to the KSPCB for grant of 
                                                 
95 Indian Medical Association Goes Eco-friendly, established by Kerala State branch of Indian 
Medical Association in 2003 

Chapter V – Management of Plastic Waste, Bio-medical Waste, E-Waste and Construction 
and Demolition Waste 
 
59 
 
authorisation. The details of HCFs identified by KSPCB and those functioning 
without authorisation from KSPCB are given in Table 5.4. 
Table 5.4: HCFs identified/functioning without authorisation 
Year Total number of HCFs identified 
by KSPCB 
Number of HCFs functioning 
without authorisation 
2016 9154 5401 
2017 9628 4785 
2018 12668 5806 
2019 13869 7108 
2020 17122 3708 
(Source: Annual Reports of KSPCB) 
As of December 2020, 3708 HCFs were functioning without authori sation in 
the State. It was also seen that of the 17 ,122 HCFs identified by KSPCB , only 
16,602 HCFs had registered with IMAGE for collection of BMW generated. As 
such KSPCB/Government had no mechanism to ascertain the nature of disposal 
of BMW by the unauthorised HCFs in ULBs. 
5.2.3 Functioning of Common Bio-medical Waste Treatment and 
Disposal Facility 
5.2.3.1 IMAGE 
There was only one  Common Bio-medical Waste treatment and Disposal 
Facility (CBWTF) in the State viz., IMAGE till May 202196 and the entire BMW 
in the State was being transported to the facility.  As per BMW  Management 
Rules, CBWTF located within the respective State/UT was allowed to cater to 
healthcare units situated at a radial distance of 75 km. However, in a coverage 
area where 10,000 beds are not available within a radial distance of 75 km, 
existing CBWTF could cater to the healthcare units situated upto 150 km radius, 
provided the BMW generated was collected, treated and disposed of within 48 
hours. The above stipulation was not adhered to, as the BMW generated in 
HCFs in southern and northern tips of the State had to cover 400 km and 380 
km respectively to reach the common facility.   
IMAGE was having treatment capacity of 49 tonnes/day, which was enhanced 
to 55.8 tonnes/day as the waste generation increased significantly amidst Covid-
19 pandemic. IMAGE informed (May 2021) the Environmental Engineer, PCB, 
Palakkad that 58 tonnes of waste (COVID and non-COVID) reached the plant 
daily. Audit observed during JPV that, regular collection of covid/non -covid 
waste was not undertaken by IMAGE  from the Medical Colleges at 
Thiruvananthapuram and Kozhikode . Laxity on the part of Government in 
setting up regional BMW treatment facili ties resulted in BMW reaching the 
IMAGE plant in excess of its processing capacity. This resulted in accumulation 
of highly infectious waste which was left exposed without any safeguards in the 
plant premises. 
Categorisation of bio-medical waste 
The BMW Management Rules, 2016 prescribe yellow, red and white coloured 
bags for the treatment and disposal of human/animal anatomical waste, 
                                                 
96 KEIL started functioning from May 2021 
Scan the QR code to 
view 

Performance Audit of ‘Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies’ 
60 
 
recyclable contaminated waste and sharp waste including metals, respectively. 
Yellow bags were to be disposed by Incineration or Plasma Pyrolysis or deep 
burial, and red and white bags by Autoclaving followed by shredding or 
mutilation.  
The BMW Management Rules, 2016 stipulated that untreated human /animal 
anatomical waste, soiled waste and biotechnology waste shall not be stored 
beyond a period of 48 hours.  Joint physical verification at IMAGE (December 
2021) revealed that BMW in red/yellow/white bags were left without disposal 
for several months in violation of Rules. Further, yellow bags enclosing body 
parts of humans/animals were seen scattered and dumped negligently, which 
was a serious offence on the part of IMAGE authorities. Further, such instances 
also point to the lack of effective monitoring by K SPCB. It was stated by the 
IMAGE authorities that the boundless increase in BMW due to the spread of the 
pandemic had resulted in the backlog. Audit observed that accumulation of huge 
quantity of BMW at IMAGE resulted in a major fire outbreak in January 2022. 
It was estimated that 2000 tonnes of waste was burnt during the incident, 
causing irreparable damage to the ambient air. Such instances causing potential 
threat to environment calls for fixing of responsibility so as to curb lapses in 
effective monitoring and supervision. 
Bio-medical waste dumped at IMAGE (December 2021) 
 
 
 
5.2.3.2 KEIL 
Though KEIL had a capacity to process 16 tonnes/day, only 6.2 tonnes of waste 
reached KEIL , whereas IMAGE received waste in excess of its capacity . 
Despite KSPCB, directing (August 2021) all HCFs in the five districts 97 to 
                                                 
97 Alappuzha, Kottayam, Ernakulam, Pathanamthitta, Idukki 


Chapter V – Management of Plastic Waste, Bio-medical Waste, E-Waste and Construction 
and Demolition Waste 
 
61 
 
provide BMW (covid and non-covid) to KEIL, the direction was not complied 
with by the HCFs in the districts. In reply, KEIL stated that the HCFs in the said 
districts have not registered themselves with KEIL and still rely upon IMAGE 
for processing their BMW. Lack of adequate Governmental intervention in 
distributing the load of BMW among the two Facilities has resulted in 
underutilisation of capacity of one plant and inability to process the overload of 
waste in the other plant.  
5.2.4 Waste management in Government Health Care 
Facilities/Institutions 
 Health Care Facilities (HCF) being centres where diagnosis, treatment or 
immunisation of human beings or animals is provided, were to be registered 
with CBWTF. As per information exhibited on the website of the 
Directorate of Health Services Kerala, the number of HCFs in Kerala under 
the Government Sector was 6691, out of which only 2190 (32.73 per cent) 
HCFs were registered with CBWTF.   
 The BMW Management Rules, 2016 stipulate d that BMW was to be 
segregated at the point of generation in designated colour coded bins by the 
person who is generating the waste . However, it was seen during JPV in 
three Medical Colleges 98 that segregation of waste was not done properly 
and solid waste got mixed with BMW.  
 Scrutiny of the records/JPV of 23 HCFs and 38 Veterinary hospitals in the 
test-checked ULBs revealed that 12 HCFs and 17 Veterinary hospitals were 
functioning without the 
authorisation of KSPCB. 
It was also seen that 34 
HCFs/Veterinary 
hospitals have not 
obtained registration of 
IMAGE/KEIL for 
disposal of BMW 
generated. The 
authorities in four 
Veterinary Hospitals 
stated that surgical waste 
was being taken away by 
the owners/care takers of 
the animals as the hospitals did not have disposal facility. Used syringes 
along with needles, gloves, etc . were seen scattered/b uried/burnt in the 
premises of seven Veterinary institutions in violation of BMW Management 
Rules.   
Lack of organized system of disposal of BMW generated by 
households/institutions render ing palliative home care services have already 
been mentioned in paragraph 3.2.2 of this report. Instances of improper 
segregation and dumping of BMW captured during joint physical verifications 
                                                 
98 Medical College Hospitals at Thiruvananthapuram, Kozhikode and Alappuzha   
Scan the QR code to 
view 
Kochi Corporation District Veterinary Hospital - Bio-medical 
waste mixed with other waste (December 2021) 

Performance Audit of ‘Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies’ 
62 
 
are presented below:        
Improper Segregation and Dumping of bio-medical waste 
 
Medical College, Thiruvananthapuram (November 2021) 
 
Bio-medical waste dumped in Kozhikode Medical College for transportation to IMAGE 
(September 2021) 
 
 
Mixed waste dumped near parking ground in Thiruvananthapuram Medical College 
(November 2021) 


Chapter V – Management of Plastic Waste, Bio-medical Waste, E-Waste and Construction 
and Demolition Waste 
 
63 
 
  
Bio-medical waste dumped for incineration at Kozhikode Medical College (September 2021) 
5.2.5 Inadequate Liquid waste treatment posing risks to environment 
According to BMW Management Rules, 
2016, the occupier of HCF shall ensure 
segregation of liquid chemical waste99 at 
source and pre -treatment or 
neutralisation prior to mixing with other 
effluents. A separate collection system 
leading to effluent treatment system was 
to be installed for treatment of liquid 
waste generated. Audit conducted JPV in 
66 HCFs in 22 test -checked ULBs and 
observed that 35 of them did not have 
Effluent Treatment Plant (ETP) installed 
to treat bio-medical liquid waste 
generated. In seven hospitals100 bio-
medical liquid waste mixed with other 
liquid waste was directly disposed to 
common drain/canals after chlorination and  without any prescribed treatment 
procedures, polluting water bodies and endangering the health of 
humans/animals in the vicinity.  
Medical College Hospital (MCH), Institute of Maternal and Child Health and 
Institute of Chest Diseases at Kozhikode with total bed strength of 2405 
generated four million litres per day (mld) of liquid waste. However, capacity 
of the Sewage Treatment Plant (STP) installed in the HCF was only two mld.  
During JPV, it was noticed that treated liquid waste from the two mld plant 
was being routed to the nearby Kanoli canal. The remaining quantity of waste 
water generated was directly drained to ground from the hill top area where 
the MCH was situated. In the course of JPV, Audit entrusted sample testing 
of drinking water collected from four wells and one pond in the vicinity to 
                                                 
99Used or discarded disinfectants, Silver X -ray film developing liquid, discarded formalin, 
infected secretions, aspirated body fluids , liquid from laboratories and floor washings, 
cleaning, house-keeping and disinfecting activities 
100Koyilandy Taluk Hospital, Government Beach Hospital, Kozhikode, Women and Child 
Hospital Kozhikode, Palluruthi Taluk Hospital, Kochi, Karuvelippadi Taluk Hospital, Kochi, 
Mattanchery Taluk Hospital, Alappuzha Medical College Hospital 
Kochi Corporation Palluruthy Taluk 
Hospital - Bio-medical liquid waste is let 
out directly to drainage (November 2021) 

Performance Audit of ‘Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies’ 
64 
 
District PCB. The sample testing revealed high content of different types of 
chemicals rendering the water unpotable for use.  
 In the three Government MCHs101 visited by Audit, no ETPs to treat bio-
medical liquid waste were seen installed. As per BMW Management Rules, 
2016, sludge from ETP was to be supplied to CBWTF for incineration or to 
Hazardous waste treatment, storage and disposal facility for disposal. 
However, Government Medical College Hospital and Korambayil hospital at 
Manjeri were using this sludge containing hazardous chemical elements as 
manure, which would harm plant and animal health.  
5.2.6 Unauthorised operation of incinerators in hospitals 
The BMW Management Rules, 2016, do not permit installation of in -house 
incinerators.  However, in case there is no common bio-medical facility nearby, 
the same could be installed by the occupier after taking authorisation from 
KSPCB. The BMW Management Rules, 2016 prescribed standards for 
incinerators so that emission of harmful chemicals like Dioxin and Furan could 
be limited to minimum. All incinerators installed were directed to comply with 
the above standards within a period of two years from the date of notification.  
The District PCBs in Kozhikode, Malappuram and Alappuzha replied to Audit 
that they have not noticed any instance of  unauthorised incinerators being 
operated in HCFs in their jurisdiction. However, JPV conducted by Audit 
alongside PCB staff revealed that 20 out of 50 test -checked hospitals had 
installed incinerators without obtaining authori sation from PCB. These 
incinerators were used for treating huge quantities of both solid and bio-medical 
waste generated in these hospitals.  That the  hospitals were operating 
incinerators which were not subject to mandated checks by PCB is a matter of 
concern. 
Accepting the audit findings, Government stated in reply (May 2022) that the 
issue of BMW would be taken up separately on high priority and that the matter 
would be discussed and resolved at the earliest. 
5.3 E-waste 
E-waste refers to electrical and electronic equipment, whole or in part discarded 
as waste by the consumer as well as rejects from manufacturing, refurbishment 
and repair processes. The presence of elements like lead, mercury, arsenic, 
cadmium, selenium, and hexavalent chromium and flame retardants  beyond 
threshold quantities in e -waste classifies it as hazardous waste. As e -waste 
dismantling or incineration is considered  toxic, they are targeted for reuse, 
recovery or hazardous waste disposal.  
5.3.1 Status of e-waste generation 
There are no specific estimates on the generation of e-waste in the State despite 
it being a major waste stream . The quantity of e-waste collected in the State  
during 2019-20 and 2020-21 as per the Annual Reports of KSPCB is shown in 
Table 5.5: 
  
                                                 
101 MCHs at Thiruvananthapuram, Alappuzha and Kozhikode 

Chapter V – Management of Plastic Waste, Bio-medical Waste, E-Waste and Construction 
and Demolition Waste 
 
65 
 
Table 5.5: Quantity of e-waste collected in the State 
Year 
Category wise quantity of  e-waste collected per year Total 
quantity of 
e-waste 
collected 
(tonne) 
Information 
Technology and 
Telecommunication 
equipment (tonne ) 
Consumer 
Electrical and 
Electronic 
items (tonne) 
Other 
items 
(tonne) 
2019-20 108.356 82.244 1098.61 1289.21 
2020-21 27.66 88.33 1378.06 1494.05 
(Source: Data provided by KSPCB) 
The 22 test-checked ULBs did not maintain any records relating to the quantum 
of e-waste generated/collected from their areas.  
5.3.2 Collection and handling of e-waste 
E-waste Management Rules, 2016 stipulate that it is the responsibili ty of 
municipal authorities/ local bodies to ensure that e-waste, if found mixed with 
Municipal Solid Waste or pertaining to orphan products  is to be properly 
segregated, collected and channelised to authorised dismantler or recycler . 
Government directed (January 2014) LSGIs to set up models for door -to-door 
collection, local and centrali sed storage facilities and arrangements with 
registered recyclers for transportation and disposal of e -waste in their 
jurisdiction. It was seen that the test-checked ULBs have not set up a mechanism 
for collection of e-waste from households so far. As a result, e-waste generated 
in households was found mixed with solid waste. 
The collection centres were to store e -waste category -wise and maintain the 
records of e-waste collected and account the same to respective producers.  The 
storage space for refrigerators and air conditioners required adequate facilities 
for managing leakage of compressor oils, coolant/refrigerant gases, mercury, 
etc. Audit, along with ULB staff visited 42 scrap dealer shops which collected 
e-waste unauthorisedly. It was observed that these scrap dealers did not adhere 
to prescribed methodology of ass essment, storage and processing of e -waste, 
raising concerns regarding the safeguards to be complied with. L ack of 
awareness imparted to public on the proper disposal of e-waste, absence of door-
to-door collection facilities , shortage of collection centres , etc. contributed to 
substantial quantities of e -waste reaching the hands of informal waste pickers 
and scrap dealers.   
During JPV , Audit noticed instances of accumulation of e -waste such as 
refrigerators, television sets, etc. dumped in open space as well as unauthorised 
dismantling of Television sets by scrap dealers in six ULBs102 in violation of 
CPCB guidelines. 
5.3.3 Role of local body as bulk consumer  
The CPCB guidelines envisaged bulk consumers to ensure that e -waste 
generated by them was handed over only to producer take back/channelisation 
system. Government of Kerala  directed (January 2014) Government 
Departments, Public Sector Undertakings, Boards and Corporations to 
incorporate the buy back/take back system of electronic goods like Compact 
                                                 
102Thiruvananthapuram, Kozhikode Corporations, Koyilandy, Kayamkulam, Mavelikkara and 
Vadakara Municipalities 

Performance Audit of ‘Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies’ 
66 
 
Fluorescent Lamps (CFL) and Fluorescent Tube Lights (FTL), Computer 
systems, etc. by the producer as a mandatory condition in all the tenders floated 
by them.  The test -checked ULBs purchase d laptops/computers/UPS/street 
lights, etc. for ₹8.18 crore  and awarded Annual Maintenance Contract (AMC) 
for ₹62.84 crore during the audit period.  
Despite being aware of the potential load of e -waste to be generated , none of 
the test-checked ULBs included the clause on buy back/take back system in the 
tenders floated. The ULBs, by 
excluding the above clause, 
could not ensure that the onus 
of recycling of e -waste was 
vested in the producers. This 
would result in ULBs facing 
practical difficult ies in 
disposing of e -waste in an 
environmentally sound 
manner. 
Audit observed that t wo ULBs103 disposed e-waste through scrap dealers and 
four ULBs104 could not dispose the e-waste generated , leading to its 
accumulation.  
5.3.4 Collection of e-waste by Clean Kerala Company 
Government of Kerala  permitted (March 2016) CKCL to collect E -waste 
generated in Government offices, institutions, public sector undertakings , etc. 
and dispose them of by handing over to authorised e-waste collectors/recyclers. 
It was seen that on ly 60 local bodies in the State handed over E -Waste (tube 
light, CFL, etc.) to CKCL during the period from 2016 -17 to 2021 -22 (upto 
December 2021) and onl y 35.24 tonne of e-waste were collected. None of the 
test-checked ULBs handed over e-waste to CKCL indicating that there was no 
system in place for effective management of e-waste. 
5.4 Construction and Demolition Waste 
Construction and Demolition (C&D) waste means the waste comprising of 
building materials, debris and rubble resulting from construction, re-modelling, 
repair and demolition of any civil structure. According to Rule 6 (4) of 
Construction and Demolition Waste Management Rules, 2016,  local bodies 
shall make arrangements and place appropriate containers for collection of 
C&D waste and the collected waste shall be transported to appropriate sites for 
processing and disposal, either through own resources or by appointing private 
operators. 
5.4.1 Status of generation of Construction and Demolition waste 
Specific estimates of quantity of C&D waste generated in their jurisdiction were 
not available with any of the  22 test -checked ULBs.  Based on the waste 
generation data of Technology Information Forecasting and Assessment 
Council (TIFAC) and extent of demolished area in ULBs during the period from 
2016-17 to 2020-21, Audit estimated the approximate quantity of C&D waste 
                                                 
103 Vadakara and Perinthalmanna Municipalities 
104 Kozhikode, Kochi Corporations and Neyyattinkara, Nedumangad Municipalities  
E-waste dumped at Pottakuzhi in Kochi Corporation 
(December 2021) 

Chapter V – Management of Plastic Waste, Bio-medical Waste, E-Waste and Construction 
and Demolition Waste 
 
67 
 
generated in 16 ULBs105 as 77,598.47 tonnes.  It was observed that though these 
ULBs generated on an average, 42.52 tonnes of C&D waste per day, they did 
not adopt prescribed met hods of disposal of C&D waste generated in their 
jurisdiction.   
5.4.2 Collection and processing of C&D waste generated in the 
ULBs 
According to C&D W aste Management Rules, 2016 , ULBs were to  place 
appropriate containers for collection of waste which shall be removed at regular 
intervals and collected waste was to be transported to appropriate sites for 
processing and disposal, either through own resources or by appointing private 
operators. However, the test-checked ULBs did not make arrangements for 
collecting C&D waste generated. As such the waste generators were compelled 
to dispose of the C&D waste emanating from construction/demolition activities. 
During JPV in four ULBs106 ,Audit noticed instances of dumping of C&D waste 
in marshy lands, roadsides, markets, etc.  
As per C&D Waste Management Rules, 2016, local bodies were to identify land 
for collection and processing of C&D waste within 18 months from the date of 
notification of the Rules . They were to  establish and make C&D waste 
processing plant functional within 24 months for cities with population of five 
lakh to 10 lakh, and within 36 months for cities with population below five lakh. 
However, none of the local bodies in Kerala have established C&D waste 
processing/recycling/disposal facility so far . This is indicative of the laxity of 
ULBs in effectively establishing a system for management of C&D waste. 
Government stated during the exit conference (May 2022) that draft guidelines 
on the processing and disposal of C&D waste w ere under consideration of 
Government. 
Reclamation of water body using C&D waste 
  
C&D waste dumped in water body in Maruthankuzhy, Thiruvananthapuram (August 2021) 
 
 
                                                 
105 Of the remaining ULBs, Alappuzha, Kayamkulam and Feroke Municipalities calculated 
property tax on the basis of Annual Rental Value, based on which floor area and extent of 
demolished area could not be reckoned. Kochi Corporation, Aluva and Parappanangadi 
Municipalities did not furnish data to Audit 
106 Kozhikode, Thiruvananthapuram Corporations and Vadakara, Angamaly Municipalities 


Performance Audit of ‘Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies’ 
68 
 
5.4.3 Improper disposal of demolition debris 
Based on the judgement of Hon’ble Supreme Court , four apartments 107 in 
Maradu Municipality were demolished (January 2020) through controlled 
explosion method. The processing and disposal of C&D waste generated was  
entrusted to M/s. Prompt Enterprises, a Land developer, which claimed to have 
removed 69,606 tonnes of debris from sites, by 18 June 2020. As per Rule 6(5) 
of Construction and Demolition Waste Management Rules, 2016, the local body 
was to transport the  collected waste to appropriate sites for processing and 
disposal either through own resources or by appointing pr ivate operators. The 
C&D waste could be utili sed in sanitary landfill for municipal solid waste , 
drainage layer in leachate collection system, daily cover over fresh waste in the 
landfill, paving blocks in pedestrian areas, etc.  
Audit noticed that the agr eement executed between the ULB and selected 
agency did not specify the locations to which the waste was to be transported or 
the proposed method for reuse/recycle/disposal of waste . Consequent upon 
receipt of direction from NGT Monitoring committee, the a gency submitted a 
plan of action indicating 11 sites in Ernakulam and Alappuzha districts to which 
waste would be transported. Though Maradu Municipality stated that major part 
of the demolition waste ( 37,441 tonnes) was transported  to Kumbalam and 
Varapuzha G rama Panchayats and KSIDC 108, Palli ppuram, the GPs/KSIDC 
replied to Audit that they had not given any sanction to the agency for dumping 
of demolition waste in their jurisdictional area. No records were furnished to 
Audit by the ULB/agency in proo f of the quantum of waste transported to the 
locations cited or method of processing and disposal of the massive quantity of 
the C&D waste resulting from the first major demolition activity undertaken in 
the State.   
Recommendation 10: Government must direct State Pollution Control Board 
to establish a mechanism by which Producers, Importers and Brand owners 
of products fulfill their Extended Producer Responsibility (EPR) obligation 
under Plastic Waste and E-waste Management Rules, 2016. 
Recommendation 11: With a view to maximise the possibility of reduction, 
reuse and recycling (3R strategy) of waste generated, Government must 
ensure that ULBs effectively implement ban on single use plastic, promote 
substitutes for plastic carry bags, use non -recyclable shr edded plastic in 
roads, operationalise Waste-to-Energy plants, etc. 
Recommendation 1 2: Government must ensure that ULBs set up Material 
Collection Facilities in all wards to facilitate proper segregation of recyclable 
portion of plastic waste. 
Recommendation 13: Government must initiate urgent steps for establishing 
Common Bio -medical Waste Management Facilities at regional level  to 
ensure disposal of bio-medical waste  within the time limit and distance 
specified in the Rules. Government and the State Pollution Control Board 
must oversee that Health care facilities ( HCFs) are functioning with proper 
                                                 
107 H2O Holy faith, Alpha Serene Towers, Jain Coral Cove and Golden Kayaloram 
108 Kerala State Industrial Development Corporation 

Chapter V – Management of Plastic Waste, Bio-medical Waste, E-Waste and Construction 
and Demolition Waste 
 
69 
 
authorisation and  that solid/liquid bio -medical waste generated in these 
HCFs are treated effectively.     
Recommendation 14: ULBs must place appropriate containers for collection 
of Construction and Demolition  (C&D) waste and identify land for 
establishing processing plant for C&D waste generated within their 
jurisdiction. 
 

 
 
CHAPTER V 
MANAGEMENT OF PLASTIC WASTE, BIO-MEDICAL 
WASTE, E-WASTE AND CONSTRUCTION AND 
DEMOLITION WASTE 
CHAPTER VI 
MONITORING 
Kozhikkode Medical College 
September 2021 
 

 
71 
CHAPTER VI 
 
MONITORING 
Effective and accura te monitoring systems of waste management are to be in 
place at various levels of Government and monitoring needs to be done at 
regular intervals throughout the life of the waste management initiative or 
process.  
Audit analysed the efficacy in monitoring of SWM activities unde rtaken by 
Suchitwa Mission, State and District Pollution Control Boards and ULBs 
themselves. The observations are detailed below: 
6.1 Monitoring by Suchitwa Mission 
6.1.1 Ineffective Management Information System 
As per State Policy on Solid Waste Management, Suchitwa Mission was to  
monitor the progress in implementation of solid waste management activiti es 
through appropriate Management Information System (MIS) and assist the 
Government for taking corrective measures wherever required. 
As requested by Haritha Keralam Mission109, an MIS named Smart Garbage 
Monitoring System (SGMS) was developed by Keltron in June 2019 for 
monitoring waste management activities/projects implemented by local bodies. 
The main objective of the MIS was to aid the local bodies in technology enabled 
solid waste management system  and to develop a centrali sed state online 
platform for local bodies for waste management.   
The system was evaluated by a Technical committee constituted by Haritha 
Keralam Mission. The Government approved the project in October 2020 and 
directed Suchitwa Mission to allocate funds for meeting the cost of development 
of the system (₹1.71 crore).  Suchitwa Mission issued work order to KELTRON 
in July 2021 to implement SGMS, nine months after approval of the project.  
Since then, no progress has been achieved in the implementation of the MIS. As 
such, there is no system available at Suchitwa Mission for monitoring the 
implementation of projects by ULBs . Consequently, effectiveness in 
implementation of C entral/State schemes could not be assessed and 
                                                 
109A Development Mission constituted by GoK in S eptember 2016 to enable sanitation and 
waste management, water conservation and agricultural expansion giving thrust to organic 
practices in an integrated manner 
Management Information System for effective monitoring of waste 
management activities was not made functional  in the State. Though 
Suchitwa Mission accorded Technical sanction to the projects, no further 
follow up/monitoring/independent assessment of projects were seen initiated 
by the Mission. Monitoring of SWM by Kerala State Pollution Control 
Board was also not adequate and effective. Social Audit Committees  were 
not constituted by test -checked ULBs for evaluating waste management 
activities.  The ULBs were lax in dealing with violations of SWM Rules and 
levying penalties as an effective deterrent. 

Performance Audit of Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
72 
 
communicated to Government by Suchitwa Mission, so as to enable timely 
corrective measures. 
Government stated in the exit conference (May 2022) that with the introduction 
of the Smart Garbage App, the Department would be better placed to monitor 
the collection of waste, effectiveness of complaint redressal mechanism, etc. It 
was also stated that the Smart Garbage App developed by KELTRON would be 
piloted shortly in some LSGIs.   
6.1.2 Absence of follow-up/monitoring 
A s crutiny of the projects to which Suchitwa Mission accorded technical 
sanction during 2016-2020 revealed that of the 220 projects, only 85 projects 
(38.64 per cent) have been completed so far. The reasons for non-completion 
were cited as non-availability of land, public protest, etc. Though 19 sanctioned 
projects have been dropped, Suchitwa Mission was unaware of the reasons 
which led to the  dropping of 15 projects. Of the 135 incomplete projects, 
Suchitwa Mission could not furnish reasons in respect of 43 p rojects. Though 
Suchitwa Mission empanelled 74 service providers during 2014-2016 to extend 
on-site solution to the end users with respect to installation and operation and 
maintenance of the waste management units, a survey conducted by the Mission 
revealed that only 44 of the 71 service providers (61.97 per cent ) recorded 
satisfactory performance and that 35.09 per cent  of the household level 
composting systems were non-functional. 
Further, the pipe compost techno logy introduced by Suchitwa Mission to 
facilitate source level processing of biodegradable waste in households, had to 
be abandoned due to issues such as inadequate diameter of pipes, generation of 
worms, foul smell, delay in compost generation, etc. Of 87 ,000 pipe compost 
units installed in Thiruvananthapuram Corporation during 2012-16, only 4,641 
units were functioning at the time of audit. 
The above aspects point towards the absence of proper follow 
up/monitoring/independent assessment of projects accord ed with Technical 
Sanction by Suchitwa Mission. Government stated in reply (May 2022) that due 
to insufficient manpower, Suchitwa Mission could closely monitor only those 
projects for which it has extended financial support for implementation and that 
the responsibility of project formulation/implementation was fully vested in 
LSGIs. The justification is not acceptable as Suchitwa Mission was the nodal 
agency vested with the responsibility of providing technical support to the waste 
management initiatives i n the State.  During the exit conference (May 2022) 
Government accepted  the need for institutional strengthening of Suchitwa 
Mission.   
6.2 Monitoring by Pollution Control Board 
The KSPCB is the principal agency for monitoring and controlling waste 
management and is vested with the responsibility to monitor compliance 
with relevant rules.   
6.2.1 Inspections by PCB 
According to the circular110 issued by KSPCB in October 2017, Red Category 
                                                 
110 KSPCB Circular PCB/HO/Circular-01/03/2017/C dated 10.10.2017 

Chapter VI – Monitoring 
73 
 
industries were to  be inspected once in six months and Orange category 
industries, once in a year. As per data furnished by KSPCB, inspections 
conducted by the PCBs in selected four districts111 ranged from 0.29 to 6.74 per 
cent in Red Category and 2.33 to 14.54 per cent in Orange Category institutions.  
Audit observed that in the absence of adequate inspections , KSPCB could not 
effectively monitor compliance of proper waste management regulations by the 
HCFs in the State. The District PCBs opined that shortage of manpower was the 
cause of ineffective monitoring.  
6.2.2 Deficiencies in Management Information System  
The KSPCB ha d launched an Online Consent Management and Monitoring 
System (OCMMS) , a portal which was developed  (2014) by the National 
Informatics Centre, New Delhi, for consent administration and authorisation of 
industries in the State.  Audit noticed the following deficiencies in the system: 
 Inspection Management which included entering the details of inspections 
conducted and retrieval of data on inspections conducted was not available. 
As such KSPCB could not monitor the adequacy of inspections conducted 
by District PCBs . It was seen that the data on inspections conducted 
furnished by KSPCB and District PCBs did not reconcile with each other.    
 Laboratory Management wherein the Board officials can view the analysis 
results and monitor the adequacy of samples checked was never 
implemented.  
 There is no system to generate category wise reports of hospitals, 
restaurants, chicken stalls , etc. so as t o obtain data on number of 
establishments not reviewing Consent to Operate . As such District PCBs 
could not monitor the compliance of the rules by various industries in test-
checked districts.  
6.3 Monitoring by Urban Local Bodies 
6.3.1 Social Audit 
Government of Kerala directed (July 2017) all local bodies to appoint three to 
five officers (including two officers trained by Haritha Kerala m Mission) to 
form a Social Audit Committee for evaluating waste management activities 
undertaken by the local bodies. Social Audi t Committee was responsible for 
assessing the performance of HKS, follow up action on  complaints received 
from public and furnishing annual reports to the local body. It was seen that the 
test-checked ULBs did not even constitute Social Audit Committees as directed 
by Government. Hence, the performance of HKS was not assessed and response 
of the public not evaluated. 
Government stated in the exit conference (May 2022) that the Kerala Institute 
of Local Administration (KILA) has been designated for undertaking Social 
Audit.    
 
 
                                                 
111 Thiruvananthapuram, Alappuzha, Kozhikode, Malappuram 

Performance Audit of Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies 
74 
 
6.3.2 Inadequate levy of penalties for violations 
According to SWM Rule s, 2016 no waste generator shall thro w, burn or bury 
the solid waste generated by him, on streets, open public spaces  or drains and 
water bodies. The ULB shall frame bye-laws and prescribe criteria for levying 
spot fine for persons who fail to comply with the provisions of these Rules. 
Details of inspections conducted and penalties imposed by test -checked ULBs 
are given in Appendix 11. It was seen that average number of annual 
inspections conducted by test-checked ULBs ranged from one to 573 only and 
the average number of annual spot fines levied ranged minimally from zero to 
232. The National Green Tribunal had directed (April 2019) that open burning 
of waste in lands and landfills should be completely prohibited and in case of 
default, violators shall be made liable to pay environmental  compensation 
ranging from ₹  5,000 to ₹ 25,000. Audit however noticed that penalty at the 
above rates was levied only by three112 out of 21 test-checked ULBs.  
 According to Section 334A (1) of the KM Act, commercial establishments, 
hospitals, slaughter houses, chicken stalls, hotels, catering establishments, 
apartments, auditorium etc. should establish necessary facilities for 
treatment and disposal of both solid  and liquid waste at source. It was also 
made mandatory to include waste processing facilities at the time of 
construction itself and the Secretary of the ULB was to cancel the licence of 
buildings without such facilities. Violators to be penalised by levying fine 
not below ₹ 10,000 or imprisonment upto  one year or both. A s per data 
furnished to Audit, the Health wings of three113 test-checked ULBs alone 
imposed penalties on such premises to ensure adherence to the provisions 
of the Act.  
 Surveillance cameras were purchased by Thiruvananthapuram Corporation 
(15 cameras for ₹ 21 lakh), Kayamkulam Municipality (five cameras for  
₹ five lakh) and Alappuzha Municipality (11 cameras for ₹ five lakh) during 
2018-19 for spotting and imposing penalty for littering in public places. 
Though the cameras at Thiruvananthapuram Corporation enabled to impose 
fine amounting to ₹41,930 (October 2021), the cameras turned defective in 
due course and the images captured were lacking in clarity to help identify 
a person/vehicle . In Kayamkulam and Alappuzha Municipalities, CCTV 
cameras were not working due to non -provision of electric 
connection/supply. Responsibility needs to be fixed on erring officials who 
failed in ensuring effective surveillance through timely repair and 
maintenance of the cameras installed.  
The above instances reveal that the ULBs were lax in dealing with violations of 
SWM Rules and in levying penalties as an effective deterrent. The failure in 
framing bye laws and getting them approved by GoK might also have facilitated 
persistent non-adherence to prompt imposition of spot fines on violators. 
Government replied (May 2022) that there were limitations to take stringent 
steps during 2020-21 owing to Covid situation. The reply is not acceptable as 
the inspections conducted during the period from 2016-17 to 2019-20 by ULBs 
were also less, ranging from zero to 19 per cent only. 
                                                 
112 Maradu, Parappanangadi and Manjeri Municipalities 
113 Aluva, Parappanangadi and Manjeri Municipalities 

Chapter VI – Monitoring 
75 
 
Recommendation 1 5: Government and the State Pollution Control Board,  
must jointly establish an effective mechanism for monitoring the performance 
of solid waste management system, complying with extant Rules.  Government 
must also  operationalise computerised Management Information System 
(MIS) and resort to stringent action to curb instances of violation of Waste 
Management Rules. 
 
 
 
 
Thiruvananthapuram,                                              (ANIM CHERIAN) 
The 30 January 2023                                     Principal Accountant General 
           (Audit - I), Kerala 
 
 
  
 Countersigned 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi,           (GIRISH CHANDRA MURMU) 
The 02 February 2023                        Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 


 
 
 
APPENDICES 

 
Appendices 
77 
 
Appendix 1 
Service Level Benchmarking performance indicators and benchmarks 
pertaining to Solid Waste Management 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.1.3.2, Page 12) 
 
Sl. 
No. Performance indicator Unit as percentage of 
Benchmark
(in           
per cent) 
1 
Household level 
coverage of Solid Waste 
Management (SWM) 
services 
Households and establishments 
covered by daily doorstep collection 
system 
100 
2 
Efficiency of collection 
of municipal solid 
waste 
Total waste collected against 
waste generated within the project 
area 
100 
3 Extent of segregation of 
municipal solid waste 
Households and establishments 
that segregate their waste 100 
4 Extent of municipal 
solid waste recovered 
Quantum of waste collected, which is 
either recycled or processed 80 
5 
Extent of scientific 
disposal of municipal 
solid waste 
Waste disposed in a sanitary landfill 
against total quantum of waste disposed 
in landfills and dumpsites 
100 
6 Efficiency in redressal 
of customer complaints 
Total number of SWM related 
complaints resolved against total number 
of such complaints received within 24 
hours 
80 
7 Extent of cost recovery 
in SWM services 
Recovery of all operating expenses 
related to SWM services that the ULB is 
able to meet from the operating 
revenues of sources related exclusively 
to SWM 
100 
8 Efficiency in collection 
of SWM user charges 
Current year revenue collected against 
total operating revenues for the 
corresponding period 
90 
(Source: MoUD website) 
 
  

Performance Audit of ‘Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies’ 
78 
 
I. Household level coverage of SWM services through door-to- 
door collection of waste 
 
 Target and achievement not declared by Thiruvananthapuram Corporation  
 
 
II. Efficiency of collection of municipal solid waste 
Target and achievement not declared by Thiruvananthapuram Corporation. Kochi Corporation and 
Kayamkulam and Perinthalmanna Municipalities did not furnish quantity of waste 
generated/collected.   
 
 
 
020406080100120SLB 01TargetAchieved as per ULBBenchmarkAchieved as per Audit020406080100120SLB 02TargetAchieved as per ULBBenchmarkAchieved as per Audit

 
Appendices 
79 
 
III. Extent of segregation of waste  
 
 Test-checked ULBs did not record the quantity of waste segregated 
 
 
IV. Extent of recovery of waste collected 
 
 
 As quantity of waste processed through source level processing also has been included in the total 
quantity of waste processed by test-checked ULBs, Audit could not work out the extent of waste 
processed, out of actual waste collected by ULBs.  
 
 
020406080100120SLB 03TargetAchievedBenchmark020406080100120SLB 04TargetAchievedBenchmark

Performance Audit of ‘Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies’ 
80 
 
V. Extent of scientific disposal of waste at landfill sites 
 
  
 
 
VI. Efficiency of redressal of customer complaints 
 
  
Only one test-checked ULB, Thiruvananthapuram Corporation had an online system in place to 
receive complaints. The remaining ULBs did not maintain separate registers to record the 
complaints relating to waste management. 
 
 
020406080100120SLB 05TargetAchieved as per ULBBenchmarkAchieved as per Audit020406080100120SLB 06TargetAchievedBenchmark

 
Appendices 
81 
 
VII. Extent of cost recovery for the ULB in SWM services 
 
 As the test-checked ULBs did not account the details of operating revenue received separately, Audit 
could not verify the extend of cost recovery declared by the ULBs. 
 
 
VIII. Efficiency in collection of SWM user charges 
 
020406080100120SLB 07TargetAchievedBenchmark020406080100120SLB 08TargetAchievedBenchmark

Performance Audit of ‘Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies’ 
 
82 
 
Appendix 2 
Allocation and Expenditure of various funds for waste management in test-checked ULBs 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.2.1, Page 16) 
(₹ in lakh) 
Year 
State fund Central fund Own fund 
Total 
receipt 
  
Total 
expendit
ure (C) 
Percentage of 
dependency on 
Government 
grants  
((A+B)/C) 
Receipt 
Total 
Expend
iture 
(A)  
Receipt 
Total 
Expend
iture 
(B)  
Allocated 
for SWM 
Expen
diture 
for 
SWM 
Develo
pment 
Fund 
(Gener
al) 
Suchit
wa 
Keral
am 
(Urba
n) 
Oth
ers* Total CFC 
Grant 
SBM 
(Urban) 
fund 
Total 
2016-17 1630.26 69.80 10 1710.06 205.04 2956.79 0 2956.79 241.32 64.84 0.98 4731.69 447.34 99.78 
2017-18 1560.30 3.17 0 1563.47 502 4936.62 0 4936.62 1841.59 23.41 0 6523.50 2343.59 100 
2018-19 1351.07 0.80 0 1351.87 326.08 3734.93 1108.36 4843.29 1381.18 335.31 1.38 6530.47 1708.64 99.92 
2019-20 568.87 0 70 638.87 146.65 5791.28 186.24 5977.52 1262.42 1884.08 86.88 8500.47 1495.95 94.19 
2020-21 1353.67 137 150 1640.67 1105.06 7048.09 1601.98 8650.07 3553.79 1622.98 95.93 11913.72 4754.78 97.98 
Total 6464.17 210.77 230 6904.94 2284.83 24467.71 2896.58 27364.29 8280.30 3930.62 185.17 38199.85 10750.30  
      (Source: Data furnished by test-checked ULBs) 
*Maintenance fund (non-road) and receipts from other ULBs 
  

 
Appendices 
83 
 
Appendix 3 
 Statement showing potential revenue out of User fee 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.2.3.5, Page 20) 
 (Source: Data furnished by test-checked ULBs) 
Name of ULB 
No. of 
househol
ds 
Mont
hly 
user 
fee 
rate 
(in ₹) 
Potential 
monthly 
revenue 
from 
households 
(in ₹) 
No of 
establis
hments 
Potential 
monthly 
revenue 
from 
establish
ments(cal
culated @ 
₹ 100 
from an 
establish
ment per 
month) 
Total 
potential 
user fee 
from 
households 
and 
establishme
nts 
(in ₹) 
Average 
monthly 
expenditu
re of ULB 
on waste 
managem
ent 
(in ₹) 
Percenta
ge of 
expendit
ure on 
waste 
manage
ment on 
total 
potential 
user fee 
Corporations 
Thiruvananthapuram  336452 100 33645200 22305 2230500 35875700 7150282 19.93 
Kochi 265288 100 26528800 66884 6688400 33217200 1996340 6.01 
Kozhikode  157753 60 9465180 32145 3214500 12679680 2662771 21 
Municipalities 
Nedumangad  22715 60 1362900 2878 287800 1650700 808627 48.99 
Neyyattinkara  23045 40 921800 2775 277500 1199300 201273 16.78 
Alappuzha  49545 40 1981800 7456 745600 2727400 853974 31.31 
Kayamkulam  16392 40 655680 2630 263000 918680 215690 23.48 
Mavelikkara 9676 60 580560 1460 146000 726560 104895 14.44 
Muvattupuzha  7414 50 370700 2003 200300 571000 135501 23.73 
Aluva  5828 100 582800 2566 256600 839400 505807 60.26 
Eloor  10995 50 549750 900 90000 639750 384983 60.18 
Kothamangalam  10389 50 519450 2239 223900 743350 283301 38.11 
Maradu  20328 60 1219680 1262 126200 1345880 146766 10.90 
Angamaly  8968 50 448400 2183 218300 666700 147983 22.20 
Malappuram  18977 30 569310 8026 802600 1371910 341101 24.86 
Parappanangadi  15413 30 462390 6127 612700 1075090 78829 7.33 
Perinthalamanna  17489 50 874450 10089 1008900 1883350 624385 33.15 
Nilambur  14652 60 879120 1650 165000 1044120 76520 7.33 
Manjeri  27668 50 1383400 4806 480600 1864000 231899 12.44 
Feroke  13284 30 398520 1750 175000 573520 135914 23.7 
Vadakara  20774 50 1038700 5200 520000 1558700 433917 27.84 
Koyilandy  20264 50 1013200 2885 288500 1301700 396386 30.45 

Performance Audit of ‘Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies’ 
84 
 
Appendix 4 
Segregation of waste at source by Households, Government Institutions and Commercial establishments 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.1.1, Page 22) 
Sl 
No 
  
ULB  
Households Government Institutions Commercial establishments Grand Total 
Total  
Providing 
segregated 
Waste 
Percen 
tage Total  
Providing 
segregated 
Waste 
Percen 
tage Total  
Providing 
segregated 
Waste 
Percen 
tage Total  
Providing 
segregated 
Waste 
Percen 
tage 
 Corporations 
1 Thiruvananthapuram  336452 92100 27.37 475 475 100.00 22305 18225 81.71 359232 110800 30.84 
2 Kochi  265288 150673 56.80 125 125 100.00 66884 12771 19.09 332297 163569 49.22 
3 Kozhikode  157753 99515 63.08 168 42 25.00 32145 9144 28.45 190066 108701 57.19 
 Municipalities 
4 Nedumangad 22715 7999 35.21 36 2 5.56 2878 1758 61.08 25629 9759 38.08 
5 Neyyattinkara 23045 16592 72.00 33 16 48.48 2775 1149 41.41 25853 17757 68.68 
6 Alappuzha 49545 45000 90.83 602 550 91.36 7456 6714 90.05 57603 52264 90.73 
7 Kayamkulam 16392 2229 13.60 35 0 - 2630 357 13.57 19057 2586 13.57 
8 Mavelikkara 9676 0 - 30 0 - 1460 46 3.15 11166 46 0.41 
9 Aluva 5828 1344 23.06 123 0 - 2566 0 - 8517 1344 15.78 
10 Angamaly 8968 4820 53.75 19 0 - 2183 1520 69.63 11170 6340 56.76 
11 Eloor 10995 7785 70.80 13 0 - 900 875 97.22 11908 8660 72.72 
12 Kothamangalam 10389 6440 61.99 35 23 65.71 2239 458 20.46 12663 6921 54.66 
13 Maradu 20328 13475 66.29 13 13 100.00 1262 1262 100.00 21603 14750 68.28 
14 Moovattupuzha 7414 1640 22.12 78 0 - 2003 0 - 9495 1640 17.27 
15 Malappuram 18977 7200 37.94 250 80 32.00 8026 420 5.23 27253 7700 28.25 
16 Parappanangadi 15413 11391  73.91 109 15 13.76 6127 802 13.09 21649 12208 56.39 
17 Nilambur 14652 1300 8.87 85 1 1.18 1650 0 - 16387 1301 7.94 
18 Manjeri 27668 7553 27.30 80 50 62.50 4806 2021 42.05 32554 9624 29.56 
19 Feroke 13284 5469 41.17 16 16 100.00 1750 590 33.71 15050 6075 40.37 
20 Vadakara 20774 12945 62.31 76 60 78.95 5200 3380 65.00 26050 16385 62.90 
21 Koyilandy 20264 12000 59.22 25 0 - 2885 115 3.99 23174 12115 52.28 
  Total 1075820 507470  2426 1468  180130 61607  1258376 570545  
(Source: Details furnished by test-checked ULBs; Details in respect of Perinthalmanna Municipality were not furnished to Audit) 

 
Appendices 
 
85 
 
Appendix 5 
Inadequate infrastructure for managing household biodegradable waste 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.1.1.1, Page 36) 
Sl 
No. 
Name of ULB No. of 
househo
lds 
No. of 
Pipe 
compost 
units 
installed 
No. of 
Pipe 
compost 
units 
work 
ing 
No. of 
househo
ld bio-
gas 
plants 
installed 
No. of 
household 
bio-gas 
plants 
work 
ing 
No. of 
Kitchen 
Bin / 
biocomp
oster 
bins 
installed 
No. of 
Kitchen 
Bin / 
biocompo
ster bins 
working 
Other 
items 
installed 
Other 
items 
work 
ing 
Total 
items 
insta 
lled 
Total 
items 
working 
Percentag
e of items 
work 
Ing 
Per 
centage 
of 
househo
lds 
where 
items 
installed 
Percent
age of 
househ
old 
process
ing 
waste 
at 
source 
Gap in 
coverage 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 
12 
(4+6+8+ 
10) 
13 
(5+7+9+ 
11) 
14 
(13/12 %) 
15 
(12/3 %) 
16 
(13/3 
%) 
17 
(100-16) 
 Corporations  
1. Thiruvananthapuram  336452 87000 4641 3982 778 46492 14505 109 109 137583 20033 14.56 40.89 5.95 94.05 
2. Kochi 265288 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
3. Kozhikode  157753 20867 16214 586 586 0 0 260 0 21713 16800 77.37 13.76 10.65 89.35 
 Municipalities  
4. Nedumangad  22715 0 0 250 250 2500 2500 0 0 2750 2750 100 12.11 12.11 87.89 
5. Neyyattinkara  23045 0 0 131 131 0 0 0 0 131 131 100 0.57 0.57 99.43 
6. Alappuzha  49545 0 0 1197 1197 0 0 5091 5091 6288 6288 100 12.69 12.69 87.31 
7. Kayamkulam  16392 0 0 12 12 0 0 0 0 12 12 100 0.07 0.07 99.93 
8. Mavelikkara  9676 0 0 12 12 0 0 190 190 202 202 100 2.09 2.09 97.91 
9. Muvattupuzha  7414 154 125 17 0 425 350 0 0 596 475 79.7 8.04 6.41 93.59 
10. Aluva  5828 0 0 65 15 805 85 0 0 870 100 11.49 14.93 1.72 98.28 
11. Eloor  10995 0 0 29 29 2323 2323 0 0 2352 2352 100 21.39 21.39 78.61 
12. Kothamangalam  10389 0 0 0 0 2400 2400 0 0 2400 2400 100 23.1 23.10 76.90 
13. Maradu  20328 940 310 216 216 600 600 0 0 1756 1126 64.12 8.64 5.54 94.46 
14. Angamaly  8968 0 0 38 38 354 354 0 0 392 392 100 4.37 4.37 95.63 
15. Malappuram  18977 0 0 175 175 981 981 1621 1621 2777 2777 100 14.63 14.63 85.37 
16. Parappanangadi  15413 0 0 13 13 73 73 2050 2050 2136 2136 100 13.86 13.86 86.14 
17. Perinthalamanna  17489 0 0 0 0 420 420 0 0 420 420 100 2.40 2.40 97.60 
18. Nilambur  14652 0 0 0 0 69 69 35 35 104 104 100 0.71 0.71 99.29 
19. Manjeri  27668 0 0 0 0 10000 10000 0 0 10000 10000 100 36.14 36.14 63.86 
20. Feroke  13284 0 0 50 50 527 527 133 133 710 710 100 5.34 5.34 94.66 
21. Vadakara  20774 3211 2730 160 120 973 828 742 640 5086 4318 84.9 24.48 20.79 79.21 
22. Koyilandy  20264 279 279 0 0 3852 3852 4017 4017 8148 8148 100 40.21 40.21 59.79  Total 1107006 112451 24299 6933 3622 72794 39867 14248 13886 206535 81674     
(Source: Details furnished by test-checked ULBs) 

Performance Audit of ‘Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies’ 
86 
 
Appendix 6 
Details of Thumboormuzhi units installed in test-checked ULBs 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.1.1.3, Page 38) 
 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of ULB No. of units 
installed 
Number of 
locations 
Number of 
units damaged 
Percentage 
of units in 
working 
condition 
Reason for 
damage 
1.  Thiruvananthapuram 
Corporation 474 
(Fixed) 52 136 71.31 
Non-maintenance,  
non-supply of 
inoculum 
 
214 (Portable) 47 49 77.10 
Seepage of  rain 
water, Non  
maintenance 
2.  Nedumangad 
Municipality 47 4 20 57.45 Non-utilisation 
3.  Neyyattinkara 
Municipality 20 8 0 100 - 
4.  Alappuzha 
Municipality 349 35 43 87.68 
Rodent menace 
and lack of 
maintenance 
5.  Eloor Municipality 6 6 0 100 - 
6.  Angamaly 
Municipality 3 3 3 0 
Not functioning 
since its 
installation, due to 
litigation 
7.  Nilambur 
Municipality 1 1 0 100 - 
8.  Kozhikode 
Corporation 10 4 4 60 Used for dumping 
plastic waste 
9.  Feroke Municipality 3 1 0 100 - 
10.  Koyilandy 
Municipality 23 3 23 0 Used for dumping 
plastic waste 
11.  Vadakara 
Municipality 14 5 7 50 Used for dumping 
plastic waste 
 Total 1164 169 285 75.52  
(Source: Details furnished by test-checked ULBs) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Appendices 
87 
 
Appendix 7 
Details of community level biogas plants installed in test-checked ULBs 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.1.1.3, Page 40) 
 
Sl. 
No. 
ULB Number of 
units 
Number of 
units not 
working 
Reasons for non-functioning 
1.  Thiruvananthapuram 
Corporation 
10 8 Improper maintenance  
2.  Nedumangad 
Municipality 
1 1 Absence of proper 
maintenance and upkeep 
3.  Neyyattinkara 
Municipality 
1 1 Absence of proper 
maintenance and upkeep 
4.  Nilambur 
Municipality 
1 1 Absence of proper 
maintenance and upkeep 
5.  Parappanangadi 
Municipality 
1 1 Absence of proper 
maintenance and upkeep 
6.  Manjeri Municipality 1 1 Technical reasons 
7.  Kozhikode 
Corporation 
1 1 Absence of proper 
maintenance and upkeep 
 Total 16 14  
(Source: Details furnished by test-checked ULBs) 
 
  

Performance Audit of ‘Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies’ 
88 
 
Appendix 8 
Details of dumpsites in selected ULBs 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.2.1, Page 47) 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of  
Local Body 
Name of 
Location 
Status of remediation 
work undertaken 
1.  
Thiruvananthapuram 
Corporation 
Vilappilsala No action taken 
2.  Palayam market Clearing of  legacy 
waste completed 
3.  Erumakkuzhy Clearing of  legacy 
waste completed 
4.  Kochi Corporation Brahmapuram Biomining work 
awarded 
5.  Kozhikode 
Corporation  Njaliyanparamba Biomining in progress 
6.  Vadakara Puthiyapp No action taken 
7.  Alappuzha Sarvodayapuram No action taken 
8.  Kayamkulam Murukkummoodu No action taken 
9.  Mavelikkara Puthiyakavu  No action taken 
10.  Muvattupuzha Valakkuzhi No action taken 
11.  Kothamangalam  Kumbalathumuri No action taken 
12.  Malappuram Near Inkel City, 
Puliyettummal No action taken 
13.  Perinthalmanna Kunnappalli No action taken 
14.  Manjeri Vettekode No action taken 
(Source: Details furnished by test-checked ULBs) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Appendices 
89 
 
 
Appendix 9 
Status of compliance of ULBs to Rules relating to  
Plastic Waste Management 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.1.1, Page 52) 
 
Sl.  
No. Requirement Provisions  Status of compliance 
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Door-to-door collection 
of non-biodegradable 
waste from all 
households, institutions 
and commercial 
establishments. 
Rule 6 (2) of 
PWM 
Rules, State 
policy 
 Of the test checked ULBs, 21 
ULBs generated 185.70 
tonnes/day of plastic waste, of 
which 149.21 tonnes/day (80.35 
per cent) were collected daily by 
18 ULBs.   
 The percentage of coverage of 
households ranged from 0114 to 76 
per cent 115.  
 Plastic waste was collected 
monthly by 14 ULBs, fortnightly 
by three ULBs, weekly by one 
ULB, daily by one ULB and yearly 
by one ULB from households.116 
 Except eight ULBs117 other test-
checked ULBs did not collect 
plastic waste from institutions and 
the percentage of collection ranged 
from 12.50 to 100 per cent.  
 Seven ULBs118 did not collect 
waste from Commercial 
establishments and percentage of 
collection of plastic waste in 
respect of other ULBs ranged from 
0.96 per cent119 to 89.99 per 
cent120. 
 Absence of a proper system for 
collection of plastic waste from 
households, institutions and 
commercial establishments 
resulted in burning of plastic 
 
114  Mavelikkara Municipality 
115  Vadakara Municipality 
116 Plastic waste is not collected in Mavelikkara Municipality; Date not available for 
Perinthalmanna Municipality, where plastic waste is being collected by a private agency. 
117 Neyyattinkara, Kothamangalam, Malappuram, Parappanangadi, Feroke, Vadakara 
Municipalities and Kochi, Kozhikode Corporations. 
118   Mavelikkara, Maradu, Nilambur, Alappuzha, Kayamkulam, Perinthalmanna Municipalities 
and Thiruvananthapuram Corporation.  
119  Parappanangadi Municipality 
120  Kochi Corporation 

Performance Audit of ‘Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies’ 
90 
 
Sl.  
No. Requirement Provisions  Status of compliance 
waste121 and dumping of waste on 
road sides122, drains, private 
properties,123 water bodies124, etc. 
as noticed during JPV. 
2 Ensuring segregation of 
recyclables by setting 
up Material Recovery 
Facilities or secondary 
storage facilities with 
sufficient space  
Rule 15(h) 
of SWM 
Rules, 2016 
 Though GoK had directed ULBs to 
setup MCF in all wards, the MCF 
to ward ratio in the test-checked 
ULBs ranged from 1:2 to 1:50. 
3 Establish Resource 
Recovery Facilities 
(RRF) in each urban 
region of 20 km2 for 
sorting and facilitating, 
reuse and recycling of 
waste materials    
 
 
Rule 6(2)(c) 
and (d) of 
SWM 
Rules, 2016, 
State Policy 
 Of the 93 ULBs in the State, only 
43 Municipalities and four 
Corporations have RRF facilities.  
 Of the 22 test-checked ULBs, 16 
ULBs have installed 16 shredding 
machines and 18 bailing machines 
in the RRF, during the period from 
2017-18 to 2020-21. 
 Eight shredding machines and four 
bailing machines were non-
functional, resulting in infructuous 
expenditure to the tune of ₹ 39.02 
lakh. 
4 Plastic waste which can 
be recycled, shall be 
channelised to registered 
plastic waste recycler  
  
Rule 5(1)(a) 
of PWM 
Rules, 2016 
 The ULBs did not ensure effective 
segregation of recyclable waste 
out of the non-biodegradable 
waste collected, resulting in 
disposal of 25 to 100 per cent of 
plastic waste as rejects. 
5 Ensuring that no 
damage is caused to the 
environment during the 
process from 
segregation to disposal 
Rule 6(2)(b) 
of PWM 
Rules, 2016 
 Improper management of plastic 
waste led to recurring instances of 
fire outbreaks at Brahmapuram 
dumpsite in Kochi Corporation 
and once in Perinthalmanna 
Municipality.  
6 Ensuring that open 
burning of plastic waste 
does not take place 
Rule 6(2)(g) 
of PWM 
Rules, 2016 
 Instances of open burning of 
plastic waste noticed in six125 test- 
checked ULBs. 
 
121  Kayamkulam, Mavelikkara, Alappuzha, Koyilandy Municipalities 
122  Kozhikode, Kochi Corporations and Kayamkulam Municipality 
123  Kochi Corporation 
124 Kozhikode, Kochi, Thiruvananthapuram Corporations, Kayamkulam, Mavelikkara 
Municipalities 
125 Thiruvananthapuram Corporation, Nedumangad, Muvattupuzha, Angamaly, Mavelikkara 
and Alappuzha Municipalities 

Appendices 
91 
 
Sl.  
No. Requirement Provisions  Status of compliance 
7 For setting up of system 
for plastic waste 
management, the local 
body shall seek 
assistance of producers 
in line with the principle 
of Extended Producer 
Responsibility (EPR) 
Rule 6(3) of 
PWM 
Rules, 2016 
 No test-checked ULB established 
an EPR based plastic waste 
management system.  
(Source: GoI Rules and State Policy on Waste Management) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Performance Audit of ‘Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies’ 
92 
 
Appendix 10 
Table showing details of disposal of plastic waste as rejects 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.1.2, Page 52) 
 
(Source: Details furnished by test-checked ULBs; details in respect of Aluva and Perinthalmanna 
Municipalities were not furnished to Audit) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sl 
No. Name of ULB 
Quantity of 
plastic 
waste 
generated 
(tonnes) 
Quantity of 
Plastic waste 
processed/ sent 
to recyclers 
(tonnes) 
Quantity of 
plastic 
disposed as 
rejects 
(tonnes) 
Percentage 
of Plastic 
waste 
recycled/ 
processed 
Percentage 
of plastic 
waste 
disposed as 
rejects 
  Corporations 
1 Thiruvananthapuram  7665 4307 3358 56.19 43.81 
2 Kochi 41009 541 40468 1.32 98.68 
3 Kozhikode  5110 367 4743 7.18 92.82 
              Municipalities 
4 Nedumangad  1423.5 620.5 803 43.59 56.41 
5 Neyyattinkara  365 16.06 348.94 4.40 95.6 
6 Alappuzha  2920 730 2190 25.00 75.0 
7 Kayamkulam  383.25 4.02 379.23 1.05 98.95 
8 Mavelikkara  153.3 1.72 151.58 1.12 98.88 
9 Muvattupuzha  1277.5 273.75 1003.75 21.43 78.57 
10 Eloor  193.45 98.55 94.9 50.94 49.06 
11 Kothamangalam  1971 1095 876 55.56 44.44 
12 Maradu  289.08 30.58 258.5 10.58 89.42 
13 Angamaly  474.5 146 328.5 30.77 69.23 
14 Malappuram  730 547.5 182.5 75.00 25.0 
15 Parappanangadi  417 50 367 11.99 88.01 
16 Nilambur  277.4 164.25 113.15 59.21 40.79 
17 Manjeri  912.5 438 474.5 48.00 52.0 
18 Feroke  1152 16.5 1135.5 1.43 98.57 
19 Vadakara  470 69.37 400.63 14.76 85.24 
20 Koyilandy  400 0 400 0.00 100 

Appendices 
93 
 
Appendix 11 
Details of inspections conducted and penalty imposed by test-checked 
ULBs during the period 2016-2021 
(Reference: Paragraph 6.3.2, Page 74) 
 
Sl 
No Name of ULB 
Number of inspections conducted Average annual inspection Penalty realised from annual inspections Number of spot fines imposed Average number of spot fines Penalty realised as spot fines Total penalty (C+F) Average monthly penalty (Total Penalty /60 months) 
  A B C D E F G H 
 Corporations 
1 Thiruvananthapuram 2866 573 141370 1159 232 2808033 2949403 49157 
2 Kochi 1588 318 649960 737 147 1171610 1821570 30360 
3 Kozhikode 456 91 350000 321 64 438920 788920 13149 
 Municipalities 
4 Nedumangad 250 50 118770 0 0 0 118770 1980 
5 Neyyattinkara 68 14 5000 136 27 54000 59000 983 
6 Alappuzha 456 91 239430 238 48 400680 640110 10669 
7 Kayamkulam 10 2 36450 95 19 236430 272880 4548 
8 Mavelikkara 18 4 50571 0 0 0 50571 843 
9 Angamaly 26 5 34550 3 1 12000 46550 776 
10 Aluva 111 22 67220 185 37 345870 413090 6885 
11 Muvattupuzha 45 9 23450 161 32 181765 205215 3420 
12 Kothamangalam 189 38 214760 0 0 0 214760 3579 
13 Eloor 6 1 14500 89 18 192180 206680 3445 
14 Maradu 11 2 5000 6 1 10500 15500 258 
15 Malappuram 42 8 64290 0 0 417750 482040 8034 
16 Perinthalmanna 8 2 40000 937 187 2139635 2179635 36327 
17 Nilambur 69 14 113330 0 0 0 113330 1889 
18 Parappanangadi 441 88 82200 14 3 69500 151700 2528 
19 Manjeri 26 5 34900 6 1 24050 58950 983 
20 Feroke 9 2 12500 63 13 145000 157500 2625 
21 Koyilandy 123 25 85100 42 8 21000 106100 1768 
22 Vadakara 46 9 58950 266 53 307430 366380 6106 
(Source: Details furnished by test-checked ULBs) 
 

  

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© COMPTROLLER AND  
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA  
www.cag.gov.in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
https://cag.gov.in/ag1/kerala/en 