 
 
Report of the  
Comptroller and Auditor General of India  
 
Performance Audit on  
Role of Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation 
(MIDC)  
in the industrial development of Maharashtra 
Government of Maharashtra                            
Report No. 5 of the year 2023 

 
i 
 
 
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Particulars   Reference to 
Paragraph Page  
Preface  iii 
Executive Summary   v-vii 
Chapter I: Introduction  
Introduction 1.1 1 
Organisational set-up 1.2 1 
Audit objectives 1.3 2 
Audit criteria 1.4 2 
Scope and Methodology of Audit 1.5 3 
Acknowledgement  1.6 3 
Chapter II: Corporate Governance and Planning  
Corporate Governance 2.1 5 
Planning 2.2 10 
Chapter III:  Land acquisition and development of industrial areas  
Land acquisition  3.1 13 
Development of industrial areas 3.2 16 
Chapter IV: Land pricing and allotment  
Land pricing  4.1 23 
Land allotment 4.2 26 
Chapter V: Recovery of revenue/dues  
Recovery of lease premium 5.1 33 
Recovery of other revenue/dues 5.2 38 
Recovery of Service charges and Water charges 5.3 5 4 
Non-recovery/remittance of Goods and Services Tax o n 
non-exempted receipts 
5.4 56 
Chapter VI: Monitoring system   
Monitoring system 6.1-6.6 57-62 
Annexures   Reference to 
Paragraph  Page  
1 Statement showing land allotted on direct basis instead 
of auction/e-bidding in violation of prevailing policy    4.2.1 65 
2 Statement showing allotment of land despite  
non-availability of plots in layout of industrial areas.  4.2.5 70 
3 Statement showing allotment of alternate plots at o ld 
rates. 5.1.1 71 
4 Statement showing re-allotment of plots and             
non-forfeiture of EMD. 5.1.4 73 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
iii 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Preface 
1. This Report has been prepared for submission to the Governor of 
Maharashtra under Comptroller and Auditor General’s  (Duties, Powers and 
Conditions of Service Act) Act, 1971.  
2. The Report contains the results of Performance A udit on ‘Role of 
Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation (MID C) in the industrial 
development of Maharashtra’ covering the period 2014-15 to 2020-21.   
3. The audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards 
issued by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
v 
Executive Summary 
1.  
Government of Maharashtra (GoM) established (August 1962) Maharashtra 
Industrial Development Corporation (MIDC) under Section 3 of Maharashtra 
Industrial Development Act, 1961 (MID Act) to promote and assist in the rapid 
and orderly establishment, growth and development of industries in the State of 
Maharashtra. MIDC is under the administrative control of Industries, Energy 
and Labour Department of the GoM. The Board of MIDC presently consists of 
eight members. Minister (Industries), GoM is the ex-officio Chairman, Minister 
of State (Industries), GoM is the ex-officio Vice-Chairman and Chief Executive 
Officer (CEO) of MIDC, is the ex-officio, Secretary. The day-to-day operations 
of MIDC are looked after by the CEO.  
The Performance Audit (PA) was conducted to cover the aspects of MIDC 
related to corporate governance, planning, development of industrial areas 
(IAs), land acquisition, pricing and allotment, recovery of charges and 
monitoring system for development and utilisation of plots during the period 
2014-15 to 2020-21.  
Audit observed that during the period 2014-21, GoM did not appoint seven out 
of 15 members to the Board of MIDC. GoM may ensure that vacancies of Board 
members of MIDC are filled up without delay. 
The Board of MIDC took important decisions having financial implications 
overriding the extant rules/policy in cases of land allotment, levy of lease 
premium/transfer charges/extension charges and sub-letting charges in favour 
of private parties. Relaxation in rules/policies on a case to case basis, lacked 
transparency and brought in arbitrariness in decision making and governance-
causing loss to public exchequer. MIDC may ensure strict implementation of 
regulations and laid down policies in land allotment and recovery of charges.  
MIDC did not formulate any programme/plan for achievement of targets set in 
the State Industrial Policy (SIP). MIDC also did not have a perspective plan for 
land acquisition, development and allotment activities in IAs detailing physical 
targets to be achieved. Land acquisition and industrial development activities of 
MIDC, thus, did not emerge out of a systematic and comprehensive plan. In the 
absence of any physical targets, there was no benchmark to assess performance 
of MIDC. MIDC may prepare Perspective Plan and Annual Plan as per the SIP, 
quantifying physical targets to be achieved. 
MIDC allotted land to prospective entrepreneurs considering, inter alia, 
proposed investment and employment generation mentioned in the Detailed 
Project Reports (DPR). There was, however, no database/system to 
ascertain/record allottee wise details regarding actual employment generated 
and investment made by an allottee vis-a-vis the DPR. MIDC, thus, confined its 
role to development/allotment of land in IAs and outcome based approach to 
industrial development (investment and employment generation) was lacking. 
MIDC may evolve a system of recording/monitoring of actual investment and 
employment generation by allottees vis-a-vis their DPRs to ensure that expected 
outcomes of industrial development from such land allotment are achieved. 

Report No. 5 (Role of MIDC in the industrial development of Maharashtra) 
vi 
MIDC had not formulated any action plan/system for acquisition of surplus/ 
unutilised land with the allottees, for allotment to new entrepreneurs as 
envisaged in Section 42A of the MID Act. Thus, MIDC did not ensure optimal 
utilisation of IAs as mandated in the MID Act. Action as stipulated under MID 
Act for reporting and acquisition of surplus/unutilised land with allottees may 
be initiated. 
Four policies implemented by MIDC for development/disposal of plots in IAs 
(allotment rate, grant of possession of plot, mixed land use on industrial plot 
and recovery of arrears as land revenue) contravened express provisions of the 
MID Act, MIDC Disposal of Land Regulations, 1975 (DLR) and Development 
Control Regulations (DCR), 2009. MIDC may ensure that all policies adhere to 
the statutory provisions. 
MIDC did not ensure timely finalisation of tenders within the validity period as 
per delegation of powers which resulted in cancellation of tenders and  
re-tendering at extra cost. MIDC may ensure timely finalisation of tenders 
within the validity period in accordance with delegation of powers to avoid  
re-tendering of works. 
Policy of fixation / revision of land rates was not appropriate. Systemic delays 
in implementation of revised land rates were observed leading to loss to MIDC. 
MIDC may ensure that revised land rates are implemented immediately after 
approval of the Board and a suitable clause regarding recovery of lease 
premium at revised rates may be incorporated in the offer letters.  
MIDC made direct allotment of plots to ineligible allottees contrary to the laid 
down policies (e-bidding, waiting list, priority and expansion). Further, allottees 
were issued offer letters for allotment of land despite non-availability of carved 
out plots in violation of MIDC Regulations. Instances of undue concession to 
allottees in recovery of revenue from lease premium, transfer charges, Urban 
Land Ceiling (ULC) Exemption transfer charges, extension charges and  
sub-letting charges were observed. Irregular grant of instalments for payment 
of lease premium and non-forfeiture/refund of lease premium in violation of 
regulations/policy were also observed. MIDC may ensure prompt recovery of 
dues from allottees as per laid down policies and responsibility needs to be fixed 
for granting undue concessions to allottees. 
Lack of system for periodic revision of water charges and service charges from 
the allottees was observed which led to short recovery of expenses. MIDC may 
ensure timely revision of water charges and service charges and responsibility 
needs to be fixed for non-implementation/withdrawal of revised rates leading to 
financial loss to the Corporation. 
MIDC had not levied and recovered Goods and Services Tax on non-exempted 
services from the plot holders leading to non-payment of statutory dues.    
There was absence of an effective system to monitor cases of non-development 
of plots/obtaining Building Completion Certificate (BCC) within the stipulated 
time limit. MIDC also did not initiate prompt action for resumption of plots and 
timely issue of notices for recovery of extension charges. MIDC may implement 

 Executive Summary 
 
vii 
an efficient and effective Information Technology (IT) based monitoring system 
for automatic generation of notices to allottees who had failed to develop 
plots/obtain BCC within the stipulated development period. 
Instances of unauthorised sub-lease and change in use of allotted plots, lack of 
system for monitoring, removal of encroachments and irregular allotment of 
land to encroachers was observed. MIDC may formulate time bound action plan 
for eviction of encroachments and demolition of illegal constructions from 
encroached properties and responsibility needs to be fixed for failure to 
prevent/demolish encroachments and irregular allotment of land to 
encroachers.

 
1 
Chapter I 
 
 
 
 
1.1    Introduction  
Government of Maharashtra (GoM) established (August  1962) Maharashtra 
Industrial Development Corporation (MIDC) under Sec tion 3 of Maharashtra 
Industrial Development Act, 1961 (MID Act) to promote and assist in the rapid 
and orderly establishment, growth and development of industries in the State of 
Maharashtra. The main activities of MIDC are:  
 preparation of a plan for systematic development of  Industrial Areas (IAs) 
on land placed at disposal of MIDC by the GoM (as well as land acquired by 
MIDC). It included preparation of layout by carving out demarcated plots in 
IAs for industrial and supporting activities (inclu ding amenities) as 
prescribed in Development Control Rules (DCR); 
 development of IAs through construction of roads, w ater supply system, 
drainage system, street light, waste/effluent treatment plants, fire station etc ; 
 allotment of plots/sheds to entrepreneurs on lease for specified purpose 
(Industrial/commercial/residential/amenities) etc.  and granting permission 
for transfer, sub-letting, extension of development period etc ; 
 regulating setting up of industries and constructio n of buildings by allottee 
as a Special Planning Authority in the IAs; and 
 maintenance of infrastructure provided in the IAs and providing water supply 
to allottees/consumers. 
As on March 2021, MIDC was in possession of land ad measuring 79,317 
hectare (Ha) and had established 289 IAs, which inc luded Special Economic 
Zones (SEZs) and specialized parks for different in dustrial sectors like 
Biotechnology, Information Technology (IT), Textile , Wine (Grape 
processing), Floriculture etc . 
1.2    Organisational set-up  
MIDC is under the administrative control of Industr ies, Energy and Labour 
Department of the GoM. The Board of MIDC presently consists of eight 
members. Minister (Industries), GoM is the ex-officio  Chairman, Minister of 
State (Industries), GoM is the ex-officio  Vice-Chairman and Chief Executive 
Officer (CEO) of MIDC, is the ex-officio, Secretary. The day-to-day operations 
of MIDC are looked after by Chief Executive Officer (CEO) with assistance of 
Joint CEOs, Deputy CEOs, General Managers, Chief Pl anner, and Chief 
Accounts Officer etc . MIDC has 16 Regional Offices (ROs) in the State, which 
are entrusted with the activities of land acquisition, preparation of layout of IAs, 
allotment of plot and post allotment activities and  monitoring. There are  
28 Division Offices (DOs) which are responsible for execution of infrastructure 
works, maintenance and recovery of service/water ch arges, granting building 
plan approval and Occupancy Certificates to allottees in the IAs.  
 
 

Report No. 5 (Role of MIDC in the industrial development of Maharashtra) 
2 
The organisational structure is depicted in Chart 1.1: 
 
1.3    Audit objectives 
The Performance Audit was conducted to assess whether: 
• MIDC was able to achieve its objective of planned and systematic industrial 
development through creation of IAs; 
• Proper system existed for fixation of price and land allotment was fair and 
transparent in line with prevailing policies/rules/regulations;  
• Internal control system was effective to ensure timely recovery of revenue/ 
dues at appropriate price; and 
• Monitoring system was adequate and effective in ensuring utilisation of land 
for the intended purposes. 
1.4    Audit criteria 
The audit criteria were adopted from the following sources: 
• Maharashtra Industrial Development Act, 1961 (MID Act), Maharashtra 
Industrial Development Rules, 1962 (MID Rules), MIDC Disposal of Land 
Regulations, 1975 (MIDC DLR) and Development Control Regulations 
(DCR), 2009; 
• The Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, 
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013 (LARR Act);  
• Industrial Policy of the GoM of 2013 and 2019; 
Joint CEO 
(Administration/IT) 
Joint CEO 
 Special Projects (1) 
Joint CEO 
 Special Projects (2) 
 Joint CEO (Konkan) 
Chart 1.1: Organisational structure MIDC 
CEO
 
Land Department  
 Engineering Department 
 Accounts Department 
Chief Engineer  
 Joint/Deputy CAO 
 Divisional Fire 
Officer  
Accounts Officer  
Superintendent 
Engineer  
Executive Engineer  
Regional 
Officer  
Field Offices  
Fire Department 

Chapter I - Introduction 
3 
• Government Resolutions, notifications and directives issued;  
• Policy, Manual, Circulars, Regulations and Guidelines issued by MIDC; 
• Term and conditions of allotment/agreement to lease; 
• Minutes/decisions of Land Allotment Committee (LC/L AC) and delegation 
of   powers; and 
• Agenda notes/Resolutions of Board Meetings. 
 
1.5    Scope and Methodology of Audit  
The Performance Audit (PA) was conducted in two pha ses; between  
May-December 2019 and August to October 2021 covering the period 2014-15 
to 2020-21. Apart from the Head Office, 11 ROs 1 out of 16 ROs of MIDC were 
selected considering revenue earned and geographica l representation of all the 
five regions of the State.  
Performance of MIDC was earlier reviewed and includ ed in Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India (PSUs), Go M for the year ended  
31 March 2013. The Committee on Public Undertakings (COPU) discussed the 
Report (January-June 2019) and their recommendation s were awaited  
(August 2022). 
An Entry Conference was held in May 2019 with Manag ement of the MIDC, 
where audit methodology, scope of audit, audit obje ctives and criteria thereof 
were explained. Exit conference was held on 20 Dece mber 2021, with 
Additional Chief Secretary (Industries), GoM and CE O, MIDC, wherein audit 
findings were discussed. Replies of the MIDC/GoM (D ecember 2021/ August 
2022) have been suitably incorporated in the Report. 
The GoM stated (December 2021) that all the audit findings in the Audit Report 
except the audit observation of non-appointment of Board members, were 
within the jurisdiction of MIDC and action was being taken by Board of MIDC 
under their powers and, hence there were no comments of GoM on the same. 
 
 
1.6    Acknowledgement 
Audit acknowledges co-operation and assistance extended by MIDC at various 
stages of conducting the Performance Audit. 
 
 
 
 
  
 
                                                 
1 Amravati, Aurangabad, Kolhapur, Mahape, Nagpur, Na nded, Nashik, Pune-I, Pune-II,  
Thane-I and Thane-II. 

 
5 
Chapter II 
 
 
Corporate Governance and Planning  
 
During the period 2014-21, GoM did not appoint seve n out of  
15 members to the Board of MIDC. The Board of MIDC took important 
decisions having financial implications overriding the extant rules/policy in 
cases of land allotment, levy of lease premium/tran sfer charges/extension 
charges and sub-letting charges in favour of privat e parties. Relaxation in 
rules/policies on a case to case basis, lacked tran sparency and brought in 
arbitrariness in decision making and governance-cau sing loss to public 
exchequer.  
MIDC did not formulate any programme/plan for achievement of targets set 
in the State Industrial Policy (SIP). MIDC also did  not have a perspective 
plan for land acquisition, development and allotment activities in Industrial 
Areas 	(IAs) detailing physical targets to be achieved. La nd acquisition and 
industrial development activities of MIDC, thus, di d not emerge out of a 
systematic and comprehensive plan. In the absence of any physical targets, 
there was no benchmark to assess performance of MIDC . 
 
 
2.1    Corporate Governance  
As per Section 3(2) the MID Act, MIDC shall be a bo dy corporate with 
perpetual succession. As per Section 4 of the MID A ct, MIDC shall consist of 
15 members (herein referred to as Board 2) as depicted in the Chart 2.1 .  
 
                                                 
2  As per MID Act, Board is not defined, however, me etings of the Members are being 
referred as meetings of the Board by MIDC. 

Report No. 5 (Role of MIDC in the industrial development of Maharashtra) 
6 
 
Audit observed lack of effective corporate governance in the following areas: 
Non-appointment of members 
2.1.1 During the period 2014-21, the Board comprised of only eight 
3 members. 
Other seven members (six members to be nominated by GoM and one member 
as a Financial Advisor of MIDC) were not appointed to the Board. It is pertinent 
to note that Section 9 of the MID Act stipulated th at any vacancy of a member 
of the MIDC shall be filled as early as practicable, which was, thus, not ensured. 
GoM stated (December 2021) that action for appointment of members of MIDC 
would be taken as per provisions of the MID Act.  
Recommendation No. 1: GoM may ensure that vacancies  of Board members 
of MIDC are filled up without delay.  
 
 
 
                                                 
3 Chairman, Vice-Chairman, CEO of MIDC; Principal Se cretary (Industries), GoM; 
Chairman and Managing Director of Maharashtra State  Electricity Distribution Company 
Limited, nominated member of Maharashtra Housing and Area Development Authority and 
Managing Directors of State Industrial and Investment Corporation of Maharashtra Limited 
and Maharashtra State Financial Corporation. 
Chart 2.1: Composition of Board of MIDC  
Ex-officio Members:  
Members from 
Departments/Public 
Sector Undertakings 
(PSUs) of the GoM  
Minister (Industries), 
GoM as Chairman Chairman and Managing 
Director of MSEDCL 
Managing Director of 
Maharashtra State Financial 
Corporation  
Managing Director of State 
Industrial and Investment 
Corporation of Maharashtra 
Ltd.  
One member nominated by 
Maharashtra Housing and 
Area Development Authority  
Minister of State 
(Industries), GoM, 
as Vice Chairman 
Chief Executive 
Officer of MIDC 
(S ecretary to Board) 
Two members of whom one 
shall be Financial Adviser to 
the MIDC 
Board of MIDC  
Members nominated by 
the State Government 
Six members to be nominated 
by the GoM, who were 
qualified with experience in 
industry, trade, or finance 
capable of representing 
interest of persons engaged or 
employed therein 

Chapter II - Corporate Governance and Planning 
7 
Decisions of MIDC  overriding laid down  policies and Regulations  
2.1.2 As per section 64 (1) of the MID Act, 1961, the MID C may, with the 
previous approval of the State Government, make Reg ulations consistent with 
this Act and Rules made thereunder, to carry out pu rposes of this Act. 
Accordingly, MIDC with previous approval (January 1 975) of GoM, framed 
MIDC Disposal of Land Regulations, 1975 (MIDC DLR) in exercise of powers 
granted under section 64 (1) of the Act, which were  applicable to all lands 
transferred to or placed at disposal of MIDC by Sta te Government. Further, as  
per Regulation 35 of MIDC DLR, MIDC may delegate any of its powers under 
these regulations to the CEO or any other officer f or efficient working and for 
the purpose of achieving the objects of the Act. 
As per provisions of MIDC DLR, MIDC was empowered t o allot plots 
(Regulation 8 and 12) and grant permission for tran sfer/subletting (Regulation 
29) to an allottee on recovery premium/charges as fixed by MIDC from time to 
time. Further, MIDC was entitled to resume possessi on of plot in case of 
contravention of any terms and condition of agreeme nt to Lease by an allottee 
(Regulation 17). In this regard, MIDC had issued va rious policy circulars, 
whereby powers were delegated to the CEO/Joint CEO/ Deputy CEO/Regional 
Officers (including committees constituted under th eir chairmanship) for 
allotment of land and granting permission of transf er/subletting/time limit 
extension to an allottee subject to fulfilment of l aid down conditions and 
levy/recovery of prescribed premium/charges. 
Audit, however, observed that the Board of MIDC as well as Chairman, MIDC 
and CEO took important decisions having financial implications-overriding the 
extant rules/policy in cases of land allotment, lev y of lease premium/transfer 
charges/extension charges and sub-letting charges which led to undue benefit to 
various private parties. Relaxation in rules/polici es on a case-to-case basis, 
lacked transparency and brought in arbitrariness in  decision making and 
governance-causing loss to public exchequer as disc ussed infra in paragraphs 
4.2.5, 4.2.7, 4.2.9, 5.1.1, 5.1.2, 5.1.3, 5.1.4, 5. 1.5, 5.2.1, 5.2.2.1, 5.2.2.2, 5.2.3 
and 5.2.4.   
2.1.3 The statutory mandate of MID Act and MID DLR has to be followed by 
MIDC while making allotment of land. As per Regulat ion 10 of MIDC DLR, 
on receipt of any application for allotment of land , the CEO shall make such 
enquiries as he deems necessary and place it before  the Land Allotment 
Committees (LCs) with his recommendations and LCs m ay either sanction or 
reject such application.  
The MIDC DLR does not mention any provision regardi ng composition/ 
constitution (members, chairman etc ) of LCs. MIDC issued policy circulars 
whereby LCs were constituted at Head Office and Reg ional Office level and 
composition (members/chairman) of LCs were laid dow n. The LCs at Head 
Office and Regional Office level, under the chairma nship of Joint Chief 
Executive Officers/ Deputy Chief Executive Officers  and Regional Officers 
respectively, were granted powers of land allotment  depending upon extent of 
area of the plot to be allotted. 

Report No. 5 (Role of MIDC in the industrial development of Maharashtra) 
8 
The LCs were thus empowered to allot available plot s considering prevailing 
policies, viability of projects, projected investme nt and employment, 
availability of land etc . 
Audit observed that land allotment in five cases 4 were placed before the LCs in 
accordance with the directions of the Chairman MIDC ; while 100 cases 5 were 
on directions/approval of the Board, as discussed infra . Thus, land allotments 
in these 105 cases vitiated the laid down procedure s and authority granted to 
LCs under Regulation 10 of MIDC DLR.  
MIDC stated (December 2021) that; 
• As per clause 15(a) of the MID Act, the MIDC shall have the power to 
acquire and hold such property, both movable and immovable as the MIDC may 
deem necessary for the performance of any of its ac tivities, and to lease, sell, 
exchange or otherwise transfer any property held by  the MIDC on such 
conditions as may be deemed proper by the MIDC. As per clause 15(k), the 
MIDC has the power to do such other things and perf orm such acts as it may 
think necessary or expedient for the proper conduct of its functions, and carrying 
into effect the purpose of this Act. In essence, the Board of Directors (BoDs) is 
the MIDC as per Sections 2(d), Section (3) and Sect ion (4) with full authority 
under Sections 14 and 15 for allotment of property or undertaking any activity 
which it deems fit for fulfilling its duties as per the Act. Although, some power 
is delegated to administration, it doesn’t preclude  the MIDC from allotment of 
land to any investor or to decide matters placed before it to serve the purpose of 
the Act.  
• The policy framework is put in place so that delegated powers of the MIDC 
are exercised in an efficient and systematic manner. However, as the industrial 
ecosystem is essentially complex in nature in which  all situations cannot be 
reflected in policies, thus necessitating customise d solutions. MIDC has to act 
in a collective wisdom to respond to emerging scenario to the investors to give 
customised solution to maintain the momentum of bus iness in the State. To 
create this balance, MIDC does take decisions from time to time to relax such 
conditions in the policies of priority allotment/au ction policy/expansion 
policy/time extension policy, etc . based on local needs and demands and to 
maintain inclusive development. It is this proactive decision making, which has 
put the State at forefront in the industrial scenario in India. In the light of above 
discussion, Board decision making needs to be seen and to be considered.  
MIDC further stated (August 2022) that the policy d ecisions and all other 
decisions taken are as per the policy in its meetin g upholding the objective of 
securing orderly establishment of industrial areas and industries in the State of 
Maharashtra. After thorough discussion of all agend a, resolutions get passed 
unanimously, as such transparency gets maintained a nd the areas/situation 
wherein industries face problems and need solution get addressed in the 
meetings of the Corporation. It was further stated that verdicts pronounced by 
                                                 
4  Refer para 4.2.2. 
5  Refer para 4.2.1, 4.2.3, 4.2.4, 4.2.5, 5.1.2 and 6.4.2.  

Chapter II - Corporate Governance and Planning 
9 
the courts of Law are binding on MIDC and the Supre me Court of India and 
Bombay High Court have upheld policy/ decisions taken by the MIDC.     
Reply is not tenable for reasons stated below: 
• As per Section 2(d) of the MID Act, Corporation mea ns MIDC established 
under Section 3. Section 4 merely laid down composition of its members. As per 
Section 66 of MID Act, all members, officers and se rvants of the MIDC shall, 
when acting or purporting to act in pursuance of an y of the provisions of this 
Act, be deemed to be public servants 
6. Thus, contention of the management that 
‘the BoD is the MIDC’ is not correct considering th at its members are deemed 
as public servants and not MIDC per se . It is also pertinent to note that MID Act 
has not defined the term ‘Board’ nor laid down powers of members of the MIDC. 
•  Powers granted to MIDC under Section 15 of the MID  Act must be strictly 
exercised in accordance with express provisions of Act, Rules/Regulations and 
laid down policies without any deviations/discrimin ation. Contention of MIDC 
regarding relaxation of policies in certain cases d epending on prevailing 
circumstances/situations was against the mandate of Article 14 (equality before 
law) of the Constitution of India. Further, Regulat ions specifically empowered 
CEO/LCs to take decisions of land allotment and not to the Board. 
• Decisions of MIDC which were in deviation from exta nt policies/statutory 
provisions and hence lacked transparency have been noticed during Audit as 
referred above. As such, contention of MIDC that de cisions of MIDC were as 
per the policies and transparent, was factually incorrect.  
• In this regard, Supreme Court of India and High Cou rts through various 
judgements have laid down principles for exercise o f power by the State/ 
Statutory Authorities like MIDC as well as Board in disposal of public property. 
As such, contention of MIDC regarding courts upholding various decisions was 
also factually incorrect. Some relevant court judgm ents in this regard are 
discussed below:  
 In two cases of land allotment by MIDC, the Bombay High Court held 
(February 2014 7/June 2016 8) that allotments made in violation of prevailing 
policies/procedures of MIDC were illegal/unlawful. The Bombay High Court 
while taking a serious view (February 2014) on Board’s decision by overruling 
the views of the management had observed that ‘MIDC  must strictly abide by 
its policy and circulars issued and in force so als o the mandate of Article 14 of 
the Constitution of India and act fairly, reasonabl y and in a non-arbitrary and 
non-discriminatory’.  
 Earlier, in another case 9, the Bombay High Court had granted                
(February 2010) an order whereby a decision/resolution of MIDC Board related 
to allotment of land was quashed and set aside on the grounds of being arbitrary, 
unreasonable and against principles of natural just ice and fair play. It was 
                                                 
6  Public servant within the meaning of Section 21 o f Indian Penal Code. 
7  Real Team Systems Private Limited versus  the State of Maharashtra (Chikalthana IA). 
8  Somnath Gangadhar Karale versus  the State of Maharashtra (Nagapur-Ahmednagar IA). 
9  Patni Computers System Limited versus MIDC. 

Report No. 5 (Role of MIDC in the industrial development of Maharashtra) 
10 
further observed that being an instrument of the St ate, it must have its actions 
judged on the criteria of being fair, bona-fide and unbiased. 
Recommendation No. 2: MIDC may ensure strict implem entation of 
regulations and laid down policies in land allotment and recovery of charges.  
 
  
2.2    Planning 
The GoM had formulated a State Industrial Policy (SIP), 2013, which was valid 
for the period up to March 2019. Subsequently, new SIP, 2019 was declared 
(March 2019) by the GoM, which was valid for a peri od of five years  
(April 2019 to March 2024).  
Lack of system to correlate/monitor achievement of State Industrial Policies  
2.2.1  The SIP, 2013, inter alia , focused more attention on less developed 
regions of the State to bring them on par with main stream industrial 
development, initiatives to encourage employment intensive industries, optimal 
utilisation of land for industrial development and strengthening of industrial 
infrastructure etc . Further, specific targets 10  were set under SIP, 2013 for 
manufacturing sector growth, job creation and inves tment in the State. MIDC 
was directed to make efforts to acquire additional land, where  
75 per cent  plots have been allotted in the existing IAs. Audi t, however, 
observed that MIDC had neither formulated any progr amme/plan for 
achievement of targets set in the SIP nor devised a ny system for 
monitoring/reporting progress and to review gaps in identified focus areas.  
The SIP, 2019 stipulated 12 issues for implementation with regards to MIDC as 
shown below:  
 
• Promote setting 
up of flatted galas 
for the micro and 
small enterprises 
under Special 
Purpose Vehicle 
model;  
• Considering the 
upcoming 
futuristic Industry 
4.0 and          hi-
tech projects such 
as air taxi, drone, 
driverless 
vehicles, etc.  
necessary 
industrial 
infrastructure 
shall be planned; 
• Creation of land bank across the 
State based on demand assessment 
considering the future industrial 
land requirement to facilitate  
₹ 10 lakh crore of investment; 
• Land owned by 
State Government 
or State 
Government 
organisation if 
required by MIDC 
for planned 
development will 
be made available 
at no cost; 
• Reserve minimum 
500 acre industrial 
area for 
development of 
warehousing and 
logistics facilities 
in the State); 
• Setup a dedicated 
Biotechnology 
Parks at suitable 
locations in the 
state (Aurangabad, 
Nagpur, Nashik 
and Pune among 
others);  
• In new MIDC industrial estates, 20 
per cent  area shall be reserved for 
Small and Medium Enterprises 
(MSMEs) with reservations for 
entrepreneurs from SC/ST category, 
Ex-servicemen, women and industrial 
units of women’s Savings Groups, for 
which modifications will be made in 
the Land Allocation Rules of MIDC; 
• Develop State of the 
art Exhibition cum 
Convention Center 
at the appropriate 
location in the State; 
                                                 
10   To achieve manufacturing sector growth rate of 12 -13 per cent  per annum and share of            
28 per cent  of State GDP, create new jobs for two million pers ons and attract investment 
of ₹ 5 lakh crore.             

Chapter II - Corporate Governance and Planning 
11 
• For units that are 
closed for a 
continuous period 
of more than 5 
years and have a 
minimum of 
20,000 sqm 
contiguous land 
in MIDC areas 
shall be allowed 
to develop such 
land for setting up 
industrial cluster;  
• In order to 
promote walk to 
work concept and 
decongest the 
cities, satellite 
offices shall be 
developed in the 
State for which 
MIDC shall be the 
planning 
authority; 
• 'Excluding Urban Local Bodies 
Area', MIDC shall be declared the 
Special Planning Authority (only 
for permission purposes and no 
infrastructure support shall be 
provided by MIDC in such areas) 
for industrial land above  
10 acre for multiple industrial units 
with single developer for a 
contiguous land of more than 10 
acre and for all the Industrial 
clusters approved under 
Government of India and State 
Government schemes; and 
• MIDC shall be the 
planning authority 
for these private 
industrial estates 
with focus on 
MSMEs. 
Audit observed that MIDC had implemented (August 20 19) only two of the  
12 issues of SIP, 2019 which were relating to reserving land for development of 
warehousing and logistics facilities in the State a nd reservation of plots for 
Micro, MSMEs entrepreneurs. 
MIDC in its reply (August 2022) while elaborating on action taken in respect of 
only one issue (development of warehousing and logistics facilities) stated that 
observation of the audit is noted and suitable proposal for preparation for policy 
will be submitted before Board for taking suitable decision. 
 
Absence of Perspective Plan 
2.2.2 MIDC manual provided for preparing a Perspective Pl an (PP) covering a 
five-year plan period of the State Plan. Further, d epending upon potential of 
various locations in the developing parts of the State, Annual Plan (AP) was to 
be worked out for acquisition and development of land at various locations. The 
SIP, 2019 declared (March 2019) by the GoM also pro vided that MIDC would 
continue to be the dedicated agency for developing industrial infrastructure. 
Further, it shall plan and develop new industrial estates and prepare PP in order 
to promote systematic and regionally balanced indus trial development across 
the State in the next five to 10 years, including i nitiatives to promote green 
industrialization in these areas. 
Audit observed that during the audit period MIDC did not prepare a Perspective 
Plan for land acquisition, development and allotmen t activities and to upgrade 
infrastructure facilities in IAs detailing physical  targets to be achieved. Land 
acquisition and industrial development activities of MIDC, thus, did not emerge 
out of a systematic and comprehensive plan. In the absence of any physical 
targets, there was no benchmark to assess the performance of MIDC.  
MIDC stated (December 2021) that it was in the proc ess of preparing a 
perspective five-year plan for systematic and regio nally balanced industrial 
development across the State.  
Recommendation No. 3: MIDC may prepare Perspective Plan and Annual 
Plan as per the SIP, quantifying physical targets to be achieved.

 
13 
Chapter III 
 
Land acquisition and development of industrial areas 
MIDC allotted land to prospective entrepreneurs con sidering, inter alia, 
proposed investment and employment generation mentioned in the Detailed 
Project Report (DPR). There was, however, no databa se/system to 
ascertain/record allottee wise details regarding ac tual employment 
generated and investment made by an allottee vis-a- vis the DPR. MIDC, 
thus, confined its role to development/allotment of land in IAs and outcome 
based approach to industrial development (investmen t and employment 
generation) was lacking. 
 MIDC had not formulated any action plan/system for acquisition of 
surplus/ unutilised land with the allottees, for al lotment to new 
entrepreneurs as envisaged in Section 42A of the MID Act. Thus, MIDC did 
not ensure optimal utilisation of IAs as mandated in the MID Act. 
Four policies implemented by MIDC for development/d isposal of plots in 
IAs (allotment rate, grant of possession of plot, mixed land use on industrial 
plot and recovery of arrears as land revenue) contr avened express 
provisions of the MID Act, MIDC Disposal of Land Re gulations, 1975 
(DLR) and Development Control Regulations (DCR), 2009. 
MIDC did not ensure timely finalisation of tenders within the validity period 
as per delegation of powers which resulted in cance llation of tenders and  
re-tendering at extra cost.  
 
 
3.1    Land acquisition 
Overview of legal framework for land acquisition 
The GoM acquires land under chapter VI of the MID A ct and places it in 
possession of MIDC for establishment of IAs. The Go I notified  
(September 2013) Right to Fair Compensation and Tra nsparency in Land 
Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013 (LARR Act). The GoM 
notified (April 2018) that the provisions of the LA RR Act, 2013, would 
however, not be applicable for acquisition of land under the MID Act. 
Subsequently, the GoM amended the MIDC Act 2019 (Ap ril 2019) which 
provided that the State Government shall adhere to the provisions of LARR Act, 
2013 relating to the determination of amount of com pensation in accordance 
with first schedule and rehabilitation and resettle ment specified in second and 
third schedules, being beneficial to affected famil ies, in land acquisition cases 
which are referred to Collector for determination of compensation under section 
33 (3) of the MID Act.  
The legal framework for various stages involved in land acquisition as provided 
in the MID Act under chapter VI is depicted in Chart 3.1 .
  
 
 
 

Report No. 5 (Role of MIDC in the industrial development of Maharashtra) 
14 
Chart 3.1: Legal framework of land acquisition under MID Act  
                     
 
(Source: MID Act, 1961) 
The procedure for land acquisition is as follows:   
The Land Selection Committee headed by concerned Deputy CEOs is entrusted 
with preliminary selection of land for IAs. The proposals with approval of CEO 
are submitted to the High Power Committee (HPC) hea ded by Principal 
Secretary (Industries) of the GoM. The proposals ap proved by the HPC are 
submitted to the GoM for issue of preliminary notification of IA under Section 
1(3) and final notification under Section 32(1) of the MID Act after completing 
land acquisition process including public hearing. Apart from this procedure, 
MIDC is also empowered to purchase land by agreement under section 15(b) of 
the MID Act from the concerned land owners.  
Details of land acquired, in possession and allotted during 2014-2021 are shown 
in Table 3.1. 
Table 3.1: Status of land acquired and allotted during 2014-21 
(In hectare)  
Year 
Land in possession 
at beginning of the 
year   
Land acquired 
during the 
year  
Total land in 
possession at 
end of the year            
Land allotted 
during the year 
2014-15 63,357 3,762 67,119 1,153.76 
2015-16 67,119 3,333 70,452 506.04 
2016-17 70,452 1,275 71,727 429.56 
2017-18 71,727 3,544 75,271 720.31 
2018-19 75,271 1,418 76,689 847.84 
2019-20 76,689 921 77,610 231.00 
2020-21 77,610 1,707 79,317 432.00 
(Source: Information furnished by MIDC) 
 
 
Section 
1(3) 
• The GoM shall issue a notification in the Official Gazette d eclaring selected area as an IA under 
Section 2(g). Provision of the chapter VI was applicable to s uch area from such dates as notified by 
the State Government under Section 1(3) (herein referred to as preliminary notification).
Section 
32(2)
• After publication of preliminary notification, GoM shall serve notice upon owner of the land to show 
cause as to why notified land should not be acquired. 
Section 
32(3)
• After considering cause of land owners and granting an opportunity of being heard, the State 
Government may pass such orders as it deemed fit. 
Section 
32(1)
• The GoM publishes a notice in the Official Gazettefor acquisition of land (herein referred to as final 
notification). 
Section 
32(4)
• The land was vested in the GoM free from all encumbrances from the date of publication of notice 
under section 32 (1). 
Section 
32(5) and 
32(6)
• The GoM issue notice to the landowners to surrender or deliver possession within a period of 30 days 
of the service of the notice, which was otherwise taken by force. 

Chapter III – Land acquisition and Development of IAs 
15 
Timelines for completion of acquisition of land 
3.1.1 MIDC was established under Section 3 of MID Act to promote and assist 
in the rapid and orderly establishment, growth and development of industries. 
Therefore, it was of utmost importance to complete process of land acquisition, 
including cancellation/de-notification of proposed IAs, if any, within a 
reasonable time. Audit, however, observed that MID Act did not provide for 
any timelines for completion of land acquisition. F urther, as per rule 30 of 
MIDC Rules, 1962; de-notification (withdrawal of no tified land from 
acquisition) was not permissible after a period of 35 years.  
MIDC stated (December 2021/August 2022) that a prop osal for amendment of 
MID Act for automatic lapse of notification after 1 8 years has been submitted 
(April 2021) to GoM, which was under their active consideration.  
Non-recovery of compensation amount for denotified land 
3.1.2 MIDC transferred land compensation amount to concer ned State Land 
Acquisition Officers (SLAOs) for payment to landown ers. As on  
31 March 2021, an amount of ₹ 4.31 crore was not recovered from SLAOs 
concerned in respect of five IAs which were de-notified during 1985 to 2005.  
MIDC stated (August 2022) that there is an effectiv e system for reconciliation 
and monitoring of unspent amount. Reply is not tena ble as despite lapse of 
considerable period after de-notification, recovery of balance amount lying with 
the SLAOs had not been effected.  
Discrepancies in land acquired by MIDC at Adali, Sindhudurg  
3.1.3 The GoM issued notification (December 2013) for acquisition of land for 
development of an IA in Adali (Sindhudurg district)  under MID Act and the 
Board approved (February 2014) acquisition under Se ction 15(b) of the MID 
Act. Subsequently, MIDC executed/registered (April 2014 to January 2017) 
agreements with private owners for acquisition of land in Adali.  
Audit observed that: 
• MIDC, 
while preparing layout for development of Adali IA,  carried out                       
(January-March 2016) detailed survey and contour su rvey of IA, wherein 
discrepancies in land areas were observed in a part icular portion (Gat No. 
665 A). Actual measurement of land carried out (Sep tember-November 2018) 
by competent authority of GoM revealed that land area was only 230.55 hectare 
against land area of 264.74 hectare mentioned in 7/ 12 extract 11  (i.e . lower by 
34.19 hectare and valuing ₹ 4.85 crore 12 ). MIDC preferred (September 2021) an 
appeal to GoM for reconciliation of 7/12 extracts, which was pending (August 
2022). This indicated  systemic flaw in land acquisition as final notification was 
issued for acquisition of land and payment made of compensation even before 
carrying out survey and actual measurement of land and reconciliation thereof. 
                                                 
11   The 7/12 extract is an information document prescri bing details about a specific piece of     
land such as survey number, area, date and more particulars about the existing owner's name. 
12   Acquisition cost of ₹ 14.20 lakh per hectare x 34.19 hectare. 

Report No. 5 (Role of MIDC in the industrial development of Maharashtra) 
16 
• As per the contour map of Adali IA prepared by MIDC , land admeasuring  
52 hectare (steep slope/thick forest land) was adjoining one boundary/outskirts 
of the IA. Hence, it should not have been acquired as it was unsuitable for 
development.  
MIDC accepted (December 2021/August 2022) that detailed measurement was 
not carried out before issue of final notification/  registration in the instant case 
in deviation from prevailing procedure. MIDC furthe r stated that sometimes 
they had to acquire such land, even if some part of  the land comes under 
landlocked i.e.  not approachable, due to development of IA or to m aintain the 
continuity in land acquisition.  
Reply of MIDC is not tenable as it had acquired 52 hectare land on boundary/ 
outskirts of IA despite having the knowledge that i t was not suitable for 
development of an IA. 
 
3.2    Development of industrial areas   
As per MIDC DLR, MIDC is required to prepare layout of the land transferred/ 
placed at its disposal by the State Government for development as IA and 
dispose of plots of land in such IAs to allottees for development of allotted plots. 
MIDC carries out developmental/infrastructure works  in IAs like construction 
of roads, water supply system, drainage system, str eet lights, waste/effluent 
treatment plants, fire station etc. as well as operation and maintenance thereof. 
Audit scrutiny revealed the following: 
Lack of outcome based approach to industrial development  
3.2.1 MIDC allotted land to prospective entrepreneurs con sidering, inter alia , 
proposed investment and employment generation menti oned in the Detailed 
Project Report (DPR), which was a mandatory require ment for land allotment. 
Audit observed that there was no system in MIDC for recording/compiling and 
reviewing actual employment generated and investmen t made by an allottee  
vis-a-vis DPR. Further, there was no database/system to ascer tain/record 
allottee wise details regarding commencement of act ivity as proposed in the 
DPR and for closed/sick units. In the absence of su ch a system, actual 
employment generated/ investment made by allottee i n IAs of MIDC was not 
ascertainable. 
MIDC, thus, confined its role to development/allotm ent of land in IAs and 
outcome based approach to industrial development (i nvestment and 
employment generation) was lacking.  
MIDC accepted (December 2021/August 2022) that it w ould develop a 
provision in the existing customer portal for custo mers to upload audited  
self-declaration document stating the actual invest ment made in a unit and 
number of employees working.  
The Economic Survey (ES) of Maharashtra prepared an nually by GoM,  
inter alia , contained details of investment and employment ge neration by 
industrial units in MIDC, which was compiled on the  basis of information 

Chapter III – Land acquisition and Development of IAs 
17 
submitted by MIDC. As there was no system/database in MIDC for 
recording/compilation of actual employment generated and investment made by 
an allottee, relying on such figures for preparation of ES may not be appropriate.  
Recommendation No. 4: MIDC may evolve a system of recording/monitoring 
of actual investment and employment generation by a llottees vis-a-vis their 
DPRs to ensure that expected outcomes of industrial  development from such 
land allotment are achieved. 
Failure to ensure optimum utilisation of land with allottees  
3.2.2 Section 42A of the MID Act provided for acquisition of unutilised surplus 
lands with the allottees in IAs and accommodating a nother industry on such 
unutilised portion for enabling MIDC to properly di scharge its functions of 
promoting rapid growth and development of industries.  
As per Section 42A(1) of the MID Act, with a view t o ascertain whether any 
industrial area developed by the MIDC has been full y utilised for industrial 
purposes or not, GoM may direct the MIDC to submit a six-monthly report. 
Further, Section 42A(4) provided that if upon the report submitted by the MIDC 
and after giving reasonable opportunity of being he ard, the State Government 
was satisfied that any plot holder did not utilise the maximum buildable area of 
his plot for a period of five years or more from the date on which possession of 
the plot was delivered to him or not likely to util ise the unutilised portion for 
industrial purposes within a reasonable period, the  State Government may 
acquire such unutilised portion as per laid down procedure.  
Audit observed that GoM neither directed MIDC to su bmit six-monthly report 
nor MIDC had prepared any report in this regard dur ing the audit period.  
In 187 IAs, MIDC had already allotted more than 80 per cent  of plots and hence 
there was limited scope or no scope for further ind ustrial development in these 
IAs. MIDC had no action-plan/system for acquisition of surplus/unutilised land 
with the allottees in these IAs, for allotment to new entrepreneurs as envisaged 
in Section 42A to ensure optimal utilisation of IAs.   
Audit further observed that: 
• As per Regulation 18.1 of Development Control Regul ations (DCR), 2009 
of MIDC, an industrial allottee was eligible to dev elop plot with maximum 
Floor Space Index (FSI) of one (100 per cent ). MIDC granted Building 
Completion Certificate (BCC)/Occupation Certificate  (OC) to allottees on 
utilisation of FSI upto 0.20 (20 per cent ) within development period of three 
to five years, which was revised (June 2019) to 0.4 0 (40 per cent ) FSI in 
respect of new plots only. MIDC, however, had not i ncorporated provision 
in the allotment order and/or lease deed, regarding  maximum FSI to be 
achieved, as may be reasonable, considering nature/ activity of unit and 
provisions of DCR. MIDC policy was, therefore, not in line with provisions 
of Section 42A of the MID Act and consequently there was no legal binding 
on an allottee to utilise the maximum buildable are a of his plot within 
stipulated period. 

Report No. 5 (Role of MIDC in the industrial development of Maharashtra) 
18 
• MIDC had decided (June 2017) to implement scheme in one IA (Trans Thane 
Creek (TTC)), whereby allottees (including closed i ndustries) were granted 
opportunity to return excess/untilised land. It was  further directed to take 
action against that allottee, who did not participa te in the scheme as per 
Section 42A of the MID Act. Audit observed that non e of the allottees 
participated in the said scheme and MIDC had not ta ken any action for 
acquisition of unutilised portion of plot till date  (December 2021). Data 
analysis in respect of TTC IA revealed that only 231 (seven per cent ) out of 
3,284 allottees had fully utilised their plots. In case of remaining 3,053 
allottees, land admeasuring 60.51 lakh sqm was lyin g unutilised as given in 
Chart 3.2 .  
 
(Source: Information furnished by MIDC) 
Data analysis  in respect of allottees from the other 158 IAs reve aled that 1,687 
(five per cent ) out of 34,574 allottees had utilised maximum FSI.  There was 
unutilised land admeasuring 12.15 crore sqm with 32 ,887 allottees as given in 
Chart 3.3 . 
 
 
(Source: Information furnished by MIDC) 
MIDC stated (December 2021/August 2022) that utilis ation of the entire plot 
could not be achieved by all plot holders considering nature of industrial activity 
and requirement of open spaces/marginal space as pe r DCR/other statutory 
norms and hence maximum 60 per cen t of plot area was consumed. It was also 
66 
1,094 
971 
922 
231 
0.11 
0.38 
0.1 0.01 
0
0
0.1 
0.2 
0.3 
0.4 
0
200 
400 
600 
800 
1000 
1200 
Below 10 10 to below 40 40 to below 70 70 to below 100 100 
Unutilised land 
(sqm in crore) 
No. of allottees 
Land utilisation (FSI in per cent) 
Chart 3.2: Land utilisation by allottees in TTC IA 
No. of Allottees Unutilised land (sqm in crore) 
2,541 
20,827 
6,856 
2,663 
1,687 
4.02 
7 1.03 
0.1 0
0
2
4
6
8
0
5,000 
10,000 
15,000 
20,000 
25,000 
Below 10 10 to below 
40 
40 to below 
70 
70 to below 
100 
100 
Unutilised land (sqm in crore) 
No. of allottees 
Land utilisation (FSI in per cent ) 
Chart 3.3: Land utilisation by allottees in IAs (other than TTC IA) 
No. of Allottees Unutilised land (sqm in crore) 

Chapter III – Land acquisition and Development of IAs 
19 
stated that a plot holder could consume 100 per cent  FSI but it could not be 
considered as a target considering that plot was de veloped in phased manner 
considering their requirements, finance and market conditions and hence all 
plots could not achieve optimal utilisation. Furthe r, a revised policy had been 
implemented in June 2019, whereby it was made compu lsory for allottees to 
consume minimum 40 per cent  FSI to obtain BCC on the plot with provision 
for extension of additional two years on payment of  non-utilisation charges, 
failing which procedure had to be initiated to resume non-utilised land from the 
plot as per Section 42A of the MID Act.  
Reply of MIDC is not tenable on the following grounds: 
• MIDC amended (November 2019) the policy regarding 4 0 per cent  FSI 
whereby plot holders, who had obtained BCC prior to  June 2019 (and in 
production) be excluded from requirement of 40 per cent  FSI. Such policy was 
based on the date of BCC obtained, besides being di scriminatory and was in 
violation of express provisions of Section 42A, whi ch provided for acquisition 
of unutilised land from all plot holders without any such classification based on 
date of BCC. 
• The Policy of uniform consumption of lower percenta ge of 40 per cent  FSI  
to be achieved by all the new allottees also lacked  justification because MIDC 
itself stated that FSI consumption varied consideri ng type of industry/phase 
wise development programme and maximum 60 per cent to 100 per cent of the 
plot area could be consumed.  
• Reply is silent on the issue of not incorporating c ondition regarding 
achievement of maximum FSI in the lease deed/allotm ent order and lack of 
system for identification/reporting of unutilised b uildable area in each plot, 
thereby failing to ensure compliance with Section 42A of the MID Act. 
• Reply is silent on the issue of failure to acquire possession of unutilised land 
with allottees as per Section 42A in TTC IA despite  clear directions of the 
Board. Further, reply is silent on lack of action against allottees having less than 
40 per cent  FSI in other IAs, which constituted 68 per cent  of total allottees 
analysed. 
Recommendation No. 5: Action as stipulated under MI D Act for reporting 
and acquisition of surplus/unutilised land with allottees may be initiated.  
Policies in violation of provisions of MIDC Act/Regulations 
3.2.3 The GoM notified MID Rules, 1962 under Section 63(1 ) of the MID Act 
for implementation of this Act. Further, GoM notified MIDC Disposal of Land 
Regulations (DLR), 1975 and Development Control Reg ulations (DCR), 2009 
as per powers conferred under 64(1) of the MID Act.  Audit observed that four 
polices implemented by MIDC were contrary to the pr ovisions of the MID 
Act/Regulations and thus, these policies were inval id/ ultra vires  as given in 
Table 3.2 . 
 
 

Report No. 5 (Role of MIDC in the industrial development of Maharashtra) 
20 
Table 3.2: MIDC policies in violation of express provisions of MID Act/Regulations 
Sl. 
No. 
Description Applicable provision of 
MID Act/ Regulations 
Policy of MIDC  Audit remarks 
1 Allotment 
rate 
As per Regulation 9 of 
MIDC DLR, payment of 
Earnest Money Deposit 
(EMD) was not to be 
construed as any 
commitment or obligation 
on the part of MIDC that a 
particular plot or any plot 
shall be allotted to applicant 
at the rate prevailing at the 
time of payment of deposit. 
As per MIDC policy (January 2012), 
land allotment was made at rates 
prevailing on the date of issue of offer 
letter provided EMD was paid within 
stipulated period of 15 days as per 
condition incorporated in the offer 
letter.  
As per policy implemented, 
offer letters thus provided 
an obligation for allotment 
at rate prevailing on the 
date of payment of EMD 
which contradicted 
statutory provision as EMD 
was not to be construed as 
any commitment to allot a 
plot at the rate prevailing at 
the time of payment of 
Deposit. Audit observed 
instances where offer 
letters were issued though 
demarcated plots were not 
available for allotment in 
the layout of IAs. 
Subsequently, allotment 
orders were issued on 
demarcation of plots when 
land rates were revised. 
Similarly, instances of 
delay in issue of circulars 
for revised rates after 
approval of Board decision 
were observed. In above 
cases, MIDC had liberty to 
charge lease premium as 
per rates applicable as on 
the date of allotment order 
as per provision of the 
MIDC DLR. This was not 
ensured which resulted in 
loss to MIDC as discussed 
infra.  
2 Grant of 
possession 
of plot to 
an allottee 
As per Regulation 13 of 
MIDC DLR, no allottee 
shall be given possession of 
the plot allotted to him 
before execution of lease 
agreement. The GoM had 
also directed (October 
2006) that possession of 
Government land shall not 
be given unless the 
agreement was executed 
and registered.  
As per MIDC policy (May 1998),  
advance possession could be granted 
to allottees before execution of 
Agreement to lease.   
 
During April 2014 to 
March 2021, MIDC 
granted advance possession 
of plots admeasuring 74.17 
lakh sqm to allottees in 
2,264 out of 3,302 cases  
(69 per cent ). This was in 
violation of MIDC DLR. 
  

Chapter III – Land acquisition and Development of IAs 
21 
Sl. 
No. 
Description Applicable provision of 
MID Act/ Regulations 
Policy of MIDC  Audit remarks 
3 Mixed land 
use on 
industrial 
plot  
There was no provision for 
mixed land use on an 
industrial plot in MIDC 
DCR, 2009 ( i.e.  support 
services, commercial etc. 
on a part/portion of plot). 
MIDC policy allowed mixed land use 
to following categories of industrial 
plot holders: 
• Micro and Small Enterprises were 
granted (July 2012) utilisation of  
20 per cent  of built up area for support 
services/ commercial purpose 
excluding residential/ educational 
use. 
• Automobile Body Building 
(ABB)/spare parts permitted 
(November 2014) to utilise (self/  
sub-letting) built up area of 10 per 
cent for related commercial activity 
of Garage, Workshop and showroom. 
• Mega projects for automobile 
industry granted (November 2019) 
permission to utilise (self/sub-letting) 
built up area of 10 per cent  for all 
commercial purposes related to 
original activity of ABB/spare parts 
including Garage, Workshop, 
showroom and financial services.   
Permission of mixed use 
without amendment of 
DCR was irregular. 
4 Recovery 
of arrears as 
land 
revenue 
 
As per Section 51 of the 
MID Act, all sums payable/ 
recoverable from any 
person and all 
charges/expenses incurred 
in connection therewith was 
recoverable as an arrear of 
land revenue. 
As per MIDC policy, arrears/dues 
recoverable in excess of land 
premium amount paid was written off 
in respect of allottees who returned 
plot on their own or where possession 
of plots was resumed by MIDC. 
During April 2014 to 
March 2021, MIDC had 
written off dues/arrears of  
₹ 23.88 crore which was 
recoverable from 353 
allottees in 11 ROs. MIDC 
policy was thus in violation 
of express provision of 
MID Act. 
(Source: Information furnished by MIDC) 
MIDC in its reply (August 2022) offered various jus tifications for 
implementation of above policies such as difficulties and delays in recovery of 
dues resulting in plots lying unused for long period of time, conscious decision 
to grant utilization for support services/commercia l purposes, actual field 
situation, obligation to allot land at premium stated in offer letter etc.  
Reply is not tenable as such policies were ultra vires,  being contrary to the 
express provisions of the MID Act/Regulations as mentioned in table above. 
Policy regarding grant of Occupation Certificate in violation of Regulations 
3.2.4 As per DCR, 2009, an allottee was required to obtai n Occupation 
Certificate (OC) from MIDC prior to any occupancy or use of the development 
so completed. The OC was granted only after the all ottee complied with fire 
safety norms and obtained final No Objection Certif icate (NOC) from fire 
authority of MIDC. Further, as per Section 3(2) of the Maharashtra Fire 
Prevention and Life Safety Measures Act, 2006, no a uthority empowered to 
sanction construction plan of any building or part of a building and to issue 
certificate of completion thereof, shall issue any certificate of completion or part 
completion thereof, unless it was satisfied that the owner had complied with the 
specified requirements for fire safety. 

Report No. 5 (Role of MIDC in the industrial development of Maharashtra) 
22 
Audit observed that MIDC implemented (September 201 5) a policy, whereby 
allottees who had commenced production without obta ining mandatory Fire 
NOC and OC, could thereafter make application to MI DC for grant of OC 
without any restriction of time limit. The policy f urther provided for 
regularisation of such cases by granting free time limit extension of 90 days for 
obtaining OC from the date of approval of application for time limit extension. 
Thus, MIDC policy granted free regularisation in ca se of unauthorised 
commencement of operation/activity without mandator y fire NOC and OC 
without any deterrence to the requirement under DCR. 
MIDC stated (January 2021) that OC was granted only  after final NOC was 
issued by Fire Authority. MIDC reiterated (August 2 022) provisions of the 
policy regarding grant of OC to allottees. Reply is not tenable as the prevailing 
policy of MIDC allowed commencement of production/a ctivities without OC 
and fire NOC which also contravened statutory provisions. 
Recommendation No. 6: MIDC may ensure that all poli cies adhere to the 
statutory provisions.  
Extra expenditure on execution of development works in IAs 
3.2.5 As per prevailing MIDC policy, Chief Engineer (CE)/ CEO was the 
competent authority vested with powers for acceptan ce and rejection of tender 
for works having tendered cost more than ₹ one crore. It was further provided 
(November 2012) that all the tenders with tendered amount of more than  
₹ one crore shall be submitted for perusal to Chairman, MIDC.  
Audit observed that the competent authority did not  approve the tenders and 
proposals were forwarded to the Chairman, MIDC without acceptance of offers. 
Audit observed that during the period from 2014-15 to 2020-21, 13 tenders were 
cancelled due to non-receipt of proposal from Chair man, MIDC within the 
validity period and delay ranged between seven to 4 06 days after lapse of 
validity period. In one tender, proposal was returned by Chairman, MIDC with 
remarks that difference between rates offered by L1  and L2 bidder was not 
practicable. These 14 tenders were subsequently re- tendered and awarded 
(August 2014 to January 2021) at an extra cost of ₹ 9.93 crore. It was further 
observed that another tender was not finalised at t he level of Management 
within the validity period and retendered at an extra cost of ₹ 1.07 crore. Thus, 
non-finalisation of 15 tenders within the validity period resulted in extra cost of  
₹ 11 crore, besides avoidable delay in execution of development work in IAs. 
MIDC stated (December 2021/August 2022) that in future approval letter would 
be issued to the lowest bidder immediately after th e approval of the competent 
authority.  
Recommendation No. 7:  MIDC may ensure timely finalisation of tenders 
within the validity period in accordance with deleg ation of powers to avoid  
re-tendering of works. 

 
23 
Chapter IV 
 
Land pricing and allotment 
Policy of fixation / revision of land rates was not  appropriate. Systemic 
delays in implementation of revised land rates were observed leading to loss 
to MIDC.  
MIDC made direct allotment of plots to ineligible a llottees contrary to the 
laid down policies (e-bidding, waiting list, priority and expansion). Further, 
allottees were issued offer letters for allotment o f land despite  
non-availability of carved out plots in violation of MIDC Regulations.  
 
 
4.1    Land pricing  
 
MIDC allots plot of land on lease basis for a perio d of 95 years on recovery of 
upfront lease premium at rates fixed from time to time. Recovery of transfer fee, 
sub-letting charges, time limit extension charges, conversion charges, 
compounding charges etc. are also based on the land rates fixed by MIDC. It 
was, thus, essential to ensure proper pricing polic ies and periodic revision of 
land rates to protect financial interests of MIDC.  
Deficient policy of fixation/revision of land rates  
4.1.1 After fixation of industrial rates; commercial and residential rates in an IA 
were fixed. As per MIDC policy (March/June 1995), residential and commercial 
rates should be 1.5 times/2 times and 2.5 times of prevailing industrial rate 
respectively. Audit, however, observed that residen tial and commercial rates 
varied from 1.22 to 4.35 times (102 IAs) and 1.43 to 3.62 times (153 IAs) of the 
prevailing industrial rates respectively. The IA wise basis/rationale for adoption 
of applying such multiplying factors was neither av ailable on record nor 
furnished to audit.  
MIDC in reply (August 2022) stated that the rate fixation was as per June 1995 
policy and variations in rates were observed in cer tain locations due to 
urbanization, transportation facilities etc . Reply is not tenable as rate fixation 
was in deviation of laid down policy in several IAs as stated above.  
4.1.2 MIDC issued (September 2016) a circular implementin g policy of  
e-bidding for allotment of plot where more than 80 per cent  plots/plottable land 
had been allotted). As of September 2016, there were 187 IAs where more than 
80 per cent  plots/plottable land had already been allotted. 
MIDC, subsequently, issued (August 2018) two circul ars for revision of land 
rates. Out of 187 IAs, prevailing land rates were r evised by a uniform rate of  
10 per cent in 135 IAs while rates were uniformly increased to ₹ 100 per sqm 
in 52 IAs (where prevailing land rates were less than ₹ 100 per sqm). 
 

Report No. 5 (Role of MIDC in the industrial development of Maharashtra) 
24 
Audit observed that MIDC had not devised any method ology/weightage 
formula for revision of land rates and rates were revised uniformly in all the IAs 
on an ad hoc basis without any cost analysis/justification on record. The relevant 
factors like rates received in e-biddings, Annual S tatement Rate (ASR)/Ready 
Reckoner Rates of the GoM, fair transaction value based on registered sale deed, 
demand-supply position etc. could have been considered before fixation/ 
revision of land rate in such 187 IAs .  
In fact, the Management had submitted (April 2018) a proposal to the Board for 
increasing land rates by 20 per cent in 30 IAs on the basis of details of average 
rates received in previous e-biddings, which ranged  between 27 per cent  and 
888 per cent  above the prevailing land rates (fixed in January 2016). This was, 
however, not considered by the Board for reasons no t on record and approval 
was granted (April 2018) for uniform revision of land rates by 10 per cent  in all 
the IAs. Thus, the prevailing land pricing policy o f uniform revision of land 
rates by 10 per cent  was not appropriate.  
MIDC stated (August 2022) that a suitable revision in the policy will be put in 
place. 
4.1.3 Audit further observed that MIDC, without any cost analysis/justification, 
had increased land rates to 
₹ 100 per sqm in 52 IAs where prevailing land rates 
were less than ₹ 100 per sqm (ranging between ₹ 20 and ₹ 95 per sqm). Reply 
of MIDC did not offer justification for fixation of  rate in these IAs. In this 
regard, a case is discussed below;  
 
Case Study 4.1: 
MIDC issued (November 2014) offer letters to 33 applicants for allotment of 
industrial plot in Mhaswad IA in District Kolhapur at applicable rate of  
₹ 40 per sqm. The applicants paid (November 2014 and  September 2015) 
Earnest Money Deposit (EMD) (25 per cent ) amounting to ₹ 13.64 lakh. After 
issue of offer letters to the applicants, Executive  Engineer, Kolhapur 
informed (October 2015) the concerned RO that the a llotment rate was very 
less and should be fixed at ₹ 550 per sqm considering the estimated cost of 
providing infrastructure in the IA. The matter rega rding fixation of rate was 
pending separately at MIDC Head Office. Due to pend ing decision on land 
rate, the RO did not issue allotment order to these applicants till date (August 
2022) despite lapse of nearly seven years since iss ue of offer letter. MIDC, 
revised rates to ₹ 50 per sqm (January 2016) and ₹ 100 per sqm (August 2018) 
on ad hoc  basis.  
MIDC while reiterating (August 2022) the facts of t he case, stated that rates 
were not decided on adhoc basis and allotment was not done as per old rates. 
The reply is not tenable as MIDC themselves had realized that land rates were 
not appropriate and hence allotment was pending till date (August 2022).  
Incorrect fixation of land rate at Adali, Sindhudurg  
4.1.4  MIDC issued (February 2019) a policy circular for fixation of land rates 
in newly acquired IAs. The circular laid down detailed methodology and various 
elements to be considered before working out land rates in an IA. In this regard, 
discrepancies noticed in Adali, Sindhudurg are discussed below. 

Chapter IV – Land pricing and allotment  
25 
 
Case Study 4.2:  
MIDC fixed (June 2019) land rates (for industrial p lot) in Adali IA at  
₹ 1,170 per sqm. The land rate fixed by MIDC was low er by ₹ 70 1  per sqm 
on account of the following:  
• As per methodology, price escalation on infrastruct ure development cost 
is to be worked out at 10 per cent  where period required for development was 
two years or more. However, in this case, price esc alation was incorrectly 
worked out at 5 per  cent though period of infrastructure development w as 
more than two years . 
• Goods and Service Tax (GST) at the rate of 18 per cent  was not considered 
on total infrastructure development cost (including  escalation and 
contingencies).  
MIDC stated (August 2022) that there was no incorrect fixation of land rate. 
Reply is not tenable as the land rates were incorrectly fixed on the lower side 
as stated above.  
Delay in implementation of revised land rate 
4.1.5 Revision in land rate was a revenue sensitive decision, which should have 
been implemented immediately from the date of decis ion without any delay. 
Systemic delays in implementation of land rate revi sed were detrimental to 
financial interests of MIDC. During the audit perio d, the Board approved 
revision of land rate on two occasions i.e.  on 30 November 2015 and  
2 April 2018. MIDC, however, issued circulars for i mplementing revised rates 
on 7 January 2016 and 27 August 2018, after a delay  of 38 and 146 days 
respectively from the date of Board decision. MIDC during the intervening 
period issued offer letters for allotment of 109 pl ots at pre-revised rates. The 
revenue foregone on this account worked out to 
₹ 15.74 crore. 
MIDC stated (December 2021/August 2022) that the is sue has been noted and 
instructions would be issued to make the rates effective immediately along with 
mentioning the same in the offer letters. 
Recommendation No. 8: MIDC may ensure that revised land rates are 
implemented immediately after approval of Board and  a suitable clause 
regarding recovery of lease premium at revised rate s may be incorporated 
in the offer letters. 
Deficient fixation of compounding charges  
4.1.6  As per prevailing MIDC policy, unauthorised construction carried out by 
an allottee was regularised on recovery of applicab le compounding charges. 
MIDC uniformly fixed (September 2013) compounding charges for residential 
and commercial buildings in all the IAs at 1.5 and 2 times of prevailing 
industrial rates stating that land rate for residen tial and commercial plot was  
1.5 and 2 times of prevailing industrial rates. Aud it observed that residential 
rates were more than 1.5 times in 35 IAs (ranged be tween 1.52 to 4.35 times) 
while commercial rates were more than 2 times in 40  IAs (ranged between 
2.09 to 3.62 times). Fixing of compounding charges without taking into account 

Report No. 5 (Role of MIDC in the industrial development of Maharashtra) 
26 
the actual rates for residential and commercial properties in the IAs revealed the 
deficiencies in the process of determining the compounding charges.  
MIDC stated (December 2021/August 2022) that audit observation has been 
noted and a suitable proposal for rectification in the policy would be submitted 
before Board for taking suitable decision. 
4.2    Land allotment 
Prior to September 2016, MIDC allotted plot on dire ct application basis to 
allotees 13 . As per revised policy (September 2016), plot for industrial purpose 
is to be allotted through e-bidding in IAs, where m ore than 80 per cent  of 
plots/plottable land is already allotted; whereas i n remaining IAs direct 
allotment of land is made by inviting online applic ations. Further, direct 
allotment of land is also permissible under priorit y category (mega projects, 
foreign direct investment, Defence, PSUs etc. ) and expansion projects in all the 
IAs. Land for residential and commercial purpose is  to be allotted through 
auction/e-bidding in all the IAs. In this connectio n, audit observed the 
following; 
Allotment in violation of policy of tender/e-bidding  
4.2.1 The Board approved (September 2015 to April 2021) a llotment of plots 
admeasuring 0.78 lakh sqm to 66 parties in 10 IAs on direct allotment basis. As 
per prevailing policy, plots should have been allotted to these 66 parties through 
auction/e-bidding as they were not eligible for dir ect allotment under priority 
categories (Annexure 1 ). 
Audit also observed arbitrary application of rates for recovery of lease premium 
in these 66 cases as given in Table 4.1 . 
Table 4.1: Land rates levied for allotment of plots 
Sl. No. Land rates applied No. of parties 
1 Prevailing rate in IA plus 10 per cent  additional charges thereon. 62 
2 Upset price for tender/auction. 1 
3 Highest rates received in previous auction. 2 
4 Highest rates received in previous auction plus 10 per cent  
additional charges thereon. 1 
(Source: Information furnished by MIDC) 
Audit further observed that out of above, 53 applic ants (in TTC IA) were 
allotted plots of 100 sqm each. This was contrary to the provisions of Regulation 
21.1.2 of DCR, which stipulated that the minimum si ze of plot that could be 
carved out and allotted in any IA was 200 sqm. 
MIDC stated (December 2021/August 2022) that in ess ence, Board was the 
MIDC having full authority under MID Act for allotm ent of property or 
undertaking any activity, which it deemed fit for f ulfilling its duties as per the 
Act. Reply is not acceptable as such arbitrary allo tments were contrary to the 
laid down policies in various cases as shown in Annexure 1 .  
                                                 
13   Except IAs at Pimpri Chinchwad and TTC where land  was allotted on tender basis  

Chapter IV – Land pricing and allotment  
27 
Allotment in violation of policy of waiting list  
4.2.2 As per the prevailing land allotment policy (prior to September 2016), 
MIDC maintained a waiting list of applications rece ived from industries and 
allotment was made based on seniority as per the wa iting list.  Audit observed 
that in accordance with the directions (August 2014 /October 2015) of the 
Chairman, LC allotted (September 2014 to April 2017 ) land admeasuring 
31,779 sqm to five parties (Talegaon IA: one 14  and Chakan-Phase II IA: four 15 ) 
who were not in the waiting list. Audit further obs erved that there were 5,900 
pending applications for allotment as per waiting l ist in Chakan IA and LAC 
decided (November 2014) to cancel applications of 5,764 parties while process 
of cancellation of remaining 136 applicants was in progress on the ground that 
plots were not available for allotment.  
The CEO of MIDC, during processing of case in Chakan IA, had also submitted 
(October 2015) to Chairman, MIDC that applicant  was not eligible for allotment 
under priority category as per MIDC policy. Thus, a llotment of land to five 
parties without considering pending applications as per the waiting list and who 
were also not eligible for allotment under MIDC policy was irregular and lacked 
transparency. 
MIDC stated (August 2022) that there was no waiting  list in existence after 
approval (November 2014) in Chakan IA. It was furth er stated that application 
of the four parties were discussed on merit as per orders of Chairman, MIDC 
and allotment was done as per decision (November 20 15) of LC. Reply in 
respect of allotment in Chakan IA was not factual a s these applicants were 
allotted plots ignoring other 136 applications who were in the waiting list. In 
respect of applicant at Talegaon IA, MIDC stated (December 2021) that on the 
request of the applicant, Chairman, MIDC had ordered to make allotment.  
Violation of policy for Allotment under priority category  
4.2.3 Audit observed that Board approved (August 2019/Feb ruary 2021) 
allotment of land to two 
16  parties under priority category 17  overruling the 
management proposal that they were not qualified un der priority category and 
land in the IAs were to be allotted through e-biddi ng only as per prevailing 
policy.  
MIDC stated (December 2021) that in respect of the allottee in Additional 
Ambernath IA, land demanded was on a hill and had n o approach road, which 
could not be allotted to anyone because of lack of approach road. This plot was 
vacant for many decades and there was fear of encro achment on these plots. 
Further, the decision of allotment was not at concessional rate, hence there was 
no financial loss to the MIDC. It was further state d (August 2022) that in 
essence, the Board was MIDC having full authority u nder MID Act for 
allotment of property or undertaking any activity, which it deemed fit for 
                                                 
14   Nutri first Agro International Private Limited (1 9,279 sqm).  
15  Ganesh Fabrotech Private Limited (6,000 sqm), CAM Tool Industries Private Limited  
(4,800 sqm), Shree Industries (1,000 sqm) and EnSys Engineers (700 sqm). 
16   Dhoot Transmission Company Private Limited at Tal egaon IA and SNP Project Private 
Limited at Additional Ambernath IA. 
17    Priority category included mega projects, foreig n direct investment, defence, PSUs etc.  

Report No. 5 (Role of MIDC in the industrial development of Maharashtra) 
28 
fulfilling its duties as per the Act and Board took  conscious decision after due 
deliberation on merit. In respect of Talegaon IA, MIDC stated (December 2021) 
that the matter was deferred and allotment order was not issued as the applicant 
had communicated to MIDC that they were not pursuing the matter considering 
slowdown in market situations. 
Reply of MIDC was incorrect in respect of allotment  in Additional Ambernath 
IA. The management had submitted (February 2021) to  the Board that the 
applicant was not eligible for priority allotment a nd land was to be allotted 
through e-bidding as per MIDC policy. The managemen t also highlighted that 
highest rate of 
₹ 15,000 per sqm was received in last e-tendering in March 2020 
as against the prevailing MIDC land rate of ₹ 4,840 per sqm in this IA. 
Considering highest auction rate of ₹ 15,000 per sqm, undue benefit of  
₹ 21.34 crore 18  was granted on account of direct allotment (March 2021) of 
21,000 sqm to the ineligible private party.  
Violation of Allotment policy for expansion category  
4.2.4 As per prevailing policy (January 2013), land could  be allotted for 
expansion of existing operational industrial units provided that FSI utilisation 
on the existing plot was minimum 40 per cent . Expansion plots were allotted on 
recovery of prevailing industrial rate plus 10 per cent  additional charges.  
Further, there was no provision in prevailing polic y for allotment to a  
sub-lettee. 
Audit observed that Board approved (July 2014 to April 2021) allotment of land 
admeasuring 25,036 sqm to six parties 
19  for expansion purpose in deviation of 
the prevailing policy. Although, only industrial allottees could be allotted plots 
for expansion under this policy, allotment in four cases was made for  
non-industrial purpose (hospitals and hotel). Further, one party was a sub-lettee, 
while in one case allotment of plot was made without ascertaining eligibility of 
the allotee as per laid down policy. 
It was further observed that rates levied for allotment also varied in three cases 
of allotment of expansion plots to hospitals. While one allotee was granted land 
at commercial rate (VMFRC) other two were given at residential rates (AIMS) 
and residential plus10 per cent  additional charges (MHITC). All these cases 
revealed the arbitrary approach of the Board towards allotment of plots. 
MIDC while citing various reasons 
20  for allotment in these cases stated 
(December 2021/August 2022) that Board had taken conscious decisions and in 
essence, the Board was MIDC with full authority under MID Act for allotment 
                                                 
18  Area (21,000 sqm) x ₹ 10,160 per sqm (Auction rate of ₹ 15,000 per sqm less allotment 
rate of ₹ 4,840 per sqm). 
19  Non-industrial purpose (Vivekananda Medical Founda tion and Research Centre (VMFRC) 
in Latur IA, Asian Institute of Medical Science (AIMS) in Dombivli IA, Mahajan Hospital 
and Industrial Trauma Center (MHITC) in TTC IA and Trishul Buildtech and 
Infrastructures Private Limited (TBIPL) in TTC IA. Sub-lettee (Polycab Wires Limited 
(PWL)) for industrial purpose and Yash Industries in Nashik (Ambad) IA.  
20  For providing medical facilities (Hospitals), for utilisation of FSI on existing plot (Hotel), 
expansion of existing business on plot on rental ba sis and proposed electronic/electrical 
manufacturing (Industrial). 

Chapter IV – Land pricing and allotment  
29 
of property or undertaking any activity which it de emed fit for fulfilling its 
duties.  
Reply is not acceptable as such arbitrary allotment s violated the laid down 
policy pertaining to allotment of plots.  
Case Study 4.3:  
An applicant (Yash Industries in Nashik (Ambad) IA)  requested (May 2020) 
for allotment of land under Mega Project (MP) categ ory. The Management 
submitted (February 2021) to the Board that the applicant was not eligible for 
land allotment under MP category while highlighting  prevailing policy for  
e-bidding. The Board, however, directed (April 2021 ) Land Allotment 
Committee (LC) to consider under expansion category  based on their 
February 2019 circular which stated that the LC was  required to ascertain 
eligibility of the applicant by obtaining/scrutinis ing mandatory documents 
like last three years audited annual accounts, orders in hand for original plot, 
documents regarding existing industry in production (on original plot) etc. In 
the instant case, the LC approved (May 2021) allotment of 6,000 sqm land to 
applicant under expansion category without ensuring  eligibility of the 
applicant as it had neither obtained nor scrutinise d mandatory documents in 
violation of February 2019 circular.   
MIDC stated (August 2022) that applicant investor h as filed all the relevant 
papers, explained to the LC and allotment was made as per MIDC DLR. 
Reply is not tenable as the mandatory documents sub mitted by applicant, if 
any, were neither recorded by LC nor made available to audit .   
Allotment of land without carving out plots in layout of IAs                              
4.2.5  As per Regulation 3 of MIDC DLR; MIDC shall prepar e a layout of the 
land transferred or placed at its disposal by the S tate Government for 
development as an IA. It was further provided in Re gulation 4 that MIDC may 
dispose of plots of land for which layout was prepa red by public auction or 
entertaining individual applications. Accordingly, MIDC implemented a policy 
(August 2012/ September 2016) directing the LC to a llot available plot to 
applicant as per approved layout of that IA. 
MIDC prepares layout of IA considering provisions o f DCR. Accordingly, in 
the initial phase, plots are carved out after reserving minimum of 10 per cent  as 
open space and five per cent  for amenities, besides keeping land for roads, 
drainages, HT corridors, Hill areas, water bodies e tc. Subsequently, plots are 
carved out from the remaining allottable land (incl uding from open 
space/amenities in excess of minimum prescribed percentage). 
Audit, however, observed that even before carving o ut plots in respective IAs, 
MIDC 
21  issued offer letters for allotment of land admeasuring 2.95 lakh sqm to 
                                                 
21  Allotment approved on directions of Board: 28 case s, Chairman of MIDC: 01 case and LC: 
74 cases. 

Report No. 5 (Role of MIDC in the industrial development of Maharashtra) 
30 
103 parties 22  in eight IAs ( Annexure 2 ). This was in violation of MIDC DLR 
and lacked transparency.  
Audit observed that after issue of offer letters in 29 cases, plots were carved out 
from plottable land in respective IAs and allotment  orders were issued. Out of 
these 29 parties, in 25 cases allotment orders were issued after a period ranging 
from 343 to 2,209 days from issue of offer letters.  Meanwhile, land rates had 
increased in these IAs and lease premium at prevailing rates (on date of issue of 
allotment order) worked out to 
₹ 19.93 crore as against ₹ 11.92 crore recovered 
(difference of ₹ 8.01 crore).  
In respect of remaining 74 parties, Board had decid ed (October 2020) to allot 
land to 70 parties in Latur IA at rates prevailing ( ₹ 120 per sqm) on the date of 
issue of offer letter (December 2014 to February 20 15). Accordingly, LC 
approved (December 2021) allotment of land admeasur ing 1.87 lakh sqm to  
70 allottees at old rates. Lease premium at prevail ing rates ( ₹ 550 per sqm) 
worked out to ₹ 10.26 crore by Audit, as against ₹ 2.24 crore being levied as per 
Board directions (difference of ₹ 8.02 crore). 
MIDC in respect of 29 allottees 23  stated (December 2021/August 2022) that 
though layout was under preparation (at the time of  issuing offer letter), 
subsequently layout was prepared and plots were allotted as per policies, hence 
there was no financial loss to MIDC and no violatio n of DLR. In respect of  
70 allottees in Latur IA, MIDC stated (August 2022)  that Board has rectified 
the errors committed by Regional Office and approve d the rates offered 
previously as per prevailing policy. In respect of remaining four allottees 24 , 
MIDC reply failed to address the issue of offer let ters despite non availability 
of carved out plots. 
Reply is not tenable as such discretionary allotmen ts in selective cases were 
contrary to Regulation 4 of MIDC DLR and Board was not empowered to take 
decisions in deviation of express provisions of the Regulations which had been 
notified by GoM with approval of State Legislature .  
Allotment of land which was not encumbrance free 
4.2.6  MIDC was granted possession (1995 to 1997) of land for development 
of two IAs at Newasa (Paandhripul) and Achalpur (Am ravati). The land was 
duly acquired by GoM as per provisions of the MID A ct and applicable 
compensation was paid to landowners. Audit observed  that MIDC allotted 
(1999 to 2015) 130 plots admeasuring 86.30 hectare in these two IAs to various 
allottees. The alloted land was, however, not encum brance free as original 
landowners/farmers continued to occupy the allotted  land, which MIDC could 
not clear till date (August 2022). 
MIDC stated (December 2021/August 2022) that due to strong agitation of local 
farmers, physical possession of land could not be t aken in Newasa IA and 
encroachments could not be cleared in both the IAs. It was further stated that all 
                                                 
22   Out of this, allotment order issued in 29 cases and remaining 74 cases were under process. 
23   Ambernath/Additional Ambernath, Pale and Kalyan B hiwandi IAs 
24    Kagal Hathkanangle, Shendra and Nashik (Ambad) I As 

Chapter IV – Land pricing and allotment  
31 
possible efforts were being undertaken to remove sa id encroachments. MIDC 
also stated (August 2022) that changes were proposed (in 2020) in the layout of 
Newasa IA as regards shifting of open space to the encroached land and 
conversion of freehold land under open spaces to plottable area. 
Allotment of plot for truck terminus  
4.2.7 MIDC issued (August 2019) a revised policy for allo tment of land for 
truck terminus. As per the revised policy, MIDC wou ld develop the land and 
hand over the same to private parties selected thro ugh tender for operation, 
repair and maintenance of truck terminus on lease rent basis for a period of five 
years, for which priority was to be given to Industrial Associations.  
Audit observed that MIDC, on directions of the Boar d, granted  
(September 2019/February 2021) lease of land to two  parties 
25  for truck 
terminus on direct allotment basis instead of tende ring/lease rent basis in 
violation of laid down policy. 
 
Case Study 4.4  
MIDC issued (April 2016) an offer letter for allotm ent of land admeasuring 
20,000 sqm to Lote Parshuram Industries Association (LPIA) for the purpose 
of truck terminus subject to payment of lease premi um of ₹ 70.35 lakh 
considering prevailing industrial rates 26 . After receipt of EMD (May 2016) of 
₹ 16.75 lakh, allotment order was issued (September 2017) demanding 
balance lease premium amount of ₹ 53.60 lakh. The allottee, however, 
requested (September 2017) for concession in lease premium, which was 
rejected by MIDC. As the allottee did not deposit b alance lease premium 
within the stipulated period, allotment order should have been cancelled and 
EMD forfeited, which was not done. The Board, after  a lapse of two years, 
approved (September 2019) re-allotment of plot with 50 per cent  concession 
in lease premium. MIDC issued a corrigendum (September 2019) to the party 
for allotment of land for 95 years for lease premiu m of ₹ 35.17 lakh  
(50 per cent  amount) at pre-revised rates.   
Allotment of land on lease of 95 years and financia l concessions granted in 
deviation from prevailing policies was irregular. I t is also pertinent to note 
that in a similar case of land allotment for truck terminus, MIDC approved 
(February 2021) allotment of land to an allottee (R oha Manufacturers 
Association (RMA)) on recovery of lease premium at prevailing industrial 
rates without any concession, which indicated lack of uniformity in decision 
for allotments. 
MIDC stated (January 2021) that comparing huge expe nditure for 
development of truck terminus, it was more beneficial to get it developed by 
the Industries Association by granting 50 per cent  concession in land 
premium in return. Thus, MIDC saved on the expendit ure on development 
which was more than the concession in land premium.  MIDC further stated 
(August 2022) that Board had powers to take decisio ns considering the 
overall merit in the proposal by overruling management’s observations as per 
                                                 
25   Lote Parshuram Industries Association (LPIA) and Roha Manufacturers Association (RMA). 
26   Considering industrial rate of ₹ 335 per sqm with five per cent  road width charges. 

Report No. 5 (Role of MIDC in the industrial development of Maharashtra) 
32 
MID Act. It was also stated that Board took conscio us decision after due 
deliberation on merit and there was no financial lo ss to MIDC. Reply of 
MIDC is not tenable as financial concessions were g ranted in violation of 
established policy.  
Allotment of land without obtaining mandatory forest clearance 
4.2.8 MIDC, without obtaining mandatory forest clearance,  advertised  
(August 2009) allotment of forest land admeasuring 41,480 sqm in Taloja IA. 
MIDC executed (March 2011) an agreement with a part y for development of a 
truck terminus and possession of the plot was hande d over (November 2011). 
The development work was, however, stopped after ob jections were raised 
(February/April 2012) by the Forest department, GoM. Audit observed that the 
party filed (October 2014) an arbitration petition and MIDC was directed 
(December 2017) to return lease premium along with interest ( ₹ 13.23 crore 
calculated at 9 per cent per annum ) citing that the agreement was illegal, null 
and void since its inception as the land was forest  land and no development 
activities could be carried out.  
MIDC stated (August 2022) that it was not aware of change in status of the land 
(i.e . forest land) as the land was in possession of MIDC. Reply is not tenable as 
MIDC allotted land without obtaining mandatory forest clearance. 
Allotment of excess land  
4.2.9 As per prevailing policy (October 2010), Project Affected Persons (PAPs) 
in Chakan IA were eligible for allotment of land eq uivalent to  
15 per cent  of land acquired from them at acquisition rate ( 
₹ 400/460 per sqm). 
Audit observed that MIDC, on directions of the Boar d, approved  
(June 2019) allotment of land to five PAPs 27 , in excess of their eligibility  
(15 per cent ) to the extent of 20,469.60 sqm at acquisition rat e. Considering 
prevailing land rate ₹ 4,770 per sqm for industrial plots in Chakan IA, M IDC 
incurred loss of ₹ 8.94 crore. 
MIDC stated (December 2021) that land was sanctioned on priority basis at the 
land acquisition rate as these land owners had not given possession of the 
acquired land and continuously obstructed development of infrastructure work. 
MIDC further stated (August 2022) that Board had po wers to take decisions 
considering the overall merit in the proposal by ov erruling management’s 
observations as per MID Act. It was further stated that Board took the conscious 
decision after due deliberation on merit and there was no financial loss to 
MIDC.  
Reply is not tenable as the decision to allot exces s land to these PAPs was in 
violation of laid down policies and also led to financial loss of 
₹ 8.94 crore. 
                                                 
27   Out of five PAPs, allotment orders issued to three PAPs. In respect of other two PAPs, offer 
letters issued and further action was in progress. 

 
33 
Chapter V 
 
Recovery of revenue/dues 
Instances of undue concession to allottees in recovery of revenue from lease 
premium, transfer charges, Urban Land Ceiling (ULC)  Exemption  
transfer charges, extension charges and sub-letting charges were observed. 
Irregular grant of instalments for payment of lease  premium and  
non-forfeiture/refund of lease premium in violation  of regulations/policy 
were also observed.  
Lack of system for periodic revision of water charg es and service charges 
from the allottees was observed which led to short recovery of expenses. 
MIDC had not levied and recovered Goods and Services Tax on non exempted 
services from the plot holders leading to non payment of statutory dues. 
 
MIDC recovers lease premium for allotment of plots besides charges for 
granting permissions for transfer/sub-lease, sub-letting, time limit extension for 
development of plot, water charges, service charges etc.  from allottees. 
 
5.1    Recovery of lease premium 
Audit observed that MIDC granted unwarranted conces sions in lease premium 
in cases of land allotment to various private parti es as discussed in succeeding 
paragraphs. 
Allotment of alternate plot at old rate in violation of directions of GoM  
5.1.1 As per section 18 of the MID Act, the State Government may issue to the 
MIDC such general or special directions as to polic y as it may think necessary 
or expedient for the purpose of carrying out the pu rposes of this Act and the 
MIDC shall be bound to follow and act upon such dir ections. The GoM had 
issued (January 1996) directions to MIDC that allotment of alternate land to an 
allottee due to ‘any reasons whatsoever’, should be  made on recovery of lease 
premium at prevailing rates.  
Audit observed that MIDC 
28  granted (February 2016 to November 2019) 
alternate land to 23 allottees considering rate at which old plot was allotted. As 
per GoM directions, differential lease premium of ₹ 9.80 crore should have been 
recovered from these 23 allottees considering prevailing rates as on the date of 
allotment of alternate plots and rate at which old allotment was made. Thus, 
non-levy of prevailing rates for allotment of alternate plot was contrary to GoM 
directions which resulted in loss of ₹ 9.80 crore ( Annexure 3 ). In two similar 
cases 29  of allotment of alternate plots, MIDC however, levied lease premium at 
prevailing rates based on same directions of GoM wh ich indicated the lack of 
consistency on part of MIDC in implementing directions of GoM.  
                                                 
28  Approving authority was Board (three cases), Joint  CEO (18 case) and Dy CEO (two cases). 
29  Vedant Udyog in Akola Growth Center and Soujanya C olour Private Limited in Additional 
Lote Parshuram IA. 

Report No. 5 (Role of MIDC in the industrial development of Maharashtra) 
34 
MIDC while citing various reasons 30  for allotment of alternate plots at old rates 
stated (December 2021/August 2022) that in essence, Board was the MIDC with 
full authority under MID Act for allotment of prope rty or undertaking any 
activity which it deemed fit for fulfilling its duties as per the Act. It was further 
stated that GoM directives pertain to cases where p lot locations were changed 
according to choice of applicant.  
Reply is not tenable as the directions of GoM did n ot mention that the lease 
premium was to be levied only when the plot locatio n was changed according 
to the choice of the applicant.  
Unwarranted concession in lease premium 
 
5.1.2 Audit observed that MIDC granted unwarranted conces sion of  
₹ 22.18 crore in lease premium to eight allottees in  violation of laid down 
polices. These eight cases are elaborated in Table 5.1  below: 
Table 5.1: Unwarranted concession in lease premium  
Sl. 
No. Details of cases and MIDC’s reply  
1   
and 2  
Continental Surface Solutions Private Limited (CSSP L) in 
Khandala IA (Phase II) and Emitec Emission Control Technology 
Private Limited (EECTPL) in Talegaon IA (Phase II) 
As per prevailing policy, lease premium was recoverable from allottees at the 
rate prevailing on date of issue of offer letter. MIDC issued offer (27 August 
2018) letter to two allottees (Continental Surface Solutions Private Limited 
(CSSPL) in Khandala IA (Phase II) and Emitec Emission Control Technology 
Private Limited (EECTPL) in Talegaon IA (Phase II)) at prevailing rates. The 
allottees subsequently requested (January 2019) for levy of pre-revised rate on 
the ground that the circular for revision in rates was issued (27 August 2018) 
on date of issue of offer letter to them. MIDC, on directions of the Board, 
granted (September 2019/January 2020) refund of 50 per cent of differential 
lease premium of ₹ 2.30 crore 31  in these two cases, in violation of prevailing 
policy of MIDC. 
MIDC stated (December 2021/ August 2022) that Board had taken conscious 
decision for giving 50 per cent  discount instead of 100 per cent  discount as 
requested by the allottees and there was no financi al loss to MIDC. Reply is 
not tenable as such conscious decision in selective  cases in violation of laid 
down policies resulted in financial loss to MIDC. 
3  
and 4  
Shantidoot Solar Industries in Krushnoor IA and Lax mi 
Vynkatesh Paper Industries in Nanded IA 
As per MIDC policy (March 2016) applicants, who had  executed 
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) under ‘Make in In dia’ programme 
were eligible for concessional rate (pre-revised ra tes), if complete proposal 
with all necessary documents were submitted before 31 March 2016.  
                                                 
30   Plot affected by natural nala, reserved land, obs tructions raised by local farmers/residents, 
absence of basic infrastructure facilities, change in alignment of road etc.  
31  CSSPL: 50 per cent  of ₹ 11 crore less ₹ 10 crore = ₹ 0.50 crore and EECTPL: 50 per cent  
of ₹ 39.54 crore less ₹ 35.95 crore = ₹ 1.80 crore. 

Chapter V - Recovery of revenue/dues 
35 
Audit observed that two allottees  (Shantidoot Solar Industries in Krushnoor IA 
and Laxmi Vynkatesh Paper Industries in Nanded IA)  were granted  
(July 2016/ January 2019) benefit of concessional l and rate by RO, 
Nanded/CEO although they had submitted (June 2016/August 2016) proposals 
after the cut-off date of 31 March 2016. In both ca ses, MIDC had correctly 
applied non-concessional rates in the offer letters  issued. However, MIDC 
granted post facto concession in lease premium on ground that parties had 
executed (February 2016) MoU under Make in India pr ogramme, which 
resulted in loss of ₹ 48.03 lakh 32 . 
MIDC stated (December 2021/August 2022) that conces sional rate were 
granted based on MIDC policy (March 2016) as MoU with GoM was executed 
within stipulated time limit (February 2016). Reply is incorrect as the allottees 
were not eligible for benefit under March 2016 policy on account of failure to 
submit proposal with all necessary documents within the stipulated time limit 
(31 March 2016).  
5, 6 
and 7  
IFB Refrigeration Limited (IFBRL) in Ranjangaon IA,  Hira 
Balaji Magasavargiya Sahkari Soot Girni Marayadit 
(HBMSSGM) in Umred IA and  Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar 
Sahakari Sootgirni Maryadit in Butibori (Phase II) 
As per the policy of Make in India of MIDC stated above, there was no provision 
for grant of concession in land rates/lease premium beyond March 2016. Audit, 
however, observed that MIDC granted (August 2021/October 2020) concession 
in lease premium/land rates (25 and 50 per cent ) to two parties (IFB 
Refrigeration Limited (IFBRL) in Ranjangaon IA and Hira Balaji 
Magasavargiya Sahkari Soot Girni Marayadit (HBMSSGM ) in Umred IA) 
which resulted in loss of ₹ 15.16 crore. Further, in another case, MIDC, on 
directions of the Board, granted (June 2017) land admeasuring 60,000 sqm to 
an allottee  (Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Sahakari Sootgirni Maryadit in Butibori 
(Phase II)) at old land rates of ₹ 520 per sqm (as earlier application of 
August 2014 was cancelled) as against the prevailing rate of ₹ 1,150 per sqm 
in the IA resulting in loss of ₹ 3.78 crore 33 . 
MIDC stated (December 2021/August 2022) that Board has taken decision in 
two cases (Umred and Butibori IA) to assist and pro mote co-operative 
movement to support weaker society through industrial growth. In respect of 
IFBRL, conscious decision was taken with approval o f Board to grant 
concessional rate to the allottee being an anchor unit, which was a requisite for 
sanction of proposed Electronics Manufacturing Clus ter 2.0. It was further 
stated that in essence, Board was the MIDC and had full authority under MID 
Act for allotment of property or undertaking any activity which it deemed fit 
for fulfilling its duties as per the Act. MIDC further stated (August 2022) that 
there is no financial loss to MIDC.  
Reply is not tenable as such decisions of allowing concession in land rates/lease 
premium in selective cases were unfair and in violation of laid down policies. 
 
                                                 
32  Shantidoot Solar Industries: ₹ 3.50 lakh ( ₹ 5.83 lakh less ₹ 2.33 lakh) and Laxmi Vynkatesh 
Paper Industries: ₹ 44.53 lakh ( ₹ 48.40 lakh less  ₹ 3.87 lakh). 
33   60,000 sqm x ₹ 630 per sqm (₹ 1,150 per sqm – ₹ 520 per sqm).  

Report No. 5 (Role of MIDC in the industrial development of Maharashtra) 
36 
8 Orange City Laghu Audyogik Sahkari Sanstha in Hingna IA 
MIDC issued (August 2019) offer letter for land adm easuring 7,200 sqm in 
Hingna IA to Orange City Laghu Audyogik Sahkari San stha. Subsequently, 
based on request of the allottee (June 2019), MIDC sub-divided the allotted 
plot into 11 separate plots (5,424 sqm) and 1,775 s qm for internal roads (in 
the middle of sub-divided plots) and a separate dem and letter was issued 
(September 2019) for payment of lease premium of ₹ 45.76 lakh towards 
internal roads in the allotted plot. MIDC submitted (October 2020) before the 
Board that there was no policy for waiver of charge s for area under internal 
roads in the already allotted plot and hence charges could not be waived. The 
Board, however, directed (October 2020) for waiver of charges without any 
justification which resulted in loss of ₹ 45.76 lakh. It is also pertinent to note 
that Board had previously (March 2020) rejected the  request for waiver of 
charges.  
MIDC stated (December 2021/August 2022) that Board had taken decision 
for financial support of small entrepreneurs and Bo ard had full authority 
under MID Act for allotment of property or undertaking any activity which it 
deemed fit for fulfilling its duties as per the Act . Reply is not tenable as the 
decision was taken in violation of prevailing policy.  
Irregular grant of instalments for payment of lease premium  
5.1.3 As per Regulation 12 of MIDC DLR; read with MIDC ci rcular  
(January 2014), in case of direct allotment of land, lease premium was payable 
in two instalments as 25 per cent  on issue of offer letter as Earnest Money 
Deposit (EMD) and balance 75 per cent  within 30 days from date of receipt of 
allotment order. It was further stipulated that ext ension for a maximum period 
of six months (including 30 days) could be granted to an allottee for payment of 
lease premium on recovery of interest in advance at applicable rates.  
Audit observed that MIDC granted permission (March 2021/August 2021) for 
payment of balance lease premium to India Jewellery  Park (IJP) in TTC IA in 
three installments over a period of four years and to IFB Refrigeration Limited 
(IFBRL) in Ranjangaon IA in four installments over a period of two years. This 
led to undue favour of ₹ 68.01 crore 34  to the two allottees towards interest which 
was otherwise payable as per clause 12 of MID DLR.  
MIDC stated (December 2021/August 2022) that Board had decided to grant 
revised schedule to IJP at their request considerin g Covid-2019 and need to 
encourage investment and promote employment. In the  case of IFBRL,  
MIDC stated (December 2021/August 2022) that the Board granted concession 
and instalment facilities to Anchor unit to facilit ate development of an 
Electronic Manufacturing Cluster, attract electroni c giants in Maharashtra and 
also get assistance from Central Government by supp orting the Anchor unit. It 
was further stated that in essence, the Board was M IDC and had full authority 
under MID Act for allotment of property or undertak ing any activity which it 
deemed fit for fulfilling its duties as per the Act.  
                                                 
34  IJP ₹ 62.09 crore and IFBRL ₹ 5.92 crore.   

Chapter V - Recovery of revenue/dues 
37 
Reply is not tenable as allowing such benefit was in contravention of Regulation 
12 of MIDC DLR and similar benefit was not granted to other allottees.  
Non-forfeiting of lease premium  
5.1.4  As per MIDC policy (January 2014) and terms and co ndition of offer 
letter/allotment order, if balance lease premium wa s not paid by the allottee 
within six months from the date of receipt of allotment letter, the allotment was 
automatically cancelled and lease premium paid as E MD was liable to be 
forfeited. Further, in case of e-bidding, applicant s were required to make 
payment of five per cent  of lease premium (at upset rate 35 ) as EMD, which was 
to be forfeited in case of withdrawal of offer. 
Audit observed that MIDC did not forfeit EMD amount ing to 
₹ 9.24 crore of  
32 parties who failed to make payment of 75 per cent  lease premium within 
maximum permissible time limit of 180 days. The allotment orders should have 
been cancelled due to non-payment of lease premium.  Instead, MIDC revived 
the allotment orders and adjusted EMD recovered earlier against lease premium 
for fresh allotments to these 32 parties ( Annexure 4 ). The land rates charged 
for fresh allotment in these 32 cases also varied, as given in Table 5.2 . 
 
Table 5.2: Land rates applied for allotment of land 
Sl. No. Rates applied No of parties 
1 Prevailing industrial/commercial rates. 23 
2 Highest rate received during e-bidding. 1 
3 Prevailing rate or highest rate received in last au ction, 
whichever is higher. 
1 
4 Highest rate received for commercial plot in e-bidd ing plus 
delayed payment charges on balance amount. 
4 
5 Prevailing rate plus 10 per cent  thereon or highest rate in last                       
e-bidding, whichever is higher. 
1 
6 Allotment rate plus 10 per cent  plus payable interest at State 
Bank of India (SBI) Prime Lending Rate (PLR) or highest rate 
received in auction plus interest payable as per SB I PLR, 
whichever is higher.  
1 
7 Bid rate of the applicant as per allotment order pl us interest at 
SBI PLR rate or last auction commercial rate whiche ver is 
higher, plus recovery of interest on BoP. 
1 
Total 32 
(Source: Information furnished by MIDC) 
MIDC while citing various reasons 36  for non-forfeiture of EMD in these cases, 
stated (December 2021/August 2022) that Board had t aken conscious decision 
and in essence, Board was the MIDC and had complete  authority under MID 
Act for allotment of property or undertaking any activity which it deemed fit for 
fulfilling its duties as per the Act. 
                                                 
35  Upset rate for e-bidding was worked out considerin g prevailing rate in IA plus 10 per cent  
increase thereon (along with applicable road width charges). 
36  Non-availability basic infrastructure in IAs, prom otion of co-operative industrial society in 
larger public interest, natural justice to allottee and development of industry, economically 
backward/financial condition of applicant, triangul ar shape of plot, health/medical reason 
cited by applicant etc.  

Report No. 5 (Role of MIDC in the industrial development of Maharashtra) 
38 
Reply is not tenable as decision in selective cases with different applications of 
land rates (as shown in Table 5.2 above) was contrary to the MIDC policy as 
well as terms and condition of allotment order. 
Refund of lease premium in violation of terms and conditions of offer letters   
5.1.5   As per MIDC policy (January 2014) and terms and con dition of offer 
letter/allotment order, if balance lease premium wa s not paid by the allottee 
within six months from the date of receipt of allot ment letter, the allotment 
would be automatically cancelled and lease premium paid as EMD was liable 
to be forfeited. Audit observed that MIDC granted ( October 2020) refund of 
EMD of 
₹ 3.04 crore to two parties ( ₹ 1.95 crore to Elmont Infra Private Limited 
(EIPL) in TTC IA and ₹ 1.09 crore to Sterlite Technologies Limited (STL) in 
Shendra Five Star IA) instead of forfeiting the same.  
MIDC, in respect of an allottee (STL) stated (December 2021/August 2022) that 
Board had taken the decision to refund the EMD sinc e MIDC was not in a 
position to allot the required land to allottee for setting up of ultra mega project. 
Reply is not tenable as the STL had accepted area o ffered by MIDC for 
allotment as per offer letter (August 2018) and hen ce was bound by terms and 
condition thereof. As regards EIPL, MIDC stated (August 2022) that Board had 
taken conscious decision considering natural justic e on request of the party to 
refund the amount paid without any deduction as it was not possible to run hotel 
business in future due to current economic downturn  caused by covid-2019 
pandemic. It was further stated that in essence, th e Board was MIDC and had 
complete authority under MID Act for allotment of property or undertaking any 
activity which it deemed fit for fulfilling its duties as per the Act.  
Reply is not tenable as the plot was allotted for I T park, commercial buildings 
and office etc. and not for hotel business. Thus, t he reply is factually incorrect 
and the decision of the Board was in violation of p revailing policy and 
conditions of offer letter/ allotment order.  
5.2    Recovery of other revenue/dues 
MIDC recovered charges due from allottees for grant ing permissions for 
transfer/sub-lease, sub-letting, time limit extension for development of plot etc . 
The audit observations in this regard are discussed in subsequent paragraphs. 
Undue concession in charges for time limit extension 
5.2.1 As per prevailing policy, an allottee could be granted time limit extension 
for development of plot on recovery of non-refundab le additional premium at 
prescribed rates 37 . Audit observed that MIDC granted undue favour of  
₹ 11.08 crore to five private parties on account of unjustified waiver/exemption 
of applicable extension charges in violation of prevailing policies as detailed in  
Table 5.3 . 
                                                 
37  At 25 per cent  and 40 per cent  of prevailing land rates for first and second two year and at 
rate of five per cent  for next four years (In IAs in A, B and C zone). I n respect of allottees 
from other IAs (D and D plus zone), rate was 10 per cent  for first two years and five per 
cent  for next four years. 

Chapter V - Recovery of revenue/dues 
39 
 
Table 5.3: Allottees granted unfair concession in extension charges 
 in violation of laid down policy 
Sl. 
No. Details of cases  
1 CEAT Limited  (Plot No.G 2-Ambernath IA)  
As per MIDC policy (March 2013), extension charges were recoverable at  
25 per cent  of land rate on proportionate basis. Board approve d (June 2015) 
recovery of extension charges for a period of four months from April to  
July 2016. Accordingly, Regional Office (RO) issued  (July 2015) a demand 
letter to the party for payment of extension charge s of ₹ 4.32 crore in 
accordance with MIDC policy. However, based on remarks of the CEO on the 
printed draft Board resolution, RO issued revised demand letter (August 2015) 
for payment of extension charges of ₹ 0.86 crore at lower rate of five per cent. 
Audit could not find the approval for grant of conc essional rate in the 
confirmed minutes of the subsequent Board meetings. This  resulted in loss of 
₹ 3.46 crore to MIDC and undue benefit to the party concerned. 
MIDC stated (December 2021) that Board had taken (J une 2015) decision to 
levy five per cent  premium amount and further stated (August 2022) there was 
mention of recovery of extension charges at rate of 5 per cent  in the confirmed 
minutes. After making necessary correction in minut es, the then CEO took 
approval for minutes and same is available in record with the MIDC. Reply is 
incorrect as there was no mention of recovery of extension charges at the rate 
of five per cent  of prevailing rate in the confirmed Board minutes.  
2 Phillips India Limited (Plot No.B 78-Chakan-Phase II IA) 
MIDC had no policy to grant waiver of extension cha rges. The Board, 
however, granted 50 per cent waiver (June 2019) in applicable extension 
charges to the allottee amounting to ₹ 3.54 crore. 
MIDC stated (December 2021) that Board, considering  the effective steps 
taken by the plot holder for development of plot, resolved to waive 50 per cent  
of extension charges. It was further stated (August  2022) that the Board has 
discretionary power to decide cases on merit by ove rruling management’s 
observations based on current policies under MID Act. Reply is not tenable as 
the decision was in violation of the prevailing pol icy and MID Act did not 
provide such discretionary power to the Board. 
3 Damani Extrusion (Aluminum) Private Limited (Plot N o.D-20/4-
Wardha IA) 
The Environmental Clearance (EC) for the proposed activity (manufacture of 
aluminum extrusion products) was rejected (June 199 1) by GoM in view of 
their policy, which restricted establishment of polluting industry. As such, the 
allottee should have either surrendered the plot or  changed the activity to 
non-polluting industry, which was not done. Subsequently, after more than 26 
years, the Board while considering request of the a llottee, approved 
(November 2017) to recover only 25 per cent  of applicable extension charges 
which resulted in waiver of ₹ 0.17 crore and also granted fresh time period of 
one year for commencement of new activity.  
MIDC stated (December 2021/August 2022) that decision was taken by MIDC 
for industrial growth and employment generation in the IA and considering 
issues of EC. Board was empowered to take such deci sions under MID Act. 

Report No. 5 (Role of MIDC in the industrial development of Maharashtra) 
40 
Reply is not tenable as the decision was in violati on of the prevailing policy 
and resulted in financial loss to MIDC. 
4 Prabhat Dairy Private Limited (Plot No.E 1-Shrirampur IA) 
As per MIDC policy (March 2013), free extension cou ld be granted only in 
case of non-provision of approach road. Non-provision of other infrastructure 
facilities like water supply was not a ground for free time limit extension under 
prevailing policy.  
The allottee requested for free time limit extensio n on the ground that water 
supply was not provided. MIDC, however, noted that approach road was 
already provided up to the plot before allotment an d hence allottee was not 
eligible for free time limit extension. MIDC accord ingly approved (March 
2016) time limit extension on recovery of applicable charges. The matter was 
placed before the Board with proposal of grant of one year time limit extension 
(March 2016 to March 2017) on recovery of applicable 10 per cent  extension 
charges. The Board, however, overruled the manageme nt proposal and 
granted (March 2016) two years free time limit exte nsion up to March 2018 
(instead of applicable charges of ₹ 0.88 crore) for construction and obtaining 
BCC on ground that the allottee could not commence production as necessary 
water supply was not provided. 
Audit further observed that allottee, after obtaini ng free time limit extension, 
did not take any action for development of the plot and surrendered the vacant 
plot in February 2018. MIDC refunded the land premium of ₹ 1.52 crore after 
deduction of five per cent  service charges. Thus, the allottee was granted 
undue benefit of ₹ 0.88 crore on account of free time limit extension  for the 
period March 2016 to March 2018. 
MIDC stated (December 2021/August 2022) that Board had considered the 
request of free extension of time limit for promoting industry but investor had 
later on declined to move ahead which could not be anticipated in advance. 
Reply is not tenable as such subjective decision wa s in violation of the 
prevailing policy which resulted in financial loss to MIDC.  
5 Meyer Organics Private Limited (Plot No.B 7 and B 10-Thane IA)  
MIDC granted (February 2015) transfer of a vacant p lot to Meyer Organics 
Private Limited (MOPL) for construction of a privat e IT Park (third 
transferee).  
As per prevailing policy (June 2013), development p eriod of two years ( i.e . 
up to February 2017) was to be granted from date of  transfer order. MIDC, 
however, granted development period upto May 2018, thereby granting free 
time limit extension of 15 months in violation to t he prevailing policies as 
below: 
• Initially, three years development period was grant ed (February 2015) to 
MOPL for period up to February 2018 (which is to be  granted to new 
allottees only). 
• At request (July 2018) of MOPL, MIDC granted (November 2018) revised 
development period of three years from May 2015 to May 2018 citing May 
2015 policy. As per May 2015 policy, revised development period of three 
years was applicable from the date of issue of circular (May 2015) to those 
plot holders, who after obtaining BCC were in produ ction and obtained 

Chapter V - Recovery of revenue/dues 
41 
demolition permission for redevelopment of plot. MOPL was however not 
eligible for benefit under the said policy as the p lot was vacant and not in 
production. 
Subsequently, MOPL failed to obtain BCC in the revi sed time limit 
(May 2018) also and further time limit extension wa s granted (November 
2018) for a period of one year (27 May 2018 to 26 May 2019) on recovery of 
non-refundable additional premium of ₹ 1.81 crore and BCC was obtained in 
May 2019.  
Audit observed that extension charges for the perio d from 20 February 2017 
to 26 May 2019 worked out to ₹ 4.84 crore. Against this, an amount of ₹ 1.81 
crore was recovered due to grant of revised development period which resulted 
in undue benefit of ₹ 3.03 crore to the party. 
MIDC stated (December 2021/August 2022) that redeve lopment period was 
granted as per May 2015 policy which stipulated gra nt of three years 
development period in case the development period w as not indicated in the 
demolition permission and hence there was no violat ion of policy. Reply is 
not tenable as granting 15 months extension to MOPL  was not as per MIDC 
policy and allottee was not eligible for re-development extension as their plot 
was vacant.  
5.2.2  MIDC introduced two schemes viz.  Revival Scheme and Udyog Sanjivani 
Scheme for facilitating development of non-developed plots.  
Revival Scheme  
5.2.2.1 MIDC implemented (December 2020/November 2021) a ‘r evival 
scheme’ for promoting transfer of plots by allottees having land of 20,000 sqm 
or more for IT/ITES 38 , Nano Technology, Bio-Tech, IIT Township and other  
important projects having investment of more than ₹ 500 crore. As per the 
scheme, allottees, who had requested for transfer of plots were eligible for grant 
of time limit extension on recovery of concessional  extension charges to the 
extent of 30 per cent  of applicable charges. Thus, the scheme was applic able 
only in case of transfer of plot.  
Audit observed that Board granted (February 2021) u nwarranted benefit of 
concession under the scheme to five ineligible allo ttees 
39  in three IAs.  There 
was no proposal for transfer of plot in these five cases and as the allottees were 
not eligible for benefit of the scheme, applicable extension charges were 
recoverable without any concession. Board, however,  directed for recovery of 
30 per cent  of applicable extension charges 40  to five allottees which resulted in 
loss of ₹ 3.01 crore. 
                                                 
38  Information Technology/Information Technology Enab led Services. 
39   Baramati Hi-tech Textile Private Limited (Baramat i IA/plot no E 1/5: ₹ 0.40 crore), 
Mahendra Consultancy Services (Ambad IA/plot no 29/ 6: ₹ 0.94  crore), Shivraj Agro 
Estate Private Limited (SAEPL) (Baramati IA/plot no  E/1/5/A: ₹ 1.09  crore), SAEPL 
(Baramati IA/plot no E/1/5/B: ₹ 0.40  crore) and Pravin Khodke Memorial Trust (Amravati 
IA/plot no P 22: ₹ 0.18  crore).  
40   Applicable charges ₹ 4.31 crore and charges collected ₹ 1.30 crore.  

Report No. 5 (Role of MIDC in the industrial development of Maharashtra) 
42 
MIDC, while citing various reasons 41  for deviations in these cases, stated 
(December 2021/August 2022) that in essence, Board was the MIDC and had 
full authority under MID Act for allotment of prope rty or undertaking any 
activity which it deemed fit for fulfilling its dut ies as per the Act. Reply is not 
acceptable as such decisions in selective cases wer e in violation of laid down 
policies and led to undue benefit to the private parties. 
A case where unwarranted free time limit extension as well as undue concession 
in extension charges was granted under Revival scheme is elaborated below: 
Case Study 5.1:  
Bajaj Auto Limited (BAL) was eligible for developme nt period upto 
November 2011 in respect of an allotted industrial plot 42  admeasuring  
7.63 lakh sqm (plot no E 2) in Chakan IA (Phase III ). MIDC, with the 
approval (October 2015) of Chairman, MIDC granted t ime limit extension 
from November 2011 to August 2013 on recovery of ex tension charges of  
₹ 24.05 crore (at 5 per cent of prevailing rate). Further, free revised 
development period from September 2013 to December 2016 was also 
granted citing reputation of BAL, project investmen t and employment 
generation based on commitment of the BAL to obtain  BCC within a period 
one year. Grant of free time limit extension for pe riod from September 2013 
to December 2016 was thus contrary to the prevailing policy. 
Audit further observed that BAL did not obtain BCC within the revised time 
limit and show cause notice was issued (April 2017)  for surrender of plot. 
BAL filed (16 May 2017) a petition in Bombay High C ourt which granted  
(22 May 2017) stay on taking action as per notice t ill June 2017. BAL filed 
application (June 2017) in the Bombay High Court th at they would submit 
request to Chairman, MIDC for not taking action til l July 2017, which was 
granted by Bombay High Court. BAL submitted represe ntation (June 2017) 
on which hearing was held (February 2019) by Chairm an, MIDC and he 
directed for placing the matter before the Board. M IDC submitted  
(June 2019) to the Board that applicable extension charges for  period from 
January 2017 to December 2019 was ₹ 233.04 crore as per MIDC policy. The 
Board, however, granted (June 2019) 50 per cent  waiver in applicable 
extension charges. MIDC issued (August 2019) demand notice to the allottee 
for payment of extension charges of ₹ 143.83 crore. BAL requested 
(December 2020) to waive off penalty from the date of filing (May 2017) writ 
petition in the Bombay High Court against this notice of MIDC for returning 
of allotted land. The Board, citing delay in court decision as circumstances 
were beyond control of BAL and COVID 2019, approved  (February 2021) 
benefit under revival scheme (for period from 1 January 2017 to 6 May 2017) 
and free time limit extension for period from 17 Ma y 2017 to 31 December 
2020. Board granted further two years’ time limit e xtension from  
January 2021 to December 2022 without any justification. 
                                                 
41   To boost textile activity in Baramati IA, support  social cause of educational institute, 
boosting economy on background of Covid-2019 etc.  
42   BAL was originally allotted (March 2007) plot admea suring 9.63 lakh sqm. Of this,  
7.63 lakh sqm remained with BAL as balance land was taken back by MIDC.  

Chapter V - Recovery of revenue/dues 
43 
Audit observed that there was no transfer of plot in the instant case and hence 
BAL was not eligible for benefit of 70 per cent concession in applicable 
extension charges under revival scheme (January 2017 to May 2017). Further, 
time limit extension for the period from September 2013 to December 2016 
and January 2021 to December 2022 was in violation of prevailing policies. 
MIDC recovered extension charges of ₹ 9.30 crore (30 per cent  of January 
2017 to May 2017) as against applicable total exten sion charges of ₹ 217.36 
crore for above period (17 May 2017 to 30 June 2021  excluding COVID 
period 43 ). MIDC thus granted undue concession of ₹ 208.06 crore to BAL in 
extension charges. 
MIDC stated (December 2021/August 2022) that the ma ndate was not to let 
a reputed company like BAL move out of Maharashtra but to retain them so 
that BAL could start their new project so as to uti lise their land parcel and 
bring in investment and generate employment. The decision was taken to hold 
back a reputed company in Maharashtra and there is no financial loss to 
MIDC. Reply is not tenable as the decision was in v iolation of laid down 
policies and caused loss of ₹ 208.06 crore to MIDC.  
Udyog Sanjivani Scheme  
5.2.2.2 MIDC implemented (October 2015) Udyog Sanjivani Scheme (USS) for 
allottees, whose development period had expired up to 31 August 2013. The 
eligible allottees were granted 50 per cent  concession in applicable extension 
charges and were required to obtain Building Comple tion Certificate (BCC) 
within stipulated period failing which the land was to be resumed back by MIDC 
by forfeiting deposited amount. Further, clause 11 of the scheme elaborated that 
for allottees whose development period had expired after 31 August 2013, the 
concession in extension charges would not be applicable. 
 
Case Study 5.2:  
Audit observed that DLF Info Parks (Pune) Limited ( DLF) 44  was granted 
revised time schedule for obtaining BCC within three years (by January 2015) 
from the date of issue of transfer order (January 2012). DLF requested (March 
2015) for grant of time limit extension on the plot  which was lying vacant. 
MIDC approved (August 2015) grant of one year time limit extension upto 
January 2016 subject to recovery of 25 per cent  extension charges. 
Accordingly, Regional Office raised (September 2015) demand for payment 
of extension charges of ₹ 8.17 crore. DLF requested (December 2015) for 
waiver of extension charges till January 2018, part icularly, considering the 
prevalent tough market conditions. Subsequently, DL F requested  
(January 2016) for grant of revised development per iod of three years from 
date of receipt of Maharashtra Pollution Control Bo ard (MPCB) consent 
(June 2014 to June 2017) and waiver of extension charges. 
                                                 
43   As per covid policy (24 May 2021) of MIDC, no exten sion charges were to be recovered 
for the period from 22 March 2020 to 30 June 2021. 
44   Land admeasuring 1.20 lakh sqm (plot no 29 and PL  2) at Rajiv Gandhi Information 
Technology Park, Hinjewadi, Pune (Phase II) was transferred to DLF. 

Report No. 5 (Role of MIDC in the industrial development of Maharashtra) 
44 
The RO submitted (December 2015) to Head Office tha t concession under 
Udyog Sanjivani Scheme (USS) cannot be granted to D LF as per MIDC 
policy as their development period had expired (on 2 January 2015) after  
31 August 2013 and recommended recovery of non-refu ndable additional 
premium of ₹ 21.24 crore for time limit extension for two years (January 2015 
to January 2017). During processing of this case, C EO, MIDC had noted 
(January 2016) that allottee had not proved satisfa ctorily that there were 
unavoidable circumstances. It was also noted by the  CEO that it was 
responsibility of the developer to obtain all Government approvals/NOC and 
MIDC was not concerned about whether consent of MPC B was received or 
not. Despite this, CEO granted (January 2016) conce ssion in extension 
charges under USS stating that there was doubt whet her the development 
period had expired before 31 August 2013 or later. Accordingly, MIDC 
granted (June 2016) time limit extension for two ye ars (January 2015 to 
January 2017) on recovery of ₹10.62 crore under USS against ₹ 21.24 crore 
levied earlier. MIDC thus granted benefit of ₹ 10.62 crore (50 per cent ) to the 
DLF under the USS in violation of laid down policy. 
MIDC stated (December 2021/August 2022) the action of the CEO was as 
per the policies as he had opined that the delay was beyond the control of plot 
holder. It was further stated that CEO had levied 5 0 per cent  applicable 
extension charges, though CEO had authority to gran t extension without 
charges as per MIDC policy (June 2013). 
Reply is not tenable as evident from the facts stat ed above that DLF was not 
eligible for concession under USS and the benefit was extended violating the 
laid down policy.  
Undue concession in transfer charges 
5.2.3 As per prevailing policies, transfer of plot was cl assified as formal 
45  and 
non-formal 46 . The formal transfer was granted free of cost or o n recovery of 
Standard Transfer Fee (STF), while non-formal trans fer was permitted on 
recovery of differential premium/STF respectively. In case of non-formal 
transfer/sub-lease, differential premium was recove rable at 30 per cent  of 
prevailing rates in case plot was vacant or having construction less than 
10 per cent/ 20  per cent 47  Floor Space Index (FSI), while differential premiu m 
was recoverable at 10 per cent  in other cases. 
Audit observed that MIDC granted undue favour of ₹ 32.33 crore to seven 
parties on account of ineligible concession in tran sfer/sub-lease charges in 
violation of prevailing policies as detailed in  Table 5.4 . 
                                                 
45  Formal transfer included transfer due to death i.e.  bequeath/will/heirship, change in 
shareholding of allottee Company less than 51 per cent , change in constitution on inclusion 
of persons in blood relations etc . 
46  Any other transfer which do not cover under formal  transfers (as per list) will be treated as 
non-formal transfer which included inducting individual/change in partners not being blood 
relations, transfer from one limited Company to ano ther limited Company, from Holding 
to subsidiary or vice versa, change in shareholding  of original shareholders of allottee 
Company more than 51 per cent  shareholding etc.  
47  Criteria of 20 per cent  FSI was applicable in case of land allotted from 1  January 2013 
onwards. 

Chapter V - Recovery of revenue/dues 
45 
Table 5.4: Allottees granted undue concession in transfer/sub-lease charges 
 in violation of prevailing policies 
Sl. No.  Details of cases  
1 Loma IT Park Developers Private Limited (Plot No. G en 4/1-  
TTC IA)  
As per prevailing policy (March 2010), differential  premium was recoverable 
considering the area of plot which is subleased as per transfer guidelines. The 
transfer guidelines stipulated recovery of 30 per cent  differential premium in 
case the area to be transferred was having construction less than 10 per cent  FSI.  
MIDC granted (May 2018) permission to the plot hold er for sub-lease of area  
ad-measuring 13,900 sqm (Loma Co-Developers I Private Limited) and 18,600 
sqm (Loma Co-Developers II Private Limited) for a p eriod of thirty years on 
recovery of 10 per cent  differential premium of ₹ 2.05 crore and ₹ 2.74 crore 
respectively. Out of this, plot area ad-measuring 1 8,600 sqm, sub-leased to 
Loma Co-Developers II Private Limited, was vacant a nd hence 30 per cent  
differential premium to the extent of ₹ 8.22 crore should have been recovered. 
MIDC, however, recovered, transfer charges of ₹ 2.74 crore considering 
10 per cent  differential premium, resulting in short recovery of ₹ 5.49 crore. 
MIDC stated (December 2021/August 2022) that the or iginal plot holder 
obtained BCC for more than 20 per cent FSI for entire plot area. Therefore, as 
per circular guidelines (April 2012) MIDC recovered  10 per cent differential 
premium. Reply is not tenable as sub-leased plot wa s vacant and 30 per cent  
differential premium was recoverable as per MIDC policy. 
2 CEAT Limited (Plot No.G2-Ambernath IA) 
As per prevailing policy (November 2013), in the ca se of a plot allotted to a 
Company incorporated under the Companies Act, trans fer of vacant plot was 
permitted to its holding/subsidiary/sister Company on recovery of 30 per cent  
differential premium. The allottee requested for transfer of vacant plot to CEAT 
Specialty Tyres Limited (subsidiary Company), for w hich 30 per cent  
differential premium of ₹ 3.51 crore was recoverable. This was also proposed  
by Regional Officer, General Manager (Legal) and Dy  CEO during processing 
of the case.  The CEO, however, decided (October 2015) to grant permission for 
transfer on recovery of 10 per cent  differential premium of ₹ 1.17 crore which 
was a deviation from prevailing policy. This result ed in loss of ₹ 2.34 crore to 
MIDC. 
MIDC stated (December 2021/August 2022) that it was  an administrative 
decision taken by CEO to levy 10 per cent differential premium with the 
condition that if the allottee failed to develop th e plot within the specific time 
limit, remaining 20 per cent  premium will be charged. The allottee completed 
construction of 20.30 per cent  FSI within the stipulated time limit. Reply is not 
tenable as the instant case was a deviation from the prevailing policy and hence 
irregular. 
  

Report No. 5 (Role of MIDC in the industrial development of Maharashtra) 
46 
3 Mahindra Heavy Engines Public Limited (Plot No.A 1/ 1- Chakan 
Phase IV IA) 
As per prevailing policy (January 2013), in case there was change in shareholding 
pattern beyond 51 per cent  of original shareholders of allottee Company, it w as 
treated as non-formal transfer and was permitted on  recovery of applicable 
differential premium. The existing shareholder (Mahindra and Mahindra Limited) 
of the allottee Company transferred 100 per cent  shares to a new legal entity 
(Mahindra Vehicle Manufacturers Limited) and reques ted (April/May 2016) 
MIDC for noting change in name to Mahindra Heavy En gines Public Limited 
without recovery of any transfer charges. 
The Legal department of MIDC opined (May/June 2016) that shareholding of the 
allottee Company had changed beyond 51 per cent and hence MIDC was entitled 
to recover differential premium being a non-formal transfer. MIDC, however, 
decided (April 2018) to record change in name witho ut recovery of charges 
contrary to prevailing policy and legal opinion in the case. This resulted in loss of 
₹ 3.24 crore to MIDC. 
MIDC stated (December 2021/August 2022) there was n o change in the 
shareholding pattern as new shareholder was a subsi diary Company of outgoing 
majority shareholder which held 100 per cent  shares in the new shareholder.  
Reply is not tenable as shareholding of the allottee Company had changed beyond 
51 per cent  and hence MIDC was entitled to recover differentia l premium of  
₹ 3.24 crore. 
4 JCB Manufacturing Limited (Plot No.A and B-Talegaon IA)      
As per MIDC policy (1998), all involuntary transfer s including amalgamation, 
demergers etc . under the directions of competent court/Tribunal/ appropriate 
Government were treated as formal transfer and STF was to be recovered. 
Subsequently in August 2011, the Board decided that  any scheme of 
amalgamation framed between entities shall not be treated as formal transfer and 
shall be permitted on recovery of differential prem ium. It was also decided that 
the revised policy would be applicable to all trans fer applications received after 
12 August 2011. Accordingly, MIDC issued (December 2011) a circular for 
implementation of revised policy for all transfer a pplications received after  
12 August 2011.  
The allottee applied (November 2011) for transfer of plot to JCB India Limited as 
per their scheme of amalgamation. Joint CEO directe d (August 2013) to recover 
differential premium of ₹ 9.41 crore and Regional Office raised (July 2015) the 
demand. The allottee, however, requested (August 20 15) for levy of STF as per 
1998 policy on the ground that revised policy was n ot applicable in their case as 
their scheme of amalgamation was approved in Februa ry 2010. MIDC decided 
(February 2019) that recovery of differential premium was as per prevailing policy 
and legal advice. However, the matter was placed before the Board for its decision. 
The Board approved (February 2019) transfer on recovery of STF on the grounds 
that amalgamation order and transfer application we re prior to date of issue of 
circular (December 2011). Accordingly, MIDC recovered STF of ₹ 0.80 crore  as 
against differential premium of ₹ 9.41  crore recoverable as per prevailing policy. 
This resulted in loss of ₹ 8.62 crore to MIDC. 

Chapter V - Recovery of revenue/dues 
47 
MIDC stated (August 2022) that Board has power to t ake decisions considering 
the overall merit in the proposal by overruling management’s observations as per 
MID Act. It was further stated that Board took the conscious decision after due 
deliberation on merit and there is no financial los s to MIDC. Reply of MIDC is 
not tenable as the transfer application was receive d from the allottee after  
12 August 2011 and hence differential premium was recoverable instead of STF.        
5 Firth India Steel Company Limited (Plot No. Gen-40-Hingna IA) 
The allottee had obtained (January 1993) BCC for 0.096 FSI. The Debt Recovery 
Tribunal (DRT) auctioned (August 2017) the plot on account of default of the 
allottee in repayment of loan of a Bank. The DRT ha nded over (March 2018) 
possession of the plot to the highest bidder, namely Goldchip Infraventure Private 
Limi ted (GIPL) for their proposed commercial project ag ainst the bid amount.  
GIPL also requested (August 2019) for waiver of transfer charges and interest on 
outstanding service charges, and Chairman, MIDC dir ected to place the matter 
before Board. GIPL also requested (September 2019) MIDC to record their name 
on the plot.  
As per prevailing policy, transfer was permissible on recovery of 30 per cent 
differential premium amounting to ₹ 7.95 crore as FSI was less than 10 per cent . 
Accordingly, the management submitted proposal to t he Board for granting 
transfer permission on recovery of 30 per cent  differential premium. The Board, 
however, directed (September 2019) to grant permission for transfer on recovery 
of differential premium of 10 per cent  amounting to ₹ 2.65 crore without assigning 
any reasons for the same. MIDC thus granted undue c oncession of  
₹ 5.30 crore to the party. MIDC issued demand notice  (January 2020) to the 
allottee for payment of differential premium of ₹ 2.65 crore which was also not 
paid till date (August 2022). 
MIDC stated (December 2021) that Board has taken de cision for recovery of  
10 per cent differential premium considering Nagpur region was one of the most 
economically backward areas of Maharashtra and to b oost the economic growth 
of this region for which industrialization was requ ired. It was further stated 
(August 2022) that in essence, Board was the MIDC and had full authority under 
MID Act for allotment of property or undertaking any activity which it deemed fit 
for fulfilling its duties as per the Act. Reply of MIDC is not tenable as decision 
was taken in violation of the laid down policy. 
6 Mercedes Benz Education Academy (Plot No. P-26/Raji v Gandhi 
Information Technology Park Phase I, Hinjewadi IA) 
The plot was allotted to Mercedes Benz Education Ac ademy, a registered public 
charitable trust for educational purpose. The allottee was running a school on the 
land and requested (September 2019) for change in n ame to Mahindra 
International School Academy. MIDC observed that th ere was change in 
Managing Committee of the allottee and it was non-formal transfer as per MIDC 
policy (1998/2013) which attracted recovery of diff erential premium. 
Accordingly, MIDC issued (November 2019) demand let ter for payment of 
transfer charges of ₹ 41.52 lakh. 
The allottee, however, represented (December 2019) to MIDC for grant of free 
transfer on the grounds that there was no share tra nsfer and financial 
consideration. Accordingly, the case was re-examine d by MIDC and authority 
(Legal) opined that there was change/transfer of pl ot from one legal entity to 

Report No. 5 (Role of MIDC in the industrial development of Maharashtra) 
48 
another legal entity even though there was no financial consideration/ transaction, 
which amounted to non-formal transfer and attracted  recovery of differential 
premium. MIDC accordingly, issued (May 2020) demand for payment of transfer 
charges of ₹ 41.60 lakh with interest at rate of 16.05 per cent  (from November 
2019 till the date of actual payment). The allottee, however, did not make payment 
and instead requested (June 2020) for grant of free  of cost transfer. The CEO 
stating (September 2020) that there was no policy f or grant of waiver of transfer 
charges to non-profit organization, directed to pla ce the matter before the Board 
for decision. The Board approved (October 2020) not ing the change in 
name/transfer free of cost on the grounds that ther e is no transfer of shares in the 
form of percentage and exchange of financial consideration. This was in violation 
of prevailing policy and led to short recovery of ₹ 0.42 crore. 
MIDC stated (December 2021/August 2022) there was no transfer of shares in the 
form of a percentage, and as well financial consideration had not been exchanged. 
Decision had been taken on this issue in the intere st of the MIDC and for 
development of social infrastructure of the region. Board was empowered to take 
such decisions under MID Act. Reply of MIDC is not tenable as decision violated 
the laid down policy. 
7 Mahindra Gears and Transmission Private Limited (MGTPL) (Plot 
No.C-23-Chakan Phase II IA) 
As per the Clause 19 of terms and condition of Agre ement to Lease executed 
(January 2013), plot could be transferred only afte r five years by recovery of  
100 per cent  differential premium. MGTPL requested (November 20 15) for 
change in their shareholding pattern. There was cha nge (June 2013) in 
shareholding beyond 51 per cent  which amounted to non-formal transfer 
permissible on recovery of 100 per cent  differential premium. MIDC, after 
obtaining (May 2016) legal opinion, issued (April 2 018) demand letter for 
payment of transfer charges of ₹ 7.90 crore (100 per cent differential premium) as 
per terms and condition of the lease agreement. MGT PL, however, requested 
(May 2018) for levy of transfer charges considering  10 per cent  differential 
premium. The Board, while accepting (April 2021) th at 100 per cent  differential 
premium ( ₹ 7.90 crore) was demanded as per the then prevailing policy of January 
2008, directed (April 2021) for recovery of transfer charges as per revised policy 
(July 2020) which provided that only 10 per cent differential premium was 
applicable. Accordingly, MIDC noted (June 2021) change in shareholding pattern 
and name of allottee on recovery of differential pr emium of ₹ 97.61 lakh. Thus, 
undue concession of ₹ 6.92 crore was granted to the party. 
MIDC stated (December 2021) that Board, considering allottee was subsidiary of 
a Fortune 500 listed company, had taken conscious d ecision to waive off the 
applied charges and recover 10 per cent  differential premium as per the prevailing 
policy. Board was empowered to take such decisions under MID Act. MIDC 
stated (August 2022) that merits on which the Board took this conscious decision 
was mentioned in the earlier reply and there is no financial loss to MIDC.  
As the demand was already issued (April 2018) as per terms and conditions of the 
agreement to lease, application of revised policy in this case was not justified.  
 
 
 

Chapter V - Recovery of revenue/dues 
49 
Transfer of plot without recovery of applicable Urb an Land Ceiling (ULC) 
exemption transfer charges. 
5.2.3.1  SI Group India Private Limited (formerly Schenectd y Herdillia 
Chemicals Limited) submitted (November 2021) an application to Maharashtra 
Industrial Development Corporation (MIDC) for transfer of their industrial plot 
(Gen 2/1/A) admeasuring 3.07 lakh sqm in Trans Thane Creek (TTC) Industrial 
Area to Gramercy Trade Industries Private Limited ( transferee). Chairman, 
MIDC decided (December 2021) to grant permission fo r transfer of plot to the 
transferee for undertaking petrochemical and specia lty chemicals activities 
subject to payment/fulfilment of the following cond itions and post facto 
approval of the Board: 
 Payment of differential premium 48  of ₹ 6.37 crore for proposed current 
transfer and balance amount of ₹ 21.83 crore for differential premium of 
previous transfers (total differential premium ₹ 28.20 crore).    
 Submission of one-year Bank Guarantee from transferee for an amount 
of ₹ 77.66 crore towards ULC exemption transfer charges  which was to be 
encashed in case of order of GoM.  The transferee was liable to pay differential 
amount, if ULC premium was more than the amount of Bank Guarantee 
furnished; and 
 Submission of indemnity bond from transferee regard ing payment of 
ULC exemption transfer charges for earlier transfers as per final decision of the 
GoM. 
 Withdrawal of all court cases filed by allottee 49  in the High Court, 
Mumbai and/or any court of Law by the allottee. 
 
The 
 transferee submitted  undertaking cum indemnity Bond (December 2021) 
regarding payment of ULC transfer charges as per fi nal order of GoM. The 
Board granted approval for transfer of plot in January 2022. The transferee paid 
(3 February 2022) the differential premium of ₹ 28.20 crore and also submitted 
Bank Guarantee (8 February 2022) of ₹ 77.66 crore towards ULC exemption 
transfer charges.  MIDC issued (8 February 2022) a transfer order granting 
permission to the plot holder to transfer plot in f avour of transferee. The 
transferee also withdrew unconditionally the writ p etition filed in the Hon’ble 
High Court, Mumbai. 
 
                                                 
48   Differential premium means difference between land rate prevailing as on the date of 
application of transfer of plot and rate at time of  allotment/last transfer of plot.As per 
prevailing MIDC policies, transfer of plot are classified into two categories namely formal 
(such as  transfer due to death i.e.  bequeath/will/heirship, change in constitution on 
inclusion of persons in blood relations etc) and a ny other transfer which do not cover under 
formal transfers (inducting individual/change in partners not being blood relations, transfer 
from one limited Company to another limited Company, from Holding to subsidiary or vice 
versa, change in shareholding of original shareholders of allottee Company etc.  The formal 
transfer are granted either free of cost or on payment of Standard Transfer Fee (STF).  
49   The allottee had filed (July 2016) a writ petition in High Court, Bombay against the demand 
order issued by MIDC (June 2010) (reminded in Decem ber 2015) for payment of 
differential premium for non-formal transfer as per  prevailing MIDC policy (change in 
name of the allottee Company and change in sharehol ding). The final order/decision from 
High Court, Mumbai in this regard was pending as on  the date of transfer order issued 
(8 February 2022) by MIDC.   

Report No. 5 (Role of MIDC in the industrial development of Maharashtra) 
50 
It was observed that; 
• MIDC had granted (May 1978/February 1980/July 1993)  exemption 
under section 20 of the Urban Land Ceiling (Ceiling and Regulation) Act, 1976 
to M/s Herdilia Chemicals Limited for the allotted plot. The GoM had issued 
(23 June 2021) a Government Resolution (GR) whereby  it was directed that 
ULC exemption transfer charges were not recoverable in case the exempted land 
was transferred for industrial purpose. The GoM further directed (August 2021) 
MIDC to recover ULC exemption transfer charges in c ase of transfers of 
exempted plot prior to June 2021 GR, as per the the n prevailing policy/GRs of 
the GoM 
50   as on the date of transfer (along with interest) where such ULC 
charges were not previously recovered by MIDC. Accordingly, ULC exemption 
transfer charges of ₹ 77.66 crore (along with interest) were recoverable from the 
plot for the earlier transfer (June 2010) i.e.  prior to June 2021, as per GoM GR 
(23 November 2007), which were not recovered by MID C prior to issue of 
transfer order.  
• Subsequently, Board of MIDC directed (December 2022 ) to recover 
outstanding ULC exemption transfer charges with interest thereon from the plot 
holder.  Accordingly, MIDC issued (23 February 2023 ) a demand letter to SI 
Group India Private Limited and Gramercy Trade Industries Private Limited for 
payment of ULC exemption transfer charges of 
₹ 77.66 crore along with interest 
of ₹ 149.16 crore for the period from June 2010 to Febr uary 2022 plus GST  
₹ 40.83 crore, amounting to ₹ 267.65 crore. The charges were, however, not 
paid till date (June 2023) and the validity of the BG had expired  
(4 February 2023). 
• MIDC, on the directions (March 2023/May 2023) of Go M, had 
submitted (March 2023/June 2023) a detailed report to GoM for orders/ 
directives regarding recovery of ULC transfer charg es. Final decision of the 
GoM in this case regarding recovery of ULC exemptio n transfer charges was 
awaited (June 2023). 
MIDC stated (8 June 2023), that Board had passed a Resolution (January 2022) 
to transfer the plot by taking BG in lieu of ULC tr ansfer exemption charges to 
be paid therein. Also indemnity was taken from the entity so it would deposit 
entire amount of charges levied as per directives sought from the GoM. Further, 
MIDC, as per directives of Board (December 2022) ha d raised  
(23 February 2023) a revised demand of 
₹ 267.65 crore (inclusive of interests 
and GST) thereon. MIDC has also submitted a detaile d report to the GoM 
(March 2023/June 2023) and demand was kept in abeya nce till receipt of 
Government clarification/guidance in this regard.  
Thus, ULC exemption transfer charges for the transfer prior to June 2021 were 
recoverable as per the then prevailing GRs/orders o f the GoM, which should 
have been recovered prior to granting permission fo r transfer of plot.  Hence, 
transfer of the plot without recovery of due charge s, and obtaining Bank 
Guarantee/Indemnity bond in lieu thereof, was an un due favour to the plot 
holder.  
 
                                                 
50   As per applicable GoM GRs (November 2007/February 2018), ULC exemption transfer charges were 
recoverable at 100  per cent and 25 per cent  of market rate/Ready Reckoner rate respectively. 

Chapter V - Recovery of revenue/dues 
51 
Short recovery of sub-letting charges 
5.2.4  MIDC granted permission (February 2008) for sub-let ting of plot/built 
up area in building for industrial/commercial purpo se and Information 
Technology (IT)/IT enabled services (ITES) units on  payment of applicable 
51  
sub-letting charges for a maximum period of 10 years. Unauthorised sub-letting 
attracted penalty at five per cent per annum per  sqm of prevailing land rate. 
Audit observed that MIDC granted ineligible concessions in sub-letting charges 
to the extent of ₹ 48.94 crore to five parties in violation of prevailing policies as 
detailed in Table 5.5 . 
Table 5.5: Allottees granted undue concession in sub-letting charges 
Sl. 
No. 
Details of cases  
1 Reliance Corporate IT Park Limited (Plot No.5, 6 and R 801-TTC) 
MIDC observed (May 2010) that 10 Affiliate Companie s of the allottee were 
utilizing plot/built up area of 1.11 lakh sqm in Trans Thane Creek (TTC) IA for 
their activities without obtaining prior permission  on payment of applicable  
sub-letting charges. Accordingly, MIDC issued (Dece mber 2010) demand 
notice for payment of sub-letting charges for the p eriod from April 2008 to 
March 2009 to the extent of ₹ 7.69 crore. The allottee, however, requested for 
exemption from levy of sub-letting charges. The man agement submitted a 
proposal to the Board stating that it was essential to recover sub-letting charges 
along with penalty from the allottee and there was no policy for granting waiver. 
The Board, however, considering request of the allo ttee, overruled 
management’s proposal and permitted (April 2011) ut ilisation of plot by 
Affiliate Companies without recovery of sub-letting charges on the ground that 
the allottee was not recovering any rent from them.  The Board also stated that 
said decision was limited to this case. Further, as  per the Board decision, the 
allottee was mandatorily required to submit a certi ficate from Chartered 
Accountant (CA) regarding non-recovery of rent from Affiliated Companies as 
per audited Balance Sheet (for past as well as in f uture), which was not 
submitted. Thus, granting concession of sub-letting  charges to the allottee was 
irregular and resulted in loss of revenue of ₹ 41.18 crore for the period upto 
December 2021. 
2 Arpee Consultants Private Limited (Plot No.D-406-TTC)  
MIDC noticed (February 2016/May 2016) that there wa s no industrial activity 
of the allottee and plot was sublet to SAP Holdings and Leasing Private Limited 
(Sharyau Motors) for commercial use as showroom and  repairing/servicing 
activities. As per prevailing policy, RO issued (October 2018) a demand notice 
for payment of ₹ 5.89 crore towards unauthorised sub-letting charge s for the 
period from January 2008 to September 2018. The allottee, however, requested  
(July 2019) for waiver of sub-letting charges on th e ground that sub-lettee was 
their affiliate Company and they were not getting any charges from them against 
the area utilised by them. The management submitted (October 2020) a proposal 
to the Board with recommendations that demand was r aised as per prevailing 
policies and charges for unauthorised sub-letting f or further period from 
October 2018 onwards may also be recovered. The Boa rd, overruling 
                                                 
51   At the rate of three per cent  per annum of prevailing land rates for industrial plots  
and 0.5 per cent  per annum for IT/ITES units.  

Report No. 5 (Role of MIDC in the industrial development of Maharashtra) 
52 
management proposal, granted (October 2020) sub-let ting permission on 
recovery of 50 per cent  of applicable sub-letting charges and penalty as p er 
prevailing policies. The Board justified the decision as there was no rent receipt 
and occupant was a sister concern of the allottee. It was further directed that this 
case should not be used as an example in similar ca ses (for recovery of 
sub letting charges). The RO issued (January 2021) revised demand for 
50 per cent  thereof amounting to ₹ 3.34 crore (for period up to September 2018). 
This included demand for period from October 2018 t o December 2020 where 
sub-letting charges were worked out without conside ring penalty. As per 
prevailing policy, sub-letting charges with penalty  worked out to ₹ 8.65 crore 
for period from January 2008 to December 2020. Thus, there was short recovery 
of sub-letting charges to the extent of ₹ 5.31 crore. It was further observed that 
the allottee had neither paid the demanded amount nor taken any permission for 
further sub-letting from January 2021 onwards. MIDC, however, had not taken 
any action against the allottee. 
MIDC stated (August 2022) that Board has power to take decisions considering 
the overall merit in the proposal by overruling man agement’s observations as 
per MID Act. It was further stated that Board took the conscious decision after 
due deliberation on merit and there was no financial loss to MIDC. Reply of the 
MIDC is not tenable as decision of the Board was co ntrary to the laid down 
policy.  
3 Sudarshan Flexible Packaging Private Limited (Plot No.D-4-Satpur)  
MIDC allotted (February 2013) a plot to the allotte e for undertaking industrial 
activity. MIDC observed (March 2018) that there was  commercial use on  
80 per cent  of the plot for which show cause notice was issued  to the allottee. 
Subsequently, a demand notice was raised (May 2019)  for payment of  
₹ 1.36 core towards unauthorised commercial utilisation of plot, which was not 
paid by the allottee. The Vice-Chairman, MIDC direc ted to place the matter 
before the Board regarding waiver of demanded charg es. The management 
submitted (April 2021) to the Board that request of  the allottee may not be 
accepted as there was no policy for waiver of sub-l etting charges. The Board, 
however, approved continuation of commercial use on  15 per cent  of the plot 
with conversion of plot for commercial use beyond 1 5 per cent  on recovery of 
additional premium. It was further directed that as  allottee had utilised the plot 
for commercial use, one time charges at three per cent  of prevailing rates be 
recovered for period of unauthorised commercial use.  
Audit observed that as per prevailing policy (October 2009), in cases where the 
plot was allotted on concessional basis, sub-letting permission could be granted 
on maximum 15 per cent  built up area, for supporting/related activities. The plot 
in question was neither allotted on concessional ba sis nor was commercial  
sub-letting permissible on such kind of industrial plots as per prevailing policies. 
Interestingly, the Board also stated that this case  should not be used as a 
precedent in similar cases.  
MIDC replied (December 2021/August 2022) that it ha d charged unauthorised 
sub-letting charges at commercial rate, which was not paid by plot holder. It was 
further stated that Board was empowered to take such decisions under MID Act. 
Reply of the MIDC is not tenable as the Board’s dec ision was not in line with 
laid down policy.  

Chapter V - Recovery of revenue/dues 
53 
4 
and 
5 
Nand Kumar Infotech Private Limited (NKIPL) (Plot No.D 507, 507 
part 1 and 2-in TTC) and Aurum Platz IT Park Limite d (APITPL) 
(Plot No. Gen 4/1 in TTC) 
MIDC implemented a policy (September 2014) which stipulated that sub-letting 
charges in respect of Financial Institutions such as Banks, Insurance Companies 
providing ITES services of data conversion, data mi ning, digitization, data 
entry, data processing, data warehousing would be r ecovered at 1.5 per cent  of 
prevailing industrial rate. 
Accordingly, MIDC granted (August 2020/September 20 20) permission to 
APITPL and NKIPL for sub-letting in their Informati on Technology (IT Park) 
buildings to financial institutions subject to paym ent of ₹ 54.72 lakh and  
₹ 1.09 crore respectively worked out at 1.5 per cent  of prevailing industrial rate.  
Both parties requested (August 2020/October 2020) f or charging sub-letting 
charges at rate of 0.5 per cent  of prevailing industrial rate as per June 2019 
circular on the grounds that the proposed sub-lettee were registered as ITES unit. 
MIDC accepted their request and issued (October 202 0) revised demand letter 
to APITPL and NKIPL of ₹ 18.24 lakh and ₹ 36.34 lakh at rate of 0.5 per cent  
by cancelling previous orders.  
Audit observed that sub-letting charges for Financi al Institutions providing 
IT/ITES services were recoverable at 1.5 per cent  as expressly provided in 
September 2014 policy, which was also correctly app lied initially. The  
June 2019 circular was applicable for sub-letting o f built up galas for IT/ITES 
units except Financial Institutions providing ITES services. Thus, revision in 
subletting charges led to grant of concession of ₹ 1.09 crore to two allottees. 
MIDC stated (August 2022) that considering request of allottees, directives were 
issued for recovery of subletting charges at 0.5 per cent  as per June 2019 circular 
as it can be made applicable in such cases. 
Reply of MIDC is not tenable as sub-letting charges  were recoverable at  
1.5 per cent  as per September 2014 policy.   
Recovery of charges from gala holders 
5.2.5 MIDC allotted galas (built up area) in constructed buildings to various 
parties on monthly rental basis. Audit, however, ob served that there was no 
system to monitor and recover dues from the gala ho lders. As on 
  
31 January 2021, rent of ₹ 14.53 crore was outstanding in respect of 187 gala s 
in seven 52  ROs.  
MIDC stated (December 2021) that due care would be taken to recover rent by 
issuing rental bills regularly and constant follow up.  
Recommendation No. 9: MIDC may ensure prompt recove ry of dues from 
allottees as per laid down policies and responsibil ity needs to be fixed for 
granting undue concessions to allottees. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
52   Dhule, Kolhapur, Latur, Nashik, Panvel, Pune-II and Thane-I.   

Report No. 5 (Role of MIDC in the industrial development of Maharashtra) 
54 
5.3    Recovery of Service charges and Water charges  
MIDC raised monthly bills for providing water supply to allottees in IAs as well 
as consumers from nearby areas (outside IAs). Further, MIDC recovered service 
charges on monthly basis from allottees in IAs to c over its expenses on 
maintenance of roads, drainage, water supply, stree t lighting and such other 
services/amenities provided to allottees.  
Lack of system for periodic revision 
5.3.1  Audit observed that there was lack of system for periodic revision of Water 
Charges (WC) and Service Charges (SC) as discussed below: 
Water charges  
5.3.1.1  WC constituted 28 per cent 
53  of total revenue receipts of MIDC. As per 
Section 17 of MID Act, notwithstanding anything con tained in any contract or 
in any law for the time being in force, MIDC had po wers to levy fees to cover 
its expenses on water supply. As per Board’s decisi on (July 2007/November 
2012), the CEO was granted power to revise water ra tes in proportion of 
increase in rates of royalty/WC, electricity charges and other charges to ensure 
recovery of increased expenditure in operation and maintenance for water 
supply on this account. Audit, however, observed la ck of system for prompt 
revision of water rate in line with proportionate i ncrease in costs as per the 
Board decision. In fact, there was no revision in W C since March 2013 till 
December 2021 though there was substantial increase  in operation and 
maintenance expenditure on water supply on account of  the following factors: 
• During April 2013 to December 2021, electricity tar iff consisting of 
demand charges and energy charges increased by 116 per cent and 20 per cent  
respectively. 
• The establishment cost of MIDC employees were incre ased with effect 
from 1 January 2016. 
• Bulk water rates for water supplied to MIDC was bei ng increased by  
10 per cent  from July 2018 to June 2019 and 20 per cent  every year from  
July 2019 to June 2020 by Water Resources Department of the GoM. 
MIDC had submitted (November 2019) to the GoM a pro posal for increase in 
water rates (minimum 45 per cent  of prevailing rates), which has not been 
approved (August 2022). It was further stated (August 2022) that water rates are 
being reviewed almost every five years or as required and revision shall be made 
applicable after approval of the Government.  
The reply is not tenable as MIDC was empowered as per Section 17 of the MID 
Act to levy water charges. Hence, there was no necessity to forward the proposal 
to GoM for approval.  
Service charges 
5.3.1.2  The Board, after a lapse of more than 11 years since last revision (2008), 
approved (February 2019) revision of SC, which was notified by the GoM in 
                                                 
53   Average for last three years during 2018-19 to 20 20-21. 

Chapter V - Recovery of revenue/dues 
55 
October 2019. MIDC issued the circular for implemen tation of revised rates 
from 1 November 2019. The Chairman, MIDC, however, directed  
(November 2019) not to implement the revised rates till further orders 
considering representation from various Industrial Associations. This action of 
the Chairman, MIDC to withhold implementation of re vised rates which was 
duly notified by the GoM was irregular. 
Accordingly, MIDC decided (December 2019) to withdr aw implementation of 
revised rates. As a result, old rates fixed in 2008  were still in force even after 
lapse of more than 13 years, despite notification i ssued by the GoM  
(December 2021). During the period from 2014-15 to 2020-21, MIDC incurred 
expenditure of 
₹ 1,737.34 crore on providing facilities and mainten ance of 
IAs while realising only ₹ 629.67 crore through SC. Lack of system for 
periodical revision of SC and non-implementation of  revised charges thus 
resulted in non-recovery of expenses to the extent of ₹ 1,107.67 crore during 
April 2014 to March 2021. 
MIDC stated (December 2021/August 2022) that timely review was being taken 
for revision of WC/SC and revision would be made ap plicable after approval 
from Government. 
Non-fixation of water rates for commercial users 
5.3.2   MIDC allotted 6,614 plots admeasuring 1.16 crore sqm upto  
September 2021 to various parties for commercial us e.  Audit observed that  
MIDC had not fixed water rates for commercial users . In absence of rates for 
commercial users, WCs were being recovered at rates  fixed by MIDC for 
industrial use.   
MIDC accepted (August 2022) that no independent cat egory existed for 
commercial plot holders as their business activity is operation based (i.e. other 
than goods manufacturing or production) and water u se is mainly for 
drinking/sanitation. The reply is not tenable as se parate rates should have been 
fixed for commercial users.
  
Arrears in water charges 
5.3.3  As per Regulation 36 of the MIDC Water Supply Regul ations, 1998; if 
the consumer fails to pay the WCs, the arrears on a ccount of WCs, delayed 
payment charges and any other expenses incurred by MIDC shall be recoverable 
as arrears of land revenue. It was further stipulated (Regulation 44) that in case 
of failure on part of the consumer to pay his bill within 15 days from the date of 
its issue, interest at 18 per cent  per annum shall be charged from the 16 
th  day 
onwards upto a further period of one month and if the consumer fails to pay the 
bill along with interest payable within a grace per iod of one month, water 
connection shall be severed. 
Audit observed that MIDC did not take timely action  for disconnection and 
recovery of dues towards WC, SC and other miscellan eous charges
54 , which 
resulted in accumulation of arrears of ₹ 4,149.40 crore upto March 2021 
(including delayed payment charges). The major non- payers were other 
Government agencies and Local Bodies which had arre ars amounting to  
                                                 
54   Environment charges, fire charges, taxes etc . which were recovered along with WC and SC 
through a single monthly bill. 

Report No. 5 (Role of MIDC in the industrial development of Maharashtra) 
56 
₹ 3,397.23 crore (82 per cent ). Audit, further, observed that MIDC billing 
system did not have any provision for ascertaining/reporting age wise dues from 
consumers.  
MIDC stated (August 2022) that disconnection of def aulters will be 
implemented in a timely and effective manner and th at shortcoming of the 
billing system would be rectified. 
Recommendation No. 10: MIDC may ensure timely revision of water charges 
and service charges and responsibility needs to be fixed for  
non-implementation/withdrawal of revised rates lead ing to financial loss to 
the Corporation.  
  
5.4 Non-recovery/remittance of Goods and Services T ax on  
non-exempted receipts  
The Government of India (GoI) issued (June 2017) no tification granting 
exemption of Goods and Services Tax (GST) on taxabl e service provided by 
State Government Industrial Development Corporations (IDC)/Undertakings to 
industrial units by way of granting long term lease  of industrial plots  
(thirty years or more) on recovery of one-time upfront amount.  
Audit observed that MIDC, during July 2017 to March  2021, had neither 
recovered from allottees nor remitted to Government , GST to the extent of  
₹  144.30  crore  on revenue ( ₹  801.69 crore) collected from supply of services 
which were not specifically exempted like lease pre mium from allotment of 
non-industrial plots (commercial, residential, amen ity etc. ), extension charges, 
sub-lease charges, plot transfer, additional FSI pr emium, development charges 
etc .  
MIDC belatedly issued a circular (September 2022) for recovery of GST on all 
the non-exempted services as pointed out above at t he applicable rate of  
18 per cent  from the date of issue of circular. 
Thus, MIDC while implementing recovery of GST prosp ectively on  
non-exempted services had not recovered/remitted GS T on receipts collected 
during July 2017 to August 2022 leading to non-payment of statutory dues. 
 
 

 
57 
Chapter VI 
 
Monitoring system 
There was absence of an effective system to monitor  cases of non-
development of plot/obtaining Building Completion Certificate (BCC) within 
the stipulated time limit. MIDC did not initiate prompt action for resumption 
of plots and timely issue of notices for recovery of extension charges. 
Instances of unauthorised sub-lease and change in use of allotted plots, lack 
of system for monitoring, removal of encroachments and irregular 
allotment of land to encroachers was observed.   
6.1 As per prevailing policy, an allottee was required to develop allotted plot 
and obtain Building Completion Certificate (BCC)/Occupancy Certificate (OC) 
within prescribed development period as per the ind ustrial zone. In case of  
non-development of plot, MIDC was required to take action for resumption of 
plots where time limit extension was not granted. 
Lack of monitoring system for non-development of plots by allottees  
6.1.1 As per information made available to Audit, it was observed that  
15,078 allottees in 225 IAs had not obtained BCC (upto March 2021) within the 
prescribed development period as depicted in Chart 6.1. 
Chart 6.1: Allottees who have not obtained BCC within stipulated development period 
(Source: Information furnished by MIDC) 
As could be seen from the table above that while 3, 901 allotees had obtained 
time limit extension, there were 11,177 allottees who did not develop the plots, 
but continued to occupy the plots without obtaining  any time limit extension. 
This included 5,901 allottees, whose development pe riod had expired for a 
period beyond five years from the stipulated date. Audit observed that MIDC 
had not taken action for resumption of plots in these cases. Thus, there was lack 
5,901 
1,580 1,523 2,173 
2,287 
508 415 
691 
0
1,000 
2,000 
3,000 
4,000 
5,000 
6,000 
7,000 
8,000 
9,000 
Above 5 years Above 3 and less 
than 5 years 
Above 1 and less 
than 3 years 
Less than 1 year 
No. of allotees without BCC 
Delay in development (beyond prescribed period) 
Delay in development period 
Time limit extension not granted Time limit extension granted 

Report No. 5 (Role of MIDC in the industrial development of Maharashtra) 
58 
of an effective system to monitor such cases and in itiate prompt action for 
resumption of plots. 
MIDC stated (December 2021) that a periodic review of such cases was taken 
at higher level and MIDC had resumed back 1,492 plo ts during May 2016 to 
November 2021. Reply indicated that no action was t aken in remaining  
9,685 cases, although prescribed development period had expired.  
Case Study 6.1:  
MIDC executed (April 2007) a MoU with Indiabulls Real Estate Limited for 
development of a multiproduct SEZ on Joint Venture (JV) basis within a 
period of five years in Additional Sinnar IA. Accor dingly, a special purpose 
vehicle (Indiabulls Industrial Infrastructure Limit ed (IIIL)) was formed and 
land admeasuring 1,047.82 hectare was allotted (Sep tember 2007 to 
February 2012) to IIIL. The GoI notified (October 2 009/April 2012) 
1,011.26 hectare land, which included processing area of 512.07 hectare and 
non-processing area of 499.19 hectare.  
Audit observed that no development was carried out in the processing area of 
512.07 hectare, which was lying vacant till date (O ctober 2021). Though 
MIDC had issued (July 2014) a show cause notice for  resuming possession 
of undeveloped land, no further action for re-possession of land was taken till 
date (August 2022). Further, in respect of non-proc essing area, IIIL 
sub-leased (October 2010) 433.04 hectare for setting up thermal power plant 
and constructed buildings on 14.17 hectare land wit hout approval of MIDC. 
MIDC, however, did not initiate any action for recovery of sub-letting charges 
including penalty and compounding charges for unauthorised sub-leasing and 
construction respectively till date (August 2022). 
MIDC stated (December 2021) that in principle decis ion for resumption of 
plot had been taken and this issue would be brought  to logical conclusion at 
the earliest. It was further stated (August 2022) t hat resumption notice has 
been issued (February 2022) and process will be com pleted in due course of 
time. 
Lack of system for timely issue of notices for recovery of extension charges 
6.1.2 Audit observed that there was no provision in the L MS for automatic 
generation of show-cause notices/demand notices to the allottees for payment 
of extension charges immediately on expiry of stipu lated development period. 
There was also no policy for recovery of interest/ penalty in case of delayed 
applications. During the period from 2014-15 to 202 0-21, MIDC granted time 
limit extension in 2,236 out of 2,848 cases analyse d (78.50 per cent ), where 
applications were made by allottees after expiry of  stipulated development 
period (delay upto 1,870 days).  
MIDC stated (December 2021/ August 2022) that proposal would be submitted 
before Board to make it mandatory for allottee to apply for time limit extension 
prior to expiry of development period with provisio n for recovery of 
interest/penalty for delay and provision for issue of automated show cause 
notices to allottees will be made in LMS. 

Chapter VI- Monitoring system 
59 
Case Study 6.2: 
MIDC executed (July 2004) a lease agreement with In ternational Biotech 
Park Limited (IBPL) for allotment of land admeasuri ng 4.13 lakh sqm at 
Rajiv Gandhi Information Technology Park (RGITP), H injawadi, Pune 
(Phase-II) on Joint Venture basis. The allottee, ho wever, failed to develop 
residential buildings within the prescribed milesto nes 55  besides 
unauthorisedly sub-leasing plots to third parties. The RO, Pune-II submitted 
(December 2016) a proposal to MIDC Head Office for recovery of charges 
of ₹ 13.09 crore towards time limit extension and unaut horised sub-lease of 
plots. Audit, however, observed that MIDC did not r ecover applicable 
charges till date (August 2022) despite lapse of ne arly five years since the 
date of proposal. 
Recommendation No. 11: MIDC may implement an efficient and effective IT 
based monitoring system for automatic generation of notices to allottees who 
had failed to develop land/obtain BCC within the st ipulated development 
period. 
Unauthorised change in use of allotted plots  
6.2 MIDC allotted (August 1978) land admeasuring 133 acre  in Nashik (Satpur) 
IA to Nashik Industrial Co-operative Estate Limited . As per terms and 
conditions of lease agreement, land was not to be u sed for any other purpose 
except as a factory for manufacturing. In this resp ect, Audit observed the 
following irregularities:   
MIDC noticed (May 2016) that there was unauthorised  residential use on  
33 plots sub-leased by the allottee. While MIDC had  filed legal cases against  
15 plot holders (pending before courts) for unautho rised use, no action was 
taken against remaining 18 plot holders. Audit obse rved that the Board 
approved (April 2021) regularisation of residential  use on such plots and 
authorised CEO to take final decision in the matter  after due scrutiny as per 
Development Control Regulations (DCR), 2009. Thus, approval of Board for 
regularisation of residential use on plots allotted for industrial use was irregular 
and in violation of terms and conditions of lease agreement. 
The allottee constructed an unauthorised commercial  complex consisting of  
46 commercial galas on a plot admeasuring 3,824 sqm  allotted for providing 
common amenities 
56  and created third party interest. RO, Nashik issue d 
(October 2018) a notice to the allottee regarding t ermination of lease for 
unauthorised commercial galas. Audit observed that no further action was taken 
in this matter for unauthorized commercial use on industrial plot. 
                                                 
55  Complete development of land during the period fro m 2004 to 2017 in three phases of four 
year (Phase I), four year (Phase II) and five year (Phase III) respectively. 
56  Banks, police out posts, canteen post and telegram s office and such other amenities. 

Report No. 5 (Role of MIDC in the industrial development of Maharashtra) 
60 
Audit observed that the allottee without obtaining prior permission also 
constructed 183 industrial galas on two industrial plots and created third party 
interest which was not allowed as per lease agreement. 
In the above cases, MIDC had not taken action for t ermination of lease and 
resumption of possession of these plots as per term s of lease agreement and 
prevailing polices. Reply of MIDC while reiterating  the facts was silent  
(August 2022) on the lack of action against the allottee for irregularities pointed 
out above.  
6.3 MIDC granted (August 1991) possession of land admea suring 77,435 sqm 
in Dombivali IA to Kalyan Dombivali Municipal Corporation (KDMC) for the 
purpose of playground and sports complex. KDMC, however, apart from sport 
complex constructed a commercial complex (14,795 sqm) having a hotel, mall, 
theaters, shops etc. in violation of terms of allotment. MIDC granted  
(October 2014) post-facto  approval to KDMC for change in use on the plot on 
recovery of applicable charges. During measurement of land, MIDC observed 
that actual area in possession of KDMC was 79,810 s qm and decided  
(May 2017) to grant permission for commercial use o n increased land area of 
2,375 sqm, subject to recovery of applicable compou nding charges on 
construction carried out thereon. Audit observed th at MIDC did not take any 
further action for recovery of compounding charges as well as lease premium 
for land being used for commercial purpose till dat e (August 2022). Besides, 
permission for sub-lease/sub-letting of galas in th e commercial complex 
admeasuring 14,795 sqm was also not sought by KDMC.  MIDC had not taken 
any action for unauthorised commercial utilisation (since 2003) in this regard 
till date (December 2021). 
MIDC stated (December 2021/August 2022) that detail ed survey would be 
conducted and necessary action would be taken for r ecovery of applicable 
charges as per policy at the earliest. 
Lack of system for monitoring and removal of encroachment  
6.4 The GoM acquired land under provisions of the MID A ct and placed them 
at disposal of MIDC for establishment/development o f IAs. The MID Act 
provided for eviction/demolition of unauthorised encroachments/ constructions. 
There was no provision for regularising encroachmen t on land acquired for 
industrial purpose.  
As per Section 44 and 45 of the MID Act, MIDC was r equired to institute 
prosecution proceedings against such persons who at  their own instance or at 
the instance of other persons undertook or carried out unauthorised construction 
of buildings in the IAs. MIDC was also required to issue order to such persons 
to demolish unauthorised buildings within a period not exceeding two months 
and in case of failure thereof, demolish buildings with recovery of expenses of 
demolition from such persons.  
6.4.1 As per MIDC policy circular (1999), concerned Regio nal Officers and 
Area Managers were primarily responsible for identi fication and removal of 
encroachments on plots in IAs. The Division Offices  (Deputy Engineers/ 

Chapter VI- Monitoring system 
61 
Executive Engineers) were solely responsible for identification and removal of 
encroachments on roads, road sides, pipeline roads etc . Further, MIDC issued a 
policy circular (January 2020) which provided that joint responsibility will be 
fixed in case of fresh/new encroachments on concerned Regional Offices, Area 
Managers, Surveyors, Executive Engineer, Deputy/ As sistant Engineer and 
Technical Assistant.   
Audit observed that as on 31 January 2021, 37.09 la kh sqm land in  
39 IAs (valuing ₹ 4,614.40 crore 57 ) was encroached by illegal occupants. Of 
this, 31.41 lakh sqm land was in 34 developed IAs h aving shortage of plots, 
which could have been allotted to prospective entre preneurs for industrial 
development in the State. MIDC did not initiate any  action for removal/ 
recovery of fines in respect of existing encroachments till date (August 2022).  
MIDC stated (December 2021/August 2022) that a poli cy had been framed 
(January 2020) for removal of encroachment and fixi ng joint responsibility on 
officers of concerned industrial area. Further MIDC  was taking all efforts 
towards protecting the land from encroachments. 
Irregular allotment of land to encroachers and regu larisation of illegal 
constructions 
6.4.2 Audit observed that MIDC approved (September 2015 t o August 2019) 
allotment of encroached land admeasuring 8,553 sqm to the encroachers 
58    and 
regularised unauthorised buildings constructed ther eon which were being used 
for residential/educational and commercial purposes.  
MIDC, in respect of Bhartiya Gramin Punarachna Sanstha (Aurangabad IA) and 
Savitribai Phule Sikshan Sanstha (Thane IA) stated (December 2021/August 
2022) that Board being empowered to take such decis ion had approved 
allotment considering the fact that educational ins titutes were constructed on 
the land. No reply is received in respect of Shri C hhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj 
Sahkari Gruhnirman Santhsa, Khalapur case. 
Reply is not acceptable as MIDC was not empowered t o allot land to 
encroachers and regularize unauthorised buildings c onstructed thereon in 
violation of express provisions of the MID Act.  
Recommendation No. 12: MIDC may formulate time bound action plan for 
eviction of encroachments and demolition of illegal  constructions from 
encroached properties and responsibility needs to b e fixed for failure to 
prevent/demolish encroachments and irregular allotm ent of land to 
encroachers.  
 
                                                 
57  At prevailing industrial rates. 
58  Shri Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj Sahkari Gruhnirma n Santhsa, Khalapur for residential 
purpose (Offer letter issued), Savitribai Phule Sik shan Sanstha, Thane (allotment letter 
issued) for school and Bhartiya Gramin Punarachna Sanstha, Aurangabad for school (offer 
letter issued). 

Report No. 5 (Role of MIDC in the industrial development of Maharashtra) 
62 
Deficiencies in Management Information System/Infor mation Technology 
System  
6.5    The Management Information System (MIS)/Information Technology (IT) 
System in MIDC was deficient in the following areas:  
• Land Management System (LMS) implemented (January 2 010) by MIDC 
recorded plot wise history of all transactions of a llottees from date of issue of 
offer letters. MIDC also implemented two independen t systems namely 
Building Plan Approval Management System (BPAMS) an d Single Window 
Clearance (SWC) System for processing of applications of allottees for grant of 
BCC and plot related permissions (time limit extens ion, sub-letting, transfer, 
sub-lease etc.)  respectively.  
Audit observed that SWC and BPAMS were not integrat ed with LMS. 
Consequently, plot wise details of BCC and various permissions granted to the 
allottees were not automatically updated in the LMS.   
MIDC stated (December 2021/August 2022) that integration of LMS with SWC 
is almost completed. 
• The LMS did not record/update details of plot wise encroachment in the IAs. 
Details of land acquisition (in progress/completed), compensation amount paid 
to State Land Acquisition Officers (SLAO) and land owners as per court awards 
were not recorded in the MIS. No effective mechanism was in place for ensuring 
timely payment of compensation to the land owners.  
MIDC stated (August 2022) that facility to mark plo t status as encroached has 
been made available in LMS and Regional Offices are  updating the status of 
such plots in LMS. It was further stated that MIDC is exploring a new system 
for Land Acquisition which will have updated databa se regarding land under 
various stages of acquisition and payments made by MIDC to SLAOs for 
reconciliation thereof.  
• Database of plots allotted on lease rental basis an d galas given on monthly 
rental basis in the buildings constructed by MIDC w ere also not maintained in 
the system. There was no database of galas/units wh ich were sub-leased/sublet 
in IT Parks. 
MIDC stated (December 2021) provision of updation o f IT Parks galas was 
made in LMS and data was being updated by the respe ctive ROs. Further, 
provision to enter details of rented properties will be developed in LMS. 
Non-submission of statutory progress reports  
6.6  As per Section 26 of the MID Rules, the annual report detailing programme 
of work of MIDC for the year vis-a-vis  progress thereof with particular 
reference to the land acquired, development carried  out, amenities provided, 
industries established in the IAs etc.  was required to be submitted to GoM 
within three months of the date of closing of each year.  

Chapter VI- Monitoring system 
63 
The annual reports were, however, not submitted reg ularly and was last 
submitted (September 2020) for the year upto 2016-1 7. Similarly, quarterly 
reports containing progress report based on its working were to be submitted to 
GoM which were not submitted during the period 2014-15 to 2020-21. 
MIDC stated (December 2021/August 2022) that due ca re would be taken in 
future to submit the statutory annual and quarterly  Reports to the Board/GoM 
in time. 
 
 
 
Nagpur 
The 
(R. THIRUPPATHI VENKATASAMY) 
Accountant General (Audit)-II, Maharashtra 
 
 
 
 
 
                                         Countersigned 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi 
The 
(GIRISH CHANDRA MURMU) 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
    
    
   
    
 
 
 
  
 
 

 
65 
Annexure 1 
Statement showing land allotted on direct basis instead of auction/e-bidding in violation of prevailing policy 
(Referred to in Paragraph 4.2.1 ) 
Sl. No.  Name of allottee/ 
Area of plot/Name of 
IA/purpose  
Management proposal/Justification given by 
Board for decision 
Reply of MIDC                                 Further audit remarks 
I Prevailing rate in IA plus 10 per cent  additional charges thereon with applicable road width charges 
1 Orange City Laghu 
Audyogik Vasahat, 
Nagpur/7,200 sqm/ 
Hingna/Industrial  
Management stated direct allotment of land cannot be 
made to applicant considering prevailing policy of 
 
e-bidding in the IA.  
The Board while stating (September 2018) that land is 
allotted through e-bidding directed management to 
verify and allot land to such applicants whose 
industries were in running condition and were willing 
to accept allotment considering recent highest auction 
rates plus 10 per cent.  Subsequently, on request of the 
applicants and citing non availability of recent auction 
rates, Board directed (July 2019) for allotment of land 
at prevailing industrial rate plus 10 per cent  additional 
premium. 
MIDC stated (December 2021) that to 
achieve equitable distribution of wealth and 
opportunities and to support small 
entrepreneurs, the Board has taken decision 
to allot the plot directly. These plots were 
given to small entrepreneurs, who are 
financially weak. MIDC reiterated (August 
2022) that in essence, the Board is the MIDC 
with full authority for allotment of property 
or undertaking any activity which it deems 
fit for fulfilling its duties as per the Act.
 
 
Reasons cited in reply were at 
variance with that recorded   
during decision making in 
Agenda Note/Board 
resolution. Further, decision 
was taken by Board 
overruling management 
proposal which were in line 
with laid down policy.  
2 Deepak Fertilizers and 
Petrochemicals 
Corporation Limited 
/8,000 sqm/Additional 
Patalganga 
(Bhokarpada)/Skill 
Development centre  
Management had highlighted that land in IA was to be 
allotted through e-bidding in the IA. 
Board approved (March 2019) allotment citing 
proposed investment and employment generation as 
per project report of the applicant. 
MIDC stated (December 2021/ August 
2022) that it took a conscious decision 
considering demand from local residents and 
industrialists to provide skill development 
centre. The allotment is not at concessional 
rate and hence there is no financial loss to 
MIDC. 
  
Decision was taken by Board 
overruling management 
proposal which were in line 
with laid down policy. 
3 40 persons under 
MSME category (100 
sqm each)/4,000 sqm/ 
TTC/Industrial 
Management submitted that land was allotted through 
tender in the IA and independent plot of 100 sqm 
cannot be allotted.  
Board approved (September 2015) allotment on the 
grounds to facilitate small scale industries 
MIDC stated (December 2021 / August 
2022) that it took a conscious decision to 
give encouragement for new MSMEs to 
establish their own units and employment 
generation potential. The allotment is not at 
concessional rate and hence there is no 
financial loss to MIDC.  
 
 
 
 
Decision was in violation of 
the laid down policy of            
e-bidding. Further, reply is 
silent on the issue of allotment 
of 100 sqm plots each in 
violation of DCR.  
4 13 persons under 
MSME category (100 
sqm each)/1,300 sqm/ 
TTC/Industrial 
Management proposed allotment of land as per similar 
decision of Board in respect of 40 persons as 
mentioned above at Sl No.3.  
Board approved (February 2016) allotment on the 
grounds to facilitate small scale industries. 

Report No. 5 (Role of MIDC in the industrial development of Maharashtra) 
66 
Sl. No.  Name of allottee/ 
Area of plot/Name of 
IA/purpose  
Management proposal/Justification given by 
Board for decision 
Reply of MIDC  Further audit remarks 
5 Micromaster 
Laboratories Private 
Limited (A 51)/17,733 
sqm./Gane Khadpoli/ 
Industrial 
Management submitted that applicant was not eligible 
for allotment under priority category while 
highlighting policy of e-bidding in IA. At same tim e, 
management also recommended allotment stating that 
proposed project was new/novel (Covid-19 testing 
and other medical equipment). 
Board approved (February 2021) allotment 
considering proposed activity of the applicant 
(manufacturing of microbiological products, 
pharmaceutical, biotech, cosmetic food and life 
sciences application). 
MIDC stated (December 2021/ August 
2022) that it took a conscious decision 
considering as a novel and unique project 
useful for Covid-19 testing kits and 
manufacturing of medical equipment.  The 
allotment is not at concessional rate and 
hence there is no financial loss to MIDC.  
Allotment was made on 
selective basis without 
framing a policy for land 
allotment for the stated 
purpose, which would have 
enabled all interested 
applicants to avail benefit of 
direct land allotment. 
6 Shree Krishna 
Enterprises/4,030 sqm. 
/Additional Ambernath 
/Industrial 
 
Management proposed for rejection for land allotment 
on the grounds that applicant was not eligible for 
allotment under priority category and prevailing 
policy of e-bidding in IA. 
 
Board approved (October 2020/February 2021) 
allotment citing proposed investment and 
employment generation from project of the applicant. 
MIDC stated (December 2021) that it took a 
conscious decision considering that no bids 
were received for these plots which were 
lying vacant for many decades and there was 
fear of encroachment on these plots as well 
as to make maximum use of land available in 
IA. During this unprecedented situation 
created by Covid-19, there was a need to 
encourage investment to promote 
employment. The allotment is not at 
concessional rate and hence there is no 
financial loss to MIDC. MIDC further stated 
(August 2022) that Board has power to take 
decisions considering the overall merit in the 
proposal overruling management’s 
observations as per MID Act. It was further 
stated that Board took the conscious decision 
after due deliberation on merit.  
Decision was taken by Board 
overruling management 
proposal which were in line 
with laid down policy. 
  

Annexure 
67 
Sl. No.  Name of allottee/ 
Area of plot/Name of 
IA/purpose  
Management proposal/Justification given by 
Board for decision 
Reply of MIDC  Further audit remarks 
7 Ganesh Raghunath 
Kotekar, Promoter of 
Proposed Private 
Limited Company/ 
2,500 sqm./Additional 
Ambernath Pale/ 
Industrial 
Management submitted that both applicants were not 
eligible for allotment under priority category whil e 
highlighting prevailing policy of allotment through            
e-bidding in the IA. 
Board approved (April 2021) allotments citing 
proposed investment and employment generation 
from project of the applicant. 
MIDC stated (December 2021) that it took a 
conscious decision considering a need to 
encourage investment to promote 
employment during this unprecedented 
situation created by Covid-19. The allotment 
is not at concessional rate and hence there is 
no financial loss to MIDC. MIDC while 
reiterating its earlier reply stated (August 
2022) that Board has power to take decisions 
considering the overall merit in the proposal 
overruling management’s observations as 
per MID Act. It was further stated that Board 
took the conscious decision after due 
deliberation on merit 
 
Decisions were taken by 
Board overruling 
management’s proposal 
which were in line with laid 
down policy. 
 
 
 
 
8 Bhusan Ganesh 
Kotekar, Promoter of 
Proposed Private 
Limited Company/ 
2,500 sqm./Additional 
Ambernath Pale/ 
Industrial 
9 Dinesh Agrawal, 
Promoter of Proposed 
Private Limited 
Company/ 2,500 sqm./ 
Additional Ambernath 
Pale/Industrial 
10 Amit Agrawal, 
Promoter of Proposed 
Private Limited 
Company/2,500 sqm./ 
Additional Ambernath 
Pale/Industrial 
11 Omkar Educational 
Trust,/3,030 sqm./ 
Dombivali/School 
Management proposed for allotment with recovery of 
differential lease premium between plots for 
residential and industrial purpose in the IA. 
Board approved (October 2020) land allotment as per 
management proposal. 
MIDC stated (December 2021) that it took a 
conscious decision in view of increasing 
need for educational facilities in the IA due 
to increasing urbanization and lack of new 
educational facilities elsewhere in the IA. 
The allotment is not at concessional rate and 
hence there is no financial loss to MIDC.  
Decision was in violation of 
the laid down policy of 
 
e-bidding. 
  

Report No. 5 (Role of MIDC in the industrial development of Maharashtra) 
68 
Sl. No.  Name of allottee/ 
Area of plot/Name of 
IA/purpose  
Management proposal/Justification given by 
Board for decision 
Reply of MIDC  Further audit remarks 
II Upset price for tender/auction 
12 Echar Elevator 
Fixtures/2,500 sqm./ 
TTC /Industrial 
Management submitted that direct allotment of land 
cannot be made to applicant in view of prevailing 
policy of tender. 
Board approved (February 2016) land allotment citing 
there was no response from bidders in auction on four 
occasions. 
MIDC stated (December 2021/ August 
2022) that it took conscious decision 
considering that plot was vacant for many 
decades and there was fear of encroachment 
on this plot and make maximum use of land 
available in IA. The allotment is not at 
concessional rate and hence there is no 
financial loss to MIDC.  
Decision was taken 
overruling management’s 
proposal which were in line 
with laid down policy. 
 
III Highest rates received in previous auction 
13 Vedant Dyestuff 
Intermediates Private 
Limited/14,468 sqm/ 
Additional Mahad/ 
Industrial 
Management submitted that applicant was not eligible 
for allotment under priority category. It was furth er 
stated that as there was policy of e-bidding in IA,  it 
was necessary to participate in e-bidding. 
Board approved (September 2019) land allotment 
citing expansion of project and height restriction for 
construction on original plot. 
MIDC stated (December 2021) that there 
was an increase in demand for their product 
and they were in need of more land for the 
project, considering their difficulties and the 
capacity of an unit to being an anchor unit, in 
changing global scenario for chemical 
industries where other state governments are 
attracting chemical sector investments. As 
the old allotment was via auction and new 
allotment was at the highest rate in the 
previous auction held in IA, there is no 
financial loss.  
Decisions were taken by 
Board overruling 
management’s proposal 
which were in line with laid 
down policy. 
 
14 Sua Automation/ 
854.76  sqm./Pimpri/ 
Industrial 
 
Management submitted that it would not be proper to  
allot land to applicant as it was not eligible unde r 
priority category. Further, land was allotted in IA  
through tenders. 
Board approved (February 2016) land allotment citing 
there was no response from bidders in previous 
auction held in November 2014. 
MIDC stated (December 2021) that the party 
was the sole bidder for plot in 
 
e-bidding, whose offer was not opened as per 
prevailing policy and therefore the same plot 
was not allotted. As per the applicant’s 
request, decision was taken to allot the plot 
at the rate quoted in the e-bidding process. 
MIDC had taken all the efforts to dispose this 
plot through auction, but there was no 
response except the above bidder company. 
Decision was taken by Board 
overruling management’s 
proposal which were in line 
with laid down policy. 
 
  

Annexure 
69 
Sl. No.  Name of allottee/ 
Area of plot/Name of 
IA/purpose  
Management proposal/Justification given by 
Board for decision 
Reply of MIDC  Further audit remarks 
IV Highest rates received in previous auction plus 10 per cent  additional charges thereon 
15 Astec Life Sciences 
Limited (Godrej 
Agrovet Limited)/ 
4,500 sqm./Mahad/ 
Residential 
Management proposed land allotment at highest rates 
received for residential plot in previous 
 
e-bidding. 
Board approved (October 2018) land allotment for 
workers of the applicant Company. 
MIDC stated (December 2021) that it had 
taken conscious decision for allotment of 
plot considering the need of residential plots 
of the plot holder. In the present case the 
applicant has been allotted the plot at the rate 
of more than 3 times the prevailing rate and 
therefore MIDC has not suffered any loss.  
MIDC further stated (August 2022) that 
Board has power to take decisions 
considering the overall merit in the proposal 
overruling management’s observations as 
per MID Act. It was further stated that Board 
took the conscious decision after due 
deliberation on merit 
Decision was in violation of 
the laid down policy of 
 
e-bidding. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Report No. 5 (Role of MIDC in the industrial development of Maharashtra) 
70 
Annexure 2 
Statement showing allotment of land despite non-availability of plots in layout of industrial areas 
(Referred to in Paragraph 4.2.5)  
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
Industrial Area 
No of 
parties Name of parties 
1 
Ambernath 15 Sai Foods, Shreeya Engineers, Condist Chemicals, Om kar Dal & Besan Mill, Uttar Packaging Private Limit ed, Gopal Dairy, 
Swastik Engineering, Smt. Sonal R. Thakare & Jigar A. Chandan partners of proposed partnership Firm, J ai Baba Textile 
Industries, Shri Vijay P Ganwani Promoter of Proposed Private Limited Company (PPPLC), Gokul Engineers Private Limited, 
Yashoda Organic Food Private Limited, V S Construct ion, Sparklet Engineers Private Limited and Oilex E ngineers (India) 
Private Limited. 
2 
Additional 
Ambernath 
 
9 Shree Mahadav Lubricants, Karuna Enterprises, Satgu ru Trailers, Modern Industrial Gases Private Limite d, CS Engineering, 
AC Chemi Equipments, Neeraj Enterprises, Shri Jatin  K Doshi Promoter of Proposed Private Limited Compa ny (PPPLC), 
Sachin Enterprises 
3 Additional 
Ambernath Pale  
4 Ganesh Kotekar, PPPLC, Bhushan Ganesh Kotekar, PPPLC, Dinesh Agrawal, PPPLC and Amit Agrawal, PPPLC. 
4 Kalyan Bhiwandi  1 Kamal Specialty Chemicals Private Limited. 
5 Kagal Hathkangle 1 VP Industries. 
6 Shendra  1 Mathoshri Audyogik Sahkari Sanstha.  
7 
Additional Latur  70 RMT Paints, Kishor Agro Industries, Balaji Industri es, Harikrushna Industries, Tirupati Plastics, A-On e Offset Industries, 
Pandurang Industries, Tirupati Agro Products, Sadgu rukrupa Products, Shriram Agro Industries, Oswal Fo od Products, 
Aradhana Agro Products, R A Food Products, Matoshri  Garments, Laxmi Agro Industries, Multi Alloy Indus tries, Kamal 
Fabrication & Furniture, Jai Bhavani Industries, Go vind Industries, Vedant Agro Industries, Maheshwari  Industries, 
Maheshwari Agro Industries, Laxmi Pulses Industries , Yamuna Industries, Abhijeet Enterprises, Katariya  Industries, 
Siddharudh Offset, Daily Yashwant, Amit Publication s, Daily Aapale Man, Hansraj Fabrication, Snehal Ga rments, Swami 
Samarth Industries, Ajay Industries, Samarth Industries, Sadguru Agro Industries, Khinoor Agro Industries, Anagha Industries, 
Kavita Agrotech Industries, Dhanshree Industries, S neha Dall Industries, V K Oil Industries, Mathura I ndustries, Nagesh 
Industries, Kishor Udyog, Raj Udyog, Vishal best Ch iwada, Rathod Steel Udyog, Namrata Shaleya Vastu Ut padan Kendra, 
Joshaba Central Consumer Co-Operative Society Limited, Matoshri Udyog, Kundan Agro Industries, Pramod Roller & Flour 
Mill, National Plastics, Shabnam Industries, Prabha t Industries, Ishwari Udyog, Juned Engineering Work s, Samrudhi Agro 
Company, Shri Gurukrupa Food Industries, Ajinta Ind ustries, Sagar Industries, Swami Samarth Industries , Pathak Food 
Products, Mauli Fabrication, Ajay Steel Industries,  Priya Food Products, Vivek Printing, Pawan Printin g and Expert Printers 
& Manufacturer.  
8 Nashik (Ambad) 2 Yash Industries and LCG Aluminum Industries Private Limited. 
 Total 103  
 
  

Annexure 
71 
Annexure 3 
Statement showing allotment of alternate plots at old rates  
(Referred to in Paragraph 5.1.1) 
Sl. 
No. 
Plot No. Name of allottee Name of IA Allotted 
area             
(In sqm) 
Land 
rate per 
sqm        
(In ₹) 
New/alternate 
plot area           
(In sqm) 
Prevailing 
land rate 
per sqm 
(In ₹) 
Land 
premium 
recovered 
Land 
premium to 
be recovered 
Difference 
(₹ in lakh) 
1 H-14/2 Core Drivelines 
India Private  
Limited 
Additional 
Murbad 
5,500 500 5,500 1,540 27.50 84.70 57.20 
2 PL-6 Ashwin Kumar 
Nangia and 
others 
Ambernath 250 300 250 12,000 0.75 30.00 29.25 
3 SZ-22, SZ-23, 
SZ-24, SZ-2, 
SZ-3 
Ramson 
Industries 
Limited 
Butibori 37,500 
628 
400  
1,450 
38,128 1,450 162.05 553.31 391.26 
4 N-39 Shree 
Enterprises 
Additional 
Patalganga 
2,000 2,660 2,000 4,000 53.20 80.00 26.80 
5 G-1 Shri Deepak 
Sardana 
Additional 
Ambernath 
5,000 2,660 5,000 4,400 133.00 220.00 87.00 
6 G-23 Salim Papa 
Momin 
Additional 
Ambernath 
5,000 2,660 5,000 4,400 133.00 220.00 87.00 
7 G-30 Sunworks 
Chemicals 
Private Limited 
Additional 
Ambernath 
4,496 2,660 4,496 4,400 119.59 197.82 78.23 
8 G-9 GK Industries Additional 
Ambernath 
658 2,395 658 4,000 15.76 26.32 10.56 
9 M-281 Lakson 
Industries 
Akola  Growth 
Center 
1,800 351.75 1,800 703.5 6.33 12.66 6.33 
10 M-255 Vilas Dall Mill Akola  Growth 
Center 
4,000 335 4,000 670 13.40 26.80 13.40 
  

Report No. 5 (Role of MIDC in the industrial development of Maharashtra) 
72 
Sl. 
No. 
Plot No. Name of allottee Name of IA Allotted 
area          
(In sqm) 
Land 
rate per 
sqm        
(In ₹) 
New/alternate 
plot area           
(In sqm) 
Prevailing 
land rate 
per sqm 
(In ₹) 
Land 
premium 
recovered 
Land 
premium to 
be recovered 
Difference 
(₹ in lakh) 
11 M-248 Paras Marble Akola  Growth 
Center 
4,550 385.25 5,325 770.5 20.51 41.03 20.52 
12 M-268 GN Enterprises Akola  Growth 
Center 
2,341 351.75 2,341 703.5 8.23 16.47 8.24 
13 M-242 Khandelwal 
Agro Industries 
Akola  Growth 
Center 
4,000 385.25 4,000 770.5 15.41 30.82 15.41 
14 M-250 Satish oil Mill Akola  Growth 
Center 
3,500 335 4,144 670 13.88 27.76 13.88 
15 M-257 Jai BabariAgro Akola  Growth 
Center 
3,999.6 351.75 3,999.6 703.5 14.07 28.14 14.07 
16 U-20 Ayush Industries Akola  Growth 
Center 
7,779 351.75 7,779 703.5 27.36 54.72 27.36 
17 M-264 Alfiya Udyog Akola  Growth 
Center 
4,474 351.75 4,474 703.5 15.74 31.48 15.74 
18 M-267 Fatema Ginning 
& Pressing 
Akola  Growth 
Center 
2,641 351.75 2,641 703.5 9.29 18.58 9.29 
19 M-263 KT Corporation Akola  Growth 
Center 
3,400 351.75 3,400 703.5 11.96 23.92 11.96 
20 M-266 Om Industries Akola  Growth 
Center 
3,719 351.75 3,719 703.5 13.08 26.16 13.08 
21 N-166 Laxmi Agro 
Industries 
Akola  Growth 
Center 
5,300 351.75 5,300 703.5 18.64 37.28 18.64 
22 M-282 Chhaya 
Industries 
Akola  Growth 
Center 
1,925             
525 
351.75 
703.50 
2,450 703.50 
6.77             
3.69 
17.24 6.78 
23 M-285 LT Agro Akola  Growth 
Center 
4,991 351.75 4,991 703.5 17.56 35.12 17.56 
                                Grand Total 860.77 1,840.33 979.56 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Annexure 
73 
Annexure 4 
Statement showing re-allotment of plots and non-forfeiture of EMD  
(Referred to in Paragraph 5.1.4) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of allottee Name of 
industrial area 
Plot No. EMD amount     
(₹ in lakh) 
Rate for allotment 
I Re-allotment in IAs having policy of direct allotment 
1 Kalika M Ispat Private Limited Additional  
Jalna Phase 3 
C-2 490 Prevailing industrial rates. 
2 Vinod Enterprises Umred D-58 1.01 Prevailing indu strial rates. 
3 Mukul Enterprises Umred D-14/50 1.08 Prevailing i ndustrial rates. 
4 Damoder Industries Umred D-49 0.68 Prevailing ind ustrial rates. 
5 Naresh Industries Umred D-48 0.68 Prevailing indu strial rates. 
6 Sumit Industries Umred D-14 0.54 Prevailing indus trial rates. 
7 Shri Salasar Packing Industries Umred D-13/1 2.70  Prevailing industrial rates. 
8 Sara Chemicals Umred D-14/19 0.54 Prevailing indu strial rates. 
9 Ambika Udyog Umred D-14/38 0.54 Prevailing indust rial rates. 
10 Chandak Trading Company Umred D-14/63 2.03 Preva iling industrial rates. 
11 Nitin Industries Umred D-14/37 0.54 Prevailing i ndustrial rates. 
12 Rakesh Industries Umred D-50 0.68 Prevailing ind ustrial rates. 
13 Ranjeet Industries Umred D-45 0.68 Prevailing in dustrial rates. 
14 Panchsheel Mahila Bachat Gat Umred D-54 1.35 Pre vailing industrial rates. 
15 Shrushti Schedule Caste Garment 
Industrial Co-op Society Limited 
Umred D-14/6 1.01 Prevailing industrial rates. 
16 Sagar Biomass Briquetting Plant Umred D-40 0.68 Prevailing industrial rates. 
17 Vishnudas Industries Umred D-61 0.68 Prevailing industrial rates. 
18 Ishwar Industries Umred D-38 0.68 Prevailing ind ustrial rates. 
19 Shiv Polymers Umred D-37 0.68 Prevailing industr ial rates. 
20 Gurudev Udyog Umred D-60 0.68 Prevailing industr ial rates. 
21 Rami Industries  Akola growth 
centre 
M-288 6.70 Prevailing industrial rates. 
II Re-allotment in Industrial areas having policy of auction/e-bidding 
22 Matoshri Audyogik Sahkari 
Sanstha 
Shendra P- 24 and            
P 24 part 1 
280.50 Prevailing land rate or highest rate receive d in last 
e-bidding of nearby IA, whichever is higher. 
23 M/s PVSS Cranes and 
Components 
Chakan Phase 2 C1/2 24.93 Prevailing rate plus 10 per cent  thereon or highest 
rate received in last e-bidding plus applicable roa d 
width charges, whichever is higher. 

Report No. 5 (Role of MIDC in the industrial development of Maharashtra) 
74 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of allottee Name of 
industrial area 
Plot No. EMD amount     
(₹ in lakh) 
Rate for allotment 
24 Mittal Industries Chakan Phase 2 D-78 33.25 Allo tment rate plus 10 per cent  with road width 
charges plus payable interest at SBI PLR rate or 
highest rate received in auction plus interest 
payable as per SBI PLR, whichever is higher. 
25 Vitthal Industries Akola growth 
centre 
T 42/3 25.12 Prevailing industrial rate 
26 Smt. Priyanka Dilip Chede Paithan X-10 2.20 Highest rates received for commercial plot in                     
e-bidding plus delayed payment charges on balance 
premium amount. 
27 Shreyas Enterprises Paithan X-9 3.34 
28 Kaushalya Packaging Industry Additional 
Jalgaon 
S-90-91 1.66 Prevailing industrial rate 
III Applicants issued allotment order through auction/e-bidding 
29 Nandan Petrochem Additional 
Patalganga 
E-155 19.33 Highest rate received during e-bidding.    
30 Sainath Mohan Solat Paithan X-6 4.87 Highest rat es received for commercial plot in  
e-bidding plus delay payment charges on balance 
amount. 
31 Proposed Private Limited Lote Parshuram P-1/1 11 .27 Highest rates received in e-bidding plus delay 
payment charges on balance amount for 153 days. 
32 Rudranee Infrastructure Limited Shendra P-14 3.1 3 Bid rate of the applicant  as per allotment order  plus 
interest at SBI PLR rate or last auction commercial  
rate whichever is higher, plus recovery of  interes t 
on BoP. 
Total 923.76   
 
 