 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India  Performance Audit on  Integrated Financial and Human Resource Management System in Tamil Nadu          Government of Tamil Nadu Report No. 3 of the year 2023 


Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Performance Audit on  
Integrated Financial and Human Resource 
Management System in Tamil Nadu 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government of Tamil Nadu 
Report No. 3 of the year 2023 

 
i 
 
 
 Paragraph  Page 
Preface v 
Executive Summary   vii 
CHAPTER I - INTRODUCTION   
Need for Integrated Financial and Human Resource 
Management System 
1.1 1 
System Architecture of IFHRMS 1.2 1 
Modules of IFHRMS 1.3 2 
Organisation structure 1.4 2 
Audit objectives 1.5 3 
Audit criteria 1.6 3 
Audit scope and methodology 1.7 3 
Acknowledgement 1.8 4 
Report Structure 1.9 4 
CHAPTER II - PROJECT MANAGEMENT   
Introduction 2.1 5 
Time overrun 2.2 8 
Cost overrun 2.3 11 
CHAPTER III - BUDGET OPERATIONS AND 
ACCOUNTS COMPILATION 
  
Introduction 3.1 15 
Budget Operations 3.2 16 
Accounts Compilation 3.3 23 
  
TABLE OF CONTENTS 

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial and Human Resource Management System 
in Tamil Nadu 
 
 
ii 
 
 Paragraph  Page 
CHAPTER IV - PROCESSING OF BILLS   
Bill Module 4.1 33 
Pension Management System 4.2 47 
CHAPTER V -   HUMAN RESOURCE 
MANAGEMENT SYSTEM 
  
Introduction 5.1 53 
Human Resource Management 5.2 54 
CHAPTER VI - SECURITY MANAGEMENT   
Introduction 6.1 67 
Identity and access management 6.2 67 
Security vulnerabilities 6.3 69 
Data protection 6.4 71 
Business Continuity and Disaster Recovery 6.5 73 
Obsolescence Management 6.6 74 
Exit management 6.7 74 
CHAPTER VII - MONITORING AND EVALUATION   
Introduction 7.1 75 
Performance of Monitoring Committee 7.2 75 
Web-based Project Monitoring Tool 7.3 76 
Non-establishment of Project e-Mission Team 7.4 77 
Performance of Help Desk 7.5 78 
Service Level Agreement performance indicators 7.6 81 
Training and User Feedback 7.7 83 
 
  

Table of Contents  
iii 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix 
No. 
Details Page 
1.1 System architecture of IFHRMS 87 
3.1 Transactions of Charged nature booked in detailed head meant 
for Voted items 
88 
3.2 Transactions of Voted nature booked in detailed head meant 
for Charged items 
89 
3.3 Booking of expenditure in ‘8005’ Major Head removed from 
LMMH 
90 
3.4 Booking of expenditure with unrelated HoD code 91 
3.5 Preparation of Accounts with wrong sub-account codes 92 
4.1 Number of users assigned multiple roles in IFHRMS 93 
4.2 Mapping of PPO number with wrong PEN ID 95 
4.3 PEN ID mapped to Employee login instead of Pensioner login 96 
4.4 Active pensioners with missing PPO numbers 97 
4.5 Pensioners deprived of timely sanction of additional pension 98 
5.1 List of Reports could not be generated in HRMS Module 99 
 Glossary of abbreviations 100 
 
APPENDICES 

v 
 
 
PREFACE 
 
This Report for the year ended March 2022 has been 
prepared for submission to the Governor of Tamil Nadu 
under Article 151 (2) of the Constitution of India, for 
being laid before the State Legislature. 
The Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of 
India contains the results of Performance Audit on 
Integrated Financial and Human Resource Management 
System in Tamil Nadu covering the period from 2015-22. 
The instances mentioned in the Report are those, which 
came to notice in the course of the performance audit 
conducted during April 2022 to September 2022.  Matters 
relating to the periods outside the audit period have also 
been reported in places where they were found necessary.  
The Audit has been conducted in conformity with the 
Auditing Standards issued by the Comptroller and 
Auditor General of India. 
v 

 
 
  
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
vii 
 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
 
Why we did this Audit? 
The vision of the Finance Department of the State - which is vested with the 
responsibility of managing the public finances of the Government of Tamil Nadu 
- is to ensure that the finance function in the State Government is modernised to 
be in tune with the twenty first century and that overall levels of accountability 
are substantially enhanced and there is real time control on flow of funds. 
To achieve this, Government of Tamil Nadu implemented Integrated Financial 
and Human Resource Management System (IFHRMS) through Finance 
Department to optimise and manage the State finances with the help of 
technology. IFHRMS was conceptualised to automate the Finance and Treasury 
functions, using real-time technology with two core components viz.,  
(i) Financial Management System (covering Department of Finance and Treasury 
functions) and (ii) Human Resource Management System (covering Employees 
and Pension management functions). 
Considering the importance of IFHRMS in rendering data to Government on a 
real time basis for monitoring and for policy making, CAG took up this 
Performance Audit covering the activities during 2015-22 with focus on 
functioning of IFHRMS modules based on the data for the financial year  
2021-22, as IFHRMS went Go-live from January 2021. Of the envisaged  
14 modules, six modules were fully functional and eight modules were yet to 
become operational.  Four functional modules viz., Budget, Financial and 
Accounting system, Human Resource and Pension modules were selected for 
detailed check.  The objectives of this Audit were to assess whether IFHRMS  
(1) was developed in a cost-effective manner within the agreed timeline; (2) has 
brought the treasury and human resource management functions of all user 
department into one unified system as envisaged and (3) was designed with 
adequate controls and authenticity of the data and its security is ensured. 
What we found? 
System Requirement Specification sign-off was deficient and gave rise to 
numerous Change Requests and the consequent time taken for developing the 
Change Requests largely delayed achievement of project Go-live by four years. 
The delay in achieving project Go-live resulted in cost overrun of  
₹79.91 crore on account of hardware maintenance, application resources, field 
level technical support and bandwidth charges during the period of delay. 
The Monitoring Committee which had to ensure that project met its goals, 
milestones and suggest necessary modifications and course corrections, did not 
manage the project as envisaged, which led to continued dependence on System 
Integrator (M/s Wipro Limited). 
Budget operations module allowed transfer of funds between Grants, incurring of 
expenditure without budget provision and withdrawal of entire budget allocation  

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial and Human Resource Management System  
in Tamil Nadu 
 
viii 
  
after expenditure had been incurred in violation of budget manual provisions.  
Further, provision/withdrawal of funds during last week of financial year to 
arrive at final modified appropriation shows that re-appropriation is a mere  
year-end adjustment exercise. 
IFHRMS does not provide a complete picture of all Government expenditure and 
receipt, as receipts are still compiled outside IFHRMS using old software and 
instances of booking of expenditure under wrong heads of account were noticed. 
As a result, Accountant General (Accounts and Entitlement) has to follow up 
with respective offices for rectification, which amounted to duplication of work 
involving additional time and effort.  Thus, accounts are not compiled in real 
time and required manual intervention.   
Bill processing module is a critical module of IFHRMS as it handles the entire 
Government disbursement. However, even after two years of IFHRMS rollout, it 
allowed double payment for same claim, could not process bills within stipulated 
timeline and Pay and Accounts Office/Treasury had to rely on physical copies of 
sanction orders, vouchers, etc., as bills could be presented online without 
attaching the soft copies of supporting documents. 
Pension management system, a citizen centric module, had inaccuracies in 
pensioner database which delayed sanction of additional pension to eligible 
pensioners and allowed creation of multiple pensioner IDs for the same 
pensioner leading to double pension payment.  Further, incorrect mapping of 
pensioner ID to pension pay order prevented pensioners from logging into 
IFHRMS for updating basic personal information like bank details, address, etc. 
Automatic updation of employee’s e-Service Record did not take place as 
integration between Human Resource and e-Service Record was incomplete due 
to which there was continued dependence on manual service registers. Further, 
all service regulations were not mapped and there were no validation controls to 
ensure that employee status, increment, leave details and date of retirement were 
correctly captured in the system, for which users had to depend on System 
Integrator to update their employee profile even after two years of project  
Go-live. 
A mission-critical system such as IFHRMS did not have robust security 
measures like biometric access, machine-based access rights and protection of 
user credentials.  Transactions by ‘anonymous user’ indicated vulnerabilities in 
the system and inadequate security management.  Non-conducting of periodic 
disaster recovery trials exposes the entire system to likely higher downtime and 
loss of confidential data. 
Monitoring Committee did not meet periodically to ensure that the project was 
completed as per the agreed timelines.  Project e-Mission Team was not 
established to monitor the project during development, implementation and post 
Go-live of IFHRMS.  The complaints raised by the IFHRMS users were not 
analysed to resolve the recurring system issues. 

Executive Summary 
 
ix 
 
 
What we recommend? 
We have made 27 recommendations as given below: 
PROJECT MANAGEMENT: 
 Government should redraw project timelines and ensure that IFHRMS is 
completed in all aspects without further delays. 
 Government should revisit the Change Requests approval process to 
avoid invalid Change Requests at the time and cost of the State 
exchequer. 
 Government should recover the excess amount paid to System Integrator 
for deploying field level technical support engineers as it was not covered 
in the agreement. 
BUDGET OPERATIONS AND ACCOUNTS COMPILATION: 
 Government should strengthen budget module to prevent transfer of 
funds between Grants by strictly enforcing provisions of budget manual. 
 Government should strengthen budget module to prevent expenditure in 
Heads of Account without budget provision and withdrawal of budget 
allocation for Heads of Account where expenditure had been incurred. 
 Government should achieve standardisation in Accounts classification to 
ensure correct classification of expenditure figures in the books of 
account. 
 Government should ensure that master data of Head of Accounts is 
continuously updated, so that accounts are not booked under non-existent 
Head of Account. 
 Government should bring all receipt transactions into IFHRMS for a truly 
automated accounting system. 
PROCESSING OF BILLS: 
 Government should strengthen IFHRMS to prevent generation of bills 
under wrong Head of Account. 
 Government should strengthen IFHRMS to ensure that bills are 
presented/returned online along with the required supporting documents 
to avoid continued dependency on physical bills. 
 Government should address the Server performance issues so that 
uniqueness of each bill generated in the system is maintained. 
 Government should strengthen IFHRMS to ensure that bills are processed 
within stipulated timeframe so that beneficiaries get their due payments 
without any delay. 
 Government should direct the System Integrator (M/s Wipro) to 
incorporate appropriate coding in IFHRMS software to prevent double 
payment for same claim.  Government should also put in place an  
 

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial and Human Resource Management System  
in Tamil Nadu 
 
x 
  
alternative mechanism to avoid double payments until such coding is 
made available in IFHRMS. 
 Government should maintain uniqueness in creation of pensioner ID to 
avoid payment of double pension to the same pensioner. 
 Government should correctly map the pensioner ID with pension pay 
order to ensure that pensioners have hassle free access to IFHRMS portal. 
 Government should ensure timely delivery of additional pension benefits 
to eligible pensioners by ensuring that pensioner date of birth details in 
the system are correct. 
HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT SYSTEM: 
 Government should fix a timeline to achieve complete integration of 
Human Resource and e-Service Record to ensure that correct employee 
information is captured in e-Service Record in real-time environment.  
Government should authenticate correctness of e-Service Records using 
Digital Signature Certificates (DSCs). 
 Government should ensure that all service regulations are correctly 
mapped in Human Resource module so that all service particulars of 
employees are captured with proper validation controls. 
 Government fix a timeline to cleanse e-Service Record data captured so 
far to ensure that employees are not subjected to any hardship at a later 
date due to missing/wrong information in their respective e-Service 
Records. 
SECURITY MANAGEMENT: 
 Government should strengthen user access controls and create awareness 
about the risks in sharing of user credentials. 
 Government should disable anonymous users in IFHRMS transactions to 
ensure audit trail. 
 Government should provide envisaged security features in IFHRMS to 
safeguard Government money. 
 Government should conduct periodic disaster recovery drill in real-time 
environment. 
MONITORING AND EVALUATION: 
 Government should ensure that the Monitoring Committee meets 
periodically to review IFHRMS. 
 Government should ensure that the Department analyses the complaints 
raised by users through Help Desk to resolve recurring system issues. 
 
 

Executive Summary 
 
xi 
 
 
 Government should consider levying penalty if System Integrator  
(M/s Wipro) fails to meet the performance indicators envisaged in the 
Service Level Agreement. 
 As training is a continuous process, Government should ensure periodical 
refresher courses to all the users so as to enable them to understand the 
application and reduce dependence on the System Integrator  
(M/s Wipro). 
Government’s response to audit recommendations 
Government while responding to the Audit observations raised, assured 
necessary corrective action wherever required.  Audit acknowledges and 
appreciates the corrective action taken/proposed by the Government to bring 
required controls and facilities in IFHRMS to address the issues pointed out in 
this report. 

 
 
CHAPTER I 
INTRODUCTION 
 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
1 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
 
 INTRODUCTION 
 
 
1.1 Need for Integrated Financial and Human Resource 
Management System 
The Department of Finance (DoF) of Government of Tamil Nadu (GoTN) is 
the custodian of State exchequer and is responsible for (i) overall management 
of State finances starting from budget preparation and allocation, (ii) budget 
control through continuous monitoring of expenditure and revenue and  
(iii) ensuring debt obligations are met. The Department of Treasuries and 
Accounts (DTA) keeps accounts of receipts and payments made to/by the 
State Government/Departments and plays a key role in supporting the DoF in 
passing bills as per budget provision and generation of monthly accounts. 
The GoTN proposed to implement Integrated Financial and Human Resource 
Management System (IFHRMS) through DoF in 2012 in order to optimise and 
manage the State finances with the help of technology. IFHRMS was 
conceptualised to automate the Finance and Treasury functions, using  
real-time technology with two core components: 
 Financial Management System (covering DoF and Treasury 
functions) 
 Human Resource Management System (covering Employees and 
Pension Management functions) 
1.2 System Architecture of IFHRMS 
IFHRMS is an internet-based application running from a centralised location 
having a modular architecture where different modules interact and share data. 
The application runs on Oracle E-Business Suite (Oracle Applications) 
comprising of software modules.  The core application has data, application 
and user authentication modules (Appendix 1.1).  The main users of the 
application are Finance Department and Drawing and Disbursing Officers of 
all Departments. User access rights would be based on roles and 
responsibilities of respective user. 
  
                                                                 
Abbreviations used in this report are listed in the Glossary at Page 100. 

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial and Human Resource Management 
System in Tamil Nadu 
 
2 
 
 
1.3 Modules of IFHRMS IFHRMS consists of the following 14 modules.  Budget  Financial and Accounting System (Bills and Accounts)  Core Human Resource Module  Payroll Module  (Payroll and Pension)  Strong Room and Inventory Management  Grievance  Third Party interfaces  Chief Minister Cell Grievance  Inspection and Audit Para Management  Court case Management System  Right to Information Management System  File Movement System  Web Portal  Business Intelligence module Of the above, six modules viz., Budget, Financial and Accounting system, Core Human Resource (HR), Payroll, Strong Room and Inventory Management and Web Portal modules were fully functional.  Other eight modules are yet to become fully operational, of which, Business Intelligence module is still under development. 1.4  Organisation structure Additional Chief Secretary to GoTN, the administrative head of DoF and Commissioner of Treasuries and Accounts (CTA), head of Department of Treasuries and Accounts are responsible for implementation of IFHRMS.  The organisational structure is depicted in Exhibit 1.1. Exhibit 1.1: Organisational structure  
Project implementation units
Department of Treasuries and Accounts
Department of Finance
Addtional Chief Secretary to Government
Commissioner of Treasuries and Accounts
Pay and Accounts Office
District Treasuries

Chapter I - Introduction 
3 
 
 
1.5  Audit objectives 
The Performance Audit objectives are to assess:   
 Whether IFHRMS was developed in a cost-effective manner within 
the agreed timeline; 
 Whether IFHRMS has brought the treasury and human resource 
management functions of all user department into one unified 
system as envisaged and 
 Whether IFHRMS was designed with adequate controls and 
authenticity of the data and its security is ensured. 
1.6  Audit criteria 
The criteria adopted to arrive at the audit conclusion are: 
 Tamil Nadu Budget Manual; 
 Tamil Nadu Financial, Accounts and Treasury Codes; 
 Master Level Agreement and Service Level Agreements; 
 Tamil Nadu Tender Transparency Act, 1998 and Rules thereunder 
and 
 Government orders and instructions issued from time to time. 
1.7  Audit scope and methodology 
The PA was conducted from April 2022 to September 2022 covering the 
period 2015-22 with focus on functioning of IFHRMS modules based on the 
data for the financial year 2021-22, as IFHRMS went Go-live in January 2021. 
Four1 modules were selected for detailed check.  The audit methodology 
included 
 Analysis of documents related to project implementation 
 Analysis of Application controls 
 Analysis of data from the databases of selected modules 
The audit plan including audit objectives, audit criteria and audit coverage was 
shared with GoTN through an Entry Conference held on 20 April 2022. The 
field work included scrutiny of related files, collection of documentary and 
electronic evidence.  An Exit Conference to discuss the audit findings with the 
Government was held on 23 January 2023. 
  
                                                                 
1  Budget, Financial and Accounting system, HR and Pension modules 

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial and Human Resource Management 
System in Tamil Nadu 
 
4 
 
 
1.8 Acknowledgement 
Audit acknowledges the cooperation extended by Government of Tamil Nadu, 
Department of Finance, Commissioner of Treasuries and Accounts, Treasury 
Staff and System Integrator in conducting the Performance Audit.  Audit also 
acknowledges and appreciates the corrective action taken/proposed by the 
Government to put required controls and facilities in IFHRMS to address 
issues pointed out in this report. 
 
1.9 Report Structure 
The audit findings are grouped under the following chapters: 
 Chapter II :  Project Management 
 Chapter III :  Budget operation and Accounts compilation 
 Chapter IV :  Processing of Bills 
 Chapter V :  Human Resource Management System 
 Chapter VI : Security Management 
 Chapter VII: Monitoring and Evaluation 

 
 
 
CHAPTER II 
PROJECT 
MANAGEMENT 
 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
5 
CHAPTER II 
 
PROJECT MANAGEMENT 
 
Project Go-live was delayed by four years as System Requirement 
Specification sign-off was deficient which gave rise to numerous Change 
Requests requiring additional time for development.  The delay in 
achieving project Go-live resulted in cost overrun of ₹79.91 crore on 
account of hardware maintenance, application resources, field level 
technical support and bandwidth charges during the period of delay 
which was paid to System Integrator.  The Monitoring Committee which 
had to ensure that project met its goals, milestones and suggest necessary 
modifications and course corrections, did not manage the project as 
envisaged, which led to continued dependence on System Integrator. 
2.1 Introduction 
Government of Tamil Nadu (GoTN) engaged a Project Management 
Consultant1 (PMC) (July 2012) to define the scope of IFHRMS, project 
approach, preparation of Detailed Project Report (DPR) including functional 
requirement specification, selection of System Integrator (SI), implementation 
of pilot rollout and State-wide rollout of IFHRMS. The PMC was also 
responsible to establish Project e-Mission Team (PeMT) as an institutional 
structure within the Department consisting of domain specialists and 
Information Technology (IT) specialists to participate and add value in the 
System Requirement Specification (SRS) review and to support the 
development and deployment of e-governance solution. 
2.1.1 Selection of System Integrator 
Based on DPR (June 2013), tenders were invited in May 2014 for selecting the 
SI. Two firms2 submitted their tenders and the bids were opened in September 
2014. After pre-qualification, technical qualification and commercial bid 
evaluation, a Master Service Agreement (MSA) was executed with L1 bidder 
viz., M/s Wipro Limited in May 2015, for developing and implementing 
IFHRMS at a cost of ₹288.91 crore.  According to MSA, SI had to develop 
IFHRMS in 20 months from May 2015 and IFHRMS should Go-live by 
January 2017.  The core activities of the SI were: 
 Designing, developing, deploying and maintaining IFHRMS; 
 Procuring and commissioning of IT infrastructure and 
 Establishment of centralised Help Desk.  
                                                                        
1  Accenture Services Private Limited. 
2  Wipro Limited and Rolta India Limited. 

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial and Human Resource Management 
System in Tamil Nadu 
 
 
6 
 
SI was also responsible for management of IT infrastructure along with other 
support activities for five years after Go-live of IFHRMS. A Third-Party Audit 
Agency3 was also engaged (November 2016) at a cost of ₹54.63 lakh to certify 
the completeness and security of the IFHRMS. 
2.1.2 Cost components of IFHRMS 
The agreed project cost (₹288.91 crore) included the following components 
(Table 2.1). 
Table 2.1: Cost components of IFHRMS 
Sl. 
No. Component Cost  
(₹in crore) 
1 State Data Centre, Near Data Centre, Disaster Centre 62.93 
2 Connectivity 21.88 
3 Application development 86.77 
4 Training 2.25 
5 Manpower (Help desk) 23.27 
6 Infrastructure cost 57.03 
7 SR Digitisation 2.80 
8 Data Scanning 1.30 
9 Taxes 30.73 
 Total 288.96 
 Less: Buy-back value of old computers 0.05  
 Total cost 288.91 
(Source: Minutes of empowered committee meeting) 
Component-wise cost analysis showed that IT infrastructure (₹62.93 crore +  
₹57.03 crore) constituted 42 per cent of total cost followed by application 
development cost of 30 per cent. Against contract value of ₹288.91 crore,  
SI has been paid ₹278.54 crore (as of October 2022).  The project Go-live 
planned for January 2017 was achieved in January 2021 after a delay of  
four years. The time and cost overrun are discussed in subsequent paragraphs. 
2.1.3 Agreed timelines vs actual timelines in achieving Go-live status 
Project timelines as per MSA is as given Exhibit 2.1. 
  
                                                                        
3  PricewaterhouseCoopers Limited.  

Chapter II - Project Management 
 
7 
Exhibit 2.1: Agreed timeline as per MSA 
SI prepared SRS for development of application software.  However, SRS was 
not prepared within the agreed timeline. The SRS sign-off was completed in 
respect of all modules only in September 2016, after a delay of 11 months. 
The Department, however, failed to ensure that SRS was complete in all 
respects before signing-off.  As a result, 1,702 Change Requests (CRs) were 
proposed, out of which 751 CRs were accepted as valid and SI was permitted 
to implement them.  Because of numerous CRs, the project and software 
development got delayed and Go-live status was achieved only in  
January 2021, as shown in Exhibit 2.2. 
Exhibit 2.2: Actual timeline achieved 
The time overrun of four years also led to cost overrun due to which the 
Department had to pay additional compensation for hardware maintenance, 
field level technical support, application resources, bandwidth charges, etc. as 
shown in Table 2.2.  
  
 Agreement Site 
preparation Pilot roll 
out readiness  
State roll 
out 
readiness 
Project  
Go-Live 
SRS Sign -
Off  
User 
Acceptance 
Acceptance 
of State roll 
out 
Acceptance 
of Pilot roll 
out 
June  
2017 
September 
2016 
March 
2019  
September 
2017 
March  
2018 
October  
2019 
January 
2021  
November 
2020  
May 
2015 
 
January 
2016  
October 
2015  
August 
2016  
June 
2016 
June 
2016  
November  
2016 
January 
2017  
January 
2017  
May 
2015  
Agreement User 
Acceptance Site 
preparation 
State roll 
out 
readiness 
 
SRS  Sign -Off  
Pilot roll out 
readiness 
Acceptance 
of State roll 
out 
Acceptance of 
Pilot roll out 
Project  
Go-Live 

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial and Human Resource Management 
System in Tamil Nadu 
 
 
8 
 
Table 2.2: Time and cost overrun  
Sl. No. Time Overrun 
Contract  signing 
May 2015 
Planned Go-live  
January 2017 
Actual Go-live  
 January 2021 
Delay in achieving 
the respective  
mile stones  
(months) Mile stone Time line as per 
contract  
Actual time line 
achieved 
1 Sign-off of detailed System 
Requirement Specification October 2015 September 2016 11  
2 Completion of User Acceptance 
Test  January 2016 September 2017 20 
3 Pilot rollout readiness 
June 2016 
March 2018 21 
4 Successful completion of site 
preparation and infrastructure 
deployment  
June 2017 12 
5 Statewide rollout readiness August 2016 October 2019 38 
6 Acceptance of Pilot rollout  November 2016 March 2019 28 
7 Acceptance of State rollout  January 2017 November 2020 46 
8 Go-live and Operations and 
maintenance phase 
60 months starting 
from January 2017 
Go-live commenced 
from 1.1.2021 48 
 Over all time delay in achieving Go-live 4 years  
Cost overrun (₹in crore) 
9 Additional compensation paid to SI on account of Change Requests, warranty, 
field level technical support, application resources, bandwidth and SR 
digitisation 
79.91 
(Source: Compiled from MSA and Monitoring Committee Meeting (MCM) minutes) 
Thus, delays starting from SRS sign-off had an impact at every stage of 
milestone due to poor project management by Department, which further 
delayed Go-live by four years.  
2.2 Time overrun 
GoTN constituted (July 2015) a Monitoring Committee4 (MC) under the 
chairmanship of Principal Secretary to Government, Finance Department to 
take necessary policy decision and render guidance to the project. The 
committee was also empowered to decide on matters relating to scope, time 
and deliverables. According to agreed timelines, IFHRMS should be 
developed in T5 + 20 months and IFHRMS should Go-live in January 2017. 
However, the timeline was extended thrice by MC as detailed in Table 2.3. 
 
  
                                                                        
4  Principal Secretary (IT), Secretary (Expenditure), Additional Secretary (Finance), 
 Commissioner of Accounts and Treasuries and Principal Accountant General (A&E) 
 would be the members. 
5  T = May 2015, i.e. the month of signing the agreement. 

Chapter II - Project Management 
 
9 
Table 2.3: Revision of Timelines for IFHRMS Roll out 
Sl. No. Extended up to Reasons  
1 July 2017 Due to administrative delays.  
2 March 2018 Delay in SR Digitisation, System Requirement Specifications 
Sign-off and carrying out corrections based on Conference 
Room Pilot (a demo of pilot version of modules to key users).  
3 December 2018 No reasons recorded for extension of time in the MC meeting 
held on 20 September 2018. 
(Source: Compiled from MCM minutes) 
In the first two instances timelines were extended with the condition that there 
would be no additional cost to Government. However, MC was silent about 
additional cost when timeline was extended for the third time. Though project 
timelines were not extended beyond December 2018, IFHRMS went live only 
in January 2021.  
Recommendation 1: 
Government should redraw project timelines and ensure that IFHRMS is 
completed in all aspects without further delays. 
2.2.1 Delay in preparation of SRS 
System Integrator had to deploy resource personnel to study the existing 
system, finance and treasury regulations, functioning of the Department 
through structured questionnaires and interviews with user groups to ensure 
the requirements were complete, accurate, consistent and unambiguous. Based 
on the study, SI prepared System Requirement Specifications (SRS) for 
Finance, Treasury and Human Resource Management related processes which 
was approved by the Department during January 2016 to September 2016. 
The first milestone for IFHRMS was SRS sign-off in T + 5 months i.e., by 
October 2015. However, SRS sign-off for all modules took place between 
January and September 2016. It was observed that the Department did not 
document the details of the meetings conducted between SI and DoF for SRS 
sign-off. Thus, the reasons for delays in SRS sign-off by the Department, 
which lasted up to 11 months, could not be assessed.   
Government replied (January 2023) that IFHRMS integrated finance and HR 
processes together, which required multiple levels of discussion with many 
stake holders, references to the erstwhile documents of various departments to 
bring clarity. Hence, it required reasonable time in documenting the SRS. 
The reply is not acceptable, as the Department had adopted the timelines for 
preparation of SRS based on Functional Requirement Specification (FRS) 
prepared by PMC engaged by Government for the project. 
2.2.2 Defective SRS sign-off leading to numerous CRs  
The SRS, prepared by SI and approved by the Department was an important 
document, as IFHRMS was developed specifically based on the requirements 

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial and Human Resource Management 
System in Tamil Nadu 
 
 
10 
 
included in SRS. Any change after signing off SRS would result in cost and 
time impact. 
After sign-off of SRS, SI conducted a Conference Room Pilot (CRP) in 
December 2016 and Key User Training (KUT)/ User Acceptance Test (UAT) 
during May 2017.  In CRP/KUT/UAT numerous changes in addition to what 
was already specified in the signed-off SRS were identified. As these changes 
were necessary for successful development and implementation of IFHRMS, 
SI proposed 971 ‘software application’ related ‘Change Requests’ (CRs) in 
seven lots.  
To study the above CRs, GoTN formed (July 2017) a sub-committee6 to 
decide on validity of CRs and its cost implications. The sub-committee 
deliberated and found that 512 CRs were valid (Table 2.4). 
Table 2.4: Application CRs proposed by SI and considered as valid  
Sl. 
No. 
CR Lot Proposed 
CRs 
Valid 
CRs 
Cost implication 
(₹in crore) 
Time implication  
(Man month) 
1 1 to 5 672 406 3.28 170.48 
2 6 133 65 0.58 28.50 
3 7 166 41 0.34 17.61 
 Total 971 512 4.20 216.59 
(Source: Compiled from related Government orders and change control notes) 
Audit checked the 512 CRs and found that 417 were either basic requirements 
or already mentioned in SRS.  However, the same were omitted and rendered 
the application incomplete (Table 2.5). 
Table 2.5: Application CRs considered invalid by Audit 
Sl.No. CR Lot CRs considered as 
valid by Department 
CRs considered valid 
by Audit 
Invalid CRs as 
per Audit 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) = (3)-(4) 
1 1 to 5 406 73 333 
2 6 65 11 54 
3 7 41 11 30 
 Total 512 95 417 
(Source: Compiled from change request data provided by DoF) 
Audit observed that 417 CRs (including 297 CRs critical for process 
completion) were invalid for the reasons as shown in the Table 2.6. 
  
                                                                        
6  Deputy Secretary to Government (Budget), Deputy Secretary to Government 
(Administrative Reforms), Additional Director (e-team), Joint Director  
(e-team) and Joint Director (New Health Insurance Scheme). 

Chapter II - Project Management 
 
11 
Table 2.6: Details of CRs considered invalid 
Description Number of CR 
items 
Items omitted in SRS/FRS but provision already available in Rules  23 
Items discussed in SRS/FRS but not included in the design  44 
Items part of work flow management flowing from extant Rules 
and SRS/FRS 350 
Total 417 
(Source: Compiled from change request data provided by DoF) 
Audit observed that failure of Department to ensure that business rules and 
workflow requirements were included in SRS, led to defective SRS sign-off 
and significant number of CRs. As a result, Department had to accept 417 CRs 
(81 per cent) out of the 512, which should have been otherwise included in 
SRS. This resulted in avoidable cost overrun of ₹3.44 crore and additional 
177.60 man months for development of CRs, which delayed Go-live of 
IFHRMS. 
Government replied (January 2023) that these items were found not to be basic 
standard process requirement or documented in SRS or Request for Proposal 
(RFP) and were discovered in later stages and felt necessary for day to day 
ease of use of system.  
The reply was not acceptable, as Government while justifying the delay of  
11 months in SRS sign-off had stated that SRS was prepared after multiple 
levels of discussion with many stake holders, references to the erstwhile 
documents of various departments to bring clarity. Such being the case, failure 
in not ensuring that all requirements were incorporated in SRS establishes that 
SRS sign-off was defective.  
Recommendation 2: 
Government should revisit the Change Requests approval process to 
avoid invalid Change Requests at the time and cost of the State 
exchequer. 
2.3 Cost overrun 
Master Service Agreement stipulated that the contract period is the period 
from date of signing of MSA to five years after Go-live or as further extended 
by the Department.  Warranty, maintenance and support throughout the 
contract period was the responsibility of SI.  Contract cost also included 
application development cost, Help Desk, manpower and back-up network 
connectivity charges. However, due to poor project management as discussed 
in the preceding paragraphs, the project got delayed and Department had to 
compensate the SI for this delay on various counts as discussed below: 
 
  

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial and Human Resource Management 
System in Tamil Nadu 
 
 
12 
 
2.3.1 Avoidable payment due to delay in achieving Go-live 
Delayed Go-live as already discussed entailed additional cost to the 
Department on various counts during the project development period until  
Go-live was achieved in January 2021 as follows:  
 The MC agreed to compensate the SI from October 2018 to the date 
of Go-live, considering it as interim period and paid ₹26.45 crore 
for the interim period towards deployment of application resources, 
provision of Help Desk, etc. 
 ₹25.62 crore towards cost of maintenance of installed hardware7 for 
the period from May 2017 to December 2020.  
 ₹6.76 crore towards redundant connectivity charges for the period 
from January 2018 to December 2020 and 
 ₹3.89 crore towards deployment of 123 field level technical 
resources for the period from May 2018 to May 2019. 
As such, the Department had to incur additional cost of ₹62.72 crore on the 
above counts, which could have been avoided by better project management to 
avoid delays. 
Government replied (January 2023) that all end user assets, manpower  
deployed and network connectivity were used for the various activities like 
data collection/cleansing, fine tuning of application, sensitisation and training 
of DDOs, digitisation of Service Registers etc. and hence additional cost paid 
was  justified. 
The reply was not acceptable because, as per clauses (c) and (d) of Section 3.1 
of MSA, commercial proposal includes cost for all the above items and SI will 
be solely responsible to bear the cost of any items that are not quoted or are 
under-quoted in this proposal, but are required to meet the Service Level 
Agreements (SLAs) or any other requirements as stated in the RFP. No 
additional payment for these components would be made to the System 
Integrator. 
2.3.2 Over-payment for deploying additional field level technical 
support  
During January 2019, SI requested deployment of additional field level 
resources based on the difficulty assessed during DDO training. The MC 
rejected this (January 2019) stating that additional resources (application 
support personnel) required by SI to meet SLA requirements should be 
deployed only at SI’s cost.  However, when SI again requested  
(September 2019) in this regard, it was sanctioned (March 2020) and  
₹13.75 crore was paid to the SI for deploying 228 additional resources at the 
rate of ₹36,785 per resource per month from June 2020 to November 2021. 
                                                                        
7  Desktops, printers, UPS and network switches. 

Chapter II - Project Management 
 
13 
During the course of audit, it was noticed that SI sub-contracted deployment 
of application support personnel in violation of non-assignment clause in 
MSA, which stipulated that SI shall not sub-contract maintenance of 
application and Help Desk.  Further, application support engineers deployed 
were actually paid ₹10,704 only against ₹36,785 quoted by WIPRO and 
sanctioned by Government. The lower salary paid to support personnel also 
violated the minimum wages fixed by GoTN viz., ₹13,440 and ₹14,100 for 
2020-21 and 2021-22 respectively. 
Thus, SI gained undue profit of ₹10.15 crore, (74 per cent) as only  
₹3.60 crore8 out of ₹13.75 crore paid by the Department was actually incurred 
by SI for deploying additional resources. 
Government stated (January 2023) that the work was executed only through 
authorised partners of SI and the cost quoted included all allowances and 
benefits of the employees. It was further stated that payments were made at the 
agreed rate and hence there was no over payment.  
The reply was not acceptable, as MSA stipulated that, sub-contractor was the 
one assigned with any part of the work by SI after necessary consent of the  
Department, which was not done. Besides, the agreement stipulated that the 
contract should be construed, interpreted and applied in accordance with the 
laws of the land.  Thus, failure of the Department in ensuring the above and 
accepting the claims as presented by the SI resulted in undue profit to the SI. 
Recommendation 3: 
Government should recover the excess amount paid to System Integrator 
for deploying field level technical support engineers as it was not covered 
in the agreement. 
                                                                        
8  Calculated at the rate of ₹10,704 for the number of staff deployed during that period. 

 
 
3.2.  
CHAPTER III 
BUDGET OPERATIONS AND 
ACCOUNTS COMPILATION 
 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
15 
CHAPTER III 
 
BUDGET OPERATIONS AND ACCOUNTS COMPILATION 
 
IFHRMS envisaged standardisation of budget operations with less manual efforts.  This was not achieved as budget operation module allowed transfer of funds between grants in violation of the provisions of budget manual, incurring of expenditure without any budget provision and withdrawal of entire budget allocation after expenditure had been incurred based on such budget allocation. 3.1 Introduction There are 14 modules in IFHRMS and audit covered the following core modules viz., Budget, Financial and Accounting (Bills and Accounts), Pension and Human Resources for detailed scrutiny in this Performance Audit. The relationship between the selected modules is shown in Exhibit 3.1. 
Exhibit 3.1: Core modules relationship 
 The data flow in IFHRMS starts from allocation of budget. Based on the budget allocated, Drawing and Disbursing Offices (DDOs) raise the bills (salary and non-salary), forward them to the respective Pay and Accounts Offices (PAOs)/District Treasuries (DTs) for processing and payment to beneficiaries is made through Electronic Clearing System (ECS). The transaction data generated is then compiled and furnished to Accountant General (A&E) for preparation of monthly accounts. The process starting from 
ACCOUNTS


Performance Audit on Integrated Financial and Human Resource Management 
System in Tamil Nadu 
16 
budget allocation to accounts compilation in IFHRMS is discussed in the 
following paragraphs. 
3.2 Budget Operations 
In pre-IFHRMS scenario, Department of Finance (DoF) manually collected 
budget requirement details from Heads of Departments (HoDs) in Compact 
Disks  and carried out budgeting activity in Microsoft Access.  
IFHRMS envisaged standardisation of budget operations with less manual 
efforts, real-time budget control, monitoring and analysis.  However, audit 
observed that improved decision making for Budget Transfer and  
re-appropriations was not achieved due to absence of processing controls 
which allows transfer of funds between Grants, incurring of expenditure 
without budget provision and withdrawal of budget provision after incurring 
expenditure as discussed in the succeeding paragraphs. 
The process of funds flow from Budget allocation to Final Modified 
Appropriation (FMA) is shown in the Exhibit 3.2. 
 
Exhibit 3.2: Funds flow from Budget allocation to Final Modified Appropriation 
 
3.2.1 Budget allocation 
Budget allocation and additional funds sanctioned through Additional 
Sanction Ledger (ASL) are distributed to all Budget Control Officers (BCOs) 
by HoDs through ‘budget transfer’ sub-module in IFHRMS. BCOs in turn 
distribute them to DDOs under their control. Workflow analysis revealed the 
following shortcomings: 
(i) Budget Manual stipulated that budget should not be transferred from 
one grant to another grant. Test check, however revealed that IFHRMS budget 
transfer process allows transfer of funds between HoDs irrespective of the 
Budget Allocation  
(Original) 
 
Supplementary  
Estimates (S) 
 
Additional funds required is 
sanctioned (ASL) 
  
Re-appropriation (R) 
Revised Estimates  
 Final Modified Appropriation 
(O + S + R) 

Chapter III - Budget Operations and Accounts Compilation 
17 
grants involved. For e.g. from Grant 6 (HoD code 0602-Animal Husbandry Department) to Grant 7 (HoD code 0701-Fisheries Department). This indicated gaps in design of budget transfer process. Government replied (January 2023) that budget transfer process is designed in such a way that it will not allow re-appropriation of budget from one grant to another. The reply was not acceptable, as budget transfer process allows transfer of funds between HoDs without any validation to restrict transfer of funds only between the HoDs of respective grants.  As a result there is a likelihood of funds getting transferred between HoDs across different grants, which contravenes clause 143(i) of Budget Manual. Recommendation 4: Government should strengthen budget module to prevent transfer of funds between grants by strictly enforcing provisions of budget manual. (ii) When budget allocation is transferred initially or during re-allocation of funds between DDOs, the availability of funds is known only on generation of Budget availability report.  However, the report has neither a date field to reflect the budget availability on that ‘date’ nor have description of the scheme for which budget was allocated and hence was not user-friendly (Exhibit 3.3). 
Exhibit 3.3: Budget availability report without nomenclature and date 
Government replied (January 2023) that as suggested by Audit, the description sub-head and date/time stamp had been included in the Budget availability Report. 3.2.2 Additional Sanctions process in IFHRMS DoF sanctions additional funds for an item of New Service (NS)1/New Instrument of Service (NIS)2/Specific Inclusion3/Re-appropriation4 based on   
                                                                 
1  An expenditure on new scheme not contemplated in the Budget. 
2  An expenditure on new scheme, which has been voted in the Legislature in the past. 
3  An expenditure for which specific approval of the Legislature is not necessary except 
to the extent savings could not be found from budget. 
4  Re-allocation of funds from the savings of one unit to other unit within the grant. 


Performance Audit on Integrated Financial and Human Resource Management 
System in Tamil Nadu 
18 
type of request from HoDs. Additional Sanction Ledger (ASL) in DoF contain 
details of all additional funds sanctioned over and above original budget 
estimates.  ASL is part of budget operations viz., Revised Estimates5/ First or 
Final Supplementary Estimates6/Final Modified Appropriation7  (FMA).   
The ASL approval process is shown in Exhibit 3.4. 
Exhibit 3.4: ASL work flow 
Work flow analysis of ASL revealed the following short comings: 
(i) ASL notifications are received in budget section of DoF for 
verification as a pooled list without any identification as to which department 
the individual ASLs are related to.  Due to this deficiency, the Department 
seeking ASL could not be identified.  Therefore, ‘Verifier’ in budget section 
processes the notification only on receipt of physical file from Department 
concerned which delays the ASL approval process. 
Government replied (January 2023) that suggestion of Audit to improve the 
ASL screen will be taken up with SI while carrying out value addition process 
for improving the user friendliness.  
(ii) After approval, HoDs receive ASL notification for distributing 
additional funds sanctioned. However, they could not act immediately on it as 
ASL GOs are not uploaded by Administrative Departments as provision to 
upload/ attach ASL GOs is not made mandatory in IFHRMS. In the absence of 
details of distribution required for further allocation in IFHRMS, HoDs have 
to wait for physical copy of GO, which delays distribution of funds to 
BCOs/DDOs. 
Government replied (January 2023) that the gap identified by Audit has been 
addressed and uploading of ASL GO had since been made mandatory. 
                                                                 
5  Estimate of probable receipt/expenditure for a financial year, made in the course of a 
year with reference to transactions already recorded and anticipated for the remainder 
of the year.  
6  Statement to be laid before the Legislature showing the estimated amount of further 
expenditure necessary over and above the expenditure authorised in Annual Financial 
Statement for that year. 
7  Sum allotted to an unit of appropriation as it stands at the end of the financial year. 
HoD will initiate Additional Budget 
requirement through Administrative 
Department 
DS (Budget) will verify and approve the 
additional Budget request 
Finance Department will examine and 
decide on type of ASL for  
NS/NIS/SI/Re-appropriation 
On approval Administrative Department 
will issue Government Order (GO) for 
ASL to  HoD 
On approval, Administrative Department 
will issue Draft GO 
Distribution by HoD to DDOs 
HoD receives GO from Administrative 
Department  

Chapter III - Budget Operations and Accounts Compilation 
19 
3.2.3 Operation of Contingency Fund 
Contingency Fund (CF) is operated under major head ‘8000’.  The CF is 
placed at disposal of Governor of the State to enable sanction of advances for 
meeting unforeseen expenditure pending authorisation of expenditure by State 
Legislature. The State currently has a CF corpus of ₹150 crore.  Funds for 
schemes identified as New Service/New Instrument of Service during the year 
after presentation of original estimates is generally provided in Supplementary 
Estimates through Additional Sanctions. However, based on urgency, 
Contingency Fund Advance (CFA) is sanctioned on specific request by HoDs.  
Once the State Legislature authorises the CFA, the advances from CF is 
recouped.  
3.2.3.1 Non-adherence to manual provision in recoupment of CF  
As per Section III of Tamil Nadu Contingency Fund Act, 1934 when 
additional funds for expenditure met from CF advance are approved by State 
Legislature and necessary Supplementary Appropriation Acts are passed, the 
entire expenditure booked under Part II - Contingency Fund would have to be 
transferred to appropriate heads under Part I - Consolidated Fund by minus 
debit under various heads opened under CF major head ‘8000’.  Accountant 
General (A&E) is solely responsible for making the recoupment adjustment 
entries and this was clearly brought out in SRS.  IFHRMS, however, allowed 
adjustment entries by Finance Department for recoupment of Contingency 
Fund indicating lack of processing controls to ensure that only AG (A&E) 
could do such adjustments. 
Government replied (January 2023) that it plans to issue amendment to Budget 
Manual as the CF recoupment process is system triggered in IFHRMS and the 
matter has been taken up with AG (A&E) to accept the change in existing 
procedure.  
3.2.3.2 Other points of interest  
(i) Two-stage processing for CFA sanction viz., one for ASL and another 
for CFA is time consuming and avoidable. Shortening the ASL to CFA 
approval workflow process by introducing one more ASL type viz., ‘ASL-CF’ 
would avoid delays in sanctioning CFA as (i) CFA request could be initiated 
soon after ASL GO is issued and (ii) it would do away with need for separate 
GO for CFA. 
Government replied (January 2023) that ASL for CF process was not 
automated to avoid blocking of funds and hence two stage processing exists. 
The reply is not acceptable, as the existing process only delays release of 
funds from CF and thereby defeats the purpose of CF sanction.  
(ii) An account of CF transactions and CF balance details as on date shall 
be maintained by DoF in Form ‘B’. However, IFHRMS report provides only 
the details of CF utilisation and not the CF balance.  As a result CF balance 
details have to be watched through a manual register which defeats the 
purpose of computerisation. 

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial and Human Resource Management 
System in Tamil Nadu 
20 
Government replied (January 2023) that the shortcoming highlighted by Audit 
has been addressed and from January 2023 ‘Form B’ report will exhibit the CF 
balance. 
(iii) The CF Government Order (CF GO) is issued only after the 
sanction/approval of CF advance and thus ‘CF GO date’ should be invariably 
on or after ‘CF sanction date’.  Audit noticed that due to lack of input controls, 
the system accepts a date earlier than CF sanction date.  For instance, in 
respect of CFA number 20220800748, CF sanction date is 24 August 2022, 
while CF GO date is 22 August 2022 resulting in lack of credibility of 
IFHRMS data. 
Government replied (January 2023) that following audit observation the bug 
has been fixed by providing necessary validation control for date. 
(iv) CFA number is auto generated in IFHRMS. Cross verification of a 
CFA GO with CFA processed in IFHRMS, revealed that the auto-generated 
CFA number 2022080074 dated 24 August 2022 differs from the CFA number 
mentioned (i.e. number 6) in GO.  Also, instead of auto-generating CFA 
number from ‘1’ at the beginning of a financial year, the system randomly 
auto generated the number 74 for 2022-23 wrongly portraying that 73 CFAs 
were already sanctioned in the financial year, when only 5 CFAs were 
sanctioned. Thus, IFHRMS auto-generates incorrect and misleading ‘CFA 
number’. 
Government replied (January 2023) that the issue has been rectified and 
proper sequential numbering of the CFA sanctions has been ensured. 
3.2.4 Budget utilisation 
Analysis of budget allocation vis-a-vis expenditure at sub-head level is given 
in Table 3.1.  
Table 3.1: Sub-head wise budget allocation and expenditure 
Sl. No. Number of  
sub-heads 
Budget allocation  
(₹ in crore) 
Expenditure 
(₹ in crore) 
Expenditure  
to Budget ratio 
1 4,806 3,49,737.81 3,12,479.89 0.89 
2 35 1.50 38.23 25.49 
3 203 0.32 5,011.94 15,662.31 
Total 5,044 3,49,739.63 3,17,530.06   
(Source: Budget data) 
It is seen from Table 3.1 that while expenditure was within allocated budget in 
95 per cent of the sub-heads (4,806) in the remaining sub-heads (238) it 
exceeded the budget allocation by more than 25 times. The increase was more 
pronounced in 203 sub-heads, where against total budget allocation of  
₹0.32 crore expenditure booked was ₹5,011.94 crore (15,662.31 times).  In 
most of these cases, only token provision was made in original/supplementary 
                                                                 
8  First 4 digits denotes year, next 2 digits the month and last 4 digits the serial number.  

Chapter III - Budget Operations and Accounts Compilation 
21 
estimates and the balance amount was met by re-appropriation, indicating that 
expenditure was incurred without sufficient funds either in Original or in 
Supplementary estimates. This points to inaccurate budget estimation despite 
availability of previous three year budget and expenditure data in the system 
for compiling the budget estimates for the current year. 
It was also seen that though availability of budget is mandatory for processing 
non-salary bills in IFHRMS, salary bills (i.e. salary/pension), could be 
processed. Thus, there is no validation control for DDOs to check for budget 
availability in respect of salary bills. 
Government replied (January 2023) that token provisions are made with an 
aim to bring to the notice of the Legislative Assembly of the proposed 
implementation of the new scheme and additional fund sanction would be 
brought to the notice of the Legislative Assembly through Supplementary 
Estimates. It was further stated that after the system gets stabilised, salary bills 
would be validated with budget allocation limits at DDO level. 
While Government accepted the observation on lack of validation control for 
DDOs to check for budget availability in respect of salary bills, in so far as the 
observation about expenditure being incurred without sufficient provision 
either in Original/Supplementary estimates, the reply is not acceptable as in 
the above cases, major portion of expenditure was incurred only through  
re-appropriation. 
3.2.5 Re-appropriation 
Re-appropriation is transfer of saving from one unit of appropriation to meet 
additional expenditure under another unit of appropriation within the same 
grant/charged appropriation by competent authority. According to  
Paragraph 14 (2) of TN Budget Manual, sufficient funds should have been 
provided for the expenditure in the Appropriation Act or by re-appropriation 
by the authority competent to sanction re-appropriation. Analysis of re-
appropriation data revealed the following: 
 In 1,082 sub-heads, additional provision given in FMA-I  
(24 March 2022) was subsequently withdrawn in FMA-II  
(31 March 2022) and in 133 sub-heads provisions withdrawn in 
FMA-I was given in FMA-II, all within a week’s time. 
 In nine Grants involving 14 sub-heads, expenditure of ₹37.92 crore 
was incurred based on Original/Supplementary provisions.  This 
included ₹34.51 crore incurred during August 2021 towards 
Madurai Airport Expansion, for which fund was provided9 in 
Supplementary estimates. However, the provision was later entirely 
withdrawn through re-appropriation as there was no processing 
control in IFHRMS to retain the provision to the extent of 
expenditure incurred. This resulted in expenditure being incurred 
without any budget provision. 
                                                                 
9  Through Additional Sanction Ledger to be included in Supplementary provision. 

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial and Human Resource Management 
System in Tamil Nadu 
22 
 In five Grants, expenditure (₹2.26 crore) was incurred under  
six sub-heads based on funds given only through re-appropriation 
i.e. there was no Original/Supplementary provision. The 
expenditure included ₹2.05 crore (State Share) incurred10 in  
March 2022, for ‘Inclusive Education for disabled at Secondary 
Stage’. Thus, IFHRMS allowed incurring of expenditure without 
Original/ Supplementary provision, i.e. without authority of the 
Legislature. 
 In Grant 16 - Finance Department, an amount of ₹32,000 was 
incurred under Head of Account (HoA) ‘7610 (Loans to 
Government servants) 00-202-AB’, without any fund allocation in 
original, supplementary or re-appropriation.  Scrutiny revealed that 
the expenditure related to refund of excess loan recovered from 
Government Servant. However, as there is no provision in IFHRMS 
to record deduct entry under the Loan head, it was shown as 
expenditure. Due to this shortcoming in IFHRMS, 35 similar refund 
transactions (April 2021 to June 2022) were all incorrectly 
exhibited as loans disbursed, inflating the loan expenditure during 
the year. 
Therefore, withdrawal of provision sanctioned by Legislature after incurring 
expenditure and provision of funds through re-appropriation for items not 
approved by Legislature, violates provisions of Budget Manual. Moreover, 
audit observed that re-appropriation takes place outside IFHRMS and  
provision/withdrawal of funds during last week of financial year shows that 
re-appropriation is a mere year-end adjustment exercise. 
Government accepted the observations and stated (January 2023) that  
(i) provision of alert message would be made while generating FMA report, 
(ii) instances of withdrawal of provision after incurring expenditure and 
allowing of expenditure through re-appropriation without provision of funds 
would be taken up for detailed scrutiny and gaps, if any, would be addressed 
and (iii) bug noticed in the bill type would be fixed so that the refunds are not 
allowed as an expenditure. 
Recommendation 5: 
Government should strengthen budget module to prevent expenditure in 
Heads of Account without budget provision and withdrawal of budget 
allocation for Heads of Account where expenditure had been incurred. 
  
                                                                 
10  Funds provided through ASL. 

Chapter III - Budget Operations and Accounts Compilation 
23 
3.3 Accounts Compilation 
The quality of IFHRMS accounts data provided by the Department to  
AG (A&E) leaves a lot to be desired due to incorrect mapping of group 
codes, wrong classification of Voted/Charged expenditure, booking 
expenditure under HoAs not in LMMH, unauthorised operation of HoAs 
by PAOs/DTs, wrong classification of sub-accounts, incorrect 
classification of cash remittances, mismatch between debit and credit 
figures and wrong booking of deduct refunds boosting the revenue 
receipts. IFHRMS data does not provide a picture of all Government 
expenditure and receipt without manual intervention, as receipts are still 
compiled outside IFHRMS using old software, while on expenditure side 
AG (A&E) has to follow up with the DDOs concerned for rectification, 
which amounted to duplication of work involving additional time and 
effort. Thus, the purpose of automation of accounts compilation is lost, as 
manual intervention defeated the expected outcome of IFHRMS. 
IFHRMS envisaged that AG (A&E) should be able to prepare Monthly 
Accounts11  through the system itself and furnish the same online to 
Department of Finance. However, interfacing between AG (A&E) and 
IFHRMS is yet to be achieved.  The flow of accounts data from IFHRMS is 
shown in Exhibit 3.5. 
Exhibit 3.5: Flow of accounts data 
  
                                                                 
11 Including all out of Treasury transactions by AG (A&E) for the month. 
Transaction table  
(Voucher level  
receipts and expenditure) 
xml Files including above tables and 
miscellaneous data are shared  
each month with AG (A&E) 
AG (A&E) imports the data into VLC  
Monthly Civil Accounts are generated  
at AG (A&E) 
Monthly transaction data is generated as 
single xml file for each DT/PAO 
Balances table  
(Head of Account wise  
receipts and expenditure) 

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial and Human Resource Management 
System in Tamil Nadu 
24 
Workflow analysis by Audit revealed that compilation of receipts and 
expenditure in IFHRMS and reconciliation of accounts still requires manual 
intervention.  Further, analysis of the IFHRMS data for the year 2021-22 
showed that the system lacked validations to prevent wrong booking of 
expenditure leading to incorrect classification of heads of accounts. The 
outcome of the analysis is discussed in succeeding paragraphs. [ 
3.3.1 Standardisation and structural uniformity not achieved 
As part of standardisation and to bring in structural uniformity in accounting 
codes, Government decided (March 2019) to introduce modifications in the 
Heads of Accounts structure, at various levels in IFHRMS. Analysis of 
implementation of those modifications revealed the following: 
(i)  Wrong classification of ‘Voted’ and ‘Charged’ expenditure  
As part of standardisation and bringing in structural uniformity, all non-salary 
items of expenditure are to be distinguished as ‘Voted’ and ‘Charged’ at  
sub-detailed head level12. For this purpose, ‘Voted’ expenditure was assigned  
sub-detailed heads ‘01’ to ‘49’ and ‘Charged’ expenditure was assigned  
‘51’ to ‘99’.   
Audit observed that the above classification was not implemented in IFHRMS 
as sub-detailed heads from ‘01’ to ‘99’ were operated for both ‘Voted’ and 
‘Charged’ expenditure without any distinction as seen from data analysis: 
 In 1,476 records, transactions amounting to ₹2,289.66 crore 
(Appendix 3.1) was classified as ‘Charged’ under sub-detailed 
heads ranging between ‘01’ to ‘09’ meant for ‘Voted’ items. 
 Conversely, in 506 records, transactions amounting to ₹3.92 crore 
was classified as ‘Voted’ under sub-detailed head codes ‘51’ and 
above meant for ‘Charged’ items.  (Appendix 3.2). 
In the case of salary items this distinction is at sub-head level only.  As long as 
salary and non-salary items of expenditure operate with same sub-detail heads, 
limiting ‘Voted’ and ‘Charged’ distinction at sub-detail head level to  
‘Non-salary items’ leaving out ‘Salary items’, the intended standardisation and 
structural uniformity in account codes would not be achieved. 
Thus mapping of sub-detailed heads to the relevant nature of Voted/Charged 
expenditure was incomplete leading to wrong classification of Voted/Charged 
expenditure. 
Government replied (January 2023) that possibilities would be explored to 
bring in unique sub-detailed head codes for the salary related heads of 
accounts. 
(ii) HoA with incorrect Group Codes:  
A group code (one digit) for classification of Receipts and Expenditure was 
introduced (March 2019). In IFHRMS, HoA is identified by 16 digit code as 
                                                                 
12  Also mentioned in ‘Introductory Note’ of Budget publication, 2021-22. 

Chapter III - Budget Operations and Accounts Compilation 
25 
follows vis-a-vis 15 digit code in the erstwhile ATBPS13  as shown in  
Exhibit 3.6. 
Exhibit 3.6: Structure of Head of account  
As shown above, the group code precedes the detailed head for identifying the 
type of receipt/expenditure viz., central receipts, capital expenditure, etc. 
Analysis of ‘Balances Table’ revealed that unrelated group codes were 
assigned to transactions totalling ₹2,740.01 crore in 110 records (Table 3.2). 
The transactions were receipts/refund of receipts/recoveries of overpayment, 
carried out in ATBPS involving manual interventions, as discussed in 
Paragraph 3.3.9. 
Table 3.2: Wrong group codes 
Sl.No. Description  Correct 
group code 
Wrong 
group code  
Transaction Amount  
(₹) 
1 Central Receipts  1 2 18,20,579 
2 State Resources 2 1,3 2,78,992 
3 Capital Expenditure 4 3 4,82,02,722 
4 Loans and Advances 5 6 40,90,37,949 
5 Public Debt 6 5 26,94,07,43,910 
6 Public Account 8 2,3 27,120 
 Total 27,40,01,11,272 
(Source: IFHRMS accounts data) 
Assignment of incorrect group codes defeated the objective of standardisation 
and structural uniformity in accounting codes.  
Government replied (January 2023) that correct group code combination is 
being validated now while converting ATBPS account entries for 
incorporation into IFHRMS. 
Recommendation 6:  
Government should achieve standardisation in Accounts classification to 
ensure correct classification of expenditure figures in the books of 
account. 
                                                                 
13 Automated Treasury Bill Passing System - The old software system used to raise 
bills and still in use for raising bills of nearly 18,000 employees of Aided Schools 
and Courts which are outside IFHRMS. 
Major Head 
(4 digits) 
 
Sub-major Head 
(2 digits) 
Minor Head 
(3 digits) 
Sub-head 
(2 digits) 
Group Code 
(1 digit) 
 
Detailed Head 
(2 digits) 
Sub-detailed Head 
(2 digits) 

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial and Human Resource Management 
System in Tamil Nadu 
26 
3.3.2 Operation of incorrect Major Heads 
(a)  According to Rule 26(d) of Government Accounting Rules, 1990, 
detailed classification of account heads in Government accounts shall be as 
prescribed in the List of Major and Minor Head (LMMH) from time to time.  
No head of account other than the Major/Sub major/Minor heads prescribed in 
LMMH can be operated for booking transactions. 
Audit noticed the following from data analysis of Balances Table: 
(i) Two transactions totalling ₹5,300 were booked in IFHRMS by 
operating major head ‘0271’ (Table 3.3). This head is not prescribed in 
LMMH.  
Table 3.3: Booking of expenditure in ‘0271’ Major Head not in LMMH 
Sl. No. Head of Account Detailed Head Amount (in ₹) 
1 027160800AT 21101 5,000 
2 027103800AA 21101 300 
Total 5,300 
(Source: IFHRMS accounts data and List of Major and Minor Head) 
(ii) Nineteen transactions totalling ₹8,17,730 (Appendix 3.3) were booked 
in IFHRMS under major head ‘8005’ which was replaced with major head 
‘8009’ from LMMH vide CGA Correction Slip No.379 dated 22 June 2000.  
(b)  Audit noticed that 459 transactions totalling ₹12,24,751 were wrongly 
booked under ‘8001’, a major head not in IFHRMS code reference for  
2021-22. On further analysis, these transactions were found to be receipts, 
which were done through ATBPS involving manual interventions, as 
discussed in Paragraph 3.3.9 defeating the purpose of computerisation of 
accounts. 
All the above indicated that the HoA Master Tables in IFHRMS is incomplete, 
as they did not update the corrections done by Controller General of Accounts. 
Government replied (January 2023) that the incorrect major heads have been 
identified and disabled in IFHRMS from August 2022 and henceforth the 
booking under incorrect major heads would not happen. 
Recommendation 7:  
Government should ensure that master data of head of accounts is 
continuously updated, so that accounts are not booked under  
non-existent Head of Account. 
  

Chapter III - Budget Operations and Accounts Compilation 
27 
3.3.3 Unauthorised operation of HoA by PAOs/District Treasuries 
For making payment in IFHRMS, LMMH prescribes distinctive HoAs  
‘8670-00-111; 8670-00-113’ for ECS payment and ‘8670-00-102;  
8670-00-104’ for cheque payments by PAOs and Treasuries respectively.  
During data analysis of ‘Balances Table’, Audit noticed that payment for 
2,33,176 transactions totalling ₹2,59,648.20 crore was made under HoA 
‘8670-00-101-AA’, which is meant for cheque payments and to be operated by 
AG (A&E). Incorrect use of HoA ‘8670-00-101-AA’ by PAOs/Treasuries/ 
Sub-Treasuries, instead of the LMMH prescribed HoA, gives a misleading 
picture that all the above payments were made through cheques.  This was due 
to wrong mapping of HoAs for payments in IFHRMS. Similar instances of 
wrong mapping of HoAs, which are to be operated by AG (A&E) but being 
operated by PAOs/Treasuries, are listed in Table 3.4, indicating absence of 
validation control in IFHRMS. 
Table 3.4: Unauthorised HoAs operated by DDOs in IFHRMS 
Sl. 
No. Major Head Minor Head Sub Head 
Transaction 
Amount 
 (in ₹) 
1 8235-General and 
Other Reserve Funds 
117-Guarantee 
Redemption Fund 
AA-Guarantee Redemption Fund 1,77,115 
2 0049-Interest Receipts 
04-Interest Receipts of 
State/Union Territory 
Governments with 
Legislature 
110-Interest realised 
on investment of 
Cash Balance 
AA-Other Receipts 25,15,28,964 
800-Other Receipts CB-Interest on investment from 
Non-Obligatory Sinking funds 
[01601] 
12,97,73,358 
CI-Interest (Premium) accrued on 
Open Market Loans 
67,73,274 
CW-Interest on Investment of 
Defined Contribution Pension 
Scheme Deposits for Government 
Servants 
95,165 
3 Receipts head with 
minor head 901 
 
901-Share of net 
proceeds assigned to 
States 
.. 18,65,125 
4 Expenditure Service 
head with minor head 
901 and 902 
 
901-Deduct 
Recoveries 
902-Deduct amount 
met from [name of 
the Reserve 
Fund/Deposit 
Account] 
.. 8,08,72,578 
 Total 47,10,85,579 
(Source: IFHRMS accounts data) 

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial and Human Resource Management 
System in Tamil Nadu 
28 
Government replied (January 2023) that AG (A&E) operated heads of 
accounts have been disabled in IFHRMS portal from August 2022 to prevent 
operation of the same by other users. 
3.3.4 Operation of unrelated HoD code for booking expenditure 
under consolidated fund 
In IFHRMS, apart from 16 digit for HoA, additional provision is made for 
Demand Number (3 digits), HoD (2 digits) and DDO location (8 digits). The 
HoD code ‘66’ is allotted to ‘Part III - Public Accounts’. From data analysis, it 
was observed that transactions with Major Heads ranging from ‘0043’ to 
‘7610’ which pertain to ‘Part I - Consolidated Fund’ were wrongly booked 
under HoD code ‘66’. The above transactions totalling ₹6.46 crore, included 
13 receipt heads, seven expenditure heads and one loan head of  
‘Part I -Consolidated Fund’ (Appendix 3.4). This indicated that the system 
had no validation control to prevent booking transactions under wrong HoD 
code resulting in wrong exhibition of accounts. 
Government replied (January 2023) that HoD code and major head of account 
mapping has been built into system from July 2022 and necessary validations 
have been placed at post level, bill generation level and bill passing level to 
ensure correctness. 
3.3.5 Wrong sub-account classification 
Data analysis of ‘Balances Table’ revealed that wrong sub-account14 codes 
were shown against major heads used for booking receipts totalling ₹3.08 lakh 
and expenditure totalling ₹167.46 crore (Appendix 3.5). As accounts are 
forwarded to AG (A&E) every month by DTs/PAOs sub-account wise, wrong 
depiction in monthly accounts impacts the accounting process in AG (A&E) 
(Table 3.5).  This indicates deficiency in compilation of monthly accounts by 
the system.  
Table 3.5: List of Major heads with wrong sub account codes 
Sl. 
No. 
Major Head Subsidiary account as per data Correct Subsidiary account 
1 0202 SA-02 SA 14, 15A, 15B, 15C 
2 0202 SA-11 SA 14, 15A, 15B, 15C 
3 0202 SA-20A SA 14, 15A, 15B, 15C 
4 0202 SA-20B SA 14, 15A, 15B, 15C 
5 0202 SA-27D SA 14, 15A, 15B, 15C 
6 0210 SA-27D SA 16, 16A 
7 0405 SA-18B SA 18D 
8 2012 SA-12 SA 10 
9 2405 SA-18C SA 18D 
10 4401 SA-18A SA 18B 
11 4406 SA-18D SA 05 
12 4700 SA-18F SA 08 
(Source: IFHRMS accounts data) 
                                                                 
14  Sub-accounts exhibiting Receipts and Disbursements up to the lowest tier of 
classification for the Major heads in operation. 

Chapter III - Budget Operations and Accounts Compilation 
29 
Government replied (January 2023) sub-account major head combination had 
been revisited and the wrongly classified sub-accounts were rectified. 
3.3.6 Incorrect classification of cash remittances 
As per LMMH, for Expenditure Heads (Revenue Account), ‘Recoveries of 
overpayments’ pertaining to previous year(s) shall be recorded under distinct 
minor head 'Deduct-Recoveries of Overpayments’ (i.e. ‘911’). This minor 
head should come below the major/sub-major head concerned as detailed head 
‘77’ and sub detailed head ‘02’ ‘without affecting gross expenditure under 
functional Major/Sub-Major Head in the Appropriation Accounts’. 
Data analysis revealed that cash remittances in 93,495 instances amounting to 
₹96.72 crore arising out of ‘Recoveries of over payments’ of previous years 
were incorrectly recorded by operating minor heads other than ‘911’, 
indicating wrong classification. This points to non-incorporation of the above 
business rule in the system. 
Government accepted the observation and stated (January 2023) that all DDOs 
have been instructed to remit the previous year over payments under 911-over 
payment recovery head and the business rule would also be incorporated. 
3.3.7 Mismatch between debit and credit figures 
For any transaction, two entries are recorded, one on debit side and the other 
on credit side. The debit side total should be equal to credit side total. Both 
‘Transaction and Balances’ tables had these entries. 
Data analysis, however, revealed that the ‘Balances Table’ for May 2021 had a 
difference of ₹11,060 between Debit and Credit columns totals, indicating a 
lapse in the system. On further analysis, it was noticed that an Alteration 
Memorandum (AM) done through ATBPS in May 2021 had minus entry of  
₹5,530 on debit side affecting HoA 201400114AK30101 and plus entry of  
₹5,530 on credit side affecting HoA 201400114AK37702. Audit observed that 
AMs are still being proposed through ATBPS because receipts and payments 
of few aided educational institutions and Courts are still being processed in 
ATBPS.  As ATBPS data was incorporated into IFHRMS, every month this 
reflected in IFHRMS data too. 
Government replied (January 2023) that conversion of ATBPS accounts into 
IFHRMS is only a temporary arrangement till the vacation of stay obtained by 
some of the aided institutions who continued to operate in ATBPS. However, 
instructions would be issued to all TOs/PAOs to cross check the ATBPS 
entries before sending conversion of Accounts data to IFHRMS. 
3.3.8 Wrong operation of ‘900’ (Deduct refunds) Minor Head 
As per LMMH, ‘Refunds of Revenue’ for Receipt Heads should be taken as 
reduction of revenue receipts under Minor Head ‘900 - Deduct-Refunds’ 
opened under respective major/sub-major heads. The system should be 
suitably designed to book ‘Refunds of Revenue’ for Receipt Heads under 

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial and Human Resource Management 
System in Tamil Nadu 
30 
minor head ‘900 - Deduct-refunds’ as ‘ minus entry’ under respective 
major/sub-major heads.  
It was, however, noticed from analysis of ‘Balances Table’ that in  
1,358 instances, refunds totalling ₹1.58 crore were incorrectly recorded as 
revenue receipts under minor head ‘900’, instead of accounting it as a ‘Deduct 
refund minus entry’.  Thus the revenue receipts was inflated by ₹1.58 crore 
during 2021-22 and indicated that the related business rule was not 
incorporated in the system. 
Government replied (January 2023) that business rules to avoid remittance 
through e-challan under minor head ‘900 – Deduct refund’ have been 
incorporated. It was further stated that business rule would also be 
incorporated in the refund bill. 
3.3.9 Receipts 
Receipts are remittances made to Government for certain purposes. When 
remittances are made into Government account in IFHRMS portal, e-challans 
are generated.  e-challan remittances take place through four banks viz., State 
Bank of India (SBI), Bank of Baroda, Indian Bank and Indian Overseas Bank.  
The receipts from these banks are auto-reconciled and accounted and 
subsequently included in monthly accounts automatically. Apart from  
e-challans, the following types of remittances outside IFHRMS are also 
received: 
e-receipts of four departments from various banks 
The receipts of four departments viz., Commercial Taxes15, Registration, 
Transport and Prohibition and Excise are remitted via ‘online payment’ mode 
and agency banks upload their scrolls in e-scroll portal on the next day  
(i.e. T+1).  Entire receipts of the previous month is downloaded from e-scroll 
portal in xml file and processed in ATBPS server for grouping receipts  
HoA-wise. Receipts under each HoA is treated as a physical challan 
remittance and input into ATBPS manually. 
Physical challans received from State Bank of India every day 
Receipts are also continued to be collected through physical challans presented 
at cash counters of SBI, Treasury branch. All physical challans are sent daily 
along with scrolls by SBI, Treasury branch. These individual challan details 
are manually fed into ATBPS.   
e-treasury challans processed at e-treasury branch, SBI 
Receipts of some offices16 are processed as e-treasury receipts at  
e-treasury branch, SBI.  Remittances received by these offices are 
consolidated and one physical challan is prepared office-wise and are captured 
in ATBPS. 
                                                                 
15 After 27 December 2021, the remittances are made through IFHRMS i.e. as  
 e-challans. 
16 TNPSC, GCTP POS, TN SANDMINING, E COURT, TNGOVT_RTI, etc. 

Chapter III - Budget Operations and Accounts Compilation 
31 
The above mentioned three kinds of receipts are processed in ATBPS with  
15-digit HoA. They are subsequently merged with e-challan receipts (which 
have 16 digit HoA) generated in IFHRMS to arrive at total monthly receipts 
and forwarded to AG (A&E) as part of Transactions and Balances tables. 
Thus, remittances occurring outside IFHRMS have to be brought into 
IFHRMS through manual interventions for accounts compilation. The 
compilation of receipts data from different sources and AMs occurring outside 
IFHRMS, defeats the primary objective of IFHRMS viz., ‘leveraging IT for 
expeditious receipt and accounting of money in the Government Exchequer’. 
Government replied (January 2023) that capacity augmentation of  
e-challan servers is in progress, once the augmentation is completed all the 
challans generated outside IFHRMS including integration with major 
department would be brought into IFHRMS, which would eliminate dual 
accounting (ATBPS and IFHRMS) and would prevent manual interventions. 
Recommendation 8:  
Government should bring about real time integration of expenditure and 
receipt transactions in IFHRMS for a truly automated accounting system. 
3.3.10 Reconciliation 
SRS states that Treasury will reconcile its Payment and Receipts reports with 
all DDO’s on monthly basis and any observations on misclassification of 
HoAs, realisation of payment for missing entries would be set right and 
correction entries passed before closure of monthly civil accounts. 
Audit, however, observed that ‘Form 70’ report in IFHRMS, shows all 
expenditure settled during a month (which also include transactions relating to 
previous months) instead of expenditure actually booked in the month.  As this 
does not aid monthly reconciliation, DDOs maintain a physical register, 
wherein expenditure booked for the month are recorded, and submit it to 
BCOs for monthly reconciliation.  
Due to this, BCOs, also manually consolidate the figures received from all 
DDOs under their control in a physical reconciliation register for 
reconciliation with Treasury Input Section.  They then prepare an abstract and 
send it to their HoD for reconciliation with AG (A&E) figures. Thus, the 
entire reconciliation of accounts activity, despite being envisaged as an 
automated process, is done manually outside of IFHRMS, which defeats its 
objectives. 
Government replied (January 2023) that MTC 70 report would be revisited 
and the parameter for generating reports would be reconsidered as suggested 
by Audit. 

 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
PROCESSING OF BILLS 
 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
33 
CHAPTER IV 
 
PROCESSING OF BILLS  
 
Bill processing, a critical module of IFHRMS that handles the entire 
Government disbursement, had deficiencies like absence of provision to 
prevent double payment for same claim and to ensure that bills are 
processed within stipulated timeline, which in turn affected the 
beneficiaries (employees/service providers/citizens) as payment was 
delayed. Bills could be generated under wrong HoAs without verification 
of check points leading to misclassification of accounts. Even after two 
years of IFHRMS rollout, PAO/Treasury rely only on physical copies of 
sanction orders, vouchers, etc., as bills could be presented online without 
attaching the soft copies of supporting documents. Bills could be rejected 
by PAO/Treasury without recording any reasons and DDOs had to 
depend on physical copies of the returned bills to take corrective action. 
4.1 Bill Module 
4.1.1 Introduction 
Disbursement process is an integral part of PAO/Treasury offices and mission 
critical module of IFHRMS which handles the processes from Bill creation to 
payment to beneficiary, after necessary checks and verification, for the State 
as a whole. The following outcomes in bill processing were expected once 
IFHRMS was implemented: 
 Bill processing to be completely integrated with other applications 
like e-pension, budget, etc.  
 Facility for online submission of bill.  
 Generate alerts for next level official after submission of bill by the 
subordinate officer. 
 Provision of dual factor authentication, digital signature validation/ 
authentication.  
 Ensure that the bills are processed within the prescribed time frame 
and audit trail was maintained. 
The process of bill creation, bill processing and bill payment in IFHRMS is 
shown in Exhibit 4.1.  
 
  

 Performance Audit on Integrated Financial and Human Resource Management 
System in Tamil Nadu 
 
34 
Exhibit 4.1: Bill creation, processing and payment process 
 
Work flow analysis of Bill processing, a mission critical module handling 
Government transactions, revealed deficiencies viz., double payment for same 
claim, delay in processing bills, generation of bills under wrong Heads of 
Accounts, continued dependency on physical copies of the supporting 
vouchers, etc., which are discussed in the succeeding paragraphs. 
Bill creation  
4.1.2 Processing of bills under wrong HoA  
During bill preparation, the ‘Initiator’ in DDOs office must select the HoA for 
accounting of expenditure. The system, however, does not alert the user, if 
‘Initiator’ selects an unrelated HoA. Thus, bill could be generated successfully 
if sufficient budget is available under the wrongly selected HoA. As a result, 
DDOs tend to generate and submit bills to PAOs/Treasuries under unrelated 
HoAs as illustrated below:     
  
Approver (DDO) will 
approve/reject the bill based on 
checks and validations. 
Initiator creates bill  
(Bill Number generated)  
and verifier checks the bill 
Return for correction  
 Approve (Token generated) 
Reject (Bill cancelled) 
L1 Auditor verifies/audits the bill 
and marks his observations 
L2 Auditor verifies/audits the bill 
and marks his observations and 
forwards the bill for approval 
L3 Auditor approves/rejects the 
bill based on the information 
furnished 
Cash section creates ECS batch and 
sends to bank and intimation goes 
to DDO 
Rejection (Returned to DDO with 
objection memo) 
 
Bill approved 
DDO User 
 Treasury User 

Chapter IV - Processing of Bills 
35 
Illustrative case: 
In Erode District Treasury office, two bills were submitted by DDO for 
same claim of rent reimbursement (₹44,400) in two token numbers viz., 
0501011621050001 and 0501011621050002. While in first token number 
0501011621050001, a rental reimbursement claim was made under wrong 
expense type i.e. ‘Medical reimbursement’, in the second token number 
0501011621050002, the same amount was claimed as rental 
reimbursement under correct expense type i.e. ‘rent’. The treasury 
rejected the wrong claim and returned the bill. 
The above case highlights the shortcoming in the system due to which a bill 
with wrong HoA classification can be submitted, by oversight, for payment by 
DDO.  
Such instances, as and when detected, are rectified through Alteration 
Memorandums (AMs) /Transfer Entries (TEs) as revealed in data analysis 
wherein AMs impacting 422 HoAs and involving ₹465.41 crore were 
proposed by 23 District Treasuries (DTs) during 2021-22, apart from AMs 
through pen corrections, which could not be quantified by Audit. Apart from 
the AMs commented above, TEs to correct misclassifications were also 
proposed. A comparative analysis of TEs proposed during 2020-21  
(pre Go-live) and 2021-22 (post Go-live) is given in Table 4.1. 
Table 4.1: Comparative analysis of TEs (pre Go-live and post Go-live) 
 
Sl.No. Details 2020-21 2021-22 Percentage of 
decrease 
1 Number of transfer entries 5,334 3,981 25  
(Source: AG (A&E) data) 
The above numbers indicate that despite TE incidences coming down in  
2021-22, the persisting need for significant number of TEs reinforces the 
Audit observation about lack of HoA validation in IFHRMS.  
IFHRMS has check points to ensure correctness of bills prepared by DDOs. 
Though DDOs could see the check points on-screen while creating bills, there 
is no suitable mechanism viz., ‘check box’ to ensure compliance/ 
non-compliance by DDO for each check point. It is suggested that a ‘check 
box’ feature for check points may be provided to DDOs to prevent wrong 
selection of HoA. 
The Government agreed (January 2023) to implement the suggestion of Audit 
to make check points mandatory to minimise such occurrences. 
Recommendation 9:  
Government should strengthen IFHRMS to prevent generation of bills 
under wrong Head of Account. 
  

 Performance Audit on Integrated Financial and Human Resource Management 
System in Tamil Nadu 
 
36 
4.1.3 Multiple beneficiary IDs 
Non-salary bills are processed in IFHRMS for settling third party beneficiaries 
including persons and organisations for services rendered.  The bill ‘Initiator’, 
after entering the basic bill details viz., ‘Bill Type’, ‘Expense Type’, ‘HoA’ 
and ‘Beneficiary Type’, selects the payee from among the beneficiaries 
registered in IFHRMS with unique beneficiary code.  If the payee is a new 
beneficiary, his details (i.e. name, bank account number, IFSC code, etc.) are 
captured in the system and he is allotted a unique beneficiary code 
automatically. 
Data analysis revealed that out of the 1.02 crore beneficiaries (i.e. third party 
person/organisation registered by DDOs) registered in IFHRMS, 13.16 lakh 
beneficiaries had more than one beneficiary ID assigned to them indicating 
duplication of beneficiaries in the system.  Similarly, 4.77 lakh Government 
employees/pensioners were also registered as third party beneficiaries.  
.The third party beneficiary duplication was due to system assigning unique 
beneficiary ID at DDO level instead of at State level and the presence of 
Government employee in Beneficiary Table was due to registering them as 
third party beneficiary for making non-salary payments viz., overtime 
allowance, TA bills, contingencies, etc.  
The presence of duplicate beneficiaries in the system indicated likely scope for 
adding a blacklisted third party beneficiary as a new beneficiary.  Provision 
for including beneficiary Aadhaar/PAN details and a validation check based 
on such details would not only prevent duplication but also curtail tax evasion 
by third party beneficiaries for services rendered to Government. 
Government replied (January 2023) that to avoid duplicates in beneficiary 
master, Global Beneficiary Master in IFHRMS is being developed and valid 
employee ID would be mandated to ensure that employees are not included as 
third party beneficiary. 
4.1.4 Lack of validation controls in bill creation 
SRS envisages various types of validations in IFHRMS to make it more 
efficient by reducing human errors. Workflow analysis of IFHRMS bill 
module, however, showed that certain validations for Non-Salary bills, though 
a part of SRS, were not incorporated as brought out below: 
 As per SRS, late fee/penalty for belated payment of telephone/ 
electricity bills should be disallowed. However, the related bill 
forms in IFHRMS had a field to capture only bill invoice value. 
There was no field for inputting late fee/penalty.  If the invoice 
value fed into the system was inclusive of fine/penalty, the bill 
would be passed for payment as the system would not be able to 
identify the late fee/penalty amount included in the bill.  
 The onus is therefore on DDO users, who generate the bill and 
PAO/Treasury users who scrutinise the physical bill to disallow the 

Chapter IV - Processing of Bills 
37 
late fee/penalty. Though data analysis revealed rejection of 208 bills 
as they included late fee/penalty, in the absence of a separate field 
for capturing late fee/penalty, Audit could not ensure the number of 
telephone/electricity bills passed for payment that included late 
fee/penalty. 
 For medical reimbursement bills not submitted within three months 
from date of cash memo, a 15 per cent cut has to be imposed on bill 
amount. However, there is no provision in IFHRMS to deduct the 
15 per cent for medical bills submitted after three months.  
 Prize/award of ₹2,000 is given to employees, who complete  
25 years of unblemished service. An employee becomes ineligible 
even if punished with censure. However, there was no validation in 
IFHRMS to check and restrict award of prize money to ineligible 
employees.   
 In purchase of machinery and supplies, SRS mandates uploading of 
sanction proceedings from competent authority and certificate for 
receipt of goods before payment. Audit noticed that there was no 
provision in IFHRMS for certifying receipt of goods. 
The absence of above validations in IFHRMS, points out flaws while mapping 
the business rules properly during system development providing scope for 
inadvertent payment of late fees, awards to ineligible employees, etc. 
Government while accepting the above observations stated (January 2023) that 
integration with TANGEDCO has been developed to get the bills directly in 
the system to avoid late fee.  It was also stated that validations would be 
provided to prevent award of prizes to ineligible persons and check box for 
certificate is provided now for receipt of goods. 
4.1.5 Lack of provision to automatically calculate Tax Deducted at 
Source  
FRS contemplates that system should provide bill forms pre-populated with 
relevant data e.g. calculation of amount, fee to be paid, etc., based on type of 
service and should minimise occurrence of data re-entry throughout the form.   
Government departments avail services of various contractors/suppliers for 
executing works/purchase of stationery, etc. IFHRMS has inbuilt provision for 
listing out various sections of IT rules, based on which Tax Deducted at 
Source (TDS) at specified rates should be deducted from bills raised by 
contractors/suppliers. Workflow analysis of bill generation screen for 
payments including TDS deduction revealed the following: 
 The bill amount, on which TDS has to be calculated, has to be 
entered manually in a separate field under ‘bill recovery line’.  Due 
to lack of input control this field accepts any amount even if it 
exceeds budget available in the HoA. 

 Performance Audit on Integrated Financial and Human Resource Management 
System in Tamil Nadu 
 
38 
 The ‘bill recovery line’ field does not automatically calculate TDS 
amount based on selected TDS code, instead bill ‘Initiator’ has to 
manually calculate and input the TDS amount. Here too, an 
incorrect input, with no relation to TDS percentage, is accepted by 
the System. 
Data analysis revealed that DDOs skipped selection of correct TDS code from 
the drop-down box for 65,875 bills and input the manually calculated TDS 
amount in ‘bill recovery line’ field. Audit observed that the lack of provision 
in ‘bill recovery line’ field for automatic calculation of TDS amount based on 
selected TDS code violates FRS and would likely lead to wrong booking of 
expenditure. 
The Government admitted (January 2023) that TDS calculation was not 
happening due to bugs in the calculation field, which have been rectified now 
by the SI. 
4.1.6 Processing of bills without attachments like sanction 
orders/proceedings  
One of the main objectives of IFHRMS is to move towards paperless office. 
SRS provides that DDO should submit bills to PAO/Treasury for further 
processing along with scanned copies of sanction order, proceedings etc.  
During 2021-22, 20.71 lakh non-salary bills (i.e. 53 per cent of the total bills 
generated in IFHRMS) were generated through IFHRMS. Following 
deficiencies were, however, noticed in this bill generation process. 
 Though IFHRMS has provisions for attaching scanned copies of 
sanction orders and proceedings, it is not a mandatory facility. 
Thus, the non-salary bills were presented online mostly without 
attaching the required scanned documents and PAOs/DTs cannot 
process the presented bills until the hard copies of sanction order, 
proceedings etc., are submitted by the DDOs. 
 Attachments could be made without proper name/logical sequence 
in IFHRMS. To locate required sanction order, proceeding and 
voucher, the PAO/Treasury users have to open attachments on trial 
and error basis.  This was also supported by the fact that in  
60 per cent of the sampled districts, the PAOs/DTs had to rely only 
on physical vouchers. 
Commissioner of Treasuries and Accounts (CTA) instructed (April 2022) to 
insist for hard copies of bills and directed PAOs/Treasuries to return bills 
presented online without hard copies. The instructions proved 
counterproductive as DDOs/DTs concentrated more on submitting/processing 
physical copies.   
As such, bills presented online are processed in IFHRMS mainly based on 
physical copies submitted by DDOs. Continued dependency on physical 
copies for passing bills ignoring soft copies attached to bills presented online, 
defeats IFHRMS objective of moving towards a paperless working 
environment. 
  

Chapter IV - Processing of Bills 
39 
Government replied (January 2023) that action to dispense with physical 
vouchers would commence and naming convention for sub-voucher category 
would be explored. 
Recommendation 10:  
Government should strengthen IFHRMS to ensure that bills are 
presented/returned online along with the required supporting documents 
to avoid continued dependency on physical bills. 
4.1.7 Duplicate Bill number/Token number 
In IFHRMS, once ‘Initiator’ creates a bill, Bill number (16 digit) and on its 
approval Token number (16 digit) is automatically generated by the system. 
Each bill should, therefore, have a unique Bill number and a unique Token 
number.  
Data analysis, however, disclosed that 3,456 bills generated in IFHRMS had 
the same bill number for two different bills.  Similarly, 860 bills submitted 
during this period had the same token number for two different bills. This 
affects credibility of data generated through IFHRMS. 
The Government while accepting the observation stated (January 2023) that 
bill/token numbers gets duplicated in some instances due to occasional server 
slowness. To resolve this issue system has been updated to handle one bill at a 
time for one DDO with validation of last bill number plus one.  
Recommendation 11:  
Government should address the Server performance issues so that 
uniqueness of each bill generated in the system is maintained. 
Bill Processing 
4.1.8 Delay in processing bills  
The CTA instructed (September 1997) all PAOs/Treasuries/Sub-Treasuries to 
ensure that all bills presented at their office on a day are thoroughly checked in 
all aspects and disposed-off within two days from the date of receipt. 
However, an analysis of bill data revealed that the time taken to process  
20.71 lakh bills (except regular pay bills) during 2021-22 varied from ‘the 
same day’ to ‘more than 100 days’.  The age-wise details are given in  
Table 4.2.  
Table 4.2: Delays in processing bills 
Bill processing time (in days) Number of bills processed between  
1 April 2021 to 31 March 2022 
0 -2 days 6,33,291 
3 - 10 days 11,68,060 
11 -25 days 2,34,011 
26 -50 days 29,967 
51 -100 days 4,907 
more than 100 days 1,005 
Total 20,71,241 
(Source: IFHRMS data dump) 

 Performance Audit on Integrated Financial and Human Resource Management 
System in Tamil Nadu 
 
40 
It is seen from Table 4.2 that nearly 70 per cent of bills processed in IFHRMS 
during 2021-22 exceeded the stipulated processing time of two days.  These 
bills mainly consisted of retirement benefits, payment advices, loans and 
advances, grants, work bills, temporary advances and related adjustment bills, 
etc. Further analysis of 2.70 lakh bills which were processed with delay of 
more than 10 days disclosed that 55 per cent were personal claims (retirement 
benefit and loans & advances, etc.) indicating employee and retired pensioners 
were made to wait to get their due benefits as no flags were generated in the 
system to indicate that bills were pending beyond the stipulated time for 
processing. Thus, there was no effective monitoring mechanism to watch 
prompt disposal of bills in IFHRMS.  
Government replied (January 2023) that dashboard for monitoring the 
pendency of bills would be provided in the Business Intelligence tool, which is 
under development. 
Recommendation 12:  
Government should strengthen IFHRMS to ensure that bills are 
processed within stipulated timeframe so that beneficiaries get their due 
payments without any delay. 
4.1.9 Lack of provision to avoid double payments  
GoTN sanctions ex-gratia of ₹50,000 from State Disaster Response Fund to 
next of kin of those deceased due to Covid-19.  For this, Tahsildar submits 
bills online with proceedings containing names of the deceased and the 
beneficiary eligible for ex-gratia. Based on the details, PAO/Treasury 
authorises payment to beneficiary. 
Analysis of bill data of PAO (North) revealed that 10 beneficiaries were paid  
ex-gratia payment twice during the same month and in some cases on the same 
day itself, as there was no provision in IFHRMS to ensure that the beneficiary 
is not paid for the same claim more than once. When this was pointed out by 
Resident Audit unit of the PAO, the PAO addressed respective Tahsildars and 
the amount was recovered from the beneficiaries and remitted into 
Government Account. However, the issue was not taken up with CTA for 
including specific check points/audit points for Covid-19 ex-gratia bills.  As a 
result, these bills were continued to be processed in the system without a 
provision1 to ensure that beneficiaries are not paid twice.   Analysis of State 
wide data revealed that there were 389 double Covid-19 payment cases 
involving ₹1.98 crore. 
Due to absence of specific controls in IFHRMS and lack of any system in 
place to watch and alert the user about the possibility of double payment for 
the same claim, treasury staff (PAO North) now maintain a master database in 
MS Excel for Covid-19 ex-gratia payment which is cross checked to avoid 
double payments.   
                                                                 
1  To check beneficiary name, expense type, bank account number and payment month. 

Chapter IV - Processing of Bills 
41 
When pointed out by the Audit, the Government replied (January 2023) that 
alert message for verifying the duplication of the beneficiary in the same type 
of bill, a feature which is under development, would be provided at all levels 
i.e. TOs and DDOs. 
Recommendation 13:  
Government should direct the System Integrator (M/s Wipro) to 
incorporate appropriate coding in IFHRMS software to prevent double 
payment for same claim.  Government should also put in place an 
alternative mechanism to avoid double payments until such coding is 
made available in IFHRMS. 
4.1.10 Lapses in sanctioning/watching closure of Temporary Advances 
According to Article 99 of Tamil Nadu Financial Code Volume I, Temporary 
Advances (TAs) could be sanctioned for a specific purpose with approval of 
Government. TAs drawn by DDOs shall normally be adjusted within two 
months from date of drawal.  If two TAs are pending with DDOs for more 
than two months, a third advance could not be drawn for any other purpose, 
unless DDO provides an undertaking to adjust the advance with detailed bills 
and vouchers within a month. Apart from Article 99, advances were also 
drawn for other purposes viz., Travelling Allowances on tour, fuel, etc.   
Workflow study of ‘Temporary Advance’ Bill screen revealed the following: 
 As per SRS, a drop down box should be provided in ‘Temporary 
Advance’ bill form for inputting the detail ‘Article 99’ mentioned in 
sanction order to distinguish it from other advances. However, there 
is no drop down box and all TAs were sanctioned without 
distinction. 
 Due to lack of validation control, to check whether the respective 
DDOs already have two TAs pending adjustment, IFHRMS allows 
passing of additional TAs.  This defect in IFHRMS is widely 
exploited during March, when a number of TAs is sanctioned 
irrespective of TAs pending closure. 
 During March 2022, 2,500 TAs (24 per cent of 10,318 TAs 
sanctioned during 2021-22) were sanctioned for ₹184.10 crore in 
respect of 783 DDOs. Of this, 56 DDOs had more than two TAs 
each that were pending closure. 
 TAs drawn before implementation of IFHRMS and pending closure 
were not completely migrated to IFHRMS for follow up and 
closure.  As of now, the pre-IFHRMS TAs are being settled on a 
case by case basis. 
 No alerts/notifications were generated in respect of TAs pending 
closure after two months and data analysis revealed that as of March 
2022, 1,655 TAs totalling ₹150.16 crore were pending closure even 
after three months. 
Thus, incomplete mapping of TA related business rule in IFHRMS allowed 
sanction of multiple TAs irrespective of TAs pending adjustment. 

 Performance Audit on Integrated Financial and Human Resource Management 
System in Tamil Nadu 
 
42 
Government replied (January 2023) that a separate dropdown box for selecting 
Temporary Advances (Article 99) and other types of Temporary Advances is 
under development. Further, through provision of appropriate ‘Reports’ the 
settlement of pending Temporary Advances would be monitored. 
4.1.11 Reassignment of notifications in case of transferred L1 auditor 
Each Bill Audit Section in PAO/Treasury has three levels of Auditors viz., L1, 
L2 and L3.  Bills submitted by DDOs lands in L1 notification page to be 
processed for payment. Thus, bill processing commences with L1 in 
PAO/Treasury.  In event of L1’s transfer/ promotion, his pending bill 
notifications have to be reassigned to incoming L1. 
Study of reassignment process in IFHRMS revealed that incoming 
notifications from DDOs are mapped to L1 ‘employee ID’ instead of L1 ‘post’ 
in an approver group, though SRS had mentioned only the post.  Therefore, 
when an L1 is transferred / promoted / moved to another approver group, his 
pending notifications are not automatically transferred to the incoming L1 by 
the system.   
To overcome this, HR Administrator in PAO/Treasury reassigns pending 
notifications to incoming L1. Despite this only closed / cancelled notifications 
are reassigned. As pending bills notifications, which require further 
processing, are not reassigned, incoming L1 remains unaware of them.  
Therefore, a ticket is raised with Help Desk seeking access to pending 
notifications for new L1.  Help Desk brings the pending bill token numbers 
into notification page of incoming L1 via a ‘triggering’ process enabling him 
to process pending bills sucessfully.  
Due to this circutious process for reassigning pending bill notifications, 
though physical transfer of the L1 official is effected, the PAO/Treasuries 
delayed the related entry of L1 transfer in IFHRMS and cleared the transferred 
L1’s pending bills using his/her User ID and password.  Once all pending bills 
are cleared, transfer of L1 is given effect in IFHRMS and user ID is added at 
the new office for assignement of role and drawal of salary at the new office.  
As a result, the audit trail (action history) of those bills which were processed 
and cleared, using the user ID and password of the transferred L1, depicts 
misleading information about the user who processed the bills, thus impacting 
the credibility of IFHRMS data.   
Government replied (January 2023) that bugs reported by Audit are rectified 
now and notifications would be automatically transferred to new user upon 
assigning roles. 
4.1.12 Issues in Rejection of bills 
Bills presented online by DDOs are checked against the audit points in 
PAOs/Treasuries at three levels (i.e. L1, L2 and L3) before being approved for 
payment.  If a bill is fit for rejection, L1 notes the objection in remarks field 
and forwards the bill to L2 and further to L3, who can either overrule the 
objections raised and pass the bill for payment or can reject the bill after 
recording his reasons in remarks column.  Once the bill is rejected, DDO is 

Chapter IV - Processing of Bills 
43 
intimated the reasons for rejection in TNTC ‘Form 69’ along with copy of 
printed rejected bill carrying rejection remarks of L1, L2 and L3.  
Audit observed the following shortcomings in rejection of bills:  
 IFHRMS did not generate TNTC ‘Form 69’ listing the audit points 
which the bill failed to satisfy. Instead, audit points were manually 
written in physical ‘Form 69’ and enclosed with hard copy of 
rejected bill sent to DDO.  
 Bills could be rejected even if L1, L2 and L3 auditors do not record 
any reasons in their respective remarks field as it was not made 
mandatory.  Data analysis revealed that 26,153 bills, rejected during 
2021-22, did not carry any remarks.  
 Due to lack of a standardised list of reasons for rejecting a bill, L1, 
L2 and L3 auditors record meaningless reasons in their remarks 
field viz., ‘l’, ‘j’, ‘k’, audit, reject, etc.  This did not help DDOs to 
readily understand rejection reasons and take remedial action. 
 Non-recording of rejection reasons by L1 and/or L2 meant that 
L2/L3 could not take appropriate action within the system itself and 
must rely on physical bills.  
 In 555 bills, despite L1 remarks rejecting the bills, L2/L3 auditors 
overruled L1 remarks and passed bills for payment, without 
recording their remarks, as it was not mandatory. Thus, in 555 cases 
reasons for overruling L1 remarks were not recorded in the system. 
Non-generation of ‘Form 69’ in IFHRMS and non-mandatory remarks field 
for recording bill rejection reasons meant that DDOs had to wait for physical 
copies of bills and enclosures from PAOs/Treasuries to know the reason for 
bill rejection and take corrective action, which defeats the goal of paperless 
environment.  
Government while accepting the observations stated (January 2023) that 
generation of ‘Form 69’ is under development and remarks columns would be 
made mandatory. 
4.1.13 No provision to identify re-submitted rejected bills  
According to SRS once a bill is rejected, DDO must raise a new bill for  
re-submission of same claim, after rectifying objections raised by 
PAO/Treasury. SRS was however silent about cross linking rejected bill and 
new bill.  
As such, there is no provision in IFHRMS for DDO to resubmit the rejected 
bill with required modification and explanation and DDOs must prepare a new 
bill and submit it afresh. The resubmitted bill, however, is not cross referenced 
to the rejected bill as there is no provision for it in IFHRMS.  Without 
recourse to rejection reasons in case of a resubmitted bill, PAO/Treasury do 
not know if a bill presented by DDO is a bill rejected earlier and process all 
bills afresh.  

 Performance Audit on Integrated Financial and Human Resource Management 
System in Tamil Nadu 
 
44 
Non-linking of rejected bill with resubmitted bill is a gap in business rule 
mapping, as section (e) of SR 32 B of Treasury Rule 16 provides that Drawing 
Officer should furnish his explanation or reply, as Treasury officer would not 
know that same claim was rejected earlier. This gives rise to a situation where 
a wrong claim, rejected earlier, could be passed for payment, when submitted 
as a new bill without the reasons for rejection being rectified by DDOs.  
Data analysis revealed that during 2021-22, 347 bills totalling ₹4.84 crore 
were rejected for reasons like wrong/excess/duplicate/double claims. In the 
absence of details to identify rejected and re-submitted bills, it could not be 
ensured whether the resubmitted bills were passed for payment correctly. 
Government replied (January 2023) that cross linking of rejected bill and new 
bill would be incorporated in the system. 
4.1.14 Settlement date not reflecting actual event  
In IFHRMS, in all three levels of bill processing at PAO/Treasury viz., L1, L2 
and L3 a ‘Settlement date’ field is provided.  This field is populated by default 
with system date i.e. the date on which L1, L2 and L3 open bill notifications 
for processing.  This field is important as e-payment batch for a bill is 
generated based on it. The system date in this field can be replaced either by 
L1, L2, L3 or by cash section with a specific date before which payment 
cannot be made. Audit noticed following deficiencies in this regard: 
 For pay bills, settlement date is by default last working day of the 
month.  However, unless ‘Settlement date’ field is manually 
changed every month to last day of the month, e-payment batch for 
salary payment will get generated on the captured system date itself. 
 No field is available in the system to record date of 
rejection/cancellation of a bill. Instead, the system date captured on 
the day of rejection/ cancellation of a bill is shown as  
‘Settlement date’ for the bill.  This was noticed in respect of  
1.42 lakh bills rejected/cancelled during 2021-22.   
Thus, not having settlement date for salary bills as last date of the month by 
default gives likely scope for payment of salary to employees earlier than last 
day of the  month.  Also, using ‘Settlement date’  field for capturing bill 
rejection date instead of having a dedicated field gives rise to misleading data 
in the system.  
Government replied (January 2023) that necessary provision would be 
incorporated in the monthly salary bill from January/February 2023 onwards 
and rejection date will be displayed separately for the audited /returned bills. 
4.1.15 Multiple workflow roles assigned to same official in IFHRMS 
An effective IT system should enforce segregation of duties using  
pre-programmed user and group security profiles, so that proper checks and 
balances on the activities of officials involved is maintained.  

Chapter IV - Processing of Bills 
45 
Based on analysis of IFHRMS data, it was seen that multiple roles were 
assigned to 5,580 users i.e. same official is assigned multiple roles viz., L1 and 
L2 auditor roles or L2 and L3 auditor role, which vitiates the principle of 
segregation of duties as shown in the examples below:  
 In District Treasury, Madurai, a Superintendent (Employee ID 
16xxxxxxx89) is assigned with L1 and L2 auditor roles from  
July 2022. 
 In District Treasury, Erode, a Superintendent (Employee ID 
16xxxxxxx24) is assigned with L1 and L2 auditor roles from  
June 2020. 
The 5,580 users constitute nearly seven per cent of the total IFHRMS users 
(83,403). District-wise break-up details of instances of 5,580 users being 
assigned multiple roles is given in Appendix 4.1.  Details of bills processed 
(i.e. prepared, verified, approved, passed for payment) by the officials in their 
dual role capacity could not be compiled in Audit, as the requested data in 
‘WF_item_attribute_values’ table was not furnished by the Department. 
Segregation of duties is a fundamental control requirement as it reduces the 
risk of error and fraud. The lack of adequate restrictive controls in IFHRMS to 
enforce separation of duties increases the risk of errors occurring and 
remaining undetected and also adoption of inappropriate working practices.  
Government admitted that (January 2023) whenever office is having shortage 
of manpower/posts, the additional roles are assigned to same person officially.  
The officials are being sensitised to avoid assigning the Initiator and Approver 
Level roles (L1 and L3) to the same person. 
4.1.16 Gaps in notification page of treasury staff 
According to FRS, system should generate alert for L1, L2 and L3 auditors in 
PAO/Treasury, when a bill is submitted online by DDOs. For this a 
notification screen is included in the landing page of L1, L2 and L3 auditors to 
enable them to take appropriate action on notifications received. Each 
notification relates to an individual bill with details of treasury token number, 
status of bill (i.e. open, pending, closed etc.) and time of receipt of 
notification. In general, the notification page is the mainstay of IFHRMS as it 
displays overall work status of each workflow user.  
Workflow study of notification page revealed the following shortcomings:  
 Under the ‘Subject’ column in notification page, ‘Treasury 
Reference Number’ is blank for approved and settled (e-payment 
batch generated) bills. 
 There is no provision in notification page to identify (i) rejected 
bills, (ii) bill type/expense type and (iii) bill group of a bill.  The 
user must open each and every notification to find the details which 
is tedious and non-user friendly.   
 Status of processed and paid bills were shown as ‘cancelled’ in 
notification page. (Exhibit 4.2). 

 Performance Audit on Integrated Financial and Human Resource Management 
System in Tamil Nadu 
 
46 
Exhibit 4.2: Notification page shows cancelled status for bills passed for payment 
 During bill processing a notification moves from L1 to L2 and then from L2 to L3.   Audit came across instances where notifications were missing in L2 or L3 notification page.  Bills associated with missing notifications could not be processed till they are found and restored.  Notification meant for one user is displayed in the screen of unrelated user.  This is a system deficiency wherein IFHRMS transactions get mixed up and display under unrelated user screens.   Notification for e-payment returns is not displayed in notification page of user and is available only under ‘e-payment return’ sub menu.  Access to this information is possible only on selection of a particular beneficiary type and not all return notifications are displayed.  It is evident from the above that notification page was not developed properly. Displaying correct bill status, option to identify rejected bills/pay bill group/ expense/bill type, displaying treasury reference number instead of blanks, preventing display of unrelated notifications and having e-payment returns notified in notification page itself so that it does not inadvertently escape scrutiny, would optimise IFHRMS workflow and make it more user friendly. Government replied (January 2023) that all the issues in notification pages as observed by Audit have been fixed and triggering of e-payment return in the main notification page would be explored as an additional feature. 4.1.17 Shortcomings in e-Vouchers IFHRMS aimed at paperless and hassle free environment for carrying out Government transactions. Submission of e-vouchers in lieu of physical vouchers would help achieve this to a large extent. Analysis of  e-vouchers generated online through IFHRMS revealed the following: 


Chapter IV - Processing of Bills 
47 
 e-vouchers did not carry digital signature for testifying its 
authenticity and for non-repudiation. All DDOs were required to 
manually sign the printouts of bills generated in IFHRMS before 
submission to PAO/Treasury. 
 e-vouchers and related sub-vouchers were not dated and time 
stamped by DDOs and did not contain all information2 as in 
physical vouchers. 
 Scanned copies of all supporting documents viz., sub-vouchers, 
sanction orders, etc., were not available for all e-vouchers, as most 
DDOs did not scan them while submitting bills online in IFHRMS. 
Thus, e-vouchers did not meet all legal requirements for acceptance and 
Department has a long way to go to reach its goal of moving to paperless and 
hassle free environment for carrying out Government transactions. 
Government replied (January 2023) that printing the details of Digital 
Signature in the bills would be enabled at the earliest and on stabilization of 
the system the physical copies would be dispensed with in a phased manner 
and that instructions have been issued to ensure attachment of scanned copies 
of all sub-vouchers. 
4.2 Pension Management System 
Pension Management System had inaccurate date of birth details which 
delayed sanction of additional pension to eligible pensioners and allowed 
creation of multiple pensioner IDs for the same pensioner leading to 
double pension payment.  Further, incorrect mapping of pensioner ID to 
pension pay order prevented pensioners from logging into IFHRMS for 
updating basic personal information like bank details, address, etc. 
In pre-IFHRMS scenario, e-Pension software, a web based application, was 
used for generating monthly pension after processing pension payment orders 
received physically from AG (A&E). It had provision for pensioner’s Master 
Card preparation and updation, change of address, bank details updation, 
stoppage of pension, etc. e-Pension software had following short comings: 
 Not integrated with ATBPS 
 Not capable of automatically calculating pension details  
 No provision for pension bill preparation 
 No internal audit mechanism or in-built audit checks. 
  
                                                                 
2  Sample pay bill e-voucher submitted in July 2022 did not contain Form Number,  
DDO Name, Gross Amount, Net Amount, Head of Account for both payment and 
recoveries. 

 Performance Audit on Integrated Financial and Human Resource Management 
System in Tamil Nadu 
 
48 
In IFHRMS, Pension Management System was envisaged to be a centralised 
pensioner database, accessed over internet by authorised users. It is an 
important citizen centric system as it caters to pensioners, who are entirely 
dependent on timely disbursement of pension.   
Pension Module is yet to be integrated with AG (A&E) office and pension 
proposals are prepared manually by Heads of Office and sent to AG (A&E) 
office for authorisation.  After pension authorisation by AG (A&E) office, it is 
processed and disbursed through IFHRMS by Pension Pay Office, Chennai, 
District Treasuries and Sub-Treasuries in the State.  The workflow process of 
pension disbursement is given in Exhibit 4.3. 
Exhibit 4.3: Workflow process of pension disbursement  
 
 
Workflow analysis of Pension Management System at Pension Pay Office3, 
Chennai revealed that the system had duplicate Pensioner IDs for same person 
leading to double payment of pension, wrong date of birth in pensioner 
database delaying sanction of additional pension to pensioners attaining the 
age of 80 and above, incorrect mapping of Pensioner ID with Pension 
Payment Order (PPO) due to which pensioner could not login into the system, 
etc., as discussed in the succeeding paragraphs. 
4.2.1 Issues in processing new pensioners  
On receipt of authorisation, pensioner is intimated to report for mustering at 
Pension Pay Office, Chennai along with required documents viz., pensioner 
authorisation copy, bank details, etc.  After mustering, pension proposal is 
                                                                 
3  Which handles 88,137 active Civil, Teacher and Family pensioners 
A token number is generated and pensioner is added to the 
existing list of pensioners for drawal of monthly pension. 
Round 3 - Pension Bill processing 
Receipt of Pension Authorisation 
from Accountant General 
Pensioner called for  
mustering in person 
Initiator creates Pensioner profile, 
verifier checks details and forwards 
to approver 
On approval PEN ID is created 
Round 1 - Creation of PEN ID 
 Round 2 - Pension Mustering 
On approval, pensioner status 
becomes Active 
Initiator updates the double 
pensioner field, pension unit and 
arrears amount 
On verification of details by verifier, 
approval is given by approver 

Chapter IV - Processing of Bills 
49 
taken up for processing in IFHRMS.  New pension cases are processed in 
three rounds in IFHRMS viz., first round for ‘creation of Pension ID’, second 
for ‘pension mustering’ and third for ‘bill passing’. The first two rounds 
involved three officials each viz., ‘Initiator’, ‘Verifier’ and ‘Approver’ and the 
last round only the ‘Initiator’. 
As Pension Pay Office, Chennai processed new pension case only after 
pensioner reported for mustering, a separate round under ‘Pension mustering’ 
sub-module in IFHRMS involving three workflow officials is unnecessary as 
it increased work drudgery and slowed down processing. Instead ‘Pension 
mustering’ may be made a part of the first round itself viz., ‘creation of 
Pension ID’. 
The new pensioner registration process in IFHRMS had the following 
shortcomings indicating lack of validation controls in Pension module: 
 Enhanced family pension is equal to original pension and is valid 
till 7 years after retirement or till pensioner attains 65 years of age 
(67 years in cases of judicial category) whichever is earlier.  The 
field for enhanced family pension however accepted any input 
value.  
 Normal family pension is 30 per cent of original pension. However, 
instead of getting auto filled based on original pension, this field 
accepted any input value.  
 Only Group C and D pensioners are eligible for certain benefits 
such as Festival Advances.  However, Pension module did not have 
‘list of values’ with group codes A, B, C and D mapped to 
corresponding pay levels for auto-populating group code based on 
employee pay. Instead ‘Initiator’ had to input the group code by 
referring to a manual register. 
The above gaps are likely to lead to errors in pension sanctioning process.   
Government replied (January 2023) that the present multiple rounds in 
processing new pensioner, input entry for family pension and enhanced family 
pension, group mapping of pensioners would be addressed when  
AG integration of pension authorisation process is completed. 
4.2.2 Absence of ‘concurrence form’ for processing new pensioner 
As discussed in Paragraph 3.3.1 a new pensioner must appear in person along 
with required documents for mustering. One of the documents was the 
‘concurrence form’ signed by the manager of pensioner’s bank.  The 
‘concurrence form’ was neither enclosed with intimation letter sent to 
pensioner nor available in IFHRMS portal. As new pension process 
commences only on submission of all required documents, pensioner had to 
visit the Pension Pay Office, Chennai twice, once to collect the concurrence 
form and again for submitting it.  
Government replied (January 2023) that orders would be issued to stop the 
practice of collecting concurrence form as bank details were captured in 
pension proposal itself. 

 Performance Audit on Integrated Financial and Human Resource Management 
System in Tamil Nadu 
 
50 
4.2.3 Commutation of pension process 
Commutation is a method in which a pensioner can commute a part of his 
pension.  Commutation of pension process commences after sanction of first 
pension provided, pensioner had opted for it along with first pension. Audit 
observed that there is no flag in pensioner profile to capture pensioner’s option 
for commutation, to trigger commutation process automatically as soon as first 
pension sanction process is completed. A simple alert/notification is not 
provided in IFHRMS, to alert ‘Initiator’ to start the commutation process.  
Provision to link commutation process with first pension sanction process 
would ensure that pensioner does not miss out on commutation benefits and 
gets it without delay.  Pension Pay Officer accepted that both are separate 
processes and should be initiated separately. 
Government replied (January 2023) that post integration with AG, the 
commutation process would be triggered automatically. 
4.2.4 Double payment of pension   
Analysis of IFHRMS database revealed that in certain cases pension pay 
orders were linked with two different PEN IDs each, one of them being 
duplicate (Table 4.3). It was found that pension was paid to both PEN IDs 
leading to excess payment of pension for varying periods during 2020-22 as 
shown below: 
Table 4.3: Double pension paid based on duplicate PEN ID 
Sl. 
No. 
PPO 
number 
Correct  
PEN ID 
Duplicate  
PEN ID 
Pension paid 
for Duplicate 
PEN ID (₹) 
Remarks 
1 Rxxxxxx7 PENxxxxxx80 PENxxxxx81 2,19,958 Excess pension to Duplicate  
PEN ID in the name of pensioner 
2 Fxxxxxx2 PENxxxxx41 PENxxxxx64 2,41,043 Excess pension to Duplicate  
PEN ID in the name of family 
pensioner 3 Cxxxxx9 PENxxxxx08 PENxxxxx00 2,12,017 
4 Cxxxx8 PENxxxxx42 PENxxxxx78 10,31,243 Excess family pension paid to the 
PEN ID of deceased pensioner 5 NIL3xxxx7 PENxxxxx78 PENxxxxx66 6,61,436 
6 Cxxxxx4 PENxxxxxx80 PENxxxxx75 2,06,904 
Excess pension to Duplicate  
PEN ID in the name of unrelated 
family pensioner 
Total 25,72,601  
(Source: IFHRMS data) 
Audit observed that there is no validation in IFHRMS to ensure uniqueness in 
pension IDs prevent generation of duplicate PEN IDs for same pension pay 
order. Hence, PEN IDs were generated without any distinction regarding 
pensioners/family pensioners/ deceased pensioners and pension was paid in 
excess against those duplicate PEN IDs.  
The Department apart from cleansing Pensioner ID data during October to 
December 2022, replied (January 2023) that uniqueness of PEN ID would be 

Chapter IV - Processing of Bills 
51 
incorporated in the system based on PPO number, Aadhaar, bank account and 
PAN number to arrest creation of duplicate PEN IDs. It was further stated that 
analysis of double/multiple payment to same bank account is being done from 
December 2022 to avoid wrong payments.  Recovery of double pension had 
also been initiated and so far ₹13.50 lakh was recovered from the pensioners. 
Recommendation 14:  
Government should maintain uniqueness in creation of Pensioner ID to 
avoid payment of double pension to the same pensioner. 
4.2.5 Pensioners IFHRMS login issues 
Each pensioner is assigned a unique Pension Payment Order (PPO) number in 
AG (A&E) authorisation.  In IFHRMS, pensioner is identified by a PEN ID. 
As pensioners were familiar with PPO number, to make it user friendly, 
Pension Payment Order number was mapped with PEN ID.   
In IFHRMS pensioners can update their basic details like residential address, 
bank details or nomination and view the updated details. To submit such 
requests, pensioner logs into IFHRMS portal by inputting his PPO number 
which automatically loads their PEN ID into the login portal4.  Thereafter, 
pensioner can enter the password to login successfully. Test check of  
2,000 cases in Pension Pay Office, Chennai revealed that in 30 cases 
pensioners faced difficulties while logging into IFHRMS due to:  
 Incorrect mapping of PPO numbers with PEN ID (Appendix 4.2). 
 PEN IDs were incorrectly mapped to Employee login  
(Appendix 4.3) instead of Pensioner login.  
Government replied (January 2023) that observations of Audit would be 
addressed by incorporating validation for generation of unique PEN ID in the 
system. 
Recommendation 15:  
Government should correctly map the Pensioner ID with pension pay 
order to ensure that pensioners have hassle free access to IFHRMS portal. 
4.2.6 Inaccuracies in pensioner database 
Analysis of pensioner database of Pension Pay Office, Chennai revealed the 
following: 
 Nine active pensioners (Appendix 4.4) in Pension Pay Office, 
Chennai did not have PPO numbers. To an Audit enquiry, Pension 
Pay Officer replied (October 2022) that the issue was raised with SI 
for rectification.   
 Out of 88,137 active pensioners/family pensioners in Pension Pay 
Office, Chennai (as on 01/04/2022), 11,291 (13 per cent) records 
had Date of Birth (DoB) as 01/01/1951.  
                                                                 
4  Separate from user ID field input for ‘Employee login’. 

 Performance Audit on Integrated Financial and Human Resource Management 
System in Tamil Nadu 
 
52 
 The DoB field is a key field for calculating additional pension to 
pensioners on attaining the age of 80/85/90/95/100.  Due to 
incorrect DoB, eligible pensioners were deprived of timely 
additional pension. A sample check of 100 PPOs in test-checked 
field units revealed that in seven cases pensioners were deprived of 
their eligible Additional Pension for a period of one to five years 
due to wrong DoB (Appendix 4.5). 
Due to incorrect DoB details the database is incomplete and points to deficient 
data cleansing work during data migration from e-pension software to 
IFHRMS. Eligible pensioners were also deprived of timely additional pension.  
Government replied (January 2023) that it planned to carry out a one-time data 
cleansing exercise for correction and updation of pensioner date of birth 
details and once the work is completed the process of sanction of additional 
pension would be triggered automatically to avoid the delay. Further, the 
errors in respect of pensioners pointed out by Audit have been rectified and 
additional pension has been sanctioned. 
Recommendation 16:  
Government should ensure timely delivery of additional pension benefits 
to eligible pensioners by ensuring that pensioner date of birth details in 
the system are correct. 
4.2.7 Other issues  
 In 4,806 instances the PPO number was incorrectly captured in the 
IFHRMS database when compared with the AG (A&E) pensioner 
database5 indicating poor data quality in IFHRMS. 
 When pension is revised, family pension also gets revised. 
However, this provision was not provided in Pension module. If 
revised family pension details are required at a later date, users have 
to depend on hardcopies of AG (A&E) authorisation. 
Government replied (January 2023) that data analysis would be done and 
necessary correction would be made and fields would be made visible for user 
to process revised family pension. 
                                                                 
5  AG (A&E) pensioner data from 2008 onwards was compared with IFHRMS data 
using PPO number. 

 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
Human Resource 
Management System 
 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
53 
CHAPTER V 
 
HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT SYSTEM 
 
Human Resource Management System had deficiencies in automatic 
updation of employee’s e-SR as integration between HR and e-SR was 
incomplete leading to discrepancies in data captured in e-SR. As e-SR 
lacked reliability, there was continued dependence on manual service 
registers which defeats the objective of digitising employee Service 
Registers. Even after two years of project Go-live there were deficiencies 
in HRMS module while creating employee profile and users continued to 
depend on System Integrator for updating employee profile. There were 
many instances of non-mapping of service regulations and absence of 
validation controls to ensure that employee status, increment, leave 
details and date of retirement are correctly captured in the System.  
5.1 Introduction 
In pre-IFHRMS, there was no application for handling Human Resource (HR) 
activities across all departments.   A few departments like Health and Police 
had their own software applications for handling HR activities. However, 
these applications were not full-fledged Human Resource Management 
System and had shortcomings in capturing employee details. 
Government decided to have an integrated framework for financial and human 
resource management system through a transparent and efficient 
comprehensive automated solution viz., IFHRMS. The aim was to (i) Digitise 
the Service Records (SR) of employees and (ii) automate SRs and employee 
service related processes/attributes/functions such as employee on-boarding, 
transfer, increment, leave management, etc., for a truly integrated Human 
Resource Management System (HRMS). 
Audit observed that integration between HR and e-SR was incomplete due to 
which there was continued dependence on manual service registers.  Further, 
analysis of various processes in HRMS module revealed non-mapping of 
service regulations and other deficiencies like creation of employee profile 
without attaching mandatory documents, as discussed in the succeeding 
paragraphs. 
  

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial and Human Resource Management 
System in Tamil Nadu 
54 
 
5.2 Human Resource Management 
Employee on-boarding process 
5.2.1 Deficiency in employee ‘profile creation’ sub-module 
In pre-IFHRMS scenario, when an individual joins Government service, a 
physical SR is opened and mandatory details such as Date of Birth (DoB), 
educational qualification, mode/date of appointment, personal identification 
marks, family details, nomination particulars etc., is recorded. 
In IFHRMS environment, creation of e-SR for new recruit is mandatory. Audit 
observed that though there were fields to capture basic details of new 
employee, all fields were not mandatory for generation of employee ID. 
It was further noticed that except for particulars like (i) Address, (ii) Phone 
number, (iii) Qualification, (iv) Family members, (v) Bank details and  
(vi) Office details in the employee profile, other employee details1 could not 
be updated by HR user once employee ID is generated. Since access to update 
employee profile is limited, rest of the details could be updated only through 
the aid of Help Desk.  Thus, Head of Office (HoO) could not carry out 
corrections in employee details based on employee’s request.  This was 
contrary to SRS/FRS provisions and perpetuated dependence on physical SRs 
for reference and delayed the objective of moving to paperless environment. 
Government replied (January 2023) that based on the suggestion of Module 
Improvement Committee, formed in October 2022 to analyse and improve the 
HR module, the feature to make the identified fields mandatory and editable is 
under development and would be deployed shortly. It was further stated that a 
tool was also being developed to enable DDOs to carry out corrections after 
due verification of relevant records by DDOs. 
5.2.2 Employee ID generated without uploading documents 
SRS specifies uploading of appointment order, joining order and medical 
fitness certificate in the System. However, provision to attach files in 
IFHRMS was not mandatory. Therefore, employee ID could be created 
without uploading above documents and those relating to educational 
qualification, date of birth, disability certificate with percentage of disability, 
caste certificate, etc.  
Since the System lacks provision for mandatory uploading of documents while 
creation of employee ID, Audit could not cross verify and derive assurance on 
the correctness of employee details captured in e-SR.  
The Government stated (January 2023) that uploading of documents would be 
made mandatory. 
  
                                                                 
1  Personal ID information, State, mother tongue, nationality, religion, height, weight, 
physical fitness certificate, personal identification marks, etc. 

Chapter V - Human Resource Management System 
55 
5.2.3 Deficiency in capturing mandatory particulars  
(i) Genuineness of educational qualification certificate of an employee 
joining Government service is ensured based on certificate obtained from 
Boards/Universities concerned.  After recording the genuineness certificate 
details in SR, the employee is accorded ‘probationer’ status.  IFHRMS did not 
have an input field to capture details of genuineness certificate received from 
Boards/Universities though SRS stipulated it. 
(ii) According to SRS, System should provide information about training 
undergone by employees on demand and store results/outcomes of 
Departmental/Professional training. An employee becomes eligible for 
‘declaration of probation’ by HoO and for his second increment only on 
successful completion of compulsory training at Civil Service Training 
Institute, Bhavani Sagar followed by an assessment.  
Audit observed that though employee training details can be captured along 
with attachments, none of the fields were mandatory2. Thus, ‘declaration of 
probation’ process could be completed even without capturing required 
information in the System.   
Government replied (January 2023) that an input field to capture details of 
genuineness certificate would be provided and necessary provision to verify 
employee training details for declaration of probation would be explored. 
5.2.4 No provision for HoOs to change employee status 
SRS describes employee status as ‘Temporary’, ‘Probationer’ and ‘Approved 
Probationer’.  Employee status had to be updated by HoO at every stage till 
employee attains ‘Approved Probationer’ status.  However, IFHRMS did not 
have a provision for HoO to update the employee status.  Data analysis 
revealed that out of 9,76,122 active employees as of June 2022,  
4,21,273 employees3 who joined service up to the year 20184 who would have 
completed probation were categorised as ‘Temporary’. 
Also, employees who joined service between January 2021 and June 2022 
should be categorised either as ‘Temporary’ or ‘Probationer’ as they would 
not have completed two years of continuous service as of June 2022.   Data 
analysis, however, revealed that 87 employees who joined service between 
January 2021 and June 2022 were assigned ‘Approved Probationer’ status. 
Permissions to ensure depiction of correct employee status may be provided to 
HoOs for real time updation in IFHRMS.  
                                                                 
2  Though a note given under ‘Training details - Entry in eSR’ as ‘TIP fields marked 
 with asterisk (*) are mandatory’. 
3  Joined between 1980 and 2018.  As database was obtained up to June 2022, the 
probable date of joining of employees was taken as 1980 since an employee born in 
the year 1962 would have become eligible to join Government service on attaining  
18 years of age in the year 1980. 
4  Those who joined up to the year 2018 should have completed probation period of two 
years on duty within continuous period of three years 

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial and Human Resource Management 
System in Tamil Nadu 
56 
Government replied (January 2023) that action has been initiated to rectify the 
discrepancies in the legacy data and to sensitise the HoOs to correct the 
employee status mentioned erroneously for the recently joined employees.  
The reply was, however, silent about giving access to HoOs to change the 
employee status as envisaged in SRS. 
5.2.5 Date of retirement not automatically calculated  
The ‘basic details’ section of employee profile sub-module includes DoB and 
date of retirement fields. As maximum age at retirement of a Government 
employee in the State is 60 years, the System should suggest a calculated 
retirement date once DoB is entered.  It was, however, seen that user has to 
calculate and input the retirement date giving scope for erroneous data entry.  
Data analysis revealed discrepancies in ‘Date of retirement’ of 14,077 out of 
9,76,122 Government employees. The discrepancy noticed included variation 
in ‘year’ or ‘month’ or ‘date’ or was a combination of these elements.  Such 
data inaccuracies would negatively impact the envisaged automatic pension 
workflow as pension calculation depended upon the date of retirement. 
Government replied (January 2023) that a provision to auto calculate date of 
retirement has been made available and displayed in the employee profile 
page. 
Recommendation 17:  
Government should fix a timeline to achieve complete integration of 
Human Resource and e-Service Record to ensure that correct employee 
information is captured in e-Service Record in real-time environment.  
Government should authenticate correctness of e-Service Records using 
Digital Signature Certificates (DSCs). 
 
Pay roll Processing 
5.2.6 Cumbersome salary bill process after ‘Payroll run’ by SI  
SRS states that cut-off date for payroll process for DDOs is twenty seventh of 
every month.  However, SI conducts a ‘Payroll run’5 during third weekend of 
the month and DDOs were asked to complete HR activities before the ‘Payroll 
run’ date. Any HR event impacting salary bill that arises after ‘Payroll run’ is 
updated in the Server using ‘mark for re-calculation’ option.  This updation 
takes a minimum of 24 hours and pay bill could not be drawn till then.  
In an automated environment, all HR entries are to be updated in the Server 
dynamically. So, whenever an HR event arises after completion of monthly 
‘Payroll run’, the System should have been designed to make necessary 
updation in the relevant tables and the same has to be reflected in the pay roll 
data instantly.  Instead ‘mark for re-calculation’, a time consuming process is 
the only option available for updating any HR entry subsequent to pay roll 
runs. As ‘mark for re-calculation’ option holds up pay bill process, events like 
                                                                 
5  Payroll run date indicates the processing date of the payroll. Every month on 
twenty seventh,, DDOs should start processing payroll of their employees.  

Chapter V - Human Resource Management System 
57 
new hire, termination, transfers, absence on duty, loan recovery, advances or 
leave that happen after ‘Payroll run’ tend to be carried over to the following 
month. 
In an online survey conducted by Audit, 655 (93 per cent) out of 708 DDOs 
responded that ‘mark for re-calculation’ option delayed the monthly pay bill 
process. This also led to belated drawal of salary ranging from 14 to 91 days in 
respect of 27 officials, who joined on transfer after payroll run, as noticed in 
seven6 test-checked field units. 
Government replied (January 2023) that augmentation of System capacity was 
underway and on achieving it, the decentralised pay roll run by DDOs would 
be explored. 
5.2.7 Non-updation of increment details in e-SR  
Annual increment is normally awarded to Government employees on  
1 January/1 April/1 July/1 October every year.  In IFHRMS, the list of 
employees eligible for increment is generated using ‘Annual Increment 
Programme’ under GTN Pay Services sub-module.  After this, the transaction 
is pushed to Bills section via payroll module and the pay of the employees gets 
revised automatically to the next stage in the pay band. 
SRS contemplates that System should facilitate auto updation of SRs including 
grant of annual increments but Audit observed that though pay was revised on 
account of annual increment, the increment entry was not auto updated in e-
SR.  The e-SR, however, could only be updated on individual employee basis 
by using ‘Update Salary’ option7 and to that extent, the design of e-SR was 
deficient and not in consonance with SRS provisions.  Data analysis also 
revealed that out of 9,76,122 active employees as per IFHRMS database, 
increment entry for the year 2021was available in e-SR for  
3,39,314 employees only.  
5.2.8 Conditions for grant of annual increment not mapped  
For a fresh recruit, the period of probation is two years. Pending declaration of 
probation, annual increment on completion of second year of service is 
awarded as an arrear after declaration of probation. SRS contemplates that for 
employee training and assessment tracking during probation, increment and 
leave should be linked. However, on execution of Annual Increment 
Programme, the System does not correlate with entries relating to mandatory 
provisions like successful completion of training, declaration of probation etc., 
before granting second increment.  
Instead, the programme fetches details of all employees who have completed 
12 months of service from date of previous increment. After this, HR initiator 
manually deselects ineligible employees and processes for the remaining 
                                                                 
6  PAO (East)-6, PAO (North)-2, and District Treasuries at Cuddalore-2 , Erode-7, 
Kanyakumari-1, Madurai-2  and Salem-7.  
7  Using ‘Employee Search’ feature by inputting ‘Employee ID’. 

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial and Human Resource Management 
System in Tamil Nadu 
58 
eligible employees. Thus, ineligible employees being granted increment due to 
oversight could not be ruled out as shown below. 
Illustration 
To demonstrate that System fails to correlate and check all conditions for 
grant of annual increment, during field visit (August 2022), Audit 
identified two employees in one sample unit who had not completed 
mandatory training.  The ‘Annual Increment Programme’ was executed in 
the presence of Audit, without removing their names from the generated 
report.  The transaction was completed without any error message and 
notification was pushed to Bill unit initiator for grant of increment.   
The above System deficiency defeats the objective of automation.  
Government replied (January 2023) that validations relating to completion of 
probation were temporarily disabled to handle the legacy discrepancies and the 
same would be restored by April 2023. However, the reply was silent about 
possibility of ineligible employees being granted increment due to oversight 
until validations were restored. 
Transfer Process 
5.2.9 Un-availed joining time not added to EL account 
When an employee’s transfer involves change of station, he is eligible for 
joining time.  The un-availed joining time is credited8 to employee’s earned 
leave account subject to a maximum credit of 240 days. 
During field visit to District Treasury Office, Kancheepuram it was seen that 
an employee transferred from District Treasury Office, Chennai in September 
2021 did not avail joining time. Though the un-availed joining time was added 
to the employee’s EL account in physical SR, it was not reflected in e-SR. 
When entry for the un-availed joining time was processed by HR user, in the 
presence of Audit, employee’s e-SR displayed ‘No’ in the ‘transit availed’ 
field but did not populate number of days in ‘un-availed joining time’ field for 
updating employee’s EL account. This shows that HR and e-SR were not fully 
integrated thereby defeating the purpose of IFHRMS. 
Government accepted the observation and stated (January 2023) that action 
would be taken to mandate the capturing of unavailed joining time whenever 
‘transit availed’ field is marked as ‘No’. 
Leave Management 
Every Government employee is entitled to various types of leave.  Sanction of 
each type of leave is governed by certain conditions. Entries relating to all 
types of leave other than casual leave have to be recorded in employee’s SR as 
it impacts pay and allowances and leave encashment at the time of retirement.  
Leave management process in HRMS had the following shortcomings: 
                                                                 
8  Though this business rule was factored into SRS, it was included as change 
 request.  

Chapter V - Human Resource Management System 
59 
5.2.10 Deficiencies in ‘leave process’ sub-module  
Leave of any kind for an employee is sanctioned by competent authority 
through ‘leave process’ sub-module of HRMS and employee’s Leave Balance 
Report (LBR) is updated.  Workflow analysis showed that: 
(a) The ‘leave process’ sub-module did not contain the following kinds of 
leave and therefore cannot process them in the System.  
 Half pay leave 
 Hospital leave 
 Paternity leave 
 Study leave AIS 
 Special leave for Medical 
Department 
 Leave on full allowance 
 Leave on half allowance 
(b) Unregularised leave and unauthorised leave, though available in ‘leave 
process’ sub-module, did not have corresponding columns in LBR to facilitate 
updation as and when such an event arises.  There is, thus a high probability of 
wrong depiction of employee leave details. 
5.2.11 Problems in updating Leave Balance Report 
Employee’s Leave Balance Report (LBR) in HRMS should get updated 
automatically. For e.g., EL balance of an approved probationer should 
automatically increase by 15 days due to advance credit on 1 January/1 July 
every year. It was, however, seen that EL balance of each employee must be 
updated manually in LBR which defeats the purpose of automation.  As 
manual updation of leave balance does not require verification or approval, it 
escapes supervisory control and gives scope for modifying/altering employee 
leave balance. Though physical service registers are currently relied on for EL 
encashment at the time of retirement, in future, when e-SR becomes the status 
quo for EL encashment, manual updation of LBR without appropriate checks 
poses a risk. 
In reply, the Government stated (January 2023) that the point raised by Audit 
would be reviewed for provision of necessary controls and validation. It was 
further stated that to have supervisory control, necessary provisions would be 
made in the System for verifier and approver to check the correctness of EL 
balance with reference to physical SR when uploaded by HR initiator at the 
first instance. 
5.2.12 Leave Balance Report for EL accepts any value beyond 
maximum credit  
As per extant rules, maximum accumulation of EL cannot exceed 240 days. 
However, 15 days of advance credit, given on 1 January/1 July every year 
beyond the maximum of 240 days, lapses if not availed within ensuing six-
month period.  Leave up to 15 days applied during this period is debited from 
additional 15 days. Audit observed that LBR had no separate field to input the 
15 days of advance credit granted to employees with EL balance of 240 days.  
As a result, the EL field in LBR, which should not exceed 240 days, accepts 

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial and Human Resource Management 
System in Tamil Nadu 
60 
255 days or even more than this when updated manually without restricting it to 240 (Exhibit 5.1). Also, EL field does not automatically reset to 240 days at the end of six months.  This indicates absence of controls to restrict and depict the maximum eligible leave in the LBR.  
Exhibit 5.1: LBR accepting a balance of more than 240 days under EL 
Government replied (January 2023) that necessary validation has been provided as pointed out by Audit. 5.2.13 Non-inclusion of compulsory leave in Leave Type SRS states that compulsory leave of one month (30 days) - termed as ‘Special Leave for Medical Department’ - could be availed by Radiologists/ Radiographers (X-Ray technicians) working in Government health care institutions after continuous service of 11 months in a year.  Though test checked physical SRs of Radiologists/Radiographers carried the compulsory leave entries availed, e-SRs did not have the corresponding entries.  This was due to non-inclusion of compulsory leave type in ‘leave process’ sub-module.  ‘Change request’ for including this leave type in IFHRMS, approved by the Department, was also not implemented.  As a result, eligible employees could not avail compulsory leave through the System. Government replied (January 2023) that Special leave for Medical Department (Compulsory leave) option has been enabled for Medical Department users. 5.2.14 Non-mapping of business rules for grant of Special Casual Leave   Special Casual Leave (SCL) is granted to employees on different occasions.  The number of days permissible differs based on reasons for grant of SCL. SRS details probable reasons for grant of SCL and corresponding number of days permissible.  It was however seen that reason for SCL is not mapped with their respective permissible number of days in HRMS.  Also, ‘Leave Reason’ input text box is not designed to display ‘list of values’ containing all probable reasons for granting SCL which would prevent eligible employees from availing SCL through the System. Government replied (January 2023) that permissible number of days and the ‘list of values’ for leave reasons would be incorporated in accordance with SRS and necessary orders in force. 5.2.15 Non-mapping of business rules for availing compensatory leave When a Government servant is called to work on holidays, he/she will be granted compensatory leave to be availed within six months. Compensatory leave can be combined with casual leave or authorised public holidays, 


Chapter V - Human Resource Management System 
61 
suffixed or prefixed with EL or unearned leave subject to the condition that the total period of absence shall not exceed 10 days.   Despite being detailed in SRS, Audit observed that the System did not have checks to ensure that the total leave of absence of an employee prefixing/suffixing compensatory leave does not exceed 10 days.   The Government assured (January 2023) that the shortcomings observed by Audit relating to compensatory leave would be fixed in due course. 5.2.16 Non-assigning of reasons for different types of leave While processing casual leave, compensatory leave, earned leave and Restricted Holidays through ‘leave process’ sub-module, ‘Leave Travel Concession’ is the default and only reason displayed (Exhibit 5.2). Thus leave could be sanctioned either without capturing reason or by accepting the default reason rendering the details of leave reasons captured and stored in the System meaningless. 
Exhibit 5.2: Restricted Holiday with Leave Travel concession as default reason 
 The Government stated (January 2023) that in view of the observation made by Audit, a new option ‘other reasons’ has been enabled to capture the detailed reason in remarks column for all types of leave. 5.2.17 Deficiencies in casual leave process When an employee applies for Casual Leave (CL), any holiday/Saturday/ Sunday either prefixed/suffixed or coming in between start date/end date of CL should not affect duration of leave (i.e. the actual leave of absence).  Workflow analysis, however, revealed the following gaps in CL process.  CL for one day with option ‘Yes’ to consider prefix/suffix of holidays, returned -1 (minus 1) as total leave duration (Exhibit 5.3). 
  


Performance Audit on Integrated Financial and Human Resource Management 
System in Tamil Nadu 
62 
Exhibit 5.3: CL applied for one day returns (-1) as leave duration 
 
 CL for two days by inputting first date as start date and next date as end date with option ‘Yes’ against ‘Consider Holidays Prefixed/ Affixed/Sandwiched’, total leave duration is taken as ‘0’ instead of as ‘2’ days.  In this case leave would not be debited for the employee.  When an employee applies for two days of CL sandwiching a public holiday that falls in between and selects ‘Yes’ against ‘Consider Holidays Prefixed/Affixed/Sandwiched’, total duration of CL is shown as ‘1’ instead of ‘2’ days.   System does not have field input for selecting forenoon/afternoon when employee applies for half-a-day CL.   CL applied for Sunday/holiday, was accepted by System due to lack of validation controls to check date/day and declared public holidays.   Employee’s CL balance not availed as on 31 December every year would lapse. However, System accepted any date from previous year in ‘Start date’ and ‘End date’ fields without alerting the user that ‘CL cannot be applied for dates in previous years’. The above shortcomings impacted the process of CL application, sanction and leave balance reporting through HRMS.  The Government assured (January 2023) that the shortcomings observed by Audit relating to CL would be fixed in due course. 5.2.18 No provision to attach certificates for certain kinds of leave The System had no provision to attach copies of certificates for availing certain kinds of leave.  Medical Certificate in case of Extra Ordinary Leave on Medical Certificate, unearned leave on Medical Certificate, Special Disability Leave, etc.  


Chapter V - Human Resource Management System 
63 
 Certificates in respect of Study Leave. 
 Legal adoption certificate and birth certificate/age certificate of 
child in case of child adoption leave granted until the child is one 
year old. 
 Proof for natural abortion or medical termination of pregnancy at 
Government health care institutions for maternity leave of 42 days.  
Government replied (January 2023) that necessary provision for attachment of 
scanned copies of certificates is available in the System.  The reply is not 
acceptable as this provision was not made mandatory.  
Recommendation 18:  
Government should ensure that all service regulations are correctly 
mapped in Human Resource module so that all service particulars of 
employees are captured with proper validation controls. 
Other points of interest 
5.2.19 Non-mapping of posts for sanctioning specific allowances  
Uniform allowance is payable to State Government employees viz., Police/ 
Traffic Police, Fire and Rescue Services, Prison, etc. It was, however, noticed 
that in ‘Employees Bills and other processes’ sub-module, Government 
employee other than the above mentioned categories could be considered for 
grant of uniform allowance.  The System thus lacks suitable validation control 
to restrict grant of uniform allowance to eligible employees.  
The Government admitted (January 2023) that the current version of IFHRMS 
has not envisaged the validation to restrict this feature only to those employees 
who are eligible for uniform allowance based on employee ID/post. 
5.2.20 Deficiencies in Employee Search feature  
‘Employee Search’ facility in HRMS has no option to select multiple 
‘Employee ID’ to initiate same type of process for more than one employee.  
To overcome this when ‘Add Another employee’ feature was used to fetch 
details of another employee, the result retrieved for the first employee 
disappeared and the message ‘No results found’ was returned.  Thus, for 
initiating the same process for multiple employees, HR initiator has to carry it 
out multiple times. 
5.2.21 Incomplete development of HR Reports sub-module 
‘Reports’ sub-module of HRMS module lists 54 types of Reports.  Audit 
however observed that 37 of the 54 Reports (Appendix 5.1) could not be 
generated as value required for mandatory fields had not been set for 
‘Administrative Department’, ‘Functional Department’ and ‘Head of the 
Department’. 
Government replied (January 2023) that following the Audit remarks, 
necessary validations have been provided in the System.  

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial and Human Resource Management 
System in Tamil Nadu 
64 
 
5.2.22 Poor quality of e-SR data capture rendered the e-SR unreliable 
The success of HRMS module rested largely on complete and error free 
digitisation of employee’s personal and service details.  According to RFP, for 
digitising employee SRs, SI had to go through all physical copies/volumes of 
employee SRs before carrying out data entry. SI had to capture legacy data of 
all Government employees as e-SR Part-I.  From IFHRMS Go-live, day to day 
SR related activities are stored in the Server and retrieved as e-SR Part-II.  
Test check of employee physical service books with corresponding e-SRs, was 
carried out in sampled units to ensure that all particulars recorded in physical 
SRs were correctly and completely captured in e-SRs.   
Audit check revealed the following deficiencies in e-SR:  
 Nomination details available in physical SR were not captured. 
 Particulars of probation declaration in promoted post not captured. 
 Employee profile details were incomplete. 
 HR events viz., transfers, promotion, increments, penalty were not 
updated automatically and required manual intervention. 
The quality of digitisation was thus poor and the purpose of automation was 
lost as departmental staff had to manually update employee details to rectify 
errors. 
Government replied (January 2023) that it was planning to give edit option to 
DDOs for updation of missing information in e-SR. 
Recommendation 19:  
Government should fix a timeline to cleanse e-Service Record data 
captured so far to ensure that employees are not subjected to any 
hardship at a later date due to missing/wrong information in their 
respective e-Service Records. 
5.2.23  Inaccuracies in e-SR database 
Data analysis revealed that lack of proper input / validation / process controls 
in IFHRMS,   resulted in following discrepancies in data: 
(a) 2,567 GPF/CPS numbers were linked to 5,945 employee IDs 
indicating duplication of GPF/CPS numbers in the System. Similarly 1,984 
PAN were linked to 4,198 employee IDs indicating duplication of PAN in the 
System. 
(b) Permanent Account Number for 4,040 employees/pensioners was not 
in standard format9 and was blank for 2,83,751 employees. 
                                                                 
9  Standardised format of PAN card number is ‘ABCDE1234Z’, where, first five digits 
are alphabets, next four digits are numbers and last digit is alphabet. 

Chapter V - Human Resource Management System 
65 
(c) Town name (i.e. employee’s town of birth detail) had several spelling 
versions rendering information in the System redundant and unusable as users 
were required to input town name in absence of a provision to select town 
name from a drop down ‘list of values’.  Illustrative case for town name 
‘Coimbatore’ is given in Table 5.1. 
Table 5.1: Field for town name containing redundant data 
Sl. No. Name of the Town Number of records 
1 Coimabtore 58 
2 Coimbator 22 
3 Coimbatore 7,004 
4 Coimbatore District 27 
5 Coimbatore Tamil Nadu 60 
6 Coimbatore Tamilnadu 142 
7 Coimbatore, Tamilnadu 55 
8 Coimbatore,Tamil Nadu 24 
9 Coimbatore,Tamilnadu 124 
10 Coimbature 46 
11 Coimpatore 38 
Total 7,600 
(Source: IFHRMS data dump) 
Government replied (January 2023) that GPF/CPS duplication have been 
rectified by synchronising with the master data of AG/Government Data 
Centre. It was stated that standardisation of PAN Number format has been 
enabled in IFHRMS application at the instance of Audit and data cleansing 
with respect to duplicate in various elements like Aadhaar, Bank Account 
Number and PAN was under process. 

 
 
CHAPTER VI 
SECURITY MANAGEMENT 
 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
67 
CHAPTER VI 
 
SECURITY MANAGEMENT 
 
The Department did not ensure that a mission-critical system such as 
IFHRMS had robust security measures like biometric access, machine-
based access rights and protection of user credentials leading to theft of 
Government money. The System allowed transactions by ‘anonymous 
user’, which, indicated vulnerabilities in the System and inadequate 
security management by the Department. Lack of periodic disaster 
recovery trials by the SI exposes the entire System to likely higher 
downtime and loss of confidential data. 
6.1 Introduction 
Security of a software system includes data integrity, confidentiality, 
authorisation, authentication, control, non-repudiation, and audit monitoring.  
Security management involves identity and access management, vulnerability 
management and data protection. 
IFHRMS, being an internet-based application running from a centralised 
location, envisaged in-built security checks, controls at application 
software/database level including user rights and privileges, processing 
controls, authorisation controls and data integrity controls.  However, Audit 
observed gaps in security features of IFHRMS such as lack of biometric 
access and machine based access rights leading to theft of Government money, 
transactions by anonymous users and ex-employees, unrestricted access to 
employee’s e-SR, etc., and are discussed in succeeding paragraphs. 
6.2 Identity and access management 
Identity Management involves establishment and maintenance of user 
identities, associated authentication and authorisation of users accessing the 
application portal.  Unique user identity ensures that no user can repudiate a 
past transaction, i.e., the individual assigned to a particular user ID can be held 
accountable for the activity performed with that ID.  IFHRMS also uses Role 
Based Access Control mechanism for permitting access to different classes of 
users. This involves setting permissions and privileges to defined roles and 
limiting access to specific resources or tasks. 
6.2.1 Non implementation of biometric access  
IFHRMS envisages biometric based authentication over internet from UID 
and digital signature-based authentication. Digital certificates were to be 
procured by SI and biometric devices by Department. It was, however, 
observed that department users of IFHRMS were not covered under biometric 
identification process. 

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial and Human Resource Management 
System in Tamil Nadu 
 
68 
Government replied (January 2023) that due complexity such as capturing, 
storing and authenticating of thumb impression and the huge task process of 
purchasing biometric devices to all 20,000 DDOs, higher secured Digital 
Signature Certificate1 has been implemented at the approver level. It was 
further stated that Government was in the process of adopting Aadhaar based  
e-Sign for further higher secured environment. 
The reply is not acceptable as failure to procure biometric devices till now had 
resulted in security gap in envisaged authorisation procedures. 
6.2.2 Sharing of user credentials by Help Desk with other users 
IFHRMS employs Single Sign On (SSO) as an authentication method. SSO 
allows users to use a single ID and password to access multiple software 
application services at the same time.  In such an environment, it is important 
that practice of password sharing among IFHRMS users and with Help Desk is 
discouraged to avoid exposure to security vulnerabilities. 
Data analysis revealed that out of 2,66,419 tickets raised by IFHRMS 
departmental users (PAOs, DTs, DDOs, etc.) during 2021-22, password 
change/reset request was made in 6,514 cases by logging into the System with 
another user’s login.  Help Desk, while resetting the password shared the new 
password with the user who raised the ticket.  Thus, sensitive information of 
one user was shared with other users despite availability of ‘Forgot Password’ 
mechanism for resetting a user’s password.  This shows lack of awareness 
among IFHRMS users and Help Desk personnel about risks of sharing login 
password. 
Disclosing user credentials undermines the fundamental principles of identity 
management and non-repudiation and is fraught with high risk in a financial 
management system.  Considering the sensitive nature of user credentials, 
Department needs to create awareness among users and Help Desk team as 
above incidents increase risk of unauthorised access, which impacts 
authenticity and non-repudiation of data. 
Government replied (January 2023) that the Help Desk officials have been 
instructed not to entertain tickets for changing user’s passwords and that 
henceforth, the password can be changed only through registered mobile 
number/email ID of the individual. 
Recommendation 20:  
Government should strengthen user access controls and create awareness 
about the risks in sharing of user credentials. 
  
                                                                        
1  DSC is the digital equivalent of physical paper-based certificate and documents are 
signed digitally. It protects the data by using encryption-decryption mechanisms. 

Chapter VI – Security Management 
 
69 
6.2.3 Transactions by retired employees 
In IFHRMS, users access the System with user ID and password and 
modules/sub modules are displayed as per user profile, access rights and 
authority.  
IFHRMS captures employee categorisation details viz., ‘temporary employee’, 
‘probationer’ and ‘ex-employee’ along with their respective User ID and 
password.  On attaining retirement age, employee should be categorised as 
‘ex-employee’ and System should automatically disable their user ID and 
assigned roles. 
Audit analysis showed that user IDs of 567 employees who had 
superannuated, were active in IFHRMS.  It was observed that user ID of 49 
retired employees were used to create 1,418 bills.  An illustrative case is given 
below: 
Illustration 
An Office Assistant (Employee ID: 04xxxxxxx41), Adi Dravidar and 
Tribal Welfare Department retired from service on 30 April 2020. Status 
changed as ex-employee from 01 May 2020, however 68 bills were created 
and passed with this employee ID between October 2020 and January 
2022 (14 months) for ₹1.53 crore. 
Of the 1,418 bills, 916 bills were passed for payment of ₹23.87 crore. This, 
included 53 bills passed for payment of ₹70.84 lakh, which related to their 
own salary, retirement benefits, etc. Reasons for transactions by retired 
employees are: 
(a) though category status of retired employees was updated in IFHRMS, 
employee’s user ID was not automatically disabled and roles assigned to 
employee was not automatically de-mapped. 
(b) all master tables were not updated due to non-integration of HRMS 
module with other modules. 
Government should ensure that IFHRMS automates controls over predictable 
events such as superannuation and institute standard procedures for timely 
updation of information. 
Government replied (January 2023) that SI has been advised to disable all 
roles for ex-employees at Enterprise Business Suite level to prevent them from 
performing any activities. 
6.3 Security vulnerabilities 
Enterprise Security has become increasingly vital for organisations and is 
critical for financial and accounting information systems.  RFP contemplates 
that IFHRMS will have security features based on ISO 27001/BS 7799 
standards to ensure (i) securing the network and servers from external as well 
as internal users, (ii) only authorised user access to resources (network, 
servers, databases, etc.), (iii) mechanism for detecting and monitoring 
intentional security breach and (iv) secure internet access. Audit noticed 
security vulnerabilities as discussed below:  

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial and Human Resource Management 
System in Tamil Nadu 
 
70 
6.3.1 Non-implementation of ‘machine based access rights’ for 
treasury functions 
RFP contemplates the concept of machine-based access rights i.e. Finance and 
Treasury functions should be done using intranet and only through specific 
devices (Desktop/Laptop) as one of the security components. MAC2 ID of 
these devices must be authenticated using the central server.  
However, it was found that a bill processing treasury official can log into 
IFHRMS using any network connected mobile phone indicating that 
application does not prevent PAO/Treasury staff from accessing IFHRMS 
using personal devices through personal internet.   
Government replied (January 2023) that machine based access right was not 
implemented as users were asked to work from home during COVID period. 
However, Static internet protocol3 validation which is already available in 
IFHRMS would be enabled once System stabilises. 
Audit observed that the ‘machine based access rights’ envisaged as a project 
security feature was not enforced, which was also a cause for theft of public 
money as discussed in Paragraph 6.4.3. 
6.3.2 Security features for user credentials not implemented  
IFHRMS security features provide that System should allow users to change 
their password periodically and have the option to change password any time. 
The System should also disable the user profile after three unsuccessful login 
attempts. 
To an Audit enquiry, Department stated (September 2022) that user password 
will expire after 180 days and thus force users to change their password every 
180 days and that System allows users to change the password anytime.  
Walkthrough of IFHRMS front-end screen however, showed that: 
 IFHRMS does not have an option for changing password inside the 
user profile which is accessed through user login.  To change the 
password, user must resort to ‘Forgot Password’ option or raise a 
ticket with Help Desk.  
 Contrary to the claim of the Department, it was also found that users 
could log into IFHRMS successfully after more than three 
unsuccessful login attempts. Thus, user was not locked out of the 
System even after multiple failed login attempts. 
Absence of envisaged security features for user credentials gives scope for 
security risks as unauthorised users will have unlimited attempts to break into 
IFHRMS. 
                                                                        
2  MAC ID is an acronym for Media Access Control ID which is a unique identifier that 
is assigned by the manufacturer to a IT hardware like desktop, laptop, etc. 
3  IP address is a numeric value assigned to a network device, and it is used for  
identification and location of a network device. 

Chapter VI – Security Management 
 
71 
Government while accepting (January 2023) that password change option was 
available under ‘forgot password’ only, stated that users have been sensitised 
to use the ‘forgot password’ option instead of raising a ticket for changing the 
password. It was further stated that user ID is locked after five unsuccessful 
continuous login attempts with a lock-in period of one hour. 
Reply is not acceptable, as the System will reflect all ‘password change’ 
incidences without distinction between ‘forgot password’ and ‘change 
password’.  Further, Audit noticed that user was not locked out of the System 
even after five unsuccessful attempts.  
6.4 Data protection 
Data protection is the process of safeguarding important information from 
corruption, compromise or loss. It is a set of strategies and processes used to 
secure privacy, availability and integrity of data.  An effective data protection 
strategy can help prevent data loss, theft, or corruption and can help minimise 
damage caused in the event of a breach or disaster. Audit noticed lapses in 
data protection as discussed below: 
6.4.1 Presence of ‘Anonymous User’ in transactions  
RFP contemplates that IFHRMS should allow only authorised users to make 
any changes to transaction details after submission of records. Audit analysis 
revealed that several transactions were recorded in the database as initiated 
and updated by ‘Anonymous user’ as detailed in Table 6.1. 
Table 6.1: Instances of transactions recorded as Anonymous user during 2021-22 
Sl. 
No. 
Table name Number of transactions 
initiated by Anonymous user 
Number of transactions ‘last 
updated’ by Anonymous user 
During the 
financial 
year 
During the 
month of 
March 
During the 
financial 
year 
During the 
month of 
March 
1 Bill Details Table 43 4 1,78,635 65,961 
2 Beneficiary Details 
Table 
4,67,173 2,07,379 4,12,017 1,79,747 
3 Workflow Official 
Details Table 
204 195 38,245 1,576 
Total 4,67,420 2,07,578 6,28,897 2,47,284 
(Source: IFHRMS data dump) 
It is seen from Table 6.1 that the above transactions - which related to 
updation of data in beneficiary table, bill table and data of employees - were 
initiated/updated by ‘Anonymous user’ particularly at the end of financial year 
i.e. in March 2022 and was 44 per cent of the total such transactions made 
during the year. In all the above cases, audit trail and transaction type are not 
available.  Masking of transactions is a major security risk as transactions of 
this nature circumvent frontend workflow access rights and authority.  
Government replied (January 2023) that when users raise tickets to rectify 
certain erroneous transactions mistakenly done by them, the backend team of 

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial and Human Resource Management 
System in Tamil Nadu 
 
72 
SI has corrected the errors. However, as they are not part of workflow, such 
transactions are marked as done by anonymous users.  It was also stated that 
these instances would be brought down by sensitising users and stopping back 
end operations to maintain audit trail in the System. 
Recommendation 21: 
Government should disable anonymous users in IFHRMS transactions to 
ensure audit trail. 
6.4.2 Security requirement not accomplished as envisaged 
SRS envisaged that employee records could be accessed only by HoO/HoD of 
respective departments/office as part of data security in the System. However, 
System allows any person assigned HR role to download e-SR Part-I and  
Part- II of employee of any office using ‘Employee ID’.  Since SR contains 
employee’s personal and service details, unregulated access to employee SR 
indicates system failure to secure confidential employee information. 
Government replied (January 2023) that from December 2022 search option 
using Employee ID has been restricted to concerned office. 
6.4.3 Gaps in security features led to theft of Government money  
On 12 November 2021, miscreants, using the username and password of 
Initiator, Verifier, and Approver of Block Development Office (BDO), 
Katpadi raised a payment advice of ₹70 lakh (Noon meal salary) and 
submitted it online to Katpadi Sub-Treasury for approval. Again, using login 
credentials of L1 and L2 Auditors of Katpadi Sub-Treasury, they approved the 
payment advice and withdrew the amount from Local Fund Deposit (LFD) 
account of BDO, Katpadi Panchayat Union4. The fraudulent payment advice 
bill was initiated on 12 November 2021 at 13.31 hours and payment was 
approved at 14.03 hours. Thus, the entire fraudulent activity was completed in 
about 30 minutes. 
The crime was discovered on 15 November 2021, (13 and 14 November 2021 
was Saturday and Sunday), when initiator at BDO checked the balance in the 
LFD account for raising a bill. A complaint was filed with cyber-crime branch, 
Police Department and the culprits were arrested. The money was recovered in 
full and remitted back to the LFD account of Katpadi BDO. The matter is 
currently under investigation. 
The following lacunae in IFHRMS led to the above incident. 
 Login credentials of IFHRMS workflow officials falling into the 
hands of miscreants indicate lack of adequate data protection of 
confidential Government information in IFHRMS. 
 Non implementation of ‘two factor authentication’ for logging into 
IFHRMS portal and ‘biometric authentication’ for treasury staff as 
                                                                        
4  Panchayat Union is the third tier of Local Government in Tamil Nadu. They operate 
LFD account to meet expenditure on various development works. 

Chapter VI – Security Management 
 
73 
envisaged in RFP, allowed miscreants to log into the System 
without alerting officials concerned. 
 Approving officials in DDO and Treasury can approve/pass for 
payment only by using E-Mudra Digital Signature Certificate. 
However, miscreants were able to submit and pass the payment 
advice bill indicating that DSC security feature was disabled at the 
time of the incident. 
 There is no provision in IFHRMS to alert officials concerned about 
high value transaction notifications being generated with their  
User ID. 
 Creation of payment advice bill and passing it for payment using 
computers outside office premises indicated that access to IFHRMS 
was not limited to specific computers within the office.  This 
exposed the System to hacking/penetration. 
 To an audit query, it was informed that IP address of IFHRMS users 
are not stored in the System. IP addresses are unique to a network 
connected device and very useful for detecting intruders. 
 As per MSA, System Integrator shall endeavour to report 
immediately to Department all identified attempts (whether 
successful or not) by unauthorised persons either to gain access to 
or interfere with the Department data, facilities, or confidential 
information. In the instant case, the siphoning of Government 
money was accidentally discovered by Initiator in BDO office.  This 
highlights deficiency in service as SI did not identify and report it.  
As such, IFHRMS failed in the above security aspects and process controls 
resulting in theft of Government money. 
Government replied (January 2023) that all Treasury Offices/PAOs have been 
sensitised in this regard and that all Treasury Offices/PAOs have been 
instructed to sensitise the DDOs through appropriate authorities with regard to 
DSC operations. It was also stated that static IP, e-sign, alert messages to users 
in case of high value transactions would also be considered for 
implementation to avoid such incidents in future.  
Recommendation 22:  
Government should provide envisaged security features in IFHRMS to 
safeguard Government money. 
6.5 Business Continuity and Disaster Recovery  
IFHRMS being a mission critical system, it is mandatory to have a Business 
Continuity Plan and Disaster Recovery Plan. SI should design and implement 
adequate data backup, business continuity and restoration procedures for 
departmental data.  Replication between Data Centre (DC) and Disaster 
Recovery (DR) site as well as change-over during disaster should be automatic 
and real-time for minimal impact on user experience. To ensure that all 

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial and Human Resource Management 
System in Tamil Nadu 
 
74 
replication and data synchronisation procedures are in place, periodic testing 
should be done. 
It was however noticed that DR drill was conducted only during November 
2019 i.e. prior to project Go-live (January 2021).  Thereafter no DR drill was 
conducted to see if System meets Recovery Point Objective and Recovery 
Time Objective targets during real time operations. In the absence of periodic 
testing to ensure data replication, synchronisation and DR drill, Audit could 
not ensure the robustness of Business Continuity Plan and Disaster Recovery 
Plan of IFHRMS. 
Government while acknowledging that DC/DR drill had not been conducted 
after Go-live, replied (January 2023) that proper DC/DR drill will be 
conducted after tech refresh is completed which has been currently taken up. 
Recommendation 23:  
Government should conduct periodic disaster recovery drill in real-time 
environment. 
6.6 Obsolescence Management 
IT assets are characterised by rapid obsolescence. An Obsolescence 
Management plan will include a variety of different elements such as 
technology roadmap, identification of criticality of components, monitoring all 
components etc. Use of outdated or obsolete technology in critical systems 
was to be avoided as far as possible.  
Government replied (January 2023) that as part of obsolescence management 
process it has been proposed for Tech fresh of IFHRMS hardware and 
Software items now. The reply is not acceptable as there was no plan to 
monitor the obsolescence of various assets procured so far. 
6.7 Exit management  
Government of India guidelines on Strategic Control over e-Governance 
Projects considers ‘Exit Management Plan’ as one of the measures to achieve 
strategic control over e-governance projects. Every project should have an 
Exit Management Plan to facilitate smooth and effective transition of service 
delivery, minimum disruption of ongoing delivery, and efficient completion of 
all agreement obligations in case of premature/planned exit of vendor.  
MSA provided for an ‘Exit Management Plan’ to be furnished in writing to 
Department by SI within 90 days from Agreement date, with the condition that 
it can be re-drafted annually to ensure that it is kept relevant and up to date.  
Audit observed that though an Exit Plan was initiated for IFHRMS (November 
2015), it is awaiting review by Third Party Audit Agency (TPAA) and  
Exit Plan was yet to be formally approved and adopted. 
Government stated (January 2023) that Exit management prepared by SI was 
pending approval with TPAA and will be approved at the earliest. 

 
 
 
CHAPTER VII 
MONITORING AND 
EVALUATION 
 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
75 
CHAPTER VII 
 
MONITORING AND EVALUATION 
 
The Monitoring Committee did not meet periodically to ensure that the 
project was completed as per the agreed timelines. Project e-Mission 
Team was not established to monitor the project during development, 
implementation and post Go-live of IFHRMS. The complaints raised by 
the IFHRMS users were not analysed to resolve the recurring issues 
raised from multiple offices. Shortfall was noticed in achieving 
performance indicators by System Integrator as per the Service level 
agreement. 
7.1 Introduction 
The success of a project depends on continuous monitoring of its 
implementation and operation. Quality of monitoring is important to achieve 
project objectives and to safeguard interests of the organisation in the long 
run.  
Gaps in monitoring the implementation of IFHRMS such as lack of periodical 
review by Monitoring committee, failure to use ticket data (complaints raised 
by users with Help Desk) for improving the system and failure to achieve 
performance indicators as envisaged in the service level agreement, etc., are 
discussed in succeeding paragraphs. 
7.2 Performance of Monitoring Committee  
GoTN constituted (July 2015) a Monitoring Committee (MC) with Principal 
Secretary to Government (Finance Department) as Chairman. The Principal 
Secretary to Government (Personnel and Administrative Reforms), Principal 
Secretary to Government (Information Technology), Secretary to Government 
(Expenditure), Additional Secretary to Government (Finance), Director of 
Treasury and Accounts and Principal Accountant General (A&E) were 
members of the MC. The major roles and responsibilities of MC were: 
 To take necessary policy decision and render guidance to the 
Project; 
 To decide on matters relating to scope, time and deliverables; 
 To ensure the project met the goals and milestones through periodic 
review meetings and 
 To co-ordinate and consult with key stake holders. 

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial and Human Resource Management 
System in Tamil Nadu 
76 
The Monitoring Committee should meet once a month to give guidance and 
directions and ensure that project timelines are met. However, there was 
shortfall in achieving the above parameter as shown below: 
 Against the requirement of 86 meetings in the seven years since its 
constitution, MC met 12 times.  The shortfall was 86 per cent. 
 The last MC meeting was conducted on 22 April 2022, after a gap 
of 15 months from the 11th MC meeting held on 15 December 2020. 
Audit observed that inadequate periodical monitoring by the MC largely 
contributed to the delay in implementing the project and in not ensuring 
IFHRMS was developed with proper controls and security features as 
discussed in the preceding chapters. 
Government replied (January 2023) that for IFHRMS review, several internal 
meetings are being conducted by HODs and on timely manner and that as 
periodical IFHRMS reviews are mostly pertaining to functional aspects, it may 
not require review by external Departmental officials. Hence, there may be 
short fall in number of MC meetings held.  Reply is not acceptable as MC 
meetings were envisaged as an important monitoring aspect for achieving 
project goals and milestones which has a bearing on project management. 
Recommendation 24:  
Government should ensure that the Monitoring Committee meets 
periodically to review IFHRMS. 
7.3 Web-based Project Monitoring Tool  
System Integrator was required to deploy a web-based Project monitoring tool 
within three months from date of signing the Contract.  The tool, which was to 
be available till the end of contract period, had to allow the 
Government/Department to view and monitor progress of various activities, 
tasks, resource deployment etc. at various locations against planned timelines 
and targets. The SI was also responsible for updating the tool daily so that 
Department was able to view the latest developments in various activities. 
The SI held a demonstration of Web Monitoring tool in the second  
MC meeting held on 11 January 2016 with provisions for Principal Secretary 
(Finance), Secretary (Expenditure) and Department to use the tool for online 
monitoring. However, as Department did not furnish details regarding 
operation of web monitoring tool and its utilisation for monitoring the Project, 
Audit could not derive assurance on the effective use of the tool. 
Government replied (January 2023) that due to shortage of technically 
qualified personnel in the Department it was not used effectively.   

Chapter VII – Monitoring and Evaluation 
 
77 
As technically qualified System Administrators have been appointed now 
(November 2022), the Web Monitoring tool will be used effectively. 
7.4 Non-establishment of Project e-Mission Team  
The Project Management Consultant (PMC) had to establish Project e-Mission 
Team (PeMT) or e-Governance Cell as an institutional structure within the 
Department consisting of domain specialists and Information Technology (IT) 
specialists. Setting up of PeMT was one of the key deliverables of PMC.  The 
role of PeMT was: 
 To participate and add value in the SRS review; 
 To support the development and deployment of e-governance 
solution. 
Scrutiny of records revealed the following: 
(i) PeMT was established in July 2015 and ₹9.68 lakh was paid to PMC in 
February 2017 for setting up PeMT. It was, however, observed that only 
Monitoring Committee and Technical Committee were constituted where 
PMC had no role. Further, the roles of Monitoring Committee and Technical 
Committee were limited to taking policy decision and monitoring and did not 
include the scope of work envisaged for PeMT. As the Department did not 
furnish details of deliberations and minutes of PeMT meetings held, it may be 
concluded that PeMT was not formed despite incurring expenditure of  
₹9.68 lakh. 
(ii) The agreement with PMC stipulated that on completion of State-wide 
rollout, the project management would come to an end. PMC, however, based 
on Monitoring Committee’s advice (September 2019), submitted a proposal 
(19 March 2020) to Department, seeking to continue its support for a 
minimum of six months beyond Go-live to ensure project stabilisation citing 
the expertise and knowledge capital they held because of their involvement in 
the project from inception. For the extended period of support, PMC quoted 
monthly contractual rate as ₹11.86 lakh. The proposal was accepted, and PMC 
was paid ₹67.99 lakh for the period January to May 2021. No payments were 
made thereafter.   
Audit observed that Consultant’s reasoning for their continued retention even 
after completion of the contract period was not justified as establishment of 
PeMT for capacity building and monitoring the project as envisaged would 
have done away with the need for PMC’s services after the contract period. 
Further, retention of PMC beyond the contract period was due to failure of 
Department to be in a state of readiness to take the project forward on its own. 
This resulted in dependence on PMC and avoidable expenditure to 
Government exchequer.  Thus, the failure of Project Monitoring Consultant 
(M/s Accenture) to establish a Project e-Mission Team, despite payment for 

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial and Human Resource Management 
System in Tamil Nadu 
78 
the same by Government also contributed to gaps in project monitoring 
leading to delay in Go-live of IFHRMS. 
Government replied (January 2023) that three system analysts have been 
deployed through outsourcing for this purpose from November 2022. 
7.5 Performance of Help Desk 
According to RFP there should be a central Help Desk for IFHRMS users as a 
one-stop solution for resolution of all IT and business process related 
queries/grievances. Help Desk was to be operated on all calendar days and 
operators had to provide information / clarification on the spot in case of an 
informational query or provide necessary troubleshooting assistance in case of 
tickets logged for application, hardware, network issues, etc.  
Help Desk ticket data is a valuable resource to assess the effectiveness and 
efficiency of IFHRMS at ground level and for course correction and 
improvement of application software. During 2021-22, 2,66,419 tickets were 
raised through web, email and phone by users for various reasons. However, 
Department failed to analyse the ticket data and take corrective steps on issues 
as discussed in the following paragraphs:  
7.5.1 Refreshing of user IDs by Help Desk 
Every time an employee is newly added to a ‘bill approver group’ in IFHRMS, 
user ID of Initiator in that bill group had to be refreshed. For this, users must 
raise a ticket with Help Desk.  Until the Initiator’s user ID is refreshed, any 
further transaction for the newly added employee could not be carried out in 
IFHRMS.  Non-refreshing of IDs in real-time was a system deficiency.  Ticket 
data analysis revealed that 5,235 such requests were received during 2021-22.  
Delay in resolving the tickets ranged from one day to 77 days in nearly  
35 per cent of cases (Table 7.1).  
Table 7.1: Delay in resolving tickets pertaining to refreshing IDs 
Sl. No Resolution time  Count of Ticket IDs 
1 Within an hour 2,516 
2 1 to 17 hours 909 
3 1 to 5 days 1,623 
4 6 to 77 days 187 
Total 5,235 
(Source: IFHRMS ticket data) 
7.5.2 Issues in Notifications 
In IFHRMS, whenever an event initiated by one user requires the attention of 
another user, a notification appears on the home screen of the other user. This 
mechanism ensures that required information flows uninterrupted to the next 

Chapter VII – Monitoring and Evaluation 
 
79 
level. In the event of any failure in this mechanism, next level user in the 
workflow would be unaware about tasks requiring his attention and 
consequently tasks lie unattended. Analysis of ticket data revealed that  
1,977 requests viz., ‘Missing Notification’; ‘next level notification not shown’; 
‘next level notification not display’; etc., were raised by users with Help Desk. 
The need for raising tickets to push notifications in IFHRMS, was a system 
deficiency, which hampered the workflow. 
Government while acknowledging (January 2023) the improper role 
assignments, role assignments not done in time by users and instances of 
missing notifications from one level to next level, stated that automation 
process of role mapping has been done as part of approval group changes from 
December 2022 which will reduce the notification/refresh ID issues.  
7.5.3 Help Desk intervention in bill process and missing audit trail 
IFHRMS has three levels of bill processing in DDO unit i.e. bill creation, bill 
verification and bill approval. On approval, the bill is presented to 
PAO/Treasury which also has three levels of checks for passing a bill. This 
defined role hierarchy in bill processing is there to ensure that control over a 
bill is transferred automatically to the next level when the bill moves to that 
level. 
However, ticket data analysis revealed that 639 tickets were raised by 
IFHRMS users with Help Desk to move bills to a lower level.  Help Desk 
resolved the tickets by promptly moving the bills as requested. This action of 
Help Desk, tantamount to backend manipulation of Server data bypassing 
‘hierarchy of roles’ in IFHRMS.  This was a violation of Government checks 
and balances.  
Moreover, the audit trail was missing for the bills where Help Desk intervened 
and moved bills to a lower level. Audit trail helps in fixing accountability for 
an action done by a user in the system and absence of audit trail reduces the 
legitimacy of the transaction making fraud detection difficult.  
Government replied (January 2023) that suitable restrictions would be 
explored and incorporated in consultation with SI, so that audit trail will not be 
missed. 
7.5.4 Incorrect classification of severity level and non-review of issues 
According to Master Services Agreement, issues raised with Help Desk were 
to be categorised as Severity Levels 1 (High1), 2 (Medium2) or 3 (Low3) based 
on three parameters viz., ‘number of locations’, ‘number of users’ and ‘call 
description’.  Though information about users and location was captured and 
                                                                        
1  Same issue in more than one location. 
2  More than five users at same location reporting same issue. 
3  Less than five users at the same location reporting same issue. 

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial and Human Resource Management 
System in Tamil Nadu 
80 
stored in ticket database, the data field ‘call description’ is designed for user 
input only.  The user-based input, information captured varied widely for the 
same type of issue. Due to lack of uniformity in one of the parameters, system 
could not automatically assign severity level for an issue. Audit also noticed 
incorrect assigning of severity level to issues as shown in Table 7.2. 
Table 7.2: Details of same issues being raised repeatedly 
Sl. 
No. 
Issue Total 
number. 
of 
tickets 
Number of 
locations 
reported 
Average 
tickets 
per 
month in 
2021-22 
Severity level 
assigned 
(number of 
cases) 
Actual 
severity level 
to be 
assigned 
1 Notification 1,977 247 164.75 1          (1 case) 
2        (3 cases) 
3 (1,973 cases) 
1 (High) 
2 Refresh 5,235 221 436.25 3 (5,235 cases) 1 (High) 
Total 7,212   7,212 cases  
(Source: IFHRMS ticket data) 
It is seen from Table 7.2 though all 7,212 cases (except one) merited 
classification as ‘Severity Level 1’, three cases were incorrectly classified as 
‘Severity Level 2’ and the remaining 7,208 cases as ‘Severity Level 3’ despite 
being raised by multiple users in multiple locations.  
Further, as seen from Table 7.2 the same type of issue was raised time and 
again by IFHRMS users throughout the year.  This not only points to adhoc 
handling of issues but also inadequate monitoring of tickets to permanently 
resolve issues to prevent their recurrence. 
Government replied (January 2023) that both missing notification and refresh 
ID issues have been sorted out by automating the role assignment process and 
that these issues would not occur in future. It was also stated that, proper care 
would be taken to assign the severity level as per the Service Level 
Agreement. 
 
Recommendation 25:  
Government should ensure that the Department analyses the complaints 
raised by users through Help Desk to resolve recurring system issues. 
  

Chapter VII – Monitoring and Evaluation 
 
81 
7.6 Service Level Agreement performance indicators 
Service Level Agreement (SLA) specified certain indicators to be ensured by 
SI. The performance of IFHRMS against those indicators is discussed below: 
7.6.1 Average System Uptime and Minimum average System Uptime 
at each location 
Average System Uptime is the period for which the specified application, 
portal and other IT Components are available to the internal and external users 
of the system averaged for all Project locations. The base line parameter is  
99 per cent system up time as per SLA. 
Minimum average System Uptime is period for which the specified 
application, portal and other IT components are available to the internal and 
external users of the system at every Project location. The base line parameter 
is 98 per cent average system up time as per SLA. 
As per Third Party Audit Agency SLA Audit report (TPAA report), while the 
system server uptime and network uptime ranged between 99 to 100 per cent, 
the minimum average system uptime was 100 per cent, thus satisfying the 
SLA requirements. 
However, it was observed that server was not available on a regular basis, the 
latest being on 24 August 2022, where users were allowed to access the 
IFHRMS server only in batches as detailed below: 
 From 3 PM to 5 PM: Finance and budget users, all Treasuries, 
PAOs, DDOs of Chennai, Tiruchirappalli and Vellore regions. 
 From 5 PM to 7 PM: Finance and budget users, all Treasuries, 
PAOs, DDOs of Coimbatore, Madurai and Tirunelveli regions. 
 After 7 PM till early morning hours: access enabled for all users. 
This situation continued on the following day too indicating non-availability 
of the Server simultaneously to all users in the State.  Thus, bills were 
processed even during night hours. This can also be correlated through the 
online survey conducted by Audit.  Nearly 90 per cent (637) of  
708 DDOs/DTs/Sub-Treasuries who took part in the survey, stated that bills 
were generated and approved during night hours due to non-availability of 
IFHRMS server during normal working hours. Bill data analysis also showed 
that during 2021-22, 47 per cent of the bills were prepared during night  
i.e. between 1 AM and 7.30 AM. 
Government replied (January 2023) that depending on the number of users in 
the region, region-wise time slicing was introduced in the business hours for 
using IFHRMS due to server slowness during month end.  However, once the 
recently initiated tech refresh is completed, this issue would be addressed 
permanently and the SLA parameters would be met without any difficulty. 

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial and Human Resource Management 
System in Tamil Nadu 
82 
7.6.2 Help Desk operator availability 
Baseline for average availability time of all Help Desk operators was fixed as 
100 per cent in SLA. Help Desk should be available from 06:00 hours to  
22:00 hours on calendar days. SI had deployed seven Help Desk operators.  
Once the operator logged into the system time stamp was captured along with 
percentage of availability.  Though Third Party Audit Agency (TPAA) audit 
report was inconclusive about this indicator, 311 (43 per cent) out of  
708 respondents in the online survey conducted by Audit stated that Help 
Desk did not respond to calls indicating that Help Desk performance fell short 
of SLA requirements. 
Government replied (January 2023) that users would be educated to use the 
option of raising the tickets in portal itself, which would save time for the 
users to get their tickets resolved at the earliest and that augmentation of 
resources would also be considered to resolve the issue. 
7.6.3 Help Desk average resolution time 
Resolution time is the time taken from generation of call to closure of call.  
Resolution time is reported by the Help Desk application deployed and 
maintained by SI. Baseline for this parameter as per SLA was as below:  
 Severity Level 1 ticket: 4 working hours for that location 
 Severity Level 2 ticket: 8 working hours for that location 
 Severity Level 3 ticket: 16 working hours for that location 
Sample check by TPAA indicated that resolution for all three levels was 
reached on an average of 0.33 hours, thus meeting SLA requirement. 
Ticket data analysis however, revealed that 1.81 lakh tickets (68 per cent) 
relating to ‘application’ / ‘hardware’ / ‘e-SR’ / ‘clarification’ were not closed 
within the SLA requirement.  They were resolved belatedly, and the delays 
ranged from more than 16 hours to 361 days irrespective of their Severity 
Level.  Further, 125 tickets relating to application/ hardware raised during 
2021-22 were still pending resolution for periods ranging from 36 to 367 days. 
Thus, ticket resolution time did not meet SLA requirements. According to the 
agreement provision, penalty for not closing tickets within stipulated time 
could be levied, subject to a maximum of ₹1.264 crore per quarterly period of 
three months. Despite this, Department failed to levy and collect penalty  
from SI. 
In the online survey by Audit, while 26 per cent of the users (182 of  
708 users) stated that their tickets were not resolved with proper solution,  
54 per cent of the users (384 of 708 users) stated that they had to raise tickets 
repeatedly to resolve an issue. 
                                                                        
4  20 per cent of quarterly payments (₹6.29 crore) made to SI for operation and 
maintenance of IFHRMS during 2021-22. 

Chapter VII – Monitoring and Evaluation 
 
83 
This indicated that the SI (M/s Wipro) failed to achieve the  
performance indicators.  Further, the Third Party Audit Agency’s  
(M/s PricewaterhouseCoopers) assessment that SI (M/s Wipro) had achieved 
the performance indicators was also not correct. 
Government replied (January 2023) that action would be taken to resolve the 
long pending 125 tickets relating to application/software issues and SI would 
be directed to strictly adhere to the SLA requirements in resolving the tickets 
pertaining to application / hardware, failing which penalty would be levied as 
per SLA.  
Recommendation 26:  
Government should consider levying penalty if SI fails to meet the 
performance indicators envisaged in the Service Level Agreement. 
7.7 Training and user Feed Back 
7.7.1 Training 
Para 3.4 of RFP required that users of IFHRMS had to be trained by SI  
(M/s Wipro) to achieve the envisaged outcomes of IFHRMS. The SI  
(M/s Wipro) commenced training programmes from the year 2017-18 
covering Treasury staff and DDOs.  However, as Go-live was achieved only in 
January 2021 after a delay of four years, knowledge transfer between the 
trained employees and new employees who replaced them during 2018-2021 
did not take place.   In a sample survey conducted by Audit, 51 per cent of 
users also expressed that the training given was not sufficient. This was also 
supported by the fact that in four5 sampled districts, the Treasury officers 
expressed the requirement of additional training for their staff. In the above 
circumstances, dependence on the technical support staff deployed by SI  
(M/s Wipro) in the district treasuries and sub-treasuries became inevitable for 
getting clarifications during day-to-day use of IFHRMS. 
Recommendation 27:  
As training is a continuous process, Government should ensure periodical 
refresher courses to all the users so as to enable them to understand the 
application and reduce dependence on the SI (M/s Wipro). 
7.7.2 User Feed back 
An online survey was conducted among IFHRMS users to assess their 
satisfaction level. The results of online survey based on the response of  
708 users are shown in the Exhibit 7.1. 
                                                                        
5  Cuddalore, Kanchipuram, Madurai and PAO (East). 

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial and Human Resource Management System in Tamil Nadu 
84 
Exhibit 7.1 – IFHRMS user feed back 
  
(Source: Compiled from Audit survey questionnaire)  Eighty nine per cent of users reported frequent server breakdowns during month end and non-availability of server during office hours (90 per cent), requiring working at night hours.  Ninety three per cent of users felt that ‘mark for re-calculation’ in pay bill processing delayed pay bill generation.  Ninety nine per cent reported that manual registers like MTC 70 are still being maintained, despite introduction of IFHRMS, while  94 per cent maintained manual SRs even for newly recruited employees, despite availability of e-SR in IFHRMS.  While 56 per cent of users reported the availability of Help Desk services over phone, 52 per cent users felt that WIPRO staff at their location is necessary to resolve issues as otherwise tickets had to be raised to resolve same complaint.  Seventy one per cent users expressed their satisfaction on IFHRMS when compared to old software, while 59 per cent expressed their satisfaction regarding user friendliness of IFHRMS.   Sixty five per cent users also expressed that IFHRMS is dependable for generation and processing of bills without hard copies of supporting documents.   
56545259716594999093890 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100Helpdesk availabilityRepeated tickets for same complaintDependency on WiproUser friendly when compared to old software…IFHRMS better than old software systemsDependable for approving bills without hard…Maintenance of manual SRMaintenance of manual registersWorking at night hoursDelay in pay bill processingFrequent server break down(In per cent)

Chapter VII – Monitoring and Evaluation  
85 
Government replied (January 2023) that user feedback compiled by Audit will be taken into consideration and steps will be taken to address the issues and make the System robust.         (C. NEDUNCHEZHIAN) Chennai  Principal Accountant General (Audit-I), The 10 May 2023                         Tamil Nadu    Countersigned      (GIRISH CHANDRA MURMU) New Delhi                 Comptroller and Auditor General of India The 11 May 2023 
 
 


 
 
APPENDICES 
 
 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
87 
Appendix 1.1 
(Reference:  Paragraph 1.2; Page 1) 
System architecture of IFHRMS 
Government of Tamil Nadu Policies, Rules and Guidelines, Budget Manual,  Treasury code and Manual and Government orders and circulars 
Users 
 
 
Delivery 
Channels 
 
 
Management 
layer 
 
 
Service 
Delivery 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Integration 
layer 
 
 
Application 
 
Data base 
layer 
 
 
 
 
  
Department 
users 
External users 
(RBI and AG (A&E)) 
Citizens 
Department 
portal 
Citizen  
portal 
Help Desk/  
call-center 
Budget, Financial and Accounting, Payroll, Pension,  
Web portal, Third party interfaces, etc. 
Work flow Payment 
services 
User 
Management 
Bio metric 
authentication 
Digital  
signage 
Content 
management 
Budget related 
Services 
Revenue 
related services 
Expenditure 
related services 
Loans related 
services 
HRMS related 
services 
Public 
Accounts 
Authentication/ 
Authorisation 
Auditing 
services 
Registration 
services 
Other 
Departments 
Integration to 
UID 
Payment 
gateway 
Master 
Data 
Business 
Transaction 
Work flow 
Data 
Document and 
image store 
Audit trails 
and logs 
Business 
Intelligence 

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial and Human Resource Management 
System in Tamil Nadu 
 
88 
Appendix 3.1 
(Reference:  Paragraph 3.3.1 (i); Page 24) 
Transactions of Charged nature booked in detailed head meant for Voted items 
(In ₹) 
Sl. No. Detailed Head No. Debit transactions Credit transactions 
1 30801 1,48,83,132 0 
2 30809 1,11,274 0 
3 30909 5,00,00,000 0 
4 31009 9,00,00,000 0 
5 31301 73,40,714 0 
6 31401 2,05,86,514 0 
7 31801 95,63,971 0 
8 31809 28,79,644 0 
9 31901 1,14,46,877 0 
10 31902 4,36,190 0 
11 31903 13,18,818 0 
12 32101 10,09,229 0 
13 32102 88,26,241 17,010 
14 32103 11,07,225 0 
15 32401 94,366 0 
16 32501 22,18,71,72,990 13,02,433 
17 33301 46,95,200 0 
18 33302 25,64,85,018 0 
19 33303 1,30,07,099 0 
20 33304 6,66,26,580 0 
21 33401 50,000 0 
22 33402 20,99,764 0 
23 34501 2,72,63,853 0 
24 34601 8,00,000 0 
25 34901 2,08,70,000 0 
26 34902 7,41,000 1,88,25,000 
27 35102 21,22,652 0 
28 35901 96,000 0 
29 36601 20,49,269 0 
30 36801 67,61,789 0 
31 37101 9,34,219 0 
32 37201 27,10,540 0 
33 37601 3,01,94,457 0 
34 37602 1,50,56,779 0 
35 37603 1,18,68,248 0 
36 37702 4,00,386 43,69,426 
37 38102 4,88,360 0 
Sub Total 22,87,20,98,398 2,45,13,869 
Grand Total 2,289.66 crore 
 

Appendices 
89 
 
Appendix 3.2 
(Reference:  Paragraph 3.3.1 (i); Page 24) 
Transactions of Voted nature booked in detailed head meant for Charged items 
(In ₹) 
Sl. No. Detailed  Debit transactions Credit transactions 
1 32551 0 9,409 
2 33359 0 1,000 
3 34752 0 9,000 
4 35152 48,25,538 19,663 
5 36451 0 70 
6 37752 0 2,04,05,848 
7 46451 1,38,37,275 0 
8 46475 0 1,41,301 
 Sub Total 1,86,62,813 2,05,86,291 
Grand Total 3,92,49,104 
 
  

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial and Human Resource Management 
System in Tamil Nadu 
 
90 
 
Appendix 3.3 
(Reference:  Paragraph 3.3.2 (ii); Page 26) 
Booking of expenditure in ‘8005’ Major Head removed from LMMH 
Sl. No. Head of Account Detailed Head Amount 
(in ₹) 
1 800501101AA 80101 57,000 
2 800501101AA 80102 21,000 
3 800501101AA 80102 57,000 
4 800501101AA 80101 1,06,700 
5 800501101AA 80202 21,000 
6 800501101AA 80101 5,000 
7 800501101AA 80102 21,000 
8 800501101AA 80101 1,10,000 
9 800501101AA 80101 15,000 
10 800501101AA 80101 13,000 
11 800501101AA 80101 10,000 
12 800501101AA 80101 1,05,000 
13 800501101AA 80101 62,000 
14 800501101AA 80101 93,300 
15 800501101AA 80101 15,000 
16 800560103AG 80102 1,680 
17 800560103AG 80101 3,850 
18 800501101AA 80101 75,000 
19 800501101AA 80101 25,200 
Total 8,17,730 
 

Appendices 
91 
Appendix 3.4 
(Reference:  Paragraph 3.3.4; Page 28) 
Booking of expenditure with unrelated HoD code 
Sl. No Major Head Debit 
(in ₹) 
Credit 
(in ₹) 
1 0043 0 12,78,383 
2 0049 0 19,87,436 
3 0055 0 9,666 
4 0059 0 1,43,03,719 
5 0070 0 41,590 
6 0071 0 54,10,767 
7 0075 0 16,23,638 
8 0202 0 2,21,50,372 
9 0216 0 11,440 
10 0235 0 21,924 
11 0406 0 1,650 
12 0701 0 9,35,459 
13 1054 10,10,468 1,53,03,164 
14 2014 0 3,13,122 
15 2053 0 1,000 
16 2055 0 9,000 
17 2202 0 64,190 
18 2210 20,000 0 
19 2401 0 1,000 
20 2515 0 26,607 
21 7610 0 99,060 
Sub Total 10,30,468 6,35,93,187 
Grand Total 6,46,23,655 
 
  

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial and Human Resource Management 
System in Tamil Nadu 
 
92 
Appendix 3.5 
(Reference:  Paragraph 3.3.5; Page 28) 
Preparation of Accounts with wrong Sub-account codes 
Sl. No. Sub-account code Expenditure 
(in ₹) 
Receipts 
(in ₹) 
1 SA-02 0 1,450 
2 SA-11 0 25,302 
3 SA-12 8,36,760 0 
4 SA-18A 72,33,724 0 
5 SA-18B 0 38,000 
6 SA-18C 16,11,60,000 0 
7 SA-18D 4,00,06,110 0 
8 SA-18F 1,46,53,85,501 0 
9 SA-20A 0 550 
10 SA-20B 0 1,95,518 
11 SA-27D 0 46,985 
 Total 1,67,46,22,095 3,07,805 
 
  
 

 
Appendices 
 
93 
Appendix  4.1 
(Reference:  Paragraph 4.1.15; Page 45) 
Number of users assigned multiple roles in IFHRMS 
Sl. 
No. 
District/PAOs/DTs Total users 
in IFHRMS 
(as of July 
2022) 
District wise 
users 
assigned 
multiple 
roles 
Multiple roles assigned in IFHRMS (as of July 2022) 
Billing activity Audit activity HRMS activity Total 
instances Initiator/ 
Verifier 
Verifier/ 
Approver 
Initiator/ 
Approver 
L1/L2 L2/L3 L1/L3 Initiator/ 
Verifier 
Verifier/ 
Approver 
Initiator/ 
Approver 
1 Ariyalur 1,045 68 117 222 24 0  17 0  113 247 53 793 
2 Chengalpattu 1,661 109 209 122 83 0  9 4 203 152 99 881 
3 Coimbatore 3,661 275 467 741 177 8 40 1 419 723 192 2,768 
4 Cuddalore 2,905 213 399 326 71 1 74 1 387 396 123 1,778 
5 Dharmapuri 1,905 80 169 174 31 0  27 0  168 205 55 829 
6 Dindigul 2,562 177 326 371 71  0 17 0  323 406 115 1,629 
7 Erode 2,054 108 364 207 53 4 59 0  350 248 100 1,385 
8 Kallakurichi 1,387 118 315 214 85 3 40 0  316 289 158 1,420 
9 Kanchipuram 1,216 72 104 53 60 2 9 1 114 73 100 516 
10 Kanyakumari 1,970 171 301 191 94 1 18 0  293 221 143 1,262 
11 Karur 1,579 86 187 112 39 3 8 0  174 133 58 714 
12 Krishnagiri 2,052 85 255 299 78  0 20 0  260 334 113 1,359 
13 Madurai 1,566 155 252 334 69 1 23 1 258 347 94 1,379 
14 Nagapattinam 1,887 155 257 195 94 0  11 0  244 266 160 1,227 
15 Namakkal 1,725 97 273 76 50 0  18 0  283 103 82 885 
16 The Nilgiris 1,172 145 174 295 52 0  22 1 160 272 68 1,044 
17 PAO (East) 1,828 72 82 66 29 9  0 0  78 80 30 374 
18 PAO (High court) 459 36 38 22 4 0  1 0  35 36 4 140 
19 PAO (Madurai) 2,019 105 142 136 58 3 2 0  144 168 68 721 
20 PAO (North) 1,236 69 139 196 61 1 1 0  138 217 71 824 
21 PAO (Sectt) 707 62 58 67 27  0 0  1 25 35 12 225 
22 PAO (South) 2,901 164 202 142 120 8 0  0  194 153 131 950 
23 Perambalur 890 54 116 113 40 0  15 0  116 118 47 565 
  

 
Performance Audit on Integrated Financial and Human Resource Management System in Tamil Nadu 
 
94 
Sl. 
No. 
District/PAOs/DTs Total No. of 
users in 
IFHRMS 
(as of July 
2022) 
District wise 
no. of users 
in assigned 
Multiple 
roles 
Multiple roles* assigned in IFHRMS (as of July 2022) 
Billing activity Audit activity HRMS activity Total 
instances 
Initiator/ 
Verifier 
Verifier/ 
Approver 
Initiator/ 
Approver 
L1/L2 L2/L3 L1/L3 Initiator/ 
Verifier 
Verifier/ 
Approver 
Initiator/ 
Approver 
24 Pudukkottai 1,976 165 338 278 100 1 43 1 331 324 149 1,565 
25 Ramanathapuram 1,898 183 274 244 78 0  32 0  266 254 112 1,260 
26 Ranipet 1,048 87 147 139 52 0  9 0  173 146 84 750 
27 Salem 3,424 228 502 410 129 2 45 1 490 446 177 2,202 
28 Sivagangai 2,032 115 261 224 96 0  30  0 258 275 150 1,294 
29 SPAO (Corpn) 443 15 23 21 2 0  0  0  22 25 4 97 
30 SPAO (New Delhi) 34 3 1 2 2 1 2 1 2 3 2 16 
31 SPAO(HC Bench) 
Madurai 246 12 33 4 0  0  0  0  32 16 4 89 
32 Tenkasi 1,745 120 202 176 67  0 12 0  177 196 91 921 
33 Thanjavur 2,680 161 297 334 87  0 46 0  277 349 93 1,483 
34 Theni 1,611 120 215 134 36 0  27 1 218 187 95 913 
35 Tiruchirappalli 3,334 205 397 239 112 1 22 0  399 285 140 1,595 
36 Tirunelveli 2,919 175 238 168 95 0  7 0  230 186 128 1,052 
37 Tirupathur 816 74 125 102 42 3 8 3 129 110 61 583 
38 Tirupur 2,158 180 334 195 68 1 22 1 329 252 117 1,319 
39 Tiruvallur 2,901 148 343 199 119 1 3 1 321 217 146 1,350 
40 Tiruvannamalai 2,787 165 305 387 78 1 55 1 282 417 107 1,633 
41 Tiruvarur 1,535 118 210 227 78 0  26 0  210 242 109 1,102 
42 Thoothukudi 2,754 225 222 85 92 2 20 1 238 148 114 922 
43 Vellore 1,715 86 234 173 63 0  8 0  230 180 72 960 
44 Villuppuram 2,228 159 361 87 57 1 3 0  340 140 110 1,099 
45 Virudhunagar 2,711 160 243 380 61 2 29 0  241 430 83 1,469 
46 Blank 21 0 1 2 1 0  0  0  2 3 2 11 
Total 83,403 5,580 10,252 8,884 2,985 60 880 21 9,992 10,053 4,226 47,353 
* Either as Initiator/Verifier or as Verifier & Approver or as Initiator/Approver 

 
Appendices 
 
95 
Appendix  4.2 
(Reference:  Paragraph 4.2.5; Page 51) 
Mapping of PPO number with wrong PEN ID 
Sl. 
No. 
Pensioner ID PPO 
Number 
Status Type of error  in 
PEN ID field 
1 PENxxxxx28 Axxxxx3 Active 
Pensioner Wrong 
2 PENxxxxx66 Axxxxx5 Active 
Pensioner Wrong 
3 PENxxxxx67 Cxxxxx0 Active 
Pensioner Wrong 
4 PENxxxxx67 Cxxxx2 Active 
Pensioner Wrong 
  
  

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial and Human Resource Management 
System in Tamil Nadu 
 
96 
Appendix 4.3 
(Reference:  Paragraph 4.2.5; Page 51) 
PEN ID mapped to Employee login instead of Pensioner login 
Sl. 
No. 
Pensioner ID PPO 
Number 
Status Type of error in 
Pensioner ID field 
1 PENxxxxx60 Axxxxx3 Active Pensioner Blank 
2 PENxxxxx44 Axxxxx4 Active Pensioner Blank 
3 PENxxxxx30 Axxxxx2 Active Pensioner Blank 
4 PENxxxxx81 Axxxxx5 Active Pensioner Blank 
5 PENxxxxx28 Axxxx3 Active Pensioner Blank 
6 PENxxxxx45 Cxxxxx5 Active Pensioner Blank 
7 PENxxxxx64 Cxxxxx1 Active Pensioner Blank 
8 PENxxxxx42 Rxxxxxx1 Active Pensioner Blank 
9 PENxxxxx64 Rxxxxxx8 Active Pensioner Blank 
10 PENxxxxx66 Cxxxxx5 Active Pensioner Blank 
11 PENxxxxx63 Cxxxx5 Active Pensioner Blank 
12 PENxxxxx62 Cxxxxx1 Active Pensioner Blank 
13 PENxxxxx42 Rxxxxxx0 Active Pensioner Blank 
14 PENxxxxx40 Cxxxxx9 Active Pensioner Blank 
15 PENxxxxx39 Axxxxx1 Active Pensioner Blank 
16 PENxxxxx12 Dxxxxxx6 Active Pensioner Blank 
17 PENxxxxx66 Fxxxxxx6 Active Pensioner Blank 
18 PENxxxxx08 Rxxxxxx9 Active Pensioner Blank 
19 PENxxxxx07 Rxxxxxx2 Active Pensioner Blank 
20 PENxxxxx06 Axxxx0 Active Pensioner Blank 
21 PENxxxxx05 Axxxxx2 Active Pensioner Blank 
22 PENxxxxx04 Axxxxx7 Active Pensioner Blank 
23 PENxxxxx94 Fxxxxxx2 Active Pensioner Blank 
24 PENxxxxx12 Rxxxxxx0 Active Pensioner Blank 
25 PENxxxxx11 Rxxxxxx3 Active Pensioner Blank 
26 PENxxxxx03 Fxxxxxx0 Active Pensioner Blank 
  
 
  

 
Appendices 
 
97 
Appendix 4.4 
(Reference:  Paragraph 4.2.6; Page 51) 
Active pensioners with missing PPO numbers 
Sl. No. PEN ID Status Category 
1 PENxxxxx63 Active Pensioner Civil Family Pension 
2 PENxxxxx12 Active Pensioner Civil Family Pension 
3 PENxxxxx77 Active Pensioner Civil Family Pension 
4 PENxxxxx00 Active Pensioner Civil Family Pension 
5 PENxxxxx69 Active Pensioner Civil Family Pension 
6 PENxxxxx97 Active Pensioner Civil Family Pension 
7 PENxxxxx40 Active Pensioner Civil Family Pension 
8 PENxxxxx97 Active Pensioner Village Office Assistant 
Family Pension 
9 PENxxxxx09 Active Pensioner Village Office Assistant 
Family Pension 
 
  

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial and Human Resource Management 
System in Tamil Nadu 
 
98 
 
Appendix 4.5 
(Reference:  Paragraph 4.2.6; Page 52) 
Pensioners deprived of timely sanction of additional pension 
Sl. 
No. 
Pensioner ID Date of Birth Eligible for additional pension 
from 
As per 
IFHRMS 
As per 
Disburser’s 
Half copy 
As per 
IFHRMS 
As per actual 
DoB 
1 PENxxxxx57 01-01-1951 30-08-1939 01-01-2031 01-08-2019 
2 PENxxxxx25 01-01-1951 31-10-1937 01-01-2031 01-10-2017 
3 PENxxxxx44 01-01-1951 01-01-1941 01-01-2031 01-01-2021 
4 PENxxxxx59 01-01-1951 10-08-1941 01-01-2031 01-08-2021 
5 PENxxxxx15 01-01-1951 01-06-1934 01-01-2031 01-06-2014 
6 PENxxxxx70 01-01-1951 02-01-1941 01-01-2031 01-01-2021 
7 PENxxxxx69 01-01-1951 01-06-1942 01-01-2031 01-06-2022 
  

 
Appendices 
 
99 
Appendix 5.1 
(Reference:  Paragraph 5.2.21; Page 63) 
List of Reports could not be generated in HRMS Module  
Sl. No. Nomenclature of Reports  
1 Adi Dravidar and Tribal Welfare Representation SC/ST Annual Return Report 
2 Annual Confidential Report 
3 Annual Return on Representation of Community 
4 Awards - Ashoka Chakara, Kirti Chakara-Recommendation For Gallantry Award 
5 Compassionate Ground Appointment Report 
6 Compulsory Retirement Review Cases 
7 Compulsory Retirement of Employee Report 
8 Compulsory Wait Report 
9 Continuation/Conversion of Temporary Post 
10 Conversion of 17(b) to 17(a) 
11 Disciplinary Cases Pending Against The Government Servants Report 
12 Disciplinary Proceedings Review Report 
13 Employee Foreign Service Card Report 
14 Employee Qualification For Selection Grade or Special Grade or Stagnation Increment 
Report 
15 Employees Deputed to Foreign Service Report 
16 Ex-Servicemen Welfare – Reservation of Post to Ex-Servicemen 
17 Foundational Course Training to be given for staff at Bhavani Sagar 
18 Group A and B Vacant For Long Time 
19 Husband and Wife In Service Report 
20 Last Pay Certificate Report 
21 List of Pending Non Vigilance Cases Report 
22 New Joinee of This Week Report 
23 Particulars of Employee Under Suspension Data 
24 Probation Declaration Report 
25 Regularisation Probation Report 
26 Regularisation of Temporary Appointment Report 
27 Regularisation of Temporary Appointment-Avoidance Of Delay Report 
28 Remittance of Pension Contribution and Leave Salary Contribution 
29 Review of Govt. Servants Who Have Lien In Another Service 
30 Review of Long Absence of Government Servants 
31 Temporary Appointment Report to TNPSC 
32 Training Details Report 
33 Training Test Details Report 
34 Transfer Request Seniority Report 
35 Transfer and Posting of Senior Officials 
36 Verification of Qualifying Service Either 28 Years of Service or 53 Years of Age 
37 Without Adequate Knowledge in Tamil Report 
 
  

Performance Audit on Integrated Financial and Human Resource Management 
System in Tamil Nadu 
 
100 
Glossary of abbreviations 
Abbreviations Full Form 
AM Alteration Memorandum 
ASL Additional Sanction Ledger 
ATBPS Automated Treasury Bill Passing System 
BCOs Budget Control Officers 
BDO Block Development Office 
CF Contingency Fund 
CF GO CF Government Order 
CFA Contingency Fund Advance 
CL Casual Leave 
CRP Conference Room Pilot 
CRs Change Requests 
CSTI Civil Service Training Institute 
CTA Commissioner of Treasuries and Accounts 
DoB Date of Birth 
DoF Department of Finance 
DPR Detailed Project Report 
DR Disaster Recovery 
DSC Digital Signature Certificate 
DTA Department of Treasuries and Accounts 
DTs District Treasuries 
ECS Electronic Clearing System 
FMA Final Modified Appropriation 
FRS Functional Requirement Specification 
GoTN Government of Tamil Nadu 
HoA Head of Account 
HoDs Heads of Departments 
HoO Head of Office 
HR Human Resource 
HRMS Human Resource Management System 

 
Appendices 
 
101 
Abbreviations Full Form 
IFHRMS Integrated Financial and Human Resource Management 
System 
IP Internet Protocol 
IT Information Technology 
KUT Key User Training 
LBR Leave Balance Report 
LFD Local Fund Deposit 
LMMH List of Major and Minor Head 
MC Monitoring Committee 
MSA Master Service Agreement 
NIS New Instrument of Service 
NS New Service 
PeMT Project e-Mission Team 
PMC Project Management Consultant 
PPO Pension Payment Order 
RPO Recovery Point Objective 
RTO Recovery Time Objective 
SBI State Bank of India 
SCL Special Casual Leave 
SI System Integrator 
SLA Service Level Agreement 
SR Service Register 
SRS System Requirement Specification 
SSO Single Sign On 
TAs Temporary Advances 
TDS Tax Deducted at Source 
TEs Transfer Entries 
TPAA Third Party Audit Agency 
TPAA report Third Party Audit Agency SLA Audit report 
UAT User Acceptance Test 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© COMPTROLLER AND 
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA 
www.cag.gov.in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
http://www.cag.gov.in/ag1/tamil-nadu/en 