 
 
Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
on 
Performance Audit of Implementation of Direct 
Benefit Transfer in payment of Post Matric 
Scholarship to eligible students in the State 
 
SUPREME AUDIT INSTITUTION OF INDIA 
लोकहितार्थ सत्यहिष्ठा 
Dedicated to Truth in Public Interest 
 
 
   
   
Government of Odisha 
Report No.2 of the year 2023 


 

 
 
 
 Report of the  
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
on 
Performance Audit of Implementation of Direct 
Benefit Transfer in payment of Post Matric 
Scholarship to eligible students in the State 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government of Odisha 
Report No. 2 of the year 2023 

 

i 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
Performance Audit of Implementation of Direct 
Benefit Transfer in payment of Post Matric 
Scholarship to eligible students in the State 
Reference 
Para Page 
Preface  iii 
Executive Summary  v 
Chapter 1 
Introduction   
Introduction 1.1 1 
Process of Delivering Benefits under DBT  1.2 2 
Organisational structure 1.3 2 
Chapter 2 
Overview of Schemes and Audit Methodology 
Background for taking up the Audit 2.1 5 
Audit Objectives  2.2 8 
Audit criteria 2.3 8 
Scope and methodology of Audit 2.4 9 
Acknowledgement 2.5 9 
Chapter 3 
Non-Adoption of DBT Framework in Implementation of PMS and 
Medhabruti Schemes 
Implementation of DBT in the State  3.1 12 
Institutional framework for implementation of DBT 3.2 13 
Inadequate preparatory measures for implementation of 
DBT 
3.3 15 
Synchronisation of scheme data in State DBT portal 3.4 17 
Chapter 4 
Process Reengineering, Identification and Coverage of Beneficiaries 
Scheme Introduction: Post Matric Scholarship and 
Medhabruti 
4.1 22 
Scheme workflow of PMS 4.2 24 
Scheme workflow of Medhabruti 4.3 26 
Identification and coverage of beneficiaries 4.4 28 
Process re-engineering for minimising the intermediary 
level for timely transfer of benefit 
4.5 31 
Inadequate process re-engineering for Medhabruti 4.6 43 
Chapter 5 
Deficient control measures in IT Systems 
Deficient application controls in the IT systems  5.1 50 
Deficient control measures for scrutiny of eligibility for 
PMS 
5.2 53 
Aadhaar seeding of bank accounts of beneficiaries 5.3 61 
Management of failed transactions 5.4 62 
Other IT deficiencies 5.5 65 
Chapter 6 
Suspected Fraud and Corruption 6.1 72 
 

ii 
Appendices 
Appen
dix No. 
Subject Paragraph Page 
4.1 Delay at different stages, in sanction of 
scholarships under e-Medhabruti 
4.6.1 81 
4.2 Non-validation of applications by Heads of 
Institutions 
4.6.2 88 
4.3 Statement showing non-validation of 
renewal applications by the Heads of 
Institutions 
4.6.2 89 
5.1 Payment of Post Matric Scholarship to 
same students studying in different 
institutions 
5.1.2 90 
5.2 Payment of Post Matric Scholarship to 
beneficiaries under same stage of course 
5.1.3 91 
6.1 Payment of Post Matric Scholarship to 
students of ineligible institutions 
6.1.1 95 
-- Glossary -- 97 
 
 

 
iii 
 
 
 
 
 
Preface 
 
This Report has been prepared for submission to the 
Governor of Odisha under Article 151 of the Constitution of 
India for being laid before the State Legislature. 
The Report contains significant results of the Performance 
Audit of Implementation of Direct Benefit Transfer in 
payment of Post Matric Scholarship to eligible students in 
the State. 
The instances mentioned in this Report are those, which 
came to notice in  the course o f test audit for the period 
2017-18 to 2020-21. 
The audit has been conducted in conformity with the 
Auditing Standards issued by the Comptroller and Auditor 
General of India. 

 

Executive Summary 
v 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
About the Report 
Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) is an initiative of the Government of India 
(GoI) for transferring cash benefits directly to the beneficiaries of the schemes. 
The initiative aims at  addressing various bottlenecks like multiple layers of 
authorisation, inaccurate targeting of beneficiaries, leakages/ pilferages and 
duplication of beneficiaries, etc., by carrying out required process re -
engineering. Also,  preparation of database of beneficiar ies with Aadhaar 
number and opening of their bank accounts with Aadhaar linkage are other 
pre-requisites for direct transfer of cash benefits from Ministries/ Departments 
to beneficiaries. 
Why did we take up this Report? 
GoI had implemented DBT in 310 schemes of 54 Ministries , as of March 
2021. At the same time, Government of Odisha had implemented 22 schemes 
pertaining to seven departments. The schemes included the Post Matric 
scholarship scheme for ST/SC/OBC/EBC students, implemented by Scheduled 
Tribes and Scheduled Castes Development, Minorities and Backward Classes 
Welfare (SSD) Department  and the Medhabruti scheme , implemented by 
Higher Education Department, which were selected for the Performance 
Audit. Through this Performance Audit, an attempt was made to evaluate: 
 the extent of  achievement of the above mentioned objectives of DBT, 
in payment of Post Matric Scholarship s (PMS) to eligible SC/ST/OBC 
students and to meritorious students under the Medhabruti scheme of 
the Government of Odisha; 
 achievement of the scheme objectives , for which the scholarship 
payments were made; and 
 coverage of the potential beneficiaries.  
Major Audit Findings 
The institutional framework for implementation of DBT was deficient , as the 
State Advisory Committee (SAC)  did not have representation from the 
National Payments Corporation of India (NPCI) . As such , the SAC remained 
deprived of valuable inputs from NPCI in rolling out DBT successfully.  The 
State DBT Cell (SDC) had decided (April 2018) to make available NPCI’s 
‘VLookup web service  and Status of bank account s’ in the State DBT portal, 
to identify the latest seeded bank accounts and ascertain the status of bank 
accounts (inactive/ dormant). For this purpose, NPCI was requested to extend 
their cooperation, by providing the facility through web service, for integration 
with the State DBT por tal. Despite nod of the NPCI to use their ‘VLookup 
web service  and Status of bank account’ service in the State DBT portal to 
identify the latest seeded bank accounts and status of bank accounts (inactive/ 
dormant), the same w ere not used. Out of 3,12,823  accounts of PMS 
beneficiaries, 2,41,870 bank accounts (77 per cent) were not Aadhaar seeded . 
Thus, both the PMS and Medhabruti were beset with issues , related to failed 

Implementation of DBT in payment of Post Matric Scholarship to eligible students in the State 
vi 
bank transactions, due to  dormant/ inactive bank accounts and credits into 
incorrect bank accounts.  
No efforts were made towards integration of scheme software payment data 
with the State DBT Portal , resulting in gaps between  the number of 
beneficiaries and the amount disbursed, as per the report of the  departments 
and the DBT portal. 
The GoI guidelines for DBT in the States envisaged setting up of a State DBT 
Cell (SDC), under the guidance of a State level DBT Advisory Committee to 
act as a nodal point for all activities and issues related to DBT operat ions in 
the State. However, DBT nodal cells had not been formed in both SSD and 
Higher Education Departments. In the absence of such facilitating mechanisms 
at the departmental level, measures like modifications in the operational 
software in line with DBT  requirements, Aadhaar seeding, timely processing 
of scholarships , etc., could not be taken up satisfactorily. As a result, the 
implementation of both PMS and Medhabruti were prone to issues related to 
delays in processing of applications, payment s to dorm ant/ inactive/ wrong 
accounts, delays in payments, fraudulent drawals, etc. 
During 2017-21, the SDC organised (July 2018) only one training programme 
on strengthening the DBT ecosystem in Odisha, at the State level. In the 
absence of adequate capacity building measures, issues relating to coverage of 
beneficiaries, deficient scrutiny of applications, delay in processing , etc., 
persisted, besides continued leakages in disbursement of benefits. 
Neither the DBT Cell nor the SSD Department , had used the data generated in 
the Socio  Economic and Caste Census, 2011 , identification of the eligible 
beneficiaries. Besides, data available in Student Academic Management 
System (SAMS) was not used to trace the students, who did no t apply for the 
PMS. Data submitted through applications by the students was the only source 
of collection of data of beneficiaries. Thus, efforts to trace and b ring the left 
out eligible students under PMS, were missing, which is evident from the fact 
that the total number of student s covered under PMS , decreased by 19 per 
cent, from 5.51 lakh in 2017-18 to 4.47 lakh in 2020-21. 
The SSD Department had not issued well -defined procedure for identification 
of bonafide institutions in terms of actual existence of institutions, affiliation 
status, availability of required  physical infrastructure and human resources , 
corresponding to the enrolment strength. In the absence of such procedure,  
User IDs and Passwords were issued to non -existing/ ineligible institutes and 
thereby, bogus students, from those institutes, were  able to avail the PMS. 
Joint Physical Inspection (JPI) of 16 registered institutes  of Mayurbhanj and 
Balasore districts, revealed that eight registered institutes were actually not in 
existence, and PMS amount of ₹ 15.57 crore, had been availed in the names of 
bogus students . Besides, 30 institutes , in six sampled districts, had been 
granted affiliation by ineligible agencies , for running Diploma courses . Thus, 
the students enrolled therein , were not eligible for PMS. However, 5,185 
students of 15 such institutes, were paid PMS amounting to ₹  15.79 crore, for 
the years 2016-17 to 2019-20. 
The process of application and approval of PMS and Medhabruti scholarships , 
continued to have involvement of various intermediary levels , before final 

Executive Summary 
vii 
disbursal of the scholarship amount. The Government  neither attempted to 
reduce intermediary levels, by carrying out necessary process re -engineering 
to rationalise layers of intermediaries to eliminate the delays in the process and 
release of scholarships. 
PRERANA and eMedhabruti management software , were neither interlinked 
with each other, nor were they linked with scholarship portals of other 
departments ( e.g., Banishree of the Social Security and Empowerment of 
Persons with Disabilities Department), due to which , applications of the same 
students, for different scholarships, at the same time, could not be detected. As 
a result , 11,880 students had been granted both PMS amounting to  ₹ 6.91 
crore, and Medhabruti, amounting to ₹ 6.80 crore, during 2017-21. Similarly, 
during 2018 -21, although 56 nursing students of sampled district s 
(Jharsuguda, Kalahandi and Mayurbhanj ), got scholarship under the National 
Health Mission, amounting to ₹  32.97 lakh, they were also paid PMS of 
₹ 35.18 lakh, for the same period.  Besides, m ultiple applications from  the 
same 973 students were registered in the PRERANA software , showing them 
as students of different courses from different institutes , and were paid PMS 
amounting to ₹  2.43 crore for each of the courses , leading to double payment 
of PMS.  In four sampled districts, 1,668 students, who pursued different 
courses later, but of  the same stage  (e.g., Intermediate of Arts after 
Intermediate of Science) , had been granted PMS, amounting to ₹  3.71 crore, 
during 2017-20. 
Furthermore, i n six sampled districts, 2,996 students of 22 test -checked 
institutes, had left their courses midway,  during 2017 -21. However, th ese 
students had been paid PMS, amounting to ₹  7.36 crore, even after their 
discontinuance of the courses.  One institute viz., SSIT, Mayurbhanj, applied 
for scholarship in the name of 280 students who had discontinued studies and 
a sum of ₹  2.36 crore was credited to the accounts of such students. On the 
strength of mandate form , signed by the students, the PMS amount was 
transferred to the bank account of SSIT. Also,  69 alleged students , in three 
sampled districts were paid ₹   14.17 lakh, but their names could not be traced 
in the admission registers. 
As per Medhabruti guidelines, the Principal of the institution is responsible for 
verifying, validating and approving the data submitted by applicants, for 
onward transmission, f or approval of scholarships  within a stipulated time 
frame. Audit observed that, in 1,466 out of 97,810 cases, all the requisite 
information, i.e., income certificate, resident certificate, mark sheet, bank 
details and Aadhaar numbers, had been uploaded , but the Principal s had not 
verified and approved the data in time. 
What do we recommend? 
It is recommended that: 
1. The SAC should include officials from all Departments, 
implementing DBT as well as representatives of NPCI. Services of 
NPCI should be availed  to check and identify Aadhaar seeded bank 
accounts to ensure that DBT operations are not exclusionary and are 
synchronised with the interests of all enablers and stakeholders. 

Implementation of DBT in payment of Post Matric Scholarship to eligible students in the State 
viii 
2. The SDC should ensure that nodal DBT Cells are set up in all 
implementing Depar tments, for more focussed and coordinated 
execution of DBT schemes in the State and to ensure that lacunae 
pointed out by the SDC in scheme implementation, are resolved in a 
timely manner. 
3. There should be regular monitoring, by way of regular meetings to 
take note of hindrances as well as absence of facilitating measures 
for smooth implementation of DBT. The officials at different levels, 
associated with implementation of DBT, should be trained 
adequately for effective execution of the DBT schemes, at the ground 
level. 
4. SDC/ SAC should take action to synchronize the scheme software 
payment data with the State DBT Portal, accurately and on a real 
time basis. 
5. The SSD Department may build appropriate mechanism to assess the 
number of potential beneficiaries and  compare the same with the 
applications received for identifying the students, not applying for 
PMS. Efforts should be made to reach out the left -out students to 
assist them in availing PMS. 
6. The Odisha State Scholarship Portal, developed for smooth 
management of scholarship schemes, should be used optimally by 
rationalising existing multiple administrative layers for faster process 
of applications and timely payment of scholarships. 
7. The SSD Department may issue a detailed checklist, to the district 
level fu nctionaries, outlining the process of verification to be 
followed before issue of user IDs and passwords to institutes, to filter 
out fraudulent and ineligible beneficiaries.  
8. The SSD Department should ensure that scholarship amounts are 
credited directly and timely to the bank accounts of the eligible 
students, eliminating the intermediaries, by carrying out required 
process reengineering. 
9. Higher Education Department should ensure timely publication of 
advertisements seeking applications for Medhabruti, an d OCAC as 
well as the treasuries, should process the applications and generate 
tokens for payments, respectively, without delays. 
10. The Higher Education Department may take concrete steps to ensure 
that applications are processed by Principals in a time bound manner 
to ensure that no eligible applicants are deprived of the benefits of 
the scheme. Also, the Principals concerned should be made 
accountable for delay as well as for non-processing of applications. 
11. OSSP computer application as well other such appli cations 
developed by other departments for managing scholarships, should 
be interlinked with each other, to arrest the incidence of payment of 
multiple scholarships to the same students. 
12. The scheme implementation Rules should be properly mapped and 
validation controls strengthened, in the OSSP system, to restrict 

Executive Summary 
ix 
sanctions to ineligible applicants and prevent excess payments to the 
beneficiaries. 
13. The SSD Department should ensure Aadhaar se eding of the bank 
accounts of the beneficiaries, being a primary requirement for DBT. 
Necessary assistance in this regard, may be extended to the students, 
so that no one is deprived of the scholarship, for want of Aadhaar 
seeding of the bank accounts. 
14. The implementing Departments should make efforts in coordination 
with State DBT Cell, to ensure use of the Vlookup web service and 
status of bank account services of NPCI, in order to ensure payment 
of funds to the intended beneficiaries. 
15. Flaws in the OSSP co mputer application system, in not detecting 
duplicate beneficiaries, incorrect capturing of vital data like dates of 
applications and Aadhaar numbers as well as absence of Master 
tables, should be remedied in order to make the system more 
efficient, in processing the scholarship applications. 
16. Reasons for suspected fraud in the payment of PMS may be 
investigated, responsibility may be fixed on the defaulting officials 
and suitable action may be taken for recovery of PMS. 
17. The SSD Department may frame detailed  guidelines for inspection 
of institutes, prior to their registration on the scheme portal of OSSP 
and the quantum of inspections to be conducted by district level 
officials, as well as the records to be verified in private institutions, 
should be specified.  
18. Institutes may be asked to forward the list of students who are 
continuing their courses in subsequent years, along with their 
applications, to the concerned DWOs, for verification of 
continuance, before issue of sanctions. 
 

 

Chapter 1 
Introduction 

 

Chapter 1: Introduction 
1 
CHAPTER 1 
 
1.1  Introduction 
Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) is an initiative launched by the Government of 
India (GoI) on 1 January 2013 to re-engineer the cumbersome delivery process 
of welfare schemes in order to reduce delay s in flow of benefits to intended 
beneficiaries through effective use of technology . It marked a paradigm-shift 
in the process of delivering benefits like wage payments, fuel subsidies, food 
grain subsidies, etc., by channelling these directly into the bank accounts of 
beneficiaries and by removing leakages. 
The need for such an initiative arose to address various bottlenecks existing in 
benefit transfer processes of welfare schemes like, involvement of numerous 
agencies result ing in multiple layers of authorisation , delayed transfers, 
inaccurate targeting of beneficiaries, leakages/ pilferages and duplication of 
beneficiaries, etc. 
1.1.1 Objectives of Direct Benefit Transfer 
DBT vision is a governance 
regime which ensures a simple 
and user -friendly Government to 
People interface and directly 
delivers entitlements to eligible 
individuals and households in a 
fair, transparent , efficient and 
reliable manner , fulfilling the 
objectives of DBT , as shown in 
Figure 1. 
For any government to transfer 
benefits to its citizens effectively, 
it needs to ensure that it can 
firstly, identify beneficiaries 
correctly and  secondly, make 
benefits accessible to them with 
minimum cost/  inconvenience. 
DBT as a delivery mechanism, 
has the potential to ensure fulfilment of both these crucial objectives. In order 
to ensure effective implementation of DBT, th ere are certain  pre-requisites, 
which are as follows: 
 Digitisation of database of beneficiary with Aadhaar number. 
 Opening of bank accounts of beneficiaries. 
 Seeding of Aadhaar numbers with digitised database and bank account 
 Transfer of cash benefits from Ministries/ Departments directly to 
beneficiaries through State Treasury or through any implementi ng 
agency as appointed by Centre/ State Government. 

Implementation of DBT in payment of Post Matric Scholarship to eligible students in the State 
2 
1.2  Process of Delivering Benefits under DBT 
The Standard Operating Procedure for DBT payments,  issued by the 
Government of India, outlined the following processes: 
(i) Beneficiary identification and enrolment in DBT Scheme 
Management Software; 
(ii) Beneficiary validation/ registration on PFMS (iFMS, in case of 
Odisha); 
(iii) Generation of payment file instructions; and 
(iv) Processing of payment file and payment to beneficiary. 
1.2.1 Beneficiary Identification and Enrolment in DBT scheme 
Management Software 
As a first step, beneficiaries need to be  correctly identified and enrolled 
through the respective DBT management software , as per requirements of the 
scheme concerned. This step also involves Aadhaar  authentication of 
beneficiaries, as well as capturing of their bank account details , at the time of 
enrolment. 
1.2.2 Beneficiary validation/ registration on PFMS/ iFMS 
The registration of beneficiaries in PFMS/ iF MS is to be done after successful 
validation of , at least one of the following: bank account/ postal account 
validation or validation on Aadhaar mapper of NPCI. 
1.2.3 Generation of Payment file instructions 
After eligibility conditions for the beneficiary under the scheme guidelines are 
successfully validated, payment instruction file  is generated, using the DBT 
Scheme portal.  
1.2.4. Processing of payment file and payment to beneficiary 
Once the payment instructio n is generated, the same is transferred to 
beneficiary’s accounts through the State Treasury Account.  The maximum 
total time for receiving payment response (success/  failure) is T +4 working 
days, where T is the day of the transaction when the payment file is received 
with authorisation to process payment by PFMS . The maximum permissible 
time for submission of response file after process of payment (success/ failure) 
to the originator of the payment file is 4 days. 
1.3 Organisational structure 
1.3.1  Organisation of DBT at GoI level 
The DBT Mission was initiated by the erstwhile Planning Commission 
(January 2013) and was subsequently transferred to the Department of 
Expenditure (DoE), Ministry of Finance  (July 2013). To give more impetus, 
DBT Mission and matters related thereto , were placed in the Cabinet 
Secretariat under Secretary (Co-ordination and PG) from September 2015. 

Chapter 1: Introduction 
3 
An Electronic Payment Framework was laid down for DBT by GoI in 
February 2015 and t his Framework is to be followed by all Ministries/ 
Departments and is applicable to all Central Sector (CS)/ Centrally Sponsored 
Schemes (CSS) and to all schemes, where components of cash are transferred 
to individual beneficiaries.  In June 2017 , GoI further issued guidelines on 
establishment of DBT framework at State level. 
The DBT Bhar at Portal was conceptualised and developed as a national 
aggregator for all DBT information in the country and was launched in August 
2016, by GoI.  
1.3.2  State level Framework for DBT: 
Government of Odisha (GoO) established a State DBT Cell in October 2016, 
under the administrative control of the Finance Department , with Principal 
Secretary, Finance, as the State level DBT Coordinator. The DBT Coordinator 
is assisted by an Officer on Special Duty for administrative work and a 
Technical Support team , which had been  deployed by World Bank , initially  
for a period of two years (2017 -19)1. The DBT Cell functions under the 
overall guidance of the State DBT Advisory Board, which w as constituted 
under the Chairmanship of Development Commissioner-cum-Additional Chief 
Secretary by GoO (September 2016). 
The State level organisation of the DBT set -up, is illustrated in the Chart 
below: 
Chart 1.1: State level organisation of the DBT set-up 
 
The State DBT Cell serves as a single point for coordinating all efforts related 
to on-boarding and implement ation of schemes under the DBT mode. In 
pursuance of GoI guidelines, a State DBT portal was launched in June 2018 , 
which acts as a dashboard for display of disaggregated data of DBT for the on-
boarded schemes from the St ate level to Gram Panchayat (GP)  level. Further, 
the DBT Portal of the State is also supposed to have linkages to the National 
DBT Portal, Public Financial Management System ( PFMS2), Portals of the 
                                                           
1  The World Bank team continued up to March 2021 
2 The Public Financial Management System (PFMS) is a web -based online software 
application developed and implemented by the Controller General of Accounts, 
Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance, Government of India  


Implementation of DBT in payment of Post Matric Scholarship to eligible students in the State 
4 
State Implementing Agencies 3 and the Integrated Financial Management 
System (iFMS4) of the State Treasury. 
1.3.3  Status of implementation of DBT in Odisha 
Delivery of benefits through DBT mode, was started by GoI in 20 districts in 
January 2013 and as of March 2021 , the Government had implemented 31 0 
schemes in 54 Ministries, through the DBT mod e, all over India . The State 
DBT Cell under Finance Department (GoO) assessed 29 schemes (21 Central 
and 8 State) for implementation t hrough the DBT mode , of which the DBT 
Cell was able to onboard only 22 schemes , pertaining to seven 5 departments, 
in the State DBT Portal , as of March 2021 , which includes the Post Matric 
scholarship scheme for ST/SC/OBC/EBC students and the Medhabruti 
scheme, selected for the Performance Audit. 
For successful and fruitful implementation of direct-benefit-transfer, the DBT 
framework, as explained above, needs to be put in place effectively, beginning 
with the coordination of the DBT Mission with the Central M inistries, which, 
in turn, coordinate with the State  and support the State DBT Cell. The State 
DBT Cell plays a pivotal role in supporting all the State departments, as well 
as the district/ block/ panchayat administration , to facilitate benefit delivery 
systems, in order to ensure that benefits reach the intended recipients 
efficiently and, in a fair, transparent and reliable manner. 
 
 
                                                           
3  PRERANA, eMedhabruti, Odisha State Scholarship Portal, S tudent Academic 
Management System 
4 Integrated Financial  Management System (iFMS) is an IT system designed to make 
payment, reporting, budgeting, etc., as required for Government of Odisha 
5 Agriculture and Farmer’s Empowerment, Food Supplies & Consumer Welfare , Higher 
Education, Housing & Urban  Development, Panchayati Raj and Drinking Water, ST& 
SC Development, Minori ties & Backward Classes Welfare and Women & Child 
Development Departments  

Chapter 2 
Overview of Schemes and Audit 
Methodology 

 

Chapter 2: Overview of Schemes and Audit Methodology 
5 
Chapter 2 
Overview of Schemes and Audit Methodology 
2.1  Background for taking up the Audit 
The Comptroller and Auditor General of India (C&AG) decided (September 
2020) to take up an Audit on DBT , with focus on coverage, identification of 
beneficiaries, efficiency of  the payment process and achievement of 
objectives. Post the execution of DBT in Odisha, as of March 2021, 22 
schemes were incorporated under the DBT framework. The present 
Performance Audit aims to assess the implementation of DBT in the State 
through detailed examination of two such schemes that are being operated via 
the DBT mode, namely , the Post Matric Scholarship scheme for 
ST/SC/OBC/EBC students and the Medhabruti scheme. The main features of 
these two schemes, as well as objectives of the P erformance Audit, along with 
audit scope, methodology, etc., are outlined in the following paragraphs:  
2.1.1  Post Matric Scholarship (PMS) scheme for ST/ SC/ OBC/ EBC 
students 
The Post Matric Scholarship (PMS) scheme for S cheduled Tribes (ST)/ 
Scheduled Castes (SC)/ Other Backward Classes (OBC)/ Economically 
Backward Classes (EBC), was introduced6 by Government of India, to provide 
scholarship to eligible ST/  SC/ OBC/ EBC students, to pursue +2, ITI, +3, 
post-graduation and professional and technical course s, like MBA, MBBS, 
MCA, Law and  M.Tech., etc. The s cholarship amount under this scheme 
covers the admission and tuition fees and also includes reimbursement of other 
non-refundable compulsory fees, charged by Educational Institutions. Students 
also receive maintenance allowance , as per the prescribed rates , to meet the 
day-to-day expenses related to education. 
In Odisha, the scheme is being implemented  by the S cheduled Tribes and 
Scheduled Castes Development, Minorities and Backward Classes Welfare  
(SSD) Department . The Department is headed by a  Secretary, who also 
functions as the Head of the Depa rtment. The Principal Secretary is, in turn, 
assisted by three Directors viz., Director (ST), Director (SC) and Director  
(OBC) at the State level. 
At the field level, the Scheme is implemented by the District Welfare Officers 
(DWOs) in every district, Assistant District Welfare Officers (ADWO) in the 
Sub-divisions and Welfare Extension Officer (WEO) in every Block. 
2.1.1.1 Funding pattern for the PMS Scheme: 
While the PMS scheme is jointly sponsored by the Centre and the State, the 
funding pattern of the scheme varie s, depending upon the category of 
beneficiaries being covered. PMS has various components viz., Schedule d 
Tribe (ST), Schedule d Caste (SC), Other Backward Classes (OBC) and  
                                                           
6 PMS (SC/ ST): 1944-45, PMS (OBC): 1998-99 and PMS (EBC): December 2016 

Implementation of DBT in payment of Post Matric Scholarship to eligible students in the State 
6 
Economically Backward Classes (EBC). Sharing of funds between the Centre 
and the State across these components, is as follows: 
 The financing of the PMS (ST) scheme was borne by the Centre and 
the State in the ratio of 75:25, during 2017-21.  
 In case of the PMS (SC)  scheme, the State Government had a 
committed liability7 of ₹ 238.28 crore during 2017 -20. However, from 
2020-21 onwards, the funding pattern changed to 60:40 ratio between 
the Centre and the State. 
 Expenditure on the PMS (OBC) scheme was borne by the State, with a 
committed liability of ₹  9.61 crore annually, during 2017 -18, while 
from the year 2018-19 onwards, the Central Government provided 100 
per cent assistance.  
 The PMS (EBC) scheme was 100 per cent  centrally assisted , during 
2017-21.  
During the period 2017-21, 20.26 lakh students in the State were benefited by 
the PMS scheme and expenditure of ₹ 2,358.54 crore was incurred by the 
Government. Category-wise number of beneficiaries and expenditure incurred, 
are given in the table below. 
Table 2.1: Number of beneficiaries and expenditure incurred on PMS scheme, 
during 2017-21 
(Amount ₹ in crore) 
Category 
2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 
No. of 
Students Amount No. of 
Students Amount No. of 
Students Amount No. of 
Students Amount 
SC 1,84,883 252.52 2,27,412 379.27 1,66,400 297.94 1,67,702 317.50 
ST 1,86,061 206.11 2,10,866 273.30 1,68,449 227.53 1,67,241 231.19 
OBC 1,79,794 33.65 1,38,030 35.70 1,14,935 44.02 1,07,925 55.72 
EBC 97 0.01 923 0.26 1153 1.07 3,702 2.75 
Total 5,50,835 492.29 5,77,231 688.53 4,50,937 570.56 4,46,570 607.16 
(Source: Records furnished by SSD Department) 
Out of the aforesaid number of beneficiaries and expenditure on PMS during 
2017-21, the number of beneficiaries who were not paid directly and were, 
instead, paid through the bank accounts of the institutions (SSD schools under 
the SSD Department and Government Industrial Technical Institute/  Centre 
and few private institutes8), are shown in the Table 2.2: 
  
                                                           
7 The expenditure incurred by a  State on the  Scheme during the terminal year of the five-
year plan period 
8  Hi-Tech Medical College and Hospital, Bhubane swar and Kalinga Institute of Medical 
Sciences, Bhubaneswar 

Chapter 2: Overview of Schemes and Audit Methodology 
7 
Table 2.2: Number of PMS scheme beneficiaries paid through institution s, during 
2017-21 
Year 
No. of beneficiaries and scholarship amounts 
transferred to the bank account of the institutes  
Scholarship payment to 
institution’s bank 
account from 2017-18 to 
2020-21 Course Fee Maintenance Allowance 
No. of 
students 
(in Nos) 
Amount 
paid (₹ in 
crore) 
No. of 
students  
(in Nos.) 
Amount 
paid (₹ in 
crore) 
No. of 
students 
(in Nos.) 
Amount 
paid  
(₹ in crore) 
2017-18 3,354 0.83 5,044 4.94 8,398 5.76 
2018-19 12,596 3.75 6,134 6.04 18,730 9.79 
2019-20 8,180 2.38 4,942 4.78 13,122 7.16 
2020-21 9,381 2.51 4,748 4.75 14,129 7.26 
Total 33,511 9.47 20,868 20.51 54,379 29.97 
(Source: Records and information furnished by SSD Department) 
The Scheme was identified for implementation under the DBT mode by 
Government of Odisha in January 2018 and was on-boarded as a DBT scheme 
in May 2018.  
2.1.2  Medhabruti Scholarship Scheme  
The 'Medhabruti' scheme wa s introduced by the Higher Education 
Department, Government of Odisha  (GoO), to provide scholarships to those 
meritorious students of the State , whose parental income does not exceed 
₹ 6.00 lakh per annum, to meet a part of their educational expenses while 
pursuing higher studies. The scholarships are awarded for pursuing general 
courses, i.e., +3 (Sr.), Post Graduation, Technical and Professional courses, in 
Colleges and Universities inside and outsi de Odisha. The Medhabruti scheme 
is implemented by the Higher Education Department  (HED), with Additional 
Chief Secretary (ACS) as the Head of the Department. The ACS is assisted by 
a Deputy Secretary in charge of Scholarship Unit and technically assisted by 
the Odisha Computer Application Centre (OCAC). 
2.1.2.1 Funding of Medhabruti 
Medhabruti, being a State sponsored scheme, the funding for the scheme was 
exclusively from the resources of the State. During the period  2017-209, 
90,484 students in the State were benefited by the Medhabruti Scheme and 
expenditure of  ₹ 73.40 crore was incurred by the State Government on the 
scheme, details of which are given in the table below. 
Table 2.3: Number of beneficiaries and expenditure incurred on Medhabruti 
scheme, during 2017-20 
Category 
2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 
No of students  
(In Nos.)10 
Expenditure 
(₹ in crore) 
No of students  
(In Nos.) 
Expenditure 
(₹ in crore) 
No of students  
(In Nos.) 
Expenditure 
(₹ in crore) 
Jr. Merit 10,897 3.28 11,973 3.32 5,577 6.99 
Sr. Merit 10,707 5.58 4,042 2.13 13,208 8.39 
PG Merit 1,757 1.76 1,547 1.55 4,083 4.28 
TP Merit 11,787 13.68 8,140 10.21 6,766 12.23 
                                                           
9 In case of  Medhabruti, the advertisement for 2020 -21 was floated in April 2021 but 
payment was not made, as of December 2021 
10  The numbers include both Fresh scholarship and Renewal of already sanctioned 
scholarship 

Implementation of DBT in payment of Post Matric Scholarship to eligible students in the State 
8 
Category 
2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 
No of students  
(In Nos.)10 
Expenditure 
(₹ in crore) 
No of students  
(In Nos.) 
Expenditure 
(₹ in crore) 
No of students  
(In Nos.) 
Expenditure 
(₹ in crore) 
Total 35,148 24.30 25,702 17.21 29,634 31.89 
(Source: Records and information furnished by Higher Education Department) 
The Scheme was identified for implementation under the DBT mode by GoO  
in February 2019 and was on-boarded as a DBT scheme in June 2019. 
2.2 Audit objectives 
The Performance Audit on “Implementation of Direct Benefit Transfer in 
payment of Post Matric Scholarship to the eligible students in the State” was 
conducted to assess whether: 
 Necessary process reengineering was done for implementation of DBT 
so as to identify and cover all the eligible beneficiaries under the 
scheme and also to minimise:  
o intermediary levels,  
o delay in payments to intended beneficiaries and  
o pilferage and duplication. 
 Infrastructure, organisation and management of DBT was adequate and 
effective. 
2.3 Audit criteria 
The performance of the schemes was evaluated with reference to the following 
criteria: 
 Circulars, instructions and notifications , issued by the DBT Mission, 
GoI and the State Government, 
 Handbook on DBT and Guidelines for State DBT Cell , issued by the 
DBT Mission, GoI, 
 Standard Operating Procedure for Direct Benefit Transfer , issued by 
GoI/ GoO, 
 Detailed Project Report, System Requirement Specifications, 
instructions on maintenance of database, IT control documents, 
generation of various reports, 
 Guidelines, Circulars/ orders of SSD Department on PMS scheme for 
ST, SC and OBC, 
 Guidelines, Circulars/ orders on Medhabruti scheme of Higher 
Education Department, 
 Instructions/ notifications of Government on PMS and Medhabruti, 
 Brochure and user manual of “PRERANA”, 
 Odisha General Financial Rules (OGFR)  and Odisha Treasury Code 
(OTC) and 
 Miscellaneous Certificate Act. 

Chapter 2: Overview of Schemes and Audit Methodology 
9 
2.4 Scope and methodology of Audit 
The Performance Audit cover s a four-year period from 2017-18 to 2020 -21. 
Audit test-checked records of the Finance Department (DBT Cell), ST and SC 
Development, Minorities and Backward Classes Welfare Department, Higher 
Education Department, Odis ha Computer Application Centre ( OCAC), eight 
District Welfare Officers 11 (DWOs) and 98 educational institutions, including 
30 institutions on judgemental basis . Besides, information of Odisha School 
Education Programme Authority (OSEPA) was also collected and utilised. 
Audit also analysed  all scholarship applications available in PRERANA 
software (14,22,413 nos.) and Odisha State Scholarship Portal  (OSSP)12 
(5,26,434 nos.) for PMS scheme as well as e-Medhabruti database (5,31,774 
nos.) for the Medhabruti scholarships . Besides, data from the Integrated 
Financial Management System (iFMS)  and the Student Academic 
Management System ( SAMS13) were also analysed . Joint physical inspection 
of institutes was carried out; photographs were captured, wherever required; 
and interviews of beneficiaries were also conducted.  
The Audit objectives, criteria, scope and methodology of this Performance 
Audit were discussed in an Entry Conference with the Secretaries of the 
Finance Department, SSD Department an d Higher Education Department , in 
February 2021.  
The Exit Conference with the concerned Departments was held in September 
2022, wherein the major Audit findings and other issues were discussed. The 
views of the Departments are suitably incorporated in the report. 
2.5 Acknowledgement 
Audit acknowledges the cooperation extended by the officials of the Finance 
Department, SSD Department, Higher Education Department , as well as by 
the officials at the associated offices of the aforesaid departments. 
 
                                                           
11 Bolangir, Gajapati, Jharsuguda, Kalahandi, Malkangiri, Mayurbhanj, Nayagarh and 
Sundargarh 
12 OSSP is an integrated e -Governance Portal for automation, streamlining and effective 
management of scholarship schemes being implemented in the State of Odisha 
13 SAMS software is an online (web -based) platform to manage the admission process for 
+2 and +3 (College) levels 

 

CChhaapptteerr  33  
Non-Adoption of DBT 
Framework in Implementation of 
PMS and Medhabruti Schemes  

 

Chapter 3: Non-Adoption of DBT Framework in Implementation of PMS and Medhabruti Schemes 
11 
Non-Adoption of DBT Framework in the Implementation of PMS 
and Medhabruti Schemes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
This Chapter focuses on preparatory measures taken by  the State 
Government for  implementation of the PMS and Medhabruti 
schemes in DBT mode. The GoI guidelines for DBT envisaged 
setting up of a State DBT Cell (SDC)  to act as a nodal point for all 
activities and issues related to DBT operations in the State.  It was to 
coordinate and liaise with government departments and various 
stakeholders, for seamle ss transitioning of schemes to the DBT 
mode. The SDC  should have support layer s for Technical, Non -
Technical, Financial and Administrative  functions for carrying out 
support activities for the SDC. The records of the State DBT Cell as 
well as implementing departments were verified  in Audit and the 
following observations were noticed:  
 The institutional framework for implementation of DBT was 
deficient as the State Advisory Committee (SAC) did not 
have representation from the National Payment Corporation 
of India (NPCI). As such the SAC remained deprived of 
valuable inputs from NPCI in rolling out DBT, successfully. 
 Despite nod of the NPCI to use their ‘VLookup web service 
and status of bank account’ service in the State DBT Portal 
(SDP) to identify the lates t seeded bank accounts and status 
of bank accounts (inactive/ dormant), the same w ere not 
used. Since 2,41,870 out of 3,12,823 bank accounts of PMS 
beneficiaries were not Aadhaar seeded and both the PMS and 
Medhabruti were beset with issues related to fail ed bank 
transactions, due to dormant/ inactive bank accounts and 
credits into incorrect bank accounts, the services of NPCI 
would have provided better guidance for direct remittance of 
scheme benefits to the eligible beneficiaries.  
 DBT Cells/ Committees h ad not been constituted in both 
SSD and HE Departments implementing the PMS and 
Medhabruti schemes, respectively. Further, no DBT Nodal 
Officer had been nominated by the two Departments, despite 
the directions of the State DBT Cell. 
 The scheme software failed to synchroni se with the State 
DBT portal, for real time updation of the c orrect payment 
data. 
Chapter 3 

Implementation of DBT in payment of Post Matric Scholarship to eligible students in the State 
12 
3.1 Implementation of DBT in the State 
The GoI guidelines for DBT  in the States  envisaged the setting up of a State 
DBT Cell (SDC) , under the guidance of a State level DBT Advisory 
Committee. The role of the SDC is to  act as a nodal point for all activities and 
issues related to DBT operations in the State. 
As DBT operates in an environment that involves multiple stakehol ders, the 
SDC’s primary function is to  coordinate and liaise with government 
departments and various stakeholders, for seamless transitioning of schemes to 
the DBT mode. Further, GoI guidelines also required the setting up of a State 
Level Advisory Committee , to provide the DBT Cell's executive body  with 
holistic, well-rounded advisory and consulting inputs.  
As regards the operational part of SDC, the GoI guidelines 14 envisaged that 
the Cell incorporate an implemen tation support layer  of the three main 
categories of  Coordinators (Technical, Non -Technical, Financial and 
Administrative), who would be responsible for carrying out support activities 
for the SDC.  
The DBT Cell in Odisha was set up in October 2016 , under the administrative 
control of the Finance Department of the State. A Standard Operating 
Procedure (SOP) was prepared by the SDC , containing the roles and 
responsibilities of various stakeholders, including the SDC and was circulated 
(December 2018) among all departments  that were  implementing DBT in 
schemes. As per this SOP, the responsibilities of the SDC were as follows: 
 Onboarding of schemes on the DBT portal. 
 Establishing user database for all Department s to link Aadhaar 
numbers with the NPCI server. 
 Collecting and analysing data for the State, Department and scheme. 
 Collecting data from various departments and technical support team 
on factors , such as Aadhaar enrollment, number of beneficiaries, 
number of active bank accounts, number of Aadhaar seeding, etc. 
 Monitoring progress of each Department against targets. 
 Facilitating all kinds of IT support for implementing DBT in different 
schemes. 
 Interacting and liasioning with all relevant stakeholders. 
 Training and capacity building of State officials on DBT. 
Audit analysed the institutional framework set up for the implementation of 
DBT and preparatory measures initiated by the SDC, in the State, especially in 
the Post Matric Scholarship  scheme for SC/ ST/ OBC/ EBC, under the ST & 
SC Development, Minorities & Backward Classes Welfare Department (SSD 
Department) and the Medhabruti scheme, under the Higher Education 
Department. Observations thereon are dealt with in this Chapter. 
                                                 
14  DBT is included in the State Protocol Document (June 2017) 

Chapter 3: Non-Adoption of DBT Framework in Implementation of PMS and Medhabruti Schemes 
13 
3.2 Institutional framework for implementation of DBT 
3.2.1 Non-utilisation of the services of NPCI to streamline the DBT 
payment process and f ormation of State Advisory Committee 
without stakeholders 
Guidelines issued by GoI for implementation of DBT in the State envisaged 
that a State Advisory Board be constituted, comprising of representatives from 
various enablers and stakeholders , such as  the government departments 
implementing DBT  schemes, Unique Identification Authority of India 
(UIDAI), National Informatics Centre (NIC), National Payment s Corporation 
of India (NPCI), etc. 
Audit noted that GoO had constituted (September 2016) a State Advisory 
Committee15 (SAC), comprising of representatives from seven Government 
departments, NIC, UIDAI , etc. However, the Board did not have any 
representation from NPCI. 
SDC decided (April 2018) to make available  NPCI’s ‘Aadhaar Mapper 
Lookup’ in the State DBT portal , which would identify the latest seeded bank 
accounts and status of bank accounts (inactive/ dormant).  For this purpose, 
NPCI was requested to extend their cooperation by providing the facility 
through web service, which would be integrated with the State DBT portal. 
NPCI agreed to the request of the SDC (February 2019) to use their services of 
‘VLookup web  service and status of bank account’ . However, no follow -up 
action was taken by the SDC  thereafter. As a result, the same had not been 
made available in the State DBT portal, as of March 2021. 
It was further noticed that the bank accounts of 2,41,870 out of 3,12,823 16 
PMS beneficiaries were not Aadhaar seeded and both the PMS and 
Medhabruti were beset with issues related to failed bank transactions , due to 
dormant/ inactive bank accounts and  credits into incorrect bank accounts. 
Utilisation of the services of NPCI would have gone a long way in providing 
better guidance related to payments in DBT schemes. 
Thus, non -utilisation of services of NPCI had impacted  the DBT process in 
failure of transactions, involving ₹ 7.90 crore, during 2020-21. Besides, during 
2017-21, ₹ 27.85 crore was returned by the Treasury to the original 
Government Heads of Account, without being paid to the beneficiaries, due to 
inaction of the SSD Department and SDC, in availing the services of NPCI.  
Further, the SAC did not include  any representative(s) from NPCI and also  
from the HED , although the Medhabruti scheme had been  implemented 
through DBT, since June 2019.  
                                                 
15 Principal Secretary/ Secretary: Finance Department, Panchayati Raj Department, E & IT 
Department, Food Supplies & Consumer Welfare Department, Women & Child 
Development Department, SS&EPD Department, Health & Family Welfare Department, 
SC & ST Development , Minorities and Backw ard Classes Welfare  Department; SIO, 
NIC, Odisha; Director, Census ; Chief General Manager, S tate Bank of India; Convenor 
SLBC; and Director, Institutional Finance. 
16 Information on Aadha ar seeding of bank accounts in regard to  Medhabruti was not 
available with HED 

Implementation of DBT in payment of Post Matric Scholarship to eligible students in the State 
14 
Thus, the initiative towards achieving accuracy in targeting eligible 
beneficiaries, by identifying their Aadhaar seeded bank accounts , remained 
flawed, due to no n-induction of NPCI in SAC and non-availing of their 
services. 
The State DBT Cell stated  (October 2022)  that representatives from NPCI 
would be included in the SAC. It also stated that the  NPCI ha d facilitated 
services for verifying latest Aadhaar seeded Bank Account through OCAC , 
which would be used by the departments, implementing the scheme. 
3.2.2 Non-constitution of departmental DBT Cells 
Para 2.1 of the DBT State Protocol , issued by GoI in June 2017 , stipulates 
that, in order to enable adoption and understanding of the DBT framework at 
the State Level, DBT Cells also need to be constituted at the departmental 
level. The State DBT Coordinator had also decided (October and December 
2016) that the DBT implementing departments shall identify a nodal officer to 
implement each of its Central/ Centrally Sponsored/ State Sector schemes. 
Audit found that DBT Cell s/ Committees had not been constituted in either of 
the two departments implementing the PMS and Medhabruti schemes, i.e., the 
SSD and HE Departments, respectively. Furthe r, no DBT Nodal Officer had 
been nominated by the two Departments , despite the directions of the State 
DBT Cell.  
Audit observed that the SDC had not followed up adherence to the directives 
by the GoI and the Board , regarding formation of DBT nodal cells in various 
Departments. In the absence of such facilitating mechanisms at the 
departmental level, measures like modifications in the operational software in 
line with DBT requirements, Aadhaar seeding , timely process ing of 
scholarships etc., could not be taken up satisfactorily. As a result, the 
implementation of both PMS and Medhabruti  were prone to issues related to 
delays in processing of applications, payment delays, fraudulent drawals , etc. 
This is also indicativ e of flawed initiatives , in making requisite institutional 
arrangements for smooth launching of DBT. 
The State DBT Cell stated (October 2022) that , in the Standard Operating 
Procedures17 (SOP), it was suggested to create DBT Cell for each scheme 
implementing department. However, the concerned implementing departments 
were having dedicated cell s for overall monitoring of the s cheme, like 
beneficiary account verification, preparing MIS and disburse ment of 
                                                 
17 The Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) was prepared and circulated (December 2018) 
to each DBT implementing department , to follow the procedure , in order to fulfil the 
objectives of DBT 
Recommendation 3.1: 
The SAC should include officials from all Departments, implementing 
DBT as well as represent atives of NPCI.  Services of NPCI  should be 
availed to check and identify Aadhaar seeded bank accounts to ensure 
that DBT operations are not exclusionary and are synchronised with 
the interests of all enablers and stakeholders.  
 

Chapter 3: Non-Adoption of DBT Framework in Implementation of PMS and Medhabruti Schemes 
15 
Recommendation 3.2: 
The SDC should ensure that nodal DBT Cells are set up in al l 
implementing Departments, for more focussed and coordinated 
execution of DBT schemes in the State and to ensure that lacunae 
pointed out by the SDC in scheme implementation, are resolved in a 
timely manner. 
scholarships etc. The reply is not acceptable , as the implementation of the 
scheme requires a dedicated Nodal Officer and a separate cell to follow the 
outlined procedure for fulfillment of the objectives of the DBT scheme. 
3.2.3 Inadequacy in taking follow up actions 
Guidelines issued by GoI for implementation of DBT in the State envisaged 
that the State Advisory Committee ( SAC) may meet once in a quarter or at 
regular intervals, as deemed fit. 
Audit noted that  SAC had been constituted in September 2016 , but only two 
meetings had been  held (27 September 2016  and 10 February 2017 ), as of 
March 2021. In the meetings,  the Chairman, State Advisory Board 
(Development Commissioner -cum-Additional Chief Secretary, Odisha ) had 
emphasised the formation of a time -bound strategy for seeding of Aadhaar 
numbers. However, as of March 2021,  only 23 per cent of the bank account s 
of the total beneficiaries had been Aadhaar seeded.  
During the period 2017-21, eight review meetings of the DBT Cell, chaired by 
Principal Secretary , Finance, were held , wherein decision s were taken for 
identification of a nodal officer in the DBT implementing departments, 
integration of the scheme software with PFMS , etc. However, no technical 
support was provided by the SDC , to the SSD as well as HED and the 
departments also did not take a proactive role in fulfilling these tasks.  
Audit observed that decisions taken by SAC, SDC as well as the Finance 
Department, on DBT , were not carried out.  As a result, disbursement of 
scholarships under PMS and Medhabruti , to bank accounts, continued without 
verification of their correctness and Aadha ar seeding status. Resultantly,  there 
was not only delay in processing of scholarship applications but also payments 
to non-existent beneficiaries, credits to wrong account numbers, etc. 
While accepting the audit observations, the State DBT Cell stated (October 
2022) that the recommendation for conducting State Advisory committee 
meetings regularly, would be followed henceforth. 
3.3 Inadequate preparatory measures for implementation of DBT 
3.3.1 Non-identification and coverage of beneficiaries under PMS 
As per GoI guidelines, the primary vision of DBT is to facilitate a paradigm 
shift in the process of del ivering entitlements to all those who are eligible 
through accurate identification and targeting of the intended beneficiaries. 
Further, the team deployed at SDC has a role in developing linkages with the  
 

Implementation of DBT in payment of Post Matric Scholarship to eligible students in the State 
16 
Socio-Economic Caste Census  (SECC)18 based social registry and take steps 
to identify the left -out population of targeted beneficiaries. The SDC , along 
with the concerned implementing Department, was also responsible for 
designing IEC activities for stakeholder s, especially beneficiaries, to enhance 
awareness about DBT schemes. 
In this regard, Audit noted that , although PMS had been identified as a DBT 
scheme, no action was taken either by the SDC or by the SSD Department , to 
analyse the SECC data for identification of targeted beneficiaries of the 
scholarship schemes. This was despite the fact there was a clear decline in the 
number of beneficiaries availing PMS scholarships from 2018 -19 onwards, as 
can be seen in the table below: 
Table 3.1: Number of beneficiaries of PMS during 2017-21 
Category No. of beneficiaries 
2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 
SC 1,84,883 2,27,412 1,66,400 1,67,702 
ST 1,86,061 2,10,866 1,68,449 1,67,241 
OBC 1,79,794 1,38,030 1,14,935 1,07,925 
EBC 97 923 1,153 3,702 
(Source: Database of PRERANA and OSSP) 
Neither the SDC, nor the SSD Department, had taken step s for identification 
of eligible beneficiaries or analysed the reason s for the decreasing trend of the 
beneficiaries in PMS. As a result, there was less coverage by 30 to 42 per cent 
beneficiaries under PMS, in comparison to the  students who were admitted in 
11th class during 2017 -21, as discussed in Paragraph 4.4.1 in the subsequent 
chapter. 
Further, although, the SDC  claimed to have prepared an Information, 
Education and Communication ( IEC) document  for cir culation to all 
concerned Departments, the same was not available on records.  
The State DBT Cell stated (October 2022) that i dentification of the eligible 
beneficiaries under PMS was the sole responsibility of the implementing 
Department. However, analysing various data ( like SECC, etc.) for creating a 
Social Registry for various schemes to identify eligible beneficiaries, would be 
undertaken by the State Government. 
3.3.2 Lack of training programmes on DBT  
As per DBT guidelines of GoI , as well as the SOP prepared and circulated by 
SDC (December 2018), there would  be an ‘Implementation Support Layer’ 
within the Cell, which would be responsible for extending support s19 to SDC, 
including terms of training and capacity building of State  and District lev el 
Officials on DBT. The district level officials, after receiving training, were to 
further train the micro level officers. 
During 2017-21, the SDC organised (July 2018) only one training programme 
on strengthening the DBT ecosystem in Odisha , at the state level , which was 
                                                 
18 Ministry of Rural Development GoI, conducted the Socio Economic and Caste Census 
(SECC) 2011, in June 2011 through a comprehensive door to door enumeration across the 
country to generate information on a large number of social and economic indicators , 
relating to household in the country 
19 Technical, non-technical, financial and administrative aspects 

Chapter 3: Non-Adoption of DBT Framework in Implementation of PMS and Medhabruti Schemes 
17 
attended by five Departments20, including three officials of SSD Department , 
but no officials from the HED. No training programmes was organised by the 
State DBT Cell for executors of the DBT scheme at the district level, who play 
a crucial role in implementing DBT schemes at the ground level in the State.  
In the absence of adequate capacity building measures, issues relating to 
coverage of beneficiaries , deficient scrutiny of applications , delay in 
processing, etc., persisted, besides continued leakages in disbursement of 
benefits, as discussed in the subsequent chapters. 
The State DBT Cell stated (October 2022) that more number s of training 
programmes would be conducted in future. 
3.4 Synchronisation of scheme data in State DBT portal 
As per DBT guidelines, the State DBT Cell may access the State page on the 
DBT Bharat Portal, to upload scheme-wise aggregated data on a monthly basis 
or, if the State has developed its own portal, the same is to be integrated to 
DBT Bharat Portal.  
It was observed that the data synchronised from PRERANA and eMedhabruti 
software with the State DBT portal was found to  be incongruent with the data 
available in the State DBT portal, as discussed in the following paragraph. 
3.4.1 Non-reflection of correct achievement of PMS and Medhabruti on 
the State DBT portal 
As a part of DBT implementation, the  State DBT Portal of Odisha was 
developed by a private vendor and the server was placed in the staging zone of 
State Data Centre, Odisha Computer Application Centre  (OCAC), 
Bhubaneswar and 22 schemes were onboarded ( scheme database was 
integrated with State DBT portal) on the State portal, as of March 2021. 
The SSD PRERANA MIS software was integrated in May 2018 and e -
Medhabruti in June 2019 , with the State DBT portal , to ensure flow of the 
data, especially the number of beneficiaries and amount disbursed in a month. 
The same gets updated on the 10th of the succeeding month and it is being 
updated in the DBT Bharat Portal after five days. The integration of OSSP 
with the State DBT Portal was not done till August 2021.  
On analysis of the i nformation furnished by the SSD, HED and SDC, it was 
noticed that the number of beneficiaries and the amount disbursed, as per the 
                                                 
20 SSD Department, Health & Family Welfare  Department, Food Supplies & Consumer 
Welfare Department, Agriculture & Fa rmer’s Empowerment Department and Panchayati 
Raj & Drinking Water Department  
Recommendation 3.3: 
There should be regular monitoring, by way of regular meetings to take 
note of hindrances as well as absence of facilitating measures for smooth 
implementation of DBT. The officials at different levels, associated with 
implementation of DBT, should be trained  adequately for effective 
execution of the DBT schemes, at the ground level.  

Implementation of DBT in payment of Post Matric Scholarship to eligible students in the State 
18 
report of the departments and the DBT portal , were not matching and there 
were considerable gaps between the two reports . Details in this regard  are 
mentioned in the tables shown below: 
Table 3.2: Physical and financial details of PMS and Medhabruti , as per the State 
DBT Portal 
Depart
ment 
Name 
Scheme 
Name 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 
Name of the 
scheme 
Activ
e 
Benef
iciary 
Total 
Disburs
al 
(₹ in 
lakh) 
Active 
Benefici
ary 
Total 
Disburs
al 
(₹ in 
lakh) 
Active 
Benefic
iary 
Total 
Disbu
rsal 
(₹ in 
lakh) 
Active 
Benefic
iaries 
Total 
Disburs
al 
(₹ in 
lakh) 
SSD 
EBC 
SDP not 
developed in 
2017-18 
920 26 0 0 0 0 
OBC 1,38,023 3,789 0 0 0 0 
SC 2,19,741 36,482 96,144 16,875 0 0 
ST 2,01,403 26,128 
1,25,86
7 17,533 0 0 
HED Medhabruti NA NA 6,186 476 0 0 
(Source: Information furnished by the State DBT Cell) 
Table 3.3: Physical and financial details of PMS and Medhabruti, as per 
information of the SSD and HE Department 
Depart
ment 
Name 
Scheme Name 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 
Name of the 
scheme 
Active 
Benefici
ary 
Total 
Disbu
rsal 
(₹ in 
lakh) 
Active 
Benefici
ary 
Total 
Disbu
rsal 
(₹ in 
lakh) 
Active 
Benefici
ary 
Total 
Disbu
rsal 
(₹ in 
lakh) 
Active 
Benefici
ary 
Total 
Disbu
rsal 
(₹ in 
lakh) 
SSD 
EBC 97 2.01 923 26.31 1,153 108.13 3,702 277.22 
OBC 
1,79,79
4 
34,001
.19 
2,10,86
6 
3,789.
07 
1,14,93
5 
4,525.
74 
1,07,92
5 
5,685.
32 
SC 
1,84,88
3 
25,251
.60 
2,27,41
2 
37,926
.53 
1,66,40
0 
29,794
.09 
1,67,70
2 
31,749
.92 
ST 
1,86,06
1 
20,611
.20 
2,10,86
6 
27,329
.68 
1,68,44
9 
22,753
.01 
1,67,24
1 
23,118
.73 
HED Medhabruti 35,148 
2,429.
15 25,702 
1,720.
70 29,634 
3,188.
49 0 0 
(Source: iFMS payment information furnished by SSD and HED) 
On analysis of the information from the aforesaid two tables, it was found that 
there was mismatch of figures between the payments shown in the  iFMS and 
the data updated in State DBT portal. In this regard, documents were sought 
from SDC, to provide details of the integration, in order to know the tables of 
the PRERANA and eMedhabruti databases used to fetch data for updation in 
State DBT Portal . However, despite repeated requisition, the same could not 
be furnished to Audit. 
It was observed that the differ ence in the aforesaid tables was due to non-
approval of the applications for scholarship (which had already been approved 
and sanctioned by the DWO), by the SSD Department , due to  
duplication/other reasons . It was also noticed that PRERANA contains the 
approved list of beneficiaries but payment to all the beneficiaries had not been 
made within the year. As a result, there were discrepancies in the data.  

Chapter 3: Non-Adoption of DBT Framework in Implementation of PMS and Medhabruti Schemes 
19 
Further, the OSSP integration with SDP had not been done, as of March 2021, 
as a result of which the data was not updated in SDP. Thus, unrealistic 
information on DBT was updated in the DBT Bharat portal. 
 
Recommendation 3.4: 
SDC/ SAC should take action to synchroni se the scheme software 
payment data with the State DBT Portal, accurately and on a real time 
basis. 

 

Chapter 4 
Process Reengineering, 
Identification and Coverage of 
Beneficiaries 

 

Chapter 4: Process Reengineering, Identification and Coverage of Beneficiaries 
21 
 
 
 
Chapter 4 
 Process Reengineering, Identification and Coverage of Beneficiaries 
This Chapter deals with process reengineering carried out for accurate 
identification and coverage of beneficiaries under the schemes through 
DBT mode. Various aspects starting from identification to coverage of all 
potential beneficiaries and time taken for processing of the applications up 
to the payment level were analysed and the major audi t observations 
emerged: 
 The aim of DBT, to cover the intended beneficiaries, was not 
fully met, as it failed to undertake awareness measures through 
various media outfits. 
 The SSD Department had not issued well -defined procedure for 
verification of institutes‟ physical infrastructure and human 
resources, prior to issue of User ID and password of scholarship 
portal. Bogus students, from non -existent institutes, were able to 
avail the benefits of PMS scholarships of ₹ 15.57 crore, due to 
negligence of the Department and its field officials. 
 The suggestions of the SDC, such as integration with the NPCI 
mapper for bank account linkage s, automation of workflow of 
the schemes etc., to plug scheme loopholes were neither 
implemented by the Departments nor ens ured by SDC, during 
follow-up. 
 The main aim of DBT i.e., to make the delivery process simpler 
and ensure timely disbursal of benefits, remained unachieved , as 
there were excessive delays in the processing and disbursement 
of scholarships, due to lack of process re-engineering.  
 The average time taken from the date of application to the date of 
disbursal of scholarships, continued to be high. I nordinate delays 
were witnessed at different stages, right from floating of 
advertisements to sanction of payments, leading to overall delays 
of 252 days in payment of PMS, and 11 to 387 days in the 
payment of Medhabruti scholarships to students.  
 Due to n on-validation of 13,975 Medhabruti scholarship 
applications by the Principals of various institutes, i nvolving an 
amount of ₹ 7.17 crore, the scholarships were not considered for 
sanction and payment, which ultimately defeated the objectives 
of DBT. 

Implementation of DBT in payment of Post Matric Scholarship to eligible students in the State 
22 
4.1 Scheme Introduction: Post Matric Scholarship and Medhabruti 
The extant audit of DBT covers two main scholarship schemes, the Post 
Matric Scholarship Scheme (PMS) and Medhabruti. The main features of 
these schemes , including eligibility conditions, fee structure, courses being 
covered, etc., are detailed in the following paragraphs.  
4.1.1 Post Matric Scholarship (PMS) scheme 
The PMS scheme, for students of Scheduled Caste  (SC), Scheduled Tribe 
(ST), Other Backward Classes  (OBC) and Economically Backward Classes  
(EBC), is a centrally sponsored scheme of GoI, for educational empowerment 
of SC/  ST/ OBC/ EBC students, studying at the post-matriculation or post -
secondary stage. The Post Matric Scholarship Scheme  for SC and ST students 
is implemented by the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment  (MoSJE) 
and Ministry of Tribal Affairs  (MoTA), respectively. Subsequently, OBC and 
EBC category students were brought into the PMS fold , in 1998-99 and 2016, 
respectively. 
The stakeholders involved in the PMS scheme are the aforementioned central 
ministries. The SSD Department at the State level, District Welfare Officers at 
the district level and institution s at micro level , are the prime stakeholders , 
besides other stakeholders at the State level , like the Directorate of Treasuries 
Inspection and State DBT Cell. 
The objective of the scheme is to provide financial assistance to the aforesaid 
category of students, for pursuing their post matriculation/  secondary courses 
through recogni sed institutions. The software used to implement the PMS 
scheme was Post Matric Scholarship, Registration, Release a nd Network 
Automation (PRERANA). The software has been developed for effective 
management of processes related to application receipt, processing , sanction 
and disbursal. This software also aimed to facilitate faster and efficient 
disposal of scholarship applications and timely payment of scholarships to 
students, direc tly in to their bank accounts. PRERANA is a web -based 
software developed by the National Informatics Centre, Madhya Pradesh, 
Bhopal, using Dot Net and C Sharp and backend in MS SQL. The data storage 
location is in NIC, Bhopal. 
The broad features of the scheme are outlined in the table below: 
Table 4.1: Features of Post-Matric Scholarship 
Eligibility of student  Students belonging to SC/  ST/ OBC/ EBC community 
and permanent residents of Odisha. 
 SC and ST: Students whose parents‟/ guardians‟ income, 
from all sources, does not exceed ₹ 2.5 lakh per annum. 
 OBC: Students whose parents‟/ guardians‟ income, from 
all sources, does not exceed ₹  1 lakh per annum ( up to 
August 2018) , ₹ 1.5 lakh per annum ( up to  2019-20) 
and ₹ 2.5 lakh per annum from 2020-21 onwards. 
 OBC students securing at least 50 per cent  marks in 
their last examination. 
 EBC: Students pursuing studies in Government 
institutions only , whose parents ‟/ guardians ‟ income, 
from all sources , does not exceed ₹  1.00 lakh per 

Chapter 4: Process Reengineering, Identification and Coverage of Beneficiaries 
23 
annum (up to 2019-20) and ₹  2.5 lakh per annum from 
2020-21 onwards. 
Eligibility of course 
and institute 
All recogni sed post -matriculation or post -secondary 
courses21 pursued in recognised institutions in India. 
Scholarship 
components 
Maintenance allowance, compulsory non -refundable fee s, 
study tour charges, thesis typing, book allowance, book bank 
facility, additional allowance for students with disabilities. 
Four Groups of 
courses that are 
eligible to be covered 
under PMS 
Group I includes degree/  post-graduate degree level 
professional courses, such as engineering, medical, business, 
finance and computer sciences and higher level specialised 
courses, such as PhD, M.Phil., CA, ICWA,  CS., PGDM and 
commercial pilot licensing. 
Group II includes graduate/ post graduate courses and other 
equivalent professional courses not included in Group -I, 
such as nursing, pharmacy and hotel management. 
Group III includes all other courses leading to a graduat ion 
degree not covered under Groups I & II. 
Group IV includes all post -matriculation level non -degree 
courses. 
(Source: PMS Guidelines)  
4.1.2 Medhabruti Scheme  
Medhabruti is a hundred per cent State sponsored scheme that was introduced 
by the Higher Education Department of Government of Odisha.  The scheme 
aims to provide scholarships to meritorious students of Odisha. 
The prime stakeholders of the scheme are the Higher Education Department at 
the state level and institution s at the micro level. Besides, the Directorate of 
Treasury Inspection, Odisha Computer Application Centre and State DBT 
Cell, are the other stakeholders at the State level. 
The e-Medhabruti sof tware was developed by CSM Technology , using Dot 
Net 4.0 and SQL Server 2017 as the backend database, with the data storage 
being the IT Centre at the Secretariat, with the objective of processing 
applications for grant of scholarships under Medhabruti.  
Detailed features of the Medhabruti scheme are outlined in the table below: 
Table 4.2: Detailed features of the Medhabruti Scholarship 
Eligibility 
of student 
 The student must be a permanent resident of Odisha State. 
 The income of the parents of the students, from all sources , 
should not exceed ₹ 6 lakh per annum. 
 The student must have secured 60  per cent  marks in the 
examination of different categories: 
 Jr Merit (+2 level) - Must have passed HSC with 60 per cent or 
more marks from an institution reco gnised by BSE Odisha/ 
                                                           
21 Except training courses like Aircraft Maintenance Engineer‟s Courses and Private Pilot 
license Courses; Courses at Training – Ship Dufferin (Now Rajendra); Courses of training 
at the Military College , Dehradun; Courses at Pre -examination Training Centres of all 
India and State levels 

Implementation of DBT in payment of Post Matric Scholarship to eligible students in the State 
24 
CBSE/ ICSE/ Equivalent boards and pursuing regular +2 
courses of 10+2 pattern. 
 Sr. Merit (+3 level) - Must have passed +2 of CHSE Odisha, 
Class XII or equivalent examination with 60  per cent or more 
marks from an institution recognised by CBSE/ ICSE and 
pursuing regular degree courses in any of the recognised 
colleges/ institutions/ Universities. 
 Post-Graduation (P.G) Merit - Must have passed +3 degree or 
equivalent with 60 per cent or more marks from a recognised 
institute and pursuing regular courses in one of the disciplines 
(where a scholarship is offered) in any of the recognised 
colleges/ institutions/ Universities. 
 Technical & Professional Merit (T&P) - Must have passed +2 
of CHSE/ CBSE / ICSE/ Equivalent exam or +3 Degree/ 
equivalent three-year course (only for MBA/ MCA/ MFC/ 
MSW) with 60  per cent or more marks and pursuing regular 
technical & professional courses in the colleges/ institutions 
recognised by respective regulatory authorities.  
Students shall apply for Medhabruti only in the year of joining 
(1st year of the course). 
Scholarship 
components:  
Medhabruti 
comprises 
four 
components, 
based on 
level of 
courses, as 
detailed in 
the table: 
Type of 
scholarship 
No. of scholarships 
Amount per 
beneficiary (₹ ) 
2017-
18 
2018-
19 
2019-
20 
2020-
21 
Junior Merit  10000 10000 Nil Nil 3000 
Senior Merit 3000 3000 3000 6000 5000 
PG Merit 1500 1500 1500 2500 10000 
T & P Merit 10000 10000 10000 6000 10000 
 
(Source: Medhabruti Guidelines)  
4.2 Scheme workflow of PMS  
To sanction and disburse PMS to eligible ST/  SC, OBC and EBC students, the 
SSD Department introduced an online e -scholarship portal viz., Post -matric 
Scholarship Registration Release and Network Automation (PRERANA) , 
from 2011-12, which was designed and developed by the National Informatics 
Centre (NIC), Bhopal. In order to manage all types of scholarships given to 
students by different departments of the State , through a single platform, the 
Odisha State Scholarship Portal (OSSP ) came into being from 2020 -21. The 
SSD Department switched over to this new portal of OSSP from 2020 -21, for 
processing of PMS. The workflow mechanism of PRERANA and OSSP are 
shown in Figure 4.1 below: 

Chapter 4: Process Reengineering, Identification and Coverage of Beneficiaries 
25 
Figure 4.1: Process flow of PRERANA & OSSP22 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
22  SSD Department prepares bill s for SC and ST beneficiaries and DWO prepare s for OBC 
and EBC beneficiaries  
Registration by the student 
Verification by Institute 
(Verifies online data with hard copy) 
Re-submission by the 
Student 
For OBC/ SEBC, the 
Dept. Provides allotment 
with list to DWOs 
PRERANA Department/ DWO 
prepares the bills manually and 
uploads these in iFMS and send these 
to Treasury 
Process Ends 
OSSP 
Department/ DWO approves the 
beneficiary list in OSSP and pushes 
the same to iFMS. 
Permanent 
Rejection 
Accepted 
Temporary 
Rejection 
Process Ends 
Permanent 
Rejection 
Accepted 
Temporary rejection 
Verification by District Welfare Officer 
(Verifies online data with hard copy) 
State Level 
(Verifies online data) 
Student submits hard copy 
application along with 
documents to institute 
Hard copy forwarded 
to DWO 
Bills processed in iFMS at Treasury after 
receipt of hard copy of bill and processed 
online without manual intervention 
Payment to beneficiary bank 
account 
The FA sanctions using digital signature in iFMS.  
The DDO uploads the manually prepared bill and generates e -book of drawal and 
pushes the same to iFMS for disbursement process. The DDO also takes print of 
the bill, sanction order and eBook of drawal and submit to Treasury for payment to 
the beneficiaries. 
No. of beneficiaries approved 
and amount involved for 
disbursement updated in State 
DBT Portal in 10th of every 
month 

Implementation of DBT in payment of Post Matric Scholarship to eligible students in the State 
26 
4.3 Scheme workflow of Medhabruti 
The „Medhabruti‟ scheme was introduced by the Higher Education 
Department, Government of Odisha (GoO) , to provide scholarships to those 
meritorious students of the State, whose parental income does not exceed ₹  6 
lakh per annum. For the management of this scholarship scheme,  e-
Medhabruti software was developed and designed by a p rivate vendor  (M/s 
CSM Technologies) and is being used by the Higher Education Department  
since 2016-17.  
Besides this, the Odisha Government also ha s a separate online system called 
the Student Academic Management System  (SAMS), which is used for 
admission to Higher secondary ( i.e., +2) and Undergraduate (UG) level 
courses. Therefore, details of st udents who have got admitted to  +2 and UG 
level general courses , are readily available in SAMS. This database available 
in SAMS is used in the e-Medhabruti application system23 for ascertaining the 
number of students eligible for the Medhabruti scholarship , as well as for 
scholarship management. The workflow mechanism of the e-Medhabruti 
software, including its interface with SAMS, is shown in the figure below:  
  
                                                           
23 From 2020-21, Government used OSSP as a common scholarship portal 

Chapter 4: Process Reengineering, Identification and Coverage of Beneficiaries 
27 
Figure 4.2: Process flow of e-Medhabruti 
  
HED approves the 
beneficiary list and 
prepares the bill manually 
and uploads the same in 
iFMS along with 
beneficiary list in excel 
format 
HED presents the manual 
bill along with required 
annexures to the Treasury 
for payment 
Payment to the 
beneficiary‟s bank account 
Students enrolled in SAMS 
college with >=60 per cent 
marks placed in Principals‟ 
login for validation by CSM 
Technologies 
Fresh applications 
by Non-SAMS 
college students 
online 
Principal verifies the 
applications online and 
validates the uploaded 
documents/ documents 
available in college (SAMS 
students) for processing  
Online submission of 
validated data to OCAC  
OCAC downloads and 
categorises the Principal‟s 
validated data into “Fresh 
and Renewal” and 
submits the data to the 
HED in excel format by 
CD/ email 
Hard copy along 
with documents sent 
to the institute 
Treasury processes the 
online bill after receipt of 
manual bill and approves 
for payment to the 
beneficiary 

Implementation of DBT in payment of Post Matric Scholarship to eligible students in the State 
28 
The OSSP is a web -based software, developed by CSM T echnologies, using 
Angular 8.3, PHP 7.1 and PHP Laravel , with backend tool of MY SQL.  The 
storage location of the OSSP da ta is the Odisha State Data Centre.  The 
technical workflow of OSSP is shown below. 
Figure 4.3 Process flow of OSSP 
 
4.4 Identification and coverage of beneficiaries 
Correct identification of beneficiaries is an important criterion for the effective 
implementation of any DBT scheme, including scholarship schemes like PMS 
and Medhabruti. C reating adequate awareness about Government sponsored 
scholarship schemes and addressing problems faced by student s while 
applying for such scholarships, are vital for proper identification and full 
coverage of eligible beneficiaries. In case of the present scholarship schemes, 
the eligible beneficiaries  included students belonging to the underprivileged 
sections of society , like SC, ST, OBCs and economically weaker income 
groups.  
On examination of records, Audit found the following deficiencies on both the 
fronts. 
4.4.1 Inadequate coverage under PMS  
Accurate targeting and identification of eligible beneficiaries is one of the 
prerequisites of successful scheme execution under DBT. The  State DBT Cell 
was entrusted with the responsibility of developing linkages with the Socio 
 


Chapter 4: Process Reengineering, Identification and Coverage of Beneficiaries 
29 
Economic and Caste Census 24 (SECC) based social registry , for coverage of 
eligible population under such schemes and to ensure formation of Nodal 
Cells in DBT implementing departments. 
Year-wise and category-wise numbers of students covered under PMS, during 
2017-21, are as follows: 
Table 4.3: Trend of coverage of beneficiaries under PMS during 2017-21 
Year 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 
SC 1,84,883 2,27,412 1,66,400 1,67,702 
ST 1,86,061 2,10,866 1,68,449 1,67,241 
OBC 1,79,794 1,38,030 1,14,935 1,07,925 
EBC 97 923 1,153 3,702 
Total 5,50,835 5,77,231 4,50,937 4,46,570 
(Source: SSD Department) 
It would be observed from the above table that the total number of student s 
covered under PMS decreased by 19 per cent, from 5.51 lakh in 2017 -18, to 
4.47 lakh in 2020 -21. Except in the EBC category, the coverage of 
beneficiaries from other cat egories registered a decline between 2017 -18 and 
2020-21. 
Audit noted that neither the DBT Cell nor the SSD Department had taken 
steps to analyse the SECC data for identification of all eligible beneficiaries. 
Data submitted through applications was the only source of collection of data 
of beneficiaries. Even the data available  in SAMS  was not used  to compare 
with number of students applied for  PMS vis-à-vis number of eligible 
students.  
Hence, in absence of any survey or a database of the eligible students available 
in the State, the Department was not in a position to ascertain the actual 
coverage of eligible ST and SC students under PMS. 
As noted in Paragraph 4.3 above, details of students who took admission in 
+2 courses in the State were available in the SAMS system. A comparative 
picture of the number of SC/ ST category students , who were admitted to +2 
courses and the number of such category students who applied for PMS during 
2017-21, is given in the table below: 
Table 4.4: Admissions vis-à-vis applications for PMS , by SC/ ST student s, during 
2017-21 
Year 
Admission in +2 Applied for PMS 
Taken admission 
but not applied for 
PMS 
Percentage of 
admitted students 
applied 
SC ST SC ST SC ST SC ST 
1 2 3 4 5 (1-3) 6 (2-4) 7 (3/1%) 8 
(4/2%) 
2017-18 73,515 79,163 42,624 52,693 30,891 26,470 58 67 
2018-19 63,990 71,756 40,751 47,212 23,239 24,544 64 66 
2019-20 56,586 65,233 31,233 39,913 25,353 25,320 55 61 
2020-21 60,736 69,634 30,774 41,010 29,962 28,624 51 59 
Total 2,54,827 2,85,786 1,45,382 1,80,828 1,09,445 1,04,958 57 63 
(Source: Data taken from SAMS, PRERANA and OSSP databases) 
                                                           
24 Ministry of Rural Development GoI, conducted the Socio Economic and Caste Census 
(SECC) 2011, in June 2011 through a comprehensive door to door enumeration across the 
country to generate information on a large number of social and economic indicators 
relating to household in the country 

Implementation of DBT in payment of Post Matric Scholarship to eligible students in the State 
30 
Audit noted that: 
 In the SC category, out of 2.55 lakh students who took admission in +2 
courses during 2017 -21, only 1.45 lakh students ( 57 per cent) applied 
for PMS. The year-wise percentage (2017-21) of admitted SC students, 
who applied for PMS, ranged from 51 to 64 per cent only.  
 In case of the ST category, the percentage of students who applied for 
PMS during the same period was relatively higher at 63 per cent, as 
1.80 lakh out of 2.86 lakh students , who were admitted at +2 level, 
applied for PMS . The annual percentage of ST students in the years 
2017-21, who applied for PMS, ranged from 59 to 67 per cent only.  
 The n umber of students from  SC category who applied for PMS  
registered a decreasing trend since 2018 -19. While 58 per cent  of 
admitted students of SC category applied for  PMS in 2017-18, the 
same reduced to 51 in 2020 -21. Similarly, the percentage of ST 
students applying for PMS reduced from 67 per cent in 2017-18 to 59 
per cent in 2020-21. 
Audit observed that the re were no efforts by the SSD Department to identify 
eligible SC and ST  students, from the data available in SECC or by survey or 
from SAMS database , to ensure that all eligible students are covered under 
PMS. 
The SSD Department stated (March 2021) that the coverage had gone down 
due to mandatory use of Aadhaar for submission of scholarship application s 
from 2019 -20 onwards.  The reason attributed by the Department is not 
convincing, as the decline in number of students at +2 level , applying for 
PMS, began in 2018-19, i.e., before the Aadha ar rule came into force . 
Moreover, even if we attribute Aadhaar becoming mandatory as a cause of 
declining coverage of PMS, it parallelly also highlights the lack of preparatory 
measures on the part of the Department, particularly, the steps necessary to be 
taken to encourage targeted beneficiaries to enrol for Aadhaar, for a successful 
implementation of DBT.  
4.4.2 Lack of adequate steps for coverage of entire eligible beneficiaries 
for Medhabruti 
The Higher Education Department (HED) awarded Medhabruti for different 
grades of students under four different categories, viz., Jr. Merit, Sr. Merit, PG 
Merit and T&P Merit. The number of new students (i.e., Fresh), to be given 
scholarships under each category, are fixed annually. A student , once covered 
under a scholarship, is entitled to the same in subsequent years (i.e., Renewal), 
Recommendation: 4.1 
The SSD Department may build appropriate mechanism to  assess the 
number of potential beneficiaries and compare the same with the 
applications received for identifying the students, not applying for PMS. 
Efforts should be made to reach out the left -out students to assist them 
in availing PMS. 

Chapter 4: Process Reengineering, Identification and Coverage of Beneficiaries 
31 
if he/ she continues in the course . Hence, no target is fixed for renewal of 
scholarships. 
The y ear-wise number of stude nts to be covered under each component of 
Medhabruti, as well as the actual coverage under both „Fresh‟ and „Renewal‟ 
categories, during 2017 -20, are shown in the table below . Award of the Jr. 
Merit scholarship was stopped since 2019 -20. In case of 2020 -21, although 
HED had fixed the number of scholarships to be awarded 25, no applications 
were invited in April 2021 and no payments had been made till December 
2021. Therefore , transactions rela ting to the year 2020-21, could not be 
analysed in Audit. 
Table 4.5: Year-wise target vis-à-vis coverage under Medhabruti 
Year Particulars Jr. 
Merit 
Sr. 
Merit 
PG 
Merit 
T&P 
Merit 
2017-18 
Target 10,000 3,000 1,500 10000 
Fresh 3,065 2,877 64 141 
Renewal 7,832 7,830 1,693 11,646 
2018-19 
Target 10,000 3,000 1,500 10,000 
Fresh 9,987 2,998 1,500 2,018 
Renewal 1,986 1,044 47 6,122 
2019-20 
Target Stopped 3,000 1,500 10,000 
Fresh 0 3,000 1,500 1,783 
Renewal 5,577 10,208 2,583 4,983 
Total 
Target 20,000 9,000 4,500 30,000 
Fresh 13,052 8,875 3,064 3,942 
Renewal 15,395 19,082 4,323 22,751 
Percentage of achievement (Fresh:Target) 65 99 68 13 
(Source: Information furnished by HED) 
Audit noted that coverage under Sr.  Merit scholarship was as per the target 
during 2016 -19, whereas, in the remaining three scholarship  categories, the 
percentage of coverage  ranged from 13 (T&P Merit) to 68 (PG Merit) only. 
Reasons for such reduction had , however, not been analysed by the 
Department. Non -validation of appl ications by the Principals of their 
respective institutes and delays in verification and non -validations of 
applications, discouragi ng students from applying for the scholarships could 
be some  of the reasons for such decline  in coverage, as discussed in 
Paragraph 4.6.1 and Paragraph 4.6.2, respectively.  
In reply, the Higher Education Department stated (September 2022) that they 
had decided to incorporate new valid courses in all categories of merit , to 
enhance the cover age of disbursal of scholarship  apart from forming  a 
scholarship committee at the institution  level, to make them more responsible 
for validating the applications. 
4.5 Process re -engineering for minimi sing the intermediary level for 
timely transfer of benefit 
DBT envisages a switchover to transfer of benefits via Aadhaar seeded bank 
accounts, which requires  a significant amount  of business process re -
engineering. The scheme implementing departments, with the assistance of the 
DBT Cell s, are responsible for this process reengineering, that aims to  
                                                           
25  Sr. Merit: 6,000, PG Merit: 2,500 and T&P Merit: 6,000 

Implementation of DBT in payment of Post Matric Scholarship to eligible students in the State 
32 
minimise intermediary level s, for transfer of benefit s and ensur ing timely 
receipt. 
4.5.1 Absence of process re-engineering 
It was decided (2015-16), by the SSD Department, that the DWO would be the 
sanctioning authority for PMS for SC/  ST/ OBC/ EBC students in their 
respective districts, while disbursement of scholarships for SC and ST students 
would be made by the SSD Department and , in case of OBC and EBC, the 
disbursement would be done by the DWO.  
Audit, however, noticed that t he process of a pplication and approval of PMS 
and Medhabruti scholarships in the PRERANA and e -Medhabruti so ftware 
involved various intermediary levels before final disb ursal of the scholarship 
amount, as is illustrated in Figure 4.4. 
Figure 4.4: Pre and Post DBT workflow of two schemes 
Post Matric Scholarship Scheme Medhabruti Scheme 
  
Levels existing in 2016-17 also prevalent as of March 2021 
(Source: Records of SSD and HED and databases) 
As illustrated in Figure 4.4, the process of PMS starts with the submission of 
applications by the students, through the PRERANA/ OSSP portal. Thereafter, 
it is the responsibility of the concerned Principals to verify the students‟ 
credentials and push the applications forward, to the concerned DWOs for 
verification and  sanction. The DWO is the sanctioning authority for all 
scholarships but, due to lack of mapping of business rules and de -duplication, 
the Scholarship Management Unit at the State Level verifies the applications 
once again , for payment to SC and ST beneficiaries, from the Department, 
through iFMS. The SSD Department releases the allotment to the DWO, for 
payment of OBC and EBC beneficiaries. 
Audit noticed  that, in case of OBC and EBC students, the SSD Department 
continued to retain authority over sanctioning of PMS , as it still conducted 
verification of applications and forwarded only the final selected list , along 
with allotments, to the DWOs, for payment. As p er the revised guidelines of 
2015-16, this process of verification, as well as sanction , was to be carried out 
by the DWO, in case of SC and ST students. As such, there was no reduction 
in intermediary levels in sanctioning of PMS. 
Thus, the intermediary l evels involved in pre and post DBT phases remained 
the same.  In pre DBT period (2015 -16), the time taken from bill date to 
Beneficiary 
Institution 
District 
Welfare 
Officer 
SSD 
Department 
Beneficiary 
Institution 
CSM/ OCAC 
 
 
 
 Higher      
Education 
Department 

Chapter 4: Process Reengineering, Identification and Coverage of Beneficiaries 
33 
voucher date ranged from 02 to120 days where as in the post DBT period 
(2016-21) the time taken rather increased in comparison to the pre DBT period 
which ranged from 01 to 272 days as detailed in the table below: 
Table 4.6: Time between the bill date and the voucher date, during 2015-21  
Year DBT period Time taken from bill date to voucher 
date (days) 
2015-16 Pre DBT 02-120 
2016-17 Post DBT 10-125 
2017-18 Post DBT 01-267 
2018-19 Post DBT 01-272 
2019-20 Post DBT 01-250 
2020-21 Post DBT 01-255 
(Source: Analysis of iFMS data) 
The process involved from submission of application to disbursement of 
scholarship to the beneficiaries in the Medhabruti scheme, has been discussed 
in Paragraph 4.6. 
Audit observed that a study conducted by the State DBT Cell, had also pointed 
out lacunae in the overall implementation of the PRERANA and Medhabruti 
schemes and suggested remedial measures , such as on-boarding of all 
scholarship schemes onto PFMS, integration with NPCI mapper to enable 
bank account linkage, automation of workflow of the schemes , etc. However, 
the same were neither carried out by the Departments , nor was any follow -up 
done by the D BT Cell, on their Report. These lacunae are discussed in detail 
in Paragraphs 5.1.1 to Paragraphs 5.1. 3 and Paragraphs 5.2.1, 5.2.2 and 
5.2.3. 
The SSD Department replied (September 2022) that the existing layers in the 
process flow are needed for scrutiny and proper management of scholarship 
programme and are, therefore, being continued. The reply is not tenable, as the 
software system is to be made robust , to avoid manual intervention in the 
scrutiny process, to avoid delay. 
4.5.2 Defective procedure for issue of user IDs to Institutes  
The PRERANA User Manual stipulates that DWO would register the 
institutes and issue User ID s and passwords to the institute s, after receipt of 
applications from the concerned institutes for processing PMS  applications. 
These IDs and passwords were to be issued to the institutes only after 
necessary verifications of the details of registration, affiliation , recognition 
and courses being offered at the time of registration in PRERANA. 
On verifi cation of records, it was noticed that , during the period 2016 -19, 
DWO, Mayurbhanj, registered 13 institutes and DWO, Balasore, registered 11 
institutes, under PRERANA and issued  User IDs and passwords to them , for 
Recommendation 4.2: 
The Odisha State Scholarship Portal, developed for smooth 
management of scholarship schemes, should be used optimally by 
rationalising existing multiple administrative layers for faster process 
of applications and timely payment of scholarships. 

Implementation of DBT in payment of Post Matric Scholarship to eligible students in the State 
34 
processing of PMS applications. However, in contravention of the guidelines, 
DWO of Mayurbhanj verified only two 26 out of the 13 institutes , before issue 
of User ID s and passwords. The issue was compounded by the fact that no 
complete Master Table of approved bodies, responsible for granting affiliation 
to the institute s, which could be used to cross -check the veracity of these 
institutes, was available in the relevant database.  
Audit conducted  (September and October 2021)  a joint physical  inspection 
(JPI) of 16 registered institutes 27 in two sample districts (Mayurbhanj: 1128 
and Balasore: 529) during September and October 2021 . Audit  did not find 
eight institutes 30 in existence and the remaining eight institutes had deficient 
infrastructure. Despite non -existence of institutes as well as deficient 
infrastructure in some others, raising doubt on genuineness of enrolment of 
students and impart of education therein, 12 of these ins titutes (Mayurbhanj: 
11 and Balasore: 1) had been paid PMS amounting to ₹ 15.57 crore 
fraudulently. Details of the same are laid out in Paragraph 6.1.1. 
Audit observed that SSD Department had not issued a well-defined procedure/ 
instructions/ checklist to be adopted by the DWOs for conducting verification 
of an institute e.g., its physical existence, availability of infrastructure 
facilities, including hostel availability, other amenities etc., prior to issue of 
User ID s and password s. As a result, bogus students , from non -existent 
institutes, were paid , due to the negligence of the Department and its field 
officials.  
The SSD Department accepted the observations and stated (September 2022) 
that, in the new portal, OSSP, necessary provisions had been made to ensure 
that the institutions , which  were duly recognised and authorised by the 
controlling department, were added to the portal. 
                                                           
26 Kalinga Fire & Safety Techniques (KFST) and Global Institute of Safety & Training 
(GIST) 
27  Selected on judgmental basis 
28 IVET Vocational Training Centre; Ashutosh  Vocational Training Centre; SAI Vocational 
Training Centre, Puruna Baripada; ITET Vocational Training Centre; SAI Safety Training 
Institute; Mayurbhanj Safety Training Institute; Baripada Safety Training Institute; 
Odisha Safety Training Institute; Kaling a Institute of Safety & Training; Global Institute 
of Safety & Training; Purusottam Institute of Fire & Safety Techniques 
29 Indian Vocational Training Centre, Januganj; Odisha Institute of Fire & Safety, Dumuda; 
Odisha Institute of Health Science, Kuruda; Odisha Vocational Training Centre, Kuruda 
and Odisha Vocational Training Centre, Dumuda 
30 Mayurbhanj: Baripada Safety Training Institute; Kalinga Institute of Safety & Training 
and Purusottam Institute of Fire & Safety Techniques 
Balasore: Odisha Institute  of Fire Safety; Odisha Vocational Training Centre; Indian 
Vocational Training Centre; Odisha Institute of Health Science and Odisha Vocational 
Training Centre 

Chapter 4: Process Reengineering, Identification and Coverage of Beneficiaries 
35 
4.5.3 Arbitrary rejection of applications for PMS 
As per the PRERANA workflow and user manual , the  institutes and the 
DWOs have the right to reject incorrect/ invalid applications of students , 
temporarily or permanently, citing reasons. However, no guidelines had been 
framed, fixing the criteria or basis for such temporary or permanent rejections.  
Audit analysis of the PRERANA and OSSP  databases revealed that out of 
14,22,413 applications , received during the period 2017 -21, 1,20,918 
applications had been rejected (8.50 per cent) by DWOs/ institutes, of which, 
1,11,793 applications for scholarships were temporarily rejected and 9,125 
applications were permanently rejected. 
It was noted that institutes/  DWOs had rejected the applications permanently, 
on the grounds of duplication, late submission, not being under the proper 
category, submission of false statement/ document/ certificate, ineligibility as 
per last year‟s percentage of marks , etc. Further, temporary rejection was 
carried out due to reasons such as incomplete application s, absence of hard 
copies of required  documents, wrong bank account details,  incorrect Aadhaar 
number, etc. 
In this regard, Audit observed the following: 
 Irregular p ermanent rejection of applications : The permanently 
rejected applications (9,125) in 28 districts included 1,117 applications 
(12 per cent ) that had been rejected on the grounds which would 
ordinarily have warranted only temporary rejections, as per the practice 
followed by the DWOs and institutes concerned. The nature of these 
rejections are summarised below: 
Table 4.7: Permanent rejection on the grounds of temporary rejection 
Nature of rejection No. of cases temporarily 
rejected 
No. of cases permanently 
rejected 
Course Completed / TC taken 1,132 14 
Incomplete Application 37,867 702 
Invalid Aadhaar Number 2,602 8 
Hard Copy Not Submitted 13,903 129 
Required Document Not Attached 12,451 91 
Wrong Bank Account Particulars 13,939 173 
Grand Total 81,894 1,117 
(Source: Analysis of PRERANA database) 
Thus, in the absence of clear guidelines from the Department, there was lack 
of uniformity on the part of DWOs and institutes , while dealing with 
applications from students. While some institutes and district authorities, only 
temporarily rejected scholarship applications on the basis of above -mentioned 
Recommendation 4.3: 
The SSD Department may issue a detailed checklist, to the district level 
functionaries, outlining the process of verification to be followed 
before issue of user IDs and passwords to institutes , to filter out 
fraudulent and ineligible beneficiaries. 

Implementation of DBT in payment of Post Matric Scholarship to eligible students in the State 
36 
criteria, others enforced permanent rejections , leading to denial of scholarship 
support to potential beneficiaries.  
 Irregular temporary rejection of applications: Temporarily rejected 
applications included 991 applications (1 per cent) that were rejected 
on such grounds which, as per the practice followed by other institutes/ 
DWOs, deserved permanent rejection. Of this, 18 applications had 
been accepted subsequently and payment of ₹ 6 lakh had been made, as 
summarised in the table below: 
Table 4. 8: Applications rejected temporar ily, having grounds for permanent 
rejection 
Nature of Rejection Number of 
applications 
Number of 
cases where 
payment made 
Amount 
(in ₹ ) 
Annual Income Exceeding the Limit 47 6 42,651 
Availing Scholarship Under Another Scheme 36 - - 
Change in Branch of Course Without 
Permission 2 - - 
Course Duration Exceeding the Normal Period  1 - - 
Duplicate Application 465 11 4,91,020 
Late Submission of Application 27 - - 
Non-Eligible as Per Last Year Percentage  64 - - 
Not Under Proper Category 58 1 66,220 
Repeating Course in Same Professional Line 1 - - 
Repeating Study in Same Stage of Education 3 - - 
Second / Subsequent Failure in Same Year  3 - - 
Submission of False 
Statement/Document/Certificate 234 - - 
Two Children Already Receiving Scholarship 2 - - 
Unsatisfactory Progress / Misconduct of 
Scholar 48 - - 
Total 991 18 5,99,891 
(Source: Analysis of PRERANA database) 
 Rejection of applications without any reason: The temporary and 
permanent rejection of applications also included  224 applications, in 
respect of which no specific grounds for rejection had been assigned. 
Thus, due to failure on the part of the SSD Department in laying down clear 
cut criteria for permanent or temporary rejection and incorporating such 
provisions in PRERANA, rejection/ acceptance of applications was  not free 
from arbitrariness , leading to denial of scholarships to potential  eligible 
beneficiaries.  
Audit noted that the Principals of two sampled institutions 31 in the Nayagarh 
district had not scrutinised 181 applications , received during 2020 -21, for 
PMS scholarships. These applications had also not been forwarded by the 
institutes to the concerned DWO for sanction. It was ascertained from the 
institutes that the reason for this non -processing of applications were issues  
related to User ID/ password assigned , due to which the  institutes could not 
access the OSSP portal, which had been introduced from 2020 -21 onwards , 
for scholarship processing. Although these issues were raised before the 
DWO, by the institutes, telephonically, no action had been taken to resolve the 
                                                           
31 Rajsunakhala Degree college, Nayagarh: 92 students and Rajsunakhala Higher Secondary 
School, Nayagarh: 89 students 

Chapter 4: Process Reengineering, Identification and Coverage of Beneficiaries 
37 
same (as of July 2021). The SSD Department had also not taken any action on 
this issue, despite the fact that this pendency in processing was clearly visible 
in the dashboard of the software , leading to denial of benefits to potential 
beneficiaries in this district.  
In reply, the SSD Department stated (September 2022) that it was left to the 
prudence and judgement of verifying and sanctioning authority , to decide 
whether the application needs to be p ermanently rejected. The reply is not 
acceptable, as the department had not laid down any clear  and definite 
principles for permanent/ temporary rejection of applications , which is 
fundamental to judge eligibility of applicants for the purpose of accurate 
targeting of beneficiaries. 
4.5.4 Irregularities in disbursement of Maintenance Allowance 
DBT envisages business process reengineering , to reduce intermediary level s, 
for transfer of benefit s directly to the beneficiaries ‟ accounts, in a timely 
manner. 
The SSD Department decided (August 2019) to transfer the Maintenance 
Allowance (MA) component of the PMS, to the bank account of the Higher 
Secondary Schools run by the SSD Department , for smooth management of 
mess at the school level. This decision of the SSD Department was only for 
the schools run by the Government Departments . T herefore, the MA 
component, in respect of students of private institutes , was to be transferred to 
the bank accounts of the students only. The Department transferred PMS , 
amounting to ₹  31.44 crore, in regard to  54,642 beneficiaries , to the bank 
accounts of 165 institutes (including two private institutes), during 2017-21, as 
given in the table below. 
Table 4.9: Transfer of MA component of PMS to the accounts of i nstitutes during 
2017-21 
Year No. of Institutions No. of students Amount paid 
(₹ in crore) 
2017-18 64 8,398 5.88 
2018-19 138 18,734 10.04 
2019-20 134 13,381 8.26 
2020-21 125 14,129 7.26 
Total  54,642 31.44 
(Source: Information furnished by SSD Department) 
Audit noticed the following deficiencies in disbursement of MA: 
 Irregular release of MA to private institutes: In respect of 276 ST/ SC 
students of the two privately managed institutes, an amount of ₹  1.37 
crore was transferred to the bank accounts of their respective institutes, 
during 2018 -20, instead of the bank accounts of the students 
concerned, which was irregular. Thus, in respect of the two private 
institutes, direct transfer of scholarship had not happened, contrary to 
the objectives of DBT. 
 Delay in disbursement: Out of 11 sampled Higher Secondary Schools 
(HSS), run by the SSD Department , in case of six HSSs (55 per cent), 
MA, amounting to ₹  69.68 lakh for 699 students had been transferred 
to the bank accounts of schools concerned and thereafter, the school 

Implementation of DBT in payment of Post Matric Scholarship to eligible students in the State 
38 
authorities had transferred the amount to the bank accounts of the 
students, after intervals of 36 to 403 days, during 2019-21. 
 Non-disbursement: The Principals of three HSS of the SSD 
Department retained the MA component of the scholarship , amounting 
to ₹  13.70 lakh , in the school accounts , without disbursing it  to 138 
students, during 2018-21, even though the mess es are being managed 
by the students themselves. 
 Disbursement through manual acquittance: The Principal of the HSS 
of the SSD at Mathili , disbursed MA of ₹  4,97,700, to 4 0 students, 
during the year 2018-20, in cash, through manual acquittance, although 
all the beneficiaries had existing bank accounts in  their name. This 
violated the prime objective of DBT and had risks of  manipulation of 
fund by the institute associated with such practice. 
 Excess payment: As per the guidelines and SSD Department‟s order, 
the Maintenance Allowance (MA) shall be paid for a maximum of 10 
months in a year. The beneficiaries of Higher Secondary School s 
(HSS) are entitled for ₹ 1,000 per month.  
On verification of records, Audit noticed that the Principal, SSD HSS, 
Badampahar and SSD HSS, Bankati, of Mayurbhanj district, disbursed 
advance MA of ₹  1,92,000 @ ₹  800 per student per month , to 80 
students, for three months and ₹  84,000 @ ₹  1000 per student per 
month, to 28 students , for three months , respectively, for the year 
2019-20. It was , however, noticed that, 43 out of the 80 students and 
16 out of 28 students , had already been paid MA for 2019 -20 @ 
₹ 10,000 per student per year. This resulted in excess payment of 
₹ 1,51,200, towards advance. 
Audit observed that despite introduction of DBT, components of PMS 
continued to be disbursed through the concerned institutes. In addition, the 
payments were neither timely nor accurate , besides non -payment to many 
students. As such, disciplines to be adhered to in  DBT, like direct and timely 
transfer of amount as well as exact amount  to be paid,  had not been adhered 
to. This is indicative of the absence of required process reengineering to this 
effect. Thus, objectives of both DBT and PMS were defeated in terms of 
timely and accurate amount of payment to beneficiaries. 
The SSD Department replied (September 2022) that , as per the decision of the 
Government, the course/ other fee component s of PMS , for students of 
Government ITI and Diploma Institutions , as well as  the maintenance 
allowance component, in regard to boarder students of SSD run schools , were 
disbursed to the accounts of institutions . The reply is not tenable , as the 
decision of Government violated the principles of DBT, as scholarship was not 
transferred directly to the bank accounts of beneficiaries.  
Recommendation 4.4: 
The SSD Department should ensure that scholarship amounts are 
credited directly and timely to the bank accounts of the eligible students, 
eliminating the intermediaries, by carrying out required process 
reengineering. 
 
 

Chapter 4: Process Reengineering, Identification and Coverage of Beneficiaries 
39 
4.5.5 Delay in processing PMS applications  
The SOP for DBT stipulates that the delivery of benefits to beneficiaries will 
be made in a timely and effective manner by reengineering the existing 
process. Audit noted the cumulative delay of 252 days 32, starting from 
advertisement to payment to the beneficiaries, during 2017-18 to 2020 -21, as 
shown in the Chart below. 
Chart 4.1: Delay (in days) at different stages of processing PMS applications 
 
 (Source: Records of SSD Department and iFMS database)  
The delay at each stage has been discussed in the succeeding points.  
• Delay in floating of advertisement: Although the PMS Guidelines 
stipulate floating of advertisement during the months of May and June, 
the same were advertised by the Department after the beginning of the 
academic session (July) , i.e., in the month of September (2017-18), 
July (2018 -19), November (2019-20) and November (2020 -21). This 
resulted in an average delay of 82 days between the start of the 
academic session and the date of publishing of advertisement, leading 
to a cascading effect on the entire process of payment of scholarship.  
• Delay in preparation of bill: Audit examined 420 bills in the SSD 
Department and noticed that in respect of 35 bills (8 per cent), bills of 
a particular year were being prepared in subsequent years, after the 
entire year of academic session was  over, as summarised  in the table 
below: 
Table 4.10: Preparation of PMS bills in subsequent years 
Year of 
PMS Category No. of 
bills 
Date of preparation 
of bills 
Amount of the bills 
(₹ in crore) 
2017-18 SC 8 April to June 2018 53.11 
ST 5 April to June 2018 24.80 
2018-19 SC 15 June to November 
2019 10.15 
ST 5 May to November 
2019 7.65 
2019-20 SC 2 July 2020 7.61 
Total  35  103.32 
(Source: Records of SSD Department) 
 
32  82+48+117+5 
82
48
117
5
0
50
100
150
200
250
Delay in floating of
advertisment
Delay in sanction by
DWOs
Delay in processing
of payment
Delay in payment to
beneficiaries
Min Max Average

Implementation of DBT in payment of Post Matric Scholarship to eligible students in the State 
40 
 Delay in sanction by the DWOs:  The Department fixed cut -off dates 
for verification of PMS application at each level i.e., at the institute 
level, for verification of applications, at the DWO level, for scrutiny of 
applications and sanction , etc. During 2018-21, the DWOs kept  the 
applications pending till the cut -off dates  and later processed the 
applications in bulk, with delays ranging between 36-60 days, from the 
cut-off date , stipulated by the Department . Apart from delay, b ulk 
sanctioning of applications carries the risk of deficient scrutiny and 
payments to ineligible beneficiaries , as well as delay in sanction of 
bills. The table below exhibits summar ised details of delays in 
verification of PMS applications during 2018-21.  
Table 4.11: Delay in sanction of PMS by DWOs 
Year Category Date of 
application 
Schedule date 
of sanction by 
DWO 
Actual date of 
sanction by 
the DWO 
Delay in days 
of sanction by 
the DWO 
2018-19 SC 31-12-2018 31-01-2019 01-04-2019 60 
2018-19 ST 31-12-2018 31-01-2019 01-04-2019 60 
2019-20 SC 30-11-2019 31-01-2020 15-03-2020 43 
2019-20 ST 30-11-2019 31-01-2020 15-03-2020 43 
2020-21 SC 15-02-2021 15-02-2021 23-03-2021 37 
2020-21 ST 15-02-2021 15-02-2021 22-03-2021 36 
(Source: Records of SSD Department) 
Thus, timelines for verification of PMS applications were not being 
adhered to by the DWOs , leading to delay in payments to eligible 
beneficiaries.  
 Delay in processing of payment : After the bills are uploaded in the 
iFMS by the DDO, the system generates token numbers automatically 
for each bill. Thereafter, the bills are processed online by different 
officials of Treasury and passed by the Treasury Officer , for payment 
to the accounts of beneficiaries, as detailed in Figure 4.5. 
  

Chapter 4: Process Reengineering, Identification and Coverage of Beneficiaries 
41 
Figure 4.5: Workflow of payment in iFMS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Analysis of the iFMS database, for the period 2017-21, revealed that there was 
inordinate delay , at the level of the SSD Department , in uploading bills for 
payment of scholarship in the iFMS  system, resulting in delay in token 
generation.  
Audit test-checked 80 bi lls of PMS for OBC/ EBC  students, in the  eight 
sampled districts and found that, in respect of 49 bills (61 per cent), there were 
delays in the process of sanction and payment. The time taken from bill date to 
credit to the beneficiaries‟ bank accounts at the district level , is shown in the 
table below. 
Table 4.12: Time taken at different stages for payment to OBC/ EBC students 
Sl. 
No. District 
No. of 
bills 
checked 
No. of bills 
processed 
with delay 
Time taken from 
bill date to credit 
to students’ 
account (days) 
Median time 
taken from the 
bill date to the 
payment date 
1 Bolangir 9 9 9-343 71 
2 Gajapati 10 7 1-135 93 
3 Jharsuguda 7 7 4-238 12 
4 Kalahandi 11 8 2-28 23 
5 Malkangiri 8 1 4-164 10 
6 Mayurbhanj 13 8 3-254 7 
7 Nayagarh 11 5 3-71 7 
8 Sundargarh 11 4 4-34 21 
 Total 80 49 -- -- 
(Source: Records of DWOs of sampled districts) 
DDO prepares the bill in iFMS. The manually prepared sanction order is 
attached to the bill. Beneficiary l ist gets uploaded on iFMS and is 
forwarded to concerned Treasury online. Also, a hard copy is sent for 
further processing. In OSSP, the process is outlined in Figure 4.1. 
 
Successfully submitted bills are available on the concerned Treasury 
Officer (TO) interface of iFMS , for further processing. Treasury 
processes after receipt of manual bill. 
 
Treasury Officer processes the bill. 
On approval: Payment advice is generated and forwarded to the Central 
Electronic Processing Centre (CEPC), which, in turn, generates and forwards 
the advice file to the Reserve Bank of India (RBI). 
 
SMS to the beneficiary is triggered upon advice 
being sent to RBI, by CEPC. 
 
Payment is made directly to the beneficiary bank account. 
 

Implementation of DBT in payment of Post Matric Scholarship to eligible students in the State 
42 
As such, inordinate delays at different stages in processing of bills, added to 
the overall delay in the payment of scholarship to students , which ultimately 
defeated the objective of DBT in regard to timely payment of benefits. 
In case  of failure of transactions,  the amounts are deposited as receipt s in 
Treasury Suspense Major Head 8658 and the beneficiary-wise failed details 
are made available at the DDO login of iFMS . The DDO rectifies the failed 
account details of the beneficiary and saves them in the iFMS system. 
Thereafter, the Treasury Officer , as DDO , prepares the refund bill in iFMS.  
On approval, pay ment advice is generated and forwarded to the Central 
Electronic Processing Centre (CEPC), wh ich, in turn, generates and forwards 
the advice file to the Reserve Bank of India  (RBI). SMS to the beneficiary is 
triggered upo n the advice being sent to RBI by CEPC and payment being 
made directly to the beneficiary‟s bank account. 
The SSD Department , while accepting the observations of Audit , stated 
(September 2022) that some delay ha d occurred due to the requirement of 
necessary modifications in the portal and compliance thereof. For this purpose, 
meeting was held with NIC for modification and updation of software and 
some modifications were still pending. 
4.5.6 Delay in payment of arrears of PMS 
Due to delay in different stages , such as floating of advertisement, scrutiny at 
intermediary levels, preparation of bills at the Department level, delay in 
payment at the treasury level, non -validation of failed transactions , etc., there 
was delay in disbursement of PMS to students. Audit noted that arrear s of  
PMS, amounting to ₹  150.97 crore, were released to 70,037 students, after 
delays of 365 to 1,460 days, as shown in the table below. 
Table 4.13: Arrear payments of scholarship under PMS  
Year of 
disbursement Period of PMS 
Category-wise number of students and amount 
of PMS 
Category Number Amount (₹ in crore) 
2017-18 2012-13 to 
2016-17 
SC 3,73733 11.46 
ST 2,58334 6.43 
2018-19 2014-15 to 
2017-18 
SC 24,31335 58.86 
ST 14,25836 28.19 
2019-20 2015-16 to 
2018-19 
SC 1,774 4.51 
ST 1,253 3.28 
2020-21 2016-17 to 
2019-20 
SC 11,68137 23.97 
ST 10,43838 14.27 
Total   70,037 150.97 
(Source: Records of the SSD Department) 
                                                           
33 SC Beneficiaries: 2012-13: 01; 2014-15: 56; 2014-15 & 2015-16: 02; 2015-16: 82; 2015-
16 & 2016-17: 05 and 2016-17: 3,591 
34 ST Beneficiaries: 2012 -13: 22; 2013 -14: 36; 2015 -16: 92; 2015 -16: 48; 2015 -16 and 
2016-17: 01 and 2016-17: 2,379 
35 SC Beneficiaries: 2014 -15: 03; 2014 -15 & 2015 -16: 01; 2015 -16: 03; 2016 -17: 631 and 
2017-18: 23,675 
36 ST Beneficiaries: 2015-16: 01; 2016-17: 3,454 and 2017-18: 10,803 
37 SC Beneficiaries: 2016-17: 04; 2017-18: 29; 2018-19: 434 and 2019-20: 11,214 
38 ST Beneficiaries: 2016 -17 & 2017 -18: 01; 2017 -18: 20; 2018 -19: 163 and 2019 -20: 
10,254 

Chapter 4: Process Reengineering, Identification and Coverage of Beneficiaries 
43 
The objective of PMS is to support needy students in meeting their educational 
expenses in a timely manner. T herefore, disbursement of PMS after such  
inordinate delays and , in fact, even after the expiry of the academic session, 
defeated the very purpose of the scheme.  It also discouraged potential 
beneficiaries of the scheme from applying fo r these scholarships in future. 
Thus, introduction of DBT in payment of scholarships to ensure timely 
payment, had remained largely unachieved. 
The SSD Department , accepting the Audit observation , stated (September 
2022) that the applications had been  sanctioned at the fag end of the last 
quarter of a particular year and could not be processed for payment within the 
timelines.  
4.6 Inadequate process re-engineering for Medhabruti 
Applications for grant of the Medhabruti scholarship are invited once in a year 
and the notice in this regard is published  in the print media, on the e-
Medhabruti portal and on the website of the Higher Education Department. 
Although no timeline was fixed in the Guidelines for publishing of 
advertisement, the cut-off date for va lidation of application s at the institute 
level and submission of validated list , by OCAC , to Government , was 
stipulated for each year. Further, as per the guidelines, only verified online 
applications are considered for sanction  and p hysical applications are not 
accepted.  
Audit observed that even after Medhabruti was adopted as a DBT scheme, the 
Department neither attempted  to reduce intermediary levels , by carrying out  
necessary process re-engineering of the e -Medhabruti software , nor did it 
manage to eliminate the delays in release of scholarships to eligible students. 
The Higher Education Department (HED) stated (September 2022) that the 
Government had introduced a new portal (OSSP) from April 2021 , to reduce 
the intermediary level. The reply is not tenable , as there was also delay in 
scrutiny of applications and disbursement of scholarship s to student s‟ bank  
accounts.  
4.6.1 Delay in processing of Medhabruti scholarship applications 
During 2017 -18 to 2019 -20, 90,484 students were granted Medhabr uti 
scholarship, amounting to ₹  73.40 crore. Audit analysis revealed that 59,436 
students ( 66 per cent)  were disbursed scholarship s with average delays 
(median value) ranging from 98 to 203 days, as shown in Chart 4.2. 

Implementation of DBT in payment of Post Matric Scholarship to eligible students in the State 
44 
Chart 4.2: Delay in payment of Medhabruti 
 
 
Audit noticed that t he scheme workflow of Medhabruti  involves different 
levels (Figure 4.2) for processing of scholarship applications of Medhabruti, 
before final disbursement. It was found that there were delays at different 
levels, as summari sed in  Appendix 4.1. In this regard, Audit noted the 
following: 
 Delay in publication of advertisement: Advertisements for 2018 -19, 
2019-20 and 2020 -21, were floated by the Department in December 
2018, October 2019 and April 2021 , respectively, whereas no 
advertisements were published for the academic year  2017-18. Thus, 
the time taken in publishing advertisements , from the start of the  
academic session (July) , for soliciting applications , ranged between 
122 and 274 days. These delays had a trickle -down effect on the entire 
chain of subsequent steps of processing and sanction ing of 
applications, leading to substantial time lag between a student applying 
for the Medhabruti scholarship and actually receiving it. 
Delays occurring at different levels of the Medhabruti scholarship 
scheme, are exhibited in the figure given below. 
Figure 4. 6: Time taken  at different stages in processing Medhabruti 
applications 
 
 Delay by OCAC: Stipulated dates were provided for the students to 
apply for the scholarship and also for the institutes to  complete the 
validation process. After validation at the level of the institutes, the 
applications are forwarded to the Odisha Computer Application Centre 
35148 
25702 
29634 
23543 21307 
14586 
98 203 137 
0
10000
20000
30000
40000
2017-18 2018-19 2019-20
Delay in payment of Medhabruti 
Total no.of students granted scholarship No.of students affected due to delay
Average day of delay
Time taken in 
floating 
advertisements  
(122 to 274 days)  
Time taken at the 
OCAC level (11 to 
387 days)  
Time taken in 
generation of the token  
(45 days)  
& 
Delay in payment  
(5 to 15 days) 

Chapter 4: Process Reengineering, Identification and Coverage of Beneficiaries 
45 
(OCAC)39, whose role is to submit the list of applicants, under the 
„Fresh‟ as well as „Renewal‟ categories, after due verification, in terms 
of the guidelines. Although  the guidelines for Medhabruti allowed 
seven days‟ time to OCAC , for submitting the data, however, OCAC 
took 11 to 387 days in forwarding the validated data to the HE 
Department. This ultimately delayed the process of sanction of 
scholarships. Audit noted that OCAC only downloaded the applicants‟ 
data, validated by Principals from the eMedhabruti portal and 
categorised them under the „Fresh‟ and „Renewal‟ categories. The data 
was arranged in Excel file s and sent to the HE Department, through 
mail, CD, etc., for final selection . OCAC , despite being the IT  
Directorate of GoO , did not analyse the applications , to filter out 
ineligible applicants , including cases of multiple applications, 
applications submitted after the due date , etc. Audi t analysis of the 
eMedhabruti database, revealed that the system had accepted multiple 
applications from the same applicant, grant ed scholarships for period 
beyond the course duration, etc., as discussed in Paragraphs 5.1.2 and 
5.2.3. 
 Delay in payment of Medhabruti : As per the mechanism followed in 
iFMS, soon after the DDO submits the bill in iFMS, a token number 
with date is generated automatically, which indicates that the payment 
file has been  received in the system. Audit examined 53 scholarship 
bills of 59,436 students  for the period 2017 -18 to 2019-20 in the HE  
Department and noticed that , even after submission of the bills in 
iFMS, the treasuries took 3 to 4 5 days for generation  of the token in 
case of all the 53 bills (the date on which iFMS accepts the bill) . Thus, 
in all the test -checked cases, the treasuries concerned had committed 
delays in generating tokens. 
The HED stated (September 2022) that delay in advertisement was due to 
delay in the admission process and , in 2020 -21, due to outbreak of Covid. 
Further, introduction of OSSP also did not require involvement of OCAC. 
 
4.6.2 Non-validation of Medhabruti applications by the Principals 
Applications for Medhabruti scholarship s, relating to first year of the course 
period, are termed as „Fresh ‟, while applications for  the second and 
subsequent years of the course period, are termed as‟ Renewal‟. The Principals 
                                                           
39 OCAC is the T echnical Directorate of IT Department of GoO, set up in March 1985 , 
functioning as IT consultant to Government. 
Recommendation 4.5: 
Higher Education Department should ensure timely publication of 
advertisements seeking applications for Medhabruti, and OCAC as 
well as the treasuries, should process the applications and generate 
tokens for payments, respectively, without delays.  

Implementation of DBT in payment of Post Matric Scholarship to eligible students in the State 
46 
of the institutes validate the applications, i.e., verify the documents of the 
students to assess their eligibility and then forward them to HED, for 
necessary sanction and payment. 
The number of „Fresh‟ applications , submitted in case of Medhabruti 
scholarships, under various categories , such as Jr. Merit, Sr. Merit and PG 
Merit, as against the target s set by the Department during 2017 -20, were as 
follows: 
Table 4.14: Category-wise targets, applications and sanctions of Medhabruti 
Category 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 
Target Applied Sanctioned Target Applied Sanctioned Target Applied Sanctioned 
Jr. Merit 10,000 51,626 3,065 10,000 1,30,355 9,987 Stopped 
Sr. Merit 3,000 10,292 2,877 3,000 44,731 2,998 3,000 42,714 3,000 
PG Merit 1,500 2,553 64 1,500 3,756 1,500 1,500 3,150 1,500 
T&P Merit 10,000 5,251 141 10,000 3,605 2,018 10,000 2,462 1,783 
Total 24,500 69,722 6,147 24,500 1,82,447 16,503 14,500 48,326 6,283 
(Source: Guidelines and data furnished by HED and OCAC) 
While in case of Jr. Merit, Sr. Merit and PG Merit , the number of applications 
were 210 to 1086 per cent  of the target s set by the HE Department  during 
2017-20, the same were only 38 per cent in case of T&P Merit. 
Audit noticed that  despite fixation of cut -off dates for validation of 
applications, in case of „Fresh‟ applications of 85,814 students , who had 
secured the minimum prescribed marks , their applications had not been 
validated by the Principals concerned (Appendix 4.2). The HED had neither 
monitored the issue of non -validation, nor initiated any action against the 
defaulting Principals. Thus, the prime objective of delivery of benefits, 
through accurate identification and targeting of beneficiaries , as envisaged 
under DBT , was defeated , to a large extent. Similarly, in respect of 63,517 
applications for „Renewal‟ of scholarship, 13,975 applications had not been 
validated by the Principals of the concerned institutes . Year-wise number of 
applications under both „Fresh‟ and „Renewal‟ categories , that were not  
validated by the Principals, during 2017-18 to 2019-20, are shown in the table 
below: 
Table 4.15: No. of applications, not validated for Medhabruti  
Year No. of applications Total 
Fresh Renewal 
2017-18 6,897 0 6,897 
2018-19 47,147 6,190 53,337 
2019-20 31,770 7,785 39,555 
Total 85,814 13,975 99,789 
(Source: Records and data of Higher Education Department) 
 
In the absence of validation, their applications were not considered for 
sanction and payment of Medhabruti scholarship s, although they were eligible 
for such benefit, amounting to ₹ 7.17 crore (Appendix 4.3).  
Audit observed that the HED, despite fixing cut off dates for timely disposal 
of applications, neither monitored the progress of validation of applications  
nor initiated any action against the defaulting Principals. Also, there was no 
dashboard in the  e-Medhabruti software , for viewing  the details of 

Chapter 4: Process Reengineering, Identification and Coverage of Beneficiaries 
47 
applications received, validated and pending , at the institute level, for 
appropriate monitoring by the HED.  
Thus, the Higher Education Department  had failed to streamline the processes 
involved through system reengineering of the Medhabruti  scholarship cycle , 
so as to reduce delays and intermediary levels, as envisaged under DBT 
objectives. 
The HED accepted (September 2022) the Audit observation and stated that the 
department had  decided to form a scholarship committee , at the l evel of 
institutions, to address the issue. 
Recommendation 4.6: 
The Higher Education Department may take concrete steps to ensure 
that applications are processed by Principals in a time bound 
manner to ensure that no eligible applicant s are deprived of  the 
benefits of the scheme. Also, the Principals concerned should be 
made accountable for delay as well as for non -processing of 
applications. 

 

CChhaapptteerr  55  
Deficient control measures in IT 
Systems  

 

Chapter 5: Deficient control measures in IT Systems 
49 
Chapter 5 
Deficient control measures in IT Systems 
 
The Chapter contains the various deficiencies existing in the softwares 
(PRERANA, eMedhabruti and OSSP), which resulted in acceptance of 
multiple applications from the same students in the same year, excess 
payment beyond the prescribed limit, acceptance of applications of 
ineligible beneficiaries, etc. Audit analysed the data dump of the 
softwares, records of SSD and HED Departments, sampled DWOs and 
institutes and noticed that: 
 PRERANA and eMedhabruti management software were neither 
interlinked with each other nor were they linked with scholarship 
portals of other departments, till 2019-20, due to which, the same 
students had availed scholarships on multiple schemes, at the 
same time.  
 The system lacked proper validation controls to prevent duplicate 
applications, as a result of which, 973 beneficiaries were found to 
have been paid ₹  2.43 crore , during 2017 -20. Even after 
introduction of the Odisha State Scholarship Portal (OSSP), from 
2020-21, the deficiencies in acceptance of multiple applications  
from the same students, persisted.  
 There were instances of excess payment of maintenance 
allowance (MA) to students. Further, there was short sanction of 
PMS of ₹ 80.29 lakh, to 17,739 OBC students , during 2017-18, 
as MA was disbursed for eight, instead of ten months.  
 Due to non -Aadhaar seeding of the bank accounts of 
beneficiaries, 1,03,369 beneficiaries, under SSD and HED , were 
deprived of the benefits of PMS and Medhabruti scheme. 
 In the absence of an audit trail in eMedhabruti, the time taken by 
the intermediary levels to process the applications and incorrect 
validations made by different authorit ies, could not be traced. 
The software also lacked presence of master table of different 
boards, which resulted in acceptance of absurd marks in the 
system. 
 Further, the Aadhaar details were neither encrypted as per the 
Aadhaar Act, nor were they captured correctly, as required under 
DBT. 
 In 1,466 out of 97,810 cases, all the requisite information, i.e., 
income certificate s, resident certificate s, mark sheet s, bank 
details and Aadhaar numbers, had been uploaded , but the 
Principals had not verified and approved the data in time. 
  

Implementation of DBT in payment of Post Matric Scholarship to eligible students in the State 
50 
5. IT systems used for processing applications for scholarships 
The SSD Department, Government of Odisha, managed the implementation of 
PMS scheme through a web -based software application 40 called PRERANA, 
from 2011-12 to 2019-20. The implementation of the Medhabruti scheme was 
carried out by the HE Department through the e -Medhabruti software 
application41, from 2016 -17 to 2019 -20. While National Informatics Centre 
(NIC), Bhopal, had developed PRERANA, for PMS scholarships, a private IT 
firm had conceptualised e-Medhabruti. 
In 2020 -21, the State Government introduced a new software , namely the 
Odisha State Scho larship Portal42 (OSSP), for management of al l post matric 
scholarships across departments , to enable more efficient processing of 
applications. The SSD Department started processing scholarship applications 
through OSSP , from 2020 -21 onwards, but HED had n ot started using the 
same for Medhabruti till 2021. 
The State DBT Cell  (SDC) conducted (February 2018 and June 2019) 
assessment studies of the scheme workflow of both PRERANA and e -
Medhabruti and recommended necessary changes in the software . It also 
recommended changes  in the implementation processes , such as , (i) data 
sanitisation, (ii) onboarding of scholarships to PFMS , (iii) integration with 
NPCI mapper , (iv) automation of schemes , to reduce processing tim e and 
erroneous data validation, (v) use of MIS, for efficient grievance handling, (vi) 
creation of helpdesk , etc. On analysis of PRERANA and e -Medhabruti 
software applications, Audit noticed  (March 2021) that the Departments  had 
not made the recommended changes in the software . Further, the SDC  had 
also not follow ed-up with the two Departments  about the implementation of 
its recommendations. Various deficiencies, in system design, input, processing 
and validation controls , noticed in aforementioned  software applications, are 
discussed in the succeeding paragraphs.  
5.1 Deficient application controls in the IT systems 
The User Requirement Specification s (URS), System Requirement 
Specifications (SRS) and Detailed Project Report  (DPR) of PRERANA, were 
not made available  to Audit , on the ground that  the software had been  
developed by NIC, Bhopal long back. The technical documents of e -
Medhabruti and OSSP were also not furnished by OCAC . However, on 
analysis of  the PRERANA, e -Medhabruti and OSSP databases , as well as 
payment data and physical records at the unit level , it was found that the 
systems were deficient in terms of application controls and were, therefore, 
unable to prevent  not just input , but also processing , of junk/ duplicate data, 
relating to payments of scholarships.  
Audit (i) test-checked records relating to sanction and paym ent of PMS of 98 
institutes and (ii) conducted JPI of 16 institutes . It found instances of receipt 
and payment of PMS to non -existent students/ institutes, as well as  instances 
                                                 
40 http://www.mpsc.mp.nic.in/scholarships/ 
41 http://www.medhabruti.org/ 
42 https://scholarship.odisha.gov.in/website/home 

Chapter 5: Deficient control measures in IT Systems 
51 
of payment of  multiple scholarship s to same student against  multiple 
applications submitted, as discussed in the following paragraphs. 
5.1.1 Acceptance of applications of same students for different 
scholarships 
As per PMS scheme guideline s in regard to  SC/ ST/ OBC/ EBC students, a 
scholarship holder under PMS should not hold any other scholarship/ stipend.  
Similarly, as per the guidelines of Medhabruti, students already availing 
scholarship for pursuing higher studies, under any other scheme of the State or 
Central Government, shall not be eligible for the Medhabruti scholarship. 
Audit found grant of different scholarships to the same students , during the 
same period, as stated below: 
 On examination of 19,54,187 applications for PMS and Medhabruti for 
the period 2017-20, Audit found that 11,880 students (0.61 per cent) 
had been granted both PMS (₹  6.91 crore) and Medhabruti (₹  6.80 
crore), contrary to the guidelines of both the scholarship schemes. 
 During 2017-21, 18 students of 15 institutes, in four sample districts43, 
were paid Banishree44 scholarship, amounting to ₹ 0.54 lakh and, at the 
same time, they were also paid PMS of ₹ 0.85 lakh. 
 Similarly, during 2018-21, although 56 nursing students of Jharsuguda, 
Kalahandi and Mayurbhanj  districts, got scholars hip under the 
National Health  Mission, amounting to ₹  32.97 lakh, they were also 
paid PMS of ₹ 35.18 lakh, during the same period. 
Audit observed that PRERANA and eMedhabruti management software were 
neither interlinked with each other , nor were they linked with scholarship 
portals of  other departments ( e.g., Banishree of the Social Security & 
Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities  Department), due to which 
applications of the same students, for different scholarships, at the same time , 
could not be detected.  
The SSD Department stat ed (September 2022) that the composite portal , 
OSSP, with a single gateway of applications , for scholarship schemes of 
different departments, was developed to obviate this problem. The reply is not 
acceptable as, even in the OSSP portal , multiple applicati ons of the same 
beneficiaries could be accepted. 
5.1.2 Acceptance of multiple applications from same students 
Audit found that control measures in PRERANA, e -Medhabruti and OSSP , 
were not adequate to check multiple applications from the same students , 
leading to payment of the same scholarship , to the same student , more than 
once, during 2017-21. 
 During 2017 -20, 14,22,413 applications from SC/ ST/ OBC/  EBC 
students were received for PMS in PRERANA. Of these , 1,28,104 
applications (9 per cent ) were foun d to have been received from the 
same students, for studying different courses in different institutes. The 
                                                 
43  Kalahandi, Malkanagiri, Nayagarh and Sundargarh 
44  Government of Odisha provides Banishree scholarships to children with disabilities  

Implementation of DBT in payment of Post Matric Scholarship to eligible students in the State 
52 
Case Study 
A student of Amravati Polytechnic, Rairangpur, Mayurbhanj district , 
was found to have taken admission in Diploma in Electrical branch , in 
the 2017-18 session and applied for PMS. For the same year, the student 
was found to have applied for PMS as  a 1st year student of Diploma in 
Industrial Safety in Odisha Safety Training Institute, Rairangpur, 
Mayurbhanj. The student was paid PMS from both the institut es, for 
2017-18, amounting to  ₹ 70,000 (₹  34,500 fro m the Amravati 
Polytechnic and ₹ 35,500 from the Odisha Safety Training Institute). 
students, in these cases , had filed applications between 2 and 306 
times, during the given time period. Of this, PMS, amounting to ₹ 2.43 
crore, was granted to 973 applica nts. Detailed analysis showed that 
these 973 students were simultaneously enrolled, in the same academic 
year, in another course  (s), in different institut es and even in different 
districts, such as  Balasore, Khurda, Keonjhar, Jajpur , Sundargarh, 
Cuttack and Bhadrak , etc. Multiple applications, from students from 
different institutes, could be registered, due to lack of input control s in 
the PRERANA software, to prevent entry of duplicate applications 
from the same student s, pertaining to same/  different institutions , as 
detailed in Appendix 5.1. 
 Although GoO, introduced OSSP as a common portal for all post -
matric scholarships, across departments, from 2020-21, the lacunae in 
IT controls were not fully resolved. Audit noted that , during 2020-21, 
out of 5,26,434  applications for PMS , received through OSSP, 1,783 
applications (0.34 per cent) were found to be from the same students 
applying from different institutes. The duplicate application s were 
rejected during manual scrutiny. Thus, the system was not adequately 
equipped with control tools to detect and reject duplicate applications.  
 In case of e-Medhabruti, although 17,291 out of 5,31,774 applications, 
received during 2017-20, were duplicate applications, those could not 
be detected by the IT system. However, no payments were made in 
these cases , as the se were detected during manual scrutiny. Despite 
this, the fact remained that multiple applications could be  accepted 
through an IT System , due to the absence of key control measures in 
the system. 
Thus, lack of validation control s in the software created scope for multiple 
registrations by the same applicants and also increased the workload of the 
verifying authorities, due to reliance on manual scrutiny.  
The SSD Department stated (September 2022) that , prior to 2019-20, Aadhaar 
was not mandatory and the software was not designed to detect multiple 
applications from the same student . Students used to apply by : (i) altering the 
matriculation code (ii) altering the spelling of self and parents  and (iii) giving 
different bank accounts, etc. In such cases, duplicates were difficult to detect, 
by means of the functionality in Microsoft Excel. The Department had tried to 

Chapter 5: Deficient control measures in IT Systems 
53 
detect duplications and also rejected many cases , but could not prevent all the 
cases.  
The reply is not tenable, as GoI had directed completion of Aadhaar enrolment 
by 2017, which the Department could not fulfil . The  deficiencies in the 
software and lack of effort s to adopt vari ous parameters to check duplicates 
resulted in payment of multiple scholarships to the same students. 
5.1.3 Grant of scholarship to same students for different courses of same 
stage 
As per the PMS guidelines, candidates who , after passing one stage of 
education, are studying in the same stage of education , in a different subject, 
e.g., Intermediate of Arts after Intermediate of Science, or Bachelor of 
Commerce after Bachelor of Arts, shall not be eligible for PMS. 
Audit found that, in four sampled districts , 1,668 students, who had pursued 
different courses at the same stage later, had been granted PMS , amounting to 
₹ 3.71 crore , during 2017 -20, as found in PRERANA  database 
(Appendix 5.2). Due to lack of validation controls in the PRERANA  software, 
along with the fact that Aadh aar was not made mandatory up  to 2019-20, the 
system was unable to  detect and reject applications of students, who had 
applied for the same stage of education again. This led to inadmissible 
payment of ₹ 3.71 crore, besides defeating the objective of the DBT to prevent 
financial leakage. 
In reply, the SSD Department (September 2022) stated that the validation 
control was not available in PRERANA. However, the same ha d been 
included in OSSP. The reply is not tenable , as no provision had been made to 
restrict applications under the same stage of education, in the OSSP software. 
5.2 Deficient control measures for scrutiny of eligibility for PMS 
5.2.1 OBC applicants with less than 50 per cent in  the last examination 
were accepted by the system 
As per the applicable guidelines, OBC students were eligible for PMS 
scholarships only if the marks scored in the last examination were at least 50 
per cent. Audit noted that PRERANA , as well as the OSSP software, had not 
been appropriately prov isioned to filter out ineligible categor ies of students , 
like multiple applications from same students, OBC  applicants with less than 
50 per cent marks in the last examination, etc.  
Recommendation 5.1: 
OSSP computer application as well other such applications developed by 
other departments  for managing scholarships , should be interlinked 
with each other , to arrest the incidence  of payment of multiple 
scholarships to the same students. 

Implementation of DBT in payment of Post Matric Scholarship to eligible students in the State 
54 
Audit noticed from  the PRERANA database that , out of a total of 14,22,413 
applications received during 2017-20, 4,16,478 applications had been received 
from OBC students.  
Scrutiny of records revealed that , out of 4,16,478 OBC applicants, 27,544 
students had secured less than 50 per cent marks. Due to absence of 
appropriate validation controls in the system to reject applications of ineligible 
applicants, the applications were scrutini sed manually. In the manual scrutiny 
process, ineligibility , in case of 1,719 applications who had secured less 
marks, was not detected and they were paid PMS amounting to ₹  49.22 lakh. 
This included 10 OBC applicants in five 45 out of eight sample d districts, who 
had not secured 50 per cent marks in their last examinations , but were 
awarded scholarship amounting to ₹  25,420. This was indicative of the fact 
that the PRERANA portal was not adequately equipped with necessary 
validation control tools to filter out the ineligible applicants. 
The above deficiencies continued in OSSP also, which replaced PRERANA 
from 2020 -21. In OSSP , out of 1,39,453 applications received from OBC 
students for 2020-21, 1,750 applicants were found to have secured less than 50 
per cent marks in their last examination, of which, 48 applicants were granted 
PMS, amounting to ₹ 3.35 lakh. 
Thus, due to absen ce of mapping of  the provisions of scheme business rules , 
both in PRERANA and OSSP systems, ineligible applications could not be 
eliminated, which led to payment of PMS , amounting to ₹  52.57 lakh , to 
ineligible applicants, during 2017-21. 
In reply, the SSD  Department stated (September 2022) that the validation 
control was not available in PRERANA but the same has been included in 
OSSP. The reply is  not tenable , as applications from OBC students , with 
marks below 50 per cent in the previous examination, were accepted in OSSP 
also. 
5.2.2 Payment of PMS to applicants having parental income  above the 
prescribed norms 
PMS guidelines and instruction s of the SSD Department provide that ST/ SC 
students, whose parental income from all sources , does not exceed ₹ 2.50 lakh 
per annum, during 2017-21, are eligible for PMS. Similarly, for OBC students, 
the parental annual income ceiling was fixed at ₹  1 lakh, up to August 2018, 
₹ 1.50 lakh up  to 2019-20 and ₹  2.50 lakh from 2020 -21 onwards. In case of 
EBC students, the ceiling of per annum parental income was fixed at ₹  1 lakh 
for 2017 -20 and ₹  2.50 lakh from  2020-21 onwards. Besides, the guidelines 
also stated that the parental annual income , as mentioned in the Income 
Certificate, issued by the competent authority of the Revenue and Disaster 
Management (RDM) Department only, shall be taken into consideration. The 
validity of Income Certificate so issued , shall be three years from the date of 
issue, as per the resolution (September 2018) of the RDM Department. 
Audit noticed that, in contravention of the above eligibility criteria, students 
having parental income of more than the ceiling fixed, were found to have 
been granted PMS during 2017-21. Category-wise number of applications that 
                                                 
45 Bolangir, Jharsuguda, Kalahandi, Malkangiri and Nayagarh 

Chapter 5: Deficient control measures in IT Systems 
55 
were accepted in the system , in cases where the parental income was more 
than the ceiling fixed , the number of applications sanctioned and amount s 
paid, are detailed in Table 5.1: 
Table 5.1: Abstract of ineligible PMS applications sanctioned and paid 
Category of 
students 
Number of 
applications 
accepted 
Number of 
applications 
sanctioned 
Amount of PMS 
paid  
(₹ in lakh) 
PRERANA 
SC and ST 3,916 51 3.26 
OBC/ SEBC 5,675 276 14.56 
EBC 122 0 0 
Sub-total 9,713 327 17.82 
OSSP 
SC and ST 947 1 0.06 
OBC/ SEBC 633 0 0.00 
EBC 81 0 0.00 
Sub-total 1,661 1 0.06 
Grant Total 11,374 328 17.88 
(Source: PRERANA and OSSP data dump and payment file of SSD Department)  
Audit observed that the PRERANA portal did not have requisite inbuilt 
controls to reject the applications that did not fulfil the eligibility criteria with 
reference to parental income. Th e same deficiency continued in OSSP portal 
also, which was used from 2020 -21. Income , as per the Income Certificate , 
was entered in the OSSP and PRERANA systems, but due to absence of 
control features, applicants not fulfilling the income criteria could not be 
filtered out. Thus, the validation control measures built in the portals did not 
help in identifying ineligible cases and , therefore, correct processing of 
applications depended upon manual intervention.  
Out of the 11,374 ineligible applications, which were manually checked, 328 
applications (2.88 per cent) were sanctioned PMS erroneously. The IT systems 
were not fully reliant in terms of built -in controls and remained dependent on 
manual vetting for judging the eligibility of applicants for PMS . In eight 
sample districts, audit examined records of DWOs relating to sanction of PMS 
and found the following irregularities i n the income certificates submitted by 
the applicants, along with their applications: 
 Invalid income certificates : RDM Department issued orders in 
September 2018 that the validity of income certificates shall be three 
years from the date of issue. In six sample districts 46, income 
certificates, in support of their parental incomes, furnished by 103 
applicants, for the years from 2018 -19 to 2020 -21, were found to  be 
more than three years old and, hence, were invalid, as per the said 
orders. Both systems, i.e., PRERANA and OSS P, did not have any 
feature to capture date of issue of income certificates. Hence, scrutiny 
of validity of income certificates was not possible through the systems 
and was left to manual examination. However, due diligence had not 
been exercised during  manual scrutiny, with the time -barred income 
certificates furnished being accepted and PMS , amounting to ₹  10.90 
lakh, being paid for the period 2018-21. Besides, tampering of names 
                                                 
46 Bolangir, Gajapati, Jharsuguda, Kalahandi, Malkangiri and Nayagarh 

Implementation of DBT in payment of Post Matric Scholarship to eligible students in the State 
56 
of two beneficiaries, in the income certificates, during 2018-20, in the 
Malkangiri district, were noticed. The beneficiaries had been paid PMS 
amounting to ₹ 5,770.  
 High parental income : DWOs of Nayagarh and Jharsuguda had 
sanctioned PMS amounting to ₹  1.36 lakh, in favour of 11 applicants , 
during 2017 -20, whose parental inco me, as found from the income 
certificates attached to their applications, was above the prescribed 
income limit. The parental income, as per the income certificates, in 
the aforesaid cases, ranged between ₹ 2.42 to ₹ 4.96 lakh per annum, in 
case of OBC students and ₹ 2.98 to ₹ 5.78 lakh , in case of SC/  ST 
students.  
Audit also noticed , from the records of the DWO, Malkangiri , that PMS , 
amounting to ₹  1.59 lakh , had been sanctioned in favour of 27 SC/  ST 
applicants, during 2017 -21, wherein the caste certific ates, attached to their 
applications, had been  issued in names of persons other than those of the 
applicants. 
In the reply, the SSD Department stated (September 2022) that the validation 
control was not available in PRERANA but the same ha d been included in 
OSSP. The reply is not tenable , as applications, with the above discrepancies, 
were accepted by OSSP and also seen during checking of applications. 
5.2.3 Payment of PMS for the period beyond the course duration 
As per Para VIII of the PMS and Medhabruti guidelines, the award of 
scholarship, once made, will be payable from the stage at which it is given t ill 
the completion of the course. 
On analysis of the PRERANA, OSSP and eMedhabruti databases , it was 
observed that: 
 During 2017-21, 832 students were paid PMS for period s beyond the 
course duration. For instance, 84 students , enrolled for +2 course  
(which is a two -year course), were paid scholarships for three to five 
years. In 279 institutes , across 30 districts of the State, 832 app licants 
had been paid scholarship for durations more than their course 
durations, resulting in excess expenditure of ₹  2.46 crore, as shown in 
the table below: 
Table 5.2: Payment of PMS beyond course duration during 2017-21 
Sl. No. Year No. of beneficiaries Excess payment (₹ in 
lakh) 
1 2017-18 524 174.89 
2 2018-19 285 62.93 
3 2019-20 22 8.01 
4 2020-21 1 0.32 
 Total 832 246.15 
(Source: Analysis of PRERANA and iFMS databases) 
 Further analysis of the eMedhabruti  database and cross -verification 
with the iFMS database showed that 638 students were paid 
scholarships during 2017 -20, in the category of Junior Merit, Senior 

Chapter 5: Deficient control measures in IT Systems 
57 
Merit and PG Merit, beyond the prescribed course period , ranging 
from one to three years, resulting in excess payment of ₹ 0.28 crore. 
Thus, the system was not designed to link the payment of scholarship with the 
duration of the course involved , so as to have an inbuilt check facility to limit 
the scholarship payments to the course duration. Failure to have such inbuilt 
systems, resulted in  excess payment of ₹  2.74 crore and, to that extent, the 
objective of DBT was not achieved. 
In reply, the SSD Department (September 2022) stated that , due to no n-
availability of  validation check in PRERANA, students were able to create 
multiple IDs for the same course year , in two academic years. However, in 
OSSP, all the courses were mapped with the prescribed course duration and 
suitable checks were applied. The reply is not tenable , as, in OSSP, the 
discrepancy is still continuing. 
5.2.4 Non-payment of PMS to eligible OBC beneficiaries  
DBT envisages accurate identification and targeting of beneficiaries by 
making the system of delivery of benefits more efficient. The PMS guidelines 
for OBC, 2018, stipulate inter alia that: (i) all eligible OBC candidates will be 
given scholarship, subject to fulfillment of eligibility criteria prescribed for the 
purpose (ii) the State would be free to allocate funds from the State  Plan, over 
and above the level of their committed liability 47 and the Central Assistance 
received, for funding additional scholarships under the scheme. 
Audit noted that 1,82,153 OBC applicants of the State applied for PMS during 
2018-19, of which 1,38,030 applicants were paid PMS and remaining 44,123 
applications, although sanctioned scholarships by DWOs, had not been paid , 
as of March 2021. In four out of eight sampled districts, Audit found that no 
payment of PMS had been made , in favour of 5,854 sanctioned applications 48 
for 2018-19, as of March 2021 , despite the same having been sanctioned by 
DWOs, during November 2018 to February 2019. 
SSD Department and DWOs of the sample d districts attributed the reason for 
non-payment of PMS to non -availability of funds. However, contrary to the 
assigned reasons, Audit found that the SSD Department had surrendered 
₹ 25.89 crore from the budgetary allocation for PMS during 2018 -19, instead 
of utilising the same towards payment of PMS to OBC applicants . Besides, 
denial of benefits to targeted beneficiaries , this issue also underlines poor 
budgetary management at the level of the SSD Department.  
No reply was furnished by the SSD Department. 
                                                 
47 Expenditure incurred by a State on a scheme during the terminal year of any plan period  
48 Mayurbhanj: 4,918, Jharsuguda: 650, Malkangiri:79 and Sundargarh: 207 
Recommendation 5.2: 
The scheme implementation Rules should be properly mapped and 
validation controls s trengthened, in the OSSP system , to restrict 
sanctions to ineligible applicants and prevent excess payments to 
beneficiaries. 

Implementation of DBT in payment of Post Matric Scholarship to eligible students in the State 
58 
5.2.5  Excess/ short payment of Maintenance Allowance 
PMS guidelines envisage d payment of Maintenance Allowance  (MA) from 
1 April or from the month of admission, whichever is later, up to the month in 
which examinations are completed, at the end of the academic year , subject to 
a maximum period of 10 months , in case of  students residing in recogni sed 
hostels. MA for day scholars is less than that for hostellers. The rate of MA for 
hostellers and day scholars remained unchanged during 2017-21, as mentioned 
in the table below. 
Table 5.3: Rates of MA for day scholars/ hostellers 
Group 
Day Scholar 
rate per 
month, for 
OBC/ SEBC 
and EBC 
Hosteller rate 
per month, 
for OBC/ 
SEBC and 
EBC 
Day Scholar 
rate per 
month, for SC 
and ST 
Hosteller 
rate per 
month, for 
SC and ST 
(Figures are in ₹ per scholar per year) 
Group-I 350 750 550 1,200 
Group-II 335 510 530 1,000 
Group-III 210 400 300 1,000 
Group-IV 160 260 230 1,000 
(Source: Guidelines of  GoI on PMS for SC/  ST/ OBC/ EBC and instructions of SSD 
Department) 
In the OSSP database for the year 2020 -21, the above irregularity also 
continued, as 80,965 students were paid MA for more than 10 months , 
resulting in excess payment of ₹ 37.56 crore. 
Test-check of hostel records, payment details and student’s admission 
registers, in selected institutes of the sampled districts , revealed cases of 
excess/ short payment of MA to the students , due to non-mapping of business 
rules of the PMS scheme in the PRERANA database, the details of which are 
discussed below: 
 Payment of MA for more than 10 months: In four sample d districts, 
MA was paid to 5,270 students, for 11 to 12 months in a year , instead 
of the maximum 10 months , during 2017 -20, resulting in excess 
payment of ₹ 24.63 lakh, as shown in the table below: 
Table 5.4: Excess payment of Maintenance Allowance to hostellers 
District No. of 
students 
Amount due 
(₹ ) 
Amount drawn 
(₹ ) 
Excess Amount 
paid (₹ ) 
Gajapati 424 12,15,000 14,45,390 2,30,390 
Jharsuguda 248 5,37,100 6,44,520 1,07,420 
Nayagarh 2,813 56,37,350 67,64,820 11,27,470 
Sundargarh 1,785 49,92,950 59,91,060 9,98,110 
Total 5,270 1,23,82,400 1,48,45,790 24,63,390 
(Source: Payment data provided by DWOs)  
 Payment of MA beyond the admission date: In two49 institutes in the 
Jharsuguda district, 258 students were paid MA for 10 months in a 
year, during 2017-20, on the basis of the dates mentioned in the hostel 
admission register. Audit, however, found that their dates of admission 
                                                 
49 Jet ANM Training Centre and the ITC, Debadihi 

Chapter 5: Deficient control measures in IT Systems 
59 
in the course s were later than the hostel admission dates. Since 
admission in hostel cannot be allowed before taking admission in the 
course, the dates entered in the hostel admission registers were not 
correct. Moreover, as per the guidelines , the dates of admission in the 
course were considered for payment of MA  and, hence, the dates of 
admissions in hostels should not have been factored in for payment of 
scholarships. As a result, excess payment of  ₹ 7.13 lakh  was made 
towards MA. 
 Payment of MA to students of institutes having no hostel facility: As 
per the PMS guidelines, students of institutes having no hostel facility 
shall be paid MA at the rate applicable for a day scholar , as shown in 
Table 5. 3 above. In five sample d districts, 235 students , of 10 
institutions, were paid MA amounting to  ₹ 16.19 lakh , as hostellers , 
during 2017 -21, although no hostel facility was available in  the said 
institutions. Details are shown in the table below: 
Table 5. 5: Payment of MA to  students, as hostellers,  in institutes with no  hostel 
facility 
District No. of 
students 
No. of 
institutions 
Amount 
due 
Amount 
paid 
Excess 
amount 
paid 
(Figures are in ₹ ) 
Gajapati 31 1 71,300 3,07,000 2,35,700 
Jharsuguda 2 1 4,600 20,000 15,400 
Malkangiri 12 1 36,000 1,20,000 84,000 
Mayurbhanj 52 3 1,19,600 3,97,000 2,77,400 
Sundargarh 138 4 8,90,000 18,96,600 10,06,600 
Total 235 10 11,21,500 27,40,600 16,19,100 
(Source: Institutions registers/ records) 
 Payment of MA to day scholars at higher rate: In seven sample d 
districts, the names of 299 students of 21 institutes were not found in 
the hostel registers of th e concerned institutes , during 2017 -21, 
indicating that they were day scholars. However, they were paid MA at 
rates applicable for hostellers, resulting in excess payment of ₹  19.66 
lakh, as shown in the table below: 
Table 5.6: Payment of MA to day scholars as hostellers 
District No. of 
students 
No. of 
institutions 
Amount 
due 
Amount 
drawn 
Excess 
amount paid 
(Figures are in ₹ ) 
Bolangir 37 5 86,500 3,70,000 2,83,500 
Gajapati 16 3 52,150 1,55,000 1,02,850 
Jharsuguda 25 2 1,26,500 2,50,000 1,23,500 
Malkangiri 125 3 3,11,300 12,50,000 9,38,700 
Mayurbhanj 32 3 29,900 1,23,500 93,600 
Nayagarh 2 1 4,600 20,000 15,400 
Sundargarh 62 4 8,99,600 13,08,400 4,08,800 
Total 299 21 15,10,550 34,76,900 19,66,350 
(Source: Payment files by DWOs, Records of the institutions) 
In reply, the SSD Department stated (September 2022) that the MA for fresh 
students was calculated from the date of admission in hostel , till the end of 

Implementation of DBT in payment of Post Matric Scholarship to eligible students in the State 
60 
academic year , in the Portal and , in case of renewal of students, MA was 
payable from the month following the month up to which scholarship was paid 
in the previous year, which goes up to 12 months. The reply is not tenable , as 
guidelines provided for payment of scholarship for only 10 months in an 
academic year. 
5.2.6 Payment of MA at higher rate, due to absence of control measures in 
PRERANA and OSSP 
Para IV of PMS guidelines provide that MA would be paid at the rate of 1/3rd 
of hosteller’s rate, if the scholars are entitled to free boarding and/ or lodging. 
Audit noted that the SSD Department provided free boarding and lodging in 
the Higher Secondary Schools (HSS) run by it. Hence, the students of these 
schools were entitled to MA at the rate of 1/3 rd of the rate applicable for 
hostellers. 
In the absence of data on MA , in the PMS data dump relating to PRERANA, 
the rate at which MA was paid to students of HSS run by the SSD Department, 
during 2017-20, could not be ascertained. However, in three sample d districts, 
Audit found that all 632 students of six HSS had been paid MA at full rate.  
The data dump of OSSP, for the year 2020-21, included details on payment of 
MA. On scrutiny of the same,  Audit found that all the 5,233 students , of 47 
HSS in the State, had been paid MA at full rate, as shown in the table below: 
Table 5.7: Excess payment of MA to hostellers 
Name of the Institute No. of 
Students 
Amount excess paid 
(₹ ) 
On test-check of physical records in sampled districts for 2017-20 
Government (SSD) HSS, Gopalpur, Kalahandi 67 4,46,689 
Government (SSD) HSS, MV-79, Malkangiri 146 9,73,333 Government (SSD) HSS, Mathili, Malkangiri 
Government (SSD) HSS, Badampahar, 
Mayurbhanj 419 24,22,787 Government (SSD) HSS, Bankati, Mayurbhanj 
Government (SSD) HSS, Badhunia, Mayurbhanj 
Sub-total 632 38,42,809 
On analysis of the OSSP database for 2020-21 
Government (SSD) HSS (47 numbers) 5,233 3,32,30,129 
Grand Total 5,865 3,70,72,938 
(Source: Payment data provided by DWOs and Institution’s Records) 
Thus, excess amount of ₹  3.71 crore, towards MA , had been paid to 5,865 
students, during 2017-21. Students of HSS, run by the SSD Department , were 
provided with free boarding/ lodging and this had a bearing on the rate of MA 
entitled, but the same had not been taken care of in both the PRERANA and 
OSSP software s. As a result, excess payments were made , which ultimately 
defeated the objective of DBT to arrest leakage of Government funds. 
In reply, the SSD Department stated (September 2022) that the MA 
component of PMS, for boarder students of SSD run by HSS, was credited in 
the school bank account , for smooth mess management at school level  at full 
rate. The reply is not convincing as funds for free foo ding and lodging were 
provided separately by the SSD Department, hence, full payment of MA for 
that matter was not a necessity. 

Chapter 5: Deficient control measures in IT Systems 
61 
5.2.7  Short sanction of MA to eligible OBC beneficiaries of ₹ 80.29 lakh 
As per the PMS guidelines, MA is payable from 1 April or from the month of 
admission, whichever is later, up to the month of the examination, for a period 
of 10 months in a year. 
Audit noticed , in six sample d districts50, that MA was disbursed to 17,739 
OBC students51, during 2017-18, for eight months, instead of ten months. The 
reasons cited by DWO s for the short sanction of ₹  80.29 lakh was non -
availability of funds and short sanction by the SSD Department. Contrary to 
the reply, Audit found that the Department had surrendered ₹  5.01 crore 
during the same year , instead of utili sing the same , highlighting poor 
budgetary management by the Department. 
No reply was furnished by the SSD Department. 
5.3 Aadhaar seeding of bank accounts of beneficiaries 
5.3.1 Disbursement of PMS to non-seeded bank accounts 
The notification (February 2017) of Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment, (MoSJE), GoI , stipulated Aadhaar as an identity document 
under Section 7 of Aadhaar Act, 2016, for all scholarship schemes, with effect 
from 16 February 2017. 
Audit found that , although the SSD Department had made Aadhaar a 
prerequisite for applying for PMS in June 2019, no order was issued  in regard 
to making linking of Aadhaar , to the bank account s of the beneficiaries, 
mandatory. The non-Aadhaar seeded bank accounts had the risk of acceptance 
of beneficiary name s, with account number s and IFSC code s belonging to 
others, during the payment process. In the absence of such measures, payment 
of scholarship to bank accounts , not seeded with Aadhaar , continued. During 
2020-21, out o f 3,12,823 beneficiaries who were disbursed PMS, the bank 
accounts of only 70,953 (23 per cent) beneficiaries were Aadhaar seeded. In 
the sampled districts, non-seeding of bank accounts with Aadhaar ranged from 
78 to 80 per cent. 
Discrepancies in  the names and bank accounts of PMS beneficiaries were 
noticed in PRERANA. On analysis of the PRERANA database, it was noticed 
that, during the period 2017 -20, in 9,288 instances , while the bank account 
numbers and IFSC codes were the same, the beneficiary names were different. 
It was also found that some of these beneficiaries were from the same 
institutes.  
With regard to eight sampled districts, 1,155 such cases , involving payment of 
₹ 3.83 crore , were detected . On detailed test -check of records, it was foun d 
that, while  these bank accounts were in the name of certain beneficiaries, 
funds had been transferred to other beneficiaries. The same issue was noted  in 
OSSP as well, in three out of 5,26,434 cases, where the bank account numbers 
of different beneficiaries were the same and payment of ₹  1.17 lakh was made 
to these three beneficiaries. The case studies are discussed below: 
                                                 
50 Balasore, Bolangir, Gajpati, Jharsuguda, Kalahandi and Sundargarh 
51 Renewal students, i.e., for second and subsequent year of course period 

Implementation of DBT in payment of Post Matric Scholarship to eligible students in the State 
62 
Case studies 
1. PMS to one student of the Annapurna ITC I nstitute, for 2017-18 and 
2018-19, was credited to the bank account number , as given by the 
student in the application form. PMS for another student, for 2019-20, 
was also credited to the same bank account. On verification, the bank 
confirmed that the account belonged to yet another person. 
2. Another student of the Annapurna ITC Institute got PMS for 2017 -18, 
in bank account No. ********992 , with IFSC Code SBIN*****47.  In 
the subsequent year (2018 -19), the same student got payment in bank 
account No. ********564, with IFSC Code UTBI*****02. In 2019-20, 
a different student got PM S for the year 2019 -20, in the sam e bank 
account (No. ********564, with the same IFSC Code). On verification, 
it was found that the bank account No. ********564 belonged to 
another person. This is indicative of the non -receipt of PMS by these 
students. 
Audit observed that the above irregularities had occurred mainly due to non -
Aadhaar seeding of bank accounts of beneficiaries, as required under DBT. As 
a result, the benefits were transferred to incorrect accounts , instead of the 
targeted beneficiaries , thereby rendering the objective of the DBT scheme , 
unfulfilled. 
The SSD Department accepted the audit observations and stated (September 
2022) that, due to low coverage of Aadh aar seeding with the bank accounts, 
Aadhaar based payment had not been made mandatory in disbursement of 
scholarships. Further, the payment gateway of treasury portal was also not 
configured for making Aadhaar based payments during 2017-20. 
5.4 Management of failed transactions 
DBT envisages a switching over , from the present electronic transfer of 
amount to bank accounts of the beneficiary , to transfer of benefits directly to 
the Aadhaar seeded bank account of  the beneficiaries , in order to facili tate 
credit of payments to the  legitimate beneficiaries, in the right accounts and in 
the right time. Further, it provides integration of the scheme management 
software with the PFMS/ State Treasury, with provision of a reversal loop for 
updation of the payment/  failure status. The Standard Operating Procedure 
(SOP) for DBT payment s also provides broad timelines for receiving 
payments/ benefits, which is T+4 working days, where ‘T’ denotes the day of 
the transaction. 
Recommendation 5.3: 
The SSD Department should ensure Aadhaar seeding of the bank 
accounts of the beneficiaries , being a primary requirement for DBT . 
Necessary assistance in this regard , may be extended to the students , 
so that no one is deprived of the scholarship , for want of Aadhaar 
seeding of the bank accounts. 

Chapter 5: Deficient control measures in IT Systems 
63 
In case of both the PMS and Med habruti scholarship schemes, the bills were 
prepared manually and uploaded in the iFMS platform, for further processing 
of paymen ts, till 2019 -20. However, from 2020 -21 onwards, the bills were 
prepared in iFMS, after the approved beneficiary data was pushed from OSSP 
to iFMS, for processing for payment and the status was  updated in OSSP. In 
case of a dormant account and mismatch of bank account number s with the 
IFSC number, transfer of amount does not take place, and these transactions 
are termed as ‘failed transactions’. In case of failed transactions, the steps to 
be taken by the DDO and Treasury , as intimated by Director of Treasury and 
Inspection (DTI), Odisha, are shown in the workflow below: 
Figure 5.1: Workflow of revalidation of failed transactions 
 
(Source: Information furnished by DTI) 
The failed transaction amounts are retained under the Suspense Head ‘8658’  
of the Government account for 90 days from the date of drawal , or till the end 
of the financial year, whichever is earlier. However, in case of drawals in the 
month of March, the failed transaction amounts are retained in the Suspense  
Head up to 30 April of the same year.  On verification of records at the SSD 
and HE Departments, the following deficiencies were noticed: 
5.4.1 Failed transactions in respect of PMS applicants 
Disbursement of PMS to ST and SC beneficiaries were being made centrally 
by the SSD Department from the year 2015 -16 onwards. The SSD 
Department, however, did not provide data on the year-wise position of failed 
transactions, as well as on settlements of the failed transactions, to Audit.  
Data on failed transactions , in disbursement of PMS , was obtained from the 
Director of Treasury and Inspection (DTI), Odisha . Audit found that 1,30,985 
transactions, involving ₹ 49.95 crore, had failed during 2017-21. This included 
92,215 failed transactions (70 per cent), pertaining to the years 2017-18 and 
2018-19, when Aadhaar linking was not made mandatory. Out of total failed 
transactions: (i) only 28,173 transactions , involving ₹  17.58 crore , had been 
settled (ii) 12,342 transactions, of ₹ 4.52 crore, remained unsettled and (iii) an 
amount of ₹ 27.86 crore, pertaining to 90,470 transactions , had been refunded 
to Government (deduct recovery) , as of  1 April 2021. As per F inance 
Department’s order, the failed / unsettled transactions are parked under the 
Suspense Head 8658, for a designated period , post which  the t reasury is 
required to refund the unsettled payments to the Government account. 
Failed amount is 
deposited as 
receipt under 
Head-8658 
Beneficiary-wise 
failed details are 
available at the 
DDO login of 
iFMS 
DDO rectifies the 
failed account 
details and saves 
them in iFMS  
TO 
prepares 
refund bill 
in iFMS  
Payment advice is 
generated and forwarded 
for payment through 
eKuber of RBI 
Payment is made 
directly to the bank 
account of the 
beneficiary 

Implementation of DBT in payment of Post Matric Scholarship to eligible students in the State 
64 
The details of such failed transactions are given in the table below. 
Table 5.8: Details of failed transactions during 2017-21 
(Amounts ₹ in crore) 
Year Failed transactions  
Settlement of failed 
transactions as of 1 April 
2021 
Unsettled failed 
transactions 
Refunded to 
Government account 
Beneficiaries Amount Beneficiaries Amount Beneficiaries Amount Beneficiaries Amount 
2017-
18 
39,850 
4.93 
2,407 
1.60 
0 
0.00 
37,443 
3.33 
2018-
19 
52,365 
23.17 
15,596 
7.67 
0 
0.00 
36,769 
15.50 
2019-
20 
24,121 
13.95 
10,024 
6.28 
48 
0.01 
14,049 
7.66 
2020-
21 
14,649 
7.90 
146 
2.03 
12,294 
4.51 
2,209 
1.37 
Total 1,30,985 49.95 28,173 17.58 12,342 4.52 90,470 27.86 
(Source: Data of DTI, Odisha) 
Audit observed that out of 1,30,985  failed transactions, only 28,173 failed 
transactions (22 per cent) could be settled during 2017 -21. As such, 1,02,812 
beneficiaries remained deprived of PMS , amounting to ₹ 32.37 crore, for one 
to four years,  which indicated failure of the concerned DDOs, to rectify  the 
applicant details, for enabling disbursal of payments. 
In reply, the SSD Department stated (September 2022) that : (i)  the failed 
transactions were tracked from iFMS  and (ii) the details of failed transactions 
were compiled and communicated back to  the district authorities, for 
communicating the same to students , through institutions and receiving 
corrected account details, for settlement of failed transactions.  
The reply is not tenable , as the students were deprived  of the scholarship and  
the failed amount s were reverted back to the Government account, leading to 
non-achievement of aim of the DBT scheme. 
5.4.2 Failed transactions in regard to Medhabruti applicants 
On analysis of the records and database of eMedhabruti,  6,124 transactions , 
involving ₹ 3.81 crore , failed during 2017 -21. This included 4,103 failed 
transactions (67 per cent ) relating to the years 2017-18 and 2018 -19, when 
Aadhaar linking was not made mandatory. Of the total failed transactions , 
5,567 failed transactions , pertaining to the period 2017 -20, involving ₹  3.47 
crore, were settled and the remaining 557 transactions, for the period 2020-21, 
involving ₹ 0.34 rore, remained unsettled, as of March 2021. 
The main reason  attributed for the huge failure of transactions was n on-
adoption of prerequisite measures for DBT , by the Departments , such as: (i)  
non-validation of bank account of students at the time of submission of 
applications (ii) non-usage of VLookup web service and (iii) non -usage of 
status of bank account service  of NPCI. The Departments and the State DBT 
Cell did not take any steps to ensure use of the VLookup web service , or the 
status of bank account service of NPCI . They also did not  make efforts 
towards integration with PFMS , for real time validation of the bank account , 
in order to deal with the significant issue of dormant/ inoperative acc ounts and 
non-existent accounts.  

Chapter 5: Deficient control measures in IT Systems 
65 
As such, 1,03,36952 (75 per cent) beneficiaries were deprived of the benefits 
of PMS and the Medhabruti scheme, for ₹ 32.70 crore53, due to non-settlement 
of failed transactions.  Despite these failed transactions , the SSD Department 
had irregularly booked the amount as expenditure. 
The HED Department accepted the observation and stated (September 202 2) 
that, after introduction of OSSP, the number of failed transaction s had been  
reduced to a great extent. However, it is a fact that the failed transactions still 
persisted, even after introduction of OSSP. 
5.5 Other IT deficiencies 
The following other IT deficiencies were noticed during scrutiny of the 
PRERANA, OSSP and eMedhabruti databases: 
5.5.1 Non-detection of duplicate beneficiaries  and non -reporting of 
savings 
Implementation of DBT envisages weeding  out of duplicate beneficiaries  
during benefit transfer. Department of MoSJE, GoI, instructed (December 
2017) the SSD Department to provide information on savings 54 arising due to 
elimination of fake/  ghost beneficiaries through the de-duplication process. 
Subsequently, the State DBT Cell communicated (March 2018 and February 
2020) these instructions to all the Departments implementing DBT schemes , 
to report savings based on weeding out of duplicates, ghost beneficiaries , etc., 
every month. Audit noted that: 
 The SSD Department had detected 4,896 duplicate applicants of SC 
and ST category 55 during 2017 -20 and rejecte d their applications. 
However, no such  exercise was undertaken to detect duplicate 
applicants belonging to the OBC and EBC categories. Analysis of  the 
iFMS database , in audit , revealed that 973 duplicate applicants , 
belonging to the SC and ST categories , had not been detected by the 
SSD and they had been paid ₹ 2.43 crore, during 2017-21. On the other 
hand, HED had not undertaken  any such exercise to  detect duplicate 
applicants for Medhabruti.  
                                                 
52 SSD: Unsettled transactions:12,342 and returned to Government: 90,470  
HED: Unsettled transactions: 557 
53 PMS: 1,02,817 failed transactions, involving ₹ 32.37 crore  
Medhabruti: 557 failed transactions, involving ₹ 0.34 crore  
54 Formula for calculation of savings: S = D x B x F (S = Saving, D = No. of beneficiaries 
removed and B = Benefit per beneficiary and F= Frequency of payment)  
55 SC: 2,154 during 2017-18 and ST: 2,742 during 2017-20 
Recommendation 5.4: 
The implementing Departments should make efforts in coordination 
with State DBT Cell, to ensure use of  the Vlookup web service and 
status of bank account services of NPCI, in order to ensure payment 
of funds to the intended beneficiaries. 

Implementation of DBT in payment of Post Matric Scholarship to eligible students in the State 
66 
 The duplicate applicants included 2,154 applications , relating  to SC 
category of students , involving a scholarship amount of ₹  5.20 crore. 
SSD Department, however, reported the figure as 1,510 to MoSJE , 
involving a scholarship amount of ₹  3.97 crore. Thus, the SSD 
Department under -reported the savings amount by ₹  1.23 crore to 
MoSJE. Further, the SSD Department also did not report detection of 
duplicate 2,742 applicants of  the ST category, to the State DBT Cell,  
as required under their circulars dated March 2018 and February 2020. 
Audit observed that , while PRERANA lacked features to detect duplicate 
applicants, the manual scrutiny by the SSD Department was neither foolproof, 
nor adequate. 
The SSD Department agreed to the audit observation and stated that the online 
portal was not suitably designed with internal checks to disallow duplicate 
entries, due to which students were able to create more than one application in 
the PRERANA Portal.  
5.5.2 PRERANA - Incorrect capturing of dates prior to academic year 
Audit noted that, in PRERANA, the applicants’ scholarship application details 
were stored in a table . The system stored the application submission date and 
time under the field  ‘insert_time’. Audit found that, in 4,270 out of 14,22,413 
applications, registered in PRERANA for the period 2017 -20, the insert date 
and time were substantially before the academic year , as can be seen in the 
table shown below: 
Table 5.9: Date & time discrepancy of PRERANA database  
Application 
ID Student Name Institute Name Academic 
Year 
Date and time of 
data entry in the 
system 
1012695 ************* Lachhaman Balajew 
(Degree) College, Angalo 
2018 - 19 08-11-2015 07:40 
1336411 ************* SCB Medical College 2018 - 19 13-10-2015 18:14 
134374 ************* Eastern Academy of 
Science Technology 
2018 - 19 03-09-2014 22:17 
357914 ************* Panchayat (Degree) 
College, Bargarh 
2018 - 19 23-09-2015 18:39 
467448 ************* District Institute of 
Education Training 
2018 - 19 05-02-2015 15:29 
486171 ************* I.T.I., Bargarh 2018 - 19 13-10-2015 14:04 
525216 ************* Ravenshaw University, 
Cuttack 
2018 - 19 06-10-2015 15:13 
585450 ************* Seemanta Engineering 
College 
2018 - 19 24-08-2014 21:22 
910072 ************* Bhairab (Degree) College, 
Dabugan 
2018 - 19 27-08-2014 12:14 
952143 ************* Bhubaneswar Institute of 
Industrial Technology 
2018 - 19 31-08-2014 17:21 
(Note: Name of the students kept confidential) 
(Source: PRERANA database) 
It would be observed from the above that , though the date / year of data 
insertions were recorded as per the system in 2014 and 2015, the 
corresponding academic years were 2018 -19, which w as obviously  not 
correct. This indicated that the actual date of data insertions was not recorded 

Chapter 5: Deficient control measures in IT Systems 
67 
correctly in the database. In the absence of actual time of data insertion, delay 
in processing of the application s could not be ascertained, for monitoring 
purposes.  
The SSD Department stated (September 2022) that: (i) the matter was reported 
to NIC for seeking clarification on the matter  and (ii) the application ID was 
created in the portal earlier , while the actual application was submitted later 
on.  
The reply is not acceptable, as there was a gap of almost four to five years and 
it is not feasible that the students would create Application ID s four to five 
years prior to their admission.  
5.5.3 eMedhabruti - Design deficiencies 
System design aims at providing the correct output by mapping the existing 
rules and regulations electronically , so as to provide assurance that all 
transactions are valid, c omplete, accurate and fulfil  the objectives of the 
scheme guidelines. 
As per best practice, audit trails (date of creation of record, up dation, date of 
verification by different authorities , etc.) should be captured in the tables for 
enforcing accountability and detective control against any manipulation of 
records in the database. The HED and the OCAC did not furnish the technical 
documentation of eMedhabruti to Audit.  On analysis of the eMedhabruti  
database, Audit found the following: 
 In critical tables 56 of the database, for the years 2017 -20, the date of 
submission of applications , by the institutes , to the intermediaries  and 
subsequent submission to Government , as well as date of final 
approval of Government, had not been captured. 
 In 73 cases, the account number s of the beneficiaries had been entered 
incorrectly. Of these, bank account numbers  in 53 cases were 
validated, while, in the remaining 20 cases, the applications had been 
rejected and/ or not verified , but payments had been made. Of the 20 
rejected cases , where payments had been made, in two cases, the 
applications had not been verified and the same were rejected by 
institutes, but payment of ₹ 20,000 had been made, as seen from  the 
iFMS database. 
In the absence of an audit trail , the time taken by the intermediary levels to 
process the applications , as well as  incorrect validations made by different 
authorities, could not be tr aced. Thus, transparency in processing the 
applications and making payments thereagainst, were found lacking.  
The HED Department stated (September 2022) that the observations of Audit 
would be communicated to the service provider, to address the deficiencies.  
5.5.3.1 Master tables not provisioned in the system 
As per best practice, a Master Table was to be created as a single source for 
common business data, with unique IDs for referencing across multiple tables 
                                                 
56 T_CAFAS_ApplicantDetails_Temp_2017, T_CAFAS_ApplicantDetails_Temp_20 18, 
T_CAFAS_SCHOLARSHIP_RENEWAL_2018 

Implementation of DBT in payment of Post Matric Scholarship to eligible students in the State 
68 
and/ or processes. eMedhabruti had several master tables 57, which were used 
during submission of application s and identification of details of transactions, 
on the basis of the unique IDs. Audit noticed existence of incorrect total marks 
in the database, due to lack of validation contro ls in the system, which would 
have restricted the marks obtained to total marks, as discussed below:  
 Incorrect total marks : In 179 out of 97,810 applications 58, the total 
marks for the course , as well as marks secured by the applicants , were 
entered incorr ectly. It was further noted that the Principals had 
validated 179 of such applications with incorrect marks. Details of 
such discrepancies are shown in the table below. 
Table 5.10: Incorrect total marks in eMedhabruti  
Scholarship Type Applicant’s 
Name College Name Full 
marks 
Marks 
secured as 
per the 
application 
Technical and 
Profession Merit ************ Gandhi Institute for Technological 
Advancement, Bhubaneswar 
2,713 3,900 
Junior Merit ************ Govt. Junior College, Angul 8.8 8.8 
PG Merit ************ Udayanath (Autonomous) College of 
Science & Technology, Adaspur 
7 7 
Technical/ 
Profession Merit ************ Regional College of Management 
(MBA) 
64.7 57.2 
Junior Merit 
************ 
Hatadihi Anchalika (Govt. Vocational 
Junior) Mahavidyalaya, Hatadihi - 
18031801 – Hatadihi 
439 10 
Technical/ 
Profession Merit ************ Gandhi Institute for Technological 
Advancement (GITA) (Engineering) 
3,503 70 
PG Merit ************ Utkal University, Bhubaneswar 1,223 657 
(Note- Applicant’s names kept confidential) 
(Source: Data dump of eMedhabruti) 
Audit observed that full marks can be only a round figure , ending with 
zero and 10, in case of Cumulative Grade Point  Average (CGPA), as 
verified from the test-checked applications but cannot be an odd figure, 
as mentioned above. In one ca se, the actual marks secured were more 
than the full marks . Thus, the full marks entered in the system 
appeared to be incorrect. 
 In eMedhabruti, the total marks secured by the applicants were 
recorded incorrectly , as th ey were found to be greater than the 
maximum mark s, in 45 out of 97,810 applications . However, the 
concerned Principals had approved the applications in 18 cases. The 
discrepancies are shown in the table below. 
Table 5.11: Cases in eMedhabruti, where the total marks shown as secured were 
greater than the maximum marks  
Applicant’s Name College Name Full marks Marks secured as per 
the application 
********* Center for Advanced Post Graduate 
Studies (CAPGS), Rourkela 
10.00 72.00 
********* Gandhi Institute for Technological 
Advancement (GITA) (MCA)  
2,713.00 3,900.00 
                                                 
57  M_College, M_District, M_Block, M_Scholarship_Board, M_Scholarship_Course, etc. 
58 T_Cafas_Applicantdetails_Temp_2016, T_Cafas_Applicantdetails_Temp_2017, 
T_Cafas_Applicantdetails_2018 and T_Cafas_Applicantdetails_Temp 

Chapter 5: Deficient control measures in IT Systems 
69 
Applicant’s Name College Name Full marks Marks secured as per 
the application 
********* 
Dhaneswar Rath Institute of 
Engineering and Management Studies, 
Cuttack (Engineering)  
10.00 35.00 
********* Government College of Engineering, 
Keonjhar  
10.00 451.00 
********* Silicon Institute of Technology, 
Bhubaneswar (Engineering) 
10.00 766.00 
********* Indic Institute of Design and Research, 
Bhubaneswar (Engineering)  
10.00 66.00 
********* Gandhi Institute for Technology, 
Bhubaneswar (Engineering) 
70.00 2,113.00 
********* Silicon Institute of Technology, 
Bhubaneswar (Engineering) 
10.00 907.00 
(Note- Applicant’s names kept confidential) 
(Source: Datadump of eMedhabruti) 
Thus, the software had been  designed without creation of a master table 
reference for different Boards of Education , with details of maximum mark s 
that would have restricted such incorrect data entries and allowed for 
rejection/ non-validation by the authorities concerned. Such discrepancies also 
indicate that the Principals concerned  had recommended the applications 
without verifying the correctness of the marks entered in the applications. 
The HED Department stated (September 2022) that the observations of Audit 
would be communicated to the service provider, to address the deficiencies.  
5.5.3.2 Non-capturing of correct Aadhaar numbers 
The Unique Identification Authority of India (UIDAI), under the Aadhaar Act 
and Regulations, 2016, has ma ndated centralised storage of all Aadhaar  
numbers in a different repository, known as the ‘Aadhaar Data Vault’. In order 
to reduce the footprint of Aadhaar numbers in the ecosystem, each Aadhaar 
number is to be referred by an additional key known as the Reference Key. 
These keys are to replace the Aadhaar numbers in the organisation’s 
ecosystem and mapping of reference key s and Aadhaar number s is to be 
maintained in the Aadhaar Data Vault. HED was required to create an 
Aadhaar data Vault and replace the Aadhaar numbers , in all existing 
databases, with the respective reference keys. 
On analysis of the eMedhabruti database, it was noticed that: 
 In 84,631  out of 97,810 applications,  Aadhaar number was stored in 
the table without encryption or masked form , due to which virtual 
identification was not captured in the database.  
 Further, in 9,801  cases, invalid Aadhaar numbers , that were less than 
12 digits or ‘Null’, were captured in the database , indicating that input 
controls were missing while desig ning th e Aadhaar data field. T his 
resulted in incorrect entry of Aadhaar number s and sharing of Aadhaar 
data without masked form, violating the Act. 
Thus, Aadhaar details were neither encrypted , as per the Aadhaar Act , nor 
captured correctly, as required under DBT. 
The HED Department stated (September 2022) that the observations of Audit 
would be communicated to the service provider, to address the deficiencies.  

Implementation of DBT in payment of Post Matric Scholarship to eligible students in the State 
70 
5.5.3.3 Non-availability of dashboard in system 
As per the Medhabruti guidelines, the Principal of the institution is responsible 
for verifying, validating and approving the data submitted by applicants , for 
onward transmission , for approval of scholarships. On analysis, it was 
observed that, in 1,466 out of 97,810 cases, all the requisite information , i.e., 
income certificate, resident certificate, mark sheet, bank details and Aadhaar 
numbers, had been uploaded  but the Principal had not verified/  updated and 
approved the data in time. 
The system did not have  a provision for student s to check their status o f 
applications. It also did not have the  facility of a dashboard , for the 
Department to monitor the number of applications received, validated and 
approved at various levels , to ensure timely processing by the institution and 
OCAC, on a real -time basis . In the absence of a real-time dashboard, the 
applicant students also could not be informed about the status of their 
applications for PMS. 
The HED Department replied (September 2022) that dashboard is available in 
the newly introduced OSSP portal. 
 
 
Recommendation 5.5: 
Flaws in the OSSP computer application system , in not detecting 
duplicate beneficiaries, incorrect capturing of vital data like dates of 
applications and Aadhaar numbers as well as absence of Master 
tables, should be remedied in order to make the system more efficient , 
in processing the scholarship applications. 

  
  
  
CChhaapptteerr  66  
 
 
SSuussppeecctteedd  FFrraauudd  aanndd  
CCoorrrruuppttiioonn    
 

 

Chapter 6: Suspected Fraud and Corruption 
71 
 
 
  
Chapter 6 
Suspected Fraud and Corruption 
This Chapter deals with loopholes in the implementation of 
PMS scheme, leading to suspected fraudulent drawal of 
scholarship by ghost institutes and diversion of scholarship by 
institutes from bank accounts of the students to bank accounts of 
the institutes. Inadequate monitoring led to payment of 
scholarship to beneficiaries, who failed to complete the course.  
Audit verified records of the sampled DWOs, institutes, selected 
banks and conducted joint physical inspection of the institutes 
and found cases of suspected fraudulent drawl of scholarships. 
The observations have been highlighted in this Chapter. 
 Due to absence of detailed checklist for inspection of 
private educational institutions, 5,185 beneficiaries of 15 
ineligible institutions, were granted PMS, amounting to 
₹ 15.79 crore, during 2016-20. 
 During 2017-21, 2,996 students of 22 sampled institutes in 
six sampled districts, were paid PMS amounting to ₹  7.36 
crore, even after their discontinuance of the courses. 
 One institute had applied for scholarships on behalf of 
discontinued students and was successful in getting the 
scholarship funds credited to the bank accounts of the 
students amounting to ₹  2.36 crore and subsequently , 
transferring the same to the institute’s bank account, 
through suspected fraudulent means. 
 

Implementation of DBT in payment of Post Matric Scholarship to eligible students in the State 
72 
6.1 Suspected Fraud and Corruption 
As per provisions contained in the Handbook o f DBT, issued by the Planning 
Commission, Government of India , DBT aims to ensure accurate targeting of 
beneficiaries as well as reduc ing fraud and corruption. Audit examined the 
implementation of both the PMS and the Medhabruti scholarship schemes 
under DBT, in order to ascertain whether the Departments had been  able to 
successfully plug in the leakage of Government funds and prevent cases of 
fraud. Audit findings in this regard are detailed in the following paragraphs.  
6.1.1 Suspected siphoning of Government funds of ₹ 15.79 crore, due to 
absence of a detailed procedure for inspection of the institution by 
DWOs, before issue of User IDs for the scholarship portal 
As per PMS software manual , DWOs are required to provide  user ID s and 
passwords to all colleges/ institut es, to allow them to register in the 
PRERANA portal and to access / update details of their affiliation, courses 
offered, number of seats approved for each course , etc. Using these IDs & 
passwords, colleges/ institutes forward the applications of eligible students to 
the concerned DWO Offices, for onward transmission to the Department. The 
institutes, from where students may avail such scholarships, for post-matric 
courses, include the  Industrial Training Institutes ( ITIs) and Diplo ma 
institutions. In order to enroll students in Diploma or ITI courses run by them, 
across the State of Odisha , must have valid affiliation from the State Council 
for Technical Education and the Vocational Training, Skill Development and 
Technical Education (SDTE) Department. 
Audit noted that there was no provision for inspection of private educational 
institutions, for the purpose of sanction of PMS. In the revised PMS guidelines 
(May 2018 ) of MoSJE, inspection of private educational institutions , by 
officials to be nominated by the District Collectors , was made mandatory. In 
pursuance of this, the SSD Department issued (August 2018) guideline s for 
constitution of district committees, for the purpose of such inspections. 
On analysis of the PRERANA database, Audit noticed that 30 institutes, in six 
districts, registered in the PRERANA portal during 2017 -20, had obtained 
affiliation from the Bharat Sevak Samaj (BSS), Tamil Nadu and the National 
Council of Vocational Research and Training (NCVRT), New Delhi. In 26 of 
these 30 institutes, 8,557 students had applied for PMS , during 2017-20. Out 
of the se, 5 ,185 beneficiaries , of 15 institutes , had been  granted PMS , 
amounting to ₹ 15.79 crore, during the period 2016-20 (Appendix 6.1). It was 
noted that t he SDTE Department  had intimated (November 2019) the SSD 
Department that, neither the BSS, nor the NCVRT, were eligible agencies, for 
granting affiliation to institutes , for running Diploma courses.  SSD 
Department, accordingly, instructed (December 2019) the DWOs not to allow 
registration of educational institutions affiliated by these bodies . The fact 
remains that , due to the non -incorporation of detailed criteria in the 
PRERANA system , as well as lack of monitoring on the part of the 
Department, 5,185 students had already been granted scholarships, irregularly.  
Joint physical inspection of 16 institutes, affiliated by NCVRT and BSS, were 
carried out in September and October 2021, by the Welfare Extension Officers 

Chapter 6: Suspected Fraud and Corruption 
73 
(WEOs) and Assistant District Welfare Officer s (ADWOs), of the DWOs , in 
the presence  of Audit officials. The results of th ese verifications are 
summarised in the table below. 
Table 6.1: Results of JPI conducted 
Particulars Mayurbhanj Balasore Total 
(a) No. of colleges for which JPI s 
were conducted 11 5 16 
(b) No. of colleges which existed 
without the required basic 
infrastructure, such as  
classrooms/laboratory/workshop/ 
hostel/faculty and non -teaching 
staff, etc. 
8 0 8 
(c) No. of institut es not found in 
existence 3 5 8 
(d) No. of applications from (c) , 
sanctioned during 2016-20 426 82 508 
(f) Amount of PMS disbursed in 
respect of (d) (₹ in crore) 1.23 0.23 1.46 
(Source: JPI of institutes, records of DWO and PRERANA/ iFMS database) 
 Non-existence of eight institutes : Of the 16 institutes verified during 
the joint verification, it was noted that  eight were not in existence and 
the existence of these institutes could not be ascertained even from the 
local people . Details of any inspection carried out by the concerned 
DWO of  Mayurbhanj and i nspection report s therein, were  also not 
available, except in two cases, as discussed in Paragraph 4.5.2.  
 Status of other eight institutes : The other eight institutes , in 
Mayurbhanj district, had stopped functioning from 2020, after rejection 
of their applications by the DWO, on instructions of the SSD 
Department. However, by then , 29 students , from seven of these 
institutes, had received PMS, amounting to ₹  7.13 lakh, during 2017-
18 and 2018-19. It was noted that these 29 students had also been paid 
PMS, amounting to ₹ 4.71 lakh, from other institutes, as mentioned in  
Paragraph 5.1.2.  
 Institutes running without infrastructure:  One institute 59 in 
Mayurbhanj district did not have its own physical infrastructure 
(classroom, workshop, staffroom, etc.) and was using the infrastructure 
of another neighbouring institute. In case of the other seven institutes60 
of the district,  the infrastructure was found to be inadequate , in 
comparison to the number of students admitted . For example, in one 
institute, only classroom was available for 792 students and the 
institute had no workshop for students . Besides, it was also seen that 
                                                 
59 Global Institute of Safety and Training, Gadadeulia, Mayurbhanj  
60 Ashutosh Vocational Tra ining Centre, Raghunathpur, Baripada ; Mayurbhanj Safety 
Training Institute  and IVET Vocational Training Centre at Baisinga ; ITET Vocational 
Training Centre  and Odisha Safety Training Institute at Asanabani, Rairangpur ; SAI 
Safety Training Institute and SAI Vocational Training Centre, Puruna Baripada  

Implementation of DBT in payment of Post Matric Scholarship to eligible students in the State 
74 
288 beneficiaries, belonging to the ITET Vocational Training Centre , 
were granted PMS at a rate  applicable for hostellers , despite the fact 
that the institute had no hostel available. Details of teaching staff , as 
well as hostel records , were not produced to Audit , to ascertain if the 
institutes were functioning.  
 
 
 
Institute building of the ITET Vocational 
Training Centre 
 
 
Only one classroom, with capacity of 60 
students, available, against admission of 
792 students 
SSD Department admitted , only in November 2019, after it had been  pointed 
out by DWO, Mayurbhanj and clarification had been sought by SDTE, that: (i) 
BSS and NCVRT were not empowered affiliating agencies and (ii) hence, the 
affiliated institutes were not eligible for registration for PMS in PRERANA. 
This indicated that due diligence had not been exercised during the 
verification process, before registering these institutes in PRERANA, for grant 
of PMS. The PRERANA software was also not equipped properly , to identify 
and filter out these ineligible institutes. As a result, PMS , amounting to 
₹ 15.79 crore, was appropriated by non-existing/ ineligible institutes. 
The SSD Department stated (September 2022) that : (i)  registration of 
institutions located in districts was the responsibility of the DWOs concerned,  
(ii) in the new portal (OSSP), it had been ensured that duly recognised and 
authorised institutions were added, after syncing information from databases 
like UDISE, SAMS and AISHE.  
Recommendation 6.1: 
Reasons for suspected fraud in the payment of PMS may be investigated, 
responsibility may be fixed on the defaulting officials and suitable action 
may be taken for recovery of PMS. 
Recommendation 6.2: 
The SSD Department may frame detailed guidelines for inspection of 
institutes, prior to their registration on the scheme portal of OSSP and the 
quantum of inspections to be conducted by district level officials, as well as 
the records to be verified in private institutions, should be specified. 

Chapter 6: Suspected Fraud and Corruption 
75 
6.1.2 Availing of PMS by students who had discontinued education 
6.1.2.1 Payment of PMS to students  
As per PMS guide lines in regard to  SC/ ST/ OBC/ EBC students, issued by  
GoI, if it is reported by the institut e, at any time , that a scholar has failed to 
make satisfactory progress during an educational course , or there has been 
irregularity in attendance without due permission, etc., the authority 
sanctioning the scholarships may either cancel the scholarship , or stop or 
withhold further payment s, for such period s, as it may think fit.  Further, the 
PMS Guidelines for SC/ ST/  OBC students, stipulate that a student has to 
refund the scholarship amount , if, during the course of the year , he/ she 
discontinues the course for which PMS was awarded. 
On analysis of the PRERANA and OSSP database, as well as the payment 
files submitted by the SSD Department , DWOs of the eight te st-checked 
districts and 69 sampled institutions, Audit found that 2, 996 students, of 22 
sampled institutes , in six sample districts, had left their courses midway , 
during 2017-21. However, those students had been paid PMS , amounting to 
₹ 7.36 crore, even after their discontinuance of the courses. The district-wise 
institutes, number of such students granted PMS and amount s thereof, are 
tabulated below. 
Table 6.2: Disbursement of PMS to discontinued students 
Sl. 
No. District No. of 
Institutions 
No. of 
students 
Amount  
(₹ in lakh ) 
1.  Gajapati 5 113 7.65 
2.  Jharsuguda 2 30 13.74 
3.  Kalahandi 1 22 1.89 
4.  Malkangiri 2 121 5.44 
5.  Mayurbhanj 8 2,619 698.00 
6.  Sundargarh 4 91 9.43 
Total  22 2,996 736.15 
(Source: Information received from the SSD Department and DWOs) 
Audit observed that the authorities of the institut es concerned had either not 
verified or ignored ineligibility of the students for PMS, before recommending 
their renewal applications, for subsequent years of the appli cable courses, to 
the DWOs, for sanction. Further, the PRERANA and OSSP portals also did 
not have a provision to mark the applicants as active/ discontinued, for judging 
the eligibility of students for PMS. One of the illustrative cases, is as discussed 
in Paragraph 6.1.2.2. 
The SSD Department accepted the audit observation and stated (September 
2022) that cases of deliberate manipulation, as pointed in audit , are 
communicated to DWOs, for verification and necessary action. 
  

Implementation of DBT in payment of Post Matric Scholarship to eligible students in the State 
76 
6.1.2.2 Grant of PMS to discontinued students of SSIT 
In one of the test-checked institute s, viz. Sakuntala Sudharsan Institute of 
Technology (SSIT) in Mayurbhanj district, 2,176 SC/ ST students were paid 
PMS, amounting to ₹  6.41 crore , during 2016 -20, as detailed in the table 
below. 
Table 6.3: Disbursement of PMS to SC/ ST students of SSIT during 2016-20 
Year 
No of applicants who 
submitted 
applications 
No of applicants 
who got PMS 
Amount  
(₹ in lakh) 
2016-17 295 293 101.09 
2017-18 640 622 177.59 
2018-19 691 685 192.41 
2019-20 606 576 169.76 
Total 2,232 2,176 640.85 
(Source: PRERANA database) 
Audit found that the institute was running three-year diploma courses, wherein 
1,369 students 61 had taken  admissions during 2016 -2062. Audit analysed the 
semester results of the 2016-19 and 2017 -20 batches and found that 138 and 
142 students , respectively, had not cleared their final examinations and  had 
discontinued their studies. However, they were found to have applied for PMS 
and SSIT and had also forwarded their renewal applications to the DWO, 
                                                 
61  SC: 218, ST: 1,027 and General: 124 
62 2016-17: 315; 2017-18: 370, 2018-19: 314 and 2019-20: 370 
Figure 6.1: Mandate form submitted to bank 

Chapter 6: Suspected Fraud and Corruption 
77 
Mayurbhanj, certifying their eligibility for PMS , for the period 2016 -20, for 
two batches (2016-19 and 2017-20).  
Subsequently, they were paid PMS, amounting to ₹ 2.36 crore. On verification 
of the bank statement s of 63 such students , to ensure that PMS ha d indeed 
been disbursed to them, it was found that a sum of ₹ 2.36 crore , received by 
them, towards PMS, for the period 2016 -20, had been transferred to the bank 
account of SSIT , on the strength of the mandate (A format prepared by the 
institute for the students to transfer the entire scholarship amount , from the 
student’s bank account , to the institute ban k account  as placed alongside ) 
signed by the students concerned and submitted to the banks. Thus, complicity 
of the management of SSIT , in availing PMS , through suspected fraudulent 
means, for their appropriat ion, cannot be ruled out  as evident from the 
following. 
 Mismatch of signature s: Signatures of 41 students , for PMS 
pertaining to the year 2016 -17, did not match with the signatures in 
their applications for the year s 2017-18 and 2018 -19. During the 
beneficiary interview of 14 recipients of PMS , by the team of Audit 
officials, the recipients concerned stated that they had not submitted 
any application for PMS, during the course period of 2016-20. 
 Role of SSIT in opening of bank accounts of beneficiaries:  The bank 
accounts of 1,077 beneficiaries were found to have been opened in one 
bank, i.e. Bank of Baroda, Church Compound Branch, Balasore, which 
is 13 0 kms away from SSIT and the bank account numbers were 
allotted serially. In all these cases, the introducer s for opening bank 
account were the office bearers of SSIT and the mobile phone numbers 
given in the accounts were those of SSIT. In the beneficiary interview 
of 14 beneficiaries, 12 of them expressed ignorance about opening of 
these bank accounts and signing mandate form s, authorising the bank 
to transfer the PMS scholarships to SSIT. 
Thus, loopholes in the IT systems , in regard  to filter ing out ineligible/ fake 
beneficiaries, facilitated availing of PMS in the names of fake/ ineligible 
students. Further, failure on the part of the DWOs and institutes , in 
undertaking detailed verification of accounts and linking them to Aadhaar , 
etc., as contemplated under DBT , coupled with complicity of the institutes 
concerned, led to leakage of PMS funds, by suspected fraudulent means. 
No reply was furnished by the SSD Department. 
 
 
Recommendation 6.3: 
Institutes may be asked to forward the list of students who are 
continuing their courses in subsequent years, along with their 
applications, to the concerned DWOs, for verification of contin uance, 
before issue of sanctions.  

Implementation of DBT in payment of Post Matric Scholarship to eligible students in the State 
78 
6.1.3 Acceptance of applications and payment of PMS to ghost 
beneficiaries 
Audit analysis of the PRERANA database revealed that applications , 
purportedly submitted by 69 applicants belonging to 14 institutes , in three 
districts, for PMS , for the academic years 2016-17 to 2020 -21, had been 
forwarded by the Principals , to the DWOs , after necessary scrutiny , for 
approval/ sanction. Upon approval of the applications by the DWOs, PMS , 
amounting to ₹ 14.17 lakh, was released, as detailed in the table below. 
Table 6.4: Payment of scholarships to ghost students 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
the district 
Academic 
Year 
No. of 
Institutions 
No. of 
students Amount (₹ ) 
1 Kalahandi 2016-17 9 44 7,68,711 
2018-19 6 56,015 
2 Jharsuguda 
2016-17 
4 
10 1,61,747 
2017-18 3 1,35,000 
2019-20 3 1,35,000 
2020-21 2 88,400 
3 Sundargarh 2018-19 1 1 72,000 
 Total  14 69 14,16,873 
(Source: Information received from the Institutions) 
Audit verified the particulars of these 69 applicants, from the admission 
registers of the concerned 14 institutes and did not find their names in the said 
registers. On enquiry, the Principals of the institut es confirmed (November 
and December 2021) that no such student s had been enrolled in their  
institutions. On further analysis, Audit noted the following deficiencies: 
 Out of 69 beneficiaries, 52 beneficiaries of  11 institutes were paid 
₹ 10.07 lakh , as PMS , during the period  2018-21, but they were not 
registered on the PRERANA portal. No explanation was available with 
the Department/  DWO on this serious lacuna (i.e., payment to non -
registered students).  
 In case of the remaining 17 beneficiaries pertaining to six institutes, it 
was seen that , although they were all registered on the PRERANA 
portal, details of only six students were forwarded to the DWO and 
payment of ₹  2.31 lakh was made . The institutes did not forward the 
applications of the remaining 11 students , to the DWOs , but payment 
of ₹ 1.79 lakh was made to those students.  Thus, there was a 
significant lack of checks and balances , at the level s of the DWO s, as 
well as the Department, leading to irregular payments, as noted above.  
 Audit observed that: (i) the authorities of the institut es had utilised the 
documents of the stud ents for siphoning the scholarship amount s and 
(ii) the DWO s and the Department had not exercis ed due diligence , 
while disbursing the PMS amount of ₹ 14.17 lakh, since this was done 
without ensuring student registration on PRERANA portal and in the 
concerned institutes. The matter, therefore, merits further investigation, 
with a view to fixing responsibility and recover ing ₹14.17 lakh , 
appropriated through illegal means. 

Chapter 6: Suspected Fraud and Corruption 
79 
The SSD Department stated (September 2022) that the matter pointed  out in 
Audit has been referred to concerned DWOs , for detailed investigation and 
necessary action. 
 
 
 
                                                                
Bhubaneswar (RAJ KUMAR) 
The 23 MAY 2023 
 Pr. Accountant General (Audit-I) 
 Odisha 
 Countersigned 
                                                           
New Delhi (GIRISH CHANDRA MURMU) 
The 01 JUN 2023 
 Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 


 

AAppppeennddiicceess  

 

Appendices 
81 
Appendix 4.1 
(Refer Paragraph 4.6.1) 
Delay at different stages, in sanction of scholarships under e-Medhabruti 
A. Renewal cases 
(Amount in ₹) 
Year Category of 
Scholarship Category 
Last date 
for 
validation 
by 
Principals 
Date of 
submission 
of data by 
OCAC to 
Department 
Delay 
between 
validation 
date and 
date of 
data 
submitted 
by OCAC 
Sanction 
Order 
No. 
Sanction 
Order 
date 
Delay 
between 
OCAC 
date and 
Sanction 
order 
date 
Bill 
No. Bill Date 
Delay in 
sanction 
order 
date 
and bill 
date 
Token 
No. 
Token 
Date 
Delay 
in 
bill 
date 
and 
token 
date 
No. of 
student 
as per 
bill 
Bill 
amount 
2017-18 T & P63 Renewal 
2016-17 20-08-2017 17-03-2018 209 25,418 06-09-2018 173 25 06-09-2018 0 11,564 07-09-2018 1 2,713 2,71,30,000 
2018-19 T&P Renewal 
2017-18 
20-01-2019 17-01-2019 -  5,938 08-03-2019 50 45 08-03-2019 0 27,082 15-03-2019 7 91 9,20,000 
2018-19 T&P Renewal 
2016-17 
20-01-2019 17-01-2019 -  5,933 08-03-2019 50 44 08-03-2019 0 27,081 15-03-2019 7 197 26,30,000 
2018-19 T&P Renewal 
15-16,  
20-01-2019 17-01-2019 -  5,928 08-03-2019 50 43 08-03-2019 0 27,079 15-03-2019 7 544 75,80,000 
2018-19 T&P Renewal 
14-15,  
20-01-2019 17-01-2019 -  5,923 08-03-2019 50 42 08-02-2019 -28 27,077 15-03-2019 7 146 24,80,000 
2018-19 T&P Renewal 
14-15,  
20-01-2019 17-03-2018 -  3,197 08-02-2019 328 37 08-02-2019 0 24,030 18-02-2019 10 341 43,70,000 
2018-19 T&P Renewal 
15-16,  
20-01-2019 17-03-2018 -  3,202 08-02-2019 328 38 08-02-2019 0 24,031 18-02-2019 10 2,226 2,60,00,000 
2018-19 T&P Renewal 
2016-17 
20-01-2019 17-03-2018 -  3,207 08-02-2019 328 39 08-02-2019 0 24,032 18-02-2019 10 2,908 3,86,20,000 
2018-19 T&P Renewal 
2017-18 
20-01-2019 17-03-2018 -  3,142 08-02-2019 328 40 08-02-2019 0 24,033 18-02-2019 10 1,009 1,00,90,000 
2018-19 T&P Renewal 
14-15,  
20-01-2019 01-03-2019 40 7,298 25-03-2019 24 64 25-03-2019 0 28,756 26-03-2019 1 3 80,000 
2018-19 T&P Renewal 
15-16,  
20-01-2019 01-03-2019 40 7,293 25-03-2019 24 65 25-03-2019 0 28,757 26-03-2019 1 49 8,30,000 
                                                           
63 Technical & Professional 

Implementation of DBT in payment of Post Matric Scholarship to eligible students in the State 
82 
Year Category of 
Scholarship Category 
Last date 
for 
validation 
by 
Principals 
Date of 
submission 
of data by 
OCAC to 
Department 
Delay 
between 
validation 
date and 
date of 
data 
submitted 
by OCAC 
Sanction 
Order 
No. 
Sanction 
Order 
date 
Delay 
between 
OCAC 
date and 
Sanction 
order 
date 
Bill 
No. Bill Date 
Delay in 
sanction 
order 
date 
and bill 
date 
Token 
No. 
Token 
Date 
Delay 
in 
bill 
date 
and 
token 
date 
No. of 
student 
as per 
bill 
Bill 
amount 
2018-19 T&P Renewal 
2016-17 
20-01-2019 01-03-2019 40 7,308 25-03-2019 24 66 25-03-2019 0 28,758 26-03-2019 1 56 6,30,000 
2018-19 T&P Renewal 
2017-18 
20-01-2019 01-03-2019 40 7,303 25-03-2019 24 67 25-03-2019 0 28,759 26-03-2019 1 21 2,10,000 
2018-19 T&P Renewal 
14-15,  
20-01-2019 10-04-2019 80 11,493 01-06-2019 52 10 10-06-2019 9 5,038 12-06-2019 11 7 1,34,000 
2018-19 T&P Renewal 
15-16,  
20-01-2019 10-04-2019 80 11,498 01-06-2019 52 13 10-06-2019 9 5,039 12-06-2019 11 58 8,80,000 
2018-19 T&P Renewal 
2016-17 
20-01-2019 10-04-2019 80 11,503 01-06-2019 52 14 10-06-2019 9 5,040 12-06-2019 11 36 5,00,000 
2018-19 T&P Renewal 
2017-18 
20-01-2019 10-04-2019 80 11,508 01-06-2019 52 15 10-06-2019 9 5,041 12-06-2019 11 17 1,70,000 
2018-19 T&P Renewal 
15-16,  
20-01-2019 26-07-2019 187 18,930 16-09-2019 52 22 16-09-2019 0 11,845 18-09-2019 2 2 50,000 
2019-20 T&P Renewal 
15-16,  
31-12-2020 13-12-2019 -  768 04-01-2020 22 27 06-01-2020 2 20,240 09-01-2020 5 5 50,000 
2019-20 T&P Renewal 
2016-17 
31-12-2020 13-12-2019 -  773 04-01-2020 22 28 06-01-2020 2 20,241 09-01-2020 5 347 35,10,000 
2019-20 T&P Renewal 
2017-18 
31-12-2020 13-12-2019 -  783 04-01-2020 22 29 06-01-2020 2 20,243 09-01-2020 5 56 5,80,000 
2019-20 T&P Renewal 
2018-19 
31-12-2020 13-12-2019 -  778 04-01-2020 22 30 06-01-2020 2 20,244 09-01-2020 5 177 17,70,000 
2019-20 T&P Renewal 
15-16,  
31-12-2020 13-01-2020 -  10,008 26-02-2020 44 32 04-03-2020 7 25,359 07-03-2020 10 301 32,90,000 
2019-20 T&P Renewal 
2016-17 
31-12-2020 13-01-2020 -  10,003 26-02-2020 44 33 04-03-2020 7 25,360 07-03-2020 10 1,662 1,68,40,000 
2019-20 T&P Renewal 
2017-18 
31-12-2020 13-01-2020 -  9,998 26-02-2020 44 34 04-03-2020 7 25,355 07-03-2020 10 746 75,70,000 
2019-20 T&P Renewal 
2018-19 
31-12-2020 13-01-2020 -  9,993 26-02-2020 44 35 04-03-2020 7 25,357 07-03-2020 10 1,398 1,39,90,000 
2019-20 T&P Renewal 
15-16,  
31-12-2020 13-01-2020 -  9,988 26-02-2020 44 36 04-03-2020 7 25,350 07-03-2020 10 56 6,60,000 
2019-20 T&P Renewal 
2016-17 
31-12-2020 13-01-2020 -  9,983 26-02-2020 44 37 04-03-2020 7 25,352 07-03-2020 10 72 7,80,000 
2019-20 T&P Renewal 
2017-18 
31-12-2020 13-01-2020 -  9,978 26-02-2020 44 38 04-03-2020 7 25,353 07-03-2020 10 54 5,40,000 
2019-20 T&P Renewal 
2018-19 
31-12-2020 13-01-2020 -  9,973 26-02-2020 44 39 04-03-2020 7 25,354 07-03-2020 10 85 8,50,000 

Appendices 
83 
Year Category of 
Scholarship Category 
Last date 
for 
validation 
by 
Principals 
Date of 
submission 
of data by 
OCAC to 
Department 
Delay 
between 
validation 
date and 
date of 
data 
submitted 
by OCAC 
Sanction 
Order 
No. 
Sanction 
Order 
date 
Delay 
between 
OCAC 
date and 
Sanction 
order 
date 
Bill 
No. Bill Date 
Delay in 
sanction 
order 
date 
and bill 
date 
Token 
No. 
Token 
Date 
Delay 
in 
bill 
date 
and 
token 
date 
No. of 
student 
as per 
bill 
Bill 
amount 
2019-20 T&P Renewal 
15-16,  
31-12-2020 03-03-2020 -  17,979 08-06-2020 97 1 09-06-2020 1 3,904 10-06-2020 2 35 4,60,000 
2019-20 T&P Renewal 
2016-17 
31-12-2020 03-03-2020 -  17,989 08-06-2020 97 2 09-06-2020 1 3,905 10-06-2020 2 115 12,30,000 
2019-20 T&P Renewal 
2017-18 
31-12-2020 03-03-2020 -  17,974 08-06-2020 97 3 09-06-2020 1 3,906 10-06-2020 2 40 4,60,000 
2019-20 T&P Renewal 
2018-19 
31-12-2020 03-03-2020 -  17,984 08-06-2020 97 4 09-06-2020 1 3,907 10-06-2020 2 104 10,40,000 
2019-20 T&P Renewal 
15-16,  
31-12-2020 21-03-2020 -  9,799 25-02-2021 341 17 25-02-2021 0 2,121 01-03-2021 4 5 50,000 
2019-20 T&P Renewal 
2016-17 
31-12-2020 21-03-2020 -  9,804 25-02-2021 341 18 25-02-2021 0 2,124 01-03-2021 4 49 5,70,000 
2019-20 T&P Renewal 
2017-18 
31-12-2020 21-03-2020 -  9,809 25-02-2021 341 19 26-02-2021 1 2,818 08-03-2021 11 21 4,70,000 
2019-20 T&P Renewal 
2018-19 
31-12-2020 21-03-2020 -  9,814 25-02-2021 341 20 26-02-2021 1 2,819 08-03-2021 11 52 16,50,000 
2018-19 Jr. Merit (B)64 Renewal 
17-18 
20-01-2019 19-12-2018 -  745 10-01-2019 22 32 11-01-2019 1 21,737 22-01-2019 12 2,492 74,76,000 
2018-19 Jr. Merit (G)65 Renewal 
17-18 
20-01-2019 19-12-2018 -  750 10-01-2019 22 33 11-01-2019 1 21,736 22-01-2019 12 2,342 70,26,000 
2018-19 PG Merit(B) Renewal 
17-18 
20-01-2019 19-12-2018 -  760 10-01-2019 22 31 03-01-2019 -7 21,734 22-01-2019 12 372 37,20,000 
2018-19 PG Merit(G) Renewal 
17-18 
20-01-2019 19-12-2018 -  755 10-01-2019 22 30 11-01-2019 1 21,734 22-01-2019 12 477 47,70,000 
2018-19 Sr. Merit (B) Renewal 
17-18 
20-01-2019 17-03-2018 -  7,192 23-03-2019 371 50 23-03-2019 0 28,740 26-03-2019 3 1,288 64,70,000 
2018-19 Sr. Merit (G) Renewal 
17-18 
20-01-2019 17-03-2018 -  7,197 23-03-2019 371 51 23-03-2019 0 28,741 26-03-2019 3 1,272 63,60,000 
2018-19 Sr. Merit (B) Renewal 
16-17 
20-01-2019 17-03-2018 -  7,187 23-03-2019 371 48 08-03-2019 -15 28,738 26-03-2019 3 546 33,50,000 
2018-19 Sr Merit (G) Renewal 
16-17 
20-01-2019 17-03-2018 -  7,182 23-03-2019 371 49 23-03-2019 0 28,739 26-03-2019 3 576 34,55,000 
2018-19 Jr. Merit (B) Renewal 
17-18 
20-01-2019 17-01-2019 -  7,202 23-03-2019 65 52 23-03-2019 0 28,743 26-03-2019 3 823 25,20,000 
                                                           
64  (B): Boys 
65  (G): Girls 

Implementation of DBT in payment of Post Matric Scholarship to eligible students in the State 
84 
Year Category of 
Scholarship Category 
Last date 
for 
validation 
by 
Principals 
Date of 
submission 
of data by 
OCAC to 
Department 
Delay 
between 
validation 
date and 
date of 
data 
submitted 
by OCAC 
Sanction 
Order 
No. 
Sanction 
Order 
date 
Delay 
between 
OCAC 
date and 
Sanction 
order 
date 
Bill 
No. Bill Date 
Delay in 
sanction 
order 
date 
and bill 
date 
Token 
No. 
Token 
Date 
Delay 
in 
bill 
date 
and 
token 
date 
No. of 
student 
as per 
bill 
Bill 
amount 
2018-19 Jr. Merit (G) Renewal 
17-18 
20-01-2019 17-01-2019 -  7,147 23-03-2019 65 53 23-03-2019 0 28,744 26-03-2019 3 1,065 31,95,000 
2018-19 Sr. Merit (B) Renewal 
16-17 
20-01-2019 17-01-2019 -  7,152 23-03-2019 65 54 23-03-2019 0 28,746 26-03-2019 3 231 14,35,000 
2018-19 Sr. Merit (G) Renewal 
16-17 
20-01-2019 17-01-2019 -  7,157 23-03-2019 65 55 23-03-2019 0 28,747 26-03-2019 3 254 16,00,000 
2018-19 Sr. Merit (B) Renewal 
17-18 
20-01-2019 17-01-2019 -  7,162 23-03-2019 65 56 23-03-2019 0 28,748 26-03-2019 3 424 21,40,000 
2018-19 Sr. Merit (G) Renewal 
17-18 
20-01-2019 17-01-2019 -  7,167 23-03-2019 65 57 23-03-2019 0 28,749 26-03-2019 3 466 23,45,000 
2018-19 PG Merit (B) Renewal 
17-18 
20-01-2019 17-01-2019 -  7,172 23-03-2019 65 58 23-03-2019 0 28,750 26-03-2019 3 60 6,00,000 
2018-19 PG Merit (G) Renewal 
17-18 
20-01-2019 17-01-2019 -  7,177 23-03-2019 65 59 23-03-2019 0 28,751 26-03-2019 3 110 11,00,000 
2018-19 Jr Merit 
(B&G)66 
Renewal 
17-18 
20-01-2019 01-03-2019 40 7,328 25-03-2019 24 60 25-03-2019 0 28,752 26-03-2019 1 872 26,55,000 
2018-19 Sr. Merit (B&G) Renewal 
16-17 
20-01-2019 01-03-2019 40 7,323 25-03-2019 24 61 25-03-2019 0 28,753 26-03-2019 1 174 12,25,000 
2018-19 Sr. Merit (B&G) Renewal 
17-18 
20-01-2019 01-03-2019 40 7,318 25-03-2019 24 62 25-03-2019 0 28,754 26-03-2019 1 389 19,55,000 
2018-19 PG Merit 
(B&G) 
Renewal 
17-18 
20-01-2019 01-03-2019 40 7,313 25-03-2019 24 63 25-03-2019 0 28,755 26-03-2019 1 81 8,10,000 
2018-19 Jr. Merit (G) Renewal 
17-18 
20-01-2019 10-04-2019 80 11,157 30-05-2019 50 1 31-05-2019 1 4,612 01-06-2019 2 918 27,72,000 
2018-19 Jr. Merit (B) Renewal 
17-18 
20-01-2019 10-04-2019 80 11,162 30-05-2019 50 2 31-05-2019 1 4,614 01-06-2019 2 1,068 32,46,000 
2018-19 Sr. Merit (B) Renewal 
16-17 
20-01-2019 10-04-2019 80 11,167 30-05-2019 50 5 31-05-2019 1 4,619 01-06-2019 2 175 1,43,50,000 
2018-19 Sr. Merit (G) Renewal 
16-17 
20-01-2019 10-04-2019 80 11,175 30-05-2019 50 6 31-05-2019 1 4,620 01-06-2019 2 175 13,55,000 
2018-19 Sr. Merit (B) Renewal 
17-18 
20-01-2019 10-04-2019 80 11,180 30-05-2019 50 8 31-05-2019 1 4,621 01-06-2019 2 368 18,55,000 
2018-19 Sr. Merit (G) Renewal 
17-18 
20-01-2019 10-04-2019 80 11,185 30-05-2019 50 9 31-05-2019 1 4,622 01-06-2019 2 326 16,40,000 
                                                           
66  B & G: Boys and Girls 

Appendices 
85 
Year Category of 
Scholarship Category 
Last date 
for 
validation 
by 
Principals 
Date of 
submission 
of data by 
OCAC to 
Department 
Delay 
between 
validation 
date and 
date of 
data 
submitted 
by OCAC 
Sanction 
Order 
No. 
Sanction 
Order 
date 
Delay 
between 
OCAC 
date and 
Sanction 
order 
date 
Bill 
No. Bill Date 
Delay in 
sanction 
order 
date 
and bill 
date 
Token 
No. 
Token 
Date 
Delay 
in 
bill 
date 
and 
token 
date 
No. of 
student 
as per 
bill 
Bill 
amount 
2018-19 PG Merit (B) Renewal 
17-18 
20-01-2019 10-04-2019 80 11,190 30-05-2019 50 4 31-05-2019 1 4,618 01-06-2019 2 18 1,80,000 
2018-19 PG Merit (G) Renewal 
17-18 
20-01-2019 10-04-2019 80 11,195 30-05-2019 50 3 31-05-2019 1 4,616 01-06-2019 2 29 2,90,000 
2018-19 Jr. Merit (B&G) Renewal 
18-19 
20-01-2019 11-02-2020 387 20,264 22-06-2020 132 7 22-06-2020 0 5,419 02-07-2020 10 3,608 1,08,24,000 
2018-19 Sr. Merit (B&G) Renewal 
17-18 
20-01-2019 11-02-2020 387 35,869 09-11-2020 272 12 11-11-2020 2 3,886 18-11-2020 9 3,051 1,63,90,000 
2018-19 PG Merit (B& 
G) 
Renewal 
18-19 
20-01-2019 11-02-2020 387 19,037 12-06-2020 122 6 22-06-2020 10 5,421 02-07-2020 20 1,196 1,19,60,000 
2019-20 Sr. Merit (B&G) Renewal 
20-21, 
21-22 
31-12-2020 26-02-2020   
3,375 
22-01-2021 331 14 23-02-2021 32 
2,815 
08-03-2021 45 
2,923 2,92,30,000 
 
 
B. Fresh cases 
Year Group Category 
Last date 
for 
validation 
by 
Principal 
Date of 
submission 
of data by 
OCAC to 
Department 
Delay in 
validati
on date 
and 
OCAC 
date (in 
days) 
Sanctio
n Order 
No. 
Sanction 
Order 
date 
Delay 
between 
Sanctio
n date 
and 
OCAC 
date (in 
days) 
Bill 
No. Bill Date Token 
No. 
Token 
Date 
Delay 
betwee
n 
sanctio
n date 
and 
token 
date (in 
days) 
No. of 
student 
as per 
bill 
Bill 
amount 
Delay 
between 
token 
date and 
OCAC 
date ( in 
days) 
2017-
18 
Jr. Merit Fresh 
(Boys) 
20-08-
2017 
22-11-2017 94 33,400 07-12-
2017 
15 26 06-12-
2017 7,558 16-12-
2017 
9 4,714 1,41,42,000 24 
2017-
18 
Jr. Merit  Fresh (Girls) 20-08-
2017 
22-11-2017 94 33,403 07-12-
2017 
15 27 12-12-
2017 7,559 16-12-
2017 
9 4,739 1,42,17,000 24 
2017-
18 
Sr. Merit Fresh 
(Boys) 
20-08-
2017 
22-11-2017 94 33,910 12-12-
2017 
20 28 13-12-
2017 7,560 16-12-
2017 
4 1,477 73,85,000 24 
2017-
18 
Sr. Merit  Fresh (Girls) 20-08-
2017 
22-11-2017 94 33,913 12-12-
2017 
20 29 13-12-
2017 7,562 16-12-
2017 
4 1,465 73,25,000 24 
2017-
18 
Jr. Merit  Fresh  20-01-
2018 
16-02-2018 27 21,731 30-07-
2018 
164 17 30-07-
2018 9,009 02-08-
2018 
3 1,350 40,50,000 167 

Implementation of DBT in payment of Post Matric Scholarship to eligible students in the State 
86 
Year Group Category 
Last date 
for 
validation 
by 
Principal 
Date of 
submission 
of data by 
OCAC to 
Department 
Delay in 
validati
on date 
and 
OCAC 
date (in 
days) 
Sanctio
n Order 
No. 
Sanction 
Order 
date 
Delay 
between 
Sanctio
n date 
and 
OCAC 
date (in 
days) 
Bill 
No. Bill Date Token 
No. 
Token 
Date 
Delay 
betwee
n 
sanctio
n date 
and 
token 
date (in 
days) 
No. of 
student 
as per 
bill 
Bill 
amount 
Delay 
between 
token 
date and 
OCAC 
date ( in 
days) 
2017-
18 
Jr. Merit Fresh  20-01-
2018 
16-02-2018 27 21,716 30-07-
2018 
164 18 30-07-
2018 9,010 02-08-
2018 
3 1,280 38,40,000 167 
2017-
18 
Sr. Merit  Fresh  20-01-
2018 
16-02-2018 27 21,726 30-07-
2018 
164 20 30-07-
2018 9,012 02-08-
2018 
3 1,440 72,00,000 167 
2017-
18 
Sr. Merit Fresh  20-01-
2018 
16-02-2018 27 21,721 30-07-
2018 
164 19 30-07-
2018 9,011 02-08-
2018 
3 1,407 70,35,000 167 
2017-
18 
Jr. Merit Fresh 20-08-
2017 
22-11-2017 94 93 02-01-
2019 
406 28 03-01-
2019 1,732 22-01-
2019 
20 422 12,66,000 426 
2017-
18 
Sr. Merit Fresh  20-08-
2017 
22-11-2017 94 88 02-01-
2019 
406 29 03-01-
2019 1,729 22-01-
2019 
20 30 1,50,000 426 
2017-
18 
PG 
Merit 
Fresh 
(Boys) 
20-08-
2017 
12-12-2017 114 5,834 26-02-
2018 
76 48 03-03-
2018 26,153 20-03-
2018 
22 466 46,60,000 98 
2017-
18 
PG 
Merit 
Fresh (Girls) 20-08-
2017 
12-12-2017 114 5,837 26-02-
2018 
76 49 03-03-
2018 26,154 20-03-
2018 
22 734 73,40,000 98 
2017-
18 
PG 
Merit 
Fresh 
(Boys) 
20-08-
2017 
12-12-2017 114 18,529 27-06-
2018 
197 8 29-06-
2018 7,162 07-07-
2018 
10 19 1,90,000 207 
2017-
18 
PG 
Merit 
Fresh (Girls)  20-08-
2017 
12-12-2017 114 18,534 27-06-
2018 
197 9 29-06-
2018 7,163 07-07-
2018 
10 45 4,50,000 207 
2017-
18 
T&P Fresh 20-08-
2017 
12-12-2017 114 5,840 26-02-
2018 
76 54 07-03-
2018 26,159 20-03-
2018 
22 1,101 1,10,10,000 98 
2017-
18 
T&P Fresh 20-08-
2017 
12-12-2017 114 21,736 30-07-
2018 
230 21 31-07-
2018 9,013 02-08-
2018 
3 141 14,10,000 233 
2018-
19 
T&P Fresh 20-01-
2019 
12-02-2019 23 14,581 02-08-
2019 
171 16 02-08-
2019 9,023 06-08-
2019 
4 2,008 2,00,80,000 175 
2018-
19 
T&P Fresh 20-01-
2019 
12-02-2019 23 19,559 23-09-
2019 
223 24 23-09-
2019 12,542 04-10-
2019 
11 10 1,00,000 234 
2018-
19 
Jr Merit Fresh 
(Boys) 
31-12-
2018 
19-01-2019 19 26,091 21-11-
2019 
306 26 21-11-
2019 17,742 04-12-
2019 
13 4,991 1,49,73,000 319 
2018-
19 
Jr Merit Fresh (Girls) 31-12-
2018 
19-01-2019 19 26,098 21-11-
2019 
306 25 21-11-
2019 17,741 04-12-
2019 
13 4,996 1,49,88,000 319 
2018-
19 
Sr. Merit  Fresh 
(Boys) 
31-12-
2018 
19-01-2019 19 16,361 14-08-
2019 
207 17 14-08-
2019 10,003 22-08-
2019 
8 1,498 74,90,000 215 
2018-
19 
Sr. Merit  Fresh (Girls) 31-12-
2018 
19-01-2019 19 16,366 14-08-
2019 
207 18 14-08-
2019 9,901 21-08-
2019 
7 1,500 75,00,000 214 
2018-
19 
PG 
Merit 
Fresh 
(Boys) 
20-01-
2019 
12-02-2019 23 16,371 14-08-
2019 
183 19 14-08-
2019 9,900 21-08-
2019 
7 750 75,00,000 190 
2018-
19 
PG 
Merit 
Fresh (Girls) 20-01-
2019 
12-02-2019 23 16,376 14-08-
2019 
183 20 14-08-
2019 9,899 21-08-
2019 
7 750 75,00,000 190 

Appendices 
87 
Year Group Category 
Last date 
for 
validation 
by 
Principal 
Date of 
submission 
of data by 
OCAC to 
Department 
Delay in 
validati
on date 
and 
OCAC 
date (in 
days) 
Sanctio
n Order 
No. 
Sanction 
Order 
date 
Delay 
between 
Sanctio
n date 
and 
OCAC 
date (in 
days) 
Bill 
No. Bill Date Token 
No. 
Token 
Date 
Delay 
betwee
n 
sanctio
n date 
and 
token 
date (in 
days) 
No. of 
student 
as per 
bill 
Bill 
amount 
Delay 
between 
token 
date and 
OCAC 
date ( in 
days) 
2019-
20 
Sr. Merit  Fresh 
(B&G) 
15-02-
2020 
26-02-2020 11 28,742 08-09-
2020 
195 9 23-09-
2020 9,755 29-09-
2020 
7 2,924 1,46,20,000 202 
2019-
20 
Sr. Merit Fresh 
(B&G) 
15-02-
2020 
26-02-2020 11 3,530 22-01-
2021 
331 13 22-01-
2021 8,827 27-01-
2021 
5 76 11,40,000 336 
2019-
20 
T&P Fresh 
(B&G) 
15-02-
2020 
26-02-2020 11 25,372 04-08-
2020 
160 8 06-08-
2020 7,734 14-08-
2020 
10 1,783 1,78,30,000 170 
2019-
20 
PG 
Merit 
Fresh 
(B&G) 
15-02-
2020 26-02-2020 
11 30,007 23-09-
2020 
210 15 28-01-
2021 9,416 01-02-
2021 
131 1,304 1,30,40,000 341 
2019-
20 
PG 
Merit 
Fresh  15-02-
2020 26-02-2020 
11 10,967 03-03-
2021 
371 23 09-03-
2021 4,746 22-03-
2021 
19 196 39,20,000 390 
(Source: Records of Higher Education Department) 
  

Implementation of DBT in payment of Post Matric Scholarship to eligible students in the State 
88 
Appendix 4.2 
(Refer Paragraph 4.6.2) 
Non-validation of applications by Heads of Institutions 
Sl. 
No. Year Type of Scholarship Category Target Students 
applied 
Validated by 
Institution 
Not-
Validated 
Cut off mark 
of selection 
(per cent) 
Students above the 
cut off mark whose 
records are not 
validated 
1 2017-18 Jr. Merit (Boys) Fresh 5,000 24,262 15,537 8,725 74.67 2,564 
2 2017-18 Jr. Merit (Girls) Fresh 5,000 27,364 17,683 9,681 76.00 2,517 
3 2017-18 Sr. Merit (Boys) Fresh 1,500 4,689 4,669 20 63.50 20 
4 2017-18 Sr. Merit (Girls) Fresh 1,500 5,603 5,591 12 66.33 12 
5 2017-18 PG Merit (Boys) Fresh 750 1,064 718 346 60.05 293 
6 2017-18 PG Merit (Girls) Fresh 750 1,489 1,081 408 60.00 352 
7 2017-18 Technical & Professional Merit Fresh 10,000 5,251 3,751 1,500 60.00 1,139 
8 2018-19 Jr. Merit (Boys) Fresh 5,000 63,956 8,227 55,723 70.83 20,481 
9 2018-19 Jr. Merit (Girls) Fresh 5,000 66,399 10,170 56,218 72.67 16,832 
10 2018-19 Sr. Merit (Boys) Fresh 1,500 19,307 3,532 15,740 69.50 5,080 
11 2018-19 Sr. Merit (Girls) Fresh 1,500 25,424 5,447 19,918 71.67 4,068 
12 2018-19 PG Merit (Boys) Fresh 750 1,543 1,180 240 65.72 158 
13 2018-19 PG Merit (Girls) Fresh 750 2,213 1,735 262 70.00 121 
14 2018-19 Technical & Professional Merit Fresh 10,000 3,605 2,796 408 60.00 407 
15 2019-20 Sr. Merit Fresh 3,000 42,714 11,643 31,071 60.00 31,071 
16 2019-20 PG Merit  Fresh 1,500 3,150 2,720 430 60.08 427 
17 2019-20 Technical & Professional Merit Fresh 10,000 2,462 2,187 275 60.00 272 
     Total 
      
85,814 
(Source: Information received from the Higher Education Department and OCAC) 
  

Appendices 
89 
Appendix 4.3 
(Refer Paragraph 4.6.2) 
Statement showing non-validation of renewal applications by the Heads of Institutions 
(Amount in ₹) 
Year Category No. of cases Approved Rejected Non-validated Scholarship amount per year Total Amount 
2018-19 Jr. Merit 12,673 9,587 453 2,633 3,000 78,99,000 
2018-19 Sr. Merit 8,888 6,700 510 1,678 5,000 83,90,000 
2018-19 PG Merit 1,264 1,152 15 97 10,000 9,70,000 
2018-19 
Technical & 
Professional. Merit67 13,289 7,997 3,510 1,782 10,000 1,78,20,000 
2019-20 Jr. Merit 10,000 5,582 577 3,841 3,000 1,15,23,000 
2019-20 Sr. Merit 8,905 5,430 615 2,860 5,000 1,43,00,000 
2019-20 PG Merit 1,500 1,279 56 165 10,000 16,50,000 
2019-20 Tech. & Prof. Merit 6,998 5,500 579 919 10,000 91,90,000 
  Total 63,517 43,227 6,315 13,975   7,17,42,000 
(Source: Information received from OCAC) 
 
  
                                                           
67  The ‘Technical & Professional’ category of scholarships under Medhabruti are meant for courses like Engineering, Medical, Management, etc. 

Implementation of DBT in payment of Post Matric Scholarship to eligible students in the State 
90 
Appendix 5.1 
(Refer Paragraph 5.1.2) 
Payment of Post Matric Scholarship to same students studying in different 
institutions 
Sl. No. District No. of Institutions Amount paid (in ₹) 
1.  Angul 26 4,90,452 
2.  Balasore 97 31,35,737 
3.  Bargarh 9 44,802 
4.  Bhadrak 24 3,12,337 
5.  Bolangir 27 2,42,458 
6.  Boudh 14 56,101 
7.  Cuttack 47 12,33,841 
8.  Deogarh 1 7,052 
9.  Dhenkanal 33 6,49,900 
10.  Gajapati 9 55,797 
11.  Ganjam 30 8,70,292 
12.  Jagatsinghpur 11 96,335 
13.  Jajpur 39 6,13,904 
14.  Jharsuguda 1 7,300 
15.  Kalahandi 28 1,75,043 
16.  Kandhamal 30 3,36,408 
17.  Kendrapada 24 1,52,400 
18.  Keonjhar 23 2,00,721 
19.  Khurda 256 1,14,06,641 
20.  Koraput 18 2,29,850 
21.  Malkangiri 2 27,074 
22.  Mayurbhanj 85 12,53,258 
23.  Nabarangpur 9 1,53,222 
24.  Nayagarh 11 3,74,300 
25.  Nuapada 13 2,10,161 
26.  Puri 39 8,00,293 
27.  Rayagada 20 5,81,953 
28.  Sambalpur 12 90,129 
29.  Subarnapur 12 2,13,161 
30.  Sundargarh 23 3,08,262 
Total 973 2,43,29,184 
(Source: Analysis of PRERANA database) 
 
 
  

Appendices 
91 
Appendix 5.2 
(Refer Paragraph 5.1.3) 
Payment of Post Matric Scholarship to beneficiaries under same stage of 
course 
Sl. 
No. Name of Institute District No. of 
students 
Amount 
(in ₹) 
1.  Bhatlaida (Junior) College, Bhatlaida Jharsuguda 1 8,000 
2.  Debadihi ITC Jharsuguda 19 5,72,800 
3.  Binayak Residential College, Bhawanipatna Kalahandi 1 4,964 
4.  Panchayat Samiti (Junior) College, Narla Kalahandi 1 5,955 
5.  Sanchergaon Anchalika Bastarani (Jr.) 
Mahavidyalaya 
Kalahandi 1 4,200 
6.  Swami Chidananda (Junior) Mahavidyalaya, 
Karchala 
Kalahandi 1 3,800 
7.  Govt. I.T.I. Malkanagiri 13 1,45,800 
8.  Malkangiri (Junior) College, Malkangiri Malkanagiri 1 3,140 
9.  Regional Higher Secondary  Malkanagiri 1 11,500 
10.  Regional Jr College Podia Malkanagiri 1 23,279 
11.  Amravati Polytechnic Mayurbhanj 35 15,62,620 
12.  Angara Para (Junior) College, Raruan Mayurbhanj 3 11,464 
13.  Anla (Junior) Mahavidyalaya, Anla Mayurbhanj 3 14,459 
14.  Annapurna ITC Mayurbhanj 6 92,000 
15.  Ashutosh Vocational Training Centre Mayurbhanj 16 4,17,120 
16.  Baba Jateswar (Junior) Mahavidyalaya Mayurbhanj 1 2,995 
17.  Baba Kakharua Baidyanath (Junior) College Mayurbhanj 1 2,995 
18.  Badampahar (Junior) College, Badampahar Mayurbhanj 5 19,989 
19.  Baisainga ITC Mayurbhanj 19 2,65,570 
20.  Banabhumi (Junior) Mahavidyalaya, 
Rangamatia 
Mayurbhanj 1 3,053 
21.  Banabhumi Higher Secondary School, 
Rangamatia 
Mayurbhanj 3 9,735 
22.  Barasahi Panchayat Samiti (Junior) College Mayurbhanj 2 5,990 
23.  Baripada (Junior) College, Baripada Mayurbhanj 1 2,823 
24.  Baripada ITC Mayurbhanj 3 65,070 
25.  Baripada Safety Training Institute Mayurbhanj 21 5,76,760 
26.  Betnoti ITC Mayurbhanj 6 1,13,420 
27.  Betnoti (Junior) College, Betnoti Mayurbhanj 4 13,423 
28.  Bhanjabhumi (Junior) Mahavidyalaya, Dukura Mayurbhanj 6 29,183 
29.  Bhanjabhumi ITC Mayurbhanj 4 90,440 
30.  BijuPatnaik (Junior) College, Ghagarbeda Mayurbhanj 1 2,995 
31.  BijuPatnaik (Junior) College, Singda Mayurbhanj 1 2,823 
32.  Binod Bihari Anchalik (Junior) Mahavidyalaya Mayurbhanj 3 14,631 
33.  Binodini (Junior) Mahila Mahavidyalaya, 
Banakati 
Mayurbhanj 1 5,818 
34.  Capital University Mayurbhanj 9 2,98,040 
35.  Chaitanya Prasad College, Bhanjakia Mayurbhanj 5 17,419 
36.  Chaitanya Prasad Junior Womens College Mayurbhanj 5 25,326 
37.  Chaitnya Prasad (Junior) College, Kendua Mayurbhanj 3 9,045 
38.  Chitrada (Junior) College, Chitrada Mayurbhanj 1 2,995 
39.  Chitrada ITC Mayurbhanj 2 20,750 
40.  Deo (Junior) College, Tato Mayurbhanj 2 11,636 
41.  Dhanghera (Junior) College, Dhanghera Mayurbhanj 1 2,995 
42.  Dhirajlal (Junior) College, Bahalda Mayurbhanj 8 43,548 
43.  Divine Institute of Engineering and Technology Mayurbhanj 31 13,63,270 
44.  Gadia Anchalika (Junior) Mahavidyalaya, Gadia Mayurbhanj 3 11,636 
45.  Garumahisani ITC, Garumahisani Mayurbhanj 5 55,380 

Implementation of DBT in payment of Post Matric Scholarship to eligible students in the State 
92 
Sl. 
No. Name of Institute District No. of 
students 
Amount 
(in ₹) 
46.  Global Institute Of Safety Training, Gadadeulia Mayurbhanj 4 1,18,410 
47.  Gorumahisani Iron (Junior) College, 
Gorumahisani 
Mayurbhanj 7 22,872 
48.  Goura Mohan Sathua (Junior) College, Kosta Mayurbhanj 1 5,818 
49.  Gouri Shankar (Junior) Mahavidyalaya, 
Khadiasole 
Mayurbhanj 1 10,523 
50.  Government Sanskrit Higher Secondary School Mayurbhanj 1 3,029 
51.  Government Vocational Higher Secondary 
School, Rangamatia 
Mayurbhanj 1 3,283 
52.  Govt Polytechnic, Mayurbhanj Mayurbhanj 15 1,27,820 
53.  Govt. (Ssd) Higher Secondary School, Bankati Mayurbhanj 1 985 
54.  Govt. (Ssd) Higher Secondary School, Badhunia Mayurbhanj 1 600 
55.  Govt. Sanskrit College, Baripada Mayurbhanj 1 2,569 
56.  Govt. TTI, Takatpur, Mayurbhanj Mayurbhanj 12 98,600 
57.  Govt. Vocational (Junior) College Mayurbhanj 1 2,863 
58.  Govt. Vocational Junior College, Rairangpur Mayurbhanj 1 5,686 
59.  Guruprasad ITC Mayurbhanj 6 70,280 
60.  Haraprava (Junior) Mahavidyalaya, Kalabadia Mayurbhanj 1 2,765 
61.  Indira Gandhi (Junior) Mahila Mahavidyalaya Mayurbhanj 4 28,211 
62.  Institute Of Industrial Education Training ITC Mayurbhanj 29 5,38,540 
63.  ITC, Bisoi Mayurbhanj 16 2,50,300 
64.  ITET Vocational Training Centre Mayurbhanj 52 14,49,470 
65.  IVET Vocational Training Centre Mayurbhanj 69 20,47,770 
66.  J.B. College Hatbadra Mayurbhanj 5 14,708 
67.  Jagannath ITC Mayurbhanj 7 1,20,680 
68.  Jashipur Higher Secondary School, Jashipur Mayurbhanj 1 2,823 
69.  JhansiraniWomens (Junior) College, Padasitha Mayurbhanj 1 2,995 
70.  Jyoti ITC, Bangiriposi Mayurbhanj 14 1,54,980 
71.  Kailash Chandra Dilip Kumar (Junior) College Mayurbhanj 1 2,995 
72.  Kalinga (Junior) College, Manada Mayurbhanj 5 19,894 
73.  Kalinga Institute Of Safety Training, 
Khetrapatna 
Mayurbhanj 12 3,48,300 
74.  Kaptipada (Junior) College, Kaptipada Mayurbhanj 2 5,818 
75.  Karanjia (Junior) College, Karanjia Mayurbhanj 3 8,718 
76.  Karanjia ITC Mayurbhanj 13 2,12,140 
77.  Kasinath Institute Of Technological Education Mayurbhanj 4 2,07,360 
78.  Khunta (Junior) Mahavidyalaya Khunta Mayurbhanj 4 14,883 
79.  Krushna Chandrapur (Junior) College Mayurbhanj 1 5,818 
80.  Lalmohan Sanskrit Mahavidyalaya Mayurbhanj 1 20,092 
81.  Laxmi Kanta (Junior) College, Bangriposi Mayurbhanj 3 28,958 
82.  Luipa (Junior) Mahavidyalaya, Radho Mayurbhanj 1 2,995 
83.  M.P.C Junior College, Baripada Mayurbhanj 11 39,029 
84.  Maa Basuli (Junior) Mahavidyalaya, 
Thakurmunda 
Mayurbhanj 5 52,861 
85.  Maa Duarsuni (Junior) College, Kuabuda Mayurbhanj 2 5,990 
86.  Maa Kitchakeswari (Junior) College, Khiching Mayurbhanj 1 2,823 
87.  Madalisahu ITC Mayurbhanj 14 2,15,730 
88.  Madalisahu Plus 2 Vocational Science College Mayurbhanj 4 14,030 
89.  Maharaja Purna Chandra Higher Secondary 
School, Baripada 
Mayurbhanj 1 3,361 
90.  Mahatma Gandhi (Junior) Mahavidyalaya, 
Baisingha 
Mayurbhanj 3 8,755 
91.  Mahatma Gandhi Higher Secondary School, 
Baisingha 
Mayurbhanj 1 2,823 
92.  Mahila (Junior) Mahavidyalaya, Rairangpur Mayurbhanj 3 23,520 
93.  Mahima Institute Of Industrial Tech. ITC Mayurbhanj 1 6,840 

Appendices 
93 
Sl. 
No. Name of Institute District No. of 
students 
Amount 
(in ₹) 
94.  Mata Baishno Devi ITC Mayurbhanj 3 26,680 
95.  Millan Devi ITC Mayurbhanj 5 75,000 
96.  North Odisha School Of Engineering Mayurbhanj 66 33,22,620 
97.  North Orissa ITC Mayurbhanj 4 59,840 
98.  Odisha Safety Training Institute Mayurbhanj 76 21,18,120 
99.  Om Sai Institute Of Paramedical Science Mayurbhanj 1 49,000 
100.  Om Sai ITC Mayurbhanj 13 2,00,760 
101.  Panchapalli (Junior) Mahavidyalaya, Sainkula Mayurbhanj 1 5,818 
102.  Panchayat Samiti (Junior) College, Dharampura Mayurbhanj 1 2,995 
103.  Panda ITC Mayurbhanj 6 78,000 
104.  Pandit Raghunath Murmu (Junior) 
Mahavidyalaya 
Mayurbhanj 2 8,583 
105.  Parmeshwar ITC Mayurbhanj 4 73,380 
106.  Purna Chandra Government ITI, Baripada Mayurbhanj 43 2,21,090 
107.  Plus 2 Junior Science College, Badampahar 
(SSD) 
Mayurbhanj 1 1,605 
108.  Purna Chandra Government ITI, Baripada Mayurbhanj 2 9,600 
109.  Purusottam Institute Of Fire And Safety 
Techniques 
Mayurbhanj 2 65,600 
110.  Radha Govinda Anchalik (Junior) 
Mahavidyalaya 
Mayurbhanj 1 2,823 
111.  Radha Krishna ITC Mayurbhanj 4 33,980 
112.  Rairangpur (Junior)College, Rairangpur Mayurbhanj 13 75,056 
113.  Rairangpur Higher Secondary School, 
Rairangpur 
Mayurbhanj 1 2,823 
114.  Rairangpur Industrial Training-cum-Production 
Centre 
Mayurbhanj 125 14,86,410 
115.  Rajanikanta (Junior) Higher Secondary School Mayurbhanj 5 14,214 
116.  Rakhal Chandra ITC Mayurbhanj 3 42,910 
117.  Regional ITC Mayurbhanj 10 1,24,300 
118.  Ridayanath (Junior) College, Barbil Mayurbhanj 2 8,813 
119.  Ridayanath Higher Secondary School, Barbil Mayurbhanj 1 2,823 
120.  Rinkul Raj Sanskrit Higher Secondary School Mayurbhanj 1 2,339 
121.  Rinkulraj ITI Mayurbhanj 1 13,000 
122.  Ritayani ITC Mayurbhanj 4 84,000 
123.  Rohi Das Soren (Junior) Mahavidyalaya, 
Kundabai 
Mayurbhanj 3 11,578 
124.  Saheed Birsa Munda (Junior) College, Jamda Mayurbhanj 15 64,137 
125.  Saheed Memorial (Junior) College, Manada Mayurbhanj 1 9,925 
126.  Sai Sadhana ITC Mayurbhanj 14 1,38,670 
127.  Sai Safety Training Institute Mayurbhanj 28 8,09,180 
128.  Sai Vocational Training Centre, Purunabaripada Mayurbhanj 8 2,24,960 
129.  Sakuntala Sudarshan Institute Of Technology Mayurbhanj 102 36,17,110 
130.  Saratpal (Junior) Mahavidyalaya, Pallabihar Mayurbhanj 1 5,588 
131.  Seemanta (Junior) Mahavidyalaya, Jharpokharia Mayurbhanj 4 14,768 
132.  Seemanta Engineering College Mayurbhanj 23 6,83,780 
133.  Seemanta I.T.C. Mayurbhanj 5 47,880 
134.  Shaikh Institute Of Medical Technology, 
Baripada 
Mayurbhanj 2 91,000 
135.  Shree Jagannath (Junior) Mahavidyalaya, 
Balijoda 
Mayurbhanj 3 11,808 
136.  Shreekshetra ITC Mayurbhanj 3 47,210 
137.  Shri Jagannath Adarsha Sanskrit Mahavidyalaya Mayurbhanj 2 5,462 
138.  Siridi Sai ITC Mayurbhanj 7 1,32,000 
139.  Sri Rama Chandra Bhanj (Junior) College Mayurbhanj 2 6,050 

Implementation of DBT in payment of Post Matric Scholarship to eligible students in the State 
94 
Sl. 
No. Name of Institute District No. of 
students 
Amount 
(in ₹) 
140.  SSB Regional Institute of Science and 
Technology 
Mayurbhanj 115 51,27,460 
141.  Sukruli (Junior) College, Sukruli Mayurbhanj 2 5,990 
142.  Technical Training Institute ITC Mayurbhanj 1 13,910 
143.  Technoworld Plus 2 Science Res. College, 
Rairangpur 
Mayurbhanj 1 3,055 
144.  TTI Takatpur, Baripada Mayurbhanj 162 5,83,590 
145.  Udala (Junior) Colleg,e Udala Mayurbhanj 2 22,870 
146.  Udayanath ITI Mayurbhanj 9 75,870 
147.  Upendra Nath (Junior) College, Nalagaja Mayurbhanj 1 2,765 
148.  Vet Vocational Training Centre, Udala Mayurbhanj 2 54,820 
149.  Vikas ITI Mayurbhanj 10 2,31,140 
150.  Mayurbhanj \Safety Training Institute Mayurbhanj 61 18,11,180 
151.  Mayurbhanj School of Engineering, Baripada Mayurbhanj 69 26,79,660 
  Grand Total  1,668  3,70,56,765 
(Source: Records of DWO and PRERANA database) 
  

Appendices 
95 
Appendix 6.1 
(Refer Paragraph 6.1.1) 
Payment of Post Matric Scholarship to students of ineligible institutions 
 
Sl. 
No. Name of Institute No. of 
Student 
Amount 
(in ₹) 
1 Ashutosh Vocational Training Centre 120 31,28,400 
2 Baripada Safety Training Institute 311 87,49,205 
3 Global Institute of Safety Training, 
Gadadeulia 92 27,44,220 
4 Institute of Allied Health Science 19 9,31,000 
5 ITET Vocational Training Centre 1,018 3,05,61,295 
6 IVET Vocational Training Centre 611 1,86,05,093 
7 Jewels International Chetna College of 
Special Education 4 49,028 
8 Kalinga Institute of Safety Training, 
Khetrapatna 87 25,97,940 
9 Mayurbhanj Safety Training Institute 862 2,63,79,687 
10 Odisha Institute of Fire And Safety 82 22,66,480 
11 Odisha Safety Training Institute 945 2,96,93,684 
12 Purushottam Institute of Fire And Safety 
Techniques 28 9,13,010 
13 Sai Safety Training Institute 836 2,66,92,669 
14 Sai Vocational Training Centre, Puruna, 
Baripada 120 33,18,980 
15 Vet Vocational Training Centre, Udala 50 12,55,140 
 Total 5,185 15,78,85,831 
(Source: PRERANA data analysis) 

 

GGLLOOSSSSAARRYY  
 

 

Glossary 
97 
Glossary of abbreviations 
ACS Additional Chief Secretary  
ADWO Assistant District Welfare Officer  
BSS Bharat Sevak Samaj  
C&AG Comptroller & Auditor General of India 
CEPC Central Electronic Processing Centre 
CGPA Cumulative Grade Point Average 
CHSE Council of Higher Secondary Education 
CS Central Sector  
CSS Centrally Sponsored Scheme 
DBT Direct Benefit Transfer 
DDO Drawing and Disbursing Officer 
DoE Department of Expenditure 
DPR Detailed Project Report 
DTET Directorate of Technical Education & Training 
DTI Director of Treasury and Inspection 
DWO District Welfare Officer 
EBC Economically Backward Classes 
GA General Administration  
GoI Government of India 
GoO Government of Odisha 
GP Gram Panchayat  
HED Higher Education Department 
HRMIS Human Resource Management Information System  
HSS Higher Secondary School 
ICSE Indian Certificate of Secondary Education 
IEC Information , Education and Communication 
IFMS Integrated Financial Management System  
ITI Industrial Training Institutes  
JPI Joint Physical Inspection  
MA Maintenance Allowance 
MoSJE Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment  
MoTA Ministry of Tribal Affairs  
NCVRT National Council of Vocational Research & Training  
NIC National Informatics Centre  
NPCI National Payment Corporation of India  
OBC Other Backward Classes 
OCAC Odisha Computer Application Centre  
OGFR Orissa General Financial Rules  
OSEPA Odisha School Education Programme Authority 
OSSP Odisha State Scholarship Portal  
OTC Orissa Treasury Code  
PFMS Public Financial Management System 
PMS Post Matric Scholarship 
PRERAN
A 
Post-matric Scholarship Registration Release and Network 
Automation 
RBI Reserve Bank of India 

Implementation of DBT in payment of Post Matric Scholarship to eligible students in the State 
98 
RDM Revenue and Disaster Management 
SAC State Advisory Committee  
SAMS Student Academic Management System  
SC Scheduled Caste 
SCTEVT State Council of Technical Educational & Vocational Training  
SDC State DBT Cell 
SDTE Skill Development and Technical Education  
SEBC Socially and Educationally Backward Classes 
SECC Socio-Economic Caste Census 
SLBC State Level Bankers' Committee 
SOP Standard Operating Procedure  
SRS System Requirement Specifications 
SSD ST&SC Development, Minorities and Backward Classes Welfare 
ST Schedule Tribe 
TP Merit Technical and Professional Merit 
UG Under Graduate 
UIDAI Unique Identification Authority of India  
URS User Requirement Specifications 
WEO Welfare Extension Officer  
 

 

 
 
© COMPTROLLER AND 
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA 
https://cag.gov.in/ag1/odisha 