www.agjh.cag.gov.in
Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India
on 
Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand 
Government of Jharkhand
(Performance Audit)
Report No. 3 of the year 2023

 
 
 
 
Report of the  
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
on  
Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
For the year ended 31 March 2021 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government of Jharkhand 
(
Performance Audit ) 
Report No. 3 of the year 2023 

TABLE OF CONTENTS  
 Page 
Preface v 
Performance Audit on Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand 
Executive Summary 1 
Chapter 1  Introduction 5 
Chapter 2 Framework of DBT Implementation in the State 11 
Chapter 3 Pre and Post Matric Scholarship Schemes for SC, ST 
and BC  21 
Chapter 4 Pre and Post Matric Scholarship Schemes for Minority  39 
Chapter 5 National Social Assistance Programme 51 
Chapter 6 IT Audit of ‘ e-Kalyan’ Portal 65 
 
Appendices 
 
 Reference to 
 Paragraph Page  
2.1 DBT schemes being implemented by 
various departments in Jharkhand 2.2 85 
3.1 
Prescribed Rates of scholarship under Pre 
matric scholarship and Post Matric 
scholarship scheme 
3.2.1 88 
3.2 List of Pre & Post matric Schools selected 
for verifying SC/ST/BC scholarship 3.7 89 
3.3 Ghost Beneficiaries in Pre- Matric 
Schools 3.8.1 92 
3.4 Ghost Beneficiaries in Post- Matric 
schools 3.8.1 92 
3.5 
Disbursement of Post Matric scholarships 
to BC category beneficiaries who 
obtained less than prescribed marks in 
previous examination 
3.8.2 93 
3.6 
Disbursement of Post Matric scholarships 
to SC/ST category beneficiaries who 
obtained less than prescribed marks in 
previous examination 
3.8.2 93 
3.7 Payment of scholarship to ineligible 
beneficiaries of Backward Community 3.8.2 94 
3.8 
Disbursement of Post Matric scholarships 
to BC category beneficiaries whose 
parental income were more than the 
prescribed limit  
3.8.2 123 

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
 
ii  
 Reference to 
 Paragraph Page  
3.9 Excess payment of Post Matric 
scholarships 3.8.3 123 
3.10 Payment of Post Matric scholarship by 
non-approved/blacklisted institutes 3.8.4 124 
3.11 
Disbursement of scholarship to the 
beneficiaries for same class in subsequent 
year/passed out beneficiaries 
3.8.5 124 
4.1 List of selected Pre & Post minority 
Schools/Institutes  4.7 125 
4.2 Disbursement of scholarship to 
Ghost/fake beneficiaries 4.8.1 126 
4.3 
Disbursement of scholarships to fake 
beneficiaries without in volvement of 
schools/institutes 
4.8.2 127 
5.1 
Essential documents required to be 
attached with app lications under various 
schemes 
5.4 128 
5.2 Fund allotted and spent under Central and 
State pension schemes 5.5.2 128 
5.3 A List of selected Blocks 5.6 129 
5.3 B Major audit observations noticed from 
data analysis of NSAP 5.6 130 
5.4 A Delay in sanction/approval of pension 
applications from date of application 5.10 (i) 131 
5.4 B 
Delay in sanction/approval of pension 
applications from the date of 
recommendation 
5.10 (i) 132 
5.5 
Pension application which was 
sanctioned but not uploaded in NSAP 
portal 
5.10 (ii) 133 
5.6 Photograph and Application of Male 
beneficiaries under widow pension 5.11 134 
5.7 Payment of more than one pension to a 
beneficiaries 5.12 135 
6.1 
Applications in which difference between 
year-of-birth and year-of-admission is ten 
(10) years or less 
6.12.2  
(1 st  Bullet) 136 
6.2 
Applications in which different applicant 
names were captured against one 
Aadhaar  number 
6.12.2  
(1 st  Bullet) 144 

Table of contents  
 
 iii 
 Reference to 
 Paragraph Page  
6.3 A 
Same applicant name, fathers’ name, 
bank account number and Aadhaar  No., 
pursuing same course in different 
academic year s but from different 
Institutes 
6.12.2  
(3 rd  Bullet) 160 
6.3 B 
Same applicant name, fathers’ name, 
bank account number and Aadhaar  No., 
pursuing same course in different 
academic years but from different 
Institutes 
6.12.2  
(3 rd  Bullet) 177 
6.4 A 
Same applicant name, fathers’ name and 
bank account number but with different 
Aadhaar  No., granted scholarship for 
pursuing same cou rse in different 
academic years 
6.12.2  
(3 rd  Bullet) 178 
6.4 B 
Same applicant name, fathers’ name and 
bank account number but with different 
Aadhaar  No., granted scholarship for 
pursuing same course in different 
academic years from same institutes 
(outside State) 
6.12.2  
 (3 rd  Bullet) 190 
6.5 
Scholarship payment to multiple 
beneficiaries through the same Aadhaar 
number 
6.12.4  
(2nd  Bullet) 191 
 Abbreviation  196 
 

 
  

 
 
Preface 

 
 
 
Preface  
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India has been prepared 
for submission to the Governor of Jharkhand under A rticle 151 of the 
Constitution of India for being laid before the State Legislative Assembly. 
A Performance Audit of Direct Benefit Transfer in J harkhand, covering the 
period from 2017-18 to 2020-21, was carried out dur ing November 2021 to 
May 2022 considering the criticality of achieving i ts intended objectives and 
relative impact of Direct Benefit Transfer in schol arship schemes and social 
security pension scheme. 
The Report has been prepared in accordance with the  Performance Auditing 
Guidelines and Regulations on Audit and Accounts of  the Comptroller and 
Auditor General of India.

 

 
  
Executive Summary 

SCHEDULED TRIBE, SCHEDULED CASTE, MINORITY & 
BACKWARD CLASS WELFARE DEPARTMENT 
AND 
WOMEN, CHILD DEVELOPMENT & SOCIAL SECURITY 
DEPARTMENT 
PERFORMANCE AUDIT OF DIRECT BENEFIT TRANSFER IN 
JHARKHAND 
Executive Summary 
About the Report:  
The Government of India started a major reform init iative to ensure better and 
timely delivery of benefits from Government to the people through Direct 
Benefit Transfer (DBT) since there was a critical requirement for sustained and 
determined action to remove leakages and enhancing financial inclusion in the 
process of delivering benefits like wage payments, fuel subsidies, food grain 
subsidies, etc .  
Why did we take up this Report?  
Considering the criticality of achieving its intend ed objectives and relative 
impact of DBT in social security pension scheme and scholarship schemes, the 
Performance Audit of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jha rkhand (2017-21), was 
conducted during November 2021 to May 2022. 
The objectives for carrying out the Performance Audit of selected social security 
pension schemes and scholarship schemes under DBT ( cash only) were to 
ascertain planning and process in place to capture data of the beneficiaries; 
necessary process re-engineering done for implement ation of DBT so as to 
minimise the intermediary levels, delay in payments  to intended beneficiaries 
and pilferage and duplication and adequacy and effe ctiveness of the 
infrastructure, organisation and management of DBT.   
The Scholarship schemes (SC, ST, BC and Minority) u nder ST, SC, Minority 
and BC Welfare Department were selected due to vuln erability, materiality of 
the schemes and in the backdrop of financial irregu larity reported in media 
under minority scholarship scheme. Besides, a syste m Audit of “ e-Kalyan  
Jharkhand”- a scheme-specific Information Technolog y software/ platform 
being used for DBT transfer to the eligible beneficiaries of “Pre and Post Matric 
scholarship schemes for SC, ST and BC category students” implemented by the 
ST, SC, Minority and Backward Class Welfare Department was also conducted 
to check the adequacy and effectiveness of built-in  controls ensuring the 
reliability and integrity of data generated through the application.  
Further, the social security pension schemes (Centr al as well as parallel State 
pension schemes) under Women, Child Development and  Social Security 
Department were selected based on high expenditure of the department and to 

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
2  
identify the overlapping and wrong inclusion of beneficiaries including delay in 
payment under the pension schemes.  
In this context, we have tried to ascertain whether  and to what extent 
beneficiaries have actually received the benefits i n context of DBT 
implementation in the State.  
This Performance Audit Report aims to identify the areas that require 
corrections and improvement in the selected schemes.  
Main Audit Conclusions 
Scholarship scheme (SC/ST/BC):  Implementation of the scheme in the State 
was deficient. Electronic database of eligible students had not been prepared by 
test-checked DWOs for monitoring progress of studen ts and for their holistic 
coverage. Instances of disbursement of scholarship to ghost/fake beneficiaries, 
reimbursement of scholarship to ineligible students , excess reimbursement of 
scholarship, payment of scholarships to passed-out students, disbursement of 
scholarships from multiple schemes etc . were noticed owing to reasons 
non-compliance of norms of scheme guidelines and de ficiency in  
e-Kalyan  scheme management software. Impact evaluation of s cheme was not 
carried out to assess the effectiveness of schemes in achieving its objective. 
Scholarship scheme (Minority): Implementation of Minority Scholarship 
scheme was very dismal in the State. Audit noticed instances of disbursement 
of scholarships to fictitious/ghost beneficiaries i n 60 per cent  test-checked 
institutes. Fraudulent disbursement of scholarships  was made from even those 
institutes which neither register themselves on NSP  nor obtained user 
credentials for log on to portal. Thus, user credential was misused for approval 
of scholarship to fake persons with the direct/indi rect involvement of 
application verifying authorities. A district level government committee framed 
for verifying minority scholarship fraud reported in Dhanbad district confirmed 
the role of INO/DNO/SNO (application verifying auth orities) in fraudulent 
approval of applications in its investigation report. Since, the stakeholders failed 
to perform its duties properly as defined under SOP s, involvement of 
ineligible/fake persons in minority scholarship cou ld not prevented by 
department. Instances of irregular disbursement of scholarships to beneficiaries 
without verifying documents relating to eligibility  criteria were also noticed. 
Evaluation studies at regular interval though requi red was not carried out as 
such effectiveness of scheme in achieving its objectives remain unnoticed to the 
department. 
Social Security Pension Schemes:  Data base of eligible beneficiaries for 
universal coverage was not maintained at districts/ state level resultantly 
department remained unaware of the absolute number of eligible beneficiaries. 
Social security pensions were not approved within the prescribed time frame as 
instances of delay in approval up to 864 days in 39  per cent  test-checked 

Executive Summary  
 3 
applications. Delay in disbursal of pensions among beneficiaries may cause 
hardship to the applicants and impede the pace of inclusion of new beneficiaries. 
Goal of social security pension schemes, to provide  income support to 
beneficiaries for monthly sustenance remain under-a chieved due to 
non-disbursal of pensions on monthly basis as disbu rsement of pension was 
delayed one to four months. Social Audit of the scheme was also not conducted 
during 2017-21 which led non-evaluation of implemen tation of scheme at the 
bottom level of governance. 
IT audit of e-Kalyan : 
e-Kalyan  application had gone live (January 2015) in the State. The features in 
the application envisaged at the time of project in itiation were not delivered as 
of June 2022. The application was not integrated with Aadhaar  e-KYC and also 
not linked with the Treasury/ Bank. Migration of the application to the National 
e-Scholarship Portal (NeSP) was not completed (June  2022). Institution level 
Users were not provided adequate training for verification of applications on the 
e-Kalyan  portal as stipulated in the guidelines. Pre-defined format of password, 
masking of password and periodic change of login password were absent which 
indicated weak password policy being used by the de partment. Due to lack of 
input and validation controls in the application, irregularities like non-capturing 
of student details, same Aadhaar  number used by different applicants, parent 
occupation and total fee paid by the applicant not in sync with annual family 
income, were noticed in the e-Kalyan  database. Further, due to non/incomplete 
mapping of business rules in the application cases of excess payment of 
scholarship and payment of scholarship to ineligible beneficiaries were noticed. 
Project Management Unit was non-functional since No vember 2017 hence 
monitoring of ‘ e-Kalyan ’ remain ineffective.  
What do we recommend? 
In order to achieve the very objective of DBT under  the scholarship and social 
security schemes the State Government should ensure  following 
recommendations: 
Scholarship scheme (SC/ST/BC):  
1.  An exercise to keep electronic database of all elig ible beneficiaries in the 
state for universal coverage and realistic budget p reparations should be 
carried out.  
2.  Monitoring and control mechanisms for verification of eligibility of 
applications as well as payments requires strengthe ning to make 
implementation of the scheme effective by checking/ preventing 
irregularities/deviations. 

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
4  
Scholarship scheme (Minority): 
1.  Government should initiate investigation to verify the financial irregularity 
throughout state and also take suitable action against the erring officials; and 
2.  The State Government should ensure provision of ben efits to eligible 
beneficiaries only by means of a suitable mechanism  and fixing 
accountability/responsibility against the defaulters.  
Social Security Pension Schemes:  
1.  The State government should ensure timely disbursem ent of pensions to 
beneficiaries. 
2.  Monitoring and control mechanisms for verification of eligibility of 
applications as well as payments require to be stre ngthened to make 
implementation of the scheme effective. 
3.  The Social Audits should be conducted in prescribed  intervals to ensure 
adequate monitoring of schemes. 
IT audit of  e-Kalyan :  
1.  Envisaged features should be incorporated into the application. 
2.  The application should be integrated with the Aadhaar e-KYC and linked 
with Treasury/ Bank as per scope of work under the RRR project. 
3.  Migration of the application to NeSP portal should be done as per GoI 
instructions. 
4.  Alternate arrangements for operation of the portal should be developed by 
the Jharkhand Agency for Promotion of Information T echnology (JAP-IT) 
for reducing dependency on the service provider. 
5.  Stakeholders of the application should be provided adequate training for 
optimal usage of the application. 

  
Chapter 1 
Introduction 

 
CHAPTER 1 
Introduction 
1.1  Background 
Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) is a major reform ini tiative of the Government 
of India to ensure better and timely delivery of   benefits from Government to 
the people. This marks a paradigm- shift in the pro cess of delivering benefits 
like wage payments, fuel subsidies, food grain subs idies, etc . directly into the 
bank accounts of the beneficiaries, removing leakages and enhancing financial 
inclusion.  
DBT vision is a governance regime which ensures a s imple and user-friendly 
Government to people interface and directly deliver s entitlements to eligible 
individuals and households in a fair, transparent, efficient and reliable manner. 
DBT framework has a multi-stakeholder architecture which capitalises on the 
competencies of various departments and institution s to deliver benefits to 
beneficiaries in a timely and effective manner.  
1.2  Vision of Direct Benefit Transfer 
Rule 87 of General Financial Rules, 2017 regarding Direct Benefit Transfer 
stipulates that: 
 Transfer of benefits should be done directly to ben eficiaries under various 
Government Schemes and Programmes using Information and Communication 
Technology (ICT). Necessary process reengineering t o minimize intermediary 
levels and to reduce delay in payments to intended beneficiaries with the 
objective of minimizing pilferage and duplication s hould be done for all 
Government Schemes and Programmes. The process for implementation of 
DBT as prescribed should be adopted. 
 DBT should include in-kind and cash transfers to be neficiaries as well as 
transfers/honorariums given to various enablers of government schemes like 
community workers, etc. for successful implementation of the schemes. 
 Transfer of cash benefits from Ministries/Departmen ts should be done (a) 
directly to beneficiaries; (b) through State Treasury Account; or (c) through any 
implementing agency as appointed by Centre/State Governments. 
1.3  Pre-requisites of DBT 
The principal objective of DBT is to facilitate dir ect processing and credit of 
payments to the legitimate beneficiary in right acc ount and in right time i.e. 
without undue delay. 
The pre-requisites of DBT are: 
 Digitization of database of beneficiaries 
 Opening of bank accounts of beneficiaries and 
 Enrolment of beneficiaries for generation of Aadhaar  number. 

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
6  
1.4  Various Processes of Direct Benefit Transfer  
Under DBT, various schemes in the categories of Cas h and in-kind are being 
covered 1 according to ‘Standard Operating Procedure for DBT  payments’, 
following process is to be followed by implementing  agencies through Public 
Financial Management System (PFMS) or other payment systems: 
I.  Beneficiary identification and enrolment in Ministr y’s DBT scheme 
Management Software; 
II.  Beneficiary validation/registration on PFMS (or any  other system), 
including first time validation of bank account details;  
III.  Generation of payment file instructions;  
IV.  Processing of payment file and payment to beneficiary. 
1.5  Audit Objectives  
The Performance Audit, covering the period from 2017-18 to 2020-21 has been 
undertaken to ascertain whether: 
 Proper planning and process were in place to captur e data of the 
beneficiaries; 
 Necessary process reengineering was done for implementation of DBT 
so as to minimize the intermediary levels, delay in  payments to 
intended beneficiaries and pilferage and duplication; and 
 The infrastructure, organization and management of DBT were 
adequate and effective. 
1.6  Audit Criteria 
The following documents issued by Government of India and State Government 
are taken up as audit criteria: 
 Documents, circulars, orders, instructions and noti fication issued by 
DBT Mission; 
 Standard Operating Procedures. Handbook on DBT and Guidelines 
issued for State DBT Cell; 
 Guidelines of Schemes on process of identification and authentication 
of beneficiaries; and 
 Instructions regarding maintenance of database, gen eration of various 
reports and IT controls. 
                                                 
1  Cash : PAHAL (Direct Benefit Transfer for LPG), Mahatma Gandhi National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Act, National Social Assistanc e Programme. In-kind:  Public 
Distribution System. Other Transfers: ASHA workers under National Health Mission, 
Aanganwadi workers under Integrated Child Development Services , teachers in Aided 
School, Sanitation staff in Urban Local Bodies. 

Chapter 1: Introduction  
 7 
1.7  Audit Scope and Methodology 
The performance audit covered the period of four ye ars from 2017-18 to 
2020-21. Audit involved scrutiny of records in the State level units 
(Departments and Directorates), selected districts,  Blocks, Institutes/Schools 
and surveys of selected beneficiaries.  
The audit had three broad areas of enquiry: 
 Granular IT data on beneficiaries’ eligibility, pay ment calculation and 
authorisation, etc. from the scheme management software i.e., e-Kalyan portal  
for the period 2017-21 has been collected from the Department of ST, SC, 
Minority and BC Welfare Department, Government of J harkhand and was 
analysed by audit and outliers were identified for detail audit in the test checked 
districts.  
Under National Social Assistance Programme (NSAP), Data dump of NSAP 
was obtained from the Social Security Department, G overnment of Jharkhand. 
In Analysis of Data dump of NSAP outliers were iden tified by audit. Audit 
however could not examine the specific pension appl ications with reference to 
audit leads in test-checked Blocks as most of the a pplications of pension 
schemes prior to 2019-20 were either not/partially available at the Blocks 
2  or 
were kept in improper order rendering it difficult to sort it out for scrutiny.  
Therefore, pension applications (Central as well as  State) were selected 
randomly from available pension applications at sel ected Blocks to verify the 
eligibility of beneficiary, sanction procedures and  timely disbursement of 
pensions. 
 Transfer of grant to the beneficiaries and whether and to what extent 
beneficiaries have actually received the benefits during the period 2017-21 was 
examined during field verification. 
 System Audit of IT platform viz . e-Kalyan , a scheme-specific IT software 
and IT platform being used for DBT transfer to the eligible beneficiaries of “Pre 
and Post Matric scholarship schemes for SC, ST and BC category students” 
implemented by the ST, SC, Minority and Backward Class Welfare Department 
has also been conducted for verifying adequacy and effectiveness of controls to 
ensure reliability and integrity of data generated by the application.  
1.8  Sample and Sampling Methodology 
The performance audit of DBT covered two Departments viz . ST, SC, Minority 
and Backward Class Welfare Department has been sele cted for the audit of 
Pre-Matric and Post-Matric Scholarship Schemes for SC, ST, BC and 
                                                 
2 Non-availability of pension records prior to 2019-20:  Kanke, Medininagar and Chainpur 
blocks; Partial availability of pension records prior to 2019-20:  Bero, Poraiyahat, Godda 
Sadar, Golmuri-cum-Jugsalai, Potka, Hunterganj, Chatra Sadar, Ichak and Hazaribag Sadar 
Blocks.   

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
8  
Minorities whereas the Women, Child Development and  Social Security 
Department has been selected for the audit of Natio nal Social Assistance 
Programme 3 (NSAP). Scheme-wise details of sampling of units a nd 
methodology are as under: 
Scholarship:  Six Districts (Chatra, Hazaribag, East Singhbhum, Godda, 
Palamu and Ranchi) have been selected on considerat ion of expenditure, 
beneficiaries, outliers identified through data dum p analysis of e-Kalyan  and 
geographical representation. 
Methodologies adopted for selection of districts were as under: 
• High risk districts were identified by Outliers noticed through data analysis 
of e-Kalyan  and given weightage of 40 per cent  for sampling purposes; 
• Data pertaining to numbers of beneficiaries and money value of scholarship 
amount of SC & ST (Pre & Post Matric) and beneficiaries have been clubbed 
district-wise and given weightage of 60 per cent ; 
• Districts were arranged Commissionerates wise in de scending order of 
money value of scholarship amount and beneficiaries; and 
• One district with highest money value and beneficia ries has been selected 
from each of five Commissionerates and sixth distri ct with lowest money 
value and beneficiaries was selected from largest Commissionerates to give 
proper representation to highest and lowest order. 
Besides that, 20 Schools/Institutes/ Madarsas  (including government/private 
/minority schools) in each sampled district were selected on the basis of output 
of data analysis  of e-Kalyan and NSP .  
NSAP:  Six Districts viz . Chatra, Hazaribag, East Singhbhum, Godda, Palamu 
and Ranchi as selected for Scholarship Schemes, hav e been retained for the 
NSAP also. Besides that, two Blocks (One Urban and One Rural) from each 
selected districts have been selected using SRSWoR method and two Gram 
Panchayats  (GPs) selected randomly from each selected Blocks.   Further, 200 
applications in each sampled block (100 applications in each sampled GP) were 
selected randomly from available records. 
As the audit findings have emerged out of test-chec k of records, it calls for a 
further thorough investigation by the Government to  ascertain the gamut of 
all irregular occurrences and initiate appropriate recovery procedures. 
                                                 
3 Centrally Sponsored DBT Schemes (CSS ) viz. Indira Gandhi National Old Age Pension schem e(IGNOAPS), 
Indira Gandhi National Widow Pension scheme(IGNWPS) , Indira Gandhi National Disability Pension 
scheme(IGNDPS) and National Family Benefit Scheme(N FBS)  and State Sponsored Schemes (SSS ) i.e. 
Mukhya Mantri  State Old Age Pension Scheme(MMSOAPS), Mukhya Mantri Adim Jan Jati  Pension 
Scheme (MMAJJPS), Mukhya Mantri Rajya Vidhwa Samman Pension Yojana(MMRVSPY) , Swami Vivekananda  
Nishakta Swavlamban Protsahan  Yojana(SVNSPY). 

Chapter 1: Introduction  
 9 
1.9  Entry and Exit Conference 
Entry Conference with the Principal Secretary, Wome n, Child Development 
and Social Security Department and the Secretary, S T, SC, Minority and BC 
Welfare Department was conducted on 18 February 202 2 and 21 March 2022 
respectively. Exit Conference was held on 8 Decembe r 2022 with Secretary, 
ST, SC, Minority and BC Welfare Department and on 19 December 2022 with 
Secretary, Women Child Development and Social Security Department. Replies 
of the Finance Department, Government of Jharkhand,  responsible for 
monitoring of implementation of DBT framework in th e State, have been 
suitably incorporated in the Report.   
1.10  Structure of the report  
This report has been structured on the basis of aud it findings on schemes 
covered in audit. The audit findings under the themes have been reported in five 
themes as follows:  
• Chapter 2: DBT framework; 
• Chapter 3: Pre & Post Matric Scholarship Schemes for SC, ST and BC;  
• Chapter 4: Pre and Post Matric Scholarship Schemes for Minority; 
• Chapter 5: National Social Assistance Programme; 
• Chapter 6: IT audit of ‘ e-Kalyan’  Portal.  
The conclusions and recommendations have been repor ted in each of the 
Chapters 3 to 6 to facilitate easy comprehension and follow up.  
1.11  Acknowledgement  
Performance Audit was conducted between November 20 21 and May 2022. 
Audit acknowledges the cooperation and assistance e xtended by the ST, SC, 
Minority and BC Welfare Department, Women, Child Development and Social 
Security Department, State DBT Cell and all the tes t-checked District Welfare 
Officers, Assistant Directors of Social Security an d Block level officers in 
conducting the performance audit. 
  

 
  
Chapter 2 
Framework of DBT 
Implementation in the State 

 
CHAPTER 2 
Framework of DBT implementation in the State 
2.1 Background  
In Jharkhand State, DBT schemes were initially started in September 2013 as a 
pilot project in seven districts 
4. A DBT Cell had been constituted (July 2016) in 
the Planning cum Finance Department for working as a nodal point for all the 
activities and matters relating to DBT operations i n the State. It is also 
coordinating the implementation of DBT in various s chemes. Government of 
Jharkhand (GoJ) constituted (August 2016) a State P roject Management Unit 
under the Finance cum Planning Department for DBT and PFMS related works. 
In November 2017, “The Jharkhand Aadhaar  (Targeted delivery of financial 
and other subsidies benefits and services) Act 2017” was enacted through which 
linking of beneficiaries’ bank accounts with Aadhaar  was made mandatory. 
2.2 Coverage of schemes under DBT 
As per information furnished by the State DBT Cell, 137 (cash and kind) Central 
and State sponsored schemes (Appendix-2.1) were being implemented by 13 
departments 
5  under DBT mode. These schemes are broadly related  to Central 
and State sponsored old age/widow/disability/ Aadim Janjati/ family benefit 
pension schemes, payment of salaries, compensation,  scholarships to 
SC/ST/BC/Minority students, stipend, transport allo wance, escort allowance, 
health schemes, distribution of Bicycle, School kit , Uniform, Agricultural 
schemes etc . During 2017-21,  ₹ 19, 641.88 crore was disbursed through DBT 
(in 110 cash only schemes) by 12 departments 6 of the State Government as 
shown in Chart 2.1  below  
  
                                                 
4 Bokaro, Hazaribag, Khunti, Lohardagga, Ranchi, Ram garh and Saraikela-Kharsawan.  
5  (1) ST, SC, Minority and BC Welfare: 22 schemes ; (2). Agriculture, Cooperation and 
Farmers Welfare, Fisheries, Dairy and Animal Husban dry: 27 schemes ; (3). Drinking 
Water and Sanitation:  01 schemes ; (4). Health, Medical Education and Family Welfare : 
10 schemes ; (5). Home, jail and Disaster Management (Home Division): 04 schemes ; (6). 
Rural Development (Development Division): 04 schemes ; (7). School Education and 
Literacy (Primary and Adult Education Division): 24 schemes ; (8). Tourism, Art, Culture, 
Sports and Youth Affairs: 07 schemes ; (9). Forest, Environment and Climate Change: 
05 schemes ; (10). Urban Development and Housing:  03 schemes ; (11). Labour, 
Employment, Training & skill Development:  03 schemes ; (12). Women, Child 
Development and Social Welfare (Social Security): 25 schemes ; (13). Food, Public 
Distribution and Consumer Affairs: 02 schemes . 
6 As per State DBT Portal 2020-21, Department of Lab our, Employment, Training & Skill 
Development which is implementing 03 schemes  but no physical & financial status was 
shown in the State DBT Portal against these schemes. 

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
12  
Chart 2.1: Disbursement through DBT (in cash only) by 12 departments 
during 2017-21 
 
2.3 Ratio of DBT Payments in selected departments 
Ratio of DBT Payments in two selected departments viz. ST, SC, Minority and 
Backward Class Welfare Department (8 per cent ) and the Women, Child 
Development and Social Security Department (44 per cent ) during 2017-21 
against overall DBT payment ( 
₹ 19641.88 crore) in State during 2017-21 is as 
shown in Chart 2.2 below: 
 
  
8,702.07 
4,176.50 
2,289.56 
1,523.64 
454.44 
303.12 
2097.25 
45.67 
28.57 
15.90 
3.84 
1.31 
0.00 
1,000.00 
2,000.00 
3,000.00 
4,000.00 
5,000.00 
6,000.00 
7,000.00 
8,000.00 
9,000.00 
10,000.00 
Cumulative Expenditure during 2017-21 ( ₹ in crores) 
9,416.17 
(48 per cent )8,702.07 
(44 per cent )
1,523.64 
(8 per cent ) Schemes under other 
department 
National Social Assistance 
Programme (CSS and SS) 
Rs. in crore 
SC ST Minority and BC 
Welfare Department Rs. in 
crore 

Chapter 2: Framework of DBT implementation in the State 
 13 
2.4 State DBT Cell 
As per Guidelines of GoI for State DBT cells, the D BT Cell shall work in 
tandem with the Centre and make the process of delivering beneﬁts on the DBT 
platform more reliable, user-friendly and time-boun d. Rather than following a 
blanket approach, State DBT Cells shall have a free  hand to customise the 
implementation process, methodology and approach ac cording to their State 
specific ground level peculiarities. The DBT cell has three components viz . State 
Advisory Board (SAB),  State DBT Coordinator 
7and Implementation Support 
Layer which constitutes the operational part of the  Cell. It operates in an 
environment that involves multiple stakeholders and  the Cell shall be 
responsible for liasoning with all such stakeholder s for the seamless 
transitioning of schemes to DBT. These State Level Cells, as a part of the 
decentralized DBT architecture, will contribute tow ards achieving effective 
delivery of government benefits.  
The main functions of DBT Cell are: 
 Collection of data from various departments and tec hnical support team on 
factors like Aadhaar enrolment, number of beneﬁciaries, number of active  
bank accounts, rate of Aadhaar seeding etc . besides monitoring progress of 
each department against targets. 
 Training and Capacity Building of state O ﬃcials. 
 Organising exposure visits for the state/ district o ﬃcials in DBT progressive 
states for familiarising them with model practices. 
 Ascertain Budgets and funds ﬂow etc . 
 Conduct benchmark studies on best practices. 
The DBT Cell in the Planning cum Finance Department has been formed (July 
2016) with an objective of overall monitoring of sc hemes under which DBT 
was to be implemented by working as focal point 8.  
Audit noticed that: 
 DBT Cell has not collected the desired information from concerned 
departments periodically. It remained dependent on the data uploaded on DBT 
portal by the various department which was itself n ot updated regularly as 
discussed in paragraph 2.5.2 . As such, the Cell was not in a position to deliver 
up-to-date status of the DBT of a particular scheme on a particular point of time 
for better monitoring;  
                                                 
7 Principal Secretary (Planning/IT/Finance) or equiv alent level oﬃcer can be nominated as the 
State DBT Coordinator who shall act as the nodal o ﬃcer for DBT related matters of the 
State. 
8  Notification no. 1994/14-07-2016. 

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
14  
 Neither training was organized nor any calendar of training for State 
officials was prepared by Cell. Thus, the Cell was unaware about status of 
required capacity building.  
 No exposure visits were organised as desired under norms to DBT 
progressive States for familiarising the officials with the model practices being 
adopted in those States. No benchmark studies were conducted on Best practices 
for developing roadmap to incorporate those practices in State operations. When 
pointed out, Additional Secretary, Finance Department accepted the fact but no 
reasons were provided.  
 DBT Cell captures financial data from DBT portal. A s such it remains 
unaware about actual budgetary provisions and fund flow under DBT related 
schemes.  
Thus, function of DBT Cell was lagging behind the p rovisions of DBT Cell 
Guidelines. 
The Special Secretary, Finance Department, GoJ accepted the audit observation 
and stated (December 2022) that it would consider t o organise training and 
capability building for State government employees/Officers and exposure visit 
in DBT progressive States.  
2.4.1 State Advisory Board  
A State Advisory Board (SAB)  under the Chief Secretary or equivalent officer  
was to be constituted as a parallel body to the sta te-level DBT Cell. The key 
role of this body is to provide a holistic advice a nd consulting inputs to the 
Executive body. Since this unit witnesses the repre sentation from all 
stakeholders, its advisory shall ensure that the Ce ll's operations are not 
exclusionary and are in sync with the interests of DBT's various enablers. This 
body may meet once in a quarter or at any other regular interval, as deemed ﬁt. 
Audit however, noticed that though SAB was constituted in August 2016 under 
the Chief Secretary but no meeting was held upto March 2021. It was stated by 
DBT Cell that proposals for meetings were moved but remained undisposed off. 
As such, SAB was deemed to be non-functional in the  State and unable to 
deliver its duty. Audit noticed various discrepancies in execution of scholarship 
& NSAP schemes which have been illustrated under ch apter 3, 4 and 5 of this 
report, which could have been minimised/checked thr ough holistic 
monitoring/guidance of apex body. 
The Special Secretary, Finance Department accepted the audit observation and 
stated (December 2022) that the first meeting of SAB had been as conducted on 
8 December 2022. 
2.5 Identification of DBT Schemes and Aadhaar Mappi ng  
In accordance with the GoI instructions (June 2016) , the Department of 
Planning & Finance GoJ issued directives (August 2016) to all the departments 

Chapter 2: Framework of DBT implementation in the State 
 15 
that DBT was to be implemented in all government sc hemes by 31 December 
2016. It was also directed to identify the DBT rela ted schemes within the 
department and onboard them on State DBT portal by mapping of beneficiaries 
and bank accounts etc ., with Aadhaar  within the prescribed time frame. Status 
of onboarding of schemes on DBT portal is illustrated in paragraph 2.5.2 .  
Audit noticed that overall status of Aadhaar  seeding of existing beneficiaries 
under all schemes being implemented by State Govern ment ranged between 
49 and 75 per cent  as shown in Chart 2.3  below: 
Chart 2.3: Status of Aadhaar  seeding of beneficiaries during 2017-21 
 
2.5.1 Aadhaar Mapping of Beneficiaries in NSAP and Scholarship scheme  
Status of Aadhaar mapping of beneficiaries under NSAP scheme is give n in 
Table 2.1  below: 
Table 2.1: Aadhaar  mapping of beneficiaries under various pension 
schemes in the State as of March 2021: 
Component of NSAP No. of 
Beneficiaries 
Aadhaar  
mapped 
Beneficiaries 
Shortage in 
mapping 
(percentage) 
Centrally sponsored schemes (CSS) 
IGNOAPS 10,16,590 8,43,789 1,72,801 (17) 
IGNWPS 2,68,537 2,37,358 31,179 (12) 
IGNDPS 26,482 20,503 5,979 (23) 
State sponsored schemes (SSS) 
MMSOAPY 4,70,229 3,26,170 1,44,059 (31) 
94,79,790 
2,27,39,455 
1,27,02,614 
1,24,13,196 
68,11,836 
(72%) 
1,69,55,517 
(75%) 
79,43,027 
(63%) 
60,53,032 
(49%) 
0
50,00,000 
1,00,00,000 
1,50,00,000 
2,00,00,000 
2,50,00,000 
Year 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 
Total nos. of beneficiaries 
Aadhar seeded beneficiaries Aadhaar  

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
16  
Component of NSAP No. of 
Beneficiaries 
Aadhaar  
mapped 
Beneficiaries 
Shortage in 
mapping 
(percentage) 
MMRVSPY 1,80,723 1,33,826 46,897 (26) 
SVNSPY 1,56,049 54,551 1,01,498 (65) 
MMRAJJPY 56,022 41,553 14,469 (26) 
It can be seen from the Table 2.1 , that overall shortage in Aadhaar  mapping of 
beneficiaries ranged between 12 and 65 per cent  as of March 2021 under NSAP. 
The shortages in Aadhaar  mapping of beneficiaries in central pension schemes 
were ranged between 12 and 23 per cent  whereas in case of state pension 
schemes it was 26 to 65 per cent . Instructions were issued (2017-21) by the 
Principal Secretary/Director, Women Child Developme nt and Social Security 
Department to all Assistant Director of Social Secu rity (ADSSs) regarding 
mapping of all the beneficiaries and their bank accounts with Aadhaar  to enable 
all payments through DBT. Audit noticed that mappin g for all beneficiaries 
were not completed due to non-availability of Aadhaar number of beneficiary, 
non-mapping of bank account through KYC 9, inactive Aadhaar, non-biometric 
updation through fingers of beneficiary. Thus, the objective of the 
implementation of Aadhaar based payments under end to end digitisation for 
DBT remained under achieved since pensions were sti ll being provided   
through NEFT alongwith DBT.   
Information of Aadhaar  mapping under scholarship scheme during 2017-21 
were not provided though called for (between August  2020 and July 2022) by 
the ST, SC, Minority and BC Welfare Department as s uch actual status of 
mapping of beneficiaries could not be ascertained. 
While accepting the fact, the Department stated (Fe bruary 2023) that Aadhaar 
mapping is a continuous process for which beneficia ry has to be physically 
present at the respective bank’s branch for biometr ic authentication. In this 
regard, notices were being regularly published in the newspapers, placed on the 
notice boards of panchayat bhavans/block offices an d, as of January 2023, 92 
per cent  of beneficiaries had been mapped.  
2.5.2 State DBT Portal 
The State DBT Portal was launched in 2017 in the lines of GoI online portal i.e. 
DBT Bharat portal. Audit observed that: 
 DBT related 29 (centrally sponsored) and 33 (state)  schemes pertaining to 
12 departments have not been on boarded on state DBT portal due to pendency 
in generation of E-code of schemes for onboarding on DBT portal and deletion/ 
listing of some schemes by GoI from central ministr y and under central sector 
respectively.  
                                                 
9 Know Your Customer. 

Chapter 2: Framework of DBT implementation in the State 
 17 
 Scrutiny of the physical and financial status of on  boarded DBT schemes 
on the state DBT portal during 2020-21 revealed that information regarding total 
numbers of beneficiaries, Aadhaar  seeded beneficiaries, fund transferred, fund 
transferred through electronic mode etc. were not reflected against 94 out of 137 
Centrally/State sponsored schemes. This reflects that portal is not being updated 
by the respective departments and the DBT portal wa s also not integrated with 
central DBT portal (March 2022).  
The Special Secretary, Finance Department accepted the audit observation and 
stated (December 2022) that an action was being tak en to set up a “Unified 
Digital Data Platform of the beneficiaries of various Central and State Schemes 
implemented by State Government” for capturing real  time data. He further 
stated that 49 State schemes were identified and onboarded on State DBT Portal 
with deletion of inactive DBT Schemes. Further, as identified by GoI, out of 12 
central schemes yet to be onboarded, one scheme had been onboarded, one had 
been exempted by GoI, proposal for exemption of fou r schemes had been sent 
to GoI whereas administrative departments had been directed to onboard the 
remaining six schemes.  
2.6 Common & Unified Database of beneficiaries  
DBT Mission GoI issued (February 2020) direction fo r end to end digitisation 
of beneficiaries 10  for the better monitoring. Accordingly, the Planni ng cum 
Finance Department decided (December 2020) to prepa re a common and 
unified database of beneficiaries for the purpose o f improvement in 
implementation of DBT and for effective monitoring of beneficiaries registered 
under various government schemes. It was also decid ed (January 2021) to 
integrate the common database with PFMS and all the  other portals operated 
individually by various departments into common database of beneficiaries.  
Audit, however, noticed that preparation of common and unified database of 
beneficiaries remained incomplete as of March 2021 as such integration of 
portals with the common database also remained pending.  
When pointed out by audit, the Additional Secretary, Finance Department GoJ 
replied (July 2022) that an inter department commit tee was constituted in 
August 2021 for the end-to-end digitisation of beneficiaries under DBT schemes 
which further suggested to develop a Unified Portal /Dashboard for all DBT 
schemes. Consequent upon the suggestion, the Inform ation Technology and 
e-Governance Department have been directed (April 2022) to prepare a separate 
scope of work for the development of Unified Portal /Dashboard by taking 
legacy data but the same was still under progress a s of July 2022. Thus, due to 
delay in preparation of common and unified database  of beneficiaries, its goal 
to improve the implementation of DBT and to effecti vely monitor the 
                                                 
10  Online registration of beneficiaries, computerized  processing of applications and electronic 
payments directly into the bank accounts of beneficiaries. 

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
18  
beneficiaries registered under various government s chemes, remained 
unachieved. 
2.7 Implementation of PFMS  
The Public Financial Management System (PFMS) is a web-based online 
software application developed and implemented by t he Controller General of 
Accounts (CGA), Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance, GoI. PFMS 
was taken up (2009) with the objective of tracking funds released under all Plan 
schemes of GoI, and real time reporting of expendit ure at all levels of 
Programme implementation. Subsequently, the scope w as enlarged to cover 
direct payment to beneficiaries under all Schemes. PFMS is also the channel for 
payment, accounting and reporting under Direct Benefit Transfer.  
Further, the Department of Expenditure, GoI mandated (April 2017) that all the 
Central and State departments should initiate DBT t ransactions with relevant 
scheme codes which was to be passed on the Public F inancial Management 
system (PFMS). Planning cum Finance Department, GoJ  issued instructions 
(August 2016, February 2018 and December 2020) for implementation of 
PFMS in all the schemes under central assistance to  State plan/Central sector 
schemes. However, integration of all the schemes with the PFMS was partially 
completed as of March 2021.  
Audit observed that 37 per cent  of total payment ( 
₹ 5884.48 crore) was made 
through electronic mode under various government sc hemes in 2017-18 
whereas in 2020-21 it was 98 per cent  of total payment ( ₹ 11290.47 crore). The 
electronic mode was inclusive of NEFT/RTGS/APB/AEPS  but segregated 
figures with respect of each electronic payment mod e were not furnished to 
audit as such, the actual volume of payment through  PFMS could not be 
ascertained.  
The Additional Secretary, Finance Department, GoJ r eplied (July 2022) that a 
revised procedure 
11  of implementation of PFMS effective from July 2021  is 
under progress. 
Further, in accordance with the direction of GoI, D epartment of Planning cum 
Finance GoJ decided (July 2020) to constitute PFMS offices at District level for 
better implementation of PFMS. Initially, 12 districts have been selected for the 
purpose. However, no progress was noticed as of March 2021.  
On being pointed out the Planning cum Finance Depar tment GoJ replied 
(July 2022) that Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance, GoI instructed 
                                                 
11  Under revised procedure (GoI letter issued on 23.0 3.2021) of PFMS every state government 
will designate a Single Nodal Agency(SNA) for imple menting each Central Sponsored 
Scheme (CSS) who will in turn open a single nodal account for each CSS at the state level 
in a commercial bank which will be utilized by each  implementing agencies (IAs). The 
Ministry/departments will release the central share  for each CSS to the State Government 
Account for further release to SNA account. SNAs and IAs will mandatorily use PFMS or 
integrate their system with PFMS. 

Chapter 2: Framework of DBT implementation in the State 
 19 
(June 2021) that district PFMS offices are to be se t up by State Government 
from their own resources. However, no decision regarding setting up of district 
PFMS offices was taken up by State Government as of July 2022. 
2.8 Savings of fund after implementation of DBT 
DBT is to ensure better and timely delivery of bene fits from Government to 
directly into the bank accounts of the beneficiarie s, removing leakages and 
enhancing financial inclusion. 
Scrutiny of data furnished by DBT Cell revealed that 6.17 lakh duplicate/ghost/ 
ineligible beneficiaries were identified under four  schemes (NSAP, Kerosene 
distribution, Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employm ent Guarantee Scheme 
i.e  MGNREGS and PDS Ration distribution) by respective  departments which 
resulted in saving of 
₹ 508.20 crore 12  due to digitisation of beneficiaries and 
introduction of DBT as of March 2021. Information regarding other schemes in 
respect of duplicate/ghost/ ineligible beneficiarie s and savings was not 
furnished. 
During audit of scholarship and NSAP schemes, cases  of duplicate/ghost/ 
ineligible beneficiaries were found (illustrated un der Chapter-3 and 4) which 
showed that the exercises conducted by State government departments were still 
deficient. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
12  NSAP & state pension schemes ( ₹ 99.52 crore), MGNREGA ( ₹ 203.4 crore), DBT 
Kerosene ( ₹ 5.27 crore), PDS Ration ( ₹ 200 crore). 

  
Chapter 3 
Pre and Post Matric 
Scholarship Schemes for SC, 
ST and BC 

 
CHAPTER 3 
Pre and Post Matric Scholarship Schemes for SC, ST and BC 
This Chapter is related to Pre & Post Matric SC, ST  and BC Scholarship 
Scheme which was examined in the context of DBT imp lementation. Audit 
collected and analysed granular IT data on beneficiaries’ eligibility, payment 
calculation and authorisation etc., from the scheme management software i.e. 
e-Kalyan for the period 2017-21 (up to July 2020). On the ba sis of data 
analysis output the outliers were identified for de tailed examination in test 
checked districts. Accordingly, audit examined reco rds of 2,444 students of 
96 pre and post matric schools/institutes in six te st-checked districts . Out of 
records of 2,444 students examined by audit specific deviations in respect of 
822 students (34 per cent ) were noticed. Important issues observed during 
audit were as under: 
• Test-checked DWOs had not maintained any electronic  database of 
potential eligible students for holistic coverage, test-check and monitoring 
progress of students. 
• Budget was prepared on ad-hoc basis by increasing a n average 
10 per cent  in previous year’s actual expenditure and in the n umbers of 
beneficiaries actually covered.  
• User charges for processing of the applications for  pre-matric and post-
matric scholarships were paid to the implementing a gency (CGG) for the 
period 2017-18, which fall under extended project p eriod resulted in undue 
payment of user charges of ₹ 95.91 lakh to CGG by the Welfare Department.  
• Audit observed that migration of ‘ e-PASS’ application was not done as 
of May 2022, though it was also decided (June 2015)  in the Inter-
Departmental Committee meeting that the ‘e-PASS’ scholarship application 
was to be migrated to the NeSP by June 2016. As a r esult, avoidable 
expenditure of ₹ 4.36 crore was made on user charges. 
• In contravention of the provisions of TDS on Income Tax and GST, taxes 
at source of ₹ 27.76 lakh were not deducted from the payment bill s which 
indicated failure to fulfil the provisions of the r espective acts which attracts 
penalty. 
• Pre and post matric scholarships amounting to ₹ 5.20 lakh were disbursed 
to 81 fake/ ghost beneficiaries in 21 schools/insti tutes of test-checked 
districts as these beneficiaries were found not enr olled in the records of 
respective schools/institutes.  
• Post-matric scholarships of ₹ 19.85 lakh was disbursed to 313 BC and 
SC/ST category students in contravention of the eli gibility criteria of 
securing minimum 45 per cent  and 40 per cent  marks, respectively in the last 
examination. Similarly, post-matric scholarships of  ₹ 2.94 lakh were 

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
22  
provided to 52 BC students whose parent/ guardian’s income was higher than 
the prescribed limit. 
• An excess payment of scholarship amounting to ₹ 5.74 lakh was made to 
195 beneficiaries as higher rates were allowed to t hem due to 
misclassification of institutes/ courses.  
• Passed out 121 students were irregularly awarded sc holarships 
amounting to ₹ 2.01 lakh for the same class in two consecutive years.  
• BC scholarship of ₹ 26.28 lakh was availed by 527 beneficiaries in 
addition to post matric Minority scholarships from same institutes by these 
beneficiaries beyond the prescribed norms.  
• District level committee was constituted but its function mainly remained 
limited to the approval of institutes and scholarships. 
Conclusion: 
Implementation of the scheme in the State was deficient. Electronic database 
of eligible students had not been prepared by DWOs for test-checking & 
monitoring progress of students and for their holis tic coverage. Budget and 
numbers of covered beneficiaries were prepared on ad-hoc  basis by 
increasing the actual expenditure/ numbers of cover ed beneficiaries of 
previous year by 10 per cent . Due to non-compliance of norms of scheme 
guidelines and deficiency in e-Kalyan  scheme management software (as 
discussed under Chapter-6) instances of disbursemen t of scholarship to 
ghost/fake beneficiaries, reimbursement of scholarship to ineligible students, 
excess reimbursement of scholarship, payment of sch olarships to pass out 
students, disbursement of scholarships from multipl e schemes etc. were 
noticed. Monitoring of the scheme was lacking as ro le of district level 
committee was limited to the approval of institutes  and scholarship only. 
Impact evaluation of scheme was not carried out to assess the effectiveness 
of schemes in achieving its objective.  
3.1 Background 
Scholarship schemes represent an important social welfare measure initiated by 
the Central and State Governments to increase the e nrolment and ensure 
retention of Scheduled Caste (SC), Scheduled Tribe (ST) and Other Backward 
Classes (OBC) students in educational institutions.  The Pre & Post-Matric 
Scholarship Scheme for SC, ST and OBC students is t he intervention of 
government for educational empowerment of students of above categories. Its 
objective is to provide financial assistance to tho se categories of students who 
are studying at pre & post matric level and enable them to complete their 
education with a better opportunity of progressing to the post-matric stage of 
education. The State Government is implementing the se schemes with 
partial/full financial support from GoI.  

Chapter 3: Pre and Post Matric Scholarship Schemes for SC, ST and BC  
 23 
The Welfare Department started (January 2015) an on line scholarship portal 
‘e-Kalyan ’ for processing online applications submitted by th e post matric 
candidates and payment of Pre and Post Matric scholarship.  
3.2 Eligibility Criteria, Application Process and S anction 
Under Pre-Matric level, students belonging to all g overnment/project/ 
government recognized schools / minorities schools are eligible for scholarship. 
Similarly, under Post Matric scholarship scheme, st udents belonging to 
recognized colleges/ universities/ Educational Inst itutions are eligible for 
scholarship. The State Government started (January 2015) an online scholarship 
portal ‘ e-Kalyan ’ for processing online applications submitted by th e post 
matric candidates and also for DBT transfer of scho larship amounts to the 
beneficiaries of pre and post matric scholarship.  
Eligibility criteria, application process and procedure of sanction of scholarship 
under Pre & Post matric scholarship scheme for SC/S T/BC is discussed as in 
Table 3.1 : 
Table 3.1: Eligibility criteria and procedure of sanction under Pre & Post 
matric scholarship schemes for SC/ST/BC 
Scholarship 
scheme 
Main Eligibility 
Criteria 
Responsibility 
Levels Procedure of application and sanction 
Pre-Matric 
SC/ST/BC 
(class I to X)
 
• Students should 
be regular/full 
time studying in a 
government/ 
recognized 
schools 
• 
Scholarship will 
be allowed for 
only one year in a 
class 
 
School 
 
 
 
 
 
• List of eligible students to be prepared by 
respective schools. 
• Head Masters/ Principals of respective schools to 
forward the list of eligible students to District 
Education Officer through block level officer. 
District  • District Education Officer after final verification  
will send the list to District Welfare Officer for 
sanction.  
• District level committee headed by Deputy 
Commissioner approves the list for making 
payments. 
Post Matric 
SC/ST/BC  
(class XI & 
onwards) 
• Parents/ 
guardian annual 
income should not 
exceed 2.50 lakh 
for SC/ST whereas 
it was ₹ 1.00 lakh 
upto 2018-19 and 
₹ 
1.5 lakh from 
2019-20 for BC 
category.  
• 
Scholarship will 
be allowed for 
only one year in a 
class 
• Students should 
have cleared 
previous class 
exa 
m with 
minimum 40 per 
cent  marks for 
SC/ST and 45 per 
cent  for BC 
• Student 
 
• Students have to apply for scholarship through 
e-Kalyan portal and to upload the necessary 
documents alongwith signed copy of application. 
• Institutes  
 
 
• Institutes Nodal Officer (INO) has to ensure that 
all necessary documents were uploaded by the 
students on portal alongwith signed copy of 
application.  
• INO to approve applications after verifying the 
details entered on application with the available 
records and thereafter forward it to DWO. 
• District  • DWO will be responsible for verification of 
uploaded documents (income/caste/residential 
certificate) from the website 
“jharsewa.jharkhand.gov.in ” before sanctioning of 
the scholarship. 
• DWO has to ensure Aadhaar seeding of 
beneficiary and mapping of bank accounts of 
students with National Payment Corporation of 
India (NPCI). 
• 
District level committee headed by Deputy 
Commissioner approves the final list for making 
payments. 

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
24  
3.2.1 Applicable Scholarship Rates 
According to guidelines for Pre & Post matric schol arship schemes for 
SC/ST/BC, the amount of scholarship is prescribed o n the basis of class in 
which the student studies and status of student (Day Scholar or Hosteller) under 
Pre matric scholarship. Under Post Matric scholarsh ip scheme, the scholarship 
amount is calculated on the basis of institute’s ow nership category (GoI/State 
and Private) and slab of courses as detailed in Appendix 3.1 .  
3.3 Organizational Structure  
The Department of ST, SC, 
 Minority and BC Welfare headed by the Secretary 
at the State exercises overall control and supervis ion of the implementation of 
schemes. The District Welfare Officers (DWOs) are r esponsible for 
implementation of the schemes at the district and field level. The organizational 
set up of the department is represented in the Chart 3.1  below: 
Chart 3.1: Organogram of ST, SC, Minority and BC Welfare department:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
3.4 Database of beneficiaries  
For better implementation of scheme, the department  has to acquaint with the 
potential eligible students under each category in the State. As per instruction 
(November 2006) of the Welfare Department, GoJ each  DWO had to prepare 
an electronic database of eligible students incorpo rating all information of 
concern students. This database was to be utilized for test-check, monitoring 
progress of students and to be published in the district website. 
Audit noticed that test-checked DWOs did not maintain any electronic database 
of potential eligible students for holistic coverage. In absence of such database 
the DWOs/department were unable to cross check the beneficiaries with student 
database, monitoring of progress of students and actual coverage of them.  
 
 
Special Secretary/ 
Additional Secretary 
 Joint Secretary  
& subordinate officers 
The Pr. Secretary/Secretary, ST SC Minority and BC Welfare 
Department  
District Welfare Officers/ Integrated 
Tribal Development Agency (ITDA) 
Tribal Welfare Commissioner 
(Directorate level) 

Chapter 3: Pre and Post Matric Scholarship Schemes for SC, ST and BC  
 25 
Recommendation: 
An exercise to keep electronic database of all eligible beneficiaries in the State 
for universal coverage and realistic budget prepara tions should be carried 
out.  
3.5 Financial Management 
The funding for the scheme is borne by both the Central and State Government 
in the ratio as discussed in Table 3.2 : 
Table 3.2: Funding pattern of scholarship schemes 
Scholarship scheme Central Share State Share 
Pre Matric SC 
- For class I to VIII 100 per cent  
Class IX and X -100 per cent  (2017-
18 & 2018-19);  
60 per cent  (2019-20 onwards). 
- 
 
40 per cent  (2019-20 
onwards). 
Post Matric SC 100 per cent  - 
Pre Matric ST 
- For class I to VIII 100 per cent  
 For class IX and X : 
75 per cent  (2017-21);  
 
For class IX and X : 
25 per cent  (2017-21); 
Post Matric ST 75 per cent  25 per cent  
Pre Matric BC 50 per cent  50 per cent  
Scrutiny of budget proposals of scholarships for th e period 2017-21 revealed 
that budget was prepared on ad-hoc basis by increas ing an average 10 per cent  
in previous year’s actual expenditure and in the nu mbers of beneficiaries 
actually covered,  though it is to be prepared on the basis of demand received 
from all the sources based on actual requirement.  
State level budget provision, allotments and expend iture during 2017-21 is 
given in Table 3.3: 
Table 3.3: Budget Allocations and Expenditure (pre & post matric) during 2017-21  
(₹ in crore)
Year Total 
Outlay 
Total 
sanction 
Allotment/  
Release 
Expenditure  Savings Savings in 
percentage  
2017-18 NA  NA  597.92  526.82  71.10  12  
2018-19 662.56  662.53  662.53  533.75  128.78  19  
2019-20 662.23  636.09  636.09  533.42  102.67  16  
2020-21 700.57  613.65  575.35  450.96  124.39  22  
Total  2025.36  1912.27  2471.89  2044.95  426.94  17  
(Source: Department of ST, SC, Minority and BC Welfare, GoJ) 
It can be seen from the Table 3.3  that savings was subsequently increased from 
12 per cent  in 2017-18 to 22 per cent  in 2020-21 despite the fact that allotment 
during 2020-21 was 18 per cent  less than the total outlay.  
Further, in six test-checked districts savings of f und was seven to 70 per cent  
against allotment of ₹ 1060.15 crore during 2017-21 as can be seen from t he 
Table 3.4 . 

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
26  
Table 3.4 Utilisation of scholarship fund at test-checked districts 
(₹ in crore) 
District Period Allotment Expenditure Savings Percentage of 
savings 
Chatra 2017-21 85.69  25.81  59.88  69.88  
East Singhbhum  2017-21 118.02  98.33  19.69  16.68  
Godda 2017-21 88.33  75.62  12.71  14.39  
Hazaribag 2017-21 156.38  133.51  22.87  14.62  
Palamu 2017-21 114.74  97.80  16.94  14.76  
Ranchi 2017-21 496.99  462.93  34.06  6.85  
  Total  1060.15  894.00  166.15    
Reasons of savings were under utilization of fund b y DWOs and mainly 
attributed to preparation of un-realistic budget si nce department remained 
unaware about the actual requirement. 
3.6 Financial Irregularities in Scheme Specific Sof tware (e-Kalyan) 
‘e -Kalyan’ portal was implemented (January 2015) in Jharkhand State under the 
project “Rapid Replication Rollout 13  (RRR) of e-PASS (Electronic Payment 
and Application System of Scholarships) Application  in Jharkhand State” 
launched by the Department of Electronic & Informat ion Technology (DeitY), 
Ministry of Communications & Information Technology, Government of India 
(GoI) through Centre for Good Governance (CGG) 14 , Hyderabad. The RRR 
project was funded under the World Bank assisted “I ndia e-Delivery of Public 
Services DPL Project”. The RRR project was administ ratively approved 
(December 2013) by the DeitY, GoI, at a total estim ated cost of ₹ 2.85 crore 15  
and ₹ 1.00 crore was released (January 2014) to CGG by t he DeitY for this 
purpose. As per the contract (October 2014) between  the DeitY, GoI and the 
CGG, the project was scheduled to be completed within a period of 30 months 16   
                                                 
13  The “Rapid Replication Roll-out Initiative” was co nceptualized with the vision of 
National e-Governance Plan (NeGP) - to enhance grow th of online e-Governance 
transactions in the country. The “Rapid Replication  Roll-out Initiative” is a unique 
initiative under which the applications from one state will be replicated across other states. 
The e-Pass Application, which has been successfully  implemented in the state of 
Telangana and is being implemented in the states of  Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, 
Himachal Pradesh, Tripura and Jharkhand as part of Rapid Replication Rollout.  
14  The Centre for Good Governance (CGG) was establish ed in October, 2001 by the then 
Government of Andhra Pradesh (GoAP) in collaboratio n with the Department for 
International Development (DFID) and the World Bank  to help it achieve the State’s goal 
of Transforming Governance. CGG undertakes action r esearch, provides professional 
advice, and conducts change management programmes f or government departments and 
agencies to enable successful implementation of their reform agenda.  
15  Customisation of e-Pass application: ₹ 95.13 lakh; Training and capacity building: 
₹ 4.75 lakh; Operations & Maintenance (for two years ): ₹ 52.64 lakh; Travel cost: 
₹ 10.00 lakh; Hosting / Storage/ Connectivity charges (for two years): ₹ 11.24 lakh; Project 
Management Unit (PMU): ₹ 97.76 lakh; and contingency: ₹ 13.58 lakh. 
16  First six months for customisation of e-PASS and 2 4 months for O&M. 

Chapter 3: Pre and Post Matric Scholarship Schemes for SC, ST and BC  
 27 
(March 2017) which was further extended (January 2018) to 31 March 2018 on 
the recommendations of Project Review and Steering Group (PRSG) 17 , GoI.  
The e-PASS Application was to be hosted in the Data Centre of the CGG located 
in Hyderabad.  
A System Audit of IT platform viz.  e-Kalyan , platform being used for DBT 
transfer to the eligible beneficiaries of “Pre and Post Matric scholarship schemes 
for SC, ST and BC category students” was carried out.  
During scrutiny of records of implementation of e-Kalyan  by the Welfare 
Department following irregularities were noticed. 
3.6.1 Irregular payment of user charges 
As per the Contract between the DeitY, GoI and the CGG, the project was 
scheduled to be completed by 31 March 2017. On bein g informed (January 
2018) by the Implementing agency (CGG) that the project was in operation and 
maintenance (O&M) phase and few project activities were yet to be completed 
for want of release of balance fund of ₹1.85 crore, the agreement was further 
extended to 31 March 2018 on the basis of recommendations (January 2018) of 
the PRSG to carry out the balance activities and ne cessary documentation 
(Project closure report, consolidated final Utilisa tion Certificate etc.) to be 
submitted by 31 March 2018. On Techno-Commercial Pr oposal submitted 
(April 2017) by CGG for continuation of e-Kalyan  for Academic Year 2017-18, 
post facto approval was accorded (August 2019) by the Jharkhand Cabinet and 
payment for processing of 26,33,489 applications for pre-matric scholarship (@ 
₹ 3.00 per application) and 3,38,139 applications for post-matric scholarship (@ 
₹ 5.00 per application) during 2017-18 was also appr oved. Audit, however, 
observed that user charges for processing of the applications for pre-matric and 
post-matric scholarships of ₹ 2.29 crore (including security audit) were paid to  
the implementing agency (CGG) for the period 2017-1 9 which included 
extended period of 2017-18. This resulted in irregular payment of user charges 
of at least ₹ 95.91 lakh for 2017-18 to CGG by the Welfare Department. 
3.6.2 Avoidable payment 
National e-Scholarship Portal (N eSP), being a Mission Mode Project (MMP) 
under the National e-Governance Plan, aims at provi ding common electronic 
portal for implementing various scholarship schemes  launched by the Central 
Government, State Governments and Union Territories  across the country, 
where all the portals of scholarship application of different States are integrated 
with the N eSP for getting information of all scholarships unde r one umbrella. 
As the Pre & Post Matric scholarship schemes are ce ntrally sponsored and are 
                                                 
17  Constituted in the Ministry of Communications & In formation Technology, Department of 
Electronics and Information Technology (DeitY), Gov ernment of India for review of 
approved projects under World Bank assisted “India:  e-Delivery of Public Services DPL 
Project”. 

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
28  
implemented through the State Governments, GoI inst ructed (July 2015) the 
states having their fully functional e-scholarship portal may require getting 
integrated with NeSP and states not having any port al or having partially 
functional portal may require to come on-board to the NeSP. 
Audit observed that migration of ‘ e-PASS’ application had not been done as of 
May 2022 though it was also decided (June 2015) in the Inter-Departmental 
Committee meeting that the ‘e-PASS’ scholarship app lication was to be 
migrated to the NeSP by June 2016. As a result, use r charges of ₹ 4.36 crore 
was paid to CGG during the period 2017-21 for proce ssing of scholarship 
applications after being selected on nomination basis by the Jharkhand Cabinet 
on the recommendation of Finance Department, GoJ. 
3.6.3  Non-functioning of Project Management Unit (PMU) at Jharkhand 
According to the provisions of the approved project  proposal, Project 
Management Unit 18  (PMU) was required to be set up in Jharkhand for w hich 
₹ 97.76 lakh was earmarked against total project cos t of ₹ 2.85 crore and 
M/s CGG was to transfer the fund to Jharkhand as pe r terms and conditions 
mentioned in the approved proposal. Audit noticed t hat only ₹ 34.22 lakh was 
transferred (August 2014) to the JAPIT, the technic al agency of the State 
Government responsible for setting up of the PMU an d ₹ 63.54 lakh was 
withheld by the CGG in contravention to the provisi ons of approved project 
proposal and not provided despite several reminders issued (between December 
2016 and October 2017) by JAPIT to the Welfare Depa rtment and CGG. As a 
result, services of e-PASS PMU were discontinued since 1 st  November 2017 
due to insufficient fund. The CGG should ensure tha t JAPIT, being an agency 
for technical assistance and implementation of the project to the Welfare 
Department, must be kept in loop throughout so that  JAPIT may aware of all 
the developments made in the e-PASS application. As  such, monitoring and 
evaluation of the project by JAPIT was hampered. Re ason for not transferring 
of the balance fund of ₹ 63.54 lakh earmarked for PMU by CGG was sought 
from the Welfare Department but reply of the depart ment is still awaited 
(October 2022). 
3.6.4 Non-deduction of taxes at source from payment s to the agency 
According to the provisions (under section 194 J of  Income Tax Act, 1961), 
taxes at source in respect of fees for technical se rvices is to be deducted at the 
rate of 10 per cent  of such fees. Further, as per the instructions of the Planning-
cum-Finance Department, GoJ, all Drawing and Disbur sing Officers (DDOs) 
are instructed (December 2018) to deduct TDS on Goo ds and Service Tax 
(GST) at the rate of two per cent  from all payments (valuing more than ₹ 2.50 
lakh). 
                                                 
18  PMU was responsible for management and administrat ion of project locally, monitoring & 
evaluation and reporting on the project. 

Chapter 3: Pre and Post Matric Scholarship Schemes for SC, ST and BC  
 29 
Scrutiny of the records relating to payment of user  charges to the agency 
revealed that a total payment of ₹ 3.39 crore was made to the agency (M/s CGG, 
Hyderabad) towards user charges and security audit charges for processing of 
applications during 2017-20. As per the provisions of the IT Act and GoJ’s 
instructions, taxes at source of ₹ 34.56 lakh (TDS on Income Tax: ₹ 28.80 lakh 
i.e., 10 per cent  of principal bill amount ( ₹ 2.88 crore) and GST: ₹ 5.76 lakh 
i.e., two per cent of principal bill amount) was required to be deducted from the 
bills of the agency by the DDO, but only ₹ 6.78 lakh (i.e., two per cent of the 
gross bill amount of ₹ 3.39 crore) was deducted from the bills. As such, there 
was less deduction of ₹ 27.76 lakh of TDS from the payments to the agency.  
Reason for short deduction of TDS from the payment to the agency was sought 
from the Department, but reply was not furnished (October 2022). 
3.7 Audit coverage 
Granular IT data on beneficiaries’ eligibility, pay ment calculation and 
authorisation, etc. from the scheme management soft ware e-Kalyan Jharkhand 
for the period 2017-21 (up to July 2020) was collec ted and analysed. On the 
basis of data analysis output and identified outliers, records of 2,444 students of 
96 pre and post matric schools/institutes (Appendix-3.2)  in six test-checked 
districts examined and in 822 cases of diversion (34 per cent ) detected.  
3.8 Implementation  
In terms of guidelines issued (February 2018) by th e Department of ST, SC, 
Minority and BC Welfare, GoJ: 
 Before sanctioning the scholarship, all the sanctio ning authorities were to 
verify the fulfillment of eligibility of beneficiaries,  
 Ensure that application forms submitted by the students in post matric cases 
have been filled properly,  
 Documents like income/caste certificate (issued by the competent 
authority), details of fee (verified by the concerned institution), mobile number 
of the student, affiliation of concerned Institutio n/College/University, etc. are 
submitted.  
Further, Rule 87 of General Financial Rules, 2017 r egarding Direct Benefit 
Transfer also stipulates that transfer of benefits should be done directly to 
beneficiaries under various Government Schemes and Programmes using ICT.  
Necessary process reengineering to minimize intermediary levels and to reduce 
delay in payments to intended beneficiaries with th e objective of minimizing 
pilferage and duplication should be done for all Go vernment Schemes and 
Programmes. 
During scrutiny of records at 96 pre & post matric institutions/schools level in 
six test-checked districts, instances of disbursement of scholarship to ghost/fake 
beneficiaries, multiple payments, excess payments, in-admissible payments 

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
30  
etc ., in the implementation of scholarship schemes wer e observed by audit as 
discussed in the subsequent paragraphs:   
3.8.1 Disbursement of scholarships to ghost/fake be neficiaries 
As per instructions contained in orders issued (200 6) by Welfare Department, 
list of eligible students were to be prepared by th e Headmasters/Principals of 
schools in case of pre matric scholarship for onwar d submission. As per 
SC/ST/BC pre & post matric scholarship Rules 2018, for the post matric 
scholarship students have to apply through e-Kalyan  portal. The INO was 
responsible for checking of the uploaded documents of post matric applications 
with the available records before making recommenda tions for scholarship. 
Further, as per State Government order (2019), in case of pre matric scholarship 
the Principals of the respective schools have to ma rk a certificate on the list of 
beneficiaries that name of all eligible students have been included in the list and 
the names of any ineligible student has not been included .  
Audit noticed that in 08 schools under two test-che cked districts (Chatra and 
Godda), pre-matric scholarships amounting to ₹ 0.53 lakh were disbursed to 39 
beneficiaries (Appendix-3.3 ) and in 13 institutes under four 19  test-checked 
districts, post matric scholarships amounting to ₹ 4.67 lakh were disbursed to 
42 beneficiaries who were found fake/ ghost (Appendix-3.4 ) as these 
beneficiaries were found not enroll in the records of respective 
schools/institutes.  
On this being pointed out, the Head Masters/Princip als of respective 
schools/institutes admitted the facts. This is indicative that the Principals of the 
respective schools did not gave due care while prep aring the list of eligible 
students of Pre matric scholarship and in case of p ost matric scholarship 
scholarship applications were recommended without p roper 
verifications/checking of documents of applicants b y the 
Principals/Headmaster/INOs/DWOs. 
3.8.2 Disbursement of scholarship without verifying  eligibility criteria of  
beneficiaries 
According to the provisions of the Welfare Departme nt, Government of 
Jharkhand Resolution (February 2018), scholarship will be allowed for once in 
an academic year for all schemes. Further, in post matric scholarship scheme 
there was criteria of minimum marks (40 per cent  marks for SC/ST and 
45 per cent  for BC) in last examination. In addition, ceiling of annual income 
of parent or guardian from all sources, prescribed by GoI, is to be adhered as 
discussed in paragraph 3.2 . 
                                                 
19  Chatra, East Singhbhum, Palamu and Ranchi. 

Chapter 3: Pre and Post Matric Scholarship Schemes for SC, ST and BC  
 31 
Audit however noticed the following observations due to improper verification 
of applications/uploaded documents with the available records by INOs: 
Analysis of e-Kalyan  database for the period 2017-21 revealed that at State level 
12,983 students of BC category pursuing post matric  courses in 1097 Post 
Matric Institutes (within State: 880 and outside St ate: 217) were awarded 
scholarship amounting to ₹10.23 crore during 2017-20 through  
e-Kalyan  portal despite the fact that percentage marks obta ined by these 
students in last examination passed were less than prescribed 45 per cent . 
Similarly, in six test-checked districts 7,330 BC b eneficiaries in 419 Institutes 
with having less than prescribed 45 per cent  marks were provided scholarship 
amounting to ₹5.55 crore during 2017-21.  
Audit examined cases of 408 students in 41 institut es out of 7,330 BC 
beneficiaries of 419 Institutes in six test-checked districts and noticed that post-
matric scholarships of ₹ 13.21 lakh was disbursed to 217 BC category students 
in contravention of the eligibility criteria of sec uring minimum 45 per cent  
marks in the last examination (Appendix-3.5 ).  
Analysis of e-Kalyan  database for the period 2017-21 revealed that at State level 
5283 students of SC/ST category pursuing post matri c courses in 675 Post 
Matric Institutes (within State: 568 and outside St ate: 107) were awarded 
scholarship amounting to ₹ 5.18 crore during 2017-20 through e-Kalyan  portal 
despite the fact that percentage marks obtained by these students in last 
examination passed was less than prescribed 40 per cent . Further, in six test-
checked districts 2,666 ST/SC beneficiaries with having less than prescribed 40 
per cent  marks were provided scholarship amounting to ₹ 2.91 crore in 274 
Institutes during 2017-21 as noticed from analysis of database e-Kalyan .  
Audit examined cases of 250 students in 23 institut es out of 2,666 SC/ST 
beneficiaries from 274 Institutes and noticed that post-matric scholarships of  
₹ 6.64 lakh was disbursed to 96 SC/ST students of fi ve 20  test-checked districts 
though they did not secure prescribed 40 per cent marks in the last examinations 
(Appendix-3.6 ). 
Due to improper mapping and lack of effective contr ols in ‘ e-Kalyan ’ 
application software approval of applications of BC /SC/ST candidates having 
marks obtained less than the required could not be prevented as incorporated in 
paragraph 6.12.3 . 
Analysis of e-Kalyan  database for the period 2017-18 to 2020-21 at State level, 
revealed that 478 students ( Appendix-3.7 ) of BC category relating to 131 
institutes in the State, were awarded scholarship a mounting to ₹ 36.33 lakh 
during 2018-19, despite of the fact that the annual family incomes entered in the 
                                                 
20  Chatra, Godda, Hazaribag, Palamu and Ranchi. 

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
32  
database were more than the prescribed limit of ₹ 1.00 lakh, but the application 
software did not restrict the applicant from applying for the scholarship. Further, 
in six test checked district, 250 BC beneficiaries in 63 Institutes were provided 
post-matric scholarships amounting to ₹ 21.28 lakh during 2017-21, whose 
parent/ guardian’s income was higher than the prescribed limit. 
Audit examined cases of 59 students in 22 institute s (except East Singhbhum) 
out of 250 BC beneficiaries in 63 Institutes of six  test-checked districts. It was 
noticed that post-matric scholarships of ₹ 2.94 lakh were provided to 52 BC 
students having income higher than the prescribed limit (Appendix-3.8), due to 
improper mapping and lack of effective controls in ‘ e-Kalyan ’ application 
software approval of applications of BC/SC/ST candi dates having annual 
family income more than prescribed limit, details a s incorporated in 
paragraph 6.12.3 . 
In reply, (March-August 2022) DWOs of two test checked districts (Chatra and 
Godda) accepted the aforesaid three audit observati ons whereas replies from 
DWOs of other three districts (Hazaribag, Palamu an d Ranchi) in this respect 
are awaited. 
 In audit, it was observed that ‘Hazaribag Chapter of Cost Accountant’ was 
registered with the courses Fundamentals of Economics and Management, Cost 
& Management Accounting, Financial Management, Operational Management 
and Cost Accounting only for the Foundation and Int ermediate Courses but 
records showed that this institute approved and for warded the applications of 
seven students (BC: 05 and SC: 02)  during 2017-20 against the un-registered 
course ‘Integrated Master of Business Administratio n" (IMBA) and "Office 
Management and Secretarial Practices” which was fur ther processed by DWO 
without proper verifications. As such a sum of ₹ 1.81 lakh was irregularly paid 
to these students. 
This reflects that the prescribed norms as illustrated under paragraph 3.2  were 
not being followed while processing the application s of scholarships for 
approval by INO/DWO concerned.  
In reply, DWO, Hazaribag (August 2022) stated that this institute has not been 
approved by the District level committee for the fu ture disbursement of 
scholarship. 
3.8.3 Excess Payment of scholarship  
According to the Resolution (February 2018) of the Department, tuition fee and 
maintenance allowance will be paid to all eligible students (Day Scholars and 
Hostellers) pursuing study from post matric institu tes according to the 
classification of courses and slabs for Tuition Fees and Maintenance allowance 
as detailed in Table 3.5  below: 
 

Chapter 3: Pre and Post Matric Scholarship Schemes for SC, ST and BC  
 33 
Table 3.5: Prescribed slabs (Tuition Fee + Maintenance Allowance) for Post Matric 
courses within state 
Course 
GoI Institutions State Institutions/ 
Private 
Hostler 
(per year)  
Day Scholar 
(per year) 
Hostler 
(per year)  
Day Scholar 
(per year) 
Tech. Degree/ Master degree & above Gen. 
course 50,000  40,000  45,000  38,000  
Graduate/  Under graduate 30,000  24,000  21,000  18,000  
Degree/Diploma other than above 25,000  20,000  17,500  15,000  
Higher Secondary/ ITI etc. 15,000  12,000  10,500  9,000  
Analysis of e-Kalyan database of Post-Matric Schola rship Schemes (Within 
State: 49,310 and Outside State: 4,538) for the period from 2017-18 to 2019-20 
revealed that scholarship amounting to ₹95.75 crore was approved by the 
District Welfare Officers (DWOs) through ‘ e-Kalyan ’ portal to 53,848 
beneficiaries for pursuing different courses in var ious institutes against the 
payable amount of scholarship worth ₹72.54 crore as per prescribed rates as 
given in Table 3.6 : 
Table 3.6: Beneficiaries pursuing different courses in various institutes 
(₹ in crore) 
Type of 
scholarship 
Period of 
Payment 
No. of 
beneficiaries  
Total 
Scholarship 
paid 
Total 
Scholarship 
payable 
Excess  
payment of 
scholarship 
Post-Matric 
Scholarship 
(Within state) 
2017-20 49310 
 88.48  69.76  18.72  
Post-Matric 
Scholarship 
(Outside state) 
2017-20 4538 
 7.27  2.78  4.49  
Total   53848  95.75  72.54  23.21  
Further, analysis of data dump of e-Kalyan  revealed that in six test checked 
districts revealed that 48,239 in 24 Institutes, students were allowed higher rate 
of scholarship, due to misclassification of institu tes/ courses during 
FY 2017-21, which resulted in excess payment of sch olarship amounting to 
₹ 18.46 crore.  
Audit verified 204 cases in 11 institutes out of 48,239 in 24 Institutes and found 
that 195 beneficiaries of six test-checked district s except Chatra district 
(Appendix-3.9) got excess payment of scholarship amounting to ₹ 5.74 lakh. 
Due to weak control process, portal could not identify the correct classification 
of institute/courses leading to excess payment to b eneficiaries as illustrated in 
paragraph 6.12.3 . 
In reply DWOs of three test checked districts (Godd a, East Singhbhum and 
Hazaribag) stated (March-August 2022) that the maximum eligible limit will be 
applied for limiting the payment of scholarship henceforth whereas replies from 
DWOs of other two districts (Palamu and Ranchi) are awaited. 
 

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
34  
3.8.4 Disbursement of scholarship to students of un -approved/blacklisted 
institutes 
As per provision 9 of the Jharkhand SC/ST/BC Post-Matric Scholarship Scheme 
Regulation, 2018, institutes have to register themselves on portal by uploading 
necessary documents in the Master Database of the I nstitutes. Further, 
according to the provision 10, the district level c ommittee under the 
chairmanship of Deputy Commissioner approves the li st of post-matric 
institutes each year by physical inspection of inst itutes and verification of 
documents uploaded by them on portal for allowing d isbursement of 
scholarships. 
Audit however, noticed that in two test-checked dis tricts (Chatra and East 
Singhbhum) 180 students (Appendix-3.10) of four institutes 
21  were allowed 
scholarship worth ₹ 14.78 lakh though district level committee disappr oved 
/blacklisted these institutes due to non-fulfillmen t of the eligibility norms for 
scholarship during 2018-21. Thus, due to non-abidin g by the decisions of the 
district level committee by respective DWOs, schola rship of ₹ 14.78 lakh was 
disbursed to the beneficiaries of the disapproved/blacklisted institutes. 
In reply DWO East Singhbhum accepted (March 2022) t he audit observations 
whereas DWO Chatra did not furnished any reply. 
3.8.5 Award of scholarships to students consecutive ly two years for same 
class 
In terms of the provisions contained in Resolution (February 2018) for 
Scholarship scheme of the Welfare Department, schol arship to a particular 
student will be allowed once in an academic year un der all schemes. In 
pre-matric scholarship scheme, list of eligible stu dents for disbursement of 
pre-matric scholarship are to be prepared by respec tive schools and duly 
certified by the Principal/Head Master of the schoo l with an assurance that 
names of only eligible students have been included in the list. Further, after 
approval of district level committee the list of el igible beneficiaries are being 
uploaded on e-Kalyan portal for processing of disbu rsement of scholarship by 
DWO. 
Analysis of e-Kalyan  database for the Pre-Matric Scholarship Scheme for  the 
period from 2017-20 revealed that at State level  scholarship amounting to  
₹ 3.16 crore was irregularly awarded to 2.96 lakh be neficiaries 22  in 30,675 
schools under the irregularities (repeater students in same class in same schools 
                                                 
21  Mehar Private ITI and Jamshedpur ITI of East Singh bhum district, RNM College 
Hunterganj and Satyanand Bhokta Inter College Unta of Chatra district. 
22  Repeater Students awarded scholarship in same class  in same school:  1,93,624    
beneficiaries in 11252 school involving ₹ 205.02 lakh;  Repeater Students awarded 
scholarship in same class in different school : 1,02,866 beneficiaries in   19423 schools  
involving ₹ 110.66 lakh. 

Chapter 3: Pre and Post Matric Scholarship Schemes for SC, ST and BC  
 35 
repeater students in same class in different school s) in two consecutive years 
during 2017-20. 
Analysis of data revealed that out of 1,93,624 case s of repeaters from same 
school 5081 students of 612 schools were awarded sc holarship of 
₹ 95.99 lakh 
for class X in two consecutive years during 2017-20. Further, 1798 out of 5081 
students (either passed out or failure) from 180 sc hools in six test-checked 
districts were irregularly awarded scholarship of ₹ 32.34 lakh for class X in the 
succeeding academic year as noticed from analysis of e-Kalyan  database.  
During physical verification in six test-check dist ricts, Audit noticed that 121 
out of 1798 students (either passed out or failure) in 16 test-checked out of 180 
schools were irregularly awarded scholarships amoun ting to ₹ 2.01 lakh for 
class X in the succeeding academic year (Appendix-3.11).  
It indicated that due care was not taken by the res pective schools while 
preparing the list of eligible beneficiaries and al so not properly verified by the 
concerned DWOs while processing the scholarship pay ment, which was 
divergent to the prescribed norms.   
Due to improper mapping of validation controls in s oftware, e-Kalyan  portal 
could not check such irregularities as illustrated in paragraph 6.12.3 . 
In reply DWOs of three test-checked districts (East  Singhbhum, Godda and 
Hazaribag) stated (March-August 2022) that matter w ill be examined and 
necessary action will be taken accordingly whereas replies from DWOs of other 
two districts (Palamu and Ranchi) are awaited. 
3.8.6 Inadmissible disbursement of scholarship from  two schemes 
As per paragraph 6 (X) of Jharkhand SC/ST/BC Post M atric Scholarship 
Scheme Regulation, 2018 and paragraph 11 (XIII & XI V) of Minority 
scholarship guidelines, a student shall be eligible  for only one scholarship out 
of all the available scholarship meant for SC/ST/BC /Minority in the same 
academic year.  
Cross verification of e-Kalyan  data 
23  with NSP data of the six test-checked 
districts revealed that 1049 applications 24  (ST and  BC category) had availed 
post-matric scholarships (SC/ST/BC) amounting to ₹ 59.67 lakh besides 
availing ₹ 61.65 lakh of Minority scholarship through NSP during 2017-20.  
Audit noticed that 527 beneficiaries in eight insti tutes of two (Ranchi and 
Hazaribag) out of six test-checked districts, avail ed Minority scholarships of 
₹ 28.77 lakh in the year 2018-19. These students had  also availed post matric 
BC scholarships of ₹ 26.28 lakh from same institutes, as detailed in Table 3.7 
below: 
                                                 
23  NSP Data of test-checked districts was only availa ble with audit.  
24  ST students: 68; and BC students: 981. 

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
36  
Table 3.7: Beneficiaries availing dual scholarships 
Name of 
District Name of Institute 
Number of 
Beneficiaries 
availed 
scholarship 
from both the 
scheme 
Total Amount 
paid through 
Post BC 
scholarship 
Total Amount paid 
through Minority 
scholarship 
Ranchi 
Doranda College 49  3,68,873  2,44,252  
St. Xaviers College 04  84,000  24,000  
Ranchi Women’s 
College 19  1,57,505  95,494 
Ranchi University 31  2,14,300  1,54,645  
Hazaribag 
Annada College 91  3,98,990  6,23,790  
KB Women’s 
College 202  8,46,990  9,95,290  
Markham College of 
Commerce 44  1,53,279  2,30,424  
St. Columbus 
College 87  4,03,675  5,08,779  
 Total  527  26,27,612  28,76,674  
 
This showed that applications of scholarships were being forwarded by INOs 
without required verification which was divergent t o the prescribed norms of 
the Resolution. Further, e-Kalyan  and NSP portal were also not integrated with 
each other which resulted in inadmissible payment o f scholarships of  
₹ 26.28 lakh to the beneficiaries under BC scholarship.   
In reply, DWO, Hazaribag (August 2022) stated that no mechanism available in 
the portal to distinguish the deficiencies whereas DWO Ranchi did not provide 
any reply so far. 
Recommendation: 
Monitoring and control mechanisms for verification of eligibility of 
applications as well as payments requires to be str engthened to make 
implementation of the scheme effective by checking/ preventing 
irregularities/deviations through integration of bo th portals (e-Kalyan and 
NSP). 
3.9 Monitoring and Evaluation 
Monitoring and evaluation are essential for ensurin g efficient utilisation of 
programme resources so that the intended outcomes a re achieved within the 
planned timeframes. As government programmes are ex ecuted over long time 
periods and at different levels, it is imperative t o have a robust and effective 
programme monitoring and evaluation system. Audit observed the following:  
3.9.1 District level committee 
As per paragraph 22 of ST, SC, BC Scholarship Regulation 2018, a district level 
committee under the chairmanship of Deputy Commissi oner is to be set up at 
district level for the approval of institutes and s cholarships. This committee is 
responsible for monitoring and supervision of schol arship schemes at district 
level. Committee shall make arrangement of physical  verification of at least 

Chapter 3: Pre and Post Matric Scholarship Schemes for SC, ST and BC  
 37 
25 per cent students studying the professional cour ses after disbursement of 
scholarships in their bank accounts. 
Audit noticed that in all test-checked districts, d istrict level committee headed 
by Deputy Commissioner was constituted but its func tion mainly remained 
limited to the approval of institutes and scholarsh ips resulted in in-sufficient 
monitoring. 
3.9.2 Impact Evaluation 
Impact evaluation is an assessment of how the inter vention being evaluated 
affects outcomes, whether these effects are intended or unintended and assesses 
program effectiveness in achieving its ultimate goa ls. The proper analysis of 
impact requires a counterfactual of what those outcomes would have been in the 
absence of the intervention. Impact evaluations oft en serve an accountability 
purpose to determine if and how well a program work ed and can also help 
answer to determine which, among several alternativ es, is the most effective 
approach. 
Scholarship schemes represent an important social welfare measure initiated by 
the Central and State Governments to increase the e nrolment and ensure 
retention of Scheduled Caste (SC), Scheduled Tribe (ST) and Other Backward 
Classes (OBC) students in educational institutions.   Its objective is also to 
provide financial assistance to those categories of students who are studying at 
pre & post matric level and enable them to complete their education with a better 
opportunity of progressing to the post-matric stage of education. 
Audit however, noticed that impact evaluation of sc holarship scheme was not 
carried out by the State government during 2017-21 as such, department was 
unaware towards the effectiveness of schemes in achieving its objectives. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Chapter 4 
Pre and Post Matric 
Scholarship Schemes for 
Minority 

 
CHAPTER 4 
Pre and Post Matric Scholarship Schemes for Minority 
This Chapter is related to Pre and Post Matric Scholarship for Minority under 
which audit observations relating to irregularities  noticed in disbursement of 
scholarships in test checked 30 Pre & Post Matric s chools/institutes in six 
selected districts have been incorporated. Benefici ary’s details of selected 
schools as featured in National Scholarship Portal (NSP) were cross-checked 
with the records of selected schools/institutes.  Important audit findings of this 
chapter are: 
• Scholarship of ₹ 1.52 lakh was paid to 20 fictitious beneficiaries since  
credentials of these beneficiaries could not get confirmed from the records 
of concerned schools/institutes.  
• Scholarships amounting to ₹ 1.17 crore were awarded to 1482 ghost/fake 
beneficiaries from 14 test-checked schools/institut es which were neither 
registered themselves on NSP nor ever obtained user credentials.  
• Scholarships amounting to ₹ 43.77 lakh was disbursed to 663 students 
without verifying documents relating to eligibility  criteria viz., annual 
income and marks secured by beneficiaries in previo us class final 
examination. 
• No details of the beneficiaries at test-checked dis tricts and department 
level were available other than NSP portal. It was also observed that 
physical and financial details of the scheme were n ot uploaded at the 
official website of the districts and the department.  
• Evaluation studies at regular interval was not carr ied out to assess the 
effectiveness of scheme in achieving its objectives. 
Conclusion: 
Implementation of Minority Scholarship scheme was d ismal in the State as 
Audit noticed instances of disbursement of scholars hips to fictitious/ghost 
beneficiaries in 18 (60 per cent ) out of 30 test-checked institutes. Fraudulent 
disbursement of scholarships was made from even tho se institutes which 
neither register themselves on NSP nor obtained user credentials. 
This reflected that, with the direct/indirect invol vement of the application 
verifying authorities, the user credentials were mi sused, for obtaining 
approval of scholarships for fake persons. Role of Institute Nodal Officer 
(INO)/ District Nodal Officer (DNO)/ State Nodal Officer (SNO) (application 
verifying authorities) in fraudulent approval of ap plications was also 
confirmed from the investigation report of a distri ct level government 
committee framed for verifying minority scholarship  fraud reported in 
Dhanbad district. Thus, department failed to restri ct the involvement of 
ineligible/fake persons, as the stake holders faile d to perform its duties 

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
40  
properly as defined under SOPs. Instances of irregu lar disbursement of 
scholarships to beneficiaries without verifying doc uments relating to 
eligibility criteria were also noticed. Evaluation studies at regular interval 
though required was not carried out as such effecti veness of scheme in 
achieving its objectives remain unnoticed to the department.  
4.1 Introduction 
The Prime Minister’s New 15 Point Programme for the  Welfare of Minorities 
was announced in June, 2006. It provides that a Pre  & Post Matric scholarship 
scheme for meritorious students from minority commu nities 
25  would be 
implemented. The scholarship at Pre & Post Matric level will encourage parents 
from minority communities to send their school goin g children to school, 
lighten their financial burden on school education and sustain their efforts to 
support their children to complete school education . The scheme will form the 
foundation for their educational attainment and pro vide a level playing field in 
the competitive employment arena. Empowerment through education, which is 
one of the objectives of this scheme, has the poten tial to lead to upliftment of 
the socio-economic conditions of the minority communities. 
The Pre-Matric scholarship will be awarded for stud ies in a government or 
private school in India from class I to class X, in cluding such residential 
Government institutes and eligible private institut es selected and notified in a 
transparent manner by the State Government. Whereas , the Post-Matric  
scholarship is to be awarded for studies in a gover nment or private higher 
secondary school/college/university in India, inclu ding such residential 
institutes of the Government and eligible private institutes selected and notified 
in a transparent manner by the State Government con cerned. It will also cover 
technical and vocational courses in Industrial Trai ning Institutes/ Industrial 
Training Centres affiliated with the National Counc il for Vocational Training 
(NCVT) of classes XI and XII level including Polyte chnics and other courses. 
Any course of less than one-year duration is not co vered under this scheme. 
Certificate courses are also not covered. 
  
                                                 
25  Muslims, Sikhs, Christians, Buddhists, Jain and Zo roastrians (Parsis) have been notified as 
minority communities under Section 2 (c) of the National Commission for Minorities Act, 
1992. 

Chapter 4: Pre and Post Matric Scholarship Schemes for Minority 
 41 
4.2 Eligibility Criteria 
As per guidelines issued by GoI the broad eligibili ty criteria to avail 
scholarships of pre & post matric scholarship by a minority category student is 
as under in Table 4.1: 
Table 4.1: Eligibility criteria of Pre & Post Matric scholarship  
Name of 
scheme 
Broad Eligibility Criteria 
Annual 
Income 
Celling for 
parents/ 
guardians 
Marks in 
last passed 
final 
examination  
Other requirement 
Pre-Matric 
scholarship 
scheme  
1.00 lakh 
Not less than 
50% marks 
or equivalent 
grade 
i.  An Income Certificate, issued from a 
Competent Authority in the State/UT 
Governments is required in respect of 
parent/guardian of the student.   
ii.  A Self- Certified Community Certificate is 
required from the student who has attained 18 
years of age. For other s the Community 
Certificate certified by parent/guardian of the 
student is required.  
iii.  The continuance of award (for Renewal 
applicants) will be subject to securing 50% 
marks in the previous year examination.  
iv.  The school/institute will certify the claim of 
st udent of being an outstation student not 
residing in hostel of the school/institute 
concerned on the basis of permanent address 
and parents’ address  
v.  A student shall be eligible for only one 
scholarship out of all the available 
scholarships of central gover nment meant for 
SC/ST/OBC/Minority  
Post Matric 
scholarship 
scheme  
2.00 lakh (Source: Government orders) 
4.2.1   Roles and Responsibilities of stakeholders 
As per Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) 2017-18 &  2018-19 for minority 
scholarship, the roles and responsibilities of stak eholders  are illustrated below 
in Table 4.2 : 
Table 4.2: Roles and Responsibilities of Stakeholders  
Stakeholders Responsibility 
Student/Applicant  The primary role of the Student/Applicant is to register and 
submit the application at NSP.  
School/College Institution  • To work as 1 st  Level Verification for the applications 
moved through NSP 
• Update Courses and update fee amount in student 
Application form. If fee entered by the student is found 
to be incorrect. Institute/College may rectify it.  
• Verify/Reject applications. 
• Verification of application by checking the correct ness 
of application form and uploaded document submitted 
by the applicant and maintain physical copies of 
supporting documents.  

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
42  
Stakeholders Responsibility 
• The District/State can ask for these documents from  the 
INO as & when required.  
SNO/ DNO 26   • To work as 2 nd  Level verification. 
• Responsible to provide login credential to Institution.  
• Responsible to verify new Institute and their cours es in 
NSP.  
• Update Fee amount, Aadhaar  no. and Account number.  
• Verify /Reject applications.  
• Generation of payment lot on NSP Portal.  
• Apply digital signature on payment file on PFMS portal. 
SNO 27   To work as 3 rd  Level verification.  
State Nodal Officer shall follow the same process a s 
followed for 2 nd  level verification. 
Central Ministry- Sanction 
Officer (PFMS Portal)  
Responsible for sanction creation and disbursement of fund 
to the beneficiary’s bank Account.  
4.3 Process of Application, Sanction and Payment   
National Scholarship Portal (NSP) opens for the reg istration on a particular 
period every year. Students can register and apply for minority scholarships 
through NSP. Verification of applications will be c arried out by INO/ DNO/ 
SNO who will ensure correctness of details in the application form and uploaded 
documents submitted by the student/applicants on NSP. NIC segregates scheme 
wise applications from merit list to create lots an d push them to PFMS. PFMS 
creates payment files and send them to State Nodal Officer (SNO) for 
verification. The SNO verify and signed digitally and forwarded to  Ministry of  
Minority Affairs (MoMA) for payment process of scho larship. Process of 
application, sanction and payment of minority schol arships is shown in the 
Chart 4.1 below: 
 Chart 4.1:   Process of application, sanction and payment of minority scholarships  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
                                                 
26  DNO is introduced as 2 nd Level verification of the applications as per SOP o f National 
Scholarship Portal (issued on 24 July 2019). 
27  Up to June 2019, SNO functioned as the 2 nd  level verification. However, from July 2019 
SNO is notified as 3 rd  level verification for the applications as per SOP  of National 
Scholarship Portal (issued on 24 July 2019). 
Student 
registration/submissio 
n of application 
through NSP portal 
Verification of 
applications by 
INO 
Verification of 
applications by 
DNO/SNO 
Preparation of merit 
list and generation 
of lots by NIC 
Approval on lots and 
marking of digital 
signature by SNO 
Payment files 
generation/ Bill 
generation and 
scholarship disbursal 
by MoMA 

Chapter 4: Pre and Post Matric Scholarship Schemes for Minority 
 43 
4.4 Organisational structure  
At the State level, the responsibility of implement ation of the minority 
scholarship schemes in the State is vested with the  ST, SC, Minority and BC 
Welfare Department, headed by the Secretary. Managi ng Director, Jharkhand 
State Minority Finance and Development Corporation (JSMFDC) exercise 
overall control over the implementation of the scheme in the state as State Nodal 
Officer. At district level the District Welfare Officer (DWOs) works as District 
Nodal Officer. The organisational structure of State level is in Chart 4.2: 
Chart 4.2: Organisational setup  
State/District level functionaries for Minority scholarship: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.5 Funding pattern  
The Minority Scholarship scheme is Central Sector S cheme and 100 per cent  
funding is provided by the Ministry of Minority Aff airs (MoMA), GoI. 
Disbursement of scholarship to beneficiaries is mad e directly by MoMA after 
scholarship applications are approved through Natio nal Scholarship Portal 
(NSP) by state functionaries in accordance with the prescribed procedure. 
4.6 Beneficiaries 
As per information received from JSMFDC, 7.99 lakh beneficiaries applied for 
pre & post matric minority scholarships out of whic h 2.48 lakh beneficiaries 
were awarded scholarships amounting to 
₹ 160.38 crore during 2017-21, as 
detailed in Table 4.3:  
Table 4.3: Total applications and disbursement of scholarships during 2017-21  
Scheme name Year 
Total 
applications 
received (fresh 
& renewal) 
Nos. of 
applications 
approved (as 
per PFMS  
payment) 
Applications 
not considered 
for payment 
Scholarship 
disbursed      
(₹ in crore) 
Pre-Matric 2017-18 77,561  51,895  25,666  29.43  
2018-19 1,66,421  50,450  1,15,971  34.6  
Additional Secretary 
Joint Secretary  
Managing Director JSMFDC  
Assistant Directors and other 
subordinate officers 
The Pr. Secretary/Secretary, ST SC Minority and 
BC Welfare Department cum Chairman JSMFDC 
District Welfare Officers/ITDA 

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
44  
Scheme name Year 
Total 
applications 
received (fresh 
& renewal) 
Nos. of 
applications 
approved (as 
per PFMS  
payment) 
Applications 
not considered 
for payment 
Scholarship 
disbursed      
(₹ in crore) 
2019-20 2,03,627  84,133  1,19,494  60.9  
2020-21 2,23,453  14,332  2,09,121  5.17  
  Total  6,71,062  2,00,810  4,70,252  130.10  
Post-Matric 
2017-18 30,650  15,025  15,625  9.96  
2018-19 40,491  12,616  27,875  8.61  
2019-20 25,016  13,182  11,834  8.72  
2020-21 31,410  5,918  25,492  2.99  
  Total  1,27,567  46,741  80,826  30.28  
 Grand Total  7,98,629  2,47,551  5,51,078  160.38  
(Source : JSMFDC ) 
It is evident from Table 4.3  above that only 30 per cent  applications were 
processed for payment during 2017-21 while others w ere pending at Institute 
Nodal Officer (INO)/ District Nodal Officer (DNO) l evel of however, reasons 
of pendency were not provided. 
4.7 Audit Coverage 
As per information furnished to audit by JSMFDC, 10 0877 beneficiaries were 
disbursed pre & post matric minority scholarship amounting to 
₹ 60.38 crore in 
six selected districts during 2017-21 as shown in Chart  4.3 below:  
Chart  4.3/A: Number of beneficiaries under pre & post matric minority scholarship 
 
 
2747 
1676 
855 
11247 
342 
15797 
4
853 
722 
10455 
155 
14082 
34 
1147 
1060 
10367 
309 
16938 
8
1783 
650 
4775 
315 
4556 
0 2000 4000 6000 8000 10000 12000 14000 16000 18000 
Chatra 
East Singhbhum 
Godda 
Hazaribag 
Palamu 
Ranchi 
2020-21 2019-20 2018-19 2017-18 

Chapter 4: Pre and Post Matric Scholarship Schemes for Minority 
 45 
Chart  4.3/B: Total Expenditure during 2017-21 under pre & post matric Minority 
scholarship 
Audit examined the records of 30 Pre & Post Matric schools/institutes in six 
test-checked districts (Appendix-4.1).  Beneficiary’s details of selected schools 
as featured in NSP were cross-checked with the reco rds of concerned 
schools/institutes. Audit observations are as under: 
4.8 Procedure for disbursement of scholarships  
As per SOP 2017-18 for minority scholarship, institutes/schools are required to 
register on NSP by filling up available registratio n form on portal. Thereafter, 
the State authority will verify the details of the institute/school and accord 
approval to it. Subsequently, the institute/school will be added in the database 
of NSP and will be provided with credentials (login/password) for the Portal by 
SNO.  
Further, students have to register themselves and a pply for minority 
scholarships through NSP. The INO has to log in on NSP for approving 
scholarship applications of the students as First L evel Verification and will 
ensure that the students are genuine & eligible and  to rule out duplication with 
other scholarship schemes. An application duly veri fied by the first level of 
verifying authority will be treated as valid applic ation. The Second Level 
Verification will ensure the correctness of credent ials of schools/institutes and 
will conduct bulk verification of applications (applicable up to July 2019). From 
August 2019, DNO/SNO also made responsible for the correctness of the details 
on the application and documents uploaded/submitted by the students. 
2.11 3.36 
1.55 
20.46 
0.48 
32.42 
Total Expenditure during 2017-21 ( ₹ in crore) 
Chatra East Singhbhum Godda Hazaribag Palamu Ranchi 

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
46  
4.8.1 Irregular disbursement of scholarships to gho st beneficiaries in 
registered schools/institutes 
Scrutiny of records in four 28  test-checked schools/institutes of three districts  
(Godda, Hazaribag and Ranchi), audit noticed that s cholarship of ₹ 1.52 lakh 
were paid to 20 beneficiaries during 2017-20 (Appendix-4.2). However, 
credentials of these beneficiaries could not get co nfirmed from the records of 
concerned schools/institutes. The payment of schola rship to fictitious 
beneficiaries could not be ruled out.   
The principals of respective schools/institutes accepted (January-August 2022) 
the audit observations and stated that these benefi ciaries were not students of 
their schools/institutes but did not provide any ev idence regarding misuse of 
their credentials for approving scholarship to these fictitious students.  
Audit could not rule out involvement of INO in approving scholarships to fake 
students since SOPs of minority scholarship scheme (2017-18 & 2019-20) 
envisaged that first level of verification is to be  done by INO 
 to ensure 
correctness of application and documents of students.  
4.8.2  Irregular disbursement of scholarships to ghost/fak e beneficiaries 
without involvement of schools/institutes 
Audit noticed that in four out of six test-checked districts, 1482 ghost/fake 
beneficiaries from 14 test-checked schools/institutes were awarded scholarships 
amounting to ₹ 1.17 crore (Appendix-4.3)  during 2017-19. On being pointed 
out, the concerned Principals/Headmaster of schools /institutes stated 
(December 2021 to July 2022) that they neither regi stered themselves on NSP 
nor obtained credentials (User ID and Password) for  institutes JSMFDC/test-
checked DNOs.  
As per SOP of minority scholarship, the credentials of schools/institutes is to be 
ensured by second level verification authority (SNO/DNO). 
Details regarding generation of User ID alongwith Password and their issuance 
to the concerned schools/institutes were neither pr ovided by DWOs of test 
checked districts nor by JSMFDC though called for. In absence of such records 
Audit could not verify the genuineness of schools/i nstitutes who were allowed 
to disburse the scholarship. 
Role of DNO/SNO in fraudulent approval of applicati ons was confirmed from 
the investigation report of a district level govern ment committee framed for 
verifying fraud reported in Dhanbad district as mentioned in paragraph 4.10.2 . 
 
                                                 
28  Godda College Godda, Qasmi Memorial Public School Islampur, Hazaribag, Annada 
College Hazaribag and Doranda College Ranchi. 

Chapter 4: Pre and Post Matric Scholarship Schemes for Minority 
 47 
4.9 Disbursement of scholarships without verificati on of eligibility of 
beneficiaries 
Guidelines of Minority Scholarship 2017 prescribes that scholarship will be 
awarded to only those students who have secured not less than 50  per cent  marks 
in the previous final examination and annual income  of their parents/guardian 
from all sources not exceeding ₹ 1.00 lakh for pre matric scholarship. Further, 
an income certificate, issued from a competent auth ority in the State 
government for parent/guardian of the student, a se lf-certified community 
certificate from the student who has attained 18 ye ars of age (for the students 
less than 18 years age, the community certificate certified by parent/guardian of 
the student is required), Aadhaar , Domicile certificate, Bank account details 
etc., were required. 
However, it was noticed in audit that in four schoo ls/institutes of two (Chatra 
and Godda) out of six test-checked districts, scholarships amounting to 
₹ 43.77 
lakh was disbursed to 663 students without verifyin g documents relating to 
eligibility criteria viz., annual income and marks secured by beneficiaries in 
previous class final examination. Details are given in Table 4.4 below. 
Table 4.4:  Numbers of applications processed without verification of documents 
of eligibility during 2017-21  
Test-
checked 
district 
Name of school 
Nos. of applications 
processed without 
verification of 
documents of 
eligibility  during 
2017-21 
Amount of 
scholarship 
disbursed during 
2017-21 
Chatra Kids Kingdom 365  3835400  
Godda High School, Nayanagar 92  126400  
St. Joseph High School, Damruhat 171  379920  
Government High School, Lukluki 35  35135  
 Total  663  4376855  
 On being pointed out, the Principals of these scho ols/ institutes stated 
(December 2021 and July 2022) that instead of verif ying the requisite 
documents they approved applications on the basis o f admission register of 
schools/institutes and pushed to DNOs for second level approval.  
Thus, in contravention of the provisions of the gui delines the scholarship were 
allowed without verifying all the requisite documents and scholarship of ₹ 43.77 
lakh was disbursed irregularly. 
Recommendations: 
Government should initiate investigation to verify the financial irregularities 
throughout the State and also take suitable action against the erring officials 
and the State Government should ensure provision of  benefits to eligible 
beneficiaries only, by means of a suitable mechanis m and fixing 
accountability/responsibility against the defaulters.  

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
48  
4.10 Monitoring and Evaluation  
4.10.1 Inadequate Monitoring 
In terms of paragraph 17 and 18 of the scheme guidelines, for monitoring of the 
schemes, the State government shall maintain year-w ise details of the students 
receiving scholarship with class, gender, fresh or renewal, permanent address 
and parents’ address and indicating name, location and status (government or 
private) of school/institute. The States shall plac e relevant physical and 
financial details in their official website.  
Audit, however, noticed that other than NSP portal no details of the 
beneficiaries at JSMFDC/test-checked DNOs level wer e available as required 
under guidelines. It was also observed that physical and financial details of the 
scheme were not uploaded at the official website of  the districts and the 
department.  
Further, the objective of scholarship scheme is to form the foundation for 
educational attainment of minority communities and to provide a level playing 
field in the competitive employment arena. Empowerm ent through education 
has the potential to lead to upliftment of the soci o-economic conditions of the 
minority communities. As per SOP of Minority schola rship (2017-18) the 
monitoring of the financial and physical performanc e of the scheme will be 
evaluated by assigning evaluation/impact studies to  reputed 
institutions/agencies by the MoMA. 
Further, during scrutiny of files at JSMFDC (February 2021) audit noticed that  
various complaints regarding fake institutes/students were received at JSMFDC 
from DWOs, Deputy Commissioners, Institutes/schools , Ministry of Minority 
Affairs etc. during 2017-20. No compliant register was maintained by JSMFDC 
however, in some cases, instructions were found iss ued to district level 
authorities but follow up was not found on records as such disposal of particular 
complaints could not get ascertained by audit. This reflected that JSMFDC had 
the information regarding fraudulent withdrawal of minority scholarships since 
2017-18.  
Had the JSMFDC initiated concrete remedial action l ike State-wise 
investigation, legal/penal action against the accou ntable 
institutes/persons/officials etc. such malpractices  could have been 
minimised/checked. Since audit noticed instances of  disbursement of 
scholarships to fraudulent students, issuance of cr edentials to fake INOs etc., 
this indicated that such malpractices continued despite coming into notice of the 
department in 2017-18.  
4.10.2 Investigation of Minority Scam 
A report about financial scam in Minority scholarsh ip in Dhanbad district was 
published (November 2020) in newspaper and to probe  into the matter, an 

Chapter 4: Pre and Post Matric Scholarship Schemes for Minority 
 49 
investigation team headed by Additional District Ma gistrate, Dhanbad was 
constituted (November 2020) by Deputy Commissioner Dhanbad.  
The team investigated applications of 13506 student s of 482 schools/institutes 
of Dhanbad district under which scholarships worth ₹11.55 crore was disbursed. 
Consequent to investigation, the team reported frau dulent disbursement of 
scholarships of ₹ 9.99 crore with the complicity of DNO, subordinate staff, State 
MIS Coordinator (JSMFDC) and middleman. The Investi gating Team 
concluded that: 
• The DNO created user credential to fictitious schoo ls/institutes and 
approved large number of applications of fake students; 
• The DNO issued user credentials to middleman which in turn lured several 
Principals/Head-Masters of schools/institutes for f raudulent disbursement 
of scholarship. 
The Investigation team also pointed out shortcomings in the scholarship scheme 
as under: 
• No mechanism existed for fixing responsibilities of  INOs/management of 
schools/Principals; 
• No system existed in Minority portal to validate the age and other details of 
beneficiaries from their Aadhaar ; 
• Schools without having UDISE/AISHE code were allowed for scholarship. 
Further, in test checked districts, Audit observed irregularity such as 
disbursement of scholarships to fake students, veri fication of scholarship 
applications without verifying eligibilities of stu dents etc . as discussed in 
paragraphs 4.8 and 4.9 . 
  

Chapter 5 
National Social Assistance 
Programme 

 
CHAPTER 5 
National Social Assistance Programme 
National Social Assistance Programme (NSAP), a GoI programme is aimed 
to provide social security to the destitute. The Go vernment of Jharkhand 
(GoJ) has also implemented pension similar to centr al pension schemes for 
covering those eligible beneficiaries who remain un -covered under GoI 
pension schemes. Besides, GoJ also launched (July 2 015) one pension 
scheme for primitive tribes of State. To assess the  performance of social 
security pension schemes in context of DBT implementation, Audit examined 
2400 Central/State pension applications (200 applic ations in each selected 
12 Blocks). Major audit observations of this Chapter are as under: 
• State had not issued any instructions to Gram Panchayats  / 
Municipalities regarding identification of potentia l beneficiaries. As 
such, data base of eligible beneficiaries was not m aintained at 
districts/state level for universal coverage. 
• There were delay in sanction of 816 pension applica tions ranging 
between four and 864 days from date of receipt and recommendations of 
applications. Besides that pensions were also not d isbursed to the 
beneficiaries on monthly basis though desired, as d elay of one to four 
month in disbursement was noticed by audit.  
• Due to change in sanctioning authority in September  2019, 5078 
applications of beneficiaries for the year 2019-20 were remained pending 
for its approval.   
• Names of 84 beneficiaries either were not excluded or excluded with a 
delay up to 65 months  (as of July 2021) due to delayed reporting of death 
which resulted in disbursal of  pension amounting t o ₹ 8.50 lakh to 
deceased persons. The concerned authority did not initiate any action for 
recovery of this amount. 
• Pension amounting to ₹ 9.54 lakh was disbursed to 16 Male beneficiaries 
under Widow Pension Schemes viz , Indira Gandhi National Widow 
Pension Scheme and Rajya Vidhwa Samman Protsahan Yojana . 
• 55 beneficiaries under Indira Gandhi National Old Age Pension Scheme 
and Indira Gandhi National Widow Pension Scheme wer e allowed 
Pension amounting to ₹ 31.69 lakh though they did not fulfil the 
minimum age criteria.  
• Dedicated State and District Level Committees as pr escribed under 
norms were not constituted.  
• In none of the test checked districts any Social Au dit relating to NSAP 
schemes was conducted.  

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
52  
Conclusions  
Data base of eligible beneficiaries was not maintai ned at districts/state level 
for universal coverage. In absence of complete data of potential beneficiaries, 
the department was unaware of the absolute number of eligible beneficiaries. 
Social security pensions were not approved within the prescribed time frame 
as instances of delay in approval up to 864 days in  816 applications 
(34 per cent ) out of test-checked 2400 applications was noticed . In one case 
sanction of application was delayed even by 1399 da ys. This resulted into 
delay in disbursal of pensions among beneficiaries which may cause hardship 
to the applicants and impeding the pace of inclusio n of new beneficiaries. 
Besides that, objective of social security pension schemes to provide income 
support to beneficiaries for monthly sustenance als o remain under-achieved 
due to non-disbursal of pensions on monthly basis a s audit noticed delay 
ranging one to four months in disbursement of pension due to delay in receipt 
of allotments. Further, monitoring of schemes was b eing done on adhoc  
manner since required monitoring committees at state and districts level were 
not formed. Social Audit of scheme was also not con ducted during 2017-21 
which led non-evaluation of implementation of scheme at the bottom level of 
governance.  
5.1  Introduction  
National Social Assistance Programme (NSAP) was lau nched (August 1995) 
by Government of India (GoI) to provide social secu rity to the destitute. The 
programme was expanded (2007/2009) to cover all eli gible persons Below 
Poverty Line (BPL) and vulnerable groups such as wi dows and disabled 
persons.  Out of the five sub-schemes as components of NSAP, three are pension 
schemes (i) Indira Gandhi National Old Age Pension Scheme (IGNOAPS), (ii) 
Indira Gandhi National Widow Pension Scheme (IGNWPS ), and (iii) Indira 
Gandhi National Disability Pension Scheme (IGNDPS).  The other two 
sub-schemes are (i) National Family Benefit Scheme (NFBS)– one time 
assistance to the bereaved family in the event of d eath of the bread winner and 
(ii) Annapurna  Scheme – food security to those eligible old aged persons who 
have remained uncovered under IGNOAPS.  
The Government of Jharkhand (GoJ) has also implemen ted four pension 
schemes of similar nature viz ., Mukhya Mantri  State Old Age Pension Yojna  
(MMSOAPY), Mukhya Mantri  Rajya Vidhwa Samman  Pension Yojna  
(MMRVSPY), Swami Vivekanand Nishakt  Swavlamban  Protsahan  Yojna  
(SVNSPY) for covering those eligible beneficiaries who remain un-covered 
under GoI pension schemes. Besides, GoJ also launch ed (July 2015) “ Mukhya 
Mantri  Rajya  Adim Janjati  Pension Yojna  (MMRAJJPY) for primitive tribes of 
State. 

Chapter 5: National Social Assistance Programme 
 53 
State Government issued (September 2019) a modified State specific guidelines 
for pension schemes for state pension schemes (cent ral as well as state) by 
considering the other criteria of NSAP guidelines of GoI, 2014. Under modified 
guidelines government enhanced the monthly pension rates and relaxed the age 
and income group criteria as mentioned in paragraph 5.3 . 
5.2 Organisational set-up 
At the central level, Ministry of Rural Development  (MoRD), GoI exercises 
overall control over the implementation of NSAP sch emes. The responsibility 
of implementation of all pension schemes in the Sta te inclusive of those under 
NSAP is vested with the Department of Women and Chi ld Development and 
Social Security, GoJ, headed by the Principal Secre tary. Assistant Director, 
Social Security, is responsible for implementing th e scheme at district level. 
Organogram of the Department is illustrated in Chart 5.1: 
Chart 5.1: Organisational set-up of Women & Child Development and Social Security 
Department 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.2.1 Roles and Responsibilities 
As per guidelines issued by GoJ, roles and responsi bilities prescribed for the 
authorities involved under social security pension schemes are described under 
Table 5.1 . 
                    Table 5.1: Roles and Responsibilities of authorities 
Authority Roles and responsibilities 
Director Allocation of targets to ADSS 
Additional Director of Social 
Security (ADSS) 
• Allocation of targets to BDO/CO  
• Monitoring of NSAP Scheme 
• Proceeding the pension disbursal process 
Sub Divisional Officer (SDO) • First appellate authority for wrong inclusion/exclu sion 
or if any dispute arises  
• Sanction of NSAP applications (up to August 2019) 
Block Development Officer 
(BDO)/Circle Officer (CO) 
• Verification and sanction NSAP applications 
(September 2019 onwards) 
• Annual verification of beneficiary 
Principal Secretary, Women & Child Development and 
Social Security Department  
Director, Social 
Security 
Special Secretary 
Joint Secretary  Joint Director,  
Social Security 
Assistant Director Social 
Security at Districts 

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
54  
Authority Roles and responsibilities 
• Deletion of beneficiaries details from NSAP databas e 
after death/migration etc. 
• Responsible for correctness of all data of NSAP 
beneficiaries 
Gram  Panchayat  (GP) Provide assistance to Block office in selecti on of 
beneficiaries and verification of the NSAP beneficiaries   
5.3 Eligibility Criteria 
The NSAP provides two scales of assistance – one fo r beneficiaries below the 
age of 80 years which varies for the three schemes (scale of central assistance 
is 
₹ 200 per month for IGNOAPS (60 to 79 years), ₹ 300 per month for 
IGNWPS and IGNDPS and ₹ 500 per month for beneficiaries of 80 years and 
above under IGNOAPS. In principal all beneficiaries  of any sub- schemes 
should be shifted to IGNOAPS (80 years and above) after attaining of 80 years 
of age for higher scale of central assistance.  The  eligibility criteria prescribed 
for each of the eight pension schemes formulated by GoI and GoJ are shown in 
Table 5.2: 
Table 5.2: Prescribed eligibility criteria for pension schemes  
Name of 
scheme 
Broad Eligibility Criteria 
Minimum 
Age Category Pension amount per month w.e.f  April 2019 
Central Share State Share Total 
IGNOAPS  60  BPL 200  800  1000  
80  BPL 500  500  1000  
IGNWPS  40  BPL  300  700  1000  
IGNDPS  18  BPL 300  700  1000  
NFBS -  BPL 20000  lump sum  0 20000  lump sum  
State Schemes 
MMSOAPY 60  Person 
holding Ration 
cards 
29  
0 1000  1000  
MMRVSPY 18  0 1000  1000  
SVNSPY 05  0 1000  1000  
MMRAJJPY -  Primitive 
Tribe Group 
(PTG) 
0
 1000  1000  
(Source: Department of Women & Child Development and Social Security, GoJ)  
It is evident from Table 5.2 that State government had provided similar amount 
of pension for state as well as central pension schemes but relaxed the minimum 
age criteria under state widow and disability pensi on schemes. The State 
schemes covered those beneficiaries who remain unco vered under central 
pension schemes due to full coverage of target set under central schemes.  
5.4 Application and Sanction procedure 
As per State scheme guidelines, eligible beneficiar ies have to submit their 
pension applications in prescribed formats to offic e  of  Block Development 
Officer  ( BDO)/ Circle Officer (CO). Ward Councillor/ Mukhiyas  of concern 
Ward/ Panchayats  verify the applications of beneficiaries and forwa rd it to 
Circle Officer (for urban area) and Block Developme nt Officer (for rural area) 
                                                 
29  Antyoday  Anna  Yojna  Card (Yellow Ration Card),  Priority House Hold Ration Card  (Pink 
Ration Card) and K-oil Ration Card  (White Ration Card). 

Chapter 5: National Social Assistance Programme 
 55 
for sanction 30 . After sanction of the applications, Circle office /Block office 
uploads the details of pensioners on NSAP portal an d thereafter Assistant 
Director Social Security of concerned districts ini tiates the payment process. 
Essential documents which are required to be attached with applications by the 
applicants under various schemes are described in Appendix-5.1 . Further, in 
case of applications which are not sanctioned/appro ved are required to be kept 
in a register/file with incorporating details of ap plications as per NSAP 
Guidelines issued by GoI (2014). 
5.5 Funding 
In terms of NSAP framework, under Central pension s chemes, the State 
contributes additional share to make the amount substantial. Based on the BPL 
population of the State, the amount of Central assistance under NSAP is worked 
out. The scheme wise annual allocation of funds is released by MoRD in two 
instalments each year. For the State pension schemes of similar nature the State 
government releases its own budget covering those w ho could not get benefit 
under NSAP. In both central and state schemes, the Department of WCD&SS 
allots funds to the Assistant Director of Social Security (ADSS) of districts for 
disbursement of pensions. 
5.5.1  State level fund allocations and expenditure  
Year wise fund position under various pension schem es from Centre and State 
for the period 2017-21 is detailed in Table 5.3: 
Table 5.3: Allocation of fund under pension schemes (Central and State) during 2017-21  
(₹ in crore)
Year  Scheme Budget  Allotment Expenditure Savings 
Percentage of 
savings wrt 
allotment 
2017-18 
Central 960.73  927.97 863.40  64.57  6.96  
State 358.58  356.42  315.85  40.57  11.38  
2018-19 
Central 955.18  943.33  883.14  60.19  6.38  
State 383.78  485.34  453.44 31.90  6.57  
2019-20 
Central 1763.38  1755.40  1662.62  92.78  5.29  
State 926.67  926.67  876.31  50.36  5.43  
2020-21 
Central 1805.25  1753.49  1677.60  75.89  4.33  
State 931.78  926.61  898.08  28.53  3.08  
(Source: Department of Women & Child Development and Social Security, GoJ)  
Utilisation of fund in state pension schemes in 202 0-21 vis-à-vis 2017-18 had 
shown significant improvement as savings has fallen to 3.08 per cent from 11.38  
per cent. 
                                                 
30  Prior to September 2019, pension applications were  being sanctioned by the Sub-Divisional 
Officers. 

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
56  
5.5.2 District level fund allotment and expenditure  
In six test-checked districts, State Government all otted ₹ 1,753.05 crore for 
implementing Central pension schemes and ₹ 954.71 crore for State pension 
schemes during 2017-21. Percentage of shortage in expenditure w.r.t.  allotment 
in Central schemes ranged between 2.52 and 7.38 per cent  whereas it was 2.45 
to 7.05 per cent  in State pension schemes (Appendix-5.2) .  
Further, Pension fund ranging ₹ 13.58 crore to ₹ 48.02 crore remained un-
utilised as of March 2021 in the account of ADSS of  test check districts due to 
non-utilisation and delayed release of fund at the fag end of the financial year.  
5.6 Audit Coverage 
The performance audit covered the period of four ye ars from 2017-18 to 
2020-21. Audit assessed the implementation of the pension schemes in the state 
through scrutiny of records of Directorate, Social Security, office of ADSS at 
six districts 
31  along with 12 Blocks 32  (one rural and one urban block in each 
selected district), 24 GPs (two Panchayats in each selected block) as illustrated 
under Appendix -5.3 A.  
Analysis of data dump of NSAP 33  provided by the Social Security Department, 
GoJ revealed audit leads (State /District level) vi z.  payment of pensions to 
ineligible 34  beneficiaries under central and state pension schemes 35 : payment of 
disability pensions with remarks in Disability colu mn in data base as “No” 36 ; 
payment of widow pensions with remarks in widow col umn in data base as 
“No”37 ; delay in sanction of pension application beyond p rescribed 60 days 38 ; 
Beneficiary claiming more than one pension under NS AP Schemes 39    etc. as 
reflected in Appendix-5.3 B .  
Audit however could not examine the specific pensio n applications with 
reference to audit leads obtained from data dump an alysis of NSAP in test-
checked Blocks as most of the applications of pension schemes prior to 2019-20 
were either not/partially available at the Blocks 40   or were kept in improper order 
                                                 
31  Chatra, East Singhbhum, Godda, Hazaribag, Palamu a nd Ranchi. 
32   Chatra Sadar, Hunterganj, Golmuri cum Jugsalai, P otka, Godda Sadar ,Poraiyahat, 
Chainpur, Medininagar, Bero, Kanke, Ichak and Hazaribag Sadar. 
33      Data Dump with masked Aadhaar  no. of beneficiaries. 
34  Age lower than prescribed under eligibility norms of NSAP Guidelines. 
35  State Level: 3.45 lakh beneficiaries, Amount ₹ 361.39 crore and Sample Districts: 1.10 lakh 
beneficiaries, Amount ₹ 114.16 crore. 
36  State level: 77427 beneficiaries, Amount ₹ 76. 31 crore and Sampled Districts: 25557 
beneficiaries, Amount ₹ 20.90 crores. 
37  State Level: 163225 beneficiaries, Amount ₹ 171.91 crore and Sampled Districts: 52629 
beneficiaries, Amount ₹ 55.81 crore. 
38  State Level: 65874 beneficiaries and Sampled Distr icts: 20431. 
39  State Level: 155 beneficiaries Amount ₹ 0.32 crore. 
40  Non-availability of pension records prior to 2019- 20: Kanke, Medininagar and Chainpur 
blocks; Partial availability of pension records pri or to 2019-20: Bero, Poraiyahat, Godda 
Sadar, Golmuri-cum-Jugsalai, Potka, Hunterganj, Chatra Sadar, Ichak and Hazaribag Sadar 
Blocks. 

Chapter 5: National Social Assistance Programme 
 57 
rendering it difficult to sort it out for scrutiny (as reflected in  paragraph 5.13.4 ). 
Under the circumstances, audit observations noticed  from data analysis could 
not be vouchsafed and this also limited the audit check to only available pension 
applications.  
Audit selected 2400 pension applications (200 appli cations in each selected 
block) randomly from available pension records in 1 2 test-checked Blocks for 
detailed check. Audit observations are discussed in succeeding paragraphs. 
Audit observations: 
5.7 Non availability of database of potential benef iciaries 
As per paragraph 3.1.3 of NSAP guidelines, Gram Panchayats / Municipalities 
should be given the central role for the identifica tion of new beneficiaries. 
Elected heads and representatives should be sensiti sed on the criteria and 
processes of NSAP. Based on the available BPL list, the beneficiaries should be 
proactively identified by reaching out to their hou seholds and any eligible 
person should not be left out whether his/her name figured in the BPL list or 
not. 
Audit, however, noticed from the information furnished by the Director, Social 
Security GoJ that State had not issued any instruct ions to Gram Panchayats / 
Municipalities regarding identification of potential beneficiaries. As such, data 
base of eligible beneficiaries was not maintained a t districts/state level for 
universal coverage. In absence of complete data of potential beneficiaries, the 
department was unaware of the absolute number of eligible beneficiaries. 
The Department accepted (February 2023) the fact and stated that the State has 
announced coverage of all eligible people of marginalized sections who are not 
income tax payees or beneficiaries of government pension/family pension after 
their retirement  i.e. , oldaged, widows, disabled, derelict women, HIV pa tients, 
primitive tribals under Sarvjan Pension Yojana. The  field offices are using the 
Census 2011 data for the maximum coverage of the el igible people and 
organising frequent camps at the grassroots levels.  
The reply was not specific to the absence of database of potential beneficiaries. 
Further, the reply was regarding coverage under onl y one programme and did 
not mention the action taken for other programmes. 
5.8 Beneficiary coverage 
Article 41 of the Constitution of India directs the  State to provide public 
assistance to its citizens in the case of unemploym ent, old age, sickness and 
disablement. As per NSAP guidelines, destitute, BPL  persons are the target 
groups or coverage under central pension schemes. A ccordingly, GoI fixes its 
targets for the central pension schemes for the identified target groups. Whereas 
the State government considers destitute and econom ically backward persons, 
fulfilling the age criteria as target groups for the state specific pension schemes. 

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
58  
However, as per State guidelines of social security  pension schemes, the 
Director Social Security issues targets to the dist ricts (ADSS) as per available 
budget allocations. These targets further transferred to BDOs/COs from ADSSs 
for the coverage. 
Against the targets, the concerned BDOs and COs wer e responsible for 
sanctioning the applications of the beneficiaries i n the rural and urban areas 
respectively under each pension scheme. The target and achievement of the 
pension schemes during 2017-21 are shown in Table  5.4 below: 
Table 5.4: Target and Achievement (coverage) of beneficiaries under pension schemes  
Pension 
Schemes 
2017-18 Ach. 
in 
per 
cent  
2018-19 Ach 
in 
per 
cent  
2019-20 Ach. 
in  
per 
cent  
2020-21 Ach 
in  
per 
cent  T A T A T A T A 
IGNOAPS 993567  921907  93  993567  1030547  104  1014800  1032430  102  1059712  1016590  96  
IGNWPS 272108  258499  95  272108  270271  99  272108  271933  100  275000  268537  98  
IGNDPS 31286  21734  69  31286  24800  79  31286  25605  82  31286  26482  85  
MMSOAPY  300000  289084  96  300000  332280  111  350000  347171  99  365000  348459  95  
MMRVSPY  180000  132653  74  180000  165902  92  157000  172508  110  182000  175285  96  
SVNSPY 181853  171729  94  163163  171535  105  282958  101459  36  150000  147056  98  
MMRAJJPY  65000  39028  60  65000  50489  78  65000  52432  81  65000  53667  83  
(Source: Department of WCD&SS (T: Target and A: Achievement)  
It is evident from Table 5.4  that beneficiaries were deprived of the benefit of  
the scheme due to short achievement of targets alth ough there were savings of 
fund ranging 3.08 per cent from 11.38  per cent during 2017-21 as shown in 
paragraph 5.5.1 .  
5.9 Annual verification of existing beneficiaries 
As per state government instructions, BDOs and COs will be responsible to 
conduct physical verification for the rural and urb an area beneficiaries 
respectively for weeding out of ineligible beneficiaries. 
However, during audit at ADSSs offices of the test- checked districts, noticed 
that physical verification of existing beneficiarie s was conducted in five test 
checked districts 
41  during 2017-21 whereas in Chatra district physical  
verification was conducted during 2019-20 only. Ins tances of disbursement of 
pensions to ineligible beneficiaries was noticed in  Audit as discussed in 
paragraph 5.11 which showed the verification exercise was not cond ucted 
properly. 
Due to partial verification of existing beneficiari es, weeding out of dead, 
migrated, ineligible beneficiaries could not be ens ured so the risk that these 
types of beneficiaries are getting pension could not be ruled out.  
                                                 
41  East Singhbhum, Godda, Hazaribag, Palamu and Ranch i. 

Chapter 5: National Social Assistance Programme 
 59 
5.10 Delay in disbursement of pension  
As per NSAP Guidelines, every State shall designate  “Sanctioning Authority” 
at the appropriate level (Municipality / Block leve l). As per State government 
guidelines, the BDOs and COs are the sanctioning au thorities for pension in 
rural areas and urban areas respectively.  After re ceipt of verified applications 
and recommendations by the Gram Sabha / Ward Committee, the Sanctioning 
Authority conveys approval to the applicant and Gram Panchayat / Municipality 
concerned. Guidelines also envisaged that disposal of sanction of application or 
its rejection should not exceed 60 days 
42  from the date of receipt of application.  
Audit during test-check at selected Blocks/ADSSs no ticed delayed 
approval/sanction and uploading of sanctioned application by concerned Blocks 
on NSAP portal as well as delay in release of allot ments to ADSSs by the 
department which resulted in delayed disbursement o f pensions to the 
beneficiaries as discussed under:  
i.  Examination of applications in the test-checked Blo cks revealed that 816 
pension applications were sanctioned/ approved with  a delay ranging 
between four and 864 days from date of receipt and recommendations 
43  of 
applications whereas one application was delayed by  1399 days 44  
(Appendix-5.4 A&B) . The delays were mainly due to the time taken in 
verification process. This resulted into delay in disbursal of pensions among 
beneficiaries which may cause hardship to the appli cants and impeding the 
pace of inclusion of new beneficiaries. In reply BDOs (Potka and Golmuri 
cum Jugsalai of East Singhbhum district) accepted ( February 2022-March 
2022) the audit observations. Replies of other BDOs are awaited.  
Age analysis of delayed sanction of pension applica tions is detailed in 
Table 5.5 A & B : 
Table: 5.5/A Delayed sanction/approval of pension applications from date of application 
Sl. 
No.  
Name of 
district 
Name of 
test-
checked 
Block 
Nos. of 
application 
sanctioned 
with delay 
Delay 
Up to 30 
days 
31- 90 
days 
91 to 180 
days 
181 to 365 
days 
More than 
365 days 
1 East 
Singhbhum 
Potka 20  02  05  12  0 01  
Golmuri-
cum-
Jugsalai 
39 
 0 05  07  07  20  
2 Hazaribag Hazaribag 
Sadar 22  05  08  03  05  01  
Ichak 47  05  14  15  7 06  
3 Ranchi Bero 01  0 0 0 01  0 
Kanke 114  39  09  56  10  0 
                                                 
42  As per schedule mentioned in paragraph 3.5 of NSAP  Guidelines, timeline prescribed upto 
sanction is: verification after submission of appli cations: 15 days; Gram Sabha/Ward: 20 
days; Gram Panchayat/Municipality: 15 days and Sanction of Pension: 10 days. 
43  Applications in which date of apply was not mentio ned by the applicants, delay in sanction 
was worked out by considering date of recommendations as date of receipt. 
44  Median value of delay 91 to 180 days. 

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
60  
Table: 5.5/B Delayed sanction/approval of pension applications from the date of 
recommendation  
Sl. 
No.  
Name of 
district 
Name of test-
checked 
Block/Circle  
Nos. of 
application  
Delay 
Up to 
30 days  
31-90 
days 
91 to 
180 
days 
181 to 
365 days  
More than 
365 days 
1. Chatra Chatra Sadar 136  33  59  23  15  06  
Hunterganj 43  02  03  19  09  10  
2. East 
Singhbhum Potka 13  02  05  06  0 0 
3. Godda Godda Sadar 159  82  44  15  0 18  
4. Palamu Medininagar 23  02  03  17  01  0 
Chainpur 27  12  06  08  01  0 
5. Ranchi Bero 172  0 21  57  71  23  
In reply, the Department stated (February 2023) tha t, in general, there was no 
delay in approval of pension at the office level within the prescribed time frame, 
with some exceptions due to the technical errors in the NSAP PPS portal. 
The reply was not acceptable, as the concerned districts (Godda, Ranchi, Chatra 
and Palamu) had accepted (December 2022 to January 2023) the delays, citing 
reasons such as non-submission of supporting docume nts by beneficiaries, 
delay in communication of targets by the department  and the covid pandemic 
and further stated that they would take corrective measures, in future.      
ii.  In Chatra Sadar block, 24 applications of beneficia ries under IGNOAPS 
were not uploaded on NSAP portal as of February 202 2 though these 
applications were sanctioned between December 2020 and March 2021 by 
BDO, Chatra (Appendix-5.5 ).  Due to non-uploading of applications, 
pensions of the beneficiaries could not be paid eve n after lapse of 12 to 15 
months. No reply was received from BDO Chatra though called for. 
iii.  In four blocks 45  of two test-checked districts (East Singhbhum and Godda), 
due to change in sanctioning authority in September 2019, 5078 applications 
of beneficiaries for the year 2019-20 were pending for approval. As such 
these applicants were deprived of the benefit of th e scheme during the 
period. In the reply concerned BDOs accepted (March-July 2022) the audit 
observations.   
Thus, due to delay in approval/sanction of pension applications, objective 
of social security pension schemes to provide timely pension to beneficiaries 
was not fulfilled. 
iv.  NSAP Guidelines (2014) of GoI as well as Guidelines  issued by the state 
government prescribe that the payment of pensions s hould be made to 
beneficiary every month. Audit however, during test-check of records in the 
offices of ADSSs in test-checked districts noticed that pensions were 
disbursed to beneficiaries in an average delay of one to four months during 
                                                 
45  Godda district- Poraiyahat (311), and  Godda Sadar  (1421); and  East Singhbhum district - 
Golmuri cum Jugsalai block (2393) and Potka block (953).  

Chapter 5: National Social Assistance Programme 
 61 
2017-21.  Reason of delay was mainly due to delay in release of allotments 
to ADSSs by the department.  Thus, the goal of soci al security pension 
schemes to provide income support to beneficiaries for monthly sustenance 
is under-achieved as the pensions were not disbursed on monthly basis. 
In reply ADSSs accepted (March-August 2022) the audit observation and stated 
that the delay in disbursement due to delay in receipt of allotment. 
The Department accepted the fact and replied (Febru ary 2023) that nowadays 
there was no delay in pension payment due to regula r and timely release of 
allotment. 
Recommendation: 
The State government should ensure timely disbursem ent of pensions to 
beneficiaries. 
5.11 Disbursement of pension to ineligible benefici ary 
In terms of NSAP Guidelines, it is the responsibili ty of GP/Municipalities to 
report death cases of beneficiaries of their respective BDO/CO for exclusion of 
names of beneficiaries in rural and urban areas respectively. Further, guidelines 
also prescribe physical verification of existing beneficiaries for weeding out of 
ineligible beneficiaries.  
Audit observed the instances of disbursement of pen sion to deceased and 
ineligible beneficiaries due to improper approval o f pension applications by 
GPs/BDOs and inadequate monitoring of ADSSs in test  checked districts as 
discussed below: 
 In Ghatshila Block of East Singhbhum district, name s of 84 beneficiaries 
either were not excluded or excluded with a delay ( up to 65 months) as of July 
2021 due to delayed reporting by GP which resulted in disbursal of  pension 
amounting to ₹ 8.50 lakh to deceased persons. The concerned authority did not 
initiate any action for recovery of this amount. 
In reply ADSS East Singhbhum accepted (March 2022) the audit observation 
and stated that some cases were due to wrong report ing during physical 
verification and these would be rectified. Further in case of delayed reporting 
the pension paid would be returned by bank after closing of pensioner account. 
The reply was not acceptable as ADSS did not take any action regarding return 
of excess amount paid to the deceased pensioners. 
 In four Blocks 46  in two districts (East Singhbhum and Godda), pensi on 
amounting to ₹ 9.54 lakh was disbursed to 16 male beneficiaries u nder Widow 
Pension Schemes viz , IGNWPS and RVSPY. 
                                                 
46  Godda district: Poraiyahat (RVSPY: 01), Godda Sada r (IGNOAPS: 04); East Singhbhum 
District: Potka (IGNWPS: 06) and Ghatshila (IGNWPS: 05 and  RVSPY: 02). 

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
62  
In reply ADSS Godda accepted (June 2022) the observ ations whereas ADSS 
East Singhbhum replied (March 2022) that it may hap pen due to portal 
migration. Reply of ADSS East Singhbhum is not acce ptable since 
disbursement of pension to ineligible beneficiary h appened mainly due to 
sanction of pension applications with improper veri fication/monitoring at 
block/district level. Photos of some beneficiaries were illustrated in 
Appendix-5.6  
 In three blocks (Poraiyahat, Godda Sadar and Potka block) of two test 
checked districts (East Singhbhum and Godda) 55 ben eficiaries 47  under 
IGNOAPS and IGNWPS were allowed Pension amounting t o ₹ 31.69 lakh (as 
on December 2021) though they did not fulfil the minimum age criteria.  
In reply ADSS Godda accepted (June 2022) the audit observation whereas 
ADSS East Singhbhum replied (March 2022) that matter is being referred to the 
concern sanction authority. 
The Department replied (February 2023) that no unde rage cases were noticed, 
as per the report of the Pension portal. 
The reply was not acceptable, as Audit had verified the age of beneficiaries from 
the Aadhaar submitted with the applications of the concerned beneficiaries, as 
there were no other documents in support of the ages entered in the portal. 
5.12 Payment of more than one pension to a benefici ary 
According to provisions 48 of the State guidelines for Pension schemes (Centra l 
as well as State), only one pension is allowed at a time to a beneficiary. As per 
NSAP guidelines (provision 3.1.3 & 3.2), it is the primary responsibility of 
GPs/Municipality to identify the beneficiaries. For  the identification of new 
beneficiaries, Gram Panchayats / Municipalities sho uld be sensitized on the 
criteria and processes of NSAP. Based on the availa ble BPL list, the 
beneficiaries should be proactively identified by r eaching out to their 
households. If an eligible person’s name does not figure in the BPL list, he/she 
should not be left out. Further, every State shall designate “Sanctioning 
Authority” at the appropriate level – Municipality / Block level. The State 
Guidelines authorised BDO/CO 49  as sanctioning authority for the sanction of 
pension applications as well as also authorised for  weeding out of names of 
ineligible beneficiaries.  
                                                 
47  Poraiyahat (IGNOAPS:01 and IGNWPS:01), Godda Sadar  (IGNOAPS:04); and Potka 
Block (IGNOAPS:47 and IGNWPS:02).  
48  Sub-clause V of Clause 2.3 of GoJ Resolution no. 2 215 dated 16.09.2019 (IGNOAPS, 
IGNWPS) and sub-clause VIII of Clause 2.3 of GoJ Resolution no. 2214 dated 16.09.2019 
(IGNDPS) Sub-clause VI of Clause 2.4 of GoJ Resolut ion no. 2208 dated 16.09.2019 
(SSOAPS, SSOWPS). 
49  From September 2019, BDO/CO was made responsible f or sanction of pension 
applications. Prior to that period SDOs were authorised for the sanction of applications. 

Chapter 5: National Social Assistance Programme 
 63 
Analysis of data base of NSAP indicated that 140 beneficiaries in the State were 
getting pension from more than one scheme while con sidering same name, 
Father/Husband name, bank Account, address and last four digits of Aadhaar . 
Further, in two test checked blocks of Godda distri ct it was noticed that 16 50  
beneficiaries were getting pension from two or more  sub-schemes 
(Appendix-5.7) consequently inadmissible pension amounting to ₹ 3.15 lakh 
was paid to them during the said period. This is indicative of that due care was 
not taken by the concerned BDOs while sanctioning t he pension applications, 
to weed out those beneficiaries who were getting mu ltiple benefits of the 
schemes. 
In reply ADSS Godda replied (June 2022) the matter will be investigated and 
suitable action will be taken accordingly. 
Recommendation: 
Monitoring and control mechanisms for verification of eligibility of 
applications as well as payments requires to be str engthen to make 
implementation of the scheme effective. Also responsibility should be fixed to 
the pension sanctioning authority. 
5.13 Monitoring and Evaluation 
Monitoring and evaluation are essential for ensurin g efficient utilisation of 
programme resources so that the envisaged outputs and outcomes are achieved 
within the planned timeframes. As government progra mmes are executed over 
long time periods and at different levels, it is im perative to have a robust and 
effective programme monitoring and evaluation syste m. Audit observed the 
following:  
5.13.1  Non-formation of State & District Level Committee  
As per paragraph 3.6.1 of NSAP Guidelines, it is th e responsibility of State to 
constitute State and District Level Committees for implementation, review and 
evaluation of NSAP.  
Audit noticed that dedicated State and District Level Committees as prescribed 
were not constituted. However, implementations of N SAP schemes were 
reviewed /monitored through various meetings by Chi ef Minister/Chief 
Secretary/Departmental Secretary/Director and throu gh these meetings 
instructions relating to Aadhaar  seeding, Targets Achievements etc. were issued 
to related authorities.  
5.13.2 Inadequate Grievance redressal mechanism 
NSAP guidelines stipulate that the State should put  in place a grievance 
redressal mechanism at GP/Municipal/District level.  State should fixed 
                                                 
50  Godda Sadar: 02 and Poraiyahat: 14. 

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
64  
timeframe for dealing with grievances and designate s an officer to whom 
grievances can be addressed. Further, the designated officer has to keep a record 
of complaints received, action taken and outcome an d inform the complainant 
about the action taken. 
Audit noticed no institutionalised mechanism for monitoring the grievances in the 
test-checked GPs/Municipalities as no records/registers was being maintained by 
them for the purpose. However, in Chatra district, register for complaints was 
maintained by ADSS but disposal of complaint was not recorded in the register. 
Thus, in absence of grievance redressal records, au dit could not ascertain the 
grievances and problems being faced by the beneficiaries.  
5.13.3 Absence of Social Audits 
NSAP guidelines (Central as well as State) stipulate that social audit of schemes 
should be conducted at least once in every six mont hs by Gram Sabha/Ward 
Committee and that for each social audit, the Gram Sabha/Ward Committee has 
to elect a Social Audit Committee comprising at lea st two beneficiaries from 
each of the schemes under NSAP, of which one shall be a woman. 
Representation of beneficiaries from SCs, STs and M inorities communities 
should also be ensured in the Social Audit Committee.  
Audit observed that the State Government has not issued any specific direction 
regarding conduct of social audit, and in none of t he test checked districts any 
Social Audit relating to NSAP schemes was conducted during 2017-21 as such 
implementation of schemes could  not get evaluated at bottom level of 
governance through social audit. No specific reason  was furnished by the 
respective ADSSs regarding non-conduct of social audit. 
The Department accepted the audit observation and r eplied (February 2023) 
that, as per NSAP guidelines, social audit is to be done by the State Audit Unit 
(MGNREGA) and the Rural Development Department, GoJ, has been requested 
(January 2023) for social audit of NSAP. 
Recommendation: 
The Social Audits should be conducted in prescribed  intervals to ensure 
adequate monitoring of schemes. 
5.13.4 Maintenance of records 
As per NSAP guidelines, a file containing photocopi es of all applications, the 
registers recording receipt of applications, sancti on orders and rejections shall 
be kept open and accessible for inspections at respective offices.  
Audit however, noticed that pension applications (2 017-21) were not kept in 
proper order and were only bundled and stored rende ring it difficult to sort out 
applications for scrutiny. It was also seen that th e verifying officers have no 
control over the applications received for verifica tion and they also were not 
maintaining any registers for recording the applications received and disposed. 

 
  
Chapter 6 
IT Audit of ‘e-Kalyan’ Portal 

 
CHAPTER 6 
IT Audit of ‘ e-Kalyan’ Portal 
Government of Jharkhand (Welfare Department) starte d (January 2015) an 
online scholarship portal ‘ e-Kalyan’  for processing online applications 
submitted by the post matric candidates and payment  of pre and post matric 
scholarship. In this chapter audit ascertained adeq uacy and effectiveness of 
IT application/software used for scheme management and IT and non-IT 
controls as part of the fund transfer platform (PFM S or other application) 
relating to beneficiary de-duplication, bank accoun t validation, transfer of 
payments to the beneficiary bank accounts and reconciliation and handling of 
failed transactions/ errors. Important audit observations are: 
• Audit instances like  payment to non-applicants without matching 
Aadhaar  Number, non-capturing of mobile numbers of the ben eficiaries, 
inadmissible payment of scholarship to beneficiarie s, excess payment of 
scholarship to beneficiaries, payment of scholarshi p to ineligible 
beneficiaries of Backward Community, payment of sch olarship to 
beneficiaries securing less percentage marks, payme nt of scholarship to 
ineligible beneficiaries under pre-matric scholarship scheme, scholarship 
disbursed to false beneficiaries, scholarship payme nt to multiple 
beneficiaries through same Aadhaar  number which were indicative of  
failures of ‘ e-Kalyan’  portal  in respect of General control, Application  
control, Process control and Payment method control. 
• Training for all the departmental officers on e-Kalyan  Version 2.0 ( e-
PASS) was conducted (January 2015) only once after being rolled out and 
no further training was arranged either by the Welf are Department or by 
the agency despite several changes were made in the application software.  
• Services of PMU were discontinued since 1 November 2017 due to 
insufficient fund which hampered the monitoring and  evaluation of the 
project. 
Conclusion: 
e-Kalyan  application had gone live (January 2015) in the St ate under RRR 
project of GoI without finalisation and approval of  SRS and with 
underdeveloped modules. The features in the applica tion envisaged at the 
time of project initiation were yet to be delivered (May 2022). The application 
was not integrated with Aadhaar  e-KYC and also not linked with the 
Treasury/ Bank. Migration of the application to the  National e-Scholarship 
Portal (NeSP) was not completed (May 2022). The Imp lementing Agency 

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
66  
continues to render its services even after completion of the extended project 
period (March 2018) due to non-development of alternate arrangement by the 
JAP-IT as stipulated in the Departmental Resolution  (August 2019). 
Institution level Users were not provided adequate training for verification of 
applications on the e-Kalyan  portal as stipulated in the guidelines. The 
password policy used by the Welfare Department was not robust as 
pre-defined format of password, masking of password and periodic change of 
login password were absent. Irregularities viz. non -capturing of student 
details, same Aadhaar  number used by different applicants, parent occupation 
and total fee paid by the applicant not in sync wit h annual family income, 
were noticed in the e-Kalyan  database due to lack of input and validation 
controls in the application. Non/incomplete mapping of business rules in the 
application resulted in excess payment of scholarsh ip and payment of 
scholarship to ineligible beneficiaries through e-Kalyan  portal. Project 
Implementation Committee was in hibernation since 2 015 and PMU was 
non-functional since November 2017 hence monitoring  of ‘ e-Kalyan ’ was 
ineffective.  
6.1 Introduction 
The Government of Jharkhand is providing financial assistance to the Scheduled 
Caste (SC), Scheduled Tribe (ST) and Backward Class  (BC) students studying 
Pre-matriculation and Post-matriculation courses for enabling them to complete 
their education. The ST, SC, Minority and BC Welfar e Department, 
Government of Jharkhand (Welfare Department) starte d (January 2015) an 
online scholarship portal ‘ e-Kalyan’  for processing online applications 
submitted by the post matric candidates and payment  of Pre and Post Matric 
scholarship. The key objectives of the ‘ e-Kalyan’  portal are to provide 
transparency and accountability for implementation and disbursement of 
scholarship besides fast tracking the pace of appli cations processing, 
sanctioning and its disbursement. 
The ‘ e-Kalyan’  portal aims to reduce drudgery, increase efficiency and provide 
a hassle-free service to the applicants by the Welfare Department. Two schemes 
viz. (i) Pre-Matric Scholarship Scheme; and (ii) Po st-Matric Scholarship 
Scheme (within/ outside the state) are on boarded on the ‘ e-Kalyan’  portal.  
6.2 Scope of work 
The scope of work consists of replication of ‘e-PASS’ Application in Jharkhand 
state. Services offered by the application includes  student registration, college 
registration, verification by college/school of Pre  & Post matric scholarship 
applications, verification by Field Officer, integr ation with Treasury for fund 
transfer to the beneficiaries, grievance redressal,  integration with counselling 
centres etc . 

Chapter 6: IT Audit of ‘e-Kalyan’ Portal 
 67 
6.3 Design & Development 
The design and development of the e-GOV Solution in cludes requirement 
analysis, design of database and user interfaces along with integration with other 
modules viz. State Welfare Department, Beneficiarie s, Scrutiny officers, 
Academic Institutions, Treasury/Fund disbursement a gency, Banks and linked 
agency. 
‘e-Kalyan’  scholarship portal works through the seamless inte gration of the 
activities of the diverse entities, viz. the studen ts, colleges, Departments, IT 
service providers, Banks, Treasuries and State welfare department  
6.4 Key Stakeholders 
Key stakeholders of e-Kalyan  portal are: 
• Students : responsible for applying and uploading required d ocuments as 
per guidelines issued by the Welfare Department and  tracking status of 
scholarship applied through their Login ID and pass word in case of post 
matric scholarship, whereas pre matric applications  involved routing 
through schools, block & district level education d epartment offices to 
District Welfare Office; 
• Universities/ Colleges/ Institutes : responsible for verification of 
applications with details of students enrolled with them and uploading their 
fee structure for different courses offered by them; 
• Verification Officers : Dealing Assistant assigned by the Welfare 
Department responsible for verifying student details uploaded on the portal; 
• Designated Officer : DWO responsible for sanctioning of funds and 
disbursement to the eligible students and Accounts Assistant for preparing 
Bills through PFMS for withdrawal from Treasury; 
• Treasury : Disbursement of earmarked funds to the Sponsor banks; 
• Banks : Payment of scholarship in the accounts of eligible students through 
DBT, submission of response file after process of payment (success/failure) 
to the originator of payment and returning the amou nt of failed transaction 
to the Treasury, if any. 
6.5 Application Software of e-Kalyan portal 
‘e-Kalyan’  is a single online application software for processing of post matric 
scholarship applications and payment of Pre and Pos t Matric scholarship in 
Jharkhand. Role based unique log-in ID and password  is assigned to all the 
stakeholders of the ‘ e-Kalyan’  portal. Processing of the applications through 
‘e-Kalyan’  portal for scholarship payment involves following steps: 
 

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
68  
• College Registration:  Institutes (within and outside State) are required  to 
register themselves on the ‘ e-Kalyan ’ portal by submitting their college 
details (course name and fee-structure) and uploadi ng desired documents 
(institution recognition/affiliation certificate, c ourse recognition certificate, 
fee structure duly approved by government authority /competent 
authority/University) on the portal. Respective DWO approves the institutes 
of the State and Tribal Welfare Commissioner approves the institutes situated 
outside the State after due verification. Thereafte r user credentials are 
provided to the institutes for verification/ forwar ding of student application 
for further verification by the competent authority. 
• Student Registration:  One time registration is required by the post matr ic 
student on the ‘ e-Kalyan ’ portal by filling a generic application form whic h 
captures the basic personal details (like name, fat her’s name, date of birth, 
mobile number and e-mail address) of the student. L og-in ID and password 
is generated by the system for the student. Student can log-in with the users’ 
credentials for filling the online scholarship application form. The student is 
also required to upload the scanned copies of the certificates/documents 51  on 
the portal. However, in case of pre matric the student data in the excel format 
duly forwarded by the District Education Officer is  to be uploaded on the 
portal by the respective DWOs using his log-in credentials. 
• Verification of student applications at District Le vel:  The details of the 
student’s applications forwarded by institutes are being verified by the 
Dealing Assistant (DA) at the district level using their log-in credentials of 
the portal and gives approval for accepting, reject ing or keeping the 
application in pending state. 
• Approval by the District Level Authority:  The accepted list of the 
applications is made available to DWO upon logging in the portal. For the 
accepted applicants pre-populated maintenance fee a nd tuition fee is 
calculated by the system. DWO approves the award li st and pass it to the 
Accounts Assistant (AA) for final submission. 
• MIS Reports:  Commissioner of Tribal Welfare is responsible for generation 
of various reports pertaining to specific Schemes a nd Budget at the State 
level. 
• Bill preparation & Payment:  AA prepares bill for the approved list of 
applicants and sends the bill to the treasury for its approval. 
• Amount Disbursal:  Treasury approves the amount and transfers it to t he 
DWO’s bank account which further, submits the PFMS advice as per final 
list of approved students to nominated bank for final disbursal through DBT. 
After payment, the Bank provides Bank Response File  to the respective 
                                                 
51  Caste certificate, income certificate, marks sheet , passbook and bonafide certificate. 

Chapter 6: IT Audit of ‘e-Kalyan’ Portal 
 69 
DWOs which subsequently uploaded on the ‘ e-Kalyan ’ portal by the district 
level authority. Since, the amount disbursal process is not integrated with the 
‘e-Kalyan’  portal as such it is being carried out manually by DWO. Modules 
of the e-Kalyan  application is as discussed in Table 6.1 : 
Table 6.1: Modules in the ‘ e-Kalyan’  application 
Sl. 
No. 
Module Name Functional Area Status of module 
1 College Registration Registration of new colleges un der “e-Kalyan’  Fully functional 
2 Student Registration Registration of new student Fu nctional for Post 
matric students only 
3 College/School 
verification for Pre & 
Post matric 
Verification by school and college using student 
details 
Functional for Post 
matric scholarship 
only 
4 Verification by Dealing 
assistant 
Online scholarship application verification by 
DA 
Fully functional 
5 Treasury bill generation 
by AA 
Online generation of bill and formats Fully functio nal 
6 EID to UID conversion Conversion of EID to UID by comparing the data 
in e-Kalyan server with data in UIDAI server. 
Not functional 
7 RASF verification Student name, Father’s name, DoB and 
photograph provided in e-Kalyan server will be 
matched with UID no. in UIDAI database. 
Not functional 
8 Bank seeding The verified UID number with bank acc ount 
details is provided to the State Level Banker’s 
Committee and Bank’s Lead District Manager. 
They fetch the data seeded and upload it to 
e-Kalyan  server. 
Not functional 
9 AADHAAR DBT Department fetch the data directly fro m the 
approved list of students and send it to treasury 
for disbursal purpose 
Not functional 
10 NPCI updation DWO would be able to check the scho larship 
data by generating a excel/csv file where it would 
be be matched with UID details and status can be 
updated in the e-Kalyan  application 
Not functional 
11 Verification by DWO/ 
Release order 
generation 
Verifying the student details based on field 
officer verification repot and sanctions the 
scholarship for the students. 
Fully functional 
12 Treasury Treasury bill is generated according to Treasury 
rules/codes and provided to Treasury with QR 
code. 
Not functional 
13 MIS Report Various reports at State, 
District/College/Student/ Public level 
Fully functional 
14 PMU Module In case of exceptions like change in bank 
account, change in college/hostel and appending 
new colleges/courses. 
Not functional since 
1
st  Nov. 2017. 
However, these 
functions were 
operated from CGG 
level. 
15 Grievance Redressal Redressal for queries/complain ts Functional at CGG 
level. 
Various stakeholders of the ‘ e-Kalyan’  application are using different user 
interfaces as per their service requirements viz. “Student User Interface” for the 
student registration and uploading of required docu ments; “College User 
Interface” for universities/colleges/institutes registration, uploading of required 
documents and updating of college details; “ e-Kalyan  Official Login Interface” 
for Dealing Assistant, District Welfare Officer, Ac counts Assistant and Tribal 
Welfare Commissioner for verification and approval of applications, 
preparation of bills for forwarding to Treasury and generation of various reports 

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
70  
and “ e-Kalyan  PMU User Interface” for approval of registered col leges and 
generation of status report. However, PMU at the St ate level in Jharkhand 
(JAP-IT) was not functional since November 2017 but  these functions were 
being operated from CGG level as discussed in Table 6.1 . 
6.6 Technology used in e-Kalyan portal 
‘e -Kalyan’  Scholarship Portal  is web-based application, which is hosted on the 
CGG Data Centre Servers, Hyderabad. The hosting env ironment is Tomcat 
server and Postgre SQL server is used to build the database for the application. 
The clients using web browser (e.g. Internet Explor er (IE) or Mozilla Online 
Intermediate Admission System, Fox 2.0) is required  to enable cookies. The 
following software were used for form design, Appli cation and Database 
servers: 
• Form Design: Java Development Kit, Java Server Page s, Servlets, JDBC, 
Struts; 
• Client Side: Web Browser; 
• Server Operating System: RHEL6.x; 
• Application Server & Web Server: Tomcat 7; and 
• Database Server: Postgre SQL 9.2 
6.7 Audit Objectives 
“IT Audit on e-Kalyan  portal” covering the period from 2017-18 to 2020-2 1 
(up to July 2020) was undertaken to ascertain whether: 
1.  IT application/software used for scheme management had adequate and 
effective controls for (a) beneficiary management, benefit processing and 
approval etc. and (b) ensuring the integrity and reliability of all data? 
2.   IT and non-IT controls as part of the fund transfer platform (PFMS or other 
application) relating to (a) beneficiary de-duplica tion and bank account 
validation (b) transfer of payments to the beneficiary bank accounts and (c) 
reconciliation and handling of failed transactions/ errors were adequate and 
effective? 
6.8 Audit Criteria 
The audit criteria were drawn from the following:  
• Documents, circulars, instructions, resolutions and  notifications issued by 
DBT Mission, GoI and State Government; 
• User/ System Requirement Specification, IT control documents, generation 
of various reports of e-Kalyan  application; 
• Guidelines on Scholarship schemes for the students of SC, ST and BC 
category; 
• Instructions/notifications of Government/ Department on implementation of 
e-Kalyan application; 

Chapter 6: IT Audit of ‘e-Kalyan’ Portal 
 71 
• General Financial Rules (GFR)/ Jharkhand Financial Rules (JFR) and 
Jharkhand Treasury Code (JTC). 
6.9 Scope and Methodology  
Audit scope and methodology includes design, development and acquisition of 
scheme management software/ application ( e-Kalyan ) portal. The data dump of 
e-Kalyan  for the period April 2017 to July 2020 was procure d (April and June 
2021) from the Department by Audit. Analysis of data dump was done with the 
assistance of Computer Assisted Audit Tools (CAAT) viz. R Data Analytic 
Software and Excel. Records of the Welfare Departme nt and Department of 
Information Technology & e-Governance were examined . Besides, records of 
DWOs in the sampled districts 
52  as well as sampled institutes were test checked 
on the basis of leads obtained from analysis of data dump.  
6.10 Project Implementation 
A pilot project ‘e -Kalyan’  was launched (May 2006) by the Department of 
Information & Technology (DoIT), Government of Jhar khand (GoJ) for web-
based information and service delivery system for t he scholarship schemes 
under Welfare Department, GoJ. After implementation  (2010) of ‘ e-Kalyan’  
application, all the procedures for obtaining appli cations for scholarship 
payment was made online and was functional up to 2013-14. Afterwards, a new 
application ‘ e-PASS’,  developed by the CGG, rolled out (January 2015) in  
Jharkhand under RRR in place of ‘ e-Kalyan’ , however, the nomenclature of the 
application remained the same as agreed (May 2014) by the PRSG, GoI . In 
terms of contract agreement (October 2014), total project tenure was 30 months 
including implementation period of six months and O perations and 
Maintenance (O&M) period of 24 months. Though, firs t instalment of 
₹ 1.00 
crore was released (January 2014) by GoI before ent ering into agreement with 
the agency in October 2014, the project could go li ve (January 2015) 
conditionally only after approval of application filing by the State Government 
without finalisation and approval of System Requirements Specification (SRS) 
and with underdeveloped modules. Moreover, the agen cy still continues to 
operate the portal even after completion of extende d project tenure (March 
2018) selected on nomination basis with the approva l (August 2019) of 
Jharkhand Cabinet on the recommendations of the Fin ance Department, GoJ. 
Though Resolution (August 2019) of the Welfare Depa rtment stipulates an 
alternative arrangement for online operation of sch olarship schemes to be 
developed by the JAP-IT 53  but no such arrangement was made as of May 2022.  
                                                 
52  1. Chatra; 2. East Singhbhum; 3. Godda; 4. Hazarib ag; 5. Palamu; and  6. Ranchi. 
53  Jharkhand Agency for Promotion of Information Tech nology (JAP-IT) is an autonomous 
society under the Department of Information Technol ogy, intended for managing Project 
Monitoring Unit of e-PASS (e-Kalyan Scholarship Online Application). 

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
72  
Project Implementation/Steering Committee 54  approved (January 2015) 
‘e-PASS’ scholarship application with online fillin g start date as 2 January 
2015, after getting confirmation by the CGG regarding completion of pre matric 
scholarship and post matric student registration module during User Acceptance 
Testing (UAT) of the Application Software conducted  between August 2014 
and December 2014.  
Moreover, the features like Remote Aadhaar Seeding Framework (RASF), 
Repository Linking, Pull up services, Treasury Link ing, Bank Linking, 
Minority Schemes, Integration of various other scho larship schemes running 
within the State, envisaged at the time of project initiation were yet to be 
delivered as of May 2022.  
6.11 Planning 
After conditional implementation of e-PASS it was d ecided in the Inter-
departmental meeting (June 2015) that the application was to be integrated with 
e-KYC, where information of the beneficiaries were automatically fetched from 
the Aadhaar  database, integrated with treasury application so that the benefits 
could be directly transferred to the beneficiary ac counts and migration of 
e-PASS application to National e-Scholarship (NeSP) Portal by June 2016 and 
the work was assigned to CGG. But the assigned and desired works were not 
completed as of May 2022 as a result several irregularities in implementation of 
scholarship scheme were noticed which are being dis cussed in succeeding 
paragraphs. 
6.12 IT Controls failures 
In the subsequent paragraphs implications of failur es under General control, 
Application control, Process control and Payment me thod control of e-kalyan  
have been discussed. Following findings are based on the analysis of data dump 
of e-Kalyan  provided by the Welfare Department for the period 2017-18 to 
2020-21 (up to July 2020). 
6.12.1 General Controls failures 
• Inadequate Physical control:  Physical access controls are specifically 
aimed at ensuring that only those who have been authorised by management 
have physical access to the computer systems to prevent unauthorised access 
and interference to IT services. In meeting this ob jective, computer 
equipment and the information contained should be p rotected from 
unauthorised users. Analysis of ‘ e-Kalyan’  database relating to Post Matric 
Scholarship scheme for the period 2017-20 revealed that physical access to 
                                                 
54  An Inter-Departmental committee headed by the 1. P rincipal Secretary, IT Dept., Jharkhand 
as Chairman; 2. Principal Secretary, Welfare Depart ment, Jharkhand; 3. Sr. Director, IT 
Dept., GoI; 4. Director, IT Department, GoI; 5. Tri bal Welfare Commissioner; 
6. Director/Special Secretary, IT Dept., Jharkhand;  7. CEO/ OSD, IT Department, JAPIT, 
GoJ; 8. SIO, NIC; 9. Assistant. Director, IT Department, Jharkhand. 

Chapter 6: IT Audit of ‘e-Kalyan’ Portal 
 73 
the computer systems by the designated users (distr ict level and above) of 
‘e-Kalyan’  portal was found logged-in between 00:00 Hrs. to 0 5:00 Hrs. 
(beyond office timings) in 1770 cases. As such, una uthorised access and 
interference to IT services could not be ruled out.  
• Inadequate Logical control:  The most common form of logical access 
control is login identifiers (IDs) followed by pass word authentication. For 
passwords to be effective there must be appropriate  password policies and 
procedures, which are known to all staff and adhered to. Organisations may 
be able to tailor the password system by, for examp le, setting minimum 
password lengths, forcing regular password changes and automatically 
rejecting purely numerical passwords, peoples’ name s, or words which 
appear in the English dictionary. 
The Welfare Department stated (May 2022) that password policy for ‘e-Kalyan’ 
portal exists but data analysis of ‘ e-Kalyan’  database revealed that passwords 
of only 37,242 out of 2,14,110 users created betwee n January 2017 and 
September 2018 were updated during this period. Mor eover, the passwords 
stored in the ‘ e-Kalyan’  database were found in unmasked format using purel y 
numerical, people’s names or words against the prov isions of appropriate 
password policy and procedures. Though application testing and certification 
was done through Centre for Development of Advanced  Computing (CDAC) 
with final stage test (November 2020 and March 2021 ) and an audit certificate 
was issued (March 2021) with five recommendations and is valid till no changes 
are done on the application's dynamic content or one year from the date of issue 
whichever is earlier. CDAC also recommended that au dit trails, sanitized 
logging and regular monitoring of logs are to be maintained for at least one year.  
Audit noticed that sanitized logging was not implemented despite recommended 
by CDAC. However, no case of security breach was fo und during field audit 
but it was noticed that in official login (DA and D WO level), passwords of the 
registered students are displayed in unmasked forma t in student details screen. 
As such, chances of security breach cannot be ruled  out due to weak password 
policy used by the department. 
6.12.2 Application Controls failures 
• Inadequate input control: Controls over input are vital to the integrity of the 
system. Input control reasonably guarantee that (i)  the data received for 
processing are genuine, complete, not previously pr ocessed, accurate and 
properly authorised; and (ii) data are entered accu rately and without 
duplication. Further, automated validation checks s hould be sufficient to 
ensure that all data accepted into the system is ca pable of acceptance by all 
subsequent processes including acceptance into other systems where there is 
an automatic transfer of data.  

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
74  
Data analysis of ‘ e-Kalyan’  database relating to Post Matric Scholarship 
scheme for the period 2017-20 revealed that (i) in 3,437 cases annual family 
income of the applicants was below Rupees one lakh despite that either or 
both parents were in government service; (ii) in 16 4 cases ( Appendix-6.1 ) 
difference between year-of-birth and year-of-admiss ion is ten (10) years or 
less; (iii) in 602 cases ( Appendix-6.2)  different applicant names were 
captured against one/same Aadhaar  number and (iv) in 1,04,536 cases  
column for capturing details of SSC/Matric (10 th  standard) were left blank. 
This clearly showed that robust data input and vali dation controls were 
absent in the “ e-Kalyan ” application.  
• Non-capturing of Mobile Numbers of the beneficiaries: During monitoring 
meeting (July 2013) of ‘ e-Kalyan’ , Chief Secretary, Jharkhand directed 
DoIT, Government of Jharkhand to prepare an SMS Gat eway for providing 
information through SMS to the students on their respective mobile numbers 
in three stages viz. (i) on receipt of complete app lication from students; (ii) 
on approval of scholarship amount; and (iii) after disbursement of 
scholarship amount. Further, SRS document of ‘ e-Kalyan’  portal also 
stipulates communication to the students through SM S alerts and e-mail in 
case of pendency of their applications and non-reimbursement of scholarship 
for compliance for which the application has a faci lity to capture mobile 
number during online application filing by the candidates. 
Analysis of e-Kalyan  database of Post-Matric Scholarship Schemes (Within 
and Outside State) for the period of 2017-20 reveal ed that status of 30,826 
applications for scholarship submitted by the students were shown as pending 
at different levels. Audit observed that the field for capturing mobile number 
was not made mandatory in the portal and hence, mob ile numbers were not 
captured at the time of application filing by the s tudents. Thus, the 
beneficiaries could not be communicated about objec tion against their 
applications through SMS alerts. As a result, the students were deprived from 
availing scholarships during 2017-20.  
• Inadmissible payment of scholarship to beneficiarie s: According to the 
guidelines, only those students will be eligible for scholarship scheme who 
have enrolled in succeeding class in new academic y ear after passing 
previous class in previous academic year. Further, the Institute is wholly 
responsible for verifying the entries of the docume nts uploaded by the 
students with the original documents before recomme ndation for 
scholarship. The ‘ e-Kalyan’  portal has also facility to capture details of the  
candidates, course details and institute details. 
Data analysis of ‘ e-Kalyan’  database for  the Post-Matric Scholarship Scheme 
during the period from 2017-18 to 2019-20 revealed that:  
i.  Applications of 257 students ( Appendix-6.3 A & 6.3 B ) with same applicant 
name, fathers’ name, bank account number and Unique Identification (UID) 

Chapter 6: IT Audit of ‘e-Kalyan’ Portal 
 75 
(Aadhaar  Number) were granted scholarship of ₹22.56 lakh for pursuing 
same course in different academic years from 125 ot her institutes (within 
State: 114 and outside State: 11) in which the stud ents were previously 
pursued same courses for which they were granted scholarships.  
Physical verification of records maintained in 21 s ampled Institutes 55  in four 
test-checked districts revealed that payment of sch olarship ( ₹2.65 lakh) was 
approved for 34 beneficiaries for pursuing same cou rse in different academic 
years from different Institutes due to absence of c ontrol in the application 
software for preventing students applying for scholarship in different academic 
years for the courses already pursued.  
Case Study-1 
In Chatra district, Audit noticed that one applican t, Anuradha Lakra 
(Application ID: 1399494 of 2017-18), was awarded s cholarship from 
Upendra Nath Verma Inter College, Chatra (Institute  code: 2236) for the 
academic year 2016-17 and 2017-18 for pursuing cour se of Intermediate of 
Science (I.Sc). Again, the same student (Applicatio n ID: 1691374 of 
2018-19) was awarded scholarship for pursuing same course (I.Sc, 2 nd  year) 
from different institute (R D S Inter Mahavidyalaya , Jitni More, Chatra 
having Institute code: 2213).  
Another applicant, Balram Kumar Ravi (Application I D: 1812200 of 
2019-20), was awarded scholarship for pursuing course Intermediate of Arts 
(I.A) during academic year 2019-20 (1 st  year) and 2020-21 (2 nd  year) from 
Upendra Nath Verma Inter College, Chatra (Institute  code: 2236) but the 
same student was awarded scholarship for pursuing same course (I.A) during 
academic year 2017-18 (1 st  year) from St. Columbas College, Hazaribag 
(Institute code: 502).  
ii.  Similarly, 205 students (within state 201 students and outside state 04 
students) applied for scholarship in same/different  academic years with 
same applicant name, fathers’ name and bank account  number but with 
different Unique Identification Number ( Aadhaar Number)  as detailed in 
Appendix- 6.4 A & 6.4 B . Due to absence of Aadhaar  validation control in 
the application software, scholarship of ₹ 40.31 lakh (within state ₹ 38.31 
lakh and outside state ₹ 2.00 lakh) granted to 205 students through 410 
applications using different UID in same/different academic years was 
doubtful.  
                                                 
55  Chatra: 04 cases in 02 Institutes ( ₹ 0.26 lakh); Hazaribag: 07 cases in 05 Institutes ( ₹ 0.30 
lakh); Palamu: 06 cases in 03 Institutes ( ₹ 0.47 lakh); and Ranchi: 17 cases in 11 Institutes 
(₹ 1.62 lakh). 

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
76  
Physical verification of records maintained in 08 s ampled institutes 56  in three 
test-checked districts revealed that payment of sch olarship ( ₹ 1.19 lakh) was 
approved for 13 out of 14 test-checked beneficiaries in different academic years 
with different Aadhaar  Numbers (UID). This is because of the fact that th e 
application software is not designed with effective input and validation controls 
for preventing approval of applications of students  pursuing same/ different 
courses from the same/ different institutes in different academic year. 
Case Study-2 
In Palamu district, one beneficiary, Kajal Kumari (Application ID: 822437 of 
2017-18), was awarded scholarship for pursuing ISc.  from Yog Singh 
Namdhari Mahila College, Daltonganj with UID (No. X XXXXXXX3873). 
Again, in academic year 2018-19, the same beneficia ry (Application ID: 
1539150 of 2018-19) awarded scholarship for pursuin g Bachelor of Arts 
(Honors) in Hindi from SSMS Degree College, Tarhasi , Palamu with a 
different UID (No. XXXXXXXX6284).  
Another student, Sonam Bharti (Application ID – 1469689 of 2017-18), with 
UID (No. XXXXXXXX8326) awarded scholarship for purs uing Master of 
Arts from Ganesh Lal Agrawal College, Daltonganj (P alamu) and again the 
same beneficiary (Application ID:  2024574 of 2019-20) awarded scholarship 
for pursuing Bachelor of Education from Jyoti Prakash Mahila B.Ed College, 
Palamu with UID (No. XXXXXXXX8750) which reflected that the 
application software lacks validation control of UID with the student personal 
details.  
6.12.3 Inadequate Process Controls 
• Excess Payment of scholarship to beneficiaries: According to the 
guidelines, scholarship and maintenance allowance s hall be paid to all 
eligible students (Day Scholars and Hostellers) pursuing study in post matric 
institutes (within and outside State) according to the type and nature 
(Government of India/ State Government/ Private Ins titutions), 
classification of courses in different groups and s cholarship slabs. The 
‘e-Kalyan ’ portal has a facility to auto calculate the amoun t of tuition fee 
and maintenance allowance being payable to an eligible candidate as per the 
data captured for the fields type and nature of sch olar, group of course and 
the institute as envisaged in the guidelines.  
Analysis of e-Kalyan  database of Post-Matric Scholarship Schemes (within and 
outside State) for the period from 2017-18 to 2019-20 revealed that scholarship 
was approved by DWOs through ‘ e-Kalyan’  portal to the beneficiaries for 
                                                 
56  East Singhbhum: 04 cases in 02 Institutes ( ₹ 0.27 lakh); Godda: 04 cases in 02 Institutes 
(₹ 0.35 lakh); and Palamu: 05 cases in 04 Institutes ( ₹ 0.57 lakh).  

Chapter 6: IT Audit of ‘e-Kalyan’ Portal 
 77 
pursuing different courses in various institutes ag ainst the payable amount of 
scholarship as described in paragraph 3.8.3 .  
Data analysis revealed that data in the fields cont aining values for College 
type/College nature in the College Master table were filled incorrectly (type of 
institute filled as institute belonging to GoI in p lace of institute belonging to 
State Government/private institutes) by the respect ive Institutes and were also 
not verified and corrected by the DWO/TWC, because DWOs/TWC are 
responsible for verification of the college details  filled by the institutes in the 
master database during registration of institutes i n the ‘ e-Kalyan’  portal along 
with documentary evidence and physical verification  for the institutes within 
state and outside state respectively. They were res ponsible for rectification of 
the errors too. As a result, an excess payment of s cholarship of ₹ 23.21 crore 
was approved by the DWOs during 2017-20 due to misc lassification of 
institutes/courses.  
During physical verification, Audit noticed excess payment of scholarship in 
five test-checked districts as discussed in paragraph 3.7.3 . 
• Payment of scholarship to ineligible beneficiaries of Backward 
Community: As per the guidelines of GoJ (February 2018) for po st matric 
scholarship, those applicants are eligible for scho larship whose parent or 
guardian annual income from all sources does not ex ceed the income limit 
prescribed by the GoI. Further, Notification issued (July 2018) by the Tribal 
Welfare Commissioner, GoJ related to inviting appli cations from eligible 
candidates of BC category for Post Matric Scholarsh ip prescribes that only 
those candidates were eligible for applying scholarship whose annual family 
income is not more than 
₹ 1.00 lakh from all sources of their 
parents/guardians. As per guidelines (February 2018 ), the institutes are 
responsible for verifying the entries of the online  applications with the 
available documents in the institutes before making  recommendation for 
scholarship. Further, the DWO is also responsible f or verification of 
uploaded documents (income certificate, caste certi ficate and residential 
certificate) from the website “ jharsewa.jharkhand.gov.in ” before 
sanctioning of the scholarship. 
Analysis of e-Kalyan  database for the period 2017-18 to 2020-21 reveale d 
that students of BC category in the State, were awa rded scholarship 
amounting to 
₹ 36.33 lakh during 2018-19 despite of the fact that the figures 
of annual family incomes entered in the database we re more than the 
prescribed limit of ₹ 1.00 lakh, but the application software did not re strict 
the applicant from applying for the scholarship as their family income was 
more than the prescribed limit as described in paragraph 3.8.2 .  
This is due to the fact that the scholarship rules were not properly mapped in 
‘e-Kalyan’  application software and the system was not designed with effective 

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
78  
controls for preventing approving of such applications of BC candidates having 
annual family income more than prescribed limit. 
Further the institutes/DWO, are responsible for verification of eligibility criteria 
of the candidates before making recommendation/appr oval of scholarship, but 
they failed to comply with their responsibilities a s stipulated in the guidelines. 
As a result, scholarship was disbursed to ineligible beneficiaries. 
During field visit Audit noticed payment of scholar ship to ineligible 
beneficiaries of BC category in test-checked instit utes in six test-checked 
districts as discussed in  paragraph 3.7.2 . The Head of the Institute 
(Ram 
Narayan Memorial College, Huntergunj, Chatra ) replied that the fact of excess 
family income of the candidate was overlooked by th em and stated that they 
must be careful and follow guidelines in future.  
• Payment of scholarship to beneficiaries securing le ss percentage marks: 
As per the guidelines for post-matric scholarship, students are eligible who 
have secured minimum 45 per cent  for BC category marks and minimum 40 
per cent  marks for SC and ST categories in the last examination passed. The 
application has facility to capture the details related to previous examination 
passed by the candidate viz. total marks, marks obt ained and percentage 
marks in the e-Kalyan  database.  
Analysis of e-Kalyan  database for the period 2017-18 to 2020-21 reveale d that 
students of BC category pursuing post matric course s in Post Matric Institutes 
(within and outside State) were awarded scholarship  through e-Kalyan  portal 
despite of the fact that percentage marks obtained by the students in last 
examination passed were less than prescribed marks of 45 per cent  as described 
in  paragraph 3.8.2 . 
Similarly, students of SC/ ST category pursuing pos t matric courses in Post 
Matric Institutes (within and outside State) were a warded scholarship during 
2017-20 through e-Kalyan  portal despite the fact that percentage marks obtained 
in last examination passed was less than prescribed 40 per cent as described in  
paragraph 3.8.2 .  
The application software did not restrict the appli cants from applying for the 
scholarship although marks in the last examination obtained by them was less 
than prescribed. This is due to the fact that the s cholarship rules were not 
properly mapped in ‘ e-Kalyan’  application software and the system was not 
designed with effective controls for preventing app roving of such applications 
of BC/SC/ST candidates having marks obtained less than the required marks. 
• Payment of scholarship to ineligible beneficiaries under Pre-Matric 
Scholarship Scheme: According to the provisions of the guidelines for Pre 
Matric scholarship, names of those students are to be considered for sanction 
of scholarship who have completed study satisfactor ily and promoted in 

Chapter 6: IT Audit of ‘e-Kalyan’ Portal 
 79 
higher class with prescribed minimum attendance. Li st of eligible students 
is being prepared by the schools and are required t o be submitted to the 
ITDA/ DWO through the District Education Officer. A n assurance that 
“names of all eligible students have been included and name of any 
ineligible student is not included in the list” is required to be submitted by 
the Headmaster/ Principal of the school. Further, as per System Requirement 
Specification, the DWO is responsible for uploading list of students in excel 
format after getting approval from the District Sanctioning and Monitoring 
Committee. 
Analysis of e-Kalyan  database for  the Pre-Matric Scholarship Scheme for the 
period from 2017-20 revealed that students (Repeater Students awarded 
scholarship in same class in same school/different school ) were irregularly 
awarded scholarships for the same class in two cons ecutive years as discussed 
in paragraph 3.8.5 .  
As per the provisions under Software Requirement Sp ecification – ‘e-Kalyan’  
Jharkhand, the Dealing Assistant is responsible for  online verification of the 
beneficiaries list and gives approval for rejecting , accepting or keeping the 
application in pending state. Further, the DWO is r esponsible for online 
verifying the beneficiary list for approval, pendin g and rejection cases. 
Approval of Pre Matric scholarship applications of ineligible students was due 
to improper mapping of Business rules in the application software.  
6.12.4 Payment control failure 
Payment to non-applicants without matching Aadhaar  Number in e-Kalyan 
database: Aadhaar  Payments Bridge System (APBS) facilitates end-to-e nd 
processing of bulk electronic payment instructions primarily facilitating the 
government departments to make DBT using Aadhaar number as the financial 
address of the beneficiaries. The benefit can be di sbursed to the account of the 
beneficiary based on mapping of Aadhaar  number to the Institution 
Identification Number (IIN) 57  of the beneficiary’s bank. UIDAI also claims that 
seeding of Aadhaar  in the scheme ensures that nobody else can claim b enefits 
by impersonating others.  
DBT is implemented to ensure a better and timely de livery of benefits to the 
people by speeding up payments and enhancing financ ial inclusion. When the 
payment file is received with authorization to proc ess payment by Public 
Financial Management System (PFMS), the sponsor bank is required to submit 
response file after process of payment (success/fai lure) to the originator of 
                                                 
57  IIN is a unique six digit number issued by NPCI to  every APB system participating bank 
and is used to uniquely identify a bank to which the APB transaction has to be routed in the 
APB system. 

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
80  
payment file with the maximum permissible time of four days excluding the day 
of transaction.  
Audit cross checked the bank response files of thre e 
58  out of six test-checked 
districts 59  in respect of post-matric scholarship schemes with e-Kalyan  database 
for the year 2017-18, 2018-19 and 2019-20 and notices the following: 
• Scholarship disbursed to false beneficiaries: According to guidelines, the 
student is required to provide Aadhaar  number and own bank account 
details at the time of applying scholarship. On submission of bank details of 
person other than applicant, the application is lia ble to be cancelled. The 
applicant is also responsible to get their bank account seeded with Aadhaar  
and to ensure that their bank account is mapped wit h NPCI. Further, the 
DWO is responsible to examine that bank accounts of all the applicants have 
seeded in their name with Aadhar  number and duly mapped with NPCI. The 
guidelines also stipulate that “the DWO will e-Tran sfer the approved 
amount into the savings bank accounts of eligible students through Aadhaar 
based DBT channel on PFMS.” 
Audit cross verified the details of the applicants of e-Kalyan  database and 
details of the beneficiaries as per the bank respon se files on the basis of 
common Aadhaar  number in three test-checked districts (Chatra, Pa lamu 
and Ranchi) for the period 2017-20 and observed tha t name and bank 
account number of the applicant as per e-Kalyan  database did not match 
with the name and bank account number of beneficiary as per bank response 
file against same Adhaar  in 2,126 cases. As a result, scholarship amounting 
to 
₹ 2.79 crore got disbursed to another person in place of applicants. 
Case Study-3 
In Palamu district, Audit noticed that two applican ts (Ekta Kumari in 
2019-20 and Monika Minj in 2020-21) using same UID 
(XXXXXXXX4876) applied for scholarship on ‘e-Kalyan ’ portal. Audit 
noticed that after final approval of the applications by the DWO, the payment 
was credited in the bank account (Holder name: Puru sottam Pandit), which 
was confirmed from the Bank Response File generated  by the banks and 
uploaded on the ‘e-Kalyan’ portal. In another case payment of scholarship 
was credited in the bank account (Holder name: Surendra Kumar Yadav) for 
the application filled by Manju Bek using UID (XXXXXXXX5520) during 
2020-21.  
                                                 
58  Chatra, Palamu and Ranchi districts. 
59  Two test-checked districts viz. Godda and Hazariba g did not provide the bank response 
files though called for whereas response file provided by East Singhbhum was  incomplete 
as such it could not be used for analysis. 

Chapter 6: IT Audit of ‘e-Kalyan’ Portal 
 81 
This happened since the application software lacks validation control of UID 
submitted by the applicants with the UIDAI Jharkhand server. Though, there 
is a provision for capturing status and date regard ing Remote Aadhaar  
Seeding Framework (RASF) verification, Bank Account  number 
confirmation and NPCI verification in the ‘e-Kalyan ’ database, but no data 
was found entered against these fields in database during 2017-20. Hence, 
scholarship was disbursed to false beneficiaries.  
• Scholarship payment to multiple beneficiaries throu gh same Aadhaar 
number: Software Requirement Specification of e-Kalyan  provides Remote 
Aadhaar  Seeding Framework (RASF) verification module which will match 
student name, father’s name, date of birth and phot ograph provided in the 
‘e-Kalyan’  server with the UID number in UIDAI Jharkhand data base. 
Further, as per scholarship guidelines, the DWO is responsible to examine 
that the bank accounts of all the applicants have s eeded in their name with 
Aadhaar number and duly mapped with NPCI. Analysis of bank  response 
files for the period 2017-20 of three (Chatra, Pala mu and Ranchi) test-
checked districts it was observed that scholarship of ₹ 28.07 lakh was 
disbursed to two different beneficiaries using same  Aadhaar  number in 
different academic years in 188 cases ( Appendix-6.5 ). This is because of the 
fact that RASF module of ‘ e-Kalyan’  software was not working and student 
details could not be validated from the UIDAI Jhark hand database. 
Moreover, the DWOs also failed to ensure that bank account of all the 
applicants were seeded with their Aadhaar  numbers and duly mapped with 
NPCI. As a result, uniqueness of financial address of the beneficiaries under 
DBT scheme could not be ensured.  
Recommendations: 
1.  Envisaged features should be incorporated into the application. 
2.  The application should be integrated with the Aadha ar e-KYC and 
linked with Treasury/ Bank as per scope of work und er the RRR 
project. 
3.  Disbursement of scholarship through e-Kalyan portal should be either 
migrated to the NeSP portal or an alternate arrange ment to be 
developed by the JAP-IT for reducing dependency on the service 
provider.  
 
 
 
 

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
82  
6.13 Training and capacity building 
As per the approved project proposal, a formal trai ning structure was required 
to be developed combining classroom style training,  independent end-user 
training via manuals and on-line help. The training requirement of the state was 
also to be documented and agreed upon during the cu stomisation phase. User 
Manuals, System Admin Manuals and Troubleshooting Manuals were required 
to be prepared and updated in case of new changes or addition of new services. 
Scrutiny of the records of the Welfare Department a nd DoIT, Jharkhand 
revealed that training for all the Welfare Departme nt officers on e-Kalyan  
Version 2.0 ( e-PASS) was conducted (January 2015) only once after  being 
rolled out and no further training was arranged eit her by the Welfare 
Department or by the agency despite several changes  were made in the 
application software. Further, no user manual for d ifferent level of users were 
documented and updated against the provision of the approved project proposal. 
Moreover, on-line help to the end user were also no t made available on the 
portal. 
The Head of the Institute (Gossner College Ranchi),  being one of the stake 
holders, stated (September 2022) that neither train ing before using the portal 
nor on-line help to perform activities as per the g uidelines were provided. 
Absence of training needs analysis and proper train ing adversely affected the 
functioning of various stakeholders of e-Kalyan  which resulted in several 
irregularities performed by stakeholders as illustr ated in paragraphs 6.12.2, 
6.12.3 and 6.12.4 .  
Recommendation: 
Stakeholders of the application should be provided adequate training for 
optimal usage of the application. 
6.14 Monitoring  
The Project Implementation/Steering Committee is re sponsible for 
computerisation of Welfare Department and implementation of the RRR project 
of ‘ e-PASS’ application in Jharkhand. The minutes of meeting of the committee 
held in June 2015 were found in records of the Welf are Department and 
thereafter the recommendations/instructions issued by the committee during 
2016-21, if any, were not available with the depart ment. Thus, the planned 
works as per approved project proposal were still not completed (May 2021). 
  

Chapter 6: IT Audit of ‘e-Kalyan’ Portal 
 83 
Further, the services of PMU for management and administration of project 
locally, monitoring & evaluation and reporting on the project was discontinued 
since 1 November 2017 citing fund crisis. This hampered the monitoring and 
evaluation of the project. 
Matter has been referred to State Government (October 2022), however, the 
reply is awaited. 
Ranchi  
The   
(
ANUP FRANCIS DUNGDUNG) 
Accountant General (Audit) Jharkhand 
Countersigned 
New Delhi  
The 
(GIRISH CHANDRA MURMU) 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India
 
 
23 June 2023
27 June 2023

 
 
 
 
Appendices 
 

 
Appendices  
Appendix-2.1 
(Referred to in paragraph 2.2; page 11) 
DBT schemes being implemented by various departments in Jharkhand 
Sl. No. Name of Department Name of schemes 
1 ST, SC, Minority and BC Welfare 1.  High School Scholarship for ST students 
2.  High School Scholarship for SC students 
3.  Middle School Scholarship for OBC students  
4.  Middle School Scholarship for SC students 
5.  Middle School Scholarship for ST students  
6.  High School Scholarship for OBC students 
7.  Primary School Scholarship ST 
8.  Primary School Scholarship BC 
9.  Chief Minister Health Aid Scheme (SC & BC) 
10.  Chief Minister Health Aid Scheme (ST) 
11.  Bicycle Vitran Yojna  for Minority 
12.  Bicycle Vitran Yojna  for SC 
13.  Bicycle Vitran Yojna  for ST 
14.  Bicycle Vitran Yojna  for BC 
15.  Centrally Sponsored Scheme for Implementation of 
Protection of Civil Rights Act 1955 And SC and ST 
and Prevention of Atrocity Act 1989 
16.  Primary School Scholarship SC students 
17.  Post Matric Scholarship for OBC students 
18.  Post Matric Scholarship for SC students 
19.  Post Matric Scholarship for ST students 
20.  Pre Matric Scholarship for OBC students 
21.  Pre Matric Scholarship for SC students 
22.  Pre Matric Scholarship for ST students 
2 Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and 
cooperative Department 
1.  Agriculture Technology Management    Agency 
(ATMA)-farmers payment 
2.  Agriculture Technology Management 
Agency(ATMA)-Extension Functionaries payment 
3.  Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojna 
4.  Conversion of Fallow Land into cropped area 
5.  Double Cropping in Rice Fallow Scheme 
6.  Sub Mission on Agricultural Mechanization 
7.  National Mission on Sustainable agriculture 
8.  Mukhyamantri Krishi Ashirwad Yojana  
9.  Jharkhand Krishi Rin Maafi Yojna  
10.  Incentive for Promotion of Farm Mechanization 
Through Women SHGs 
11.  Horticulture Development Scheme 
12.  National Food Security Mission 
13.  Mission for Integrated Development of Horticulture 
(NHM) 
14.  Sub Mission on Seed and Planting Material 
15.  Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana 
16.  Assistance to Progressive Dairy Farmers (cash/kind) 
17.  Milch Cattle Induction on 90% subsidy to BPL 
Women beneficiary 
18.  Training Extension and Skill Development 
19.  Pig Development Scheme 
20.  Goat Development Scheme 
21.  15 Duck Chick Distribution Scheme 
22.  500 Broiler bird Distribution Scheme 
23.  Ved Vyas Housing Scheme 
24.  Fish Rearing Tank Construction 
25.  Payment made for Training of Fish Farmers 

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
86  
Sl. No. Name of Department Name of schemes 
26.  Livestock Health and Disease Control 
27.  Feed based fisheries 
3 Drinking Water and Sanitation Nirmal Bharat Abhiyan 
4 Health, Medical Education and Family 
Welfare 
1.  Janani Suraksha Yojna 
2.  NIKSHAY-DOT Provider Honorarium 
3.  NIKSHAY-Tribal TB Patients 
4.  Payment to Contractual Staff 
5.  Family Planning Compensation Schemes 
6.  ASHA incentives 
7.  NIKSHAY-TB Notification incentive for Private 
Sector 
8.  Janani Shishu Suraksha Karyakram 
9.  NATIONAL AYUSH MISSION 
10.  NIKSHAY-TB Patient Incentive for Nutritional 
Support 
5 Home, jail and Disaster Management 
(Home Division) 
1.  Pension/Benefits to Jai Prakash Andolankari/dependent  
2.  Pension/Benefits to Jharkhand/ Vananchal 
Andolankari/dependent 
3.  Special/Medical Allowance to freedom 
fighters/dependents 
4.  Pension to 1984 sikh riot victims/dependents 
6 Rural Development (Development 
Division) 
1.   Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment 
Guarantee Act 
2.  Pradhan Mantri Awaas Yojna Gramin 
3.  Ambedkar Awaas Yojna 
4.  Legislature Scheme (Scheme on Recommendation) 
7 School Education and Literacy (Primary 
and Adult Education Division) 
1.  School Kit 
2.  KGBV/JBAV Stipend 
3.  Para Teachers Salary 
4.  KGBV Stipend 
5.  National Programming of Mid Day Meal in Schools 
6.  Sakshar Bharat 
7.  Transport Allowance (Intervention for CWSN) 
8.  Escort Allowance (Intervention For CWSN) 
9.  Inclusive Education For Disabled At Secondary Stage 
(Transport Allowance) 
10.  Inclusive Education For Disabled At Secondary Stage 
(Escort Allowance) 
11.  Kind Benefit Under IEDSS Of RMSA 
12.  Inclusive Education For Disabled At Secondary Stage 
(Stipend For CWSN Girls) 
13.  National Scheme of Incentive to girls for secondary 
education 
14.  National Means cum Merit Scholarship Scheme 
(NMMS) 
15.  Samagra Shiksha (Uniform/text books) 
16.  Uniform for APL boys 
17.  Mukhyamantri Special Scholarship Scheme (class 1-8) 
18.  Free Cycle Distribution 
19.  Free Distribution Of Dress/Text Book/Copy To Girl 
Students 
20.  Mukhyamantri Special Scholarship Scheme (secondary 
class 9-12) 
21.  Additional Nutrition Egg Fruits 
22.  Additional Honorarium for CCH cook cum Helper 
23.  Cooking cost financial year 2020-21 
24.  Shoes and shocks for class VI-VIII students 
8 Tourism, Art, Culture, Sports and Youth 
Affairs 
1.  Cash award to sports person 
2.  Players Welfare fund 

Appendices  
 
 87 
Sl. No. Name of Department Name of schemes 
3.  Khel Vritika (Sports Scholarship) 
4.  Scholarship for Day-Boarding Centers Trainees 
5.  Cultural award to renowned artist 
6.  Medical grant to artists 
7.  Monthly pension to elderly or sick artists 
9 Forest, Environment and Climate 
Change 
1. Mukhyamantri Jan Van Yojana 
2. Project Elephant 
3. Project Tiger (60:40) 
4. Integrated development of Wild life habitats 
5. Project Tiger (50:50) 
10 Urban Development and Housing  1. Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana-Urban 
2. Swatchh Bharat Misssion (IHHT) 
3. Day NULM 
11 Labour, Employment, Training and 
Skill Development 
1.  Saksham Jharkhand Kaushal Vikas Yojana 
2.  Deen Dayal Upadhyay Mega skill Centre 
3.  Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojana 
12 Women, Child Development and Social 
Welfare (Social Security) 
1.  Indira Gandhi National Old Age Pension Scheme (40-
79 yrs) 
2.  Indira Gandhi National Widow Pension Scheme (40-79 
yrs) 
3.  Indira Gandhi National Old Age Pension Scheme (80 
yrs and above) 
4.  Indira Gandhi National Disability Pension Scheme (18-
79 yrs) 
5.  State Social Security Pension Scheme 
6.  Adim Jan Jati Pension Scheme 
7.  Rajya Vidhwa Samman Pension Yojna 
8.  State Pension scheme for HIV/AIDS Affected persons 
9.  ICDS ESTABLISHMENT 
10.  POSHAN PAHAL 
11.  Swadhar Greh- Salary to staff 
12.  Scheme for Adolescent Girls 
13.  National Family Benefit Scheme 
14.  Pradhan Mantri Matru Vandana Yojana 
15.  Ujjawla-salary 
16.  Ujjawla-Facilities to Beneficiaries 
17.  ICDS- Child Protection Services - Salary of staff 
18.  ICDS - Training program 
19.  Swadhar Grih- Facilities to beneficiaries 
20.  ICDS - Supplementary Nutrition Program(SNP) 
21.  National Creche Scheme-Honorarium to Workers 
22.  National Creche Scheme-Nutrition 
23.  Scholarship to Handicapped Students 
24.  Swami Vivekanand Nishakt Swawlamban  Protsahan 
Yojna 
25.  Mukhyamantri Kanyadan Yojna 
13 Food, Public Distribution and 
Consumer Affairs 
1.  Kerosene Oil DBT 
2.  CM SUPPORT (Chief Minister subsidy for purchase of 
petrol for riding two wheelers) 
(Source: Information provided by State DBT Cell for the year 2020-21) 
 
  

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
88  
Appendix-3.1 
(Referred to in paragraph 3.2.1; page 24) 
Prescribed Rates of scholarship under Pre matric scholarship and Post Matric scholarship scheme  
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
Scholarship 
Category and Scholarship amount  (In Rupee) 
 
Remarks 
1 
Pre Matric 
Scholarship Scheme 
for, ST SC and BC 
Class Hosteller (Per month) Day Scholar (Per month)  
I to IV 150 50 
V to VI 150 100 
VII to 
VIII 
200 150 
IX to X  525 plus 
Ad hoc grant per annum 
750 
225 plus 
Ad hoc grant per annum 
1000 
 
Scholarship 
disbursed for 10 
months in a year 
through Bank 
Account  
2 
Post Matric 
Scholarship Scheme 
for ST SC and BC 
Name of Course  GoI Institution State/Private 
Institution 
Hosteller 
(Per year)  
Day 
Scholar 
(Per 
year) 
Hosteller 
(Per year)  
Day 
Scholar 
(Per year)  
Degree/Master 
Degree 
50000/ 
40000 
40000/ 
30000 
45000/ 
25000 
38000/ 
20000 
Graduate/Under 
Graduate 
30000/ 
24000 
24000/ 
18000 
21000/ 
15000 
18000/ 
12000 
Graduate other 
than above 
25000 20000 17500 15000 
Higher 
Secondary/ ITI 
etc 
15000 12000 10500 9000 
 
 
- 
 
  

Appendices  
 
 89 
Appendix-3.2 
(Referred to in paragraph 3.7; page 29) 
List of Pre & Post matric Schools selected for verifying SC/ST/BC scholarship 
Name of 
District Sl. No. Name of school Pre/ Post Matric 
School/Institute 
Chatra 
1 UMS Laxmanpur Pre Matric 
2 UMG Jangi Hindi Pre Matric 
3 UHS Maramdiri Pre Matric 
4 UHS Ara Pre Matric 
5 Najreth Vidya Niketan Pre Matric 
6 SS Girl High School Pre Matric 
7 MS Dibha Pre Matric 
8 Bhadrakali Inter College Post Matric 
9 RNM Hunterganj Post Matric 
10 Bhadrakali Degree College Post Matric 
11 Chatra College Chatra Post Matric 
12 Upendranath Verma College Post Matric 
13 Satyanand Bhokta Inter College Post Matric 
14 Simaria Degree College Post Matric 
15 Rajya Samposhit  +2 High School, Simaria Post Ma tric 
16 Simaria Inter Mahavidyalaya Post Matric 
17 Ramnarayan Smarak Inter Mahavidyalaya Post Matri c 
East 
Singhbhum 
18 High School, Karandih Pre Matric 
19 Gurunank High School Mango Pre Matric 
20 Middle School, Muiguitu Pre Matric 
21 Primary School, Khursi Pre Matric 
22 UHS, Kalikapur Pre Matric 
23 G.E.L. Church PS, Gitilipi, Mango Pre Matric 
24 Maa Rankini Industrial Training Centre, Ghatsila  Post Matric 
25 Jamini Kant Inter College Post Matric 
26 Jamini Kant B Ed. College Post Matric 
27 Maryland Institute of Technology And Management Post Matric 
28 Ghatsila College, Ghatsila Post Matric 
29 Jamshedpur Women’s College Post Matric 
Godda 
30 PS, Tilaipara 2 Pre Matric 
31 UPS, Manglatola Pre Matric 
32 Govt. Girls HS, Pathargama Pre Matric 
33 NG HS Pathargama Pre Matric 
34 MS Meherma Girls Pre Matric 
35 Govt. High School Bhatkhoriya Pre Matric 
36 Govt. High School, Ghorikitta  Pre Matric 
37 Satyendra Pvt ITI Post Matric 
38 Suraj Mandal Inter College Post Matric 

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
90  
Name of 
District Sl. No. Name of school Pre/ Post Matric 
School/Institute 
39 Nav Bharat Pvt. ITI Post Matric 
40 Godda College, Godda Post Matric 
41 Deaf and Dumb and MR Residential cum Resource 
Centre, Poraiyahat Post Matric 
42 Mahila College, Godda Post Matric 
43 10+2 High School, Godda Post Matric 
44 SBS/SPS Inter College, Pathargama Post Matric 
45 SBS/SPS Degree College, Pathargama Post Matric 
Hazaribag 
46 UMS Kandtari (Barkagaon) Pre Matric 
47 UPS Mahuabad, Chouparan Pre Matric 
48 K.B. High School, Hazaribag Pre Matric 
49 C.M. Adarsh High School Pre Matric 
50 KBSS + 2 High School, Chauparan Pre Matric 
51 Adarsh Middle School, Barkagaon Pre Matric 
52 Upg H.S Choutha (Bishnugarh) Pre Matric 
53 AISECT University Pre Matric 
54 Annada college Post Matric 
55 Vinoba Bhave University Post Matric 
56 St. Columba’s College, Hazaribagh Post Matric 
57 University College of Engineering and Technology  Post Matric 
58 K. B. Women s College, Hazaribagh Post Matric 
59 Maa Vindhyavashini College Of Education Post Mat ric 
60 Bishnugarh Inter College, Bishnugarh Post Matric  
61 Markham college of commerce Post Matric 
62 Hazaribagh Chapter of Cost Accountants Post Matr ic 
Palamu 
63 UMS Sokara Pre Matric 
64 Govt. PS Dugila, Lesliganj Pre Matric 
65 R.K.H.S, Lesliganj Pre Matric 
66 UPG Rajkiyakrit urdu high school, Jhabar Pre Mat ric 
67 B.C.C Mission Girls High School, Abadganj Pre Ma tric 
68 Govt. Urdu UMS BMC Neura Pre Matric 
69 Gurukul Pvt. Industrial Training Institute(ITI) Post Matric 
70 Yog Singh Naamdhaari Mahila College, Daltonganj Post Matric 
71 Jyoti Prakash Mahila B. Ed. College Post Matric 
72 Industrial Training Centre Post Matric 
73 Sumitra Pvt. ITI Post Matric 
74 Ganesh Lal Agarwal College, Daltonganj Post Matr ic 
75 SSMSDC Tarhasi Post Matric 
76 Majdur Kisan Inter College, Paki Post Matric 
77 Giriwar Inter College (+2 School) Daltonganj Pos t Matric 
78 Jyoti PVT. ITI Post Matric 

Appendices  
 
 91 
Name of 
District Sl. No. Name of school Pre/ Post Matric 
School/Institute 
Ranchi 
79 GMS BMP Doranda Pre Matric 
80 Chotanagpur Girls HS Tharpakhna Pre Matric 
81 St. Joseph MS Hesag Hatia Pre Matric 
82 SS Doranda High School Pre Matric 
83 GMS Pithoria Pre Matric 
84 GHS Boreya Pre Matric 
85 GUMS Harmu Housing Colony Pre Matric 
86 St. Kuldeep Middle School Harmu Pre Matric 
87 St. Xavier's College Post Matric 
88 Dr. Shyama Pd. Mukherjee University Post Matric 
89 Ram Tahal Chowdhry Inter College, Dardaag Post M atric 
90 St. Xavier's Inter College Post Matric 
91 Ranchi University Post Matric 
92 Doranda College Post Matric 
93 St. Annes Intermediate College, Mandar  Post Mat ric 
94 Marwari College (Boys) Ranchi Post Matric 
95 Gossnar College Post Matric 
96 Ursuline Intermediate College Post Matric 
 
  

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
92  
Appendix-3.3 
(Referred to paragraph 3.8.1; page 30) 
Ghost Beneficiaries in Pre-Matric Schools 
District Nos. of Ghost beneficiary  Nos. of institutes Amount of scholarship        
(₹ in lakh) 
Godda 15 01 0.09 
Chatra 24 07 0.44 
Total  39 08 0.53 
 
Appendix-3.4 
(Referred to paragraph 3.8.1; page 30) 
Ghost Beneficiaries in Post-Matric schools 
District Nos. of Ghost beneficiary  Nos. of institutes Amount of scholarship 
(₹ in lakh) 
Palamu 20 06 2.73 
Chatra 08 03 0.36 
Ranchi 13 03 1.47 
East Singhbhum 01 01 0.11 
Total  42 13 4.67 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Appendices  
 
 93 
Appendix-3.5 
(Referred to paragraph 3.8.2; page 30) 
Disbursement of Post Matric scholarships to BC category beneficiaries who obtained less than prescribed 
marks in previous examination 
District Nos. of beneficiary Nos. of institutes Amount of scholarship  
(₹ in lakh) 
Palamu 07 05 0.37 
Chatra 53 07 2.95 
Hazaribag 55 07 2.28 
Ranchi 45 09 4.35 
Godda 49 08 2.51 
East Singhbhum 08 04 0.75 
Total  217 41 13.21 
Appendix-3.6 
(Referred to paragraph 3.8.2; page 30) 
Disbursement of Post Matric scholarships to  SC/ST  category beneficiaries who obtained less than 
prescribed marks in previous examination  
District Nos. of beneficiary Nos. of institutes Amount of scholarship 
(₹ in lakh) 
Palamu 03 03 0.20 
Chatra 08 04 0.56 
Hazaribag 45 05 2.19 
Ranchi 28 07 2.90 
Godda 12 04 0.79 
Total  96 23 6.64 
 
 

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
94   
Appendix-3.7 
(Referred to paragraph 3.8.2; page 30) 
Payment of scholarship to ineligible beneficiaries of Backward Community  
Sl. 
No.  
Academic 
year 
Application 
ID 
Name of 
applicant 
Date of 
birth 
Gender  Category  Family 
Income 
Bank account no. UID Total 
maintenance 
fee 
Final 
tuition 
fee 
Total 
scholarship 
paid 
1 2018-19 20181620670 RANJEET 
KUMAR 
1998-05-18  M BC 120000  24479998571  XXXXXX 
XX9875  
1890  3000  4890  
2 2018-19 20181358730 SHAHDEW 
KUMAR 
CHAUDHARY 
1998-11-05  M BC 110000  596110110002979  XXXXXX 
XX7798  
2520  1090  3610  
3 2018-19 20181746506 PUJA BHARTI 1996-01-05  F BC 115000  470210110001355  XXXXXX 
XX2487  
2800  35200  38000  
4 2018-19 20181538037 SATENDRA 
KUMAR 
2001-01-09  M BC 120000  36228292931  XXXXXX 
XX1518  
2100  1290  3390  
5 2018-19 20181567267 JAY KARAN 
KUMAR 
2000-09-29  M BC 120000  489710110012366  XXXXXX 
XX3674  
2310  1290  3600  
6 2018-19 20181630034 AYESHA 
PARWEEN 
2000-04-12  F BC 120000  33661431689  XXXXXX 
XX9197  
2310  1290  3600  
7 2018-19 20181686999 BABY KUMARI 2000-03-31  F BC 123000  34092808531  XXXXXX 
XX7747  
2100  1290  3390  
8 2018-19 20181516698 VIKAS KUMAR 1999-03-07  M BC 140000  32234751986  XXXXXX 
XX6026  
4200  11610  15810  
9 2018-19 20181696492 KAJAL KUMARI 2002-05-04  F BC 106000  33307165279  XXXXXX 
XX8667  
1920  2690  4610  
10 2018-19 20181748699 LAKSHAMI 
KUMARI 
2001-03-28  F BC 115000  472818210010944  XXXXXX 
XX0380  
1920  3035  4955  
11 2018-19 20181696526 PAWAN KUMAR 
SAW 
2002-05-18  M BC 120000  593018210003708  XXXXXX 
XX9748  
1920  3230  5150  
12 2018-19 20181731426 SUMIT KUMAR 1995-08-23  M BC 110000  7348000100003541  XXXXXX 
XX0868  
3850  34150  38000  
13 2018-19 20181677034 PINTU 
CHAUDHARY 
1998-01-27  M BC 105000  33370925485  XXXXXX 
XX8631  
1920  7080  9000  
14 2018-19 20181267465 PRITI KUMARI 1998-06-11  F BC 105000  32783858346  XXXXXX 
XX7693  
2520  975  3495  
15 2018-19 20181736473 SABIR ANSARI 1999-10-16  M BC 105000  32828415500  XXXXXX 
XX8501  
2520  975  3495  

Appendices  
 
 95  
Sl. 
No.  
Academic 
year 
Application 
ID 
Name of 
applicant 
Date of 
birth 
Gender  Category  Family 
Income 
Bank account no. UID Total 
maintenance 
fee 
Final 
tuition 
fee 
Total 
scholarship 
paid 
16 2018-19 2018843952 SHIVNARAYAN 
SAHA 
1998-02-20  M BC 101580  1894010062383  XXXXXX 
XX3414  
4200  33800  38000  
17 2018-19 20181667497 FARIDA 
PARWEEN 
1993-08-19  F BC 120000  480110310000195  XXXXXX 
XX8368  
4020  13980  18000  
18 2018-19 20181751237 OM PRAKASH 
MAHATO 
1999-01-10  M BC 115000  470210110002514  XXXXXX 
XX5510  
1680  2122  3802  
19 2018-19 20181749374 AVINASH 
KUMAR 
MAHATO 
2000-10-02  M BC 130000  36191873491  XXXXXX 
XX1952  
2100  2122  4222  
20 2018-19 20181740729 DEEPAK KUMAR 
SONI 
1998-10-25  M BC 115000  34693942393  XXXXXX 
XX6642  
1890  1331  3221  
21 2018-19 20181417914 GUDIYA 
KUMARI 
2002-04-26  F BC 110000  3283778101  XXXXXX 
XX6962  
1920  406  2326  
22 2018-19 20181391097 AFSANA 
KHATOON 
2001-10-05  F BC 110000  7348000100032095  XXXXXX 
XX5561  
1920  406  2326  
23 2018-19 20181349502 KRITI KUMARI 2002-10-22  F BC 110000  7348001700068930  XXXXXX 
XX7747  
1920  430  2350  
24 2018-19 20181312356 ABHISHEK 
PRAJAPATI 
2001-04-10  M BC 110000  7348001700069337  XXXXXX 
XX4652  
1920  430  2350  
25 2018-19 20181355330 ANAND KUMAR 1997-06-16  M BC 110000  4901108003314  XXXXXX 
XX8017  
1920  7080  9000  
26 2018-19 20181627138 ANJALI KUMARI  2002-02-14  F BC 110000  50162973788  XXXXXX 
XX5523  
1600  262  1862  
27 2018-19 20181525451 HEMANT 
KUMAR YADAV 
2003-10-10  M BC 150000  590118210002672  XXXXXX 
XX6583  
1760  262  2022  
28 2018-19 20181541871 AMIT YADAV 2000-09-10  M BC 105000  33160368668  XXXXXX 
XX5395  
1920  406  2326  
29 2018-19 20181596846 SAPNA KUMARI 2001-03-15  F BC 110000  32220110056684  XXXXXX 
XX6596  
1920  2580  4500  
30 2018-19 20181632476 ANJLI KHATUN 2000-06-17  F BC 105000  33327631012  XXXXXX 
XX1912  
2310  4120  6430  
31 2018-19 20181636017 SHAMI HUSSAIN  2000-05-18  M BC 105000  7348001500008181  XXXXXX 
XX3331  
2310  4120  6430  
32 2018-19 20181558102 MD GULFAM 
ANSARI 
1998-10-18  M BC 110000  50010100004476  XXXXXX 
XX4120  
2100  4120  6220  

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
96   
Sl. 
No.  
Academic 
year 
Application 
ID 
Name of 
applicant 
Date of 
birth 
Gender  Category  Family 
Income 
Bank account no. UID Total 
maintenance 
fee 
Final 
tuition 
fee 
Total 
scholarship 
paid 
33 2018-19 20181675032 SAKSHI KUMARI 
GUPTA 
2000-06-08  F BC 115000  50167064621  XXXXXX 
XX7372  
2310  4120  6430  
34 2018-19 20181651320 BIPIN KUMAR 
VISHWAKARMA 
 
2001-02-05  M BC 120000  50162852517  XXXXXX 
XX8563  
2310  4120  6430  
35 2018-19 20181598622 JAYPRAKASH 
KUMAR YADAV 
1999-03-23  M BC 100500  32220110024140  XXXXXX 
XX7372  
2100  4480  6580  
36 2018-19 20181667421 SHIVPUJAN 
PRASAD 
1999-04-20  M BC 150000  37962175485  XXXXXX 
XX6066  
2310  4480  6790  
37 2018-19 20181744337 RAJAN KUMAR 1997-11-15  M BC 120000  12350110029169  XXXXXX 
XX6764  
2520  12480  15000  
38 2018-19 20181365142 NIRANJAN ROY 1999-04-24  M BC 107948  18190110012055  XXXXXX 
XX5412  
2520  2400  4920  
39 2018-19 20181542768 NIBHA KUMARI 1999-08-20  F BC 120000  50221512552  XXXXXX 
XX0424  
2310  1825  4135  
40 2018-19 20181521723 TARUN KUMAR 
MAHTO 
1997-12-24  M BC 125000  37899732039  XXXXXX 
XX3183  
1600  336  1936  
41 2018-19 20181667635 BITU KUMAR 2003-09-18  M BC 120000  27620110067116  XXXXXX 
XX5085  
1920  3610  5530  
42 2018-19 20181733685 SAPNA KUMARI 2000-06-07  F BC 110000  486010110003558  XXXXXX 
XX9720  
2100  1331  3431  
43 2018-19 20181593947 RENU  
CHOUDHARY 
1989-06-06  F BC 120000  139710100029792  XXXXXX 
XX6603  
3350  3129  6479  
44 2018-19 20181705727 SHILPA KUMARI  1999-11-04  F BC 120000  1258104000118507  XXXXXX 
XX1440  
2520  12480  15000  
45 2018-19 20181552693 SWATI KUMARI 1994-02-12  F BC 140000  33619581954  XXXXXX 
XX0237  
3685  1734  5419  
46 2018-19 20181557512 BASANT GOPE 2001-02-05  M BC 102000  493010510008001  XXXXXX 
XX4100  
1920  3025  4945  
47 2018-19 20181740684 PUJA KUMARI 1999-05-16  F BC 113000  33149745882  XXXXXX 
XX2681  
2520  975  3495  
48 2018-19 20181269522 PRATHAM 
SHONDIK 
2000-01-20  M BC 110000  1776010113472  XXXXXX 
XX2552  
1920  10080  12000  
49 2018-19 20181752616 RISHIKESH 
KUMAR PATEL 
2000-09-21  M BC 120000  37047524450  XXXXXX 
XX0275  
2520  4600  7120  

Appendices  
 
 97  
Sl. 
No.  
Academic 
year 
Application 
ID 
Name of 
applicant 
Date of 
birth 
Gender  Category  Family 
Income 
Bank account no. UID Total 
maintenance 
fee 
Final 
tuition 
fee 
Total 
scholarship 
paid 
50 2018-19 20181495774 UMESH KUMAR 2003-10-21  M BC 108000  482418210014441  XXXXXX 
XX1128  
1920  2000  3920  
51 2018-19 20181729142 RUPESH KUMAR 
YADAV 
1997-04-07  M BC 120000  0744010485166  XXXXXX 
XX1895  
1600  7400  9000  
52 2018-19 20181543701 MD  IMTIYAZ  
ANSARI 
1999-01-10  M BC 120000  7908000100019133  XXXXXX 
XX1958  
4200  33800  38000  
53 2018-19 20181535018 MD ASIF ALI 2001-03-12  M BC 120000  1552010029759  XXXXXX 
XX5665  
2310  1150  3460  
54 2018-19 20181333588 SUPRIYARANI 1999-01-26  F BC 145000  35830100003895  XXXXXX 
XX0174  
2520  4292  6812  
55 2018-19 20181528901 NAJIYA PRAWIN  2000-06-23  F BC 100500  50168801940  XXXXXX 
XX6339  
2310  4120  6430  
56 2018-19 20181704530 SHOEB AHMAD 2003-06-06  M BC 120000  588010110003384  XXXXXX 
XX8111  
2310  12690  15000  
57 2018-19 20181331760 NEHA 
KHATOON 
1997-02-02  F BC 110000  32825708973  XXXXXX 
XX9465  
2520  1331  3851  
58 2018-19 20181513246 ABUTALHA 
ANSARI 
2003-01-10  M BC 120000  37645174062  XXXXXX 
XX6210  
2520  5507  8027  
59 2018-19 20181629220 AASHISH 
KUMAR YADAV 
2003-12-07  M BC 120000  539102120000365  XXXXXX 
XX8160  
1920  2000  3920  
60 2018-19 20181749988 UJJWAL 
BHASKER 
1998-02-17  M BC 116160  118410100065864  XXXXXX 
XX8531  
2520  1885  4405  
61 2018-19 20181624608 CHANDAN 
KUMAR 
2003-02-02  M BC 120000  37974860602  XXXXXX 
XX0451  
1760  2000  3760  
62 2018-19 20181564048 RAVI KUMAR 
SONI 
1999-01-01  M BC 150000  488010510003623  XXXXXX 
XX1903  
2520  5050  7570  
63 2018-19 20181570273 RISHAB KUMAR 
SAHU 
1998-01-02  M BC 105000  20351970616  XXXXXX 
XX4681  
4200  20800  25000  
64 2018-19 20181570023 VISHAL KUMAR 2001-02-01  M BC 110000  590110510001042  XXXXXX 
XX8619  
1920  406  2326  
65 2018-19 20181684534 VIKAS SAHU 2000-07-13  M BC 105000  1776010089140  XXXXXX 
XX7791  
2100  2326  4426  
66 2018-19 20181530061 ARPANA 
KUMARI 
2003-10-27  F BC 120000  2650001500056730  XXXXXX 
XX4170  
1760  1200  2960  

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
98   
Sl. 
No.  
Academic 
year 
Application 
ID 
Name of 
applicant 
Date of 
birth 
Gender  Category  Family 
Income 
Bank account no. UID Total 
maintenance 
fee 
Final 
tuition 
fee 
Total 
scholarship 
paid 
67 2018-19 20181514138 APURVA 
KUMARI 
1993-12-06  F BC 110000  20460110032602  XXXXXX 
XX0791  
4200  33800  38000  
68 2018-19 20181741910 PUSHPA 
KUMARI 
1997-10-18  F BC 120000  139710100066492  XXXXXX 
XX5745  
4020  1290  5310  
69 2018-19 20181307079 INTEKHAB 
ANSARI 
1998-02-05  M BC 110000  154401000055419  XXXXXX 
XX2426  
2520  1320  3840  
70 2018-19 20181752613 SHIVAM GUPTA 2000-01-19  M BC 130000  72837200010139  XXXXXX 
XX2737  
2310  629  2939  
71 2018-19 20181691849 MD ALTAMASH 2002-12-25  M BC 120000  26450100009693  XXXXXX 
XX0083  
1760  867  2627  
72 2018-19 20181747412 SHIVAM KUMAR 
SAH 
2001-07-15  M BC 110000  163602101000761  XXXXXX 
XX9630  
1920  919  2839  
73 2018-19 20181576958 AKSHAY 
KUMAR KUNDU 
1997-01-03  M BC 110000  20458127110  XXXXXX 
XX9997  
2520  415  2935  
74 2018-19 20181599295 MONU KUMAR 
GUPTA 
2003-09-07  M BC 110000  0877010525022  XXXXXX 
XX4710  
1440  2000  3440  
75 2018-19 20181715763 SHAHZAD 
HUSSIAN 
2000-06-02  M BC 120000  118410100036002  XXXXXX 
XX1889  
1920  2000  3920  
76 2018-19 20181461775 SATYAM 
KUMAR 
1998-12-31  M BC 115000  708202120000100  XXXXXX 
XX1566  
2520  2051  4571  
77 2018-19 20181427357 RISHAV RAM 1998-10-21  M BC 120000  615410110000218  XXXXXX 
XX3115  
2520  2051  4571  
78 2018-19 20181148074 SANGAM 
KUMAR 
1998-10-02  M BC 120000  175810100056671  XXXXXX 
XX2085  
2520  2605  5125  
79 2018-19 20181416599 SHIVANI GUPTA 1998-04-24  F BC 110000  7348001500017992  XXXXXX 
XX2006  
2520  2831  5351  
80 2018-19 20181259200 KAMLESH 
KUMAR 
1997-04-15  M BC 120000  3398335067  XXXXXX 
XX5822  
4020  1734  5754  
81 2018-19 20181258644 MEGHAKUMARI  1996-08-06  F BC 120000  8625101043399  XXXXXX 
XX9262  
4020  1734  5754  
82 2018-19 20181296856 AMIT KUMAR 1998-03-25  M BC 105000  50170007223374  XXXXXX 
XX2385  
2520  17480  20000  
83 2018-19 20181400988 SHIVAM 
SHEKHAR 
2000-01-04  M BC 150000  1776010109857  XXXXXX 
XX4306  
2520  17480  20000  

Appendices  
 
 99  
Sl. 
No.  
Academic 
year 
Application 
ID 
Name of 
applicant 
Date of 
birth 
Gender  Category  Family 
Income 
Bank account no. UID Total 
maintenance 
fee 
Final 
tuition 
fee 
Total 
scholarship 
paid 
84 2018-19 20181258682 NEHA SINGH 2001-12-30  F BC 120000  499310510002538  XXXXXX 
XX2889  
1920  10080  12000  
85 2018-19 2018901099 SALIQUE 
JAFFER 
1997-01-05  M BC 120000  137510033924  XXXXXX 
XX0705  
2520  14570  17090  
86 2018-19 2018899071 MUSDDIKA 
SHREEN 
1998-03-26  F BC 110000  595802010002605  XXXXXX 
XX6364  
2520  16400  18920  
87 2018-19 20181098205 JUHI KUMARI 1996-12-02  F BC 120000  35530704719  XXXXXX 
XX9040  
2520  16400  18920  
88 2018-19 20181262226 MD ABID 
ANSARI 
2000-01-09  M BC 127280  478218210000174  XXXXXX 
XX7271  
2520  17480  20000  
89 2018-19 20181065683 ASHISH 
SHARMA 
2000-03-25  M BC 107448  35805760559  XXXXXX 
XX5777  
2520  12480  15000  
90 2018-19 20181477204 NUTAN KUMARI  1997-01-15  F BC 120000  34306549305  XXXXXX 
XX8397  
4200  33800  38000  
91 2018-19 20181696240 MANISH KUMAR 
MAHTO 
2003-02-19  M BC 105000  490818210000612  XXXXXX 
XX9723  
1760  336  2096  
92 2018-19 20181631981 PANKAJ KUMAR 
GHOSH 
1994-01-15  M BC 120000  490010510000269  XXXXXX 
XX7420  
2520  415  2935  
93 2018-19 20181619003 MAHADEV 
KUMHAR 
2000-04-19  M BC 125000  492710510005907  XXXXXX 
XX6806  
2100  415  2515  
94 2018-19 20181752496 RAHUL GOPE 2002-02-10  M BC 120000  27620110013848  XXXXXX 
XX8080  
1920  1520  3440  
95 2018-19 20181634313 PARWATI 
KUMARI 
2002-03-23  F BC 115000  50464179011  XXXXXX 
XX5452  
1920  2233  4153  
96 2018-19 20181575138 SRITY RAWANI 2003-08-03  F BC 111000  16250110035566  XXXXXX 
XX4063  
2520  2255  4775  
97 2018-19 20181599338 KARISHMA 
KUMARI 
2000-04-23  F BC 110000  06480110106686  XXXXXX 
XX6511  
4400  2326  6726  
98 2018-19 20181587121 VIPIN KUMAR 
YADAV 
2000-01-17  M BC 110000  156301000050796  XXXXXX 
XX3178  
2100  2326  4426  
99 2018-19 20181556857 KISHAN KUMAR 
GUPTA 
1999-03-17  M BC 110000  644802010007651  XXXXXX 
XX7369  
2100  2326  4426  
100  2018-19 20181635076 VICKEY KUMAR 
SAHU 
2001-06-18  M BC 120000  492410510005846  XXXXXX 
XX6147  
2100  2326  4426  

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
100   
Sl. 
No.  
Academic 
year 
Application 
ID 
Name of 
applicant 
Date of 
birth 
Gender  Category  Family 
Income 
Bank account no. UID Total 
maintenance 
fee 
Final 
tuition 
fee 
Total 
scholarship 
paid 
101  2018-19 20181701859 SONAL KUMARI 2000-07-07  F BC 120000  047810100073146  XXXXXX 
XX0525  
2100  2326  4426  
102  2018-19 20181694887 ANIL KUMAR 
SAHU 
1998-07-01  M BC 120000  27620110007075  XXXXXX 
XX6937  
2100  2326  4426  
103  2018-19 20181604918 ANISH ANSHUL 2003-02-15  M BC 110000  362202120000587  XXXXXX 
XX5478  
1920  2390  4310  
104  2018-19 20181630031 SHILPA KUMARI  2003-08-18  F BC 120000  492410510007411  XXXXXX 
XX6945  
1920  2390  4310  
105  2018-19 20181594241 SHUBHAM 
KUMAR 
2002-03-01  M BC 120000  27620110066379  XXXXXX 
XX1807  
1760  2390  4150  
106  2018-19 20181592064 PUJA KUMARI 2002-02-01  F BC 120000  2652001500004610  XXXXXX 
XX5564  
1760  2390  4150  
107  2018-19 20181696992 RUBI KUMARI 2000-04-15  F BC 120000  492418210003532  XXXXXX 
XX9558  
1760  2390  4150  
108  2018-19 20181627056 PRINCE 
MANOHAR 
KUMAR 
2000-01-05  M BC 120000  482310510006103  XXXXXX 
XX9968  
2310  2618  4928  
109  2018-19 20181553660 DURGA KUMAR 
GUPTA 
1999-10-19  M BC 120000  491310110011351  XXXXXX 
XX6528  
2520  2618  5138  
110  2018-19 20181645092 SWARAJ SAW 2000-02-12  M BC 135000  50441492601  XXXXXX 
XX1462  
1890  2618  4508  
111  2018-19 20181633746 TUNNU 
PRAJAPATI 
1995-04-21  M BC 120000  483410510001620  XXXXXX 
XX2656  
2520  2831  5351  
112  2018-19 20181695633 NITISH KUMAR 2002-08-05  M BC 110000  499310110010853  XXXXXX 
XX9036  
1920  3196  5116  
113  2018-19 20181590733 RAMESH 
KUMAR SAHU 
2002-01-12  M BC 120000  492418210003430  XXXXXX 
XX3513  
1920  3610  5530  
114  2018-19 20181672141 JAISHREE 
MAHTO 
2002-02-25  F BC 120000  490810110011771  XXXXXX 
XX5049  
2310  4517  6827  
115  2018-19 20181509370 ANKIT KUMAR 
GUPTA 
2002-08-15  M BC 145296  37536967113  XXXXXX 
XX8464  
2520  5507  8027  
116  2018-19 20181731148 SHRIKANT 
KUMAR SAHU 
2000-10-04  M BC 140000  302410100012923  XXXXXX 
XX7752  
2100  12900  15000  
117  2018-19 20181620452 KHUSHBOO 
KUMARI 
2000-09-25  F BC 150000  38002205063  XXXXXX 
XX8682  
2310  12690  15000  

Appendices  
 
 101  
Sl. 
No.  
Academic 
year 
Application 
ID 
Name of 
applicant 
Date of 
birth 
Gender  Category  Family 
Income 
Bank account no. UID Total 
maintenance 
fee 
Final 
tuition 
fee 
Total 
scholarship 
paid 
118  2018-19 20181568702 SHAMA ARSHI 1993-10-26  F BC 120000  20066022666  XXXXXX 
XX4367  
6120  14880  21000  
119  2018-19 20181585366 RAJIV RANJAN 1993-07-23  M BC 110000  692002010003188  XXXXXX 
XX2762  
4020  13980  18000  
120  2018-19 20181590276 DIMPAL GUPTA 1995-03-05  F BC 110000  33701983262  XXXXXX 
XX0791  
3850  34150  38000  
121  2018-19 20181497935 KUMARI 
BARKHA 
1996-02-01  F BC 102000  490411610000095  XXXXXX 
XX5815  
3350  1332  4682  
122  2018-19 20181613978 DIPSHIKHA 
KUMARI 
1997-11-30  F BC 120000  156301000050554  XXXXXX 
XX0785  
3350  1332  4682  
123  2018-19 20181738423 SIKENDRA 
KUMAR MAHTO 
1996-08-09  M BC 120000  499110110010730  XXXXXX 
XX7557  
3350  1332  4682  
124  2018-19 20181666476 NAJ PARWEEN 1995-03-04  F BC 120000  590510110002651  XXXXXX 
XX1975  
3350  1332  4682  
125  2018-19 20181656292 POOJA GUPTA 1996-12-05  F BC 130000  0377108909480  XXXXXX 
XX4022  
3685  1332  5017  
126  2018-19 20181626017 NIKITAKUMARI 1997-02-20  F BC 144000  615610110000704  XXXXXX 
XX9482  
5100  1332  6432  
127  2018-19 20181575149 SAKSHI PRIYA 1997-06-12  F BC 150000  2514101006707  XXXXXX 
XX5605  
3685  1332  5017  
128  2018-19 20181560651 MADHU RANI 1998-03-27  F BC 108000  35591914158  XXXXXX 
XX1874  
3685  1734  5419  
129  2018-19 20181575688 MANISH KUMAR 
MANJHI 
2000-03-09  M BC 120000  32710934174  XXXXXX 
XX2724  
2520  2740  5260  
130  2018-19 20181656186 BABITA 
KUMARI 
1998-03-03  F BC 135000  1776010084862  XXXXXX 
XX7925  
2520  13500  16020  
131  2018-19 20181701691 SOURABH 
SUMAN 
1993-05-08  M BC 111000  33714813036  XXXXXX 
XX0309  
2520  16800  19320  
132  2018-19 20181643324 FARHEEN FIZA 1999-12-17  F BC 120000  1776010141734  XXXXXX 
XX6682  
2520  17480  20000  
133  2018-19 20181503816 ASHHAR RAJA 2000-07-15  M BC 150000  588610510000267  XXXXXX 
XX9622  
2520  17480  20000  
134  2018-19 20181685863 RAVI KUMAR 
SHARMA 
2001-03-26  M BC 120000  5795108000262  XXXXXX 
XX0247  
4400  20600  25000  

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
102   
Sl. 
No.  
Academic 
year 
Application 
ID 
Name of 
applicant 
Date of 
birth 
Gender  Category  Family 
Income 
Bank account no. UID Total 
maintenance 
fee 
Final 
tuition 
fee 
Total 
scholarship 
paid 
135  2018-19 20181550033 SHRUTI KUMARI  2002-09-17  F BC 110000  50457751104  XXXXXX 
XX1108  
3120  11500  14620  
136  2018-19 20181567908 MADHURI 
SINGH 
2002-12-07  F BC 120000  493010510019517  XXXXXX 
XX6602  
1920  10080  12000  
137  2018-19 20181547051 AASTHA 
CHOUDHARY 
2002-04-09  F BC 120000  491218210004555  XXXXXX 
XX2791  
1920  10080  12000  
138  2018-19 20181635997 SHAGUFA 
SHAMIM 
2002-04-04  F BC 140000  35122333089  XXXXXX 
XX9616  
3120  11880  15000  
139  2018-19 20181506453 SURAJ KUMAR 2002-02-23  M BC 120000  20324817823  XXXXXX 
XX0022  
2310  16190  18500  
140  2018-19 20181546376 PRITHEEBI 
KUMAR 
1999-12-05  M BC 120000  156301000005413  XXXXXX 
XX1765  
2310  16190  18500  
141  2018-19 20181528249 JASMINE 2000-02-05  F BC 150000  1421101925622  XXXXXX 
XX7250  
2310  17415  19725  
142  2018-19 20181600794 DEEPAK KUMAR  1997-01-03  M BC 150000  7348001500003177  XXXXXX 
XX6180  
2520  17480  20000  
143  2018-19 20181616926 AHMAD 
SAFDAR HABIBI 
2001-12-09  M BC 125000  3906108001248  XXXXXX 
XX1609  
1920  7080  9000  
144  2018-19 20181583745 PINKU KUMAR 
MAHTO 
2002-07-16  M BC 150000  496610110005639  XXXXXX 
XX4499  
1920  7080  9000  
145  2018-19 20181528036 SOUMYA 
KUMARI 
2002-12-31  F BC 120000  1776010134699  XXXXXX 
XX1904  
1760  7240  9000  
146  2018-19 20181532253 ANKIT KUMAR 2003-06-03  M BC 120000  1079010234306  XXXXXX 
XX4326  
1920  7080  9000  
147  2018-19 20181529747 SUDHANSHU 
KUNDU 
2001-09-02  M BC 120000  1776010135269  XXXXXX 
XX4900  
1920  7080  9000  
148  2018-19 20181540362 PAPPU KUMAR 2003-10-02  M BC 140000  1776010132589  XXXXXX 
XX1026  
1920  7080  9000  
149  2018-19 20181525860 JAYDEEP 
KUMAR 
2003-03-18  M BC 140000  492610510005978  XXXXXX 
XX2682  
1920  7080  9000  
150  2018-19 20181488728 ANUJ GUPTA 1999-08-31  M BC 110000  1776010085278  XXXXXX 
XX9389  
2520  3620  6140  
151  2018-19 20181733729 WAKIL MAHTO 1998-03-10  M BC 129000  33386197515  XXXXXX 
XX2447  
2520  3955  6475  

Appendices  
 
 103  
Sl. 
No.  
Academic 
year 
Application 
ID 
Name of 
applicant 
Date of 
birth 
Gender  Category  Family 
Income 
Bank account no. UID Total 
maintenance 
fee 
Final 
tuition 
fee 
Total 
scholarship 
paid 
152  2018-19 20181683909 HEMANT 
KUMAR 
MAHATO 
2000-03-05  M BC 125000  33925807395  XXXXXX 
XX1243  
1920  7080  9000  
153  2018-19 20181538114 SONI KUMARI 2000-02-06  F BC 120000  157901000004657  XXXXXX 
XX8490  
2310  586  2896  
154  2018-19 20181580120 NIRAJ KUMAR 2003-08-30  M BC 120000  27620110065709  XXXXXX 
XX8127  
1760  1520  3280  
155  2018-19 20181733935 NISHA KAUR 2001-05-10  F BC 150000  482218210007816  XXXXXX 
XX2332  
1680  5005  6685  
156  2018-19 20181378996 JAYPRAKASH 
YADAV 
1999-07-25  M BC 110000  449918210010634  XXXXXX 
XX0199  
2520  1150  3670  
157  2018-19 20181742041 UTTAM KUMAR 
PANDIT 
2000-08-15  M BC 105000  478510110007159  XXXXXX 
XX5485  
2520  1250  3770  
158  2018-19 20181745992 RAVI KUMAR 2003-07-27  M BC 108000  482718210011511  XXXXXX 
XX7917  
1920  3800  5720  
159  2018-19 20181501634 SAURAV 
KUMAR 
2003-05-17  M BC 122800  59041141505  XXXXXX 
XX9630  
1920  2000  3920  
160  2018-19 20181596789 SANDEEP 
KUMAR 
1998-08-29  M BC 110000  7348001500005430  XXXXXX 
XX4296  
2520  3620  6140  
161  2018-19 20181640162 JYOTI KUMARI 2000-11-30  F BC 120000  33123719409  XXXXXX 
XX8704  
2520  3620  6140  
162  2018-19 20181584091 SUMAN   
KUMARI 
2001-07-24  F BC 120000  33907002562  XXXXXX 
XX2466  
4000  2326  6326  
163  2018-19 20181517252 NIRBHAY 
KUMAR 
2002-09-11  M BC 105000  4022015967  XXXXXX 
XX8404  
1920  2000  3920  
164  2018-19 20181711610 PRIYANKA 
KUMARI 
1999-03-12  F BC 105000  590110110002473  XXXXXX 
XX9159  
2310  4480  6790  
165  2018-19 20181585463 PRIYANKA 
KUMARI 
2001-05-25  F BC 110000  1632010156073  XXXXXX 
XX0661  
2310  3765  6075  
166  2018-19 20181733112 VIJAY RANJAN 2000-06-01  M BC 120000  480918210016483  XXXXXX 
XX8002  
2520  3980  6500  
167  2018-19 20181633790 NIRPATI KUMAR 
SAHU 
1990-10-27  M BC 120000  1259104000020581  XXXXXX 
XX2026  
6120  2210  8330  
168  2018-19 20181589083 CHANDAN 
YADAV 
2000-01-03  M BC 110000  7348001700055538  XXXXXX 
XX4597  
2100  2326  4426  

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
104   
Sl. 
No.  
Academic 
year 
Application 
ID 
Name of 
applicant 
Date of 
birth 
Gender  Category  Family 
Income 
Bank account no. UID Total 
maintenance 
fee 
Final 
tuition 
fee 
Total 
scholarship 
paid 
169  2018-19 20181650463 MAYANK 
KESHRI 
2001-10-14  M BC 120000  38002648459  XXXXXX 
XX3062  
1920  800  2720  
170  2018-19 20181748648 AMIT NAGRAJ 1997-12-16  M BC 120000  490911610000046  XXXXXX 
XX3118  
2520  12480  15000  
171  2018-19 20181650325 NIHAL KUMAR 
GUPTA 
1999-10-12  M BC 150000  50396730793  XXXXXX 
XX9780  
1920  705  2625  
172  2018-19 20181586590 PRIYANKA 
KUMARI 
2001-07-22  F BC 120000  3958883520  XXXXXX 
XX7576  
2100  3767  5867  
173  2018-19 20181310471 VIKASH 
MAHATO 
1999-12-15  M BC 112000  1052010199353  XXXXXX 
XX5909  
1920  7080  9000  
174  2018-19 20181379824 KAZI SABAQUE 
ASHRAF 
1999-05-25  M BC 108000  472818210021663  XXXXXX 
XX9127  
1920  7080  9000  
175  2018-19 20181573736 LEENA PRIYA 2003-08-02  F BC 110000  472818210007652  XXXXXX 
XX6927  
1760  940  2700  
176  2018-19 20181556397 PIRYANKA 
KUMARI 
2002-04-20  F BC 125000  587810110003347  XXXXXX 
XX9826  
1920  2000  3920  
177  2018-19 20181536432 PRITY KUMARI 1997-03-10  F BC 125000  587810110004247  XXXXXX 
XX6964  
1760  2000  3760  
178  2018-19 20181592868 SANDHYA 
KUMARI 
2002-05-06  F BC 120000  587810110003362  XXXXXX 
XX5729  
1760  2000  3760  
179  2018-19 20181236254 JAGANNATH 
DEY 
2000-01-14  M BC 118000  35375390390  XXXXXX 
XX1256  
2520  1122  3642  
180  2018-19 20181369871 SWETA KUMARI  1998-05-21  F BC 102000  4899101000419  XXXXXX 
XX1648  
2520  12480  15000  
181  2018-19 20181367735 NIRAJ KUMAR 1999-02-03  M BC 120000  488710110003202  XXXXXX 
XX7474  
2520  3800  6320  
182  2018-19 20181588852 Sanjay 
Vishwakarma 
1995-12-01  M BC 109448  33588315440  XXXXXX 
XX2222  
3500  34500  38000  
183  2018-19 20181690692 MUKESH 
KUMAR 
MANDAL 
1995-02-14  M BC 105000  37111897909  XXXXXX 
XX9763  
1920  7080  9000  
184  2018-19 20181579439 ARCHANA 
KUMARI 
1998-01-20  F BC 120000  3688762942  XXXXXX 
XX7086  
2520  855  3375  
185  2018-19 20181698072 SULEKHA 
KUMARI 
2000-03-20  F BC 120000  482118210015639  XXXXXX 
XX2539  
2520  2000  4520  

Appendices  
 
 105  
Sl. 
No.  
Academic 
year 
Application 
ID 
Name of 
applicant 
Date of 
birth 
Gender  Category  Family 
Income 
Bank account no. UID Total 
maintenance 
fee 
Final 
tuition 
fee 
Total 
scholarship 
paid 
186  2018-19 20181683117 RIZWAN 
ANSARI 
2001-01-05  M BC 106000  34057628539  XXXXXX 
XX7353  
1440  2025  3465  
187  2018-19 20181739966 LAXMI KUMARI 1998-05-25  F BC 120000  38084020290  XXXXXX 
XX3573  
2680  983  3663  
188  2018-19 20181751974 ALI HUSSAIN 2000-04-02  M BC 105000  33663437179  XXXXXX 
XX0184  
1890  2000  3890  
189  2018-19 20181643484 SACHIN VERMA 2002-01-12  M BC 115000  37170224171  XXXXXX 
XX9762  
1920  2000  3920  
190  2018-19 20181540238 ASHUTOSH RAJ 2001-07-19  M BC 110000  1776010136228  XXXXXX 
XX9128  
1920  7080  9000  
191  2018-19 20181530841 BHIM MANDAL 2002-12-23  M BC 108000  477410510000651  XXXXXX 
XX3740  
1920  919  2839  
192  2018-19 20181532518 REENA 
PERWEEN 
1999-03-10  F BC 120000  1552010029768  XXXXXX 
XX3060  
2520  1150  3670  
193  2018-19 20181677269 SHIBA NAAZ 1996-01-25  F BC 120000  470110510001570  XXXXXX 
XX6438  
4020  1340  5360  
194  2018-19 20181614119 ASHISH KUMAR 1985-05-02  M BC 120000  1349104000004800  XXXXXX 
XX2456  
4020  13980  18000  
195  2018-19 20181509746 AFROJ ANSARI 1996-01-29  M BC 105000  591110110008277  XXXXXX 
XX3478  
2600  7900  10500  
196  2018-19 20181615803 ANAND KUMAR 
RANA 
2001-01-15  M BC 140000  488218210006419  XXXXXX 
XX7091  
1920  3610  5530  
197  2018-19 20181753056 DILEEP MAHTO 1999-04-21  M BC 110000  496718210001257  XXXXXX 
XX7538  
1890  1320  3210  
198  2018-19 20181745432 KESHAV DAN 2000-03-06  M BC 108000  34069871319  XXXXXX 
XX4419  
2100  2572  4672  
199  2018-19 20181603628 JAHAN AARA 1996-02-22  F BC 125000  587910110001807  XXXXXX 
XX9799  
4020  1332  5352  
200  2018-19 20181468813 SURBHI 
PARMANIK 
2002-04-21  F BC 120000  474810110009722  XXXXXX 
XX8378  
1920  920  2840  
201  2018-19 20181592489 LALIT RANJAN 
PANDIT 
1996-08-27  M BC 107448  33506977986  XXXXXX 
XX1567  
4200  33800  38000  
202  2018-19 20181753007 LAXMI KUMARI 1998-06-15  F BC 105000  32786308536  XXXXXX 
XX2133  
1890  975  2865  

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
106   
Sl. 
No.  
Academic 
year 
Application 
ID 
Name of 
applicant 
Date of 
birth 
Gender  Category  Family 
Income 
Bank account no. UID Total 
maintenance 
fee 
Final 
tuition 
fee 
Total 
scholarship 
paid 
203  2018-19 20181752898 RAJJAB KALAM 1980-01-10  M BC 120000  048901507745  XXXXXX 
XX3483  
1760  7240  9000  
204  2018-19 20181587746 SAHJAD ANSARI  2002-01-17  M BC 110000  590110510001029  XXXXXX 
XX8775  
1600  262  1862  
205  2018-19 20181557907 NIRAJ KUMAR 
GUPTA 
1998-02-14  M BC 130000  3430689792  XXXXXX 
XX1307  
4020  1734  5754  
206  2018-19 20181630414 SONI KUMARI 2003-05-25  F BC 120000  492418210003443  XXXXXX 
XX5897  
4020  4248  8268  
207  2018-19 20181571142 PRAKASH 
KUMAR 
RAWANI 
2000-01-05  M BC 105000  474810110006773  XXXXXX 
XX6490  
1920  662  2582  
208  2018-19 20181623484 PRAMILA 
KUMARI 
1994-04-19  F BC 105000  399602010008392  XXXXXX 
XX1175  
3350  2783  6133  
209  2018-19 20181620622 SHUBHAM 
GUPTA 
2001-10-14  M BC 140000  11112243390  XXXXXX 
XX6434  
1920  4780  6700  
210  2018-19 20181642040 POONAM 
KUMARI 
1989-01-05  F BC 120000  50464027557  XXXXXX 
XX0398  
3015  1332  4347  
211  2018-19 20181637829 ROCKY KUMAR 
MEHTA 
2003-09-06  M BC 120000  35829151212  XXXXXX 
XX6574  
1760  640  2400  
212  2018-19 20181638575 CHAMELI 
KUMARI 
2001-03-01  F BC 120000  35530704708  XXXXXX 
XX3805  
4000  2618  6618  
213  2018-19 20181644225 SWATI KUMARI 2002-12-11  F BC 115000  50464182671  XXXXXX 
XX4471  
1760  2233  3993  
214  2018-19 20181627803 PIYUSHKUMAR 2001-08-16  M BC 110000  644802010011367  XXXXXX 
XX6868  
2100  12900  15000  
215  2018-19 20181514293 ROHIT KUMAR 
KASHI 
1998-12-02  M BC 150000  7765001700015348  XXXXXX 
XX1295  
2520  12480  15000  
216  2018-19 20181617081 JUHI FATIMA 2003-05-01  F BC 103736  36158142745  XXXXXX 
XX1223  
1920  10080  12000  
217  2018-19 20181243806 BIKASH KUMAR 
PAL 
1999-02-10  M BC 105000  3906108000705  XXXXXX 
XX4789  
2520  17480  20000  
218  2018-19 20181607749 ANAND KUMAR 
YADAV 
2000-09-06  M BC 100500  50165032023  XXXXXX 
XX7107  
4800  12700  17500  
219  2018-19 20181580518 BABITA 
KUMARI 
2002-09-05  F BC 130000  1090001700023001  XXXXXX 
XX8461  
1920  9400  11320  

Appendices  
 
 107  
Sl. 
No.  
Academic 
year 
Application 
ID 
Name of 
applicant 
Date of 
birth 
Gender  Category  Family 
Income 
Bank account no. UID Total 
maintenance 
fee 
Final 
tuition 
fee 
Total 
scholarship 
paid 
220  2018-19 20181657413 MD BADAL 2002-03-05  M BC 110000  34237004447  XXXXXX 
XX7771  
1760  336  2096  
221  2018-19 20181282515 VIJAY PRASAD 
SHARMA 
1999-08-12  M BC 107448  481818210001472  XXXXXX 
XX3964  
4200  35800  40000  
222  2018-19 20181659037 SUDHA 2001-05-12  F BC 105000  59115591553  XXXXXX 
XX6310  
1760  1129  2889  
223  2018-19 20181660400 AVINASH 
KUMAR PANDIT 
2001-02-02  M BC 115000  33292492606  XXXXXX 
XX1896  
2520  362  2882  
224  2018-19 20181412744 NITU KUMARI 2002-05-17  F BC 130000  33076707314  XXXXXX 
XX6364  
1920  744  2664  
225  2018-19 20181743922 RUPESH KUMAR 
MANDAL 
1993-04-01  M BC 120000  32922427187  XXXXXX 
XX8055  
4020  598  4618  
226  2018-19 20181661596 ARPITA KUMARI  1999-01-28  F BC 110000  590118210002786  XXXXXX 
XX1758  
2520  6142  8662  
227  2018-19 20181651972 ROSHAN 
KUMAR SAHU 
1998-02-19  M BC 125000  3945060612  XXXXXX 
XX2741  
3350  3148  6498  
228  2018-19 20181657295 SAGAR KUMAR 1995-05-05  M BC 125000  20224664855  XXXXXX 
XX5763  
3685  3148  6833  
229  2018-19 20181597079 VIKASH VERMA 2000-05-23  M BC 106000  20396747086  XXXXXX 
XX6220  
2520  2618  5138  
230  2018-19 20181272112 SURENDRA 
YADAV 
1998-01-01  M BC 105000  0877010515122  XXXXXX 
XX4245  
2520  1885  4405  
231  2018-19 20181754298 SONAM BALA 2001-06-05  F BC 110000  33153617832  XXXXXX 
XX5081  
1920  411  2331  
232  2018-19 20181653859 SHWETA 
KUMARI 
1999-08-06  F BC 115000  32474807755  XXXXXX 
XX6609  
2520  1100  3620  
233  2018-19 20181753895 ZAHID ANSARI 2000-01-13  M BC 100500  7348001500000567  XXXXXX 
XX7781  
2520  12480  15000  
234  2018-19 20181733720 MANITA 
KUMARI 
2000-04-08  F BC 120000  33398635239  XXXXXX 
XX7013  
1890  1825  3715  
235  2018-19 20181319263 MD IRFAN 
ANSARI 
2002-02-15  M BC 120000  07631000023309  XXXXXX 
XX3138  
2520  12480  15000  
236  2018-19 20181620497 KAMAL KUMAR 1994-04-17  M BC 120000  496710510003571  XXXXXX 
XX5859  
3350  1710  5060  

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
108   
Sl. 
No.  
Academic 
year 
Application 
ID 
Name of 
applicant 
Date of 
birth 
Gender  Category  Family 
Income 
Bank account no. UID Total 
maintenance 
fee 
Final 
tuition 
fee 
Total 
scholarship 
paid 
237  2018-19 20181620999 MAMTA 
KUMARI 
1998-01-13  F BC 120000  1673010039118  XXXXXX 
XX4767  
2520  12480  15000  
238  2018-19 20181668159 AKASH KUMAR 
SAHU 
1999-08-07  M BC 120000  27620110007396  XXXXXX 
XX5056  
2100  3106  5206  
239  2018-19 20181655982 RAJESH KUMAR 
MAHTO 
1999-08-05  M BC 110500  496710110007867  XXXXXX 
XX7567  
2310  1320  3630  
240  2018-19 20181498789 VIMAL KUMAR 1994-09-10  M BC 115000  469710110008704  XXXXXX 
XX9970  
2520  4600  7120  
241  2018-19 20181652340 RAJEEV KUMAR 1994-07-20  M BC 118000  33170009990  XXXXXX 
XX7490  
1920  2650  4570  
242  2018-19 20181591321 SHAHNAWAZ 
ALAM 
1994-10-02  M BC 120000  459910110004521  XXXXXX 
XX8210  
9000  20800  29800  
243  2018-19 20181439071 MAYURI 
KUMARI 
1993-12-29  F BC 120000  28080110062135  XXXXXX 
XX1008  
4200  33800  38000  
244  2018-19 20181728713 LAXMI KUMARI 2002-12-03  F BC 102000  84014494964  XXXXXX 
XX1933  
1920  1900  3820  
245  2018-19 20181740628 ANJU KUMARI 2000-02-04  F BC 105000  482518210004891  XXXXXX 
XX5936  
1890  1331  3221  
246  2018-19 20181649559 MOHIT KUMAR 
MAHTO 
2000-02-10  M BC 120000  492710110004094  XXXXXX 
XX3088  
2520  415  2935  
247  2018-19 20181500516 RAJ KUMAR 
MAHTO 
2000-12-29  M BC 120000  33282202863  XXXXXX 
XX7365  
2100  2000  4100  
248  2018-19 20181587799 PREMANAND 
MAHTO 
1994-08-11  M BC 120000  490010110008461  XXXXXX 
XX2592  
2520  427  2947  
249  2018-19 20181649977 SUJATA 
KUMARI 
1998-03-16  F BC 120000  54238100001918  XXXXXX 
XX7302  
2520  415  2935  
250  2018-19 20181341030 VISHAL KUMAR 1999-08-10  M BC 120000  0056013271274  XXXXXX 
XX0171  
1920  2000  3920  
251  2018-19 20181259568 SONU KUMAR 
GUPTA 
1998-12-10  M BC 110000  50010100006702  XXXXXX 
XX5030  
2520  2618  5138  
252  2018-19 20181671150 NISHA RANI 2000-12-17  F BC 150000  09932191078050  XXXXXX 
XX5169  
1920  7080  9000  
253  2018-19 20181447774 KHUSHBOO 
KUMARI 
1998-01-28  F BC 115000  32220110007679  XXXXXX 
XX2565  
2520  12400  14920  

Appendices  
 
 109  
Sl. 
No.  
Academic 
year 
Application 
ID 
Name of 
applicant 
Date of 
birth 
Gender  Category  Family 
Income 
Bank account no. UID Total 
maintenance 
fee 
Final 
tuition 
fee 
Total 
scholarship 
paid 
254  2018-19 20181665398 PRAKASH 
KUMAR 
MAHATO 
1998-07-03  M BC 118000  474810110003308  XXXXXX 
XX3973  
2520  1122  3642  
255  2018-19 20181560518 SURAJ PRASAD 
VISHWAKARMA 
 
2000-03-31  M BC 116000  50214247717  XXXXXX 
XX3062  
2520  17480  20000  
256  2018-19 20181563280 PIYUSHKUMAR 2000-11-25  M BC 120000  918010091415418  XXXXXX 
XX1814  
2520  17480  20000  
257  2018-19 20181522371 BIRENDER 
YADAV 
2000-01-01  M BC 150000  156301000050953  XXXXXX 
XX6262  
2520  16190  18710  
258  2018-19 20181533340 UDAY KUMAR 
SONI 
2003-11-03  M BC 110000  1052010370936  XXXXXX 
XX9190  
3120  2150  5270  
259  2018-19 20181611812 RAJU KUMAR 
SHARMA 
2001-01-01  M BC 102000  35199045988  XXXXXX 
XX7263  
1920  430  2350  
260  2018-19 20181729770 NASRINA 
PERWEEN 
2000-02-09  F BC 110000  590118210003060  XXXXXX 
XX0612  
1920  262  2182  
261  2018-19 20181324287 SAHJADI 
KHATUN 
2001-01-12  F BC 102000  33386604066  XXXXXX 
XX1090  
1920  406  2326  
262  2018-19 20181647859 PARMANAND 
CHAUDHARY 
2000-01-18  M BC 105000  4051001500029461  XXXXXX 
XX8019  
1920  1225  3145  
263  2018-19 20181673935 GULAM ALI 
WARSI 
2000-05-24  M BC 120000  588810110002916  XXXXXX 
XX1273  
1890  2000  3890  
264  2018-19 2018908304 DIKSHA 
KUMARI 
1996-03-12  F BC 120000  34000441895  XXXXXX 
XX6658  
9000  41000  50000  
265  2018-19 20181670060 NISHA KUMARI 2002-09-07  F BC 125000  0056013392647  XXXXXX 
XX7738  
1440  2000  3440  
266  2018-19 20181714499 RAJESH KUMAR 
MAHATO 
1998-03-31  M BC 105000  592110110000251  XXXXXX 
XX8397  
2310  3980  6290  
267  2018-19 20181595174 KRISHNA SAHU 2003-08-17  M BC 120000  492418210003445  XXXXXX 
XX4625  
1920  2390  4310  
268  2018-19 20181662162 RANJEET GOPE 2002-08-17  M BC 120000  492410510006369  XXXXXX 
XX0942  
1920  1520  3440  
269  2018-19 20181664631 AKANKSHA 
PRASAD 
1996-05-21  F BC 146000  3422156800  XXXXXX 
XX4507  
4020  1332  5352  
270  2018-19 20181576693 PAWAN KUMAR 
SINGH 
1993-03-23  M BC 149184  156301000081769  XXXXXX 
XX8763  
3350  1734  5084  

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
110   
Sl. 
No.  
Academic 
year 
Application 
ID 
Name of 
applicant 
Date of 
birth 
Gender  Category  Family 
Income 
Bank account no. UID Total 
maintenance 
fee 
Final 
tuition 
fee 
Total 
scholarship 
paid 
271  2018-19 20181627644 SHIVANI 
KUMARI 
2000-04-07  F BC 120000  50439963686  XXXXXX 
XX7356  
2520  6142  8662  
272  2018-19 20181701692 KAJAL KUMARI 1999-02-07  F BC 110000  8625108058457  XXXXXX 
XX9442  
2100  2326  4426  
273  2018-19 20181347810 KHUSHBOO 
KUMARI 
2002-04-17  F BC 120000  3569293453  XXXXXX 
XX0551  
1920  1470  3390  
274  2018-19 20181561569 TANU KUMARI 2003-11-26  F BC 120000  492418210003531  XXXXXX 
XX2735  
1920  2390  4310  
275  2018-19 20181520833 SUMIT MODAK 2002-06-11  M BC 108000  470710110005718  XXXXXX 
XX4189  
2310  4600  6910  
276  2018-19 20181639624 AHMAD SANDID 
HABIBI 
2001-12-09  M BC 125000  3906108001249  XXXXXX 
XX5908  
1920  919  2839  
277  2018-19 20181321027 SHIVANI 
KUMARI 
2000-12-06  F BC 110000  00280110092699  XXXXXX 
XX7545  
1920  1870  3790  
278  2018-19 20181584543 ANNU KUMARI 2002-01-15  F BC 120000  50287609433  XXXXXX 
XX1891  
1920  1470  3390  
279  2018-19 20181751524 KAVITA 
KUMARI 
2001-09-24  F BC 123000  586310110013837  XXXXXX 
XX1770  
1890  2000  3890  
280  2018-19 20181260967 MUKUL RAJ 1999-09-05  M BC 130000  50409452011  XXXXXX 
XX9093  
1920  929  2849  
281  2018-19 20181234446 ABHIJEET 
KUMAR 
2000-01-08  M BC 109000  33350860756  XXXXXX 
XX5836  
1920  2200  4120  
282  2018-19 20181234497 BIRENDRA 
KUMAR 
2002-02-15  M BC 109000  33895855226  XXXXXX 
XX7589  
1920  2200  4120  
283  2018-19 20181679912 LAXMI RANI 2003-11-27  F BC 130000  0877010526302  XXXXXX 
XX3840  
1600  2000  3600  
284  2018-19 20181684424 DINESH 
KARMKAR 
2002-12-30  M BC 135000  473418210014883  XXXXXX 
XX2156  
1760  3090  4850  
285  2018-19 20181512534 LALIT PANDIT 2001-10-30  M BC 108000  477410510000444  XXXXXX 
XX8358  
2310  586  2896  
286  2018-19 20181552761 SATYANARAYA 
N MAHTO 
1998-12-05  M BC 110500  34780024190  XXXXXX 
XX4446  
2100  895  2995  
287  2018-19 20181686125 BABAN 
CHAUDHARY 
2000-01-08  M BC 105000  34697272796  XXXXXX 
XX1937  
1600  7400  9000  

Appendices  
 
 111  
Sl. 
No.  
Academic 
year 
Application 
ID 
Name of 
applicant 
Date of 
birth 
Gender  Category  Family 
Income 
Bank account no. UID Total 
maintenance 
fee 
Final 
tuition 
fee 
Total 
scholarship 
paid 
288  2018-19 20181620276 MD MUNSHER 
ANSARI 
2002-08-22  M BC 110000  35009912306  XXXXXX 
XX2838  
1600  349  1949  
289  2018-19 20181690317 CHANDA SAHU 1999-12-19  F BC 120000  4043001700089541  XXXXXX 
XX6229  
2100  12900  15000  
290  2018-19 20181691764 RAKESH 
RANJAN 
2004-02-16  M BC 110000  32220110021774  XXXXXX 
XX8795  
1600  262  1862  
291  2018-19 20181657277 LAKSHAMAN 
PRAJAPATI 
2000-06-09  M BC 102000  59037273435  XXXXXX 
XX9774  
2520  4480  7000  
292  2018-19 20181662845 ANKIT KUMAR 
JAISWAL 
2000-01-24  M BC 110000  84018631465  XXXXXX 
XX0616  
2520  12480  15000  
293  2018-19 20181662674 AJAY PANDIT 2000-09-13  M BC 108000  33216205670  XXXXXX 
XX5532  
2310  670  2980  
294  2018-19 20181687902 AMIT KUMAR 1998-02-01  M BC 120000  118410100041855  XXXXXX 
XX1595  
2520  1885  4405  
295  2018-19 20181537969 NASIRA 
KHATOON 
1998-11-06  F BC 110000  154401000055398  XXXXXX 
XX5129  
2100  1320  3420  
296  2018-19 20181404870 RAMESH 
KUMAR PRASAD 
 
2000-09-20  M BC 100500  7348001500013446  XXXXXX 
XX1827  
1920  430  2350  
297  2018-19 20181281115 RAVI KUMAR 1999-08-17  M BC 120000  497810110007055  XXXXXX 
XX2021  
2520  1090  3610  
298  2018-19 20181709874 ANKIT KUMAR 
GUPTA 
1998-12-10  M BC 102000  463510110003542  XXXXXX 
XX6629  
2520  479  2999  
299  2018-19 20181508129 RANI KUMARI 1999-06-23  F BC 120000  0607010162060  XXXXXX 
XX2287  
2520  1090  3610  
300  2018-19 20181663333 TOUSIF RAZA 1998-03-10  M BC 120000  588918210000785  XXXXXX 
XX5799  
2520  1090  3610  
301  2018-19 20181524942 SHIV SHANKAR 
CHOUDHARY 
2003-01-07  M BC 130000  482310510000161  XXXXXX 
XX8747  
1760  1108  2868  
302  2018-19 20181642363 ALISHA 
KUMARI 
2004-01-20  F BC 110000  7348001700067056  XXXXXX 
XX9876  
1600  275  1875  
303  2018-19 20181554066 RAHUL KUMAR 2002-04-25  M BC 110000  3471932015  XXXXXX 
XX6564  
1600  275  1875  
304  2018-19 20181595258 KAJAL KUMARI 2002-05-15  F BC 110000  590110510000587  XXXXXX 
XX8108  
1760  275  2035  

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
112   
Sl. 
No.  
Academic 
year 
Application 
ID 
Name of 
applicant 
Date of 
birth 
Gender  Category  Family 
Income 
Bank account no. UID Total 
maintenance 
fee 
Final 
tuition 
fee 
Total 
scholarship 
paid 
305  2018-19 20181679884 MUSKAN 
KUMARI 
2002-04-25  F BC 110000  50164204620  XXXXXX 
XX4272  
1920  406  2326  
306  2018-19 20181629986 SUSHMA 
KUMARI 
2000-03-22  F BC 110000  32220110043004  XXXXXX 
XX0106  
1920  2245  4165  
307  2018-19 20181721471 VIKASH KUMAR 
MAHATO 
1999-08-13  M BC 108000  5361120000708  XXXXXX 
XX9137  
1890  1400  3290  
308  2018-19 20181323521 MD SHADAB 1998-06-13  M BC 120000  487410110003152  XXXXXX 
XX5286  
2520  12480  15000  
309  2018-19 20181510846 MD TAUSHIF 
NAWAZ 
1998-12-17  M BC 120000  31270110009185  XXXXXX 
XX1338  
2520  10600  13120  
310  2018-19 20181461882 SHIVAM KUMAR  2002-04-16  M BC 115000  4901001700014038  XXXXXX 
XX1416  
1920  10080  12000  
311  2018-19 20181699138 RUPESH KUMAR 
KUSHWAHA 
1991-02-13  M BC 110000  32332573104  XXXXXX 
XX5900  
3350  3129  6479  
312  2018-19 20181660889 MANISH KUMAR  1999-02-02  M BC 110000  4901108003194  XXXXXX 
XX5224  
2520  3620  6140  
313  2018-19 20181548068 RANI KUMARI 2000-02-04  F BC 110000  35508204498  XXXXXX 
XX3188  
2100  1290  3390  
314  2018-19 20181509999 SATYENDRA 
KUMAR 
THANDAR 
2000-08-10  M BC 120000  482910110005064  XXXXXX 
XX4632  
2310  1290  3600  
315  2018-19 20181746980 INBESAT 
ANWAR 
1997-05-02  M BC 120000  4107001500006037  XXXXXX 
XX9520  
2520  2000  4520  
316  2018-19 20181506577 SUMIT KUMAR 
RAWANI 
2000-10-02  M BC 120000  20477116559  XXXXXX 
XX0090  
2520  12480  15000  
317  2018-19 20181592802 AYUSH KUMAR 1998-04-05  M BC 143316  472010110011866  XXXXXX 
XX2060  
8250  36750  45000  
318  2018-19 20181711187 NIGAR FARJANA  1997-06-05  M BC 105000  101410110004439  XXXXXX 
XX7490  
2520  10350  12870  
319  2018-19 20181423841 VISHWA 
MOHAN 
SHARMA 
1994-02-14  M BC 120000  31489201575  XXXXXX 
XX9918  
4200  20800  25000  
320  2018-19 20181422559 ABHISHEK 
KUMAR 
1998-12-15  M BC 110000  3706108000305  XXXXXX 
XX3695  
2520  2000  4520  
321  2018-19 20181236259 SHITAL KUMAR 
MAHATO 
1999-02-04  M BC 115000  592810110002013  XXXXXX 
XX2292  
2520  12480  15000  

Appendices  
 
 113  
Sl. 
No.  
Academic 
year 
Application 
ID 
Name of 
applicant 
Date of 
birth 
Gender  Category  Family 
Income 
Bank account no. UID Total 
maintenance 
fee 
Final 
tuition 
fee 
Total 
scholarship 
paid 
322  2018-19 20181711236 NAJNINA 
PARWEEN 
2002-10-16  F BC 105000  494710510006705  XXXXXX 
XX6726  
1920  10080  12000  
323  2018-19 20181638685 AMITKUMARTH 
AKUR 
2001-06-18  M BC 120000  1421108037850  XXXXXX 
XX0075  
2310  2000  4310  
324  2018-19 20181722349 CHINMAY DEY 1998-04-07  M BC 117200  84025952978  XXXXXX 
XX7911  
2520  379  2899  
325  2018-19 20181673681 DAMINI 
KUMARI 
1999-06-24  F BC 110000  50261259512  XXXXXX 
XX5378  
2520  3980  6500  
326  2018-19 20181621134 MD ARSHAD 
HUSSAIN 
1993-11-26  M BC 120000  473310400013664  XXXXXX 
XX4171  
4800  1400  6200  
327  2018-19 20181256202 SAKSHI KUMARI  2002-08-31  F BC 120000  0056013379910  XXXXXX 
XX6534  
1920  1120  3040  
328  2018-19 20181590402 CHHATHU 
CHAUDHARY 
1996-08-20  M BC 105000  4051000100235540  XXXXXX 
XX4133  
3850  34150  38000  
329  2018-19 20181398967 PRIYAKUMARI 1995-07-05  F BC 120000  30585920959  XXXXXX 
XX3428  
4200  33800  38000  
330  2018-19 20181049206 VIVEK KUMAR 1997-11-03  M BC 120000  477111610000465  XXXXXX 
XX8523  
4200  33800  38000  
331  2018-19 20181240565 VINAY KUMAR 2002-04-15  M BC 107000  34886072394  XXXXXX 
XX6592  
1920  1020  2940  
332  2018-19 20181379014 MUKESH 
KUMAR YADAV 
2000-05-07  M BC 110000  449918210005744  XXXXXX 
XX6505  
2520  1150  3670  
333  2018-19 20181507862 PRIYANKA 
MANDAL 
2002-10-29  F BC 136160  33114766529  XXXXXX 
XX3292  
1760  2145  3905  
334  2018-19 20181339265 ANJALI KUMARI  2000-01-22  F BC 120000  308159006138  XXXXXX 
XX6138  
1920  1870  3790  
335  2018-19 20181554440 ARUN KUMAR 1996-05-20  M BC 120000  3507855495  XXXXXX 
XX2069  
3685  658  4343  
336  2018-19 20181749327 MANSI KUMARI 1999-01-20  F BC 105000  35735813490  XXXXXX 
XX5359  
1760  7240  9000  
337  2018-19 20181744633 PUNAM KUMARI  1999-04-21  F BC 110000  50361933998  XXXXXX 
XX0426  
2520  629  3149  
338  2018-19 20181499673 NUNESHWAR 
PANDIT 
1997-11-18  M BC 110000  50300353204  XXXXXX 
XX6662  
2520  641  3161  

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
114   
Sl. 
No.  
Academic 
year 
Application 
ID 
Name of 
applicant 
Date of 
birth 
Gender  Category  Family 
Income 
Bank account no. UID Total 
maintenance 
fee 
Final 
tuition 
fee 
Total 
scholarship 
paid 
339  2018-19 20181570832 PANKAJ KUMAR  1997-01-20  M BC 120000  446110110002031  XXXXXX 
XX9506  
3685  658  4343  
340  2018-19 20181664401 SURAJ KUMAR 1995-12-14  M BC 120000  3538136531  XXXXXX 
XX9749  
4020  658  4678  
341  2018-19 20181562590 NIRANJAN 
KUMAR YADAV 
2001-02-07  M BC 120000  190010100015355  XXXXXX 
XX1168  
2310  670  2980  
342  2018-19 20181590067 MENKA 
KUMARI 
2000-02-06  F BC 120000  157901000004658  XXXXXX 
XX3409  
1890  670  2560  
343  2018-19 20181581722 MOHANI 
KUMARI 
2001-07-13  F BC 110000  33764961733  XXXXXX 
XX3814  
1920  1020  2940  
344  2018-19 20181675098 AJIT KUMAR 2002-02-15  M BC 120000  163602101000070  XXXXXX 
XX9791  
1920  1020  2940  
345  2018-19 20181519274 HIMANSHU 
KUMAR 
2001-07-13  M BC 125000  33673642041  XXXXXX 
XX7868  
1920  1020  2940  
346  2018-19 20181743223 RANJAN KUMAR 
YADAV 
2000-04-20  M BC 110000  449918210005743  XXXXXX 
XX6451  
2520  1050  3570  
347  2018-19 20181728347 PINKI  KUMARI 2002-03-31  F BC 109448  33156987731  XXXXXX 
XX4580  
1760  1770  3530  
348  2018-19 20181727900 ARATI KUMARI 2001-04-15  F BC 120000  843401111000441  XXXXXX 
XX4322  
1760  1770  3530  
349  2018-19 20181731370 DOLI MANDAL 2001-03-30  F BC 120000  843401111000012  XXXXXX 
XX0022  
1920  1820  3740  
350  2018-19 20181494534 RISHI ROSHAN 2002-11-20  M BC 115256  35942759252  XXXXXX 
XX8886  
1920  3850  5770  
351  2018-19 20181390067 AMIT KUMAR 
MAHTO 
1995-10-15  M BC 105000  587318210004818  XXXXXX 
XX3313  
1920  7080  9000  
352  2018-19 20181379299 AHMAD RAZA 1999-05-14  M BC 125000  35261018987  XXXXXX 
XX7389  
2520  12480  15000  
353  2018-19 20181753317 ISHA DEOL 
MAHATO 
1997-09-04  F BC 120000  592210110002299  XXXXXX 
XX2316  
1600  3560  5160  
354  2018-19 20181661658 KAJAL KUMARI 2001-04-15  F BC 107448  37851402732  XXXXXX 
XX1520  
1920  1164  3084  
355  2018-19 20181362591 RAKESH 
KUMAR 
1999-12-08  M BC 110000  7348001500006138  XXXXXX 
XX6022  
2520  3620  6140  

Appendices  
 
 115  
Sl. 
No.  
Academic 
year 
Application 
ID 
Name of 
applicant 
Date of 
birth 
Gender  Category  Family 
Income 
Bank account no. UID Total 
maintenance 
fee 
Final 
tuition 
fee 
Total 
scholarship 
paid 
356  2018-19 20181701644 KHUSHBOO 
RANI KUMARI 
2000-01-06  F BC 110000  4935000100000642  XXXXXX 
XX9902  
1890  1320  3210  
357  2018-19 20181509818 SWATI RANI 2000-05-05  F BC 102000  4899108003023  XXXXXX 
XX2403  
2310  1320  3630  
358  2018-19 20181545909 MANOJ KUMAR 
SAHU 
1998-11-04  M BC 105000  154401000055397  XXXXXX 
XX7743  
2100  1320  3420  
359  2018-19 20181737505 RADHIKA 
KUMARI 
1993-08-31  F BC 105000  3357902570  XXXXXX 
XX7742  
2520  1320  3840  
360  2018-19 20181611745 BIBHA KUMARI 2001-02-27  F BC 110000  105310410000901  XXXXXX 
XX5849  
2100  1320  3420  
361  2018-19 20181571544 JUBERYA 
PARWEEN 
2000-01-31  F BC 110000  50163420574  XXXXXX 
XX9837  
2100  1320  3420  
362  2018-19 20181664816 ANJUKUMARI 1999-12-10  F BC 110000  493510510006531  XXXXXX 
XX0798  
2100  1320  3420  
363  2018-19 20181539985 PRIYANKA 
KUMARI 
1999-08-18  F BC 110000  496710110009553  XXXXXX 
XX3263  
2100  1320  3420  
364  2018-19 20181737278 SAHINA 
KHATOON 
1998-11-24  F BC 110000  496710110006224  XXXXXX 
XX9966  
2520  1320  3840  
365  2018-19 20181542554 RAHUL KUMAR 1998-06-15  M BC 110000  494210110002084  XXXXXX 
XX2638  
2100  1320  3420  
366  2018-19 20181742301 HEMANT SAHU 1998-03-25  M BC 110000  493010510007917  XXXXXX 
XX9492  
2520  1320  3840  
367  2018-19 20181745813 KARAN GOPE 1995-02-06  M BC 110000  34818325474  XXXXXX 
XX4050  
2520  1320  3840  
368  2018-19 20181748678 DEEPAK SAHU 1994-03-04  M BC 110000  493010510007916  XXXXXX 
XX3903  
2520  1320  3840  
369  2018-19 20181682193 VIJAY SAY 1998-08-25  M BC 110500  457210510003161  XXXXXX 
XX4081  
2100  1320  3420  
370  2018-19 20181506909 ABHISHEK 
KUMAR 
1999-10-08  M BC 118000  06480110105085  XXXXXX 
XX1667  
2310  1320  3630  
371  2018-19 20181655800 SURUCHI 
KUMARI 
2000-10-01  F BC 120000  493018210006445  XXXXXX 
XX6466  
2100  1320  3420  
372  2018-19 20181531340 AATISH 
PRAJAPATI 
1999-05-08  M BC 120000  6498244367  XXXXXX 
XX7428  
2310  1320  3630  

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
116   
Sl. 
No.  
Academic 
year 
Application 
ID 
Name of 
applicant 
Date of 
birth 
Gender  Category  Family 
Income 
Bank account no. UID Total 
maintenance 
fee 
Final 
tuition 
fee 
Total 
scholarship 
paid 
373  2018-19 20181530777 NEHA KUMARI 1999-02-26  F BC 120000  50161778020  XXXXXX 
XX4356  
2310  1320  3630  
374  2018-19 20181735414 MINU KUMARI 1998-05-10  F BC 120000  491310510001344  XXXXXX 
XX6725  
2520  1320  3840  
375  2018-19 20181535156 ARJUN SAHU 2001-04-20  M BC 110000  154401000055243  XXXXXX 
XX4737  
2100  1503  3603  
376  2018-19 20181737518 ROSHNI 
KUMARI 
1996-03-14  F BC 110000  615610110000299  XXXXXX 
XX8277  
2520  1503  4023  
377  2018-19 20181588079 SURESH  
KANSARI 
1998-02-16  M BC 120000  0608010232623  XXXXXX 
XX9397  
2100  1503  3603  
378  2018-19 20181741940 DEEPAK KUMAR 
PANDIT 
2002-07-13  M BC 105000  478510110008796  XXXXXX 
XX7736  
1760  1330  3090  
379  2018-19 20181633835 ANIMA KUMARI 1995-12-07  F BC 120000  20390055545  XXXXXX 
XX5770  
4020  2210  6230  
380  2018-19 20181695255 RAJESH KUMAR 
THAKUR 
1986-01-01  M BC 120000  07852151021044  XXXXXX 
XX0213  
4200  33800  38000  
381  2018-19 20181674643 KAMESHWAR 
SAHU 
1993-12-13  M BC 120000  596602010008189  XXXXXX 
XX7786  
3850  34150  38000  
382  2018-19 20181624404 SAJEED ANSARI 1996-05-05  M BC 110000  50080027639  XXXXXX 
XX1414  
3350  14650  18000  
383  2018-19 20181610513 MANOJ SAHU 2001-01-01  M BC 105000  37186280810  XXXXXX 
XX0565  
1920  3025  4945  
384  2018-19 20181392285 NIKKE KUMARI 1996-12-10  F BC 120000  486010510000537  XXXXXX 
XX3472  
1920  1200  3120  
385  2018-19 20181232556 ASHOK KUMAR 
RAY 
1999-05-12  M BC 145000  498318210002179  XXXXXX 
XX9090  
1920  5000  6920  
386  2018-19 20181503119 SIKANDAR 
KUMAR SAW 
2002-03-26  M BC 110000  486018210000496  XXXXXX 
XX3676  
1920  2000  3920  
387  2018-19 20181633494 SUJEET KUMAR 2002-04-08  M BC 105000  37973150230  XXXXXX 
XX6326  
1760  5000  6760  
388  2018-19 20181745883 AMIT KUMAR 2002-12-28  M BC 115000  586310110020652  XXXXXX 
XX7803  
1920  5000  6920  
389  2018-19 20181745859 PRAVEEN 
KUMAR 
2002-07-15  M BC 125000  586318210005266  XXXXXX 
XX1580  
1760  5000  6760  

Appendices  
 
 117  
Sl. 
No.  
Academic 
year 
Application 
ID 
Name of 
applicant 
Date of 
birth 
Gender  Category  Family 
Income 
Bank account no. UID Total 
maintenance 
fee 
Final 
tuition 
fee 
Total 
scholarship 
paid 
390  2018-19 20181739511 BHUPESH 
KUMAR SINGH 
1998-01-23  M BC 120000  0561011027697  XXXXXX 
XX8654  
2520  1100  3620  
391  2018-19 20181476272 SANJU KUMARI 2002-03-05  F BC 120000  34057629917  XXXXXX 
XX4891  
1920  2900  4820  
392  2018-19 20181472080 AMAR PRASAD 
GUPTA 
1998-06-10  M BC 100005  917010067519422  XXXXXX 
XX9990  
1920  7080  9000  
393  2018-19 20181740578 JAYRAM MEHTA  1993-11-10  M BC 105000  31949138769  XXXXXX 
XX2086  
1820  8680  10500  
394  2018-19 20181754738 PUJA KUMARI 
KUSHWAHA 
2001-01-18  F BC 107448  202610100080155  XXXXXX 
XX1652  
2100  1250  3350  
395  2018-19 20181739841 RAJKISHOR 
VERMA 
2000-01-12  M BC 150000  6634001500010251  XXXXXX 
XX8131  
2100  1250  3350  
396  2018-19 20181701575 SOURAV 
KUMAR PANDIT 
1995-07-01  M BC 120000  34446228619  XXXXXX 
XX4210  
1890  5500  7390  
397  2018-19 20181428821 PAPPU KUMAR 1993-04-08  M BC 110000  20399126292  XXXXXX 
XX8661  
1920  7080  9000  
398  2018-19 20181740905 WASIM AKRAM 2001-07-01  M BC 110000  34779737309  XXXXXX 
XX5798  
1920  838  2758  
399  2018-19 20181744269 KUMARI JUHI 
PRIYA 
2000-11-08  F BC 118400  591010110007483  XXXXXX 
XX2264  
1470  1149  2619  
400  2018-19 20181754830 RIMJHIM 
KUMARI 
1997-01-12  F BC 102000  591010110005800  XXXXXX 
XX6521  
2520  1449  3969  
401  2018-19 20181646888 SUBHASH RAY 2002-06-25  M BC 102000  592418210002657  XXXXXX 
XX0154  
1760  1900  3660  
402  2018-19 20181676025 MD JAWED 
AKHTAR 
2002-06-05  M BC 102000  35227597000  XXXXXX 
XX3115  
1920  2200  4120  
403  2018-19 20181583337 RITU KUMARI 2000-08-02  F BC 102000  591010110005066  XXXXXX 
XX5045  
2520  3850  6370  
404  2018-19 20181498077 MANISH KUMAR  2003-04-10  M BC 105000  34310707764  XXXXXX 
XX3860  
1920  965  2885  
405  2018-19 20181452231 MD SAFRAJ 
ANSARI 
1998-04-08  M BC 110000  496710510004002  XXXXXX 
XX2758  
2520  1320  3840  
406  2018-19 2018808824 PRIYANKA 
KUMARI 
1999-04-10  F BC 110000  493010510012710  XXXXXX 
XX0888  
2520  1320  3840  

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
118   
Sl. 
No.  
Academic 
year 
Application 
ID 
Name of 
applicant 
Date of 
birth 
Gender  Category  Family 
Income 
Bank account no. UID Total 
maintenance 
fee 
Final 
tuition 
fee 
Total 
scholarship 
paid 
407  2018-19 20181526327 KAJAL KUMARI 1999-02-15  F BC 125000  493010510003443  XXXXXX 
XX1865  
3350  2210  5560  
408  2018-19 20181590941 SARIKA 
KUMARI 
1995-02-25  F BC 105000  3194525774  XXXXXX 
XX9799  
4020  2210  6230  
409  2018-19 20181577739 DIVYA KUMARI 2003-09-15  F BC 110000  493010510018336  XXXXXX 
XX4529  
1920  2530  4450  
410  2018-19 20181743169 AFREEN EJAJ 1999-06-17  M BC 120000  11222308247  XXXXXX 
XX7105  
2520  3295  5815  
411  2018-19 20181456651 ANJANI KUMARI  2001-03-17  F BC 105000  50018100011494  XXXXXX 
XX2214  
1920  2580  4500  
412  2018-19 20181638955 SHUBHAM 
KUMAR 
2001-08-21  M BC 120000  1776010095099  XXXXXX 
XX1596  
2520  17480  20000  
413  2018-19 20181363733 MD TOUFEEQUE 
ALAM 
2002-06-18  M BC 107448  593210110001068  XXXXXX 
XX0810  
1920  336  2256  
414  2018-19 20181393447 ABDUL NAIYAR 
SHEIKH 
1992-04-02  M BC 105000  33686423443  XXXXXX 
XX5379  
4020  503  4523  
415  2018-19 20181593799 MD TARIQUE 
ALAM 
2002-10-03  M BC 115000  34821993479  XXXXXX 
XX4806  
1920  102  2022  
416  2018-19 20181737194 ROKAYA BINTE 
HAQUE 
2001-11-01  F BC 115000  34656883996  XXXXXX 
XX5979  
1920  102  2022  
417  2018-19 20181566703 RUPA KUMARI 2002-10-12  F BC 102000  34290423282  XXXXXX 
XX1786  
1760  193  1953  
418  2018-19 20181520930 SONAM KUMARI  2000-12-19  F BC 120000  59027927415  XXXXXX 
XX0489  
2520  194  2714  
419  2018-19 20181549619 ANMOL ALOK 1996-12-01  M BC 105000  592010110003629  XXXXXX 
XX6507  
3350  503  3853  
420  2018-19 20181666814 TARANNUM 
PARVIN 
2000-04-15  F BC 110000  36468029114  XXXXXX 
XX2813  
2310  214  2524  
421  2018-19 20181665191 SAGAR 
MALAKAR 
2002-01-29  M BC 120000  20092121003514  XXXXXX 
XX4553  
1920  1325  3245  
422  2018-19 20181753500 PRIYANSHU 
KUMAR 
SHARMA 
1999-07-12  M BC 120000  307110100004720  XXXXXX 
XX5938  
2450  35550  38000  
423  2018-19 20181733822 ANU KUMARI 2002-08-20  F BC 110000  489018210008364  XXXXXX 
XX6930  
1600  3590  5190  

Appendices  
 
 119  
Sl. 
No.  
Academic 
year 
Application 
ID 
Name of 
applicant 
Date of 
birth 
Gender  Category  Family 
Income 
Bank account no. UID Total 
maintenance 
fee 
Final 
tuition 
fee 
Total 
scholarship 
paid 
424  2018-19 20181660756 JITENDRA  
KUMAR SEN 
1997-12-17  M BC 110000  0744010145152  XXXXXX 
XX6800  
2520  2400  4920  
425  2018-19 20181701089 ROSHANI 
KUMARI 
2001-04-24  F BC 110000  34718140000  XXXXXX 
XX7934  
2100  2822  4922  
426  2018-19 20181514760 RIMA KUMARI 2000-04-12  F BC 107500  15080110026199  XXXXXX 
XX5092  
4800  4600  9400  
427  2018-19 20181522712 SOURABH 
KUMAR 
MAHATO 
2001-04-21  M BC 108000  5361108002118  XXXXXX 
XX8219  
2520  4600  7120  
428  2018-19 20181741208 IMRAN AHMAD 1980-07-18  M BC 125000  20057144040  XXXXXX 
XX4723  
4200  33800  38000  
429  2018-19 20181687806 VIKASH SAW 1992-04-02  M BC 125000  32898745080  XXXXXX 
XX2279  
1760  2000  3760  
430  2018-19 20181735676 RINKI KUMARI 1997-08-16  F BC 120000  481310510000006  XXXXXX 
XX4243  
2680  2000  4680  
431  2018-19 20181717180 NAZNEEN NAAZ  1990-10-28  F BC 120000  21897085657  XXXXXX 
XX1615  
1760  2000  3760  
432  2018-19 20181458199 MD TAZEEM 
ANSARI 
1995-08-18  M BC 120000  841001111000708  XXXXXX 
XX1500  
4020  2264  6284  
433  2018-19 20181726352 FARHAT JAHAN 2003-07-14  F BC 120000  486610110004381  XXXXXX 
XX9029  
1920  1800  3720  
434  2018-19 20181297833 SONU YADAV 2002-11-26  M BC 110000  478318210003180  XXXXXX 
XX2127  
1920  2000  3920  
435  2018-19 20181271580 KAUSAR AFRIN 1998-02-02  F BC 120000  68010252043  XXXXXX 
XX7886  
4020  1203  5223  
436  2018-19 20181405260 CHANDAN 
KUMAR 
1994-06-04  M BC 120000  497818210003728  XXXXXX 
XX0912  
4020  2264  6284  
437  2018-19 20181752021 MD SHAMS 
TABREZ ALAM 
2001-11-25  M BC 101000  476418210007881  XXXXXX 
XX3251  
2520  2000  4520  
438  2018-19 20181624977 AJIT KUMAR 2002-09-19  M BC 105000  482518210036110  XXXXXX 
XX6824  
1920  2000  3920  
439  2018-19 20181274152 PRATIMA 
KUMARI 
1998-07-21  F BC 120000  0877010449236  XXXXXX 
XX0456  
2520  1885  4405  
440  2018-19 20181743932 SANJAY KUMAR 
GUPTA 
1997-10-31  M BC 115000  478910110001365  XXXXXX 
XX9278  
2345  2000  4345  

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
120   
Sl. 
No.  
Academic 
year 
Application 
ID 
Name of 
applicant 
Date of 
birth 
Gender  Category  Family 
Income 
Bank account no. UID Total 
maintenance 
fee 
Final 
tuition 
fee 
Total 
scholarship 
paid 
441  2018-19 20181752265 SUDHANSHU 
KUMAR 
1999-12-31  M BC 120000  481010110010358  XXXXXX 
XX3455  
2520  2000  4520  
442  2018-19 20181637064 SUBHASH 
KUMAR 
2002-05-15  M BC 120000  36220967764  XXXXXX 
XX4379  
1920  2000  3920  
443  2018-19 20181737525 ANURADHA 
KUMARI 
1999-09-17  F BC 120000  589310110003132  XXXXXX 
XX5875  
2520  1885  4405  
444  2018-19 20181747230 ALABA 
HUSSAIN 
1999-10-17  F BC 120000  4107001500006046  XXXXXX 
XX2675  
2520  2000  4520  
445  2018-19 20181609458 DULAL KUMAR 
MANDAL 
1997-04-07  M BC 120000  474810110002809  XXXXXX 
XX3345  
4020  1340  5360  
446  2018-19 20181743773 VIKASH KUMAR 
YADAV 
1998-07-03  M BC 120000  482610110012992  XXXXXX 
XX9853  
2520  798  3318  
447  2018-19 20181750482 RAJESH KUMAR 1991-02-18  M BC 130000  645602010001158  XXXXXX 
XX9736  
2520  798  3318  
448  2018-19 20181576898 CHANCHAL 
YADAV 
2000-02-08  M BC 120000  3357046131  XXXXXX 
XX6739  
2100  998  3098  
449  2018-19 20181607921 SHIVANI GUPTA 2002-01-24  F BC 120000  483418210008862  XXXXXX 
XX6944  
1920  2400  4320  
450  2018-19 20181434429 KULDEEP 
KUMAR YADAV 
1997-06-12  M BC 120000  6438098449  XXXXXX 
XX2852  
2520  1885  4405  
451  2018-19 20181245746 MANJAY 
KUMAR MAHTO 
1998-10-15  M BC 140000  118410100041280  XXXXXX 
XX4405  
2520  2000  4520  
452  2018-19 20181377908 ROHIT KUMAR 1999-02-10  M BC 110000  3706101000272  XXXXXX 
XX8193  
2520  2000  4520  
453  2018-19 20181232000 SUMIT KUMAR 
THAKUR 
1999-11-18  M BC 120000  1421108036517  XXXXXX 
XX7448  
2520  2000  4520  
454  2018-19 20181277782 PAWAN KUMAR 1999-07-05  M BC 120000  37116581548  XXXXXX 
XX4753  
2520  2000  4520  
455  2018-19 20181311219 RUPA KUMARI 1997-09-13  F BC 120000  37113551855  XXXXXX 
XX7138  
2520  2000  4520  
456  2018-19 20181473213 FIROZ ANSARI 2001-05-15  M BC 120000  399602010709931  XXXXXX 
XX8388  
1920  2000  3920  
457  2018-19 20181261926 PREM PRAKASH 
MAHTO 
2002-02-10  M BC 130000  6635001500023786  XXXXXX 
XX6158  
1920  2000  3920  

Appendices  
 
 121  
Sl. 
No.  
Academic 
year 
Application 
ID 
Name of 
applicant 
Date of 
birth 
Gender  Category  Family 
Income 
Bank account no. UID Total 
maintenance 
fee 
Final 
tuition 
fee 
Total 
scholarship 
paid 
458  2018-19 20181742110 SAPNA KUMARI 2002-05-13  F BC 115000  33175853658  XXXXXX 
XX1494  
1920  411  2331  
459  2018-19 20181741050 ALISHA 
KUMARI 
1997-05-25  F BC 120000  498010110001918  XXXXXX 
XX6315  
2520  1880  4400  
460  2018-19 20181511681 SUJEET KUMAR 2000-07-04  M BC 120000  481010110018710  XXXXXX 
XX2952  
2100  1885  3985  
461  2018-19 20181744601 BASANT 
KUMAR MAHTO 
1998-12-22  M BC 110000  35306770123  XXXXXX 
XX4594  
2520  2000  4520  
462  2018-19 20181492276 RAJNI GUPTA 1998-08-16  F BC 120000  3363168299  XXXXXX 
XX2313  
2520  2000  4520  
463  2018-19 20181539301 SWETA KUMARI  2002-03-26  F BC 102960  587610110004120  XXXXXX 
XX5058  
1600  2000  3600  
464  2018-19 20181742589 SUMIT KUMAR 2003-11-06  M BC 105000  54778100003640  XXXXXX 
XX0501  
1120  2000  3120  
465  2018-19 20181732787 NARAYAN 
SAHU 
1998-04-12  M BC 120000  29230100023050  XXXXXX 
XX0643  
2520  2000  4520  
466  2018-19 20181736412 DEEPTI KUMARI  1997-05-12  F BC 150000  3521414351  XXXXXX 
XX4515  
2520  2000  4520  
467  2018-19 20181751080 AVINASH 
KUMAR 
1999-12-25  M BC 140000  481310110014619  XXXXXX 
XX6916  
1680  2000  3680  
468  2018-19 20181502328 KRITI PRABHO 2003-01-30  M BC 120000  04331000012592  XXXXXX 
XX3403  
1760  2000  3760  
469  2018-19 20181555084 MD KALAM 
UDDIN 
2001-06-04  M BC 120000  587810110003201  XXXXXX 
XX2665  
1760  2000  3760  
470  2018-19 20181701564 AMAN KUMAR 2003-03-23  M BC 105000  401510110001538  XXXXXX 
XX0553  
1920  2000  3920  
471  2018-19 20181542663 SUMAN KUMAR 2000-12-21  M BC 111000  59121218549  XXXXXX 
XX8507  
1440  2000  3440  
472  2018-19 20181498718 JUHI KUMARI 2004-02-08  F BC 140000  3960712094  XXXXXX 
XX6664  
1920  2000  3920  
473  2018-19 20181284830 SUMIT KUMAR 
MAHATO 
1997-11-05  M BC 120000  0986101024171  XXXXXX 
XX7275  
2520  1572  4092  
474  2018-19 20181577039 SWEETY 
KUMARI 
2002-08-01  F BC 105000  587410110001821  XXXXXX 
XX9872  
1920  920  2840  

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
122   
Sl. 
No.  
Academic 
year 
Application 
ID 
Name of 
applicant 
Date of 
birth 
Gender  Category  Family 
Income 
Bank account no. UID Total 
maintenance 
fee 
Final 
tuition 
fee 
Total 
scholarship 
paid 
475  2018-19 20181739662 JANARDAN 
MAHATO 
1996-08-15  M BC 120000  587510510000501  XXXXXX 
XX2384  
4020  1120  5140  
476  2018-19 20181577983 SHALINI 
KUMARI 
2002-06-10  F BC 105000  587410110001819  XXXXXX 
XX9289  
1920  1375  3295  
477  2018-19 20181724317 RAJKUMAR 
YADAV 
1999-04-14  M BC 114448  488510110007068  XXXXXX 
XX6910  
2520  1572  4092  
478  2018-19 20181499790 SAURAV 
KUMAR PAUL 
2003-04-24  M BC 110880  477218210001884  XXXXXX 
XX5327  
1920  2010  3930  
           Total  3633268  
 
 
 
 

Appendices  
 
 123 
Appendix-3.8 
(Referred to paragraph 3.8.2; page 30) 
Disbursement of Post Matric scholarships to  BC  category beneficiaries whose parental income were more 
than the prescribed limit  
District Nos. of beneficiary Nos. of institutes Amount of scholarship 
(₹ in lakh) 
Palamu 03 02 0.09 
Chatra 06 03 0.28 
Ranchi 14 06 0.99 
Godda 12 06 0.55 
Hazaribag 17 05 1.03 
Total  52 22 2.94 
Appendix-3.9 
(Referred to paragraph 3.8.3; page 32) 
Excess payment of Post Matric scholarships  
District Nos. of beneficiary Nos. of institutes Amount of scholarship 
(₹ in lakh) 
Palamu 12 01 0.36 
Hazaribag 06 01 0.24 
Godda 135 01 4.06 
East Singhbhum 10 03 0.27 
Ranchi 32 05 0.81 
Total  195 11 5.74 
 
  

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
124  
Appendix-3.10 
(Referred to paragraph 3.8.4; page 34) 
Payment of Post Matric scholarship by non-approved/blacklisted institutes 
District Name of Institute Number of 
beneficiary 
Blacklisted/ Debarred 
by District level 
committee 
Scholarship    
(₹ in lakh) 
East Singhbhum Mehar Private ITI 04 2018-19 0.48 
Jamshedpur Private 
ITI 
76 2020-21 6.84 
Chatra R N M College, 
Hunterganj 
81 2018-19 6.33 
Satyanand Bhokta 
Inter College, Unta 
19 2018-19 1.13 
 Total 180  14.78 
Appendix-3.11 
(Referred to paragraph 3.8.5; page 34) 
Disbursement of scholarship to the beneficiaries for same class in subsequent year/passed out 
beneficiaries 
District Pre/Post Nos. of beneficiary Nos. of institutes Amount of scholarship 
(₹ in lakh) 
Palamu Pre 09 03 0.11 
Chatra Pre 02 01 0.03 
Hazaribag Pre 55 01 0.83 
Ranchi Pre 10 04 0.08 
Post 02 01 0.18 
Godda Pre 19 02 0.43 
East Singhbhum Pre 24 04 0.35 
Total  121 16 2.01 
 
 
 

Appendices  
 
 125 
Appendix-4.1 
(Referred to paragraph 4.7; page 44) 
List of selected Pre & Post minority Schools/Institutes  
Name of 
District 
Sl. No.  Name of school Pre/Post Schools/ 
Institutes 
Chatra 1.   AL Humd Public School, Khap Pre 
2.   Kids Kingdom Pre 
3.   BMP School, Unta More Pre 
East Singhbhum 4.   Kerala Public School, Mango Pre 
5.   Venus Public School, Mango Pre 
6.   Amar Jyoti Public School, Pardih Pre 
7.   Al Safa English School, Jugsalai Pre 
8.   B.D.S.L.  Mahila College, Ghatshila Post 
9.   RNS Institute of Technology Private ITI, Parsudih Post 
10.   Jamshedpur Private ITI, Mango Post 
11.   IDEAL Private ITI, Mango Post 
Godda 12.   Government High School, Bhatkhoriya Pre 
13.   SRT College, Godda   Post 
14.   SBS/SPS Inter College, Pathargama Post 
15.   Madarsa  Hussania Tajweedul Quran Dighi Pre 
16.   High School, Nayanagar Pre 
17.   St. Joseph High School, Damruhat Pre 
18.   Government High School, Lukluki Pre 
Hazaribag 19.   C.M. Adarsh High School, Ichak Pre 
20.   Mahadul Quasim Islampur, Bishnugarh Pre 
21.   Qasmi Memorial Public School, Islampur, Bishnugarh  Pre 
Palamu 22.   Rajkiyakrita Plus 2 Giriwar High School, Medininag ar Pre 
23.   Urdu Girls High School, Medininagar Pre 
24.   Madarsa Sajdiya, Kajaru kala Pre 
25.   Talent Public School, Medininagar Pre 
Ranchi 26.   Model School, Burmu Pre 
27.   Model School, Bero Pre 
28.   Doranda College, Doranda Post 
29.   St. Annes Intermediate College, Mandar  Post 
30.   Marwari College (Boys), Ranchi Post 
 
 
  

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
126  
Appendix-4.2 
(Referred to paragraph 4.8.1; page 46) 
Disbursement of scholarship to Ghost/fake beneficiaries  
Name of 
District 
Name of school/ 
institute 
No. of fictitious 
beneficiary 
Amount of 
Scholarship 
disbursement 
Period Pre/Post 
school 
Godda Godda College, 
Godda 
01 8,700.00 2018-19 Post 
Hazaribagh Qasmi Memorial 
Public School, 
Islampur 
13 1,00,380.00 2017-20 Pre 
Annada College 02 15,300.00 2018-19 Post 
Ranchi Doranda College 04 27,638.00 2018-20 Post 
 Total 20 1,52,018.00   
 
 
 
 
 
  

Appendices  
 
 127 
Appendix-4.3 
(Referred to paragraph 4.8.2; page 46) 
Disbursement of scholarships to fake beneficiaries without involvement of schools/institutes: 
Name of 
District 
Name of school/institute No. of ghost 
beneficiaries 
Amount of 
Scholarship 
disbursement 
Year Pre/Post 
schools 
Chatra BMP School Unta More 13  1,33,900  2017-18 Pre 
Al Humd Public School, 
Khap 
99 
 9,41,600  2017-18 Pre 
East Singhbhum  Kerala Public School, 
Mango 
57 
 5,62,550  2017-18 Pre 
Venus Public School, 
Mango  
31 
 3,26,700  2017-18 Pre 
AL SAFA School, Jugsalai  42  3,95,060  2017-19 Pre 
B.D.S.L Mahila College, 
Ghatshila 
732 
 51,67,190  2017-18 Post 
RNS Institute of 
Technology Private ITI,  
316 
 24,17,860  2017-20 Post 
Jamshedpur Private ITI, 
Mango 
41 
 2,93,590  2017-18 Post 
IDEAL Private ITI, 
Mango 
11 
 1,35,300  2017-19 Post 
Godda Government High School, 
Bhatkhoriya 
01  5,420  2018-19 Pre 
SRT College, Godda 77  6,42,853  2017-18 Post 
SBS College, Pathargama 02  15,400  2017-18 Post 
Ranchi Model School, Bero 40  4,23,000  2017-19 Pre 
Model School, Burmu 20  2,14,000  2018-20 Pre 
 Total  1,482  1,16,74,423    
 
  

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
128  
Appendix-5.1 
(Referred to paragraph 5.4; page 54) 
Essential documents required to be attached with applications under various schemes : 
Pension 
Schemes Documents required to be  attached with application 
IGNOAPS Voter ID, Aadhar , Bank Account 
IGNWPS Voter ID, Aadhar , Bank Account, Death Certificate of Husband, Family member certificate 
IGNDPS Voter ID, Aadhar , Disability Certificate, Bank Account 
NFBS Voter ID, Aadhar , Death Certificate, Bank Account 
MMSOAPY Voter ID, Aadhar , Bank Account 
MMRVSPY Voter ID, Aadhar , Bank Account 
SVNSPY Voter ID, Aadhar , Disability Certificate, Bank Account 
MMRAJJPY Voter ID, Aadhar , Caste certificate, Bank Account 
Appendix-5.2 
(Referred to paragraph 5.5.2; page 56) 
Fund allotted and spent under Central and State pension schemes 
(₹ in lakh)  
Name of 
District Scheme Allotment Expenditure Savings Savings in 
Percentage 
Chatra Central schemes 19329.32  18497.38  831.94  4.30 
State schemes 10690.58  9936.92  753.66  7.05 
East Singhbhum  Central schemes 27127.83  26445.08  682.75  2.52 
State schemes 14328.9  13916.48  412.42  2.88 
Hazaribag Central schemes 28482.51  27665.37  817.14  2.87 
State schemes 12755.4  12172.7  582.7  4.57 
Godda Central schemes 28552.61  27707.83  844.78  2.96 
State schemes 12921.21  12359.28  561.93  4.35 
Palamu Central schemes 42370.85  39243.17  3127.68  7.38 
State schemes 22038.53  20623.88  1414.65  6.42 
Ranchi Central schemes 29441.88  27620.41  1821.47  6.19 
State schemes 22736.70  22178.98  557.72  2.45 
(Source: Directorate, Social Security) 
 
  

Appendices  
 
 129 
Appendix-5.3A 
(Referred to paragraph 5.6; page 56) 
List of selected Blocks 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of District 
sampled 
Name of Bolcks sampled Name of Gram Panchayat sampled 
1. Chatra Chatra Sadar Darha and Dariyatu 
Hunterganj Jabra and Kataiya 
2. East Singhbhum Golmuri cum Jugsalai Barabanki an d Luabasa 
Potka Gowalkanta and Hathibinda 
3. Godda Godda Sadar Pachrukhi and Gaychand 
Poraiyahat Lathibari and Dhenukatta  
4. Hazaribag Hazaribag Sadar Nagawan and Chutiaro 
Ichak Dumraon and Barka Khurd 
5. Palamu Medininagar Chiyanki and Redma South 
Chainpur Narsinghpur Pathra and Shahpur North 
6. Ranchi Bero Hariharpur Jamtoli and Ghaghra 
Kanke Ichapirhi and Pithoria 
 
 
            
  

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
130  
Appendix-5.3B  
(Referred to paragraph 5.6; page 56) 
Major audit observations noticed from data analysis of NSAP  
  In State In Test-Checked Districts 
Major audit findings  Pension 
schemes  
No. of 
beneficiaries 
involved  
Amount 
involved 
in Cr. 
(2020-21)  
No. of 
beneficiaries 
involved  
Amount 
involved in 
Cr.  
(2020-21)  
Payment of pensions to 
ineligible (under prescribed age) 
beneficiaries 
IGNOAPS 306296  320.11 101625  105.03  
IGNDPS 1341  1.43 281  0.28  
IGNWPS 36638  39.27 8330  8.78  
RVSPY 116  0.12 38  0.04  
SVNSPY 364  0.46 03  0.03  
Total  344755  361.39  110277  114.16  
Payment of disability pensions 
with remarks in Disability 
column in data base as “NO” 
SVNSPY 77356  76.24 25536  20.88  
IGNDPS 71  0.07 21  0.02  
Total  77427  76.31  25557  20.90  
Payment of widow pensions 
with remarks in Widow column 
in data base as “NO” 
IGNWPS 2127  2.35 415  0.55  
RVSPY 161098  169.56 52214  55.26  
Total  163225  171.91  52629  55.81  
Delay in sanction of pension 
applications (beyond prescribed 
60 days)  
AJJPY 1136  --  136  --  
IGNDPS 659  --  201  --  
IGNOAPS 25413  --  7866  --  
IGNWPS 3515  --  688  --  
RVSPY 8262  --  2398  --  
SSSOAPS 14177  --  7182  --  
SVNSPY 10542  --  1619  --  
NFBS 2170  --  341  --  
Total  65874  --  20431  --  
Beneficiary claiming more than 
one pension under NSAP 
Schemes (same Applicant 
Name, Father/Husband Name, 
Bank Account, IFSC Code with 
multiple application number) 
-- 155 
beneficiaries 
getting 
pensions from 
311 
Applications 
ID 
0.32 --  --  
 
  

Appendices  
 
 131 
Appendix-5.4A 
(Referred to paragraph 5.10 (i); page 59) 
Delay in sanction/approval of pension applications from date of application 
Sl. 
No.  
Name of 
district 
Name of 
test-
checked 
Block 
Nos. of 
application 
sanctioned 
with delay 
Period of 
application  
Period  
of 
sanction  
Delay 
beyond 60 
days (in 
days) 
Schemes name with nos. 
of applications 
1 East 
Singhbhum 
Potka 20  2017-21  2018-21 17-422 IGNOAPS (14), AJJPY 
(03), RVSPY (03) 
Golmuri-
cum-
Jugsalai 
39 
 2015-20 2017-21 34-724 SSSOPS(19), RVSPY 
(04), IGNOAPS (15), 
IGNWPS (01) 
2 Hazaribag Hazaribag 
Sadar 
22  2018-21 2019-22 10-488 IGNOAPS (01), IGNDPS 
(01), IGNWPS (01), 
NFBS (05), RVSPY (06), 
SSSOAPS (08) 
Ichak 47  2016-22 2017-22 08-553 & 
1399 (01 
application)  
IGNOAPS (03), 
IGNWPS (03), 
RVSPY (07),  
SSSOAPS (34) 
3 Ranchi Bero 01  2018-19 2019-20 252 IGNOAPS 
Kanke 114  2020-21 2020-22 04-300 SSSOPS 
  Total  243      
 
  

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
132  
Appendix-5.4B 
(Referred to paragraph 5.10 (i); page 59) 
Delay in sanction/approval of pension applications from the date of recommendation 
Sl. 
No.  
Name of 
district 
Name of 
test-checked 
Block/Circle  
Nos. of 
application  
Period of 
recommendations  
Period of 
sanction  
Delay 
beyond 
60 days 
(in 
days) 
Schemes name 
with nos. of 
applications 
1. Chatra 
Chatra Sadar 136  2020-21 2020-22 13-454 
SSOAPS (95), 
RVSPY (06), 
IGNOAPS (35) 
Hunterganj 43  2020-22 2020-22 02-443 
IGNOAPS(23) 
RVSPY (08) 
SSSOAPS (10) 
SVNSPY (02) 
2. East 
Singhbhum Potka 13 
 2017-21 2018-21 15-119 
AJJPY 2 
IGNOAPS-7 
RVSPY-1 
SSOAPS-2 
SVNSPY-1 
3. Godda Godda Sadar 159  2016-21 2017-22 4-449 
IGNOAPS-129 
IGNDPS-1 
RVSPY-17 
SSOAPS-12 
4. Palamu Medininagar 23  2019-21 2020-21 7-259 SSOAPS 
Chainpur 27  2020-21 2020-22 04-184 SSOAPS 
5. Ranchi Bero 172  2016-21 2019-21 74 -864  IGNOAPS(94) 
SSOAPS(78) 
  Total  573      
 
  

Appendices  
 
 133 
Appendix-5.5 
(Referred to paragraph 5.10 (ii); page 60) 
Pension applications which were sanctioned but not uploaded in the NSAP portal 
Name of 
district 
GP Name  SL 
No. 
Date of 
application 
Date of 
approval 
Delay in 
approval 
(in days) 
Name of 
Beneficiary  
Name of 
Father/Husband  
Age  
Chatra Dariyatu 1 20-03-2020 02-12-2020 197 Sugiya Devi Indradev Dangi 69 
Dariyatu 2 20-03-2020 02-12-2020 197 Shanti Devi Rameshwar 
Yadav 62 
Dariyatu 3 20-03-2020 02-12-2020 197 Jaynandan 
Dangi 
Late Somar 
Mahto 66 
Dariyatu 4 20-03-2020 02-12-2020 197 Hulsi Devi Ram avtar Dangi 61 
Dariyatu 5 31-07-2020 02-12-2020 64 Soniya Devi Nageshwar 
Mahto 63 
Dariyatu 6 20-03-2020 02-12-2020 197 Nanku Dangi  Late Jivlal Dangi 65 
Dariyatu 7 18-03-2020 02-12-2020 197 Kailash Ram  Girdhari Ram 62 
Dariyatu 8 20-03-2020 02-12-2020 197 Shiv Ram Buttu  Ram 64 
Dariyatu 9 14-09-2020 02-12-2020 19 Rajkumar 
Ram  Kesho Ram 72 
Dariyatu 10 14-09-2020 02-12-2020 19 Indri Devi Bij ay Dangi 77 
Dariyatu 11 14-09-2020 02-12-2020 19 Nagina Ram Dha nukhi Ram 62 
Dariyatu 12 14-09-2020 02-12-2020 19 Shankar 
Yadav Late Eto Yadav 63 
Dariyatu 13 31-07-2020 02-12-2020 64 Hevanti Devi  Prayag Mahto 66 
Dariyatu 14 14-09-2020 02-12-2020 19 Prayag 
Mahto Late Loki Mahto 64 
Dariyatu 15 31-07-2020 02-12-2020 64 Indradev 
Mahto Late Luta Mahto 61 
Dariyatu 16 31-07-2020 02-12-2020 64 Tapeshwar 
Dangi Late Tejo Mahto 62 
Dariyatu 17 31-07-2020 02-12-2020 64 Bhuneshwar 
Mahto 
Late Meghu 
Mahto 67 
Dariyatu 18 18-03-2020 02-12-2020 199 Daso 
Bhuiyan 
Late Bhavani 
Bhuiyan 66 
Darha 19 29-09-2020 15-03-2021 107 Sabita Devi Dham a Bhuiyan 65 
Darha 20 29-09-2020 15-03-2021 107 Badri 
Bhuiyan Suraj Bhuiyan 66 
Darha 21 16-11-2020 15-03-2021 59 Nando 
Ganjhu 
Late Nageshwar 
Ganjhu 68 
Darha 22 29-09-2020 15-03-2021 107 Nimiyan 
Devi Jagdev Ganjhu 77 
Darha 23 30-09-2020 15-03-2021 106 Mutari Devi Puna  Ganjhu 63 
Darha 24 16-11-2020 15-03-2021 59 Urmila Devi Badhu  Ganjhu 68 
 

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
134  
Appendix-5.6 
(Referred to paragraph 5.11; page 61) 
Photograph and Application of Male beneficiaries under widow pension 
  
  
 
 


Appendices  
 
 135 
Appendix-5.7 
(Referred to paragraph 5.12; page 62) 
Payment of more than one pension to a beneficiaries 
Sl. 
No. 
Application No. Applicant 
Name 
Father's/ 
Husband Name  
Age/ 
Gender  
Scheme Pension 
effective 
date 
Last 
Pension 
Month 
Pension 
Amount 
1 JH-A-01654979 SUMITRA  
DEVI LAXMAN SAH 
75 / F IGNOAPS 26-02-2018  Apr-22 44800  
2 JH-A-01654983 SUMITRA  
DEVI LAXMAN SAH 
75 / F IGNOAPS 26-02-2018  Apr-22 44800  
3 
JH-A-01511251 
MOSOMAT 
SUMITRA 
DEVI 
LATE LAKSMAN 
SAAH 
75 / F RVSPY 30-09-2016  Aug-22 -  
4 JH-A-01660338 HOPONMAY  
MURMU 
PECHA 
HEMBRAM 
54 / F RVSPY 01-01-2018  Aug-22 46000  
5 JH-A-01684862 HOPONMAY  
MURMU 
PECHA 
HEMBRAM 
54 / F IGNWPS 01-12-2017  Jul-22  
6 JH-A-02934467 KALRA 
MURMU JOHAN SOREN 
62 / F SSSOAPS 01-03-2022  Aug-22 6000  
7 JH-A-02780568 KALRA 
MURMU JOHAN SOREN 
52 / F RVSPY 01-02-2022  Aug-22  
8 JH-A-00552397 KAMAL 
PANDIT MOTI PANDIT 
74 / M IGNOAPS 01-08-2015  Aug-22 67400  
9 JH-A-01294283 KAMAL 
PANDIT MOTI PANDIT 
70 / M SSSOAPS 16-08-2014  Aug-22  
10 JH-A-02933998 ABIJAN BIBI JALEEL ANSARI 74 / F SSSOAPS 01-03-2022  Aug-22 6000  
11 JH-A-02457842 ABIJAN BIBI JALIL ANSARI 65 / F SSSOAPS 01-07-2021  Aug-22  
12 JH-A-02934791 BADNI DEVI JIYALAL KAR 59 / F SSSOAPS 01-03-2022  Aug-22 6000  
13 JH-A-02714473 BADNI DEVI JIYA LAL KAR 59 / F SSSOAPS 01-01-2022  Aug-22  
14 JH-A-02935016 BIBI PRAISAN  RUSTAM ALI 65 / F SSSOAPS 01-03-2022  Aug-22 6000  
15 JH-A-02675516 BIBI PRAISAN  RUSTAM ALI 65 / F SSSOAPS 01-01-2022  Aug-22  
16 JH-A-01954051 BIBICHAN 
MURMU 
CHHOTKA 
MURMU 
25 / F RVSPY 01-07-2019  Aug-22 38000  
17 JH-A-01903871 BIBICHN 
MURMU 
CHOTKA 
MURMU 
26 / M IGNDPS 01-02-2019  Aug-22  
18 JH-A-02903862 DEVLI DEVI ANDU MAHTO 59 / F RVSPY 01-02-2022  Aug-22 7000  
19 JH-A-02873775 DEVLI DEVI ANDU MAHTO 59 / F SSSOAPS 01-02-2022  Jul-22  
20 JH-A-02934994 DHANESHWA 
RI NAGO RAY 
61 / F SSSOAPS 01-03-2022  Aug-22 6000  
21 JH-A-01978268 DHANESHWA 
RI NAGO RAY 
61 / F IGNWPS 01-08-2019  Aug-22  
22 JH-A-02938189 DUGAN 
YADAV JOGU YADAV 
62 / M IGNOAPS 01-03-2022  Aug-22 6000  
23 JH-A-02482356 DUGAN 
YADAV JOGU YADAV 
63 / M SSSOAPS 01-08-2021  Aug-22  
24 JH-A-00528780 DULARI 
MARANDI RASAKA TUDU 
79 / F IGNOAPS 21-07-2014  Aug-22  
25 JH-A-02851991 DULARI 
MARANDI RASKA TUDU 
74 / F SSSOAPS 01-02-2022  Aug-22 7000  
26 JH-A-02747495 GUNADHAR 
MAHTO KISTO MAHTO 
66 / M SSSOAPS 01-02-2022  Aug-22 7000  
27 JH-A-02217330 GUNADHAR 
MAHTO KISTO MAHTO 
68 / M IGNOAPS 01-11-2020  Apr-22  
28 JH-A-02934583 KOSHILA 
DEVI 
BARSA 
PAHADIYA 
53 / F RVSPY 01-03-2022  Aug-22 6000  
29 JH-A-02648376 KOSHILA 
DEVI 
BARSA 
PAHARIYA 
54 / F RVSPY 01-01-2022  Aug-22  
30 JH-A-02938192 LAKHIRAM 
MARANDI 
DEWAN 
MARANDI 
74 / M SSSOAPS 01-03-2022  Aug-22 6000  
31 JH-A-02485704 LAKHIRAM 
MARANDI 
DEVAN 
MARANDI 
75 / M SSSOAPS 01-08-2021  Aug-22  
32 JH-A-02933602 LALCHAND 
YADAV HUBAL YADAV 
62 / M SSSOAPS 01-03-2022  Jul-22 5000  
33 JH-A-02830609 LALCHAND 
YADAV HUBAL YADAV 
61 / M SSSOAPS 01-02-2022  Aug-22  
       Total 3,15,000  
 
 
 

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
136   
Appendix-6.1 
(Referred to in paragraph 6.12.2 (1st  Bullet); page 74) 
Applications in which difference between year-of-birth and year-of-admission is ten (10) years or less 
Sl. 
No. 
Academic 
year 
Application 
ID 
Name of 
Applicant Father's Name Gender Category Date of 
Birth 
Admission  
no. 
Admission 
date 
Bank Account 
No. 
UID 
  
Total 
maintenance 
fee 
Final 
Tuition 
fee 
Difference 
in year 
1 2017-18 20171459377  RAJESH BEDIYA AKLU BEDIYA M ST 04-11-2017 939 04-08-2017  710104000097802  XXXXXXX 
X6745  2530  6470  0 
2 2017-18 2017965834 RAKHI KUMARI BADRI PRASAD 
SAHU 
F BC 20-11-2017 7398 26-08-2016  35711567462  XXXXXXX 
X9419  1920  2894  -1 
3 2019-20 20191831419  KAILASH MAHTO JIBADHAN MAHTO M BC 02-01-2019 2475 05-10-2016  491110610002365  XXXXXXX 
X8636  2520  415  -3 
4 2019-20 20191518054  MD SAJID ANSARI MD KHURSHID 
ALAM ANSARI 
M BC 16-08-2019 948 22-06-2018  37807257946  XXXXXXX 
X5604  4200  33800  -1 
5 2019-20 20191782730  SONU MODI MANOJ MODI M BC 23-01-2019 93384 12-07-2019  50326883697  XXXXXXX 
X4666  2520  3756  0 
6 2019-20 20191819499  BHUSHAN TIRKEY KULDEEP TIRKEY M ST 19-08-2003 98 21-06-2009  493310510007503  XXXXXXX 
X9547  4560  10440  6 
7 2017-18 20171406515  AVINASH PAUL 
BARLA 
THOMAS PRADEEP 
BARLA 
M ST 06-01-2017 1049 09-10-2017  499310110008385  XXXXXXX 
X9151  2700  2290  0 
8 2018-19 20181727338  SRISHTI NIDHI 
DANGWAR JIREN DANGWAR 
F ST 29-05-2015 Btech/ 03-08-2018  1670110079768  XXXXXXX 
X5659  13200  36800  3 10551/18 
9 2017-18 20171442468  VIKASH  KUMAR JAYNANDAN 
MAHTO 
M BC 21-09-2017 1554 21-07-2017  156301000053794  XXXXXXX 
X4281  2310  14160  0 
10 2017-18 20171227278  GAUTAM  KUMAR RAMDEV PRASAD M BC 07-10-2017 126 12-07-2017  29620110029022  XXXXXXX 
X1128  1920  10080  0 
11 2017-18 20171296696  JAGBIR SAHU PRAMESHWAR 
SAHU 
M BC 02-01-2017 7598 29-06-2017  746010445382  XXXXXXX 
X0885  1920  3215  0 
12 2017-18 20171299071  SHUBHAM KUMAR 
MAHTO DEBU MAHATO 
M BC 07-03-5618 107 08-07-2017  470818210002434  XXXXXXX 
X8575  4800  12700  -3601  
13 2017-18 20171070562  AJIT KUMAR 
MAHTO 
DURGA CHARAN 
MAHTO 
M BC 01-07-2005 15ME131 19-09-2015  469910110002210  XXXXXXX 
X7441  2520  17480  10  
14 2017-18 2017849006 ROHIT GARI RAVI GARI M ST 20-07-2015 370 22-07-2016  3971518743  XXXXXXX 
X5597  3600  3375  1 
15 2017-18 20171462383  SIDDHIKUMARI NANDKUMARSAHU F BC 17-12-2002 171 17-12-2012  492910110010599  XXXXXXX 
X4312  1920  704  10  
16 2019-20 20191775288  LAXMAN MUNDA MAHU MUNDA M ST 27-01-2001 1303 10-07-2009  35518403714  XXXXXXX 
X6585  2760  2450  8 
17 2019-20 20191931060  PUNAM KUMARI GANESH PRASAD 
BHAGAT 
F BC 05-01-1999 1343 03-07-2009  31856103150  XXXXXXX 
X5018  2520  756  10  
18 2017-18 20171399001  CHANCHALA 
KUMARI GOBIND PRAJAPATI 
 F BC 27-11-2002 22186 11-07-2011  481118210008790  XXXXXXX 
X6541  1920  1015  9 
19 2017-18 20171449000  SONU KUMAR 
SAHU RAM BREET SAHU 
M BC 16-01-1999 27502 22-08-2009  494510110014293  XXXXXXX 
X8241  2520  3375  10  
20 2017-18 20171442090  SEEMA KUMARI PRADEEP SAW F BC 26-06-2013 72 30-07-2017  591010110002362  XXXXXXX 
X0108  2310  2025  4 

Appendices  
 
 137  
Sl. 
No. 
Academic 
year 
Application 
ID 
Name of 
Applicant Father's Name Gender Category Date of 
Birth 
Admission  
no. 
Admission 
date 
Bank Account 
No. 
UID 
  
Total 
maintenance 
fee 
Final 
Tuition 
fee 
Difference 
in year 
21 2017-18 20171417485  DILIP KUMAR 
KISKU BODINATH KISKU 
M ST 10-07-2016 080MECH 30-07-2016  474210110009321  XXXXXXX 
X3955  14400  7525  0 
22 2017-18 20171364887  VIJAY KUMAR 
MAHTO 
NAGESHWAR 
MAHTO 
M BC 10-12-2017 855 26-08-2017  591810110000381  XXXXXXX 
X9987  2520  3460  0 
23 2017-18 20171386276  RAJAUL ANSARI ZAKIR MIYA M BC 29-03-2002 7658 11-08-2012  34407907118  XXXXXXX 
X1631  1920  724  10  
24 2017-18 20171484356  VIJAY KUMAR UMESH MAHTO M BC 01-10-2015 403/2017 31-10-2017  317001000005850  XXXXXXX 
X4281  1680  1295  2 
25 2019-20 20191829978  PANKAJ KUMAR MANTU PRSAD 
SINGH 
M BC 25-10-2019 40 24-06-2019  33385332013  XXXXXXX 
X6158  1440  7080  0 
26 2019-20 20191997715  AKRAM ANSARI KAMALUDDIN 
ANSARI 
M BC 06-03-2001 14 23-09-2009  74772200022250  XXXXXXX 
X4188  1920  7080  8 
27 2019-20 20191901740  SACHIN MANDAL NIRESH MANDAL M BC 15-09-2000 191 03-08-2009  34462117987  XXXXXXX 
X0362  1920  7080  9 
28 2017-18 2017976055 SHASHI LINDA SOMRA ORAON F ST 13-06-2016 4251 08-07-2016  156301000051053  XXXXXXX 
X7943  3600  7920  0 
29 2017-18 20171429273  LUKHIMUNI 
SOREN DASHRATH SOREN 
F ST 05-03-2002 7613 08-08-2012  6729001500004022  XXXXXXX 
X2790  2760  724  10  
30 2017-18 2017884455 RAUNAQ TIRKEY NEMHAS TIRKEY M ST 08-03-2017 1506133 18-08-2015  499210110000362  XXXXXXX 
X7508  6600  31400  -2 
31 2017-18 20171137174  JAGDISH MAHTO SHYAMLAL MAHTO  M BC 14-01-2018 1401205 09-09-2014  596110110001912  XXXXXXX 
X2002  4200  33800  -4 
32 2018-19 2018976055 SHASHI LINDA SOMRA ORAON F ST 13-06-2016 4251 08-07-2016  156301000051053  XXXXXXX 
X7943  3600  10620  0 
33 2018-19 20181566686  PINKEY KUJUR FRANSIS XAVIER 
KUJUR 
F ST 17-10-2001 20 16-08-2010  1673010114349  XXXXXXX 
X3208  4560  7100  9 
34 2017-18 20171411208  PARWATI KUMARI INDAR MANJHI F ST 11-11-2017 91 16-09-2016  50167285675  XXXXXXX 
X7328  2760  2235  -1 
35 2019-20 20191850844  AAFREEN 
KHATOON MOHMMAD ALAM 
F BC 25-09-1999 54572 21-09-2009  481310110009442  XXXXXXX 
X7146  2520  2000  10  
36 2019-20 20191774826  RAKESH KUMAR SARYU MAHTO M BC 01-12-2003 315 01-06-2009  488610510003336  XXXXXXX 
X1447  1920  693  6 
37 2019-20 20191851879  GULNAAZ BANO MD AKHTAR ALI F BC 22-02-2019 91 03-09-2019  482210510001393  XXXXXXX 
X2100  2520  4800  0 
38 2019-20 20191878736  ROJID ANSARI RASID ANSARI M BC 01-01-2002 545 09-07-2009  15181000003403  XXXXXXX 
X0561  2520  17480  7 
39 2019-20 20191406515  AVINASH PAUL 
BARLA 
THOMAS PRADEEP 
BARLA 
M ST 06-01-2017 1049 09-10-2017  499310110008385  XXXXXXX 
X9151  3600  2020  0 
40 2019-20 20191767853  MADHU KUMARI PARSHU RAM 
MAHTO 
F BC 28-01-2002 635212 
9018 06-07-2009  3222011941  XXXXXXX 
X4979  2520  4450  7 
41 2019-20 20191880274  ROUSHAN KUMAR 
SAHU 
LT DHANESHWAR 
SAHU 
M BC 15-05-2019 402 17-02-2018  494710510005505  XXXXXXX 
X9671  2520  11250  -1 
42 2019-20 20191780384  SATISH EKKA RAMA EKKA M ST 04-09-2000 104 16-06-2009  38734084022  XXXXXXX 
X6757  2760  6240  9 

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
138   
Sl. 
No. 
Academic 
year 
Application 
ID 
Name of 
Applicant Father's Name Gender Category Date of 
Birth 
Admission  
no. 
Admission 
date 
Bank Account 
No. 
UID 
  
Total 
maintenance 
fee 
Final 
Tuition 
fee 
Difference 
in year 
43 2019-20 20191883153  ANUP KUMAR YUVRAJ SAHU M SC 05-02-2015 13 20-07-2018  38788100007238  XXXXXXX 
X0004  2760  611  3 
44 2019-20 20192009638  SUJIT KUMAR SAW  PRAKASH SAW M BC 01-01-2002 354 23-07-2009  35324617904  XXXXXXX 
X7584  1920  789  7 
45 2019-20 20191892424  SHITAL KUMARI JITWAHAN MAHTO F BC 12-10-2002 185 05-07-2009  495210610000023  XXXXXXX 
X3789  1920  2450  7 
46 2019-20 20191893549  RISHI KUMAR NAGESHWAR 
YADAV 
M BC 04-03-2001 5945 01-07-2009  596310510000348  XXXXXXX 
X8188  2520  5500  8 
47 2019-20 20191953546  MILENI BASKEY LAKHAN BASKEY F ST 09-05-2000 295 10-09-2009  2730108006577  XXXXXXX 
X3850  3600  15200  9 
48 2019-20 20191763031  PUJA KUMARI BHUBNESHWAR 
SAW 
F BC 15-10-2019 99 05-08-2019  481510110011896  XXXXXXX 
X4252  4200  12100  0 
49 2019-20 20191904279  NISHA KUMARI 
SAW BARELAL SAW 
F BC 14-08-2003 294 25-06-2009  594810510005622  XXXXXXX 
X2508  1920  2480  6 
50 2019-20 20191822881  HEENA KHATOON SAMRUDDIN 
ANSARI 
F BC 12-07-2019 165 31-07-2019  1052010156165  XXXXXXX 
X4380  1760  939  0 
51 2019-20 20191904808  MILI KUMARI KALI ORAON F ST 24-01-2000 62820 24-10-2009  407010763981  XXXXXXX 
X1501  3600  3580  9 
52 2019-20 20191853701  YASHODA 
KUMARI KUNWAR MAHTO 
F BC 28-10-2019 3872 10-07-2019  482118210017987  XXXXXXX 
X5083  1920  2000  0 
53 2019-20 20191549815  RAJKISHOR 
BARAIK 
SHAMBHULAL 
BARAIK 
M ST 18-09-2019 113 10-08-2018  37964728746  XXXXXXX 
X5997  3600  2020  -1 
54 2019-20 20191831764  KUSUM KUMARI SURESH KUMAR F BC 05-08-2003 42 19-06-2009  482118210025765  XXXXXXX 
X7810  1920  869  6 
55 2019-20 20191811944  PRADEEP KUMAR KASHI MAHTO M BC 24-11-2019 53390 14-08-2019  597010110006093  XXXXXXX 
X9160  2310  2000  0 
56 2019-20 20191914851  SOMI RASHID ABDUL RASHID F BC 21-07-2019 19 08-08-2017  1629010037952  XXXXXXX 
X5342  2520  12480  -2 
57 2019-20 20191819164  SUREN ORAON DHANESHWAR 
ORAON 
M ST 26-01-2019 755 15-07-2019  469510110006019  XXXXXXX 
X4529  3600  3520  0 
58 2019-20 20191914355  AKASH KUMAR AJAY PANDIT M BC 01-10-2019 319 24-06-2019  34467283767  XXXXXXX 
X9692  1920  2800  0 
59 2019-20 20191928658  MUSKAN KUMARI SANTOSH YADAV F BC 08-09-2019 7 02-07-2019  32815257013  XXXXXXX 
X1279  1920  925  0 
60 2019-20 20191940072  DIPALEE GOPE GHASIRAM GOPE F BC 04-10-1999 13611 07-07-2009  451710110007414  XXXXXXX 
X1049  2520  1572  10  
61 2019-20 20191814817  SHAILENDRA 
DUNGDUNG 
LATE WENSESLAS 
DUNGDUNG 
M ST 22-11-2019 127 01-07-2019  1776010148719  XXXXXXX 
X6611  3600  16300  0 
62 2019-20 20191937231  BALRAM MANDAL  DAYAL MAMDAL M BC 09-08-2019 11987 12-07-2019  38550126344  XXXXXXX 
X5984  2520  657  0 
63 2019-20 20191939039  PINKU KUMAR 
MAHTO KESHAV MAHTO 
M BC 01-01-2001 16096 19-07-2009  35993260684  XXXXXXX 
X0884  1920  954  8 
64 2019-20 20191828493  JUNAID ANSARI KHURSHID ANSARI M BC 17-03-2000 27674 29-07-2009  589510110001992  XXXXXXX 
X6354  2520  12100  9 

Appendices  
 
 139  
Sl. 
No. 
Academic 
year 
Application 
ID 
Name of 
Applicant Father's Name Gender Category Date of 
Birth 
Admission  
no. 
Admission 
date 
Bank Account 
No. 
UID 
  
Total 
maintenance 
fee 
Final 
Tuition 
fee 
Difference 
in year 
65 2019-20 20191950535  KARISHMA 
KUMARI SHIVCHARAN SAHU 
 F BC 05-12-2002 2243 25-07-2009  491810110008924  XXXXXXX 
X8121  2520  2580  7 
66 2019-20 20191516297  SHANI RANJAN 
PASWAN BINDA PASWAN 
M SC 05-12-2019 014D 31-07-2018  471810510004948  XXXXXXX 
X3455  6600  12312  -1 
67 2019-20 20191963457  VISHWAJIT  
MANDAL BADAL MANDAL 
M BC 26-01-2001 8804 06-07-2009  34976101280  XXXXXXX 
X8816  1890  569  8 
68 2019-20 20191784981  AMBIKA KUMARI BIR KUMAR 
GAUNJHU 
F BC 28-04-2001 20 08-07-2009  6730000100045813  XXXXXXX 
X6398  2520  4450  8 
69 2019-20 20191970796  DURGA KUMAR BINOD GANJHU M SC 03-02-2000 23 16-09-2009  34255532329  XXXXXXX 
X0678  2760  604  9 
70 2019-20 20191826257  RIYA KUMARI RAMESH PANDIT F BC 24-10-2003 7 16-07-2009  449918210000543  XXXXXXX 
X7648  1920  100  6 
71 2019-20 20191968845  RUKSHAR 
PARWEEN 
MD ALTAF 
HUSSAIN 
F BC 05-09-2001 125 05-07-2009  33310857639  XXXXXXX 
X5385  2520  1050  8 
72 2019-20 20191941870  RUPMANI MURMU MASI MURMU F ST 13-03-1999 4926 15-07-2009  33662115936  XXXXXXX 
X0703  2700  349  10  
73 2019-20 20191767573  ANMOL LATA ASHOK RAM F SC 07-02-2002 3 19-06-2009  9932413000611  XXXXXXX 
X0708  6600  13900  7 
74 2019-20 20191982678  TASAWWOR 
ANSARI SALIM ANSARI 
M BC 01-01-2001 51 07-07-2009  494610510003575  XXXXXXX 
X9633  2520  12100  8 
75 2019-20 20192005567  NEHA KUMARI BAIJNATH RAM F SC 03-02-2002 355 08-07-2009  50495525487  XXXXXXX 
X4782  3600  780  7 
76 2019-20 20191984604  MD NIJAMUL 
ANSARI 
ABDUL ANSARI 
MIYA 
M BC 05-05-2000 238 07-07-2009  478318210002503  XXXXXXX 
X9397  2520  4550  9 
77 2019-20 20191925743  SONY KUMARI BHUNESWAR 
MANDAL 
F BC 28-10-2019 3767 16-09-2019  257201000674  XXXXXXX 
X2220  3350  2000  0 
78 2019-20 20191776950  URMILA KUMARI SANJAY SAW F BC 18-04-2002 743 04-07-2010  2651001500027861  XXXXXXX 
X1799  1920  2800  8 
79 2019-20 20191842602  SOURAV MAHATO BUDHESWAR 
MAHATO 
M BC 21-09-2019 40 14-08-2019  300301000000694  XXXXXXX 
X1962  4400  5720  0 
80 2019-20 20191932238  GANGADHAR 
MAHATO 
SHIVCHARAN 
MAHATO 
M BC 03-09-2019 TPIJ/18/25 
9 27-06-2018  594810110001518  XXXXXXX 
X2774  1920  7080  -1 
81 2019-20 20191993319  NILESH KUMAR FANI BHUSHAN 
KUMBHKAR 
M BC 05-01-2001 
DPL2-
1921010 
20021 
15-08-2009  587518210001213  XXXXXXX 
X9541  2520  12480  8 
82 2019-20 20191900525  ROHIT DAS BINOD DAS M SC 29-10-2019 2706 02-07-2019  35026269317  XXXXXXX 
X3393  3600  646  0 
83 2019-20 20191832658  PRITI JOSPHINE 
TIRKEY SANJAY TIRKEY 
F ST 01-11-2001 59 01-08-2009  404001500057297  XXXXXXX 
X0828  14400  10600  8 
84 2019-20 20191776215  RINKI KUMARI NAVAL KISHOR 
YADAV 
F BC 15-04-2003 300 19-07-2009  35109391082  XXXXXXX 
X1855  1920  574  6 
85 2019-20 20191764737  USHA RANI 
TIRKEY SURESH LOHRA 
F ST 21-03-2009 54 29-05-2019  479310510000903  XXXXXXX 
X6616  2760  2561  10  

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
140   
Sl. 
No. 
Academic 
year 
Application 
ID 
Name of 
Applicant Father's Name Gender Category Date of 
Birth 
Admission  
no. 
Admission 
date 
Bank Account 
No. 
UID 
  
Total 
maintenance 
fee 
Final 
Tuition 
fee 
Difference 
in year 
86 2019-20 20192002559  SADIYA PARWEEN ABDUL RAUF F BC 28-02-2003 242 29-06-2010  473410510003275  XXXXXXX 
X5001  1920  3850  7 
87 2019-20 20191973697  ANUJ KUMAR NARAYAN PRASAD 
MEHTA 
M BC 21-02-2002 1062 12-06-2009  33250110004708  XXXXXXX 
X9545  1920  2000  7 
88 2019-20 20191888103  MAINO MURMU ARJUN MURMU F ST 01-05-2003 3155 27-06-2009  453610110007298  XXXXXXX 
X4262  2760  354  6 
89 2019-20 20191785399  RAVILAL MAHTO ASHESHWAR 
MAHTO 
M BC 20-03-2004 861 10-07-2009  50361288256  XXXXXXX 
X3259  1920  2415  5 
90 2019-20 20191417485  DILIP KUMAR 
KISKU BODINATH KISKU 
M ST 10-07-2016 080MECH 30-07-2016  474210110009321  XXXXXXX 
X3955  14400  12312  0 
91 2019-20 20191927384  GUNJAN KUMAR 
PANDIT HALDHAR PANDIT 
M BC 05-05-2002 851 08-07-2009  50466636078  XXXXXXX 
X6635  2520  5500  7 
92 2019-20 20191807576  DIKSHA KUMARI VIJAY PRASAD F BC 02-04-2004 332 18-07-2009  34336977084  XXXXXXX 
X9115  1920  929  5 
93 2018-19 20181442468  VIKASH KUMAR JAYNANDAN 
MAHTO 
M BC 21-09-2017 1554 21-07-2017  585410110008572  XXXXXXX 
X4281  2520  14310  0 
94 2019-20 20191928344  ADARSH KUMAR 
GAUTAM MANOJ KUMAR 
M SC 19-12-2003 666 26-07-2013  33470274721  XXXXXXX 
X8588  2760  890  10  
95 2019-20 20191824773  KHUDU RAM 
MURMU LAXMAN MURMU 
M ST 12-01-2019 206 10-04-2019  34394647310  XXXXXXX 
X8913  2760  6240  0 
96 2019-20 20191828844  DINESH KUMAR BAHADUR MAHTO M BC 10-01-2005 552 10-08-2009  488918210004313  XXXXXXX 
X8601  1920  734  4 
97 2019-20 20191938514  PAWAN KUMAR 
YADAV BALDEV MAHTO 
M BC 30-12-2009 31299 01-10-2019  38819901630  XXXXXXX 
X0548  1890  5840  10  
98 2017-18 20171240932  AMELE MARANDI JOTIN MARANDI M ST 07-09-2015 840 25-09-2015  44200101023570  XXXXXXX 
X3016  14400  10600  0 
99 2017-18 20171363952  PRITI KUMARI BHIM PRASAD 
MATHURI 
F BC 05-12-5672 1215 14-10-2017  32887183350  XXXXXXX 
X9412  1890  2000  -3655  
100 2018-19 20181586347  SANUJA ANSARI SAJID ANSARI M BC 14-10-2018 3486 18-07-2018  7765001500009796  XXXXXXX 
X8026  2520  6260  0 
101 2018-19 20181301327  RAHUL ROSHAN 
MARANDI MINASHI MARANDI 
M ST 18-03-2018 7049 25-08-2015  1257104000006170  XXXXXXX 
X4642  6600  31400  -3 
102 2017-18 20171367176  PUNAM KUMARI  
DAS BASU DAS 
F SC 26-09-2017 324 26-07-2017  472210110005107  XXXXXXX 
X0277  2760  4625  0 
103 2017-18 20171349496  CHHOTU VERMA GANESH VERMA F BC 08-01-2018 15567 14-10-2017  37027653377  XXXXXXX 
X2770  1890  5170  -1 
104 2017-18 20171483394  AMISHA SINGH MANOJ KUMAR F BC 07-01-2002 87/12 07-04-2012  36931756905  XXXXXXX 
X4795  1920  7080  10  
105 2019-20 20191957441  AJITA SOREN BINOD SOREN F ST 04-03-1999 508 05-07-2009  33020338859  XXXXXXX 
X7899  2700  349  10  
106 2017-18 20171468257  NEHA NISHA 
KUJUR JIWAN KUJUR 
F ST 13-01-2018 1089 03-11-2017  20382926785  XXXXXXX 
X1102  9600  15400  -1 
107 2017-18 20171442741  GANGAJAL 
MAHTO BIGAL MAHTO 
M BC 14-06-2017 45 14-11-2016  33355381918  XXXXXXX 
X2783  2520  1090  -1 

Appendices  
 
 141  
Sl. 
No. 
Academic 
year 
Application 
ID 
Name of 
Applicant Father's Name Gender Category Date of 
Birth 
Admission  
no. 
Admission 
date 
Bank Account 
No. 
UID 
  
Total 
maintenance 
fee 
Final 
Tuition 
fee 
Difference 
in year 
108 2017-18 20171361798  SHASHTICHARAN 
KUMAR JANKI MAHTO 
M BC 31-12-2017 135 03-02-2017  482910510003329  XXXXXXX 
X3254  1920  2000  0 
109 2018-19 20181750195  SANTOS BAXLA REMESH BAXLA M ST 19-08-2008 112 13-10-2016  47238100000830  XXXXXXX 
X5808  3600  1188  8 
110 2017-18 2017938847 CHANDRAKANT 
MEHTA RAVINDRA MEHTA 
M BC 28-06-2016 EL/2016- 
18/38 29-09-2016  2648001700145048  XXXXXXX 
X6946  1920  7080  0 
111 2019-20 20191831012  RAKESH KUMAR 
MAHATO 
RANJIT KUMAR 
MAHATO 
M BC 27-03-2001 43284 01-07-2009  457510110017048  XXXXXXX 
X0696  2520  5670  8 
112 2019-20 20191948020  NAMITA 
KUMBHAKAR 
DAMODAR 
KUMBHAKAR 
F BC 04-01-2000 43241 01-07-2009  457510110002482  XXXXXXX 
X2498  2520  6210  9 
113 2019-20 20191769135  ANKIT KUMAR 
MAHATO BIRBAL MAHATO 
M BC 16-10-2001 FBA0 
210/19 03-07-2009  593710110006008  XXXXXXX 
X9385  2520  8567  8 
114 2018-19 20181299071  SHUBHAM KUMAR 
MAHATO DEBU MAHATO 
M BC 07-03-5618 107 08-07-2017  470818210002434  XXXXXXX 
X8575  4800  12700  -3601  
115 2018-19 20181753800  RAJU KUMAR PREM SINGH M BC 14-01-2015 46 19-07-2017  590310110002443  XXXXXXX 
X7405  1920  7080  2 
116 2017-18 20171258007  ARYAN SHARMA LATE THAKUR 
SHARMA 
M BC 24-08-2018 865 26-07-2017  2961108206217  XXXXXXX 
X1758  2310  1279  -1 
117 2017-18 20171301327  RAHUL ROSHAN 
MARANDI MINASHI MARANDI 
M ST 18-03-2018 7049 25-08-2015  1257104000006170  XXXXXXX 
X4642  6600  31400  -3 
118 2017-18 20171450773  KRISHNA KUMAR 
PANDIT RAJENDRA PANDIT 
M BC 31-12-2017 7377 29-06-2016  489510110005454  XXXXXXX 
X0500  1920  4130  -1 
119 2017-18 2017855684 NITESH KUMAR KARTIK DAS M BC 09-06-2018 21417 11-05-2016  591918210001277  XXXXXXX 
X9031  2520  629  -2 
120 2017-18 20171300658  KAUSHAL KISHOR 
KAUSHAL 
KAMESHWAR 
VISHWAKARMA 
M BC 22-12-2018 49 20-06-2017  32594311998  XXXXXXX 
X6673  4200  33800  -1 
121 2018-19 20181578680  SEEMA LAKRA PARMESHWAR 
LAKRA 
F ST 05-03-2008 60 11-09-2018  32678255554  XXXXXXX 
X6143  2760  611  10  
122 2017-18 2017872848 DIVYA BHAGAT BIRSA BHAGAT F ST 06-11-3427 4959 19-07-2016  20270499533  XXXXXXX 
X7996  6840  3888  -1411  
123 2017-18 20171237991  AMIT  GUPTA BENARASI GUPTA M BC 22-07-2017 163 19-06-2017  35612097918  XXXXXXX 
X2423  1920  7080  0 
124 2017-18 20171327236  RAJESH KUMAR 
MAHALDAR KISAN MAHALDAR 
M BC 02-01-2017 575 15-09-2017  33293369433  XXXXXXX 
X2355  1920  720  0 
125 2017-18 2017880942 MD MAKSUD 
ANSARI 
MD ALIMUDDIN 
ANSARI 
M BC 06-10-2017 443 02-02-2016  591010110004827  XXXXXXX 
X9855  2520  3610  -1 
126 2018-19 20181631578  REENA KUMARI GYANI MAHTO F BC 15-10-2014 PTPS/ 
BA/III/372  11-08-2016  32873777995  XXXXXXX 
X1928  2520  3000  2 
127 2018-19 20181550251  BILAS KOL DUKHU KOL M ST 06-03-2008 12881 13-08-2018  664302010001986  XXXXXXX 
X0166  2530  912  10  
128 2019-20 20191885626  AFTAB ANSARI SAFIK ANSARI M BC 04-04-2000 9812 11-07-2009  492510510002999  XXXXXXX 
X4906  2520  2580  9 
129 2018-19 20181386276  RAJAUL ANSARI ZAKIR MIYA M BC 29-03-2002 7658 11-08-2012  34407907118  XXXXXXX 
X1631  1920  644  10  

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
142   
Sl. 
No. 
Academic 
year 
Application 
ID 
Name of 
Applicant Father's Name Gender Category Date of 
Birth 
Admission  
no. 
Admission 
date 
Bank Account 
No. 
UID 
  
Total 
maintenance 
fee 
Final 
Tuition 
fee 
Difference 
in year 
130 2018-19 20181684629  RISHU RAJ RAJESH KUMAR M BC 12-12-2002 30 03-05-2010  588018210005307  XXXXXXX 
X6968  1920  10080  8 
131 2018-19 20181648658  MAHESH TIRKEY BUTNA TIRKEY M ST 01-07-2007 260 28-07-2017  494810610000188  XXXXXXX 
X7581  4560  3025  10  
132 2018-19 20181694144  ATIT KUMAR RAVINDRA PRASAD  M BC 12-10-2018 1792 11-08-2018  31808442806  XXXXXXX 
X0419  1760  7240  0 
133 2018-19 20181399001  CHANCHALA 
KUMARI GOBIND PRAJAPATI 
 F BC 27-11-2002 22186 11-07-2011  481118210008790  XXXXXXX 
X6541  1920  1207  9 
134 2019-20 20191790701  RAUSHAN ORAON SANJAY ORAON M ST 17-10-2002 37556 03-07-2010  492310510008638  XXXXXXX 
X2791  2760  772  8 
135 2018-19 20181533245  ANKITA TOPPO ROMANUS TOPPO F ST 04-11-2017 CQLSJ 
1617019 28-11-2017  67379982953  XXXXXXX 
X8913  14400  10600  0 
136 2018-19 20181364887  VIJAY KUMAR 
MAHTO 
NAGESHWAR 
MAHTO 
M BC 10-12-2017 855 26-08-2017  591810110000381  XXXXXXX 
X9987  2520  4900  0 
137 2018-19 20181417485  DILIP KUMAR 
KISKU BODINATH KISKU 
M ST 10-07-2016 080MECH 30-07-2016  474210110009321  XXXXXXX 
X3955  14400  11517  0 
138 2018-19 20181429273  LUKHIMUNI 
SOREN DASHRATH SOREN 
F ST 05-03-2002 7613 08-08-2012  6729001500004022  XXXXXXX 
X2790  2760  644  10  
139 2018-19 2018872848 DIVYA BHAGAT BIRSA BHAGAT F ST 06-11-3427 4959 19-07-2016  20270499533  XXXXXXX 
X7996  6840  2618  -1411  
140 2019-20 20192010666  ABHIJEET GOPE SRI AMAR NATH 
GOPE 
M BC 12-04-2003 100236 18-06-2009  15083211002338  XXXXXXX 
X9581  1920  1675  6 
141 2018-19 20181237991  AMIT  GUPTA BENARASI GUPTA M BC 22-07-2017 163 19-06-2017  35612097918  XXXXXXX 
X2423  1920  5356  0 
142 2019-20 20191817559  PAYAL MONDAL GOPAL CHANDRA 
MONDAL 
F BC 07-03-2002 100 25-07-2009  474210510000760  XXXXXXX 
X3603  2520  2022  7 
143 2019-20 20191860178  AJAY KUMAR DAS SHIV CHARAN DAS M SC 03-02-2002 80 14-06-2009  35858439850  XXXXXXX 
X1922  2760  5400  7 
144 2018-19 20181300658  KAUSHAL KISHOR 
KAUSHAL 
KAMESHWAR 
VISHWAKARMA 
M BC 22-12-2018 49 20-06-2017  32594311998  XXXXXXX 
X6673  4200  33800  -1 
145 2018-19 20181519673  RANJEET KUMAR 
SAW DHANESHWAR SAW 
 M BC 15-11-2002 948 30-08-2011  35211683341  XXXXXXX 
X8499  1920  2000  9 
146 2018-19 2018849006 ROHIT GARI RAVI GARI M ST 20-07-2015 370 22-07-2016  3971518743  XXXXXXX 
X5597  3600  2605  1 
147 2018-19 20181406515  AVINASH PAUL 
BARLA 
THOMAS PRADEEP 
BARLA 
M ST 06-01-2017 1049 09-10-2017  499310110008385  XXXXXXX 
X9151  3600  1530  0 
148 2018-19 20181449000  SONU KUMAR 
SAHU RAM BREET SAHU 
M BC 16-01-1999 27502 22-08-2009  494510110014293  XXXXXXX 
X8241  2520  2605  10  
149 2018-19 20181227278  GAUTAM KUMAR RAMDEV PRASAD M BC 07-10-2017 126 12-07-2017  156301000052976  XXXXXXX 
X1128  1920  10080  0 
150 2018-19 20181483394  AMISHA SINGH MANOJ KUMAR F BC 07-01-2002 87/12 07-04-2012  36931756905  XXXXXXX 
X4795  1920  7080  10  
151 2018-19 20181363952  PRITI KUMARI BHIM PRASAD 
MATHURI 
F BC 05-12-5672 1215 14-10-2017  472410110003442  XXXXXXX 
X9412  2520  2000  -3655  

Appendices  
 
 143  
Sl. 
No. 
Academic 
year 
Application 
ID 
Name of 
Applicant Father's Name Gender Category Date of 
Birth 
Admission  
no. 
Admission 
date 
Bank Account 
No. 
UID 
  
Total 
maintenance 
fee 
Final 
Tuition 
fee 
Difference 
in year 
152 2019-20 20191876748  DIVYA 
SATKARAMKAR 
BHOLANATH 
SATKARAMKAR 
F BC 15-04-2002 93361 02-07-2009  457910110002341  XXXXXXX 
X2209  2520  728  7 
153 2019-20 20191442468  VIKASH KUMAR JAYNANDAN 
MAHTO 
M BC 21-09-2017 1554 21-07-2017  585410110008572  XXXXXXX 
X4281  2520  13730  0 
154 2019-20 20192017921  BABLU MAHTO TEJA MAHTO M BC 21-05-2000 54 14-06-2009  495210510007689  XXXXXXX 
X4613  2520  2400  9 
155 2019-20 20191761061  KAJAL KUMARI SURESH PRASAD 
SINHA 
F BC 23-03-1999 26670 05-07-2009  29170100017245  XXXXXXX 
X7091  4020  2000  10  
156 2019-20 20191797924  PRIYA KUMARI PROMOAD KUMAR 
BARNWAL 
F BC 25-09-2019 613 31-07-2019  33487132982  XXXXXXX 
X8513  2310  194  0 
157 2019-20 20191837467  VIKASH KUMAR BHOLA NATH 
KUMAR 
M BC 08-10-2001 BS190 
732020 17-07-2009  744010436373  XXXXXXX 
X3690  2520  2022  8 
158 2019-20 20191825126  SANJEEV KUMAR 
VERMA ARJUN MAHTO 
M BC 07-05-2001 757 20-07-2009  475918210007661  XXXXXXX 
X2721  2520  5390  8 
159 2019-20 20191845731  JANKI KUMARI MOTICHAND 
MAHTO 
F BC 16-04-2003 171572 17-06-2009  473418210005793  XXXXXXX 
X0557  1920  2290  6 
160 2019-20 20191905701  AMIT KUMAR 
RANA RAMADHIN RANA 
M BC 08-10-2019 1903MI04 14-08-2019  36430718469  XXXXXXX 
X0005  4400  13100  0 
161 2019-20 20192019517  NANDINI 
CHANDRA 
GULAB CHANDRA 
PRAJAPATI 
F BC 29-10-2001 4503 30-07-2009  38858409878  XXXXXXX 
X4268  4800  20200  8 
162 2019-20 20191902071  VIKRAM KUMAR 
VISHWAKARMA 
DURGALAL 
VISHWAKARMA 
M BC 10-01-2019 FT-48 29-08-2019  3531363800  XXXXXXX 
X1117  1600  7400  0 
163 2019-20 20191776786  PRINCE KUMAR KARAMVIR 
PRASAD 
M BC 27-01-2002 3 16-07-2009  5707108000965  XXXXXXX 
X3701  1920  7080  7 
164 2019-20 20191533245  ANKITA TOPPO ROMANUS TOPPO F ST 04-11-2017 CQLSJ 
1617019 28-11-2017  67379982953  XXXXXXX 
X8913  14400  10600  0 
 
  

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
144   
Appendix-6.2 
(Referred to paragraph 6.12.2 (1st  Bullet); page 74) 
Applications in which different applicant names were captured against one Aadhaar number 
Sl.  
No.  
Academic 
year 
Application 
ID 
UID Name of applicant Father's name Date of 
birth 
Gender  Category  Amount paid 
1 2017-18 20171364258  XXXXXXXX2481 SAHIL KUMAR ARUN DAS 1993-02-19  M BC 15000  
2 2019-20 20191952050  XXXXXXXX2481 FRANCIS SOY THOMAS SOY 1995-01-18  M ST 38000  
3 2018-19 20181490405  XXXXXXXX7665 PALLAVIKUMARI SHRAWANKUMAR 1997-02-01  F BC 25000  
4 2019-20 20192012656  XXXXXXXX7665 SUMAN KANDULNA DULAR KANDULNA 1993-10-18  F ST 25000  
5 2017-18 20171368658  XXXXXXXX3422 KHUSBOO  KUMARI GHANSHYAM  MAHTO 1997-03-05  F BC 7760  
6 2019-20 20191921531  XXXXXXXX3422 PRAGYA KUMARI SURESH MAHTO 2004-03-02  F BC 5510  
7 2017-18 20171330316  XXXXXXXX2216 JITENDAR KUMAR PATEL BINESH KUMAR SINGH 2000-08-15  M BC 9000  
8 2019-20 20192001450  XXXXXXXX2216 CHANDAN KUMAR THAKUR VINOD THAKUR 1999-06-30  M BC 5170  
9 2017-18 20171280982  XXXXXXXX1310 PURNIMA KUMARI NIRAJ PASWAN 1995-04-25  F SC 7060  
10 2019-20 20191957047  XXXXXXXX1310 SONI KUMARI GIRJA PRASAD 1997-12-24  F BC 25000  
11 2017-18 20171260140  XXXXXXXX5304 ARVIND KUMAR MAHTO TILAK DHARI MAHTO 1997-06-15  M BC 9000  
12 2019-20 20191978625  XXXXXXXX5304 MUKESH KUMAR SAW SONARAM SAW 1997-12-15  M BC 7910  
13 2017-18 20171380312  XXXXXXXX4971 AMBIKA KUMARI BADRI PRASAD SAHA 1997-11-06  F SC 25000  
14 2018-19 20181751629  XXXXXXXX4971 JYOTI KUMARI KAMLESHWAR PRASAD 1996-05-08  F SC 20200  
15 2017-18 20171305075  XXXXXXXX6832 DAUD ALAM KASIM ANSARI 2002-01-15  M BC 9000  
16 2019-20 20192023404  XXXXXXXX6832 VIVEK KUMAR MAHENDRA PRASAD KUSHWAHA 2001-06-06  M BC 9000  
17 2017-18 2017978506 XXXXXXXX9559 BISHAL KUMAR MAHTO DHANESHWAR MAHTO 1996-12-25  M BC 45000  
18 2019-20 20192026399  XXXXXXXX9559 SANGETA TOPNO DAYANAND TOPNO 1997-06-02  F ST 25000  
19 2017-18 20171027466  XXXXXXXX0142 SABA NAZ LATE MD ALIM 1997-01-10  F BC 6751  
20 2018-19 20181712518  XXXXXXXX0142 BASAN TIRKEY BASAN TIRKEY 1990-11-01  F ST 45000  
21 2017-18 20171381795  XXXXXXXX1744 AMISHA GUPTA BHAVESH KUMAR 2001-08-15  F BC 3274  
22 2019-20 20191509620  XXXXXXXX1744 KUMARI ALKA BHAVESH KUMAR 2002-01-26  F BC 3434  
23 2017-18 20171446012  XXXXXXXX5995 DANISH HASAN ALI HASAN MANSURI 2001-01-05  M BC 5205  
24 2019-20 20192022662  XXXXXXXX5995 EKTA PRASAD RAJKUMAR PRASAD 1987-05-13  F BC 6615  
25 2017-18 20171296782  XXXXXXXX0233 MATIYAS LUGUN CLEMENT LUGUN 1997-09-03  M ST 3867  
26 2018-19 20181548484  XXXXXXXX0233 ARCHANA DUNGDUNG STEPHAN DUNGDUNG 2000-07-07  F ST 4460  
27 2018-19 20181709142  XXXXXXXX3489 PINKY KUMARI DASHRATH OHDAR 2000-10-10  F BC 6200  
28 2019-20 20191845864  XXXXXXXX3489 RINKY KUMARI DASHRATH OHDAR 2000-10-10  F BC 5320  
29 2017-18 20171369772  XXXXXXXX6787 URMILA KUMARI RAMKISHOR RANA 1999-11-02  F BC 5670  
30 2019-20 20191814329  XXXXXXXX6787 ABHISHEK KUMAR BASUDEV PRASAD KUSHWAHA 2003-11-22  M BC 4220  
31 2017-18 20171394854  XXXXXXXX5236 BISARJIT SETH BASUDEV SETH 1995-03-12  M SC 7255  
32 2018-19 20181722367  XXXXXXXX5236 VISHRAM SETH DUKHAN SETH 1997-10-09  M SC 7255  
33 2017-18 20171027882  XXXXXXXX1867 MUKESH KUMAR MAHTO PAVITAR MAHTO 1992-02-02  M BC 6000  
34 2018-19 20181718828  XXXXXXXX1867 BHAGIRATH KUMAR NARAYAN PD YADAV 1997-10-15  M BC 5708  
35 2017-18 20171410546  XXXXXXXX8750 ABHISHEK KUMAR CHOURASIYA GOPAL PRASAD CHOURASIYA 1996-01-15  M BC 9000  

Appendices  
 
 145  
Sl.  
No.  
Academic 
year 
Application 
ID 
UID Name of applicant Father's name Date of 
birth 
Gender  Category  Amount paid 
36 2019-20 20192024574  XXXXXXXX8750 SONAM BHARTI ARJUN PRASAD 1993-07-04  M BC 38000  
37 2017-18 20171489885  XXXXXXXX6930 ANSHU KUMAR SUDAN DAYAL MEHTA 1997-01-01  M BC 15000  
38 2018-19 20181505423  XXXXXXXX6930 HITESH KUMAR THAKUR LAKHAN THAKUR 1994-01-01  M BC 38000  
39 2018-19 20181753713  XXXXXXXX5851 HINA KAUSAR AYUB ANSARI 1978-12-13  F BC 5540  
40 2019-20 20191784847  XXXXXXXX5851 PRIYANKA YADAV PARAS NATH YADAV 1997-05-15  F BC 12000  
41 2017-18 20171364213  XXXXXXXX3418 DAVID KUMAR DAS KARTIK RAVIDAS 1990-01-08  M SC 15000  
42 2019-20 20191922777  XXXXXXXX3418 BASANT TOPPO ARIAL TOPPO 1995-07-18  M ST 38000  
43 2017-18 20171286959  XXXXXXXX9215 ANJLI KUJUR BELAS KUJUR 1994-04-04  F ST 38000  
44 2018-19 20181604384  XXXXXXXX9215 MANISHA KUJUR BELAS KUJUR 1992-06-30  F ST 8959  
45 2017-18 20171489729  XXXXXXXX2958 SARITA KUMARI PRABHU MAHTO 1998-01-01  F BC 15000  
46 2018-19 20181505410  XXXXXXXX2958 DILIP KUMAR GIRIDHARI SAW 1996-01-01  M BC 38000  
47 2017-18 2017993501 XXXXXXXX6968 RITU MONIKA TIGGA ANUDEEP TIGGA 1995-07-01  F ST 7100  
48 2018-19 20181754150  XXXXXXXX6968 NEHA TIGGA ANUDEEP TIGGA 1995-09-05  F ST 17500  
49 2018-19 20181614264  XXXXXXXX4589 AMIT KUMAR SINGH KRISHNA SINGH 1995-11-25  M BC 9000  
50 2019-20 20192012360  XXXXXXXX4589 SHIVAM KUMAR JICHHU TANTI 2001-02-02  M BC 9000  
51 2017-18 20171333062  XXXXXXXX6382 RAM MURMU PATWARI MURMU 1998-02-05  M ST 3589  
52 2019-20 20191873478  XXXXXXXX6382 LAKHAN MURMU PATWARI MURMU 2001-11-05  M ST 3311  
53 2017-18 2017956916 XXXXXXXX1451 SANTOSH KUMAR MUNDA SUDHIR MUNDA 1997-06-21  M ST 11200  
54 2019-20 20191877857  XXXXXXXX1451 ANUJ MUNDA SUDHIR MUNDA 2002-02-16  M ST 2785  
55 2018-19 20181655622  XXXXXXXX1270 MD FARYAD ALAM MD KHALIL MIYAN 1998-10-14  M BC 9000  
56 2019-20 20192015457  XXXXXXXX1270 NAJNI PRAWEEN WAHID ANSARI 2001-02-03  F BC 5120  
57 2017-18 20171343926  XXXXXXXX4229 NIYATI GOPE GOURANGO GOPE 1995-12-25  F BC 3248  
58 2019-20 20191885112  XXXXXXXX4229 GOPE NIYATI GOURANGO GOPE 1995-12-25  F BC 9000  
59 2017-18 20171322986  XXXXXXXX9555 SHARIQUE ANWAR MD ZEYAULLAH 1995-12-09  M BC 6913  
60 2018-19 20181505590  XXXXXXXX9555 ANWAR SHARIQUE MD ZEYAULLAH 1995-12-09  M BC 5683  
61 2017-18 20171318180  XXXXXXXX8336 RAJESH  YADAV GOVARDHAN YADAV 1998-08-18  M BC 7760  
62 2018-19 20181601466  XXXXXXXX8336 NIRAJ KR VERMA PRABHU PRASAD VERMA 2001-12-30  M BC 6020  
63 2019-20 20192028041  XXXXXXXX8336 MANISHA  KUMARI ATWARI  RAJAK 2003-09-05  M SC 7330  
64 2017-18 2017831514 XXXXXXXX5264 MAMTA KUMARI DASHRATH PRASAD MEHTA 1998-09-04  F BC 3000  
65 2018-19 20181628689  XXXXXXXX5264 SEMA KUMARI GIRIDHARI PASAWN 1999-05-14  F BC 3925  
66 2018-19 20181673643  XXXXXXXX2361 GAYTRI KUMARI BHARAT MAHTO 2001-02-05  F BC 3920  
67 2019-20 20191884302  XXXXXXXX2361 PANCHAM KUMAR BHARAT MAHTO 2002-03-08  M BC 3920  
68 2017-18 2017873983 XXXXXXXX6633 SABINA KHATOON NOUSHAD ANSARI 2000-05-17  F BC 2244  
69 2019-20 20191927466  XXXXXXXX6633 TABASSUM ARA MD NOUSHAD ANSARI 2002-05-07  F BC 3486  
70 2017-18 20171467368  XXXXXXXX0405 GETHA KISKU DEVLAL KISKU 1997-07-16  M ST 3222  
71 2018-19 20181583094  XXXXXXXX0405 JETHA KISKU DEVLAL KISKU 1997-07-16  M ST 4922  
72 2017-18 20171296145  XXXXXXXX9997 SANTOSH KUMAR KAPRI PARMOD KAPRI 1995-10-28  M BC 9000  
73 2018-19 20181667280  XXXXXXXX9997 MANISH KUMAR DARVE BIPIN DARVE 2003-01-01  M BC 2491  
74 2017-18 20171381557  XXXXXXXX8153 SHUBHAM KUMAR PARMANAND MAHTO 1998-12-06  M BC 15000  

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
146   
Sl.  
No.  
Academic 
year 
Application 
ID 
UID Name of applicant Father's name Date of 
birth 
Gender  Category  Amount paid 
75 2018-19 20181496197  XXXXXXXX8153 MIHIR RAJ UMESH PRASAD 1997-04-23  M BC 15000  
76 2018-19 20181612999  XXXXXXXX6946 PINKY PINGUA HARI PINGUA 2001-01-06  F ST 12000  
77 2019-20 20191769175  XXXXXXXX6946 RINKY PINGUA HARI PINGUA 2001-01-06  F ST 22040  
78 2018-19 20181674459  XXXXXXXX4765 BALESHWAR MAHTO RAMKISHUN MAHTO 2002-01-06  M BC 2621  
79 2019-20 20191882493  XXXXXXXX4765 RAMKISHUN MAHTO BALESHWAR MAHTO 2002-01-06  M BC 9000  
80 2018-19 20181656802  XXXXXXXX1373 SUNIL KUMAR YADAV DUDHESHVAR YADAV 1994-04-08  M BC 38000  
81 2019-20 20191983135  XXXXXXXX1373 GAYATRIKUMARI SIVKUMARRAM 1999-08-15  F SC 6250  
82 2017-18 20171373197  XXXXXXXX4710 DHANESHWAR  MAHTO GHANSHYAM MAHTO 2000-07-05  M BC 5670  
83 2018-19 20181541263  XXXXXXXX4710 SANDIP  KUMAR  MANDAL RAJENDRA PRASAD MANDAL 1999-12-04  M BC 7700  
84 2018-19 20181721310  XXXXXXXX3667 SULEKHA  KUMARI BHUSLU  KUMHAR 2001-06-05  F BC 2256  
85 2019-20 20191888374  XXXXXXXX3667 BANESHWAR MAHATO SAMBAD  MAHATO 2001-07-20  M BC 2256  
86 2017-18 20171379712  XXXXXXXX3268 MAHESH   MANDAL SUDHIR MANDAL 1995-06-01  M BC 6130  
87 2018-19 20181724918  XXXXXXXX3268 BABULAL HEMBROM BAIJUN HEMBROM 1998-09-02  M ST 3760  
88 2017-18 20171316143  XXXXXXXX3295 ANIL KUMA R LOKNATHMAHTO 1996-08-03  M BC 6300  
89 2019-20 20191988471  XXXXXXXX3295 DIWAKAR KUMAR DARSHAN MAHTO 2000-09-10  M BC 4520  
90 2017-18 2017947400 XXXXXXXX3182 MD AFROJ ALAM MD ASHRAF ALI 1995-10-20  M BC 38000  
91 2019-20 20191943386  XXXXXXXX3182 FIROJ  ANSARI ASRAF  ALI  ANSARI 1991-02-15  M BC 20000  
92 2017-18 20171228464  XXXXXXXX1967 ANISHKUMAR CHOUDHARY LAKSHMAN PRSAD CHOUDHARY 1998-11-24  M BC 38000  
93 2019-20 20191854965  XXXXXXXX1967 NISHA CHOUDHARY LAKASHMAN PRASAD CHOUDHARY 1999-01-16  F BC 18000  
94 2017-18 20171357570  XXXXXXXX9267 NAVIN KUMAR KARTIK MAHTO 1993-06-28  M SC 24000  
95 2018-19 20181502342  XXXXXXXX9267 SONU   KUMAR   SAHU RAM  JIWAN  SAHU 1994-05-17  M BC 30000  
96 2018-19 20181739574  XXXXXXXX9696 KAMLEE KUMARI BHAIYARAM ORAON 1998-04-08  F ST 4788  
97 2019-20 20191773564  XXXXXXXX9696 ANIS KUMAR THAKUR OOM PRAKASH THAKUR 2000-08-23  M ST 20000  
98 2017-18 20171406540  XXXXXXXX8792 CHUNCHUN   MANDAL SURENDRA MANDAL 1993-06-05  M BC 20000  
99 2019-20 20191997152  XXXXXXXX8792 DULAL CHANDRA ROOJ MANGAL CHANDRA ROOJ 1999-10-06  M BC 8380  
100  2018-19 20181735503  XXXXXXXX5770 RAJESH KISKU CHHOTA PARDHAN KISKU 1992-03-04  M ST 9000  
101  2019-20 20192015306  XXXXXXXX5770 DEVRAJ KUMAR MANORANJAN BHAGAT 2000-03-11  M BC 9000  
102  2018-19 20181581780  XXXXXXXX1456 BIRENDRA KUMAR SURENDRA KUMAR DAS 1996-12-25  M SC 10500  
103  2019-20 20191708296  XXXXXXXX1456 RAJESH KUMAR MOHAR MAHTO 1996-01-16  M BC 6020  
104  2018-19 20181729167  XXXXXXXX2030 BHANESHWARI KUMARI RANTHI LAKRA 2002-03-07  F ST 6810  
105  2019-20 20191962445  XXXXXXXX2030 SUMAN KUMARI JALESHWAR GOPE 2001-12-10  F BC 5880  
106  2017-18 20171490200  XXXXXXXX0297 MANISHA MUNDU BOAS MUNDU 1995-07-16  F ST 21000  
107  2018-19 20181511427  XXXXXXXX0297 RESHMA LATA SORENG FRANCIS SORENG 1995-12-13  F ST 45000  
108  2017-18 20171244417  XXXXXXXX0278 DILEEP KUMAR BULAKI MAHTO 1993-04-09  M BC 4032  
109  2019-20 20192003197  XXXXXXXX0278 AJAY KUMAR TULSI MAHTO 1993-03-25  M BC 38000  
110  2017-18 20171364024  XXXXXXXX2521 RINA KUMARI NARESH YADAV 1998-09-08  F BC 2100  
111  2019-20 20191928398  XXXXXXXX2521 NIRAJ DAS SHERA DAS 1996-10-10  M SC 10598  
112  2017-18 20171436058  XXXXXXXX0793 KUMARI ALKA BHAVESH KUMAR 2002-01-26  F BC 3274  
113  2019-20 20191509791  XXXXXXXX0793 AMISHA GUPTA BHAVESH KUMAR 2001-08-15  F BC 3434  

Appendices  
 
 147  
Sl.  
No.  
Academic 
year 
Application 
ID 
UID Name of applicant Father's name Date of 
birth 
Gender  Category  Amount paid 
114  2017-18 20171465904  XXXXXXXX1060 AAMAUL  SHEIKH SEJAMUDDIN SHEIKH 1998-01-04  M BC 1926  
115  2019-20 20191754666  XXXXXXXX1060 SHAHJAHAN  SHAIKH ALIM SHAIKH 2000-10-17  M BC 5269  
116  2017-18 20171487585  XXXXXXXX6106 PRIYA EKKA ARVIND EKKA 1995-10-08  F ST 38000  
117  2019-20 20192009118  XXXXXXXX6106 VIVEK SAGAR EKKA ARVIND EKKA 2000-05-03  M ST 9000  
118  2017-18 20171324338  XXXXXXXX3629 GOHAGINI MURMU CHHOTE LAL MURMU 1999-01-02  F ST 3277  
119  2019-20 20191825108  XXXXXXXX3629 SOHAGINI MURMU CHHOTE LAL MURMU 1999-01-02  F ST 4089  
120  2017-18 20171461635  XXXXXXXX2772 BIKESH KUMAR VASANT PD YADAV 1991-01-18  M BC 9000  
121  2018-19 20181665995  XXXXXXXX2772 VIKESH KUMAR VASANT PD YADAV 1991-01-18  M BC 9000  
122  2017-18 20171020670  XXXXXXXX9236 ARPANA KUMARI RAMRATAN PRASAD 1996-04-17  F BC 4870  
123  2018-19 20181642939  XXXXXXXX9236 PRIYANKA KUMARI RAMRATAN PRASAD 1996-04-17  F BC 5017  
124  2018-19 20181490635  XXXXXXXX5962 ROMILAPURTI NOELPURTI 1993-03-13  F ST 25000  
125  2019-20 20191764104  XXXXXXXX5962 AARTI  KUMARI LT  KRISHNA  SAHU 1993-09-01  F BC 25000  
126  2017-18 20171479486  XXXXXXXX0325 DHANANJAY KUMAR YADAW GOPAL YADAW 1998-04-10  M BC 9000  
127  2019-20 20192000102  XXXXXXXX0325 RAHUL KUMAR RAMBALAK SAHU 1999-03-05  M BC 5170  
128  2017-18 20171422243  XXXXXXXX8324 SARWAR ANSRI KAIMUL ANSARI 1996-08-30  M BC 5250  
129  2019-20 20192011338  XXXXXXXX8324 GULSABA PARWEEN JAMAL ANSARI 2001-01-01  F BC 5100  
130  2017-18 20171230332  XXXXXXXX5491 RAVI KUMAR RANJAN SITARAM SAH 1996-06-21  M BC 5980  
131  2019-20 20191929979  XXXXXXXX5491 BHAWESH KUMAR RAJHANS DIWAKAR PRASAD CHOUHAN 1988-10-16  M BC 25000  
132  2017-18 20171252550  XXXXXXXX3570 RAVI KUMAR HEERALAL LOHAR 1997-06-15  M BC 9000  
133  2019-20 20192027511  XXXXXXXX3570 SUJEET KUMAR BHAGAT VIJAY BHAGAT 2001-01-16  M BC 9000  
134  2017-18 20171287052  XXXXXXXX3308 KUMAR CHANDAN HADIRAM MUNDA 2001-01-01  M ST 5259  
135  2019-20 20191821375  XXXXXXXX3308 CHANDAN MUNDA HADIRAM MUNDA 2001-01-01  M ST 7982  
136  2017-18 20171470763  XXXXXXXX1526 PRAKASH KUMAR BHOLA MAHTO 1984-11-22  M BC 9000  
137  2018-19 20181722051  XXXXXXXX1526 DEEPAK KUMAR JASENDRA RAM 1984-11-22  M SC 9000  
138  2019-20 20191937970  XXXXXXXX1526 ARVIND PAL RAM PATI PAL 1991-05-03  M BC 10500  
139  2017-18 20171068652  XXXXXXXX1327 ANIL KUMAR KESHAR SAW 2000-01-01  M BC 2153  
140  2018-19 20181700473  XXXXXXXX1327 KIRAN KUMARI KESHWAR SAW 1998-12-09  F BC 4033  
141  2017-18 20171479951  XXXXXXXX0449 RAHUL  RAJAN RAJEV RANJAN 2001-10-17  M SC 12000  
142  2018-19 20181572343  XXXXXXXX0449 PARERNA KUMARI DADAN KUMAR 2001-04-18  F SC 20000  
143  2017-18 20171178173  XXXXXXXX4693 JUBEDANSARI MD ANWARULANSARI 1991-05-21  M BC 22300  
144  2019-20 20191964070  XXXXXXXX4693 AMRITA SINGH KRISHNAKANT SINGH 1997-04-14  F BC 38000  
145  2017-18 2017976106 XXXXXXXX8811 SACHIN KUMAR ARJUN  PRASAD 1999-07-05  M BC 3945  
146  2019-20 20191999443  XXXXXXXX8811 VIVEK KUMAR PAWAN KUMAR 2001-03-01  M BC 45000  
147  2017-18 20171221960  XXXXXXXX5856 SANT KUMAR CHOUDHARY AKHILESHWAR PRASAD CHOUDHARY  2001-02-21  M BC 9000  
148  2018-19 20181746073  XXXXXXXX5856 ASRAF ANSARI MAKSUD ANSARI 2001-01-06  M BC 9000  
149  2017-18 20171464179  XXXXXXXX0148 VIKASH ORAON KUJA ORAON 2000-11-08  M ST 5975  
150  2018-19 20181560838  XXXXXXXX0148 BIKASH ORAON KUJA ORAON 2000-11-08  M ST 6720  
151  2017-18 20171478627  XXXXXXXX2208 FARHIN JAHAN KAMRUDDIN 1995-01-02  F BC 4179  
152  2019-20 20191985350  XXXXXXXX2208 KAINATH PARWEEN KAMRUDDIN 2005-03-15  F BC 4310  

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
148   
Sl.  
No.  
Academic 
year 
Application 
ID 
UID Name of applicant Father's name Date of 
birth 
Gender  Category  Amount paid 
153  2017-18 20171228449  XXXXXXXX2635 VISHAL KUMAR MANOJ KUMAR 1996-01-01  M SC 30000  
154  2019-20 20191543222  XXXXXXXX2635 KHUSHBU KUMARI DHANU MAHATO 1999-09-22  F SC 25000  
155  2018-19 20181667520  XXXXXXXX2409 ABDUL HAKIM HAJRAT ANSSARI 1998-03-01  M BC 4755  
156  2019-20 20191968300  XXXXXXXX2409 URMILA PANNA MAHTO PANNA 1995-02-10  F ST 8470  
157  2017-18 20171475091  XXXXXXXX0351 SAMEER TERKEY JOAHAN TIRKEY 1998-07-14  M ST 25000  
158  2018-19 20181602082  XXXXXXXX0351 ROUSHAN KUMAR MAHAVIR MAHATO 2000-05-09  M SC 25000  
159  2017-18 20171269413  XXXXXXXX1512 SANTOSH HORO JAKRIAS HORO 2002-04-28  M ST 4994  
160  2019-20 20191861077  XXXXXXXX1512 ASRITA SOY DHANKUNWAR SOY 2001-04-05  F ST 3621  
161  2018-19 20181676990  XXXXXXXX5207 PANKAJ SHARMA NAGDEV SHARMA 1999-10-26  M BC 9000  
162  2019-20 20192002105  XXXXXXXX5207 CHANDAN THAKUR ANIL THAKUR 1999-06-09  M BC 9000  
163  2017-18 20171361338  XXXXXXXX4840 NITESH BARA SUDHEER BARA 1998-06-17  M SC 25000  
164  2018-19 20181570799  XXXXXXXX4840 SWETY   VERMA RAJENDAR  VERMA 2000-05-10  F BC 25000  
165  2017-18 20171477385  XXXXXXXX4476 SONI KUMARI KRISHNA THAKUR 1987-11-15  F BC 9000  
166  2019-20 20192028012  XXXXXXXX4476 RAHUL KUMAR RAJESH KUMAR 2000-07-12  M BC 15000  
167  2017-18 20171360216  XXXXXXXX2034 RAJU KUMAR BIJAY PRASAD 1996-01-23  M BC 9000  
168  2019-20 20192008866  XXXXXXXX2034 ANKESH KUMAR CHANDRESH MAHTO 1997-08-13  M BC 9000  
169  2017-18 20171460731  XXXXXXXX3826 NITISH KUMAR GUPTA Devnsndan prassd ######### M BC 3625  
170  2018-19 20181550276  XXXXXXXX3826 DHARMENDRA KUMAR PAL AMIRAK PAL 1999-08-06  M BC 3945  
171  2017-18 20171333645  XXXXXXXX0671 CHANDRIKA  MANDAL GANGO MANDAL 2000-10-10  M BC 5670  
172  2019-20 20192028073  XXXXXXXX0671 GOPAL  KUMAR VERMA BANARAS MAHTO 2003-09-04  M BC 6720  
173  2017-18 20171395451  XXXXXXXX9034 KUMARI SARITA BIDHRAM MUNDA 2000-01-20  M ST 6810  
174  2018-19 20181576400  XXXXXXXX9034 SARITA KUMARI PAWAN KUMHAR 2000-01-20  F ST 9000  
175  2017-18 20171235910  XXXXXXXX6887 PHULMATI BIRUA BUDHAN SINGH BIRUA 1999-02-26  F ST 3384  
176  2018-19 20181510850  XXXXXXXX6887 FULMATI BIRUA BUDHAN SINGH BIRUA 1999-02-28  F ST 3341  
177  2017-18 20171305383  XXXXXXXX4323 BADAL KUMAR ASHOK PRASAD MEHTA 2000-12-10  M BC 3920  
178  2019-20 20191964334  XXXXXXXX4323 JAY KUMAR SHIVAJI YADAV 1997-07-09  M BC 38000  
179  2017-18 20171396606  XXXXXXXX3308 SURENDRA KR MAHTO BHOLA MAHTO 1999-04-07  M BC 6090  
180  2019-20 20191978166  XXXXXXXX3308 GAURAV PAUL NIRMAL PAUL 1997-06-12  M BC 9000  
181  2018-19 20181740496  XXXXXXXX9324 SANJIT ORAON KINU ORAON 1999-04-14  M ST 4788  
182  2019-20 20191988111  XXXXXXXX9324 CHANDAN LAKRAA KAMIL LAKRAA 1995-06-13  M ST 8470  
183  2017-18 20171400425  XXXXXXXX2626 AUGUST SAH DWARIKA SAH 1997-08-07  M BC 9000  
184  2019-20 20191999710  XXXXXXXX2626 SANJIV KUMAR THAKUR VINAY KUMAR THAKUR 1998-09-20  M BC 9000  
185  2017-18 20171321349  XXXXXXXX0960 ANSU M TIGGA RAMESH TIGGA 2000-10-03  M ST 24000  
186  2019-20 20191525219  XXXXXXXX0960 PALAVI   KUMARI KALESWAR   GOP 2000-04-04  F SC 20000  
187  2017-18 20171363132  XXXXXXXX1080 NITU  KUMARI LALCHAND YADAV 1999-03-01  F BC 4960  
188  2019-20 20191915913  XXXXXXXX1080 SEEMA VERMA SURENDRA PRASAD VERMA 2001-05-15  F BC 8360  
189  2018-19 20181627266  XXXXXXXX4052 RAJENDRA KUMAR DILO DANGI 1999-02-04  M BC 4100  
190  2019-20 20191755252  XXXXXXXX4052 KAJAL KUMARI DILO DANGI 1999-07-03  F BC 45000  
191  2018-19 20181754275  XXXXXXXX7851 MAMTA LAKRA LATE MUKUT LAKRA 1991-02-27  F ST 9000  

Appendices  
 
 149  
Sl.  
No.  
Academic 
year 
Application 
ID 
UID Name of applicant Father's name Date of 
birth 
Gender  Category  Amount paid 
192  2019-20 20192012246  XXXXXXXX7851 KHUSHBOO KUMARI GANDORI PRASAD MEHTA 1996-01-10  F BC 10500  
193  2018-19 20181497595  XXXXXXXX7571 MAJIDAN KHATOON RUSTAM ANSARI 1998-01-01  F BC 9000  
194  2019-20 20191968336  XXXXXXXX7571 AFTAB ALAM MOBARAK HUSAIN 1998-03-12  M BC 7470  
195  2017-18 20171302682  XXXXXXXX7749 PRIYANKA KIRO RIMISH KIRO 2000-11-04  F ST 8260  
196  2018-19 20181539768  XXXXXXXX7749 ALICE DUNGDUNG SUSHIL DUNGDUNG 2001-03-29  F ST 8760  
197  2017-18 20171273042  XXXXXXXX5518 MANJU KUMARI BHUNESHWAR MAHTO 1996-03-02  F BC 38000  
198  2019-20 20191974332  XXXXXXXX5518 PUJA  KUMARI INDRADEO PRASAD 1997-09-12  F BC 38000  
199  2017-18 20171489367  XXXXXXXX5782 NASIME PARWEEN HABIB ANSAARI 1991-01-01  F BC 3318  
200  2018-19 20181670453  XXXXXXXX5782 HASIB ANSARI BASIRUDDIN ANSARI 2000-02-10  M BC 5815  
201  2017-18 2017883262 XXXXXXXX4875 BHAWEN KUMAR MAHTO DINESHWAR MAHTO 1996-08-07  M BC 38000  
202  2019-20 20191866844  XXXXXXXX4875 NISHI  KUMARI SURENDRA KUMAR PRASAD 1996-04-09  F BC 24000  
203  2017-18 20171243155  XXXXXXXX0573 BEERBAL MAHTO SURESH MAHTO 1994-05-15  M BC 38000  
204  2018-19 20181673495  XXXXXXXX0573 PAYAL KUMARI BAL KRISHNA MAHTO 1996-03-20  F BC 9000  
205  2017-18 2017886003 XXXXXXXX7186 GANESH THAKUR SURESH THAKUR 1996-10-12  M BC 3109  
206  2019-20 20191918396  XXXXXXXX7186 DOMAN THAKUR PRABODH KUMAR THAKUR 1993-03-18  M BC 25000  
207  2018-19 20181706227  XXXXXXXX0622 SUMANTI KUJUR LEKHRAJ ORAON 2001-06-10  F ST 6210  
208  2019-20 20191853127  XXXXXXXX0622 HIRA KUMARI NARAYAN ORAON 2001-01-05  F ST 7130  
209  2018-19 20181622866  XXXXXXXX0030 ASHUTOSH BHAGAT LATE BINOD BHAGAT 2000-12-20  M ST 9000  
210  2019-20 20191963595  XXXXXXXX0030 POONAM HEMROM GAHNU HEMROM 1995-10-20  F ST 38000  
211  2017-18 20171374413  XXXXXXXX7752 SANJU KUMARI BASKI YADAV 1998-04-15  F BC 3653  
212  2018-19 20181754565  XXXXXXXX7752 RAYMOND HEMBRAM SONOT HEMBRAM 1998-11-10  M ST 8500  
213  2018-19 20181739134  XXXXXXXX2847 EDLIN KUJJUR JOWAKIM KUJUR 1997-09-09  F ST 4788  
214  2019-20 20191774178  XXXXXXXX2847 ANNUJ PRATAP BIHARI RAM 1996-03-01  M ST 6550  
215  2017-18 20171244525  XXXXXXXX9378 SUMIT SORENG MADAN SORENG 1999-07-15  M ST 25000  
216  2019-20 20191806593  XXXXXXXX9378 ANANTKRITI PRAMODKUMAR 1999-07-06  M BC 20000  
217  2017-18 2017955842 XXXXXXXX3157 CHANDAN KUMAR MANDAL HIMANSU MANDAL 2000-06-10  M BC 4420  
218  2018-19 20181669615  XXXXXXXX3157 MRITUNJAY KUMAR UPENDRA YADAV 2001-04-12  M BC 2023  
219  2017-18 20171335777  XXXXXXXX7413 NEPAL MAHTO RAKESH MAHTO 1995-10-11  M BC 9000  
220  2018-19 20181501554  XXXXXXXX7413 RAKESH MAHTO DHANESHWAR MAHTO 1998-06-12  M BC 2515  
221  2017-18 20171237878  XXXXXXXX1664 KHATIR TOPNO KOMAL TOPNO 1990-09-24  M ST 25000  
222  2019-20 20192012539  XXXXXXXX1664 SALOMI SOY NAMAN SOY 1992-01-25  F ST 25000  
223  2018-19 20181737553  XXXXXXXX4246 SARVJEET HEMBROM BETAKA HEMBROM 1996-05-10  M ST 8500  
224  2019-20 20191858091  XXXXXXXX4246 TALKU MURMU BETAKA HEMBROM 1996-05-10  M ST 7871  
225  2017-18 20171015167  XXXXXXXX3989 PRADEEP KUMAR MAHTO BASUDEV MAHTO 2000-02-15  M BC 15000  
226  2019-20 20191572468  XXXXXXXX3989 SWETA KUMARI BINOD KUMAR 1999-05-11  F BC 25000  
227  2017-18 20171265390  XXXXXXXX6022 RAHUL KUMAR MAHATO LAL CHAND MAHATO 1998-07-27  M BC 15000  
228  2018-19 20181712596  XXXXXXXX6022 KUMARI RENU RADHIKA MAHTO 1990-04-25  F BC 38000  
229  2017-18 20171365401  XXXXXXXX1399 LOVELY KUMARI RAMSWARUP THAKUR 1993-01-01  F BC 15000  
230  2019-20 20191914680  XXXXXXXX1399 PUJA KUMARI BUDHNATH SAWANSI 1994-08-19  F SC 38000  

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
150   
Sl.  
No.  
Academic 
year 
Application 
ID 
UID Name of applicant Father's name Date of 
birth 
Gender  Category  Amount paid 
231  2018-19 20181541552  XXXXXXXX2773 MD JABAAZ ABDUL AZIZ ANSARI 1998-02-06  M BC 4755  
232  2019-20 20191987085  XXXXXXXX2773 AMIT KUMAR LALDEO MAHTO 1995-06-08  M BC 24000  
233  2017-18 20171327832  XXXXXXXX8153 JYOTISH KUMAR SAH PRITAM SAH 1999-12-07  M BC 2607  
234  2019-20 20191947671  XXXXXXXX8153 DAYANAND HEMBROM BINAY HEMBROM 2000-04-06  M ST 5549  
235  2017-18 20171301004  XXXXXXXX2266 SHABNAM KHATOON MERAZ AHAMAD 2000-09-02  F BC 2725  
236  2018-19 20181503085  XXXXXXXX2266 NEHA PRAVEEN MERAZ AHAMAD 2001-12-08  F BC 3770  
237  2017-18 20171481436  XXXXXXXX5491 GHANSHYAM MUKTA PRASAD 1996-02-15  M BC 40000  
238  2019-20 20191915265  XXXXXXXX5491 SAURAV KUMAR DILIP KUMAR 2002-04-15  M BC 40000  
239  2017-18 20171381493  XXXXXXXX4697 SUYASH PRABHAKAR YUGESHWAR MAHTO 1997-12-28  M BC 24000  
240  2019-20 20191896171  XXXXXXXX4697 MD AHSAN  TAQUWEEM MD ALAM 2000-06-13  M BC 20000  
241  2017-18 20171316650  XXXXXXXX0783 ABHAY SHANKAR RAM KISHAN MEHTA 1993-12-10  M BC 18000  
242  2018-19 20181708557  XXXXXXXX0783 KAJAL KUMARI KARTIK PRASAD MEHTA 1995-01-18  F BC 4680  
243  2017-18 2017992934 XXXXXXXX2817 SUBHASH CHANDRA MAHTO RANGA MAHTO 1992-03-15  M BC 15000  
244  2019-20 20191981150  XXXXXXXX2817 YAMUNA  KUMARI BHUWNESHWAR  MAHTO 1998-08-06  F BC 2947  
245  2017-18 20171364277  XXXXXXXX6014 SUJEET KUMAR BADRI PRASAD MEHTA 1997-10-10  M BC 15000  
246  2018-19 20181505445  XXXXXXXX6014 ASHOK RAM MURLI RAM 1998-01-01  M SC 38000  
247  2018-19 20181696213  XXXXXXXX2508 RESHMI KERKETTA RAGHUNANDAN KERKETTA 2002-03-01  F ST 11060  
248  2019-20 20191921945  XXXXXXXX2508 KESAR SAW LALO SAW 2002-03-30  M BC 5172  
249  2017-18 20171454476  XXXXXXXX5554 ABHISHEK SAURAV ANIL KUMAR 1992-10-03  M BC 20000  
250  2018-19 20181714886  XXXXXXXX5554 NIKET SINGH RAGHVENDRA KUMAR SINGH 1996-09-09  M BC 25000  
251  2017-18 20171412760  XXXXXXXX4768 PUSHPA KUMARI PACHACHU RANA 1997-03-20  F BC 9000  
252  2019-20 20192014705  XXXXXXXX4768 ROBIN PASAWAN GOPAL PASAWAN 2002-05-18  M BC 9000  
253  2017-18 20171347287  XXXXXXXX7458 GULSHAN PRAWEEN MD NASIR 1998-05-03  F BC 4461  
254  2019-20 20191945258  XXXXXXXX7458 DEEBYANI MUNDA RAJENDRA MUNDA 1996-06-20  F ST 7495  
255  2017-18 20171265977  XXXXXXXX2998 PARVEJ ALAM JAYAUL RAHMAN 2002-05-02  M BC 2626  
256  2019-20 20191850236  XXXXXXXX2998 ANAMIKA KUMARI OMKAR PRASAD 1998-07-16  F BC 15000  
257  2017-18 20171293816  XXXXXXXX1330 PUJA KOTWAR BHANU KOTWAR 1995-09-05  F BC 30000  
258  2018-19 20181503468  XXXXXXXX1330 ROHIT   MEHTA GYANI   MEHTA 1998-04-07  M BC 25000  
259  2017-18 20171422099  XXXXXXXX5419 PARWAJ ANSARI KAIMUL ANSARI 1997-01-24  M BC 7088  
260  2019-20 20192012789  XXXXXXXX5419 SABBA PRAWEEN MD QAYUM 2002-01-01  F BC 5605  
261  2017-18 20171279684  XXXXXXXX7976 MANTU KUMAR BHUWNESHWER MAHTO 1998-07-12  M BC 9000  
262  2019-20 20191996142  XXXXXXXX7976 KULDEEP KUMAR RAJ KUMAR 2003-02-06  M ST 6360  
263  2017-18 20171364040  XXXXXXXX8870 DHANANJAY KUMAR PAL JANARDAN PAL 1992-03-23  M BC 4758  
264  2019-20 20191880198  XXXXXXXX8870 SHASHI SHEKHAR KUMAR BINDESHWARI PRASAD 1992-09-07  M BC 25000  
265  2017-18 20171489954  XXXXXXXX7598 MINA KUMARI UMESH DAS 1998-10-14  F BC 15000  
266  2019-20 20192027919  XXXXXXXX7598 CHANDAN KUMAR AMRENDRA KUMAR ROY 1998-06-11  M BC 15000  
267  2017-18 20171400158  XXXXXXXX2676 VIKASHKUMAR RANJIT DAS 1997-02-25  M SC 6780  
268  2019-20 20191940046  XXXXXXXX2676 JAYRAM KUMAR BILASH KUMAR 2001-02-04  M BC 9000  
269  2017-18 20171457658  XXXXXXXX3314 JYOTI  KUMARI TINKU KUMAR 1998-07-14  F BC 7760  

Appendices  
 
 151  
Sl.  
No.  
Academic 
year 
Application 
ID 
UID Name of applicant Father's name Date of 
birth 
Gender  Category  Amount paid 
270  2018-19 20181513993  XXXXXXXX3314 NILESH KUMAR YADAV RAJENDRA YADAV 2002-08-09  M BC 5200  
271  2017-18 20171328930  XXXXXXXX7688 RAJKUM RA YADAV LAKSHMAN YADA V 2001-02-10  M BC 4120  
272  2019-20 20192027246  XXXXXXXX7688 PRIYANKA  KUMARI PAWAN KUMAR VERM 2004-02-04  M BC 6720  
273  2017-18 20171347816  XXXXXXXX9575 ZUBAIDA KHATOON MD RAFIQUE QURAISHI 2000-03-24  F BC 4085  
274  2018-19 20181565996  XXXXXXXX9575 SHIBA PARWEEN MD RAFIQUE QURAISHI 2000-03-24  M BC 4426  
275  2018-19 20181733023  XXXXXXXX9109 JAHEDA KHATUN RUSTAM  ANSARI 2000-01-01  F BC 4510  
276  2019-20 20191839679  XXXXXXXX9109 MAJIDAN KHATOON RUSTAM ANSARI 1998-01-01  F BC 20000  
277  2018-19 20181569901  XXXXXXXX4336 DEWANTI  KUMARI SUGAN RAVIDAS 2001-01-01  F SC 6360  
278  2019-20 20192025795  XXXXXXXX4336 SANDEEP  DAS SURESH KUMAR DAS 2004-08-20  M SC 7330  
279  2017-18 20171426652  XXXXXXXX6373 PRIYANKA KUMARI BATESHWAR YADAV 1998-12-05  F BC 3110  
280  2019-20 20192018261  XXXXXXXX6373 SUSHMA KUMARI BATESHWAR YADAV 1998-12-05  F BC 3363  
281  2018-19 20181666750  XXXXXXXX5520 SURENDRA KUMAR YADAV BADIL YADAV 1994-11-15  M BC 5560  
282  2019-20 20192023266  XXXXXXXX5520 MANJU BEK BHOLA  ORAON 1991-01-15  F ST 38000  
283  2018-19 20181752205  XXXXXXXX6217 PUJA KUMARI GOPESHWAR MAHTO 1999-07-15  F ST 4483  
284  2019-20 20191986926  XXXXXXXX6217 MANISHA KISPOTTA AMRIT KISPOTTA 1993-04-13  F ST 17500  
285  2018-19 20181568157  XXXXXXXX0971 MUNNA KUMAR GOURI SHANKAR BHAGAT 1999-06-08  M BC 9000  
286  2019-20 20191937826  XXXXXXXX0971 PANKAJ KUMAR GOURISHANKAR BHAGAT 2000-11-09  M BC 8380  
287  2018-19 20181722157  XXXXXXXX0371 SAGIR AKHTAR AJMUDDIN ANSARI 2003-01-01  M BC 9000  
288  2019-20 20191929254  XXXXXXXX0371 JAMIL AKHTAR MD AJAMUDIN ANSARI 1997-02-13  M BC 9000  
289  2017-18 20171483376  XXXXXXXX7108 KISAN  KUMAR RAM  SAGAR  MAHATO 1997-08-20  M BC 20000  
290  2019-20 20191822468  XXXXXXXX7108 AKRITI KUMARI ASHOK KUMAR 2001-04-10  F SC 19900  
291  2017-18 20171488151  XXXXXXXX0672 SUNIL KUMAR MAHENDAR RAM 2002-10-11  M BC 9000  
292  2018-19 20181543854  XXXXXXXX0672 BIRENDAR KUMAR GUPTA MANGRU SAW 2003-08-10  M BC 9000  
293  2017-18 20171269823  XXXXXXXX5426 RENU KUMARI SHASHIBHUSHAN PRASAD 1981-06-08  F BC 17500  
294  2019-20 20192014635  XXXXXXXX5426 ANJU MINJ BHUGLU MINJ 1991-06-16  F ST 45000  
295  2017-18 20171317706  XXXXXXXX5313 SADIA FIRDOUS MD SHAFIQUE ANSARI 2001-01-12  F BC 12000  
296  2019-20 20191981304  XXXXXXXX5313 AFIFA NAUREEN ARSHAD JAMAL 2003-06-07  F BC 12000  
297  2017-18 20171303119  XXXXXXXX7214 ASIF UDDIN MD HAMEED UDDIN 1996-03-27  M BC 30000  
298  2018-19 20181610740  XXXXXXXX7214 JEVAN ORAON BISRAM ORAON 1999-06-21  M ST 25000  
299  2017-18 20171253038  XXXXXXXX9528 DAYAMANI HASSA BARNABAS HASSA 2001-05-07  F ST 3194  
300  2019-20 20191793992  XXXXXXXX9528 ASHRITA PURTI YAKUB PURTI 2001-10-20  F ST 7220  
301  2017-18 20171376041  XXXXXXXX8280 RUPA BHARTI BHIMNATH MAHTO 1999-09-09  F BC 4920  
302  2018-19 20181581119  XXXXXXXX8280 PAULIN HANS CHATAN HANS 1989-10-18  F ST 38000  
303  2017-18 20171141483  XXXXXXXX2388 MOHAMMAD YASIR ANSARI SHOUKAT ALI 1998-02-02  M BC 3578  
304  2018-19 20181729753  XXXXXXXX2388 RINKKI NAYAK SURES NAYAK 1999-11-24  F BC 5815  
305  2018-19 20181490363  XXXXXXXX4416 SHALINIBARLA PITERBARLA 1994-08-30  F ST 25000  
306  2019-20 20191763547  XXXXXXXX4416 NEELUKUMARI CHANDESHWARBHAGAT 1994-09-06  F ST 25000  
307  2017-18 20171477929  XXXXXXXX0914 KUNTIKUMARI GANGA SAW 1999-02-20  F BC 4080  
308  2019-20 20191912125  XXXXXXXX0914 DEEPAK KUMAR SAW GANGA SAW 1997-03-05  M BC 7910  

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
152   
Sl.  
No.  
Academic 
year 
Application 
ID 
UID Name of applicant Father's name Date of 
birth 
Gender  Category  Amount paid 
309  2017-18 2017951167 XXXXXXXX4450 GOUTAM DAS TAPAN DAS 1997-02-21  M SC 9000  
310  2018-19 20181714041  XXXXXXXX4450 MARTHA SURIN GABRIEL SURIN 1994-11-03  F ST 38000  
311  2017-18 20171318688  XXXXXXXX1650 RANJIT KUMAR   DAS NAND KISHORE DAS 1995-02-02  M SC 7429  
312  2018-19 20181750831  XXXXXXXX1650 PANKAJ KUMAR SHARMA NANDLAL SHARMA 1994-11-21  M BC 5949  
313  2017-18 2017889105 XXXXXXXX7882 GULABSHA PERWEEN NEYAMATTULLAH ANSARI 2000-01-07  F BC 4085  
314  2019-20 20191945358  XXXXXXXX7882 PUNNAM KHALKHO BIRSA KHALKHO 1998-07-15  F ST 18460  
315  2017-18 20171424402  XXXXXXXX9561 MEHTARINKIKISHOR KISHOR MEHTA 1992-07-08  F BC 5123  
316  2019-20 20191922236  XXXXXXXX9561 HEMROM DIPTI MARSEL HEMROM 1995-08-16  F ST 38000  
317  2017-18 20171466069  XXXXXXXX3376 SAPNA KUMARI SHAMBHU NATH HAJAM 2001-01-28  F BC 2096  
318  2019-20 20191955893  XXXXXXXX3376 DILIP KUMAR GOPE JAGANNATH GOPE 1995-03-02  M BC 4409  
319  2017-18 20171385376  XXXXXXXX8520 AFTAB ANSARI ABEDIN ANSARI 1999-12-21  M BC 3620  
320  2019-20 20191916356  XXXXXXXX8520 SARITA HEMBROM AKIND HEMBROM 2001-10-12  F ST 4241  
321  2018-19 20181672889  XXXXXXXX5995 RUBI KUMARI SUDHAMA SHARMA 2002-04-22  F BC 3221  
322  2019-20 20191892965  XXXXXXXX5995 NIRMAL KUMAR KRISHNA MEHTA 2001-03-07  M BC 3460  
323  2017-18 20171366499  XXXXXXXX0815 SUNIL KUMAR RAM UDEIT RAM 1996-05-24  M SC 9000  
324  2018-19 20181735927  XXXXXXXX0815 BALRAM CHOUDHARY SHIV PUJAN CHAUDHARY 2000-03-15  M BC 9000  
325  2019-20 20192027751  XXXXXXXX0815 VIKASH RAM BIJAY RAM 2001-06-20  M SC 9000  
326  2017-18 2017903261 XXXXXXXX4902 RUPESHKUMARYADAV NARESHPRASADYADAV 1995-08-14  M BC 4079  
327  2019-20 20191797505  XXXXXXXX4902 NITIN ANAND NARESH YADAV 2004-07-05  M BC 2950  
328  2017-18 20171154148  XXXXXXXX5139 SANAULLAH ANSARI ALIMUDDIN ANSARI 1996-07-07  M BC 18000  
329  2019-20 20191892456  XXXXXXXX5139 KAUSHAR ANSARI ALIMUDDIN ANSARI 1994-05-19  M BC 38000  
330  2017-18 20171490211  XXXXXXXX1948 DHARMENDRA KUMAR CHURAMAN MAHTO 1998-06-18  M BC 15000  
331  2019-20 20192020879  XXXXXXXX1948 SUNNY KUMAR BHOLA SAW 1999-03-11  M BC 15000  
332  2017-18 20171488624  XXXXXXXX0664 SUMAN KUMARI KARUNA KAR GOPE 1995-01-10  F BC 5884  
333  2019-20 20191827526  XXXXXXXX0664 JIDAN BHENGRA LATE ELIYAS BHENGRA 1994-12-23  M ST 4028  
334  2017-18 20171295005  XXXXXXXX9461 MARY EKKA AANAND EKKA 1995-03-07  F ST 24000  
335  2018-19 20181505343  XXXXXXXX9461 NISHI KUMARI SURENDRA PRASAD 1996-08-20  F BC 16020  
336  2017-18 2017820916 XXXXXXXX1473 KANCHAN KUMARI JAGDISH YADAV 1997-10-05  F BC 3851  
337  2018-19 20181557026  XXXXXXXX1473 PUNAM KUMARI JAGDISH YADAV 2001-01-15  F BC 6320  
338  2017-18 20171308492  XXXXXXXX7461 AMIT KUMAR KISHORI RANA 1991-08-05  M SC 11191  
339  2019-20 20191811485  XXXXXXXX7461 UPENDRA KUMAR DAS SHIBU RAM 1987-06-06  M SC 8360  
340  2017-18 2017806124 XXXXXXXX5462 RAVINDRA KUMAR MAHTO MANOJ MAHTO 1998-02-06  M BC 6300  
341  2019-20 20191931357  XXXXXXXX5462 PRASADI MAHTO DHANESHWAR MAHTO 2002-05-23  M BC 4520  
342  2018-19 20181569530  XXXXXXXX8357 VIMLA KUMARI BHEKHLAL MAHTO 1999-07-05  M BC 7910  
343  2019-20 20191951181  XXXXXXXX8357 RI NKI KUMARI BHEKHLAL MAHTO 1999-03-15  F BC 7910  
344  2017-18 20171483331  XXXXXXXX1213 AARCHANA  PURTY ISREAL  PURTY 1998-07-15  F ST 20000  
345  2018-19 20181503442  XXXXXXXX1213 ROHIT   KUMAR GYANI PRASAD 1998-07-08  M BC 25000  
346  2017-18 20171444686  XXXXXXXX8402 VIKAS KUMAR YADAV SAHDEO PRASAD YADAV 2001-03-01  M BC 2592  
347  2019-20 20191989443  XXXXXXXX8402 PRAKASH KUMAR YADAV SAHDEO PRASAD YADAV 1998-06-06  M BC 3166  

Appendices  
 
 153  
Sl.  
No.  
Academic 
year 
Application 
ID 
UID Name of applicant Father's name Date of 
birth 
Gender  Category  Amount paid 
348  2017-18 20171220656  XXXXXXXX2396 REKHA KUMARI MOTI CHAND MAHTO 1998-10-05  F BC 7760  
349  2019-20 20192020927  XXXXXXXX2396 DEGLAL MAHTO JAIRAM MAHTO 1992-04-03  M BC 9000  
350  2017-18 2017985316 XXXXXXXX1829 MARGUB ALAM MD ZAHUR ALAM 1998-08-11  M BC 3945  
351  2019-20 20191983394  XXXXXXXX1829 SOHEL FRAZ SHEKH RAFIQUE 2003-01-01  M BC 3920  
352  2017-18 20171281113  XXXXXXXX1257 CHANDAN  KUMAR RAM MANOJ RAM 2000-05-03  M BC 4120  
353  2019-20 20192026981  XXXXXXXX1257 SAKALDEW  KR VERMA SANTOSH  KR VERMA 2003-03-25  M BC 6720  
354  2017-18 20171456122  XXXXXXXX1773 PUSHPA HORO MASI CHARAN HORO 1993-04-22  F ST 18000  
355  2018-19 20181576059  XXXXXXXX1773 AKSHAY  DENIS  TIRKEY LEO ABHAY TIRKEY 1994-07-27  M ST 25000  
356  2018-19 20181729330  XXXXXXXX5015 MADHU KUMARI MANOJ BHAGAT 1999-01-04  F BC 3969  
357  2019-20 20191854992  XXXXXXXX5015 ABHA BHARTI MANOJ BHAGAT 2002-11-01  F BC 5420  
358  2017-18 20171487659  XXXXXXXX8679 RAVI KUMAR MANOJ SAW 2000-01-17  M BC 20000  
359  2019-20 20191993867  XXXXXXXX8679 VIDYA KUMARI RAJESHWAR RAM 1998-06-17  F SC 12070  
360  2017-18 20171233810  XXXXXXXX6775 VIKRAM KUMAR SHYAM LAL 1998-09-09  M BC 20000  
361  2018-19 20181543232  XXXXXXXX6775 NITISH KUMAR NERAJ SAHU 2000-05-16  M SC 20000  
362  2017-18 20171301424  XXXXXXXX1866 UMESH KUMAR SAW HIRALAL SAW 1995-08-12  M BC 9000  
363  2019-20 20191973604  XXXXXXXX1866 BINOD KUMAR MAHATO MAGAN MAHATO 1998-05-25  M BC 9000  
364  2017-18 20171303157  XXXXXXXX2345 RAJESH KUMAR ALDA DHANESHWAR ALDA 1997-09-08  M ST 25000  
365  2018-19 20181613376  XXXXXXXX2345 PRAVESH  DAS VIJAY  DAS 1999-04-05  M SC 25000  
366  2017-18 20171247747  XXXXXXXX7495 MISHI SWATI MINJ ADLOS MINJ 1999-01-24  F ST 17340  
367  2018-19 20181583819  XXXXXXXX7495 NISHI SWATI MINJ ADLOS MINJ 1999-01-24  F ST 19240  
368  2017-18 20171447115  XXXXXXXX0096 HAFIJ ANSARI NEJAM ANSARI 1997-05-05  M BC 3735  
369  2019-20 20191945240  XXXXXXXX0096 DIBYANEE MUNDA RAJENDRA MUNDA 1996-06-20  F ST 8250  
370  2018-19 20181733399  XXXXXXXX9052 YASHODA  KUMARI RANJIT SWANSI 2001-08-03  F SC 3096  
371  2019-20 20191884352  XXXXXXXX9052 KAJAL KUMARI RADHA GOVIND SINGH MUNDA 1998-04-24  F ST 3715  
372  2017-18 2017924157 XXXXXXXX2989 SADDAM ANSARI YUSUF ANSARI 1995-04-07  M BC 9000  
373  2019-20 20191971856  XXXXXXXX2989 PUJA KUMARI DOULAT  YADAV 2003-01-01  F BC 6420  
374  2017-18 20171479839  XXXXXXXX6400 REENA TIRKEY LACHHU BHAGAT 1998-08-16  F ST 9600  
375  2019-20 20191947948  XXXXXXXX6400 BEENA TIRKEY LACHHU BHAGAT 1998-08-16  F ST 13600  
376  2017-18 20171425528  XXXXXXXX5619 PRIYA  KUMARI SOMAR  MAHTO 2000-05-09  F BC 7760  
377  2018-19 20181513354  XXXXXXXX5619 DHEERAJ  KUMAR KUSHALNATH MAHTO 2003-03-02  M BC 5520  
378  2017-18 20171252953  XXXXXXXX0251 SAPNA KUMARI RISHI KESH KUSHWAHA 1994-11-22  F BC 38000  
379  2019-20 20192000166  XXXXXXXX0251 VISHAL KUMAR RISHI KESH KUSHWAHA 1997-03-12  M BC 5960  
380  2018-19 20181755058  XXXXXXXX4827 RENNU KUMARI BIRENDRA BHAGAT 1998-11-18  F ST 4788  
381  2019-20 20191841098  XXXXXXXX4827 SARFARAZ ANSARI JABAR ANSARI 2003-08-08  M BC 3280  
382  2017-18 20171303106  XXXXXXXX0302 ANISHA GUPTA NARAYAN KUMAR GUPTA 1998-12-23  F BC 25000  
383  2019-20 20191909685  XXXXXXXX0302 PREMLATA KUMARI AKHILESH PRASAD 1996-02-29  F SC 40000  
384  2017-18 20171335178  XXXXXXXX3667 PRADEEP KUMAR RAJAK BULAKI RAJAK 1993-02-19  M SC 15000  
385  2019-20 20191942412  XXXXXXXX3667 KHUSHBOO KUMARI BHIKHO RAJAK 1995-05-16  F SC 38000  
386  2018-19 20181609820  XXXXXXXX8351 SAHDEO KACHHAUA BUDHRAM KACHHUA 1994-08-16  M ST 11172  

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
154   
Sl.  
No.  
Academic 
year 
Application 
ID 
UID Name of applicant Father's name Date of 
birth 
Gender  Category  Amount paid 
387  2019-20 20191805663  XXXXXXXX8351 FULDEO KACHHUWA BUDHRAM  KACHHUWA 1991-01-12  M ST 10500  
388  2017-18 20171490263  XXXXXXXX6803 NISHA KUMARI SANTOSHI KUMHAR 1998-09-10  F BC 15000  
389  2019-20 20192020864  XXXXXXXX6803 RANJAN KUMAR TIKESHWAR THAKUR 2000-05-02  M BC 15000  
390  2017-18 20171281169  XXXXXXXX4784 MD  AZAD ALI MD AFTAB ALAM 2000-07-03  M BC 4120  
391  2019-20 20192026660  XXXXXXXX4784 RUPALI  KUMARI KARTIK MANDAL 2004-09-15  F BC 6660  
392  2017-18 20171252691  XXXXXXXX9551 ASHISHKUMARVERMA CHANDRASHEKHARPRASADVERMA 1997-02-25  M BC 38000  
393  2018-19 20181726439  XXXXXXXX9551 SUMITKUMAR SHIVPRAKASH 2000-02-25  M BC 15000  
394  2017-18 20171351559  XXXXXXXX0780 RUPA  RANI SUBHASH PRASAD SAH 1996-02-01  F BC 7130  
395  2019-20 20191974569  XXXXXXXX0780 BABY KUMARI CHANDRA MANDAL 1998-07-07  F BC 25000  
396  2018-19 20181687216  XXXXXXXX8631 ASHA HEMANTI TIGGA BARNA ORAON 2003-02-14  F ST 12000  
397  2019-20 20191883484  XXXXXXXX8631 JYOTI ALBINA TIGGA BARNA ORAON 2001-11-01  F ST 12000  
398  2017-18 20171403470  XXXXXXXX3781 ANISHKUMAR RAJESH KUMAR 1999-04-07  M BC 5880  
399  2019-20 20191765453  XXXXXXXX3781 RAJDEEP PAUL RAJENDRA PAUL 2000-04-01  M BC 4192  
400  2017-18 20171320427  XXXXXXXX4263 VINAY KUMAR  YADAV SUDAN YADAV 1996-06-02  M BC 6300  
401  2018-19 20181521585  XXXXXXXX4263 BRAHMDEV KUMAR VERMA JAGDISH MAHTO 2000-05-02  M BC 6020  
402  2017-18 20171162762  XXXXXXXX8707 NITESH KUMAR RAJAK SHIV SHANKAR RAJAK 1995-08-09  M SC 20000  
403  2018-19 20181747526  XXXXXXXX8707 DEEPA KUMARI UMESH PRASAD PAS 1983-09-02  F SC 38000  
404  2017-18 20171132741  XXXXXXXX3442 BIPIN KUMAR RAMPEYARE THAKUR 2000-10-10  M BC 9000  
405  2019-20 20191968486  XXXXXXXX3442 FULENDRA KUMAR ANESHWAR MAHTO 2000-04-11  M BC 9000  
406  2017-18 20171291119  XXXXXXXX2420 MUKTA   PRAMANIK GANESH   PRAMANIK 1998-12-15  F BC 3900  
407  2019-20 20191866163  XXXXXXXX2420 RAKESH PRAMANIK GANESH PRAMANIK 2003-03-14  M BC 4109  
408  2017-18 20171281345  XXXXXXXX2033 VIKASH  KUMAR YADAV VINOD YADAV 2001-01-05  M BC 4120  
409  2019-20 20191963598  XXXXXXXX2033 PANKAJ KUMAR VERMA PRAKASH VERMA 2004-08-10  M BC 2925  
410  2017-18 20171278629  XXXXXXXX0404 NANDU KUMAR VERMA BIRBAL VERMA 1999-04-18  M BC 3090  
411  2019-20 20191991449  XXXXXXXX0404 VIKRAM KUMAR CHOURASIYA GANESH PD CHOURASIYA 1998-04-01  M BC 3066  
412  2017-18 20171400033  XXXXXXXX7261 MALTI  KUMARI SANTOSHI   NAYAK 1984-02-17  F BC 9000  
413  2019-20 20191779701  XXXXXXXX7261 BHARTI KUMARI UPENDRA SAW 2004-02-16  F BC 3720  
414  2017-18 20171079604  XXXXXXXX8526 AJAY KUMAR DAS NARESH DAS 1987-02-14  M SC 45000  
415  2018-19 20181673087  XXXXXXXX8526 SARITA DEVI LAKSHMAN DAS 1986-10-01  F SC 15000  
416  2018-19 20181675977  XXXXXXXX1818 ERITA MURMU BALA MURMU 1991-01-05  F ST 6821  
417  2019-20 20191788907  XXXXXXXX1818 ARITA MURMU BALA MURMU 1991-01-05  F ST 38000  
418  2017-18 20171250192  XXXXXXXX1765 SUSHMA KUMARI DINESHWAR SINGH BINJHIYA 1998-05-13  F SC 3415  
419  2018-19 20181582601  XXXXXXXX1765 LAKHI KUMARI FEKLU MACHHUWA 1996-12-16  F SC 4015  
420  2017-18 2017993960 XXXXXXXX7466 PIYUSH YADAV SOTI YADAV 1998-12-04  M BC 9000  
421  2019-20 20191874566  XXXXXXXX7466 AISHA KHATOON MD ISLAM 2001-04-11  F BC 3384  
422  2017-18 20171455203  XXXXXXXX4876 PURUSHOTAM KUMAR BIGAN PRAJAPATI 1991-01-01  M BC 9000  
423  2019-20 20191999075  XXXXXXXX4876 EKTA KUMARI DEVRAJ KUMAR 1995-02-26  F BC 38000  
424  2017-18 20171286283  XXXXXXXX3714 BABITA KUMARI BALKISHOR PRASAD MEHTA 2002-02-08  F BC 3920  
425  2018-19 20181596926  XXXXXXXX3714 KAJAL KUMARI UMESH PRASAD MEHTA 2003-10-09  F BC 3760  

Appendices  
 
 155  
Sl.  
No.  
Academic 
year 
Application 
ID 
UID Name of applicant Father's name Date of 
birth 
Gender  Category  Amount paid 
426  2017-18 20171391488  XXXXXXXX4152 SAPNA KUMARI VIDYASAGAR SAH 1995-01-01  F BC 6130  
427  2019-20 20192022797  XXXXXXXX4152 MALTI TUDU SONA TUDU 1993-12-22  F ST 25000  
428  2017-18 20171474726  XXXXXXXX7243 PRITAM  MARANDI JOSEPH MARANDI 2001-09-07  M ST 15000  
429  2019-20 20191762610  XXXXXXXX7243 RAHUL KUMAR SHAILENDRA KUMAR MAHTO 2001-09-05  M BC 15000  
430  2017-18 20171273020  XXXXXXXX1938 SUMAN KUMAR DWARIKA PRASAD 1993-01-15  M BC 38000  
431  2019-20 20192015289  XXXXXXXX1938 PANKAJ KUMAR CHOUTELAL PRASAD MEHTA 1995-11-15  M BC 38000  
432  2018-19 20181751905  XXXXXXXX8755 NOORSABA PARWEEN ZEYAUL ANSARI 1999-05-06  F BC 3403  
433  2019-20 20191943531  XXXXXXXX8755 LAALAN KUMAR YADAV CHANDRAMOHAN YADAV 1999-08-03  M BC 20000  
434  2018-19 20181698100  XXXXXXXX3696 DEEPSHIKHA BHARTI RAMNARAYAN MAHTO 2002-01-14  F BC 9940  
435  2019-20 20191801141  XXXXXXXX3696 SWATI KUMARI RAM NARAYAN MAHTO 2002-01-14  F BC 13560  
436  2017-18 2017997606 XXXXXXXX7384 SAVITRI KUMARI DHANESHWAR MAHTO 1996-10-25  F BC 4580  
437  2019-20 20191722688  XXXXXXXX7384 BABITA KUMARI BASUDEV MAHTO 2001-08-03  F BC 5520  
438  2017-18 20171015479  XXXXXXXX7591 ARUN LAMAY DINESH LAMAY 1994-02-20  M ST 9000  
439  2018-19 20181725461  XXXXXXXX7591 SANGEETA LAMAY DINESH CHANDRA LAMAY 1997-09-09  F ST 4478  
440  2017-18 20171462909  XXXXXXXX8303 DINESH KUMAR BABULAL  MAHTO 1998-09-11  M BC 7760  
441  2019-20 20191796246  XXXXXXXX8303 SANJAY KUMAR SURESH PRASAD KUSHWAHA 2002-07-09  M BC 8360  
442  2017-18 20171481746  XXXXXXXX2049 AJIT KUMAR AADITYA PD VERMA 2001-01-10  M BC 5670  
443  2019-20 20191962082  XXXXXXXX2049 PINTU KUMAR VERMA DUMARCHAND MAHTO 2002-05-25  M BC 4570  
444  2017-18 20171481058  XXXXXXXX9383 ADITYA KUMAR ABHAY KUMAR 1997-04-15  M BC 40000  
445  2018-19 20181511097  XXXXXXXX9383 JOYTI GUPTA ASHWANI GUPTA 1998-10-08  M BC 40000  
446  2017-18 20171451121  XXXXXXXX8140 BIKRAM KUMAR DAS NAGESHWAR DAS 2000-03-01  M SC 3448  
447  2019-20 20191790209  XXXXXXXX8140 RINKI KUMARI LAL NAGESHWAR DAS 1995-02-15  F SC 7658  
448  2017-18 20171384658  XXXXXXXX2284 HIMANSHU KUMAR HEMANT PRASAD GUPTA 1999-10-05  M BC 7130  
449  2019-20 20191815073  XXXXXXXX2284 NITISH KUMAR SUBHASH PRASAD GUPTA 1999-10-02  M BC 9000  
450  2017-18 20171374586  XXXXXXXX7547 TAMJEED  ANSARI MUSLIM ANSARI 1996-07-03  M BC 6300  
451  2018-19 20181631300  XXXXXXXX7547 ANAND KUMAR RAMCHANDRA PRASAD VERMA 2003-12-25  M BC 6020  
452  2018-19 20181510931  XXXXXXXX5890 ISHRAT JAHAN SULTAN ANSARI 1996-01-06  F BC 4510  
453  2019-20 20191994686  XXXXXXXX5890 SUNNAINA KUMARI MANOJ PRASAD 1994-05-18  F BC 7630  
454  2017-18 20171361326  XXXXXXXX6400 DEEPAK  KUMAR ASHOK  PRASAD 1999-10-06  M BC 25000  
455  2018-19 20181572422  XXXXXXXX6400 AVINAV KUMAR RAM NARAYAN 2000-06-15  M SC 20000  
456  2018-19 20181262525  XXXXXXXX0321 JITENDRA KUMAR HEM LAL MAHTO 1992-04-10  M BC 45000  
457  2019-20 20191262525  XXXXXXXX0321 MR JITENDRA KUMAR BINOD MAHTO 1999-02-02  M BC 45000  
458  2017-18 20171324748  XXXXXXXX4065 MD SAHWAZ ALAM SAJJAD ALAM 1991-04-04  M BC 7340  
459  2019-20 20191923510  XXXXXXXX4065 PRADYUMN YADAV UMESH YADAV 1999-06-08  M BC 25000  
460  2017-18 20171399193  XXXXXXXX4895 ALKA KUMARI DHARMPAL PRASAD 1991-10-20  F BC 38000  
461  2018-19 20181755068  XXXXXXXX4895 KAMTA KUMAR AYODHAYA RAM 1979-01-31  M SC 18000  
462  2018-19 20181710765  XXXXXXXX5199 ANJALI  KUMARI DINESH PRASAD GUPTA 2002-10-25  F BC 5520  
463  2019-20 20192018263  XXXXXXXX5199 NISHA  KUMARI KARTIK MISTRI 2002-02-25  F BC 6560  
464  2017-18 20171395843  XXXXXXXX5107 MD TABREZ ALAM MD MANIRUDDIN ANSARI 1988-03-18  M BC 5447  

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
156   
Sl.  
No.  
Academic 
year 
Application 
ID 
UID Name of applicant Father's name Date of 
birth 
Gender  Category  Amount paid 
465  2019-20 20191997648  XXXXXXXX5107 TABREZ ALAM TAUFIQUE ALAM 1994-12-17  M BC 20000  
466  2017-18 20171285295  XXXXXXXX3695 PRIYANKA MINJ VINOD MINJ 1999-06-02  F ST 25000  
467  2018-19 20181502516  XXXXXXXX3695 SHARMILI   KUMARI NARAYAN  RANA 2000-06-19  F SC 20000  
468  2018-19 2018805138 XXXXXXXX4425 MD RIZWAN ANSARI MD AKHATAR ALI 1996-01-05  M BC 9700  
469  2019-20 20192027314  XXXXXXXX4425 SHIV KUMAR DINDAYAL MODI 1996-12-14  M BC 9000  
470  2017-18 20171243617  XXXXXXXX9497 PREETI JANE TETE ANIL TETE 2001-01-24  F ST 9560  
471  2018-19 20181523364  XXXXXXXX9497 OLIVE JOJO KULDEEP JOJO 2003-01-25  F ST 10060  
472  2017-18 20171370539  XXXXXXXX3745 CHAMELI KUMARI BABULAL PRASAD 1996-03-15  F BC 4520  
473  2019-20 20191981631  XXXXXXXX3745 VANDANA KUMARI KAMAL KISHORE 1997-11-19  F BC 38000  
474  2017-18 20171475474  XXXXXXXX1588 VIVEK  RANJAN RAJESH KUMAR VERMA 2000-10-04  M BC 15000  
475  2018-19 20181570017  XXXXXXXX1588 AYUSH  KUMAR NANDKISHOR PRASAD 2002-04-02  M BC 5520  
476  2019-20 20192026267  XXXXXXXX1588 SEJAL  KUMARI DHANESHWAR MANDAL 2003-03-27  F BC 6820  
477  2017-18 2017809275 XXXXXXXX2374 PRIYANKA KUMARI RAMNATH MAHTO 1996-04-10  F BC 5754  
478  2018-19 20181755043  XXXXXXXX2374 SABIHA PARWEEN MOKHTAR ANSARI 1999-01-01  F BC 20000  
479  2017-18 2017872790 XXXXXXXX8072 KHAGESH KUMAR SAH PRAHLAD SAH 1991-08-07  M BC 5763  
480  2019-20 20191716071  XXXXXXXX8072 GAYATRI BHARTI SANTOSH KUMAR SAAH 1997-02-08  F BC 20000  
481  2017-18 2017860573 XXXXXXXX7590 AMAN PRINCE EKKA AJIT PRAKASH EKKA 1999-02-02  M ST 14480  
482  2019-20 20191939490  XXXXXXXX7590 PRIYA EKKA AJIT EKKA 1997-07-13  F ST 38000  
483  2018-19 20181543671  XXXXXXXX2098 MUKTESWAR KUSHWAHA NAWAL KISHOR KUSHWAHA 2002-04-22  M BC 9000  
484  2019-20 20192002493  XXXXXXXX2098 RANJAN KUMAR THAKUR ANIL THAKUR 1998-02-25  M BC 9000  
485  2017-18 20171252934  XXXXXXXX7372 RICHA KUMARI RAMJIWAN SAHU 1997-01-01  F BC 24000  
486  2018-19 20181535491  XXXXXXXX7372 MANSHA KUMARI DAYANAND    SAHU 1998-02-26  F SC 30000  
487  2018-19 20181510627  XXXXXXXX4805 LAKHIN MUNDA SAWARAN MUNDA 1996-03-07  M ST 9000  
488  2019-20 20191876251  XXXXXXXX4805 ARJUN MUNDA HARIPADO SINGH MUNDA 2001-06-08  M ST 7260  
489  2017-18 20171293623  XXXXXXXX0018 SUMAN KUMARI ASHOK KUMAR 1998-09-01  F SC 25000  
490  2018-19 20181502418  XXXXXXXX0018 RICHA   KUMARI RAMJIVAN   SAHU 1997-01-01  F BC 20000  
491  2017-18 20171318026  XXXXXXXX7066 PAWAN  KUMAR SUBHASH PANDIT 1998-07-09  M BC 7760  
492  2019-20 20191855508  XXXXXXXX7066 DHIRAJ KUMAR VERMA PRABHU PRASAD VERMA 2001-01-05  M BC 2293  
493  2017-18 20171479713  XXXXXXXX9942 SUJRUNA NUSHA ASLAM ANSARI 1997-02-12  F BC 5345  
494  2018-19 20181710757  XXXXXXXX9942 TANJILA  PERWEEN AKHTAR ANSARI 1999-11-19  F BC 6587  
495  2017-18 20171471644  XXXXXXXX1142 GEETA KUMARI GOPAL SINGH 1999-05-12  F ST 3164  
496  2018-19 20181562517  XXXXXXXX1142 PRERNA GURIA FRANCIS GURIA 1999-07-01  F ST 4082  
497  2017-18 20171383822  XXXXXXXX4247 SHILA KUMARI SUDAM MAHTO 2001-02-25  F BC 2256  
498  2018-19 20181681705  XXXXXXXX4247 PANCHAMI KUMARI MUNI SAW 1997-06-07  F BC 2935  
499  2018-19 20181751822  XXXXXXXX4674 NEHHA TOPPO CHANDE ORAON 1998-10-16  F ST 4483  
500  2019-20 20191987242  XXXXXXXX4674 MEERA MEHTA DANI RAM MAHTO 1994-06-21  F BC 12000  
501  2017-18 20171410482  XXXXXXXX0111 ARCHNA KUMARI SHRAWAN KUMAR SINGH 1997-12-02  F SC 38000  
502  2019-20 20192015350  XXXXXXXX0111 RAJESH KUMAR ARJUN PRASAD 2000-04-11  M BC 10030  
503  2017-18 20171449031  XXXXXXXX4846 SONULAL KUSHWAHA NAND LAL MAHTO 1998-04-10  M BC 9000  

Appendices  
 
 157  
Sl.  
No.  
Academic 
year 
Application 
ID 
UID Name of applicant Father's name Date of 
birth 
Gender  Category  Amount paid 
504  2019-20 20191998671  XXXXXXXX4846 PUMMY KUMARI RANJIT KUMAR GUPTA 1996-01-01  F BC 38000  
505  2018-19 20181713636  XXXXXXXX8947 PUJA  KUMARI PRAYAG YADAV 1999-03-30  F BC 6020  
506  2019-20 20192018992  XXXXXXXX8947 ANIL  KUMAR RITLAL PRASAD VERMA 2004-02-25  M BC 6720  
507  2017-18 20171043293  XXXXXXXX0828 PUSHPA KUMARI RAMNATH SAH 1996-07-16  F BC 6600  
508  2018-19 20181752507  XXXXXXXX0828 ROHIT KUMAR SAH MAHENDRA SAH 1996-12-20  M BC 7420  
509  2017-18 20171472025  XXXXXXXX0679 SARITA EKKA PAULUS EKKA 1987-10-25  F ST 6812  
510  2018-19 20181562066  XXXXXXXX0679 ASRITA EKKA PAULUS EKKA 1987-10-25  F ST 8122  
511  2017-18 20171460109  XXXXXXXX6313 ASHOK RAM MURLI RAM 1998-01-25  M SC 15000  
512  2018-19 20181508115  XXXXXXXX6313 SONI KUMARI UPENDRA KUMAR 1999-09-05  F BC 15000  
513  2017-18 20171288674  XXXXXXXX1111 PARWATI KUMARI CHANDRA URAON 1998-03-01  F ST 3794  
514  2019-20 20191806236  XXXXXXXX1111 AMIT KUJUR CHANDRA ORAON 1998-09-07  M ST 7202  
515  2017-18 20171252157  XXXXXXXX8714 SAHIBA PERWEEN NASIR HUSSAIN 2001-11-15  F BC 4839  
516  2019-20 20191897563  XXXXXXXX8714 KANCHAN KUMARI RUPU SAHU 1996-05-17  F BC 6470  
517  2017-18 20171440676  XXXXXXXX1784 SHARMILI  KUMARI NARAYAN  RANA 1999-08-03  F BC 22930  
518  2018-19 20181529436  XXXXXXXX1784 AKANKSA   KUMARI ASHOK   VERMA 1997-06-11  F BC 24000  
519  2017-18 20171371013  XXXXXXXX1106 ANIL KUMAR MEHTA KAMESHWAR MEHTA 1994-12-05  M BC 9000  
520  2019-20 20192015312  XXXXXXXX1106 GUDDOO KUMAR SANJAY SAW 1999-04-12  M BC 9000  
521  2017-18 20171381479  XXXXXXXX0897 ANAND PRASAD MUNDRIKA PRASAD 1997-07-08  M BC 15000  
522  2018-19 20181496278  XXXXXXXX0897 SUJIT KUMAR SUDAMA GUPTA 1998-05-08  M BC 25000  
523  2018-19 20181725531  XXXXXXXX0572 SOURAV KUMAR BECHAN PRASAD YADAV 1998-09-08  M BC 3969  
524  2019-20 20191956789  XXXXXXXX0572 PRASHANT KUMAR DEY LAKHAN CHANDRA DEY 1998-03-04  M BC 5318  
525  2018-19 20181501218  XXXXXXXX0447 NEETU KUMARI BADRI PRASAD MEHTA 1998-12-24  F BC 15000  
526  2019-20 20191885670  XXXXXXXX0447 ANITA KUMARI DUKHWA SINGH 1996-10-24  F BC 38000  
527  2017-18 20171235825  XXXXXXXX2854 JULKAR ANSARI HAMID ANSARI 2001-03-02  M BC 2040  
528  2019-20 20191815392  XXXXXXXX2854 RAMJAN ANSARI HAMID ANSARI 2000-04-08  M BC 2520  
529  2017-18 20171426406  XXXXXXXX7833 ANIMA LAKRA JIWAN LAKRA 2000-12-06  F ST 12000  
530  2019-20 20191894995  XXXXXXXX7833 PRAMILA LAKRA JIWAN LAKRA 2000-12-06  F ST 12000  
531  2018-19 20181747620  XXXXXXXX5392 RAHUL KUMAR YOGENDRA PRASAD GUPTA 1997-08-01  M BC 7420  
532  2019-20 20191997445  XXXXXXXX5392 MONA RANI SUDHIR KUMAR GUPTA 2001-08-20  F BC 8020  
533  2017-18 20171329007  XXXXXXXX7414 RAUSHAN KUMAR ASHISH PRASAD SINGH 1993-03-10  M BC 20000  
534  2018-19 20181496837  XXXXXXXX7414 MANOJ KUMAR MAHESH SAHU 1997-03-08  M BC 25000  
535  2017-18 20171334316  XXXXXXXX4200 RUPESH KUMAR MEHAR ASHOK KUMAR MEHAR 2001-07-28  M BC 2711  
536  2018-19 20181535525  XXXXXXXX4200 SUKESH KERKETTA TOBIAS KERKETTA 1999-12-18  M ST 15000  
537  2018-19 20181490643  XXXXXXXX9677 SUMANKANDULNA DULARKANDULNA 1993-10-20  F ST 25000  
538  2019-20 20191763732  XXXXXXXX9677 JYOTI TOPNO MARSHAL TOPNO 1988-05-17  F ST 25000  
539  2017-18 20171430840  XXXXXXXX6898 DURGA PANDIT RAMCHANDRA PANDIT 1999-06-06  M BC 5670  
540  2018-19 20181558263  XXXXXXXX6898 KAPOOR RAJAK BHUKHAL RAJAK 2000-03-02  M SC 6860  
541  2017-18 20171279708  XXXXXXXX2490 BIRENAR KUMAR MAHTO GENDO MAHTO 1999-06-08  M BC 6300  
542  2018-19 20181609524  XXXXXXXX2490 SUDHIR KUMAR KARTIK MAHTO 2000-03-03  M BC 6020  

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
158   
Sl.  
No.  
Academic 
year 
Application 
ID 
UID Name of applicant Father's name Date of 
birth 
Gender  Category  Amount paid 
543  2017-18 20171351527  XXXXXXXX0978 SHIWANI KUMARI INDRAJEET MIRDHA 2001-01-08  F SC 5260  
544  2019-20 20191906365  XXXXXXXX0978 BHAWANI  KUMARI INDRAJEET   MIRDHA 2002-12-12  F SC 5260  
545  2017-18 20171445464  XXXXXXXX0164 SUNIL KUMAR MUNNILAL PRASAD 1998-04-02  M BC 4520  
546  2019-20 20192017997  XXXXXXXX0164 BIJENDRA KUMAR TULU MAHTO 1999-05-20  M BC 38000  
547  2017-18 20171348088  XXXXXXXX6867 SANJAY KUMAR PANDIT TRILOCHAN PANDIT 2000-04-01  M BC 4420  
548  2019-20 20191678286  XXXXXXXX6867 ANUJ KUMAR PANDIT TRILOCHAN PANDIT 2002-03-05  M BC 4445  
549  2018-19 20181522270  XXXXXXXX9154 BABY KUMARI GIRDHARI PRASAD YADAV 2004-01-01  F BC 4120  
550  2019-20 20191779100  XXXXXXXX9154 MAHESHWARI KUMARI GIRDHARI PRASAD YADAV 2002-01-01  F BC 5420  
551  2018-19 20181677138  XXXXXXXX3338 BIKASH KUMAR AWADH SHARMA 1999-02-01  M BC 9000  
552  2019-20 20192005370  XXXXXXXX3338 ANJANA KUMARI BISHNUDEV SAW 2003-01-26  F BC 2975  
553  2017-18 20171482812  XXXXXXXX3888 CHANDARMANI KUMARI SUNA ORAON 1997-04-30  F ST 25000  
554  2019-20 20191857546  XXXXXXXX3888 SUNITI KUMARI SHANKAR MAHTO 2001-04-25  F BC 5605  
555  2017-18 20171402835  XXXXXXXX2776 SOURAV  KUMAR DEV  PRASAD 1997-10-23  M BC 23030  
556  2018-19 20181525399  XXXXXXXX2776 KAJAL   KUMARI SURAJ   PRASAD   GUPTA 1999-06-01  F SC 25000  
557  2017-18 20171388937  XXXXXXXX3824 SHABANA PARWIN MD  NAJIB ALAM 1999-03-04  F BC 3915  
558  2019-20 20191972138  XXXXXXXX3824 AFSANA  PARWEEN MD NAJIB ALAM 1999-06-02  F BC 6385  
559  2017-18 20171402439  XXXXXXXX2452 ASHOK KUMAR THAKUR SANJAY THAKUR 1999-02-05  M BC 3653  
560  2019-20 20191947131  XXXXXXXX2452 KALPANA KUMARI LILA MIRDHA 1997-07-09  F SC 9100  
561  2018-19 20181490406  XXXXXXXX9216 RAJNIPURTI BIJAY KR PURTI 1992-12-04  F ST 25000  
562  2019-20 20191763738  XXXXXXXX9216 MEENU KUMARI PURNDHAR SINGH 1997-12-06  F BC 25000  
563  2017-18 20171225866  XXXXXXXX5746 NEYAZ ALAM MS ALAM 1993-01-01  M BC 10500  
564  2019-20 20192027887  XXXXXXXX5746 ASHFAQUE AHMED MD SAYEED 2000-10-20  M BC 45000  
565  2017-18 20171351566  XXXXXXXX4442 RAJEEV  RANJAN UPENDRAPRASAD SAH 1994-02-22  M BC 7130  
566  2019-20 20191936057  XXXXXXXX4442 SHUBHAM KUMAR SAH UPENDRA PRASAD SAH 1994-03-15  M BC 9000  
567  2018-19 20181662442  XXXXXXXX9141 RAJKUMAR MURMU LEELU MURMU 1993-01-25  M ST 10343  
568  2019-20 20192017979  XXXXXXXX9141 ANKITA TUDU SHIV CHARAN TUDU 1994-12-08  F ST 38000  
569  2017-18 20171296365  XXXXXXXX3903 KALESHWAR PURAN PARIKSHIT PURAN 1995-05-25  M ST 15000  
570  2019-20 20191888523  XXXXXXXX3903 NAND KISHOR MAHTO ABHAY  MAHTO 2003-08-19  M BC 2256  
571  2017-18 20171403395  XXXXXXXX0521 KUDRAT ALI TAUKIR AHMAD 1996-07-20  M BC 9000  
572  2018-19 20181530780  XXXXXXXX0521 SATISH PRASAD SANJIV PRASAD 2000-05-13  M BC 9000  
573  2017-18 20171489991  XXXXXXXX4281 CHANDAN KUMAR BISHNU PADA KUMBHAKAR 1998-07-16  M BC 15000  
574  2019-20 20192027971  XXXXXXXX4281 ANAND KUMAR BADRI PRASAD VERMA 2000-05-11  M BC 15000  
575  2018-19 20181754426  XXXXXXXX7584 SHIROMANI KUMARI LATE JAGDISH BARAIK 1989-12-12  F ST 9000  
576  2019-20 20192011064  XXXXXXXX7584 ANUJ KUMAR GANDORI PD MEHTA 1998-04-11  M BC 10500  
577  2017-18 20171351570  XXXXXXXX2279 APSAR ANSARI KAIMUL ANSARI 1996-07-19  M BC 5250  
578  2019-20 20192011023  XXXXXXXX2279 FARJANA KHATOON SAMIM ANSARI 2002-01-01  F BC 5100  
579  2017-18 20171478501  XXXXXXXX4566 AASHISH KUMAR SARKAR DILIP KUMAR SARKAR 1994-02-10  M SC 45000  
580  2018-19 20181515673  XXXXXXXX4566 SHIVA SARKAR DILEEP SARKAR 1995-02-28  M SC 45000  
581  2017-18 20171361347  XXXXXXXX2720 VIKASH KUMAR GAVDEV MAHATO 1999-10-07  M SC 20000  

Appendices  
 
 159  
Sl.  
No.  
Academic 
year 
Application 
ID 
UID Name of applicant Father's name Date of 
birth 
Gender  Category  Amount paid 
582  2019-20 20191543203  XXXXXXXX2720 MANISHA SUHANA TIGGA JOHN TIGGA 1999-06-09  F ST 25000  
583  2018-19 20181490400  XXXXXXXX6402 SALOMISOY NAMANSOY 1992-01-24  F ST 25000  
584  2019-20 20191763657  XXXXXXXX6402 TARAKUMARI LT RAMLAKHANSAHU 1999-09-01  F BC 25000  
585  2017-18 20171341741  XXXXXXXX2754 MD ASLAM ANSARI MD YUSUF ANSARI 2000-05-01  M BC 2440  
586  2019-20 20192015287  XXXXXXXX2754 RAMESH KUMAR PRAMOD MANDAL 1998-03-04  M BC 9000  
587  2017-18 20171488675  XXXXXXXX0502 DINA NATH SAH HARI SAH 1998-10-01  M BC 3109  
588  2019-20 20191927683  XXXXXXXX0502 BAIJANTI KUMARI NEELKANTH MARAIYA 1998-01-05  F ST 9100  
589  2017-18 20171461007  XXXXXXXX3952 RANJEET RAJAK LALBAHADUR BAITHA 1995-06-28  M SC 7810  
590  2019-20 20191924494  XXXXXXXX3952 SHANI DEW RAJAK LAL BAHADUR RAJAK 1993-04-15  M SC 38000  
591  2017-18 20171059215  XXXXXXXX7462 MD SAJID ANSARI HASIB ANSARI 1999-10-06  M BC 3318  
592  2019-20 20191878818  XXXXXXXX7462 SAJID ANSARI SAMSUL ANSARI 1992-10-25  M BC 20000  
593  2017-18 20171445675  XXXXXXXX2506 KHUSHBU  KUMARI SHIVAN  PASWAN 1994-03-16  F BC 24000  
594  2018-19 20181546454  XXXXXXXX2506 AARCHANA KUJUR WILSON KUJUR 2000-07-25  F SC 20000  
595  2018-19 20181510795  XXXXXXXX5533 RESHMA KHATUN JASMUDDIN ANSARI 1996-01-05  F BC 4175  
596  2019-20 20191994506  XXXXXXXX5533 SUNAINA KUMARI MANOJ PRASAD 1995-06-14  F BC 6520  
597  2017-18 20171381377  XXXXXXXX3299 PROSENJIT MANDAL MADAN MANDAL 1999-01-17  M BC 9000  
598  2019-20 20192026455  XXXXXXXX3299 ANJU RANI MAHATOO SURENDRA NATH MAHATOO 2000-02-13  F BC 9000  
599  2018-19 20181731989  XXXXXXXX9561 ARBIND PAL RAMPATI PAL 1982-01-15  M BC 9000  
600  2019-20 20191938149  XXXXXXXX9561 SUNIL KUMAR AMBIKA RAM 1990-04-02  M SC 10500  
601  2017-18 20171358843  XXXXXXXX3841 INDRAJEET VERMA MAHENDRA VERMA 1993-03-23  M BC 6020  
602  2019-20 20191765810  XXXXXXXX3841 PRITY VERMA MAHENDRA RAM 1986-03-03  F BC 38000  
 
  

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
160   
Appendix-6.3A 
(Referred to paragraph 6.12.2 (3rd  Bullet); page 75) 
Same applicant name, fathers’ name, bank account number and Aadhaar No., pursuing same course in different academic years but from different Institutes  
Sl. 
No.  
Academic 
year 
Application 
ID 
Name of 
applicant 
Father's 
name 
Date of 
birth 
Course 
code 
Institute 
code 
Course 
year 
Admission 
no. 
Admission 
date 
Gender  Category  Bank 
account 
number 
UID Final 
tuition 
fee 
Total 
maintenance 
fee 
Total 
scholarship 
paid 
1 2018-19 20181623038  SAURAV MODI  PRAKASH 
MODI 
21-12-2001  6038 5114 2 843 2017-07-10  M BC 17760101 
19276  
XXXX 
XXXX 
7261 
 
7080  1920  9000  
2 2018-19 20181573742  VIKRAM 
KUMAR 
KRISHNA 
MURARI 
RAM 
12-09-1989  6091 3124 2 09 42905 M SC 11442683 
786  
XXXX 
XXXX 
7456 
 
6240  2760  9000  
3 2019-20 20191785831  SHEFALI 
XAXA 
SOHRAI 
XAXA 
03-10-1999  6089 680 1 15483 2019-07-12  F ST 50216334 
573  
XXXX 
XXXX 
3528 
 
2400  3600  6000  
4 2019-20 20191830607  ANJALI 
XALXO 
NIRDOSH 
XALXO 
01-01-1995  6090 3252 1 3000667 43672 F ST 17760100 
03926  
XXXX 
XXXX 
5202 
 
31950  6050  38000  
5 2018-19 20181545110  TILESHWAR 
MAHATO 
GULU 
MAHATO 
03-06-1997  6126 3833 2 24929 2018-08-31  M BC 47261011 
0003365  
XXXX 
XXXX 
1013 
 
2600  2520  5120  
6 2017-18 20171412774  DEEPAK 
KUMAR 
MAHESH 
THAKUR 
27-02-1999  6089 833 1 1617 42987 M BC 34489195 
320  
XXXX 
XXXX 
8019 
 
2000  2100  4100  
7 2018-19 20181588215  NIRAJ ORAON KAMDEV 
ORAON 
24-06-2002  6038 3275 1 52 2018-06-23  M BC 49001011 
0012871  
XXXX 
XXXX 
3558 
 
6450  3120  9570  
8 2018-19 20181489912  RAZAUL 
ANSARI 
AZIZ ANSARI 
 16-02-1991  6090 226 2 17 42947 M BC 33330566 
872  
XXXX 
XXXX 
3352 
 
30000  4200  34200  
9 2019-20 20191785995  RAHUL 
LAKRA 
VISHWANAT 
H ORAON 
11-09-2001  6038 741 1 8262 2019-07-10  M ST 15010101 
26687  
XXXX 
XXXX 
9600 
 
2050  2760  4810  
10 2017-18 20171299591  INDU KUMAR 
BHAGAT 
SRI 
SUKHDEO 
BHAGAT 
30-12-2001  6038 2046 1 328 42908 M ST 17760101 
16077  
XXXX 
XXXX 
7156 
 
10440  4560  15000  
11 2017-18 2017987361 AVIJIT 
CHANDRA 
SUKESH 
CHANDRA 
18-10-1999  6088 2400 3 160 2015-07-27  M BC 34878144 
180  
XXXX 
XXXX 
5314 
 
120  1680  1800  
12 2018-19 20181584997  SUMAN 
KUMARI 
LAKHI KANT 
PRAMANIK 
13-09-1998  1108 3833 2 441H 43091 F BC 59121899 
977  
XXXX 
XXXX 
3402 
 
2600  2520  5120  
13 2017-18 20171405901  MITHUN 
KUMAR 
SAINATH 
MAHTO 
01-01-2002  1429 773 1 119 2017-07-06  M BC 58861051 
0000890  
XXXX 
XXXX 
6622 
 
897  1920  2817  

Appendices  
 
 161  
Sl. 
No.  
Academic 
year 
Application 
ID 
Name of 
applicant 
Father's 
name 
Date of 
birth 
Course 
code 
Institute 
code 
Course 
year 
Admission 
no. 
Admission 
date 
Gender  Category  Bank 
account 
number 
UID Final 
tuition 
fee 
Total 
maintenance 
fee 
Total 
scholarship 
paid 
14 2019-20 20192027033  SANJAY 
KUMAR 
MANDAL 
NIRODH 
MANDAL 
04-02-1997  6089 581 3 254 43628 M BC 74882200 
009789  
XXXX 
XXXX 
1925 
 
5860  2520  8380  
15 2019-20 20191944461  NOUSHAD 
ALAM 
SULEMAN 
ANSARI 
01-06-2000  1496 2600 1 488 2019-10-03  M BC 91901005 
6838468  
XXXX 
XXXX 
0413 
 
7560  1440  9000  
16 2019-20 20191828317  MD MERAJ 
ASHRAF 
ANSARI 
MD 
KALIMUDDI 
N ANSARI 
03-05-1998  6079 3348 1 ME/19/12  43692 M BC 45741011 
0008251  
XXXX 
XXXX 
9809 
 
34150  3850  38000  
17 2019-20 20191804361  SUBODH 
KUMAR 
MUNDRIKA 
RAM 
15-11-1989  1887 4473 2 115 2017-11-21  M BC 20060993 
452  
XXXX 
XXXX 
2660 
 
2165  4020  6185  
18 2017-18 20171295426  ARBIND RAVI 
DAS 
JYOTISH 
RAVIDAS 
08-02-2000  6038 582 2 218 42536 M SC 33515420 
438  
XXXX 
XXXX 
5167 
 
2155  2760  4915  
19 2017-18 20171356666  JYOTI SOY REGA SOY 07-07-1995  6093 487 1 22 2017-08-29  F ST 04040015 
00057701  
XXXX 
XXXX 
5423 
 
3936  5300  9236  
20 2018-19 20181721829  MANISH 
KUJUR 
LAKHINDAR 
KUJUR 
02-02-2002  6038 383 2 230 42919 M ST 35112732 
643  
XXXX 
XXXX 
1766 
 
1100  2760  3860  
21 2018-19 20181508798  PATRASH 
BADAL KISKU 
SURESH 
KISKU 
05-04-1999  6089 581 1 517 2018-07-28  M ST 20366189 
138  
XXXX 
XXXX 
2685 
 
5500  3300  8800  
22 2019-20 20191819739  ANJU KUMARI  JITU ORAON 07-04-1998  6089 746 1 1700 43664 F ST 34680100 
0005537  
XXXX 
XXXX 
0842 
 
11250  3600  14850  
23 2017-18 20171357189  SALOMI NAG MASI NAG 11-11-1993  1006 4100 1 459 2017-09-01  F ST 34039376 
148  
XXXX 
XXXX 
7396 
 
11800  5700  17500  
24 2017-18 20171338081  VISHWNATH 
KISKU 
KAILA 
KISKU 
04-09-1993  6089 157 1 1488 42947 M ST 00550102 
38045  
XXXX 
XXXX 
8759 
 
1600  3300  4900  
25 2019-20 20191946203  MAMTA 
KUMARI 
RAMDHANI 
ORAON 
10-03-2002  6029 713 1 188 2019-07-29  F ST 07460107 
39115  
XXXX 
XXXX 
4121 
 
513  2530  3043  
26 2019-20 20191976039  MANISHKUMA 
R 
SURENDRAP 
RASAD 
03-02-2000  6029 770 1 391 43651 M BC 35166996 
046  
XXXX 
XXXX 
6226 
 
734  1920  2654  
27 2017-18 20171227710  HINDU TOPNO SINGHRAY 
TOPNO 
17-03-1996  6089 52 1 52560 2017-07-28  M ST 45781011 
0000655  
XXXX 
XXXX 
9361 
 
1128  6270  7398  
28 2017-18 20171368609  VICKY 
KUMAR 
YADAV 
RAMCHAND 
RA YADAV 
12-07-2002  6041 2155 1 43 42920 M BC 47921821 
0006148  
XXXX 
XXXX 
4782 
 
3040  1920  4960  

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
162   
Sl. 
No.  
Academic 
year 
Application 
ID 
Name of 
applicant 
Father's 
name 
Date of 
birth 
Course 
code 
Institute 
code 
Course 
year 
Admission 
no. 
Admission 
date 
Gender  Category  Bank 
account 
number 
UID Final 
tuition 
fee 
Total 
maintenance 
fee 
Total 
scholarship 
paid 
29 2017-18 20171476536  SADIK 
HUSSAIN 
MEHANDI 
HUSSAIN 
12-03-1999  6029 57 2 1350 2017-09-19  M BC 48441011 
0004179  
XXXX 
XXXX 
5692 
 
2000  1920  3920  
30 2017-18 20171228572  MD JABED 
ANSARI 
MD RAFIK 
ANSARI 
05-02-2000  6041 490 1 23222 42930 M BC 34606310 
672  
XXXX 
XXXX 
8863 
 
3348  1920  5268  
31 2019-20 20191764259  JAISINTA 
KUMARI 
BAHURA 
ORAON 
08-06-2001  6029 685 2 79 2019-08-29  F ST 49231051 
0008505  
XXXX 
XXXX 
9416 
 
3450  2760  6210  
32 2017-18 20171159420  PRATIMA 
KARMALI 
KAITKA 
KARMALI 
12-03-1999  6089 2094 2 30113 42611 F ST 59018542 
674  
XXXX 
XXXX 
5070 
 
1257  3600  4857  
33 2017-18 20171365532  MURTEJ 
ANSARI 
JEIYAUDDIN 
ANSARI 
20-12-1999  6038 582 2 240 2017-07-18  M BC 33495892 
456  
XXXX 
XXXX 
7543 
 
2155  1920  4075  
34 2019-20 20191903906  KUNDAN 
KUMAR 
NIRMAL 
SAW 
26-08-1999  1499 2913 1 05 43684 M BC 48441011 
0007536  
XXXX 
XXXX 
7538 
 
7240  1760  9000  
35 2018-19 20181641057  AJAY 
MANDAL 
CHINIBAS 
MANDAL 
16-01-1998  1499 3290 2 22 2018-08-21  M BC 47341821 
1008434  
XXXX 
XXXX 
4506 
 
7080  1920  9000  
36 2018-19 20181294710  PRATIMA 
KUMARI 
LAXMAN 
PRASAD 
16-01-2002  6029 176 2 165 42947 F BC 49301821 
0000232  
XXXX 
XXXX 
2798 
 
3025  1920  4945  
37 2019-20 20191995223  PRASAN LAL 
KUJUR 
SULEMAN 
KUJUR 
29-12-1997  1215 454 2 242 2018-09-07  M ST 49931011 
0010503  
XXXX 
XXXX 
6371 
 
4030  3600  7630  
38 2018-19 20181609840  ABHISHEK 
KUMAR 
MUNDA 
KHUDIA 
MUNDA 
17-12-2000  6041 5114 1 030718-
0164 
43284 M ST 17760101 
09529  
XXXX 
XXXX 
3255 
 
6240  2760  9000  
39 2019-20 20191690402  PANKAJ 
KUMAR 
BHUNESHW 
AR MAHTO 
21-07-1999  1496 2829 2 1234 2018-08-25  M BC 35119572 
409  
XXXX 
XXXX 
8263 
 
7080  1920  9000  
40 2019-20 20191801793  ANJALI 
MEHTA 
DILIP 
PRASAD 
MEHTA 
12-07-2002  6089 2271 1 435 43642 F BC 58881821 
0001369  
XXXX 
XXXX 
7816 
 
1225  2520  3745  
41 2017-18 2017907982 POOJA 
KUMARI 
BHARAT 
MAHTO 
16-04-2000  6038 773 2 249 2016-07-20  F BC 35876145 
338  
XXXX 
XXXX 
6393 
 
1433  1920  3353  
42 2018-19 20181323503  HRITIK 
ROUSHAN 
ANAND 
SATYANARA 
YAN 
MANDAL 
10-03-2002  6038 268 2 78 42934 M BC 48701051 
0001123  
XXXX 
XXXX 
9111 
 
915  3120  4035  
43 2017-18 20171455995  AJIT KUMAR 
RAM 
DILIP RAM 
01-01-2000  6029 582 1 333 2017-07-13  M BC 50172816 
666  
XXXX 
XXXX 
9014 
 
2155  1920  4075  

Appendices  
 
 163  
Sl. 
No.  
Academic 
year 
Application 
ID 
Name of 
applicant 
Father's 
name 
Date of 
birth 
Course 
code 
Institute 
code 
Course 
year 
Admission 
no. 
Admission 
date 
Gender  Category  Bank 
account 
number 
UID Final 
tuition 
fee 
Total 
maintenance 
fee 
Total 
scholarship 
paid 
44 2019-20 20191963781  SUMANT 
KUMAR 
RAMESHWA 
R PD SAW 
10-08-1995  6090 5139 1 1250 43705 M BC 48881011 
0006658  
XXXX 
XXXX 
1285 
 
34500  3500  38000  
45 2019-20 20191762301  VISHAL 
KUMAR SAHU 
OM 
PRAKASH 
SAHU 
28-08-2001  6029 680 1 16134 2019-07-19  M BC 49241051 
0006142  
XXXX 
XXXX 
2572 
 
1360  1920  3280  
46 2018-19 20181682276  SRISHTI 
AKANKSHA 
XALXO 
VIKRAM 
XALXO 
28-06-1999  6038 5114 2 123 42920 F ST 17760101 
02087  
XXXX 
XXXX 
5639 
 
5940  4560  10500  
47 2017-18 20171245320  RAVI   KUMAR  SAHDEV  
NARAYAN 
08-10-2001  6070 741 1 7765 2017-08-17  M BC 32344100 
23  
XXXX 
XXXX 
9514 
 
1960  2310  4270  
48 2017-18 20171262598  TULSI TIRIYA MAHATI 
TIRIYA 
09-07-1999  6089 52 1 52586 42944 F ST 45221011 
0003752  
XXXX 
XXXX 
6207 
 
1128  3300  4428  
49 2019-20 20191794647  DIMPI 
JAISWAL 
SANJAY 
KUMAR 
JAISWAL 
16-12-2001  6088 454 1 341 2019-07-29  F BC 48021051 
0005972  
XXXX 
XXXX 
3678 
 
4430  2310  6740  
50 2017-18 20171298716  ROHIT BAXLA RANJIT 
BAXLA 
16-12-1999  6041 2046 1 145 42909 M ST 17760101 
21026  
XXXX 
XXXX 
1415 
 
9240  2760  12000  
51 2017-18 20171429921  KHUSHBOO 
RANI 
HEMLAL 
DAS 
08-12-2002  6029 561 1 1514 2017-07-21  F SC 48901051 
0003260  
XXXX 
XXXX 
8814 
 
937  2530  3467  
52 2019-20 20191874657  SANDEEP 
ORAON 
GANGA 
ORAON 
07-04-2000  6029 698 1 013 43607 M ST 49231051 
0007881  
XXXX 
XXXX 
6532 
 
1095  2760  3855  
53 2018-19 20181565210  ROHIT KUMAR  GOVIND 
MAHTO 
15-03-2001  6038 5114 1 900 2017-07-10  M BC 17760101 
10631  
XXXX 
XXXX 
2963 
 
7080  1920  9000  
54 2018-19 20181543955  RAVI KUMAR WAKIL 
PRASAD SAH 
12-11-2000  6038 267 2 110 42928 M BC 34061780 
394  
XXXX 
XXXX 
5047 
 
2967  1920  4887  
55 2019-20 20191673055  CHAMELI 
KUMARI 
MADHUSUD 
AN VERMA 
05-02-2000  6029 582 2 829 2018-08-04  F BC 59103896 
864  
XXXX 
XXXX 
4287 
 
3500  1920  5420  
56 2017-18 20171367426  BALRAM 
KUMAR RAVI 
BISHESWAR 
KUMAR 
RAVI 
15-12-1997  6029 502 1 15524 42928 M BC 31232004 
013  
XXXX 
XXXX 
3619 
 
2000  1920  3920  
57 2017-18 20171312304  MD ARMAN MD MULTAN 16-06-1995  6029 57 2 076 2017-04-19  M BC 33170970 
207  
XXXX 
XXXX 
1845 
 
2000  1920  3920  
58 2017-18 20171385703  MITHUN 
KUMAR 
YADAV 
HRIDAY 
NARAYAN 
ADAV 
10-06-1996  6029 582 2 448 42906 M BC 33341086 
340  
XXXX 
XXXX 
0652 
 
2155  1920  4075  

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
164   
Sl. 
No.  
Academic 
year 
Application 
ID 
Name of 
applicant 
Father's 
name 
Date of 
birth 
Course 
code 
Institute 
code 
Course 
year 
Admission 
no. 
Admission 
date 
Gender  Category  Bank 
account 
number 
UID Final 
tuition 
fee 
Total 
maintenance 
fee 
Total 
scholarship 
paid 
59 2018-19 20181500571  MD 
MOBRAKHOSS 
AIN 
RAJIBUL 
SHAIKH 
13-01-1989  6090 4691 1 03 2018-06-19  M BC 20092851 
921  
XXXX 
XXXX 
2777 
 
33800  4200  38000  
60 2018-19 20181521807  NITU KUMARI JAYNATH 
PRASAD 
SAW 
05-04-1999  1108 3833 2 45H 43092 F BC 58691011 
0003525  
XXXX 
XXXX 
3730 
 
2600  2520  5120  
61 2019-20 20192020949  ABHAY 
KUMAR 
MEHTA 
VINDESHWA 
R MEHTA 
21-02-1995  1852 4473 2 273 2019-08-08  M BC 31430822 
238  
XXXX 
XXXX 
5587 
 
1815  4020  5835  
62 2019-20 20191692628  DHEERAJ 
KUMAR 
BINOD MODI 
04-01-2000  6038 739 2 45021 43357 M BC 00580102 
60480  
XXXX 
XXXX 
3164 
 
2660  1920  4580  
63 2017-18 20171369218  RANJEET 
RAJAK 
FULENDAR 
RAJAK 
11-07-1995  6142 2187 3 017CV78 2017-08-01  M SC 49161051 
0001792  
XXXX 
XXXX 
7864 
 
1805  3600  5405  
64 2019-20 20191848468  PANO PINGUA SONARAM 
PINGUA 
12-02-1996  6182 335 2 39372 43532 F ST 45221011 
0006088  
XXXX 
XXXX 
7284 
 
1624  6360  7984  
65 2019-20 20191984958  MD JACKY ISMAIL 
KHALIFA 
11-10-2000  6038 5114 2 690 2019-08-27  M BC 17760101 
11942  
XXXX 
XXXX 
5324 
 
7080  1920  9000  
66 2018-19 20181638760  USHA KUMARI  GANESH 
MAHTO 
05-05-1996  6014 2789 3 AP141101 
030 
42591 F BC 10900015 
00139476  
XXXX 
XXXX 
7672 
 
12480  2520  15000  
67 2019-20 20191846920  SUMAN TUDU YOGEN 
TUDU 
10-11-1996  6029 475 2 23 2019-07-06  M ST 34436116 
026  
XXXX 
XXXX 
4070 
 
989  2760  3749  
68 2019-20 20191831172  NISHA RANI VIJAY 
KUMAR 
BHAGAT 
03-03-2001  6088 581 2 20 43718 F BC 35021400 
596  
XXXX 
XXXX 
5336 
 
5860  2520  8380  
69 2017-18 20171293190  FRANCIS 
BARLA 
THOMAS 
BARLA 
18-09-1996  1254 2078 1 59 2017-08-11  M ST 31234759 
653  
XXXX 
XXXX 
1462 
 
1058  3300  4358  
70 2018-19 20181512536  SUMAN 
KUMARI 
BIRU MAHTO 
 22-02-2000  6125 3833 1 37253 42947 F BC 58691011 
0008896  
XXXX 
XXXX 
9206 
 
2600  2520  5120  
71 2017-18 20171226101  SHOBHA 
KUMARI 
SUKRA 
KHARIA 
03-03-2001  6029 3093 1 261 2017-07-04  F ST 34577782 
307  
XXXX 
XXXX 
7576 
 
6240  2760  9000  
72 2017-18 2017983168 RAVINDRA 
MUNDA 
MANGRA 
MUNDA 
01-08-1998  1499 2670 2 155 42606 M ST 49941011 
0003717  
XXXX 
XXXX 
6356 
 
6240  2760  9000  
73 2017-18 2017811573 BINDIYA 
KUMARI 
SURESH 
VISHWAKAR 
MA 
17-09-1999  6089 502 2 998 2016-07-20  F BC 08770104 
53561  
XXXX 
XXXX 
2477 
 
1425  2520  3945  

Appendices  
 
 165  
Sl. 
No.  
Academic 
year 
Application 
ID 
Name of 
applicant 
Father's 
name 
Date of 
birth 
Course 
code 
Institute 
code 
Course 
year 
Admission 
no. 
Admission 
date 
Gender  Category  Bank 
account 
number 
UID Final 
tuition 
fee 
Total 
maintenance 
fee 
Total 
scholarship 
paid 
74 2018-19 20181521038  AMISHA 
VERMA 
ANIL KUMAR 
MADHUKAR 
13-01-2000  6041 5114 1 710 42922 F BC 17760101 
23273  
XXXX 
XXXX 
8463 
 
7080  1920  9000  
75 2018-19 20181605090  SAVITA 
KUMARI 
RATAN 
MAHTO 
16-03-1999  6126 3833 1 837H 2017-07-28  F BC 47241011 
0006403  
XXXX 
XXXX 
3150 
 
2600  2520  5120  
76 2018-19 20181555330  MANOJ 
TIRKEY 
JATAN 
TIRKEY 
06-03-2002  6038 5114 1 120718-
0052 
43293 M ST 17760101 
14653  
XXXX 
XXXX 
8476 
 
6240  2760  9000  
77 2018-19 20181599033  VIKAS TIGGA ROSHAN 
TIGGA 
15-02-2002  6029 5114 1 301 2017-06-29  M ST 17760101 
18620  
XXXX 
XXXX 
1977 
 
6240  2760  9000  
78 2017-18 20171243643  SANDHYA 
SORENG 
FLORENS 
SORENG 
20-08-2000  6038 684 1 26 42915 F ST 37073691 
691  
XXXX 
XXXX 
6767 
 
6000  4560  10560  
79 2017-18 20171078992  MD 
ABBASUDDIN 
AMANAT 
SHEKH 
03-08-2000  6038 616 2 184 2016-07-25  M BC 32937341 
097  
XXXX 
XXXX 
6064 
 
450  1920  2370  
80 2017-18 20171440996  KALPANA 
KUMARI 
GANESH 
MATHO 
12-11-1997  6029 582 1 852 42887 F BC 43251080 
01097  
XXXX 
XXXX 
3302 
 
2155  1920  4075  
81 2017-18 20171425733  RAJU MAHTO KALIPAD 
MAHTO 
15-04-2001  6029 2604 1 916 2017-10-31  M BC 33706305 
316  
XXXX 
XXXX 
1307 
 
4480  1280  5760  
82 2019-20 20191864890  SABERA 
ANJUM 
BELAL 
AHMAD 
15-07-2002  6029 5001 2 26 43662 F BC 48441011 
0007746  
XXXX 
XXXX 
7779 
 
2000  1920  3920  
83 2017-18 20171091820  HARSHIT 
TIRKEY 
BINOD 
ORAON 
11-07-2001  6029 552 2 448 2016-06-08  F ST 49681011 
0003985  
XXXX 
XXXX 
8144 
 
1415  2760  4175  
84 2019-20 20191771470  SHIBANI 
HEMBRAM 
KRISHNA 
CHANDRA 
HEMBRAM 
09-08-2001  6029 576 1 332 43667 F ST 47601011 
0011576  
XXXX 
XXXX 
0439 
 
1810  2530  4340  
85 2017-18 20171286711  MUNNIKUMA 
RI 
WAKIL 
PRASAD SAH 
04-12-1997  6089 271 1 53 2017-07-10  F BC 31938945 
710  
XXXX 
XXXX 
2237 
 
2025  2520  4545  
86 2019-20 20191827523  RUPESH 
KUMAR 
DINESHSONI 
25-07-1998  1254 741 1 9559 42945 M BC 48211821 
0013325  
XXXX 
XXXX 
7543 
 
1848  2520  4368  
87 2019-20 20192002278  DOLI KUMARI ASHOK 
KUMAR 
SAHU 
08-05-2002  6038 5114 2 29 2018-06-21  F BC 74772310 
000234  
XXXX 
XXXX 
7621 
 
7080  1920  9000  
88 2019-20 20191792328  KUSUM KISKU  SITARAM 
KISKU 
13-03-1994  6089 581 1 12 43647 F ST 16320100 
13031  
XXXX 
XXXX 
5914 
 
5500  3600  9100  

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
166   
Sl. 
No.  
Academic 
year 
Application 
ID 
Name of 
applicant 
Father's 
name 
Date of 
birth 
Course 
code 
Institute 
code 
Course 
year 
Admission 
no. 
Admission 
date 
Gender  Category  Bank 
account 
number 
UID Final 
tuition 
fee 
Total 
maintenance 
fee 
Total 
scholarship 
paid 
89 2019-20 20191779927  AMIS SAHAB MD IDRIS 03-04-1999  6089 502 1 1119 2019-07-02  M BC 33658379 
846  
XXXX 
XXXX 
7259 
 
1420  2520  3940  
90 2018-19 20181550890  ALMA 
BHENGRA 
ASHOK 
BHENGRA 
04-06-2000  6038 5114 2 611 43241 F ST 16420100 
63522  
XXXX 
XXXX 
5682 
 
6240  2760  9000  
91 2019-20 20191928548  TASLEEM 
ANSARI 
KURBAN 
ANSARI 
02-05-1998  1496 3010 1 117744 2019-08-12  M BC 10520102 
57091  
XXXX 
XXXX 
5049 
 
7240  1760  9000  
92 2017-18 20171371073  DILIP 
HEMBROM 
LALA 
HEMBROM 
12-01-1999  6029 470 2 121 42559 M ST 50297951 
613  
XXXX 
XXXX 
4510 
 
1141  4560  5701  
93 2018-19 20181604047  RAHUL 
LAKRA 
BABLU 
LAKRA 
14-10-2000  6041 5114 1 204 2018-07-10  M ST 17760101 
22009  
XXXX 
XXXX 
1277 
 
6240  2760  9000  
94 2019-20 20191946878  TUNTUN 
KUMAR SAH 
UDIT KUMAR 
SAH 
10-11-2002  6038 475 2 102 43686 M BC 50413407 
709  
XXXX 
XXXX 
1263 
 
989  3120  4109  
95 2018-19 20181675728  PRAKASH 
TIRKEY 
SANJAY 
TIRKEY 
16-10-2001  1496 2670 2 73 2017-07-10  M ST 49921011 
0004785  
XXXX 
XXXX 
7391 
 
6240  2760  9000  
96 2018-19 20181636470  ROSHAN 
KUMAR 
MAHTO 
SANTOSH 
MAHTO 
28-06-2001  6029 129 2 565 43365 M BC 74592200 
015720  
XXXX 
XXXX 
7709 
 
1055  1920  2975  
97 2019-20 20191891587  BHARTI 
KUMARI 
SUKRA 
MUNDA 
21-06-2000  6029 4200 1 44486 2019-07-05  F ST 28440015 
00048330  
XXXX 
XXXX 
0115 
 
3800  2760  6560  
98 2017-18 20171399494  ANURADHA 
LAKRA 
RAMAKANT 
ORAON 
02-01-2001  6038 2236 2 39 42544 F ST 32762725 
886  
XXXX 
XXXX 
6685 
 
2450  2760  5210  
99 2017-18 20171256765  ANIL 
KACHHAP 
DURU 
KACHHAP 
10-08-2001  6029 197 1 85 2017-08-11  M ST 35030707 
809  
XXXX 
XXXX 
5197 
 
724  4180  4904  
100  2019-20 20191940910  JYOTI TOPPO JAI BIRAS 
TOPPO 
28-03-1996  6093 487 1 30271285 
42 
43669 F ST 00590111 
63184  
XXXX 
XXXX 
4807 
 
4300  5830  10130  
101  2017-18 20171331468  AMAN 
KACHHAP 
KALUWA 
KACHHAP 
22-05-2001  6142 4152 1 002 2017-08-26  M ST 12661003 
7977  
XXXX 
XXXX 
3131 
 
11800  5700  17500  
102  2017-18 20171274852  ROHIT BANRA MOHAN 
SINGH 
BANRA 
25-01-1998  1108 2046 1 173 42915 M ST 17760101 
19610  
XXXX 
XXXX 
2066 
 
16400  3600  20000  
103  2018-19 20181691610  AJAY KUMAR PRAFULYA 
MAHTO 
16-01-2002  6029 129 2 569 2017-06-22  M BC 33465440 
653  
XXXX 
XXXX 
1038 
 
1055  1920  2975  

Appendices  
 
 167  
Sl. 
No.  
Academic 
year 
Application 
ID 
Name of 
applicant 
Father's 
name 
Date of 
birth 
Course 
code 
Institute 
code 
Course 
year 
Admission 
no. 
Admission 
date 
Gender  Category  Bank 
account 
number 
UID Final 
tuition 
fee 
Total 
maintenance 
fee 
Total 
scholarship 
paid 
104  2019-20 20191826304  PRAKASH 
MURMU 
MASUDAN 
MURMU 
03-01-1992  6092 227 1 156 43659 M ST 38224497 
766  
XXXX 
XXXX 
9083 
 
491  7380  7871  
105  2018-19 20181394873  BISHNU 
KUMAR 
MANDAL 
PRAMOD 
MANDAL 
20-01-1999  6038 582 2 287 2017-07-14  M BC 33428897 
884  
XXXX 
XXXX 
4204 
 
2200  1920  4120  
106  2019-20 20191932716  GAYATRI 
DEVI 
BINOD 
PRASAD 
SONI 
25-02-1988  6090 2808 2 55 43714 F BC 31567698 
248  
XXXX 
XXXX 
2804 
 
33800  4200  38000  
107  2019-20 20191795127  ANKIT 
KANDULNA 
RAFAEL 
KANDULNA 
28-02-2001  6029 303 1 292 2019-07-15  M ST 45971051 
0009267  
XXXX 
XXXX 
1542 
 
530  2760  3290  
108  2018-19 20181512375  RAMESH 
KUMAR 
MAHTO 
DWARIKA 
PRASAD 
MAHTO 
24-02-1997  1072 3833 2 22033 43133 M BC 47261821 
0008502  
XXXX 
XXXX 
1974 
 
2600  2520  5120  
109  2019-20 20191887884  ROSHAN LAL 
MEHTA 
SHIV 
NARAYAN 
MAHTO 
14-06-2000  6038 4781 2 16 2017-09-01  M BC 55528100 
000470  
XXXX 
XXXX 
2806 
 
7080  1920  9000  
110  2017-18 20171250891  SUCHITA 
TOPPO 
BIMAL 
TOPPO 
02-01-1999  6089 680 1 39402 42947 F ST 49591011 
0006199  
XXXX 
XXXX 
9806 
 
798  3300  4098  
111  2018-19 20181625763  ABHISHEK 
KHALKHO 
BIMAL 
KISHORE 
KHALKHO 
02-08-1999  6038 5114 2 609 2017-06-26  M ST 50148368 
043  
XXXX 
XXXX 
4519 
 
6240  2760  9000  
112  2017-18 20171260828  VIJAY SINGH 
HEMBROM 
CHANDRA 
MOHAN 
HEMBROM 
18-11-1997  6089 3815 1 9606 42955 M ST 45781011 
0005081  
XXXX 
XXXX 
7471 
 
1410  3300  4710  
113  2018-19 20181600819  RIZWANA 
PARWEEN 
MD ABDUL 
HAKIM 
05-08-1999  6089 741 1 204 2018-08-21  F BC 48741011 
0004776  
XXXX 
XXXX 
1874 
 
1960  2100  4060  
114  2017-18 20171323745  ANUJ TIGGA BIRSA 
ORAON 
08-11-1996  6089 457 1 7984 42926 M ST 01960110 
080535  
XXXX 
XXXX 
2976 
 
4730  3600  8330  
115  2017-18 20171437055  ISHA SURIN LATE 
SACHIT 
SURIN 
19-09-2002  6029 2019 2 148 2017-06-29  F ST 49211821 
0022706  
XXXX 
XXXX 
5179 
 
4800  2760  7560  
116  2018-19 20181341164  ASHISH 
TOPPO 
TINTUSH 
TOPPO 
05-07-1992  1496 4065 2 411 42965 M ST 31675173 
204  
XXXX 
XXXX 
4741 
 
6240  2760  9000  
117  2019-20 20191904543  HEMANT SAW DHARMANA 
TH SAW 
11-12-1998  1496 5050 2 16/126 2018-08-06  M BC 36501811 
152  
XXXX 
XXXX 
2293 
 
7080  1920  9000  
118  2018-19 20181344697  SANT KUMAR GOPAL 
PRASAD 
YADAV 
15-01-2003  6038 268 2 77 42923 M BC 20398979 
808  
XXXX 
XXXX 
4404 
 
915  1920  2835  

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
168   
Sl. 
No.  
Academic 
year 
Application 
ID 
Name of 
applicant 
Father's 
name 
Date of 
birth 
Course 
code 
Institute 
code 
Course 
year 
Admission 
no. 
Admission 
date 
Gender  Category  Bank 
account 
number 
UID Final 
tuition 
fee 
Total 
maintenance 
fee 
Total 
scholarship 
paid 
119  2019-20 20191936532  KUMAR 
RAHUL 
RAUSHAN 
RAJENDRA 
DASS 
25-07-1999  6087 218 1 56829 2019-06-28  M SC 01960110 
086155  
XXXX 
XXXX 
5667 
 
11640  6360  18000  
120  2017-18 20171350755  RAJU RAJAK GULABI 
RAJAK 
25-04-2000  6038 470 2 0332 42557 M SC 35075428 
532  
XXXX 
XXXX 
5535 
 
1354  2760  4114  
121  2018-19 20181503916  NITISH  
KUMAR  
BHAKAT 
RAVINDRA  
NATH  
BHAKAT 
27-03-2000  1194 2046 1 112 2018-06-27  M BC 17760100 
82420  
XXXX 
XXXX 
8536 
 
17480  2520  20000  
122  2018-19 20181567013  RAMESH 
SINGH 
SACHIDANA 
ND SINGH 
SARDAR 
05-06-1996  1499 2621 2 048 42690 M ST 32921199 
31  
XXXX 
XXXX 
6310 
 
6240  2760  9000  
123  2018-19 20181568477  PANKAJ 
KUMAR 
SAMAD 
PONDEY 
RAM SAMAD 
15-01-2001  6041 5114 1 14 2018-06-19  M ST 17760101 
11294  
XXXX 
XXXX 
0502 
 
5940  4560  10500  
124  2019-20 20191941154  BHARAT 
PANDIT 
BHUNESHW 
AR 
PRAJAPATI 
15-04-1998  6089 2123 2 1602 43369 M BC 48021011 
0013855  
XXXX 
XXXX 
2819 
 
5390  2520  7910  
125  2018-19 20181600574  NILESH 
KUMAR 
DIWAKAR 
YADAV 
23-04-2000  6038 267 2 155 2017-06-19  M BC 34565152 
040  
XXXX 
XXXX 
6457 
 
2967  1920  4887  
126  2017-18 20171366729  TARKESHWAR 
KUMAR DAS 
NARESH 
RAVIDAS 
18-04-2002  6038 57 2 11 43000 M SC 34257471 
306  
XXXX 
XXXX 
8002 
 
2000  2760  4760  
127  2018-19 20181565961  SHAHBAZ 
ANSARI 
SAHJAD 
ALAM 
26-11-1999  6041 5114 1 628 2017-06-28  M BC 17760101 
18156  
XXXX 
XXXX 
0747 
 
7080  1920  9000  
128  2017-18 20171354534  RINKI 
KUMARI 
PANCHAM 
MAHTO 
25-02-1998  6090 3403 1 17027 42958 F BC 48151011 
0006381  
XXXX 
XXXX 
7206 
 
34150  3850  38000  
129  2019-20 20191945078  ABHISHEK 
KUMAR 
VIJAY RAM 
27-12-2000  6029 833 1 405 2019-07-23  M SC 48761011 
0005622  
XXXX 
XXXX 
6207 
 
3250  2530  5780  
130  2017-18 20171423122  SHAMBHU   
DAS 
VIMAL DAS 
13-02-1996  1496 3957 1 18 42641 M BC 08000015 
00010630  
XXXX 
XXXX 
1022 
 
7080  1920  9000  
131  2019-20 20191832609  REKHA 
MURMU 
BABUJI 
MURMU 
10-04-2002  6029 579 1 316 2018-07-17  F ST 33102873 
294  
XXXX 
XXXX 
0916 
 
1350  2760  4110  
132  2019-20 20191899752  EVA 
PRAMANIK 
SHREEKANT 
PRAMANIK 
25-12-1999  6029 487 2 639 43434 F BC 27281010 
08415  
XXXX 
XXXX 
4027 
 
3469  1920  5389  
133  2018-19 20181569960  GAUTAM 
KUMAR 
MAHTO 
DALO 
MAHTO 
29-04-1999  1499 3290 2 50 2018-07-25  M BC 47341821 
0013568  
XXXX 
XXXX 
0816 
 
7080  1920  9000  

Appendices  
 
 169  
Sl. 
No.  
Academic 
year 
Application 
ID 
Name of 
applicant 
Father's 
name 
Date of 
birth 
Course 
code 
Institute 
code 
Course 
year 
Admission 
no. 
Admission 
date 
Gender  Category  Bank 
account 
number 
UID Final 
tuition 
fee 
Total 
maintenance 
fee 
Total 
scholarship 
paid 
134  2017-18 20171326285  ANIL MUNDA BUDHWA 
MUNDA 
20-10-1998  6089 457 1 9509 42943 M ST 49431821 
0001890  
XXXX 
XXXX 
8233 
 
4730  3300  8030  
135  2017-18 20171395874  RAKHI 
KUMARI 
BASANT SAH 
 14-01-2000  6029 582 2 265 2016-07-14  F BC 33598113 
009  
XXXX 
XXXX 
1350 
 
2155  1920  4075  
136  2018-19 20181523757  VIMAL 
MUNDA 
PANDU 
MUNDA 
03-03-2001  6029 3416 1 78 43302 M ST 19962122 
004131  
XXXX 
XXXX 
7360 
 
6470  2530  9000  
137  2017-18 20171437905  BENEDICT 
SANGA 
AGNESH 
SANGA 
21-01-2002  6038 457 1 15354 2017-06-20  M ST 35236349 
817  
XXXX 
XXXX 
0140 
 
5685  2760  8445  
138  2019-20 20191885680  TULSI 
KUMARI 
VHIKHU 
PRADHAN 
16-11-1999  1072 673 1 381 43661 F SC 49321821 
0000468  
XXXX 
XXXX 
7455 
 
2350  6840  9190  
139  2017-18 2017822147 AMIT KUMAR 
MANDAL 
BIMAL 
KUMAR 
MANDAL 
09-09-2001  6038 268 2 46 2016-07-14  M BC 16320101 
02742  
XXXX 
XXXX 
7922 
 
1355  1920  3275  
140  2017-18 20171272963  MD BARKAT 
ALI 
MD 
AFAZUDDIN 
30-12-1992  6090 218 1 65 42949 M BC 31632979 
698  
XXXX 
XXXX 
3911 
 
34150  3850  38000  
141  2019-20 20191764768  BALEN TIRIYA  SHIV 
SHANKAR 
TIRIYA 
17-03-2000  6038 52 1 92404 2019-07-05  F ST 58911011 
0013483  
XXXX 
XXXX 
7547 
 
1576  2760  4336  
142  2018-19 20181565494  SONALI DAS BALDEO DAS  07-04-1999  1054 3833 1 36343 42936 F BC 47241011 
0004971  
XXXX 
XXXX 
3064 
 
3600  2520  6120  
143  2017-18 20171473829  ANKIT 
KUMAR RAJ 
RANJAN DAS 
24-12-1996  1499 3011 1 130 2017-05-08  M SC 34329547 
38  
XXXX 
XXXX 
6231 
 
6240  2760  9000  
144  2018-19 20181751706  SACHIN 
KUMAR 
SHANKAR 
RANA 
11-02-2000  6038 601 2 260 42992 M BC 36320140 
391  
XXXX 
XXXX 
7333 
 
5405  1920  7325  
145  2019-20 20191892112  SHRILAL 
TUDU 
DAROGA 
TUDU 
21-06-1996  6029 475 2 79 2018-07-14  M ST 34436116 
779  
XXXX 
XXXX 
2487 
 
989  4560  5549  
146  2017-18 20171308387  HIFJUR 
RAHMAN 
MD NAZME 
ALAM 
03-04-2001  6029 616 1 6348 42927 M BC 32616183 
704  
XXXX 
XXXX 
3385 
 
394  3120  3514  
147  2017-18 20171006895  MUKESH 
KUMAR 
MEHRA 
LAKSHMAN 
MEHRA 
28-12-2000  6038 582 2 2533 2016-07-13  M SC 33469477 
077  
XXXX 
XXXX 
1380 
 
2155  2760  4915  
148  2017-18 20171357775  AMERIKA 
DANGI 
ADITYA 
DANGI 
05-04-1991  1887 450 1 107 42996 M BC 08770103 
29444  
XXXX 
XXXX 
8380 
 
2480  3350  5830  

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
170   
Sl. 
No.  
Academic 
year 
Application 
ID 
Name of 
applicant 
Father's 
name 
Date of 
birth 
Course 
code 
Institute 
code 
Course 
year 
Admission 
no. 
Admission 
date 
Gender  Category  Bank 
account 
number 
UID Final 
tuition 
fee 
Total 
maintenance 
fee 
Total 
scholarship 
paid 
149  2018-19 20181527592  UJJWAL TUDU STANISLAUS 
TUDU 
09-08-1990  6092 227 2 25 2018-06-13  M ST 31397644 
454  
XXXX 
XXXX 
3087 
 
2400  9840  12240  
150  2018-19 20181446906  JAMEMA 
KHATUN 
SANAULE 
HAQUE 
10-05-1998  6089 615 3 6965 42891 F BC 36058730 
524  
XXXX 
XXXX 
7493 
 
536  2520  3056  
151  2018-19 20181549381  ANIL KUMAR 
MAHTO 
ARJUN 
MAHTO 
10-03-2000  6038 5114 2 17ISM018 
54 
2017-06-21  M BC 17760101 
12406  
XXXX 
XXXX 
3960 
 
7080  1920  9000  
152  2017-18 20171360089  HEMANT 
KUMAR 
MAHTO 
SHALIGRAM 
MAHTO 
31-05-1994  6089 2358 1 1453 43025 M BC 48071051 
0005498  
XXXX 
XXXX 
8970 
 
2740  1890  4630  
153  2019-20 20192024959  SAMENDRA 
ORAON 
KAMESHWA 
R ORAON 
17-04-1999  1499 3353 2 82 2018-08-29  M ST 73480017 
00066297  
XXXX 
XXXX 
2892 
 
6240  2760  9000  
154  2017-18 20171299863  BRAJ 
KISHORE 
MAHTO 
JHUWA 
MAHTO 
12-11-1996  6089 680 1 41308 42936 M BC 20349381 
886  
XXXX 
XXXX 
3641 
 
798  2520  3318  
155  2019-20 20191947167  SONI KUMARI SUNIL 
KUMAR 
KUSHWAHA 
05-02-2001  6089 2123 1 483 2019-07-12  F BC 59149110 
869  
XXXX 
XXXX 
9459 
 
5390  2520  7910  
156  2017-18 20171420172  MANOHAR 
ORAON 
LATE 
BANSINGH 
ORAON 
29-06-1998  1108 454 1 11192 42935 M ST 09390001 
00212793  
XXXX 
XXXX 
2989 
 
2151  3600  5751  
157  2017-18 20171315370  KIRAN 
MUNDA 
BALAK RAM 
MUNDA 
15-02-1998  1252 3437 1 234 2017-07-28  F ST 26248100 
011064  
XXXX 
XXXX 
4829 
 
11980  9020  21000  
158  2017-18 20171225198  UDAY KUMAR  SURESH RAM  08-06-2000  6088 680 1 39410 42947 M SC 34873379 
26  
XXXX 
XXXX 
0346 
 
1098  3300  4398  
159  2017-18 20171469978  ALIYA 
KUMARI 
RAJAK 
RAVINDRA 
RAJAK 
07-12-1998  6089 487 1 135 2017-08-08  F SC 49631011 
0007178  
XXXX 
XXXX 
1656 
 
2100  3300  5400  
160  2017-18 20171353344  RAVI 
DUNGDUNG 
CHRISTOPHE 
R 
DUNGDUNG 
10-01-2001  6041 665 1 007 42901 M ST 49321821 
0003416  
XXXX 
XXXX 
7200 
 
10440  4560  15000  
161  2017-18 20171452533  SONU KUMAR DASHAI 
MUNDA 
01-02-2001  6029 454 1 685 2017-07-31  M ST 59031011 
0005310  
XXXX 
XXXX 
2072 
 
1740  2530  4270  
162  2017-18 20171367467  ANKIT TOPPO KRISHNA 
TOPPO 
29-09-2001  6038 52 1 14645 42922 M ST 10730015 
00039380  
XXXX 
XXXX 
5391 
 
1576  2760  4336  
163  2017-18 20171411748  SURESH 
KUMAR 
MAHTO 
KETAR 
MAHTO 
01-06-2002  1429 773 1 316 2017-08-24  M BC 58861051 
0002681  
XXXX 
XXXX 
9561 
 
897  1600  2497  

Appendices  
 
 171  
Sl. 
No.  
Academic 
year 
Application 
ID 
Name of 
applicant 
Father's 
name 
Date of 
birth 
Course 
code 
Institute 
code 
Course 
year 
Admission 
no. 
Admission 
date 
Gender  Category  Bank 
account 
number 
UID Final 
tuition 
fee 
Total 
maintenance 
fee 
Total 
scholarship 
paid 
164  2018-19 20181608610  PUJA KUMARI NUNCHAND 
SAW 
06-12-1999  2468 3833 2 150 43133 F BC 47241011 
0006394  
XXXX 
XXXX 
0517 
 
2600  2520  5120  
165  2017-18 20171473140  ANUJ KUMAR SARYU 
MAHTO 
25-04-1996  6029 603 1 0139 2017-07-14  M BC 34630603 
817  
XXXX 
XXXX 
5311 
 
2700  1920  4620  
166  2017-18 20171227474  RAHUL 
KUMAR 
LAXMAN 
MAHTO 
10-10-1999  1108 454 1 11318 42943 M BC 17760100 
56975  
XXXX 
XXXX 
6194 
 
2151  2310  4461  
167  2019-20 20192014952  FARZANA 
KHATOON 
IMTIYAZ 
ANSARI 
08-05-2000  6089 680 2 2246 2018-08-30  F BC 50123351 
072  
XXXX 
XXXX 
3105 
 
2400  2520  4920  
168  2019-20 20192023069  VIVEK MAHTO  RANTHU 
MAHTO 
15-08-2000  6089 490 1 49313 43778 M BC 86251080 
58555  
XXXX 
XXXX 
8442 
 
3360  1680  5040  
169  2017-18 20171355873  GOVIND 
ORAON 
GOYO 
ORAON 
13-03-2002  6029 746 1 128 2017-07-17  M ST 10251011 
0003442  
XXXX 
XXXX 
9816 
 
5920  2760  8680  
170  2018-19 20181431418  RAKESH 
KUMAR 
BAKLA 
UPENDRA 
URAWN 
06-04-2001  6029 383 2 1235 42919 M ST 20445254 
371  
XXXX 
XXXX 
8340 
 
900  2760  3660  
171  2018-19 20181625840  ASHISH 
KHALKHO 
BIMAL 
KISHOR 
KHALKHO 
02-08-1999  6038 5114 2 610 2017-06-26  M ST 50148367 
196  
XXXX 
XXXX 
1701 
 
6240  2760  9000  
172  2019-20 20191732902  RUBI KUMARI PRADIP 
THAKUR 
12-08-1998  6089 581 3 492 43446 F BC 33217908 
525  
XXXX 
XXXX 
5915 
 
5860  2520  8380  
173  2017-18 20171424637  KUNDAN 
KUMAR 
DILIP SAW 
20-08-1994  1499 2522 2 11 2017-04-26  M BC 19021010 
09899  
XXXX 
XXXX 
7963 
 
7080  1920  9000  
174  2017-18 20171241363  SUNITA 
BALAMDINA 
KUJUR 
HILARIUS 
KUJUR 
04-11-1999  6041 223 1 649 42912 F ST 04070106 
99877  
XXXX 
XXXX 
4816 
 
9240  2760  12000  
175  2018-19 20181715201  NABIN 
MOHALI 
MADHU 
MOHALI 
10-01-1994  1496 3011 2 29 2018-08-21  M ST 47331010 
0009566  
XXXX 
XXXX 
3462 
 
6240  2760  9000  
176  2018-19 20181491729  GUHI RAJAK ALKU RAJAK  13-06-1993  1496 3011 1 512 43206 M SC 47361011 
0004877  
XXXX 
XXXX 
6411 
 
6240  2760  9000  
177  2018-19 20181735584  RANJAN 
KUMAR SINGH 
 
MADAN 
SINGH 
05-02-1998  6089 581 3 617 2018-11-26  M BC 50437927 
072  
XXXX 
XXXX 
7222 
 
4900  2520  7420  
178  2018-19 20181575915  MANOJ 
KARWA 
GANESH 
CHANDRA 
KARWA 
06-01-1997  6089 52 1 76241 43342 M ST 45101011 
0010006  
XXXX 
XXXX 
8780 
 
878  3000  3878  

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
172   
Sl. 
No.  
Academic 
year 
Application 
ID 
Name of 
applicant 
Father's 
name 
Date of 
birth 
Course 
code 
Institute 
code 
Course 
year 
Admission 
no. 
Admission 
date 
Gender  Category  Bank 
account 
number 
UID Final 
tuition 
fee 
Total 
maintenance 
fee 
Total 
scholarship 
paid 
179  2017-18 20171420478  AJIT ORAON BANDHNAU 
ORAON 
09-03-2001  6029 923 1 24 2017-08-09  M ST 40430015 
00090035  
XXXX 
XXXX 
4006 
 
473  2530  3003  
180  2019-20 20191980784  RAHUL 
KUMAR 
INDER 
PRASAD 
MEHTA 
23-08-2000  6029 2770 1 0031 43661 M SC 49381051 
0005363  
XXXX 
XXXX 
3717 
 
2000  2760  4760  
181  2017-18 20171237050  SUNIL SOREN MANJLA 
SOREN 
01-01-2001  6038 383 1 1079 2017-07-01  M ST 23970100 
002881  
XXXX 
XXXX 
1730 
 
1100  4560  5660  
182  2018-19 20181558079  KHUSHBOO 
KUMARI 
PAWAN 
MAHATO 
30-01-2000  2468 3833 1 37239 42947 F BC 50320452 
666  
XXXX 
XXXX 
4544 
 
2600  2520  5120  
183  2019-20 20191828371  SANDEEP 
KUMAR 
VERMA 
DHANPAIT 
MAHTO 
15-12-2001  6038 770 1 40 2019-07-15  M BC 47821821 
0000249  
XXXX 
XXXX 
7238 
 
1165  1920  3085  
184  2018-19 20181535365  AJAY 
KACHHAP 
SOHRAI 
KACHHAP 
16-02-2001  6041 5114 1 206 43291 M ST 12601040 
00002455  
XXXX 
XXXX 
3596 
 
6240  2760  9000  
185  2017-18 20171354935  MAHENDRA 
KUMAR 
MURMU 
BUDHAN 
MANJHI 
03-03-1999  6070 741 1 5744 2017-08-05  M ST 48081011 
0029075  
XXXX 
XXXX 
8618 
 
1960  3300  5260  
186  2017-18 20171476469  AMIT KUMAR 
GOPE 
SHIV 
SHANKAR 
GOPE 
10-09-1998  6089 218 1 14245 42928 M BC 35870201 
0609011  
XXXX 
XXXX 
9616 
 
3375  2520  5895  
187  2019-20 20191934516  SAIMAN 
MARANDI 
NARENDRA 
MARANDI 
09-05-2000  6029 582 1 540 2019-07-31  M ST 59117081 
889  
XXXX 
XXXX 
0428 
 
2800  2530  5330  
188  2017-18 20171385585  SONAM 
SAKSHI 
BIJAY 
KUMAR 
VIMAL 
22-09-2002  6029 582 1 414 42898 F BC 33432213 
027  
XXXX 
XXXX 
7514 
 
2155  1920  4075  
189  2019-20 20191800686  RAJLAXMI 
SINKU 
JAGMOHAN 
SINKU 
28-10-1991  6182 335 2 39398 2019-03-07  F ST 19180100 
31231  
XXXX 
XXXX 
3214 
 
2414  6360  8774  
190  2018-19 20181711833  KISHOR 
KUMAR 
MANDAL 
SHAMBHUN 
ATH 
MANDAL 
11-08-2000  6504 3571 2 474 43024 M BC 50163723 
205  
XXXX 
XXXX 
5905 
 
3560  1920  5480  
191  2019-20 20191970204  DINESH 
KUMAR 
REWA 
MAHTO 
10-06-2000  6029 2592 1 470 2019-09-04  M BC 47921051 
0005188  
XXXX 
XXXX 
9638 
 
4100  1600  5700  
192  2019-20 20191921372  SUMAN 
SOREN 
ABHILAL 
SOREN 
10-05-2001  6029 582 1 541 43677 M ST 59077951 
529  
XXXX 
XXXX 
6884 
 
2800  2530  5330  
193  2017-18 20171448719  SITARAM 
KUMAR 
GUPTA 
NAGESHVAR 
GUPTA 
10-08-1998  6029 603 2 0338 2017-08-26  M BC 36252704 
015  
XXXX 
XXXX 
6006 
 
2700  1920  4620  

Appendices  
 
 173  
Sl. 
No.  
Academic 
year 
Application 
ID 
Name of 
applicant 
Father's 
name 
Date of 
birth 
Course 
code 
Institute 
code 
Course 
year 
Admission 
no. 
Admission 
date 
Gender  Category  Bank 
account 
number 
UID Final 
tuition 
fee 
Total 
maintenance 
fee 
Total 
scholarship 
paid 
194  2019-20 20191576848  RISHAV  
KUMAR 
ADITYA 
PRAJAPATI 
17-01-1999  6046 218 2 24281 43303 M BC 33232984 
495  
XXXX 
XXXX 
4157 
 
12700  4800  17500  
195  2018-19 20181573210  KALESHWAR 
MURMU 
MAHADEV 
MURMU 
05-02-2001  6038 3833 2 31 2016-06-21  M ST 47261821 
0000829  
XXXX 
XXXX 
3873 
 
2600  2760  5360  
196  2019-20 20191854085  RITESH 
LAKRA 
ROSHAN 
LAKRA 
14-05-2002  6038 2094 1 19ISC026  43645 M ST 49631011 
0008559  
XXXX 
XXXX 
6458 
 
2589  2760  5349  
197  2017-18 20171241727  SHISHUPAL 
YADAV 
SURENDRA 
YADAV 
22-01-1991  6094 450 1 86746 2017-08-23  M BC 46991011 
0001992  
XXXX 
XXXX 
4172 
 
503  3350  3853  
198  2018-19 20181443696  POOJA 
KUMARI 
KRISHNA 
SAHU 
12-02-2002  6038 487 2 11644 42927 F BC 61591011 
0000952  
XXXX 
XXXX 
9411 
 
3561  3120  6681  
199  2017-18 20171310122  ARBIN 
KONGARI 
PIUS 
KONGARI 
12-11-2002  6038 2046 1 630 2017-06-27  M ST 06090102 
35006  
XXXX 
XXXX 
0024 
 
9240  2760  12000  
200  2018-19 20181579205  SNEHIL RIMIL 
TOPNO 
JUNUL SILAS 
TOPNO 
21-01-2002  6041 5114 1 18ICM000 
27 
43280 M ST 17760101 
13649  
XXXX 
XXXX 
9635 
 
6240  2760  9000  
201  2018-19 20181567636  MANORANJAN 
ORAON 
JITRAM  
ORAON 
25-03-1997  6089 671 1 1904 2018-09-06  M ST 37453725 
382  
XXXX 
XXXX 
1632 
 
1480  3000  4480  
202  2017-18 20171333325  MD NAUSHAD 
ANSARI 
MD AKHTAR 
HUSSAIN 
26-01-1998  6089 581 2 547 42910 M BC 31249506 
570  
XXXX 
XXXX 
4731 
 
3460  2520  5980  
203  2017-18 20171122836  NILAM 
KUMARI 
LATE LAICHI 
SAHU 
15-03-1999  6041 3375 2 257 2016-06-10  F BC 04070107 
07664  
XXXX 
XXXX 
3292 
 
7080  1920  9000  
204  2019-20 20191764767  ARVINDKUMA 
R 
MAHAVIRM 
AHTO 
25-10-1997  6086 3037 1 H-21 43697 M BC 35106257 
244  
XXXX 
XXXX 
8242 
 
13100  4400  17500  
205  2019-20 20191814520  SANJIV 
KUMAR 
MARANDI 
SHIV 
CHARAN 
MARANDI 
06-11-1989  6092 227 1 111 2019-07-12  M ST 67280001 
00036661  
XXXX 
XXXX 
2915 
 
491  7380  7871  
206  2018-19 20181722057  DEEPAK 
KUMAR 
VIJAY 
MEHTA 
11-12-1996  6090 414 2 46 43298 M BC 31985934 
406  
XXXX 
XXXX 
9477 
 
33800  4200  38000  
207  2019-20 20191946722  KANHAIYA 
MAHTO 
SHIVSHANK 
AR 
PRAJAPATI 
06-02-2000  6029 170 1 1208 2019-07-14  M BC 49351051 
0007440  
XXXX 
XXXX 
1391 
 
1636  3120  4756  
208  2018-19 20181557235  NIRAJ KUMAR MANOJ 
KUMAR 
BHAGAT 
13-03-2001  6038 5114 1 90 42913 M ST 17760101 
12871  
XXXX 
XXXX 
8835 
 
5940  4560  10500  

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
174   
Sl. 
No.  
Academic 
year 
Application 
ID 
Name of 
applicant 
Father's 
name 
Date of 
birth 
Course 
code 
Institute 
code 
Course 
year 
Admission 
no. 
Admission 
date 
Gender  Category  Bank 
account 
number 
UID Final 
tuition 
fee 
Total 
maintenance 
fee 
Total 
scholarship 
paid 
209  2019-20 20192023419  NIDHI 
KUMARI 
BIRENDRA 
PRASAD 
08-03-1997  6092 4473 2 131 2019-08-22  F BC 34190542 
113  
XXXX 
XXXX 
1892 
 
2625  4020  6645  
210  2019-20 20191889486  DEEPAK 
KUMAR 
MAHTO 
BAIJNATH 
MAHTO 
27-12-1995  6092 2078 1 57618 43660 M BC 15630100 
0045468  
XXXX 
XXXX 
5075 
 
2900  4020  6920  
211  2018-19 20181703679  IJHAR  
ANSARI 
HABIB 
ANSARI 
01-01-2000  6126 196 1 256 2018-07-04  M BC 77660015 
00012999  
XXXX 
XXXX 
4647 
 
3295  2520  5815  
212  2018-19 20181512592  ZABI ARJU MUSHARAF 
ANSARI 
12-05-1998  6126 3833 2 17014106 
9141 
42579 F BC 36211577 
164  
XXXX 
XXXX 
1019 
 
2600  2520  5120  
213  2017-18 20171389041  JITENDAR 
KUMAR DAS 
DHANESHW 
AR RAVIDAS 
15-10-1999  1496 3010 1 0039 2017-07-19  M SC 39283188 
93  
XXXX 
XXXX 
0812 
 
6240  2760  9000  
214  2017-18 20171248275  CHANDAN 
KUMAR 
DEV KUMAR 
SAW 
07-02-1998  6126 415 1 791 42951 M BC 26500015 
00029286  
XXXX 
XXXX 
3344 
 
1060  2310  3370  
215  2019-20 20191933640  TRIBHUWAN 
KUMAR 
SUKHDEO 
MAHTO 
15-05-1996  6089 2123 1 1777 2019-09-24  M BC 48021011 
0008816  
XXXX 
XXXX 
9964 
 
5390  1890  7280  
216  2018-19 20181530928  HEENA 
PRAVEEN 
JAIMUDDIN 
ANSARI 
05-01-2000  6089 671 1 781 43343 F BC 35072532 
169  
XXXX 
XXXX 
5877 
 
1480  2100  3580  
217  2018-19 20181637781  DILEEP 
KUMAR 
MEHTA 
RAJVANSHI 
MEHTA 
04-02-1996  1499 2522 2 100 2017-08-16  M BC 33172798 
326  
XXXX 
XXXX 
1126 
 
7080  1920  9000  
218  2017-18 20171398658  NITESH TOPPO  BENEDIK 
TOPPO 
23-09-2001  6029 457 1 04 42906 M ST 35287133 
411  
XXXX 
XXXX 
6473 
 
5433  2760  8193  
219  2019-20 20191953666  SANJAY 
KUMAR 
NAYAK 
MANGAL 
NAYAK 
27-10-1994  6090 546 1 71 2019-05-07  M SC 24508728 
936771  
XXXX 
XXXX 
3667 
 
31400  6600  38000  
220  2019-20 20191590880  JAISDUNGDU 
NG 
VIJAYDUNG 
DUNG 
18-01-2001  6029 5081 2 76 43285 M ST 49631011 
0007405  
XXXX 
XXXX 
6452 
 
6240  2760  9000  
221  2017-18 20171240522  ARCHNA 
BARWA 
MARIYANUS 
BARWA 
03-12-2001  6029 684 1 166 2017-06-27  F ST 19511500 
00049  
XXXX 
XXXX 
0368 
 
5000  2760  7760  
222  2018-19 20181523783  NEERAJ HORO WILLIAM 
HORO 
04-04-2002  6029 5114 1 160 43286 M ST 17760101 
24546  
XXXX 
XXXX 
1984 
 
6240  2760  9000  
223  2018-19 20181605571  PUJA KUMARI MANILAL 
MAHTO 
10-09-1997  2468 3833 1 627 2017-07-26  F BC 58731161 
0000068  
XXXX 
XXXX 
4693 
 
2600  2520  5120  

Appendices  
 
 175  
Sl. 
No.  
Academic 
year 
Application 
ID 
Name of 
applicant 
Father's 
name 
Date of 
birth 
Course 
code 
Institute 
code 
Course 
year 
Admission 
no. 
Admission 
date 
Gender  Category  Bank 
account 
number 
UID Final 
tuition 
fee 
Total 
maintenance 
fee 
Total 
scholarship 
paid 
224  2017-18 20171412947  SUJEET 
KUMAR 
RAMESHWA 
R PRASAD 
07-06-1996  1496 3139 2 5597 42940 M BC 33336296 
435  
XXXX 
XXXX 
1567 
 
7080  1920  9000  
225  2019-20 20191604049  AJAY MAHTO BALDEV 
MAHTO 
10-05-2000  6038 698 2 006 2018-07-13  M BC 49151051 
0011847  
XXXX 
XXXX 
1570 
 
1095  1920  3015  
226  2018-19 20181610657  FAIZAAN 
AKHTAR 
ANSARI 
AKHTAR 
HUSSAIN 
ANSARI 
05-02-2001  6038 5114 1 156 43299 M BC 17760101 
12529  
XXXX 
XXXX 
4808 
 
7080  1920  9000  
227  2019-20 20192011100  HEENA 
LAHERI 
JAI PRAKASH 
LAHERI 
17-01-1994  1146 4827 1 089 2018-08-29  F BC 33478021 
932  
XXXX 
XXXX 
3992 
 
13980  4020  18000  
228  2017-18 2017958468 RAJ KUMAR 
PRAJAPATI 
RAMCHAND 
RA 
PRAJAPATI 
18-11-2000  6038 773 2 102 42548 M BC 32848334 
36  
XXXX 
XXXX 
5366 
 
1433  1920  3353  
229  2019-20 20191941563  NITESH  
KUMAR 
UPENDER 
KUMAR 
DANGI 
17-06-2000  1499 3523 1 462 2019-07-25  M BC 38356468 
166  
XXXX 
XXXX 
6268 
 
7240  1760  9000  
230  2017-18 20171385543  SHAISTA 
KHATOON 
MD ILIYAS 
11-02-1998  6089 581 1 54 42906 F BC 33539815 
258  
XXXX 
XXXX 
7225 
 
4820  2520  7340  
231  2017-18 20171262064  SHANI KUMAR  SAHDEV 
RAM 
19-01-2001  6038 546 2 41525 2016-08-01  M BC 36146380 
455  
XXXX 
XXXX 
3894 
 
1382  1920  3302  
232  2018-19 20181359594  RUBY 
KUMARI 
ASHOK SAH 
25-08-1997  6089 271 3 246 42935 F BC 50263247 
345  
XXXX 
XXXX 
0678 
 
3750  2520  6270  
233  2017-18 20171306461  AMANDEEP 
KHOYA 
PATRAS 
KHOYA 
10-01-2002  6041 2046 1 220 2017-06-27  M ST 17760101 
22467  
XXXX 
XXXX 
0386 
 
9240  2760  12000  
234  2017-18 20171259697  RIYA MEHTA NIRAJ 
MEHTA 
30-12-1999  1108 2078 1 BCOM241 
16 
42964 F BC 49181011 
0009944  
XXXX 
XXXX 
7274 
 
745  4400  5145  
235  2019-20 20191816984  PINKU KUMAR  NARESH 
SAW 
11-04-1998  6089 5274 1 49 2019-06-06  M BC 48771011 
0012599  
XXXX 
XXXX 
8279 
 
2000  2520  4520  
236  2019-20 20192002706  PREETAM 
KUMAR 
RAJKUMAR 
MANDAL 
15-10-1996  6088 581 3 236 43719 M BC 34236479 
832  
XXXX 
XXXX 
6802 
 
5860  2520  8380  
237  2018-19 20181625933  AMBIYA ALI ALI IMAM 07-01-2001  6041 454 2 1665 2017-07-19  F BC 86251010 
47080  
XXXX 
XXXX 
1882 
 
1520  1920  3440  
238  2017-18 20171434774  AMIT TIRKEY MAHADEO  
TIRKEY 
15-08-1997  6089 680 1 40994 42975 M ST 09390015 
00064845  
XXXX 
XXXX 
9109 
 
798  3000  3798  

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
176   
Sl. 
No.  
Academic 
year 
Application 
ID 
Name of 
applicant 
Father's 
name 
Date of 
birth 
Course 
code 
Institute 
code 
Course 
year 
Admission 
no. 
Admission 
date 
Gender  Category  Bank 
account 
number 
UID Final 
tuition 
fee 
Total 
maintenance 
fee 
Total 
scholarship 
paid 
239  2018-19 20181494900  SUMANTI 
KUMARI 
SANTOSH 
ORAON 
27-03-1988  1006 3846 2 030/ASN 2013-10-01  F ST 03272041 
002214  
XXXX 
XXXX 
8354 
 
10660  6840  17500  
240  2018-19 20181569565  UMASHANKA 
R KUMAR 
YADAV 
GOVIND 
MAHTO 
20-02-2002  6038 562 2 877 43139 M BC 48901011 
0013401  
XXXX 
XXXX 
6793 
 
4100  1920  6020  
241  2018-19 20181504968  ABHISHEK 
KUJUR 
PAIKAS 
KUJUR 
21-09-2001  6038 2703 1 78 2018-07-04  M ST 50393463 
173  
XXXX 
XXXX 
4531 
 
6240  2760  9000  
242  2017-18 20171413060  AASHIS 
KUMAR 
RAJESH 
PRASAD 
16-03-2000  1496 3139 2 5596 42940 M BC 36158528 
138  
XXXX 
XXXX 
6920 
 
7080  1920  9000  
243  2018-19 20181517087  BALINDRA 
KUMAR 
NAGESHHW 
ARSAW 
18-06-1994  6090 2865 1 95 2017-12-01  M BC 48101011 
0007063  
XXXX 
XXXX 
0512 
 
12800  4200  17000  
244  2019-20 20192005454  NEETU 
KUMARI 
GOVERDHAN 
MAHTO 
23-09-2002  6041 680 1 5504 43755 F BC 15181000 
004125  
XXXX 
XXXX 
0644 
 
1360  1440  2800  
245  2018-19 20181576613  ALICE KUJUR SILBANUS 
KUJUR 
20-06-1999  6029 5114 2 108 2018-05-22  F ST 17760101 
18330  
XXXX 
XXXX 
7857 
 
6240  2760  9000  
246  2018-19 20181611741  RAZIYA 
SULTANA 
MD ZIBRAIL 
11-02-2000  6038 271 2 869 42907 F BC 35994368 
597  
XXXX 
XXXX 
4783 
 
3195  3120  6315  
 
 
  

Appendices  
 
 177  
Appendix-6.3B 
(Refer to paragraph 6.12.2 (3rd  Bullet); page 75) 
Same applicant name, fathers’ name, bank account number and Aadhaar No., pursuing same course in different academic years but from different Institutes 
Sl. 
No. 
Academic 
year Application ID  Name of applicant Father's name  Date of 
birth 
Course 
code 
Institute 
code 
Course 
year Admission no. Admission 
date Gender Category 
Bank 
account 
no. 
UID 
Final 
tuition 
fee 
Total 
maintenance 
fee 
Total 
scholarship 
paid 
1 2018-19 20181677352 MD MAJAHRUL 
ANSARI 
MD NURUDDIN 
NSARI 
1989-11-06 6090 6928 2 BEDN1ED17044 2017-08-04 M BC  20366191 
635  
XXXXXX 
XX9719  
15800  4200  20000  
2 2017-18 20171348112 MD RUBAB ANSARI MD 
MAQUESUD 
ANSARI 
1993-04-21 6090 6263 1 DPA006 2017-09-14 M BC 59101 051 
0008516  
XXXXXX 
XX0872  
16500  3500  20000  
3 2017-18 20171058402 DANISH RAJA 
AKHTAR 
TAUFIQUE 
AKHTAR 
1996-12-17 6098 5483 2 036 2016-08-10 M BC 60109362
983  
XXXXXX 
XX4080  
16000  9000  25000  
4 2017-18 20171471828 RAM KUMAR SUDHIR PD 
SAH 
1983-03-03 6090 7490 1 35 2017-09-16 M BC 30493678 
253  
XXXXXX 
XX1085  
16500  3500  20000  
5 2017-18 20171402977 GOPAL SAH KALI CHARAN 
SAH 
1996-02-08 6090 5754 1 43 2017-08-10 M BC 62110201 
0006629  
XXXXXX 
XX5217  
16150  3850  20000  
6 2017-18 20171354346 ASHOK KUMAR SAH ANIL KUMAR 
SAH 
1995-01-02 6090 5797 1 35217 2017-03-14 M BC 502982 72 
563  
XXXXXX 
XX6795  
15800  4200  20000  
7 2019-20 20191929213 RAJESH KUMAR SAH ANANT 
KUMAR SAH 
1995-08-15 6090 8544 1 35 2019-06-25 M BC 34673247 
532  
XXXXXX 
XX0815  
15800  4200  20000  
8 2018-19 20181604668 LAKHAN     MAHTO NIRPAT     
MAHTO 
1993-01-11 6090 5768 1 56 2018-08-10 M BC 50020530 
678  
XXXXXX 
XX8604  
16150  3850  20000  
9 2017-18 20171002871 ASHA KUMARI LAXMAN GOP 1993-02-20 6053 6449 4 23 2013-09-01 F BC 45551011 
0003095  
XXXXXX 
XX0160  
16000  9000  25000  
10 2019-20 20191974768 SAYMAN  MARANDI BABUJEE  
MARANDI 
1991-02-07 6090 8410 1 28 2019-07-03 M ST 50409024 
006  
XXXXXX 
XX9002  
13400  6600  20000  
11 2017-18 20171342039 LUCKY HUSSAIN ANWAR 
HUSSAIN 
1994-01-01 6080 6987 3 16ERNCE215 2016-09-26 M BC 4 8361011 
0004366 
 
XXXXXX 
XX6768  
15800  4200  20000  
 
  

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
178   
Appendix-6.4A 
(Refer to paragraph 6.12.2 (3rd  Bullet); page 76) 
Same applicant name, fathers’ name and bank account number but with different Aadhaar No., granted scholarship for pursuing same course in different academic years 
Sl. 
No.  
Academic 
year 
Application 
ID Name of applicant Father's name Date of birth  Gender Category Bank account no. UID Final Tution 
fee 
Total 
maintenance 
fee 
Total 
scholarship 
paid 
1 2018-19 20181721295  ABHINANDAN KAPRI  VIBHISHAN KAPRI 1999-10-05 M BC 33587740974  XXXXXXXX7913  5500  1890  7390  
1 2017-18 20171436323  ABHINANDAN KAPRI  VIBHISHAN KAPRI 1999-10-05 M BC 33587740974  XXXXXXXX8683  1733  1920  3653  
2 2019-20 20192012981  ABHISHEK TURI LATE SHIVAKANT TURI 1998-12-16 M SC 50162661872  XXXXXXXX9953  469  6840  7309  
2 2017-18 20171487640  ABHISHEK TURI LATE SHIVAKANT TURI 1998-12-16 M SC 50162661872  XXXXXXXX2965  469  4560  5029  
3 2017-18 20171376132  AISHA KHATOON MD ISLAM 2001-04-11 F BC 37248412793  XXXXXXXX6532  1141  1920  3061  
3 2019-20 20191874566  AISHA KHATOON MD ISLAM 2001-04-11 F BC 37248412793  XXXXXXXX7466  864  2520  3384  
4 2017-18 20171350880  AKASH BHAGAT MOHNA BHAGAT 2001-02-10 M ST 0746010452021  XXXXXXXX3335  1751  2760  4511  
4 2019-20 20191870993  AKASH BHAGAT MOHNA BHAGAT 2001-02-10 M ST 0746010452021  XXXXXXXX1092  6470  2530  9000  
5 2019-20 20191780934  ALFI SIDRA MD AJMATULLAH 2004-01-01 F BC 494210510005779  XXXXXXXX2445  3295  2520  5815  
5 2017-18 20171241121  ALFI SIDRA MD AJMATULLAH 2001-10-05 F BC 494210510005779  XXXXXXXX0613  1636  1760  3396  
6 2018-19 20181672799  AMAN KUMAR SAW RANJEET SAW 2002-04-14 M BC 482010110005170  XXXXXXXX6073  2000  1920  3920  
6 2017-18 20171283561  AMAN KUMAR SAW RANJEET SAW 2002-04-14 M BC 482010110005170  XXXXXXXX4077  2000  1920  3920  
7 2017-18 20171381795  AMISHA GUPTA BHAVESH KUMAR 2001-08-15 F BC 1632010174015  XXXXXXXX1744  1354  1920  3274  
7 2019-20 20191509791  AMISHA GUPTA BHAVESH KUMAR 2001-08-15 F BC 1632010174015  XXXXXXXX0793  914  2520  3434  
8 2019-20 20191561536  AMIT KUMAR RAMNATH SAH 1998-06-04 M BC 258110100049583  XXXXXXXX3295  1320  2520  3840  
8 2017-18 20171111869  AMIT KUMAR RAMNATH SAH 1998-06-04 M BC 258110100049583  XXXXXXXX8390  7080  1920  9000  
9 2019-20 20191914478  AMRIT KUMAR KANHIYA YADAV 1998-06-07 M BC 33236185614  XXXXXXXX2346  7400  1600  9000  
9 2018-19 20181720602  AMRIT KUMAR KANHIYA YADAV 1998-06-07 M BC 33236185614  XXXXXXXX1864  2000  1680  3680  
10 2017-18 20171297110  ANGITA MUKHI RAMJEEVAN MUKHI 1997-07-17 F SC 453910110010280  XXXXXXXX3591  1036  2760  3796  
10 2019-20 20191556607  ANGITA MUKHI RAMJEEVAN MUKHI 1997-07-17 F SC 453910110010280  XXXXXXXX8375  6240  2760  9000  
11 2018-19 20181539715  ANIL SOREN HANJA SOREN 2001-03-24 M ST 34190262512  XXXXXXXX0121  1149  5700  6849  
11 2017-18 2017862876 ANIL SOREN HANJA SOREN 2001-03-24 M ST 34190262512  XXXXXXXX6633  1100  2760  3860  
12 2018-19 20181496676  ANISHA  MURMU RAILA MURMU 1996-07-27 F ST 32717984493  XXXXXXXX2742  251  9840  10091  
12 2019-20 20191819719  ANISHA  MURMU RAILA MURMU 1996-07-27 F ST 32717984493  XXXXXXXX0114  251  9840  10091  
13 2018-19 20181501232  ANITA KUMARI RAM LAKHAN RAM 1997-10-15 M BC 722502010001290  XXXXXXXX9281  20315  3685  24000  
13 2019-20 20192003765  ANITA KUMARI RAM LAKHAN RAM 1995-02-01 F BC 722502010001290  XXXXXXXX5867  33800  4200  38000  
14 2017-18 20171416385  ANJALI KUMARI BRAHMADEV SINGH 2001-08-14 F BC 0404001500047643  XXXXXXXX9752  8300  1920  10220  
14 2019-20 20191988610  ANJALI KUMARI BRAHMADEV SINGH 2001-08-14 F BC 0404001500047643  XXXXXXXX0651  3330  2520  5850  
15 2018-19 20181701015  ANJLI KUJUR BELAS KUJUR 1994-04-04 F ST 3200819907  XXXXXXXX7660  31400  6600  38000  
15 2017-18 20171286959  ANJLI KUJUR BELAS KUJUR 1994-04-04 F ST 3200819907  XXXXXXXX9215  31400  6600  38000  
16 2017-18 20171482771  ANKIT EKKA SHITAL EKKA 1996-12-26 M ST 156301000050740  XXXXXXXX5795  8270  3600  11870  
16 2019-20 20191844263  ANKIT EKKA SHITAL EKKA 1996-12-26 M ST 156301000050740  XXXXXXXX3868  18170  5830  24000  
17 2017-18 20171020670  ARPANA KUMARI RAMRATAN PRASAD 1996-04-17 F BC 489710110012632  XXXXXXXX9236  2350  2520  4870  
17 2018-19 20181625909  ARPANA KUMARI RAMRATAN PRASAD 1996-04-17 F BC 489710110012632  XXXXXXXX7333  1734  3685  5419  
18 2019-20 20191687216  ASHA HEMANTI 
TIGGA 
BARNA ORAON 
2003-02-14 F ST 9265001500004059  XXXXXXXX9463  9240  2760  12000  
18 2018-19 20181687216  ASHA HEMANTI 
TIGGA 
BARNA ORAON 
2003-02-14 F ST 9265001500004059  XXXXXXXX8631  9240  2760  12000  
19 2019-20 20192020959  ASHISH KUMAR HIRA LAL MAHTO 1996-12-12 M BC 32551752445  XXXXXXXX3342  7240  1760  9000  

Appendices  
 
 179  
Sl. 
No.  
Academic 
year 
Application 
ID Name of applicant Father's name Date of birth  Gender Category Bank account no. UID Final Tution 
fee 
Total 
maintenance 
fee 
Total 
scholarship 
paid 
19 2017-18 2017866727 ASHISH KUMAR HIRA LAL MAHTO 1996-12-12 M BC 32551752445  XXXXXXXX6294  36000  9000  45000  
20 2017-18 20171370019  ASHISH KUMAR 
MANDAL 
PRAMOD KUMAR 
MANDAL 
2001-03-29 M BC 50410590342  XXXXXXXX8049  1155  3120  4275  
20 2019-20 20191917464  ASHISH KUMAR 
MANDAL 
PRAMOD KUMAR 
MANDAL 
2001-03-29 M BC 50410590342  XXXXXXXX3149  5500  2520  8020  
21 2019-20 20191984707  BABITA KUMARI ETWA ORAON 1999-04-20 F ST 255301000002624  XXXXXXXX2282  1230  3600  4830  
21 2017-18 20171323780  BABITA KUMARI ETWA ORAON 1999-04-20 F ST 255301000002624  XXXXXXXX7060  1250  3000  4250  
22 2019-20 20191778970  BABY KUMARI GIRDHARI PRASAD 
YADAV 
2004-01-01 F BC 59146178491  XXXXXXXX5368  3500  1920  5420  
22 2018-19 20181522270  BABY KUMARI GIRDHARI PRASAD 
YADAV 
2004-01-01 F BC 59146178491  XXXXXXXX9154  2200  1920  4120  
23 2018-19 20181604125  BAJRANG GOPE FAGUWA GOPE 1999-03-15 M BC 08030110023839  XXXXXXXX4316  2618  2310  4928  
23 2019-20 20191774442  BAJRANG GOPE FAGUWA GOPE 1999-05-22 M ST 08030110023839  XXXXXXXX8908  9240  2760  12000  
24 2017-18 2017890087 BALIKA ORAON BUDHU ORAON 2000-02-11 F ST 453718110003730  XXXXXXXX6635  581  2760  3341  
24 2019-20 20191581170  BALIKA ORAON BUDHU ORAON 2000-02-11 F ST 453718110003730  XXXXXXXX1793  877  3600  4477  
25 2019-20 20191880360  BASUDEV TIRIYA ADHIKARI TIRIYA 1999-04-07 M ST 452210110005321  XXXXXXXX3265  728  3300  4028  
25 2018-19 20181562434  BASUDEV TIRIYA ADHIKARI TIRIYA 1999-04-07 M ST 452210110005321  XXXXXXXX1552  774  2760  3534  
26 2017-18 20171231156  BHAGIRATH 
PRASHAD VERMA 
HIRAMANI PRASHAD 
VERMA 
2001-04-06 M BC 5713120000249  XXXXXXXX5754  2000  1920  3920  
26 2018-19 20181737908  BHAGIRATH 
PRASHAD VERMA 
HIRAMANI PRASHAD 
VERMA 
2001-03-06 M BC 5713120000249  XXXXXXXX1053  12480  2520  15000  
27 2018-19 20181568717  BHAVISH KUMAR 
SHARMA 
ARJUN SHARMA 
2000-03-02 M BC 499310110007555  XXXXXXXX1823  12690  2310  15000  
27 2019-20 20191776572  BHAVISH KUMAR 
SHARMA 
ARJUN SHARMA 
1998-05-22 M ST 499310110007555  XXXXXXXX5383  16400  3600  20000  
28 2017-18 20171467551  BHEEM SAHU RAMCHANDRA SAHU 2001-06-30 M BC 0609010280709  XXXXXXXX6408  616  1920  2536  
28 2019-20 20191887514  BHEEM SAHU RAMCHANDRA SAHU 2001-06-30 M BC 0609010280709  XXXXXXXX6408  1550  2520  4070  
29 2018-19 20181736464  BIKRAM RAM ROHIT RAM 1997-04-05 M SC 4107001500019189  XXXXXXXX0810  2000  2700  4700  
29 2017-18 20171463344  BIKRAM RAM ROHIT RAM 1997-04-05 M BC 4107001500019189  XXXXXXXX0255  2000  1920  3920  
30 2019-20 20191776889  BINOD KINDO NICODIM KINDO 1998-02-05 M ST 3710242078  XXXXXXXX4734  6240  2760  9000  
30 2018-19 20181641712  BINOD KINDO NICODIM KINDO 1999-11-10 M ST 3710242078  XXXXXXXX6250  2618  3300  5918  
31 2019-20 20192027816  BIPIN  EKKA RAJA EKKA 1999-06-15 M ST 35949772549  XXXXXXXX6844  503  9840  10343  
31 2017-18 20171479746  BIPIN  EKKA RAJA EKKA 1999-06-15 M ST 35949772549  XXXXXXXX1000  362  6840  7202  
32 2018-19 20181674133  CHANCHALA 
KUMARI 
SURESH MAHTO 
2001-03-10 F BC 482010110005189  XXXXXXXX3340  2000  1920  3920  
32 2017-18 20171326255  CHANCHALA 
KUMARI 
SURESH MAHTO 
2001-03-10 F BC 482010110005189  XXXXXXXX7507  2000  1920  3920  
33 2018-19 20181426201  CHANDNI KUMARI NANDKISHOR DAS 2001-03-20 F SC 484610110008022  XXXXXXXX4486  93  2760  2853  
33 2019-20 20192013603  CHANDNI KUMARI NANDKISHOR DAS 2001-03-20 F SC 484610110008022  XXXXXXXX4887  3980  3600  7580  
34 2019-20 20191546796  CHANDNI KUMARI RAMPRAKASH 
CHOUDHARY 
1999-06-22 F BC 154401000054704  XXXXXXXX9906  3295  2520  5815  
34 2017-18 2017804921 CHANDNI KUMARI RAMPRAKASH 
CHOUDHARY 
1999-06-22 F BC 154401000054704  XXXXXXXX2034  1636  1920  3556  
35 2018-19 20181646694  CHANDRIKA 
KUMARI 
PAWAN KUNVAR 
1998-02-18 F BC 32492152002  XXXXXXXX2608  2400  3015  5415  
35 2017-18 20171323237  CHANDRIKA 
KUMARI 
PAWAN KUNVAR 
1998-02-18 F BC 32492152002  XXXXXXXX8672  569  2520  3089  

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
180   
Sl. 
No.  
Academic 
year 
Application 
ID Name of applicant Father's name Date of birth  Gender Category Bank account no. UID Final Tution 
fee 
Total 
maintenance 
fee 
Total 
scholarship 
paid 
36 2019-20 20191874761  DEEKSHA KUMARI DINESH SAHU 2003-02-13 F BC 595902010012180  XXXXXXXX5699  2580  2520  5100  
36 2018-19 20181743787  DEEKSHA KUMARI DINESH SAHU 2003-02-13 F BC 595902010012180  XXXXXXXX6192  3450  1920  5370  
37 2017-18 20171326873  DEEPAK DAS BHIM DAS 1990-03-11 M SC 32612869208  XXXXXXXX9324  30000  9840  39840  
37 2019-20 20191796750  DEEPAK DAS BHIM DAS 1990-03-11 M SC 32612869208  XXXXXXXX1639  31400  6600  38000  
38 2017-18 20171402928  DEEPAK KUMAR 
MANDAL 
DINBANDHU MANDAL 
1999-02-01 M BC 261401000005482  XXXXXXXX3363  1683  2310  3993  
38 2018-19 20181696002  DEEPAK KUMAR 
MANDAL 
DINBANDHU MANDAL 
2000-04-16 M BC 261401000005482  XXXXXXXX2318  5500  2310  7810  
39 2017-18 20171437872  DEEPAK PRAJAPATI DAWARIKA PRAJAPATI 2000-09-20 M BC 482310110003535  XXXXXXXX9767  2000  1920  3920  
39 2019-20 20191689404  DEEPAK PRAJAPATI DAWARIKA PRAJAPATI 2000-09-20 M BC 482310110003535  XXXXXXXX1535  2000  2520  4520  
40 2017-18 20171151993  DHARMENDRA 
KUMAR SAH 
ASHOK SAH 
1998-02-15 M BC 59099926176  XXXXXXXX2022  7080  1920  9000  
40 2019-20 20191965423  DHARMENDRA 
KUMAR SAH 
ASHOK SAH 
1998-02-08 M BC 59099926176  XXXXXXXX4671  5500  2310  7810  
41 2017-18 20171467443  DILIP KUMAR GOPE JAGANNATH GOPE 1995-03-02 M BC 595010110000230  XXXXXXXX6741  415  2520  2935  
41 2019-20 20191955893  DILIP KUMAR GOPE JAGANNATH GOPE 1995-03-02 M BC 595010110000230  XXXXXXXX3376  724  3685  4409  
42 2019-20 20191733960  DINESH DAS KULDEO MAHRA 1996-04-04 M SC 449910110007507  XXXXXXXX3116  758  9840  10598  
42 2017-18 2017824762 DINESH DAS KULDEO MAHRA 1996-03-03 M SC 449910110007507  XXXXXXXX7358  820  6840  7660  
43 2019-20 20191999075  EKTA KUMARI DEVRAJ KUMAR 1995-02-26 F BC 20380696489  XXXXXXXX4876  33800  4200  38000  
43 2018-19 20181688732  EKTA KUMARI DEVRAJ KUMAR 1995-02-26 F BC 20380696489  XXXXXXXX0173  33800  4200  38000  
44 2017-18 20171229848  FAIYAJ ANSARI ABUL ANSARI 1998-01-01 M BC 35001788160  XXXXXXXX0271  2155  1920  4075  
44 2019-20 20191823845  FAIYAJ ANSARI ABUL ANSARI 1998-01-01 M BC 35001788160  XXXXXXXX9644  5500  2520  8020  
45 2017-18 20171432666  FULMANI KACHHAP KARMA KACHHAP 1998-06-22 F ST 495410110004380  XXXXXXXX7895  1776  2760  4536  
45 2018-19 20181619033  FULMANI KACHHAP KARMA KACHHAP 1998-06-22 F ST 495410110004380  XXXXXXXX2018  745  3000  3745  
46 2019-20 20191802713  GANESH SINGH SHANKAR SINGH 1997-12-28 M BC 33587452193  XXXXXXXX9655  3610  4020  7630  
46 2017-18 20171478740  GANESH SINGH SHANKAR SINGH 1997-12-28 M BC 33587452193  XXXXXXXX9965  1320  2520  3840  
47 2018-19 20181673643  GAYTRI KUMARI BHARAT MAHTO 2001-02-05 F BC 482010110005040  XXXXXXXX2361  2000  1920  3920  
47 2017-18 20171326093  GAYTRI KUMARI BHARAT MAHTO 2001-02-05 F BC 482010110005040  XXXXXXXX0441  2000  1920  3920  
48 2017-18 20171317050  GUDIYA KUMARI SHATRUGHAN MAHTO 2001-09-05 F BC 482618210002377  XXXXXXXX9583  984  1760  2744  
48 2019-20 20192008761  GUDIYA KUMARI SHATRUGHAN MAHTO 2001-09-05 F BC 482618210002377  XXXXXXXX5031  5500  2520  8020  
49 2019-20 20191804492  GUNAMAY DHIBAR SUKUMAR DHIBAR 2001-04-07 M BC 477010110004472  XXXXXXXX4962  2850  2520  5370  
49 2017-18 20171312607  GUNAMAY DHIBAR SUKUMAR DHIBAR 2001-04-07 M BC 477010110004472  XXXXXXXX8868  519  1760  2279  
50 2018-19 20181719442  HEMAN KUMAR DASHRATH MAHTO 2001-04-02 M BC 0062010710824  XXXXXXXX7519  2605  2100  4705  
50 2017-18 20171476150  HEMAN KUMAR DASHRATH MAHTO 2001-04-02 M BC 0062010710824  XXXXXXXX0621  2165  1920  4085  
51 2018-19 20181743483  IRSHAD AMIN HASMUDDIN ANSARI 1998-11-14 M BC 3377101004179  XXXXXXXX7104  1058  4800  5858  
51 2017-18 2017899080 IRSHAD AMIN HASMUDDIN ANSARI 1998-11-14 M BC 3377101004179  XXXXXXXX5497  1058  4800  5858  
52 2019-20 20191880429  JAIPAL ORAON BARNA ORAON 1998-02-01 M ST 1776010077473  XXXXXXXX2068  17640  6360  24000  
52 2018-19 20181633500  JAIPAL ORAON BARNA ORAON 1998-02-01 M ST 1776010077473  XXXXXXXX5010  17640  6360  24000  
53 2019-20 20191929254  JAMIL AKHTAR MD AJAMUDIN ANSARI 1997-02-13 M BC 34467915629  XXXXXXXX0371  7080  1920  9000  
53 2018-19 20181714849  JAMIL AKHTAR MD AJAMUDIN ANSARI 1997-02-13 M BC 34467915629  XXXXXXXX2011  7080  1920  9000  
54 2019-20 20191787553  JAYANTI KUMARI DHANU MAHTO 2002-09-01 F BC 483510110009594  XXXXXXXX4806  1420  2520  3940  
54 2018-19 20181564956  JAYANTI KUMARI DHANU MAHTO 2002-09-01 F BC 483510110009594  XXXXXXXX1938  2000  1920  3920  
55 2018-19 2018967996 JAYRAM KUMAR GANGADHAR MAHTO 1998-06-20 M BC 20452299357  XXXXXXXX9878  3980  2520  6500  
55 2019-20 20192004653  JAYRAM KUMAR GANGADHAR MAHTO 1998-06-20 M BC 20452299357  XXXXXXXX2477  3980  2520  6500  

Appendices  
 
 181  
Sl. 
No.  
Academic 
year 
Application 
ID Name of applicant Father's name Date of birth  Gender Category Bank account no. UID Final Tution 
fee 
Total 
maintenance 
fee 
Total 
scholarship 
paid 
56 2017-18 2017872996 JOWAKIM TUDU JAYRAM TUDU 1995-12-26 M ST 34669208779  XXXXXXXX6221  850  3600  4450  
56 2019-20 20191812208  JOWAKIM TUDU JAYRAM TUDU 1995-12-26 M ST 34669208779  XXXXXXXX9929  31950  6050  38000  
57 2018-19 20181754850  JYOTI BAGE ENAM BAGE 1998-09-16 F ST 490411610000963  XXXXXXXX6911  1530  3600  5130  
57 2017-18 20171479894  JYOTI BAGE ENAM BAGE 1998-09-16 F ST 490411610000963  XXXXXXXX0646  1890  3600  5490  
58 2018-19 20181444655  KAJAL KUMARI ANAND THAKUR 2001-04-23 F BC 50413716116  XXXXXXXX1158  2690  1920  4610  
58 2019-20 20191808786  KAJAL KUMARI ANAND THAKUR 2001-04-23 F BC 50413716116  XXXXXXXX6718  4460  2310  6770  
59 2017-18 2017822437 KAJAL KUMARI UDESHWAR KUMAR 
RAM 
2000-08-18 F SC 2650001500038521  XXXXXXXX3873  859  2760  3619  
59 2018-19 20181539150  KAJAL KUMARI UDESHWAR KUMAR 
RAM 
2000-08-18 F SC 2650001500038521  XXXXXXXX6284  1250  3000  4250  
60 2018-19 20181516597  KAMESHWAR 
BHAGAT 
BABULAL BHAGAT 
2000-09-08 M ST 06480110105948  XXXXXXXX8757  1163  6270  7433  
60 2017-18 2017929833 KAMESHWAR 
BHAGAT 
BABULAL BHAGAT 
2000-09-08 M ST 06480110105948  XXXXXXXX5371  5940  4560  10500  
61 2018-19 20181614726  KARISHMA EKKA ATHNAS EKKA 2002-01-06 F ST 499910510006918  XXXXXXXX4516  12400  3300  15700  
61 2017-18 20171454620  KARISHMA EKKA ATHNAS EKKA 2002-01-06 F ST 499910510006918  XXXXXXXX0870  9000  2760  11760  
62 2019-20 20191850415  KAVITA TOPPO RAMDAS ORAON 2000-05-18 F ST 26260100014242  XXXXXXXX7904  2400  3600  6000  
62 2017-18 20171268500  KAVITA TOPPO RAMDAS ORAON 2000-05-18 F ST 26260100014242  XXXXXXXX7804  798  3000  3798  
63 2018-19 20181691489  KIRAN KUMARI KAPIL SAW 1998-03-11 F BC 09932191057232  XXXXXXXX4709  34500  3500  38000  
63 2019-20 20191847725  KIRAN KUMARI KAPIL SAW 1996-03-12 F BC 09932191057232  XXXXXXXX4761  34150  3850  38000  
64 2017-18 20171052351  KOMAL KUMARI RANJIT PD SAH 2002-02-14 F BC 35763300133  XXXXXXXX2521  513  1920  2433  
64 2019-20 20191530449  KOMAL KUMARI RANJIT PD SAH 2002-02-14 F BC 35763300133  XXXXXXXX1292  469  2520  2989  
65 2018-19 20181665663  KULDEEP KUMAR BADHAN PRASAD 1999-07-26 M BC 0877010308676  XXXXXXXX8280  360  1920  2280  
65 2019-20 20191908907  KULDEEP KUMAR BADHAN PRASAD 1999-07-26 M BC 0877010308676  XXXXXXXX6037  1420  2520  3940  
66 2019-20 20191509620  KUMARI ALKA BHAVESH KUMAR 2002-01-26 F BC 1632010174008  XXXXXXXX1744  914  2520  3434  
66 2017-18 20171436058  KUMARI ALKA BHAVESH KUMAR 2002-01-26 F BC 1632010174008  XXXXXXXX0793  1354  1920  3274  
67 2019-20 20191944420  KUNDAN KUMAR 
THAKUR 
PRADIP THAKUR 
1999-02-08 M BC 33353607065  XXXXXXXX6935  5500  2520  8020  
67 2018-19 20181752212  KUNDAN KUMAR 
THAKUR 
PRADIP THAKUR 
1999-08-02 M BC 33353607065  XXXXXXXX0884  4900  2520  7420  
68 2019-20 20191907591  LAXMI KUMARI PAPPU MODI 2000-03-17 F BC 588110110007968  XXXXXXXX5444  2000  2520  4520  
68 2017-18 20171377219  LAXMI KUMARI PAPPU MODI 2000-03-17 F BC 588110110007968  XXXXXXXX5426  4150  2100  6250  
69 2017-18 20171443241  MAHENDRA SAH BIMAL KRISHNA SAH 1998-01-01 M BC 35256956850  XXXXXXXX4587  1200  2520  3720  
69 2019-20 20191856717  MAHENDRA SAH BIMAL KRISHNA SAH 1999-01-01 M BC 35256956850  XXXXXXXX9140  491  3015  3506  
70 2018-19 20181233250  MALAY GORAIN DHANKRISTA GORAIN 2001-05-31 M BC 33149273849  XXXXXXXX8870  2145  1920  4065  
70 2019-20 20191861852  MALAY GORAIN DHANKRISTA GORAIN 2001-05-31 M BC 33149273849  XXXXXXXX7317  569  2100  2669  
71 2017-18 2017905254 MALTI KUMARI SHANKAR MAHTO 1999-05-04 F BC 51992342000831  XXXXXXXX9349  1776  1920  3696  
71 2018-19 20181618462  MALTI KUMARI SHANKAR MAHTO 1999-05-04 F BC 51992342000831  XXXXXXXX7628  745  1890  2635  
72 2019-20 20191939455  MAMTA KUMARI ETWA ORAON 1998-08-27 F ST 59001122363  XXXXXXXX6057  1230  3600  4830  
72 2017-18 20171326614  MAMTA KUMARI ETWA ORAON 1998-08-27 F ST 59001122363  XXXXXXXX7735  1250  3000  4250  
73 2018-19 20181431290  MAMTA KUMARI NANDKISHOR PRASAD 2002-03-22 F BC 484618210001726  XXXXXXXX8390  3700  1920  5620  
73 2019-20 20191935044  MAMTA KUMARI NANDKISHOR PRASAD 2002-03-22 F BC 484618210001726  XXXXXXXX9135  5390  2520  7910  
74 2018-19 20181568262  MANESH KUMAR 
MAHTO 
BHITKA MAHTO 
1996-02-25 M BC 087510026490  XXXXXXXX8258  798  2520  3318  

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
182   
Sl. 
No.  
Academic 
year 
Application 
ID Name of applicant Father's name Date of birth  Gender Category Bank account no. UID Final Tution 
fee 
Total 
maintenance 
fee 
Total 
scholarship 
paid 
74 2019-20 20191948214  MANESH KUMAR 
MAHTO 
BHITKA MAHTO 
1996-02-15 M BC 087510026490  XXXXXXXX4137  7400  1600  9000  
75 2018-19 20181522487  MANIKANT RAJAK RAVINDRA KUMAR 
RAJAK 
1997-02-22 M SC 36398100011963  XXXXXXXX9587  30600  14400  45000  
75 2019-20 20191925250  MANIKANT RAJAK RAVINDRA KUMAR 
RAJAK 
1997-03-26 M SC 36398100011963  XXXXXXXX9587  30600  14400  45000  
76 2019-20 20191787887  MANISHA KUMARI SHRI BASANT KUMAR 
MEHTA 
1999-12-09 F BC 840401111000727  XXXXXXXX5311  36000  9000  45000  
76 2017-18 20171395424  MANISHA KUMARI SHRI BASANT KUMAR 
MEHTA 
1999-12-09 F BC 840401111000727  XXXXXXXX8598  36000  9000  45000  
77 2017-18 20171354647  MANORANJAN 
KUMAR DAS 
SUBODH KUMAR DAS 
2001-09-28 M SC 50409311284  XXXXXXXX8195  2950  6840  9790  
77 2019-20 20191888564  MANORANJAN 
KUMAR DAS 
SUBODH KUMAR DAS 
2001-09-28 M SC 50409311284  XXXXXXXX8345  3657  6840  10497  
78 2019-20 20191810285  MANSINGH TUDU SOBEN TUDU 1992-02-03 M ST 451710510001737  XXXXXXXX5231  1372  6360  7732  
78 2017-18 20171248789  MANSINGH TUDU SOBEN TUDU 1992-02-03 M ST 451710510001737  XXXXXXXX6469  1566  5300  6866  
79 2018-19 20181703414  MANU KUMAR SURESH SAHU 1997-03-21 M BC 75272010015745  XXXXXXXX6029  35800  4200  40000  
79 2019-20 20191845355  MANU KUMAR SURESH SAHU 1987-10-06 M BC 75272010015745  XXXXXXXX9696  33800  4200  38000  
80 2019-20 20191848128  MARYSHILA SOREN MANWEL SOREN 1999-01-15 F ST 32588865491  XXXXXXXX6252  491  4770  5261  
80 2017-18 20171484929  MARYSHILA SOREN MANWEL SOREN 1999-01-15 F ST 32588865491  XXXXXXXX5327  469  3600  4069  
81 2017-18 2017922078 MD ANWAR ANSARI SHAFIQUE ANSARI 1997-06-28 M BC 34139334036  XXXXXXXX0476  564  4800  5364  
81 2019-20 20191928487  MD ANWAR ANSARI SHAFIQUE ANSARI 1997-06-27 M BC 34139334036  XXXXXXXX6002  36750  8250  45000  
82 2018-19 20181745926  MD MINNATULLAH MD SHAHABUDDIN 1999-08-16 M BC 358702010611933  XXXXXXXX0580  1058  2520  3578  
82 2017-18 20171480804  MD MINNATULLAH MD SHAHABUDDIN 1999-08-16 M BC 358702010611933  XXXXXXXX8249  1058  2520  3578  
83 2017-18 20171315244  MD REYAZ ANSARI MD ISLAM ANSARI 1995-02-02 M BC 47230100000929  XXXXXXXX6129  10080  1920  12000  
83 2018-19 20181422664  MD REYAZ ANSARI MD ISLAM ANSARI 1999-12-06 M BC 47230100000929  XXXXXXXX1561  798  2520  3318  
84 2017-18 20171363926  MD WAQUAR 
HASSAN 
MD QAMAR JAWAID 
1996-01-07 M BC 470010110005924  XXXXXXXX3324  20220  9000  29220  
84 2019-20 20191782942  MD WAQUAR 
HASSAN 
MD QAMAR JAWAID 
1996-01-07 M BC 470010110005924  XXXXXXXX2839  17620  9000  26620  
85 2018-19 20181754594  MEGHA 
SRIVASTAVA 
ARUN LAL 
SRIVASTAVA 
2001-10-19 F BC 35560464566  XXXXXXXX3331  7100  3120  10220  
85 2017-18 20171490236  MEGHA 
SRIVASTAVA 
ARUN LAL 
SRIVASTAVA 
2002-08-04 F BC 35560464566  XXXXXXXX6976  10600  3120  13720  
86 2019-20 20191845127  MINAKSHI KUMARI NARESH SAW 1997-03-24 F BC 09932191057295  XXXXXXXX6817  34150  3850  38000  
86 2018-19 20181703429  MINAKSHI KUMARI NARESH SAW 1999-08-05 F BC 09932191057295  XXXXXXXX0542  35800  4200  40000  
87 2017-18 20171112710  MISSON MURMU RAGAT MURMU 1997-02-03 M ST 32563026055  XXXXXXXX0140  362  6840  7202  
87 2019-20 20191870484  MISSON MURMU RAGAT MURMU 1997-02-03 M ST 32563026055  XXXXXXXX1675  503  9840  10343  
88 2018-19 20181753166  MOKHTAR ALAM AJIM MIYAN 1998-06-25 M BC 669502010006728  XXXXXXXX9041  1058  4800  5858  
88 2017-18 20171478205  MOKHTAR ALAM AJIM MIYAN 1998-06-25 M BC 669502010006728  XXXXXXXX4566  1058  4800  5858  
89 2019-20 20191842820  MONU MACHHUWA RANJIT MACHHUWA 1994-05-12 M SC 491110110006540  XXXXXXXX1916  415  3600  4015  
89 2017-18 20171341379  MONU MACHHUWA RANJIT MACHHUWA 1994-05-12 M SC 491110110006540  XXXXXXXX5301  6700  2300  9000  
90 2019-20 20191808217  MRITUNJAY KUMAR UPENDRA YADAV 2001-04-12 M BC 35144693900  XXXXXXXX3922  5500  2520  8020  
90 2018-19 20181669615  MRITUNJAY KUMAR UPENDRA YADAV 2001-04-12 M BC 35144693900  XXXXXXXX3157  103  1920  2023  
91 2019-20 20191746080  MUKTI CHANDRA KULDIP SAHU 2001-09-20 F BC 597410510001832  XXXXXXXX7815  12480  2520  15000  
91 2018-19 20181664040  MUKTI CHANDRA KULDIP SAHU 2000-09-20 F BC 597410510001832  XXXXXXXX8097  2000  1890  3890  

Appendices  
 
 183  
Sl. 
No.  
Academic 
year 
Application 
ID Name of applicant Father's name Date of birth  Gender Category Bank account no. UID Final Tution 
fee 
Total 
maintenance 
fee 
Total 
scholarship 
paid 
92 2019-20 20191543175  MUNNI TIRKEY ARJUN TIRKEY 2001-02-13 F ST 7549001500004539  XXXXXXXX4540  18160  6840  25000  
92 2017-18 20171237614  MUNNI TIRKEY ARJUN TIRKEY 2001-02-13 F ST 7549001500004539  XXXXXXXX7180  9240  2760  12000  
93 2019-20 20191889868  NAJMIN PARWEEN MINHAJUL ANSARI 2002-12-06 F BC 589510110003486  XXXXXXXX5596  4450  2310  6760  
93 2018-19 20181706609  NAJMIN PARWEEN MINHAJUL ANSARI 2002-12-06 F BC 589510110003486  XXXXXXXX3195  3561  1920  5481  
94 2017-18 20171334192  NAMITA KUMARI BINOD MAHATO 2000-12-08 F BC 474010110003945  XXXXXXXX0915  750  1760  2510  
94 2019-20 20191888024  NAMITA KUMARI BINOD MAHATO 2000-12-08 F BC 474010110003945  XXXXXXXX3202  3118  2100  5218  
95 2019-20 20191792933  NARAYAN PANDIT BINOD PANDIT 2001-07-31 M BC 33640489123  XXXXXXXX6610  907  2520  3427  
95 2018-19 20181694142  NARAYAN PANDIT BINOD PANDIT 2001-07-31 M BC 33640489123  XXXXXXXX5284  2200  1920  4120  
96 2018-19 20181729201  NEHA PARWEEN MD MAZAHAR 
RABBANI 
1996-03-01 F BC 485710110012904  XXXXXXXX4461  7720  1280  9000  
96 2019-20 20192007885  NEHA PARWEEN MD MAZAHAR 
RABBANI 
1996-03-01 F BC 485710110012904  XXXXXXXX2287  33800  4200  38000  
97 2017-18 20171302284  NEHA PRAVEEN MERAZ AHAMAD 2001-12-08 M BC 2650001500058686  XXXXXXXX5400  805  1920  2725  
97 2018-19 20181503085  NEHA PRAVEEN MERAZ AHAMAD 2001-12-08 F BC 2650001500058686  XXXXXXXX2266  1250  2520  3770  
98 2018-19 20181682394  NIBHA KUMARI AMALDEO ORAON 1996-10-12 F ST 644802010009332  XXXXXXXX6908  1085  4770  5855  
98 2017-18 20171203509  NIBHA KUMARI AMALDEO ORAON 1996-10-12 F ST 644802010009332  XXXXXXXX7423  5010  3600  8610  
99 2019-20 20191963087  NIBHA KUMARI ARVIND KUMAR 2002-02-11 F BC 33494024343  XXXXXXXX8871  4120  2520  6640  
99 2017-18 20171406495  NIBHA KUMARI ARVIND KUMAR 2002-02-11 F BC 33494024343  XXXXXXXX7756  1860  1760  3620  
100  2018-19 20181608509  NISHA KUMARI SHUBHANKAR 
MANDAL 
2000-08-15 F BC 36236896411  XXXXXXXX9998  1500  1680  3180  
100  2017-18 20171349570  NISHA KUMARI SHUBHANKAR 
MANDAL 
2000-08-15 F BC 36236896411  XXXXXXXX6048  2265  1920  4185  
101  2017-18 20171273274  NISHANT RANA SUNIL KUMAR RANA 2002-02-02 M BC 3618603848  XXXXXXXX5698  975  1440  2415  
101  2019-20 20191926598  NISHANT RANA SUNIL KUMAR RANA 2000-02-02 M BC 3618603848  XXXXXXXX7509  10600  1890  12490  
102  2019-20 20191815073  NITISH KUMAR SUBHASH PRASAD 
GUPTA 
1999-10-02 M BC 35168707281  XXXXXXXX2284  7240  1760  9000  
102  2017-18 20171100408  NITISH KUMAR SUBHASH PRASAD 
GUPTA 
1999-10-02 M BC 35168707281  XXXXXXXX7608  1733  1920  3653  
103  2018-19 20181741953  NITU KUMARI ARJUN PRASAD 1996-01-01 F BC 482518210001293  XXXXXXXX5633  2000  2345  4345  
103  2017-18 20171382957  NITU KUMARI ARJUN PRASAD 1998-05-25 F BC 482518210001293  XXXXXXXX8649  2000  2520  4520  
104  2017-18 20171297843  NOMITA EKKA BARNABAS EKKA 1998-10-31 F ST 51992342004600  XXXXXXXX5707  1776  2760  4536  
104  2018-19 20181619239  NOMITA EKKA BARNABAS EKKA 1998-10-31 F ST 51992342004600  XXXXXXXX4833  745  3300  4045  
105  2019-20 20192004899  PANKAJ KUMAR 
MAHTO 
PRABHUNATH MAHTO 
2003-01-01 M BC 59079305823  XXXXXXXX0003  1350  1920  3270  
105  2017-18 20171411061  PANKAJ KUMAR 
MAHTO 
PRABHUNATH MAHTO 
2003-01-01 M BC 59079305823  XXXXXXXX8157  688  1920  2608  
106  2019-20 20191914277  PAPPU KUMAR BHAGIRATH SAW 2000-06-25 M BC 482118210015643  XXXXXXXX4266  7080  1920  9000  
106  2018-19 20181706834  PAPPU KUMAR BHAGIRATH SAW 2001-06-25 M BC 482118210015643  XXXXXXXX1172  2000  1600  3600  
107  2017-18 20171367298  PAWAN KUMAR 
YADAV 
FAGU YADAV 
1999-04-18 M BC 18802221000642  XXXXXXXX0877  1146  1920  3066  
107  2018-19 20181603810  PAWAN KUMAR 
YADAV 
FAGU YADAV 
1999-04-18 M BC 18802221000642  XXXXXXXX6026  3100  2100  5200  
108  2017-18 20171427056  PINTU KUMAR BADELAL THAKUR 2000-12-20 M BC 483510110010352  XXXXXXXX7329  779  1920  2699  
108  2019-20 20191756147  PINTU KUMAR BADELAL THAKUR 2000-12-20 M BC 483510110010352  XXXXXXXX6359  100  1920  2020  
109  2019-20 20191796178  POOJA ORAON GANDRU ORAON 1994-08-15 F ST 156301000046809  XXXXXXXX0118  31950  6050  38000  
109  2017-18 20171247902  POOJA ORAON GANDRU ORAON 1994-08-15 F ST 156301000046809  XXXXXXXX8093  1332  5830  7162  

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
184   
Sl. 
No.  
Academic 
year 
Application 
ID Name of applicant Father's name Date of birth  Gender Category Bank account no. UID Final Tution 
fee 
Total 
maintenance 
fee 
Total 
scholarship 
paid 
110  2017-18 20171048008  PRADEEP KUMAR 
DAS 
SOMAR DAS 
1996-03-22 M SC 588110510000544  XXXXXXXX6357  2000  3600  5600  
110  2019-20 20191913514  PRADEEP KUMAR 
DAS 
SOMAR DAS 
1997-03-22 M SC 588110510000544  XXXXXXXX5053  1543  6360  7903  
111  2017-18 20171375055  PRADEEP MURMU SANATAN MURMU 1993-02-02 M ST 31506673722  XXXXXXXX6152  6240  2760  9000  
111  2018-19 20181751919  PRADEEP MURMU SANATAN MURMU 1993-03-02 M ST 31506673722  XXXXXXXX0698  6240  2760  9000  
112  2017-18 20171467467  PRAHUL KUMAR LALMOHAN MAHTO 2001-04-07 M BC 44780100008594  XXXXXXXX3605  11500  2520  14020  
112  2019-20 20191788207  PRAHUL KUMAR LALMOHAN MAHTO 2001-04-07 M BC 44780100008594  XXXXXXXX1359  12480  2520  15000  
113  2019-20 20191881824  PRAKASH KUMAR MOHAN GUPTA 1999-12-29 M BC 6106064712  XXXXXXXX1243  1710  2520  4230  
113  2017-18 20171277557  PRAKASH KUMAR MOHAN GUPTA 1999-12-29 M BC 6106064712  XXXXXXXX7150  2000  1920  3920  
114  2018-19 20181740482  PRANAY RAJ 
KUSHWAHA 
UPENDRA KUMAR 
MAHTO 
2000-09-19 M BC 4043001500078404  XXXXXXXX2273  2326  2310  4636  
114  2017-18 20171445218  PRANAY RAJ 
KUSHWAHA 
UPENDRA KUMAR 
MAHTO 
2000-09-19 M BC 4043001500078404  XXXXXXXX3227  2159  1920  4079  
115  2018-19 20181742819  PRASHANT KUMAR 
DEY 
LAKHAN CHANDRA 
DEY 
1998-03-04 M BC 50123538639  XXXXXXXX9583  1449  2520  3969  
115  2019-20 20191956789  PRASHANT KUMAR 
DEY 
LAKHAN CHANDRA 
DEY 
1998-03-04 M BC 50123538639  XXXXXXXX0572  1298  4020  5318  
116  2017-18 20171377414  PRITI KUJUR MATIYAS KUJUR 1997-11-30 F ST 0407010942867  XXXXXXXX6615  2290  3600  5890  
116  2018-19 20181578315  PRITI KUJUR MATIYAS KUJUR 1997-11-30 F ST 0407010942867  XXXXXXXX1766  1310  2760  4070  
117  2019-20 20191492767  PRIYANKA KUMARI ANIL PANDIT 2000-04-12 F ST 591210110006972  XXXXXXXX5882  415  3600  4015  
117  2017-18 20171163629  PRIYANKA KUMARI ANIL PANDIT 2000-04-12 F BC 591210110006972  XXXXXXXX2613  427  1920  2347  
118  2019-20 20191905126  PUJA KUMARI RAJENDRA YADAV 1997-05-09 F BC 483910510000064  XXXXXXXX2932  7080  1920  9000  
118  2018-19 20181628594  PUJA KUMARI RAJENDRA YADAV 1997-05-09 F BC 483910510000064  XXXXXXXX3414  4150  2520  6670  
119  2019-20 20191981284  PUNAM KUMARI PARMESHWAR SAW 2001-02-02 F BC 473410110007436  XXXXXXXX0608  4460  2520  6980  
119  2018-19 20181407884  PUNAM KUMARI PARMESHWAR SAW 2001-02-02 F BC 473410110007436  XXXXXXXX3012  2990  1920  4910  
120  2019-20 20191886345  PUNITA ORAON LITHU ORAON 2002-02-15 F ST 638202010004888  XXXXXXXX4100  3580  3600  7180  
120  2017-18 20171373986  PUNITA ORAON LITHU ORAON 2002-02-15 F ST 638202010004888  XXXXXXXX9229  6240  2760  9000  
121  2019-20 20191770599  RAFAT JABBI SULTAN AHMAD 1999-06-10 M BC 11222308242  XXXXXXXX1772  3950  2520  6470  
121  2018-19 20181752215  RAFAT JABBI SULTAN AHMAD 1998-10-12 F BC 11222308242  XXXXXXXX9054  3295  1890  5185  
122  2019-20 20191982095  RAHUL KUMAR RADHESHYAM SAH 1992-01-04 M BC 31976036516  XXXXXXXX6765  7080  1920  9000  
122  2018-19 20181659661  RAHUL KUMAR RADHESHYAM SAH 1992-01-04 M BC 31976036516  XXXXXXXX6720  12900  2100  15000  
123  2018-19 2018987851 RAHUL KUMAR 
MAHATO 
HEMANT KUMAR 
MAHATO 
1997-08-17 M BC 19522121008225  XXXXXXXX9220  750  2520  3270  
123  2019-20 20191952914  RAHUL KUMAR 
MAHATO 
HEMANT KUMAR 
MAHATO 
1997-08-17 M BC 19522121008225  XXXXXXXX5311  698  2520  3218  
124  2018-19 20181633220  RAHUL KUMAR 
MAHTO 
KALESHWAR MAHTO 
2000-01-20 M BC 495310110008384  XXXXXXXX1404  2740  2310  5050  
124  2017-18 2017843801 RAHUL KUMAR 
MAHTO 
KALESHWAR MAHTO 
2000-01-22 M BC 495310110008384  XXXXXXXX4659  3340  1920  5260  
125  2017-18 20171291042  RAHUL ORAON GHASIYA ORAON 2002-02-05 M ST 50389196112  XXXXXXXX9199  9240  2760  12000  
125  2019-20 20191879814  RAHUL ORAON GHASIYA ORAON 2002-02-05 M ST 50389196112  XXXXXXXX7922  3530  6270  9800  
126  2017-18 20171273928  RAJ KUMAR PRADEEP KUMAR 
RAJAK 
1995-09-25 M SC 2992000109964159  XXXXXXXX0603  11640  6360  18000  
126  2019-20 20191744189  RAJ KUMAR PRADEEP KUMAR 
RAJAK 
1995-09-25 M SC 2992000109964159  XXXXXXXX7883  11640  6360  18000  
127  2019-20 20191708296  RAJESH KUMAR MOHAR MAHTO 1996-01-16 M BC 539102010955110  XXXXXXXX1456  2000  4020  6020  

Appendices  
 
 185  
Sl. 
No.  
Academic 
year 
Application 
ID Name of applicant Father's name Date of birth  Gender Category Bank account no. UID Final Tution 
fee 
Total 
maintenance 
fee 
Total 
scholarship 
paid 
127  2017-18 20171047914  RAJESH KUMAR MOHAR MAHTO 1998-01-16 M BC 539102010955110  XXXXXXXX7139  2000  2520  4520  
128  2018-19 20181638407  RAJKUMAR RAJAK GANESH RAJAK 1995-09-10 M SC 34259291876  XXXXXXXX5181  1200  9840  11040  
128  2017-18 2017982642 RAJKUMAR RAJAK GANESH RAJAK 1995-09-10 M SC 34259291876  XXXXXXXX5818  491  9840  10331  
129  2018-19 20181660976  RAKESH PRAJAPATI SHANKAR DAYAL 
PANDIT 
1997-10-05 M BC 1568001500006215  XXXXXXXX1820  13110  1890  15000  
129  2019-20 20191956171  RAKESH PRAJAPATI SHANKAR DAYAL 
PANDIT 
1997-10-05 M BC 1568001500006215  XXXXXXXX4342  7080  1920  9000  
130  2019-20 20191888746  RAMESH KUMAR 
SAW 
MOHAN SAW 
2000-01-03 M BC 477810110005434  XXXXXXXX1383  5390  2100  7490  
130  2018-19 20181404260  RAMESH KUMAR 
SAW 
MOHAN SAW 
2000-01-03 M BC 477810110005434  XXXXXXXX0888  3600  1920  5520  
131  2019-20 20191865896  RAMIM ANSARI HAMID ANSARI 2001-05-05 M BC 33072653611  XXXXXXXX7007  1500  3600  5100  
131  2018-19 20181636409  RAMIM ANSARI HAMID ANSARI 2001-05-05 M BC 33072653611  XXXXXXXX5069  800  1920  2720  
132  2019-20 20191875684  RAMNANDAN SAH GHANSHYAM SAH 1998-02-04 M BC 59032236589  XXXXXXXX7777  1298  4020  5318  
132  2017-18 20171300645  RAMNANDAN SAH GHANSHYAM SAH 1998-02-04 M BC 59032236589  XXXXXXXX9709  589  2520  3109  
133  2017-18 20171427474  RANJAN KUMAR 
YADAV 
UPENDRA PRASAD 
YADAV 
1996-11-07 M BC 50020394317  XXXXXXXX1507  3460  2520  5980  
133  2019-20 20191724483  RANJAN KUMAR 
YADAV 
UPENDRA PRASAD 
YADAV 
1993-09-10 M BC 50020394317  XXXXXXXX7999  5500  2520  8020  
134  2019-20 20191983744  RANJIT MUNDA BANMALI MUNDA 1997-09-03 M ST 491110110010105  XXXXXXXX1316  415  6840  7255  
134  2017-18 20171456947  RANJIT MUNDA BANMALI MUNDA 1997-09-03 M ST 491110110010105  XXXXXXXX9238  415  3600  4015  
135  2019-20 20191909940  RAVI RANJAN 
PRASAD 
NARAYAN PRASAD 
2001-10-24 M BC 3539465000  XXXXXXXX5499  2000  2520  4520  
135  2017-18 20171231859  RAVI RANJAN 
PRASAD 
NARAYAN PRASAD 
2001-10-24 M BC 3539465000  XXXXXXXX3497  2000  1920  3920  
136  2017-18 20171343073  REENA KUMARI RABINDRA SAHU 1999-08-23 F BC 0407010699839  XXXXXXXX1889  2851  2310  5161  
136  2019-20 20191779263  REENA KUMARI RABINDRA SAHU 1999-08-23 F BC 0407010699839  XXXXXXXX3243  4030  4800  8830  
137  2019-20 20191842546  REENA SOREN LATE SOM SOREN 1997-04-05 F ST 36398100011624  XXXXXXXX5072  251  9840  10091  
137  2018-19 20181639056  REENA SOREN LATE SOM SOREN 1997-04-05 F ST 36398100011624  XXXXXXXX5598  251  9840  10091  
138  2017-18 20171476806  REETA KUMARI 
ORAON 
FULDEV ORAON 
1998-03-05 F ST 19782122003031  XXXXXXXX9424  1250  3300  4550  
138  2019-20 20191954766  REETA KUMARI 
ORAON 
FULDEV ORAON 
1999-03-05 F ST 19782122003031  XXXXXXXX9180  1230  3600  4830  
139  2017-18 20171332262  RENU KUMARI KAILASH PRAJAPATI 1999-03-02 F BC 482010110005280  XXXXXXXX4703  2000  1920  3920  
139  2018-19 20181668344  RENU KUMARI KAILASH PRAJAPATI 1999-03-02 F BC 482010110005280  XXXXXXXX7739  2000  1920  3920  
140  2017-18 20171124257  RENUKA ORAON AWADHESH ORAON 1998-03-23 F ST 30368100001289  XXXXXXXX7673  1163  3600  4763  
140  2019-20 20191940506  RENUKA ORAON AWADHESH ORAON 1998-03-23 F ST 30368100001289  XXXXXXXX4425  2110  6360  8470  
141  2018-19 20181511427  RESHMA LATA 
SORENG 
FRANCIS SORENG 
1995-12-13 F ST 50142052239  XXXXXXXX0297  30600  14400  45000  
141  2017-18 20171490193  RESHMA LATA 
SORENG 
FRANCIS SORENG 
1995-12-13 F ST 50142052239  XXXXXXXX5037  12800  8200  21000  
142  2019-20 20191784403  RESHMI KERKETTA RAGHUNANDAN 
KERKETTA 
2002-01-03 F ST 47230100001513  XXXXXXXX1383  3530  3600  7130  
142  2018-19 20181696213  RESHMI KERKETTA RAGHUNANDAN 
KERKETTA 
2002-03-01 F ST 47230100001513  XXXXXXXX2508  8300  2760  11060  
143  2018-19 20181543137  RINA MAHATO SUKLAL MAHATO 1995-07-25 F BC 452810510001581  XXXXXXXX2352  849  4020  4869  
143  2017-18 20171409510  RINA MAHATO SUKLAL MAHATO 1995-07-25 F BC 452810510001581  XXXXXXXX9654  1312  2520  3832  

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
186   
Sl. 
No.  
Academic 
year 
Application 
ID Name of applicant Father's name Date of birth  Gender Category Bank account no. UID Final Tution 
fee 
Total 
maintenance 
fee 
Total 
scholarship 
paid 
144  2017-18 20171319714  RINKI KUMARI RAMDHAN PRAJAPATI 2000-04-26 F BC 492310110006679  XXXXXXXX2903  1250  2100  3350  
144  2019-20 20191900856  RINKI KUMARI RAMDHAN PRAJAPATI 2000-04-26 F BC 492310110006679  XXXXXXXX2903  730  2520  3250  
145  2017-18 20171336171  RISHU RANI RAJU MAHTO 2002-05-08 F BC 27620110059005  XXXXXXXX0039  2631  1920  4551  
145  2019-20 20191776148  RISHU RANI RAJU MAHTO 2002-05-08 F BC 27620110059005  XXXXXXXX9768  3530  2520  6050  
146  2018-19 20181601166  RITU MONIKA TIGGA  ANUDEEP TIGGA 1995-07-01 F ST 75252010008405  XXXXXXXX5909  4050  3600  7650  
146  2017-18 2017993501 RITU MONIKA TIGGA  ANUDEEP TIGGA 1995-07-01 F ST 75252010008405  XXXXXXXX6968  3500  3600  7100  
147  2019-20 20191934433  ROHIT BODRA GABRIEL BODRA 1998-10-28 M ST 490410110010345  XXXXXXXX2641  31400  6600  38000  
147  2017-18 20171480128  ROHIT BODRA GABRIEL BODRA 1998-10-28 M ST 490410110010345  XXXXXXXX7652  1790  3600  5390  
148  2018-19 20181468703  ROHIT KUMAR SAW MAHENDRA SAW 2002-03-20 M BC 484610110008351  XXXXXXXX4714  3600  1920  5520  
148  2019-20 20191908814  ROHIT KUMAR SAW MAHENDRA SAW 2002-03-20 M BC 484610110008351  XXXXXXXX0055  3980  2310  6290  
149  2019-20 20191887906  ROHIT MANDAL SHISHIR MANDAL 2002-02-01 M BC 474310110006011  XXXXXXXX1355  4575  2520  7095  
149  2017-18 20171333007  ROHIT MANDAL SHISHIR MANDAL 2002-02-01 M BC 474310110006011  XXXXXXXX3070  280  1920  2200  
150  2018-19 20181689110  RUBY KUMARI MAHADEV PRASAD 
MEHTA 
2001-12-15 F BC 588818210000541  XXXXXXXX6245  2000  1600  3600  
150  2019-20 20192012490  RUBY KUMARI MAHADEV PRASAD 
MEHTA 
2001-01-10 F BC 588818210000541  XXXXXXXX1999  7080  1920  9000  
151  2019-20 20191981178  SADIA FIRDOUS MD SHAFIQUE ANSARI 2001-01-12 F BC 0404001500064729  XXXXXXXX0859  3530  2310  5840  
151  2017-18 20171317706  SADIA FIRDOUS MD SHAFIQUE ANSARI 2001-01-12 F BC 0404001500064729  XXXXXXXX5313  10080  1920  12000  
152  2017-18 20171406091  SAHAJUDDIN 
ANSARI 
MD SAFIK ANSARI 
1997-02-09 M BC 621102010006804  XXXXXXXX4131  589  2520  3109  
152  2019-20 20191849492  SAHAJUDDIN 
ANSARI 
MD SAFIK ANSARI 
1997-02-09 M BC 621102010006804  XXXXXXXX5947  1298  4020  5318  
153  2017-18 20171390479  SALENDRA PRASAD 
VERMA 
SAKALDEV PRASAD 
VERMA 
2000-10-06 M BC 489110110012581  XXXXXXXX1184  2200  1920  4120  
153  2019-20 20192020432  SALENDRA PRASAD 
VERMA 
SAKALDEV PRASAD 
VERMA 
2000-10-06 M BC 489110110012581  XXXXXXXX1083  7080  1920  9000  
154  2017-18 20171463519  SAMIYA PERWEEN MD HASIB 1999-05-16 F BC 8625108056169  XXXXXXXX9430  2151  2310  4461  
154  2019-20 20191950120  SAMIYA PERWEEN MD HASIB 1999-05-16 F BC 8625108056169  XXXXXXXX7989  3330  2520  5850  
155  2019-20 20191762688  SANGEETA LAMAY DINESH CHANDRA 
LAMAY 
1997-09-09 F ST 4516108001129  XXXXXXXX8954  1214  5830  7044  
155  2018-19 20181725461  SANGEETA LAMAY DINESH CHANDRA 
LAMAY 
1997-09-09 F ST 4516108001129  XXXXXXXX7591  878  3600  4478  
156  2018-19 20181732750  SANJAY KUMAR SANTOSH SAW 1998-09-15 M BC 1776010056443  XXXXXXXX0817  17480  2520  20000  
156  2017-18 20171292822  SANJAY KUMAR SANTOSH SAW 1998-01-02 M BC 1776010056443  XXXXXXXX2296  10080  1920  12000  
157  2017-18 20171254449  SANJEET KUMAR 
GANJHU 
GOBIND RAM GANJHU 
1995-07-21 M SC 3973133078  XXXXXXXX6409  3375  3600  6975  
157  2018-19 20181582026  SANJEET KUMAR 
GANJHU 
GOBIND RAM GANJHU 
1995-07-21 M SC 3973133078  XXXXXXXX2399  2605  3600  6205  
158  2019-20 20191886972  SANJU KUMARI 
VERMA 
SURESH KUMAR 
VERMA 
1999-12-30 F BC 50417611926  XXXXXXXX9589  2332  2520  4852  
158  2017-18 20171470866  SANJU KUMARI 
VERMA 
SURESH KUMAR 
VERMA 
1999-12-30 F BC 50417611926  XXXXXXXX6183  1117  1920  3037  
159  2017-18 20171102417  SANTOSH KUMAR BAHALI  SAW 1984-06-13 M BC 1079010102503  XXXXXXXX2414  33800  4200  38000  
159  2019-20 20191823492  SANTOSH KUMAR BAHALI  SAW 1984-06-13 M BC 1079010102503  XXXXXXXX4689  13980  4020  18000  
160  2018-19 20181640364  SANTOSH KUMAR 
AZAD 
HARENDRA KUMAR 
AZAD 
1995-06-17 M SC 533302010018087  XXXXXXXX5434  30600  14400  45000  

Appendices  
 
 187  
Sl. 
No.  
Academic 
year 
Application 
ID Name of applicant Father's name Date of birth  Gender Category Bank account no. UID Final Tution 
fee 
Total 
maintenance 
fee 
Total 
scholarship 
paid 
160  2017-18 20171200694  SANTOSH KUMAR 
AZAD 
HARENDRA KUMAR 
AZAD 
1995-06-17 M SC 533302010018087  XXXXXXXX3417  31400  6600  38000  
161  2019-20 20191956978  SARITA KUMARI NEMCHAND MAHTO 2000-10-16 F BC 479710110021271  XXXXXXXX7515  3980  2520  6500  
161  2017-18 20171417552  SARITA KUMARI NEMCHAND MAHTO 2000-10-16 F BC 479710110021271  XXXXXXXX2481  3750  1920  5670  
162  2018-19 20181618551  SARON TIGGA PREMCHAND TIGGA 2000-08-26 F ST 51992342000155  XXXXXXXX7188  745  2700  3445  
162  2017-18 2017827664 SARON TIGGA PREMCHAND TIGGA 2000-08-26 F ST 51992342000155  XXXXXXXX7597  1776  2760  4536  
163  2017-18 2017979624 SATYAM KUMAR 
MAHTO 
KALAMNATH MAHTO 
2002-08-12 M BC 496918210005976  XXXXXXXX2384  10080  1920  12000  
163  2019-20 20191856597  SATYAM KUMAR 
MAHTO 
KALAMNATH MAHTO 
2002-08-12 M BC 496918210005976  XXXXXXXX3553  12480  2520  15000  
164  2019-20 20191756265  SAVITA KUMARI ROHIT MAHTO 2001-08-03 F BC 20313624812  XXXXXXXX0605  12480  2520  15000  
164  2017-18 20171288728  SAVITA KUMARI ROHIT MAHTO 2001-08-03 F BC 20313624812  XXXXXXXX0625  5900  1920  7820  
165  2017-18 20171399419  SEEMA KUMARI NILKANTH KEWAT 1997-06-25 F BC 477810110003368  XXXXXXXX0841  760  2310  3070  
165  2019-20 20191676102  SEEMA KUMARI NILKANTH KEWAT 1997-06-25 F BC 477810110003368  XXXXXXXX8820  3600  2520  6120  
166  2019-20 20191951187  SEETARAM MAHATO  BIRINCHI MAHATO 2001-02-03 M BC 453710110016467  XXXXXXXX4110  7400  1600  9000  
166  2018-19 20181543341  SEETARAM MAHATO  BIRINCHI MAHATO 2001-02-03 M BC 453710110016467  XXXXXXXX9689  633  1920  2553  
167  2018-19 20181665356  SHAILENDRA 
NAYAK 
SANJAY  NAYAK 
2000-01-05 M SC 494510510011084  XXXXXXXX3497  6240  2760  9000  
167  2019-20 20192017397  SHAILENDRA 
NAYAK 
SANJAY  NAYAK 
2000-01-05 M SC 494510510011084  XXXXXXXX8835  6240  2760  9000  
168  2017-18 20171307212  SHAKUNTLA 
SARDAR 
SONARAM SARDAR 
2000-12-08 F ST 5356108000229  XXXXXXXX3204  431  2760  3191  
168  2019-20 20191881565  SHAKUNTLA 
SARDAR 
SONARAM SARDAR 
2000-12-08 F ST 5356108000229  XXXXXXXX9973  1258  6840  8098  
169  2018-19 20181545100  SHILA KUMARI SUDAM MAHTO 2001-02-25 F BC 32819383452  XXXXXXXX9883  415  2100  2515  
169  2017-18 20171383822  SHILA KUMARI SUDAM MAHTO 2001-02-25 F BC 32819383452  XXXXXXXX4247  336  1920  2256  
170  2017-18 2017889353 SHIVAM KUMAR OM PRAKASH BHAGAT 2000-06-14 M BC 31493134758  XXXXXXXX3476  969  1920  2889  
170  2019-20 20191636267  SHIVAM KUMAR OM PRAKASH BHAGAT 2000-06-14 M BC 31493134758  XXXXXXXX1732  1320  2520  3840  
171  2018-19 20181562543  SHIVANI KUMARI SANJAY PRASAD 
GUPTA 
1995-11-22 F BC 480110510000076  XXXXXXXX2351  12900  2100  15000  
171  2019-20 20191960432  SHIVANI KUMARI SANJAY PRASAD 
GUPTA 
1995-11-22 F BC 480110510000076  XXXXXXXX9204  7080  1920  9000  
172  2017-18 20171248024  SHIVRAJ SUMAN RUPLAL PRASAD 
SUMAN 
2002-09-10 M BC 480518210001048  XXXXXXXX1134  3750  1920  5670  
172  2019-20 20191916125  SHIVRAJ SUMAN RUPLAL PRASAD 
SUMAN 
2002-09-10 M BC 480518210001048  XXXXXXXX1193  5390  2520  7910  
173  2019-20 20191898684  SHIWANI KUMARI INDRAJEET MIRDHA 2001-01-08 F SC 591010110003984  XXXXXXXX4202  5860  3600  9460  
173  2017-18 20171351527  SHIWANI KUMARI INDRAJEET MIRDHA 2001-01-08 F SC 591010110003984  XXXXXXXX0978  2500  2760  5260  
174  2019-20 20191826422  SHUBHAM KUMAR BHAGWAN DAS SAW 2002-01-01 M BC 50229913033  XXXXXXXX0245  10080  1920  12000  
174  2017-18 20171317430  SHUBHAM KUMAR BHAGWAN DAS SAW 2002-01-01 M BC 50229913033  XXXXXXXX0718  3750  1920  5670  
175  2017-18 20171280624  SIMALSOREN PIRUSOREN 1995-10-10 M ST 20231244912  XXXXXXXX7432  11400  3600  15000  
175  2019-20 20191860288  SIMALSOREN PIRUSOREN 1995-10-10 M ST 20231244912  XXXXXXXX7432  11400  3600  15000  
176  2017-18 20171162534  SOMCHAND 
MAHATO 
SHISHUPAL MAHATO 
1999-08-02 M BC 450611610001661  XXXXXXXX6892  650  1920  2570  
176  2018-19 20181511214  SOMCHAND 
MAHATO 
SHISHUPAL MAHATO 
1999-08-02 M BC 450611610001661  XXXXXXXX0756  1091  2100  3191  
177  2019-20 20191857125  SOME ORAON BUDU ORAON 2002-03-12 M ST 638202010004883  XXXXXXXX9848  2950  3600  6550  

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
188   
Sl. 
No.  
Academic 
year 
Application 
ID Name of applicant Father's name Date of birth  Gender Category Bank account no. UID Final Tution 
fee 
Total 
maintenance 
fee 
Total 
scholarship 
paid 
177  2017-18 20171392626  SOME ORAON BUDU ORAON 2002-03-12 M ST 638202010004883  XXXXXXXX1111  3100  2760  5860  
178  2019-20 20191760658  SONALI HANSDA SUKUMAR HANSDA 1999-03-05 F ST 20369464261  XXXXXXXX6614  15200  6840  22040  
178  2017-18 20171256709  SONALI HANSDA SUKUMAR HANSDA 1999-03-05 F ST 20369464261  XXXXXXXX8244  10500  6840  17340  
179  2019-20 20192024574  SONAM BHARTI ARJUN PRASAD 1993-07-04 M BC 1679010030694  XXXXXXXX8750  35200  2800  38000  
179  2017-18 20171469689  SONAM BHARTI ARJUN PRASAD 1993-07-04 F BC 1679010030694  XXXXXXXX8326  3080  4020  7100  
180  2019-20 20191947167  SONI KUMARI SUNIL KUMAR 
KUSHWAHA 
2001-02-05 F BC 59149110869  XXXXXXXX9459  5390  2520  7910  
180  2018-19 20181644548  SONI KUMARI SUNIL KUMAR 
KUSHWAHA 
2001-02-05 F BC 59149110869  XXXXXXXX5848  93  1920  2013  
181  2018-19 20181711891  SONY BARA NAVIN BARA 1996-10-05 F ST 480102010875869  XXXXXXXX3973  12400  3600  16000  
181  2019-20 20192004729  SONY BARA NAVIN BARA 1996-10-05 F ST 480102010875869  XXXXXXXX2195  2900  5830  8730  
182  2019-20 20191641983  SUCHITA ORAON BISHWA ORAON 2000-02-10 F ST 33408141956  XXXXXXXX6460  3580  3600  7180  
182  2018-19 20181641983  SUCHITA ORAON BISHWA ORAON 2000-02-10 F ST 33408141956  XXXXXXXX0293  2605  3000  5605  
183  2018-19 20181577109  SUJAY RUI DAS SUNIL RUI DAS 2001-09-16 M SC 33316632905  XXXXXXXX5251  718  2760  3478  
183  2019-20 20191809885  SUJAY RUI DAS SUNIL RUI DAS 2001-09-16 M SC 33316632905  XXXXXXXX8496  3000  3300  6300  
184  2017-18 20171433322  SUMAN KUMARI HIRAMAN RANA 1998-11-10 F BC 32031041444  XXXXXXXX7726  1810  2100  3910  
184  2019-20 20191959959  SUMAN KUMARI HIRAMAN RANA 1998-10-25 F BC 32031041444  XXXXXXXX7085  2000  3685  5685  
185  2019-20 20191962445  SUMAN KUMARI JALESHWAR GOPE 2001-12-10 F BC 492410110004324  XXXXXXXX2030  3360  2520  5880  
185  2017-18 20171027829  SUMAN KUMARI JALESHWAR GOPE 2001-12-10 F BC 492410110004324  XXXXXXXX4182  3100  1920  5020  
186  2019-20 20191904330  SUMAN KUMARI JITAN MANDAL 2002-04-15 F BC 33148172784  XXXXXXXX3992  3600  2520  6120  
186  2017-18 20171280106  SUMAN KUMARI JITAN MANDAL 2002-04-15 F BC 33148172784  XXXXXXXX4783  2000  1920  3920  
187  2018-19 20181562692  SUMATI MINZ CHARWA MINZ 1999-08-16 F ST 358702010616730  XXXXXXXX8906  745  3300  4045  
187  2017-18 20171292980  SUMATI MINZ CHARWA MINZ 1999-08-06 F ST 358702010616730  XXXXXXXX6574  3100  2760  5860  
188  2018-19 20181722215  SUNIL KUMAR RAJKUMAR SAW 1997-07-26 M BC 27620110029138  XXXXXXXX7706  36000  9000  45000  
188  2017-18 20171211633  SUNIL KUMAR RAJKUMAR SAW 1997-07-26 M BC 27620110029138  XXXXXXXX9849  33800  4200  38000  
189  2019-20 20191972715  SUNIL KUMAR SURESH LAL RAJAK 1993-12-24 M SC 31299934234  XXXXXXXX6889  2000  3600  5600  
189  2017-18 20171027395  SUNIL KUMAR SURESH LAL RAJAK 1993-12-24 M SC 31299934234  XXXXXXXX8570  6240  2760  9000  
190  2017-18 20171357138  SUNIL YADAV KISHOR YADAV 1998-02-11 M BC 3997163720  XXXXXXXX2999  2000  2100  4100  
190  2018-19 20181740471  SUNIL YADAV KISHOR YADAV 1998-02-11 M BC 3997163720  XXXXXXXX0549  2000  2520  4520  
191  2018-19 20181231895  SUNITA KORAH NANDLAL KORAH 1996-01-01 F ST 480102010873217  XXXXXXXX5229  31400  6600  38000  
191  2017-18 20171231895  SUNITA KORAH NANDLAL KORAH 1996-01-01 F ST 480102010873217  XXXXXXXX2229  31400  6600  38000  
192  2017-18 20171304235  SURAJ KUJUR SHIBDEO KUJUR 2002-03-04 M ST 50410345696  XXXXXXXX5733  1740  2760  4500  
192  2019-20 20191965607  SURAJ KUJUR SHIBDEO KUJUR 2002-03-04 M ST 50410345696  XXXXXXXX2309  3530  3600  7130  
193  2017-18 20171388421  SUSHIL MANDI PANCHANAN MANDI 2001-11-10 M ST 37235865782  XXXXXXXX8956  2800  2760  5560  
193  2019-20 20191884431  SUSHIL MANDI PANCHANAN MANDI 2001-11-10 M ST 37235865782  XXXXXXXX0180  9470  2530  12000  
194  2017-18 20171252726  SWEETY KUMARI SANJAY SAO 2002-03-10 F BC 34548308838  XXXXXXXX2862  2200  1920  4120  
194  2019-20 20191856485  SWEETY KUMARI SANJAY SAO 2002-03-10 F BC 34548308838  XXXXXXXX2128  5400  2520  7920  
195  2017-18 20171262963  TANWEER ALAM JAKIR  ANSARI 2001-04-01 M BC 33432101458  XXXXXXXX4126  2000  1920  3920  
195  2019-20 20191877334  TANWEER ALAM JAKIR  ANSARI 2001-04-01 M BC 33432101458  XXXXXXXX6753  2600  1920  4520  
196  2018-19 20181596015  USHA KUMARI GOBIND MAHTO 2000-11-19 F BC 0607010298384  XXXXXXXX0033  1290  2100  3390  
196  2017-18 20171113486  USHA KUMARI GOBIND MAHTO 2000-11-19 F BC 0607010298384  XXXXXXXX0033  1234  1920  3154  
197  2018-19 20181684415  USHA KUMARI RAM KINKER RAUT 1999-01-06 F BC 591010110006141  XXXXXXXX4492  5500  2100  7600  
197  2017-18 20171260244  USHA KUMARI RAM KINKER RAUT 1999-01-08 F BC 591010110006141  XXXXXXXX3843  2155  1920  4075  
198  2017-18 20171295028  VIKKI NAYAK KALINDRA NAYAK 1998-10-14 M SC 1776010055550  XXXXXXXX6437  9240  2760  12000  

Appendices  
 
 189  
Sl. 
No.  
Academic 
year 
Application 
ID Name of applicant Father's name Date of birth  Gender Category Bank account no. UID Final Tution 
fee 
Total 
maintenance 
fee 
Total 
scholarship 
paid 
198  2018-19 20181732697  VIKKI NAYAK KALINDRA NAYAK 1998-08-11 M SC 1776010055550  XXXXXXXX7752  16400  3600  20000  
199  2019-20 20191763494  VINIT BARI MANOHAR SINGH BARI 1995-04-07 M ST 451010510002876  XXXXXXXX1831  728  3600  4328  
199  2017-18 20171227677  VINIT BARI MANOHAR SINGH BARI 1995-04-07 M ST 451010510002876  XXXXXXXX9087  1128  3600  4728  
200  2017-18 20171303824  WATAN KUMAR 
MANDAL 
SATISH KUMAR 
MANDAL 
2000-07-18 M BC 59106355287  XXXXXXXX7031  3750  1920  5670  
200  2018-19 20181745865  WATAN KUMAR 
MANDAL 
SATISH KUMAR 
MANDAL 
2000-07-18 M BC 59106355287  XXXXXXXX7590  7240  1760  9000  
201  2019-20 20191775869  GURU PRASAD 
PANDIT 
SARWESHWAR PANDIT 
2000-11-06 M BC 59137182613  XXXXXXXX9822  5500  2520  8020  
201  2018-19 20181330671  GURU PRASAD 
PANDIT 
SARWESHWAR PANDIT 
2000-11-06 M BC 59137182613  XXXXXXXX4875  915  1920  2835  
 
  

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
190   
Appendix-6.4B 
(Refer to paragraph 6.12.2 (3 rd  Bullet); page 76) 
Same applicant name, fathers’ name and bank account number but with different Aadhaar No., granted scholarship for pursuing same course in different 
academic years from same institutes (outside State) 
Sl. 
No. 
Accademic 
year 
Application 
ID 
Name of 
applicant 
Father's 
name Date of birth  Mother's name  Gender Category Bank account no. UID Final 
Tuition fee 
Total 
maintenance 
fee 
Total 
scholarship 
paid 
1 2019-20 20192012539  SALOMI SOY NAMAN SOY 1992-01-25 MARSA SOY F ST 0164001500012341  XXXXXXXX1664  10600 14400 25000 
2 2017-18 2017904187 SALOMI SOY NAMAN SOY 1992-01-25 MARSA SOY F ST 0164001500012341  XXXXXXXX0101  10600 14400 25000 
3 2017-18 20171630598  SHAHBAAZ 
PERWAIZ 
PERWAIZ 
ALAM 
1994-08-23 SHAKILA 
PERWAIZ 
M BC 20277278303  XXXXXXXX3061  16000 9000 25000 
4 2017-18 20171403200  SHAHBAAZ 
PERWAIZ 
PERWAIZ 
ALAM 
1994-10-09 SHAKILA 
PERWAIZ 
M BC 20277278303  XXXXXXXX1059  16000 9000 25000 
5 2019-20 20192012656  SUMAN 
KANDULNA 
DULAR 
KANDULNA 
1993-10-18 BUDINI 
KANDULNA 
F ST 34255690896  XXXXXXXX7665  10600 14400 25000 
6 2017-18 2017911823 SUMAN 
KANDULNA 
DULAR 
KANDULNA 
1993-10-18 BUDHNI 
KANDULNA 
F ST 34255690896  XXXXXXXX8921  10600 14400 25000 
7 2017-18 2017977572 VIJAY 
MAHATO 
GHALTU 
MAHATO 
1995-03-01 SULOCHANA 
DEVI 
M BC 470710110003302  XXXXXXXX2385  16000 9000 25000 
8 2017-18 20171629799  VIJAY 
MAHATO 
GHALTU 
MAHATO 
1993-08-23 SULOCHANA 
DEVI 
M BC 470710110003302  XXXXXXXX6865  16000 9000 25000 
 
 
 
  

Appendices  
 
 191  
Appendix-6.5 
(Refer to paragraph 6.12.4 (2nd  Bullet); page 81) 
Scholarship payment to multiple beneficiaries through the same Aadhaar number 
Sl. No.  Aadhaar No Academic Year  Application ID Name of beneficiary  Beneficiary A/c number Amount credited District 
1 XXXXXXXX1659  2017-18 20171381559 SATYENDRA KUMAR GANJHU 5230108001765  3846  Chatra 
2 XXXXXXXX1659  2018-19 20181515771 SANTOSH KUMAR GANJHU 5230108001765  4180  Chatra 
3 XXXXXXXX2765  2018-19 20181540884 VIKASH KUMAR 35265570729  4093  Chatra 
4 XXXXXXXX2765  2019-20 20191964276 NO NAME 35265570729  4138  Chatra 
5 XXXXXXXX2490  2018-19 20181675047 MD SOHEL 32545481255  4460  Chatra 
6 XXXXXXXX2490  2019-20 20191675047 NO NAME 32545481255  4680  Chatra 
7 XXXXXXXX5491  2017-18 20171481436 GHANSHYAM 645602010008513  40000  Chatra 
8 XXXXXXXX5491  2019-20 20191915265 NEHA PERWEEN DO MD SAFDAR 645602010008513  40000  Chatra 
9 XXXXXXXX6373  2017-18 20171426652 PRIYANKA KUMARI 482610510004344  3110  Chatra 
10 XXXXXXXX6373  2019-20 20192018261 SUSHMA KUMARI D/O BATESHWAR YADAV 482610510004344  3363  Chatra 
11 XXXXXXXX7262  2018-19 20181684626 KHUSHNUMA BANO 484810110003378  7360  Chatra 
12 XXXXXXXX7262  2019-20 20191684626 MD.ANSAR RAJA 484810110003378  7570  Chatra 
13 XXXXXXXX2967  2018-19 20181569871 NAGENDRA KUMAR 488010510003674  2664  Chatra 
14 XXXXXXXX2967  2019-20 20191569871 RAMASHI KUMAR 488010510003674  3431  Chatra 
15 XXXXXXXX2060  2018-19 20181588694 DURGESH KUMAR RAM 33452903912  9000  Palamu 
16 XXXXXXXX2060  2019-20 20191588694 AMBEDKAR SUMAN 4022649326  9000  Palamu 
17 XXXXXXXX1856  2017-18 20171403004 LABHUK SAMITI ANDHARIBAGH KALAN 2648000100101317  9000  Palamu 
18 XXXXXXXX1856  2018-19 20181403004 SANTOSH KUMAR 35821022386  9000  Palamu 
19 XXXXXXXX1768  2017-18 20171489645 KHUSHBOO RANI 31018846920  5670  Palamu 
20 XXXXXXXX1768  2018-19 20181572891 CHANDANI KUMARI 34311384107  38000  Palamu 
21 XXXXXXXX7196  2018-19 20181669897 CHANCHAL KUMARI 2652001700080964  38000  Palamu 
22 XXXXXXXX7196  2019-20 20191669897 MAYA RANI NA78  38000  Palamu 
23 XXXXXXXX2476  2017-18 20171456270 DEO KUMAR SO GOPAL PRASAD 2648000100116461  9000  Palamu 
24 XXXXXXXX2476  2018-19 20181456270 AJIT PRASAD 30771400258  9000  Palamu 
25 XXXXXXXX5520  2018-19 20181666750 SURENDRA KUMAR YADAV 2509001700051183  5560  Palamu 
26 XXXXXXXX5520  2019-20 20192023266 MANJU BEK NA1  38000  Palamu 
27 XXXXXXXX0285  2017-18 20171453975 RAM PRAVESH SAW 33649264565  9000  Palamu 
28 XXXXXXXX0285  2018-19 20181453975 PRAVESH KUMAR NA7  9000  Palamu 
29 XXXXXXXX8135  2018-19 20181712705 SHAHADAT ANSARI NA389  9000  Palamu 
30 XXXXXXXX8135  2019-20 20191712705 FAIZ AHMAD 1258104000149679  9000  Palamu 
31 XXXXXXXX6077  2018-19 20181610321 SHANI KUMARI 84013279426  6860  Palamu 
32 XXXXXXXX6077  2019-20 20191610321 RANI KUMARI 84008048166  2935  Palamu 
33 XXXXXXXX2888  2017-18 20171459942 SHANKAR KUMAR MAMTA DEVI 11444123776  6000  Palamu 
34 XXXXXXXX2888  2019-20 20191927338 MAMTA DEVI NA13  18000  Palamu 
35 XXXXXXXX3438  2018-19 20181744916 SUDESH KUMAR GUPTA NA432  9000  Palamu 
36 XXXXXXXX3438  2019-20 20191744916 AMARNATH SAH 84008672913  9000  Palamu 

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
192   
Sl. No.  Aadhaar No Academic Year  Application ID Name of beneficiary  Beneficiary A/c number Amount credited District 
37 XXXXXXXX5468  2017-18 20171389249 ISRAT KHATUN 35089659085  15000  Palamu 
38 XXXXXXXX5468  2018-19 20181389249 RAJKUMAR GUPTA 31447396572  15000  Palamu 
39 XXXXXXXX6812  2017-18 20171288496 SURBHI TOPNO DO LT INNOCENT TOPNO 0404001500063872  12000  Ranchi 
40 XXXXXXXX6812  2018-19 20181288496 MR SUSHILA KHALKHO 38811991179  9860  Ranchi 
41 XXXXXXXX8576  2018-19 20171359086 SAURAV KACHHAP 490410110007325  11158  Ranchi 
42 XXXXXXXX8576  2019-20 20181701473 MRS MADHU MINZ 39113329177  38000  Ranchi 
43 XXXXXXXX7844  2018-19 20171418072 PINKI TOPPO D/O MUDLI TOPPO 494310110011651  8429  Ranchi 
44 XXXXXXXX7844  2019-20 20181606283 JYOTI KUMARI NA25  10870  Ranchi 
45 XXXXXXXX5541  2017-18 20171268555 NISHANT HORO S/O SUNIL HORO 126610038921  12000  Ranchi 
46 XXXXXXXX5541  2018-19 20181535542 ISHANT HORO SO SUNIL HORO 126610038921  20000  Ranchi 
47 XXXXXXXX0886  2017-18 2017901904 MRS BIMLA KUJUR 32668794825  25000  Ranchi 
48 XXXXXXXX0886  2018-19 2018901904 MR UDIT KUJUR 20298704610  25000  Ranchi 
49 XXXXXXXX3987  2017-18 20171444598 MS ARTI BHENGRA 34811510394  45000  Ranchi 
50 XXXXXXXX3987  2018-19 20181444598 MISS DEEPA BHENGRA 20231454930  45000  Ranchi 
51 XXXXXXXX4812  2018-19 2017817541 PUNIA DEVI 494510510005708  4426  Ranchi 
52 XXXXXXXX4812  2019-20 20181554079 PRIYA KUMARI NA112  5850  Ranchi 
53 XXXXXXXX1825  2018-19 20171412927 SIMA KUMARI 494510510007800  9445  Ranchi 
54 XXXXXXXX1825  2019-20 20181412927 ANJANA KUMARI 000110045121  10870  Ranchi 
55 XXXXXXXX9024  2018-19 2017961893 SAGAR ORAON 494510510008022  7742  Ranchi 
56 XXXXXXXX9024  2019-20 2018961893 NEHA KUMARI 54240100004600  10870  Ranchi 
57 XXXXXXXX7324  2017-18 20171474002 MS ANJANA KUMARI 32748070888  6100  Ranchi 
58 XXXXXXXX7324  2018-19 20181604721 MR BHUPESH MAHTO 33121479864  6400  Ranchi 
59 XXXXXXXX3382  2017-18 20171343217 SEROPHINA EKKA NA30  7162  Ranchi 
60 XXXXXXXX3382  2019-20 20191856363 MEENA TOPPO NA5  7130  Ranchi 
61 XXXXXXXX9628  2018-19 20181500309 KAMAL KISHOR MAHTO 300902010253031  25000  Ranchi 
62 XXXXXXXX9628  2019-20 20191500309 DEEPAK KUMAR 300902010253051  25000  Ranchi 
63 XXXXXXXX8536  2017-18 20171247440 NISHI KORIYAR D/O SURESH KORIYAR 126610035110  10510  Ranchi 
64 XXXXXXXX8536  2018-19 20181247440 ISHI KORIYAR DO SURESH KORIYAR 126610035110  7660  Ranchi 
65 XXXXXXXX9670  2017-18 20171256850 ANIMA BHENGRA D/O PATRAS BHENGRA 480102010873385  38000  Ranchi 
66 XXXXXXXX9670  2019-20 20191807515 SALOMI TIRKEY 480102010868675  38000  Ranchi 
67 XXXXXXXX3581  2018-19 20181663563 PINKI KUMARI D/O BUDHWA GANJHU 491110610000324  6996  Ranchi 
68 XXXXXXXX3581  2019-20 20191958915 SEEMA KUMARI 54238100004222  7250  Ranchi 
69 XXXXXXXX2600  2018-19 20181716431 DOLLY KACHHAP 7549001500008748  4571  Ranchi 
70 XXXXXXXX2600  2019-20 20191716431 ANUJ KUMAR GUPTA 490910110006988  5850  Ranchi 
71 XXXXXXXX7080  2018-19 20181620228 ROZY KHALKHO 491010110004440  6570  Ranchi 
72 XXXXXXXX7080  2019-20 20191620228 SHIVANI KUMARI 494510510009604  5880  Ranchi 
73 XXXXXXXX7274  2018-19 20181372798 DEEPA  TIRKEY 499810110000588  8830  Ranchi 
74 XXXXXXXX7274  2019-20 20191372798 NISHA KUMARI 7608000100053042  8830  Ranchi 
75 XXXXXXXX7978  2018-19 20181509895 SUNAINA SWATI LINDA 1776010014289  22000  Ranchi 
76 XXXXXXXX7978  2019-20 20191509895 ANUP KERKETTA 1776010007436  22600  Ranchi 

Appendices  
 
 193  
Sl. No.  Aadhaar No Academic Year  Application ID Name of beneficiary  Beneficiary A/c number Amount credited District 
77 XXXXXXXX2364  2018-19 20181638947 MD NISHAD ANSARI 491010110004507  3390  Ranchi 
78 XXXXXXXX2364  2019-20 20191988394 ZEENAT FIRDOUS 490210110008307  6050  Ranchi 
79 XXXXXXXX1040  2017-18 20171479061 GANESH MUNDA 156301000048810  10670  Ranchi 
80 XXXXXXXX1040  2018-19 20181572592 NISHI KHALKHO 20812413000194  7564  Ranchi 
81 XXXXXXXX3058  2018-19 20181665718 MISS. SAROJINI  MEHTA 59000285410  38000  Ranchi 
82 XXXXXXXX3058  2019-20 20191665718 MISS. SONAL  MEHTA 59000285410  45000  Ranchi 
83 XXXXXXXX7711  2018-19 20181550307 SAIMA NISHA 8625108052374  18000  Ranchi 
84 XXXXXXXX7711  2019-20 20191550307 SONI MUNDA 8625108052373  18000  Ranchi 
85 XXXXXXXX8114  2017-18 2017828473 SANJAY KUMAR 8625108052341  6408  Ranchi 
86 XXXXXXXX8114  2019-20 20191793814 RAVI RANJAN SHARMA 615510110008302  8956  Ranchi 
87 XXXXXXXX4492  2018-19 20181575777 BUTAN DEVI 0870010149563  15000  Ranchi 
88 XXXXXXXX4492  2019-20 20191575777 PRIYA KUMARI 44358100003059  17500  Ranchi 
89 XXXXXXXX3127  2018-19 20181615178 SANTOSH TIGGA 490410510002307  38000  Ranchi 
90 XXXXXXXX3127  2019-20 20191615178 DHANESHWARI KUMARI 44358100011484  38000  Ranchi 
91 XXXXXXXX1465  2018-19 20181561171 ROHIT HEMROM 496310110009728  9000  Ranchi 
92 XXXXXXXX1465  2019-20 20191561171 JOHNY TOPNO NA60  9000  Ranchi 
93 XXXXXXXX5839  2017-18 20171280721 ANIL ORAON 495910110006866  4670  Ranchi 
94 XXXXXXXX5839  2019-20 20191785317 ANISHA KISPOTTA 4895101008057  7120  Ranchi 
95 XXXXXXXX5611  2018-19 20181565152 REENA SHABNAM GURIA 480102010868823  38000  Ranchi 
96 XXXXXXXX5611  2019-20 20191565152 PREETI CHHAYA HEMBROM 480102010873283  38000  Ranchi 
97 XXXXXXXX7740  2018-19 20181558890 SUSHMA MINJ U/G JUGI MINJ 358702010616729  3798  Ranchi 
98 XXXXXXXX7740  2019-20 20191558890 JASMIN KUJUR U/G JUVEL KUJUR 358702010616747  6000  Ranchi 
99 XXXXXXXX9617  2018-19 20181665017 MR. KUMAR PRASHANT VIRAJ 3494198596  15000  Ranchi 
100 XXXXXXXX9617  2019-20 20191665017 MR. CHANDRA MOHAN  GUPTA 3992046284  15000  Ranchi 
101 XXXXXXXX2037  2018-19 20181709090 FARHAT NAAZ 496410110005358  4530  Ranchi 
102 XXXXXXXX2037  2019-20 20191709090 BIRENDRA ORAON 590010110003716  5620  Ranchi 
103 XXXXXXXX9595  2017-18 20171337545 0 Paid  12860  Ranchi 
104 XXXXXXXX9595  2018-19 20181593891 ANSU ANJALI LAKRA 493110510011628  25000  Ranchi 
105 XXXXXXXX1509  2017-18 2017964158 NIKITA OLIVE TIRKEY 7549001500003594  11060  Ranchi 
106 XXXXXXXX1509  2018-19 20181557354 PUNIT BARSA JOJOWAR 7549001500004946  19240  Ranchi 
107 XXXXXXXX2298  2018-19 20181556386 MUKHIYA  PURAN S/O ADHANU PURAN 469410110003062  7725  Ranchi 
108 XXXXXXXX2298  2019-20 20191556386 GUDDI KUMARI D/OTHAKUR PRASAD KARMKAR 469410610003062  7725  Ranchi 
109 XXXXXXXX9109  2018-19 20181517083 LAL MOHAMMAD 479310110009464  38000  Ranchi 
110 XXXXXXXX9109  2019-20 20191517083 RAJ AKHTAR 483610110004474  38000  Ranchi 
111 XXXXXXXX3286  2018-19 20181248539 ALKA ROSHNI TIRKEY 7549001500004487  20000  Ranchi 
112 XXXXXXXX3286  2019-20 20191248539 RAJNI TOPNO 1776010041706  20000  Ranchi 
113 XXXXXXXX3971  2018-19 20181697957 SUBODH KERKETTA 490410110007577  17220  Ranchi 
114 XXXXXXXX3971  2019-20  MR SAMEER SANGA 39407720054  8860  Ranchi 
115 XXXXXXXX9004  2018-19 20181229084 AFRIN JAHAN 7549001500006272  7660  Ranchi 
116 XXXXXXXX9004  2019-20 20191982812 ROSHNI  KACHHAP D/O MAHADEV ORAON 638202010005359  45000  Ranchi 

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
194   
Sl. No.  Aadhaar No Academic Year  Application ID Name of beneficiary  Beneficiary A/c number Amount credited District 
117 XXXXXXXX0997  2017-18 20171250520 MISS. ARTI  KUMARI 3544173406  7162  Ranchi 
118 XXXXXXXX0997  2018-19 20181250520 MISS FUL KUMARI 31215644759  7692  Ranchi 
119 XXXXXXXX0668  2017-18 20171282351 HEMANT KACHHAP NA113  3745  Ranchi 
120 XXXXXXXX0668  2019-20 20191282351 MUKUT GARIMA LAKRA NA580  9000  Ranchi 
121 XXXXXXXX3565  2017-18 2017989735 AKANSHA PRIYA TIGGA 0404001500038238  12920  Ranchi 
122 XXXXXXXX3565  2018-19 2018989735 MR JAKIR ANSARI 33132153781  17220  Ranchi 
123 XXXXXXXX3794  2017-18 20171339330 SANGEETA MAHTO 495710610000739  3330  Ranchi 
124 XXXXXXXX3794  2018-19 20181560060 REKHA KUMARI 495710110008402  3630  Ranchi 
125 XXXXXXXX3892  2018-19 20181622281 ROHIT KUMAR 459910110004634  38000  Ranchi 
126 XXXXXXXX3892  2019-20 20191622281 BEBI PRAVIN 459910110004634  38000  Ranchi 
127 XXXXXXXX2792  2017-18 20171263798 PIYUSHI CHRISTINA EKKA 0404001500058056  12000  Ranchi 
128 XXXXXXXX2792  2019-20 20191981453 MR SUNIL ORAON 33211151912  9000  Ranchi 
129 XXXXXXXX8702  2018-19 20181332177 AGATHA MONIKA TIRKEY 0404001500058153  20000  Ranchi 
130 XXXXXXXX8702  2019-20 20191332177 PRIYA MUNDA 1776010127585  9600  Ranchi 
131 XXXXXXXX6033  2018-19 20181542961 ANSHU LAKRA 0404001500058232  15000  Ranchi 
132 XXXXXXXX6033  2019-20 20191542961 SHWETA KUMARI 000110065843  15000  Ranchi 
133 XXXXXXXX6431  2017-18 20171380649 SAMEER SANGA 490410110007573  8928  Ranchi 
134 XXXXXXXX6431  2019-20 20191896330 PRATIBHA KUMARI 09932191045212  38000  Ranchi 
135 XXXXXXXX4326  2017-18 20171334075 SUBHARINI MARANDI NA42  38000  Ranchi 
136 XXXXXXXX4326  2019-20 20191988687 RAHUL ORAON NA6  20000  Ranchi 
137 XXXXXXXX9992  2018-19 20181584360 BARKHA KACHHAP 496410110005911  38000  Ranchi 
138 XXXXXXXX9992  2019-20 20191584360 ROSHNI ORAON 496410110005892  38000  Ranchi 
139 XXXXXXXX8937  2018-19 20181499478 ANKIT BARLA 107310410000788  19240  Ranchi 
140 XXXXXXXX8937  2019-20 20191499478 MR. PRABIL  DUNGDUNG 22016197756  18460  Ranchi 
141 XXXXXXXX9537  2017-18 2017970704 RUDRAJEET RAVIDAS 54230100000764  9000  Ranchi 
142 XXXXXXXX9537  2018-19 20181540812 NARENDRA KUMAR MAHTO 54230100000136  2947  Ranchi 
143 XXXXXXXX2391  2018-19 20181563337 SUKHDEW BEDIYA S/O BHAGIRATH BEDIYA 301002010018316  5050  Ranchi 
144 XXXXXXXX2391  2019-20 20191563337 PUJA KUMARI D/O KRISHNA SONAR 301002010018376  6930  Ranchi 
145 XXXXXXXX8659  2018-19 20181677224 MR. RAMLAL  MAHTO 3631028972  9000  Ranchi 
146 XXXXXXXX8659  2019-20 20191677224 MR. MADHUKAR MAHADEORAO THAKARE 3250584577  9000  Ranchi 
147 XXXXXXXX5117  2017-18 20171291848 SAGIR ANSARI 0407010879729  3660  Ranchi 
148 XXXXXXXX5117  2019-20 20191953676 EKRAMUL ANSARI 0407010893732  4710  Ranchi 
149 XXXXXXXX4658  2018-19 20181573941 BIRBAL KARMALI S/O JAGADMB KARMALI 0944001500034095  20000  Ranchi 
150 XXXXXXXX4658  2019-20 20191573941 PRAMOD KUMAR S/O JAGESHWAR MAHTO 0944001500034040  20000  Ranchi 
151 XXXXXXXX3352  2018-19 2018838176 MR. SHATRUDHAN  MUNDA 3634170233  6205  Ranchi 
152 XXXXXXXX3352  2019-20 20191833962 MISS. SUDHA 2993116487  10340  Ranchi 
153 XXXXXXXX7045  2017-18 20171366591 MANAS CONSTRUCTION 588920110000149  38000  Ranchi 
154 XXXXXXXX7045  2018-19 20181366591 MITHILESH KUMAR 10989308039  38000  Ranchi 
155 XXXXXXXX1032  2017-18 20171281664 MR RUSTAM ANSARI 32609297244  9000  Ranchi 
156 XXXXXXXX1032  2018-19 20181281664 MR MATHURA YADAV 33008977381  9000  Ranchi 

Appendices  
 
 195  
Sl. No.  Aadhaar No Academic Year  Application ID Name of beneficiary  Beneficiary A/c number Amount credited District 
157 XXXXXXXX4942  2018-19 20181597236 SUSHILA DEVI 495410110001327  15700  Ranchi 
158 XXXXXXXX4942  2019-20 20191597236 KHUSHBOO GURIA 9265001500005678  18800  Ranchi 
159 XXXXXXXX8714  2017-18 20171252157 MS. SHAIKA  PERWEEN  U/G MD NASIR HUSSAI 50126451449  4839  Ranchi 
160 XXXXXXXX8714  2019-20 20191897563 MS. SAHIBA  PARWEEN 50126459732  6470  Ranchi 
161 XXXXXXXX1364  2017-18 20171268271 ANKTI TIRKY S/O ALPHONSE TIRKY 102010110005773  8094  Ranchi 
162 XXXXXXXX1364  2018-19 20181522412 MRS. ROSS TIRKEY W/O ALFONS TIRKEY  . 22010392649  38000  Ranchi 
163 XXXXXXXX1054  2018-19 20181524135 MR SUMIT KUMAR BHAGAT 36194933404  20000  Ranchi 
164 XXXXXXXX1054  2019-20 20191524135 MR SADO TUTI 36557443409  18460  Ranchi 
165 XXXXXXXX5045  2017-18 20171393425 GEETAKUMARI RAM 7549001500001930  25000  Ranchi 
166 XXXXXXXX5045  2018-19 20181393425 MS ANSHU XAXA 38392354575  25000  Ranchi 
167 XXXXXXXX9984  2017-18 20171410417 MISS BINITA KUMARI 32698125778  6580  Ranchi 
168 XXXXXXXX9984  2018-19 20181597162 WINOTA KUMARI 000110031818  2305  Ranchi 
169 XXXXXXXX7000  2017-18 20171259914 ANJALI KUMARI 7549001500004256  4461  Ranchi 
170 XXXXXXXX7000  2018-19 20181259914 MR AMIT KUMAR AGRAWAL 32762228502  4571  Ranchi 
171 XXXXXXXX2602  2018-19 20181647284 KRISHNA MUNDA 491610510004849  9878  Ranchi 
172 XXXXXXXX2602  2019-20 20191647284 KANTA KERKETTA 1943010060899  11260  Ranchi 
173 XXXXXXXX6821  2017-18 20171354815 SUMITRA TOPPO 0407010541497  7692  Ranchi 
174 XXXXXXXX6821  2018-19 20181643017 SUNITA TOPPO 0407011019397  7692  Ranchi 
175 XXXXXXXX3571  2017-18 20171264412 SUSHMA KHALKHO 499410110002930  6675  Ranchi 
176 XXXXXXXX3571  2018-19 20181264412 CHOTTU TOPPO 499410110003540  6205  Ranchi 
177 XXXXXXXX8600  2018-19 20181531563 MR BIKASH NAYAK 32797138955  9000  Ranchi 
178 XXXXXXXX8600  2019-20 20191531563 MR PREM ORAON 32691122231  9000  Ranchi 
179 XXXXXXXX1508  2017-18 20171004414 HALEN KUMARI   D/O SHIVNATH ORAON 101310410001283  12000  Ranchi 
180 XXXXXXXX1508  2018-19 20181504130 SHREYA KUMARI 0404001500046316  40000  Ranchi 
181 XXXXXXXX5859  2017-18 20171265887 SHWETA TOPPO D/O HERMAN TOPPO 499910510001779  11760  Ranchi 
182 XXXXXXXX5859  2018-19 20181718942 SANJNA TOPPO D/O ARJUN TOPPO 499910510001736  16000  Ranchi 
183 XXXXXXXX2617  2018-19 20181302192 NAZIYA PERWEEN 0404001500061421  4571  Ranchi 
184 XXXXXXXX2617  2019-20 20191302192 ROSHNI NAZIA 0404001500088668  5850  Ranchi 
185 XXXXXXXX5637  2018-19 20181642699 MR. BHUDHRAM  MUNDA 22011888863  7875  Ranchi 
186 XXXXXXXX5637  2019-20 20191642699 PRAKASH  MUNDA 20049124109  8565  Ranchi 
187 XXXXXXXX2686  2018-19 20181593324 CHAHAT PRIYA 0404001500045423  20000  Ranchi 
188 XXXXXXXX2686  2019-20 20191593324 ANISHA  AAFREEN 1776010141208  20000  Ranchi 
Total  2807477   

Performance Audit Report of Direct Benefit Transfer in Jharkhand  
196  
Abbreviation  
 
AA Accounts Assistant 
ADSS Assistant Director of Social Security  
AEPS Aadhaar  Enabled Payment System 
APBS Aadhaar  Payments Bridge System 
AISHE All India Survey on Higher Education 
BC Backward Class 
BPL Below Poverty Line 
BDO Block Development Officer 
CAAT Computer Assisted Audit Tools 
CDAC Centre for Development of Advanced Computing 
CGA Controller General of Accounts 
CGG Centre for Good Governance 
CO Circle Officer 
CSS Centrally Sponsored Scheme 
DA Dealing Assistant 
DBT Direct Benefit Transfer 
DDO Drawing and Disbursing Officer 
DeitY Department of Electronic & Information Techno logy 
DNO District Nodal Officer 
DWO District Welfare Officer 
EID Enrolment Identification 
e-PASS  Electronic Payment and Application System o f Scholarships 
GFR General Financial Rules 
GoI  Government of India 
GoJ Government of Jharkhand 
GP Gram Panchayat 
GST Goods and Service Tax 
ICT Information and Communication Technology 
IGNDPS Indira Gandhi National Disability Pension Sc heme 
IGNOAPS Indira Gandhi National Old Age Pension Sche me 
IGNWPS Indira Gandhi National Widow Pension Scheme 
IE Internet Explorer 
IIN Institution Identification Number 
INO Institute Nodal Officer 
IT Information Technology 
ITDA Integrated Tribal Development Agency 
JAP-IT Jharkhand Agency for Promotion of Informatio n Technology 
JFR Jharkhand Financial Rules 
JSMFDC Jharkhand State Minority Finance and Develop ment Corporation 
JTC Jharkhand Treasury Code 
KYC Know Your Customer 
MMP  Mission Mode Project 
MoMA Ministry of Minority Affairs 
MoRD Ministry of Rural Development 
MMRAJJPY Mukhya Mantri  Rajya  Adim Janjati  Pension Yojna  
MMRVSPY Mukhya Mantri  Rajya Vidhwa Samman  Pension Yojna  

Appendices  
 
 197 
MMSOAPY  Mukhya Mantri  State Old Age Pension Yojnna  
NCVT National Council for Vocational Training 
NEFT National Electronic Funds Transfer 
NeGP National e-Governance Plan 
NeSP  National e-Scholarship Portal 
NFB  National Family Benefit Scheme 
NPCI  National Payment Corporation of India 
NSAP National Social Assistance Programme 
NSP National Scholarship Portal 
O&M Operation and Maintenance 
PFMS Public Financial Management System 
PMU Project Management Unit 
PRSG Project Review and Steering Group 
RASF Remote Aadhaar Seeding Framework 
RRR Rapid Replication Rollout 
RTGS Real Time Gross Settlement 
SAB State Advisory Board 
SC Scheduled Caste 
SNO State Nodal Officer 
SOP Standard Operating Procedure 
SRS System Requirements Specification 
SQL Structured Query Language 
SRSWoR Simple Random Sampling without Replacement 
SSS State Sponsored Scheme 
ST Scheduled Tribe 
SVNSPY  Swami Vivekanand Nishakt  Swavlamban  Protsahan  Yojna  
TDS Tax Deducted at Source 
UAT User Acceptance Testing 
UDISE Unified District Information System for Educa tion 
UID Unique Identification 
UIDAI Unique Identification Authority of India 
WCD&SS Women, Child Development & Social Security 
 
 

© COMPTROLLER AND 
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA
https://cag.gov.in
https://cag.gov.in/ag/jharkhand/en