 
Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
on  
Public Sector Undertakings  
 for the year ended 31 March 2021 
 
 
 Government of Telangana 
Report No. 3 of 2023


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Report of the  
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
on 
Public Sector Undertakings 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for the year ended 31 March 2021 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government of Telangana 
Report No. 3 of 2023

 
 

 
_________________________________________________________________________ _____________ 
Page i 
 
Subject 
Reference to 
Paragraph Page 
Preface  iii 
Executive Summary  v 
Chapter I - Introduction 
General 1.1 1 
Audit Mandate 1.2 1 
Coverage of this Report 1.3 1 
Response of PSUs/ Government to audit findings 1.4 2 
Chapter II – Performance Audit 
Industries and Commerce Department 
(Telangana State Mineral Development Corporation  
Limited) 
Sand mining with special emphasis on initiatives taken to curb 
illegal mining 
2 7 
Chapter III – Compliance Audit Observations 
Municipal Administration and Urban Development Department 
(Hyderabad Metro Rail Limited) 
Hyderabad Metro Rail Project 
3.1 41 
Energy Department 
(Northern Power Distribution Company of Telangana 
Limited) 
Loss of ₹50.37 crore due to continuance of power supply despite 
non-payment of dues 
3.2 62 
Appendices  65 
Glossary of Abbreviations  79 
Table of Contents 

 
_________________________________________________________________________ _____________ 
Page ii 
Appendices 
Sl. 
No. Particulars 
Reference to 
Paragraph Page 
1.1 Statement showing the cluster -wise list of Departments and 
Public Sector Undertakings 1.3 2 
1.2 Working PSU wise and Department wise break -up of 
outstanding Inspection Reports and Paragraphs 1.4.1 2 
2.1 Organisational set up of Director of Mines and Geology 2.1.3 8 
2.2 Statement showing Audit Sample 2.1.6 9 
2.3 Statement showing undue benefit enjoyed by third party 
contractors  2.2.2 14 
3.1.1 Statement showing lease rentals due from the 
Concessionaire 3.1.10 58 
 
  

 
 
 
_________________________________________________________________________ _____________ 
Page iii 
Chapter I 
 
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General has been prepared for submission to 
the Governor of Telangana under Article 151 of the Constitution of India and Section 19A 
of the Comptroller and Auditor General’s (Duties, Powers and Conditions of Service) Act, 
1971 for being laid before the State Legislature. 
2. This Report deals with results of Performance Audit of “Sand mining with special 
emphasis on initiatives taken to curb illegal mining ” and other Compliance Audit 
observations on State Public Sector Undertakings . This Report  covers three clusters , 
namely, Energy & Power, Industry & Commerce and Urban Development of the 
Government of Telangana. 
3. The instances mentioned in this Report are those which came to notice in the course 
of test audit for the period 2019-21 as well as those which came to notice in earlier years, 
but could not be reported in previous Audit Reports . Matters relating to the period 
subsequent to 2019-21 have also been included, wherever necessary.  
4. The audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards issued by 
the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
Preface 

 
 
Pages v - ix 
 Executive Summary 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 

Executive Summary 
Page v  
Executive Summary 
This Report contains a Performance Audit Report on “Sand mining with special emphasis 
on initiatives taken to curb illegal mining ” (Industries and Commerce Department), one 
Compliance Audit Report on Hyderabad Metro Rail Project (Municipal Administration and 
Urban Development) and one Compliance Audit paragraph relating to loss of revenue 
(Energy Department). 
Performance Audit on Sand Mining 
In Telangana, river sand is available from three sources namely (i) riverbed and streams 
which are categorised into I to V order streams depending upon quantum of sand available, 
(ii) de-siltation of irrigation projects and (iii) de-casting of private patta lands. Government 
of Telangana (GoTS) introduced (December 2014) the New Sand Mining Policy, 2014 (NSM 
Policy) and framed (January 2015) the Telangana State Sand Mining Rules, 2015 (TSSM 
Rules) to ensure availability of adequate quantity of the right quality of sand at a reasonable 
price to the people of the State. Under the NSM Policy and TSSM Rules, the responsibility 
for excavation, regulation and supply of sand was entrusted to the Telangana State Mineral 
Development Corporation Limited (TSMDCL) which functioned under the supervision and 
control of the Director of Mines and Geology (DM&G), Industries and Commerce Department. 
This is th e first Performance Audit of sand mining operations since the formation of 
Telangana State and it covered the five-year period from 2016-17 to 2020-21. The audit 
Sample included three (out of eight) selected Project Offices (POs) of TSMDCL namely , 
Jayashankar Bh upalapally, Bhadradri Kothagudem and Karimnagar . Audit also test 
checked and reviewed the r ecords of t he offices of the Director of Mines and Geology, 
Assistant Director of Mines and Geology (ADM&G)  and the offices under the control of 
the District Collectors falling under the jurisdiction of the above POs. 
The Performance Audit was conducted to ascertain whether excavation, transportation, 
storage and sale of sand was carried out efficiently; effective control mechanisms were put 
in place to detect and prevent illegal sand mining; and environmental concerns related to  
sand mining were appropriately addressed. 
Significant audit findings and conclusions of the Performance Audit are given below. 
• Audit noticed that  TSMDCL entered into sand raising contracts with the local 
registered tribal societies. The se tribal societies in -turn engaged non-local or           
non-tribal third parties for excavation of sand although sub-letting was prohibited in 
the sand raising contract . Thus, the objective of eliminating exploitation of mineral 
resources available in the Scheduled Areas by non-locals or non-tribals as envisaged 
by the Panchayat Extension to Scheduled Areas (PESA) Act, 2002 and PESA Rules, 
2011 was defeated. Audit also observed that the tribal societies appointed third parties 
without following any tender process and the undue benefit enjoyed by the third-party 
sub-contractors worked out to ₹11.61 crore.  
• Audit observed that as against the stipulated time limit of four weeks from the receipt 
of the Inspection Report of the ADM&G  for disposal of applications for  grant of 

Report of the CAG on PSUs for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page vi  
permission to de-cast the patta lands, 31 applications received by the District Level 
Sand Committee (DLSC) Bhadradri Kothagudem during 2016-17 were still pending. 
This has resulted in non-removal of sand from patta lands thereby depriving pattadars 
(farmers) from cultivating their lands.  
• Audit also observed instances of delay in excavation of sand due to reasons like          
non-receipt of clarification from the State Government on the rate payable to the sand 
raising contractors (tribals) at Dummugudem Anicut and lack of action plan on the part 
of TSMDCL to excavate sand as per the timelines agreed with the pattadars. As a 
result, the State Government was deprived of revenue of ₹172.64 crore due to  
non-excavation of sand and consequent delay in commencement of sale.  
• In the test checked POs, Audit observed that, 
➢ Closed Circuit Television Cameras and Weighbridges were installed at very few 
sand reaches and stock yards resulting in overloading of the vehicles at the time 
of their dispatch from the stockyard. 
➢ Vehicles transporting sand were not provided with Geo Positioning System and 
Radio Frequency Identification devices to enable their tracking and monitoring 
the sand dispatch and delivery operations. 
➢ TSMDCL did not evolve an appropriate stock policy and Stock Registers, stock 
balances were not maintained/ recorded properly. 
Thus, TSMDCL’s monitoring of sand reaches and stockyard operations was ineffective. 
• Audit review of sand raising contracts awarded by the selected POs revealed that the 
ADM&Gs and TSMDCL during their inspections noticed that the sand raising 
contractors excavated sand beyond the specified geo -coordinates, permitted depth 
and quantity. However, the DM&G did not levy the applicable penalty of ₹7.19 crore 
as per TSSM Rules. TSMDCL pleaded unjustified excuses of payment of Seigniorage 
Fee (SF) and no revenue loss/ remittance of sale proceeds to Government Treasury  
to avoid levy and payment of penalty . Thus, the DM&G and TSMDCL casually 
implemented NS M Policy and TSSM Rules  which rendered them ineffective  in         
curbing the illegal sand mining activities. 
• In the PO of Bhadradri Kothagudem , Audit also observed that  unauthorised and 
excess excavation and transportation of sand through the Sand Taxi 
Management  System (Mana Isuka Vahanam or Sand Taxi) went unnoticed because 
the software did not provide for limiting the customer bookings once the permitted 
quantity gets exhausted for a particular sand reach.  Thus, the objective of curtailing 
illegal transportation of sand through Sand Taxi for sand reaches of I, II and III order 
streams could not be ensured. 
• TSMDCL also excavated and dispatched sand without obtaining sand dispatch 
permits from the ADM&Gs and without paying SF and other additional fees 
amounting to ₹108.96 crore as of March 2022. Consequently, Government’s revenue 
was blocked to that extent. 

Executive Summary 
Page vii  
• Review of the mechanism put in place to protect the environment from the effects of 
sand mining revealed the following. 
➢ The District Survey Report meant to map the sand sources available in a district 
to enable excavation of sand in a systematic manner was not prepared for any 
of the districts under the selected POs up to January 2020. 
➢ Monitoring of the impact of sand mining through photographing of project sites 
and recording of changes in the ground water levels was not done. 
➢ TSMDCL did not incur the committed capital and revenue expenditure towards 
environmental protection measures as required under the conditions governing 
the Environmental Clearance.  
➢ The DLSC, Khammam permitted TSMDCL to de -cast sand from the patta 
lands located midst of the Godavari River before TSMDCL obtained necessary 
statutory clearances. 
➢ TSMDCL diverted 94.71 per cent (₹162.27 crore out of ₹171.32 crore) of Road 
Damage Charges collected during the period 2016-17 to 2020-21 for other than 
the specified purposes. 
Thus, the recommended action for sustainable sand mining was not taken/ ensured. 
• Audit observed that the State Government did not relax the condition of 100 per cent 
M-Sand production to avail the incentives proposed under NSM Policy, as requested 
by the M-Sand Manufacturing Industry Association. The DLSCs also did not promote 
the manufacture and use of M -Sand. Further, TSMDCL did not establish a crusher 
for manufacturing M -Sand even th ough the lease period was due to expire in 
November 2023. Thus, State Government did not properly address the concerns of 
M-Sand industry.  
Audit Recommendations: 
➢ District Level Sand Committees may ensure processing of the pattadar applications 
within the stipulated timelines and TSMDCL may prepare an action plan to        
de-cast sand within the timelines stipulated in the agreements with the pattadars. 
➢ District Level Sand Committees may conside r allotting sand mining licenses in 
the Scheduled Areas to tribal societies and TSMDCL may consider appointing 
the sand raising contractors on behalf of the tribal societies duly following open 
tender process. 
➢ Government may fix  the responsibility of the officials concerned for allowing 
excess payments to the pattadars. 
➢ Government may ensure that TSMDCL puts proper monitoring mechanism in 
place namely, installation of CCTV cameras, Weighbridges and maintenance of 
Stock Registers at sand reaches and stockyards.  

Report of the CAG on PSUs for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page viii  
➢ Department of Mines & Geology may consider using Remote Sensing Mapping 
or Drone enabled (Intelligent Video Surveillance) technology to monitor and 
regulate the sand excavations effectively. 
➢ Government may consider incorporating suitable provisions in the NSM Policy 
and the TSSM Rules to bring sand raising contractors and pattadars under the 
ambit of penalty provisions for breach of any contractual obligations. 
➢ Government may direct TSMDCL to comply with the conditions governing 
Environmental Clearance, the SSMM Guidelines and the TSSM Rules. 
➢ Government may consider framing suitable guidelines for extending the benefits 
envisaged under the NSM Policy and TSSM Rules to the M-Sand manufacturers. 
Compliance Audit Observations 
Compliance Audit of the Hyderabad Metro Rail Project revealed that delays in finalisation 
of metro corridors and acquisition of land for Miyapur Depot delayed the operationalisation 
of the Project and also resulted in cost escalation. Six stations between MG Bus Station and 
Falaknuma on Corridor - II involving 5.12 KMs were still incomplete. Consequently, the 
project cost was bound to escalate. The stations, parking and circulation areas were not 
developed as envisaged. As a result, the Concessionaire was unduly benefitted by ₹227.19 
crore. The Project could achieve only 22 per cent of the expected ridership. The effect of 
insufficient parking spaces on the ability of the Project to operate at full potential in future 
cannot be ruled out. 
The Concessionaire was allowed to fix higher fares than those envisaged under the 
Concession Agreement. Audit observed that by fixing higher fares, the Concessionaire had 
collected excess fare of ₹213.77 crore during the period from November 2017 to March 
2020. The Company could not enforce CA provisions relating to urban rejuvenation works 
and prohibition of sub -leasing of Project assets before the COD of the Project. The 
Company did not recover fair rent of the la nds leased to Concessionaire and waived 
administrative charges. The Company also did not utilise the Putlibowli Commercial 
Complex, constructed at a cost of ₹11.68 crore, effectively for a period of five years. 
Audit recommendations: 
➢ Government may prepare an action plan to complete Corridor - II of the Project 
at the earliest. Otherwise, ridership will remain low. 
➢ Government may fix the responsibility of the officials concerned for allowing  
unauthorised deviations in the construction of station boxes. 
➢ Government may take steps to provide sufficient Parking and Circulation areas to 
improve the ridership. 
➢ Government may constitute a fare fixation committee at the earliest to review the 
fare structure. 
➢ Government may enforce the Concession Agreement conditions and contractual 
provisions to realise its dues from the Concessionaire. 

Executive Summary 
Page ix  
Northern Power Distribution Company of Telangana Limited incurred loss of ₹50.37 
crore during June 2014 to July 2018 due to continuance of power supply to M/s. Sirpur Paper 
Mills Limited despite non-payment of dues. 

 
 
Chapter I 
Pages 1 - 5 
 
 
 
Introduction 

 
 

Chapter I -  Introduction 
 
 
Chapter I - Introduction  
1.1 General 
Telangana State was formed on 2 June 2014. As on 31 March 2021, there were 82 Public 
Sector Undertakings ( PSUs) in Telangana State under the audit jurisdiction of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India (CAG). These included eight Government 
Companies in Power Sector , 68 Government Companies, three Other Companies 1 
Controlled by Government and three Statutory Corporations2 in Non-Power Sector. Out 
of the 82 PSUs, 66 were working and 16 were inactive 3 PSUs. Two working PSUs, 
namely, Andhra Pradesh Tribal Power Company Limited and Infrastructure Corporation 
of Andhra Pradesh Limited were under demerger. During the period 2019 -21, one 
Government Company4 got dissolved and four Government Companies5 came under the 
audit jurisdiction of the CAG. 
1.2 Audit Mandate 
The authority for audit by the CAG is derived from Articles 149 and 151 of the 
Constitution of India and Section 19 and 19A of the Comptroller and Auditor General's 
(Duties, Powers and Conditions of Service) Act, 1971 (DPC Act). The CAG also conducts 
supplementary audit of accounts of the PSUs under Section 143 of the Companies Act, 
2013. Audit of Statutory Corporations is governed by their respective legislations. Out of 
the three Statutory Corporations, CAG is the sole auditor for Telangana State Road 
Transport Corporation.  
Principles and methodologies for various audits are prescribed in Auditing Standards and 
Regulations on Audit and Accounts, as well as other guidelines, manuals and instructions 
issued by the CAG. 
1.3 Coverage of this Report 
The summary of financial performance of PSUs of Telangana Government (GoTS) as 
revealed from the accounts/ information furnished by them and results of oversight role 
of the CAG is reported separately as part of the CAG’s State Finances Audit Report.   
 
 
 
1  Hyderabad Growth Corridor Limited, Karimnagar Smart City Corporation Limited and Greater 
Warangal Smart City Corporation Limited 
2  Telangana State Financial Corporation, Telangana State Road Transport Corporation and Telangana 
State Warehousing Corporation 
3  Either defunct or under liquidation. Of these, 15 Companies are under demerger 
4  Southern Transformers and Electricals Limited 
5  Telangana Rythu Bandhu Samithi, Bio Tech  Hub Limited, Karimnagar Smart City Corporation 
Limited and Greater Warangal Smarty City Corporation Limited 

 Report of the CAG on PSUs for the year ended 31 March 2021 
 Page 2  
This Report of the CAG contains matters arising from the compliance audit of transactions 
and review of performance of the PSUs of the GoTS coming under the administrative 
control of three departments falling under three clusters 6. The cluster wise list of 
Departments and the PSUs under their jurisdiction is given in Appendix 1.1. 
In this Report, one Performance Audit on “Sand mining with special emphasis on 
initiatives taken to curb illegal mining”, one Detailed Compliance Audit on Hyderabad 
Metro Rail Project and one Compliance Audit Paragraph are included and these were 
issued to t he Special Chief Secretary / Principal Secretaries of the concerned Departments 
with a request to furnish reply within four to six weeks. Government replies and the views 
expressed by the State Government during the Exit Conference on the Performance Audit  
Report are suitably incorporated in this Report.  
The primary purpose of this Report is to bring to the notice of the State Legislature, 
significant results of audit  on PSUs. The findings of audit are expected to enable the 
Executive to take corrective acti on, to frame appropriate policies as well as to issue 
directives that will lead to improved financial management of the PSUs and contribute to 
better governance. 
1.4  Response of PSUs/ Government to audit findings 
1.4.1 Response to previous Inspection Reports 
Inspection Reports are issued to the Head of the auditee unit with a copy to next higher 
authority for necessary action. They are required to respond to the audit observations 
within four weeks . As of 3 0 September 2021, 361  IRs containin g 2,323  Paragraphs 
pertaining to previous years were pending settlement. Of these, first replies have not been 
received in respect of 552  Paragraphs (63 IRs) as detailed in Table 1.1. Working PSU 
wise and Department wise details are given in Appendix 1.2. 
Table-1.1:  
IRs/ Paragraphs for which first replies were not received as of 30 September 2021 
Year 
Number of IRs/ Paragraphs pending 
settlement 
IRs/ Paragraphs for which even  
first replies were not received 
IRs Paragraphs IRs Paragraphs 
2016-17 & 
earlier years 194 724 10 68 
2017-18 41 389 12 139 
2018-19 51 413 16 132 
2019-20 57 642 18 149 
2020-21 18 155 7 64 
Total 361 2,323 63 552 
Source: Records maintained by Office of the Accountant General (Audit), Telangana 
 
6  Telangana State Mineral Development Corporation Limited under the Director of Mines and Geology, 
Industries and Commerce Department of the Industr y and Commerce cluster, Hyderabad Metro Rail 
Limited under Municipal Administration and Urban Development Department  of Urban Development 
cluster and Northern Power Distribution Company of Telangana Limited  under Energy Department of 
Energy and Power cluster  
 

Chapter I -  Introduction 
 Page 3  
Lack of action on IRs and audit paragraphs is fraught with the risk of perpetuating serious 
financial irregularities as pointed out in these reports. It may also result in dilution of 
internal controls in the governance process, inefficient and ineffective delivery of public 
goods/ services, fraud, corruption and loss to public exchequer. 
1.4.2 Follow up action on Audit Reports 
The Reports of the CAG are products of audit scrutiny. It is, therefore, necessary that 
they elicit appropriate and timely response from the executive. As per the instructions 
issued (June 2004) by t he Finance Department  of erstwhile Government of A P, all 
Administrative Departments are requi red to submit replies/  explanatory notes to 
paragraphs/ reviews included in the Audit Reports of the CAG of India within a period 
of three months of their presentation in the Legislature in the prescribed format, without 
waiting for any questionnaires from the Committee on Public Undertakings (CoPU). 
As of 30 September 2021, out of 85 Performance Audits  (PAs) and 428  Paragraphs  
featured in CAG Reports on Telangana PSUs, Explanatory Notes (ENs) to 19 PAs and 
72 Paragraphs were awaited. Of these, one PA and 13 Paragraphs pertains exclusive to 
Telangana and 18 PAs and 59  Paragraphs are common to both Andhra Pradesh and 
Telangana. Details are given in Table 1.2. 
Table 1.2: Status of receipt of Explanatory Notes 
Year of  
the Audit 
Report 
Date of 
Placement of 
Audit Report in 
the State 
Legislature 
Total PAs and 
Paragraphs in the 
Audit Report 
Number of PAs/ Paragraphs  
for which ENs were not received 
Exclusive to State Common (TS & AP)* 
PAs Paragraphs PAs Paragraphs PAs Paragraphs 
Upto 2013-14 81 399 0 2 18 59 
2014-15 30 March 2016 1 3 0 0 NA NA 
2015-16 27 March 2017 1 8 0 0 NA NA 
2016-17 29 March 2018 1 8 0 2 NA NA 
2017-18 26 March 2021 1 6 1 5 NA NA 
2018-19 26 March 2021 0 4 0 4 NA NA 
Total 85 428 1 13 18 59 
*These relate to PSUs in the composite State of AP. These PSUs are, however currently under the control 
of Government of Telangana 
NA implies Not Applicable as Separate Audit Reports were issued from 2014 -15 onwards 
Source: Compiled by Office of the Accountant General (Audit), Telangana 
 

 Report of the CAG on PSUs for the year ended 31 March 2021 
 Page 4  
1.4.3 Discussion of Audit Reports by the Committee on Public  Undertakings 
(CoPU) 
The status of PAs and Paragraphs that featured in CAG Audit Reports on Telangana PSUs 
and discussed by the CoPU as on 30 September 2021 is given in Table 1.3. 
Table 1.3: PAs/ Paragraphs discussed vis-à-vis featured in Audit Reports 
Year of the Audit Report 
(Commercial/ PSU) 
Total PAs and 
Paragraphs in the 
Audit Report 
Number of PAs/ Paragraphs  
Discussed 
Exclusive to State Common (TS & AP)* 
PAs Paragraphs PAs Paragraphs PAs Paragraphs 
Up to 2013-14 81 399 1 23 21 199 
2014-15 1 3 1 1 NA NA 
2015-16 1 8 0 2 NA NA 
2016-17 1 8 0 2 NA NA 
2017-18 1 6 0 0 NA NA 
2018-19 0 4 0 0 NA NA 
Total 85 428 2 28 21 199 
* These relate to PSUs in the composite State of AP. These PSUs are however, currently under the control 
of Government of Telangana 
NA implies Not Applicable as Separate Audit Reports were issued from 2014 -15 onwards 
Source: Compiled by Office of the Accountant General (Audit), Telangana 
Out of 85 PAs and 428 Paragraphs relating to Telangana PSUs, 23 PAs and 227 
Paragraphs were discussed by C oPU. During 2019-21, CoPU had partly discussed one 
PA (Audit Report for 2014-15) and five Paragraphs in the Audit Reports relating to PSUs.  
1.4.4 Compliance to Reports of CoPU 
Action Taken Notes (ATNs) in respect of 458 recommendations pertaining to 41 CoPU 
Reports (upto 2006-07) on PSUs had not been received from the Administrative departments 
(September 2021) as detailed in Table 1.4. 
Table 1.4: Compliance to CoPU Reports 
Year of the 
CoPU Report 
Total number of 
CoPU Reports 
Total No. of 
recommendations in 
CoPU Reports 
ATNs not received 
Exclusive to 
State 
Common  
(TS & AP) 
Upto 1998-99 22 592 2 378 
2000-01 13 114 0 52 
2002-03 1 24 0 0 
2004-05 10 80 0 7 
2006-07 4 25 0 19 
Total 50 835 2 456 
Note: After 2006-07 no Report was issued by the CoPU 
Source: Compiled by Office of the Accountant General (Audit), Telangana 

Chapter I -  Introduction 
 Page 5  
Lack of remedial action on Performance Audits/ Paragraphs that featured in CAG Audit 
Reports and lack of discussion by CoPU on these Reports coupled with absence of follow 
up action by the Government are fraught with the risk of perpetuating serious financial 
irregularities as pointed out in the earlier Reports. It may also result in dilution of internal 
controls in the governance process, inefficient and ineffective delivery of public goods/  
services, fraud, corruption and loss to public exchequer. 

 
 
Chapter II 
Pages 7 - 39 
 Performance Audit 

 
 

 Chapter II – Performance Audit 
 
 
Chapter II – Performance Audit  
Industries and Commerce Department  
Telangana State Mineral Development Corporation Limited 
Sand mining with special emphasis on initiatives taken to 
curb illegal mining 
2.1  Introduction 
Summary 
Government of Telangana (GoTS) introduced (December 2014) the New Sand Mining 
Policy, 2014 (NSM Policy) and framed (January 2015) the Telangana State Sand Mining 
Rules, 2015 (TSSM Rules) to ensure availability of adequate quantity of the right quality of 
sand at a reasonable price to the people of the State. Telangana State Mineral Development 
Corporation Limited (TSMDCL) which functioned under the supervision and control of the 
Director of Mines and Geology (DM&G), Industries and Commerce Department  was 
responsible for excavation, regulation and supply of sand. 
This Performance Audit was conducted to ascertain whether excavation, transportation, 
storage and sale of sand were carried out efficiently, effective control mechanisms were put 
in place to detect  and prevent illegal sand mining and environmental concerns related to 
sand mining were appropriately addressed. Audit test checked and reviewed the records of 
three selected Project Offices (POs) of TSMDCL namely, Jayashankar Bhupalapally, 
Bhadradri Kothagudem and Karimnagar, the Director of Mines and Geology, Assistant 
Director of Mines and Geology (ADM&G) and the offices under the control of the District 
Collectors falling under the jurisdiction of the above POs and covered the five-year period 
from 2016-17 to 2020-21. 
2.1.1  Sources of sand 
Sand can be classified into two types; River sand and Manufactured sand or M-Sand (used 
as a substitute for river san d and manufactured artificially by crushing hard stones). River 
sand is again of two types namely, coarse sand (used for building large concrete structures) 
and fine sand (used for plastering/ finishing works). Both River sand and M -Sand are 
available in Telangana. Sand is used for construction and stowing1 activities. 
In Telangana, river sand is available from three sources namely, (i) riverbed and streams 
 
1  Usage of sand for filling the abandoned or exhausted coal pits 

Report of the CAG on PSUs for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 8  
which are categorised into I to V order streams2 depending upon quantum of sand available, 
(ii) de-siltation of irrigation projects and (iii) de -casting3 of private patta lands. Sand in           
I, II and III order streams is left to the villagers for domestic use (free of cost) as well as 
for local body and Government sponsored weaker section housing schemes (on payment of 
Seigniorage Charges). The excavation and transportation of sand in I, II and III order 
streams are to be done manually and neither mechanical means are allowed nor sand is 
allowed to be transported outside the local jurisdiction. Sand in IV and V order streams is 
allowed for commercial exploitation subject to Water, Land and Trees (WALTA) Act, 2002 
and WALTA Rules, 2004. 
2.1.2  Accountability for sand mining 
Government of Telangana (GoTS) introduced (December 2014) the New San d Mining 
Policy, 2014 (NSM Policy) and framed (January 2015) the Telangana State Sand Mining 
Rules, 2015 (TSSM Rules) to ensure availability of adequate quantity of the right quality 
of sand at a reasonable price to the people of the State. Under the NSM P olicy and TSSM 
Rules, the responsibility for excavation, regulation and supply of sand was entrusted to the 
Telangana State Mineral Development Corporation Limited (TSMDCL), a State Public 
Sector Enterprise incorporated (October 2014) under the Companies A ct, 2013. The 
TSMDCL functions under the supervision and control of the Director of Mines and 
Geology (DM&G) 4, Industries and Commerce Department.  
2.1.3  Organisational set up 
Organisational set up of the DM&G is as detailed in Appendix 2.1. The management of 
TSMDCL is vested in its Board of Directors (BoD). The Vice Chairman and Managing 
Director (VC&MD) of TSMDCL looks after the day -to-day operations of the Company 
and is assisted by five General Managers who look after the specific operations like mining, 
legal, finance, projects and information technology and human resources. The General 
Managers are assisted by two Deputy General Managers and eight Project Officers who 
monitor the sand excavation and stockyard operations at field level. 
2.1.4  Audit Objectives 
This Performance Audit was conducted to ascertain whether: 
• Excavation, transportation, storage and sale of sand were carried out efficiently, 
• Effective control mechanisms were put in place to detect and prevent illegal sand 
mining, and 
• Environmental concerns related to sand mining were appropriately addressed. 
 
2  The source of I order streams  is a small village stream or “ Vagu” while the source of V order streams 
would be large rivers like the Krishna and the Godavari 
3  Is the process of quarrying/ removing sand deposits accumulated on agricultural lands due to flooding  
4  The DM&G oversees the functions of receipt and processing of mineral concession applications, grant of 
leases, approval of mining plans, inspection of mines, curbing of illicit mining, vigilance, monitoring, 
survey and demarcation of areas, mineral revenue collection, etc. 

Chapter II – Performance Audit 
Page 9  
2.1.5  Audit Criteria 
Audit findings were benchmarked against audit criteria sourced from the following: 
• NSM Policy and TSSM Rules issued by GoTS and as amended from time to time, 
• Sustainable Sand Mining Management Guidelines, 2016 (SSMM Guidelines) 
issued by Ministry of Environment, Forests & Climate Change, Government of 
India (MoE,F&CC), 
• Water, Land and Trees Act, 2002 (WALTA) and WALTA Rules, 2004, 
• Panchayat Extension to Scheduled Areas Act, 2002 (PESA) and PESA Rules, 2011 
(PESA Rules),  
• Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957, 
• Telangana Minor Mineral Concession Rules, 1966 (as adapted in August 2015), 
• Telangana Mineral Dealer Rules, 2000 (as adapted in August 2015), 
• Notifications and Circulars issued by the Central/ State Governments and the 
Directorate of Mines & Geology, GoTS relating to sand mining, 
• The agenda and minutes of the meetings of the BoD of TSMDCL,  
• Standard procedures of tendering and award of contracts and  
• The tender documents, contracts awarded, correspondence made with contractors 
and payments released. 
2.1.6  Audit Scope, Sample and Methodology 
This Performance Audit was conducted from October 2021 to March 2022 covering the 
activities carried out by the DM&G and the TSMDCL during the period 2016 -17 to       
2020-21. Information pertaining to prior and subsequent periods was also revie wed as per 
requirement. 
Audit selected three (out of eight) Project Offices (POs) of TSMDCL using stratified 
sampling based on the parameter of quantity of sand excavated. Further, records of the 
TSMDCL Corporate Office and offices of the DM&G, the Assista nt Director(s) of Mines 
and Geology (ADM&Gs) and the District Collectors of eight revenue districts covered by 
the selected POs were reviewed. Similarly, records of District Police Authorities and State 
Transport Department were also reviewed wherever found necessary. Judgmental sampling 
was used in selecting the records of the offices of TSMDCL, the DM&G, the ADM&G, 
the District Collector, etc. Further, Joint Physical Verification (Joint PV) of 46 (out of 251) 
sand reaches and stockyards under the selected  POs was conducted along with the 
TSMDCL and Departmental representatives to check the facilities available and 
compliance to various guidelines. Details of audit sample are indicated in Appendix 2.2. 
 

Report of the CAG on PSUs for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 10  
An Entry Conference was held on 14 February 2022 with the Joint Director, Mines and 
Geology and the VC&MD of TSMDCL wherein the audit objectives, criteria, scope, 
sample and methodology were discussed. Audit findings were discussed with the 
Department, TSMDCL in the Exit Conference conducted on 20 Septem ber 2022. Replies 
furnished (January 2023) by  the State Government and the views expressed in the Exit 
Conference have been suitably incorporated in the Report. 
2.1.7  Acknowledgement 
Audit acknowledges the cooperation and assistance rendered by the officials of the DM&G 
and the TSMDCL in conducting the Performance Audit. 
2.1.8  Audit findings 
Audit findings relating to excavation of sand, control mechanisms to detect and prevent 
illegal sand mining and environmental concerns related to sand mining are presented under 
the following sections. 
• Section 2.2 - Excavation, transportation, storage and sale of sand. 
• Section 2.3 - Control mechanisms to detect and prevent illegal sand mining. 
• Section 2.4 - Addressing environmental concerns related to sand mining. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Chapter II – Performance Audit 
Page 11  
2.2 Excavation, transportation, storage and sale of sand 
Summary 
The tribal societies entered into sand raising contracts with TSMDCL  and engaged third-
party sub-contractors for excavation of sand. This defeated the objective of eliminating 
exploitation of mineral resources available in the Scheduled Areas by the non-locals/ tribals 
as envisaged in the PESA Act and PESA Rules. The tribal societies appointed third parties 
without following any tender process, resulting in extension of undue benefit to the third -
party sub-contractors.  
Delays in excavation and sale of sand due to various reasons like delay in processing of the 
applications by the District Level Sand Committees, non -receipt of clarification from the 
State Government and lack of action plan to excavate sand as per the timelines agreed with 
the pattadars deprived the pattadars from cultivating their lands and delayed the earning 
of revenue by the Government. Further, TSMDCL incurred avoidable extra expenditure 
due to payment of pre-revised rates despite amendments to the TSSM Rules. 
Introduction 
The Irrigation Department (as well as pattadars for de-casting of patta lands) submits 
proposals to the Additional Director of Mines & Geology (ADM&G) for de-casting of sand 
bearing areas and de -siltation of Reservoirs/ Dams. The ADM&G carries out a Joint 
Inspection5 and submits a Report to District Level Sand Committe e (DLSC) for approval. 
The DLSC allots mining license for sand bearing areas to TSMDCL for excavation and 
sale of sand. The TSMDCL will then obtain the statutory clearances like Environmental 
Clearance (EC) from State Environment Impact Assessment Authorit y (SEIAA), Mining 
Plan from the Deputy Director of Mines, Environment Management Plan, Consent for 
Establishment (CFE) and Consent for Operation (CFO) from the Telangana State Pollution 
Control Board (TSPCB). Once the TSPCB’s clearance is obtained, TSMDCL appoints sand 
raising contractors/ tribal societies (pattadars in case of patta lands) for excavation of sand. 
The excavated sand is transported to stockyards established near the sand reaches and 
managed by TSMDCL. The consumers make online bookings for sand through TSMDCL’s 
web portal “Sand Sale Management and Monitoring System (SSMMS)”, make the payment 
at approved rates and obtain the E-Order copy. The sale proceeds are directly credited into 
the Treasury. The sand is loaded into the designated transport vehicles at the stockyards on 
the production of E -Order copy and the stockyards issue the E -Transit Pass for onward 
 
5  Joint Inspection is conduc ted with the following: (i) ADM&G shall certify the suitability of sand for 
construction, (ii) Tahsildar shall identify the patta land, possessor/ occupier and furnish attested sketch 
demarcating the area and fix the boundaries on ground, (iii) Mandal Agri culture Officer shall certify that 
without de-casting, the patta land is not fit for agriculture, (iv) Ground Water Department shall record the 
geo co-ordinates of the patta land as per boundaries fixed by the Tahsildar, assess the thickness, quantify 
the sand to be de -casted and give specific recommendation on the mode of de -casting i.e. manual or 
mechanised and (v) Executive Engineer, Irrigation Department shall report on the location of patta land 
with reference to riverbed/ course 

Report of the CAG on PSUs for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 12  
transportation of sand to the designated consumer locations. The TSMDCL receives 
reimbursement of operational expenditure incurred and six  per cent service charges from 
the State Government.  
The above flow of sand mining operations is indicated in the Chart 2.1. 
Chart 2.1: Flow of sand mining activities 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Out of the total assessed sand availability of 1,001.64 lakh Cubic Meters (CBM) in 709 
sand reaches operated during the period from 2016 -17 to 2020 -21, TMSDCL excavated 
685.55 lakh CBM and sold 672.18 lakh CBM valued ₹4,262.95 crore. Audit reviewed the 
sand mining operations and observed the following. 
2.2.1  Delay in disposal of applications for de-casting of patta lands 
Rule 7 of TSSM Rules permitted de -casting of sand from the private patta lands to make 
them fit for agriculture. The pattadar shall for this purpose make an application to the 
ADM&G concerned along with a copy of the pattadar passbook6 and location of the land 
on the village map. Based on the application made by the pattadars, the ADM&G shall take 
up a joint inspection of the patta land and submit a report to the DLSC which after 
considering the same, permits TSMDCL to de -cast sand from the patta lands by entering 
into agreement with the pattadars. 
 
6  Title Deed Book 
Sand Streams/ 
Patta lands 
 I, II, III   IV, V 
ADM&G DLSC 
TSMDCL 
PCB, SEIAA 
Contractors & 
Pattadars 
Transporters 
Consumers 
Treasury 
Stockyard 
Collector 
MRO 
Irrigation / 
Pattadars 

Chapter II – Performance Audit 
Page 13  
Audit noticed in one (Bhadrardri Kothagudem) of the three sampled POs that out of the 53 
applications received by the ADM&G for de -casting of patta lands during the year        
2016-17, only 22 applications were approved. Reasons for not approving the remaining 31 
applications were not on record. 
The GoTS issued (April 2018) instructions to the District Collectors requiring them to 
review all the pending applications of the farmers and to clear the applications to enable 
the farmers to remove sand and make the area viable for cultivation. The DLSCs were also 
directed to conduct monthly review of the ADM&G’s inspection report on the applications 
received from the pattadars and grant or reject the applications within four weeks from the 
receipt of the inspection report. Audit observed that despite such clear instructions from the 
GoTS, the ADM&G and the DLSC of Bhadradri Kothagudem did not take any action and 
the above 31 applications received during 2016 -17 were still pending (December 2021). 
Thus, non-disposal of pending applications was not only in  violation of the Government 
instructions but also resulted in non -removal of sand from patta lands thereby depriving 
the pattadars/ farmers from cultivating their lands. The Government was also deprived of 
the revenue realisable (not ascertainable due to non-assessment of extractable sand 
quantity) from the sale of sand from these patta lands for that period. 
Government replied (January 2023) that the applications were pending for want of 
feasibility reports from the Tahsildars concerned.  In the Exit Conference, Government 
stated that the DLSCs would be asked to dispose-off the pending applications. 
The fact remained that the DLSC Bhadradri Kothagudem failed to adhere to the 
Government’s directions resulting in non-conversion of patta lands fit for agriculture. 
Recommendation 1: District Level Sand Committees may ensure processing of the 
pattadar applications within the stipulated timelines and TSMDCL may prepare an 
action plan to de -cast sand within the timelines stipulated in the agreements with the 
pattadars. 
2.2.2  Engagement of third parties for sand excavation 
The Panchayat Extension to Scheduled Areas (PESA) Act, 2002 and PESA Rules, 2011 
allowed exploitation of minor minerals in areas located fully/ partially in the Scheduled Areas 
only by the individual members of local Scheduled Tribes (ST) or societies comprising 
exclusively of members of local ST. Further, Clause 2 (iii) and (iv) of the agreement entered 
by TSMDCL with sand raising contractor (tribal society) for excavation of sand stipulated 
that the agreement was not transferable, sub -lease of the same to any third -party was 
prohibited and in the event of failure, the pending payments of the society were liable to be 
held up and forfeited. 
In the test checked POs of Jayashankar Bhupalapally and Bhadradri Kothagudem, audit 
noticed that the tribal societies appointed third parties  on nomination basis as their     
sub-contractors for excavation o f sand. The DLSCs also permitted (November 2015) the 
sub-lease of sand raising agreements due to tribal societies’ lack of financial, operational 

Report of the CAG on PSUs for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 14  
and technical capacities required for sand mining operations. Moreover, the DLSCs 
allowed payment of ₹180 per CBM to the sub-contractors (out of ₹220 per CBM paid by 
TSMDCL to the tribal societies) and retention of the balance ₹40 per CBM by the societies 
for equal distribution among its members.  
The TSMDCL too noticed (November 2018) that the tribal societies engaged third parties 
for excavation of sand and that the Integrated Tribal Development Authority (ITDA) itself 
made payments to the tribal societies and the third-party contractors as per the ratio decided 
by the DLSCs. The TSMDCL requested the DLSCs concerned to stop the third -party 
contractors’ interference to ensure that the benefit of sand mining in the Scheduled Areas  
reaches the tribal societies for whom it is intended. The TSMDCL however, did not take 
any action against the tribal societies as per the terms and conditions of the sand raising 
agreement. 
Thus, audit observed that none of the stakeholders took steps to prevent third parties from 
performing sand mining operations despite clear statutory and contractual provisions. This 
defeated the objective of eliminating exploitation of mineral resources available in the 
Scheduled Areas by the non -locals/ tribals as envisaged by the PESA  and PESA Rules . 
Audit also observed that the tribal societies appointed third parties without following any 
tender process. Thus, out of the total ₹56.73 crore paid by TSMDCL to the tribal societies, 
the third parties were paid ₹46.42 crore. Further, considering the rates finalised by 
TSMDCL under tenders invited for sand raising contracts for desiltation at Medigadda, 
Annaram Barrages ( ₹68.50 per CBM to ₹135 per CBM) and at Khammam ( ₹75.01 per 
CBM), the undue benefit enjoyed by the third -party sub-contractors worked out to ₹11.61 
crore (25.79 lakh CBM X (( ₹180 - ₹135)) during the period 2016-2021. Details are given 
in Appendix 2.3. 
Management replied (September 2022) that in some cases tribal societies might have hired 
tractors for transportation of sand because societies themselves may not have the required 
type of tractors. The payment made for tractor hire charges cannot be treate d as                   
sub-contracting. Further, the cost of sand excavation by way of de -siltation of reservoirs 
cannot be compared to the cost of sand excavation through de-casting of sand bearing areas 
since the former is a mechanised operation and the latter is a manual operation. 
Government concurred (January 2023) with the management’s reply. 
The reply is not tenable since the tribal societies have sublet the entire sand excavation 
activities to the third party contractors by paying ₹180 per CBM out of ₹220 per CBM paid 
by TSMDCL to the tribal societies. The tribal societies would benefit more by seeking 
competitive rates instead of appointing the third-party contractors on nomination basis with 
a fixed payment of ₹180 per CBM. 
In the Exit Conference, the Government agreed to take up the matter with the Tribal 
Welfare Department. 

Chapter II – Performance Audit 
Page 15  
The fact remained that the objective of eliminating exploitation of mineral resources 
available in the Scheduled Areas by the non-locals/ tribals was defeated. 
Recommendation 2: District Level Sand Committees may consider  allotting sand 
mining licenses in the Scheduled Areas to tribal societies and TSMDCL may consider 
appointing the sand raising contractors on behalf of the tribal societies duly following 
open tender process. 
2.2.3  Excavation of sand without DLSC approval, agreement with TSMDCL  
Rule 7 of TSSM Rules stipulated obtaining of DLSCs approval and entering into agreement 
by the pattadars with TSMDCL for de-casting of sand from their patta lands. In case, the 
allotted quantity is not de -casted within the time stipulated by such approval and the 
agreement, the TSMDCL obtained DLSC’s approval afresh, and entered into a fresh 
agreement with the pattadars for de-casting the balance quantity of sand from their patta 
lands. Further, Rules 5 (1) (f) and 7 (5) (f) of the TSSM Rules prescribed levy of a penalty 
of ₹1,00,000 or ₹500 per CBM, whichever is higher, if sand was excavated beyond the 
specified limits (area) or beyond the specified width (thickness) or for any other violation 
on both the TSMDCL and the pattadar respectively. 
In the selected PO of Karimnagar, audit observed that one pattadar (Giravelli village) did 
not extract any sand (out of 2.47 lakh CBM) and another pattadar (Kunchavelli village) 
excavated only 7,970 CBM (out of 1.06 lakh CBM) during the contract period (September 
2018 to September 2019) for which DLSC’s approvals were obtained in April 2017.  
Though fresh approval of DLSC was required for extracting the balance quantity of sand, 
the TSMDCL, in anticipation of the extension of time by the DLSC, extended (December 
2019) the period of the original agreements with the above pattadars stating severe shortage 
of sand in the State and the need to make sand available to reduce the burden of sand supply 
and vehicle/ traffic conjunction from Kaleshwaram road.  
Audit observed that the DLSC was yet to extend the validity of its approval. The TSMDCL 
however, excavated (February 2020) 4,582 CBM of sand (Giravelli: 1,848 CBM and 
Kuchavelli: 2,734 CBM) under its extended agreements. Thus, excavation of sand from the 
above two patta lands without obtaining due approval from the DLSC was irregular and 
attracted penalty of ₹22.91 lakh (4,582 CBM X ₹500 per CBM). But the ADM&G did not 
impose any penalty either on the TSMDCL or the pattadars. 
Management replied (September 2022) that the sand was not de-casted within the stipulated 
contract period from the above patta lands due to various reasons like heavy rains and local 
issues with the villagers. It was further stated that it was only a case of extension of the 
contract period in anticipation of the DLSC’s approval and there is no violation of TSSM 
Rules as sand was sold properly following the usual mechanism. 
The reply is not specific to the audit observation on extension of the agreement period with 
the pattadars without prior extension/ approval of DLSC and agreement with TSMDCL as 
provided in the TSSM Rules. 

Report of the CAG on PSUs for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 16  
Government’s reply was awaited (January 2023). During discussion in the Exit Conference, 
the Government directed TSMDCL to seek ratification of the DLSC concerned. 
The fact remained that TSMDCL did not adhere to the spirit of the TSSM Rules.  
2.2.4  Delay in excavation of sand 
As per Rules 4 and 5 of the TSSM Rules, after communication of DLSC’s approval for 
allotment of specific sand bearing areas to TSMDCL for excavation of sand, the TSMDCL 
shall within a period of three months (extendable by another three months) obtain necessary 
permissions for sand mining and enter into licensee agreement with the ADM&G and 
extract and dispatch sand by appointing sand raising contractors (contractors or tribal 
societies). Further, under Rule 7 of TSSM Rules , the DLSC, after considering the report 
submitted by ADM&G permits TSMDCL to de-cast sand from the patta lands by entering 
into agreement with the pattadars. 
In the selected POs of Jayashankar Bhupalapally and Bhadradri Kothagudem au dit 
observed excavation of sand was delayed despite existence of DLSC’s approvals, as 
detailed below. 
2.2.4.1    Delay in de-silting at Dummugudem Anicut 
The DLSC, Bhadradri Kothagudem permitted (February 2020) TSMDCL to de -silt 
23,38,080 CBM of sand under the submergence area of Dummugudem Anicut on the Godavari 
River for a period of one year from the date of commencement of sand excavation. 
TSMDCL was required to enter into an agreement with four local tribal societies concerned 
and desilting was to be carried out by mechanised method. 
However, TSMDCL decided that the said de-silting of sand from the submergence areas of 
Dummugudem Anicut was of the nature of civil works of Irrigation Department, and sought 
(April 2020) clarification from the State Government whether to appoint the tribal societies 
as per PESA Rules and if so whether the estimated rate of ₹120 per CBM was payable (based 
on the quoted rate o f ₹90 per CBM obtained for similar operations in Medigadda and 
Annaram Barrage areas). However, the State Government has not yet (March 2022)  
furnished any clarification in the matter. Hence, TSMDCL did not enter into sand raising 
agreements with the local tribal societies for de-siltation of 23,38,080 CBM sand under the 
submergence area of Dummugudem Anicut till March 2022. Audit observed that the delay 
of 24 months led to delay in realisation of estimated revenue of ₹140.28 crore (23,38,080 
CBM X ₹600 per CBM) due to non-commencement of sale of sand by TSMDCL from this 
project area. 
Management replied (September 2022) that approval of GoTS to award the work to local 
tribal societies at ₹120 per CBM was awaited. 
Government in its reply (January 2023) acknowledged that TSMDCL had sought (April 
2020) clarification from the State Government. In the Exit Conference, the Government 
agreed to examine the matter. 

Chapter II – Performance Audit 
Page 17  
The fact remained that inordinate delay on the part of the  Government resulted in delay in 
realisation of estimated revenue of ₹140.28 crore from de-silting the Dummugudem Anicut. 
2.2.4.2    Delay in de-casting of patta lands 
Audit noticed that during the period 2016 -17 to 2020 -21, TSMDCL did not commence      
de-casting of sand from patta lands in 35 cases in the selected POs of BDKG and JSBP 
even after obtaining DLSC’s approval and entering into agreements with the pattadars. The 
total approved quantity of sand to be de-casted from these patta lands was 4.80 lakh CBM 
valued ₹28.78 crore (4.80 lakh CBM X ₹600 per CBM). 
Further, in respect of two other patta lands under PO Bhadradri Kothagudem, TSMDCL 
excavated (up to March 2017 ) only 21,901 CBM (26.87 per cent) out of 81,522 CBM 
approved (October 2016) by DLSC Khammam and stopped the work thereafter. Aggrieved 
by the poor rate of sand excavation, the pattadars filed (March 2018) a case in the 
Honourable High Court of Telangana &  Andhra Pradesh. The TSMDCL submitted to the 
High Court that since the validity of these agreements lapsed before de -casting the full 
allotted quantity, TSMDCL would excav ate the balance quantity of 59, 621 CBM valued 
₹3.58 crore (59,621 CBM X ₹600 per CBM) by renewing these agreements after obtaining 
necessary approval from the concerned DLSC. The State Government also instructed (April 
2018) TSMDCL to complete the excavation of sand from patta lands within the time 
allowed under the agreements with the pattadars. The High Court disposed the above cases 
directing (April 2018) TSMDCL to strictly adhere to the instructions issued by the State 
Government. 
Audit observed that despite clear directions of the State Government and the High Court, 
TSMDCL did not prepare an action plan to adhere to the timelines of its agreements with 
the pattadars. TSMDCL neither renewed the agreements till date nor took any other steps 
to excavate sand from these 37 patta lands. Specific reasons for not de -casting sand from 
these patta lands were not placed on record. Thus, the State Government was yet to earn 
the revenue of ₹32.36 crore (₹28.78 crore + ₹3.58 crore) due to delay in commencement 
of sale from the above patta lands. Further, the objective of converting these patta lands 
into cultivable lands was not achieved. 
Management replied (September 2022) that sand was not excavated from the patta lands 
due to unwillingness of the farmers, poor quality of sand, road connectivity problem, local 
issues and objection by the Forest Department. It was further stated that the time allowed 
by the DLSCs was not sufficient to de-cast total sand from patta lands. However, the entire 
requirement of sand in the State was already met.  Government concurred (January 2023) 
with the management’s reply. 
In the Exit Conference, the Government opined that the DLSCs have to take a call in this 
issue and directed TSMDCL to write to the DLSCs for cancellation of the approvals. 

Report of the CAG on PSUs for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 18  
Reply of the Company and the response of the Government are  not acceptable as the 
reasons stated for not commencing the de -casting of sand were not found on records 
produced to audit. Further, the DLSC, Jayashankar Bhupalapally (JSBP), to which these 
patta land cases were transferred, decided not to de-cast sand from the said patta lands on 
the ground that even after de -casting the balance quantity of sand, these patta lands may 
not be fit for cultivation. The decision of DLSC, JSBP was inappropriate since the DLSC, 
Khammam had already approved the de -casting of these patta lands following due 
procedures and considering all the parameters and TSMDCL also entered into agreements with 
these pattadars. Thus, the delay in de -casting of patta lands defeated the objective of 
conversion of patta lands fit for cultivation. 
2.2.5  Excess payment to pattadars 
2.2.5.1    Payment at higher rate 
Rule 7 of TSSM Rules permitted TSMDCL to de-cast sand from the patta lands of private 
pattadars by entering into agreement with them. The original TSSM Rules, however, did 
not specify any amount to be paid to the pattadars as their share from the sale of sand      
de-casted from their patta lands. Pending determination of such rate, the State Government 
in a review meeting (May 2015) instructed the TSMDCL to pay ₹200 – ₹250 per CBM to 
the pattadars. Accordingly, TSMDCL entered into agreements with the pattadars and 
allowed payment of ₹250 per CBM (₹200 towards beneficiary amount and ₹50 towards 
raising cost). Subsequently, State Government amended (August 2015) the TSSM Rules 
and allowed payment of 35 per cent of the sale amount, subject to a maximum ceiling of 
₹200 per CBM, as the pattadar’s share. 
Audit noticed that TSMDCL continued to pay ₹250 per CBM in 124 agreements entered 
after amendment of the TSSM Rules by the selected POs of Jayashankar Bhupalapally (45 
cases), Bhadradri Kothagudem (64 cases) and Karimnagar (15 cases). The TSMDCL 
however, did not place on record the basis for fixation of the rate of ₹250 per CBM in these 
agreements. Hence, payment of ₹250 per CBM in contravention of the amended TSSM 
Rules was not justified and this had resulted in avoidable excess payment of ₹11.43 crore 
to the pattadars on 22.88 lakh CBM of sand de -casted under these agreements during the 
period September 2015 to March 2021. 
Management replied (September 2022) that the rate of ₹250 per CBM was allowed as per 
the minutes of review meeting (May 2015) chaired by the Minister for Mines and Geology. 
It was further stated that as de-casting operations increased in the State, the rate was reduced 
to ₹100 per CBM.  
Government stated (January 2023) that the decision (May 2015) to pay ₹200 to ₹250 per CBM 
was based on availability of sand in the State at that point of time. During the Exit Conference, 
the Government explained that higher rate was allowed to stabilise the NSM Policy. 

Chapter II – Performance Audit 
Page 19  
The reply of TSMDCL and the response of the Government are not acceptable because the 
TSMDCL allowed the rate of ₹250 per CBM even in the agreements entered after 
amendment (August 2015) of the TSSM Rules.  
2.2.5.2    Payment at old rate 
The State Government further amended (November 2017) the TSSM Rules to provide for 
payment of ₹100 per CBM as the pattadar’s share from the sale of sand de-casted from their 
patta lands. The State Government however, permitted (March 2018) TSMDCL to enter 
into agreements at the old rate of ₹200 per CBM with the pattadars who had got DLSC’s 
proceedings prior to the further amendment (November 2017) of the TSSM Rules. 
Accordingly, TSMDCL entered into agreements with pattadars for de-casting of sand at 
₹200 per CBM.  
Audit however, noticed that in 76 agreements, TSMDCL did not excavate the entire 
approved quantity of sand within the agreement period. Hence, TSMDCL entered (between 
May 2018 and May 2021) into fresh agreements (Jayashankar Bhupalapally - 32 cases, 
Bhadradri Kothagudem - 37 cases and Karimnagar - seven cases) with pattadars for the 
balance quantities after obtaining separate DLSC approvals. However, in these subsequent 
agreements also TSMDCL agreed to pay ₹200 per CBM though the rate was re -fixed at 
₹100 per CBM. Adoption of old rate in respect of subsequent agreements enter ed for 
balance quantities as per separate DLSC proceedings was not justified and resulted in 
avoidable extra payment of ₹10.69 crore on 10.69 lakh CBM in these 76 pattadar 
agreements. 
Management replied (September 2022) that since TSMDCL entered into fresh  contracts 
with the pattadars for balance quantities under the same DLSC proceedings issued prior to 
the amendment of the TSSM Rules, the rate of ₹200 per CBM was allowed to the pattadars.  
Government concurred (January 2023) with the management’s reply. During Exit 
Conference, TSMDCL further contended that since the total quantities to be excavated were 
already approved by the DLSCs under the earlier proceedings, payment of the rate of ₹200 
per CBM was justified. 
The reply is not acceptable because as per the procedure in vogue, in case the allotted 
quantity is not de -casted within the stipulated time, the TSMDCL obtained DLSC’s 
approval afresh and entered into fresh agreement s with the pattadars for de-casting the 
balance quantity of sand from their patta lands (refer to Para 2.2.3 above). Hence, the 
relaxation given by GoTS in March 2018 cannot be applied to the fresh agreements 
undertaken (between May 2018 and May 2021) after amendment of the TSSM Rules. 
Recommendation 3: Government may fix the responsibility of the officials concerned 
for allowing excess payments to the pattadars. 
 

Report of the CAG on PSUs for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 20  
2.2.6  Extension of undue benefit to sand raising contractors 
During 2017 -18 to 2018 -19, the selected POs of Jayashankar Bhupalapally, Bhadradri 
Kothagudem and Karimnagar entered into 47 sand raising contracts for a period of 18 
months and extendable for another six months. Clauses 3 (v) of these contracts provided 
for furnishing a Performance Security Deposit (PSD) and Additional Performance Security 
Deposit (APSD) as mentioned in the tender document to TSMDCL. Further as per Clause  
3 (xiv) of these contracts, TSMDCL shall closely monitor the achievement of the monthly 
targeted quantities (assessed quantity / number of months) and reserves the right to forfeit 
the PSD in case excavation was less than 50 per cent of the monthly targeted quantities. 
The agreement was also liable for termination without any further notice. 
A review of 27 out of 47 contracts revealed the following: 
• All the 27 contractors did not excavate sand as per the monthly targeted quantities,  
• Extension was given for 12 months for excavation of balance quantities, in all the cases,  
• Second Extension of contracts was given in 16 cases, and  
• Third Extension was given in six cases.  
Despite grant of extension of time by TSMDCL, the rate of extraction by the contractors 
remained poor as they failed to adhere to the monthly targeted quantities. 
Therefore, audit observed that despite a clear failure on the part of the sand raising 
contractors, TSMDCL extended the contracts in a routine manner beyond the maximum 
allowed contract period of 24 months instead of calling for fresh tenders at the end of the 24 
months period. TSMDCL did not invoke the contractual provisions of forfeiture of the PSD 
and APSD and termination of the contracts. In two cases, instead of forfeiting the PSD and 
APSD amounting to ₹3.59 crore, TSMDCL imposed a token penalty of ₹7.00 lakh only for 
delayed excavation even though the contracts did not provide for imposition of any penalty. 
Thus, by extending the contracts beyond the agreed contract period and by not invoking the 
contractual clauses, TSMDCL extended undue benefit to the sand raising contractors. 
Management replied (September 2022) that extension of time became inevitable because 
of the difficulties in providing sand reaches continuously for 18 months, re -assessment of 
sand quantity due to impounding/ water storage in the reservoir for more than 10 months 
and mobilisation/ demobilisation every year within 50 to 60 days’ time. 
Government concurred (January 2023) with the management’s reply. 
In the Exit Conference, TSMDCL agreed to incorporate suitable penal provisions in  the 
sand raising contracts. Government concurred with the views of TSMDCL. 
The reply is not acceptable because TSMDCL finali sed the contract period in the tenders 
and entered into agreements duly considering the working conditions in the field. Further, 
TSMDCL itself expressed dissatisfaction on the performance of the sand raising contractors 
and stated that the sale of sand to meet the customer demand was getting affected due to 
their poor performance. Hence, not invoking of the contractual provisions of forfeiture of 
the PSD and APSD and termination of the contracts was not justified. 

Chapter II – Performance Audit 
Page 21  
2.3 Control mechanisms to detect and prevent illegal sand mining 
Summary 
Control mechanisms to detect and curb illegal sand mining were not put in place as 
TSMDCL did not evolve an appropriate stock policy. Closed Circuit Television Cameras 
and Weighbridges were not installed at all the stockyards up to September 2020. The 
vehicles transporting sand were not tracked through Global Positioning Systems and Radio 
Frequency Identification Devices. Thus, TSMDCL did not exercise effective monitoring over 
the sand reaches, stockyards and sand transportation vehicles.  
The TSMDCL excavated and dispatched sand from the allotted sand bearing areas without 
obtaining sand dispatch permits from the ADM&G. The sand raising contractors excavated 
excess quantities of sand by excavating sand beyond the specified geo -coordinates, depth 
and quantity. The ADM&G also did not carry out periodical inspection of the sand bearing 
areas. Even in cases where excess excavation of sand was noticed, the TSMDCL pleaded 
excuses to avoid levy and payment of applicable penalty. Hence, the casual implementation 
of the NSM Policy and the TSSM Rules rendered them ineffective in curbing the illegal 
sand mining in the State. Also, unauthorised and excess excavation and transportation of 
sand from I, II and III order streams  went unnoticed because the Sand Taxi Management 
System had a software glitch. 
Monitoring Mechanism 
According to the New Sand Mining (NSM) Policy and TS Sand Mining (TSSM) Rules, 
any vehicle carrying sand without a waybill issued by TSMDCL will be considered as 
illegal and seized. Also, any machinery and vehicles used for extraction and transportation 
of sand in contravention of the TSSM Rules shall be seized. Further, excavation of sand 
without obtaining necessary approvals from the concerned authorities or beyond the 
specified Geo Co -ordinates or beyond the specified depth were also considered by the 
DM&G as illegal mining activity. The Revenue, Police and ADM&G authorities at the 
district level were authorised to seize the illegal sand vehicles, machinery, stocks and to 
impose penalties as prescribed under TSSM Rules. The seized sand stocks were to be 
disposed-off through TSMDCL.  
During the years 2016-17 to 2020-21, the ADM&Gs of 32 revenue districts detected 21,768 
cases of illegal sand transportation and imposed penalty of ₹31.84 crore. Audit reviewed 
the mechanism put in place to detect and curb illegal mining and transportation of sand and 
observed the following. 
2.3.1 Stock Policy not evolved  
As a licensee for mining, stocking, and trading of sand under the NSM Policy an d TSSM 
Rules, the TSMDCL operated stockyards for stocking sand excavated from sand reaches 
till sand is dispatched to the consumers. Therefore, evolving an appropriate stock policy as 

Report of the CAG on PSUs for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 22  
a monitoring mechanism was necessary to detect and prevent illegal sand mining through 
excavation and transportation of sand more than the prescribed limits.  
Audit however, observed that the NSM Policy and TSSM Rules did not specifically require 
TSMDCL to evolve an appropriate stock policy. The TSMDCL also did not take any steps 
in this regard. Audit observed that TSMDCL did not determine the modalities to fix the 
percentage of normal stock loss at various stockyards. This indicated not only lack of policy 
support but also lack of managerial action to put in place control mechanisms to detect and 
prevent illegal sand mining. As a result, audit noticed unreasonable stock levels as per the 
stock registers maintained by the selected POs as detailed below. 
➢ Negative stock balances were noticed at Janampeta reach under PO Bhadradri 
Kothagudem (-132 CBM on 23 August 2016) and Kodimunja reach under PO Karimnagar 
(-115 CBM on 31 January 2018).  
➢ Zero or negligible (0.50 CBM to 10 CBM) stock balances in 35 instance s were 
noticed during the years 2016 -17 to 2020 -21 under the selected POs of JSBP and 
Karimnagar.  
➢ After considering the opening Balance, production and despatch of sand at Tallagadda, 
Audit arrived at huge stock balance of 12,930 CBM (20,688 Metric Tonnes  - MTs) as of 
February 2019 at Tallagadda -1 reach under PO Karimnagar whereas book balance was 
1971 CBM. This was equivalent to 690 sand lorries of 30 MT capacity. 
Management replied (September 2022) that the percentage of normal stock loss could not 
be fi xed as the surface area and type of soil is not uniform at various stockyards. No 
stockyard was handed over without dispatching the leftover stocks. It was further stated 
that TSMDCL accounted for stocks in a systematic manner using Oracle based solutions 
and the Sand Sale Management and Monitoring System (SSMMS).  
The reply is not acceptable because without the yardstick of normal loss being fixed, 
TSMDCL could not hold the sand raising contractors liable for the shortfall in the quantity 
of sand at the stockyards. Further, from the information furnished by TSMDCL itself audit 
observed the presence of left over stocks on the date of handing over of the stockyards. 
Government stated (January 2023) that all the transactions i.e., excavation, stock and sales 
are recorded on TSMDCL’s online (SSMMS) portal. In the Exit Conference, TSMDCL 
agreed to frame a stock policy after studying the issues related to stock maintenance and 
stock records. Government concurred with the views of TSMDCL. 
Reply confirmed that TSMDCL did not evolve a stock policy till date (September 2022). 
2.3.2  Non-compliance of rules regulating operation of sand reaches and 
stockyards 
With a view to detect and curb illegal mining and transportation of sand, the TSSM Rules 
and the Sustainable Sand Mining Management Guidelines (SSMG) issued (January 2016) 

Chapter II – Performance Audit 
Page 23  
by Government of India stipulated that following monitoring arrangements at sand reaches 
and stockyards should be put in place within three months (by 15 April 2016). 
➢ Installation of Closed-Circuit Television Cameras (CCTVs) at the sand bearing areas 
as well as the stockyards at TSMDCL’s expense for electronic surveillance of 
excavation of sand from allotted sand bearing areas and dispatch of sand from stockyards. 
Also, the stockyards should be geo co-ordinated and geo fenced to avoid the entry of 
any unauthorised vehicles into the stockyard areas. 
➢ Installation of computerised weighbridges at the stockyards for electronic 
documentation linked to a central documentation monitoring facility of TSMDCL and 
loading of sand from stockyards as per the approved capacity of the vehicles through 
weighment or volumetric analysis of sand stocks before unloading at the stockyard. 
➢ Transportation of excavated sand to and from the approved stockyards along with the waybill 
issued by the ADM&G and the computerised weighment slip. Also, the  vehicles 
transporting sand were to be provided with Global Positioning System (GPS) and Radio 
Frequency Identification (RFID) to enable tracking of vehicles for surprise checks 
and avoiding discrepancies in the delivery of sand. Further, vehicles carrying more 
than the permitted capacity from the stockyard were subject to levy of penalty of 
₹10,000.00 per MT (₹2,000.00 per MT with effect from February 2015). 
➢ Maintenance of daily stock/ production and dispatch register/ records at the allotted sand 
bearing areas and stockyards. 
During the Joint PV of 46 sand reaches and stockyards in the selected POs of Jayashankar 
Bhupalapally, Bhadradri Kothagudem and Karimnagar , audit reviewed the availability, 
functioning and maintenance of the above facilities and records which were essential to 
curb illegal mining, transportation of sand and noticed the following shortcomings. 
2.3.2.1    Installation of CCTVs and geo-fencing the sand reaches and stockyards 
Installation of CCTVs in PO Jayashankar Bhupalapally commenced from September 2020 
onwards and by March 2021 CCTVs were installed at only 21 out of the 49 stockyards 
operated during 2016-21. 
In PO Bhadradri Kothagudem, CCTVs were not installed at patta lands and none of the 
stockyards were geo fenced.  
Hence, audit observed that TSMDCL did not exercise effective monitoring over the sand 
reaches and stockyards to ensure that excess quantities of sand were not excavated and 
dispatched. 
Management replied (September 2022) that CCTV cameras were installed at 44 sand 
reaches in the State till March 2021. Due to lack of/ infrequent power connectivity, limited 
period operations and remoteness of the locations, CCTV cameras were installed on the 
approach roads from where all the patta lands could be monitored. TSMDCL’s outsourced 

Report of the CAG on PSUs for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 24  
staff were allotted duties of route check &  night vigilance for monitoring sand 
transportation. Government concurred (January 2023) with the management’s reply. 
In the Exit Conference, the management stated that cost -benefit proportions are the main 
considerations resulting in provision of insufficient number of CCTV cameras particularly 
at the patta lands. Despite delay, the Company has been making steady progress in 
providing required monitoring facilities at the sand reaches and stock yards.  Government 
concurred with the views of TSMDCL.    
The reply is not tenable because TSMDCL confirmed (September 2022) that there is delay 
in implementation of the SSMM guidelines regarding installation of CCTV cameras and   
that separate records of posting orders, attendance registers and wages for night shift duties 
were not maintained. The reply is also silent about Geo-fencing of the stockyards.  
2.3.2.2     Installation of weighbridges and dispatch of sand from the stockyards 
Installation of weighbridges in PO Jayashankar Bhupalapally commenced from December 
2020 and by March 2021 weighbridges were installed at eight (out of 49) stockyards. 
However, the calibration certificate issued by the Department of Weights and Measures 
and test weights were not made available to check the accuracy of the weighment made by 
these eight weighbridges. Further, weighbridges were not found installed in any of the 
stockyards in PO Bhadradri Kothagudem. The services of empanelled private parties for 
weighbridges utilised by PO Bhadradri Kothagudem were not found to be satis factory. 
Further, none of the vehicles transporting sand were provided with GPS, RFID to enable 
their tracking and monitoring the sand dispatch and delivery operations. 
Audit noticed that due to non -availability of weighbridges at the stockyards, TSMDCL 
loaded the vehicles as per the approved capacity of the vehicle on volumetric basis and noted 
the estimated weight of the consignment in the E -waybills issued by it. The ADM&G 
however, levied penalty on the excess quantity found during the transportation o f sand. 
Hence, audit observed that there was no monitoring mechanism to ensure that the vehicles 
were loaded with the correct weight of sand at the time of their dispatch from the stockyard. 
The ADM&Gs maintained data of only the number of vehicles penalis ed for overloading 
but did not maintain the data related to the number of vehicles checked. Thus, audit also 
could not ascertain the magnitude of overloading cases. Hence, the sufficiency of vigilance 
exercised by ADM&G to ensure that excess sand quantitie s drawn were detected and 
assessed for levy of penalty could not be verified. 
Management replied (September 2022) that TSSM Rules allowed weighment on volumetric 
basis and weighment through weighbridges was meant to be a counter check only. Two 
weighbridges (Ramanujavaram and Morranpalli Banjara) under PO Bhadradri Kothagudem 
were empanelled since 2017-19. Further, GPS/ RFID devices were installed in 9,800 out of 
39,900 vehicles registered with TSMDCL till date and the process is going on. 
Government concur red (January 2023) with the management’s reply and stated that 
applicable penalty was levied on vehicles violating the TSSM Rules to check leakage. 

Chapter II – Performance Audit 
Page 25  
In the Exit Conference, TSMDCL also stated that GPS facilities are provided in all the 
vehicles transporting sand for irrigation department and bulk consumers.  Government 
concurred with the views of TSMDCL.    
The reply is not acceptable because the ineffectiveness of the weighment arrangements 
made was evident from the number of overloading cases booked and penalty levied during 
the period 2016 -21 (1,163 No.s involving penalty of ₹1.40 crore in PO Jayashankar 
Bhupalapally and 1,910 No.s involving penalty of ₹2.28 crore in Bhadradri Kothagudem).  
2.3.2.3    Discrepancies in the maintenance of registers and records 
Audit noticed that although the required registers such as Dumping/ Production Register, 
Daily Dispatch Register, Cumulative Register and Security Paper Register were maintained 
at the stockyards, their correctness was not authenticated at regular intervals either by the 
Sand Reach Assistant or by the competent authority at the Project Office level. Audit also 
noticed many instances of (i) differences between the closing stock balances as per the 
registers maintained at the stockyards and the Sand Sale Management and Monitoring 
System (SSMMS) maintained by TSMDCL, (ii) errors in casting the closing balanc es in 
the registers, and (iii) carrying forward the closing balances.  
Audit further noticed that the POs endorsed the contractor’s monthly bills for water 
sprinklers without insisting upon the maintenance and submission of the vehicle logbooks 
though it was provided in the contracts. Hence, audit observed that TSMDCL did not ensure 
proper maintenance of the required records. Absence of reliable records would render 
detection of illegal transactions very difficult. Further, in the absence of vehi cle logbooks, 
audit could not verify the veracity of expenditure of ₹1.87 crore incurred by the POs of  
Karimnagar and Jayashankar Bhupalapally towards water sprinklers. 
Management replied (September 2022) that stock figures were updated in the Oracle based 
SSMMS software only after their certification by the POs and reconciliation of differences, 
if any. It was further stated that since sprinkling of water by tractors was carried out by 
local villagers, much documentation was not insisted  upon. However, Logbooks will be 
maintained henceforth and submitted during next audit.  
Government agreed (January 2023) to advise TSMDCL to improve the existing system of 
maintenance of records and their authentication from time to time. 
In the Exit Conference management accepted the audit observation and assured to improve 
the maintenance of records. Government concurred with the views of TSMDCL.    
Recommendation 4: Government may ensure that TSMDCL puts proper monitoring 
mechanism in place namely, installation of CCTV cameras, Weighbridges and 
maintenance of Stock Registers at sand reaches and stockyards. 
Recommendation 5: Department of Mines & Geology may consider using Remote 
Sensing Mapping or Drone enabled (Intelligent Video Surveillance) technology to 
monitor and regulate the sand excavations effectively. 

Report of the CAG on PSUs for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 26  
2.3.3  Dispatch of sand without obtaining the permit and without paying requisite 
fees for sand 
Rule No.5 (1) (d) of TSSM Rules stipulated that TSMDCL shall extract and dispatch sand 
from the allotted sand bearing area to the approved stockyard along with the sand dispatch 
permit (i.e., the waybill in Form -S2) obtained from the ADM&G after paying in advance 
the Seigniorage Fee (SF) of ₹40 per CBM and other taxes (i.e., District Mineral Foundation 
Trust (DMFT) 7 at the rate of 30 per cent of SF and State Mineral Exploration Trust 
(SMET)8 at the rate of two per cent of SF) for the quantity of sand proposed for extraction. 
Audit noticed that TSMDCL excavated and dispatched sand from the allotted sand bearing 
areas without obtaining sand dispatch permits from ADM&G and also without paying SF, 
DMFT and SMET. Further, Audit noticed that an amount of ₹50.15 crore was due towards 
SF (₹37.99 crore), DMFT (₹11.40 crore) and SMET ( ₹0.76 crore) on 94.98 lakh CBM of 
sand excavated and dispatched by TSMDCL during the year 2020 -21. Further, an amount 
of ₹58.81 crore was due to be paid towards SF, DMFT & SMET on 111.37 lakh CBM of 
sand excavated during 2021-22 by TSMDCL. Thus, audit observed that TSMDCL violated 
the TSSM Rules which attracted penalty  of ₹1,031.75 crore 9. Non -observance of rule 
provisions also resulted in blocking of Government revenue to the extent of ₹108.96 crore.  
Management replied (September 2022) that SF is remitted upto March 2020. Thereafter, 
remittance of SF was held up due to lack of funds with  TSMDCL. An amount of            
₹584.00 crore receivable from Government was pending due to various administrative 
reasons. Soon after receipt of this amount from Government, TSMDCL would remit the 
pending SF. 
Government replied (January 2023) that the sand sale price of ₹600 per CBM included SF 
of ₹40 per CBM. The TSMDCL was collecting the sand sale price at the time of sale of sand 
and remitting the entire sale price to the State exchequer.  
During Exit Conference, Government agreed to examine the matter further. 
The fact remained that both TSMDCL and the DM&G failed to adhere to the TSSM Rules 
resulting in sub-version of the prescribed procedure and blocking of Government revenue  
to the extent of ₹109 crore. 
2.3.4  Discrepancies in the implementation of Sand Taxi 
Rule 3 of the TSSM Rules provided that for enforcement of extraction and transportation 
of sand in I, II and III (from February 2015) order streams, the District Collector (DC) who 
is also the Chairman of DLSC (Rule 4) shall put in place proper administrative mechanism 
comprising of district level authorities from revenue, ground water, irrigation, police, and 
transport departments. 
 
7  A statutory trust to work for the interests, benefits and sustainable development of areas affected by 
mining and mining related operations in the district 
8  A statutory trust to promote mineral exploration in the State 
9  ₹1,031.75 crore [(94.98 lakh CBM + 111.37 lakh CBM) X ₹500 per CBM] 

Chapter II – Performance Audit 
Page 27  
District Level Sand Committee, (DLSC) Peddapalli under PO Karimnagar first introduced 
(February 2017) Sand Taxi Management System (STMS popularly known as Mana Isuka 
Vahanam or Sand Taxi) with the objective of curtailing illegal transportation and 
interference of middlemen in the supply of sand from I, II and III order streams.  Sand Taxi 
is an online web application where public  can book sand through online portal and get it 
delivered at their doorstep through authorised tractors at affordable rates. The Sand 
Management Society (SMS) under the Chairmanship of the DC looked after the policy 
framework, implementation, functions, vigilance activities and disciplinary action on the 
Sand Taxi. The STMS was maintained and operated by the Center for Good Governance, 
Gachibowli, Hyderabad (CGG). Other DLSCs like Mahaboobnagar, Nalgonda, 
Karimnagar, Gadwal and Wanaparthy started (April 2018) emulating the Sand Taxi system 
owing to successful implementation of Sand Taxi by DLSC, Peddapalli. From a review of 
implementation of Sand Taxi in the revenue districts covered by the selected POs of 
TSMDCL audit observed the following. 
2.3.4.1    Excavation and transportation of excess quantity of sand 
The SMS Bhadradri Kothagudem approved extraction and transportation of sand within 
the specified geo co -ordinates for a defined period ( six months to one year) from the 
commencement of sand excavation  or completion of the approved quantity whichever is 
earlier.  
Audit noticed that as against 1.60 lakh CBM of sand approved (October 2019 to March 
2021) for extraction from 15 sand reaches by the SMS, Bhadradri Kothagudem, the actual 
quantity of sand excav ated and transported through the Sand Taxi was 2.82 lakh CBM. 
Thus, huge excess quantity of 1.22 lakh CBM was extracted and transported over and above 
the approved quantity.  
Thus, audit observed that there was unauthorised/ illegal excavation and transportation of 
sand under Sand Taxi. However, the ADM&G Bhadradri Kothagudem received the SF and 
other taxes for the over exploited quantities also. The over extraction went un -noticed 
because the STMS software did not provide for limiting the customer bookings on the web 
portal once the permitted quantity from a particular sand reach gets exhausted. Hence, audit 
observed that the objective of curtailing illegal transportation through Sand Taxi for sand 
reaches of I, II and III order streams could not be ensured by the SMS concerned. 
Government replied (January 2023) that ADM&G Bhadradri Kothagudem has confirmed that 
the excess extraction and sale of sand occurred due to the glitch in the STMS software as 
pointed out by audit. 
In the Exit Conference, Gove rnment agreed to examine the issues raised by audit in 
consultation with the DLSC Bhadradri Kothagudem. 
2.3.4.2    GPS devices were not installed in the tractors transporting the sand 
As per the Sand Taxi policy, every owner of the tractor willing to engage his vehicle as a 
Sand Taxi should make an application to the Revenue Divisional Officer duly depositing 

Report of the CAG on PSUs for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 28  
refundable advance deposit amount of ₹25,000.00. Also, the tractor shall be installed with 
GPS device to tag the vehicle and monitor its movement while transporting the sand. 
Under SMS, Karimnagar , 1,712 tractors and under SMS, Peddapalli , 1,461 tractors were 
registered as Sand Taxis. However, details of deposit collected from the tractor owners 
were not available with the ADM&Gs concerned. Further, GPS devices were installed in  
only 235 tractors under SMS, Peddapalli. Details of installation of GPS devices in the 
tractors under SMS, Karimnagar were not available with the ADM&G, Karimnagar.  
Thus, audit observed that the objective of curtailing illegal transportation through 
monitoring the movement of Sand Taxi could not be ensured by the SMS concerned.  
Government replied (January 2023) that ADM&G Karimnagar had proposed to increase the 
vehicle registration fee from ₹300 to ₹1,000 to enable installation of GPS devices in the  
tractors and after DLSC’s approval the same will be implemented. Further, ADM&G 
Peddapalli informed that installation of GPS in all the tractors was not insisted since the 
tractors registered under Sand Taxi were also used for other purposes. 
In the Exit Conference, Government agreed to examine the issues raised by audit in 
consultation with the DLSCs concerned. 
2.3.5  Inaction in cases of excavation of sand beyond the permitted limits 
Rule 5 (1) (k) and Rule 7 (5) (f) (i) of the TSSM Rules stipulated that penalty of 
₹1,00,000.00 or ₹500.00 per CBM whichever is higher shall be imposed on the licensee 
(TSMDCL) if sand is excavated or de -casted beyond the specified limits (approved 
quantity) or more than the stipulated thickness/ depth. Further, as per the Manual of the 
DM&G, the ADM&G and the Royalty Inspector at the district level were required to 
periodically inspect mineral mines. 
Review of sand raising contracts awarded by the selected POs of Jayashankar Bhupalapally, 
Bhadradri Kothagudem and Karimnagar revealed that the ADM&G did not carry out periodical 
inspection of the sand reaches licensed to TSMDCL. Further, even in the cases where excess 
excavation of sand was noticed during field inspection by the ADM&G and the TSMDCL, the 
DM&G did not levy the prescribed penalties. Few such instances are discussed below. 
2.3.5.1    N on levy of penalty on the licensee for excavation of sand beyond the 
specified limits at Chenchupally 
During the joint inspection (April 2016) by the ADM&G, Warangal and TSMDCL of the 
sand reach at Chenchupally village, it was noticed that out of the quantity of 1,79,452.80 CBM 
of sand permitted to be excavated during March 2016 to March 2021, the sand raising  
contractor (SR Contractor -1) excavated a tot al of 98,991.50 CBM outside the geo                
co-ordinates as g iven in the Approved Mining Plan. Out of this quantity, TSMDCL had 
already sold 28,991.50 CBM and a quantity of 70,000 CBM was available in the stockyard 
as on the date of the joint inspection.   

Chapter II – Performance Audit 
Page 29  
Accepting the plea (August 2016) of TSMDCL that the sand exc avated outside the geo    
co-ordinates was stacked properly in the authorised stockyard, sold online to the general 
public and the sale amount was remitted directly to the Government Treasury, the GoTS 
permitted (August 2016) the TSMDCL to sell the balance quantity of sand available in the 
stockyard by forfeiting the sand raising cost payable to the Sand Raising Contractor-1.  
The Sand Raising Contractor-1 however, challenged this decision of the GoTS before the 
honorable High Court of Telangana (High Court) which directed (January 2018) the GoTS 
and the TSMDCL to pay the remuneration, subject to deduction of reasonable 
compensation. Accordingly, the GoTS ordered (April 2018) TSMDCL to deduct 50 per cent 
of the remuneration payable to the SR Contractor-1 who again challenged the GoTS  
decision before the honorable High Court. The High Court in its order (September 2018) 
directed that entire remuneration should be paid to the SR Contractor -1 and observed that 
since TSMDCL had entered into agreem ent with the ADM&G for sand mining, the Sand 
Raising Contractor-1 who undertook the entire activity under the supervision and control 
of TSMDCL was not recognised as a party to the contract for sand mining.  
Audit also observed that in addition to the quan tity of 98,991.50 CBM excavated outside 
the geo-coordinates, the Sand Raising Contractor-1 excavated 37,633.20 CBM in excess of 
the permitted quantity of 1,79,452.80 CBM from the same sand reach.  
Thus, audit observed that although it was a clear case of illegal mining as TSMDCL failed to 
ensure that sand mining was carried out within the specified geo co -ordinates, the DM&G 
did not take any action to impose penalty of ₹6.83 crore [(98,991.50 CBM + 37,633.20   
CBM) X ₹500 per CBM] on TSMDCL. 
Management replied (September 2022) that mining beyond the permitted geo co-ordinates 
occurred since the society members were innocent local tribals unaware of Rules and 
Regulations. However, the excess excavated sand was sold through TSMDCL and the sale 
proceeds were r emitted to the Government.  Government did not furnish any  reply   
(January 2023). 
The reply is not acceptable because in the instant case also the tribal society engaged a    
non-tribal third party as their nominated contractor who are experienced contractor in this 
field and ignorance of the rules cannot be accepted.  
2.3.5.2    L enient action on illegal excavation of sand beyond the specified depth 
at Ramaraopet 
During inspection (June 2017) of the sand reach at Ramaraopet village the ADM&G, 
Bhadradri Kothagudem noticed that out of the 1,25,124 CBM of sand excavated by the 
sand raising contractor (SR Contractor -2), a quantity of 6,188 CBM was excavated in 25 
pits by digging sand up to a depth of 1.75 meters (on average) which was more t han the 
permitted depth of one meter. Accordingly, the ADM&G served (July 2017) notice to 
TSMDCL and imposed (September 2017) a penalty of ₹30.94 lakh (6,188 CBM X ₹500 
per CBM).  

Report of the CAG on PSUs for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 30  
The TSMDCL filed (October 2017) an appeal before the DM&G on the grounds that the 
joint inspection was conducted after the closure of activities at the sand reach without the 
involvement of its authorised officials, an opportunity of being heard was not of fered and 
issue of demand notice without considering the reply submitted by TSMDCL. However, 
observing that opportunity of personal hearing was accorded and that TSMDCL sold the 
entire quantity of 1,25,124 CBM duly paying the SF in advance, the DM&G dismis sed 
(January 2020) the appeal and advised TSMDCL to file revision petition before the 
Government for waiving the penalty. The TSMDCL however, after a lapse of more than 
two years filed (April 2022) an appeal before the GoTS for waiver of penalty. Reasons for 
such delay were not forthcoming from the records produced to audit. Further, no such 
waiver was allowed by the GoTS till date (May 2022).  
Audit observed that TSMDCL failed to monitor sand raising activities effectively to see that 
sand was not excavated beyond the specified depth. However, the DM&G issued prejudicial 
orders instead of promptly acting against TSMDCL to impose the penalty of ₹30.94 lakh. 
Management replied (September 2022) that Government heard (August 2022) the revision 
petition filed by  TSMDCL for waiver of penalty and orders were awaited.  Government 
confirmed (January 2023) the management’s reply. 
The reply is not tenable because after holding TSMDCL liable for the illegal excavation of 
sand, the DM&G should have imposed and recovered the applicable penalty. However, this 
was not done resulting in non-compliance of the TSSM Rules. 
2.3.5.3    De-casting of sand by pattadars beyond the specified quantity 
Audit reviewed 22 (out of 89) cases of patta lands de -casted during the period from       
2016-17 to 2020 -21 at PO Bhadradri Kothagudem (BDKG) and observed that in three 
cases, pattdars had de -casted excess quantity (1,097 CBM) of sand than the quantity 
(44,289 CBM) approved by the DLSC, BDKG. This indicated that TSMDCL did not 
effectively supervise the de -casting activity done by pattadars in their patta lands. The 
ADM&G however, did not hold TSMDCL responsible for its deficient monitoring and did 
not impose the applicable penalty of ₹5.49 lakh (1,097 CBM X ₹500 per CBM).  
Management replied (September 2022) that the actual sand excess de -casted was only up 
to 450 CBM. Further, TSMDCL had not released the raising cost to the pattadars towards 
the excess de -casted quantity but remitted the s ale amount against the excess de -casted 
quantity into Government Treasury. 
Government concurred (January 2023) with the management’s reply. 
The reply is not acceptable because the Sand Sale Management and Monitoring System 
(SSMMS) web portal of TSMDCL depicted the above excess de-casted quantities against 
the quantity approved by the DLSC. Further, withholding of the raising cost payable to the 
pattadars was not legally permissible (refer Para 2.3.5.1 above) and hence, not a remedy. 

Chapter II – Performance Audit 
Page 31  
In view of the foregoing, audit observed that the above instances of excavation of sand 
beyond permitted limits were in violation of the NSM Policy, the TSSM Rules, approvals 
accorded by the DLSCs and the conditions appended to the Environmental Clearance 
Certificate. However, as the NSM Policy and the TSSM Rules made TSMDCL liable for any 
type of illegal sand mining, both the DM&G and the TSMDCL pleaded unjustified excuses 
of payment of SF, remittance of sale proceeds to Government Treasury and no revenue loss 
suffered by Government to avoid levy and payment of applicable penalty. Therefore, DM&G 
and the TSMDCL dealt with the identified cases of sand mining beyond the permissible limits 
by the sand raising contractors and pattadars as a matter of routine. This indicated that both 
the DM&G and the TSMDCL were not acting firmly against identified cases of illegal sand 
mining. Hence, the casual implementation of the NSM Policy and the TSSM Rules rendered 
them ineffective in curbing the illegal sand mining in the State. 
In the Exit Conference, Government agreed to examine audit’s suggestion to make the 
actual perpetuators liable for the illegal mining through suitable amendments to the policy. 
Recommendation 6: Government may consider incorporating suitable provisions in the 
NSM Policy and the TSSM Rules to bring sand raising contractors and pattadars under 
the ambit of penalty provisions for breach of any contractual obligations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Report of the CAG on PSUs for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 32  
2.4 Addressing Environmental concerns related to sand mining 
Summary 
The District Survey Report meant to map the sand sources available in a district to enable 
excavation of sand in a systematic manner was not prepared for any of the districts under 
the selected POs up to January 2020. Further, monitoring of the impact of sand mining 
through photographing of project sites and recording of changes in the ground water levels 
was not done. The TSMDCL did not incur the committed capital and revenue expenditure 
towards environmental protection measures as required under the conditions governing the 
Environmental Clearance.  
The concerns raised by M -Sand manufacturing industry were not properly addressed 
resulting in non-extension of the incentives and concessions envisaged under the NSM Policy 
and TSSM Rules. The DLSCs also did not promote the manufacture and use of M-Sand. The 
TSMDCL also did not establish a crusher for manufacturing M-Sand even though the lease 
period was due to expire in November 2023. Further, TSMDCL diverted 94.71 per cent of 
the Road Damage Charges collected during the period 2016-17 to 2020-21 for other than the 
specified purposes. Moreover, de-casting of patta lands located in the midst of the Godavari 
riverbed was permitted before TSMDCL obtained necessary statutory clearances. 
Introduction 
Rule 4 (iv) (b) of TSSM Rules required TSMDCL to obtain (i) Ap proved Mining Plan 
(AMP) from the DM&G, (ii) Environmental Clearance (EC) from the State Level 
Environment Impact Assessment Authority (SEIAA) and (iii) Consent for Establishment 
(CFE), Consent for Operation (CFO) from the Telangana State Pollution Control  Board 
(TSPCB). Also, Rule 5 (1) (b) of the TSSM Rules stipulated that TSMDCL should excavate 
sand as per the approved AMP and other conditions laid in the clearances issued under the 
River Conservancy Act, 1884, the WALTA Act, 2002, the Environment Protec tion Act, 
1986 and Air & Water Pollution Prevention Act, 1974 and amendments thereon or any 
suitable subsequent Act/ Rules issued by Government from time to time. Further, the 
MoE,F&CC issued SSMM Guidelines with the objective to ensure sustainable sand mining 
and environment friendly management practices  to restore and maintain the ecology of 
river and other sand sources. Audit reviewed the above mechanism put place to protect the 
environment from the effects of sand mining and observed the following. 
2.4.1 Mapping and monitoring of sand sources not done 
The SSMM Guidelines mandatorily required mapping of sand resources and monitoring of 
the mined-out material for management of sustainable sand extraction. Accordingly, the 
SSMM Guidelines sti pulated preparation of District Survey Report (DSR) by a District 
Environment Impact Assessment Authority (DEIAA) for mapping the sand sources 
available in a district to identify the rivers, streams and other sources suitable for extraction 

Chapter II – Performance Audit 
Page 33  
of sand, their carrying capacity and the maximum quantity to be extracted in a systematic 
manner. 
The SSMM Guidelines further stipulated that, photographs of the project sites should be 
taken prior to excavation to document the baseline conditions, and again during each 
monitoring session. Photos should be taken twice a year and photos of structures nearby like 
outfalls/ off-takes, intakes, bridges and other structures were to be regularly taken. Similarly, 
monitoring wells were to be established adjacent to each off-channel flood plain excavation 
to record changes in ground water levels. Measurements should be taken monthly to help 
analyses of surface water and ground water interaction along the sand reaches. This has to be 
done by the Environment Clearance holder and duly checked and assessed by the DEIAA. 
Audit noticed that though the SSMM Guidelines were communicated by GoI in March 
2016, the DSR was not prepared for any of the districts under the selected POs up to January 
2020. Further, monitoring of the impact of sand mining through photographing of pro ject 
sites and recording of changes in the ground water levels was not done. Thus, audit 
observed that the recommended action for sustainable sand mining was not taken. 
Management replied (September 2022) that DSRs were prepared for nine districts. 
Government stated that DSRs were prepared for the districts having IV and above order 
streams where sand deposits were available. 
In the Exit Conference, TSMDCL stated that DSR has been prepared in respect of the sand 
bearing districts. Government concurred with the views of TSMDCL. 
The fact remained that DSRs were prepared after a delay of more than four years. Further, 
TSMDCL has not confirmed whether the DSRs were approved for implementation.  
2.4.2  Non-compliance of the conditions governing the Environmental Clearance 
The ECs issued by the State Level Environment Impact Assessment Authority (SEIAA) 
inter-alia specified the conditions to; 
➢ take up plantation on both sides of approach road between the river bund and main road 
to absorb dust and other particles around sand mining area. 
➢ incur prescribed capital and revenue expenditure for Environmental Protection Measures 
(EPMs) and to keep the funds in separate account and not to divert for any other 
purposes. 
➢ set up separate Environment Management Ce ll (EMC) with suitably qualified persons 
to implement the environmental protection measures. 
➢ report the year wise expenditure on EPMs and to submit half -yearly reports on 
compliance with the EC conditions to Regional Office of MoE,F&CC at Chennai. 
During 2016-17 to 2020-21, TSMDCL obtained 29 ECs (PO’s Bhadradri Kothagudem and 
Jayashankar Bhupalapally) and committed to incur capital expenditure of ₹65.39 lakh and 
annual revenue expenditure of ₹41.21 lakh for EPMs. Similarly, TSMDCL in the Report 

Report of the CAG on PSUs for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 34  
(January 2021) on Environmental Impact Assessment of De-siltation of sand at Annaram 
and Medigadda barrages (EIAD Report) under PO Jayashankar Bhupalapally estimated to 
incur capital expenditure of ₹13.50 lakh and annual revenue expenditure of ₹11.00 lakh for 
(a) barricading of dredge area in riverbed to avoid fall of animals, (b) plantation of trees at 
river bund and stockyards, (c) providing enclosures and seep traps at stockyards to avoid 
dust emission and to collect seepage water, (d) annual silt deposit ratio studies to fix depth 
of de -silting and (e) environmental monitoring of water, air, noise and ground water 
fluctuations in the surrounding areas of de-siltation.  
From a review of records of selected POs and Joint Physical Verification (JPV) of selected 
stockyards, audit observed that TSMDCL did not implement any of these EPMs. Details of 
constitution and functioning of EMC, expenditure details and half -yearly compliance 
reports submitted to MoE,F&CC were not made available to audit. Also, as of March 2021, 
TSMDCL was to incur capital expenditure of ₹78.89 lakh  and cumulative revenue 
expenditure of ₹1.66 crore. Details of expenditure incurred on EPM were also not furnished 
to audit. 
Management replied (September 2022) that there was no environmental impact due to sand 
mining since the operations were carried out manually, up to the specified depth, non-release 
of affluents and non-removal of plants. Hence, the conditions mentioned in Schedule A of 
the CFE and CFO are not applicable to sand mining activity . It was further stated that 
(a) due to presence of guide bund along the de -siltation area, there was no need for 
barricading, (b) farmers objected to plantation at stockyards because they had to use the land 
for cultivation after dispatches from stockyards, (c) seep traps were provided and water was 
sprinkled at required locations to avoid dust emissions, (d) scienti fic study of annual sand 
deposit ratio was conducted, (e) the dredged areas were located in areas which were safe in 
terms of ground water levels and (f) expenditure of ₹1.66 crore was incurred on EPMs . 
However, TSMDCL would maintain separate record of expenditure incurred for EPMs. 
In its reply (January 2023) and in the Exit Conference, Government concurred with the reply 
of TSMDCL. 
Reply is not acceptable because while obtaining the ECs, TSMDCL committed to undertake 
EPMs by incurring the specified amount of expenditure. However, TSMDCL failed to 
undertake any steps for protecting the environment. Further, the reply is also contradictory 
to the suggestions made by TSMDCL in the EIAD Report. The reply is also silent ab out 
the formation, functioning of EMC and submission of the required reports by TSMDCL to 
the MoE,F&CC.   
Recommendation 7: Government may direct TSMDCL to comply with the conditions 
governing Environmental Clearance, the SSMM Guidelines and the TSSM Rules. 
2.4.3  Non-promotion of ‘Manufactured Sand’ as an alternative to natural sand  
The NSM Policy and the TSSM Rules identified Crushed Stone Sand or Manufactured 
Sand (M-Sand) as a viable alternative to reduce the pressure on ordinary/ riverbed/ natural 

Chapter II – Performance Audit 
Page 35  
sand in the State. It was also proposed to mandate the Government Departments to use  at 
least 50 per cent of M-Sand in Government constructions. Further, certain incentives like 
industry status, Value Added Tax and power subsidies were proposed to be provided to 100 
per cent M-Sand manufacturing units to make M-Sand available at affordable cost to meet 
the requirement of bulk consumers. The annual demand for sand in Telangana State was 
estimated (March 2018) at 125 lakh CBM as against its availability of 70 lakh CBM. The 
availability of M-Sand capacity was assessed at 40 lakh CBM. 
The M-Sand Manufacturers Association (MSMA) in its representation (October 2017) to the 
Government stated that three stage crushing, shaping, and screening plants produce M-Sand 
in the ratio of 50 per cent coarse aggregates and 50 per cent M-Sand. Due to factors like rock 
index and installed plant technology, production of 100 per cent M-Sand is practically not 
possible. The MSMA also suggested exemption from mining royalty, Goods and Services 
Tax (GST) for a specified period and priority in allocation of mines besides making use of  
M-Sand compulsory for all Government projects. The GoTS could have considered reduction 
of the limit of 100 per cent M-Sand production as requested by M -Sand manufacturing 
industry. The GoTS however, issued (May 2018) orders merely directing all its engineering 
works departments to use M-Sand and natural sand in the ratio of 50:50.  
Audit observed that the GoTS did not properly address the concerns raised by the MSMA by 
not reducing output ratio of M-sand from 100 per cent to 50 per cent and as a result, they are 
not eligible for the incentives and concessions envisaged under the NSM Policy and TSSM 
Rules. The DLSCs of the districts covered by the selected POs of Jayashankar Bhupalapally, 
Bhadradri Kothagudem and Karimnagar did not discuss any issu es for promoting the 
manufacture and use of M-Sand as per the orders issued by the GoTS.  
Audit also noticed that TSMDCL proposed (October 2017) to establish a crusher for 
manufacture of road metal aggregates and sand in 33.50 acres of land taken (November  
2008) on lease for 15 years (annual dead rent was ₹31.89 lakh) in the Bandaraviryala  
mining zone, Hayatnagar mandal, Ranga Reddy district. On receipt (June 2018) of GoTS 
permission to undertake quarry operations, TSMDCL applied for EC and other statutory 
clearances to the Telangana State Pollution Control Board (TSPCB). However, TSMDCL 
could not conduct public hearing and obtain the statutory clearances till date (March 2022).  
Audit observed that despite incurring unfruitful expenditure of ₹4.15 crore on dead rent for 
13 years (₹2.23 crore for seven years since the announcement of NSM Policy), TSMDCL 
did not establish a crusher for manufacturing M-Sand even though the lease period was due 
to expire in November 2023. 
Management replied (April 2022) that though public hearings were planned to be conducted, 
the same could not be held due to Greater Hyderabad Municipal Corporation (GHMC) 
elections (December 2020) and non-availability of police protection (January 2021). It was 
further stated that TSMDCL did n ot have information about other M-Sand manufacturing 
units in the State. 

Report of the CAG on PSUs for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 36  
The DM&G replied (December 2021) that stone crushing units did not come forward to 
manufacture M-Sand due to cheap availability of river sand and high cost involved in 
maintenance of M-Sand manufacturing units. 
Government reiterated (January 2023) that TSSM Rules mandated Government 
departments to use at least 50 per cent of M-Sand in Government constructions. 
The reply is not acceptable because the DM&G did not take constructive steps t o promote 
M-Sand and restricted the policy to a mere prescription for use of M -Sand for the 
Government projects. Thus, the objective of NSM Policy to promote the M -Sand as an 
alternative to natural sand was not achieved. 
Recommendation 8: Government may consider framing suitable guidelines for 
extending the benefits envisaged under the NSM Policy and TSSM Rules to the M-Sand 
manufacturers. 
2.4.4  Diversion of Road Damage Charges 
In addition to sand cost, the GoTS permitted (March 2016) TSMDCL to collect Road 
Damage Charges (RDC) ranging between ₹150 and ₹250 based on the carrying capacity  
(measured by the number of tyres) of vehicles used for transportation of sand. The RDC 
receipts were to be kept in separate account and utilised for the development, refurbishment 
and maintenance of roads leading to TSMDCL stockyards. The GoTS also advised 
TSMDCL to evolve a mechanism to periodically monitor the receipts and payments of 
RDC from the separate account and inform the result thereon to the Government.  
Accordingly, the BoD of TSMDCL approved (July 2016) the following guidelines for 
utilisation of the RDC funds. 
(i) To take up any new work of laying approach road from stockyard to connecting main 
road for sand transportation at the de-siltation sand reaches and specified sand bearing areas, 
(ii) To take up repair and maintenance of the existing approach road from stockyard to 
connecting main road for sand transportation at the de-siltation sand reaches and specified 
sand bearing areas, 
(iii) To relay the road, if needed by the road owning department based on their estimates, 
by TSMDCL itself duly following the tender process, and  
(iv) To take up road work for patta lands in an exceptional situation when the assessed 
sand quantity is huge.  
The GoTS further directed (April 2018) TSMDCL to meet the expenditure on payment of 
compensation to accident victims due to sand lorries from RDC fund. 
Details of RDC collected and  utilised during the years 2016 -17 to 2020-21 were as given 
in the Table 2.1. 
 

Chapter II – Performance Audit 
Page 37  
Table 2.1: Details of RDC collected and utilised 
(Amount in ₹ crore) 
Year RDC 
collected 
RDC utilised for specified purposes RDC 
utilised for 
other 
purposes 
Closing 
Balance Compensation 
paid to road 
accident victims 
Road 
repairs Total 
2016-17 12.64 0.00 0.29 0.29 11.64 0.71 
2017-18 25.68 0.00 3.19 3.19 15.63 7.57 
2018-19 70.87 0.15 0.19 0.34 77.70 0.40 
2019-20 48.06 0.25 1.30 1.55 42.98 3.93 
2020-21 14.07 0.40 0.02 0.42 14.32 3.26 
Total 171.32 0.80 4.99 5.79 162.27  
Source: Records and information furnished by TSMDCL 
Audit noticed that out of ₹171.32 crore RDC funds collected during the period 2016-17 to 
2020-21, TSMDCL utilised ₹162.27 crore (94.71 per cent) for other purposes than the 
specified one like payment of statutory dues such as Income Tax, GST and general  
operational expenses. Thus, audit observed that TSMDCL diverted the RDC funds for other 
purposes in contravention of the Government’s guidelines. Such diversion of funds became 
possible because Government fixed the RDC far in excess of the actual requirement for the 
specified purposes. Consequently, the public consumers had to bear this extra burden. 
Management accepted (September 2022) that funds were diverted from RDC account but 
stated that statutory dues were paid from RDC funds as their non -payment in time attracts 
penalties. It was also stated that these payments were made from RDC funds as ₹473.23 crore 
(as of May 2022) towards sand operational expenses, supporting charges were not received 
from the Government in time. On receipt of pending dues from th e Government, the RDC 
fund would be recouped. Government concurred (January 2023) with the management’s reply. 
The diversion of RDC funds citing delay in receipt of operational expenses and support 
charges from the Government is not tenable.   
In the Exit Conference, the Government concurred with the reply of TSMDCL. 
The fact remained that the purpose of collection of RDC was defeated as meagre (five           
per cent) funds were spent for road repairs, etc. 
2.4.5  Irregular permission for de -casting of patta lands located in midst of 
the Godavari River without any statutory clearances  
Sub Clause 8 of Rule 7 of TSSM Rules provided that the District Level Sand Committee 
(DLSC) shall allot patta lands located in the mi dst of riverbed/ course to TSMDCL for     
de-casting sand only after TSMDCL submits statutory approvals such as Approved Mining 
Plan (AMP) from the DM&G, EC from State Level Environment Impact Assessment 
Authority (SEIAA), Consent for Establishment (CFE)/ Consent for Operation (CFO) from 
Telangana State Pollution Control Board (TSPCB).  

Report of the CAG on PSUs for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 38  
The Mandal Revenue Office, Manuguru Mandal, Khammam District assigned (2003) 
agricultural land pattas to an extent of 78.35 acres in the Godavari riverbed in Ramanujavaram 
Village to 64 pattadars/ villagers without assigning any survey numbers or effecting any 
changes in the Pahani or the Village Map. These lands were matted with sand during  the 
Godavari floods in 2013. The assignees represented (December 2014) to the Minister for 
Mines and Geology, GoTS to permit for the de-casting of sand from their assigned lands to 
make them fit for agriculture. Accordingly, this issue was discussed in the DLSC of 
Khammam (February and July 2016) and it was decided to allow for the de-casting of sand.  
The images obtained by audit from Google Earth Pro incorporating the geo co -ordinate 
boundaries of these patta lands showed that they were located in the midst of the Godavari 
River. Thus, de-casting of sand from these patta lands required obtaining of above statutory 
clearances by TSMDCL from the respective authorities. 
 
Figure 2.1: Photo taken from Google Earth Pro on 9 December 2021 
However, DLSC, Khammam without directing TSMDCL to get the necessary statutory 
clearances such as EC, CFE and CFO gave permission to TSMDCL to commence the        
de-casting of sand. Accordingly, TSMDCL entered into  de-casting agreement (September 
to November 2016) with above pattadars for de-casting 6.38 lakh CBM of sand. Under 
these agreements, TSMDCL excavated total 6.28 lakh CBM of sand. Audit observed that 
DLSC Khammam contravened the TSSM Rules by permitting TSMDCL to de -cast sand 
from these patta lands located in the midst of the Godavari riverbed, before TSMDCL obtained 
necessary statutory clearances. 
Management replied (September 2022) that the condition to obtain Environmental 
Clearance, Consent for Establishment, Consent for Op eration was not mentioned in the 
DLSC’s approval. It was further stated that the exact location of these lands cannot be 
decided as per Google images without physical inspection. These lands were located 


Chapter II – Performance Audit 
Page 39  
adjacent to the Godavari River and the River Authority namely, the Irrigation Department 
never mentioned that these lands were falling in the river course. 
Government concurred (January 2023) with the management’s reply. 
In the Exit Conference, TSMDCL contended that the DLSC ’s approvals are based on the 
submissions of the representatives of the Irrigation Department who did not declare that 
these lands were lying amidst the river course. Government concurred with the views of 
TSMDCL. 
The reply is not acceptable because as per the TSSM Rules, the TSMDCL was required to 
obtain necessary statutory clearances before excavating sand . Further, the TSSM Rules 
require the DLSC to identify the specific sand bearing area based on the geo co -ordinates 
to be fixed by the Ground Water Department and not th e Irrigation Department as 
contended by TSMDCL. Based on the  geo co -ordinates as indicated in the DLSC’s 
approval letters, Audit also obtained the Google image of the location of the patta lands. 

 
 
 
Chapter III 
Pages 41 - 63 
Compliance Audit Observations 

 
 

 Chapter III – Compliance Audit Observations 
 
  
Chapter III – Compliance Audit Observations 
Municipal Administration and Urban Development Department  
Hyderabad Metro Rail Limited 
3.1 Hyderabad Metro Rail Project 
Summary 
The Government of Telangana (GoTS) envisaged Hyderabad Metro Rail Project to cater to 
the needs of passengers commuting on the busy road traffic corridors of Hyderabad City. 
Audit observed that there were delays in finalisation of metro corridors, acquisition of lands 
and properties resulting in delayed operationalisation of the Project and also resulted in cost 
escalation.  The stations, parking and circulation areas were not developed as envisaged in 
the Concession Agreement (CA) and the Project was not yet complete. As a result, the 
Concessionaire was unduly benefitted by ₹227.19 crore. Further, the project cost was bound 
to escalate and the Project was unlikely to achieve the expected ridership. The transition of 
the CA to the Central Metro Acts was not properly handled resulting in fixation of higher 
fares by the Concessionaire ignoring the specific provisions of the CA. There were also 
issues relating to adherence to the Concession Agreement conditions and contract 
management resulting in idling of assets, extra expenditure and losses. Thus, the Project 
could not achieve its intended objectives. 
Introduction 
The development of a rail-based Mass Rapid Transit System (MRTS) was recommended by 
different studies commissioned by the State Government to address the problem of traffic 
congestion in Hyderabad. Further, the draft National Urban Transport Policy, 2002 of the 
Government of India as well as the Action Plan for Traffic and Transportation Management 
in Hyderabad Metropolitan Area (2008) envisaged a metro rail based urban transport system 
for Hyderabad.  
The State Government engaged Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC) to prepare the 
Detailed Project Report (DPR) for Phase -I of the Hyderabad Metro Rail Project. The 
DMRC provided various alternative proposals with different corridors and routes and 
submitted its first DPR for Corridor I and II in June 2003. The DMRC submitted two more 
DPRs – one for Corridor - III (February 2006) and another for extension  of Corridor - III 
(October 2007).  
The State Government created (April 2007) Hyderabad Metro Rail Limited (Company) as 
a Special Purpose Vehicle to act on its behalf as the Concessioning Authority and a single 
point agency for interacting with the Concess ionaire to monitor timely implementation of 
the Project and oversee its operations & maintenance as per the Concession Agreement 
(CA). The Company functions under the administrative control of Municipal 
Administration and Urban Development (MA&UD) Department of the State Government 
and is governed by a Board of Directors (BoD) headed by a non -executive Chairman. 
Managing Director is the Chief Executive Officer of the Company and is assisted by five 
Technical Executives and four General Managers. 

 Report of the CAG on PSUs for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 42  
About the Project 
Phase-I of the Hyderabad Metro Rail Project (Project) was envisaged with three fully elevated 
corridors built over the central median of existing high density road corridors of Hyderabad City. 
The Project was to serve 66 metro stations spanning 71.16 Kilo Meters (KM) as given below:   
• Corridor - I - Miyapur to L.B. Nagar - 28.87 KMs - 27 stations, 
•  Corridor - II - Jubilee Bus Station to Falaknuma - 14.78 KMs - 16 stations, and 
•  Corridor - III - Nagole to Raidurg - 27.51 KMs - 23 stations. 
Each of these three corridors was to have a depot located at Miyapur, Falaknuma and Nagole 
respectively. 
The Concessionaire was required to execute the Project on Design, Build, Finance, Operate 
and Transfer (DBFOT) basis while the State Government retained the ownership of the 
Project. The Project was expected to achieve a Target Traffic of 2.14 crore Passenger 
Kilometres (PKM)1 per day as on 1 October, 2024 (Target Date). It was also envisaged that 
Parking and Circulation (P&C) facilities would be provided at 25 stations in 57 acres. The 
Concessionaire was also required to undertake the development, operation and maintenance 
of the Real Estate Development (RED) of six million Square Feet (Sft.) over the P&C 
facilities besides 12.50 milli on Sft. at the depots and exploit the RED for commercial 
purposes. The Concession Period was for 35 years starting from the Appointed Date 2 and 
was extendable for another 25 years subject to fulfilment of conditions of the CA. 
 
Figure 3.1: Hyderabad Metro Rail Route Map 
 
1  PKM means the cumulative distance travelled by users of the rail system in a day  
2  Appointed Date means the date on which financial close (the fulfilment of all the conditions precedent to 
the initial availability of funds under the financing agreements) is achieved or an earlier date that the 
parties may by mutual consent determine, and shall be deemed to be the date of commencement of the 
concession period 


Chapter III – Compliance Audit Observations 
Page 43  
Progress and present status of the Project 
The State Government originally entered (September 2008) into a CA with M/s. MAYTAS 
Metro Limited, Hyderabad (MAYTAS) for development of the Project. However, owing to 
the failure of MAYTAS to furnish the Performance Security and to achieve financial closure 
as per the terms of the CA, the State Government terminated (July 2009) the CA and decided 
(July 2009) to execute the Project through fresh tenders. After completion of the due process, 
the State Government entered (4 September 2010) into a fresh CA with M/s. L&T Hyderabad 
Metro Rail Private Limited (Concessionaire) to execute the Project on DBFOT basis. Th e 
Company fixed 5 July 2012 as the Appointed Date. The Project was scheduled to be 
completed on the 1,826 th day (i.e., 4 July 2017) from the Appointed Date. The Project, 
however, got delayed and the Commercial Operations on part stretches were commissioned 
as detailed below in Table 3.1.1: 
Table 3.1.1: Corridors completed and their Date of Commercial Operation 
Corridor From To No. of 
Stations 
Length 
(KM) 
Commercial 
Operation Date 
1 2 3 4 5 6 
I Miyapur Ameerpet 11 12.187 29 November 2017 
I Ameerpet L.B.Nagar 16 17.015 24 September 2018 
 Sub-Total 27 29.202  
II Jubilee Bus 
Station (JBS) Parade Grounds 0 0.00 Work in halt 
II Parade Grounds MG Bus Station 9 9.66 8 February 2020 
II MG Bus Station Falaknuma 0 0.00 Work in halt 
 Sub-Total 9 9.66  
III Nagole Ameerpet 14 17.560 29 November 2017 
III Ameerpet Hitec City 8 8.645 20 March 2019 
III Hitec City Raidurg 1 1.342 29 November 2019 
 Sub-Total 23 27.547  
 Total 59 66.409  
Source: CA and Company records 
While Corridors I and III were fully completed and operational, the work on Falaknuma depot 
and seven stations of Corridor - II (six stations between MG Bus Station and Falaknuma and the 
station of JBS) was halted due to problems in land acquisition and concerns to save the heritage 
sites enroute. The Project achieved a maximum PKM of 43.32 lakh in February 2020. The 
Company could acquire and hand over to the Concessionaire only 33 acres of the identified 
land parcels at 11 stations. The Company also acquired the balance 24 acres at alternate 
locations and handed over them to the Concessionaire for P&C/ RED. The Concessionaire, 
however, could develop RED of 1.20 million Sft. only. On the sp ecific request of 
Concessionaire, the Company granted extension of time for completion of rest of the Project 
(other than halted works) up to 30 June 2020. 
The Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance, Government of India (GoI) 
approved the Proj ect Cost (PC) of ₹11,814 .00 crore in July 2008 under Public Private 
Partnership mode (PPP). Out of this, the GoI agreed (May 2013) to provide ₹1,458.00 crore as 
Viability Gap Funding (VGF) to the Project under the Scheme for Financial Support to 

 Report of the CAG on PSUs for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 44  
Public Private Partnership in Infrastructure Projects of the GoI. The Concessionaire 
obtained financial closure (i.e., sourcing funds for the project) for ₹16,375.00 crore including 
the above VGF. In addition to the above approved PC, the State Government was expected to 
incur about ₹3,000.00 crore towards cost of land acquisition, shifting of obstructing utilities, 
obtaining Right of Way (RoW), payment for compensation packages, etc. 
The Concession Period was for 35 years. The Concessionaire shall pay the Company by way 
of concession fee a sum of ₹1 .00 (one rupee)  per annum and from the twenty -first year 
commencing from the Commercial Operation Date (COD), pay an additional concession fee 
equal to 0.50 per cent of the total realisable fare during that year to be increased by 0.50 per 
cent annually subject to a ceiling of 10 per cent. Therefore, the Company, at present, does 
not have any direct source of in come and functioned mainly with the assistance of funds 
given by the State Government as interest free loans . During the period from 2010 -11 to 
2019-20, the State Government provided ₹2,246.91 crore to the Company and the Company 
expended a total of ₹2,726.00 crore (including loans taken from other sources) towards 
State Government’s obligations of obtaining RoW, Shifting of Obstructing Utilities etc., 
besides meeting its operating expenditure. 
Audit Scope, Objectives and Methodology 
Audit of the Project was carried out covering the period from March 2003 to November 2020 
(inception to the present stage) to assess whether: 
(a) The Project was implemented as envisaged, 
(b) The Concession Agreement was adhered to by the Government and the 
Concessionaire, and 
(c) Contract management was carried out efficiently. 
The records related to various activities and works undertaken by the Company for 
implementing the Project and available at the Head Office of the Company were selected 
for examination based on  necessity. The Purchase/ Work Orders were selected randomly 
based on materiality. Replies furnished (August 2022) by the State Government are suitably 
incorporated in the Report. 
Audit Findings 
Project implementation 
3.1.1  Delayed finalisation of corridors and routes resulted in cost escalation 
In the first DPR (June 2003), the DMRC considered five alternatives with different 
corridors. The DMRC found that the intensity of utilisation was more in the alternative 
having Corridor - III from Secunderbad to Hitec City. But the DMRC opined that Corridor - III 
was not feasible from engineering point of view as a fully elevated corridor due to steep  
gradients, large number of ups and downs along the alignment and presence of four flyovers 
enroute. Therefore, the DMRC selected the next best alternative with only two corridors 
(Corridors I & II). 
However, in the second DPR (February 2006), the DMRC noted that Hyderabad being one 
of the fastest growing urban agglomerations of the country, the corridors proposed in Phase - I 

Chapter III – Compliance Audit Observations 
Page 45  
need to be extended. Accordingly, the DMRC finalised the route for Corridor - III from the 
Indian Institute of Chemical Technology (IICT) at Tarnaka to Shilpara mam via 
Secunderabad – Hitec City though the same was an engineering impracticability as per the 
first DPR. The DMRC also stated that the alignment for Corridor - III negotiates the existing 
flyovers, Rail Overbridges and other obligatory points enroute wi th safe horizontal and 
vertical clearances. 
The Nagole3  to Ameerpet section4 and Ameerpet to Hitec City section of Corridor - III were 
respectively commissioned as fully elevated corridors between November 2017 to March 
2019. Thus, audit observed that due to delay in finalisation of Corridor - III because of its 
improper evaluation in the first DPR, the Project got delayed by nearly three years (June 2003 
to February 2006) which resulted in escalation of the estimated PC by ₹1,232 .00 crore         
[₹6,387.00 crore (cost of Corridor I, II and III as per DPR -II) - ₹3,205.00 crore (cost of 
Corridor I and II as per DPR-I) - ₹1,950.00 crore (cost of Corridor - III as per DPR-II)]. 
Government replied (August 2022) that though the DPR was prepared in June 2003, no 
decision was taken to go ahead with the Project due to many reasons including resource 
constraints. Government decided to include Corridor  - III in the Project due to growing 
importance of Hitec  City area as a major destination for I nformation Technology 
Companies. By that time DMRC executed its project and gained experience of construction 
in difficult areas similar to Corridor - III. As the actual execution of the Project got delayed, 
there was escalation in costs. 
The reply is not tenable because of the fact that the first DPR studied the traffic demand of 
Corridor - III (Secunderabad – Hitec City) and opined that the intensity of utilisation was the 
highest in the alternative which included Corridor  - III prov ing that the importance of        
Hitec City route was already known and considered. Also, the audit observation is about the 
delay in finalisation of the corridors and routes, and not about the delay in commencement 
of execution of the Project which actually occurred more than six years after the finalisation 
of Secunderabad – Hitec City route of Corridor - III. Further, the Government did not furnish 
any evidence to support the argument that DMRC gained experience and expertise in 
constructing corridors akin to Corridor - III only after the preparation of the first DPR.  
3.1.2 Delay in acquisition of land for Miyapur Depot 
As per the Land Acquisition Policy (February 2005) of the State Government, where the 
government land being procured for infrastructure projects is in dispute, the process of 
acquisition will proceed as per the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 (L.A. Act) 
without prejudice to the case of the Government and money deposited in the court to be given 
to the rightful owners. Further, as per the Enemy Property Act, 1968, (EP Act) all enemy 
properties shall vest with the Custodian of Enemy Properties in India (CEPI). At the district 
level, the District Collector (DC) is appointed as the CEPI under the Defense of India Rules, 
1971. Under the EP Act, the DC on being authorised by the Government is empowered to 
transfer by way of sale, mortgage or lease or otherwise dispose of any of the enemy properties 
 
3  Corridor - III was extended (third DPR of October 2007) by about five kilometres from IICT at Tarnaka to 
Nagole due to problems in acquisition of lands belonging to Osmania University at Tarnaka 
4  Interchange station on Corridor - III 

 Report of the CAG on PSUs for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 46  
and no person including (his legal heirs and successors) shall have or be deemed to have any 
rights in relation to such enemy property (Clauses 5, 5B and 8 (2) (vii) of the EP Act).  
The Depot for Corridor  - I was to be located in 40 h ectares (98.842 acres) of vacant 
Government land in Miyapur area. Accordingly, based on the requisition made (August 
2007) by the Company for acquisition of 104 acres (99 acres for Depot and 5 acres for 
terminal station) in Miyapur village, the District Co llector, Ranga Reddy District 
(Collector, RR District) issued notification dated 06.08.2007 for acquisition of above 
Government lands which were classified as Enemy Properties. However, some private 
persons filed three Writ Petitions against these notifications before the Hon’ble High Court 
of Andhra Pradesh (Court) which issued (August 2007 – December 2008) stay orders and 
the matter remained sub-judice till November 2011.  
In November 2011, the Advocate General appearing on behalf of the State Government and 
the Company filed a memo in the Court seeking leave to withdraw the above notifications 
as the same were observed to have been issued before the delegation of power to the 
Collector, RR District by the State Government. The Advocate General  also sought 
permission to issue fresh notification under the L.A. Act. Accordingly, the Court dismissed 
the above three Writ Petitions. Thereafter, the Collector, RR District issued (12 January 
2012) a fresh notification to acquire 104 acres and determine d (24 March 2012) the 
compensation payable by the Company at ₹192.77 crore. Accordingly, the Company 
deposited (26 March 2012) the amount and took physical possession of land on the same day. 
Thus, audit observed that after withdrawal of impugned notificat ion and issue of fresh 
notification, the State Government took just three months’ time to complete the process for 
acquisition of Miyapur lands. Therefore, citing pendency of court cases for more than four 
years’ time (August 2007 to January 2012 ) was abso lutely unjustified as the State 
Government had the authority under  the LA Act and the Enemy Property Act, 1968 to 
proceed to occupy the said Government Lands/ Enemy Property, which in fact was the 
course of action ultimately adopted by the State Government to acquire the Miyapur lands.  
Audit observed that due to delayed acquisition of Miyapur lands, the declaration of Appointed 
Date got delayed by 16 months5.  After acquiring Miyapur lands, the Company finally fixed 
the Appointed Date as 5 July 2012 against 4 March, 2011 as contemplated in CA.  
The Government replied (August 2022) that informal consultations and efforts made in 
vain to resolve the prolonged legal dispute and to get the stay orders vacated cannot be 
captured on record. As a strategy, the technical lacuna in the notification issued by the DC 
was used in resolving this legal hurdle. 
The reply is not tenable because though pendency of the court cases was a fact, such 
pendency could not have impacted the State Governments right to acquire the said enemy 
property lands for the Project ab-initio in view of the clear provision of the Policy on Land 
Acquisition and the EP Act. Further, the Court dismissed the Writ Petitions not on the basis 
of their merits but on the basis of the technical lacuna in the issue of notifications, which 
 
5   Appointed Date of 05.07.2012 plus 180 days allowed for financial close minus Agreement Date of 
04.09.2010 

Chapter III – Compliance Audit Observations 
Page 47  
the State Government could identify only after a delay of m ore than four years. Also, the 
subsequent action of the State Government/ Company proved that the Miyapur lands could 
have been swiftly acquired for the Project. 
3.1.3  Non-completion of Corridor - II 
As per Annexure-I of Schedule A of the CA, Corridor - II was proposed with 16 stations from 
Jubilee Bus Station (JBS) in Secunderabad to Falaknuma in Hyderabad. Also, Corridor - II 
was also to serve as an interconnection between the two main bus stations of JBS and MG 
Bus Station (MGBS) operated by the State Road Transport Corporation. As per the CA, the 
Concessionaire should undertake the Project on Design, Build, Finance, Operate and Transfer 
(DBFOT) basis. 
Audit however, observed that the station of JBS and six stations 6 beyond MGBS were not 
constructed so far due to problems in land acquisition and concerns to save the heritage sites 
enroute. Thus, Corridor - II involving a total distance of 5.12 KMs (14.78 KMs minus 9.66 
KMs) was still incomplete. Audit further observed that though the Company handed over  
(October 2012) 21 acres of land 7 to the Concessionaire for construction of the depot and 
terminal station at Falaknuma, the same could not be utilised due to cessation of Corridor - II 
at MGBS. Thus, due to the failure of the Company to acquire the required properties and the 
failure of the Concessionaire to come up with an engineering solution to save the heritage 
sites in the Old City area of Hyderabad, the intended benefits of Corridor - II were not yet fully 
realised. Further, the delay in completion of Corridor  - II would escalate the project cost, 
and impact viability of the project and the expected ridership. 
The Government replied (August 2022) that works in the 5.12 KM stretch of Corridor  - II 
could not be taken up along with rest of the Project due to opposition to the  proposed 
alignment from the public representatives of the area  and presence of a large number of 
religious/ heritage and sensitive structures. Alternative alignments proposed by the public 
representatives were only found to be more complicated and unfeasible. However, through 
engineering re-design, the number of affected structures were reduced and at present road 
widening alternatives are being explored. 
The reply confirmed the audit observation that due to non -completion of Corridor - II, its 
intended benefits could not be fully realised. 
Recommendation 1: Government may prepare an action plan to complete Corridor - II 
of the Project at the earliest. Otherwise, ridership will remain low. 
3.1.4  Unrealistic ridership estimates  
As per Article 29 of the CA, the State Government and the Concessionaire have agreed that 
the Passenger Kilometres (PKM)8 per day as on 1 October, 2024 (Target Date) is estimated 
to be 2.14 crore (Target Traffic). They further agreed that in the event the Actual Average 
Traffic (AAT) determined as per Article 22 and Article 29 of the CA falls short of the Target 
Traffic by more than five per cent thereof, then for every one per cent shortfall as compared 
 
6  Salarjung Museum, Charminar, Shalibanda, Shamshergunj, Jangammet and Falaknuma  
7  Taken over from HMDA free of cost 
8  PKM means the cumulative distance travelled by users of the rail system in a day 

 Report of the CAG on PSUs for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 48  
to the Target Traffic, the Concession Period shall, subject to payment of Concession Fee being 
increased by one point five per cent subject to a maximum of seven years. Similarly, if the 
AAT exceeds the Target Traffic, then for every one per cent excess as compared to the Target 
Traffic, the concession period shall, being reduced by one per cent provided that such reduction 
in concession period shall not in any case exceed a maximum period of three and half years.  
As per the Concessionaire Agreement, the total track length of the Project consisting of 
three Corridors was 71.16 KM. The Project was operational since November 2017 and the 
present cumulative track length in all three Corridors is 66.409 KMs. The average PKM per 
day in respect of different periods and length of the tracks is shown in Table 3.1.2 below: 
Table 3.1.2: Actual PKM achieved by the Project 
(PKM in lakhs) 
Length of 
Track 
Months of 
operation 
Highest total PKM in any month 
during the period of operation PKM per day  
1 2 3 4 
29.747 KM Nov. 17 to Sep. 18 346.41 (Sep. 18) 11.55 
46.762 KM Oct. 18 to Mar. 19 705.34 (Mar. 19) 22.75 
55.407 KM Apr. 19 to Nov. 19 1,285.60 (Nov. 19) 42.85 
56.749 KM Dec.19 to Jan. 20 1,202.67 (Dec. 19) 38.80 
66.409 KM Feb. 20 to Mar. 20 1,213.11 (Feb. 20) 43.32 
  Source: Company Records 
Audit observed that the maximum PKM of 43.32 lakh passengers on a particular day was 
recorded in the month of February 2020 which was only 21.68 per cent of the Target Traffic 
of 1.997 crore9 in October, 2024. This was despite the fact that Company initia ted several 
proactive measures to improve the ridership like introduction of merry go round buses, 
shuttle services, app based connectivity through two/ four wheelers, providing pick up and 
drop points for cab services at metro stations, etc., for providin g last mile connectivity. 
Further, the non-completion of the MGBS – Falaknuma section of Corridor - II would also 
have an adverse effect on achievement of the Target Traffic by the Target Date. 
Audit also observed that the Targeted Traffic Date was fixed as 1 October 2024 i.e., nearly 
seven years and seven months from the scheduled time (4 July 2017). But, the CA did not 
consider the effect of likely delays in completion of the Project. Further, the Actual Average 
Traffic once assessed will not be reassesse d again during the Concession Period. Had the 
CA stipulated multiple periods and targets for ridership estimates, the extension/ reduction 
of the concession period could have been more reasonable. Thus, audit observed that the 
possibility of achieving the Targeted Traffic of 2.14 crore PKM especially during the initial 
years of operation itself is very remote and hence, the ridership estimates of the Project are 
highly unrealistic. Moreover, the basis for prescribing varying periods for extension (up to 
seven years) and for reduction (three and half years) of concession period in case of 
shortfall/ excess of the Targeted Traffic by the same percentage is not forthcoming from 
the CA/ records produced to audit. 
 
9  PKM of 2.14 crore / 71.16 KMs X 66.409 KMs 

Chapter III – Compliance Audit Observations 
Page 49  
The Government replied (August 2022) that a fter a lot of deliberations and forethought, a 
small incentive was incorporated in the CA to provide for varying period for extension and 
reduction of the Concession Period as the private sector investors were not coming forward 
to take up projects in PPP mode. 
The reply is not acceptable as the PKM of 2.14 crore as on 1 October 2024 is very high 
ridership and even the highly populated cities like Delhi and Bangalore which have a wide 
metro network could not achieve such high ridership. Further, keeping such unrealistic traffic 
target would lead to extension of concession period beyond  35 years as provided in the 
Concession Agreement. The reply is also silent about the CA not prescribing multiple periods 
and targets for estimating ridership. 
Adherence to the Concession Agreement (CA) 
3.1.5 Construction of station boxes with reduced area in contravention of the CA 
Metro stations had to be built over the existing roads of the city, which cannot be widened 
beyond a point due to presence of buildings, based on the road widths and scope for road 
widening. As per the Annexure I of Schedule A of the CA following parameters have been 
provided for construction of the stations:  
(i) Category I: 12 stations of 20 Meters (Mtr.s) X 135 Mtr.s size (approximate), 
(ii) Category II: 40 stations of 30 Mtr.s X 135 Mtr.s size (approximate), and 
(iii) Category III: 14 stations of more than 30 Mtr.s X 135 Mtr.s size (approximate). 
Category wise RoW provided by the Company and the actual size of the stations 
constructed by the Concessionaire was as given in Table 3.1.3. 
Table 3.1.3: Size of RoW provided and Stations constructed 
Category 
No. of 
Stations 
as per 
the CA 
RoW provided by the Company Stations built by the 
Concessionaire 
Remarks No. of 
Stations 
with 30 
Mtr.s ROW 
No. of 
Stations 
with 45 
Mtr.s ROW 
No. of 
Stations 
with 60 
Mtr.s ROW 
No. of 
Stations* 
Size of the 
Stations 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
I 12 6 0 0 6 20 Mtr.s X 
135 Mtr.s 
 
II 40 19 10 4 33 20 Mtr.s X 
138.50 Mtr.s 
Includes Punjagutta with 32 
Mtr.s X 138.50 Mtr.s and 
Jubilee Hills Check Post with 
32 Mtr.s X 160.50 Mtr.s 
III 14 0 6 9 15 20 Mtr.s X 
138.50 Mtr.s 
Includes Ameerpet with 42 
Mtr.s X 160 Mtr.s 
Total 66 25 16 13 54   
* Data Not Available for 5 Stations and 7 Stations were on hold 
Source: CA and details provided by the Company 
It can be seen that despite provision of sufficient ROW of 45 Mtr.s to 60 Mtr.s width for 14 
Category II stations and 15 Category III stations, the Concessionaire constructed all (except 
three stations as stated above) the 29 stations with a uniform width of 20 Mtr.s and length of 
138.50 Mtr.s. Hence, there is a reduction of station area to the extent of 1,280 Square Meters10 
 
10  30 Mtr.s X 135 Mtr.s minus 20 Mtr.s X 138.50 Mtr.s 

 Report of the CAG on PSUs for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 50  
(Sq.M.) per station and a total reduction of 37,120 Sq.M. area for 29 stations which was a 
deviation from the provisions of the CA.  
Audit observed that the CA did not contain any provisions to deal with such reduction in the 
scope of the Project by the Concessionaire. Audit however, noticed that construction of 
stations with reduced area has a consequent effect of reduction of PC and extension of undue 
benefit to the Concessionaire to the extent of ₹227.19 crore11. Hence, responsibility needs to 
be fixed on the concerned officials for allowing such unauthorised deviations from the CA.  
The Government replied (August 2022) that Audit considered the width of the main station 
box as indicated by the CA as the width of the station and did not consider the Entry and 
Exit arms station area of 56,980 Sq.M. Further, the total constructed area of all the stations 
(both typical and special) was 2,37,986 Sq.M. (including Entry and Exit arms station area 
of 56,980 Sq.M.) as against 2,33,550 Sq.M. indicated by the CA. Also, the Concessionaire 
constructed the Project with higher technical specifications entailing higher costs than 
envisaged. Thus, undue benefit was not extended to the Concessionaire. 
The reply is not tenable because (a) the total constructed area of the station boxes excluding 
the Entry and Exit arms area was 1,81,006 Sq.M. as against 2,33,550 Sq.M. indicated by 
the CA and confirmed in the Government’s reply, (b) the Entry and Exit arms are essential 
to access the main station box area and so by considering the Entry and Exit arms area, the 
total area to be constructed works out to 2,90,530 Sq.M. as against 2,37,986 Sq.M. 
constructed by the Concessionaire resulting in a net shortfall of 52,544 Sq.M. valued 
₹130.00 crore12, (c) construction of lesser station box area is tantamount to non-adherence 
by the Concessionaire to the scope of the Project and (d) construction of Project with higher 
technical specifications cannot be said to have an overriding effect on the physical aspects 
of station box area which was specifically provided in the CA. Further, the Company and 
the State Government had a prerogative to raise an objection if t he approved drawings did 
not meet the station box area criteria as per the CA. However, this was not done. 
Recommendation 2: Government may fix the responsibility of the officials concerned for 
allowing unauthorised deviations in the construction of station boxes. 
3.1.6 Non-availability of sufficient parking facilities  
As per Article 3.1.3 and Annexure -II of Schedule A of the CA, the Concessionaire was 
required to undertake development, operation and ma intenance of the RED at and above 
the first-floor level of all depots and above the P&C areas of selected stations. For this 
purpose, the CA identified 57 acres of land at 25 locations/ stations for being provided to 
the Concessionaire for development of RED and P&C areas. The CA also stipulated that in 
the event that any of the lands earmarked for P&C areas and consequent RED was not made 
available to the Concessionaire, the Government shall earmark alternative sites of 
comparable size and potential for RED. 
Details of lands identified for Parking & Circulation areas and lands handed over to the 
Concessionaire were as detailed in Table 3.1.4. 
 
11  (Station Cost of ₹1,636 crore/ 66 stations X 29 stations)/ (30 Mtr.s X 135 Mtr.s) X (20 Mtr.s X 138.50 Mtr.s) 
12  (Station Cost of ₹1,636 crore/ 66 stations X 29 stations)/ (2,90,530 Sq.M X 52,544 Sq.M) 

Chapter III – Compliance Audit Observations 
Page 51  
Table 3.1.4: Details of P&C areas 
(in acres) 
Sl. 
No. Corridor Location/ 
Station 
Extent of 
land to be 
given as 
per CA 
Extent 
of land 
handed 
over 
Reasons for not acquiring the lands 
1 2 3 4 5 6 
1 I Irrum Manzil 1 0 Roads & Buildings Department had its 
own development programme 
2 I & III Ameerpet 1.25 1.69  
3 I Punjagutta 3 4  
4 I Nampally 1 0 Affected buildings were to be 
reconstructed 
5 I Osmania 
Medical College 1 0 Opposition from Osmania University 
and Students Associations 
6 I Malakpet  0.75 0 Encroachments could not be cleared 
7 I Dilsukhnagar 1 0 TSRTC had its own development 
programme 
8 II Jubilee Bus 
Station 1 0 Lessee, The Secunderabad Club 
approached Court 
9 II & III Parade grounds 1 1  
10 II Narayanaguda 1 0 Police Department refused 
11 II Sultan Bazar 1 0 Opposition from Osmania University 
and Students Associations 
12 III Secunderabad 1 0 Existing Police Station could not be 
shifted 
13 III Shilparamam 2 0 
Located in buffer zone of water body 
where developmental activity is not 
allowed 
14 I Miyapur 5 5  
15 I Balanagar 2 2  
16 I ESI Hospital 3 0 Medical Department constructed a 
medical college 
17 I Irrum Manzil 3 4  
18 I Musarambagh 4 3.65  
19 I L.B. Nagar 1.5 1.66  
20 II Falaknuma 4 4  
21 III Habsiguda 8 0 Opposition from Osmania University 
and Students Associations 
22 III Tarnaka 2.5 0 Opposition from Osmania University 
and Students Associations 
23 III Hitec City 2 2  
24 III Nagole  4 4  
25 III Paradise 2 0 Opposition from Osmania University 
and Students Associations 
Total 57 33  
Alternate Locations 
1 III Raidurg 0 15 Purchased from APIICL 
2 III Yusufguda 0 0.8  
3 II Gandhi Hospital 0 5.05  
4 II MG Bus Station 0 0.65  
5 I Kukatpally 0 1  
6 III Rasoolpura 0 1.5  
Total 0 24 . 
Grand Total 57 57  
Source: CA and details provided by the Company  

 Report of the CAG on PSUs for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 52  
Audit noticed that as against 57 acres of land earmarked at 25 different locations, the Company 
could provide 33 acres of land at 11 locations only. Hence, the Company provided balance 24 
acres at six alternative locations to the Concessionaire despite the fact that the Company was 
in possession of 22.38 acres of land at 15 different locations that were made available to it free 
of cost by various State Government Departments and Agencies. These excess lands were 
neither generating any revenue to the Company nor were used to fulfill the intended objective. 
Audit observed that lands provided at alternate locations included one parcel of 15 acres at 
Raidurg which the Company acquired (September 2012) from the Andhra Pradesh 
Industrial Infrastructure Corporation Limited (APIIC L) on payment of ₹9.00 crore. This 
parcel of land was also situated at a distance of more than 700 meters away from the 
Raidurg terminal station forcing the commuters to cross busy roads and signal junctions to 
reach the Raidurg station. Thus, the metro commuters were denied the benefit of P&C area, 
smooth and unhindered access to the Metro Rail System (MRS), which the Concessionaire 
was required to provide as per the CA. 
Audit also observed that t he CA itself contemplated provision of P&C areas at only 25 
stations which got further reduced to 17 stations (including 15 acres at Raidurg) as against 
the 59 stations built up on the three Corridors of the Project to the end of March 2020. Thus, 
the remaining 42 stations had no provision for P&C area. Availability of P&C area is one 
of the contributing factors to the increase in ridership. However, due to lack of sufficient 
P&C facilities the commuters are denied the benefit of parking space.  
The Government replied (August 2022) that it (Government) could not procure identified 
lands at some locations due to vociferous protests and prolonged agitations mainly against 
sparing Osmania University lands for metro stations. However, by providing a big chunk of 15 
acres of land at a distance of about 450 meters from Raidurg station, Government/ Company 
fulfilled the State Government’s obligation under the CA to give equivalent land for RED and 
P&C areas. It was also replied that provision of lands for P&C areas at all the metro stations is 
neither feasible nor envisaged in the CA. In any case, sufficient parking facilities were 
provided at almost all the metro stations. 
The reply is not tenable as the Company itself undertook the development of P&C facilities 
in land parcels of less than one acre totaling to 2.03 acres that were made available by the 
State Government as per the CA. Also, 3.20 acres of land at three locations which were 
earmarked for development of Multilevel Parking Complex (MPC) could have been handed 
over to the Concessionaire for development of P&C areas for the stations concerned. 
Further, the Concessionaire was utilising the Raidurg land entirely for RED and the P&C 
facilities provided nearby are also temporary. Moreover, the reply does not sp ecify the 
capacity of the parking lots provided at the metro stations to assess their sufficiency. 
Recommendation 3: Government may take steps to provide  sufficient Parking and 
Circulation areas to improve the ridership. 
3.1.7 Fixation of higher fares 
In order to provide uniformity of standards and safety certification by the Commissioner of 
Railway Safety, the GoI sought extension (September 2009) of the Metro Railways 
(Operation and Maintenance) Act, 2002 and the Metro Railways (Construction of Works)  

Chapter III – Compliance Audit Observations 
Page 53  
Act, 2002 (Central Metro Acts) to all the Metro Railway Projects in the country. Under 
Section 33 of the Metro Railways (Operation and Maintenance) Act, 2002, the Metro Rail 
Administration (MRA) had the authority to fix the initial fares on commencement  of the 
metro rail operations. Subsequent revision was to be done in consultation with the Fare 
Fixation Committee (FFC) to be appointed by the GoI. 
As the CA was framed (2008) under the Andhra Pradesh Municipal Tramways (Construction, 
Operation and Maintenance) Act, 2008 (AP Tramways Act) and the Central Metro Acts had 
contrary provisions inter-alia with regard to fixation of fares, the State Government requested 
(December 2009) the GoI not to cover the Project under the Central Metro Acts. The GoI, 
however, clarified (December 2011) that no response was received from the State 
Government for its proposals (September 2009) to extend the Central Metro Acts before their 
extension (November 2009) to all Metros in the country. The GoI formally notified extension 
of Central Metro Acts to the Project in January 2012.  
Meanwhile, the State Government entered (September 2010) into CA with the 
Concessionaire as per the provisions of the AP Tramways Act. As per Article 27 of the CA, 
the Concessionaire agreed to collect user fares as per the predetermined fare structure13 set 
forth in Schedule – R of the CA as detailed in Table 3.1.5 below. 
Table 3.1.5: Basic fare fixed as per CA 
Sl. No. Distance (in KMs) Fare (in ₹) 
1 2 3 
1 Up to 2 8 
2 More than 2 and up to 6 10 
3 More than 6 and up to 10 12 
4 More than 10 and up to 14 14 
5 More than 14 and up to 18 16 
6 More than 18 19 
7 Unlimited use for the day 40 
  Source: CA 
This predetermined tariff structure was a bidding parameter to seek Viability Gap Funding 
(VGF)/ Grant from GoI . The Empowered Committee, Department of Economic Affairs, 
GoI ( Empowered Committee) which reviews proposals for financial support under the 
Scheme for Financial Support to Public Private Partnership in Infrastructure Projects of the 
GoI, recommended (May 2013) for approval of VGF of ₹1,458 .00 crore to the Project as 
quoted by the Concessionaire, being the successful bidder.  
The Company again requested (December 2014) the GoI for saving the provisions relating 
to fare fixation of the CA to avoid the uncertainties associated with the possible abandoning 
of the predetermined fare structure set forth in the CA due to operation of the Central Metro 
Acts. But, there was no response from the GoI which released VGF amounting to ₹1,204.20 
crore to the end of December 2017. 
 
13  The basic fare shall be increased annually (without compounding) by 5 per cent for 15 successive years 
commencing from April 2014. Further, the applicable basic fare shall be revised annually with effect from 
April each year to reflect the variation in the Wholesale Price Index 

 Report of the CAG on PSUs for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 54  
The State Government appointed (December 2015) the Concessionaire as the MRA as per 
the provisions of the Central Metro Act.  On the commencement of 30 KM Miyapur – 
Ameerpet (Corridor - I) and Ameerpet – Nagole (Corridor - III) stretch of the Project in 
November 2017, the Concessionaire, as MRA, fixed fares that were higher than the fares 
notified as per the CA as detailed in Table 3.1.6. 
Table 3.1.6: Fare fixed by the Concessionaire 
Sl. No. Distance (in KMs) Fare (in ₹) 
1 2 3 
1 Up to 2 10 
2 More than 2 and up to 4 15 
3 More than 4 and up to 6 25 
4 More than 6 and up to 8 30 
5 More than 8 and up to 10 35 
6 More than 10 and up to 14 40 
7 More than 14 and up to 18 45 
8 More than 18 and up to 22 50 
9 More than 22 and up to 26 55 
10 More than 26 60 
  Source: Press notification issued by the Concessionaire  
The Concessionaire requested (July 2018) the GoI to constitute a FFC but later withdrew 
(August 2018) the same stating that there was no urgent need to constitute a FFC as it had 
no intention to revise the fares for some more time. Thus, fixation of fares in excess of the 
fares fixed in the CA led to violation of the provisions of the CA. Therefore, the GoI did 
not release the balance VGF amounting to ₹253.80 crore.   
Audit observed that the CA did not contain any provisions to protect the predetermined fare 
structure notified under the CA in case of change in law. Though the Central Metro Acts were 
made applicable to the Project, the CA was not cancelled or amended to bring it in line with 
the provisions of the Central Metro Acts and the CA continued to be valid in all other aspects. 
Therefore, the State Government could have given a conditional acceptance for appointment 
of the Concessionaire as the MRA so as to protect the fare structure prescribed by the CA. 
But this was not done resulting in improper handling by the State Government of the 
transition to the Central Metro Acts and fixation of higher fares by the Concessionaire 
ignoring the specific provisions of the CA.  
Audit observed that by fixing higher fares the Concessionaire had collected an amount of 
₹213.77 crore as excess fare during the period from November 2017 to March 2020. Further, 
the implementation of the Empowered Commi ttee’s decision (35th Meeting dated 23 July 
2019) to re-determine the VGF as per the Change in Law provisions of the CA taking into 
account elements like reduction in the ridership estimates, change in scope of the Project, Real 
Estate Development along with the impact of higher fares was pending. 
The Government replied (August 2022) that the Attorney General of India upheld the legality 
of fixation of initial fares by the Concessionaire, as MRA. Further, the GoI initiated the process 
of constitution of FFC. It was also stated that the Concessionaire had incurred a cumulative loss 
of ₹4,108.00 crore upto March 2022 and the net present value of the net cash flows has 

Chapter III – Compliance Audit Observations 
Page 55  
worsened as compared to the Financial Model. Hence, refund of ₹213.77 crore as contended 
by Audit does not arise. 
Reply is not tenable as the fact remained that the State Government did not properly handle 
the transition of the CA to the Central Metro Acts resulting in fixation of higher fares by the 
Concessionaire ignoring the specific provisions of the CA. 
Recommendation 4: Government may constitute a fare fixation committee at the earliest 
to review the fare structure. 
3.1.8 Avoidable expenditure on Urban Rejuvenation Works 
Article 5.8 and Schedules A to D of the CA read with Clauses 9, 10 and 14 of the 
Manual of Standard Specifications (MSS), provided for the development of the MRS with 
inter modal integration facilities such as skywalks, underpasses, bus bays and bus shelters so 
as to provide seamless travel facility to the commuters. Construction of pedestrian facilities, 
landscaping and plantation along the central median and station areas, improving street scape 
were also to be undertaken to ensure proper flow of urban traffic along the metro corridors 
and to maintain aesthetic quality of the MRS. The Independent Engineer 14 also noted 
(August 2016) that these works fell under the scope of the Concessionaire’s obligations 
since the MSS was referred to in the CA. 
However, the Concessionaire refused (July 2016) to provide the above facilities taking the 
view that the CA restricted the scope of Concessionaire’s obligations to the “Site of the 
Project” and that the MSS being only a technical document specifying the manner in which 
the work has to be executed cannot impose a scope of work independently or beyond that 
envisaged by the CA. Audit observed that since the Concessionaire was not attending to 
the above works, the Company itself undertook to develop these facilities  as “Urban 
Rejuvenation Works”. 
However, due to shortage of funds flow from the State Government, the Company availed 
loans to the tune of ₹200.00 crore 15 from Andhra bank and the Hyderabad Metropolitan 
Development Authority (HMDA) to take up the Urban Rejuvenation Works. To the end of 
March 2020 , the Company had drawn loans amounting to ₹132.08 crore and incurred 
expenditure of ₹105.40 crore towards Urban Rejuvenation Works. The Company had 
incurred an avoidable interest burden of ₹7.55 crore 16 (including ₹3.81 crore interest on 
HMDA loan which was yet to be paid).   
The Government replied (August 2022) that the Concessionaire fulfilled its obligations and 
spent higher amounts to carry out station development works and passenger facilities beyond 
its scope envisaged in the CA. The Urban Rejuvenation Works were undertaken by the 
Company as part of Government’s vision to develop Hyderabad as a global city and 
investment destination. On an average ₹10.00 crore income per annum is generated for the 
Company through monetization of the facilities created under the Urban Rejuvenation 
Works. 
 
14  M/s. Louis Berger Consulting Private Limited 
15  ₹150 crore (June 2019) from Andhra Bank and ₹50 crore (August, October 2019) from HMDA 
16  ₹3.74 crore on loan of Andhra Bank and ₹3.81 crore on HMDA loan  

 Report of the CAG on PSUs for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 56  
The reply is not tenable because (a) it is contradictory to the recorded observations of the IE 
and the correspondence made by the Company with the Concessionaire and IE, (b) no 
evidence of the Urban Rejuvenation Works undertaken by the Company as being separate 
from those covered by the CA, MSS were furnished and (c) details of Urban Rejuvenation 
Works infrastructure created and monetized to generate income of ₹10.00 crore per annum 
was not furnished along with the reply. 
3.1.9  Entering into Sub Lease Agreements (SLAs) before COD of the Rail system  
As per Article 5.2.5 of the CA, the Concessionaire shall not sub -licence, assign or in any 
manner create an Encumbrance on any Project Asset forming part of RED at any time prior 
to the Commercial Operation Date (COD). The COD of the MRS shall be the date on which 
Provisional Certificate or the Completion Certificate is issued (Article 15.1). The Completion 
Certificate for Ameerpet to Hitec City (part of Corridor - III) was issued on 18 February 2019 
and for Ameerpet to LB Nagar (part of Corridor - II) on 3 September 2018. 
Audit however, noticed that the Concessionaire entered into 50 SLAs 17 for lease of Hitec 
City (November 2017 to September 2019) and Panjagutta Malls (November 2017 to April 
2019) before the COD of the respective Corridors of the MRS and collected RED revenues 
amounting to ₹19.46 crore (₹8.52 crore for Hitec City Mall and ₹10.94 crore for Punjagutta 
Mall) in contravention of the CA provisions. Audit observed that the Company did not take 
approval of the State Government or its BoD for allowing utilisation of these Malls by the 
Concessionaire before COD of the MRS.  
The Government replied (August 2022) that the Attorney General had opined that partial 
COD of the Project shall be treated as COD for the entire Project. Though the Government 
was requested to permit operations a t Panjagutta and Hitec City Malls, no effective 
sublicensing and operations took place before the COD which happened on 29 November 
2017 when the 30 KM stretch of Miyapur – Ameerpet – Nagole was made operational. 
Also, commercial operations and realisation of revenue from the Panjagutta and Hitec City 
Malls were from mid-February 2018 and March 2018 respectively. 
The reply is not tenable because the Attorney General had clearly opined that the CA 
contemplates collection of fares qua (in respect of) only those parts of the Project whose 
COD was achieved. Thus, the reply proved that the Concessionaire collected RED revenues 
amounting to ₹19.46 crore in respect of non -operational parts of the Project in 
contravention of the CA provisions and the same was not objected to by the Company/ 
State Government. 
Contract management 
3.1.10  Fixation of lower lease rent for Uppal casting yard 
As per Article 3.1.2 (f) of the CA, the Concessionaire shall bear and pay all costs, expenses 
and charges in connection with or incidental to the performance of the obligations of the 
Concessionaire under the CA. The obligations of the State Government were limited to 
providing reasonable assistance to the Concessionaire in obtaining access to all necessary 
 
17  20 SLAs for 1.15 lakh Sft. (out of 1.90 lakh Sft.) of Hitec City Mall at Madhapur and 30 SLAs for 2. 43 
lakh Sft. (out of 4.85 lakh Sft.) of Panjagutta Mall at Punjagutta 

Chapter III – Compliance Audit Observations 
Page 57  
infrastructure facilities and utilities, including water and electricity at the rates and terms 
as applicable to other commercial customers (Article 6.1.2 (b)). 
The Company acquired (November 2010) 141.675 acres land costing ₹87.26 crore at Uppal 
Bhagat Village for setting up the depot for Corridor - III of the MRS. The Concessionaire 
requested (May 2011) the Company to make available 42 acres out of the allotted land on 
temporary lease of five years for establishing a pre -casting yard for the MRS and for 
fixation of the lease rent on par with the leas e rent fixed for similar projects for which 
Government Lands were given on lease. Accordingly, the Company handed over 
(July  2011) 42 acres of land to the Concessionaire. Audit, however, observed that the 
Company neither entered into any formal written lease agreement18 with the Concessionaire 
nor fixed the lease rent to be collected for the land leased. 
The Company belatedly informed (April 2012) the Concessionaire to pay a lease rent at the 
rate of ₹1.50 lakh per acre per annum pending finalisation of lease rent at Government level. 
The Concessionaire was also informed that the difference of lease amount and interest, if 
any, to be paid will be intimated in due course after finalisation of actual lease rent.  
Based on the Company’s request for fixation of the lease rent for the land leased to the 
Concessionaire, the Chief Commissioner of Land Administration19 advised (February 2013) 
the Company to charge the lease rent as per the Standard Rates fixed (February 2010) by the 
State Government i.e., at 10 per cent of the Current Market Value prevailing at the time of 
grant for an initial lease period of five years which can be extended upto a maximum of 25 
years. 
Accordingly, based on the prevailing market value of ₹4,500.00 per square yard 20 the 
Company revised (March 2013) the lease rent to ₹21.78 lakh21 per acre per annum with effect 
from July 2011 and also claimed the differential lease rent of ₹14.91 crore22 for the period 
from July 2011 to March 2013. The Concessionaire, however, paid the lease rent at the rate 
of ₹1.50 lakh per acre per annum only up to March 2017 and requested (January 2017) the 
State Government to have a relook at the lease rent fixed in the interest of the MRS. The 
Company however, asked (July 2017) the Concessionaire to clear the dues amounting to 
₹58.12 crore (from July 2011 to March 2018). Thus, audit observed that, despite the 
Concessionaire’s continued failure to clear the dues, the Company allowed the 
Concessionaire to remain in occupation of its land and did not take any steps to enter into a 
written lease agreement. 
Audit also observed that since the market value of the pertinent lands was revised (with 
effect from April 2013) from ₹4,500.00 per square yard to ₹7,000.00 per square yard, the 
 
18  Section 107 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 stipulates that a lease of immovable property from year 
to year, or for any term exceeding one year, or reserving a yearly rent, can be made only by a registered 
instrument executed by both the lessor and the lessee. Further, Section 49 of the Registration Act, 1908  
stipulates that a document required to be registered under the Transfer of Property Act shall not, unless it 
has been registered, confer any power or be received as evidence of any transaction 
19   The Chief Commissioner of Land Administration  is also the Special Chief Secretary  (Revenue 
Department), State Government 
20  Fixed (August 2010) for the lands in Uppal Bhagat Village by the Registration & Stamps Department, 
Government of Andhra Pradesh 
21   1 Acre = 4,840 Square Yards X ₹4,500 X 10 %  
22  (₹21.78 lakh X 42 acres/ 12 months X 21 months) – (₹1.50 lakh X 42 acres/ 12 months X 21 months) 

 Report of the CAG on PSUs for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 58  
Company should have claimed the lease rent at the revised rates from July 2016 onwards, 
i.e., on completion of lease period of five years as per the Standing Orders of the Board of 
Revenue (BSO)23. The Company, however, continued to claim lease rent at the pre-revised 
rates only. As a result, the lease rent claimed by the Company upto March 2018 was less to 
an extent of ₹8.89 crore24 as detailed in Appendix 3.1.1. Further, the Company stopped 
claiming the lease rent from the year 2018-19 onwards. The total lease rent dues payable by 
the Concessionaire upto March 2020 as per the Standard Rates fixed by the State 
Government considering the prevailing/ revised market value worked out to ₹95.47 crore as 
detailed in Appendix 3.1.1. 
Audit also noticed that as against the Company’s proposal to fix a rate of ₹2.50 lakh25 per 
acre per annum for M/s. HMT Machine Tools Limited, Hyderabad’s ( HMT) land at 
Qutubullapur leased to the Concessionaire for use as casting yard , the Ministry of Heavy 
Industries & Public Enterprises, Department of Heavy Industries, GoI fixed (July 2012) the 
lease rent of ₹5.00 lakh per acre per annum. Thus, the rate of ₹1.50 lakh per acre per annum 
which the Company collected for leasing the land at Uppal was only 30 per cent of the rate 
of ₹5.00 lakh per acre per annum which the Company collected from the Concessionaire for 
leasing the HMT’s land at Qutubullapur for the same purpose.  
Thus, the Company failed to enter into a formal written lease agreement with the 
Concessionaire and to fix a reasonable lease rent as per the BSO. As there was no written 
lease agreement, the Company also could not make it binding on the Concessionaire to pay 
the lease rent subsequently fixed by the Company. Thus, fixation of lease rent less than the 
Standard Rates fixed under the BSO resulted in revenue loss of ₹95.47 crore.  
The Government replied (August 2022) that the lease rent collected by the Company  was 
on par with the rent charged by the adjacent land owners from whom the Concessionaire 
hired another 25 acres land for the same casting yard and three times the lease rent 
(₹50,000.00) charged (2017) by HMDA towards similar lease of lands given for casting yard 
for the P.V. Narasimha Rao Expressway flyover project. 
The reply is not tenable since as per the Transfer of Property Act, 1882, a lease given for a 
period of 12 months or more is a long -term lease and so a written agreement was required 
to be entered. The land was not given for the Project itself but for use as a casting yard by 
the Concessionaire who undertook the Project on commercial principles and so the 
government rates should have been applied as provided in the CA. Thus, the fact remained 
that the State Government’s directions (February 2010) to fix lease rent at 10 per cent of 
the Current Market Value was not adhered to. 
Recommendation 5: Government may enforce the Concession Agreement  conditions 
and contractual provisions to realise its dues from the Concessionaire. 
 
23  Article 317 of the Telangana Financial Code , 2016 required that in regard to the sale, transfer, etc., of 
Government land and buildings, the Standing Orders of the Board of Revenue (BSO) should be observed. 
BSO – 24 (A) (9) on Levy of Charge for occupation of government lands on lease was issued vide G.O.Ms.No.100 
under the Andhra Pradesh Land Reforms (Ceiling on Agricultural Holdings) Act, 1973  
24  Enhanced lease rent considered from July 2016 onwards, i.e., after completion of the initial lease period 
of 5 years as per the BSO 
25  Worked out at the rate of 1.15 per cent of the market value of ₹2.18 crore per acre as certified by the 
Registration and Stamps Department of the State Government 

Chapter III – Compliance Audit Observations 
Page 59  
3.1.11 Waiver of Administrative Charges  
The Company entered (September 2012) into a Leave and License Agreement (LLA) with 
the Concessionaire for temporary lease of 64.626 acres at Qutubullapur village. The LLA 
provided for advance payment of annual lease rent of ₹3.23 crore including the applicable 
Service Tax and Cess on lease rent at the rates prescribed by the Government from time to 
time. The LLA also provided that the Concessionaire shall pay ‘Administrative Charges’ to 
the Company at the rate of 18.50 per cent on the License Fee and Service Tax thereon. Due 
to delay in completion of the Project the LLA was extended up to August 2018. 
Audit observed that the Concessionaire paid only the License Fee including Service Tax 
thereon but did not pay the Administrative Charges (except for the first year 2012-13) and 
requested (August 2017) the Company to waive the levy of Administrative Charges. The 
total amount due from the Concessionaire towards the Administrative Charges amounted 
to ₹3.47 crore for the period 2013 -14 to 2017 -18. Audit noticed tha t the BoD after 
considering the Concessionaire’s request, directed (September 2017) the Company to take 
appropriate action in the matter. The action taken by the Company in this regard was not 
found on record and the amount of ₹3.47 crore remained unreali sed resulting in undue 
benefit to the Concessionaire.  
The Government replied (August 2022) that Administrative Charges were levied on the 
Concessionaire more as a strategy to counter the claims of the Concessionaire. The Project 
has experienced cost overru ns and incurred heavy losses from the beginning of the 
operations. The Concessionaire wanted to quit the Project and made several requests for 
financial support. The BoD after deliberations, authori sed the Company to take an 
appropriate decision regarding waiver of Administrative Charges and to judiciously use it 
during negotiations with the Concessionaire with a view to strengthening the position of 
the Government in dealing with the Concessionaire a nd in successfully executing the 
Project. Accordingly, the Company kept the issue alive to legally safeguard the 
Government’s position and facilitating the successful completion of the Project. 
The reply is not tenable as the Government did not furnish any  evidence to substantiate 
either the claim that the Administrative Charges were levied more as a strategy to counter 
the Concessionaire’s claims or that any of the claims/ issues raised by the Concessionaire 
were settled/ withdrawn because of waiver of Administrative Charges. 
3.1.12 Non-utilisation of Putlibowli Commercial Complex 
The route of Corridor - II between Kachiguda X Roads and Putlibowli is a highly commercial 
zone with ROW available for 10 to 20 Mtr.s, particularly the stretch of Sultan Bazar was very 
narrow with ROW of only 10 Mtr.s. The commercial establishments were getting affected to 
the extent of 5 Mtr.s on either side even after reducing the ROW to about 20 Mtr.s as against 
30 Mtr.s required by the CA. Sultan Bazar, being a very ol d and prestigious market of 
Hyderabad City, the affected traders and hawkers agitated against the Project and requested 
for change of alignment of Corridor - II. 
In view of this, the Company proposed (August 2012) to construct Putlibowli Commercial 
Complex (PCC) near the Sultan Bazar market area for providing relief and rehabilitation 
(R&R) to the affected traders and hawkers. Accordingly, the Company constructed (May 
2015) the PCC with 77 shops (10,397 Sft.) and 124 hawker platforms (3,105 Sft.) at a total 

 Report of the CAG on PSUs for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 60  
cost of ₹11.68 crore. Audit however, observed that a list of affected traders and hawkers to 
whom the shops and/ or hawker platforms were to be allotted/ leased was not found 
maintained by the Company. Further, the Company leased (August 2019) the entire PCC 
to a party 26 (lessee) for a period of nine years (extendable by another two spells of nine 
years each) with a total lease rent of ₹4.21 lakh per month ( ₹36.00 per Sft. per month for 
shops and ₹15.00 per Sft. per month for hawker platforms) including Goods and Services 
Tax. Audit however, observed that the intending lessees had while proposing (May 2019) to 
take the PCC on lease stated that the shops would be sub-let to vendors of their choice.  
As per Clause 2.3 of the lease agreement, the tenure of first nine years of lease shall 
commence from the date of handing over or possession of licensed property , whichever is 
earlier. Audit however, observed that the Company constructed the PCC in May 2015, 
leased the PCC in August 2019, entered into lease agreement in June 2020 but did not hand 
over the building to the lessee till date (November 2021). The reasons for non -leasing of 
the PCC for more than five years since its construction and entering into lease agreement 
after a delay of 10 months were not on record. The lessee sought (June 2020) time for taking 
possession of the building citing low commercial activity due to COVID -19 Pandemic. 
Thus, audit observed that non-leasing of the PCC resulted in loss of revenue of ₹2.50 crore 
to the Company besides an estimated annual expenditure of ₹22.31 lakh towards  
maintenance of the PCC. Also, the intended objective of providing R&R to the affected 
traders and hawkers of Sultan Bazar was not achieved. 
The Government replied (August 2022) th at after prolonged and tactical persuasion, the 
affected traders and hawkers of Sultan Bazar accepted the R&R package involving 
construction of the PCC. After its construction, the affected traders and hawkers utilised 
the PCC from 2015 till the completion of viaduct in the Sultan Bazar stretch and the Sultan 
Bazar station in mid -2020. After that, the affected traders moved back to their shops that 
were rebuilt and modernized, with the help of the Company, in the remaining portion of the 
affected properties instead of continuing in the PCC. Also, the Company developed special 
hawker platforms on the street and all the hawkers were rehabilitated under the viaduct in 
the Sultan Bazar stretch. Hence, it was decided to utilise the PCC to generate some income 
for the Company and the same was leased to a private agency. However, due to COVID-19 
Pandemic, the lessee was unable to attract any customers into the PCC, but is attending to 
the day-to-day maintenance of the PCC at its own cost. 
The reply is not tenable because (a) the PCC was not proposed to be a temporary shelter for 
the affected traders and hawkers, (b) details of the affected traders and hawkers identified for 
providing R&R and (c) details of rents collected, if any, from the affected traders and hawkers 
for the period of occupation of the PCC were not furnished along with the reply. The reply 
also proved that the PCC did not serve its intended objective because the Company 
rehabilitated the affected traders and hawkers by making alternative arrangements. 
3.1.13 Interest on deposits made with GHMC 
Out of ₹2,246.91 crore provided by the State Government, the Company deposited an 
amount of ₹956.18 crore in the separate account maintained for the purpose of HMRL’s 
transactions with the Greater Hyderaba d Municipal Corporation (GHMC) towards land 
 
26  M/s. Sri Ven Ads, Sky Media J.V. (renamed (January 2020) as Sri Ventures)  

Chapter III – Compliance Audit Observations 
Page 61  
acquisition, road widening, utility shifting etc. Out of ₹956.18 crore provided by the 
Company, GHMC deposited an amount of ₹313.00 crore in short term fixed deposits during 
2012-13 and 2013-14 and earned ₹26.09 crore towards interest. 
Audit observed that the Company did not enter into any agreement with GHMC regarding 
the modalities for utilisation of these funds and the interest, if any, earned due to temporary 
parking of funds provided. But, during the meeting held (September 2016) for reconciliation 
of the amounts between the Company and the GHMC, the Special Chief Secretary to 
Government, MA&UD Department directed the GHMC to account for the interest earned 
and add it to the Company’s funds. However, fro m the records of final reconciliation of 
amounts deposited with GHMC it was observed that the interest amount of ₹26.09 crore was 
not considered and not included in the final settlement amount arrived at by GHMC and the 
Company. Thus, before depositing the amounts with GHMC, the Company neither entered 
into an agreement with GHMC requiring it to account for the interest earned to its credit nor 
pursued the matter for recovery of its claim despite the State Government’s direction. 
The Government replied (July 2022) that after detailed reconciliation (September 2016) an 
amount of ₹9.06 crore was arrived as payable by GHMC to the Company and this amount 
was duly paid to Company. It was also stated that there was no loss to the Company as the 
Company would have to normally pay over ₹175.00 crore for the services of GHMC either 
in the form of administrative charges or actual expenditure incurred for the land acquisition 
works undertaken by the GHMC for the Project.  
The reply is not acceptable as it does not speci fy that the interest amount of ₹26.09 crore 
was included in the reconciled statement. Also, neither GHMC had claimed any 
administrative charges nor there was any agreement for payment of the same to GHMC for 
the land acquisition works undertaken by it. Further, the reply is silent about the Company 
not entering into an agreement with the GHMC regarding treatment of interest earned.  
3.1.14 Delay in mutation of the lands 
As part of its obligations under the CA, the State Government transferred 276.38 acres of 
land to the Company during the period between December 2007 and January 2018 for 
construction of depots (212 acres) and P&C areas (64.38 acres) for the three corridor s on 
the MRS. The transfer of these lands to the Company was evidenced by the Panchanamas. 
However, the Administrative Sanctions/ Government Orders for transferring the properties 
to the Company were still pending and the mutation of the Company’s name as the land 
owner in the revenue records has not been completed. The Company also handed over 
(October 2012 to January 2013) 269 acres to the Concessionaire as required by the CA.   
Further, the State Government in an attempt to enhance the ‘Ease of Doing Business’ in the 
State, had introduced (June 2016) the reforms to integrate the mutation process with the 
registration process through automatic update of land and municipal records during 
property registration. Audit however, observed that the Company did not initiate any action 
for mutation of its lands till date to avoid any disputes in the ownership and encroachment 
of lands.  
The Government replied (August 2022) that action had been initiated for mutation of lands 
and the matter is being regularly pursued with the Revenue Department. 
 

 Report of the CAG on PSUs for the year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 62  
Energy Department  
Northern Power Distribution Company of Telangana Limited 
3.2 Loss of ₹50.37 crore due to continuance of power supply despite 
non-payment of dues  
As per the Electricity Act, 2003 and the Electricity Supply Code, the Company was 
empowered to disconnect the electricity supply service if consumer neglects to pay 
monthly consumption charges or any other sums due. The Company, however, 
continued to supply electricity to M/s . Sirpur Paper Mills Limited during June 2014 
to July 2018 despite continued non -payment of dues, which resulted in loss of  ₹50.37 
crore. 
As per Section 56 of the Electricity Act, 2003 and Clause 4.8.1 of the Andhra Pradesh 
Electricity Regulatory Commission Regulation No.5 of 2004 (Electricity Supply Code), the 
distribution licensee is empowered to disconnect the supply of electricity by giving 15 days’ 
notice, if the consumer neglects to pay Consumption Charges (CC) or any other sums due 
to the licensee. In case of continued d efault, the licensee is entitled to terminate the 
agreement executed by the consumer and keep the supply disconnected till such amounts 
were paid. 
M/s. Sirpur Paper Mills Limited, Sirpur Kaghaznagar, Adilabad District, Telangana 
(Consumer)27 availed of a High Tension (HT) service connection (Service No. ADB-009) from 
the Northern Power Distribution Company of Telangana Limited (Company) from October 
2008 onwards. The Consumer defaulted in payment of the monthly CC bill of June 2014 
amounting to ₹4.48 crore. The Company however, allowed (July 2014) the Consumer to pay 
the same in four equal monthly installments along with the applicable interest. This 
opportunity was given on the condition that the power supply was liable for disconnection 
for default of payment of either installments or regular monthly CC bills on the due dates or 
both at any time without any further notice.  
The Mill closed down in September 2014 and the Consumer had paid only three installments 
and the monthly CC bill of July 2014 till that time. However, the Company did not disconnect 
power supply to the Consumer despite continuous default in payment of dues. The arrears 
accumulated to ₹35.40 crore at the end of December 2016 as the power supply was used by 
the employees of the Consumer staying in the Mill colony quarters for water and lighting 
purpose, although the Mill was not running. 
In January 2017, the Company directed its Circle Of fice, Adilabad (CO) to disconnect the 
service and report compliance. The CO however, did not disconnect the power supply to the 
Consumer and after lapse of 10 months, justified the inaction stating (October 2017) that, 
the National Company Law Tribunal, Hyderabad Bench (NCLT) imposed (September 2017) 
a moratorium (September 2017 to July 2018) and ruled that supply of essential goods or 
services to the Consumer shall not be terminated or suspended or interrupted during the 
moratorium period. The dues of ₹50.37 crore (including ₹21.24 crore towards late payment 
charges) accumulated till July 2018, since the Company continued the power supply during 
the moratorium period. As per the final resolution plan approved (July 2018) by the NCLT, 
 
27  Incorporated on 17 November 1938 under the Hyderabad Companies Act, 1930 

Chapter III – Compliance Audit Observations 
Page 63  
M/s. JK Paper Limited (New Consumer) took over the Mill from the Consumer and paid the 
monthly CC bills from August 2018 onwards and paid (September 2018) ₹3.85 crore 
towards final settlement of the outstanding dues of the consumer. Thus, the Company 
incurred loss of ₹50.37 crore due to continuance of power supply despite non -payment of 
dues resulting in non-compliance of the Electricity Act, 2003 and the Electricity Supply Code. 
Hence, responsibility needs to be fixed on the concerned officials for recovery of the loss 
sustained by the Company. 
Government stated (December 2022) that even though the Mill was not running, the 
employees of the Consumer were staying in the housing quarters and utilised the power 
supply for water and lighting purposes. The Company issued disconnection notices to the 
Consumer from time to time but the employees of the Consu mer approached different 
forums of Government. Disconnection of power supply was deferred as per the oral advice 
(October 2014) of the Industries and Commerce Department. Also, considering the request 
of the New Consumer to write off the dues of various St ate Government Departments and 
its agencies pertaining to the period prior to the NCLT’s orders, the Industries and 
Commerce Department issued (March 2021) orders not to demand the past period dues and 
to write off such dues. Further, in a meeting held on 22 October 2022, the Industries and 
Commerce Department opined that balance CC dues of the Company would be settled by 
providing budgetary support at a later date.  
The reply is not acceptable as the Company is yet to realise the outstanding dues from the 
Government. 
Hyderabad 
The 
(SUDHA RAJAN) 
Accountant General (Audit), Telangana 
Countersigned 
New Delhi  
The 
(GIRISH CHANDRA MURMU) 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 


 
 Pages 41 - 55 
 
Pages 65 - 77 
 
 
 
Appendices

 
 
Page 94  
 
 

 Appendices 
 
Page 65  
Appendix 1.1 
(Refer to Paragraph 1.3 at Page 2) 
Statement showing the cluster-wise list of Departments and Public Sector Undertakings 
Sl. Cluster Departments Public Sector Undertakings Remarks 
1 
Agriculture, Food and Allied 
Industries 
Agriculture and Cooperation 
Telangana Rythu Bandhu Samithi  
2 Telangana State Agro Industries Development Corporation Limited  
3 Telangana State Horticulture Development Corporation Limited  
4 Telangana State Seeds Development Corporation Limited  
5 Telangana State Warehousing Corporation Statutory 
Corporation 
6 Consumer Affairs, Food and 
Civil Supplies 
Andhra Pradesh Essential Commodities Corporation Limited Inactive 
7 Telangana State Civil Supplies Corporation Limited  
8 Culture and Tourism Youth Advancement , Tourism 
and Culture Telangana State Tourism Development Corporation Limited  
9 Education, Skill Development 
and Employment 
Labour, Employment, Training 
and Factories Telangana Overseas Manpower Company Limited  
10 
Energy and Power Energy 
Andhra Pradesh Tribal Power Company Limited Under 
Demerger 
11 Northern Power Distribution Company of Telangana Limited  
12 Southern Power Distribution Company of Telangana Limited  
13 Telangana Power Finance Corporation Limited  
14 Telangana State Power Generation Corporation Limited  
15 Telangana State Renewable Energy Development Corporation Limited  
16 The Singareni Collieries Company Limited  
17 Transmission Corporation of Telangana Limited  

Report of the CAG on PSUs for the year ended 31 March 2021 
 
Page 66  
Sl. Cluster Departments Public Sector Undertakings Remarks 
18 Environment, Science and 
Technology 
Environment, Forest, Science 
and Technology Telangana State Forest Development Corporation Limited  
19 Finance Revenue Telangana State Beverages Corporation Limited  
20 
Governance, Law and Order 
General Administration Telangana State Film Development Corporation Limited  
21 Home Telangana State Police Housing Corporation Limited  
22 
Health and Welfare 
Backward Classes Welfare Telangana State Most Backward Classes Development Corporation  
23 
Minorities Welfare 
Telangana State Christian Minorities Finance Corporation Limited  
24 Telangana State Minorities Finance Corporation  
25 
Industry and Commerce Industries and Commerce 
Allwyn Auto Limited Inactive 
26 Allwyn Watches Limited Inactive 
27 Andhra Pradesh Automobile Tyres and Tubes Limited Inactive 
28 Andhra Pradesh Electronics Development Corporation Limited Inactive 
29 Andhra Pradesh Steels Limited Inactive 
30 A.P. Small Scale Industrial Development Corporation Limited Inactive 
31 Aptronix Communications Limited Inactive 
32 Bio Tech Hub Limited  
33 Damodhara Minerals Private Limited  
34 E-City Manufacturing Cluster Limited  
35 Fab City SPV (India) Private Limited  
36 Golkonda Abrasives Limited Inactive 
37 Hyderabad Chemicals and Fertilizers Limited Inactive 
38 Hyderabad Pharma City Limited  
39 Infrastructure Corporation of Andhra Pradesh Limited Under 
Demerger 

 Appendices 
 
 
Page 67 Pages 41 - 55 
Sl. Cluster Departments Public Sector Undertakings Remarks 
40 
Industry and Commerce Industries and Commerce 
Krishi Engineering Limited Inactive 
41 Maheswaram Science Park Limited  
42 Marine and Communication Electronics (India) Limited Inactive 
43 Pashamylaram Textiles Park  
44 PJ Chemicals Limited Inactive 
45 Republic Forge Company Limited Inactive 
46 Telangana Handloom Development Corporation Limited  
47 Telangana Industrial Health Clinic Limited  
48 Telangana Life Sciences Infrastructure Development Limited  
49 Telangana Powerloom and Textile Development Corporation Limited  
50 Telangana State Financial Corporation Statutory 
Corporation 
51 Telangana State Handicrafts Development Corporation Limited  
52 Telangana State Industrial Development Corporation Limited  
53 Telangana State Industrial Infrastructure Corporation Limited  
54 Telangana State Leather Industries Promotion Corporation Limited  
55 Telangana State Mineral Development Corporation Limited  
56 Telangana State Trade Promotion Corporation Limited  
57 The Nizam Sugars Limited  
58 TSMDC-SCCL Suliyari Coal Company Limited Inactive 
59 Vidyut Steels Limited Inactive 
60 We hub Foundation  
61 Zaheerabad NIMZ Limited  

Report of the CAG on PSUs for the year ended 31 March 2021 
 
Page 68  
Sl. Cluster Departments Public Sector Undertakings Remarks 
62 Industry and Commerce Infrastructure and Investment Telangana State Aviation Corporation Limited  
63 
IT and Communications Information Technology, 
Electronics and Communications 
Photonics Valley Corporation  
64 Telangana Fiber Grid Corporation Limited  
65 Telangana State Technology Services Limited  
66 T-works Foundation  
67 
Public Works Irrigation and Command Area 
Development 
Kaleshwaram Irrigation Project Corporation Limited  
68 Telangana State Irrigation Development Corporation Limited  
69 Telangana State Water Resources Infrastructure Development Corporation 
Limited  
70 Telangana Water Resources Development Corporation Limited  
71 Rural Development Panchayat Raj and Rural 
Development Telangana Drinking Water Supply Corporation Limited  
72 Transport Transport, Roads and Buildings Telangana State Road Transport Corporation Statutory 
Corporation 
73 
Urban Development 
Housing 
Telangana Rajiv Swagruha Corporation Limited  
74 Telangana State Housing Corporation Limited  
75 
Municipal Administration and 
Urban Development 
Greater Warangal Smart City Corporation Limited GCOC 
76 Hyderabad Airport Metro Limited  
77 Hyderabad Growth Corridor Limited GCOC 
78 Hyderabad Metro Rail Limited  
79 Hyderabad Road Development Corporation Limited  
80 Karimnagar Smart City Corporation Limited GCOC 
81 Musi Riverfront Development Corporation Limited  
82 Telangana Urban Finance and Infrastructure Development Corporation Limited  
GCOC means Government Controlled Other Company. 

Appendices 
 
 
Page 69  
Appendix 1.2 
(Refer to Paragraph 1.4.1 at Page 2) 
Working PSU wise and Department wise break-up of 
outstanding Inspection Reports and Paragraphs 
Sl. 
No. Name of the PSU 
Number of IRs/ Paragraphs 
pending as of  
30 September 2021 
IRs Paragraphs 
1 Telangana Rythu Bandhu Samithi 0 0 
2 Telangana State Agro Industries Development Corporation Limited 3 28 
3 Telangana State Horticulture Development Corporation Limited 1 4 
4 Telangana State Seeds Development Corporation Limited 1 15 
5 Telangana State Warehousing Corporation 3 26 
 Agriculture and Cooperation  8 73 
6 Telangana State Most Backward Classes Development Corporation 0 0 
 Backward Classes Welfare  0 0 
7 Telangana State Civil Supplies Corporation Limited 5 57 
 Consumer Affairs, Food and Civil Supplies  5 57 
8 Andhra Pradesh Tribal Power Company Limited 0 0 
9 Northern Power Distribution Company of Telangana Limited 67 532 
10 Southern Power Distribution Company of Telangana Limited 85 432 
11 Telangana Power Finance Corporation Limited 1 5 
12 Telangana State Power Generation Corporation Limited 34 183 
13 Telangana State Renewable Energy Development Corporation 
Limited 
3 21 
14 The Singareni Collieries Company Limited 7 65 
15 Transmission Corporation of Telangana Limited 41 232 
 Energy  238 1,470 
16 Telangana State Forest Development Corporation Limited 3 21 
 Environment, Forest, Science and Technology  3 21 
17 Telangana State Film Development Corporation Limited 0 0 
 General Administration 0 0 
18 Telangana State Police Housing Corporation Limited 2 18 
 Home  2 18 
19 Telangana Rajiv Swagruha Corporation Limited 0 0 
20 Telangana State Housing Corporation Limited 2 24 
 Housing 2 24 

 Report of the CAG on PSUs for the year ended 31 March 2021 
 
Page 70  
 
Sl. 
No. Name of the PSU 
Number of IRs/ Paragraphs 
pending as of  
30 September 2021 
IRs Paragraphs 
21 Bio Tech Hub Limited 0 0 
22 Damodhara Minerals Private Limited 2 3 
23 E-City Manufacturing Cluster Limited 2 12 
24 Fab City SPV (India) Private Limited 2 7 
25 Hyderabad Pharma City Limited 0 0 
26 Infrastructure Corporation of Andhra Pradesh Limited 1 6 
27 Maheswaram Science Park Limited 1 4 
28 Pashamylaram Textiles Park 1 6 
29 Telangana Handloom Development Corporation Limited 0 0 
30 Telangana Industrial Health Clinic Limited 0 0 
31 Telangana Life Sciences Infrastructure Development Limited 0 0 
32 Telangana Powerloom and Textile Development Corporation 
Limited 
0 0 
33 Telangana State Financial Corporation 1 11 
34 Telangana State Handicrafts Development Corporation Limited 3 13 
35 Telangana State Industrial Development Corporation Limited 2 15 
36 Telangana State Industrial Infrastructure Corporation Limited 3 33 
37 Telangana State Leather Industries Promotion Corporation Limited 4 17 
38 Telangana State Mineral Development Corporation Limited 4 36 
39 Telangana State Trade Promotion Corporation Limited 3 8 
40 The Nizam Sugars Limited 2 2 
41 We hub Foundation 0 0 
42 Zaheerabad NIMZ Limited 0 0 
 Industries and Commerce 31 173 
43 Telangana State Aviation Corporation Limited 1 9 
 Infrastructure and Investment 1 9 
44 Photonics Valley Corporation 0 0 
45 Telangana Fiber Grid Corporation Limited 0 0 
46 Telangana State Technology Services Limited 2 8 
47 T-works Foundation 1 11 
 Information Technology, Electronics and Communication 3 19 
48 Kaleshwaram Irrigation Project Corporation Limited 1 9 

Appendices 
 
 
Page 71  
 
Sl. 
No. Name of the PSU 
Number of IRs/ Paragraphs 
pending as of  
30 September 2021 
IRs Paragraphs 
49 Telangana State Irrigation Development Corporation Limited 3 18 
50 Telangana State Water Resources Infrastructure Development 
Corporation Limited 
0 0 
51 Telangana Water Resources Development Corporation Limited 0 0 
 Irrigation and Command Area Development 4 27 
52 Telangana Overseas Manpower Company Limited 1 8 
 Labour, Employment, Training and Factories 1 8 
53 Telangana State Christian Minorities Finance Corporation Limited 1 9 
54 Telangana State Minorities Finance Corporation 2 10 
 Minorities Welfare 3 19 
55 Greater Warangal Smart City Corporation Limited 0 0 
56 Hyderabad Airport Metro Limited 0 0 
57 Hyderabad Growth Corridor Limited 3 35 
58 Hyderabad Metro Rail Limited 2 26 
59 Hyderabad Road Development Corporation Limited 1 7 
60 Karimnagar Smart City Corporation Limited 0 0 
61 Musi Riverfront Development Corporation Limited 1 1 
62 Telangana Urban Finance and Infrastructure Development 
Corporation Limited 
1 6 
 Municipal Administration and Urban Development 8 75 
63 Telangana Drinking Water Supply Corporation Limited 2 13 
 Panchayat Raj and Rural Development 2 13 
64 Telangana State Beverages Corporation Limited 3 18 
 Revenue 3 18 
65 Telangana State Road Transport Corporation 43 237 
 Transport, Roads and Buildings 43 237 
66 Telangana State Tourism Development Corporation Limited 4 62 
 Youth Advancement, Tourism and Culture 4 62 
 Total 361 2,323 
 
 
 

 Report of the CAG on PSUs for the year ended 31 March 2021 
 
Page 72  
 
 Appendix 2.1 
(Refer to Paragraph 2.1.3 at Page 8) 
 Organisational set up of the Director of Mines and Geology  
Department  
 
Enforcement Committee 
 
Sole Dealer Licensee 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
• Principal Secretary to Government, Industries and 
Commerce Department, Government of Telangana.
Government level
• Director, Mines & Geology is assisted by the Deputy
Director, Mines & Geology.
Department Level
• Deputy Director, Mines & Geology is assisted by ADM&G
concerned. There are three Regional Deputy Directors located
at Hyderabad, Nizamabad and Warangal.
Zonal Level
• Assistant Director, Mines & Geology (ADM&G) is assisted by
Royalty Inspector. Presently, there are 33 ADM&G offices,
one for each district in Telangana State.
District Level
• State level Sand Committee headed by Chief Secretary with 
Director, Mines & Geology as the Member Secretary.
State level
• District level Sand Committee headed by a Chairman
(District Collector) who is assisted by Mandal Revenue
Officer and ADM&G concerned as the convenor.
District Level
• Vice Chairman and Managing Director is assisted by five 
General Managers at Corporate Office and eight Project 
Officers at field level.
TSMDCL

Appendices 
 
 
Page 73  
  
Appendix 2.2 
(Refer to Paragraph 2.1.6 at Page 9) 
Statement showing Audit Sample 
Sl. No. Project Office Revenue District Sand reaches inspected 
1 Bhadradri Kothagudem 
Bhadradri Kothagudem 
Chintakunta 64/AA, 
Chintakunta 64/E, 
C Kathigudem, 
Edulla Bayyaram 332, 
Janampeta SBAA5, 
Mogallapalli 38/A, 
Mogallapalli 44/1, 
Mogallapalli 44/2, 
Mogallapalli 44/3, 
Mote SBAA5, 
Padmagudem SBAA5, Pedamandava 
Sompally 203/34/A and 
Subbampeta 1&2 
 (Total 14) 
Khammam 
2 Jayashankar 
Bhupalapally 
Jayasankar Bhupalpally 
Beglur 1, Beglur 2, 
Bommapur 1, Bommapur 2,  
Brahmanapally 2,  
Kuntlam 1& 2, Kuntlam 3 
Mahadevpur 1, Mahadevpur 2, 
Mahadevpur 3, Mahadevpur 4, 
Mahadevpur 5, 
Palugula 2, Palugula 5, Palugula 6, 
Palugula 7, Palugula 8, Palugula 9,  
Palugula 10, Palugula 11, 
Palugula 12 and Suraram 2 
(Total 22) 
Warangal (Rural) 
3 Karimnagar 
Adilabad  Kollur 1, Kollur 2, Kollur 3, 
Kollur 4, Kollur 5, Kollur 6, 
Kollur 7, Kollur 8, 
Yarraipet and Parepally 
(Total 10) 
Karimnagar 
Peddapalli 
Rajanna Siricilla 
 
 
 
 

 Report of the CAG on PSUs for the year ended 31 March 2021 
 
Page 74  
Appendix 2.3 
(Refer to Paragraph 2.2.2 at Page 14) 
Statement showing undue benefit enjoyed by third party contractors 
(Quantity in CBM and amount in ₹) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Reach 
Name of the Tribal Society 
Contractor 
Name of the Third 
Party Contractor 
Assessed 
Quantity 
Dispatched 
Quantity 
(as per 
SSMMS) 
Amount to 
Tribal Society 
Contractor @ 
₹220 per CBM 
Amount paid 
to Third Party 
Contractor @ 
₹180 per CBM 
Differential 
amount 
between ₹180 
and ₹135 
1 Alubaka 
Alubaka Mahila Tribal Sand 
Quarry Labour Contract 
Mutually Aided Cooperative 
Society Limited 
Not Available 2,25,000 1,36,955.50 3,01,30,210 2,46,51,990 61,62,998 
2 Bhadrachalam 
Bhadrachalam Girijana Sand 
Quarry Labour Contract 
Mutually Aided Co -operative 
Society Limited 
M/s. Bhadradri Sand 
Supply Agency 
2,22,000 1,86,530.40 4,10,36,688 3,35,75,472 83,93,868 Veeramalla Srisailam 
Bhookya Bhalya S/o 
Umla Bhadrachalam 
3 Chenchupally 
Chenchu Lakshmi ST Isuka 
Quarry Labour Contract 
Cooperative Society Limited 
M/s. Sri Sai Thirumala 
Infra Project 1,79,453 1,79,452.80 3,94,79,616 3,23,01,504 80,75,376 
4 Chinnaravi 
gudem 
Sammakka Sarakka Tribal Sand 
Quarry Labour Contract 
Mutually Aided Cooperative 
Society Limited 
Vamshi S/o Yellaiah 2,40,000 59,612 1,31,14,640 1,07,30,160 26,82,540 
5 Janampeta 
Sammakka Sarakka Sand Quarry 
Girijana Labour Contract 
Mutually Aided Cooperative 
Society Limited 
M/s. Rishitha Sai 
Developers 2,42,400 1,63,212.50 3,59,06,750 2,93,78,250 73,44,563 
6 Kathigudem 
Giriputra Girijana Sand Quarry 
Labour Contract Cooperative 
Society Limited 
M/s. Bhavika 
Explorations 98,280 98,244 2,16,13,680 1,76,83,920 44,20,980 

Appendices 
 
 
Page 75  
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Reach 
Name of the Tribal Society 
Contractor 
Name of the Third-
Party Contractor 
Assessed 
Quantity 
Dispatched 
Quantity 
(as per 
SSMMS) 
Amount to 
Tribal Society 
Contractor @ 
₹220 per CBM 
Amount paid 
to Third Party 
Contractor @ 
₹180 per CBM 
Differential 
amount 
between ₹180 
and ₹135 
7 Kondaigudem 
The Shabari Sand Quarry 
Adivasi Girijana Labour 
Contract Mutually Aided 
Cooperative Society Limited 
M/s. Sai Keerthi 
Constructions 2,25,000 1,81,328.50 3,98,92,270 3,26,39,130 81,59,783 
8 Kondapuram 
Kondapuram Mahila Tribal Sand 
Quarry Labour Contract 
Mutually Aided Cooperative 
Society Limited 
Purjari Suresh S/o 
Ramulu 2,45,000 59,955 1,31,90,100 1,07,91,900 26,97,975 
9 Kothapally  
Kothapally Mahila Tribal Sand 
Quarry Labour contract Mutually 
Aided Cooperative Society 
Limited 
S.Ramesh Reddy S/o 
Varada Reddy  1,80,000 48,420 1,06,52,400 87,15,600 21,78,900 
10  
Marikala 
Girija Girijana Tribal Sand 
Quarry Labour Contract 
Mutually Aided Cooperative 
Society Limited 
CH. Anil Kumar Reddy 
S/o Satyanarayana Reddy  
2,37,000 
 
2,20,024 
 
4,84,05,280 
 
3,96,04,320 
 
99,01,080 Balasani Krishnarjun 
Rao S/o Sanyasaiah 
11 Morramvani 
gudem 
Godavari Tribal Women Sand 
Quarry Labour Contract MACS 
Limited 
M/s. Shree Rama Mines 
& Minerals 2,37,300 1,34,096 2,95,01,120 2,41,37,280 60,34,320 
12 Mutharam 
Mutharam Mahila Tribal Women 
Sand Quarry Labour Contract 
Mutually Aided Cooperative 
Society Limited 
Kode Suresh Chowdary 79,800 38,815 85,39,300 69,86,700 17,46,675 
13 Ramanna 
gudem 
Sri Rama Tribal Isuka Quarry 
Labour Contract Cooperative 
Society Limited 
M/s. Sri Hemachala 
Lakshminarasimha 
Swamy Minerals 
4,50,000 1,40,842 3,09,85,240 2,53,51,560 63,37,890 
14 Ramanujavaram 
Tribal Labour Contract Mutual 
Aided Cooperative Society 
Limited 
Not Available 3,15,655 3,05,345.50 6,71,76,010 5,49,62,190 1,37,40,548 

 Report of the CAG on PSUs for the year ended 31 March 2021 
 
Page 76  
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Reach 
Name of the Tribal Society 
Contractor 
Name of the Third-
Party Contractor 
Assessed 
Quantity 
Dispatched 
Quantity 
(as per 
SSMMS) 
Amount to 
Tribal Society 
Contractor @ 
₹220 per CBM 
Amount paid 
to Third Party 
Contractor @ 
₹180 per CBM 
Differential 
amount 
between ₹180 
and ₹135 
15 Ramaraopet 
Tribal Women Sand Quarry 
Labour Contract Mutually Aided 
Cooperative Society Limited 
M/s. I Max Infra 1,35,000 1,26,258 2,77,76,760 2,27,26,440 56,81,610 
16 Rampur 
Sri Mahalaxmi Adivasi (ST) 
Isuka Quarry Labour Contract 
Cooperative Society Limited 
M/s. Malayappa Swamy 
Minerals 2,21,268 1,13,767 2,50,28,740 2,04,78,060 51,19,515 
17 Peddapally 
Peddapally Mahila Tribal Sand 
Quarry Labour Contract 
Mutually Aided Cooperative 
Society Limited 
L. Vinayak S/o 
Mangithya 2,49,600 73,566.50 1,61,84,630 1,32,41,970 33,10,493 
18 Veerapuram 
Sri Giri Laxmi Sand Quarry 
Tribal Labour Contract 
Cooperative Society Limited 
M/s. Sri Ekshwaka Sands 
Private Limited 5,60,000 2,20,788.50 4,85,73,470 3,97,41,930 99,35,483 
19 Vijayanagaram 
Sand Quarry Tribal Labour 
Contract Cooperative Society 
Limited 
M/s. Vamshi 
Constructions  2,40,000 91,618.50 2,01,56,070 1,64,91,330 41,22,833 
Total         25,78,831.70 56,73,42,974 46,41,89,706 11,60,47,430 
 

Appendices 
 
 
Page 77  
 
 Appendix 3.1.1 
(Refer to Paragraph 3.1.10 at Page 58) 
Statement showing lease rentals due from the Concessionaire 
(Amount in ₹) 
Sl. 
No. Particulars Amount 
1 Total Extent of land given for lease 42 acres 
2 Prevailing market rate of 42 acres @ ₹4,500 per square yard  
(42 acres X 4,840 square yards per acre X ₹4,500) 
91,47,60,000 
3 Standard Rate of Lease Rent to be fixed @ 10 % of market 
value (₹91,47,60,000 X 10%) 
9,14,76,000 
4 Annual lease rent from July 2011 to March 2012 (9 months) 
 (₹9,14,76,000 X 9 months/ 12 months) 
6,86,07,000 
5 Annual lease rent from April 2012 to March 2016 (4 years) 
 (₹9,14,76,000 X 4 years) 
36,59,04,000 
6 Annual lease rent from April 2016 to June 2016 (3 months)  
(₹9,14,76,000 X 3 months/ 12 months) 
2,28,69,000 
7 Prevailing market rate of 42 acres @ ₹7,000 per square yard  
(42 acres X 4,840 square yards per acre X ₹7,000) 
1,42,29,60,000 
8 Standard Rate of Lease Rent to be fixed @ 10 % of prevailing 
market value (₹1,42,29,60,000 X 10%) 
14,22,96,000 
9 Annual lease rent from July 2016 to March 2017 (9 months) 
 (₹14,22,96,000 X 9 months/ 12 months) 
10,67,22,000 
10 Annual lease rent from April 2017 to March 2018 (1 year) 14,22,96,000 
11 Total lease rent payable by the Concessionaire upto March 2018 
(4 + 5 + 6 + 9 + 10) 
70,63,98,000 
12 Total lease rent paid by the Concessionaire from July 2011 to 
March 2017 @ ₹1,50,000 per acre per annum 
(₹1,50,000 X 42 acres X 69 months/ 12 months i.e., for 5 years 9 months) 
3,62,25,000 
13 Balance Lease rent payable upto March 2018 (A) 67,01,73,000 
14 Lease rent claimed by the Company upto March 2018 58,12,38,000 
15 Lease rent short claimed 8,89,35,000 
16 Annual lease rent not claimed from April 2018 to March 2019 
(B) 
14,22,96,000 
17 Annual lease rent not claimed from April 2019 to March 2020 
(C) 
14,22,96,000 
18 Total lease rent due from the Concessionaire upto March 2020 
 (A + B + C) 
95,47,65,000 

 
  
Pages 79 - 81 
 
  
Glossary of Abbreviations 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Glossary of Abbreviations 
 
 
AAT Actual Average Traffic 
ADM&G Assistant Director of Mines and Geology 
AMP Approved Mining Plan 
APIICL Andhra Pradesh Industrial Infrastructure Corporation Limited 
APSD Additional Performance Security Deposit 
BDKG Bhadradri Kothagudem 
BoD Board of Directors 
BSO Standing Orders of the Board of Revenue 
CA Concession Agreement 
CBM Cubic Meters 
CC Consumption Charges 
CCTV Closed Circuit Television Cameras 
CFE Consent for Establishment 
CFO Consent for Operation 
CGG Centre for Good Governance 
CO Circle Office 
COD Commercial Operation Date 
DBFOT Design, Build, Finance, Operate and Transfer 
DC District Collector 
DLSC District Level Sand Committee 
DM&G Director of Mines and Geology 
DMFT District Mineral Foundation Trust 
DMRC Delhi Metro Rail Corporation Limited 
DPR Detailed Project Report 
DSR District Survey Report 
EC Environmental Clearance 
EIAD Report Report on the Environmental Impact Assessment of De -siltation of 
sand at Annaram and Medigadda barrages 
EMC Environment Management Cell 
EPM Environmental Protection Measures 
FFC Fare Fixation Committee 
GHMC Greater Hyderabad Municipal Corporation 
GoI Government of India 
GoTS Government of Telangana 
GPS Global Positioning System 
GST Goods and Services Tax 
HMDA Hyderabad Metropolitan Development Authority 
HMT M/s. HMT Machine Tools Limited, Hyderabad 
HT High Tension 

 Report of the CAG on PSUs for year ended 31 March 2021 
Page 80  
IE Independent Engineer 
IICT Indian Institute of Chemical Technology 
ITDA Integrated Tribal Development Authority 
Joint PV Joint Physical Verification 
JSBP Jayashankar Bhupalapally 
KM Kilo Meters 
KRMR Karimnagar 
L.A. Act Land Acquisition Act, 1894 
LLA Leave and License Agreement 
MA&UD Municipal Administration and Urban Development 
MAYTAS M/s. MAYTAS Metro Limited, Hyderabad 
MoE,F&CC Ministry of Environment, Forests & Climate Change 
MPC Multilevel Parking Complex 
MRA Metro Rail Administration 
MRS Metro Rail System 
MRTS Mass Rapid Transit System 
M-Sand Manufactured Sand 
MSMA M-Sand Manufacturers Association 
MSS Manual of Standard Specifications 
Mtr.s Meters 
NCLT National Company Law Tribunal 
NSM Policy New Sand Mining Policy, 2014  
PC Project Cost 
P&C Parking & Circulation 
PCC Putlibowli Commercial Complex 
PESA Panchayat Extension to Scheduled Areas Act, 2002 
PESA Rules Panchayat Extension to Scheduled Areas Rules, 2011 
PKM Passenger Kilometres 
PO Project Office 
PPP Public Private Partnership 
PSD Performance Security Deposit 
RDC Road Damage Charges 
RED Real Estate Development 
RFID Radio Frequency Identification 
RoW Right of Way 
R&R Relief and Rehabilitation 
RR Ranga Reddy 
SEIAA State Level Environment Impact Assessment Authority 
SF Seigniorage Fee 

Glossary of Abbreviations  
 
Page 81 
Sft. Square Feet 
SLA Sub-Lease Agreement 
SMET State Mineral Exploration Trust 
SMS Sand Management Society 
Sq. M. Square Meters 
SR Contractor Sand Raising Contractor 
SSMM 
Guidelines Sustainable Sand Mining Management Guidelines, 2016 
SSMMS Sand Sale Management and Monitoring System 
ST Scheduled Tribes 
STMS Sand Taxi Management System 
TSMDCL Telangana State Mineral Development Corporation Limited 
TSPCB Telangana State Pollution Control Board 
TSSM Rules Telangana State Sand Mining Rules, 2015  
VC&MD Vice Chairman and Managing Director 
VGF Viability Gap Funding 
WALTA Act Water, Land and Trees Act, 2002  
WALTA Rules Water, Land and Trees Rules, 2004 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
© 
COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA 
2023 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
www.cag.gov.in

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
    
  
 
 
 
 
 
© COMPTROLLER AND 
 AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA 
www.cag.gov.in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
https://cag.gov.in/ag/telangana 