 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Report of the  
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
 
on 
 
Performance Audit of Implementation of  
74th Constitutional Amendment Act in Telangana State 
for the year ended 31 March 2021 
 
 
 
Government of Telangana 
Report No.2 of 2022 
 

 
Page i 
 
 
 
 Reference to 
 Paragraph Page 
Preface  iii 
Executive Summary  v 
Chapter I – Introduction 
74th Constitutional Amendment Act, 1992 1.1 1 
Trend of Urbanisation in Telangana 1.2 1 
Profile of Urban Local Bodies 1.3 1 
Grades of Municipalities and Municipal Corporations 1.4 2 
Legislations governing Urban Local Bodies 1.5 3 
Organisational Structure of Urban Governance in Telangana 1.6 3 
Audit Objectives 1.7 3 
Audit Criteria 1.8 3 
Audit Scope and Methodology 1.9 4 
Acknowledgement 1.10 5 
Chapter II - Compliance to provisions of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
Comparison of State level Legislations with 74th CAA 2.1 7 
Chapter III - Empowerment of Urban Local Bodies and their functioning 
Actual status of devolution of functions 3.1 11 
State Election Commission 3.2 16 
Composition of Councils in Municipal Corporations/ 
Municipalities 
3.3 16 
Reservation of seats for the Councils of Municipal 
Corporations/Municipalities 
3.4 16 
Status of Elections and formation of Councils 3.5 16 
Mayor/Deputy Mayor and Chairperson/Vice-Chairperson 3.6 17 
Wards Committees in Municipal Corporations and 
Municipalities 
3.7 18 
District Planning Committee for Urban Local Bodies 3.8 18 
Government’s power and control over ULBs as per TM 
Acts 
3.9 19 
Table of Contents 

 
  Page ii 
 
 Reference to 
 Paragraph Page 
Limited powers over Manpower 3.10 19 
Observations on selected Functions/Activities 3.11 21 
Conclusion 3.12 26 
Recommendations 3.13 27 
Chapter IV - Financial Resources of Urban Local Bodies 
Financial Resources of ULBs 4.1 29 
Estimation of requirement of funds/expenditure 4.2 34 
Conclusion 4.3 36 
Recommendations 4.4 37 
Appendices 
Appendix 
No. 
Subject Reference to 
Paragraph Page 
1.1 Major changes made to the Article 243 in the 74 th 
Constitutional Amendment Act, 1992 
1.5 39 
1.2 Organisational structure with respect to 
functioning of ULBs in the State 
1.6 43 
1.3 List of sampled Urban Local Bodies 1.9 44 
3.1 List of Parastatal Agencies 3.1 45 
3.2 Control and overriding power of the State 
Government over ULBs as per Municipal Acts 
3.9 47 
3.3 Vacancy position of sampled ULBs 3.10.2 50 
3.4 Statement showing the details of training 
programmes conducted by the ULBs during 2015-
2021 
3.10.3 51 
3.5 Present per capita demand and supply of water in 
test-checked ULBs 
3.11.1(A) 52 
4.1 A) Test-checked ULBs-wise arrears in collection 
of Property Tax to end of March 2021 
B) Year -wise details of Demand, Collection and 
Balance of PT arrears in test-checked ULBs 
4.1.5.2 53 
 Glossary of Abbreviations     55 
 

 
 
Page iii 
 
 
 
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India for the year ending 31 March 
2021 has been prepared for submission to the Governor of Telangana under Article 151 of 
the Constitution of India, for being laid before the Legislature of the State. 
The Report contains significant results of the Performance Audit of Implementation of 74th 
Constitutional Amendment Act in Telangana State , covering the period 2015 -16 to 
2020-21. 
The instances mentioned in this Report are among those which came to notice during the 
course of test audit. 
The Audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards  
issued by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
 
 
  
Preface 

 
 
 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Executive Summary 
  

 
 
 
 

 
 
Page v 
 
 
The 74th Constitutional Amendment Act (74 th CAA) 1992, which came into effect on  
01 June 1993, provided a Constitutional status to Urban Local Bodies  (ULBs). Article 
243W of the 74 th CAA authorised the State Legislatures to enact laws to enable ULBs to 
function as institutions of self -governance and make provisions for devolution of powers 
and responsibilities.  It empowered ULBs to perform 18  functions listed in the Twelfth 
Schedule of the Constitution.  Telangana Government incorporated corresponding 
provisions in the Telangana Municipalities Act, 2019 which superseded the earlier Acts.   
(Paragraphs 1.1 and 1.5) 
The aim of this Performance Audit was to see whether the ULBs are funct ioning in the 
manner as envisaged in the 74th CAA and adequately empowered to discharge the devolved 
functions effectively and that the devolution of funds had taken place as recommended by 
the Finance Commissions.  
(Paragraph 1.7) 
Compliance to provisions of 74th CAA  
Telangana through statutes had complied with the provisions of the 74 th CAA, however, 
compliance to the constitutional provisions by law does not guarantee effective 
de-centralisation on ground unless followed by effective implementation. It was observed 
that the legal provisions were not backed by decisive actions with respect to timely conduct 
of elections, implementation of S tate Finance Commission (SFC) recommendations and 
constitution of District Planning Committees (DPCs). 
(Paragraph 2.1) 
Empowerment of Urban Local Bodies and their functioning  
Out of 18 functions, 17 functions have been devolved to ULBs except Fire Services. 
However, major functions such as drinking water supply and urban/town planning are 
entrusted to State Departments/Parastatal Agencies. 
(Paragraph 3.1) 
The task of delimitation to State Election Commission (SEC) as recommended by the 
Second Administrative Reforms Commission had not been entrusted to SEC (March 2022). 
(Paragraph 3.2) 
The elections of ULBs were held with delays ranging from four to sixty-six months. In the 
absence of an elected body, the Administration was run by Special Officers appointed by 
the State Government. 
(Paragraph 3.5) 
District Planning Committees have not been constituted in any of the districts  and as a 
result, consolidated Draft Development Plans were not prepared considering local needs 
and matters of common interest. 
(Paragraph 3.8) 
Executive Summary 

Performance Audit of ‘Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act in Telangana State’  
Page vi 
 
The ULBs neither had the powers to assess the staff requirement, nor to recruit the required 
staff.  As against sanctioned strength of 8,752, 3900 posts (45 per cent) were vacant in the 
State, resulting in dependence on outsourced staff for service delivery. 
(Paragraphs 3.10.1 and 3.10.2) 
There was inadequate focus on training of functionaries/staff, with 10  out of 17 ULBs 
test-checked, not conducting any training programme for the staff during the period 2015-21. 
(Paragraph 3.10.3) 
The water supply was deficient in meeting the per capita norms in 10 selected ULBs.  In 
the selected ULBs, except for Greater Wa rangal Municipal Corporation (where the 
household coverage was only one per cent), none of the Urban Local Bodies had installed 
water meters. Water audit was not being conducted in 11 selected ULBs. State Government 
had not approved the draft rules for periodical revision of water charges which could result 
in loss of incremental revenue to ULBs. 
(Paragraphs 3.11.1(A), (B), (C) and (D)) 
Solid Waste Management plans, as required under Solid Waste Management Rules, 2016, 
were not prepared in five ULBs.  Urban Local Bodies failed to collect garbage charges 
from the households in seven ULBs. Solid Waste Management was ineffective due to non-
identification of sanitary landfills sites in 15 ULBs. 
(Paragraphs 3.11.2, 3.11.2.1 and 3.11.2.2) 
Financial Resources of Urban Local Bodies 
The fiscal transfers from Government during the period 2015 -16 to 2020-21 formed 46 to 
66 per cent of total revenue of ULBs. 
(Paragraph 4.1.1) 
The State Government constituted State Finance Commission (SFC) in March 2015, 
however, Chairperson and Members were appointed only in January 2018.  In the absence 
of SFC recommendations, State Government released funds to ULBs taking the population 
as criterion, during the period 2015-16 to 2020-21. The recommendations submitted by the 
SFC in October 2020 are yet to be accepted by State Government (March 2022). The short 
releases against allocations of SFC grants during 2017 -18 to 2019 -20 ranged between 5 0 
and 85 per cent affecting the financial position of the ULBs. 
(Paragraph 4.1.2) 
There was short release of `647.23 crore of 14 th Finance Commission grants during the 
period 2015-16 to 2019-20.  
(Paragraph 4.1.3) 
Surcharge on Stamp Duty of `1,822.49 crore collected on transfer of properties during 
2019-20 and 2020-21 was not assigned to ULBs by Registration and Stamps Department. 
(Paragraph 4.1.4) 

Executive Summary 
Page vii 
 
The share of Property Tax revenue to total revenue in ULBs stood at 42 per cent during the 
period 2015-16 to 2020 -21. The arrears of Property Tax along with interest as on 31 
March 2021 was `786.71 crore.  
(Paragraphs 4.1.5.1 and 4.1.5.2) 
Accumulated arrears of water charges amounting to `37.54 crore was noticed in nine 
selected ULBs to the end of March 2021. The Operation and Maintenance (O&M) charges 
towards water supply incurred by the Municipalities was generally more than the actual 
receipt of water charges. 
(Paragraphs 4.1.5.3 and 4.1.5.4) 
There were huge variations between Budget Estimates and actual income and expenditure 
during 2015-16 to 2020-21 which indicated unrealistic budget formulation in two sampled 
ULBs. 
(Paragraph 4.2.1) 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
Pages 1 - 5 
Chapter I 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Introduction 
 
 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Chapter I - Introduction 
Page 1 
 
Chapter I – Introduction 
 
1.1 74th Constitutional Amendment Act, 1992 
In order to enable the Urban Local Bodies  (ULBs) to perform effectively as vibrant 
democratic units of self -government, it was considered necessary that provision s relating 
to ULBs are incorporated in the Constitution of India through an amendment. Such an 
amendment was to put on a firmer footing, their  relationship with the State Government 
with respect to the functions and resources as well as for regular conduct of elections and 
for providing adequate representation for the weaker sections like Scheduled Castes, 
Scheduled Tribes and Women.  
The Constitution (Seventy Fourth Amendment) Act, 1992, which came into effect on  
01 June 1993, provided a Constitutional status to ULBs in the country. Article 243W of the 
Constitutional Amendment Act authorised the State Legislatures to enact laws to endow 
local bodies with powers and authority as may be necessary to enable them to function as 
institutions of self -governance and make provisions for devolution of powers and 
responsibilities. The Twelfth Schedule of the Constitution enumerates 18 specific functions 
to be devolved to ULBs. 
1.2 Trend of Urbanisation in Telangana 
Telangana is geographically the twelfth largest State of the Country, with a population of 
3.52 crore.  As per Census-2011, 1.36 crore 1 people reside in urban  areas of Telangana, 
constituting 38.64 per cent  of total population  of the State . The growth rate of the 
population in the decade 2001-2011 was 13.58 per cent2. Each Municipality in Telangana 
is an extensive human settlement with high density of population  with ever increas ing 
demands on sanitation, water supply, transport and communication among others. In this 
scenario, ULBs have an important role to play, as most of these issues are handled best at 
the local level3. 
1.3 Profile of Urban Local Bodies 
 Article-243Q of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act (74th CAA) provided for constitution 
of three types of Municipalities viz., (i)  Nagar Panchayat s, (ii) Municipal 
Councils/Municipalities and (iii) Municipal Corporations. The Telangana Transitional 
Area an d Smaller Urban Areas (Fixation of criteria) Rules,1995 and The Telangana 
Municipal Corporations (Fixation of criteria for specification of larger urban areas) Rules, 
1994 as amended, provide the criteria for constitution of three types of Municipalities a s 
detailed in Table-1.1. 
 
1 out of the total population of 3.52 crore of the State 
2 Decadal growth rate as per ‘Telangana State at a Glance’ published (2017) by the Directorate of Economics and 
Statistics, Telangana 
3 Section 107(1) of Telangana Municipalities Act, 2019 (TM Act, 2019) 

Performance Audit of ‘Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act in Telangana State’ 
Page 2 
 
Table-1.1: Criteria for constitution of Nagar Panchayats, Municipal Councils/Municipalities 
and Municipal Corporations 
Sl. 
No. 
Criteria of Population Nagar 
Panchayat# 
Municipality Municipal Corporation 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
1 Population as per last 
Census-2011 
20,000 to 
40,000 
Above 40,000 and 
up to 3 lakh 
3 lakh and above with 
certain relaxations 
2 Density of population 
per square km. 
400  500  Not less than 5,000 
3 Revenue  `40 lakh 
subject to 
relaxations 
`60 lakh  —  
 
4 Percentage of 
employment in non -
agricultural activities 
25 per cent  
subject to 
relaxations 
40 per cent subject to  
relaxations 
—  
 
5 Economic 
importance 
Availability of 
market 
facilities and 
potentialities 
to attract 
industries 
Availability of 
market facilities and 
potentialities to 
attract industries 
Established industries, 
potential for growth of 
industries, commerce, 
higher education, 
medical facilities and 
adequate infrastructure 
necessary for economic 
and industrial growth 
6 Other factors Local area 
acquiring 
urban 
characteristics 
Local area acquiring 
urban 
characteristics, 
peripheral villages 
The number of 
peripheral villages 
whose growth and 
expansion are towards 
the proposed larger 
urban area 
Source: Manual of Municipal Administration in Telangana, 2017 
# All the Nagar Panchayats have been upgraded as Municipalities 
1.4 Grades of Municipalities and Municipal Corporations 
The grades of Municipalities categorised in the Manual of Municipal Administration, 2017 
based on the annual income are (i) Selection Grade (`8 crore and above), (ii) Special Grade 
(`6 crore and above and below `8 crore), (iii) First Grade ( `4 crore and above and below 
`6 crore), (iv) Second Grade (`2 crore and above and below `4 crore) and (v) Third Grade 
(`1 crore and above and below `2 crore). 
There were 73 ULBs (Six Municipal Corporations, 42 Municipalities and 25 Nagar 
Panchayats) that existed in 2016. Subsequently, the number of ULBs have increased to 141 
(13 Municipal Corporations and 128 Municipalities) due to upgradation/bifurcation of 
earlier Nagar Panchayats to Municipalities and Municipalities to Municipal Corporations.  
Each Municipal Corporation/Municipality area has been divided into Wards, based on the 
population, which are determined and notified by the State Government for the purpose of 
election of Corporators /Councillors (Ward Members) . All ULBs have an elected body 
comprising Mayor/Chairperson and Corporators/Councillors. 

Chapter I - Introduction 
Page 3 
 
1.5 Legislations governing Urban Local Bodies 
The Municipal Corporations/Municipalities are governed by: 
• The Greater Hyderabad Municipal Corporation Act, 1955 (GHMC Act, 1955); 
• The Telangana Municipalities Act, 1965 (TM Act, 1965); 
• The Telangana Municipal Corporations Act, 1994 (TMC Act, 1994); and 
• The Telangana Municipalities Act, 2019 (TM Act, 2019). 
Subsequent to the 74 th CAA, 1992, all the provisions of the Act were amended in  the 
Telangana Municipal Laws (Second Amendment Act, 1994) and all the amendments made 
from time to time were incorporated in the new Telangana Municipalities Act, 2019 (July 
2019).  The major changes pertaining to the Article-243W and 243X of the Constitution of 
India have been discussed in detail in Para 3.9 of the Report . The exhaustive list of 
amendments made with respect to the Constitution and Composition of the Municipalities, 
Wards Committees, Reservation of the seats for SCs, ST s, BCs and Women etc., to the 
Telangana Municipal Acts is given in Appendix-1.1. 
1.6 Organisational Structure of Urban Governance in Telangana 
The Municipal Administration and Urban Development Department (MAUDD), headed by 
the Principal Secretary t o the Government, is the Department which oversees  the 
governance of all ULBs. The Commissioner and Director of Municipal Administration 
(CDMA) functions as an interface between the State Government and ULBs (except for 
Greater Hyderabad Municipal Corporation, which functions directly under MAUDD). The 
organisational structure with respect to functioning of ULBs in the State is indicated in 
Appendix-1.2. 
1.7 Audit Objectives 
The Performance Audit seeks to ascertain whether: 
➢ The Urban Local Bodies have been empowered by the State Government to discharge 
their functions/responsibilities effectively through creation of appropriately designed 
institutions/institutional mechanisms and their function; 
➢ The functions stated to have been devolved were effective on the ground; and  
➢ The Urban Local Bodies have been empowered to access adequate resources, 
including sufficient resources for discharge of functions stated to have been devolved 
to them. 
1.8 Audit Criteria 
The criteria for the Performance Audit were sourced from the following: 
✓ 74th Constitutional Amendment Act, 1992 
✓ Greater Hyderabad Municipal Corporation Act, 1955 
✓ The Telangana Municipalities Act, 1965 (TM Act, 1965) 
✓ The Telangana Municipal Corporations Act, 1994 (TMC Act, 1994) 
✓ Telangana Municipalities Act, 2019   

Performance Audit of ‘Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act in Telangana State’ 
Page 4 
 
✓ Telangana Municipal Budgeting and Accounting Rules 
✓ Telangana Financial Code 
✓ State Finance Commission Reports 
✓ 14th Finance Commission Report 
✓ Telangana Urban Areas (Development) Act, 1975 
✓ Telangana Town Planning Act, 1920 
✓ Central Public Health and Environmental Engineering Organisation (CPHEEO) 
Manual 
✓ Solid Waste Management Rules, 2016 
✓ State Government orders, notifications, circulars and instructions issued from time 
to time 
✓ Manual of Municipal Administration in Telangana, 2017 by Centre for Good 
Governance  
 
1.9 Audit Scope and Methodology 
The Performance Audit on Implementation of 74th CAA in Telangana State was conducted 
during January to October 2021 covering the period April 2015 to March 2021.  
The offices covered in audit include (i) Secretariat of MAUDD, (ii) CDMA and (iii) 
Seventeen ULBs  sampled by Audit as indicated in Appendix-1.3. The 17 ULBs were 
selected from the  73 ULBs (that existed in 2016) through simple random sampling w ith 
population as criteria (based on Census-2011) from each tier of ULB.  We selected the 
following five functions out of seventeen functions/activities devolved to ULBs for detailed 
examination:  
1. Property Tax 
2. Public health and sanitation 
3. Solid Waste Management 
4. Water supply 
5. Water charges 
Information was also obtained from State Election Commission (SEC) and Telangana State 
Pollution Control Board (TSPCB) regarding conduct of elections and management of solid 
waste. Audit methodology included scrutiny o f records and joint physical verification, 
wherever necessary. Entry Conference was held on 22 January 2021 with the Principal 
Secretary, MAUDD and CDMA wherein the audit methodology, scope, objectives and 
criteria were explained. Audit findings were discussed with the CDMA and other Officers 
of the Department in the Exit Conference held on 14 March 2022 and Government replies 
have been suitably incorporated in the Report.  Further, the recommendations given by 
Audit were accepted by the Government. 

Chapter I - Introduction 
Page 5 
 
The audit observations relating to status of compliance to the 74 th CAA provisions, 
devolution of functions, funds and functionaries are presented in the following chapters. 
Chapter-II :  Compliance to provisions of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
Chapter-III:  Empowerment of Urban Local Bodies and their functioning  
Chapter-IV:  Financial Resources of Urban Local Bodies 
1.10 Acknowledgement 
We acknowledge the cooperation and assistance extended by the State Government , staff 
of CDMA and all the test-checked ULBs in conducting the Performance Audit. 
 

 
 

 
 
 
Pages 7 - 9 
Chapter II 
 
 
 
 
 
                  
  
Compliance to provisions of  
74th Constitutional Amendment Act  
 
  

 
 
 
 

Chapter II – Compliance to provisions of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
Page 7 
 
Chapter II – Compliance to provisions of 74th Constitutional 
Amendment Act 
 
2.1 Comparison of State level Legislations with 74th CAA 
The 74 th CAA vide Articles 243Q to 243ZG  introduced certain provisions relating to 
Municipalities. Provisions corresponding to the 74 th CAA were incorporated by the State 
Government in the Telangana Municipal Acts. Details of the Telangana Municipalities Act, 
2019 which superseded all earlier Telangana Municipal Acts, are indicated in Table-2.1. 
 
Table-2.1: Comparison of State level Legislations with the provisions of 74th CAA 
Provision of 
Constitution of 
India 
Requirement as per provision of Constitution of India Provision of TM 
Act, 2019 
(1) (2) (3) 
Article 243Q Constitution of Municipalities: It provides for 
constitution of three types of Municipalities namely a 
Nagar Panchayat for transitional area, a Municipal Council 
for a smaller urban area and a Municipal Corporation for a 
larger urban area. 
Section-3  
Article 243R Composition of Municipalities: All the seats in a 
Municipality shall be filled by direct elections and by 
persons with special knowledge in municipal 
administration nominated by Government. The 
Legislature of a State may by law, provide for 
representation to the Municipa lity, Members of House of 
People and Legislative Assembly whose constituencies 
comprise wholly or partly  the municipal area and 
Members of the Council of States and State Legislative 
Council who are registered as electors within the 
municipal area. 
Section-5  
Article 243S Constitution and composition of Wards Committee:  
This provides for constitution of Wards Committees in all 
Municipalities with a population of three lakh or more. 
Sections-17 and 30  
Article 243T Reservation of seats:  The seats to be reserved for 
Scheduled Caste (SC)/Scheduled Tribe (ST), Backward 
Classes (BC) and Women for direct election. 
Section-7  
Article 243U Duration of Municipalities:  The Municipality has a 
fixed tenure of five years from the date appointed for its 
first meeting. As per article 243 U(3) an election for 
constitution of the Municipality shall be completed 
before the expiry of its duration of five years. 
Sections-10(1) and 
15(3) 
Article 243V Disqualifications for membership: A Person shall be 
disqualified for a member of a Municipality- 
If he is so disqualified by or under any law for the time 
being in force for the purposes of elections of the 
Legislature of the State ; If he is so disqualified by or 
under any law made by the Legislature of the State. 
Sections-12 and 13  

Performance Audit of ‘Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act in Telangana State’ 
Page 8 
 
Article 243W Powers, authority and responsibilities of the 
Municipalities: All the M unicipalities would be 
empowered with such powers as may be necessary to 
enable them to function as effective institutions of self -
government. The State Government shall entrust such  
powers and authority  to enable them to carry out the 
responsibilities in relation to Twelfth Schedule of the 
Constitution of India. 
Sections-51 to 55  
Article 243X Power to  impose taxes by, and funds of the 
Municipalities: Municipalities would be empowered to 
levy and collect the  taxes, fees, duties  etc. Grant-in-aid 
would be given to the  Municipalities from the  State 
Consolidated Fund for crediting and withdrawal of 
moneys by the Municipality. 
Sections-82, 83, 84 
of TM Act, 2019 and 
Section-197 of 
GHMC Act, 1955 
Article 243Y 
read with 
Article 243I 
Finance Commission: State Government shall constitute 
Finance Commission for Review the financial position of 
the Municipalities  and taking such steps that help in 
boosting the financial condition of the Municipal bodies. 
Distributing between the State and  the Municipalities of 
the net proceeds of the taxes, fees, tolls and duties that are 
charged by the State Government. Allotting the funds to 
the municipal bodies in the State from the Consolidated 
fund of the State. 
Section-113A  
Article 243Z Audit of Accounts of Municipalities:  This provides a 
provision for maintenance of accounts by the 
Municipalities and the auditing of such accounts. 
Section-110 of TM 
Act, 2019  and 
Section-196 of 
GHMC Act, 1955 
Article 243ZA 
Read with 
Article 243K 
Elections to the Municipalities:  The superintendence, 
direction and control of all procedure of election of 
the Municipalities shall be vested in the SEC. 
Section-194  
Article 243ZD Committee for District Planning:  Constitution of 
District Planning Committee  (DPC) at district  level. 
Composition of District Planning Committee. Preparation 
of draft development plan and forward ing it to the 
Government. 
No provision was 
made in TM Acts for 
constitution of 
District Planning 
Committees. 
However, 
Government may 
constitute Planning 
Committees at 
Municipality level  
under Section-75(2) 
of TM Act, 2019. 
Source: TM Act, 2019 and GHMC Act, 1955 
The table shows that Telangana through statutes had complied with the provisions of the 
74th CAA. However, compliance to the constitutional provisions by law does not guarantee 
effective decentralisation on ground unless followed by effective implementation. We 
observed that the legal provision s were not backed by decisive actions , resulting in a 
situation in which the spirit of the 74 th CAA has not fructified particularly with respect to 
timely conduct of elections, implementation of S tate Finance Commission (SFC)  
recommendations and constitution of DPCs . This was also true in the case of provisions 

Chapter II – Compliance to provisions of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
Page 9 
 
pertaining to the devolution of functions and creation of appropriate institutional 
mechanisms for effective decentralisation, as brought out in the succeeding chapters. 
Government stated (March 2022) that the elections were delayed in 71 ULBs due to 
pending Court cases . As a major governance reform towards decentrali sation of 
administration, the Government had created the post of Additional Collector (Local Bodies) 
in the districts.  

 
 
 
 
  

 
 
 
Chapter III 
Pages 11 - 27 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                  
 
Empowerment of Urban Local 
Bodies and their functioning  
 
 
 

 
 

Chapter III – Empowerment of Urban Local Bodies and their functioning 
Page 11 
 
Chapter III - Empowerment of Urban Local Bodies  
and their functioning 
 
3.1 Actual status of devolution of functions 
The 74th CAA sought to empower ULBs to perform functions and implement schemes in 
relation to 18 subjects specified in the Twelfth  Schedule of the Constitution of India. Each 
State was expected to enact a legislation to implement the amendment. The State 
Government through amendments to TM/TMC Acts had devolved 17 out of 18 functions 
to ULBs, except Fire Services. Of the 17 devolved functions, the ULBs had full jurisdiction 
in six, partial jurisdiction in nine, no jurisdiction in one and overlapping jurisdiction in one. 
Details are discussed in Table-3.1. 
Table-3.1: Statement showing the actual status of implementation of the devolved functions 
Sl. 
No. 
Functions   Activities Actual status of 
implementation of the 
devolved functions 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
  Functions where ULB has full jurisdiction 
1 Burials and burial 
grounds; 
cremations, 
cremation grounds 
and electric 
crematoriums 
Construction and Operation & 
Maintenance (O&M) of 
crematoriums and burial grounds, 
upgrade them as modern 
crematoriums and electric 
crematoriums  
All the 17 test-checked ULBs 
have been carrying out this 
function.  
2 Cattle pounds; 
prevention of cruelty 
to animals 
Reduce the stray animal’s 
population, catching strays and 
handing over to Animal Protection 
Committees 
All the 17 test -checked ULBs 
have been carrying out this 
function. 
Registration of pet animals, cause 
vaccination 
Ensuring safety of animals 
3 Regulation of 
slaughter- houses 
and tanneries 
Ensuring quality of animals and 
meat 
All the 17 test -checked ULBs 
have been carrying out this 
function. Prohibit or regulate the slaughter, 
cutting or skinning of animals 
Establishment and moderni sation 
of slaughter-houses 
4 Slum improvement 
and upgradation 
Improvement of notified and 
identified slums 
Nine4 out of 17 test -checked 
ULBs are only carrying out 
the slum improvement 
activities.  
De-notification of developed slums 
5 Public amenities 
including street 
lighting, parking 
lots, bus stops and 
Installation and maintenance of 
streetlights, conversion of 
conventional streetlights into 
energy efficient lighting mode 
Public toilets were constructed 
in 14 ULBs. No parking lots 
were constructed in any of the 
17 test-checked ULBs.   
 
4 Municipal Corporations of Boduppal, Meerpet, Ramagundam and Warangal; Municipalities of Medak, Pedda 
Amberpet, Sadasivapet, Shadnagar and Siddipet 

Performance Audit of ‘Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act in Telangana State’ 
 
Page 12 
 
public conveniences Development of road junctions , 
medians and parking spaces . 
Establishment and maintenance of 
destitute homes, night shelters and 
shelters for exigencies , bus stops 
and bus shelters 
6 Provision of urban 
amenities and 
facilities such as 
parks, gardens, 
playgrounds 
Creation of parks, gardens, 
community halls and sports 
complexes 
Parks and nurseries were 
created in 16 ULBs but no 
Playgrounds exist in any of 17 
test-checked ULBs.  Operation & Maintenance 
Functions where ULB has no role 
7 Urban planning 
including town 
planning 
 Preparation of Master Plans Master Plans are prepared by 
Urban Development 
Authorities (UDAs)/  
Directorate of Town and 
Country Planning (DTCPs). 
Enforcing implementation of 
Master Plan regulations 
Enforcement is done by 
UDAs/ DTCPs. 
Planned development of new areas 
for human settlement 
Functions where ULB has partial role 
8 Planning for 
economic and social 
development 
Programme implementation for 
economic activities 
While the State Government 
issues the guidelines and 
recognises the beneficiaries, 
verification is done by the 
ULBs for implementation of 
Welfare schemes such as 
housing and other livelihood 
enhancement programmes.  
Policies for social development 
9 Safeguarding the 
interests of weaker 
sections of society 
including the 
handicapped and 
mentally retarded 
Identifying/verification of 
beneficiaries 
State Departments such as (i) 
Scheduled Castes 
Development, (ii) Health, 
Medical and Family Welfare, 
(iii) Women, Children,  
Disabled & Senior Citizens  
and State Engineering 
Departments are responsible 
for these functions. ULBs 
were only doing 
identification/verification of 
the beneficiaries.  
Providing tools/benefits such as 
tricycles 
Housing programmes 
10 Urban poverty 
alleviation 
Identifying/verification of 
beneficiaries 
Only 
identification/verification of 
beneficiaries is done by 
ULBs. Scheme 
Implementation done by 
District Rural Development 
Agencies (DRDAs) and other 
Livelihood and employment 
Street vendors 

Chapter III – Empowerment of Urban Local Bodies and their functioning 
Page 13 
 
livelihood5 activities by 
Mission for Elimination of 
Poverty i n Municipal Areas 
(MEPMA).  
11 Regulation of land -
use and 
construction of 
buildings 
Ensuring construction and 
development in accordance with 
the plan and land use and 
regulation of unauthori sed 
buildings 
Land use and building 
construction activities are 
regulated by ULBs. In case of 
the high -rise buildings , 
various bodies such as UDAs 
and State Fire Services are 
involved.  The role of ULBs is 
restricted to issu ance and 
renewal of building 
permissions and enforcement 
of building byelaws. 
Approving building plans/high 
rises 
12 Roads and bridges Improve or repair the same 
ensuring public safety or 
convenience. Divert or close 
public roads. Widen or expand 
roads ensuring traffic flow pattern 
While Roads &  Buildings 
Department plays the lead 
role in construction of roads 
and bridges, flyovers 6, ULBs 
are involved in construction 
and maintenance of roads, 
bridges, drains and footpaths 
within the jurisdiction.  
Construction and maintenance of 
bridges, drains, flyovers and 
footpaths 
13 Public health, 
sanitation, 
conservancy and 
solid waste 
management 
Construction of individual 
household toilets, public toilets, 
community toilets, SHE toilets, 
make Municipalities Open 
Defecation Free (ODF), sewage 
and sewerage management, faecal 
sludge and septage management, 
wastewater treatment 
ULBs only have a limited role 
in case of public health allied 
responsibilities, as 
Department of Health, 
Medical and Family Welfare 
plays the m ajor role in 
maintaining hospitals and 
dispensaries. The ULBs along 
with the State Departments/  
Parastatal agencies7 undertake 
immunisation/ vaccination 
programmes and wastewater 
treatment. ULBs are also 
responsible for cleaning and 
disinfecting of locali ties 
affected by infectious 
diseases. 
Prevention and control of infectious, 
communicable diseases public 
vaccination 
Promotion measures for abatement 
of all forms of pollution, including 
air pollution 
Cleaning and disinfection of 
localities affected by infectious 
diseases 
Solid Waste Management Solid waste management and 
control and supervision of 
public markets are vested with 
ULBs. 
Control and supervision of public 
markets 
14 Urban forestry, 
protection of the 
environment and 
Afforestation ULBs undertake afforestation 
and awareness drives under 
Harithaharam8 along with the Greenification 
Awareness drives 
 
5 Training in capacity building, soft loans and skilled training 
6 Hyderabad Metropolitan Development Authority (HMDA) co-exist in construction of flyovers in Hyderabad 
7 Hyderabad Metropolitan Water Supply and Sewerage Board (HMWS&SB) undertakes wastewater treatment/sewerage 
treatment and its disposal in Hyderabad   
8 Harithaharam is a flagship programme of the State Government envisages increasing the tree cover of the State from 
the present 25.16 per cent to 33 per cent of the total geographical area 

Performance Audit of ‘Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act in Telangana State’ 
 
Page 14 
 
promotion of 
ecological aspects 
Protection of the 
environment and promotion of 
ecological aspects 
Horticulture and Forest 
Departments.  Hence, 
protection of the environment 
and promotion of ecological 
aspects is partially vested with 
the ULB. 
Maintenance of natural resources 
like lake s and water bodies 
protection and development, etc. 
15 Promotion of 
cultural, educational 
and aesthetic aspects 
Promotion of cultural activities, 
music, physical education, sports 
and theatres and infrastructure 
therefor 
Primary responsibility vests 
with Department of 
Education. ULBs along with 
the State Departments of 
Culture, Archaeology & 
Museums and UDAs 
undertake activities allied with 
public spaces beautification, 
organising fairs and festivals. 
Heritage structures/areas 
Beautification of public spaces  
16 Vital statistics 
including 
registration of births 
and deaths 
Coordinating with hospitals Both ULBs and the  
Department of Health, 
Medical and Family Welfare  
maintain database of births 
and deaths. ULBs register and 
issue certificates of births and 
deaths. 
Maintaining and updating 
Database 
Functions with minimal role and/or having overlapping jurisdictions with State 
Departments and/or parastatals 
17 
 
Water supply for 
domestic, industrial 
and commercial 
purposes 
Water supply Rural Water Supply and 
Sanitation (RWS&S)/Mission 
Bhagiratha Department and 
Hyderabad Metropolitan 
Water Supply and Sewerage 
Board (H MWS&SB)9 are in 
charge of creation of assets. 
ULBs’ role is restricted to 
distribution, operation and 
maintenance of water supply. 
Providing individual tap 
connections. 
Operation & Maintenance , 
reducing non-revenue water  and 
undertake water audit. 
Collection of water charges 
Function not devolved 
18 Fire Services Providing fire NOC/approval 
certificate in respect of high-rise 
buildings 
This function is vested with 
Telangana State Disaster 
Response and Fire Services 
Department. 
In Telangana State, the major functions such as water supply and urban/town planning are 
entrusted to State Departments/Parastatal Agencies. These parastatal agencies (detailed in 
Appendix-3.1) are being controlled by the Government through their own Governing 
Bodies. The functions of parastatal agencies are as follows. 
• The State Government has entrusted the function of ‘supply of drinking water ’ to 
Hyderabad and surrounding ULBs such as Corporations of Meerpet, Boduppal and 
Municipalities of Bhongir and Pedda Amberpet to HMWS&SB. It also undertakes the 
work of the underground drainage in Hyderabad city. 
 
9 Water supply in Hyderabad city and surrounding ULBs 

Chapter III – Empowerment of Urban Local Bodies and their functioning 
Page 15 
 
Government stated (March 2022) that the functions of water supply and sewerage were 
entrusted to HMWS&SB to ensure uniform infrastructure between GHMC and 
adjacent ULBs. The issues of urban agglomeration and non -availability of natural 
resources for water drawl by the ULBs were also kept in view.  
• The functions of urban planning and regulation of land use are discharged by the eight 
UDAs10 established for the planned development of important urban areas under the 
Telangana Urban Areas Development Act, 1975. 
• The Directorate of Town and Country Planning (DTCP) is involved in preparation  of 
Master Plans for towns in Telangana State, revision of Master Plans for the ULBs other 
than those covered under UDAs, giving assistance to Municipalities in development 
programmes and technical advice to UDAs and other Government organi sations. The 
DTCP also gives technical approval of the layouts, group housing, commercial 
complexes, preparation and approval for type of designs for community and public 
buildings. Thirty-two Town Planning Authorities (T PAs) in the State are responsible 
for implementatio n of these functions. The DTCP has taken up preparation of 
Geographic Information System (GIS) based Master Plans for four UDAs 11 and six 
ULBs12. 
Government stated (March 2022) that all the ULBs are also involved in preparation of 
Master Plans, Road Development Plans, Water Supply Network Plans, Junction Plans, 
Solid Waste Management (SWM) Plan, Sanitation Plans, Green Space Plan, etc., and 
are actively participating in implementation of such approved plans to improve the 
quality of life of citizens. However, the extent of ULBs’ involvement in these activities 
was not forthcoming from their reply.  
• The Telangana Urban Finance and Infrastructure Development Corporation Limited 
(TUFIDC) undertakes various projects with support from external sources such as 
Financial Institutions, Centrally Sponsored Schemes and State Government schemes 
for investment support to ULBs. The ULBs approach TUFIDC with a loan/grant 
proposal to support its pote ntial investment. In this context, ULBs enter into an 
agreement specifying the terms and conditions of loan with TUFIDC.   
The parastatal agencies were established before and after enactment of 74 th CAA through 
issue of the notifications and are governed b y the respective State Acts. The Government 
should have amended these Acts to comply with the provisions of 74th CAA. In the 17 test-
checked ULBs, 2013 parastatal agencies and other Departments were involved in service 
delivery of 11 functions. 
Without complete devolution of the functions, the ULBs cannot be strengthened in the 
State.  
 
10 1)Satavahana UDA, Karimnagar, 2)Stambhadri UDA, Khammam, 3)Nizamabad UDA, 4)Kakatiya UDA, Warangal, 
5)Siddipet UDA, 6) Yadagirigutta Temple DA, Hyderabad, 7) Vemulawada Temple DA and 8) Quli Qutub Shah UDA, 
Hyderabad 
11 Karimnagar, Khammam, Nizamabad Corporations and Siddipet Municipality 
12 Ramagundam Corporation; Adilabad, Mahbubnagar, Miryalaguda, Nalgonda and Suryapet Municipalities  
13 DTCP (1), HMWS&SB (1), UDAs (4) and other Departments (14)  

Performance Audit of ‘Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act in Telangana State’ 
 
Page 16 
 
3.2 State Election Commission 
The Telangana State Election Commission (SEC) was formed in September 2014. The 
duties of the Commission include superintendence, direction and control of the preparation 
of electoral rolls and the conduct of all elections to Panchayats and ULBs. The Second 
Administrative Reforms Commission (ARC) in its Sixth Report on Local Governance (vide 
Para 3.2.1.12) on electoral process have recommended that the task of delimitation and 
reservation of constituencies should be entrusted to the SECs  and the same was  accepted 
by Government of India  (GoI). However, the powers regarding delimitation of wards, 
reservation of seats for the Council and rotation policy of seats for the posts of 
Mayor/Chairperson, Deputy -Mayor/Vice-Chairperson and Wards rest with the State 
Government. 
Government accepted (March 2022) the audit observation and stated that as it was a policy 
decision, the Government would take a decision in the matter.  
3.3  Composition of Councils in Municipal Corporations/Municipalities 
Article-243R of India n Constitution stipulates the composition of Municipalities. The 
Corporations and Municipalities  for a specified urban area  consist of elected 
Corporators/Councillors (Ward Members), nominated Members, Member of Legislative 
Assembly, Member of Legislative Council, Members of the House of People, Members of 
the Council of States representing the Constituencies14. The nominated members do not have 
voting power. The Mayor is elected from among the Corporators and the Chairperson from 
amongst the Councillors15.   
3.4 Reservation of seats for the Councils of Municipal Corporations/  
Municipalities 
Article-243T stipulated reservation of seats for Scheduled Castes (SCs), Scheduled Tribes 
(STs), Backward Classes (BCs) and Women for direct election. The Telangana Municipal 
Acts also provide for allotment of reserved seats in different Wards as per the rotation 
policy adopted by the Government. Reservation of seats shall be made for (i) SCs/STs and 
(ii) Backward classes  (BCs) in proportion of  their population , p rovided that the seats 
reserved shall not exceed 50 per cent of the total number of seats of the Municipality, (iii) 
While 50 per cent of the total seats are reserved for women, same 50 per cent ratio is to be 
observed for women in the respective categories also.  
Further, the reservations shall be made by rotation and shall continue to remain for two 
consecutive terms. In all 17 test-checked ULBs, these provisions have been complied with.  
3.5 Status of Elections and formation of Councils 
Elections to ULBs shall be completed before the expiry of their duration. In case of dissolution, 
elections shall be held within six months from that date. Further, Article-243U(3)(a) of the 
Indian Constitution and TMC Act, 1994 stipulate a fixed te nure of five years for the 
Corporators/Councillors (Ward Members) of ULBs from the date of its first meeting. The 
status of elections and formation of Councils in the ULBs is depicted in Table-3.2. 
 
14 which comprise wholly or partly (to be chosen for one of the Municipalities) in the Municipal area 
15 as per Section-5 of TM Act, 2019 

Chapter III – Empowerment of Urban Local Bodies and their functioning 
Page 17 
 
Table-3.2: Status of Elections and formation of Councils in ULBs 
Name of the ULB No. of 
ULBs 
Due date for 
conduct of 
Election 
Actual date of 
election 
Delay in months 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
GHMC 1 December 2014 February 2016 14 
Khammam and Warangal 
Corporations 
2 October 2011 March 2016 52 
Atchampet Municipality 1 May 2013 March 2016 33 
Siddipet Municipality 1 September 2010 April 2016 66 
Municipalities (120) and 
Municipal Corporations 
(10) 
130 July 2019 January 2020 6 
Nakrekal Municipality 1 December 2020 April 2021 4 
Manuguru, Mandamarri 
and Palvancha 
Municipalities 
3 - - Due to non -
extension of TM 
Act, 2019 to the 
ULBs situated in 
Scheduled Areas 
Zaheerabad Municipality 1 - - Due to pending 
Court Case 
Total ULBs 140 (*)    
Source: Information furnished by State Election Commission (*) There was no delay in one ULB viz., 
Jadcherla Municipality (total 141 ULBs). 
In spite of completion of the Municipal Councils’ terms, the elections were conducted with 
a delay ranging between four and sixty-six months. There was a  delay of 52 months  in 
Khammam/Warangal Corporations.  Similarly, the delay was 66 months in Siddipet 
Municipality and 33 months in Atchampet Municipality . The term of the Municipal 
Councils expired for the 130 ULBs in July 2019 but the elections were held in January 
2020, due to delayed enactment of the new Municipal Act by the Government and 
litigations on delimitation of Municipalities/Corporations pending in the Courts.  Special 
Officers were appointed to the ULBs and the State Government took over the functions of 
Councils in 17 ULBs test -checked. The State delayed the delimitation process, which in 
turn delayed Council elections. 
Government did not furnish reasons for delay in conduct of elections in respect of GHMC, 
Khammam and Warangal Corporations and Atchampet Municipality. The delay in conduct 
of e lections in other ULBs  was attributed to pending Court cases  and Public Interest 
Litigations (PILs).  
3.6 Mayor/Deputy Mayor and Chairperson/Vice-Chairperson 
The Mayor/Chairperson is the first citizen of the City/Town who is to be elected from 
amongst the elected members of the Council. He/she is empowered to preside over every 
meeting of the Municipal Corporation/Municipality and has the power to inspect and give 
direction to the Commissioner with regard to implementation of any Resolution of the 
Corporation/Council. He/she may call  for any record of the Municipal Corporation/  
Municipality from the Commissioner, who is the Executive Head.   

Performance Audit of ‘Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act in Telangana State’ 
 
Page 18 
 
In Telangana, the term of office of Mayor/Chairperson and Deputy Mayor/Vice -
Chairperson in the case of Corporations and Municipalities is five years from the date of 
holding its first meeting. The offices of Mayor/Deputy Mayor and Chairperson/Vice -
Chairperson are to be reserved  for different categories such as SCs, STs, BCs, Women and 
General and rotated among them. This process was complied with in the 17 test-checked 
ULBs. 
3.7  Wards Committees in Municipal Corporations and Municipalities 
Article-243S of the Constitution of India provides for constitution of Wards Committees in 
all the Municipalities with a population of three lakh or more. Wards Committees shall be 
constituted by the Government for the Corporations. The number of Wards Committee shall 
be as determined by Government. Each Wards Committee shall consist of not less than ten 
Wards and include elected Members from the wards for which the Wards Committee is 
constituted. While the Wards Committees were formed in Warangal  and Karimnagar 
Municipal Corporations, they were not formed in Nizamabad Corporation. Though Wards 
Committees were formed in Ramagundam Municipal Corporation, no meetings were held. 
Further, f our types of Ward Commi ttees16 shall be constituted with community 
participation on rotation basis annually , for each Ward , by all the Municipalities and 
Corporations. However, no Ward Committees were constituted in Meerpet and Nizamabad 
Corporations and Kamareddy Municipality. This defeated the objective of facilitating 
community participation in local governance. The absence of community participation 
would adversely impact prioritisation of development works, monitoring of execution of 
works, utilisation and maintenance of assets created, etc. 
Government stated (March 2022) that there was delay in constitution of Ward Committees 
and the meetings could not be conducted in regular intervals due to Covid -19 pandemic. 
However, t he W ard Committees have been constituted in  Meerpet and Nizamabad 
Corporations and Kamareddy Municipality.  
3.8 District Planning Committee for Urban Local Bodies 
Article-243ZD of Constitution of India provides for constitution of a District Planning 
Committee (DPC) for consolidation of plans prepa red by the Panchayats and Municipal 
Corporations/Municipalities. Government may constitute, after consultation with 
Municipal Corporation/Municipality, a Planning Committee for any Municipal 
Corporation/Municipality to prepare plans for development works.  
The DPCs, as enunciated in Article -243ZD of the Constitution of India, have not been  
constituted in any of the Districts. Though the Commissioner, GWMC stated that DPC was 
formed under the Chairmanship of the District Collector , it was not a comprehensive 
Committee, as the Panchayat Raj Institutions were not included. Also , no D raft 
Development Plan (DDP) was prepared and submitted to the District Collector, taking into 
 
16 Youth, Women, Senior Citizens and other Eminent People of the Ward. The functions of Ward Committees include (a) 
upkeep and maintenance of sanitation and solid waste management, (b) tree plantations (Harithaharam), (c) 
maintenance of water supply, parks, playgrounds, public toilets and market places, (d) facilitate collection of taxes, fees 
and other dues to the municipality and (e) taking up to the authority of unauthorised constructions and encroachments, 
(f) encourage art and cultural activities, sports and games and (g) discourage of use of plastic  

Chapter III – Empowerment of Urban Local Bodies and their functioning 
Page 19 
 
consideration the local needs and matters of common interest such as drinking water, roads 
and sewerage system, solid waste management, etc. Non-preparation of comprehensive 
DDP by DPC defeated the very purpose of devolvement of the function s to the ULB as 
envisaged in 74th CAA.  
Government accepted (March 2022) the audit observation and stated that the issue would 
be examined. 
3.9 Government’s power and control over ULBs as per TM Acts 
Constitution of Municipalities and their sustenance is the responsibility of the State 
Government as per Article -243 of the Constitution of India. State Government amended 
the TM Act, 1965 and introduced TMC Act, 1994.  Subsequently, Government introduced 
TM Act, 2019 covering both the Municipal Corporations and Municipalities (except 
GHMC).  We however, observed that while new provisions of the 74 th CAA were 
incorporated in the Telangana State Municipal Acts, pro visions which existed in the 
TM Act, 1965 we re also retained, which accorded the State Government control and 
overriding powers over the ULBs. Further, these powers were retained even in the new TM 
Act, 2019, which allowed the State to continue with the control over the ULBs as detailed 
in the Appendix 3.2. 
In contravention of the envisaged provisions of the 74th CAA, the State Government retains 
the powers to call -for the records of the ULBs and take action against any Municipal 
Authority, if it fails to perform its duty. The State Government also e njoys the powers to 
cancel the resolution passed by Chairperson/Vice -Chairperson and Members of  the 
Municipal Council. Further, the Government has powers of suspension or removal of the 
Chairperson/Vice-Chairperson, the Commissioner or any officer/employee  of the 
Municipality and dissolve a Council. The State Government also has the powers to inspect 
the Municipal properties, call-for documents, plans, estimates, accounts or statistics, report 
on any municipal matters, give directions and frame the rules. The powers to levy Property 
Tax, prepare the Budget, sanction to borrow money for developmental works and allow 
works to be taken up, direct the Municipalities regarding supply of water for residential and 
commercial properties and establishment of slaughte r-houses also vest with the State 
Government. 
3.10 Limited powers over Manpower 
 
3.10.1 Manpower Position of ULBs in Telangana State 
Adequate and qualified Manpower based on the service-oriented functions to be discharged 
within the reasonable time period is required for empowerment of the ULBs.  This 
assessment could be done best by ULBs themselves considering various criteria such as  
(i) type/nature of service to be provided , (ii) extent of geographical area to be covered ,  
(iii) population to be served , (iv) number of existing properties , etc. However, the ULBs 
neither had the powers to assess the staff requirement nor to recruit the permanent staff on 
their own.  
State Government assessed17 the staff requirement based on population, revenue, properties 
etc., without seeking the views of ULBs.  The powers to make rules to govern the 
 
17 vide GO Ms. No.218 MA&UD(G1) Department dated 15 June 2011 

Performance Audit of ‘Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act in Telangana State’ 
 
Page 20 
 
classification, methods of recruitment, qualification, conditions of services, pay and 
allowances, trainings, discipline and conduct and other service conditions of the common 
municipal staff as per Section -43(2) of  TM Act, 2019 w ere vested with the State 
Government. Further, the powers to transfer the officers /staff between the ULBs and to 
deal with the appeals,  against the order of ULBs imposing penalty on any of the officers 
and employees, also rests with the State Government as per Section-44 and 73 of TM Act, 
2019 respectively.  
Scrutiny of staff position of ULBs in the State revealed that the percentage of vacancies 
was very high in Group IV (94 per cent).  In Group I and III, it was over 50 per cent.  The 
Group-wise details of staff position is as shown in Table-3.3. 
Table-3.3: Statement showing the staff vacancy position as on 6 January 2021 
Sl. 
No. 
Category Sanctioned 
Strength 
Persons in 
Position 
Vacancy Percentage of 
vacancy 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
1 Indian Administrative 
Service/ Group-I 
232 83 149 64 
2 Group II 58 54 4 7 
3 Group III      
Senior Accountant 96 32 64 67 
Health Assistant 141 70 71 50 
4 Group IV/Junior Assistant 99 6 93 94 
Source: Information furnished by CDMA 
Further, it was seen from details furnished by the CDMA that 3,900 posts are vacant out of 
8,752 sanctioned posts (all cadres) in the State, resulting in 45 per cent vacancies, affecting 
the delivery of services. 
3.10.2 Staff position in test-checked ULBs 
Tier-wise details of working strength of test-checked Urban Local Bodies showing 
sanctioned post, person-in-position and vacancies are given in Chart-3.1. 
 
 
2907
1124
1356
611
1551
513
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
Municipal Corporations Municipalities
Chart 3.1:  Working Strength of Test checked Urban Local 
Bodies
Sanctioned Post
Person-in-Position
Vacant

Chapter III – Empowerment of Urban Local Bodies and their functioning 
Page 21 
 
As seen, in the 17 test-checked ULBs, 2064 posts we re vacant as against the sanctioned 
strength of 4,031, resulting in 50 per cent vacancies. The details are given in Appendix-3.3. 
We also noticed that ULBs were largely dependent on outsourced staff for service delivery 
and in 17 test -checked ULBs , 8087 outsourced staff were deployed during  
2020-21. 
In the exit conference (March 2022), Department accepted the observation of huge 
vacancies and large gap between the sanctioned strength and persons in position. As there 
was no staffing pattern earlier, the Government had framed norms (June 2011) for staffing 
pattern for ULBs, based on population, area and revenue to ensure uniformity in the 
staffing. However, the fact remains that manpower position in ULBs has not improved and 
the ULBs are largely dependent upon the outsourced staff for the service delivery. 
3.10.3 Capacity Building  
Capacity building is essential for strengthening the capabilities of personnel and for 
equipping them with advanced skills to deliver better services.  
As per Section -42 of the TM Act, 2019 all Ward Members, Chairpersons, 
Vice-Chairpersons elected under th is Act shall undergo training initially and in regular 
intervals on departmental activities and functions of ULBs, provisions of this Act and the 
Rules made thereunder. As per Section -72 (17) of the TM Act, 2019 capacity building 
programmes should be organ ised for the Municipal functionaries. The CDMA nominates 
participants from various ULBs for the training which is a continuous process to be 
reviewed periodically. However, no training programmes were held during 2015 -2021 in 
1018 out of 17 ULBs, as detailed in the Appendix-3.4. In the remaining seven ULBs, training 
was conducted either for the representatives or the employees only. We observed that no 
proposals were sent to CDMA on training requirements. The ULBs did not furnish the 
reasons for non-imparting the training as per the provisions of the Act. There was also no 
mechanism to obtain the feedback to evaluate the impact of training imparted to the staff 
of ULBs on the discharge of functions. We also observed that a database of trained 
personnel was not maintained by the Department.  
Government stated (March 2022) that the training was imparted to elected representatives 
on departmental activities and functions of ULBs through Regional Centre for Urban 
Environmental Studies (RCUES), Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, GoI, Hyderabad.   
3.11  Observations on selected Functions/Activities 
To assess the efficiency of service delivery, five functions/activities devolved to ULBs have 
been selected for examination in the performance audit. Out of the five selected  
functions/activities, three functions viz., 1. Public Health and Sanitation, 2. Solid Waste 
Management and 3. Water supply have been discussed in this Ch apter, along with brief 
introduction of Water charges. Further, the observations relating to Property Tax and Water 
charges have also been discussed in detail in Para 4.1.5 of Chapter-IV of the Report.  
 
18 Municipal Corporations of Boduppal, Karimnagar, Meerpet, Nizamabad and Ramagundam; and Municipalities of 
Kamareddy, Medak, Medchal, Siddipet and Wanaparthy  

Performance Audit of ‘Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act in Telangana State’ 
 
Page 22 
 
3.11.1  Water Supply system in Telangana 
Water supply to residential, commercial and industrial establishments is an obligatory and 
important function of the ULBs, devolved by the State Government as per Article -243W 
of the Constitution . The ULBs receiv e bulk water supply from rivers through Mission 
Bhagiratha network, in addition to their own source of surface and ground water. A s per 
the Service Level Benchmarks (SLBs) fixed by Ministry of Urban Development (MoUD) 
and recommended by 13th and 14 th Finance Commissions, water is to be supplied  to 
households on daily basis. 
(A) Per capita norms for water supply 
Telangana Government launched Mission Bhagiratha (2015) for supply of bulk drinking 
water drawn from the river sources through grid network to all households in the State. As 
per the project, quantity of water to be supplied was 100 lpcd 19 (Rural areas/Gra m 
Panchayats), 135 lpcd (Urban areas/Municipalities) and 150 lpcd (Urban areas/Municipal 
Corporations).  
As per the recommendations of the 14th Finance Commission, the ULBs have to notify the 
SLBs of the basic services to be provided every year in the District Gazette. The ULBs had 
notified SLBs in the Gazette relating to four functions viz., (1) water supply, (2) wastewater 
management, (3) solid waste management and (4) storm water drains. As per the SLBs, 
water was to be supplied at 135 lpcd (24 hours water supply) in the ULBs with 100 per cent 
coverage of connections. We noticed that the water supply was deficient in 1020 out of 17 
test-checked ULBs and the percentage of shortfall rang ed from 10 to 68 per cent  as 
indicated in Appendix-3.5. Though water is supplied daily in nine21 ULBs, the duration of 
supply ranged between half -an hour and one hour. In the remaining eight ULBs where 
water is supplied through parastatal agencies22, it was noticed that in six 23 ULBs water is 
supplied once in two /three/six days in a week . Further, the effective quantity of water 
supply in seven24 ULBs, where the supply was not made on daily basis ranged between 
14 lpcd and 68 lpcd, indicating acute shortage of water.  
Government stated (March 2022) that the per capita water supply under Mission Bhagiratha 
(8 ULBs) would be achieved on completion of the works  such as additional storage 
reservoirs, distribution pipelines in uncovered/extended areas and by providing additional 
household connections. In respect of the two ULBs located w ithin the Outer Ring Road, 
per capita water supply could be achieved through HMWS&SB on completion of the 
comprehensive scheme sanctioned in September 2021.  Further, the CDMA accepted that 
the water supply indicators mentioned in the SLBs were not fully achieved. 
 
19 litres per capita, per day  
20 Meerpet Corporation and Bhongir, Bodhan, Jangaon, Kamareddy, Medchal, Pedda Amberpet, Sadasivapet, Shadnagar  
and Wanaparthy Municipalities 
21 Municipal Corporations: Karimnagar, Nizamabad, Ramagundam and Warangal; Municipalities: Bodhan, Jangaon, 
Medak, Siddipet and Wanaparthy 
22 HMWS & SB and Mission Bhagiratha 
23 Municipal Corporation of Meerpet & Municipalities of Bhongir, Kamareddy, Medchal, Pedda Amberpet and Shadnagar 
24 Municipal Corporations: Boduppal and Meerpet; Municipalities: Kamareddy, Medchal, Pedda Amberpet, Sadasivapet 
and Shadnagar 

Chapter III – Empowerment of Urban Local Bodies and their functioning 
Page 23 
 
(B) Non-Fixation of water meters 
As per the SLBs fixed by MoUD (GoI) and recommended by the 13th and 14th Finance 
Commissions, meters were to be installed in 100 per cent  of the water connections. 
However, no water meters  were installed in any of the test-checked ULBs, except 
Warangal.  In Warangal Corporation also, only a meagre 648 (less than 1 per cent) out of 
1,74,666 households were fixed with water meters. 
Government stated (March 2022) that the ULBs are encouraged to swit chover to water 
meter system. However, the switchover to meter system would take time i n view of the 
financial implications i.e., cost of meters , additional staff required for meter reading and 
other factors. Further, the elected Councils of the ULBs have to take initiative in this regard.  
(C) Increased extent of Non-Revenue Water (NRW) supply  
As per the SLB 1.4 of 14 th Central Finance Commission, the extent of non -revenue water 
supply should not be more than 20 per cent of the total supply. In Warangal Corporation, 
the water losses accounted for 33 per cent i.e., loss of 55.80 Million Liters per Day (MLD) 
out of 168.92 MLD.  In Ramagundam Corporation, water losses accounted for 28 per cent 
i.e., loss of 10 MLD out of 36 MLD. No information on water losses was furnished by 
Bhongir Municipality and Meerpet Corporation and in respect of other 13 test-checked 
ULBs, it was within permissible limits.  
Further, water audit25 is to be conducted where piped water supply was being made, to 
detect the pilferage, losses etc. However, this was not done in 11 26 out of 17 test-checked 
ULBs. No information was furnished by two ULBs viz., Meerpet and Nizamabad 
Corporations. The other four ULBs viz., Boduppal Corporation and Kamareddy, Pedda 
Amberpet and Siddipet Municipalities informed that the water audit was being conducted. 
However, we were not provided the details/reports of such audit. 
Government stated (March 2022) that  the bulk meters were provided in 10 ULBs under 
AMRUT27 scheme and  24x7 water supply had been taken up on pilot basis in Karimnagar 
Municipal Corporation for controlling Non-Revenue Water supply. 
(D) Periodic Revision and fixation of water supply rates 
We observed that the water charges were revised only in five out of 17 test-checked ULBs 
viz., Ramagundam Corporation, Sadasivapet Municipality, Pedda Amberpet Municipality, 
Warangal Corporation and Wanaparthy Municipality.  
Further, as per TM Act, 2019, the Government may make rules governing the allocation  
and classification of supply of water for residential and commercial purposes  including 
shops, hotels, industrial undertakings and other such non -residential undertakings and 
determine the levy of charges for different categories. The draft Telangana Municipalities 
Water Supply, Drainage and Sewerage (Fixation of charges) Rules, 20 20 had been 
submitted28 by CDMA to Government on 10 December 2020. However, the same has not  
yet been approved (March 2022). 
 
25 as per Section-115 of the TM Act, 2019 and Para 15.2 of CPHEEO O&M Manual 
26 Municipal Corporations of Karimnagar, Ramagundam and Warangal & Municipalities of Bhongir, Bodhan, Jangaon, 
Medak, Medchal, Sadasivapet, Shadnagar and Wanaparthy  
27 Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation 
28 CDMA Lr.Roc.No.27226/2020-H2 dated 10 December 2020 

Performance Audit of ‘Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act in Telangana State’ 
 
Page 24 
 
Government stated (March 2022) that  instructions were issued (December 2020) for 
collection of water charges on monthly basis and Municipalities are taking action 
accordingly. However, Government did not reply on the issue relating to revision of water 
charges. 
3.11.2 Solid Waste Management   
In accordance with Solid Waste Management Rules, 2016 (SWM Rules, 201629), the State 
Government had framed the Telangana Solid Waste Management Policy and Strategy 
(TSWMP&S) in September 2018. Further, Rule-4 of Municipal Solid Waste (Management 
and Handling) Rules, 2000 states that every Municipal authority shall, within the territorial 
areas of the Municipality, be responsible for the implementation of the provisions of these 
rules and for any infrastructure development for collection, storag e, segregation, 
transportation, processing and disposal of municipal solid wastes.  
The Urban Local Bodies are required to ensure that solid waste generated in the city/town 
is managed in accordance with the provisions of SWM Rules, 2016. These rules also state 
the duties of solid waste management of various Departments/agencies like Urban Local 
Bodies, State Pollution Control Boards, Hospitals and Industries , etc. Further, every ULB 
has to prepare a Solid Waste Management (SWM) Plan within six months from the date of 
notification as per the TSWMP&S (September 2018). However, SWM Plan was not 
prepared in five of the 17 ULBs viz., Municipalities of Medak, Sadasivapet and Wanaparthy 
and Corporations of Meerpet and Warangal. Absence of a SWM plan  affects the 
effectiveness of the waste management system and impact functions such as door-to-door 
collection of garbage, training to waste pickers, formation of Self Help Groups, collection 
of user charges, etc. 
Government stated (March 2022) that the SWM Plans were prepared by all ULBs. Further, 
100 per cent  door to door garbage collection, training to staff at regular intervals and 
awareness campaign to households are being done in all ULBs. 
3.11.2.1  Non-collection of User charges for collection of garbage 
The ULBs can collect the User charges for the civic services like solid waste management, 
i.e., for collection of garbage and disposal. Further,  as per Telangana Solid Waste 
Management Policy and Strategy, 2018, the ULBs shall notify the User charges for door-to-
door garbage collection for different categories once in two years. The User charges shall 
be informed to the public through Press statem ent and ULB s are also to achieve service 
level bench marking of 90 per cent in respect of collection of User charges. We noticed 
that in seven30 out of 17 test -checked ULBs, User charges were not being collected from 
residential households.  
Government stated (March 2022) that the ULBs have outsourced the collection and 
transportation of solid waste through Swachh Autos, being operated on owner-cum-driver 
basis on collection of nominal charges to reduce the financial burden.  
 
29 As notified by the Ministry of Environment, Forests & Climate Change 
30 Municipalities of Bhongir, Jangaon, Kamareddy, Medak, Sadasivapet, Siddipet and Wanaparthy  

Chapter III – Empowerment of Urban Local Bodies and their functioning 
Page 25 
 
3.11.2.2  Non-identification of site for Sanitary Landfills in the Urban Local Bodies 
As per Rule 15 -zi of Solid Waste Management Rules 2016, every ULB shall undertake 
construction, operation and maintenance of sanitary landfill and associated infrastructure 
for disposal of residual wastes. The sanitary landfills are required to be established in and 
around the dumping yards. These sanitary landfills are necessary for disposal of the various 
types of waste i.e., (i) non -biodegradable waste (ii) co -mingled waste (iii) pre -post 
processing rejects and (iv) non-hazardous waste not processed or recycled causing harm to 
the environment. Further, Rule-22 prescribes that the identification of suitable31 site should 
be completed within a year of notification of SWM Rules, 2016.  
The TSPCB had issued the Implementation Schedule32 wherein the ULBs were instructed 
to identify the sites/land for the sanitary landfills by taking environmental issues into 
consideration and construct well-designed engineered sanitary landfill facility.  
However, only two out of 17 test -checked ULBs viz., municipalities of Sadasivapet and 
Siddipet had identified sites for sanitary landfills. The garbage/rejects in the remaining 15 
ULBs is being dumped in open areas.  
Government stated (March 2022) that all the ULBs have land for dump yards totaling to an 
extent of 966.81 acres. ULBs have also established the compost units for processing of wet 
waste and Dry Resource Collection Centres (DRCCs). Further,  bio-medical domestic 
hazardous waste was handed over to the TSPCB certified agencies for processing. Due to 
this, there was drastic reduction in inerts i.e., less than 10 per cent. The construction of 
sanitary landfills is being pursued  on regional basis by taking into consideration  the 
availability of resources viz., technical manpower, land and finance. 
3.11.2.3   Observations on Joint Physical Verification of dump yards 
We conducted the Joint Physical Verification (JPV) of dump yards along with the ULB 
officials in 10 ULBs, to ascertain the compliance to the SWM Rules, 2016  in the 
functioning and maintenance of dump yards. The details of the JPV are shown in Table-3.4. 
Table-3.4: Observations made during the Joint Physical Verification of dump yards  
Sl. 
No. 
Observations of Audit Name of the ULB 
(1) (2) (3) 
(i) Compound wall or fence for the dump yards 
was not existing in four ULBs and partially 
existed in two ULBs. 
Nizamabad, Ramagundam 
Corporations and Jangaon, Medak 
Municipalities 
Warangal Corporation and Sadasivapet 
Municipality 
(ii) Approach road and internal roads did not exist 
in four ULBs and partially existed in one ULB. 
Ramagundam Corporation and 
Jangaon, M edak, Wanaparthy 
Municipalities 
Sadasivapet Municipality 
 
31 Common regional sanitary landfill facilities for a suitable cluster of local authorities up to 0.5 million population. For 
the population of 0.5 million or more, a common/standalone sanitary landfill site  
32 Member Secretary, TSPCB Lr.No.MSW-03/TSPCB/CPCB-AR/2019 dated 19 July 2021 (Annexure-III/Schedule-II) 

Performance Audit of ‘Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act in Telangana State’ 
 
Page 26 
 
(iii) Provisions like weigh bridge to measure 
quantity of waste and fire protection equipment 
not available in the dump yard, in four ULBs. 
Ramagundam Corporation and Medak, 
Sadasivapet, Wanaparthy 
Municipalities 
(iv) Plantation to minimise the soil erosion was not 
done in six ULBs.  
Ramagundam, Karimnagar, Warangal 
Corporations and Jangaon, Sadasivapet, 
Wanaparthy Municipalities 
(v) Green belt around the boundaries of the dump 
yards was not covered in six ULBs. 
Karimnagar, Ramagundam, Warangal 
Corporations and Jangaon, Sadasivapet 
Wanaparthy Municipalities 
 
3.11.3  Public Health and Sanitation in Urban Local Bodies 
Health, Medical and Family Welfare (HM&FW) Department through Government 
hospitals discharge major functions relating to public health in urban areas . The role of 
ULBs is restricted to assessment of infectious diseases, control of mosquito growth and 
taking up of preventive measures . As contemplated in the TM Act, 2019, the activities of 
immunisation, vaccination, spraying, fogging , etc., are to be conducted by ULBs in 
coordination with HM &FW Department. In addition to this, Municipal authorities shall 
ensure implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006, handling of Construction 
and Demolition waste by identifying suitable places and modernisation of Slaughter-houses 
in accordance with TM Act, 2019.  
(i) The Municipalities have to handle the Construction and Demolition (C&D) waste and 
have to identify suitable place for its disposal and processing. It was noticed that six33 
out of 17 test-checked ULBs did not identify any land for construction and demolition 
waste. Though the land was identified in Karimnagar  Corporation, the same was not 
put into use. 
Government stated (March 2022) that it is planning to establish C&D waste processing 
plants on cluster basis considering the quantities being generated in the ULBs.  The 
C&D waste processing facilities at Greater Warangal Municipal Corporation and 
Municipalities of Nalgonda and Sangareddy have been approved by the GoI. 
(ii) The duty of regulation and scientific management of Slaughter -houses and Tanneries 
rests with the ULBs. It was observed that there were no Slaughter-houses in three out 
of 17 test-checked ULBs viz., Bhongir, Kamareddy and Medak Municipalities. Though 
Slaughter-houses existed in two ULBs viz., Nizamabad and Warangal Corporations , 
these were not scientifically maintained as defined in the Prevention of Cruelty to 
Animals (Slaughter-House) Rules, 2001. 
3.12 Conclusion 
Out of 141 Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) in the State, 137 ULBs have their Local Self 
Government where elections were held between February 2016 and April 2021 with a 
delay ranging between four and sixty-six months. In the absence of an elected body, the 
Administration was run by Special Officers appointed by the State Government. State 
Government had not entrusted (March 2022) the task of delimitation to State Election 
 
33 Nizamabad, Ramagundam, Warangal Corporations and Jangaon, Sadasivapet, Wanaparthy Municipalities  

Chapter III – Empowerment of Urban Local Bodies and their functioning 
Page 27 
 
Commission as recommended by the Second Administrative Reforms Commission an d 
accepted by Government of India (GoI). Ward Committees were not constituted in three 
ULBs.  District Planning Committees have not been constituted in any of the districts 
and no consolidated Draft Development Plans for considering local needs and matters  
of common interest were prepared.  Though the provisions of the 74 th CAA enunciates 
devolution of functions to the ULBs, most of the functions were discharged by State 
Government through its Departments/Parastatal agencies. 
The Urban Local Bodies have no powers either to assess staff requirement or to recruit 
the staff, except outsourcing personnel as the State Government has retained these 
powers.  Out of 8,752 sanctioned posts in the State, 3,900 posts (45 per cent) are vacant, 
resulting in larger dependence on outsourced staff for service delivery. 
Water supply was deficient in terms of per capita norms in 10 out of 17 test -checked 
ULBs.  Water meters have not been installed in any of the ULBs except in Warangal 
where the coverage is one per cent. Wat er Audit was not being done in 11 test -checked 
ULBs to detect the pilferage/losses. Draft Rules for periodical revision of water charges 
are yet to be approved by State Government and the ULBs were unable to meet the cost 
of water supply.  Solid Waste Mana gement was ineffective due to non -identification of 
sites for sanitary landfills in 15 out of 17 ULBs and non -collection of garbage charges 
from the households in seven out of 17 ULBs.  Thus, the ULBs could not achieve the 
SLBs in water supply and solid waste management functions. 
3.13 Recommendations 
i. Legal and administrative arrangements 
➢ The Government may ensure timely elections to Urban Local Bodies to enable them 
to function as Institutions of self-governance.  
➢ Various Committees like Ward Committees, District Planning Committees may be 
constituted in the Urban Local Bodies as envisaged in the Telangana Municipalities 
Act, 2019 and encouraged to function effectively as envisaged in 74th CAA. 
ii.  Manpower/Staffing 
➢ The Government may delegate adequate powers to Urban Local Bodies to assess and 
recruit staff required for efficient service delivery. 
➢ The Government may impart training to all functionaries/employees in regular 
intervals to equip them to discharge their duties effectively. 
 
 

 
 
 
Chapter IV 
Pages 29 - 37 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                  
Financial Resources of 
Urban Local Bodies  
 
 
  

 
 
 
 
 

 Chapter IV – Financial Resources of Urban Local Bodies 
Page 29 
 
 
Chapter IV - Financial Resources of Urban Local Bodies 
 
 
4.1 Financial Resources of ULBs 
Sustainable financing is paramount to ensure discharge of any function. The devolved 
functions can be carried out effectively by ULBs only when they are supported with 
sufficient financial resources. Such financial resources could take the form of predictable 
fiscal transfers or access to own revenue streams that are buoyant and commensurate with 
the expenditure obligations, accompanied  with appropriate financial powers o f 
expenditure. Predictable fiscal transfers to ULBs need to be ensured through a robust State 
Finance Commission mechanism and compliance with State and Central Finance 
Commission recommendations. Access to own sources of revenue w ould include both the 
power to levy and collect taxes/charges/duty/fee  from specific revenue streams. Financial 
powers or expenditure powers refer to reasonable delegation limits that allow the ULBs to 
utilise their financial resources. 
Source of revenue of ULBs consist of own revenues 34 included tax and non-tax receipts, 
assigned revenues35 apportioned to ULBs, devolution at the instance of State and Central 
Finance Commissions, Central and State Government grants for maintenance and 
development purposes and other receipts 36. Summary of grants/receipts of ULBs for the 
years 2015-16 to 2020-21 are given in the Table-4.1. 
Table-4.1: Details of grants/receipts of ULBs in the State during the period 2015-16 to 2020-21 
(`` in crore) 
Year Grants Assigned 
Revenue* 
Own 
Revenue 
Total 
Revenue 
Percentage 
of own 
revenue to 
total 
revenue 
Percentage 
of fiscal 
transfers to 
total 
revenue 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 
2015-16 592.83 118.86 451.46 1163.15 38.81 61.19 
2016-17 860.55 115.61 504.89 1481.05 34.09 65.91 
2017-18 665.62 100.24 540.32 1306.18 41.37 58.63 
2018-19 668.99 152.74 697.99 1519.72 45.93 54.07 
2019-20 1038.42 135.81 850.55 2024.78 42.01 57.99 
2020-21 889.00 2.91 1068.17 1960.08 54.50 45.50 
Average 42.78 57.22 
Source: Information furnished by CDMA; (*) The amounts shown in column (3) include arrears of previous 
years 
The details of revenues of the 17 test-checked ULBs during the period 2015-16 to 2020-21 
are indicated in Table-4.2. 
 
34 Property Tax, Advertisement Tax, Water Charges, Rents from markets, shops and other properties, auction proceeds 
etc. 
35 Surcharge on Stamp Duty, Entertainment Tax collected by Departments of ‘Registration and Stamps’ and ‘Commercial 
Taxes’ respectively 
36 Donations, Interest on Deposits, etc. 

Performance Audit of ‘Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act in Telangana State’ 
 
Page 30 
 
Table-4.2: Details of revenues in 17 test-checked ULBs during the period 2015-16 to 2020-21 
(`` in crore) 
Year Grants Assigned 
Revenue 
Own 
Revenue37 
Total Percentage 
of Own 
Revenue to 
Total 
Revenue 
Percentage 
of fiscal 
transfers to 
Total 
revenue 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 
2015-16 115.62 59.14 118.77 293.53 40.46 59.54 
2016-17 123.66 48.83 135.63 308.12 44.02 55.98 
2017-18 62.69 34.56 155.91 253.16 61.59 38.41 
2018-19 146.67 53.52 178.71 378.90 47.17 52.83 
2019-20 196.68 30.96 190.84 418.48 45.60 54.40 
2020-21 112.01 0.00 175.68 287.69 61.07 38.93 
Average 49.98 50.02 
Source: Information furnished by the ULBs 
Note: 1) Grants includes 14th Finance Commission and State Government grants received by the test-checked 
ULBs. Information regarding 14th FC grants in respect of five 38 ULBs and information regarding 
State Government grants in respect of eight39 ULBs is not furnished. 
2) Assigned Revenue includes Stamp Duty (SD) and Entertainment Tax (ET) received by the ULBs. 
Information on SD was not furnished by three 40 ULBs for all the above years. ET is subsumed in 
GST from July 2017. Information on ET was provided by seven41 ULBs. 
3) Own Revenue includes Property Tax (PT) and Water Charges (WC) only collected by the 
test-checked ULBs. Information on PT furnished partially in six 42 ULBs. Information on Water 
Charges was not furnished by three43 ULBs for all the years and eight44 ULBs furnished partially. 
4.1.1 Fiscal transfers of Government to ULBs 
As per the recommendations of the Central Finance Commission  and State Finance 
Commission, funds were devolved to ULBs through transfer by the Central and State 
Governments in the form of grants.  As seen from the Table-4.1 above, the fiscal transfers 
from Government constituted 57 per cent of the total revenue of ULBs in the State during 
the period 2015 -16 to 2020 -21. The year -wise fiscal transfer of funds ranged between 
46 and 66 per cent. The shortcomings observed in fiscal transfers are discussed below. 
4.1.2 State Finance Commission (SFC) Grants 
Article-243Y read with Article-243I of the Constitution of India makes it mandatory for 
the State Government to constitute the Finance Commission within one year of the 
commencement of the 74th CAA and thereafter on expiry of every five years. The mandate 
of the SFC is to review the financial condition of the ULBs and to make recommendations 
to the Government. 
 
37 Revenues pertaining to Property Tax and Water charges 
38 2015-16: Boduppal Municipal Corporation and Pedda Amberpet  Municipality; 2020 -21: Kamareddy, Medak and 
Wanaparthy Municipalities 
39 Municipalities of Bhongir (2020 -21), Jangaon (2015-16), Kamareddy (2020 -21), Medak (2020 -21) and Pedda 
Amberpet (2015-16); Siddipet (2015-16, 2016-17) and Wanaparthy (2020-21); and Municipal Corporation: Boduppal 
(2015-16, 2017-18) 
40 Medak, Medchal and Wanaparthy Municipalities 
41 Karimnagar, Nizamabad Corporations for 2015 -16 to 2017 -18; Ramagundam Corporation, Bhongir and Siddipet  
Municipalities for 2015-16 to 2016-17; and Jangaon and Kamareddy Municipalities for 2016-17 
42 Boduppal, Jangaon, Medak, Medchal, Sadasivapet and Wanaparthy Municipalities 
43 Bodhan Municipality; and Boduppal and Meerpet Corporations 
44 Siddipet and Wanaparthy Municipalities for 2015-16 to 2019-20; Shadnagar Municipality for 2015-16, 2016-17 and 
2020-21; Kamareddy Municipality for 2015 -16 and 2016 -17; Medch al, Pedda Amberpet and Sadasivapet 
Municipalities for 2020-21; Medak Municipality for 2015-16 

 Chapter IV – Financial Resources of Urban Local Bodies 
Page 31 
 
The State Government constituted the SFC in March 2015 45 without any Members. The 
Chairman, Member Secretary and Member s were appointed only in January 2018 , after 
three years of formation of the Commission. Thus, there were no recommendations for the 
period 2015 -16 to 2019 -20. State Government released funds taking the population as 
criterion46 for the distribution of the funds. Further, the SFC submitted its Report in October 
2020 and the same is yet to be accepted by Government (March 2022). 
Timely constitution of SFC and taking swift actions on its recommendations is critical 
towards strengthening the financial position of Urban Local Bodies.  State Government, 
however released  funds of only `1,974 crore47  (in lieu of SFC grants) (63 per cent) out of 
the allocation of `3,144 crore48 during the years 2015 -16 to  
2020-21. The short releases against allocations during 2017-18 to 2019-20 ranged between 
50 and 85 per cent. This adversely affected the financial position of the ULBs. 
Government stated (March 2022) that  it would provide a matching amount equal to the 
municipality-wise devo lution under the  Finance Commission, over and above the own 
resources of the Municipality , as per Section -107(2) of the TM Act, 2019 . Any deficit in 
the matching grant contribution from the State Government shall be carried forward to the 
next year.  
4.1.3 Central Finance Commission (CFC) Grants 
Article-280(3)(c) of the Constitution of India mandates the CFC to recommend measures 
to augment the Consolidated Fund of a State to supplement the resource of Municipalities, 
based on the recommendations of the respective SFCs. The 14 th Finance Commission 
(14th FC) recommended grants under Basic Grant 49 and Performance Grant 50 to ULBs in 
the ratio of 80:20. The allocation and release of 14th FC grants in the State during the period 
2015-16 to 2019-20 are given in Table-4.3. 
Table-4.3: Allocation and Release of 14th FC Grants during 2015-16 to 2019-20 
(`` in crore) 
Year Amount allocated by GoI Amount received by State 
Government 
Balance 
to be 
received 
Basic 
Grant 
Performance 
Grant 
Total Basic 
Grant 
Performance 
Grant 
Total  
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) 
2015-16 325.23 0 325.23 291.95 0 291.95 33.28 
2016-17 450.33 132.91 583.24 428.89 109.79 538.68 44.56 
2017-18 520.32 150.41 670.73 474.61 126.01 600.62 70.11 
2018-19 601.92 170.81 772.73 531.73 0 531.73 241.00 
2019-20 813.32 223.66 1036.98 778.70 0 778.70 258.28 
Total 2,711.12 677.79 3,388.91 2,505.88 235.80 2,741.68 647.23 
Source: Information furnished by the CDMA 
 
45 vide G.O.Ms. No. 31 (PR&RD) dated 16 March 2015 
46 CDMA Lr.Roc.No.138990/2021/B3 dated 31 August 2021 
47 2015-16: `300.88 crore, 2016-17: `321.87 crore, 2017-18: `65.00 crore, 2018-19: `137.26 crore 2019-20: `259.72 
crore and 2020-21: `889.00 crore 
48 2015-16: `300.88 crore, 2016-17: `321.87 crore, 2017-18: `198.79 crore, 2018-19: `911.92 crore, 2019-20: `521.74 
crore and 2020-21: `889.00 crore 
49 Basic Grants are meant for basic services like water supply, solid waste management, sanitation including septage 
management, public health and sanitation, drainage, sewerage storm water drains, maintenance of community assets, 
maintenance of roads, footpaths, streetlights, burials and other basic services 
50 Performance Grants are released after satisfying the conditions like improvement of own revenues, submission of 
audited accounts within two years, relating to the preceding two years in which the ULB claims for performance grants, 
ULBs publish the Service Level Benchmarks (SLBs), submission of utilisation certificates for the grants etc. 

Performance Audit of ‘Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act in Telangana State’ 
 
Page 32 
 
As seen from the Table-4.3 above, there was short release of `647.23 crore of Basic Grants 
and Performance Grants during the award period of 2015-16 to 2019-20. 
Basic Grants are released in two installments , i.e., June and October every year and 
Performance Grants relating to previous financial year are  required to be released in 
October month of the succeeding financial year, along with the 2 nd installment of Basic 
Grant.  However, we observed that the Performance Grant of 2016-17 and first installment 
of Basic Grant for 2017-18, were released by State Government to ULBs with delays of 6 
and 93 days respectively . As a result,  the State Government had to pay  penal interest of  
`3.76 crore to the ULBs.  Further, there were delays51 in release of 1st and 2nd installments 
of Basic Grants from GoI to State Government, during 2018-19 and 2019-20. 
Government accepted the audit observation and stated (March 2022)  that 14th FC funds 
were released only to the ULBs with elected bodies. Further, delay in conduct of elections 
was attributed to delay in taking up of pre-election process such as delimitation of Wards, 
publication of electoral rolls, reservations, etc., in Siddipet and Warangal ULBs.  
4.1.4 Assigned Revenue 
As per Section 105 A, B and C of TM Act, 2019 and Para-1.11.3(ii) of Manual of Municipal 
Administration in Telangana 2017, the duty on transfer of immovable property shall be 
levied in the form of Surcharge on Stamp Duty at the rate of 1.5 per cent of the value of 
instrument i.e., sale, gift, mortgage, exchange and lease in perpetuity of immovable 
property situated within the limits of a Municipal area. The entire amount of Surcharge on 
Stamp Duty collected shall be passed  on to ULBs in the State.  This is one of the main 
sources of assigned revenue to ULBs.   
Out of total amount of Surcharge on Stamp Duty  collected (`1,879.66 crore) during  
2019-20 and 2020 -21 by the Registration and Stamps Department , an amount of `57.17 
crore was transferred to ULBs during 2019-20. However, the balance amount of `1,822.49 
crore has not been transferred to the ULBs since May 2019.  
Registration and Stamps Department replied that the amount was kept under abeyance 52 
based on the Treasuries & Accounts Department (TAD) ’s instructions (January 2020 ).  
However, the TAD instructions referred to, were applicable to Panchayat Raj and Rural 
Development Department and not to MAUDD.  
Further, Entertainment Tax  (ET), which was  another source of assigned revenue , was 
subsumed in GST, with effect from 1 July 2017 .  There was no arrangement to 
compensate/reimburse the loss of revenue to ULBs in lieu of the ET since 2017. Thus, the 
ULBs were deprived of all the assigned revenue sources viz., Surcharge on Stamp Duty and 
Entertainment Tax, resulting in reduction of revenues of the ULBs.  
Government accepted the audit observation and stated (March 2022) that the Surcharge on 
Stamp Duty was not received after May 2019 due to some technical reasons and it is in the 
process of releasing to the ULBs. 
 
51 ranging from four to eight months 
52 letter No.F4/827/2016, dated 08  January 2020 addressed to Finance Department by Director of Treasuries and 
Accounts, Telangana 

 Chapter IV – Financial Resources of Urban Local Bodies 
Page 33 
 
4.1.5 Own Revenues 
 
4.1.5.1 Revenue on Property Tax (PT) 
Property tax  is levied on all buildings or vacant land or both, for each half year under 
Section-85 and 91 of the TM Act, 1965 and Sections-92 and 100 of the TM Act, 2019. The 
PT is levied on the basis of Annual Rental Value 53 (ARV) and the tax so fixed together 
with the incidence of library and education cess shall not exceed 25 per cent and 33 per cent 
of the ARV of residential and non -residential buildings respectively. Alternatively, the 
Property tax can also be levied on the Capital Value method 54 or such basis as prescribed 
in the latest TM Act, 2019.  
The share of Property tax revenue to total revenue in the 17 test-checked ULBs stood at 
42 per cent during the period 2015-16 to 2020-21 as shown in Table-4.4. 
Table-4.4: Revenue on Property Tax in the test-checked ULBs during 2015-16 to 2020-21  
(`` in crore) 
Year Total Revenue Property Tax Percentage of Property 
Tax over Total Revenue 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
2015-16 293.53 96.85 33.00 
2016-17 308.12 110.93 36.00 
2017-18 253.16 131.79 52.06 
2018-19 378.90 154.70 40.83 
2019-20 418.48 164.36 39.28 
2020-21 287.69 146.28 50.85 
Average 42.00 
Source: Information furnished by ULBs 
Government stated (March 2022) that ULBs are in the process of converting to Capital 
Value system from Annual Rental Value system. For th e purpose, an integrated software 
system55 has been developed which would help to improve the revenue of ULB s and to 
have an accountable system.   
We noticed the following constraints/deficiencies in levy and collection of Property tax and 
maintenance of records in the 17 test-checked ULBs.  
4.1.5.2 Arrears in collection of Property Tax and User Charges in lieu of Property Tax 
Property tax shall be levied every half year and shall be paid by the owner of the assessed 
premises within 30 days after commencement of the half year. In case of failure to pay the 
PT within the due date  (by the end of June or December as the case may be) , a simple 
interest at two per cent per month shall be charged.  
 
53 Deemed to be the gross annual rent reasonably be expected from letting with reference to its location, plinth area, age 
of the building, nature of use and such other criteria as may be prescribed  
54 The value fixed by Registration and Stamps Department for the purpose of registration of lands/buildings 
55 called emunicipal.telangana.gov.in 

Performance Audit of ‘Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act in Telangana State’ 
 
Page 34 
 
The total arrears of P roperty tax along with interest (as on 31 March 2021) was `786.71 
crore in the State 56. Accumulated arrears of P roperty tax in the 1 7 test-checked ULBs57 
amounted to `54.58 crore out of the total assessed demand of `274.60 crore. The ULB-wise 
and year-wise details are given in Appendix-4.1. The total arrears constitute 20 per cent of 
the total demand.  
Further, User charges (in lieu of Property Tax) shall be levied on properties of Central 
Government (CG) Departments for providing at 75 per cent (full services) or 50 per cent 
(partial services) or 33 1/3 per cent (nil services) of PT, as the case may  be. There are no 
CG properties in four58 ULBs. It was noticed that User Charges in five59 test-checked ULBs 
are not being levied and two  ULBs (Medchal and Shadnagar Municipalities) had not 
identified the CG properties. User charges amounting to `10.96 crore (96 per cent of total 
demand of `11.43 crore) in respect of CG properties situated in six60 ULBs were in arrears, 
as of March 2021. 
Government stated (March 2022) that ULBs are taking steps for collection of Property tax 
including arrears by conducting special drives. Multiple options are provided to citizens to 
enable them to make  online payments and through UPI/QR Code s. Further, ULBs are 
taking up IT based initiatives under Smart Cities or through Bhuvan based Property 
Mapping (GIS platform). The activity will help to levy on not only the Central Government 
properties, but also tap the un-assessed/under-assessed properties.    
4.1.5.3 Revenue on Water Charges 
As per Section-138 of TM Act, 1965 and Section-82 (2)(b)(i) of TM Act, 2019, for all the 
water supplied, payment shall be made on such basis, at such times and such conditions laid 
down in the ULB Bye-laws and shall be recoverable in the same manner as the property tax.  
We observed that the accumulated arrears of water charges in nine61 out of 17 test-checked 
ULBs to the end of March 2021 amount ed to `37.54 crore62 (56 per cent out of the total 
demand of `66.97 crore). 
4.1.5.4 Non-coverage of Operation and Maintenance (O&M) expenses of water charges 
As per Section 2.1.8 of SLB issued by MoUD (GoI), cost recovery in  respect of water 
supply services should be 100 per cent . However, we noticed that  the O&M  charges 
towards water supply incurred by the Municipalities was generally more than the actual 
receipt of water charges. 
 4.2 Estimation of requirement of funds/expenditure 
The Council of the ULB shall, in each year, frame a budget showing the probable receipts 
and the expenditure which it proposes to incur during the following  year and shall submit 
a copy of the budget to the Government before such date as may be fixed by them in that 
 
56 as per the information furnished by the CDMA 
57 Data of Jangaon, Medchal and Sadasivapet Municipalities pertaining to 2019-20 has been considered 
58 Boduppal and Meerpet Municipal Corporations; and Pedda Amberpet and Wanaparthy Municipalities 
59 Municipal Corporations of Karimnagar (26) and Ramagundam (1); and Municipalities of Bodhan (13), Jangaon (82), 
Sadasivapet (3) 
60 Municipal Corporations of Nizamabad and Warangal; and Municipalities of Bhongir, Kamareddy, Medak, and Siddipet  
61 eight ULBs did not furnish data for 2020-21 
62 Municipal Corporations of Karimnagar: `0.90 crore, Nizamabad: `9.18 crore, Ramagundam: `1.65 crore and Warangal: 
`11.50 crore; Municipalities of Bhongir: `1.70 crore, Jangaon: `3.48 crore, Kamareddy: `0.62 crore, Medak: `2.89 
crore and Siddipet: `5.62 crore 

 Chapter IV – Financial Resources of Urban Local Bodies 
Page 35 
 
behalf. A copy of budget for the ensuing year shall be submitted to the Government at least 
a fortnight before the end of the financial year. 
Further, if in the course of a year, the Council finds it necessary to modify the figures shown 
in the budget with regard to its receipts or to the distribution of the amounts to be expended 
on the different services it undertakes, it may submit a supplementa l or revised budget , 
provided that no alteration shall be made without the consent of the Government or any 
agency, specified therefor. 
4.2.1 Unrealistic Budget exercise 
Expenditure estimation depends on services to be provided by the local government and 
the costs associated with the provisions of these services. Since the delivery of municipal 
services comes with a cost, it is necessary to realistically estimate the cost of each municipal 
service to assess the requirement and source of funds for efficient delivery. However, such 
an exercise was not undertaken either by ULBs or by State Government.   
Statement showing the variation between budget and actuals noticed in two sampled units 
of ULBs, for the years 2015-2021 is given in Table-4.5. 
Table-4.5: Details of Receipts and expenditure proposed in Budget estimates and actuals 
during 2015-2021 
(`` in crore) 
Name of the 
ULB 
Year Receipts Expenditure 
Budget 
Estimates 
Actuals Percentage 
of over 
estimation 
of Budget  
Budget 
Estimates 
Actuals Percentage 
of over 
estimation 
of Budget 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) 
Kamareddy 
Municipality 
2015-16 24.21 20.92 13.60 21.92 12.22 44.25 
2016-17 52.62 15.26 70.99 45.27 12.09 73.29 
2017-18 43.62 15.88 63.58 43.18 16.58 61.61 
2018-19 42.56 21.67 49.10 41.51 17.41 58.06 
2019-20 45.78 37.27 18.60 43.17 34.48 20.14 
2020-21 54.81 29.62 45.97 53.21 27.42 48.46 
Nizamabad 
Municipal 
Corporation 
2015-16 76.13 70.66 7.19 76.06 45.51 40.17 
2016-17 167.21 48.54 70.97 167.12 48.87 70.76 
2017-18 133.96 121.48 9.31 133.77 109.36 18.24 
2018-19 454.33 138.00 69.63 626.48 159.82 74.49 
2019-20 494.72 186.50 62.30 566.99 155.43 72.59 
2020-21 341.79 151.89 55.56 341.47 123.66 63.78 
Source: Budget Estimates and Annual Accounts of ULBs 
The budget receipts were overestimated in all these years and the variation in actual receipts 
vis-à-vis the budget during 2015 -16 to 2020 -21 ranged between 14 and 71 per cent  in 
Kamareddy Municipality and 07 and 71 per cent in Nizamabad Municipal Corporation. 
Further, the budget expenditure was also overestimated ranging from 20 per cent to 73 per cent 
in Kamareddy Municipality and 18 per cent to 74 per cent in Nizamabad Corporation. 
4.2.2 Expenditure of Urban Local Bodies 
The expenditure of ULBs can be categorised into five major categories of expenses such as 
Establishment, Administrative,  O&M, Interest and finance charges and Programme 

Performance Audit of ‘Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act in Telangana State’ 
 
Page 36 
 
expenses. The details of expenditure incurred by 14 test-checked ULBs63 in the State during 
the period 2015-16 to 2019-20 is exhibited in Table-4.6. 
Table-4.6: Details of expenditure incurred by sampled ULBs during 2015-16 to 2019-20 
(`` in crore) 
Year Establishment 
expenses 
(percentage of 
total 
expenditure) 
Administrative 
expenses 
(percentage of 
total 
expenditure) 
Operations 
and 
Maintenance 
(percentage 
of total 
expenditure) 
Interest and 
Finance 
Charges 
(percentage 
of total 
expenditure) 
Programme 
Expenses 
(percentage 
of total 
expenditure) 
Total 
Expenditure 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 
2015-16 72.36 (39) 35.58 (19) 75.04 (41) 0.12 (0) 1.55 (1) 184.67 
2016-17 87.43 (41) 20.21 (10) 99.41 (47) 0.01 (0) 4.47 (2) 211.53 
2017-18 88.00 (39) 17.56 (08) 115.98 (51) 0.18 (0) 5.4 (2) 227.12 
2018-19 124.03(42) 20.94 (07) 139.61 (48) 0.57 (0) 6.84 (2) 291.99 
2019-20 133.37 (35) 41.87 (11) 155.24 (41) 32.04 (8) 17.55 (5) 380.08 
Total 505.19 (39) 136.16 (11) 585.28 (45) 32.92 (2) 35.81 (3) 1295.39 
Source: Annual Accounts (Income and Expenditure statements) 
The O& M expenses constituted about 4 5 per cent of the total expenditure followed by 
Establishment expenses at 39 per cent. The capital expenditure i.e., Programme expenses 
incurred by ULBs from their own revenue sources (consisting of both Municipal General 
Fund and Capital Projects Fund) was merely three per cent of the total expenditure during 
the period 2015-2020. This indicates that ULBs attach least im portance to developmental 
programmes in terms to expenses. 
4.3 Conclusion 
The State Government constituted the SFC in March 2015, however, Chairman  
and Members were appointed only in January 2018. In the absence of SFC 
recommendations, State Government released funds to ULBs taking the population as 
criterion64, during the period 2015-16 to 2020-21. 
The year-wise fiscal transfers from Government during the period 2015 -16 to 2020 -21 
formed 46 to 66 per cent of total revenue of ULBs. The short releases against allocations 
of SFC grants during 2017 -18 to 2019-20 ranged between 50 and 85 per cent affecting 
the financial position of the ULBs.  Further, there was short release of ``647.23 crore of 
14th Finance Commission grants during the period 2015-16 to 2019-20.   
Surcharge on Stamp duty of ``1,822.49 crore collected on transfer of properties during 
2019-20 and 2020-21 was not assigned to ULBs, by Registration and Stamps Department.  
Property Tax and Water charges form a major share in the own revenue of ULBs. The 
share of Property Tax revenue to total revenue in ULBs stood at 42 per cent during the 
period 2015 -16 to 2020 -21. The arrears of Property Tax along with interest as on  
31 March 2021 was ``786.71 crore.   
Accumulated arrears of water charges amounting to ``37.54 crore was noticed in nine 
out of 17 test -checked ULBs up to the end of March 2021.  The Operation and 
 
63 Annual Accounts was not furnished by Municipal Corporations of Boduppal and Meerpet; and Jangaon Municipality  
64 CDMA Lr.Roc.No.138990/2021/B3 dated 31 August 2021 

 Chapter IV – Financial Resources of Urban Local Bodies 
Page 37 
 
Maintenance (O&M) charges towards water supply incurred by the Municipalities was 
generally more than the actual receipt of water charges.   
Since the delivery of municipal services comes with a cost, it is necessary to estimate  
the cost of each municipal service to realistically assess the requirement and source of 
funds for efficient delivery. We noticed that the budget exercise in Nizamabad 
Corporation and Kamareddy Municipality was not based on realistic assessment as there 
was over estimation of receipts and expenditure in budget preparation during the years 
2015 to 2021.   
4.4 Recommendations 
Finance and Budget management 
(i) Government may avoid delays in constitution of the State Finance Commission and 
ensure prompt implementation of their recommendations in timely manner.  
(ii) Government may ensure timely transfer of fiscal grants to Urban Local Bodies so that 
financial position of ULBs would be strengthened. 
(iii) Government may motivate Urban Local Bodies to prepare realistic budgets, taking 
into account their most probable income and expenditure. 
  
(SUDHA RAJAN) 
Hyderabad  Accountant General (Audit) 
The  Telangana 
 
Countersigned 
 
 
(GIRISH CHANDRA MURMU) 
New Delhi Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
The   
 


 
 
 

 
 
 
Pages 39 - 53 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendices 
 

 
 

Appendices 
 
Page 39 
 
Appendix-1.1 
(Reference to paragraph 1.5, page 3) 
Major changes made to the Article 243 in the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act, 1992 
1. Article-243Q: Constitution of three types of Municipalities : The Hyderabad Municipal 
Corporation and Municipalities have been constituted under GHMC Act, 1955 and TM Act 
1965 respectively. The Nagar Panchayats were const ituted as per Section -2A inserted by Act 
17 of 1994. The Municipal Corporations (other than GHMC) have been constituted as per the 
Municipal Corporations Act, 1994. All the Municipal Corporations (except GHMC) and 
Municipalities have been included in Secti on-3(2) of TM Act 2019. Further, all the Nagar 
Panchayats were deemed to have been upgraded as Municipalities. Consequent of this, two 
types of Municipalities (Municipalities and Municipal Corporations) are in existence in the 
State from July 2019. 
2. Article-243R: Composition of Municipalities: There shall be elected Members to the Council, 
having right to vote ( Section-5 of TM Act, 1965). Member of Legislative Assembly, Member 
of House of the people and Member of Council of States representing a constituency which 
comprises wholly or partly the municipal area will be the ex-officio Members, without having 
voting rights (Substituted by Act 5  of 1999). Required number persons having special 
knowledge or experience in Municipal Administration and persons belonging to Minority will 
be the co-opted Members, without having voting rights (Substituted by Act 14 of 2000 and 25 
of 1995 respectively). However, ex -officio Members have been given voting rights as per 
Section-5(3)(e) of TM Act 2019. The Chairperson / Mayor  will be elected directly as per 
Section-23(1)(a) of TM Act, 1965. However, the Chairperson will be elected by the Ward 
Members as per Section-20(1) of TM Act, 2019. 
3. Article-243S: Constitution and composition of Wards Committees : As per Section -5B of 
TM Act, 1965 inserted by Act 17 of 1994, Wards Committees for the Municipalities, having 
more than three lakh population to be constituted and  each Wards Committee shall consist of 
not less than five Wards. Where population is less than three lakh, CDMA may determine to 
constitute Wards Committees. The Chairperson of the Wards Committee shall be elected 
among the Members of the Ward. As per Sect ion-17, 30 and 31 of TM Act, 2019, four Ward 
Committees representing Youth, Women, Senior Citizens and other Eminent People shall be 
constituted for each Ward, to consider and advice on the issues referred to them. Each Ward 
committee shall consist of a maximum of 15 members. 
4. Article-243T: Reservation of seats SC, ST, B C and Women: As per Section-8 of TM Act, 
1965 substituted in Act 17 of 1994 , in every Municipality, out of the total strength of elected 
members determine d under Section 5, seats shall be reserved (a) in favour of SC/ST in 
proportion to their respective population of the Municipality, (b) one-third of the total number 
of seats sha ll be reserved to the Backward Classes , (c) Not less than one- third of the seats 
reserved for SC, ST and BCs shall be reserved to Women and (d) Not less than one -third of 
total seats including reserved for SC, ST and BCs shall be reserved to Women. As per Section-7 
of TM Act, 2019, the one-third limit of reservation enhanced to 50 per cent.  
5. Article-243U: Duration of Municipalities: Five years from date appointed for first meeting 
of the Council [Section-20 of TM Act, 1965 ]. As per Section -10(1) of TM Act, 2019, the 
duration will be five years from date first meeting of the Council, after the ordinary election. 
6. Article-243V: Disqualification of Members: A person holding an office of profit under a 
Municipality, Central/Sate Government shall be disqualified t o be the Member. Further, a 

Performance Audit of ‘Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act in Telangana State’ 
Page 40 
 
person with unsound mind, deaf -mute or suffering from leprosy and an applicant to be 
adjudicated an insolvent or un -discharged insolvent shall be disqualified [Section-14 & 15 of 
TM Act, 1965]. Similar provision exists in Section-12 of TM Act, 2019. 
7. Article-243W: Powers, authority and responsibilities of Municipalities : Municipal 
administration shall vest in the Council, for the purpose the Council shall exercise such powers 
and perform such functions as may be conferred upon it [Section-30 of TM Act, 1965 ]. The 
Chairperson will convene the Council meetings, refer any resolution to the Council for its re -
consideration, perform all the functions specifically conferred on him, all official 
correspondence between the Council, Government/Head of the Department. He/she will have 
the powers to incur the contingent expenditure and have power to direct the execution of any 
work, in case of emergency for which the Council resolution is required [Section-47, 48 & 49 
of TM Act, 1965]. The Commissioner shall carry into effect all the resolutions of the council, 
furnish to the council about the progress. He/she exercise the executive powers, discipline over 
the employees, collection of taxes, custody of municipal records, inspect places of 
entertainment [Section-56 of TM Act, 1965]. No amendment made to this provision in the new 
TM Act, 2019. 
(i) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules which the Government may make in 
this behalf, the Council may frame regulations in respect of officers and employees of 
the municipality appointed under the Section-74 [Section-76 of TM Act, 1965]. 
(ii) State Institute of Urban Excellence will be established by the State Government which 
will not only impart training but will also be a hub for urban excellence, specialising in 
the broad domains of urban development, management, governance, finance, poverty 
and policy. It shall aim at quality research, undertake training, consultancy services and 
policy reforms on urban sector issues [Section-81 of TM Act, 2019 ]. However, there 
was no such provision in TM Act, 1965.  
(iii) There shall be compulsory training and orientation for all chairpersons, vice -
chairpersons and ward members to make them aware of the Act at regular intervals 
[Section-42 of TM Act, 2019]. However, there was no such provision in TM Act, 1965. 
(iv) Manual system existed for issue of birth and death certificates and corrections [Section-
308 of TM Act,1965 ]. As per Section -165 of TM Act,  2019, the birth and death 
certificates are being issued through online system. 
8. Article-243X: Powers to impose taxes by, and funds of, the Municipalities: Every Council 
shall by resolution, levy the taxes -property tax, tax on carriages and carts and tax on animals 
[Section-81 of TM Act,1965]. Transfer Duty on Properties shall be levied, Tax on animals shall 
be levied, if the Council determines and Tax on Advertisements shall be levied under Section-
82, 113 & 114 of TM Act,1965. All moneys received by the Municipality constitute the 
Municipal Fund Section-125 of TM Act, 1965. The principal and interest on the loans floated 
by the Council bears the guarantee of Government to such an amount as may be fixed and 
subjected to certain conditions [Section-131 of TM Act,1965]. The Government is entitled to 
recover the loan or advance made t o any Council [Section-132 of TM Act, 1965 ]. The 
provisions for assessment of Property Tax and Municipal Fund and Government Guarantee 
exist under Section-92, 106 and 112 in the TM Act, 2019.   
(i) The Council shall frame and approve the annual Budget and subm it a copy to the 
Government every year [Section-126 of TM Act,  1965]. Participation of District 
Collector in the Budget exercise included in Section-107(3) of TM Act, 2019. 

Appendices 
 
Page 41 
 
(ii) Every Building shall be assessed together with its site and its adjacent premises 
occupied as an appurtenance thereto based on the annual rental value  [Section-87 of 
TM Act, 1965]. As per Section-93 of TM Act, 2019 , Property Tax on buildings shall 
be levied on the basis of (a) Capital Value or (b) Annual Rental Value or (c) such other 
basis as prescribed. Further, a provision is available for self-assessment in case of new 
construction or reconstructions [Section-94 (1), (2), (3) of TM Act, 2019]. 
(iii) Government may constitute special task force at the district level to detect and monitor 
the unauthorised constructions and take timely enforcement action in the manner as 
prescribed [Section-178 (1) of TM Act, 2019]. However, there was no such provision 
in TM Act, 1965. 
(iv) Building permissions for construction will be given on personal visit to the office and 
submission of  application in the concerned Municipality. As per Section-174(7) of TM 
Act, 2019, building permission can be obtained through online system.  
(v) Not less than 10 per cent of Municipal Budget shall be allocated towards Green Budget 
for plantations and nursery [Section-107 (4) (d) of TM Act, 2019]. However, there was 
no such provision in TM Act, 1965. 
(vi) District Level Committee headed by the District Collector consisting of District Forest 
Officer, in-charge of Haritha haram and respective Commissioners shall draw up ward-
wise and Municipality -wise Green Action Plan year -wise for a period of five years 
[Section-24 of TM Act, 2019]. However, there was no such provision in TM Act, 1965. 
9. Article-243Y read with 243I: Finance Commission: As per Section-132-A of TM Act, 1965 
(inserted by Act 17 of 1994), the Finance Commission constituted under Article -243-I, shall 
also review the financial position of Municipalities and make recommendations to the 
Government on (i) distribution of taxes, duties, tolls, fee, (ii) determination of taxes, duties, 
tolls, fee which may be assigned to Municipalities, (iii) Grants -in-Aid from the Consolidated 
Fund of State etc. Similar provision is available in Section-113-A of TM Act, 2019. 
10. Article-243Z: Audit of accounts of Municipalities:  The Government shall appoint auditors 
for audit of the accounts of receipts and expenditure of the Municipal Fund [Section-128 of TM 
Act, 1965]. As per Section-109 & 110 of TM Act, 2019, the Annual Accounts shall be prepared 
in Double Entry accrual-based accounting system and forwarded to the Director of State Audit 
for conduct of Audit . The Government shall prescribe the procedure for Audit of the Annual 
Accounts of the Municipal fund. The Municipality shall provide for pre-audit and internal audit 
of the regular accounts of the Municipality for submission to the Municipal Council. 
Government may appoint any person to carry out a special audit on specific accounts or whole 
of the accounts of any period and submit the special audit report to the Government. 
11. Article-243ZA read with 243K: Elections to Municipalities: For the purpose of election of 
Members, to a Council, the Government may, after consultation with the Council, divide the 
Municipality into as many single member wards. Determine the wards in which seats reserved 
etc [Section-10 of TM Act, 1965]. 
The preparation of electoral rolls for, and the conduct of elections to, all Municipalities in the 
State shall be under the superintendence, direction and control of the State Election 
Commission [Section-10-A of TM Act,1965 as inserted by Act 17 of 1994]. For the purpose of 
election of Members of a Municipal Council, each municipality shall be divided into such 
number of wards on territorial basis as prescribed by notification in such a manner that all wards 
have as far as practicable, equal number of voters and one member shall be elected from each 
ward. Determine the wards in which seats reserved shall be set apart [Section-6(1) of TM Act, 
2019]. The preparation of electoral rolls for, and the conduct of elections to, all Municipalities 

Performance Audit of ‘Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act in Telangana State’ 
Page 42 
 
in the State shall be under the superintendence, direction and control of the State Election 
Commission [Section-194 (1) of TM Act, 2019]. 
12. Article-243ZD: Committee for District planning: The Government may, after consultation 
with the Council, constitute Planning Committees for any Municipality, consisting of such 
number of members as may be appointed by them, for the purpose of preparing plans in respect 
of such developmental works as may be approved by the Government for execution within the 
Municipality; and the Council shall undertake all such works [Section-65 (2) of TM Act,1965]. 
As per Section-75(2) of TM Act, 2019, a provision for formation of Planning Committees was 
made. However, no provision was made in TM Acts for constitution of District Planning 
Committees. 

Appendices 
 
Page 43 
 
Appendix-1.2 
(Reference to paragraph 1.6, page 3) 
Organisational structure with respect to functioning of ULBs in the State 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chairperson 
Vice-Chairperson 
 
Ward 
Committees 
Members 
Principal Secretary, 
Municipal Administration and Urban 
Development Department 
Municipal Administration and Urban Development Department 
(MAUDD) 
Commissioner and 
Director of Municipal 
Administration 
(CDMA) 
Greater Hyderabad 
Municipal Corporation 
(GHMC) 
Municipal 
Corporations 
Commissioner 
 
Mayor 
Deputy Mayor 
Corporators 
 
Deputy /Addl. 
Commissioner 
Superintending / 
Executive Engineer 
City Planner 
Revenue Inspector 
Town Planning 
Officer 
Examiner of Accounts 
Health Officer,  
other staff 
Ward Committees 
Members 
Municipalities 
Commissioner 
Executive /Deputy 
Executive Engineer 
Revenue Inspector/ 
Bill Collector 
Town Planning 
Officer 
Manager 
Accounts 
Officer/Junior 
Accounts Officer 
other staff 
 

Performance Audit of ‘Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act in Telangana State’ 
Page 44 
 
Appendix-1.3 
(Reference to paragraph 1.9, page 4) 
List of sampled Urban Local Bodies 
Sl. No. Name of the ULB Category District 
Old New 
1 Greater Warangal Corporation Warangal Warangal 
2 Karimnagar Corporation Karimnagar Karimnagar 
3 Nizamabad Corporation Nizamabad Nizamabad 
4 Ramagundam Corporation Karimnagar Peddapally 
5 Bhongir Municipality Nalgonda Yadadri Bhongir 
6 Bodhan Municipality Nizamabad Nizamabad 
7 Boduppal Municipality 
(upgraded as 
Corporation) 
Rangareddy Rangareddy 
8 Jangaon Municipality Warangal Jangaon 
9 Kamareddy Municipality Nizamabad Kamareddy 
10 Medak Municipality Medak Medak 
11 Meerpet Municipality 
(upgraded as 
Corporation) 
Rangareddy Rangareddy 
12 Sadasivapet Municipality Medak Sangareddy 
13 Shadnagar Municipality Rangareddy Rangareddy 
14 Siddipet Municipality Medak Siddipet 
15 Wanaparthy Municipality Mahabubnagar Wanaparthy 
16 Medchal Nagar Panchayat 
(Upgraded as 
Municipality) 
Rangareddy Medchal 
Malkajgiri 
17 Pedda Amberpet Nagar Panchayat 
(Upgraded as 
Municipality) 
Rangareddy Rangareddy 
 
  

Appendices 
 
Page 45 
 
Appendix-3.1 
(Reference to paragraph 3.1, page 14) 
List of Parastatal Agencies 
Sl.No. Name of the Parastatal bodies Locations 
1. Hyderabad Metropolitan Water Supply and Sewerage Board 
(HMWS&SB) 
Hyderabad 
2. Telangana Urban Finance and Infrastructure Development 
Corporation Limited (TUFIDC) 
Hyderabad 
 
Sl.No. Name of the Parastatal bodies – Urban Development Authorities Location 
1 Satavahana Urban Development Authority  Karimnagar 
2 Stambhadri Urban Development Authority Khammam 
3 Nizamabad Urban Development Authority Nizamabad 
4 Kakatiya Urban Development Authority Warangal 
5 Siddipet Urban Development Authority Siddipet 
6 Yadagirigutta Temple Development Authority Hyderabad 
7 Vemulawada Temple Development Authority Vemulawada 
8 Quli Qutub Shah Urban Development Authority. Hyderabad 
 
Sl.No. Name of the Parastatal bodies - Town Planning Authorities Location 
 Regional office  
1 Regional Deputy Director of Town and Country Planning, 
Hyderabad Region 
Hyderabad 
2 Regional Deputy Director of Town and Country Planning 
KUDA, Warangal Region 
Hanamkonda 
 Old District  
1 The District Town and Country Planning Officer Adilabad 
2 The District Town and Country Planning Officer Nalgonda 
3 The District Town and Country Planning Officer Mahabubnagar 
4 The District Town and Country Planning Officer Nizamabad 
5 The District Town and Country Planning Officer Khammam 
6 The District Town and Country Planning Officer Karimnagar 
7 The District Town and Country Planning Officer Hyderabad  
(RR district) 
8 The District Town and Country Planning Officer Medak 
9 The District Town and Country Planning Officer Hanamkonda, 
Warangal 
 New Districts  
1 The District Town and Country Planning Officer Kothagudam 
2 The District Town and Country Planning Officer Mancherial 
3 The District Town and Country Planning Officer Suryapet 
4 The District Town and Country Planning Officer Sangareddy 
5 The District Town and Country Planning Officer Kamareddy 
6 The District Town and Country Planning Officer Nagarkurnool 

Performance Audit of ‘Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act in Telangana State’ 
Page 46 
 
7 The District Town and Country Planning Officer Wanaparthy 
8 The District Town and Country Planning Officer Gadwal 
9 The District Town and Country Planning Officer Vikarabad 
10 The District Town and Country Planning Officer Bhongir 
11 The District Town and Country Planning Officer Medchal 
12 The District Town and Country Planning Officer Siddipet 
13 The District Town and Country Planning Officer Mahabubabad 
14 The District Town and Country Planning Officer Bhupalapally 
15 The District Town and Country Planning Officer Jangaon 
16 The District Town and Country Planning Officer Jagitial 
17 The District Town and Country Planning Officer Peddapally 
18 The District Town and Country Planning Officer Sircilla 
19 The District Town and Country Planning Officer Asifabad 
20 The District Town and Country Planning Officer Nirmal 
21 The District Town and Country Planning Officer Mulugu 
22 The District Town and Country Planning Officer Narayanpet 
23 The District Town and Country Planning Officer Hanamkonda 

Appendices 
 
Page 47 
 
Appendix-3.2 
(Reference to paragraph 3.9, page 19) 
Control and overriding power of the State Government over ULBs as per Municipal Acts 
1. Power to call-for records, etc.: Government or the District Collector may enter on and inspect, 
any immovable property or work in progress and also competent to (i) call for any document ; 
(ii) require any return, plan, estimate, statement, a ccount or statistics ; (iii) require any 
information or report on any municipal matter and (iv) record in writing, any observation in 
regard to its duties [Section-67 of TM Act, 1965]. Similar provision exists in Section-71 of TM 
Act, 2019. 
2. Power to take ac tion, when any Authority fails to perform its duty: If any Municipal 
authority fails to perform its duties, Government fixes a time to perform to do so and if not 
done, appoints some person to perform it [Section-64 of TM Act, 1965 ]. Similarly, as per 
Section-74 TM Act, 2019, if it appears to the Government or District Collector that the 
Municipal Council, the Chairperson/Vice-Chairperson or the Members or the Committees has 
made any default in performing any duty imposed, the Government may in writing fix a period 
for the performance of such duty.  
3. Power on Cancellation and Suspension of Resolution: Government may either suo-motu or 
on a representation of a Member, Chairperson or Commissioner, cancel any resolution passed, 
order issued, license or permission granted or prohibit doing of any act which is about to be 
done or being done, if opined that it has not been made in accordance with law [Section-59 of 
TM Act, 1965]. Similar provision exists in Sections 65(1) and 80 of TM Act, 2019. 
4. Suspension of Chairperson, Vice -Chairperson or Member: Government is competent to 
suspend Chairperson/Vice-Chairperson or Member who in their opinion, willfully misbehaved 
or manhandled any other member or officer or employee of the municipality or destroyed the 
property of municipality or used unparliamentary language or abused his position in the course 
of meetings of the Council or during the discharge of any duty, so as to lead a situation in which 
municipal administration cannot be carried on in accordance with the provisions of the Act or 
the financial st ability of Municipality is threatened [Section-59A of TM Act, 1965 ]. Similar 
provision exists in Section-66 of TM Act, 2019. 
5. Power to remove Chairperson or Vice-Chairperson: Government is empowered to remove 
Chairperson or Vice-Chairperson in the cases of (i) willfully omits or refuses to carry out or 
disobeys the provisions of the Act, rules, bye-laws, regulations or lawful orders, (ii) abuses his 
position or the powers vested in him [Section-60 of TM Act, 1965].  As per Section-67 of TM 
Act, 2019, the additional provisions added viz., (i) failed in performing functions or discharging 
the duties, (ii) omitted or refused to carry out the orders of Government for proper working of 
the Municipality, (iii) guilty of mis conduct in the discharge of his duties, guilty of 
embezzlement of Municipal fund, (iv) persistently defaulted functions and duties and (v) 
become incapable of such performance.  
6. Power to dissolve Council: Government is competent to dissolve the Council in the cases: (i) 
when the Council is not competent to perform or persistently makes default in performing its 
duties, (ii) exceeds or abuses its position or powers , (iii) a situation exists in which the 
municipal administration cannot be carried on in accordance with the provisions of the Act and 
(iv) the financial stability or credit of the Council is threatened (Section- 62 of TM Act, 1965). 
As substituted in Act  17 of 1994 and also included in Section-68 of TM Act, 2019, the 
Government when dissolved the Municipality with effect from specified date and reconstituted 
either immediately or with effective from another specified date not later than six months from 
the date of dissolution; notification shall be laid before both houses of State Legislature.  
7. Power to give directions: Government is competent to give such directions not inconsistent 
with the provisions of the Act or rules made thereunder to the Council, as it may consider 

Appendices 
 
Page 47 
 
Appendix-3.2 
(Reference to paragraph 3.9, page 19) 
Control and overriding power of the State Government over ULBs as per Municipal Acts 
1. Power to call-for records, etc.: Government or the District Collector may enter on and inspect, 
any immovable property or work in progress and also competent to (i) call for any document ; 
(ii) require any return, plan, estimate, statement, a ccount or statistics ; (iii) require any 
information or report on any municipal matter and (iv) record in writing, any observation in 
regard to its duties [Section-67 of TM Act, 1965]. Similar provision exists in Section-71 of TM 
Act, 2019. 
2. Power to take ac tion, when any Authority fails to perform its duty: If any Municipal 
authority fails to perform its duties, Government fixes a time to perform to do so and if not 
done, appoints some person to perform it [Section-64 of TM Act, 1965 ]. Similarly, as per 
Section-74 TM Act, 2019, if it appears to the Government or District Collector that the 
Municipal Council, the Chairperson/Vice-Chairperson or the Members or the Committees has 
made any default in performing any duty imposed, the Government may in writing fix a period 
for the performance of such duty.  
3. Power on Cancellation and Suspension of Resolution: Government may either suo-motu or 
on a representation of a Member, Chairperson or Commissioner, cancel any resolution passed, 
order issued, license or permission granted or prohibit doing of any act which is about to be 
done or being done, if opined that it has not been made in accordance with law [Section-59 of 
TM Act, 1965]. Similar provision exists in Sections 65(1) and 80 of TM Act, 2019. 
4. Suspension of Chairperson, Vice -Chairperson or Member: Government is competent to 
suspend Chairperson/Vice-Chairperson or Member who in their opinion, willfully misbehaved 
or manhandled any other member or officer or employee of the municipality or destroyed the 
property of municipality or used unparliamentary language or abused his position in the course 
of meetings of the Council or during the discharge of any duty, so as to lead a situation in which 
municipal administration cannot be carried on in accordance with the provisions of the Act or 
the financial st ability of Municipality is threatened [Section-59A of TM Act, 1965 ]. Similar 
provision exists in Section-66 of TM Act, 2019. 
5. Power to remove Chairperson or Vice-Chairperson: Government is empowered to remove 
Chairperson or Vice-Chairperson in the cases of (i) willfully omits or refuses to carry out or 
disobeys the provisions of the Act, rules, bye-laws, regulations or lawful orders, (ii) abuses his 
position or the powers vested in him [Section-60 of TM Act, 1965].  As per Section-67 of TM 
Act, 2019, the additional provisions added viz., (i) failed in performing functions or discharging 
the duties, (ii) omitted or refused to carry out the orders of Government for proper working of 
the Municipality, (iii) guilty of mis conduct in the discharge of his duties, guilty of 
embezzlement of Municipal fund, (iv) persistently defaulted functions and duties and (v) 
become incapable of such performance.  
6. Power to dissolve Council: Government is competent to dissolve the Council in the cases: (i) 
when the Council is not competent to perform or persistently makes default in performing its 
duties, (ii) exceeds or abuses its position or powers , (iii) a situation exists in which the 
municipal administration cannot be carried on in accordance with the provisions of the Act and 
(iv) the financial stability or credit of the Council is threatened (Section- 62 of TM Act, 1965). 
As substituted in Act  17 of 1994 and also included in Section-68 of TM Act, 2019, the 
Government when dissolved the Municipality with effect from specified date and reconstituted 
either immediately or with effective from another specified date not later than six months from 
the date of dissolution; notification shall be laid before both houses of State Legislature.  
7. Power to give directions: Government is competent to give such directions not inconsistent 
with the provisions of the Act or rules made thereunder to the Council, as it may consider 
Appendices 
 
Page 49 
 
14. Government to take up works with the consent:  The Government may with the consent of 
the Council, undertake on its behalf the construction of water supply, drainage or other works. 
A planning committee may be appointed for preparation of plans for developmental works 
[Section-65 of TM Act, 1965]. Similar provision exists in Section-75 (1) TM Act, 2019.  
15. Directions to the Municipality on water supply: The Government may constitute water board 
for one or more municipalities or other local authorities. The Council shall, so far as the funds 
at its disposal admit, provide sufficient water to the habitats. Further, the Council may, on the 
direction of the Government, supply water to local authority or other person outside the 
municipality [Section-138 & 143 of TM Act, 1965]. Similar provisions exist in Section-116 (2) 
of TM Act, 2019.  
16. Establishment of Slaughter-houses: The Council shall provide a sufficient number of places 
as municipal slaughter-houses within or outside with the permission of Government and charge 
rent and fees at such rates. The Council may place the collection of such rents and fees under 
the management [Section-271(1)(2)(3) of TM Act, 1965].  As per Section-152(1)(2)(3) TM 
Act, 2019, subject to such rules made by the Government, every Municipality may designate 
places for use as public slaughter-houses and charge rents and fees for the places so designated. 
If such land for the purpose is not available, it shall be the duty of the District Collector to 
provide land available under his control. The Municipality shall in consultation with the District 
Collector and CDMA make efforts to modernise all the existing slaughter-houses in a time 
bound manner.  
Appendices 
 
Page 49 
 
14. Government to take up works with the consent:  The Government may with the consent of 
the Council, undertake on its behalf the construction of water supply, drainage or other works. 
A planning committee may be appointed for preparation of plans for developmental works 
[Section-65 of TM Act, 1965]. Similar provision exists in Section-75 (1) TM Act, 2019.  
15. Directions to the Municipality on water supply: The Government may constitute water board 
for one or more municipalities or other local authorities. The Council shall, so far as the funds 
at its disposal admit, provide sufficient water to the habitats. Further, the Council may, on the 
direction of the Government, supply water to local authority or other person outside the 
municipality [Section-138 & 143 of TM Act, 1965]. Similar provisions exist in Section-116 (2) 
of TM Act, 2019.  
16. Establishment of Slaughter-houses: The Council shall provide a sufficient number of places 
as municipal slaughter-houses within or outside with the permission of Government and charge 
rent and fees at such rates. The Council may place the collection of such rents and fees under 
the management [Section-271(1)(2)(3) of TM Act, 1965].  As per Section-152(1)(2)(3) TM 
Act, 2019, subject to such rules made by the Government, every Municipality may designate 
places for use as public slaughter-houses and charge rents and fees for the places so designated. 
If such land for the purpose is not available, it shall be the duty of the District Collector to 
provide land available under his control. The Municipality shall in consultation with the District 
Collector and CDMA make efforts to modernise all the existing slaughter-houses in a time 
bound manner.  
Appendices 
 
Page 49 
 
14. Government to take up works with the consent:  The Government may with the consent of 
the Council, undertake on its behalf the construction of water supply, drainage or other works. 
A planning committee may be appointed for preparation of plans for developmental works 
[Section-65 of TM Act, 1965]. Similar provision exists in Section-75 (1) TM Act, 2019.  
15. Directions to the Municipality on water supply: The Government may constitute water board 
for one or more municipalities or other local authorities. The Council shall, so far as the funds 
at its disposal admit, provide sufficient water to the habitats. Further, the Council may, on the 
direction of the Government, supply water to local authority or other person outside the 
municipality [Section-138 & 143 of TM Act, 1965]. Similar provisions exist in Section-116 (2) 
of TM Act, 2019.  
16. Establishment of Slaughter-houses: The Council shall provide a sufficient number of places 
as municipal slaughter-houses within or outside with the permission of Government and charge 
rent and fees at such rates. The Council may place the collection of such rents and fees under 
the management [Section-271(1)(2)(3) of TM Act, 1965].  As per Section-152(1)(2)(3) TM 
Act, 2019, subject to such rules made by the Government, every Municipality may designate 
places for use as public slaughter-houses and charge rents and fees for the places so designated. 
If such land for the purpose is not available, it shall be the duty of the District Collector to 
provide land available under his control. The Municipality shall in consultation with the District 
Collector and CDMA make efforts to modernise all the existing slaughter-houses in a time 
bound manner.  

Performance Audit of ‘Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act in Telangana State’ 
Page 50 
 
Appendix-3.3 
(Reference to paragraph 3.10.2, page 21) 
Vacancy position of sampled ULBs 
Sl. No. Category of ULB Name of the ULB Sanctioned 
Strength 
Persons In 
Position 
Vacancies 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
1. Municipal Corporation Boduppal 4 3 1 
2. Municipal Corporation Karimnagar 497 230 267 
3. Municipal Corporation Meerpet 4 4 0 
4. Municipal Corporation Nizamabad 661 369 292 
5. Municipal Corporation Ramagundam 230 91 139 
6. Municipal Corporation Warangal 1,511 659 852 
Total (A) 2,907 1,356 1,551 
7. Municipality Bhongir 141 88 53 
8. Municipality Bodhan 143 71 72 
9. Municipality Jangaon 132 62 70 
10. Municipality Kamareddy 162 80 82 
11. Municipality Medak 133 76 57 
12. Municipality Medchal 5 3 2 
13. Municipality Pedda Amberpet 2 0 2 
14. Municipality Sadasivapet 86 55 31 
15. Municipality Shadnagar 58 29 29 
16. Municipality Siddipet 170 85 85 
17. Municipality Wanaparthy 92 62 30 
Total (B) 1,124 611 513 
Grand total (A + B ) 4,031 1,967 2,064 
 
  

Appendices 
 
Page 51 
 
Appendix-3.4 
(Reference to paragraph 3.10.3, page 21) 
Statement showing the details of training programmes conducted by the ULBs during 
2015-2021 
Sl. 
No. 
Category Name of the 
ULB 
Whether 
proposals sent 
to CDMA 
Whether 
training 
conducted 
Whether 
evaluation sent 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
1 Municipality Bhongir Details not 
furnished 
Yes Details not 
furnished 
2 Municipality Bodhan No Yes No 
3 Corporation Boduppal No No No 
4 Corporation Warangal No Yes Yes 
5 Municipality Jangaon Details not 
furnished 
Yes Details not 
furnished 
6 Corporation Karimnagar No No No 
7 Municipality Medak No No No 
8 Municipality Medchal No No No 
9 Corporation Meerpet No No No 
10 Corporation Nizamabad No No No 
11 Municipality Pedda Amberpet Details not 
furnished 
Yes Details not 
furnished 
12 Corporation Ramagundam No No No 
13 Municipality Sadasivapet No Yes No 
14 Municipality Shadnagar No Yes 
Details not 
furnished 
No 
15 Municipality Siddipet No No No 
16 Municipality Wanaparthy No No No 
17 Municipality Kamareddy No No No 
 
  

Performance Audit of ‘Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act in Telangana State’ 
Page 52 
 
Appendix-3.5 
(Reference to paragraph 3.11.1(A), page 22) 
Present per capita demand and supply of water in test-checked ULBs 
Name of the 
ULB 
Present 
Demand-
MLD 
Present 
supply-
MLD 
Short 
fall 
MLD 
Per cent 
of short 
fall on 
Demand 
Quantity of water Supply made 
As per ULB (in 
lpcd) 
Effective as per 
frequency of 
supply (lpcd) 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 
Bodhan 
Municipality 
12.21 10 2.21 18 110 
one hour daily 
110 
Bhongir 
Municipality 
8.08 5.31 2.77 34 96 
frequency not 
stated 
96 
Boduppal 
Corporation 
NA 12 NA 0 135 
one and half 
hour, twice/ 
thrice in a week 
67.5 
Jangaon 
Municipality 
8.77 7.80 0.97 11 130 
one hour daily 
130 
Kamareddy 
Municipality 
14.75 9.60 5.15 35 113 
once in two 
days 
56.5 
Karimnagar 
Corporation 
60 60 0 0 135 
45 minutes 
daily 
135 
Medak 
Municipality 
8.00 8.00 0 0 120 
one hour daily 
120 
Medchal 
Municipality 
6 3.5 2.5 42  135 
30 minutes once 
in two days 
67.5 
Meerpet 
Corporation 
12.5 4.0 8.5 68 43 
twice in a week 
14.3 
Nizamabad 
Corporation 
40 40 0 0 135 
one hour daily 
135 
Pedda 
Amberpet 
Municipality 
8.77 7.60 1.17 13 116 
twice in a week 
38.6 
Ramagundam 
Corporation 
36 36 0 0 135 
daily 
135 
Sadasivapet 
Municipality 
7.43 4.00 3.43 46 90 
one hour, once 
in three days 
30.0 
Shadnagar 
Municipality 
9.45 6.25 3.20 34 100 
one hour, once 
in six days 
16.7 
Siddipet 
Municipality 
18.75 18.75 0 0 135 
30 minutes 
daily 
135 
Wanaparthy 13.20 11.90 1.30 10 135 
one hour daily 
135 
Warangal 
Corporation 
168.92 168.92 0 0 138.28 
daily 
138.28 

Appendices
Page 53
Appendix-4.1
(Reference to paragraph 4.1.5.2, page 34)
A) Test-checked ULBs-wise arrears in collection of Property Tax to end of March 2021
                                          (`` in lakh)
Name of the 
ULB
Demand Collection Balance Percentage 
of Balance Arrear Current Total Arrear Current Total Arrear Current Total
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11)
Bhongir 30.59 448.57 479.16 29.37 445.40 474.77 1.22 3.17 4.39 0.92
Bodhan 391.40 215.54 606.94 370.69 202.13 522.82 13.41 34.12 47.53 7.83
Boduppal 324.26 1049.42 1373.68 207.02 670.76 877.78 117.24 378.66 495.9 36.10
Jangaon 235.92 141.55 377.47 227.99 137.84 365.83 7.93 3.71 11.64 3.08
Kamareddy 223.36 601.10 824.46 191.23 510.47 701.70 32.13 90.63 122.76 14.89
Karimnagar 368.92 2626.97 2995.89 359.74 2192.66 2552.40 9.18 434.31 443.49 14.80
Medak 157.46 356.00 513.46 153.39 350.04 503.43 4.07 5.96 10.03 1.95
Medchal 157.65 505.14 662.79 108.38 311.83 420.21 49.27 193.31 242.58 36.60
Meerpet 278.58 886.71 1165.29 192.69 507.41 700.10 85.89 379.301 465.19 39.92
Nizamabad 3637.30 3520.83 7158.13 2859.30 3092.30 5951.60 778 428.53 1206.53 16.86
Pedda 
Amberpet 414.21 446.12 860.33 350.85 408.79 759.64 63.36 37.33 100.69 11.70
Ramagundam 271.11 550.95 822.06 255.57 529.23 784.80 15.54 21.72 37.26 4.53
Sadasivapet 126.06 275.37 401.43 15.50 228.00 243.50 110.56 47.37 157.93 39.34
Shadnagar 20.14 335.41 355.55 13.41 268.39 281.80 6.73 67.02 73.75 20.74
Siddipet 1047.80 637.28 1685.08 798.48 140.54 939.02 249.32 496.74 746.06 44.27
Wanaparthy 400.01 287.94 687.95 216.85 219.97 436.82 183.16 67.97 251.13 36.50
Warangal 1632.84 4857.26 6490.10 1070.33 4378.86 5449.19 562.51 478.4 1040.91 16.04
Total 9717.61 17742.16 27459.77 7420.79 14594.62 21965.41 2289.52 3168.25 5457.77 19.88
B) Year-wise details of Demand, Collection and Balance of PT arrears in test-checked ULBs
(`` in lakh)
Year Demand Collection Balance Percentage of 
collection against 
demand
Percentage of 
arrears against 
demand
2015-16 12,764.31 10,797.14 1,967.14 84.59 15.41
2016-17 14,445.30 11,854.07 2,592.98 82.06 17.94
2017-18 16,513.86 14,171.90 2,340.24 85.82 14.18
2018-19 19,555.02 16,972.59 2,577.90 86.79 13.21
2019-20 21,961.35 17,799.81 4,080.90 81.05 18.95
2020-21 26,018.08 20,935.87 5,045.62 80.47 19.53

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
Pages 55 - 56 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Glossary of Abbreviations 
 

 
 

Glossary of Abbreviations 
 
Page 55 
 
 
ARC Administrative Reforms Commission 
ARV Annual Rental Value 
BC Backward Classes 
C&D Construction and Demolition 
CAA Constitutional Amendment Act 
CDMA Commissioner and Director of Municipal Administration 
CFC Central Finance Commission 
CG Central Government 
CPCB Central Pollution Control Board 
CPHEEO Central Public Health and Environmental Engineering Organisation 
DDP Draft Development Plan 
DPCs District Planning Committees 
DRCCs Dry Resource Collection Centres 
DRDAs District Rural Development Agencies 
DTCP Directorate of Town and Country Planning 
ET Entertainment Tax 
GHMC Greater Hyderabad Municipal Corporation 
GHMC Act, 1955 The Greater Hyderabad Municipal Corporation Act, 1955 
GIS Geographic Information System 
GoI Government of India 
GST Goods and Services Tax 
HM&FW Health, Medical and Family Welfare 
HMDA Hyderabad Metropolitan Development Authority 
HMWS&SB Hyderabad Metro Water Supply and Sewerage Board 
IT Information Technology 
JPV Joint Physical Verification 
KUDA Kakatiya Urban Development Authority 
lpcd Litres Per Capita per day 
MAUDD Municipal Administration and Urban Development Department 
MEPMA Mission for Elimination of Poverty in Municipal Areas 
MLD Million Litres per Day 
MoUD Ministry of Urban Development 
NOC No objection certificate 
O&M Operation and Maintenance 
ODF Open Defecation Free 
PIL Public Interest Litigation 
PT Property Tax 
RR District Ranga Reddy District 
RWS&S Rural Water Supply and Sanitation 

Performance Audit of ‘Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act in Telangana State’ 
Page 56 
 
SC Scheduled Castes 
SD Stamp Duty 
SEC State Election Commission 
SFC State Finance Commission 
SLB Service Level Benchmark 
ST Scheduled Tribes 
SWM Solid Waste Management 
TAD Treasuries & Accounts Department 
TM Act, 1965 The Telangana Municipalities Act, 1965 
TM Act, 2019 The Telangana Municipalities Act, 2019 
TM Acts The Telangana Municipal Acts 
TMC Act, 1994 The Telangana Municipal Corporations Act, 1994 
TPAs Town Planning Authorities 
TSPCB Telangana State Pollution Control Board 
TSWMP&S Telangana Solid Waste Management Policy and Strategy 
TUFIDC The Telangana Urban Finance and Infrastructure Development 
Corporation Limited 
UDAs Urban Development Authorities 
ULBs Urban Local Bodies 
WC Water Charges 

 
 
 
 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© COMPTROLLER AND 
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA 
https://cag.gov.in 