 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India  Performance Audit on Implementation of eProcurement system in Tamil Nadu          Government of Tamil Nadu Report No. 4 of the year 2023 


Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Performance Audit on Implementation of 
eProcurement system in Tamil Nadu 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government of Tamil Nadu 
Report No. 4 of the year 2023 

i 
 
 Paragraph  Page 
Preface v 
Executive Summary   vii 
CHAPTER I - INTRODUCTION   
Introduction 1.1 1 
Objectives of eProcurement system 1.2 1 
System description 1.3 2 
Modules of GePNIC 1.4 2 
Workflow of the eProcurement system 1.5 3 
Audit objectives 1.6 3 
Audit criteria 1.7 4 
Audit scope and methodology 1.8 4 
Acknowledgement 1.9 5 
Report Structure 1.10 5 
CHAPTER II - PORTAL IMPLEMENTATION    
Introduction 2.1 7 
Partial implementation of eProcurement portal 2.2 7 
Utilisation of eProcurement portal by procuring 
entities 
2.3 8 
Status of updation of published tenders in comparison 
with other State Governments using GePNIC 
2.4 11 
Management of Earnest Money Deposit in the 
eProcurement portal 
2.5 12 
Imparting of training and awareness about 
eProcurement portal 
2.6 13 
Level of competition 2.7 14 
Time taken for processing of tenders 2.8 15 
Conclusion 2.9 16 
Recommendations 2.10 16 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 

Performance Audit on Implementation of eProcurement system in Tamil Nadu 
ii 
 
CHAPTER III - DEFICIENCIES IN THE 
APPLICATION SOFTWARE 
  
Introduction 3.1 17 
Non-mapping of Business Rules 3.2 17 
Inadequate controls in the system 3.3 22 
Other issues in eProcurement system 3.4 32 
Conclusion 3.5 35 
Recommendations 3.6 36 
CHAPTER IV - TENDER PROCESSING   
Introduction 4.1 37 
Bid submission 4.2 38 
Evaluation of tenders 4.3 40 
Conclusion 4.4 45 
Recommendations 4.5 46 
CHAPTER V - COLLUSIVE BIDDING AND 
CARTELISATION IN TENDERING 
  
Introduction 5.1 47 
Analysis of number of bids received for a tender 5.2 48 
Bidders becoming L1 on rotation (Bid rotation) 5.3 49 
Bidders with family relationship 5.4 51 
Bid participation by the same group of companies 5.5 53 
Inconsistent bidding patterns noticed from IP address 5.6 54 
Bidding patterns noticed from EMD payments 5.7 56 
Conclusion 5.8 58 
Recommendations 5.9 59 
 
  

Table of Contents  
iii 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix 
No. 
Details Page 
1.1 List of sampled procuring entities in sampled districts. 61 
1.2 Risk parameters considered in the sampling of tenders 62 
2.1 Details of discontinuance in usage of eProcurement portal by 
procuring entities 
63 
2.2 Status of updation of published tenders by GoTN in 
comparison with other State Governments using GePNIC 
64 
3.1 Details of procuring entity-wise tenders published with less 
than the prescribed time for bid submission 
65 
5.1 Details of procuring entities where bids were submitted from 
same IP address 
67 
5.2 Details of procuring entities where bidders had submitted bids 
with consecutive EMD instrument numbers 
68 
 Glossary of abbreviations 69 
 
APPENDICES 

v 
 
PREFACE 
 
This Report for the year ended March 2022 has been 
prepared for submission to the Governor of Tamil Nadu 
under Article 151 (2) of the Constitution of India, for 
being laid before the State Legislature. 
The Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of 
India contains the results of Performance Audit of 
Implementation of eProcurement System in Tamil Nadu 
covering the period from 2016-22. 
The instances mentioned in the Report are those, which 
came to notice in the course of the performance audit 
conducted during June 2022 to November 2022.  Matters 
relating to the periods outside the audit period have also 
been reported in places where they were found necessary.  
The Audit has been conducted in conformity with the 
Auditing Standards issued by the Comptroller and 
Auditor General of India. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
v 

  
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
vii 
 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
 
Why we did this Audit? 
To enhance the efficiency of project management processes in various 
departments and speed up the implementation of projects, Government of Tamil 
Nadu envisioned an ambitious comprehensive Project Formulation, Execution 
and Management System to integrate and computerise the entire process of 
projects and works implementation in the State.  This system also envisaged an 
eProcurement portal and the adoption of electronic tendering procedures in 
Government.  
To achieve this, Government of Tamil Nadu implemented an eProcurement 
System (GePNIC Portal) through Finance Department. The system was 
conceptualised to reduce the tendering cycle time, the indirect costs and for 
enhancing the transparency in the procurement process.  The eProcurement 
System enables the tenderers to download the Tender Schedule free of cost and 
then submit the bids online through the eProcurement portal. 
Considering the importance of the eProcurement system for bringing in more 
transparency and efficiency in procurements by the State Government and State 
Public Sector entities, CAG took up this Performance Audit covering the 
activities during 2016-22 with a focus on the functioning of the eProcurement 
Portal (GePNIC) and on evaluation and finalisation of tenders based on the data 
for the period 2016-22 and the physical tender documents. All the envisaged 
eight modules were fully functional.  The objectives of this Audit were to assess 
whether (1) the eProcurement system was effectively implemented and 
efficiently utilised to achieve its objectives of promoting competition, 
transparency, and accountability; (2) the business rules were adequately mapped 
into the system and (3) adequate controls were built into the system to ensure the 
completeness, integrity and reliability of data in the system. 
What we found? 
In the absence of specific Government instructions mandating all procuring 
entities in the State to carry out procurements through GePNIC portal, user 
departments, including procurement entities which use eProcurement portal, 
adopted differing/alternate modes of procurement viz., manual purchase, GeM 
(Government eMarket place), MSTC etc.  There was no ‘Centre of 
responsibility’ to co-ordinate and monitor the functions of the eProcurement 
portal. Seventy four per cent of the procuring entities did not utilise the 
eProcurement portal even after a lapse of 15 years since inception. 
Non-uploading of tender evaluation reports renders the eProcurement system 
incomplete affecting transparency and objectivity of the tender process and 
perpetuates dependence on manual records.  Even after 15 years since inception, 
GoTN stands eleventh with respect to updation of the stages of tender processes 
in GePNIC portal when compared to 15 other State Governments.   

Performance Audit on Implementation of eProcurement system in Tamil Nadu  
viii 
  
Though online EMD collection was enabled in December 2017, EMD was 
collected through offline mode.  This led to delayed refunding of EMD to the 
unsuccessful bidders. 
No steps were taken by Finance Department or the user Departments to create 
awareness about the eProcurement portal among the bidders and to encourage 
them to register on the eProcurement portal. The envisaged centralised open 
online workflow model of registration of vendor was yet to be implemented 
resulting in failure to broaden the bidder base and enhance vendor participation. 
The prescribed timelines as per Tamil Nadu Transparency in Tender Rules, 2000 
(TNTIT Rules) were not followed by the departments and the software was not 
designed to incorporate the timeline related provisions of TNTIT Rules. 
The system does not cater to the provisions of TNTIT Rules for providing 
purchase preference to domestic enterprises. Similarly, there was no provision in 
the software to capture details of purchase order(s) issued during the rate contract 
period. 
The system lacked provisions for negotiation with L1 bidder after generation of 
Bill of Quantities and for situations where participating bidders quoted the same 
price necessitating manual intervention. 
The eProcurement portal did not ensure that only ‘non-zero’ values were allowed 
for EMD and Tender values, which resulted in 10 percent of published tenders 
exhibiting EMD value or Tender value as ‘zero’.  There were discrepancies in 
mandatory fields and NULL values in name fields due to lack of input controls in 
the system. 
Bids submitted for the same tender were decrypted on different dates in 
contravention of TNTIT Rules. The Bill of Quantities comparative chart in  
buy-back cases added the buy-back amount to the quoted amount instead of 
reducing the same in three instances. 
Discrepancies were noticed in role creation by user Departments. There was no 
processing control as the organisations created multiple Nodal officers and 
blocked tenderers and blocked Department users had participated in the tender 
process during the blocked period. 
Patterns of bidding viz., bid rotation, bidders with family relationship, bid 
submission from procuring entity computers, different bidders placing bids for a 
tender from the same IP address, double EMD, coded intimation by bidders and 
consecutive EMD instrument numbers indicative of bid rigging and cartelisation 
were noticed. These fraudulent practices among the bidders and the failure on the 
part of the officials involved in the evaluation and approval of the tenders 
derailed the efforts of GoTN in increasing participation, reducing costs, 
enhancing transparency and improving the procurement system. 
  

Executive Summary 
 
ix 
  
Data analysis of 1.34 lakh tenders for which valid bids were received revealed 
that 444 bids submitted in 208 tenders were received from bidders having the 
same address registered in the eProcurement portal and were submitted from the 
same IP address. 
The above instances point to collusive bidding as either (i) the bidders from 
different geographical locations of the State submit the bids from the same IP 
address or (ii) submit the bids from the Department’s premises indicating that the 
Department was a party to it.  This shows that the L1 is not decided by the 
system or the Department concerned but is pre-determined by the participating 
bidders.  Thus, the envisaged objectives of eProcurement system viz., promoting 
competition and transparency in the procurement process was not achieved. 
What we recommend? 
We have made 17 recommendations as given below: 
PORTAL IMPLEMENTATION: 
 Government should come up with a comprehensive solution to address 
the technical and procedural shortcomings on priority. 
 GoTN should issue orders to all the procuring entities to mandatorily use 
the eProcurement portal for all procurement activities. 
 Procuring entities should update the tender stages in the eProcurement 
portal immediately on completion of every stage and the same should be 
monitored by the Nodal Officers of the department using the 
Management Information System (MIS) reports available in the 
eProcurement portal. 
 Government should fix responsibility for the diversion of EMD funds and 
bring in a mechanism so that offline payments are authorised by an 
authority higher than the publisher of the Tender. 
 Government should speed up the process to implement the centralised 
open online workflow model of registration. 
 Government should chart out and implement a structured training 
programme for effective utilisation of the eProcurement portal by 
officials of procuring entities and should take steps to achieve improved 
bidder participation through help desk, hand holding and pre-bid meeting 
activities. 
  

Performance Audit on Implementation of eProcurement system in Tamil Nadu  
x 
 
 
DEFICIENCIES IN THE APPLICATION SOFTWARE: 
 Government should incorporate suitable provisions in the software, in 
line with TNTIT Rules, in consultation with the Finance Department, 
should provide suitable input controls in the eProcurement portal during 
capture of the registration information of the departmental users/bidders, 
should provide necessary validation controls and customise the 
eProcurement portal for Tamil Nadu to ensure transparency, impartial 
decision making and confidentiality. 
 Government should take steps for the public to easily access  
non-sensitive information in the eProcurement portal without any 
restriction for a truly transparent system. 
 
TENDER PROCESSING: 
 Government should establish a Centre of responsibility to escalate 
eProcurement portal issues to NIC for appropriate resolution.   
 Government should instruct the procuring entities to evaluate the tenders 
only based on the documents uploaded by the bidders to the 
eProcurement portal. 
 Government should fix responsibility on the tender inviting authorities 
and officers involved in the tender process for discrepancies in tender 
processing. 
 Government should consider introducing a feature in the system for 
fixing responsibility on the tender evaluator and for breaking down bid 
conditions into its components and generate an automatic inviolable 
checklist for the tender evaluation. 
 Government, through NIC, should take steps to map the policies relating 
to SSIs/MSMEs bidders in the eProcurement portal to ensure a holistic 
tender evaluation. 
 Government should ensure that the bidders who indulge in malpractices 
are blacklisted. 
 Nodal Officers of procuring departments should ensure that all evaluation 
reports are uploaded in the eProcurement portal in complete shape for 
transparency in tender processing. 
COLLUSIVE BIDDING AND CARTELISATION IN TENDERING: 
 Government should redesign the system to flag bids submitted by bidders 
from the same registered address and/or the same IP address. 
 Government should conduct enquiry and fix responsibility for collusive 
bidding and cartelisation instances pointed out by Audit. 

Executive Summary 
 
xi 
  
 Officials involved in the evaluation and finalisation of tenders should 
carefully examine the documents uploaded in the eProcurement portal 
using ‘Tender Discursive Report’ available in MIS, which provides all 
the information about the bid viz., IP Address, EMD, GST etc. to guard 
against collusive practices by the bidders.  The procuring entities should 
not allow the bidders to access their office computer systems for 
submission of bids. 
Government’s response to audit recommendations 
Government while responding to the Audit observations raised, assured 
necessary corrective action wherever required.  Government has also taken steps 
for procurement by public procuring entities of the Government of Tamil Nadu 
through the online eProcurement portal from 1 April 2023.  Audit acknowledges 
and appreciates the corrective action taken/proposed by the Government to bring 
required controls and facilities in the eProcurement system to address issues 
pointed out in this report. 

CHAPTER I 
INTRODUCTION 
 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
1 
CHAPTER I 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
1.1 Introduction 
The Department of Finance (DoF), Government of Tamil Nadu (GoTN), with 
a view to implement e-tendering process in a phased manner, issued orders1 
for e-submission of tenders exceeding ₹10 lakh in value from  
October 2007 on a pilot basis in major infrastructure departments2.  On 
successful completion of the pilot phase, it was extended to all the procuring 
entities under the Tamil Nadu/Transparency in Tenders (TNTIT) Act, 1998 
from January 20083 onwards in a designated eProcurement portal.  
Government eProcurement system of National Informatics Centre (GePNIC), 
the designated eProcurement portal was developed by National Informatics 
Centre (NIC) as a product in consultation with the Department of Expenditure, 
Ministry of Finance, Government of India (GoI) for facilitating electronic 
procurement in Government. The GePNIC portal was modified as per the 
requirement of GoTN and was implemented from the financial year  
2008-2009.  The eProcurement portal was provided to GoTN by NIC free of 
cost. 
Subsequently, the TNTIT Rules, 2000 was amended incorporating changes in 
the relevant sub-rules on publication of tenders on the website, electronic 
submission of tenders, opening of e-submitted tenders and authentication of 
documents by digital signature. 
As on December 2022, 2.97 lakh tenders amounting to ₹2,92,050 crore were 
published on this eProcurement portal (https://tntenders.gov.in,) from the date 
of inception. 
1.2 Objectives of eProcurement system 
The following are the benefits envisaged from the eProcurement system. 
⮚ Expanding the accessibility of Tender Notices/Advertisement. 
⮚ Non-discrimination amongst bidders and promoting competition. 
⮚ Enhanced transparency. 
                                                                 
Abbreviations used in this report are listed in the Glossary at Page 69. 
1 Vide G.O. Ms. No. 471 Finance (Salaries) Department dated 30-09-2007. 
2 Public Works, Highways, Rural Development, Municipal Administration,  
Tamil Nadu Electricity Board, Tamil Nadu Water Supply and Drainage Board, 
Chennai Metro Water Supply and Sewerage Board and Tamil Nadu Medical Services 
Corporation. 
3 Vide G.O. Ms. No. 599 Finance (Salaries) Department dated 28-12-2007. 

Performance Audit on Implementation of eProcurement system in Tamil Nadu 
2 
⮚ Compliance with Government regulations and guidelines like 
General Financial Rules 2017, Central Vigilance Commission, 
World Bank, Asian Development Bank etc. 
⮚ Secure Bid Submission using Public Key Infrastructure 
Technology. 
⮚ Accountability of all activities. 
1.3 System description 
The eProcurement portal was developed by NIC using Java/JEE technology 
working on Linux OS with Open-Source PostgreSQL database. Currently, the 
size of the database for TN Tenders site is about 14 TB including the 
associated documents storage.  NIC at the National Data Centre at Shastri 
Park, New Delhi is the Primary site of the eProcurement portal and as per the 
NIC-Business Continuity Plan, if the Primary site is completely down, the 
same will be made available from the Disaster Recovery site at the National 
Data Centre, Hyderabad. 
1.4 Modules of GePNIC 
The following eight modules are available in GePNIC: 
⮚ Registration Module: Registration/Enrolment of Government 
officials & bidders with Digital Signature Certificate (only these 
users are authenticated to login to the system and participate in the 
tender process) and without DSC (to view MIS Reports). 
⮚ Publishing of tender: Tender creation and publishing, publishing 
of corrigendum, publishing of pre-bid meeting documents, 
clarification on the tenders published. 
⮚ Bid submission: Online bid submission/re-submission as many 
times as required (the latest bid before closing of bid submission 
will be the final bid), freezing of bids, facility for online payment 
collection through bank payment gateway, encryption of bids 
submitted by the bidder, facility for single/multiple cover bid 
system. 
⮚ Tender opening: The bids submitted for a tender, are opened 
online by the authorised bid openers, who have been configured at 
the time of tender creation. 
⮚ Technical evaluation: Downloading of documents submitted by 
the bidder through eProcurement portal and manual evaluation 
thereof. The results on selection of bidders and date of financial bid 
opening to be uploaded in the system.  
⮚ Financial bid opening: Only the technically qualified bids of the 
bidders for the tender, are opened online again by the authorised bid 
openers configured in the system during tender creation. 

Chapter I - Introduction 
3 
⮚ Financial evaluation: Evaluation of the financial bid through automatic comparison of Bill of Quantity (BoQ) and selection of L1 bidder. The financial evaluation committee goes through the price bids and the comparative chart. The results are updated into the system along with the selection of the bidders, the member details, and the report of the recommendation. 
⮚ Award of Contract (AoC): Letter of Acceptance (LoA) issued to a successful bidder (L1).  The Tender Inviting Authority (TIA), based on the recommendations of the financial evaluation committee, and after getting approval, prepares the order manually and then updates the order, along with the contract details. 1.5 Workflow of the eProcurement system The workflow of the GePNIC software is depicted in Exhibit 1.1. 
Exhibit 1.1: Workflow of the GePNIC software 
1.6 Audit objectives The objectives of audit are to assess: 
⮚ Whether the eProcurement system has been effectively implemented and efficiently utilised to achieve its objectives of promoting competition, transparency and accountability. 
⮚ Whether the business rules have been adequately mapped into the system. 
⮚ The completeness, integrity and reliability of data in the system and to evaluate whether adequate controls have been built into the system. 
  


Performance Audit on Implementation of eProcurement system in Tamil Nadu 
4 
1.7 Audit criteria 
The criteria adopted to arrive at the audit conclusion are: 
⮚ Tamil Nadu Transparency in Tenders (TNTIT) Act 1998. 
⮚ Tamil Nadu Transparency in Tenders Rules 2000. 
⮚ Government orders, circulars and guidelines issued by the State 
Government relating to procurement. 
⮚ eProcurement guidelines issued by Standardisation Testing and 
Quality Certification (STQC) Directorate, Department of 
Information Technology, Government of India. 
⮚ Guidelines issued by Central Vigilance Commission (CVC), 
Government of India on e-tendering solutions. 
1.8 Audit scope and methodology 
The Information Technology (IT) Audit was conducted from June 2022 to 
November 2022 covering the period 2016-2022 with focus on functioning of 
the GePNIC modules based on the data furnished by NIC. The Audit 
methodology included - 
⮚ Analysis of documents uploaded in the eProcurement portal, as well 
as the manual documents related to tender processing in the 
sampled units. 
⮚ Analysis of Application controls. 
⮚ Analysis of data from the GePNIC database. 
The Audit plan, including audit objectives, audit criteria and audit coverage 
was shared with GoTN through an Entry Conference held on 26 July 2022. 
The field work included scrutiny of related files, collection of documentary 
and electronic evidence.  An Exit Conference to discuss the audit findings 
with the Government was held on 15 February 2023. 
As on date, 53 Departments/Organisations (procuring entities) under the 
GoTN have published tenders in the eProcurement portal during the last  
six years. The entire data dump covering the period 2016-17 to 2021-22 
involving 1.78 lakh tenders relating to all procuring entities under GoTN 
which had implemented eProcurement were analysed with reference to the 
Audit Objectives for checking adequacy of validation controls with reference 
to provisions of the TNTIT Rules, tender conditions of the user departments 
and to bring out the bidding patterns to check bid rigging and cartelisation, if 
any.  Further, field visit was done in respect of selected tenders (sampling 
explained below) to corroborate the results of data analysis with available 
manual documents and to understand the field level issues in use of the 
eProcurement portal. 
 

Chapter I - Introduction 
5 
Sampling was done in three stages:  
(i) Sampling of procuring entities: Fourteen procuring entities were 
selected (Appendix 1.1) based on the number of tenders published viz., seven 
from procuring entities which published more than or equal to 500 tenders and 
seven procuring entities which published less than 500 tenders, by random 
sampling method.  The 53 procuring entities using the eProcurement portal 
had published 1.78 lakh tenders online (Total tender value: ₹2,15,060 crore) as 
of December 2022.  Based on this, the selected 14 procuring entities represent 
76 per cent (1.32 lakh tenders) of the published tenders and  
71 per cent of the total tender value (₹1.52 lakh crore).  
(ii) Sampling of tenders: Twelve risk parameters were considered and 
were grouped into three categories and weightage assigned based on (a) bids 
received; (b) IP address and (c) financial parameters. The risk score for each 
risk parameter is given in Appendix 1.2.  Tenders falling under the above risk 
parameters were identified using a set of PostgreSQL queries and 25 per cent 
of the tenders published (subject to a maximum of 100 tenders) by each of the 
sampled 14 procuring entities viz., 1,183 tenders4 were selected. 
(iii) Sampling of districts: Seven districts viz., Chennai, Coimbatore, 
Salem, Thanjavur (Top 4) and Karur, Krishnagiri and Perambalur (Bottom 3) 
based on the volume of district-wise transactions of the procuring entities, 
were selected for field visit by random sampling method. 
1.9 Acknowledgement 
Audit acknowledges the overall cooperation extended by Government of 
Tamil Nadu, DoF, NIC and the sampled field units in conducting the IS Audit. 
1.10 Report Structure 
The audit findings are grouped under the following Chapters: 
⮚ Chapter II : Portal implementation 
⮚ Chapter III :  Deficiencies in the application software 
⮚ Chapter IV :  Tender processing 
⮚ Chapter V :  Collusive bidding and cartelisation in tendering 
                                                                 
4 A total of 1,260 tenders were verified during field visit which included 1,183 sampled tenders 
and 77 tenders related to the sampled tenders. 

CHAPTER II 
PORTAL 
IMPLEMENTATION  
 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
7 
CHAPTER II 
 
PORTAL IMPLEMENTATION 
 
 
Government failed to make the procurement of goods and services only 
through eProcurement portal mandatory for all procuring entities in the 
State.  There was no ‘Centre of responsibility’ to co-ordinate and monitor 
the functions of the eProcurement portal despite a lapse of more than  
15 years since its implementation. This resulted in partial/non-utilisation 
of the eProcurement portal defeating the envisaged objective of 
transparency in the tender process. 
2.1 Introduction 
Though eProcurement was initiated in October 2007, the successive 
Government Orders had not clarified its mandatory adoption by all procuring 
entities under the GoTN.  ‘Centre of responsibility’ did not exist at the 
State/Department level for ensuring adherence to the instructions issued by 
GoTN.   
User departments directly interacted with NIC to resolve the technical issues 
in publishing and processing their tenders in the eProcurement portal. The 
administrator of the eProcurement portal (DoF) was not involved in this 
process and hence was not aware of the issues in the eProcurement portal and 
its utilisation. 
These issues were due to both technical and procedural shortcomings and 
appropriate comments highlighting such shortcomings are discussed in 
Chapters III and IV.  Rectification of the deficiencies/glitches and automated 
validation checks for financial and technical evaluation requires a 
comprehensive technical and procedural solution involving Business Process 
Re-engineering, time locks/time stamps etc. 
The problems in the implementation and utilisation of the eProcurement 
system at the level of procuring entities, user departments and DoF are 
brought out in the succeeding paragraphs and chapters of the Report.  These 
are mainly attributable to weak administrative and regulatory framework and 
also poor planning and initiation of the Project by GoTN. 
2.2 Partial implementation of eProcurement portal 
On successful completion of pilot phase in October 2007, eProcurement 
facility through the designated eProcurement portal viz., GePNIC was 
extended to all procuring entities under the Tamil Nadu/Transparency in 
Tenders (TNTIT) Act, 1998 from January 2008 onwards.  The Department of 
Finance (DoF) is the Administrator for the implementation of eProcurement 

Performance Audit on Implementation of eProcurement system in Tamil Nadu 
8 
portal and the procuring entities in the eProcurement system are independent 
procurement centres.  It was noticed that 
 148 out of 201 procuring entities did not use the eProcurement 
portal as of December 2022. 
 Data analysis for the period 2016-17 to 2021-22 disclosed that  
18 out of the 53 procuring entities that were procuring goods and 
services through the eProcurement portal, subsequently 
discontinued using the eProcurement portal (Appendix 2.1).  
Thus, non-utilisation of the eProcurement portal by 74 per cent of procuring 
entities, even after a lapse of 15 years since inception of eProcurement portal,  
points to the failure of GoTN to make mandatory all procurements exceeding 
₹10 lakh despite the clear instructions in the Government order issued in 
December 2007 that specifically stated, “procuring entities shall provide for 
submission of tenders by electronic mode also for all tenders exceeding  
₹10 lakh in value from 1-1-2008”. This merely made the eProcurement portal 
an additional mode for procurement.  The said Government order did not 
provide for a ‘Centre of responsibility’ to resolve issues.  
DoF stated (December 2022) that GoTN had issued orders (February 2016) 
regarding adoption of eProcurement and informed that the eProcurement 
System will be made mandatory from April 2023 onwards. This reply was 
endorsed (February 2023) by Government during the Exit meeting. 
The fact remains that despite issuance of orders in February 2016 regarding 
implementation of eProcurement, no significant progress has been made in 
this regard.  The lacunae in the implementation of procurement process 
through the eProcurement portal, noticed through data analysis and sampled 
manual records, are discussed below and in the succeeding Chapters. 
2.3 Utilisation of eProcurement portal by procuring entities 
As of December 2022, the 53 procuring entities that utilised the GePNIC 
portal during 2016-22 published 1.78 lakh tenders with a total value of 
₹2,15,060 crore.  However, it was seen that even among the 53 procuring units 
that took to GePNIC, the utilisation of the eProcurement portal was only 
partial.  In six selected units, only 21.06 per cent (₹1,255.54 crore) of the total 
procurement (₹5,959.70 crore) was carried out through the eProcurement 
portal during 2019-22. The Government did not issue specific instructions 
requiring the procuring entities in the State to carry out all procurements 
through GePNIC portal. Therefore, the procuring entities that used the 
eProcurement portal, also adopted alternate modes of procurement viz., 
manual purchase, GeM (Government e Market place), MSTC etc. In view of 
the above Audit studied the level and effectiveness of eProcurement portal 
utilisation by the procuring entities through data analysis and scrutiny of 
records.  The findings in this regard are discussed below: 
 

Chapter II – Portal implementation  
9 
To be opened(51,354 tenders; 29 per cent)Technical Bid Opening(37,738 tenders; 21 per cent) Technical Evaluation (24,685 tenders; 14 per cent)Financial Bid Opening(32,425 tenders; 18 per cent)Financial Evaluation(10,853 tenders; 6 per cent)Award of Contract(20,758 tenders; 12 per cent)(a) Non-updating of tender processing status in the eProcurement portal As discussed in Paragraph 1.5, GePNIC workflow envisages a sequential step-by-step progress through different stage of tender, culminating in Award of Contract (AoC) to the successful bidder.  Thus, reaching the AoC stage in the online tender process is an indicator of the complete and effective use of GePNIC portal.  Data analysis revealed that only 12 per cent (20,758 out of 1.78 lakh) of the tenders published in the eProcurement portal during 2016-22 reached the AoC stage. The percentage of tenders at various stages of processing as per eProcurement portal data is depicted in Exhibit 2.1.  
Exhibit 2.1: Percentage of tenders at various stages of processing 
All the tenders were past their bid validity period indicating that the eProcurement portal did not reflect their actual status.   Scrutiny of manual records of 1,260 sampled tenders revealed that despite 643 tenders being awarded the contract, only 404 tenders reached the AoC stage in the eProcurement portal. This indicated that once bid documents and system-generated price bid comparative statement for a tender was downloaded, the tender was processed manually till AoC, without updating the corresponding stages on the eProcurement portal. When this was pointed out, the user Departments attributed (October 2022) the non-updation in the eProcurement portal to lack of awareness among the department’s users and shortage of manpower. It was also stated that the eProcurement portal could not be updated subsequently due to transfer/retirement of the officials concerned and expiry of the validity of Digital Signature Certificates. In the Exit Meeting (February 2023), Government replied that the issue would not arise in future as Award of Contract will be done only online in the new eProcurement portal proposed from April 2023. Thus, though the procuring entities had switched to the eProcurement mode, in respect of a majority of the tenders published online they were switching to the manual mode of processing tenders at different stages of the tender process resulting in partial/ineffective use of the eProcurement portal.  This defeated the envisaged objective of transparency in tender process.  The discrepancies in manual evaluation of tenders noticed during scrutiny of tenders documents in the selected procuring units are discussed in Chapter IV of this report. (b) Non-uploading of tender summary reports in the eProcurement portal The eProcurement portal provides for uploading of summary reports at each stage of the tender process as detailed in Table 2.1. 

Performance Audit on Implementation of eProcurement system in Tamil Nadu 
10 
Table 2.1: Details of summary reports to be uploaded 
Stage Activity to be carried out 
Summary 
to be 
uploaded 
Details in the summary 
Bid opening Bids opened online, number of 
bids and payment details checked. 
Bid opening 
summary 
Number of bids and other details 
as necessary, minutes of bid 
opening. 
Technical 
evaluation 
Bids checked against the 
technical criteria specified in the 
tender document. 
Technical 
evaluation 
summary 
List of qualified bidders whose 
bids will be eligible for opening 
of financial bid along with 
reasons of bids accepted/rejected 
in technical evaluation. 
Financial bid 
opening 
Opening of bids of technically 
qualified bidders.   
Financial 
bid opening 
summary 
Overall summary about the 
opening of the financial bids, 
minutes of bid opening. 
Financial 
Evaluation 
The Bill of Quantity (BoQ) of 
each bidder opened and the L1 
bidder identified from the system 
generated BoQ comparative chart. 
Financial 
evaluation 
summary 
The position of the bidders (L1, 
L2 etc.) is to be uploaded. 
Award of 
Contract 
After identification of L1 bidder, 
contract value and the date of 
contract are entered in the system. 
AoC 
Summary 
Letter of Acceptance (LoA)/work 
order is to be uploaded. 
(Source: System Requirement Specification) 
All the above processes are to be followed so that the details of each stage of 
the tender are available in the eProcurement portal at any point of time for 
transparency in the tender process and for future reference.  On the 
eProcurement portal, the next stage in the tender process can be 
enabled/accessed only on completion of the preceding stage and uploading of 
the related summary report. Lapses noticed in uploading of evaluation 
summary reports are detailed below: 
(i)  Data analysis showed that summary reports for various stages of 
tender processing were not uploaded to the eProcurement portal as detailed in 
Table 2.2. 
 Table 2.2: Non-uploading of summary reports to eProcurement portal 
Particulars 
Total number of 
tenders in this 
stage 
Number of tenders (out 
of col. (2)) without 
summary reports 
Compliance 
percentage 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
Technical bid opening summary 1,26,459 29,742 76  
Technical evaluation summary 88,721 33,867 62  
Financial bid opening summary 64,036 28,376 56  
Financial evaluation summary 31,611 9,759 69  
AoC (Award of Contract) 20,758 1,513 93  
(Source: Database of eProcurement portal) 
To cite an instance, in one of the selected procuring unit viz., DRDA, Karur 
data analysis of 858 tenders published during 2016-21 revealed that technical 
evaluation summary uploaded in respect of 781 tenders contained only the list 
of committee members. 

Chapter II – Portal implementation  
11 
(ii) Audit analysed the eProcurement portal data of selected DRDAs 
and compiled the details on number of days taken for completing the 
‘Technical Evaluation’ and ‘Price Bid Opening’ from the date of the opening 
of the tender as shown in Table 2.3. 
Table 2.3: Time taken to process and upload tenders at various stages  
Sampled 
Units under 
DRDA 
Total 
number 
of 
tenders 
Number of tenders for which 
Technical 
evaluation summary 
uploaded within 24 
hours of opening of 
tender 
Technical evaluation 
summary uploaded 
within one hour from 
time of opening of 
tender 
Price bid 
opened within 
24 hours of 
opening of 
tender 
Price bid 
opened within 
one hour from 
time of opening 
of tender 
Coimbatore 970 400 212 113 0 
Karur 781 591 333 141 15 
Krishnagiri 1,457 1,015 909 133 5 
Perambalur 318 55 41 0 0 
Salem 1,781 278 11 7 0 
Thanjavur 808 141 41 1 0 
(Source: Database of eProcurement portal) 
From Table 2.3 it is evident that summaries were uploaded in the 
eProcurement portal before completion of a tender stage and did not reflect the 
correct stages of the tender process as preparing and uploading the technical 
evaluation summary followed by opening of the price bid within 24 hours is 
unrealistic considering that most of the tenders relate to works contract 
requiring reasonable time to evaluate the bids received. 
On this being pointed out, DRDA, Krishnagiri accepted the observation and 
stated (November 2022) that after the bid was opened, only the list of Tender 
Committee members was uploaded as technical/financial evaluation summary 
and that technical/financial evaluation was actually done based on the manual 
documents submitted by the bidder. It was further stated that the 
technical/financial evaluation reports were kept only in manual records and 
were not uploaded to the eProcurement portal.  
Non-uploading of the evaluation reports renders the IT system incomplete, 
affecting transparency and objectivity of the tender process and perpetuates 
dependence on manual records.  Moreover, evaluation of tenders based on 
manual documents submitted outside the eProcurement portal by bidders 
points to deliberate by-passing of the envisaged eProcurement process. 
During the Exit Meeting (February 2023) Government stated that training 
would be given to familiarise user departments with tender conditions and all 
departments will be brought under eProcurement. 
2.4 Status of updation of published tenders in comparison with 
other State Governments using GePNIC 
A comparison of tenders published vis-à-vis updation of their AoC status in 
the eProcurement portal by GoTN and other State Governments who 
published more than 10,000 tenders in each of the years 2020-21 and 2021-22 

Performance Audit on Implementation of eProcurement system in Tamil Nadu 
12 
was carried out using the data available in the eProcurement Dashboard (Appendix 2.2).  The outcome of the comparison is depicted in Exhibit 2.2.  
(Source: Dashboard of GePNIC) 
It can be seen from Exhibit 2.2 that out of the 15 States, Tamil Nadu stood at the eleventh position as it has updated only 11.27 per cent of the tenders published in the eProcurement portal, though 15 years had passed since its implementation in 2008. Even after completion of 15 years since inception, GoTN stands in eleventh position with respect to updation of the stages of tender processes up to Award of Contract in GePNIC portal when compared to other 15 State Governments. 2.5 Management of Earnest Money Deposit in the eProcurement portal Earnest Money Deposit (EMD) is the amount required to be remitted by a tenderer along with his bid indicating his willingness to implement the contract.  The eProcurement portal facilitates online collection of EMD and its prompt refund to the unsuccessful bidder without manual intervention. A Memorandum of Understanding between GoTN and State Bank of India (SBI) provided for a payment gateway viz., Multi Option Payment System for online collection of EMD and Security Deposit (SD) for tendering. A Pooling Bank Account (SBI, Chennai) was opened for this purpose and GoTN issued orders (December 2017) for the on-line collection and refund of EMD and SD.  The bidders submit the original financial instruments1 for the prescribed amount to the tendering office and upload its copy in the eProcurement portal along with their bid, failing which the bid will be considered as unresponsive and rejected. The EMD so received is deposited into an account maintained by the procuring entity and subsequently refunded to the unsuccessful bidder. 
                                                                 
1  Demand Draft, Bankers Cheque, Fixed Deposit Receipts, etc. 
68.6651.4746.2445.3945.3543.3942.1937.4525.2216.1011.274.153.953.692.1001020304050607080Exhibit 2.2: Percentage of published tenders for which contract was awarded as per eProcurement Dashboard for the years 2020-22

Chapter II – Portal implementation  
13 
Data analysis revealed that for 0.98 lakh tenders out of 1.34 lakh tenders 
(73.13 per cent), EMD totaling ₹3,328.49 crore was collected from 2.17 lakh 
bidders through offline mode. 
Though online EMD collection was enabled in December 2017, collection of 
EMD in offline mode and non-refunding of the EMD in time to the 
unsuccessful bidders results in accumulation of funds not belonging to the 
procuring entity in the bank accounts maintained by them.   
It was further noticed that DRDAs, Salem and Perambalur diverted  
₹16.93 crore out of ₹31.40 crore collected as EMD to meet administrative 
expenditure.  In reply (September 2022), the DRDAs stated that due to 
shortage of funds, moneys from the EMD account was utilised as a temporary 
measure. 
The reply was not acceptable as the purpose of the EMD account is to deposit 
and refund the money collected from the contractors/vendors and diversion of 
funds not belonging to the Department for other purpose was not in order. 
In the Exit Meeting (February 2023), Government replied that henceforth, 
online EMD collection would be mandatory.  It was also stated that diversion 
of funds from EMD account would not be possible in future as the new 
eProcurement portal is designed to refund EMD of rejected bidders 
automatically on the 30th day after AoC and the reason for non-refunding of 
EMD would also be recorded. 
2.6 Imparting of training and awareness about eProcurement 
portal 
GoTN issued (February 2016) orders for constituting an inter-departmental 
sub-committee, headed by the Additional Chief Secretary to Government, 
Finance Department.  This sub-committee was tasked with carrying out work 
relating to validation and recommendation of registration of vendors in the 
common eProcurement portal to assign Unique Identification Number for each 
vendor. 
The inter-departmental sub-committee, was however convened only once in 
June 2016 and decided that a centralised open online workflow model of 
registration of vendor was to be undertaken and Unique Identification Number 
assigned to each vendor.  
NIC was entrusted (February 2016) with the preparation of eBidding manual 
and with imparting department-wise training, both for officials and bidders at 
ELCOT/Anna Institute of Management, Chennai.  During 2019-21,  
NIC imparted training for a duration of 1-2 days to 732 (6 per cent) of the 
13,081 registered officials in the procuring entities.   
To an audit enquiry, the sampled units replied that no action was taken to 
create awareness among the bidders about the switch over to the eProcurement 
system and no drive conducted to register all the existing bidders (in the 
manual system) in the eProcurement portal.    

Performance Audit on Implementation of eProcurement system in Tamil Nadu 
14 
No action was taken by Department of Finance (DoF) or user Departments to 
create awareness among the bidders and encourage them to register in  
eProcurement portal. The envisaged centralised open online workflow model 
of registration of vendor was yet to be implemented resulting in failure to 
broaden the bidder base and enhance vendor participation. 
Inadequate training and consequent lack of awareness was one of the reasons 
attributed by the sampled entities for non-updation of stages of tender process 
in the eProcurement portal.  As no effective steps were taken by the DoF and 
the procuring entities to create awareness among the prospective bidders, the 
bidder base has not increased, and the vendor participation has also not 
improved for obtaining competitive rates. 
In the Exit Meeting (February 2023), Government stated that registration of 
contractors is proposed to be done through e-Sevai Maiyam (Common Service 
Centre) and that registration of Metro Water and Public Works Department 
contractors was currently being done.  It was also stated that bidders will be 
assured of a fair platform to give them the confidence that rejection for flimsy 
reasons would not occur.  NIC added that they were also planning to train all 
district-level officers and to hold weekly Video Conference sessions to discuss 
the training and that training has been planned for all the Secretariat 
Departments and bidders, along with Audio-Video sessions of Training in 
offline mode and accepted Audit’s suggestion to include Self Learning 
Modules in future, which were being followed in many IT systems for easy 
access to different types of users. 
2.7 Level of competition 
One of the prime objectives of an eProcurement system is to increase 
competition.  Data analysis of 1.34 lakh tenders revealed that the number of 
bids received for each tender ranged from one bid to 89 bids as detailed in 
Table 2.4. 
Table 2.4: Details of number of bids received for each tender 
Number of bids received Number of Tenders Percentage 
Single bid 22,338 16.62 
Two bids 61,533 45.77 
Three bids 23,542 17.51 
More than 3 bids 27,016 20.10 
Total 1,34,429*  
* Including 17,212 tenders in which bidders from outside Tamil Nadu also participated 
 (Source: Database of eProcurement portal) 
Analysis of eProcurement portal data revealed that in 0.84 lakh tenders  
(62.39 per cent) out of 1.34 lakh tenders which received valid bids, only one 
or two bids were received  indicating poor bidder participation.   
To ascertain if there was an increase in bidder participation after introduction 
of eProcurement system compared to the manual tendering system,  

Chapter II – Portal implementation  
15 
Audit called for the details of bidders who participated in manual tendering 
prior to switching over to eProcurement portal from the sampled units.  The 
sampled units, however did not furnish the information. Hence, 
increase/decrease in competition on implementing the eProcurement system 
could not be verified by Audit.  
2.8 Time taken for processing of tenders  
Reduction in tender processing time is also one of the main objectives of the 
eProcurement system. Data analysis revealed that 88 per cent (1.57 lakh out of 
1.78 lakh) of the published tenders were not updated with details of award of 
contract.  In the absence of relevant details the actual time taken for processing 
the 1.57 lakh tenders could not be verified in Audit.  However, when the time 
taken for processing of tenders from bid opening date to award of contract for 
the remaining 20,758 tenders was analysed, in 5,726 tenders it was found that 
it exceeded the tender validity period from 3 to more than 36 months as 
detailed in Table 2.5: 
Table 2.5: Delay in processing of tenders 
Sl. No. Delay in months Number of tenders 
1 Up to 3 months 693 
2 4 to 6 months 2,425 
3 7 to 12 months 1,640 
4 13 to 24 months 714 
5 25 to 36 months 197 
6 More than 36 months 57 
  Total 5,726 
(Source: Database of eProcurement portal) 
The delay ranged from 9 days to 1,552 days in 5,726 tenders indicating that 
adoption of eProcurement did not result in reduction of the processing time. 
The eProcurement system lacked a provision to promptly flag instances of 
inordinate delays in tender processing.  The reasons for the same could be 
attributed to the fact that critical activities like technical evaluation, financial 
evaluation and award of contract were done manually outside the system.  
The eProcurement portal, though implemented in the year 2008, was utilised 
only by 53 out of 201 procuring entities as it was not made mandatory by 
GoTN. Thus, the overall deficiencies noticed in the implementation and 
utilisation of eProcurement portal is due to (i) Government’s failure to make it 
mandatory for all procuring entities in the State to procure goods and services 
only through GePNIC and (ii) the absence of a ‘Centre of responsibility’ to  
co-ordinate and monitor the functions of the eProcurement portal. 
During the Exit Meeting (February 2023), Government stated that alerts on bid 
validity to bidders and procuring entities would be incorporated in the 
software, to process the tenders within the specified timelines. It was also 
stated that accountability will be ensured by making it mandatory for 
capturing the reasons for extending the bid validity. 

Performance Audit on Implementation of eProcurement system in Tamil Nadu 
16 
Government while assuring that all Audit recommendations will be covered in 
the new eProcurement portal to be implemented from 1 April 2023, added that 
the work of developing a comprehensive software for (i) estimate preparation 
and (ii) digital M-Book has been entrusted to TNeGA and that it was planned 
to have a Common Schedule of Rates for all departments.  
2.9 Conclusion  
Government failed to make the procurement of goods and services only 
through eProcurement portal mandatory for all procuring entities in the State.  
There was no ‘Centre of responsibility’ to co-ordinate and monitor the 
functions of the eProcurement portal despite a lapse of more than 15 years 
since its implementation. This resulted in partial/non-utilisation of the 
eProcurement portal defeating the envisaged objective of transparency in the 
tender process. 
2.10 Recommendations  
 Government should come up with a comprehensive solution to 
address the technical and procedural shortcomings on priority. 
 Government should issue orders to all the procuring entities to 
mandatorily use the eProcurement portal for all procurement 
activities. 
 Procuring entities should update the tender stages in the 
eProcurement portal immediately on completion of every stage and 
the same should be monitored by the Nodal Officers of the 
department using the Management Information System reports 
available in the eProcurement portal.  Nodal officers of the 
procuring entities should ensure that the complete evaluation reports 
are uploaded to the eProcurement portal at the appropriate stages 
without fail and should ensure that all tenders are processed and 
finalised based on bid documents submitted through the 
eProcurement portal. 
 Government should fix responsibility for the diversion of EMD 
funds and bring in a mechanism so that offline payments are 
authorised by an authority higher than the publisher of the Tender. 
 Government should speed up the process to implement the 
centralised open online workflow model of registration. 
 Government should chart out and implement a structured training 
programme for effective utilisation of the eProcurement portal by 
officials of procuring entities and should take steps to achieve 
improved bidder participation through help desk, hand holding and 
pre-bid meeting activities. 

CHAPTER III 
DEFICIENCIES IN 
THE APPLICATION 
SOFTWARE 
 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
17 
CHAPTER III 
 
DEFICIENCIES IN THE APPLICATION SOFTWARE 
 
 
The software was not designed to incorporate the timeline related 
provisions of TNTIT Rules. There were no provision in the eProcurement 
system to capture details of item-wise EMD payments and for extending 
purchase preference to domestic enterprises. Departments resorted to 
manual tender processing in cases where multiple bidders quoted the 
same price.  The system lacked provisions for negotiation with L1 bidder 
after generation of Bill of Quantities and for situations where 
participating bidders quoted the same price necessitating manual 
intervention.  ‘NULL’, duplicate and erroneous values were noticed in 
mandatory fields.  Bids of the same tender were decrypted on different 
dates in contravention of TNTIT Rules.  Discrepancies were noticed in 
role creation by user departments, as key roles of an organisation were 
created by other department users. 
3.1 Introduction 
Government organisations procure a wide variety of goods and services and 
undertake execution of works in pursuance of their duties and responsibilities. 
With a view to improving transparency in decision making in public 
procurement and reducing the scope for subjectivity, the Tamil Nadu 
Transparency in Tenders Act, 1998 was enacted and the Tamil Nadu 
Transparency in Tender Rules, 2000 (TNTIT Rules) thereunder made for 
procurement of goods, execution of works and hiring of consultants.  Audit 
checked whether the timelines and instructions mentioned in the TNTIT Rules 
were mapped in the application software and necessary validation controls 
existed in the system for ensuring the integrity of the data. The points noticed 
in this regard are brought out in the following paragraphs. 
3.2 Non-mapping of Business Rules  
3.2.1 Non-mapping of prescribed timelines in the system 
(i) Prescribed minimum number of days between ‘date of publishing 
of tender’ and ‘bid submission closing date’ not followed 
Rule 20 of TNTIT Rules, prescribes minimum number of days between date 
of publishing of tender and last date for submission of tenders based on the 
value of the tender. On data analysis, it was observed that in 1.22 lakh tenders 
published between April 2016 and March 2022, the number of days between 
‘date of publishing of tender’ and ‘bid submission closing date’, was less than 
the prescribed number of days, as listed in Table 3.1.  Department wise details 
are given in Appendix 3.1. 
  

Performance Audit on Implementation of eProcurement system in Tamil Nadu 
 
18 
Table 3.1: Tenders published with less than prescribed number of days 
Value of Tender Prescribed 
number of days 
Number of tenders published 
with less than prescribed 
number of days 
Up to ₹2 crore 15 1,16,109 
More than ₹2 crore 30 5,480 
Total  1,21,589 
(Source: Data Analysis of eProcurement portal data) 
(ii) Prescribed minimum number of days between ‘Seek clarification 
end date’ and ‘bid opening date’ not followed 
Rule 17 (2) of TNTIT Rules states that at the time of publishing of a tender, 
the last date for clarification must be at least 48 hours (2 days) before opening 
of the tender. During data analysis, it was observed that out of 1.78 lakh 
published tenders, the number of days between ‘seek clarification end date’ 
and ‘bid opening date’ was less than the prescribed two days in 18,923 tenders 
(10.64 per cent).   
Thus, the prescribed timelines as per TNTIT Rules were not followed by the 
departments and the software was not designed to incorporate the timeline 
related provisions of TNTIT Rules.  
While Tamil Nadu Civil Supplies Corporation, Thanjavur replied  
(December 2022) that tenders were published with lesser than the prescribed 
period due to urgency to complete the work, sampled institutions of the 
Directorate of Technical Education (DoTE) replied (November 2022) that this 
was due to urgent need and that timelines would be followed in future. 
There was no provision in the application software to handle cases of urgent 
requirements with authentication/approval by an appropriate authority higher 
than the tender publishing authority and to capture and store details of such 
instances. 
In this connection, NIC replied (December 2022) that the minimum number of 
days was mapped against individual organisation in the recent version of the 
software and that provision had been given to capture the reason for tenders 
with short bid submission period. 
Reply is not acceptable as Audit verified (December 2022) the claim of NIC 
and found that provision is still not available in the current software version 
(Version 1.09.16). 
During Exit Meeting (February 2023), Government stated that the timeline 
issues are addressed in the new eProcurement portal and that a provision to 
capture reasons for resorting to shorter tender will also be incorporated. 
3.2.2 Lack of provision in the system for item-wise EMD payment 
In case of tenders with multiple items, where the bidder can choose to quote 
for selected items only, the EMD has to be paid only for the items quoted by 
him and not for the whole tender. 

Chapter III - Deficiencies in the application software  
 
 
19 
Audit scrutinised a tender comprising multiple items published (March 2022) 
by the Director of Sericulture, Salem wherein the EMD amount fixed for the 
tender as a whole was ₹23,700.  A bidder (Lawrence and Mayo India Private 
Limited) had quoted for only one item (Microscope) for which the EMD value 
was ₹900. 
In this instance, though the bidder submitted a Demand Draft for ₹900 as 
EMD, he had to enter the EMD paid value as ₹23,700 (i.e. EMD fixed for the 
whole tender) in the column ‘Offline EMD Fee Payment Details_Amount in 
Rupees’ as the system did not allow inputting of item-specific EMD amount.  
In this regard, Director of Sericulture stated (September 2022) that the system 
did not have a provision for entering item-wise EMD paid by the bidders. 
Due to the lack of a provision for capturing item-wise EMD, the system 
captured and stored incorrect information about the actual EMD remitted by 
the bidders who quoted for selected items only.  
NIC replied (November 2022) that there was a workaround in the software 
wherein by enabling the provision for EMD exemption at the time of online 
tender creation, the system would allow the bidder to input an amount lesser 
than the total EMD value for the tender. The bidder, could then upload a 
statement detailing the number of items for which he is participating, in the 
provision meant for uploading document as proof of EMD exemption.   
Reply is not acceptable since EMD exemption relates to bidders with SSI/ 
MSME Certification cases only and item-wise EMD payment cannot be 
equated to EMD exemption. 
Government replied (Exit Meeting held on February 2023) that NIC will be 
instructed to provide separate provision in the eProcurement system for  
item-wise EMD payment and NIC informed that the issue will be addressed. 
3.2.3 Lack of provision in the system to handle purchase preference 
for domestic enterprises 
As per Rule 30-A of TNTIT Rules, purchase preference is to be given to 
domestic enterprises in case of procurement of goods or services, where it is 
possible for the procuring entity to divide the award of tenders to more than 
one supplier or service provider.  The tender document should clearly indicate 
that up to 25 per cent of the total requirement in the procurement may be 
awarded to domestic enterprise, not being the lowest tender, in respect of only 
goods manufactured or produced or services provided or rendered by them, if 
(a) the lowest tender is not a domestic enterprise, (b) the preferential award 
shall extend only to the lowest tender among the domestic enterprises, who are 
substantially responsive and technically qualified and (c) such domestic 
enterprise is willing to match the price of the lowest tender. 
Audit observed that, though there was a checkbox i.e. ‘Allow Preferential 
Bidder’, (Exhibit 3.1) it does not cater to the provisions of Section 30-A of 
TNTIT Rules for purchase preference to domestic enterprises. 

Performance Audit on Implementation of eProcurement system in Tamil Nadu 
 
20 
Exhibit 3.1: Checkbox viz., ‘Allow Preferential Bidder’ provided in the system for 
uploading of tender 
(Source: eProcurement portal user manual) 
NIC replied (November 2022) that the present system was being refined to handle the domestic enterprises option as per Section 30-A of TNTIT Rules and development was in progress. Audit observed that the tenders involving preferential bidders can be processed by the departments, only outside the eProcurement portal, till incorporation of this feature. In the Exit Meeting (February 2023), NIC stated that the issue has been addressed in the new eProcurement portal. 3.2.4 Lack of provision in the system for capturing purchase value in Rate Contract tenders As per Rule 31-A of TNTIT Rules, Fixed Rate Contract would be through a process like open tender. The Tender Acceptance Committee (TAC) determines and notifies an appropriate rate, as the fixed rate, after negotiating with the lowest tenderer for further reduction and/or considering other relevant factors viz., prevailing market rate and rates of previous period.  All eligible suppliers who accept the fixed rate should be enlisted by the procuring entity for delivery of services or goods and orders would be placed on need basis after finalising the tender and awarding the contract. Audit noticed that there is no provision in the software to capture details of purchase order(s) issued during the rate contract period. Hence, only the finalised rate value of a rate contract tender is shown in the eProcurement portal and not the value of purchases made during the rate contract period.  On this being pointed out, NIC replied (November 2022) that the option was not available in the system and added that this issue would be discussed with the Finance Department. 
  


Chapter III - Deficiencies in the application software  
 
 
21 
In the Exit Meeting (February 2023), Government stated that this feature will 
be considered in consultation with NIC. 
3.2.5 Lack of provision in the system to enforce password policy  
Password policy of Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology 
(MeitY), Government of India, mandates that all user-level passwords  
(e.g., email, web, desktop computer, etc.) shall be changed periodically (i.e. at 
least once every three months).  Users shall not be able to reuse previous 
passwords. 
In the eProcurement portal, after registering, users can login using the User 
ID, Password, and the Digital Signature Certificate (DSC).  Passwords are 
encrypted at the database level and known only to the users.  In data analysis, 
the following points were noticed: 
 As of 31 March 2022, Audit found that in 62,274 out of 68,484 user 
records, the password had not been changed for more than 90 days. 
 Out of these, in 17,233 cases, the latest login date was more than 
 90 days after the date of last change of password. 
Non-enforcement of password policy could result in misuse by unauthorised 
persons and pose a threat to data security.  
NIC replied (December 2022) that the eProcurement portal had implemented 
two factor authentication (Password and DSC) to gain access to the 
eProcurement portal.  DSC, being the second authentication factor, will not 
allow access to unauthorised users.  
Reply is not acceptable as departmental users without DSC can still login and 
download bid documents through the Management Information System (MIS) 
reports feature, even before completion of tender process.  This affects the 
confidentiality of the process. There should be an automatic alert after lapsing 
of 90 days for change in password system. 
During the Exit Meeting (February 2023), Government replied that password 
policy will be enforced in the new eProcurement portal and that two factor 
authentication has been adopted now for Reports Module also. 
3.2.6 Requisite features not available in eProcurement portal 
Rule 29(3) of TNTIT Rules provides for negotiations with tenderer and  
Rule 29(4) spells out the methodology for identifying the lowest tenderer in 
the event two or more tenderers make the same financial bid. 
The BoQ comparative chart containing information on the L1 bidder, is 
generated by the system during the financial evaluation stage. However, Audit 
noticed that manual intervention was resorted to for finalising the L1 and 
Award of Contract (AoC) in certain circumstances viz., (a) When the same 
price was quoted by more than one bidder, (b) Negotiation was done with L1 
and (c) Comparison of Bidder Rates with the Estimates prepared by the 

Performance Audit on Implementation of eProcurement system in Tamil Nadu 
 
22 
Departments for Works tenders (Buildings and Roads). This rendered the 
system generated BoQ ineffective.  
In DRDA, Coimbatore it was noticed that the BoQ comparative chart was 
downloaded from the eProcurement portal and compared manually with the 
estimates. The Department then negotiated with L1 bidder for further price 
reduction. The negotiated reduced rates were entered manually in an Excel 
Sheet and used for finalising the tender.  DRDA, Salem stated  
(November 2022) that there is no provision in the software to deal with 
instances of same price quoted by more than one bidder. 
NIC replied (December 2022) that the system identified the L1 bidder among 
bidders who quoted the same price, based on who had quoted the value first 
(up to milliseconds) and that the module for negotiation was under 
development. Further, NIC accepted that provision for comparison of bidders’ 
rates with estimate was not available. NIC further stated that eProcurement 
portal for Tamil Nadu was being redesigned as per TNTIT Rules and would be 
implemented from the financial year 2023-24 with the required provisions. 
NIC’s reply is not acceptable since identifying L1 among bidders who quoted 
same price, solely on the basis of who quoted the value first, is not in line with 
TNTIT Rules. Lack of essential provisions impacts the effectiveness of the 
eProcurement portal. 
In the Exit Meeting (February 2023), NIC stated that provisions have been 
made in the eProcurement portal for (a) and (b) situations mentioned above 
and that provision for comparison of bidder rates with estimates will be 
incorporated in the eProcurement portal after discussion with the Finance 
Department and procuring entities. 
3.3 Inadequate controls in the system 
In order to ensure data integrity, suitable controls are to be incorporated in the 
system, viz., input control, validation control etc. Audit checked whether the 
application software possessed the required controls to check errors in the 
database. 
Lack of input controls 
3.3.1 Tender details not entered  
(i) EMD Value entered as ‘zero’: Rule 14 of TNTIT Rules,  
stipulates “tender documents shall require all tenderers without exception to 
pay an Earnest Money Deposit (EMD) ordinarily not exceeding one per cent 
of the value of the procurement by means of electronic mode of payment or in 
the form of a demand draft, banker’s cheque, specified small savings 
instruments or where the procuring entity deems fit, irrevocable bank 
guarantee in a prescribed form”.  The tender documents shall clearly state that 
any tender submitted without the EMD in the approved form shall be 
summarily rejected. 

Chapter III - Deficiencies in the application software  
 
 
23 
The eProcurement portal, however, has no provision to ensure only ‘non-zero’ values are allowed for EMD, which resulted in data of 17,082 tenders out of 1.78 lakh tenders published during 2016-22 exhibiting EMD value as ‘zero’. (ii) Tenders with ‘zero’ value:  In the front-end screen of GePNIC web application software, the estimated value of the tender, is indicated as a mandatory information to be provided. The Department has the option to choose if the Tender value is to be displayed in public domain by selecting the option ‘Yes’ or ‘No’ under ‘Show Tender value in Public Domain’  (Exhibit 3.2). When ‘No’ is chosen, though the value of the tender is captured and stored in the database, it will not be visible in the public domain.  
Exhibit 3.2:  Provision in eProcurement portal for display of tender value in  
Public Domain 
 
(Source: eProcurement portal user manual) 
The system also provides for an eProcurement dashboard that displays information relating to the procurements based on inputs at the time of publishing in the eProcurement portal, viz., year-wise number of tenders and total value of tenders published. Data analysis revealed that out of 1.78 lakh tenders published, the tender value was ‘zero’ in 17,036 tenders. This results in incorrect depiction of the total value of tenders published through the eProcurement portal in the eProcurement dashboard. Sampled institutions of Directorate of Technical Education replied  (October 2022) that the tender value would be captured in future with option ‘No’ so that it is not viewable in the public domain.  NIC replied  (December 2022) that tender value may be zero in cases where financial quote is invited in the first stage of tenders i.e. ‘Request for Proposal/Expression of Interest’.   Reply is not acceptable since there is no provision in the system to capture Tender Value/EMD value based on the type of tender.  Further, the instances pointed out by Audit do not relate to ‘Request for Proposal/Expression of Interest’ invitations indicating lack of input controls in the tender value field.  In the Exit Meeting (February 2023), NIC stated that the software has been fixed to not allow ‘zero’ values. 


Performance Audit on Implementation of eProcurement system in Tamil Nadu 
 
24 
3.3.2 Lack of input controls in mandatory fields  
Audit Scrutiny of the registered users’ data revealed that there were  
45,000 DSCs registered users in the eProcurement portal as on 1 April 2022.  
Of these, 31,728 users were registered during 2016-22.  Discrepancies noticed 
in mandatory fields are tabulated in Table 3.2. 
Table 3.2: Discrepancies in mandatory fields 
Nature of 
discrepancy in the 
mandatory field 
Number of cases where discrepancy 
was noticed 
Number of cases where discrepancy 
was noticed in registration made in 
the Audit period 
Invalid mobile 
numbers 
837 users 
(479 users had ‘9999999999’  
139 users had ‘0000000000’) 
46 users  
 
Duplicate mobile 
Numbers 
13,788 users 
(146 users had ‘9842815073’) 
8,322 users  
Different users with 
the same alternate 
email ID 
5,367 users 
223 users had ‘bhaaskaar@gmail.com’ 
as their alternate email ID.  
3,607 users  
209 users had ‘bhaaskaar@gmail.com’ 
as their alternate email ID 
Users without 
Permanent Account 
Number (PAN) 
88 users 80 users 
Different users with 
the same PAN 
15,812 users  
(‘AESTG2458A’, which was given as 
an example in the online enrolment 
form of corporate/bidder - 405 users; 
‘TEMPZ9999Z’ - 301 users; 
‘ACUPK7945G’ - 25 users) 
9,895 users  
(‘AESTG2458A’, which was given as 
an example in the online enrolment 
form of corporate/bidder - 87 users; 
‘TEMPZ9999Z’ - 126 users; 
‘ACUPK7945G’ - 24 users) 
Null values in 
mandatory fields 
10,300 users with null values in 
Registration number, city and postal 
code and State 
80 users with null values in State field 
(Source: Data analysis of the registered users’ data) 
The above discrepancies point to lack of input control in mandatory fields 
which affects the data integrity of the system. 
NIC replied (December 2022) that necessary validations would be 
incorporated in the system to ensure PAN is mandatory. In respect of multiple 
PANs, NIC stated that as a business requirement multiple users from the same 
company could have the same PAN in the system. In respect of ‘NULL’ 
values, NIC stated (December 2022) that these records relate to the period 
prior to 2015 and necessary input control has been incorporated subsequently.   
Reply is not acceptable since the number of duplicates are high in some cases 
indicating that it cannot be related to the number of users of the same 
company.  Besides, the company names, registered addresses and corporate 
addresses differ.   In so far as reply furnished by NIC for ‘NULL’ values, it 
was verified and found that ‘NULL’ entries in the State field persisted even 
after 2015 indicating lack of input control. 
  

Chapter III - Deficiencies in the application software  
 
 
25 
In the Exit Meeting (February 2023) NIC stated that these issues will be addressed and Goods and Services Tax (GST) validation will be made mandatory in the new eProcurement portal. Lack of processing/validation controls 3.3.3 Different decryption dates for the same packet of a tender  In the eProcurement portal, departmental user should have a valid email ID as the login ID of the System with valid password and DSC for opening the Technical and Financial Bids. The tender to be opened should be selected by entering the Tender ID.  After this, on clicking ‘Decrypt’ button, the Packet Name, Bid IDs are displayed as a list.  Again, on clicking ‘Proceed’ button, a message is displayed viz., ‘Decryption completed successfully’ along with decryption status in the list.  Snapshot of the decryption process is depicted in Exhibit 3.3. 
Exhibit 3.3: Snapshot of the decryption process 
  
  
On data analysis, it was observed that in 1,220 instances1, the decryption date differs for the same Packet ID of a tender i.e. bids of the same tender decrypted on different dates. These instances have 2, 3 and 5 different decryption dates ranging from difference of one day to many days.  Two illustrative cases are given in Table 3.3. 
  
                                                                 
1 2,471 distinct decryption dates involving 5,632 records. 


Performance Audit on Implementation of eProcurement system in Tamil Nadu 
 
26 
Table 3.3: Illustrative cases of instances with different decryption dates 
Sample case number 1 
Bid ID Packet ID Decryption Date Decrypted 
by (ID) 
Work Item 
ID (Tender) 
102279 92960 04-07-2016 12:56 21882 81828 
102260 92960 04-07-2016 12:55 21882 81828 
102036 92960 04-07-2016 12:52 21882 81828 
102279 92961 01-07-2016 12:17 21882 81828 
102260 92961 01-07-2016 12:15 21882 81828 
102036 92961 30-06-2016 15:40 21853 81828 
In this instance, the packet was decrypted with one day difference 
 
Sample case number 2 
Bid ID Packet ID Decryption Date Decrypted 
by (ID) 
Work Item 
ID (Tender) 
102928 93237 27-07-2016 16:44 22322 82044 
102910 93237 27-07-2016 16:42 22322 82044 
103321 93238 26-07-2016 16:03 22322 82044 
102928 93238 20-07-2016 16:31 16460 82044 
102910 93238 20-07-2016 16:34 16460 82044 
In this instance, the packet was decrypted with six days difference  
(Source: Data analysis of the eProcurement data) 
It is seen from Table 3.3 that technical bids for the same tender were opened 
on different dates. 
NIC replied (December 2022) that during Bid opening, GePNIC decrypts the 
bid documents in two steps viz., (i) retrieval of the original key for decryption 
(ii) decrypting documents using the key by clicking on the ‘Lock’ icon against 
the individual bids. The system allows department user to open the decrypted 
bid documents at any time once the decryption keys are retrieved.   
Reply is not acceptable since TNTIT Rules state that all tenders received by 
the TIA shall be opened at the time and venue specified in the Notice Inviting 
Tender. Allowing department users to decrypt bid documents at any point of 
time once the decryption keys were retrieved is in contravention of TNTIT 
Rules and impacts transparency, impartial decision making and 
confidentiality. 
In the Exit Meeting (February 2023), NIC accepted that the decryption was 
done bidder-wise in the eProcurement portal and agreed to take remedial 
action so that decryption is done bid-wise. 
  

Chapter III - Deficiencies in the application software  
 
 
27 
3.3.4 Issues in Bill of Quantities comparative charts generated in  
buy-back cases 
During 2016-22, 253 tenders were published with a condition for buy-back in 
the eProcurement portal by various Departments of the State.  The BoQ 
comparative chart in buy-back cases added the buy-back amount to the quoted 
amount instead of reducing the same. This was observed in three instances2 
relating to purchase of batteries and UPS involving buy-back.  Due to this 
discrepancy, the user departments manually identified the Ll bidder after 
making necessary corrections in the system generated BoQ comparative chart.   
NIC replied (November 2022) that the BoQ template used for buy-back 
tenders was not designed as per the requirement by the Tender Inviting 
Authority and the above mentioned tenders had used the normal Item Rate 
BoQ template and that department users were instructed to contact NIC for 
assistance in case of requirement for new logic in the system. 
In the Exit Meeting (February 2023), Government accepted the audit 
observation and said that provision for separate BoQ template for handling 
such cases will be made available in the new eProcurement portal. 
3.3.5 Gaps in system generated Row ID numbers 
All the tables in the eProcurement database carry a column named ‘ID’, which 
is a system generated sequential number whenever a record is added to that 
table and it is a primary field (no duplicates allowed).  It serves as linking 
information for validating, joining related tables and fetching information.  An 
analysis of the important tables indicated that there were gaps in the ‘ID’ 
column.  In the table containing details of all the bids received for the tenders, 
there were 218 missing IDs for the period from 01/04/2016 to 31/03/2022 in 
the ID numbers ranging from 101710 to 502687.  
NIC replied (December 2022) that the ‘row ID’ numbers were generated using 
sequence.  While adding a record, the sequence would get incremented even 
when the insert statement was not executed due to constraints like query 
exceptions, issues from load balancers, etc. and the missing sequences were 
not due to deletion of records. 
Reply is not acceptable since there is no trail for details of events which led to 
missing sequences. This impacts data security and data completeness.   
In the Exit Meeting (February 2023), NIC stated that, to overcome the above 
issues, provision for audit trail including timestamp will be included in the 
new eProcurement portal. 
3.3.6 Tender status not updated by the system 
In the eProcurement database, the database table relating to tender details, 
contains a column named ‘packetsnum’ which stores the value ‘1’ or ‘2’ for 
single cover tender and two cover tender respectively.  The decryption date, 
                                                                 
2 January, September and October 2019 – Directorate of Technical Education - 
Government College of Engineering, Salem. 

Performance Audit on Implementation of eProcurement system in Tamil Nadu 
 
28 
details of work including the tender status3 and tender stage4 are captured and 
stored in two separate database tables. Analysis of the related tables in the 
database revealed the following:  
 In 12,501 tenders with one packet (single cover), though the bids 
were decrypted, the tender status of the tender was stored as ‘To be 
Opened’ in the database table relating to work items of a tender and 
also displayed as ‘To be Opened’ in the Tender Status in the 
eProcurement portal. 
 Similarly, in 2,679 tenders with 2 packets (2 cover), though the bids 
were decrypted, the tender status of the tender was stored as ‘To be 
Opened’ in the database table relating to work items of a tender and 
also displayed as ‘To be Opened’ in the Tender Status in the 
eProcurement portal.  
Thus, the tender status was misleading and did not show the correct status of 
the tender indicating lack of process control in the application software.  
NIC replied (December 2022) that the stage of the tender is updated only 
when the particular stage is completed/concluded and not at the beginning of 
the stage. For instance, when a tender was published, the stage of the tender 
remained as ‘To-be-opened’ until the technical cover opening summary was 
uploaded.   It was a business requirement that the status of each bid for the 
stage should be revealed only after the stage was completed since department 
users could change the bidder status from ‘Accepted’ to ‘Rejected’ or vice 
versa until the opening and evaluation stage was completed. Hence, the stage 
was updated once each stage was completed i.e. once the Technical Opening 
Summary was uploaded. 
Reply is not acceptable as once the bid is decrypted, the technical bid opening 
stage is complete. In this case, storing the tender status as ‘To-be-Opened’ is 
misleading. 
In the Exit Meeting (February 2023), NIC while acknowledging the issues 
pointed out in Audit, stated that this issue will be addressed. 
3.3.7 Deficiencies noticed in use of Digital Signature Certificate  
Each user in the eProcurement system has to register with an email id as 
his/her user ID, which is mapped with the DSC to perform vital activities like 
tender creation, publishing, opening, updation etc. (department user) and for 
submitting bids etc. (corporate user).  
On data analysis, it was observed that the name of the user was not validated 
at the time of renewal of DSC and different names were captured against the 
same user ID in 147 cases.  In one instance, six DSCs were mapped against 
the same user ID 43748 in the application software during the period from  
                                                                 
3 Published, Open, Expired, Retender and Cancelled. 
4 To be Opened, Bid Opened 1, Evaluated Technical, Bid Opened 2, Evaluated 
 Financial and AoC. 

Chapter III - Deficiencies in the application software  
 
 
29 
20 April 2021 to 27 December 2021.  DSC with the same name was mapped 
with different user IDs in 591 cases. In another instance, DSC with the name 
‘SHANKAR SANDHYA’ was mapped with five different User IDs (30359, 
30361, 54178, 54755 and 62765).  These five bidders had submitted 35 bids 
for 18 tenders during the period from 12 October 2017 to 11 January 2022.   
The above deficiencies indicated that lack of validation control resulted in 
improper mapping of DSC with the user ID due to which the legal sanctity of 
DSC and legitimacy of bids could not be ensured. 
NIC replied (December 2022) that the system did not validate the name of the 
DSC holder with the profile name, since the profile name could be company’s 
name whereas DSC would be issued to the individual bidder as per the name 
in the ID proof submitted by him.  
Reply is not acceptable since the registered DSC should be used only by the 
bidder. Also, DSC once mapped to an account cannot be remapped to any 
other account and can only be inactivated. Suitable control is required to have 
similar ID proof for DSC and registration in the eProcurement portal. 
In the Exit Meeting (February 2023), NIC stated that this problem arises when 
an official in the procuring entity with DSC leaves the organisation and the 
organisation fails to update the DSC with the new incumbent.  Audit contends 
that the DSC should be revoked once the official leaves the organisation. 
3.3.8 Discrepancies noticed in role assignments to users 
An effective IT system should enforce segregation of duties through the use of 
pre-programmed user and group security profiles, so that proper checks and 
balances on the activities of officials involved is maintained.  Rights/Roles 
allocations are done to ensure only authorised personnel perform the tasks. 
The software is a role-based access system and even menus are enabled by 
roles.  The Nodal Officer, a key role, is designated by the user department and 
created by NIC.  He creates users for his organisation and is responsible for 
overall user management including assignment/re-assignment of various roles 
viz., Tender Creator, Tender Publisher, Tender Opener and Tender Evaluator 
as per need.  The department users have different access roles and perform 
their duties with Login ID and DSC. 
It has been observed that the roles of Super Admin, System Admin and 
Application Admin were performed only by NIC.  The DoF (Administrator) 
neither used these roles nor had access to eProcurement portal data.  On data 
analysis, the following observations were made: 
(i) 14,184 users had multiple roles (66,017 roles were mapped to  
14,184 users). 
(ii) 125 organisations had multiple Nodal Officers (ranging from 2 to 51).  
NIC replied (December 2022) that, in cases where the number of tender 
processing officials in the organisation chain was less, the Nodal Officer may 

Performance Audit on Implementation of eProcurement system in Tamil Nadu 
 
30 
require other roles also.  Hence the form was designed with options for 
multiple roles. 
Reply is not acceptable since assigning certain roles like Tender Creator and 
Tender Publisher to one and the same person indicates that segregation of 
duties is not followed, and hence, the risk of errors being carried through 
different stages without being verified and rectified, is high.   
In one instance in DRDA, Salem, Audit found that 34 tenders were cancelled 
due to mistakes while uploading the document. The creator and publisher of 
these tenders was the same user. Non-segregation of the roles of creator and 
publisher resulted in the error going unnoticed before publishing. An amount 
of ₹54,332 was incurred on advertisement expenses for retender which was a 
wasteful expenditure. 
(iii) Discrepancies were noticed in role creation by user Departments viz., 
Nodal Officer role created by departmental users, departmental roles created 
by users other than Nodal Officers, etc. The instances noticed are given in 
Table 3.4. 
Table 3.4: Discrepancies noticed in role creation for departmental users 
Discrepancy Number of instances 
Nodal Officer role created by Nodal Officers 4 
Nodal Officer role created by Department users 308 
Department users created by Department users of similar roles 6,250 
(Source: Data analysis) 
NIC replied (December 2022) that Nodal Officer role was created by NIC with 
reference to the signed request from the user department and that these Nodal 
Officers could also create further Nodal Officers and Department users.  
Further, in respect of the instances of user creation by users other than Nodal 
Officers, it stated that, at the time of creating the Nodal Officer/Other 
Department users, the user would have had the role of Nodal Officer.  
Subsequently, the departmental Nodal Officer role might have been removed 
from that user.  Reply is not acceptable since trail is not available in the 
database to justify the reply. Also, hierarchy would not be maintained when a 
Nodal role is able to create a similar role. 
(iv) In 6,394 records (1,611 user IDs), officials with designations like 
Assistant, Junior Assistant, Clerk and Typist were assigned key roles in tender 
processing viz., Nodal Officer, Procurement Officer Evaluator, Procurement 
Officer Opener, Procurement Officer Publisher, Procurement Officer Admin 
and Auditor. 
In NIC’s reply (December 2022), it was stated that the GePNIC system is a 
role based system which does not have any connectivity to the actual 
designation of the department user. Audit observes that assignment of vital 
roles in the tender process to lower-level officials by the user departments 

Chapter III - Deficiencies in the application software  
 
 
31 
without following the hierarchy would compromise the confidentiality and 
objectivity of the tender process. 
These discrepancies indicated lack of processing control and failure in 
ensuring accountability, reliability and data security. Moreover, users with 
multiple roles imply lack of segregation of duties and assignment of multiple 
responsibilities to one user. 
Government accepted the observation during the Exit Meeting  
(February 2023) and stated that during training for new eProcurement portal, 
the procuring entities have been instructed to adopt proper role assignment. 
3.3.9 Blocked users participating in tender process 
Blocking of users from logging into GePNIC portal is done (i) for users who 
retired from service or transfer, (ii) based on mail request, (iii) due to 
administrative reasons, (iv) wrongly created user, etc.  Analysis of data 
disclosed the following: 
(i) In database table relating to blocked users, out of 6,631 records,  
3,548 records had User Status as ‘Blocked’, out of which, 3,424 records had 
Reject Reason as ‘NULL’.  
(ii) In database table relating to details about blocking users, with  
5,281 records (3,676 user IDs), the fields given in Table 3.5 had ‘NULL’ 
value though the information in these fields about the blocked period, the 
authorised person doing the blocking/unblocking, grounds on which blocking 
is done viz., for Item/Tender/Department or Login Security/Disciplinary action 
are mandatory. 
Table 3.5: Number of records with ‘NULL’ value in the fields of Blocked users table 
Fields Number of Records with ‘NULL’ Value 
‘BlockedTo’ 4,451 
‘BlockedBy’ 3,426 
‘BlockedReason’  5,047 
‘UnblockedDate’ 598 
‘UnblockedReason’ 4,732 
‘UnblockedBy’ 3,176 
(Source: Data analysis of eProcurement data) 
The missing information is due to lack of input control rendering the database 
incomplete and unreliable. Due to lack of transparency and trail, it may not be 
possible to fix responsibility.   
(iii) It was observed that blocked tenderers and blocked Department users 
had participated in the tender process during the blocked period. The details 
are listed in Table 3.6. 
  

Performance Audit on Implementation of eProcurement system in Tamil Nadu 
 
32 
Table 3.6: Number of blocked users who participated in tender process 
Table name Field name Number 
of blocked 
users 
Number of 
tenders 
processed by 
blocked users 
Blocked tenderers 
Gep_Bids TendererID, BidPlacedDate 3 227 
Blocked Department users 
Gep_Bid_Decrypted DecryptedBy, DecryptedDate 3 41 
Gep_Tender_Basic_Details CreatedBy, CreatedDate 15 227 
Gep_Tender_Basic_Details UpdatedBy, UpdatedDate 15 225 
Gep_Tender_Work_Items CreatedBy, CreatedDate 14 213 
Gep_Tender_Work_Items UpdatedBy, UpdatedDate 14 215 
Gep_Bid_Packet_Documents EvaluatedBy, EvaluatedDate 3 74 
Gep_Tender_Evaluation UploadedBy, UploadedDate 3 40 
(Source: Data analysis of eProcurement data) 
(iv)  Two blocked users created 3,652 users and 12 blocked users updated 
1,169 users during the blocked period. 
This renders the database unreliable and lacking in security since ineligible 
tenderers and Department users had participated in the tender process.  It is 
evident that there is lack of input/processing control and referential integrity.  
NIC replied (December 2022) that in the earlier system, when there were three 
continuous failed login attempts, then the user got blocked by the system with 
the blocked reason as ‘NULL’.  The user had to unblock himself using the 
option provided in the eProcurement portal. In the present version, after three 
failed login attempts, the system-generated OTP is sent to the user to login to 
the eProcurement portal.   
Notwithstanding the reasons put forth by NIC, blocked and unblocked details 
should be stored in the system for audit trail, failing which the database will be 
incomplete and unreliable. Further, NIC is silent about the observation that 
blocked tenderers and blocked department users have participated during the 
tender process during blocked period.  
In the Exit Meeting (February 2023), NIC assured that this issue will be 
addressed and streamlined in the new eProcurement portal. 
3.4 Other issues in eProcurement system 
3.4.1 Non-refund of EMD collected online 
The eProcurement portal has facility for online collection of Tender Fee and 
EMD. When EMD is paid online by the bidder, it is automatically refunded to 
the unsuccessful bidder in the technical and financial evaluation stage and to 
the L1 bidder after AoC.   

Chapter III - Deficiencies in the application software  
 
 
33 
On data analysis, it was observed that in 968 out of 4,630 instances relating to 
the period 2016-22, the EMD collected online was not refunded to the bidders 
though the system provided for automatic refund. 
In reply (December 2022), NIC stated that for the online EMD remitted for 
tenders, the refund of fee is initiated only on completion of the appropriate 
stage in the eProcurement portal by the department user. The different stages 
of the tender processing are said to be completed only on uploading the 
summary details at each stage. Audit observed that failure of the user 
departments to upload the summaries resulted in non-refund of EMD. 
In the Exit Meeting (February 2023), Government stated that the new 
eProcurement portal is designed to refund EMD of rejected bidders 
automatically on the 30th day after Award of Contract. 
3.4.2 Different Bill of Quantities (BoQ) comparative charts on 
different dates 
After decryption of financial bids of technically responsive bidders, the system 
automatically generates the ‘BoQ comparative chart’ listing the rates quoted 
by the bidders side-by-side and based on the quoted rates, L1 bidder name and 
amount is identified by the system. 
On downloading the BoQ comparative charts for selected tenders from MIS 
reports of the eProcurement portal, it was observed that in some instances, 
only one bidder’s rates were listed irrespective of number of technically 
responsive bidders.  However, BoQ with rates quoted by all the technically 
responsive bidders had been generated earlier and downloaded by the 
Department during tender evaluation.  Thus, different BoQ comparative charts 
were generated on different dates. This was noticed in 14 sampled tenders 
during field visit.  
To cite an illustration, in one Tender (May 2018), out of four bidders, two 
bidders viz., M/s Jawahar Constructions and M/s Vetri Constructions, were 
found technically responsive for opening of price bids.  However, in the BoQ 
comparative chart generated by system (December 2018), it was observed that 
only one bidder’s (M/s Jawahar Constructions) quotes was listed and 
identified as Ll.   During the scrutiny of tender files of the Water Resources 
Department, it was noticed that the copy of the system generated BoQ 
comparative chart downloaded (August 2018) and placed in file had the rates 
quoted by both the technically responsive bidders.  This indicated that the 
system had generated two different BoQ comparative charts for the same 
tender four months apart.  
NIC replied (November 2022), that at the time of financial bid opening, the 
system generates the BoQ comparative chart with technically accepted 
bidders. Due to storage space constraints, tenders that had completed AoC 
stage were archived temporarily. Since the files were temporarily moved, 
GePNIC generated the comparative chart again with currently accepted 

Performance Audit on Implementation of eProcurement system in Tamil Nadu 
 
34 
bidders available in AoC alone. NIC further stated that these are a few specific 
cases for which the issue has been fixed subsequently. 
Reply is not acceptable as audit verified that in these specific cases, the system 
continued (January 2023) to generate BoQ comparative charts with only the 
bidders, who were given the AoC, which is misleading.  
In the Exit Meeting (February 2023), NIC stated this problem occurred due to 
a bug in the program and assured that steps would be taken to resolve the 
issue.  
3.4.3 Standardisation, Testing and Quality Certification 
Standardisation, Testing and Quality Certification (STQC) ensures quality 
assurance services in the area of Electronics and Information Technology.  It 
aims to help in hardening of websites from a wide range of Security threats, 
increasing accessibility, assuring commitment to services and ensuring 
compliance to the requirements of Guidelines for Indian Government 
Websites (GIGW - 2018).  It carries a validity of three years from the date of 
issue subject to satisfactory findings during surveillances. 
As per STQC guidelines, during the three-year period of validity, at the end of 
first and second year, ‘Surveillance Audit’ covering the activities of (i) EPS  
(eProcurement System) and related documentation, (ii) Application Security 
and Network Security Assessment, (iii) List of clients, (iv) Details of feedback 
or complaint received and (v) Review of state of continuation of ISO 27001 
certificate for the system has to be carried out. Only on a satisfactory report 
from STQC testing laboratory, a statement of ‘Continuity of Certificate’ shall 
be issued by STQC. 
STQ Certificate for the software was issued (December 2020) with validity for 
three years with effect from 21/12/2020 for the eTendering application - 
version 1.09.08 subject to STQC guidelines on ‘Surveillance Assessment’.  It 
was also mentioned that in case of major changes in eTendering application -
GePNIC or hosting infrastructure, it should be re-certified.  However, the 
present version of https://tntenders.gov.in eProcurement portal is 1.09.15 dated  
27 July 2022 which was seven versions viz., 1.09.09, 1.09.10, 1.09.11, 
1.09.12, 1.09.13, 1.09.14 and 1.09.15, after the issuance of STQC.  
NIC replied (December 2022), that there were only minor changes in the 
software and hence the need for re-certification of STQC was not felt and that 
a fresh Audit with STQC has been planned as soon as they complete the major 
requirements in GePNIC. 
NIC, however, did not furnish specific reply regarding ‘Surveillance 
Assessment’ at the end of first and second year and issuance of statement of 
‘Continuity of Certificate’ for STQC. 
In the Exit Meeting (February 2023), NIC, while noting the issues pointed out 
in Audit, stated that the new eProcurement portal will undergo a fresh audit 
certification. 

Chapter III - Deficiencies in the application software  
 
 
35 
3.4.4 Non-provision for general public to view tender documents 
after the ‘Document download/sale end date’ 
The eProcurement portal has a provision for the general public to view the 
tender status of each tender published in the eProcurement portal, to ensure 
transparency in the tender process.  Tender Summary Reports containing the 
details and documents uploaded by the department relating to the stage-wise 
Opening Summary, Evaluation Summary, BoQ comparative chart and AoC 
for each tender were also available in the eProcurement portal for viewing and 
downloading by the general public. 
Audit, however, noticed that the tender documents containing the scope and 
details of work were available for public viewing and downloading only for a 
limited period viz., from the ‘Publish date’ till the ‘Document download/sale 
end date’.   
The general public/bidders interested in tracking the works or comparing the 
outcome with the tender specifications, were unable to do so due to  
non-availability of the tender documents beyond the limited period.   
This restriction on accessing the Tender Documents which become 
non-sensitive documents once published, defeats one of the basic objectives of 
the eProcurement portal i.e. transparency. 
When this was pointed out, NIC replied (December 2022), that the prospective 
tenderers and general public would be interested to download the tender 
documents only during the bid submission date and after it, would be 
interested to know only the status of the tender process. NIC further stated that 
persons requiring the tender document could obtain it by approaching the 
department. 
Reply is not acceptable since in a transparent system, non-sensitive 
information in the eProcurement portal should be made easily accessible to the 
public without any restriction. 
In the Exit Meeting (February 2023), NIC stated that this issue will be 
addressed. 
3.5 Conclusion 
The software was not designed to incorporate the timeline related provisions 
of TNTIT Rules. There were no provision in the eProcurement system to 
capture details of item-wise EMD payments and for extending purchase 
preference to domestic enterprises. Departments resorted to manual tender 
processing in cases where multiple bidders quoted the same price.  The system 
lacked provisions for negotiation with L1 bidder after generation of Bill of 
Quantities and for situations where participating bidders quoted the same price 
necessitating manual intervention.   ‘NULL’, duplicate and erroneous values 
were noticed in mandatory fields.  Bids of the same tender were decrypted on 
different dates in contravention of TNTIT Rules.  Discrepancies were noticed 

Performance Audit on Implementation of eProcurement system in Tamil Nadu 
 
36 
in role creation by user departments, as key roles of an organisation were 
created by other department users. 
3.6 Recommendations 
 Government should incorporate suitable provisions in the software, 
in line with TNTIT Rules, in consultation with the Finance 
Department, should provide suitable input controls in the 
eProcurement portal during capture of the registration information 
of the departmental users/bidders, should provide necessary 
validation controls and customise the eProcurement portal for Tamil 
Nadu to ensure transparency, impartial decision making and 
confidentiality.  
 Government should take steps for the public to easily access  
non-sensitive information in the eProcurement portal without any 
restriction for a truly transparent system. 
 

CHAPTER IV 
TENDER 
PROCESSING  
 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

37 
CHAPTER IV  TENDER PROCESSING 
 
 
Provisions available in the eProcurement portal for submission of bid documents and for calling missing bid documents within a stipulated time were not utilised and manually submitted documents were relied upon, defeating the objective of transparency in tender processing.  Deficiencies in designing the BoQ template, awarding of contracts without ensuring compliance to bid conditions and inconsistencies in bid evaluation impaired the objectivity of the tender evaluation process besides depriving the legitimate bidders from being awarded the contract.  Government accepted (February 2023), the observations and stated that the inputs will be useful for the new eProcurement portal to be implemented from 1 April 2023. 4.1 Introduction Section 2(f) of the TNTIT Act, 1998 defines ‘Tender’ as the formal offer made by any means including electronic mode in pursuance of an invitation by the procuring entity.  The tender process consists of the following stages: The eProcurement portal has provisions enabling the procuring entities to publish the tender documents and the template for Bill of Quantities (BoQ).  The bidders have to upload the required documents and quote their rates in the BoQ template.  As per System Requirement Specifications (SRS) the bids submitted for a tender are opened online by the officials who have been assigned with the role of bid opener at the time of tender creation. The bid documents are to be downloaded for technical evaluation purposes and the results on the selection of the bidders and the date of financial bid opening are updated into the system. At the time of financial bid opening, the system automatically generates the BoQ comparative statement identifying the L1 bidder. The Tender Inviting Authority (TIA), based on the recommendations of the financial evaluation committee, prepares the Award of Contract (AoC) manually and then updates the order along with contract details.  Since the evaluation process of tenders is a combination of manual verification of documents, automatic comparison of price bids by the system and AoC, audit verified the tender processes through scrutiny of manual documents, Management Information System (MIS) reports and analysis of data. 
(1)  Publishing of Notice Inviting Tender(2)  Bid Submission(3) Bid Opening(4) Bid Evaluation(5) Award of Contract

Performance Audit on Implementation of eProcurement system in Tamil Nadu 
 
38 
The issues noticed in respect of bid submission and bid evaluation in the 
eProcurement portal among the 1,260 sampled tenders are discussed in the 
following paragraphs. 
4.2 Bid Submission  
(a) Mandatory documents not uploaded by bidders 
Uploading of requisite tender documents1 by bidders in support of fulfilling 
the laid down eligibility criteria, technical conditions, commercial conditions 
etc. is stipulated in the Notice Inviting Tenders (NIT).  Only, the Earnest 
Money Deposit (EMD) instrument and affidavit(s) in original were to be 
submitted manually to the TIA.  
Analysis of MIS reports relating to sampled tenders, revealed that bidders 
have not uploaded the mandatory documents in 94 tenders, as detailed in 
Table 4.1 and two cases are illustrated below: 
Table 4.1: Mandatory documents not uploaded by bidders  
Sl. No. Sampled Office Number of tenders in 
which mandatory 
documents not uploaded 
1 Directorate of Sericulture, Salem 1 
2 District Rural Development Agency, Coimbatore 28 
3 District Rural Development Agency, Thanjavur 37  
4 District Rural Development Agency, Krishnagiri 10 
5 District Rural Development Agency, Karur 18 
 Total 94 
(Source: eProcurement portal) 
(i)  In 10 sampled tenders 2 relating to District Rural Development 
Agency (DRDA), Krishnagiri, the bidders have not uploaded the mandatory 
documents such as PAN, annual turnover certificate, list of similar works 
executed, affidavit, undertaking to abide by the terms of contract etc. 
(ii)  In the eight sampled tenders3 relating to DRDA, Karur the bidders 
have not uploaded any of the mandatory documents except the EMD 
document. 
DRDAs replied (December 2022), that though the mandatory documents were 
not uploaded in the eProcurement portal, the tender evaluation was carried out 
based on the manually submitted documents.  
                                                                 
1   Scanned copies of Demand Draft towards the EMD, copy of PAN, contractor 
registration certificate and live certificate, evidence of access to line of credit, annual 
turnover certificate from Chartered Accountant, breakup of civil works and total 
works in each financial year, affidavit regarding correctness of certificates, list of 
similar nature of works executed, list of works in hand, list of machineries 
owned/brought on hire etc. 
2  Tenders for ‘Renovation or Rejuvenation of Ponds and Ooranies from State Finance 
Commission Grants 2019-20’. 
3  Tenders for ‘Functional Household Tap connection to Rural Households under the 
Jal Jeevan Mission Scheme’. 

Chapter IV – Tender Processing 
39 
The reply was not acceptable as bid submissions were accepted in violation of 
the stipulated NIT conditions.   
(b) Calling for shortfall documents in the Bid  
The eProcurement portal provides a menu option, viz., ‘Shortfall of Tech 
documents’ enabling the TIA to call for any shortfall documents from specific 
bidder during the technical evaluation.  The menu also facilitates stipulating a 
time schedule to upload the called for documents. If the bidder fails to provide 
the documents within the stipulated time, the bid may be rejected. 
In the following instances (Table 4.2), it was noticed that documents which 
were to be uploaded at the time of bid submission were subsequently called 
for through email after opening the bid. 
Table 4.2: Calling for missing documents 
Sl. No. Sampled procuring entities Number of tenders in 
which missing documents  
were called for 
1 Tamil Nadu Medical Services Corporation (TNMSC) 1 
2 
O/o the Superintending Engineer, Water Resources 
Department, Ground Water Circle, Taramani, 
Chennai (World Bank tenders) 
27 
 Total 28 
(Source: Records of selected procuring entities) 
Analysis of the correspondence made in this regard revealed the following: 
(i) The NIT pertaining to a tender published (February 2022), by 
TNMSC stipulated that bid submitted in manual mode would not be 
considered.  TNMSC, however, while seeking clarification prior to financial 
bid opening (July 2022), also required the single bidder to submit mandatory 
documents viz., EMD details, Annual Sales Turnover, signatory copy of bid 
document etc.  Based on the documents submitted (July 2022) by the bidder, 
the tender was finalised and AoC was awarded. 
Audit observed that TNMSC failed to utilise the provision available in the 
eProcurement portal to call for ‘Shortfall documents’ and accepted submission 
of bid documents outside the eProcurement portal which was in violation of 
NIT.   
TNMSC stated (December 202) that though the bidder had uploaded the 
documents as per the schedule, due to technical issues, the bid could not be 
opened and hence the documents were called for through email. 
Reply was not acceptable as the actions of TNMSC was in violation of NIT 
and  the reply did not specify the action taken by TNMSC to escalate the 
technical issues to NIC authorities for clarification/rectification.  
(ii) The technical evaluation of 27 World Bank Tenders published by 
Water Resources Department (WRD), Ground Water Circle (GWC) Chennai, 
was based on the submission of requisite documents by the bidders in response 
to the requisition made through email.    

Performance Audit on Implementation of eProcurement system in Tamil Nadu 
 
40 
Superintending Engineer, WRD, GWC in reply (December 2022), stated that 
the eProcurement portal provides the option for calling for ‘Shortfall 
documents’ only once during the technical evaluation and any further 
requirement of submission of clarification at the review or approval stage 
would not be possible.  Hence clarifications during technical evaluation were 
being sought through email.  
During the Exit meeting (February 2023), NIC stated that provision has been 
made in the new eProcurement portal to call for missing documents more than 
once. 
Despite availability of provisions in the eProcurement portal for submission of 
bid documents and calling for missing documents within a stipulated time, 
continuous dependence on manual documents defeats the objective of 
transparency in tender processing. 
4.3  Evaluation of tenders 
As per SRS, the bid documents submitted online are to be opened, printed, 
signed and submitted to the committee for technical evaluation purposes. 
In the above context, Audit noticed discrepancies in 79 tenders as detailed in 
Table 4.3 and some of the instances are elaborated below: 
Table 4.3: Discrepancies noticed in evaluation of sampled tenders  
Sl. 
No. 
Selected procuring entity Number of tenders in 
which discrepancies were 
noticed in evaluation 
1 Directorate of Sericulture, Salem 9 
2 District Rural Development Agency, Coimbatore 34 
3 District Rural Development Agency, Thanjavur 10 
4 District Rural Development Agency, Krishnagiri 1 
5 District Rural Development Agency, Karur 16 
6 Tamil Nadu Medical Services Corporation 4 
7 O/o Superintending Engineer, Water Resources 
Department, Ground Water Circle, Taramani, Chennai 5 
 Total 79 
(Source: Records of respective procuring entities) 
(i) Wrong identification of L1: The price bid details of a tender 
published (October 2021) by Director of Sericulture (DoS) for supply of  
35 KVA Generator is given in Table 4.4.  
  

Chapter IV – Tender Processing 
41 
Table 4.4: Details of bids with different GST rates for same item 
Bidder Rate 
without 
tax  
(₹) 
GST 
percentage
quoted by 
bidder 
Rate with 
quoted GST  
(₹) 
Bid 
Rank 
Rate with 
correct GST 
of 18 per cent 
(₹) 
Chennai Diesel 
Private Limited. 
4,11,111 12 4,60,444.32 L1 4,85,111 
Madras Power 
Corporation 
4,06,800 18 4,80,024.00 L2 4,80,024 
Sri Lakshmi 
Agencies 
4,02,000 21.73 4,89,360.00 L3 4,74,360 
The Precision 
Scientific Company 
4,40,000 18 5,19,200.00 L4 5,19,200 
(Source: Records of Directorate of Sericulture) 
Though the GST rate for 35 KVA Generator was 18 per cent, the bidders have 
submitted the bids with different rates of GST.  Consequently, Chennai Diesel 
Private Limited was shortlisted as L1 bidder in the system generated BoQ 
comparative chart based on their quoted rate inclusive of incorrect GST at the 
lesser rate of 12 per cent. The Department thus incorrectly finalised Chennai 
Diesel Private Limited as L1 bidder.  
DoS, accepted (October 2022), that the tender was finalised as per the system 
generated BoQ and AoC was issued for a negotiated sum of ₹4.48 lakh.  
The reply points to the failure of DoS in designing the BoQ template duly 
incorporating the correct GST rate to avoid quoting of different GST rates for 
the same item by the bidders.  
(ii) Discrepancies in technical specifications submitted online  
vis-à-vis manual records:  Tender document pertaining to a tender published 
(August 2019) by DRDA, Krishnagiri for work of installation of 35 Reverse 
Osmosis (RO) plants had stipulated certain conditions for submission of 
technical specifications by a bidder who is an authorised dealer viz., (i) 
documentary evidence issued by the manufacturer that the bidder is a dealer, 
(ii) bidder should have supplied a cumulative of minimum 50 number of RO 
plants during the past three years, (iii) in the event of being technically 
qualified,  inspection report of the original manufacturing unit to be obtained 
from the Executive Engineer (EE), DRDA and submitted before price bid 
opening etc.  
Scrutiny of manual records and bid documents uploaded to eProcurement 
portal vis-a-vis tender evaluation carried out by DRDA, Krishnagiri with 
reference to the above eligibility criteria are detailed in Table 4.5. 
  

Performance Audit on Implementation of eProcurement system in Tamil Nadu 
 
42 
Table 4.5: Details of technical evaluation of bids received for installation of RO plants 
Name of the technically 
qualified bidder out of 
four bids received 
Qualification 
criteria required as 
per bid document 
As per the manual 
evaluation 
summary 
As per the documents 
uploaded by bidders in 
the eProcurement portal 
M/s Sky Traders, Salem Dealer Certificate Dealer of IIROS 
Water purifiers 
Authorised dealer of 
‘Battery operated electrical 
vehicles for various 
models’ 
Details of execution 
of similar nature of 
work 
Stated as enclosed-
details not available 
Supplied Electric Cart 
Battery vehicle 
M/s Anbu Agencies, 
Dharmapuri 
Dealer Certificate Dealer of IIROS 
Water purifiers 
Authorised dealer of ‘LED 
lights, Solar systems and 
Electric vehicles’ 
Details of execution 
of similar nature of 
work 
Stated as enclosed-
details not available 
Supplied Electric Cart 
Battery vehicle 
The mandatory inspection report of EE/DRDA to be obtained prior to opening of price bid was not 
available 
(Source: eProcurement database and records of DRDA, Krishnagiri) 
Despite the above discrepancies, the price bid was opened (October 2019) and 
the work was awarded (November 2019) to M/s Sky Traders, Salem.   
DRDA, Krishnagiri accepted (December 2022) that the mandatory inspection 
of manufacturing unit had not been conducted and that action will be initiated 
against the tenderer as per tender conditions. Reply was not acceptable as 
awarding of contract without ensuring the completeness of bid documents is in 
violation of tender conditions. 
Tender evaluation process is vital in identifying the bidder who meets the 
criteria fixed for the work for early/effective completion of work. Deficiencies 
in designing the BoQ template which is relied upon for selection of lowest 
bidder and awarding of contract without ensuring compliance to bid conditions 
contributes to deficient/delayed completion of works. 
(iii) GST Registration: TNMSC published (July 2021) a tender for 
supply of Dual Chamber Temporary Pacing Machine. One of the conditions 
specified in the bid document was furnishing of GST registration number for 
supply and services along with the Harmonised System of Nomenclature 
(HSN) code4 of the item in the price schedule. The GST Registration of  
M/s Swastika Medical Center, the successful bidder related only to 
Medicaments, Sprays and Deodorants and not to Pacing Machine.  
TNMSC replied (December 2022), that the item procured was an imported one 
and the supplier can supply with the existing GST registration number itself.  
The reply is not acceptable as it violates the tender condition.  Also, the HSN 
Code (‘90215000’) quoted by the bidder in the price schedule appended to the 
                                                                 
4  Harmonised System of Nomenclature meant for systemic classification of goods based 
on which GST rates are levied. 

Chapter IV – Tender Processing 
43 
NIT does not figure in the HSN number pertaining to the GST Registration of 
M/s Swastika Medical Center.    
(iv) ISO Certification - Director of Sericulture (DoS), Salem published 
a tender for the supply of ‘Silkworm rearing bed disinfectant’ (Ankush).  The 
Condition No. 5(b) for the bidders in the NIT stipulates that the entity must 
have ISO certification.  Audit, however, observed that the ISO certification of 
M/s SR Systems, Salem, the successful bidder, related only to IT 
Infrastructure and not to the disinfectant Ankush.  
DoS accepted (September 2022), that the Tender Scrutiny Committee verified 
ISO certification of the bidders but failed to verify the goods and services for 
which it was given and further stated that such verification will be ensured in 
future. 
Awarding contracts without appropriate GST registration / ISO certification is 
not in order and could result in non-execution of the contract.  
(v) Non-exemption of EMD for SSI/MSME bidders: GoTN 
exempted (September 2013) Small Scale Industries (SSIs) located outside the 
State and registered with National Small Industries Corporation (NSIC) from 
payment of EMD/SD in respect of items manufactured by them. The 
eProcurement portal provides for such exemption for SSIs/ Micro, Small and 
Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) and the documents in support of the exemption 
are to be uploaded in the eProcurement portal. 
In two sampled tenders published (February/March 2022) by TNMSC, the 
bidders5 were not granted EMD exemption though they had uploaded 
necessary documents on the grounds that they were not domestic enterprises. 
Details of bids received in one of the tenders and in the retender consequent on 
cancellation of the first tender are given in Table 4.6. 
Table 4.6: Details of bids received  
Tender ID Name of bidder Price 
quoted 
Remarks 
2022_TNMSC_222594_1 M/s Analytical 
Technologies 
Limited, Baroda 
₹20 lakh Bid rejected as he claimed EMD 
exemption under NSIC.  
M/s Spincotech 
Private Limited 
₹35 lakh Since the quote exceeded the threshold 
limit of ₹25 lakh for limited tender, the 
tender was cancelled. 
2022_TNMSC_230305_1 M/s Analytical 
Technologies 
Limited, Baroda 
₹35 lakh In the retender, incorporating the EMD 
exemption for domestic enterprise clause, 
two bidders remitted EMD and qualified 
for the price bid. Since the prices 
exceeded the limited tender threshold, 
corrigendum was published on 
05/07/2022 for cancellation of Tender. 
M/s Spincotech 
Private Limited 
₹35 lakh 
(Source: Records of TNMSC) 
                                                                 
5  M/s Quality Scientific & Mechanical Works, Haryana and M/s Analytical 
 Technologies Limited, Baroda. 

Performance Audit on Implementation of eProcurement system in Tamil Nadu 
 
44 
Scrutiny of records revealed that M/s Analytical Technologies Limited, being 
aware of the higher price quoted by M/s Spincotech Private Limited in the  
first tender, quoted their price higher by ₹15 lakh.  The limited tender was 
however, cancelled subsequently and it was decided to float open tender 
online.  
Audit observes that if the EMD exemption had been considered during the 
first Tender, M/s Analytical Technologies Limited would have been L1 within 
the threshold limit of limited tender.   
TNMSC replied (December 2022) that the criteria that EMD exemption is 
only for domestic enterprises and not for non-domestic units had been 
incorporated in all subsequent tenders.  The reply is not acceptable as the 
action of TNMSC in failing to extend exemption from payment of EMD/SD to 
SSIs located outside the State is in contravention of Government orders that 
was meant to encourage SSIs. 
(vi) Different procedures for similar tenders: For impartial evaluation 
of all tenders, the procuring departments should follow uniform methods while 
evaluating the bid documents submitted by the bidders.  It was, however, 
noticed that in three instances involving seven tenders, the evaluation differed 
for same criteria in similar tenders and for same bidders too. In this regard, 
illustrative cases noticed in tenders published by Director of Sericulture, 
Salem are discussed in Table 4.7. 
Table 4.7: Illustrative cases of different procedure adopted in tenders for procuring 
machineries/equipment 
Sl. 
No. 
Tender ID 
(Name of the bidder) 
Tender status Audit observation on tender evaluation 
Case 1: 
1 2018_SERI_114430_1 
(M/s Star Associated 
Traders, Pollachi) 
The bid was accepted 
and contract awarded 
(February 2019). 
In both the tenders the Test report (Birsa 
Agricultural University, Ranchi) was 
furnished by the bidder without rectification 
documents.  However, while the first tender 
was accepted the second tender was rejected 2 2020_SERI_188007_1 
(M/s Star Associated 
Traders, Pollachi) 
The bid was rejected 
(January 2021) in 
technical evaluation. 
Case 2: 
3 2018_SERI_114430_1 
(M/s Fortune Agro 
Impex, Bangalore) 
The bid was rejected 
(January 2019) in 
technical evaluation. 
Bid was rejected due to submission of 
tampered/manipulated document in another 
tender 2018_SERI_114568_1 (January 
2019). However, the bidder had not been 
blacklisted. 
4 2021_SERI_211898_1 
(M/s Fortune Agro 
Impex, Bangalore) 
The bid was accepted 
(November 2021) and 
qualified for price bid 
opening. 
Bid accepted without considering that the 
bidder had submitted tampered/ manipulated 
documents in an earlier bid. 
(Source: Records of Directorate of Sericulture, Salem) 
DoS stated (December 2022) that in Case 1 (Table 4.7), the test report 
submitted by the bidder for the second tender was thoroughly verified and then 
rejected for the second tender as the test report was not updated / rectified for 
more than 3 years.  In  respect of Case 2 (Table 4.7), it was stated that the bid 

Chapter IV – Tender Processing 
45 
for the second tender was accepted as the previous performances of the bidder 
was good and that in future, firms submitting manipulated records would be 
recommended to Government for blacklisting at least for a year. The reply is 
not acceptable since Department was inconsistent in verifying the test reports 
and in evaluating the bids and also failed to blacklist the bidder who submitted 
tampered documents so that he would not be considered for future bids.  
(vii) Bidder rejected by TSC but approved by TAC: In WRD, PWD, 
Chennai in the following two instances, the bidders who were rejected in the 
technical evaluation by the Tender Scrutiny Committee (TSC) were awarded 
the contract by the Tender Acceptance Committee (TAC) without recording 
the justification. 
In one tender, three bids were received from M/s Vetri Constructions (B1), 
M/s Vishnu Infrastructures (B2) and M/s Jawahar Constructions (B3).  The 
TSC pre-qualified B1 observing that he alone fulfilled all criteria while the 
other two bidders (B2 and B3) did not qualify in the ‘Tools and Plant’ criteria.  
Subsequently, the TAC decided that B3 alone satisfied all qualification criteria 
and rejected the bids of B1 and B2 on the grounds that they did not fulfill the 
‘Tools and Plant’ criteria.  Consequently, the tender was finalised and the 
contract awarded to B3.  
In another tender bids were received from seven tenderers viz., KKS &  
Co (B1), VNS Constructions (B2), Dharani Hitech Projects Private Limited 
(B3), Vetri Constructions (B4), V.Meenal (B5), P.Angamuthu (B6) and PRG 
Constructions (B7). As per TSC report, all seven bidders did not  
pre-qualify as they failed to satisfy the Class-I Live Certificate criteria.  TAC, 
however, decided that three bidders viz., B1, B4 and B5 satisfied all criteria 
including the Class-I Live Certificate criteria and evaluated their price bids 
and awarded the contract to the shortlisted L1 bidder i.e. B5.  
It was observed in Audit that though TAC is empowered to overrule the 
decision of TSC, the reasons for the same should be recorded and uploaded in 
the eProcurement portal which was not done in the above two cases. The 
deficiencies brought out above impair the objectivity of the evaluation process 
besides depriving the legitimate bidders from being awarded the contract. 
4.4  Conclusion 
Provisions available in the eProcurement portal for submission of bid 
documents and for calling missing bid documents within a stipulated time 
were not utilised and manually submitted documents were relied upon, 
defeating the objective of transparency in tender processing.  Deficiencies in 
designing the BoQ template, awarding of contracts without ensuring 
compliance to bid conditions and inconsistencies in bid evaluation impaired 
the objectivity of the tender evaluation process besides depriving the 
legitimate bidders from being awarded the contract.  Government accepted 
(February 2023) the observations and stated that the inputs will be useful for 
the new eProcurement portal to be implemented from 1 April 2023. 

Performance Audit on Implementation of eProcurement system in Tamil Nadu 
 
46 
4.4  Recommendations 
 Government should establish a ‘Centre of responsibility’ to escalate 
eProcurement portal issues to NIC for appropriate resolution.   
 Government should instruct the procuring entities to evaluate the 
tenders only based on the documents uploaded by the bidders to the 
eProcurement portal. 
 Government must fix responsibility on the tender inviting 
authorities and officers involved in the tender process for 
discrepancies in tender processing. 
 Government should consider introducing a feature in the system for 
fixing responsibility on the tender evaluator and for breaking down 
bid conditions into its components and generate an automatic 
inviolable checklist for the tender evaluation. 
 Government, through NIC, should take steps to map the policies 
relating to SSIs/MSMEs bidders in the eProcurement portal to 
ensure a holistic tender evaluation. 
 Government should ensure that the bidders who indulge in 
malpractices are blacklisted. 
 Nodal Officers of procuring departments should ensure that all 
evaluation reports are uploaded in the eProcurement portal in 
complete shape for transparency in tender processing. 
 

CHAPTER V 
COLLUSIVE BIDDING 
AND 
CARTELISATION IN 
TENDERING 
 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

47 
CHAPTER V 
 
COLLUSIVE BIDDING AND CARTELISATION IN 
TENDERING 
 
 
Collusive bidding or bid rigging counteracts the purpose of tendering and 
is inherently anti-competitive.  Scrutiny of selected tenders, revealed 
patterns of bidding viz., bid rotation, bidders with family relationship, bid 
submission from procuring entity computer, different bidders placing 
bids for a tender from the same IP address, double EMD, coded 
intimation by bidders and consecutive EMD instrument numbers, 
indicative of bid rigging and cartelisation. These fraudulent practices by 
bidders and failure of tender evaluating/approving officials, derail 
Government’s efforts to increase bidder participation, reduce costs and 
enhance transparency in the procurement system.  Government accepted 
(February 2023) the observations and stated that the inputs will be useful 
for the new eProcurement portal to be implemented from 1 April 2023. 
5.1 Introduction 
Tender process is intended to enable the procurement of goods or services on 
the most favourable terms and conditions. But this intention is defeated if 
prospective bidders collude or act in agreement. Such collusive bidding or bid 
rigging counteracts the purpose of tendering and is inherently  
anti-competitive.  
‘Bid rigging’ is defined as any agreement, between enterprises or persons 
engaged in identical or similar production or trading of goods or provision of 
services, which has the effect of eliminating or reducing competition for bids 
or adversely affecting or manipulating the process for bidding1. 
‘Cartel’ includes an association of producers, sellers, distributors, traders or 
service providers who, by agreement amongst themselves, limit, control or 
attempt to control the production, distribution, sale or price of or trade in 
goods or provision of services2. 
One or more bidding patterns noticed in the same tender is an indicator of 
organised limited participation of bidders preventing healthy competition.  
Scrutiny of 1,260 sampled tenders in the selected procuring units and data 
analysis revealed seven patterns of bidding viz., bid rotation, bidders with 
family relationship, bid submission from procuring entity computer, different 
bidders placing bids for a tender from the same IP address, double EMD, 
coded intimation by bidders and consecutive EMD instrument numbers 
indicative of bid rigging and cartelisation. Further, at least one pattern 
indicating collusive bidding was noticed in 347 tenders as depicted in the 
Exhibit 5.1. 
                                                                 
1 The Explanation to Section 3(3) of the Competition Act, 2002. 
2  As defined in Section 2(c) of the Competition Act, 2002. 

Performance Audit on Implementation of eProcurement system in Tamil Nadu 
 
48 
 The above mentioned bidding patterns indicate collusion between the procuring entity and the bidders and is a form of assuring the bidders that they would get the contract before submission of bid.  It also points to failure on the part of the officials involved in the evaluation and approval of the tenders which derails the Government’s efforts to improve the procurement system by increasing participation, reducing costs and enhancing transparency.  Deficiencies noticed in this regard are discussed below. 5.2 Analysis of number of bids received for a tender The eProcurement system does not restrict prospective eligible bidders from bidding for a tender published in the eProcurement portal. Data analysis of 1.34 lakh tenders published in the eProcurement portal between April 2016 and March 2022 disclosed that 0.62 lakh tenders (46.27 per cent) received only two bids.  Details of such limited bidding in the selected procuring units are given in Table 5.1. 
Table 5.1: Tenders with same pair of bidders in sampled procuring entities 
Sl. 
No. 
Office Number of  Percentage of 
pairs in 
column (e) to 
pairs in 
column (d)  
Percentage 
of tenders 
for pairs in 
column (f) to 
column (c) 
Tenders 
with two 
bids 
Pairs of 
bidders 
Pairs of 
bidders placed 
bids for 10 or 
more tenders 
Tenders 
participated 
by bidders in 
column (e) 
(a) (b) (c) (d) (e) (f) (g) = ((e)/(d)) 
x 100 
(h) = ((f)/(c)) x 
100 
1 Greater Chennai 
Corporation 
7,607 2,102 158 3,658 7.51 48.09 
2 DRDA, Coimbatore 918 168 26 543 15.48 59.15 
3 DRDA, Karur 724 146 21 375 14.38 51.80 
4 DRDA, Krishnagiri 1,216 202 28 758 13.86 62.34 
5 DRDA, Perambalur 299 63 6 169 9.52 56.52 
6 Tamil Nadu Electricity 
Board 
11,303 4,061 213 4,267 5.25 37.75 
7 DRDA, Salem 1,647 302 46 1,057 15.23 64.18 
8 DRDA, Thanjavur 681 159 15 366 9.43 53.74 
9 TNCSC 346 100 6 113 5.94 32.66 
(Source: Data analysis of tender data) 
120 (35 per cent)175 (50 per cent)52 (15 per cent)Exhibit 5.1: Tenders with number of collusive bidding patterns
One pattern
Two Patterns
Three Patterns

Chapter V – Collusive bidding and Cartelisation in tendering 
 
49 
It is seen from Table 5.1 that: 
 Five to sixteen per cent pair of bidders participated in 33 to  
64 per cent of tenders indicating limited participation of bidders and 
the likelihood of collusive bidding by participating bidders. 
 In DRDA, Perambalur and TNCSC, six pairs participated in  
169 and 113 tenders respectively.  In these tenders, the contracts 
were shared between the two participating bidders in the ratio of 
50:50 in DRDA, Perambalur and 55:45 in TNCSC. 
In the sampled procuring entities where more than 300 tenders were received 
with only two bids, it was noticed that the same pairs of bidders bid for a large 
number of tenders and cornered the lion’s share of contracts. 
5.3 Bidders becoming L1 on rotation (Bid rotation) 
Bid rotation is the arrangement among bidders to determine bid winners in 
advance on a rotational basis and is one of the methods adopted for bid 
rigging. Scrutiny of sampled tenders in two selected procuring units revealed 
occurrence of Bid rotation in 20 tenders as discussed below: 
(i) TNCSC, Chennai published 15 tenders (January 2019) for the work 
of ‘Re-construction of 5,000 MT Godowns’ in Nagapattinam District. While 
eight tenders received three bids each, the remaining seven tenders received 
two bids each.  In the eight tenders with three bids, one bidder in each case 
had not paid EMD which indicated that it was a non-serious bid/dummy bid 
bound to be disqualified. Hence, effectively there were only two eligible 
bidders for each of the fifteen tenders. In total, ten bidders submitted bids for 
the fifteen tenders.   
Scrutiny of tender documents along with the bidding pattern showed that the 
above mentioned 10 bidders emerge as five distinct pairs. Each of the five 
pairs always bid for the same tender and come out successful in half the 
number of tenders they bid for as shown in Table 5.2. 
Table 5.2: Details of bids submitted and the outcome in 15 tenders 
Pair 
No. 
Bidder Bids 
submitted 
Bids as 
L1 
Bids as L2 
1 Chinnasamy Builders, Thanjavur 4 2 2 
RK Engineering, Chennai 4 2 2 
2 S. Sambasivam, Thanjavur  4 2 2 
P. Muthuvel, Thiruvarur 4 2 2 
3 Himeshwar Engineering, Thiruvarur 3 2 1 
MSG Infra, Thiruvarur 3 1 2 
4 G. Jeshpal, Needamangalam 2 1 1 
M/s Senthur Infratech and Builders, Erode  2 1 1 
5 S. Nallathambi, Thanjavur 2 1 1 
M/s U.G. Construction, Thanjavur 2 1 1 
(Source: Records furnished by TNCSC) 

Performance Audit on Implementation of eProcurement system in Tamil Nadu 
 
50 
It was seen from Table 5.2 that:  
 All bids were submitted on the same day within 5 to 10 hours 
though the bidders were from different geographical locations3.  
While six of the ten bidders submitted their bids from the IP address 
117.241.31.37 the remaining bidders submitted their bids from the 
IP address 117.241.91.82. 
 Though the work is of the same type, in the same place and the 
department estimated item rates are same for all tenders, all the ten 
bidders have consistently submitted higher bids for tenders in which 
they are L2 bidders compared to their bids submitted for tenders in 
which they are L1 bidders. 
(ii) In another work viz., ‘Providing of 10 numbers, 20 numbers and  
20 numbers Portable Paddy covered shed by using Pre-fabricated Galvalume 
sheet shelter with movable type to open plinth cap paddy storage’ in 
Nagapattinam, Thanjavur and Thiruvarur Districts respectively TNCSC, 
Chennai published three tenders (November 2020).  The Bill of Quantities 
(BoQ) of all three tenders carried the same 30 items and estimated item rate. 
The details of bids received and the outcome of the tenders are given in  
Table 5.3. 
Table 5.3: Details of bidders in three tenders of TNCSC 
Sl. 
No. 
Tender Id and 
Tender value 
District Number 
of Works 
Number of 
bidders 
L1 L2 
1 2020_TNCSC_184349_1
₹1,00,00,000 
Nagapattinam 10 2 P.Muthuvel Himeshwar 
Engineering 
2 2020_TNCSC_184370_1
₹2,00,00,000 
Thanjavur 20 2 Himeshwar 
Engineering P.Muthuvel 
3 2020_TNCSC_184403_1
₹2,00,00,000 
Thiruvarur 20 2 Himeshwar 
Engineering P.Muthuvel 
(Source: Records furnished by TNCSC) 
It is seen from Table 5.4 below, which brings out the similarities in the  
item-wise rates quoted by the bidders, that the two participating bidders 
quoted the same lower rate in tenders where they were shortlisted as L1 and 
the same higher rate in the tenders where they were unsuccessful (L2).  
Table 5.4: Details of rates quoted for items of works 
Item of Work 2020_TNCSC_184370_1 2020_TNCSC_184403_1 2020_TNCSC_184349_1 
Himeshwar 
Engineering 
(L1) 
P.Muthuvel 
(L2) 
Himeshwar 
Engineering 
(L1) 
P.Muthuvel  
(L2) 
P.Muthuvel  
(L1) 
Himeshwar 
Engineering 
(L2) 
(In ₹) 
Cutting and levelling 
the earth using JCB 
990.00 1,008.00 990.00 1,008.00 990.00 1,008.00 
Earth Work excavation 
for foundation 
205.25 209.00 205.25 209.00 205.25 209.00 
Cement Concrete 
1:5:10 for foundation 
5,352.90 5,450.00 5,352.90 5,450.25 5,352.90 5,450.00 
(Source: Records furnished by TNCSC) 
                                                                 
3  Chennai, Erode, Needamangalam, Thanjavur and Thiruvarur.  

Chapter V – Collusive bidding and Cartelisation in tendering 
 
51 
Moreover, the address of the two bidders registered in the eProcurement portal 
and in the documents submitted online for other tenders is Door No. 10/30, 
Balan Street, Vaduvur and Door No. 10/31, Balan Street, Vaduvur 
respectively.  This indicates that the bidders were in a position to influence the 
other bidder in placing their bids and carried out collusive bidding.  
(iii) In DRDA, Perambalur, tenders for 22 works were called  
(November 2019) in 19 packages through eProcurement system for 
implementation of Village Panchayat and Panchayat Union road improvement 
works under Tamil Nadu Rural Roads Improvement Scheme - 2019-20. The 
item of works mentioned in the technical specification and the price estimated 
for each item of work were similar in nature for all packages. 
Four bidders, (two pairs) participated in 12 packages and the pattern of 
awarding of contract is shown in Table 5.5.  
Table 5.5: Pattern of awarding of contract for 22 works in DRDA, Perambalur 
Name of the Contractor (Shri) Number of packages 
Participated L1 in L2 in 
Pair 1 Pannerselvam 7 4 3 
Krishnasamy 7 3 4 
Pair 2 Janarthanan 5 3 2 
Senthilkumar, Siruvayalur 5 2 3 
(Source: Records furnished by DRDA, Perambalur) 
These four bidders uploaded tender documents for 12 packages (24 bids) from 
two IP addresses (223.182.214.145 and 45.126.252.194).  In 6 of the  
12 packages bids of Pair 1 (Table 5.5) were uploaded from the IP address 
45.126.252.194. 
Further analysis of system generated comparative statements of BoQ 
submitted by Pair 1 (Table 5.5) in two packages it was seen that the rates 
quoted by the bidders were not same and the bidders quoted lesser price in all 
items of work in the package in which they were L1 and higher price for the 
same items of work in the package where they were L2. The similarities in the 
item wise rates quoted by the bidders indicate that the bidders were aware of 
the rates quoted by each other and point to collusive bidding. 
5.4 Bidders with family relationship 
Possibility of bid rigging is high when competing bidders have a family 
relationship as one bidder would be able to influence another bidder.   Bidding 
for the same tender by bidders having family relationship was noticed in  
35 tenders sampled in the selected procuring entities as detailed in Table 5.6.  
Two such cases are illustrated below: 
 
  

Performance Audit on Implementation of eProcurement system in Tamil Nadu 
 
52 
Table 5.6: Procuring entity-wise details of participation by bidders from same family  
Sl. 
No. 
Sampled Office Number of tenders with 
bidders with family 
relationship 
1 Executive Engineer, Public Works Department, 
WRO , GWC, Salem (World Bank tenders) 6 
2 District Rural Development Agency, Salem 1 
3 District Rural Development Agency, Coimbatore 27 
4 NABARD and Rural Road Circle, Highways 
Department, Salem 1 
 Total 35 
(Source: Records furnished by respective sample units) 
(i) Water Resources Department, Ground Water Division, Salem, 
published six tenders for World Bank Assisted works under National 
Hydrology Project.  The Notice Inviting Tender (NIT) stipulates that a bidder 
may be considered to have a conflict of interest for the purpose of this bidding 
process, if the bidder “has a relationship with another bidder, directly or 
through common third parties, that puts it in a position to influence the bid of 
another bidder or influence the decisions of the employer regarding this 
bidding process”.  Also, as per World Bank policy participating firm shall not 
have conflict of interest4.  However, in violation of NIT and World Bank 
policy, the bids submitted by two bidders with family relationship (Father/Son 
in one tender and Husband/Wife in five tenders) were evaluated and the 
tenders were finalised.   
The Department accepted the observation and replied (September 2022) that 
the bids were evaluated by following the due procedure and contract awarded 
to the lowest bidder and the point raised by Audit has been noted for future 
compliance. 
(ii) Two bidders viz., Mallaiyan Infrastructures and M. Doraisamy were 
registered in the eProcurement portal with the same address and mobile 
number.  These bidders participated in 27 tenders published by DRDA, 
Coimbatore and in all the tenders Mallaiyan Infrastructure was shortlisted as 
L1.  Scrutiny of tender documents revealed that the proprietor of Mallaiyan 
Infrastructures (D. Jayakumar) is the son of M. Doraisamy.  While submitting 
bids for 27 tenders, both bidders uploaded the prerequisite documents of  
Shri M. Doraisamy in the eProcurement portal.   In 20 of the 26 tenders the bid 
submission was done from the same IP address.  Thus, it is construed in Audit, 
that collusive bidding had taken place in the above tenders. 
On this being pointed out DRDA, Coimbatore accepted the observation and 
replied (October 2022) that Technical Evaluation Committee carried out the 
                                                                 
4 Clauses 1.6 and 1.7 of the World Bank’s Guidelines: Procurement of Goods, Works 
and Non-Consulting Services under IBRD Loans and IDA Credits and Grants by 
World Bank Borrowers, January 2011, revised July 2014. 

Chapter V – Collusive bidding and Cartelisation in tendering 
 
53 
technical evaluation of bids only with the manual documents submitted by the 
bidders and not with the documents uploaded online. Technical evaluation in 
cases pointed out by Audit was erroneous and caution will be taken to avoid 
such mistakes in future. 
The reply of the Department is not acceptable since World Bank policy on 
conflict of interest was not considered during evaluation of the tenders. 
(iii) Para 103.16 of TN Highways Manual Part-I stipulates that a bidder 
will be considered for disqualification when submitting “more than one tender 
for the same work, from an individual, firm or company in which any one of 
them have interest in any capacity as individual firm or company”.   
NABARD and Rural Road Circle, Highways Department, Salem published a 
tender for ‘Upgradation of Panchayat and Panchayat Union Roads  
(3 Works)’. Two bidders viz., M/s P. Rayin Constructions Company Private 
Limited and Shri P. Rayin participated in the bidding. The work was awarded 
(August 2020) to M/s P. Rayin Constructions Company Private Limited (L1) 
for a value of ₹5.70 crore. Scrutiny of documents uploaded in the 
eProcurement portal revealed that the Managing Director (Shri P. Rahim) of 
L1 is the son of Shri P. Rayin (L2).  
The Department replied that the two bidders in the above mentioned tender are 
registered separately as individual contractor and as a firm. It was further 
stated that most contractors are not interested in participating in works in hill 
areas, which is the case in the above tender, and as such tender is awarded to 
the lowest bidder among participating bidders.   
Reply is not acceptable as Department did not take into consideration the ibid 
rules while finalising the tenders.  
5.5 Bid participation by the same group of companies 
In Greater Chennai Corporation, tender for the work of Annual Maintenance 
of Effluent Treatment plant at Villivakkam slaughterhouse at a cost of
₹10.55 lakh per year was published in June 2021.  Three bidders participated 
in the tender and details are shown in Table 5.7. 
Table 5.7: Details of bidder participation  
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the bidder Quoted amount  
(₹in lakh) 
Ranking 
Per month Per year 
1 M/s CPC Green Energy Engineering Private 
Limited 
0.90 10.80 L1 
2 M/s Cryogenic Process Controls (CPC) 0.95 11.40 L2 
3 M/s Sree Venkateshwara Construction 1.10 13.20 L3 
(Source: Records of Greater Chennai Corporation) 

Performance Audit on Implementation of eProcurement system in Tamil Nadu 
 
54 
The maintenance work was awarded (June 2021) after negotiation to L1 
bidder at a cost of ₹10.55 lakh. The work was completed, and the contractor 
was paid in August 2022.  It was seen from the contractor’s work completion 
report that M/s CPC Green Energy Engineering Limited (L1) is a unit of 
Cryogenic Process Controls (L2).  Further analysis of bid documents 
submitted by L1 and L2 revealed that (i) both firms had the same address,  
(ii) both firms had submitted their bids from same IP address (117.221.22.178) 
within four minutes of each other’s submission and (iii)  EMD instrument of 
both firms were drawn by the same individual on the same day (24/06/2021) 
with consecutive numbers. 
Thus, participation of two firms (L1 and L2) who are sister companies 
(belonging to the same group of companies) and one of them becoming L1 
indicates collusion among the bidders. 
Data analysis of 1.34 lakh tenders for which valid bids were received revealed 
that 444 bids submitted in 208 tenders were received from bidders having the 
same address registered in the eProcurement portal and were submitted from 
the same IP address. 
The above instances point to collusive bidding as either (i) the bidders from 
different geographical locations of the State submit the bids from the same  
IP address or (ii) submit the bids from the Department’s premises indicating 
that the Department was a party to it.  This shows that the L1 is not decided by 
the system or the Department concerned but is pre-determined by the 
participating bidders.  Thus, the envisaged objectives of eProcurement system 
viz., promoting competition and transparency in the procurement process was 
not achieved.  
5.6 Inconsistent bidding patterns noticed from IP address 
Internet Protocol (IP) address, is a series of numbers that identifies any device 
on a network. Computers use IP addresses to communicate with each other 
both over the internet as well as on other networks. 
The eProcurement system captures the IP Address of the computer from which 
a bid is placed.  Placing of more than one bid for the same tender from the 
same IP address more often than not shows that the same computer was used 
to place the bids and is an indicator for collusion among bidders. Likelihood of 
collusion between bidders and department officials is all the more if bids are 
placed from IP addresses of procuring entity. Such cases are discussed in the 
following paragraphs. 
5.6.1 Bidding using computers of the procuring entity 
In DRDA, Salem, 73 per cent of tenders (1,265 out of 1,741 tenders) which 
reached the financial evaluation stage in the eProcurement system during 
2016-22, were uploaded from the IP addresses of DRDA, Salem (Table 5.8). 
  

Chapter V – Collusive bidding and Cartelisation in tendering 
 
55 
Table 5.8: Details of tenders uploaded using same IP address 
IP address Number of tenders uploaded 
45.116.113.120 879 
45.116.113.121 259 
45.116.114.129 89 
45.116.114.15 38 
Total 1,265 
(Source: eProcurement portal data) 
As the eProcurement portal envisages a secured Public Key Infrastructure 
encrypted system, submission of bids using the computers of procuring entity 
in its premises undermines data secrecy and confidentiality. 
When this was pointed out, the procuring entity replied (November 2022) that 
submission of bids by bidders was permitted in DRDA premises to guide new 
contractors for uploading bid documents to the eProcurement portal and that 
instructions were issued to desist from this practice in future.  
Reply of the Department is not acceptable as processing of tenders and 
submission of 73 per cent of bids from DRDA premises indicates collusion 
among bidders and staff of the procuring entity and is an anti-competitive 
practice.  
In the Exit Meeting (February 2023), Government stated that the procuring 
entity’s response was not appropriate. 
5.6.2 Bidding for a tender by different bidders from same IP address 
Submission of bids for a tender from the same IP address by different bidders 
from different geographical locations within a short span of time is indicative 
of collusive bidding and cartelisation. 
Data analysis of tenders processed through the eProcurement system revealed 
that out of 1.34 lakh tenders published in the eProcurement portal, in 0.44 lakh 
tenders (33 per cent) the number of bids submitted from the same IP address 
for a tender ranged from 2 to 33. 
In the sampled procuring entities, bids for each tender were uploaded from the 
same IP Address in 232 sampled tenders, the details are shown in  
Appendix 5.1 and two cases are illustrated below: 
In DRDA, Salem, 33 tenders (31 with two bids each and two with four bids 
each) were published for execution of water, wall and road works in various 
Blocks under the Infrastructure Gap Filling Fund - 2016-17. In 29 of the  
33 tenders the bids (more than one) received for each tender were uploaded 
from the same IP address and out of the 70 bids received for these tenders,  
35 bids were uploaded from the IP address 27.62.119.224. In DRDA, 
Coimbatore, 33 tenders for various works in which two bidders i.e.  
Shri K. Selvaraj and Shri R. Rajendran had participated were scrutinised.  
In 22 of the 33 tenders the two bids received for each tender were uploaded 
from the same IP address. 

Performance Audit on Implementation of eProcurement system in Tamil Nadu 
 
56 
DRDA, Salem accepted the observation and stated (November 2022) that all 
the bidders upload their documents from the same browsing centre and so bid 
submission was consecutive.  It was also stated that due to workload and lack 
of manpower, they could not verify the documents uploaded online by the 
bidders. Further DRDA, Salem in its reply (December 2022) accepted the 
observation and stated that such lapses will not occur in future.  In this regard, 
DRDA, Coimbatore replied (October 2022) that they did not verify the 
documents uploaded online by the bidder and that submission of bids from the 
same IP and existence of cartelisation among bidders could not be verified and 
assured that such lapses will not occur in future. 
During the Exit Meeting (February 2023) Government stated that a detailed 
reply has been called from NIC regarding the pattern of collusive bidding 
emerging from analysis of eProcurement portal data vis-à-vis IP address. 
5.7 Bidding patterns noticed from EMD payments 
Earnest Money Deposit (EMD) is the amount remitted by a bidder along with 
his bid indicating his willingness to implement the contract.  The tender 
documents shall require all bidders without exception to pay  
EMD ordinarily not exceeding one per cent of procurement value5.  As 
guarantee for contract performance, a Security Deposit (SD) not exceeding 
five per cent of the value of the orders placed shall be taken from the 
successful bidder6. 
In the selected procuring entities of DRDA, EMD is accepted through offline 
mode wherein the bidder submits the original EMD instrument to the 
procuring entity before opening of the bid in addition to uploading copy of the 
same in the eProcurement portal along with the bid documents.  Patterns 
indicating bidder collusion observed on scrutiny of EMD instruments are 
discussed below: 
5.7.1 Bidders confident of award of contract before bidding 
Tender conditions of District Rural Development Agencies stipulates that each 
bidder shall furnish EMD which is one per cent of the tender value and the 
successful bidder shall furnish SD equivalent to two per cent of the contract 
value, which includes EMD already paid, within 15 days from the date of 
letter of acceptance. Data analysis of EMD paid by bidders revealed the 
following: 
 Out of 29,284 tenders published by DRDAs during 2016-22, in 
2,213 tenders the bidders who had remitted exactly twice the EMD 
amount were finalised as L1 in the respective tenders and the 
contract was awarded to them. 
 Out of the above 2,213 tenders, in 1,472 tenders both L1 and L2 
bidders submitted their bids from the same IP address. 
                                                                 
5 Rule 14(1) of TNTIT Rules, 2000. 
6 Rule 14(3) of TNTIT Rules, 2000. 

Chapter V – Collusive bidding and Cartelisation in tendering 
 
57 
It is evident from the above that the bidder who furnished twice the EMD 
amount had prior knowledge of bagging the contract and the likelihood of 
collusive bidding in all these cases cannot be ruled out. In reply, DRDA, 
Coimbatore (47 cases) stated (October 2022) that such cases will not be 
allowed in future. 
5.7.2 Submission of coded EMD document in eProcurement portal by 
bidders 
From the MIS reports of the eProcurement portal and scrutiny of sampled 
tenders in selected units, it was observed that the name of the document 
containing the scanned image of the EMD instrument uploaded by the L1 and 
L2 bidders contained letters such as ‘L1’, ‘ori’, ‘orginal’, ‘DDO’ and ‘L2’, 
‘dum’, ‘dummy’, ‘DDD’ respectively. 
Analysis of eProcurement portal data revealed that EMD document uploaded 
in 1,917 out of 61,533 tenders, which received two bids during 2016-22, 
contained such letters. 
Uploaded EMD files carrying names like ‘L1’, ‘orginal’, ‘L2’, ‘dummy’, etc., 
amounts to coded communication by bidder conveying that he/she is the  
L1 (original) / L2 (dummy) bidder and does not rule out collusion among 
bidders and officials of procuring entity. 
On this being pointed out DRDA, Karur accepted the observation and replied 
(December 2022) that the registered contractors/bidders need to be rigorously 
trained regarding uploading of the tender documents and such practices will be 
viewed seriously by blacklisting the bidders concerned in the eProcurement 
portal, in future. 
5.7.3 EMD instruments with consecutive numbers 
In offline mode of EMD submission, the EMD instrument should be scanned 
and uploaded to the eProcurement portal in the Fee/PreQual/Technical packet 
of the bid. From the MIS reports of the eProcurement portal and scrutiny of 
sampled tenders in selected units, it was observed that bidders had furnished 
EMD instruments with consecutive numbers issued by the same branch of a 
bank in 76 sampled tenders (Appendix 5.2). This is an indication of collusive 
bidding by the bidders.  Two such cases are illustrated below: 
 In 37 works7 related tenders published by DRDA, Salem the same 
pair of bidders participated and furnished EMD in the form of DDs 
with consecutive numbers issued by the same bank branch. In all 
these tenders, the two bids received for each tender was uploaded 
from the same IP address (21 bids from IP 45.116.113.120 and  
17 bids from IP 45.116.114.15) which are also the IP addresses of 
                                                                 
7  Implementation of Jal Jeevan Mission for providing functional household tap 
connection to rural households.  

Performance Audit on Implementation of eProcurement system in Tamil Nadu 
 
58 
the procuring entity.  Analysis of the prices quoted by the  
two bidders revealed that the variation in respective tenders ranged 
from 0.02 to 0.47 per cent. 
 Scrutiny of 19 sampled tenders relating to various schemes in 
DRDA, Coimbatore revealed that in four tenders, the  
two competing bidders had furnished EMD in the form of DDs with 
consecutive numbers issued on the same day by the same bank 
branch. In three of the four tenders the two bids received for each 
tender was uploaded from the same IP address. 
When the above inconsistencies were pointed out, DRDA, Salem accepted the 
observation and stated (December 2022) that such lapses will not occur in 
future and DRDA, Coimbatore stated (October 2022) that payment of 
DDs/FDs submitted by the bidders with consecutive numbers in same bank on 
the same day could not be verified due to workload and assured that in future, 
such lapses will not occur. 
5.7.4 L1 furnishing EMD of L2 for adjustment against SD 
Manual scrutiny of tender documents in one of the selected procuring entities 
viz., DRDA, Salem revealed that in 31 tenders the EMD instrument returned to 
the unsuccessful L2 bidders was resubmitted by the L1 bidders as adjustment 
against his/her SD for the same tender/other tender. This indicates the 
collusive practice amongst the bidders. 
DRDA, Salem while accepting (December 2022) that EMD instrument of  
L2 bidder is used by L1 bidder for adjustment against Security Deposit stated 
that this could be due to emergency purpose and added that they will ensure 
that such lapses do not occur in future. 
5.8 Conclusion 
Collusive bidding or bid rigging counteracts the purpose of tendering and is 
inherently anti-competitive.  Scrutiny of selected tenders, revealed patterns of 
bidding viz., bid rotation, bidders with family relationship, bid submission 
from procuring entity computer, different bidders placing bids for a tender 
from the same IP address, double EMD, coded intimation by bidders and 
consecutive EMD instrument numbers, indicative of bid rigging and 
cartelisation. These fraudulent practices by bidders and failure of tender 
evaluating/approving officials, derail Government’s efforts to increase bidder 
participation, reduce costs and enhance transparency in the procurement 
system.  Government accepted (February 2023) the observations and stated 
that the inputs will be useful for the new eProcurement portal to be 
implemented from 1 April 2023. 
  

Chapter V – Collusive bidding and Cartelisation in tendering 
 
59 
5.9 Recommendations  Government should redesign the system to flag bids submitted by bidders from the same registered address and/or the same  IP address.  Government should conduct enquiry and fix responsibility for collusive bidding and cartelisation instances pointed out by Audit.  Officials involved in the evaluation and finalisation of tenders should carefully examine the documents uploaded in the eProcurement portal using ‘Tender Discursive Report’ available in MIS, which provides all the information about the bid viz.,  IP address, EMD, GST etc., to guard against collusive practices by the bidders.  The procuring entities should not allow the bidders to access their office computer systems for submission of bids.         (C. NEDUNCHEZHIAN) Chennai  Principal Accountant General (Audit-I), The 10 May 2023                         Tamil Nadu    Countersigned 
 
    (GIRISH CHANDRA MURMU) New Delhi                 Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
The 11 May 2023 
 


APPENDICES 
 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

61 
Appendix 1.1  
(Reference: Paragraph 1.8 (i); Page 5) 
List of sampled procuring entities in sampled districts.  
Sl. No. Name of the procuring entity Number of 
tenders 
published 
1 Greater Chennai Corporation 
More than 500 
2 Directorate of Technical Education 
3 Directorate of Town Panchayats 
4 Highways Department 
5 Rural Development and Panchayat Raj Department 
6 Tamil Nadu Civil Supplies Corporation 
7 Tamil Nadu Electricity Board 
8 Information Technology and Digital Services Department 
Less than 500 
9 Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Department 
10 Public Works Department 
11 Public Works Department – World Bank Tenders 
12 Registrar of Co-operative Societies (Housing) 
13 Sericulture Department 
14 Tamil Nadu Medical Services Corporation 
 
  

Performance Audit on Implementation of eProcurement system in Tamil Nadu 
 
62 
Appendix 1.2  
(Reference: Paragraph 1.8 (ii); Page 5) 
Risk parameters considered in the sampling of tenders  
Risk 
Category 
Category 
weightage 
Risk parameter Risk 
score 
Bids 50 
Only Single Bid 15 
Only Two Bids 12 
Cancelled/retender tenders 10 
Latest Bid becoming L1 7 
Bidders getting maximum contracts 
AOC 4 
Same set of bidders in an 
organisation - Top 5 2 
IP Address 30 
Tenders with Bids from the IP of the 
Department 20 
Tenders with Bids from Same IP 10 
Financial 20 
For tenders more than ₹2 crore - less 
than or equal to 15 days (norm 30 
days) between date of publication and 
date of submission 
8 
For tenders less than ₹2 crore - less 
than or equal to 7 days (norm 15 
days) between date of publication and 
date of submission 
6 
Tender value More than ₹1 crore 4 
Tender value Less than ₹1 crore 2 
Total 100  100 
 
  

Appendices 
 
63 
Appendix 2.1 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.2; Page 8) 
Details of discontinuance in usage of eProcurement portal by procuring entities 
Sl. 
No. 
Name Date of first 
tender 
published 
Date of last 
tender 
published 
Number 
of 
months 
utilised 
Number 
of 
tenders 
published 
1 Industries Department 10/02/2020 10/02/2020 0 1 
2 Tamil Nadu Cooperative Union, 
Chennai 23/09/2016 23/09/2016 0 1 
3 Tamil Nadu Minerals Limited 20/04/2018 08/05/2018 1 2 
4 Metropolitan Transport Corporation 
(Chennai) Limited 13/11/2021 13/12/2021 1 4 
5 State Express Transport Corporation 
Tamil Nadu Limited 08/11/2021 09/12/2021 1 6 
6 Tamil Nadu Industrial Development 
Corporation Limited 18/10/2021 27/11/2021 1 2 
7 State Project Management Unit-Jal 
Jeevan Mission 27/08/2021 01/11/2021 2 3 
8 Hindu Religious Charitable 
Endowments, Chennai  13/08/2019 22/02/2020 6 10 
9 Civil Supplies &Consumer Protection 
Department, Chennai 28/05/2018 01/02/2019 8 2 
10 Tamil Nadu National Law University 13/08/2019 10/06/2020 10 5 
11 Public Works Department  21/02/2018 15/02/2019 12 88 
12 
Tamil Nadu Road Infrastructure 
Development Corporation (TNRIDC) - 
World Bank / MDB Tenders 
29/09/2020 30/12/2021 15 14 
13 Chennai Central Cooperative Bank 
Limited, Chennai 07/02/2018 17/10/2019 20 2 
14 Police Department 14/02/2020 30/12/2021 23 5 
15 Anna Institute of Management, 
Chennai 19/05/2017 27/10/2020 41 3 
16 Tamil Nadu Road Sector Project 05/07/2017 22/01/2021 43 34 
17 Tamil Nadu Agricultural University 17/07/2017 08/02/2021 43 173 
18 Registrar of Housing Cooperative 
Societies 11/10/2017 30/12/2021 51 56 
 
  

Performance Audit on Implementation of eProcurement system in Tamil Nadu 
 
64 
 
Appendix 2.2 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.4; Page 12) 
Status of updation of published tenders by GoTN in comparison with other State 
Governments using GePNIC 
 
Sl.No. Name of the State Number of 
tenders 
published during 
2020-22 
Number of 
tenders updated 
to AoC during 
2020-22 
Percentage of 
tenders updated to 
AoC 
1 Tripura 17,740 12,181 68.66 
2 Kerala 1,89,509 97,541 51.47 
3 West Bengal 1,99,341 92,184 46.24 
4 Madhya Pradesh 1,20,959 54,908 45.39 
5 Maharashtra 3,44,790 1,56,370 45.35 
6 Punjab 88,147 38,243 43.39 
7 Haryana 1,07,815 45,492 42.19 
8 Odisha 72,732 27,237 37.45 
9 Himachal Pradesh 33,299 8,398 25.22 
10 Uttar Pradesh 3,98,625 64,187 16.10 
11 Tamil Nadu 71,372 8,041 11.27 
12 Uttarkhand 21,490 891 4.15 
13 NCT of Delhi 43,014 1,697 3.95 
14 Rajasthan 1,48,029 5,456 3.69 
15 Jharkhand 18,151 382 2.10 
 
  

Appendices 
 
65 
Appendix 3.1 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.2.1 (i); Page 17) 
Details of procuring entity-wise tenders published with less than the prescribed time for bid 
submission  
Sl. 
No. 
Procuring entity Department wise details of tenders  
(value <= ₹2 crore) published with period of bid 
submission less than the prescribed time (15 
days) 
Department wise details of tenders  
(value > ₹2 crore) published with period of 
bid submission less than the prescribed time 
(30 days) 
Number 
tenders 
Value  
(₹ in 
crore) 
Maximum 
number of 
bids 
received 
for a 
tender 
Minimum 
number 
of bids 
received 
for a 
tender 
Number 
of 
tenders 
Value 
(₹ in 
crore) 
Maximum 
number of 
bids 
received 
for a 
tender 
Minimum 
number 
of bids 
received 
for a 
tender 
1 Anna University, Chennai 8 1.42 4 1 2 18.50 7 3 
2 CMWSS Board 280 200.69 15 1 51 3,238.77 8 1 
3 Greater Chennai Corporation  18,370 1,824.22 19 1 1,030 8,644.98 14 1 
4 Department of Information 
Technology 3 0.00 6 2 1 4.00 3 3 
5 Department of Sericulture 4 1.83 13 3 1 3.20 6 6 
6 
Department of Sugar 
(Division of TN Co-operative 
Sugar Federation Limited) 
10,595 69.61 22 1 75 1,618.47 19 1 
7 Directorate of Technical 
Education 4,615 7.14 25 1 0 0.00 0 0 
8 Directorate of Town 
Panchayats 6,600 1,193.64 6 1 144 502.11 3 1 
9 Greater Chennai Corporation – 
ADB Tenders 0 0.00 0 0 1 53.82 0 0 
10 ELCOT 5 0.00 5 2 0 0.00 0 0 
11 Highways 393 300.52 11 1 1,057 8,481.38 12 1 
12 Hindu Religious and Charitable 
Endowments Department 3 1.72 6 2 2 8.49 6 4 
13 Industries Department 0 0.00 0 0 1 10.76 35 35 
14 Municipal Administration and 
Water Supply Department 22,551 3,088.08 19 1 1,654 11,528.89 8 1 
15 Metropolitan Transport 
Corporation(Chennai) Limited 4 0.00 66 3 0 0.00 0 0 
16 Micro Small and Medium 
Enterprises 74 27.95 18 1 5 63.95 5 2 
17 NIC TNSU 1 0.11 2 2 1 10.00 3 3 
18 Police Department 0 0.00 0 0 1 4.80 4 4 
19 Public Works Department 
(PWD) 33 36.09 8 2 46 290.98 8 1 
20 PWD - WB / MDB Tenders 22 2.16 5 1 0 0.00 0 0 
21 Registrar of Housing 
Cooperative Societies 21 10.66 5 2 2 9.88 4 4 

Performance Audit on Implementation of eProcurement system in Tamil Nadu 
 
66 
Sl. 
No. 
Procuring Entity Department wise details of tenders  
(value <= ₹2 crore) published with period of bid 
submission less than the prescribed time (15 
days) 
Department wise details of tenders  
(value > ₹2 crore) published with period of 
bid submission less than the prescribed time 
(30 days) 
Number 
tenders 
Value  
(₹ in 
crore) 
Maximum 
Number 
of bids 
received 
for a 
tender 
Minimum 
Number 
of bids 
received 
for a 
tender 
Number 
of 
tenders 
Value 
(₹ in 
crore) 
Maximum 
Number 
of bids 
received 
for a 
tender 
Minimum 
Number 
of bids 
received 
for a 
tender 
22 O/o the Superintendent 
Engineer, Rural Development 23,871 9,901.53 14 1 627 3,363.39 12 1 
23 
State Express Transport 
Corporation Tamilnadu 
Limited 
6 1.44 41 6 0 0.00 0 0 
24 State Project Management 
Unit-Jal Jeevan Mission 3 0.47 4 3 0 0.00 0 0 
25 Tamil Nadu Agricultural 
University 43 26.07 9 1 1 3.25 2 2 
26 Tamil Nadu Magnesite Limited 0 0.00 0 0 1 35.00 12 12 
27 Tamil Nadu Minerals Limited 2 1.25 6 4 12 88.00 9 1 
28 Tamil Nadu Police Housing 
Corporation 476 348.06 15 1 154 1,303.28 15 1 
29 Tamil Nadu Veterinary and 
Animal Sciences University 237 43.51 12 1 7 70.28 9 2 
30 Tamil Nadu Co-operative Milk 
Producers Federation Limited 137 78.12 19 1 46 464.44 7 1 
31 Tamil Nadu Medical Services 
Corporation 55 8.64 11 1 8 1,470.50 17 1 
32 
Tamil Nadu Road 
Development Company 
Limited 
7 5.00 8 2 1 3.40 5 5 
33 Tamil Nadu Warehousing 
Corporation 0 0.00 0 0 16 87.11 5 1 
34 Tidel Park Ltd Chennai 1 1.55 6 6 3 34.70 6 3 
35 Tamil Nadu Cements 
Corporation 214 88.49 30 1 63 1,769.33 40 1 
36 Tamil Nadu Civil Supplies 
Corporation 536 66.36 8 1 44 419.66 6 1 
37 Tamil Nadu Electricity Board 
(TNEB)  26,731 2,145.51 33 1 396 13,617.41 93 1 
38 TNEB - WB / MDB Tenders 1 0.00 2 2 0 0.00 0 0 
39 Tamil Nadu Water Supply and 
Drainage Board 207 21.90 8 1 27 1,101.04 7 1 
 Total 1,16,109    5,480    
 
  

Appendices 
 
67 
 
Appendix 5.1 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.6.2; Page 55) 
Details of procuring entities where bids were submitted  
from same IP address  
Sl. No. Sampled office Number of tenders 
with bids from 
same IP Address 
1 District Rural Development Agency, Salem 76 
2 District Rural Development Agency, Coimbatore 92 
3 District Rural Development Agency, Thanjavur 2 
4 District Rural Development Agency, Krishnagiri 17 
5 District Rural Development Agency, Karur 24 
6 District Rural Development Agency, Perambalur 6 
7 Tamil Nadu Civil Services Corporation, Chennai 10 
8 Greater Chennai Corporation  5 
 Total 232 
 
  

Performance Audit on Implementation of eProcurement system in Tamil Nadu 
 
68 
Appendix 5.2 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.7.3; Page 57) 
Details of procuring entities where bidders had submitted bids with  
consecutive EMD instrument numbers 
Sl. No. Sampled office Number of tenders for 
which bids received with 
consecutive EMD 
instrument numbers 
1 Executive Engineer, Public Works Department, 
WRO , GWC Salem (World Bank tenders) 2 
2 District Rural Development Agency, Salem 59 
3 District Rural Development Agency, Coimbatore 4 
4 District Rural Development Agency, Krishnagiri 5 
5 District Rural Development Agency, Karur 3 
6 Greater Chennai Corporation 3 
 Total 76 
 
  

Appendices 
 
69 
Glossary of abbreviations 
Abbreviations Full Form 
AoC Award of Contract 
BoQ Bill of Quantities 
CPC Cryogenic Process Controls 
CVC Central Vigilance Commission 
DoF Department of Finance 
DoS Director of Sericulture 
DoTE Directorate of Technical Education 
DRDA District Rural Development Agency 
DSC Digital Signature Certificate 
EE  Executive Engineer 
EMD Earnest Money Deposit 
e-Sevai Maiyam Common Service Centre 
GeM Government eMarket place 
GePNIC Government eProcurement system of National Informatics 
Centre 
GIGW – 2018 Guidelines for Indian Government Websites 
GoI Government of India 
GoTN Government of Tamil Nadu 
GWC Ground Water Circle 
HSN Harmonised System of Nomenclature 
IP Internet Protocol 
IT Information Technology 
L1 successful bidder 
LoA Letter of Acceptance 
MeitY Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology 
MIS Management Information System 
MSMEs Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 
NIC National Informatics Centre 
NIT Notice Inviting Tender 
NSIC National  Small Industries Corporation 

Performance Audit on Implementation of eProcurement system in Tamil Nadu 
 
70 
Abbreviations Full Form 
PAN Permanent Account Number 
SBI State Bank of India 
SD Security Deposit 
SRS System Requirement Specifications 
SSIs Small Scale Industries 
STQC Standardisation, Testing and Quality Certification 
TAC Tender Acceptance Committee 
TIA  Tender Inviting Authority 
TNTIT Rules Tamil Nadu Transparency in Tender Rules, 2000 
TSC Tender Scrutiny Committee 
WRD Water Resources Department 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© COMPTROLLER AND 
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA 
www.cag.gov.in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
http://www.cag.gov.in/ag1/tamil-nadu/en 