 
Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for the year ended March 2022 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Union Government (Commercial)  
Report No.15 of 2023 
Compliance Audit of Activities of  
S                           elected CPSEs 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 
 
SUBJECT PAGE 
NO. 
 PREFACE ii 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY iii 
 
Chapter I Setting-up of a greenfield airport in 
Pakyong, Sikkim 
1 
Chapter II Revival of NEPA Limited through Revival 
and Mill Development Plan 
18 
Chapter III Operational Performance of Bokaro Power 
Supply Company (Private) Limited 
45 
 
 Annexures 72-80 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
i 
CONTENTS 

 
 
 
 
1. This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India has been 
prepared for submission to the Government under the provisions of Section 19-A of 
the Comptroller and Auditor General’s (Duties, Powers and Conditions of Service) 
Act, 1971, as amended in 1984. 
 
2. This Audit Report contains the audit findings arising out of compliance audit 
of the selected areas of operation relating to Airports Authority of India under the 
administrative control of Ministry of Civil Aviation, Government of India, NEPA 
Limited under the administrative control of Ministry of Heavy Industries, Government 
of India  and B okaro Power Supply Company (Private) Limited  under the 
administrative control of Ministry of Steel, Government of India.  
 
3. This Audit Report includes the audit findings on the following three subjects: 
 
• Setting-up of a greenfield airport in Pakyong, Sikkim 
• Revival of NEPA Limited through Revival and Mill Development 
Plan     
• Operational Performance of Bokaro Power Supply Company 
(Private) Limited    
 
4. The audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards issued 
by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ii
PREFACE 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Report No.15 of 2023 
iii 
 
 
I Introduction 
This Audit Report contains audit findings arising out of compliance audit of selected areas of 
operation relating to Airports Authority of India under the administrative control of Ministry 
of Civil Aviation, Government of India, NEPA Limited under the administrative control of 
Ministry of Heavy Industries, Government of India  and B okaro Power Supply Company 
(Private) Limited under the administrative control of Ministry of Steel, Government of India. 
These areas were selected in Audit for review on the basis of their relative importance. This 
Audit Report includes audit findings on the following three subjects: 
1. Setting-up of a greenfield airport in Pakyong, Sikkim 
2. Revival of NEPA Limited through Revival and Mill Development Plan     
3. Operational Performance of Bokaro Power Supply Company (Private) Limited    
II  Highlights 
Highlights of significant observations on the selected areas included in the Report are given 
below: 
Setting-up of a greenfield airport in Pakyong, Sikkim 
 
Airports Authority of India (Authority) considered (June 2001) Pakyong, a sub -divisional 
town of East Sikkim, as the site for setting up the first greenfield airport of Sikkim. 
Government of Sikkim entered into (March  2002) a Memorandum of Understanding with 
Airports Authority of India to construct the greenfield airport. The Project was approved by 
Government of India in October 2008 with scheduled completion in January 2012 and the 
approved cost was ₹309.46 crore. Th e project cost was to be borne by Government of India 
and Airports Authority of India in 9:1 ratio. The airport was ultimately declared ready for 
commercial operations by Airports Authority of India in May 2018. However, the commercial 
operations of flights were suspended from June 2019 to January 2021 and again from October 
2022 till February 2023 due to poor visibility.  Till March 2022, the cost of construction of 
the airport was ₹708.46 crore, out of which Government of India grant was ₹448.09 crore. In 
the meantime, Pakyong airport was included (September 2018) in the “ Ude Desh ka Aam 
Nagrik (UDAN)” Regional Connectivity Scheme and the Authority received ₹164.38 crore as 
Regional Connectivity Scheme grant. 
Construction and operation of greenfield airport at Pakyong was analysed in audit and major 
audit observations are as follows: 
• Adoption of an improper slope-cutting design resulted in major cracks in houses leading to 
local agitation. This led to avoidable expenditure on account of payment of compensation 
to locals, stalling of the construction work and cost overrun as well as extra works to 
mitigate the problems occurring due to ground subsidence amounting to ₹314.53 crore.   
 (Paragraph 1.2.1.1) 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

Report No.15 of 2023 
iv 
Recommendation 1: Airports Authority of India needs to exercise proper diligence while 
implementing as well as making any subsequent modification to critical drawings/designs.  
 
Recommendation 2: Adequate control measures including inter-alia financial controls may 
be exercised by Airports Authority of India while executing projects in order to avoid time 
and cost overrun. 
 
• The Airports Authority of India did not comply with the Directorate General of Civil 
Aviation's directives to conduct an aeronautical study prior to construction of the Pakyong 
airport project, leading to issues with obstacles in the transitional surface that impacted 
flight operations.  
(Paragraph 1.2.1.2) 
 
Recommendation 3: Airports Authority of India may ensure that all the relevant studies as 
recommended by various regulatory bodies are conducted prior to commencement of 
Projects. 
• Airports Authority of India had an agreement with M/s Punj Lloyd Ltd. for construction of 
the Pakyong airport but failed to make necessary deductions from earlier Running Account 
Bills. Recovery of ₹25.92 crore was due to be made from Punj Lloyd Ltd. However, the 
Company has become bankrupt and the chances of recovery appear to be remote.  
(Paragraph 1.2.1.3) 
 
Recommendation 4: Adequate internal controls should be put in place by Airports Authority 
of India while releasing the contractor’s payments and responsibility should be fixed in 
case of any lapses. 
 
• The meteorological data considered in Detailed Project Report pertained to Gangtok, which 
is approximately 33 kilometres away from Pakyong. Going for project based on 
meteorological data of Gangtok indicates that adequate emphasis was not given to 
meteorological data before planning of the Airport. 
(Paragraph 1.2.2.1) 
 
• Audit observed that the actual runway length of Pakyong airport was 560 metres less than 
the required length for Bombardier Q -400 aircraft which was being operated by M/s 
SpiceJet Ltd.  
(Paragraph 1.2.2.2) 
 
• Audit observed that the Runway End Safety Area available at Pakyong airport was only 70 
metres and 90 metres at the northern and southern ends respectively, while the Detailed 
Project Report had envisaged a length of 150 metres at both ends. 
(Paragraph 1.2.2.3) 
 

Report No.15 of 2023 
v 
Recommendation 5: Airports Authority of India may take suitable measures to address 
safety concern issues regarding deficiency in availability of adequate length of runway as 
well as Runway End Safety Area for flight operations with Bombardier Q-400 aircraft. 
• The Doppler Very High Frequency Omni Range/Distance Measuring Equipment and Very 
High Frequency radio installed at Pakyong airport in February 2018 were found to be not 
functioning optimally due to surrounding hilly terrain during calibration in March 2018. 
The International Civil Aviation Organisation flagged this as a hazard  in April 2019 and  
recommended the installation of repeaters to enhance the signals. However, as of April 
2021, the Management had not installed repeaters to enable proper functioning of 
navigational aids.  
(Paragraph 1.2.2.4) 
• Audit observed that Directorate General of Civil Aviation provided inconsistent licences 
as it granted a “2C” aerodrome licence at Pakyong to the Airports Authority of India, while 
it provided a licence for the operation of a “3C” aircraft to SpiceJet, whi ch is a higher 
category aircraft.  
(Paragraph 1.2.2.5) 
Recommendation 6: Airports Authority of India should ensure compliance to 
conditions/requirements of Directorate General of Civil Aviation/International Civil 
Aviation Organisation during the operations at Pakyong airport. 
 
• Airports Authority of India failed to explore the best possible method to resolve visibility 
issues at Pakyong airport despite the fact that the same was made available by the 
International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO) vide its Performance Based Navigation 
Manual in 2008. The airport experienced cancellation of scheduled flights due to visibility 
issues since the commencement of commercial operations. 
(Paragraph 1.2.2.6) 
 
Recommendation 7: Directorate General of Civil Aviation/Airports Authority of India must 
ensure compliance with the category of licence issued for aerodrome/aircraft to ensure 
safety of flight operations. For Pakyong airport, responsibility needs to be fixed for 
permitting operation of aircrafts which were not compatible with infrastructure as well as 
aerodrome licence. 
 
• Pakyong airport was included in UDAN Scheme in 2017, and M/s SpiceJet was selected 
as the exclusive operator for three years under the Scheme. However, Audit observed that 
SpiceJet only operated in four out of ten allotted UDAN routes . SpiceJet was required to 
submit certain returns to the Airports Authority of India. These returns were not provided 
to Audit by the Authority despite repeated requests. Hence, Audit could not get an 
assurance that the seats reserved under the Regional Connectivity Scheme were actually 
made available to the targeted passengers at the approved Regional Connectivity Scheme 
fare. 
(Paragraph 1.2.2.7) 

Report No.15 of 2023 
vi 
Revival of NEPA Limited through Revival and Mill Development Plan 
The Government of India (GoI) took over the controlling interest in National Newsprint & 
Paper Mills Limited (Private Company) by acquiring 51 per cent shares of the Company in 
1958. The name of the Company was changed to NEPA Limited in 1 989. NEPA’s core 
activity was manufacturing of Newsprint Paper.  
NEPA Limited was making profit till 1991 i.e., before implementation of New Economic 
Policy. Though there was no ban on import pre -liberalisation, there was restriction/quota on 
import of pap er with certain conditions. Post liberalisation, newsprint industry transformed 
from a completely protected environment where government exercised control on its 
production, distribution and pricing, to sudden exposure to international competition. 
Cost of Newsprint Paper manufactured by NEPA Limited could not compete with the 
international rates. Further, quality of paper produced was much lower than the market 
requirements due to ageing equipment and non -availability of proper de -inking facilities.  
Hence, NEPA Limited started incurring losses and its net worth was completely eroded by  
31 March 1997 and it was referred to Board of Industrial and Financial Reconstruction (BIFR) 
in 1998. 
BRPSE recommended (September 2011) Revival package for NEPA Limited. Government of 
India approved (September 2012) Revival and Mill Development Plan at a cost of ₹285 crore 
which was approved by BIFR in March 2014. The cost of the revival package was revised 
(October 2021) to ₹512.41 crore.  
Revival of NEPA Limited was  aimed at operation of NEPA on a sustainable profit basis, to 
bring it out of the purview of BIFR and turn its net worth positive after revival. It was 
envisaged to strategically disinvest NEPA after its revival.  
Revival and Mill Development Plan work was  to be completed by December 2019 i.e.,  
12 months from the date of release of first installment of funds in December 2018. The work 
was completed at revised cost of ₹512.41 crore in August 2022 and NEPA Limited 
commenced production in September 2022. 
Implementation of Revival and Mill Developmen t Plan was analysed in Audit and the 
following significant reasons for delay and increased cost were observed: 
• NEPA appointed Tata Consulting Engineers Limited as Project Management Consultant 
based on its own technical experience and that of its alliance partner A.F. Incepal, Spain. 
The alliance partner, however, discontinued to work with Tata Consulting Engineers after 
January 2016. This adversely affected the implementation of Revival and Mill Development 
Plan. 
(Paragraph 2.2.1.1) 
• Project Management Cons ultant did not prepare detailed and realistic estimates of works 
before issue of tender to evaluate the authenticity and appropriateness of rates quoted by the 
bidders in respect of work pertaining to refurbishment of 12.27 megawatts captive power 
plant, r efurbishment of paper machines and procurement/supply and installation of  
De-inking plant through open tendering process. This resulted in substantial differences 

Report No.15 of 2023 
vii 
between estimated value of ₹127.70 crore and awarded value of ₹213.46 crore, delay in 
evaluation of bids and frequent changes in scope of work leading to cascading delays and 
cost overrun. 
(Paragraph 2.2.1.2) 
• Clause for payment of escalation for services provided by Project Management Consultant 
after scheduled completion period of 24 months from the date of Letter of Intent was not 
mentioned in the contract signed between Project Management Consultant and NEPA  
Limited. The Company, without amending clause 3 of the work order, approved various 
contract amendments through which time extensions beyond the scheduled completion date 
were granted with increased cost. 
(Paragraph 2.2.1.3) 
• Ineffective monitoring of Revival and Mill Development Plan works on the part of Project 
Management Consultant and non -deployment of skilled work force by it resulted in delay 
in completion of the project due to which NEPA Limited was deprived from its envisaged 
benefits on time. 
(Paragraph 2.2.1.4) 
Recommendation 1: The Ministry may strengthen the mechanism for monitoring the 
activities of the Project Management Consultant and for due performance by him in future 
assignments. 
• Contract value of civil and structural work for construction of 300 Bone Dry Tonne Per Day 
De-Inking Plant, Raw Material Storage building and modification works for both Paper 
Machines was increased by 97.60 per cent of total awarded cost which resulted in violation 
of contractual terms which permitted variation of only (+/-) 15 per cent. 
(Paragraph 2.2.2.2) 
• NEPA envisaged to construct an ash pond to dump ash generated during two years by 
Captive Power Plant on an area of nine acres which was subsequently reduced to 4.5 acres 
to accommodate ash generated during one year only considering financial constraints. This 
may cause overflow of ash after one year which would not only damage environment but 
may involve additional cost for construction of another ash pond. 
(Paragraph 2.2.4) 
• NEPA Limited extended undue favor to contractors viz. giving them various time 
extensions, allowing price escalation of ₹23.60 lakh and submission of security deposit 
beyond stipulated date. 
(Paragraph 2.2.5) 
Recommendation 2: The Company may develop a mechanism for enforcing procurement 
guidelines and contractual terms and conditions for effective works management. 
• NEPA failed to fulfil the export obligation of ₹69.46 crore within the time prescribed under 
Export Promotion Capital Goods Scheme due to which it was required to pay custom duty 
of ₹11.57 crore (50 per cent of total duty saved) along with interest of ₹3.44 crore (at the 
applicable rate of 18 per cent per annum up to December 2021). 
(Paragraph 2.3.1) 

Report No.15 of 2023 
viii 
• Due to failure to make timely pay ments of electricity bills, NEPA had to pay delayed 
payment surcharge of ₹58.52 lakh. Further, NEPA did not seek relief available to a sick 
industrial company and consequently had to bear damages and interest amounting to  
₹5.75 crore levied by Employees P rovident Fund Organisation on account of default in 
deposit of Provident Fund contribution. 
(Paragraphs 2.3.2 and 2.3.3) 
Recommendation 3: Financial management may be strengthened so that statutory dues are 
paid on time to avoid punitive action. 
• The Department of Heavy Industry did not prescribe any formal monitoring and supervision 
mechanism to ensure timely completion of Revival and Mill Development Plan activities 
since its inception to September 2018. A Monitoring Committee was constituted (Octobe r 
2018) to monitor the progress on monthly basis which held 23 meetings up to 25 November 
2021 in which the focus was mainly on speeding up of tendering process and it did not make 
recommendations on sequencing of various activities to shorten the implementation process 
time. 
(Paragraph 2.5.1) 
• Management did not ensure retention of sufficient skilled manpower for effective and 
efficient implementation of Revival and Mill Development Plan while approving Voluntary 
Retirement Scheme for employees. 
(Paragraph 2.5.2) 
Recommendation 4: The Ministry may ensure that proper monitoring mechanism exists for 
all major projects. Voluntary Retirement Scheme may be implemented after assessing the 
manpower required for completion of the project(s). 
Operational Performance of Bokaro Power Supply Company (Private) Limited 
Bokaro Power Supply Company (Private) Limited (BPSCL) was formed in September 2001 
as a Joint venture of Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL) and Damodar Valley Corporation 
(DVC) with 50:50 share capital to operate as a captive power plant to supply steam and power 
to SAIL/Bokaro Steel Plant. The Company had rated capacity for steam and power generation 
of 2,180 tonnes per hour and 338 Megawatt respectively.  
Review of Operational performance of the Company in audit revealed the following: 
• Annual planned production fixed by Bokaro Power Supply Company (both in respect of 
steam and power) was lower than the rated capacity of the plant and actual production 
was lower than Bokaro Steel Plant ’s planned intake (except power in 2020 -21) from 
Bokaro Power Supply Company. Generation of power by Bokaro Power Su pply 
Company was between 68 per cent and 97 per cent of the planned requirement of power 
by Bokaro Steel Plant during 2016-17 to 2019-20. The generation of power was, however 
100 per cent of the planned requirement in 2020-21. Steam generation in comparison to 
requirement of Bokaro Steel Plant  was between 81 per cent  and 96 per cent  during  
2016-17 to 2020-21. 
(Paragraph 3.3.1) 

Report No.15 of 2023 
ix 
Recommendation 1: The Company may make efforts to ensure achievement of annual 
requirement of power for Bokaro Steel Plant and to manage the availability of its inputs to 
overcome shortages constraining production. 
• Four boilers (Boilers 2 to 5) were operating lower than the rated capacity (around 60 per 
cent). Hourly rate of steam production in Boiler 9 commissioned in 2014 was only 75 per 
cent of the rated capacity which was lower than that of Boilers 6, 7 and 8 commissioned 
during 1980-1989.This was mainly due to forced shutdown on account of tripping of 
rotors, leakages in tube, tripping on Rotor Earth Fault etc., which were operat ional 
reasons and should have been controlled by the Management.  
 (Paragraph 3.3.2.1) 
• Performance of turbo generators was between 26 per cent  and 51 per cent . The 
performance of Turbo Generator 9 which was commissioned in 2014, was also low and 
ranged between 13.14 Megawatt and 16.09 Megawatt. The reasons for low performance 
were avoidable like tube leakage, power failure etc. These were mainly due to lack of 
overhauling/capital repairs on time.  
(Paragraph 3.3.2.2) 
• As boilers at Bokaro Power Supply Company had outlived their useful life of  30 years, 
Bokaro Power Supply Company fixed norm for overhauling of boilers within two to three 
years. Audit noted that out of 8 boilers, overhauling was done within the scheduled time 
in respect of only three boilers ( Boilers 4, 6 and 7). Capital repair of Boiler 8 was done 
after gap of six years. Percentage of planned shutdown hours against total working hours 
was in the range of 21.59 per cent to 50.82 per cent whereas that of forced shut down 
hours was in the range of 1.94 per cent to 5.04 per cent. Forced outages were mainly due 
to tube leakages which could have been reduced with proper repair and maintenance.  
• Out of six turbo generators, two (Turbo Generators 6 and 7) were not due for capital 
repairs as they had not surpassed 50,000 hours from the last capital repairs and remaining 
four were operated for more than 21,000 to 63,000 hours beyond scheduled capital repair 
i.e. 50,000 hours. Original Equipment Manufacturer of Turbo Generator 2 had 
recommended for scheduled capital repair after 45,000 hours of running, whereas the last 
repair was done in March 2009. Management did not overhaul the equipment even after 
running of 93,736 hours. 
(Paragraph 3.3.2.3) 
Recommendation 2: The Company may ensure that the boilers and turbo generators are 
repaired and maintained as per the norms fixed by the Management to reduce the shutdown 
hours. 
• Percentage of un-burnt carbon in fly ash and bottom ash was more than the norms in the 
boilers. Since boilers were in continuous use over more than thirty years, various sections 
of these boilers such as structural elements, pressure parts, refractory lini ng, ducts etc., 
were badly damaged resulting in air ingress in large amount causing high un-burnt carbon 
levels, partial loading of coal, low efficiency etc. Thus, due to higher percentage of  
un-burnt carbon in fly ash and bottom ash against norms, 2.69 l akh tonnes of un -burnt 
carbon equivalent to ₹284.41 crore value of coal was not utilised. 

Report No.15 of 2023 
x 
• As per the Energy Audit report (2016), boiler thermal efficiency above or equal to  
84 per cent is very good, equal to or above 80 per cent is good and below 80 per cent 
needs corrective action. Boiler thermal efficiency in all the boilers (except 6,7, 8 and 9) 
was below 80 per cent (ranging between 50 per cent and 74 per cent) during 2016-17 to 
2020-21, which indicated that corrective action was required to be taken. 
(Paragraph 3.3.2.4) 
Recommendation 3: The Company may make efforts to reduce unburnt carbon in boilers 
to reduce the consumption of coal and take appropriate steps to address the issues raised by 
the Energy Audit.  
• Projects related to replacement/augmentation of boilers, replacement of steam pipelines, 
solar power units that were envisaged to improve its performance were not implemented.  
(Paragraph 3.3.3) 
Recommendation 4: Company may expedite its efforts to complete the solar power units so 
as to utilise its investment fruitfully and to supply green power. 
• Bokaro Power Supply Company  could not achieve Central Electricity Regulatory 
Commission norms in respect of operational parameters like Plant Load Factor, 
consumption o f steam, Station Heat Rate etc. Company was not able to operate at 
minimum Plant Load Factor based on the total requirement of Bokaro Steel Plant which 
resulted in shortfall in generation of 1,398 million units of power during 2016 -17 to  
2020-21 and loss of profit margin of ₹49.47 crore.  
• Excess consumption of steam beyond the norms resulted in loss of generation of power 
by 236.52 million units with profit margin of ₹8.36 crore during 2016-17 to 2020-21. 
(Paragraph 3.3.4) 
Recommendation No. 5: Th e Company may make efforts to improve its operational 
parameters like Plant Load Factor, Consumption rate of Steam and Station Heat Rate and 
bring it at par with other comparable units so that no further loss is incurred on account of 
higher cost. 
• Bokaro Power Supply Company procured lower quality of coal from Bharat Coking Coal 
Limited even though there was scope of procurement of superior quality of coal from 
Central Coalfields Limited which resulted in extra expenditure of ₹10.47 crore during 
2020-21. Bokaro Power Supply Company  could not avail rebate of ₹41.38 crore on 
excess ash content from Central Coalfields Limited and Bharat Coking Coal Limited in 
absence of third party sampling.  
• Bokaro Power Supply Company  received 11,140 tonnes of stone/boulders valuing  
₹4.50 crore during 2016 -17 to 2020 -21. The Company did not raise the issue with the 
coal companies.  
(Paragraph 3.3.5) 
Recommendation No. 6: The Company may make effort to reduce procurement of coal 
having poor calorific value and high ash content and regularly monitor the quality of coal 
through third party sampling. 

Report No.15 of 2023 
xi 
• Bokaro Power Supply Company  had 17 transformers out of which only 10 had fire 
protection system till March 2022. The remaining seven were installed and commissioned 
by 14 November 2022. 
(Paragraph 3.3.6) 
The Company did not implement the instructions of Ministry  of Environment, Forest and 
Climate Change regarding emissions of dust and gases from power plants. Audit noted that 
total 28.95 lakh cubic metres of ash was generated by the Company during 2016-17 to 2020-
21. However, 33.55 lakh cubic metre of ash was uti lised by the Company during the above 
period. The Company utilised mostly the current generated ash and disposal of legacy ash 
accumulated over the years was very slow. There was an accumulation of 29.77 lakh cubic 
metre of legacy ash as on 31 March 2023, which was yet to be disposed off. 
(Paragraph 3.3.7) 
 
Recommendation No. 7: Bokaro Power Supply Company may make all efforts to set up the 
Wet type Flue Gas Desulphurisation system as recommended by the consultant relating to 
emission of various gases  to avoid any penalty from Ministry of Environment, Forest & 
Climate Change. 
Recommendation No. 8: Bokaro Power Supply Company may make all efforts to 
utilise/dispose the legacy ash in order to comply with the notification of Ministry of 
Environment, Forest & Climate Change. The matter of utilisation of pond ash for road 
construction may also be actively followed up with NHAI.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Report No.15 of 2023 
1 
CHAPTER I: Ministry of Civil Aviation 
 
   
Airports Authority of India 
Setting-up of a greenfield airport in Pakyong, Sikkim 
 
1.1 Introduction 
Sikkim is a land locked mountainous State having international borders with Nepal, Bhutan and 
Tibet. It also has border with the State of West Bengal. It was envisaged that establishing of air 
link would play a major role in developing the economy of the State as well as increasing the 
employment and contribution to balanced regional growth of Sikkim. At present, the nearest 
railway station and airport are New Jalpaiguri and Bagdogra respectively (both in the 
neighboring state of West Bengal). Railway Station at New Jalpaiguri is 120 kilometres from 
Gangtok, capital of Sikkim whereas Bagdogra airport is 125 k ilometres from Gangtok. 
Pakyong, a sub-divisional town of East district of Sikkim is approximately 33 kilometres from 
Gangtok. 
Airports Authority of India considered (June 2001) the feasibi lity and suitability of five sites, 
namely, Saddam, Namchi, Chemchey, Ranka village and Pakyong, for development of an 
airport for 50 -seater class of aircraft operation under fair weather condition only. Finally, 
Pakyong, a sub -divisional town of East Sikk im, situated approximately 33 k ilometres from 
Gangtok was selected (2001) as the site for setting up the first greenfield airport of Sikkim. 
Topographically, Pakyong airport has a runway stretching from north to south which abruptly 
descends into a surrounding valley. The area on the western side of the airstrip is uphill while 
on the eastern side, it is downhill. This peculiarity required cutting of uphill slopes and using 
the same material to fill up the downhill area in order to develop the airstrip. 
 
  
Figure 1.1: Pakyong Airport, Sikkim Figure 1.2: Pakyong Airport Terminal 
building 
 


Report No.15 of 2023 
2 
 
Figure 1.3: Map of Sikkim 
(Source: Website of State Government of Sikkim) 
 


Report No.15 of 2023 
3 
1.1.1  Project cost of the Pakyong Airport 
Government of Sikkim entered into  (March 2002) a Memorandum of Understanding with 
Airports Authority of India to construct the greenfield airport. It took more than six years to get 
clearances from various authorities i.e., Ministry of Defence, Government of India, Ministry of 
Civil Aviation, Government of India and Ministry of Environment, Government of Sikkim. The 
Project was, however, finally approved by Government of India in October 2008 with scheduled 
completion by January 2012. Detailed Project Repo rt for the project as a whole was prepared 
by M/s Mott MacDonald Pvt. Ltd and was submitted in January 2009. Approved cost was 
₹309.46 crore which was later (June 2017) increased to ₹553.53 crore. The construction work 
commenced in January 2009. Airports Authority of India engaged three private parties viz., M/s 
Mott MacDonald Pvt. Ltd. for technical consultancy, M/s Punj Lloyd Ltd. for earth work in 
cutting and filling, geo -grid reinforced retaining wall, drainage system including box culvert, 
aerodrome pavement etc., and M/s PABSCON for construction of the terminal building, control 
tower cum fire station etc.  The project cost was to be borne by Government of India and 
Airports Authority of India in 9:1 ratio. Till March 2022, the cost of construction of the airport 
was ₹708.46 crore, out of which Government of India grant was ₹448.09 crore. In the meantime, 
Pakyong Airport was included (September 2018) in the “ Ude Desh ka Aam Nagrik  (UDAN)” 
Regional Connectivity Scheme and the Authority received ₹164.38 cr ore as Regional 
Connectivity Scheme grant. 
1.1.2 Audit objectives 
● To assess whether due diligence was exercised by Airports Authority of India while 
planning and executing the construction works for the Airport.  
● To assess the performance of Airport after its operationali stion and analy sing reasons for 
deficiencies, if any.  
● To assess whether the objectives of including the Pakyong airport under Regional 
Connectivity Scheme were fulfilled. 
1.1.3 Audit scope and criteria 
Audit covered decisions taken by Airports Authority of India relating to conceptuali sation, 
planning, approval, financing, execution, completion, initial operationalisation and suspension 
as well as resumption of operations of Pakyong airport. Further, the effectiveness of including 
Pakyong airport in Regional Connectivity Scheme – ‘Ude Desh Ka Aam Nagrik  (UDAN)’ has 
also been reviewed. 
 
Criteria for conducting the Compliance Audit included Civil Aviation Requirements and 
guidelines as issued by the Directorate General of Civil Aviation, guidelines issued by Ministry 
of Civil Aviation, Government of India, guidelines and study reports issued by the International 
Civil Aviation Organi sation, relevant files and correspondences, Detailed Project Reports, 
tender committee deliberations etc., in connection with the construction as well as 
operationalisation of the airport.  
 

Report No.15 of 2023 
4 
1.2 Audit findings 
1.2.1     Planning and execution of the airport  
1.2.1.1    Adoption of improper design of slope cutting 
In May 2003, a high -level meeting was held among Government of India, Government of 
Sikkim and Airports Authority of India wherein it was decided that a Geo Technical Consultant 
for undertaking special soil investigation, design of retaining wall etc. , may be appointed to 
facilitate the execution of project works of Pakyong airport. Accordingly, Airports Authority 
of India appointed (May 2003) Jadavpur University, Kolkata as a Geo Technical Consultant for 
undertaking special soil investigation, design of retaining wall etc. to facilitate the execution of 
project works of Pakyong airport. The report submitted (December 2004) by Jadavpur 
University analysed the slope protection 1 on uphill and downhill sides as well as revised cost 
thereon and gave the following recommendations: 
i. Requirement of acquisition of additional land of 77 acres.  
ii. On the uphill side, soil reinforcement was not to be considered and suitable slopes 
with artificial embankment had to be designed. On the other hand, the downhill side 
slopes would be made with filled up soil. 
iii. The slope of the uphill side was recommended at 28 degree angle.  
Later, Airports Authority of India appointed (April 2008) M/s Mott MacDonald Pvt. Ltd. as 
Engineering consultant for construction of the new airport to provide detailed engineering work 
along with review of the report prepared by Jadavpur University. M/s Mott MacDonald Pvt. 
Ltd. submitted (January 2009) their report for construction of new airport at Pakyong, Sikkim 
wherein it was suggested that the angle for hill cutting on the uphill side should be 36 degrees.  
Airports Authority of India chose to proceed with the recommendations of M/s Mott 
MacDonald Pvt. Ltd. in respect of cutting angle of uphill side. This resulted in multiple adverse 
impacts as discussed in detail in succeeding paragraphs. However, nothing was found on record 
to indicate that a comparative analysis was done on recommendations of Jad avpur University 
and those of M/s Mott MacDonald Pvt. Ltd. before deciding to go ahead with recommendations 
of latter. 
(A) Ground subsidence and local agitations due to adoption of inappropriate angle 
Based on the report of M/s Mott MacDonald Pvt. Ltd., Airports Authority of India awarded 
(January 2009) construction work of the airport to M/s Punj Lloyd Ltd. The earthwork involved 
was critical for smooth completion of the project as well as all other civil works2. But major as 
well as minor cracks started to develop (November 2013) in the houses in and around the uphill 
side area of the airport during the progress of the project. This led to agitation by the locals and 
project work was partially stalled in multiple phases during November 2013 to September 2015. 
In the meantime, Airports Authority of India had to disburse compensation in three tranches 
 
1  Slope stabilisation/protection refers to any implemented technique that aims to stabili se an unstable or 
inadequately stable slope. The purpose of slope stabili sation techniques is to increase the factor of safety 
of a slope to a level that is considered adequate.  
2  Like construction of terminal building, construction of roads, Air Traffic Control tower etc. 

Report No.15 of 2023 
5 
(September 2014, July 2015 and December 2019) to the tune of ₹84.64 crore to the affected 
house owners to resume the construction works. Therefore, acceptance of i mproper design 
ultimately affected the execution phase of project works leading to cost overrun as well as time 
overrun. 
The Management stated (July 2021) that the adoption of 28  degree slope cutting on the uphill 
side would have resulted in huge earthwork causing a logistical issue and huge financial burden 
for Airports Authority of India. Moreover, less slope on uphill would have increased the height 
of land fill from 80 metres to 100 metres and even higher which might have resulted in creating 
more instability issues on the downhill side. As such, they adopted an angle of 36 degree slope 
for cutting of the hill as suggested by the consultant M/s Mott MacDonald Pvt. Ltd. and the 
same was analysed by Indian Institute of Technology, Mumbai.  
The reply of the Management needs to be viewed in the light of the fact that they submitted 
(September 2016) to the Dispute Resolution Board 3 that advice of M/s Mott MacDonald in 
respect of hill cutti ng angle of 36 degree on the uphill side was wrong and this fact was also 
confirmed by Central Building Research Institute (December 2015). Contention of 
Management regarding analysis by Indian Institute of Technology, Mumbai could not be 
verified by Audit  as Indian Institute of Technology , Mumbai was not appointed by Airports 
Authority of India but their opinion was stated to be obtained by M/s Mott MacDonald directly. 
Further, report of Indian Institute of Technology, Mumbai was not provided to Audit.  
Recommendation 1: Airports Authority of India  needs to exercise proper diligence while 
implementing as well as making any subsequent modification to critical drawings/designs.  
(B)   Escalation and extra work  
M/s Punj Lloyd Ltd. was awarded (January 2009) the earth work in cutting and filling, geo-grid 
reinforced retaining wall, drainage system including box culvert, aerodrome pavement etc., at 
a cost of ₹264.29 crore with scheduled completion by January 2011. The work was actually 
completed in May 2018 because of multiple 4 extensions. Such extensions were allowed as 
ground subsidence 5 relating to uphill slopes occurred during construction. This necessitated 
extra earthwork of 11.36 lakh cubic met res for soil cutting and filling by M/s Punj Lloyd Ltd. 
beyond the original sc ope of awarded work. Further, extra work was also carried out in 
connection with construction of geo -grid retaining walls and drainage works. This led to an 
excess expenditure of ₹74.58 crore on account of such escalations and extra works directly 
attributable to adoption of improper design of M/s Mott MacDonald Pvt. Ltd.  
Similarly, M/s PABSCON was awarded (April 2013) the work for construction of terminal 
building for ₹43.44 crore with scheduled completion by March 2015. The same was actually 
completed in February 2018 at a cost of ₹46.21 crore.  This delay of 35 months was attributed 
primarily to agitation by local people for damages to their houses in the local periphery resulting 
 
3  Matter went into Dispute Resolution Board and Airports Authority of India  claimed a n amount of  
₹ 125.14 crore from M/s Mott MacDonald for recommending improper slope cutting angle. 
4  Six times (first extension till January 2012, second till July 2012, third till April 2013, fourth till March 
2014, fifth till March 2015 and sixth till August 2018). 
5  A gradual settling or sudden sinking of the earth's surface due to removal or displacement of subsurface 
earth materials. 

Report No.15 of 2023 
6 
from ground subsidence of uphill side due to adoption of improper design a s provided by  
M/s Mott MacDonald Pvt. Ltd. For such idle period, M/s PABSCON demanded cost escalation 
and Airports Authority of India had already released an additional amount of ₹2.77 crore6. Thus, 
an excess expenditure of ₹77.35 crore was paid to two contractors (M/s Punj L loyd and  
M/s PABSCON) on account of escalations and extra works due to adoption of improper design 
of M/s Mott MacDonald Pvt. Ltd. 
While accepting the fact of additional expenditure, the Management stated (July 2021) that 
payment of escalation was made to both contractors due to total stoppage of work by villagers 
whose houses got damaged.  
Reply of the Management is to be viewed in light of the fact that the stoppage of work was due 
to agitation by villagers against damages to their houses in the periphery of the airport which 
resulted from adoption of improper design for uphill slope cutting.  
(C)  Additional expenditure after project completion 
Post completion of project activities at Pakyong airport, Airports Authority of India was 
compelled to take action to mitigate the problems occurring due to ground subsidence from the 
uphill slope on the western side of the airport. Details of avoidable actions are stated below: 
i) One work order was issued (August 2018) to M/s Geo Spar & Sew Joint Venture for 
concrete cladding wall to maintain the uphill slope on the western side of the basic strip at 
Pakyong airport at a cost of ₹108.63 crore. The scheduled completion of the work was 
November 2019. The work for concrete cladding wall was completed to the extent of 62.50 
per cent at a cost of ₹97.09 crore till March 2022. 
ii)  Another work order was issued (December 2018) to M/s Spar Geo Infra Private Limited 
for strengthening the base of the retaining wall at a cost of ₹29.74  crore with scheduled 
completion by February 2020. The job for strengthening the base of the retaining wall was 
achieved to the extent of 92 per cent by incurring ₹45.27 crore till March 2022. 
iii) Further, Airports Authority of India had to acquire 7.42 acres of additional land by paying 
₹10.18 crore for dumping the excavated materials from the uphill slope as a result of above 
additional works.  
Audit observed that had the Management adopted appropriate design for slope cutting at the 
planning stage, Airports Authority of India could have saved avoidable expenditure of ₹314.53 
crore7 as of March 2022 which is likely to increase further. 
 
6  (₹46.21crore - ₹43.44 crore) = ₹2.77 crore. 
7  ₹84.64 crore + ₹77.35 crore + ₹152.54 crore as mentioned in paras 1.2.1.1 (A), (B) and (C) respectively.  

Report No.15 of 2023 
7 
  
Figure 1.4: Ongoing work of concrete 
cladding wall 
Figure 1.5: Ongoing work of strengthening 
the base of the retaining wall 
The Management stated (July 2021) that the works for strengthening the base of reinforced 
earth wall and the cladding wall for uphill slope were taken based on the expert study on 
enhancing the safety of the airport infrastructure and to ensure the runway strip of 75 metres on 
both sides of runway center line.  
Reply of the Management needs to be viewed in light of the fact that main reason behind these 
additional works was adoption of improper design for slope cutting by the Management.  
Recommendation 2: Adequate control measures including inter-alia financial controls may 
be exercised by Airports Authority of India while executing projects in order to avoid time 
and cost overrun. 
1.2.1.2     Delay in conducting aeronautical study 
During planning stage of the airport, Directorate General of Civil Aviation instructed Airports 
Authority of India (November 2004) to carry out an aeronautical study8 prior to according ‘No 
Objection Certificate’ for the Pakyong airport project. In reply to Authority’s repeated requests 
for exempting them from such study, Directorate General of Civil Aviation reiterated the 
necessity of such aeronautical study to determine the impact of obstacles 9 in the transitional 
surface10. Airports Authority of India, however, did not comply with such directives of 
Directorate General of Civil Aviation and continued its project construction activities.  
Directorate General of Civil Aviation issued provisional aerodrome licence to Airports 
Authority of India in May 2018 wherein it was categorically mentioned that an aeronautical 
study should be done within four months of grant of such licence. However, Airports Authority 
of India appointed International Civil Aviation Organisation for aeronautical study belatedly in 
June 2018 and recommendations thereof were received from International Civil Aviation 
 
8  This study was needed in order to  analyse the infringements in the transitional surfaces and availability 
of obstacle free air space for flight operation in the hilly terrain of the proposed Pakyong airport site.  
9  All fixed (temporary or permanent) and mobile objects that are located on an area intended for the surface 
movement of aircraft. 
10  A complex surface along the side of the runway strip and part of the side of the approach surface.  


Report No.15 of 2023 
8 
Organisation in April 2019.  Meanwhile, flight operations at Pakyong airport were started by 
SpiceJet in October 2018 without having the results of aeronautical study. 
The flights operated intermittently till May 2019 and thereafter remained suspended from June 
2019 to January 2021. Subsequently, flights again operated intermittently till October 2022 and 
thereafter remained suspended  till February 2023. Presence of obstacles in the transitional 
surface and poor visibility were reasons cited by SpiceJet for stopping flight operations from 
Pakyong airport . Presence of obstacles in transitional surface was also flagged by the 
International Civil Aviation Organi sation as a ‘Class -I hazard ’11 in their aeronautical study 
report.  
Thus, had Airports Authority of India conducted aeronautical study as recommended by 
Directorate General of Civil Aviation  in the initial stages of construction of Pakyong airport, 
corrective measures for flight operations could have been taken earlier and operations would 
have been smooth.   
The Management replied (July 2021) that preliminary study of obstacles and aeronautical 
feasibility study was carried out at the site selection stage of Pakyong airport.  
The reply of the Management needs to be viewed in light of the fact that had the obstacle 
limitation surf ace survey  been sufficient and acceptable to Directorate General of Civil 
Aviation, it would not have insisted for aeronautical study despite repeated requests by Airports 
Authority of India for exemption from the same and SpiceJet would not have cited the presence 
of obstacles in the transitional surface as one of the primary reasons for stoppage of flight 
operations.  
Recommendation 3: Airports Authority of India  may ensure that all the relevant studies as 
recommended by various regulatory bodies are conducted prior to commencement of 
Projects. 
1.2.1.3     Failure to recover an amount of ₹25.92 crore from the contractor 
Airports Authority of India entered (January 2009) into an agreement with M/s Punj Lloyd Ltd. 
for earth work in cutting and filling, geo -grid reinforced retaining wall, drainage system 
including box culvert, aerodrome pavement etc. for construction of the new greenfield airport 
at Pakyong at a cost of ₹264.29 crore.  
As per the agreement , certain recoveries such as non -deployment of machineries, inadequacy 
of test results, liquidity damages etc., were to be made from successive Running Account Bills 
of M/s Punj Lloyd Ltd. While evaluating the last and final Running Account Bill (April 2019), 
Airports Authority of India found that ₹25.92 crore was due to be recovered from M/s Punj 
Lloyd Ltd.  
Audit observed that Airports Authority of India failed to make necessary deductions from 
earlier Running Account Bills submitted by M/s Punj Lloyd Ltd. This indicated absence of 
financial control and supervision on the part of Airports Authority of India t o ensure that all 
relevant recoveries were ensured prior to release of payment to M/s Punj Lloyd Ltd. before 
 
11  Implies that risk cannot be justified under any circumstances. 

Report No.15 of 2023 
9 
finalising the final Running Account Bill. Further, M/s Punj Lloyd Ltd. has become bankrupt 
and has been referred to National Company Law Tribunal,  hence, the chances of recovery of 
₹25.92 crore (Annexure-I) appear to be remote. 
While accepting the fact, the Management stated (July 2021) that they are holding ₹17.97 crore 
of the contractor which was awarded by Arbitrator in favour of contractor.  
The fact remains that chances of recovery of remaining amount i.e., ₹7.95 crore are remote due 
to poor financial management. 
Recommendation 4: Adequate internal controls should be put in place by Airports Authority 
of India while releasing the contractor’s payments and responsibility should be fixed in case 
of any lapses. 
1.2.2  Operationalisation of the airport  
1.2.2.1     Inadequate emphasis on meteorological data   
Pakyong airport, located at 1500 metres above the mean sea level, was proposed to be an airport 
that would follow Visual Flight Rules 12 under fair weather conditions for both take-off and 
landing of the aircrafts. International Civil Aviation Organi sation’s Rules of the Air (2005), 
stipulate that an airport located at an altitude of 900 metres (up to 3050 metres) above mean sea 
level should be having a clear visibility of 5 kilometres. 
After the commencement of commercial operations (October 2018), SpiceJet was able to 
operate flight services for 125 days only out of 231 days during its initial eight months’ of 
operations (October 2018 to May 2019). Thereafter, flight services remained s uspended from 
June 2019 to January 2021 and again from October 2022 till February 2023. One of the main 
reasons for such low flight operations was poor visibility as stated by the flight operator.  
Audit observed that meteorological data, as considered by Airports Authority of India while 
preparing Detailed Project Report for the Pakyong Airport project, pertained to Gangtok, which 
is approximatel y 33 kilomet res away from Pakyong.  Further, analysis of the same data set 
revealed that number of available days  with visibility of more than 5 k ilometres was not 
adequate13 even in Gangtok. Going for project  based on meteorological data of Gangtok 
indicates that adequate emphasis was not given to the meteorological data before planning the 
airport. Had such emphasis been given, Airports Authority of India could have considered other 
viable options including adoption of technological advancements for mitigating this constraint 
of poor visibility thereby enabling regular flight operations at Pakyong airport.  
The Management stated (July 2021) that the meteorological data was analy sed adequately 
during the planning stage and the same was duly captured in the Detailed Project Report. 
 
 
12  Visual Flight Rules  simply means that the aircraft is intended to operate in visual meteorological 
conditions.  
13  As per Detailed Project Report , visibility of above 4 k ilometres was projected only for 244.1 days (66.87 
per cent of a year) in a year. 

Report No.15 of 2023 
10 
Reply of the Management is not tenable as the meteorological data captured in Detailed Project 
Report was for Gangtok which was 33 kilomet res away from the site of airport at Pakyong. 
Further, M/s SpiceJet Ltd. could operate only 54 per cent14 of scheduled flights during the first 
eight months following commencement of commercial flight operations. Primary reason cited 
by M/s SpiceJet Ltd. for this disruption of flight services was poor visibility of less than  
5 kilometres.   
1.2.2.2    Inadequate Length of Runway  
As per Aerodrome Design Manual of International Civil Aviation Organisation, the basic length 
is the runway length selected for aerodrome planning purposes which are required for take-off 
and landing under standard atmospheric conditions for zero elevation, zero wind and zero 
runway slope. After that the required runway leng th should be determined by the following 
correction factors for elevation, temperature and slope: 
i. The basic length selected for the runway should be increased at the rate of 7 per cent per 
300 metres of elevation, 
ii. The length of runway determined above should further be increased at the rate of one per 
cent for every one degree centigrade by which the aerodrome reference temperature exceeds 
the temperature in the standard atmosphere for aerodrome elevation;  
iii. Where the basic length determined by take-off requirements is 900 metres and over, runway 
length should be further increased at the rate of 10 per cent for each per cent of the runway 
slope. 
Audit observed that the Aeroplane  Reference Field Length for Bombardier Q -400 aircraft is 
1300 met res at mean sea level under Standard Atmosphere conditions. Considering the 
elevation, reference temperature and runway longitudinal slope of Pakyong airport, the 
effective Aeroplane Referenc e Field Length 15 for Q -400 turns out to be 2 ,260 met res 
(Annexure-II). The available runway length of Pakyong airport is 1 ,700 metres only. Thus, 
the actual runway length of Pakyong  airport was lesser than the required runway length by 
560 metres. 
The Management stated (July 2021) that the required runway length ha d to be determined 
with corrections on elevation, temperature and the runway slope and the runway at Pakyong 
airport was designed considering the operation of ATR 42 -500 and ATR 72 -500 type s of 
aircraft. 
Reply of the Management regarding available length of runway is irrelevant in the present 
context as M/s SpiceJet Ltd. is operating Bombardier Q-400 aircrafts at Pakyong airport which 
is high-end aircraft compared to ATR 42/72 type aircraft. 
 
14  125 days only out of 231 days during October 2018 to May 2019. 
15  As recommended in International Civil Aviation Organisation Manual. 

Report No.15 of 2023 
11 
 
Figure 1.6: Runway at Pakyong airport, Sikkim 
1.2.2.3     Runway End Safety Areas 
The Detailed Project Report of Pakyong airport envisaged that the length of the Runway End 
Safety Area16 at both ends of the runway should be 150 metres. However, Audit observed that 
the length of Runway End Safety Area available (May 2018) at the northern end (Runway 20 
end) of the runway at Pakyong airport was onl y 70 met res while that at the southern end 
(Runway 02 end) was only 90 metres. 
 
        
Figure 1.7: Runway End Safety Area              Figure 1.8:  Runway End Safety Area  
                     at RWY02                                                                 at RWY20                                                                                   
The Management accepted that the length of Runway End Safety Area avail able at Pakyong 
airport was inadequate in respect of Q -400 aircraft operations and the same fact has been 
notified17. 
Reply of the Management that matter regarding inadequate Runway End Safety Area has been 
notified through Notice to Airmen is not justified as  Notice to Airman is only one type of 
 
16  Directorate General of Civil Aviation has defined Runway End Safety Area as an area symmetrical about 
the extended runway center line and adjacent to the end of the strip primarily intended to reduce the risk 
of damage to an aeroplane undershooting or overrunning the runway.  
17  Through Notice to Airmen. 


Report No.15 of 2023 
12 
alert/information to the airline operator and it never entirely mitigates the risk posed by 
insufficient length of Runway End Safety Area. 
Recommendation 5:  Airports Authority of India may take suitable measures to address safety 
concern issues regarding defici ency in availability of adequate length of runway as well as 
Runway End Safety Area for flight operations with Bombardier Q-400 aircraft. 
1.2.2.4     Non-compliance of International Civil Aviation Organisation recommendation 
on navigational aids 
Doppler Very High Frequency Omni Range/ Distance Measuring Equipment  and Very High 
Frequency radio (a navigational aid for enroute and terminal navigation) were installed at 
Pakyong airport at a cost of ₹1.44 crore in February 2018. Further , an expenditure of ₹0.78 
crore was incurred for construction of Doppler Very High Frequency Omni Range building. 
During calibration (March 2018) of those equipment , it was identified that these devices were 
not functioning optimally due to surrounding hilly terrain. In Ap ril 2019, International Civil 
Aviation Organi sation flagged this as hazard in their Aeronautical Study Report and 
recommended the installations of repeaters18 to enhance the signals from such navigational aids.  
Audit observed that the Management had not installed repeaters (April 2021) to enable proper 
functioning of navigational aids. Further, the Management knew that Doppler Very High 
Frequency Omni Range/Distance Measuring Equipment and Very High Frequency radio would 
not be able to function optimally even prior to its commercial operation of the airport. Had the 
Management got the aeronautical study conducted by International Civil Aviation Organisation 
as directed by Directorate General of Civil Aviation prior to operationalisation of the airport, 
the corrective measures as recommended by International Civil Aviation Organi sation would 
have already been adopted.  
The Management stated (July 2021) that necessary Notice to Airmen  had been published for 
flight operator regarding the limitations of Doppler Very High Frequency Omni Range/ 
Distance Measuring Equipment. It was also stated that though International Civil Aviation 
Organisation recommended for installation of repeater but the same had not been installed due 
to high terrain. 
Reply of the Management needs to be viewed in light of the fact that issuing Notice to Airmen 
did not relieve Airports Authority of India from its primary responsibility for safety of the flight 
operations. Further, International Civil Aviation Organisation recommended to install repeater 
for aiding safe flight navigation with high terrain situation of Pakyong airport which is yet to 
be done. 
1.2.2.5     Inconsistency between the aerodrome licence and aircraft operator’s licence  
Airports Authority of India  submitted (April 2018) application for an aerodrome licen ce to 
Directorate General of Civil Aviation to operate Pakyong airport commercially. The application 
 
18  In telecommunications, a  repeater is an electronic device that receives a  signal and retransmits it. 
Repeaters are used to extend transmissions so that the signal can cover longer distances or be received on 
the other side of an obstruction.  
 

Report No.15 of 2023 
13 
inter alia sought permission to operate the airport under Aerodrome Reference Code “3C” and 
the aircraft proposed to be operated therefrom was ATR -72 only . As per  the manuals of 
International Civil Aviation Organisation as well as Directorate General of Civil Aviation , for 
an airport to have Reference Code “3C”, Aeroplane Reference Field length should be between 
1,200 metres to 1,800 metres. 
Moreover, reference code “3C” for a non-instrument runway like Pakyong requires a basic strip 
of at least 75 metres on either side of the centre line of the runway. Therefore, the Directorate 
General of Civil Aviation turned down (April 2018) the application as only 40 met res to 59 
metres of basic strip width from the runway centre line was available for a length of 900 metres 
due to presence of steep hill on the western side at Runway 02 end. Directorate General of Civil 
Aviation further advised Airports Authority of India  to submit a revised application seeking  
‘2C’ aerodrome licence keeping in view the available infrastructure at Pakyong airport.  
Consequently, Airports Authority of India submitted (April 2018) revised application with 
Aerodrome/airport reference code “2C” 19. Finally, Directorate General of Civil Aviation 
granted (May 2018) provisional aerodrome licence for Pakyong airport for a period of six 
months with effect from May 2018 to November 2018 under Aerodrome Reference code “2C” 
for the proposed aircraft ATR -42 500/600 under Day - Visual Flight Rules 20. Eventually, such 
licence was further renewed from November 2018 to May 2020 and further till May 2022. 
Scrutiny of records revealed that Ministry of Civil Aviation/Airports Authority of India entered 
(September 2018) into agreements with the Selected Airline Operator (M/s SpiceJet) for flight 
operations from Pakyong airport under the Regional Connectivity Scheme. The agreements 
stipulated that M/s SpiceJet should deploy Q -400 aircraft (a “3C” Category aircraft) for 
provision of flight services from Pakyong airport.  
Audit observed that Directorate General of Civil Aviation provided “2C” aerodrome licence to 
the Airports Authority of India on the basis of Civil Aviation Requirements (Aerodrome 
Standards and Licencing) as a runway strip of 40 metres to 59 metres was available on western 
side of runway centre line. But code “3C” aircraft operated by Spice Jet requires runway strip 
of 75 metres on each side of runway centre line. However, it provided permit for operation of 
“3C” aircraft to SpiceJet.  
Directorate General of Civil Aviation stated (May 2023) that detailed assessment of Pakyong 
airport was carried out by team consisting of members from DGCA, Airports Authority of India 
and SpiceJet in the year 2018.  Subsequently , based on the safety risk assessment and risk 
mitigation measures proposed, the Standard Operating Procedure for operations of Q-400 type 
of aircraft was approved without compromising on flight safety. It was further stated that “2C” 
aerodrome licence was granted to Airports Author ity of India keeping in view the available 
infrastructure and the same is valid till May 2024.  
 
19  An airport would be having Reference Code “2C”, if Aeroplane Reference Field length is between 800 
metres to 1,200 metres. 
20  Day-Visual Flight Rules  means flights shall be conducted so that the aircraft is flown in conditions of 
visibility and distance from clouds during daytime. 

Report No.15 of 2023 
14 
The reply needs to be viewed in light of the fact that Directorate General of Civil Aviation 
issued two inconsistent licences to Airports Authority of India and  SpiceJet and also that the 
aircraft being operated by SpiceJet was of a higher category than permitted for category of 
licence given for the airport. This may also be viewed in the light of the fact that the provisions 
of International Civil Aviation Organisation’s Manual were not followed when the licence for 
operation of a higher category aircraft was given to SpiceJet.  
Recommendation 6: Airports Authority of India should ensure compliance to 
conditions/requirements of Directorate Ge neral of Civil Aviation/International Civil 
Aviation Organisation during the operations at Pakyong airport. 
1.2.2.6     Flight landing navigational procedure 
The flight operations at the Pakyong airport commenced initially from  October 2018. Since 
inception of such commercial operation s, the airport experienced the issue regarding 
cancellation of the scheduled flights due to visibility issue and this had continued till the 
suspension of flight operations from June 2019. In this regard, the aeronautical study report as 
submitted (April 2019) by International Civil Aviation Organi sation recommended following 
solutions for continuity of aircraft operations at Pakyong: 
i. Required Navigation Performance Authorisation Required (RNP AR21) 0.1 approach at 
the southern side of the runway, and 
ii. RNP 1 departure from the northern side of the runway. 
Following a discussion (in November 2019) among the stakeholders viz., Airports Authority of 
India, SpiceJet, Directorate General of Civil Aviation and Indian Meteorological Department 
on the above recomme ndations, M/s SpiceJet informed (December 2019) that their current 
aircrafts were not capable of adopting such solution as the same was not developed by the 
Original Equipment Manufacturer of the aircraft. During another round of discussions in 
January 2020, SpiceJet informed that Original Equipment Manufacturer of their aircraft had not 
planned any upgradation to include the recommendation of International Civil Aviation 
Organisation as it would involve huge cost and lengthy certification process.  
Thereafter, Airports Authority of India submitted (August 2020) another navigational approach 
procedure (RNP Y i.e. , RNP APCH at RWY02) to Directorate General of Civil Aviation for 
approval and the same was approved in November 2020. The said approach procedure w as 
suitable for Category ‘A/B’ aircraft 22 due to obstacle environment and available airport 
infrastructure. This procedure would also improve access to the airport and safety by providing 
runway aligned stabilised approach and provide sufficient reaction time. The flight operations 
in Pakyong airport were resumed from January 2021, however, the suitable aircraft like ATR-
42/ATR-72 which would be compatible with the navigational approach procedure was not 
deployed by the Selected Airline Operator.  
 
21  Required Navigation Performance is a family of navigation specifications under Performance Based 
Navigation which permit the operation of aircraft along a precise flight path with a high level of accuracy 
and the ability to determine aircraft position with both accuracy and integrity. This offers safety benefits 
by means of its precision and accuracy and it reduces the cost of operational inefficiencies. 
22  Category-A aircraft s refer to those aircrafts whose wing span is less than 15 metres and Category -B 
aircrafts refer to those aircrafts whose wing span is more than 15 metres but less than 24 metres.  

Report No.15 of 2023 
15 
Audit observed that though the constraints of visibility at Pakyong airport were known to the 
Management since conceptualisation of the project, Airports Authority of India failed to explore 
the best possible method to res olve the problem. This was despite the fact that  the same was 
made available by International Civil Aviation Organi sation vide its Performance Based 
Navigation Manual in 2008 . Audit also observed that the aircraft operated by the Selected 
Airline Operator was not compatible with the navigational procedure as approved by 
Directorate General of Civil Aviation. 
The Management accepted (July 2021) the fact and stated that they had not explored the 
appropriate flight landing navigational procedure although the s ame was made available by 
International Civil Aviation Organi sation in 2008 vide its Performance Based Navigation  
Manual due to high equipage cost . This indicated t he failure of the Management towards 
adoption of appropriate flight landing navigational procedure. 
Recommendation 7: Directorate General of Civil Aviation/Airports Authority of India must 
ensure compli ance with the category of licenc e issued for Aerodrome/Aircraf t to ensure 
safety of flight operations . For Pakyong airport, responsibility needs to be fixed for 
permitting operation of aircrafts which were not compatible with infrastructure as well as 
aerodrome licence. 
1.2.2.7     Non-adherence to conditions of Regional Connectivity Scheme Agreement 
Government of India launched the Regional Connectivity Scheme Ude Desh Ka Aam Nagrik 
(UDAN) in December 2016 as a component of the National Civil Aviation Policy 2016. The 
primary objective of the Sc heme was to stimulate regional air connectivity by making it 
affordable. Pakyong airport was brought under the ambit of UDAN Scheme in August 2017. 
M/s SpiceJet Limited emerged as the lowest bidder23 interested in scheduled commercial flight 
operations in two24 Regional Connectivity Scheme networks.  
Subsequently, Selected Airline Operator Agreements were signed (September 2018) between 
Airports Authority of India and SpiceJet Limited with following conditions: 
• Operating seven flights per week in the assigned Regional Connectivity Scheme networks 
which comprised of 10 routes.  
• SpiceJet was selected exclusive operator for three years under Regional Connectivity 
Scheme. 
• 39 seats should be reserved as Regional Connectivity Scheme seats. 
• The maximum air fare would range between ₹2,570 to ₹3,470.  
• The viability gap funding to M/s SpiceJet could range from Nil to ₹4,000.25  
 
23  Based on the bids submitted by them in response to Notice Inviting Proposals for Selection of Airline  
Operators under the Regional Connectivity Scheme. 
24  Delhi-Pakyong-Kolkata-Bokaro-Kolkata-Pakyong-Delhi and Kolkata-Pakyong-Guwahati-Pakyong-
Kolkata.  
25  In Kolkata-Pakyong-Kolkata route – there was no viability gap funding. However, maximum air fare for 
a Regional Connectivity Scheme seat should not be more than ₹2,570. For Delhi-Pakyong Delhi segments 
there would be viability gap funding of ₹4,000 per seat of Regional Connectivity Scheme category but the 
maximum air fare should not be more than ₹3,470.  
 

Report No.15 of 2023 
16 
• SpiceJet was to submit on daily basis the details/return regarding flight -wise data of  
Regional Connectivity Scheme seats and Non- Regional Connectivity Scheme seats sold by 
them along with airfare collected from passengers to the Authority. 
Audit observed that SpiceJet operated only in four out of 10 allotted Regional Connectivity 
Scheme routes. In order to ascertain whether the benefits envisaged in Regional Connectivity 
Scheme were actually being passed on to the passengers, Audit called for the obligatory returns, 
as mentioned above, from the Management. The same were, however, not provided despite 
repeated requests. Hence, Audit could not get an assurance that the seats reserved under the 
Regional Connectivity Scheme were actually made ava ilable to the targeted passengers at the 
approved Regional Connectivity Scheme fare.  
The Management stated (July 2021) that M/s SpiceJet was operating routes at Pakyong airport 
without any viability gap funding and the Regional Connectivity Scheme grants received from 
the Ministry of Civil Aviation had been utilised towards development works undertaken at the 
airport.  
Reply of the Management may be viewed in the light of the fact that objective of Regional 
Connectivity Scheme was not the saving by non-utilisation of viability gap fund and grants but 
was to stimulate regional air connectivity by making it affordable.  Further, t he reply of 
Management was silent on non-submission of returns by SpiceJet. 
1.3 Conclusion 
Government of Sikkim entered into a Memorandum of Understanding with Airports Authority 
of India to construct a greenfield airport at Pakyong, Sikkim with objectives to boost 
development of the economy of the State as well as increasing the employment and contribution 
to balanced regional growth.   Permission for setting up of this airport was accorded by the 
Government of India in October 2008 with scheduled completion by January 2012. The 
Pakyong airport was included under Regional Connectivity Scheme of Government of India in 
the year 2017. The primary objective of the Scheme was to stimulate regional air connectivity 
by making it affordable. Till March 2022, cost of construction of airport stood at ₹708.46 crore.  
During planning stage of the airport itself, Airports Authority of India was directed by the 
Directorate General of Civil Aviation in the year 2004 to carry out aeronautical study which 
was meant to analyse the infringements in the transitional surfaces and availability of obstacle 
free spac e for flight operation in the hilly terrain. However, Airports Authority of India 
appointed International Civil Aviation Organis ation for aeronautical study belatedly in June 
2018 and recommendations thereof were received from Inte rnational Civil Aviation 
Organisation in April 2019.  Meanwhile, flight operations at Pakyong airport were started by 
SpiceJet in October 2018 without having the results of aeronautical study. This led to 
unresolved issues of obstacles in the transitional surface that impacted fli ght operations. 
Further, adequate emphasis was not given to meteorological data as the data considered while 
preparing Detailed Project Report pertained to Gangtok, whic h was approximately 33 
kilometres away from Pakyong. 

Report No.15 of 2023 
17 
The airport was declared ready for  commercial operations by Airports Authority of India in 
May 2018 as against scheduled completion in January 2012. The delay in setting up of Pakyong 
airport was mainly due to adoption of improper angle  for slope cutting of uphill side of the 
airport due to which cracks started developing in the houses in and around the uphill side area 
of the airport leading to agitation by locals.  Jadavpur University, Geo Technical Consultant 
appointed by Airports Authority of India initially, had recommended for a slope cutting angle 
at 28 degree. Subsequently, Airports Authority of India appointed another consultant M/s Mott 
MacDonald Pvt. Ltd. who suggested the angle to be at 36 degrees. Airports Authority of India 
proceeded with the recommendation of the latter. Subsequently, Central Building Re search 
Institute confirmed that adoption of angle at 36 degrees was wrong. Project work had to be 
stalled on many occasions due to ground subsidence and resultant agitation by the locals leading 
to delays as well as avoidable expenditure of ₹314.53 crore till March 2022 due to compensation 
paid to locals and extra works.   
Due to reasons explained above, commercial operation of flights that could be started in October 
2018 was suspended from June 2019 to January 2021 and again from October 2022 till February 
2023 due to poor visibility and obstacles in transitional surface. Thus, flights operated only for 
a total period of approximately 30 months till February 2023.  
It was also seen that Director General of Civil Aviation had granted a reference code “2C”, to 
the Pakyong airport which is given to Airports having infrastructure suitable for “2C” types of 
aircrafts (which are smaller aircrafts). But it provided permit for operation of “3C” aircraft to 
SpiceJet. Therefore, due to inconsistency between type of a irport licence and type of aircraft 
permitted to be operated from there, SpiceJet operated Bombardier Q -400 aircraft from 
Pakyong airport which was higher category than permitted for category of licence given for the 
airport. 
Thus, due to various deficiencies in planning and non-compliance with directions of regulatory 
body, the Project faced various hurdles and operations remained suspended from time to time.  
Therefore, objective of establishing Pakyong airport as well as bri nging it under Regional 
Connectivity Scheme of Government of India remained unfulfilled. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Report No.15 of 2023 
19 
CHAPTER II: Ministry of Heavy Industries 
 
 
NEPA Limited 
Revival of NEPA Limited through Revival and Mill Development Plan  
 
2.1 Introduction 
The National Newsprint & Paper Mills Limited was incorporated on 25  January 1947 as a 
private enterprise under the Indian Companies Act, 1913. The Government of India (GoI) took 
over the controlling interest by acquiring 51 per cent shares of the Company in the year 1958. 
The name of the Company was changed to NEPA Limited with effect from 21 February 1989.  
The Company is located at Nepanagar in Burhanpur  district of Madhya Pradesh and is under 
the administrative control of Ministry of Heavy Industries (earlier, Department of Heavy 
Industry). 
The Management of the Company is vested in Board of Directors consisting of the Chairman -
cum-Managing Directo r and five Directors including an Independent Director. As on  
31 January 2023, the staff strength of the Company was 548 personnel which comprised  
88 Executives, 92 Non-Executives, 53 temporary employees and 315 contractual workers. 
The Company’s core activity was manufacturing of Newsprint Paper which was carried out 
through two Paper Machines viz., Paper Machine-1 commissioned in the year 1956 with a rated 
capacity of 30,000 tonnes per annum (enhanced to 50,500 tonnes per annum in November 1989) 
and Paper Machine-2 commissioned in the year 1969 with a rated capacity of 37,500 tonnes per 
annum. 
A typical flow diagram of the manufacturing process followed by the Company is given below: 
Chart 2.1: Manufacturing Process of Newsprint Paper 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i) Captive Power Plant:  Used for generating steam and power for use in paper -making and 
for energising paper machines and related plants. 
CAPTIVE POWER PLANT 
(i) 
 
 
DE-INKING PLANT 
(ii) 
 
CHEMICAL HANDLING PLANT 
(iii) 
PAPER MACHINE 
(iv) 
REWINDER 
(v) 
REEL WRAPPING MACHINE 
(vi) 

Report No.15 of 2023 
20 
(ii) De-Inking Plant: Used for sorting, cutting, pulping and de-inking of waste paper. 
(iii) Chemical Handling Plant: Used for mixing chemicals in the pulp for stock preparation. 
(iv) Paper Machine: Consists of wire section, press section, dryer section and calendar section 
and used for processing stock (pulp) into final product viz., paper. 
(v) Rewinder: Used for cutting the paper manufac tured by Paper Machine in 6 met res width 
into smaller size and rewind the paper from steel roller to card board roller for making reels. 
(vi) Reel Wrapping Machine: Used for wrapping the reels by applying edge, inner and outer 
surface protector on reels to protect the reels from moisture. 
As on 31 March 2022, t he Net Worth 26, Capital Employed 27 and Working Capital 28 of the 
Company were ₹119.72 crore, ( -) ₹98.19 crore and ( -) ₹112.45 crore resp ectively. The 
Company incurred net loss of ₹59.90 crore during 2021-22. 
2.1.1 The Road to Revival and Mill Development Plan 
NEPA Limited was operating well till the year 1991. It produced and sold 75,040 metric tonnes 
of newsprint paper and earned a profit of ₹205.89 lakh by registering a sale of ₹112.35 crore 
during 1991-92. The net worth of the Company was ₹61.56 crore as on 31 March 1992. 
However, cheaper imports of good quality Newsprint  Paper post-liberalisation affected the 
Company adversely as the cost of Newsprint Paper manufactured/supplied by the Company 
could not compete with the international rates. Due to procurement of raw material from far off 
places, ageing equipment  and non-availability of proper de -inking facilities, quality of paper  
produced by the Company was much inferior than the market requirem ents. The Company, 
however, continued production by switching over to recycled fibre (old newspapers) based 
production but witho ut appropriate modification/change in process . Accumulated losses of 
NEPA continued to increase and its net worth had completely eroded by 31 March 1997.  
The Board for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction (BIFR) declared NEPA Limited as a sick 
company in August 1998 and after a series of events, the Revival and Mill Development Plan 
was approved in September 2012. The chain of eve nts leading to approval of the Revival and 
Mill Development Plan in the year 2012 is given below: 
  
 
26  Net Worth represents total of paid -up share capital including share application money and free reserves 
and surplus. 
27  Capital employed represents Fixed Assets excluding Capital Work in Progress plus Working Capital.  
28  Working Capital represents Current Assets minus Current Liabilities. 

Report No.15 of 2023 
21 
Chart 2.2: Series of events leading to approval of Revival & Mill Development Plan 
 
The originally sanctioned cost of the Revival and Mill Development Plan (i.e., approved capital 
expenditure) was ₹285 crore to be funded through equity contribution of ₹157 crore from GoI 
and the balance ₹128 crore as loan from consortium of banks. The sanctioned cost was revised 
(October 2018) to ₹434 crore t o be fully funded as equity contribution from GoI, as NEPA 
could not arrange the loan from consortium of banks. The sanctioned cost was further revised 
(October 2021) to ₹512.41 crore. The entire amount of ₹512.41 crore was utilised by the 
Company for Revival and Mill Development Plan  works, which were completed in August 
2022 and the Company commenced production from September 2022. 
2.1.2     Revival and Mill Development Plan 
Revival of NEPA  Limited was aimed at operation on a sustainable profit basis, to bring the 
Company out of the purview of the BIFR and turn its net worth positive after revival. It was 
envisaged to strategically disinvest the Company after its revival. As per approval (September 
2012) of the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) to the revival package of the 
Company, the decision of the CCEA would be communicated to BIFR immediately, and once 
the Company was out of the purview of BIFR, the implementation of Revival and Mill  
Development Plan would be completed within 24 months. The Revival and Mill Development 
Plan had following components: 
• Installation of two new De -Inking Plants (175 tonnes per day and 100 tonnes per day ) 
which was subsequently changed to one De -Inking Plant with increased capacity of 300 
tonnes per day; 
• Up-gradation of existing Paper Machines viz., Paper Machine-1 and 2; 
• NEPA was referred to Disinvestment Commission in April 1997 and to the Board for
Industrial and Financial Reconstruction (BIFR) in 1998
• Disinvestment efforts made in 2000 and 2003 could not succeed due to lack of offers
• Referred to Board for Reconstruction of Public Sector Enterprises (BRPSE) in 2005
• BRPSE recommended a revival package in September 2011
• Revival package including Revival and Mill Development Plan prepared on the basis of
Techno Economic Feasibility Report (TEFR) submitted to Department of Heavy
Industry in June 2012
•Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs approved the revival package at a cost of
₹ 285 crore in September 2012
• BIFR sanctioned the revival package as Sanctioned Scheme-14 in March 2014

Report No.15 of 2023 
22 
• Installation of new 8 Megawatt (MW) plant which was subsequently dropped in favour of 
cheaper option of renovation of existing 132 kilo volt ( KV) sub-station to source power 
through grid; and 
• Refurbishment/up-gradation of existing captive power unit (commissioned in 1989) of 
12.27 MW. 
The Departme nt of Heavy Industry, while intimating the sanction of  revised cost, directed 
(October 2018) that the balance works of Revival and Mill Development Plan  should be 
completed within 12 months from release of the first instalment of funds. First instalment of 
additional funds was released in December 2018 and hence,  Revival and Mill Development 
Plan works were to be completed by December 2019 . The Company, however, completed the 
Revival and Mill Development Plan works only in August 2022 and commenced production in 
September 2022. 
The implementation of Revival and Mill Development Plan  works got delayed due to the 
following reasons: 
• The entire equity contribution of ₹157 crore was released by the GoI between March 2014 
and February 2016 but loan from co nsortium of banks could not be arranged by the 
Company which resulted in cost escalation of ₹149 crore (original sanctioned cost of ₹285 
crore revised to ₹434 crore). 
• BIFR’s sanction to the Revival and Mill Development Plan was obtained in March 2014 
i.e., after 18 months of Government sanction, and Environment clearance was received in 
January 2016 i.e., after 22 months of BIFR sanction. 
• Increase in the scope of work due to defects/deteriorated condition of internal parts of the 
machines which was noticed only after the dismantling of machines and setting up of a new 
Effluent Treatment Plant, online pollution monitoring system etc., due to regulatory norms. 
• Delay in processing of tenders due to backing out of some of the established 
brands/multinational companies at the time of final bidding due to disagreements over 
contract clauses. 
2.1.3      Financial Status and Production Performance 
The financial status and production performance of the Company during the period 2012-13 to 
2016-17 (i.e., the year in which work on the Revival and Mill Development Plan  were started 
after discontinuance of production in July 2016) is given below: 
Table 2.1: Financial performance of NEPA for five years up to 2016-17 
(₹ in crore) 
Particulars 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 
Share Capital 107.86 107.86 107.86 502.98 584.71 
Reserve & surplus (-) 755.54 (-) 446.68 (-) 495.39 (-) 565.51 (-) 634.13 
Borrowings 636.87 64.97 71.78 80.55 96.48 
Net worth (-) 587.68 (-) 16.33 (-) 15.04 18.72 (-) 49.41 
Revenue from operations 141.40 131.19 102.12 70.99 30.31 
Net profit/ loss (-) 84.08 308.86 (-) 48.71 (-) 70.12 (-) 68.62 
Accumulated Losses 755.65 446.79 495.50 565.62 634.23 
Production (metric tonnes) 50,055 43,110 30,035 21,826 4,482 

Report No.15 of 2023 
23 
The Company never achieved its installed production capacity of 88,000 tonnes per annum. 
The production consistently decreased from the year 2012 -13 and reached an all -time low of 
4,482 metric tonnes during 2016-17. The production in the Company during 1997-98 to 2017-
18 is given in the following chart: 
Chart 2.3: Production in NEPA Ltd during the period 1997-98 to 2017-18 
 
2.1.4   Audit Objectives 
Audit was conducted to assess: 
• Whether the formulation of Revival and Mill Development Plan and its implementation 
addressed the shortcomings identified in the revival package, and 
• Whether activities of Revival and Mill Development Plan  were carried out in 
compliance with the prescribed rules, established procedure s and cannons of financial 
prudence. 
2.1.5   Scope of Audit  
Audit was conducted during 26 November 2021 to 4 February 2022 with a view to assess the 
achievement of objectives of the Revival and Mill Development Plan  by the Company during 
the years 2012-13 to 2021-22 (up to December 2021).  
2.1.6   Audit Criteria 
Audit criteria were derived from the following: 
• Detailed project analysis and Techno-economic feasibility study. 
• Minutes of the meetings of the Board of Directors. 
• Proceedings and awards/orders of the Board for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction. 
• Guidelines/directives/orders issued by the administrative department and/or Department 
of Public Enterprises, Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, and State 
Pollution Control Board/National Green Tribunal. 


Report No.15 of 2023 
24 
• Provisions of the Export Promotion Capital Goods Scheme. 
• Terms and conditions of the contracts/agreements/work orders/supply orders. 
• Guidelines of Central Vigilance Commission on procurement of goods and services. 
2.1.7   Audit Methodology 
The audit methodology adopted was as follows: 
• Entry Conference with the Management was held on 26 November 2021 to discuss the 
objectives and scope of audit. 
• Examination of records relating to im plementation of Revival and Mill Development 
Plan works as available in the Corporate office of the Company. 
• Exit Conference with the Management was held on 4 February 2022 to discuss audit 
findings.  
2.1.8   Sampling for Audit 
As per information  and work orders  furnished to Audit, the Company executed 109 
contracts/work orders valuing ₹404.03 crore during 2012 -13 to 2021 -22 for carrying out the 
Revival and Mill Development Plan works. Of these, 29 contracts/work orders valuing ₹329.63 
crore (81.59 per cent) were selected for review on the basis of stratified random sampling using 
Interactive Data Extraction and Analysis (IDEA) Software. Details of the selected projects are 
given in Annexure-III. 
2.2   Audit Findings 
 
2.2.1      Appointment of Project Management Consultant 
NEPA Limited floated a global tender (March 2013) for Project Management Consultan t 
services for Revival and Mill Development Plan works in which three bids were received. Only 
one bidder i.e., Tata Consulting Engineers Limited was qualified on the basis of pre -
qualification criteria. The Company appointed (October 2013) Tata Consulting E ngineers 
Limited as the Project Management Consultant at a  cost of ₹5.75 crore (excluding taxes) 
initially for a term of 24 months from the date of Letter of Intent i.e., 12 June 2013. The contract 
term was extended f ive times with the last extension up to 31 August 2021 (approved on 31 
March 2021). No details of further extension of the Project Management consultancy contract 
beyond 31 August 2021 were available on record. The cost of consultancy was also increased 
to ₹7.99 crore exclusive of taxes against which payment of ₹5.01 crore had been made to the 
Project Management Consultant till March 2021. 
In this regard, Audit observed the following: 
2.2.1.1    Non-ensuring the availability of technical partner with Project Management 
Consultant till completion of project 
As per clause 2.2 of the tender document  for appointment of Project Management Consultant , 
the bidder could engage alliance partner for any one or two or f or all the process packages/or 

Report No.15 of 2023 
25 
the civil construction package according to its requirement. Clause 2.4 of the tender document 
stipulated that the bidder and his alliance partner(s) should jointly fulfil all the pre-qualification 
criteria. Further, clause 2.5 stipulated that the bidder and alliance partner(s), if any, would ensure 
to continue to work till completion of the project. 
On the basis of technical evaluation, Tata Consulting Engineers Limited was declared as 
qualified29  based on its own experience together with the experience of its alliance partner viz., 
A.F. Incepal , Spain . Although, Tata Consulting Engineers Limited was not a renowned 
consultant engaged in Project Management consultancy services in the field of Pulp and Paper 
Industry, its alliance partner was engaged in such services in the field. Audit, however, observed 
that A.F. Incepal did not continue the work towards  Revival and Mill Development Plan  
activities beyond January 2016 and Tata Consulting Engineers did not engage any other 
technically competent firm in place of A.F. Incepal. This resulted in non-compliance to clause 
2.5 of the tender document as Tata Consulting Engineers failed to ensure the availability of its 
alliance partner till the conclusion of the project. 
The Management stated (March 2022) that T ata Consulting Engineer’s alliance partner was 
involved in the conceptualis ation of the De -Inking Plant and in Engineering Services as their 
designing team expert which had already been mostly finalised by the end of 2015. 
The reply is not tenable as discontinuation of work by the alliance partner before completion of 
the project was in violation of terms and conditions of the tender document and it consequently 
led to delay in finalisation and award of tenders/work contract s for Revival and Mill 
Development Plan activities. 
Thus, non-ensuring the availability of its alliance partner by the Project Management 
Consultant adversely affected the implementation of  Revival and Mill Development Plan  
activities as discussed in succeeding paragraphs. 
2.2.1.2     Deficiencies in preparation of estimates and delay in technical evaluation  
As per terms of the work order issued by NEPA Limited (October 2013) to Tata Consulting 
Engineers Limited, the scope of services shall be as per the t ender document. Clause 4 of the 
tender document, inter alia , provided that all activities for the successful completion and 
commissioning of the project are deemed  to be i ncorporated in the scope of services of the 
Project Management Consultant although not specifically mentioned in the tender documents.  
Audit noticed that the Project Management Consultant did not prepare detailed estimates of 
works and bill of quantities properly and therefore, additional work/quantities were necessitated 
during actual execution of work. Substantial change s in scope of work necessitated during 
execution contributed to delays and additional expenditure of ₹20. 79 crore as detailed in 
Annexure-IV. Also, fresh tender had to be called for in one case. 
Audit also noticed that detailed and realistic estimates were not prepared before issue of tender 
in order to evaluate the authenticity and appropriateness of rate quoted by the bidders in respect 
of work pertaining to refurbishment of 12.27 MW Captive Power Plant, refurbishment of Paper 
Machines and procurement/supply and installation of De -Inking Plant through open tendering 
 
29  The other bidders were Development Consultant Pvt. Ltd., Kolkata and Signet Products Pvt. Ltd, Pune . 

Report No.15 of 2023 
26 
process. The Project Management Consultant prepared one -page estimate instead of detailed 
and realistic estimates on the basis of analysis of prev alent market rates of respective items of 
works and supply. Consequently, the reasonability of rates for awarding of contract could not 
be verified in audit. Due to non -preparation of realistic estimates, substantial differences 
between estimated value (₹1 27.70 crore) and awarded value (₹213.46 crore) were noticed in 
the contracts as detailed in Annexure-V. 
Further, in the absence of any timeframe for evaluation of techno-commercial bids, the Project 
Management Consultant took between 79 days and 689 days in techno-commercial evaluation 
of bids for six major tenders which had a cascading effect on evaluation of price bids and issue 
of Letters of Intent as detailed in Annexure-VI. This was mainly attributed to frequent changes 
in scope and specificatio ns of work due to which bid validity of some of the bids had to be  
extended. 
The Management, while confirming the audit observation regarding estimate s, stated (March 
2022) that T ata Consulting Engineers did not do conceptual engineering to make the budget 
estimate more realistic at the beginning and was fully dependent on vendor input for every 
procurement. Tata Consulting Engineers provided bill s of quantities and estimates only after 
completion of deta iled engineering from all vendors, which took lot of time to initiate 
procurement and it entailed cost increase too. Change of scope was due to detection of 
additional work during renovation/dismantling of plant and machinery. 
The Ministry stated (December  2022) that the initial scope of work was based on the Techno 
Economic Feasibility Study conducted in the year 2010 and the bill s of quantities and  draft 
tender were made accordingly. However, change in the scope of work was necessitated as the 
plant was o perating till the year 2016 which led to further wear and tear in the old plant. 
Technical evaluation is a time -consuming process particularly for an old plant and with 
decreased experienced manpower, the challenges compounded. Also, many observations of 
various statutory bodies at various phases added to the time taken.  
The reply is to be viewed in the light of the fact that non -preparation of detailed and realistic 
estimates by the Project Management Consultant before issue of tender notice was the primary 
reason for subsequent changes in scope of work.  Further, the reply regarding time taken in 
evaluation of technical bids is not acceptable as no timeframe had been prescribed for 
completion of technical evaluation.  
Thus, non -preparation of detailed est imates for various works and undue time taken  in 
evaluation of bids by the Project Management Consultant resulted in frequent changes in scope 
of work leading to cascading delays and cost overrun.  
2.2.1.3    Ambiguous contract conditions leading to cost escalation   
As per clause 3 of work order issued (October 2013) to the Project Management Consultant , 
NEPA Limited may consider granting limited extension of time for genuine reasons. However, 
no additional payment will be made for services provided after scheduled completion period of 
24 months from the date of Letter of Intent (i.e., 12 June 2013). Further, clause 2.3 (d) of the 
agreement (March 2014) between the Com pany and the Project Management Consultant 
provided that the Consultant would ensure that they continued to work till completion of the 

Report No.15 of 2023 
27 
project. However, the methodology of arriving at the price implication of Project Management 
consultancy services rendered beyond the stipulated period of 24 months was not specifically 
mentioned anywhere in the agreement.  
The Company, without amending clause 3 of the work order, approved various contract 
amendments through which time extensions beyond the scheduled comple tion date were 
granted with increased cost. The Project Management Consultant demanded cost escalation of 
₹3.92 crore up to December 2019 which was rejected by the Company as the work of  Revival 
and Mill Development Plan  was delayed due to poor performance  of the Consultant. Finally, 
the Company approved (August 2020) escalation of ₹1.13 crore. It was also decided that for 
any extension beyond December 2019, escalation at the rate of eight per cent  per year on 
unbilled amount was to be paid to the Project Management Consultant. Accordingly, NEPA 
paid ₹0.58 crore up to January 2021.  
The Management stated (March 2022) that the contract with Tata Consulting Engineers was 
extended as per the prevailing progress of the Revival and Mill Development Plan till the year 
2017. As loan of ₹128 crore from financial institutions as per the originally sanctioned scheme 
could not be received due to various reasons, financial crunch occurred which resulted in the 
delay in implementation of the project and while remobilising Tata Consulting Engineers to the 
site after sanction of the revised scheme in 2018, escalation was accepted to resolve the dispute. 
The Ministry stated (December 2022) that payment for escalation was made with the approval 
of the Board of Directors. It further added that NEPA was constrained to accede to escalation 
due to non-availability of funds.  
The replies of the Management and the Ministry did not address the audit observation on 
absence of a clause in the agreement, defining the methodology for arriving at the price 
implication of Project Management consultancy services rendered beyond the stipulated 
completion period of 24 months. 
2.2.1.4     Inadequate monitoring of Revival and Mill Development Plan works by Project 
Management Consultant 
As per Annexure-III to the consultancy agreement, the Project Management Consultant  was 
required to establish the project time control procedures and detailed project planning, 
scheduling and monitoring systems and evaluate the progress of work there against. The Project 
Management Consultant was also required to monitor the day -to-day progress of the Revival 
and Mill Development Plan project and remove any bottleneck, if required.  
Audit observed that:  
• The Project Management Consultant neither prepared activity -wise schedule of 
implementation of various activities of Revival and Mill De velopment Plan  nor 
prepared Programme Evaluation and Review Technique chart. 
• The Project Management Consultant did not adopt Critical Path Method to prioritise 
different Revival and Mill Development Plan  activities for timely and uninterrupted 
completion o f project and did not prepare and present work process chart despite 

Report No.15 of 2023 
28 
direction by the Chairman of the Monitoring Committee in its meeting dated 26 July 
2019. 
• The Project Management Consultant changed the project manager of consultancy work 
frequently and it did not provide sufficient skilled work force at the site on continuous 
basis as envisaged in the consultancy agreement. The Consultant also did not inform the 
aforesaid changes to the Company.  
• The Project Management Consultant did not submit weekly pro gress report s to the 
Technical Committee despite repeated instructions in the meetings of the Monitoring 
Committee. 
The Management, without submitting specific reply, stated (March 2022) that Tata Consulting 
Engineers submitted monthly progress review reports and weekly progress reports with project 
schedule monitoring. 
The Management’s reply is to be viewed in the light of the fact that the weekly/monthly 
progress reports along with project schedule monitoring were neither available in records nor 
provided to Audit. 
The Ministry stated (December 2022) that the site office of the Project Management Consultant 
included experienced personnel in all specialised engineering fields. While major or contentious 
issues were referred to the Head Office at Mumbai, day to day issues were resolved at the site. 
While the Project Management Consultant could have done a better job, non -availability of 
funds for nearly two years and two phases of Covid-19 accentuated delays in the project. 
The reply is to be viewed in the light of the fact that almost entire activities were managed by 
the Project Management Consultant from its Mumbai office and the issues arising at the work 
site were resolved through email and Skype meetings which is evident from the specific records 
of the Company. Quality in consultancy contracts is largely dependent upon deployment and 
performance of key personnel during execution of the contract. Besides, the reply was silent 
regarding non -preparation of Programme Evaluation and Review Technique Chart, non -
adoption of Critical Path Method and non-submission of weekly/monthly progress reports. 
Recommendation 1:The Ministry may strengthen the mechanism for monitoring the 
activities of the Project Management Consultant and for due performance by him in future 
assignments. 
2.2.2     Award and execution of works 
 
2.2.2.1     Acceptance of invalid bid and undue favour to contractor 
NEPA Limited awarded (July 2015) different works 30 for renovation of both Paper Machines 
on lump sum basis to PAPCEL (a body incorporated in Czech Republic ) at a cost of ₹103.82 
 
30  Refurbishment/modification of Stock preparation, Approach Flow, Broke Handling System, Fibre 
Recovery, Paper Machines with Auxiliaries excluding civil works. 

Report No.15 of 2023 
29 
crore (€ 60,21,545 for imported supplies 31 plus ₹61.10 crore for indigenous supplies and 
services) after inviting global tender. 
Audit observed that: 
• The bid on the basis of which the contract was awarded to PAPCEL was in fact 
submitted by another company i.e. , Papcel Technology (I) Pvt.  Limited. Mr. V. 
Gokulakrishnan, a director in Papcel Technology (I) Pvt. Limited  (who was also a 
Director in PAPCEL)  had signed the price bid by putting common seal 32 of Papcel 
Technology (I) Pvt. Limited.  
• Although the Managing Director of PAPCEL authori sed (23 September 2014) Mr. V. 
Gokulakrishnan to sign and submit the tender referring to the power of attorney dated 
29 September 2014 granted in his favour by PAPCEL but the said power of attorney 
was neither available in records nor formed part of the ag reement executed with 
PAPCEL. Moreover, the bid was not submitted by Mr. V. Gokulakrishnan  as a 
representative of PAPCEL but as a director of Papcel Technology (I) Pvt. Limited. 
• The bid was liable to be rejected but the P roject Management Consultant responsible 
for evaluation of bids, did not consider this aspect and recommended (March 2015) to 
open the price bid submitted by Papcel Technology (I) Pvt. Limited which was the only 
bid found technically qualified among two bidders. 
• For any valid contract, there should be a proposal, acceptance and consideration. In this 
case, the proposal was given by Papcel Technology (I) Pvt. Limited but the agreement 
was executed with PAPCEL and as such the contract cannot be said to be enforceabl e.   
Offer (bid) against the Notice Inviting Tender issued by NEPA Limited was submitted 
by Papcel Technology (I) Pvt. Limited  (an entity distinct from PAPCEL) but the 
contract/agreement was executed with PAPCEL which never made an offer to NEPA 
Limited. As such, contract agreement executed between PAPCEL and NEPA was not 
enforceable in law. 
• Due to disputes regarding payment related issues, PAPCEL demobilised its resources 
from the site during the period May 2017 to April 2019. For resolving the matter, NEPA 
Limited was bound  to accept all deviations proposed by PAPCEL during currency of 
the contract for renovation works of both the Paper Machines, valuing ₹ 5.54 crore33. 
 
31  Converted to ₹42.72 crore @ 70.9378 prevalent on 30 June 2015. 
32  Common seal means the official seal of a Company which can be affixed only with the approval of the 
Board of Directors of the Company. It is the signature of the Company having separate legal entity in 
terms of jurisprudence. 
33  EURO 2,22,564 equivalent to ₹186.06 lakh (converted at the prevailing exchange rate: 1 EURO: ₹83.60 as 
on 28 January 2022) and ₹368.38 lakh. 

Report No.15 of 2023 
30 
• There was undue favour to PAPCEL as they completed engineering work on 01 April 
2017 with a delay of 54 weeks but liquidated damages of €9,519.50 plus ₹12.60 lakh 
were not levied34 resulting in non-compliance of Clause 9(1) of the agreement35. 
The Management stated (March 2022) that the Managing Director of PAPCEL had authorised 
(23 September 2014) Mr. V. Gokulakrishnan, along with two other executives of the company 
to sign and submit the proposal/tender in respect of the captioned job and also to sign and submit 
all the papers/documents as may be necessary in this regard in terms of power of attorney dated 
29 September 2014 granted in his favour by PAPCEL. It further stated that liquidated damages 
on account of delay in completion of engineerin g services was not levied on the advice of the 
Project Management Consultant who opined that the liquidated damages clause was on overall 
contract completion of vendor and an amount of ₹3.42 crore was withheld by way of deduction 
from various bills of the contractor as on 31 January 2022 for the purpose. 
The Ministry stated (December 2022) that copies of requisite authorisation letter by PAPCEL 
(verified through a letter by the Chairman cum Managing Director, NEPA Limited from Czech 
Ambassador, India and th eir concurrence obtained ) for Mr. V. Gokulakrishnan, to sign and 
submit the proposal/tender in respect of the captioned jobs and also to sign and submit all the 
papers/documents as may be necessary including the agreement were handed over to Audit. It 
further added that liquidated damages will be imposed on PAPCEL at the time of final payment 
and 10 per cent amount is withheld. 
The replies of the Management and the Ministry are not tenable as Mr. V. Gokulakrishnan 
submitted the bid in the capa city of director of Papcel Technology (I) Pvt. Limited  not as a 
representative of PAPCEL. Besides, power of attorney dated 29 September 2014 was neither 
available in records nor formed part of the agreement executed with PAPCEL. It is also worth 
mentioning that the date of authorisation letter was 23 September 2014 and it referred to the 
power of attorney executed at a subsequent date viz., 29 September 2014. Further, liquidated 
damages should have been deducted from the bills of contractors as per terms of  the contract 
and the amount withheld as retention money would be payable to contractor on successful 
completion of entire work and would not be subject to adjustment on account of liquidated 
damages. 
Thus, award of contract to PAPCEL on the basis of bid w hich was not submitted by it was 
against the basic premise of tendering and frequent disruption in work by PAPCEL resulted in 
cost escalation. 
 
 
 
 
34  Calculated at the rate  of 5 per cent of engineering services in respect of imported items (€1 ,90,390) and 
indigenous items (₹252.00 lakh). 
35  If contractor fails to provide engineering services within agreed completion dates, the purchaser may 
deduct from the contract price as liquidated damages, a sum equivalent to 0.5 per cent of engineering fee 
for each week of delay until the completion of engineering services, subject to a maximum of 5 per cent of 
the total engineering fees.  

Report No.15 of 2023 
31 
2.2.2.2     Irregular award of additional civil works 
NEPA Limited awarded (18 September 2015) civil and structural works for construction of 300 
Bone Dry36 Tonne Per Day De-Inking Plant, Raw Material Storage Building and modification 
works for Paper Machine -1 & 2 to Capital Construction Private Limited at a cost of ₹12.06 
crore including service tax of ₹63.97 lakh . As per the work order, entire work was to b e 
completed within a period of 10 months to be reckoned from the 14th day of issue of work order 
or handing over of the site, whichever was later. Thus, work was to be completed by July 2016 
i.e., 10 months reckoned from 14 th day of issue of work order  but the work could not be 
completed within scheduled completion time and the Company granted various time extensions 
through amendments in the contract. Last extension was up to 31 August 2021.  
The contract value was also incre ased by 97 .60 per cent  of original total awarded cost  
(₹23.83 crore from ₹12.06 crore) and 80.56 per cent of original total awarded cost excluding 
taxes (₹20.62 crore from ₹11.42 crore) . There were huge variations in quantity during actual 
execution but i nstead of assessing the expected quantity of works and revising the bill of 
quantities, the Company kept approving the cost escalation and revised bill of quantities was 
not prepared as of March 2022. The escalation was mainly due to: 
➢ Introduction of Goods  and Services Tax; tax impact on unbilled portion increased by 
₹14.02 lakh 
➢ Increase in rates for excavation due to hard rock: ₹33.72 lakh 
➢ Additional civil works: ₹9.96 crore 
Audit observed that: 
• As per clause 7.7 of the contract, variation of (+/ -) 15 per cent was admissible but in 
contravention, the Company approved additional work entailing additional cost to the 
extent of 80.56 per cent of original awarded cost. 
• Soil investigation studies was in the scope of work of  the Project Management 
Consultant. However, it did not conduct the soil investigation properly due to which 
additional expenditure of ₹33.72 lakh had to be incurred due to hard rock found during 
execution. The reasonability of additional expenditure towards hard rock excavation 
could not be ensured as there were no competitive rates available. 
• The details of additional civil work have not been provided due to which Audit could 
not comment on justification/requirement of additional works. 
 
36  Bone-dry denotes moisture free. 

Report No.15 of 2023 
32 
 
Figure 2.1: Civil works 
The Management stated (March 2022) that additional work was awarded to c ontractor in 
accordance with the Company’s policy stating that repeat order shall be placed on the party on 
the same rate and terms and conditions for 50 per cent quantity of the original tender quantity 
and policy of Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited  stating that total increase in quantity through 
amendments or repeat orders sh ould not exceed two times (200 per cent ) of the originally 
ordered quantity with due approval of Board of Directors.   
The Ministry stated (December 2022) that the initial scope of work was drawn up based on the 
initial report of 2010 and with the project execution commencing from July 2016, there was an 
increase in the scope being an old pl ant and a brown field project. Therefore, based on the 
growth of work, additional 50 per cent of the contract amount was approved by the Board as 
per existing financial regulations of the Company in order to complete the work without any 
further disruption. Another additional 50 per cent was envisaged with the progress of work 
(keeping in view of Covid pandemic situation resulting in restriction on availability of labour) 
and the case was forwarded in December 2020 and approved by the next higher authorities, i.e., 
Ministry of Heavy Industries.   
The replies of the Management and the Ministry are not tenable as neither the existing financial 
regulations of the Company nor the General Financial Rules permit awarding of additional 
quantity of work to an existi ng contractor to the extent of 100 per cent of original awarded 
quantities. Besides, repeat order is an order placed again by a customer for a product or service 
they have ordered before. In this case, there was additional quantity of works and this was not 
a repeat order. 
Thus, award of additional civil works was in violation of tender conditions a s well as  the 
Company’s own policy for procurement. 


Report No.15 of 2023 
33 
2.2.3     Avoidable cost escalation 
Out of total 29 contracts costing ₹329.63 crore selected in audit, three contracts costing ₹186.30 
crore, inter-alia, included supply of imported plant and machineries attracting customs duty. 
Customs duty was a part of basic price wherever basic price was explicitly mentioned.  
Under the contract37 for refurbishment of existing Rewinder for Paper Machine -1 and new 
Rewinder for Paper Machine-2 awarded to PAPCEL, advance payment equal to 10 per cent of 
the total basic price (₹22.93 crore including customs duty on imported part of delivery) was to 
be paid upon signing of the contract against submission of advance bank guarantee. 
The contractor (PAPCEL) submitted (December 2016) advance bank guarantee equal to 10 per 
cent of the total basic price and asked for advance payment of ₹2.29 crore as per terms of the 
contract. But the Company released advance payment of ₹2.02 crore only after deducting the 
import duty. The contractor did not agree to this and stated that they were not willing to work 
on the project until balance advance payment was released. The deadlock situation remained 
for a period of more than 27 months 38. The Company finally agreed to release the balance 
amount but the contractor demanded additional amount of ₹1.50 crore on account of price 
escalation against which the Company agreed (February 2019) to pay ₹0.90 crore. 
Thus, non -releasing of advance payment as per terms of agreement resulted in avoidable 
escalation of ₹0.90 crore. 
The Management stated (March 2022)  that there wer e severe fund constraints with the 
Company due to which only 10 per cent of the basic value was paid to the vendor and balance 
10 per cent was paid when the funds resumed later. 
The Ministry stated (December 2022) that the Company had to pay  10 per cent of ₹2,293.23 
lakh i.e., ₹229.30 lakh to PAPCEL as advance as per the contract post payment of advance bank 
guarantee by the contractor. The Company was constrained to restrict the advance payment to 
₹202 lakh in March 2017 as the Project Account had no further funds available which had been 
verified from the accounts. It was further added that as per the directives of the Department of 
Heavy Industry, the complete project was kept on hold due to fund constraint until the receipt 
of clearance from the Cabinet for the additional fund. Therefore, the time delay or logjam was 
not on account of the reason as per the audit observation but because the Company was waiting 
for the Project Fund to be sanctioned. 
The reply is not tenable as the Company had cash and cash equivalents of ₹204.61 lakh as on 
31 March 2017 and ₹87.76 lakh as on 31 March 2018 as per its audited financial statements. 
Besides, the  approval regarding release of advance payment clearly showed that advance 
payment was re leased after deducting import duties whereas the same was to be released on 
contract price including import duties. 
Thus, injudicious decision to release the advance amount excluding import duty led to dispute 
with the contractor resulting in subsequent delay and cost escalation. 
 
37  No. PROJ/908/2016 dated 31 August 2016. 
38  Calculated from the date of effectiveness of initial contract (29 November 2016) to the date of effectiveness 
of amended contract (01 March 2019) 

Report No.15 of 2023 
34 
2.2.4     Construction of ash pond of inadequate capacity  
The Company initially estimated (October 2016) construction of an ash pond on 18 acre s area 
of land to cater the need of dumping ash generated by its Captive Power Plant over a period of 
five years. The area of ash pond was revised (September 2017) by the Project Department to 
nine acres (tentative cost of ₹15 crore) which could accommodate ash generated over a period 
of two years. However, the Civil Department estimated the  cost of ₹6 crore which was not 
considered reliable by the Project Department. 
The Company  invited (October 2017) Expression of Interest for construction of ash pond 
wherein Indo Engineering Project Corporate  Pvt. Ltd. proposed to construct an ash pond to 
store 56,000 metric tonnes of ash generated during one year of operation of Captive Power Plant 
at a cost of ₹6.30 crore.  Considering this, the Company further reduced the area of ash pond to 
4.5 acres of land to acco mmodate ash to be generated (56 ,000 metric tonnes) in one year of 
operation of Captive Power Plant. 
Subsequently, the Company invited (May 2019) tender for construction of ash pond and 
awarded (September 2019) t he work of construction of ash pond  on 4.5 ac res of land to 
Neelkantham Systems Pvt. Ltd. at a cost of ₹6.45 crore. As per the agreement, the work was to 
be completed within six months from the date of Letter of Intent (30 August 2019). The work 
was not completed within scheduled time and six time -extensions were granted with the last 
extension up to 31 December 2021. The work was under progress and a payment of ₹5.52 crore 
had been made to the contractor until 31 December 2021. 
Audit observed that construction of lower capacity ash pond would result in overflow which 
would not only damage the environment and may invite action from environmental authorities 
but would also draw penalty charges. This could also lead to stalling of the Company’s activities 
of manufacturing of paper. 
  
Figure 2.2: Ash Pond 
The Management stated (March 2022) that ash pond was constructed on 4.5 acre s of land to 
cater the need of storage of ash generated in one year considering the disinvestment process and 
budget restriction at that time to fulfil the Pollution Control Board norms for 12.27 MW Captive 


Report No.15 of 2023 
35 
Power Plant. After start-up of the plant and gener ation of revenue, remaining ash pond would  
be constructed in next phase as per the requirement in future. 
The Ministry reiterated (December 2022) the facts stated in the reply of the Management. 
The replies of the Management and the Ministry indicate an ad-hoc approach towards works as 
the Company only requested (November 2017) funds of ₹6 crore from the Ministry towards 
cost of constructing the ash pond on 4.5 acre s of land instead of constructing the ash pond on 
nine acres of land. Besides, cost of construction of higher capacity ash pond is always much 
lower than additional cost of construction of new ash pond at different place than the existing 
one. 
Thus, construction of ash pond on lesser area of land by the Company was made w ithout 
applying due diligence.  
2.2.5     Undue favour to contractors 
In respect of three contracts, the contractors were extended undue favour and benefits in several 
forms in violation of the terms and conditions of the contract agreements, prevalent statute and 
rules and regulations as detailed below: 
a) NEPA awarded a contract for Sludge Handling System and Effluent Treatment Plant to 
Arvind Envisol Limited at a value of ₹22.47 crore.  As per contract, the work was to be 
completed by 26 October 2019 i.e. , within eight months from date of issue of L etter of Intent 
(26 February 2019). The contractor was to submit performance security for an amount equal to 
10 per cent of the total value of ₹22.47 crore of the contract within seven days from the date of 
Letter of Intent as per clause 19.6 of the terms and conditions of the tender.  
Audit noticed that time extensions up to 31 August 2021 were provided to contractor through 
nine contract amendments. However, the contractor was allowed to work at site beyond August 
2021 without further extension of time. Liquidated damages at the prescribed rate as per 
contract terms were also not imposed on account of delay in completion of work. Besides, the 
contractor was also allowed to submit bank guarantee on 8 May 2019 with a delay of more than 
two months. 
The Management stated (March 2022) that contractor was allowed to continue the work at site 
even after scheduled date of completion as per extension of time due to Covid-19 pandemic. 
The reply was, however, silent in  respect of relaxation in submission of bank guarantee and 
non-deduction of liquidated damages contrary to the terms and conditions of the contract. 
b) In the contract for Pre-Engineered Building work for De-Inking Plant and Raw Material 
Storage awarded to M/ s Everest, the contractor was allowed to submit general arrangement 
design documents after six months against the requirement of furnishing the same within 1.5 
months which consequently delayed other activities under the contract. Further,  the contractor 
was allowed 13 time-extensions and price escalation of ₹23.60 lakh (including taxes) although 
there was no such provision in the contract. 
The Management, while confirming the facts, stated (March 2022) that liquidated damages 
were not imposed as delay was attributable to the Project Management Consultant and the 

Report No.15 of 2023 
36 
Company and escalation was paid as per clause 10 CC of the Central Public Works Department 
Manual. 
The reply is not tenable as contractor submitted general arrangement design documents after 
six months instead of within 1.5 months, which consequently delayed other activities under the 
contract, and thus delay was attributable to the contractor. Moreover, escalation should have 
been regulated as per contract terms. 
In respect of points (a) and (b) above, the Ministry stated (December 2022) that the Company 
had not shown any undue favour and would impose liquidated damages on all contractors who 
had not adhered to the contractual obligations in their final billing. It is pertinent to mention 
that 10 per cent of amount of the defaulted firms had been withheld to ensure that liquidated 
damages were levied. It was further stated that the procurement guidelines of the Company had 
been revisited as per various guidelines and as advised by the Audit. 
The reply is not tenable as 10 per cent was withheld on account of performance security which 
would be paid subsequently to the contractors after successful completion of contractual 
obligations and shall not be subject to adjustment against liquidated damages . The liquidated 
damages were governed by a separate clause {clause 19.23 of tender in respect of (a) above and 
clause 2 of tender in respect of (b) above}and therefore the same were required to be levied as 
per the terms and conditions of the contracts.  
c) In the contract for new De-Inking Plant awarded to M/s Andritz, NEPA allowed waiver 
in respect of quality inspection in violation of shop inspection and test clause 39. Further, bank 
guarantee was not renewed timely and venue of arbitration was changed from Bhopal to 
Singapore in deviation from tender conditions. 
The Management stated (March 2022) that waiver was not given to any main equipment except 
for some small parts the performance of which would be assessed only after installation.  
The reply of the Management was silent on the change of venue of arbitration and non- renewal 
of bank guarantee timely. 
 The Ministry did not furnish any reply for the above issue. 
Thus, undue favour to contractors were allowed in the form of time relaxation in submission of 
bank guarantee/security deposit, non-imposition of liquidated damages, cost escalation, etc. 
Recommendation 2: The Company may develop a mechanism for enforcing procurement 
guidelines and contractual terms and conditions for effective works management. 
 
39  This clause entailed that the vendor shall provide all services to establish and maintain quality of 
workmanship in his works and plant and equipment to be supplied under the contract shall be subject to 
inspection and testing.  

Report No.15 of 2023 
37 
2.3    Other Audit findings 
 
2.3.1    Failure to fulfil export obligations under Export Promotion Capital Goods 
Scheme 
The Techno -Economic Viability Study, based on  which revised cost of Revival and Mill 
Development Plan (₹434 crore) was approved by the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs 
in October 2018, envisaged a waiver of customs duties of ₹33.09 crore under Export Promotion 
Capital Goods Scheme40 while arriving at the projected cost of Revival and Mill Development 
Plan against which export obligations of ₹198.54 crore were to be m et by supplying the final 
product (viz., Newsprint and Writing & Printing Paper) to the neighbouring countries like Sri 
Lanka, Afghanistan and others. GoI, while according its approval to the revised cost of Revival 
and Mill Development Plan viz., ₹434 crore, also considered Export Promotion Capital Goods 
benefits of ₹24 crore. 
Export Promotion Capital Goods Scheme allows import of capital goods (except those specified 
in negative list in Appendix 5F 41) for pre-production, production and post -production at zero 
customs duty. Import under E xport Promotion Capital Goods  Scheme shall be subject to an 
export obligation equivalent to six times of duties, taxes and cess saved on capital goods to be 
fulfilled i n six  years reckoned from date of issue of  Export Promotion Capital Goods 
authorisation. As per clause 5.01 (c) of the Export Promotion Capital Goods Scheme, 
authorisation shall be valid for import for 18 months from the date of its issue. 
As per the prescribed42 procedure, 50 per cent of export obligation was to be fulfilled in block 
of first four years and the balance during next two years (5 th and 6th year). Where the export 
obligation of the first block is not fulfilled and extension was not provided by  the Regional 
Authority, the Authorisation holder shall, within three months from the expiry of the block, pay 
duties of custom s (along with applicable interest as notified by the Department of Revenue ) 
proportionate to duty saved amount on total unfulfilled export obligation of the first block. 
NEPA Limited obtained eight zero duty Export Promotion Capital Goods authorisations from 
Regional Licensing Authority to avail Export Promotion Capital Goods benefits in form of zero 
customs duty. Out of these, the Company imported Plant and machineries (De-Inking Plant, 
parts of Paper Machines, Chemical Handling & Processing Plant and Reel Wrapping Machine) 
in respect of four Export Promotion Capital Goods authorisations. Export obligation in respect 
of one authorisation43 had not arisen at the end of year 2021 although Reel Wrapping Machine 
had been imported and customs duty was saved as per provisions of Foreign Trade Policy. For 
balance three authorisations, fulfilment of block -wise export obligation by the Company was 
to be done as per details given below: 
 
 
40  Chapter-5 of Foreign Trade Policy 2015-20. 
41  Appendix-5F of the Foreign Trade Policy contains the list of goods not permitted/permitted for import 
subject to specific conditions under the Export Promotion Capital Goods Scheme. 
42  Clause 5.14 of Handbook of Procedures. 
43  No. 0530174037 dated 5 March 2019. 

Report No.15 of 2023 
38 
Table 2.2: Block-wise fulfilment of Export Obligation by NEPA Limited 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Export 
Promotion 
Capital 
Goods 
Authorisation 
Number 
Item 
Imported 
Date of 
Authorisation 
Total 
Export 
Obligation 
Duty 
saved 
Date of 
fulfilment 
of Export 
Obligation 
in first 
Block 
Export 
Obligation 
to be 
fulfilled in 
the block 
of first 
four years 
1 0330043570 De-Inking 
Plant 
27.01.2016 70.83 11.81 26.01.2020 35.42 
2 0530168243 Parts of 
Paper 
Machines 
03.08.2016 62.33 10.39 02.08.2020 31.17 
3 0330046712 Chemical 
Handling 
and 
Processing 
Plant 
21.03.2017 5.73 0.96 20.03.2021 2.87 
 Total   138.89 23.16  69.46 
Audit observed that the Company failed to fulfil the export obligation of ₹69.46 crore in the 
block of first four years due to which it wa s required to pay customs duty of ₹11.57 crore (50 
per cent of total duty saved) along with interest of ₹3.44 crore (at the applicable rate of 18 per 
cent per annum up to December 2021). NEPA sought extension in the export obligation period 
in respect of one export obligation44  belatedly (August 2020) but no extension was sought for 
other two export obligations. 
Keeping in view the inordinate delay in completion of Revival and Mill Development Plan 
works and consequential delay in commencement of production of Writing and Printing Paper 
and Newsprint Paper, chances of fulfilling the export obligation was remote even within the 
total extended period45 of eight years (including one extension of up to two years, if allowe d) 
and ultimately entire customs duty of ₹23.16 crore would have to be paid along with applicable 
interest. 
The Management, while accepting the facts, stated (March 2022) that it was dedicated towards 
the export o bligation and was working towards the compl etion of Revival and Mill 
Development Plan with a positive approach.  
The Ministry while accepting the facts stated (December 2022) that a case has been taken up 
with the Director General of Foreign Trade to extend the period from six years to the maximum 
as per laid down regulations. The Company was confident of meeting the target in next two 
years based on the prevailing Paper market scenario. Customers from various countries had 
already approached the Company with enquiries. 
 
44  Authorisation No. 0330043570. 
45  As per clause 5.01 (c) read with clause 5.17 (b) of EPCG Scheme. 

Report No.15 of 2023 
39 
The fact remains that 50 per cent of the export obligation for the block of first four years had 
already expired in March 2021 and extension from Director General of Foreign Trade was still 
awaited.  
Thus, due to delay in completion of Revival and Mill Development Plan works, the Company 
could not complete the export o bligation and therefore lost opportunity to save import duty 
amounting to ₹23.16 crore. 
2.3.2     Avoidable payment of delayed payment surcharge on electricity bills 
NEPA Limited had a sanctioned load of 1.25 Mega Volt Ampere (MVA) on 132 kV supply 
voltage for which  it was required to make payment of electricity bills on monthly basis on 
specified due date failing which delayed payment surcharge at the rate of 1.25 per cent per 
month or part thereof on the amount outstanding including arrears was payable.  
Audit noticed that the Company defaulted in making payment of electricity bills from February 
2018 to October 2019 and again from April 2020 to October 2020 for which it had to pay 
delayed payment surcharge of ₹58.52 lakh. 
The Management stated (March 2022) that electricity dues could not be paid due to non -
availability of fund with NEPA and due to non -availability of sanctioned head it was not 
possible to process the payment of electricity bill from project fund and  bills were paid when 
the funds were available.  
Further to the reply of the Management, the Ministry stated (December 2022) that effort was 
made by the Company with a request for waiving off the accumulated surcharge of ₹43.55 lakh 
to Madhya Pradesh Paschim Kshetra Vidyut Vitran Company Limited which was not acceded 
to by them. 
The reply is to be viewed in the light of the fact that the Company did not approach the 
Department of Heavy Industry proactively for timely release of funds for making paymen t for 
the committed expenses on electricity. 
2.3.3  Avoidable payment of damages and interest on E mployees’ Provident 
Fund 
NEPA Limited being an industrial establishment under Employees’ Provident Fund & 
Miscellaneous Provision Act, 1952  (EPF Act) was required to remit/deposit employees and 
employer’s contribution towards provident fund to Employees’ Provident Fund Organisation 
timely as required under the provisions of EPF Act. Any delay in deposit of contribution invited 
penalty as damages not exceeding the amount of arrears under Section 14B of the Act, provided 
that the Central Board may reduce or waive the damages levied under this section in relation to 
an establishment which is a sick industrial company and in respect of which a sch eme for 
rehabilitation has been sanctioned by the B oard for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction. 
Besides, employer shall be liable to pa y interest at the rate of 12  per cent  per annum  as 
prescribed by Section 7Q of the Act. 
Audit noticed that  Employees Provident Fund Organisation levied damages of ₹3.86 cr ore 
under Section 14B and interest of ₹1.89 crore under Section 7Q of the EPF Act, 1952 for default 
in remittance for the period from December 2014 to October 2017.  The Company  did not 

Report No.15 of 2023 
40 
deposit the penalty imposed within the stipulated time . As a result, bank accounts of the 
Company with the State Bank of India and the Bank of India were attached by Employees 
Provident Fund Organisation (November 2021) and a sum of ₹5.75 crore was withdrawn. The 
Company did not seek relief available under the Act for sick industrial company although the 
Board for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction had already sanctioned a rehabilitation 
scheme for the Company. It affected the implementation of Revival and Mill Development Plan 
and blocking of substantial funds along with consequential loss of interest thereupon. 
The Management stated (March 2022) t hat NEPA was undergoing tough financial condition 
and was totally dependent on GoI for salary and wages support . Salary and wages dues  were 
pending from GoI since April 2014 due to which NEPA was not able to pay Provident Fund 
dues on time. GoI was requested to extend financial support citing  the pendency of Provident 
Fund dues. The Central Provident Fund Commissioner was also requested through the 
Administrative Ministry to consider the waiver of damages and interest charged from the 
Company. 
The Ministry reiterated (December 2022) the facts stated by the Management in its reply. 
The replies of the Management and the Ministry are to be viewed in the light of the fact that the 
Company failed to take up the matter of waiver of damages and interest timely and to seek relief 
in the capacity of a sick industrial company after sanction of rehabilitation plan by the Board 
for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction.  
Thus, non-seeking of relief available to a sick industrial undertaking led to block ing of funds 
amounting to ₹5.75 crore.  
Recommendation 3: Financial management may be strengthened so that statutory dues are 
paid on time to avoid punitive action. 
2.4  Expected shortfall in producing envisaged quantity of Writing and 
Printing Paper 
Revival and Mill Development Plan was aimed at product diversification by producing 46,800 
tonnes per annum of Writing and Printing Paper and 36,200 tonnes per annum of Newspr int 
Paper with increased brightness of 57-60 degree46 from existing 38-42 degree. Keeping in view 
the existing configuration of Paper Machines-1 & 2, production of Writing and Printing Paper 
was considered in Paper Machine-1 and production of Newsprint Paper was considered in Paper 
Machine-2, as Paper Machine-1 was capable to produce higher volume of paper as compared 
to Paper Machine-2. Since both Paper Machines were identified for producing different types 
of paper, two De -Inking Plants with c apacities of 175 tonnes per day and 100 tonnes per day 
were proposed to be installed under the Revival and Mill Development Plan for Paper  
Machine-1 and Paper Machine-2 respectively. But in the revised cost, only one De-Inking Plant 
of 300 tonnes per day capacity was envisaged to be installed. 
Audit noticed that a single De -Inking Plant was proposed in view of economy in the Revival 
and Mill Development Plan cost but the production effectiveness of a single De -Inking Plant 
 
46  The higher the degree, the higher will be the brightness of paper. 

Report No.15 of 2023 
41 
was not considered. Through a sin gle De-Inking Plant, production of only one type of paper 
(Newsprint Paper or Writing and Printing Paper) at a time would be possible and to manufacture 
another type of paper, stock preparation i.e. , pulp making would have to be changed. Change 
of the process would not only result in idling of plant but higher input cost. Thus, the Company 
would not be able to achieve the envisaged objective of producing 46,800 tonnes per annum of 
Writing and Printing Paper.  
Further, Writing and Printing category of paper includes papers of office stationery, textbooks, 
copier, notebooks etc. It was, however, noticed that the Paper Machines would be able to 
produce textbook and notebook paper only under Writing and Pr inting Paper category after 
renovation/refurbishment of the Paper Machines under Revival and Mill Development Plan 
which may impact their market presence. Necessary modifications in plant and machineries 
were also not considered for producing copier paper and office stationery during technical and 
economic feasibility study. 
The Management stated (March 2 022) that NEPA would produce Writing and Printing Paper  
on both the Paper Machines with the use of imported raw material and hence both the Paper 
Machines were capable to produce Writing and Printing Paper as well as Newsprint Paper. As 
per Techno-Economic Feasibility Report, only internal sizing was considered in Paper Machine 
and therefore the Company would be able to produce notebook and textbook paper only under 
the category of  Writing and Printing Paper. For the photocopier paper and office stationery, 
external sizing is required and Size press would have to be installed in Paper Machine which 
was not considered due to the huge modification requirements and space constraints. 
The Ministry stated (December 2022) that with the present condition of the plant, the Company 
was confident of achieving the desired target in the present configuration both for Writing and 
Printing Paper and Newsprint Paper. This was based on the trials and present rate of production. 
The replies of the Management and the Ministry need to be viewed in light of the fact that the  
proposal to install only one De-Inking Plant  was made without considering production 
effectiveness, idling of machines and higher input cost which may result in shortfall from 
envisaged production. Further, the envisaged objective of producing 46,800 tonnes per annum 
of Writing and Printing Paper might not be possible to achieve without producing p hotocopier 
paper and office stationery as these form a substantial part of the total demand of Writing and 
Printing Paper. 
2.5    Monitoring and Supervision 
 
2.5.1      Monitoring and Supervision by Department of Heavy Industry/NEPA 
As per the approval (September 2012) of the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs , the 
progress of Revival and Mill Development Plan was to be monitored on a quarterly basis. As 
per Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs  approval (October 2018) of revised Revival and 
Mill Development Plan  cost, a Committee under the chairm anship of Financial Advisor, 
Department of Heavy Industry  was required to monitor the monthly progress of R evival and 
Mill Development Plan, especially with reference to time and cost. Further, NEPA Management 
was accountable for fulfilling the commitment of timely completion. 

Report No.15 of 2023 
42 
Audit observed that: 
• The Department of Heavy Industry did not prescribe any formal  monitoring and 
supervision mechanism to ensure timely completion of Revival and Mill Development 
Plan activities since its inception to September 2018. 
• A Monitoring C ommittee was constituted (October 2018) under Additional Secretary 
cum Financial Advisor, Department of Heavy Industry  to monitor the progress on 
monthly basis. The Committee held 23 meetings up to 25 November 2021 in which the 
focus was mainly on speeding up of tendering process and it did not make 
recommendations on sequencing of various activities to shorten the implementation 
process time. 
• The Department of Heavy Industry directed (16 September 2016) for re -allocation of 
works of Deputy General Managers, making them in -charge of three major projects 
(Paper Machine, D e-Inking Plant and Power Station) with direct reporting to the 
Chairman-cum-Managing Director to sho rten the reporting channel and direct 
monitoring of project progress by the Chairman-cum-Managing Director . But in 
violation of these directions, the Deputy General Managers were reporting to General 
Managers as per routine reporting channel. 
The Management stated (March 2022) that Tata Consulting Engineers  was appointed as the 
Project Management Consultant f or monitoring and controlling the  day-to-day activities of 
Revival and Mill Development Plan. No committee was formed at the level of the Company to 
monitor the progress of Revival and Mill Development Plan financially. However, the existing 
tender committee was involved, to resolve any ongoing financial impact and cost escalation to 
have a proper control.  
The reply is not tenable as no project monitoring committee was constituted at local 
management level. Merely, inclusion of monitoring of R evival and Mill Development Plan 
works in the scope of the Project Managemen t Consultant does not relieve  the local 
management from the responsibility of monitoring construction/erection/supplies activities. 
The Ministry stated (December 2022) that monitoring of the work was duly assigned to 
individual nodal officers at various levels for each package. Deputy General Manager (Project) 
and General Manager (Works & Project) were specifically empowered to monitor the project 
activities.  The delay was observed due to the various reasons beyond the control of NEPA 
Management. Further, monthly meetings of the Monit oring Committee were held by Ministry 
of Heavy Industries under the chairmanship of Special Secretary & Financial Advisor to review 
and monitor the project status. 
The reply needs to be viewed in the light of the fact that Ministry’s directions to the effe ct of 
re-allocation of works of the Deputy General Managers making them in-charge of three major 
projects and direct reporting to C hairman-cum-Managing Director was not adhered to by the 
Management.  

Report No.15 of 2023 
43 
Thus, non-monitoring of work on the part of the Company not only shows the lackadaisical 
approach of the Company but is one of the main reasons for delay in completion of Revival and 
Mill Development Plan works.  
2.5.2       Insufficient skilled work force 
As recommended by the Board for Reconstruction of Public Sector Enterprises,  GoI accorded 
(September 2012 and October 2018) approval for introducing voluntary retirement scheme in 
respect of 800 employees at a cost of ₹150.83 crore to be released in the form of 7 per cent non-
cumulative preference share contribution against which, a fund of ₹106.54 crore was released 
for the purpose. 
Out of total 1,180 employees (including temporary and badli workers) as of September 2012, 
671 employees were given voluntary retirement (leaving 509 employees on roll) and payment 
of ₹95.47 crore was made. The number of employees declined continuously due to 
superannuation leaving actual number of employees between 544 and 288 during 2018 -19 to 
2021-22.  
Audit observed that NEPA did not ensure retention of sufficient skilled work force for effective 
and efficient implementation of Revival and Mill Development Plan while approving Voluntary 
Retirement Scheme. It identified only 25 employees as key personnel irrespective o f their 
balance service up to their respective superannuation. Against the recommendation of the Board 
for Reconstruction of Public Sector Enterprises for recruiting minimum necessary General 
Managers and Deputy General Managers including 70 experienced sk illed persons on regular 
basis, 54 persons were recruited out of which 32 persons left the job during their initial service 
years. Even after completion of Revival and Mill Development Plan works, operation of NEPA 
on a sustainable profit basis cannot be ensured without having experienced manpower. 
Thus, non-availability of sufficient skilled work force with NEPA not only adversely affected 
the timely and effective implementation of Revival and Mill Development Plan but would also 
affect the future operations of NEPA. 
The Ministry stated (December 2022) that insufficient skilled work force has been an issue but 
it was considered prudent by the Management of the day with the approval of GoI to accord 
voluntary retirement  to save the exchequer during the perio d of the project. Thirty -two 
applications for voluntary retirement were not sanctioned as the personnel were required by the 
Company for successful completion of R evival and Mill Development Plan. It was further 
stated that Revival and Mill Development Plan was not affected because of the workforce, but 
many other reasons were involved in its delay. 
The fact, however, remains that implementation of V oluntary Retirement Scheme without 
retaining minimum required skilled workforce was not prudent  and it was a factor which 
adversely affected the implementation of Revival and Mill Development Plan activities. 
Recommendation 4: The Ministry may ensure that proper monitoring mechanism exist s for 
all major projects. V oluntary Retirement Scheme may be implemented after assessing the 
manpower required for completion of the project(s). 

Report No.15 of 2023 
44 
2.6 Conclusion 
Revival and Mill Development Plan for NEPA Limited was sanctioned by the Cabinet in the 
year 2012 at a cost of ₹285 crore. The original cost ballooned to ₹512.41 crore (increase in cost 
by almost 80 per cent) by October 2021. The reasons for time and cost overrun were ineffective 
project management as there were undue favours to contractors and execution of additional 
work in violation of tende r conditions. Installation of two De-Inking Plants was changed to a 
single De-Inking Plant without considering idling of machine, higher input cost and production 
effectiveness. 
The Project Management Consultant did not prepare detailed estimates for  various works 
leading to frequent revisions and cost escalation. The Project Management Consultant evaluated 
bids with inordinate delay, leading to cascading delays in the commencement of projects. The 
Project Management Consultant frequently changed its project manager which led to ineffective 
monitoring.  
Due to non -fulfilment of export obligation, the Company lost opportunity to get waiver of 
import duty to the extent of ₹23.16 crore under the Export Promotion Capital Goods Scheme . 
It also failed to seek relief as a sick industrial undertaking from payment of damages on account 
of non -deposit of Provident Fund contribution which led to blocking of funds with the 
Employees Provident Fund Organisation.  
The monitoring and supervision of R evival and Mill Development Plan activities by the 
Company and the Department of Heavy Industry (now Ministry of Heavy Industries) was 
inadequate. The Company did not retain minimum skilled workforce to ensure timely and 
successful implementation of the project . The D epartment of Heavy Industry  set up a 
monitoring committee only in October 2018 after the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs 
gave directions to that effect while approving the revised cost of Revival and Mill Development 
Plan.   
The Company had stopped production activities from July 2016 for implementation of Revival 
and Mill Development Plan works. The production was again commenced by the Company 
from September 2022 onwards after completion of Revival and Mill Development Plan works 
in August 2022, i.e., after 10 years from the date of first approval (September 2012) of the Plan.  
Thus, the objectives of Revival and Mill Development Plan i.e., operation of NEPA Limited on 
a sustainable profit basis was yet to be achieved despite lapse of considerable time and spending 
of GoI funds of more than ₹500 crore.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Report No.15 of 2023 
45 
CHAPTER III: MINISTRY OF STEEL 
 
 
Bokaro Power Supply Company (Private) Limited 
Operational Performance of Bokaro Power Supply Company (Private) 
Limited 
3.1 Introduction 
Bokaro Power Supply Company (Private) Limited (BPSCL or Company) is a Joint Venture of 
Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL) and Damodar Valley Corporation with 50:50 share 
capital. Bokaro Power Supply Company was formed in September 2001 after SAIL transferred 
captive power plant at Bokaro Steel Plant consisting of eight boilers 47 with a production 
capacity of 1880 tonnes per hour of steam  and six turbo generators with capacity to generate 
302 Megawatt of power . Main objective for formation of the Joint Venture was to acquire, 
operate and maintain the existing captive power and steam generating station of SAIL and to 
supply power and steam to Bokaro Steel Plant  to maintain captive status of the power plant . 
Bokaro Power Supply Company commissioned 9th boiler in September 2014 which increased 
the rated capacity for steam and power generation to 2,180 tonnes per hour and 338 Megawatt 
respectively. Out of 2180 tonnes per hour of steam, 1220 tonnes per hour would be used for 
generation of power, 960 tonnes per hour steam and 338 Megawatt power would be sold to the 
Bokaro Steel Plant. 
The Bokaro Power Supply Company  power plant is situated in the premises of SAIL/Bokaro 
Steel Plant. The Company is managed by the Board of Directors compr ising of six Directors, 
three each nominated by SAIL and Damodar Valley Corporation. As per the Power and Steam 
Purchase Agreement between SAIL and Bokaro Power Supply Company Limited, all 
expenditure (variable cost or fixed cost) including Return on Equity at the rate of 15.5 per cent 
is to be borne by SAIL/Bokaro Steel Plant. 
3.2 Audit objectives, Scope and Criteria 
Records relating to operational performance of Bokaro Power Supply Company were examined 
for the period from 2016 -17 to 2020 -21 with the Audit objectives to assess whether (i) the 
power plants were operated effectively to meet the power and steam required by Bokaro Steel 
Plant, (ii) inputs were procured judiciously and consumptio n of fuels and auxiliaries were 
within the norms, (iii) scheduled repair and maintenance of plant and machineries were carried 
out timely and capital projects were implemented as planned, and (iv) statutory provisions of 
safety and environmental issues were complied by the Company. 
Audit criteria used during the audit comprised of Power and Steam Purchase Agreement, Shared 
Facilities and Support Services Agreement between SAIL and Bokaro Power Supply Company, 
Board decisions of Bokaro Power Supply Company , Operational and Performance reports, 
norms fixed by Management/ Central Electricity Regulatory Commission  for consumption of 
 
47  Boilers 1 to 5 are named as Thermal Power Plant s and Boilers 6 to 8 named as Captive Power Plant s by 
the Company.  

Report No.15 of 2023 
46 
fuels and auxiliaries, operating indices of some other power generating companies, Fuel Supply 
Agreements, Schedule for repairs and maintenance of plant and machineries, Detailed Project 
Reports/Feasibility Reports for projects, contracts placed for capital works, Energy Audit 
Reports and Notifications/guidelines issued by Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate 
Change. 
3. 3  Audit findings 
3.3.1    Non-achievement of planned production 
Clause 3.1 of the Power and Steam Purchase Agreement stipulated that SAIL and Bokaro Power 
Supply Company shall mutually finalise a generation schedule for the year at least thirty days 
in advance of each year after considering the existing operating conditions of the captive power 
plant (all boilers and turbines) and production plan of Bokaro Steel Plant. Accordingly, Bokaro 
Steel Plant annually fixed the quantity of steam and power it expected to receive from Bokaro 
Power Supply Company ’s power plants. Bokaro Steel Plant ’s planned requirement of steam 
and power from the Company, rated capacity, annual planned and actual production during 
2016-17 to 2020-21 are given in Tables 3.1 and 3.2. 
Table 3.1:  Bokaro Power Supply Company’s  rated capacity, planned and actual 
production and Bokaro Steel Plant’s planned intake of steam 
(Figures in tonnes per hour) 
Year Rated 
Capacity 
Bokaro 
Steel 
Plant’s 
planned 
intake  
Production Plan 
of Bokaro Power 
Supply 
Company 
Actual 
production 
of steam 
Shortfall Per cent   of 
generation with 
respect to 
Planned intake 
of Bokaro Steel 
Plant 
2016-17 1960* 1485 1485 1338 147 90 
2017-18 1960 1410 1410 1189 221 84 
2018-19 1960 1400 1400 1134 266 81 
2019-20 1960 1300 1300 1248 52 96 
2020-21 1960 1052 1052 1011 41 96 
*Capacity of Boiler 1 (220 tonnes per hour) not considered as the same was out of operation since November 
2016. 
 

Report No.15 of 2023 
47 
 
Table 3.2:  Bokaro Power Supply Company ’s rated capacity, planned and actual 
production and Bokaro Steel Plant’s planned intake of power 
(Figures in Megawatt) 
Year Rated 
Capacity 
Bokaro 
Steel 
Plant’s 
planned 
intake 
Production Plan 
of Bokaro Power 
Supply Company 
Actual 
production 
of power 
Shortfall Per cent  of 
generation 
with respect 
to Plan of 
Bokaro Steel 
Plant 
2016-17 338 215 215 194 21 90 
2017-18 338 215 215 156 59 73 
2018-19 338 210 210 142 68 68 
2019-20 338 175 17548 169 6 97 
2020-21 338 134 134 134 00 100 
 
 
48  Bokaro Steel Plant reduced the intake from Bokaro Power Supply Company to purchase more power from 
Damodar Valley Corporation. The plan for production was revised accordingly by Bokaro Power Supply 
Company.  
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21
Chart 3.1:- Performance of production of steam
Rated Capacity
Bokaro Steel Plant’s planned intake
Production Plan of Bokaro Power Supply Company
Actual production of steam
Figures in tonnes per hour 
hourhour 

Report No.15 of 2023 
48 
  
Audit noted that: 
• Annual planned production fixed by Bokaro Power Supply Company  (both in respect 
of steam and power) was lower than the rated capacity of the plant and actual production 
was lower than Bokaro Steel Plant ’s planned intake (except power in 2020 -21) from 
Bokaro Power Supply Company. 
• Steam generation in comparison to requirement of Bokaro Steel Plant was between 81 
per cent and 96 per cent during 2016-17 to 2020-21. 
• Generation of power by Bokaro Power Supply Company was between 68 per cent and 
97 per cent of the planned requirement of power by Bokaro Steel Plant during 2016-17 
to 2019 -20. The generation of power was, however 100 per cent  of the planned 
requirement in 2020-21. 
The Management replied (March 2022) that: 
• The production of steam during 2016 -17 to 2018 -19 was less due to poor supply of 
coal and short supply of Blast Furnace and Coke Oven gas. The boilers were forced to 
run most of the time with coal/furnace oil support because Bokaro Steel Plant was not 
able to supply the required amount of Blast Furnace and Coke Oven gas . Further, 
changing fuel combustion system was not technically feasible in existing boilers. 
• Though, the Fuel Supply Agreement with Central Coalfields Limited had provision for 
supply of imported coal, the Company did not put in efforts to obtain imported coal, to 
reduce the cost of power as imported coal had a higher cost. 
• Bokaro Steel Plant had reduced their power requirement from Bokaro Power Supply 
Company from October 2019 to 175 MW and subsequently to 134 MW in 2020 -21. 
This was done to take more power from DVC. 
The Ministry added (May 2023) that Boilers 2 to 5 were multi-fueled fired boilers using Blast 
Furnace gas, Coke Oven gas and  coal as main fuel. F or ac hieving full rated capacity of 
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21
Chart 3.2:- Performance of generation of power
Rated Capacity
Bokaro Steel Plant’s planned intake
Production Plan of Bokaro Power Supply Company
Actual production of power
Figures in Megawatt 

Report No.15 of 2023 
49 
steaming, Boilers 2 to 5 required main fuel i.e., coal along with Blast Furnace and Coke Oven 
gases. These boilers could operate only on gas also, but with a reduced steaming rate. It further 
stated that it had approached Central Coalfields regularly to take Run of Mines coal from 
alternative sources (Magadh, Amrapali) etc.   
Reply of the Management/Ministry may be seen in view of the following: 
• Thermal Power Plants ( Boilers 2 to 5) are multi fuel type boilers wh ich could be 
operated entirely on coal or operated entirely on Blast Furnace and Coke Oven gases. 
Non-utilisation of gas would lead to increased consumption of coal. It was noted that 
Company did not approach Bokaro Steel Plant  for higher supply of gas or make any 
effort for alternative sources of gas. Further, despite the recommendation by Energy 
Audit to reduce dependency on Bokaro Steel Plant for Blast Furnace and Coke Oven  
gases, the Company had not got any technical assessment done by third part y for 
changing the fuel combustion system.  
• Central Coalfields Limited did not supply the required quantity of coal. Though there 
were instances of loss of production due to shortage of coal, Company did not approach 
Central Coalfields Limited for supply of imported coal.  
Clause 11.3.1.2 of the Power and Steam Purchase Agreement stipulated that 
responsibility for procurement of coal would be of Bokaro Power Supply Company . 
Audit noted that though short supply of coal was 1.47 per cent and 9.15 per cent in 
2016-17 and 2017 -18 respectively, short production of steam was between 10 and 16 
per cent respectively during the same period. Reduction in production of steam was not 
in proportion to shortage of coal . Moreover, as this was an operational issue, 
Management should have taken steps to ensure availability of coal. 
• Besides, lower generation of power by Bokaro Power Supply Company resulted in 
Bokaro Steel Pl ant increasing (September 2017)  the contract demand from Damodar 
Valley Corporation from 180 Mega Volt Ampere (MVA)49 to 220 MVA. This was more 
than the quantity planned to be purchased from Damodar Valley Corporation as per the 
Annual Business Plan and was done despite the fact that cost of procurement of power 
from Bokaro Power Supply Company  was cheaper than that of Damodar Valley 
Corporation. Bokaro Steel Plant also  restricted (October 2019) the demand of power 
from Bokaro Power Supply Company Limited to 134  Megawatt (from 210 Megawatt 
per hour in 2018-19 and 175 Megawatt in 2019-20) initially for two months which was 
to be reviewed thereafter. However, Bokaro Power Supply Company did not approach 
Bokaro Steel Plant for restoration of the quantity of power after the lapse of two months. 
• Management had intimated the Board (September 2018) that Boilers 1 to 5 could be 
operated entirely on Blast Furnace and Coke Oven gases with zero feeding of coal.   
 
49  Megawatt describes the actual power that can be supplied to the load whereas MVA includes both the 
power supplied to the load and the power that recirculates between the power plant and the load . 

Report No.15 of 2023 
50 
Recommendation 1:  The Company may make efforts to ensure achievement of annual 
requirement of power for Bokaro Steel Plant and to manage the availability of its inputs to 
overcome shortages constraining production. 
3.3.2    Causes contributing to lower production than the plan 
3.3.2.1     Low performance of Boilers 
Boilers are required to be 
operated optimally to 
conserve energy, 
generate required power  
and maintain pressure. 
Seven out of eight boilers 
in operation were 
installed 33 to 49 years 
ago and had outlived their 
useful life of 30 years.  
Hourly rates of steam 
generated by the boilers 
in Bokaro Power Supply 
Company during 2016-17 
to 2020 -21 are given in 
table below. 
 
 
Table 3.3: Hourly rates of steam generated by each boiler 
Year Hourly rates of steam production (tonnes per hour) 
Boiler No. 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
Year of 
Commissioning 
1972 1972 1974 1978 1980 1985 1988 2014 
Rated capacity 220 220 220 220 260 260 260 300 
2016-17 137.70 122.63 136.52 143.14 224.28 228.25 206.75 229.98 
2017-18 125.70 119.84 125.51 125.30 223.08 208.04 220.76 230.42 
2018-19 113.23 125.08 145.47 128.65 222.86 222.52 215.69 214.15 
2019-20 121.89 139.78 157.94 131.72 211.48 210.95 238.86 231.00 
2020-21 125.54 122.86 127.05 133.00 196.53 202.92 195.55 214.32 
Average 124.81 126.04 138.50 132.36 215.64 214.54 215.52 223.97 
% w.r.t rated capacity 57% 57% 63% 60% 83% 83% 83% 75% 
From the above table, it is seen that four boilers (Boiler s 2 to 5) were operating at lower than 
the rated capacity (around 60 per cent ). Hourly rate of steam production in Boiler 9 
commissioned in 2014 was only 75 per cent of the rated capacity which was lower than that of 
Boilers 6, 7 and 8 commissioned during 1980 -1989. This was mainly due to forced shutdown 
Figure 3.1: Boiler 

Report No.15 of 2023 
51 
on account of tripping of rotors, leakages in tube 50, tripping on Rotor Earth Fault etc., which 
were operational reasons and should have been controlled by the Management. T herefore, the 
deterioration in steam production was largely due to inadequate repair and maintenance 
resulting in lower boiler efficiency. 
Management replied (March 2022) that Bokaro Power Supply Company  was keeping one 
thermal power plant boiler and one captive power plant boiler in reserve since October 2019 
due to less requirement of steam and power by Bokaro Steel Plant. 
The reply of the Management may be seen in the light of the fact that the performance of boilers 
was low throughout the period 2016 -17 to 2020-21, whereas one thermal51 power plant boiler 
and one captive power plant boiler each were kept in reserve only from November 2019 
onwards. Moreover, the equipment were kept in reserve on account of lower demand of steam 
and power by Bokaro Steel Plant, which in turn was the consequence of the failure of Bokaro 
Power Supply Company in supplying the power demanded by Bokaro Steel Plant.   
The Ministry added (May 2023) that had there been free availability of Blast Furnace and Coke 
Oven gases in the market or purchase of coal from sources other than Central Coalfields Limited 
or Bharat Coking Coal Limited, the said operational issues would have been addressed. Further, 
Boiler 9 was commissioned in September 2014 and took time to stabilise. 
The reply may be seen in view of the fact that even though the Company was aware that it was 
dependent on Bokaro Steel Plant for supply of Blast Furnace and Coke Oven gases , the 
Company did not explore the possibility of getting gases from alt ernative sources. The Fuel 
Supply Agreement with Central Coalfields provide d for supply of imported coal but Bokaro 
Power Supply Company Limited did not approach the coal companies for supply of imported 
coal. As the Boiler 9 was  commissioned in September 2014, there was sufficient time for 
stabilisation of the boiler. Ministry reply is silent on inadequate repairs and m aintenance of 
boilers as pointed out in the para. 
3.3.2.2     Low performance of Turbo Generators 
Bokaro Power Supply 
Company Limited was 
capable to generate 338 
Megawatt power with seven 
turbo generators under full 
load of operations.  
Performance of turbo 
generators are given in the 
table below- 
 
 
 
50  There are water wall s made of tubes around the furnace which heat  the water. There were leakage s in 
these tubes. 
51  Boilers 1 to 5 have been named as thermal power plant boilers and 6 to 8 as captive power plant boilers by 
the Company. 
Figure 3.2: Turbo Generator 

Report No.15 of 2023 
52 
Table 3.4: Performance of Turbo Generators 
                      Power Generation in Megawatt 
Turbo Generator No.  1 2  3 6 7  8 9 
Year of 
commissioning 
1974 1972 1973 1986 1988 1989 2014 
Rated capacity 12 55 55 60 60 60 36 
2016-17 2.93 3.2552 38.40 33.66 51.09 48.34 16.09 
2017-18 2.52 30.70 22.53 27.11 30.36 27.18 15.61 
2018-19 2.83 27.93 23.43 27.05 21.15 25.79 13.58 
2019-20 3.67 30.49 22.84 35.63 39.65 23.80 13.14 
2020-21 3.74 31.50 21.98 27.31 11.87 24.46 13.37 
Average 3.14 24.77 25.84 30.15 30.82 29.91 14.36 
Average (%)  26 45 47 50 51 50 40 
Audit noted that performance of turbo generators was only between 26 per cent and 51 per cent. 
The performance of Turbo Generator 9 which was commissioned in 2014, was also low and 
ranged between 13.14 Megawatt and 16.09 Megawatt. Main reasons for lower performance 
were tube leakage, power failure etc. These were mainly due to lack of overhauling/capital 
repairs on time as discussed in para 3.3.2.3 below.  
Management/Ministry replied (March 2022 /May 2023) that Bokaro Power Supply Company  
operated at lower load , as Bokaro Steel Plant  was an integrated steel plant  and its steam and 
power requirements were both for production purpose as well as to ensure safety of working 
personnel and equipment in case of any emergencies.  
The reply is not justifiable as all turbo generators were not required to run at half capacity for 
meeting any probable emergencies. Also, the reply may be seen in the light of the fact that 
during 2012-13 to 2016-17, the Company was producing power ranging between 166 Megawatt 
and 195 Megawatt and only subsequently there was a reduction in the generation of power. This 
indicated that performance of turbo generators could have been increased by taking proper 
corrective action and timely repairs to address the avoidable reasons for low performance of 
turbo generators.   
3.3.2.3     Lack of proper repair and maintenance 
Central Electricity Regulatory Commission stipulated 25 years useful life for thermal based 
power generating units. Energy Audit Report on Bokaro Power Supply Company for the year 
2016 envisaged 30 years useful life for power plant. Capital maintenance and technical 
renovation of various plants and machineries is of vital importance to achieve good 
performance thereafter. As boilers at Bokaro Power Supply Company had outlived their useful 
life of 30 years, Bokaro Power Supply Company fixed norm for overhauling of boilers within 
two to three years. Audit noted that out of 8 boilers, overhauling was done within the scheduled 
time in respect of only three boilers ( Boilers 4, 6 and 7). Capital repair of Boiler 8 was done 
 
52  There was a fire incident in T urbo Generator 2 in October 2015. It was brought back to operation in 
February 2017. Therefore, the production was low during 2016-17. 

Report No.15 of 2023 
53 
after gap of six years.  Audit examined the planned shutdown, forced outages and total working 
hours for the period from 2016-17 to 2020-21 as below: 
Table 3.5: Total hours, available working hours and forced outages of Boilers 
Year Total 
hours  
Total 
working 
hours 
Total 
planned 
shutdown 
hours 
Percentage of 
planned 
shutdown 
hours against 
total working 
hour 
Total forced 
shutdown 
hours 
Percentage of 
forced 
shutdown 
hours against 
total working 
hour 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
2016-17 77,078 63,391 13,687 21.59 1,761 2.78 
2017-18 77,509 57,347 19,785 34.50 1,299 2.27 
2018-19 77,761 55,475 22,210 40.04 1,078 1.94 
2019-20 77,492 60,402 18,202 30.13 1,624 2.69 
2020-21 76,264 50,565 25,699 50.82 2,551 5.04 
From the table above, it may be seen that the percentage of planned shutdown hours against 
total working hours was in the range of 21.59 per cent to 50.82 per cent whereas that of forced 
shut down hours was in the range of 1.94 per cent to 5.04 per cent. The planned shutdown was 
mainly due to capital repair, repair and maintenance, non-availability of gases, shortage of coal 
and less requirement of steam and power from Bokaro Steel Plant since October 2019. Despite 
being aware of the shortage of gases and coal in advance, no corrective action was taken by the 
Management. Forced outages were mainly due to tube leakages which could have been reduced 
with proper repair and maintenance.  
In c ase of turbo generators, Bokaro Power Supply Company  fixed norm for capital 
repair/overhauling after 50,000 running hours. Audit noted that out of six turbo generators, two 
(Turbo Generators 6 and 7) were not due for capital repair s as they had not surpassed 50,000 
hours from the last capital repairs and remaining four were operated for more than 21,000 to 
63,000 hours  beyond scheduled capital repair i.e. , 50,000 hours. Original Equipment 
Manufacturer of Turbo Generator 2 had recommended for scheduled capital repair after 45,000 
hours of running, whereas the last repair was done in March 2009. Management did not 
overhaul the equipment even after running of 93,736 hours. Delays in overhauling of the turbo 
generators impacted their functioning. Problems in smo oth changing of load, higher steam 
consumption and higher iron and copper temperature in generator winding were noted by the 
Management due to which the load on turbine could not be increased beyond 40 Megawatt 
against its capacity of 55 Megawatt.  
Management replied (March 2022) that overhauling plan for boilers in 2-3 years was tentative 
and varied as per shut down availability and prevailing requirement of steam and power from 
Bokaro Steel Plant. Boilers 2 and 3 were kept under planned shut down and hence effective gap 
was lower. Main reason of delay in overhauling of Boiler 5 was unavailability of Air Pre 

Report No.15 of 2023 
54 
Heater53 blocks. Capital repair of Boiler 8 was done in October 2020. It also further stated that 
it now planned to do overhauling of boilers as per schedule. 
In respect of turbo generators, Management stated that capital repair was not carried out in 
Turbo Generator 1 because full capacity utilisation could not be achieved.  Turbo Generator 2 
had a majo r fire incident in October 2015. Contract for capital repair of Turbo Generator 2 
could not be awarded due to lack of interest from the bidders and new tender for capital repair 
of Turbo Generator 2 would be issued shortly. Thereafter, capital repair of ot her turbo 
generators would be taken up as per recommended schedule.  
Ministry replied (May 2023) that Boilers 2 and 3 were under shut down for a considerable 
period due to non-availability of Blast Furnace and Coke Oven gases from Bokaro Steel Plant 
and shortage of coal. In case of Boiler 8, scheduled date of its last overhauling was on 
November 2019 which got delayed by 11 months. In case of Turbo Generator 1, the rate of 
wear and tear was less due to operating at a low load condition. After finalisation of Residual 
Life Assessment work order, the overhauling would be taken up immediately. 
Reply of the Management/Ministry may be seen in view of the fact that as per norms fixed by 
the Management, the overhauling of boilers was to be scheduled in 2-3 years and not on the 
basis of working hours. Moreover, procurement of critical spares like Air Pre Heater blocks in 
time was an operational issue and should have been addressed by the Management.  Also, to 
ensure smooth operations, ev en though turbo generators were not operated at rated capacity, 
overhauling was required to be done as per the norms of 50,000 running hours fixed for 
overhauling.  
Recommendation 2: The Company may ensure that the boilers and turbo generators are 
repaired and maintained as per the norms fixed by the Management to reduce the shutdown 
hours. 
3.3.2.4     Non-implementation of Energy Audit recommendations 
Energy Audit Services, Faridabad conducted (2016) the Energy Audit of the Company and 
expressed major concerns in areas such as (i) Ingress Air54 be identified and rectified, as a part 
of routine maintenance, (ii) High un-burnt carbon in fly ash, (iii) Reconditioning of certain Air 
Pre Heater Units : temperature of the Exit Flue gas would be much higher causing 
proportionately higher level of heat loss through the chimney and resultant higher coal 
consumption and (iv) Reduce chimney loss. To address these issues, 14 recommendations were 
given after the Energy Audit. Bokaro Power Supply Company  complied with nine of these 
recommendations. Five recommendations that were not yet complied were: (i)  to restrict air 
ingress and reduce loss of boiler efficiency, major repairs and maintenance of thermal power 
plant boilers be done (ii) Installation of new turbo generator set after major repairs and 
maintenance, (iii) Burner Management System be introduced to help boilers to operate under a 
steady load with even low availability of blast furnace and coke oven gases, (iv) Installation of 
 
53  The purpose of the Air Pre Heater unit is to recover the heat from the boiler flue gas, which increases the 
thermal efficiency of the boiler by reducing the useful heat loss in the flue gas.  
54  Lot of air entering into the ducting system commonly known as Ingress Air.  

Report No.15 of 2023 
55 
water filtration system and (v) Variable frequency drives55 be planned for forced draft56 fan of 
thermal power plant boilers.  
Audit noted the following due to non-implementation of above recommendations:  
• The loss due to dry flue gas increased in Boilers 2, 6 and 8. 
• Bokaro Power Supply Company fixed norms for un-burnt carbon in fly ash and bottom 
ash as 2 to 3 per cent and 6 to 8 per cent respectively. Percentage of un-burnt carbon in 
fly ash and bottom ash in thermal power plant boilers, captive power plant boilers a nd 
Boiler 9 during 2016-17 to 2020-21 were as below:  
 
 
From the above charts it is seen that in case of fly ash the percentage of un-burnt carbon 
was between 14.9 to 21.8 per cent, 6.6 to 9.1 per cent and 4.4 to 8 per cent against the 
norms of 3 per cent in thermal power plant boilers, captive power plant boilers and 
Boiler 9 respectively . In case of bottom ash the percentage of un -burnt carbon was 
between 26.1 to 31.9, 8.9 to 15.7 and 14.2 to 28.6 per cent against norm of 8 per cent in 
thermal power plant boilers, captive power plant boilers and Boiler 9 respectively. 
 
Since boilers were in continuous use over more than 30 years, various sections of these 
boilers such as structural elements, pressure parts, refractory lining, ducts etc., were 
badly damaged resulting in air ingress in large amount causing high un -burnt carbon 
levels, partial loading of coal, low efficiency etc. Thus, due to higher percentage of un-
 
55  Variable Frequency Drives are used to control the speed of fans, pumps, and mills in power plants. 
56  Forced draft is achieved by forcing air into a furnace with a special fan and ductwork.  
3 3 3 3 3
18.25
16.07
21.79
19.05
14.94
6.58
8.1
9.08
7.91 7.7
4.4 4.99
8
6.07
4.82
2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21
Chart 3.3: Percentage of un-
burnt carbon in fly ash
Fly Ash Norms Fly Ash TPP
Fly Ash CPP Fly Ash Boiler 9
8 8 8 8 8
27.65
26.14
28.15
31.9
26.4
13.58 13.08
15.73
12.35
8.95
24.56
28.65
24.26
18.9
14.19
2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21
Chart 3.4: Percentage of un-
burnt carbon in bottom ash
Bottom Ash Norms Bottom Ash TPP
Bottom Ash CPP Bottom Ash Boiler 9

Report No.15 of 2023 
56 
burnt carbon in fly ash and bottom ash against norms, 2.69 lakh tonnes of un -burnt 
carbon equivalent to ₹ 284.41 crore57  value of coal was not utilised. Thus, even though 
the Energy Audit recommended (2016) to control loss of flu gas and un-burnt carbon to 
increase the boiler efficiency, Management had not taken concrete action in this regard. 
• As per the Energy Audit report (2016), boiler thermal efficiency above or equal to 84 
per cent is very good, equal to or above 80 per cent is good and below 80 per cent needs 
corrective action. Boiler thermal efficiency in all the boilers (except 6,7, 8 and 9) was 
below 80 per cent (ranging between 50 per cent and 74 per cent) during 2016 -17 to 
2020-21 which indicated that corrective action was required to be taken.  
 
Management replied (March 2022) that: 
o Proposal for major repair and maintenance of thermal power plant boilers 
consisting of transformation of existing ‘Bare tube water wall’58 to ‘Membrane type’59 
was initiated but subsequently dropped on the recommendation of the  committee 
consisting of experts from Damodar Valley Corporation , SAIL and Bokaro Power 
Supply Company that such type of job was very rarely done and success rate was very 
low. Tender for water filtration system could not materialise due to technical 
constraints and the installation of Variable frequency drives could not materialise due 
to constraint of space. 
o As the implementation of recommendation regarding changing the design of the 
thermal power plant boiler was not possible, the possibility of installing a new boiler 
was being explored. As repair and maintenance of boiler did not happen, installation 
of new turbo generator was not processed. 
o It was continuously moni toring health of ducts, air pre heaters and carried out 
repair work during shut downs. Minimisation of air ingress into boilers were being 
done on continuous basis which resulted in reduction of unburnt carbon in Boiler 7, 8 
and 9.  
o It was very difficult to increase efficiency of boilers to their design value after 
servicing of more than 30 years by only doing capital repair/maintenance work.  
The Ministry added (May 2023) that the recommendations of Energy Audit which were not 
implemented were either techno -commercially not feasible or retendered for reasons not 
attributable to Bokaro Power Supply Company Limited.  
The reply of the Management/Ministry may be seen in view of the fact that: 
 
57  Calculation was made on the basis of year wise consumption of total coal used in thermal power plant, 
captive power plant and Boiler 9 separately and thereafter  apportioned them in fly ash (80 per cent) and 
bottom ash (20 per cent) of ash content. The excess carbon (than the norm of fly ash (3 per cent) and 
bottom ash (8 per cent)) was multiplied by the coal procurement rate.  
58  These are tubes in the boiler where water is evaporated to steam.   These tubes also form the walls of the 
boiler. 
59   A series of tubes welded together tangentially or with membrane bar between them to form the walls of the 
boilers combustion chamber. 

Report No.15 of 2023 
57 
o Even after three years from the Committee’s recommendation (March 2020) for 
not pursuing proposals of Energy Audit related to certain specific areas (on the ground 
that such jobs were very rarely done and success rate was very low), no further action 
was taken to address those concerns.  
o The matter was brought before the Board Committee meeting (April 2022) and 
it was decided to engage a consultant for preparation of feasibility study for installation 
of a new multi-fuel boiler of around 300 tonnes per hour capacity. This was still under 
finalisation. 
o There was no significant improvement in loss due to dry flue gas, which rather 
increased in Boilers 2, 6 and 8.  Though, reduction of unburnt carbon in Boilers 7, 8 
and 9 was noted between 30 November 2021 to 8 February 2022,  other boilers had 
more percentage of unburnt carbon in fly ash and bottom ash. 
o Management accepted that increase in efficiency of boilers was low due to old 
age however no concrete action was taken for a viable solution.  
Recommendation 3: The Company may make efforts to reduce unburnt carbon in boilers to 
reduce the consumption of coal and take appropriate steps to address the issues raised by the 
Energy Audit. 
3.3.3     Execution of Projects  
3.3.3.1    Non replacement/augmentation of Boiler 1 
Bokaro Power Supply Company had nine boilers out of which eight were installed more than 
32 years ago. The Company decided (October 2012) for extensive repair and maintenance of 
thermal power plant Boilers 1 to 5 (installed between 1972 and 1985) as the boilers had outlived 
their useful life. Boiler 1 was not in operation since November 2016 due to its poor operating 
and safety condition. Bokaro Power Supply Company  Board directed (2019) to make firm 
action plan to revive it to keep in safe condition. A Committee constituted (February 2020) for 
study for revival of Boiler 1 observed (March 2020) that due to non -repair and continuous 
service over more than last forty years, various sections of the boiler were badly da maged 
resulting in air ingress in large amount causing high un-burnt carbon levels, partial loading, low 
efficiency, etc. The Committee recommended (October 2020) for installation of new boiler with 
not less than the present capacity which can run both on pulverisation of coal as well as on blast 
furnace gas, coke oven gas and convertor gas (Linz-Donawitz) generated in Bokaro Steel Plant. 
The Board approved (October 2020) the recommendation and directed to get budgetary offer 
from the Consultancy wing of NT PC, which was nominated to be hired as a consultant for 
installation of the boiler . Bokaro Power Supply Company  requested (November 2020) for 
budgetary offer from Consultancy wing of NTPC.  
Management/Ministry replied (March 2022 /May 2023) that Consultancy Wing of NTPC had 
been assigned (February 2022) the work of preparation of feasibility study for installation of a 
new multi-fuel fired boiler of about 300 tonnes per hour capacity. However, it further stated 
(November 2022) that Consultancy wing of NTPC had shown its inability and the process for 
finalisation of another consultant was underway.  

Report No.15 of 2023 
58 
Thus, even after a lapse of more than six years since Boiler 1 was out of operation and ageing 
of the other boilers, Management has not finalised a full time consultant for either installation 
of a new boiler or revival of Boiler 1 as NTPC had refused  (March 2022) consultancy for such 
low capacity boiler. 
  3.3.3.2      Non replacement of steam pipeline  
BHEL recommended (1996) for replacement of old 100 atmosphere absolute (ata) 60/5400C 
steam pipelines of Boilers 4 and 5 to prevent any sudden failure of the pipelines, enhance 
reliability and safety of the plant and to help in improving the efficiency. Audit noted that during 
last 24 years, Management had taken several initiatives to finalise the contract for replacement 
of above pipelines, however, the same was not successful mainly due to delay in appointment 
of consultant, non-finalisation of commercial terms and conditions of the consultant, delay in 
tendering etc. Bokaro Power Supply Company  submitted (April 2022) drawing and design to  
Consultancy wing of NTPC who found the drawings insufficient and suggested to develop as 
on date drawings with essential technical details by using the latest technology available. Thus, 
due to non-replacement of pipelines even after lapse of 26 years sin ce the recommendation to 
replace it, Bokaro Power Supply Company  continues to operate the pipelines below its 
capacity61 affecting its operating efficiency. Also, the safety concerns due to potential threat of 
any accident or failure of pipelines cannot be ignored.  
Management replied (March 2022) that the work order would be issued within one month and 
the drawings be developed within two months. Thereafter, Consultancy wing of NTPC would 
be engaged as the consultant and tender for replacement floated. 
Ministry added (May 2023) that fresh enquiry was floated, and work order placed on 13 October 
2022. The drawings had  been sent to NTPC for their views and final acceptance by Bokaro 
Power Supply Company Limited. After finalisation of the drawings. NTPC would be asked to 
submit their offer for Project Management Consultancy. 
The fact remained that even after a lapse of 26 years since the recommendation to replace the 
steam pipelines, the Company was not able to change the steam pipelines. 
3.3.3.3     Non-completion of Solar power units 
The Company decided (September 2016) to install solar power units in and around Bokaro Steel 
Plant for supply of green power. The work was completed in April 2019 after delay of 16 
months from the scheduled date of completion. The solar power units were not handed over for 
operation due to non-completion of Performance Guarantee test.  
Audit observed that the agency scheduled Performance Guarantee test on 6 May 2019 and 
requested (2 May 2019) Bokaro Power Supply Company  for trimming of trees, as due to 
shadow, modules would be affected. It also stated that the Performance Guarantee test be 
performed during the months of March to May. Bokaro Power Su pply Company  however 
trimmed the trees in June 2020 and asked the agency for Performance Guarantee test. However, 
 
60  1 ata=1.033kg/square cubic metre. 
61   The designed inlet steam pressure for the turbine was 90 ata and the working pressure is maintained at 
or below 85 ata resulting in loss of efficiency and heat rate. 

Report No.15 of 2023 
59 
the Performance Guarantee test was not conducted and the project was not handed over for 
operation. In this regard, it was noted that power was being generated from the solar power 
units and being supplied to Bokaro Steel Plant. However, bills for the same could not be raised 
as the Power Purchase Agreement had not been signed. Bokaro Power Supply Company could 
not raise the bill amounting to ₹ 0.86 crore62 on Bokaro Steel Plant.  
Management replied (March 2022) that they were in the process of taking up left over work and 
commence the operation and maintenance of the Plant through some external agency.  
Ministry replied (May 2023) that a proposal had been put up to Board Committee for Contract 
and Tender (February 2023) for termination of the contract for negligence on the part of 
contractor to complete the project and failure to carry out the comprehensive operations and 
maintenance.  
Audit noted that the amount of ₹8.71 crore invested in 2019 could not be utilised fruitfully. 
Bokaro Power Supply Company failed to raise bills on Bokaro Steel Plant due to absence of 
Power Purchase Agreement and the left over work and required operation and maintenance of 
the solar power plant also could not be completed.  
Recommendation 4: Company may expedite its efforts to complete the solar power units so 
as to utilise its investment fruitfully and to supply green power.  
3.3.4     Non achievement of operational parameters  
The norms stipulated by Central Electricity Regulatory Commission are not applicable to 
captive power plants. However, the Quality Policy of Bokaro Power Supply Company  inter-
alia, stipulated, achieving the norms as fixed by Central Electricity Regulatory Commission 
from time to time in respect of various operational parameters like Normative Plant availability 
factor63, Auxiliary Power consumption64, Specific Oil consumption65 and Heat rate66 etc. Audit 
noted that Bokaro Power Supply Company could not achieve the norms of Central Electricity 
Regulatory Commission in respect of operational parameters as the Company did not have any 
incentive to improve its operational parameters because as per its Power and Steam P urchase 
Agreement with SAIL, all expenditure including Return of Equity @15.5 per cent was to be 
borne by SAIL. The details are discussed in the following paragraphs. 
3.3.4.1     Extra expenditure due to low Plant Load Factor 
Central Electricity Regulatory Commission stipulated ‘Plant Load Factor’ for thermal 
generating station which is expressed as a percentage of sent out energy corresponding to 
installed capacity during a period. Central Electricity Regulatory Commission  also stipulated 
 
62  Power generated by solar power equipment for 2019 -20 and 2020-21 being 17,43,062 kilo watt at the rate 
of ₹ 4.98 per kilo watt.  
63  Plant Availability Factor in relation to a generating station for any period means the average of the daily 
declared capacities for all the days during the period expressed as a percentage of the installed capacity in 
MW less the normative auxiliary energy consumption.  
64  Auxiliary energy consumption means the quantum of en ergy consumed by auxiliary equipment of the 
generating station, expressed as a percentage of the sum of gross energy generated.  
65  Specific oil consumption means oil consumed for generating power.  
66  Gross Station Heat Rate means the heat energy input in kilo calories required to generate one kilowatt 
hour of electrical energy. 

Report No.15 of 2023 
60 
Normative Annual Plant Availability Factor for Damodar Valley Corporation67 units at Bokaro, 
Chandrapura and Durgapur as 85 per cent, 75 per cent and 74 per cent respectively. However, 
Central Electricity Regulatory Commission  norms for Plant Load Factor is applicable for 
commercial power generating stations and not for captive power plants. It was seen that during 
the period 2016-17 to 2020-21, Plant Load Factor of Bokaro Power Supply Company was less 
than the Plant Load Factor achieved by NTPC and Damodar Valley Corporation (Chandrapura 
Thermal Power Station). 
For the purpose of comparative analysis, Plant Load Factor of Bokaro Power Supply Company 
and other captive power generating companies (of Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited  and NTPC 
SAIL Power Company Limited) during 2016-17 to 2020-21 is given in the following table. 
Table 3.6: Comparison of Plant Load Factor achieved by power generating companies 
(units in per cent) 
Year Bokaro Power 
Supply Company 
Rashtriya Ispat 
Nigam Limited 
NTPC SAIL Power Company 
Limited 
Bhilai Durgapur Rourkela 
2016-17 57 14 53 95 94 
2017-18 46 64 63 92 96 
2018-19 42 87 73 93 96 
2019-20 50 85 78 88 93 
2020-21 40 58 63 82 99 
Plant Load Factor in Bokaro Power Supply Company was lower than that of other captive power 
plants like those of Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited (except in 2016-17) and NTPC SAIL Power 
Company (except Bhilai in 2016 -17). Further, non -achievement of even the  lowest Central 
Electricity Regulatory Commission  norms for thermal generating stations (74 per cent)68 and 
non-achievement of maximum target given by Bokaro Steel Plant to Bokaro Power Supply 
Company during 2016-17 to 2020-21 (215 Megawatt i.e., about 64 per cent) resulted in shortfall 
in generation of 1 ,398 million units of power during 2016 -17 to 2020 -21 and loss of profit 
margin of ₹49.47 crore.69 
Management replied (March 2022) that Central Electricity Regulatory Commission norms for 
Plant Load Factor was for commercial power generating stations of higher capacity and that it 
could not generate more power than the requirement given by Bokaro Steel Plant. 
The reply of the Management may be viewed in the light of the fact  that Quality Policy of the 
Company stipulates to achieve the Central Electricity Regulatory Commission norms. Further, 
the captive power plants attached to other Steel Sector Companies like Rashtriya Ispat Nigam 
Limited and NTPC SAIL Power Company  were also having higher Plant Load Factor . Also, 
 
67  Plant Load Factor  of Damodar Valley Corporation  has been considered as it is one of the old pioneer 
Government power generating companies and is also 50 per cent partner of the joint venture Bokaro Power 
Supply Company. 
68  Being the lowest norm fixed by Central Electricity Regulatory Commission  for Damodar Valley 
Corporation Durgapur unit. 
69  As power generation by Bokaro Power Supply Company was mainly dependent on the requirement placed 
by Bokaro Steel Plant, hence for calculation of P lant Load Factor, maximum demand placed by Bokaro 
Steel Plant has been considered.   

Report No.15 of 2023 
61 
due to lower production by Bokaro Power Supply Company , Bokaro Steel Plant restricted 
power requirement from Bokaro Power Supply Company only from October 2019.  
The Ministry replied (May 2023) that the Plant Load Factor of Bokaro Power Supply Company 
Limited was lower as compared to power plants of Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited and NTPC 
SAIL Power Company Limited due to the fact that those plants were not supplying processed 
steam to steel plant s. All units of power plants of Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited and NTPC 
SAIL Power Company Limited, except one 120 M egawatt unit of Rashtriya Ispat Nigam 
Limited, were coal based and were not dependent on the supply of Blast Furnace and Coke 
Oven gases from steel plants.  
The reply of the Ministry may be seen in view of the fact that the power plants of Bokaro Power 
Supply Company Limited were designed to supply steam to steel plants and for generation of 
power simultaneously. Supply of gases and coal should have been ensured by the Management 
through alternate arrangements.  
3.3.4.2     Excess consumption of steam 
Bokaro Power Supply Company fixed norm for consumption of steam to generate 1 Megawatt 
power as 3.92 tonnes for thermal power plant and 3.79 tonnes for captive power plant turbines70. 
The Company however fixed target of 4 tonnes for generation of 1 Megawatt power in its annual 
plan. Audit noted that consumption of steam was more than the norms as well as target fixed 
by the Company. The steam c onsumption was between 4.12 and 4.16 tonnes per Megawatt 
during 2016-17 to 2020-21. This resulted in excess consumption of steam and loss of generation 
of power by 236.52 million units with profit margin of ₹ 8.36 crore during 2016-17 to 2020-21. 
Management replied (March 2022) that steam consumption was higher since the machineries 
were more than 35-40 years old and were of old design.  
Reply of the Management may be seen in the light of the fact that audit has considered the loss 
with respect to target fixed by the Management itself in its Annual Plan, which was fixed after 
considering all factors including age of plants.  Further, the Board of Directors also directed 
(April 2019) to limit consumption o f steam by  4 tonnes per Megawatt through regular 
Condenser Cleaning. In Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited, steam consumption rate was between 
3.68 tonnes per Megawatt and 3.86 tonne per Megawatt during the same period. 
Ministry replied (May 2023) that a six years rolling plan for overhauling of boilers and turbines 
had been prepared and Bokaro Power Supply Company Limited would try to adhere to the 
schedule of overhauling of turbines to reduce the steam consumption.  
3.3.4.3       Excess Station Heat Rate 
Heat rate indicates efficiency of a power plant which is inversely related to efficiency i.e., lower 
heat rate indicates better efficiency. Central Electricity Regulatory Commission notified Gross 
Station Heat Rate (SHR) as 2,750 and 2,850 Kilo calorie per Kilo Watt for Badarpur, Talcher 
and Tanda NTPC units and 2,700 to 3,100 Kilo calorie per Kilo Watt for Bokaro Thermal Power 
 
70  The norm for consumption of steam of 3.92 tonne per Megawatt for Thermal Power Plant and 3.79 tonne 
per Megawatt for captive power plant turbine were given by manufacturer.  

Report No.15 of 2023 
62 
Station, Chandrapura Thermal Power Station and Durgapur Thermal Power Station of Damodar 
Valley Corporation.  
Station Heat Rate of Bokaro Power Supply Company, Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited, Damodar 
Valley Corporation and National Thermal Power Corporation are tabulated below: 
Table 3.7: Comparison of station heat rate of Bokaro Power Supply Company with other 
power plants 
Year Bokaro Power 
Supply 
Company 
Rashtriya 
Ispat Nigam 
Limited 
Damodar Valley Corporation NTPC 
   Bokaro  Chandrapura  Durgapur  (different units) 
2016-17 3,196 3,115 2,766 2,567 2,707 2,292-2,685 
2017-18 3,049 2,699 2,606 2,345 2,648 2,186-2,846 
2018-19 3,209 2,577 2,807 2,323 2,652 2,125-2,859 
2019-20 3,167 2,690 2,705 2,331 2,635 2,153-3,167 
2020-21 3,224 2,697 2,733 2,366 2,656 2,082-2,936 
 
Audit noted that Station Heat Rate of Bokaro Power Supply Company was between 3,049 Kilo 
calorie per Kilo Watt  and 3,224 Kilo calorie per Kilo Watt  during 2016 -17 to 2020 -21. In 
Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited , Station Heat Rate was between 2,577 and 3,115  Kilo calorie 
per Kilo Watt, in Damodar Valley Corporation  (Bokaro, Durgapur and Chandrapur unit) it 
ranged between 2,323 and 2,807 Kilo calorie per Kilo Watt whereas in NTPC the same was 
between 2,082 and 3,167 Kilo calorie per Kilo Watt. Thus, the heat rate in Bokaro Power Supply 
Company was more than the Central Electricity Regulatory Commission  norms as well as 
Station Heat Rate of other power generating companies like Damodar Valley Corporation , 
NTPC and power plant of Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited . Due to higher station heat rate, 
Bokaro Power Supply Company  generated less power. High Station Heat Rate also indicates 
inefficiency of boilers and turbines and excess consumption of fuels. 
Management replied (March 2022) that Central Electricity Regulatory Commission norms for 
station heat rate were for commercial power plants. Ministry added (May 2023) that Bokaro 
Power Supply Company had to operate more numbers of smaller capacity and old units to cater 
both uninterrupted steam and power requirement of Bokaro Steel Plant.  
Audit noted that the Quality Policy of the Company stipulates to achieve the Central Electricity 
Regulatory Commission norms. Further, Central Electricity Authority notified (March 20 19) 
norm for Station Heat Rate as 2, 600 Kilo calorie per Kilo Watt  irrespective of the age or 
technical parameter of power plants.  
Recommendation 5: The Company may make efforts to improve its operational parameters 
like Plant Load Factor, Consumption rate of Steam and Station Heat Rate and bring it at par 
with other comparable units so that no further loss is incurred on account of higher cost.  
3.3.5     Coal Management 
Bokaro Power Supply Company procures coal from Central Coal Fields Limited, Bharat 
Coking Coal Limited and SAIL. It entered into Fuel Supply Agreements on 30 April 2008 and 

Report No.15 of 2023 
63 
3 May 2014 with Central Coal Fields Limited with annual contracted quantity of 8,75,532 
tonnes and 1,73,300 tonnes (for Boiler 9) respectively. The validity of Fuel Supply Agreements 
was five years which was extended till 2023 and 2024 respectively. Bokaro Power Supply 
Company also entered (April 2008) into an agreement with Bharat Coking Coal Limited for 
Annual Contracted Quantity of 5,52,000 tonnes which is valid till 2023.  
Clause 5 of the Fuel Supply Agreements with Central Coal Fields Limited  and Bharat Coking 
Coal Limited stipulated that the seller should take all reasonable steps to remove stone, shale 
and extraneous matters before loading the coal. Further, the purchaser should inform the seller 
about all incidence of presence of stones in any specif ic consignment immediately on its 
detection at the delivery point.  
Audit noted that stones, 
shale and extraneous matters 
were mixed with the coal 
supplied in a regular manner. 
Bokaro Power Supply 
Company received 11,140 
tonnes of stone/ boulders 
valuing ₹4.50 crore during 
2016-17 to 2020-21. Bokaro 
Power Supply Company 
however, did not raise the 
issue with the coal 
companies. This resulted in 
extra expenditure of  
₹4.69 crore (including ₹0.19 crore as picking cost).  
Management replied (March 2022) that quantity of stone/boulders was negligible i.e., 0.14 per 
cent of total quantity of coal handled and mostly they were coming from Chasnalla71/SAIL. 
The reply of the Management may be seen in the light of the fact that stone, shale and extraneous 
material was continuously being received with the coal. Even, if that was the case, records were 
also not maintained relating to extraneous material/lumpy coal/stones/muddy coal supplied by 
Central Coal Fields Limited, Bharat Coking Coal Li mited and Chasnalla separately. Bokaro 
Power Supply Company  should have taken up the ma tter regarding supply of stone/ boulders 
with Chasnalla/SAIL as this was increasing expenditure of Bokaro Power Supply Company and 
the cost of power. 
 
 
71  Chasnalla is a captive colliery of SAIL. Bokaro Power Supply Company procures coal from Central Coal 
Fields Limited, Bharat Coking Coal Limited and SAIL. SAIL adjusted the price of Chasnalla coal through 
power cost.  
 
Figure 3.3: Coal Stock Yard 

Report No.15 of 2023 
64 
3.3.5.1 Unclaimed r ebate of ₹ 41.38 crore on account of higher ash content in coal 
supplied 
Clause 8.1 of Fuel Supply Agreements with Central Coalfields Limited stipulated that if the 
purchaser is desirous of availing joint sampling (third party sampling in case of Fuel Supply 
Agreement with Bharat Coking Coal Limited ), such facility shall be all owed at the Delivery 
Point only and for the coal produced from Seller’s own sources and not for imported coal. 
Clause 8.2 of the Fuel Supply Agreements stipulated that sample shall be drawn separately for 
the supplies made, from each colliery, grade wise a nd the venue for collection of samples by 
the third party shall be the delivery point. Price notification of Central Coalfields Limited ( 2 
February 2019) and Bharat Coking Coal Limited (29 January 2019) stipulated bonus or penalty 
at the rate of ₹ 7 per to nne charged for each 0.1 per cent increase or decrease in ash content 
above or below 34 per cent.  
Audit reviewed the bills of Central Coalfields Limited  and Bharat Coking Coal Limited for 
2020-21 and noted that in case of supply from Rajrappa/Central Coalfields Limited washeries, 
ash content was not indicated in the invoices for 2020 -21. However, from the sample of coal 
tested at Bokaro Power Supply Company laboratory, it was noted that ash content in 81 out of 
86 rakes was more than 34 per cent . Similarly , in case of supply from Central Coalfields 
Limited/Kathara, Kedla and Swang, invoices (2020-21) indicated 34 per cent ash whereas ash 
content as per laboratory report at Bokaro Power Supply Company were more than 34 per cent 
in 89 out of 97 rakes. 
In case  of supply from Bhojudih ( Bharat Coking Coal Limited ) all the invoices (2020 -21) 
indicated less than 34 per cent ash content. However, as per laboratory report ash content was 
between 35.46 per cent and 54.87 per cent in 14 out of 15 rakes. 
Audit observed that though the Management was aware about the wide variance in the ash 
content and that the terms of agreement provided for third party sampling, no third -party 
sampling was done during 2016-17 to 2020-21. The third-party sampling was started only from 
September/October 2021. In the absence of third -party sampling, seller did not accept the test 
conducted at Bokaro Power Supply Company laboratory.  Thus, in the absence of sampling of 
coal by third party, Bokaro Power Supply Company could not avail rebate of ₹ 41.38 crore72 
on excess ash content on coal supplied by Central Coalfields Limited and Bharat Coking Coal 
Limited as they did not accept coal analysis report conducted in the Bokaro Power Supply 
Company laboratory. Moreover, coal bills were continuously being paid by the Company even 
though ash content was not mentioned there.  
Management replied (March 2022) that the analysis report of the in- house laboratory of Bokaro 
Power Supply Company  was not recognised by any other party due to lack of accreditation. 
Hence, the rebate based on in-house laboratory report was not admissible. Ministry added (May 
2023) that third party sampling was being done from September 2021.  
The reply of the Management/Ministry establishes the fact that after deficiencies were noticed 
in the in-house testing, third party sampling was necessary. Third party sampling was not done 
 
72  Quantity of coal with ash content above 34 per cent multiplied with rebate of ₹7 per tonne for each 0.1 per 
cent increase in ash content above 34 per cent on average basis. 

Report No.15 of 2023 
65 
and only joint sampling was carried out with Bharat Coking Coal Limited and Central Coal 
Supply Organisation73. As third party sampling was not carried out, Management was unable to 
claim rebate. 
3.3.5.2  Extra expenditure due to supply of poor quality coal by Bharat Coking Coal 
Limited 
Clause 5.3 of Fuel Supply Agreement with Bharat Coking Coal Limited inter-alia stipulated the 
seller shall make adequate arrangement to assess the quality and monitor the same to endeavour 
that coal having Gross Calorific Value 74 less than 2,200 kilo calorie per kg is not loaded in 
purchaser’s containers. From review of laboratory test reports of Bokaro Power Supply 
Company of 2020-21, Audit noted that coal in 12 rakes out of total 63 rakes received from 
Jamadoba, Munidih and Bhelatand mines of Bharat Coking Coal Limited had c alorific value 
less than 2 ,200 kilo calorie per kilogram . Average calorific value of coal in these ra kes was 
2,730 kilo calorie per kg, 3,331  kilo calorie per kg and 2,727 kilo calorie per kg respectively 
against average calorific value of 4,300 kilo calorie per kg for coal supplied by Central 
Coalfields Limited. 
Audit also noted that coal from Jamadoba and Bhelatand was procured first time during the last 
five years. As Bokaro Power Supply Company had sufficient quantity of coal at beginning of 
2020-21 (1.71 lakh tonnes) and supply from Central Coalfields Limited was 57 per cent only, 
Bokaro Power Supply Company had an option to procure more coal from Central Coalfields 
Limited rather than from Bharat Coking Coal Limited  which had lesser calorific value. This 
resulted in extra expenditure of ₹10.47 crore during 2020-21 on account of poor quality of coal 
from these mines. Though the quality of coal was not as per specification of the Fuel Supply 
Agreement, the Company only intimated Central Coal Supply Organisation/SAIL who was the 
coal co-ordinator but did not take up the matter with higher authorities of Central Coal Supply 
Organisation and Bharat Coking Coal Limited . It was further noted that Memorandum of 
Understanding which was entered into by SAIL and Bharat Coking Coal Limited  inter alia 
stipulated to carry out third party sampling which was not done. 
Management replied (March 2022) that as per the Fuel Supply Agreement with Bharat Coking 
Coal Limited , supply of at least 60  per cent  of the Fuel Supply Agreement  quantity was 
mandatory. Non-fulfilment of the same would attract penalty and Bharat Coking Coal Limited 
might review their stance for future Fuel Supply Agreement with Bokaro Power Supply 
Company. Bokaro Power Supply Company had regularly corresponded regarding poor quality 
of coal with Central Coal Supply Orga nisation/SAIL which was coordinating the supply from 
Bharat Coking Coal Limited. 
The reply of the Management may be seen in view of the fact that Bokaro Power Supply 
Company procured 62 per cent of Annual Contracted Quantity from Central Coalfields Limited 
in 2020-21, whereas it procured 76 per cent of Annual Contracted Quantity from Bharat Coking 
Coal Limited. As it was aware that the coal from Bharat Coking Coal Limited was of lower 
 
73  Central Coal Supply Organisation is a unit of SAIL which coordinates supply of coal to SAIL and its Joint 
ventures from Central Coalfields Limited and Bharat Coking Coal Limited. 
74  Calorific Value indicated the heat produced in kCal by complete combustion of one kilogr am of coal.  

Report No.15 of 2023 
66 
quality in comparison to the Central Coalfields Limited, it could have restricted the procurement 
of coal from Bharat Coking Coal Limited to the minimum level required (60 per cent of Annual 
Contracted Quantity) to avoid any penalty. The Chairman of the Board Committee for Finance, 
Accounts and Audit of Bokaro Power Supply Company also directed (July 2021) Bokaro Power 
Supply Company  Management to conduct meeting with SAIL/  Central Coal Supply 
Organisation so that Bokaro Power Supply Company  was not given only residua l low grade 
coal.  
Ministry replied (May 2023) that there was acute crisis in coal supply during pandemic and post 
Covid period. Priority was given by the Ministry to supply coal to commercial Power Sector 
Companies.  
Reply of Management may be seen in the light of the fact that despite there being provision in 
the Fuel Supply Agreement with Central Coalfields Limited for import of coal, the Co mpany 
did not opt for the same and rather procured lower/inferior quality of coal. Overall Coal 
Management was very poorly handled by the Company and consequently it ended up with coal 
with low calorific value, higher ash content and coal that was mixed up with stones/boulders 
and other extraneous material. 
Recommendation 6: The Company may make effort to reduce procurement of coal having 
poor calorific value and high ash content and regularly monitor the quality of coal through 
third party sampling.   
3.3.6     Safety and Environmental Issues 
3.3.6.1     Safety issues  
Section 88 of the Factories Act, 1948 stipulated that in case any accident occurs which causes 
death or any bodily injury by reason of which the person injured is prevented from working for 
a period of forty-eight hours or more, it should be treated as Non-Fatal –reportable accident and 
should be intimated to the concerned statutory authority. Bokaro Power Supply Company  
declared one case as reportable and 31 non -reportable during 2016 -17 to 2020 -21. Audit 
however noted that in 17 cases wherein the workers were absent from duty from 3 days to 46 
days were not treated as reportable and declared as non -reportable cases. This was against the 
provisions of the Factories Act. 
Management replied (March 2022) that 20 incidents were road accidents that occurred outside 
the premises of Power Plant and seven incidents were cases where injury leave was extended 
by Hospital and was not reported. 
Reply of the Management may be viewed in the light of the fact that  17 accidents noted by 
Audit occurred in the plant premises of Bokaro Power Supply Company and leave of employees 
were more than 48 hours and were required to be reported under the provisions of Factories 
Act. 
The Ministry added (May 2023) that Safety department had started gathering data/information 
from Bokaro General Hospital for such cases and such information was being provided to the 
Statutory bodies and Factories Act and Rules were being complied. 

Report No.15 of 2023 
67 
3.3.6.2     Non installation of fire protection system in transformer 
Central Electricity Authority (Measures Relating to Safety and Electric supply) Regulation, 
2010 stipulated that all the transformers of Mega Volte Ampere and above or in case of oil filled 
transformer with oil capacity of more than 2000 litres shall be provided w ith IS-3034:1993 
firefighting systems or with nitrogen injection fire protection system.  Bokaro Power Supply 
Company had 17 transformers out of which only 10 had fire protection systems till March 2022. 
The nitrogen injection fire protection system  for remaining seven transformers were yet to be 
installed. 
Audit noted that Central Electricity Authority raised the issue of non -installation of nitrogen 
injection fire protection system  in February 2014, however the same was not fully complied 
with even after lapse of seven years. Two incidences75 occurred in Turbo Generator 2 (October 
2015) and in Generator Transformer in Turbo Generator 7 (August 2020). Turbo Generator 2 
was repaired in February 2017 and taken back in operation after shutdown of 17 months. Turbo 
Generator 7 was out of operation till September 2021. Audit observed that due to delay in 
installation of fire protection system, there was non-compliance of Central Electricity Authority 
orders on the part of the Company. Generation of power was also affected due to the fire 
incidences mentioned above.  
Management replied (March 2022) that commissioning of nitrogen injection fire protection 
system in remaining seven transformers would be done by end of 2022. 
Ministry replied (May 2023) that nitrogen injection fire protection system had been installed 
and commissioned in all seventeen transformers as on 14 November 2022. 
3.3.7      Environmental issues 
3.3.7.1    Non-adherence of Ministry of Environment, Forest . and Climate Change 
guidelines for emission of dust and gases 
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change ha d amended the Environment 
(Protection) Amendment Rules, 1986 and notified it as ‘The Environment (Protection) 
Amendment Rules, 2015’ in December 2015. The Rules specified norms of emissions of gases 
and dust from Power Plants i.e. , (sulphur di-oxide and nit rogen oxide) and particulate matter 
for the Thermal Power Plants installed before December 2003 and those installed between 
January 2003 and December 2016. Bokaro Power Supply Company entrusted (October 2018) 
MECON76 to carry out Study and prepare Feasibility Report to adhere to the norms of Ministry 
of Environment, Forest and Climate Change for flue gas emission limits in its power plant. 
MECON submitted the Feasibility Report in November 2019.  
MECON carried out field test to check the various pollutants present in the flue gas and noted 
that parameters were beyond the limit specified by the Ministry of Environment, Forest and 
Climate Change. Though the sulphur di -oxide level in Boilers 2 to 5 wa s within the norm of 
600  milligrams per cubic metre (mg/Nm3), sulphur di-oxide level in Boilers 6 to 9 was between 
 
75  In both cases fire occurred. 
76  MECON Limited, known as Metallurgical & Engineering Consultants (India) Limited is a government 
owned engineering consultancy service provider under the Ministry of Steel, Government of India.  

Report No.15 of 2023 
68 
1,227 and 1,796 milligrams per cubic metre. Nitrogen oxide level in all the boilers in operation 
was between 606 and 3,517 milligrams per cu bic met re against the norm of 600  mg/Nm3. 
Suspended Particulate Matter level in the Boilers 2 to 8 was between 161 and 207 milligrams 
per cubic metre  against the norm of 100 milligrams per cubic metre  (Suspended Particulate 
Matter in Boiler 6 was within the norm) whereas in Boiler 9, the level was 126 milligrams per 
cubic metre which was higher than its norm of 50 milligrams per cubic metre. 
MECON recommended 77 (November 2019) nitrogen oxide  level, Selective Non Catalyst  
Reduction system for Boilers 3 to 5. Regarding Boilers 6 to 9, it recommended to set up Semi 
Dry Flue Gas Desulphurisation system . Combination of combustion modification technology 
and Selective Non Catalyst Reduction System was recommended for Boiler 9. 
Audit observed that though the notification issued in December 2015 was to be complied within 
two years, Bokaro Power Supply Company  initiated the proposal in October 2018 after lapse 
of more than two years. The recommendation of MECON was yet to be implemented (March 
2022). 
Management replied (March 2022) that Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change 
had given a time extension to the industries for implementation of Flue Gas Desulphurisation 
system till December 2024. Bokaro Power Supply Company had taken steps for preparation of 
Technical Specifications for installation of Flue Gas Desulphurisation system in Boilers 6 to 9. 
Ministry stated (May 2023) that NTPC consultancy wing was engaged as Project Management 
Consultant for the project in March 2021. NTPC had submitted detailed project report wherein 
setting up of Wet type Flue gas Desulphuri sation system for Boilers 6 to 9 was recommended 
instead of Semi Dry type Flue gas Desulphurisation systems recommended by MECON earlier. 
The tender specifications were being prepared by NTPC.  
The reply of the Management/Ministry may be seen in the light of the fact that even after a 
lapse of seven years from date of notification issued in December 2015 and a lapse of three 
years since recommendation of MECON, direction given by Ministry of Environment, Forest 
and Climate Change was not complied with. The Managem ent was yet to float tender enquiry 
to setup Wet type Flue gas Desulphuri sation system as recommended by NTPC in November 
2022. As such, while Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change has given extension, 
the fact remain ed that hazardous gases we re emitted above the environmental norms thereby 
posing threat to human life nearby. 
Recommendation 7: Bokaro Power Supply Company may make all efforts to set up the Wet 
type Flue Gas Desulphurisation system  as recommended by the consultant relating to 
emission of various gases to avoid any penalty from Ministry of Environment, Forest & 
Climate Change. 
 
 
 
77  Boiler 1 was not in use since November 2016.  MECON stated that Boiler 2 met the new norm and 
accordingly they did not recommend for Boiler 2.  

Report No.15 of 2023 
69 
3.3.7.2: Non-compliance of directions issued by  Ministry of Environment and Forest  
relating to disposal of fly ash 
Ministry of Environment and Forest issued notification (September 1999) for disposal of ash 
generated from all coal based thermal power stations to achieve target of 100 per cent fly ash 
utilisation within five years. The notification was amended in 2003, 2009, 2016 and latest in 
April 2021 and December 2021 . As per the notification, all coal based thermal power plants 
shall, within a radius of 300 kilometres, bear the cost of transportation of ash to the site of road 
construction. As per amendment made in December 2021, every coal based thermal power plant 
shall be responsible to utilise 100 per cent ash (fly ash and bottom ash) generated during that 
year. 
Further, in case of unutilised accumulated ash i.e., legacy ash, shall be utilised progressively by 
the Thermal Power Plants in such a manner that the utilisation of legacy ash shall be completed 
fully within 10 years (1st year – at least 20 per cent, 2nd year at least 35 per cent and 3rd to 10th 
year at least 50 per cent ) from 1 April 2022 otherwise a fine of ₹1000 per tonne of unutilised 
legacy ash during that financial year will be imposed. 
Audit noted that total 
28.95 lakh cubic met res 
of ash was generated by 
Bokaro Power Supply 
Company during 2016 -
17 to 2020-21. However, 
33.55 lakh cubic met re 
of ash was utilised by the 
Company during the 
above period. Audit 
observed that the 
Company utilised 
mostly the current 
generated ash and 
disposal of legacy ash 
accumulated over the 
years was very slow. This was evident from the fact that there was accumulation of 31.80 lakh 
cubic metre of legacy ash as on 31 March 2021. 
Further, National Highway Authority of India requested (October 2019) for supply of 19.96 
lakh cubic metre of pond ash for road construction, however, Bokaro Power Supply Company 
could supply only 1.71 lakh cubic metre of ash (8.56 per cent) to National Highway Authority 
of India till October 2020.  
Management replied (March 2022) that ash utilisation was more than the ash generated during 
last five years. Bokaro Power Supply Company  was constantly exploring new avenues to 
increase the ash utilisation. Major concern in ash utilisation was continuous agitation by local 
villagers against execution of the work which affected the disposal of ash. Management also 
stated that NHAI did not lift the ash.  
Figure 3.4: Ash Pond 

Report No.15 of 2023 
70 
Ministry replied (May 2023) that Bokaro Power Supply Company Limited was in the course of 
utilisation of legacy ash as per the guidelines of Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate 
Change. 
The reply of the Management may be seen in the light of the fact that only freshly generated ash 
was being disposed off and legacy ash were not utilised adequately. Agitation of local villagers 
is an administrative issue which should be taken care of by the Management. The reply of 
Ministry may be seen in the light of the fact that there was an accumulation of 29.77 lakh cubic 
metres of legacy ash as on 31 March 2023, which was yet to be disposed off. 
Recommendation 8: Bokaro Power Supply Company may make all efforts to utilise/dispose 
the legacy ash in order to comply with the notification of Ministry of Environment, Forest & 
Climate Change. The matter of utilisation of pond ash for road construction may also be 
actively followed up with NHAI. 
3.3.8     Conclusion 
Bokaro Power Supply Company Limited was formed as a Joint venture of SAIL and Damodar 
Valley Corporation to operate as a captive power plant to supply steam and power to Bokaro 
Steel Plant. However, it could achieve production ranging between 68 per cent and 90 per cent 
of the annual requirement of Bokaro Steel Plant during 2016 -17 to 201 8-19. Consequently, 
Bokaro Steel Plant reduced the demand of power from Bokaro Power Supply Company Limited 
from 210 Megawatt in 2018 -19 to 175 Megawatt in 2019 -20 and furt her reduced it to 134 
Megawatt in 2020-21. Bokaro Steel Plant instead procured more power from Damodar Valley 
Corporation.  
Audit noted that the major reasons for the inability of Bokaro Power Supply Company Limited 
to achieve its planned production /requirement of Bokaro Steel Plant  was low performance of 
its boilers and turbo generators, lack of repair and maintenance and the failure of the Company 
to implement all the recommendations of the Energy Audit. Due to high percentage of un-burnt 
carbon in the fly and bottom ash against norms, the Company was also not able to utilise 2.69 
lakh tonnes of unburnt carbon equivalent to coal valuing ₹284.41 crore.  Management also 
failed to implement various projects like replacement/augmentation of boilers,  replacement of 
steam pipelines, solar power units that were envisaged to improve its performance.  
Bokaro Power Supply Company Limited could not achieve the nor ms of Central Electricity 
Regulatory Commission in respect of operational parameters like plant load factor, 
consumption of steam, station heat rate etc. Company was not able to operate at minimum Plant 
Load Factor based on the total requirement of Bokaro Steel Plant which resulted in shortfall in 
generation of 1,398 million units of power during 2016-17 to 2020-21and loss of profit margin 
of ₹49.47 crore. Excess consumption of steam beyond the norms resulted in loss of generation 
of power by 236.52 million units with profit margin of ₹ 8.36 crore.  
Several issues were also noted with respect to Coal Management. It procured lower quality of 
coal from Bharat Coking Coal Limited even though there was scope of procurement of superior 
quality of coal from Central Coalfields Limited which resulted in extra expenditure of ₹10.47 
crore during 2020-21. Bokaro Power Supply Company  could not avail rebate of ₹41.38 crore 

Report No.15 of 2023 
71 
on excess ash content from Central Coalfields Limited  and Bharat Coking Coal Limited in 
absence of third party sampling.  
Lapses were also noted in respect of safety and environment related issues. The Company did 
not implement the instructions of Ministry  of Environment, Forest and Climate Change 
regarding emissions of dust and gases from power plants.    
Bokaro Power Supply Company Limited being a captive power plant of SAIL, needs to operate 
efficiently, economically and effectively and minimise the dependency of SAIL on power from 
other sources.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi                                                                          (R.G. Viswanathan) 
Dated: 11 July 2023                                      Deputy Comptroller and Auditor General  
            and Chairman, Audit Board 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Countersigned 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi                                                                               (Girish Chandra Murmu) 
Dated: 13 July 2023                                       Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Report No.15 of 2023 
73 
Annexure I  
Statement showing calculation for the amount of due to be recovered from  
M/s Punj Lloyd 
(Referred to in paragraph 1.2.1.3) 
 
 
  
Particulars Formula Amount 
Final bill (80th RA) for work done value A ₹ 16,196,702 
12th Escalation bill B ₹ 52,982,838 
Other Payable C ₹ 6,518,305 
Total Payable D=(A+B+C) ₹ 75,697,845 
Recovery towards non deployment of 
Machinery 
E ₹ 21,894,500 
Inadequacy of Test results of Geo-grid F ₹ 36,051,126 
Security Deposit for Defect Liability 
Period 
G ₹ 100,000,000 
Liquidity Damage imposed by AAI H ₹ 264,290,000 
Interest for non-submission of BG I ₹ 11,597,222 
Other Recoveries J ₹ 1,064,209 
Total Recoveries K=(E+F+G+H+I+J) ₹ 434,897,057 
Recoveries to be made L=(K-D) ₹ 359,199,212 
Less - Security deposit M ₹ 100,000,000 
Net Recoveries  ₹ 259,199,212 

Report No.15 of 2023 
74 
Annexure-II 
Statement showing calculation of Runway length correction of Q-400 aircraft at 
Pakyong Airport 
(Referred to in paragraph 1.2.2.2) 
 
Runway take-off length for Q-400 1300 m 
Runway take-off length corrected  
for elevation 
(1300 X 0.07 X (1416 /300) + 1300) 
1729.520 m 
 
Runway take-off length corrected 
for elevation and temperature 
 (1729.520 X (30.02 -5.796) X 0.01) + 1729.520 
 2148.479 m 
Runway take-off length corrected 
for elevation, temperature and 
slope 
 (2148.479 X 0.5 X 0.10) +2148.479 
= 2255.903 m  = 2260 m (say) 
  
Elevation of Pakyong airport 1416 m 
Reference Temperature at 
Pakyong airport 
30.02 degree C 
Longitudinal slope-runway (avg.) 0.5% 
Temperature in the standard  
atmosphere at sea level 
15 degree C 
 
Temperature in the standard 
atmosphere for 1416 m 
(15 – (6.5 X 1416 / 1000))  
5.796 degree C 

Report No.15 of 2023 
75 
Annexure-III 
Statement showing details of contracts selected in sampling 
(Referred in para 2.1.8) 
 
S. 
No 
Contract/work order no/date Particulars of 
contracts/ work 
order 
Name of 
contractor/ 
vendor 
Awarded 
value of 
contract/ 
work 
order (₹ 
in lakh) 
1 Nepa/Proj/1309/15-16 
dated 18.09.2015 
Civil & Structural 
Work of Revival and 
Mill Development 
Plan 
M/s Capital 
Construction 
Pvt. Ltd., 
Indore 
1,883.08 
2 PROJ/1304/2015 
dated 18.03.2016 
PEB work for D e-
Inking Plant & Raw 
Material Storage 
M/s Everest 
Industry 
Limited 
499.18 
3 Proj/5523/651  
dated 18.01.2019 
Procurement of PPC 
Cement 
M/s Jai 
Corporation 
62.00 
4 Nepa/Proj/1308-1 
dated 30.10.2015 
Procurement of 
Reinforcement Steel 
M/s Jindal 
Steel Pvt. Ltd. 
659.25 
5 Proj/1318/5525/18-19 
dated 05.03.2019 
Procurement of 
Structural Steel 
M/s Sitaram 
Ganeshmall 
183.43 
6 Nepa/Proj/5546/20-21 
dated 22.08.2020 
Procurement of 
Structural Steel 
M/s Sitaram 
Ganeshmall 
57.95 
7 NEPA/1313/2017-18 
dated 02.05.2017 
Structural Audit & 
NDT Testing 
M/s Global 
Engineers 
Services 
9.84 
8 NEPA/Proj/1317  
dated 10.05.2019 
Construction of New 
Ash Pond 
M/s 
Neelkantham 
System Pvt. 
Ltd. 
645.46 
9 Proj/2013-1/369  
dated  30.05.2019 
Construction of 80 
m height RCC 
chimney 
M/s  Slipco 233.65 
10 Project/1321/19-20 
dated 13.08.2019 
RCC dismantling in 
Paper Machine area 
M/s B.S. 
Rajput 
33.69 
11 Proj/903/2015 
dated 29.07.2015 
Refurbishment/ 
modification of stock 
preparation, 
approach flow, broke 
handling system, 
fiber recovery, Paper 
Machines with 
auxiliaries, its 
erection, 
commissioning and 
Performance 
Guarantee run 
M/s PAPCEL, 
Czech 
Republic 
11,563.08 

Report No.15 of 2023 
76 
S. 
No 
Contract/work order no/date Particulars of 
contracts/ work 
order 
Name of 
contractor/ 
vendor 
Awarded 
value of 
contract/ 
work 
order (₹ 
in lakh) 
12 Proj/908/2016 
dated 31.08.2016 
Refurbishment of 
Existing Rewinders 
For Paper Machine-1 
& New Rewinder for 
Paper Machine-2 
M/s PAPCEL 
a.s., Czech 
Republic 
2,894.57 
13 Proj/815/5528/2019-20 
dated 11.01.2019 
Additional Erection 
Items for Mech 
M/s 
Siddhivinayak 
Steel Mumbai 
247.05 
14 TCE-7295A-C-690-
001/NEPA/RMDP/ETP/Proj.1404 
Effluent Treatment 
Plant (ETP) 
Arvind 
Envisol 
2,247.00 
15   Repairing of ETP 
Transformer 
M/s Power 
Batteries 
5.94 
16 TCE7295A-C300-
001/NEPA/RMDP/DIP/05 
De-Inking Plant M/s Andritz 4,171.76 
17   CHA & Logistics M/s Boxco 
Logistics 
283.95 
18   Third Party 
Inspection 
M/s SGS 1.12 
19 PROJ/819 
dated 24.06.2019 
Fire Fighting M/s Extinct, 
Mumbai 
310.00 
20 Proj/2004/2016 
dated 10.09.2016 
12.27 MW Captive 
Power Plant (CPP) 
M/s Sitson 5,191.00 
21 Proj/CPP/ADD. 
MECH./2013/2019 
Dated 12.07.2019 
CPP Additional 
Boiler Mechanical 
M/s Sitson 138.00 
22 Proj/925/2019-20 
dated 06.06.2020 
Vaccum Pumps for 
Paper Machine-2 
M/s PPI 
Pumps Pvt 
Ltd. 
Ahmedabad 
182.23 
23 Proj/1204/132 KV Substation/03 
dated 28.11.2015 
Supply of 132/6.9 
KV Substation 
M/s Asiatic 
Traders 
307.97 
24 Proj/1204/132 KV Substation 
dated 15.11.2019 
Additional Budget 
for 12.5 MVA 
Transformer 
M/s Royal 
Electrical 
Works,  
Kalyan 
157.53 
25 AE/2016-17/50 
dated 13.05.2016 
Shifting of 33 KV 
line -1 (P/H) 
M/s 
MPPKVVCL, 
Indore 
60.00 
26 Proj/3007/2013 
dated 27.11.2013 
Geotechnical 
investigation - Work 
of Factory Premises 
M/s DBM 
Geotechics & 
Construction 
Pvt. Ltd -
Mumbai 
9.55 

Report No.15 of 2023 
77 
S. 
No 
Contract/work order no/date Particulars of 
contracts/ work 
order 
Name of 
contractor/ 
vendor 
Awarded 
value of 
contract/ 
work 
order (₹ 
in lakh) 
27 LOI No. Proj/1301 
dated 06.12.2013 
Project Managemen t 
consultancy services 
for RMDP 
M/s TCE,  
Mumbai 
917.49 
28 P.O. 6006 Search Report of 
M/s Cathar Ltd 
Jasbil & 
Company, 
New Delhi 
0.07 
29 Proj/5505_1/15-16 
dated 23.02.2016 
Rotary with Carbon 
Rings 
M/s Marko 
Steamjet Pvt.  
Ltd. 
6.92 
Total 32,962.76 
 
  

Report No.15 of 2023 
78 
Annexure-IV 
Statement showing changes in scope of work under tenders of Revival and Mill 
Development Plan 
(Referred in para 2.2.1.2) 
 
Sr. 
No 
Name of major activity Awarded 
cost (₹ in 
crore) 
Revised 
cost (₹ 
in 
crore) 
Difference 
(₹ in crore) 
1 300 Bone Dry Tonne Per Day De-Inking 
Plant (Civil works) 
12.06 23.83 11.77 
2 Renovation of Paper Machines 103.82 107.80 3.98 
3 Renovation of 12.27 MW Captive Power 
Plant 
49.34 51.91 2.57 
4 300 Bone Dry Tonne Per Day De-Inking 
Plant (Erection works) 
Fresh 
tender 
2.47 2.47 
 
 Total 20.79 
 
  

Report No.15 of 2023 
79 
Annexure-V 
Statement showing estimated cost and actual awarded cost of various works under 
Revival and Mill Development Plan 
(Referred in para 2.2.1.2) 
 (₹ in crore) 
S. 
No. 
Particulars of work Estimated 
Cost 
Revised 
Estimated 
cost 
Awarded 
Cost 
Revised 
awarded 
cost 
1. Refurbishment/ modification 
of stock preparation, 
approach flow, broke 
handling system, fiber  
recovery, Paper Machines 
with auxiliaries, its erection, 
commissioning and 
Performance Guarantee run 
41.30 78.07 103.82 107.80 
2. Refurbishment and R&M of 
12.27 MW cogen power plant 
& Auxiliaries on lump sum 
basis excluding civil works 
20.00 38.00 49.34 51.91 
3. Design, Engineering, 
Construction, Manufacture, 
Assembly, Test at 
Manufacturers Works, 
Supply, Refurbishment of 
existing Equipment, Erection, 
Commissioning and 
Performance Acceptance Test 
and onsite training of Sludge 
Handling System (Package-1) 
and Effluent Treatment Plant 
(Package-2) 
27.00 -- 22.47 -- 
4. Pre-Engineered building 
works for construction of 
proposed 300 B one Dry 
Tonnes Per Day De-Inking 
Plant Building, Raw Material 
Storage (RMS) warehouse 
under R evival and Mill 
Development Plan 
6.00 -- 4.59 4.99 
5. Refurbishment of existing 
Rewinder for Paper Machine-
1 and new Rewinder for Paper 
Machine-2 
23.00 -- 27.10 28.95 
6. Reel Wrapping System 10.40 -- 6.14 -- 
 Total 127.70  213.46  
 
 
 

Report No.15 of 2023 
80 
Annexure-VI 
Statement showing time taken by the Project Management Consultant (PMC) in evaluation of bids and issue of Letters of Intent 
(Referred to in paragraph 2.2.1.2) 
S.No. Tender No. Actual date 
of opening 
of Part-I of 
the tender 
Date of 
recommendation 
by PMC 
Time taken 
by PMC 
for 
technical 
evaluation 
of bid 
(in days) 
Date of 
Opening of 
Part-II 
(Price Bid) 
of the 
tender 
Time 
Taken 
for 
opening 
of Price 
bid (in 
days) 
Date of 
issue of LoI 
Time 
taken 
in 
issue 
of LoI 
(in 
days) 
Date of 
execution 
of  contract 
1 TCE-7295A-C-510-
002/Nepa/RMDP/CPP/08  
28.04.2014 17.03.2016 689 24.05.2016 757  30.06.2016 794 10.09.2016 
2 TCE 7295A-C 310-
001/Nepa/RMDP/PM/09  
28.11.2014 05.03.2015 97 11.03.2015 103  25.06.2015 209 29.07.2015 
3 TCE 7295A-C 300-
001/Nepa/RMDP/DIP/05  
07.02.2014 20.05.2014 102 30.05.2014 112  02.07.2014 145 14.11.2014 
4 NEPA/RMDP/Rewinder/20 13.01.2016 01.04.2016 79 12.04.2016 90 21.07.2016 190 31.08.2016 
5 NEPA/RMDP/812 30.11.2016 21.03.2017 111 24.04.2017 145 16.01.2019 777 31.01.2019 
6 TCE-7295A-C-690-
001/NEPA/RMDP/ETP/ 
PROJ1404 
30.11.2016 01.03.2017 91 24.04.2017 145 26.02.2019 818 NA 
 