 
 
 
 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor 
General of India 
 
 
 
 
Performance audit  
on 
Implementation of the Rights of Persons 
with Disabilities Act, 2016 (RPWD) 
 
 
 
Government of Karnataka 
Report No.02 of the year 2024 
 
 
 
 
Government of Karnataka 
Report No.10 of the year 2022 

 
 
 

 
i 
Table of contents 
 
Paragraph Contents Page 
Number 
 Preface v 
 Executive Summary vii 
Chapter I Introduction  
1.1 The Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 
2016 
1 
1.2 Demographic profile 2 
1.3 Organisation setup 2 
1.4 Audit Objectives 3 
1.5 Audit criteria 4 
1.6 Audit scope and methodology 4 
1.7 Acknowledgement 4 
Chapter II Planning and Financial Management  
2.1 Planning 5 
2.2 Institutional Framework 10 
2.3 Financial Management 18 
Chapter III Accessibility   
3.1 Accessible India Campaign 25 
3.2 Accessible Tourism 28 
3.3 Accessibility to libraries 29 
Chapter IV Education   
4.1 Schools for intellectually disabled 32 
4.2 Schools for Visually Impaired 34 
4.3 Schools for Hearing Impaired 38 
4.4 Registration of Teachers with Rehabilitation 
Council of India 
41 
4.5 Accessible infrastructure in Schools 42 
4.6 Poor functioning of GIA Schools vis-à-vis CC 
Schools 
45 
4.7 Absence of Higher Secondary Education 
Schools for Visually and Hearing Impaired 
46 
4.8  Reservation in Higher Educational Institutions  46 
4.9 Absence of Education Indicators  47 

Implementation of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 
ii 
Paragraph Contents Page 
Number 
Chapter V Skill Development, Employment and Social 
Security  
 
5.1 Skill development for PwDs 49 
5.2 Employment of PwDs 50 
5.3 Social Security for PwDs 53 
5.4 Issues due to lack of awareness amongst 
stakeholders 
56 
Chapter VI Rehabilitation   
6.1 Manasa Kendras 59 
6.2 After Care Home for Mentally Retarded 
Women 
61 
6.3 Deendayal Disabled Rehabilitation Scheme 61 
6.4 District Disability Rehabilitation Centres 62 
6.5 District Early Intervention Centres 65 
6.6 Establishment of Day Care Centres 66 
  

Table of contents 
iii 
List of Appendices 
Appendix 
Number Details Page 
Number 
3.1 Statement showing the compliance to provisions of 
RPWD Act by KSRTC and BMTC 
67 
 
4.1 Details of students appeared/not appeared for Music 
examination 
68 
4.2 Absence of infrastructure facilities in Regular 
Schools  
69 
4.3 Absence of infrastructure facilities in Special 
Schools  
70 
5.1 Details of schemes implemented by NHFDC 
 
71 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
v 
Preface 
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India for the year 
ended 31 March 202 2 has been prepared for submission to the Governor of 
Karnataka under Article 151 (2) of the Constitution to be tabled in the State 
Legislature. 
 
The Report covering the period 2016 -22 contains the results of performance 
audit of “Implementation of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 ” 
with a specific focus on ‘Duties and Responsibilities of Appropriate 
Governments. 
The instances mentioned in this Report are those, which came to notice in the 
course of test audit for the period 2016 -22 as well as those which came to 
notice in earlier years but could not be reported in the previous Audit Reports; 
matters relating to the period subsequent to 2016 -22 have also been included, 
wherever necessary. 
Audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards issued 
by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
Audit wishes to acknowledge the cooperation received from the Department 
of Empowerment of Differently Abled and Senior Citizens at each stage of the 
audit process. 
 

 
 
 
 

 
vii 
Executive summary 
Why CAG did this audit? 
The Differently Abled persons are those who are either born with disability or 
the victims of circumstances for reasons beyond their control, and the resultant 
misfortune places them in a disadvantageous position as compared to the able 
persons. As per Census 2011, Karnataka has 13.24 lakh people suffering from 
disabilities, which is 4.94  of the total Persons with Disabilities 
(PwDs) in the Country (2.68 crore). Lack of facilities and opportunities 
prevent disabled persons from gaining suitable edu cation, special training and 
skilled employment. State Government is striving for providing  facilities and 
opportunities.  
The RPWD Act was enacted in December 2016 in place of PwD Act 1995 to 
promote and protect the rights and dignity of people with disabilities in 
various aspects of life – educational, social, legal, economic, cultural and 
political. 
The Performance Audit (PA) was  undertaken with reference to the provisions 
of the RPWD Act to assess the effectiveness of the Government interventions 
in p roviding rehabilitation, education, economic opportunities, barrier free 
environment and other supporting services to the PwDs so as to enable their 
integration within the mainstream of society.  
Major Audit Findings  
Delayed notification of the K arnataka Persons with Disability Rules delayed 
implementation of the Act and Rules. The Department failed to conduct a 
comprehensive survey covering all disabilities due to which it did not have a 
database on the number of persons with various disabilities in the State. Only 
46 per cent of the differently abled persons were issued with Unique ID for 
Persons with Disabilities (UDID) cards whi ch helps in tracking the benefits 
availed and facilitating monitoring and future planning. 
Non-establishment of District Disability Rehabilitation Centre (DDRCs) Day 
Care Centres and Early Intervention Centres in all the districts, failure to 
identify and notify designated authorities for implementation of the Act 
highlights the absence of appropriate mechanism for rehabilitation of PwDs. 
Accessibility continued to be a major hurdle for PwDs in the State.  The State 
Government was yet to provide accessible infrastructure in many of the 
Government institutions, public transport, regular and special schools, 
libraries and tourist places.   
Though Special schools were established for various categories of students 
with disabilities, performance of many of these institutions w as far from 
satisfactory in terms of availability of infrastructure,  accessibility features, 
qualification of teachers, continued vacancies etc. 
per cent

Implementation of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016  
viii 
The State Government brought out an exclusive reservation policy of 
mandatory appointment in each group of posts meant to be filled with persons 
with benchmark disabilities in September 2020 after a lapse of four years of 
implementation of the RPWD Act. Though an expert committee was 
constituted to identify the posts in the various Departments five years ago, but 
the Committee is yet to  submit its report (December 2022).  Non-submission 
of the report led to non-identification of the posts in various departments. 
Due to absence of awareness initiatives, the exclusive benefits available under 
five per cent budget reservation was not completely availed and did not figure 
in any monitoring and reporting system. 
The Human resources available for implementation and monitoring of the 
various schemes at the State and district level and in the institutions 
established for the upliftment of PwDs etc., were  insufficient.  Capacity 
building was either absent or inadequate . T he State Government lost 
opportunity to avail Central Government grants by non -implementation of 
schemes. Due to the absence of a designated Corporate Social Responsibility 
(CSR) policy for special schools by the State Government, corporate 
involvement in enhancing infrastructural facilities is limited to Bengaluru. 
What CAG recommends  
1: The State Governmen t should prepare comprehensive d atabase by 
conducting a detailed survey  with experts’ engagement capturing details of 
PwDs under 21 categories.  It should also ensure that all the identified 
PwDs are issued with Unique ID cards with consent linking to Aadhaar for 
DBT under State/Central Scheme.  
2: The State Government should strengthen the institutional mechanism to 
address the needs of the PwDs and ensure that provisions of the Act/Rules 
are strictly followed through identified and notified authorities for speedy 
implementation of RPWD Act 2016. 
3: The State Government should  ensure that local authorities make the 
mandatory contributions, and all disabilities are covered.  
 
4. The State Government should accord top priority and step up its efforts to 
ensure that all public buildings, public transport and public places are 
provided with barrier free access to PwDs. 
5: The State Government must ensure that all Intellectual Disability schools 
follow uniform syllabus (FACP), fill up the posts of occupational/  
physiotherapist on priority basis and provide accessible infrastructure in all 
schools. 
6: The State Government needs to ensure availability of hearing aids, audio 
books and equipment in all institutions for overall improvement of PwDs.  
 

Executive summary 
ix 
7: The State Government should ensure that schemes are aimed at providing 
self-employment opportunities supported by MSME/NHFDC.  
 
8: The State Government should implement Niramaya health insurance 
scheme and consider payment of renewal amount by Government itself to 
ensure adequate and affordable health services to PwDs. Further , insurance 
scheme for parents/guardians should be improvised in providing additional 
financial benefits to the members/subscribers. 
 
9: The State Government should address staff shortage, improve 
infrastructure facilities and establish DDRCs in all districts to strengthen 
rehabilitation mechanism. It should bring DDRCs under the control of 
DDWOs for effective functioning of DDRCs. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER I 
INTRODUCTION 
 

 
 
 

 
1 
Chapter-I: Introduction 
 
Lack of ability or any restriction to perform an activity in a manner or within 
the range considered normal for the human beings, resulting from impairment 
is termed as disability. Impairment concerns the physical aspects of health and 
disability is the loss of functional capac ity resulting from an impaired  organ. 
Handicap is a measure of the social and cultural consequences of an 
impairment or disability. Early identification of dev elopment delays or 
disabilities reduces the  chances of its p rogression to severe disability. Hence, 
timely intervention is a  vital component in  the rehabilitation of disabled . 
Disabled individuals in the community face many social probl ems and are  
being neglected in the community because of inaccessibility to services and 
lack of opportunities like health services, schools, vocational education 
programs, and jobs. 
 
Article 41 of the Indian Constitution mandates the State to make effective 
provisions for securing the right to education, work and public assistance for 
people affected by disability within the constraints of its economic capacity 
and level of development.  Also, non-inclusion of Persons with Disabilities 
(PwDs) in the development process has several implications as stigma of 
disability may result in loss of income and additional cost to the PwDs, for 
their care providers and other family members.  
1.1 The Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 
 
India is a signatory to the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons 
with Disabilities 2006 (UNCRPD).  The Government of India (GoI), to give 
effect to the principles laid down in the said Convention enacted the Rights of 
Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 (RPWD Act)  with effect from 27 
December 2016 by replacing the “Persons with Disability (Equal 
Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full Participation) Act 1995, (PwD 
Act)” and framed the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Rules, 2017 (June 
2017).  Some of the important provisions of the  RPWD Act are highlighted 
below: 
• Covers 21 disabilities as against seven disabilities in the PWD Act. 
• Increase in reservations from three per cent to four per cent in Government establishments for 
certain persons or class of persons with benchmark disability. 
• Right to free education for every child with benchmark disability between the age group of 6 
to 18 years. 
• Five per cent reservation in allotment of agricultural land and housing in all relevant schemes, 
poverty alleviation programmes and development programmes. 
• Constitution of District level committees by the State Governments to address local concerns 
of PwDs. 
• Designation of Special Courts in each district to handle cases concerning violation of rights of 
PwDs. 
• Setting up of Central and State Advisory Boards on Disability to serve as apex policy -making 
bodies at the Central and State level. 
• Providing incentives that are within the limits of their economic capacity to establishments to 
ensure that at least five per cent  of the work force comprises of persons with benchmark 
disability. 
• Constitution of a State Fund for PwDs in consultation with C omptroller and Auditor General 
of India. 
• Additional thrust on activities such as awareness campaigns, access to transport, grievance 
redressal, social audit etc. 

Implementation of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 
2 
 
Apart from the above, the RPWD Act includes a dedicated chapter for rights 
and entitlements which include equality and non -discrimination, community 
life, protection against cruelty and inhumane treatment, protection from abuse, 
violence and exploitation, protection and safety in situations of risk, armed 
conflict, humanitarian emergencies and natural disasters, reproductive rights, 
access to voting, access to justice, legal capacity, provision of guardianship 
etc., (Chapter II). The Act also mandates the appropriate Governments to 
frame schemes and programmes in the areas of social security, healthcare, 
rehabilitation, research and development, culture and recreation, sporting 
activities, skill development etc., for effective empowerment and inclusion of 
PwDs (Chapter V). 
1.2 Demographic Profile  
As per Census 2011, Karnataka has 13.24 lakh people  with disabilities, which 
is 4.94 per cent of the total PwDs in the country (2.68 crore). The PwD Act,  
1995 had seven categories of disabilities that was expanded to 21 categories  
under the RPWD Act , 2016 to include cerebral palsy, dwarfism, muscular 
dystrophy, acid attack victims, autism spectrum disorders, chronic 
neurological disorders such as multiple sclerosis and Parkinson's disease, 
blood disorders such as haemophilia, thalassemia, and sickle cell anaemia etc. 
The percentage share of  disabilities under various categories as per 2011 
census is shown in Chart 1.1. 
Chart 1.1: Disabilities in Karnataka as per 2011 census 
 
 
1.3 Organisation setup 
In Karnataka, the Department of Empowerment of Differently Abled and 
Senior Citizens (DEDASC) is responsible fo r p roviding rehabilitation, 
education, economic opportunities, barrier free environment and other 
supporting services to facilitate the integration of persons with disabilities in 
the mainstream of society.   
 
 
20%
18%
7%
20%
7%
2%
19%
7% Visual
Hearing
Speech Deformity
Orthopedically Disabled
Mentally Retarded
Mentally ill
Other Disability
Multiple Disability

Chapter I-Introduction 
3 
The Organogram of the Department is as shown below: 
 
The Department for the Empowerment of Differently Abled and Senior 
Citizens (DEDASC), which functions under the administrative control of the 
Principal Secretary, Women and Child Development and Empowerment of 
Differently Abled and Senior Citizens Department is headed by the Director, 
who is assisted by a Joint Director, two Deputy Directors, an Assistant 
Director and District Disability Welfare Officers (DDWO) as the 
implementing Officers at District Level.  
In addition, an independent office of the State Commissioner for PwD, 
established (March 1998) under the PwD Act, 1995 is responsible for 
• Monitoring the implementation of the RPWD Act; 
• Monitoring   the utilization of funds disbursed by the State Government; 
• Safeguarding the rights and facilities made available to PwDs; 
• Submitting reports to the Central and State Governments on the 
implementation of the Act; and 
• Looking into complaints relating to deprivation of rights of PwDs; 
• Inquire, suo motu or otherwise deprivation of rights of persons with 
disabilities and safeguards  available to them in respect of matters for 
which the State Government is the appropriate Government and take up 
the matter with appropriate authorities for corrective action;  
1.4 Audit objectives 
The present Performance Audit (PA) seeks to ascertain, with reference to the 
provisions of the RPWD Act, whether - 
1. Proper planning for identification and verification of the PwDs along 
with appropriate rehabilitation measures were in place; 
2. Adequate measures were undertaken to ensure access to means of 
empowerment of PwDs; and  
3. Existing system of governance including financial management, 
monitoring and internal control system were effective. 
Principal Secretary to Government of Karnataka
Department of Women & Child Development & Empowerment of Diﬀerently Abled
and Senior Citizens
Director State Commissioner for the persons
wit disabilities (RPWD Act)

Implementation of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016  
4 
 
1.5 Audit criteria 
The criteria for the PA were derived from the following: 
• The Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights 
and Full Participation) Act, 1995 
• The Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights 
and Full Participation) (Karnataka) Rules, 2003 as amended from time to 
time 
• The Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016  
• The Rights of Persons with Disabilities Rule, 2017  
• Karnataka Rights of Persons with Disabilities Rules, 2019  
• Scheme notifications and guidelines  
• Rehabilitation Council of India Act, 1992 
• National Trust for the Welfare of Persons with Autism, Cerebral Palsy, 
Mental Retardation and Multiple Disabilities Act,1999 
• Annual plans of the Department and Annual Reports of the State 
Commissioner  
• Instructions and guidelines issued by the Government/competent 
authority from time to time.  
1.6 Audit scope and methodology 
The PA was conducted for the period 2016 -17 to 2020 -21 during November 
2020 to July 2021 and updated up  to March 20 22 from October 2022 to 
January 2023.  
Audit methodology involved collection of data through document analysis in 
the Secretariat, Directorate and 111 District offices  and seeking a response to 
audit enquiries /questionnaires / proforma besides conducting joint inspection 
of 70 out of 111 test -checked institutions/schools maintained by the 
Government and NGOs in selected districts.   
An entry conference was held on 11 December 2020  with the Commissioner 
to discuss the audit objectives, criteria, scope and methodology. The audit 
findings were discussed with the Director in the exit conference held on        
09 February 2023. The response of the Government to the Draft Audit Report 
(May 2023) and their comments in the exit conference have been suitably 
incorporated in this Report. 
1.7 Acknowledgement 
Audit acknowledges the cooperation and assistance extended by the officers  
and staff of the DEDASC, the State Commissioner  and the test checked  
institutions in conducting the audit. 
 
1  Bengaluru Urban, Bidar, Belagavi, Bagalakote, Chitradurga, Dakshina Kannada, Hassan 
Haveri, Mysuru, Raichur and Ramanagara.   

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
PLANNING AND FINANCIAL 
MANAGEMENT 
 
 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
5 
Chapter-II: Planning and Financial Management 
The State Government delayed notifying the RPWD Rules which led to 
delayed implementation of the Act and Rules. The Department failed to 
conduct a comprehensive survey covering all disabilities as mentioned in 
the RPWD Act due to which it did not have a database on the number of 
persons with various disabilities. F ailure to make UDID cards mandatory 
and fixing a time frame to obtain UDID cards , was dissuading PwDs to go 
for UDID cards. The Department failed to utilise the entire funds provided 
for the empowerment and rehabilitation of the PwDs. The State Government 
failed to avail of the central assistance and therefore had to incur 
expenditure from out of its own sources. Without adequate monitoring 
mechanism, the reservation of funds in the budgetary allocations of other 
departments prescribed or its utilisation were not ensured, thereby 
depriving the rightful benefits to the disabled persons.  The institutional 
mechanism established in the State for implementation of the provisions of 
the Act and Rules existing from time to time was inadequate and lacking in 
its efforts. 
Non-conducting social audit and periodical internal audit to ensure 
adherence to its policies, plans and guidelines prescribed for 
implementation of the schemes led to ineffective monitoring of 
implementation of the Act by the office of State Commissioner.  
2.1 Planning 
Planning ensures efficient utilization of resources , timely compliance to 
policies, preparedness in execution of schemes  and facilitates informed 
decision making . It involves stakeholder engagement and setting clear 
objectives and targets.  
Office of State Commissioner for RPWD Act in -coordination with 
Department should list specific, measurable goals and targets. Planning should 
also include a reasonable time frame for these tasks to be accomplished as 
implementation of Act needs coordination of both the offices . Audit observed 
lack of coordination between both the offices as a result of which, pace of 
implementation of the provisions of the Act was slow  such as delay in 
notification of rules, non -conducting survey of disabled persons, delay  in 
issue of Unique Disability ID (UDID) cards for Persons with Disabilities, non-
establishment of District Early Intervention Centres, non -framing Corporate 
Social Responsibility policy to ensure better infrastructural facilities in schools 
as detailed in succeeding paras.  
2.1.1 Delay in notification of State Rules 
Section 101 of the RPWD Act stipulated framing of Rules by  the State 
Governments for carrying out the provisions of the Act, not later than six 
months from the date of the commencement of the Act.  Audit observed that 
the State Government had notified the Karnataka Rights of Persons with 
Disabilities Rules, 2019 in August 2019 after a delay of more than two years .    
Consequently, the implementation of the provisions of the revised Act and 
Rules were delayed. This indicates that the State Government had not 

Implementation of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 
6 
accorded adequate priority for welfare of differently abled  persons. The State 
Government (May 2023) while accepting the finding stated that lack of 
expertise in the field of disability and inexperience in newly identified 
disabilities caused delay in framing the said rules. 
2.1.2 Survey for identification of persons with specific disabilities 
As per Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation (GoI), the main 
objective of the “Survey of Persons with Disabilities” is to estimate indicators 
of incidence and prevalence of disability, cause of disability, age at onset of 
disability, facilities available to the persons with disability, difficulties faced 
by persons with disability in accessing public building/public transport, 
arrangement of regular care giver, out of pocket expense relating to disability, 
etc.  
Following the announcement in the budget speech for 2018 -19 for provision 
of ₹5 crore for  survey of disabled persons covering all the 21 disabilities, the 
State Government accorded (September 2018) sanction to incur ₹5 crore for 
conducting the survey . This survey would enable creation of a database of 
PwDs. 
Audit observed that neither the Government nor the State Commissioner had 
prescribed any guidelines for conducting the survey. Capturing details of all 
types of disabilities required the services of medical experts. The Department 
without engaging any experts conducted (February -March 2021) the survey 
through Village Rehabilitation Workers 2 (VRWs) at Gram Panchayat (GP) 
level and captured details of eight to nine disabilities instead of 21 disabilities.    
Further, in Bengaluru Urban district, the survey conducted was negligible as 
only 3,860 disabled persons were surveyed as against 2.74 lakh disabled 
persons as per Census 2011. The incomplete coverage rendered the survey 
ineffective and did not serve the intended purpose. As a result, the Department 
did not have comprehensive data on the number of persons with each of the 21 
disabilities identified under the RPWD Act even after six years of the  Act 
coming into force.  
Further, Section 17 (a) of the RPWD Act mandates the appropriate 
Government and local authorities to conduct survey of school going children 
once in every five years for identification of  children with disabilities, 
ascertaining their special needs and the extent to which these are being met. 
The first survey, to be conducted within a period of two years from the date of 
commencement of this Act, is yet to be  done (March 2023). The State 
Government did not offer its comments . The failure of the Government to 
carry out the survey results in a large population of persons with disability 
being deprived of welfare measures which would empower them. 
 
 
2  A disabled person in the 18 -45 age group, who studied up to class 10 and is staying within 
that gram panchayat, is appointed as VRW. 

Chapter-II: Planning and Financial Management 
7 
2.1.3 Non-availability of database 
The PwD and RPWD Acts provide for creating educational, employment , and 
rehabilitation opportunities by the State Governments, which are being carried 
out through implementation of the various schemes. Consequently, the 
Department is required to maintain data regarding the number of PwDs in the 
State, the benefits availed from Government including scholarships, pensions 
and other financial assistance for setting up projects, and the details for 
various schemes introduced by the Central and State Governments etc. 
Audit observed that the Department did not have a comprehensive database of 
the PwDs, the schemes implemented, the benefits availed etc., which would 
have enabled the planning process, monitoring and decision making.  
The State Government stated that Department had decided to implement all 
the beneficiary-oriented schemes through online portal. 
 
The reply of the Government does not address the requirement of the database 
of PwDs which would en able smoother and official implementation of the 
schemes for PwDs. 
2.1.4 Delay in issue of Unique ID for Persons with disabilities 
GoI launched (March 2016)  a project viz., Unique ID for Persons with 
Disabilities (UDID) with a view to create a national database and build a 
holistic end -to-end integrated system for issuance of Universal ID and 
Disability Certificates for PwDs with their identification and disability details. 
The Application Software provides  an online platform for issuance of 
disability certificates. The project would encourage transparency, efficiency 
and ease of delivering the Government benefits to PwDs and also help in 
monitoring of physical and financial progress of beneficiary at all levels of 
hierarchy– i.e., village level, block level, District level, State level and 
National level. The database captures personal details, identity details, 
disability details (type of disability,  per cent  of disability etc.,) education 
status, employment details, Income level (BPL/ APL,  etc.,) scheme related 
details etc. 
PwDs are required to register with the UDID portal. Once registered, after the 
login is complete, PwDs will be able to apply online for Disability Certificate 
and UDID card and will also be able to track the status of their application . 
PwDs can also request for renewal of Disability Certificate/UDID Card and 
request for another card in case of loss of their UDID Card. PwDs can 
download and  print the copy of their respective Disability Certificate/UDID 
Card.  
One of the unique features of UDID shall be the ability to locate their Chief 
Medical Officer Office/Medical Authority for assessment of disability, District 
Welfare Officer to receive assistance and to know about the various schemes 
for Persons with Disabilities besides , viewing latest news/announcements 
pertaining to disabilities. 

Implementation of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 
8 
Disability Certificate Issuing Authorities (CMO Office/Medical Authority) 
will use this application to record the details of Persons with Disabilities 
(PwDs) and issue Disability Certificate/UDID Card electronically. Application 
from the PwD will be received by the CMO Office/Medical Authority. After 
necessary verification, the PwDs will be referred to designated 
Specialist/Medical board for disability assessment and once the assessment is 
over, the assessment details are submitted and Disability Certificat e/UDID 
Card will be issued electronically . As assessment has to be done by the CMO , 
which will take time , automating Disability Certificate/UDID Card issue 
process will significantly reduce the time and ensure timely delivery of the 
Disability Certificate/UDID Card.  Sample image of UDID is shown in 
Exhibit 2.1 
District Welfare Officer/District Social Welfare Officers shall use the UDID 
portal for facilitating PwDs in getting Disability Certificate/UDID Card by 
means of providing application receiving counter, facilitating in camps. The 
web portal would also facilitate smooth implementation of schemes meant for 
PwDs. 
Exhibit 2.1. Unique Disability Identity Card 
 
Model UDID card Image 
In Karnataka UDID project commenced in April 2019, Audit observed that the 
pace of implementation of UDID project in the State was slow. As of 31 
December 2022, only 46 per cent of the differently abled persons were issued 
with UDIDs in the State. 
  


Chapter-II: Planning and Financial Management 
9 
The district-wise status of UDIDs issued as of 31 December 2022 is shown in 
Chart 2.1  
      Source: Information furnished by the Department 
Analysis showed that while Uttara Kannada district topped the list with an 
achievement of 78 per cent  of applications, Bengaluru Urban district which 
has a population of 2.74 lakh PwDs occupied the last position with a dismal 
performance of nine per cent. The Department also failed to initiate action to 
link benefits/concessions availed with UDID as su ggested by G oI and 
practiced by other States (Gujarat and Uttar Pradesh). 
The State Government , (May 2023), while mentioning that 8.11 lakh out  of 
9.90 lakh received applications were disposed of, stated  that a joint  circular 
was issued (August 2022) for expeditious distribution of Unique Identity Card 
after holding a meeting with the officials of Health and Family Welfare 
Department and a nodal  officer was appointed by the Department for the 
progress of this project.  
While the State Government’s strides in processing applications for the 
Unique Identity Card are notable, the fact remains that 1.79 lakh applications 
are still pending without disposal.  A comprehensive review of the process, 
transparency, accountability, and effectiveness of implemented measures is 
imperative. This scrutiny is essential to offer a thorough response and to 
ensure efficient delivery of quality services to the disabled.  
Recommendation 1:  The State Government should prepare 
comprehensive data base by conducting a detailed survey with expert 
engagement capturing details of PwDs under 21 categories.   It should 
also ensure that all the identified PwDs are issued with Unique ID cards 
with consent linking to Aadhaar for DBT under State/Central Scheme.  
2.1.5 Corporate Social Responsibility 
Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) is a strategic philanthropy linked with 
responsibility and veering towards community development through various 
projects and looking beyond financial performance, and to integrate social and 
environmental concerns into their strategic management.  The Companies Act, 


Implementation of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 
10 
2013 mandates providing a contribution of two per cent  of the average net 
profits (for companies having ₹5 crore as net profit for a year). One of the 
suggested areas of activity as per Schedule VII was promoting special 
education and employment enhancing vocation skills especially among the 
differently abled and livelihood enhancement projects. 
Audit scrutiny revealed that CSR funds for special educational schools were 
primarily concentrated in Bengaluru with  only seven institutes receiving  
grants amounting to ₹207.65 crore during 2016-17 to 2021-22.  
The Department had neither framed any  guidelines to ensure equitable 
distribution of funds across the State nor encouraged corporates to invest in 
areas outside Bengaluru.  This limited the improvement of infrastructure and 
access to education for differently abled individuals. 
Illustration 
In one case of misuse of CSR funds, Karnataka Welfare Association for Blind, 
Bengaluru (KWAB), which is presently taking care of 37 visually impaired 
students, had paid a social activist/consultant ₹13.37 lakh, a whopping 45 per 
cent of the total CSR fund of ₹ 33.00 lakh (Cheque number: 607261 dated          
26-07-2017 for ₹13,36,500) received by it. Even TDS was deducted before 
making payment. The consultant helps the corporates in disbursing CSR funds 
on commission basis.  The consulting fee was returned to KWAB later (023981 
dated 16 -07-2018 ₹13.37 lakh) only after filing FIR (April 2018). Audit 
noticed that legal opinion was taken before paying fee demanded by 
consultant and legal experts had mentioned that it was not proper for the 
association to pay the said percentage or anything in excess of 10 to 15 per 
cent. 
The State Government stated that office of State Commissioner had requested 
(March 2023) all the industrial sectors, banking sectors to create platform for 
CSR support for PwDs and a meeting also was being convened with lead bank 
managers and other corporate sectors to formulate guidelines to ensure the 
proper utilisation of CSR fund. 
While the State Government's initiative to encourage CSR support for PwDs is 
a step in the right direction, there is a need for accountability, and accessibility 
in the formulation and implementation of these initiatives. By addressing these 
considerations, the government can ensure that CSR funds are utilied 
effectively to improve the lives of PwDs and promote inclusivity and equality 
in society. 
2.2 Institutional Framework 
For effective implementation of the RPWD Act, it is essential to have an 
efficient institutional structure.  This required a revamp of the Department by 
posting technical persons having knowledge  (persons possessing 
Bachelor’s/Post Graduate degree in Rehabilitation Counselling, Social Work, 
Counselling, Psychology, Special  Education or related field, with four -five 
years’ experience working with students /people with designated disabilities 

Chapter-II: Planning and Financial Management 
11 
and program coordination) in disability related issues at  least on outsourcing 
basis as was done in the UDID Project.  This was, however, not done  by the 
Department. 
The institutional framework existing  in the State apart from the State 
Commissioner is indicated in Table 2.1. Audit observed that the State 
Government belatedly constituted the committees required as per the Act.  
Further, meetings were not held regularly which led to non -consideration of 
important issues needing immediate attention such as creating awareness 
about the Act, recommend/monitor action taken to ensure accessibility, non-
discrimination for PwDs, design disability -wise specific policies and 
programmes etc.  
Table 2.1: Status of institutional structure overseeing the implementation 
       of RPWD Act as on January 2023 
Sl. 
No. 
Section 
of the 
Act 
Committee 
(Chairperson) Purpose Remarks 
1 66 State Advisory Board 
(Minister in charge of 
the Department) 
To advise the State Government on 
legislation, programmes, projects and 
to facilitate the continuous evolution 
of a comprehensive policy for the 
empowerment of PwDs and the full 
enjoyment of rights 
Constituted in March 2018. 
Conducted only one virtual 
meeting in July 2020. No follow - 
up action is taken thereafter on 
the decisions taken in the 
meeting. 
2 72 District Level 
Committee on 
disability 
To perform such functions as 
prescribed by State Government 
Formed between October 2019 
and November 2020 in 27 
districts of the State , and 
meetings were conducted in 10  
districts out of 11 test checked 
districts. 
3 79(7) State Level Advisory 
Committee comprising 
of not more than five 
members drawn from 
experts in the disability 
sector 
To assist the State Commissioner in 
such manner as may be prescribed by 
the State Government 
Constituted in December 2018. 
The Committee conducted a 
meeting only once in June 2019. 
4 23 Grievance Redressal 
Officer 
To register grievances/complaints, 
investigate it and take up the matter 
with the establishment for corrective 
action. 
No Grievance Redressal Officer 
was appointed.  
Source: Information furnished by the Department 
The State Government stated that proposal was submitted to hold State Level 
Advisory Board and all Departments concerned were instructed to obtain 
compliance reports on the issues discussed in meeting held in July 2020. 
However, compliance reports are yet to be received.  Further, it was also stated 
that District Level Committees were set up in 30 districts and all District Level 
Committees were directed to submit progress reports to State Commissioner. 
The office of the State Commissioner for RP WD Act had also conducted the 
State Level Advisory Committee  meeting (August 2022) at the All-India 
Institute of Speech and Hearing (AIISH) Mysuru to discuss the issues for 
implementation of the Act. 
In respect of appointment of Grievance Redressal Officer, State Government 
stated that following issue (January 2023) of a circular directing 
Departments/Boards/Corporations/Commissions to appoint a Grievance 

Implementation of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 
12 
Redressal Officer as per the provisions of the Act, most of the State 
Government Departments Boards and Corporations had appointed the 
grievance redressal officers.  
From the above it  is evident that actions were  taken only at the instance of 
audit which indicates that institutional intervention of the Department was not 
effective / or absent for the implementation of the various schemes. 
2.2.1 State Commissioner for PwDs 
2.2.1.1 Appointment of State Commissioner  
As per provisions of Section 79 of the Act, there shall be a State 
Commissioner for PwDs for the implementation of this Act. After the 
completion of the term of the State Commissioner in February 2021, the 
Director of the Empowerment of Differently Abled and Senior Citizens is 
functioning as in -charge Commissioner. Even though notifications are being 
issued from time to time, the post is yet to be filled (May 2023). 
As per Section 60 of PwD Act, 1995 and Section 79 of the RPWD Act 2016, 
‘a person shall not be qualified for appointment as the State Commissioner 
unless he has special knowledge or practical experience in respect of matters 
relating to rehabilitation’.  
Audit also noticed that since inception of the Office of the State Commissioner 
for PwDs in January 1999, only 5 out of 17 offi cers appointed as 
Commissioners were persons with special knowledge or practical experience 
in matters relating to rehabilitation. The remaining 12 were officers of the 
State Government, such as Principal Secretaries and Directors. Even the post 
of Assistant Commissioner was being filled up from other Departments. Thus, 
the objective of Act to appoint specially qualified officers to the top 
management was not adhered to on many occasions.  
The State Government stated that as the applications for eligible candidates 
were invited for the post of State Commissioner, filling the State 
Commissioner Post is under process. However, the fact remains that office of 
State Commissioner has remained vacant for the last 27 months , since 
February 2021. 
2.2.1.2 Functioning of the State Commissioner 
(a) As per Section 80 of the RPWD Act, the State Commissioner shall (a) 
identify, suo moto  or otherwise, provision of any law or policy, programme 
and procedures, which are inconsistent with this Act, and recommend 
necessary corrective steps; and (b) inquire, suo moto or otherwise deprivation 
of rights of PwDs and safeguards available to them in respect of matters for 
which the State Government is the appropriate Government and take up the 
matter with appropriate authorities for corrective action.  
As per Section 81, whenever the State Commissioner makes a 
recommendation to an authority in pursuance of Section 80, that authority 
shall take necessary action on it, and inform him of the action taken within 
three months from the date of receipt of the recommendation and in case 

Chapter-II: Planning and Financial Management 
13 
authority does not accept a recommendation, it has to convey reasons for non -
acceptance to the State Commissioner and the aggrieved person within the 
period of three months.  
The State Commissioner as part of his duties visits the districts and reviews 
the implementation of the Act in force and recommends necessary corrective 
steps. However, the proceedings of the meetings with the district 
heads/authorities of the departments were not being prepared and kept on 
record, as a result, there was no follow up on the recommendations.  
Audit further observed that the State Commissioner was not uploading the 
details of all the cases registered and disposed of on the website of the 
department on the lines of the Chief Commissioner for PwDs of GoI.  
In respect of cases registered and judgements delivered, the action taken by 
the departments concerned on the recommendation of the State Commissioner 
within three months was not on record and follow up action was also not taken 
by the office of State Commissioner ; thereby, the entire process of registering 
of cases and delivering of judgements had become, by and large, ineffective. 
The State Government did not offer its comments.  
(b) Section 40 to 45 of Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act 2016 states that 
Chief Commissioner should formulate rules for persons with disabilities 
laying down the standards of accessibility for the physical environment, 
transportation, information and communications. 
Scrutiny of the records in the office of the Commissioner, audit observed an 
instance of accessibility problems such as accessible pathways for PwDs, 
braille numbers in elevators, specific parking slots for PwDs etc., in a private 
residential building. 
The State Commissioner (September 2020) instructed the owners of the 
apartments to create necessary barrier free features as per RPWD Act to 
ensure that rights of PwDs are protected  and directed the Department to issue 
notifications to the Local Authorities to ensure that before issuing the 
Occupancy Certificates to the multi -storeyed buildings, had to provide 
accessible pathways for PwDs, braille numbers in elevators, specific parking 
slots for PwDs etc., and the rights of PwDs are protected.  
The State Government stated that the State Commissioner for RP WD Act - 
directed owner of prominent residential welfare association to provide the 
necessary accessibility in the said building .  However, the reply was silent 
about whether owner of the building had complied with the directions.  
2.2.2 Committee for Research on Disability  
In accordance with Section 6 of the RPWD Act, no person with a disability 
shall be made a subject of any research without the acquisition of their free 
and informed consent through accessible modes, means, and formats of 
communication, and without the prior permission of a Committee for Research 
on Disability. The Committee is to be constituted with the Chairperson being 

Implementation of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 
14 
an eminent person with vast experience in the field of science and medical 
research, along with members nominated for the purpose. The Committee 
shall frame guidelines on timeline and research norms subject to approval of 
the Government. 
Audit observed that the State Government had not constituted a Committee for 
Research on Disability despite a lapse of two and a half years since framing of 
Rules. As a result, detailed guidelines prescribing the procedure to be followed 
for conducting clinical investigations/research through obtaining consent 
before making any PwD for a subject of research, were not in place. 
The State Government stated that the proposal submitted by the Department 
(February 2023) to constitute a committee for research on disability is under 
process. 
2.2.3 Equal Opportunity Policy  
As per Section 21 of RPWD Act, every establishment is to notify equal 
opportunity policy for PwDs detailing measures proposed to be taken by it as 
per the Act and is to register a copy of the said policy with the State 
Commissioner. Rule 8 of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Rules, 2017 
of G oI mandate that every establishment shall publish equal opportunity 
policy for persons with disabilities and shall display the equal opportunity 
policy preferably on their website, failing which, at conspicuous places in their 
premises.  
Every establishment (Further, the policy of  private establishments having 
twenty or more employees and all the Government establishments ) is  to 
contain provisions for assistive devices/barrier free accessibility, appointment 
of liaison officer, identification of posts for PwDs and facilities and amenities  
to be provided for such employees.  
Though the State Government brought out the Karnataka State Rights of 
Persons with Disabilities Rules, 2019 (KRPWD Rules) and stipulated 
publishing of equal opportunity policy and its display , it was silent on the 
other provisions of the Act mentioned above. Consequently, there was no 
binding on private establishments to maintain the details of PwDs appointed 
and facilities and amenities provided to them.  Audit also observed that these 
establishments had not registered the copy of the policy with the State 
Commissioner. 
On being pointed out by Audit, t he State Government stated that office of the  
State Commissioner had issued (March 2023) a circular along with guidelines 
about the procedure to be followed by every establishment to publish the equal 
opportunity policy.   
2.2.4 Authority for PwDs with high support needs 
Person with disability having High Support needs means a person with 
benchmark disability who needs intense support - physical, psychological or 
otherwise, to carry out activities of daily living, access facilities/services and 

Chapter-II: Planning and Financial Management 
15 
to take decisions  including education, employment, family, treatment, 
community life and therapy. 
As per Section 38 of RPWD Act and Rule 14A of RPWD Rules 2017, any 
person with benchmark disability, who considers himself to need high support 
may apply to an authority, to be notified by the appropriate Government, 
requesting to provide high support. On receipt of an application, the authority 
shall refer it to an Assessment Board consisting of District Chief Medical 
Officer, District Social Welfare Officer, five rehabilitation specialists, 
Occupational therapist or Speech therapist or Clinical psychologi st or 
Physiotherapist (as per requirement) as may be prescribed by the State 
Government. The Assessment Board invites the applicant for clinical 
assessment and sends a report to the authority certifying the need of high 
support and its nature and on receipt of a report, the authority shall take steps 
to provide support in accordance with the report.  
Audit observed that the KRPWD Rules neither notified the authority to whom 
a person with benchmark disability could apply for high support requirement  
nor had specified the procedure to be adopted in such instances.  This 
omission resulted in depriving the persons with benchmark disabilities of high 
support. 
The State Government (May 2023)  stated that it had notified  (November 
2022) the authority and assessment board as per the provisions of the Act to 
provide high support to the needy disabled persons.  Further, it was stated that 
the office of State Commissioner had also issued directions (May 2023 ) to  
district authorities to constitute the assessment boards. However, the reply is 
silent about whether district authorities had constituted assessment boards or 
are initiating steps to constitute assessment boards as per directives. 
2.2.5 Human Resource Management 
2.2.5.1 Inadequate Human Resources 
As per the information furnished by the Director, out of the total 464 
sanctioned posts, only 162 posts were filled up , and the balance of 302 posts 
were vacant as of 31 March 2023.  The status of sanctioned strength and men 
in position in the Department is indicated in Table 2.2 
Table 2.2: Status of sanctioned and working strength of the Department 
(2022-23) 
Cadre Sanctioned 
strength 
Person in 
position Vacant Remarks 
Director 01 01 00 These posts were temporary 
posts and not permanent posts 
and were filled up through 
deputation from other 
Departments. 
Joint Director 01 01 00 
Deputy Director 02 00 02 
Assistant Director 01 00 01  
District Disabled Welfare 
Officers /Superintendent 
35 14 21 The 21 vacant posts are 
managed by in charge staff and 
staff from WCD and other 
Departments 

Implementation of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 
16 
Cadre Sanctioned 
strength 
Person in 
position Vacant Remarks 
Superintendent – Special 
Schools 
08 00 08 - 
Non-Gazetted Assistants 12 05 07 - 
Programme Assistants / 
First Division Assistants 
51 32 19 06 posts of Programme 
Assistants are filled through 
deputation  
Graduate Assistants 34 15 19 - 
Vocational/Computer 
Teachers 
09 01 08 - 
Second Division 
Assistant / Warden / 
Storekeeper 
39 19 20 - 
Others 271 74 197 - 
Total 464 162 302 - 
Source: Information furnished by the Department 
As can be seen from the above, 60 per cent of the vacant posts in the cadres of 
DDWO/Superintendent were filled up either through in charge arrangements 
or through deputation. The Superintendent post in all the special schools were 
vacant. Similarly, the posts of Director, Joint director, Deputy directors are 
filled through deputation from other Departments. As a result, audit observed 
that the officers recruited as DDWO, which is a Group B post, continue to 
remain as DDWOs without any promotional opportunity.  
Resorting to in charge or stopgap arrangements, especially at the district level 
in Departments which deal with the vulnerable sections of the society may 
slow down the effective functioning of the departments in implementation and 
monitoring the activities as laid down in the Acts/Rules. 
The State Government stated (May  2023) that action would be taken to fill up 
all the vacant posts as per norms. 
2.2.5.2 Capacity Building  
As per Section 47 of the RPWD Act, mandatory training is to be imparted on 
disability rights in all courses for training of stakeholders and care providers 
such as Asha workers, Anganwadi workers, colleges and University teachers, 
doctors, nurses, para -medical personnel, rural development officers etc., on 
caregiving and support. 
This required the State Government/Department to prepare suitable plan of 
action to conduct the necessary trainings for all the concerned, coordinate with 
the Education Department to ensure that disability as a component was 
introduced in education courses at all levels and associate with research 
institutions to design courses specially for the parents and family members to 
train them to effectively handle PwDs and develop communication and 
language skills in their children.   
Audit observed that neither the State Government nor the Department had 
initiated any such measures to ensure compliance with the provisions of 
RPWD Act. As a result, disability as a component in education courses was 

Chapter-II: Planning and Financial Management 
17 
not introduced , and training courses for parents and family members to 
effectively handle PwDs were not framed. 
The State Government stated that the first batch of District Welfare Officers 
were trained in Administrative Training Institute (ATI) Mysuru during     
2022-23. Besides, it was also proposed to establish Sheltered workshop to 
provide vocational training to persons with intellectual disability. 
2.2.6 Internal Control 
Internal controls refer to the systematic review of procedures framed by the 
Department to comply with Act/Guidelines to ensure adherence to its policies 
and plans and the overall purpose of internal control is to help the Department 
to achieve its mission and to accomplish goals and objectives.  
Audit observed absence of internal controls and deficiencies in the monitoring 
system, which led to non -compliance of various provisions of the Act despite 
lapse of more than six years since its introduction in December 2016.  Detailed 
observations are brought out in the succeeding paragraphs in this chapter. 
2.2.6.1 Social Audit and Internal Audit 
Section 48 of the RPWD Act mandates the appropriate Government to 
undertake social audit of all general schemes and programmes involving the 
PwDs to ensure that the scheme and programmes do not have an adverse 
impact upon them and requirements and concerns of PwDs  are taken into 
account. Audit observed that the State Commissioner had not forwarded any 
proposals to the Government for conducting social audit during the period 
under review.  
Further, periodical internal audit of district offices and 211 schools/institutions 
working under the jurisdiction of DEDASC were not conducted to ensure 
adherence to its policies and plans at periodical intervals. 
Audit also observed the State Government had not issued instruction to 
monitor the functioning of these institutions periodically.  However, the 
department was conducting annual inspections to assess the eligibility of 
schools/institutions for release of grants on regular basis. 
 
The State Government, while accepting audit observation, stated that as the 
State Commissioner officer and the Directorate DEDSC did not have separate 
audit wing, the internal audit of the district offices was not conducted at 
regular intervals and stated that steps would be taken to establish separate 
audit wing in the Directorate. 
2.2.6.2 Absence of Standard Operating Procedure Manual  
Since the Department deals with different types of institutions to cater to the 
needs of the PwDs, a Standard Operating Procedure Manual ought  to have 
been prepared by the Department to ensure uniform standards across 
institutions serving PwDs. This manual should detail qualifications for 

Implementation of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 
18 
teaching and non -teaching staff, classroom designs, and seating arrangements 
suitable for students with disabilities.  Additionally, it should specify required 
physiotherapy equipment, such as trampoline, balance ball, CP chair, 
cycle/walker, physiotherapy tables and finger ladders accessibility features for 
school and hostel structures, and appropriate teacher -to-pupil ratios based on 
disability types. Furthermore, the manual must address syllabus development 
for various disability categories and establish regular internal audit schedules 
for institutions, including DDWO offices, within the Department's jurisdiction. 
Audit observed that the Department had not initiated steps to prepare such a 
manual for all stakeholders (NGOs) involved in it. Consequently, different 
institutions were following different types of practices in teaching methods 
especially when dealing with Intellectual Disability students as discussed 
earlier, besides not complying with the minimum accessibility features in 
buildings such as ramp with railings and specially designed toilets for disabled 
children.  
Recommendation 2:  The State Government should strengthen the 
institutional mechanism to address the needs of the PwDs and ensure that 
provisions of the Act/Rules are strictly followed through identified and 
notified authorities for speedy implementation of RPWD Act, 2016. 
2.3 Financial Management  
The budget allocation, releases, and expenditure thereon by the DEDASC 
during the period 2017-18 to 2022-23 is indicated in Table 2.3. 
Table 2.3: Budget Allocation, Releases and Expenditure 
(₹ in crore)  
Year Budget 
provision Releases Expenditure Savings 
Per cent of 
savings to 
releases 
2017-18 198.10 198.10 168.72 29.38 15 
2018-19 162.04 162.04 138.96 23.08 14 
2019-20 195.46 186.14 160.00 26.14 14 
2020-21 199.38 199.38 167.81 31.57 16 
2021-22 177.81 177.40 168.20 9.20 05 
2022-23 254.57 253.89 235.31 18.58 07 
Total 1,187.36 1,176.95 1,039 137.95 12 
Source: Information furnished by the Department 
 
Audit observed that n on-utilisation of funds under various schemes such as 
Aadhara, Niramaya, distribution of motorised vehicles etc., were the reasons 
for savings. 
Major schemes  along with details of expenditure for the period 2017 -18 to 
2022-23 being  implemented by the State Government are detailed  in        
Table 2.4.  

Chapter-II: Planning and Financial Management 
19 
Table 2.4: Details of Major Schemes implemented by the Government. 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Scheme Objective of the Scheme Funds 
released 
Actual 
expenditure 
1 Child Centric 
Scheme  
Grants based on students’ strength   
under Child Centric Scheme are 
provided to NGOs running residential 
and non-residential Special schools.   
362.71 333.61 
2 1982 GIA Scheme GIA in the form of salaries on par with 
State Government Teachers is provided 
to Organizations imparting special 
education.  
96.88 96.88 
3 Niramaya Health 
Insurance Scheme 
The scheme provides the beneficiaries 
with medical insurance coverage up to 
₹1.00 lakh per year based on onetime 
payment of ₹250 as premium. 
0.31 0.25 
4 Adhara Scheme  ADHARA loan scheme is being 
implemented to enable the disabled 
people to take up self -employment and 
live a life. Under this scheme, 5 0 per 
cent bank loan and 5 0 per cent subsidy 
is provided by the Department 
14.32 10.70 
5 Motorized Two-
Wheeler for Persons 
with Physically 
Disability 
Persons in the age group of 20-60 years 
with severe physical disabilities and 
hailing from families with income less 
than ₹2.00 lakh  per annum will be 
provided motorized two wheelers once 
in a life time, to the eligible 
beneficiaries 
75.93 75.93 
6 DDRC Scheme The main objective of the programme is 
to identify and provide comprehensive 
total rehabilitation service at the 
doorstep of the beneficiaries under 
single window system. 
14.05 14.16 
7 Aids and Appliances 
to disabled persons:  
 
Under this scheme, aids and appliances 
are distributed to the Persons with 
Disability whose family income is less 
than ₹11,500/- per annum in rural areas 
and ₹24,000/- in urban areas. 
14.63 13.09 
  Total  578.83 544.62 
Source: Information furnished by the Department 
 
The deficiencies in implementation of the schemes are discussed in the 
subsequent chapters. 
2.3.1 Constitution of State Fund for PwDs. 
As per Section 88 of RPWD Act, 2016, the State Government has to constitute 
a State Fund for persons with disabilities which should be utili sed and 
managed as per the procedure prescribed by the State Government in 
consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
As per Rule 41 of KSRPWD 2019, all sums received by way of grant, gifts, 
donations, benefactions, bequests or transfers and all sums received from the 
State Government including grants -in-aid are to be credited to the State Fund 
created and utili sed and managed in the areas which are not specifically 
covered under any scheme and where any programmes of the State 

Implementation of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 
20 
Government are not adequately funded under any scheme or programme of the 
Central Government. 
Audit observed that the State Fund for persons with disabilities ha d not been 
constituted. Records indicated that the Department had not initiated any steps 
to appraise the State Advisory Board who in turn will to advise and make 
recommendations to the State Government to issue notification for 
constitution of State Fund for PwDs.  
The State Government stated that a Government Order was issued in 
March 2020 for constitution of State Fund for PwDs and necessary 
guidelines are being prepared for implementation of the scheme. 
2.3.2 Reservation in schemes and development programmes 
Section 37 of RPWD Act mandates the appropriate Government and local 
authorities to make schemes in favour of persons with benchmark disabilities 
by notification to provide for five per cent  reservation in allotment of 
agricultural land and housing, poverty alleviation and other development 
schemes, and allotment of land on concessional rate for the purpose of 
housing, shelter, occupation, business, enterprise, recreation centres and 
production centres.  The State Government reiterated (August 2018) that all  
Urban local bodies have to mandatorily allot five per cent of their budget for 
PwDs. 
Audit observed that the Department did not possess the data of the 
beneficiaries who had availed the benefits under various schemes and 
programmes as the local authorities had not prepared and forwarded their 
action plans to the Department. Further it was seen that the Department did not 
have a system in place to monitor the mandatory allotment of funds and its 
utilisation thereon.  Hence, even Department could not ascertain whether the 
stipulated five per cent  reservation was being adhered to during the 
implementing the schemes. The State Government did not offer its comments. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Chapter-II: Planning and Financial Management 
21 
Illustration 
Study on mandatory allotment and utilisation of five per cent of budget for 
PwDs by the office of State Commissioner 
To ascertain the compliance and implementation of reservations prescribed as 
per the extant provisions of the Act, the State Commissioner had conducted 
(August-September 2019) a study with the support of Dhwani Foundation, 
Bengaluru in Davanagere and Koppala districts. The study revealed that only 
0.75 per cent of funds was utilised for the benefit of PwDs from the overall 
budget approved/released under poverty alleviation and other development 
programmes. While the Rural local bodies (Zilla Panchayats and Taluk 
Panchayats) utilised four per cent of funds, the line Departments had utilised 
only 0.51 per cent. The study further noted that the benefits given were not 
spread across all types of disabilities and most deserving types of disabilities 
(Mental health and hearing impaired) were neglected. The five per cent 
budget reservation did not figure in any monitoring and reporting system. The 
study also observed that there were no significant efforts to raise the 
awareness among PwDs of their rights and entitlements and the field 
functionaries were also not suitably trained. 
Recommendation 3: The State Government should ensure that local 
authorities make the mandatory contributions and all disabilities are 
covered. 
2.3.3 Non-availing of Central Assistance  
GoI has been implementing various schemes for providing financial assistance 
for undertaking various activities particularly relating to rehabilitation and 
provision of barrier -free accessibility features. Grant -in-aid is provided to 
State Governments and various bodies set up by the Central and State 
Government including autonomous bodies and Universities. 
Further, audit also observed that there was loss of central assistance as 
Department had not availed Central grants in respect of first two schemes, and 
in respect of other four schemes, there was potential loss of central assistan ce 
as Department had not implemented it, thereby , depriving beneficiaries of 
intended objectives of the central schemes as detailed in Table 2.5. 
Table 2.5: Non-availing of Central Assistance and Potential loss of  
       Central Assistance  
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the Scheme Objectives Audit Remarks 
1 Central Sector Scheme 
of “Support for 
establishment / 
modernisation / capacity 
augmentation of Braille 
Presses”. 
The GoI launched the 
Central Sector Scheme of 
“Support for establishment / 
modernization / capacity 
augmentation of Braille 
Presses” in November 2014. 
The Department procured (June 2018) 
high speed computerised Braillo 
Embosser at a cost of ₹71.40 lakh to 
replace existing Braille Embosser 
(Braillo 400 SR) purchased  during 2005 
for use of Government Braille Printing 
Press, Mysuru.  However, the 
Department did not submit any proposal 
for purchase of the said equipment under 
the scheme  and consequently failed to 
avail central assistance. 

Implementation of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 
22 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the Scheme Objectives Audit Remarks 
2 Grant to the State 
Governments/UTs 
infrastructure facilities 
under Scheme for 
Implementation of the 
Rights of Persons with 
Disabilities Act, 2016 
(SIPDA). 
GoI offered (2016) a one -
time grant to the State 
Governments/Union 
Territories under SIPDA for 
providing infrastructure 
facilities to the Office of the 
State Commissioner.   
The State Government did not avail of 
this assistance and spent (March 2020) 
₹27.50 lakh out of its own budget for 
providing infrastructure facilities to the 
Office of the State Commissioner. The 
State Government stated that under 
SIPDA scheme, there was no opportunity 
for renovation of the office of the State 
Commissioner for RPWD Act -
Karnataka, hence an amount of  ₹27.50 
lakh was incurred from state fund for 
renovation of this office.  The reply is 
not acceptable as the G oI guidelines 
provided for the same as a onetime grant. 
3 Awareness Generation 
and Publicity scheme. 
The GoI launched the 
(revised in 2015-16) with the 
objective of giving wide  
publicity, including event-
based publicity through 
electronic, print, film media, 
multimedia for  the schemes, 
programmes being run by 
different departments. 
The Department did not implement the 
scheme in the State and thereby the 
eligible institutions were deprived of 
central assistance. 
4 Assistance to disabled 
persons for 
purchase/fitting of aids 
and appliances (ADIP 
Scheme). 
 
The main objective of the 
scheme is to assist the needy 
disabled persons with 
modern, standard aids and 
appliances that can promote 
their physical, social and 
psychological rehabilitation 
by reducing the effects of 
disabilities and enhance their 
economic potential including 
conduct of corrective 
surgeries. The beneficiaries 
are eligible for only those 
aids/appliances which do not 
cost more than ₹8,000 and 
for visually, mentally, 
speech and hearing or 
multiple disabled, the limit is 
₹12,000. 
The Department had not implemented 
the scheme in the State despite the 
existence of DDRCs in 16 districts.  As a 
result, it lost the opportunity of availing 
central assistance.  Audit observed that 
the Department had spent state funds of 
₹12.78 crore towards purchase and 
distribution of assistive devices to PwDs 
(28,573) during the period 2016 -17 to 
2021-22. 
The State Government stated that 
DDRCs had not applied for grants under 
ADIP schemes.  The reply cannot be 
accepted as department had failed to take 
proactive role in informing the DDRCs 
to avail of ADIP scheme benefits , as 
with central scheme funds in addition to 
State funds, more beneficiaries would be 
benefitted as there is always constraint 
on State Budget. 
5 Swavlamban Chhatravas 
Yojana. 
With a view to enhance 
opportunities of education at 
primary, secondary and 
tertiary levels for children 
and youth with disabilities 
who due to barriers in the 
built-up environment and 
transport system, are not 
able to reach their places of 
education, G oI introduced 
(2015) the scheme of 
Swavlamban Chhatravas 
Yojana.  Under the scheme, 
central assistance of up to ₹2 
crore per hostel at ₹2 lakh 
State Government had not sought for 
proposals from the districts, voluntary 
organisations or educational institutions 
under the scheme and hence did not avail 
of any assistance.  Consequently, the 
State lost the opportunity of availing 
central assistance to provide necessary 
rehabilitation measures to the PwDs. 
Audit observed that , 35 out of 88 
institutions were functioning in rented 
premises.  
The State Government stated that as the 
GoI had not formulated guidelines, this 
scheme was not implemented in the 

Chapter-II: Planning and Financial Management 
23 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the Scheme Objectives Audit Remarks 
per inmate with disability as 
normative cost t o be 
reviewed every three years  
would be provided. 
State. However, reply is not acceptable 
as the Department had not submitted any 
initial proposals during 2015 and scheme 
was not implemented 
6 
Scheme of free coaching 
for students with 
disabilities. 
 
GoI introduced (April 2017) 
a scheme of free coaching 
for students with disabilities 
having minimum 40 per cent 
or more disability to enable 
them to appear in 
competitive examinations / 
entrance examinations for 
admission in Engineering, 
Medical and Professional 
courses Under the scheme 
guidelines, fee component 
will be released directly to 
the coaching institutes in the 
form of GIA besides paying 
monthly stipend/ special 
allowances to students. 
The State Government/Department had 
neither implemented this scheme in the 
State nor had created any awareness of 
the scheme for the benefit of students 
with disabilities. The St ate Government 
did not offer any comments.  
 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
ACCESSIBILITY 
 
 
  

 
 
 
 

 
25 
Chapter-III: Accessibility  
The State Government has taken the initiatives for providing accessibility to 
PwDs but is yet to provide  barrier free facilities in all the public buildings, 
initiate action to improve disabled friendly facilities in Transportation and 
Tourism sectors and ensure accessibility to regular and special schools 
conforming to the standards prescribed. 
“Accessible” means a person with a disability is afforded the opportunity to 
acquire the same information, engage in the same interactions, and enjoy the 
same services as a person without a disability in an equally effective and 
equally integrated manner, with substantially equivalent ease of use.  The 
RPWD Act through Sections 40 -46 mandates accessibility to be ensured in all 
public centric buildings,  transportation systems, Information and 
Communication Technology (ICT) services, consumer products and all other 
services being provided by Government or other service providers in a time 
bound manner. The Act also provides for formulation of Accessibility 
Standards / Guidelines for incorporation across various sectors.  
 
GoI released ₹27.09 crore for providing accessibility facilities in public 
buildings during 2018-19 and 2019 -20. However, t he State Government had 
not made any separate provision for allotment of funds for providing 
accessible features in special schools, rehabilitation homes/centres under the 
jurisdiction of the Department. Audit noticed that funds provided for 
Accessible India Campaign by GoI were not utilised optimally, accessible  
features were not provided by special and regular schools in its premises as 
discussed in subsequent paragraphs. 
3.1 Accessible India Campaign  
Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities (DEPwD), Ministry 
of Social Justice and Empowerment launched (December 2015) Accessible 
India Campaign (Sugamya Bharat Abhiyan) as a nation -wide campaign for 
achieving universal accessibility for PwDs. The campaign focusses on three 
important verticals, viz., the Build Environment, the Transportation Sector and 
the Information and Communication Technology (ICT) ecosystem as depicted 
in Chart 3.1. 
  

Implementation of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 
26 
Chart 3.1: Verticals and their objectives 
 
3.1.1 Built Environment  
For providing accessibility facilities, the G oI released ₹27.09 crore to 47 
buildings ( ₹11.04 crore during 2018 -19 for 20 buildings and  ₹16.05 crore 
during 2019-20 for 27 buildings) based on the estimates submitted by the State 
Government. Out of the above funds received, the State Government released  
₹11.04 crore to the Department during January 2020 and the remaining funds 
were released to the Department ( 2022-2023). Audit observed that the 
Department provided Accessibility facilities to 18 buildings by incurring an 
expenditure of ₹8.44 crore . The facilities are yet to be provided  to the 
remaining two buildings. As the funds for the period 2019 -20 are yet to be 
received by the Department, works were not taken up for the 27 buildings.  
₹2.60 crore received for the works identified in 2018 -19 are yet to be utilised 
by the Department (May 2023). 
Audit also observed that the process of identification of public buildings to be  
provided barrier free environment was yet to be taken up in other parts of the 
State.  
The State Government stated (May 2023) that though the Finance department 
had released this budget to DEDSC during the year 2022-23, department could 
not utilise the funds as the sub -agencies had not accepted the released budget 
due to change in scheduled rates and requested for additional budget. Hence , 
the released amount of ₹16.05 crore has been deposited to Central Nodal 
Agency (C.N.A) account as per the instructions of Government of India. 
 
• Enhancing the proportion of accessible
Government buildings and conducting
accessibility audit of at least 50 most
important Government buildings in 26
cities including Bengaluru and converting
them into fully accessible buildings
Built Environment
• Enhancing the proportion of accessible
Public Transport - Ensuring that 10 per
cent of Government owned public
transport carriers in the country are
converted into fully accessible carriers
Transportation Sector
• Conducting accessibility audit of 50 per
cent of all Government (both Central and
State Governments) websites and
converting them into fully accessible
websites and ensuring that at least 50 per
cent of all public documents issued by the
Central Government and the State
Governments meet accessibility standards
ICT ecosystem

Chapter III-Accessibility 
27 
The delay in releasing funds by th e State Government and Department’s 
failure to monitor the progress of utilisation of grants affected the 
implementation of the work for making the building accessible and barrier free 
for PwDs thereby resulted in deprivi ng divanganjan of accessible 
infrastructure. 
 
Illustration  
 Accessibility to voting for PwDs 
Following concerted efforts of the State Election Commission of Karnataka to 
identify and enrol PwDs through door -to-door survey, introduction of 
Chunavana App for booking wheel chairs, providing sturdy ramps with 
handrails, preparation of voter slips in braille script, engaging renowned 
PwDs as State icons etc., the State witnessed an increase in PwD voters 
turnout from 67 per cent in 2013 Assembly Elections to 76 per cent in 2018 
Assembly Elections and 80 per cent in 2019 Lok Sabha elections. 
The Election Commission of India acknowledged the good practices and new 
initiatives in Karnataka such as continuous identification and solutions, voter 
registration and polling, inclusive voter education, leveraging technology for 
accessible elections etc., and incorporated these in its Strategic Framework. 
There were 5.71 lakh PwD voters in Karnataka (Assembly Elections 
conducted in May 2023) and for the first time, home voting facility was 
provided for 19 ,279 PwD voters with benchmark disability in Karnataka and 
of these, 95 per cent of PwDs cast their vote from home.  
3.1.2 Transportation Sector   
Section 41 of the RPWD Act mandates the appropriate Government to take 
suitable measures to provide- 
• facilities for persons with disabilities at bus stops, railway stations and 
airports conforming to the accessibility standards relating to parking 
spaces, toilets, ticketing counters and ticketing machines and  
• access to all modes of transport that conform  to the design standards, 
including retrofitting old modes of transport, wherever technically 
feasible and safe for persons with disabilities, economically viable and 
without entailing major structural changes in design. 
The State of Karnataka has 8,673 buses (inter district/state) run by Karnataka 
State Road Transport Corporation (KSRTC) and 6,603 buses run by 
Bengaluru Metropolitan Transport Corporation (BMTC). In response to audit 
query regarding the status of accessibility features, the Managing Directors of 
KSRTC and BMTC stated (October 2020) that the Committee of disabled 
persons was not formed to consider disabled -friendly suggestions while 
planning and executing transport-related infrastructure projects. It was als o 
stated the provisions of accessibility features for PwDs as enumerated in the 
Bus Body Code were taken into consideration while framing bus body 
specifications besides providing facilities such as foldable and potable ramps 
with customised wheelchairs in all major and minor bus stands to facilitate 
easy entry and exit of all passengers with reduced mobility into all types of 
buses.  

Implementation of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 
28 
In respect of the existing buses, it was stated that retro fitment of lift 
mechanism facility was not technically feasible in all high floor buses and 
technical assistance was sought to make these buses accessible to PwDs and 
assured that facilities like audio alert, buzzers and ring holders would be 
provided for retro fitment in the coming days. A statement showing the 
compliance to the provisions by KSRTC and BMTC is detailed in      
Appendix 3.1.  
The State Government (May 2023) has not offered any comments.  
3.1.3 Absence of Accessibility features in AMRUT projects 
Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation (AMRUT), a G oI 
Scheme aims to provide basic services like water supply, sewerage, urban 
transport to households and build amenities in cities which will improve the 
quality of life for all, especially the poor and the disadvantaged. The 
components of AMRUT consists among other things, capacity building, urban 
transport and development of green spaces and parks. 
The minimum accessibility features for differently abled persons comprise the 
following: 
Urban Transport  
 
Level boarding/alighting at the stations a nd space for 
wheelchair movement, providing easy accessibility  at 
entrance to the bus stations, ramp access with tactile 
blocks, ramps and low flooring aligned with bus stops 
displaying a disabled friendly image. 
Green space and 
parks- General 
Accessibility 
Features 
Wheelchair-accessible entrance gates and pathways, 
non-slippery and levelled pathways bordered by a 
handrail, ramps with railings at entrance gates and play 
areas, display of Signage in Braille (English and 
Kannada). 
 
Audit observed that the Detailed Project Reports prepared under the scheme 
did not include accessibility features for PwDs. 
 
The State Government  (May 2023)  stated that the  Department of Urban 
Development would be requested to issue directions to the Urban Local 
Bodies to incorporate accessibility features for PwDs in Detailed Project 
Reports for future projects and tender documents in consultation with special 
educators and occupation therapists before  incorporating the  accessibility 
features.  
3.2 Accessible Tourism 
Accessible tourism (also known as ‘inclusive tourism’ and ‘barrier -free 
tourism’) is tourism and travel that is accessible to all people, with disabilities 
or not, including those with mobility, hearing, sight, cognitive, or intellectual 
and psychosocial disabilities, older persons and those with temporary 
disabilities. (Takayama Declaration, UNESCAP 2009). 

Chapter III-Accessibility 
29 
Audit observed that the State Tourist Policy for 2015 -20 and 2020-25 did not 
focus on the above issues , and it lacked the perspective on major attributes of 
tourists with disabilities like lack of proper information and inadequate 
signages at major points, non -availability of personal aids/equipment, locating 
affordable and accessible accommodation, non -availability of toilets for 
people with reduced mobility etc., as mentioned in ‘Report on Problems and 
Prospects of Accessible Tourism in India3’ (October 2010). 
The State Government  (May 2023)  stated that the Department of Tourism 
would be requested to amend the State Tourism Policy to include accessibility 
guidelines for Tourists with disabilities. 
3.3 Accessibility to Libraries 
The provisions of the RPWD Act mandate the appropriate Governments to 
ensure that all existing public buildings shall be made accessible for PwDs in 
accordance with the rules formulated by the Central Government within a 
period not exceeding five years from the date of notification of such rules.   
The Central Government brought out (February 2016) the ‘ Harmonised 
Guidelines and Space standards for Barrier Free Environment for Persons with 
Disabilities’ to facilitate/guide design of spaces to ensure equitable, easy 
access to persons with disabilities. As per Para 4.2 (vi) of the said guidelines, 
all open book stacks and all library facilities and equipment should be 
accessible.  A special room should also be provided for people with hearing 
and vision impairment who need assistance while reading. 
There are 6,861 public libraries in the State including 5,766 Gram Panchayat 
libraries.  Audit observed that the Karnataka Library Act, 1965 was not 
amended to include provisions such as retrofitting the libraries with reasonable 
structural modifications etc., to make libraries accessible to PwDs.  The 
Department of Libraries did not prepare a plan of action to assess the existing 
levels of accessibility of library buildings for further enhancements.   
Information furnished by 229 libraries (48 – District Central library; 23 – City 
Central library and 158 – Other libraries) on the status of infrastructure 
facilities available indicated that more than 88 per cent of the libraries did not 
have accessible toilets and furniture for PwDs; 38 per cent of the libraries did 
not provide for ease of access into the library; 47 per cent did not have media 
formats exclusive for PwDs such as audio and visual assisting 
materials/software and 74 per cent  did not have services for intellectually 
disabled persons as shown in Chart 3.2.   
 
 
 
 
3 Study carried out by the Indian Institute of Tourism and Travel Management.  

Implementation of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 
30 
Chart 3.2: Status of infrastructure facilities 
 
 
The State Government stated that the Director, Department of Library is 
requested by the State Commissioner to create a plan of action for assessing 
accessibility levels and establishing a separate library wing for the visually 
challenged persons. 
 
Recommendation 4: The State Government should accord top priority and 
step up its efforts to ensure that all public buildings, public transport and 
public places are provided with barrier free access to PwDs.  
 
2
1
1
2
9
15
156
141
26
21
113
44
71
87
202
206
107
170
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200 220 240
Out side of the library
Getting into the Library
Toilets
Furniture
Media Formats
Special services for cognitively disabled
(intellectually disabled) persons
Completely provided Partially provided Not provided

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
EDUCATION 
  

 
 
 
 

 
31 
Chapter-IV: Education 
Only 59 per cent of the teachers working in the test checked special schools 
were registered with the Regional Council of India (RCI) while only 40 per 
cent teachers working had the required qualifications. Special Teachers’ 
Training Centres for Mentally Retarded are yet to be established in the 
State while the Centenary building constructed in Mysuru is left unused and 
absence of comprehensive data contributed to the non -achievement of 
desired objective of providing quality education to the disabled childr en in 
the State. 
 
Section 17 (b) to (k) of the RPWD Act mandates the appropriate Government 
and Local Authorities to take specific measures to promote and facilitate 
inclusive education.  This required establishing adequate number of teacher s 
training institutions, establishing adequate number of resource centres to 
support educational institutions at all levels of school education, promote use 
of appropriate augmentative and alternative modes, to make suitable 
modifications in the curriculum and examination system to meet t he needs of 
students with disabilities, to promote research to improve learning etc. 
 
"Special education" students are those with a wide range of disabilities, 
including mental retardation, hearing, visual, and speech impairment, serious 
emotional disturbances, orthopaedic impairments and learning disabilities. 
There is no “one size fits all”  approach to special education.  It is tailored to 
meet each student’s needs.   There are 1 78 special schools functioning under 
the control of the Department. These schools are classified administratively as 
Government, Grants -In-Aid and Child Centric Sch ools, and functionally for 
various types of disabilities as detailed in Chart 4.1. 
Chart 4.1: Details of Special Schools functioning under the Department 
 
Source: Information furnished by the Department 
 


Implementation of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 
32 
4.1 Schools for Intellectually Disabled 
Intellectual Disability (earlier known as Mental Retardation), a condition of 
significant limitation both in intellectual functioning (reasoning, learning, 
problem solving) and in adaptive behaviour which covers a range of every 
day, social and practical skills, is characteri sed by below -average intelligence 
or mental ability and a lack of skills necessary for day-to-day living.   
In Karnataka, there are 93 schools that are specifically designed to cater to the 
needs of intellectually disabled students. These schools provide education, 
therapy, and vocational training for children and young adults with a variety of 
disabilities besides offering a range of speciali sed services, including 
occupational therapy, speech therapy, and physiotherapy to help students 
overcome their physical and intellectual challenges. 
In test checked 46 schools, audit  observed issues  such as non -following 
uniform syllabus for intellectually disabled students in schools, shortage of 
therapists in GIA schools.  
4.1.1 Non-adoption of Functional Assessment Checklist for Programming 
of students with profound mental retardation 
Intellectual disability varies from mild to profound (based on Intelligent 
Quotient levels). The National Institute for the Empowerment of Persons with 
Intellectual Disabilities (NIEPID), Secunderabad formerly known as National 
Institute for Mentally Handica pped (NIMH) had developed the Functional 
Assessment Checklist for Programming (FACP)  of students with profound 
mental retardation for different groups. These groups were categorised as Pre -
primary, primary, secondary, pre -vocational and vocational based on ability 
and chronological age. Adopting this syllabus required the teachers to (i) enter 
information at the entry level and periodically every quarter; (ii) prepare a 
teaching plan activity for each child for every term and (iii) send progress 
reports to parent periodically.  The State Government in the year 2010 issued 
orders to adopt and follow RCI/FACP syllabus in all CC Schools.   
 
A test -check of 46  (10 GIA and 36  CC Schools) out of the 90  Intellectual 
disability schools revealed the following findings: 
➢ Though State Government stipulated the CC schools to follow the 
RCI/FACP syllabus, it had not issued similar instructions to the GIA 
schools. Hence there was no uniformity in the syllabus being followed 
by the GI A and CC Schools. However, five  GIA schools adop ted the 
Audit observed that as against an amount of ₹492.88 crore released during the
period 2017-18 to 2022-23, ₹457.94 crore was spent towards education
including grants to Government schools, NGOs running Child Centric (CC)
schools, Grant In Aid (GIA) schools and scholarships to students. Important
observations regarding deficiencies noticed (90 test checked schools) in the
functioning of different types of special schools such as Schools for
Intellectual Disabilities, Visually Impaired and Hearing Impaired are
discussed in subsequent paragraphs.

Chapter-IV: Education 
33 
FACP syllabus and 24  out of 36 CC schools test -checked were 
following the FACP syllabus.  
➢ In schools where the FACP syllabus was being followed, student’s 
assessment was not being done and recorded . The level of disability in 
respect of intellectual disabled students was not being recorded at the 
time of admission. This hinders the teaching staff from assessing the 
improvements of the children. Audit noticed that though records were 
maintained, entries were made in pencil instead of in ink which 
provides scope for alterations. Further, it was seen that signature of the 
parents was not obtained in the progress reports.  
The State Government stated that the CC school guidelines vary from GIA 
school guideline. The CC schools for ID children should follow the RCI or 
NIMH approved syllabus and whereas no restriction in particular syllabus for 
ID schools under GIA code. It was further stated that the schools which were 
following the FACP syllabus were directed to conduct the assessment of the 
special students.  
 
However, Department had ignored the fact that whether it is CC schools or 
GIA schools, syllabus is uniform and since GIA schools were formed in 1982 
when FACP syllabus was not framed , GIA schools followed different 
syllabus. However, it is the responsibility of the Department to review 
periodically and follow uniform syllabus for ID students studying in all 
schools. GoI suggested adoption of FACP syllabus for ID students in 2003. 
4.1.2 Vacant Occupational therapists and Physiotherapists posts  
The GIA code norms stipulate appointment of one Occupational Therapist and 
one Physiotherapist in each of the Intellectual Disability School to assess, 
manage and help children to develop functional skills for everyday life in 
areas of self-care, schoolwork and play etc. Audit observed that except in one 
school out of the ten test checked GIA schools, these posts were vacant in all 
the remaining schools. This resulted in the students being deprived of 
specialist teachers’ services.  
In CC schools where physiotherapist was available, physiotherapy equipment 
such as trampoline, balance ball, CP chair, cycle/walker, physiotherapy tables 
and finger ladders etc., were not being used. The Department had failed to 
ensure the facilities are provided in these schools before  releasing grants 
periodically.  
The State Government stated that the DDWOs of the districts concerned were 
directed (April 2023) to submit the report about the non -availability of 
Occupational Therapist and Physiotherapist in Intellectual Disability Schools. 
4.1.3 Absence of lady teachers 
Scrutiny of the records of Mahaprajapati Day Special School for Intellectual 
Disabled Children, Bidar showed that one third of the students were girls and 
aged about 18 years. However, there were no lady teachers to deal with these 
girl students.  In response, the Institute stated that ayahs were appointed, and 
efforts would be made to appoint lady teachers. Thus, absence of lady teachers 

Implementation of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 
34 
in Intellectually Disabled schools where girl students are in  sufficient number 
would be a grave inconvenience for the girl students. 
 
The State Government stated that the Board of Management of the said school 
would be instructed to hire women special teachers and report accordingly. 
 
Recommendation 5: The State Government must ensure that all 
Intellectual Disability schools follow uniform syllabus (FACP), fill up the 
posts of occupational/physiotherapist on priority basis and provide 
accessible infrastructure in all schools.
4.2 Schools for Visually Impaired  
RPWD Act defines visual impairment as a condition where a person has either 
total absence of sight or a low vision. The education for visually impaired is 
aimed to develop physical, mental and social potentials of these children and 
in turn develop life adjustment and self -care skills to help them become well -
adjusted and independent individuals in society. While visually impaired 
children at the primary level require the direct assistance of a specialist 
teacher, the children at higher levels depend more on regular classroom 
teachers provided they are given the necessary materials for learning in the 
regular classroom.  
Apart from academic subjects, blind child is required to be well trained in 
compensatory skills such as braille reading methods, use of slate and audio 
equipment, development of visual perceptual activities, orientation and 
mobility etc. 
For visually impaired students, there are 3 1 schools which provide them with 
food, accommodation and medical facilities. The students are given computer 
training, English communication, leadership qualities, motivation and 
confidence building cours es besides imparting training in mobility tec hniques 
such as crossing roads, boarding buses and walking in busy streets.   
In test-checked 20 schools, Audit observed various shortcomings as discussed 
below. 
4.2.1 Orientation and Mobility Training Centre, Bengaluru 
Orientation and Mobility Program (OMP) refers to training involving special 
instructions that enables blind and visually impaired individuals to learn safe 
techniques for crossing streets and accessing public transportation using canes. 
The State Government a ccorded permission (January 1984) to appoint  ten 
Orientation and Mobility Officers for imparting training at the Orientation and 
Mobility Training Centre at the National Association for the Blind (NAB), 
Karnataka Branch, Bengaluru to GIA. Each Officer c an train four blind 
persons in one batch for six weeks and 28 blind persons can be trained in a 
year in seven batches by one officer. 
 

Chapter-IV: Education 
35 
As per the data furnished to audit, the Centre had conducted 37 courses during 
the period from 2016 -17 to 2021 -22 and trained 556 persons. Audit noticed 
that as many as 50, 28 and 22 persons were trained in each batch during 2019 -
20 which works out to 17, 9 and 7 persons per teacher.  
From 2019 -20 the Centre had only two permanent staff (one retired in July 
2022 and another due in February 2025) and one temporary teaching staff for 
conducting its courses.    
The reduction in duration of the course and increase in number of persons per 
teacher reflects on the effectiveness of the training imparted to blind persons. 
The activities of the Institute are likely to stop unless steps are initiated to fill 
the vacant posts. 
The State Government stated that DDWO concerned was instructed (February 
2023) to take necessary action to appoint Orientation and Mobility Instructor 
as per 1982 GIA code.  
4.2.2 Vacant posts of Mobility Instructor 
Students in preschool and elementary school need to be instructed on how to 
travel around their school building, playground, and neighbourhood by 
themselves, and about more complex environmental concepts, including 
topography (slope, hilly) and textures (concrete, bumpy), and about positional 
concepts (in front of, in back of).   
Though a ll the four Government and six out of the seven GIA schools test -
checked had a sanctioned post of Mobility Instructor to teach the blind 
children, these posts were vacant.  
The State Government stated since the qualified candidates were not available 
in the State, these posts are yet to be filled. However, the Department had 
requested (February 2020) the RCI, New Delhi to organise the refresher and 
training programmes for in service teachers of special schools in Karnataka.  
Audit, however, observed that further follow up action was not taken up with 
RCI New Delhi regarding refresher and training programmes. 
4.2.3 Music exam for visually impaired students   
Karnataka Secondary Education Examination Board is responsible for 
conducting examinations like Music, Karnataka Open School, Diploma in 
Education, etc.  The State Government sanctioned a post for music teacher in 
all schools including the GIA and CC schools. As per the information 
furnished, music teachers were appointed and working in 16 test -checked 
schools.  In the remaining three 4 schools (two GIA and one CC), the post was 
vacant. 
Though the schools adopted the music syllabus as prescribed by the Board, it 
was observed that no student in 13 of the test -checked schools had taken the 
music examination conducted by the Board during the period from 2017 -18 to 
 
4 M. Krishna School for Blind, Hassan, Karnataka Welfare Association for the Blind Bengaluru, Asha 
Kirana School for Blind, Chikkamagaluru. 

Implementation of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 
36 
2021-22. In the other six schools, only one to 18 per cent of the total students 
had taken up the music exam during the above period which was not in 
continuous pattern. (Appendix 4.1).  
The Department thus failed to take corrective action to encourage blind 
students to appear for the music examination.  This deprived the students from 
obtaining certificates that can help them in securing jobs.  
The State Government stated that instructions were issued (February 2023) to 
all DDWOs to coordinate with the NGOs who are running special schools for 
Visually Impaired children to encourage the students to appear for music 
examination conducted by the Karnataka Secondary Education Examination 
Board. 
4.2.4 Unfruitful expenditure on construction of Centenary Bhavan 
The State Government, to commemorate completion of 100 years of the 
Government Blind School, Mysuru established in 1901, accorded (March 
2003) sanction for construction of a Centenary Bhavan within the premises of 
the Deaf and Dumb School.  The work was entrusted (August 2005) to 
Karnataka Land Army Corporation (now known as Karnataka Rural 
Infrastructure Development Limited) and the work was completed at a total 
cost of ₹50 lakh and handed over (January 2012) to the Department. 
 
The building was not inaugurated and kept idle for the last nine years .  A udit 
observed that the windows and windowpanes were broken and many 
wheelchairs, motorised vehicles, artificial limbs and crutches etc., were 
dumped in the building.  Though the Institute submitted (February 2020) 
proposals to the Director seeking grants for undertaking repairs estimating to 
cost ₹19.50 lakh, the Director did not consider (March 2020) the proposal as 
the District Disabled Welfare Officer, Mysuru stated that no grants were 
required for repair. There were, however, no recorded reasons justifying the 
action of the DDWO. Consequently, the building continues to be in a bad 
shape and non-utilisation of the building resulted in infructuous expenditure of 
₹50 lakhs.  
The State Government stated (May 2023) that at present DDWO, Mysuru was 
using the building. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Chapter-IV: Education 
37 
Exhibit 4.1: Centenary Building within the premises of deaf and dumb 
school, Mysuru 
  
 
Source: Photographs taken during Joint Physical Verification 
4.2.5 Institution specific findings 
(i) Teekshna Blind School, Chitradurga 
Test check of records of Teekshna Blind School, Chitradurga (granted GIA 
status in April 2011) revealed that the students’ strength which was 70 during 
2011-12 reduced to 23 during 2014 -15 and to four during 2021 -22. Though 
Departmental authorities including Chief Executive Officer (CEO), Zilla 
Panchayat (ZP), Chitradurga (April 2018 -April 2019) noticed that number of 
teachers were more than the number of students and recommended 
relocation/transfer of the teachers to other GIA institutions on top priority,  no 
action was initiated.  Records indicated that the management of the school had 
sought (January 2020) for cancellation of release of grants to this school and 
requested for transfer of teachers to some other school on the ground that there 
were no sufficient students in the school. The proposal of the Department 
(May 2021) to transfer the teachers to Asha Kirana Residential Blind School, 
Chikkamagaluru is yet to be approved by the Government. It was seen that the 
Department had released ₹1.05 crore as gr ants to the institution during the 
period 2017 -18 to 2021 -22. Thus, following decreasing trend in students’ 
admission, action should have been taken for the transfer of the students as 
requested for. 
The State Government stated that request for seeking approval for transfer of 
the teachers to other GIA institutions is under process.   
(ii) M. Krishna Residential School for the Blind, Hassan 
Review of records of M . Krishna Residential School for the Blind, Hassan 
revealed that there was a gradual reduction in the strength of students from 45 
in 2011-12 to eight in 2022 -23. The institution had requested (July 2018) for 
transfer of students to other institutions as teachers were not working 


Implementation of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 
38 
satisfactorily. The Department did not initiate action even after the request of 
the institution was forwarded by the State Commissioner (November 2021) to 
take suitable action in the interest of the students. It was noticed that         
₹1.52 crore was released towards salaries of the staff during the last five years. 
The State Government stated  (May 2023)  that District Disabled Welfare 
Officer, Hassan was instructed (February 2023) to submit a detailed report and 
after receiving the report, action would be taken against the organisation as per 
rules. 
4.3 Schools for Hearing Impaired 
Hearing impairment is a partial or total inability to hear. It consists of two 
categories - deaf and hard of hearing. “Deaf” means persons having 70 dB 
hearing loss in speech frequencies in both ears and “Hard of hearing”  means 
person having 60 dB to 70 dB hearing loss in speech frequencies in both ears.  
In test checked 23 schools audit observed shortcomings in functioning of these 
schools for visually impaired students are detailed in subsequent paragraphs.  
4.3.1 Non-availability of Group Hearing Aids 
A student with a hearing impairment may experience difficulty in the subjects 
of grammar, spelling  and vocabulary, taking notes while listening to lectures, 
participating in classroom discussions, watching educational videos and 
presenting oral reports.  Group Hearing aids enable hearing impaired students 
to study together  with normal students. It consists of one Teacher’s Mic 
Amplifier Unit and 8 to 12 students’ Headphone Mic Amplifier units.  
Audit observed that except seven 5 schools, none of the other test -checked 
schools including Government schools were using the group hearing aids for 
teaching purposes. This will result in communication barriers, limited access 
to information and social exclusion. The State Government did not offer any 
comments.     
  
 
5  Sheila Kotwala School for hearing Impaired Bengaluru, Sunaada Deaf and Dumb School, 
Bengaluru, Shatashrunga Residential School for Hearing Impaired Children Bengaluru, 
PV Datti Rotary School for Deaf and Dumb, Hubbal li, Sri Renuka Yellamma Resident ial 
School Ranebennur Haveri district, Sairanga Deaf and Dumb School , Mysuru, 
Putteeramma Deaf and Dumb School, Mysuru.  

Chapter-IV: Education 
39 
Exhibit 4.2 : Group Hearing Aids in Hearing Impaired Schools 
  
Dr. PV Datti Rotary School for Hearing 
Impaired Children, Hubballi, Dharwad 
Smt. Putteramma School for Hearing Impaired 
Girls, Mysuru 
    Source: Photographs taken during Joint Physical Verification 
4.3.2 Non-implementation of Project - Learning Enhancement for 
 Differently Abled Students of Primary Schools 
The State Government under the State Collaboration Initiative Programme of 
GoI proposed for implementation of the Project ‘Learning Enhancement  for 
Differently Abled Students of Primary Schools’ at an estimated cost of      
₹2.36 crore. The project aimed to provide hearing impaired students with 
digital education, ensure learning Math, Science and English concepts at 
appropriate grade level that would enhance their regular classroom teaching 
besides enabling access to new technologies and multimedia in special schools 
using multimedia room, tablets, satellite and internet connectivity . More than 
1000 primary class students with hearing impairment across 46 special schools 
in the State were to obtain benefits out of this project. G oI released (March 
2016) an amount of ₹80 lakh out of its share of one crore rupees.   
Records indicated that citing the reason that a similar project implemented on 
pilot basis in Education Department did not achieve the fruitful result, the 
Department decided (May 2020) to drop the project  and refunded (December 
2020) ₹89.77 lakh along with  interest to G oI. It was noticed that the 
Department had not conducted an independent pilot study to arrive at its  
decision thereby losing out an opportunity to avail the funding from the GoI to 
the benefit for the PwDs education. The State Government did not offer its 
comments.   
4.3.3 Institution specific findings 
(i) Government School for deaf and dumb, Bengaluru (Hamsadhwani) 
Test check of records of School of Hearing and Speech Impaired run by M/s 
NASEOH Institution Bengaluru (Hamsadhwani) (granted GIA status in 1988) 
revealed that the students’ strength had reduced from 72 in 2015 -16 to 12 in 
2021-22.  Following Department’s recommendation to protect the interest of 
72 students studying in the school and to protect the land (2 acres and 13 
guntas) located in the prime area of the city, the State Government accorded 
(July 2016) permission to convert the school into a residential school and 
sanctioned ₹64.35 lakh to construct the hostel. Though the hostel building was 
constructed and handed over (February 2019) to the Department, the hostel 


Implementation of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 
40 
was not put to use and the school was yet to be converted into residential 
school.  
Exhibit 4.3:   Hostel building of Government School for Deaf and Dumb,  
  Bengaluru (Hamsadhwani) 
  
Source: Photographs taken during Joint Physical Verification  
Further, it was also noticed that the high school classes were being conducted 
without teachers for Maths and Science subjects since 2015 -16. Audit also 
observed that the teachers let out a portion of the school ground to a nearby 
private school (Presten Public School) for a monthly rent of  ₹5,000 without 
any agreement and without the concurrence of the Department. The State 
Government did not offer its comments. 
(ii) Government Residential School for Deaf, Mysuru 
During the period 2011 -12 to 2018 -19, it was reported that 41 
students/inmates studying in Government Residential School of Deaf ran away 
from the school and only six students were traced later.  Audit observed that 
neither the institution nor the Department had taken any measures to trace the 
whereabouts of the other 35 students (March 2023) which not only exposed 
security concerns but also indicated lack of sensitivity towards CWSNs.  The 
State Government did not offer its comments.  
(iii) Guild of Service, Speech and Hearing Centre, Mangaluru. 
The Guild of Service, Speech and Hearing Centre established (1974) in 
Mangaluru provides training and services to children and adults (age group 
ranging from 20 months to 80 years) with defects in speech and hearing.   The 
State Government accorded (1982) GIA status and sanctioned two posts of 
Speech Therapists and one Senior Division Assistant (SDA). Consequent on 
retirement of both the Speech Therapists (2003 and 2011), no further 
recruitments were made. At present, the institute is functioning with one 
Speech Therapist and one Ear Mould Technician on honorarium basis in 
addition to the regular SDA posted.   
Audit noticed that institution is working with the services availed through the 
Speech Therapist who retired in 2011. Even though requests were made to 
reimburse the honorarium, the Department is yet to release grants even when 
the number of speech therapy sessions increased from 1 ,380 in 2015 -16 to 
2,036 in 2021-22. Thus, non-filling up of permanent technical staff might lead 
to closure of the institution. The State Government did not offer its comments. 


Chapter-IV: Education 
41 
4.4 Registration of teachers with Rehabilitation Council of India 
The Rehabilitation Council of India (RCI) set up as a registered society in 
1986, became (June 1993) a statutory body through the enactment of the RCI 
Act (September 1992). The mandate given to RCI is to regulate and monitor 
services given to persons with disability, to standardise syllabi and to maintain 
a Central Rehabilitation Register of all qualified professionals and personnel 
working in the field of Rehabilitation and Special Education . It has the 
additional responsibility to ensure that professionals in these fields update and  
upgrade their knowledge and skills on a continuing basis. The persons 
registered with RCI shall be entitled to practice as a rehabilitation professional 
/personnel in any part of India. The registration is to be renewed once in every 
five years. 
There are a total of 778 teachers working in the 90 test checked schools of 
which 531 teachers (68 per cent) had registered with RCI. Further, out of the 
531 registered teachers, 315 teachers (59 per cent ) had renewed their 
registrations Thus, only 315 (40 per cent ) out of 778 teachers in the test 
checked schools were qualified enough to deliver services to PwDs as shown 
in Chart 4.2. 
Chart 4.2: Registration and Renewal of teachers with RCI 
 
Though Department was aware that teachers not registered with RCI were 
working in all categories of schools, adequate steps were not taken to ensure 
that all teachers update and upgrade their knowledge and skills in a time 
bound manner . Audit observed that the Department did not insist on this 
aspect while releasing the grants to Grant -in-Aid (GIA) and Child Centric 
(CC) schools. In respect of six schools 6, it was noticed that all the teachers 
were not registered with RCI but had received grant of ₹1.99 crore during 
 
6  Ajay Deaf and Dumb School Belagavi, Asha Kirana School for Blind Bidar, Avakasha 
MR School Hassan, Jyanayogi Pandit Panchakshari Gavai Galavara School for HI, Siggavi 
Haveri district, Sri Jnana Kirana Residential school for MR children, Chikkakuravathi, 
Ranebennur, Haveri District and Vidyachetana School for MR Children Byadagi Haveri 
District.  


Implementation of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 
42 
2021-22 only. It was also seen that 18 teachers in GIA schools, seven teachers 
in Government schools and 34 teachers in CC schools had not acquired the 
special D.Ed /B.Ed qualifications. 
Thus, 60 per cent of the teachers were delivering services to the students with 
disabilities in violation of the statutory provisions of the RCI Act, and the 
Department failed to monitor this aspect. This led to students being deprived 
of quality teaching. 
The State Government stated that the Grant -in-Aid (GIA) were being 
sanctioned to schools in the interest of the special children.  It was also stated 
that GIA were not released to teachers of CC schools who had not acquired 
special D.Ed/B.Ed qualifications. However, the reply was not specific about 
RCI registration and its renewal.  
Illustration  
 
Dr. Steiner’s Curative Educational Institute for Mentally Retarded, 
Dharwad: 
This School for Intellectually disabled had 51 students during 2022-23 and did 
not have any qualified teacher. After retirement of regular teaching staff/death 
of the staff (October 2003 to May 2011), the management had not taken any 
steps to appoint qualified teaching staff. Instead, the physical education 
teacher and music teacher were handling the classes though they did not 
possess any requisite qualifications for teaching including RCI registration.  
Government school for Deaf students (Mysuru): Three teachers were teaching 
since 2000 without any requisite qualifications for teaching including RCI 
registration. 
4.5 Accessible Infrastructure in Schools 
The RPWD Act mandates that appropriate Government and Local Authorities 
shall ensure that every child with benchmark disability has access to free 
education in an appropriate environment and there is a direct relationship 
between school infrastructure and educational performance. 
4.5.1 Accessible infrastructure in regular schools 
Analysis of the information provided by the Project Directors of Sarva 
Sikshana Abhiyan regarding the status of accessibility in 71,830 schools of the 
State showed the absence of disabled friendly toilets in 52,321 schools (73 per 
cent). While ramps were provided in 51,464 schools (72 per cent ), railings 
were fixed in 42,987 schools (60 per cent). District-wise analysis showed that 
in Dakshina Kannada, majority of schools were provided with ramps and 
railings and disabled friendly toilets and most of the sc hools in Kodagu, 
Mandya and Uttara Kannada had ramps and railings.  The performance of 
Bengaluru Urban (ramps/railings), Kolar (ramps/railings) and Belagavi, 
Hassan and Kalaburagi (toilets) was poor as majority of the schools were not 

Chapter-IV: Education 
43 
disabled friendly. The district wise availability of accessible infrastructure is 
indicated in Appendix 4.2.  
4.5.2 Accessible infrastructure in special schools 
Audit noticed that no action plan was drawn up at the Apex level to conduct 
Access Audit of the special schools to identify the deficiencies and take 
corrective measures thereon to ensure that these schools are accessible. 
Analysis of the information obtained from special schools regarding the status 
of accessibility in 90 out of 178 special schools in the State showed absence of 
disabled friendly toilets in 69 schools (77 per cent ).  While ramps were 
provided in 46 schools (51 per cent ), railings were fixed in 42 schools  
(47 per cent) (Exhibit 4.4). 
 
Exhibit 4.4: Ramp with handrails and disabled friendly toilets 
   
Ramp with Handrails- Vishwas 
Intellectual Disability School 
Bidar 
Ramps with Handrails-Asha 
Kiran School for Visually 
Impaired children, 
Chikkamagaluru 
Disabled Friendly Toilet 
Shraddhanjali integrated school, 
Bengaluru 
Source: Photograph taken during Joint Physical Verification 
Joint Physical Verification of special schools in the selected districts showed 
deficiencies in amenities provided and many of the schools were in deplorable 
conditions as detailed in Appendix 4.3. A few examples with photographs are 
given below.  
 
Illustration 
SJM Residential School for Physically Handicapped, Haveri 
The school did not have ramp facilities and railings in the entire campus.  
There were steep steps at the entrance of the classrooms. There were no 
separate toilets for boys and girls and only two toilets were available which 
were also far from the classrooms. The classroom building was in 
dilapidated condition and did not have fans and proper furniture.  There 
were no separate rooms for both boys and girls for residential purposes 
(hostels). The rooms meant for office use of the Ashrama located in the 
premises were being utilised as hostel rooms. Facilities such as cots, 
pillows, mattresses and mosquito nets were not provided. 


Implementation of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 
44 
 
Exhibit 4.5: Deficiencies of amenities in the schools 
  
Source: Photographs taken during Joint Physical Verification 
Illustration 
 
Mahaprajapati MR Special Residential School, Bidar 
Number of inmates 56 boys and 30 girls 
School was functioning in a residential house with attached accommodation 
for classes (shed made of metal sheets). Classrooms were made by 
partitioning the shed with metal sheet walls.  As there were wide gaps between 
the roof and walls, there was no protection during heavy rain.  Teaching 
activities cannot be conducted during heavy rain seasons and in summer 
seasons. Condition of toilets was very poor and even doors of the toilets were 
not properly covered. 
   
Residential School Building Classroom Toilets 
Source: Photographs taken during Joint Physical Verification 
In exit conference it was stated that necessary steps would be taken to address 
issues raised by audit. One instance of action taken subsequent to audit is 
shown below: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Chapter-IV: Education 
45 
Illustration 
 
During joint physical verification of CC School (Jyothi Residential School for 
Mentally Retarded, Haveri) in December 2020, audit party noticed improper 
infrastructural facilities. (The school was located in an industrial area.  It 
consists of one big hall converted into classrooms and one hostel room each 
for boys and girls.  This hostel also acts a storeroom/godown for the factories 
in the industrial area for keeping their materials) Management of the school 
had taken action to improve infrastructural facilities and present school 
building is completely renovated (June 2023). 
 
Jyothi Residential School for Mentally Retarded, Haveri (December 2020) 
 
Source: Photographs taken during Joint Physical Verification 
4.6 Poor functioning of GIA schools vis-a-vis CC schools  
Audit noticed decreasing trend in admission of students in GIA schools 
compared to students’ admission in CC schools as detailed in Chart 4.3 and   
shortage of teaching faculty and absence of infra facilities in GIA schools 
could be the main reason for decreasing trend in admission of students in GIA 
when compared to CC schools , where grants are being given on the basis of 
admission of students.  
 
 
 
 
Apart from Government schools, Government releases grants also to GIA
Schools and CC Schools. Main difference between GIA Schools and CC
Schools is that under GIA schools, staff get Government pay scales
irrespective of strength of students whereas Department releases grants to CC
schools as per the strength ₹6,200/6,800 per student in case of residential and
₹5,200/6,000 per student in case of non-residential and teachers only get
honorarium ranging from ₹13,500-₹21,000 per month. (Honorarium revised
from September 2022).

Implementation of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 
46 
Chart 4.3: GIA schools and CC schools 
 
The State Government stated that GIA norms were different from CC school 
norms, but the reply did not offer any comments about decrease in the strength 
of students.  
4.7 Absence of Higher Secondary Education Schools for Visually and 
 Hearing Impaired 
The existing special schools in the State offer education up to tenth standard 
for the visually and hearing impaired. This requires the students to 
subsequently study in normal schools (where there are no special teachers to 
cater to the needs of these students) or have to discontinue and look for 
vocational courses of one/two -year duration. Audit observed that the 
Department had not initiated action to commence Higher Secondary Schools 
till 12 th standard. Hence the students studying in the State are depriv ed of 
Higher Education after completion of schooling. The State Government did 
not offer its comments. 
4.8 Reservation in Higher Educational Institutions 
As per Section 32 of RPWD Act, all Government institutions of higher 
education and other higher education institutions receiving aid from the 
Government are to reserve not less than five per cent seats for persons with 
benchmark disabilities and the persons with benchmark disabilities are to be 
given an upper age relaxation of five years for admission in institutions of 
higher education. 
Audit observed that the Department did not maintain data on the total number 
of seats available in Government and Aided colleges and those earmarked, if  
any, were in accordance with the provisions of the Act.  As a result, there was 
no mechanism to monitor the compliance of the Act by these colleges. The 
State Government did not offer its comments.   
 
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
4500
5000
Total number of
students in 2017
Total number of
students in 2021
Total number of
students in 2017
Total number of
students in 2021
GIA Schools CC Schools
1631 1407
4729 4917

Chapter-IV: Education 
47 
4.9 Absence of Education Indicators 
The Education Department introduced Student Achievement Tracking System 
(SATS) to track every child through the State, from birth registration till he or 
she attains vocational or professional qualification.  The policy goal of “Every 
Child in School and Learning Well” requires tracking enrolment of all 
children of school going age in Government, aided and unaided schools.  
Audit observed that the Department had neither adopted the SATS nor had 
brought any such similar mechanism to have a comprehensive database of the 
students studying in special schools.  Consequently, there was no data on the 
various education indicators 7 in respect of special schools which come under 
the purview of the Department resulting in non-tracking of social cost benefit 
on the budget expenditure (asset management) of the Government on Human 
Development Index. Absence of these indicators resulted in a loss of 
opportunity to analyse specific reasons for school dropouts, if any, to design 
appropriate intervention strategy and reduce dropout rate. The State 
Government did not offer its comments.   
Recommendation 6: The State Government needs to ensure availability of 
hearing aids, audio books and equipment in all institutions for overall 
improvement of PwDs. 
 
 
7 Gross Enrolment Ratio, Net Enrolment Ratio, Retention, Transition Rate, Average 
Annual Drop Out, Promotion Rate, Gender Parity Index, Pupil Teacher Ratio for 
sanctioned posts and Pupil Teacher Ratio for working posts. 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
SKILL DEVELOPMENT, 
EMPLOYMENT AND SOCIAL 
SECURITY 
 

 
 

 
49 
Chapter-V: Skill Development, Employment and Social 
Security 
 
The Government is yet to establish required technical training institutions for  
imparting skills to enable them secure livelihood. Community Care Centres 
were not established for the orphaned children and destitute disabled persons 
and many Central Sector Schemes designed for the welfare of the disabled 
were not implemented. The awareness and publicity about the provisions of 
the revised Act and Rules was inadequate , which resulted in their non -
implementation.  As a result, many of the PwDs had to seek legal intervention 
for their rights. There were deficiencies in few of the test -checked schemes 
implemented. 
 
Social protection plays a key role in realizing the rights of persons with 
disabilities of all ages , providing them with an adequate standard of living, a 
basic level of income security , thus, reducing levels of poverty and 
vulnerability. People with disabilities need skills to engage in livelihood 
activities. These skills can be classified into foundation skills acquired through 
education, professional skills to enable undertake a particular activity or task 
and business skills to succeed in self-employment.  
5.1 Skill development for PwDs 
Government is extending grants to institutions such as Non -residential 
Industrial Training Institute of the National Association for Blind, Mysuru, 
Technical Training Institute run by the National Association for Blind, 
Bengaluru, Association of People with Disabilities (APD), Bengaluru to  
impart vocational trai ning to PwDs  and improve their employability skill and 
these institutions are functioning with 100  per cent financial assistance from 
the State budget (Under 1982 GIA code). Audit observations on functioning of 
technical institutes are discussed in subsequent paras in this chapter.  
5.1.1 Non-compliance to guidelines by Non-residential Industrial Training 
 Institute of the National Association for Blind, Mysuru 
The State Government accorded (December 1985) sanction to start non-
residential Industrial Training Institute (ITI) for the blind run by National 
Association for Blind (NAB) at Mysuru under the GIA scheme for Physically 
handicapped persons and Mentally Retarded children.  The institution initially 
established for blind students is also now training hearing impaired students.   
Records indicated that the teaching faculty did not possess either Braille skills 
or sign language required to teach the visually and hearing impaired.  The  
institute stated (January 2021) the teachers were imparting training through 
experience. It was also seen that the post of the Director is vacant since 1995 
and the running of the institute is by a manager. 
The condition of the institute is detrimental to the interest of the children.  

Implementation of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 
50 
5.1.2 Working of Technical Training Institute run by the National 
 Association for Blind, Bengaluru 
The Technical Training Institute established in 1982 by the National 
Association for Blind was granted affiliation by State Council of Vocational 
Training in 1987 for conducting ITI related courses. The Institute had not 
conducted ITI courses since all the GIA teaching staff had retired by 2015 -16 
The institution has so far not filled up the vacant posts. As per the information 
furnished by the institution, it had conducted one course each of six months 
duration (foundation course) during 2017 -18 and 2018 -19 through an 
outsourced staff and the Attender. In 2019 -20, five courses of two -month 
duration (Garment course) were conducted. 
Audit observed that necessary permission for conducting these courses was 
not obtained from the Government. It was noticed that the institution had 
received grants of ₹25.11 lakh during the period 2016 -17 to 2021 -22 which 
was thus largely unfruitful. The State Government did not offer its comments.  
5.1.3 Non-establishment of Training Centres 
The State Government accorded (September 2001) its approval to establish 
two Special Training Centres during the year 2002 -03 viz., the Community 
Based Rehabilitation (CBR) Workers’ Training Centre with financial 
assistance from GoI and the Special Teachers’ Training Centre for Vocational 
Training to MR children with assistance from NIEPID, Secunderabad. The 
role of CBR was to enable PwDs to access work opportunities by actively 
promoting and facilitating the acquisition of relevant knowledge, skills and 
attitudes. 
Audit observed that the Department had not taken steps to establish these 
institutions even after 18 years of approval  by the State Government.  As a 
result, it failed to create conducive conditions assuring vocational education 
initiatives to PwDs. The State Government did not offer its comments. 
5.2 Employment of PwDs 
Government of India have reserved identified posts and Special Employment 
Exchanges were also established  to provide platform for job aspirants to 
register themselves for appointments. Besides, RPWD Act provides incentives 
to private sector employers who give opportunities to PwDs. Besides, GoI also 
extends financial assistance to PwDs for their skill upgradation and provides 
loans at concessional rates of interest for self-employment opportunities.  
Audit observed that as against an amount of ₹ 2.64 crore released for 
placement cell of the differently abled programme during the period 2017 -18 
to 2022-23, ₹0.32 crore was spent which indicates department had accorded 
least priority to employment programmes for PwDs. 
Audit observations in providing jobs to PwDs in Government jobs, working of 
Special Employment exchanges and compliance to Act provisions are 
discussed below.   
 

Chapter-V: Skill Development, Employment and Social Security 
51 
5.2.1 Delay in notification of Reservation and identification of posts 
Section 34 of the RPWD Act stipulates that ‘Every appropriate Government 
shall appoint in every Government establishment, not less than four per cent, 
of the total number of vacancies in the cadre strength in each group of posts 
meant to be filled with persons with benchmark disabilities. Further, as per 
Section 33, the appropriate Government shall identify posts in establishments 
which can be held by respective category of persons with benchmark 
disabilities in respect of the vacancies reserved in accordance with the 
provisions of section 34, constitute an expert committee with representation of 
persons with benchmark disabilities for identification of such posts. 
The State Government brought out an exclusive reservation policy of 
mandatory appointment of not less than four per cent of the total number of 
vacancies (Group A and B) and not less than five per cent of the total number 
of vacancies (Group C and D) in the cadre strength in each group of posts 
meant to be filled with persons with benchmark disabilities in September 2020 
after a lapse of four years of implementation of the RPWD Act. Though an 
expert committee was constituted (November 2017) to identify the posts in the 
various Departments that were to be held by persons with benchmark 
disabilities, the Committee was yet to submit its report (December 2022).  
The State Government stated that a committee for identification posts of 
persons with disabilities had been constituted and every Department in the 
State had to submit the proposal in prescribed format to this committee to 
identify the particular post for PwD and issue the notification.  Based on the 
request, Committee will identify and submit the report to concerned authority 
to fill post as per the roster system.   
Non-submission of the report led to non-identification of the posts in various 
departments, thereby denying the rightful opportunity to the deserving 
candidates. 
5.2.2 Non-implementation of Supreme Court directions 
The Hon’ble Supreme Court vide its judgement (in Writ Petition (Civil) No. 
521 of 2008) upheld (June 2016) that once the post is identified, it must be 
reserved for PwD, irrespective of the mode of recruitment adopted by the State 
for filling up of the said post. In the light of this judgement, the State 
Commissioner requested (February 2020) to issue revised order s as was done 
in Andhra Pradesh and Punjab States. The Government is yet to act in this 
regard. Consequently, reservation in promotions w ere not being followed in 
the State. The State Government did not offer its comments. 
5.2.3 Special Employment Exchange 
As per Section 36 of RPWD Act 2016, the appropriate Government may 
require the employer in every establishment to furnish such information or 
return as prescribed in relation to vacancies appointed for persons with 
benchmark disability that have occurred or are about to occur in 
establishments to such Special Employment Exchange (SEE) and the 
establishment is to comply with such requisition. 

Implementation of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 
52 
The State Government decided (February 2004) to close down the SEEs at 
Belagavi, Hubballi, Kalaburagi, Mangaluru and Mysuru due to insufficient 
work and fewer number of PwDs getting jobs through SEEs. Only one SEE is 
presently functioning at Bengaluru.  Only 98 of the registered PwDs were 
employed (32 in Government/Central PSU and 66 in private sector) through 
SEE during the period 2016 -17 to 2021 -22 as few organisations barring 
furnishing the prescribed returns to SEE. As per the information furnished by 
Assistant Director, SEE, there are a total of 1,026 PwDs registered as of 
March 2022.  In the absence of SEEs other than Bengaluru, there was no 
platform for the job aspirants to register themselves for appointments. 
The Department had not made alternate arrangements for registration of job 
aspirants like creating awareness about kaushalkar.com, the web portal of the 
Department of Skill Development, Entrepreneurship an d Livelihood (SDEL) 
which provides the youth to acquire necessary skills and expertise to increase 
their employability besides providing with job opportunities. The State 
Government did not offer its comments. 
5.2.4 Incentives to private sector employers for providing employment to
 PwDs 
As per Section 35 of RPWD Act, incentives are to be provided to private 
sector employers to ensure that at least five per cent  of their work force is 
composed of persons with benchmark disability. Accordingly, t he G oI 
introduced (February 2017) ‘Incentive Scheme for providing employment to 
PwDs in the private sector’ effective from 1 April 2016, which provides for 
payment of employer’s contribution to Provident Fund and Insurance by 
Government, payment of gratuity etc.   
Audit observed that the Department had neither maintained any data on 
employment of PwDs in private sector nor had conducted any survey to assess 
the extent of employment among PwDs. It also failed to give wide publicity 
about the scheme by arranging workshops or seminars in association with 
FICCI / Chamber of Commerce / ASSOCHAM to sensitise multinational and 
domestic private employers about the provisions of the RPWD Act and the 
incentives to be provided to them.   
The State Government  stated that office of the State Commissioner  has 
requested (February 2023) Confederation of Indian Industry (CII)  and 
Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and  Industry (FICCI)  Chamber 
of Commerce and ASSOCHAM, Bengaluru to facilitate a workshop with 
corporate sectors to create awareness about the provisions of Section 35 of the 
RPWD Act 2016 and further stated that the private sectors would be  requested 
to provide at least  five per cent employment opportunities to PwDs in their 
firms and incentives will also be provided to the private sectors who will 
provide employment opportunity for PwDs.   
5.2.5 Non-execution of Agreement with National Handicapped Finance 
 and Development Corporation 
The National Handicapped Finance and Development Corporation (NHFDC) 
established (January 1997) by GoI finances, facilitates and mobilises funds for 
the empowerment of PwDs including their skill upgradation and provides 

Chapter-V: Skill Development, Employment and Social Security 
53 
loans to target groups through its State Channelizing Agencies (SCAs) 
nominated by State Government, Public Sector Banks, Regional Rural Banks 
and other Institutions. A total of 3,117 beneficiaries in the State had received 
loans amounting to ₹10.15 crore during the period 2002-03 to 2013-14.  
The State Government transferred (October 2014)  the responsibility of 
implementing NHFDC schemes from Karnataka State Women Development 
Corporation to DEDASC. Consequently, the Department was required to 
execute General Loan Agreement with NHFDC and provide State 
Government Guarantee. Audit observed that the Department did not execute 
the agreement for which no reasons were placed on record. No action was 
taken by the State Government even when NHFDC in January 2020  had 
appraised that it was not able to actively engage in the State. 
Consequently, the PwD population in the State were not able to benefit from 
NHFDC’s concessional credit linkages in the absence of an active SCA for its 
schemes like  Jan Aushadi Kendras,  NHFDC Swavalamban Kendra, 
Divyangjan Swavalamban Yojana etc.  The objectives of the schemes are 
indicated in Appendix 5.1. 
The State Government stated that  Karnataka State Women Development 
Corporation and other nationalised banks had not accepted /shown interest to 
become a SCA, for implementation of the scheme. Therefore, all NHFDC 
schemes had not been implemented since 2014 -15. The State Government 
should have explored other avenues especially in the light of NHFDC’s 
appraisal, the scheme would be a means of aiding PwD in empowerment. 
5.3 Social Security for PwDs 
5.3.1 Establishment of Community Centres 
As per Section 24 of the RPWD Act, the appropriate Government shall within 
the limit of its economic capacity and development formulate necessary 
schemes and programmes to safeguard and promote the right of PwDs for 
adequate standard of living to enable them to live independently or in the 
community, provided that the quantum of assistance to the persons with 
disabilities under such schemes and programmes shall be at least 25 per cent 
higher than the similar schemes applicable to others. 
The schemes devised shall provide for Community centres with good living 
conditions in terms of safety, sanitation, health care and counselling, facilities 
for persons including children with disabilities who have no family or have 
been abandoned, or are without shelter or livelihood, support during natural or 
man-made disasters and in areas of conflicts etc. 
Audit observed that apart from Intellectual Disability schools and Manasa 
Kendras in Bengaluru and Belagavi, the Department had not initiated steps to 
identify institutions or devised schemes to encourage establishing such 
community centres.  
The State Government stated that Hon’ble Chief Minister of Karnataka has 
announced setting up  of Shelter workshop for mentally retarded persons to 
provide required rehabilitation and training facilities under one roof and once 

Implementation of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 
54 
the schemes are approved at the Government level, the project would be 
implemented in the State. 
5.3.2 Non-implementation and deficiencies in implementation of schemes 
The main objective of the Department was to bring the PwDs into mainstream 
of the society with focus on their abilities rather than their disabilities.  This 
required a multi dimension approach for overall welfare and development of 
the PwDs. Accordingly, Government is implementing schemes such as 
Niramaya Health Insurance Scheme, Adhara Scheme  etc., for the benefit of 
PwDs. Audit observed deficiencies in implementation which resulted in not 
extending the benefits of these schemes to the PwDs as discussed below: 
5.3.2.1 Niramaya Health Insurance Scheme 
The National Trust for the Welfare of Persons with Autism, Cerebral Palsy, 
Mental Retardation and Multiple Disabilities had brought out the Health 
Insurance scheme with the objective of providing affordable Health Insurance 
to PwDs under the National Trust Act. Under the scheme, all enrolled 
beneficiaries would be provided with a health insurance cover of up to one 
lakh rupees on reimbursement basis for OPD treatment including medicines, 
pathology, diagnostic tests etc., non-surgical hospitalisation, correc tive 
surgeries for existing disabilities.  Every year the policy is to be renewed 
online either by the beneficiary or NGO by paying the prescribed fee. 
The State Government implemented the scheme from August 2014 and pays       
₹250 per beneficiary for the first time and beneficiary needs to renew it 
thereafter to avail the scheme benefits. As per the information furnished by 
eleven test-checked districts, an expenditure of ₹5.95 lakh was incurred during 
the period 2016-17 to 2021-22 towards enrolment of 2,379 persons.  
Audit observed that only 201 beneficiaries in Bagalakote district had renewed 
their policies (one time only) and the Department had not taken any measures 
to ensure that beneficiaries renewed their policies so that the benefit of 
insurance could be availed by them. As the renewal fee is only of ₹50 per year 
per beneficiary, Department needs to revisit scheme guidelines to pay renewal 
fee also to ensure health insurance scheme benefits are availed by all PwDs.  
The State Government stated that the Department had appointed District 
Disabled Welfare Officer of Belagavi as the nodal officer for adequate 
implementation of the scheme. The concerned District Disabled Welfare 
Officers and Nodal Agency were instructed to renew the policy for all the 
beneficiaries registered under the scheme. 
5.3.2.2 Insurance scheme for Parents/Guardians of Mentally Retarded 
 Children 
Under this scheme, the Directorate of Disabled Welfare contributes the annual 
premium to Life Insurance of Corporation of India under a specially designed 
group Insurance policy for parents/ guardians of persons with mental 
retardation whose annual income is ₹12,000 or less per year.  After the demise 

Chapter-V: Skill Development, Employment and Social Security 
55 
of the parents / guardians of the mentally retarded person, the nominee will get 
a one -time lump sum amount of ₹20,000 for the maintenance of the person 
with retardation. 
As per th e information furnished by six 8 test-checked districts, 787  persons 
were enrolled under the scheme. However, the details of registration were not 
placed on record. The DDWOs were forwarding the same list every year to the 
Directorate and there were no additions. This indicates that the Department 
had not taken steps to publicise the scheme to identify new beneficiaries.  
The State Government stated that t he District Disabled Welfare Officers 
would be directed to create awareness about the usefulness of the scheme at 
the district level beneficiaries.  
5.3.2.3 Adhara – Self Employment Scheme 
Under the scheme, financial assistance of ₹20,000 would be provided to the 
eligible persons as interest free working capital along with a kiosk worth 
₹15,000 for setting up petty business.  As per the information furnished by 
test-checked districts, an amount of ₹2.23 crore was disbursed to 1,113 
beneficiaries during the period 2014 -15 to 2017-18 as working capital. It was 
seen that only ₹32,000 was recovered in Mysuru district  and ₹5,000 was 
recovered in Bagalakote district while  there were no recoveries in the 
remaining districts. The State Government subsequently waived (June 2016) 
₹11.08 crore being the outstanding loan not repaid by beneficiaries since 
1995-96 till 2013-14. 
The State Government revised (August 2018) the above scheme wherein the 
beneficiary would be provided a maximum assistance of one lakh rupees per 
unit (₹50,000 as bank loan and ₹50,000 as back-end subsidy). The scheme was 
not implemented in 2018 -19 even though a budget allotment of ₹3.36 crore 
was made and during 2019 -20, only ₹1.43 crore was spent against ₹3.90 crore 
released. The balance amount of ₹2.47 crore lapsed.  The Department did not 
furnish the reasons for not utilising the funds.  Evidently, the scheme did not 
achieve its desired objective of providing self -employment to the PwDs to the 
maximum extent. 
Audit also observed instances of rele ase of back-end subsidy of ₹1.33 crore in 
test checked 287 cases of ten  districts for the period 2019 -20 to 2021-22 even 
before the sanction and disbursement of loan by the banks.  Evidently, the 
Department had failed to ensure sanction of bank loans before crediting the 
back-end subsidy indicating that funds were drawn to avoid lapse of grants. 
The State Government stated that action would be taken to ensure sanction of 
bank loans before crediting the back-end subsidy. 
 
 
8 There were no enrolments in Bengaluru, Bidar, Dakshina Kannada, Raichur and Ramanagara     
districts. 

Implementation of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 
56 
5.3.2.4 Distribution of motorised vehicles 
The State Government accorded (July 2014) approval for distribution of 
motorised vehicles to PwDs, subject to fulfilment of conditions, to enable 
them to travel to their places of duty or learning.  During the period 2016-17 to 
2021-22, a total of 3,980 vehicles were distributed to PwDs in the test-checked 
districts.  
Illustration 
 
Non-distribution of 82 Motori sed Tri Wheel 90 CC TVS BS 6 vehicles 
despite lapse of three years due to non-preparation of beneficiary list  
 
Motorised Tri Wheel 90 CC TVS BS 6 vehicles  (82) were purchased for 
distribution to differently abled persons in the district of Hassan during the 
financial year 2019 -20 and 2020 -21 for ₹59.86 lakh at ₹73,000 per vehicle 
from the agency and amount was paid to  an agency.  Audit noticed that as 
beneficiaries list was yet to be prepared (October 2022) for the period 2019 -
20 and 2020 -21, vehicles were not supplied by the agency. but Memorandum 
of Understanding  was entered into for the period 2019 -20 for supply of 
vehicles after receipt of beneficiary list. However, no agreement was entered 
into with the agency  for the period 2020 -21. Even for the period 2021 -22, 
₹8.55 lakh was released for purchase and distribution of Motori sed Tri Wheel 
vehicles and kept in bank account without being utili sed for the purpose for 
which it was granted on the ground that beneficiary list was not prepared and 
submitted by ZP.  
 
The State Government stated that beneficiary list for the period 2019 -20 was 
yet to be approved and vehicles were distributed to 39 beneficiaries for period 
2020-21. 
5.4 Issues due to lack of awareness amongst stakeholders 
Non enforcement and lack of awareness amongst the stakeholders related to 
the RPWD Act in the matters of employment has resulted in PwDs seeking 
legal interventions to get their rights. A few such cases are discussed below: 
5.4.1 Denial of employment due to omissions 
As per Section 33 of PwD Act and Section 20 read with Schedule under 
Section 2 -zc of RPWD Act, persons with locomotor disability or cerebral 
palsy are eligible to write examinations under the physically handicapped 
quota. Audit noticed an instance of opportunity being denied as explained 
below: 
The Karnataka Public Service Commission (KPSC) invited (22 June 2017) 
applications from the prospective candidates for appointment to the posts of 
Assistant Engineer in the Department of Water Resources. The notification, 

Chapter-V: Skill Development, Employment and Social Security 
57 
however, omitted certain disabilities such as scoliosis9. A prospective candidate 
citing discrimination on the ground of disability in the above notification 
approached (14 July 2017) the State Commissioner seeking justice.  
The Department of Water Resources in response to the summons issued by the 
State Commissioner deposed (December 2017)  that Job identification 
committee of DWCD/Directorate for the Empowerment of Differently abled 
and Senior Citizens was consulted and reservation for disabled candidates was 
decided accordingly.  Audit observed that the DWCD in its letter  
(26 July 2016) had mentioned locomotor disability of cerebral palsy instead of 
loco motor disability or cerebral palsy.  This omission went unnoticed during 
the entire appointment process.  Though the State Commissioner ordered 
(June 2018) to appoint the candidate subject to eligibility, it was not 
implemented.  
Thus, despite the existence of law, opportunity was denied not only the to the 
petitioner but other prospective candidates with similar disabilities. The order 
of the State Commissioner was not complied with by  the Government 
Department. The State Government did not offer its comments.   
Recommendation 7:  The State Government should ensure that schemes 
are aimed at providing self -employment opportunities supported by 
MSME/NHFDC.  
 
Recommendation 8:  The State Government should implement Niramaya 
health insurance scheme and consider payment of renewal amount by 
Government itself to ensure adequate and affordable health services to 
PwDs. Further, insurance scheme for  parents/guardians should be 
improvised in providing additional financial benefits to the 
members/subscribers.  
 
  
 
9  Scoliosis is a sideways curvature of the spine that most often is diagnosed in adolescents  
and can occur in people with conditions such as cerebral palsy and muscular dystrophy . 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER VI 
 
REHABILITATION 
  

 
 
 
 

 
59 
Chapter-VI: Rehabilitation 
Non-establishment of Manasa Kendras in proposed five districts, District  
Disability Rehabilitation Centre (DDRCs) in 14 districts, and Day Care 
Centres in proposed districts, non -availing central assistance for 
establishment of DDRS in districts and poor monitoring of working of 
Manasa Kendras/DDRCs indicate deficiencies in rehabilitation measures as 
mandated in RPWD Act. 
Rehabilitation plays a critical role in empowering individuals with disabilities 
to lead fulfilling and independent lives . Special measures are to be taken to 
ensure disab led persons  enjoy rights equally with others and to protect the 
PwDs from being subjected to cruelty, inhumane treatments and from all 
forms of abuse, violence, and exploitation.  
As Section  27 of the RPWD Act lays emphasis on rehabilitation , t he State 
Government and local authorities are to undertake services and programmes 
for rehabilitation particularly in areas of health and employment for all PwDs. 
Accordingly, Government had established Manasa Kendras, DDRCs and After 
Care Homes for  mentally retarded women etc., as a part of rehabilitation 
measures as detailed below. 
Table 6.1: Details of rehabilitation measures 
Sl. No Name of the institutions Objectives 
1 Manasa Kendras  Short term stays for persons with mental disorders who do 
not require complete hospitalization  
2 After Care Home for 
Mentally Retarded 
Women 
Home for mentally retarded women aged above 18 years 
where food and medical facilities are provided. 
3 Deendayal Disabled 
Rehabilitation Scheme 
Extension of financial assistance to v oluntary 
organisations to  provide services necessary for the 
rehabilitation of PwDs.  
4 District Disability 
Rehabilitation Centre 
To provide comprehensive rehabilitation services at the 
doorstep of beneficiaries.  
5 Day Care Centres For children with autism, cerebral palsy, mental retardation 
and multiple disabilities 
Source: Information furnished by the Department 
Audit observed that as against an amount of ₹441.41 crore released during the 
period 2017-18 to 2022-23, ₹370.52 crore was spent towards rehabilitation of 
PwDs including grants to Manasa Kendras, DDRCs and After Care Homes for 
men and women.  Audit observations such as functioning of rehabilitation 
centres with limited staff, failure to utilise central grants optimally for 
institutions such as DDRS and DDRCs and non -establishment of Day Care 
Centres etc., noticed in functioning of these institutions are discussed in 
subsequent paras in this chapter.  
6.1 Manasa Kendras 
With a view to provide residential facility to persons with mental disorders 
who do not require complete hospitalization but cannot function in the 
community without adequate professional supervision and support, the 

Implementation of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 
60 
Department proposed (August 2006) to set up Manasa Kendras (MKs)  in the 
State. The State Government accorded (August 2007) its sanction to set up 
five MKs at Ballari, Belagavi, Bengaluru, Raichur and Shivamogga. Each 
Manasa Kendra was sanctioned a total of 17 posts , which include d Social 
Worker and Psychiatrist.  However, only two of the five MKs established are 
functioning.  
In Manasa Kendra Bengaluru, Audit noticed that the Psychiatrist was visiting 
only once in fifteen days , as against the requirement of once a week for the 
period 2017-18 to 2019-20.  
Exhibit 6.1 Manasa Kendra Bengaluru 
 
Source: Photographs taken during Joint Physical Verification  
It was also observed that 48 inmates undergoing treatment in the MK had 
absconded during the period 2011 -12 to 2021-22 and only two were traced so 
far.  In the Exit Conference, it was stated that it was a serious issue and action 
would be taken to avoid such incidents in future. 
In MK  Belagavi, out of the sanctioned strength of 17 staff, only 11 were 
working.  All the four sanctioned nurse posts were vacant since 2015 -16, and 
only two nurses had worked since inception up to 2014-15 as a result, inmates 
care was compromised despite regular visits made by doctors. The Sta te 
Government did not offer any comments. 
Further, the State Government also proposed (December 2016) to hand over 
the maintenance of MKs to the National Institute of Mental Health and 
Neurosciences (NIMHANS), Bengaluru, a globally recognised institute in the 
area of mental health and neurosciences . NIMHANS had prepared and 
submitted a pilot project/blueprint for taking over MK, Bengaluru for an initial 
period of three years  and if  proved successful, it was ready to take over the 
other MKs.  The Project also proposed to establish an Orphan Care Cen tre for 
mentally disabled women to provide professional psychiatric treatment to 
bring them back to mainstream society.   
The lack of initiative on part of the Department to hand over maintenance of 
MKs to NIMHANS resulted in depriving adequate professional medical 
supervision and support for patients with mental disorder. In Exit Conference, 
it was stated that action will be taken to coordinate with NIMHANS with 
submitted blueprint for taking over of MKs.   
 


Chapter-VI: Rehabilitation  
61 
6.2 After Care Home for Mentally Retarded Women 
The State Government established (1972) the After Care Home for Mentally 
Retarded Women with the specific objective of providing care, protection, 
shelter, medical and psychiatric treatment and training (wherever possible) to 
mentally retarded women and girls above 18 years who are resident s of 
Karnataka.  The inmates admitted through orders of Courts/Director of 
Women and Child/DCs are provided with food, shelter, clothing and bedding 
and segregated as mild, moderate, profound and severely mentally retarde d 
based on NIMHANS doctors’ medical certificate. 
The State Government sanctioned (March 1972 and January 1983) 34 posts 
for running the institution which was revised to 27 while transferring the 
management of the institute from the Department of Women and Child 
Development to Department of Empowerment of Differently Abled and 
Senior Citizens in October 2010. The State Government also accorded (March 
1995) sanction for creation of two female Medical Officers (eight hours each 
in two shifts) and supporting technical and non -technical staff to look after the 
inmates located in Bengaluru Rehabilitation Complex which includes the 
After Care Home also. 
Further, a Managing Committee comprising of D eputy Commissioner (DC) , 
three officials from the Department of Health, Mental Hospitals and 
NIMHANS, and non-official members (having experience in the field of work 
with mentally challenged persons), was to be constituted to advise the Director 
for the proper management of the After Care Home regarding admission and 
discharge of inmates, training and rehabilitation etc.   
In this regard, Audit observed the following: 
➢ Though two female medical officers were appointed, they were not 
attending to the inmates and recording periodical reports about the health 
and mental status of the inmates (94 inmates). 
➢ The Managing Committee was not formed as a result of which the non -
visit of Medical Officers and other related issues could not be addressed. 
➢ Since the institute is specially meant of women and girls, posting a female 
probationary Officer and Superintendent would help in better 
understanding and appreciation of the problems to take suitable measures.  
Audit observed that the Department had posted male Probationary Officer 
Grade 2 (May 2018) for supervising the working of this institution . 
Consequent upon receipt of complaints against him, the Officer  was 
deputed (February 2021) to the vacant post of Probationary Officer in the 
Social Service Comp lex, Bengaluru and another female Probationary 
Officer working in the institute was put in charge of the post of 
Superintendent.  
6.3 Deendayal Disabled Rehabilitation Scheme 
In compliance to Section 66 of PWD Act, 1995, the four existing schemes for 
rehabilitation of persons with disabilities were amalgamated into a single 
Central Sector Scheme, called the "Scheme to Promote Voluntary Action for 
Persons with Disabilities"  in 1999 . During April 2003, t he amalgamated 

Implementation of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 
62 
scheme was revised and renamed as the "Deendayal Disabled Rehabilitation 
Scheme” (DDRS). 
Under this Scheme, the Voluntary organisations were provided financial 
assistance to avail a whole range of services necessary for the rehabilitation of 
PwDs including early intervention, development of daily living skills, 
education and training. 
Audit observed that only three 10 institutions in the State are receiving funds 
from GoI under this scheme. It was seen that during the period under review, 
the State Government had sent only 13 proposals which was less than one per 
cent of the total 2024 proposals received by GoI during this period. 
The State Government stated that the proposals of NGOs received , if any , 
would be recommended and forwarded to Central Government. The reply is 
not acceptable as guidelines were framed by Central Government , and the 
State Government failed to take advantage of this central sector scheme to 
identify and promote more institutions for the benefit of the differently abled 
citizens of the State.  
6.4 District Disability Rehabilitation Centres 
The District Disability Rehabilitation Centre (DDRC) scheme of the Ministry 
of Social Justice and Empowerment, G oI was being implemented since 1999 -
2000.   
The DDRCs are to facilitate conducting survey and identification of PwDs 
through camp approach, awareness generation, early detection and 
intervention, provision/fitment, follow up and repair of assistive devices, 
therapeutic services such as physiotherapy, speech therapy etc., counselling of 
persons with disabilities, their parents and family members, arrangement of 
loans for self -employment, promotion of barrier free environment, and 
maintaining data of organizations working for the empowerment of PwDs in 
the district. 
Each DDRC was to function under the supervision of a District Management 
Team (DMT) headed by the District Collector.  The DMT was to identify an 
implementing agency which should preferably be a Red Cross Society or such 
autonomous/semi-autonomous bodies of State Government or a reputed NGO.  
Audit findings on the review of implementation of the scheme are discussed in 
the succeeding paragraphs. 
6.4.1 Establishment of DDRCs 
As per the guidelines of the scheme, DDRCs may have a maximum of 12 staff 
which includes Clinical Psychologist, Physiotherapist, Prosthetist/Orthoptist, 
Speech Therapist, Mobility Instructor and other technical  and supporting staff 
having specified qualifications.  These professionals were to be paid  a fixed 
honorarium as per prescribed norms and should preferably be registered with 
RCI. 
 
10  Sri Ramana Maharshi Academy for the Blind, Bengaluru, Vishwadhama Mahila and 
Makkala Shikshana Sevashrama Samithi, Dharwad and Sri Ramana Maharshi Trust for 
Disabled Persons, KGF. 

Chapter-VI: Rehabilitation  
63 
The State Government initially established DDRCs in eight districts through 
Central Assistance from 1999-2000 and from the year 2011-12 started funding 
these institutions through budgetary allocations . Subsequently, the State 
Government accorded (May 2016) approval for establishing DDRCs in all the 
districts of the State and provided for a total budget of ₹10.80 crore  by 
enhancing the annual grant from the existing ₹28 lakh to ₹36 lakh per centre. 
At present there are 16 DDRCs in the State.   
6.4.1.1 Functioning of DDRCs 
A review of the functioning of the DDRCs showed that the duties to be 
performed by DDRC staff were similar to the duties being discharged by the 
Village Rehabilitation Workers at the G ram Panchayat level and Multi -
Purpose Rehabilitation Workers (MRWs) at the Taluk level such as 
identification of persons for Physically Handicapped Pension (PHP), issue of 
disability certificate, identify cards, bus pass, implementation of A adhara 
scheme etc. Consequently, the role of DDRC in the above matters was 
negligible and amounted to duplication of work. 
Audit test -checked eight DDRCs out of the existing 16 DDRCs. The 
observations noticed during the review of records of the test checked DDRCs 
are as below: 
➢ Camps were to be conducted in villages for identifying children with 
disabilities and to provide them with necessary support.  This required the 
participation of technical staff such as Prosthetics and Orthotics Engineer, 
Speech Therapist, Mobility Instructor and Ear Mould Technician.  
However, camps were conducted without technical staff as these posts 
were vacant since establishment of these DDRCs. Consequently, the 
camps were just restricted to identifying beneficiaries  and therapeutic 
services were not provided. 
➢ In DDRCs of Hassan, Haveri and Raichur, the records did not indicate the 
place where camps were held and most of the columns in the prescribed 
format were blank indicating inadequate documentation and raising 
concerns on the genuineness of the activities undertaken. 
➢ Promotion of barrier free environment was one of the objectives of 
DDRC. Except DDRC, Chitradurga, none of the other DDRCs had 
identified public places/buildings for creation of barrier free environment. 
➢ Workshops were not established in four 11 DDRCs and though established 
in the four 12 DDRCs, it was either being underutilised or not being 
utilised due to vacancies in technical staff.   
Audit also observed from the minutes of the meeting held on 14 January 2020 , 
by Director with district officers that the staff of DDRCs were being utilised 
by the Red Cross Societies, which were managing the affairs of DDRCs, for 
their own activities. Similarly, Additional Deputy Commissioner, Mysuru had 
reported (March 2020) about having received complaints such as staff of 
 
11  Bidar, Hassan, Haveri and Raichur. 
12  Bengaluru, Chitradurga, Dakshina Kannada and Mysuru. 

Implementation of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 
64 
DDRC working at other places and staff instigating persons visiting DDRC to 
go to private therapy clinics for availing therapeutic services of 
Physiotherapist.  
The State Government stated that the nodal officers concerned were instructed 
to conduct medical camps for a period of three days in a week and initiate 
steps to implement the scheme as per the guidelines.  It was also stated that all 
the Deputy commissioners, Heads  of the Departments and DDRCs were 
directed to provide the barrier free environment in all public places as per the 
provisions of the Section 40 -46 of RP WD Act , 2016 and Harmonised 
guidelines of Government of India. 
Illustration 
  
DDRC, Bidar 
Established in September 2019 through Sri Siddeshwar Handicapped Persons 
Education Society. 
Though Speech Therapist, Physiotherapist, Clinical Psychologist, Psychiatrist, 
ENT specialist, Ophthalmologist, Ear Mould Technician etc., were shown as 
working, there were no supporting records/registers indicating the number of 
cases handled, period of treatment given etc. Records in support of having 
conducted camps were also not available indicating that camps were not 
conducted since establishment of DDRC , Bidar.  However, an amount of     
₹60.19 lakh was drawn for payment of honorarium to the staff of DDRC during 
the period 2019-20 to 2021-22. 
There were discrepancies between the Appointment letters issued and the salary 
statements in respect of Accountant cum clerk, Computer operator, as shown in 
Table 6.2. 
Table 6.2: Discrepancies between appointment and actual working 
(Amount in ₹) 
Post 
Name as per 
Appointment 
letter 
Name as per 
salary drawn 
register 
Salary 
per 
month 
Salary drawn from 
April 2019 to 
November 2020 
Accountant cum Clerk Shri Rajkumar Keerti 12,000 2,40,000 
Computer Operator Shri Shivakumar Sangeetha 9,000 1,62,000 
Source: Information furnished by DDRC, Bidar 
The State Government stated that compliance report was sought from the  
office of the District Disabled Welfare Officer, Bidar, and Chairman of the 
organisation on audit findings and steps  would be taken to implement the 
program as per the plan guidelines in this district. 
 
 
 
 
 

Chapter-VI: Rehabilitation  
65 
Illustration  
DDRC Ramanagara 
The State Government accorded (July 2014) approval to M/s Samarthanam Trust 
for Disabled, Bengaluru to commence DDRC , Ramanagara and released (August 
2014 and February 2015) ₹12.04 lakh. The DMT recommended (August 2016) for 
closure of DDRC following discrepancies noticed in the functioning such as 
appointment of staff without notification inviting applications from prospective 
candidates and without informing DMT/ Department, drawing salary for staff 
from September 2014 without performing duties, non -furnishing of monthly 
reports to DDWO etc.   
Audit observed from the minutes of the meeting held on 27 August 2016 that the 
staff appointed were working at two places simultaneously. The Director directed 
(June 2018), the DDWO, Ramanagara to recover the amount of ₹12.04 lakh from 
the Trust.  The amount was yet to be recovered (December 2022). 
The State Government stated that DDWO Ramanagara had filed a case against 
the organisation for its failure to run the project and the case is pending before 
Hon’ble District Court Ramanagara 
6.4.1.2 Scheme for Implementation of Rights of Persons with Disabilities 
 Act 2016 (SIPDA) 
The GoI formulated (January 2016) the Scheme for Implementation of Rights 
of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 (SIPDA) under which grants are 
provided to the State Governments and various other bodies set up by the 
Central and State Governments including Autonomous Bodies and 
Universities to support various activities like providing barrier free 
environment, skill development, awareness campaign and sensitisation 
programmes etc.   
From 2018-19, the funding of the DDRC Scheme was brought under SIPDA.  
It was however , observed that no funds were requested by the State 
Government under this scheme and therefore lost the opportunity for 
providing comprehensive services to PwDs at the grass root level in the 
districts even when DDRCs are yet to be established in 14 districts.  The State 
Government did not offer its comments.  
6.5 District Early Intervention Centres   
All activities such as motor, speech and language, intelligence, vision, hearing 
is controlled by different centres in the brain. Maximum growth of the brain 
occurs in utero (50  to 55 per cent) and in the first three years (90 per cent). 
The purpose of early intervention services is to enhance the development of 
infants and toddlers with developmental delays or disabilities and minimize 
the need for special education and related services after they reach school age. 
One of the main objectives of D DRC was to provide comprehensive services 
to the PwDs including sensitizing on early intervention methods. Further, each 
DDRC was to set up an early intervention unit and low -cost intervention using 
locally available material for continuing the intervention at place of their 
residence.  Even though the management of DDRCs were taken over by the 

Implementation of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 
66 
State Government, in the absence of specific guidelines for functioning of 
these Centres, the Department could not set up any early intervention units. 
The State Government stated that the Department of Health and Family 
Welfare Services,  Karnataka was requested to establish  District Early 
Intervention Centres (DEICs) in all the district hospitals  and 13 DEICs have 
been established in the State with effect from 2016-17. 
6.6 Establishment of Day Care Centres 
The State Government proposed (May 2017) to establish Day Care Centres 
(DCCs) for children with autism, cerebral palsy, mental retardation and 
multiple disabilities in the four revenue divisions and issued (May 2017) 
guidelines.  As per the guidelines, each DCC was eligible for a maximum 
grant of ₹25 lakh ( ₹10,000 per child for 25 children for 10 months) and the 
teacher student ratio was fixed at 1:3. Only two DCCs were e stablished (both 
in Bengaluru) as a result of this, children with above disabilities were deprived 
of facilities  like physiotherapy being offered in DCCs. Though it was again 
proposed (January 2020) to set up DCCs in the revenue divisions in addition 
to the existing two in Bengaluru, the Department was yet to estab lish these 
DCCs. The State Government did not offer its comments. 
Recommendation 9: The State Government should address staff shortage, 
improve infrastructure facilities, and establish DDRCs in all districts to 
strengthen rehabilitation mechanism. It should bring DDRCs under the 
control of DDWOs for effective functioning of DDRCs.
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bengaluru           (Shanthi Priya S) 
The               Principal Accountant General (Audit I) 
                                   Karnataka  
 
 
 
 
Countersigned 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi                                                  (Girish Chandra Murmu) 
The        Comptroller and Auditor General of India 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendices 
  

 
 
 
 

Appendices 
67 
Appendix 3.1 
(Reference: Para no. 3.1.2/Page 28) 
Statement showing the compliance to provisions of RPWD Act by 
KSRTC and BMTC 
Provision Compliance as furnished by 
 KSRTC (8673 buses) BMTC (6603 buses) 
Designation of priority seats Complied Complied 
Priority seats to be provided 
with appropriate facility for 
securing clutches, canes, 
walkers etc. 
As majority of Type I city buses 
operated in KSRTC are converted 
buses ( i.e., express buses are 
converted to city/rural buses after 
certain kms), these provisions are 
not made. However, care will be 
taken to ensure that these facilities 
will be provided in the newly 
inducted city buses 
In 150 AC (JnNURM -II) 
buses, priority seats are 
provided with appropriate 
facilities. However, care will 
be taken to ensure that these 
facilities will be provided in 
future. 
Handrails and / or stanchions are 
to be provided at the entrance of 
all Type I buses in a 
configuration, which allows 
persons with disabilities to grasp 
such assists from outside the 
vehicle while starting to board, 
until they reach the designated 
seating area.  
Hand grabs, handrails, stanchions, 
handholds, seat handles etc., were 
provided right from the entrance 
step till the driver compartment in 
all buses irrespective of type to 
enable easy and safe movement of 
passengers.  
Hand grabs, handrails, 
stanchions, handholds, seat 
handles etc., were provided 
right from the entrance step 
till the driver compartment in 
all buses irrespective of type 
to enable easy and safe 
movement of passengers. 
All Type I NDX buses are to be 
provided with controls adjacent 
to priority seats for requesting 
stops and which alerts the driver 
that a mobility aid user wishes 
to disembark.  
This provision was not complied 
with as most of the buses were 
converted from Express buses. 
However, out of 1,549 Type I 
NDX buses, 487 buses which were 
inducted during JnNURM scheme 
have been provided with such 
controls.  
2,627 out of 6,603 Type I 
NDX buses have been 
provided with such controls 
and care would be taken to 
provide such controls in 
future.   
Lift Mechanism Facility  49 Volvo buses have kneeling 
mechanism which would facilitate 
easy entry of PwDs. In the 
remaining buses which ae high 
floor buses, providing lift 
mechanism would involve major 
structural changes in design and is 
technically not feasible.  
823 Volvo city buses have 
kneeling mechanism which 
would facilitate easy entry of 
PwDs. In the remaining 
buses, providing lift 
mechanism would involve 
major structural changes in 
design and is technically not 
feasible.  
Audio alert system for the 
visually challenged 
812 buses are ITS enabled having 
audio alert system where 
announcement is made both in 
English and Kannada.  
5,000 buses are ITS enabled 
having audio alert system 
where announcement is made 
both in English and Kannada.  
Fitted with buzzers and switches 487 buses are fitted with buzzers 
and switches and 844 are fitted 
with panic buttons.  
2,627 buses are fitted with 
buzzers and switches and 
1,150 are fitted with panic 
buttons.  
Rings for holding canes used by 
the visually challenged. 
 
This provision was complied with 
in all buses.  
This provision was complied 
with in all buses. 
Source: Information furnished by KSRTC and BMTC 

Implementation of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 
68 
Appendix 4.1 
(Reference: Para no. 4.2.3/Page 36) 
Details of students appeared/not appeared for Music examination 
District / School Total 
students 
Appeared 
(per cent) Passed Availability of 
Music Teacher 
Number of 
years 
appeared 
for exam 
Number of 
years not 
appeared for 
exam 
Government Blind Schools (4) 
Mysuru 151 0 0 Appointed  0 5 
Davanagere  50 8 (16) 08 Appointed  3 2 
Hubballi  106 19 (18) 19 Appointed  3 2 
Kalaburagi  72 5 (7) 05 Appointed  1 4 
Total 379 32 (8) 32    
Grant in Aid Schools (6) 
Maheshwari School for Blind, 
Belagavi  
499 0 0 Appointed  0 5 
Ambubai Blind School for 
Girls, Kalaburagi  
220 0 0 Appointed  0 5 
Mathrushri Education Trust 
for the Blind, Yelahanka, 
Bengaluru  
149 5(3) 5 Appointed  1 4 
Teekshna Blind School,  
Chitradurga  
39 0 0  Appointed  0 5 
M Krishna School for Blind, 
Hassan  
40 0 0 Not Appointed  0 5 
Asha Kirana School for Blind, 
Chikkamagaluru  
315 0 0 Not Appointed  0 5 
Total 1,262 5(1) 5    
Child Centric Schools (9)  
Asha Kirana School for blind 
Bidar  
191 0 0 Appointed  0 5 
Sajeevi Residential School for 
VI Children, Bagalakote  
236 0 0 Appointed  0 5 
Roman and Catherin Lobo 
Residential Blind Children 
School, Mangaluru  
80 0 0 Appointed  0 5 
Jnanajyothi Blind Children 
Residential School, Haveri  
242 0 0 Appointed  0 5 
Sri Manik Prabhu Blind 
Residential School, 
Humnabad, Bidar  
229 0 0 Appointed  0 5 
Sri Manik Prabhu Blind 
Residential School, Raichur  
174 0 0 Appointed  0 5 
Sri Balagangadharanatha 
Swamy Blind Residential 
School, Ramanagara  
765 11(1) 06 Appointed  2 3 
Rangarao Memorial School 
for disabled (Blind Girls), 
Mysuru  
330 16 (5) 16 Appointed  5 0 
Karnataka Welfare 
Association for Blind 
Bengaluru  
198 0 0 Not appointed  0 5 
Total 2,445 27 (1)     
Source: Information furnished by schools  
Figures in parentheses indicates percentage 
  

Appendices 
69 
Appendix 4.2 
(Reference: Para no. 4.5.1/Page 43) 
Absence of infrastructure facilities in Regular Schools  
District Ramps Without 
Ramps Handrails Without 
Handrails 
CWSN 
Toilets 
Without 
CWSN 
Toilets 
Schools 
Bagalakote 1,989 268 1,830 427 424 1,833 2,257 
Ballari 793 403 628 568 341 855 1,196 
Belagavi  4,228 968 3,806 1,390 882 4,314 5,196 
Bengaluru Rural 1,034 452 906 580 320 1,166 1,486 
Bengaluru 
Urban 2,235 3,223 1,612 3,846 2,622 2,836 5,458 
Bidar 1,467 1,146 1,046 1567 795 1,818 2,613 
Chamarajanagar 771 362 536 597 398 735 1,133 
Chikkamagaluru 1,349 501 1,140 710 404 1,446 1,850 
Chikkaballapur 964 955 785 1,134 424 1,495 1,919 
Chitradurga 2,060 307 1,873 494 537 1,830 2,367 
Dakshina 
Kannada 1,720 81 1,358 443 1,520 281 1,801 
Davanagere 1,485 553 1,223 815 771 1,267 2,038 
Dharwad 997 516 845 668 425 1,088 1,513 
Gadag 962 139 867 234 264 837 1,101 
Hassan 2,385 634 1,894 1,125 488 2,531 3,019 
Haveri 1,541 334 1,248 627 317 1,558 1,875 
Kalaburagi 2,421 1,183 1,822 1,782 1,110 2,494 3,604 
Kodagu 574 60 547 87 207 427 634 
Kolar 1,168 1,243 882 1,529 569 1,842 2,411 
Koppal 1,100 478 878 700 365 1,213 1,578 
Mandya 2,231 125 2,073 283 603 1,753 2,356 
Mysuru 2,517 565 2,241 841 752 2,330 3,082 
Raichur 1,372 1,034 1,077 1,329 630 1,776 2,406 
Ramanagara 1,281 421 1,045 657 395 1,307 1,702 
Shivamogga 2,203 437 1,850 790 680 1,960 2,640 
Tumakuru  2,863 1,529 2,437 1,955 758 3,634 4,392 
Udupi 946 162 774 334 386 722 1,108 
Uttara Kannada 2,384 172 2,204 352 424 2,132 2,556 
Vijayanagara 1,209 494 1,050 653 589 1,114 1,703 
Vijayapura 2,218 1,116 1,688 1,646 848 2,486 3,334 
Yadgiri 997 505 822 680 261 1,241 1,502 
Total 51,464 20,366 42,987 28,843 19,509 52,321 71,830 
Source: Information furnished by the Department 
  

Implementation of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 
70 
Appendix 4.3 
(Reference: Para no. 4.5.2/Page 43) 
Absence of infrastructure facilities in Special Schools  
District Name of the School Audit observations 
Bidar Shri Manik Prabhu 
Blind Residential 
School, Humnabad, 
Bidar District 
Toilets/bathrooms for boys were not available in the same buildings 
as it were situated 50 meters away in opposite campus (10 
toilets/bathrooms) and boys had to go down from first floor to the 
toilet and bathroom. 
Haveri Arunodaya 
Residential School 
for MR Children, 
Koda, Hirekerur 
Toilets were without doors and entrances of toilets/bathroom were 
very narrow and chances of skidding were more as path to 
bathrooms was slippery. The windows of classrooms and hostel 
rooms were not having doors and ventilators were not covered and 
kept open in the hostel room for boys. For residential purpose, one 
room (for boys) was available with seven cots but without pillows 
and mattresses. Mosquito nets were also not available. 
Bagalakote Shiva Shikshana MR 
School, Mudhol 
Two girls hostel rooms (8x 8 sq.ft each) for 20 students and one 
Boys hostel room (25x11 sq.ft) for 50 students were there in the 
school.  Hostel for Boys and classrooms were constructed with 
asbestos sheet roof and hostel room floors was rough and not 
suitable for sleeping. There was one big hall which was converted 
into 10 classrooms through partitions. 
Bagalakote Sri Murugendra 
Shivacharya 
Mahaswami Samsthe 
Deaf and Dumb 
Residential School, 
Ilkal, Bagalkote 
There were no cots for girl students (36 members) who sleep on 
floor and the flooring was rough in Girl’s Hostel room.  
Hassan Jeevan Jyothi 
Residential School 
for Deaf, Hassan 
Combined classrooms for 1 and 2, 3 and 4,5 and 6, 7 and 8 classes 
and the passage on the first floor and at the stair case was very 
narrow. There were no cots, only mattresses were available and 
there were no tables in the dining hall. 
Raichur Asha Deepa School 
for MR children, 
Raichur 
There are two classrooms, one measuring 12x18 sq. ft and another 
was a shed that was partitioned with curtains accommodating 49 
students.  Chairs and tables were not provided and only two toilets 
were available in the school. 
Bagalakote Sarvodaya Deaf and 
Dumb School, Ilkal, 
Jamkhandi 
Management was running both school and hostel in three different 
locations (for boys and girls). Even girls’ hostel was also located far 
away from boy s hostel and for dinner/lunch/ breakfast purpose, 
disabled girls were forced to walk for nearly half a kilometre every 
time for dinner/lunch/ breakfast purpose. 
Belagavi  Ajay Deaf and Dumb 
School 
There is no concrete wall and roof on the first floor and unsafe for 
students. There was no separate dining hall available and as the 
school is located in big shed, dining hall is being used as both dining 
hall and classrooms.   
Kalaburagi  Government school 
for Blind, Boys 
Classes were being conducted in school which was declared unfit by 
Public Works Department for conducting classes since it was 
constructed 60 years back.  
Source: Joint inspection reports of special schools 
 
 
 

Appendices 
71 
Appendix 5.1 
(Reference: Para no. 5.2.5/Page 53) 
Details of schemes implemented by NHFDC 
  
Name of the Scheme  Objectives 
Jan Aushadi Kendras Pradhan Mantri Bhartiya Janaushadhi Pariyojana ( PMBJP) is a 
campaign launched by the Department of Pharmaceuticals to 
provide quality medicines at affordable prices to the masses.  
Keeping in view the importance of PMBJP and its potential as a 
self-employment model for PwDs, NHFDC had informed (April 
2017) the Department to send names of at least 50 eligible PwDs 
for establishing Jan Aushadhi Kendras in the State. 
NHFDC 
Swavalamban Kendra 
(NSK) 
NHFDC rolled out the concept of NSK by converging the credit 
needs, skilling needs, assured business linkage needs, etc., on 
pilot scale basis initially covering each district in the country at 
the rate of one NSK per district. Each NSK is established at a 
capital cost of around ₹12 lakh by PwD entrepreneurs with 100 
per cent  financing from NHFDC. These NSKs will be used as 
mini-incubation centres to train the PwDs for self -employment 
opportunities in and around their localities. 
Divyangjan 
Swavalamban Yojana 
Under this scheme, NHFDC provides financial assistance in the 
form of loan up to ₹50 lakh to PwDs for self -employment 
activity at the rate of interest five to nine per cent for starting any 
activity contributing directly or indirectly in the income 
generation or helping PwDs to pursue skill development courses, 
undergraduate, post-graduate and other professional courses. 
Vishesh Microfinance 
Yojana 
NHFDC, with a view to encourage small/micro business and 
developmental activities both for promoting sustainable and 
inclusive livelihoods and facilitating comfortable living for the 
Divyangjans in the society, extends loan (90 per cent  of the 
project cost) and the balance 10 per cent is to be contributed by 
the Implementing Agencies or other organizations acting as 
implementing partner of NHFDC, and/or beneficiaries. The loan 
amount is to be repaid in quarterly instalments within a 
maximum period of three years from the date of each 
disbursement including the moratorium period of three months.  
The unit cost of Project shall not exceed ₹60,000. 
Source: Information as per NHFDC website 