Report of the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India
on 
Information Systems Audit of selected 
Central Public Sector Enterprises
Union Government (Commercial)
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas
No. 2 of 2024
(Compliance Audit Observations)


 
Report of the  
Comptroller and Auditor General of India  
on  
Information Systems Audit of selected Central Public 
Sector Enterprises 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Union Government (Commercial)  
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
No. 2 of 2024 
(Compliance Audit Observations) 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTERS SUBJECT CPSE PAGE NO. 
 PREFACE  i 
 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  iii 
 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
 
Chapter I Information Systems Audit of 
Enterprise Resource Planning 
implementation in Brahmaputra 
Cracker and Polymer Limited 
 
Brahmaputra 
Cracker and 
Polymer Limited 
 
1-30 
 
Chapter II 
Information Systems Audit of the 
Plant Maintenance Module of 
SAP ERP in Oil and Natural Gas 
Corporation Limited 
Oil and Natural 
Gas Corporation 
Limited 
31-57 
Annexures 59-67 
 
CONTENTS 
 

i 
PREFACE 
  
1. This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India has been prepared 
for submission to the Government under the provisions of Section 19 -A of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General’s (Duties, Powers and Conditions of Service) 
Act, 1971, as amended in 1984. 
2. This Report contains the results of Compliance Audit of Information Systems of 
two Central Public Sector Enterprises under the administrative control of Ministry 
of Petroleum and Natural Gas as detailed below: 
a. Information Systems Audit of Enterprise Resource Planning implementation in 
Brahmaputra Cracker and Polymer Limited. (2016-17 to 2020-21) 
b. Information Systems Audit of the Plant Maintenance Module of SAP ERP in Oil 
and Natural Gas Corporation Limited. (2014-15 to 2020-21) 
3. The audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards issued 
by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
4. Audit wishes to acknowledge the cooperation received from the Managements of 
CPSEs and the Administrative Ministry at each stage of audit process. 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Executive Summary 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Report No. 2 of 2024 
iii 
 
Executive Summary  
I  Introduction  
This Audit Report contains the results of Compliance Audit of Information Systems of two 
Central Public Sector Enterprises under the administrative control of Ministry of Petroleum 
and Natural Gas, as detailed below: 
a. Information Systems Audit of Enterprise Resource Planning implementation in 
Brahmaputra Cracker and Polymer Limited. 
b. Information Systems Audit of the Plant Maintenance Module of SAP ERP in Oil 
and Natural Gas Corporation Limited. 
II  Highlights  
Highlights of significant observations on the selected areas included in the Report are 
given below: 
A. Information Systems Audit of Enterprise Resource Planning implementation in 
Brahmaputra Cracker and Polymer Limited. 
Brahmaputra Cracker and Polymer Limited  (Company/BCPL) was incorporated in 
January 2007 as a subsidiary of GAIL  (India) Ltd (GAIL). GAIL is the major shareholder 
of the Company having 70 per cent shares and the balance is equally held by Oil India 
Limited, Numaligarh Refinery Limited and Government of Assam at 10 per cent each. The 
Company is engaged in production of polymers from natural gas procured from Oil India 
Limited and Oil and Natural Gas Corporation  Limited whereas naphtha is procured from 
Numaligarh Refinery Limited. The Company entered (March 2016) into an agreement with 
GAIL for marketing of its products.  
The objectives for audit were to assess: 
i. Adequacy of IT Governance framework and its implementation by the Company. 
ii. Adequacy and effectiveness of General and Application Controls in Enterprise 
Resource Planning. 
iii. Efficiency in Business process re-engineering in SAP. 
iv. Adequacy of change management and business continuity plans and its 
implementation. 
 
 

Report No. 2 of 2024 
iv 
 
Significant audit findings are given below: 
Planning and Organisation 
The Company implemented SAP Enterprise Resource Planning Central Component as its 
Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) with modules pertaining to Finance and Control, 
Materials Management, Quality Management, Sales and Distribution, Warehouse 
Management and Human Capital Management with India payroll & Enterprise portal. The 
Company was yet to implement modules pertaining to Production Planning and Plant 
maintenance.  
(Para 1.6.1.1) 
Despite acquiring SAP Solution Manager (sub -module of SAP Technical module) , it was 
not activated which would have enabled identification and documentation of ‘AS-IS’ critical 
business processes, identification of business needs etc.  
(Para 1.6.1.2) 
Various matrices of Control Objectives for Information and Related Technologies (COBIT) 
such as Critical Success Factors (CSF), Key Performance Indicator (KPI), Key Goal 
Indicator (KGI) to determine the efficacy of all IT systems were not designed and measured 
by the Company.  
(Para 1.6.1.3) 
No IT strategy or Plan was prepared by the Company in contravention of the requirement 
of COBIT. 
(Para 1.6.1.4) 
There was no segregation of duties for personnel having access to Development, Quality & 
Assurance and Production servers of SAP which showed that the Company was unable to 
minimise reliance on a single individual performing a critical job function.  
(Para 1.6.1.5) 
Although the Company had decided in N ovember 2012 to train its staff  to gain sufficient 
expertise and experience in the operation and maintenance to handle operations 
independently once ERP was implemented, the Company was hiring multiple consultants 
for regular operation and maintenance even after expiry of six years since operationalisation 
of SAP. The Company is largely dependent on the external consultants for routine activities 
related to Operation & Maintenance in the absence of adequate SAP training for its 
employees and had to deploy multiple consultants at a higher cost of ₹6.46 crore during six 
years since implementation of SAP. 
(Para 1.6.1.6) 

Report No. 2 of 2024 
v 
 
Recommendation 1: The Management may develop criteria and matrices to assess the 
project outcome and performance of SAP Enterprise Resource Planning System. 
Recommendation 2: The Management may ensure that the IT policy reflects the latest 
developments in IT Governance and Management. 
Recommendation 3: IT organi sation may be strengthened and segregation of roles 
ensured. The Company may develop in -house capabilities and reduce recurring 
dependencies on consultants. 
Acquisition and Implementation 
The Company has no Standard Operating Procedure to keep its software updated and 
authorise/monitor changes made on SAP which is in contravention of the requirement of 
COBIT. SAP table logging has not been activated, therefore, changes made to SAP tables 
are not traceable. 
Recommendation 4: Table Logging may be implemented to record documentation of 
change management. 
(Para 1.6.2.1) 
IT Support System 
The Company was yet to prepare a data management policy and prescribe a procedure to 
manage media library, backup and recovery of data, and proper disposal of media.  
Recommendation 5: The Company may frame a ‘data management policy’ at the earliest. 
(Para 1.6.3.1) 
The Company’s IT policy does not specifically address a business recovery plan. It  has not 
prepared a business impact analysis, it has not identified roles, responsibilities, and 
communication process for disaster recovery. 
(Para 1.6.3.2) 
The Company does not have an IT security policy. Crisis Management Plan which was put 
in place to address natural disasters, man -made disasters, and cyber -attacks to the 
Company’s IT Systems was reactive rather than proactive in nature and addressed post 
incident response.  
(Para 1.6.3.3 A) 
Several risks including three high risks were not mitigated which were identified during 
Vulnerability Assessment and Penetration Testing in August 2020 and then a re -audit in 
July 2021, both conducted by M/s Bharat Electronics Ltd.  
(Para 1.6.3.3 B) 

Report No. 2 of 2024 
vi 
 
Audit examination of user’s access controls on SAP revealed existence of incomplete 
address data, retention of default username with default password for 17 instances, existence 
of users with multiple critical roles and authorisation for 735 users, provision of critical 
authorisations to multiple users ranging from 10 to 731 users, assignment of duplicate user 
IDs to one user, non-deactivation of SAP user IDs who had not logged in for a specified 
time period, non -configuration of the requirement of the IT Policy of the Company to 
change password after every 60 days and absence of documented Standard Operating 
Procedure in respect of source data preparation and authorisation.  
Recommendation 6: The Company may define roles and provide access to SAP based on 
SAP standard roles or custom roles. Segregation of duties may be enforced when defining 
roles. Password policy may be enforced without compromise. 
(Para 1.6.3.4) 
Users should not be able to edit the field named “GR -Bsd IV” i.e. “Goods Receipt based 
Invoice” in standard (domestic) Purchase Orders  so that unauthori sed acceptance or 
payment is not done . There were 86,358 documents pertain ing to standard (domestic) 
purchases where creation of invoices without Good Received Number was editable.  
(Para 1.6.3.5 B) 
In BSIK table (a standard table in SAP containing open items pertaining to vendors ) 4,958 
entries aggregating to ₹ 1,136.10 crore out of 5,960 entries were kept eligible for payment 
with blank entry in the payment block key  indicating ineffective controls on account 
payables and entailed a risk of unauthorised payment.  
(Para 1.6.3.5 C-I) 
Scrutiny of LFA1 table (a standard SAP vendor master table) and LFBK (a standard SAP 
table containing the banking data for the vendors) revealed that table LFA1 had 6,252 
vendor records and table LFBK had 4,101 banking records of vendors. Out of 6,252 vendors 
shown in LFA1 table, banking data was not available for 2,306 vendors, bank account 
holder’s name was not noted for 1,104 vendors, invalid bank account number was recorded 
against 129 vendors, 2,509 vendor ID did not contain Permanent Account Number (P AN) 
and 228 Vendor ID consists invalid Permanent Account Number.  
(Para 1.6.3.5 C-II) 
Non-integration of Distributed Control System and SAP resulted in manual intervention for 
recording the stock of hydrocarbons related data in SAP as well as different production data 
of polymers recorded in Distributed Control System and data generated by SAP.  
 

Report No. 2 of 2024 
vii 
 
Recommendation 7: The Company may ensure that the loaded quantity of hydrocarbons 
should pass to the SAP automatically through an interface between SAP and Terminal 
Automation System. 
(Para 1.6.3.5 E) 
Similarly, non -integration of Terminal Automation System (records the quantity of 
hydrocarbon delivered to a tanker) and SAP resulted in manual intervention for recording 
delivered hydrocarbon related data in SAP as well as different Delivery Order data sh own 
in Terminal Automation System and SAP. Key internal controls including delegation of 
powers applicable to the Company’s operations were not configured in SAP. As a result, 
the necessary approvals were taken in files on paper trails and note sheets. 
Recommendation 8: The Company may implement Production Planning and Plant 
Maintenance module. Automatic input of source data may be prioritised to create single 
source of data.  
(Para 1.6.3.5 I) 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
The Company did not have a documented policy, procedure or method of evaluation of 
changes made to master tables.  The Company did not comply with own IT policy that 
required SAP functional audit and technical audit covering the entire IT infrastructure at 
least once in every two years. 
Recommendation 9: Internal control may be mapped in SAP itself and SAP functional 
and technical audit may be carried out at the earliest. 
(Paras 1.6.4.1 & 1.6.4.2) 
B. Information Systems Audit of the Plant Maintenance Module of SAP ERP in ONGC 
Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Limited (ONGC) is an Oil and Gas Public Sector 
Undertaking (PSU) engaged in exploration and production of oil and gas. ONGC 
implemented SAP ERP in October 2003 with 10 modules. The Plant Maintenance (PM) 
Module is one of the ten modules implemented in the Company. The PM Module is used to 
maintain the master data of Equipment/Technical systems, map the maintenance processes 
and provide information for analysis and decision making at unit as well as organisation 
level. 
An IS  Audit was conducted to review the implementation and utilisation of the Plant 
Maintenance module of SAP in ONGC to assess the: 
i) correct mapping of business rules and requirements of the Company; 

Report No. 2 of 2024 
viii 
 
ii) controls in place to ensure reliability and integrity of data; and 
iii) effectiveness of Plant Maintenance Module as implemented in the Company. 
Significant audit findings are given below: 
Mapping of business rules and requirements of the Company 
Master Data deficiencies were noticed like not capturing details pertaining to manufacturer, 
warranty, Asset numbers, cost centres, start-up date and business area. In the absence of 
relevant data, the controls mapped with the Master data were less effective or the linkage 
with other modules was  limited to that extent . Measuring points were not created for 
pressure, temperature, vibration values and particle count. Thus, these parameters could not 
be captured as envisaged in the Business blueprint diminishing the utility of the SAP system 
especially from preventive maintenance perspective. 
Recommendation 1: It is recommended that along with the cleaning of equipment master 
data which should be done in a time bound manner,  all fields in master data like 
manufacturer details, startup date, Asset numbers and warranty etc. may be filled up 
mandatorily.  
Recommendation 2 : The Company should consider developing measuring points and 
start recording the parameters like vibration levels, pressure and temperature in the SAP 
PM Module daily to effectively utilise the ERP system from preventive and predictive 
maintenance perspective and better monitoring of maintenance activities.  
(Paras 2.5.1.1 & 2.5.1.2) 
Major equipment like  Compressors, Vacuum Pumps, Draw works, Blow out preventers 
were reg ularly retired from active use/ scrapped as per the Asset Retired Report of the 
Finance Module.  The same were , however, not updated in the PM Module by way of 
changing the user status leading to incorrect depiction of available equipment, continuance 
of redundant reports/data and incorrect reporting.  
Recommendation 3: The Management may ensure that th ere is time bound 
verification/cleaning of equipment data and necessary controls are built so that the 
dismantling procedure is adhered to. Feasibility of integration of Asset accounting with 
equipment master may also be explored. 
(Para 2.5.1.3) 
Transactional data-Correctness and Completeness 
With regard to transaction data pertaining to measuring documents and daily progress 
reports, there was continuing reliance on manual records for daily reports which form the 
basis for PM processes and failure to enforce timely entering of daily transaction data with 

Report No. 2 of 2024 
ix 
 
gaps of more than a month. Maintenance orders essential for planning of maintenance jobs 
were having incorrect order types  and business closure of transactions were found 
incomplete (as of March 2022) for even orders which were technically completed during 
the period January 2014 to August 2021. 
Recommendation 4:  Adherence to daily reporting within the window made available 
through the SAP system must be ensured for control purpose and to avail the benefits of 
the PM Module across the organisation. Interface with equipment controls/SCADA1 may 
be considered wherever feasible to minimi se manual interventions in capturing 
performance parameters/exception events. Responsibility may be fixed in case of delay in 
daily reporting. 
Recommendation 5:  To ensure reduction  in unplanned orders, the desirable ratio of 
planned/unplanned orders may be notified for work centres and monitored through the 
PM Module. Responsibility may be fixed in case of non-adherence to maintenance plan. 
(Paras 2.5.2.1, 2.5.2.2 & 2.5.2.3) 
Root cause analysis of equipment failure were not maintained in PM Module. Logbooks 
feature was not enabled in 50 plants and therefore continued with manual records.  
Recommendation 6:  The Management should clearly fix the criteria for conducting a 
Root Cause Analysis and ensure that Root Cause Analysis reports are recorded in suitable 
reporting structure in the PM Module. 
Recommendation 7:  The Company may ensure that the primary source of information 
like log books is maintained through PM Module for reliability, easy availability and from 
the perspective of preventive maintenance. 
(Paras 2.5.2.4 & 2.5.2.5) 
In the absence of regular maintenance/inspection data in the system, the timely maintenance 
of the equipment could not be ensured. Even in the monthly maintenance reports, the static 
equipment were not covered. The time-based maintenance schedule was not available in the 
PM Module for the equipment. 
Recommendation 8: The Management may conduct a review of static equipment which 
are critical from operational/process perspective and map them with maintenance plans 
accordingly. 
(Para 2.5.2.6) 
 
 
 
1   Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition  

Report No. 2 of 2024 
x 
 
Manpower Issues 
Segregation of duties were not adhered to and maintenance in -charge roles were clubbed 
with other authori sations. As many as 30 roles were authori sed to same person in three 
locations.  
Recommendation 9: (a) The Management may conduct a systematic and complete review 
of role authorisations so that the inbuilt controls of segregation of duties are maintained.  
(b) The Management, through proper training for officials and staff, may ensure that 
maintenance work processes are carried out through PM Module only.  
(c) The Management may consider revisiting Maintenance SOPs to ensure that the 
maintenance work is carried out obligatorily through the SAP System.  
(Para 2.5.3.3) 
Use of Key Performance Indicators for effective utilisation of PM Module and 
Management oversight 
The Key Performance Indicators for measuring the performance of the maintenance teams 
were not flowing from the PM Module but maintained outside the ERP system. The monthly 
reports maintained outside the system were found susceptible to change and unreliable.  
There were instances of equipment being denoted on standby even when under repair and 
availability hours were incorrectly denoted.  
Recommendation 10: The Management may ensure that the Key Performance Indicators 
are transmitted to the work centres  who are ultimately responsible for maintaining the 
equipment/releasing the production equipment for maintenance purpose. The 
Management may also ensure that Key Performance Indicators flow from verifiable and 
standard data of the Plant Maintenance Module. 
(Para 2.5.4.2) 
PM Module reports were not used by the Management to aid their decision making like 
repair versus replacement. This could be attributed partially to the deficiencies in data and 
reports. Backlog monitoring was also not effective. Reasons for backlogs were blank fields 
and incorrect dates found in the last allowed finish date field. After excluding the incorrect 
dates, backlog days ranged from 1 day to 2 years. The quarterly maintenance review 
dashboard containing major reasons for backlogs, equipment availa bility of critical 
equipment, spares procurement lead times, maintenance costs were discontinued. 
Recommendation 11: Reports in PM Module that could aid in the Management decision 
making for repairs/replacements and for comparative analysis may be made available 
and suitably used. 

Report No. 2 of 2024 
xi 
 
Recommendation 12: The Management may ensure that the escalation matrix is adhered 
to, through the system, for reporting the backlogs so that timely maintenance action is 
taken. Cleaning of old backlogs must be taken up on time bound basis, so that monitoring 
of maintenance efforts could be effective.  
Recommendation 13: The Top Management may utilise the Maintenance Dashboard for 
effective monitoring. 
(Paras 2.5.4.3 and 2.5.4.4) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter I 
Information Systems Audit of Enterprise 
Resource Planning implementation in 
Brahmaputra Cracker and Polymer Limited 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Report No. 2 of 2024 
1 
CHAPTER I 
 
1.1 Introduction 
Brahmaputra Cracker and Polymer Limited  (Company/BCPL) was incorporated  
(January 2007) in Lepetkata, Dibrugarh as a subsidiary1 of GAIL (India) Ltd (GAIL). GAIL 
is the major shareholder of the Company having 70 per cent shares and the balance is 
equally held by Oil India Limited, Numaligarh Refinery Limited and Government of Assam 
at 10 per cent each. The Company is engaged in production of polymers from natural gas 
procured from Oil India Limited  and Oil and Natural Gas Corporation  Limited whereas 
naphtha is procured from Numaligarh Refinery Limited. The Company has entered (March 
2016) into an agreement with GAIL for marketing of its products. 
The IT department of the Company is headed by the Chief Operating Officer under the 
general supervision of the Managing Director. The Chief Operating Officer  is assisted by 
Deputy General Manager. 
1.2  Enterprise Resource Planning in the Company 
The Company awarded (December 2014) a contract to M/s Wipro for implementation of 
Systems, Applications & Products in Data Processing (SAP) Enterprise Resource Planning, 
and set ting up of IT infrastructure and construction of Data Centre along with Annual 
Maintenance Contract for three years at a value of ₹23.72 crore. The project was ultimately 
completed at a cost of ₹24.69 crore. The scheduled date for going live for the SAP Enterprise 
Resource Planning system was September 2015 but it went live from 1 April 2016. 
The Company implemented SAP E nterprise Resource Planning Central Component as its 
Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) with modules pertaining to Finance and Control, 
Materials Management, Quality Management, Sales and Distribution, Warehouse 
Management and Human Capital Management with India payroll & Enterprise portal.  
The Company uses SAP E nterprise Resource Planning with SAP Graphic User Interface 
(GUI) as the presentation layer or front end, SAP NETWEAVER7.4 as in -between 
application server and Oracle 11.2.0.4.0 database at back end with Windows Server 2012 
R2 as operating system. There are 208  SAP users and 542  Employee Self Service (ESS) 
users in the Company.  
 
1  Formation of Brahmaputra Cracker and Polymer Limited  was a part of implementation of Assam 
accord (August 1985) 
Information Systems Audit of Enterprise Resource Planning 
implementation in Brahmaputra Cracker and Polymer 
Limited 

Report No. 2 of 2024 
2 
The Company uses NetVault Backup Plug‑in for SAP on Oracle and its disaster recovery 
server is located within GAIL’s data centre at Noida. The Company also maint ains a near 
recovery centre at Plant’s central control room. The Company deploys CISCO ASA 2400 
NGFW as external and Juniper SRX 550M as internal Firewall.  
The Company adopted an IT Policy in September 2018 based on C OBIT 4.1 framework  
much after award of contract for implementation of Systems, Applications & Products in 
Data Processing (SAP) Enterprise Resource Planning in December 2014. 
1.3  Audit Scope and Methodology 
The Information System audit of the Company  covered the period from April  2016 to 
March 2021 and assessed the adequacy of IT Governance framework of the Company and 
its implementation regarding the SAP -Enterprise Resource Planning. However, mat ters 
relating to earlier period as well as subsequent period are also included wherever pertinent.  
The audit process commenced with an entry meeting in August 2021 where the modalities 
of the audit were discussed. The IS  audit was conducted between September 2021 and 
December 2021. 
Audit methodology included scrutiny of relevant records, test check of controls on SAP, 
exporting data from SAP and analysis of data using C omputer Assisted Audit Tool, 
generating reports from SAP and inspection of the Data Centre and physical infrastructure. 
It also involve d discussion with the Management and soliciting their response to audit 
observations.  
The audit observations were issued to the Management on 19 January 2022 and response 
received on 30 March 2022. An Exit Conference was held with the Management on 15 
December 2021. The report incorporating Management responses was issued to Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas in March 2022 and the response of the Ministry was received   
in June 2022. The responses of the Management /Ministry have been considered and 
incorporated in the report.  
1.4  Audit objectives 
The objectives for the audit were to assess: 
i. Adequacy of IT Governance framework and its implementation by the Company. 
ii. Adequacy and effectiveness of General and Application Controls in E nterprise 
Resource Planning. 
iii. Efficiency in Business process re-engineering in SAP. 

Report No. 2 of 2024 
3 
iv. Adequacy of change management and business continuity plans and its 
implementation. 
1.5  Audit Criteria 
The criteria applied to assess the audit objectives were: 
❖ Control Objectives for Information and related Technology (COBIT2) 
❖ Company’s Business Plan and objectives enshrined in its IT policy 
1.6  Audit Findings 
 
1.6.1 Planning and Organisation 
1.6.1.1  Status of Implementation of Enterprise Resource Planning 
The Company implemented Finance and Control, Materials Management, Sales and 
Distribution, Warehouse Management, Quality Management and Human Capital 
Management with India payroll and Enterprise portal. The Company is yet to implement 
modules pertaining to Production Planning and Plant maintenance.  
The Management , however, communicated (March 2022) that they were consider ing 
implementing the Production Planning module.  
1.6.1.2 Non-activation of SAP solution manager 
Among the modules implemented by the Company, SAP Technical module has sub module 
SAP Solution Manager  which would enable identification and documentation of AS -IS3 
critical business processes, identification of business needs etc.  
Audit observed that 
though the Company 
acquired the SAP 
Solution Manager as part 
of the SAP E nterprise 
Resource Planning, yet it 
had not reaped the above 
benefits due to non -
activation. While 
accepting the audit observation, the Ministry ( June 2022)/Management ( March 2022) 
assured to implement the SAP Solution Manager after migration to newer version of SAP.  
 
2  BCPL has adopted COBIT 4.1 framework as per their IT policy 
3  AS-IS refers to  the mapping of the existing business processes in place and keep it documented for 
customising the SAP as per business requirements. 
Figure 1: Key Functional Building Blocks of SAP Solution 
Manager 
 


Report No. 2 of 2024 
4 
1.6.1.3  IT processes, organisation and relationships 
As per COBIT, the Company is required to determine various matrices such as Critical 
Success Factors (CSF), Key Performance Indicator (KPI) and Key Goal Indicator (KGI) to 
measure the efficacy of all IT systems . The project was completed by M/s Wipro and 
Enterprise Resource Planning and went live from April 2016. Audit observed that none of 
the afore-mentioned ma trices were designed and measured by the Management as 
on December 2021. It was also observed that the Company’s Board played limited role in 
IT Governance of the Company as the M anagement did not place any data o n the 
performance of the Enterprise Resource Planning before the Board in order to determine if 
the project was ultimately beneficial to the Company.  
The Ministry (June 2022)/Management (March 2022) accepted the observation and assured 
to prepare appropriate matrices to measure the efficacy of all IT systems. 
1.6.1.4  Strategic Plan 
COBIT requires that the Management should prepare Strategic IT plan to manage and direct 
all IT resources in line with business strategy and priorities. It also necessitates setting and 
tracking IT budgets in line with IT strategy. Audit observed that the Company  does not 
prepare IT strategy or Plan.  
The Ministry stated (June 2022) that a draft IT strategy had been developed and the same 
was under review before implementation. 
1.6.1.5  IT Organisation 
COBIT requires establishment of an IT organisational structure that reflects business needs, 
to define and identify key IT personnel and minimi se reliance on a single individual 
performing a critical job function  and Chief Information Officer  being an individual 
responsible for IT group within an organis ation. Further, t he Responsible, Accountable, 
Consulted and Informed chart within COBIT includes the role of Chief Information Officer 
for each COBIT objective. COBIT also requires segregation of duties i.e. , a division of 
roles and responsibilities which will  reduce the possibility of a single individual 
compromising a critical process. 
There is no designated Chief Information Officer in the Company. However, the Chief 
Operating Officer is overall incharge of the IT function s alongside the chairperson of the 
IT Security Steering Committee. Thus, the Company is unable to minimi se reliance on a 
single individual performing a critical job function. Further, the Company has not 
designated and separated the role of System Administrator, Database Administrator  and 
Information Security Officer as on December 2021. It was also observed that there was no 
segregation of duties for personnel having access to Development, Quality and Assurance 
and Production servers of SAP. 

Report No. 2 of 2024 
5 
The Company developed (January 2020) a Crisis Management Plan in which it had 
designated a Chief Information Security Officer  and Deputy Chief Information Security 
Officer along with other personnel as members of the Crisis Management Cell. It was seen 
that there had been a change in personnel of that Crisis Management Cell due to promotion 
and retirement/termination. But the list of members of the Crisis Management Cell was not 
revised. Hence, in absence of the revised list of the members of such Cell, the objectives of 
the Crisis Management Plan would be defeated. 
The Ministry/Management  accepted the audit observation and stated ( June 2022 /March 
2022) that necessary remedial measures regarding IT organogram and the Crisis 
Management Plan have been taken. 
1.6.1.6  Management of Human Resources 
The Company should define the target groups, appoint trainers and organise timely training 
sessions so that officials become independent in operating the SAP system. A training 
curriculum for each group of employees should be established and training alternatives 
should also be explored (internal or external site, in -house trainers or third -party trainers 
etc.).  
The Company has 619 employees out of which 208 are designated as SAP professional 
users for whom the Company has 
acquired 208 SAP professional user 
licenses. The Company has also 
acquired 542 Employee Self 
Service (ESS) users’ licenses for its 
employees. The IT department of 
the Company is responsible for 
training of the Company ’s 
employees for using SAP. In this 
regard, the Company awarded 
(November 2014) a contract of 
₹40.59 lakh to SAP India Limited 
for training of 11 employees across 
all the eight modules. 10 employees 
were ultimately trained  (between 
November 2014 and January 2015) 
in seven modules. Further, the Company conducted (between April 2016 and March 2021) 
three training programs on SAP at an additional cost of ₹3.36 lakh to train 32 employees in 
SAP Finance and Control, Warehouse Management , Quality Management and Human 
Resource modules against 208 SAP professional users in the Company.  
 
Picture 1: SAP training conducted at BCPL 


Report No. 2 of 2024 
6 
In this regard, Audit observed the following: 
• The Company did not have a formal documented , detailed training plan for its 
employees. As a result, the capabilities and familiarity with the new system varied 
widely. 
• Even after completion of five years since “Go -Live” of SAP in April 2016, only 18 per 
cent of SAP professional users presently employed by the Company were given training. 
The remaining employees were not imparted any kind of training on SAP modules 
deployed by the Company.  
• Out of the 42 trained employees, four ha d left the Company. Further, out of remaining 
38 employees, one was SAP process owner for Quality Management module and five 
others were core team members in H uman Resource, Material Management, Sales and 
Distribution, Quality Management and Warehouse Management modules. In case of 
remaining 32 employees, roles were not documented.  
• The Company  had decided in November 2012 to train its staffs to gain sufficient 
expertise and experience in the o peration and maintenance to handle operations 
independently once ER P was implemented. Instead, in  the absence of adequate SAP 
training for its employees the Company had to deploy multiple consultants at a higher 
cost of `6.46 crore even after six years since implementation of SAP. 
The Management stated (March 2022) that services of external consultants were hired to 
get expert services to resolve time -to-time complex business/statutory issues on demand 
and pay-for-use basis only. The Management also assured that end user level training to the 
untrained SAP professional users would be provided in future on need basis. 
Reply of the Management is to be viewed against the fact that the Company was hiring 
multiple consultants for regular operation and maintenance even after expiry of six years 
since operationalisation of SAP.  
The Ministry, in their reply (June 2022), stated that it was planned to further strengthen the 
existing SAP core team of the Company and accordingly, necessary action had already been 
taken to provide advanced training to 11 new core team members. Post SAP professional 
training to the core team members, the requirement of an external SAP consultant would be 
reviewed and decision would be taken accordingly. The new core team members would 
train the end users of the Company SAP system from time to time.  
Recommendation 1: The Management may develop criteria and matric es to assess the 
project outcome and performance of SAP Enterprise Resource Planning System. 
Recommendation 2: The Management may ensure that the IT policy reflects the latest 
developments in IT Governance and Management.  

Report No. 2 of 2024 
7 
 
Recommendation 3: IT organi sation may be strengthened and segregation of roles 
ensured. The Company may develop in -house capabilities and reduce recurring 
dependencies on consultants. 
1.6.2 Acquisition and Implementation  
1.6.2.1 Change Management 
COBIT requires setting up of formal change management procedures to handle in a 
standardised manner all requests (including maintenance and patches) for changes to 
applications, procedures, processes, system and service parameters and the underlying 
platforms. However, the Company  had no Standard Operating Procedure  to keep its 
software updated and authorise/monitor changes made on SAP.  
During audit, it was also observed that about 200 Notes were issued for system updation by 
SAP India Ltd during 2020-21 out of which only five Notes were implemented. 
Audit observed that the Company had outsourced the maintenance activities for its 
Enterprise Resource Planning  system to consultants who also modif ied/customised the 
Enterprise Resource Planning system to meet the evolving needs of the Company. However, 
changes to Enterprise Resource Planning system made by consultants were not documented 
in the SAP configuration documents and business blue-print documents.  
The Ministry/Management stated (June 2022/March 2022) that a Standard Operating 
Procedure had been prepared to integrate all the activities from requisition of change to 
development to quality to production in SAP. The new version of design document was also 
being updated. However, the reply is silent about implementation of very low number of 
SAP Notes. 
Recommendation 4: Table Logging may be implemented to record documentation of 
change management.  
1.6.3 IT Support System 
1.6.3.1 Data Management 
As per the IT policy of the Company, it shall establish procedures to manage media library, 
backup and recovery of data and proper disposal of media. The Company shall also 
implement an electronic and physical records retention schedule to maintain records for a 
period of eight years as per statutory requirements, to ensure that  the Company adheres to 
existing record  keeping regulations and requirements and does so consistently. The 
Company shall also formulate a process of systematically determining which records need 
to be captured and how long they need to be retained in the Company.  

Report No. 2 of 2024 
8 
Audit observed the following: 
• The Company did not prepare a data management policy and prescribe a procedure to 
manage media library, backup and recovery of data and proper disposal of media.  
• Classification of  data by information criteri a such as confidentiality, integrity  and 
availability was not done.  
• Policies were yet to be established to store documents, data and source programmes  in 
accordance with the organisation's activities, size and mission. 
• Portability of data through pen drives and other means were not regulated and remote 
administration tools such as 
‘AnyDesk’ and 
‘TeamViewer’ were used to 
access remote desktops and 
transfer data. The Company  
did not have a policy for use 
of unauthorised remote 
administration tools. 
• Further, the contracts with 
consultants did not have any 
clause that enabled audit to 
access the records, processes 
and policies of the 
consultants having 
connection with their 
services provided to the Company. Consequently, audit was unable to vouchsafe that 
the access of the consultants to the Company’s Enterprise Resource Planning system 
was limited to legitimate requirement of the consultants. 
The Management stated (March 2022) that data management policy would be formulated 
along with the revision of IT policy. 
Recommendation 5: The Company may frame a ‘data management policy’ at the earliest.  
1.6.3.2  Ensuring Continuous service 
The Company prepared a Business Continuity Plan in January 2020 which provides that if 
it is assessed that the primary data centre cannot be made functional within 36  hours of a 
disaster, the Company will immediately switch over to the disaster recovery centre. The 
Company takes daily back -up which are stored in two sets. One is online backup of all 
systems and the other is on tape. There are two disaster recovery centres, one is located at 
Picture 2: AnyDesk and TeamViewer used by the 
Company as remote administration tool. 

Report No. 2 of 2024 
9 
central control building within the factory complex at Lepetkata in Assam and the other is 
located at Noida within the premises of GAIL’s data centre. The Company  uses 
NETVAULT (a software used to routinely take back -up) to automatically take daily and 
weekly backup on tapes. Monitoring of the backup has been outsourced to contractual staff. 
The backup tapes are retained in a separate vault designated for that purpose. Business 
Continuity Plan for SAP systems requires testing as per data replication monitoring process 
of Procedure for Data Centre/Server Room Management of the Company ’s Q uality 
Management System Procedural Manual. Moreover, the Business Continuity Plan requires 
the Company to have similar information security controls at its disaster recovery centres 
as it ha s for its data centre. The continuous availability of servers w as ensured by use of 
cluster servers at d ata centre either of which can seamlessly take over t asks if the other 
server fails/is unavailable. 
In this connection, Audit observed the following: 
• Company’s IT policy d id not specifically address a business recovery plan. The 
Company has not prepared a business impact analysis and  has not identified roles, 
responsibilities and communication process for disaster recovery. 
• Test check of the Data Recovery Centre at Lepetkata (Assam) revealed that the room 
containing the servers did not have a gas -based fire suppressant system. Thus, the 
disaster recovery centre did not have fool proof protection from fire. 
• The cluster servers are located adjacent to each other. So, in case of a disaster, there 
was high probability that it could affect the servers. As such, use of mirror servers 4 
at different location would have obviated the risk. 
• Test check of NETVAULT back -up logs between 1  August 2021 and 
6 November 2021 
revealed 158 instances 
when back-up had failed 
or had been aborted. 
148 of these instances 
were subsequently 
restarted manually. Out 
of the remaining 
10 instances, in 7  
instances the personnel 
deputed by th e 
contractor reported that 
 
4  Mirror Server is a replica server. 
Picture 3: NETVAULT backup tapes are maintained in a 
vault 
 


Report No. 2 of 2024 
10 
backup was successful when it had failed or was aborted.  
• Movement of the tapes between data centre and vault were not logged. 
• Test check of NETVAULT back up logs revealed that a virtual hard disk was 
restored from NETVAULT backup tape on 25  September 2020 and at tached to a 
new virtual machine . As per the log, the recovery of virtual hard disk had been 
completed within target recovery time. However, the reason for the recovery and the 
nature of data recovered were not on record. 
• In absence of documentation, Audit could not vouchsafe that testing was done as per 
data replication monitoring process of Procedure for Data Centre/Server Room 
Management of the Company’s Quality Management System Procedural Manual. 
• A mock drill was undertaken by the Company in March 2019 to assess the disaster 
recovery capability. It was found that there was bandwidth constraint to recover data 
from Data Recovery Centre. To resolve this problem, the Company  
obtained (October 2019 and March  2020) 20  Mbps and 18  Mbps point to point 
leased line link bandwidth between the Company data centre at Lepetkata and Data 
Recovery Centre at Noida from M/s Bharti Airtel Ltd. and M/s BSNL respectively. 
However, after obtaining the increased bandwidt h, no drills were carried out to 
assess the resolution of the problem and successful data recovery from D ata 
Recovery Centre at Noida. No such drills were undertaken to assess the utility of 
Data Recovery Centre at Lepetkata. 
• As per Emergency Response and Disaster Management Plan, testing and mock drills 
for onsite emergency plan sh ould be carried once in three months and for offsite 
emergency plan once in twelve months. However, only one mock drill was 
conducted (February 2021) till date. But the same did not address the assessment of 
readiness for restoring full functionality of the Company ’s E nterprise Resource 
Planning capability after a disaster. 
Thus, A udit observed that there were both policy and procedural shortcomings in the 
Company’s business continuity and recovery plans which m ight have repercussions if the 
Company faces an actual disaster. 
The Management, while accepting the audit observation, stated (March 2022) that business 
recovery plan would be executed as per the approved Business Continuity Plan of the 
Company and the same shall be reviewed to address the audit observations. It was also 
stated that inclusion of the business recovery plan in IT policy w ould be done during the 
review of IT policy. The Management further assured that either appropriate firefighting 
equipment would be installed or the server w ould be relocated to have the gas -based fire 
suppressant system at the near Data Recovery Centre. Moreover, mock drill of SAP will be 

Report No. 2 of 2024 
11 
carried out in association with M/s SAP once the ORACLE, Net weaver and Solution 
Manager is upgraded to the latest version as advised by them.  
While endorsing the Management’s views, the Ministry stated (June 2022) that fire fighting 
equipment had been installed. The Ministry also stated that to mitigate any further lapse in 
complying with the Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory Board  Regulations 2010, 
periodic re-certification of Emergency Response and Disaster Management Plan  would be 
ensured based on the validity of the certificate awarded by the Petroleum and Natural Gas 
Regulatory Board approved Third Party Agency. The Ministry/Management is silent in their 
reply regarding conduct of drills to assess the utility of Data Recovery Centre at Lepetkata. 
1.6.3.3  Ensuring Systems Security 
The Company appointed a service provider for data centre infrastructure support with  
 
Capability Maturity Model Integration level 3 certification5. During audit, the Management 
failed to furnish the Capability Maturity Model Integration appraisal report for two out of 
its three service providers for the data centre infrastructure support. Further, the certification 
of the third service provider which was furnished to Audit, was not found amongst the 
published certificates of Capability Maturity Model Integration ce rtifying authority. 
Therefore, Audit was unable to independently vouchsafe such certification.  
 
5  The Capability Maturity Model Integration is a process and behavioural model that helps organisations 
streamline process improvement and encourage productive, efficient behaviours that decrease risks in 
software, product and service development. As per Cap ability Maturity Model Integration, at stage III, 
organisations are more proactive than reactive. There’s a set of “organisation -wide standards” to 
“provide guidance across projects, programs and portfolios.” Businesses understand their 
shortcomings, how to address them and what the goal is for improvement. 
Figure 2: Capability Maturity Model Integration 

Report No. 2 of 2024 
12 
The Ministry, while accepting the audit observation , stated (June  2022) that tender 
conditions for subsequent tenders had been revised to ensure Capability Maturity Model 
Integration certification agency. 
(A)  IT Security Policy 
As per the Company’s IT Policy, the Company shall establish and maintain IT security roles 
and responsibilities, policies, procedures and guidelines and perform continuous security 
monitoring. However, the Company does not have an IT security policy. Physical access 
security policy and a Standard Operating Procedure are yet to be prepared by the Company. 
In January 2020, a Crisis Management Plan was put in place to address natura l disasters, 
man-made disasters and cyber-attacks to the Company’s IT Systems. However, the said plan 
was reactive in nature and addressed post incident response. Proactive or continuous 
monitoring of IT environment for threats including timely updating of software to avoid IT 
security incidences were not addressed in that plan. 
The Management, in its reply (March 2022), accepted the audit observation and assured that 
Policy/Standard Operating Procedure would be prepared by end of June 2022. 
The Ministry, in their reply (June  2022), assured that those proactive roles and 
responsibilities would be incorporated in the IT security policy. 
(B) Vulnerability Assessment and Penetration Testing 
The Company  had undertaken V ulnerability Assessment and Penetration Testing  in 
August 2020 and then a re-audit in July 2021 both conducted by M/s Bharat Electronics Ltd. 
to test mitigation of the risks identified during audit of August 2020. Out of four  high, 
ten medium and ten low category risks identified in August 2020, three high, seven medium 
and five low risks were found unmitigated during re-audit in July 2021. 
Audit observed that three high, one medium and two low risks were yet to be mitigated as 
on December 2021. Audit further observed that the Management had no documented policy 
of addressing risks in a time bound manner. 
The Ministry, while accepting the audit observation, stated (June 2022) that necessary action 
had already been initiated. 
(C) Table logging and audit trail 
Changes to general system settings as well as to data relevant for financial statements must 
always be transparent, plausible and traceable . These requirements are particularly 
necessary if the changes are done without change management procedures. For transactional 
data and sometimes even for configurations, elaborate change management procedures are 
not implemented. In such cases, logs are fundamental part of IT systems for accomplishing 

Report No. 2 of 2024 
13 
the above-mentioned objective. The central log in the SAP system for documenting changes 
to data is the table logging function. 
Audit observed that the Company  had not implemented table logging yet and hence the 
change documentations were not available. In this connection, it is also stated that 
Companies (Accounts) Rules, 2014 recommends that there should be audit trail in the entity. 
The Ministry/Management accepted the observation ( June 2022/March 2022) and assured 
to enable table logging for selected tables. However, the reply of the Ministry/Management 
is not tenable as table logging should be enabled for all tables for complete audit trail. 
1.6.3.4  Access and authorisation 
The role and profile that a specific user will have on SAP would be defined by the role and 
job profile that employee has within the organisation, its authority and responsibility. Access 
to SAP should enable an employee to successfully undertake their tasks. However, access 
should also be restricted to such aspects where an employee is not expected to undertake 
any activity.  
However, the Company  did not implement workflow -based SAP Access Management 
System until October 2021. It also did not ha ve a documentation defining the job profiles 
and roles of its employees. In absence of such documentation, the IT department of the 
Company relied on the requests it receive d from the respective Head s of the 
Departments and assigned SAP access, authorisation and roles based on such request s. IT 
department had not maintained any consolidated documentation of all such requests 
received from the Heads of the Departments. As a result, Audit observed conflicts in roles 
and authorisation of users which are discussed in the ensuing paragraphs. 
Audit examination of user’s access controls on SAP revealed the following: - 
(A) Users with incomplete address data 
The user master record which decides the level of access in the SAP system should be 
complete in all aspects. During audit, the existence of incomplete address data with default 
password was obtained by execution of built-in SAP report RSUSR007 in t-code SA 38 and 
SUIM. Analysis of the data revealed that users’ identification data were missing in database. 
Further, users were provided with access to SAP without restricting the same up to their 
retirement date or date of completion of deputation. 
The Ministry stated (June 2022) that action had already been taken and user authorisations 
been reviewed.  

Report No. 2 of 2024 
14 
(B) Changes made to security authorisations 
Authorisations are the core of security in any Enterprise Resource Planning system. 
Authorisation objects, profiles and roles decide the level of access that will be available to 
a particular user. During audit, the changes made to security authorisation was prepared by 
execution of built -in SAP report RSUSR102 in t -code SA 38 and the same was analy sed 
which revealed that there were 77,856 change documents. In absence of consolidated 
documentation, Audit could not vouchsafe if such changes to security authorisation were in 
consonance with the employee’s roles within the Company’s organisation. 
The Management, while accepting the audit observation , stated (March 2022) that proper 
records would be maintained using the SAP Access Management System. The Ministry in 
their reply (June 2022) also endorsed the views of the Management.  
(C) Changes made to security profile 
Profiles are used to assign security rights to users in SAP. Changes to security profiles 
should be closely monitored. During audit, the existence of changes made to security profile 
was obtained by execution of built-in SAP report RSUSR101 in t-code SA 38 and the same 
was analysed which revealed that there were 7,104 profile change documents. In absence of 
consolidated documentation, Audit could not vouchsafe if such changes to security profile 
were in consonance with employee’s roles within the Company’s organisation. 
The Management, in its reply (March 2022) , accepted the observation and assured to 
maintain proper records using the SAP Access Management System.  The Ministry in their 
reply (June 2022) also endorsed the views of the Management.  
(D) Default passwords for default SAP users 
During installation of SAP system, default users are created with default passwords. These 
default passwords are well known and if not properly secured, it could pose a security threat. 
During audit, the existence of default username with default password was observed by 
execution of built -in SAP report RSUSR003 in t -code SA 38 and the same was analy sed 
which revealed 17 instances where default passwords were retained. 
The Management/Ministry, while accepting the audit observation , stated (June 2022) that 
default/initial passwords of all the default users had been changed. 
(E) Changes made to users’ security 
The master record contains the roles and profiles assigned to user. Roles and profiles decide 
the level of access of a user in the SAP system. Changes to Master data record should  be 
closely monitored. During audit, 32,653 changes made in users’ security were obtained by 

Report No. 2 of 2024 
15 
execution of built -in SAP report RSUSR100N in t -code SA  38. In absence of 
documentation, Audit could not vouchsafe reasons for such changes. 
The Management, while accepting the audit observation , stated (March 2022) that proper 
records would be maintained using the SAP Access Management System. The Ministry, in 
their reply (June 2022), also endorsed the views of the Management.  
(F) Users with multiple critical roles 
During IT audit, the existence of users with multiple critical roles was obtained from t-code 
SUIM and the same was analysed. The analysis revealed that 735 users6 had access to critical 
roles and authorisation which allowed the users to make changes on SAP. Out of these 735 
users, 485 users had seven roles each pertaining to E mployee Self Service. Out of the 
remaining 250 users, it was observed by Audit that between 10 and 67 roles were assigned 
to individual users. Since the Company did not document the roles and responsibilities of 
its employees within the Company, Audit could not vouchsafe that the roles assigned to the 
users on SAP were appropriate and commensurate with the roles of the said user within the 
Company.  
In this connection, Audit also observed that providing SAP access to employees in excess 
of their Delegation of Power s may expose the Company to the risk of frauds. Thus, there 
was urgent need to periodically review the delegated roles assigned to the use r. However, 
the Company did not have any documented policy for periodic review of user roles to ensure 
that it was commensurate with their Delegation of Power.  
The Management/Ministry, while accepting the audit observation , stated (June 2022) that 
SAP roles had been reviewed and suitable access/authorisation have been granted. 
(G) Users with critical combination of authorisation 
Access to SAP system is controlled through authori sations. It is necessary to review users 
with critical combination of authori sations to assess so that only ap propriate role specific 
authorisations are provided to the users to enable them to perform their official duty. The 
list of users with critical combination of authoris ations was obtained by using SAP report 
RSUSR008_009_NEW in t -code SA 38 and analysed. The analysis revealed that critical 
authorisations were provided to multiple users ranging from 10 to 731 users. 
Audit observed that the Company did not practice periodic review of users to assess the 
appropriateness of the authorisations available to the users. There was no documented policy 
 
6  735 users include present employees/retired/resigned/terminated employees, consignment stockist, 
audtors etc. 

Report No. 2 of 2024 
16 
to guide the SAP BASIS administrators 7 to determine the appropriate authori sations and 
roles and assign the same to the user. 
The Management/Ministry, while accepting the audit observation , stated (June 2022) that 
SAP users’ roles had been reviewed and multiple authorisations had already been revoked. 
It was also stated that proper records were maintained using the SAP Access Management 
System. The Ministry further stated that periodic review of authorisation given to the users 
would be carried out.  
(H) Same name with multiple user ID 
In SAP, one user should be assigned only one user ID and given authorisation and roles 
commensurate with Delegation of Powers. 
Audit noticed that one person was assigned two user IDs. These user IDs were created in 
October 2019 and November  2019 and both were active at the time of audit (December 
2021) and could be used to log in to SAP although the user  ID created in November 2019 
had not been used to log into SAP since its creation. Audit observed that user IDs assigned 
to various users were not reviewed from time to time to weed out duplicate user IDs. 
The Ministry/Management, in its reply, stated (June/March 2022) that the duplicate user ID 
had been deleted and periodic review will be done to identify and resolve such incidents. 
(I) User not logged in for last two months 
Scrutiny (December 2021) revealed that 79 users including 15 consignment agents had not 
logged in to SAP since October  2021. It include d users who ha d not logged in since 
November 2015. Such user IDs have not been blocked as on  December 2021. Audit 
observed that periodic review of user ID s and their activity on SAP were not done by the 
Company. 
The Management stated (March 2022) that locking an idle user after a short duration will 
increase operation & maintenance tasks on the SAP BASIS team. 
The Management’s reply may be seen in light of the fact that de-activation of SAP user IDs 
which were not logged in for a specified time period is essential in order to safeguard the 
Enterprise Resource Planning system. 
The Management/Ministry, while accepting the audit observation, stated (June 2022) that a 
system would be developed to review dormant SAP users which would be locked after 60 
days of inactivity/absence of login into the SAP system.  
 
7  SAP BASIS administrators are responsible for managing a SAP environment on day-to-day basis. 

Report No. 2 of 2024 
17 
(J) Change of password 
As per the IT policy of the Company, the password to authenticate access to SAP should be 
changed after every 60 days. However, this requirement has not been configured in SAP. 
As a result, password of all users in SAP were more than 60 days old. 
The Management/Ministry, while accepting the audit observation , stated (June 2022) that 
the policy for mandatory change of password had already been implemented by the 
Company.  
(K) Source data preparation and authorisation 
An entity should document procedure for source data preparation and ensure that they are 
effectively and properly communicated to appropriate and qualified personnel. These 
procedures should establish and communicate required authorisation levels (input, editing, 
authorising, accepting and rejecting source documents). The procedures should also identify 
the acceptable source media for each type of transaction. Further, entities should also define 
and communicate criteria for timeliness, completeness and acc uracy of source documents 
and also establish mechanisms to ensure that data input is performed in accordance with the 
timeliness, accuracy and completeness criteria.  
However, no such Standard Operating Procedure in respect of source data preparation and 
authorisation was documented by the Management.  The Ministry/Management, while 
accepting the audit observation , stated (June /March 2022) that necessary Standard 
Operating Procedure would be prepared. 
Recommendation 6: The Company may define roles and provide access to SAP based on 
SAP standard roles or custom roles. Segregation of duties may be enforced when defining 
roles. Password policy may be enforced without compromise.  
1.6.3.5 Management of Operations 
(A) SAP Procure to Pay Cycle 
In the accounting and book-keeping area of 
accounts payable, the three -way match 
refers to a procedure used when processing 
an invoice received from a vendor or 
supplier. The vendor’s invoice, prior to its 
paying is matched with the purchase 
order prepared and issued to the vendor and 
the goods received report or Goods 
Received Number (GRN) that was prepared 
upon receipt of the goods. These three 
documents are matched by comparing the quantities, price per unit, terms and other 
Figure 3: SAP Procure to Pay Cycle 

Report No. 2 of 2024 
18 
information appearing on the three documents.  The purpose of the three -way match is to 
avoid paying an incorrect and perhaps fraudulent invoice. 
In this regard, Audit undertook substantive analysis which revealed the following: 
(B) Invoice with editable Goods Received Number 
At the time of raising purchase order in SAP, there is an important data field named “GR -
Bsd IV”, i.e., “Goods Receipt based Invoice” which is editable at the time of issuing 
Purchase Order. However, data field “GR -Bsd IV” should not be  editable at the time of 
receipt or payment so that unauthorised acceptance or payment is not done. This is a cause 
for concern because this enables subsequent users to create an invoice with  edited Goods 
Received Number.  
An analysis of 1,54,695 purchasing document items, however, revealed that data field “GR-
Bsd IV” related to 1,06,336 purchasing documents items was editable at the time of receipt 
or payment purchase order. Out of these 1,06,336 purchasing documents, 
86,358 documents8 pertained to standard (domestic) purchases where creation of invoices 
with editable Good Received Number should not have been enabled. 
The Ministry/Management stated (June/March 2022) that “GR B sd IV” indicator had not 
been kept mandatory for foreign vendor code in SAP. 
Replies of the Ministry/Management are not relevant as audit observation is related to 
domestic vendors. 
(C) Internal control deficiencies in vendor management 
A robust internal control over vendor management is necessary to ensure that frauds and 
misappropriations are avoided. Analysis of the tables associated with vendors and vendor 
payment data revealed the following deficiencies: 
I. BSIK9 is a standard table in SAP containing open items pertaining to vendors.  In this 
table, payment block keys denote the reasons for whi ch the payment is kept 
pending/being an open item. Similarly, blank entry in the payment block key means 
those items which are eligible for payment. Scrutiny of the BSIK table revealed that it 
contained 5,960 entries out of which, 4,958 entries aggregating to ₹1,136.10 crore were 
kept eligible for payment with blank entry in the payment block key. Analysis of these 
4,958 entries revealed that these pertain to the fiscal years 2016-17 to 2020-21 as shown 
in the table below:  
 
8  19,978 documents pertain to Consignment, Subcontracting, Stock transfer and Service.  
9  BSIK is a standard Financial Accounting Transparent Table in SAP. 

Report No. 2 of 2024 
19 
Table: 1.1 Year-wise statement showing blank entries in the payment block key  
Financial year of posting of 
payment 
No. of records Amount left for payment 
(₹ in crore) 
2016-17 1,735 177.15 
2017-18 611 357.83 
2018-19 640 175.40 
2019-20 1,128 157.35 
2020-21 844 268.37 
Audit observed that considerable numbers of items lying as eligible for payment for five 
years was an indicator of ineffective controls on account payables . Further, it was also 
not clear whether they were actually eligible for payment or not.  
The Management, in their reply  (March 2022), stated that as per the Company ’s bill 
process and payment procedure, payment was processed for only those selected Journal 
Vouchers whose physical authorisation were received and was due for payment. Since 
the Company configured SAP automatic payment t-code with mandatory selection of 
vendor code and respective Journal Voucher numbers along with physical authorisation, 
additional payment block check was not maintained in SAP. The Management further 
assured that based on the advice of A udit, additional payment block w ould be 
implemented for future transactions. 
II. LFA1 is standard SAP vendor master table and LFBK is a standard SAP table 
containing the banking data for the vendors. In the Company, the table LFA1 had 6,252 
vendor records and table LFBK had 4,101 banking records of vendors. Scrutiny of 
banking data fo r the 6,252  vendors in table LFBK revealed that out of the 6,252 
vendors, the banking data of 2,306 vendors was not with the Company. Further, out of 
6,252 vendors, bank account holder’s name was not noted for 1,104 vendors and invalid 
bank account number was recorded against 129 vendors. 
Additionally, scrutiny of the table LFBK revealed that out of 4,101 banking records, 1,397 
records had invalid bank key.  In table LFA1, out of 6,252 records, 2 vendor IDs had no 
name, 6 vendors had 2 vendor IDs assigned to them and one vendor with name “NIL” had 
14 IDs assigned. Moreover, it was noticed in audit that the address fields, nature of business, 
industry type and other details were not recorded in the table LFA1. It was also noticed that 
out of 6,252 vendor master records, 2,509 vendor ID s did not contain Permanent Account 
Numbers and 228 vendor IDs consisted invalid Permanent Account Numbers. 
The Management clarified (March 2022) that the audit observations emanated from earlier 
practices which the Company had discontinued and corrective steps were being undertaken. 

Report No. 2 of 2024 
20 
The Ministry, in their reply, stated (June 2022) that as advised by Audit, all the open items 
were being reviewed on a regular basis and clearing of the same was being carried out 
individual vendor wise.  
(D) Reliance on manual systems for stock keeping of hydrocarbons10 
As per the Company’s configuration document for silo11 management module, tank level of 
liquid and vapor data is captured from Distributed Control  System by plant personnel and 
data can be entered manually into SAP System. However, if  interface specification for 
connectivity between Distributed Control System and SAP is provided and a connection is  
established, tank level data can be captured automatically into SAP System from Distributed 
Control System. System will calculate the volume and various process parameters with the 
given inputs from Distributed Control System.  Such a utomatic recording of data in 
Enterprise Resource Planning System obviates human mistakes in manual entry and 
provides real time data for decision making. 
During audit, it was observed that the calibration data was duly loaded in SAP. However, 
the stock of hydrocarbons produced by the Company was obtained manually by the shift-in-
charge from Distributed Control System on daily basis. The shift-in-charge collated the data 
for each type of hydrocarbon and determined the quantum based on parameters recorded in 
Distributed Control System in an excel sheet. Subsequently, the data was manually entered 
into SAP by the site -in-charge using t -codes YSI04, YSI05, YSI06 and MIGO. Thus, 
automatic recording of stock for hydrocarbons was not functional. 
Further, at  the Company ’s plants at Lakwa and Duliajan 12 (both located in Assam) , the 
recording of natural gas consumption which constitutes the principal raw material for the 
Company was also not recorded automatically in SAP but by manual MIGO entry based on 
periodic bills raised by Oil and Natural Gas Corporation and Oil India Ltd respectively.  
The Management (March 2022) stated that Distributed Control System was not integrated 
with SAP due to vulnerable exposure of process safety  which may lead to disastrous  
consequences. However, the Company would review the risk and  explore future 
possibilities of Integrating Distributed Control System with SAP. 
The Ministry stated (June 2022) that the Company would review the risk and explore future 
possibilities of Integrating Distributed Control System with SAP.  
 
10  Hydrocarbons means HPG and CBFS. HPG means Hydrogenated Pyrolysis Gasoline and CBFS 
means Carbon black feed stock. 
11  Silo is a storage container. 
12  BCPL receives natural gas from OIL India Ltd at Duliajan (Assam) and from ONGC Ltd at Lakwa 
(Assam).  

Report No. 2 of 2024 
21 
(E) Reliance on manual recording of sale of hydrocarbons 
Terminal Automation System  records13 the 
quantity of hydrocarbon delivered to a tanker by 
capturing data from batch controller 14 at each 
hydrocarbon loading bay 15. Batch controllers 
ensure that the correct quantum of hydrocarbons 
as per Filling Advise Note16 is delivered.  
Audit observed that contrary to the proposed 
interface between SAP and Terminal 
Automation System ( Figure 4) the data 
regarding quantity delivered from Terminal 
Automation System  was not automatically 
transferred and recorded in SAP. Instead, the 
weight of both empty tankers 17 and loaded 
tankers18 were captured from the weigh bridge 
by Terminal Automation System . The 
difference of weight between the empty tanker 
and loaded tanker was recorded manually and 
the same was entered in SAP through the 
t-code VL02N as the final delivered  quantity. The invoices were then raised based on 
delivery quantity recorded in SAP. 
The Management provided Terminal Automation System  data from batch controllers to 
Audit but mentioned that it did not record the data pertaining to the mass flow mete r19. 
Scrutiny of the data provided by the Management revealed that it was inconsistent and 
therefore unreliable.  In absence of reliable records from the Management, hydrocarbon 
production data from the internal vigilance department of the Company for the period 
April 2018 to March 2019 was analysed which revealed that the Company had under billed 
its customer s to the extent of 244.01  metric tonne s of HPG 20 valuing ₹0.89 crore  
(Annexure I) by relying on weighment of trucks instead of relying on data from batch 
controllers. 
 
13  Terminal Automation System is an IT system that is used by BCPL to monitor loading of hydrocarbons 
in tankers. 
14  As per Terminal Automation System Functional Design Specifications document.  
15  Two for Hydrogenated Pyrolysis Gasoline and one for Carbon Black Feed Stock.  
16  Filling advise note is prepared by BCPL’s fire and safety department after inspecting the conditions of 
the tanker vehicle and is based on statutory norms. It is prepared in Terminal Automation System.  
17  Before loading of tanker with hydrocarbons it is weighed to measure its tare i.e., weight of empty tanker. 
18  After loading of tanker with hydrocarbons, it is again weighed. The difference in this weight with tare 
is deemed the quantity of hydrocarbons delivered. 
19  Mass Flow Meter is an instrument to measure flow of fluids. 
20  Hydrogenated Pyrolysis Gasoline. 
Figure 4: Proposed interface between 
Terminal Automation System and SAP 

Report No. 2 of 2024 
22 
Thus, there was under reporting of quantity of hydrocarbon delivered on SAP during the 
manual entry. It may be concluded that non -integration of Terminal Automation System  
with SAP resulted in loss of source documentation and rendered manually entered data on 
SAP unreliable. 
The Management, in their reply (March 2022), stated that with the present configuration of 
Terminal Automation System  as well as SAP, it was not possible to integrate Terminal 
Automation System with SAP for all the transactions. However, possibility of integration 
would be reviewed and explored at the time of upgradation of the existing system.  It was 
also stated that variation in measurement of Hydrogenated Pyrolysis Gasoline was mainly 
due to the difference in accuracy level of two different types of measurement systems  i.e., 
weighbridge and batch controller. 
The Ministry, in their reply, stated (June 2022) that the possibility of integration with SAP 
was under review with the Original Equipment Manufacturer and would be implemented 
during Terminal Automation System upgradation.  
The Ministry’s/Management’s replies may be viewed in light of the fact that as per the 
Company’s business blueprint document for sales and distribution, the loaded quantity of 
hydrocarbons should pass to the SAP automatically through an interface between SAP and 
Terminal Automation System. Hence, both SAP and Terminal Automation System should 
have been configured accordingly. Further, due to the difference in accuracy level of two 
different types of measurement systems, the Company incurred pecuniary loss. 
Recommendation 7: The Company may ensure that the loaded quantity of hydrocarbons 
should pass to the SAP automatically through an interface between SAP and Terminal 
Automation System.  
(F) Difference in Delivery Orders between Terminal Automation System and SAP 
In SAP, Delivery Order numbers  are recorded in st andard SAP table LIPS in Sales and  
Distribution module. Further, as per documentation provided by the Management, the 
Filling Advise Note data from  the Terminal Automation System  is recorded in table 
ZSDTASINTERFACE in SAP. Analysis of this table and comparing the same with delivery 
data from Terminal Automation System revealed the following: 

Report No. 2 of 2024 
23 
➢ Out of 11,521 records in Terminal Automation System, the Delivery Order was not 
recorded for 35 deliveries between August  2016 and December 2018 for 
600.40 metric tonnes  of 
hydrocarbons indicating 
insufficient check in 
Terminal Automation 
System. As Delivery Order 
uniquely identifies each 
delivery, in absence of 
Delivery Order these 
delivery documents canno t 
be traced to SAP. Therefore, 
Audit could not vouchsafe 
that these transactions were 
duly recorded in SAP, billed 
and accounted for in the 
books. 
➢ 532 records in Terminal Automation System recorded zero or negative quantum of 
deliveries resulting into inconsistency. In the absence of documentation, Audit could 
not vouchsafe if these tankers were filled with hydrocarbons or left empty after 
initial weighment.  
➢  As stated above, the Filling Advise Note data from Terminal Automation System  
were to be recorded in the table ZSDTASINTERFACE in SAP. During audit, 
comparison of data obtained from Terminal Automation System  with the table 
ZSDTASINTERFACE revealed that 148 records21 in Terminal Automation System 
were not recorded in SAP table ZSDTASINTERFACE between August 2016 and 
October 2021. These constituted 3,353.50 metric tonnes of hydrocarbons delivered 
valued at ₹ 11.11 crore. Audit observed that not all data points were automatically 
uploaded from Terminal Automation System to SAP and as a result, manual entry 
of data from Terminal Automation System to SAP was necessitated. 
➢ Further, as  all the data from Terminal Automation System  does not flow 
automatically to ZSDTASINTERFACE, consequently they also do not flow to SAP 
table LIPS22. The data from Terminal Automation System is manually entered into 
SAP through t -code Vl02n. During a udit, comparison of data from Terminal 
Automation System with LIPS revealed that 58 records from Terminal Automation 
System were not recorded in LIPS. These 58 records pertain ed to delivery of 
 
21  Excluding those without Delivery Order in Terminal Automation System.  
22  SAP table that documents delivery item data. 
Picture 4: Delivery of liquid hydrocarbon at tanker 
after weighment in Weighbridge. 


Report No. 2 of 2024 
24 
hydrocarbons between August 2016 and October 2020 aggregating 1,196.40 metric 
tonnes valued at ₹3.90 crore.  
Audit observed that due to absence of automation, completeness of records on SAP was 
compromised. Further, manual entry of records entails the risk that all records might not be 
entered if there is absence of necessary controls. Audit also observed that necessary controls 
such as control totals or count documents were absent. 
The Management stated (March  2022) that there was technical issue with the Terminal 
Automation System till March 2019 and the reafter system reliability had  improved. The 
Management also assured that a robust documentation system would be developed to record 
weighment of tanker. The Management further contended that the data as mentioned in the 
audit observation were available in SAP without mentioning table names. 
The Management’s reply may be seen in light of the fact that it had not mentioned the tables 
where these data were recorded. In this connection, Audit had pointed out the relevant tables 
where they should have been automatically recorded for Filling Advise Note after delivery. 
The TheMinistry, while accepting the audit observation , stated (June 2022) that the 
Company would explore and develop a robust documentation system. 
(G) Verification of polymer delivered on weigh bridge 
The Company has four weigh  bridges out of which two weigh  bridges are dedicated to 
weighment of tankers at the time of delivery of 
hydrocarbons. The remaining two weigh 
bridges are located at material store and 
between polymer loading point  and exit gate 
for trucks. These two weigh bridges were 
meant to weigh material coming into store and 
delivery of polyme r. However, the weigh s 
bridges located at material store and between 
polymer loading point and delivery gate were 
never made operational.  
Consequently, the quantity of polymers sold are not weighed on weigh bridges. Instead, the 
Company dispatched polymers after manual counting, witnessed, and verified by different 
agencies including Central Industrial Security Force. Audit observed that had the Company 
practiced weighment of the trucks before and after delivery of polymers, it could have 
created an additional check that would have ensured that correct quantity of polymers was 
loaded in the trucks for delivery to customers. In this connection, it is worth mentioning that 
the Company found (March 2020) two trucks that were carrying 280 bags of polymers more 
than their authorised quantity. The valuation of these seven metric tonnes of polymers was 
₹5.93 lakh. Audit observed that had the Company practiced the weighment of trucks 
Picture 5: Bags of polymers kept at 
Product Transfer Department 


Report No. 2 of 2024 
25 
carrying polymers for delivery and recording of the same on SAP, it would have deterred 
such events as well as provided an assurance that the trucks were always loaded with correct 
quantity of polymers for delivery.  
The Management stated (March  2022) that the Company was following manual counting 
method for dispatch of polymers and the same was witnessed and verified by different 
agencies including Central Industrial Security Force. 
The Management’s reply may be viewed 
in light of the fact that weigh bridges were 
installed and the same should have been 
used at the time of delivery of polymers. 
The Ministry stated (June 2022) that 
Terminal Automation System system was 
configured only for loading of liquid 
products/liquid hydrocarbons. However, 
The Ministry’s reply does not address the reasons for non -automation of weighment of 
trucks carrying polymers both before and after loading to automatically determine the 
quantum of polymers loaded in each truck and reconcile the same with polymers dispatched 
recorded in SAP.  
(H) Inability to create single source of data 
The Company, through “ Exaquantum” software 23, automatically records the quantity of 
polymers it sends to packaging department and the number of bags that are filled and 
included in pellet. At the packaging department (also responsible for transport and delivery), 
the number of bags of polymers are physically counted and recorded on SAP through t-code 
MIGO. When production data for polymers is sought, the Management uses a customised t-
code ZSDPRODUCTION_V in SAP to report the same. The table below shows production 
data for polymers recorded on Exaquantum data generated by the Management from SAP 
using customised t-code ZSDPRODUCTION_V and the production  data recorded through 
MIGO by packaging department and stored in SAP standard table MSEG. 
 
 
 
 
 
23  This software gets the data from Distributed Control System. It is a standalone software and cannot be 
accessed over network, unlike that for SAP. 
Picture 6: Unused Weighbridge near PTD 


Report No. 2 of 2024 
26 
Table 1.2: Statement showing multiple values for quantity of production of  
LLDPE* and HDPE** in each year. 
Year  Source Production 
of LLDPE 
& HDPE 
(At the 
point of 
bagging in 
PTD (A)) 
Quantity of LLDPE & 
HDPE Packed 
(At the point of 
pelletiser in Product 
Transfer Department 
(PTD) (B)) 
Wastage/sweep 
etc 
=(A-B) 
2018-19 Source: Exaquantum 
Software Data 
2,22,995 2,22,628 367 
Source: Using SAP T-code 
ZSDPRO DUCTION _V 
2,35,417  6 
(SAP data 
manually entered 
on MIGO by 
PTD) 
Source: From SAP Table 
MSEG for movement type 
521 
2,17,798  
2019-20 Source: Exaquantum 
Software Data 
2,25,067 2,24,036 1031 
Source: Using SAP T-code 
ZSDPRO DUCTION _V 
2,35,308  19 
(SAP data 
manually entered 
on MIGO by 
PTD) 
Source: From SAP Table 
MSEG for movement type 
521 
2,41,051  
2020-21 Source: Exaquantum 
Software Data 
2,29,091 2,27,438 1,653 
Source: Using SAP T-code 
ZSDPRO DUCTION _V 
2,32,446  94 
(SAP data 
manually entered 
on MIGO by 
PTD) 
Source: From SAP Table 
MSEG for movement type 
521 
2,31,350  
* LLDPE - Linear Low-Density Polyethylene ** HDPE –High Density Polyethylene  
From the above table24, it is apparent that the data generated from each of the above source 
were at variance with each other. Audit observed that manual input of data, in absence of 
appropriate controls, cannot always ensure that records were correctly entered in SAP. On 
the other hand, automatic capture and recording of data into SAP would have resulted in 
real-time availability of correct data with single source.  
The Management, in their reply (March 2022), stated that Distributed Control System was 
not integrated with SAP  due to vulnerable exposure of process safety which may lead to 
disastrous consequences. However, the Company will review the risk and  explore future 
possibilities of integrating Distributed Control System with SAP.  
The Ministry, in their reply, stated (June 2022) that the Company would review and explore 
future possibilities of integrating Distributed Control System with SAP.  
 
24  Management could not provide the instrumentation reading on Distributed Control System for the years 
2016-17 and 2017-18. 

Report No. 2 of 2024 
27 
(I) Internal Controls and business processes not mapped on SAP 
While developing an Enterprise Resource Planning system, it is imperative that the required 
controls necessary to mitigate risks are configured into the E nterprise Resource Planning. 
During implementation, SAP can be configured to ensure that the necessary internal controls 
are in place and operational. During IS audit of the Company, it was observed by Audit that 
some key internal controls including delegation of powers applicable to the Company ’s 
operations were not configured in SAP. As a result, the necessary approvals were taken in 
files on paper trails and note-sheets. In this connection, Audit observed the following: 
i. The Company had a policy whereby credit exposure to a consignment stockist was 
determined based on the bank guarantee submitted by them. In one instance, the 
Company approved (March 2018) supply of polymers more than the exposure limit 
stipulated by the policy. Subsequently, the consignment stockist was unable to pay 
or return the stock to the Company . As of November  2021, ₹11.46 crore was 
outstanding for over three years from this consignment stockist. 
Audit observed that while maximum credit exposure limit was configured on SAP, 
the same could be manually overridden. SAP should h ave been configured to 
prevent such overriding. 
The Ministry/Management, in its reply  (June 2022/March 2022,) stated that there 
was no provision for maximum limit in the t-code. 
Reply of the Ministry/Management is to be viewed against the fact that the Company 
did not explore  the possibility of stopping the manual overriding of maximum 
exposure limit in t-code manually. 
ii. When supplies or deliveries are scheduled, the details of the vehicle assigned should 
be available for verification on a computer terminal at the gates by security 
personnel to independently assess the bona-fide purpose of such vehicles. This 
would also create a record for vehicle movement into and out of factory premises 
and provide an additional security. Audit observed that no computer terminals were 
available at gates. 
The Ministry/Management, in their reply  (June 2022/March 2022), accepted the 
audit observation and stated that implementation of such system at material gate 
would be explored. 
iii. Contracts with specific price variation clause were not separately identifiable on 
SAP. Price variation provisions are not mapped in SAP for automatic computation 
based on specified inputs. Audit observed that there were instances where price 
variation allowed on High Speed Diesel for transportation contracts was at variance 
from formulae stipulated in the contract. 

Report No. 2 of 2024 
28 
The Ministry/Management, while accepting the audit observation , 
stated (June 2022/March 2022) that they would explore the possibility with the help 
of SAP Original Equipment Manufacturer. 
Recommendation 8: The Company may implement Production Planning and Plant 
Maintenance module. Automatic input of source data may be prioriti sed to create single 
source of data.  
1.6.4 Monitoring and Evaluation 
1.6.4.1  Master File Changes 
The purpose of master file controls is to ensure the ongoing integrity of the standing data 
contained in the master files. It is vitally important that stringent ‘security’ controls should 
be exercised over all master files. These include the establishment  of adequate procedures 
over amendment of data, comprising appropriate segregation of duties and authority to 
amend being restricted to appropriate responsible individuals and regular checking of 
master file data to authori sed data, by an independent respo nsible official. In this regard, 
Audit observed following: 
• The Company  did not have a documented policy, procedure or method of 
evaluation of changes made to master tables. 
 The Ministry/Management stated (June 2022/March 2022) that Standard Operating 
Procedure for changes in the master table would be prepared. 
• One user had the authorisation of making changes in the bank master and creation 
of bank key while also having authorisation to make changes in vendor master and 
customer master. Therefore, risk of fraudulent transaction could not be ruled out. 
The Ministry/Management, in their reply (June 2022/March 2022), stated that the 
point was noted and the authorisation for changing the vendor and customer master 
data and bank master data would be reviewed for further strengthening the internal 
control system. 
• From April 2016 to September 2021 total 53,208 changes (create and edit) had 
been made in the vendor master by 16 users. It was further noticed that one user 
had authorisation of t-codes XK01 and FK01 for creation of vendors as well as t-
codes of F-40 and F-53 for making payment to the vendor. From April 2016 , the 
said user had made total 3,879 number of changes in the vendor master. 
The Management accepted (March 2022) that it had al lowed multiple users to 
create/change Vendor Master Data, however, the same was not documented. The 

Report No. 2 of 2024 
29 
reply was silent on the fact that a single user had been authori sed to both create 
vendor as well as to make payment to vendor. 
The Ministry, in their reply, stated (June 2022) that there was no case where single 
user had been authorised to create vendor as well as to make payment to vendor. The 
reply of the Ministry was factually incorrect as during inspection, Audit found that 
one user with authorisation to create vendor as well as payment to the vendor.  
• General Ledger accounts master data is very critical in SAP as the entire transaction 
postings are based on General Ledger accounts. Any changes to General Ledger 
accounts data might be of interest to auditors from audit perspective. During test  
check, it was observed by Audit that one user had changed General Ledger line items 
six times from the year 2016. However, specific changes were not documented. In  
the absence of proper documentation, Audit could not vouchsafe that the changes 
were bonafide and necessary. 
The Management accepted (March 2022) the observation and noted for future compliance. 
The Ministry also endorsed (June 2022) the views of the Management.  
1.6.4.2  Periodical review 
As per the Company’s IT policy, the Company was required to conduct a SAP functional 
audit and a technical audit covering the entire IT infrastructure at least once in every two 
years. However, it was observed that no such audit was conducted till December 2021. 
Moreover, the activities of C hief Information Security Officer of the Company should be 
reviewed by the Chief Information Officer or other senior authority. No such reviews were 
carried out till December 2021. 
The Ministry/Management accepted the observation and assured ( June/March 2022) that 
SAP functional audit and technical audit covering the entire IT infrastructure would be 
carried out at least once in every two years. 
Recommendation 9: Internal control may be mapped in SAP itself and SAP functional 
and technical audit may be carried out at the earliest. 
1.6.5 Future vision and way forward for the Company’s implementation of SAP 
Due to rapid technological changes in the IT domain, there shall always be some gap in 
implementing the latest developments. The Company  may ensure that the various 
components of the technology stack are upto date, fully supported by the concerned Original 
Equipment Manufacturers and all relevant patches and update installations are current, as 
far as possible, for all the IT systems installed in the Company.  

Report No. 2 of 2024 
30 
The Management, in their reply, stated (June 2022) that upgrading of SAP Net Weaver 7.4 
to the latest version of SAP Net Weaver 7.5 had been initiated on all the SAP portal servers 
(Development, Quality and Production). Similarly, Oracle 11.2.0.4.0 had been upgraded to 
the latest version of Oracle 19.0C in the Sandbox, Development, Quality SAP E nterprise 
Resource Planning servers, while upgradation for Production server was under progress. 
The project for migration from Windows Server 2012 R2 to Windows server 2019 was also 
under process. The Company  was also working out on the technical  requirement with 
Original Equipment Manufacturers to integrate Terminal Automation System with SAP for 
bi-directional data transfer. The Management was also actively considering implementation 
of production planning and plant maintenance modules in SAP and integrating the same 
with the Company’s existing production control system. 
1.7  Conclusion 
The Company’s IT Governance was inadequate and SAP was utili sed as a repository of 
information, rather than complete management of business transactions as a fully 
implemented enterprise resource planning software. Moreover, the Company ha d not 
determined criteria and matrices to measure the success and failure of the IT project. The 
Company had an inadequate IT security and Business Continuity Plan. However, it needed 
to be tested for their efficacy at the time of crisis. Change management was inadequate and 
Table logging was not available. No policy was framed regarding role-based access to SAP 
and segregation of duties. Access to critical t-codes was not limited. Password policy ha d 
not been enforced. Automation of source data was inadequate and manual entries were 
allowed. Interface between SAP and other syste ms was not properly configured and other 
IT systems from which data could flow to SAP had also  not been properly configured. 
Internal controls were inadequately configured in SAP and we re on paper trails. SAP 
functional and technical audit s were also not conducted periodically to assess the efficacy 
of the system. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter II 
Information Systems Audit of the Plant 
Maintenance Module of SAP ERP in Oil and 
Natural Gas Corporation Limited 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Report No. 2 of 2024 
31 
CHAPTER II 
 
2.1 Introduction 
Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Limited (Company) is an Oil and Gas public sector 
undertaking (PSU) engaged in exploration and production of oil and gas. ONGC, under the 
project Information Consolidation for Efficiency (Project ICE) , implemented SAP ERP in 
October 2003 with 10 modules1. The total investment 2 on ICE excluding implementation 
cost amounted to ₹81.50 crore. The P lant Maintenance (PM)  Module is one of the 10 
modules implemented in the Company. The PM Module is used to maintain the master data 
of Equipment/Technical systems and map the maintenance processes to facilitate tracking 
of equipment history (technical and financial) and provide information for analysis and 
decision making at unit as well as organisation level. The different processes mapped under 
PM Module include maintenance planning and scheduling, unplanned maintenance, 
refurbishment processes and work permits.  
The SAP-PM Module was implemented in ONGC during the year 2003. Due to lack of 
conversance and the optional nature  of its usage, even the initial benefits could not be 
sustained. A second attempt was made in 2015 to revive it fully, under the project 
IMPACT3, which was implemented in consultation with M/s Boston Consulting Group 
(BCG) in offshore plants. It was later decided to implement it in onshore area also in phased 
manner as Computerised Maintenance Management System (CMMS).  
Many of the equipment identified by the Company as critical for its operations had 
surpassed their useful life determined internally  (eight out of 15 critical equipment 
categories exceeded their prescribed life as detailed in Annexure II), thereby emphasising 
the need for proper maintenance to minimise production/process interruptions.  
The objectives of PM Module implementation at ONGC were to: 
• standardise maintenance business processes across organisation; 
• integrate maintenance business processes with other functions; 
 
1  Financial (FI), Controlling (CO), Material Management, Plant Maintenance, Project Systems, 
Investment Management, Asset Management, Treasury, Sales and Distribution, Business Information 
Warehouse. 
2  Cost of hardware, software, networking etc. 
3  Improving Maintenance Practices through Accelerated Capability-building and Transformation. 
Information Systems Audit of the Plant Maintenance Module of SAP 
ERP in Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Limited 

Report No. 2 of 2024 
32 
• improve quality of information, data transparency; 
• achieve optimisation of available resources; and 
• reduce time taken for procurement/issuing material and planning. 
As against the expenditure under the head Repairs to Plant and Equipment of ₹1 ,281.16 
crore as per the Profit & Loss Account statements for 2020 -21, the PM order cost for the 
same period was available for only ₹99. 22 crore.  This indicates  that all the repairs and 
maintenance costs do not flow from Plant Maintenance Module and there is partial 
utilisation of the Module. The Compliance Audit Report No. 19 of 2021 of the Comptroller 
and Auditor General of India on ‘Water Injection Operations in Western Offshore, ONGC’ 
had earlier brought out status of maintenance of equipment used in water injection and their 
impact on the operations. The Report touched upon the sub -optimal utilisation of PM 
Module with regard to equipment used for water injection (Annexure III).  
2.2 Audit Objective, Scope and Methodology 
The audit objective was to review the implementation and utili sation of the Plant 
Maintenance Module of SAP in ONGC to assess the: 
i) correct mapping of business rules and requirements of the Company; 
ii) controls in place to ensure reliability and integrity of data; and 
iii) effectiveness of Plant Maintenance Module as implemented in the Company. 
An Entry Conference was held with the Management on 27 October 2021 through video 
conference for explaining the Audit objective, methodology and criteria to be adopted.  
Audit methodology adopted included:  
• Collection of Data dump from the Company for the said period for transaction data 
and entire Master data and its analysis. Company provided data dump of the tables of 
PM Module master data and transaction data pertaining to the period April 2014 to 
August 2021.  
• Test of controls to determine reliability of internal controls.  
• The v erification of transactions from source documents (SAP data /other data 
maintained by the Company). 
• Evidence collection through Audit requisitions.  
The draft Audit Report was issued to the Management on 8 March 2022 and response was 
received on 30 March 2022. An Exit Conference was held with the Management on 31 

Report No. 2 of 2024 
33 
March 2022. The report incorporating Management responses was issued to Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas in April 2022 and the response of the Ministry was received in 
November 2023. The responses of the Management /Ministry have been considered and 
incorporated in the report.  
2.3 Audit criteria 
Audit criteria were drawn from  the Original Equipment Manufacturer ( OEM) norms for 
periodical maintenance /running hours /maintenance Allocation Chart , 
Policies/guidelines/Standard Operating Procedures adopted by the Company for critical 
equipment, Minutes of Top Management meetings and Business Blueprint4 document.  
2.4 Limitations to Audit  
The Human Resource related information5 provided to Audit was incomplete. The Monthly 
Performance Reports prepared by the locations (Plants) were not from the SAP system but 
maintained and reported manually . A single format was not followed and there were 
changes to the structure and information furnished across ONGC and within the same unit, 
over time. The information was also not available for the entire audit period. This made it 
difficult for Audit to combine the dat a and compare it across units/ study their trends and 
verify the data integrity.  
2.5 Audit findings 
Plant Maintenance module caters to both planned and unplanned maintenance activities. 
The Master data in module consists of Functional location, Equipment, Measuring Points, 
Task Lists and Maintenance Plans. The planned maintenance is scheduled based on ta sk 
lists created for an equipment category. Maintenance processing for unplanned tasks 
involves creation of maintenance notification, maintenance order and execution of work 
order. 
Audit findings based on the assessment of the PM Module utilisation have been elaborated 
in the ensuing paras. 
 
 
 
 
4  Business Blueprint is a detailed description of the Company’s business processes and system 
requirements at the time of implementation of the ERP.  
5  Audit requested for access to H uman Resource Module of SAP ERP. Training data was provided but 
details of employees posted in Maintenance was not furnished. In the absence of detail s of employees,  
Audit could not  compare data across units/study their trends and verify the data integrity . 

Report No. 2 of 2024 
34 
2.5.1 Mapping of business rules and requirements of the Company  
2.5.1.1 Observations on Master data creation and Maintenance - Asset Master Data  
The master data for the PM Module included Equipment, Functional Location, Measuring 
Points, Task lists, Bill of Materials and Maintenance Plans. The scrutiny of the master data 
of equipment6 made available to Audit revealed the discrepancies as detailed in table below:  
Table 2.1: Discrepancies in the master data of equipment 
Parameter Total 
records 
Discrepancy Impact 
Asset Number 
 
62,000 Field not filled in 60,671 
records (97.86 per cent) 
Asset numbers are the crucial 
link between PM Module and 
Asset Management of 
Financial Accounting  
Module. ERP software work 
on the basis of inter linkage 
between the modules. In the 
absence of these linkages, data 
flow is affected from one 
module to another.  For 
example, while Asset is 
retired in F inancial 
Accounting Module, the 
equipment continues to be 
shown as in service in PM 
Module. 
Manufacturer 
details and 
Model 
numbers 
51,546 Field not filled in 35,343 
records (68.57 per cent) 
Performance/downtime 
comparisons between 
manufacturers/similar models 
are not possible. 
Cost-centre 51,546 Field was blank in 8,155 
records in Equipment 
master (15.82 per cent)  
Could not be ensured that the 
costs are loaded to the 
appropriate cost- centre. 
Start up date 51,546 Field was blank in 49,761 
records in Equipment 
master (96.53 per cent) 
Start-up date is the date when 
the equipment operation 
started. In the absence of 
information, reports that rely 
 
6  Table on Equipment master and Warranty Master. 

Report No. 2 of 2024 
35 
Parameter Total 
records 
Discrepancy Impact 
on this data would show 
wrong results like MTBR 
(Mean time between Repairs). 
Business Area 23,866 Field was blank in 5,176 
records in Equipment 
master (21.69 per cent) 
In the absence of this data, 
complete linkage between PM 
Module and Finance Module 
could not be ensured.  
Warranty 
details 
51,546 
 
 
 
 
 
Vendor details, Warranty 
Date, Warranty end were  
not filled in all the 51,546 
records (100 per cent ) in 
Asset Master.  Audit test 
check of equipment also 
revealed blank warranty 
data. 
In the absence of warranty 
particulars, the controls 
regarding warranty 
management/cost-controls 
were not found functioning.  
Appropriate information 
message for Warranty check 
to be displayed at the time of 
creation of 
Notification/Maintenance 
Order during warranty period 
could not be generated.  
In the absence of relevant data, the controls mapped with the Master data were less effective 
or the linkage with other modules was not possible to that extent.  
The Management, in reply, stated (December 2021/March 2022) that the Equipment number 
was not made mandatory  in view of existence of sub -equipment and  an exercise to 
review/cleanse the master data asset wise is being taken up. Cost centre have been updated 
in 60,112 records.  
The Management assured to review and update Master data. However, in the absence of 
Asset number in Master data in PM Module, linkage may not be possible between PM 
Module and other Modules in the ERP. Equipment were not being retired in the PM Module 
even when related Assets  were removed in Finance Module. Also, d espite the availability 
of facility to capture the warranty details, reliance on manual check does not the serve the 
purpose of ERP implementation.  
The Ministry stated (November 2023) that an internal multi-disciplinary committee shall be 
constituted by the Company to formulate the broad guidelines  on interlinking of Finance 
Module with Plant Maintenance Module. The Company had initiated Asset condemnation 

Report No. 2 of 2024 
36 
mail trigger process in SAP system  wherein mails are sent for updation in PM Module, 
when an Asset is condemned . The Management had taken corrective action by deleting 
1,330 equipment which were reduntant, by incorporating manufacturer/model details in new 
equipment and updating in existing equipment (15,587), updating start -up date fields in 
48,431 records and steps wer e taken to reduce errors by incorporating drop down menu. 
The Ministry referred to the Management’s corrective action of incorporating system 
control for new equipment wherein warranty details are made mandatory. Technical 
Services of ONGC had initiated the review of Functional structural Hierarchy as well as 
cleansing and updating of Equipment master data asset-wise in a phased manner.  
The Ministry/Management’s reply may  be viewed in light of the fact that t he interlinkage 
of PM Module and Finance Module would be effective with proper linkage of equipment 
number in PM Module with the concerned asset number in Finance Module. 
Recommendation 1: It is recommended that along with the cleaning of equipment master 
data which should be done in a time bound manner,  all fields in master data like 
manufacturer details, start -up date, Asset numbers and warranty etc., may be filled up 
mandatorily. 
2.5.1.2 Measuring Points  
Measuring points describe the physical and/or logical locations at  which a condition is 
described (e.g., the compressor discharge pressure , running hour details of a rotating 
equipment etc. ). Measuring points can be either a parameter value or a counter.  
Measurement Readings are entered for the measuring point with reference to a specific time. 
Target values and Range of operations could be mentioned as part of master data 
accordingly. Notifications can be generated automatically if the value of the measuring 
reading exceeds the range specified in measuring point. Measurement and counter readings 
are stored in the system in the form of measurement documents. The measuring documents 
are the basis for performance-based maintenance planning.  
The Blueprint document 7 envisaged that Measuring point s were required for recording 
performance parameters like pressure, temperature, operating hours, vibration values, Parts 
per Million (PPM) etc., to document the condition of a technical object at a particular point 
of time. Various instrumentation items like temperature/pressure gauges, tachometer, hour 
meter, flow meter, speedometer and vibration probes are the different measuring points and 
counters, which are used for different types of equipment.  Condition and counter -based 
maintenance tasks are the forms of predictive/preventive maintenance, which would reduce 
the number of breakdowns of the technical objects. These measuring points could be used 
to trigger performance-based maintenance plans, performance evaluation of equipment and 
 
7  An IT blueprint document is a planning tool or document that an  information technology 
organisation creates in order to guide its priorities, projects, budgets, staffing and other  IT strategy-
related initiatives. 

Report No. 2 of 2024 
37 
creating warranty conditions. Discrepancies noticed in capturing measuring data are 
detailed in the table below: 
Table 2.2: Discrepancies in capturing measuring data 
Parameter Total 
records 
Discrepancy Impact 
Target 
value 
3,319 Field was blank in 3,315 
records (99.90 per cent) 
Control regarding the limits up to 
which the equipment could 
operate, is deficient. 
Equipment 3,319 Duplicates in Measuring 
point in 477 cases (14.37 
per cent) 
There could be only one measuring 
point against an equipment for a 
parameter and in case of multiple 
measuring points, the irrelevant 
ones had to be deleted.  This may 
impact the monitoring of the 
condition of the equipment. 
Audit observed that i n the absence of valid data, blank fields and counters in the master 
data, the effectiveness of the PM Module is undermined. 3 ,309 measuring points out of 
3,319 records, were only running hours and the balance being linear data related to 
pipelines.  
In the absence of master data creation of units for pressure, temperature, vibration values, 
particle count, these parameters could not be captured as envisaged in the Business 
blueprint. This diminishe d the utility of the SAP system especially from preventive 
maintenance perspective.  
The values other than running hours data aid in 
condition monitoring by capturing the data in the 
system and storing it at  a single point in the ERP 
system. This would benefit the Company from the 
perspective of preventive maintenance, Root Cause 
Analysis and for ensuring continuous operation.  
The Management stated (December 2021/March 2022) that measuring point for 
performance parameters have not been mapped in the system as ONGC has been following 
only preventive and periodic maintenance strategy.  
The Management reply  indicated sub-optimal utili sation of the SAP system . Review of 
measuring point discrepancies are required even for the periodic maintenance activities. In 
Good Practice 
In Hazira Plant, Vibration levels 
are being monitored and 
recorded as notifications by a 
separate Asset Integrity Cell for 
condition monitoring of the 
equipment. 

Report No. 2 of 2024 
38 
case of Uran Plant, Inspection section monitors the vibration levels, but the condition 
monitoring reports are recorded manually outside the PM Module.  
The Ministry stated (November 2023) that the work centres across ONGC has been 
sensitised to follow the good practices pointed out by Audit and policy guidelines were 
circulated (March 2022). The f easibility of developing and capturing measuring points, as 
suggested by audit, were explored for implementation.  However, due to system limitation 
and bulk volume of various parameters data to be monitored and captured in SAP system it 
was not recommendeded for implementation. 
The Ministry response indicates the sub-optimal utilisation of the PM Module. Presently, in 
the manual log sheet, daily and shift wise operation parameters are recorded against the 
target values by the field units of the Company. Audit recommendation is not fo r 
instantaneous and continuous capture of equipment parameters which may be resource 
intensive at this stage. Considering huge costs associated with breakdowns and disruption 
in operations, Company has to consider shifting gradually to preventive if not pr edictive 
maintenance at pilot locations by harnessing the available features in the PM Module. The 
condition monitoring needs to be progressively ensured through PM module to enable better 
control and assure timely maintenance.  
Recommendation 2: The Company should consider developing measuring points and 
start recording the parameters like vibration levels, pressure and temperature in the SAP 
PM Module daily to effectively utilise the ERP system from preventive and predictive 
maintenance perspective and better monitoring of maintenance activities. 
2.5.1.3 Assets retirements in master data of PM Module with impact on scheduling and 
Backlogs 
As per the process prescribed for equipment condemnation/scrap in the business blueprint, 
equipment identified for condemnation/scrap is dismantled from the functional location in 
the system and the user status of the equipment changed to “condemned”. The equipment 
is to be sent to stores  for inspection, transferred to scrap storage location and disposed off 
as per Material Management procedures.  
Audit observed that during the period April 2014 to August 2021, multiple equipment were 
retired from active use. In the absence of corresponding data of inventory number or asset 
number referenced in the equipment master, it was not possible for Audit to link this report 
with equipment master tables of PM Module.  
From the scrutiny of major equipment like  Compressors, Vacuum Pumps (12 records), 
Draw works (61 records), Blow out preventers (BOPs - 116 records), it was observed that 
these equipment were regularly retired from active use /scrapped as per the Asset Retired 
Report (Financial Module). The same were , however, not updated in the PM Module by 
way of changing the user status. In case of compressors, in 827 records out of 832 records, 

Report No. 2 of 2024 
39 
the status continu ed to remain as system healthy/ system installed despite around 5 4 sub-
equipment/equipment retired during 2014 -15 itself. The remaining five records have also 
not been marked for condemnation.  In the absence of updation of the status in the PM 
Module, these equipment were being shown as those in active use and their maintenance 
schedules were drawn up accordingly. This led to incorrect master data of equipment and 
impacted the planned maintenance /consumption planning and consequently the backlogs. 
This also led to incorrect reporting.  
The Management stated (January 2022 /March 2022) that the exercise of verification and 
cleansing master data had already started, trainings would also be conducted in phases to 
inculcate best practices of PM business processes among users for better utilisation of SAP 
PM Module. 
The Ministry stated (November 2023) that action has been initiated for identifying 
equipment already been condemned/in the process of condemnation for deactivating the 
same in PM Master data. System control through generation of automatic mail with asset 
number and corresponding equipment details has been implemented.  
The Management/Ministry reply needs to be seen in the light of the fact that in the absence 
of proper adherence to the procedures at field level, there is incorrect depiction of available 
equipment, continuance of redundant reports/data and incorrect reporting. Proper linkage is 
necessary between Financial Accounting Module and PM Module.  
Recommendation 3: The Management may ensure that there is time bound 
verification/cleaning of equipment data and necessary controls are built so that the 
dismantling procedure is adhered to.  Feasibility of integration of Asset accounting with 
equipment master may also be explored. 
2.5.2 Transaction data – Correctness and Completeness  
2.5.2.1 Ineffective utilisation of PM Module in capturing transaction data pertaining 
to Measuring Documents and Daily Progress Reports  
The measurement taken at a measuring point, or a counter is recorded as a measurement 
document in SAP system. This data can be fed automatically or manually. In ONGC, the 
measurement data is fed manually.  
The running hours are required to be captured through the Daily Progress Report (PM- Daily 
Progress Report) by the maintenance team. It was observed that on certain days rather than 
through Daily Progress Report, a separate measuring document  was created . Out of 
9,64,410 measuring documents, 1,27,582 measuring documents (13.23 per cent) were not 
through the PM- Daily Progress Report. Audit highlighted that the measuring points with 
more than 500 entries were not through the PM- Daily Progress Report method.  

Report No. 2 of 2024 
40 
Blueprint document envisaged that PM - Daily Progress Report would capture parameters 
pertaining to maintenance while some  parameters were to be taken from Production 
Planning Module. The integration of PM- Daily Progress Report with PP- Daily Progress 
Report as envisaged was not complete. The Daily Progress Report was to be created on a 
daily basis. It was observed that there was delay in entering the Daily Progress Report in 
the system as could be observed from the difference between the system date (Time  stamp 
field) and the Daily Progress Report created date. Out of 5,08,834 Daily Progress Reports 
for the Audit period, in 6,359 records, the Daily Progress Reports were delayed by 4 days 
to 84 days. Of these, in 588 records, the Daily Progress Reports were delayed by more than 
a month (32 days to 84 days).  
The Management stated (December 2021) that the provision to enter Daily Progress Report 
within “the  three-day window ” has been incorporated  recently in 2019.  Still in some 
instances measuring document were created by user to regularise the Daily Progress Report 
due to lack of awareness . The Management added (March 2022) that compliance to daily 
report would be ensured and automatic escalation messages with respect to Daily Progress 
Reports would be incorporated with trigger points and trigger levels. The PM Daily Progress 
Report process was initiated in phased manner. The physical Daily Progress Reports were 
still in vogue to bridge the gap.  Moreover, there were certain other challenges, such as 
absence of tech -savvy personnel, especially in onshore well services, as well as the 
connectivity issues due to frequent rig movements. However, these shall be addressed in the 
ongoing exercise. 
The Management reply needs to be seen in the light of continuing reliance on manual 
records for daily reports which form the basis for PM processes , thereby defeating the 
purpose of adopting the ERP system.  Concentration of authori sations to few individuals 
(discussed in subsequent para 2.5.3.3) also led to backlog. Audit had observed an instance 
where a Process  Gas Compressor at a Platform was not functioning for 63 hours after 
tripping in June 2021. PM- Daily Progress Report were not recorded in the SAP system for 
17 days during that month . The maintenance of primary and daily records about the 
equipment needs to be looked from the perspective of preventive maintenance and health 
of the equipment. Audit recommended to ensure daily reporting through SAP system, 
consider interface with equipment control systems/SCADA to minimise manual 
interventions.   
The Ministry stated (November 2023) that as per ONGC, due to limited authorisations at 
installations, engagement of personnel in operational requirements and new equipment 
pending mapping, direct entries were allowed for Daily Progress Reports. Guidelines for 
compliance to daily progress reporting has been issued and escalation messages in case of 
non-compliance has been incorporated with trigger levels. Further integration of real time 
data with SCADA has been initiated and smart sensors are being installe d for integration 
with SCADA in case of standalone systems.  

Report No. 2 of 2024 
41 
Audit acknowledges the positive response by the Management in ensuring daily reporting 
and automatic escalation to highlight non-compliance and the assurance for integration with 
SCADA which would minimise manual interventions in recording performance parameters/ 
exception events. 
Recommendation 4: Adherence to daily reporting within the window made available 
through the SAP system must be ensured for control purpose and to avail the benefits of 
the PM Module across the organisation. Interface with equipment controls/SCADA8 may 
be considered wherever feasible to minimi se manual interventions in capturing 
performance parameters/exception events. Responsibility may be fixed in case of delay in 
daily reporting. 
2.5.2.2 Transaction data deficiencies in Maintenance Orders 
Maintenance Order is used to plan tasks regarding the type, scope, dates  of maintenance 
activity and to monitor the execution of tasks.  A maintenance order is created with or 
without reference to the system notification. Maintenance orders are created, and based on 
the priority assigned by the planner; these orders are released. After material issue/purchase 
order as required, the work would be technically completed, and the business settlement of 
orders would be done once in a month.  In comparison to  the two offshore platforms, 
erstwhile operated by private JVs which had more than 24,000 equipment mapped in each 
of their SAP ERP system, the highest number of equipment mapped in ONGC platform was 
only 6,357. Only three platforms had more than 1,000 equipment mapped in them indicating 
the lackadaisical approach in the ERP implementation and usage.  
Out of 513 Plants in the PM Module, there were less than 1,000 orders in 449 Plants while 
one plant (Hazira) had created around 21 per cent  of all orders in the Company, which 
indicates varying level of acceptance from the end users of the Module. The PM Order types 
are used to group orders according to application components.  Realisation and subsequent 
processing options of orders are dependent on order types catering to different type of 
maintenance activity.  In ONGC , order types 9 PM 10 to PM 70 are available for plant 
maintenance as detailed in Annexure IV.  
It was observed that the order types were not properly adhered to, at the time of creation of 
such orders. Out of 8,72,309 records pertaining to PM40 (Preventive Maintenance orders) 
6,490 records were maintenance orders for repairs /failures/trips which were not to be 
recorded under preventive maintenance but under PM15 Malfunction reports.  Incorrect 
order types affect subsequent controls and flow of data for preventive maintenance of the 
equipment.  
 
8  Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition  
9  The numbering is kept with some gaps for future usage. 

Report No. 2 of 2024 
42 
It was further observed that i n 1 1 onland locations, there were very  high number of  
unplanned orders as compared to planned orders, show ing lack of preventive maintenance 
as detailed in Annexure V. Planned maintenance is expected to reduce breakdowns and 
unplanned repairs. However, large number of unplanned orders  as against planned orders 
indicate gaps in the actual maintenance in those locations. 
The Ministry stated (November 2023) that Company would be issuing guidelines for 
compliance of proper order types. Review of existing and creating new maintenance plans 
for all critical equipment across ONGC has been initiated. In future, such discrepancies 
would be taken care of by regular monitoring at ONGC’s Asset level.  
The Management/Ministry accepted the observation.  
2.5.2.3 Delay in business closure of completed maintenance orders 
The business closure of maintenance orders has to be done within the same month of 
technical closure, so that the costs are absorbed within the financial period. It was observed 
that there were undue delays between technical completion of orders and their business 
closure. 88 per cent of the cases were delayed beyond 365 days (7,23,609 cases) with a 
possible impact on the financial accounting of th at particular period. The cost (value) of 
such delayed orders was estimated to be ₹604.09 crore 10. 2,45,525 orders which were 
technically completed during the period January 2014 to August 2021 were yet to be closed 
(March 2022) with the business completion. 
The Management stated (January  2022/March 2022) that most of the anomalies in Order 
type were in the maintenance order s created during the initial period.  After imparting 
training to the end user s such anomalies or gaps in the system have reduced considerably.  
However, still an exercise shall be taken up to bridge such gaps by regular monitoring from 
the competent authorities at Asset level.  More than 70 per cent of the orders for critical 
equipment were now auto-generated and they were in the process of review of existing and 
new maintenance plans for all critical equipment across the plants of ONGC. At the time of 
period closing, all the PM orders are analysed and Finance and Controlling Modules were 
reconciled. However, a background program will be scheduled for updating CLSD11 status 
after settlement of cost for the period.  
The Management further stated (March 2022) that as per the action plan for review of PM 
Module master data, preparation/review of standard task lists and maintenance plans along 
with their scheduling for all critical equipment would be done by March 2023. Due diligence 
shall be done to fix up desirable ratio of planned/unplanned orders and guidelines revisited.  
 
10  Considering the cost estimate available at MC18 report for maintenance orders during the audit 
period. 
11  Closed (Business Completion status after Technical Completion of maintenance order). 

Report No. 2 of 2024 
43 
The Management assured to implement a background process to update the closed status 
for those orders after settlement of their cost, and review of task lists and maintenance plans. 
However, the fact remains that in the absence  of proper maintenance plan, the preventive 
maintenance schedule was jeopardised.  
The Ministry stated (November 2023) that guidelines are already in place for maintenance 
compliance to be above 95 per cent . Adherence with preventive maintenance plan will 
automatically reduce the unplanned breakdown orders. Further due diligence would be done 
to fix up the desirable ratio.  
The Management/Ministry accepted the audit observation.  
Recommendation 5: To ensure reduction in unplanned orders, the desirable ratio of 
planned/unplanned orders may be notified for work centres and monitored through the 
PM Module. Responsibility may be fixed in case of non-adherence to maintenance plan. 
2.5.2.4 Ineffective utilisation of PM Module as Root Cause Analysis reports are not 
generated/distributed in PM Module 
Root Cause Analysis is done for equipment failures to understand the reasons for failure. 
The external consultant12 report stated (December 2012) that Root Cause Analysis process 
was not followed stringently /discontinued in the Company and a method to fix 
accountability on persons for the Root Cause Analysis  outcome was absent. Root Cause 
Analysis process re-design and guidelines for conducting the Root Cause Analysis  were 
discussed in the Consultancy Report.  The report recommended that data capture for Root 
Cause Analysis would happen via SAP (linked to break down work order).  Root Cause 
Analysis will be conducted for break downs of critical equipment based on parameters of 
repair cost, production loss, environmental /safety impact and recurrence of fault with 
threshold limits. The Root Cause Analysis  template was to be filled out by Maintenance 
manager within 72 hours of the closure of the breakdown work order and in case of delay, 
the matter would be escalated to Head Offshore/Onshore Maintenance. A circular issued by 
Corporate Technical services in July 2020 reiterated the need for failure analysis as a tool 
to prevent recurrence of failures including avoiding premature failures of equipment. The 
detailed failure report including Root Cause Analysis were to be furnished within one month 
from the date of failure. 
Audit observed that ZPMRCAREP – a customised report for reporting Root Cause Analysis 
was developed by the  in-house ICE team , but data table furnished by the Company 
contained only two records since inception (October 2003) to August 2021, of which , in 
only one notification , the details were available.  Considering the number of Breakdown 
orders (7 ,760) generated during the audit period 13, t he number of failures which would 
 
12  Boston Consulting Group. 
13  PM Order type- PM10. 

Report No. 2 of 2024 
44 
qualify for the Root Cause Analysis14 ought to be significantly higher. In the absence of the 
data in the SAP system , it could not be ensured that the learnings /preventive actions were 
implemented across the work centres in the organisation having such equipment with 
similar make /model. Timely identification of root cause,  fixing of accountabilities and 
adoption of preventive steps across the organisation could not be ensured.  
The Management stated (January/March 2022) that Root Cause Analysis is generally 
carried out for critical equipment especially in case of premature failures.  It was ensured 
that the recommended learnings were shared and implemented  across the concerned work 
centres through mail/ONGCREPORTS portal etc. The Root Cause Analysis format in SAP 
System would be reviewed and guidelines would be issued for future compliance. 
The Management reply may be viewed in light of the fact that due to absence of data in the 
SAP system, timely identification of root causes, fixing of accountabilities and adoption of 
preventive steps across the organisation could not be ensured.  
The Ministry in its reply (November 2023) stated that the Root Cause Analysis  format, 
criteria and process have been reviewed through an internal committee and necessary 
modifications have been implemented in the system as per revised format of Root Cause 
Analysis report along with recommended signatory levels and authorisations.  
Recommendation 6: The Management should clearly fix  the criteria for conducting a 
Root Cause Analysis and ensure that Root Cause Analysis  reports are recorded in a 
suitable reporting structure in the PM Module. 
2.5.2.5 Non-utilisation of customi sed reports for Logbook and continu ed reliance on 
Manual records  
The Logbook in PM Module is an easy-to-use tool to log daily maintenance activities for 
equipment like malfunction information, operating data, periodic inspection data, solutions 
adopted and maintain equipment history. The log notifications of defects can be used to 
generate maintenance orders and the maintenance completion can be certified.  
ONGC work centres continue to maintain physical logbook of equipment for operation and 
maintenance. The maintenance logbook contains maintenance history of the equipment 
including details of equipment shutdown, overhauls, trips and the rectifications adopted. As 
mentioned earlier, Daily Progress Reports are also maintained by the operation team. 
It was observed that Logbook feature had not been enabled in more than 50 plants out of 
total 51 3 plants. Even in those plants where it was maintained, the se were blank 
entries/entries with minimum details. The notification/order numbers were not available. 
 
14  As per the threshold parameters provided by consultant Boston Consulting Group . 

Report No. 2 of 2024 
45 
The table data furnished by the Company did not contain the equipment number /status of 
the log in most of the cases (completed/in process).  
Audit also observed that Input control was not 
available as incorrect dates like 2100/2201  were 
observed in some log date fields . Similarly, 
activities not pertaining to maintenance were also 
found entered in these logbooks (Sagar Bhushan – 
“Baryte taken from supply vessel”). The log entries 
were not updated and continued to be shown as 
“INPC” (in process) even after a lapse of more than three years from entry.  
The Management stated (February/March 2022) that emphasis has been from streamlining 
of master data, to fo llowing PM processes of Orders/notifications and  implementation of 
Daily Progress Reports. Efforts had been made for acquaintance of users with SAP PM Log 
book through trainings.  
The Management also stated that suitable validation for logbook date is done. The feasibility 
for simplification of the process to maintain logbook would be checked, so that it is 
automatically fetched and reflected as an entry in the logbook of the respective equipment 
during the SAP (S4/HANA) upgradation. However, an exercise shall be taken up to bridge 
such gaps by sensitising the end users about this pivotal feature and regular monitoring from 
the competent authorities at asset level. The Management assured to make efforts to avoid 
multiple data entries towards automatic fetching of data from inputs within the module and 
regular monitoring. 
The Ministry stated (November 2023) that the logbook process was deliberated by an 
inhouse committee of the Company and it was decided to have single point of entry through 
PM Daily Progress Reports (DPR) and log book process has been incorporated in PM DPR 
process. Separate report for log book is being developed and guidelines being issued.  
The Management/Ministry reply may be viewed in light of the f act that the availability of 
information of maintenance history of the equipment, shutdown, overhauls, trips and the 
rectifications adopted may have to be ensured in the system to provide complete 
maintenance details of the equipment. 
Recommendation 7: The Company may ensure that the primary source of information 
like log books is maintained through PM Module for reliability, easy availability and from 
the perspective of preventive maintenance.  
Good Practice 
In case of Dahej C2-C3 Plant, the 
logbook entries were found 
exhaustive and for almost all 
major equipment. 

Report No. 2 of 2024 
46 
2.5.2.6 Static equipment and safety critical equipment coverage in PM module  
Work centres denote th e critical equipment with moving parts (Pumps, Compressors, 
Turbines etc.) as Rotary equipment and those with no moving parts as static equipment 
(Filters, Knock out Drums etc.).  In ONGC, maintenance of static and rotary equipment is 
handled by different groups - rotary equipment by the maintenance team, and static 
equipment by production/process team. The static and rotary maintenance teams report to 
different heads at Platform and Base. The gaps in the maintenance organisation structu re 
were identified by the external consultant and integration of activities in static and rotary 
maintenance was recommended.  
The maintenance issues , if any, in the static equipment critically impact the downstream 
rotary equipment e.g., filters to protect the pump.  The business blueprint stipulated that 
master data was required for all objects which can be installed /dismantled from a location 
and those for which a maintenance plan was needed. Out of 1 ,42,978 equipment, 8 ,654 
equipment were denoted by the Company as static equipment in the IT system based on the 
Authorisation group. Audit observed that there were no corresponding task lists15 for 5,673 
static equipment. Out of those, 724 equipment were marked as ‘A’ category equipment 
signifying that their non -availability had a high impac t. In the absence of task lists, the 
scheduled maintenance plan for these 5,673 equipment could not be ensured.  
The Executive Co mmittee, in its 507 th meeting, approved the policy regarding Safety 
Critical Equipment across the organi sation in April 2018.  Accordingly, a list of Safety 
Critical Equipment was to be mapped with their maintenance schedules. Provision exists in 
the system for t he maintenance plan in PM Module to be based on parameters other than 
the running hours for static equipment (time -based/condition-based). The Safety Critical 
Equipment policy stipulates the intervals and the inspections to be done fo r various safety 
valves. The Management stated (February 2022)  that the static equipment  were 
maintained/inspected when the associated processes/ trains were under shutdown (Boiler 
shutdown/Process Gas Compressor shutdowns etc.).  
Thus, i n the absence of regular maintenance/inspection data in the system , the timely 
maintenance of these equipment could not be ensured.  Even in the monthly maintenance 
reports, the static equipment were not covered. The time-based maintenance schedule was 
not available in the PM Module for the above equipment.  
The Management stated (February 2022) that the maintenance of static equipment is under 
process managers, as maintenance of such critical static equipment may involve planned 
process shutdowns due to non -redundancy. All the maintenance activities pertaining to 
process equipment (static as well as rotating) are carried out with mutual coordination and 
consultation. The gaps in the classification field of Authorisation groups in onshore 
 
15  Task lists contain a series of individual maintenance activities which has to be performed repeatedly.  

Report No. 2 of 2024 
47 
locations shall be identified and reviewed under upcoming exercise.  In onshore surface 
installations mapping of static equipment, there are gaps mainly due to lack of availability 
of relevant data and relatively less -tech savvy manpower engaged in maintenance of these 
static equipment. Calibration and PMS records for the production critical static equipment 
are being physically maintained at asset level.  
The Management added (March 2022) that t he gaps relevant to scheduled maintenance 
plans for static equipment especially for production critical equipment in onshore areas will 
be bridged through upcoming exercise . Around 10,603 equipment have been classified as 
safety critical equipment and mapped with 3 ,049 associated maintenance plans.  Mapping 
and classification of safety critical equipment is ongoing exercise expected to be completed 
in due course.  
Recommendation 8: The Management may conduct a review of static equipment which 
are critical from operational/process perspective and map them with maintenance plans 
accordingly. 
The Ministry stated (November 2023) that the audit recommendation has been noted by the 
Company for compliance and gaps are being identified. Around 4,709 numbers of 
equipment were identified and classified as static in the system. The mapping of static 
equipment across ONGC is being carried out along with the maintenance plan for those 
equipment with a likely completion by January 2024.  
The Management/Ministry accepted the audit observation. 
2.5.3 Ineffective utili sation of PM Module and user acceptance of PM Module –
Manpower issues 
2.5.3.1 User authorisations and Training of Maintenance Personnel 
The Management informed that during the period 2015-2019, 500 persons had been trained 
in PM Module. Of these only three per cent of the mandays were imparted to the staff below 
the level of E0, while the rest 97 per cent pertains to Executives/Officers. This needs to be 
seen against the fact that 42 per cent of the staff 16 posted in the field were below the E0 
level.  
Audit did not have access to generate HR reports pertaining to details of personnel posted 
at Maintenance Plants across ONGC. However, it was observed in audit that o ut of 1,180 
officers/staff posted for maintenance duties in Mumbai Offshore, 665 persons had no PM 
Module authorisation. Even considering only officers (E0-E9), 311 officers (26.35 per cent 
of those engaged in maintenance) did not have any PM Module authorisations.  
 
16  Mumbai High Asset in year 2016 

Report No. 2 of 2024 
48 
Optimal usage of SAP ERP system was not found among the manpower engaged in 
maintenance. The continuance of manual registers /manual returns indicates that 
maintenance work process was not carried out through the SAP ERP system even when the 
facility is available. Absence of authorisation to even officers indicates lack of seriousness 
on the part of the Management in ensuring workflow through the ERP system.  
The Management stated (March 2022) that  in ONGC, SAP PM authori sation is generally 
given to Executive/Officer level employees. However, E-learning course under Company’s 
portal is available for all levels.  Since the year 2015, 500 maintenance persons have been 
trained in PM executive roles.  Apart from these, 165 persons from various work centres 
were identified and trained as maintenance planners.  The priority of sustaining operations 
through actual maintenance over virtual maintenance makes it difficult for PM module 
compliance to be made mandatory in nature. 
The Management reply needs to be seen in the context of deficiencies pointed out earlier in 
the PM Master data maintenance, transaction data inputs and the utilisation of the Module 
(Para 2.5.1, 2.5.2 and 2.5.3). The ERP benefits would not be reaped unless the maintenance 
activities are routed through the system and the objectives for PM Module implementation 
would remain to be achieved. 
2.5.3.2 Incorrect data in Manpower utilisation reports 
One of the Key Performance Indicators recommended by the Consultant17 appointed by the 
Company was for manpower utilisation. The data source were the maintenance orders from 
SAP system  and it was based on the manhours used for maintenance against available 
manhours and this report was recommended to be part of the M anagement Information 
System furnished periodically. Audit analysis found that the customised report prepared for 
viewing manpower utilisation gave erroneous results like zero/1,000 per cent utilisation. As 
such, these results appeared unreliable.  
Such unusual numbers have rendered a very effective tool unreliable due to data integrity.  
The Management stated (March 2022) that the customised report developed in 2003 is not 
being used now. Alternatively, Manpower Utilisation Report was developed under Project 
IMPACT which is available with Daily Progress Reports ( ZPMDPR). Incorrect data in 
Manpower Utilisation Report is mainly due to the unreliable man hour data entered in the 
maintenance orders. Lack of awareness among the end users about the repercussions of 
incorrect man hours against the operation/activities is the main reason for such gaps.  Such 
gaps shall be bridged through trainings and sensiti sing the user about this pivotal data as 
well as regular monitoring by the competent authorities at Asset level.  Moreover, all such 
 
17  Boston Consulting Group  

Report No. 2 of 2024 
49 
reports are planned to be reviewed during the process of SAP upgrade. Guidelines shall also 
be issued in this regard. 
2.5.3.3 Segregation of duties 
SAP prescribes separate roles for PM Module to ensure that the segregation of duties 
principle is not violated.  It provides for separate roles for creation, processing, display of 
notifications/orders/measurement documents , processing of historical /refurbishment 
orders, completion confirmation of orders and resource planning/allocation. The task of the 
maintenance worker is to carry out maintenance activities while resource allocation, 
processing of orders, completion confirmation is assigned to a responsible person higher in 
the hierarchy. 
Audit observed that multiple role authori sations were provided to same person across the 
work centres. In case of Uran , Hazira and Central Workshop Baroda , as many as 3 0 roles 
were authori sed to same person. Out of 19 ,923 records in the table containing role 
authorisations, 332 records had no username and 18 ,508 were found to be duplicates 
(employee IDs with multiple roles).  
Audit also observed that Daily Progress Report creation and executive roles, Daily Progress 
Report creation/executive and incharge maintenance roles were assigned to a single person. 
Maintenance incharge  roles were clubbed with other authori sations. This leads to a 
weakened segregation of duty and control issues. 
The Management stated (February 2022) that due to manpower constraints, in some work 
centres, multiple authorisations have been given to a single user, but only after getting the 
approval from competent authority. The Management further stated (March 2022) that t he 
need for review of various PM role authori sations is agreed and an exercise shall be taken 
up soon to review the multiple-role authorisations. Approvers would be sensitised through 
suitable communications to ensure correct role assignments in line with the assigned duties 
along with trainings in phases to inculcate among users the best practices pertaining to PM 
Module. 
The renewed efforts in training more personnel and assurance to review the multiple roles 
are acknowledged.  
Recommendation 9: (a) The Management may conduct a systematic and complete review 
of role authorisations so that the inbuilt controls of segregation of duties are maintained.  
(b) The Management, through proper training for officials and staff , may ensure  that 
maintenance work processes are carried out through PM Module only.  
(c) The Management may consider revisiting Maintenance SOPs to ensure that the 
maintenance work is carried out obligatorily through the SAP System.  

Report No. 2 of 2024 
50 
The Ministry stated (November 2023) that ONGC has taken corrective actions with respect 
to multiple authorisations in the two plants mentioned in Audit observation. With regard to 
other units, instructions were passed on to ensure the role assignments are as per  business 
requirements and training are conducted to imbibe the best practices pertaining to PM 
business processes for better utilisation of SAP PM Module.  
The Management/Ministry accepted the audit observation. 
2.5.4 Use of Key Performance Indicators  for effective utili sation of PM Module and 
the Management oversight  
2.5.4.1 Performance Measurement and Monitoring  
The Performance Management and Benchmarking Group of the Company formalises the 
Performance Contracts which are entered in the SAP system.  After mapping Key 
Performance Indicators and the targets , it is signed by Strategic Business Unit chiefs and 
Directors concerned.  
The Chief Technical Services office was entrusted (2016) with the overall responsibility of 
maintenance/upkeep of the equipment. Technical services sign a performance contract with 
concerned functional directors. The Management informed that there is no service level 
agreement entered by Technical Services.  
2.5.4.2 Key Performance Indicators for maintenance performance  
System availability and equipment availability are the Key Performance Indicators  
measured for the performance of Chief Technical Services.  The system availability is a 
metric that measures the availability of all units required at any given instance for optimum 
fulfilment of operational requirement.  Equipment availability measures the availability of 
individual equipment.  For the purpose of determining equipment /system availability , 
running hours of the equipment and its standby hours are considered as available hours. The 
Key Performance Indicator targets are 100 per cent for system availability and 95 per cent 
for equipment availability. Audit observed the following: 
• the Key Performance Indicators were not flowing from the PM Module or the SAP 
system but from the Monthly reports furnished to the Chief Technical Services 
office by the respective Plants /Assets/Basins maintained outside the system in 
Excel.  
• The equipment availability and system availability targets were found to be achieved 
in all the years. The monthly reports denoting the Key Performance Indicators were 
not made available for the entire audit period (April 2014-August 2021) and also not 
for all work centres.  It was observed that format for the monthly reports was not 

Report No. 2 of 2024 
51 
uniform across the work centres and even within the same work centre over the 
period.  
• Audit analysed the available Monthly Performance Report data with respect to data 
maintained in the SAP -PM Module and also other reports furnished to the Chief 
Technical Services office by the work centres.  The Key Performance Indicator  
achievement claimed by the work  centres were found to be based on unreliable 
manual reports. Instances were observed where equipment were denoted on standby 
even when under repairs as well as availability hours and cumulative hours were 
incorrect, Daily Progress Reports were  not recorded continuously when major 
equipment was under repair etc. (Details are in the Annexure VI and VII). 
• In the internal reports on analysis of decline of the fields of Neelam Heera Asset, it 
was observed that partial shutdown of 37 days in the field was effected during a 
Process Gas Compressor major overhauling. Subsequent to this incident, production 
loss of around 1,000 barrels of oil per day (20 per cent decline) happened in the Base 
wells18, which could not be regained at later date.  It was also cited by an 
International Domain Expert19, engaged for vetting the reserve position of the field, 
that operational shutdowns for any longer period posed a serious risk to production 
and such operational shutdowns needed to be optimised in future to reduce the risk 
of production loss in the matured field.  
Such prolonged shutdowns happen when there is no proper standby equipment in 
running condition in place which is amplified by continuing to operate the 
equipment beyond the specified running hour norms prescribed by the OEM. The 
standby position and consequently the unreliable reporting of equipment/system as 
available for operations during the intervening periods needs to be seen in the 
context of relying on manual data despite the daily entries in PM Module.  
• It was observed that the targets for equipment availability /system availability were 
not part of the Performance Contracts signed by the Assets /Plants. There is no 
percolation of the Key Performance Indicators  from the top to the work 
centres/groups responsible for equipment upkeep. 
The Management stated (March 2022) that;  
• The Technical Services w ere mandated as Corporate Maintenance Management 
Group in June 2016 and therefore, equipment availability and system availability 
targets had been included in Technical Services performance contract since 2016 -
17 onwards. The maintenance Monthly Performance Report system was introduced 
accordingly in August 2016 to facilitate regular monitoring.  The M onthly 
 
18  29 oil producing wells 
19  M/s Beicip Franlab 

Report No. 2 of 2024 
52 
Performance Report format was standardised since 2018. Once the Daily Progress 
Report compliance is achieved in the ongoing exercise, feasibility for automatic 
creation of Monthly Performance Report, capturing all the information from Daily 
Progress Report shall be explored.  
• Standby equipment are available against critical systems as a philosophy, to meet 
any operational exigency and maintain the desired system availability.  However, 
some time s, it happens that the equipment trips or production is affected due to 
various other reasons like process upsets /valve malfunctions /pipeline leakages, 
despite the equipment being in healthy condition and available for operation.  
Considering the availability of standby equipment, it is quite possible that system 
availability is 100 per cent, despite the equipment availability being low.  However, 
discrepancies as pointed out shall be checked, analysed in respect of standby 
availability, and will be taken care accordingly.  
• Observation with regard to continuous stand by of equipment is well -taken. The 
same shall be checked and accordingly respective work centres shall be suitably 
sensitised. 
Continued reliance on manual reporting must be seen from the perspective of maintenance 
requirements of aged equipment, reliable information on their performance status and 
timely intervention to minimise process upsets.  
Recommendation 10: The Management may ensure that the Key Performance Indicators 
are transmitted to the work centres who are ultimately responsible for maintaining the 
equipment/releasing the production equipment for maintenance purpose. The 
Management may also ensure that Key Performance Indicators flow from verifiable and 
standard data of the Plant Maintenance Module. 
The Management added (March 2022) that the audit recommendation is being taken up with 
Top Management for Key Performance Indicator transmission to assets. The Ministry stated 
(November 2023) that automatic generation of PM Monthly Performance Report  in SAP 
PM was implemented by ONGC in July 2023. The Ministry futher stated that ONGC is in 
the process of implementation of Audit recommendation after internal consultation.  
The Management/Ministry accepted the audit observation.  
2.5.4.3 Maintenance data in PM M odule not aiding Repair versus R eplacement 
decisions  
The repair versus replacement decision depends on information about equipment health, its 
intended repair cost, the carrying cost including repair costs till date and its replacement 
cost.  

Report No. 2 of 2024 
53 
Audit observed that the PM Module reports were not used by the Management to aid their 
decision making. This could be attributed partially to the deficiencies in data and reports.  
There is a SAP standard report for analysis of manufacturer-wise/equipment-wise/year-wise 
maintenance data for a particular period. The notifications created, breakdown reported, 
orders created, planned costs, actual costs etc. , are indicated in the report. Audit analysed 
the report for a class of equipment - Motors. It was observed that same manufacturer had 
multiple entries20 with slight difference in their names thereby making the manufacturer-
wise analysis erroneous. Also, the carrying cost of the equipment was not available in PM 
Module Reports to understand the lifecycle cost of the equipment at any point.  
In the absence of information about equipment health, its intended repair cost, the carrying 
cost including repair costs till date, PM Module is not used for the repair versus replacement 
decisions. 
The Management stated (March 2022) being a free text field, multiple entries exist. Such 
irregularities/deficiencies like duplicity in manufacturer /make/model shall be 
addressed/rectified in the ongoing review of equipment master data.  System controls shall 
be developed to select manufacturer from the drop-down list. 
Recommendation 11: Reports in PM Module that could aid the Management’s decision 
making for repairs/ replacements and for comparative analysis may be made available 
and suitably used. 
2.5.4.4 Management oversight  
The monitoring and management oversight through the PM Module were not prevailing as 
discussed below.  
A) Monitoring of Backlog 
The Maintenance orders (Planned and Unplanned) have a planned completion time frame 
and based on their priority, an inbuilt threshold (last allowed finish date) is also given. The 
back log of orders, if any, is worked out based on the difference between last allowed finish 
date and the report creation date.  
The Consultant 21 appointed by the Company for the Project IMPACT , in its report 
(December 2012), had prescribed Management Information System report through SAP 
System including Backlog reports for maintenance activities with weekly, monthly and 
quarterly periodicity along with the escalation matrix. The quarterly review  Management 
Information System dashboard recommended at Director level also included the backlog 
 
20  Manufacturer name had multiple entries, for example, Crompton, Crompton Greaves, Crompton Greaves Ltd 
(some other in Capital letters). 
21  Boston Consulting Group 

Report No. 2 of 2024 
54 
dashboard along with the major reasons for backlog orders, so that the same is monitored at 
Top Management level. Accordingly, a customised report was developed (June 2013) for 
PM Order backlog.  
Audit observed following discrepancies in the backlog generation and monitoring: - 
• The reasons  for backlogs were absent in 27, 38,166 out of 28,87,618 records  
(94.82 per cent) and thus, by not making the reasons field mandatory, the monitoring 
of backlogs was rendered ineffective. 
•  It was observed that out of 28,87,618 records, 1,14,644 records (3.97 per cent) had 
incorrect dates in the last allowed finish date field. Thus, due to lack of input 
controls, incorrect dates were entered in the last allowed finish date thereby making 
the backlog report incorrect. 
• Out of 28,87,618 orders, 4,213 were closed without technical completion.  
• Backlogs were measured as counts (running hours) and as days. The summary of 
backlogs after excluding the incorrect date entries in the last row, show ed that the 
backlog days ranged between one day to more than two years.  
• Out of 28,87,618 backlog records 22, 18,59,512 (64.39 per cent) were pertaining to 
high and very high priority. The backlog status was cross checked with the tripping 
details of the plants and it was observed that out of 28,87,618 backlog records, 5,107 
were breakdowns (Order type PM10 – after excluding incorrect dates) thereby 
signifying that even breakdowns were not attended on time.  
Considering the continuous operational requirement especially where there was no standby 
mechanism, such backlog levels need a review of the maintenance process /systems and 
closer monitoring. The summary of plant-wise backlog of breakdown orders  is given in 
Annexure VIII.  
The ineffective adoption of breakdown notifications/orders brought out earlier coupled with 
incorrect/blank entries in backlog data and discontinuance of the exception reports despite 
recommendations of an international consultant has rendered the manageme nt 
controls/maintenance monitoring through the PM Module ineffective. The fact that even 
breakdown orders continued to be unattended and under backlog for long duration indicates 
lapses in monitoring and timely interventions.  
The Management stated (January2022/March 2022) that open order status/backlog is being 
monitored using standard t-code: IW39 and customised report (ZPMSTATUS) other than 
Backlog Report. The reasons field shall be made mandatory after review  and instructions 
 
22  AFIH (Priority type) + zpmdprblog +AUFK (TECO/CLSD status) tables  

Report No. 2 of 2024 
55 
shall be issued in this regard. Necessary modifications will be done in customised Backlog 
Report regarding last allowed date . Most of the anomalies in backlog of orders are in the 
maintenance orders created during the period before implementation of Project IMPACT 
and Computerised Maintenance Management System . After imparting training to the end 
user such anomalies or gaps in the system have reduced considerably. However , still an 
exercise shall be taken up to bridge such gaps by regular monitoring from t he competent 
authorities at Asset level.  
The Management assurance for corrective action on customised Backlog Report for last 
allowed date field, assurance for filling the gaps in the backlog report and its adherence is 
noted. 
Recommendation 12: The Management may ensure that the escalation matrix is adhered 
to, through the system, for reporting the backlogs so that timely maintenance action is 
taken. Cleaning of old backlogs must be taken up on time bound basis so that monitoring 
of maintenance efforts could be effective. 
The Ministry stated (November 2023) that audit recommendation is accepted and escalation 
mechanism would be devised during S4 HANA upgradation  and various dashboards on 
equipment overhaul, replacement, D aily Progress Reports compliance and maintenance 
order compliance are under development.  
B) Management Dashboard 
Success of any IT system depends on the Top Management  involvement and initiative 
which ensures correctness and completeness of data fed and timely completion of pending 
work. SAP Business Information Warehouse provides data warehousing functions, a 
business intelligence platform, and a suite of business intelligence tools. On the basis of this 
analysis, businesses can make well -founded decisions and determine target -oriented 
activities. The Business Information Warehouse is the analysis system defined in the 
Company for Plant Maintenance Information System.  
Exception reports like Root Cause Analysis, backlogs of orders released, threshold reports, 
performance measurement system for scheduled compliance, backlog activities, manpower 
status, manpower effectiveness, breakdown analysis, manufacturer analysis, cost 
evaluation, mean time between repairs and mean time  taken to repair were some of the 
customised developments made during/after the implementation of the module relevant for 
Top Management decision making and timely interventions.  
The quarterly Management Information System review dashboard for Directors was 
suggested by the external consultant including the backlog dashboard along with the major 

Report No. 2 of 2024 
56 
reasons for backlog orders, equipment availability of critical equipment 23, backlog status 
(with average overshot and average days delay) and reasons, spares procurement lead times, 
inventory turnover and maintenance cost.  The consultant had also recommended standard 
reports on procurement lead time and Key Performance Indicators. Maintenance Dashboard 
were also generated for Director (Onshore) and Director (Technology & Field Services) 
pertaining to onland locations and for functional locations of rigs/vessels. 
To an audit query on dashboard/reports made available to Top Management , it was 
conveyed that a dashboard containing the relevant reports ( Business Information 
Warehouse - PM Reports Tab) was developed during 2006 -07 as part of initial 
implementation and subsequent system upgrade. Audit observed that the dashboards were 
discontinued with effect from February 2019. In the absence of access to and involvement 
of Top Management, it is unlikely that the initiative to utilise the PM Module effectively 
would percolate down the line.  
The Management stated (October 2021) that based on the present requirement by data 
owners/business heads, the revival of these reports/dashboard could be attempted. The 
Management stated that transaction code IW39 and customised report ZPMSTATUS were 
utilised to view backlog reports. It was observed during the field visit that even middle level 
management were not having PM Module access and maintenance planners were not 
designated in many locations.  
The Management further stated (February/ March 2022) that dashboard was available on 
ERP Central Component side under t-code: ZPMDPR and data was available till date except 
backlog status and reasons, which was discontinued as data was not getting properly 
updated. An in-built report shall be available for backlog status with escalation under SAP 
upgrade.  
Recommendation 13: The Top Management may utilise the Maintenance Dashboard for 
effective monitoring.  
The Ministry stated (November 2023) that the  Audit recommendation is accepted and 
maintenance reports/dashboard are being developed by the Company.  
2.6 Conclusion 
The Plant Maintenance Module was implemented in ONGC to improve maintenance 
practices and for ensuring timely maintenance activities.  
Many of the equipment identified by the Company, as critical for its operations , had long 
surpassed their useful life, thereby emphasi sing the need for proper maintenance to 
 
23  Process Gas Compressor, Turbine Generator, Mail Oil Pump, Main Injection Pump, Sea water lift 
pumps etc. 

Report No. 2 of 2024 
57 
minimise production/process interruptions.  ONGC initially  implemented the SAP – PM 
Module in 2003 but due to keeping it as optional for work process, the implementation did 
not yield the identified results . A second attempt was made from 2015 to implement it 
through Computerised Maintenance Management System. However, the implementation of 
the PM Module has been slow across the work centres with some plants yet to adopt the 
system fully even after 18 years of implementation of SAP ERP.  
There was sub-optimal and insufficient mapping of equipment in ONGC platforms which 
was in contrast with the mapping of equipment on two platforms operated by private JVs.  
There was partial implementation and adoption from the envisaged levels and manual data 
was still relied. Master data deficiencies, data multiplicity and incorrectness in customised 
reports were observed. Backlog monitoring or exception reporting through the system was 
not ensured. Unreliable manual data continued to be relied for performance monitoring.  
By allowing the system -based working to be non -mandatory and by not ensuring the 
performance targets linked with data flowing from SAP PM Module, there was lack of thrust 
from the Management to ensure that the benefits of the ERP implementation were achieved.  
The Ministry stated (November 2023) that audit observations for improved utilisation and 
better compliance of SAP PM Module have been well -taken and ONGC is committed to 
address all the issues raised , through an extensive exercise covering all the aspects and 
involving all the stakeholders.  
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi (Raj Ganesh Viswanathan) 
Dated: 22 March 2024 Deputy Comptroller and Auditor General  
                                                                       (Commercial) and Chairman, Audit Board 
 
 
 
 
 
Countersigned 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi (Girish Chandra Murmu) 
Dated:  22 March 2024   Comptroller and Auditor General of India 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annexures
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Report No. 2 of 2024 
 
59 
Annexure I 
[referred to in para 1.6.3.5 (E)] 
 
Statement showing difference in measurement of quantity of hydrocarbon delivered 
Month Total Delivery 
Order quantity 
(quantity 
desired to be 
loaded) (MT) 
Total Batch 
quantity 
(quantity loaded 
as measured in 
Mass Flow 
Meter) (MT) 
Net weight measured 
in Weigh Bridge 
(MT) 
Difference in 
measurement 
between Mass 
Flow Meter 
and Weigh 
Bridge (MT) as 
computed by 
Audit 
A B C D E (C-D) 
Apr-18 3,441.43 3,300.39 3,274.75 25.64 
May-18 3,344.54 3,202.27 3,188.99 13.28 
Jun-18 5,033.68 4,769.96 4,739.38 30.58 
Jul-18 6,077.77 5,728.91 5,738.42 -9.51 
Aug-18 3,654.22 3,494.48 3,479.07 15.41 
Sep-18 4,066.44 3,909.36 3,872.63 36.73 
Oct-18 4,674.03 4,428.94 4,397.17 31.77 
Nov-18 986.72 918.51 915.39 3.12 
Dec-18 3,159.00 2,976.42 2,945.29 31.13 
Jan-19 3,493.38 3,293.36 3,270.94 22.42 
Feb-19 4,859.10 4,636.69 4,612.47 24.22 
Mar-19 2,552.49 2,423.43 2,404.21 19.22 
Total 45,342.80 43,082.72 42,838.71 244.01 
Average Price (pre discount) ₹ 36,648.00 
Valuation ₹ 89,42,478.48 
 
  

Report No. 2 of 2024 
60 
Annexure II 
(referred to in para 2.1) 
 
Average age of critical equipment in ONGC against the norms adopted internally  
for replacement 
Plants/ Offshore/ 
Onshore 
Equipment Name Year of 
Commissioning 
Ageing of 
equipment 
(Years) 
Average 
age 
(years) 
Norms -
Equipment 
replacement 
age as per 
ONGC 
(years) 
Plants Onshore Air Compressor 1987 -2015 6 to 34 15.26 22 
Plants Onshore Pumps 
(Reciprocating/Centrifugal) 
1987-2018 3 to 34 10.09 16 
Plants Onshore Turbine 1984-2015 6 to 37 17.35 22 
Plants Onshore Off Gas Compressor 1988-2013 8 to 31 27.00 22 
Plants Onshore Propane Gas  Compressor 1987-2013 8 to 34 26.85 22 
Plants Onshore Compressor 1981-2015 6 to 41 21.48 22 
Off Shore 
Surface 
Air Compressor 1987-2017 4 to 34 11.78 10 
Off Shore 
Surface 
Alternator 1982-2020 2 to 40 27.42 20 
Off Shore 
Surface 
Gas Turbine 1989-2019 3 to 33 17.67 20 
Off Shore 
Surface 
Pumps (MOL/MIPs) 1982-2019 3 to 31 20.44 20 
Off Shore 
Surface 
Power Turbine 1982-2017 5 to 40 29.71 20 
Off Shore 
Surface 
Compressor 1983 -2019 3 to 39 19.25 20 
Off Shore 
Drilling 
Air Compressor 1985-2016 6 to 37 18.91 10 
Off Shore 
Drilling 
Alternator 1982-2019 3 to 40 16.27 20 
Off Shore 
Drilling 
Pump 1982-2012 10 to 40 32.83 20 
 
  

Report No. 2 of 2024 
 
61 
Annexure III 
(referred to in para 2.1) 
 
Highlights of observations on PM Module in Compliance Audit Report No. 19 of 2021 of 
the Comptroller and Auditor General of India on ‘Water Injection Operations in 
Western Offshore, ONGC’ 
• Equipment logs/ history of repairs/ make -wise performance of equipment could 
not be obtained from the Plant Maintenance module in the absence of data not 
being fed or due to lack of mapping. 
• In large number of cases, day -wise equipment availability data does not match 
with the monthly equipment availability data. 
• The equipment history, tripping details and monthly performance reports were 
maintained outside the SAP system.  
  

Report No. 2 of 2024 
62 
Annexure IV 
(referred to in para 2.5.2.2) 
  
Types of PM Orders 
  
 
Out of the 10,69,967 PM orders which were closed during the Audit period, the order 
type-wise break up were : 
Breakdown orders 7,760 Threshold orders 1,683 
Malfunction 16,503 Maintenance requests 1,30,479 
Modular repairs 92 Crisis management 1 
Preventive maintenance 8,72,309 Calibration orders 5,340 
Refurbishment 4,501 Refurbishment- workshop 27,639 
Refurbishment – OEM 3,016 Audit orders 644 
 
PM 10 Break down orders, PM 15 Malfunction orders, PM 20 Modular repairs,  
PM 25 Threshold orders, PM 30 Maintenance request orders,  
PM 35 Crisis management orders, PM 40 Preventive Maintenance,  
PM 45 Calibration orders, PM 50 Refurbishment orders,  
PM 55 Refurbishment orders – workshop, PM 60 Refurbishment orders – OEM/ External,  
PM 65 Audit orders, PM 70 PM orders for IMR activities. 

Report No. 2 of 2024 
 
63 
Annexure V 
(referred to in para 2.5.2.2) 
High Unplanned orders in 11 onland locations 
  
Year 
Order Type Engineering 
Services 
Ahmedabad 
Well Services 
Ahmedabad 
Engineering 
services 
Ankleshwar  
Engineering 
services 
Mehsana  
Mehsana 
asset 
Drilling 
services 
Baroda  
Engineering 
services 
Cambay  
Cambay 
Asset  
Cambay 
Forward 
base  
Central 
Workshop 
Sibsagar 
Agartala 
2014 Planned 50 1  14 156     137 44 
Unplanned 757 442 2,110 2,167 1,439  19  46 1,720 396 
2015 Planned 63 4 2 6 330     91 248 
Unplanned 714 315 1,444 2,483 1,937 1 37  45 1,580 909 
2016 Planned 107 173 1 20 260 1 1   112 181 
Unplanned 634 1,253 1,540 2,479 1,773 1 17 48 8 1,371 556 
2017 Planned 69 65  19 311   5  72 107 
Unplanned 754 584 1,163 2,052 1,781 4 9 45  1,435 299 
2018 Planned 72 128  8 243  1 3  69 2 
Unplanned 661 878 1,202 2,049 1,557  5 54  1,147 471 
2019 Planned 81 101 5 1 138   11  58 13 
Unplanned 587 867 1,377 1,533 1,271  7 91 15 992 613 
2020 Planned 27 26 1  143   17  58 2 
Unplanned 425 347 1,064 1,715 1,006 1 1 84  789 115 
2021 Planned 42 3 1  24   12  77 22 
Unplanned 762 324 1,485 1,815 809  2 119 2 1,579 32 
 

Report No. 2 of 2024 
64 
Annexure VI  
(referred to in para 2.5.4.2) 
 
Discrepancies in the Monthly Performance Report with SAP reports/other periodical 
reports 
The data was maintained in EXCEL and from the data provided by the company it was 
observed that uniformity was not maintained in across work centres and within same work 
centre over time.  
Asset/Complex Equipment Sub-
Equipment 
Reported 
Equipment 
Availability 
( per cent) 
Actual 
Equipment 
availability  
( per cent) 
Remarks  
Neelam Heera 
 
Turbine 
Generators 
Gas 
Turbines,  
Alternators 
100 0 to 89 Equipment were  
under maintenance 
and even  then 
during entire 
month, system 
availability was 
reported 100 per 
cent. 
 
Standby hours/ 
maintenance hours 
were denoted 
wrongly. 
Sea Water Lift 
Pumps  
Pump, Motor 100 0 to 85 
Process Gas 
Compressors, 
Turbine 
Generators  
 100 0 to 85 
Gas Turbine 
Engine 
100 0 to 90 
Mumbai High 
 
Process Gas 
compressors 
 
Gas 
Compressors 
100  Even when all 4 
PGCs were used, 
system availability 
was wrongly 
denoted when 
equipment were 
under 
maintenance. 
HP 
Compressor 
and LP 
compressor 
100 77.19 to 
98.10 
System 
availability 
wrongly denoted.  
Uran Plant 
 
Gas Turbines/ 
Auxilliary 
Power Utilities 
 100 0 to 90 Even for 
equipment without 
standby, standby 
hours were 
considered as 
available hours. 
Lean Gas 
compressor, 
Expander Feed 
Gas Compressor 
Off Gas 
Compressor 
 
GT Thermax 
Boiler 
0-90 Less than 
100  
Even when there 
were no standby, 
and equipment 
availability was 
less than 100 per 

Report No. 2 of 2024 
 
65 
Asset/Complex Equipment Sub-
Equipment 
Reported 
Equipment 
Availability 
( per cent) 
Actual 
Equipment 
availability  
( per cent) 
Remarks  
cent. System 
availability was 
reported 100  per 
cent  
Hazira Plant Cogeneration 
Units/ 
Condensate 
Fractionation 
Unit/ LPG Unit 
Gas Turbine, 
Process Gas 
Compressor, 
Lean Gas 
Compressor 
100 Less than 
100 
Running hours 
were less, but 
system availability 
denoted 100 per 
cent. 
Ankleshwar Gandhar Central 
Processing 
Facility, Central 
Tank Farm 
Ankleshwar 
Gas 
Compressors 
100 Less than 
100 
Bassein & 
Satellite Asset 
Compressor BC-A, B & C 100 Less than 
100 
Cumulative 
running hours 
were not changed 
even though 
monthly running 
hours were 
indicated, system 
availability 
wrongly denoted 
and running hours 
since last 
Boroscopic 
Inspection was not 
updated.   
 
 
 
 
 
  

Report No. 2 of 2024 
66 
Annexure VII 
(referred to in para 2.5.4.2) 
 
Unreliable Manual reporting of System and Equipment availability 
• There were instances where Audit observed that equipment were  denoted as being in 
standby even when they were under repair. Process Gas Compressors were denoted as 
under standby even when all the equipment were under operation and System 
availability was claimed at 97.4 0 per cent - 100 per cent. List of cases are given in 
Annexure VI wherein there were incorrect reporting of 100 per cent  system 
availability even when the equipment availability was less than 90 per cent.  
• Pumps equipment availability was reported at more than 100 per cent and monthly 
running hours were reported more than 720/744 available hours during the month. 
System availability was denoted 100 per cent  even when equipment were under 
repair/ unavailable during the entire month. Even in case of systems without standby, 
when equipment were down, system availability continued to be denoted as 100 per 
cent.  
• The cumulative hours were reckoned for deciding the overhaul periodicity and the 
ageing of the equipment. The cumulative hours were incorrectly reckoned upward by 
532 hrs in a Co -generation plant (during November 2020), thereby carrying forward 
wrong figures from November 2020 to August 2021.  
• It was observed during 10  June 2021 to 13  June 2021, a PGC at a Platform was not 
functioning for 63 hours after tripping. The daily reports (PM -DPR) were not 
recorded in the SAP system durin g the period 12 June 2021 to 28  June 2021. In the 
monthly reports of June 2021, 100 per cent system availability was claimed.  
• Equipment were continually kept on standby and sent for repairs. A Turbine 
Generator at Heera was under standby continuously during six months (2017 -18) and 
thereafter under repairs off and on till February 2020. Five Gas turbines were operated 
on regular basis at Heera Platform. In 13 instances, the equipment did not run at all in 
entire month (equipment availability reported zero) still the system availability was 
claimed to be 100 per cent . Air Compressor I at Heera and Expander Feed Gas 
Compressor at Uran, were denoted as on standby continuously for more than five 
months. The standby is normally kept on rotation basis so that maintenance activities 
does not interfere with production process. Continuous standby of these equipment 
makes their availability status unreliable.  
  

Report No. 2 of 2024 
 
67 
Annexure VIII 
(referred to in para 2.5.4.4 (A)) 
 
Summary of Plant wise position of backlog of breakdown orders 
PLANT code No. of records 
 
10D1 22 
10P1 19 
11F1 729 
11F2 1,232 
11F4 743 
11F5 1,234 
11F7 5 
12F1 277 
12F2 296 
13F1 412 
13F9 2 
20A1 1 
22A1 2 
23P1 50 
40D1 9 
40W1 1 
50A1 68 
50D1 1 
60A1 1 
60D1 2 
61W2 1 
 

© COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA
www.cag.gov.in