Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India
 for the year ended 31 March 2021
GOVERNMENT OF GOA
Report No. 1 of the year 2024
Performance Audit of Implementation of 73  Constitutional
Amendment Act in Goa
rd

 
https://www.cag.gov.in/en 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Report of the  
Comptroller and Auditor General  
of India 
 
For the year ended 31 March 2021 
 
 
 
Performance Audit of Implementation of 73rd 
Constitutional Amendment Act in Goa 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GOVERNMENT OF GOA 
Report No. 1 of the year 2024 

i 
Table of Contents 
Paragraph 
Number  
Contents  Page 
Number  
Preface  iii 
Executive Summary v 
Chapter I: Introduction 
1.1 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act 1 
1.2 Rural profile of Goa 2 
1.3 Panchayati Raj Institutions of Goa 2 
1.4 Organizational structure of Panchayati Raj Institutions 3 
1.5 Audit objectives 4 
1.6 Audit criteria 4 
1.7 Scope of audit and methodology 4 
1.8 Acknowledgment  5 
1.9 Structure of the Report 5 
 
Chapter II: Compliance to provisions of 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act 
 
2.1 Compliance of State laws with 73rd Constitutional 
Amendment Act 
7 
2.2 Powers of the State Government over PRIs 8 
 
Chapter III: Composition and organization of Panchayati Raj Institutions 
 
3.1 State Election Commission 11 
3.2 Organization of PRIs 12 
 
Chapter IV: Empowerment of Panchayati Raj Institutions and their functioning 
 
4.1 Devolution of functions vis-à-vis the 73rd Constitutional 
Amendment Act 
15 
4.2 Inadequate devolution of administrative and financial 
powers to PRIs 
18 
4.3 Role of parastatals in implementation of PRI functions  20 
4.4 Planning for execution of functions in PRIs 23 
 
Chapter V: Financial resources of Panchayati Raj Institutions 
 
5.1 Sources of revenue 27 
5.2 Own revenues of PRIs 28 
5.3 Fiscal transfers to PRIs 33 
5.4 Assigned revenues 35 
5.5 State Finance Commission 36 
5.6 Budget, accounts and audit 38 
 
 

 
ii 
 
Chapter VI: Human resources in Panchayati Raj Institutions 
 
6.1 Adequacy of manpower 43 
6.2 Role of other organizations implementing PRI functions   45 
6.3 Capacity building 47 
 
Appendices 
 
1 Devolution of functions to Zilla Panchayats and actual 
status of implementation 
 
51 
2 Devolution of functions to Village Panchayats and actual 
status of implementation 
59 
3 Schemes implemented by DRDAs 66 
4 Statement showing variation in budgets of Village 
Panchayats 
67 
 
 
 
 

iii 
 
 
 
 
This Report for the year ended 31 March 2021 has been prepared for submission to the 
Governor of Goa under Article 151 of the Constitution of India.  
 
Audit of Panchayati Raj Institutions  (PRIs) is conducted under the provisions of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General’s (Duties, Powers and Conditions of Service) Act, 
1971, which empowers the Comptroller and Auditor General of India to conduct audit 
of the accounts of PRIs and submit such Audit Report to the State Government for its 
placement in the State Legislature. 
The Report covering the period 2016 -17 to 2020-21 contains the results of Performance 
Audit of Implementation of 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act in Goa. 
 
The audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards issued by the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
 
 
Preface 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Executive Summary 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

v 
 
 
Intent of 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act 
The 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act, 1992 gave constitutional status to institutions 
of rural local self -government in the Country. Consequent upon the Constitutional 
Amendment Act, the Government of Goa enacted the Goa Panchayat Raj Act, 1994  
(GPRA). There are 02 Zilla Panchayats (ZPs) and 191 Village Panchayats  (VPs) in 
Goa. 
Why this Performance Audit?  
To ascertain whether the 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act provisions have been 
adequately covered in State laws and whether the Panchayat i Raj Institutions (PRIs) 
have been empowered to perform their functions through appropriate institutions and 
commensurate devolution of funds and human resources. 
Period of audit: 2016-17 to 2020-21 
Sample: 16 VPs out of total 1 91 VPs and both ZPs were selected in sample for 
their overall devolution of functions, funds and functionaries. 
What audit found?  
Compliance to provisions of 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act 
The provisions of the State Acts were compliant with the provisions of the 73rd 
Constitutional Amendment Act. However, the State laws also provided for overriding 
powers to the State Government over the PRIs in many aspects.  
Principal findings and recommendations of the Performance Audit 
The chapter wise findings that led to audit conclusions and recommendations are as 
follows: 
Chapter III: Composition and organization of PRIs  
A review of the composition and organization of PRIs vis-à-vis the provisions of the 
73rd Constitutional Amendment Act  indicated that the powers of delimitation and 
reservation of constituencies were vested in the Directorate of Panchayats  (DoP) and 
not in the State Election Commission (SEC). While these powers have been transferred 
to the SEC recently, the power to fix the date of elections remains with the DoP. The 
PRIs complied with the provisions for formation of statutory committees but necessary 
provisions relating to the conduct of their business were not made  which impacted 
their effectiveness. 
Recommendations: 
➢ The State Government may complete the process of transfer of election related 
powers to the SEC by transferring the power to fix the date of elections too. 
➢ Necessary provisions relating to the conduct of business by Standing 
Committees in the PRIs may be made to facilitate their effective functioning. 
Executive Summary 

vi 
 
Chapter IV: Empowerment of PRIs and their functioning 
As per the mandate of the  73rd Constitutional Amendment Act, 29 functions were to 
be devolved to PRIs along with necessary powers to enable their implementation. 
Though the GPRA devolved 26 functions (42 sub -functions) to ZPs, only three sub -
functions were implemented by ZPs. The ZPs also implemented three other sub -
functions, which were actually devolved to VPs.  On the other hand 24 functions were 
devolved to the VPs, though only 11 were transferred and implemented fully. The 
others were either implemented partially or not implemented a t all and Government 
departments or parastatals continued to carry out such PRI functions. Specifically, the 
role of District Rural Development Agencies (DRDAs) in the implementation of rural 
development schemes resulted in curtailment of the role of PRIs. Further, the PRIs did 
not have adequate administrative and financial powers with regard to works taken up 
with grants and approvals of the DoP and State Governm ent were mandatory which 
impacted their operational autonomy as well as timely utilization of funds.  
Recommendations: 
➢ The Government may take necessary action for devolution of all the functions 
enumerated in the Eleventh Schedule.  
➢ Detailed sub-function/activity mapping of all functions may be carried out and 
responsibility assigned to the PRIs along with commensurate financial and 
administrative powers to discharge these functions. 
➢ Necessary action may be taken by the Government to transfer implementation 
of devolved functions to PRIs from parastatals. 
Chapter V: Financial resources of PRIs 
Devolution of adequate financial resources was critical for local bodies for 
implementation of their functions. However, in the absence of adequate sources of own 
revenues, the PRIs were found to be highly dependent on Government grants for 
carrying out their functions. The ZPs did not have any source of own revenue and their 
dependence on Government grants for even their establishment expenditure severely 
affected their autonomy and curtailed their role.  
Neither of the ZPs prepared any budget. In the absence of budgets, there was no 
assurance that their expenditure was as per a financial plan/approved priorities 
mandated by the elected Panchayats. Budgets prepared by the VPs were unrealistic as 
the actual revenues and expenditures varied from the budgeted estimates. 
Though the VPs had sources of own revenues, most of them depended on Government 
grants for meeting their establishment expenditure.  Non -revision of property tax, 
inefficient collection mechanism and inaction on collection of arrears on the part of 
the VPs adversely affected their financial position. 
The State Finance Commission  (SFC) was an important mechanism to review the 
financial position of the PRIs in the State. However, there were delays in the 
constitution of the SFCs in the State and no action has been taken on any of the SFC 

vii 
 
recommendations by the Government, which hindered the fiscal empowerment of 
PRIs. 
Recommendations: 
➢ VPs must undertake a detailed review of their finances in terms of tax potential, 
additional resource mobilization, rationali zation of tax structures, etc. in 
addition to strengthening their revenue collection machinery to reduce the 
revenue arrears. 
➢ The State Government must constitute SFCs as per the timeframe prescribed in 
the Constitution. Recommendations of the SFC may be considered and accepted 
recommendations implemented in a time-bound manner. 
Chapter VI: Human resources in PRIs  
The PRIs required adequate and competent manpower to execute the various 
developmental and civic functions in an efficient and accountable manner.  However, 
due to the absence of dedicated cadres as well as the role of other organizations in 
the implementation of functions meant to be performed by PRIs, they were left with 
a small number of functionaries vis-à-vis the manpower at the disposal of the Block 
Development Offices and DRDAs. 
Recommendations: 
➢ Rationalization of manpower requirements of PRIs may be considered 
including the transfer/creation of appropriate cadres for the specialized 
functions of the PRIs. 
➢ Training Need Assessment may be carried out and systematic capacity building 
of PRI functionaries may be taken up to strengthen their competencies, skills 
and knowledge. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter I 
Introduction 
 
 
 
  

 

Chapter I: Introduction 
 
1.1 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act 
Institutions of rural local self -government in the country were given a constitutional 
status through 73 rd Constitutional Amendment Act, 1992. The Constitutional 
Amendment Act incorporated Part IX ‘The Panchayats’ and Eleventh Schedule of the 
Constitution.  The Eleventh Schedule of the Constitution enumerated 29 functions for 
devolution to Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) as given in Table 1.1 below: 
Table 1.1: Functions listed in the Eleventh Schedule of the Constitution 
Sl. No.  Functions 
1 Agriculture, including agricultural extension. 
2 Land improvement, implementation of land reforms, land consolidation 
and soil conservation. 
3 Minor irrigation, water management and watershed development. 
4 Animal husbandry, dairying and poultry. 
5 Fisheries. 
6 Social forestry and farm forestry. 
7 Minor forest produce. 
8 Small scale industries, including food processing industries. 
9 Khadi, village and cottage industries. 
10 Rural housing. 
11 Drinking water. 
12 Fuel and fodder. 
13 Roads, culverts, bridges, ferries, waterways  and other means of 
communication. 
14 Rural electrification, including distribution of electricity. 
15 Non-conventional energy sources. 
16 Poverty alleviation programme. 
17 Education, including primary and secondary schools. 
18 Technical training and vocational education. 
19 Adult and non-formal education. 
20 Libraries.  
21 Cultural activities. 
22 Markets and fairs. 
23 Health and sanitation, including hospitals, primary health centres and 
dispensaries. 
24 Family welfare. 
25 Women and child development. 
26 Social welfare, including welfare of the handicapped and mentally 
retarded. 

PA of Implementation of 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act in Goa 
 
2 
Sl. No.  Functions 
27 Welfare of the weaker sections, and in particular, of the Scheduled Castes 
and the Scheduled Tribes. 
28 Public distribution system. 
29 Maintenance of community assets. 
(Source: Eleventh Schedule of Constitution of India) 
The responsibility for implementation of the Constitutional Amendment Act , via 
enactments and other measures for transfer of powers, functions and resources was 
vested with the states. 
1.2 Rural profile of Goa 
Goa, with an area of 3,702 sq. km. has 334 villages and habitations, organized into 12 
blocks constituting two districts (North Goa and South Goa). According to Census 
2011, the rural population of Goa was 5.5 2 lakh. Out of 334 villages, 14 were 
considered as part of urban agglomerations in the census.  
1.3 Panchayati Raj Institutions of Goa 
Article 243B of the Constitution provided for the constitution of three types of 
panchayats at village, intermediate and district levels , while making the constitution 
of intermediate panchayats optional in states with a population of less than 20 lakh.  
In the State of Goa a single tier panchayat system consisting of Village Panchayats 
(VPs) had been constituted under the ‘Goa Daman & Diu Village Panchayat 
Regulations, 1962’ passed by the Parliament before Goa attained statehood. 
Consequent to the 73 rd Constitutional Amendment Act , a two -tier PRI system 
comprising Village Panchayats (VPs) and Zilla Panchayats (ZPs) was established as 
per the Goa Panchayat Raj Act, 1994 (GPRA) passed by the State Legislature. As the 
population of Goa was less than 20 lakh as per the 1991 census, intermediate 
panchayats were not constituted.  The categorization of PRIs is shown in Table 1.2 
below: 
Table 1.2: Different types of PRIs in the State 
(Source: Information provided by Directorate of Panchayat) 
There are two ZPs (North Goa Zilla Panchayat and South Goa Zilla Panchayat) and 
191 VPs in Goa. The VPs are classified into four categories based on the population1. 
 
1   VPs with more than 8 ,000 population are categori zed as ‘A’, those with more than 5 ,000 and less 
than 8,000 as ‘B’, those with more than 2 ,000 and less than 5,000 as ‘C’ and those with population 
of less than 2,000 but more than 1,500 are categorized as ‘D’. 
Panchayati Raj 
Institution 
Legislation Total Number 
Zilla Panchayat The Goa Panchayat Raj Act, 1994  02 
Village Panchayat  The Goa Panchayat Raj Act, 1994      191         36 in “A” category 
48 in “B” category 
96 in “C” category 
11 in “D” category 

Chapter I: Introduction 
 
3 
 
Though the minimum population for classification as ‘D’ category VP was 1 ,500 as 
per the GPRA, six VPs that had a population of less than 1,500 were constituted in the 
State. Geographical location, scarce population and sparse location of houses were 
cited as reasons by the Department for constitution of these VPs.  
1.4 Organizational structure of Panchayati Raj Institutions 
The organizational set up of PRIs in Goa is depicted in Chart 1.1 and Chart 1.2 below: 
Chart 1.1: Elected bodies in PRIs 
 
Chart 1.2: Administrative set-up in PRIs
 
The Secretary (Panchayats) is the administrative head of the Panchayat Department, 
Government of Goa. The Director of Panchayats (DoP) exercises control and 
supervision over the PRIs and acts as the appellate authority under the GPRA.  
Sarpanchas, who are elected , head the VPs  and are assisted by Village Secretaries 
The Minister, Panchayat Raj
Zilla Panchayat
Adhyaksha
Upadhyaksha
Village Panchayat
Sarpanch
Dy. Sarpanch
Secretary 
(Panchayats)
Director
(Panchayats)
Additional 
Director -I
Chief 
Executive 
Officer, Zilla 
Panchayat
Dy. Director 
of 
Panchayats 
(North)
Block Development
Officer 
Secretary, Village 
Panchayat
Dy. 
Director of 
Panchayats 
(South)
Block
Development
Officer
Secretary, 
Village 
Panchayat
Additional 
Director -II

PA of Implementation of 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act in Goa 
 
4 
appointed by the Government. Adhyakshas, who are elected, head the ZPs while the 
Chief Executive Officers (CEOs) and Chief Accounts Officers (CAOs) are appointed 
by the Government.  
A separate Department of Rural Development was set up (February 2020) in the State 
headed by the Secretary, Rural Development to oversee the administration of District 
Rural Development Agencies (DRDAs) 2, which were responsible for the 
implementation of Central and State Government schemes in the rural sector.   
1.5  Audit objectives  
This performance audit was carried out with a view to ascertain whether: 
➢ Provisions of 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act have been adequately covered 
in State Legislation. 
➢ PRIs are empowered by the State Government to discharge their functions 
effectively through the creation of appropriate institutions/mechanisms. 
➢ PRIs have access and powers to raise financial resources commensurate with 
their functions. 
➢ PRIs have adequate powers to mobilize human resources commensurate with 
their functions. 
1.6 Audit criteria 
This performance audit is based on the following sources of criteria: 
➢ 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act, 1992; 
➢ The Goa Panchayat Raj Act, 1994 and Rules made thereunder;  
➢ Central/State Finance Commission Reports; 
➢ Bye-laws of Local Bodies; 
➢ Central Public Works Manual;  
➢ Orders, notifications, circulars, guidelines, etc. issued by State/Central 
Government.  
1.7    Scope of audit and methodology 
The Performance Audit covered the implementation of the 73 rd Constitutional 
Amendment Act in the State of Goa over a period of five years from 2016 -17 to  
2020-21.  
Audit methodology involved scrutiny of records, discussion with officials and analysis 
of data with reference to the audit criteria. Test-check of records was carried out at the 
Directorate of Panchayat s (DoP). Stratified random sampling was used to select 16 3 
 
2  Formed in 1999, the DRDAs earlier functioned under the supervision of Secretary, Rural 
Department. 
3  Casarvornem, Assagao, Reis -Magos, Pilerne-Marra, Taleigao, Chodal Madel, Mulgao, Pissurlem,  
Wadi-Talaulim, Chinchinim, Colem, Sancordem, Curdi-vaddem, Xeldem, Loliem-Polem, Chicalim 

Chapter I: Introduction 
 
5 
 
VPs for detailed audit. Both the ZPs were also selected, and necessary information was 
collected from parastatals4.  
An Entry Conference was held (June 2021) with the Secretary , Department of 
Panchayats and the audit objectives, scope and methodology of the audit were 
discussed. Preliminary observations were issued to the departments/bodies/authorities 
and discussed at an Exit Conference on 16.06.2022 with the Secretary, Department of 
Panchayats to obtain their views. 
1.8      Acknowledgment 
Audit is grateful for the co -operation of the Department of Panchayats, Rural 
Development Department, Finance Department and all the test -checked ZPs and VPs 
in providing records, information and clarifications from time to time for the smooth 
conduct of this audit. 
1.9      Structure of the Report 
 
 
4  Goa State Urban Development Agency (GSUDA), Goa State Infrastructure Development 
Corporation (GSIDC) and District Rural Development Agency (DRDA) 
Chapter II Compliance to provisions of 73rd Constitution Amendment Act  
Chapter III Composition and organization of PRIs  
Chapter IV Empowerment of PRIs and their functioning 
Chapter V Financial resources of PRIs 
Chapter VI Human resources in PRIs 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter II 
Compliance to provisions 
of 73rd Constitutional 
Amendment Act 
 
 

 

 
Chapter II: Compliance to provisions of 73rd Constitutional 
Amendment Act 
In compliance to the provisions of 73 rd Constitutional Amendment Act , the State 
Government enacted a new legislation for P anchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) in the 
State. However, the Act also provided for several overriding powers of the State 
Government over the PRIs, curtailing their autonomy. 
2.1      Compliance of State laws with 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act 
Provisions relating to PRIs were incorporated in the Constitution by the 73 rd 
Constitutional Amendment Act  vide Article 243A to 243O. Accordingly, the State 
Government repealed the Goa, Daman & Diu Village Panchayat Regulation, 1962 and 
replaced (April 1994) it with an ordinance, the Goa Panchayat Raj Ordinance, 1994, 
which subsequently became (August 1994) the Goa Panchayat Raj Act, 1994 (GPRA). 
Comparison of provisions in the 73 rd Constitutional Amendment Act  with GPRA is 
shown in Table 2.1 below.  
Table 2.1: Comparison of provisions of 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act 
with State PRI Acts 
Provision of 
constitution 
Requirement as per the provision of 
Constitution of India 
GPRA 
VP* ZP* 
Article 243A  Constitution of Gram Sabha in VPs with 
powers and functions assigned under State 
laws. 
Section 4 Not 
applicable 
Article 243B Constitution of panchayats at the village, 
intermediate and district levels #. 
Section 3 Section 116 
Article 243C  Composition of panchayats is to be from 
elected members with their constituencies 
delimited in accordance with State laws.  
Section 7 Section 11 
Article 243D Reservation in elections to Scheduled 
Castes, Scheduled Tribes and women. 
Section 7 Section 118 
Article 243E Duration of the panchayats shall be five 
years from its first meeting. 
Section 42 Section 129 
Article 243F Disqualifications for membership of 
panchayats. 
Section 10 Section 123 
read with    
Section 10 
Article 243G 
read with 
Eleventh 
Schedule  
State legislation to provide powers and 
authority to panchayats to function as 
institutions of self -government and 
prepare plans and implement schemes in 
respect of 29 functions in Eleventh 
Schedule. 
Section 60 and 
61 read with 
Schedule I 
Section 140 
and 141 read  
with 
Schedule II 
 

PA of Implementation of 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act in Goa 
8 
 
Provision of 
constitution 
Requirement as per the provision of 
Constitution of India 
GPRA 
VP* ZP* 
Article 243H   State legislation to empower the 
panchayats to impose taxes, duties, tolls 
and fees and assignment from 
Consolidated Fund of State. 
Section 153 read 
with Schedule 
III 
No specific 
provision for 
taxes 
State legislation to provide for 
constitution of funds to credit all 
moneys received and the withdrawal 
therefrom. 
Section 161 Section 166 
Articles 243-I and 
243Y 
Constitution of Sate Finance 
Commission to review the financial 
position of the PRIs, recommend the 
distribution of revenues between the 
State and the PRIs and allotting the 
funds from the Consolidated Fund of the 
State. 
Section 199 
 
Article 243J Maintenance of accounts by the 
panchayats. 
Section 184 and 
185 
Section 191 
Audit of accounts maintained by 
panchayats. 
Section 187 Section 194 
Article 243K Elections to panchayats  – Provision for 
constitution of State Election 
Commission, conduct of elections and 
providing staff during elections. 
Section 237 
Article 243ZD Constitution of District Planning 
Committee, its composition and role for 
preparation of draft development plan. 
Section 239 
(Source: The Constitution of India and GPRA)  
#A two-tier panchayat system was constituted with two Zilla Panchayats at the district level (in 2000) 
and 191 Village Panchayats (from 1962 onwards) at the village level. 
*Village Panchayats and Zilla Panchayats 
Hence, as tabulated above the State legislation is in compliance with the provisions of 
73rd Constitutional Amendment Act. However, Audit observed that State legislations 
also provides for overriding powers to the State Government over the PRIs. 
2.2   Powers of the State Government over PRIs 
The GPRA provided for the control of State Government over the functioning of PRIs 
through the following provisions as indicated in Table 2.2. 
 
 
 
 

Chapter II: Compliance to provisions of 73 rd Constitutional Amendment Act 
 
9 
 
Table 2.2: Powers of State Government over PRIs 
Sl.No. Subject Provision 
1 Power to frame rules. The State Government may by notification in the 
Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the purpose 
of this Act (Section 240 of GPRA). 
2 Power to amend, omit and add any 
activity in respect of devolved 
functions and taxes and their 
minimum rate. 
The State Government may omit, amend or add any 
activity, programme or scheme in respect of devolved 
function to PRIs and taxes and their minimum rates 
(Section 241 of GPRA).  
3 Power to exercise any function. State Government may exercise any of the functions 
devolved to PRIs for the purpose of carrying out any 
developmental works in the jurisdiction of Panchayat 
without consultation with PRIs (Section 244A of 
GPRA).  
4 Power of Government to allow to 
carry out any developmental works 
in any panchayat area. 
Government may issue directions to the panchayats 
to carry out any developmental works or such other 
functions as the Government deems fit (Section 244 
of GPRA). 
5 Restrictions, conditions and 
limitations on expenditure from the 
Panchayat Fund or the Zilla 
Panchayat Fund. 
Financial powers are restricted by providing for 
requirement of previous sanction of the Zilla 
Panchayat (for VPs) or the Government (Para 3 of 
notification issued by Department). 
6 Power to write off. Power to write off irrecoverable dues of VPs and ZPs 
beyond specified limit rests with the Government 
(Section 186 and 193 of GPRA read with ‘ The Goa 
Panchayat Raj (Write Off Irrecoverable Amounts) 
Rules, 1999)’. 
7 Power to assignments of functions. The Government may assign additional functions 
specified in the provision and withdraw them 
(Section 60). 
8 Sanction to deposit and invest 
surplus funds. 
Deposit and invest surplus funds of ZPs in banks with 
sanction of Government (Section 167 of GPRA). 
9 Suspension/cancellation of 
resolution of PRIs. 
Power to cancel and suspend a resolution or decision 
taken by PRIs rests with Government (Section 178 of 
GPRA). 
(Source: Extracts of GPRA and rules below them) 
As detailed above, the State Government had far-reaching powers over the functioning 
of PRIs in the State. Specifically, the powers to amend, omit and add any activity in 
respect of devolved functions and taxes, to withdraw any function, exercise any 
devolved function without consultation with the PRIs,  restrictions placed on 
expenditure out of Panchayat Fund, cancellation and suspension of the resolutions of 
the PRIs as mentioned above, significantly curtailed the autonomy of the PRIs to 
function as institutions of self-government. 
Given the legislative framework as detailed above, the actual powers devolved to the 
PRIs and their functioning vis-à-vis the provisions of 73rd Constitutional Amendment 
Act are detailed in the subsequent chapters. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter III 
Composition and 
organization of Panchayati 
Raj Institutions 
 
 

 

 
 
Chapter III: Composition and organization of Panchayati Raj 
Institutions 
A review of the composition and organi zation of Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) 
vis-à-vis the provisions of 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act  indicated that the 
powers of delimitation and reservation of constituencies were vested with the 
Directorate of Panchayats (DoP) and not in the State Election Commission  (SEC), 
which was in contravention to the Constitutional Amendment Act . 
Inconsistencies/shortcomings were observed in the discharge of these functions by 
the DoP. While these powers have been transferred to the SEC recently, the power to 
fix the date of elections remains with the DoP. The PRIs complied with the provisions 
for formation of statutory committees but necessary provisions relating to the conduct 
of their business were not made which impacted their effectiveness.  
The 73 rd Constitutional Amendment Act  envisaged the establishment of necessary 
institutional mechanisms as detailed in Table 3.1, for discharge of devolved functions 
by the PRIs and their empowerment as institutions of self -governance. This section 
discusses the effectiveness of such institutional mechanisms. 
3.1 State Election Commission  
Article 243K of the Constitution provides for the constitution of  SEC, which shall 
supervise, direct and control the preparation of electoral rolls and conduct elections to 
the panchayats. Further, Article 243E of the Constitution provides that the term of 
panchayat be fixed at five years from the date appointed for its first meeting.  
➢ The SEC, Goa was established in the year 1994. However, not all election related 
functions were performed by the SEC.  The distribution of electoral functions in 
the State during the audit period was as shown in Table 3.1 below. 
Table 3.1: Authorities for election related functions 
Sl. No. Function Authority under Goa State Acts and Rules 
1 Delimitation of wards State Government  
2 Reservation of wards State Government  
3 Fixing date of elections State Government  
4 Conduct of elections State Election Commission 
(Source: Extracts of GPRA and rules)                        
Election related functions like delimitation, reservation of wards and fixing of dates of 
elections were performed by the Government till February 2022 under the G oa 
Panchayat Raj Act, 1994 (G PRA) (Section 7 and 15). After an amendment to  
‘The Goa Panchayat and Zilla Panchayat (Election Procedure) Rules, 1996’, the 
functions of delimitation and reservation were transferred to the SEC in February 
2022. However, the power for fixing the date for elections is still vested with the 
Government (Section 15 of GPRA). 
➢ Article 243D of the Constitution mandates the reservation of seats for Scheduled 
Castes (SC)/Scheduled Tribes (ST) and women in direct elections to PRIs. 

PA of Implementation of 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act in Goa 
 
12 
Necessary provisions were made in the GPRA for PRIs, which inter alia provided 
that reservation for women was to be provided in not less than one -third of the 
total constituencies. Further, the Hon’ble High Court of Bombay at Goa  
(March 2021) upheld that every fraction of reservation will entitle the category of 
women to have one complete number of seat.  
Audit found that in 34 VPs and in both the ZPs, the number of seats reserved for 
women was less than one -third of the total constituencies due to rounding of f the 
fraction to the nearest lower digit, while the reservation for SC s/STs was in line with 
the provisions of the acts.  
In response to the audit observation, DoP confirmed (March 2022) the shortfall and 
informed that the responsibility of delimitation of the VPs and ZPs was assigned 
(February 2022) to the SEC. The Secretary, Department of Panchayats acknowledged 
the observation of audit during Exit Conference (June 2022) with an assurance to bring 
the issue to the notice of SEC. A communication to this effect was sent by DoP to SEC 
in August 2023. 
Performance of important electoral  functions by the State Government impacted the 
independence of the electoral process.  
Recommendation 1: The State Government may complete the process of transfer 
of election related powers to the SEC by transferring the power to fix the date of 
elections too.    
3.2 Organization of PRIs 
Article 243A of the Constitution provides for the constitution of Gram Sabha in VPs 
and necessary provisions in this regard were made in the GPRA. Compliance of the 
provisions of Gram Sabha and other provisions in GPRA for statutory committees in 
the test-checked PRIs was as below. 
A. Zilla Panchayats 
As per sections 136 and 142 of the GPRA, the el ected panchayat of the ZP and 
Standing Committees were to be established respectively to carry out the functions 
described in Schedule II of the GPRA. The elected panchayat of the ZP is required to 
meet for the transaction of business at least once in two months (ordinary meeting). 
While six Standing Committees 1 were to be set up, no rules/guidelines existed 
regarding their functioning.  
 
1  General Standing Committee, Finance, Audit and Planning Committee, Social Justice Committee, 
Education and Health Committee, Agriculture and Industries Committee and Taluka Development 
Committee. Each Standing Committee shall consist of such number of members not exceeding five 
elected members of ZP. The Adhyaksha shall be the ex-officio member and chairman of the General 
Standing Committee and the Finance, Audit and Planning Committee. The Upadhyaksha shall be 
the ex -officio member and chairman of the Social Justice Committee. The other Standing 
Committees shall elect the chairman from amongst their members. 

Chapter III: Composition and organization of PRIs 
 
13 
 
The panchayat of the South Goa Zilla Panchayat (SGZP) held 22 meetings during 
2015-20 as against the prescribed 30 meetings. While the panchayat of North Goa Zilla 
Panchayat (NGZP) conducted 30 meetings during this period.  
All the six Standing Committees were formed in 2015 in both the ZPs. However, no 
meetings of the Committees were held over a period of five years except for one 
meeting of the Finance Audit and Planning committee in SGZP. 
The C hief Executive Officer (CEO) , SGZP accepted (December 2021) that the 
provisions for frequency of meetings were not complied with and assured to conduct 
timely bi -monthly meetings in future.   The Secretary, DoP also acknowledged the 
observation during the Exit Conference (June 2022) and stated that instructions would 
be issued to ZPs to avoid the shortfall in meetings. ZPs were however requested 
(August 2023) to ensure that required number of mandatory meetings of ZP as well as 
Standing Committees are conducted. 
B. Village Panchayats 
As per Sections 4, 7 and 63 of the GPRA, the Gram Sabha, the elected panchayat and 
the Standing Committees were to carry out the functions devolved to the VP. The 
Gram Sabha, constituted out of all the electors in a VP was the corner stone of the PRI 
system. The Gram Sabha was to approve the budget estimates, accounts, 
developmental works and programmes proposed for the financial year , etc. Meetings 
of the Ordinary Gram Sabha (OGS) 2 and Special Gram Sabha (SGS) 3 were to be 
conducted four times each in a year as per GPRA. Further, the elected panchayat was 
required to meet twice a month as per Section 54 of the GPRA.  
The results of shortfall in OGS, SGS and panchayat meetings in the test-checked VPs 
after verification of the periodicity of meetings are depicted in Chart 3.1 below. 
Chart 3.1: VPs with shortfall in meetings 
 
(Source: Information provided by the VPs4) 
 
2   Ordinary Gram Sabha: A panchayat shall meet for transaction of business at least once in 15 days at 
the office of the panchayat and at such time the Sarpanch may determine. 
3   Special Gram Sabha : Special meetings of the Gram Sabha to be convened by the Sarpanch on  
26th January, 15th August, 2nd October and 19th December every year. 
4  Three VPs each did not provide information of OGS and SGS and five did not provide information 
of panchayat meetings.  
5
8
10
4
7 8
0
7
10
1
7
109 8
11
0
5
10
15
OGS (13 VPs) SGS (13 VPs) Panchayat(11 VPs)
No. of VPs
Type of meeting
2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21

PA of Implementation of 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act in Goa 
 
14 
Verification of the periodicity of meetings of Gram Sabha and panchayat in the test -
checked VPs revealed that majority of the VPs did not conduct the prescribed number 
of SGS and panchayat meetings. Except for 2020-21, the majority of test-checked VPs 
conducted the prescribed number of OGS from 2016-17 to 2019-20. 
Further, Section 63 of the GPRA provided for constitution of three categories of 
Standing Committees  - Production Committee5, Social Justice Committee 6 and 
Amenities Committee7. As per information provided by 14 VPs, (other two VPs did 
not provide the information) the number of Committees ranged from four (Taleigaon) 
to twenty-five (Xeldem). 
The Secretary, DoP assured during the Exit Conference (June 2022) that shortfall of 
the meetings would be verified and instructions to avoid the shortfall would be issued. 
At the instance of Audit, the DoP initiated an action only in August 2023 to ensure that 
the Committees are formed and meetings are conducted in time. 
Recommendation 2: Necessary provisions relating to the conduct of business by 
Standing Committees in the PRIs may be made to facilitat e their effective 
functioning.  
 
5  Functions relating to agricultural production, animal husbandry and rural industries and poverty  
alleviation programmes. 
6  Functions relating to (a) promotion of educational, economic, social, cultural and other interests of 
the SCs/STs and Backward Classes; (b) Protection of such Castes and Classes from social injustice 
and any form of exploitation; and (c) Welfare of women and children. 
7   Functions to be implemented in respect of education, public health, public works and other functions 
of the panchayat. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter IV 
Empowerment of 
Panchayati Raj Institutions 
and their functioning 

 

Chapter IV: Empowerment of Panchayati Raj Institutions  
and their functioning 
As per the mandate of the 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act, 29 functions were to 
be devolved to Panchayat i Raj Institutions (PRIs) along with necessary powers to 
enable their implementation. The G oa Panchayat Raj Act, 1994 (GPRA)  devolved 
most of the 29 functions mentioned in the Eleventh Schedule of the Constitution to the 
PRIs. However, in case of Zilla Panchayats (ZPs), out of 26 functions devolved in the 
Act, the number of functions actually implemented was only three. On the other hand, 
out of the 24 functions devolved in the Act, the V illage Panchayats (VPs) fully 
implemented 11, while the remaining were either partially implemented or not 
implemented. The VPs lacked adequate administrative and financial powers to 
function with any degree of operational autonomy with regard to public works and 
overlap in the execution of some important functions with the Government 
departments or parastatals limited their role. The Government did not carry out the 
merger of District Rural Development Agency (DRDA) with the ZPs, which allowed 
the continuance of parallel system for implementation of PRI functions.  The 
mechanism of the District Planning Committees  remained dysfunctional and 
integrated district planning through the local body institutions did not take place. 
The 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act, authorised the State Legislature to enact laws 
to endow the PRIs with powers and authority to enable them to function as institutions 
of self -governance as well as  to make provisions for devolution of powers and 
responsibilities. The Eleventh Schedule of the Constitution enumerated 29 functions 
to be devolved to PRIs. 
4.1  Devolution of functions vis-a-vis the 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act  
The State Government enacted (1994) GPRA to include the provisions of the 73 rd 
Constitutional Amendment Act in the State Act. Accordingly, the GPRA (Section 140 
and 141 read with Schedule II) devolved 26 functions1 to the ZPs. The functions were 
further divided into 42 sub-functions, which delineated their scope for performance of 
ZPs. Twenty-four out of the twenty-six functions in GPRA corresponded to the list in 
the Eleventh Schedule with 41 sub -functions. Audit scrutiny of the mandate for 
implementation of functions in GPRA was made in the two ZPs . It was noticed that 
ZPs executed three 2 sub-functions. Further, status of execution by the ZPs was as 
detailed in Appendix 1 and discussed in Paragraph 4.1.1. 
 
1  Three functions from the list of subjects in Eleventh Schedule to the Constitution were not devolved 
viz. 1. Markets and fairs, 2. Public Distribution System and 3. Social Forestry and Farm Forestry. 
2  i. Providing for the timely and equitable distribution and full use of water under irrigation schemes 
under the control of the ZP; ii. Construction and maintenance of District roads and culverts, 
causeways and bridges (excluding State Highways and Village roads); and iii. Construction and 
maintenance of Higher Secondary Schools. 

PA of Implementation of 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act in Goa 
 
16 
➢ GPRA (Section 60 and 61 read with Schedule  I) also devolved 29 functions 3 to 
the VPs, further divided into 65 sub-functions. Twenty-four out of the twenty-nine 
functions devolved to the VPs under the GPRA  corresponded to the list in the 
Eleventh Schedule with 53 sub-functions. Five functions4 were devolved without 
any corresponding mention in Eleventh Schedule of the Constitution. The actual 
status of execution of the mandate in GPRA by VPs was as detailed in Appendix 
2 and discussed in Paragraph 4.1.2.  
4.1.1  Actual status of devolution of functions by the ZPs 
Audit categorised the sub-functions based on the roles 5 i.e. executive, supervisory, 
promotional or mixed roles. The 26 devolved functions which corresponded to the list 
in the Eleventh Schedule of the Constitution had 42 sub-functions. Sixteen out of them 
were with executive role, 19 with supervisory role, six with promotion/guidance role 
and one was with mixed role (executive and promotional role). Audit scrutiny revealed 
that three sub-functions were executed by the ZPs where the devolution was for their 
execution by VPs, as shown in Table 4.1 below.  
Table 4.1: Status of implementation of sub-functions by the ZPs 
Sl. 
No. 
Sub-function Implementation by 
the ZPs 
Audit comments 
1 Guidance for 
promotion of 
drinking water and 
rural sanitation to 
Taluka Panchayat 
and Village 
Panchayat (under 
Function ‘Drinking 
Water’). 
ZPs executed 42 
works amounting to  
₹ 1.70 crore for 
construction and 
maintenance of wells 
in the VPs.  
GPRA provided only promotional role to the 
ZPs. The role of construction, repairs and 
maintenance of drinking water  well, tanks 
and ponds; prevention and control of water 
pollution; and maintenance of rural water 
supply schemes  was provided to the VPs 
(Item No VIII of Schedule I of GPRA). The 
ZPs thus usurped the role of VPs. 
2 Guidance for 
promotion of 
drinking water and 
rural sanitation to 
Taluka Panchayat 
and VPs (under 
Function ‘Health 
and family 
welfare’). 
ZPs executed 24 
works relating to toilet 
blocks amounting to  
₹ 1.03 crore during 
2016-21. 
Item no XVIII (4) under Schedule I of GPRA 
devolved the Function of ‘Construction and 
maintenance of public latrines’ to the VPs. 
The ZPs only had a guidance role over the 
VPs (Item No. IX of Schedule II of GPRA).   
The ZPs undertook the actual execution 
without any devolution and usurped the role 
of the VPs in respect of the sub-function.   
 
3  Five functions from the list of subjects in Eleventh Schedule to the Constitution were not devolved 
1. Land improvement, implementation of land reforms, land consolidation and soil conservation; 2. 
Minor irrigation, water management and watershed development; 3. Small Scale Industries, 
including food processing industries; 4. Technical training and vocational education; and 5. Public 
Distribution System.   
4  i. Construction and maintenance of cattle sheds, ponds, cart stands; ii. Construction and maintenance 
of slaughter houses; iii. Regulation of manure pits in public places; iv. Establishment and control of 
Shandies; and v. Such other functions as may be entrusted 
5  The functions/sub-functions with scope for actual construction or service delivery by the ZPs were 
classified as ‘Executive role’; supervision over the execution by the VPs as ‘Supervisory role’ and 
promotion/guidance to VPs or general public was classified as ‘Promotional role’.  

Chapter IV: Empowerment of PRIs and their functioning 
 
 
17 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Sub-function Implementation by 
the ZPs 
Audit comments 
3 Supervision and 
guidance over the 
community assets 
maintained by 
Taluka Panchayat 
and VPs (under the 
Function 
‘Maintenance of 
Community 
Assets’). 
ZPs executed 765 
works amounting  
₹ 38.73 crore to 
construct and maintain 
community assets.   
There was no executive role for construction 
and maintenance of community assets either 
to the ZPs or the VPs6. The actual 
construction and maintenance of community 
assets by ZPs was thus in deviation of the 
devolution.   
(Source: Compiled from the information provided by the ZPs) 
The above execution of works infringed upon the VP’s functions as mandated by the 
GPRA as well as resulted in overlap  as the VPs and the parastatals (DRDA and G oa 
State Infrastructure Development Corporation (GSIDC) ) were executing similar 
works.   
4.1.2  Implementation of functions by the VPs 
An audit analysis revealed that out of the 53 sub-functions devolved, a total of 30 sub-
functions were implemented by the VPs which covered full execution of 11 functions 
and partial execution of six functions. The execution was as discussed below.   
4.1.2.1  Fully executed functions 
➢ It was observed that in six functions, i.e i. Khadi, village and cottage industries, ii. 
Women and child development, iii. Poverty alleviation, iv. Welfare of the weaker 
sections, v . Rural electrification, including distribution of electricity, and vi . 
Cultural activities, the VPs had  a role to promote and facilitate the 
schemes/programmes among the villagers. The same was implemented by the VPs 
by spreading awareness in the villages with support from department officials and 
parastatals.  
➢ Further, the remaining five functions, i.e i. Roads, culverts, bridges, ferries, 
waterways and other means of communication, ii. Libraries, iii. Market and fairs, 
iv. Health and sanitation, including hospitals, primary health centres and 
dispensaries, and v. Maintenance and preservation of community assets were 
executed by VPs by undertaking the required activities  (repairing, cleaning, 
painting, beautification of the community assets ). However, three of these 
functions were also executed by the DRDA s independently (i. Roads, culverts, 
bridges, ferries, waterways and other means of communication, ii. Health and 
sanitation, including hospitals, primary health centers and dispensaries, and iii. 
 
6  The mandate of ZPs was for supervision and guidance over the community assets maintained by 
VPs. The GPRA, Schedule I (Item No . XXIII devolved two sub -functions to VPs i.e.  
(1) Maintenance of community assets; and (2) Preservation and maintenance of other community 
assets. 

PA of Implementation of 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act in Goa 
 
18 
Maintenance and preservation of community assets).  Overlapping of these 
functions is discussed in Paragraph 4.3.1. 
4.1.2.2  Partially executed functions  
The six partially executed functions (i. Animal husbandry, dairying and poultry, ii. 
Rural Housing, iii. Drinking water, iv. Family welfare v. Social welfare, including 
welfare of the handicapped and mentally retarded and vi. Education including Primary 
and Secondary Schools) had been devolved to VPs with the responsibility for 
promotion as well as executive action. VPs executed the functions p artially (either 
promotional part or execution part), while the other sub -functions were either carried 
out by para statals or the line departments of the State Government. The remaining 
seven devolved functions were not executed by VPs. Constitutional functions of social 
forestry and farm forestry; fuel and fodder; and minor forest produce were included in 
one function in the GPRA under heading ‘Social and Farm Forestry, minor Forest 
Produce Fuel and Fodder’. This function was not executed by the VPs. However, one 
activity (planting and preservation of trees on side of the roads and on other public 
places) under social forestry and farm forestry was being executed by DRDA under 
MGNREGA7 scheme.  
4.2  Inadequate devolution of administrative and financial powers to PRIs  
PRIs would be able to discharge their functions effectively only when the devolution 
of functions is supported through appropriate devolution of administrative and 
financial powers. Further, both the tiers of PRI system have to be in sync with each 
other to effectively implement the mandate and the roles for an implementing agency 
and supervising agency have to be clearly defined.    
The VPs formed a one-tier system till constitution of the ZPs  (February 2000) which 
was supervised then by the Administrative Department. The proposal for constitution 
of the Block Panchayats instead of the ZPs was made by the State Government after 
the 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act came into existence. The proposal was denied 
by the Government of India. Further, ZPs in Goa were constituted after  
recommendation of the First State Finance Commission (June 1999) . However, the  
pre-existing system of supervision by the Department continued due to non-execution 
of structural changes to align the VPs and the ZPs, even subsequent to the constitution 
of ZPs. Consequently, the ZPs did not have much role in supervision of planning, 
budgeting, administration and implementation of the functions by the VPs. 
Execution of public works is an important component of implementing functions like 
maintenance of roads, bridges, community assets and public amenities. However, in 
the backdrop of the above, the powers 8 of Administrative Approval (AA) and 
Expenditure Sanction (ES) for works done by VPs through State grants, Finance 
Commission grants and panchayat funds were shared between B lock Development 
 
7  Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005  
8  Government of Goa circular dated 22.10.2020 

Chapter IV: Empowerment of PRIs and their functioning 
 
 
19 
 
Officers, DoP and State Government as shown in Table 4.2 below with no supervisory 
role envisaged for the ZPs.  
Table 4.2: Financial limits of authorities for expenditure on works by VPs 
Sl. 
No 
Funds Expenditure limit (per work) Competent Authority for 
AA and ES 
1 Grants-in-aid 
(State) 
Up to ₹ 10 lakh Director of Panchayats  
2 XIV and XV 
Finance 
Commission 
Up to ₹ 6 lakh Block Development Officer  
More than ₹ 6 lakh and less than ₹ 10 
lakh 
Director of Panchayat 
Above ₹ 10 lakh Government of Goa 
3 Panchayat fund Up to ₹ 6 lakh  Block Development Officer  
Above ₹ 6 lakh and up to ₹ 10 lakh Director of Panchayat 
Above ₹  10 lakh Government of Goa 
(Source: Information furnished by DoP) 
As seen above, no powers were delegated to the VPs with regard to approval of works. 
The Block Development Officers (BDOs) were responsible for technical approvals as 
well as supervision and measurement of the works executed by the VPs. With regard 
to works taken up under State grants, the approval of DoP/Government was needed. 
Similarly, the State Government (August 2000), prescribed a maximum ceiling of 
estimated cost of items/works/projects of ZPs up to ₹ five lakh.  
Audit observed that the supervisory role of ZPs under Schedule II of GPRA over public 
works of VPs was rendered redundant as the administrative, technical and financial 
approvals were given by the BDOs, DoP and State Government and the ZPs had no 
role to play. This is to be seen in the context of the absence of sanctioned strength of 
the necessary human resources in the ZPs to implement these functions  as discussed 
in Paragraph 6.1.1 that rendered them incapable of discharging any supervisory 
function.  
The GPRA devolved most of the 29 functions in the Eleventh Schedule of the 
Constitution to the PRIs. However, in the case of ZPs, the number of functions actually 
implemented were only three, that too partially. On the other hand, the VPs fully 
implemented 11 of the devolved functions. The remaining were either partially 
implemented or not implemented at all. The devolution of functions to PRIs is 
inconsequential in cases of functions implemented by departments or parastatals, as 
the transfer of functions is not completed according to devolution. Further, the absence 
of adequate administrative and financial powers rendered them incapable of playing 
the role envisaged for them as district level institutions of self -governance. 
The VPs lacked adequate administrative and financial powers to function with any 
degree of operational autonomy with regard to public works. 
 
 

PA of Implementation of 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act in Goa 
 
20 
Recommendation 3: The Government may take necessary action for devolution of 
all the functions enumerated in the Eleventh Schedule. Detailed  
sub-function/activity mapping of all functions may be carried out and responsibility 
assigned to the PRIs along with commensurate financial and administrative powers 
to discharge these functions. 
4.3 Role of parastatals in implementation of PRI functions  
Parastatals were implementing the schemes of Government of Goa (GoG)  and 
Government of India  (GoI) through their own manpower and incidentally they 
performed the functions mandated to the PRIs. Test-check of such implementation by 
DRDAs and GSIDC and its impact on performance of functions by PRIs is discussed 
below. 
4.3.1 Implementation of functions by DRDAs  
DRDAs are societies registered under the Societies Registration Act and have a Board 
of Governing Authorities which comprises of the sitting members of Parliament and 
sitting members of Assembly of respective district. Since February 2020, the DRDAs 
came under the administrative purview of the newly created Rural Development 
Department (RDD). Guidelines on DRDA Administration, 2008, issued by Ministry 
of Rural Development (MoRD), GoI provided that the DRDAs were expected to 
oversee the implementation of dif ferent anti -poverty programmes of the Ministry. 
However, actual implementation would be by the Panchayat i Raj and other 
Institutions. The DRDAs would monitor the implementation through reports and field 
visits and facilitate the implementing agencies in implementation process.   
The DRDAs in Goa implemented 11 schemes of Central Government and State 
Government aimed at providing employment, housing and poverty alleviation. Seven 
schemes9 out of 11 were implemented with the participation of VPs 10, while the 
remaining four schemes 11 were implemented by the DRDAs through their own 
machinery. Statement of schemes implemented and role of DRDA is as depicted in 
Appendix 3. Scrutiny of three schemes (MGNR EGS, SPMRM and GGSY) was 
conducted by Audit and following observations were made. 
 
 
 
9  Central schemes: 1. Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana-Gramin (PMAY-G), 2 Mahatma Gandhi National 
Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS), 3. National Rural Lively hood Mission 
(NRLM), 4. Shayma Prasad Mukherji Rurban Mission Scheme  (SPMRM) 5. Sansad Adarsh Gram 
Yojana.    State Schemes: 1. Goa Grameen Urja Yojana (GGUY) and 2. Goa Gram Samrudhi Yojana 
(GGSY)  
10  VPs participated by conducting activities like identification of beneficiaries, preparation of initial 
proposals, providing NOC for construction/land use. 
11  1. Indira Gandhi National Old Age Pension Scheme (NOAPS), 2. Indira Gandhi National Widow 
Pension (IGNWP), 3. Indira Gandhi National Disability Pension Scheme (IGNDPS) and 4. National 
Family Benefit Scheme (NFBS) 

Chapter IV: Empowerment of PRIs and their functioning 
 
 
21 
 
4.3.1.1  Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme 
(MGNREGS) 
MGNREGS is implemented with effect from 2008 -09 by GoI, with an objective to 
provide for at least 100 days of guaranteed wages employment in every financial year 
to every household. The works under the scheme were taken up in the VPs on demand 
by Job Card Holders. Gram Sabha  of VP s approved all the proposed works. 
Subsequently, Technical Sanctions (TS) and Administrative Approvals (AA) were 
accorded by DRDA. DRDAs carried out 916 works (₹ 8.94 crore) during the period 
2016-17 to 2020-21 in the entire State. 
Audit noticed during the test-check that the DRDAs maintained a parallel structure of 
manpower for approval of works and supervision of the works. Role of VPs was 
limited to approval of works through Gram Sabhas  and payment of bills after the 
execution of works. The works executed by DRDA under the MGNREGS resulted in 
partial execution of six functions12 by the PRIs. 
4.3.1.2  Implementation of Goa Gram Samrudhi Yojana (GGSY) 
GGSY is implemented by the State Government to create infrastructure in villages 
such as community halls, crematorium, development and beautification of open 
spaces, construction of playgrounds, senior citizen/children recreational parks etc. for 
the villagers on need basis.  
Under this Scheme, the VP identified works and the Panchayat Body’s approval was 
taken and forwarded to the DRDAs for implementation. Limits of AA were divided 
between DRDA (up to ₹ 25 lakh) and the State Government (above ₹ 25 lakh). The 
DRDA prepared estimates, accorded  TS and executed (tender, measurements and 
payments) through its manpower and assets handed over to VPs upon project 
completion. The  DRDAs executed 104 works ( ₹ 21.45 crore) during the  period  
2017-22. Execution of these works by the DRDAs limited the operational scope of 
VPs as t hese works carried out under GGSY resulted in partial execution of three 
functions13 by VPs. 
4.3.1.3  Implementation of Shyama Prasad Mukherjee Rurban Mission  
(SPMRM) 
The SPMRM aimed at development of a cluster of villages and creation of urban 
facilities.  
The DRDA identified the clusters under SPMRM. The DRDA appointed (February 
2017) the State Technical Support Agency 14 which prepared the Integrated Cluster 
Action Plan (ICAP) and Detailed Project Report (DPR) for the Cluster. The ICAP and 
 
12  1. Roads, buildings, culverts, bridges, ferries, waterways and other means of communication,  
2. Rural sanitation, 3. Drinking water, 4. Social and farm Forestry, 5. Minor irrigation, water 
management and watershed development and 6. Agriculture including agricultural extension. 
13  1. Roads, buildings, culverts, bridges, ferries, waterways and other means of communication .  
2.  Maintenance of community assets, and 3. Rural sanitation.  
14  Goa College of Architecture. 

PA of Implementation of 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act in Goa 
 
22 
DPR had to be approved by the State Empowered Committee for approval of the 
Ministry of Rural Development, Go I. Approved works in ICAP  and DPR were 
executed by the DRDA with their manpower.  
Participating VPs could  propose the infrastructure works to be taken up under the 
mission. The DRDA, North had not taken up any work under this scheme (September 
2022) due to delay in preparation of ICAP and its approval. However, the DRDA, 
South carried out 30 works ( ₹ 14.59 crore) under cluster Xeldem -Barcem-Morpirla 
(August 2022). Execution of these works by the DRDAs limited the operational scope 
of VPs as execution of these works  resulted in partial execution of four functions 15 
devolved to VPs. 
Audit observed that the works taken up by DRDAs for implementation of the above 
schemes overlapped with the functional responsibilities of VPs as depicted in Table 
4.3 below.    
            Table 4.3: Overlapping of work 
Functions Taken up by DRDA (2017-22) Execution of similar 
works in  
test-checked VPs 
(2016-21) 
MGNREGS GGSY SPMRM 
Roads, buildings, culverts, bridges, 
ferries, waterways and other means 
of communication 
130 26 03 514 
 
Rural sanitation 113 02 04 16 
Drinking water 112 -- -- 10 
Maintenance of community assets -- 76 22 111 
(Source: Information provided by DRDA and VPs) 
Overlapping of the various works undertaken by DRDAs with the scope of work of 
functions assigned to VPs resulted in curtailment of powers of the PRIs. 
The Department of Rural Development, GoG was created in February 2020 with 
sanction of 24 posts accorded in November 2021. However, M inistry of Rural 
Development (MoRD), GoI communicated (November 2021) to the State Government 
that the DRDAs should be discontinued and merged with ZPs. The staff working on 
deputation were advised to be repatriated and other staff absorbed in line departments. 
Balance accounts of DRDAs were directed to be transferred to ZPs. 
Audit observed that overlapping of various works undertaken by DRDAs with  scope 
of work of functions assigned to VPs resulted in curtailment of powers of the PRIs. 
While the ZPs had no mechanism to supervise the functions of VPs, DRDAs 
implemented the functions of PRIs through their substantial human resources.  The 
status of overlapping of works and incidental execution of functions by the DRDAs 
has to be seen in light of the suggestion (November 2021) of MoRD , GoI  to 
 
15  1. Roads, buildings, culverts, bridges, ferries, waterways and other means of communication,  2. 
Maintenance of community assets, 3. Rural sanitation and 4. Non-conventional energy source 
 

Chapter IV: Empowerment of PRIs and their functioning 
 
 
23 
 
discontinue and merge DRDAs with the ZPs. Pending action on discontinuation and 
merger of DRDAs with the ZPs , the execution of functions remains outside the 
purview of bodies with elected public representatives.  
The Secretary, Panchayats acknowledged the observation during Exit Conference 
(June 2022) and stated that the matter would be analyzed.  However, the DoP replied 
(August 2023) that there was no proposal for merger of DRDAs with the ZPs.  
4.3.2 Construction of VP buildings through parastatals  
Sub-function of ‘Construction of administrative and other buildings connected with 
the requirements of the Zilla Panchayat’ was devolved to ZPs under GPRA. However, 
VPs were devolved the sub -function only for ‘Maintenance of the transferred 
buildings’. Thus, ZPs were mandated to undertake the constructions of administrative 
buildings for VPs.  
The ‘Deendayal Panchayati Raj Infrastructure Development Scheme, 2013’ 
(DPRIDS), a State  Government scheme, under the Department of Panchayats was 
implemented inter alia through GSIDC for creation of infrastructure projects in VPs. 
The scheme provided that projects are identified and recommended for execution by 
the VPs through a resolution of the Panchayat and executed inter alia through GSIDC. 
The implementation of works was subsequently transferred (July 2020) to the 
‘Technical Cell’ under the DoP. Out of total 29 works being executed by GSIDC under 
the scheme, 10 works were completed before January 2016 and 19 works continued to 
be executed by them (March 2021).  
Audit observed that the 19 ongoing works ( ₹ 37.23 crore) being executed by the 
GSIDC were of construction of Panchayat buildings along with market complex, 
community hall or combination of them. Since the function of construction of 
administrative buildings was assigned to the ZPs, the execution of works by a 
parastatal (till July 2020) an d afterwards by the Administrative Department was 
inconsistent with the mandate given. Moreover, the funds for the construction were 
fully provided by the Government to the parastatals directly, denying the ZPs of any 
role in the execution or supervision of the work.   
There existed a parallel system for implementation of PRI functions either through a 
department of the Government or a parastatal disempowering the PRIs to that extent. 
The Government did not carry out the required structural reorganisation to strengthen 
the institutional capacity of PRIs to perform these functions. 
Recommendation 4: Necessary action may be taken by the Government to transfer 
implementation of devolved functions to PRIs from parastatals. 
 
4.4 Planning for execution of functions in PRIs  
The planning mechanism for implementation of PRIs were reviewed in the ZPs and 
test-checked VPs. 

PA of Implementation of 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act in Goa 
 
24 
4.4.1 District Planning Committee 
Setting up of a District Planning Committee (DPC)16 is mandated as per Article 243ZD 
of the Constitution and the GPRA (Section 239).  
District Plans were to be prepared by the DPC by consolidating the annual plans of 
ZPs, VPs and Municipalities in the district. The District Plans so prepared would have 
regard to matters of common interest between the Local Bodies including sharing of 
water and other physical and natural resources, the integrated development of 
infrastructure and environmental conservation and the extent and type of  available 
resources financial or other, etc. 
Audit observed that DPCs were formed during the audit period, for 2016-21 and for 
2021-26 in both districts. While the North Goa DPC did not hold any meeting, the 
South Goa DPC held four meetings. However, no plans were prepared by either of the 
ZPs in any of the terms. The High Court of Bombay at Goa directed (February  2020) 
to prepare the development plans in accordance with GPRA and Constitution of India 
for a district as a whole  while deciding on a public interest litigation 17 regarding 
preparation of development plan. However, non -compliance with the provision has 
continued. 
In response to the audit observation, the NGZP replied (March 2022) that the Plan was 
under preparation.  
4.4.2 Planning in ZPs and VPs 
Audit reviewed the status of planning in different tiers of PRIs and observed the 
following: 
➢ VPs were required to prepare (Section 238 of GPRA) Annual Development 
Plans18 and submit to the ZPs for preparation of District Plan. Out of 89 VPs in 
South Goa district, only 11 in 2017-18 and 2018-19, and 47 and 24 VPs in 2019-
20 and 2020-21 respectively, submitted Annual Plans to the ZP. None of the 102 
VPs in North Goa district submitted Plans in time to the ZP during the four-year 
period 2016-20. Whereas only 84 VPs submitted Annual Plans for the period 
2020-21.  
 
16  DPC shall consist of members of the House of the People who represent the whole or part of the 
district; the members of the Council of States who are registered as electors in the district; Adhyaksha 
of the Zilla Panchayat; the President of the Municipal Council having jurisdiction over the 
headquarters of the district; such number of persons, not less than four -fifth of the total number of 
members of the Committee as may be specified by the Government, elected in the prescribed manner 
from amongst the members of the ZP and Councillors of the Municipal Council in the district, in 
proportion to the ratio between the population of the rural areas and of the urban areas in the district. 
All the members of the State Legislative Assembly whose constituencies lie within the district shall 
be permanent invitees of the Committee. The Adhyaksha of ZP shall be the ex-officio Chairman of 
the DPC and the Chief Executive Officer shall be the Secretary of the Committee. 
17   vide PIL writ petition no. 6/2018 
18  The Goa Panchayat (Constitution, Powers and Functions of Ward Development Committees and 
preparation of Annual Development Plan) Rules, 2008. 

Chapter IV: Empowerment of PRIs and their functioning 
 
 
25 
 
➢ The ZPs did not prepare any plans or budget for execution of the functions 
devolved to them.  Execution of any functions/activities was dependent upon the 
sanction of grants from the Government based on the resolutions passed by the 
ZP. 
➢ Audit observed that no timelines were prescribed by the ZPs for VPs and MCs 
to submit their annual plans in time for preparation of the District Plan by the 
DPC. 
The Secretary, Panchayats acknowledged the observation during Exit Conference 
(June 2022) and stated that instructions would be issued to PRIs to submit plans to 
DPC for consolidation. The instructions were issued (August 2023) by DoP to ZPs and 
VPs, to prepare respective plans for further consolidation into District Plans. 
Institutionalised planning for execution of devolved functions was absent in the case 
of ZPs and it was ineffective in the case of VPs . This  impacted the systematic 
performance of the functions assigned to them.  
The mechanism of the DPC remained dysfunctional and integrated district planning 
through the local body institutions did not take place. 
Recommendation 5: The planning machinery of PRIs may be activated to 
facilitate the preparation of developmental plans. The District Planning 
Committees may be made functional, and District Plans may be prepared as per 
mandate. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter V 
Financial resources of 
Panchayati Raj Institutions

 

Chapter V: Financial resources of Panchayati Raj Institutions 
Devolution of financial resources was critical for Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) 
for the successful implementation of devolved functions. Finances of PRIs comprised 
their own revenues, assigned revenues and transfers from State and Central 
Governments. The Zilla Panchayats (ZPs) did not have any source of own revenue 
and depended on Government grants for even their establishment expenditure. Full 
potential of collecting own revenues was not tapped by the Village Panchayats (VPs). 
Non-revision of property tax , inefficient collection mechanism and inaction on 
arrears affected their financial position. There were delays in the release of Central 
Finance Commission  (CFC) grants and their utilization by the PRIs was not 
monitored effectively. Further, the trend of release of State Government grants was 
uneven.  Delays in the constitution of State Finance Commissions (SFC) and inaction 
on their recommendations by the Government, rendered the SFC mechanism 
redundant and hindered the fiscal empowerment of PRIs . ZPs did not prepare the 
budgets and the budgets of the VPs were unrealistic. Model Accounting 
System/software applications ( MAS based PRIASoft and e -gramswaraj) were not 
adopted in ZPs and were adopted in the VPs  only for CFC grants. Majority of the 
VPs were not able to meet even their establishment expenditure out of their own 
resources which increased their dependence on Government grants. 
Successful implementation of devolved functions and delivery of services by PRIs is 
dependent upon the availability of adequate financial resources with them. The 
resources of PRIs can be broadly categorized as (i) Own revenue s, which PRIs 
mobilize through their power to levy and collect taxes and fees, (ii) Assigned revenues, 
which accrues to the PRIs as a certain percentage of a tax levied and collected by the 
State Government , and (iii) State and Central Government grants including CFC 
grants. 
5.1 Sources of revenue  
Own-revenues (tax and non -tax revenues)  assigned revenues and Government 
transfers including Finance Commission grants comprised the sources of revenue for 
PRIs in Goa. Composition of sources of revenue of PRIs for the period from 2016-17 
to 2020-21 is summarized in Table 5.1 and depicted in Chart 5.1. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

PA of Implementation of 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act in Goa 
 
28 
Table 5.1: Sources of revenues of PRIs 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Year ZPs VPs 
Own 
revenue 
Per- 
centage 
of total 
revenue 
Assigned 
revenue 
Govt 
grant* 
Total Own 
revenue 
Per 
cent of 
total 
revenue 
Assigned 
revenue 
Govt. 
grant* 
Total 
1 2016-17 0.00 0.00 8.00 16.13 24.13 61.86 44.94 14.00 61.78 137.64 
2 2017-18 0.00 0.00 8.00 25.81 33.81 70.26 54.37 14.00 44.97 129.23 
3 2018-19 0.00 0.00 0.00 21.23 21.23 63.30 49.19 0.00 65.39 128.69 
4 2019-20 0.00 0.00 0.00 25.61 25.61 81.86 59.90 0.00 54.81 136.67 
5 2020-21 0.00 0.00 0.00 33.90 33.90 83.77 39.19 0.00 129.98 213.75 
 Total 0.00  16.00 122.68 138.68 361.05  28.00 356.93 745.98 
(Source: Information made available by Directorate of Panchayat)  
* Includes grants from both State Government and Central Government  
Chart 5.1: Composition of revenues of PRIs for the period 2016-21 
 
 (Source: Information provided by Directorate of Panchayat) 
It may be seen from the above chart that Government grants comprised 88 per cent of 
total revenues during the period 2016 -21 and from 2018 -19 onwards, the ZPs were 
fully dependent on Government grants alone for their functioning.  
Own revenues of VPs (48.40 per cent) were almost equal to Government grants (47.85 
per cent) during this period. The share of Government grants increased from 44.89 per 
cent to 60.81 per cent, while the share of own revenue decreased from 44.94 per cent 
to 39.19 per cent. Audit observations on sources of revenue of PRIs were as below.  
5.2  Own revenues of PRIs  
Article 243H of the Constitution inter alia provided that the Legislature of a State may 
authorise PRIs to levy, collect and appropriate such taxes, duties, tolls and fees  in 
accordance with such procedure and subject to such limits as may be specified in the 
ZP VP
0%
48%
12%
4%88%
48%
Own revenue Assigned revenues Transfers from governments

Chapter V: Financial resources of PRIs 
 
29 
 
law. Necessary provisions have been made in the G oa Panchayat Raj Act, 1994 
(GPRA) for devolution of sources of revenue in respect of PRIs.  
5.2.1 Own revenues of Zilla Panchayats  
The GPRA did not make any provision to enable collection of taxes by ZPs. However, 
Section 166 of GPRA enabled them to constitute their own fund with contributions 
inter alia from non-tax revenues such as fees, fines and penalties levied and collected 
and rents from its properties.    
Audit observed that the ZPs did not own any assets from which rents/fees could be 
collected other than insignificant amounts from RTI fees, tender form fees and interest 
on bank balances . This resulted in their complete dependence on grants from the 
Government for all activities including establishment expenditure.  
The Secretary, Panchayats acknowledged the observation during the Exit Conference  
(June 2022). 
5.2.2 Own revenues of Village Panchayats 
Section 153 of the GPRA enabled the VPs to impose mandatory property tax (tax upon 
buildings and tax on lands) and 1 5 discretionary rates/taxes1. The rules made 
thereunder provided for the imposition and recovery of taxes, details of procedures, 
schedule of rates, etc. 
Audit observed that all the 16 test-checked VPs levied the mandatory property tax only 
upon buildings but not on lands. Only eight out of the 14 2 discretionary taxes/rates 
were being levied in these VPs. Composition of own revenues during 2016 -17 to  
2020-21 in the test-checked VPs is depicted in Chart 5.2. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1  i. Water rate for supply of water for drinking and other purposes; ii. Tax on entertainment other than 
cinematograph shows; iii. Tax on vehicles other than motor vehicles; iv. Tax on advertisement and 
hoarding; v. Pilgrim fee on persons attending the jatras, festivals; vi. Market fee on persons who 
expose their goods for sale in any marketplace; vii. Fee on the registration of cattle brought for sale 
in any marketplace; viii. Fee on buses and taxies and auto -stands; ix. Fees on grazing cattle in the 
grazing lands, x. Lighting tax; xi. Drainage tax; xii. Tax on profession, trades, calling and 
employment; xiii. Fees for sale of goods in melas, fairs and festivals; xiv. Garbage disposal tax; and 
xv. Octroi other than on petroleum products (not levied) 
2  Out of 15 discretionary taxes, octroi was abolished after adoption of GST. 

PA of Implementation of 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act in Goa 
 
30 
Chart 5.2: Composition of own revenues of test-checked VPs3 
  
(Source: Income and Expenditure Statements of 16 test-checked VPs for the period 2016-21)  
Property tax, rent from own properties, construction licence fees and garbage tax were 
the primary sources of revenue of test-checked VPs. Own revenue of test-checked 16 
VPs from different sources was as shown in the Table 5.2 below. 
Table 5.2: Own revenue of test-checked VPs for the period 2016-21 
     (₹ in crore) 
Type of Revenue 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 Total Percentage 
to total 
revenue 
Construction Licence/Licence 1.76 1.64 2.03 1.61 1.45 8.49 19.39 
Property tax 2.42 2.58 3.00 3.04 2.97 14.01 32.00 
Rent 1.91 3.21 2.52 2.79 1.64 12.07 27.58 
Trade tax 0.19 0.26 0.30 0.28 0.39 1.33 3.24 
Market fees 0.09 0.13 0.09 0.13 0.07 0.51 1.17 
Garbage tax 1.14 1.31 1.41 1.62 1.44 6.92 15.81 
Other Taxes/fees 0.07 0.08 0.11 0.10 0.08 0.44 1.01 
Total 7.58 9.21 9.46 9.57 8.04 43.86  
(Source: Information compiled from annual accounts of 16 VPs) 
The revenues of VPs were showing an increasing trend from the year 2016 -17 to  
2019-20. However, individual sources of revenues were showing up and down trend 
during the entire audit period as compared to respective previous year figures.  
 
Audit review revealed the following issues with regard to the imposition and collection 
of taxes: 
 
3  Percentage of total tax/fees collections of test-checked 16 VPs. 
Construction 
Licence/Licence
19%
Property Tax
32%
Rent
28%
Trade Tax
3%
Market fees
1%
Garbage Tax
16%
Other Taxes/fees
1%
Good practice: Life jacket hiring fees was collected by Collem VP, the average 
annual collection being ₹ 80.78 lakh during the audit period. Taking advantage 
of its location near the popular tourist destination of Dudhsagar waterfall this VP 
generated additional income through this innovative service. 

Chapter V: Financial resources of PRIs 
 
31 
 
5.2.3   Efficiency of revenue collection mechanism  
Efficient collection of revenues is necessary for attaining self-sufficiency in operations 
of the PRIs, i.e. execution of their functions and delivery of services. The GPRA and 
the Goa Panchayat Raj (Recovery of taxes, fees and other dues) Rules, 1999 and orders 
of Government provided the mandate for imposition and collection mechanism for 
taxes and other dues. Shortcomings in the imposition and collection of revenues were 
as below.   
5.2.3.1  Non-revision of property tax rates 
Property tax constituted nearly one -third of the VPs’ own tax revenues and its 
periodical revision, correct assessment and efficient collection were important for the 
financial health of VPs. The GPRA provided (Section 153 of GPRA) that the VPs shall 
revise the rate of property tax once in every three years by a minimum increase of  
10 per cent thereon. Out of the 16 test-checked VPs, four VPs revised the rates of 
property tax and seven did not revise the rates for periods ranging from three to 27 
years. Five VPs4 did not provide the details of revision.  
5.2.3.2   Non-imposition of taxes on garbage  
Rule 15 of Solid Waste Management Rules , 2016, provided that local bodies may 
collect user fee for solid waste management from waste generators. It was expected to 
recover the expenditure on the services provided through collection of taxes. Though 
garbage collection services were provided by all the 16 test-checked VPs, no user fees 
were imposed by 11 out of the 16 VPs. The expenditure on garbage collection and 
solid waste management was met out of the panchayat fund or Government grants  
(₹ 11.80 crore to all VPs during 2016-21 provided under ‘The Goa Panchayats (Grants 
to Tackle Garbage Menace) Scheme’.  
5.2.3.3    Inefficient recovery mechanism    
Rule 9 of General Financial Rules, 2017, mutatis mutandis provides to ensure that all 
receipts and dues have to be correctly and promptly assessed, collected and duly 
credited to the fund. Test-check of revenues by 13 test -checked VPs 5 and status of 
demands, collections and arrears were as shown in Table 5.3. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4  1. Reis-Magos; 2. Taleigao; 3. Mulgao; 4. Wadi-Talaulim; and 5. Xeldem 
5  Three VPs i.e. Colem, Sancordem and Xeldem did not furnish the information of arrears.  

PA of Implementation of 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act in Goa 
 
32 
Table 5.3: Arrears of major taxes in test-checked 13 VPs 
(₹ in crore) 
Type of tax Arrear 
(as on 
March 
2020) 
Current 
Demand 
(2020-21) 
Total 
(2020-21) 
Collection 
(2020-21) 
Arrear (as 
on March 
2021) 
Percentage 
of arrears to 
total demand 
1 2 3 (2+3) =4 5 (5-4) = 6 (6/4*100) =7 
Property tax 5.29 2.70 7.99 2.86 5.13 64.21 
Garbage tax 1.60 1.13 2.74 1.24 1.49 54.38 
Advertisement 
tax 0.17 0.06 0.24 0.04 0.20 83.33 
Trade tax 0.57 0.39 0.96 0.36 0.60 62.50 
Total  7.63 4.28 11.93 4.50 7.42  
(Source: Data compiled from information furnished by 13 VPs out of 16 test-checked) 
Audit noticed that Section 154 of GPRA read with The Goa Panchayat Raj (Recovery 
of taxes, fees and other dues) Rules, 1999 ,  provided the mandate for issue of bills 
(Rule 5), demand notice (Rule 6) and issue of warrant (Rules 7, 8 and 9) for recovery 
of dues. In the test-check of VPs for recovery of three taxes (Property tax, 
Advertisement/signboard tax and Trade tax), it was noticed that issue of bills and 
demand notices were not followed up by the issue of warrants where necessary. This 
resulted in poor recovery of revenues as seen from the fact that arrears of major taxes 
ranged from 54.38 per cent to 83.33 per cent of the total demand at the year ending 
2021. 
Thus, non-utilization of executive authority mandated in the rules to enforce collection 
of revenues resulted in poor recovery of revenues. 
While confirming the audit observation the DoP stated (March 2022) that instructions 
would be issued to VPs for revision of property tax, levy of garbage tax, etc. and the 
VPs would be instructed to find out reasons for arrears and initiate remedial action. 
The Secretary, Panchayats acknowledged the observation during the Exit Conference 
(June 2022) and stated that corrective measures would be taken.  At the instance of 
Audit, the DoP issued (August 2023) instructions to the VPs to revise the taxes timely 
and collect garbage tax according to the bye-laws adopted. 
The ZPs did not have any source of own revenue and their dependence on Government 
grants for even their establishment expenditure severely affected their autonomy and 
curtailed their role. Full potential of collecting own revenues was not tapped by the 
VPs. Non-revision of property tax, inefficient collection mechanism and inaction on 
arrears affected the financial position of PRIs. 
 
 
 
 

Chapter V: Financial resources of PRIs 
 
33 
 
Recommendation 6: The Government may review the status of devolution of 
finances to ZPs and take action to empower them through assignment of own 
sources of revenue. VPs must undertake a detailed review of their finances in 
terms of tax potential, addition al resource mobilization, rationalization of tax 
structures, etc. in addition to strengthening their revenue collection machinery to 
reduce the revenue arrears.   
5.3 Fiscal transfers to PRIs 
Share of fiscal transfers from CFC and State Government grants in the total revenues 
of ZPs ranged from 67 per cent to 100 per cent and from 35 per cent to 61 per cent in 
VPs during the period 2016 -17 to 2020 -21. Audit observations on sanction, release 
and utilisation of grants are detailed below. 
5.3.1 Non-utilization of Fourteenth Finance Commission Grants 
The Fourteenth Finance Commission (FC XIV) recommended assured transfers in the 
form of Basic Grants (BG) and Performance Grants (PG) to PRIs for effective planning 
and delivery of basic services within the functions assigned to them. The FC XIV 
sanctioned a BG of ₹ 120.39   crore during the period 2015-16 to 2019-20, which was 
fully transferred to the VPs by the DoP. The Fifteenth Finance commission  (FC XV) 
sanctioned grants under two categories of tied (₹ 37.50 crore) and untied grants  
(₹ 37.50 crore) in the year 2020-21, which were released to the PRIs. Untied grants of 
₹ 11.00 crore were also sanctioned during the period 2021-22. 
Details of fiscal transfers to PRIs under the Finance Commission grants for the period 
2015-21, and the actuals against them is given in Table 5.4 below. 
Table 5.4: Finance Commission grants sanctioned and released 
(₹ in crore) 
Year Finance Commission Grants sanctioned to PRIs 
Sanctioned Released 
BG* PG* BG* PG* 
FC XIV 
2015-16 14.44 0.00 14.44 0.00 
2016-17 20.00 2.62 20.00 2.62 
2017-18 23.10 2.97 23.10 2.97 
2018-19 26.73 3.37 26.73 0.00 
2019-20 36.12 4.41 36.12 0.00 
Total 120.39 13.37 120.39 5.59 
FC XV 
 tied6 untied  tied untied  
2020-21 37.50 37.50 37.50 37.50 
 (Source: Information provided by the DoP) 
* BG: Basic Grants; PG: Performance Grants 
 
6  According to FC XV report for the period 2020 -21; 50 per cent grants to rural local bodies were 
‘Untied Grants’ (which could be utilised for any function) and remaining 50 per cent grants were 
‘Tied Grants’ for Sanitation and Water Supply. 

PA of Implementation of 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act in Goa 
 
34 
➢ Out of the ₹13.38 crore sanctioned as PG, ₹ 7.79 crore was not released by GoI 
during the years 2018 -19 and 2019 -20 to the State Government for reasons not 
available on record. 
➢ Out of the total release of ₹ 125.98 crore to VPs under FC XIV up to 2019-20, an 
amount of ₹ 28.02 crore was unutilized (March 2021). While confirming the non-
utilization of grants, DoP had informed (March 2022) that Ministry of Panchayati 
Raj (MoPR) had extended (March 2021) the time limit for utilization till March 
2022. Later, the time for utilization of the grants by VPs was extended (June 2023) 
by the DoP till March 2024 on the basis of clarification (May 2023) from MoPR. 
➢ As a result of non-compliance with the requirement of releasing the grants under 
FC XIV to PRIs within 15 days of receipt from G overnment of India (G oI), the 
State Government had to pay an interest of ₹ 1.47 crore for delays of 07 to 157 
days to VPs during the period 2015-20. Similar delay of 07 to 81 days was noticed 
in release of grants under FC XV and interest of ₹ 72.51 lakh was paid by the State 
Government as shown in Table 5.5 below.   
Table 5.5: Delay in release of grant and interest paid by the State Government 
(₹ in lakh) 
Year  Type of 
Grant 
Instalment Amount Delay (days) Interest paid  
FC XIV 
2015-16 BG I 722.00 157 47.00 
2016-17 BG II 1000.00 21 3.59 
PG NA 262.00 18 0.84 
2017-18 BG I 1155.00 19 3.75 
BG II 1155.00 07 1.32 
2018-19 BG I 1336.50 13 2.58 
BG II 1336.50 113 22.34 
2019-20 BG I and II 3612.00 154 66.23 
Total (A)   10579.00  147.65 
FC XV 
2020-21 tied  I 1875.00 78 29.01 
 united I 1875.00 81 30.13 
 tied  II 1875.00 07 2.60 
 united  II 1875.00 32 10.77 
Total (B)   7500.00  72.51 
Total (A +  B)   18079.00  220.16 
(Source: Information provided by Directorate of Panchayat) 
The Department accepted (March 2022) that the funds were not released in time. 
➢ Third-party audit of FC XIV grants released to PRIs was recommended in the 
guidelines. But no audits were conducted for assurance regarding utilization of 
funds for the purposes for which they were sanctioned.  
Delayed release of Finance Commission grants by the State Government had an impact 
on certainty of flow of funds, adversely affecting the planning and utilization of funds 
by VPs.  

Chapter V: Financial resources of PRIs 
 
35 
 
Recommendation 7: The Government may review the reason for delayed release 
of Central Finance Commission grants and ensure their timely release. 
5.3.2 State Government grants to PRIs 
The GPRA (Section 160) provided for release of grants to the respective Local Bodies 
by the Government of Goa. In the absence of principles of distribution of finances 
recommended by the State Finance Commission these grants were allocated to the 
PRIs by the Government as deemed fit. Accordingly, grants were released for salaries, 
honoraria of elected authorities, development works, execution of functions like solid 
waste management and special grants (under notified schemes to financially weaker 
VPs). Details of the grants are given in Table 5.6 below. 
Table 5.6: Grants sanctioned and released by the State Government 
(₹ in crore) 
Type of grant 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 
Zilla Panchayats 
Rural infrastructure grant  10.00 10.00 14.20 9.60 16.00 
Administration grant  4.50 9.00 9.46 9.60 16.00 
Grant to compensate in lieu of octroi  8.00 8.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Total 22.50 27.00 23.66 19.26 32.00 
Village Panchayats 
Matching grant 5.85 5.21 6.10 5.13 5.00 
Grant to compensate in lieu of Octroi 14.00 14.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Salary grant 5.94 5.97 6.03 5.65 9.96 
Garbage grant 1.90 1.91 4.61 1.39 1.95 
Weaker panchayat grant 5.19 8.66 9.97 5.89 13.50 
Development grant 11.77 5.61 14.86 13.45 20.84 
Special component plan for SCs 
(VPs and ZPs) 
1.64 1.04 1.19 1.60 1.95 
Special component plan for STs (VPs 
and ZPs) 
7.82 6.20 7.70 6.39 8.89 
Total  54.11 48.60 50.46 39.50 62.09 
 (Source: Appropriation accounts of Government and information provided by the DoP for the year 
2020-21) 
Existence of multiple grants and uneven trend of disbursement was result of absence 
of principles governing the grants-in-aid to the panchayats from the Consolidated Fund 
of the State. Such principles, expected to be recommended by the State Finance 
Commission were not made as the Commission  was redundant as discussed in  
Paragraph 5.5.  
5.4 Assigned revenues 
Article 243H of the Constitution inter alia provided that the States may make provision 
for assignment of revenues to PRIs, levied and collected by the State Government. 
Specific provision for assignment of certain revenues was made for ULBs in the State 
but similar provision was however, not made in the GPRA for PRIs.  

PA of Implementation of 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act in Goa 
 
36 
On behalf of the PRIs, the Government was collecting additional Value Added Tax 
(VAT) @ two per cent on petrol and diesel and sharing the proceeds with PRIs in lieu 
of octroi. The Government had compensated ₹ 44.00 crore (13.50 per cent) out of total 
revenue of the PRIs (₹ 324.81 crore) in lieu of octroi for the period 2016-18. Upon the 
implementation of Goods and Services Tax (GST) in place of VAT w.e.f. 01.07.2017, 
the Government decided to discontinue (February 2019) the collection and assignment 
of octroi. 
Audit observed that the VAT on diesel and petrol continued to be levied as they were 
not covered under the GST (December 2021). However, the assignment was stopped 
to PRIs without compensating them through any other means. Considering the VAT 
collected on petrol and diesel in 2018 -19, the PRIs were deprived of  
₹ 8.39 crore7 annually. Failure of the State Government to assign an alternative source 
of revenue in place of the discontinued octroi was a setback to the PRIs. 
The Secretary , Panchayats, while acknowledging the observation during the Exit 
Conference (June 2022), stated that the matter would be referred to the SFC for their 
recommendations.  
Thus, an important source of revenue to the PRIs was discontinued, with no alternative 
source being identified. 
Recommendation 8: The Government may identify alternative revenue streams for 
assignment to PRIs in place of the discontinued additional VAT on petrol and diesel. 
5.5 State Finance Commission  
State Finance Commissions (SFCs) were envisaged to reduce intra -state disparities 
through their recommendations on principles governing the distribution and 
assignment of revenues to PRIs and fiscal transfers from Governments. The SFCs 
consider factors like area, population, density of population and economic factors for 
recommending the principles of distribution of resources. Article 243 -I of the 
Constitution provided for setting up a SFC within one year from the commencement 
of the Constitutional Amendment Act, and thereafter, at the expiry of every fifth year. 
The Government made provisions for SFC (Section 199 of GPRA) and constituted 
(April 1999) the first SFC with three members which submitted its Report in June  
1999. The second SFC (SSFC) was constituted in August 2005 and the third in 
December 2016. Audit observed that:  
➢ Government constituted only three SFCs during the period 1999 to 2021 as against 
the six due.  
➢ Reports of the first and second SFC were pending to be submitted to the 
Legislature along with Action Taken Reports. The first SFC made 
recommendations inter alia  for transfer of state’s own revenues and share of 
Central taxes to ZPs (27 per cent ) for transferred activities. Devolution from 
 
7  Two per cent of VAT collected on petrol and diesel (two per cent of ₹ 671.26 crore = ₹13.42 crore). 
The share of PRIs was 62.50 per cent of this = ₹ 8.39 crore.  

Chapter V: Financial resources of PRIs 
 
37 
 
Annual State Plan to PRIs (13 per cent) was also recommended against transferred 
activities, which were however rejected by the Government  with a reason that 
State’s tax revenue was under pressure and funds would be transferred to ZPs as 
per their requirements. The Commission also observed that transferring resources 
without transferring functions and responsibilities served no purpose. The second 
SFC inter alia  undertook the task of mapping the devolved functions with 
activities, to facilitate their implem entation and made recommendations on 
devolution of finances according to the programmes/schemes executed by 
different tiers. The Committee8 constituted (July 2010) to consider the 
implementation of recommendations did not submit its report for more than 11 
years (July 2022), rendering the work of both the SFCs infructuous. 
➢ The third SFC was constituted (December 2016) after a delay of more than six 
years. However, the Commission did not commence functioning due to the lack 
of infrastructure support, like office space, etc. from the Government. 
The SFCs made several recommendations regarding functional and financial 
devolution as well as manpower in PRIs to enable them to function effectively as 
institutions of self -governance. However, pending decision/action on the 
recommendations of the SFCs, the devolution of functions through the GPRA was not 
accompanied by further measures to ensure actual transfer of all devolved functions 
and left the PRIs without much operational scope as observed 9 by the second SFC.  
Recommendations for financial empowerment and provision of staff to PRIs which 
were linked to the devolution of functions were also not acted upon.  
One of the pre-conditions for release of grants from the year from 2022 -23 under the 
FC XV was that the states shall issue notification for the constitution of the SFC in 
such a way so as to have the recommendations available for laying in the State 
Legislature on or before March 2024. The Government notified the reconstitution of 
third State Finance Commission in January 2022.  It was specified in the notification 
that the Chairman and the Members shall initially hold full time office for a period of 
one year and submit its report before expiry of its term. 
The Secretary, Panchayats , acknowledged the observation during Exit Conference 
(June 2022) and stated that  the reconstituted third SFC has commenced functioning 
and is expected to prepare its report by October 2022. However, it was further informed 
(August 2023) by DoP that SFC has submitted its interim report.  
Recommendation 9: The State Government must constitute SFCs as per the 
timeframe prescribed in the Constitution. Recommendations of the SFC may be 
considered and accepted recommendations implemented in a time-bound manner. 
 
8  A Committee was constituted by the Government (July 2010) of five members for examination of 
the report of the SSFC. The composition of the Committee was changed in February 2013. The 
report of the Committee was awaited as of July 2022. 
9  Paragraphs 13.7 and 13.8 of the second State Finance Commission Report 

PA of Implementation of 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act in Goa 
 
38 
5.6 Budget, accounts and audit 
Article 243J of the Constitution provided that the Legislature of a State may, by law, 
make provisions with respect to the maintenance of accounts by the PRIs and audit of 
such accounts. Adequacy of provisions and their compliance related to preparation of 
budget, accounts and audit was verified in Audit  and the f ollowing observations are 
made. 
5.6.1 Budgets in PRIs 
5.6.1.1 Preparation of budget in PRIs 
➢ Section 188 of GPRA provides for the preparation of annual budgets by ZPs 
before the  10th of March every year. Audit observed that neither of the ZPs 
prepared any budget during any of the years from 2016 -17 to 2020 -21. Audit 
noticed that the panchayat of S outh Goa Zilla Panchayat (SG ZP) had resolved 
(May 2016 and March 2017) that the Chief Accounts Officer should prepare the 
budget but the same was not complied with till August 2023. In the absence of any 
source of revenue, the ZPs were dependent on Government grants (administration, 
development grants and assigned revenues till 2017 -18) and received grants 
amounting to ₹ 124.22 crore during the period 2016 -21. The ZPs utilized these 
grants without an approved budget which was a major violation of section 188 of 
GPRA. Also, there was no assurance that the expenditure out of the grants was as 
per a financial plan/ approved priorities mandated by the elected panchayats. 
At the instance of Audit, DoP issued an instruction (August 2023) to ZPs to prepare 
the budgets and submit them to the Government. 
➢ The VPs were required (Section 182 of GPRA) to prepare their budgets before the 
10th of March every year. Audit observed that the GPRA (Section 182 (1) and Rule 
25 (i) of Goa Panchayats (Accounts, Audit and Custody of Funds) Rules, 1995 
made thereunder were not in line with each other as  the GPRA required the VPs 
to prepare the budget between 1 st February to 10th March but the prescribed date 
for submission of budgets to the BDO, as given in the Rule was 1st March.  
➢ In the test-checked 13 VPs 10 a total of 65 budgets (13 VPs for 5 years) were 
prepared during the period 2016 -21. However, 42 of them provided the date of 
preparation of budget . The delay in preparation of budgets and submission to 
BDOs was calculated with respect to last date of submission of the budget to the 
BDO i.e. 1st March. It was found that  10 out of 42 budgets were not prepared in 
time with delays ranging from 04 to 364 days. Thirty-one out of forty-two budgets 
were not submitted to BDOs in time with delays ranging from 01 to 102 days. The 
VPs were also required to submit their budgets to ZPs. However, this was not 
complied with except in 2020 -21, when 09 out 191 VPs submitted their budgets 
to the respective ZPs. 
 
10  Three VPs of Assagaon, Chodan-Madel and Sancorde did not furnish information.  

Chapter V: Financial resources of PRIs 
 
39 
 
While accepting (March 2022) the Audit observations,  the DoP assured that 
instructions would be issued for submission of budgets to ZPs in time.  Further, at the 
instance of Audit, an instruction (August 2023) was issued  by DoP to VPs to ensure 
that budgets are prepared and submitted to ZPs in time.  
5.6.1.2  Unrealistic budgets 
The VPs prepared their budgetary revenue estimates based on expected own revenues 
and allocation of funds by the Government and Finance Commission grants. The 
expenditure estimates were based on capital, O&M and other expenditure for carrying 
out the activities/services required of them.  
Variance in the estimates of receipts and expenditure was analyzed in the test-checked 
16 VPs for the period 2016-17 to 2020-21 and are shown in Appendix 4.  
In case of test-checked VPs, the actual revenue vis-à-vis the budget ranged between 
34 to 84 per cent, while the expenditure vis-à-vis the budget ranged between 31 to 54 
per cent. In the VPs, expenditure towards basic services like rural housing and drinking 
water, education and culture, social welfare and poverty alleviation programmes was 
less than one per cent of actual total expenditure during the period 2016-21. 
The Secretary, Panchayats, acknowledged (June 2022) the observation and assured that 
options would be explored to make the budgets more realistic.  
Non-preparation of budgets by ZPs, delays in preparation of budgets of VPs and their 
being unrealistic, indicated that compliance of provisions for preparation and 
submission of budgets was not effective. 
Recommendation 10: The ZPs may ensure that budgets are prepared annually and 
approved by the elected panchayat. The Directorate of Panchayats may monitor and 
support the timely preparation of budgets by PRIs. 
5.6.2   Accounts and audit  
Article 243J of the Constitution provides that the Legislature of a State may, by law, 
make provisions with respect to the maintenance of accounts by the Panchayats and 
the audit of such accounts. On the recommendation of the Eleventh Finance 
Commission (2001), the Model Accounting System (MAS) was prescribed by 
Ministry of Panchayati Raj (MoPR), GoI in consultation with the CAG and simplified 
in 2009. However, the same was not implemented by the PRIs in the State. The MoPR 
launched (September 2010) an accounting software called Panchay ati Raj Institution 
Accounting Software (PRIASoft)11. Further, MoPR merged (April 2020) the PRIASoft 
application with other applications called e-GramSwaraj a web -based portal . T he  
e-GramSwaraj was adopted only for the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Finance 
Commission Grants for VPs. It was further informed (February 2024) by Secretary, 
Panchayats, that e-GramSwaraj was being used for preparation of Z illa Panchayat 
 
11  PRIASoft is one of the Common Core Applications under Panchayat Enterprises Suits (PES) of  
e- Panchayat MMP 

PA of Implementation of 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act in Goa 
 
40 
Development Plan (ZPDP) . The status of preparation of accounts and audit is 
discussed in the succeeding paragraphs. 
➢ No rules were prescribed under the GPRA for maintenance of accounts of ZPs, 
unlike that for VPs 12. Accounts of N orth Goa Zilla Panchayat (N GZP) were 
incorrectly prepared from 2009 -10 till 2015-16. Further, the accounts were not 
submitted by NGZP for the period 2016 -17 onwards for Audit. Hence, the audit 
of these years' accounts could not be conducted by the CAG.  
The NGZP agreed (March 2022) to correct the accounts and resubmit for audit. 
Though the DoP did not call for accounts from the ZPs as required under Section 
175(3) of the GPRA, it agreed (March 2022) to take up the matter with the ZP. At the 
instance of Audit, DoP issued an instruction (August 2023) to correct the accounts. 
➢ In all test-checked 16 VPs, annual accounts were prepared till 2020-21 (as on June 
2022) in accordance with the formats prescribed in  ‘The Goa Panchayats 
(Accounts, Audit and Custody of Funds) Rules, 1997’ . The DoP stated (March 
2022) that the issue of onboarding of e-GramSwaraj for other schemes (State and 
Central) would be considered.  
The Secretary, Panchayats, acknowledged the observation during Exit Conference 
(June 2022) and stated that the Department would take up the matter regarding the 
rules and preparation of pending accounts.  
➢ MoPR developed an application ‘AuditOnline’ for online audit of PRIs. It 
facilitated internal and external audit of PRIs including financial audit of accounts. 
MoPR instructed (October 2020) the State Governments to get 20 per cent of VPs 
audited during 2020-21. It was observed that the audit cell of DoP conducted audit 
of accounts of FC XIV grants for 48 VPs (out of 191) for the year 2019-20, while 
the audit of accounts for the year 2020-21 were yet to be conducted.  
The Secretary, Panchayats, while acknowledging the observation during Exit 
Conference (June 2022) stated that audits were now being undertaken in ‘AuditOnline’ 
application. It was informed (August 2023) by DoP that audit of Finance Commission 
grants was being conducted in ‘AuditOnline’ application. 
➢ The Director of Accounts, who was the Statutory Auditor for the VPs 13 
discontinued the audits with effect from April 2018 with the approval of the 
Government of Goa due to lack of manpower. As a result, the accounts of VPs 
were not audited from 2018 -19 till 2020 -21(March 2022). The Director of 
Accounts informed that audits of VPs have been resumed from April 2022.  
There were delays in the preparation of accounts of ZPs.  Discontinuation of audit of 
Local Bodies by the Statutory Auditor was a serious lapse.  
 
12   The Goa Panchayats (Accounts, Audit and Custody of Funds) Rules, 1997.  
13  Section 187 of GPRA read with Rule 23 of the Goa Panchayats (Accounts, Audit and Custody of 
Funds) Rules, 1997. 

Chapter V: Financial resources of PRIs 
 
41 
 
Recommendation 11: The Government may notify Accounting Rules for PRIs based 
on Model Accounting System . The Directorate of Panchayats may monitor and 
support the timely preparation of accounts of PRIs and their audit. 
5.6.3 Revenue expenditure gap in PRIs 
Analysis of trends of revenue and expenditure for two ZPs and 191 VPs revealed that 
while ZPs faced 100 per cent revenue-expenditure gap14, the VPs were able to generate 
their own revenues to meet about 60 per cent of their total expenditure during the audit 
period as shown in Table 5.7 below. 
Table 5.7: Comparison of own revenues of VPs to expenditure 
(₹ in crore)  
Year Own revenue Total expenditure Percentage of own revenue to 
total expenditure 
2016-17 61.86 102.10 60.58 
2017-18 70.26 114.42 61.40 
2018-19 63.30 115.38 54.86 
2019-20 81.86 133.13 61.49 
2020-21 83.77 136.56 61.34 
Total 361.06 601.61 60.01 
(Source: Information provided by DoP) 
Audit observed that 46 out of 191 VPs were able to meet the establishment expenditure 
out of their own revenues during 2016-17 to 2020-21 and four15 had a mixed record of 
being able to meet during a few years, while failing to do so in other years. The 
remaining 141 VPs could not meet their establishment expenditures during any of the 
five years.  
Majority of the PRIs were not able to meet even their establishment expenditure out 
of their own resources. Inability of PRIs to earn sufficient own revenue resulted in 
increased dependence on grants from the Government. 
 
 
 
14  The revenue expenditure gap indicates difference between earned revenue by a Local Body by using 
its statutory means like taxes, fees, etc. and total expenditure. 
15  Dhargalim-met the expenditure status: two year s (yes), three year s (no); Davorlim - met the 
expenditure status: three year s (yes), two year s (no); Camorlim- met the expenditure status: three 
years (yes), two year s (no); Veling, Priol, Cuncoliem - met the expenditure status: one year (yes), 
four years (no). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter VI 
Human resources in 
Panchayati Raj Institutions

 

 
Chapter VI: Human resources in Panchayati  
Raj Institutions 
Availability of adequate human resources was a necessary condition for effective 
implementation of their mandate by the local bodies. Absence of dedicated cadres as 
well as the role of other organizations in the implementation of functions, left the PRIs 
with a small number of functionaries vis -à-vis the manpower at the disposal of the 
Block Development Offices (BDOs)  and D istrict Rural Development Agencies 
(DRDAs). Lack of a concerted and systematic approach to capacity building of PRI 
functionaries impaired their capacity to effectively perform the functions devolved.  
The 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act  required the State Governments to devolve 
functions enumerated in the Eleventh Schedule to the P anchayati Raj Institutions 
(PRIs), as well as endow them with the necessary powers and authority to carry out 
their functions. As per their mandate, broad categorization of the functions performed 
by PRIs is as mentioned in Table 6.1 below. 
Table 6.1: Functional framework in PRIs 
(Source: Goa Panchayat Raj Act, 1994 (GPRA)) 
Availability of adequate and qualified manpower is a pre-requisite for any organization 
to discharge their functions in an efficient and effective manner. Adequacy of 
manpower and their capacity building were scrutinized in audit and the following were 
observed.   
6.1 Adequacy of manpower  
The requirement of manpower in a PRI would inter alia depend on the geographical 
area, size of the population, functions to be executed, etc. and adequacy of manpower 
is to be assessed accordingly.  
6.1.1 Manpower of Zilla Panchayats 
Section 150 of GPRA provided for the appointment of Chief Executive Officers (CEO) 
and Chief Accounts Officer (CAO) and constitution of services for ZPs. ZPs were 
sanctioned manpower for administrative functions vide orders of Government (1999 
and 2000) upon the formation of ZPs in the State. The posts of CEO, Chief Finance 
Officers, Accountants and other administrative staff was sanctioned. The status of 
manpower in ZPs was as shown in Table 6.2. 
Category Function 
Administration General administration, including meetings of panchayats and committees 
(Both Zilla Panchayat (ZP) and Village Panchayats (VPs)) 
Engineering Construction of roads and bridges, other repair and maintenance of public 
amenities and community assets (Both ZPs and VPs)  
Revenue  Imposition of taxes and fees and their collection  (only VPs) 
Finance & Accounts  Preparation of plans, budgets and accounts and expenditure monitoring 
(Both ZPs and VPs) 
Regulation  Regulation of constructions and trade through licensing (only VPs) 

PA of Implementation of 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act in Goa 
 
44 
Table 6.2: Manpower of Zilla Panchayats 
(Source: Information provided by the ZPs) 
The DoP created (2008) a cadre of technical manpower for execution of works of PRIs.  
The ZPs were supported by the DoP’s technical cadres in the preparation of plans and 
execution of public works. However, no plans were prepared  by the technical 
manpower provided and only the execution of works was carried out. 
The DoP sent a proposal1 (2008) to the Government for constitution of administrative 
services, technical services and district rural development services for carrying out the 
functions of the PRIs. The draft rule for constitution of these services was also sent 
(January 2009) to ZPs for comments but they were pending consideration for over 14 
years (August 2023). The ZPs thus depended upon the manpower controlled by the 
DoP for the execution of all public works. Further, as the ZPs did not have the 
necessary technical manpower , the DoP, through the BDOs retained effective 
administrative and technical control over the functions executed by the VPs under their 
jurisdiction.  
The absence of cadres in ZPs and the resulting constraints were acknowledged  
(June 2022) by the Secretary, Panchayats during the Exit Conference. The DoP further 
informed (August 2023) that the proposal was under consideration of the Government. 
Execution of functions devolved to the ZPs as well as their supervisory responsibilities 
vis-à-vis VPs were impacted by the lack of adequate and specialised manpower with 
them. 
 
1  The Goa Zilla Panchayat (Constitution of services, recruitment, and other conditions of service) 
Rules, 2008. 
Category Function Sanction for 
manpower 
Persons-in-Position 
Administration General 
administration 
including meetings 
of panchayats and 
committees. 
CEO were to be 
posted for every 
ZP. 
CEO was posted by Government 
from the State administration cadre. 
Engineering Execution of public 
works. 
Manpower was 
not assessed. 
Manpower was provided from DoP’s 
cadre of technical manpower on 
working arrangement basis. Planning  Preparation of 
plans and 
execution. 
Finance & 
Accounts 
Preparation of 
budgets and 
accounts and 
expenditure 
monitoring. 
One CAO and one 
Accountant each 
was sanctioned 
for ZP. 
Sanctioned manpower was appointed 
by State Government from cadre of 
the Directorate of Accounts. 
Other 
subordinate 
manpower 
Subordinate 
manpower for 
administration and 
other functions. 
22 Group C and D 
posts were 
sanctioned.  
21 contractual staff were appointed 
against 14 vacancies. 

Chapter VI: Human resources in PRIs 
 
45 
6.1.2 Manpower of Village Panchayats 
Section 113 of the GPRA provided for the appointment of Secretary of VPs. Section 
114 of GPRA provided that the Government may, by order, specify the staffing pattern, 
the scales of pay and mode of recruitment of staff of panchayats.  Accordingly, 
manpower for VPs was sanctioned by the Government, vide ‘Goa Panchayat (staffing 
pattern, scales of pay and mode of recruitment of staff of Panchayats) Order, 2003, 
revised in 2007 and 2010. The order prescribed the number of clerks and peons to be 
appointed2 according to their category. Amendment to order (2007) enabled the VPs 
to appoint one Pound keeper, one Driver for garbage vehicle, one Librarian and one 
Library Attendant. The order also enabled the financially capable VPs to appoint any 
additional staff temporarily for a specific purpose (with the approval of the  
Gram Sabha and the DoP).  Such personnel could be recruited through a Departmental 
Selection Committee comprising the Sarpanch of the VP, BDO and representative of 
the CEO of ZP.  
The staff position in 16 test-checked VPs is shown in Table 6.3 below. 
Table 6.3: Staff position of 16 test-checked VPs 
Post Sanctioned 
strength  
Person-in -
position 
Vacant post Contractual 
staff 
VP Secretary 16 16 00 00 
Clerks and peons 45 31 14 38 
Total 61 47 14 38 
(Source: Information provided by the 16 VPs) 
The Village Secretaries who were Government employees were appointed by the DoP. 
There were 31 persons posted as clerks and peons against the 45 posts sanctioned in 
test-checked VPs. The vacancies were operated through the appointment of contractual 
staff. The VPs depended upon the BDO for technical support and approvals of public 
works due to non-availability of technical manpower in the PRI system. 
6.2 Role of other organizations implementing PRI functions  
The DoP had not transferred the administrative and functional control of VPs to ZPs 
and instead exercised this control over VPs  through the BDOs. Further, the DRDAs 
working under the administrative control of the Department of Rural Development 
executed certain functions which overlapped with PRI functions. As a result, the BDOs 
and DRDAs possessed the manpower which should ideally have been available to the 
PRIs.  
6.2.1 Block Development Offices 
Block level panchayats, an intermediate tier of the PRI system is absent in Goa, unlike 
in majority of the states due to its small size. However, there existed an administrative 
tier at the level of Blocks under the DoP. The Block Development Offices had a total 
 
2  A class VPs - three clerks and one peon; B class VPs - two clerks and one peon; C and D class VPs 
- one clerk and one peon. 

PA of Implementation of 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act in Goa 
 
46 
sanctioned  strength of 5 163 with 15 BDOs and 501 subordinate staff, against which 
all except 19 subordinate staff positions were filled. 
As pointed out in Paragraph 4.2, the effective functional and administrative linkage 
is not developed between VPs and ZPs. The VPs reported to the BDOs for 
administrative and functional purposes, who were then reporting to Administrative 
Department. The requirements of functioning of bo th the tiers of PRIs for effective 
planning, financial control and execution of function can be addressed only if there 
exists a middle tier of functionaries too forming a link. Consideration of full or part 
transfer of funct ionaries at BDO level to the PRI system may help to establish the 
missing link and also fulfil the requirement of manpower for the PRI system.   
6.2.2 District Rural Development Agency 
The DRDAs which implemented State and Central rural development schemes, 
recruited manpower for their administrative and technical functions (as against 
sanctioned strength of 98 in two DRDAs4, 67 were in position). Additionally, the 
DRDAs also engaged manpower in accordance with the guidelines of the schemes for 
implementation of schemes (Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee 
Scheme (M GNREGS) and National Rural Livelihood Mission ( NRLM)). For 
implementation of MGNREGS, the DRDAs deployed a total manpower of 230 persons 
(15 Programme Officers,  20 Assistant Engineers, 19 Accountants  and 176 Gram 
Rozgar Sahayaks) at  the District, Block and VP levels.  
Audit noticed that  the DRDA either fully or partially carried out  activities under 10 
functions5 devolved to ZPs ( Table 4.2 ). DRDAs utilised their own manpower and 
executed schemes in association with VPs/BDOs. 
The Ministry of Rural Development (M oRD), G overnment of India (Go I) decided 
(November 2021 ) the  discontinuation of ‘ DRDA Administration Scheme’  and 
suggested the merger of DRDAs with ZPs . It was further suggested that staff  on 
deputation may be repatriated and other staff may be absorbed by line departments or 
continue to work on schemes. However, the State Government has not initiated any 
steps for the same and implementation of schemes continued to remain with DRDAs. 
Pending merger of DRDAs with ZPs, the manpower of 2 30 persons in MGNREGS 
and 67 in DRDAs continued to remain outside the system of PRIs. 
The DoP replied (August 2023) that there was no proposal for merger of DRDAs and 
they were under a separate Department.  
PRIs required adequate and competent manpower to execute the various development 
and civic functions in an efficient and accountable manner. However, due to the 
absence of dedicated cadres as well as the role of other organizations in the 
 
3  BDOs, Secretaries of VPs, Gram Sevaks and subordinate staff.  
4  Two DRDAs – one each in North Goa and South Goa  
5  1. Agriculture including agricultural extension; 2. Minor forest produce; 3. Rural housing; 4.  Social 
forestry and Farm forestry ; 5. Minor forest produce; 6. Rural housing; 7. Fuel and fodder; 8. Non-
conventional energy sources ; 9. Poverty alleviation programme; and 10. Health and sanitation 
including hospitals, primary health centres and dispensaries.                

Chapter VI: Human resources in PRIs 
 
47 
implementation of functions meant to be performed by PRIs, they were left with 
insufficient number of functionaries to carry out the designated tasks.  
Recommendation 12: Rationalization of manpower requirements of PRIs may be 
considered including the transfer/creation of appropriate cadres for the specialized 
functions of the PRIs.  
6.3 Capacity building                       
The Goa Institute of Public Administration & Rural Development (GIPARD), a 
registered society, is the apex institute for training State Government employees and 
those of autonomous bodies.  
GIPARD conducted training programmes for PRIs on various subjects such as 
preparation of development plans, conduct of Gram Sabha, preparation of plans for 
utilisation of finance commission grants, operation of village development 
committees, implementation of Swach h Bharat Mission, malnutrition, office 
procedures, management information systems and social audits. ‘Rashtriya Gram 
Swaraj Abhiyan (RGSA)’6 a Government of India scheme, was an important scheme 
having components of trainings and capacity building. The said component under the 
program was implemented by GIPARD, meant for elected representatives and officials 
of PRIs, the focus of the scheme inter alia was to ensure basic orientation training for 
the elected representatives of PRIs, within six months of their election and refresher 
trainings within two years. Under the RGSA scheme, the GIPARD had to prepare 
Annual Action Plan  (AAP) to impart training which was approved by the Central 
Executive Committee (CEC), Ministry of Panchayati Raj (MoPR), GoI. The number 
of trainings proposed, approved and conducted under RGSA is shown in the Table 6.4 
below.    
Table 6.4: Number of trainings under RGSA to PRI officials and non-officials 
Year No of trainings proposed 
in Annual Action Plan 
No. of trainings 
approved by CEC  
Total trainings  
No. Trainees 
2016-17 376 376 101 3905 
2017-18 152 152 63 3179 
2018-19 91 91 45 2071 
2019-20 34 34 119 3098 
2020-21 120 120 57 2033 
Total 773 773 385 14286 
(Source: Information provided by GIPARD) 
Audit observed that:  
➢ Total trainings showed a reducing trend from 2016 -17 to 2020 -21 (except  
2019-20). The CEC had approved 773 trainings to be conducted under the scheme 
for the period 2016-21 but the GIPARD conducted only 385 trainings.  
 
6  ‘Rajiv Gandhi Panchayat Sashaktikaran Abhiyan’ was implemented with effect from 2013-14. The 
scheme was restructured as ‘Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Abhiyan ’ (RGSA) for implementation with 
effect from April 2018. 

PA of Implementation of 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act in Goa 
 
48 
➢ Twenty-one trainings were conducted (2017-18) for orientation of newly elected 
representatives of VPs which was attended by 1,119 elected representatives out of 
1,555.  A similar training programme (2017-18) for newly elected representatives 
of ZPs was attended only by 16 out of 50 elected representatives.  
➢ There were 624 elected women representatives in the PRIs of Goa. Three separate 
trainings were conducted by the GIPARD for elected women representatives 
which was however, attended by  45 and 11 in 2016 -17 and 45 elected 
representatives in 2018-19. 
Audit noticed that though the trainings were not mandatory for elected representatives, 
the State Government otherwise insisted the member s to attend the courses but there 
was still a lot of shortfall in attendance.  
➢ Sharing pattern of the scheme was in the ratio of 60:40 between Centre and State. 
The Central Government contributed ₹ 2.65 crore of its share under RGSA during 
the years from 2015-16 to 2017-18, while the State Government contributed ₹ one 
crore for the year 2020 -21. The GIPARD did not receive Central grants for the 
period 2018-19 to 2020-21 as the State Government did not release its contribution 
in time. Hence, the number of trainings conducted for PRIs by GIPARD fell way 
short of the planned number.  
Audit observed that t he trainings and capacity building programmes were  conducted 
on areas like administration, planning, execution of functions, implementation of 
schemes, maintenance of accounts, social audits , etc. Attending the same could help 
elected representative and officials to have better capacity to attend administrative and 
functional requirements effectively. However, the benefits of trainings/ programmes 
could not be availed by the functionaries who did not attend the same. Further, audit 
also noticed that neither GIPARD nor the DoP/PRIs conducted any training needs 
analysis for the staff of PRIs during the audit period.  
The GIPARD accepted (March 2022) that trainings were not carried out according to 
plan and informed that the number of training programmes was reduced due to fund 
constraints. At the instance of Audit,  the DoP further requested (August 2023) the 
GIPARD to ensure that training need analysis is carried out and required number of 
trainings are conducted.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Chapter VI: Human resources in PRIs 
 
49 
Recommendation 13: Training Need Assessment may be carried out and systematic 
capacity building of PRI functionaries may be taken  up to strengthen their 
competencies, skills and knowledge. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Panaji                   (ANITHA BALAKRISHNA) 
The 06 May 2024                          Principal Accountant General 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Countersigned 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi                 (GIRISH CHANDRA MURMU) 
The 08 May 2024   Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendices 
 
 
 
  

 

Appendices 
 
 
 51 
APPENDIX 1 
(Referred to in Paragraph 4.1) 
Devolution of functions to Zilla Panchayats and actual status of implementation 
 
Sl. No. Functions listed in Eleventh 
Schedule of Constitution 
Devolution under GPRA Sub-functions under 
GPRA 
Status of 
implementation  
Audit remarks 
  I General functions. Overall supervision, co -
ordination and integration of 
development schemes at 
District levels and preparing 
the plan for the development 
of the District. 
The functions were not 
implemented to the extent 
as pointed in the 
Paragraphs 5.6.1.1, 4.4.2 
and 4.3. 
 
Function not 
devolved by 
Constitution but 
devolved under 
GPRA.  
1 Agriculture including agricultural 
extension. 
  
II 
Agriculture 
(including 
Agricultural 
Extension) and 
Horticulture. 
(1) Establishment and 
maintenance of godown. 
Not implemented. Sub-functions 
implemented by the 
Department of 
Agriculture.  
 
(2) Management of 
agricultural and 
horticultural extensions 
and training centres. 
(3) Training of farmers. 
2 Land improvement, 
implementation of land reforms, 
land consolidation and soil 
conservation. 
III Land improvement 
and soil 
conservation. 
Planning and 
implementation of land 
improvement and soil 
conservation programmes 
entrusted by the 
Government. 
Not implemented. Function 
implemented by 
Department of 
Revenue, Town and 
Country Planning 
Department and 
Department of 
Agriculture.  
3 Minor irrigation, water 
management and watershed 
development. 
IV Minor Irrigation, 
Water Management 
and Watershed 
Development. 
(1) Providing for the timely 
and equitable 
distribution and full use 
of water under irrigation 
schemes under the 
control of the Zilla 
Panchayat. 
Function was executed 
by one of the ZPs by 
constructing the bandhs. 
Function was partially 
implemented.  
There are no 
schemes 
transferred to ZPs 
by Water 
Resources 
Department. 
 
(2) Development of ground 
water resources. 
Not implemented. Sub-function 
implemented by 
the Department of 
Water Resources. 

PA of Implementation of 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act in Goa 
 
 52 
Sl. No. Functions listed in Eleventh 
Schedule of Constitution 
Devolution under GPRA Sub-functions under 
GPRA 
Status of 
implementation  
Audit remarks 
(3) Supervision over the 
minor irrigation works 
undertaken by Taluka 
Panchayat. 
Not implemented. Sub-function is 
not applicable as 
there are no 
Taluka 
Panchayats. 
4 Animal husbandry, dairying and 
poultry. 
 
V Animal Husbandry, 
Dairying and 
Poultry. 
(1) Supervision over the 
Village Veterinary   
Hospitals, first -aid 
Centres and Mobile 
Veterinary dispensaries. 
Not implemented. Sub-functions are 
implemented by 
the Department of 
Animal 
Husbandry.  
(2) Training for farmers of 
dairy farming, Poultry 
and Piggery. 
Not implemented. 
5 Fisheries. VI Fisheries. (1) Development of 
fisheries in irrigation 
works vested in the Zilla 
Panchayat.  
Not implemented. Sub-functions are 
implemented by 
Department of 
fisheries  
(2) Promotion of inland, 
brackish water and 
marine fish culture. 
Not implemented. 
6 Khadi, village and cottage 
industries 
VII Khadi, Village and 
Cottage Industries 
(1) Establishment and 
Management of 
Training-cum-
Production Centre. 
Not implemented. Sub-function is 
implemented by 
the Khadi and 
Village Industries 
Board. 
(2) Organisation of 
marketing facilities for 
products of cottage and 
village industries. 
Not implemented. Sub-function is 
implemented by 
the VPs. 
7 Small-scale industries, including 
food processing industries 
VIII Small-Scale 
industries including 
Food Processing 
Industries 
 Educating youth for 
establishment of Small -
Scale Industries. 
Not implemented. Sub-function is 
continued to be 
implemented by 
the Department of 
Industries, Trade 
and Commerce 
(DITC). 

Appendices 
 
 
 53 
Sl. No. Functions listed in Eleventh 
Schedule of Constitution 
Devolution under GPRA Sub-functions under 
GPRA 
Status of 
implementation  
Audit remarks 
8 Rural housing IX Rural Housing Guidance to the Taluka 
Panchayat for Promotion 
of Rural  Housing 
Programme. 
Not implemented.  Sub-function is 
not applicable as 
there are no 
Taluka 
Panchayats. 
Rural Housing 
programme is 
implemented by 
DRDAs. 
9 Drinking water X Drinking Water  Guidance for promotion 
of drinking water and 
rural sanitation to 
Taluka Panchayat and 
Village Panchayat. 
Not implemented. Sub-function is 
continued to be 
implemented by 
the Public Works 
Department.  
10 Minor forest produce. XI Minor forest 
produce and Fuel 
and Fodder. 
 Guidance for the 
management of minor 
forest produce of the 
forest raised community 
lands. 
Not implemented. Sub-functions are 
continued to be 
implemented by 
the Department of 
Forest.  
11 Fuel and fodder Minor forest 
produce and Fuel 
and Fodder 
Not implemented. 
12 Roads, culverts, bridges, ferries, 
waterways and other means of 
communication. 
XII Roads, Buildings, 
Bridges, Ferries, 
Waterways and 
other means of 
communication. 
(1) Construction and 
maintenance of District 
roads and culverts, 
causeways and bridges 
(excluding State 
Highways and Village 
roads). 
Construction or 
maintenance of roads is 
executed. 
Implemented 
 
Sub-functions are  
also continued to 
be implemented 
by the DRDAs 
(MGNREGS and 
GGSY schemes). 
(2) Construction of 
administrative and other 
buildings connected 
with the requirements of 
the Zilla Panchayat. 
  Not implemented. Sub-functions are 
continued to be 
implemented by 
the DRDAs 
(MGNREGS and 
GGSY schemes). 
(3) Supervision over the 
works undertaken by 
Village Panchayat and 
Not implemented. Sub-function 
continued to be 
implemented by 

PA of Implementation of 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act in Goa 
 
 54 
Sl. No. Functions listed in Eleventh 
Schedule of Constitution 
Devolution under GPRA Sub-functions under 
GPRA 
Status of 
implementation  
Audit remarks 
Taluka Panchayat as 
regards to the 
construction of roads. 
the Department of 
Panchayat. 
13 Non-conventional energy sources. XIII Non-Conventional, 
Energy sources. 
 Promotion and 
development of non -
conventional energy 
sources. 
Not implemented. Sub-function 
continued to be 
implemented by 
the Department of 
Science and 
Technology. 
14 Poverty alleviation programme. XIV Poverty Alleviation 
Programmes. 
 Supervision over the 
implementation of 
poverty alleviation 
programmes in the 
Village Panchayat. 
Not implemented. Sub-function 
continued to be 
implemented by 
the Department of 
Social Welfare 
and DRDA. 
15 Education including primary and 
secondary schools. 
XV Education including 
primary schools. 
(1) Promotion of 
educational activities in 
the District including the 
establishment and 
maintenance of Higher 
Secondary Schools. 
Not implemented. Sub-function 
continued to be 
implemented by 
the Department of 
Education.  
(2) Establishment and 
maintenance of Ashram 
School and orphanages. 
Not implemented. Sub-functions 
continued to be  
implemented by 
the Government 
Departments.  
(3) Survey and evaluation 
of educational activities. 
Not implemented. Sub-functions 
also continued to 
be implemented 
by Department of 
Education. 
(4) Construction and 
maintenance of Higher 
Secondary Schools. 
One sub -function of 
construction and 
maintenance of higher 
secondary schools was 
done as works related to 
repairs of school 
buildings, wells, toilets, 

Appendices 
 
 
 55 
Sl. No. Functions listed in Eleventh 
Schedule of Constitution 
Devolution under GPRA Sub-functions under 
GPRA 
Status of 
implementation  
Audit remarks 
stages, playgrounds 
were carried out by ZPs. 
Partially implemented. 
16 Technical training and vocational 
education. 
XVI Technical training 
and Vocational 
Education. 
 Encouraging and 
assisting rural 
vocational training. 
Not implemented. Sub-function 
continued to be  
implemented by 
the Department of 
Technical 
Education. 
17 Adult and non-formal education. XVII Adult and non-
formal Education. 
 Supervision over the 
implementation of 
programmes of Adult 
Literacy and non-formal 
Education Programme.   
Not Implemented. Sub-function 
continued to be  
implemented by 
the Department of 
Education. 
18 Health and sanitation including 
hospitals, primary health centres 
and dispensaries. 
XVIII Health and Family 
Welfare. 
(1) Management of 
Hospitals and 
dispensaries excluding 
those under the 
management of 
Government or any local 
authority. 
 
Not implemented. Sub-functions 
continued to be  
implemented by 
the Department of 
Health. 
(2) Supervision over the 
implementation of 
maternity and Child 
Health programme. 
Not implemented. 
(3) Supervision over the 
implementation of 
immunisation and 
vaccination programme. 
Not implemented. 
(4) Supervision over the 
implementation of 
family welfare 
programme. 
Not implemented. 
19 Family welfare. 
20 Women and child development. XIX Woman and Child 
Development. 
(1) Supervision over the 
promotion of 
Not implemented. Sub-functions 
continued to be  

PA of Implementation of 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act in Goa 
 
 56 
Sl. No. Functions listed in Eleventh 
Schedule of Constitution 
Devolution under GPRA Sub-functions under 
GPRA 
Status of 
implementation  
Audit remarks 
programme relating to 
development of Women 
and Children. 
implemented by 
the Department of 
Women and Child 
Development. (2) Supervision over the 
promotion of school 
health and nutrition 
programme. 
Not implemented. 
(3) Supervision over the 
promotion of 
participation of 
voluntary organisation 
in Women and Child 
Development 
Programmes. 
Not implemented. 
21 Social welfare including welfare of 
the handicapped and mentally 
retarded. 
XX Welfare of the 
weaker sections and 
in particular welfare 
of handicapped and 
mentally retarded. 
 Promotion of Social 
Welfare Programme  
including Welfare of 
handicapped, mentally 
retarded and destitute. 
Not implemented. Sub-function 
continued to be 
implemented by 
the Department of 
Social Welfare. 
22 Welfare of the weaker sections, 
and in particular of  the Scheduled 
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes. 
XXI Welfare of the 
weaker sections and 
in particular of the 
Scheduled Castes 
and Scheduled 
Tribes. 
 Supervision and 
management of hostels 
in the District, 
distribution of grants, 
loans and subsidies to 
individuals and other 
Schemes for the welfare 
of Scheduled Castes, 
Scheduled Tribes and 
Backward Classes. 
Not implemented. Sub-function 
continued to be 
implemented by 
the Departments 
of Social and 
Tribal Welfare. 
23 Maintenance of community assets. XXII Maintenance of 
Community assets. 
 Supervision and 
guidance over the 
community assets 
maintained by Taluka 
Panchayat and Village 
Panchayat. 
Not implemented. Sub-function 
continued to be 
implemented by 
the Department of 
Panchayat.  

Appendices 
 
 
 57 
Sl. No. Functions listed in Eleventh 
Schedule of Constitution 
Devolution under GPRA Sub-functions under 
GPRA 
Status of 
implementation  
Audit remarks 
24 Cultural activities. XXIII Cultural activities.  Promotion of social and 
cultural activities. 
Not implemented. Sub-function 
continued to be 
implemented by 
the Department of 
Art and Culture. 
25 Rural electrification including 
distribution of electricity. 
XXIV Rural 
electrification. 
 Supervision over 
electrification by Taluka 
Panchayat and Village 
Panchayat. 
Not implemented. Sub-function 
continued to be 
implemented by 
the Department of 
Electricity.  
26 Libraries. XXV Libraries.  Supervision over the 
construction of libraries 
by Taluka Panchayat 
and Village Panchayat. 
Not implemented. Sub-function 
continued to be 
implemented by 
the Department of 
Art and Culture.  
  XXVI Such other 
functions as may be 
entrusted. 
-- -- -- 
Following Functions in the Eleventh Schedule were not devolved with corresponding function in Schedule II of GPRA 
1 Social forestry and Farm forestry. Function not devolved in the 
Act. 
Not applicable. Function not 
implemented by ZPs. 
 
Function was 
implemented by 
Department of 
Forest and 
DRDAs. 
2 Public Distribution system. Function not devolved in the 
Act. 
Not applicable. Function not 
implemented by ZPs. 
Function was 
implemented by 
State Department 
(Public Distribution 
and Food Supplies).  
3 Markets and Fairs. Function not devolved in the 
Act. 
Not applicable. Function not 
implemented by ZPs. 
Sub-function of 
‘Regulation and 
fairs (including 
cattle fairs) and 
festivals’ is 
devolved to VPs 

PA of Implementation of 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act in Goa 
 
 58 
Sl. No. Functions listed in Eleventh 
Schedule of Constitution 
Devolution under GPRA Sub-functions under 
GPRA 
Status of 
implementation  
Audit remarks 
(Item No. XVII of 
Schedule I under 
GPRA).  
(Source: Eleventh Schedule to the Constitution, Schedule II of GPRA and information provided by the PRIs and Department) 
  

Appendices 
 
 
 59 
APPENDIX 2 
(Referred to in Paragraph 4.1) 
Devolution of functions to Village Panchayats and actual status of implementation 
Sl. No. Functions listed in 
Eleventh Schedule of 
the Constitution 
Devolution under GPRA Sub-functions under GPRA Status of 
Implementation in 
VPs 
Audit remarks 
  I General functions. (1) Preparation of annual plans for 
development of the panchayat area. 
The sub -function was 
implemented to the 
extent pointed in 
Paragraph 4.4. 
Function not devolved by 
the Constitution but 
devolved by GPRA. 
(2)  Preparation of annual budget. The sub -function was 
implemented to the 
extent pointed in the 
Paragraph 5.6 
(3)  Providing reliefs in natural calamities. Not Implemented. 
(4) Removal of encroachments on public 
properties. 
Not Implemented. 
(5) Organising voluntary labour and 
contribution for community works. 
Not Implemented. 
(6)  Maintenance of essential statistics of the 
village. 
Implemented. 
(7)  Demolition of unauthorised construction. Not Implemented 
1 Agriculture including 
agricultural extension. 
II Agriculture including agricultural 
extension. 
(1)  Development of waste lands. Not Implemented. Sub-functions continued 
to be i mplemented by the 
Department of 
Agriculture and by the 
DRDAs under 
MGNREGS. 
(2)  Development and maintenance of grazing 
lands and preventing their unauthorised 
alienation and use. 
Not Implemented. 
2 Animal husbandry, 
dairying and poultry. 
III Animal Husbandry, Dairying and 
Poultry. 
(1) Promotion of dairy farming, poultry and 
piggery. 
Implemented. Director of Animal 
Husbandry through the 
Government Schemes, 
while VPs promoted these 
schemes in their 
respective VP with the 
help of the Department. 
(2) Grass land development. Not Implemented. 

PA of Implementation of 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act in Goa 
 
 60 
Sl. No. Functions listed in 
Eleventh Schedule of 
the Constitution 
Devolution under GPRA Sub-functions under GPRA Status of 
Implementation in 
VPs 
Audit remarks 
Function is partially 
executed.  
3 Fisheries. IV Fisheries. (1) Development of fisheries in the villages. Not implemented. Sub-function continued to 
be i mplemented by  the 
Department of Fisheries. 
4 Social forestry and 
farm forestry. 
V Social and Farm Forestry, minor 
Forest Produce Fuel and Fodder. 
(1) Planting and preservation of trees on the 
sides of roads and other public lands under its 
control. 
Not implemented. Sub-functions continued 
to be i mplemented by the 
Department of Forest and 
the DRDAs. (2) Fuel plantation and fodder development. Not implemented. 
5 Minor Forest. (3) Promotion of farm forestry. Not implemented. 
6 Fuel and Fodder. (4) Development of Social forestry Not implemented. 
7 Khadi, village and 
cottage industries. 
VI Khadi, Village and Cottage 
Industries. 
(1) Promotion of rural and cottage industries. Implemented. VPs promote d schemes 
implemented by the 
‘Khadi and Village 
Industries Board’. 
 
(2) Organisation of conferences, seminars and 
training programmes, agricultural and 
industrial exhibitions for the benefit of the 
rural areas. 
Implemented. 
8 Rural housing. VII Rural Housing. (1) Distribution of house sites within Village 
Panchayat limits. 
Not implemented. Sub-functions continued 
to be i mplemented by the 
DRDAs. 
(2) Maintenance of records relating to the 
house, sites and other private and public 
properties. 
Implemented. Sub-function is 
implemented by the VPs. 
9 Drinking water. VIII. Drinking water. (1) Construction, repairs and maintenance of 
drinking water well, tanks and ponds. 
Implemented. Implemented by the VPs 
but similar functions were 
also implemented by the 
DRDAs under 
MGNREGS. 
(2) Prevention and control of water pollution. Implemented. 
(3) Maintenance of rural water supply 
schemes. 
Not implemented Maintenance of rural 
water supply schemes is 
done by PWD. 

Appendices 
 
 
 61 
Sl. No. Functions listed in 
Eleventh Schedule of 
the Constitution 
Devolution under GPRA Sub-functions under GPRA Status of 
Implementation in 
VPs 
Audit remarks 
10 Roads, culverts, 
bridges, ferries, 
waterways and other 
means of 
communication. 
IX Roads, buildings, culverts, 
bridges, ferries, waterways and 
other means of communication. 
(1) Construction and maintenance of village 
roads, drains and culverts. 
Implemented. Sub-functions are 
implemented by the VPs.  
The sub-functions were 
also implemented by the 
DRDAs under 
MGNREGS, GGSY and 
SPMRM. 
(2) Maintenance of buildings under its control 
or transferred to it by the Government or any 
public authority. 
Implemented. 
11 Rural electrification 
including distribution 
of electricity. 
X Rural electrification: Providing for 
and maintenance of lighting of 
public streets and other places. 
Providing for and maintenance of lighting of 
public streets and other places. 
Implemented. Sub-function is 
implemented by the VPs. 
12 Non-conventional 
energy sources. 
XI Non-conventional energy source. (1) Promotion and Development of non -
conventional energy schemes. 
Not implemented. Sub-functions continued 
to be i mplemented by the 
Department of Science & 
Technology and partially 
by the DRDAs. 
(2) Maintenance of community non -
conventional energy devices including bio -
gas plants. 
Not implemented. 
(3) Promotion of approved chulhas and other 
efficient energy devices. 
Not implemented. 
13 Poverty alleviation 
programme. 
XII Poverty alleviation programmes. (1) Promotion of public awareness and 
participation in poverty alleviation 
programmes for fuller employment and 
creation of productive assets, etc. 
Implemented. Sub-functions 
implemented by the VPs. 
(2) Selection of beneficiaries under various 
programmes. 
Implemented. 
(3) Participation in effective implementation 
and monitoring. 
Implemented. 
14 Education including 
primary and secondary 
schools 
XIII Education including Primary 
Schools: 
(1) Promotion of public awareness and 
participation in primary education. 
Implemented. Sub-function is 
implemented by the VPs. 
(2) Ensuring full enrolment and attendance in 
primary schools 
Not implemented Sub-functions continued 
to be implemented by the 
Department of Education. 
15 Adult and non -formal 
education. 
XIV Adult and non-formal education. Promotion of adult literacy. Not implemented. Sub-functions continued 
to be implemented by the 
Department of Education. 

PA of Implementation of 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act in Goa 
 
 62 
Sl. No. Functions listed in 
Eleventh Schedule of 
the Constitution 
Devolution under GPRA Sub-functions under GPRA Status of 
Implementation in 
VPs 
Audit remarks 
16 Libraries. XV Libraries: Village libraries and 
reading rooms. 
Village libraries and reading rooms. Implemented. Sub-functions are 
implemented by the VPs. 
17 Cultural activities. XVI Cultural activities: Promotion of 
social and cultural activities. 
Promotion of social and cultural activities Implemented. 
18 Markets and fairs. XVII Markets and fairs. Regulation and fairs (including cattle fairs) 
and festivals. 
Implemented. 
19 Health and sanitation 
including hospitals, 
primary health centres 
and dispensaries. 
XVIII Rural sanitation. (1) Maintenance of general sanitation. Implemented. Sub-functions are 
implemented by the VPs. 
However, s imilar 
functions were also 
implemented by the 
DRDAs under 
MGNREGS, GGSY and 
SPMRM 
schemes/programme. 
(2) Cleaning of public roads, drains, tanks, 
wells and other public places. 
Implemented. 
(3) Maintenance and regulation of burning 
and burial grounds. 
Implemented. 
(4) Construction and maintenance of public 
latrines. 
Implemented. 
(5) Disposal of unclaimed corpses and 
carcasses. 
Implemented. Sub-functions are 
implemented by the VPs. 
(6) Management and control of washing and 
bathing gaits. 
Implemented. 
20 Family welfare XIX Public Health and Family Welfare. (1) Implementation of Family Welfare 
Programmes. 
Not implemented. Sub-functions continued 
to be implemented by the 
Department of Health. (2) Prevention and remedial measures against 
epidemics. 
Not implemented. 
(3) Regulation of sale of meat, fish and other 
perishable food articles. 
Not implemented. Sub-functions continued 
to be implemented by the 
Department of Food and 
Drugs. 
(4) Participation in programmes of human 
and animal vaccination. 
Not implemented. Sub-function continued to 
be implemented by the 
Department of Health and 
Department of Animal 
Husbandry. 

Appendices 
 
 
 63 
Sl. No. Functions listed in 
Eleventh Schedule of 
the Constitution 
Devolution under GPRA Sub-functions under GPRA Status of 
Implementation in 
VPs 
Audit remarks 
(5) Licensing of eating and entertainment 
establishments. 
Implemented. Sub-function is 
implemented by the VPs. 
(6) Destruction of stray dogs. Not implemented. Sub-function continued to 
be implemented by the 
Department of Animal 
Husbandry. 
(7) Regulation of offensive and dangerous 
trades. 
Implemented. Sub-function continued to 
be implemented by the 
Department of Industries, 
Trade and Commerce 
(DITC). 
(8) Regulation of curing, tanning and dyeing 
of skins and hides. 
Not implemented. Sub-function continued to 
be implemented by the 
Department of Health and 
Department of Animal 
Husbandry. 
21 Women and child 
development. 
XX Women and Child Development. (1) Participation in the implementation of 
women and child welfare programme. 
Implemented. Sub-functions are 
implemented by the VPs. 
(2) Promotion of schools, health and nutrition 
programmes. 
Implemented. 
22 Social welfare 
including welfare of 
the handicapped and 
mentally retarded 
XXI Social welfare including welfare 
of the handicapped and mentally 
retarded. 
(1) Participation in the implementation of the 
school welfare programmes including welfare 
of the handicapped, mentally retarded and 
destitutes.  
Implemented. Sub-function is 
implemented by the VPs. 
(2) Monitoring of old age and widows 
pension schemes. 
Not implemented. Sub-function continued to 
be implemented by the 
Department of Social 
Welfare. 
23 Welfare of the weaker 
sections, and in 
particular, of the 
XXII Welfare of the Weaker Sections 
and in particular the Scheduled 
Castes and Scheduled Tribes. 
(1) Promotion of public awareness with 
regard to welfare of Scheduled Castes, 
Scheduled Tribes and other weaker sections. 
Implemented Sub-function is 
implemented by the VPs. 

PA of Implementation of 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act in Goa 
 
 64 
Sl. No. Functions listed in 
Eleventh Schedule of 
the Constitution 
Devolution under GPRA Sub-functions under GPRA Status of 
Implementation in 
VPs 
Audit remarks 
 Scheduled Castes and 
the Scheduled Tribes. 
(2) Participation in implementation of 
specific programmes for welfare of  the 
weaker sections. 
Implemented. Sub-function is 
implemented by the VPs. 
24 Maintenance of 
community assets 
XXIII Maintenance of community assets. (1) Maintenance of community assets. Implemented. The function was also 
implemented by DRDAs 
under GGSY and 
SPMRM. 
(2) Preservation and Maintenance of other 
community assets. 
Implemented. 
XXVI Maintenance of Public Parks, 
playgrounds etc. 
-- Implemented. Function is implemented 
by the VPs. 
No corresponding 
function in the 
Constitution. 
XXIV Construction and maintenance of 
cattle sheds, ponds, cart stands. 
-- -- Functions not mentioned 
in the Constitution but 
devolved in the GPRA.  XXV Construction and maintenance of 
slaughterhouses. 
-- -- 
XXVII Regulation of manure pits in 
public places. 
-- -- 
XXVIII Establishment and control of 
Shandies. 
-- -- 
XXIX Such other functions as may be 
entrusted. 
-- -- 
Following Functions in the Eleventh Schedule were not devolved with the corresponding function in Schedule I of GPRA  
1 Land improvement, 
implementation of 
land reforms, land 
consolidation and soil 
conservation. 
 Function not devolved in the Act. Not applicable. Not implemented. The function continued to 
be i mplemented by 
Department of 
Agriculture and Revenue 
Department. 
2 Minor irrigation, water 
management and 
watershed 
development. 
 Function not devolved in the Act. Not applicable. Not implemented. The function continued to 
be i mplemented by the 
Department of Water 
Resources and also by the 
DRDAs (MGNREGS). 
3 Technical training and 
vocational education. 
 Function not devolved in the Act. Not applicable. Not implemented. The function continued to 
be i mplemented by the 
Directorate of Technical 
Education. 

Appendices 
 
 
 65 
Sl. No. Functions listed in 
Eleventh Schedule of 
the Constitution 
Devolution under GPRA Sub-functions under GPRA Status of 
Implementation in 
VPs 
Audit remarks 
4 Small scale industries 
including food 
processing industries. 
 Function not devolved in the Act. Not applicable. Not implemented. The function continued to 
be i mplemented by the 
Directorate of Industries, 
Trade and Commerce. 
5 Public distribution 
system. 
 Function not devolved in the Act. Not applicable. Not implemented. The function continued to 
be i mplemented by the 
Department of Forest and 
DRDA. 
(Source: Eleventh Schedule to the Constitution, Schedule I of GPRA and information provided by the PRIs and Department) 
  

PA on Implementation of 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act 
 
 
 66  
APPENDIX 3 
(Referred to in Paragraph 4.3.1) 
Schemes implemented by DRDAs 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of Scheme Objective Implementing officers  
Government of India schemes  
1 Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana-
Gramin (PMAY-G) 
To provide basic and homestead to 
families covered under Socio 
Economic Caste Census-2011. 
BDO 
2 Mahatma Gandhi National 
Rural Employment Guarantee 
Act (MGNREGA) 
To provide at least 100 days 
guaranteed wages employment to 
every rural house hold. 
Gram Rojgar Sahayak  of 
DRDA at Village Panchayats 
3 National Rural Livelihood 
Mission (NRLM) 
To reduce poverty. Technical Assistant and BDO 
4 Shyama Prasad Mukherji 
Rurban Mission (SPMRM) 
To stimulate local economic 
development, enhance basic 
services and create well planned 
Rurban clusters.  
Nodal Officer/Assistant Project 
Officer, DRDA  
5 Sansad Adarsh Gram Yojana Development of Villages which 
includes social and cultural 
development and spread 
motivation. 
DRDA and District Collector  
6 Indira Gandhi National Old 
Age Pension Scheme 
(NOAPS) 
To provide basic level of financial 
support. 
Technical Assistant/BDO 
7 Indira Gandhi National Widow 
Pension (IGNWP) 
To provide basic level of financial 
support. 
Technical Assistant/BDO 
8 Indira Gandhi National 
Disability Pension 
Scheme(IGNDPS) 
To provide basic level of financial 
support. 
Technical Assistant/BDO 
9 National Family Benefit 
Scheme (NFBS) 
To assist the family on death of its 
primary breadwinner. 
Technical Assistant/BDO 
Government of Goa schemes 
1 Goa Grameen Urja Yojana 
(GGUY) 
To provide LPG connection to all 
BPL families. 
BDO 
2 Goa Gram Samrudhi Yojana 
(GGSY) 
Creation of infrastructure assets in 
rural area. 
Executive Engineer, DRDA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Appendices 
 
 
 67 
APPENDIX 4 
(Referred to in Paragraph 5.6.1.2) 
Statement showing variation in budgets of Village Panchayats 
(₹ in crore) 
Year Receipts Expenditure 
Budget Actual Percentage of 
actuals to budget 
Budget Actual Percentage of 
actuals to 
budget 
2016-17 21.95 18.36 83.64 27.20 13.12 48.24 
2017-18 23.04 18.44 80.03 33.44 18.04 53.95 
2018-19 30.61 19.02 62.14 42.04 21.09 50.17 
2019-20 54.86 18.62 33.94 57.76 18.64 32.27 
2020-21 48.01 24.01 50.01 53.54 16.81 31.40 
 Total 178.47 98.45 55.16 213.98# 87.70 40.99 
(Source: Information compiled from the Annual Accounts of 16 test-checked VPs) 
# The budgeted expenditures were more by 19.90 per cent as compared to the estimated receipt as the surplus 
revenues of previous years were being carried over to the next year and considered during estimation of 
expenditures. 

© COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA
https://cag.gov.in/en 
https://cag.gov.in/ag/goa/en