Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India
 for the year ended 31 March 2021
GOVERNMENT OF GOA
Report No. 2 of the year 2024
Performance Audit of Implementation of 74   Constitutional
Amendment Act in Goa
th

 
https://www.cag.gov.in/en 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Report of the  
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
For the year ended 31 March 2021 
 
 
 
Performance Audit of Implementation of 74th 
Constitutional Amendment Act in Goa 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GOVERNMENT OF GOA 
Report No. 2 of the year 2024 
 
 
 
 
 
 

i 
 
Table of Contents 
Paragraph 
Number 
Contents Page 
Number  
Preface  iii 
Executive Summary v 
 
Chapter I: Introduction 
1.1 74th Constitutional Amendment 1 
1.2 Urban profile of Goa  2 
1.3 Urban Local Bodies of Goa 2 
1.4 Organizational structure of urban governance 3 
1.5 Audit objectives 4 
1.6 Audit criteria 4 
1.7 Audit scope and methodology  5 
1.8 Acknowledgement  5 
1.9 Structure of the Report 6 
Chapter II: Compliance to the provisions of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
2.1 Compliance of State laws with 74th Constitutional Amendment 
Act 
7 
2.2 Powers of State Government over Urban Local Bodies 8 
 
Chapter III: Composition and organization of Urban Local Bodies  
3.1 State Election Commission  11 
3.2 Composition of Urban Local Bodies  11 
3.3 Organization of Urban Local Bodies 13 
 
Chapter IV: Empowerment of Urban Local Bodies and their functioning  
4.1 Devolution of functions vis-a-vis 74th Constitutional Amendment 
Act in Goa 
17 
4.2 Actual status of devolution of functions 22 
4.3 Inadequate devolution of administrative and financial powers to 
Urban Local Bodies 
29 
4.4 Role of parastatals in implementation of schemes 31 
4.5 Planning by Urban Local Bodies 35 
 
Chapter V: Financial resources of Urban Local Bodies  
5.1 Sources of revenue 37 
5.2 Own revenues of Urban Local Bodies 38 
5.3 Own revenues of CCP 39 
5.4 Fiscal transfers to Urban Local Bodies 44 
5.5 State Finance Commission  47 
5.6 Budget, accounts and audit of ULBs 48 
  

ii 
 
 
Chapter VI: Human resources in Urban Local Bodies 
6.1 Adequacy of manpower 54 
6.2 Capacity building 58 
Appendices 
1 Delegation of financial powers to Urban Local Bodies 61 
2 Parastatals and their functions 63 
3 Statement showing variation in budget of Urban Local Bodies 64 
 

iii 
 
 
 
 
This Report for the year ended 31 March 2021 has been prepared for submission 
to the Governor of Goa under Article 151 of the Constitution of India.  
 
Audit of Urban Local Bodies  (ULBs) is conducted under the provisions of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General’s (Duties, Powers and Conditions of Service) 
Act, 1971 , which empowers the Comptroller and Auditor General of India to 
conduct audit of the accounts of ULBs and submit such Audit Report to the State 
Government for its placement in the State Legislature. 
The Report covering the period 2016 -17 to 2020 -21 contains the results of 
Performance Audit of Implementation of 7 4th Constitutional Amendment Act in 
Goa. 
 
The audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards issued 
by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
 
 
Preface 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Executive Summary 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
v 
 
 
Intent of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
The Constitution of India provided clear mandate for democratic decentralisation through 
74th Constitutional Amendment which sought to create an institutional framework for 
ushering in democracy at the grass root level through self -governing local bodies at the 
urban areas of the country. The 74 th Constitutional Amendment came into effect on  
01 June 1993 and empowered Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) to perform 18 functions listed 
in the Twelfth Schedule to the Constitution of India. 
Why this Performance Audit?  
To ascertain whether the State Government empowered the ULBs through the robust 
creation of institutional framework as well as transfer of functions, funds and 
functionaries. 
Period of audit: 2016-17 to 2020-21 
Sample: Five ULBs out of total 14 were selected in sample for their overall 
devolution of functions, funds and functionaries. 
What audit found?  
Compliance to provisions of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
The provisions of the State Acts were compliant with the provisions of the 74 th 
Constitutional Amendment Act. However, the State laws also provided for overriding 
powers to the State Government over the ULBs in many aspects.   
Principal findings and recommendations of the Performance Audit 
The chapter -wise findings that led to audit conclusions and recommendations are as 
follows: 
Chapter III: Composition and organization of ULBs  
A review of the compo sition of ULBs vis-à-vis the Constitutional Amendment Act  
indicated that the powers of delimitation of constituencies in Corporation of City of Panaji 
(CCP) were vested with the Directorate of Urban Development, instead of with the State 
Election Commission. 
 
Executive Summary 
 

 
 
vi 
 
Recommendation 
➢ The State Government may take necessary action to entrust delimitation of wards 
in CCP to the State Election Commission at the earliest. 
Chapter IV: Empowerment of ULBs and their functioning 
As per the mandate of the Constitutional Amendment Act , 18 functions were to be 
devolved to ULBs, along with necessary powers to enable their implementation. 
However, it was seen that most of these functions were devolved to the ULBs only 
partially, as Government departments or parastatals continued to implem ent several 
components of these functions and the operational scope for ULBs remained limited.  
Execution of works by ULBs out of Central Finance Commission grants and State grants 
required departmental approvals, which limited their operational autonomy and caused 
delays in implementation. The parastatals were assigned the responsibility of 
implementing several urban infrastructure schemes without accountability to the ULBs. 
Recommendations: 
➢ The Government may ensure that the functions devolved to the ULBs are actually 
carried out by them. 
➢ Democratically elected ULBs must be given a greater role in the planning and 
implementation of schemes pertaining to local body functions as per the 
devolution. 
➢ Adequate administrative and financial autonomy may be allowed to the ULBs in 
the execution of functions devolved to them. 
Chapter V: Financial Resources of ULBs 
Devolution of adequate financial resources was critical for local bodies for 
implementation of their functions. In the absence of adequate sources of own revenues, 
ULBs in the State were found to be dependent on Government grants for carrying out 
their fun ctions. Majority of ULBs were not able to meet even their establishment 
expenditure out of their own resources. Further, the ULBs were not efficient in realising 
the full potential of their own sources of revenue. 
The State Finance Commission (SFC) w as to be set within one year from the 
commencement of the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act as provided in the Constitution 
(Article 243-I read with Article 243 Y) and at the expiry of every fifth year thereafter. 
SFCs were expected to recommend on principles governing the distribution and 

 
 
vii 
 
assignment of revenues and fiscal transfers from Government to ULBs. There were delays 
in the constitution of the SFCs in the State and no action has been taken on any of the 
SFC recommendations by the Government, which hindered the fiscal empowerment of 
ULBs. 
There were delays in preparation of budgets of the ULBs. The budgets were also not 
realistic. Further, the process of adopting the ‘Accrual Based Double Entry Accounting 
System’ (ABDEAS) was in progress in Municipal Councils (MCs). 
Recommendations: 
➢ ULBs may undertake a detailed review of their finances in terms of tax potential, 
additional resource mobilization, rationalization of tax structure, etc. in addition 
to strengthening their revenue collection machinery to reduce the revenue arrears. 
➢ The State Government must constitute SFCs as per the time frame prescribed in 
the Constitution. Recommendations of the SFC may be considered and accepted 
recommendations implemented in a time bound manner. 
➢ Migration to accrual-based accounting by MCs may be expedited. 
Chapter VI: Human Resources in ULBs  
Availability of adequate human resources was a necessary condition for effective 
implementation of their mandate by the ULBs. The absence of adequate sanctioned 
strength in the ULBs has an adverse impact on the implementation of functions. The 
requirement of additional cadre posts in ULBs was under consideration of the 
Government. Audit also noticed that capacity building efforts for ULB personnel were 
inadequate. 
Recommendations: 
➢ Government may consider rationalizing the sanctioned strength as per the 
functional requirements of ULBs 
➢ Need based trainings may be imparted to the functionaries of ULBs. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter I 
Introduction 
 
 
 
  

 

 Chapter I: Introduction 
1.1 74th Constitutional Amendment 
In order to enable the Urban Local Bodies  (ULBs) to perform effectively as vibrant 
democratic units of self-government, it was considered necessary that provisions relating 
to ULBs are incorporated in the Constitution of India through an amendment . Such an 
amendment was to put on a firmer footing, their relationship between the State 
Government with respect to the functions and resources as well as for regular conduct of 
elections and providing adequate representation for the weaker sections like Sc heduled 
Castes, Scheduled Tribes and women. 
The 74th Constitutional Amendment Act, 1992, which came into effect on 1 June 1993, 
provided a constitutional status to ULBs in the Country. Article 243W of the 
Constitutional Amendment Act authorised the State Legislatures to enact laws to endow 
local bodies with powers and authority as may be necessary to enable them to function as 
institutions of self -governance and make provisions for devolution of powers and 
responsibilities. The Constitutional Amendment Act  incorporated Part IXA -‘The 
Municipalities’ and the Twelfth Schedule in the Constitution. 
The Twelfth Schedule of the Constitution enumerated 18 specific functions to be 
devolved to ULBs as given in Table 1.1. 
Table 1.1: Functions listed in the Twelfth Schedule of the Constitution 
Sl. No. Function 
1 Urban planning including town planning. 
2 Regulation of land-use and construction of buildings. 
3 Planning for economic and social development. 
4 Roads and bridges. 
5 Water supply for domestic, industrial and commercial purposes. 
6 Public health, sanitation conservancy and solid waste management. 
7 Fire services. 
8 Urban forestry, protection of the environment and promotion of ecological 
aspects. 
9 Safeguarding the interests of weaker sections of society, including the 
handicapped and mentally retarded. 
10 Slum improvement and upgradation. 
11 Urban poverty alleviation. 
12 Provision of urban amenities and facilities such as parks, gardens, 
playgrounds. 

PA of Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act in Goa 
2 
 
Sl. No. Function 
13 Promotion of cultural, educational and aesthetic aspects. 
14 Burials and burial grounds, cremations, cremation grounds and electric 
crematoriums. 
15 Cattle pounds prevention of cruelty to animals. 
16 Vital statistics including registration of births and deaths. 
17 Public amenities including street lighting, parking lots, bus stops and 
public conveniences; and 
18 Regulation of slaughterhouses and tanneries. 
(Source: Constitution of India) 
1.2   Urban profile of Goa 
As per the census of 2001, urban population in Goa was 49.76 per cent, which increased 
to 62.17 per cent as per the census of 2011. In absolute terms, the urban population in the 
State as per census of 2011 was 9.06 lakh.  
Goa has 14 statutorily recognised towns1. However, the Census of India identified urban 
areas on two criteria i.e. statutorily recognized towns and other places satisfying the 
criteria of a Census Town2. As per Census 2011, there were 14 Statutory Towns (ULBs), 
56 Census Towns and three Urban Agglomerates 3 (UA) of Margao, Mormugao and 
Panaji.  
The demands on urban governance in the State are manifold, ranging from water supply 
and sanitation, waste management, disaster management, etc. and local bodies have an 
important role to play in these areas. 
1.3 Urban Local Bodies of Goa 
Article 243Q of the Constitution provided for constitution of three types of ULBs viz. 
Nagar Panchayats, Municipal Councils and Municipal Corporations for transitional 
areas4, smaller urban areas and larger urban areas respectively.  There are two types of 
ULBs in Goa – Municipal Corporation and Municipal Councils. The categorization of 
ULBs is shown in Table 1.2. 
 
 
1   Statutory towns are recognized municipal areas under the Acts, such as Corporation/Municipal Councils 
(Schedule I of The City of Panaji Corporation Act and Schedule I of The Goa Municipalities Act) 
2   A place with a minimum population of 5,000; engagement of at least 75 per cent of the male main 
workers in non-agricultural pursuits; and density of population of at least 400 per sq. km. 
3    An urban agglomeration is a continuous urban spread constituting a town and its adjoining urban 
outgrowths, or two or more physically contiguous towns together with the continuous and well 
recognized urban outgrowths, if any. 
4    An area in transition from a rural area to an urban area. 

Chapter I: Introduction 
 
3 
 
Table 1.2: Different types of ULBs in the State 
(Source: Information provided by the Department) 
While there is a single Municipal Corporation in Goa, for the city of Panaji, there are 13 
Municipal Councils, which are categorised5 on the basis of population as A, B or C.   
1.4 Organizational structure of urban governance 
The organizational set up of ULBs is depicted in Chart 1.1 and Chart 1.2 given below. 
Chart 1.1: Elected Bodies
 
* Statutory committees are required to be formed as per CCP Act and GMA, out of members of ULBs to 
carry out the delegated functions by the respective Urban Local Body. 
 
 
5  MCs with more than 50,000 population fall under category ‘A’, those with more than 10,000 and less 
than 50,000 under category ‘B’ and those with population of less than 10,000 under category ‘C’ 
Corporation of the City of 
Panaji
Mayor
Statutory Committee*
Municipal Councils
Chairperson
Statutory Committee*
ULBs Legislation Total Number 
Municipal Corporation The City of Panaji Corporation 
Act, 2002 (CCP Act) . 
     01 
Municipal Councils  The Goa Municipalities Act, 1968 
(GMA). 
   13 02 in ‘A’ category 
07 in ‘B’ category 
04 in ‘C’ category 

PA of Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act in Goa 
4 
 
Chart 1.2: Administrative set-up 
 
The Secretary, Urban Development is the administrative head of the Department of Urban 
Development, which oversees the functioning of ULBs  in the State. The Director of 
Urban Development (DUD) exercises control and supervision over the ULBs under the 
authority of CCP Act and GMA.  
The CCP is headed by an elected Mayor, who is assisted by a Commissioner appointed 
by the State Government. Municipal Councils (MCs) are led by elected Chairpersons, 
who are assisted by Chief officers appointed by the Government.  
1.5 Audit objectives  
The Performance Audit was carried out with a view to ascertain whether:  
➢ Provisions of 74 th Constitutional Amendment Act have been adequately covered in 
State Legislation; 
➢ ULBs are empowered by the State Government to discharge their functions 
effectively through the creation of appropriate institutions/mechanisms; 
➢ ULBs have access and powers to raise financial resources commensurate with their 
functions; and 
➢ ULBs have adequate powers to mobilize human resources commensurate with their 
functions. 
1.6 Audit criteria 
The criteria for the Performance Audit were derived from the following sources:  
➢ The Constitution (74th Constitutional Amendment Act, 1992); 
➢ The City of Panaji Corporation Act, 2002;  
➢ The Goa Municipalities Act, 1968 and rules made thereunder;  
➢ Central/State Finance Commission Reports; 
Secretary, 
Urban Development
Director,  Municipal Administration
Commissioner, 
Corporation of the City of Panaji
Chief Officer,
Municipal Councils

Chapter I: Introduction 
 
5 
 
➢ The Goa, Daman and Diu Municipal Account Code, 1972; 
➢ The Goa Municipal Accounting Code, 2007; 
➢ The Goa, Daman and Diu Municipalities (Consolidated Property Tax) Rules, 1971 
and bye-laws made thereunder; 
➢ Bye-laws of Urban Local Bodies; 
➢ Central Public Works Manual; and  
➢ Orders, notifications, circulars, guidelines, etc. issued by State/Central Government.  
1.7   Audit scope and methodology 
The performance audit covered the implementation of the 74th Constitutional Amendment 
Act in the State of Goa, over a period of five years i.e. from 2016-17 to 2020-21.  
Audit methodology involved scrutiny of records, discussion with officials and analysis of 
data with reference to the audit criteria. Test check of records was carried out at the DUD. 
Stratified random sampling was used to select five 6 ULBs (default selection of 
Corporation of City of Panaji and two ULBs from each of the two districts) for detailed 
audit. Necessary information was collected from parastatals7.  
An Entry Conference was held (June 2021) with the Secretary, Urban Development (UD) 
and the audit objectives, scope and methodology of the audit were discussed. An Exit 
Conference was held (April 2022) with the Secretary, UD where the Audit findings were 
discussed. Replies of the Government have been incorporated appropriately. 
1.8 Acknowledgement 
Audit is grateful for the co -operation of the Urban Development Department, Finance 
Department and all the test -checked ULBs in providing records, information and 
clarifications from time to time for the smooth conduct of this Performance Audit. 
 
 
 
 
 
6   Corporation of the city of Panaji and MCs of Curchorem- Cacora, Mapusa, Margao and Pernem 
7   Goa State Urban Development Agency (GSUDA) and Imagine Panaji Smart City Development Limited 
(IPSCDL) 

PA of Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act in Goa 
6 
 
1.9  Structure of the report 
Audit findings are presented in the following chapters: 
 
Chapter II Compliance to provisions of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act  
Chapter III Composition and organization of Urban Local Bodies 
Chapter IV Empowerment of Urban Local Bodies and their functioning 
Chapter V Financial resources of Urban Local Bodies 
Chapter VI Human Resources in Urban Local Bodies 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter II 
Compliance to provisions 
of  
74th Constitutional 
Amendment Act 
 
 

 
 

 
xx 
Chapter II: Compliance to provisions of 74th Constitutional 
Amendment Act 
2.1 Compliance of State laws with 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
Provisions relating to municipalities were incorporated in the Constitution  by the 74th 
Constitutional Amendment Act , vide Articles 243 Q to 243ZG. Accordingly, t he State 
Government amended The Goa Municipalities Act, 1968  (GMA) in 1994 and enacted 
The City of Panaji Corporation Act (CCP Act), 2002. A comparison of the provisions of 
the GMA and CCP with the requirements of the 74 th Constitutional Amendment Act is 
given in Table 2.1.  
Table 2.1: Comparison of provisions of the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
with State ULB Acts 
 
Provision of 
constitution 
Provisions of Constitution incorporated by 
the 74th Amendment Act 
CCP Act GMA 
Article 243Q Constitution of three types of municipalities is 
prescribed. 
Section 7 Sections 3 
and 4 
Article 243R Composition of ULBs will be from elected 
members, nominated members and 
representation of Members of Parliament and 
Legislative Assembly. 
Section 9 Section 9 
Article 243S Constitution of Ward committees in ULBs with 
prescribed composition. 
Section 41 No 
provision 
Article 243T Reservation of seats for Scheduled Caste 
(SC)/Scheduled Tribe  (ST), Women and 
Backward classes in direct elections. 
Section 10 Section 10 
Article 243U Duration of the municipalities shall be five 
years from its first meeting. 
Section 17 Section 42 
Article 243V Disqualifications of a person for being a 
member and under any other law. 
Sections 
15, 21 and 
23 
Section 16 
Article 243W 
read with 
Twelfth 
Schedule  
Empowerment of municipalities with such 
powers and authority to enable their effective 
functioning as institutions of self-government 
and to carry out the responsibilities in relation 
to the 18 subjects in Twelfth Schedule. 
Sections 
59 and 60 
Sections 51 
and 322A 
read with 
Schedule X 
Article 243X Municipalities would be empowered to levy 
and collect taxes, fees, duties, etc.  
Section 
104 
Sections 
101 and 
104 
Grants-in-aid would be given to municipalities 
from the State. 
Section 81 Section 
142A 
Constitution of funds for crediting and 
withdrawal of moneys by municipalities. 
Section 80 Section 86 

PA of Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act in Goa 
 
8 
 
Provision of 
constitution 
Provisions of Constitution incorporated by 
the 74th Amendment Act 
CCP Act GMA 
Article 243-I 
read with 
Article 243Y 
Constitution of State Finance Commission to 
review the financial position of municipalities, 
recommend the distribution of revenues 
between the State and municipalities and 
allotting the funds from the Consolidated Fund 
of the State. 
Section 
5(23) – 
definition 
Section 
143A 
Article 243Z Maintenance of accounts by municipalities. Section 98 Section 98 
Audit of accounts maintained by 
municipalities. 
Section 
102 
Section 100 
Article 243ZA Constitution of State Election Commission for 
preparation of electoral rolls for, and the 
conduct of, elections to municipalities. 
Section 11 Section 10 
A 
Article 243ZD Constitution of District Planning Committee 
to prepare a draft development plan for the 
district. 
No 
provision 
Section 
184F 
 (Source: The Constitution of India, CCP Act, 2002 and GMA, 1968) 
Article 243Q provided for the constitution of three types of municipalities depending 
upon the size and area viz. (i) Nagar Panchayat for an area in transition from rural to urban 
area; (ii) Municipal Council for smaller urban area; and (iii) Municipal Corporation for 
larger urban area. One municipal corporation and 13 municipal councils were constituted 
under the CCP Act 2002 and GMA 1968, (amended in 1994) respectively. There was no 
provision for Nagar Panchayats in Goa.  
Article 243S provided for the constitution of Ward Committees in all municipalities with 
a population of more than three lakh. Though none of the ULBs in Goa have a population 
exceeding three lakh, the CCP Act provided for the constitution of Ward Committees 
while GMA did not. 
Hence the State legislations are in compliance with the provisions of the 74 th 
Constitutional Amendment Act . However, the State legislations also provide for 
overriding powers to the State Government over the ULBs in the State. 
2.2  Powers of the State Government over Urban Local Bodies 
The CCP Act and the GMA provided for the control of the State Governmen t over the 
functioning of ULBs through the provisions as mentioned in Table 2.2. 
              
 
 
 
 
   

Chapter II: Compliance to provisions of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
 
9 
 
Table 2.2: Powers of State Government over ULBs 
Sl. No. Subject Provision in CCP Act Provision in GMA 
1 Power to make rules Government may frame rules under CCP Act/GMA (Section 
391 of CCP Act and Section 306 of GMA)  
2 Composition/ 
Removal of 
Councillor 
Five Councillors shall be 
nominated by the State 
Government (Section 9).  
Government may on its 
own motion remove any 
Councillor for misconduct, 
disgraceful conduct or 
being incapable (Section 
44). 
3 Appointment of 
Officers and Servants 
of ULBs  
Government shall approve  
the appointment,  salary, 
allowances and conditions of 
service of the City Engineer, 
Health Officer and Municipal 
Secretary and certain other 
officers and servants (Section 
52).  
Government shall sanction 
the creation of posts  
and prescribe the rules  
for qualifications, pay, 
conditions of service and 
the method of recruitment 
of the officers of ULBs 
(Section 72 and 73). 
(Ref: Paragraph no. 6.1.3) 
4 Conduct of meetings 
of Corporation/ 
Councils 
Not Available (NA) Residual powers rests with 
Government to make rules 
regarding conduct of 
business at meetings of the 
Councils (Section 78). 
(Ref: Paragraph no. 3.3.2) 
5 Transfer of municipal 
property 
Contract for acquisition and 
disposal of immovable 
property involving an 
expenditure exceeding  
` three lakh, shall be 
approved by the Government 
(Section 68). 
Sanction of Government is 
required for transfer   
of immovable property 
(Section 88). 
6 Institution of suit 
against Councillors 
for liability  
NA Suit may be instituted 
against Councillors,  
officers and servants for 
loss, damage or pending 
liability (Section 92). 
7 Execution of 
resolutions or 
decisions by ULBs 
Government/DUD has powers to suspend execution of 
orders and resolutions of CCP or MCs respectively (Section 
378 of CCP Act and Section 293 of GMA). 
8 Reduction of 
establishment  
Government/DUD may reduce the number of excess persons 
or reduce the remuneration of such person or persons 
(Section 377 of CCP Act and Section 295 of GMA). 

PA of Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act in Goa 
 
10 
 
Sl. No. Subject Provision in CCP Act Provision in GMA 
9 Inquiry/inspection 
into municipal 
matters 
Government may make an 
inspection, enquiry or 
examination of any 
department, office, officer, 
service, work or thing under 
the control of any Corporation 
authority and require CCP to 
initiate an action (Section s 
373, 374 375 and 376). 
Government may order an 
inquiry into any matters 
concerning the municipal 
administration or any 
matters with respect to 
which sanction, approval or 
consent of the Government 
is required (Section 296). 
10 Sanction of by e-laws 
by Government 
State Government may 
modify, vary, amend, delete 
or add to draft by e-laws of 
CCP and shall approve it 
(Section 389). 
DUD and the Government 
(in case of any tax) are 
empowered to sanction the 
bye-laws for the MCs and 
prepare model bye -laws 
(Section 307).    
11 Power to dissolve 
ULBs 
Government may dissolve 
CCP in case of incompetency 
or default or excess or abuse 
of power (Section 379). 
Dissolution of the Council 
after review of Municipal 
Administrator's work 
(Section 300). 
12 Appointment of a 
Recovery Officer 
NA Director may appoint a 
Recovery Officer, in certain 
cases, without reference to 
Council (Section 163). 
13 Provisions regarding 
revenues 
Government may exempt or 
suspend levy of tax if the 
public interest is involved   
(Section 134). 
Approval of Director is 
necessary to write off 
irrecoverable tax, fee or 
other amount beyond  
` 5,000 (Section 162). 
 (Source: The Constitution of India, CCP Act, 2002 and GMA, 1968) 
Hence, the Government had far reaching powers over the composition and functioning of 
ULBs in the State. Specifically, powers for removal of Councillors (GMA), appointment, 
salary and allowances of CCP functionaries, notification of residual powers for conduct 
of business of MCs (GMA), transfer of municipal properties, institution of suits against 
councillors (GMA), suspension of execution of resolutions/orders passed by the ULBs, 
reduction of estab lishment,  inquiry into municipal matters, sanction of by e-laws, 
appointment of Recovery Officer (GMA) and certain provisions regarding revenues , 
reduced the autonomy of ULBs significantly.  
Given the legislative framework as detailed above, the actual powers enjoyed by ULBs 
and their functioning vis-à-vis the provisions of the 74 th Constitutional Amendment Act 
are detailed in the subsequent chapters. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter III 
Composition and 
organization of Urban 
Local Bodies 
 
 
 

 

 
 
Chapter III: Composition and organization of U rban Local Bodies 
 
 
A review of the composition and organi zation of ULBs vis -à-vis the Constitutional 
Amendment Act indicated that the power of delimitation of constituencies in CCP was 
vested with the Directorate of Urban Developm ent, in contravention of the 
Constitutional Amendment Act provision that this function is to be carried out by the 
State Election Commission.  The ULBs complied with the provisions for formation of 
statutory committees but necessary provisions relating to the conduct of their business 
were not made, which impacted their effectiveness. 
The 7 4th Constitutional Amendment Act envisaged the  establishment of necessary 
institutional mechanisms as detailed in Table 2.1 (Chapter II), for the discharge of 
devolved functions by the ULBs and their empowerment as institutions of  
self-government. This section discusses the effectiveness of such institutional 
mechanisms. 
3.1  State Election Commission  
Article 243ZA read with article 243K of the Constitution provide s for a State Election 
Commission (SEC) that shall supervise, direct and control the preparation of electoral 
rolls and conduct elections to the U rban Local Bodies (ULBs) . The SEC, Goa  was 
established in the year 1994 under Section 10A of Goa Municipalities Act (GMA).  
The 74th Constitutional Amendment Act required that the SEC shall supervise, direct and 
control the preparation of electoral rolls and conduct elections to the ULBs. However, not 
all election related functions were performed by the SEC in Goa. The functions of 
delimitation of the wards in CCP and municipalities, and allocation of reservation in 
wards of municipalities were being performed by the D irector of Urban Development 
(DUD). 
Secretary, Urban Development (UD), stated (April 2022) that the amendment for transfer 
of all election related functions to the SEC was in the pipeline. It was further informed 
(January 2024) by the DUD that after Audit pointed out, functions of delimitation and 
reservations in Municipal Councils (MCs) were transferred to SEC.  
Recommendation 1: The State Government may take necessary action to entrust 
delimitation of wards in CCP to the State Election Commission at the earliest. 
3.2  Composition of Urban Local Bodies  
Article 243R of the Constitution enabled Governments to make provisions regarding the 
composition of ULBs. The CCP Act (Section 9) provided for 30 elected members and 
five nominated members in CCP, while the GMA (Section 9) provided for 10 to 25 
elected members in each MC. Audit observed the following regarding composition of 
ULBs: 
 

PA of Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act in Goa 
 
12 
 
3.2.1  Elected Members 
The composition of the MCs was dependent on the population. The prescribed 
composition in GMA for all classes of MCs was revised in 2015 by the State Government. 
Number of minimum and maximum elected Councilors in each category of MCs, before 
and after revision was as shown in Table 3.1. 
Table 3.1: Number of elected Councilors in MCs 
Category of 
MCs 
Before amendment After amendment 
Minimum Maximum Minimum Maximum 
A 15 20 15 25 
B 10 15 10 20 
C 10 10 10 10 
(Source: Goa Municipalities Act, 1968 and amendment thereto in December 2015)  
Sankhali MC, with a population of 13 ,651 (2011 Census),  was a ‘C’ class MC till its 
reclassification (December 2017) as ‘B’ class MC. Upon reclassification, the Council was 
eligible for 12 councilors under revised criteria (minimum of 10 and one additional 
councilor for every 3,000 of the population or part thereof above 10,000). Audit observed 
that Sankhali MC had 11 councilors till it was a ‘C’ class MC, instead of the prescribed 
10 and after reclassification as a ‘B’ class MC, the composition was revised to 13 instead 
of 12.  
DUD replied (January 2024) that on being pointed out by Audit, the composition of 
Sankhali MC was revised (February 2023) from 13 members to 12 members. 
3.2.2  Status of reservation 
Article 243T of the Constitution of India stipulated that reservation of seats by rotation 
should be provided for Schedule Castes (SC), Schedule Tribes (ST) and women in 
different constituencies in a municipality for direct election. The reservation of seats for 
SC/ST was required to be in the same proportion as their population bears to the entire 
population of the municipal area. Further, not less than one -third of the total number of 
seats including seats reserved for SC/ST  was required to be reserved fo r women. It also 
provided for reservation of seats to Backward Classes (BCs) by the State Legislature. 
Both the CCP Act (Section 10) and GMA (Section 9 and  10) in Goa provided for 
reservation of seats for SC/ST in the same proportion as their population bears to the 
entire population of municipal area  on rotation basis. CCP Act provided for reservation 
of 27 per cent of seats for BCs. One-third of the constituencies (including the number of 
seats reserved for SCs, STs and BCs) were reserved for women on rotation basis. GMA 
too provided for reservation of constituencies for SCs, STs and BCs in proportion to their 
population and not less than one-third of the constituencies were to be reserved for women 
on rotation basis across all categories.  
Audit observed that seats  reserved for SC s, ST s, BC s and women in all the five-test 
checked ULBs, were as per the provisions contained in the Acts. 

Chapter III: Composition and organization of Urban Local Bodies  
 
13 
 
3.3 Organization of Urban Local Bodies  
Article 243S of the Constitution provides for the constitution of Ward Committees in 
ULBs and necessary provisions in this regard were made in the CCP Act. Compliance of 
the provisions for Ward Committees in CCP Act and for other Statutory C ommittees in 
ULBs in CCP Act and GMA was as below: 
3.3.1 Corporation of the City of Panaji 
As per the CCP Act, an elected body (Corporation), a Standing Committee, three Special 
Consultative Committees1 and seven Ward Committees 2 (Section 41, CCP Act) were to 
be established to carry out the functions of the CCP. The CCP Act also provided for the 
optional constitution of a Committee for Women and Child Welfare (Section 43).  
➢ The Corporation:  
The elected body of the Corporation is required to meet at least once every month or when 
so directed by the State Government as per Section 25 of  the CCP Act for general 
transaction of business of the Corporation. Audit noticed that 28 ordinary meetings of the 
elected body (Corporation) were held during 2016-17 to 2020-21 in place of 60 meetings 
and they did not meet during 32 calendar months with intervals ranging from two to seven 
months between two meetings. 
➢ The Standing Committee:  
The Standing Committee was responsible for preparation of budgets, submission to the 
Corporation, re-appropriations, financial sanctions of works, approval of procurements, 
engaging services, etc. Decisions of the Standing Committee and the Corporation were 
executed by the Commissioner and subordinate officers. There was no periodicity 
prescribed in the CCP Act for meeting of the Standing Committee. However, the Standing 
Committee met 46 times during the period 2016-17 to 2020-21. 
➢ Ward Committees: 
Article 243S of the Constitution stipulated the establishment of Ward Committee 
consisting of one or more wards, within a territorial area of municipality having a 
population of three lakh or more.  
Though none of the ULBs in Goa have a population exceeding three lakh, the CCP Act 
(Section 41) provided for the constitution of seven Ward Committees comprising such 
contiguous electoral wards, as may be decided by the Corporation. The composition 3 of 
Ward Committee was laid down in the Act. The duration of the Wards Committee shall 
 
1   There shall be a standing committee and three Special Consultative Committees (Public Works 
Committee; Public Health and Markets Committee; and Hospital Committee ) each consisting of not 
less than three and not more than seven Councilors. The terms of every Committee shall be one year. 
2   The Ward Committees comprising of terrestrial areas of the committee and not exceeding three other 
members of recognized non -Government Organizations and community -based organizations engaged 
in social welfare activities working within the area of the Wards Committee. The duration of these 
committees shall be co-terminus with the duration of the Corporation. 
3  Ward Committee comprised of Councillors; the officer -in-charge of the territorial area of the Wards  
Committee, if any; and up  to three number of nominated members from recognised non -Government 
organizations and community-based organizations. 

PA of Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act in Goa 
 
14 
 
be co -terminus with the duration of the Corporation.  The Ward Committees were 
assigned the function of speedy redressal of common grievances, make recommendations 
on budgetary expenditure requirements in wards and to grant administrative approval and 
financial sanction for works upto ₹ five lakhs for inclusion in the budget. The committees 
were required to meet at least once in every month.  
Ward Committees in the CCP were constituted only in 2020 , though no meetings were 
ever held. However, the Ward Committees were not reconstituted when the newly elected 
body took over in March 2021. The system of Ward Committees was thus inactive.  
➢ Special Consultative Committees 
The CCP Act (Section 42) provided for three Special Consultative Committees (Public 
Works Committee, Public Health and Markets Committee and Hospital Committee). 
Even though the committees on Public Works and Public Health  and Markets were 
formed, Audit noticed that the Hospital Committee was not formed subsequent to 
elections to CCP in 2016 and 2021.  
Recommendation 2: The Government may constitute Ward Committees in the CCP to 
facilitate community participation in local governance and greater accountability. 
3.3.2 Municipal Councils  
As per Section 59 of the GMA, an elected body (Council), one Standing Committee and 
Subject Committees were to be constituted to carry out the functions of the Municipal 
Council. The Administration of the municipal area was vested in the Council (Section 51, 
GMA). Constitution of Standing Committee was mandatory (Section 63, GMA) and was 
to be constituted with such number of members as the Council may determine subject to 
maximum of one-third of total number of Councillors. Standing Committees were formed 
in all the four test-checked Councils.   
Section 78 of the GMA prescribed the conduct of six Ordinary Council Meetings (OCM) 
every year for the disposal of general business. It also provided for the conduct of Special 
Council Meetings (SCM) at the request of one-third of the members. Details of meetings 
of OCM and SCM in the four test-checked MCs is indicated in the Table 3.2.    
Table 3.2: Frequency of meetings of OCM and SCM during 2016-21  
MC OCM SCM Audit comments 
Curchorem-
Cacora  
29 12 OCM were less than six per year in two (2017-18 and 
2020-21) out of five years.  
Mapusa 25 34 OCM were fewer than six per year in four out of five 
years (except  2019-20). Two emergency meetings 
were conducted in 2016-21. 
Margao 23 29 OCM were fewer than six per year in four (2016 -17, 
2018-19, 2019-20 and 2020-21) out of five years.   
Pernem  8 37 OCM were fewer than six per year in all the five years. 
No OCM was conducted in 2017 -18 and 2020 -21. 
Five emergency meetings were conducted in 2016-21. 
(Source: Information provided by the MCs) 

Chapter III: Composition and organization of Urban Local Bodies  
 
15 
 
The Council 
The Councils met frequently, considering OCM and SCM togethe r, but the ordinary 
meetings were held less than the prescribed number. Delay in conducting meetings led to 
delays in the approval of all five budgets of Margao MC, four budgets of Pernem MC, 
three budgets of Curchorem-Cacora MC and one budget of Mapusa MC during the period 
2016-21.  
Standing and Subject Committees 
Standing Committees were to be constituted with the allocation of subjects of transport 
undertaking, finance and welfare of conservancy staff  (Section 68 of GMA) . Further, 
additional responsibilities on subjects of fairs and pilgrims ; Sanitation; Medical and 
Public Health were also to be allocated to Standing Committee s where separate Subject 
Committees were not constituted.  MCs were required to allot the subjects and powers to 
Standing and Subject Committees by making bye-laws (Section 68 of GMA). However, 
none of the four test checked Councils prepared the bye-laws.  
Secretary, UD, agreed (April 2022) during the Exit Conference to make the functioning 
of Committees more effective and assured to bring in model bye-laws for the functioning 
of Committees.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter IV 
Empowerment of Urban 
Local Bodies  
and  
their functioning 
 

 

 Chapter IV: Empowerment of Urban Local Bodies  
and their functioning 
 
 As per the mandate of the Constitutional Amendment Act , 18 functions were to be 
devolved to Urban Local Bodies  (ULBs) along with necessary powers to enable their 
implementation. However, it was seen that most of these functions were devolved only 
partially, and departments of the Government or parastatals continued to implement 
the remaining activities. The requirement o f submission of works proposals for 
approvals, under Central Finance Commission as well as State Grants, to the 
Government undermined the autonomy of the ULBs. Several important urban 
infrastructure schemes were implemented by parastatal agencies without 
accountability to the ULBs. 
The 74th Constitutional Amendment Act, 1992 authorised the State Legislature to enact 
laws to endow the ULBs with powers and authority to enable them to function as 
institutions of self-government as well as make provisions for devolution of powers and 
responsibilities. The Twelfth Schedule of the Constitution enumerated the 18 functions 
to be devolved to ULBs. 
4.1  Devolution of functions vis-à-vis 74th Constitutional Amendment Act in Goa 
The Corporation of City of Panaji (CCP) Act, 2002 devolved 28 obligatory (Section 59) 
and 23 discretionary activities 1 (Section 60) to CCP. These activities, when mapped, 
covered 16 functions listed in the Twelfth Schedule of the Constitution.  
The Goa Municipalities Act (GMA), applicable to Municipal Councils (MCs) in the State, 
had a provision for 21 obligatory and 22 discretionary activities2 (Section 51), before 74th 
Constitutional Amendment Act  was enacted. The GMA was amended after 74 th 
Constitutional Amendment Act to devolve 11 functions listed in the Twelfth Schedule of 
the Constitution (inserted as Section 322A with enlisting of 11 functions in Schedule X 
to GMA). Mapping of activities devolved in GMA and  11 functions added after 
amendment to it, covered 17 out of the 18 functions listed in the Twelfth schedule of the 
Constitution. The devolution of activities/functions under the CCP Act and  GMA are 
detailed in Table 4.1. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1  Referred as ‘Matters to be provided for by Corporation’ in the CCP Act 
2  Referred as ‘Obligatory duties and discretional functions of the Council’ in the GMA  

PA of Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act in Goa 
 
18 
 
Table 4.1: Devolution of functions to ULBs in Goa vis-à-vis  
74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
Sl. 
No. 
Functions  in 
Twelfth 
Schedule 
Activities/functions devolved under the provisions of 
CCP Act, 2002 GMA, 1968 
1  Urban 
planning 
including 
town 
planning  
CCP is a planning authority 
(Section 255 of CCP Act)  
Section 322A along with Schedule X: 
Urban Planning including town 
planning. 
Obligatory activity for demarcation of 
limits of the municipal area (Section 51 
(2)(o)). 
2  Regulation of   
land use and 
construction 
of buildings  
  
Obligatory activities  for 
complying with environment 
laws; and removal of 
dangerous buildings/places 
(Section 59 (f) and (j)). 
Discretionary activity  for 
reclaiming unhealthy localities 
(Section 60 (a)). 
Section 322A along 
with Schedule X: Regulation of land -
use/construction of buildings. 
Obligatory activities for 
removal/reclaiming of dangerous 
buildings/unhealthy localities (Section 
51 (2)(g)). 
Discretionary activity  for laying out 
new public streets (Section 51 (3)(a)). 
3  Planning for 
economic 
and  
social 
development  
Obligatory activity  for 
planning for economic and 
social development (Section 
59 (b)). 
Discretionary activity for 
making surveys (Section 60 
(k)). 
Discretionary activity for making a 
survey (Section 51 (3)(f)). 
4  Roads  and  
Bridges  
Obligatory activities  for 
removal of unauthorised 
obstructions/projections in 
public streets/places; naming 
streets/numbering houses; and 
provision of traffic signs   
(Section 59 (h),(r), (y) and (q)) 
Discretionary activity for 
Constructing/maintaining 
roads, buildings and other 
Government works (Section 
60) 
Section 322A along  with Schedule X: 
Roads and bridges. 
Obligatory activities  for   
Constructing/altering/maintaining 
public streets, culverts; and removal of 
unauthorised obstructions/projections in 
public streets/places (Section 51 (2 )(g) 
and (2)(f)) 
 
5 Water supply 
for  
domestic,  
industrial and 
commercial 
purposes  
Obligatory activity for water 
supply works (Section 59 (m)) 
Discretionary activities for 
supply of water to private 
premises; and construction/ 
maintenance of drinking 
fountains (Section 60 (n), (s)). 
Obligatory activities  for obtaining a 
supply/additional supply of water 
(Section 51 (2)(j)). 

Chapter IV: Empowerment of Urban Local Bodies and their functioning 
19 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Functions  in 
Twelfth 
Schedule 
Activities/functions devolved under the provisions of 
CCP Act, 2002 GMA, 1968 
6  Public 
 health,  
sanitation,  
conservancy 
and solid 
waste  
management  
Obligatory activities  for 
cleaning public streets/sewers; 
disposal of night -
soil/preparation of compost; 
regulation of dangerous trade; 
construction/maintenance of 
public 
amenities/conveniences/public 
hospitals/dispensaries; 
ambulance service; 
vaccination; prevention of 
infectious disease, sewage 
disposal (Section 59 (d), (e), 
(g), (l), (n), (p), (q), (u) and (z-
3)). 
Discretionary activities   
of sewage management; 
organization and management 
of health laboratories; 
regulation of offensive trades; 
miscellaneous matter of public 
health/safety/convenience 
(Section 60 (o), (r), (m) and 
(x)). 
Obligatory activities  for regulating 
dangerous trades, crematoriums, Public  
vaccination, disposing of night -soil and 
preparation of compost, prevention from 
communicable disease and public 
dispensaries  
(Section 51 (2 )(e), (2)(h), (2)(l), (2)(p), 
(2)(q) and (2)(t)). 
Discretionary activities  for regulation 
of offensive trades; sewage 
management; and disposal of sewage 
(Section 51 (3)(i), (3)(j) and (3)(l)). 
  
7 Fire services  No provision Obligatory activity for fire 
extinguishing (Section 51 (2)(d))  
8 Urban 
forestry, 
protection of 
the 
environment 
and 
promotion of  
ecological 
aspects  
Obligatory activity for  
urban forestry/protection of 
environment/promotion of 
ecological aspects (Section 59 
(c)) 
Discretionary activity for 
planting/maintaining trees 
(Section 60 (h))  
Section 322 A along  with Schedule X: 
Urban forestry, environment and 
promotion of ecological aspects 
9 Safeguarding 
the interests 
of weaker 
sections of 
society, 
including the 
handicapped 
No provision  No provision  

PA of Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act in Goa 
 
20 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Functions  in 
Twelfth 
Schedule 
Activities/functions devolved under the provisions of 
CCP Act, 2002 GMA, 1968 
and mentally 
retarded 
10 Slum  
improvement 
and  
upgradation  
Discretionary activity for 
slum 
improvement/upgradation 
(Section 60 (h)) 
Section 322 A along  with schedule X: 
Slum improvement and upgradation 
11 Urban 
poverty  
alleviation  
Obligatory activities for 
prevention of vagrancy; 
establishing/maintaining poor 
houses (Section 59 (v)). 
Discretionary activity for 
urban poverty alleviation 
(Section 60 (c)). 
Obligatory activity for relief for 
destitute (Section 51 (2)(r)). 
12 Provision of 
urban 
amenities and 
facilities such 
as parks, 
gardens, 
playgrounds  
Obligatory activities for 
maintenance of municipal 
office/property/public 
amenities (Section 59 (x) and 
(z-1) 
Discretionary activity  for 
construction/maintenance of 
public amenities  
Section 322 A along  with Schedule X: 
Provision of urban amenities and 
facilities  
Discretionary activity of public parks/ 
tree plantation/providing music (Section 
51 (3)(c) and (3)(d))  
13 Promotion of 
cultural,  
educational 
and aesthetic 
aspects 
Discretionary activities   
for establishment and 
maintenance of primary 
schools; fairs and exhibitions; 
music in public places; 
preparation and presentation 
of address to persons of 
distinction;   
public reception ceremony or 
entertainment (Section 60 (g), 
(p), (t), (v) and (w)). 
Section 51 (2 )(u): establishing and 
maintaining primary schools 
(Obligatory). 
Discretionary activities  for grants or 
donations to schools or hostels; and 
public reception, ceremony, fair, 
entertainment or exhibition (Section 51 
(3)(s) and (3)(u)). 
14 Burials and 
burial 
grounds; 
cremations,  
cremation  
 grounds;  and  
electric  
crematoriums  
Section 59 (k): places for the 
disposal of the dead and 
disposal of unclaimed bodies 
(Obligatory). 
Section 322 A along  with Schedule X: 
Burials and cremation and places for 
them. 

Chapter IV: Empowerment of Urban Local Bodies and their functioning 
21 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Functions  in 
Twelfth 
Schedule 
Activities/functions devolved under the provisions of 
CCP Act, 2002 GMA, 1968 
15 Cattle 
pounds; 
prevention of  
cruelty to 
animals  
Section 59 (i): cattle -pounds 
(Obligatory). 
Discretionary activities  for 
cattle pounds and prevention 
of cruelty to animals; and 
destruction/detention, of dogs 
(Section 60 (d) and(l))  
 
Section 322 A along  with Schedule X: 
Cattle pounds; prevention of cruelty to 
animals 
Obligatory activities for 
accommodation of animals for their 
supply (Section 51 (2)(m)) 
Discretionary activities  for 
destruction/detention/preservation of 
dogs; setting up of dairies or farms and 
acquisition and maintenance of grazing 
grounds (Section 51 (3 )(h), (3 )(t) and 
(3)(k))  
16 Vital 
statistics 
including 
registration 
of births and 
deaths  
Obligatory activity  for 
registering births and deaths 
(Section 59 (t)) 
Discretionary activity for 
vital statistics (Section 60 (j))  
Section 322 A along  with Schedule X: 
Vital statistics  
Section 51 (3 )(e): vital statistics 
(Discretionary)  
17 Public 
amenities 
including 
street 
lighting, 
parking lots, 
bus stops and 
public 
conveniences  
Obligatory activity  for 
lighting public streets, places 
and buildings (Section 59 (a)) 
Discretionary activities for 
parking; and transport 
facilities (Section 60 (i) 
and(u)). 
 
Section 322 A along  with Schedule X: 
Public amenities including street 
lighting, parking lots, bus stops and 
public conveniences  
Obligatory activity for 
lighting/watering/cleaning public 
streets, places, sewers and buildings; 
and Constructing and maintaining 
public streets/markets/urinals/drains/ 
tanks, etc; and naming streets and 
numbering of premises (Section 51 
(2)(a), (2)(b), (2)(c), (2)(i) and (2)(k)). 
Discretionary activities for 
establishing/maintaining public  
buildings and making contributions for 
construction/establishment/maintenance 
of such buildings 
(hospitals/schools/libraries, museums/ 
asylums/gymnasiums etc.); construction 
of dwellings for the poorer classes; 
providing transport facilities; supply of 
electrical energy or ga s (Section 51 
(3)(b), (3)(o), (3)(p), (3)(q) and (3)(r)). 

PA of Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act in Goa 
 
22 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Functions  in 
Twelfth 
Schedule 
Activities/functions devolved under the provisions of 
CCP Act, 2002 GMA, 1968 
18 Regulation of 
slaughter 
houses and 
tanneries  
Obligatory activity for 
construction/maintenance of 
public markets/slaughter -
houses and their regulation 
(Section 59 (o)) 
Discretionary activity for 
regulation of tanneries 
(Section 60 (e)). 
Section 322 A along  with schedule X: 
Regulation of slaughter houses and 
tanneries 
(Source: The Constitution of India, CCP Act, 2002 and GMA, 1968) 
There was no provision for the constitutional function of ‘Safeguarding the interests of 
weaker sections of society, including the handicapped and mentally retarded’ either in 
the CCP Act or the GMA, while the Fire Services function was not devolved to the CCP. 
Also, some of the functions were only partially devolved, as discussed below. 
4.2 Actual status of devolution of functions  
Audit observed that 16 and 17 functions were devolved to the CCP (through 51 activities) 
and MCs (through 43 activities and 11 functions) respectively. However, the actual status 
showed only partial devolution of majority of the functions. The status of ac tual 
devolution and implementation of the constitutionally enumerated functions by ULBs in 
Goa is detailed in Table 4.2. 
Table 4.2: The actual status of devolution and implementation of  
functions to ULBs 
Sl.  
No.  
Functions in  
Twelfth 
Schedule  
CCP Municipal Councils 
1  Urban planning 
including town 
planning  
Not executed by CCP as this 
function was carried out by the 
Department of Town and 
Country Planning. The CCP Act 
(Section 255) specifically 
provided for declaration of 
municipal area of CCP as a 
‘Planning Area’ and CCP as a 
‘Planning Authority’ under the 
Goa Town and Country Planning 
Act, 1974.   However, powers 
and duties of a ‘Planning 
Authority’ continued to be 
executed by the North Goa 
Planning and Development 
Authority.  
Not executed by MCs as this 
function was carried out by the 
Department of Town and Country 
Planning through the three  
Planning and Development 
Authorities in North Goa, South 
Goa and Mormugoa. 

Chapter IV: Empowerment of Urban Local Bodies and their functioning 
23 
 
Sl.  
No.  
Functions in  
Twelfth 
Schedule  
CCP Municipal Councils 
2  Regulation of   
land use and 
construction of 
buildings  
  
CCP’s role was restricted to 
issuing construction licenses  
and providing occupancy 
certificates. The functions 
continued to be executed by the 
line departments. 
Demolition of old structures was 
undertaken by CCP. 
 
Activity of  removal of dangerous 
buildings was executed by the 
MCs. 
With regard to  regulation of land 
use and construction of buildings, 
MCs’ role was restricted to issuing 
construction licenses and providing 
occupancy certificates. The rest of 
the activities were being carried out 
by the three Planning and 
Development Authorities. 
3  Planning for 
economic and  
social 
development  
Function not executed as no 
activity related to planning  
for economic and social 
development or surveys was 
carried out by CCP. 
Function n ot executed by MCs as 
these activities under the function  
continued to be executed by 
Planning and Statistics 
Department. 
4 Roads and 
Bridges  
The obligatory activities  were 
being executed by CCP. 
However, under discretionary 
activities, minor maintenance 
works for roads and footpath was 
being carried out by using the 
municipal funds or grants from 
Government. 
Eight works amounting to ₹ 3.18 
crore relating to roads, footpath , 
etc. were executed. 
Streets were named and house 
numbers were issued by the 
CCP. 
Traffic signs were executed by 
CCP under AMRUT Mission. 
Partially executed by MCs 
depending on the sanction of works 
and release of grants. 
However, there was no 
classification of roads jurisdiction 
between Public Works Department 
(PWD) and MCs, construction and 
maintenance works of roads and 
bridges in municipal areas  were 
taken by MCs as well as PWD. 
5 Water supply for  
domestic,  
industrial and 
commercial 
purposes  
The function of water supply 
was not transferred to CCP and 
still vested with Public Works 
Department. 
Cleaning and maintenance of 
wells are taken by CCP. 
Water supply was implemented by 
PWD. However, one MC (Margao) 
executed four works related to well 
cleaning ( ₹ 1.88 lakh) during  
2020-21. 
6 Public health,  
sanitation,  
conservancy and 
solid waste  
management  
Activities of cleaning public 
streets, places, and sewers and 
public spaces open to the 
enjoyment of the public and 
Drive for public vaccination is 
carried out by Health Department. 
 
Two MCs (Mapusa and Margao) 
executed 27 works amounting to  

PA of Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act in Goa 
 
24 
 
Sl.  
No.  
Functions in  
Twelfth 
Schedule  
CCP Municipal Councils 
removing noxious vegetation 
were being carried out by CCP. 
Night soil is disposed of by CCP. 
The activity  related to 
organization of laboratories and 
examinations was carried out by 
the Health Department. 
Trade licenses were issued by 
CCP and regulation of trade is 
carried out. 
Construction and maintenance of 
public toilets and urinals was 
executed by CCP. 
Medical health for public was 
executed by the Health 
Department. This activity was 
carried out by Health 
Department. 
₹ 9.88 crore regarding solid waste 
management during 2020-21. 
Night soil is disposed by the MCs. 
Maintenance of factory for the 
disposal of sewage is maintained by 
the PWD. 
Medical health for public is 
executed by Health Department. 
Dispensaries were not vested in the 
MCs. This activity was carried out 
by Health Department. 
7 Fire services  This function was not devolved  This function is carried out by the 
Department of Fire and 
Emergency. 
Emergency works relating to hiring 
of casual workers for disaster 
management and making laborers 
available to fire station for 
emergency clearance of uprooted 
trees and blockades were executed 
in an ad hoc arrangement between 
MCs and Department of Fire and 
Emergency. MCs would hire these 
laborers and provide them to Fire 
Department. The hiring work 
amounting to ₹ 51.84 lakh was 
executed for the period from 2016-
17 to 2020-21 by three MCs (out of 
four test -checked) viz. Mapusa, 
Curchorem-Cacora and Pernem 
MCs. 
8 Urban forestry, 
protection of the 
environment and 
promotion of  
This function was not carried out 
by CCP. This function was  
executed by Forest Department.  
No obliga tory and discretionary 
activities provided in the GMA. 
This function was not carried out by 
MCs. The function was executed by 
Forest Department. 

Chapter IV: Empowerment of Urban Local Bodies and their functioning 
25 
 
Sl.  
No.  
Functions in  
Twelfth 
Schedule  
CCP Municipal Councils 
ecological 
aspects  
9 Safeguarding the 
interests of 
weaker sections 
of society, 
including 
handicapped and 
mentally  
retarded  
This function was not devolved  This function was not devolved  
10 Slum  
improvement and 
upgradation  
This function was not carried out 
by CCP due to absence of 
notified slum area under CCP 
jurisdiction. 
No obliga tory and discretionary 
activities listed in the GMA. This 
function was not carried out by 
MCs. 
11 Urban  poverty  
alleviation  
This function  was executed by 
Social Welfare Department. The 
scheme on the subject was 
implemented by parastatal. 
 
This function was executed by 
Social Welfare Department.  The 
scheme on the subject was 
implemented by parastatal. 
12 Provision of 
urban amenities 
and facilities 
such as parks, 
gardens, 
playgrounds  
Public amenities like parks, 
gardens and parking spaces were 
maintained by CCP. Four works 
amounting to ₹ 1.69 crore were 
executed. 
Activities like maintaining public 
parks, gardens and providing music 
for people were executed by MCs. 
 
13 Promotion of 
cultural,  
educational and 
aesthetic aspects 
Activities related to primary 
education was executed by  
Education Department. 
Fairs and exhibitions were 
organized and stalls were 
regulated by CCP. 
Activities related to primary 
education were established  
and maintained by Education 
Department. 
Fairs and exhibitions were fully 
executed by MCs. 
14 Burials and burial 
grounds; 
cremations,  
cremation  
grounds; and  
electric  
crematoriums  
Three burial grounds and one 
electric crematorium were being 
maintained by CCP. 
Maintenance of burials and burial 
grounds; crematorium was 
executed by MCs. 

PA of Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act in Goa 
 
26 
 
Sl.  
No.  
Functions in  
Twelfth 
Schedule  
CCP Municipal Councils 
15 Cattle pounds; 
prevention of  
cruelty to animals  
One pound keeper is appointed 
but there was no cattle pound. 
CCP engaged animal welfare 
organizations for rescue and 
management of stray cattle and 
small animals. 
Activities under this function were 
executed by the Department of 
Animal Husbandry. 
In three (Mapusa MC, Margao MC 
and Curchorem-Cacora MC) out of 
the four test-checked MCs, a pound 
keeper was appointed by MCs but 
was looking after clerical work. 
16 Vital statistics 
including 
registration of 
births and deaths  
Registration of births and deaths 
was carried out on behalf of 
Chief Registrar for the State. 
Registration of birth and deaths was 
carried out by MCs. 
17 Public amenities 
including street 
lighting, parking 
lots, bus stops 
and public 
conveniences  
Activity of m aintenance of 
parking spaces was executed by 
CCP. 
Motor transport facilities are 
provided by Kadamba Transport 
Corporation Limited for the 
conveyance of the public and 
Goa Tourism Development 
Corporation for tourists. 
Partially devolved as street lights 
were maintained by MCs, they 
provide electric consumables for 
streetlight and community places . 
However, other activities related to 
electricity supply still remained 
with Electricity Department. 
MCs executed construction and 
maintenance of public streets, 
culverts, municipal boundary 
marks, markets, latrines, urinals, 
drains, sewers, drainage -works, 
sewerage works, baths, drinking 
fountains, tanks, wells, town halls, 
municipal offices and shops. 
All other activities continued to be 
executed by the line departments. 
Management of propelled transport 
facilities for the conveyance of the 
people was provided by Kadamba 
Transport Corporation Limited and 
not by MCs. 
18 Regulation of 
slaughter houses 
and tanneries  
CCP constructs, maintains and 
regulates market places. No 
slaughter houses and tanneries 
were established by CCP. 
No slaughter houses and tanneries 
were established by MCs. 
(Source: Information provided by the Department and test-checked ULBs) 
The above status of devolution and implementation of functions in ULBs is depicted in 
Chart 4.1. 
 

Chapter IV: Empowerment of Urban Local Bodies and their functioning 
27 
 
Chart 4.1: Status of devolution and implementation of functions by ULBs 
 
(Source: Information provided by the Department and test-checked ULBs) 
Corporation of City of Panaji 
The actual status of devolution of functions vis-à-vis the 74th Constitutional Amendment 
Act is summarized in Table 4.3. 
Table 4.3:  Summary of devolution and transfer of functions to CCP 
Sl. 
No. 
Status of devolution 
/execution 
Obligatory 
activities  
Discretionary 
activities 
Number of 
constitutional 
functions 
1 Functions devolved in CCP 
Act but not executed by CCP. 
03 03 04 
2 Functions which are partially 
devolved in the CCP Act 
which are partially/fully 
implemented by CCP. 
24 21 12 
3 Functions which are not 
devolved. 
-- -- 02 
(Source: Analysis from CCP Act and scrutiny of records) 
Out of 18 constitutionally enumerated functions, four were fully devolved (through three 
obligatory and three discretionary activities) and 12 were partially devolved (through 24 
obligatory and 21 discretionary activities ) and the remaining two were not devolved at 
all.  
Four functions were fully devolved for implementation by CCP (Urban planning 
including town planning; Urban poverty alleviation; Slum improvement and upgradation; 
and Urban forestry, protection of the environment and promotion of ecological aspects ). 
Urban Planning was executed by the North Goa Planning and Development Authority, a 
parastatal organization . Urban Poverty Alleviation  scheme (Deendayal Antyodaya 
Yojana-National Urban Livelihoods Mission)  was being implemented by Goa State 
Urban Development Agency (parastatal). The function of ‘ Urban forestry, protection of 
the environment and promotion of ecological aspects’ was being performed by the Forest 
18 18
16 17
12
8
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
CCP MCs
No of functions 
Urban Local Bodies
Constitution Devolved (excluding those not mapped to constitution) Implemented

PA of Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act in Goa 
 
28 
 
Department of the State. Audit noticed that CCP had not effectively implemented these 
fully devolved functions thereby rendering their devolution inconsequential. 
Further, Audit noticed  that out of twelve partially devolved functions , five3 functions 
were being implemented fully, six4 implemented partially and one function (Planning for 
economic and social development) was not being implemented.  
  Municipal Councils  
The actual status of devolution of functions as observed in the four test checked MCs is 
summarized in the Table 4.4:  
Table 4.4:  Summary of devolution and transfer of functions to MCs 
Sl. 
No. 
Status of devolution 
/implementation 
Activities devolved in 
Section 51 of GMA 
Devolution 
in GMA 
(Schedule 
X) 
Number of 
constitutional 
functions  
Remarks  
Obligatory 
activities  
Discretionary 
activities 
1 Functions which are 
partially devolved in 
GMA but not executed by 
MCs. 
05 04 03 07 -- 
2 Functions which are 
partially devolved in 
GMA and partially/ fully 
implemented by MCs. 
15 14 06 08 Out of 8 
constitutional 
functions 35 
are fully 
implemented 
3 Functions which are  
devolved in GMA but 
there is no corresponding 
obligatory or 
discretionary activity. 
-- -- 02 02 Not 
implemented  
4 Functions which are not 
devolved. 
-- -- -- 01 -- 
(Source: Analysis from GMA and scrutiny of records) 
As seen from the above table only one of the 18 functions enumerated in the Twelfth 
Schedule of the c onstitution was not devolved to the MCs and remaining  17 functions 
 
3   i. Provision of urban amenities and facilities such as parks, garden, playground; ii. Burial and burial 
grounds, cremations, cremation grounds and electric crematorium; iii. Cattle pound, prevention of 
cruelty to animals; iv. Vital statistics including registration of births and deaths and v. Public amenities 
including street lighting, parking lots, bus stops and public conveniences 
4   i. Regulation of land -use and construction of buildings; ii. Roads and bridges; iii. Water supply for 
domestic, industrial and commercial purposes; iv. Public health, sanitation conservancy and solid waste 
management; v. Promotion of cultural, educational and aesthetic aspects and vi. Regulation of slaughter 
houses and tanneries 
5   i. Provision of urban amenities and facilities such as parks, gardens, playgrounds; ii. Burials and burial 
grounds; cremations, cremation grounds; and electric crematoriums; and iii. Vital statistics including 
registration of births and deaths 

Chapter IV: Empowerment of Urban Local Bodies and their functioning 
29 
 
were not devolved in full. Further, it is seen that seven functions6 of the Twelfth Schedule, 
which included crucial municipal functions like water supply for domestic, industrial and 
commercial purposes, urban poverty alleviation, etc. which were partially devolved in 
GMA (through five obligatory and four discretionary activities) were not implemented 
by the MCs. Only eight partially devolved functions 7 (through 15 obligatory and 14 
discretionary activities in the GMA) were implemented by the MCs. Eleven functions 
from the Twelfth Schedule of the Constitution were added to GMA through insertion of 
Section 322A (inserted in 1994). However, there were no corresponding activities 
(obligatory or discretionary activities) to be carried out by MCs  with respect to two 
functions ‘Urban forestry, protection of the environment and promotion of ecological 
aspects’ and ‘Slum improvement and upgradation’. 
During the Exit Conference (April 2022), the Secretary, Urban Development, agreed to 
the observations and further informed that CCP was issuing construction licenses after 
approval of the planning authority.  
Recommendation 3: The Government may ensure that the functions devolved to the 
ULBs are actually carried out by them. 
4.3  Inadequate devolution of administrative and financial powers to Urban Local 
Bodies 
Appropriate enabling mechanisms for implementation of the devolved functions is 
essential for effective discharge of functions by ULBs. The CCP (Section 67 of CCP Act) 
and MCs (Section 86 read with Section 84 and 93 of the GMA) are authorized to use their 
respective Corporation/Municipal funds for the purposes mentioned in the respective 
Acts.  
The CCP Act (Section 68, 212 and 214) provided powers for execution of tenders and 
contracts to the Commissioner, Standing Committee, Corporation and the Government 
with varying financial limits.  Similarly, the GMA (Section 89 and 69) authori zed the 
MCs and Standing Committees thereunder to authori ze expenditure within the limits 
specified. Powers of technical sanction to works were assigned to the specified officers 
of PWD, GSUDA and Municipal Engineers. Details of delegation of powers in ULBs are 
given in Appendix 1. 
Finance Commission (FC) grants were disbursed and lying in the accounts of ULBs. But 
the works to be carried out by ULBs, using the FC funds were subject  to approvals of 
Directorate and Secretary, Urban Development. Similarly, State Government grants for 
 
6   i. Urban planning including town planning, ii. Planning for economic and social development iii. Water 
supply for domestic, industrial and commercial purposes. iv. Fire services v. Urban poverty alleviation 
vi. Cattle pounds; prevention of cruelty to animals vii. Regulation of slaughterhouses and tanneries 
7  i. Regulation of land-use and construction of buildings, ii. Roads and bridges iii. Public health, sanitation 
conservancy and solid waste management iv. Provision of urban amenities and facilities such as parks, 
gardens, playgrounds v. Promotion of cultural, educational and aesthetic aspects vi. Burials and burial 
grounds; cremations, cremation grounds; and electric crematoriums vii. Vital statistics including 
registration of births and deaths viii. Public amenities including street lighting, parking lots, bus  stops 
and public conveniences 
 

PA of Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act in Goa 
 
30 
 
development works were released only after approvals of Directorate and Finance 
Department. 
Actual status of implementation of financial delegation is discussed below in relation to 
execution of works through grants. 
4.3.1  Works executed through Central Finance Commission grants  
FC grants are subject to operational guidelines in addition to other specific grant related 
conditions. The general administrative and financial delegation of powers to ULBs was 
applicable for utilisation of the grants.  Further, conditions prescribed by the DUD at the 
time of release for submission of utilization certificate and performance report were to be 
complied with. 
Fourteenth FC in its report recogni zed that a trust-based approach must be adopted for 
release of grants and recommended that no further conditions or directions, other than 
those indicated by FC should be imposed either by the Union or the State Government 
for the release of funds to local bodies.   
Audit observed that all the works taken up by ULBs with FC grants were routed through 
DUD and Secretary, Urban Development for administrative approvals and financial 
sanctions.  
4.3.2   Works executed out of State grants 
Inadequate own revenues of the ULBs, as discussed subsequently and lack of assured 
resources in the absence of SFC recommendations made them dependent on State 
Government’s budgetary grants for execution of works. State Government sanctioned 
grants (‘Development grants’ and grants under ‘ Goa Special Grants to Municipalities 
Scheme’) amounting to ₹ 69.58 crore to ULBs for execution of public works like 
construction or repairs of drainages, footpaths, roads and community assets, etc. for the 
period 2016-17 to 2020-21.  
Audit observed that work proposals to be executed by ULBs through Government grants 
were subjected to multiple administrative approvals8. Grants were sanctioned by the State 
Finance Department after tenders were finalized by ULBs. The Finance Department 
accorded sanctions in batches, which caused avoidable delays in the projects. The status 
of proposals of works by three ULBs, their administrative approvals (AA) and 
expenditure sanctions (ES) is shown in the Table 4.5. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8   Approval granted by respective Chief Officers/Commissioner of CCP; Councils/CCP and then by 
DUD 

Chapter IV: Empowerment of Urban Local Bodies and their functioning 
31 
 
Table 4.5:  Summary of work proposals and their approvals  
ULB No of 
works with 
AA  
No of 
works with 
ES   
No of 
batches 
for ES  
Delays in test checked cases 
CCP 130 34 4 AA for 38 works were accorded in 
April 2016. Only 26 were provided ES 
(after 12 months to 14 months). Twelve 
works were awaiting ES. 
Mapusa  114 73 9 AA for 61 works were accorded during 
November 2017 to August 2019 . Only 
24 were provided ES (after 9 months to 
25 months ). Thirty-seven w orks were 
awaiting ES. 
Margao  130 126 6 AA for 69 works were accorded in 
November 2016 (ES was accorded after 
7 months to 14 months).  
Total 374 233 19  
(Source: Information provided by DUD)  
Out of 3 74 works proposed and administratively approved, only 233 were provided 
expenditure sanction in 19 batches and 141 were awaiting such sanctions. It was also seen 
that 37, 39, 55 and 63 per cent of grants sanctioned 9 for developmental works during 
2016-17 to 2020-21 remained unutilized in Margao MC, Curchorem-Cacora MC, Pernem 
MC and Mapusa MC respectively. 
Secretary, Urban Development, confirmed during the Exit Conference (April 2022) that 
there were delays due to approvals at various levels and added that adequate 
administrative and financial autonomy for ULBs, including delegation of powers relating 
to public works would be considered.  
Recommendation 4: Adequate administrative and financial autonomy may be allowed 
to the ULBs in the execution of functions devolved to them. 
4.4  Role of parastatals in implementation of schemes  
The 74 th Constitutional Amendment Act  envisaged that the delivery of urban 
infrastructure and services would be entrusted to the ULBs. The status of actual 
implementation of devolved functions by ULBs has been detailed in Appendix 2. 
Parastatal agencies such as Goa State Infrastructure Development Corporation (GSIDC), 
Imagine Panaji Smart City Development Limited (IPSCDL) , GSUDA, Planning and 
Development Authorities, etc. were constituted to deliver or facilitate urban infrastructure 
and services in the State and they played an important role in the execution of functions 
such as water supply & sanitation , construction of roads, buildings and crematoria , 
urban/town planning, regulation of land use , etc. The parastatals implemented several 
 
9  Margao MC: ₹ 2.05 crore unutilized out of ₹ 5.51 crore (37 per cent ); Pernem MC: ₹ 1.17 crore 
unutilized out of ₹ 2.13 crore (55 per cent); Curchorem-Cacora MC: ₹ 3.33 crore unutilized out of  
₹ 8.60 crore (39 per cent) and Mapusa MC: ₹ 5.06 crore unutilized out of ₹ 7.98 crore (63 per cent) 

PA of Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act in Goa 
 
32 
 
important schemes10 in these functional areas. Audit examined the role of parastatals vis-
à-vis ULBs in the implementation of three such schemes and the findings are discussed 
below. 
4.4.1  Implementation of Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban 
Transformation (AMRUT) 
The Ministry of Urban Development (MoUD), Government of India (GoI) launched (June 
2015) the Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation (AMRUT)  with the 
objective of improving water supply, sewerage, public amenities, and transport in urban 
areas. Programme Management Structure of the scheme provided (Para graph 10 of 
scheme guidelines) that at city level, the ULBs will be responsible for implementation of 
the mission. The Municipal Commissioner will ensure timely preparation of Service 
Level Improvement Plans (SLIP). The ULBs were to develop D etailed Project Reports 
(DPRs)/bid documents/ensure approvals for projects and appoint implementation 
agencies as per the approvals in State Annual Action Plans (SAAP). The ULBs were to 
ensure its timely completion. 
The scheme guidelines provided ( Paragraph 8.1) that the if the ULBs did not have 
adequate capacity to handle projects, speciali zed parastatal agencies could be engaged 
through the execution of a tripartite Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) amongst the 
State Government, the specialized parastatal agencies and the concerned Municipality.  
Audit  observed that CCP  passed a resolution (November 2015)  and handed over the 
work of preparation SLIP and SAAP to GSIDC .  However, State level High Powered 
Committee11 (SLHPC) appointed (March 2016) GSIDC and later IPSCDL (May 2017 ) 
as the implementing agency 12 for AMRUT. GSIDC and IPSCDL were unilaterally 
appointed as the implementing agencies by the Government without any tripartite 
agreement as envisaged in the scheme guidelines.  
The scheme guidelines required that funds (Central and State share) are transferred to 
ULBs within seven working days of release of the Central share by the MoUD. However, 
all the funds were directly transferred to GSIDC and IPSCDL by the Government, instead 
of CCP, effectively denying any control to CCP over the project implementation. 
 
10  i. GSUDA implemented three central schemes ( Deendayal Antyodaya – National Urban Livelihoods 
Mission (DAY-NULM), Swachh Bharat Mission (Urban), Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana - Housing for 
All (Urban), (PMAY -HFA(U)) and one State scheme - Integrated Development of Major Towns 
(IDMT). ii. Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation (AMRUT) and Smart City 
Scheme are implemented by IPSCDL 
11  Members of SLHPC were  1. Chief Secretary; 2. Secretary (Urban Development); 3. Secretary 
(Finance); 4. Secretary (Planning); 5. Chief Town Planner; 6. Director of Urban Development; 7. 
Mayor/Commissioner, CCP; 8. Chairperson/Chief Officer, Mormugao; and 9. Chairperson/Chief 
Officer, Margoa; 10. Pr. Chief Engineer and 11. Representative of MoHUA 
12   CCP resolved (24.11.2015) to hand over the work of preparation of SLIPs to the GSIDC. Accordingly, 
GoG appointed (March 2016) GSIDC as the Directorate of Mission for implementation of AMRUT 
Mission. GSIDC prepared the SLIP and SAAP for the years 2015-16, 2016-17 and 2017-18 wherein 29 
works (₹ 209.18 crore) were approved. Subsequently, GoG appointed (24.05.2017) IPSCDL as a nodal 
agency with transfer of all unutilized funds from GSIDC 

Chapter IV: Empowerment of Urban Local Bodies and their functioning 
33 
 
The scheme recommended prioritization of works for universal coverage of water and 
sewerage. GSIDC proposed 29 works 13 (₹ 209.18 crore) during the period 2015 -16 to 
2017-18. Out of 29 works, only four projects (₹18.57 crore) pertained to water supply and 
sewerage (8.88 per cent) but there were 22 works (₹185.47 crore) of Urban Transport 
(88.67 per cent ). Further, the SLHPC decided (February 2021) to withdraw the 20 
projects which had not commenced and seven14 new projects of ₹ 169.48 crore were 
submitted to MoHUA. Three projects out of the seven newly proposed ones were 
approved (September 2021) by the ministry.  
The implementing agencies did not identify the priority areas of works in CCP initially 
and their delayed identification resulted in delayed execution.  
The ULBs were required to monitor the projects  closely through their elected 
representatives and direct citizen feedback using mobiles and e -groups. As CCP had no 
role in the implementation of these projects, no monitoring was carried out.  
Thus, the CCP did not have any role in the implementation of AMRUT, which included 
projects for important municipal services like water supply, sewerage, public amenities, 
etc. which undermined the CCP’s responsibility and accountability for service levels in 
these areas as well as its power and authority. 
4.4.2  Implementation of Smart City Scheme 
MoHUA, GoI launched (June 2015) the Smart Cities Mission (SCM) with the objective 
of promoting cities that provide core infrastructure and give a decent quality of life to its 
citizens, a clean and sustainable environment and application of ‘Smart’ solutions. In 
Goa, Panaji city was selected and the IPSCDL 15 was constituted (June 2016) as an SPV 
to implement the Mission. 
Para 14 of the scheme guideline  stipulated that SCM may carry out convergence with 
other Central and State Government programmes/schemes to derive greater benefit and 
convergence was to be sought at the planning stage itself.  
 
 
13   Out of the 29 works, four (₹ 18.57 crore) pertained to water supply and sewerage, 22 (₹ 185.47 crore) 
pertained to Urban Transport and three (₹ 4.14 crore) pertained to Green Spaces and Park Sector.  
14  i. Upgradation of Sewage network for Panaji City (₹ 118.96 crore); ii. Upgradation of Sewage pumping 
installation at Panaji City (₹ 1.05 crore); iii. Rejuvenation of Campal area of Panaji City as a green space 
(₹ 30.09 crore); iv. Supply of treated effluen t water from Tonca STP to green space and institution in 
Panaji City (₹ 13.12 crore); v. Development of Community green space at Caranzalem  
(₹ 3.45 crore); vi. Development of green space near Govt. Quarters Altinho, Panaji  
(₹ 1.69 crore); and vii.  Landscaping for Open spaces at Altinho neighborhood greens (₹ 1.12 crore).  
15  Board of Directors (BoD) of IPSCDL comprised of Government of Goa Officers like Chief Secretary 
as Chairman and other members included Secretary (Urban Development); Secretary (Finance); 
Collector, North Goa; Director of Urban Development; Commissioner, CCP; and  
Pr. Chief Engineer. The BoD also included Under Secretary, Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, 
Government of India; Mayor of CCP; and Member of Legislative Assembly for Panaji assembly 
constituency.  

PA of Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act in Goa 
 
34 
 
Audit observed that  three projects 16 of CCP proposed under Fourteenth and Fifteenth 
Finance Commission (FFC) grants had to be terminated after issuing of work orders, as 
the same areas were proposed for development under projects by IPSCDL. Another 
work17 executed by the CCP under Finance Commission grants was removed by  the 
IPSCDL to carry out the work under SCM. Absence of convergence with the CCP’s work 
resulted in termination of works.   
4.4.3  Implementation of Swachh Bharat Mission – Urban 
The Swachh Bharat Mission (SBM)-Urban is a GoI  scheme where the guidelines 
specified a role for ULBs in all the six 18 components of the mission. GSUDA was 
appointed as a nodal agency for implementation of the scheme. Audit observed that: 
➢ Individual Household Latrine (IHHL) component of the scheme provided for 
beneficiary led construction of the IHHL by sanction of grant of ₹ 5,333 (and ₹ 6,667 
w.e.f. 2017) in two instalments (Para graph 4.4.1 and 4.4.3 of the guidelines) by the 
ULBs after verification of the progress. Audit observed that grant for this component 
was distributed through ULBs for the first instalment but the second instalment was 
transferred to the beneficiaries by GSUDA instead of ULBs. 
➢ ULBs are advised (Paragraph 7.10.5 of the guidelines) to use the GeM (Government  
e-Market place) portal as a one -stop-shop for formally procuring all waste 
management equipment.   
Audit observed that under the component of Solid Waste Management  (SWM) of the 
SBM, GSUDA received the proposals from ULBs for procurements/works and the same 
were executed after approval of State Level High Powered Committee. Resultantly, 
GSUDA procured equipments for Solid Waste Management worth ₹ 87.32 lakh between 
February 2020 to March 2021 through GeM instead of ULBs. This was in contravention 
of the scheme guidelines and the ULBs were deprived of their role in implementation of 
SWM component of the scheme. 
➢ Guidelines prescribed (Para graph 8.4) that Information, Education and 
Communication (IEC) & Public Awareness (PA) funds were to be transferred at the 
rate of 50 per cent of the grant for utilization by the ULBs. Audit observed that since 
2019-20, GSUDA did not transfer grants amounting to ₹ 3.10 crore  (between  
2019-20 to 2021-22) to ULBs and the same were utilized by GSUDA for expenditure 
of IEC component, which was contrary to the guidelines of the scheme.  
The role of ULBs in implementing SBM in Goa was partially taken over by the parastatal.  
DUD replied (September 2022) that GSUDA procured the equipment on behalf of ULBs 
being the nodal agency for implementation of the scheme. Further, Secretary , Urban 
 
16    Construction of drain along with laying of RCC slabs in front of St. Inez church and Thakur Garage in 
ward No. 10 ( ₹ 11.08 lakh), construction of road with side drain in ward No. 02 ( ₹ 6.03 lakh) and 
construction of drain with RCC slabs near Shenaz shopping centre in ward no. 11 and 12 ( ₹ 7.86 lakh) 
17   Providing and laying of pavers for existing footpath in ward no. 12 (₹ 7.48 lakh) 
18   i. Individual Household Latrines (IHHL) including conversion of insanitary latrines into pour -flush 
latrines; ii. Community toilets; iii. Public toilets and urinals; iv. Solid waste management; v. IEC & 
Public Awareness and vi. Capacity building and Administrative and Office Expenses (A&OE) 

Chapter IV: Empowerment of Urban Local Bodies and their functioning 
35 
 
Development stated in Exit Conference (April 2022) that works pertaining to ULBs were 
transferred to GSUDA. 
The reply was not tenable in view of the guidelines of the scheme to transfer the funds to 
ULBs rather than make procurement on their behalf.  
The parastatals were assigned the responsibility of implementing several urban 
infrastructure schemes by the State Government, and the same were implemented without 
accountability to the ULBs which were ultimately responsible for municipal services. 
Recommendation 5: Democratically elected ULBs must be given a greater role in the 
planning and implementation of schemes pertaining to local body functions as per the 
devolution. 
4.5 Planning by Urban Local Bodies  
Setting up of District Planning Committee (DPC)19 is mandated as per Article 243ZD of 
the Constitution. The GMA provided (Section 184F) that every MC shall prepare every 
year, a development plan and submit it to the District Planning Committee constituted 
under Section 239 of the Goa Panchayat Raj Act, 1994. 
Necessary planning for execution of devolved functions was mandated to be carried out 
through the DPC by consolidating the annual plans of MCs in the district. The district 
plans so prepared would have regard to matters of common interest between the local 
bodies including sharing of water and other physical and natural resources, the integrated 
development of infrastructure and environmental conservation, and the extent and type 
of available resources. 
Audit observed that DPCs were formed during the audit period, 2016-21 and for 2021-26 
in both the districts. While the North Goa DPC did not hold any meeting, the South Goa 
DPC held four meetings.  However, none of the ULBs prepared/submitted any 
development plans to the DPC for preparation of consolidated district plans. Consolidated 
development plan for the district as a whole has never been prepared by either of the 
DPCs.  
Secretary, Urban Development agreed (April 2022) with the observation during the Exit 
Conference and stated that planning machinery of ULBs would be activated to facilitate 
the preparation of developmental plans.  
Recommendation 6: The State Government may ensure that DPCs are functioning 
effectively and prepare the District Development Plans by consolidating the plans. 
 
19  DPC shall consist of members of the Loksabha, Rajyasabha, members of Legislative Assembly, 
Adhyaksha of the ZP, the President of the Municipal Council having jurisdiction over the headquarters 
of the district, members specified from elected members of ZP and ULBs. Adhyaksha and Chief 
Executive Officer of ZPs shall be the ex-officio Chairman and Secretary of the DPC respectively. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter V 
Financial resources of 
Urban Local Bodies 

 

 Chapter V: Financial resources of Urban  
Local Bodies 
Devolution of financial resources was critical for local bodies for the successful 
implementation of devolved functions. Finances of U rban Local Bodies (ULBs)  
comprised their own revenues, assigned revenues and transfers from the State and 
Central Governments. ULBs were highly dependent on Government grants for carrying 
out their functions. Full potential of collecting own revenues was not tapped by the ULBs 
and majority of them were not able to meet even their establishment expenditure out of 
their own resources. The delays in the constitution of State Finance Commissions (SFCs) 
and inaction on their recommendations by the Government, rendered the SFC mechanism 
redundant and deprived the ULBs of assured revenues. Unrealistic budgets by ULBs  
rendered them ineffective as  an instrument of financial management and programme 
execution. Migration to Accrual Based Double Entry Accounting System was yet to be 
completed in Municipal Councils (MCs). 
Successful implementation of devolved functions and delivery of services by ULBs is 
dependent upon the availability of adequate financial resources with them. The resources 
of ULBs can be broadly categorized as (i) Own revenue, which ULBs mobilise through 
their power to levy and collect taxes and fees; (ii) Assigned revenue, which accrues to the 
ULBs as a certain percentage of a tax levied and collected by the State Government and; 
(iii) State and Central Government grants including Central Finance Commission (CFC) 
grants. 
5.1  Sources of revenue  
Own revenues (tax and non-tax revenues), assigned revenues and Government transfers 
including Finance Commission (FC) grants comprised the sources of revenue for ULBs  
in Goa. Composition of sources of revenue of ULBs for the period 2016-17 to 2020-21 is 
summarized in Table 5.1 and depicted in Chart 5.1. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

PA of Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act in Goa 
 
38 
 
Table 5.1: Sources of Revenues of ULBs 
 (` in crore) 
(Source: Information provided by Director of Urban Development) 
* includes grants from both State and Central Government 
Chart 5.1: Composition of revenues of ULBs during the period 2016-21 
(₹ in crore) 
 
(Source: Information provided by Directorate of Urban Development) 
Own revenue of CCP constituted 88.38 per cent of the total revenue, whereas it accounted 
for 54.55 per cent in the rest of the MCs. Government grants for CCP and MCs constituted 
9.69 per cent and 41.10 per cent of their total revenues respectively.  
Audit observations on revenues of ULBs were as below:  
5.2  Own revenues of Urban Local Bodies  
Article 243X of the Constitution inter alia provided that a State legislature may authorise 
the ULBs to levy, collect and appropriate taxes, duties, tolls and fees. Accordingly, 
necessary provisions were made in the Corporation of City of Panaji (CCP) Act, 2002 
and Goa Municipalities Act (GMA), 1968.  
219.48
460.73
4.79
36.65
24.06
347.17
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
CCP MCs
Percentage
ULBs 
Own revenue
 Assigned revenues
 Transfers from governments
Year  Corporation of City of Panaji (CCP)  MCs  
 Own 
revenue 
Percentage 
of total 
revenue 
Assigned 
revenue 
Grant* Total Own 
revenue 
Percentage 
of total 
revenue 
Assigned 
revenue 
Grant* Total 
2016-17 32.94 94.06 2.08 -- 35.02 66.00 60.99 14.21 28.00 108.21 
2017-18 47.97 94.65 2.71 -- 50.68 95.53 45.86 22.44 90.30 208.27 
2018-19 53.99 91.11 -- 5.27 59.26 103.45 68.29 -- 48.03 151.48 
2019-20 35.08 80.97 -- 8.24 43.32 93.57 45.01 -- 114.30 207.87 
2020-21 49.50 82.43 -- 10.55 60.05 102.18 60.56 -- 66.54 168.72 
Total 219.48  4.79 24.06 248.33 460.73  36.65 347.17 844.55 

Chapter V: Financial resources of Urban Local Bodies 
39 
 
5.3 Own revenues of CCP 
Section 104 of the CCP Act empowered the CCP to mandatorily impose property taxes 
and cess on animals or goods brought within the city for sale, consumption or use and six 
types of discretionary taxes 1. Composition of CCP’s own sources of revenue for the 
period from 2016-17 to 2020-21 is depicted in Chart 5.2. 
Chart 5.2: Composition of own sources of revenues in CCP 
 
(Source: Income and expenditure statements of CCP for the period 2016 -21) 
The top seven contributors to the revenues of the CCP were property tax, garbage tax, 
construction licence fees, advertisement tax, professional tax , rent and parking fees  as 
shown in Table 5.2.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1  (a) A tax payable by the owners on all or any vehicles or animals used for riding, driving, draught, or 
burden, or on dogs where such vehicles, animals or dogs are kept within the city, (b) A toll on vehicles 
and animals used as aforesaid entering the city and on boats moored within the city; (c) Fees on the 
registration of cattle sold within the city; (d) A lighting rate where the lighting of public streets, places 
and buildings is undertaken by the Corporation; (e) Market dues on persons exposing goods for sale in 
any market or in place belonging to or under the control of the Government or of the Corporation and; 
(f) Any other tax not being a tax on professions, trades, calling and employments which the State 
Legislature has power to impose in the State under the Constitution  
Advertisement Tax
5%
 Construction 
Licence fees
11%
Garbage Tax/fees
14%
Market fees
2%
Trade Tax
5%
Property tax
48%
Rent
4%
Other taxes/fees
11%

PA of Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act in Goa 
 
40 
 
Table 5.2: Collection of revenues of CCP for the period 2016-21 
 (₹ in crore) 
Type of Revenues 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 
Property tax 13.30 13.71 15.81 19.70 20.34 
Garbage tax 4.54 4.98 5.05 5.25 5.32 
Construction License Fees 4.46 2.24 4.23 2.90 5.30 
Advertisement tax 1.60 1.64 1.76 1.88 1.89 
Professional tax 1.49 1.85 1.81 2.03 2.37 
Rent 0.88 1.02 1.07 1.33 2.05 
Parking fee 0.11 0.09 0.03 0.11 0.80 
Total 26.38 25.53 29.76 33.20 38.07 
(Source: Income and expenditure statements of CCP for 2016-21) 
Compared to 2016-17 all the revenues have increased in 2020-21 as evident from the 
above table. 
5.3.1 Own revenues of MCs  
Section 101 and 104 of the GMA empowered the MCs to impose compulsory taxes 2, 
discretionary taxes and toll. MCs may also charge fees for certain licences, permissions 
(Section 143 of GMA), and stallages3 and rents for market space (Section 257 of GMA).  
The four test checked MCs (Curchorem -Cacora, Mapusa, Margao and Pernem) levied 
property tax, professional tax, advertisement tax, garbage tax, construction licence fees, 
market fees, rent and other fees (like parking fee, transfer fee of property/trade, 
registration of birth and death, etc.). Composition of the taxes/fees collected by the MCs 
is depicted in Chart 5.3. 
Chart 5.3: Composition of own revenues in test checked MCs  
for the period 2016-21
 
(Source: Income and expenditure statements of the MCs for the period 2016 -21) 
 
2  Taxes on lands/buildings, professions, trades, calling, employment, theatre and advertisement could be 
levied 
3   Rental, taxation or fees charge for the holding of a stall in a market 
Advertisement Tax
1%
Construction 
Licence fees
29%
Garbage 
Tax/fee
13%
Market fees
6%
Trade Tax
4%
Property Tax
26%
Rent
11%
Other taxes/fees
10%

Chapter V: Financial resources of Urban Local Bodies 
41 
 
Major contribution (79 per cent ) to the revenues of MCs was from four sources 
(Construction license fees, property tax, garbage tax and rent ). Revenue from important 
sources in test checked MCs was as shown in the Table 5.3.  
Table 5.3: Revenues of test checked MCs for the period 2016-21 
(₹ in crore) 
Type of Revenues 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 
Construction License Fees 5.26 10.85 13.19 8.66 11.24 
Property tax 7.08 9.59 10.37 9.85 8.40 
Garbage tax 2.05 5.54 4.61 4.60 4.76 
Rent 3.80 3.94 3.70 3.57 3.70 
Market fees 1.87 2.60 2.22 2.25 1.19 
Other income 1.50 1.71 1.81 1.51 0.79 
Professional tax 1.21 1.42 1.68 1.45 1.59 
Total  22.77 35.65 37.58 31.89 31.67 
(Source: Receipt and Payment accounts of the MCs for the period 2016 -21) 
As evident from the table there was an overall increase of revenue of  
₹ 8.90 crore in 2020-21 as compared to 2016-17. However, revenues from ‘rent’, ‘market 
fees’ and ‘other income’ decreased in 2020-21 as compared to 2016-17. 
5.3.2 Efficiency of revenue collection mechanism  
Deficiencies noticed in the revenue collection mechanism of the ULBs were as below: 
5.3.2.1 Pending revision of rates of property tax    
As per the GMA, consolidated property tax (Section 101) could be levied by MCs on 
lands and buildings based on their ‘rateable value4’. It was further instructed (November 
2007) by D irector of Urban Development (DUD) that the plinth area rate fixed by the 
PWD be adopted as the basis for assessment of property tax. The revised plinth areas rates 
were published by the PWD in August 2016. These rates were applicable during the audit 
period for adoption by MCs for revision of rates of property tax. Audit observed that 
ULBs did not adopt the PWD plinth area rates for property tax rates. The CCP revised 
(April 2016) property tax for residential (` 97.20 per sq. m.) and commercial properties 
(` 594 per sq.m.). Details of property tax rates based on PWD notified plinth area rates 
and rates in test-checked MCs were as shown in Table 5.4. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4  Rateable value (Section 110 of the GMA) is value of property for which it might be reasonably expected 
to let, or which it is actually let, whichever is greater, after deduction of a sum equal to ten per cent for 
repairs. 

PA of Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act in Goa 
 
42 
 
Table 5.4: Comparative rates of Property Tax as of March 2021 
(Amount in ` ) 
Name of 
MCs 
Class 
of 
MCs 
Date of 
last 
revision of 
property 
tax 
 Rate of property tax based on 
PWD rates (per sq. m.) 
Rates of ULB (per sq. m.) 
Residential 
rate 
Commercial 
rate 
Residential 
rate 
Commercial 
rate 
Margao A 12/03/2018 178.00 206.00 18.75 25.00 
Mapusa B 20/03/2023 143.00 165.00 10.00 30.00 
Curchorem-
Cacora 
B 03/07/2020 143.00 165.00 19.50 66.30 
Pernem C 17/05/2016 107.00 124.00 7.00 10.00 
(Source: Data made provided by four test-checked MCs) 
The rates adopted by the test-checked MCs were very low in comparison to PWD plinth 
area rates.  
Pernem MC assured  (March 2022) to submit the proposal for adoption of property tax  
rates before the Council.  
5.3.2.2 Inefficient revenue recovery mechanism    
Rule 9 of General Financial Rules, 2017, requires that all receipts and dues have to  be 
correctly and promptly assessed, collected and duly credited to the concerned fund.  
City Corporation of Panaji 
Consolidated arrears of revenues5 in CCP were as shown in Table 5.5 below: 
Table 5.5: Consolidated arrears of revenues of CCP for the period 2016-21 
                                                                                           (`  in crore) 
Year Demand Collection 
Arrears 
Percentage 
increase 
over 
previous 
year 
 Arrears Interest Current 
demand 
Total 
demand 
Arrears Interest Current 
collection 
Total 
collection 
1 2 3 4 5=(2+3+4) 6 7 8 9=(6+7+8) 10=(5-9) 11 
2016-17 15.20 4.61 20.31 40.12 2.71 0.69 14.76 18.16 21.96 NA 
2017-18 18.62 5.27 22.19 46.08 3.61 0.73 16.20 20.54 25.54 16.25 
2018-19 20.73 5.93 25.12 51.78 3.83 0.75 17.79 22.37 29.41 15.16 
2019-20 23.34 6.84 28.31 58.49 2.93 0.62 17.87 21.42 37.07 26.04 
2020-21 31.16 9.72 29.60 70.48 3.85 1.06 17.54 22.45 48.03 29.57 
(Source: Information provided by CCP) 
As evident from the above table consolidated arrears of revenues increased from ` 21.96 
crore to ` 48.03 crore during the audit period . Yearly increase in percentage terms over 
previous year was also showing increasing trend from 16.25 per cent (2017-18) to 29.57 
per cent  (2020-21). Audit noticed in the test -check of three taxes ( property tax, 
 
5  i. Property tax; ii. Garbage Tax; iii. Advertisement Tax; iv. Professional Tax; and v. Rent  

Chapter V: Financial resources of Urban Local Bodies 
43 
 
advertisement/signboard tax and trade tax) that statutory procedure6 of issue of bills and 
demand notices for collection of advertisement/signboard tax and trade tax was not 
followed. Further, survey for identification of illegal houses and identification of expired 
or illegal licenses of professions were not being carried out. This resulted in accumulation 
of arrears.   
The Corporation stated (September 2022) that bills would be issued and recovery 
commenced. 
Municipal Councils 
Consolidated arrears of revenues 7 in test checked MCs were as shown in the Table 5.6 
below: 
Table 5.6: Consolidated arrears of revenues in MCs for the period 2016-21 
(` in crore) 
Year Demand Collection 
Arrears 
Percentage 
increase 
over 
previous 
year 
Arrears Interest Current 
demand 
Total 
demand 
Arrears Interest Current 
collection  
Total 
collection 
1 2 3 4 5=(2+3+4) 6 7 8 9=(6+7+8) 10=(5-9) 11 
2016-17 11.49 2.05 9.63 23.17 2.13 0.29 6.23 8.65 14.52 NA 
2017-18 12.59 2.36 10.98 25.93 3.18 0.29 7.83 11.30 14.63 0.75 
2018-19 12.97 2.70 15.85 31.52 2.28 0.33 10.00 12.61 18.91 29.25 
2019-20 17.31 3.06 13.67 34.04 2.76 0.31 8.63 11.70 22.34 18.14 
2020-21 20.33 3.90 14.32 38.55 2.13 0.41 8.12 10.66 27.89 24.84 
(Source: Information provided by the MCs) 
There was increase in total arrears of four important taxes during the audit period from 
₹14.52 crore to ₹ 27.89 crore. Audit noticed that there was no system8 of issue of notices 
and warrants to recover the arrears in revenue. 
It was stated (March 2022) by three MCs (Margao, Mapusa and Curchorem-Cacora) that 
the reasons would be analysed and corrective measures taken.  Further, DUD also stated 
(April 2022) that MCs would be instructed to take measures to collect the arrears.  
Property Tax Board 
The Thirteenth CFC recommended the establishment of a Property Tax Board which 
would assist all the ULBs in the State to put in place an independent and transparent 
procedure for assessing property tax. However, the State Government did not constitute 
the Property Tax Board  and decisions pertaining to tax slab rates were left to the 
individual ULBs.  
 
6  Chapter XII ‘Recovery of Corporation's Claims’ in the CCP Act details the procedure for issue of bills 
(Section 144), demand notice (Section 145), warrant (Section 146), breaking open of premises  
(Section 148) and execution of warrant (Section 149) 
7  i. Property tax ii. Advertisement tax iii. Professional tax and 4. Rent 
8  Test-check of recovery procedure in three taxes 1. Property tax 2. Professional tax and 3. Advertisement 
tax 

PA of Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act in Goa 
 
44 
 
Recommendation 7: ULBs may undertake a detailed review of their finances in terms 
of tax potential, additional resource mobilization, rationalization of tax structure, etc. 
in addition to strengthening their revenue collection machinery to reduce the revenue 
arrears. 
5.4 Fiscal transfers to Urban Local Bodies  
Fiscal transfers, in the form of grants of CFC and State Government grants contributed 
20 per cent to 49 per cent of the total revenue in ULBs during the period 2016 -17 to  
2020-21.  
5.4.1  Central Finance Commission Grants  
The Fourteenth Finance Commission (XIV FC) recommended assured transfers in the 
form of basic grants and performance grants to the ULBs for efficient delivery of basic 
services within the functions assigned to them. The Fifteenth Finance Commission  
(XV FC) recommended grants inter alia for Non-Million Plus Cities (NMPCs) for ULBs 
in two parts  as Untied and Tied grants for the award year 2020 -21 and for the period 
2021-26. As per the operational guidelines, untied grants were to be utilized on need basis 
under the eighteen subjects of Twelfth schedule of the Constitution. Fifty per cent of the 
tied grants were required to be utilized on ‘Sanitation and Solid Waste Management’ and 
attainment of star ratings as developed by Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs 
(MoHUA). Remaining tied grants (50 per cent) was to be utili zed for ‘Drinking water, 
rainwater harvesting and water recycling’.  
5.4.2  Sanctions and releases 
Details of the sanctioned fiscal transfers to ULBs under the XIV FC and XV FC for the 
period 2015 -16 to 2020 -21 and the actual releases against them was as given in  
Table 5.7.  
Table 5.7: Finance Commission grants sanctioned and released 
(₹ in crore) 
Commission Year Sanctioned Released 
BG* PG^ BG PG 
XIV FC  2015-16 21.10 -- 21.10 -- 
2016-17 29.21 8.62 29.21 8.62 
2017-18 33.76 9.76 33.76 9.76 
2018-19 39.05 11.08 39.05 -- 
2019-20 52.76 14.51 52.76 -- 
Total 175.88 43.97 175.88 18.38 
XV FC   Tied Untied Tied Untied 
2020-21 18.00 18.00 18.00 18.00 
(Source: Information provided by DUD) 
(*BG- Basic grant, ^PG- Performance grant) 
It was observed that Performance grants amounting to ₹ 25.59 crore for the years 2018-
19 and 2019 -20 sanctioned by the Government of India (GoI) were not released to the 
State Government. Further, as a result of non -compliance with the requirement of 

Chapter V: Financial resources of Urban Local Bodies 
45 
 
releasing the basic grant to ULBs within 15 days of receipt from GoI, the Government of 
Goa (GoG) had to pay an interest of ₹ 74.2 lakh for delays of 11 to 288 days to ULBs 
during the period 2015-20 as shown in Table 5.8 below: 
Table 5.8: Delay in release of grant and interest paid by the State Government 
Year  
(Instalment 
No.) 
Type of grant Date of 
release of 
grant by GoI 
Amount 
(₹ in 
crore) 
Date of 
release by 
GoG 
Delay 
(days) 
Interest 
paid to 
ULBs  
(₹ in lakh) 
2015-16 (1st) Basic Grant 13-07-2015 10.55 27-04-2016 288 53.28 
2016-17  Performance 
Grant 31-03-2017 8.62 06-06-2017 51 4.82 
2017-18  Performance 
Grant 23-08-2019 9.76 30-09-2019 22 2.53 
2018-19 (1st) Basic Grant 11-02-2019 19.53 01-04-2019 33 10.15 
2019-20 (1st) Basic Grant 03-09-2019 26.38 30-09-2019 11 3.42 
Total  74.20 
 (Source: Information as provided by Department of Urban Development)  
According to the DUD, delay of 288 days in releasing grants to ULBs was on account of 
non-availability of account head.  However, audit observed that delays have continued in 
subsequent years also, though to a smaller extent.   
Accepting the delay, Secretary, Urban Development assured (February 2024) that 
timeline to disburse the XV FC grants would be adhered to. 
5.4.2.1  Utilization of grants under XIV FC  
Utilization of XIV FC grants in test-checked three ULBs (CCP, Margao and Mapusa) was 
as detailed in Table 5.9. 
Table 5.9: Utilization of XIV FC grants in test checked ULBs 
(₹ in crore) 
Year CCP Margao MC Mapusa MC Total Utilization 
(percentage) Receipt Exp. Receipt Exp. Receipt Exp. Receipt Exp. 
2016-17 1.10 0.06 1.10 -- 0.75 0.06 2.95 0.12 4.06 
2017-18 5.03 0.76 8.16 0.45 4.09 0.41 17.28 1.62 9.37 
2018-19 3.16 0.12 6.88 0.40 3.21 3.60 13.25 4.12 31.09 
2019-20 6.14 0.98 18.73 1.38 8.97 1.05 33.84 3.41 10.07 
2020-21 2.47 5.06 -- 0.27 2.51 4.35 4.98 9.68 194.37 
Total 17.90 6.98 34.87 2.50 19.53 9.47 72.30 18.95 26.21 
(Source: Information provided by ULBs) 
The utili zation of grants by the ULBs was subject to the approvals of the DUD and 
Secretary, Urban Development. ULBs could utilize only 26.21 per cent till March 2021. 
Revision of proposals by ULBs subsequent  to scrutiny by DUD as well as delay in 
approval by DUD/Secretary, Urban Development impacted the timely utilization of funds 
by the ULBs. In the case of Margao MC , utilization of grant  was only 7.16 per cent. 
Approvals for works/purchases of ₹ 13.32 crore was given by DUD during the above 
period to Margao MC but the MC could utilise only ₹ 2.50 crore. 

PA of Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act in Goa 
 
46 
 
5.4.2.2  Utilization of grants under XV FC 
DUD released the grants of ₹ 36 crore under XV FC to the ULBs in 2020-21. In the test- 
checked three ULBs (CCP, Mapusa MC and Margao MC) an amount of ₹ 7.54 crore was 
disbursed. However, only ₹ 1.42 crore was expended up to 2020-21. Dilution of delegated 
powers of ULBs with respect to FC grants was one of the reasons for under-utilization of 
the grants and was discussed in Paragraph 4.3.1. 
5.4.3 State Grants to ULBs 
The CCP Act (Section 81) and the GMA (Section 142A) provided for release of grants to 
the respective ULBs by the Government of Goa. In the absence of principles of 
distribution of finances recommended by State Finance Commission, GoG allocated 
grants to the ULBs as per  a Pattern of Assistance (PoA) notified (2019) by the State 
Government. PoA specified the purposes and timelines of issue of grants. Accordingly, 
grants were released for salaries, developme nt works, and execution  of activities  like 
Solid Waste Management and special grants (under notified scheme to MCs). The grants 
for works were to be issued according to the priority of works of ULBs. Grants were 
sanctioned and released as detailed in Table 5.10. 
Table 5.10: Different types of grants sanctioned and released by GoG 
(₹ in crore) 
Type of grant 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 Total 
Salaries  13.93 37.36 9.42 13.91 23.22 97.84 
Development grants 
including special 
component plan for SCs 
and STs 
3.57 25.84 10.15 5.04 14.41 59.01 
Goa special grants to 
municipalities scheme 
-- -- -- 4.95 5.60 10.55 
Solid Waste 
Management (SWM) 
4.15 3.49 0.89 1.04 3.40 12.97 
e-Governance (to 
GSUDA) 
-- -- 0.50 0.50 0.40 1.40 
Grant to compensate in 
lieu of octroi 
16.13 25.15 -- -- -- 41.28 
Grants under IDMT * 
scheme (to GSUDA) 
19.76 54.34 21.63 25.02 18.82 139.57 
Total 57.54 146.18 42.59 50.46 65.85 362.62 
(Source: Appropriation accounts of GoG and information furnished by DUD) 
* Integrated Development of Major Towns (IDMT) 
Grants of ₹ 264.78 crore and ₹ 97.84 crore were sanctioned during 2016-17 to 2020-21 
to ULBs under Pattern of Assistance ( PoA) and salaries respectively.  Overall, trend of 
sanction of grants was increasing except in the year 2018 -19. The decrease in the year 
2018-19 was on account of reduction in major grants (Development grants, Solid Waste 
Management grant and grants under IDMT scheme) besides discontinuation of grant to 
compensate in lieu of octroi.  

Chapter V: Financial resources of Urban Local Bodies 
47 
Grants for e-governance and IDMT scheme (for major works in ULBs) were made to a 
parastatal (GSUDA) for execution of works in ULBs. Their utili zation was made by the 
parastatal. Grants pertaining to development works including grants under special scheme 
(Goa special grants to municipalities scheme ) and for SWM were to be utili zed by the 
ULBs after approval of the DUD and Finance Department. The consequent delays 
resulted in grants ranging from 37 to 63 per cent, for developmental works , remaining 
unutilized for the period 2016-17 to 2020 -21 in test -checked MCs as pointed out in 
Paragraph 4.3.2. 
Recommendation 8: The Government may review and streamline the system and 
processes for sanction/disbursement of grants to enable the ULBs to ensure their timely 
utilisation by the ULBs.  
5. 5  State Finance Commission 
The Constitution provided (Article 243-I read with Article 243Y) for setting up a State 
Finance Commission (SFC) within one year from the commencement of the Constitution 
Amendment Act, and thereafter at the expiry of every fifth year.  SFCs were expected to 
reduce intra-state disparities through their recommendations on principles governing the 
distribution and assignment of revenues to Local Bodies (LBs) and fiscal transfers from 
Governments. SFCs consider factors like area, population, density of population and 
economic factors for recommending the principles of distribution of resources.  
As per the provisions of the GMA and G oa Panchayat Raj Act, the Government of Goa 
constituted (April 1999) the first SFC with three members that submitted its report in June 
1999. The second SFC was constituted in August 2005 and the third in December 2016. 
Audit observed that:  
➢ The Government constituted only three SFCs during the period 1999 to 2021 as 
against six required as per the provisions of the Constitution. The First SFC inter 
alia recommended the transfer of State’s own revenues and share of Central taxes 
to ULBs (nine per cent) for transferred activities. Out of the 26 recommendations 
of the first SFC on functions, administration and finances, 15 were accepted, nine 
rejected and two partly accepted. 
➢ The second SFC inter alia undertook the task of mapping the devolved functions 
with activities, to facilitate their implementation and made recommendations on 
devolution of finances according to the programmes/schemes executed by different 
tiers. The committee 9 constituted by the Government (July 2010) to consider the 
recommendations did not submit its report for more than 11 years (March 2022), 
rendering the work of the Commission redundant.  
➢ Reports of both the SFCs were pending to be submitted to the Legislature by the 
Government, along with Action Taken Reports.  
9   A committee was constituted by the Government (July 2010) of five members for examination of the 
report of the second SFC. The composition of the committee was changed in February 2013. The report 
of the committee was awaited as of July 2022. 

PA of Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act in Goa 
 
48 
 
➢ The third SFC was constituted (December 2016) after a delay of more than six 
years. The Commission could not commence its functioning as the Government 
failed to provide infrastructure support like office space, etc.  
➢ One of the pre-conditions for release of grants from the year from 2022 -23, under 
XV FC was that the states shall issue notification for the constitution of SFC so as 
to have the recommendations available for tabling in the State Legislature on or 
before March 2024. The State Government notified the reconstitution of third SFC 
in January 2022.  
Recommendation 9: The State Government must constitute SFCs as per the time frame 
prescribed in the Constitution. Recommendations of the SFC may be considered and 
accepted recommendations implemented in a time-bound manner. 
5.6  Budget, accounts and audit of ULBs 
Article 243Z of the Constitution provide s that the Legislature of a State may, by law, 
make provisions with respect to the maintenance of accounts by municipalities 
respectively and auditing of such accounts. Adequacy of provisions and their compliance 
related to preparation of budget, accounts and audit were verified in Audit.  
5.6.1 Delays in budget preparation  
 
The Municipal Account Code, 1972 (replaced in 200 7) prescribed that the budgets of 
MCs and CCP are approved by the Standing Committee and the Councils/Corporation 
before the first of March every year. Audit observed that out of 25 budgets of five ULBs 
during 2016-21, 16 were approved with a delay10 ranging from 07 to 77 days.  
5.6.2 Unrealistic budgets  
 
ULBs prepared their budgetary revenue estimates based on expected own revenues and 
allocation of funds by the Government and Finance Commission Grants. The expenditure 
estimates were based on capital, Operation & Maintenance (O&M) and other expenditure 
for carrying out the activities/services required by them. Statement showing variation in 
budgets of ULBs during the audit period is depicted in Appendix 3. 
➢ In the case of test -checked ULBs for the period 2016 -17 to 2020 -21, variation of 
actual receipts vis-à-vis the budget ranged between five to 126 per cent 11. The 
budgeted receipts were overestimated in all the years except in three budgets where 
the actual 
 
10   Margao MC, Mapusa MC, Pernem MC and Curchorem-Cacora MCs approved their five, one, four and 
three budgets respectively (out of five each) with delay ranging from 07 to 77 days during the period . 
from 2016-21. CCP delayed approval of its budgets with a delay of 20 to 59 days during the same period 
11  5.03 to 34.39 per cent in Curchorem-Cacora MC ; 18.64 to 97.20 per cent in Pernem MC; 23.33 to 
70.10 per cent in Margao MC; 32.78 to 61.80 per cent in Mapusa MC and 37.63 to 126.18 per cent in 
CCP 

Chapter V: Financial resources of Urban Local Bodies 
49 
 
receipts were more than 90 per cent12. The variation in actual expenditure vis-à-vis 
the budget ranged between 05 to 86 per cent 13. The budgeted expenditure was 
overestimated by 60 per cent on average during 2016-17 to 2020-21. 
➢ Though ULBs budgeted for subjects like Animal Husbandry, Health  and Social 
Welfare, no expenditure was incurred during any of the financial years from  
2016-21. No plans were prepared to execute these functions and to incur expenditure.  
➢ Expenditure on development works was negligible (7.70 per cent of the budgeted 
amount) indicating the absence of realistic estimates in the ULBs’ budgets.  
➢ Budgets in Margao MC and Mapusa MC  were prepared by the Finance/Accounts 
wings without inputs from the concerned sections of the Municipal Councils.  
Thus, budgeting in these ULBs served as more of an administrative exercise rather than 
an instrument of financial management and programme execution.  
During the Exit Conference (April 2022), Secretary, Urban Development, stated that a 
Standard Operating Procedure would be issued to ULBs for budget preparation and 
training programmes undertaken for the staff. 
5.6.3 Delays in preparation of accounts and audit 
Section 98 of CCP Act and Section 98 of GMA provided that the Commissioner , CCP 
and the Chief Officers of MCs, respectively, shall arrange to prepare the accounts for the 
year. Accounts of all the 14 ULBs were prepared up to 2021-22. 
Audit of all the 14 ULBs was completed till 2019-20 by engaging Chartered Accountants 
and for the year 2020-21 audit of 12 ULBs (except CCP and Mapusa MC) was completed. 
Director of Accounts (DoA), who was the Statutory Auditor for the MCs14, discontinued 
the audits with effect from April 2018 with the approval of the Government of Goa due 
to lack of manpower. However, the audits were resumed since April 2023. 
5.6.4  Delay in migration to Accrual Based Double Entry Accounting System  
Based on the National Municipal Accounts Manual (NMAM) prepared by the Ministry 
of Urban Development (MoUD), GoI, State Governments were required to prepare state-
level accounting manuals according to their requirements. The State Government issued 
notification (January 2008) introducing ‘the Goa Municipal Accounting Code, 2007’ with 
Accrual Based Double Entry Accounting System (ABDEAS). The CCP migrated to 
ABDEAS during 2013 -14. GSUDA was engaged to facilitate adoption of ABDEAS in 
the MCs. The accounts were being migrated through a computeri zed application viz. 
 
12   CCP - During 2017-18, the Government grants received, other receipts and deposits were more than 
that budgeted for CCP and during 2018 -19, fees and user charges earned and interest on bank deposits 
were more than estimated. In Pernem MC; 97.20 per cent  of actual realisation was noticed against 
estimation of revenues (2020-21). 
13   5.05 to 20.47 per cent in Curchorem-Cacora MC; 07 to 86 per cent in Pernem MC; 27.37 to 68.53 per 
cent in Margao MC; 28.62 to 43.14 per cent in Mapusa MC and 49.19 to 66.28 per cent in CCP 
14  Section 100 of GMA read with Rule 152 of Municipal Accounts Code, 1972  

PA of Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act in Goa 
 
50 
 
Financial Accounting System on UPYOG platform developed and maintained by 
MoHUA under National Urban Digital Mission. 
Secretary, Urban Development informed (February 2024) that ABDEAS is under 
adoption.   
Recommendation 10: Migration to accrual-based accounting by MCs may be 
expedited. 
5.6.5   High percentage of establishment expenditure  
Expenditure of test-checked five ULBs has been categorized by audit into four categories 
i.e. establishment (salaries and contingent), O&M (maintenance of roads, 
buildings/markets, sewers, parks, gardens, wells , etc.), programmes/activities (social 
welfare, health and sanitation, libraries , etc.) and miscellaneous for analytical purposes. 
Details of these expenditure categories are shown in Table 5.11. 
Table 5.11: Details of expenditure incurred by test-checked ULBs  
(` in crore) 
Year Establishment Expenditure on activities of ULBs 
O&M Execution of 
programmes 
Others Total 
2016-17 55.37 10.75 1.06 2.27 69.45 
2017-18 67.90 13.18 0.84 2.09 84.01 
2018-19 74.71 18.50 3.19 1.86 98.26 
2019-20 81.56 18.43 7.79 0.03 107.81 
2020-21 75.89 14.61 10.47 2.06 103.03 
Total 355.43 75.47 23.35 8.31 462.56 
Percentage 77 16 05 02  
(Source: Information furnished by five ULBs) 
As can be seen above, expenditure on O&M and execution of schemes/programmes was 
21 per cent , while establishment expenditure accounted for  77 per cent  of the tota l 
expenditure. Application of 77 per cent of financial resources on establishment severely 
affected the capacity of ULBs to spend on public amenities and on new projects/schemes.   
 
5.6.6    Resource - Expenditure gap  
Analysis of trends of revenue and expenditure for ULBs revealed that the ULBs were able 
to generate  own revenues to the extent of 74 per cent  of their total expenditure. A 
comparison of the own revenue to total expenditure is depicted in Chart 5.4. 
 
 
 
 
 

Chapter V: Financial resources of Urban Local Bodies 
51 
 
Chart 5.4: Own revenue-expenditure gap in ULBs 
 
(Source: Information provided by the DUD) 
Audit observed that in the test-checked five ULBs, only CCP and Margao MC managed 
to raise enough own revenues (excluding compensation in lieu of octroi received from 
GoG during 2016-17 to 2017-18) to meet their establishment expenditures during all the 
five years. Mapusa MC was self-sufficient in four years (2017-18 to 2020-21) and Pernem 
MC in 2016 -17 and 2018 -19. Curchorem -Cacora MC was not able to meet its 
establishment expenditure out of own revenues during the audit period. 
 
9895
14350 15745
12866
15169
12207
14698
20449 20362
24294
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
30000
2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21
` in lakh
Years
Total Own Revenue Total Expenditure

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter VI 
Human resources in  
Urban Local Bodies 

 

Chapter VI: Human resources in Urban Local Bodies 
 
Availability of human resources is a necessary condition for effective implementation of their 
mandate by the Urban Local Bodies (ULBs). There was variation in the sanctioned strength 
of staff vis-à-vis the population across ULBs. Proposal of the Director, Urban Development 
(DUD) to augment the sanctioned strength  of ULBs  is under consideration  of the State 
Government.  
The 74th Constitutional Amendment Act required the State Governments to devolve functions 
enumerated in the Twelfth Schedule to the ULBs as well as to endow them with the necessary 
powers and authority to carry out their functions. Broadly, the functional framework for the 
ULBs to discharge their responsibilities is as mentioned in Table 6.1. 
Table 6.1: Functional framework in ULBs 
Sl. 
No. 
Wing/section Functions 
1.  Administration General administration, including meetings of the Council, 
Committees, etc. 
2.  Revenue  Assessment and collection of taxes, rent, advertisements, etc. 
3.  Accounts Preparation of budgets and maintenance of accounts. 
4.  Public Health Sanitation, street sweeping, solid waste management and other 
public health related activities. 
5.  Town Planning 
 
Issue of construction licenses, execution of development 
works. 
6.  Engineering Construction/Operation & Maintenance (O&M)  of roads, 
drains, buildings, water supply and street lighting etc.  
7.  Welfare Schemes for social, economic development. 
 
(Source: Information provided by the ULBs) 
Availability of a dequate and qualified manpower is a pre -requisite for any organization to 
discharge their functions in an efficient and effective manner. Audit observed wide variation 
in the sanctioned strength vis-a-vis the population and inadequacy of staff among the various 
ULBs. Adequacy of manpower and capacity building in ULBs are discussed below. 
 
 

PA of Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act in Goa 
 
54 
 
6.1 Adequacy of manpower 
6.1.1   Inadequate sanctioned strength 
The manpower requirement in a ULB would primarily depend on the geographical area, size 
of the population, services to be provided, etc. Creation of posts and recruitment in ULBs are 
governed by Sections 48, 51 and 52 of the Corporation of City of Panaji (CCP) Act and 
Section 72 and 73 of the Goa Municipal Act  (GMA) and are vested with the State 
Government. Audit observed that there were no uniform criteria for sanctioned strength of 
ULBs. An analysis1 of the sanctioned strength in ULBs, in terms of the number of employees 
per 1,000 population (as per 2011 census) showed that it ranged between 1.15 to 9.42 as 
indicated in Chart 6.1.  
Chart 6.1: Employees per 1000 population 
 
(Source: Information provided by the DUD) 
 
1  Staff strength ratio on per thousand population = (existing staff strength of ULBs x 1000)/Population of 
ULB 
9.42
2.99
2.21
4.23
2.88 2.65
1.15 1.25
1.62 1.50
2.25
2.64
1.17 1.39
0.00
1.00
2.00
3.00
4.00
5.00
6.00
7.00
8.00
9.00
10.00
Employees per 1000 population

Chapter VI: Human resources in Urban Local Bodies  
55 
 
In six MCs (Quepem, Sanquelim, Cuncolim, Curchorem-Cacora, Valpoi and Pernem) there 
were less than two staff per 1,000 population while in six other MCs (Margao, Mormugao, 
Bicholim, Ponda, Cancona and Sanguem) there were two to three staff per 1000 population. 
The CCP was the outlier with 9.42 employees per 1000 population while the MC of Mapusa 
had the highest staff strength per 1000 population among the MCs at 4.23.  
Thus, the staff strength and the population to be served by each ULB had no correlation as 
seen from the wide variation in the sanctioned strength of staff vis-à-vis the population, which 
can have adverse implications for the efficient discharge of services by the ULBs. 
6.1.2  Shortage of staff vis-a-vis sanctioned strength 
During scrutiny of test-checked MCs and CCP it was observed that 22.352 per cent posts of 
the total sanctioned strength were vacant at the end of March 2022 as given in Table 6.2.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2   Total vacant post (235) x 100/1051 (Total Sanctioned Strength) 

PA of Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act in Goa 
 
56 
 
Table 6.2: Sanctioned strength (SS) vis-a-vis person in position (PIP) in test-checked 
ULBs 
Designation Margao MC CCP  Mapusa MC Curchorem – 
Cacora MC 
Pernem MC 
SS PIP Vacant SS PIP Vacant SS PIP Vacant SS PIP Vacant SS PIP Vacant 
Officers3 01 01 - 01 01 - 01 01 - 01 01 - 01 01 - 
Technical 
Officer4 10 10 - 09 09 - 05 05 - 03 03 - 01 01 - 
Accounts5 04 04 - 05 05 - 03 03 - 01 01 - 01 01 - 
Revenue 
Recovery 
officer/Municipal 
Inspector 
06 03 03 09 09 - 01 - 01 02 01 01 - - - 
LDC/DEO/UDC 56 35 21 60 59 01 31 20 11 10 08 02 03 01 02 
Skilled labour6 98 46 52 37 35 02 19 18 01 14 09 05 01 01 - 
Peon/MTS 09 06 03 - - - 05 03 02 02 02 - 02 02 - 
Workers 199 130 69 294 280 14 133 96 37 13 05 08 - - - 
Total 383 235 148 415 398 17 198 146 52 46 30 16 09 07 02 
 (Source: Data provided by test-checked ULBs) 
Revenue Recovery/Municipal Inspectors were functionaries for effecting revenue recovery 
and hence were important from the perspective of revenue efficiency of ULBs. However, the 
sole post of Revenue Recovery/Municipal Inspector in the case of Mapusa was vacant, while 
in the case of Margao MC and Curchorem-Cacora MC half of the posts were vacant. The 
overall vacancy position of Margao MC was the most concerning with 38.6 0 per cent 
vacancies. 
6.1.3  Cadre management in ULBs  
In the CCP, powers of making rules and regulations for the post of Commissioner, Principal 
Officers (Deputy Commissioner, City Engineer, Health Officer and Municipal Secretary) and 
other officers, their appointment, transfer, salary and power of punishment are vested with 
the State Government. Similar was the case with the MC’s functionaries as well. 
The Government  framed Rules  for three types of Common Cadre staff – The Goa 
Municipalities (Common Cadre of Chief Officer) Rules, 1997, Goa Municipalities (Common 
Accounts Cadre of Municipal Employees) Recruitment Rules, 2006 and Goa Municipalities 
(Common Cadre of Municipal Engineers) Recruitment Rules 2006 under Section 72 of the 
 
3  Officers include posts of Executive Officers, Commissioners, Additional commissioner s, etc.  
4   Municipal Engineer, Automobile Engineer, etc. 
5   Accounts and Taxation Officer, Accounts and Administrative Officer, Accountant , etc. 
6   Driver, Mechanic, Electrician, Plumber, Carpenter, Gardener, Pound keeper , etc. 

Chapter VI: Human resources in Urban Local Bodies  
57 
 
GMA. The Goa Municipalities (Common Accounts Cadre of Municipal Employees) 
Recruitment Rules, 2006 and Goa Municipalities (Common Cadre of Municipal Engineers) 
Recruitment Rules, 2006 were extended to the CCP. 
The post of Commissioner of the CCP is manned mostly by the officers of the Indian/State 
Administrative Service s. The officers below the rank of Commissioner are from the 
Corporation or appointed on deputation from State Government.  In the MCs, the Chief 
Officer is appointed by the State Government from the State Administrative Services. The 
Administrative, Accounts employees and E ngineers in the CCP and MCs are from the 
Common Cadre of ULBs.  The Common Cadre employees are recruited by a Departmental 
Selection Committee comprising of Director of Urban Development as Chairman, senior 
most Municipal Engineer Grade I and Under Secretary dealing with Municipal  
Administration as Members.  Subordinate staff of the CCP is recruited through a selection 
process and approved by a Selection Committee comprising  the Mayor, Commissioner and 
the DUD. The Selection Committee for subordinate staff in the case of MCs comprised the 
Chairperson of MCs, the Chief Officer  and a representative of the DUD.  
Audit observed that the D UD carried out an assessment in all 14 ULBs on the request of 
ULBs to increase the sanctioned strength to address the increase in workload. The DUD 
proposed creation of 2 ,510 additional posts other than common cadre and deputation  posts 
(February 2019). The Secretary, Urban Development informed (February 2024) that the 
proposal was returned by the State Government for rectification and the revised proposal s 
are under preparation by DUD.  
Similarly, DUD’s proposal (October 2021) to create 51 posts7 under Common Cadres was 
only partially approved (24.11.2021) by the Government and as per the recommendation of 
the Administrative Reforms Department (ARD) only 10 8 posts were sanctioned . Thus, an 
exercise carried out to rationalize and increase the manpower of ULBs at subordinate level 
as well as in Common Cadres was pending approval/partially accepted by Government. 
The Secretary, Urban Development informed (February 2024) that proposal of the DUD and 
ULBs to create additional posts was under revision.  
Recommendation 11: Government may consider rationalizing the sanctioned strength as 
per the functional requirements of ULBs.  
 
7   Municipal Engineers (ME), Asst Accounts Officer, Accounts cum Taxation Officer (ATO) and Accountant 
under the common cadre staff 
8   Four and six posts under ME grade II and ME grade III respectively 

PA of Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act in Goa 
 
58 
 
6.2  Capacity building 
Capacity building of employees to improve their competencies in terms of skills, knowledge 
and mindsets for improved service delivery  are an important aspect of strengthening the 
performance of ULBs.  
6.2.1 Lackadaisical approach to training of ULB personnel  
The training institute ‘ Goa Institute of Public Administration and Rural 
Development’(GIPARD) was established to provide training to Government and Local Body 
employees as well as elected representatives of Local Bodies, Self Help Groups (SHGs), etc. 
Audit observed the following with regard to capacity building of ULBs: 
Scrutiny of records  of GIPARD revealed that only three  training programmes for elected 
councilors were conducted by GIPARD during 2016 -17 to 20 20-21 and no training 
programmes were planned or carried out for ULBs staff9 as given in Table 6.3.  
Table 6.3:  Details showing position of year-wise training programme 
(` in lakh) 
Year Funds 
provisioned  
Utilizat-
ion of 
fund  
Total no. of 
training 
programmes 
planned 
Total no. of 
training 
programmes 
organized 
Nominated 
participants 
Attended 
participants 
2016-17 40.00 -- -- -- -- -- 
2017-18 40.00 -- -- -- -- -- 
2018-19 19.49 1.70 01 01 250 250 
2019-20 05.00 0.22 02 
(Workshops) 
02 95 95 
2020-21 01.00 0.54 -- -- -- -- 
Total 105.49 2.46 03 03 345 345 
(Source: Information provided by the DUD) 
DUD had provisioned ₹ 1.05 crore for awareness/training on environmental issues in urban 
areas in their annual budget during 2016-17 to 2020-21. Out of the budgeted funds, an amount 
of only ₹ 2.46 lakh was spent on conducting three training programmes.  No training for 
capacity building was imparted during 2016 -17, 2017 -18 and 2020 -21. Further, the total 
trainees (345) included only 50 staff members of MCs, who were provided one day training. 
 
 9  Fifty MCs staffs were imparted in a training programme during 2018-19. 

Chapter VI: Human resources in Urban Local Bodies  
59 
 
During scrutiny of records of test-checked ULBs, it was observed that only Margao MC made 
provisions for training programmes in their annual budget . However, out of provision 
amounting to ₹ 1.40 crore only ₹ 8,260 were spent on participation in a workshop. 
Thus, poor utilization of training budgets resulted in loss of opportunities for enhancement 
of skills and knowledge by ULB personnel. 
Recommendation 12: Need based trainings may be imparted to the functionaries of 
ULBs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Panaji                 (ANITHA BALAKRISHNA) 
The 06 May 2024           Principal Accountant General 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Countersigned 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi             (GIRISH CHANDRA MURMU) 
The 08 May 2024          Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendices 
 
 
 
  

 

 
 
 
APPENDIX 1 
(Referred to in paragraph 4.3) 
Delegation of financial powers to Urban Local Bodies 
Corporation of the City of Panaji (CCP) 
Provision Authority Subject Financial limit 
Section 68 of CCP 
Act. 
Commissioner Contracts and tenders ` 3,00,000 subject to 
approval by the 
Standing Committee. 
Section 68 of CCP 
Act. 
Commissioner with the 
information of the 
Standing Committee. 
Contracts and tenders Between ` 50,000 
and ` 3,00,000. 
Section 212 of CCP 
Act. 
Commissioner with 
reference to the 
Corporation for orders. 
Scheme related to 
drainage, sewage and 
waterworks. 
Sum exceeding 
` 1,00,000.  
Section 214 of CCP 
Act. 
Corporation  Scheme related to 
drainage, sewage and 
waterworks. 
Up to ` 5,00,000. 
Section 214 of CCP 
Act. 
State Government Scheme related to 
drainage, sewage and 
waterworks. 
Sum exceeding   
` 5,00,000. 
 
Municipal Councils 
Provision Authority Subject Financial limit 
Section 89 of GMA Chief Officer Contracts and tenders Subject to provision 
of item of 
expenditure in budget 
or resolution of the 
MC. 
Section 59(2) of 
GMA 
Chairpersons Emergency expenditure  Subject to 
information to the 
council. 
Section 69 of the 
GMA 
Standing 
Committee and 
the Subject 
Committees of 
Councils. 
Financial sanction of 
varying limits in different 
classes of MCs: 
Standing Committee (A 
class - `10,00,000; B class - 
` 6,00,000;     and C class -   
` 4,00,000) 
Financial sanction in 
subject allotted. 
 
 
 
 
 

PA of Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act in Goa 
 
62 
 
Delegation of powers of technical sanction of works for all  
ULBs in ‘Goa Municipalities  
(Competent Authorities for granting technical sanction) Rules, 1979 
(Source: Goa Municipalities Act, 1968 & Corporation of City of Panaji Act, 2002) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Authority Limit  Jurisdictional area 
Chief Engineer (CE), PWD 
and Chief Project Officer 
(CPO), GSUDA. 
Full powers Powers of technical sanction by CE PWD 
over municipal works and by CPO , 
GSUDA over works undertaken by them 
either directly or at the request of ULBs. 
Superintending Engineer 
(SE), Circle I and Circle II 
PWD, Panaji 
Up to ` 10 crore  Jurisdiction of two SEs over specified 
ULBs. 
Municipal Engineer, Grade I  Up to ` one crore  Jurisdiction over the works in the ULBs 
where they are posted and other specified 
MCs. 
Executive Engineer, 
Building, Circle I Building 
Division XIV-Ponda 
Up to ` one crore Jurisdiction over the works in Ponda 
Municipal Council. 
Municipal Engineer of ‘B’ 
Class Municipal Councils  
Up to ` six lakhs Jurisdiction over the works in the 
specified Municipal Councils. 

Appendices 
63 
 
APPENDIX 2 
(Referred to in paragraph 4.4) 
Parastatals and their functions 
Sl. No.  Parastatal  Function  
1 Imagine 
Panaji Smart 
City 
Development 
Limited 
(IPSCDL) 
IPSCDL, a wholly owned Government Company and Special 
Purpose Vehicle (SPV) of the GoG acts as the State Mission 
Directorate for AMRUT and State Level Nodal Agency and the 
State Mission Management Unit for Smart Cities Mission. IPSCDL 
has been formed with an objective to plan, a ppraise, approve, 
release funds, implement, manage, operate, monitor and evaluate 
development projects in Panaji City. 
2 Goa State 
Urban 
Development 
Agency  
The Goa State Urban Development Agency (GSUDA) Society 
registered under the Societies Registration Act , 1860 under the 
administrative control of the Directorate of Urban Development, 
Government of Goa. GSUDA is the Nodal Agency for co -
ordination, monitoring and implementation of Centrally sponsored 
schemes like Deendayal Antyodaya – National Urban Livelihoods 
Mission (DAY-NULM), Swachh Bharat Mission (Urban), Pradhan 
Mantri Awas Yojana - Housing for All (Urban), (PMAY-HFA(U)). 
The agency also implemented one State scheme - Integrated 
Development of Major Towns (IDMT)  intended at improving 
infrastructural facilities and creation of durable public assets. 
3 Planning and 
Development 
Authorities 
Planning and Development Authorities (PDA) were constituted for 
effective implementation of ‘Town and Country Planning Act’ and 
preparation of Outline Development Plans. The North Goa PDA is 
having jurisdiction over Panaji Planning Area, Mapusa Planning 
Area and Calangute -Candolim Planning Area.   The South Goa 
PDA is having jurisdiction over Margao Planning Area , Ponda 
Planning Area and the Mormugao PDA having its jurisdiction 
over Vasco-da-Gama Planning Area and Sancoale Planning Area. 
(Source: Information provided by the DUD) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

PA of Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act in Goa 
 
64 
 
APPENDIX 3 
(Referred in paragraph 5.6.2) 
Statement showing variation in budget of Urban Local Bodies 
(` in crore) 
Name of 
ULB 
Year Receipt Expenditure 
Budget Actuals Percentage 
of actuals 
to budget 
Budget Actuals Percentage 
of actuals 
to budget 
Corporation 
of the City 
of Panaji 
2016-17 47.10 38.78 82.34 46.06 30.53 66.28 
2017-18 51.49 64.97 126.18 59.89 38.31 63.97 
2018-19 65.70 59.65 90.79 69.96 44.01 62.91 
2019-20 77.51 44.97 58.02 79.84 39.27 49.19 
2020-21 66.09 24.87 37.63 77.32 39.84 51.53 
Pernem 
Municipal 
Council 
2016-17 11.48 2.14 18.64 11.31 0.83 7.34 
2017-18 8.70 2.01 23.10 8.67 1.07 12.34 
2018-19 6.83 2.47 36.16 8.01 1.47 18.35 
2019-20 7.80 3.62 46.41 9.28 2.19 23.60 
2020-21 2.86 2.78 97.20 3.46 2.97 85.84 
Mapusa 
Municipal 
Council 
2016-17 51.25 21.06 41.09 46.23 20.20 43.69 
2017-18 50.86 31.43 61.80 50.33 22.72 45.14 
2018-19 64.84 24.36 37.57 57.57 25.23 43.82 
2019-20 63.46 29.52 46.52 71.95 24.69 34.32 
2020-21 82.73 27.12 32.78 82.69 23.67 28.62 
Margao 
Municipal 
Council 
2016-17 85.67 19.99 23.33 80.97 22.16 27.37 
2017-18 87.94 53.86 61.25 81.08 29.47 36.35 
2018-19 75.28 39.12 51.97 68.70 31.32 45.59 
2019-20 71.88 50.39 70.10 63.45 43.48 68.53 
2020-21 66.38 44.03 66.33 58.32 34.58 59.29 
Curchorem-
Cacora 
Municipal 
Council 
2016-17 88.49 4.45 5.03 73.30 3.70 5.05 
2017-18 27.22 9.36 34.39 37.00 5.16 13.95 
2018-19 41.73 9.43 22.60 43.58 7.38 16.93 
2019-20 43.82 7.91 18.05 45.76 6.91 15.10 
2020-21 49.13 7.84 15.96 48.08 9.84 20.47 
Total  1296.24 626.13  1282.81 511.00  
(Source: Information provided by ULBs 

© COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA
https://cag.gov.in/en 
https://cag.gov.in/ag/goa/en