 
 
Performance Audit Report of the  
Comptroller and Auditor General of India  
on Integrated Financial Management System 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for the year ended 31 March 2022
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government of Uttarakhand  
Report No. 1 of the year 2024 

i 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Sl. No.  Contents Paragraph  Page No. 
1. Preface  iii 
2. Highlights  v 
CHAPTER-1: IFMS OVERVIEW AND AUDIT APPROACH 
3. Introduction 1.1 1 
4. Salient Features of IFMS 1.2 1 
5. Functions Performed by DDOs and Treasuries through 
IFMS 1.3 2 
6. Important Milestones of IFMS 1.4 3 
7. Organisational Set-up 1.5 3 
8. Audit Objectives 1.6 4 
9. Audit Criteria 1.7 4 
10. Audit Scope and Methodology 1.8 4 
11. Acknowledgement 1.9 5 
CHAPTER-2: PROJECT MANAGEMENT 
12. Introduction 2.1 7 
13. Audit Findings 2.2 7 
14. Deficiencies in DPR preparation 2.2.1 7 
15. Inadequate Business Process Re-engineering 2.2. 2 7 
16. Software Development lifecycle 2.2.3 8 
17. Payment of ` 32.08 lakhs to Vendors without ensuring 
deliverables 2.2.4 9 
18. Go-live of IFMS after 10 days of signing contract with 
new vendor 2.2.5 12 
19. Relevant Treasury and Financial codes not updat ed 2.2.6 13 
20. Change Management 2.2.7 13 
21. Conclusion 2.3 14 
22. Recommendations 2.4 14 
CHAPTER-3: SYSTEM FUNCTIONALITY AND CONTROLS 
23. Functioning of IFMS system 3.1 15 
24. Audit Findings 3.2 15 
25. Modules envisaged in IFMS not implemented 3.2.1  15 
26. Manual Sanctions 3.2.2 16 
27. Non-revocation of access rights of ceased users  3.2.3 16 
28. Non-review of Super User activity 3.2.4 17 
29. Budgetary workflow and control deficiencies 3.2 .5 17 
30. Key workflow processes not automated 3.2.5.1 18  
31. Deficient control over Re-appropriation of budg et 3.2.5.2 19 
32. Irregular surrender of budget 3.2.5.3 20 
33. Absence of alert functionality 3.2.5.4 20 
34. DDO module workflow and controls 3.2.6 21 
35. Non segregation of roles 3.2.6.1 21 
36. Incomplete implementation of e-sign functionali ty 3.2.6.2 22 
37. Inconsistent workflow 3.2.6.3 22 

Performance Audit Report on Integrated Financial Management System for the year ended 31 March 2022 
ii 
38. Absence of DDO specimen signature in system 3.2 .6.4 23 
39. Non-automation of functionalities in DDO module  3.2.6.5 23 
40. Lack of internal control in timely processing o f bills 3.2.6.6 24 
41. Lack of internal control in drawing of AC bills  3.2.6.7 25 
42. Non-availability of functionality for Bill Defacement 
in IFMS 3.2.6.8 26 
43. e-Payment workflow and controls 3.2.7 26 
44. Beneficiary bank details not validated 3.2.7.1 26 
45. Reconciliation process not automated 3.2.7.2 27  
46. e-challan module: A successful tool 3.2.8 27 
47. Accounting workflow and integration with AG (A& E)  3.2.9 28 
48. Partial integration of IFMS with Transport depa rtment  3.2.9.1 28 
49. Deficient functionality of correction of accounts 
through transfer entries 3.2.9.2 29 
50. Conclusion 3.3 29 
51. Recommendations 3.4 29 
CHAPTER-4: INFORMATION SYSTEM SECURITY 
52. Introduction 4.1 31 
53. Audit Findings 4.2 31 
54. Non-conduction of Performance and Quality Audit 
from STQC 4.2.1 32 
55. IS security systemic deficiencies 4.2.2 32 
56. Absence of Business Continuity Plan (BCP) 4.2.3  33 
57. Disaster Recovery site not set up 4.2.4 34 
58. Backup and recovery controls 4.2.5 35 
59. Critical financial data handled by outsourced p ersonnel  4.2.6 35 
60. Absence of documentation and policies 4.2.7 36 
61. Poor feedback from end users of IFMS 4.3 36 
62. Conclusion 4.4 36 
63. Recommendations 4.5 37 
 
APPENDICES 
Appendix-1.1  List of Treasuries/Sub-Treasuries 39 
Appendix-1.2  List of applications integrated with IFMS 41 
Appendix-1.3  List of Modules 42 
ABBREVIATIONS 
List of abbreviations  47 
 

iii 
Preface 
 
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India for the year ended  
31 March 2022 has been prepared for submission to t he Governor of the State of 
Uttarakhand under Article 151(2) of the Constitution of India. 
The Report contains the result of the Audit on ‘Int egrated Financial Management System 
(IFMS)’, covering the period 2019-22. 
The instances mentioned in this Report are those wh ich came to notice in the course of 
test audit for the period 2019-22; any development subsequent to the year 2021-22 have 
also been included, wherever necessary. 
The Audit has been conducted in conformity with the  Auditing Standards issued by the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
Audit wishes to acknowledge the co-operation received from Government of Uttarakhand 
at each stage of the audit process. 
 
 

Highlights 

v 
Highlights 
 
Intent of Integrated Financial Management System 
Integrated Financial Management System (IFMS) was d eveloped under Mission Mode 
Project (MMP) of National e-Governance Plan (NeGP) with a vision to increase 
efficiency of treasury functions, transparency in f inancial administrative systems, better 
cash flow management, better accounting of receipts  and payments, improved regulatory 
mechanism, better control on State Finances, strong er Management Information System, 
accuracy and speed in accounts and budget preparation. 
Why this Performance Audit?  
Audit was conducted to assess and derive assurance about the effectiveness of IFMS 
system with regards to Information Technology (IT) controls, mapping of business 
processes and functioning of major modules of the system. 
Period of Audit: 2019-20 to 2021-22 
Sample: Nine out of 25 modules 
What Audit found?  
 Audit observed that preliminary study of existing s ystem was not carried out by the 
Department which resulted in inclusion of outdated information in Detailed Project 
Report (DPR) like Inventory Management Module for e -stamps was included in the 
DPR and the Request for Proposal (RFP) of the vendo r, despite the presence of a 
prior agreement with Stock Holding Corporation of I ndia Limited (SHCIL) for 
implementation of e-stamping system. 
(Paragraph 2.2.1(i), page 7) 
 DPR was not reviewed before submission to Governmen t of India (GoI) by State 
Project e-Mission Committee (SPeMT), responsible to  prepare DPR and oversee 
project execution,  as committee was formed in December 2013, i.e. a ye ar after 
submission of DPR to GoI. 
(Paragraph 2.2.1(ii), page 7) 
 Department paid full scheduled amount of ` 32.08 lakh to vendors without ensuring 
delivery of certain major deliverables such as Busi ness Continuity Plan, Backup 
Plan, High & Low Level design documents and User Acceptance Testing (UAT). 
(Paragraph 2.2.4, page 9) 
 Post Go-Live, relevant treasury and financial codes  were not updated to align with 
the working of IFMS. 
(Paragraph 2.2.6, page 13) 
 Department had not formulated or adopted any change  management policy. Change 
management in IFMS was being carried out without ap proval of competent 
authority which shows the lack of internal controls and monitoring. 
(Paragraph 2.2.7, page 13) 

Performance Audit Report on Integrated Financial Management System for the year ended 31 March 2022 
vi 
 There was no integration between IFMS and Departmen t of Finance (Budget 
Section) due to which complete automation was not a chieved in budget workflow. 
IFMS did not support online submission of receipt estimates and revised estimates.  
(Paragraph 3.2.5.1, page 18) 
 There was no control or check in IFMS to prevent re -appropriation of budget from 
Voted to Charged head and vice versa  and Revenue to Capital head and vice versa . 
Analysis of IFMS data revealed re-appropriation of ₹ 51.85 crore from Revenue 
head to Capital head and ₹ 13.87 crore from Loan head to Revenue head in  
2020-21. 
(Paragraph 3.2.5.2, page 19) 
 Data analysis revealed that government orders were not implemented in IFMS, and 
bills were found to be pending at each level for more than 30 days. 
(Paragraph 3.2.6.6, page 24) 
 Only limited checks were available for pre-validati on of bank account details. 
Complete checks regarding correctness of beneficiar y name, IFSC and beneficiary 
account number were not present in the system. 
(Paragraph 3.2.7.1, page 26) 
 The process of reconciliation of payments between R BI/SBI and Treasury was not 
automated.  
(Paragraph, 3.2.7.2 page 27) 
 IFMS went live without required performance and quality certification from STQC.  
(Paragraph 4.2.1, page 32) 
 In IFMS, DDOs were registered with their personal e -mail IDs causing potential 
security risk.  
(Paragraph 4.2.2 (i), page 32) 
 Department did not implement biometric authentication even after three  years of 
operationalization of IFMS.  
(Paragraph 4.2.2 (iv), page 33) 
 In absence of audit certificate, network security of IFMS could not be ensured.  
(Paragraph 4.2.2(v), page 33) 
 Business Continuity Plan was not framed and adopted  for IFMS, even after four 
years since operation. In its absence, the staff/ u sers were unaware of the procedure 
to be followed in the event of disruptions/ disasters. 
(Paragraph 4.2.3, page 33) 
 Uttarakhand being in seismic zone IV, Department di d not set up any functional 
Disaster Recovery(DR) site. In absence of functiona l DR site, business continuity 
of IFMS remained at risk in case of disasters. 
(Paragraph 4.2.4, page 34) 

Highlights 
vii 
 In absence of documented policies, users were free to handle security related issues 
in their own manner which could pose risks to IT security of IFMS. 
(Paragraph 4.2.7, page 36) 
What Audit recommends?  
1. Department should ensure delivery of technical d ocuments from the vendor to 
avoid any vendor lock-in situation. 
2. Department should expedite the process of updati on of financial rules/codes in line 
with the working of IFMS. 
3. Department should issue Standard Operating Proce dure (SOP) for key process 
implemented in IFMS such as correction of accounts,  handling of failed payments, 
etc. 
4. Department should integrate IFMS with e-Office s o that sanction orders can be 
uploaded automatically. 
5. Department should implement functionality for su bmission of receipt estimates and 
revised estimates through IFMS. 
6. Department should integrate IFMS with Budget dep artment for obtaining Budget 
data and processing it automatically. 
7. Department should formulate BCP and set up DR si te to ensure that the system runs 
smoothly and resumes its operations within definite  time period in case of disasters 
and other emergency events. 
8. The Department should expedite the process of cr eating and updating government 
email Ids for remaining DDOs in IFMS. 
9. The Department should review and test the backup  restore activity on regular basis 
so that data can be restored if inadvertently destroyed or lost. 
10.  The Department should formulate an IT security poli cy for security of IT assets, 
software and data, backup, data retention and disposal, etc. 

Chapter -1 
IFMS overview and Audit approach  

1 
CHAPTER-1 
IFMS overview and Audit approach 
 
1.1 Introduction  
Integrated Financial Management System (IFMS) is a Web based financial accounting 
system under Mission Mode Project (MMP) of National  e-Governance Plan (NeGP). 
IFMS was designed and developed to provide user int erface to various users of State 
Government Treasury in the State. This portal provi des real time financial transactions of 
Government of Uttarakhand (GoU) performed at 91 1Treasuries/Sub Treasuries connected 
through dedicated lease lines across the state. The  list of treasuries and sub-treasuries is 
given in Appendix-1.1 . 
Before implementation of IFMS, various transactions  related to Drawing and Disbursing 
Officers (DDOs) of GoU were being carried out through Core Treasury System. 
NeGP, originally launched by the Government of Indi a (GoI) in 2006, currently 
comprises 31 MMPs. An MMP is an individual project that focuses on one aspect of 
electronic governance, such as banking, land record s and commercial taxes, etc. 
Treasuries computerization was one of the 13 MMPs f or states (rest MMPs were central 
or integrated MMPs) which was developed as IFMS in Uttarakhand. 
The IFMS architecture was a centralised system with  all processing centralised in a set of 
servers located at the Finance Data Centre (FDC). T he treasuries were connected to the 
FDC through Uttarakhand State Wide Area Network (UK SWAN). There was a total of 
4,586 DDOs registered in IFMS. IFMS was integrated with 23 different applications as 
given in Appendix-1.2 . IFMS went live in all Department of Uttarakhand w ith effect 
from 01 April 2019. 
1.2 Salient features of IFMS  
 
 
                                                           
1 13 District Treasuries, six Treasuries, one Cyber Treasury, 70 sub-treasuries and one Pay and Accounts 
Office (PAO) 
Common Electronic 
Platform 
•To provide 
Common Electronic 
Platform to its 
internal and external 
stakeholders 
Centralised Data 
Processing 
•To process all 
receipts and 
payments 
transactions online 
centrally at FDC. 
Uniformity 
•To establish 
uniformity between 
Government, Head 
of the Departments 
and Head of the 
Offices. 
Transparency 
•To make all 
payments 
trasparently in a 
defined time period. 

Performance Audit Report on Integrated Financial Management System for the year ended 31 March 2022 
2 
1.3 Functions performed by DDOs and Treasuries thro ugh IFMS  
DDOs and Treasuries perform various functions through IFMS which are shown below: 
 
 
  
Functions of DDO 
Online Generation of various Bill forms used by the DDO 
Online Generation of Employee claims 
Online Generation of GPF Claim 
Online Generation of GIS Bills 
Online Generation of Pension Papers for Retiring 
Employees 
Maintenance of Cash Book and other Register through 
System 
Reconciliation of Drawls with the Treasuries 
Functions of Treasury 
Disbursement of Salaries 
Disbursement of Non-Salaried bills 
Disbursement of Pensions 
Selling and Inventory Management of Stamps 
DCL Accounts 
Maintenance of Personal Ledger Accounts 
Transmission of Details to other Departments 
Rendering of Accounts to the Accountant General 

Chapter-1: IFMS overview and Audit approach 
3 
1.4 Important milestones of IFMS  
 
1.5 Organisational set-up  
Directorate of Treasury, Pension and Entitlement (D TPE) under the administrative 
control of Finance Department (FD) was the nodal ag ency for implementation of IFMS. 
Detailed organisational set-up is given in Chart-1 below: 
Chart-1: Organisational Structure 
 
2010 - Computerisation of 
Treasuries initiated under 
Mission Mode Project 
(MMP) of National e-
Governance Plan (NeGP) 
July 2010 - Government of 
India (GoI) issued Office 
Memorandum to all States 
to send their proposals in 
accordance with guidelines 
January 2013 -
Government of 
Uttarakhand submitted its 
Detailed Project Report 
(DPR) - MMP Treasuries 
and named the project as 
IFMS 
26 July 2013 - GoI 
approved DPR and 
released ` 243.50 lakh 
against total project cost of 
` 1150.17 lakh. 
16 October 2014- Tender 
for Software Development 
invited. Bid cancelled as 
only one bidder was 
qualified in technical bid. 
23 February 2015 - Re-
tender invited. M/s Techno 
Brain India Pvt. Ltd. 
selected (06 June 2015) to 
develop IFMS at a total 
cost of `1,51,68,600/-
08 October 2015 -
Contract signed between 
Finance Department and 
M/s Techno Brain India 
Pvt. Ltd. 
30 August 2018 - Contract 
with M/s Techno Brain 
India  Pvt Ltd. Terminated. 
18 August 2018 - Tender 
was invited for completion 
of residual software 
development. 
25 October 2018 - M/s 
Indus Web Solution, Pvt. 
Ltd. selected to complete 
residual work at a cost of 
` 1,12,92,000/-. 
22 March 2019 - Contract 
signed with M/s Indus 
Web Solution, Pvt. Ltd. 
01 April 2019 - IFMS was 
made Go-Live. 
Principal Secretary/ Secretary Finance 
Director- Treasury, 
Pension and Entitlement 
Additional Director 
Data Centre 
Assistant Director 
Data Centre 
Additional 
Director 
Deputy Director 
Additional Director 
(Camp Office, Haldwani) 

Performance Audit Report on Integrated Financial Management System for the year ended 31 March 2022 
4 
1.6 Audit Objectives 
Audit was conducted to assess and derive assurance about the effectiveness of IFMS 
system with regards to IT controls, mapping of busi ness processes and functioning of 
major modules of the system. The audit assessed eff iciency and effectiveness of 
following- 
 
 Business process re-engineering. 
 Project Management. 
 IFMS functionalities and controls. 
 Integration of IFMS with other systems; and 
 Information system security.  
1.7 Audit criteria 
The audit criteria were derived from the following sources: 
 Provisions of National e-Governance policies & stan dards and technical 
documents. 
 Detailed Project Report (DPR) of IFMS, Request for Proposal (RFP); Software 
Requirement Specifications (SRS) and Functional Req uirement Specification 
(FRS) of IFMS. 
 Government Orders with regard to treasury computeri zation /cyber security / IT 
systems etc.; and  
 Uttarakhand Budget Manual, Financial Hand Book/ Tre asury Rules and Standing 
Orders on Treasuries. 
1.8 Audit Scope and Methodology  
Audit of IFMS was conducted from 05 September 2022 to  15 December 2022. An entry 
conference was conducted on 26 August 2022 with the Secretary- Finance and Additional 
Director, In-Charge FDC, DTPE, Dehradun. Audit checked the records of DTPE and was 
given access to test environment of IFMS. We also a nalysed IFMS data covering the 
period from 1 April 2019 to 31 March 2022.The Audit  examined nine major modules 2 
out of total 25 modules, given in Appendix-1.3, available in IFMS. We had access to the 
system through front-end and back-end for user walk through, and data analysis. Audit 
also visited Cyber Treasury and FDC to gain insight of the working of IFMS. 
Audit findings were reported to GoU on 07.03.2023 and an exit conference was held with 
the Secretary-Finance, GoU on 21.06.2023. The respo nses during exit conference and 
written replies received (23.08.2023) from the Gove rnment have been incorporated in 
this report, at appropriate places. 
 
                                                           
2 Budget (Budget Preparation, Budget Disbursement, B udget Maintenance, Budget Planning); DDO,  
e-Challan, Receipt Accounting, e-Payment, and Payment Accounting.  

Chapter-1: IFMS overview and Audit approach 
5 
1.9 Acknowledgement  
The Office of the Principal Accountant General (Aud it) Uttarakhand acknowledges the 
co-operation extended by the officers and staff of DTPE in providing necessary access to 
data, information and records for audit. 

Chapter -2 
Project Management 

7 
CHAPTER-2 
Project Management 
 
2.1 Introduction 
The success of an e-Governance project depends upon  the development of the project in 
an integrated and holistic manner. E-Governance sho uld not be understood merely as the 
procurement of hardware and other networking equipm ent. E-Governance is an 
integration of various fields of management thus ma king it a management game rather 
than merely a technology enabled project. 
As a part of the project life cycle, the existing I T systems were required to be assessed 
along with coverage and gaps to understand the exis ting processes before conducting 
Business Process Re-engineering (BPR). It was vital  that the process redesign, i.e. the 
critical analysis and radical redesign of workflows  and processes within and between 
governmental Departments, was undertaken to achieve  breakthrough improvements in 
performance. 
2.2 Audit findings 
The Audit noticed following shortcomings in development of IFMS:  
2.2.1 Deficiencies in DPR preparation 
(i) Absence of preliminary study of existing system   
GoI has directed all States to fill the gaps in com puterization, up-gradation, expansion, 
and interface requirements of existing system. For this, preliminary study of existing 
system was to be performed to understand the gaps i n existing system and identify 
potential improvement areas. Audit noticed that no such study was carried out by the 
Department which resulted in the inclusion of outda ted information in Detailed Project 
Report (DPR). For example, Inventory Management Mod ule for e-stamps was included 
in the DPR and the Request for Proposal (RFP) of th e vendor, despite the presence of a 
prior agreement with Stock Holding Corporation of I ndia Limited (SHCIL) for 
implementation of e-stamping system. 
(ii) DPR not reviewed before submission to GoI 
State Project e-Mission Team (SPeMT) headed by Secr etary-in-charge of the Department 
was to be constituted as per scheme guidelines. SPe MT had the responsibility to prepare 
DPR, oversee project execution, manage implementati on and deal with technology, 
process & change management related issues. Audit n oticed that SPeMT was formed in 
Uttarakhand in December 2013, i.e. a year after sub mission of DPR to GoI 
(January 2013), thus it did not fulfill its role in DPR preparation and reviewing. 
2.2.2 Inadequate Business Process Re-engineering 
BPR is the radical redesign of business processes t o achieve dramatic improvements in 
critical aspects like quality, output, cost, servic e, and speed. GoI directed (July 2010) 

Performance Audit Report on Integrated Financial Management System for the year ended 31 March 2022  
8 
States that while preparing DPR, it should include BPR of existing process and introduce 
new processes, where necessary. The requirement of process re-engineering and a brief 
methodology to conduct the same was to be included in DPR. The main objective of 
IFMS was to build an integrated finance information  system to provide efficient transfer, 
storage and retrieval of information through workfl ow automation. For this, potential 
improvement areas were to be identified through BPR. 
As the Department did not provide any document, Aud it could not derive assurance 
whether BPR was undertaken by the Department or not. 
During audit, deficiencies were observed in the IFMS which indicates lack of proper BPR 
prior to development of system. The deficiencies in clude lack of Integration with Budget 
Section for automation of budget process (Para 3.2. 5.1.i.a), lack of Full automation of 
submission of supplementary budget estimates (Para 3.2.5.1.i.c), lack of auto-generation 
of sanction orders in IFMS (Para 3.2.2), lack of De facement of vouchers/sub-vouchers in 
IFMS (Para 3.2.6.8), and lack of Automation of acco unts acceptance and further 
correction (if required through transfer entries) with AG (A&E) (Para 3.2.9.2.v).  
DTPE accepted (Dec 2022) the facts and stated that the current mechanism was adopted 
in consultation with budget section of Department o f Finance. It also assured that further 
discussions shall be held with the budget section a nd if required, such functionality shall 
be added in IFMS. It was also informed that sanctio ned orders were being generated 
manually but the Department was planning to integrate IFMS with e-Office so that digital 
sanction orders were automatically made available i n IFMS. DPTE also assured that bill 
defacement would be implemented in future. 
The Secretary-Finance, during exit conference (June  2023) agreed to the audit 
observations and stated that communication with bud get section was underway for 
integration and functionality for submission of sup plementary estimates through IFMS 
has been implemented and functional. 
Reply confirmed that complete workflow automation o f IFMS could not be achieved due 
to non-review of BPR. Thus, the Department failed t o accomplish one of the major 
objective of the project. However, at the instance of Audit, the Department implemented 
the functionality for submission of supplementary estimates through IFMS. 
2.2.3 Software Development lifecycle  
The Software Development Life Cycle (SDLC) is a fra mework defining tasks performed 
at each step in the software development process. I t consists of a detailed plan describing 
how to develop, maintain and replace specific softw are. It divides the project into distinct 
stages which follow sequentially and contain key decision points and signoffs. 
SDLC permits an ordered evaluation of the problem t o be solved, an ordered design and 
development process, and an ordered implementation of the solution. An example of 
SDLC is provided in Chart-2: 

Chapter-2: Project Management 
9 
Chart-2: Software Development Life Cycle 
 
Audit scrutiny revealed that there was no document available with the Department to 
ensure that any structured approach for development  of IFMS was adopted. Department 
continued project development on unstructured appro ach, thus, resulted in non-delivery 
of key technical design documents (High-Level Desig n and Low-Level Design 
documents) which was essential to mitigate vendor dependency, non-execution of System 
Testing and User Acceptance testing to ensure quali ty of the developed software during 
the project development stages.  
Thus, non-adherence to SDLC methodology towards sof tware design and development 
escalated the risk of vendor dependency and compromised the software quality. 
Government, while accepting the audit observation, stated (Aug 2023) that constant 
efforts were being made by the Department to get th e essential documents prepared 
without any additional financial burden. 
Reply was not acceptable as the fact remains that n on-adherence to SDLC resulted in 
non-identification of risks during each stage of pr oject development like project timelines 
were not met, project documentation was not done by  the vendor, deliverables were not 
achieved, system not tested before Go-Live, cost escalation, quality not assured, etc. 
 
2.2.4 Payment of `` ``    32.08 lakhs to Vendors without ensuring deliverables  
Agreements between the Department and both the vend ors (M/s. Techno Brain India 
Private Limited (TBIL) & M/s. Indus Web Solutions P rivate Limited (IWS)) provide for 
the project milestones with its deliverables and th e amount payable against completion of 
each milestone. Audit however, noticed that the Dep artment paid contracted amount of 
₹ 32.08 lakh 1 despite lack of delivery of certain deliverables a s detailed in  Table-2.1 
below. 
                                                           
1 ` 22,24,728 to TBIL and ` 9,84,000 to IWS  
1. E-Governance 
Strategy 
Development 
2. Current State 
Assessment 
3. Future State 
Definition 
4. 
Implementation 
Approach and 
Sourcing 
5. Develop and 
Implement IT 
System 
6. Operate and 
Sustain 

Performance Audit Report on Integrated Financial Management System for the year ended 31 March 2022  
10 
Table-2.1: List of deliverables not delivered by th e vendor. 
Sl. 
No. Deliverable Significance of deliverable Audit observation Government’s  
reply 
1.  Business 
Continuity Plan 
(BCP)/Back-up 
Plan 
BCP is a document that outlines 
every aspect of disaster 
preparedness, response, 
recovery, and training. It dictates 
all the steps that should be taken 
during a critical event and 
outlines the preventative 
measures for mitigating the risks 
of disaster. 
The backup plan defines a 
comprehensive backup strategy 
to identify critical data and 
systems to be protected, backup 
administrator responsibilities, 
data retention, restoration 
procedures and more. It is 
essential because it is last line of 
defense against data loss 
stemming from data corruption, 
hardware failure, or security 
breach. 
No BCP formulated by 
the Directorate till 
August 2023. In its 
absence, the staff/ users 
were unaware of the 
procedure to be 
followed in the event of 
disruptions/ disasters. 
They were also not 
trained in preventing, 
mitigating, and 
responding to 
emergency situations. 
Government 
emphasized the 
criticality of BCP 
during exit 
conference (June 
2023) and 
directed DTPE to 
frame the BCP as 
soon as possible.  
2.  High Level 
Design (HLD) 
and Low Level 
Design (LLD) 
documents 
HLD refers to overall system 
design. It is significant as it 
covers the system architecture 
and database. It describes the 
relation between various 
modules and functions of the 
system in brief along with data 
flow, flow charts and data 
structures. It converts the 
business requirements into High 
Level Solution. 
LLD refers to component-level 
design process, thus it is like 
detailing HLD. It is significant as 
it converts the High-Level 
Solution into Detailed solution. It 
defines the actual logic for each 
component of the system and 
goes deep into each modules 
specification. 
Design documents were 
not delivered by the 
vendor and its contract 
expired on 31 March 
2023. As these 
documents were 
necessary to understand 
the system, there was a 
dependency on vendor 
as well as contractual 
staff. In absence of 
design documents, it 
will be very difficult for 
new vendor to gain 
complete understanding 
of the system. On 
expiry of present 
contract, Department 
will face a vendor lock-
in like situation. 
Government 
accepted the facts 
and during exit 
conference (June 
2023), directed 
DTPE to get the 
essential 
documents 
delivered from the 
vendor as these 
documents were 
critical to avoid 
vendor lock-in 
situation. 
3.  Unit testing, 
System testing, 
test cases and test 
reports. 
Quality Assurance testing (Unit 
Testing, System Testing, 
Integration testing, etc.) is an 
integral aspect of the software 
development lifecycle to ensure 
that software meet the required 
quality, security, availability, 
No document was made 
available to audit in this 
regard. Hence, Audit 
could not derive any 
assurance whether 
software met the 
required quality, 
Government 
accepted the facts 
(August  2023) 
and stated that 
Unit testing, 
System testing, 
Test 

Chapter-2: Project Management 
11 
Sl. 
No. Deliverable Significance of deliverable Audit observation Government’s  
reply 
reliability, and scalability 
standards. 
security, availability, 
reliability, and 
scalability standards. 
cases and Test 
reports were not 
provided by the 
Vendor. 
4. User Acceptance 
Testing (UAT) 
UAT is crucial for the successful 
launch of any online platform. 
UAT ensures that system is 
performing as expected and 
whether the user accepts the 
finished product. 
The system was made 
Go-Live hurriedly on 
01 April 2019, within 
just 10 days of new 
contract. The 
Department did not 
conduct any UATs 
before implementing 
the software. Various 
shortcomings noticed in 
different modules could 
be addressed if user 
acceptance tests were 
done. 
 
Government 
replied (August 
2023) that the 
work order was 
issued on 25 
October, 2018 and 
based on that 
Vendor started 
working on the 
development of 
the software.  
Contract was 
signed at a later 
stage. UAT 
document was not 
provided by the 
vendor before Go-
live. After Go-  
live FDC prepared 
UAT Document 
to ensure software 
meets user needs.  
These documents 
were made 
available to the 
Audit.  
5.  Data migration 
and verification 
support; 
Restructuring of 
tables and 
streamlining of 
database 
Data Migration is necessary to 
ensure data is transferred 
successfully and securely and 
prevent corruption or data loss. It 
is required in scenarios where a 
business needs to upgrade its 
system or server, hardware, 
databases that is more aligned 
with business requirement.  
The streamlining of databases 
paves the way for consolidation 
of databases through integration 
and elimination of unnecessary 
tables and overlapping data 
items. Thus, it allows to take 
advantage of better data 
accuracy, better productivity, 
getting data faster, cost 
Data Migration, 
restructuring of tables 
and streamlining of 
database was not 
carried out as data of 
legacy system was kept 
in a separate schema. 
Government 
stated (August 
2023) that data 
migration, 
restructuring of 
tables were done 
by combining all 
the previous data 
of the two 
databases i.e., 
Core Treasury 
System and DDO 
database in a 
single merged 
database. For 
smooth 
functioning of 
the system, only 
current financial 

Performance Audit Report on Integrated Financial Management System for the year ended 31 March 2022  
12 
Sl. 
No. Deliverable Significance of deliverable Audit observation Government’s  
reply 
efficiency and overall 
standardized business processes 
year data was 
migrated to 
UKIFMSW 
schema and the 
data 
previous to the 
current financial 
year was kept in 
BACKDBA 
schema 
of the same 
database. The 
migrated new 
joint database was 
named 
as IFMRAC. 
Government, in its reply (August 2023) confirmed th at data of legacy system was kept in 
separate schema i.e. BACKDBA and only current year data was migrated to new 
database i.e. UKIFMSW. This clearly shows that the tables were not restructured and 
databases were not streamlined. 
Regarding UAT, no supporting documents were provide d to Audit to confirm that work 
order was issued on 25 October 2018 and UATs were c arried out by the vendor before 
Go-live. Also, UAT reports provided by the Departme nt showed that UATs were 
conducted after Go- live of the IFMS. 
2.2.5 Go-live of IFMS after 10 days of signing cont ract with new vendor 
M/s. IWS was selected on 25 October 2018 to complet e the residual work after 
termination of contract with M/s. TBIL. An agreemen t was signed between Department 
and M/s. IWS on 22 March 2019, according to which 2 4 weeks were assigned to the 
vendor for completion of the residual work before IFMS was made to Go-Live.  
Audit noticed that despite agreement, IFMS was made  Go-Live on 01 April 2019, just 
10 days from signing the contract and without condu cting the mandatory processes of 
data migration, UAT and a Performance and Quality A udit from Standardization Testing 
and Quality Certification (STQC). 
The Government replied (August 2023) that work orde r was issued on 25 October 2018 
and based on that vendor started working on the dev elopment of the software. The 
contract was signed at a later stage. So, the vendo r had sufficient time for working on the 
development of the software. 
Reply was not acceptable as no supporting documents  were provided to Audit to confirm 
that work order was issued on 25 October 2018 and t he vendor started working on 
software development before signing of contract. In  absence of work order, audit could 
not ascertain when vendor initiated the software development work. 

Chapter-2: Project Management 
13 
2.2.6 Relevant Treasury and Financial codes not upd ated 
Guidelines for ‘Computerization of Treasuries’ issu ed by GoI in July 2010 stipulated that 
since a large part of treasury computerization woul d become possible only after relevant 
codes are amended by the States, each state was to prepare and submit an action plan 
which included the changes required in procedures, practices, codes, manuals and laws 
(like provision for use of digital signatures, file  formats, transfer of funds electronically) 
with explicit time lines. The cost of setting up of  a task force to examine the codes was 
considered a valid cost under the scheme. Similarly , before the IFMS was made go-live 
in Uttarakhand, a detailed order was issued on 29 M arch 2019 by the State Finance 
Secretary reiterating that current rules and Financ ial Handbooks would be amended after 
operationalization of IFMS in the state. 
During the audit, it was observed that: 
 The relevant codes like Treasury Rules, Financial H andbooks were not 
updated/amended to reflect the current situation wh ere majority of critical financial 
functions and transactions were being carried onlin e through IFMS. This resulted in ever 
increasing gap between the business rules mentioned in the codes which became outdated 
and the rules on basis of which actual financial op erations were being transacted in 
IFMS. 
 Some functions like digital signature, Bill processing, etc. of IFMS had their basis 
in GOs issued by GoU. However, for some critical fu nctionalities, audit could not locate 
any written documentation or authority. For example : Rules governing the system of 
handling failed payments in IFMS. 
Case Study : In case of incorrect bank details of beneficiary,  a Return Note was received 
in IFMS. The details of these failed payments were displayed to DDO and Treasury. 
DDOs, through failed upload option in IFMS, rectify  the failed payment both in Return 
Note and Master tables by correcting bank details o f beneficiary. DDO sends a certificate 
of correctness to treasury and the bill was process ed again. The above process was 
neither documented nor available in existing financial rules. 
Government, during exit conference (June 2023) acce pted the audit observation and 
stated that report had been prepared and submitted by Niyam Samiti  to GoU. The 
Secretary-Finance directed concerned officials that  a weekly meeting with the members 
of Niyam Samiti  shall be held to finalize the relevant rules. 
2.2.7 Change Management 
National Information Security Policy and Guidelines  provides that the organization must 
implement and maintain a change management process to track and monitor activity 
related with changes to existing software applicati ons. Activity such as application 
maintenance, installation of critical changes, revi ew of changes and post testing, 
responsibility of changes, documenting change reque st amongst others must be 
documented with relevant details. Each significant change in application must be 
approved. SpeMT was responsible for change management. 

Performance Audit Report on Integrated Financial Management System for the year ended 31 March 2022  
14 
Scrutiny of records revealed that the Department ha d not formulated or adopted any 
change management policy. Change management in IFMS  was being carried out without 
approval of SpeMT / FDC-in-charge which shows the l ack of internal controls and 
monitoring. 
The Government in its reply (August 2023) stated th at formal change management policy 
was not in place and changes were made in the softw are after approval from the 
competent authority and made live after the success ful testing by the team. Framing of 
change management policy was in progress. 
The reply was not acceptable as documents provided by the Department revealed that 
changes in the system were being made without neces sary approval from the competent 
authority. In absence of change management policy, the due process of change 
management was not defined. 
2.3 Conclusion 
The Department had not conducted preliminary study and BPR which resulted in 
functional deficiencies in IFMS. Further, SDLC fram ework was not followed during 
software development which resulted in non-delivery  of essential technical documents of 
the project. Department made a payment of 
₹ 32.08 lakhs to vendor without ensuring 
certain major deliverables like BCP, Testing report s etc. IFMS was made Go-Live 
without ensuring sufficient testing. Post Go-Live, relevant treasury and financial codes 
were not updated to align with the working of IFMS.  The department did not frame any 
change management policy to track and monitor modif ications in the source code of the 
IFMS. 
2.4 Recommendations 
 The Department should ensure delivery of technical documents (HLD, LLD, test 
cases etc.) from the vendor to avoid any vendor lock-in situation. 
 The Department should expedite the process of updat ing of financial rules/codes 
in line with the working of IFMS. 
 The Department should issue Standard Operating Proc edure (SOP) for key 
process implemented in IFMS such as correction of a ccounts, handling of failed 
payments, etc. 
 The Department should formulate and implement a Cha nge Management Policy 
for any changes to be made in IFMS source code. 
 

Chapter -3 
System Functionality and Controls 

15 
CHAPTER-3 
System Functionality and Controls 
3.1 Functioning of IFMS system 
Nine modules were selected for this performance aud it: Budget (Budget Preparation, 
Budget Disbursement, Budget Maintenance and Budget Planning) DDO, E-Challan, 
Receipt Accounting, E-Payment and Payment Accountin g. They capture whole process 
from Budget estimation and approval to expenditure and receipt, their accounting and 
their compilation by AG (A&E) as Finance Account.  
3.2 Audit findings 
The Audit noticed following shortcomings in system functionality and controls of IFMS:  
3.2.1 Modules envisaged in IFMS not implemented 
The IFMS application was developed by M/s. TBIL and  M/s. IWS. As per RFP 
document, 31 Modules were to be developed by the ve ndor. Also, approval of SPeMT 
committee was required before undertaking any chang es in scope of work. Audit noticed 
that only 25 modules were developed by the vendor, with following modules (Table-3.1) 
declared ‘out-of-scope’ by the Directorate without consulting the stakeholder 
Departments and without obtaining necessary approvals from SPeMT. 
Table-3.1: List of modules declared out-of-scope 
Sl. No.  Modules  Objective/Function  
1. Resource Planning 
It includes receipt estimation and would have helped t he resource planning 
section to perform trend analysis and estimation of  expected figures of 
receipt for the next year.  
2. Public Debt 
Management 
The module would have provided projection on GoU  fiscal deficit. Periodic 
cash inflow and outflow projections through this mo dule would have been 
a critical factor in resource planning estimates an d meeting mandatory 
liabilities of GoU . 
3. Budget Plan An interface was to be provided to State Planning Department  to upload 
annual plan outlay and filtering of estimates under Plan and Non Plan head.  
4. Input/output It included  generation of State Cash Book for receipt and payme nt and 
graphical presentation of data of five years for decision makers.  
5. E-Audit 
It included  Annual Audit Plan, digitization of formats as per a udit manual, 
audit sampling techniques, Computer Aided Audit Tec hniques, audit 
progress monitoring system , etc.  
The Government replied (August 2023) that meetings were held under the chairmanship 
of competent authorities and as per the directions these modules were kept out of scope. 
Additionally, certain new modules like SGHS, OPGM, RBI eKuber 2.0 upgradation etc. 
were added in place of modules kept “Out of Scope”. 
Reply was not acceptable as the Department did not provide any documents to support 
the fact that meetings were held with the respectiv e Department. As every module had 
different requirements and involved different quant ity of work in its development, 
therefore replacing some modules with others did no t justify that same amount of work 
was executed. Also, the Department did not seek any  approval for these changes from 
SPeMT. 

Performance Audit Report on Integrated Financial Management System for the year ended 31 March 2022 
16 
3.2.2 Manual sanctions  
GoU order stipulated that paperless facility should  be available in IFMS for any 
application, form, bill, sanction order, etc. relat ed to any work and it would be auto 
generated from system. 
The Audit noticed that the sanctions were not auto generated from IFMS but 
communicated physically by the competent authority.  The processing of sanctions was 
handled in IFMS in broadly two ways: 
 Facility of uploading sanctions available on IFMS i n some cases : Physical 
sanctions/ sanctions obtained through e-Office were scanned and uploaded along-with the 
bill in IFMS. Sanctions related to expenditure coul d be uploaded along with other 
supporting documents during Upload Document stage. 
 No facility of uploading sanctions available in res t cases : No facility was 
available in IFMS for capturing the sanctions/order s related to creating a new DDO post 
or suspension of an employee. Although the processe s could be carried out through 
IFMS, its authenticity could not be relied upon, as  the functionality to upload 
sanctions/orders was not available in IFMS. 
Provision of uploading of sanction orders in IFMS u navailable in case of suspension and 
creation of new DDO post depicted failure in accomp lishment of paperless facility in 
IFMS and lack of functionality to auto-generate san ction orders in IFMS and thus, paved 
the way for manual intervention. 
The Government accepted the facts and stated (Augus t 2023) that sanction orders were 
generated using e-Office and a PDF copy of these or ders was uploaded in IFMS. 
Communication with NIC was open regarding integrati ng e-Office with IFMS. Also, 
working of IFMS was completely made paperless from 01 Jan 2023 for cyber treasury 
and from 01 April 2023 for all the other treasuries , uploading of supporting document 
was made mandatory in almost all the modules. 
3.2.3 Non-revocation of access rights of ceased use rs  
User rights and permissions are the levels of acces s granted to users, enabling them to 
perform specific tasks and access resources on netw ork such as data files or applications. 
There are four types of access rights (roles) in IF MS viz., Employee, Operator, 
Supervisor and Officer. These access rights enable users to perform various tasks 
associated with IFMS. 
Data Analysis revealed that access rights of 23 emp loyees who had retired or resigned 
from service or deceased were not revoked. No funct ionality was available in IFMS to 
auto deactivate the users from assigned role in cas e of death, retirement, or resignation. It 
was the responsibility of concerned Treasury Office r/DDOs to manually deactivate the 
User Roles in IFMS. Manual deactivation of User Rol e rather than auto deactivation 
renders IFMS vulnerable to potential risk of misuse of functionalities of IFMS. 

Chapter-3: System Functionality and Controls 
17 
The Government accepted the facts and stated (Augus t 2023) that the issue had been 
resolved and assigned roles were removed by default  as soon as Last Pay Certificate 
(LPC) was generated in any of the cases (transfer, death, retirement or resignation). 
3.2.4 Non-review of Super User activity 
DTPE created a ‘Super User’ who was to act like fro nt end gateway meant for Data 
Center for facilitating its treasury operations. It  was the most privileged user in DTPE 
who was capable to make any changes (Modify/Update)  in various Master 
 tables like 
Bank Master, DDO Master, Treasury Master, HoD Maste r, etc. Functionalities which 
were inter alia performed by Super User were: 
 DDO Code Creation  
 Treasury IP binding  
 Update Master  tables  
 Display alerts/messages in IFMS  
 Update DA/DR rates  
However, Audit observed that Super User was single- handedly performing critical 
functions like significant changes in Masters i.e. changes in bank details, changes in 
scheme, activate/deactivate menu in IFMS, changes i n Object Code, DDO Post 
generation, update party name, etc. It implied that  an individual (Super User) had full 
control over master data. Activities of Super User,  despite it being the most privileged 
user, were never reviewed. Super User login facilit ated single mode approval rather than 
three tier approval, as envisaged in Government Orders. Hence, it was pertinent to review 
its activities periodically. Furthermore, DTPE was unable to formulate any 
documentation to substantiate activities performed by Super user. Non-reviewing of 
critical treasury functions discharged by immensely  empowered Super User was sheer 
illustration of arbitrary conduct and thus, subject ed to individual will or judgement 
without restriction.  
The Government replied (August 2023) that any chang es made by Super User were 
performed after the approval from the competent aut hority and logs for the same were 
also being maintained in the system. Also, Implemen tation of three level approval for 
super user was in progress. 
Reply was not acceptable as the Department did not provide any document to support 
their claims. Further, three levels of approval for Super User was to be implemented.  
3.2.5 Budgetary work flow and control deficiencies  
The budgetary process in IFMS was required to provi de support for Budget management, 
including preparation, communication, and revision of budgets for the State/UT 
Governments. It would enable the Department to mode rate the demands made by field 
offices and submit them to the Finance Department, indicating their requirements for 
funds. The Finance Department would analyze the dem ands from various perspectives 

Performance Audit Report on Integrated Financial Management System for the year ended 31 March 2022 
18 
and finally recommend provisions for each of the bu dget heads/ Department. The module 
would be able to print the document for being place d before the legislature for approval. 
This module would facilitate timely releases as wel l as adherence to the authorized limits 
of expenditure by the DDOs. The module would allow re-appropriation / supplementary 
grants, surrenders to be handled through it in similar manner. 
Audit noticed following systemic deficiencies in their analysis:  
3.2.5.1 Key work flow processes not automated 
(i)  Audit noticed that following key processes in the workflow of budget preparation, 
approval and distribution were done manually or req uired manual intervention in some 
form or other. 
a)  Budget estimation: Budget estimation includes both receipt and expendi ture 
estimates for generation of Annual Financial Statem ent or State Budget to be laid before 
Legislature. Budget Estimates (BE) limited to expen diture estimates from DDO to HoD 
and from HoD to Secretary level were submitted thro ugh IFMS. During the system 
walkthrough, it was noticed that there was no integ ration between IFMS and Department 
of Finance (Budget Section). However, an interface was provided to the budget section in 
IFMS. The secretaries could submit consolidated exp enditure estimates to Finance 
Department online followed by final submission to B udget section for consideration. 
Thereafter, the budget section downloaded the expenditure estimates in excel format from 
the available interface in system for budget formul ation. IFMS was oblivious of the data 
worked upon by the budget section for budget formul ation. Thus, due to absence of 
integration with Budget section, complete automatio n was not achieved in budget 
workflow. 
b)  Receipt estimates: IFMS supported online submission of expenditure est imates 
only whereas online submission of receipt estimates  was not supported as the Resource 
Planning module proposed for receipt estimates was dropped. Thus, due to incomplete 
formulation of budget estimation, IFMS was unable t o generate State Budget (Budget 
Literature) which was required to be generated from the system automatically. 
c)  Revised estimates: Due to absence of functionality in IFMS, revised es timates 
were submitted manually by the Department. 
The Government accepted the facts and stated (Augus t 2023) that the entire budget 
module was developed as per the requirement of the budget directorate. Budget 
preparation was being done by the budget Department  using its own software. Therefore, 
many functionalities associated with budget prepara tion had not been provided in IFMS. 
However, Receipt estimation and revised estimation functionality would be provided in 
IFMS from financial year 2024-2025 after consultation with budget Department. 
(ii) Uploading of approved budget in IFMS : After the budget is approved by 
Legislature, there was no functionality in IFMS for  budget section either to upload or fill 
the approved budget details in IFMS. Therefore, approved budget details were sent by the 

Chapter-3: System Functionality and Controls 
19 
Finance Department to FDC, DTPE in excel format thr ough e-mail. FDC imported the 
budget details in IFMS database manually which then  became available to all secretaries 
for further distribution. 
The Government accepted the facts and stated (Augus t 2023) that at present, database 
dump was shared by the budget section after its app roval by the Governor. However, 
from financial year 2024-25, the budget data will b e obtained through an API from the 
budget section in the Finance Department. 
(iii) Budget distribution:  
 From Secretary to HoD : A batch ID was generated in IFMS whenever secreta ry 
allotted funds to HoD. The Batch ID generated in IF MS was not visible to HoD. 
Therefore, Batch ID was being communicated to HoD t hrough a letter. Once the letter 
was received, HoD was required to enter the Batch I D manually in IFMS and accept the 
funds. There was no functionality to accept the funds automatically. 
 From HoD to DDO : Similarly, a Batch ID was generated and communica ted to 
DDO through a letter by HoD after allotment of funds. In place of DDO, the functionality 
to accept the budget was provided to Treasury Offic er. For acceptance of allotted budget, 
DDO had to produce the letter before the Treasury Officer. 
DTPE accepted the facts and assured Audit that all manual intervention in all modules 
would be automated after implementation of e-sign. 
The Government accepted the facts and stated (Augus t 2023) that working of IFMS was 
made paperless from 01 April 2023 across the state.  Also, alert functionality was 
implemented for all the modules. 
3.2.5.2 Deficient control over Re-appropriation of budget 
Rule 134 of Uttarakhand Budget Manual stipulates th at Re-appropriations are not 
permissible -  
(i)  from one Grant/Appropriation to another; 
(ii)  from the Charged to the voted section or vice versa; 
(iii)  where provision for an existing service has been ma de either in the Revenue, 
Capital or Loan section and it is proposed to chang e the character of service by 
transferring it from the existing section to any other section; 
(iv) to provide for new expenditure, whether voted or charged; 
(iv)  to increase or provide for the expenditure on an it em the provision for which was 
specifically reduced or disapproved by the Assembly either through a substantive or 
a token cut; and  
(v)  after the close of the financial year. 
Audit scrutiny of the system revealed that there wa s no control or check in IFMS to 
prevent re-appropriation of budget between inadmiss ible budget heads (from Voted to 
Charged head and vice-versa  or from Revenue to Capital head and vice-versa ). Analysis 

Performance Audit Report on Integrated Financial Management System for the year ended 31 March 2022 
20 
of IFMS data revealed re-appropriation of ₹ 51.85 crore from Revenue head to Capital 
head in 2020-21 and ₹ 13.87 crore from Loan head to Revenue head as deta iled in 
Table-3.2 . 
Table-3.2: Instances of inadmissible Re-appropriations 
Sl. 
No. 
Financial 
Year 
Grant 
No. From Head To Head Amount 
(in `` ``) Remarks 
1 
2020-21 19 
250106102010105 451500102010653 2,78,00,000 
Revenue Head 
to Capital Head  
2 251500102011042 451500102010653 18,00,00,000 
3 251500102280050 451500102010653 6,00,00,000 
4 251500102350050 
251500102350056 451500102010653 7,10,00,000 
5 11 220202113010303 420201202010153 17,97,14,778 
6 2020-21 18 242500106030050 642500108020061 13,86, 69,800 Loan Head to 
Revenue Head  
The Government accepted the facts and stated (Augus t 2023) that necessary validations 
were implemented as per Uttarakhand Budget Manual, 2012. 
3.2.5.3 Irregular surrender of budget 
Rule 125 of Uttarakhand Budget Manual provides that  all the final savings must be 
surrendered to the Finance Department by 25 
th  March. 
Audit scrutiny of IFMS revealed that there was no c ontrol or check to prevent generation 
of surrender requests after the end of financial ye ar. Thus, the system was allowing 
surrender of budget after 31 st  March. Analysis of IFMS data revealed that: 
 A total of 1493 surrender requests were submitted f rom HoD to secretary level 
after 31 March 2021, i.e., from April 2021 to August 2021 (FY 2020-21). 
 A total of 2339 surrender requests were submitted f rom HoD to secretary level 
after 31 March 2022, i.e., from April 2022 to September 2022. (FY 2021-22). 
Moreover, the Audit noticed that there was no funct ionality in IFMS through which the 
concerned secretaries could surrender the excess bu dget of their Department to the 
Finance Department. In absence of such functionalit y, the surrender was done through 
manual process. 
The Government accepted the facts and stated (Augus t 2023) that implementation of 
functionality to enable budget surrender by Secreta ry to Finance Department was in 
progress. 
3.2.5.4 Absence of alert functionality 
There was a provision in DPR and FRS to generate e-mail alerts in IFMS on irregularities 
like unexpected variation in estimates. Regular ale rts to notify concerned estimating 
officer about the last date of estimate submission were also to be generated in IFMS so 
that budget estimates from all Department could be submitted timely. During system 
walkthrough, Audit noticed that budget estimate sub mission timeline was not captured in 
IFMS. E-mail alert functionality, as part of intern al control and monitoring, was not 
implemented in IFMS to notify higher authorities ab out any unexpected variation or 
delay in submission of estimates. 

Chapter-3: System Functionality and Controls 
21 
The Government accepted the facts and stated (Augus t 2023) that e-mail alert 
functionality was developed and it would be enabled  for the officials whose official 
email-id are available in the system. 
3.2.6 DDO module workflow and controls  
Drawing and disbursing officer works on behalf of s tate government and is responsible 
for all money received or disbursed in his office a nd the maintenance of accounts thereof. 
There were 4586 DDOs in the state who were using E-DDO module in IFMS.  
DDO module was an online application/interface in IFMS which enabled DDOs 
 to:  
 to create various bills and submit those bills online to Treasury, 
 to prepare and approve employee loans and advances like House Building advance, 
Medical Advance, Travelling Allowance, GPF advance and LTC advance, 
 to generate pension papers of retiring servants, 
 to online Reconcile data with Treasuries, 
 to generate Cash Book, 
 to keep track of receipts and expenditure through v arious MIS reports like Bill 
Register, UTR detail, Payment Status Report and Voucher list, etc., and 
 to view the status of their bills submitted online,  and verify status whenever their 
Bill was approved. 
Audit noticed following systemic deficiencies in DDO module: 
3.2.6.1 Non segregation of roles 
GoU directed that operator (Maker), supervisor (Che cker) and Officer (Approver) would 
be made three tier users separately in IFMS portal. 
Data analysis revealed that system, while mapping a n employee to DDO post, by default 
assigned multiple roles (Operator, Supervisor, Offi cer, and Admin) to a single employee. 
There was no bar on assigning distinct roles to dif ferent employees, as multiple roles 
could be assigned to a single person in IFMS. Furth er, Audit noticed that a DDO could 
assign multiple roles to a subordinate employee. As  a result, Audit noticed instances of a 
single user performing different and incompatible r oles and functions as shown in  
Table-3.3 : 
Table-3.3: Instances of Incompatible roles by same user 
Financial 
Year 
Total no. of bills 
processed during the 
year 
All the three user’s 
functions performed by a 
single person 
Two out of three user’s 
functions performed by a 
single person 
2019-20 6,28,663 3,03,940 1,45,611 
2020-21 6,80,802 2,64,875 1,91,485 
2021-22 6,71,553 2,61,496 1,85,506 
01.04.22 to 
01.11.22 4,47,186 1,32,824 1,37,937 

Performance Audit Report on Integrated Financial Management System for the year ended 31 March 2022 
22 
It is evident from above Table that the segregation  of duties which is a strong safeguard 
against error, fraud and embezzlement was largely a bsent in financial transactions of the 
State government. 
The Government accepted the facts and stated (Augus t 2023) that due to limited staff in 
many offices, the ability to assign multiple roles to a single person was kept flexible. 
The reply was not acceptable as assignment of multi ple roles to a single user clearly 
depicted lack of segregation of duties. 
3.2.6.2 Incomplete implementation of e-sign functio nality  
Government orders provided that bill would be prepa red online and scanned copy of 
related sub-voucher/vouchers/sanction orders, etc. would be uploaded in the system along 
with the bill. The existing practice of producing h ard copy of bill and vouchers at 
treasury/PAO was to be discontinued. To achieve this, e-signature was to be implemented 
at all levels.  
Audit noticed that the Department did not implement  e-sign functionality in all types of 
bills. E-sign functionality was implemented only in  three types of bills (Whole Transfer, 
Value Added Tax refund and State Government Health Scheme claims) and two types of 
reports (Pension Payment Order and Monthly accounts  sent to AG (A&E)). Remaining 
bills were being prepared and forwarded to treasury /PAO online. As e-sign functionality 
was not implemented, a printout copy of online prep ared bill, along-with original 
supporting documents, after manual signature was be ing sent physically to treasury/PAO 
for passing of payment. Treasuries, after matching the specimen signature of DDO, 
passed the bill online. After passing the bill onli ne, treasury transmitted the payment 
schedule electronically to RBI for e-payment. Once e-payment was made, physical bills 
were marked as paid and vouchers/sub-vouchers were defaced manually by the treasury. 
The Government accepted the facts and stated (Augus t 2023) that e-sign functionality 
was implemented in all the modules of IFMS. 
3.2.6.3 Inconsistent workflow 
The procedure for bill processing was divided into three main phases: Bill Initiation, 
Document Upload, and Bill Generation. Initially, th e Bill was prepared by the DDO, who 
completed essential information such as the grant, head of the account, and the amount. 
Subsequently, the DDO uploaded the necessary accomp anying documents. Once done, 
the DDO triggered the bill generation process, resu lting in the creation of a Transaction 
ID. This ID was then sent to the Treasury for the subsequent stages of processing. 
During the audit, it was observed that the DDO enco untered difficulties in creating bills 
due to the absence of a feature that would automati cally display the budget availability 
for a specific scheme in IFMS during the bill processing. This led to a situation where the 
budget availability was not automatically populated  while entering details for a particular 
scheme during bill processing. In cases where the b udget limit was exceeded, a message 

Chapter-3: System Functionality and Controls 
23 
indicating that the 'bill cannot be generated' woul d appear during the Bill Generation 
stage. This forced the DDO to start the bill preparation process anew. 
To ensure budget availability, the DDO had to manua lly cross-reference a separate 
register called the 'Budget Register' in the IFMS. This involved navigating through 
various pages of the DDO web application to check t he budget availability during the bill 
processing. This approach resulted in an inconsiste nt workflow for the bill processing 
procedure and imposed unnecessary workload on the DDO. 
The Government accepted the facts (August 2023) and  assured of improvement in User 
interface of bill preparation. 
3.2.6.4 Absence of DDO specimen signature in system  
Workflow automation was one of the key objectives of the IFMS project. 
Audit noticed absence of a functionality that would  allow the DDO's specimen signature 
to be automatically populated within the system thr oughout the entire Bill Processing 
Workflow. Instead of utilizing an online submission  process through IFMS, the DDO's 
name and specimen signature were being manually tra nsmitted to the 
PAO/Bank/Treasury Officer. Even after the online su bmission of the bill to the Treasury, 
the DDO still had to send a physical printout of th e online-prepared bill to the Treasury. 
There, the Treasury Officers manually cross-verifie d the signature on the bill with the 
DDO's specimen signature, which had been provided m anually to the concerned treasury 
for authentication. 
The lack of an automated DDO specimen signature mec hanism prevented the system 
from achieving full paperless functionality. This absence created a barrier to the complete 
elimination of the necessity to print bill documents for physical signatures. Consequently, 
Government Departments were unable to fully realize  the advantages of a seamlessly 
electronic workflow. 
The Government accepted the facts and stated (Augus t 2023) that e-sign functionality 
was implemented in all the modules of IFMS. 
3.2.6.5 Non-automation of functionalities in DDO mo dule 
(i)  Creation of New DDO Code 
DTPE created a Super User who was provided with pri vilege to change DDO Master. 
Super User through DDO Master created Post/Designat ion of DDO consequent upon 
receiving of Government Order regarding approval of  creation of new DDO which 
contained therein only name of DDO and Treasury wit hout mention of DDO Code. After 
filling various fields like DDO Code, Treasury, DDO  Name, Department, Tax Deduction 
and Collection Account Number (TAN), Goods and Serv ices Tax Identification Number 
(GSTIN), District, Mobile Number and Email ID in DD O Master, DDO ID was created. 
Thereafter any Treasury Officer (having same treasu ry which was contained in GO while 
creating post of DDO) via his Admin Role maps requi site employee to DDO. After this 
stage, User ID was created for that particular employee. 

Performance Audit Report on Integrated Financial Management System for the year ended 31 March 2022 
24 
Audit noticed that DDO Code was entered manually ra ther than auto generated in IFMS, 
whereas it was observed that Secretary Code was auto generated. DDO Codes were being 
allotted randomly by DTPE. No prescribed formula or  criteria was being followed while 
allotting DDO Codes rendering non-uniformity in allotted DDO Codes. 
The Government accepted the facts (August 2023) and  assured of implementing the 
functionality in future. 
(ii) Bill Register (11C) Serial Number 
A bill register was maintained physically by DDO fo r record of all bills processed for 
later verification with Treasury.  
Audit noticed that at the time of Generating Bill, 11C serial number (Bill register) was 
entered manually rather than auto populated in IFMS . The serial number to be entered 
was to be time and again tracked from physical Bill  register maintained in the office. 
Thus, IFMS lacked the functionality of tracking Bil l serial numbers despite the fact that 
all bills were being processed through IFMS. Non-ac hievement of automation in above 
functionalities in DDO module defeated the very pur pose of holistic automation of whole 
DDO functions and enhanced the unnecessary manual workload. 
The Government accepted the facts and stated (Augus t 2023) that functionality of auto 
generation of 11C numbers was implemented. 
3.2.6.6 Lack of internal control in timely processi ng of bills  
Government orders provided that a bill since its creation in DDO office till its approval at 
treasury/PAO could be held for a maximum period of one day at each user level. If a bill 
was held for more than one day at any level, then s ystem should not allow the bill to be 
approved at maker and approver level for further processing. 
System walk-through revealed that no alert/checks mechanism was implemented in IFMS 
to force or remind the maker, checker, or approver to process the bill within stipulated 
time limit. 
Data analysis revealed that government orders were not implemented in IFMS, and bills 
were found to be pending at each level for more than 30 days as shown in Table-3.4 : 
Table-3.4: Pendency of bills at different stages 
Financial 
Year 
Total Bills 
Processed 
during the 
year 
Time 
taken 
(in 
days) 
Number of Bills processed 
At DDO level At Treasury/PAO level 
By 
Maker 
By 
Checker 
By 
Approver 
By 
Maker 
By 
Checker 
By 
Approver 
2019-20 628663 
00-01 526373 574898 582993 323560 615842 603377 
02-10 92798 49803 41880 269138 12398 24252 
11-20 7282 3042 3001 26666 318 698 
21-30 1428 621 489 5883 63 196 
More 
than 30 782 299 300 3416 42 140 
 
2020-21 
 
 
680802 
 
00-01 560025 623726 636113 385275 662280 671247 
02-10 115143 55157 42591 283447 17765 9516 
11-20 4592 1522 1685 8950 541 34 
21-30 728 253 289 1911 103 2 

Chapter-3: System Functionality and Controls 
25 
Financial 
Year 
Total Bills 
Processed 
during the 
year 
Time 
taken 
(in 
days) 
Number of Bills processed 
At DDO level At Treasury/PAO level 
By 
Maker 
By 
Checker 
By 
Approver 
By 
Maker 
By 
Checker 
By 
Approver 
 
 
 
 
More 
than 30 314 144 124 1219 113 3 
2021-22 671553 
00-01 555845 614403 626586 404005 647553 659790 
02-10 110128 55022 43018 267548 23768 11763 
11-20 4553 1707 1576 0 163 0 
21-30 709 306 238 0 21 0 
More 
than 30 318 115 135 0 48 0 
Further, though, a DDO could check the status of bi lls pending at various levels but 
duration of pendency was not shown. Not-implementin g of above timelines/ 
functionalities in IFMS was in contravention of Gov ernment Order and manifests lack of 
internal control in timely processing of bills at v arious levels and also the possibility of 
lack of accountability and delay in processing of bills cannot be ruled out. 
The Government accepted the facts and stated (Augus t 2023) that timeline of one 
working day at each user-level had been implemented  from 01 April 2023. Also, 
dashboard preparation for monitoring/alert purposes was in progress. 
3.2.6.7 Lack of internal control in drawing of AC b ills  
Financial Rules provided that Drawing Officer is au thorized to draw advances on 
Abstract Contingent Bill (AC Bill). A certificate to the effect that the Detailed Contingent 
Bills (DC Bills) in respect of drawings on AC Bills  have been furnished in respect of 
each drawing which is over three months old has been recorded on the DC Bill. 
Audit noticed that system accepted all AC Bills wit hout checking any details related to 
pending DC Bills. DC bills were required to be subm itted to AG (A&E) and certificate to 
this effect was to be attached with AC bills. In fa ct, a separate provision for capturing 
details of this certificate did not exist in the sy stem. Details of AC bills not adjusted 
within stipulated time limit is shown in Table-3.5 and 3.6 : - 
Table-3.5: Details of AC Bills adjusted through DC Bills 
Financial 
Year 
Total No. of 
AC Bills 
Drawn 
Duration of AC Bills adjusted through DC Bills 
Within 3 
months 
3 to 6 
months 
6 to 9 
months 
9 to 12 
months 
Beyond 
1 year 
Beyond 2 
year or 
more 
2019-20 1558 108 61 19 13 0 0 
2020-21 838 157 24 10 9 23 0 
2021-22 600 226 59 12 15 30 8 
Table-3.6: Details of pending AC Bills 
Financial 
Year 
Previous year’s AC 
Bills pending for 
adjustment 
Total No. of AC 
Bills Drawn 
during the year 
Bills adjusted 
through DC 
Bills 
AC Bills pending for 
adjustment at the 
end of year 
2019-20 1217 1558 201 2574 
2020-21 2574 838 223 3189 
2021-22 3189 600 350 3439 

Performance Audit Report on Integrated Financial Management System for the year ended 31 March 2022 
26 
Not adjusting of AC bills in stipulated time indica tes lack of monitoring and internal 
control at treasuries level.  
The Government accepted the facts and stated (August 2023) that implementation of such 
control through IFMS would be explored in future. 
Reply was not acceptable as AC bills were to be adj usted timely as per existing financial 
rules. 
3.2.6.8 Non-availability of functionality for Bill Defacement in IFMS  
All sub-vouchers, whether they were to be retained in the Office of the DDO/Controlling 
Officer or to be submitted to the AG (A&E), should be cancelled or so defaced or so 
mutilated by the DDO concerned that they cannot be used again. 
Audit observed that there was no functionality for online Bill Defacement in the IFMS 
even though, IFMS had checks and controls for preve nting generation of duplicate bills. 
Once e-payment was made, physical bills were marked  as paid and vouchers/sub-
vouchers were defaced manually by the treasury. 
The Government replied (August 2023) that digital d efacement will not serve any 
purpose because without physical defacement the sam e sub-voucher may be uploaded 
again. Also, necessary validations had already been  implemented to avoid the possibility 
of re-use of the same invoice/sub-voucher. 
Reply was not acceptable as digital defacement was necessary in cases where only online 
bills were provided by the third party for achieving paperless processing of bills.  
3.2.7 e-Payment work flow and controls 
e-Payment module of IFMS was designed for automated  processing of electronic 
payments. The entire process like preparation of tr ansaction files for uploading to bank, 
integrations with payment gateways and treasury por tal along with proper validations, 
were captured and followed in the module. On behalf  of government, RBI was 
responsible for making all e-payments except draft payments as draft payments were 
processed by SBI. All payment requests from IFMS to  RBI and SBI were transmitted 
through Secure File Transfer Protocol (SFTP) in the  form of payment schedules. Once 
payment was credited to the beneficiary, the detail s of payment were transmitted back by 
both the banks to IFMS. Payment details received fr om RBI and SBI were populated in 
IFMS through scheduler. Audit observed following de ficiencies during analysis of 
e-payment module: -
  
3.2.7.1 Beneficiary bank details not validated  
Functional Requirement Specification (FRS) of e-pay ment module provided that while 
making e-payment, the bank account details of benef iciary or third party would be 
pre-validated. During system analysis, audit notice d that only limited checks which 
included checks on length of account number and Ind ian Financial System Code (IFSC) 
only, were available for pre-validation of bank acc ount details. Complete checks 

Chapter-3: System Functionality and Controls 
27 
regarding correctness beneficiary name, IFSC and be neficiary account number were not 
present in the system.  
The Government accepted the facts and stated (August 2023) that DTPE had signed MoU 
with National Payments Corporation of India (NPCI) for validating the beneficiary’s 
name, account number, IFSC etc. and this functionality would be implemented soon. 
3.2.7.2 Reconciliation process not automated  
Workflow automation was the main objective of IFMS project. It removes manual 
intervention and hence ensures data accuracy and integrity. 
Audit noticed that the process of reconciliation of  payments between RBI/SBI and 
Treasury was not automated and carried out manually . The daily and monthly scrolls 
were received from agency banks and RBI through e-m ail. The payment details received 
in scrolls were manually reconciled by treasuries a nd posted in IFMS. Hence, 
reconciliation process was not automated. 
The Government stated (August 2023) that there was automatic reconciliation of 
payments done using RBI’s e-Kuber system. IFMS auto matically identify the differences 
in Return Note (RN)/Debit Note (DN) details and ACS T (Account Statement). Once 
identified, treasury officials would take up the is sue with RBI and resolve the difference. 
E-mail facility was an additional check to verify t he account statement manually. It was 
same as the details already shared electronically in the form of ACST. 
Reply was not acceptable as Department did not prov ide any documents to support their 
claim of automatic reconciliation of payments in IFMS. 
3.2.8 e-challan module: A successful tool 
The practice of manual deposition of governmental r eceipts was discontinued and online 
collection of all Government receipts through e-Cha llan module was made mandatory 
w.e.f. 01 April 2021. 
 e-Challan module facilitated selection of Departmen t and its 
various services automatically. Multiple services o f a Department could be selected for 
depositing amount against each service in a single challan ( Figure-1). The module 
provided the options to deposit the challan amount online or offline. Payment for offline 
challan could be made at any SBI counter. For onlin e challans, SBI provided banking 
services including payment gateway, internet bankin g, mobile banking, etc. SBI prepared 
a daily receipt e-scroll and sent it to IFMS throug h SFTP. Once e-scroll was received 
from SBI, the IFMS reconciled the receipts automati cally. Department having their own 
receipt collection portal like excise, mining, elec tion, Police Headquarter, etc. were 
integrated with IFMS.  
Audit checked the e-challan module on the parameter s like complete head classification, 
automation of workflow, checks to prevent refund mo re than once, etc., and found that 
entire workflow of the module was automated, contai ned necessary checks and controls 
and functioning as per requirements. Hence, e-chall an module successfully achieved its 
objectives. 

Performance Audit Report on Integrated Financial Management System for the year ended 31 March 2022 
28 
 
Figure-1 
 
3.2.9 Accounting workflow and integration with AG ( A&E)  
Financial Rules stipulated that after the close of the month, a consolidated monthly 
account should be sent to the Accountant General, A ccounts & Entitlements (AG- A&E). 
The respective treasury generated the monthly accou nts in IFMS and submitted its 
e-signed report to AG (A&E) online. Various e-signe d reports such as List of Payments 
(LoP)/Schedule of Payments (SoP), cash account, Res erve Bank Deposit statement, etc. 
and other data were being forwarded to A&E office t hrough IFMS user interface. During 
analysis of receipt accounting module, audit observed that: 
3.2.9.1 Partial integration of IFMS with Transport Department 
Online receipts of transport Department were collec ted using departmental portal i.e. 
e-Vahan/ Sarathi  etc. Since there was no integration between IFMS a nd e-Vahan/ 
Sarathi , the information regarding the receipts collected by Transport Department were 
received at FDC only through e-scrolls received fro m SBI.  As e-scrolls of Transport 
Department contained only major head wise details. Thus, the complete 13-digit 
classification of receipt heads was not captured in  IFMS leading to incomplete data being 
forwarded to AG (A&E). 
The Government accepted the facts and stated (Augus t 2023) that multiple reminders 
were sent to the Transport Department but no action  was taken by Transport Department 
in this regard. 
Reply was not acceptable as complete integration wi th Transport Department was not 
achieved. Further, the reply clearly depicted that there had been lack of synergy between 
DTPE and Transport Department since requirement gathering phase of the project. 


Chapter-3: System Functionality and Controls 
29 
3.2.9.2 Deficient functionality of correction of ac counts through transfer entries  
Audit noticed that although, functionality of propo sing accounts correction through 
transfer entry was developed in IFMS, the process of account correction and the authority 
of AG (A&E) office was not captured in the system. Thus, the correction proposals were 
not submitted to AG (A&E) office through IFMS. Inst ead, to propose any correction in 
accounts through transfer entry, a printout of the proposal was taken out by the concerned 
treasury and sent manually to the AG (A&E) Office. After the approval from AG (A&E) 
Office was obtained, the same was approved in IFMS by the Treasury Officer. 
The Government accepted the facts and stated (Augus t 2023) that functionality for 
correction of account through transfer-entry was pa rtially automated and team was 
working to fully automate this process.  
Reply was not acceptable as complete automation of correction of account through 
transfer-entry was not implemented in IFMS. 
3.3 Conclusion 
The Department did not implement all the envisaged modules in IFMS. There was 
existence of manual intervention in IFMS which defe ated the purpose of automation. 
Duties of ‘Super User’ were not segregated and all the tasks were executed at single user 
level. The receipt estimates were not submitted thr ough IFMS. IFMS was unable to 
generate State Budget (Budget Literature) which was  required to be generated from the 
system automatically. The budget modules lacked com plete automation in budget 
distribution, deficient controls over re-appropriat ion and surrender of budget. There was 
absence of alert functionality in IFMS to notify hi gher authorities about any unexpected 
variation or delay in submission of estimates. 
IFMS lacked segregation of duties at DDO level. The re was no control in IFMS for 
timely processing of bills and settlement of AC bil ls. There was lack of validation 
(beneficiary name, IFSC and bank account number) wh ile adding a new beneficiary in 
IFMS. There was lack of synergy between DTPE and va rious stakeholders since 
requirement gathering phase of the project. 
3.4 Recommendations 
 Department should integrate IFMS with e-Office so t hat sanctions orders can be 
uploaded automatically. 
 Department should implement functionality for submi ssion of receipt estimates 
and revised estimates through IFMS. 
 Department should integrate IFMS with Budget Depart ment for obtaining 
Budget data and processing it automatically. 
 Department should integrate IFMS with NPCI for vali dation of beneficiary bank 
details while making payment. 
 Department should completely integrate IFMS with Tr ansport Department for 
capturing complete receipt details from e-Vahan / Sarathi. 

Chapter -4 
Information System Security  

31 
CHAPTER-4 
Information System Security 
4.1 Introduction 
Traditionally, information available with the gover nment has been safely managed by 
keeping it in paper records throughout its lifecycl e i.e. creation, storage, access, 
modification, distribution, and destruction. Howeve r, to make all government services 
accessible to the common man in his locality, throu gh efficient service delivery outlets, 
along with transparency & reliability, the governme nt has steadily graduated towards 
using electronic formats of information. 
IFMS is a web-based application for payment, accoun ting and reconciliation of 
Government transactions which integrates various ex isting standalone systems. 
 IFMS 
envisages single point of data capture; hence assum e greater importance to ensure the 
integrity and correctness of information.  As treasury transactions are very sensitive in 
nature and is therefore imperative that the securit y, consistency and integrity of such data 
and transactions should be maintained at all levels. 
4.2 Audit findings 
In Uttarakhand, the IFMS went live from 1 April 201 9. It is currently being operated 
through FDC located in the premises of Directorate Treasury, Pension and Entitlement, 
Dehradun. During Joint physical inspection of FDC a nd system review of IFMS, audit 
found following (Table-4.1 ) features to be installed and working in the IFMS and setup: 
Table-4.1: List of observations noticed during join t verification of FDC 
Sl. No. Parameter Audit observation 
1. Physical Access 
controls 
During Joint inspection of FDC audit noticed that  
• Physical access to FDC was restricted by biometric door lock 
devices.  
• Server room was secured with three layer biometric securities and 
only authorised personnel were given access to the server room.  
• Preventive measures like fire extinguishers, air-co nditioned 
machines, etc. were in place. No dust and loose art icles were found 
in server room. 
2. 
Monitoring 
Vulnerability and 
threats 
Intrusion Prevention System (IPS), Anti Malware, Fi rewall, email 
filtering to monitor vulnerability and threat throu gh Fort iGATE 2600F 
Series Firewall was installed at FDC and system log s were being 
recorded. 
3. Database security 
Audit observed that: 
• Database server was installed on separate dedicated  machine, hosted 
in private network of UKSWAN.  
• Three – tier connection methodology was adopted as all connections 
to database were routed through Application / Integration Server.  
• Database was configured to allow only trusted IP ad dress.  
• All users’ sessions were encrypted through Secure S ocket Layer 
(SSL) handshake keeping data secure in transit.  
• The development database / application was kept sep arate from 
production database / application. 

Performance Audit Report on Integrated Financial Management System for the year ended31 March 2022  
32 
4.2.1 Non-conduction of Performance and Quality Aud it from STQC  
Standardization Testing and Quality Certification ( STQC) Directorate, is an attached 
office of the Ministry of Electronics and Informati on Technology, Government of India, 
which provides Quality Assurance Services for softw are testing, information security and 
IT Service Management by conducting Testing, Training, Audit and Certifications.  
Audit observed that it was the responsibility of se lected bidder 1 to carry out Performance 
and Quality Audit from STQC before IFMS went live. But the system went live on 
01 April 2019 without the required certification fr om STQC. During audit, DTPE also 
accepted that the users of IFMS were facing slownes s issues. Therefore, in absence of 
necessary STQC certification, risk of quality and p erformance issues in IFMS could not 
be ruled out. 
The Government in its reply accepted the facts and stated (August 2023) that some 
digitization work was going on and shall be complet ed by 2023-24. STQC will be done 
once digitization work was completed.  Reply was no t acceptable as the contract with the 
vendor, who had already been paid for the deliverab le ‘Performance and Quality Audit 
from STQC’, already expired on 31 
st  March 2023. 
4.2.2 IS security systemic deficiencies 
During system review, audit noticed following deficiencies in the system: 
(i)  Use of personal email IDs by DDOs  
As per directions of GoU, “All DDOs shall use Gover nment e-mail in IFMS portal 
provided by State NIC for all official work and com munication. Usage of personal email 
is strictly forbidden in IFMS”. Audit observed that  2912 (63%) out of 4586 DDOs were 
registered with their personal e-mail IDs as there was no check available in IFMS to 
ensure that DDOs register in IFMS through governmen t e-mail IDs only. This created a 
potential security risk as government data was being stored in servers outside government 
control.  
The Government, during exit conference (June 2023) accepted the audit observation and 
stated that a campaign to create government e-mail IDs for remaining DDOs shall be 
launched and subsequently e-mail IDs of DDOs shall be updated in IFMS. 
Chart-5: Use of email IDs 
 
                                                           
1 M/s IWS. 
7%
63%
30% NIC email 
Personal email 
No email 

Chapter-4: Information System Security 
33 
(ii) Non-incorporation of audit trails 
An audit trail (also called audit log) is a securit y-relevant chronological record, set of 
records, and/or destination and source of records t hat provide documentary evidence of 
the sequence of activities that have affected at an y time a specific operation, procedure, 
event, or device. During system walk through, audit  noticed that audit trails were not 
being incorporated in IFMS due to which details of changes made through IFMS were 
not traceable through front end. For example: Lifec ycle of a bill including details of 
rejections and subsequent actions taken on the bill  were captured in the form of logs at 
back-end but were not available at front end for DDO user. 
Government accepted the fact that audit trail was n ot visible through front end and stated 
(August 2023) that report of audit trail will be made available to DDOs soon. 
(iii)  Weak Password policy 
Password policy provides that password should be a combination of upper and lower case 
characters, digits and punctuation characters as we ll and other characters. Audit noticed 
that the system was not enforcing use of lower case while constructing password. 
The Government accepted the fact and assured (August 2023) of its compliance in future. 
(iv) Non implementation of Biometric authentication  during Login  
As per Software Requirement Specification (SRS) of the project, Biometric 
authentication (in form of fingerprint capture) of registered users of DDO System 
2 and 
Treasuries was to be implemented in IFMS. However, it remained non-implementable 
even after three years of operationalization of IFMS. 
The Government accepted the importance of biometric  authentication and stated 
(August 2023) that integration with Aadhaar was pro posed. Once implemented, Aadhaar 
based biometric authentication will be done by the users at the time of login.  
(v) Network Security 
Audit observed that IFMS was being operated on UKSW AN managed by Information 
Technology Development Agency (ITDA), Dehradun. Des pite request to DTPE and 
ITDA to provided network security audit certificate s of UKSWAN to Audit, they were 
not provided. In absence of audit certificate, Audi t could not ascertain the network 
security of IFMS. 
4.2.3 Absence of Business Continuity Plan (BCP)  
Formulation of BCP was the major component to be im plemented under IFMS project. It 
ensures that the system runs smoothly and resumes i ts operations within definite time 
period in case of disasters and other emergency eve nts. Audit noticed that BCP had not 
been framed and adopted for IFMS, even after four y ears since operation. In its absence, 
the staff/ users were unaware of the procedure to b e followed in the event of disruptions/ 
                                                           
2 DDO is primarily a front-office type of web applic ation and is accessible over the internet using a web 
browser. 

Performance Audit Report on Integrated Financial Management System for the year ended31 March 2022  
34 
disasters. They were also not trained in preventing , mitigating, and responding to 
emergency situations. 
The Government accepted the criticality of BCP duri ng exit conference (June 2023) and 
directed DTPE to frame the BCP as soon as possible. 
Reply was not acceptable as framing of BCP was the responsibility of vendor who had 
already been paid for the same. In absence of BCP, business continuity of IFMS 
remained at risk in case of disruptions/disasters. 
4.2.4 Disaster Recovery site not set up  
Disaster Recovery (DR) aims at protecting the Depar tment from the effects of significant 
catastrophic events. It allows the Department to quickly resume mission-critical functions 
after a disaster. Various possible disasters that c an take place are – human error, 
epidemic, power outage, fire or explosions etc. The  distance for a DR site can vary 
depending on the types of disaster - such as earthq uakes, floods, terror attacks, etc. The 
Department should choose a DR location that fits it s business model and regulatory 
requirements. 
Audit observed that as per the DPR of the project, DR site was to be set up at State Data 
Centre (SDC) at ITDA. In the same DPR, it was envis aged that once the SDC at ITDA 
becomes operational, all IT infrastructure and IFMS  operations at Finance Data Center 
3 
(FDC) would be relocated to SDC and the former woul d act as an archival site. The 
proposal to make SDC the DR site was reiterated in a meeting held with DTPE, NIC & 
ITDA under chairmanship of Finance Secretary on 03 December 2021. 
Audit noticed that the two provisions of DPR were m utually contradictory as in case of 
shifting of IFMS operations from FDC to SDC, the la tter could not act as DR site which 
by definition had to be present at geographically d ifferent location. Moreover, both FDC 
and SDC were located near to each other, around 6.5  kilometers apart and in a region 
vulnerable to disasters (Seismic zone IV). Recently , flash flood like situation was created 
in the region due to cloudburst on 25 August 2021. Thus, despite IFMS being operational 
since 1 April 2019, no efforts had been made to set  up a DR Site, in absence of which the 
critical financial operations of GoU remained vulnerable in case of any disaster. 
During exit conference (Jun 2023), Government accep ted the importance of DR site and 
stated that IFMS application, presently hosted in F DC was planned to be shifted to SDC 
in ITDA. Further, ITDA was planning to create a ‘fa r’ DR site for all the applications 
hosted in SDC. 
Reply was not acceptable as Dehradun lies in seismi c zone and prone to natural disasters 
like earthquakes, floods, cloud bursts etc. In abse nce of a functional DR site, business 
continuity of IFMS remained at risk in case of disasters. 
                                                           
3 In DPR, Integrated Data Center  

Chapter-4: Information System Security 
35 
 
4.2.5 Backup and recovery controls  
National Information Security Policy and Guidelines , 2014 provides that organization 
must ensure that backup copies are maintained for a ll operational data to enable 
reconstruction should they be inadvertently destroy ed or lost. Also, Back-up copies of 
information and software shall be taken and tested regularly in accordance with the 
agreed backup policy. 
Audit noticed that the data generated in IFMS was replicated on real time basis in SDC of 
ITDA. In the FDC of DTPE, scheduled backup was done  in which backup of data 
schemas was taken on daily basis and full backup wa s taken after every 15 days. 
However, despite three years of go-live of IFMS, De partment had not formulated the 
backup policy and tested the system by restoring it  through back-up data. Also, the 
Department did not determine the data retention per iod, in absence of which data kept on 
accumulating and could impact the performance of sy stem such as increased response 
time, etc. 
The Government in its reply (August 2023) accepted the fact that backup policy had not 
been formulated but daily, monthly, incremental and  full backups were taken by the 
Database Administrator (DBA). Government in its rep ly claimed that backup activities 
were reviewed and tested on monthly basis, however no documents were provided to 
audit to substantiate the claims. 
4.2.6 Critical financial data handled by outsourced  personnel 
To manage FDC, DTPE demanded the sanction of seven  posts/technical cadre citing the 
necessity of deploying technically proficient regul ar personnel in view of the sensitivity 
of the work and the financial implications involved. As per GO dated 12 September 2019, 
three technical posts 4 were sanctioned by the GoU and directed DTPE to fo rmulate 
service rules before direct recruitment to aforesai d technical cadre and fill the created 
posts before 29.02.2020. 
Audit noticed that instead of formulating the requi red service rules and direct recruitment 
to the sanctioned posts, all the technical staff at  FDC was outsourced and hired on 
contractual basis. This not only created dependency  on contractual staff but also involved 
significant security risk as the critical database including financial transactions and 
personal data were handled by outsourced personnel.  This defeated the purpose of 
‘restricting the possible misuse and to protect the  stored data’ for which DTPE got the 
technical cadre sanctioned from the GoU. 
The Government in its reply (August 2023) stated th at outsourced personnel worked 
under the close supervision of the Domain Team whic h was manned by government 
employees. Most of the outsourced personnel were working with FDC since last ten years. 
Efforts were being made to have additional technica l resources who would not only help 
                                                           
4 Two direct recruitment posts (System Administrator  and Database Administrator) and one outsourced 
post (Senior Software Engineer) 

Performance Audit Report on Integrated Financial Management System for the year ended31 March 2022  
36 
in maintenance and enhancement of IFMS but work as back up of existing resources. In 
future, requisition would also be sent to the Gover nment for hiring permanent technical 
staff after their service rule is framed. 
4.2.7 Absence of documentation and policies 
Web Application security is of paramount concern fo r all stakeholders. Guidelines for 
Indian Government Websites state that Department mu st formulate a security policy to 
address various security issues related to the webs ite. Hence, a well-documented security 
policy was required for proper functioning of IFMS.  
Audit observed that Department did not formulate an y IT security policy for security of 
IT assets, software and data, backup, data retentio n and disposal, incident reporting, 
e-mail, Password, etc. Due to lack of documented se curity policy, every user was free to 
handle such issues in his own manner which could pose risks to IT security of IFMS.  
The Government accepted the facts and stated (Augus t 2023) that IFMS was being 
shifted to SDC and IT policies regarding infrastruc ture, network, password etc. would be 
adopted as of SDC. Whereas other policies like BCP,  DR Policy etc. would be framed by 
DTPE in due course. 
 
4.3 Poor feedback from end users of IFMS 
Audit carried out an online survey to get feedback from end-users of IFMS at DDOs and 
Treasuries. Nearly 370 responses were received. Iss ues reported were related to Login, 
OTP delay, poor and delayed support from helpdesk, slow speed of site, server down, bill 
creation and accounting, lack of training, lack of user-friendliness, issue in various 
reports and modules, non-availability of legacy dat a, work-flow, vendor or party 
management, file-upload size, unnecessary 20 minute s’ wait period after abrupt logout, 
duplicity of work due to hardcopies, save-session n ot enabled, mismatch in GPF, delayed 
voucher generation, duplicity of accounts of contra ctors in context of GST, Works 
module, and many other issues. 
The Government accepted the feedback given by IFMS users and stated (August 2023) 
that few issues had been identified and fixed. Issu es related to slowness of the system 
would be resolved once system is moved to SDC. Other issues would be fixed after hiring 
of additional technical staff. 
4.4 Conclusion 
Information security of IFMS application is of para mount concern to owners as well as 
users of the applications as treasury transactions are very sensitive in nature. Audit 
noticed that IFMS went live without required perfor mance and quality certification from 
STQC. In IFMS, DDOs were registered with their pers onal e-mail IDs causing potential 
security risk. Department did not implement biometr ic authentication even after three  
years of operationalization of IFMS. In absence of audit certificate, network security of 
IFMS could not be ensured. Despite being in seismic  zone, Department did not frame 
BCP/set up any functional DR site. In absence of BC P/DR site, business continuity of 

Chapter-4: Information System Security 
37 
IFMS remained at risk in case of disasters. Department did not formulate any IT security 
policy. In absence of documented policies, users were free to handle security related 
issues in their own manner which could pose risks to IT security of IFMS. 
4.5 Recommendations 
 The Department should expedite the process of creating and updating government 
email Ids for remaining DDOs in IFMS. 
 The Department should formulate Business Continuity Plan and set up Disaster 
Recovery site to ensure that the system runs smoothly and resumes its operations 
within definite time period in case of disasters and other emergency events. 
 The Department should review and test the backup restore activity on regular basis 
so that data can be restored if inadvertently destroyed or lost. 
 The Department should formulate an IT security policy for security of IT assets, 
software and data, backup, data retention and disposal etc. 
Dehradun 
The 10 April 2024   
(PRAVINDRA YADAV) 
Principal Accountant General (Audit), 
Uttarakhand 
Countersigned 
New Delhi  
The 26 April 2024    
(GIRISH CHANDRA MURMU) 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 

Appendices  

39 
Appendix-1.1 
(Reference: Paragraph-1.1; Page-1) 
 
List of Treasuries/Sub-Treasuries 
 
Sl. No. District Treasury Treasury Sub-Treasury 
1 Sadar Treasury Dehradun   
1-Chakrata 
2-Mussoorie 
3-Tyuni 
4-Rishikesh 
5-Vikasnagar 
2 Sadar Treasury Nainital   
1-Betalghat 
2-Koshyakutoli 
3-Ramanagar 
4-Kaladhungi 
5-Dhari 
3 Sadar Treasury Almora   
1-Chaukhutiya 
2-Dwarahat 
3-Deghat 
4-Maulekhal 
5-Lamgada 
6-Takula 
7-Danya 
8-Bhikiyasen 
9-Someshwar 
4 Sadar Treasury Pithoragarh   
1-Berinag 
2-Didihat 
3-Ganaigangoli 
4-Dharchula 
5-Gangolihat 
6-Munsiyari 
7-Thal 
8-Askot 
9-Nachni 
10-Dewalthal 
5 Sadar Treasury Gopeshwar, Chamoli   
1-Chamoli 
2-Joshimath 
3-Karnprayag 
4-Pokhri 
5-Gairsain 
6-Tharali 
7-Dewal 
8-Narayanbagad 
9-Ghat 
6 Sadar Treasury Uttarkashi   
1-Purola 
2-Bhatwadi 
3-Badkot 
4-Dunda 
7 Sadar Treasury Pauri Garhwal   
1-Srinagar 
2-Thalisan 
3-Dhoomakot 
4-Satpuli 
8 Sadar Treasury New Tehri   
1-Ghansali 
2-Thatyud 
3-Pratapnagar 

Performance Audit Report on Integrated Financial Management System for the year ended 31 March 2022 
40 
Sl. No. District Treasury Treasury Sub-Treasury 
4-Devprayag 
5-Nainbag 
9 Sadar Treasury Haridwar   1-Haridwar 
2-Laksar 
10 Sadar Treasury Udham Singh Nagar   
1-Jaspur 
2-Kashipur 
3-Bajpur 
4-Gadarpur 
5-Kiccha 
6-Sitarganj 
7-Khatima 
11 Sadar Treasury Champawat   
1-Lohaghat 
2-Pati 
3-Tanakpur 
12 Sadar Treasury Bageshwar   
1-Kapkot 
2-Kanda 
3-Garud 
4-Dungnakuri 
13 Sadar Treasury Rudraprayag   
1-Agastmuni 
2-Ukhimath 
3-Jakholi 
14 Other Treasuries 
1-Roorkee   
2-Kotdwar   
3-Lansdowne   
4-Narendra Nagar   
5-Ranikhet   
6-Haldwani   
Total  13 6 70 
15 Pay and Accounts Office, New Delhi 
16 Cyber Treasury, Dehradun 
Grand Total 91 
 
  

Appendices 
41 
Appendix-1.2 
(Reference: Paragraph-1.1; Page-1) 
 
List of applications integrated with IFMS 
 
Sl. No Name of Application 
1.  Reserve Bank of India 
2.  State Bank of India 
3.  Goods and Services Network (GSTN) 
4.  National Securities Depository Limited (NSDL) 
5.  Public Financial Management System (PFMS) 
6.  CDAC 
7.  Jeevan Praman 
8.  NIC-SMS Gateway 
9.  NIC-Email Gateway 
10.  Stock Holding Corporation of India Limited 
11.  Social Welfare Department 
12.  State Tax Department 
13.  Excise Department 
14.  Directorate of Industries 
15.  Police Department 
16.  Planning Department 
17.  National Scholarship Portal 
18.  PSARA 
19.  National Payment Corporation of India (NPCI) throug h SFTP 
20.  National Payment Corporation of India (NPCI) throug h API 
21.  Digi Locker 
22.  Apuni Sarkar 
23.  State Government Health Scheme (SGHS) 
  

Performance Audit Report on Integrated Financial Management System for the year ended 31 March 2022 
42 
Appendix-1.3 
(Reference: Paragraph-1.8; Page-4) 
 
List of modules 
 
Sl. No. Module Proposed Functionality Requirements 
1 Pay Roll 
1.  Information of Employee Master, Nominee Details 
2.  Information of Pay, Entitlements, Loan & Claims 
3.  Monthly Attendance 
4.  Monthly Regular Salary Processing 
5.  Monthly Supplementary Salary Processing 
6.  Monthly Salary Arrears Processing 
7.  Salary Bill Generation 
8.  Employees Pay Slip Generation 
9.  Employees Annual Statement 
10.  Last Pay Certificate Generation 
11.  Schedule of Advances, Recoveries, Loans etc. 
12.  Bank Schedule 
13.  Other Analytical Reports for MIS 
2 Claims 
1.  Online Claims Bill Submission by Employees for various personal 
nature claims as per entitlements 
2.  Processing of Claims at treasury 
3.  MIS of Claims 
3 Pension 
Disbursement 
1.  Information of Pensioner Master, Nominee Details 
2.  Monthly Pension Processing 
3.  Monthly Pension Arrears Processing 
4.  Pension Bill Generation 
5.  Last Pay Certificate Generation 
6.  Life Time Arrear Payment Calculation for Death Case s 
7.  First Payment Processing 
8.  Pensioners Slip Generation 
9.  Pensioners Annual Statement Generation 
10.  Generation of Various Schedules 
11.  Other Analytical Report for MIS 
12.  Capturing of Biometric & Photo for Annual Verification 
13.  Online Verification of Pensioners annually 
4 Income Tax 
1.  Generation of Form 16 
2.  Generation of Form 16 A 
3.  Generation of Form 24 Q 
4.  Generation of Form 26 Q 
5.  Income Tax Calculator for Employees & Pensioners 
6.  Generation of Form 24 G 
7.  Online Submission of required return through Treasu ry Portal 
5 E-Payment 
1.  Preparation of Beneficiary and transaction files generated from 
various modules for uploading in net banking 
2.  Provision of Validation before upload 
3.  Integration of Treasury Portal with Bank Server through SFTP 
4.  Integration of payment gateways 
5.  MIS 
6 HRMS 
1.  Employees Service Book Maintenance 
2.  Employees Leave Details 
3.  Employees Corrector Rolls Maintenance 
4.  Generation of Appointment orders, Transfer Orders & Retirement 
Orders 
5.  Annual Character Reports (ACR) 

Appendices 
43 
Sl. No. Module Proposed Functionality Requirements 
6.  Employees Property Return Maintenance 
1.  MIS 
7 Works 
Accounting 
2.  Online issue of CCL 
3.  Online Generation of Works Bills 
4.  Generation of Accounts for AG Submission 
5.  Generation of Schedules of Recoveries & Advances 
6.  Generation of Asset and Liability Register 
7.  Maintenance of Budget and Balances under CCL/DCL 
8.  e-payment to Contractors 
9.  MIS 
8 PLA 
1.  Online Deposit of money in PLA 
2.  Online Payment to third Parties 
3.  Generation of Schedules of Recoveries & Advances 
4.  Generation of Asset and Liability Register 
5.  Maintenance of Budget and Balances 
6.  e-payment 
7.  MIS 
9 Receipt 
Accounting 
1.  Integration of e-scroll received from Agency Bank 
2.  Data Entry of Physical Challan 
3.  Generation of Receipt Account 
4.  Generation of Receipt Cash Book 
5.  Generation of Cash Account with enclosures 
6.  CCL, DCL, PLA Receipt Accounting 
7.  MIS 
10 Payment 
Accounting 
1.  Integration of e-payment scroll received from Agency Bank 
2.  Generation of Report KA 
3.  Generation of Report KHA 
4.  Generation of Report GA 
5.  Generation of Cash Book 
6.  Generation of List of Payment with enclosures 
7.  Generation of Payment Account 
8.  CCL, DCL,PLA Payment Account 
9.  Generation of Schedules for e-payments 
10.  MIS 
11 GIS 
1.  Claim Listing 
2.  Calculation Sheet 
3.  Objection Letter 
4.  Form 26 
5.  Form 27 
6.  Form 28 (Claim Register) 
7.  Form 29 (Covering Letter) 
8.  Pending Claim List 
9.  Schedule for e-payment 
10.  Integration and up gradation to a web enabled appli cation 
11.  MIS 
12 GPF 
1.  Annual GPF Slip Processing 
2.  Online GPF Claim Submission 
3.  Broad Sheet Maintenance 
4.  Interest Calculations 
5.  GPF Accounting 
6.  MIS 
13 Virtual Treasury 1.  Online integration with the Bankers and RBI to capt ure receipt data 
on run time 

Performance Audit Report on Integrated Financial Management System for the year ended 31 March 2022 
44 
Sl. No. Module Proposed Functionality Requirements 
2.  Online verification of e-transactions 
3.  MIS 
14 DDO 
1.  Online Generation of various Bill forms used by the DDO 
2.  Online Generation of Employee claims 
3.  Online Generation of GPF Claims 
4.  Online Generation of GIS Bills 
5.  Online Generation of Pension Papers for Retiring Employees 
6.  Maintenance of Cash Book and other Register through System 
7.  Reconciliation of Drawls with the Treasuries 
8.  MIS 
15 e-Challan 
1.  Online Collection of all government receipts, Taxes, duties, 
penalties and cess 
2.  Site to site integration with other department's web site 
3.  Online reconciliation of receipts collected through e-Challan 
4.  Online Generation of e-stamp to pay stamp duty 
5.  MIS 
16 Registration 
1.  Online Application Submission for Registration & Renewal of 
Societies & chits firms 
2.  Online Collection of fees 
3.  Online additional information required it, form applicant 
4.  Online information to applicant about issuing of certificates 
5.  Online appointment for Applicants 
6.  Data entry for Registration & Renewal 
7.  Duplicity check 
8.  Name matching 
9.  Generation of Registration & Renewal Certificates 
10.  Digitization of records 
11.  Generation of Amendments requests 
12.  MIS 
17 Pension Sanction 
1.  Online submission of pension documents by DDO to pe nsion 
Director 
2.  Online submission of PPO to Treasuries & Sub Treasu ries using 
Digital Signature 
3.  Online Pension Sanctioning 
4.  Generation of PPO, GPO, CPO 
5.  Online Calculation of Pension 
6.  Online Calculation of revised Pension 
7.  Electronic routing of application for necessary approval 
8.  Integration of email and SMS gateway 
9.  Monthly pension payment analysis vis-à-vis sanctions 
10.  MIS 
11.  Digitization of records 
18 GIS 
1.  Online Account preparation from payments made by treasuries 
2.  Online analysis of payment made by treasuries 
3.  Online maintenance of AIS (All India Services) acco unts 
4.  Online payment of the premium 
5.  Online request for claims from AIS accounts 
6.  MIS 
19 IRLA 
1.  Maintenance of Service History and Service Book of entitled 
officers 
2.  Generation of Pay slip 
3.  Online application for issuance of Pay Slips 
4.  MIS 

Appendices 
45 
Sl. No. Module Proposed Functionality Requirements 
20 NPS 
1.  Maintenance of Master of NPS Employees 
2.  Online Claim Processing 
3.  Online Contribution Matching based on the data rece ived from the 
Treasuries 
4.  Online uploading of the monthly CPSN using FUV to N SDL 
website 
5.  MIS 
21 Budget 
Preparation 
1.  Entry of Gazetted and Non-Gazetted Posts Details (Volume 6) 
2.  Entry of Expenditure detail (Volume 5) 
3.  Actual Expenditure 
4.  Deduct & refund 
5.  Revised estimates 
6.  Entry of State Receipt details (Volume 4) 
7.  Contingency & Public Accounts 
8.  Generation of Vote on Account 
9.  Updation of Vote on Account 
10.  Details of Supplementary Budget 
11.  Entry of New Demands 
12.  Online submission of estimates using the web based interface 
13.  Inbuilt rules, checks and the request would automatically get routed 
for approval 
14.  Provision for providing online comments and remarks  
15.  Comments and editing done during the approval proce ss would be 
visible till finalization 
16.  System would assist Budget Department in scrutinizing the 
estimates on the basis of state resource plan and past data available 
17.  Integration with Resource planning module 
18.  Generation of alerts on irregularities like unexpected variation in 
estimates 
19.  Online submission of budget estimates by DDO to HOD  
20.  Online submission of budget estimates by HOD to Adm inistrative 
Department 
21.  Online submission of budget estimates by Administrative 
Department to Finance Section 
22.  Online submission by Finance Department to Budget Department 
22 Budget 
Disbursement 
1.  Records Head-wise Government Approved budget as rec eived from 
State Government 
2.  Records the Allocation Authority related data as re ceived from State 
Government 
3.  Records the New expenditure related data for the current Financial year 
4.  Reports 
5.  DDO-wise Head-wise budget allocation 
6.  Treasury-wise consolidated budget allocation 
7.  Re-appropriation budget 
8.  Surrender of Budget 
9.  Budget Control Register (BM-10) 
10.  Import/ Enter Monthly Expenditure Register (BM-4) o f the DDO 
11.  Register of Expenditure (BM-6) 
12.  Statement of Progressive Expenditure (BM-8) 
13.  Exceptional Reporting Head-wise for unutilized heads 
14.  Online Grant distributions to Admin Dept., their controlling officers 
and Drawing and disbursement officers within the limit of approved 
budget 

Performance Audit Report on Integrated Financial Management System for the year ended 31 March 2022 
46 
Sl. No. Module Proposed Functionality Requirements 
15.  MIS for monitoring of expenditure w.r.t Allocated Grant and budget 
23 Budget 
Maintenance 
1.  Amendment in 15 digit code 
2.  Maintenance of profile like User, Admin etc. 
3.  Upload data 
4.  Integration and up gradation to a web enabled appli cation 
24 CPSMS 
1.  Integrate the Central Plan Schemes Monitoring Syste m with the 
Treasury Portal to exchange the data between Central and State 
2.  MIS 
25 AG Module 
1.  Online verification of data processed by Treasuries on various 
parameters 
2.  Preparation of State Classified Account 
3.  Online processing and Sanctioning of GPF to State government 
employees 
4.  Accounting of GPF and Loan disbursed to the government 
employees 
5.  Online processing and Sanctioning of Pensions of other state 
pensioners 
6.  Calculation of interest on GPF, loans and advances 
7.  Online Reimbursement and Accounting of other state pension claims 
paid from state treasuries 
8.  Compilation and preparation of works account submitted by works 
Department like PWD, Irrigation, Forest etc. 
9.  Online payments of various payments on behalf of State 
Government 
10.  Online reconciliation of budget, releases and expenditure 
 

Abbreviations  

47 
List of Abbreviations 
 
Sl. No.  Abbreviation  Description of Abbreviated Term  
1.   A&E  Accounts and Entitlement  
2.   AC Bill  Abstract  Contingency Bill  
3.   ACR  Annual Character Reports  
4.   ACST  Account Statement  
5.   AG  Accountant General  
6.   AIS  All India Services  
7.   API  Application Programming Interface  
8.   BCP  Business Continuity Plan  
9.   BE  Budget Estimates  
10.   BPR  Business process Re -engineering  
11.   CA  Cash Account  
12.   CCL  Cash Credit Limit  
13.   CDAC  Centre for Development of Advanced Computing  
14.   CPO  Commutation Payment Orders  
15.   CPSMS  Central Plan Scheme Monitoring System   
16.   CTS  Core Treasury System  
17.   DBA  Database Administrator  
18.   DC Bill  Detailed Contingency Bill  
19.   DCL  Deposit Credit Limit  
20.   DDO  Drawing and Disbursing Officer  
21.   DN  Debit Note  
22.   DPR  Detailed Project Report  
23.   DR  Disaster Recovery  
24.   DTPE  Director, Treasury, Pension and Entitlement  
25.   FD  Finance Department  
26.   FDC  Finance Data Centre  
27.   FRS  Functional Requirement Specifications  
28.   GIS  Group Insurance Scheme  
29.   GO  Government Orders  
30.   GoI  Government of India  
31.   GoU  Government of Uttarakhand  
32.   GPF  General Provident Fund  
33.   GPO  Gratuity Payment Orders  
34.   GST  Goods and Service Tax  
35.   GSTN  Goods and Service Tax Network  
36.   HBA  House Building Advance  
37.   HLD  High Level Design  
38.   HOD  Head of Department  
39.   ID  Identity Document  
40.   IFMS  Integrated Financial Management System  
41.   IFSC  Indian Financial System Code  
42.   IPS  Intrusion Prevention System  
43.   IRLA  Individual Running Ledger Account  
44.   IT  Information Technology  

Performance Audit Report on Integrated Financial Management System for the year ended 31 March 2022  
48 
45.   ITDA  Information Technology Development Agency  
46.   IWS  Indus Web Solutions Private Limited  
47.   LLD  Low Level Design  
48.   LOP  List of Payment  
49.   LPC  Last Pay Certificate  
50.   LTC  Leave Travel Concession  
51.   MIS  Management Information System  
52.   MMP  Mission Mode Project  
53.   MoU  Memorandum of Understanding  
54.   NeGP  National e -Governance Plan  
55.   NIC  National Informatics Centre  
56.   NPCI  National Payment Corporation of India  
57.   NPS  National Pension System  
58.   NSDL  National Securities Depository Limited  
59.   OPGM  Online PRAN Generation Module  
60.   OTP  One Time Password  
61.   PAO  Pay and Account Office  
62.   PSARA  Private Security Agency Regulation Act  
63.   PDF  Portable Document Format  
64.   PFMS  Public Financial Management System  
65.   PLA  Personal Ledger Account  
66.   PPO  Pension Pay Orders  
67.   PRAN  Permanent Retirement  Account Number  
68.   PWD  Public Works Department  
69.   RBD  Reserve for Bad Debt  
70.   RBI  Reserve Bank of India  
71.   RFP  Request for proposal  
72.   RN  Return Note  
73.   SBI  State Bank of India  
74.   SDC  State Data Centre  
75.   SDLC  Software Development Lifecycle  
76.   SFTP  Secure File Transfer Protocol  
77.   SGHS  State Government Health Scheme  
78.   SHCIL  Stock  Holding Corporation of India Limited  
79.   SMS  Short Messaging System  
80.   SOP  Standard Operating Procedure  
81.   SoR  Schedule of Receipts  
82.   SPeMT  State Project e -Mission Team  
83.   SRS  Software Requirement Specifications  
84.   STQC  Standardizations Testing Quality Certification  
85.   TAN  Tax Collection Account Number  
86.   TBIL  Techno Brain India Private Limited  
87.   UAT  User Acceptance testing  
88.   UKSWAN  Uttarakhand State Wide Area Network  
89.   UTR  Unique Transaction Reference   
90.   VLC  Voucher Level Computerisation  
 