© COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA 
PERFORMANCE AUDIT ON SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT IN URBAN AREAS OF MEGHALAYA—  REPORT NO. 2 OF 2024
2024
www.cag.gov.in/ag/meghalaya/en
lR;eso t;rs
Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India
Performance Audit 
on 
Solid Waste Management in Urban Areas of 
Meghalaya
for the year ended 31 March 2022
Government of Meghalaya
Report No. 2 of 2024


Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India
Performance Audit
 on 
Solid Waste Management in Urban Areas of 
Meghalaya
for the year ended 31 March 2022
Government of Meghalaya
Report No. 2 of 2024

i
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Paragraph Contents Page 
Preface v
Executive Summary vii
Chapter I Introduction
1.1 Definition and classification of waste 1
1.2 Waste Management hierarchy 1
1.3 Regulatory Framework 2
1.4 Organisational Set-up for Management of Solid Waste in the 
Urban  Area
2
Chapter II Audit Framework
2.1 Introduction: Why did we take up this Audit? 5
2.2 Audit Objectives 5
2.3 Audit Criteria 5
2.4 Scope of Audit, Audit Sample and Audit Methodology 6
2.5 Acknowledgement 7
Chapter III Institutional Mechanisms for Solid Waste Management in 
Meghalaya
3.1 Introduction 9
3.2 Notification of State Policy by Urban Affairs Department 11
3.3 Framing of Bye Laws 12
3.4 Preparation of Solid Waste Management (SWM) Plans by 
Urban Local Bodies (ULBs)
12
3.5 Role of Town Committees in Census Town Areas 14
3.6 Preparation of Contingency Plans 15
3.7 Periodical review of SWM Rules by Urban Affairs 
Department
15
3.8 Assessment of waste generation in urban areas 16
3.9 Maintenance of SWM data by Meghalaya State Pollution 
Control Board (MSPCB)
18
3.10 Availability of supervisory posts for SWM purposes 19
3.11 Training of SWM Staff 21
3.12 Integration of informal waste collectors in waste 
management
22
3.13 Achievement of Service Level Benchmark 23
3.14 Conclusion 25

Performance Audit on Solid Waste Management in Urban Areas of Meghalaya
ii
Paragraph Contents Page 
Chapter IV Financial Management
4.1 Introduction 27
4.2 Sources of funds 27
4.3 Municipal Finances 30
4.4 Collection of User charges 32
4.5 Conclusion 34
Chapter V Segregation, collection and transportation of waste
5.1 Segregation 35
5.2 Collection of solid municipal waste 39
5.3 Infrastructure for Collection and Transportation of municipal 
solid waste
42
5.4 Conclusion 46
Chapter VI Processing and Disposal of Municipal Solid Waste
6.1 Status of Waste Processing in Meghalaya 49
6.2 Value Chain in Waste Processing 50
6.3 Integration of the informal sector in recycling process 51
6.4 Status of Composting 53
6.5 Dumping of Municipal Waste 58
6.6 Open dumping of waste 66
6.7 Conclusion 66
Chapter VII Management of Construction & Demolition Waste, Bio–Medical 
Waste, E-waste and Plastic Waste
7.1 Construction & Demolition Waste 69
7.2 Bio Medical Waste 71
7.3 E-Waste 74
7.4 Plastic Waste 77
7.5 Conclusion 80
Chapter VIII Conclusion & Recommendations
8.1 Conclusion 81
8.2 Recommendations 83

Table of Contents
iii
Appendix
Number
Details Page
Number
Appendix I Details of urban towns in Meghalaya as per Census 2011 87
Appendix II Position of supervisory posts in selected ULBs/Town 
Committee vis-à-vis the recommendations of the MSWM 
manual 2016
88
Appendix III Expenditure incurred on dumping of waste in private lands 
by JMB during the period from January 2022 to March 
2023
89
APPENDICES

v
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This Stand Alone Report of the Comptroller and Auditor 
General of India containing the results of Performance Audit 
on ‘Solid Waste Management in Urban Areas of Meghalaya’ 
for the period from 2017-18 to 2021-22 has been prepared for 
submission to the Governor of Meghalaya under Article 151 of 
the Constitution of India.
The Performance Audit was conducted to evaluate whether 
management of municipal solid waste and special waste 
(including plastic waste, e-waste, bio-medical waste and 
construction & demolition waste) was carried out according to 
existing statutes and legislations.
Audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing 
Standards issued by the Comptroller and Auditor General of 
India.
PREFACE

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Efficient management of different types of solid waste generated by rapidly growing 
towns and cities across the country is the need of the hour. With ever increasing 
population and growing consumerism, solid waste management has become an important 
issue concerning legislators and the public alike. Integrated waste reduction policies 
along with introduction of new and innovative solutions are the key to minimise the 
detrimental effects of improper solid waste management (SWM) on the environment 
and human health.
 Scope of Audit
A performance audit on ‘Solid Waste Management in Urban Areas of Meghalaya’ for 
the period 2017-18 to 2021-22 was conducted to evaluate whether the management 
of municipal solid waste (MSW) and special  waste (including plastic waste, e-waste, 
bio-medical waste and construction & demolition waste) was carried out according 
to existing statutes and legislations. It involved examination of the records relating to 
SWM in the Directorate of Urban Affairs, State Investment Project Management and 
Implementation Unit (SIPMIU), Meghalaya Urban Development Authority (MUDA), 
the Meghalaya State Pollution Control Board (MSPCB), Deputy Commissioners, 
Municipal Boards, Town Committees and Traditional Institutions (ADCs and Dorbar 
Shnongs) in the selected urban areas.
(Paragraph 2.4)
	 Delay	in	notifying	State	Policy	by	Urban	 Affairs	Department
The performance audit showed that there was a delay in notifying the Meghalaya 
State Waste Management Policy and Strategy, despite the SWM Rules, 2016 reflected 
lackadaisical approach of Urban Affairs Department in implementing the waste 
management rules.  Further, the State Government was yet to approve the State 
Policy on Construction & Demolition (C&D) Waste even after a delay of almost five 
years. The delay in notification and approval of requisite legislations has inhibited the 
implementation of SWM activities.
(Paragraph 3.2 & 7.1.1) 
 Framing of Bye Laws 
None of the Municipal Boards in Meghalaya, and two autonomous district councils, 
namely, JHADC and GHADC, had framed bye-laws for implementing SWM Rules 2016, 
while the KHADC had only notified the Khasi Hills Autonomous District (SWM) Act, 
2020 in February 2022, rendering the implementation of SWM Rules 2016 ineffective 
due to the absence of legally empowering bye-laws.
(Paragraph 3.3) 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Performance Audit on Solid Waste Management in Urban Areas of Meghalaya
viii
 Non- Preparation of Solid Waste Management Plans by Urban Local Bodies 
Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) in Meghalaya were required to prepare comprehensive 
short-term and long-term Solid Waste Management (SWM) plans aligned with the State 
policy. However, the selected Municipal Boards, Town Committees, and Census Towns 
have failed to develop such plans within the stipulated timelines, with only Shillong 
having submitted a City Solid Waste Action Plan that awaits approval. Absence of SWM 
Plans indicated that ULBs had not set any short-term or long -term goals and targets 
absence of targets and goals for implementing the SWM Rules in Meghalaya.
(Paragraph 3.4)
 Inadequate enforcement of SWM Rules in Town Committees and Census 
Town Areas
In Meghalaya, jurisdiction of the Town Committees and Census Towns was not vested 
upon the Urban Affairs Department. Rather, these areas (47 per cent of the total urban 
population) are governed by the concerned ADCs. Annual Reports were not submitted 
by the Town Committees and Census Towns to the Director, Urban Affairs Department 
nor to the MSPCB. As a result, there was no data available with the MSPCB regarding 
SWM in these areas. Although the Deputy Commissioners were directed to ensure 
timely submission of Annual Reports by all Town Committees under their respective 
jurisdiction in a meeting chaired by the Chief Secretary (August 2019), no reports have 
however been submitted by the Town Committees/Census Towns during the period 
covered by audit.
(Paragraph 3.5)
 Non-Preparation of Contingency Plans
The failure of the test-checked urban areas in Meghalaya to develop contingency plans 
for waste storage, as stipulated by the MSWM Manual 2016, left them unprepared to 
address unforeseen crises like waste transportation disruptions and waste accumulation 
on streets of Jowai leading to public protest.
(Paragraph 3.6)
	 Periodical	review	of	SWM	Rules	by	Urban	 Affairs	Department	
Though the Urban Affairs Department in-charge of implementing SWM and Plastic 
Waste Management Rules established State Level Advisory Committees for periodic 
review of implementation of SWM Rules 2016, absence of records of such meetings 
indicated that these committees were largely non-functional.
(Paragraph 3.7)
 Inadequate assessment of waste generation
A comprehensive assessment of waste generation using well-defined metrics is crucial 
for effective Solid Waste Management, however, lack of reliable data collection and 

Executive Summary
ix
periodic surveys in urban areas, along with discrepancies in waste estimation methods, 
indicated deficiencies in planning and coordination. 
(Paragraph 3.8)
 Maintenance of SWM data by MSPCB 
The effective management of solid waste relies on accurate data collection and analysis, 
yet discrepancies between waste generation and collection figures reported by the 
Meghalaya State Pollution Control Board (MSPCB) and information provided by tested 
Urban Local Bodies (ULBs), along with the absence of data from Town Committees 
and Census Towns, underscore issues of data accuracy, completeness, and reliability.
(Paragraph 3.9)
 Availability of supervisory posts for SWM purposes
The inadequate availability of supervisory staff, falling significantly short of the 
recommendations outlined in the MSWM Manual 2016, has adversely affected the 
ability of the selected Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) and Town Committee in Meghalaya 
to effectively manage solid waste activities, including collection and disposal.
(Paragraph 3.10)
	 Training	of	SWM	Staff	
Unsatisfactory training and capacity-building initiatives for staff involved in Municipal 
Solid Waste Management (MSWM) activities across various selected Urban Local 
Bodies (ULBs) in Meghalaya, resulted in operational inefficiencies and issues like 
mixing of segregated waste during collection, transportation, and processing.
(Paragraph 3.11)
 Integration of informal waste collectors in waste management
The recognition and integration of the informal waste sector, including waste pickers and 
collectors, into the formal waste management system has been inadequately addressed 
in Meghalaya.
(Paragraph 3.12)
 Achievement of Service Level Benchmark
The Service Level Benchmarking (SLB) initiative launched by the Ministry of Urban 
Development aims to monitor urban services, but despite notification for Shillong 
Municipal Board (SMB), SLBs for other Municipal Boards were not established, and 
SMB’s performance in meeting SLB targets was generally below benchmarks.
(Paragraph 3.13)
 Sources of fund
During the period from 2017-18 to 2021-22 in Meghalaya, the State Government heavily 
relied on external funding (Asian Development Bank) and Central grants, while the 

Performance Audit on Solid Waste Management in Urban Areas of Meghalaya
x
budgetary support from the State budget as agencies’ own resources contributed only a 
minor share towards financing of Solid Waste Management activities.
 (Paragraph 4.2)
 Municipal Finances
The financial resources of the six Municipal Boards in Meghalaya from 2017-18 to 
2021-22, primarily consisted of their own revenue, Central Finance Commission (CFC) 
transfers and State Grants-in-Aid, but a significant gap between operating revenue 
and operating expenses for Solid Waste Management (SWM) activities exists due 
to insufficient collection of user charges, indicating the need for improved revenue 
generation and strict enforcement of SWM charges.
 (Paragraph 4.3)
 Collection of User charges
Despite the provision in SWM Rules and local bye-laws for the collection of user fees 
from households to cover solid waste management costs, most Municipal Boards did 
not collect user fee resulting in a significant loss of potential revenue that could have 
helped offset operating losses incurred in SWM activities.
(Paragraph 4.4)
 Segregation of waste at source in the urban areas
Insufficient segregation of solid waste at source by households and institutions and 
no facilities for segregating domestic hazardous waste indicated weak enforcement 
of SWM Rules in Meghalaya, on one hand, and other hand an absence of effective 
awareness raising programmed among the households and citizens. Despite distribution 
of dual-coloured household bins for source segregation of waste, the effectiveness of 
segregation of waste at source was inadequate. Data available with the department on 
waste segregation at source was unreliable. 
(Paragraph 5.1.1)
 Segregation of domestic hazardous waste and sanitary waste
Absence of notified lists of hazardous waste items, and failure to establish waste 
deposition centers as required by regulations, and inadequate awareness resulted in non- 
implementation of source segregation and management of domestic hazardous waste.
 (Paragraph 5.1.2)
 Extent of collection of municipal waste at source 
Municipal Boards and Dorbar shnongs played primary role in collection of municipal 
waste from households under Municipal areas and most ULBs reported almost hundred  
per cent  collection of municipal waste at source, absence of a reliable system for 
assessment of quantum of waste imposed limitation on the reliability of the data 
available, including absence of weighbridges methods, including the absence of 

Executive Summary
xi
functioning weighbridges, has led to uncertainties in quantifying the actual amount of 
waste collected, raising concerns about waste management accuracy and effectiveness.
 (Paragraph 5.2.1)
 Infrastructure for Collection and Transportation of municipal solid waste
Lack of source segregation in the tested urban areas resulted in mixed waste being sent 
to treatment facilities, leading to manual sorting by informal workers during processing 
and disposal, consequently affecting the quality of processed waste.
(Paragraph 5.2.2)
 Facilities for waste collectors and handlers
Vehicles utilised for transportation of waste were not equipped with the necessary 
specifications such as partitions for segregated waste and management information 
systems. As such, waste was mixed during transportation and effective monitoring of 
the whole process was non-existent.
(Paragraph 5.3.1)
 Monitoring of transportation vehicles through Management Information 
System
The ULBs and Autonomous District Councils in Meghalaya were ill-equipped to 
manage and monitor transport vehicles carrying municipal waste from collection points 
to dumping sites. Absence of Management Information Systems (MIS) and essential 
facilities in waste transportation vehicles, along with the lack of GPS and GIS, limited 
their capacity for identification of garbage vulnerable points and regulated movement of 
transport vehicles as part of solid waste management services.
(Paragraph 5.3.2)
 Status of Waste Processing in Meghalaya
Test check of urban agglomerations revealed that significant portion (70 per cent to 98 
per cent) of municipal waste ended up in landfills without any processing.  
(Paragraph 6.1)
 Integration of the informal sector in recycling process
Despite the presence of recycling initiatives in certain urban areas, such as Shillong and 
Tura, the proper functioning and integration of waste recovery centers and recyclers 
into the solid waste management system, as required by SWM Rules, 2016, have been 
lacking, leading to suboptimal recycling efforts.
(Paragraph 6.3)
 Compost plant in Nongpoh
The Nongpoh solid waste management project, sanctioned under JnNURM, faced 
delays and remained incomplete, with the composting facility and associated structures 

Performance Audit on Solid Waste Management in Urban Areas of Meghalaya
xii
left unused and unfunctional, despite payments for civil works and machinery which led 
to wasteful expenditure of ₹ 4.48 crore.
(Paragraph 6.4.1)
 Compost Plant in Tura
The Tura solid waste management project sanctioned under JnNURM, including a 
compost plant, faced delays and remained incomplete, with the composting facilities 
and associated structures left unused and the machinery not utilized as intended, despite 
payments for civil works and commissioning which led to wasteful expenditure of 
₹ 5.16 crore.
(Paragraph 6.4.2)
 Compost plant in Shillong
The compost plant installed at Marten landfill site in Shillong was handed over to the 
Shillong Municipal Board (SMB) but experienced underutilization due to challenges in 
source segregation, lack of marketing efforts, and issues with compost quality, resulting 
in a production far below its capacity. 
(Paragraph 6.4.3)
	 Identification	 and	acquisition	of	suitable	land	for	sanitary	landfill	and	other	
waste management facilities.
The Solid Waste Management Rules mandated the identification and allocation of 
suitable land for waste processing, but despite the reconstitution of a Task Force 
Committee and recommendations for certain areas, the acquisition process for the 
required land in multiple urban areas including Shillong, Tura, and Jowai was still 
pending as of May 2023.
(Paragraph 6.5.1)
	 Availability	and	Landfill	Capacity	of	the	 Waste	Disposal	Sites
Despite the establishment of Task Force Committees and the stipulation under Solid 
Waste Management Rules, none of the four tested urban areas have successfully acquired 
suitable land for processing and disposal facilities for solid waste, with only Tura having 
initiated the acquisition process among the three identified areas.
(Paragraph 6.5.2)
 Open dumping of waste
Waste generators in certain areas were observed to be violating Rule 4(2) of the Solid 
Waste Management Rules, 2016 by dumping waste in open spaces and water bodies, 
as seen during Joint Physical Verifications and reported in news articles, causing both 
environmental degradation and health risks.
(Paragraph 6.6)

Executive Summary
xiii
 Meghalaya State Policy on Construction and Demolition Waste
Delay in finalizing and approving the Meghalaya State Policy on Construction & 
Demolition (C&D) Waste, along with the lack of direction from relevant authorities, 
has hindered the implementation of C&D Waste Management Rules 2016 in the 
State.
(Paragraph 7.1.1)
 Comparison between Meghalaya SWM Bye Law and C&D Waste Management 
Rules 2016
As per information furnished by MSPCB, there were 142 unauthorised Health Care 
Facilities in the state in 2020. Data for 2021-22 was not available even though called 
for.
(Paragraph 7.1.2)
 Authorisation status of Health Care Establishments
Healthcare facilities in Meghalaya showed a gradual decrease in unauthorized status 
from 2017 to 2020 under the Bio-Medical Waste Management Rules 2016, but MSPCB 
should ensure compliance of BMW Rules 2016 by all the HCFs in the state.
(Paragraph 7.2.1)
 Generation and treatment of Bio Medical Waste
Despite an increase in bio-medical waste (BMW) generation from 2017 to 2020, 
treatment by Common Bio-Medical Waste Treatment Facility (CBMWTF) surged from 
37 per cent to 76 per cent, while captive treatment declined. However, scrutiny revealed 
operational issues with the sole CBMWTF in Shillong, casting doubt on the accuracy of 
reported data provided by MSPCB to CPCB.
 (Paragraph 7.2.2)
 Disposal of Bio Medical Waste
Except for Shillong Municipal Board, the test-checked ULBs and Town Committees 
in Meghalaya lacked Common Bio-Medical Waste Treatment and Disposal Facilities 
(CBMWTF) as required by BMW Rules 2016, resulting in improper disposal practices 
that pose risks to public health and environmental contamination.
(Paragraph 7.2.3)
 MSPCB Status of CBMWF in Shillong
Non-functioning incinerator of CBMWTF Shillong attracted imposition of 
Environmental Compensation of ₹ 0.82 crore on Shillong Municipal Board by the 
CPCB.
(Paragraph 7.2.4)

Performance Audit on Solid Waste Management in Urban Areas of Meghalaya
xiv
 Producer Responsibility Organisation registered with MSPCB
In Meghalaya, there are three registered Producer Responsibility Organisations (PROs) 
based in Shillong responsible for collecting e-waste, but there was a lack of dedicated 
collection vehicles, insufficient storage facilities for categorization, and lack of 
awareness, hindering effective implementation of e-waste management as per E-Waste 
Rules 2016.
(Paragraph 7.3.1)
 Inventory of e-waste in the state of Meghalaya 
The Meghalaya State Pollution Control Board (MSPCB) has failed to maintain an 
inventory of e-waste generation as required by E-Waste (Management) Rules 2016, 
leading to a lack of comprehensive data for comparison with e-waste collection by 
Producer Responsibility Organisations (PROs).
(Paragraph 7.3.2)
 Disposal of E-Waste mixed with Municipal Solid Waste
E-Waste found to be mixed with Municipal Solid Waste in Tura solid waste disposal site 
in contradiction to the E-Waste (Management) Rules 2016.
(Paragraph 7.3.3)
 Status of submission of Annual Return of Plastic Waste
The plastic waste management reporting by ULBs has been inconsistent as evidenced 
by incomplete and delayed annual reports, discrepancies between submitted data and 
CPCB estimates, and the lack of MSPCB’s effective oversight and guidance to ensure 
accurate reporting.
(Paragraph 7.4.1)
 Setting up of infrastructure for plastic waste management
The selected ULBs and Town Committees in Meghalaya have not taken effective action 
to establish infrastructure for plastic waste management or provide accurate information 
on plastic waste, revealing a lack of commitment from both the local authorities and 
higher administrative bodies, while on-site observations demonstrate mixed disposal 
with MSW, limited segregation efforts, and challenges related to recycling capacity.
(Paragraph 7.4.2)

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER -I
INTRODUCTION

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

1.1	 Definition	and	classification	of	waste	
Waste are materials that are not prime products (that is, products produced for the 
market) for which the generator has no further use in terms of his/her own purposes of 
production, transformation or consumption, and of which he/she wants to dispose1. Waste 
Management is the collection, transportation, recovery and disposal of waste, including 
the supervision of such operations and after-care of disposal sites. Waste accumulation 
and its improper handling and disposal represent a major threat to the environment as 
also to the health of all living organisms. Waste is generally classified into municipal 
solid waste (MSW), bio-medical waste (BMW), construction and demolition (C&D) 
waste, e-waste, plastic waste, industrial waste and hazardous waste by virtue of their 
nature. Inadequate management of waste has significant negative externalities in terms 
of public health and environmental outcomes. Besides, it has an adverse impact on the 
aesthetic appearance of the surroundings.
1.2 Waste Management hierarchy
An ideal waste management strategy requires that municipal waste generated should not 
be simply disposed. Efforts should be made to recover value from the waste by various 
methods - recover for energy resource, composting etc. A typical waste management 
hierarchy is shown in Chart 1.1:
Chart 1.1: Waste Management Hierarchy2
 
1 Definition as per United Nations Statistics Division.
2 ‘Types of Recycling’ published by Nord Holding AD – https://nordholding.bg/en/news-en/types-of-
recycling.
Chapter-I
Introduction

Performance Audit on Solid Waste Management in Urban Areas of Meghalaya
2
1.3 Regulatory Framework
The Central Government has issued several notifications to regulate the prevention and 
control of waste in the country under the provisions of the Environment (Protection) Act, 
1986. These cover the management and handling of municipal, biomedical, hazardous 
and plastic waste, etc. Some of the Act and Rules enacted by GoI are given below:
	Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 (EP Act) was enacted by GoI as an umbrella 
Act to cover all the specific and general provisions relating to pollution of the 
environment including the management of hazardous, bio-medical and solid waste. 
Under this Act, GoI also notified the Environment (Protection) Rules in 1986;
	The Bio-Medical Waste (Management and Handling) Rules, 2016;
	Solid Waste Management (SWM) Rules, 2016;
	Plastics Waste Management Rules, 2016;
	E-Waste (Management) Rules, 2016.;
	Construction and Demolition Waste Management Rules, 2016.
In conformity with the Solid Waste Management Rules, 2016, Government of 
Meghalaya (GoM) had notified the Meghalaya State Waste Management Policy and 
Strategy in Urban Areas on 17 June 2019 and also framed the Meghalaya Solid Waste 
Management Bye Law, 2020 on 19 May 2020.
1.4 Organisational Set-up for Management of Solid Waste in the Urban Area
As per Census 2011, Meghalaya has 22 urban areas (settlement/towns), predominant 
being Shillong Urban Agglomeration which comprises of 12 towns viz., the Shillong 
Municipality, Shillong Cantonment and 103 census towns.
Chart 1.2: Map of urban areas in Meghalaya as per Census 2011
 
Source: Information available in department’ s website.
3 (i) Mawlai, (ii) Pynthorumkhrah, (iii) Nongmynsong, (iv) Mawpat, (v) Umpling, (vi) Nongthymmai, 
(vii) Madanriting, (viii) Lawsohtun, (ix) Nongkseh & (x) Umlyngka.

Chapter I: Introduction
3
The Urban Affairs Department, along with its parastatals is the nodal department for 
implementing policies and schemes pertaining to waste management in the urban areas. 
The administration of solid waste management is vested in the Municipal Boards. 
In Shillong, these responsibilities vest with Shillong Municipal Board for Shillong 
Municipal area and with the Cantonment Board in Shillong Cantonment area. The urban 
areas outside the Shillong Municipal Board or the Shillong Cantonment Boards, i.e. 
the census towns fall within the jurisdiction of the Khasi Autonomous District Council  
(as per Sixth Schedule provisions) which has delegated the task of solid waste 
management to the local traditional bodies, referred to as Dorbar Shnongs. 
Among the 10 other urban areas in the State, five fall under municipal boards, three are 
under town committees and two are census towns. The total population covered under 
these notified urban areas was 5,95,450 out of the total population of the state which was 
29,66,889 i.e. 20 per cent (Appendix I). 
As per the study conducted by North Eastern Hill University
4, average waste generation 
per person per day in an urban area was estimated at 341 gms./capita/day. Trend in 
quantum of solid waste generated in the urban areas 5 over past ten years is shown in 
Chart 1.3.
 
268.5 279.7
201.35 204.25 204.25
218.78 231.78
274.68
158.68 158.93
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Chart 1.3: Status of waste generation  in Meghalaya (in TPD)
Source: Meghalaya State Pollution Control Board6. 
Fluctuating trend in average tonnes per day (TPD) of urban waste generation is a 
reflection on unreliability/incompleteness of available data, rather than a real decrease 
in the quantum of urban waste generated, as commented later in this Report. According 
4 Estimate as per the Solid Waste Quantification & Characterisation study conducted by the Department 
of Environmental Studies, North Eastern Hill University, Shillong, Meghalaya during 2010 – 2011.
5 Figures submitted by MSPCB includes status of waste generation of six Municipal Boards and 
Shillong Cantonment Board.
6 In cases where the Annual Reports for a particular year were not submitted to MSPCB by ULBs, the 
figures of the previous year have been taken into account.
2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22
0 0

Performance Audit on Solid Waste Management in Urban Areas of Meghalaya
4
to the latest census projections available, the urban population of Meghalaya increased 
by 31.12 per cent during 2001-2011, and is expected to rise further. Accordingly, the 
urban waste is also likely to shown in increasing trend.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
CHAPTER -II
AUDIT FRAMEWORK

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

2.1  Introduction: Why did we take up this Audit?
Solid waste generation in Meghalaya, as per latest data available (March 2022), 
was reported to be 158.93 TPD, i.e. 58,009 metric tonnes annually. Management 
of solid waste in the urban areas of the State of Meghalaya has gained attention of 
the policy makers and citizens in recent years in view of various reports emanating 
in the Government Departments and in media regarding scarcity of dumping areas 
for municipal waste, inadequate waste processing facilities and rising instances of 
contamination of rivers in the State which serve as critical source of drinking water. 
Performance Audit (PA) of “Solid Waste Management in Urban Areas” was conducted 
with a view to assess the efficacy of government agencies involved in solid waste 
management over the entire life cycle of waste management, namely, whether the 
government had in place mechanisms to assess accurately and regularly  the quantum of 
different kinds of waste such as municipal solid waste, C&D waste, bio-medical waste, 
e-waste and plastic waste being generated in the urban areas , whether collection and 
disposal of waste was being done scientifically , whether facilities had been created for  
recycling, re-use and safe disposal of municipal solid waste, etc. Given the involvement 
of different agencies in the solid waste management in the State, Audit further sought 
to examine the role and accountability of each of the agencies involved. Issues covered 
in this PA have been examined against the legal framework, financial framework and 
operational guidelines embedded in various Acts, regulations and bye laws promulgated 
by the Union and the State governments in this regard. 
2.2  Audit Objectives
Performance Audit of Solid Waste Management in urban areas of Meghalaya was 
undertaken with the objective to assess whether:
1. A functional institutional mechanism was in place for solid waste management 
supported by adequate funding and there were effective policies/strategies for 
waste management in urban settlements in accordance with the Acts/Rules, etc.; 
2. The procedures for segregation, collection, transportation, processing and disposal 
of solid waste were carried out economically and scientifically; and 
3. There was an efficient monitoring and evaluation mechanism for regulating the 
provisions of the Acts/Rules.
2.3 Audit Criteria
Audit findings were benchmarked against the criteria sourced from the following:
	 Solid Waste Management Rules, 2016 and respective Manuals (Ministry of Urban 
Development);
Chapter-II
Audit Framework

Performance Audit on Solid Waste Management in Urban Areas of Meghalaya
6
	 Bio-Medical Waste (Management and Handling) Rules, 2016;
	 Plastics Waste Management Rules, 2016;
	 E-Waste (Management) Rules, 2016;
	 Construction and Demolition Waste Management Rules, 2016;
	 Meghalaya State Waste Management Policy and Strategy in Urban Areas; 
	 Meghalaya Solid Waste Management Bye Law, 2020;
	 Meghalaya State Pollution Control Board (MSPCB) guidelines issued from time 
to time; National Green Tribunal (NGT) orders and other Court orders; and
	 NITI Aayog’s document on Waste Wise Cities – Best Practices in Municipal Solid 
Waste Management.
2.4 Scope of Audit , Audit Sample and Audit Methodology
The PA was conducted to cover activities of the agencies concerned during the five-
year period from 2017-18 to 2021-22. Under the scope of solid waste, municipal solid 
waste (MSW), bio-medical waste (BMW), construction and demolition (C&D) waste, 
e-waste, and plastic waste were covered.
The subject of solid waste management has been devolved to the urban local bodies in 
Meghalaya. However, the administration of solid waste management in the State not 
only depends on the nodal department, i.e. the Urban affairs department but also several 
other agencies. The three Autonomous District Councils which cover the entire state 
also play a significant role through traditional bodies.  Accordingly, the audit sample 
was designed to cover all the significant agencies involved in management of solid 
waste in Meghalaya. 
Under the audit sample three municipal boards out of six viz. Shillong, Jowai and Tura 
were selected
7. One Town Committee viz. Nongpoh and two census towns, viz. Mawlai 
and Umpling were also selected by applying simple random sampling using IDEA 
application software. In addition the Urban Affairs department, State Investment Project 
Management and Implementation Unit (SIPMIU) 8, Meghalaya Urban Development 
Authority (MUDA), Meghalaya State Pollution Control Board (MSPCB) and three 
Autonomous District Councils 9 (ADCs) were also covered under this PA. The office 
of the Deputy Commissioners of the districts where the selected Municipal Boards/
Town Committees were located were also covered. Audit collected information from 
the Shillong Cantonment Board through written queries, as examination of records of 
the Cantonment Board and site visit was beyond the audit mandate of this office. 
7 Municipal Boards contained more than 25 per cent of the entire urban population in the region were 
selected.
8 The Government of Meghalaya, Finance (Economic Affairs) Department, vide Notification dated 
05 January 2009 constituted the State Investment Project Management and Implementation Unit 
(SIPMIU) in Meghalaya for implementation of the North Eastern Region Capital Cities Development 
Investment Programme (NERCCDIP) funded through ADB (Loan arranged through an agreement 
between Asian Development Bank (ADB) and Government of India).
9 Khasi Hills Autonomous District Council (KHADC), Jaintia Hills Autonomous District Council 
(JHADC) & Garo Hills Autonomous District Council (GHADC).

Chapter II: Audit Framework
7
Audit Planning was done through desk review based risk assessment and use of statistical 
sampling for selection of sample. Field Audit methodology comprised of examination 
of records of the entities, interview with the functionaries concerned and site visits 
along with the department officials. 
Being a technical subject, Audit engaged with experts in this subject as well as with the 
departmental officials involved in the solid waste management to identify areas of focus 
and fine tune audit scope. Two workshops were held (September 2022 and January 2023) 
with subject experts
10 to discuss specific issues surrounding Solid Waste Management 
(SWM) in North Eastern States, as these states have a different geographical and socio-
economic profile, than many other States in the rest of the country. 
The PA commenced with an entry conference (17 August 2022) where the audit 
objectives, criteria, scope and methodology were discussed. The Performance Audit 
Report was issued to the Government on 27 April 2023. Reply of the Government 
was not received till May 2023. Meanwhile, the findings of the PA were discussed 
with the Government representatives from the Urban Development Department and 
the Directorate, representatives of MSPCB, SIPMIU, MUDA, Municipal Boards of 
Shillong, Tura and Jowai, District Administration and representatives of Autonomous 
District Councils in an exit conference held on 17 May 2023. Replies received during 
exit conference have been suitably incorporated in the Report.
2.5 Acknowledgement
Audit acknowledges the cooperation and assistance extended by the State Government, 
all the selected ULBs/Town Committee, MSPCB, SIPMIU, MUDA, ADCs and 
Deputy Commissioners of the selected districts. Further, audit also acknowledges the 
guidance provided by the subject matter experts on issues pertaining to Solid Waste 
Management.
10 (i) Dr Suneel Pandey, Director, Green Growth & Resource Efficiency Division, the Energy and 
Resources Institute (TERI), New Delhi (Solid Waste Management); (ii) Dr Paramita Datta Dey, 
Sr. Research Officer and Project Coordinator, NIUA, New Delhi (Waste Management in Smart 
Cities); (iii) Dr Brijesh Kumar Dubey, Professor, IIT Kharagpur (Waste Management in Smart Cities);  
Dr Asokan Pappu, Senior Principal Scientist, Chairman Business Development Cell CSIR-Advanced 
Materials and Processes Research Institute, Bhopal (Waste Management).

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
   
INSTITUTIONAL MECHANISMS 
FOR SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT 
IN MEGHALAYA
CHAPTER -III

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
   

3.1. Introduction 
Municipal Solid Wastes (Management and Handling) Rules 2000 apply to every 
municipal authority as these authorities are responsible for management of municipal 
solid waste (MSW).
Ministry of Environment, Forests & Climate Change (MoEFCC), Government of India 
(GoI), amended (8 April 2016) the Municipal Solid Waste (Management and Handling) 
Rules 2000 and notified the SWM Rules 2016, extending the jurisdiction of SWM Rules 
beyond ‘municipal area’ to cover the expanding boundaries of urban agglomerations, 
Census towns, notified areas and notified industrial areas, defence establishments etc. 
Meghalaya State Waste Management Policy and Strategy was notified on 17 June 2019 
under which the roles and responsibilities of different departments/agencies involved in 
solid waste management were defined.  Details are shown in Table 3.1.
Table	3.1:	Details	showing	the	functions	of	different	departments/agencies	in	
respect of Solid Waste Management in Meghalaya
Level/	Responsible	
Institution
Role and responsibilities of Institution in SWM
State Government 
(Secretary, Urban 
Affairs	Department	
and Director, Urban 
Affairs)
•	 Responsible for overall implementation and enforcement of 
SWM Rules, 2016.
•	 Prepare State Solid Waste Management Policy and Strategy in 
consultation with core/key stakeholders.
•	 Ensure identification and allocation of suitable land to ULBs 
for setting up solid waste processing and disposal/treatment 
facilities.
•	 Facilitate establishment of Common Regional Sanitary 
Landfill for group of towns/ULBs falling within 50 kms on 
cost sharing basis and ensuring professional management of 
such landfill.
•	 Capacity building of ULBs in SWM, prepare scheme for 
registration of waste pickers/dealers.
Meghalaya State 
Pollution Control 
Board
•	 Ensure the implementation of SWM Rules, 2016 in the State 
through ULBs in their respective region and review the 
implementation /status twice a year in coordination with other 
stakeholders.
•	 Monitor adherence to Environmental standards as prescribed, 
examine proposals and authorise ULBs for SWM, monitor 
compliance standards as laid down in SWM Rules 2016 and 
offer directions for safe handling/disposal of waste at deposition 
centres.
Chapter-III
Institutional Mechanisms for Solid Waste 
Management in Meghalaya

Performance Audit on Solid Waste Management in Urban Areas of Meghalaya
10
Level/	Responsible	
Institution
Role and responsibilities of Institution in SWM
Deputy Commissioners 
of all districts
•	 Facilitate identification and allocation of suitable land to ULBs 
for setting up solid waste processing and disposal/treatment 
facilities in their jurisdiction, in coordination with State 
Secretary and review the performance of ULBs every quarter 
and take corrective measures.
Municipal	authorities/
Town	Committees/
Cantonment Board 
and traditional 
institutions (ADCs and 
Dorbar	Shnongs)	of	
census towns
•	 Shall prepare SWM plan as per State policy and strategy and 
submit to State Government.
•	 Frame bye laws incorporating provisions of these rules and 
implement them effectively.
•	 Arrange door to door collection of segregated waste from 
all households, including slums and informal settlements, 
commercial, non-residential premises, all public institutions, 
commercial complexes, housing boards etc.
•	 Educate, enforce waste generators on five Rs (reduce, reuse, 
recycle, recover and remove).
•	 Involve communities in waste management and promotion 
of home composting and de-centralised waste processing at 
community level and maintain hygienic condition.
•	 Create public awareness through Information, Education & 
Communication (IEC) and educate public and involve them in 
SWM at critical levels regarding segregation of waste at source, 
littering.
•	 Capacity building of SWM workers on all aspects to ensure 
implementation of the SWM Rules, 2016.
•	 Provide bins for storage of biodegradable/non-biodegradable 
waste and ensure collection of waste by primary collection 
system, transfer them through secondary collection mechanism 
for disposal and treatment at landfill.
•	 Setup material recovery facilities with sufficient space for 
sorting recyclable waste by waste pickers and recyclers.
•	 Provide proper collection, disposal and set up treatment facilities 
for city SWM in accordance with the rules, with authorisation 
from the State authorities.
•	 Implement and ensure all points as per State Policy for effective 
waste management services in city/ULB.
Source: Meghalaya Solid Waste Management Policy & Strategy.
The 74th Constitutional Amendment Act sought to empower ULBs to function as Local 
Self-Government and to deliver efficient & effective services for economic development 

Chapter III: Institutional Mechanisms for Solid Waste Management in Meghalaya
11
and social justice with regard to 18 subjects11 listed in XII Schedule of the Constitution. 
In Meghalaya, functions to the urban local bodies have been carried out under the 
Meghalaya Municipal Act, since Meghalaya is exempted from implementation of 
the 74th CAA under Article 243 ZC of the Constitution. The Director, Urban Affairs 
Department, stated (June 2023) that Government of Meghalaya has devolved 16 
functions12 to the ULBs, but it was seen that only three 13 functions have been fully 
transferred and discharged14 by the six Municipal Boards of Meghalaya of which solid 
waste management is one of the fully devolved functions. 
This Chapter examines the efficiency and adequacy of institutional mechanisms, as well 
as the efficiency of the different departments/agencies in carrying out their roles. 
3.2	 Notification	of	State	Policy	by	Urban	 Affairs	Department
Delay in notifying the Meghalaya State Waste Management Policy and Strategy, 
despite the SWM Rules, 2016 reflected lackadaisical approach of Urban Affairs 
Department in implementing the waste management rules.
 As per Rule 11 of the SWM Rules, 2016, the Secretary, Urban Affairs Department 
should prepare a state policy and solid waste management strategy for the State in 
consultation with stakeholders including representatives of waste pickers, self-help 
group (SHGs) and similar groups working in the field of waste management consistent 
with these rules, in a period not later than one year from the date of notification of the 
SWM Rules.
The SWM Rules were notified in April 2016 whereas the Meghalaya State Waste 
Management Policy and Strategy which was due to be notified in April 2017 was notified 
only on 17 June 2019 i.e., after a delay of more than two years.  
Delay in notifying the Meghalaya State Waste Management Policy and Strategy 
indicates lackadaisical approach of the Urban Affairs Department in the implementation 
of SWM Rules, 2016. As a result of the delay in notifying the Meghalaya State Waste 
Management Policy and Strategy, it was seen that there was a gap in the implementation 
11 1. Urban planning including town planning; 2. Regulation of land-use and construction of buildings; 
3. Planning for economic and social development; 4. Roads and bridges; 5. Water supply for domestic, 
industrial and commercial purposes; 6. Public health, sanitation, conservancy and solid waste 
management; 7. Fire services; 8. Urban forestry, protection of the environment and promotion of 
ecological aspects 9. Safeguarding the interests of weaker sections of society, including the handicapped 
and mentally retarded 10.Slum improvement and upgradation 11.Urban poverty alleviation;12.
Provision of urban amenities and facilities such as parks, gardens, playgrounds; 13.Promotion of 
cultural, educational and aesthetic aspects; 14.Burials and burial grounds; cremations, cremation 
grounds and electric crematoriums 15.Cattle pounds; prevention of cruelty to animals; 16.Vital 
statistics including registration of births and deaths; 17.Public amenities including street lighting, 
parking lots, bus stops and public conveniences; 18.Regulation of slaughter houses and tanneries.
12 Except for (i) Fire Service and (ii) Urban Forestry, protection of the environment and promotion for 
ecological aspects.
13 (i) Public health, sanitation conservancy and solid waste management (ii) Urban poverty alleviation 
and (iii) Vital statistics including birth and deaths. 
14 For Public health, sanitation conservancy and solid waste management, all the five MBs was 
discharging this function except Williamnagar MB. 

Performance Audit on Solid Waste Management in Urban Areas of Meghalaya
12
of the SWM Rules 2016 such as non-integration of informal waste collectors in waste 
management, delay in imposition of user charges, etc. as discussed in the succeeding 
paragraphs.
The Department accepted the observation during the Exit Conference held on May 
2023.
3.3. Framing of Bye Laws 
None of the Municipal Boards in Meghalaya, and two autonomous district councils, 
namely, JHADC and GHADC, had framed bye-laws for implementing SWM Rules 
2016, while the KHADC had only notified the Khasi Hills Autonomous District 
(SWM) Act, 2020 in February 2022, rendering the implementation of SWM Rules 
2016 ineffective due to the absence of legally empowering bye-laws.
As per Rule 15(e) of the SWM Rules, 2016, Local authorities were required to frame 
bye-laws incorporating provisions of SWM Rules 2016, within one year from the date 
of notification of these rules. 
Meghalaya State Waste Management Strategy and Policy of June 2019 stipulated that 
the local authorities will frame bye laws incorporating the provisions of State Policy & 
Strategy document for implementing the same in their respective jurisdictions. 
Audit noticed that none of the Municipal Boards in Meghalaya had framed any bye-laws 
for implementation of SWM Rules 2016 as of 31 March 2022. Further, Audit noticed 
that though the ADCs were to formulate bye laws under SWM Rules 2016, JHADC and 
GHADC were yet to comply with these directions till the date of audit (November 2022) 
while the KHADC had notified the Khasi Hills Autonomous District (SWM) Act, 2020 
only in 10 February 2022.
The Shillong Cantonment Board reported (January 2023) that they had forwarded the 
draft bye laws to the higher authority in December 2022 and were awaiting approval, 
it was however seen that draft bye laws of Shillong Cantonment Board were yet to be 
approved till January 2023. 
Thus, the implementation of SWM Rules 2016 in Meghalaya remained a pipe dream 
in the absence of relevant bye-laws of the local authorities which would have legally 
empowered them to implement the SWM Rules.
3.4 Preparation of Solid Waste Management Plans by Urban Local Bodies 
ULBs in Meghalaya were required to prepare comprehensive short-term and 
long-term Solid Waste Management (SWM) plans aligned with the State policy. 
However, the selected Municipal Boards, Town Committees, and Census Towns 
have failed to develop such plans within the stipulated timelines, with only 
Shillong having submitted a City Solid Waste Action Plan that awaits approval. 
Absence of SWM Plans indicated that ULBs had not set any short-term or long 
-term goals and targets absence of targets and goals for implementing the SWM 
Rules in Meghalaya.

Chapter III: Institutional Mechanisms for Solid Waste Management in Meghalaya
13
As per the Municipal Solid Waste Management (MSWM) Manual, 2016 (Section 
1.4.5 and 1.4.6), ULBs were required to prepare a detailed SWM plan, with short 
term (2-5 years) and long-term (20-25 years) actions. Short-term plans were to cover 
aspects of institutional strengthening, community mobilisation, waste minimisation 
initiatives, waste collection and transportation, treatment and disposal, and financial 
outlay, while long term plans were to consist of four-five short term planning cycles. 
Actions to be undertaken in each of these short term planning cycles should be 
clearly identified in the long term plans and the short term plans should lead to 
achievement of the long term plan. Moreover, as per the Meghalaya State Waste 
Management Policy and Strategy which was approved by the State Government and 
notified on 17 June 2019, each city/town/census town was to prepare its own Waste 
Management Plan which should be in tandem with the objectives of the Policy and 
Strategy document.
The status of preparation of plans in the selected Municipal Boards, Town Committee 
or Census Town is detailed in Table 3.2.
Table 3.2: Status of preparation of SWM plan by selected Municipal Boards, 
Town Committee and Census Towns
Area/	
Jurisdiction
Responsible 
Agency
Timelines as prescribed 
in State Policy and 
Strategy document
Current Status
Shillong 
Municipal Area
Shillong 
Municipal Board
By September 2019 City Solid Waste Action 
Plan prepared and sent to 
Urban Affairs Department 
on 20 June 2022 but 
approval was awaited
Jowai Municipal 
Area
Jowai Municipal 
Board
By September 2019 Yet to be prepared
Tura Municipal 
Area
Tura Municipal 
Board
By September 2019 Yet to be prepared
Nongpoh Area Nongpoh Town 
Committee
By November 2019 Yet to be prepared
Mawlai and 
Umpling Census 
Towns
Khasi Hills 
Autonomous 
District Council
By November 2019 Yet to be prepared
Source: Reply furnished by SMB, JMB, TMB, Nongpoh Town Committee and KHADC.
While the approval of City Solid Waste Management Plan (which is a short term plan) 
was awaited (May 2023) in case of Shillong Municipal Board, none of the other selected 
Municipal Boards, Town Committee or Census Town had prepared any short-term or 
long-term plans. 
In the Exit Conference (May 2023), the Director, Urban Affairs Department stated that 
the City Solid Waste Action Plan was prepared (April 2023) for all the ULBs under 
Swacch Bharat Mission and the same was under consideration of the Ministry of Housing 
and Urban Affairs for approval. The Department, however did not provide any copies of 
the Action Plan submitted to the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs to audit. Also, 
no action was being undertaken for preparation of long term plans. 

Performance Audit on Solid Waste Management in Urban Areas of Meghalaya
14
Absence of SWM Action plans of the Municipal Boards resulted in there being no short-
term or long-term planned interventions for solid waste management in the urban areas 
of Meghalaya.  
3.5 Role of Town Committees in Census Town Areas 
There were no functional Town Committees in the Census Towns, under the 
jurisdiction of the ADCs, test checked by Audit. Lack of coordination between the 
Urban Affairs Department, the ADCs, and the State Pollution Control Board was 
evident from the non-submission of annual reports on waste management by Dorbar 
Shnongs under the Town Committees and Census Towns to the MSPCB. Absence of 
data on solid waste collection and disposal in these areas indicated that SWM Rules 
2016 had not been implemented.
In Meghalaya, the Town Committees and Census Towns do not fall under the 
administrative control of the Urban Affairs Department. Rather, these areas (47 per 
cent of the total urban population
15) are governed by the respective ADCs, under 
whose jurisdiction the Town Committees are set up. As per the Meghalaya Solid 
Waste Management Bye Law, 2020, the responsibility for collection, transportation, 
processing, of solid waste in the Census Towns outside the Municipal Area lies with 
local traditional institutions (called the Dorbar Shnongs) in association with ADCs.
Rule 15 (za & zb) of SWM Rules, 2016 stipulates that the local authorities and village 
panchayats of census towns and urban agglomerations shall prepare and submit annual 
reports on SWM and submit the same to the Director, Urban Affairs Department who 
will then forward it to the Commissioner & Secretary, Urban Affairs Department and the 
respective State Pollution Control Board by the 31
st May of every year. 
Audit found very little documentation of the SWM activities being carried out by the 
ADCs through Dorbar Shnongs. For example, no data was available on the number of 
households under the Town Committees/Census Towns, quantum of waste generated, 
segregated and collected, dumping sites and waste processing facilities. 
During site visit of seven Dorbar Shnongs, Audit found that Dorbar Shnong were using 
trucks/pick up for doing house to house collection of waste. Audit also noticed that 
Dorbar Shnongs were collecting user charges from households for waste collection at 
the rate of ₹ 40 - ₹ 130 per household under the Mawlai and Umpling Census Towns. 
However, no user charges were collected by the Dorbar Shnongs concerned under the 
Nongpoh Town Committee.  
In a meeting (August 2019) chaired by the Chief Secretary, the Deputy Commissioners 
of all concerned districts were directed to ensure timely submission of Annual Reports 
by all Town Committees under their respective jurisdiction. The Chief Secretary 
advised the concerned Deputy Commissioners and representatives of the KHADC 
to explore constitution of a Town Committee in each of the 12 Census Towns. He 
suggested that since the Dorbar Shnongs of the 10 census towns within the Shillong 
Urban Agglomeration are already undertaking various activities for management of 
15 Total urban population of Meghalaya – 5,95,450, Town Committee and Census Towns 2,79,680.

Chapter III: Institutional Mechanisms for Solid Waste Management in Meghalaya
15
wastes, they may be recognised as institutional structures for implementation of waste 
management till a town committee is established. He further suggested that the SMB 
may provide necessary help to the Dorbar Shnongs of the Census Towns in preparation 
of the Annual Report. 
However, despite the directions from the Chief Secretary in August 2019, Audit found 
that till date, the Town Committees (Nongpoh, Mairang and Nongstoin) and Census 
Towns were not submitting the annual reports to the Urban Affairs Department.  
The MSPCB stated (December 2022) that the list of Town Committees and Census 
Towns was yet to be shared by the Urban Affairs Department and as such, monitoring of 
Town Committees and Census Towns was not carried out by them. 
The absence of a functional Town Committees in Census towns, absence of data on 
SWM from the ADCs and no reporting on SWM activities as per SWM Rules 2016, 
are indicators that the Census Towns were still to be on boarded into the mainstream 
institutional framework for SWM. 
As a result, the MSPCB did not have any data on the generation, collection and 
transportation of waste from these town committee/census town areas. This indicates 
absence of monitoring of the local traditional bodies by the MSPCB and also lack of 
coordination between the Urban Affairs Department and the ADCs in the implementation 
of SWM Rules, 2016.
3.6 Preparation of Contingency Plans
The failure of the test-checked urban areas in Meghalaya to develop contingency 
plans for waste storage, as stipulated by the MSWM Manual 2016, left them 
unprepared to address unforeseen crises like waste transportation disruptions and 
waste accumulation on streets of Jowai leading to public protest.
MSWM Manual 2016 (Section 5.4) stipulated that ULBs should prepare contingency 
plans for appropriate storage of waste, to tide over situations of non-performance of 
processing/treatment/disposal facilities. Requirement of a contingency plan was neither 
envisaged in the Meghalaya State Waste Management Policy and Strategy nor addressed 
by any of the test-checked urban areas. As a result, ULBs were not prepared to tackle 
any unforeseen situation or crisis such as public protest in Jowai Municipal Area when 
the villagers did not allow passage of waste transportation vehicles, resulting in piling 
up of waste on streets, which is discussed in Para 6.4.3.2.
3.7	 Periodical	review	of	SWM	Rules	by	Urban	 Affairs	Department	
Though the Urban Affairs Department in charge of implementing SWM and Plastic 
Waste Management Rules established State Level Advisory Committees for periodic 
review of implementation of SWM Rules 2016, absence of records of such meetings 
indicated that these committees were largely non-functional.
As seen from Table 3.1, Urban Affairs Department was responsible for overall 
implementation and enforcement of SWM Rules, 2016. Moreover, Rule 23 of the SWM 
Rules, 2016 stipulates that the Department in-charge of local bodies of the concerned 

Performance Audit on Solid Waste Management in Urban Areas of Meghalaya
16
State Government shall constitute a State Level Advisory Body within six months from 
the date of notification (April 2016) of these rules. 
Scrutiny of records revealed that the Urban Affairs Department vide Notification No 
UAU.9/2015/565 dated 25 April 2017 constituted the State Level Advisory Committee 
chaired by the Commissioner & Secretary, Urban Affairs Department. The State Level 
Advisory Committee was to meet at least once in every six months to review the matters 
related to implementation of the SWM rules, 2016. 
Similarly, scrutiny of records revealed that the Urban Affairs Department vide 
Notification No UAU.70/2016/81 dated 25 January 2018 constituted the State Level 
Advisory Committee for monitoring of Plastic Waste Management Rules, 2016 chaired 
by the Commissioner & Secretary, Urban Affairs Department. The State Level Advisory 
Committee was to meet at least once in every six months for the purpose of effective 
monitoring of implementation of the Plastic Waste Management Rules 2016. 
However, the Director, Urban Affairs Department failed to produce any records showing 
the number of meetings being conducted by the two Advisory Boards during the period 
covered by Audit and copy of minutes of meetings held by these Committees (if any), was 
also not furnished though called for (June 2022
16). In absence of such basic information/ 
records, Audit could not ascertain whether proper monitoring has been ensured in the 
implementation of the SWM Rules, 2016 and the Plastic Waste Management Rules, 
2016 by the State Level Advisory Committees.
3.8 Assessment of waste generation in urban areas
A comprehensive assessment of waste generation using well-defined metrics is 
crucial for effective Solid Waste Management; however, lack of reliable data 
collection and periodic surveys in urban areas, along with discrepancies in waste 
estimation methods, indicated deficiencies in planning and coordination.
A comprehensive assessment of waste generation determined by well-defined metrics is 
imperative for efficient Solid Waste Management. Section 1.4.3.3.1 of the Solid Waste 
Management Manual, 2016 stipulates that the average amount of waste disposed by a 
specific class of generators may be estimated by averaging data from several samples to 
be collected continuously for a period of seven days at multiple representative locations 
within the jurisdiction of the ULB, in each of the three main seasons viz. summer, winter 
and rainy season. Waste should then be aggregated over the seven-day period, weighed 
and averaged. These quantities could then be extrapolated to the entire ULB/urban area 
and per capita generation assessed. This should be repeated once every 3-5 years. 
Under the NERCCDIP, Shillong, the capital city of Meghalaya, was to be provided with 
the SWM facilities including an engineered sanitary landfill site with improvements in 
primary and secondary collection, transportation and disposal. In connection with the 
programme, it was required to quantify and characterize municipal solid waste from 
residential and institutional sources. As such, Audit noticed that survey for quantification 
and characterisation of waste (Solid Waste Quantification & Characterisation study) 
16 Reminders were also issued during September 2022 & February 2023, but reply was not furnished.

Chapter III: Institutional Mechanisms for Solid Waste Management in Meghalaya
17
was conducted for the Shillong Urban Agglomeration (SUA) area by the Department of 
Environmental Studies, North Eastern Hills University during 2010-11. During the period 
covered by audit (except for 2020
17) annual surveys  on waste generation, segregation 
at source and transportation in the Shillong Urban Agglomeration (SUA) area were 
conducted by SIPMIU. There were no records, however, to indicate that these annual 
survey reports were submitted by SIPMIU to MSPCB or Urban Affairs Department. As 
a result, neither the MSPCB nor the Urban Affairs Department used these reports for 
extrapolation of per capita SWM generation resulting in lack of viable data.
As per Section 1.4.3.3.1 of the Solid Waste Management Manual 2016, the practice 
of an eye estimate of waste quantity transported is not reliable as many times, trucks 
carrying waste are half full or carry light material. Further, the quantity of waste 
measured at transfer stations or processing and disposal sites also does not accurately 
reflect waste generation rates, since these measurements do not include waste disposed 
at unauthorised places, waste recovered by informal waste collectors or waste pickers 
from the streets, bins, and intermediate transfer points, etc.
No surveys were conducted in Jowai, Tura and Nongpoh municipal areas, Audit noticed 
that for these areas, assessment of per capita waste generation was arrived at based on 
approximation of quantity of transported waste. Thus, it implies a lack of reliable data 
and absence of planning mechanism in the ULBs and Town Committee with regards to 
SWM as discussed in the succeeding paragraph.
Per day waste generation in the test checked urban areas
18 for the period from 2017-18 to 
2021-22  as per the survey conducted by SIPMIU in Shillong Urban Agglomeration and 
assessment by per capita based estimates and/or estimation of quantity of transported 
waste information in Jowai and Tura19 is given in Chart 3.1.
 
144 153 156
No survey
158
60 60 60 60
19.524 25 27 29 29
0
50
100
150
200Tonnes per Day (TPD)
Financial Year
Chart 3.1: Status of waste generation in Shillong Urban 
Agglomeration, Jowai and Tura from 2017-18 to 2021-22
Shillong Urban Agglomeration Jowai Tura
Source: Information furnished by SIPMIU, JMB and TMB.
17 Due to Covid-19 pandemic.
18 Shillong Municipal Area, Census Towns within Shillong Urban Agglomeration but outside Shillong 
Municipal Area, Jowai Municipal Area, Tura Municipal Area, Nongpoh Town.
19 Data was not available with respect to Nongpoh town.
2017-18            2018-19            2019-20             2020-21            2021-22

Performance Audit on Solid Waste Management in Urban Areas of Meghalaya
18
During Exit Conference (17 May 2023), the Department stated that during the preparation 
of the City Solid Waste Action Plan under SBM, a survey on quantum of waste generated 
was conducted in all Municipal areas recently. However, on being asked whether this is 
a regular periodical exercise, the Department stated that the current exercise was solely 
done for the purpose of preparation of the Action Plan. However, the Department will 
consider conducting periodical surveys.
3.9 Maintenance of SWM data by MSPCB 
The effective management of solid waste relies on accurate data collection and 
analysis, yet discrepancies between waste generation and collection figures reported 
by the Meghalaya State Pollution Control Board and information provided by tested 
Urban Local Bodies, along with the absence of data from Town Committees and 
Census Towns, underscore issues of data accuracy, completeness, and reliability.
As per Section 6.1.3 of the SWM Manual 2016, collection and analysis of data related 
to SWM is required to assess the existing situation and propose adequate measures for 
improving service delivery. A good management information system helps in establishing 
a strong and reliable information database necessary to facilitate planning, midcourse 
corrections, and decision making. Further, as per Rule 15 (zb) of SWM Rules 2016, 
the annual reports prepared by the ULBs shall be sent to the Secretary -in-Charge of 
the State Urban Development Department and to the respective State Pollution Control 
Board by the 31st May of every year. 
As per information obtained from MSPCB, the position of waste generation and collection 
in the six ULBs of Meghalaya for the audit period is shown in Chart 3.2 below. It 
may be mentioned here that MSPCB does not collect the data on waste generation and 
collection from town committees and census towns.
Chart 3.2: Position of waste generation and collection in the six ULBs of 
Meghalaya from 2017-18 to 2021-22
 
218.78 231.78
274.68
158.68 158.93
181.56 191.56
236.69
140.69 137.85
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
In TPD
Waste generated Waste collected
From Chart 3.2, it could be seen that there was an increase of nine per cent of waste 
generation per day between 2017-18 and 2019-20. However, closer scrutiny of the 
figures revealed that there were discrepancies between the data shown by MSPCB in 
their Annual Reports and the figures furnished by the test checked ULBs to Audit. 
2017-18             2018-19             2019-20             2020-21             2021-22

Chapter III: Institutional Mechanisms for Solid Waste Management in Meghalaya
19
A comparison of data shown by MSPCB and data provided to audit by the test-checked 
ULBs (Shillong, Jowai and Tura Municipal Boards) with regards to waste generation 
and collection for the audit period is shown in Table 3.3 and Table 3.4. 
Table 3.3: Comparison of quantum of waste generated in the test-checked ULBs 
with MSPCB data
(in	TPD)
Year SMB JMB TMB
As per 
MSPCB
As per 
information 
furnished to 
audit by ULBs
As per 
MSPCB
As per 
information 
furnished to 
audit
As per 
MSPCB
As per 
information 
furnished to 
audit
2017-18 56.08 62 56 60 65 24
2018-19 56.08 66 60 60 75 25
2019-20 59.95 69 60 60 75 27
2020-21 59.95 NA 19.50 60 35 29
2021-22 85.40 70 19.50 19.50 35 29
Table 3.4: Comparison of quantum of waste collected in the test-checked 
ULBs with MSPCB data
(in	TPD)
Year SMB JMB TMB
As per 
MSPCB
As per 
information 
given to audit
As per 
MSPCB
As per 
information 
given to audit
As per 
MSPCB
As per 
information 
given to audit
2017-18 44.86 59 50 60 45 23
2018-19 44.86 62 56 60 50 23
2019-20 50.96 63 56 60 50 23
2020-21 50.96 DNA 15.50 60 30 23
2021-22 68.32 67.50 15.50 Not Available 23 23
During the Exit Conference (May 2023), the Member Secretary, MSPCB admitted that 
the MSPCB was collecting the data from different ULBs but they had no mechanism to 
verify the validity of information. Moreover, the MSPCB did not collect data from the 
Town Committees and Census Towns which means that the data maintained by MSPCB 
was neither complete nor reliable.
3.10 Availability of supervisory posts for SWM purposes
The inadequate availability of supervisory staff, falling significantly short of the 
recommendations outlined in the MSWM Manual 2016, has adversely affected the 
ability of the selected Urban Local Bodies and Town Committee in Meghalaya to 
effectively manage solid waste activities, including collection and disposal.
Section 1.4.5.4 of MSWM Manual, 2016 strongly recommends that ULBs should have 
an SWM cell or SWM department having staff with technical and managerial skills 
specific to MSW management. Based on an expert committee report, the MSWM 
manual recommended hiring professionals in MSW services to scientifically manage 
the waste issues. 

Performance Audit on Solid Waste Management in Urban Areas of Meghalaya
20
The recommendations from the expert committee report are given below:
	 Towns below 1 lakh Population
One experienced Junior Engineer, if the population is more than 50,000 or in places 
with high floating population.
•	 One qualified sanitation diploma holder or Chief Sanitary Inspector or as 
Sanitary Officer if the population is more than 50,000.
•	 One qualified Sanitary Inspector per 50,000 population.
•	 One qualified Sanitary Sub-inspector per 25,000 population.
•	 One Sanitary Supervisor per 12,500 population.
	 Cities between 1 and 2.5 lakh Population
•	 One experienced graduate engineer or Equivalent Health Officer.
•	 One experienced Junior Engineer per 1 lakh population.
•	 Qualified sanitation diploma holder Chief Sanitary Inspector or
•	 Sanitation Officer to look after the collection, transportation, processing and 
disposal of waste.
•	 Qualified sanitation diploma holder Sanitary Inspector: 1 per 50,000 
population.
•	 Qualified sanitation diploma holder Sanitary Sub-inspector: 1 per 25,000 
population.
•	 Sanitary Supervisors (a person who can read, write, and report): 1 per 12,500 
population.
The position of supervisory staffing in the test checked ULBs/Town Committee vis-à-vis 
the recommendations of the MSWM manual are shown in Chart 3.3.
 
23
12
4 4
15
7
1 0
8
5
3 4
0
5
10
15
20
25
Chart 3.3: ULB wise position of supervisory staff vis-a-vis the 
recommendations of the MSWM Manual 2016
It is seen from the Chart 3.3 that there was shortage of supervisory posts in all the 
selected ULBs and Town Committee ranging from 35 per cent (SMB) to 100 per cent 
(Nongpoh Town Committee). Details of the position of supervisory posts is shown in 
Appendix II. The shortage of personnel had an adverse impact on the ULBs ability to 
 Shortfall
Shillong Municipal
Board
Nongpoh Town
Committee
Tura Municipal Board Jowai Municipal Board 
No of post recommended 	No	of	similar	nature	post	filled	up

Chapter III: Institutional Mechanisms for Solid Waste Management in Meghalaya
21
meet the rigorous demands of SWM activities, particularly collection and disposal of 
solid waste in ULBs.
3.11	 Training	of	SWM	Staff	
Unsatisfactory training and capacity-building initiatives for staff involved in 
Municipal Solid Waste Management activities across various selected Urban Local 
Bodies in Meghalaya, resulted in operational inefficiencies and issues like mixing 
of segregated waste during collection, transportation, and processing.
As per clause 1.4.5.5 of Municipal Solid Waste Management (MSWM) Manual, 2016, 
there is an urgent need to train and enhance the capacities of staff in MSWM activities 
since capacity building of staff is essential for enhancing their skills for monitoring 
provision of SWM services. The various capacity building approaches that can be 
adopted by the ULBs for different stakeholders are shown in Chart 3.4.
Chart	3.4:	Capacity	building	of	SWM	Staffs
 
Source: MSWM Manual 2016.
	 Training in Shillong Municipal Board
Scrutiny of records revealed that in Shillong, training to SMB staff on the above topics 
had been imparted by SIPMIU. Though training was imparted to SWM staff in SMB, 
it was seen that municipal staff engaged in collection and transport of municipal waste 
ended up mixing all the waste at the collection stage, even if the same was segregated 
by the households. Thus staff seemed to be unaware and untrained for keeping the waste 
segregated at the collection stage. 

Performance Audit on Solid Waste Management in Urban Areas of Meghalaya
22
Exhibit 3.1 Unsegregated garbage being dumped into a compactorExhibit 3.1 Unsegregated garbage being dumped into a compactor 
 
 	 Training in Tura Municipal Board
In TMB, training had been imparted for senior officers, collection and transportation 
staff but no training was provided to staff at processing plant.
	 Training in Jowai Municipal Board
In JMB, no training was imparted to staff regarding collection, transportation and 
processing. As a result, there was mixing of segregated waste during collection and 
transportation in Jowai. 
	 Training in Nongpoh Town Committee
No training was conducted in Nongpoh Town Committee since no staff has been employed 
for the purpose of SWM by Nongpoh Town Committee. The respective Dorbar Shnongs 
of Nongpoh Town are managing the SWM activities on their own. There was nothing 
on record to indicate that these Dorbar Shnongs of Nongpoh were trained in any of the 
above parameters.
3.12 Integration of informal waste collectors in waste management
The recognition and integration of the informal waste sector, including waste pickers 
and collectors, into the formal waste management system has been inadequately 
addressed in Meghalaya.
SWM Rules, 2016 (Clauses 11(c) and 15(c)) and MSWM Manuals, 2016 (Section 2.3.7) 
acknowledged the primary role played by the informal sector of waste pickers, waste 
collectors and recycling industry in reducing waste. SWM Rules, 2016 requires the 
State Government to provide broad guidelines regarding integration of waste pickers or 
informal waste collectors with the waste management system. The ULBs are expected 
to establish an integrated system involving informal organisations of waste pickers or 

Chapter III: Institutional Mechanisms for Solid Waste Management in Meghalaya
23
informal waste collectors and 
facilitate formation of Self Help 
Groups (SHGs) to promote 
community participation in solid 
waste management including 
door to door collection of 
waste.
There were several examples of 
good practices being adopted 
by ULBs in small and medium 
cities, one such study being 
done by the Niti Aayog
20. 
It was observed that though 
the Meghalaya State Waste 
Management Policy and 
Strategy (2019) proposed 
utilising the services of NGOs/
SHGs to provide support to the 
informal sector, no guidelines 
were issued by the Urban Affairs 
Department in this regard. In the 
test checked municipal boards 
and town committee, only one SHG viz., Ianehskhem SHG was recognised by Shillong 
Municipal Board. The other test-checked urban areas (TMB, JMB and Nongpoh Town 
Committee) failed to recognise organisations of informal waste collectors and integrate 
them in SWM.
During the Exit Conference (May 2023), the Department while accepting the audit 
finding, stated that the matter will be taken up with all Municipal Boards to come up 
with likely strategies for the integration of the informal sector with the governmental 
interventions in SWM.
3.13 Achievement of Service Level Benchmark
Service Level Benchmarking initiative launched by the Ministry of Urban 
Development aims to monitor urban services, but despite notification for Shillong 
Municipal Board, SLBs for other Municipal Boards were not established, and 
SMB’s performance in meeting SLB targets was generally below benchmarks.
Ministry of Urban Development (MoUD), Government of India, launched (2008) 
the Service Level Benchmarking (SLB) initiative covering water supply, waste 
water, SWM and storm water drainage. The 13 th and 14 th FCs have also endorsed the 
principle of benchmarking and included SLB as one of the conditions for the allocation 
20 NITI Aayog’s Waste Wise Cities- Best Practices, (2021).
 (website link - https://www.niti.gov.in/sites/default/files/2021-12/Waste-Wise-Cities.pdf)
Best Practices - Ambikapur
Before 2015, Ambikapur displayed the usual 
manifestations of a town – overflowing community 
bins and waste dumped indiscriminately near 
roads, streets and a garbage mountain containing 
legacy waste. With the intervention of the local 
administration and women self-help groups and 
inspired by the concept of the Garbage Clinic 
Model, the city is now able to achieve 100 per cent 
segregation, collection and processing of waste. 
The waste is brought to the Solid and Liquid 
Resource Management (SLRM) Centre, where 
the recyclables are first extracted into 20 inorganic 
fractions by secondary segregation, followed by 
156 categories in the tertiary segregation. The 
legacy waste dumpsite is cleared by the urban 
local bodies and now being used as waste recycling 
centre.
Source: NITI Aayog’ s Waste Wise Cities- Best 
Practices (Pg-24).

Performance Audit on Solid Waste Management in Urban Areas of Meghalaya
24
of performance-based grants to ULBs. MoUD defined (2008) a common minimum 
framework for monitoring and reporting on performance indicators; 
As mentioned in Chapter 2 of Annual Technical Inspection Report (ATIR) 2016-17, 
the State Government notified the SLBs for four basic services viz., (i) water supply,  
(ii) sewerage, (iii) storm water drainage and (iv) solid waste management in March 
2012. However, these SLBs were notified only for Shillong Municipal Board. It has 
still not notified the SLBs for the other five 21 MBs. The extent of achievement by the 
SMB (submitted in June 2022) vis-a-vis the targets and benchmarks are shown in 
Chart 3.5.
Chart 3.5: Targets and achievement of Shillong Municipal Board  
(SMB)	in	June	2022
 
100 100 100 80 100 50 100 100100 80 100 50 20 80 30 0
100 100 100
80
100
100
80
90
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Household
level
coverage of
SWM
services
Efficiency
of
collection
of
municipal
solid waste
Extent of
segregation
of
municipal
solid waste
Extent of
municipal
solid waste
recovered
Extent of
scientific
disposal of
municipal
solid waste
Extent of
cost
recovery in
SWM
services
Efficiency
in redressal
of
customer
complaints
Efficiency
in
collection
of SWM
user
charges
Service Level Benchmark Data of SMB
Target as per SMB Achievement as per SMB Benchmark	(in	per	cent)
Source: Information furnished by Shillong Municipal Board.
It is evident from the Chart 3.5 that SMB has set targets at par with the Benchmark 
except for ‘extent of cost of recovery in SWM services’, where SMB had set a 
lower target of 50 against the benchmark of 100, ‘efficiency in redressal of customer 
complaints’ where SMB had fixed a higher target of 100 as compared to the benchmark 
of 80 and ‘efficiency in collection of SWM user charges’ where SMB had fixed a 
higher target of 100 against the benchmark of 90. As per the SMB’s declarations, 
efficiency of collection, extent of recovery, extent of disposal, and collection of user 
charges were below the targets/benchmarks. 
Audit verified the claims made by SMB regarding achievement of Service Level 
Benchmarks with that of annual survey data conducted by SIPMIU. It was noticed 
that the SIPMIU data showed a lower achievement of targets for collection of waste 
(74 per cent) and segregation at source (70 per cent) during 2022 as against the claim 
of 80 per cent and 100 per cent made by SMB respectively.
21 Jowai, Tura, Williamnagar, Baghmara and Resubelpara MBs.
(in per cent)

Chapter III: Institutional Mechanisms for Solid Waste Management in Meghalaya
25
3.14 Conclusion
The function of Municipal Waste Management in the state of Meghalaya is severely 
hampered due to weak institutional mechanism that is manifested in none of the multiple 
agencies involved in this process being compliant with the responsibilities assigned 
to them under the Meghalaya SWM Rules. SWM functions are further hampered by 
the fact that though a state wise policy has been put in place, none of the agencies 
involved, i.e. Municipal Boards, Cantonment Board (in Shillong) and Autonomous 
District Councils had formulated their Bye Laws respectively. The Town Committees 
were found to be practically non-existent as a result of which habitations covered 
under the census towns were completely deprived of functional waste management 
systems. At the government level, Urban Affairs department was hamstrung with 
lack of data on municipal waste generation to be in any position to take effective 
policy based initiatives to handle the municipal waste scientifically and effectively. 
Periodic Surveys for assessment of waste generation was not conducted in the test 
checked ULBs/Town Committee except in Shillong. As a result, inaccurate methods 
of evaluation such as per capita estimation and estimation of quantity of transported 
waste was adopted in Tura and Jowai. Data was unavailable for Nongpoh Town with 
regard to waste generation, segregation, collection, and disposal from 2017-18 to  
2020-21. Similarly, MSPCB’s role making effective intervention in controlling 
pollution in and around dumping ground seemed ineffective since it had no reliable 
data on waste generated and collected.  
Waste Management Plans (either short term or long term) were not prepared in the 
test checked ULBs/Town Committee except for Shillong Municipal Area, where a City 
Solid Waste Action Plan had been prepared by the Shillong Municipal Board (SMB) 
but the same was still awaiting approval. A contingency plan was neither envisaged in 
the Meghalaya State Waste Management Policy and Strategy nor addressed by any of 
the test checked ULBs/Town Committee. These delays in preparation and approval of 
requisite legislations and plans had inhibited the implementation of SWM activities. 
Further, shortage of supervisory staff in the Municipal Boards and Town Committees as 
well as lack of trained staff for collection and transport of municipal waste resulted in 
unscientific management of municipal waste in the urban areas.  
Recommendations:
1. The State Government may ensure that the required Bye laws under the Solid 
Waste Management Rules, 2016 are framed and implemented by the ULBs and 
ADCs in the State.  The State Government may take up the matter with Shillong 
Cantonment Board for effective implementation of the SWM Act and Rules.
2. The Urban Affairs Department needs to assist ULBs/ local traditional bodies 
involved in SWM for preparation of Long-term, Mid-term and Short-term 
action plans to enhance the efficacy of solid waste management. 

Performance Audit on Solid Waste Management in Urban Areas of Meghalaya
26
3. The Urban Affairs Department should encourage and promote involvement 
of informal sector in solid waste management (SWM) activities to increase 
efficiency of SWM.
4. Considering the intricate administrative framework encompassing agencies 
engaged in solid waste management (SWM) activities within urban areas 
of Meghalaya, it is imperative for the State Government to establish robust 
coordination among these entities and ensure vigilant monitoring of the diverse 
provisions pertaining to SWM.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CHAPTER -IV
FINANCIAL  
MANAGEMENT

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

4.1 Introduction 
Availability of sufficient and sustainable financing is key to the success of SWM 
activities. Ideally, the Municipal bodies and other local government institutions involved 
in managing municipal waste should be able to raise enough resources through user 
charges to be able to meet the expenditure pertaining to SWM activities.   
This Chapter looks at the financial management of the State with regards to SWM 
activities.
Chart 4.1 provides an overview of various sources of financing available for solid waste 
management. 
Chart 4.1: Sources of funds for SWM activities in Meghalaya
 
1. Garbage 
collection fees 
from 
institutions, 
commercial 
establishments
2. Dumping 
charges
3. Sale of 
compost, FUD
Own Sources
Grants-in-aid 
(capital 
creation)
State Grants
North-Eastern 
Region Capital 
Cities 
Development 
Investment 
Programme 
(NERCCDIP) -
funded by  
Asain 
Development 
Bank (ADB) 
Externally 
Aided Project
1. 14th
Finance 
Commission
2. 15th
Finance 
Commission
3. Swachh 
Bharat 
Mission
Central 
Grants
4.2 Sources of funds 
During the period from 2017-18 to 2021-22 in Meghalaya, the State Government 
heavily relied on external funding from Asian Development Bank and Central 
grants, while the budgetary support from the State budget as agencies’ own resources 
contributed only a minor share towards financing of Solid Waste Management 
activities.
Source-wise details of funds received, and expenditure incurred for SWM purposes in 
Meghalaya during 2017-18 to 2021-22, are shown in Chart 4.2.
Chapter-IV
Financial Management

Performance Audit on Solid Waste Management in Urban Areas of Meghalaya
28
Chart 4.2 : Funds released and expenditure incurred on SWM activities  
during 2017-2022 
8.48, 8%
19.56, 
18%
1.45, 1%
63.01, 
57%
17.8, 
16%
Amount released (₹ in	crore)
14 FC
15 FC
Swacch Bharat
North-Eastern Region Capital Cities Development Investment
Programme
State Grants-in-aid
7.13, 9%
7.39, 9%
1.22, 2%62.03, 
80%
Expenditure incurred (₹ in	crore)
14 FC
15 FC
Swacch Bharat
North-Eastern Region Capital Cities Development Investment
Programme
State Grants-in-aid
 
 
8.48
19.56
1.45
63.01
17.8
16%, 1.35
62%, 12.17
16%, 0.23
2%, 0.98
NA, 0
14 FC
15 FC
Swacch Bharat
North-Eastern Region Capital Cities Development
Investment Programme
State Grants-in-aid
Position of various sources of fund
Amount released Unspent Amount
Source: Information furnished by Department/ULBs. However, information on expenditure incurred 
under State GIA was not furnished.
4.2.1 Dependence on ADB and Central Grants
During the five years period of 2017-18 to 2021-22 under audit, funds to the tune 
of ₹  110.30 crore were allocated towards solid waste management in the State. 
As seen from Chart 4.2 above, out of the total funds available, ₹ 63.01 crore. i.e. 
57 per cent, were received as part of the externally aided project of the ADB funded 
NERCCDIP22.
22 The Government of Meghalaya, Finance (Economic Affairs) Department, vide Notification dated 
05 January 2009 constituted the State Investment Project Management and Implementation Unit 
(SIPMIU) in Meghalaya for implementation of the North Eastern Region Capital Cities Development 
Investment Programme (NERCCDIP).

Chapter IV: Financial Management
29
The objective of the NERCCDIP funding was to assist the State Government in providing 
the people living in the city with access to better urban services especially in the Solid 
waste management services and to help create citizens’ awareness and behavioural 
changes with regards to waste management. The NERCCDIP funding was primarily for 
activities like construction of landfill, Compost plant at Marten, Shillong, procurement 
of Vehicles and equipment such as metal containers, bins, loaders etc. for SWM works, 
as detailed in Table 4.1. 
Table 4.1: Primary projects implemented under NERCCDIP 
(₹ in crore)
Sl. 
No.
Project component Estimated 
Cost
Expenditure 
incurred
1. Construction of Sanitary Landfill site at Marten 4.74 4.43
2. Procurement of Primary and Secondary Collection 
Vehicles and Workshop Machineries for SMB area
1.37 1.31
3. Procurement of different types of Bins and Personal 
Protective Equipment (PPE) for SMB area
1.90 1.90
4. Construction of Garage cum Workshop shed and staff 
rest room at Marten
2.18 2.14
5. Procurement of equipment for Landfill site and 
Compost Plant, Shillong
2.02 1.69
6. Construction of additional landfill area of 8500 sq. m. 
and ancillary works at Marten
19.33 19.32
7. Procurement of Equipment and Vehicles for Waste 
Management at Shillong
4.90 0.48
8. Procurement of Primary and Secondary Refuse 
Collection Vehicles and Metal Containers for SWM in 
Greater Shillong
9.85 9.20
9. Procurement of different types of Bins and PPE for 
SWM in Greater Shillong
6.70 6.53
10. Construction of Civil Works and Supply, Installation, 
Testing, Commissioning and Trial Run of Mechanical 
Equipment of 170 TPD Compost Plant
16.32 16.24
Source: Information furnished by SIPMIU.
Thus, the funding support under this project was in the nature of one-time expenditure 
on construction of sanitary landfill, purchase of vehicles & equipment and construction 
of compost plant. However, there was no evidence available to ascertain the resources 
available for sustainable functioning of the vehicles and equipment purchased. In 
addition, the Sanitary Landfill in Marten is facing a reduced design life due to poor 
processing capability of the Compost Plant as discussed in Para 6.4.3. It is also pertinent 
to mention that the vehicles are 5-7 years old as they were purchased in 2015 and 2017 
and may require more extensive maintenance in the near future. Further, the state received 
₹ 29.49 crore, i.e. 27 per cent of the total funds, under 14 Finance Commission
23, 15th 
Finance Commission24 and Swachh Bharat Mission (Urban).
23 Procurement and repair of vehicles for Jowai, Tura, Williamnagar and Resubelpara Municipal Boards, 
Procurement of bins for Jowai, etc.
24 Setting up of Bio Medical Waste Treatment Facility at Shillong, Tura, Williamnagar, Procurement of 
Garbage Tipper Trucks and other machineries for Jowai, Tura, Williamnagar and Baghmara Municipal 
Boards, etc.

Performance Audit on Solid Waste Management in Urban Areas of Meghalaya
30
Therefore, most of the SWM infrastructure funded by way of Central Grants during the 
audit period may not be sustainable in the long run without significant investment from 
the State Government for maintenance of the same. 
The utilisation of funds during the period covered by audit under these schemes was 
to the extent of 84 per cent (14 FC), 38 per cent (15 FC), 84 per cent (Swachh Bharat) 
and 98 per cent (NERCCDIP) respectively as shown in Chart 4.3, reasons for low 
utilisation of 15 FC grants during the period covered by audit was due to delay in transfer 
of 1
st instalment by GoM to the ULBs. Though GoI released the 1st instalment of 15 FC 
grants on 19 May 2020 (Untied grants) and 05 November 2020 (Tied grants), the State 
Government released the untied grants only on 22 January 2021 and the tied grants on 
23 February 2022 after a delay of 248 days and 475 days respectively. 
The budgetary support from the State’s budget for SWM was ₹ 17.80 crore (16 per cent), 
during the five-year period. 
Thus, on one hand the State was heavily dependent on external sources for financing 
the activities of SWM, on the other hand, the resources available were mostly tied to 
specific conditions. State’s own budgetary support being meagre, this model of financing 
indicated a non-sustainable funding pattern for the SWM functions in the State. 
4.3 Municipal Finances 
The financial resources of the six Municipal Boards in Meghalaya from 2017-18 
to 2021-22, primarily consisted of their own revenue, Central Finance Commission 
transfers and State Grants-in-aid, but a significant gap between operating revenue 
and operating expenses for Solid Waste Management activities exists due to 
insufficient collection of user charges, indicating the need for improved revenue 
generation and strict enforcement of SWM charges.
4.3.1 Overview of MB wise sources of revenue
The 74th Constitutional Amendment Act sought to empower ULBs to function as Local 
Self-Government and to deliver efficient & effective services for economic development 
and social justice with regard to 18 subjects
25 listed in XII Schedule of the Constitution. 
In Meghalaya, functions to the urban local bodies has been carried out under the 
Meghalaya Municipal Act 1973. Though the Director, Urban Affairs Department stated 
(June 2023) that Government of Meghalaya has devolved 16 functions
26 to the ULBs, it 
25 1. Urban planning including town planning; 2. Regulation of land-use and construction of buildings; 
3. Planning for economic and social development; 4. Roads and bridges; 5. Water supply for domes-
tic, industrial and commercial purposes; 6. Public health, sanitation, conservancy and solid waste 
management; 7. Fire services; 8. Urban forestry, protection of the environment and promotion of eco-
logical aspects 9. Safeguarding the interests of weaker sections of society, including the handicapped 
and mentally retarded 10.Slum improvement and upgradation 11.Urban poverty alleviation;12.Provi-
sion of urban amenities and facilities such as parks, gardens, playgrounds; 13.Promotion of cultural, 
educational and aesthetic aspects; 14.Burials and burial grounds; cremations, cremation grounds and 
electric crematoriums 15.Cattle pounds; prevention of cruelty to animals; 16.Vital statistics including 
registration of births and deaths; 17.Public amenities including street lighting, parking lots, bus stops 
and public conveniences; 18.Regulation of slaughter houses and tanneries.
26 Except for (i) Fire Service and (ii) Urban Forestry, protection of the environment and promotion for 
ecological aspects.

Chapter IV: Financial Management
31
was seen that only three27 functions have been fully devolved and discharged28 by the six 
Municipal Boards of Meghalaya of which solid waste management is one of the fully 
devolved functions. As such, it was expected that the State had put in place mechanisms 
for devolution of funds to the ULBs with respect to the functions devolved. 
Audit noticed that the State Government is yet to set up the State Finance Commission 
even though the notification for the same has already been given in March 2012. Thus, 
there was no formal mechanism for the devolution of funds to the Municipal Boards.  
Further, under Section 68 of the Meghalaya Municipal Act, 1973 (as amended), the 
MBs can impose within their limits, taxes on holdings (property tax), water tax, light 
tax, latrine tax, drainage tax, private markets tax, fees on carts, carriages and animals, 
registration fees for dogs and cattle and any other tax, toll and fee duly sanctioned by 
the Government. 
However, the power to raise taxes by the Municipal Boards is limited due to absence of 
an elected Board. In Meghalaya, elections for the Municipal Boards have not been held 
ever since their formation
29.
Besides their own revenue, the MBs also receive Central Finance Commission (CFC) 
grants and State Government grants released through the Director, Urban Affairs 
Department for salary, maintenance and development purposes. 
The overall financial position of all the six MBs during the period from 2017-18 to 
2021-22 is tabulated below:
Table 4.2: ULB resources
(₹	in	crore)
Source 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 Total
Own Revenue 13.95 15.72 12.80 11.74 10.87 65.08
State Grants-in-Aid 4.50 8.54 6.07 20.67 49.20 88.98
Central Finance 
Commission	(CFC)	
transfers
5.49 Nil Nil 43.04. 21.19 69.72
Total 23.94 24.26 18.87 75.45 81.26 223.78
It could be seen from the above that out of total receipts of ₹ 223.78 crore during 
2017-22, ₹ 65.08 crore (29 per cent) was from their own revenue, ₹ 69.72 crore 
(31 per cent) was from CFCs while ₹  88.98 (40 per cent) was from State Grants-in-
Aid. 
4.3.2 Resource gap for SWM in Municipal Boards
In order for the MBs to become self-sufficient in meeting operation and maintenance 
costs of SWM, it is desirable that the ULBs are able to generate sufficient revenue 
from their own resources. Strict enforcement of levy and collection of SWM charges is 
essential.
27 (i) Public health, sanitation conservancy and solid waste management (ii) Urban poverty alleviation 
and (iii) Vital statistics including birth and deaths. 
28 For Public health, sanitation conservancy and solid waste management, all the five MBs was 
discharging this function except Williamnagar MB. 
29 Year of formation of SMB – 1913; TMB-1979; JMB-1995; WMB-1995; BMB-1995; RMB – 1997.

Performance Audit on Solid Waste Management in Urban Areas of Meghalaya
32
Test check of municipal finances30 revealed that revenue receipts31 under  SWM  in the 
three test checked ULBs was not adequate to meet their revenue expenditure 32 for the 
period from 2017-18 to 2021-22 as shown in Chart 4.4.
Chart 4.4: Resource Gap for SWM activities in selected ULBs for the period from  
2017-22	(₹	in	crore)
 
1.88
20.35
18.47
1.79
3.88
2.09
0.2
10
9.8
0 5 1 0 1 5 2 0 2 5
Revenue
Expenditure
Di ffere nc e
Revenue
Expenditure
Di ffere nc e
Revenue
Expenditure
Di ffere nc e
S M BJ M BT M B
SMB, JMB and TMB could recover 9, 46 and 2 per cent  respectively of the O&M 
costs. Compared to SMB and TMB, JMB fared relatively better in recovering the O&M 
costs. One of the main reasons for less recovery of O&M costs by SMB and TMB was 
due to non-levy of user charges from households which is discussed in the succeeding 
paragraph. 
4.4 Collection of User charges
Despite the provision in SWM Rules and local bye-laws for the collection 
of user fees from households to cover solid waste management costs, most 
Municipal 	 Boards 	 did	 not	 collect 	 user	 fee	 resulting 	 in	 a	 significant 	 loss	 of	
potential 	 revenue 	 that	 could 	 have	 helped 	 offset	 operating 	 losses 	 incurred 	 in	
SWM activities.
Rule 15 (f) read with Rule 3 (54) of the SWM rules 2016 stipulates that the local 
authorities shall prescribe from time-to-time user fee and collect the fee from the waste 
generators on its own or through authorised agency to cover full or part cost of providing 
solid waste collection, transportation, processing and disposal services. As per Clause 
16 of the Meghalaya Solid Waste Management Bye Law, 2020 which was notified by 
the Urban Affairs Department on 19 May 2020, an amount of ₹ 50 per household per 
month was to be charged by the local authorities viz. ULBs. 
During audit, it was seen that Jowai Municipal Board was collecting user fees from 
the households for collection of solid waste. During the period from 2017-18 to 
2021-22, out of total assessed User Fee of ₹ 2.67 crores, JMB had managed to collect  
₹ 1.76 crores resulting in shortfall of ₹ 0.91 crore in collection of user fee. In Nongpoh, 
30 In Nongpoh Town Committee, the Dorbar Shnongs of the respective localities are carrying out the 
collection and transportation of waste from the localities.
31 Includes garbage collection fees from institutions, shops; penalties, sale of compost, etc.
32 O&M expenditure on SWM activities which includes salaries, wages, fuel, vehicle maintenance, etc.

Chapter IV: Financial Management
33
the Town Committee was not involved in the collection and transportation of waste and 
it was managed by the Dorbar Shnongs of the localities from their own funds.
The other test checked ULBs have not collected the user fees during the period covered 
by audit resulting in loss of revenue as shown in Table 4.3.
Table 4.3: Details of loss of revenue due to non-collection of user fees from households
(₹	in	crore)
Name	of	ULB/Town	
Committee
Number	of	households	(HH) Amount of user fees not 
collected since June 2020 to 
March 2022
Shillong Municipal Board 34158 HH during 2020-21 & 34655 
HH during 2021-22
3.79
Tura Municipal Board 13359 HH during 2021-22 1.47
Total 5.26
Source: Information furnished by the test checked ULBs/Town Committee.
It could be seen from the above that the SMB 
and TMB lost revenue amounting to ₹ 5.26 
crore due to non-collection of user fees from 
households which could have mitigated the 
operating losses incurred by the ULBs on 
SWM activities. 
During the Exit Conference (May 2023), the 
Department agreed with the audit observation 
and stated that the issue of collection of user 
fees as a standard charge under the Property 
Tax has been proposed in the Agenda before 
the Cabinet.
4.4.1 Finances of traditional local bodies 
(Dorbar Shnongs) in the Census Towns 
It has been pointed out in Chapter II that in 
urban areas not falling under the Municipality 
or Cantonment Board, Dorbar Shnongs were 
responsible for SWM activities. Audit carried 
out a survey of 26 Dorbar Shnongs (localities) 
under Mawlai and Umpling Census Towns 
in East Khasi Hills District to ascertain the 
collection of user charges in census town areas. 
Responses received from 15 out of 26 Dorbar 
Shnongs surveyed revealed that user charges 
ranging from ₹ 40.00 to ₹ 130.00 per household 
per month were being collected in ten Dorbar 
Shnongs.  Further, three Dorbar Shnongs had 
outsourced the waste collection to “Lasara 
Society” i.e. a Self Help Group, which was 
collecting household waste on payment basis 
from the individual households.
Best Practices
In Sikkim, Gangtok Municipal 
Corporation (GMC) engaged 22 
NGOs (operators) to organise door 
to door collection of solid waste from 
households. User fee is collected by 
the NGOs from the households, part of 
which is shared with the GMC. 
In Meghalaya, the Urban Affairs 
Department may explore the feasibility 
of carrying out similar initiatives in 
the urban areas.
Chart 4.5 - Collection of user charges 
by Dorbar Shnongs 
 Chart 4.5 - Collection of user charges by Dorbar 
S h n o n g s 

Performance Audit on Solid Waste Management in Urban Areas of Meghalaya
34
No user charges were collected in the remaining two Dorbar Shnongs.
The survey thus revealed that though there was no institutional presence of the state or 
municipality in these areas, the traditional bodies and SHGs were playing an important 
role in municipal waste collection. However, in the absence of a legal framework in 
the form of bye laws governing the functioning of traditional institutions, the activity 
of household waste collection was carried out as an informal and unorganised activity. 
Determination of user charges was ad hoc and unscientific, while collection of user 
charges by these bodies seemed more as a way to augment the earnings of Dorbar 
Shnongs/SHGs, rather than as a means to sustain the SWM activity. 
There were no records in SMB/Urban Affairs Department to indicate that this Society 
had been registered as a SHG by SMB/Urban Affairs Department. 
Moreover, since the Dorbar Shnongs were not covered under any bye law nor were they 
recognised as a formal agency involved in household waste collection, no funds could 
be released to them under the state budget of under CFC grants. 
It was interesting to note that although 87 per cent  of localities under Mawlai and 
Umpling Census Towns were paying user charges to the Dorbars, SMB and TMB were 
yet to impose user charges in their jurisdiction up till the audit period.
4.5 Conclusion
Analysis of financial resources for the solid waste management in Meghalaya has brought 
out that over a period of previous five years, bulk of the financial resource has been 
received under the Asian Development Bank’s external funded project of NERCCDIP. 
However, the NERCCDIP funding agreement being for a period of 10
33 years and for 
specified activities, this remained a finite source of fund. The Municipal Boards were 
unable to meet even the operational costs of collection and disposal of municipal waste 
due to poor collection of user charges.  In the absence of any significant budgetary 
support from the state government, and lack of own funds in the Municipal Boards, the 
SWM activities in Meghalaya suffer from paucity of funds.  
Recommendation:
5.  Necessary steps should be taken for augmentation of sustainable financial 
resources of the Municipal Boards including system of collection of user 
charges and for strengthening their administrative capacity by recruiting 
the required manpower and imparting regular training to them to improve 
efficiency and effectiveness in solid waste collection, transportation and 
processing.
33 Tranche 1- Date of loan agreement-04.08.2009, Loan closing date-22.06.2019.
 Tranche 2- Date of loan agreement-19.11.2012, Loan closing date-22.06.2019.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
CHAPTER -V
SEGREGATION, COLLECTION 
AND TRANSPORTATION OF 
WASTE

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   

NITI Aayog in its Report on Waste-Wise Cities 2021, has cited the example of Indore 
as the number one city in waste management. One of the success parameters of waste 
management in Indore was effective and persuasive awareness programme to encourage 
residents to adopt waste segregation. Once segregation was achieved, the city undertook 
a study to ascertain the population and the amount of waste generated in each ward, based 
on which a route plan was developed. Vehicle and staff demand was arrived at to meet 
the waste collection demand of each ward. Through source segregation, participation of 
all stakeholders and good governance, Indore has become a champion and number one 
city in the waste management sector in India.
Audit examined the waste management practices in the urban agglomerations in 
Meghalaya with respect to the statutory requirements and in comparison to the 
benchmarks of good practices across the country. 
The Audit findings are discussed in this Chapter. 
5.1 Segregation
Indiscriminate dumping of solid waste in landfills is not only hazardous for surrounding 
areas and residential dwellings, it has a far reaching climate impact. Biodegradable 
waste in landfills releases methane which has a 34 times higher global warming impact 
over 100 years than carbon dioxide
34. 
Segregation of waste at source is key to scientific waste management process. Proper 
source segregation results in waste minimisation thereby improving the efficiency of 
processing and treatment of waste which translates into longer life spans of landfills. 
Rule 4 (a) of the Solid Waste Management Rules, 2016 mandates the segregation of 
waste into bio-degradable, non-biodegradable and domestic hazardous waste at source. 
The Meghalaya State Waste Management Strategy and Policy, 2019
35 also mandates 
segregation of waste into 3 streams:
• Bio-degradable waste
• Non-biodegradable waste
• Domestic hazardous waste
34 Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Fifth 
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
35 Meghalaya State Waste Management Strategy and Policy, 2019 was notified by the Government of 
Meghalaya on 17 June 2019.
Chapter-V
Segregation, collection and transportation of waste

Performance Audit on Solid Waste Management in Urban Areas of Meghalaya
36
5.1.1 Segregation of waste at source in the urban areas
According to the Reports of Meghalaya Pollution Control Board, during the period 
2017-18 to 2021-22, the waste collection in urban areas of the state was to the extent of 
83 to 89 per cent. 
As per data available in various agencies, the extent of source segregation of waste in 
the test checked urban areas was as depicted in Chart 5.1 and Chart 5.2.
per data available in various agencies, the extent of source segregation of waste in the test 
checked urban areas was as depicted in &KDUWand &KDUW
Source: Information furnished by SIPMIU.
 
   
   
   
144 153 156 158
68 81 91.8 84.2
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
,Q73'
&KDUW6WDWXVRIVRXUFHVHJUHJDWLRQLQ6KLOORQJ8UEDQ$JJORPHUDWLRQ
    
    
    
24 25 27 29 29
0 0
4.6
9.2 9.2
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
,Q73'
&KDUW6WDWXVRIVRXUFHVHJUHJDWLRQLQ7XUD
Source: Information furnished by SIPMIU.
per data available in various agencies, the extent of source segregation of waste in the test 
checked urban areas was as depicted in &KDUWand &KDUW
Source: Information furnished by SIPMIU.
 
   
   
   
144 153 156 158
68 81 91.8 84.2
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
,Q73'
&KDUW6WDWXVRIVRXUFHVHJUHJDWLRQLQ6KLOORQJ8UEDQ$JJORPHUDWLRQ
    
    
    
24 25 27 29 29
0 0
4.6
9.2 9.2
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
,Q73'
&KDUW6WDWXVRIVRXUFHVHJUHJDWLRQLQ7XUD
Source: Information furnished by Tura Municipal Board.
Insufficient segregation of solid waste at source by households and institutions and 
no facilities for segregating domestic hazardous waste indicated weak enforcement 
of SWM Rules in Meghalaya, on one hand, and other hand an absence of effective 
awareness raising programmed among the households and citizens. Despite 
distribution of dual-coloured household bins for source segregation of waste, the 
effectiveness of segregation of waste at source was inadequate. Data available with 
the department on waste segregation at source was unreliable.
Generated
Generated
Generated
Generated
Segregated
Segregated
Segregated
Segregated

Chapter V: Segregation, collection and transportation of waste
37
According to municipal records/ SIPMIU records there were 84,571 number of 
domestic households under Shillong Urban Agglomeration as of 2022. According to 
the records of Shillong Municipal Board, 80,282 households (95 per cent) in Shillong 
urban agglomeration area were provided with dual coloured 36 household bins free of 
cost during 2015-16 & 2017-18 under the NERCCDIP project 37. In Jowai Municipal 
area, 12,800 dual coloured household bins were purchased for Jowai town under the 
14 Finance Commission during 2021-22 for a sum of ₹ 40.96 lakh. From scrutiny of the 
stock register of Jowai Municipal Board, it was observed that 7,050 of the 12,800 bins 
purchased had been distributed free of cost to 3,252 out of 5,057 domestic households 
(70 per cent) in Jowai Municipal area.  During audit, there were no records to indicate 
that bins were procured in Tura and Nongpoh.
Table 5.1 Details of expenditure on household bins in the test-checked urban areas
Urban area No. of households 
covered
No. of households 
issued to
Name of scheme Expenditure 
incurred
Shillong UA 84,571 80,282 NERCCDIP ₹ 3.58 crores
Jowai 5,057 3,525 14th FC ₹ 0.41 crores
However, as seen from Charts 5.1 and 
Chart 5.2 above, the rate of segregation 
of waste at source in Shillong and Tura 
urban areas was between 47-59 per cent 
and 0-32 per cent, respectively during 
2017-18 to 2020-21. In Jowai town,  
despite the distribution of 7,050 bins, 
no segregation was carried out. 
Thus, it was clear that despite the 
state government’s initiative of 
free distribution of waste bins for 
segregating waste at source in the 
domestic households, the actual extent 
of segregation of municipal waste at source was far from hundred per cent. 
During the Exit Conference (May 2023), the Department accepted the observation 
that segregation of waste into recyclable and non-recyclable waste was not being done 
completely. However, it was stated that in some localities in Shillong, dry and wet waste 
was collected on different days. 
It was thus evident that due to poor segregation of waste in the urban areas, untreated 
waste was being collected and dumped in the landfills. Poor segregation of waste 
limited any opportunity for waste recycling and composting of biodegradable waste as 
economic activities in the value chain.  
36 Green bins for bio-degradable waste and blue bins for non-bio-degradable waste as per Clause 4 
(ii) of the Meghalaya Solid Waste Management Bye Law 2020.
37 North-Eastern Capital Cities Development Investment Programme (an Asian Development Bank 
funded project). 
Exhibit 5.1: Household bins lying unutilised in the 
Jowai	Municipal	Board	office	premises.


Performance Audit on Solid Waste Management in Urban Areas of Meghalaya
38
As far as statistics on waste segregation was concerned, the Department stated these 
statistics were based on the periodic reports that MSPCB was collecting from different 
agencies. However, MSPCB stated that they had no mechanism to verify the validity 
of information submitted. The lack of reliability of data submitted by the ULBs to the 
MSPCB has been reflected in various parts of this report. 
5.1.2 Segregation of domestic hazardous waste and sanitary waste
Section 2.2.1.1 of the Solid Waste Management Manual, 2016 stipulates that all waste 
generators practice source segregation of domestic hazardous waste
38. Domestic 
hazardous waste is to be segregated in separate bins at the household level. Further, 
as per Rule 15 (i) of the Solid Waste Management Rules, 2016, it is the responsibility 
of the ULBs to establish waste deposition centres for domestic hazardous waste and 
give direction for waste generators to deposit domestic hazardous wastes at this centre 
for its safe disposal. Also, as per decisions taken in a meeting chaired by the Chief 
Secretary (24 July 2019), the Deputy Commissioners of all districts, in consultation 
with the concerned ULBs, were tasked with identifying suitable sites for establishment 
of deposition centres for domestic hazardous waste for every 20 sq. km area in each of 
22 cities/towns in the State, and to initiate process for establishment and operation of 
such centres at each identified location. Section 2.2.1.1 of the Solid Waste Management 
Manual, 2016 stipulates that sanitary waste generated from the households must be 
wrapped up properly and handed over to the waste collectors and should be preferably 
disposed in biomedical or MSW incinerators, as applicable to the local context or as 
directed by the State Pollution Control Board.
The extent of non-segregation of domestic municipal waste has already been pointed out 
in Para 5.1.1 above. Audit further found that no waste deposition centres for domestic 
hazardous waste had been established by the municipal authorities in any of the test 
checked urban areas. As a result, domestic hazardous waste was mixed with municipal 
solid waste.
38 Domestic hazardous waste consists of any chemical or product such as discarded paint drums, pesticide 
cans, CFL bulbs, tube lights, expired medicines, broken mercury thermometers, used batteries, used 
needles and syringes and contaminated gauge, etc., generated at the household level that can cause 
serious illness or pose an environmental threat if improperly disposed or treated. 
Absence of notified lists of hazardous waste items, and failure to establish waste 
deposition centers as required by regulations, and inadequate awareness resulted 
in non- implementation of source segregation and management of domestic 
hazardous waste.

Chapter V: Segregation, collection and transportation of waste
39
Exhibit 5.2 Unsegregated sanitary waste at 
Nongpoh	dumping	ground	(Umshangling)
Exhibit 5.3 Unsegregated domestic waste at 
Tura	(Rongkhon	Songittal)
This can be attributed to general lack of awareness of what constitutes domestic 
hazardous waste as apart from Shillong Municipal Board, the other test checked ULBs 
have not notified and publicised the list of items classified as domestic hazardous waste 
to be segregated at source. 
Exhibit 5.4: Segregation of waste at Rongkhon 
Songgital, Tura
Exhibit 5.5: Mixed waste being loaded on 
to a compactor, Shillong
5.2 Collection of solid municipal waste 
An efficient system of waste collection is an essential step in the solid waste 
management hierarchy. Improper waste collection mechanism adversely affects the 
aesthetics and public health of towns and cities. Clause 5 of the Meghalaya Solid 
Waste Management Bye Law, 2020 states that waste collection is the responsibility 
of the Local Authority i.e. Municipality in municipal areas and local traditional 
institutions in association with District Council with technical support from Agencies 
of Department of Urban Affairs or any agency authorised outside the municipal 
area.

Performance Audit on Solid Waste Management in Urban Areas of Meghalaya
40
Waste collection is categorised into primary and secondary collection. Primary 
collection pertains to the collection and removal of segregated solid waste from 
source of its generation including households, shops, offices, markets, etc. and taking 
the waste to a storage depot or transfer station or directly to the disposal site or to a 
designated sorting/transfer facility. Secondary collection is the collection of waste 
from community bins, sorting/transfer points to the processing and disposal sites.
5.2.1 Extent of collection of municipal waste at source 
In Meghalaya, the municipal boards and traditional bodies (Dorbar Shnongs) 
under municipal and town committees/non-municipal areas respectively, were the 
designated primary agencies involved in the collection and transport of municipal 
solid waste. 
The details of waste collection in relation to the quantum of waste generated in 
the test checked urban areas for the years 2017-18 to 2021-22 as per information 
furnished by the ULBs and Town Committee are shown in Chart 5.3, Chart 5.4 
and Chart 5.5.
 
Generated 144 153 156 158
Collected 131 137 137 146
144 153 156 158
131 137 137 146
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
Chart 5.3: Status of waste collection in Shillong Urban Agglomeration
Source: Information furnished by SIPMIU.
Municipal Boards and Dorbar Shnongs played primary role in collection of 
municipal waste from households under Municipal areas and most ULBs reported 
almost hundred percent collection of municipal waste at source, absence of a reliable 
system for assessment of quantum of waste imposed limitation on the reliability 
of the data available, including absence of weighbridges methods, including the 
absence of functioning weighbridges, has led to uncertainties in quantifying the 
actual amount of waste collected, raising concerns about waste management 
accuracy and effectiveness.
Generated Collected
2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2021-22
In TPD

Chapter V: Segregation, collection and transportation of waste
41
Generated 60 60 60 60 19.5
Collected 60 60 60 60 15.5
60 60 60 60
19.5
60 60 60 60
15.5
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
In TPD
Chart 5.4: Status of waste collection in Jowai            
Generated Collected
Generated 24 25 27 29 29
Collected 23 23 23 23 23
24 25 27 29 29
23 23 23 23 23
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
In TPD
Chart 5.5: Status of waste collection in Tura
Generated Collected
Source: Information furnished by Jowai Municipal Board.
Generated 60 60 60 60 19.5
Collected 60 60 60 60 15.5
60 60 60 60
19.5
60 60 60 60
15.5
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
In TPD
Chart 5.4: Status of waste collection in Jowai            
Generated Collected
Generated 24 25 27 29 29
Collected 23 23 23 23 23
24 25 27 29 29
23 23 23 23 23
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
In TPD
Chart 5.5: Status of waste collection in Tura
Generated Collected
Source: Information furnished by Tura Municipal Board.
Data was not available with respect to Nongpoh Town Committee for the year 2017-18 
to 2020-21. During 2021-22, four TPD of waste was collected in Nongpoh out of the 
seven TPD of waste generated. 
For Shillong urban agglomeration, the SIPMIU data indicated that on an average 
90 per cent of municipal waste generated in TPD was being collected by the ULB. 
Similarly, JMB data showed hundred per cent collection of waste that in four out of five 
years while the collection of waste in Tura was shown as 23 TPD for the period under 
audit review. 
A requirement under Section 4.5.2.10.6 of the Solid Waste Management Manual, 2016 
is that there should be a weighbridge in every landfill must have a weighbridge for 
assessing the quantum of waste collected. Audit observed from JPV of the processing 
and disposal sites that there were no functioning weighbridges available around landfills 
2017-18
2017-18
2018-19
2018-19
2019-20
2019-20
2020-21
2020-21
2021-22
2021-22

Performance Audit on Solid Waste Management in Urban Areas of Meghalaya
42
test checked by audit, a fact accepted by the Department during the Exit Meeting.  As 
such, the ULBs and Town Committee had no proper means to quantify the actual amount 
of waste collected.
Thus, while the statistics of municipal waste collection are encouraging, the reliability 
of these remain questionable due to weakness of data collection system and absence of 
any validation mechanism. 
5.3 Infrastructure for Collection and Transportation of municipal solid waste.
Lack of source segregation in the tested urban areas resulted in mixed waste being 
sent to treatment facilities, leading to manual sorting by informal workers during 
processing and disposal, consequently affecting the quality of processed waste.
Segregation of waste at source cannot be successful unless the institutional mechanisms 
for collection and transportation of municipal waste is not in place. According to NITI 
Aayog39, “Inadequate infrastructure, operational inefficiencies, and poor services for 
collection and transportation of segregated waste can have a direct bearing on waste 
segregation behaviour”. 
Meghalaya Solid Waste Management Bye Laws, 2020, states that non-biodegradable 
waste, both recyclable and non-recyclable shall be stored and delivered by every 
generator of waste to the dry waste collection vehicle, which shall be provided by the 
Local Authority, or any agency appointed by them, twice or thrice a week. Similarly, 
segregated biodegradable waste shall be stored by generators of such waste within 
their premises and its delivery shall be ensured by every such generator to the sanitary 
workers or collection vehicles provided by the Local Authority. Section 2.3.2 of the 
Solid Waste Management Manual, 2016, stipulates that vehicles used for transportation 
of waste be covered so that waste is not visible to the public and should have the facility 
for preventing spillage of waste. As such, it is the responsibility of the designated Local 
Authority to ensure that the vehicles deployed for collection and transportation are 
equipped with the prescribed facilities.
Audit found that in the municipal areas under SMB, JMB and TMB, frequency of 
collection of household waste was daily for localities under SMB, three times a week 
with alternative days for dry and wet waste in Jowai, while waste was collected daily 
in Tura. 
Further, in survey of 26 localities under traditional local authority, i.e. Dorbar Shnongs 
under Mawlai and Umpling Census Towns, Audit found that out of 15 respondents, three 
(20 per cent) Dorbar Shnongs carried out daily door to door collection; one (7 per cent) 
Dorbar Shnong carried out door to door collection four times a week; five (33 per cent) 
Dorbar Shnongs carried out door to door collection twice a week.
Amongst the remaining six authorities, four Dorbar Shnongs (27 per cent) stated that 
they were collecting waste only once a week while two (13 per cent) were not collecting 
39 Policy Guidelines on “Promoting Behaviour Change for strengthening waste segregation at source” 
issued by NITI Aayog in November 2021.

Chapter V: Segregation, collection and transportation of waste
43
any waste. In these two Dorbar Shnongs, it was stated that the waste was self-disposed 
by the households or openly dumped. Thus, there was no uniform practice of waste 
collection across the different local authorities, resulting in unpredictiveness of waste 
collection for the residents. 
During Audit’s Physical Verification of vehicles used for collection and transportation 
in the few sampled urban areas40, it was observed that majority of the vehicles deployed 
for collection of municipal waste had no partition for storing segregated dry and wet 
household waste. Thus, even if segregated waste was collected from the households, 
it was mixed up during collection stage in the transportation vehicles due to absence 
of partitions in the collection vehicles, thereby rendering the source segregation 
efforts futile. Segregated waste from primary collection vehicles was also mixed while 
unloading on to the compactors in the transit points. It was also observed that most 
vehicles were not covered during transportation resulting in foul odour emanating from 
the uncovered waste.
 
Exhibit 5.6: Unsegregated waste being transported 
to dumpsites in a uncovered and un-partitioned  
vehicle, Jowai
Exhibit 5.7: Waste Collection truck without 
cover and partition, SUA
During the Exit Conference held in May 2023, the Department accepted the Audit 
observation regarding mixing of segregated waste during collection and transportation. 
The Member Secretary, MSPCB agreed that segregated waste collected from the 
households were mixed in the transportation vehicles. The Director, Urban Affairs 
Department, however, stated that the segregation of waste by the public was a good step 
in the right direction which would be fruitful when the Compost Plant/Processing Plants 
are functioning at full capacity.
Thus, while ULBs and traditional bodies involved in collection of waste carried out 
the exercise of waste collection from the localities being served by them, absence of a 
predictable routine coupled with unhygienic conditions of the transport vehicles carrying 
solid waste indicated that inefficient and insufficient mechanism which could not attract 
much response from people. 
40 Jaiaw Shyiap, Mission Compound, Lower Mawprem, Nongrim Hills, Laitumkhrah, Rongkhon 
Songittal, Ladthalaboh West.

Performance Audit on Solid Waste Management in Urban Areas of Meghalaya
44
5.3.1  Facilities for waste collectors and handlers 
As stipulated in Rule 15 (zd) of Solid Waste Management Rules, 2016, local bodies shall 
ensure that the operators of municipal solid waste collection and processing facilities 
provide personal protection equipment including uniform, fluorescent jacket, hand 
gloves, raincoats, appropriate footwear, and masks to all workers handling solid waste 
and the same are used by the workforce. 
Audit conducted a Joint Physical Verification (JPV) of waste segregation centres in 
Shillong and Tura and found that workers were manually sorting waste in the processing 
and disposal facilities in Shillong
41 and Tura 42. Due to poorly segregated waste, the 
quality of processed waste was also adversely affected. During JPVs of selected wards 
Audit found that majority of the workers involved in collection of waste were not 
utilising the available safety equipment like boots, gloves and face masks.
Exhibit 5.8: SWM workers handling waste 
without protective equipment, SMB
Exhibit 5.9: SWM workers handling waste 
without protective equipment, SMB
Scrutiny of records of JMB revealed that PPE kits such as coat with caps, gumboots, 
glow jackets, helmet, gloves, masks, etc. were procured at a cost of ₹ 3.08 lakhs during 
2017-18 to 2021-22 from the Boards’ own fund/ Swachh Bharat Mission. 
Absence of hygienic waste handling facilities for the workers involved in collection and 
transportation of waste was a significant gap in the institutional mechanism put in place 
by the state for ensuring safety of the workers. 
41 A 170 TPD Compost plant at Marten landfill site.
42 A Refuse Derived Fuel (RDF) plant at Rongkhon Songgital dumpsite.
Insufficient source segregation and unscientific collection of municipal waste 
resulted not only in mixed waste being sent to treatment facilities, but also 
necessitating manual sorting of waste in unhygienic conditions. Personal Protective 
Equipment kits were not found to be used by the waste handlers thus exposing them 
to several health hazards.

Chapter V: Segregation, collection and transportation of waste
45
5.3.2 Monitoring of transportation vehicles through Management Information 
System
In its Report of 2021, the NITI Aayog43 pointed out that monitoring of waste management 
practices has been one of the significant challenges in most urban areas. In 2020, to 
monitor the services and synchronise coordination among different waste management 
concessionaires, Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP) employed several 
Information, Communication, and Technology (ICT) solutions, including an RFID-
based attendance system and geotagging of collection routes to monitor the waste 
management services. In addition, a mobile-based application called Ezetap has been 
designed to monitor garbage-vulnerable points and impose penalties on offenders. 
Even under Solid Waste Management Manual, 2016 (Section 2.3.12.1), guidance has 
been provided for putting in place an appropriate management information systems 
(MIS) including deploying geographic information system (GIS), Global Positioning 
System (GPS), radio frequency identification (RFID) and general packet radio services 
(GPRS) to manage municipal solid waste. The head of the SWM department as well 
as the head of the ULB must be informed of the day-to-day performance of the SWM 
service and daily reports on some aspects of the waste transportation system need to be 
compiled to take stock of existing performance and take corrective measures.
The fact of municipal waste collection 
vehicles without partition has already 
been stated in Para 5.3. Audit further 
sought to examine the mechanism 
deployed by the local authorities in 
monitoring and tracking of these 
vehicles. Scrutiny of information 
provided by the selected ULBs 
and Town Committee revealed that 
none of the vehicles used by the 
local authorities for collection and 
transportation of municipal waste 
were equipped with tracking devices 
like GPS or RFID. Due to lack of GPS and GIS, the local authorities were not in 
apposition to accurately track the movement of vehicles, which could have enabled 
these authorities to efficiently plan and deploy these vehicles.
43 NITI Aayog’s Waste-Wise Cities Best Practices in Municipal Solid Waste Management.
The ULBs and Autonomous District Councils in Meghalaya were ill-equipped to 
manage and monitor transport vehicles carrying municipal waste from collection 
points to dumping sites. Absence of Management Information Systems and essential 
facilities in waste transportation vehicles, along with the lack of GPS and GIS, 
limited their capacity for identification of garbage vulnerable points and regulated 
movement of transport vehicles as part of solid waste management services.
Exhibit 5.10  Waste transportation trucks, Jowai.


Performance Audit on Solid Waste Management in Urban Areas of Meghalaya
46
Information obtained from SIPMIU revealed that most of the vehicles in SMB and 
adjoining areas under SUA had been purchased in the year 2015 from the NERCCIPD 
funds. Subsequently, no budget allocation was made by State Government or ULBs for 
regular maintenance and upgrade of these vehicles. 
Vehicles operating without proper fitness certificates indicated lackadaisical approach 
of the ULBs towards monitoring minimum working standards of the vehicles deployed 
by them for waste management services. 
During the Exit Conference (May 2023), the Director, Urban Affairs Department stated 
that the vehicles would be equipped with GPS monitoring systems under Smart City 
Mission.
Convergence of solid waste management infrastructure under the Smart City Mission for 
Shillong is a welcome step, and should be taken up in all earnestness by the Government. 
At the same time, the State Government needs to converge better resources under FC 
grants, Swachh Bharat Mission scheme and state budgetary resources to modernise and 
upgrade the infrastructure meant for solid waste segregation, collection and transport 
in all the urban areas along with the active involvement of the autonomous district 
councils / traditional bodies. 
5.4 Conclusion
Segregation of waste at different levels was either absent or partial in all the test-
checked ULBs. Segregation of domestic hazardous waste was not done and sanitary 
waste was not collected separately. Hence, mixed waste was transported to landfills. 
Household bins for source segregation were purchased and distributed only in Shillong 
and Jowai but not in Tura and Nongpoh. Even though bins were distributed in Jowai, 
source segregation of waste had not yet been carried out. 
During joint physical verification, majority of the workers handling waste were not 
utilising the available safety equipment even though protective gears were procured by 
the ULBs. The vehicles were not covered during transportation resulting in foul odour 
emanating from the uncovered waste. None of the available vehicles were equipped 
with Management Information Systems such as GPS and GIS, due to which tracking of 
transportation vehicles was not carried out.

Chapter V: Segregation, collection and transportation of waste
47
Recommendations:
6. The State Government should encourage segregation of waste at source by 
devising a system for incentivising waste generators and collectors for proper 
segregation of waste and through public awareness campaigns and regular 
meetings with local traditional bodies, group housing associations, and 
NGOs.
7. Municipal Boards may consider option of installing community waste bins for 
collection of waste in a segregated manner apart from providing bins to each 
household.
8. ULBs should sensitise workers involved in handling waste to ensure compliance 
to occupational health and safety protocols by wearing safety gear and other 
protective equipment.
9. The vehicles procured should be suitably designed to collect and transport 
segregated waste efficiently so as to prevent mixing of segregated waste during 
various stages of SWM.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
    PROCESSING AND DISPOSAL OF 
MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE
CHAPTER -VI

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
    

The Annual Report (2019-20) of Meghalaya State Pollution Control Board indicates 
that despite the high percentage of municipal waste collection of 83 per cent in 
urban areas, a significant portion was disposed off in landfills without processing. 
Judicious processing of municipal waste not only creates value out of waste, but also 
aids in scientific and non-polluting methods of municipal waste disposal.
Municipal Solid Waste Management Manual (2016), provides guidance on management 
of Integrated Solid Waste Management (ISWM), pictorially depicted as follows:  
6.1 Status of Waste Processing in Meghalaya 
Test check of urban agglomerations revealed that significant portion (70 per cent to 
98 per cent) of municipal waste ended up in landfills without any processing.
An ideal mechanism for processing municipal solid waste is depicted below: 
Chart 6.1: Integrated Solid Waste Management Hierarchy
 
Source: Municipal Solid Waste Management Manual 2016.
In the hierarchy of solid waste management, dumping of solid waste in landfills should 
be of the residual waste remaining after retrieval, reuse, composting and processing of 
solid waste. 
As per MSPCB Annual Report 2019-20, total waste generated in seven 44 urban local 
bodies was 229.18 TPD 45 out of which 83 per cent (191.19 TPD 46) was collected by 
44 Six Municipal Boards and one Cantonment Board, Shillong (SCB).
45 SMB-59.85 TPD, SCB-16, JMB-60, TMB-75, WMB- 11.20, RMB-1.03, BMB-6.
46 SMB-50.96, SCB-16, JMB-56, TMB-50, WMB- 11.20, RMB-1.03, BMB-6.
Chapter- VI
Processing and Disposal of Municipal Solid Waste

Performance Audit on Solid Waste Management in Urban Areas of Meghalaya
50
the ULBs and only 9.64 TPD 47 (four per cent ) was processed and rest 181.55 TPD 
(79 per cent) was disposed to the landfill.
The status of waste collected and processed in the test-checked urban areas during the 
period 2017-18 to 2021-22 is given in the Graph below:
Chart 6.2 – Comparison of Waste processing and disposal in selected Urban 
Areas	(Period	from	2017-18	to	2021-22)
 
1 3 7 . 7 5  T P D
9 0 % 2 3  T P D
8 6 %
5 1 . 1 0  T P D
9 8 %
3 0  T P D
2 0 % 2  T P D
8 % 0  T P D
0 %
1 0 7 . 5 8  T P D
7 0 %
2 1  T P D
7 8 %
5 1 . 1 0  T P D
9 8 %
0 %
2 0 %
4 0 %
6 0 %
8 0 %
1 0 0 %
1 2 0 %
S h i l l o n g  U r b a n
Agglomeration
(152.75 TPD Avg waste
g e n e r a t i o n  d u r i n g  a u d i t
p e r i o d )
T u r a  M u n i c i p a l  B o a r d
(26.80 TPD Avg waste
g e n e r a t i o n  d u r i n g  a u d i t
p e r i o d )
Jowai Municipal Board
(51.90 TPD Avg waste
g e n e r a t i o n  d u r i n g  a u d i t
p e r i o d )
% o f W a s t e
c o l l e c t e d
(T P D)
% of Quantity
o f  w a s t e
t r e a t e d  ( T P D )
% o f W a s t e
disposed at
landfill/dumps
ite (TPD)
 
Source: Information submitted by the SIPMIU48/selected ULBs.
From the information available as shown in the Chart above, it can be seen that the 
waste processing capacity of the major urban areas like Shillong and Tura were grossly 
insufficient.  In Shillong, only 20 per cent of the total collected waste, i.e. 30 tonnes 
was being processed, while in Tura the percentage of waste processing was abysmal  
eight per cent . Although the collection of waste from selected urban areas were 
90 per cent for Shillong Urban Agglomeration, 86 per cent for Tura MB and 98 per cent 
for Jowai MB, 70 to 98 per cent of unprocessed solid waste ended up in landfills.   
No data was being maintained by the Nongpoh Town Committee till 2020-21. During 
2021-22, seven TPD waste was generated in Nongpoh but nothing was processed. 
Thus, in the hierarchy of Integrated Solid Waste Management laid down in the Municipal 
Solid Waste Management Manual, Meghalaya was operating at the lowest level of 
hierarchy or in the least preferred stage.  
6.2 Value Chain in Waste Processing 
An important component of value chain in solid waste management is recovery of 
materials that could be used further or recycled. After the initial collection of municipal 
waste, the first step is to transfer the waste to resource recovery centres, from where the 
initial segregation of recyclables, organic and inorganic waste and inert could be carried 
out.  
47 SMB 
48 In Shillong, as per information submitted by SIPMIU; 137.75 TPD of waste was generated of which 
30 TPD was processed, 107.58 TPD was disposed in landfill while the remaining 0.17 TPD was 
unaccounted.

Chapter VI: Processing and Disposal of Municipal Solid Waste
51
Recyclables like plastic, metal, glass etc. have a high potential of material recovery, 
that can be sold as scrap or used as raw materials if appropriate technology is 
available. 
Organic waste, which forms a bulk of solid municipal waste can be treated further for 
composting or for energy conversion.  The value chain in solid waste management was 
practically non-existent as composting was unsuccessful due to poor waste segregation 
practices as pointed out in the succeeding paragraphs.
6.3 Integration of the informal sector in recycling process
Despite the presence of recycling initiatives in certain urban areas, such as Shillong 
and Tura, the proper functioning and integration of waste recovery centers and 
recyclers into the solid waste management system, as required by SWM Rules, 2016, 
have been lacking, leading to suboptimal recycling efforts.
Section 3.1 of MSWM Manual 2016 defines recycling as “the process of transforming 
segregated solid waste into a new product or a raw material for producing new products.” 
Further, it also states that “arrangement shall be made to provide segregated recyclable 
material to the recycling industry through waste pickers or any other agency engaged or 
authorised by the urban local body for the purpose”. Chart 6.1 indicates the importance 
of recycling in the ISWM hierarchy.
Audit carried out a survey of 26 Dorbar Shnongs (localities) under Mawlai and Umpling 
Census Towns (East Khasi Hills) to ascertain the recycling and composting activities 
in census town areas, of which 15 responded. Out of 15 respondents of the survey of 
Dorbar Shnongs, 14 (93 per cent) stated that no recycling or composting activities were 
undertaken in the localities.
During Joint Physical Verification (JPV) of the test checked Urban Areas, audit noticed 
the following:
• A Waste Recovery Centre (WRC) Shillong, to reduce waste transportation cost by 
recovering recyclable waste to be sold as scrap, was set up at Umpling,
 a census 
town within SUA, which was being operated by two people (unregistered as 
SHG till the date of JPV). The WRC was set up with space for composting and 
storing of waste. During JPV (September 2022), it was however seen that all the 
sheds to segregate and store valuable materials from the waste were empty except 
glass bottle shed. The person in-charge admitted that the WRC was not yet fully 
functional and there were no earnings from the WRC. It was also stated that due to 
improper segregation, the entire waste goes to landfill. The SMB in collaboration 
with the Dorbar Shnong of Umpling should take steps to fully operationalise this 
WRC in order to reduce the waste generated from the locality which will ultimately 
reduce the burden in the sanitary landfill at Marten. 

Performance Audit on Solid Waste Management in Urban Areas of Meghalaya
52
Exhibit 6.1: Storage shed used not as intended
 Exhibit 6.2: Glass bottle storage 
• Eleven recyclers were operating in Marten landfill site to collect, sort and transport 
various types of recyclable materials segregated from the collected waste. However, 
there were no records to indicate that these recyclers have been formally integrated 
into the SWM system.
Exhibit 6.3: Recyclers operating at Marten, 
Shillong
Exhibit 6.4: Manual workers sorting recyclables 
from dumped waste 
• In Tura, some workers were seen segregating/sorting the recyclables, valuable 
materials from the heap of garbage and transferring them to recycling industries. 
These workers were part of Swapan Industries and they are recycling about one TPD 
of waste from Rongkhon Songittal, the dumping site of Tura. The proprietor informed 
that his transporting capacity could be augmented if one plastic baling machine was 
made available to him.
Exhibit 6.5 & 6.6: Informal Sector workers sorting and packaging recyclables at Tura dumpsite

Chapter VI: Processing and Disposal of Municipal Solid Waste
53
There is a vertical composting unit available at the Waste Recovery Centre (WRC), 
Umpling. However, plastic waste was seen mixed with the vertical composting which 
may degrade the quality of compost. There was no earning as on the date of audit from 
the sale of compost.
Thus, within the test checked urban areas, there were very limited mechanisms in place, 
including involvement of informal sector, for waste recovery for transferring them to 
recycling industry, observed only in Tura and Shillong. 
6.4 Status of Composting
According to Section 3.2 of MSWM Manual, composting is a process of controlled 
decomposition of the organic waste, typically in aerobic conditions, resulting in the 
production of stable humus-like product, i.e., compost. Composting improves soil quality, 
enhances water retention capacity of soil, increases biological activity, micronutrient 
content, and improves pest resistance of crops. It also minimises greenhouse gases 
emissions from anaerobic decomposition of organic waste and increases the design life 
of other waste management facilities.
As per Section 3.2.4 of MSWM Manual 2016, market development for compost and 
proper quality monitoring are crucial. The pricing mechanism for sale of compost 
should be assessed by fixing a minimum retail price for compost, which meets Fertiliser 
Control Order (FCO) 2009 standards. All state and local government departments 
should be encouraged to promote the use of compost in parks, gardens, nurseries, and 
urban forestry projects. The benefits of compost should be informed to farmers, who 
should be encouraged to partially substitute inorganic fertilisers with organic compost, 
as appropriate for their crop and specific soil. In addition, opportunities for involving 
agricultural officers to generate awareness of compost usage among farmers should be 
looked into.  
In Meghalaya, sanction had been accorded through schemes like JnNURM (March 
2009) and NERCCDIP (May 2019) for setting up of composting plants in Nongpoh, 
Tura and Shillong. The status of these composting plants is discussed in succeeding 
paragraphs.
6.4.1 Compost plant in Nongpoh 
SWM project for Nongpoh town was sanctioned (March 2009) at a cost of ₹ 600.16 lakh 
under UIDSSMT
49 of JnNURM. Mention was made in Paragraph 1.6 of the Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India on Social, Economic, General and Economic 
(PSUs) Sectors for the year ended 31 March 2015 regarding delay in executing the civil 
49 Urban Infrastructure Development Scheme for Small & Medium Towns.
The Nongpoh solid waste management project, sanctioned under JnNURM, faced 
delays and remained incomplete, with the composting facility and associated 
structures left unused and non-functional, despite payments for civil works and 
machinery which led to wasteful expenditure of ₹ 4.48 crore.

Performance Audit on Solid Waste Management in Urban Areas of Meghalaya
54
and compost plant works in Nongpoh leading to the project remaining incomplete.  Two 
major components of this project were ‘Civil works for Compost Plant site including 
windrow platform, vermi pits, office building for main structure, site development 
for plant and installation of ‘25 TPD Compost Plant’. The work was allotted to M/s 
Marbaniang Enterprises. Total expenditure incurred towards civil works as per final 
Running Account (RA) bills for civil works was ₹ 3.63 crore whereas the expenditure 
incurred towards the compost plant was ₹ 0.82 crore.
During Joint Physical Verification (JPV) of SWM facilities in Nongpoh (17 November 
2022), the following were revealed:
• This facility was yet to be handed over to the Town Committee by MUDA.
• Though the composting plant and windrow platform was available at the site, no 
composting was being carried out.
• Facilities including the machineries, the windrow platforms, vermi-compost pits, 
office building, storage rooms, etc. was not used as they were originally intended.
• Machineries at Nongpoh could not be started and vegetation could be seen growing 
out of the machinery. The windrow platform, vermi-compost pits and office building, 
etc. were lying idle and unused since completion.
Exhibit 6.7: Compost Plant Machineries with 
vegetation coming up at Nongpoh 
 
Exhibit 6.8: Unused windrow platform at 
Nongpoh 
Exhibit 6.9: Damaged panel board of compost 
plant
Exhibit 6.10: Parts of the machineries lying 
separately

Chapter VI: Processing and Disposal of Municipal Solid Waste
55
In reply to audit (January 2023), the Secretary, MUDA stated that the handing over 
of the facility was deferred due to the pandemic.  It was further stated that present 
waste characteristics of the solid waste generated and collected in Nongpoh comprises 
mainly of biodegradable and recyclable waste and only a small fraction of inert waste is 
generated and collected. Hence, absence of sanitary landfill will not hamper operation 
of the solid waste management in Nongpoh. 
Audit noted that the final bill for construction of the civil works for Compost Plant site 
was paid in March 2017, which was three years prior to the pandemic.
Further, according to the Detailed Project Report (DPR), 52 per cent of waste generated 
in Nongpoh town area was bio-degradable, 24 per cent was inert and rest was recyclable. 
Hence, the statement made by the Secretary that only a small fraction of inert waste is 
generated and collected was inconsistent with the DPR. 
As evident from the photographs taken on site, civil structures for segregation, treatment 
and storage of waste as well as the compost plants were not used. 
Exhibit 6.11: Unused vermi compost pits at 
Nongpoh
Exhibit	6.12:	Unused	office	room
Thus, this resulted in wasteful expenditure on civil works for Compost Plant site and 
Compost Plant machineries. Further, absence of waste composting facility exacerbated 
the risk of dumping untreated waste in landfills. 
6.4.2 Compost Plant in Tura
SWM project for Tura town was sanctioned (March 2009) at a cost of ₹ 833.10 lakh 
under UIDSSMT50 of JnNURM. Mention was made in Paragraph 1.6 of the Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India on Social, Economic, General and Economic 
50 Urban Infrastructure Development Scheme for Small & Medium Towns.
Tura solid waste management project sanctioned under JnNURM, including 
a compost plant, faced delays and remained incomplete, with the composting 
facilities and associated structures left unused and the machinery not utilised as 
intended, despite payments for civil works and commissioning which led to wasteful 
expenditure of ₹ 5.16 crore.

Performance Audit on Solid Waste Management in Urban Areas of Meghalaya
56
(PSUs) Sectors for the year ended 31 March 2015 regarding delay in executing the civil 
and compost plant works in Tura leading to the project remaining incomplete. Two 
major components of this project were ‘Civil works for Compost Plant site including 
covered window platform, tromel shed, ramp, office, retaining walls, site development 
for plant, finished and semi-finished store etc.’ and installation of ‘Compost Plant’. The 
work was executed by Shri R.P. Marak and Smti S.Ch. Momin. The total expenditure 
incurred towards civil works as per final Running Account (RA) bills for civil works 
was ₹ 3.98 crore
51. 
A Compost Plant of 50 TPD was commissioned during February 2015. It was also 
noticed that an amount of ₹ 1.08 crore was incurred towards the Compost Plant.
During JPV (November 2022) of SWM facilities in Tura, the following were revealed:
• The facilities were handed over to TMB by the Executive Engineer, Urban Affairs, 
Tura (July 2019). 
• A composting plant was also available at the site but it was observed that no composting 
was being carried out. Officials from the TMB apprised that the machinery was 
never used for its intended purpose.
• The road around the plant, drain around the road, leachate drain was not observed. 
Officials from the TMB apprised that those could not be seen as they were already 
under the dumped garbage.
• The vermi composting platform was learned to be dismantled and now being used to 
dump garbage and no traces of the same was visible.
Exhibit 6.13: Unused Compost Plant Machineries Exhibit 6.14: Dumping of waste near Compost 
Plant
Hence, it is evident that the civil structures for segregation, treatment and storage of 
waste as well as the compost plant machinery was not used as intended. This resulted 
in wasteful expenditure of  ₹ 5.16 crore towards civil works for Compost Plant site 
and Compost Plant machineries leading to the risk of dumping untreated waste in 
landfills. 
During the Exit Conference (May 2023), the Director, Urban Affairs Department stated 
that the Department would take steps to hand hold the Municipal Board to ensure that 
the Compost Plants become functional.
51 RP Marak (₹ 3.53 crore) + S. Ch Momin (₹ 0.45 crore).

Chapter VI: Processing and Disposal of Municipal Solid Waste
57
6.4.3 Compost plant in Shillong
The compost plant installed at Marten landfill site in Shillong was handed over to 
the Shillong Municipal Board but experienced underutilisation due to challenges 
in source segregation, lack of marketing efforts, and issues with compost quality, 
resulting in a production far below its capacity.
The revised estimate for supply and installation of 170 TPD compost plant costing 
₹ 16.32 crore was sanctioned (May 2019) under NERCCDIP which was to be installed 
in Marten, the sanitary landfill site of Shillong Municipal Board. The compost plant 
started functioning since March 2022. The Compost plant had been proposed as the 
only alternative for the safe treatment of segregated organic waste generated in Shillong 
Urban Agglomeration area. In the DPR, it was stated that the compost produced from 
mixed waste had very less acceptability and it was a herculean task to market the compost 
and due to this, it was proposed that only segregated biodegradable waste be treated in 
the composting plant to obtain the desired quality of the compost. 
During JPV (September 2022), it was seen that the compost plant was functioning 
but was not utilised at full capacity due to poor source segregation of waste. This was 
apparent from the fact that even though the compost plant started functioning since 
March 2022, presently, SMB processed only 30 TPD of segregated waste collected 
against the capacity of 170 TPD during the year 2022. Audit noticed that the reasons for 
under performance was as under:
• The SMB could not ensure proper source segregation and transportation of 
segregated wastes to the composting units without getting mixed.
• Till now no steps were taken by the SMB to market the compost through publicity or 
by any other means. 
Due to the above reasons, the SMB was unable to maximise the benefits of the compost 
plant due to which the quantum of processed waste in Shillong still remained low at 
17 per cent 
52 during 2022.
Exhibit	6.15:	Mixed	waste	put	into	first	input	
section of the compost plant
Exhibit	6.16:		Output	from	the	first	section	not	
properly segregated
During the Exit Conference (May 2023), the Department admitted that the compost 
plant at Shillong was not functioning at its full capacity. Further, on being asked 
whether compost being produced is of commercial grade and being sold in the market, 
52 30 TPD compost out of 178 TPD generated.

Performance Audit on Solid Waste Management in Urban Areas of Meghalaya
58
it was stated that the sample of the compost was sent for testing but test report was still 
unsatisfactory. Therefore, the compost being produced is unmarketable currently.
6.5 Dumping of Municipal Waste 
Discussion in the preceding paragraphs has revealed that most of the municipal waste 
in the urban areas in Meghalaya is being dumped in landfills in the absence of adequate 
and appropriate waste processing facilities. 
Audit examined the condition of landfills falling under the jurisdiction of sampled 
municipal boards and observed the following: 
6.5.1	Identification	and	acquisition	of	suitable	land	for	sanitary	landfill	and	other	
waste management facilities.
Solid Waste Management Rules mandated the identification and allocation of 
suitable land for waste processing, but despite the reconstitution of a Task Force 
Committee and recommendations for certain areas, the acquisition process for the 
required land in multiple urban areas including Shillong, Tura, and Jowai was still 
pending as of May 2023.
Rule 15(zh) of the SWM Rules, 2016 states that it is the duty of the local authorities to 
stop land filling or dumping of mixed waste and to set up and operationalise the sanitary 
landfill as per the timeline specified in Rule 22. The extract of timelines is given in 
Table 6.1.
Table 6.1: Timeline to identify suitable sites and setting up solid waste processing 
facility	and	sanitary	landfill	facilities.
Sl. No. Activity Time limit from the date 
of	notification	of	rules	(8	
April	2016)
1. Identification of suitable sites for setting up solid waste 
processing facilities.
1 year
2. Identification of suitable sites for setting up common re-
gional sanitary landfill facilities for suitable clusters of 
local authorities under 0.5 million population and for 
setting up common regional sanitary landfill facilities or 
standalone sanitary landfill facilities by all local authori -
ties having a population of 0.5 million or more.
1 year
3. Procurement of suitable sites for setting up solid waste 
processing facility and sanitary landfill facilities.
2 years
Source: Rule 22 of SWM Rules, 2016.
A Task Force Committee was constituted by the Urban Affairs Department on 
11 March 2011 to identify a suitable location for a landfill site in all the districts which 
would meet the future requirement. The Committee was reconstituted on 13 February 2016 
and 21 May 2018. The Committee comprised of the Director, Urban Affairs as Chairman 
and District Urban Planner of the concerned Districts as Member Secretary. During 

Chapter VI: Processing and Disposal of Municipal Solid Waste
59
April 2022, the Committee was again reconstituted with the Deputy Commissioner 
and the District Urban Planner of the concerned Districts as the Chairman and Member 
Secretary respectively. However, till date (May 2023), none of the four test checked 
Urban Areas were able to acquire suitable land as stipulated under Clause 4.5.2.1 of 
MSWM Manual 2016 which is detailed in the succeeding para. 
As per Rule 11 (f) of the Solid Waste Management (SWM) Rules 2016, it was the duty 
of Secretary-in-charge, Urban Development in the States to ensure identification and 
allocation of suitable land to the local bodies within one year for setting up of processing 
and disposal facilities for solid waste and incorporate them in the master plans (land use 
plan) of the State or as the case may be, cities through metropolitan and district planning 
committees or town and country planning department.
In this regard, the Director, Urban Affairs Department stated (March 2023) that the 
Task Force Committee had recommended the sites for Shillong, Tura and Jowai and the 
acquisition process has been initiated for Tura but acquisition process for Shillong and 
Jowai was still awaited.
6.5.2	 Availability	and	Landfill	Capacity	of	the	Waste	Disposal	Sites
Despite the establishment of Task Force Committees and the stipulation under Solid 
Waste Management Rules, none of the four tested urban areas have successfully 
acquired suitable land for processing and disposal facilities for solid waste, with only 
Tura having initiated the acquisition process among the three identified areas.
Mention was made in Paragraph 1.1.13.4 of the Report of the Comptroller and Auditor 
General of India on Social, Economic, General and Economic (PSUs) Sectors for the 
year ended 31 March 2011 regarding lack of scientific landfills in all the six municipal 
boards of the State resulting in open dumping of mixed waste which could lead to 
environmental pollution. The condition of the old and prevailing dumpsites and 
sanitary landfill (as on the date of JPVs) in the test checked Urban Areas are detailed 
in Table 6.2.
Table 6.2: Status of old dumpsites of test checked ULBs
Sl. 
No.
Name Used by 
Locality
Category Total Area of the 
existing disposal facility 
(in	acre)
Current 
Condition
1 Marten Shillong Urban 
Agglomeration
Converted 
to Sanitary 
Landfill
11.63 acres
53 In use
2 Mynkjai Jowai Town Dumpsite 2.22 acres54 Closed
3 Ronkhon 
Songgital
Tura Town Dumpsite 3.99 acres55 In use
4 Umshangling Nongpoh Town Dumpsite 1.50 acres In use
Source: Information furnished by test checked ULBs.
53 4.706 hectares.
54 0.9 HA.
55 16187.24 sqm.

Performance Audit on Solid Waste Management in Urban Areas of Meghalaya
60
As per Clause 4.5.2.1 of MSWM Manual 2016 the Design Life for a Sanitary Landfill 
should be 20 to 25 years 56
53 and as per Clause 4.5.1.3 of MSWM manual the required 
area of the landfill site for the selected urban areas57
54 should be 15 – 20 hectares (Section 
4.5.2.1 of MSWM Manual). In this period, as per data submitted by Shillong, Jowai and 
Tura Municipal board and Nongpoh Town Committee, the estimated waste generation 
of these ULBs for 20 to 25 years is detailed in Table 6.3 (considering five per cent 
annual increase in waste generation as per Section 1.4.3.3 of MSWM Manual 2016).
Table 6.3: Projection of Waste Generation for the next 20-25 years and area 
required	for	development	of	sanitary	landfill	and	related	infrastructure.
Sl. 
No.
Locality Avg Waste 
Generation 
(TPD)	from	
2017-18 to 
2021-22	(A)
Yearly 
waste 
generation 
(Ton)
(B)	=	(A)	*	
365
Cumulative 
waste 
generation 
in 20-25 
years (in 
lakh	tonnes)	
(C)58
Area (in 
acre)	
required59
Total 
Area 
of the 
existing 
disposal 
facility 
(in	acre)	
Percentage 
area of 
available 
land in 
comparison 
with actual 
requirement
1 Shillong 
Urban 
Agglome-
ration
152.75 55754 1.48 - 1.89 37.01-49.42 11.63 
acres
24 – 31 %
2 Jowai 51.9 18943.5 0.50 - 0.64 37.01-49.42 Nil
60 -
3 Tura 26.8 9782 0.26 - 0.33 37.01-49.42 3.99 acres 8 – 11 %
4 Nongpoh 7 2555 0.07 - 0.09 37.01-49.42 1.5 acres 3 – 4 %
Hence, it is evident from the table above that, none of the test checked Urban Areas 
has enough space (not even 50 per cent) to carry out scientific SWM through setting up 
sanitary landfill and other required processing plants/infrastructure for the next 20-25 
years. 
Director, Urban Affairs Department stated (March 2023) that the Task Force Committee 
set up to identify landfill sites had recommended the sites for Shillong, Tura and Jowai 
and the acquisition process has been initiated for Tura but acquisition process for 
Shillong and Jowai was still awaited.
Thus, the State of Meghalaya is facing a precarious situation of non-availability of 
suitable land for scientific disposal and mining of municipal waste with an enhanced 
risk to public health and environment. 
56 only the active period excluding closure & post closure period.
57 In all the selected areas, the quantity of waste generated would be less than 10 lakh ton during the 
period of Design Life.
58 C (lakh tonnes) = [ B x (1.05) ^ Number of years] / 100000.
59 As per Clause 4.5.1.3 required sanitary landfill area including the related infrastructure is 15-20 HA 
(37.01 - 49.42 acres) for less than 10 lakh tonnes waste generation throughput design life of the 
sanitary landfill (only considering the active period excluding closure & post closure period).
60 Mynkjai dumping site was closed since November 2021.

Chapter VI: Processing and Disposal of Municipal Solid Waste
61
Case	Study	1–	Shillong	Landfill	Facility	
The	Shillong	Landfill	Facility	(SLF)	established	under	NERCCDIP	in	two	phases	has	
seen a shorter-than-anticipated operational lifespan due to poor waste processing 
efficiency,	with	 Phase	 I	 fully	 utilised	 and	 Phase	 II	 rapidly	 filling,	prompting	the	
need for increased waste processing	efficiency	to	extend	the	facility’s	use	beyond	
the estimated eight years.
  
Phase I of SLF was completed in May 2017 while Phase II was completed in February 
2021. As per the DPR, the proposed design life of the landfill was 15 years i.e., up to 
2029. This SLF was being used by Shillong Municipal Board (SMB) and the Dorbar 
Shnongs under the Census Towns. 
Satellite imagery showed that Phase I of the SLF was already fully utilised and was 
covered under vegetation. Major portion of the Phase II SLF was already filled with 
waste. During Joint Physical Verification with the audit team, officials from the 
Shillong Municipal Board  confirmed that the space (Phase II) would last only for 
three more years up to 2025.
Considering that the dumping of waste in Phase I started during October- November 
2017 and would last up to 2025, it indicates that the SLF can now be used for eight 
years only, instead of the design life of 15 years. 


Performance Audit on Solid Waste Management in Urban Areas of Meghalaya
62
During the Exit Conference (May 2023), the Department agreed to the audit findings. 
The Director, Urban Affairs Department stated that Request for proposal (RFP) was 
floated to process the legacy waste in Marten which will free up more space.
Case Study 2- Disposal of solid waste in Jowai
Since inception of JMB (November 1995) the municipal waste collected was being 
dumped at JHADC’s old dump site situated at Mynkjai
61
55. After receipt of a complaint 
(September 2015) from 12-Dorbar Shnong Joint Action Committee (JAC), West Jaintia 
Hills District, JHADC closed the old dumpsite (November 2015). Subsequently, a new 
dump site was identified on the other side of Mynkjai. An agreement was also entered 
between JMB and JHADC (August 2017) for disposal of waste at the new dumpsite 
until a sanitary landfill was established.
Protests emerged during March 2021 against the unhygienic dumping of waste at the 
new dump site at Mynkjai by the local villages
62
56 and students, in response to which the 
district administration agreed to use this site as an interim arrangement for three months 
w.e.f 14 August 2021. 
Exhibit 6.17: Traces of Haphazard dumping of 
waste at Mynkjai dumping ground (October 
2022)
Exhibit 6.18: Traces of Unsegregated waste at 
Mynkjai	dumping	ground	(October	2022)
61 Mynkjai is a site used for dumping by JHADC.
62 Pynthor, Langtein, Umsalang, Shken Pyrsit, Mupyut, Madan Tyrpait, Moosakhia and Sohmynting.

Chapter VI: Processing and Disposal of Municipal Solid Waste
63
In this interim period of three months, the JMB identified a plot of land of 136.60 acre at 
Mookabeng Village belonging to one Smt. Baiamonlang Shylla as temporary dumping 
site. 
On 8 November 2021, Deputy Commissioner, 
West Jainitia Hills gave an order to JMB to 
start disposing its waste at the temporary 
dumping ground at Mookabeng village 
immediately and to sign an agreement with 
the landowner i.e. Smt. Baiamonlang Shylla 
for the same.  After signing the agreement 09 
November 2021, the JMB started dumping 
wastes from 15 November 2021. It was 
observed from the proceedings of the meeting 
held (21 December 2021) between JMB 
and the local community members that the 
latter raised the objections on the temporary 
dumping site due to fear that the unscientific 
dumping of waste will lead to problems of 
air and water pollution and affect the nearby 
Umngi river, paddy fields, water sources and general health. The Elaka Nartiang 
Coordinate Committee (ENCC) also mentioned that the haphazard disposal of waste 
into shallow burial pits without establishing a sanitary landfill and scientific plants would 
definitely impact the land and village. The protest of the community members resulted 
in law-and-order problem in the area whereby Section 144 of Cr.P.C was imposed on 
23 December 2021. Subsequently, on 3 January 2022, the four villages
63
57 and  ENCC 
agreed to revoke their opposition and allowed to dump waste until 5  February 2022 
provided the Government show sign of constructions for improvement of the site.  An 
awareness programme was also conducted in the four villages on 31 January 2022 and 
3 February 2022. However, action taken in this regard, if any, by the Deputy Commissioner 
or by JMB was not available on records. Subsequently, a Public Hearing was conducted 
on 04 March 2022. It was noticed from the minutes that though the Waheh Shnongs
64
58  
of the aforementioned four villages had no objection with the project, however, majority 
of the general public present in the hearing opposed it. 
Concurrently, the local administration in West Jainita Hills submitted a proposal for 
acquiring land at a lumpsum rate of ₹ 5.65 crore to be used as a permanent landfill site 
to the State Government, which was not approved till date.   
After the opposition over the dumping of waste in Mookabeng village by the ENCC, the 
JMB were able to dump their waste in Mookabeng only up to 5 February 2022. Thus, 
JMB was unable to dispose the loaded garbage and waste from Market areas as well as 
from households started accumulating in the town area for almost two months which led 
63 Larnai, Sohphoh, Thadmusem & Nongkroh.
64 Waheh Shnongs denote locality/village headmen of villages under Jaintia Hills.
Exhibit 6.19: Mixing of non-biodegradable 
(plastics)	with	biodegradable	waste	in	
temporary dumping of waste at Mookabeng

Performance Audit on Solid Waste Management in Urban Areas of Meghalaya
64
to a huge uproar by the residents/NGOs as well as negative media feedback on the issue. 
In view of the sensitive situation, the JMB resorted to dumping of waste in private land 
by using private dumpers. 
Scrutiny of records made available to 
audit revealed that the JMB had already 
incurred an expenditure of ₹ 33.36 lakh  
(₹ 19.58 lakh which has already been paid 
(Appendix	 III) and pending bills as of  
11 May 2022 amounting to ₹ 13.78 lakh for 
dumping of waste in private lands during 
the period from January 2022 up to August 
2022. The Chairman, JMB also forwarded 
(August 2022) a proposal to the Minister-
in-charge, Urban Affairs Department 
seeking additional funding of ₹ 60.80 lakh 
which will be used for dumping of waste 
from August 2022 to March 2023.
The case study of open and unscientific dumping of municipal waste in Jowai and 
adjoining areas under the Jowai Municipal Board and Jaintia Hills Autonomous District 
Council reveal the stark reality of absence of any mechanism of solid waste management 
in the urban agglomerates of West Jainitia Hills. The ad hoc measures taken by different 
government agencies for disposal of municipal waste, and failure of the government 
to identify a suitable landfill site have resulted in an unsustainable situation of waste 
disposal. 
During the Exit Conference (May 2023), the Department stated that the municipal waste 
was currently being dumped at an undisclosed site. The department informed that a 
landfill site had been identified in Jowai, and an Environmental Impact Assessment 
(EIA) for identified landfill site at Jowai is underway.
Case Study 3 - Disposal of solid waste in Tura 
Tura Municipal Board was constituted in 1979 and a small plot of land measuring only 
about 3.99 acres at Rongkhon Songittal was acquired for use as dumping site. At the 
time of acquisition, the site was uninhabited. As time passed, the surrounding of the 
dumpsite was occupied by residential buildings, graveyard, roads and public amenities. 
Continuous dumping resulted in spillage of garbage outside the compound which 
affected a public graveyard situated very near to the dumpsite. The Secretary of the 
Rongkhon Songittal
59
65 filed a case against indiscriminate dumping in and around the 
dumpsite causing encroachment of the graveyard, burning of garbage and violation of 
SWM Rules 2016. The Meghalaya High Court (December 2018) directed TMB not to 
use the graveyard as a dumpsite and clean the garbage from the graveyard. During June 
2019, the TMB had to dismantle one of its assets vermi-composting pits to make space 
for dumping of waste.
65 Secretary of the village traditional local body.
Exhibit 6.20: Temporary dumping site at Mukhla 
where	waste	was	filled	with	loose	soil

Chapter VI: Processing and Disposal of Municipal Solid Waste
65
Exhibit 6.21: Haphazard dumping of waste at 
Tura
Exhibit 6.22: Spillage of waste at Tura
During the Exit Conference (May 2023), the Department stated that partial payment 
has recently been made for procurement of 30 acres of additional land for landfill.
Case Study 4- Disposal of municipal waste in Nongpoh 
In Nongpoh, the waste is disposed at 
Umshangling dumpsite. During JPV , it 
was seen that mixed waste was openly 
dumped in a gorge in the dumpsite. It was 
also noticed that the waste was being burnt 
to which the officials from Nongpoh Town 
Committee stated that waste was burned 
by miscreants oftentimes as the dumpsite 
was neither fenced nor gated. 
   
Exhibit	6.24	&	6.25:	Unscientific	dumping	of	unsegregated	waste	into	a	gorge	at	Nongpoh
During the Exit Conference (May 2023), the Director, Urban Affairs Department agreed 
that the Compost Plant must be made functional. He stated that the Department would 
take steps to decentralise the system of processing of waste so as to reduce the burden 
on the dumpsite.
Exhibit 6.23: Traces of burning of wastes at 
Nongpoh

Performance Audit on Solid Waste Management in Urban Areas of Meghalaya
66
6.6 Open dumping of waste
Waste generators in certain areas were observed to be violating Rule 4 (2) of the 
Solid Waste Management Rules, 2016 by dumping waste in open spaces and water 
bodies, as seen during Joint Physical Verifications and reported in news articles, 
causing both environmental degradation and health risks.
Rule 4 (2) of the Solid Waste Management Rules, 2016 clearly mandates that no waste 
generator shall throw, burn, or bury the solid waste generated, on streets, open public 
spaces, outside his premises or in the drain or water bodies. In contravention to this rule, 
it was observed during JPVs (22 & 23 August 2022) that waste was being dumped in 
open spaces in Shillong and Jowai. It was seen that this practice was carried out even 
in wards where door to door collection was available. A news report from the Shillong 
Times 13 March 2022 issue (Page 3) also highlighted the open dumping of waste in a 
stream in Kabul Market, Tura. Dumping of waste in open spaces or streams not only 
damages the aesthetics of an area but also poses a serious health hazard.
Exhibit 6.27 & 6.28: Household waste dumped in open spaces in Shillong 
(Laitumkhrah	&	Lower	Mawprem)
6.7 Conclusion
Processing of municipal waste and its scientific disposal have emerged as the weakest 
links in the state’s solid waste management system. In Shillong urban areas only 
20 per cent of waste collected was processed through composting plants while in other 
urban areas the extent of waste processing was negligible. The grave situation of solid 
waste processing and disposal was caused by two key factors, namely, one that most of 
the municipal waste ended up in landfill sites untreated, and two, that the landfill sites 
were either grossly inadequate to handle the burden on dumping or were entirely absent, 
resulting in dumping of untreated waste in ad hoc dumping sites.   
The value chain in solid waste management was practically non-existent as composting 
was unsuccessful due to poor waste segregation practices. Failure to make the compost 
plant functional under SWM project rendered the expenditure incurred on these plants 
unfruitful. Little incentive was visible for informal sector to be involved in waste 
segregation.

Chapter VI: Processing and Disposal of Municipal Solid Waste
67
Recommendations:
10.  The State Government needs to urgently acquire suitable land for establishing 
modern SWM facilities and sanitary landfill to mitigate the risk of public 
health disasters and soil and water pollution.
11.  Responsibility needs to be fixed for non-completion compost plant at Nongpoh 
& Tura and under-utilisation of the compost plant at Shillong.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
      
    
MANAGEMENT OF CONSTRUCTION 
AND DEMOLITION WASTE, BIO-
MEDICAL WASTE, E-WASTE AND 
PLASTIC WASTE
CHAPTER -VII

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
      
    

The scope of this Performance Audit (PA) was to cover the solid waste management 
framework in Meghalaya with solid waste being defined as municipal solid waste (MSW), 
bio-medical waste (BMW), construction and demolition (C&D) waste, e-waste, and 
plastic waste. This chapter deals with the management of Construction & Demolition 
Waste, Bio–Medical Waste, E-waste and Plastic Waste.
7.1 Construction & Demolition Waste 
MSWM Manual, 2000 stipulates that C&D waste, being predominantly inert in nature 
does not create chemical or biochemical pollution. Hence maximum effort should be 
made to reuse and recycle them. It was only in 2016 that separate rules for C&D waste 
was notified by Government of India. According to the Building Material Promotion 
Council, the total C&D waste generation estimated in India from buildings activities 
in the year 2020 was 4.11 lakh TPD
66
60 while the recycling capacity was 6,500 TPD. 
The information on quantum of C&D waste generated in the State was not available 
with MSPCB. Similarly, test-checked ULBs also do not have the data on C&D waste 
generation in their jurisdiction.
7.1.1 Meghalaya State Policy on Construction and Demolition Waste
Delay in finalising and approving the Meghalaya State Policy on Construction & 
Demolition (C&D) Waste, along with the lack of direction from relevant authorities, 
has hindered the implementation of C&D Waste Management Rules 2016 in the 
State.
Rule 9 (1) of the C&D Waste Management Rules 2016 stipulates that the Secretary  
in-charge of Development in the State Government shall prepare their policy document 
with respect to management of C&D waste in accordance with the provisions of these 
rules within one year from date of final notification (29 March 2016) of these rules. 
From records, it was seen that the draft Meghalaya State Policy on C&D Waste was 
forwarded by the Directorate to the Department of Urban Affairs on 7 January 2022, 
after a delay of almost five years. The State Government was also yet to approve the 
Meghalaya State Policy on C&D Waste. As a result of delay in approval of the State 
Policy, audit noticed the following:
• It was seen that neither the concerned Department of the State Government nor 
the ULBs/Town Committee had framed any directions or carried out any activities 
regarding C&D waste.
• As per Rule 8 of the C&D Waste Management Rules, the State Pollution Control Board 
shall monitor the implementation of these rules by the concerned local bodies and 
66 150 million tons per year/365 day= 4.11 lakh TPD.
Chapter- VII
Management of Construction & Demolition Waste,  
Bio–Medical Waste, E-waste and Plastic Waste
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
      
    

Performance Audit on Solid Waste Management in Urban Areas of Meghalaya
70
the competent authorities and the annual report shall be sent to the Central Pollution 
Control Board and the State Government for generating State level comprehensive 
data. Moreover, as per Rule 9 (2) of the C&D Waste Management Rules 2016, the 
concerned department in the State Government dealing with land shall be responsible 
for providing suitable sites for setting up of the storage, processing and recycling 
facilities for construction and demolition waste.
 In the latest report submitted (29 July 2022) by MSPCB to CPCB, it was pointed out 
that the State Government was yet to finalise the Meghalaya State Policy on C&D 
Waste. It was also submitted that the site for collection and processing facility was 
also yet to be identified by the State Government. Thus, it could be seen that no 
concrete steps had been taken by the State Government to ensure implementation of 
the C&D Waste Management Rules 2016.
• Rule 6 of the C&D Waste Management Rules states that the ULBs/Town Committee 
were to issue directions with regard to proper management of C&D waste, chalk out 
stages, methodology and equipment, material involved in the overall activity and final 
clean up after completion of the construction and demolition, make arrangements 
and place appropriate containers for collection of waste and shall remove at regular 
intervals etc. In the absence of the State Policy on C&D waste, none of the selected 
ULBs/Town Committees had issued any directions or made any plans with regard to 
management of C&D Waste in their jurisdiction.
During the Exit Conference (May 2023), the Director, Urban Affairs Department stated 
that the Policy has been forwarded to the Cabinet for approval.
7.1.2 Comparison between Meghalaya SWM Bye Law and C&D Waste 
Management Rules 2016.
The Meghalaya Solid Waste Management Bye Law of 2020 requires Local Authorities 
to collect and dump Construction & Demolition (C&D) waste separately without 
mixing, but the practice of dumping C&D waste within landfill sites goes against 
national policy; thus, there is a need for the State Government and Local Authorities 
to establish appropriate storage, processing, and recycling facilities for C&D waste.
Section 5 (i) of the Meghalaya Solid Waste Management Bye Law, 2020 stipulates that 
the C&D waste should be collected by the respective Local Authority (Municipal boards, 
Town Committees or Dorbar Shnongs) without mixing with other solid waste and the 
Local Authority should develop and maintain an area specifically for dumping of C&D 
waste in a landfill site. The dumping of C&D within the landfill site is, however against 
the National policy
67
61 which stipulates that the department in the State Government 
dealing with land shall be responsible for providing suitable sites for setting up of the 
storage, provide processing and recycling facilities for C&D waste. 
During JPV of Marten (SLF of Shillong), it was confirmed that C&D waste was 
dumped separately within the premises of Marten. Further, no processing or recycling 
of C&D waste were noticed. In reply to audit, the test checked ULBs/Town Committee 
67 Rule 9(2) of the C&D Waste Management Rules 2016.

Chapter VII: Management of Construction & Demolition Waste, Bio–Medical Waste, E-waste and Plastic Waste
71
admitted that they were yet to provide any processing facility of C&D waste. The State 
Government along with the ULBs should take up concrete steps to provide storage, 
processing and recycling facilities for C&D waste.
Exhibit 7.1 : Dumped C&D Waste and covered with loose soil in Marten, Shillong
7.2 Bio Medical Waste
GoI notified (July 1998) the Bio-medical Waste (Management and Handling) Rules, 
1998, which provided a regulatory framework for management of BMW generated in 
the country. This was replaced by the Bio-medical Waste Management Rules, 2016 
(BMW Rules, 2016) notified (March 2016) by GoI.
MSPCB is the authority designated for implementation of the provisions of these 
rules. Every occupier or operator handling BMW, irrespective of the quantity should 
obtain authorisation from MSPCB and shall hand over segregated waste to a common  
bio-medical waste treatment facility (CBMWTF) for treatment, processing and final 
disposal.
7.2.1 Authorisation status of Health Care Establishments
Healthcare facilities in Meghalaya showed a gradual decrease in unauthorised 
status from 2017 to 2020 under the Bio Medical Waste Management Rules 2016, 
but MSPCB should ensure compliance of BMW Rules, 2016 by all the HCFs in the 
State
Rule 10 of the Bio Medical Waste Management Rules 2016 states that every occupier 
or operator handling bio-medical waste, irrespective of the quantity shall make an 
application in Form II to the prescribed authority i.e. State Pollution Control Board for 
grant of authorisation. 
The status of authorisation of Healthcare Facilities in the State during the period 2017 
to 2020
68
62 is given in Chart 7.1.
68 Position up to 2020 since Annual Reports of MSPCB are available only up to 2019-20.

Performance Audit on Solid Waste Management in Urban Areas of Meghalaya
72
 
740
 809
 874
973
54%
401
46%
371
 37%
320
 15%
142
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
Chart 7.1: Status of authorisation of Healthcare Facilities in the State 
during the period 2017 to 2020
Source: CPCB Annual Reports of Bio Medical Waste.
Hence, it is evident from the Chart 7.1 that the percentage of unauthorised HCFs were 
decreasing gradually from the year 2017 to 2020. However, MSPCB should ensure 
compliance of BMW Rules, 2016 by all the HCFs in the state.
7.2.2 Generation and treatment of Bio Medical Waste
Despite an increase in bio-medical waste (BMW) generation from 2017 to 2020, 
treatment by Common Biomedical Waste Treatment Facility (CBMWTF) surged 
from 37 per cent to 76 per cent, while captive treatment declined. However, scrutiny 
revealed operational issues with the sole CBMWTF in Shillong, casting doubt on the 
accuracy of reported data provided by MSPCB to CPCB.
The status of generation and treatment of BMW in the State during the period 2017 to 
2020 as per the annual reports of CPCB is given in Chart 7.2.
 
1061.65
1432.87
 1276.24
1556.95
63%
663.58
66%
941.40
75%
962.32
24%
367.8
37%
398.07
34%
491.47
 25%
313.9
76%
1189.15
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
2017 2018 2019 2020
Chart 7.2: Status of generation and treatment of BMW in the State from 
2017 to 2020
Source: CPCB Annual Reports of Bio Medical Waste.
No. HCFsQuantity	of	BMW	(Kg/day)
Total	Quantity	of	BMW	generated	(kg/day) Total	treated	by	Captive	Treatment	(kg/day)
Total	treated	by	CBMWTF	(kg/day)
Total	no.	Health	Care	Facilities	(HCFs) Total no. of HCFs in operation without Authrization
2017
2017
2018
2018
2019
2019
2020
2020

Chapter VII: Management of Construction & Demolition Waste, Bio–Medical Waste, E-waste and Plastic Waste
73
It can be seen from the chart above that there was an increase in the generation of 
BMW from 2017 to 2020. Also, the treatment of BMW by CBMWTF increased from 
37 per cent to 76 per cent while the captive treatment was shown to have decreased 
by 63 per cent to 24 per cent. Further, during the year 2019 and 2020, an amount of 
313.9 kg/day (25 per cent) and 367.8 kg/day (24 per cent) was shown to be treated 
by CBMWTF. Scrutiny of records, however revealed that from August 2018 to March 
2021, the only CBMWTF in Shillong was not operational as pointed out in Para 7.2.4. 
Hence, MSPCB provided the unverified information to CPCB resulting in compilation 
of incorrect reports which raised questions about the reliability of data maintained by 
MSPCB.
7.2.3 Disposal of Bio Medical Waste
Except for Shillong Municipal Board, the test-checked ULBs and Town 
Committees in Meghalaya lacked Common Bio-Medical Waste Treatment and 
Disposal Facilities (CBMWTF) as required by BMW Rules, 2016 resulting in 
improper disposal practices that pose risks to public health and environmental 
contamination.
As per Schedule III (7) to BMW Rules, 2016, 
ULBs shall (a) provide or allocate suitable 
land for development of CBMWTF in their 
respective jurisdictions as per the guidelines of 
CPCB. During 2017-22, it was seen that none of 
the test checked ULBs/Town Committee except 
Shillong Municipal Board had a CBMWTF. 
In Tura, it was stated (October 2022) that the 
BMW was either disposed in the deep burials 
available in Rongkhon Songittal, the dumpsite 
of Tura or in the deep burials of the respective 
hospitals. In Jowai and Nongpoh, BMW was disposed by the hospitals concerned and 
were not collected by the JMB and Nongpoh Town Committee. During JPV of Rongkhon 
Songittal, the dumping site of Tura Municipal Board, it was noticed that BMW such as 
syringes, ampoules, etc. were openly dumped as shown in exhibit 7.1.
Improper disposal of BMW would not only affect public health but also lead to 
contamination of the surrounding environment.
7.2.4  Status of CBMWF in Shillong
Non-functioning incinerator of CBMWTF Shillong attracted imposition of 
Environmental Compensation of ₹ 0.82 crore on Shillong Municipal Board by the 
CPCB.
During audit, it was seen that the CPCB had conducted an inspection of the 
CBMWTDF at Marten, Shillong on 4 December 2018 and found the following 
observation:
Exhibit 7.1: Openly dumped BMW in Tura


Performance Audit on Solid Waste Management in Urban Areas of Meghalaya
74
a. Unit did not have a valid authorisation under BMW Rules, 2016;
b. Separate space for treated and untreated BMW was not provided;
c. Incinerator was not in operation since August 2018 and BMW was being openly 
burned and dumped;
d. No treatment equipment like autoclave/shredder was provided for treatment and 
disposal of red, blue and white category of waste, etc. 
As a result of non-compliance of SMB to the Bio Medical Waste Rules 2016, the 
CPCB imposed a fine of ₹ 8.60 lakh as Environmental Compensation for period from 
4 December 2018 to 27 February 2019
69
63. It further ordered that an amount of ₹ 10,000 
per day of Environmental Compensation from 28 February 2019 till compliance to the 
provisions of the BMW Rules was payable by SMB.
Further scrutiny of records revealed that an agreement for setting up of the CBMWTDF 
at Shillong and Tura was signed (4 June 2020) by the Director, Urban Affairs 
Department and the supplier (M/S S.M Enterprise). The CBMWTDF at Shillong was 
made operational in March 2021 while the CBMWTDF at Tura was yet to be made 
operational till date of audit (October 2022).
Hence, because of non-compliance to the BMW Rules 2016, SMB was liable to pay the 
CPCB an amount of ₹ 81.70 lakh (₹ 8.60 lakh + 731 days X ₹ 10,000) as Environmental 
Compensation.
During the Exit Conference (May 2023), the Department stated that the Environmental 
Compensation was not paid by the Shillong Municipal Board, and it has also not been 
insisted by MSPCB. It was stated that the new CBMWTDF was functioning in Marten 
since March 2021.
7.3 E-Waste
Ministry of Environment Forest and Climate Change (MoEFCC), Government of 
India notified (March 2016) the E-Waste (Management) Rules, 2016 (EWM Rules, 
2016) which came into effect from 1 October 2016. These rules are applicable to every 
producer, consumer or bulk consumer, collection centre, dismantler and recycler of  
e-waste involved in the manufacture, sale, purchase and processing of electrical and 
electronic equipment or components specified in Schedule-I of these Rules. 
7.3.1 Producer Responsibility Organisation registered with MSPCB
In Meghalaya, there are three registered Producer Responsibility Organisations 
(PROs) based in Shillong responsible for collecting e-waste, but there was a lack of 
dedicated collection vehicles, insufficient storage facilities for categorisation, and 
lack of awareness, hindering effective implementation of e-waste management as 
per E-Waste Rules, 2016.
69 at the rate of ₹10,000 per day since day of inspection.

Chapter VII: Management of Construction & Demolition Waste, Bio–Medical Waste, E-waste and Plastic Waste
75
‘Producer Responsibility Organisation’ (PRO) means a professional organisation 
authorised or financed collectively or individually by producers, which can take the 
responsibility for collection and channelisation of e-waste generated from the ‘end-of-
life’ of their products to ensure environmentally sound management of such e-waste. 
There are only three registered PROs in Meghalaya and all of them are based in Shillong. 
Thus, other urban areas of the State were yet to be covered by the PROs for collection 
of e-waste. The names of the registered PRO/ collection centre on behalf of a registered 
PRO are (i) M/s Karo Sambhav (ii) M/s RLG Reverse Logistics India Pvt. Ltd. and 
(iii) M/s J.S Enterprise (authorised collector on behalf of PRO Hulladek Recycling). 
A JPV of the PROs was conducted (January 2023) and the following observation were 
noticed:
• None of the PROs had their own collection and transportation vehicle and they 
were hiring vehicles at the time of collection. It was thus difficult to collect 
and transport various categories of e-waste as envisaged in Schedule-I of the  
E-Waste Rules, 2016.
• The storage space of all the PROs did not have any partition or separate space to store 
separate various categories of e-waste as envisaged in Schedule-I of the E-waste 
Rules, 2016. 
• M/s RLG Reverse Logistics India and M/s J.S Enterprise informed that unwillingness 
by general public as well as organisations to deposit e-waste through authorised 
collection centres and general lack of awareness was one of the biggest challenges 
faced by the collection centre.
Exhibit 7.2: Unorganised Storage 
of	e-waste	at	M/s	Karo	Sambhav
Exhibit 7.3: Storage section of 
M/s	RLG	Reverse	Logistics	India
Exhibit 7.4: Storage section of 
M/s	J.S	Enterpris
7.3.2 Inventory of e-waste in the state of Meghalaya
The Meghalaya State Pollution Control Board (MSPCB) has failed to maintain an 
inventory of e-waste generation as required by E-Waste (Management) Rules 2016, 
leading to a lack of comprehensive data for comparison with e-waste collection by 
Producer Responsibility Organisations.
As per the annual report submitted by the MSPCB to CPCB from 2017-18 to 2020-21, 
the status of e-waste collection is detailed in Table 7.1.

Performance Audit on Solid Waste Management in Urban Areas of Meghalaya
76
Table 7.1: Status of e-waste collection in the State of Meghalaya
FY Collection centres Name Qty of e-waste 
collected	(Kg)
2017-18 1 collection centre M/s Karo Sambhav 1,500
2018-19 2 collection centres M/s Karo Sambhav & M/s RLG 840
2019-20 3 collection centres M/s Karo Sambhav, M/s RLG & M/s 
Kenny D Kharkongor (scrap dealer)
4,714.34
2020-21 3 collection centres M/s Karo Sambhav, M/s RLG & M/s 
Fabshop Technology
6,175.09
Source: Information furnished by MSPCB.
As per Schedule-IV of E-Waste (Management) Rules 2016, it is the duty of State 
Pollution Control Boards to prepare and maintain an inventory of e-waste. Though 
MSPCB was maintaining a list of bulk generators in the State, it did not make any 
inventory of e-waste generation by these bulk consumers. As a result, audit could not 
compare the e-waste generation and collection done by the PROs. Secondly, it was 
noticed that various central and State Government department offices and financial 
institutions like office of the Principal Accountant General (Audit) and (Accounts & 
Entitlement), Fisheries Department and Reserve Bank of India; educational institutions 
like Shillong Law College, Institute of Hotel Management; and defence establishments 
like the Director General, Assam Rifles  were not included in the list of bulk generators 
of e-waste prepared by MSPCB (the names provided here are illustrative and not 
exhaustive). Further, the list was not updated periodically to incorporate all kinds of 
bulk generators. As such, a comprehensive inventory of e-waste generation was yet to 
be prepared by MSPCB.
The Member Secretary, MSPCB stated that the task of preparation of inventory of  
e-waste generation had been outsourced to the Indian Institute of Waste Management, 
Bengaluru but the report was yet to be finalised.  The reply is not tenable as the MSPCB 
has failed to comply with the provisions of the E-Waste (Management) Rules, 2016 
even after a lapse of seven years from the date of notification of the rules.
7.3.3 Disposal of E-Waste mixed with Municipal Solid Waste
E-Waste found to be mixed with Municipal Solid Waste in Tura solid waste disposal 
site in contradiction to the E-Waste (Management) Rules, 2016.
As per Schedule-IV of the E-Waste (Management) 
Rules 2016, it was the duty of ULBs to ensure 
that e-waste if found to be mixed with Municipal 
Solid Waste is properly segregated, collected and is 
channelised to authorised dismantler or recycler.
However, during JPV conducted in Tura Municipal 
Board (TMB), e-waste i.e., printer cartridges, etc. 
were seen lying without required care within the 
premises of the dumpsite.
Exhibit 7.5: e-waste disposed openly in 
TMB dumpsite


Chapter VII: Management of Construction & Demolition Waste, Bio–Medical Waste, E-waste and Plastic Waste
77
7.4 Plastic Waste
MoEFCC notified (February 2011) the Plastic Waste (Management and Handling) Rules, 
2011 (PW Rules, 2011). It was replaced by the Plastic Waste Management Rules, 2016 
(PWM Rules, 2016) notified (18 March 2016) by Government of India. These rules 
shall apply to every waste generator, local body, manufacturer, importers and producer.
As per Section 7.4.3 of MSWM Manual 2016, reuse and recycling of plastic waste 
are the preferred methods for managing plastic wastes after reduction. However, as 
mentioned, plastics cannot be recycled indefinitely; each recycling cycle reduces the 
strength and utility of the plastic. 
7.4.1 Status of submission of Annual Return of Plastic Waste 
The plastic waste management reporting by ULBs has been inconsistent as evidenced 
by incomplete and delayed annual reports, discrepancies between submitted data 
and CPCB estimates, and the lack of MSPCB’s effective oversight and guidance to 
ensure accurate reporting.
As per Rule 17 (2) of Plastic Waste Management Rules 2016, every local body shall 
prepare and submit an annual report in Form–V to the concerned Secretary-in-charge of 
the Urban Development Department under intimation to the concerned State Pollution 
Control Board or Pollution Control Committee by the 30
th of June, every year. However, 
the status of Plastic Waste Management in Meghalaya as per records submitted by 
MSPCB is detailed in Table 7.2.
Table 7.2: Compilation of Annual Report submitted to the MSPCB from 2017-22
Sl. 
No.
Name of the Local Body PW generated in (in TPA70)
2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 
1 Shillong Municipal Board 6.276 Not 
submitted
Not 
submitted
Not 
submitted
Not 
submitted
2 Jowai Municipal Board 2.8 1260 5040 Not 
submitted
Not 
submitted
3 Tura Municipal Board 2.78 Not 
submitted
Not 
submitted
Not 
submitted
488.4
4 Shillong Cantonment Board 2.12 Not 
submitted
Not 
submitted
Not 
submitted
Not 
submitted
5 Baghmara Municipal Board 0.4 Not 
submitted
Not 
submitted
Not 
submitted
Not 
submitted
6 Resubelpara Municipal Board 0.32 Not 
submitted
Not 
submitted
0.516 Not 
submitted
7 Williamnagar Municipal 
Board
0.4 3 3 3 Not 
submitted
From the Table above it could be seen that, during five years (2017-22) none of the 
Local bodies had submitted Annual Report for all the years. Shillong Municipal Board, 
Shillong Cantonment Board and Baghmara Municipal Board has submitted only one 
70 Tons per Annum.

Performance Audit on Solid Waste Management in Urban Areas of Meghalaya
78
Annual Report in respect of 2017-18, thereafter no Report was furnished. Other local 
bodies had submitted ranged from two (Jowai Municipal Board) to four (Williamnagar 
Municipal Board).
During the Exit Conference (May 2023), the Member Secretary, MSPCB stated that 
directions are being issued regularly to submit their replies in time.
As per the CPCB Annual Report 2019-20 on implementation of PWM Rules 2016, 
the per capita plastic waste generation was appox. 2500 grams/year. On that basis, the 
plastic waste generation in the seven ULBs of Meghalaya are given in Table 7.3.
Table 7.3: Quantum of plastic waste generation per annum
Sl. 
No.
Name of the Local Body Population as per 
2011 census
Quantum of plastic waste 
generated per annum71	(Tons)
1 Shillong Municipal Board 143,229 358
2 Jowai Municipal Board 28,430 71
3 Tura Municipal Board 74,858 187
4 Shillong Cantonment Board 11,930 30
5 Baghmara Municipal Board 13,131 33
6 Resubelpara Municipal Board 19,595 49
7 Williamnagar Municipal Board 24,597 61
Thus, it could be seen from the above that the reports submitted by the ULBs were 
not consistent with the data generated by CPCB and most of the ULBs did not even 
submit their reports on time. There was nothing on record to indicate that the MSPCB 
had taken any action to ensure submission of reports by ULBs nor did they provide 
necessary guidance to the ULBs to rectify/submit accurate information. In fact, MSPCB 
had merely forwarded the reports to CPCB without any scrutiny.
7.4.2 Setting up of infrastructure for plastic waste management
The selected ULBs and Town Committees in Meghalaya have not taken effective 
action to establish infrastructure for plastic waste management or provide accurate 
information on plastic waste, revealing a lack of commitment from both the local 
authorities and higher administrative bodies, while on-site observations demonstrate 
mixed disposal with MSW, limited segregation efforts, and challenges related to 
recycling capacity.
As per Rule 6 (1) of the PWM Rules 2016, every local body shall be responsible for 
development and setting up of infrastructure for the management of plastic waste. 
Moreover, as per Form-V of PWM Rules 2016, the ULBs should submit the quantum 
of plastic waste generated, collected, reused, recycled or disposed in their respective 
jurisdictions. None of the selected ULBs/Town Committee were able to furnish 
information on the quantum of plastic waste collected, processed and disposed during 
2017-22. 
71 0.0025 tonne X population.

Chapter VII: Management of Construction & Demolition Waste, Bio–Medical Waste, E-waste and Plastic Waste
79
During January 2017, the MSPCB directed the Deputy Commissioners of all the 
districts of Meghalaya “to ensure for development and setting up of infrastructure for 
segregation, collection, storage, transportation, processing and disposal of the plastic 
waste either on its own or by engaging agencies or producers”. No infrastructure was 
however created in Shillong or Jowai by the respective Deputy Commissioners. 
In reply (December 2022), the Deputy Commissioner, Ri-Bhoi District stated that 
the matter was dealt with by the Nongpoh Town Committee. The reply is not tenable 
as the Nongpoh Town Committee had not undertaken any activity/programme with 
regard to setting up of infrastructure for plastic waste management. Reply from Deputy 
Commissioner, West Garo Hills District is yet to be received in this regard. This indicates 
the lackadaisical attitude of the ULBs, MSPCB as well as the Deputy Commissioners to 
tackle the growing problem of plastic waste.
During JPV the following were noticed:
• In Shillong region, plastic waste was 
mixed with MSW and efforts were seen to 
segregate them either manually or by using 
Compost Plant Machineries which was then 
sent to cement factories for use as RDF. 
Other recyclable portion of plastic waste 
was being sorted and transported by the 
recyclers that are operating inside Marten. 
As per SMB, they processed about 36 TPD 
of recyclables. Though SMB was unable to 
quantify the amount of plastic waste sent to 
the cement companies, scrutiny of records 
of MSPCB revealed that only 1.04 tonnes 
of plastic waste was processed during  
2021-22 by cement company.
• In Jowai, no segregation was carried out 
and all the plastic waste was being disposed 
in dumpsites. 
• In Tura, one group of workers was 
segregating and sorting plastic waste from 
MSW and they were processing one TPD 
of recyclables. The rest were being dumped 
in Ronkhon Songital dumpsite, Tura. The 
proprietor of the informal group informed 
that his capacity could be augmented if one 
plastic baling machine was made available 
to him.
• In Nongpoh, no segregation was carried out 
and all the plastic waste was dumped in the Umshangling dumpsite.
Exhibit 7.6: Plastic baling machine at 
Marten, Shilllong
Exhibit 7.7: Informal Sector workers 
working on segregation at Tura


Performance Audit on Solid Waste Management in Urban Areas of Meghalaya
80
7.5 Conclusion
Health care institutions were functioning without authorisation and unauthorised 
disposal of biomedical waste and e-waste was observed in TMB. SMB was imposed 
a fine amounting to ₹ 0.82 crore as Environmental Compensation by the CPCB due 
to non-compliance to BMW Rules, 2016. The accuracy and reliability of data in the 
annual reports submitted with regards to BMW was not verified by MSPCB. Similarly, 
annual reports submitted by ULBs regarding plastic waste generation were found to be 
inconsistent with the data generated by CPCB. In addition, the list of bulk generators 
of e-waste maintained by MSPCB did not include various central and state offices and 
other institutions and an inventory of e-waste generation was not maintained. There 
are only three registered Producer Responsibility Organisation (PROs) for collection of 
e-waste in Meghalaya. Infrastructure for the efficient management of Plastic waste and 
C&D waste was non-existent in all the test checked urban areas.
Recommendations:
12. The State Government should expedite preparation of State policy on C&D 
waste without any further delay.
13. The MSPCB needs to ensure that all health care facilities obtain necessary 
authorisation for their functioning and adhere to the BMW Rules.
14. The State Government must promote awareness and adherence to e-waste 
management regulations to ensure that e-wastes are exclusively channelled 
through authorised Producer Responsibility Organisations (PROs). 
Additionally, the MSPCB should maintain a database of bulk generators and 
an inventory of e-waste.
15. Greater emphasis needs to be placed on proper disposal of e-waste to minimise 
the risk of toxic pollutants contaminating the soil, air, water bodies, etc. and 
sensitise the public at large about benefits of disassembling, repairing and 
recycling of e-waste.
16. The MSPCB should analyse the data/information in the reports submitted by 
ULBs/ other bodies before compiling and forwarding to CPCB since unreliable 
data is likely to result in incorrect/skewed action taken by the management. 
They should also ensure timely submission of reports vis-à-vis various waste 
management rules by repeated follow up.

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
CHAPTER -VIII
CONCLUSION AND 
RECOMMENDATIONS

 
 
 
 
 
  
 

8.1 Conclusion
Based on the analysis in the preceding paragraphs, Audit concludes that the function 
of Municipal Waste Management in the state of Meghalaya is severely hampered 
due to weak institutional mechanism that is manifested in none of the multiple 
agencies involved in this process being compliant with the responsibilities assigned 
to them under the Meghalaya SWM Rules. SWM functions are further hampered by 
the fact that though a state wise policy has been put in place, none of the agencies 
involved, i.e. Municipal Boards, Cantonment Board (in Shillong) and Autonomous 
District Councils had formulated their Bye Laws respectively. The Town Committees 
were found to be practically non-existent as a result of which habitations covered 
under the census towns were completely deprived of functional waste management 
systems. At the government level, Urban Affairs department was hamstrung with 
lack of data on municipal waste generation to be in any position to take effective 
policy based initiatives to handle the municipal waste scientifically and effectively. 
Periodic Surveys for assessment of waste generation was not conducted in the test 
checked ULBs/Town Committee except in Shillong. As a result, inaccurate methods 
of evaluation such as per capita estimation and estimation of quantity of transported 
waste was adopted in Tura and Jowai. Data was unavailable for Nongpoh Town 
with regard to waste generation, segregation, collection, and disposal from 2017-18 
to 2020-21. Similarly, MSPCB’s role making effective intervention in controlling 
pollution in and around dumping ground seemed ineffective since it had no reliable 
data on waste generated and collected.  
Waste Management Plans (either short term or long term) were not prepared in the test 
checked ULBs/Town Committee except for Shillong Municipal Area, where a City 
Solid Waste Action Plan had been prepared by the Shillong Municipal Board (SMB) 
but the same was still awaiting approval. A contingency plan was neither envisaged 
in the Meghalaya State Waste Management Policy and Strategy nor addressed by 
any of the test checked ULBs/Town Committee. These delays in preparation and 
approval of requisite legislations and plans had inhibited the implementation of 
SWM activities. Further, shortage of supervisory staff in the Municipal Boards 
and Town Committees as well as lack of trained staff for collection and transport 
of municipal waste resulted in unscientific management of municipal waste in the 
urban areas.  
Analysis of financial resources for the solid waste management in Meghalaya has 
brought out that over a period of previous five years, bulk of the financial resource 
Chapter- VIII
Conclusion & Recommendations

Performance Audit on Solid Waste Management in Urban Areas of Meghalaya
82
has been received under the Asian Development Bank’s external funded project of 
NERCCDIP. However, the NERCCDIP funding agreement being for a period of 
10
72
64 years and for specified activities, this remained a finite source of fund. The 
Municipal Boards were unable to meet even the operational costs of collection and 
disposal of municipal waste due to poor collection of user charges.  In the absence of 
any significant budgetary support from the state government, and lack of own funds 
in the Municipal Boards, the SWM activities in Meghalaya suffer from paucity of 
funds.
Segregation of waste at different levels was either absent or partial in all the test-
checked ULBs. Segregation of domestic hazardous waste was not done and sanitary 
waste was not collected separately. Hence, mixed waste was transported to landfills. 
Household bins for source segregation were purchased and distributed only in 
Shillong and Jowai but not in Tura and Nongpoh. Even though bins were distributed 
in Jowai, source segregation of waste had not yet been carried out. 
During joint physical verification, majority of the workers handling waste were not 
utilising the available safety equipment even though protective gears were procured 
by the ULBs. The vehicles were not covered during transportation resulting in foul 
odour emanating from the uncovered waste. None of the available vehicles were 
equipped with Management Information Systems such as GPS and GIS, due to 
which tracking of transportation vehicles was not carried out.
Processing of municipal waste and its scientific disposal have emerged as the weakest 
links in the state’s solid waste management system. In Shillong urban areas only 
20 per cent of waste collected was processed through composting plants while in 
other urban areas the extent of waste processing was negligible. The grave situation 
of solid waste processing and disposal was caused by two key factors, namely, one 
that most of the municipal waste ended up in landfill sites untreated, and two, that 
the landfill sites were either grossly inadequate to handle the burden on dumping 
or were entirely absent, resulting in dumping of untreated waste in ad hoc dumping 
sites.   
The value chain in solid waste management was practically non-existent as 
composting was unsuccessful due to poor waste segregation practices. Failure to 
make the compost plant functional under SWM project rendered the expenditure 
incurred on these plants unfruitful. Little incentive was visible for informal sector 
to be involved in waste segregation.
Health care institutions were functioning without authorisation and unauthorised 
disposal of biomedical waste and e-waste was observed in TMB. SMB was imposed 
a fine amounting to ₹0.82 crore as Environmental Compensation by the CPCB due 
72 Tranche 1- Date of loan agreement-04.08.2009, Loan closing date-22.06.2019.
 Tranche 2- Date of loan agreement-19.11.2012, Loan closing date-22.06.2019.

Chapter VIII: Conclusion & Recommendations
83
to non-compliance to BMW Rules 2016. The accuracy and reliability of data in 
the annual reports submitted with regards to BMW was not verified by MSPCB. 
Similarly, annual reports submitted by ULBs regarding plastic waste generation 
were found to be inconsistent with the data generated by CPCB. In addition, the 
list of bulk generators of e-waste maintained by MSPCB did not include various 
central and state offices and other institutions and an inventory of e-waste generation 
was not maintained. There are only three registered Producer Responsibility 
Organisation (PROs) for collection of e-waste in Meghalaya. Infrastructure for the 
efficient management of Plastic waste and C&D waste was non-existent in all the 
test checked urban areas.
8.2 Recommendations
Recommendation 1: The State Government may ensure that the required Bye laws 
under the Solid Waste Management Rules, 2016 are framed and implemented by 
the ULBs and ADCs in the State.  The State Government may take up the matter 
with Shillong Cantonment Board for effective implementation of the SWM Act and 
Rules.
Recommendation 2: The Urban Affairs Department needs to assist ULBs/ 
local traditional bodies involved in SWM for preparation of Long-term, 
Mid-term and Short-term action plans to enhance the efficacy of solid waste 
management.
Recommendation 3: The Urban Affairs Department should encourage and promote 
involvement of informal sector in solid waste management (SWM) activities to 
increase efficiency of SWM.
Recommendation 4: Considering the intricate administrative framework 
encompassing agencies engaged in solid waste management (SWM) activities 
within urban areas of Meghalaya, it is imperative for the State Government to 
establish robust coordination among these entities and ensure vigilant monitoring 
of the diverse provisions pertaining to SWM. 
Recommendation 5: Necessary steps should be taken for augmentation of 
sustainable financial resources of the Municipal Boards including system of 
collection of user charges and for strengthening their administrative capacity 
by recruiting the required manpower and imparting regular training to them to 
improve efficiency and effectiveness in solid waste collection, transportation and 
processing.
Recommendation 6: The State Government should encourage segregation of waste 
at source by devising a system for incentivising waste generators and collectors 

Performance Audit on Solid Waste Management in Urban Areas of Meghalaya
84
for proper segregation of waste and through public awareness campaigns and 
regular meetings with local traditional bodies, group housing associations, and 
NGO.
Recommendation 7: Municipal Boards may consider option of installing community 
waste bins for collection of waste in a segregated manner apart from providing 
bins to each household.
Recommendation 8: ULBs should sensitise workers involved in handling waste to 
ensure compliance to occupational health and safety protocols by wearing safety 
gear and other protective equipment.
Recommendation 9: The vehicles procured should be suitably designed to collect 
and transport segregated waste efficiently so as to prevent mixing of segregated 
waste during various stage of SWM.
Recommendation 10: The State Government needs to urgently acquire suitable 
land for establishing modern SWM facilities and sanitary landfill to mitigate the 
risk of public health disasters and soil and water pollution.
Recommendation 11: Responsibility needs to be fixed for non-completion compost 
plant at Nongpoh & Tura and under-utilisation of the compost plant at Shillong.
Recommendation 12: The State Government should expedite preparation of State 
policy on C&D waste without any further delay.
Recommendation 13: The MSPCB needs to ensure that all health care facilities 
obtain necessary authorisation for their functioning and adhere to the BMW 
Rules.
Recommendation 14: The State Government must promote awareness and 
adherence to e-waste management regulations to ensure that e-wastes are 
exclusively channelled through authorised Producer Responsibility Organisations 
(PROs). Additionally, the MSPCB should maintain a database of bulk generators 
and an inventory of e-waste.
Recommendation 15: Greater emphasis needs to be placed on proper disposal of 
e-waste to minimise the risk of toxic pollutants contaminating the soil, air, water 

Chapter VIII: Conclusion & Recommendations
85
bodies, etc. and sensitise the public at large about benefits of disassembling, 
repairing and recycling of e-waste.
Recommendation 16: The MSPCB should analyse the data/information in the 
reports submitted by ULBs/ other bodies before compiling and forwarding to 
CPCB since unreliable data is likely to result in incorrect/skewed action taken by 
the management. They should also ensure timely submission of reports vis-à-vis 
various waste management rules by repeated follow up.
Shillong	 (Shefali	Srivastava	Andaleeb)
The: 05 August 2024	 Principal	 Accountant	General	(Audit),	Meghalaya
Countersigned
New	Delhi	 (Girish	Chandra	Murmu)
The: 07 August 2024 Comptroller and Auditor General of India


APPENDICES

Appendix I
Details of urban towns in Meghalaya as per Census 2011
(Reference: Paragraph 1.4)
Sl. No. District Name of urban towns Administrative 
status
Population as 
per Census 2011
1
East Khasi Hills
Shillong Municipal Board Municipality 1,43,229
2 Shillong Cantonment Cantonment Board 11,930
3 Mawlai Census Town 55,012
4 Pynthorumkhrah Census Town 27,219
5 Nongmynsong Census Town 15,017
6 Mawpat Census Town 6,184
7 Umpling Census Town 8,214
8 Nongthymmai Census Town 8,529
9 Madanriting Census Town 38,004
10 Lawsohtun Census Town 29,194
11 Nongkseh Census Town 4,846
12 Umlyngka Census Town 7,381
13 Sohra Census Town 11,722
14 West Garo Hills Tura Municipality 74,858
15 West Jaintia 
Hills
Jowai Municipality 28,430
16 South Garo Hills Baghmara Municipality 13,131
17 East Garo Hills Williamnagar Municipality 24,597
18 North Garo Hills Resubelpara Municipality 19,595
19 Eastern West 
Khasi Hills
Mairang Town Committee 14,363
20 West Khasi Hills Nongstoin Town Committee 28,742
21 Ri Bhoi Nongpoh Town Committee 17,055
22 Umroi Census Town 8,198

Performance Audit on Solid Waste Management in Urban Areas of Meghalaya
88
Appendix II
Position	of	supervisory	posts	in	selected	ULBs/Town	Committee	vis-à-vis the 
recommendations of the MSWM manual 2016
(Reference: Paragraph 3.10)
(A) Position in Shillong Municipal Board
Name of post recommended 
as per MSWM Manual
No of post 
recommended
No of similar nature of 
post	filled	up	in	SMB	
for SWM
Shortfall	(-)	/
Excess(+)
For cities having population between 1 to 2.5 lakh
Graduate	 engineer/Health	
Officer.
1 2 (+)1
Junior Engineer 1 2 (+) 1
Chief Sanitary Inspector or 
Sanitation	Officer
1 0 (-) 1
Sanitary Inspector 3 6 (+) 3
Sanitary Sub-inspector 6 0 (-) 6
Sanitary Supervisors 11 5 (-) 6
Total 23 15 (-)	8
(B) Position in Tura Municipal Board
Name of post recommended as 
per MSWM Manual
No of post 
recommended
No of similar nature of post 
filled	up	in	TMB	for	SWM
Shortfall	(-)	/
Excess	(+)
For cities having population between 50000 to 1 lakh
Junior Engineer 1 1 -
Chief Sanitary Inspector or 
Sanitation	Officer
1 Nil (-) 1
Sanitary Inspector 1 1 -
Sanitary Sub-inspector 3 2 (-) 1
Sanitary Supervisors 6 3 (-) 3
Total 12 7 (-)	5
(C) Position in Jowai Municipal Board and Nongpoh Town Committee 
Name of post 
recommended as per 
MSWM Manual
No of post 
recom-
mended
No of similar 
nature of 
post	filled	up	
for SWM
Shortfall	(-)	/
Excess	(+)
No of similar 
nature of post 
filled	up	for	
SWM
Shortfall	(-)	/
Excess	(+)
Jowai Municipal Board Nongpoh Town Committee
Sanitary Inspector 1 1 - Nil (-) 1
Sanitary 
Sub-inspector
1 Nil (-) 1 Nil (-) 1
Sanitary Supervisors 2 Nil (-) 2 Nil (-) 2
Total 4 1 (-)	3 Nil (-)	4

Appendices
89
Appendix III
Expenditure incurred on dumping of waste in private lands by JMB during the 
period from January 2022 to March 2023
(Reference: Paragraph 6.5.2)
Sl. 
No.
Particulars 
of Bill
Particulars of work done Expendi-
ture 
incurred
POL Dates of disposal
1 Shri. H. 
Phawa
Being cost of waste disposal 
and JCB for making approach 
road for pit at Mutong
17,900 - 07-Mar-22
2 Self Being work done by JCB 
by Shri Pyrkhat Shylla for 
excavation deep pit garbage 
car rage and garbage loading 
by dumping in pit at Mukhla, 
and bill for Shri. Morda Uru 
Laloo, land use for deep pit at 
Riatmuke, Ladthalaboh
3,36,200 5,000 20,21,24,25/
May/2022 and 
1,2,6,7,8, 9,10,11/ 
June 2022
3 Shri. M. 
Passah, A.E.
Being cost of payment 
advance for meeting and lifting 
transportation and disposal 
of waste from Jowai town to 
present dumping site.
1,50,000 - 5,6/January/2022 & 
19/Feb/2022
4 Shri. S. 
Bareh
Being loading of waste from  
iewmusiang.
2,20,000 - 21,22/April/2022
5 SHRI. K. 
Ryngkhlem
Being clearing the garbage at 
Wapung.
32,600 - 31/March & 1,2,4/
April 2022
6 Branch 
Manager, 
Punjab 
National 
Bank.
Being cost paid to Shri.D. 
Siangshai, for collection of 
garbage JMB TRUCK and 
transporting the same to dumper 
truck designated place.
2,33,400 - 20,23,25,28,29, 30/
July 2022
7 Shri. D. 
Siangshai
Being cost of collection of 
garbage from JMB truck 
and transporting the same to 
designated place.
3,92,600 - 2,3,4,5,6,8,9,10/ 
August 2022
8 Shri Pyrkhat  
Shylla
Being cost of collection of 
garbage from JMB truck and 
transportation to designated 
place
4,85,651 8,349 21, 23, 25/ June & 4, 
5, 7, 8, 9, 11, 12, 13, 
15, 16/July 2022
9 A. Phawa Loading and lifting of garbage 
near DC office and near Thomas 
Jones College
76,000 - 21,22,23,24/April 
2022
Total 19,44,351 13,349

© COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA 
PERFORMANCE AUDIT ON SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT IN URBAN AREAS OF MEGHALAYA—  REPORT NO. 2 OF 2024
2024
www.cag.gov.in/ag/meghalaya/en
lR;eso t;rs
Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India
Performance Audit 
on 
Solid Waste Management in Urban Areas of 
Meghalaya
for the year ended 31 March 2022
Government of Meghalaya
Report No. 2 of 2024
