 
 
Audit Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
Performance Audit of Systems and Controls in Assessment 
and Collection of Revenue from Major Minerals  
for the year ended March 2022 
 
 
 
 
 
  Government of Odisha 
  Report No.6 of the year 2024 
 

 
 
Audit Report of the  
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
Performance Audit of Systems and Controls in Assessment 
and Collection of Revenue from Major Minerals  
for the year ended March 2022   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government of Odisha 
Report No. 6 of the year 2024 
 

i 
Table of contents 
 
Paragraph Contents Page 
Number 
 Preface v 
 Description of technical terms vii 
 Executive summary xiii 
 Recommendations xix 
Chapter I Introduction  
1.1 Mineral Resources of Odisha 1 
1.2 Organisation Structure 2 
1.3 Trend of Mining Revenues 2 
1.4 Audit Objectives 4 
1.5 Audit Criteria 4 
1.6 Scope and Methodology 4 
1.7 Integrated Mines and Mineral Management System 
(i3MS) 
5 
1.8 Acknowledgement 5 
1.9 Money value involved in Audit observations of this 
Report 
6 
Chapter II Grants/ Extension of Mining Leases  
2.1 Introduction 7 
2.2 Irregular grant of leases 9 
2.2.1 Mining lease for Quartz and Gemstone mine under 
the Balangir mining circle 
10 
2.2.2 Mining lease for semi -precious stone (Cat’s eye) 
mine under Koraput mining circle 
11 
2.2.3 Mining lease for Gem Stone (Cat’s eye) mine under 
Kalahandi mining circle 
12 
2.3 Irregular extension of leases for major minerals 13 
2.3.1 Mining lease for Manganese ore mine under Kor aput 
mining circle 
13 
2.3.2 Mining lease for Iron and Manganese ore mine under 
Koira mining circle 
14 
2.3.3 Mining lease for Iron ore under Joda mining circle 15 
2.4 Irregular extension of lease for specified minor 
minerals 
17 
2.4.1 Mining lease for Decorative stone under Koraput 
mining circle 
17 
2.4.2 Mining lease for Decorative Stone under Balangir 
mining circle 
18 
2.5 Non-initiation of auction process for cancelled leases 19 
2.6 Delay in auction of Specified Minor Mineral blocks 20 
Chapter III Reporting of Mineral Despatch and Sale  
3.1 Introduction 23 

ii 
Paragraph Contents Page 
Number 
3.2 System of calculation of royalty and premium 23 
3.2.1 Reporting of the grades of iron-ore produced 25 
3.2.2 Reporting of iron-ore fines as screened fines 41 
3.2.3 Reporting of size of iron-ore (lumps vs. fines) 45 
3.3 Wide variations in the reported ex-mine prices of 
iron-ore 
48 
3.3.1 Wide variations in the ex-mine prices, reported by 
the same lessees, for the same grade of iron -ore, for 
the same months 
49 
3.3.2 Wide variations in the ex-mine prices reported by 
different lessees, for the same grades of iron -ore, for 
the same months 
51 
3.4 Non-utilisation/ non -disposal of low -grade iron -ore 
and chromite in lease areas 
53 
3.4.1 Non-utilisation of sub -grade iron-ore in violation of 
Mining plan 
53 
3.4.2 Non-accounting of excavated sub -grade iron -ore in 
auctioned mines 
55 
3.4.3 Non-utilisation of beneficiable and sub -grade 
chromite in violation of mining plan 
55 
Chapter IV Assessment and Collection of Mineral Receipts  
4.1 Introduction 59 
4.2 Non-levy of interest on delayed payment of royalty 59 
4.3 Short-assessment of royalty, due to non -verification 
of sales turnover reported by lessees 
60 
4.4 Blockage of revenue due to non -disposal of seized 
minerals 
61 
4.5 Non-realisation of compensation for illegal 
extraction 
62 
4.5.1 Compensation for illegal extraction of iron and 
manganese ores 
62 
4.5.2 Compensation demanded for illegal extraction of 
chromite 
63 
Chapter V Regulation of Mining Activities  
5.1 Introduction 65 
5.2 Production of mineral ores in violation of statutory 
clearances and approved mining plans 
65 
5.2.1 Production of coal in excess of the quantity approved 
in Environment Clearance 
66 
5.2.2 Production of iron -ore exceeding the quantity 
approved in the Environment Clearances 
67 
5.2.3 Production of iron -ore exceeding the quantities 
approved in the mining plans 
68 

 
iii 
Paragraph Contents Page 
Number 
5.2.4 Production of chromite without forest clearance 70 
5.2.5 Operation of mine on unauthorised transfer of lease 71 
Chapter VI Internal Controls and Monitoring  
6.1 Introduction  73 
6.2 Functioning of Government Laboratories 73 
6.2.1 Analysis of ore samples without sufficient st ock of 
essential chemicals 
75 
6.2.2 Use of chemicals received from lessees  77 
6.2.3 Shortage of technical staff related to analysis of 
samples 
77 
6.2.4 Discrepancies between the analysis reports of 
Government laboratories 
79 
6.3 Issuance of Transit Pass (e-Pass) 80 
6.4 Functioning of check gates/ weighbridges 82 
6.5 Inspections 86 
6.5.1 Inadequate number of raids by the State Level 
Enforcement Squad 
86 
6.5.2 Inadequate inspection of mines 88 
 
Appendices 
Appendix I Short levy of royalty and premium due to reporting 
of lower grades of iron ore – Jajang iron ore mine 
91 
Appendix II Short levy of royalty and premium due to reporting 
of lower grades of iron ore – Roida-II iron ore mine 
92 
Appendix III Short levy of royalty and premium due to reporting 
of lower grade s of iron ore – Thakurani iron ore 
mine 
93 
Appendix IV Short levy of royalty and premium due to reporting 
of lower grades of iron ore – Nuagaon iron ore mine 
94 
Appendix V Short levy of royalty and premium due to reporting 
of lower grades of iron ore – Jaribahal iron ore mine 
95 
Appendix VI Short levy of royalty and premium due to reporting 
of lower grades of iron ore – Gonua iron ore mine 
96 
Appendix VII Consolidated statement of short levy of royalty and 
premium due to reporting of lower grades of iron ore 
by the six lessees, post-auction 
97 
Appendix VIII Reporting of iron-ore fines as screened fines  98 
Appendix IX Ex-Mines Prices (PMV) of Lessees (2015 -16) 
worked out from the total sale values and quantities 
furnished to IBM, in F1 Returns 
99 
Appendix X Accumulation of low grade iron and chromite in 
lease areas, violating the principle of sustainable use 
and conservation of minerals 
106 
Appendix XI OMC, South Kaliapani Cr mines: Loss of royalty, 107 

iv 
due to direct sale of low grade ore 
Appendix XII Non-levy of interest on delayed payment of royalty 108 
Appendix XIII Differential royalty leviable on the differential sales 
turnover declared by the mines owners (Lessees), in 
their Annual Returns, under the VAT/ GST Acts and 
Mining Acts, during the period 2015-22 
111 
Appendix XIV Unlawful production of iron ore, exceeding the 
quantity approved in the Environment Clearance 
113 
Appendix XV Excess production of ore, exceeding the quantities 
stipulated in the mining plans 
114 
Appendix XVI Unlawful production of chromite without Forest 
Clearance 
115 
Glossary of Abbreviations 117 
 

 
v 
 
P R E F A C E 
 
 
 
 
 
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India for the year 
ended 31 March 2022 has been prepared for submission to the Governor of 
the State of Odisha under Article 151 of the Constitution of India and 
under CAG’s DPC Act 1971. 
This Report contains results of a Performance Audit o f Systems and 
Controls in Assessment and Collection of Revenue from Major Minerals 
which was conducted with the objectives to assess whether grant and 
extension of mining leases for extraction of minerals, were in accordance 
with applicable laws, rules and policies; reporting of mineral despatch and 
sales by lease holders, was checked for correctness, by authorities 
concerned; mining activities were being regulated in compliance with 
statutory and other applicable provisions; assessment and collection of 
mining revenues was being done in accordance with applicable laws and 
rules; and internal controls and monitoring mechanisms were functioning 
effectively, to prevent illegal mining and leakage of mining revenues. 
The Performance Audit covered five selected Mining Circles  of Steel and 
Mines Department and Directorate of Mines.  
Audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards 
issued by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
 

 
 

 
vii 
 
 
A number of technical terms have been used in this Audit Report. Description 
of those technical terms have been compiled relating to major minerals  and 
specified minor minerals. 
Technical terms relating to Major and Specified Minor Minerals 
(A) Additional amount is the amount payable (product of bid percentage 
quoted during auction and the value of mineral despatched) by a 
successful bidder becoming the lease holder after grant of lease. 
Authorized Officer is the Director of Mines or Director of Geology or any 
officer of the Directorate of Mines or Directorate of Geology duly 
authorized by the Government in writing for the purpose. 
Average Sale Price is compiled and published monthly (State-wise and 
mineral wise) by the Indian Bureau of Mines (IBM) on the basis of ex-
mines price reported by the lessees. 
(B) Beneficiation is processing of minerals or ores for the purpose of 
regulating the size of a desired produce, removing unwanted 
constituents and improving quality, purity or assay grade of desired 
product. 
Bid Percentage  - During auction of mineral blocks the qualified 
bidders submit their final price offer which shall be a percentage of 
value of mineral despatched and greater than the floor price.  
(C) Calibrated Lump Ore s are sized ores , produced after processing 
(crushing and screening) of run of mines (ROM) ores with different 
sizes like 5-18 mm, 10-30 mm etc. 
Captive use is the usage  of entire quantity of minerals extracted from 
the mining lease in a mineral processing unit or mineral beneficiation 
unit owned by the lessee excluding the mineral of substandard quality 
or mineral rejects. 
Competent Authority is  the concerned Department of Government 
mentioned in columns (3) and (4) of Schedule IV  of OMMC 
(Amendment) Rules, 2017,  for the purpose and jurisdiction specified 
against each of them in Columns (2) and (1) respectively thereof. 
Consent to Establish/ Consent to Operate is the consent required from 
State Pollution Control Board under Section 25 of the Water 
(Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 and Section 21 of the 
Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981  to establish any 
industry, operation or process.  
Controlling Authority are the officers mentioned in the column (2) of 
Schedule III of the OMMC (Amendment) Rules 2017 for the purpose and 
jurisdiction specified against each of them in column (1) thereof. (The 
Controlling Authority is the Collector of the District as mentioned under 
Schedule III). 
Description of Technical Terms  
 

Performance Audit of Systems and Controls in Assessment and Collection of Revenue from 
Major Minerals for the year ended March 2022 
viii 
Crushed Fines  are finely crushed or powdered mineral of Iron ore 
fragments. 
(D)  Dead Rent is a rent that  the holder of a mining lease shall pay every 
year, at such rate specified in the Third Schedule  of MMDR Act 1957  
for all the areas included in the instrument of lease.  
Decorative stones include all types of granites and any other rock 
suitable for decorative or export purpose including dimension stone. 
DGPS Survey  is based on  Differential Global Positioning System 
(DGPS), an enhancement to the Global Positioning System (GPS), 
which provides improved location accuracy.  
Despatch is the removal of minerals or mineral products from the 
leased area.  It also  includes the consumption of minerals and mineral 
products within such leased area. 
District Mineral Foundation Trust  is a Trust notified by the State 
Government under Section 9B of MMDR Amendment Act, 2015 with 
the objective to work for the interest and benefit of persons, and areas 
affected by mining related operations in such manner as may be 
prescribed by the State Government. 
(E) Ex-mines Price is the sale price of the mineral at mine head reported 
by the lessee to IBM and State Government. 
(F) Floor Price  is the highest initial price offer amongst the technically 
qualified bidders in the first round of auction for the second round of 
online electronic auction of mineral blocks. 
(G) G4 (Reconnaissance)  includes Remote sensing, airborne geophysical 
survey, mapping, grab/chip sampling of rocks, ground geophysical 
survey, trenching/pitting/drilling, determination of principal rock 
types, mineral assemblage, identification of minerals of interest and 
synthesis of all available data/concepts. 
Gochar Land is the land reserved for grazing of cattle.  
GPS Survey is a quick and accurate way of mapping and modelling the 
physical world, from mountainous landscapes to city skylines. 
(H) High Level Committee was constituted by notification of 22 June 2015 
under the chairmanship of Development Commissioner cum Addl. 
Chief Secretary with representatives from Steel & Mines Department, 
Industry Department, ORSAC & OMC to streamline the auction of 
major mineral concessions in Odisha. 
(I) i3MS is a computerised system called Integrated Mines and Mineral 
Management System (i3MS) adopted by the Steel and Mines 
Department with the objective of capturing all transactions and 
regulating activities of mining lessees and licensees. 
The Indian Bureau of Mines (IBM)  established under Ministry of 
Mines, is engaged in promotion of conservation, scientific 
development of mineral resources and protection of environment in 
mines other than coal, petroleum & natural gas, atomic minerals and 

Description of Technical Terms 
ix 
minor minerals. The functions of IBM include promoting conservation 
of mineral resources by way of inspection of mines, geological studies, 
scrutiny and approval of mining plans and mining schemes, conducting 
environmental studies and environment related activities, evolving 
technologies for upgradation of low grade ores and identifying avenues 
for their utilisation, preparation of feasibility reports for mining and 
beneficiation projects, preparation of minerals maps and National 
Mineral Inventory of miner als resources; providing technical 
consultancy services  to  mineral  industry and functioning as a data 
bank for mines and minerals, and preparing of technical and statistical 
publications. 
Immovable Property,  as per Section 2(6) of Registration Act, 1908, 
include land, buildings, hereditary allowances, rights to ways, lights, 
ferries, fisheries or any other benefit to arise out of land, and things 
attached to the earth, or permanently fastened to anything which is 
attached to the earth, but not standing timber, growing crops nor grass. 
List of immovable properties is issued by the Sub -Collector (Revenue 
Authority). 
Initial Price Offer  is an offer which shall be a percentage of value of 
mineral despatched quoted by the bidders during first round of auction 
of mineral blocks. 
Inter Departmental Committee  was constituted by notification of 19 
March 2015 under the chairmanship of the Development 
Commissioner cum Addl. Chief Secretary and representatives from 
Steel & Mines Department, Forest & Environment Department, 
Revenue & Disaster Management Department, Law Department to 
scrutinize the proposals for extension of mining leases and to 
streamline the process of such extension. 
(K) Kissam means variety or classification of land  like Gochar (grazing 
land), Jalasya (water body) etc. 
(L) Lease area  is the area specified in the mining lease within which 
mining operations can be undertaken, includes the non -mineralised 
area required and approved for the activities falling under the definition 
of mine. 
Letter of intent  is a letter issued by the State Government to the 
applicant who had applied for grant of a mining lease. It specifies the 
willingness of State Government to grant the lease subject to fulfilment 
of certain terms and conditions by the applicant. 
Lumps are the part of the ROM ore produced from mine with size 
exceeding 40mm. 
(M) MMDR Act  is an Act [Mines and Minerals (Development and 
Regulation) Act, 1957 as amended] of Government of India to provide 
for the development and regulation of mines and minerals under the 
control of the Union. 

Performance Audit of Systems and Controls in Assessment and Collection of Revenue from 
Major Minerals for the year ended March 2022 
x 
Major Minerals  are the  minerals like Bauxite, Chromite, Coal, Iron, 
Manganese etc., as specified in Second Schedule appended with the 
MMDR Act. 
Mine closure involves the steps taken for reclamation, rehabilitation 
measures taken in respect of a mine or part thereof commencing from 
cessation of mining or processing operations in a mine or part thereof. 
Mine Development and Production Agreement is an agreement signed 
by the successful bidder with the State Government upon obtaining all 
consents, approvals, permits, no -objections and the like as may be 
required under applicable laws for commencement of mining 
operations. 
Mineral includes all major minerals and such of the minor minerals as 
may be specified by the Government. 
Mineral concession is a reconnaissance permit, prospecting licence, 
mining lease, composite licence.   
Mineral reserve is the economically mineable part of a measured and 
indicated mineral resource. 
Mining lease (Major Minerals)  is the lease granted for the purpose of 
undertaking mining operations, and includes a sub -lease granted for 
such purpose as defined under MMDR Act, 1957. 
Mining operation  is the  operation undertaken for the purpose of 
mining any mineral. 
Mining Plan (Major Minerals)  is a document prepared under Section 
5 of the MMDR Act and Rules made thereunder. It is to be submitted 
by the lessee prior to grant of lease after obtaining approval from the 
Indian Bureau of Mines (IBM). 
Mining Plan (Specified Minor Minerals) is a mining plan prepared under 
the Granite Conservation and Development Rules, 1999 and in relation to 
all other minor minerals means a mining plan prepared under these rules 
(OMMC Rules). 
Minor minerals are the building stones, gravel, ordinary clay, ordinary 
sand other than sand used for prescribed purposes, and any other 
mineral which the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, declare to be a minor mineral. 
(N) National Mineral Exploration Trust  is a trust  established by the 
Central Government, with the object ive of using the funds for the 
purposes of regional and detailed exploration, as a non -profit body, 
wherein the holder of a mining lease or a prospecting licence -cum-
mining lease shall pay to the Trust a sum equivalent to two per cent of 
the royalty paid.  
Notified Minerals are specified in fourth Schedule  of MMDR Act (as 
amended in 2015)  viz., Bauxite, Iron ore, Limestone and Manganese 
ore.  
(O) OMMC Rules are the rules  (Odisha Minor Mineral Concession Rules 
2016) made by the Odisha Government in exercise of the powers 

Description of Technical Terms 
xi 
conferred by sub-section (1) of Section 15 of the MMDR Act, 1957  for 
regulating the grant of mineral concessions in respect of minor 
minerals. 
(P) Production is the winning or raising of minerals within the leased area 
for the purpose of processing or despatch. 
Prospecting licence -cum-mining lease  is a two -stage concession 
granted for the purpose of undertaking prospecting operations followed 
by mining operations. 
(Q) Quarry lease is a lease granted on tenure basis for extraction, collection 
and/or removal of minor minerals other than specified minor minerals 
over a compact area. 
(R) Revisionary Authority is the authority of Central Government which is 
empowered to revise any order of the State Government, in respect of 
major minerals. The revisionary powers of the Central Government are 
delegated to Joint Secretary/Director/Deputy Secretary of the Ministry 
of Mines and the designated officers act as the Revisionary Authority 
to dispose off the revision applications under Rule 54 of MCR 1960.  
Royalty is the a mount that the holder of a mining lease shall pay in 
respect of any mineral removed or consumed by him at the rates as 
specified in the second schedule of the MMDR Act.   
Run of Mines is the unprocessed mined material which consists of the 
soil, overburden and impurities.  
(S) Screening Committee was constituted by notification of 06 May 2016 
and re -constituted on 01 August 2016 under the chairmanship of the 
Director of Mines with members from Regional Controller of Mines, 
IBM, Deputy Director General, GSI to scrutinize the mining lease 
application received for grant of mine lease under Section 10A(2)(b) 
and 10A(2)(c) of the MMDR Act. 
 Specified minor minerals are the minerals including decorative stones 
other than the minor minerals, as notified by the Government of India 
and administered by the Steel & Mines Department. 
Surface Rent is the rent to be paid by lessee at the prescribed rate for 
the surface area used by him for the purposes of mining operations. 
(T) Tahasildar is the officer so appointed by the Government for local 
administration in a tahasil and includes the Additional Tahasildar. 
 Trading license is a license of any category, issued by the Competent 
Authority to any person, who wishes to possess, sell, trade in, 
transport, store or otherwise deal with any mineral. 
Transit Pass is a printed and machine numbered  form in the Government 
Press and supplied by the competent authority on payment of the cost 
thereof as fixed by the Director of Mines with the approval of the State 
Government (Rule 58(2) of OMMC Rules, 2016)  to be issued by the 
competent authority permitting the despatch of minerals. 
(U)  Umpire Sample is a part of the sample drawn by the mining authority 
in presence of lessee prior to issue of permission for despatch of 

Performance Audit of Systems and Controls in Assessment and Collection of Revenue from 
Major Minerals for the year ended March 2022 
xii 
mineral from mine. It is kept with the Mining Officer or Deputy 
Director of Mines, as the case may be, under joint seal and signature of 
mine owner. In case of dispute over the result of chemical analysis 
report of the 1st part of the sample, it is analysed in Government 
Laboratory in presence of mine owner for confirmation of the grade of 
the mineral.  

 
xiii 
 
 
Receipts from mining of major and minor minerals form a major source of 
non-tax revenue of the State. The Steel & Mines Department (for major 
minerals and specified minor minerals), and the Revenue & Disaster 
Management Department (for minor minerals) are responsible for regulation 
of the mining sector in the State. The regulation of mines, and assessment and 
collection of mining revenues, is governed primarily by the Mines and 
Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 and Odisha Minor Mineral 
Concession Rules, 2016. 
The MMDR Amendment Act, 2015, which came into force on 12 January 
2015, has replaced the erstwhile first -come-first-served/ application  
mechanism, for grant of mineral resources, with a competitive auction process. 
The e-auction process for grant of mineral blocks has been laid down in the 
Mineral (Auction) Rules, 2015. The auction regime allows States to obtain an 
enhanced share of the value of mineral resources in the form of additional 
amount (or premium), charges towards District Mineral Foundation (DMF ) at 
the rate of 10 per cent of royalty and National Mineral Exploration Trust 
(NMET) at the rate of two  per cent of royalty, in addition to the royalty 
receivable. Provisions were also included for extension of existing mining 
concessions upto March 2030 for captive mines and upto March 2020 for 
other than captive mines. 
The Performance Audit of “Systems and Controls in Assessment and 
Collection of Revenue from Major Minerals” was conducted  between August 
2021 and September 2022. The audit covered the period 2015 -22, with a focus 
on examining issues relating to: grant and extension of mining leases/ permits/ 
licences for extraction of minerals; reporting of mineral despatch and sales by 
leaseholders; regulation of mining activities in compliance with statutory and 
other provisions; assessment and collection of mining revenu es; and 
effectiveness of internal controls and monitoring mechanisms. 
Major issues noticed during the course of this  audit due to implementation of 
the policy and monitoring mechanism by the State Government are 
summarised below.  Money value involved in  the audit observations is 
approximately ` 22,392.51 crore. 
1. Grant/Extension of Mining Leases 
There were a number of cases of irregular grant of leases and e xtensions of 
tenures of existing leases, in contravention of statutory provisions and rules . 
This also resulted in non -settlement of these mines through auction and 
deprived the State Government of the additional revenue in the form of 
premium/ additional amount during this period. 
 
E X E C U T I V E   S U M M A R Y 

Performance Audit of Systems and Controls in Assessment and Collection of Revenue from 
Major Minerals for the year ended March 2022 
xiv 
2. Reporting of Mineral Despatch and Sales 
The royalty and the premium payable by the leaseholder, on the various grades 
of iron-ore lumps and fines despatched from the lease area, is worked out as a 
fixed percentage of the notified average sale prices for the respective grades , 
sizes and category. Thus, it is crucial for the State Government to monitor the 
ex-mine prices, grades, and classifications of iron -ores as lumps and fines, 
reported by leaseholders, in order to safeguard the mining revenues of the 
Government. 
2.1 Decline of Reported Grade of Iron-Ore 
It was observed after auction that in case of selected mines , there was an 
abrupt and abnormal decline in the grade of iron -ore and its classification 
reported by the new lessees. Though more than 83 per cent production was 
reported in the grade of 62 -65% Fe in the pre -auction period, the same came 
down to approximately 16 per cent in the two years after auction (2020 -2022). 
Similarly, share of grades 60% Fe and below went up from approximately 11 
per cent of total production to more than 60 per cent of total production in the 
two years after auction (2020 -2022). A similar trend was also noticed in the 
case of production of fines. To elaborate, in case of one iron -ore mine under 
the Joda Circle, the average production of lumps of grades above 60% Fe was 
about 77 per cent before auction, which drastically reduced to a mere 9.88 
per cent within one year, in FY 2020 -21 and further reduced to zero per cent 
during FY 2021-22 after new lessee started operating the mine. 
It is highly improbable that the grades of mineral reserves, produced from the 
auctioned mines, would witness an abrupt decline within a short period of one 
or two years. Such a significant and sharp decline in the grade of iron -ore 
indicated a significant risk that the new lessees were misreporting the grade of 
iron-ore produced, in order to avoid higher royalty and premium payable on 
higher grades.  
For the six test -checked mines, changes in reported grades of production of 
lumps and fines after auction, as compared to the consistent pattern in the 
grade of production, as reported by the older lessees, have consequently 
resulted in a revenue implication of approximately ₹4,162.77 crore for the 
years 2020-21 and 2021 -22 in the form of lesser royalty and premium  (post 
auction). 
2.2 Reporting of Iron-Ore Fines as Screened Fines  
As per a State Government order issued in 2010, crushed fines are also to be 
charged at the rates applicable to lumps. After this notification, the mining 
circles had charged higher royalty for “crushed fines” equivalent to lumps,  but 
charged lower royalty for “screened fines” equivalent to fines. In this context, 
Audit noticed abnormal increase in the reported production of screened fines 
(having lower royalty) and declining trend in reported production of crushed 
fines from the year 2010 -2011, which indicated a significant risk of 
misreporting of the “crushed fines”, produced from processing of ROM ores/ 
lumps in crusher machines, leading to avoidance in payment of higher royalty 
and premium.  
Out of the 14 mines for which production data for the period prior to 2010 was 
available, seven mines had not reported any production of screened fines, 

Executive Summary 
xv 
whereas three mines had reported the same as being less than seven per cent, 
one mine as 12 per cent, and only three mines as between 23 -42 per cent. 
However, the proportion of screened fines, produced from the same mines as 
reported by the lessees, increased from FY 2010-11 onwards, which is the year 
when the order of the State Government was issued. By FY 2021 -22, out of 
the 12 active mines, the reported proportion of screened fines ranged from 60 
per cent to as high as 82 per cent in the case of 10 mines, 44 per cent, for one 
mine; and 27 per cent, for another mine. For instance, in one mine under Joda 
Circle, the percentage of production of screened fines increased from 7 per 
cent during 2007-10 to upto 86 per cent during 2010-21.  
Thus post the State Government order of 2010, there was a significant 
decrease in reporting of crushed fines from the production pattern of crushed 
and screened fines as prevalent before the order, leading to revenue 
implication of ` 10,294.24 crore for the 2 0 test checked mines consisting of  
royalty of approximately ₹  5,841.80 crores and premium of approximately  
₹ 4,452.44 crores (for four auctioned mines). 
2.3 Decline in Reported Proportion of Lumps vis-a-vis Fines  
ASP and consequently the royalty and premium payable on lumps is much 
higher than that on fines. Scrutiny of data of eight auctioned mines showed 
that, in case of five of these mines, there was a sharp decline in the proportion 
of lumps and increase in the proportion of fines, as reported by the new 
lessees, in comparison to the old lessees. During the period 2014 -20, the 
proportion of lumps produced in different mines, was reported by the old 
lessees, to be in the range of 23 per cent to 50 per cent.  It declined abruptly in 
FY 2020-21, to between 10 per cent and 29 per cent, while the proportion of 
fines showed a concomitant increase.  
2.4 Reporting of Ex-Mine Prices 
Wide variations in the Ex -Mines Prices (EMPs) were reported by the same 
lessees, as well as different lessees, for the same grade of iron -ore lumps and 
fines. As the EMPs reported by lessees were the determinant for calculation of 
the Average Sale Price (ASP) by IBM, the reporting of low EMPs, by the 
lessees, had the effect of lowering the ASP of iron -ore, as published by IBM, 
and, consequently, the amount of royalty and premium payable by the lessees 
along with charges towards DMF and NMET. 
These abnormal variations in ex -mine prices, across different grades, should 
have been a sufficient red flag. However, these variations were not analysed or 
taken up for examination/ investigation, and no action was initiated, at the 
level of the DDMs, Directorate or Government. 
3. Assessment and Collection of Mineral Receipts 
The royalty payable by mining lease holders is to be assessed on a quarterly 
basis, by the DDMs/ MOs of the concerned mining circles. Upon receipt of 
the monthly returns, along with particulars of the royalty paid by leaseholders, 
the DDMs/ MOs are required to undertake quarterly verification of the said 
returns and also inspect the accounts, as well as other relevant documents 
maintained by the leaseholders, in respect of the minerals consumed/ removed 
from the mining lease areas. 

Performance Audit of Systems and Controls in Assessment and Collection of Revenue from 
Major Minerals for the year ended March 2022 
xvi 
3.1 Non-verification of sales turnover 
There was a difference in the total sales turnover, reported by seven lessees, to 
the Commercial Tax (CT) department, as against the sales reported to the 
mining circles. This indicated  a significant rise of  lessees underreporting their 
sales turnover, in order to reduce their liability towards payment of royalty. 
The short -assessment of royalty, for these seven lessees, worked out  
approximately to ₹905 .66 crore; with District Mineral Fund (DMF) of 
approximately ₹271.70 crore (30 per cent) and National Mineral Exploration 
Trust (NMET) of approximately ₹18.11 crore (2 per cent) also being leviable . 
Due to the extent of variation between the report ed sales turnover between 
GST returns and annual returns in i3MS, Audit could not draw an assurance 
that the annual returns in i3MS contained declaration of correct and complete 
sales turnover by the lessees. 
4. Regulation of mining activities 
Regulation of mining activities, relating to major minerals and specified, 
minor minerals in accordance with the provisions of laws, rules, notifications, 
and in terms of the conditions prescribed in the approved mining plans and 
statutory clearances, is the responsibility of the Steel & Mines department. 
4.1 Violation of provisions of environment protection  
Mining activities beyond limits of environmental clearances can have very 
severe and far -reaching adverse impacts on the environment. Production of 
minerals, in excess of the limits stipulated in the Environment Clearance (EC) 
was noticed in cases of two iron -ore mines and one coal mine. Deviation from 
the production limits prescribed in EC constituted unlawful mining and hence 
is liable to attract levy and realization of price of the mineral so produced, 
amounting to ` 1,699.05 crore.   
There had also been unauthorized extraction of mineral from forest land, 
without due approval from the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate 
Change (MoEFCC), in the case of one chromite mine, which is liable for levy 
and realization of price of the minerals so raised, amounting to `150.10 crore. 
In addition, these cases are also liable for penal action under concerned 
provisions of the Environment Protection Act and the Forest Conservation Act 
respectively. 
4.2 Production in excess of the approved Mining Plan 
In regard to regulation of mining activities, it was observed that there had been 
production of minerals in excess of the limits stipulated in the approved 
mining plans, in case of eight iron ore mines, attracting levy and realization of 
price of the minerals so raised, amounting to `3,618.50 crore. 
Carrying out mining activities in violation of relevant environment protection 
provisions and also crossing the limits of mining plan also bound to have 
adverse effects on the environment of the impacted areas. 
 

Executive Summary 
xvii 
5. Monitoring and internal controls 
A robust system of internal controls is vital for monitoring the mining 
activities of leaseholders and safeguarding the interest of the Government. 
5.1 Functioning of Government Laboratories 
There were significant issues relating to the functioning of government 
laboratories for chemical testing to ascertain the grades of mineral ores.  Out 
of a total of 31,677 samples, for which chemical analysis of chromite had been 
carried out during the years 2015 -22, 31,340 samples had been analysed 
without sufficient stock of essential chemicals. Similarly, the stocks of 
chemicals, required for analysis of iron-ore samples, had been exhausted on 10 
occasions and there had been gaps of 9 to 82 days in rece iving new stocks, 
during which these samples were shown as analysed. Analysis of samples, 
without the required chemicals being in stock, posed serious questions over the 
validity of the analysis reports and there was a risk that the analysis reports 
had been issued without the actual testing of samples. 
Further, the results of samples were different for the same samples analysed in 
different Government Laboratories/ same Laboratories, at different periods of 
time. This indicated lack of robustness in the system of testing and analysis of 
samples and raised serious questions in regard to the accuracy and reliability 
of the analysis reports issued by the Government laboratories. 
5.2 Functioning of check gates 
Major issues were observed in regard to issuance of transit passes and their 
checking at check gates/ weighbridges. Out of a total of 1,18,44,864 e -passes, 
generated for Mineral Carrying Vehicles (MCVs), routed through the 10 
sample check gates during 2017-22, it was found that there were no records in 
i3ms with regard to the 16,79,220 e-passes. Non-checking of the 16,79,220 e-
passes generated for MCVs resulted in absence of end-to-end tracking of 
transportation of a minimum of 1.48 crore MT of iron ore val uing atleast 
` 1473.26 crore. In the absence of end-to-end tracking of these e passes, the 
risk of excess extraction and transportation of minerals in violation of existing 
regulatory framework could not be completely ruled out.  
Moreover, there was shortage of manpower, lack of internet connectivity and 
essential items like bar code scanners at check gates. Weigh bridges were also 
found to be non -functional. In such a scenario , practice of  transportation of 
excess minerals in these areas could not be ruled out. 
5.3 Issuance of e -Passes to non - mineral carrying vehicles  
Audit noticed that 3,697 vehicles for which e -Passes were generated were 
registered as motorcycles, cars, three wheelers etc. and have been shown to 
have transported 67,271.82 MT of minerals during the audit period. These 
vehicles were also not registered on i3MS. This clearly indicates lack of 
monitoring of unregistered vehicles for carrying minerals and therefore the 
possibility of illegal transportation of unaccounted minerals cannot be ruled 
out. 
5.4 Inspections and raids 
Only 265 inspections/ raids had been conducted by State Level Enforcement 
Squad (SLES), during 2015 -22, against the target of 2,520 to 2,940 

Performance Audit of Systems and Controls in Assessment and Collection of Revenue from 
Major Minerals for the year ended March 2022 
xviii 
inspections / raids. Thus, the achievement was only 9.01 to 10.52 per cent of 
the prescribed target. Audit also found shortfalls in the inspection of working 
and non-working mines by Deputy Directors of Mines (DDMs), in five test -
checked mining circles, during the period 2015 -22, ranging from 73.96 to 100 
per cent. Thus, the department was not exercising adequate monitoring, to 
protect mineral resources from unauthorised activities. 

 
xix 
Recommendations: 
Government should: 
1. fix responsibility on the concerned officers who recommended 
extension of the lease period despite objections were raised by 
multiple departments on irregularities committed by the lessee. 
2. carry out a complete and timely investigation across all auctioned 
mines into the sudden reporting of lower grades of iron -ore as 
found in test check by Audit, to ascertain willful or deliberate 
misreporting in order to avoid payment of higher royalty and 
premium.   
3. put in place a policy/ mechanism for preventing leakage of revenue 
due to the significant risk of misreporting of category and sizes of 
iron-ore when reported as fines and the rapid increase of screened 
fines on which the royalty and premium are lower. 
4. re-verify the grade -wise mineral production of all the mines, in 
coordination with IBM, to ascertain the actual grades and sizes of 
iron ore and mix of lumps, crushed fines and screen fines in order 
to arrive at the range for each mine and also to realise appropriate 
royalty and premium. This range should be integrated in i3ms to 
ensure system-based control over reporting of grade, size and mix 
of minerals by the respective lessee. 
5. investigate the reporting of low ex -mines prices by lessees, to 
ascertain whether this was being done deliberately in order to 
reduce the average sale price and, consequently, the royalty and 
premium payable.  
6. fix responsibility on the concerned officers for lack of adequate 
monitoring and inspection regarding exercising quality checks 
(grade, category and size) in production of minerals. 
7. investigate the under reporting of sales turnover  by lessees on 
i3MS.  
8. ensure robust integration of i3MS with GSTN in order to facilitate 
cross-validation of information, and accuracy in assessment of the 
royalty receivable. Further, the Government may also explore the 
possibility of integrating turnover reported in GST returns in the 
assessment system of royalty, in coordination with Ministry of 
Mines.  
9. take up the matter of reviewing the existing grading classification 
for chromite with IBM, to devise more appropriate grading 
brackets for publication of average sale prices of ores having 
different Cr2O3 content, so that the royalty leviable is reflective of 
the actual market prices. 
10. take timely action under Section 21(5) of MMDR Act against the 
violators of Environment Clearance granted for mining and 
consider taking penal action under relevant provisions of the 
Environment Protection Act, 1986 and the Forest (Conservation) 
Act, 1980. 

Performance Audit of Systems and Controls in Assessment and Collection of Revenue from 
Major Minerals for the year ended March 2022 
xx 
11.  develop a robust mechanism to ensure regular checks on quantity 
extracted by the lease holders vis-à-vis the quantity authorised 
under various statutory clearances. 
12.  fix responsibility for not taking action against lessees for violations 
of conditions stipulated in various regulations. 
13. investigate the cases of unchecked e-passes generated for the 
MCVs and revamp the existing mechanism to ensure control over 
unchecked passes for end to end monitoring of movement of 
mineral resources.   
14. ensure deployment of adequate personnel at the check -gates, 
weighbridges and laboratories, as also availability of the required 
equipment for smooth functioning of the check gates/ weighbridges 
and Government laboratories.  
15. ensure carrying out required quantum of inspections/ raids by the 
SLES, as well as inspection of mines by the DDsM, for adequate 
monitoring of mining activities and for protecting its mineral 
resources from unauthorised activities. 
 

 
 
 
 
CHAPTER I 
Introduction 
 

 
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This chapter provides an introduction to the mineral resources of Odisha, the 
organisation structure for regulation of mineral resources and the trend of 
mining revenues. The Chapter also covers the objectives of this performance 
audit, audit criteria, scope of the audit and the methodology adopted.  
1.1 Mineral Resources of Odisha 
Odisha is a mineral rich state occupying a prominent place in the mineral map 
of the country. The State is endowed with vast reserves of major minerals like 
iron ore, chromite, manganese, coal, bauxite, dolomite, limestone, graphite, 
nickel etc.; and minor minerals like decorative stone quartz, fireclay, ordinary 
clay, silt, rehmatti, ordinary sand, brick-earth, ordinary earth, moorum, laterite 
slabs, ordinary boulders etc.  
Receipts from 
mining of major 
and minor minerals 
form a major 
source1 of the non -
tax revenue of the 
State. The mineral 
receipts mainly 
consist of Royalty, 
Dead Rent and 
Surface Rent. The 
regulation of 
mines, and 
assessment and 
collection of 
mining revenues is 
governed by the 
Mines and 
Minerals 
(Development and 
Regulation) Act, 
1957 (MMDR Act) 
and amendments 
thereto, as promulgated by the Government of India (GoI). Under the Act, the 
power of formulation of Rules, in regard to major minerals, is vested with the 
 
1  Mining revenue was 31.78 per cent of the revenue receipts of the State for the year 2021-
22  
Introduction 1 
MINERAL MAP OF ODISHA 

Performance Audit of Systems and Controls in Assessment and Collection of Revenue from 
Major Minerals for the year ended March 2022 
2 
Union Government , and, in respect of minor minerals, with the State 
Governments.  
The Steel & Mines (S&M) Department, Government of Odisha (GoO) is 
responsible for discovery, extraction and administration of the mineral 
resources of the State. The department administers central legislations { viz, 
MMDR Act, 1957, Mineral Concession Rules (MCR), 1960, the Mineral 
(Other than Atomic and Hydro Carbons Energy Minerals) Concession Rules, 
2016} for major minerals as well as implements the Odisha  Minor Mineral 
Concession (OMMC) Rules, 2004 and 2016, for minor minerals and specified 
minor minerals2. The majority of activities in the mining sector, (viz. grant and 
extension of lease, collection of royalty, ensuring lawful mining, etc.) are 
controlled by the Directorate of Mines under the S & M department, GoO.  
Grants of lease and extension etc. of the Hydro Carbons/ Energy Minerals 
(Minerals like Coal and Lignite specified under Part A of the First Schedule of 
MMDR Act) Atomic Minerals (Minerals like rare earth containing Uranium, 
Thorium, Titanium etc. specified under Part B of the Schedule supra) are 
governed under the Coal Blocks Allocation Rules, 2017 and The Atomic 
Minerals Concession Rules, 2016, respectively, by the State Government with 
prior approval of Central Government.  
1.2 Organisation Structure 
The regulation of major minerals in the State is under the control of the S & M 
Department of the GoO. The functions of the S & M Department include 
systematic survey and assessment of mineral deposits (major minerals and 
specified minor minerals); exploitation and administration of mines and 
mining leases; prevention of illegal mining and transport of minerals; 
assessment and collection of mining revenues; study of impact of mining 
operations on environment etc. The State is divided into 14 mining circles, 
headed by the Deputy Director of Mines or Mining Officers. The mining 
circles are under the administrative control of the Director of Mines & 
Geology, who reports to the Principal Secretary (Steel & Mines Department). 
The organisational setup for administration of major minerals and specified 
minor minerals is as follows: 
 
 
1.3  Trend of Mining Revenues 
The year -wise receipts, on account of major and minor minerals, during  
2015-23, is shown in Table 1.1: 
 
2  All minor minerals including decorative stones like Granite etc. other than the minor 
minerals listed at serial No. 1(ii) of Schedule -III OMMC Rules, 2016 and is administered 
by the Steel & Mines Department 

Chapter I: Introduction 
 
3 
MAJOR / SPECIFIED MINOR MINERALS 
Table 1.1: Trend of mining receipts 
(₹ in crore) 
Financial 
Year 
Mineral receipts Total 
Mineral 
Receipts 
Total 
Revenue 
Receipts of 
the State 
Percentage of total 
Mineral Receipts to 
total Revenue 
Receipts of the State 
Major 
Minerals 
Minor 
Minerals 
2015-16 5,337.32 461.64 5,798.96 68,941 8.41 
2016-17 4,599.74 326.05 4,925.79 74,299 6.63 
2017-18 5,760.71 370.28 6,130.99 85,204 7.20 
2018-19 10,103.39 376.22 10,479.61 99,546 10.53 
2019-20 10,664.78 355.24 11,020.02 1,01,568 10.85 
2020-21 13,308.39 482.93 13,791.32 1,04,387 13.21 
2021-22 48,045.36 596.39 48,641.75 1,53,059 31.78 
2022-23 37,568.55 506.49 38,075.04 1,50,462 25.31 
Source: Information furnished by the Department and State Finance Report 
The steep increase in mining revenues during 2021 -22 in respect of major 
minerals can be attributed to: (i) increase (12.01 per  cent) in the despatch 
quantity from 32.04 crore MT in FY 2020 -21 to 35.89 crore MT in FY 
2021-22, and (ii) realisation of mining revenues, in addition to royalty dues, in 
the form of (a) additional amount (premium) for auctioned mines during FY 
2021-22, and (b) additional amount for non -auctioned mines3, introduced with 
effect from 28 March 2021. However, there was steep decline in mining 
receipts during 2022-23. 
Process for assessment and collection of mining revenues 
The prescribed mechanism, for assessment and collection of mining revenues, 
is depicted in the following schematic Chart:   
 
Chart 1.1: Flow chart showing mechanism of assessment and 
collection of mining revenue 
 
 
 
Source: MMDR Act and Rules made thereunder 
 
3  The mines granted prior to amendment of MMDR Act in 2015 and continuing operations 
till expiry of their term as provided under MMDR amendment Act, 2015 


Performance Audit of Systems and Controls in Assessment and Collection of Revenue from 
Major Minerals for the year ended March 2022 
4 
1.4  Audit Objectives 
The Performance Audit was conducted to examine whether: 
i. grants and extensions of mining leases / permits / licences, for extraction 
of minerals, were in accordance with applicable laws, rules and policies 
ii. reporting of mineral despatch and sales, by lease holders, was checked 
for correctness, by authorities concerned 
iii. mining activities were being regulated in compliance with statutory and 
other applicable provisions 
iv. assessment and collection of mining revenues was being done in 
accordance with applicable laws and rules and 
v. internal controls and monitoring mechanisms were functioning 
effectively, to prevent illegal mining and leakage of mining revenues. 
1.5  Audit Criteria 
The audit observations were benchmarked against criteria derived from the 
following: 
Acts and Rules notified by Government of India: 
▪ Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957. 
▪ Mineral Concession Rules, 1960. 
▪ Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Amendment Act, 2015. 
▪ Mineral Auction Rules, 2015. 
▪ The Minerals (Evidence of Mineral Contents) Rules, 2015. 
▪ Minerals (Other than Atomic and Hydrocarbons Energy Minerals) 
Concession Rules, 2016. 
▪ Mineral Conservation and Development Rules, 1988 and 2017. 
▪ Forest Conservation Act, 1980. 
▪ The Environment (Protection) Act, 1986. 
▪ Granite Conservation and Development Rules, 1999. 
▪ The Coal Bearing Areas (Acquisition and Development) Act, 1957. 
▪ National Mineral Exploration Trust Rules, 2015. 
▪ Circulars and other relevant notifications issued by Union Government. 
Acts and Rules notified by Government of Odisha: 
▪ Odisha Minerals (Prevention of Theft, Smuggling & Illegal Mining and 
Regulation of Possession, Storage, Trading and Transportation) Rules, 
2007. 
▪ Odisha District Mineral Foundation Rules, 2015. 
▪ Odisha Minor Mineral Concession Rules, 2004 and 2016. 
▪ Odisha Specified Minor Minerals Auction Rules, 2019. 
▪ Circulars and other relevant notifications issued by State Government. 
1.6  Scope and Methodology 
The Performance Audit , conducted from August to December 2021 and 
August to September 2022, covered the period 2015 -22, but also included 
coverage of prior / past periods, wherever relevant or necessary.  

Chapter I: Introduction 
 
5 
Audit test-checked records in the Steel & Mines (S&M) Department, as well 
as the Directorate of Mines & Geology, and also test -checked five4 out of 14 
Mining Circles in respect of major minerals . The mining circles were selected 
using stratified random sampling, taking into consideration the collection of 
revenue by the mining circles.  
The methodology of audit included scrutiny of physical and computerised 
records made available in Department, Directorate of Mines and Geology and 
selected mining circles and Joint Physical Verification (JPI) of check-gates in 
presence of the officers of the department.  
The Entry Conference was conducted (virtual mode) on 12 April 2021, with 
the Principal Secretaries and other officers of the S&M Department and 
R&DM Department, GoO,  in which the audit objectives, criteria, scope and 
methodology, were discussed. The audit findings were discussed in the Exit 
Conference, held on 28 June 2023 and replies of the Government furnished in 
subsequent stages have been suitably incorporated in the Report.  
1.7 Integrated Mines and Mineral Management System (i3MS) 
The GoO has designed and developed (2010) a computerised system called 
the ‘Integrated Mines and Mineral Management System’ (i3MS), with the 
objective of capturing all transactions and regulating the activities of mining 
lessees and licensees. The software has various modules that cover various 
processes, such as:  (i) clearances – codification of leases and lessees, 
statutory clearances and registration of transporters (ii) production – 
verification of clearances, validity and limits of clearances, monthly returns 
furnished by lessees / licensees, updating of daily production, calculation of 
royalty and demand assessment and generation of e -transit permits 
(iii) Despatch – system generated e -transit pass uniquely bar -coded with 
date/time stamp and auto -check of Despatches against permitted quantities 
(iv) verification – bar-code scanners at check gates, enroute verification 
through mobile application and vehicle tracking system (v) receipts – real-
time reporting of production and Despatch, reports on excavation and stock 
and reports on royalty due and collection (vi) integration – validation & 
integration of weigh -bridges and RTO integration, for authentication of 
carriers.  
The i3MS system was implemented with the intent to be a significant step 
towards greater transparency and efficiency in regulation of the mining sector. 
However, there remained serious deficiencies (as brought out in this report) 
that need to be addressed by the department, so that the large volume of 
information contained in the system can be used. The i3MS system, therefore, 
needs to be more effectively leveraged, to strengthen the monitoring 
mechanisms and controls within the department. 
1.8 Acknowledgement 
Audit acknowledges the cooperation extended by the S & M Department, 
Government of Odisha, in providing necessary information and records to 
Audit. 
 
4    DDM, Joda; DDM, Jajpur Road; DDM, Koira; DDM, Talcher; and MO, Berhampur  

Performance Audit of Systems and Controls in Assessment and Collection of Revenue from 
Major Minerals for the year ended March 2022 
6 
1.9 Money value involved in Audit observations of this Report 
Results of audit of the systems and controls in assessment and collection of 
mineral receipts in respect of major and specified minor minerals have been 
compiled in this Report. Money value involved in audit observations is 
approximately ` 22,392.51 crore as detailed in Table 1.2 below. 
Table 1.2: Para-wise money-value of the observations included in the report 
(` in crore) 
Para No. Appendix 
No. 
Brief Subject Period of 
coverage 
Money 
Value  
3.2.1 VII Reporting of the grade of iron -ore 
produced (Reporting of lower grade of 
iron ore) 
2020-22 4,162.77 
3.2.2 VIII Reporting of iron -ore fines as screened 
fines 
2015-22 10,294.24 
3.5.1  X Non-utilisation of sub-grade iron-ore 2014-22 1,183.02 
3.5.3  XI Non-utilisation of beneficiable and sub -
grade chromite 
2015-22 51.71 
4.2 XII Non-levy of interest on delayed payment 
of royalty 
2015-22 28.66 
4.3 XIII Short assessment of royalty, due to non -
verification of sales turnover reported by 
lessees 
2015-22 1,195.47 
4.4 XIV Blockage of revenue due to non -disposal 
of seized minerals 
2015-22 6.35 
5.2.1 -- Production of coal in excess of the  
quantity approved in Environment 
Clearance 
2017-18 88.60 
5.2.2 XV Production of iron -ore exceeding the 
quantity approved in the Environment 
Clearances (i) Roida-II 
 
 
2019-20 
 
 
52.04 
 (ii) Thakurani Block-B 2019-21 1,558.41 
5.2.3 XVI Production of iron -ore exceeding the 
quantities approved in the mining plans 
2015-21 3,618.50 
5.2.4 XVII Production of chromite without forest 
clearance 
2019-22 150.10 
5.2.5 -- Operation of mine on unauthorized 
transfer of lease 
2016-20 2.64 
  Total  22,392.51 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER II 
Grant/ Extension of 
Mining Leases 
 

 
7 
 
 
 
 
This chapter contains audit findings relating to the grant of mining leases. The 
audit observations include: irregular grants of leases for quartz, gemstone and 
/ semi-precious stone mines; irregular extensions of leases for major minerals, 
like iron and manganese ores; irregular extensions of leases for specified 
minor minerals, like decorative stone; lack of due diligence in regard to  
e-auction of mineral blocks; non -initiation of auction process for cancelled 
leases; and delays in auction of specified minor mineral blocks.  
 
 
2.1  Introduction 
The Mines and Minerals (Development & Regulation) Act, (MMDR) 1957, is 
the principal legislation that governs the minerals and mining sector in India. 
Judicial pronouncements for allocation of natural resources and 
recommendations of high -level committees led to a paradigm shift in the 
allocation of mineral blocks through an auction system. The MMDR 
Amendment Act, 2015, which came into force on 12 January 2015, has 
replaced the erstwhile first -come-first-served/ application mechanism, for 
grant of mineral r esources, with a competitive auction process. Th e e-auction 
process for grant of mineral blocks has been laid down in the Mineral 
(Auction) Rules, 2015. The auction regime allows States to obtain an 
enhanced share of the value of mineral resources in the form of additional 
amount (or premium), charges towards District Mineral Foundation (DMF) at 
the rate of 10 per cent of royalty and National Mineral Exploration Trust 
(NMET) at the rate of two  per cent of royalty, in addition to the royalty 
receivable.  
A schematic diagram showing the pre and post 2015 regime for allotment / 
extension of mining leases is shown in Chart 2.1:  
Grant/ Extension of Mining Leases  
(Major and specified Minor Minerals) 
2 
 
 
 
2 

Performance Audit of Systems and Controls in Assessment and Collection of Revenue from 
Major Minerals for the year ended March 2022 
8 
 
 
 
 
As per the provisions of the MMDR Amendment Act, 2015, a mining lease 
can be granted only through the mechanism of auction. The lessee is required 
to pay additional amount (premium) equal to the product of percentage quoted 
during auction and the value of the mineral despatched, as well as 
contributions towards the District Mineral Fund (DMF) and National Mineral 
Exploration Trust (NMET), in addition to Royalty or Dead Rent and Surface 
Rent, at the prescribed rates. However, in cases where leases were alrea dy 
granted prior to the 2015 amendment, the lessees are to pay Royalty  or Dead 
Rent, Surface Rent and contribution towards DMF and NMET. There was no 
provision for payment of any additional amount till March 2021; however, 
thereafter, vide amendment to MMDR Act in 2021, an additional amount is 
Chart 2.1:  Flow chart showing allotment procedure of major 
mineral concessions 
Source: MMDR Act, 1957 and MMDR Amendment Act, 2015 

Chapter II: Grant / Extension of Mining Leases 
 
9 
also payable at a prescribed percentage of the royalty. A comparison of mining 
revenue realisable in respect of prior and post 2015 are shown in the Table 
2.1. 
Table 2.1: Comparison of levies on the mining activities prior and post 
2015 
Nature of levies Prior to Amendment 
of MMDR Act in 2015 
Subsequent to 
Amendment of 
MMDR Act in 2015 
Royalty 15 per cent of the ASP 15 per cent of ASP 
Premium/Additional 
Amount 
-- Bid percentage of ASP* 
DMFT contribution -- 10 per cent of Royalty 
NMET contribution -- 2 per cent of Royalty 
*In the auctions for lease of mines during 2015 to 2022 the percentage of the ASP settled as 
payable additional amount for the eight test checked iron ore mines ranged between 90 to 150 
per cent.  
From the above table, it can be seen that prior to implementation of MMDR 
(Amendment) Act , 2015, the lessees were liable to pay royalty only, which 
explains the vast variations in realisable revenue between pre and post auction 
period. 
Audit observations, relating to grant of mining leases, are discussed in the 
following paragraphs. 
2.2 Irregular grant of leases 
As per Section 10A (1) of the MMDR Amendment Act , 2015 (Act), all 
applications for grant of prospecting licence and mining lease , received prior 
to the date of commencement of the  Act, shall become ineligible with some 
exceptions. Section 8A (2) provides that on and from the date of the 
commencement of the Act, all mining leases shall be granted for the period of 
fifty years. 
Under Section 10A(2)(c) of the  Act, in cases where , before the 
commencement of the Act;  
(i) the Central Government ha d communicated approvals  for grant of a 
mining lease for Hydrocarbons/ Energy Minerals and Atomic minerals; 
or  
(ii) if a letter of intent (LoI) 5 had been issued by the State Government to 
grant a mining lease,  
the mining lease  is to  be granted , subject to fulfilment of the conditions 
stipulated in the previous approval / LoI, within a period of two years from the 
date of commencement of this Act (12 January 2015). In case of failure on the 
part of the applicant to comply with the terms and conditions stipulated, the 
Approval/LoI can be cancelled.  
 
5  LoI is a letter issued by the State Government to the applicant who had applied for grant 
of a mining lease. It specifies the willingness of State Government to grant the lease 
subject to fulfilment of certain terms and conditions by the applicant 

Performance Audit of Systems and Controls in Assessment and Collection of Revenue from 
Major Minerals for the year ended March 2022 
10 
Further, under Rule 31(1) of the Mineral Concession Rules (MCR) , 2016, 
every lease deed is to be executed within six months from the date of grant of 
the lease, or within such period as the State Government may allow in this 
regard, and if no such lease deed is executed within the said period due to any 
default on the part of the applicant, the State Government may revoke the 
order granting the lease. 
Scrutiny of records revealed that, out of the 16 test checked cases of grant of 
mining leases, during 2015 -22, there were three specified minor minerals 
mining leases which had been granted in contravention of the above 
provisions of the law and rules, as mentioned in the succeeding paragraphs.  
This also resulted in  non-settlement of these mines through auction and 
deprived the State Government of the additional revenue in the form of 
premium/additional amount during this period.  
2.2.1 Mining lease for Quartz and Gemstone mine under the B alangir 
mining circle  
Sub-section 10 of Section 11 of MMDR Act , 1957 provides that the holder of 
a prospecting licence, who completes the prospecting operation as laid down 
in sub-section (9) and establishes the existence of mineral contents in the area, 
shall be required to apply for a mining lease for such area and shall have the 
right to get the mining lease and thereafter undertake mining operations in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act. 
LoI for the quartz and gemstone 6 mine over 21.092 ha, in village Bankia was 
issued by the State Government, in September 2003. Subsequently, the State 
Government cancelled (December 2006) the LoI, due to non -submission of 
documents like Geological Prospecting Report  (GPR), by the applicant 7. The 
applicant filed (February 2007) a revision application 8 against the cancellation 
order, with the Revisional Authority 9 (RA) (Joint Secretary, Ministry of 
Mines, GoI), who set aside (January 2011) the cancellation order and directed 
the State Government to decide the matter afresh, within six months. The State 
Government examined the matter afresh and informed (July 2011) the 
applicant about the objections, like non -submission of authenticated GPR, 
inclusion of impermissible lands of gochar10 and jalasaya11 kissam within the 
lease area, etc. The applicant submitted (July 2011) a compliance letter, with 
an undertaking for exchange of gochar land, but did not submit the required 
GPR. No decision was taken by the State Government on this compliance 
letter. Subsequently, after four years, the mining lease was granted (January 
2017) for a period of 50 years, on the basis of LoI issued in 2003 and 
cancelled in 2006. The lease deed was executed in January 2017 (the last 
month of the stipulated period of two years for grant of lease). However, the 
 
6  Major minerals  
7  M/s Manikeswari Minerals 
8  Any person aggrieved by any order made by the State Government or other authority 
may, within three months of the date of communication of the order to him, apply to the 
Central Government, for revision of the order 
9  Authority of the Central Government authorised to pass orders against any order made by 
the State Government on submission of revision application by any aggrieved party 
(lessee/licensee) under Rule 54 of the MCR, 1960. 
10  Grazing land 
11   Water body  

Chapter II: Grant / Extension of Mining Leases 
 
11 
deficiency of documents, due to which the LoI had been cancelled, remained 
unresolved.  
Grant of mining lease, against LoI cancelled earlier due to non -fulfilment of 
the conditions stipulated therein was against the provisions of the law and 
rules.  
In reply, the State Government stated (September 2023)  that the applicant had 
produced deficient documents to DoM, but in compliance to the order dated 
12 January 2011 of the RA, the matter was placed before the screening 
committee constituted by the Government on 28 November  2016 to examine 
the case where in it was opined by the members that there is no necessity for 
insisting on the authenticated Geological Prospecting Report (GPR)  at this 
stage when the mining plan has been approved by the IBM which reflects 
geological information therein, Committee recommend ed Government for 
issue of grant order. Accordingly, the lease had been granted to the lessee.  
The Government reply admits that the documents , which included the GPR,  
submitted by the applicant were deficient. Government reply that GPR was not 
required as the mining plan was approved, is not correct , as Rule 22 (4) of 
MCR 1960, mining plan is prepared after grant of the lease and as per Section 
11(10) of MMDR Act, 1957, completion of prospecting operations was a pre-
condition for grant of mining lease, results of which are contained in the GPR . 
Hence, the grant of lease was not against the applicable provisions. 
2.2.2 Mining lease for semi -precious stone (Cat’s eye) mine under 
Koraput mining circle 
The terms and conditions for grant of lease for semi-precious stone (Cat’s eye) 
mine, over 41.485 ha in villages Paikadakulguda and Kandhadakulguda were 
issued to the applicant 12 alongwith the LoI, in 2001. After receipt of the 
approved mining plan, the lease was granted (November 2007), with the 
stipulation that the applicant should furnish a surveyed map and description of 
land, to the Collector, Rayagada, within three months from the date of the 
order. The lease execution order 13, however, could not be issued, due to 
litigation in High Court of Odisha involving the lessee, with a third party. 
Although the court case was disposed of in favour of the lessee in 2011, 
neither the lease execution order was issued nor was the lease executed.  The 
lease order was not cancelled even after a lapse of eight years from date of its 
issue, upto introduction of MMDR Amendment Act, in violation of the 
provisions of Rule 31 of MCR, 1960 . After notification of the MMDR 
Amendment Act, 2015, the applicant requested (July 2015 and September 
2016) for execution of lease and the lease was re -granted for a period of 50 
years and executed in January 2017, over an area of 41.485 ha.  
However, in view of the provisions of MCR, 1960, the grant order should have 
been revoked on account of non -execution of the lease deed, within the 
stipulated period of six months.  
In reply, the Government stated ( September 2023) that the execution of the 
 
12  M/s Bajrang Lal Gupta 
13  The lease execution order is issued by the Collector of the District for registration of the 
lease deed after grant of lease by Government 

Performance Audit of Systems and Controls in Assessment and Collection of Revenue from 
Major Minerals for the year ended March 2022 
12 
lease deed could not be taken up after 2011 as the Collector, Rayagada had 
not submitted the survey and demarcation status of the mining lease area.  So, 
there was no fault on the part of the grantee and accordingly , after examining 
the genuineness of the matter, the Government allowed further period for 
execution of mining lease as per Rule 31 of MC Rules, 1960. 
The reply is not acceptable as it is not only failure of Collector, Rayagada in 
timely submission of survey and demarcation status of the mining lease area , 
but also the department’s  monitoring failure to ensure timely submission of 
the above report. Whether the lessee had deposited the amount for survey and 
demarcation and had submitted a surveyed map and description within three 
months from the date of issue of grant of lease as per terms and the condition s 
issued in 2001 and grant order issued in 2007 wa s not on record and also not 
furnished to Audit. In this scenario, Audit could not draw an assurance that the 
delay was not due to the default on the part of the lessee. Any Government 
order, allowing further period beyond six months for grant of lease , was also 
not on record. Hence , the grant order was liable for revocation under Rule 31 
of MCR, 1960.    
2.2.3 Mining lease for Gem Stone (Cat’s eye) mine under Kalahandi 
mining circle 
The terms and conditions for grant of lease for gem stone (cat’s eye) mine, 
over 17.122 ha in villages Pipalpadar and Sirjapali were issued in July 2005 
and the lease was granted by the State Government, in November 2007, for a 
period of 20 years. The Mining Officer, Kalahandi, asked (April 2008) the 
applicant to submit the lease deed, with stamp duty worth ₹14,40,952, for 
execution of the mining  lease by the Collector, Kalahandi. The lessee, 
however, did not submit the lease deed document within the prescribed period 
of six months. The department did not revoke the grant order under provisions 
of MCR, 1960. After lapse of eight years, the applicant submitted a 
representation (September 2016) (after amendment of the MMDR Act in 
2015) that the lease deed could not be executed due to non -finalisation of 
royalty, based on which the stamp duty was to be calculated. In January 2017, 
the State Government  granted the mining lease to the applicant for 50 years, 
by irregular implementation of the provisions of the MMDR Amendment Act 
2015, following which the lease deed was executed. 
Audit observed that the grant of lease was not in consonance with the rules, as 
the lease deed had not been executed by the lessee, even within 10 years, 
against the stipulated period of six months.  
In reply, the Government stated (September 2023) that the delay in execution  
of the lease deed is attributable to the inability of the authority to arrive at 
the proper and accurate rate of mineral. Repeated correspondence among 
various Government offices failed to resolve the issue. So  here the lessee is  
not at fault and hence the grant order was not revoked. 
The reply is not acceptable as it was silent on the issue of grant of lease in 
contravention to the rules and the department has not furnished the compliance 
regarding when the rate of the mineral was finalised by the proper authority.  
Also, the Government order allowing further period beyond six months for 

Chapter II: Grant / Extension of Mining Leases 
 
13 
grant of lease was not on record. Hence, the grant order was liable for 
revocation under Rule 31 of MCR, 1960. 
2.3 Irregular extension of leases for major minerals 
As per Section 8A (3) of the MMDR Amendment Act, 2015, all mining leases, 
granted before the commencement of the MMDR Amendment Act, 2015, shall 
be deemed to have been granted for a period of fifty years. As per Rules 28 
and 28(A) of MCR, 1960, where mining operations are not commenced within 
a period of two years from the date of execution of the lease, or discontinued 
for a continuous period of two years after commencement of such operations, 
the State Government shall, by an order, declare the mining lease as lapsed 
and communicate the declaration to the lessee. In such cases, the lessee may 
submit an application to the State Government, explaining the reasons beyond 
his control, at least three months before the expiry of such period or within six 
months from the date of its lapse. 
Scrutiny of records of the DoM revealed that, out of 38 test -checked cases of 
extension of mining leases, there were three mining leases which had been 
extended in contravention of the above provisions of the law and rules, as 
mentioned in the succeeding paragraphs. 
2.3.1 Mining lease for Manganese ore mine under Korput mining circle 
The mining lease for manganese ore mine over 501.67 ha in village Nishikhal 
was granted for 20 years, from 28 June 1964, and the first Renewal of Mining 
Lease (RML) was granted for another 20 years, from 28 June 1984 to 27 June 
2004. The second RML application, submitted on 26 June 2003, remained 
pending up to January 2013 with DDM, Koraput. While forwarding (January 
2013) the RML application to DoM, the Collector, Rayagada, stated that the 
mine had been suspended, due to want of statutory clearances, such as 
approved mining plan, Environment Clearance (EC) and Consent to Operate 
(CTO). DoM forwarded (June 2013) the same to the State Government, with 
the remarks that the mine had been non -working since January 1997, and the 
lessee had not submitted any application justifying the reasons for the delay in 
commencement of mining operations to save the lease from lapsing; and, thus, 
the mining lease was liable for being declared as having ‘lapsed’ under Rule 
28 of MCR, 1960. However, the Government did not take any action on the 
matter, and, instead of declaring the lease as lapsed, extended (September 
2018) the validity of the lease period for another 50 years, from June 1984 (i.e. 
up to 27 June 2034) on the basis of Rule 3 of Mineral (Mining by Government 
Company) Rules, 2015. No reasons/  justification for ignoring the 
recommendation of the DoM Odisha was found on record.  
In reply, the Government stated ( September 2023) that the Manganese Mining 
lease over 501.67  ha in village Nishikhal under Koraput Mining Circle of 
OMC Ltd. is a non-working mine which finds place in list of 102 non-working 
mining leases submitted before Hon’ble Supreme Court by the Central 
Empowered Committee (CEC). The Hon’ble Supreme Court vide orde r dated 
16.05.2014 in W.P(C) No. 114/2014 have directed that mining operations in 
these 102 mining leases listed in Annexure - R-2 of the report of the CEC shall 
remain suspended, but it will be open to such lessees to move the concerned 

Performance Audit of Systems and Controls in Assessment and Collection of Revenue from 
Major Minerals for the year ended March 2022 
14 
authorities to obtain all the clearances/ approval/ consent, and they may move 
this Court for modification of this interim order in relation to their cases. The 
said lease is considered as subsisting as per order dated 04.04.2016 of Hon’ble 
Supreme Court passed in W.P.(C) No. 114/2014. The lessee has paid the entire 
compensation for unlawful production as per order dated 02  August 2017 of 
the Hon’ble Supreme Court. The validity of the lease has been extended 
following the provisions of the erstwhile Mineral (Mining by Government 
Company) (MMGC) Rules, 2015.  
The reply of the Government is not acceptable as the mine remained non -
working beyond two years from 1997 and no application justifying the reasons 
for not working the mines was submitted by the lessee , for which the mine 
should have been declared as lapsed by the State Government much earlier to 
the Supreme Court judgement in 2016. Accordingly, the provisions of MMGC 
Rules, 2015 were also not applicable as the mine was non -working for more  
than two years and liable to be lapsed under MC Rules , 1960. Further, the 
department has not furnished the compliance whether the lessee had obtained 
all the statutory clearances from the concerned authorities and moved the 
Hon’ble Supreme Court for modification of the interim order , as required vide 
order of Hon’ble Supreme Court dated 16 May 2014.  
2.3.2 Mining lease for Iron and Manganese ore mine under Koira 
mining circle 
The lease 14 for iron and manganese ore mine over 70.917 ha in village 
Sanindpur had been granted for 20 years, from 10 September 1980 to 
9 September 2000, and the first RML was granted for another 20 years, up to 9 
September 2020. Mining operations were stopped by the DDM, Koira from 26 
August 2010, for want of EC, and the lessee could not resume mining 
operations. Therefore, State Government declared (June 2015) the lease as 
‘lapsed’. However, the lessee filed a revision application, against the State 
Government order before the Revisional Authority (RA), who rejected 
(February 2016) the revision application as being devoid of merits. The lessee 
filed a petition before the Hon’ble High Court of Odisha, which quashed 
(2017) both the orders, leaving it open to the State Government to pass 
necessary orders, after giving opportunity of hearing to the petitioner. The 
State Government, accordingly, conducted (August 2017) a personal hearing 
and again declared the lease to be ‘lapsed’, in October 2017, on the grounds 
that the discontinuance of mining operation beyond two years was due to 
lapses on part of the lessee, and ordered that possession of the lease area be 
taken over.  
The lessee, however, submitted (November 2017) a revival application to the 
State Government under Rule 20 (7) of MCR, 1960 against the lapse order. 
Contrary to its previous decisions on the matter, the State Government 
approved (June 2018) the revival of lease, on the grounds that the EC had been 
duly applied for by the lessee in June 2007, but had been granted by MoEF in 
June 2013, and, therefore, the lessee had no role in the delay and was not 
responsible for discontinuance of mining operations. The tenure of the lease 
was also extended (April 2021) up to 9 September 2030.  
 
14  M/s National Enterprises 

Chapter II: Grant / Extension of Mining Leases 
 
15 
Scrutiny of records, however, showed that neither the revision or revival 
applications nor the court petition of the lessee had any mention of submission 
of application for EC in 2007. Further, no records supporting the 
government’s view regarding submission of application for EC in 2007 was 
made available.  Audit observed that the EC approval letter of 2013 of MoEF 
made a reference to the application of the lessee for EC submitted in 2010. 
Thus, after rejecting the application of the lessee on three occasions (2015, 
2016 and 2017), the revival of the lease (2018) on the ground that the lessee 
was not liable for delay in obtaining EC was contrary to the previous 
viewpoint and hence appears to be an afterthought to favour the lessee, which 
requires investigation at appropriate levels.  
Moreover, after review of the case upon the directions of the Hon’ble High 
Court of Odisha, the State Government order of 2017, declaring the lease as 
lapsed, should have been considered as the final order, and, accordingly, there 
was no scope for further revival in 2018.  
In reply, the Government stated ( September 2023) that the Iron and 
Manganese mining lease over 70.917 ha in village Sanindpur under Koira 
Mining Circle was a non -working mine which finds place in the list of 102 
non-working mining leases submitted before Hon'ble Supreme Court by the 
CEC. The Hon'ble Supreme Court vide order dated 16.05.2014 in W.P(C) 
No.114/2014 have directed that mining operations in these 102 mining leases 
shall remain suspended, but it will be open to such lessees to move the 
concerned authorities to obtain all the clearances/ approval/ consent, and after 
that they may move this Court for modification of this interim order in relation 
to their cases. The said lease was considered as subsisting as per order dated 
04.04.2016 of Hon'ble Supreme Court passed in W.P(C) No.114/2014. The 
lessee has paid the entire compensation for unlawful production as per order 
dated 02.08.2017 of the Hon'ble Supreme Court. The validity of the lease has 
been extended following the provisions of the MMDR (Amendment) Act and 
allowed mining operation after obtaining all clearances.  
The reply is not acceptable as the lease was again declared lapsed in October 
2017 i.e. after the Hon’ble Supreme Court order dated 04.04.2016, hence, the 
argument of the Government that the lease was considered as subsisting as per 
Hon’ble Supreme Court order does not stand.  After rejecting the applications 
of the lessee on three occasions (2015, 2016 and 2017), the revival of the lease 
(2018) on the ground that the lessee was not liable for delay in obtaining EC 
was contrary to the previous viewpoint and hence appears to be an 
afterthought to favour the lessee. 
2.3.3 Mining lease for Iron ore under Joda mining circle 
The mining lease 15 for iron ore in Guali village over 365.026 ha was granted 
for 20 years, from 27 June 1953 to 26 June 1973, and first renewal was 
granted for another 20 years, up to 26 June 1993. The second renewal, applied 
for on 10 February 1992 and the third renewal applied for on 25 April 2012, 
were pending, without approval.  
In the meantime, the following events occurred: 
 
15  In favour of M/s R.P. Sao 

Performance Audit of Systems and Controls in Assessment and Collection of Revenue from 
Major Minerals for the year ended March 2022 
16 
a. Government issued (September 2011) a show -cause notice to the 
lessee, for violation of Rule 37 of MCR, 1960, in which it was stated 
that mining activities had been undertaken by another entity and not by 
the lessee, without prior approval of Government.  
b. Another show-cause notice was issued in November 2011, on the basis 
of a report furnished by the Divisional Forest Officer (DFO), Keonjhar, 
which stated that a sponge iron plant had been established by another 
entity, over 28.84 ha inside the lease area, which was partly in the 
forest area, and recommended cancellation of the lease.  
c. The Indian Bureau of Mines (IBM), Bhubaneswar, in its letter 
(October 2012), stated that the lessee had been issued show -cause 
notice for violation of the Mineral Conservation and Development 
Rules (MCDR) provisions, including the erection of a plant, in the 
name of another entity, within the mine lease area, on mineralized 
ground, without having specific approval in the mining plan.  
d. DDM, Joda, also highlighted (July 2013) that a sponge and power 
plant was in operation, by another entity, in the lease hold area.  
e. DoM also pointed out (April 2015) that the user agency had allowed 
another entity to establish a sponge iron plant, without approval from 
the competent authority.  
Despite multiple objections / observations as highlighted above, the State 
Government extended (April 2015) the lease up to March 2020, on the basis of 
Rule 8(A)(6) of MMDR Amendment Act, 2015, without examining the 
irregularities committed by the lessee. Gover nment did not initiate any 
effective action against the lessee except for issuing show -cause notices, 
which remained unresponded and the reasons for the same were not on record. 
Extension of the lease, despite unauthorised activities by the lessee ins ide the 
lease area (including part of the forest area), was irregular.  
In reply, the Government stated ( September 2023) that the Iron mining lease 
over 365.026 ha in Guali of Keonjhar District of M/s. R. P Sao was a non -
working mine which finds place in the list of 102 non -working mining leases 
submitted before Hon'ble Supreme Court by the CEC. The Hon'ble Supreme 
Court vide order dated 16.05.2014 in W.P(C) No.114/2014 have directed that 
mining operations in these 102 mining leases listed in Annexure R -2 of the 
report of the CEC shall remain suspended, but it will be open to s uch lessees 
to move the concerned authorities to obtain all the clearances/ approval/ 
consent, and after that they may move this Court for modification of this 
interim order in relation to their cases. The said lease is considered as 
subsisting as per order dated 04.04.2016 of Hon'ble Supreme Court passed in 
W.P(C) No.114/2014. The lessee has paid the entire compensation for 
unlawful production as per order dated 02.08.2017 of the Hon'ble Supreme 
Court. The two judges committee appointed by Hon'ble Supreme Court has 
opined that the lessee has not acted in violation of rule 37 of MC Rules, 1960. 
The validity of the lease has been extended following the provisions of the 
MMDR (Amendment) Act and allowed mining operation as per orders of the 
Hon'ble Supreme Court after obtaining all statutory clearances.  
The reply of the Government is not acceptable as it is silent about the main 

Chapter II: Grant / Extension of Mining Leases 
 
17 
issue of erection of a plant,  as reported by the Divisional Forest Offic er, 
Keonjhar and IBM, Bhubaneswar,  in the name of another entity, within the 
mine lease area, without having specific approval in the mining plan and in 
violation of provisions of the Mineral Conservation and Development Rules 
(MCDR). With regard to two judges committee as referred in the reply, no 
document relating to this committee including its report was made available 
by the Department to Audit. 
2.4  Irregular extension of leases for specified minor minerals16 
Under Rule 8 (7) of the Odisha Minor Mineral Concession (OMMC) Rules, 
2004, an application for renewal of mining/quarry lease is to be made at least 
ninety days before the expiry of lease. Under Rule 25 (5) of the above Rules, 
if the lessee does not work upon the lease for a continuous period of two years, 
the lease is liable to be cancelled, unless prior permission has been granted for 
such stoppage, by the competent authority, on reasonable grounds.  
Scrutiny of records of DoM revealed that 12 mining leases of specified minor 
minerals were extended during 2016 -22. Out of these, two leases were 
extended in contravention of the above provisions of the law and rules, as 
mentioned in the succeeding paragraphs. 
2.4.1 Mining lease for decorative stone under Koraput mining circle 
The lease for decorative stone quarry over an area of 11.083 ha under village 
Tediliguda was granted for a term of 10 years , from 23 October 2002 to 22 
October 2012. The  application for  renewal of mining lease (RML) was 
received on 1 August 2012. As per the report (December 2015) of DDM , 
Koraput, the lessee had not commenced mining operations during the tenure of 
the lease. DoM forwarded (April 2016) the case to the S&M Department, with 
the remarks that : (i) no Despatch of mineral ha d been made during the entire 
period of lease, (ii) the RML application had not been filed within the 
prescribed time period and (iii) no representation for condonation of delay had 
been submitted by the lessee.  
The State Government, however, approved (April 2020) the extension of lease 
for 20 years , from 23 October 2012 to 22  October 2032, despite the fact that 
the lease had not been operationalised during the entire term, and ignored the 
delay in submission of the RML application by the lessee. 
After this was pointed out by Audit, the State Government stated ( September 
2023) that: (i) the lease agreement had been registered on 1  November 2002, 
and accordingly, the term would be 10 years from date of registration, (ii) 
hence the application for renewal submitted on 1  August 2012, was in due 
time of three months prior to the date of expiry, and (iii) the mining operations 
had been stopped from 2 July 2010, for want of statutory clearances, and (iv) 
non-operationalisation of the lease was not attributable to the lessee, as he had 
taken adequate steps to obtain statutory clearances. Further, the Government 
stated that later , with the amendment of OMMC Rules, 2016 as OMMC 
 
16  All minor minerals including decorative stones other than the minor minerals listed at 
Serial No. 1 (ii) of Schedule -III of OMMC Rules, 2016 a re administered by the Steel & 
Mines Department 

Performance Audit of Systems and Controls in Assessment and Collection of Revenue from 
Major Minerals for the year ended March 2022 
18 
(Amendment) Rules, 2018, provision for extension of validity of lease period 
was inserted. Under this clause, extension of validity of lease period can only 
be considered when the lessee has complied with all terms and conditions 
issued and has set up an industry in the State for consumption of the 
decorative stone extracted from the said lease hold area. In this case, the lessee 
has set up the Granite Cutting and Polishing Unit at Tit ilagarh Industrial area 
and commenced production from 15.10.2001. Accordingly, the mining lease 
period was extended up to 22.10.2032 as per the provision s stated under rule 
8A of the said rules as the lessee had set up industry during the lease period 
and not violated any of the terms and conditions.  
The reply is not acceptable, as  the Government claim in the reply, that the 
operations of the mine stopped from 2 July 2010, was in contradiction to the 
report/ recommendation of the DDM, Koraput, and DoM, that the lessee had 
not operationalised the mine for the entire tenure of lease. Further, no records 
were produced to Audit, in support of the claim that the lessee had taken 
adequate steps to obtain statutory clearances. Moreover, there was no record 
of any prior permission on stoppage of the mining operation s granted by the 
competent authority on reasonable grounds, in terms of the Rule 25(5) of 
OMMC Rules. Also, the term of the initial lease was from 23 October 2002 to 
22 October 2012, hence, the renewal application should have been submitted 
90 days prior to 22 October 2012 i.e. before 24 July 2012.  The Department’s 
claim that the term of the lease was from the date of the registration deed, is 
not supported by the facts available on record. Thus, the extension of lease 
was irregular.  
2.4.2 Mining lease for decorative stone under Balangir mining circle 
A quarry lease 17 for the decorative stone mine over 17 .676 ha in village 
Kurlubhata was granted for 10 years, from 20 July 2000 to 19 July 2010. The 
same was declared to be a mining lease 18 in 2005 due to notification of 
OMMC Rules , 2004, which provided that the quarry leases already granted 
shall be treated as mining leases.  As the RML application was filed within 
due date, the lessee continued mining operations under deemed extension 
provision under Rule 57 of OMMC Rules , 2004. In April 2012, the Mining 
Officer (MO) directed the lessee not to undertake mining operations until 
submission of statutory clearances, including Environmental Clearance from 
MoEF, as required under the Environment Impact Assessment (EIA) 
notification of 2009. The mine remained non-operational, for want of statutory 
clearances beyond two years, from April 2012 to May 2020.  Also, no prior 
permission was obtained by the lessee for stoppage of mining operations due 
to non-submission of statutory clearance, from the competent authority (State 
Government), in terms of the OMMC Rules. In May 2020, the State 
Government extended the lease for 30 years, up to 19 July 2030, even though 
the mine had remained non -operational, without due permission, for a period 
of more than two years. 
 
17  The Lease granted for minor minerals is termed as Quarry Lease with tenure extending up 
to 10 years in pre-auction regime 
18  The Lease granted for major minerals and specified minor minerals are termed as Mining 
Lease with tenure extending up to 30 years during pre-auction regime 

Chapter II: Grant / Extension of Mining Leases 
 
19 
Audit noticed that the lessee was required to submit EC from 2009, however, 
no records showing that the lessee had applied for EC was available. It was 
also noticed that the lessee had appointed a consultant for obtaining EC, only 
in November 2015, thus confirming that discontinuance of the mining 
operations for over two years was due to inaction on part of the lessee in 
submission of EC and therefore, the lease was liable for cancellation. Thus, 
the extension of validity of the lease, by the State Government, was irregular.  
In reply, the Government stated (September 2023) that the validity of the lease 
had been extended under the special provision of Rule 8 A of the, OMMC 
(Amendment) Rules, 2018, as the lessee had set up an industry in the State, 
based on decorative stones.  
The reply was not acceptable as it remained silent regarding non -operation of 
the mine for more than two years, on account of which it was liable for 
cancellation in April 2014 as the amended  Rule 8 A of May 2018 was not 
applicable. 
2.5 Non-initiation of auction process for cancelled leases 
As per the provisions of the MMDR Act, for the purpose of granting a mining 
lease, in respect of any notified mineral 19, in a notified area 20, the State 
Government is to select, through auction, by a method of competitive bidding, 
including e -auction, an applicant who fulfils the eligibility conditions, as 
specified in this Act. Further, Rule 5 of the Mineral (Auction) Rules, 2015, 
mandates the State Government to initiate an auction process for grant of a 
mining lease, with respect to an area within the State, if the mineral content in 
such area has been established in accordance with the provisions of the 
Minerals (Evidence of Mineral Contents) Rules, 2015. 
Scrutiny of records and information, furnished by the DoM, revealed that 203 
mining leases, of minerals like iron ore, china clay, quartzite, gem stone 
quartz, graphite, fireclay, manganese, pyrophyllite, soapstone, limestone and 
dolomite, had been cancelled (rejected/ declared lapsed by the State 
Government /expired without renewal or surrendered by the lessee) during the 
last 10 years. These cancelled leases had been previously granted on the basis 
of exploration/ prospecting reports and, after confirming evidence of the 
presence of minerals. In view of the above, for these cancelled leases, the 
department should have either initiated the process of auction, in terms of 
Mineral (Auction) Rules, 2015, or taken steps for further prospecting / 
exploration, to ascertain the availability of mineral content, in terms of the 
Minerals (Evidence of Mineral Contents) Rules, 2015. However, no steps had 
been taken by DoM, for auction or prospecting of these cancelled leases. Non -
auction of these mines resulted in deferment/loss of revenue to the 
Government exchequer. 
In reply, the Government stated ( September 2023) that leases in question are 
very old  leases and  there is  no statutory document available to access the 
mineral content in the leases. Existence of mineral content is a pre-requisite 
 
19  Minerals classified as such in Fourth Schedule of MMDR Amendment Act, 2015 
(Bauxite, Iron Ore, Limestone and Manganese) 
20  As defined under Section 10(B) (4) of MMDR Amendment Act, 2015  

Performance Audit of Systems and Controls in Assessment and Collection of Revenue from 
Major Minerals for the year ended March 2022 
20 
for putting any area into auction. Steps have, therefore, been taken for 
allotment of these blocks to different  exploring agencies in phased  manner 
for carrying  out exploration. On receipt  of the outcome  of prospecting 
operations, the decision for putting these blocks to auction can be taken. The 
fact, however, remained that the department had not initiated the work of 
prospecting/ exploration or auction, for several years after cancellation of 
these leases, which indicate s lack of proactive planning and department also 
lost the opportunity to earn additional revenue from these cancelled mines. 
2.6  Delay in auction of Specified Minor Mineral blocks 
Rule 10, read with Rule 16 of the OMMC Rules, 2016,  provides that the State 
Government shall grant prospecting -cum-mining lease, through auction, by a 
method of competitive bidding, including e-auction, to an applicant who fulfils 
the prescribed conditions, for an area where general exploration 21 has been 
carried out. 
Scrutiny of records of DoM, pertaining to auction of specified minor minerals, 
revealed the following:  
i. Delay in formulation of rules – Despite the fact that detailed procedures 
for auction had already been prescribed in the Mineral (Auction) Rules, 
2015, the  department chose to frame dedicated rules for auction of 
Specified Minor Minerals. These dedicated rules, viz. Odisha Specified 
Minor Minerals (Auction) Rules (OSMMAR), detailing the procedures 
for auction, were approved by the competent authority in June 2019, with 
a delay of two and half years since the notification of the OMMC Rules. 
This consequently delayed the auction of specified minor mineral blocks 
and resulted in deferment of realisation of revenue to State exchequer. 
ii. Non-initiation of auction – After notification of OSMMAR , 2019, the 
State Government directed (August 2019) DoM to furnish the list of 
specified minor mineral blocks that were ready for auction, along with 
their geological report status. This was reiterated in the High -Level 
Committee (HLC) meeting, held (September 2019) to finalise the auction 
of 14 specified minor mineral blocks by the end of November 2019. 
Accordingly, DoM forwarded boundary maps of the 14 specified minor 
mineral blocks, to the Odisha Remote Sensing Application Centre 
(ORSAC), Bhubaneswar, for conducting a Differential Global Positioning 
System (DGPS) survey. In December 2019, DoM received the block 
summary reports for 12 out of 14 specified minor mineral blocks, for 
which DGPS survey had been completed by ORSAC. It was observed, 
however, that DoM submitted the details of the 12 blocks, to the State 
Government, only in April 2021, after a delay of 16 months. Further, even 
after submission of the details, the 12 blocks were yet to be notified for 
auction (as of September 2022). 
Thus, even after three years of publication of OSMMAR, 2019, the 
auction process of 12 ready -to-auction specified minor mineral blocks 
could not be initiated, resulting in deferment of realisation of revenue to 
the Government exchequer. 
 
21  Up to G4 level, as per United Nations Framework Classification guidelines  

Chapter II: Grant / Extension of Mining Leases 
 
21 
In reply, the Government stated ( September 2023) that the Department had 
prioritised the auction of major mineral blocks in view of their higher value.  
The auction rule was revisited and certain amendments were made during 
March 2022. After amendment of this Rule, steps were taken by the 
Government for auction of specified minor mineral blocks. On 22 August 
2022, the State Government had published notice inviting tender (NIT) for 
auction of five specified minor mineral blocks. Out of which , two blocks 
were successfully auctioned and auction of other three blocks were annulled 
due to receipt of inadequate bids. Similarly, on 18 May 2023, NIT for 
auction of 12 Specified minor mineral blocks was published. Again, the 
auction of all 12 blocks was annulled due to non -participation of any bidder. 
However, the Government needs to put in concerted efforts for the auction 
of 12 specified minor mineral blocks to prevent further deferment of revenue 
collection and to ensure optimal utilisation of the mineral resources therein.  
Recommendation:  
1. Government should fix responsibility on the concerned officers 
who recommended  extension of the lease period despite 
objections were raised by mult iple departments on 
irregularities committed by the lessee. 
 
 

 
 
 
 
  
 
CHAPTER III 
Reporting of Mineral 
Despatch and Sale 
 

 
23 
 
 
 
 
 
This chapter contains audit findings on the reporting of mineral despatch 
and sale by leaseholders. Significant audit observations relate to the 
reporting of grade (per cent of iron content) and size (lumps or fines) of iron-
ore produced, wide variations in the reported ex -mines prices of iron -ore, 
reporting of iron -ore fines as screened fines, and non -utilisation/ non -
disposal of low grade iron and chromites in lease areas.   
 
3.1 Introduction 
Mineral ores occur with variations in chemical and physical form. In the case 
of iron -ore, the ores can be categorised, based on the percentage of mineral 
content, into different “grades”; and, on the basis of the size of the ore, into 
“lumps” and “fines”. As per Rule 45 of MCDR , 2017, all mining lease holders 
are required to submit monthly returns on production, despatch and sale of 
minerals, from their lease areas. The returns should contain data on the ex-
mine prices of the various grades of lumps and fines, despatched from the 
mines. These ex-mine prices, as reported by the lessees, form the basis on 
which the average sale prices are notified by IBM, for the various grades of 
iron-ore lumps and fines. The royalty payable by the leaseholder, on the 
various grades of iron -ore lumps and fines despatched from the lease area, is 
worked out as a fixed percentage of the notified average sale prices for the 
respective grades. Thus, it is crucial for the State Government to monitor the 
ex-mine prices, grades, and classifications of iron -ores as lumps and fines, 
reported by leaseholders, in order to safeguard the mining revenues of the 
Government. 
Audit observations, pertaining to the above aspects of reporting, are discussed 
in the following paragraphs. 
3.2        System of calculation of royalty and premium 
Iron-ore occurs with large variations in chemical composition, most important 
of which is the percentage of iron or ‘Fe’ content in the ore. Based on the iron/ 
Fe content, iron-ore is categorized into different “grades”, with iron-ore having 
higher Fe content being regarded as a higher grade. The following standard 
grading is followed, as per IBM (as of March 2022): (i) 65% Fe and above (ii) 
62-65% Fe (iii) 60-62% Fe (iv) 58-60% Fe (v) 55-58% Fe and (vi) below 55% 
Fe. The grade of iron -ore has implications for the degree of processing (if 
any), required for upgrading the ore for industrial use. In general, higher 
grades of iron -ore require lower (or no) processing, produce higher hot metal 
yields22, and require lesser quantity of coke in the blast furnace, thus reducing 
the costs of industrial production. For these reasons, higher grades of iron -ore 
fetch higher prices in the market, as compared to lower grades. 
 
22  It is the hot, liquid, metallic iron product obtained upon reduction of iron ore (normally in 
Blast Furnace or in Corex Furnace) 
Reporting of Mineral Despatch and Sale   
 
3 

Performance Audit of Systems and Controls in Assessment and Collection of Revenue from 
Major Minerals for the year ended March 2022 
24 
Iron-ore also varies in physical form, and can be classified based on its size, as 
“lumps” and “fines”. As per IBM publications, the size of iron -ore lumps lies 
in the range of 10 mm and above, whereas iron -ore fines are of size less than 
10 mm. Fines require sintering 23 (agglomeration into crude pellets), prior to 
their use in blast furnaces. Lump ore can bypass this process and be charged 
directly into the furnace. For this reason, lumps fetch higher price in the 
market, as compared to fines, for any particular grade of iron-ore. 
IBM notifies an average sale price (ASP) for each grade of iron -ore lumps and 
fines, on a monthly and State-wise basis. In general, a higher grade of iron -ore 
has a higher ASP, as compared with a lower grade; and iron -ore lumps have a 
higher ASP, as compared with fines. The royalty on different grades of iron -
ore lumps and fines is worked out as a fixed percentage (15 per cent for iron-
ore) of the ASP notified by IBM, for the iron-ore lumps and fines of respective 
grades. Hence, the royalty payable on higher grades of iron -ore is higher than 
the royalty payable for lower grades . Similarly, the royalty payable on lumps 
would be higher than the royalty payable on fines. An example of the ASP, 
notified by IBM for different grades of iron-ore lumps and fines, for the month 
of March 2022, for Odisha, and the royalty (15 per cent of ASP) worked out 
thereon, is shown in Table 3.1, 
Table 3.1: Average Sale Price for Lumps and Fines (March 2022), for 
Odisha 
(in ` /MT) 
Grade of iron ore 
ASP notified by IBM  Royalty at the rate of 
15 per cent of ASP 
Lumps Fines Lumps Fines 
Below 55% Fe  3,763 1,838 564.45 275.70 
55% to below 58% Fe 4,389 3,580 658.35 537 
58% to below 60% Fe 5,780 3,764 867 564.60 
60% to below 62% Fe 7,193 4,523 1,078.95 678.45 
62% to below 65% Fe 8,341 5,215 1,251.15 782.25 
65% Fe and above 8,695 5,974 1,304.25 896.10 
Source: IBM publication of Average Sale Price for March 2022 
As royalty is based on grade ( the percentage of iron ore content ) and size 
(lumps or fines) of the ore, the risk of misreporting of the grade and size of ore 
to avoid payment of higher royalty should be properly safeguarded against.  
This risk is significantly higher in the case of fresh mining leases, granted 
through auctions conducted in FY 2019 -20, in pursuance of the amended 
provisions24 of MMDR Act, 2015, which required all expiring mining leases to 
be presettled through a fresh auction process. In such fresh mining lease cases, 
the lessees were committed, as per Rule 8(3) of the Mineral (Auction) Rules, 
2015, to pay additional amount (premium), as a fixed percentage of the ASP 
as settled in auction, over and above the royalty payable. Data in regard to 
such auctions showed that the premia payable by the new lessees, ranged from 
90.90 per cent to 150 per cent of the ASP. A sample calculation of the amount 
of royalty and additional amount (premium), payable per metric ton (MT), by 
various lessees, for March 2022, is shown in Table 3.2. 
 
23  Sintering is a process of compacting and forming a solid mass of material by pressure or 
heat without melting it to the point of liquefaction. 
24  Section 8A (4)(5)(6) of MMDR Amendment Act, 2015 

Chapter III: Reporting of Mineral Despatch and Sale 
25 
Table 3.2:  Calculation of royalty and additional amount (premium)  per 
Metric Ton, in respect of the auctioned mines 
(in `/ MT) 
Sl. 
No. 
Lessee Name of 
mine 
auctioned 
Circle Percentage of 
additional 
amount settled 
after auction  
IBM ASP 
for 62-65% 
Fe lumps 
March 2022 
Royalty (at 
the rate of 
15 per cent 
of ASP) 
Additional 
amount 
payable 
(E×F) 
Total 
amount 
payable 
A B C D E F G H I 
1 Arcelor Mittal Thakurani Joda 107.55 
8,341 1,251.15 
8,971 10,222 
2 JSW Steel Jajang Joda 110.00 9,175 10,426 
3 JSW Steel Nuagaon Joda 95.20 7,941 9,192 
4 Kashvi 
International  Jaribahal Joda 150.00 12,512 13,763 
5 Narbheram Power 
and Steel Roida-II Joda 90.90 7,582 8,833 
6 Serajuddin and Co. Balda Joda 118.05 9,847 11,098 
7 JSW Steel Gonua Koira 132.00 11,010 12,261 
8 JSW Steel Narayanposi Koira 98.55 8,220 9,471 
Source: IBM publication of Average Sale Price for March 2022 and bid per cent of auctioned mines 
As can be seen from Table 3.2 , for every MT of iron -ore produced and 
despatched, the lessees were required to pay an amount, in the form of royalty 
and additional amount (premium), which was much higher than the average 
sale price. For instance, Table 3.2 indicates that, the ASP for March 2022, for 
Odisha, was ` 8,341 per MT, but different lessees were required to pay 
amounts, in the range of ` 8,833 to ` 13,763 per MT, to the State Government. 
Therefore, the risk of misreporting of the grades and classifications of the iron-
ore produced, due to the differen ce in royalty and the premium amounts for 
each grade and classification, became significant. 
In view of the above and considering the risk of  misreporting of grade and 
size, Audit scrutinized the trend in reporting of iron -ore grades, by old (pre -
auction) lessees, as well as new (post -auction) lessees, of eight iron -ore 
mines25, under the two major 26 mining circles (Joda and Koira). The data, as 
reported by both the old and new lessees, to the State Government and IBM, 
for the FYs 2014 -15 to 2021 -22, was examined by Audit, with particular 
attention to the change-over of lessees due to the expiry of old leases and grant 
of fresh leases, following auctions in 2019 -20. Findings in this regard, are 
detailed in the sub-paragraphs below: 
3.2.1          Reporting of the grades of iron-ore produced 
Scrutiny of data showed that, in the case of six out of the eight auctioned 
mines, there had been an abrupt and abnormal decline, in the grade of iron -ore 
(both lumps and fines), as reported by the new lessees, as compared with the 
old lessees. The  methodology adopted to quantify the monetary impact on 
revenue and  mine-wise observations are discussed in the following sub-
paragraphs.  
 
25  (i) Jajang - Old Rungta Mines - New JSW; (ii) Roida -II - Old KN Ram – New 
Narbheram; (iii) Thakurani - Old Kaypee Enterprises - New Arcelor Mittal; (iv) Nuagaon 
- Old KJS Ahluwalia - New JSW; (v) Jaribahal - Old Patnaik Minerals - New Khashvi 
International;(vi) Narayanposi - Old AMTC - New JSW;(vii) Gonua - Old PK Ahluwalia 
- New JSW; and (viii) Balda-Old Seerajuddin - New Seerajuddin 
26  Total production of iron ore, in the State, during FY 2021 -22, was 147.364 MT, out of 
which the production in Joda and Koira circles was 131.437 MT, which constituted 89.19 
per cent of the total production  

Performance Audit of Systems and Controls in Assessment and Collection of Revenue from 
Major Minerals for the year ended March 2022 
26 
Methodology adopted to quantify the monetary impact on revenue due to 
reporting of lower grades of iron ore produced 
➢ Percentage of reported quantity of different grades over the total 
production during six years (2014 -20) reported by old lessees has been 
calculated. 
➢ That percentage was considered for calculation  on the total production 
during the years 2020 -21 and 2021 -22 by the new lessees of the same 
mines, to arrive at the grade-wise production. 
➢ The royalty and premium leviable on the grade -wise production arrived at 
by Audit, has been calculated by using annual average of ASP published 
by Indian Bureau of Mines. 
➢ The leviable royalty and premium have been compared with the actual 
royalty and premium (collected on the despatched quantities + to be 
collected on un -despatched/ closing balance of quantities, out of 
production of two years) on the reported grade -wise production by the 
new lessees during the years 2020-21 and 2021-22. 
 
i. Jajang iron-ore mine (Joda circle)  
Audit analysed the grade-wise production of iron-ore lumps in Jajang iron-ore 
mine as reported by the old lessee (Rungta Mines) and new lessee (JSW 
Steel), which is shown in Table 3.3 and chart 3.1 below: 
Table 3.3: Grade-wise production of lumps 
Lessee Financial 
Year(s) Production 
Grade-wise production  
65% and 
 above 62 - 65% 60 - 62% 58 - 60% 55 - 58% Below 55% 
Old Rungta 
Mines    2014-20 
Average production 
per year (in MT) 764.02  19,37,623.13 1,33,249.35 5,81,845.46 1,044.97 35,578.34 
Average percentage 
share of total 
production 
0.03% 72.03% 4.95% 21.63% 0.04% 1.32% 
Range of year-wise 
percentage share of 
total production  
0-0.33% 58-81% 0-16% 14-30% 0-0.14% 0-7.75% 
New JSW 
Steel 
2020-21 
Total production  
(in MT) 0 0 1,28,159 10,47,701 24,200 97,460 
Percentage share of 
total production 0% 0% 9.88% 80.75% 1.87% 7.51% 
2021-22 
Total production  
(in MT) 0 0 0 13,14,725 6,54,679 6,96,032 
Percentage share of 
total production 0% 0% 0% 49.32% 24.56% 26.11% 
Source: Calculation by Audit, based on the annual production reported in the i3MS portal  

Chapter III: Reporting of Mineral Despatch and Sale 
27 
Chart 3.1: Jajang: Grade-wise production of lumps 
 
Source : Calculation by Audit, based on the annual production reported in the i3MS portal 
It is evident from Table 3.3  above that, during 2014 -20, the average 
production of lumps of grades above 60%  Fe, reported by the old lessee 
(Rungta) was about 77 per cent. However, within a year of auction, under the 
new lessee (JSW Steel), this drastically reduced to a mere 9.88 per cent, in FY 
2020-21, and further to 0 per cent during FY 2021 -22. Moreover, the old 
lessee (Rungta) was consistently reporting the bulk of production of iron -ore 
lumps in the 62 -65% Fe grade; but within a year, the new lessee ( JSW Steel) 
did not report any production in this grade. Instead, the new lessee (JSW 
Steel) reported the bulk of production (nearly 81  per cent) in FY 2020 -21 in 
the grade of 58 -60% Fe; and significant production (totalling over 50 
per cent) in 2021-22 in the lower grades of 55-58% Fe and below 55% Fe.  
Audit also analysed the grade-wise production of iron-ore fines in Jajang iron-
ore mine as reported by the old lessee (Rungta Mines) and new lessee (JSW 
Steel), which is shown in Table 3.4 and chart 3.2 below: 
Table 3.4: Grade-wise production of fines 
Lessee Financial 
Year(s) Production Grade-wise production  
62 - 65% 60 -62% 58- 60% 55 - 58% Below 55% 
Old  Rungta 
Mines   2014-20 
Average production per 
year (in MT) 33,60,030.35 31,98,889.53 0.00 13,15,189.05 50,798.36 
Average percentage 
share of total 
production 
42.40% 40.37% 0.00% 16.60% 0.64% 
Range of year-wise 
percentage share of 
total production  
6-64% 28-53% 0% 0-44% 0-3% 
New JSW 
Steel 
2020-21 
Total production (in 
MT) 0 8,68,748 34,38,592 5,45,220 6,300 
Percentage share of 
total production 0% 17.88% 70.77% 11.22% 0.13% 
2021-22 
Total production (in 
MT) 0 5,29,338 30,58,291 41,56,173.90 17,90,094.10 
Percentage share of 
total production 0% 5.55% 32.08% 43.59% 18.78% 
 Source: Calculation by Audit, based on the annual production reported in the i3MS portal 
 

Performance Audit of Systems and Controls in Assessment and Collection of Revenue from 
Major Minerals for the year ended March 2022 
28 
Chart 3.2: Jajang: Grade-wise production of fines 
 
Source : Calculation by Audit, based on the annual production reported in the i3MS portal 
It may be seen that, till the financial year 2019 -20, the average production of 
fines of grades above 60% Fe was reported as more than 82  per cent by the 
old lessee (Rungta). However, within a year of auction of the mines, the new 
lessee (JSW Steel) reported production of fines above 60% Fe as only 17.88  
per cent in FY 2020 -21 and a mere 5.55  per cent in FY 2021 -22. The old 
lessee had consistently been reporting the bulk of production of iron-ore fines, 
in the higher grades of 60 -62 % Fe and 62 -65% Fe. However, the new lessee 
(JSW Steel) did not report any production in the 62 -65% Fe grade and only 
limited production in 60 -62% Fe grade. The new lessee (JSW Steel) reported 
the bulk of production (nearly 71  per cent) in FY 2020-21 in the grade of 58 -
60% Fe; and significant production (totalling over 62 per cent) in FY 2021-22 
in the lower grades of 55 -58% Fe and below 55% Fe, as shown in Table 3.4 
above. 
Due to this abrupt and drastic decline in the grade (% of Fe content) of 
production of iron -ore lumps and fines, royalty payment was made on lower 
rates, for the lower grades reported by the new lessee. Changes in reported 
grades of production of lumps and fines after auction, as compared to the 
consistent pattern in the grade of production, as reported by the older lessees, 
have inevitably resulted in a revenue implication of approximately ₹2,877.27 
crore27, as compared to the amount payable based on its reported production, 
as detailed in Appendix-I. 
ii. Roida-II iron ore mine (Joda circle) 
Audit analysed the grade-wise production of iron-ore lumps in Roida-II iron-
ore mine  as reported by the ol d lessee ( K N Ram & Co. ) and new lessee 
(Narbheram Power and Steel), which is shown in Table 3.5 and chart 3.3: 
 
27  Worked out by calculating the estimated production during 2020 -22, based on the 
percentage of average production (grade -wise) by the old lessee during 2014 -20 and the 
royalty payable thereon, minus the royalty and premium payable by the new lessee, as per 
the reported production, using the average ASP for the relevant years 

Chapter III: Reporting of Mineral Despatch and Sale 
29 
Table 3.5: Grade-wise production of lumps 
Lessee Financial 
Year(s) Production Grade-wise production 
65% and above  62 - 65% 60 - 62% 58 - 60% 55 - 58% 
Old K N Ram & 
Co. 2014-20 
Average production per 
year (in MT) 37.39 3,94,972.99 88,453.41 0 0 
Average percentage 
share of total 
production 
0.01% 81.70% 18.30% 0.00% 0.00% 
Range of year-wise 
percentage share of 
total production  
0-0.04% 71-100% 0-29% 0% 0% 
New Narbheram 
Power and 
Steel 
2020-21 
Total production  
(in MT) 0 80,487.24 55,822.91 0 0 
Percentage share of total 
production 0% 59.05% 40.95% 0% 0% 
2021-22 
Total production  
(in MT) 0 6,384.31 1,51,107.4 81,114.39 5,515.07 
Percentage share of total 
production 0% 2.62% 61.90% 33.23% 2.26% 
Source: Calculation by Audit, based on the annual production reported in the i3MS portal 
Chart 3.3: Roida-II: Grade-wise production of lumps 
 
Source : Calculation by Audit, based on the annual production reported in the i3MS portal 
It may be seen that during the financial years 2014-15 to 2019-20, the average 
production of lumps of grades above 62% Fe as reported by the old lessee (K. 
N. Ram & Co.) was 81.71  per cent. However, within one year of auction,  
under the new lessee (Narbheram Power & Steel) , this reduced to 59.05  
per cent in FY 2020-21, and drastically to a mere 2.62 per cent in FY 2021-22. 
The old lessee (K. N. Ram & Co.) had consistently been reporting the bulk of 
production of iron -ore lumps in grade s above 62% Fe. Howeve r, within two 
years’ time , in FY 2021-22, the new lessee (Narbheram Power & Steel) , 
reported the bulk of production (61.90 per cent) in the grade of 60-62% Fe and 
significant production (totalling over 35  per cent) in FY 2021-22 in the lower 
grades of 58-60% Fe and 55-58% Fe, as shown in Table 3.5 above.  
Audit also analysed the grade -wise production of iron-ore fines in Roida-II 
iron-ore mine as reported by the old lessee ( K N Ram & Co. ) and new lessee  
(Narbheram Power and Steel), which is shown in Table 3.6 and chart 3.4: 

Performance Audit of Systems and Controls in Assessment and Collection of Revenue from 
Major Minerals for the year ended March 2022 
30 
Table 3.6: Grade-wise production of fines 
Chart 3.4: Roida-II: Grade-wise production of fines 
 
Source : Calculation by Audit, based on the annual production reported in the i3MS portal 
It may be seen that till 2020, as reported by the old lessee (K. N Ram), the 
average production of fines, for the 62 -65% Fe grade, was more than 90  
per cent, with very little production in the other lower grades. In FY 2021 -22, 
however, the new lessee (Narbheram) reported only 22.34 per cent production 
in the 62-65% Fe grade, and significant production in the grade of 60 -62% Fe 
(nearly 45 per cent), and the lower grades of 58-60% Fe and 55-58% Fe (both 
together totalling nearly 32 per cent), as shown in Table 3.6 above.  
Due to this abrupt and drastic decline in the grade (% of Fe content) of 
production of iron -ore lumps and fines, royalty payment was made on lower 
rates, for the lower grades reported by the new lessee. Changes in reported 
grades of production of lumps and fines after auction, as compared to the 
consistent pattern in the grade of production, as reported by the older lessees, 
have inevitably resulted in a revenue implication of approximate ly ₹215.27 
crore28, as compared to the amount payable based on its reported production, 
as detailed in Appendix-II. 
 
28  Worked out by calculating the estimated production during 2020 -22, based on the 
percentage of average production (grade -wise) by the old lessee during 2014 -20 and the 
royalty payable thereon, minus the royalty and premium payable by the new lessee, as per 
the reported production, using the average ASP for the relevant years 
Lessee Financial 
Year(s) Production 
Grade-wise production 
62-65%  60-62%  58-60%  55-58%   Below 
55%  51-55%  
Old KN Ram 
& Co. 2014-20 
Average production per year 
(in MT) 14,62,586.37 1,14,604.38 40,923.50 0 260.17 0.00 
Average percentage share of 
total production 90.37% 7.08% 2.53% 0.00% 0.02% 0.00% 
Range of year-wise percentage 
share of total production  79-100 0-17% 0-11% 0% 0-3% 0% 
New Narbheram 
Power and 
Steel 
2020-21 
Total production  
(in MT) 12,33,323.49 40,707.17 0 0 0 0 
Percentage share of total 
production 96.80% 3.20% 0% 0% 0% 0% 
2021-22 
Total production  
(in MT) 4,72,678.15 9,52,095.55 4,03,194.86 2,73,164.7 0 14,917.66 
Percentage share of total 
production 22.34% 44.99% 19.05% 12.91% 0% 0.70% 
Source: Calculation by Audit, based on the annual production reported in the i3MS portal 

Chapter III: Reporting of Mineral Despatch and Sale 
31 
iii. Thakurani iron-ore mine (Joda circle) 
Audit analysed the grade -wise production of iron-ore lumps in Thakurani 
iron-ore mine  as reported by th e old lessee ( Kaypee) and new lessee 
(Arcelor Mittal), which is shown in Table 3.7 and chart 3.5 below: 
Table 3.7: Grade-wise production of lumps 
 Lessee Financial 
Year(s) Production Grade-wise production 
62-65% 60-62% 58-60% 
Old 
Kaypee  2014-20 
Average production per year (in MT) 7,85,868 2,3269 0 
Average percentage share of total 
production 97.12% 2.88% 0.00% 
Range of year-wise percentage share 
of total production  91-100% 0-8% 0% 
New Arcelor 
Mittal 
2020-21 Total production (in MT) 0 5,87,369.8 0 
Percentage share of total production 0.00% 100% 0.00% 
2021-22 Total production (in MT) 0 3,17,073 8,16,836.75 
Percentage share of total production 0.00% 28% 72% 
Source: Calculation by Audit, based on the annual production reported in the i3MS portal 
Chart 3.5: Thakurani: Grade-wise production of lumps 
 
Source : Calculation by Audit, based on the annual production reported in the i3MS portal 
It may be seen that, during the years 2014 -15 to 2019 -20, the old lessee 
(Kaypee) was reporting almost the entire production of lumps, as being in the 
grade 62-65% Fe (over 97  per cent). However, under the new lessee (Arcelor 
Mittal), this drastically reduced to 0  per cent during next two financial years 
(i.e. 2020-21 and 2021 -22). The new lessee (Arcelor Mittal) reported 100 
per cent production in the 60-62% Fe grade during FY 2020-21, which further 
reduced to 27.96  per cent in FY 2021 -22. During FY 2021 -22, the bulk of 
production (72 per cent) was reported in the further lower grade of 58 -60% 
Fe, as shown in Table 3.7 above.  
Audit also analysed the grade -wise production of iron-ore fines in Thakurani 
iron-ore mine as reported by the old lessee ( Kaypee) and new lessee ( Arcelor 
Mittal), which is shown in Table 3.8 and chart 3.6: 

Performance Audit of Systems and Controls in Assessment and Collection of Revenue from 
Major Minerals for the year ended March 2022 
32 
Table 3.8: Grade-wise production of fines 
 Lessee Financial 
Year(s) Production Grade-wise production 
62-65% 60-62% 58-60% 
Old 
Kaypee  2014-20 
Average production per year (in 
MT) 33,62,850 2,724 25,933 
Average percentage share of total 
production 99.16% 0.08% 0.76% 
Range of year-wise percentage 
share of total production  96-100% 0-0.35% 0-3.61% 
New Arcelor 
Mittal 
2020-21 
Total production  
(in MT) 28,84,354.3 1,55,442 0 
Percentage share of total production 94.89% 5.11% 0% 
2021-22 
Total production  
(in MT) 12,49,701 29,41,326.5 1,72,950 
Percentage share of total production 28.64% 67.40% 3.96% 
Source: Calculation by Audit, based on the annual production reported in the i3MS portal 
Chart 3.6: Thakurani: Grade-wise production of fines 
 
Source : Calculation by Audit, based on the annual production reported in the i3MS portal 
It may be seen that, during the financial years 2014 -15 to 2019 -20, the old 
lessee (Kaypee) was reporting almost the entire production of fines in the 
grade 62-65% Fe (over 99  per cent). Under the new lessee (Arcelor Mittal), 
this remained at par during FY 2020 -21 but drastically reduced to 28.64  
per cent in FY 2021 -22, during which significant production (over 67 
per cent) was reported in the grade 60 -62% Fe, and production of nearly 4 
per cent in the even lower grade of 58-60% Fe, as shown in Table 3.8 above.  
Due to this abrupt and drastic decline in the grade (% of Fe content) of 
production of iron -ore lumps and fines, royalty payment was made on lower 
rates, for the lower grades reported by the new lessee. Changes in reported 
grades of production of lumps and fines after auction, as compared to the 
consistent pattern in the grade of production, as reported by the older lessees, 
have inevitably resulted in a revenue implication of approxima tely 
₹27.65 crore29, for the years 2020-21 and 2021-22 in the form of lesser royalty 
and premium as detailed in Appendix-III. 
 
29  Worked out by calculating the estimated production during 2020 -22, based on the 
percentage of average production (grade -wise) by the old lessee during 2014 -20 and the 
royalty payable thereon, minus the royalty and premium payable by the new lessee, as per 
the reported production, using the average ASP for the relevant years 

Chapter III: Reporting of Mineral Despatch and Sale 
33 
iv. Nuagaon iron-ore mine (Joda circle) 
Audit analysed the grade -wise production of iron-ore lumps in Nuagaon iron-
ore mine  as reported  by the old lessee ( K.J.S. Ahluwalia ) and new lessee 
(JSW Steel), which is shown in Table 3.9 and chart 3.7 below: 
Table 3.9: Grade-wise production of lumps 
Lessee Financial 
Year(s) Production 
Grade-wise production 
62-65% 60- 62% 58-60% Below 
55% 
Old K.J.S. 
Ahluwalia 2014-20 
Average production per year 
(in MT) 15,22,243.30 31,111.67 2,508.33 173.33 
Average percentage share 
of total production 97.83% 2.00% 0.16% 0.01% 
Range of year-wise 
percentage share of total 
production  
96-100% 0-4% 0-0.44% 0% 
New 
JSW Steel 
2020-21 
Total production (in MT) 7,41,181 2,22,561.85 0 0 
Percentage share of total 
production 76.91% 23.09% 0% 0% 
2021-22 
Total production (in MT) 4,97,065 5,70,660 3,70,670 0 
Percentage share of total 
production 34.56% 39.67% 25.77% 0% 
Source: Calculation by Audit, based on the annual production reported in the i3MS portal 
Chart 3.7: Nuagaon: Grade-wise production of lumps 
 
Source : Calculation by Audit, based on the annual production reported in the i3MS portal 
It may be seen that, during the financial years 2014 -15 to 2019 -20, the old 
lessee (KJS Ahluwalia) was reporting almost the entire production (nearly 98  
per cent) of lumps in the grade 62 -65% Fe. However, under the new lessee 
(JSW Steel), this reduced to 76.91  per cent in FY 2020 -21 and further down 
to 34.56 per cent in FY 2021-22. In FY 2021 -22, the new lessee (JSW Steel) 
reported significantly high production in the grade 60 -62% Fe (nearly 40  
per cent) and the lower grade 58 -60% Fe (over 25  per cent), as shown in 
Table 3.9 above.  
Audit also analysed the grade -wise production of iron-ore fines in Nuagaon 
iron-ore mine as reported by the old lessee ( K.J.S. Ahluwalia) and new lessee 
(JSW Steel), which is shown in Table 3.10 and chart 3.8: 
 

Performance Audit of Systems and Controls in Assessment and Collection of Revenue from 
Major Minerals for the year ended March 2022 
34 
Table 3.10: Grade-wise production of fines 
Lessee Financial 
Year(s) Production 
Grade-wise production 
65% and 
above 
62-65% 60-62% 58-60% 55-58% Below 55% 
Old KJS 
Ahluwalia 2014-20 
Average production 
per year (in MT) 0 28,10,678.43 30,625.79 34,658.33 52,978.43 1,26,533.33 
Average 
percentage share 
of total production 
0% 91.99% 1.00% 1.13% 1.73% 4.14% 
Range of year-wise 
percentage share 
of total production  
0 90-95% 0.1-8.3% 0-8% 0.4-4% 0-9% 
New 
JSW Steel 
2020-21 
Total production  
(in MT) 0 17,01,925.25 14,81,433 0 0 0 
Percentage share of 
total production 0% 53.46% 46.54% 0% 0% 0% 
2021-22 
Total production  
(in MT) 53,440 10,76,900 11,23,337 22,35,223 4,03,492 0 
Percentage share of 
total production 1.09% 22.01% 22.96% 45.69% 8.25% 0% 
Source: Calculation by Audit, based on the annual production reported in the i3MS portal 
Chart 3.8: Nuagaon: Grade-wise production of fines 
 
Source : Calculation by Audit, based on the annual production reported in the i3MS portal 
It may be seen that, during the financial years 2014 -15 to 2019 -20, the old 
lessee (KJS Ahluwalia) was reporting almost the entire production (nearly 92  
per cent) of fines in the grade 62 -65% Fe. However, under the new lessee 
(JSW Steel), this reduced to about 53  per cent in FY 2020 -21 and further 
down to 22  per cent in FY 2021 -22. In FY 2021 -22, the new lessee (JSW 
Steel) reported production in the grades 60 -62% Fe (nearly 23  per cent) and 
58-60% (over 45  per cent), as well as some production in the 55 -58% Fe 
grade (over 8 per cent), as shown in Table 3.10 above.  
Due to this abrupt and drastic decline in the grade (% of Fe content) of 
production of iron -ore lumps and fines, royalty payment was made on lower 
rates, for the lower grades reported by the new lessee. Changes in reported 
grades of production of lum ps and fines after auction, as compared to the 
consistent pattern in the grade of production, as reported by the older lessees, 
have inevitably resulted in a revenue implication of approximately 

Chapter III: Reporting of Mineral Despatch and Sale 
35 
₹153.79 crore30, for the years 2020 -21 and 2021 -22 in the form  of lesser 
royalty and premium as detailed in Appendix-IV. 
v. Jaribahal iron-ore mine (Joda circle) 
Audit analysed the grade -wise production of iron-ore lumps in Jaribahal iron-
ore mine  as reported by the old lessee ( Patnaik Minerals ) and new lessee 
(Kashvi International), which is shown in Table 3.11 and chart 3.9 below: 
Table 3.11: Grade-wise production of lumps 
Lessee Financial 
Year(s) Production Grade-wise production 
62- 65%  60-62%  58-60%  Below 55%  
Old Patnaik 
Minerals 2018-20 
Average production per year (in 
MT) 3,80,097.24 1,05,035.61 54,706.13 0 
Average percentage share of 
total production 70.41% 19.46% 10.13% 0 
Range of year-wise percentage 
share of total production  69-73% 16-26% 15-43% 0% 
New Kashvi 
International 
2020-21 
Total production (in MT) 0 88,573.7 78,591.5 17,635 
Percentage share of total 
production 0% 47.93% 42.53% 9.54% 
2021-22 
Total production (in MT) 0 0 0 2,91,447.5 
Percentage share of total 
production 0% 0% 0% 100% 
Source: Calculation by Audit, based on the annual production reported in the i3MS portal 
Chart 3.9: Jaribahal: Grade-wise production of lumps 
 
Source : Calculation by Audit, based on the annual production reported in the i3MS portal 
It may be seen that , during the financial years 2018-19 and 2019 -20, the old 
lessee (Patnaik Minerals) had reported significant production (over 70  
per cent) of lumps in the grade 62 -65% Fe. However, under the new lessee 
(Kashvi International), this was immediately reduced to 0 per cent in the next 
two financial years. Within two years, in FY 2021-22, the new lessee reported 
the entire production as being in the lowest grade of below 55% Fe , without 
any production in any of the higher grades, as shown in Table 3.11 above.  
 
30  Worked out by calculating the estimated production during 2020 -22, based on the 
percentage of average production (grade -wise) by the old lessee during 2014 -20 and the 
royalty payable thereon, minus the royalty and premium payable by the new lessee, as per 
the reported production, using the average ASP for the relevant years 

Performance Audit of Systems and Controls in Assessment and Collection of Revenue from 
Major Minerals for the year ended March 2022 
36 
Audit also analysed the grade -wise production of iron-ore fines in Jaribahal 
iron-ore mine as reported by the old lessee ( Patnaik Minerals) and new lessee 
(Kashvi International), which is shown in Table 3.12 and chart 3.10 below: 
Table 3.12: Grade-wise production of fines 
Lessee Financial 
Year(s) Production 
Grade-wise production 
62-65%  60-62%  58-60%  55-58%   Below 
55%  
Old Patnaik 
Minerals 2018-20 
Average production per year 
(in MT) 2,13,380.9 1,45,366 13,900.68 1,82,449.3 2,904.55 
Average percentage share of 
total production 38.24% 26.05% 2.49% 32.70% 0.52% 
Range of year-wise percentage 
share of total production  10-68% 22-30% 0.2-5% 0-64% 0-1% 
New Kashvi 
International  
2020-21 
Total production  
(in MT) 0 0 26,620.2 1,07,827 4,61,784.6 
Percentage share of total 
production 0% 0% 4.46% 18.08% 77.45% 
2021-22 
Total production  
(in MT) 0 0 6,102 0 7,13,774.5 
Percentage share of total 
production 0% 0% 0.85% 0% 99.15% 
Source: Calculation by Audit, based on the annual production reported in the i3MS portal 
Chart 3.10: Jaribahal: Grade-wise production of fines 
 
Source : Calculation by Audit, based on the annual production reported in the i3MS portal 
It may be seen that , during the financial years 2018-19 and 2019 -20, the old 
lessee (Patnaik Minerals) reported significant production (about 64 per cent) 
of fines in the higher grades of 62 -65% Fe and 60 -62% Fe , with negligible 
production of the lowest grade of below 55% Fe. However, under the new 
lessee (Kashvi International) , the trend immediately changed within two 
financial years, and in FY 2021-22, almost the entire production (99 per cent) 
was reported in the lowest grade of below 55% Fe , as shown in  Table 3.12 
above. 
Due to this abrupt and drastic decline in the grade (% of Fe content) of 
production of iron -ore lumps and fines, royalty payment was made on lower 
rates, for the lower grades reported by the new lessee. Changes in reported 

Chapter III: Reporting of Mineral Despatch and Sale 
37 
grades of production of lumps and fines after auction, as compared to the 
consistent pattern in the grade of production, as reported by the older lessees, 
have inevitably resulted in a revenue implication of approximately ₹703.66 
crore31, for the years 2020 -21 and 2021 -22 in the form of lesser royalty and 
premium as detailed in Appendix-V. 
vi. Gonua iron-ore mine (Joda circle) 
Audit analysed the grade-wise production of iron-ore lumps in Gonua iron-ore 
mine as reported by the ol d lessee ( P K Ahluwalia ) and new lessee ( JSW 
Steel), which is shown in Table 3.13 and chart 3.11 below: 
Table 3.13: Grade-wise production of lumps 
Lessee Financial 
Year(s) Production Grade-wise production 
62-65% 60-62% 58-60% 55-58% 
Old  PK 
Ahluwalia 2018-20 
Average production per year 
(in MT) 2,05,690 0 0 0 
Average percentage share of 
total production 100% 0% 0% 0% 
Range of year-wise 
percentage share of total 
production  
0-100% 0% 0% 0% 
New 
JSW Steel 
2020-21 
Total production (in MT) 78,097 34,574 0 0 
Percentage share of total 
production 69.31% 30.69% 0% 0% 
2021-22 
Total production (in MT) 41,411 6,468 62,036 11,712 
Percentage share of total 
production 34.05% 5.32% 51.01% 9.63% 
Source: Calculation by Audit, based on the annual production reported in the i3MS portal 
Chart 3.11: Gonua: Grade-wise production of lumps 
 
Source : Calculation by Audit, based on the annual production reported in the i3MS portal 
 
31  Worked out by calculating the estimated production during 2020 -22, based on the 
percentage of average production (grade -wise) by the old lessee during 2018 -20 and the 
royalty payable thereon, minus the royalty and premium payable by the new lessee, as per 
the reported production, using the average ASP for the relevant years 

Performance Audit of Systems and Controls in Assessment and Collection of Revenue from 
Major Minerals for the year ended March 2022 
38 
It may be seen that , during the financial years 2018-19 to 2019 -20, the old 
lessee (P K Ahluwalia) had reported the entire production (100 per cent) of 
lumps in the grade 62 -65% Fe. However, under the new lessee (JSW Steel) , 
this drastically reduced to 69.31 per cent in FY 2020-21 and 34.05 per cent in 
FY 2021-22. Further, in FY 2021-22, the new lessee reported the bulk of 
production (more than 51  per cent) in the grade of 58 -60% Fe and some 
production (nearly 10 per cent) in the lowest grade of below 55% Fe, as shown 
in Table 3.13 above. 
Audit also analysed the grade-wise production of iron-ore fines in Gonua iron-
ore mine as reported by the old lessee ( P K Ahluwalia) and new lessee ( JSW 
Steel), which is shown in Table 3.14 and chart 3.12 below: 
Table 3.14: Grade-wise production of fines 
Lessee  Financial 
Year(s) Production Grade-wise production 
62 - 65% 60 - 62% 58 - 60% 55 - 58% 
Old  PK 
Ahluwalia 2018-20 
Average production per year (in 
MT) 2,04,660 0 0 0 
Average percentage share of 
total production 100% 0% 0% 0% 
Range of year-wise percentage 
share of total production  0-100% 0% 0% 0% 
New 
JSW Steel 
2020-21 
Total production (in MT) 3,25,800 2,56,687 0 0 
Percentage share of total 
production 55.93% 44.07% 0% 0% 
2021-22 
Total production (in MT) 83,051 64,299 4,63,590 2,58,478 
Percentage share of total 
production 9.55% 7.40% 53.32% 29.73% 
Source: Calculation by Audit, based on the annual production reported in the i3MS portal 
 
Chart 3.12 : Gonua: Grade-wise production of fines 
 
Source : Calculation by Audit, based on the annual production reported in the i3MS portal 
It may be seen that , during the financial years 2018-19 to 2019 -20, the old 
lessee (P K Ahluwalia) had reported the entire production (100 per cent) of 
fines in the grade 62-65% Fe. However, under the new lessee (JSW Steel), this 
drastically reduced to 55.93  per cent in FY 2020-21 and further down to only 

Chapter III: Reporting of Mineral Despatch and Sale 
39 
9.55 per cent in FY 2021-22. Further, in FY 2021-22, the new lessee reported 
the bulk of production (more than 53  per cent) in the grade 58 -60% Fe and 
significant production (30  per cent) in the lowest grade of below 55% Fe , as 
shown in Table 3.14 above. 
Due to this abrupt and drastic decline in the grade (% of Fe content) of 
production of iron -ore lumps and fines, royalty payment was made on lower 
rates, for the lower grades reported by the new lessee. Changes in reported 
grades of production of lumps and fines after auction, as compared to the 
consistent pattern in the grade of production, as reported by the older lessees, 
have inevitably resulted in a revenue implication of approximately ₹185.15 
crore32, for the years 2020 -21 and 2021 -22 in the form of lesser royalty and 
premium as detailed in Appendix-VI. 
Impact of reporting of lower grade of iron-ore 
A summarised comparison of the production of iron -ore lumps and fines of 
different grades reported by the old and new lessees of the six iron -ore mines 
is shown in Chart 3.13 below: 
Chart 3.13:  Flow chart showing grade-wise comparison of production of 
iron-ore lumps and fines 
 
Source: Prepared by Audit, based on the annual production reported in the i3MS portal  
It is evident from the above sub -paragraphs, tables and charts that, after 
auction of leases under MMDR (Amendment) Act , 2015, there was an 
inexplicable and steep decline, in the reported production of higher grade of 
iron-ore from the same mines, within a very short period of one-two years. It is 
highly improbable that the grades of mineral reserve, produced from all these 
 
32  Worked out by calculating the estimated production during 2020 -22, based on the 
percentage of average production (grade -wise) by the old lessee during 2018 -20 and the 
royalty payable thereon, minus the royalty payable by the new lessee, as per the reported 
production, using average ASP for the relevant years 

Performance Audit of Systems and Controls in Assessment and Collection of Revenue from 
Major Minerals for the year ended March 2022 
40 
auctioned mines, would naturally witness an abrupt decline, within a short 
period of one or two years, especially when there was a consistent pattern in 
grade of iron-ore production (i.e. % of ‘Fe’ content) in the last six years’ time 
under the old lessees. Thus, such a significant and sharp decline, in the 
production of higher grade of iron -ore lumps and fines, indicated a significant 
risk that the new lessees were misreporting the grade of iron -ore produced, in 
order to avoid the higher royalty that would  have been payable on higher 
grades. Despite such abnormal decline in the grades of iron -ore lumps and 
fines, indicating the risk of misreporting, the State Government had not taken 
any steps to investigate the grades of iron -ore production reported by the new 
lessees as of March 2022. 
For the six test -checked mines, changes in reported grades of production of 
lumps a nd fines after auction, as compared to the consistent pattern in the 
grade of production, as reported by the older lessees, have inevitably resulted 
in a revenue implication of approximately ₹4,162.77 crore for the years 2020 -
21 and 2021 -22 in the form of lesser royalty and premium. The detailed 
figures and calculations in this regard, are contained in Appendix-VII. 
In reply, the Government stated ( September 2023) that a committee under the 
Chairmanship of Director of Mines and Geology was constituted (13 July 
2021) to study the discrepancy in downgrading and misreporting of size of ore. 
Accordingly, the committee observed downgrading of ore in three leases and 
discrepancy in size of ore in six leases. On account of the violation an amount 
of ₹ 471.48 crore has been demanded. The lessees, against whom  the demand 
has been made, have preferred revision of the cases before the Revision 
Authority. In addition, it was stated that drop of grade is noticed in present 
production system on the basis of sample drawn from working face of mines 
as per report of State Level Enforcement Squad (SLES) during their inspection 
of mines in Joda Circle.  
It was noticed that the action as reported in the reply was taken after issue was 
raised in audit . Further, details of the basis of calculation of the  demanded 
amount was not furnished to Audit. Regarding the report of SLES, it has been 
observed that the report points out difference of the overall average grade of 
the samples drawn from limited number of boreholes in the inspected mine s 
and the average grade s as mentioned in geological report, which ranged 
between 0% to 5.96%. However, Audit has pointed out  the abrupt and 
abnormal decline in quantity and size of the ore production post-auction period 
by the new lessees vis -à-vis the average production of different grades 
reported themselves by the old lessees. 
Therefore, the present status clearly indicates existence of system failure to 
timely detect the actual grades of lumps and fines produced, which adversely 
impacted the State Government revenue. Moreover, the Government also 
failed to develop an effective monitoring mechanism to ensure the actual 
grades of lumps and fines after auction in comparison to lumps and fines 
extracted by the previous lessees. Further, significant deficiencies were 
noticed by Audit in functioning of internal control and monitoring mechanism 

Chapter III: Reporting of Mineral Despatch and Sale 
41 
relating to inspection of mines by departmental officers (as commented in 
detail in Chapter VI of the report) and government may institute a 100% 
inspection and forensic audit of the abnormal decline that emerged in the test 
check conducted by Audit.  
3.2.2  Reporting of iron-ore fines as screened fines 
According to Section 9 of the MMDR Act, 1957, royalty is to be charged on 
minerals removed from or consumed within the lease area. Further, Rule 64 -B 
of the Mineral Concession Rules, 1960, stipulates that, in cases where 
processing of Run -Of-Mine (ROM) ore is carried out within the leased area, 
royalty is chargeable on the processed mineral removed from the leased area.  
Iron-ore, excavated from a mine, is termed as ROM ore and is usually found 
in the form of lumps. The ROM ores / lumps are processed in crushers. A 
typical crusher machine produces Calibrated Lump Ores (CLOs) (standard 
sized lumps of 5 -18 mm, 10 -30 mm, 10 -40 mm etc.) and fines (0 -10 mm), 
both of which are removed from the crusher, through separate screening 
systems. A schematic diagram of the process is shown below: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Iron-ore CLOs, lumps and fines, are separately despatched from the lease 
areas and have different market prices. Typically, the market prices are the 
highest for CLOs , followed by lumps, and lowest for fines.  As discussed 
previously, ASP for lumps is higher than the fines of the same grade of iron -
ore and royalty is payable at a fixed percentage (15 per cent) of the ASP 
published by IBM. Therefore, for the same grade of iron -ore, the royalty 
payable on lumps is invariably higher than the royalty payable on fines. 
As of March 2022, IBM had published ASP for lumps and fines, but not for 
CLOs. This issue was in the notice of the State Government, which had 
ordered (September 2010) that, “whenever Iron ore lump/ROM is subjected to 
Source: Indian Bureau of Mines, Vision 2020, published in the year 2011 
Chart 3.14: Flow chart showing dry processing of iron ore 

Performance Audit of Systems and Controls in Assessment and Collection of Revenue from 
Major Minerals for the year ended March 2022 
42 
processing, iron fines are generated along with CLOs (Calibrated Lump 
Ores). In practice, iron ore lumps, CLOs and fines are separately despatched 
from the leasehold area. However, due to non-publication of rate for CLOs of 
iron ore by the IBM, royalty on CLOs is collected at the rate of lumps during 
despatch from the leasehold area. The sale prices of CLOs are always higher 
than the lumps. Due to non -publication of the rate of CLOs, the State 
Government loses huge sum of royalty.  As there are separate rate of royalty 
for lumps and fines and the latter attracts less rate of royalty than the former, 
the generation of fines during processing of lumps causes loss of royalty to 
the Government with the CLOs being charged at the rate of lump. Thus, the 
lessee, if he had paid on ore without processing, could have paid a higher 
amount of royalty. After processing, he pays a lesser amount for fines, 
whereas for CLOs he pays at the same rate as lump ore. The Department has 
already taken up the matter with IBM to publish the sale price of CLOs with 
different Fe content, so that royalty on CLOs can be charged accordingly and 
royalty shall be assessed on iron ore lumps mined or on the processed from, 
i.e., fines and CLOs whichever is higher”. 
Audit conducted scrutiny of assessment records and monthly returns for 20 
iron-ore mines (under 23 lessees) under two circles 33, and analysis of 
production data from FY 2007 -08 onwards. Observations emerging from the 
scrutiny and analysis, are discussed below:  
i. After the State Government notification of September 2010, the DDMs 
of the mining circles had charged higher royalty for “crushed fines” 
equivalent to lumps, but charged lower royalty for “screened fines” 
equivalent to fines. 
ii. All mining leaseholders began to report production of fines separately as 
“crushed fines34” and “screened fines 35”, starting from FY 2010 -11, i.e. 
the year of issuance of the State Government notification of September 
2010. During the previous period ( 2007-10), out o f the 14 mines, for 
which production data was available, seven mines had not reported any 
production of “screened fines” – these leaseholders had reported 
production of only CLOs and “fines”/ “crushed fines”. Further, three 
mines had reported negligible production of “screened fines”, viz. less 
than five per cent; one mine had reported production of “screened fines” 
as 12 per cent; and three mines had reported production of “screened 
fines” as being between 25 -38 per cent. However, after State 
Government notification of September 2010, the lessees of all these 
mines made a distinction between “screened fines” and “crushed fines” 
in their production reports.  
iii. In the above context, Audit observed a steadily declining trend in the 
reported proportion of CLOs and crushed fines (on both of which, 
royalty was charged at the higher rate of lumps), and an increasing trend 
 
33  DDM, Joda and DDM, Koira 
34  ROM processed by crushing to achieve specific size of lumps (Calibrated Lump Ore), the 
fines produced during the crushing process are called “crushed fines”. 
35  The screening process of ROM before crushing results in segregation of lumps (of various 
sizes) and fines, such fines are called “screened fines” or natural fines. 

Chapter III: Reporting of Mineral Despatch and Sale 
43 
in the reported proportion of screened fines (on which royalty was 
charged at the lesser rate of fines), as detailed in Table 3.15. 
Table 3.15: Proportion of production of CLO/Crushed fines (CF) and Screened fines 
(SF), by lessees  
(Numbers: Percentage of total production) 
CLO  + CF 73 100 63 74 31 47 46 31 26 29 36 31 32
SF 27 0 37 26 69 53 55 69 74 71 64 69 68
CLO  + CF 100 100 89 85 55 45 45 36 33 36 39 38
SF 0 0 11 15 45 55 55 64 67 64 61 62
CLO  + CF 96 80 69 96 57 100 65 44 67 42 38 32 32
SF 4 20 31 4 43 0 35 56 33 58 62 68 68
CLO  + CF 98 89 72 88 88 76 87 84 83 85 79 57 56
SF 2 11 28 12 12 24 13 16 17 15 21 43 44
CLO  + CF 77 59 69 55 36 41 49 30 22 20 19
SF 23 39 31 45 64 59 51 70 78 80 81
CLO  + CF 
SF
CLO  + CF 42 45 30 46 32 24 23 17 17
SF 58 55 70 54 68 76 77 83 83
CLO  + CF 
SF
CLO  + CF 54 56 67 36 14 21 25 26 27 23
SF 46 44 33 64 86 79 75 74 73 77
CLO  + CF 
SF
CLO  + CF 88 63 75 73 77 48 36 39 27 35 27
SF 12 37 25 27 23 52 64 61 73 65 73
CLO  + CF 
SF
CLO  + CF 93 48 47 49 45 36 30 28 14 18
SF 7 52 53 51 55 64 70 72 86 82
CLO  + CF 58 70 53 49 42 17 39 56 44 42 49
SF 42 30 47 51 58 83 61 44 56 58 51
CLO  + CF 35 30
SF 65 70
CLO  + CF 100 97 75 84 50 55 47 52 47 40 35
SF 0 3 25 16 50 45 53 48 53 60 65
CLO  + CF 35 28
SF 65 72
CLO  + CF 100 100 50 43 33 38 35 31 36 30
SF 0 0 50 57 67 62 65 69 64 70
CLO  + CF 27 25
SF 73 75
CLO  + CF 100 100 100 100 76 66 76 76 77 76 71 32
SF 0 0 0 0 24 34 24 24 23 24 29 68
CLO  + CF 100 90 93 97 96 97 97 95 94 87 67 73
SF 0 10 7 3 4 3 3 5 6 13 33 27
CLO  + CF 100 69 100 50 61
SF 0 31 0 50 39
CLO  + CF 
SF
CLO  + CF 100 95 89 67 60 49 40
SF 0 5 11 33 40 51 60
CLO  + CF 
SF
CLO  + CF 19 18
SF 81 82
PK Ahluwalia
Gonua
*NA Lease 
expired
O perations started from July 2020 after auctionJSW
*NA
*NA
Inoperative, no production
Inoperative, no production
O perations started from July 2020 after auction
Lease 
expired
O perations started from July 2020 after auction
Lease 
expired
O perations started from July 2020 after auction
Lease 
expired
Lease 
expired
*NA
*NA
O perations started from O ctober 2020 after auction *NA
O perations started from July 2020 after auction *NA
Lease 
expired
Jaribahal
Kashvi 
International 
K N Ram
Kaypee 
*NA
*NA
O perations started from O ctober 2020 after auction
O perations started from August 2020 after auction
T RB JSPL
Unchabali Indrani
Pattnaik 
Jajang
Rungta
JSW
BICO
Raikela Geetarani
Serajuddin & 
Co.
Raikela PTA
Narayanaposi
AMTC
JSW
Nuagaon
KJS Ahluwalia 
JSW
Kurmitar OMC
Patnaik  
Minerals
Balda
Serajuddin & 
Co.
Petabeda MGM
ESL
Nadidihi
Roida-II
Narbheram 
Power and Steel
T hakurani
Arcelor Mittal
Lease 
expired
Lease 
expired
2021-22
O rghat Rungta
2010-11
Nuagaon Essel
2012-13
2013-14
2014-15
Name of 
Mines
Name of the 
lessee
Proportion 
of 
2007-10
2015-16
Lease 
expired
O perations started from February 2022 after auction *NA
2018-19
2019-20
2020-21
2011-12
*NA
*NA
*NA
2016-17
2017-18
 
*NA : Data not available 
Source: Audit analysis of the monthly returns of lessees 

Performance Audit of Systems and Controls in Assessment and Collection of Revenue from 
Major Minerals for the year ended March 2022 
44 
As can be seen from Table 3. 15, out of the 14 mines for which production 
data for the period prior to 2010 was available, seven mines had not reported 
any production of screened fines, three mines had reported the same as being 
less than seven per cent, one mine as 12 per cent, and only three mines as 
between 23-42 per cent. However, the proportion of screened fines, produced 
from the same mines, as reported by the lessees, increased from FY 2010 -11 
onwards. By FY 2021 -22, out of the 12 active mines, the reported proportion 
of screened fines ranged from 60 per cent to as high as 82 per cent in the case 
of 10 mines, 44 per cent, for one mine; and 27 per cent, for another mine.  
It was further observed that 12 lessees 36, in their monthly returns for 122 
months, had shown production of CLOs, but ‘nil’ production of “crushed 
fines”; all fines produced had been reported as “screened fines”. This could 
not be correct, as production of CLOs through crushing machines was not 
possible without production of “crushed fines”.  
The significantly higher proportion of screened fines post notification should 
be viewed in the context of clear lower quantification of proportion of 
screened fines before the notification, where it ranged from  two per cent  to 
forty-two per cent  
compared to zero per cent  
to eighty-six per cent  post 
notification. Since higher 
proportion of screened fines 
has a significant impact on 
royalty payable by the 
lessee to the government, a 
sudden inexplicable 
increase in screened fines is 
a clear and red flag  as it 
creates risk  of loss of 
potential revenue to the 
state exchequer and result 
in undue gain to the lessee. 
 It is also pertinent to 
mention in this regard that, 
during the same period, i.e., 
FYs 2015 -16 to 2021 -22, 
an iron -ore mine in the 
same mining area, owned 
by SAIL (Central PSU), 
viz. Bolani (Koira circle), 
consistently reported ‘nil’ 
production of “screened 
fines” and its entire 
 
36 (i) Unchabali -Indrani Patnaik (ii) Roida II -K N Ram (iii) Kurmitar -OMC (iv) Nadidih -
BICO (v) Narayanposhi -AMTC (vi) Deojhar -Tarini Minerals (vii) Jaribahal - Patnaik 
Minerals (viii) Naibega Katupali –TP Mohanty (ix) Nuagaon -JSW (x) Jajang -JSW (xi) 
Gonua-JSW and (xii) Narayanposhi-JSW 
Methodology adopted to quantify the monetary 
impact on revenue due to reporting of iron-ore fines 
as screened fines. 
➢ Percentage of reported proportional quantity of CLO 
and Crushed fines to Screened Fines produced from 
2007-10 (wherever available), i.e. prior to September 
2010 notification reported by the lessees, has been 
calculated.  
➢ That proportion was considered for calculation on the 
reported total production of CLO, Crushed Fines and 
Screened Fines during the years 2010 -22, i.e., after 
the notification of September 2010, to arrive at the 
CLO & Crushed fines to Screened Fines production.  
➢ The royalty and premium leviable on category -wise 
production arrived at by Audit, has been calculated by 
using monthly ASP of the concerned actual grade (Fe 
content) published by Indian Bureau of Mines.  
➢ The leviable royalty and premium have been 
compared with the actual royalty and premium levied 
on the reported category of production.  

Chapter III: Reporting of Mineral Despatch and Sale 
45 
production was reported as  lumps and crushed fines, attracting higher royalty 
equivalent to lumps. 
The separate reporting of “screened fines” by lessees; which attracted lesser 
royalty equivalent to fines, and abnormal increase in production of “screened 
fines” reported by the lessees, indicated that there had been the significant risk 
of misreporting of the “crushed fines” produced from processing of ROM 
ores/ lumps in crusher machines as “screened fines”. It can be concluded that 
this was done to avoid payment of higher royalty applicable on crushed fines 
equivalent to lumps in terms of the State Government order of September 
2010.  
Thus, post the State Government order of 2010, there was a significant 
decrease in reporting of crushed fines from the production pattern of crushed 
and screene d fines as prevalent before the order, leading to revenue 
implication of ` 10,294.24 crore for the 20 test checked mines including 
royalty of approximately ₹5, 841.80 crores and premium of approximately 
₹4,452.44 crores (for four auctioned mines ) for which complete information 
were available, as detailed in Appendix-VIII. 
It may be highlighted that the increasing trend in reporting of “screened fines” 
had not been investigated by the department as of March 2022 , which if 
conducted may lead to a substantial boost in revenue collection of the State.  
In reply, the Government stated (September 2023) that iron ore produced from 
the quarry is generally fed to the screening/ crushing plant to separate the 
products into different size and the oversize products i.e. +30mm/ +40mm fed 
to the crusher unit to obtain the product -5mm, -10mm and 5-18mm/ 10-80mm 
size. Accordingly, all lessees have been instructed to maintain their Books of 
Account separately as screened fines as well as crushed fines.  
The Government reply is not acceptable as it has not been intimated as to 
when the instructions for maintenance of separate books were issued and 
whether those were complied with by the lessees.  The Government had not 
furnished the specific lessee-wise compliances to the audit observations and is 
silent on the core issue of misreporting of crushed fines as screened fines by 
the lessees to avoid payment of higher royalty . Further, it may also be 
mentioned that Audit found lapses in inspection of mines by de partmental 
officers and specially constituted squads, shortage of testing chemicals and 
technical staff in mineral testing labs, inefficient functioning of check gates 
and monitoring of transportation of minerals, as discussed in detail in Chapter 
VI, on the subject of “Internal Controls and Monitoring”. 
3.2.3 Reporting of size of iron-ore (lumps vs. fines) 
While the previous section discussed the risk of misreporting of fines as 
skewed towards screened fines, in view of the differential royalty payable on 
the types of fines, this section examines the trend of reporting of lumps and 
fines in the period subsequent to the introduction of the auction methodology 
for allocation of mines. 
Scrutiny of data, of eight auctioned mines, showed that, in case of five out of 
these eight mines, there had been a sharp decline in the proportion of lumps 
and increase in the proportion of fines, as reported by the new lessees, in 

Performance Audit of Systems and Controls in Assessment and Collection of Revenue from 
Major Minerals for the year ended March 2022 
46 
comparison to the old lessees. The mine -wise production of lumps and fines, 
as reported by the old and new (auctioned) lessees, is detailed in Table 3.16. 
Table 3.16:  Proportion of lumps and fines in regard to the old and new 
lessees 
Sl. 
No. 
Old/ 
Auctioned 
lessee 
Lessee Mine and 
Location 
Financial 
Year 
Average Production (MT) 
 Percentage 
of total 
production 
Lumps Fines Total Lumps Fines 
1 
Old  K.N. Ram & 
Co. Roida-II, 
Joda 
2014-15 to 
2019-20 4,83,463.789 16,18,374.41 21,01,838.2 23 77 
New  
Narbheram 
Power & 
Steel  
2020-21 1,36,310.15 12,74,030.66 14,10,341 10 90 
2021-22 2,44,121.12 21,16,050.88 23,60,172 10 90 
2 
Old  K.J.S. 
Ahluwalia Nuagaon, 
Joda 
2014-15 to 
2019-20 15,56,036.63 30,55,474.32 46,11,510.95 34 66 
New  JSW Steel  2020-21 9,63,742.85 31,83,357.75 41,47,100.6 23 77 
2021-22 14,38,395 48,92,392 63,30,787 23 77 
3 
Old  Patnaik 
Minerals  Jaribahal, 
Joda 
2018-19 to 
2019-20 5,39,838.975 5,58,001.495 10,97,840.47 49 51 
New  Kashvi 
International  
2020-21 1,84,800.2 5,96,231.8 7,81,032 24 76 
2021-22 2,91,447.5 7,19,876.5 10,11,324 29 71 
4 
Old  P.K. 
Ahluwalia Gonua, 
Koira 
2018-19 to 
2019-20 2,05,690 2,04,660 4,10,350 50 50 
New  JSW Steel  2020-21 1,12,671 5,82,487 6,95,158 16 84 
2021-22 1,21,627 8,69,418 9,91,045 12 88 
5 
Old  AMTC  Narayanposi, 
Koira 
2014-15 to 
2019-20 12,86,718.68 17,04,452.66 29,91,171.34 43 57 
New  JSW Steel  2020-21 10,10,508 24,78,372 34,88,880 29 71 
2021-22 12,23,171.16 45,70,924.46 57,94,095.62 21 79 
Source: Lessee-wise production data of i3MS 
 
 
 
 
 
Source: Calculation by Audit, based on the annual production reported in the i3MS portal 
 
 
 
Chart 3.15: Proportion of Lumps and 
Fines in regard to the Roida -II iron 
ore mine 
 
Chart 3.16: Proportion of Lumps and 
Fines in regard to the  Nuagaon iron 
ore mine 
 

Chapter III: Reporting of Mineral Despatch and Sale 
47 
Chart 3.19: Proportion of Lumps and 
Fines in regard to the Nara yanposi 
iron ore mine 
 
 
 
Source: Calculation by Audit, based on the annual 
production reported in the i3MS portal 
It can be seen from the above table and 
charts that, during the period 2014 -20, the 
proportion of lumps produced in different 
mines, was reported by the old lessees, to 
be in the range of 23  per cent to 50  
per cent.  It declined abruptly in FY 2020 -
21, to between 10 per cent and 29 per cent, 
while the proportion of fines showed a 
concomitant increase. It may be noted that 
with the introduction of the auction regime, 
the abrupt change in the reported 
proportion of lumps and fines, for all of the 
above mines, was at least 10  per cent; and the change was a steep 25  per cent 
in case of Jaribahal (Joda), and 34 per cent in case of Gonua (Koira).  
It is implausible that the nature of mineral reserves, produced from all these 
auctioned mines, would naturally undergo an abrupt variation, in a short 
period of one -two years. Thus, such a significant and sharp change in the 
reported proportion of lumps (decline) and fines (increase), indicates a high 
probability that lessees were misreporting the production of lumps, as fines, in 
order to avoid the higher royalty payable on lumps.  
The lessees in these five cases are required to pay premium at higher rates as 
settled in auction (90.90% to 150% of the price of mineral notified by IBM) 
over and above payment of applicable royalty. In such a scenario, the risk of 
misclassification of ore produced to minimize the liability towards payment of 
premium cannot be ruled out. 
In reply, the Government stated ( September 2023) that a committee under the 
Chairmanship of Director of Mines and Geology was constituted (13 July 
2021) to study the discrepancy in downgrading and misreporting of size of ore. 
Accordingly, the committee observed discrepancy in size of ore in six leases. 
Source: Calculation by Audit, based on 
the annual production reported in the 
i3MS portal ore mine 
 
Chart 3.17: Proportion of Lumps and 
Fines in regard to the Jaribahal iron 
ore mine 
 
Chart 3.18: Proportion of Lumps and 
Fines in regard to the Gonua iron ore 
mine 
ore mine 
 

Performance Audit of Systems and Controls in Assessment and Collection of Revenue from 
Major Minerals for the year ended March 2022 
48 
In addition, the State Government decided (28 April 2021) for modification of 
stacking and sampling exercise to be carried out for removal/ transportation of 
minerals from the Mines sources. As per the guidelines, the terms and 
expression introduce d are required to tender online request through i3MS 
application interface in form "S" and the in -person mandatory supervision of 
the Junior Mining Officer/ Ass istant Mining Officer for the sample collection 
process including random generation of sampling points, the collection of the 
ore via trenching and sectioning techniques, the mixing, bagging of primary, 
secondary and umpire samples have been introduced.  
However, the fact remains that, despite constitution of a committee in July 
2021, reporting of size of iron ore continued to be very different , with lesser 
share of lumps, from the previous lessees, as can be seen in the production 
data compiled in Table 3.1 6. Moreover, the working of internal control and 
monitoring mechanism of the State Government was very weak, as 
commented in detail in Chapter VI of the report.  In this scenario, Audit could 
not draw any assurance that there was correct reporting of  the actual sizes of 
lumps and fines extracted in post-auction period. 
3.3 Wide variations in the reported ex-mine prices of iron-ore 
As per Rule 64D of the Mineral Concession Rules, 1960, and Rule 39 (3) of 
the Minerals (Other than Atomic and Hydro Carbons Energy Minerals) 
Concession Rules, 2016, wherever the royalty, in respect of any mineral, is to 
be paid on an ad valorem  basis, it shall be calculated at the specified 
percentage of the average sale price of such mineral grade/ concentrate, for the 
month of removal/ consumption, as published by IBM. Under Rule 42 of the 
Rules ibid, the ex-mine price (EMP) (also termed Pit Mouth Value, i.e. PMV), 
reported by the lessees in their monthly returns, shall be used to compute the 
average sale price of the mineral grade/ concentrate.  
In the case of iron -ore, royalty is to be paid ad valorem. Thus, in terms of the 
above rules, royalty on iron -ore is worked out as a fixed percentage of the 
average sale price (ASP) notified by IBM (on a monthly basis, State -wise) for 
different grades (having different iron/ Fe content) and the classification 
(lumps or fines) of iron-ore. IBM calculates the ASP37 based on the grade-wise 
lumps and fines production and sales data, as reported 38 by the lessees every 
month, in a prescribed format 39. Thus, the production and sales data, reported 
by lessees, is the input on which the ASP is worked out, and there is a risk of 
underreporting of the sale price by lessees, which would lower the ASP, and, 
consequently, the royalty payable.  
In the context of royalty being charged on ad-valorem basis from August 
2009, the State Government had observed (February 2011) that it was 
important to ascertain the actual PMV of different mines, so that Government 
 
37  IBM calculates the ASP considering the Ex-Mines Price (EMP) of only non -captive sales 
of iron-ore using the weighted-average method 
38  Under Rule 42 of the Rules ibid, the ex-mine price, reported by lessees in their monthly 
returns, shall be used to compute the average sale price of the mineral grade/ concentrate  
39  All lessees are required to report the actual production and sales data, in the prescribed 
form F1, on a monthly basis, to IBM, with a copy to State Government.  

Chapter III: Reporting of Mineral Despatch and Sale 
49 
does not stand to lose towards royalty on account of under reporting of the 
PMV, by lessees. The State Government stated that it had observed wide 
variations in prices, for identical types and grades of iron -ore, in the same 
region, after examining the returns submitted by some lessees for September 
2010, and it had, accordingly, issued instructions to all DDMs/ MOs, to verify 
the actual PMV prices, at different mines, properly. 
In order to examine the reporting of ex-mine prices by lessees, Audit 
scrutinised records relating to ASP, as published by IBM, and EMP/PMV in 
respect of iron -ore lumps and fines (grade -wise), as reported by 12 lessees, 
under two mining circles 40, in their F1 returns, in respect of the grade 62 -65% 
Fe, for both lumps and fines, for the period 2015-22. 
The audit observations are discussed below: 
3.3.1 Wide variations in the ex-mine prices, reported by the same lessees, 
for the same grade of iron-ore, for the same months 
It was observed that the same lessees had reported widely varying EMPs, for 
the same grades of iron -ore, as sold to different buyers, during the same 
months.  
Some examples of the large variations in EMPs, as reported by lessees, for the 
iron-ore grade of 62 -65% Fe Lumps, during the same months, are shown in 
Table 3.17. 
Table 3.1 7: Lessee -wise variation in EMP,  by more than 200  per cent, for 62 -65% Fe 
Lumps (includes CLO 41), during the same month (instances for the period 
2015-22) 
(₹ per MT) 
Sl. 
No. Month Name of Lessee/Mine Minimum  
EMP 
Maximum  
EMP 
Variation 
percentage 
ASP of 
IBM 
1 May-2015 Serajuddin & Co., Balda 1,600 4,400 275 3,521 
2 August-2015 Serajuddin & Co., Balda 1,500 3,550 237 2,823 
3 October-2015 Serajuddin & Co., Balda 1,400 3,133 224 2,434 
4 February-2016 Rungta, Jajang 1,200 2,414 201 1,900 
5 June-2016 Rungta, Jajang 1,000 2,504 250 1,745 
6 July-2016 Rungta, Jajang 1,000 2,392 239 1,746 
7 September-2016 Rungta, Jajang 1,250 2,669 214 1,744 
8 October-2016 B.I.CO, Nadidihi 1,000 3,229 323 2,020 
9 November-2016 Feegrade Rengalibeda Nadikasira 800 3,245 406 2,119 
10 February-2017 Feegrade Rengalibeda Nadikasira 1,950 8,018 411 2,376 
11 April-2017 Serajuddin & Co., Balda 1,100 3,400 309 2,759 
12 May-2017 Serajuddin & Co., Balda 1,100 3,400 309 2,710 
13 September-2017 B.I.CO, Nadidihi 1,000 3,850 385 2,604 
14 November-2017 Feegrade Rengalibeda Nadikasira 1,000 3,800 380 2,711 
15 December-2017 Feegrade Rengalibeda Nadikasira 1,000 4,984 498 2,992 
16 January-2018 B.I.CO, Nadidihi 1,000 5,547 555 3,825 
17 June-2018 Feegrade Rengalibeda Nadikasira 1,000 5,500 550 4,094 
18 September-2018 Serajuddin & Co., Balda 1,350 5,500 407 4,585 
 
40  Joda and Koira Mining Circles 
41  Calibrated Lump Ores (CLO) which are of different sizes like 5 -18mm 10 -30mm, etc., 
produced after processing (crushing and screening) of iron-ore lumps 

Performance Audit of Systems and Controls in Assessment and Collection of Revenue from 
Major Minerals for the year ended March 2022 
50 
Sl. 
No. Month Name of Lessee/Mine Minimum  
EMP 
Maximum  
EMP 
Variation 
percentage 
ASP of 
IBM 
19 March-2019 K.J.S. Ahluwalia (Nuagaon) 1,855 9,148 493 3,703 
20 June-2019 Feegrade Rengalibeda Nadikasira 1,700 4,800 282 3,468 
21 August-2019 Feegrade Rengalibeda Nadikasira 1,600 4,300 269 3,417 
22 November-2019 Feegrade Rengalibeda Nadikasira 1,700 4,350 256 3,189 
23 February-2020 Feegrade Rengalibeda Nadikasira 1,700 5,045 297 3,672 
24 September-2020 Rungta Sons, Oraghat 2,600 6,750 260 3,325 
25 October-2020 Rungta Sons, Oraghat 2,714 6,750 249 4,285 
26 May-2021 Rungta Sons, Oraghat 4,500 10,100 224 8,484 
27 August-2021 Rungta Sons, Oraghat 4,720 11,700 248 10,711 
Source: Calculation by Audit, based on EMP data from the F1 returns furnished by the lessees 
As can be seen from Table 3.17, there were wide variations (ranging up to 555 
per cent), between the minimum and maximum EMPs, reported by the same 
lessees, during the same months. For instance, during January 2018, the same 
lessee B.I. CO. (Nadidihi) (Sl.No.16), for the same grade of iron -ore (62-65% 
Fe Lumps), had reported minimum EMP of ₹1,000 per MT and maximum 
EMP of ₹5,547 per MT (variation of 555 per cent).  
Some examples of large variations in EMPs, as reported by the lessees, for the 
iron-ore grade of 62 -65% Fe Fines, during the same month, are shown in 
Table 3.18. 
Table 3.18: Lessee-wise variations in EMPs,  by more than 200  per cent, for 62 - 65% Fe 
Fines, during the same months (instances for the period 2015-22) 
(₹ per MT) 
Sl. 
No. 
Month Name of Lessee/Mine Minimum  
EMP 
Maximum  
EMP 
Variation 
percentage 
ASP 
of 
IBM 
1 June-2015 K.N. Ram and Co. (Roida - II) 800 1,950 244 1,582 
2 July-2015 Kaypee Enterprises (Thakurani) 1,600 4,105 257 1,598 
3 March-2016 Feegrade Rengalibeda Nadikasira 836 1,865 223 1,180 
4 April-2016 Feegrade Rengalibeda Nadikasira 831 1,781 214 1,132 
5 September-2016 B.I.CO, Nadidihi 703 1,535 218 985 
6 December-2016 Rungta Sons, Oraghat  695 1,565 225 1,113 
7 January-2017 Kaypee Enterprises (Thakurani) 1,040 3,542 341 1,189 
8 June-2017 Feegrade Rengalibeda Nadikasira 1,014 3,339 329 1,206 
9 July-2017 Rungta Sons, Oraghat 802 1,769 221 1,161 
10 December-2017 Rungta_Jajang Iron mines 1,115 2,662 239 1,435 
11 January-2018 Rungta_Jajang Iron mines 1,103 2,720 247 1,875 
12 April-2018 S.N. Mohanty KJST, Jaldihi 900 2,200 244 1,877 
13 September-2018 Serajuddin & Co., Balda 950 2,700 284 2,344 
14 November-2018 Serajuddin & Co., Balda 950 2,700 284 2,713 
15 January-2019 Essel Nuagaon, Kadodih 1,658 4,915 296 1,956 
16 December-2019 Rungta Sons, Oraghat 1,345 2,716 202 1,816 
17 February-2020 Feegrade Rengalibeda Nadikasira 1,303 2,904 223 2,056 
18 September-2020 Rungta Sons, Oraghat 1,081 3,749 347 2,157 
19 January-2021 JSW Steel (Nuagaon) 2,157 6,431 298 4,916 
20 April-2021 S.N. Mohanty KJST, Jaldihi 2,750 6,650 242 5,905 
Source: Calculation by Audit based on EMP data from F1 returns furnished by the lessees 
As in the cases of iron ore lumps, it can be seen from Table 3.18 that there 
were wide variations (ranging up to 347 per cent), between the minimum and 
maximum EMPs, reported by the same lessees, during th e same months. For 

Chapter III: Reporting of Mineral Despatch and Sale 
51 
instance, during the month of September 2020, the same lessee, i.e. Rungta 
Sons (Oraghat) (Sl. No.18), for the same grade of iron -ore (62-65% Fe Fines), 
had reported minimum EMP of ₹ 1,081 per MT and maximum EMP of  
₹ 3,749 per MT (variation of 347 per cent). 
3.3.2 Wide variations in the ex-mine prices reported by different 
lessees, for the same grades of iron-ore, for the same months 
There were also wide variations, in EMPs, amongst different lessees, for the 
same grades of iron-ore, during the same months.  
Some examples of the large variation in minimum EMPs, as reported by 
different lessees, for the iron -ore grade of 62-65% Fe Lumps, during the same 
months are shown in Table 3.19. 
Table 3.1 9: Variations in minimum EMPs, amongst differe nt lessees, during the same 
months, for 62-65% Fe Lumps42 (instances for the period 2015-22) 
(₹ per MT) 
Month Name of the Lessee/ Mine 
Minimum 
EMP 
reported 
Name of the Lessee/Mine 
Minimum 
EMP 
reported 
Variation 
percentage 
ASP of  
IBM 
June-2015 Seerajuddin & Co. (Balda) 1600 Rungta Sons, Oraghat 4,100 256 3,302 
July-2015 Seerajuddin & Co. (Balda) 1600 Essel Nuagaon, Kadodih 3,893 243 3,139 
October-2015 Seerajuddin & Co. (Balda) 1400 K.N. Ram & Co.(Roida -II) 2,800 200 2,434 
February-2016 Rungta Jajang 1200 Feegrade Rbeda Nadikasira 2,170 181 1,900 
June-2016 Rungta Sons Oraghat 1000 K.N. Ram & Co. (Roida -II) 2,075 208 1,745 
July-2016 B.I.CO, Nadidihi 1000 K.N. Ram & Co. (Roida -II) 2,075 208 1,746 
October-2016 B.I.CO, Nadidihi 1000 Essel Nuagaon, Kadodih 2,722 272 2,020 
March-2017 Serajuddin & Co. (Balda) 1100 Essel Nuagaon, Kadodih 3,246 295 2,553 
April-2017 Serajuddin & Co. (Balda) 1100 Essel Nuagaon, Kadodih 3,674 334 2,759 
September-2017 Feegrade Rbeda Nadikasira 1000 Essel Nuagaon, Kadodih 3,494 349 2,604 
December-2017 Feegrade Rbeda Nadikasira 1000 Essel Nuagaon, Kadodih 3,686 369 2,992 
February-2018 B.I.CO, Nadidihi 1000 Essel Nuagaon, Kadodih 5,076 508 3,915 
June-2018 Feegrade Rbeda Nadikasira 1000 Essel Nuagaon, Kadodih 4,788 479 4,094 
September-2018 Serajuddin & Co. (Balda) 1350 Essel Nuagaon, Kadodih 6,257 463 4,585 
October-2018 Serajuddin & Co. (Balda) 1350 Essel Nuagaon, Kadodih 6,001 445 4,672 
January-2019 Serajuddin & Co. (Balda) 1800 B.I.CO, Nadidihi 4,600 256 3,947 
June-2019 Feegrade Rbeda Nadikasira 1700 Essel Nuagaon, Kadodih 4,104 241 3,468 
August-2019 Feegrade Rbeda Nadikasira 1600 Essel Nuagaon, Kadodih 3,931 246 3,417 
October-2019 Feegrade Rbeda Nadikasira 1700 Essel Nuagaon, Kadodih 3,708 218 3,277 
February-2020 Feegrade Rbeda Nadikasira 1700 Essel Nuagaon, Kadodih 4,809 283 3,672 
June-2020 B.I.CO, Nadidihi 2000 Essel Nuagaon, Kadodih 3,208 160 3,128 
September-2020 K.N. Ram & Co. (Roida - II) 1500 Essel Nuagaon, Kadodih 5,153 344 3,325 
October-2020 K.N. Ram & Co. (Roida - II) 800 Essel Nuagaon, Kadodih 5,909 739 4,285 
March-2021 Serajuddin & Co. (Balda) 1250 Essel Nuagaon, Kadodih 7,422 594 6,197 
April-2021 Serajuddin & Co. (Balda) 1461 Essel Nuagaon, Kadodih 10,187 697 7,903 
August-2021 Rungta Sons, Oraghat 4720 Essel Nuagaon, Kadodih 12,300 261 10,711 
November-2021 K.J.S. Ahluwalia (Nuagaon) 2400 Essel Nuagaon, Kadodih 9,458 394 7,900 
March-2022 Essel Nuagaon, Kadodih 4900 JSW Steel (Nuagaon) 6,921 141 8,341 
Source: Calculation by Audit based on EMP data from F1 returns furnished by the lessees 
As can be seen from Table 3.19, there were wide variations (ranging up to 739 
per cent), between the minimum EMPs reported by different lessees, during 
the same months. For instance, based on various sale transactions for the same 
grade of iron-ore (62-65% Fe Lumps), during the month of October 2020, K N 
 
42  Includes Calibrated Lump Ores (CLO), produced after sizing of iron -ore lumps 

Performance Audit of Systems and Controls in Assessment and Collection of Revenue from 
Major Minerals for the year ended March 2022 
52 
Ram & Co. (Roida -II) reported minimum EMP of ₹ 800 per MT, whereas 
Essel (Nuagaon, Kadodih) reported minimum EMP of ₹ 5,909 per MT.  
Some examples of the variations in the minimum EMPs, as reported by 
different lessees, for the iron -ore grade of 62 -65% Fe Fines, during the same 
months, are shown in Table 3.20. 
Table 3.20:  Variations in minimum EMPs  amongst different lessees, during the same 
months, for 62-65% Fe Fines (instances for the period 2015-22)  
(₹ per MT) 
Month Name of the Lessee/Mine 
Minimum 
EMP 
reported 
Name of the Lessee/Mine 
Minimum 
EMP 
reported 
Variation 
percentage 
ASP of  
IBM 
June-2015 K.N. Ram & Co. (Roida-II) 800 Essel Nuagaon, Kadodih 2,096 262 1,582 
September-2015 B.I.CO, Nadidihi 807 Feegrade Rbeda Nadikasira 1,962 243 1,455 
December-2015 K.N. Ram & Co. (Roida-II) 1,025 K.J.S. Ahluwalia (Nuagaon) 1,700 166 1,436 
January-2016 K.N. Ram & Co. (Roida-II) 1,093 K.J.S. Ahluwalia (Nuagaon) 1,630 149 1,399 
June-2016 K.J.S. Ahluwalia (Nuagaon) 682 Rungta Jajang 1,357 199 1,086 
September-2016 B.I.CO, Nadidihi 703 K.N. Ram & Co. (Roida – II) 1,150 164 985 
December-2016 Rungta Sons, Oraghat 695 K.N. Ram & Co. (Roida – II) 1,350 194 1,113 
January-2017 Rungta Sons, Oraghat 803 K.N. Ram & Co. (Roida – II) 1,350 168 1,189 
April-2017 Rungta Sons, Oraghat 1,007 Indrani Patnaik, Unchabali 1,500 149 1,277 
July-2017 Rungta Sons, Oraghat 802 K.N. Ram & Co. (Roida – II) 1,250 156 1,161 
December-2017 S.N. Mohanty KJST, Jaldihi 900 K.N. Ram & Co. (Roida – II) 1,500 167 1,435 
February-2018 S.N. Mohanty KJST, Jaldihi 900 Essel Nuagaon, Kadodih 2,198 244 2,050 
April-2018 S.N. Mohanty KJST, Jaldihi 900 Essel Nuagaon, Kadodih 2,064 229 1,877 
September-2018 Serajuddin & Co. (Balda) 950 Essel Nuagaon, Kadodih 3,138 330 2,344 
November-2018 Serajuddin & Co. (Balda) 950 Essel Nuagaon, Kadodih 2,705 285 2,713 
January-2019 Serajuddin & Co. (Balda) 950 Feegrade Rbeda Nadikasira 1,863 196 1,956 
June-2019 Serajuddin & Co. (Balda) 1,600 Essel Nuagaon, Kadodih 2,283 143 1,931 
September-2019 Rungta Sons., Oraghat 1,344 Essel Nuagaon, Kadodih 2,133 159 1,849 
October-2019 S.N. Mohanty KJST, Jaldihi 1,200 Essel Nuagaon, Kadodih 2,138 178 1,764 
February-2020 S.N. Mohanty KJST, Jaldihi 1,293 Essel Nuagaon, Kadodih 2,582 200 2,056 
May-2020 Essel Nuagaon, Kadodih 1,588 KJS. Ahluwalia (Nuagaon) 2,595 163 1,696 
September-2020 K.N. Ram & Co. (Roida-II) 800 Essel Nuagaon, Kadodih 3,064 383 2,157 
October-2020 K.N. Ram & Co. (Roida-II) 800 Essel Nuagaon, Kadodih 3,513 439 2,562 
January-2021 Serajuddin & Co. (Balda) 2,044 Essel Nuagaon, Kadodih 6,275 307 4,916 
April-2021 Serajuddin & Co. (Balda) 1,166 Narbheram P&S (Roida II) 6,100 523 5,905 
July-2021 Serajuddin & Co. (Balda) 4,000 Essel Nuagaon, Kadodih 10,115 253 8,364 
November-2021 K.J.S. Ahluwalia (Nuagaon) 2,100 JSW Steel (Nuagaon) 7,116 339 5,799 
March-2022 Rungta Sons, Oraghat 4,723 Essel Nuagaon, Kadodih 6,150 130 5,215 
Source: Calculation by Audit based on EMP data from F1 returns furnished by the lessees 
As can be seen Table 3. 20, there were wide variations (ranging up to 523 
per cent), between the minimum EMPs reported by different lessees, during 
the same months. For instance, based on various sale transactions for the same 
grade of iron -ore (62 -65% Fe Fines),  during the month of April 2021, 
Serajuddin & Co. (Balda) reported minimum EMP of ₹1,166 per MT, whereas 
Narbheram Power & Steel (Roida -II) reported minimum EMP of ₹6,100 per 
MT.  
Details of the lessee -wise minimum and maximum EMPs, in regard to the 12 
test-checked lessees and ASPs published by IBM, for the period 2015 -22, are 
given in Appendix-IX. 
Impact of wide variations in ex-mine prices 
These abnormal variations in ex -mine prices, across different grades, should 
have been a sufficient red flag, as highlighted in the State Government’s 

Chapter III: Reporting of Mineral Despatch and Sale 
53 
Circular of 2011. However, these variations were not analysed or taken up for 
examination/ investigation, and no action was initiated, at the level of the 
DDMs, Directorate or Government.  
As the EMPs reported by the lessees were the determinant for calculation of 
ASPs by IBM, the reporting of low EMPs, by lessees, had the effect of 
lowering the ASPs of iro n-ore, as published by IBM, and, consequently, the 
amount of royalty payable by the lessees. 
In reply, the Government stated ( September 2023) that  the SLES team along 
with IBM has observed six mines who have reported lowering of Ex -Mines 
Price during the year 2022 -23. The action as deem ed proper is being taken by 
the IBM as per provision of MCDR , 2017. The  details of the mines are (i) 
Badampahar Iron Ore Block of G. S. Mishra and Sons, (ii) Gorumahisani Iron 
Ore Block of G. S. Mishra and Sons, (iii) Patabeda Mines of MGM Minerals 
Ltd., (iv) Raikela & Tantra Mines of PTA Pvt.  Ltd., (v) Raikela Mines of 
Geetarani Mohanty, and (vi) Sanindpur Mines of Rungta Sons Ltd.  In 
consonance with audit observations, SLES team along with IBM also  proved 
the lowering of Ex -Mines Price during the year 2022 -23. However, the 
Government has not furnished the specific lessee -wise compliances on the 
Audit observations for the period 2015 -22. Moreover, the fact remains that, 
Government failed to develop an effective monitoring mechanism to detect the 
wide variation in reporting and consequently lowering of Ex-Mines Price.  
3.4  Non-utilisation/ non-disposal of low-grade iron-ore and chromite 
 in lease areas 
Rules 31 and 12 of the Mineral Conservation and Development Rules, 1988 
and 2017, respectively, provide that mining operations should be carried out in 
a manner that ensures development of mineral deposits, conservation of 
minerals and protection of environment.  
In this context, Audit examined records pertaining to lower grades of iron -ore 
and chromite, maintained in three mining circles (Joda and Koira for iron -ore, 
and Jajpur Road for chromite). The audit findings in this regard, are discussed 
below. 
3.4.1 Non-utilisation of sub-grade iron-ore in violation of Mining plan 
In the interest of systematic development of mineral deposits and conservation 
of minerals, IBM revised (October 2009) the threshold limit of iron -ore from 
55% Fe to 45% Fe. This revision in the threshold limit implied that iron -ore of 
45-55% Fe grade, earlier regarded as “mineral reject”, was to be deemed as 
useful for mineral recovery, utilisation, and marketability, either in its original 
mined grade, or in a higher grade produced after beneficiation 43. It was stated 
that mineral/ ore stacks above the 45% Fe limit should be properly maintained, 
indicating their quality and quantity, and inventories of such material should 
be updated monthly. In this context, DoM directed (December 2011) all 
DDMs / MOs to identify and submit reports, within two months, on all iron -
ore resources with content of 45 -55% Fe (termed “sub -grade” ores) lying 
 
43  Process of enrichment of mineral content, by which a higher grade of mineral can be 
produced from a lower grade of mineral, with volume loss 

Performance Audit of Systems and Controls in Assessment and Collection of Revenue from 
Major Minerals for the year ended March 2022 
54 
amongst the dumps of all mines. It was also directed that all lessees be 
instructed to maintain a separate account for the same.  
Scrutiny of the monthly returns, furnished by the lessees, as well as of the 
approved mining plans of the 11 lessees, under two 44 circles, revealed the 
following –  
i. Identification of sub -grade iron -ore (45 -55% Fe) from the dumps, in 
the lease areas of the lessees, had not been carried out, either by the 
lessees, or by the DDMs/ MOs, as of March 2022. In the absence of 
such identification, the department did not have information about the 
quantity of such useful ores lying unused in the dumps of various 
mining lease areas. 
ii. Study of the approved mining plans showed that these plans contained 
data on the existing dumps of sub -grade iron -ore, available in the 
mining lease areas. These stocks of sub -grade iron-ore (45-55% Fe), 
previously classified as mineral rejects, had accumulated in the mining 
lease areas, during production prior to FY 2015 -16. Although these 
approved mining plans specified that such ore was to be despatched 
after processing / beneficiation or direct sale, it was observed that this 
sub-grade ore had not been disposed of as of March 2022, 4,29,09,486 
MT of sub -grade iron ore, having average sale price of ₹7,886.78 
crore, shown in the mining plans of eleven test -checked iron -ore 
mines45 as having accumulated from mining prior to FY 2015 -16, 
remained undisposed of and royalty amounting to ₹ 1,183.02 crore (as 
detailed in Appendix-X) remained unrealised . No ac tion had been 
taken by the mining authorities against the lessees, in regard to the 
non-processing / beneficiation / sale of this sub -grade ore despite the 
stipulation made in the approved mining plans. 
iii. It was further noticed that the lessees had been directly selling sub -
grade ore (45 -55% Fe), out of their current production from mining 
activity, during 2015 -22, in the market, without processing/ 
beneficiation. However, the sub -grade ore, already stocked in the 
dumps, from prior periods, had not been sold, as highlighted in point 
(ii) above. Further, no attempt was being made by the lessees, to 
enrich the mineral content of this sub -grade ore, for better utilisation 
in industry. 
The mining of larger quantities of iron -ore (especially high -grade ores), 
without processing/ beneficiation of low-grade or sub-grade ore already mined 
and kept dumped in the lease areas for several years, was against the principle 
of sustainable use/ conservation of minerals in violation of Mining plan. 
In reply, the Government stated (September 2023) that the  ore having +45 to 
-55% Fe is stored separately  because of its non -utilisation in the Plant. 
 
44  DDM, Joda and DDM, Koira  
45  Jajang of M/s Rungta Mines, Unchabali of M/s Indrani Patnaik, Balda Block of M/s 
Seerajudin & Co., Roida - II of M/s K. N. Ram & Co., Thakurani of M/s KayPee 
Enterprises, Nadidih of Fee grade & Co., Narayanposhi of M/s Aryan Mining & Trading 
Corporation, Kurmitar of M/s OMC, Sanindpur of M/s Rungta Sons, KJST Iron ore 
Mines of S N Mohanty, and Orghat of M/s Rungta Sons 

Chapter III: Reporting of Mineral Despatch and Sale 
55 
These quantities of sub-grade Iron ore can be utilised in near future for  
pellet making, beneficiation or export.  
However, the fact remains that without beneficiation of sub -grade ore already 
mined and kept dumped in the lease areas for several years, was against the 
principle of sustainable use/ conservation of minerals. 
3.4.2 Non-accounting of excavated sub -grade iron -ore in auctioned 
mines 
As per instructions of the Steel & Mines Department and DoM (October 
2020), a committee [consisting of representatives from the Directorate of 
Mines, Odisha Mining Corporation (OMC), and lessees ] was formed for 
identifying and taking over of undisposed assets/ stock of minerals and 
infrastructure, relating to 28 expired mining leases, which had been auctioned 
and settled in favour of new lessees. The entire stock of minerals was to be 
taken over by OMC, on an as -is-where-is basis, after conducting joint 
verification of the stock. 
Audit noticed that, for the 28 leases that had expired in March 2020 and had 
been settled in favour of new lessees after auction, OMC had taken over the 
undisposed stock of mineral reported through the returns of these leases. 
However, this did not include the dumps of sub -grade iron -ore lying in the 
lease areas, as these had not been reported in the returns submitted by the 
lessees. As a result, these dumps of sub -grade iron-ore had neither been taken 
over by OMC, nor accounted for in official records. Hence, there was a risk of 
theft or unauthorised sale/ disposal of these dumped minerals, lying in the 
lease areas. 
In reply, the Government stated (September 2023) that as per the previous 
mining plan of the ex -lessee, the sub -grade ore pertaining to +45 -55% Fe 
grade was stored separately which are the natural  rights of the auction holder 
as per vesting orders issued in their favour. Thus, the sub-grade ore have been 
accounted for in favour of present lessee.  
However, the fact remains that the dumps of sub -grade iron -ore lying in the 
lease areas, had not been reported in the returns submitted by the  new lessees 
for which the dumps could not be accounted in the official records. 
3.4.3 Non-utilisation of beneficiable and sub -grade chromite in violation 
of mining plan 
Indian Minerals Yearbook 2019 published by IBM stated that more than 
96 per cent of chromite resources in India are located in Odisha, mostly in 
Jajpur district. 
As per the approved mining plans of South Kaliapani and Sukrangi chromite 
mines of M/s. OMC Ltd. for the period 2015-22, the beneficiable ore (30 to 40 
per cent Cr2O346), in the South Kaliapani chromite mines, and the sub -grade 
 
46   Chemical name of Chromium Oxide 

Performance Audit of Systems and Controls in Assessment and Collection of Revenue from 
Major Minerals for the year ended March 2022 
56 
ore (10 to 30 per cent Cr2O3) of the South Kaliapani and Sukrangi chromite 
mines, were to be beneficiated, to obtain concentrate grade47.  
Scrutiny of records at the Jajpur Road mining circle, relating to assessment, as 
well as monthly returns and approved mining plans of the South Kaliapani and 
Sukrangi mines, revealed that: 
i. In the South Kaliapani mines, the stock of chromite of low -grade, up to 40 
per cent Cr2O3, increased from 9,10,083.865 MT (as of 1 April 2015) to 
11,37,125.07 MT (as of 31.03.2022). During 2015 -17, only 77,589.70 MT 
(about seven per cent of the closing stock) of low-grade chromite had been 
beneficiated and converted to marketable concentrate ore grade. However, 
during 2017-22, no low-grade ore was beneficiated. This indicated that a 
huge quantity of low -grade ore had been lying in the lease area, without 
beneficiation for making it marketable for sale. Non-beneficiation and non-
disposal of 11.37 lakh MT of low -grade chromite resulted in non -
realisation of royalty of `36.76 crore48.   
In this context, it was further observed that M/s OMC Ltd. (lessee of the 
South Kaliapani mines) had sold 88,338.42 MT of low -grade chromite, 
during June to October 2020, without beneficiation and conversion to 
concentrate grade. Since the royalty payable on low-grade chromite (below 
40% Cr2O3) is much lower than the royalty payable on beneficiated 
(concentrate) ore 49, chromite direct sale of low -grade ore, without 
beneficiation in violation of Mining plan , resulted in loss of royalty to the 
State Government, amounting to `2.72 crore, as detailed in Appendix-XI. 
ii. In case of the Sukrangi mines, no beneficiation of low -grade ore had been 
carried out. The closing stock of low -grade ore below 40 per cent Cr2O3 
(produced during 2015 -22), dumped without beneficiation, was 
3,78,229.85 MT. Non-disposal of the 3.78 lakh MT of low -grade chromite 
resulted in non -realisation of royalty amounting to `12.23 crore 50 which 
was in violation of Mining plan. 
In reply, the Government stated ( September 2023) that, prior to 2015 -17 and 
during 2015-17 the sub-grade ore produced in Kaliapani Chromite Mines was  
beneficiated in  their beneficiation plant. Thereafter , beneficiation plant 
located at Kaliapani is under renovation. So, the sub-grade chromite ore could 
not be processed. After renovation of benefication plant the sub-grade chrome 
ore of both Kaliapani and Sukrangi mines shall be beneficiated for production 
of high-grade saleable chrome ore. However, the fact remains that, Government 
failed to develop an effective plan to ensure beneficiation of all low-grade ore 
below 40 per cent of Cr2O3 as of September 2023.  
 
 
47  Concentrate grade of chromite is obtained on beneficiation of low -grade chromite fines. 
Separate ASP is published by IBM for the concentrate grade 
48  11,37,125.07 MT × `323.25 (lowest rate of royalty of chromite for March 2015) =  
`36,75,75,679 
49  For instance, in the month of October 2020, royalty on low -grade chromite below 40% 
Cr2O3 was ₹340.65 per MT, whereas the royalty of beneficiated ore (concentrate) was 
₹1,884.60 per MT 
50  3,78,229.85 MT × `323.25 (lowest rate of royalty of chromite for March 2015)  
= `12,22,62,799 

Chapter III: Reporting of Mineral Despatch and Sale 
57 
Recommendations: 
Government should: 
2. carry out a complete and timely investigation across all auctioned 
mines into the sudden reporting of lower grades of iron -ore as 
found in test check by Audit, to ascertain willful or deliberate 
misreporting in order to avoid payment of higher royalty and 
premium.   
3. put in place a policy/  mechanism for preventing leakage of 
revenue due  to the significant risk of misreporting of category 
and sizes of iron -ore when reported as fines and the rapid 
increase of screened fines on which the royalty and premium are 
lower. 
4. re-verify the grade -wise mineral production of all the mines, in 
coordination with IBM, to ascertain the actual grades and sizes of 
iron ore and mix of lumps, crushed fines and screen fines in order 
to arrive at the range for each mine and also to realise 
appropriate royalty and premium. This range should be 
integrated in i3ms to ensure system -based control over reporting 
of grade, size and mix of minerals by the respective lessee. 
5. investigate the reporting of low ex -mines prices by lessees, to 
ascertain whether this was being done deliberately in order to 
reduce the average sale price and, consequently, the royalty and 
premium payable.  
6. fix responsibility on the concerned officers for lack of adequate 
monitoring and inspection regarding exercising quality checks 
(grade, category and size) in production of minerals. 
 
 

 
 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
Assessment and 
Collection of Mineral 
Receipts 
 

 
59 
 
 
 
This chapter discusses various issues regarding the assessment and 
collection of mineral receipts. The audit observations include non -levy of 
additional amount, along with royalty, from Government Companies/ 
Corporations; non -levy of interest on delayed payment of royalty; short 
assessment of royalty, due to non -verification of the sales turnover reported 
by lessees; blockage of revenue, due to non -disposal of seized minerals; non-
realisation of compensation for illegal extraction; and a suggestion for 
review of the existing grade classification of chromite.   
 
4.1 Introduction  
The royalty payable by mining lease holders is to be assessed on a 
quarterly basis, by the DDMs/ MOs of the concerned mining circles. As 
per GoO order dated 9 th August 1974, upon receipt of the monthly returns, 
along with particulars of the royalty paid by leaseholders, the DDMs/ MOs 
are required to undertake quarterly verification of the said returns and also 
inspect the accounts, as well as other relevant documents maintained by 
the leaseholders, in respect of the minerals consumed/ removed from the 
mining lease areas.  
Audit observations, relating to the assessment and collection of mineral 
receipts, are discussed in the following paragraphs. 
4.2  Non-levy of interest on delayed payment of royalty 
Under Rule 64 A of the Mineral Concession Rules, 1960, the State 
Government may charge simple interest, at the rate of twenty-four per cent per 
annum, on any unpaid rent, royalty or fee or other sum due to the Government, 
for the period from the sixtieth day of the expiry of the due date fixed by the 
State Government, up to the date of payment. The due date for payment of 
royalty was 15 th of each month,  against all ores/minerals removed during the 
previous month, as per the notification (August 1974) of GoO. 
Scrutiny of assessment files, for the years 2015 -22, in respect of different 
mines, under three mining circles 51, revealed tha t 15 mines did not pay the 
royalty and additional amount within the prescribed period, including the 
grace period of sixty days. The delays ranged from 04 to 133 days, for which 
interest amounting to ₹28.66 crore was to be realised, as detailed in Appendix-
XII. However, no action was taken by the DDMs, for realisation of the interest 
amount. 
In reply, the Government stated ( September 2023) that, the IBM is publishing  
the Average Sale Price of corresponding month after three and four months 
later. Thereafter, only circle offices are demanding the differential royalty for 
payment within specified  period. In case of non-payment of differential 
 
51   DDM, Jajpur; DDM, Joda; and DDM, Koira   
Assessment and Collection of Mineral 
Receipts 
4 

Performance Audit of Systems and Controls in Assessment and Collection of Revenue from 
Major Minerals for the year ended March 2022 
60 
royalty within the time  limit specified earlier , the interest on delayed 
payment is being demanded and realised. However, the fact remains that 
Government could not furnish the lessee -wise compliances for non -levy of 
interest on delayed payment of royalty. 
4.3  Short-assessment of royalty, due to non -verification of sales 
 turnover reported by lessees 
As per State Government notification of August 1974, for assessment of 
royalty payable by mining leaseholders, the mining officers are required to 
scrutinise the prescribed returns submitted by the mining leaseholders to the 
mining circles, and verify the same with reference to relevant records .  
Mining leaseholders were reporting their sales turnovers through various 
annual returns ( H1 return / G1 return 52) uploaded on the i3MS software of 
the S&M Department. According to departmental records, the i3MS 
software had been integrated with the Value Added Tax Information System 
(VATIS) of the Commercial Taxes (CT) department in order to enable 
validation of the sales turnover reported by leaseholders on i3MS with the 
corresponding sales turnover data submitted by leaseholders on VATIS to the 
CT Department for assessment of tax.  
However, scrutiny of records of two mining circles (Joda and Koira) 
showed that despite integration of i3MS with VATIS, the TIN Number of 
the lessees (as recorded on VATIS) was not being entered on i3MS. 
Further, it was also observed that similar integration of i3MS with Goods 
and Services Tax Network (GSTN) had not been done as of March 2022. In 
the absence of this linkage, the sales turnover from minerals, as reported by 
the lessees in their annual returns on i3MS, could not be cross -validated by 
the mining officers with corresponding data on VATIS (as submitted by 
the leaseholders under Dealer Return Summary) or GSTN, at the time of 
assessment of royalty. The veracity of the ASP using invoice data from 
GSTN was not ascertained leading to risk of suppressed ASP and lower 
royalty.  
In this regard, Audit scrutinised annual returns (H1/G1) submitted on i3MS 
by seven lessees of two mining circles (Joda and Koira) who were engaged 
solely in trading of minerals (as per their registration certificates issued by the 
CT department), and cross -checked the same with their annual returns 
submitted, as per the VAT/ GST Acts, to the CT department, for the period 
2015-22. It was found that for all the seven lessees, the sales turnovers 
declared by them in their returns submitted to the mining circles on i3MS, 
were different from those reported to the CT department on VATIS / GSTN. 
The sales turnovers of these lessees, as per their VAT/GST returns, were 
higher than the sales turnovers shown in their H1/G1 annual returns, submitted 
to the mining circles. For instance, during FY 2019 -20, for the lessee, M/s 
Essel Mining and Industries, the sales turnover, reported to the CT department, 
was ₹ 5,561.18 crore. However, the return submitted by the same lessee, to the 
Joda mining circle, showed the sales as only ₹2,946.75 crore, i.e. lesser by 
₹2,614.43 crore, on which royalty of ₹392.16 crore was realisable, along with 
DMF and NMET charges of ₹117.65 crore and ₹7.84 crore, respectively. 
 
52  The annual report format prescribed by the IBM for the lessees   

Chapter IV: Assessment and Collection of Mineral Receipts 
61 
This was indicative of the risk that lessees were underreporting their sales 
turnovers, to the concerned mining circles, in order to reduce their liability 
towards payment of royalty. On the basis of the above scrutiny and cross -
verification of the total sales turnover, the short -assessment of royalty, for the 
seven lessees, worked out to ₹905.66 crore. Accordingly, charges towards 
DMF, amounting to ₹271.70 crore (30 per cent) and towards NMET, 
amounting to ₹18.11 crore (2  per cent), were also leviable, as detailed in 
Appendix-XIII. Thus, due to non -integration of VATIS/ GSTN with i3MS, 
the department could not verify the sales turn over declared in annual returns 
(H1) with the sales turn over declared in annual returns under VAT/  GST Acts 
in Commercial Taxes Department. Thus, an indicative  amount of ₹1,195.47 
crore was short assessed by the DDMs and was recoverable from the lessees 
concerned. 
In reply, the Government stated (September 2023) that, it has been ascertained 
that, the sale s turnover declared by the lessee in return submitted  to the 
Mining Circle covers only for royalty portion. In case of the report/ returns 
submitted to Commercial Tax Department  covers royalty,  sales of value 
added products, sales of services (B2B)  and other operating costs. Hence, the 
objection is not realisable.  
The reply of the Government was not acceptable as the audit observation was on 
non-integration of VATIS/ GSTN with i3MS for which there was short 
assessment of royalty.  Moreover, the Government’s current reply is in non -
confirmation of their previous reply during exit conference that government 
would ensure a mechanism to fetch/ validate sales or turnover data as reported 
by lessees on the i3MS system with the GSTN system.  Further, it was noticed 
that the only business of these lessees , as reported in the VAT/  GST 
registration, was iron-ore and document s relating to explaining the existence 
of other product s/ services in the reported turn over by the lessees w ere not 
provided with the reply. In this scenario and due to the extent of variation 
between the reported sales turnover between GST return s and annual returns 
in i3MS, Audit could not draw an assurance that the annual returns in i3MS 
contained declaration of correct and complete sales turnover by the lessees. 
4.4  Blockage of revenue due to non-disposal of seized minerals 
Under Section 21(4) of the MMDR Act, 1957, any mineral, raised or 
transported without lawful authority, is liable to be seized by an officer or 
authority specially empowered in this behalf. As per guidelines prescribed by 
GoO in November 2008, minerals, seized by mining circle offices, are to be 
immediately handed over to OMC, for storing, processing and sale. 
Scrutiny of records of four DDMs (Joda, Koira, Talcher, Jajpur), relating to 
seizure cases, revealed that 955 cases of unlawfully raised/ transported 
minerals, registered durin g 2015 -22, had remained undisposed (as of March 
2022) without these seized minerals having been handed over to OMC (iron 
ore: 36,461.463 MT, manganese: 1,542.260 MT, coal: 4,655.434 MT and 
chromite: 465.992), with a total value of ₹7.94 crore 53. Reasons for  non-
 
53  Calculated as per the lowest average sale price amongst various grades, as notified by 
IBM for March 2022 

Performance Audit of Systems and Controls in Assessment and Collection of Revenue from 
Major Minerals for the year ended March 2022 
62 
disposal were not found available on records. Delay in disposal of the seized 
minerals resulted not only in blockage of revenue of ₹6.35 crore (80 per cent 
of the value of minerals, since the remaining 20 per cent handling charges 
were to be retained by OMC), accruable to Government, but also posed the 
risk of theft and deterioration in the quality of minerals. 
In reply, the Government stated ( September 2023) that,  in respect of  DDM, 
Koira, M/s G.M. (Sales) of M/s OMC Ltd., Bhubaneswar has been requested 
(June 2023) and  for other mining circle offices also requested M/s OMC 
Ltd. to take possession  of seized minerals for disposal.  Disposal of such  
seized minerals is being done by OMC Ltd. during their monthly auction sale 
of minerals. However, the fact remains that its only after audit observations, the 
Government initiated the process of dispose of all the seized ores . This 
indicates lack of monitoring at department level for timely disposal of seized 
minerals. 
4.5  Non-realisation of compensation for illegal extraction 
As per Section 21 (5) of the MMDR Act, 1957, if any person raises mineral 
from any land without lawful authority, the State Government may recover, 
from such person, the mineral so raised, or, where such mineral has already 
been disposed of, the price thereof, and may also recover, from such person, 
rent, royalty or tax, for the period during which the land had been occupied by 
such person without any lawful authority.  
4.5.1 Compensation for illegal extraction of iron and manganese ores 
Scrutiny of records revealed that  in pursuance of Hon’ble Supreme Court 
order (August 2017) in context of illegal mining in Odisha,  the DDMs of 
seven54 mining circles had raised (September 2017) demand of ₹21,427.28 
crore, against 144 Iron and Manganese mines , for unlawful mining, during the 
years 2000-11. Out of this, `16,350.90 crore was realised from 106 lessees and 
the balance ₹5,076.38 crore had remained unrealised, as of March 2022.  
In reply, the Government stated (September 2023) that, pursuant to judgement 
(August 2017)  of Hon'ble Supreme  Court of India, the State Government 
raised demands under Section 21(5) of MMDR Act, 1957 for payment of 
compensation towards minerals produced without/ in  excess of limit 
permissible for Iron and Manganese ore under EPA/  FCA. After scrutiny of 
records, 26 Iron and Manganese mining leaseholders have not yet paid the 
compensation demand of ₹ 2,965.29 crores out of total compensation demand 
of ₹3,308.35 crores. The concerned Collector & District Magistrates have 
instituted the Certificate Cases under OPDR Act, 1962 in respect of 26 
defaulting lessees for Iron and Manganese leases which is yet  to be finalised 
and concerned authorities are taking necessary  initiation for speedy recovery 
of entire amount along with the applicable interest.  
Although the Government has accepted the audit observation, but the balance 
amount yet to be realised , as reported by the Director of Mines, Bhubaneswar 
was ` 5,076.38 crore.  Further, the fact remains that cases for realisation of 
compensation for illegal extraction of iron and manganese ores are pending for 
 
54  Balangir, Baripada, Jajpur Road, Joda, Keonjhar, Koira and Koraput 

Chapter IV: Assessment and Collection of Mineral Receipts 
63 
many years. This indicates lack of monitoring mechani sm for collection of 
Compensation for illegal extraction of iron and manganese ores. 
4.5.2 Compensation demanded for illegal extraction of chromite 
Scrutiny of the records of DDM, Jajpur Road, revealed that compensation 
demands of ₹3,091.18 crore had been raised (April 2018) against 11 lessees, 
for unlawful mining, out of which ₹2,437.28 crore had been realised from six 
lessees. The other five lessees had not paid the demanded amount of `653.90 
crore and had obtained (May 2018) a stay from the Revisional Au thority. 
Although four years had elapsed, the State Government had not taken 
necessary action, such as issuing instructions to the concerned DDMs for 
ascertaining the status of the cases, for vacation of the stay, or to pursue the 
matter in an appropriate court of law. 
In reply, the Government stated ( September 2023) that, cases filed by the 
lessees, are pending at the level of the Revisional Authority. The Revisional  
Authority has passed orders not to take any coercive action against the 
said lessees till finalisation of the case.  
The reply of the Government was not acceptable as these cases are pending 
from many years and the Government had not taken necessary action, for 
vacation of the stay, or to pursue the matter in an appropriate court of law. 
 
Recommendations: 
Government should: 
7.  investigate the under reporting of sales turnover by lessees on i3MS.  
8. ensure robust integration of i3MS with GSTN in order to facilitate 
cross-validation of information, and accuracy in assessment of the 
royalty receivable.  Further, the Government may also explore the 
possibility of integrating turnover reported in GST returns in the 
assessment system of royalty, in coordination with Ministry of 
Mines.  
9. take up the matter of reviewing the existing grading classification 
for chromite with IBM, to devise more appropriate grading 
brackets for publication of average sale prices of ores having 
different Cr 2O3 content, so that the royalty leviable is reflective of 
the actual market prices. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
CHAPTER V 
Regulation of Mining 
Activities 
 

 
65 
 
 
5.1 Introduction 
Regulation of mining activities, relating to major minerals and specified, 
minor minerals in accordance with the provisions of laws, rules, notifications, 
and in terms of the conditions prescribed in the approved mining plans and 
statutory clearances, is the responsibility of the Steel & Mines department.  
Hon’ble Supreme Court, in its judgment of August 2017, had observed that 
“the holder of a mining lease is required to adhere to the terms of the mining 
scheme, the mining plan and the mining lease, as well as the statutes such as 
Environment Protection Act , 1986, the Forest (Conservation) Act , 1980, the 
Water (Prevention and control of Pollution) Act , 1974 and the Air (Prevention 
and control of Pollution) Act , 1981. If any mining operation is conducted in 
violation of any of these requirements, then that mi ning operation is illegal or 
unlawful. Any extraction of a mineral through an illegal or unlawful mining 
operation would become illegally or unlawfully extracted mineral”. 
Audit observations, relating to the regulation of mining activities, are 
discussed in the following paragraphs. 
5.2 Production of mineral ores in violation of statutory clearances and 
approved mining plans 
According to the Mineral Conservation and Development Rules (MCDR), 
1988 and 2017, the holder of a mining lease is required to adhere to the 
provisions of the Environment Protection Act , 1986. As per the Environment 
Impact Assessment (EIA) notification (January 1994), issued by the 
MoEF&CC, GoI (i) mining operations can  not be commenced, unless 
MoEF&CC, GoI, has accorded environmental clearance (EC) and (ii) mineral, 
from a specified site, can be extracted only up to the quantity sanctioned in the 
EC, regar dless of the quantum of extraction shown in the approved mining 
plan. Under Section 2 of the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980, any forest land, 
or any portion thereof, cannot be used for any non -forest purpose, without 
prior approval of the Central Government. Under Rule 22A of the Mineral 
Concession Rules, 1960, mining operations are to be undertaken only in 
accordance with the duly approved mining plan.  
Further, under Section 21(5) of the MMDR Act, 1957, whenever any person 
raises, without any lawful authority, any minerals, from any land, the State 
Government may recover, from such person, the minerals so raised, or, where 
such minerals have been disposed of, the price thereof. In addition, the State 
This chapter contains audit observations relating to the regulation of mining 
activities, including production of coal and iron -ore in excess of the 
quantities approved in environmental clearances; production of iron -ore in 
excess of the quantities approved in mining plans; production of chromite 
without forest clearance; and operation of mines on transfer of leases. 
Regulation of Mining Activities 5 

Performance Audit of Systems and Controls in Assessment and Collection of Revenue from 
Major Minerals for the year ended March 2022 
66 
Government may also recover, from such person, rent, royalty or tax, for the 
period during which the land had been occupied by such persons, without 
lawful authority. 
The purpose of fixing the limit of production of minerals in mines is to keep a 
check on changes due to excessive extraction of mineral and overburden.  
Violation of the stipulated production limit endangers the environment and can 
have severe and far -reaching impacts on the environment like habitat 
destruction and biodiversity loss, water pollution, air pollution, soil 
contamination, water resource depletion, increased risk of natural disasters, 
climate change contribution etc. Hence calls for action under Environment 
(Protection) Act. 
Section 15(1) of Environment (Protection) Act provides that whosoever fails 
to comply with or contravenes any of the provisions of this Act, rules made 
thereunder shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to five years or with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees or with 
both and in case the failure or contravention continues, with additional fine 
which may extend to five thousand rupees for every day during which such 
failure or contravention continues after the conviction for the first such failure 
or contravention.   
5.2.1  Production of coal in excess of the quantity approved in 
Environment Clearance 
Audit test -checked assessment records, production and despatch statements, 
monthly returns and EC s, relating to eight coal mines. It was observed, in the 
case of one coal mine 55, leased to Mahanadi Coalfields Ltd. (MCL), under the 
Talcher mining circle, that in the EC, the limit for extraction had been  
enhanced by MoEF&CC, GoI, from 25 million tons per annum (MTPA), to 28 
MTPA, with effect from 16 February , 2018. Accordingly, the quantum of 
extraction, permissible for the financial year 2017 -18, was 25.25 M illion 
Ton56 (MT) (calculated on pro rata  basis, ignoring the revised limit for 
February 2018, as the approval order had been issued after 15th of the month). 
However, the quantity of coal , actually extracted during the financial year 
2017-18, was 26.25 MT, which constituted excess production of one MT 
(26.25 – 25.25). As the extraction exceeded the stipulated quantity in EC, the 
lessee was liable to pay the price of the additional mineral extracted, which 
worked out to ₹88.60 crore, taking into account the price (₹886 per metric ton) 
of coal of same grade (G12) notified by Coal India Limited , applicable to 
power utilities as of March 2018. 
Further, as the production of minerals in excess of the quantity approved in the 
Environment Clearance, was in violation of the provisions of Environment 
(Protection) Act, no penal action, in terms of Section 15(1) of the Act, taken 
against the violating lessees, was found available on records. 
In reply, the Government stated (September 2023) that, the DDM, Talcher has 
demanded to the Project Officer, Bhubaneswari OCP of M /s MCL for 
payment of ₹ 88.62 crore  towards unlawful production of coal exceeding the 
quantity approved in  EC. However, the Government may take appropriate 
 
55  Bhubaneswar Opencast Project 
56  Revised production limit for FY 2017-18 = (25/12 x 11) + (28/12 x 1) = 25.25 

Chapter V: Regulation of Mining Activities 
67 
action to recover the above amount from the lessee and furnish compliance to 
Audit. 
5.2.2  Production of iron -ore exceeding the quantity approved in the 
Environment Clearances 
Audit test -checked assessment records, production and despatch statements, 
monthly returns and approved ECs, in respect of iron -ore mines. It was 
observed that there had been production of iron -ore, in excess of the limits 
stipulated in the ECs, in the case of two iron-ore mines, as detailed below:  
i. In case of the Roida -II iron-ore mine (Joda circle), the lessee applied for 
EC, to enhance its production capacity, from 2.2 MTPA, to 3.5 MTPA, 
which was granted (18 April 2019) by the State Environment Impact 
Assessment Authority (SEIAA). As the clearance had been granted after 
15th of April 2019, the revised production capacity was to be applicable 
proportionately, from the month of May 2019, as clarified by Hon’ble 
Supreme Court, in its judgment of August 2017. Hence, the production 
limit for FY 2019 -20 should have been reckoned as 3.39 MT 57. 
However, the lessee had produced 3.50 MT of ore, during the same year, 
which constituted excess p roduction of 0.11 MT against the limit 
prescribed under the EC. Accordingly, the lessee was liable to pay the 
price of the mineral so raised, amounting to ₹52.04 crore58.  
ii. In respect of Thakurani Block -B iron-ore mine59, over 946.047 ha (Joda 
circle), it was  observed that MoEF &CC, in its letter dated 15 January 
2015, had conveyed grant of EC for production of four MTPA of iron -
ore (lump). As per letter dated 21 December 2018, MoEF &CC clarified 
that as per data of the EIA report submitted by lessee, based on which 
the earlier EC was granted in 2004 for production of four MTPA lumps, 
the lump ore and ROM produced during five years period (2017 -21) 
would be 20 MT and 30.77 MT, respectively.   Accordingly, production 
of 4 MTPA iron -ore lump would be equivalent to extraction of 6.154 
MTPA of ROM, assuming production of four MT iron ore lumps of (+)5 
mm size and 2.154 MT of ( -) 5 mm fines along with production of 
mineral rejects, sub grade ore.  
Scrutiny of records, in respect of the above mine, revealed that, during 
the financial years 2019 -20 and 2020 -21, the lessee reported through 
monthly returns, extraction of ROM ore and processing of the same to 
produce CLOs and ( -) 10 mm size fines along with ( -) 2 mm slime 60 of 
40,202 MT. The reported production did not contain mineral rejects, sub 
grade ore and fines of ( -) 5 mm size, as had been assumed at the time of 
 
57  Limit for EC = (2.2/12 x 1) + (3.5/12 x 11) = 3.391667 MTPA  
58  Taking into account the IBM price for (+) 65% Fe for March 2020 – the lessee was 
paying the highest royalty as prescribed under the Second Schedule of the Act and the 
stacking and sampling of minerals was dispensed with in favour of the lessee as per Rule 
10 (7) of OMPTS Rules 2007 = 1,07,624.57 MT × ` 4,835 = ` 52,03,64,795 
59  M/s. Sarda Mines (P) Ltd. 
60  Iron ore slime is a waste material generated after beneficiation of iron ores 

Performance Audit of Systems and Controls in Assessment and Collection of Revenue from 
Major Minerals for the year ended March 2022 
68 
interpreting (2018) the production limit of the original EC of 2004 to be 
6.154 MTPA ROM.  
The permissible limit of production vis-à-vis the production reported is 
detailed in Table 5.1. 
Table 5.1:   Details of production limit and reported production 
during the financial years 2019-20 and 2020-21 
Financial 
Year 
Permissible limit as per clarification 
issued in 2018 (Metric Tons) 
Actual production as reported by lessee  
(Metric Tons) 
ROM Lumps 
(+5) mm 
Mineral 
rejects/sub 
grade ore and 
Fines (-5) mm 
ROM Lumps/CLO 
(5-40) mm 
Fines 
(-10) mm 
Slime 
(-2) mm 
2019-20 61,54,000 40,00,000 21,54,000 49,61,260 4,83,036 44,78,224 0 
2020-21 61,54,000 40,00,000 21,54,000 61,53,976 17,05,567 44,08,207 40,202 
Source: As per the EC letter of 2018 and returns furnished by the lessee 
The above table shows that, although the limit prescribed for production of 
ROM has been complied with, but the fines ( -10 mm) have not been counted 
under the production limit of four MTPA (+) 5 mm lumps, whereas the 
MoEF&CC had clarified (December 2018) that the extracted ore of 5 mm and 
above will be treated as lumps.  Thus, during FYs 2019 -20 and 2020 -21, the 
lessee extracted ore, exceeding the production limit stipulated under the EC, 
of four MTPA (+) 5 mm lumps, by 30.75 lakh MT, for which ₹1,558.41 
crore, towards the price of the excess mined mineral, was required to be 
levied, as per details in Appendix - XIV. 
Further, as the production of minerals in excess of the quantity approved in 
the Environment Clearance, was in violation of the pro visions of 
Environment (Protection) Act, no penal action, in terms of Section 15(1) of 
the Act, taken against the violating lessees, was found available on records. 
In reply, the Government stated (September 2023) that, t he Environment  
Clearance, approved  Mining Plan and production made by the lessee are 
being verified. Action as per Law will be  taken after completion of 
verification of records.  However, the Government may take immediate 
appropriate action to recover the above amount from the lessee and furnish 
compliance to Audit. 
5.2.3  Production of iron-ore exceeding the quantities approved in the 
mining plans 
Under Rule 22A of the Mineral Concession Rules, mining operations are to be 
undertaken only in accordance with the duly approved mining plans. As stated 
by the Hon’ble Supreme Court, in its judgement of August 2017, in the 
context of illegal mining in Odisha, a mining plan is of considerable 
importance for a mining lease holder and is, in essence, sacrosanct. The holder 
of a mining lease is required to adhere to the terms of the mining scheme/ 
plan. The production limit capped in the mining plan/ scheme must be adhered 
to, by the mining lease holders.  Any mineral, extraction through an illegal or 
unlawful mining operation, would become illegally or unlawfully extracted 
mineral.  

Chapter V: Regulation of Mining Activities 
69 
Scrutiny of assessment records, production and despatch statements, monthly 
returns and mining plans, relating to the period 2015 -22, revealed that the 
quantities of ores, sub -grade ores, mineral rejects and production from sub -
grade dumps, were categorically stipulated in the approved mining plans, 
along with the capped limits of production for each category.  
Audit observed that eight 61 mining leaseholders, under two circles 62, reported 
nil/ negligible production of sub -grade ore, mineral rejects, and from sub -
grade dumps, even though such production had been stipulated in their 
approved mining plans. Production of sub -grade ore and mineral rejects is  
inevitable in the production process of high grade ore as these are by -products 
of the process.  Further, the production of graded ores exceeded the limits 
stipulated in their approved mining plans, as per details shown in Table 5.2. 
Table 5.2:        Production reported by lessees, as against the quantities 
stipulated in the approved mining plans 
Name of  
mine  
Financial 
Years 
Production stipulated in the mining plan  
(in MT) 
Actual production Excess 
production 
of ore 
(in MT) 
Total price 
leviable on 
excess 
production  
(` in 
crore) 
Ore Subgrade Mineral  
Reject 
Production 
from sub- 
grade dump 
Ore Sub-
grade 
Mineral 
Reject 
  
Kaypee 
Enterprises 
Thakurani Iron 
ore 
2016-18 1,05,13,422 4,86,733 0 2,700 1,09,80,801.00 0 0 4,67,379 151.77 
K N Ram  
Roida-II Iron 
ore 
2015-17 & 
2019-20 64,30,483 14,64,330 0 0 78,96,596.30 0 0 14,66,113.30 511.78  
(-) 52.04* 
Rungta 
Jajang Iron ore 2017-18 1,21,95,855 6,41,887 0 0 1,27,00,232.11 0 0 5,04,377.11 238.32 
Indrani 
Patanaik 
Unchabali Iron 
ore 
2015-18 & 
2019-20 1,30,61,626 22,88,276 0 4,50,000 1,57,45,906.00 0 0 26,84,280 1021.89 
OMC 
Roida C 2017-19 6,58,464 1,51,715 0 0 7,59,510.00 0 0 1,01,046 48.06 
M/s. SN 
Mohanty KJST 
Iron, Bauxite 
and Manganese 
2016-21 74,51,211 0 10,99,359 14,00,000 91,04,131.79 1,81,000 2,20,726.57 16,52,921 617.52 
M/s. JN Patnaik 
Bhanjpali Iron 
ore mines 
2019-20 1,75,420 0 46,924.80 37,590 2,51,100.00 0 1,200 75,680 20.33 
M/s. Essel 
Mining Koira 
Iron ore mines  
2016-21 2,09,00,000 0 31,00,000 2,40,00,000 2,34,97,134.00 0 2,15,482 25,97,134 1,060.88 
Total 3,618.50 
Source: Audit calculation from returns of lessees and assessment records 
*  The lessee, during 2019-20, had violated the production limit prescribed in EC also, as pointed out in Para 5.2.2 
(i), hence the value of the minerals extracted in excess to EC limit, amounting to ` 52.04 crore has been deducted. 
The total price of the excess graded ores, produced by the above eight lessees, 
amounted to `3,618.50 crore, which was recoverable from the lessees. The 
year-wise details are in Appendix - XV. 
 
61  (i) KJST Iron, Bauxite and Manganese mines of M/ s S.N. Mohanty (ii)  Thakurani of 
Kaypee Enterprise (iii) Roida -II of M/s K.N Ram & Co (iv) Jajang of M/s Rungta Mines 
(v) Unchabali of Smt. Indrani Patnaik (vi) Roida -C of OMC (vii) Koira Iron ore mines of 
Essel Mining and (viii) Bhanjapali Iron ore mines of M/s J N Patnaik 
62   DDM, Joda and DDM, Koira 

Performance Audit of Systems and Controls in Assessment and Collection of Revenue from 
Major Minerals for the year ended March 2022 
70 
In reply, the Government stated (September 2023) that,  the compliances in 
respect of three mining leases under the DDM, Koira, after scrutiny of 
mining plans, the DDM has reported that there was no excess production of 
iron ore violating the mining plans. Further, it was stated that in respect of 
DDM, Joda, the Environment Clearance, approved Mining Plan and  
production made by the lessees are being verified. Action as per law will be 
taken after completion of verification of records.  
The compliances by the DDMs as intimated by the Government in the reply are 
not tenable as the details of production quantity provided by department to 
Audit also depict excess production than the approved mining plan and tallied 
with quantities shown in Table 5.2. Facts contradict the contention of DDM, 
Koira. Further, all the figures shown in the above table are derived from the 
approved mining plans as well as i3MS portal. Comparison of the production 
limits of iron ore specified in the approved mining plan with the actual 
production of iron ore clearly indicates that the production was in excess of the 
approved quantities. Moreover, the Government failed to ensure extraction of 
actual quantities approved in the mining plans and take appropriate action to 
recover the price of the excess production of ore in respect of Joda Circle. The 
stated verification may be completed at the earliest and action may be taken to 
recover the amount. 
Despite appearance of similar observation in Compliance Audit Paragraph 6.5.1 
in Report of Comptroller and Auditor General of India on Revenue Sector for 
year ended March 2020 (Report No. 6 of 2021) , Government of Odisha, no 
preventive action was taken by the Government and the matter persisted.  
5.2.4 Production of chromite without forest clearance 
Scrutiny of lease files, assessment records and monthly returns, of the 
Kaliapani chromite mines, over 64.463 ha, of M/s Balasore Alloys Pvt. 
Limited, under the Jajpur Road mining circle, revealed that the Divisional 
Forest Officer (DFO), Cuttack, informed (December 2014) the lessee that the 
entire lease area was under “forest land”, as per Hal settlement records63, and 
sought clarification on the status of land of the lease area. In April 2015, the 
DFO again informed the lessee that, as per MoEF &CC guidelines (March 
2016), areas falling within mining leases, which had been recorded as “Forest” 
in government records, on or after the day the Forest Conservation Act, 1980, 
came into force, require approval from Central Government, to be obtained 
within one year from the date of issue of the guidelines. However, the lessee 
obtained (March 2016) status quo  from the Hon’ble High Court of Odisha, 
which was gradually extended by the Hon’ble High Court up to December 
2019 and the status quo  was not extended beyond December 2019. It was, 
however, noticed that the lessee had continued to carry out mining operations 
beyond December 2019, up to March 2022 and submitted the monthly reports 
on production and despatch with payment of royalty thereon. On being pointed 
out by Audit, DDM, Jajpur Road, intimated that a show cause notice has been 
issued to the lessee on 12 September 2022. This is indicative of poor 
monitoring of activities in the leased areas. 
 
63  Current record of land use 

Chapter V: Regulation of Mining Activities 
71 
In the absence of any authorization from the competent authority, the mining 
operations, carried out beyond December 2019, were unlawful, for which the 
lessee was liable to pay the price of minerals extracted during the period, 
amounting to `150.10 crore, as detailed in Appendix -XVI. 
In reply, the Government stated (September 2023) that, show cause notice was 
issued to M/s Balasore Alloys Ltd. in respect of Kaliapani Chromite Mines by 
DDM, Jajpur Road on 12 September 2022.  
The action taken as reported by the Government in the reply is not sufficient 
and Government failed to take  any appropriate action to recover the price of 
minerals extracted beyond the permissible period  despite lapse of a period 
more than a year of SCN . Further, no penal action  taken, in terms of Section 
3(A) and other applicable provisions of the Forest Conservation Act , against 
the violating lessee was found available on records. 
5.2.5  Operation of mine on unauthorised transfer of lease  
Under Rule 3 of the OMMC Rules, 2004,  no person shall undertake any 
prospecting or mining or quarrying operations for specified minor minerals, in 
any area, except under and in accordance with the terms and conditions of a 
prospecting licence or a quarry/  mining lease or auction of source or a quarry 
permit granted under the rules. Under Rule 25(30) of the above Rules, the 
lessee shall not, without any previous consent of the State Government, (a) 
assign, sublet, mortgage, or in any other manner, transfer t he mining lease, or 
any right title or interest therein or (b) enter into or make any agreement, 
contract or understanding whereby the lessee will or may be directly or 
indirectly financed by, any person or body of persons other than the lessee. 
Under Rule 68 (4) of the above Rules, whenever any person raises, without 
any lawful authority, any mineral from any land, the Tahasildar/  Mining 
Officer/ Deputy Director/ Divisional Forest Officer, may recover, from such 
person, the mineral so raised, or, where such mineral has already been 
disposed of, the price thereof, and may also recover from such person, rent, 
royalty or tax, as the case may be, for the period during which the land was 
occupied by such person without any lawful authority. 
A mining lease of decorative stone mine, in Parsurampur, over 49.922 ha, was 
granted in favour of M/s New Laxmi Granite, from 30 March 2005, for a 
period of 20 years. The lessee intimated the MO, Berhampur, on 31 May 
2016, that he had already made an irrecoverable power of attorney, registered 
on 29 April 2016, in favour of M/s Jagannath Granites. As seen from the 
recitals of the document, all the related operational activities of the said mine 
had been entrusted to M/s Jagannath Granites (attorney), who wo uld also 
receive all types of payments and operate the bank accounts. The power of 
attorney was irrevocable by the lessee on his own will and would remain valid 
till expiry of the lease term. Thus, the power of attorney document clearly 
constituted transfer of rights, title and interest, on the lease hold area, by the 
lessee, to the attorney. As the transfer of lease had been done without prior 
approval of the Government, operation of mines, by the new entity, was 
unlawful, and accordingly, the price of the  mineral raised was required to be 
realised. The quantity of mineral, extracted from April 2016 to March 2020, 

Performance Audit of Systems and Controls in Assessment and Collection of Revenue from 
Major Minerals for the year ended March 2022 
72 
was 4,058.068 cum, for which the price worked out to ₹ 2.64 crore, which was 
recoverable from the lessee.64  
In reply to the above observations, the Government stated ( September 2023) 
that, the Power of Attorney is granted/ executed/ implemented when the 
principal authorizes anybody to act on  his/her behalf, certain things with 
specified scope. Thus, empowering  any authorized entity/ person with a 
Power of Attorney (PoA) doesn't vest any right or control  on the asset/ lease, 
for which the PoA holder takes action on  behalf of the legal right owner. Here 
in this case, i.e., transfer of lease is effected under the orders of the 
Government, the authority who grants lease to the Lessee, which is a statutory 
procedure and is not for limited purpose. Therefore,  Transfer of Mining Lease 
is a restrictive Legal procedure enacted  under the Law, which is granted 
specifically under the authority  of the State Government  whereas, Power of 
Attorney is an agreement  authorizing anyone for certain activities and both 
are not equal.  
The reply of the Government is not acceptable as the lessee intimated MO, 
Berhampur, DoM, Odisha on 31 May 2016  about transferring the rights, after 
executing the Power of Attorney on 29 April 2016 as checked from the 
correspondence made by the lessee . This confirms that no prior approval of 
Government was obtained for such transfer of the lease. Also, no documentary 
evidence could be furnished to Audit regarding approval of the State 
Government for transfer of lease on the basis of power of attorney. Moreover, 
such type of transfer of lease is in contravention to Rule 25(30)  (b) of the 
OMMC Rules, 2004 and therefore, the Government should take appropriate 
action to recover the applicable dues. 
Recommendation:  
Government should: 
10. take timely action under Section 21(5) of MMDR Act against the 
violators of Environment Clearance granted for mining and 
consider taking penal action under relevant provisions of the 
Environment Protection Act , 1986 and the Forest (Conservation) 
Act, 1980. 
11.  develop a robust mechanism to ensure regular checks on 
quantity extracted by the lease holders vis-à-vis the quantity 
authorised under various statutory clearances. 
12.  fix responsibility for not taking action against lessees for 
violations of conditions stipulated in various regulations. 
 
 
64  Price recoverable = `2,63,77,442 (4,058.068 × `6,500, the PMV declared by the lessee 
for March 2020) 

 
 
 
 
  
 
CHAPTER VI 
Internal Controls 
and Monitoring 

 
73 
 
 
 
 
 
This chapter contains audit findings relating to internal controls and 
monitoring: functioning of government laboratories, issuance of transit 
passes, functioning of check gates/ weighbridges, conduct of inspections of 
mines by departmental officials and raids by the State Level Enforcement 
Squad. 
 
6.1 Introduction 
A robust system of internal controls is vital for monitoring the mining 
activities of leaseholders and safeguarding the interest of the Government. In 
pursuance of this objective, the rules and notifications of the Government 
provide for verification of mineral ore grades through a system of sample 
collection; issuance of transit passes to authorise despatch of minerals from 
lease areas; checking of transit passes at check gates and weighment of the 
mineral despatched at weighbridges; and a system of perio dic and surprise 
inspections by departmental officials and special squads, to exercise check 
over illegal mining.  
By virtue of powers conferred under Section 23C of the Mines and Minerals 
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1957, the State Government framed 
Odisha Minerals (Prevention of Theft, Smuggling & Illegal Mining and 
Regulation of Possession, Storage, Trading and Transportation) (OMPTS) 
Rules, 2007, for prevention of theft, smuggling and illegal mining and to 
regulate the possession, storage, trading and transportation of minerals in the 
State of Odisha. The Rules provide for establishment of check -post(s) with or 
without barrier(s) and weighbridge(s) at any place within the State to check the 
transport and storage of minerals raised without lawful aut hority and to check 
the quality and quantity of minerals transported from lease -hold areas. It also 
provides for chemical analysis of the mineral analysed in a Government 
Laboratory/ laboratory of Public Sector Undertaking approved by the 
Government. 
Audit observations, in this regard, are discussed in the following paragraphs. 
6.2 Functioning of Government Laboratories 
As per Rule 10 (5) of the OMPTS Rules, 2007, the lessee, after proper 
dressing, stacking, grading and analysis of the mineral, shall apply to the 
concerned Mining Officer or Deputy Director of Mines, as the case may be, 
for removal of  such mineral, in proper form, along with copies of these 
chemical analysis report of the mineral, analysed in a Government Laboratory/  
laboratory of Public Sector Undertaking approved by the Government. 
Internal Controls and Monitoring 6 

Performance Audit of Systems and Controls in Assessment and Collection of Revenue from 
Major Minerals for the year ended March 2022 
74 
Thus, before any mineral is removed from the lease area, it needs to be 
analysed, in an approved laboratory, to determine the grade of the mineral. 
This is to be done independently by the lessee, as well as by the mining 
officers, before the despatch of every consignment of minerals from the lease 
area. Analysis of minerals is to be done by collection of samples from the 
designated mineral stacks and testing of the same in approved government/ 
PSU laboratories. There are State Government chemical analysis laboratories 
at the circle level, in Joda and Jajpur Road, and a central laboratory at 
Bhubaneswar. A flow chart showing the chemical analysis procedure is 
depicted below: 
 
 
 
Source: Records of Deputy Directors (Chemical Analysis), Jajpur Road and Joda  
In this context, Audit examined the functioning of government laboratories, 
through scrutiny (September 2022) of records (stock registers of chemicals and 
registers of applications received from lessees for chemical analysis), for the 
Chart 6.1: Flow chart showing process of chemical analysis of Iron and 
chromite samples 


Chapter VI: Internal Controls and Monitoring 
75 
period 2015-22, in the offices of the Deputy Directors of Chemical Analysis 
(DDCA), Joda and Jajpur Road. Audit observations in this regard, are 
discussed below: 
6.2.1 Analysis of ore samples without sufficient stock of essential 
chemicals  
As per the Bureau of Indian Standards IS 12667 -3 (1989), for chemical 
analysis of chromite samples, three chemicals, viz., ammonium persulphate, 
ferrous ammonium sulphate and orthophosphoric acid, are required. Similarly, 
for analysis of iron -ore samples, hydrochloric acid, mercuric chloride and 
orthophosphoric acid, are required. 
i. In the office of DDCA, Joda, it was observed that the stock of 
chemicals, required for analysis of iron -ore samples, had been 
exhausted on 10 occasions, and there was a gap of 9 to 82 days in 
receiving new stock, during which the samples had been shown as 
having been analysed. Details in this regard are shown in the Table 
6.1. 
Table 6.1: Iron-ore samples analysed without stock of chemicals 
(period 2015-22) 
In reply, the Government stated (September 2023) that,  the store may reflect 
that the chemical position is nil but in actual there is some chemicals must be 
there in the Lab, to cater the analytical process. Even in some occasions 
chemicals has been diverted from Research Laboratory, Bhubaneswar to cater 
the emergency requirement of Joda Laboratory. 
The Government’s reply was not tenable as the stock records reflecting the 
existence of nil stock of chemicals should be  the only authentic source of 
information and no documents substantiating the reply of the Government 
was provided to audit.  Further, n o requisition sent to Research Laboratory, 
Bhubaneswar for transfer/ diversion of chemicals was found on record.  
Sl. 
No. 
Name of Chemical Date on 
which stock 
of chemicals 
was ‘nil’ 
Date of 
receipt of 
chemicals  
No. of days 
when there 
was nil stock 
of chemical 
Total no. of 
samples 
analysed during 
nil stock of 
chemicals 
1 Mercuric Chloride 06-Jun-2016 19-Aug-2016 74 1,479 
2 Mercuric Chloride 26-Nov-2018 16-Jan-2019 51 1,255 
3 Mercuric Chloride 25-May-2021 19-Jul-2021 55 4,762 
4 Mercuric Chloride 29-Nov-2021 08-Dec-21 18 543 
5 Hydrochloric Acid 26-Nov-2018 16-Jan-2019 51 1,255 
6 Hydrochloric Acid 20-Dec-2019 11-Feb-2020 53 2,281 
7 Hydrochloric Acid 02-Jul-2021 19-Jul-2021 17 1,665 
8 Orthophosphoric Acid 26-Nov-2018 16-Jan-2019 51 1,253 
9 Orthophosphoric Acid 20-Nov-2020 10-Feb-2021 82 6,795 
10 Orthophosphoric Acid 11-Feb-2021 20-Feb-2021 09 718 
 Total    22,006 
Source: Compiled from DDCA Joda records 

Performance Audit of Systems and Controls in Assessment and Collection of Revenue from 
Major Minerals for the year ended March 2022 
76 
ii. In DDCA, Jajpur Road, it was noticed that, out of a total of 31,677 
samples, for which chemical analysis of chromite had been carried out 
during the years 2015 -22, 31,340 samples had been analysed without 
sufficient stock of essential chemicals, such as ammonium persulphate 
(1 gram per sample), ferrous ammonium sulphate (39.21 gram per 
sample) and orthophosphoric acid (150 ml. per sample), in their 
respective proportions, as against the number of samples analysed. 
Details in this regard are shown in Table 6.2. 
Table 6.2: Chromite samples analysed without sufficient stock of 
chemicals (period 2015-22) 
Financial 
Year Chemical in short supply 
No. of samples 
for which 
required 
quantity of 
chemical was 
available 
No. of 
samples 
actually 
analysed 
No. of samples 
analysed without 
the required 
chemicals 
2015-16 
Ammonium persulphate  5,000 
3,997 3,895 Ferrous Ammonium Sulphate  102 
Orthophosphoric Acid  117 
2016-17 
Ammonium persulphate  6,000 
5,013 4,947 Ferrous Ammonium Sulphate 140 
Orthophosphoric Acid  66 
2017-18 
Ammonium persulphate  3,000 
5,460 5,427 Ferrous Ammonium Sulphate  38 
Orthophosphoric Acid  33 
2018-19 
Ammonium persulphate  4,500 
5,111 5,078 Ferrous Ammonium Sulphate  64 
Orthophosphoric Acid  33 
2019-20 
Ammonium persulphate  4,000 
4,588 4,524 Ferrous Ammonium Sulphate  64 
Orthophosphoric Acid  117 
2020-21 
Ammonium persulphate  1,500 
3,024 2,998 Ferrous Ammonium Sulphate  26 
Orthophosphoric Acid  50 
2021-22 
Ammonium persulphate  1,500 
4,484 4,471 Ferrous Ammonium Sulphate  13 
Orthophosphoric Acid  33 
  Total 31,677 31,340 
Source: Compiled from the records of DDCA, Jajpur Road 
Analysis of samples, without the required chemicals being in stock, posed 
serious questions over the validity of the analysis reports and there was a risk 
that the analysis reports had been issued without actual testing of samples. 
In reply, the Government stated (September 2023) that, the system is that if the 
stock is exhausted from the store , it does not mean that particular chemical is 
not available in the Laboratory. So, the question of analysis of samples without 
chemicals does not arise but it involves a complete cyclic process.  

Chapter VI: Internal Controls and Monitoring 
77 
The reply of the Government is not acceptable as when Government 
Laboratory’s own records depict ‘nil’ stock, then without the required 
chemicals in stock, there is no possibility of analysis of ore samples. 
Therefore, the validity of the analysis reports cannot be assured. 
 
6.2.2 Use of chemicals received from lessees 
In DDCA, Joda, it was found that during FY 2016 -17, some stock of required 
chemicals, viz. hydrochloric acid (2.5 litres), mercuric chloride (250 gram), 
orthophosphoric acid (10 x 5 litres), had been received from a lessee and had 
been used for analysis of iron ore samples of the same lessee. This was 
improper and constituted a conflict of interest. 
Accepting the audit observation, in reply, the Government stated (September 
2023) that, only one case in last five years, some chemicals which were not 
available at that time in the local market, has been brought from the lessee to 
maintain the analytical process of iron samples and this process has not been 
repeated again. 
6.2.3 Shortage of technical staff related to analysis of samples 
It was noticed that there were vacancies, extending up to 100 per cent, in 
respect of different technical posts, such as Analytical Chemist, Assistant 
Chemist, Junior Chemist, Lab Technician, Sampling Supervisor and Sampler, 
required for analysis of samples, in the Government Laboratories at Joda and 
Jajpur, as detailed in Table 6.3. 
Table 6.3: Shortage of staff in Government Laboratories, during FYs  
2015-16 to 2021-22 
Financial  
Year 
Post Government Laboratory, Joda Government Laboratory, Jajpur Road  
Sanctioned 
strength 
Persons 
in 
position 
Shortage Percentage 
of shortage 
Sanctioned 
strength 
Persons 
in 
position 
Shortage Percentage of 
shortage 
2015-16 
Analytical 
Chemist 
1 1 0 0 1 0 1 100 
Asst. Chemist 3 1 2 67 7 2 5 71 
Sr. Lab Assistant 4 2 2 50 3 3 0 0 
Sampler 8 3 5 63 3 2 1 33 
2016-17 
Analytical 
Chemist 
1 1 0 0 1 0 1 100 
Asst. Chemist 3 1 2 67 7 2 5 71 
Sr. Lab Assistant 4 2 2 50 3 2 1 33 
Sampler 8 3 5 63 3 2 1 33 
2017-18 
Analytical 
Chemist 
1 1 0 0 1 0 1 100 
Asst. Chemist 3 1 2 67 7 2 5 71 
Sr. Lab Assistant 4 2 2 50 3 2 1 33 
Sampler 8 3 5 63 3 2 1 33 
2018-19 
Analytical 
Chemist 
1 1 0 0 2 1 1 50 
Asst. Chemist 3 1 2 67 4 0 4 100 
Sr. Lab Assistant 4 2 2 50 2 2 0 0 

Performance Audit of Systems and Controls in Assessment and Collection of Revenue from 
Major Minerals for the year ended March 2022 
78 
Financial  
Year 
Post Government Laboratory, Joda Government Laboratory, Jajpur Road  
Sanctioned 
strength 
Persons 
in 
position 
Shortage Percentage 
of shortage 
Sanctioned 
strength 
Persons 
in 
position 
Shortage Percentage of 
shortage 
Sampler 8 3 5 63 3 1 2 67 
2019-20 
Analytical 
Chemist 
1 1 0 0 2 1 1 50 
Asst. Chemist 3 1 2 67 4 0 4 100 
Sr. Lab Assistant 4 2 2 50 0 0 0 0 
Sampler 8 3 5 63 2 2 0 0 
2020-21 
Analytical 
Chemist 
3 0 3 100 2 1 1 50 
Asst. Chemist 6 0 6 100 4 0 4 100 
Sampler 7 2 5 71 3 1 2 67 
2021-22 
Analytical 
Chemist 
3 0 3 100 2 0 2 100 
Asst. Chemist 6 1 5 83 4 1 3 75 
Sr. Lab Assistant 4 2 2 50 0 0 0 0 
Sampler 7 2 5 71 2 1 1 50 
Jr. Chemist 3 1 2 67 2 1 1 50 
Source: Compiled from the records of DDCA Jajpur Road and Joda. 
Analytical Chemist is required to check 10 per cent of the analysed samples of 
the Assistant Chemists and Senior Laboratory Assistants of the office. 
However, there was no Analytical Chemist in Joda Laboratory for two years 
during the years 2020-22. Similarly, in Jajpur Road laboratory , shortage of the 
Analytical Chemist during the years 2015 -16, 2016-17, 2017-18 2019-20 and 
2021-22 was 100 per cent.  
Assistant Chemist is assigned with the duties of analysis of Ores and Minerals 
as per IBM guidelines. In Joda Laboratory, the analysis of minerals, was 
carried out for five years, during 2015-20, by one out of three sanctioned posts 
of Assistant Chemist and there was no Assistant Chemist in 2020 -21. 
Similarly, in Jajpur Road Laboratory, there was shortage ranging up to 71 per 
cent during 2015-18 and functioning without any Assistant Chemist for three 
years i.e. 2018-21. 
Junior Chemist is responsible for preparation of Solutions, assisting the 
Assistant Chemists in day to day analysis work. It was noticed that during 
2021-22, the shortage of Junior Chemist in Joda and Jajpur Road laboratories 
was 67 and 50 per cent respectively.  
It is evident that such large vacancies would have adversely impacted the 
performance and reliability of these laboratories, in the analysis of samples. 
Accepting the audit observation, in reply, the Government stated (September 
2023) that, the existing laboratory personnel are working overtime to clear the 
sampling and analysis as this is essential to collect Government revenue in 
time. Even in many cases the technical staff worked in the laboratory till late 
hours to avoid the pendency. Simultaneously, correspondence has been 
regularly being made with the higher authorities to resolve the situations. 
 

Chapter VI: Internal Controls and Monitoring 
79 
6.2.4 Discrepancies between the analysis reports of Government 
laboratories 
Rule 10 (7) of OMPTS Rules, 2007 effective prior to 16 April 2021 65, laid 
down that, in case the Senior Inspector of Mines (SIM) felt that the grade of 
stacked mineral was different from the grade mentioned in the analysis report, 
the SIM would draw joint samples from the said stacks, in the presence of the 
lessee or his authorized representative. The sample, so collected, would be 
prepared and divided into three parts and sealed with the joint signatures of the 
lessee or his authorized representative. The first part would be sent to the 
government laboratory for analysis, the second part would be handed over to 
the lessee, and the third part would be deposited with the Mining Officer/ 
DDM, as the umpire sample, to be used for final analysis in the government 
laboratory, in case the report from the first part of the sample was challenged 
by lessee. Further, the analysis results from the government laboratory would 
be considered as final.  
Scrutiny of records, relating to analysis of the grade of minerals, revealed the 
following:–  
i. In Deputy Director (Chemical Analysis) (DDCA), Jajpur Road, the 
results of 107 samples 66 of chromite, analysed by the DDCA, during 
November 2020 to September 2021, had been challenged by the 
lessee67 of two mines. The umpire samples had been sent for analysis 
to the Joint Director (Chemical Analysis) Research Laboratory 
(JDCA), Bhubaneswar. Cross-checking of the umpire sample analysis 
reports, issued by JDCA, Bhubaneswar, with the first analysis reports 
issued by DDCA Jajpur Road, revealed that, in all 107 cases, there 
had been discrepancies (both upwards and downwards), ranging from 
(-) 18.74 per cent Cr2O3 to (+) 12.44 per cent Cr2O3, between the 
mineral content shown by the two government laboratory reports. 
There was not even a single case, across the 107 challanged samples, 
where the results of both government laboratories had matched. 
ii. In DDCA, Joda, the results of 80 samples 68 of iron -ore, of two 
lessees69, analysed by the DDCA, during September 2020 to March 
2021, had been challenged by the lessees. The umpire samples had 
been analysed, by DDCA, Joda, in December 2021. Cross-checking of 
the umpire sample analysis reports, with the first analysis reports, 
revealed that, in all 80 cases, there had been discrepancies (both 
upwards and downwards), ranging from  (-) 5.52 per cent Fe to (+) 
06.02 per cent Fe between the mineral content shown by the two 
government laboratory reports. There was not even a single case 
 
65  Odisha Minerals (Prevention of Theft and Smuggling) Rules 2007 were amended w.e.f. 
16 April 2021 
66  Out of 7,508 samples (1.43 per cent) relating to 2020-22 
67  M/s Tata Steel Mining Limited (TSML) of Sukinda and M/s Saruabil Chromite Mines 
68  Out of 4,976 samples (0.16 per cent) relating to 2020-21 
69  M/s Kashvi International of Jaribahal Iron ores and M/s Tarini Minerals of Deojhar Iron 
ore Mines 

Performance Audit of Systems and Controls in Assessment and Collection of Revenue from 
Major Minerals for the year ended March 2022 
80 
where the results of the two sets of samples, tested in the same 
government laboratory, had matched.  
The above findings raised serious questions on the accuracy and reliability of 
the analysis reports being issued by the government laboratories. As the results 
of analysis of the initial and umpire samples were different in all cases, this 
indicated lack of robustness in the system of testing and analysis of samples. 
Accepting the audit observation, in reply, the Government stated ( September 
2023) that , the accuracy and reliability of analysis report of the sample 
packets issued to the analyst has been properly maintained but since the 
homogeneity of different packets has not been maintained during the drawal 
process which reflects the difference in analysis reports. Recently, there has 
been a proposal to introduce robotic labs to minimize human interaction, thus 
reducing the level of erroneous analysis.  
6.3 Issuance of Transit Pass (e-Pass) 
As per Rule 10(A) of OMPTS (Amended) Rules, 2015, every mineral 
carrying vehicle (MCV) requires a transit pass, for removal of mineral from 
lease area. The i3MS portal generates an e -Pass for every MCV. Every 
e-Pass is uniquely bar -coded and contains specific details of the MCV 
concerned. The e -pass is to be scanned and verified at check gates, railway 
sidings etc. An e-Pass can be printed, only by the lessee/ licensee 70 who has 
been issued an e -permit for the total quantity of stacked mineral, proposed 
to be despatched from the mining lease area, which is regulated in i3MS 
module on the basis of individual login ID and password.  
As per amended Rule 45 of the Mineral Conservation & Development 
Rules (MCDR), all State Governments have to register mineral carrying 
vehicles. The Directorate of Mines is required to facilitate online 
registration of truck owners and their vehicles, for electronic verification with 
the Transport department database, to check whether the concerned road 
permits, details of payment of road tax and fitness validity, are available or 
not.  
Audit conducted scrutiny of i3MS data, for four circles 71, for the financial 
years 2015 -22, in regard to the issuance of e -Passes. Findings are discussed 
below. 
i. Issuance of e -Passes to mineral carrying vehicles not registered on 
i3MS 
During 2015 -22, a total of 4,78,38,521 e-passes had been generated by 
lessees/ licensees, under the four mining circles. It was, however, observed 
that 37,958 e-passes had been generated for MCVs not registered on the i3MS 
portal, as detailed in Table 6.4.  
 
70  Lessees: Lease holder of the mine Licensee s: Licensed by DoM for trading, transporting 
and storing of mined minerals 
71   DDM, Joda, DDM, Koira, DDM, Jajpur Road; and DDM, Talcher 

Chapter VI: Internal Controls and Monitoring 
81 
Table 6.4: E-passes generated by lessees/ licensees, for vehicles not 
registered on i3MS, during 2015-22 
Financial 
Year 
No. of Passes Generated by Lessee/ licensees Total Registered Vehicle Unregistered Vehicle 
2015-16 28,07,867 13,102 28,20,969 
2016-17 81,30,999 4,961 81,35,960 
2017-18 80,88,613 6,645 80,95,258 
2018-19 77,42,523 3,362 77,45,885 
2019-20 82,77,356 2,260 82,79,616 
2020-21 65,83,114 1,369 65,84,483 
2021-22 61,70,091 6,259 61,76,350 
Total 4,78,00,563 37,958 4,78,38,521 
Source: Information obtained from the i3MS portal 
This indicated a lack of validation controls, in the i3MS software, for 
ensuring that e -passes were issued only for vehicles registered on i3MS.  
Transportation of minerals through unregistered vehicles may facilitate the 
illegal transportation of unaccounted/  stolen/ unauthorisedly mined 
minerals, as the origin and destination of such minerals cannot be tracked 
through i3MS tracking module . 
In reply, the Government stated (September 2023) that , the DDM, Jajpur Road 
has reported that he has imposed penalty amount of ₹3.40 lakh against the 27 
erring licensees who have used un -registered vehicle in  i3MS portal for 
transportation of minerals. Out of 27, 26 licensees have deposited the penalty 
amount of ₹3.15 lakh. 
ii. Issuance of e -Passes to non - mineral carrying vehicles  
Out of the 37,958 e-passes generated for the vehicles not registered on 
i3MS, Audit cross -checked the vehicle details in regard to 23,266 e -Passes, 
generated by the licensees, with the VAHAN database of the Transport 
department. It was noticed, in this regard, that 3,697 (16 per cent) e-passes 
were for vehicles that had been registered on the three-wheelers etc., which 
could not be mineral carrying vehicles.  Details in this regard are shown in 
Table 6.5. 
Table 6.5: Vehicles other than MCVs, for which e-Passes had been issued 
during 2015-22 
 Mineral No. of e-Passes generated 
by licensees, for 
unregistered vehicles 
No. of e-passes 
where vehicles 
found to be other 
than MCVs  
Quantity of minerals shown 
having been transported on 
vehicles other than MCVs (in 
MT) 
Coal 17,048 2,915 53,828.25 
Dolomite 486 200 4,449.11 
Gypsum  62 13 284.50 
Limestone  935 102 1,839.48 

Performance Audit of Systems and Controls in Assessment and Collection of Revenue from 
Major Minerals for the year ended March 2022 
82 
 Mineral No. of e-Passes generated 
by licensees, for 
unregistered vehicles 
No. of e-passes 
where vehicles 
found to be other 
than MCVs  
Quantity of minerals shown 
having been transported on 
vehicles other than MCVs (in 
MT) 
Pyroxenite 172 112 1,130.10 
Quartzite 1,538 67 1,499.66 
Bentonite 49 16 255.66 
Chromite 224 10 228.10 
Bauxite 940 11 239.08 
Magnesite 397 7 137.79 
Manganese 2 2 36.21 
Iron Ore 1,371 242 3,343.88 
Dunite 42 0 0.00 
Total 23,266 3,697 67,271.82 
Source: Information obtained from the i3MS portal and VAHAN database  
As actual transportation of minerals, weighing 67,271.82 MT, using 
motorcycles/ cars/ three -wheelers, was not practicable, this indicated either 
incorrect entries or deliberate falsification of vehicle numbers, at the time of 
generation of e -Passes. The matter merits investigation, in order to establish 
the underlying causes and take remedial measures. 
In reply, the Government stated ( September 2023) that, the DDM, Koira has 
issued show cause notice to concerned licensees for engaging un­registered 
vehicles for  transport of  minerals during  financial year 2015 -16 to 2019 -20. 
Further, only i3MS registered vehicles are being engaged for transportation of 
minerals.  
However, the fact remains that there were instances of issue of e -passes to the 
unregistered vehicles of four circles and the compliance is furnished only on 
two circles. Moreover, Audit pointed out 37,958 unregistered vehicles for 
carrying minerals, whereas Government had taken action against 27 licences 
only. This clearly indicate lack of monitoring of unregistered vehicles for 
carrying minerals and possibility of illegal transportation of unaccounted/ 
stolen minerals cannot be ruled out. 
6.4  Functioning of check gates/ weighbridges 
Under Section 11 of the OMPTS Rules, 2007, check posts, barriers and 
weighbridges, are established to check transport and storage, of minerals 
raised with lawful authority, as also to check the quality and quantity of 
minerals transported from leasehold areas. All MCVs will normally pass 
through checkpost/(s) or checkpost -cum-weighbridge/(s) of the department, or 
other weighbridge/(s) installed in leasehold areas, plants or factory premises, 
approved by the Director of Mines. Government is to engage checkin g staff to 
supervise such weighments.  
The lessees/  licensees are required to print the transit passes/ permits, 
generated through the i3MS software, which are, then, to be carried by all 

Chapter VI: Internal Controls and Monitoring 
83 
MCVs. All MCVs are required to carry two copies of the transit passes/ 
permits, and stop at the check -posts/ weighbridges where the quantity and 
quality of the minerals is to be verified by Government checking staff. MCVs 
can proceed only after being cleared at the check -posts. At the check -gates/ 
weighbridges, the barcodes on these e -passes are to be scanned by the 
Government checking staff, using barcode scanners and also to be validated 
online, through the i3MS central server.  
As per the business process of check gate automation in the solution 
architecture of the i3MS, each check -gate is required to have a weighbridge, 
computer, printer and internet connectivity (to access the i3MS central server), 
as well as two computer operators, for e-pass verification.  
Analysis of records and data on check gates, in the i3MS portal, for 2017 -22, 
and joint physical verification (by Audit, with officers in -charge of check 
gates), in respect of four check gates, under the Joda circle 72 and six check 
gates under the Koira circle73, revealed the following: 
i. Missing MCVs  
Data from the i3MS software showed that a total of 1,18,44,864 e-passes 
had been generated, for MCVs routing through these 10 check gates. 
However, it was found that only 1,01,65,644 MCVs had actually been 
recorded as “checked” at these check gates. There was no record for the 
remaining 16,79,220 e-passes for MCVs (14 per cent) and there were risks 
that: (i) these MCVs had been routed through different routes, bypassing 
the check gates (ii) allowed to pass through the designated check -gates 
without any checking/ verification or (iii) had been physically checked but 
not recorded on the i3MS software, due to system issues etc. Details in 
this regard are shown in Table 6.6. 
Table 6.6: MCVs routed through the test -checked check gates, during FY 
2017-18 to 2021-22 
Financial 
Year 
DDM, Joda Circle DDM, Koira Circle 
No. of e-passes for Vehicles 
Routed Checked Not Checked Routed Checked Not Checked 
2017-18 4,69,569 4,69,517 52 18,47,164 15,13,584 3,33,580 
2018-19 8,79,092 8,78,408 684 16,16,529 13,92,462 2,24,067 
2019-20 10,33,915 10,30,596 3,319 15,75,494 13,04,303 2,71,191 
2020-21 5,72,392 5,45,922 26,470 16,37,802 11,56,013 4,81,789 
2021-22 7,04,868 6,91,009 13,859 15,08,039 11,83,830 3,24,209 
Total 36,59,836 36,15,452 44,384 81,85,028 65,50,192 16,34,836 
Source: Information obtained from the i3MS portal 
Non-checking of 16,79,220 e-passes generated for MCVs resulted in 
absence of end to end tracking of transportation of a minimum of 1.48 
 
72  Joda Circle – Gandarpada, Lahanda, Nayagarh and Nalda 
73  Koira Circle – Barsuan, Jamdihi, Koleiposh, Kolmong, Langaleswar and Malda 

Performance Audit of Systems and Controls in Assessment and Collection of Revenue from 
Major Minerals for the year ended March 2022 
84 
crore MT of iron ore  (by taking into account 8.83 MT per MCV, the 
minimum quantity of minerals carried by the test checked MCVs during 
the audit period) valuing atleast ` 1,473.26 crore (calculated by taking the 
average ASP of five years in respect of lowest grade of iron-ore i.e. below 
55% fines).  In the absence of end to end tracking of these e passes, the 
risk of excess extraction and transportation of minerals in violation of 
existing regulatory framework could not be completely ruled out. 
ii. Short-deployment of staff at check-gates  
Joint physical inspections (JPIs) of ten check gates under the Joda and 
Koira circles were conducted by Audit along with officials of department 
during September 2022.  
JPI of the check-gates revealed that adequate staff had not been deployed 
for checking of MCVs.  
a. As per solution architecture of i3MS there is provision of posting of 
two computer operators at each checkgates. However, in JPI , it was 
observed that in each of the four checkgates of the Joda circle, only 
one regular check  gate clerk had been posted. Moreover, other  
support staff were deputed by OMC, a State PSU and a lessee.  
b. Out of the six check  gates of the Koira circle, in two check gates 
(Jamdihi and Koleiposh ) neither check gate clerk nor computer 
operator were posted. Two staff from OMC had been posted,  at each 
check gate.  
As check gates are operational for all  24 hours each day, a minimum of 
three persons are required to be deployed, on rotation basis  (8-hour 
shifts), at each check gate . It is evident that 24 X7 checking was not 
possible by staff posted at these check gates, which implied that, for some 
periods (particularly during the night), the check gates would have 
remained closed, causing MCVs to either wait for long hours until they 
reopened, or to pass through without checking. 
In this regard, it is pertinent to mention that the shortage of manpower had 
been highlighted in Para No. 6.2.13.1 of the Report (No.4 of 2014) of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India , on Government of Odisha, for 
the year ended March 2013 . However, the issue still remained 
unaddressed, even after nine years.  
iii. Lack of internet connectivity at the check-gates 
JPI of the above ten check -gates revealed that , two check gates 74 of the 
Joda circle and two check gates 75 of the Koira circle, had been operating 
without internet connectivity. Due to non-availability of internet facility in 
these four check gates, checking and updating of e-passes/ permits, in the 
i3MS software, could not be done. During 2017-22, a total of 62,14,409 e-
 
74  Nalda and Nayagarh 
75  Barsuan and Jamdihi 

Chapter VI: Internal Controls and Monitoring 
85 
passes for MCVs had been routed through these four check gates , for 
which the transit passes could only be physically checked at the check -
gates, without any cross-verification/ validation on i3MS. 
iv. Non-availability of barcode scanners  
In six out of the ten test-checked check gates, viz. two check gates76 of the 
Joda circle and four check gates 77 of the Koira circle, barcode scanners 
had not been provided. Due to non -availability of barcode scanners, 
63,10,355 e -pass transit permits for MCVs could not be scanned and 
automatically verified on the i3MS software, and instead only physical 
checking of the e-pass could be done by the check-gate staff. 
v. Non-installation of weighbridges  
Out of the 10 cross -checked check gates, four check  gates of the Koira 
circle (Barsuan, Jamdihi, Kolmong and Malda) had been  functioning 
without any weighbridges. Due to non -availability of weighbridges at the 
check gates, the actual weight s of the minerals transported , as per the 
transit passes, were not being cross -checked, and only the validity of the 
passes and vehicle numbers were being verified on i3MS, after which the 
MCVs were being designated as “checked”. In such a scenario, 
transportation of excess quantities of minerals could not be ruled out. 
vi. Non-working of weighbridge  
In one check  gate (Lahanda) of the Joda Circle, the weighbridge of the 
check-gate had not been in working condition from February 2020 to June 
2022, due to which the actual weight of the minerals transported could not 
be verified. However, i3MS data showed that 3,44,589 e-passes for MCVs 
had been “checked” during this breakdown period. This established that 
the i3MS software had been designating MCVs as “checked”, as soon as 
the barcode was scanned, without capture and cross -verification of the 
actual weight of minerals transported against the weights shown in the e -
passes. 
vii. Non-accessibility to weighbridges  
The approach roads, to the weighbridges of two check gates78 were not in 
a motorable condition. Due to this, MCVs were unable to access the 
weighbridge for weighment. The MCVs were being passed at the check 
gates only on the basis of verification of the validity of  the passes and 
vehicle number s on i3MS, without verification of the weight s of the 
minerals recorded in the transit permits. 
 
76  Gandarpada and Lahanda 
77  Barsuan, Jamdihi, Kolmong and Malda 
78  Lahanda checkgate in the Joda Circle and Jamdihi checkgate in the Koira Circle  

Performance Audit of Systems and Controls in Assessment and Collection of Revenue from 
Major Minerals for the year ended March 2022 
86 
Photograph No . 1: Non availability of 
approach road at Lahanda Checkgate 
 
Photograph No . 2: Non availability of 
approach road at Jamdihi Checkgate 
 
 
 
Further, the MCVs had to perforce stand on the main roads / national 
highways, causing congestion around the check-gate area.  
In reply, the Government stated ( September 2023) that, during the financial 
year 2022-23, the Department has converted the existing weighbridges  like 
Lahanda, Gandalpada and Nayagarh under Joda mining circle as unmanned 
weighbridges. The weighbridges were equipped with boom barrier, traffic 
lights, camera, displays,  RFID readers etc. The weighbridge is fully 
automatic, and no manpower will be required. Currently the same is 
managed using handheld Barcode scanner.  The Department is planning to 
mandate the FASTag in all the MCVs in the State , as they are plying on the 
National Highways. The Government has already decided to establish 
existing weighbridges and upcoming weighbridges in Koira, Jajpur and 
Keonjhar mining circle during the financial year 2023 -24 and 2024-25. 
After establishment of same, the weighbridges would be independent 
without human interference.  
The Government reply is silent about the deficiencies at check gates/ 
weighbridges pointed out by Audit. T he Government reply is also futuristic 
assurance and subject to actual implementation. 
 
6.5 Inspections 
 
 
6.5.1 Inadequate number of raids by the State Level Enforcement 
Squad 
The State Level Enforcement Squad (SLES), comprising personnel from the 
Police, Forest and Mining Departments, was constituted (May 2007), by the 
State Government, for the purpose of checking illegal mining activities. As per 
the instructions (April 2011) of the S&M Department, each team of SLES was 
required to inspect/ raid 30 to 35 lessees and licensees, per month. The squad 
was also required to check transportation of minerals en -route, as well as to 
conduct raids on free -hold areas (areas for which mini ng lease had not been 
granted) that were prone to illegal mining activities. The squad was not to be 


Chapter VI: Internal Controls and Monitoring 
87 
kept idle at headquarters and the summary of the activities of SLES was to be 
submitted, on a monthly basis, to the S&M Department. 
Scrutiny of records of raids/ inspections, conducted by the three SLES teams, 
for 2015-22, revealed the following –  
i. Only 265 inspections/ raids had been  conducted during 2015 -22, by 
these three teams, against the target of 2,520 to 2,940 inspections/ raids. 
Thus, these achievement was only 9.01 to 10. 52 per cent of the 
prescribed target.  
ii. Monthly reports , containing summar ies of the activities of the SLES, 
were clubbed into 52 reports and submitted with delay s ranging up to 
188 days after the scheduled date s. In four cases, consolidated reports 
for multiple months had been submitted, instead of monthly reports. 
iii. Only 125 raids had been  conducted on free -hold areas 79, during the 
period 2015 -22, and no such raid s had been  conducted during FY  
2021-22. 
iv. Over the 84 -month period during 2015 -22, in violation of Government 
instructions, the SLES teams were kept idle at headquarters , without any 
raids having been conducted,  for periods totalling 44 months 80 (52 
per cent of the total period).   
The inadequate raids/ inspections, of lessees, traders and free -hold areas prone 
to illegal mining etc., defeated the purpose of formation of the SLES and 
indicated that the State Government was not carrying out adequate monitoring, 
to protect its mineral resources from unauthorised activity.  
In reply, the Government stated (September 2023) that no target is fixed by 
Government for SLES  Team, so, SLES Team moves  as and when there is 
some allegation/ complaint or any irregularities noticed in  mining activities. 
There were three SLES Teams. In addition to the field visits for inspection, the 
SLES team members are to perform additional duties, also. Visit to a mine and 
verifying the field activities and books of account took longer time as the 
locations are far from headquarters  and due to voluminous books of account 
and records. The number of inspections/raids might appear to be less in 
number, but maintaining the qualitative aspect of the raid was the main 
objective due to which  large sum of penalty amount was collected and as a 
long term result of this verification this Department was able to achieve a 
record amount of revenue  during 2021 -22. For intensive SLES activities,  
 
79     Mineral Bearing Areas not leased out 
80   Team I - May, November  and December 2016, April 2020 to May 202 1, August 2021 , 
Oct 2021 to March 2022 Team II - October, November 2017, October 2018, January and 
March 2020, April 2020 to May 2020, July 2020 to August 2020, Dec 2020 to Feb 2021, 
May 2021 to June 2021, Aug 2021 to Dec 2021, Feb 2021 to March 2021 Team III  - 
October, November 2017, January, May, June, September 2018, December 2019, January, 
February  and March 2020, April 2021 to July 2021, September 2021, January 2021 to 
Dec 2022, Feb 2022 to March 2022 

Performance Audit of Systems and Controls in Assessment and Collection of Revenue from 
Major Minerals for the year ended March 2022 
88 
steps are being taken  for recruitment of more staff. Further, during Covid 
period, the SLES team could not move to mines area to conduct raid.  
The reply is not acceptable, as the teams had been sitting idle for 44 months, 
i.e. 52 per cent of the total period of 84 months, at headquarters, in 
contravention of Government instructions . Therefore, the objective behind 
constitution of the SLES, to check illegal mining activities was not achieved. 
6.5.2 Inadequate inspection of mines 
Section 24 (1) of the MMDR Act, 1957, empowers mining authorities to 
conduct inspection of mines. As per the instructions of DoM (July 1987), 
DDMs/ MOs are required to inspect all working mines leases at least once in 
six months, non-working mines leases once in a year, and large mines at least 
once in each quarter. Inspection reports are required to be submitted to the 
Directorate by 15th of the month following the month of inspection. 
Scrutiny of records, of inspections, in the five test -checked mining circles, 
revealed that there had been shortfalls in inspection of working and non -
working mines, during the period 2015 -22, varying from 73.96 to 100 
per cent, as shown in Table 6.7.  
Table 6.7: Shortfall in inspections during 2015-22 
Circle Number of 
Percentage 
of shortfall 
Number of 
Percentage 
of shortfall 
Working 
Mines 
Inspections Non-working 
Mines 
Inspections 
Due Carried 
out 
Due Carried 
out 
Jajpur Road 12 168 11 93.45 4 28 0 100 
Talcher 12 120 0 100 9 45 0 100 
Koira 31 434 53 87.78 45 315 82 73.96 
Joda 27 378 0 100 40 280 0 100 
Berhampur 16 160 10 93.75 22 110 7 93.63 
Total 98 1,260 74  120 778 89  
Source: Information provided by the DDM offices 
These shortfalls, in the inspection of mines, implied that the department was 
not carrying out adequate monitoring, to protect its mineral resources from 
unauthorised activities.  
Upon the aforementioned facts being pointed out by Audit, DDM, Koira, 
stated (September 2022) that periodic inspection of mines was being 
conducted by the SLES and joint inspection with IBM officials was also being 
conducted. The fact remained, however, that the percentage of inspections, by 
DDMs/ MOs, in the areas under their direct jurisdictions was very low. 
The issue of shortfall in inspections of mines had also been highlighted in Para 
No. 6.2.13.2 of the Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India, on 
the Government of Odisha, for the year ended March 2013. However, the issue 
still remained unaddressed, even after the passage of nine years. 
Accepting the audit observation, in reply, the Government stated ( September 
2023) that, as per guidelines, inspection of mines (working and non-working) 
is being conducted.  However, instruction in the audit  observation will be  
followed and copy  of inspection  report will be kept in the lease files 
henceforth. 

Chapter VI: Internal Controls and Monitoring 
89 
 
 
 
 
Recommendations: 
Government should: 
13. investigate the cases of unchecked e-passes generated for the 
MCVs and revamp the existing mechanism to ensure control 
over unchecked passes for end to end monitoring of movement 
of mineral resources.   
14. ensure deployment of adequate personnel at the checkgates, 
weighbridges and laboratories, as also availability of the 
required equipment for smooth functioning of the check gates/ 
weighbridges and Government laboratories. 
15. ensure carrying out required quantum of inspections/ raids by 
the SLES, as well as inspection of mines by the DD sM, for 
adequate monitoring of mining activities and for protecting its 
mineral resources from unauthorised activities. 
Bhubaneswar 
The 21 July 2024 
(VISHWANATH SINGH JADON) 
Accountant General (Audit-II), Odisha 
 
                                           Countersigned 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
New Delhi 
The 25 July 2024 
(GIRISH CHANDRA MURMU) 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 

 
 
 
 
 
Appendices  
 

 
91 
Appendix-I 
(Refer paragraph- 3.2.1(i) at page 26) 
Short levy of royalty and premium due to reporting of lower grades of iron ore – Jajang iron ore mine  
(Quantity in MT and amount in ₹) 
Type of 
Ore 
Name of  
the mines 
Name of the 
old lessee 
Financial 
Year 
Total 
Average 
production 
Grade wise Production  Name of the 
Auctioned 
lessee 
Premium  
Rate 
Financial 
Year 
Total  
production 
Grade-wise estimated production based on percentage of old lessee and royalty leviable  
Above  
65 (%) 
62-65  
(%) 
60-62  
(%) 
58-60 
(%) 
55-58  
(%) 
Below  
55 (%) 
Above 
 65 
(%) 
Average 
ASP 
Royalty  
leviable 
Premium  
leviable  
62-65  
(%) 
Average 
sale 
price 
Royalty leviable Premium leviable  
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) (14) (15) (16) (17) (18) (19) (20) (21) (22) (23) 
Lumps 
Jajang Rungta mines 
2014-20 26,90,105 0.03 72.03 4.95 21.63 0.04 1.32 
JSW  
110% 2020-21 12,97,520 389 5,438 3,17,523 23,28,499 9,34,604 4,835 67,78,05,725 4,97,05,75,315 
110% 2021-22 26,65,436 800 9,838 11,79,955 86,53,005 19,19,914 8,612 2,48,02,64,320 18,18,86,05,010 
Fines 2014-20 79,24,907 0.00 42.40 40.37 0.00 16.60 0.64 
110% 2020-21 48,58,860 0 3,838 0 0 20,60,157 3,601 1,11,27,24,937 8,15,99,82,873 
110% 2021-22 95,33,897 0 6,753 0 0 40,42,372 6,389 3,87,42,09,639 28,41,08,70,687 
 
Grade-wise estimated production based on percentage of old lessee and royalty leviable  
60-62 
(%) 
Averag
e ASP 
Royalty 
leviable 
Premium 
leviable 
58-60 
(%) 
Average 
ASP 
Royalty 
leviable 
Premium 
leviable 
55-58 
(%) 
Averag
e 
ASP 
Royalty 
leviable 
Premium 
leviable 
Below 
55 (%) 
Average 
ASP 
Royalty 
leviable 
Premium 
leviable 
Total 
royalty 
Total 
premium 
Royalty and 
premium 
(24) (25) (26) (27) (28) (29) (30) (31) (32) (33) (34) (35) (36) (37) (38) (39) (40) (41) (42) 
64,227 4,187 4,03,41,129 29,58,34,949 2,80,654 3,370 14,18,56,350 1,04,02,79,900 519 3,167 2,46,572 18,08,195 17,127 2,201 56,53,424 4,14,58,446 86,62,20,723 6,35,22,85,304 7,21,85,06,027 
1,31,939 7,366 14,57,79,492 1,06,90,49,606 5,76,534 6,047 52,29,37,783 3,83,48,77,074 1,066 5,279 8,44,170 61,90,582 35,184 3,522 1,85,87,578 13,63,08,904 3,16,95,93,297 23,24,36,84,180 26,41,32,77,477 
19,61,522 3,195 94,00,92,006 6,89,40,08,044 0 2,871 0 0 8,06,571 2,871 34,72,95,926 2,54,68,36,794 31,097 1,393 64,98,175 4,76,53,280 2,40,66,11,044 17,64,84,80,991 20,05,50,92,035 
38,48,834 5,156 2,97,69,28,937 21,83,08,12,205 0 4,306 0 0 15,82,627 3,861 91,66,37,719 6,72,20,09,938 61,017 1,964 1,79,79,404 13,18,48,965 7,78,57,55,699 57,09,55,41,795 64,88,12,97,494 
 
Year Royalty levied 
on Despatch 
Premium levied 
on Despatch 
Royalty and premium leviable against closing balance as on March 2022  
Above 
65 (%) 
ASP of Mar 
2022 
Royalty 
collectable 
Premium 
collectable 
62-65 
(%) 
ASP of Mar 
2022 
Royalty 
collectable 
Premium 
collectable 
60-62 
(%) 
ASP of Mar 
2022 
Royalty 
collectable 
Premium 
collectable 
(43) (44) (45) (46) (47) (48) (49) (50) (51) (52) (53) (54) (55) (56) (57) 
2020-21 51,29,07,176 3,76,13,19,292 0 8,695 0 0  0 8,341 0 0  0 7,193 0 0 
2021-22 66,96,73,271 4,91,09,37,318 0 8,695 0 0 0 8,341 0 0 47,275 7,193 5,10,07,868 37,40,57,701 
2020-21 1,89,53,22,001 13,89,90,28,004 0 5,974 0 0  0 5,215 0 0  0 4,523 0 0 
2021-22 5,50,18,04,121 40,34,65,63,553 0 5,974 0 0 0 5,215 0 0 15,813 4,523 1,07,28,364 7,86,74,668 
 
 
Royalty and premium leviable against closing balance as on March 2022  Short levy of 
royalty and 
premium 58-60 
(%) 
ASP of Mar 
2022 
Royalty 
collectable 
Premium 
collectable 
55-58 
(%) 
ASP of 
Mar 2022 
Royalty 
collectable 
Premium 
collectable 
Below 
55 (%) 
ASP of 
Mar 2022 
Royalty 
collectable 
Premium 
collectable 
Total 
royalty 
collectable 
Total premium 
collectable 
Royalty and 
premium 
collectable 
(58) (59) (60) (61) (62) (63) (64) (65) (66) (67) (68) (69) (70) (71) (72) (73) 
 0 5,780 0 0 0  4,389 0 0   3,763 0 0 51,29,07,176 3,76,13,19,292 4,27,42,26,468 2,94,42,79,559 
12,52,115 5,780 1,08,55,83,324 7,96,09,44,372 3,25,270 4,389 21,41,41,393 1,57,03,70,212 7,93,492 3,763 44,78,86,559 3,28,45,01,436 2,46,82,92,414 18,10,08,11,039 20,56,91,03,453 5,84,41,74,024 
 0 3,764 0 0  0 3,580 0 0   1,838 0 0 1,89,53,22,001 13,89,90,28,004 15,79,43,50,005 4,26,07,42,030 
2,16,175 3,764 12,20,52,534 89,50,51,914 3,40,383 3,580 18,27,85,403 1,34,04,26,285 2,95,867 1,838 8,15,70,623 59,81,84,568 5,89,89,41,044 43,25,89,00,988 49,15,78,42,032 15,72,34,55,462 
              Total 2877,26,51,075 
 
Royalty and Premium collectable against closing balance as of March 2022 has been calculated by taking into account the ASP of different grades of iron ore of March 2022 
  (Source: Annual production reported in i3MS and Average of ASP published by IBM) 

Performance Audit of Systems and Controls in Assessment and Collection of Revenue from Major Minerals for the year ended March 2022 
92 
Appendix-II 
(Refer paragraph- 3.2.1(ii) at page 28) 
Short levy of royalty and premium due to reporting of lower grades of iron ore – Roida-II iron ore mine  
(Quantity in MT and amount in ₹) 
Type of 
Ore 
Name of 
the mines 
Name of the 
old lessee Year 
Total 
Average 
production 
Grade wise Production Name of the 
Auctioned 
lessee 
Premium 
Rate Year Total 
production 
Grade-wise estimated production based on percentage of old lessee and royalty leviabl e 
Above 
65 (%) 
62-65 
(%) 
60-62 
(%) 
58-60 
(%) 
55-58 
(%) 
Below 
55 (%) 
Above 
65 (%) 
Average 
ASP 
Royalty 
leviable 
Premium 
leviable 
62-65 
(%) 
Average 
sale price Royalty leviable Premium 
leviable 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) (14) (15) (16) (17) (18) (19) (20) (21) (22) (23) 
Lumps 
Roida - II K.N. Ram and 
Co. 
2014-21 4,83,464  0.01 81.70 18.30 0.00 0.00 0 Narbheram 
Power and 
Steel 
90.90% 2020-21 1,36,310 14 6,145 12,564 76,140 1,11,365 5,637 9,41,67,792 57,06,56,818 
90.90% 2021-22 2,44,121 24 9,838 36,023 2,18,300 1,99,447 8,612 25,76,58,042 1,56,14,07,734 
Fines 2014-20     16,18,375  0.00 90.37 7.08 2.53 0.00 0.02 90.90% 2020-21 12,74,031 0 4,979 0 0 11,51,342 4,346 75,04,73,178 4,54,78,67,459 
90.90% 2021-22 21,16,051 0 6,753 0 0 19,12,275 6,389 1,83,27,24,533 11,10,63,10,669 
 
 Grade-wise estimated production based on percentage of old lessee and royalty leviable  
60-62 
(%) 
Average 
ASP 
Royalty 
leviable 
Premium 
leviable 
58-60 
(%) 
Average 
ASP 
Royalty 
leviable 
Premium 
leviable 
55-58 
(%) 
Average 
ASP 
Royalty 
leviable 
Premium 
leviable 
Below 
55 (%) 
Average 
ASP 
Royalty 
leviable 
Premium 
leviable 
Total 
royalty 
Total 
premium 
Royalty and 
premium 
(24) (25) (26) (27) (28) (29) (30) (31) (32) (33) (34) (35) (36) (37) (38) (39) (40) (41) (42) 
24,945 4,860 1,81,83,481 11,01,91,895 0 3,759 0 0 0 3,558 0 0 0 2,531 0 0 11,23,63,837 68,09,24,853 79,32,88,690 
44,674 7,366 4,93,60,485 29,91,24,538 0 6,047 0 0 0 5,279 0 0 0 3,522 0 0 30,70,54,550 1,86,07,50,573 2,16,78,05,123 
90,201 3,761 5,08,91,613 30,84,03,177 32,233 3,313 1,60,18,983 9,70,75,038 0 3,313 0 0 255 1,504 57,465 3,48,239 81,74,41,240 4,95,36,93,913 5,77,11,35,153 
1,49,816 5,156 11,58,77,369 70,22,16,857 53,536 4,306 3,45,76,951 20,95,36,324 0 3,861 0 0 423 1,964 1,24,704 7,55,707 1,98,33,03,557 12,01,88,19,556 14,00,21,23,113 
 
Year Royalty levied 
on Despatch 
Premium levied 
on Despatch 
Royalty and premium leviable against closing balance as on March 2022  
Above 
65 (%) 
ASP of Mar 
2022 
Royalty 
collectable 
Premium 
collectable 
62-65 
(%) 
ASP of Mar 
2022 
Royalty 
collectable 
Premium 
collectable 
60-62 
(%) 
ASP of Mar 
2022 
Royalty 
collectable 
Premium 
collectable 
(43) (44) (45) (46) (47) (48) (49) (50) (51) (52) (53) (54) (55) (56) (57) 
2020-21 11,65,00,612 70,59,93,729 0 8,695 0 0 0  8,341 0 0 0  7,193 0 0 
2021-22 14,51,34,228 87,95,13,558 0 8,695 0 0 3,401 8,341 42,55,261 2,57,86,883 80,972 7,193 8,73,65,203 52,94,33,132 
2020-21 14,41,342 87,34,534 0 5,974 0 0  0 5,215 0 0  0 4,523 0 0 
2021-22 1,31,84,85,055 7,99,00,21,658 0 5,974 0 0 10,60,440 5,215 82,95,29,307 5,02,69,47,602 3,56,425 4,523 24,18,16,290 1,46,54,06,715 
 
 
Royalty and premium leviable against closing balance as on March 2022  Total 
royalty 
collectable 
Total premium 
collectable 
Royalty and 
premium 
collectable 
Short levy of 
royalty and 
premium 
58-60 
(%) 
ASP of Mar 
2022 
Royalty 
collectable 
Premium 
collectable 
55-58 
(%) 
ASP of 
Mar 2022 
Royalty 
collectable 
Premium 
collectable 
Below 
55 (%) 
ASP of 
Mar 2022 
Royalty 
collectable 
Premium 
collectable 
(58) (59) (60) (61) (62) (63) (64) (65) (66) (67) (68) (69) (70) (71) (72) (73) 
0 5,780 0 0 0 4,389 0 0   3,763 0 0 11,65,00,612 70,59,93,729 82,24,94,341 -2,92,05,651 
17,607 5,780 1,52,65,434 9,25,08,528 1,870 4,389 12,30,851 74,58,958 0 3,763 0 0 25,32,50,978 1,53,47,01,060 1,78,79,52,038 37,98,53,085 
0 3,764 0 0 0 3,580 0 0   1,838 0 0 14,41,342 87,34,534 1,01,75,876 5,76,09,59,277 
1,58,817 3,764 8,96,68,118 54,33,88,797 1,14,103 3,580 6,12,73,139 37,13,15,220 11,900 1,838 32,80,750 1,98,81,345 2,54,40,52,658 15,41,69,61,337 17,96,10,13,995 -3,95,88,90,882 
              Total 2,15,27,15,829 
 
Royalty and Premium collectable against closing balance as of March 2022 has been calculated by taking into account the ASP of different grades of iron ore of March 2022 
  (Source: Annual production reported in i3MS and Average of ASP published by IBM) 
 

Appendices 
93 
 
Appendix-III 
(Refer paragraph - 3.2.1(iii) at page 31) 
Short levy of royalty and premium due to reporting of lower grades of iron ore – Thakurani iron ore mine  
(Quantity in MT and amount in ₹) 
Type of 
Ore 
Name of 
the mines 
Name of 
the old 
lessee 
Year 
Total 
Average 
production 
Grade wise Production Name of 
the 
Auctioned 
lessee 
Premium 
Rate Year Total 
production 
Grade-wise estimated production based on percentage of old lessee and royalty leviable 
Above 
65 (%) 
62-65 
(%) 
60-62 
(%) 
58-60 
(%) 
55-58 
(%) 
Below 
55 (%) 
Above 
65 (%) 
Average 
ASP 
Royalty 
leviable 
Premium 
leviable 
62-65 
(%) 
Average 
sale 
price 
Royalty leviable Premium 
leviable 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) (14) (15) (16) (17) (18) (19) (20) (21) (22) (23) 
Lumps 
Thakurani Keypee  
Entp 
2014-20 8,09,137 0.00 97.12 2.88 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Arcelor 
Mittal 
107.55% 2020-21 5,87,370 0 5,438 0 0 5,70,454 4,835 41,37,11,929 2,96,63,14,534 
107.55% 2021-22 11,33,910 0 9,838 0 0 11,01,253 8,612 1,42,26,67,646 10,20,05,27,025 
Fines 2014-20 33,91,507 0.00 99.16 0.08 0.76 0.00 0.00 107.55% 2020-21 30,39,796 0 3,838 0 0 30,14,262 3,601 1,62,80,53,150 11,67,31,41,085 
107.55% 2021-22 43,63,978 0 6,753 0 0 43,27,320 6,389 4,14,73,03,573 29,73,61,66,621 
 
 Grade-wise estimated production based on percentage of old lessee and royalty leviable  
60-62 
(%) 
Average 
ASP 
Royalty 
leviable 
Premium 
leviable 
58-60 
(%) 
Average 
ASP 
Royalty 
leviable 
Premium 
leviable 
55-58 
(%) 
Average 
ASP 
Royalty 
leviable 
Premium 
leviable 
Below 
55 (%) 
Average 
ASP 
Royalty 
leviable 
Premium 
leviable 
Total 
royalty 
Total 
premium 
Royalty and 
premium 
(24) (25) (26) (27) (28) (29) (30) (31) (32) (33) (34) (35) (36) (37) (38) (39) (40) (41) (42) 
16,916 4,187 1,06,25,097 7,61,81,944 0 3,370 0 0 0 3,167 0 0 0 2,201 0 0 42,43,37,026 3,04,24,96,478 3,46,68,33,504 
32,657 7,366 3,60,82,278 25,87,09,935 0 6,047 0 0 0 5,279 0 0 0 3,522 0 0 1,45,87,49,925 10,45,92,36,960 11,91,79,86,885 
2,432 3,195 11,65,498 83,56,624 23,102 2,871 99,47,531 7,13,23,795 0 2,871 0 0 0 1,393 0 0 1,63,91,66,179 11,75,28,21,504 13,39,19,87,683 
3,491 5,156 27,00,298 1,93,61,139 33,166 4,306 2,14,20,824 15,35,87,305 0 3,861 0 0 0 1,964 0 0 4,17,14,24,695 29,90,91,15,065 34,08,05,39,760 
 
Year Royalty levied 
on Despatch 
Premium levied 
on Despatch 
Royalty and premium leviable against closing balance as on March 2022  
Above 
65 (%) 
ASP of Mar 
2022 
Royalty 
collectable 
Premium 
collectable 
62-65 
(%) 
ASP of Mar 
2022 
Royalty 
collectable 
Premium 
collectable 
60-62 
(%) 
ASP of Mar 
2022 
Royalty 
collectable 
Premium 
collectable 
(43) (44) (45) (46) (47) (48) (49) (50) (51) (52) (53) (54) (55) (56) (57) 
2020-21 0 0 0 8,695 0 0   8,341 0 0   7,193 0 0 
2021-22 59,06,14,512 4,23,47,07,799 0 8,695 0 0 0 8,341 0 0 4,34,003 7,193 46,82,67,029 3,35,74,74,596 
2020-21 1,70,61,94,135 12,23,34,15,458 0 5,974 0 0   5,215 0 0   4,523 0 0 
2021-22 4,15,93,69,135 29,82,26,79,447 0 5,974 0 0 181 5,215 1,41,882 10,17,295 31,828 4,523 2,15,93,467 15,48,25,159 
    
Royalty and premium leviable against closing balance as on March 2022  Total 
royalty 
collectable 
Total premium 
collectable 
Royalty and 
premium collectable 
Short levy of 
royalty and 
premium 
58-60 
(%) 
ASP of Mar 
2022 
Royalty 
collectable 
Premium 
collectable 
55-58 
(%) 
ASP of 
Mar 2022 
Royalty 
collectable 
Premium 
collectable 
Below 
55 (%) 
ASP of 
Mar 2022 
Royalty 
collectable 
Premium 
collectable 
(58) (59) (60) (61) (62) (63) (64) (65) (66) (67) (68) (69) (70) (71) (72) (73) 
0 5,780 0 0  0 4,389 0 0  0 3,763 0 0 0 0 0 3,46,68,33,504 
8,11,810 5,780 70,38,39,617 5,04,65,30,052  0 4,389 0 0 0 3,763 0 0 1,76,27,21,158 12,63,87,12,447 14,40,14,33,605 -2,48,34,46,720 
 0 3,764 0 0  0 3,580 0 0  0 1,838 0 0 1,70,61,94,135 12,23,34,15,458 13,93,96,09,593 -54,76,21,910 
17,384 3,764 98,15,085 7,03,74,163  0 3,580 0 0 0 1,838 0 0 4,19,09,19,570 30,04,88,96,064 34,23,98,15,634 -15,92,75,874 
              Total 27,64,89,000 
 
Royalty and Premium collectable against closing balance as on March 2022 has been calculated by taking into account the ASP of different grades of iron ore of March 2022 
  (Source: Annual production reported in i3MS and Average of ASP published by IBM) 
 

Performance Audit of Systems and Controls in Assessment and Collection of Revenue from Major Minerals for the year ended March 2022 
94 
Appendix-IV 
(Refer paragraph - 3.2.1(iv) at page 33) 
Short levy of royalty and premium due to reporting of lower grades of iron ore – Nuagaon iron ore mine 
(Quantity in MT and amount in ₹) 
Type of 
Ore 
Name of 
the mines 
Name of the 
old lessee Year 
Total 
Average 
production 
Grade wise Production Name of the 
Auctioned 
lessee 
Premium 
Rate Year Total 
production 
Grade-wise estimated production based on percentage of old lessee and royalty leviable 
Above 
65 (%) 
62-65 
(%) 
60-62 
(%) 
58-60 
(%) 
55-58 
(%) 
Below 
55 (%) 
Above 
65 (%) 
Average 
ASP 
Royalty 
leviable 
Premium 
leviable 
62-65 
(%) 
Average 
sale 
price 
Royalty leviable Premium leviable 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) (14) (15) (16) (17) (18) (19) (20) (21) (22) (23) 
Lumps 
Nuagaon KJS 
Ahluwalia 
2014-20 15,56,037 0 97.83 2.00 0.16 0 0.01 
JSW 
95.20% 2020-21 9,63,743 0 5,438 0 0 9,42,830 4,835 68,37,71,475 4,33,96,69,631 
95.20% 2021-22 14,38,395 0 9,838 0 0 14,07,182 8,612 1,81,78,85,435 11,53,75,12,894 
Fines 2014-20 30,55,474 0 91.99 1.00 1.13 1.73 4.14 
95.20% 2020-21 31,83,358 0 3,838 0 0 29,28,371 3,601 1,58,16,61,872 10,03,82,80,682 
95.20% 2021-22 48,92,392 0 6,753 0 0 45,00,511 6,389 4,31,32,90,127 27,37,50,14,670 
   
 Grade-wise estimated production based on percentage of old lessee and royalty leviable  
60-62 
(%) 
Average 
ASP 
Royalty 
leviable 
Premium 
leviable 
58-60 
(%) 
Average 
ASP 
Royalty 
leviable 
Premium 
leviable 
55-58 
(%) 
Average 
ASP 
Royalty 
leviable 
Premium 
leviable 
Below 
55 (%) 
Average 
ASP 
Royalty 
leviable 
Premium 
leviable 
Total 
royalty 
Total 
premium 
Royalty and 
premium 
(24) (25) (26) (27) (28) (29) (30) (31) (32) (33) (34) (35) (36) (37) (38) (39) (40) (41) (42) 
19,275 4,187 1,21,06,538 7,68,36,159 1,542 3,370 7,79,398 49,46,580 0 3,167 0 0 96 2,201 31,812 2,01,897 69,66,89,223 4,42,16,54,267 5,11,83,43,490 
28,768 7,366 3,17,85,653 20,17,32,943 2,301 6,047 20,87,485 1,32,48,572 0 5,279 0 0 144 3,522 75,990 4,82,286 1,85,18,34,563 11,75,29,76,694 13,60,48,11,257 
31,834 3,195 1,52,56,773 9,68,29,650 35,972 2,871 1,54,88,919 9,83,03,006 55,072 2,871 2,37,13,124 15,04,99,292 1,31,791 1,393 2,75,39,928 17,47,86,745 1,66,36,60,616 10,55,86,99,374 12,22,23,59,990 
48,924 5,156 3,78,40,817 24,01,63,055 55,284 4,306 3,57,05,882 22,66,13,328 84,638 3,861 4,90,21,493 31,11,23,073 2,02,545 1,964 5,96,82,425 37,87,84,454 4,49,55,40,743 28,53,16,98,581 33,02,72,39,324 
 
Year Royalty levied 
on Despatch 
Premium levied 
on Despatch 
Royalty and premium leviable against closing balance as on March 2022  
Above 
65 (%) 
ASP of Mar 
2022 
Royalty 
collectable 
Premium 
collectable 
62-65 
(%) 
ASP of Mar 
2022 
Royalty 
collectable 
Premium 
collectable 
60-62 
(%) 
ASP of Mar 
2022 
Royalty 
collectable 
Premium 
collectable 
(43) (44) (45) (46) (47) (48) (49) (50) (51) (52) (53) (54) (55) (56) (57) 
2020-21 53,49,10,285 3,39,48,97,342 0 8,695 0 0  0 8,341 0 0 0  7,193 0 0 
2021-22 84,53,03,254 5,36,48,58,759 0 8,695 0 0 3,85,702 8,341 48,25,70,432 3,06,27,13,673 3,42,251 7,193 36,92,71,490 2,34,36,43,056 
2020-21 1,88,07,11,982 11,93,62,50,802 0 5,974 0 0  0 5,215 0 0 0  4,523 0 0 
2021-22 3,80,97,32,995 24,17,91,09,459 10,849 5,974 97,22,183 6,17,03,456 1,36,917 5,215 10,71,03,046 67,97,47,329 78,829 4,523 5,34,81,556 33,94,29,609 
 
Royalty and premium leviable against closing balance as on March 2022  Total 
royalty 
collectable 
Total premium 
collectable 
Royalty and premium 
collectable 
Short levy of royalty 
and premium 58-60 
(%) 
ASP of Mar 
2022 
Royalty 
collectable 
Premium 
collectable 
55-58 
(%) 
ASP of 
Mar 2022 
Royalty 
collectable 
Premium 
collectable 
Below 
55 (%) 
ASP of 
Mar 2022 
Royalty 
collectable 
Premium 
collectable 
(58) (59) (60) (61) (62) (63) (64) (65) (66) (67) (68) (69) (70) (71) (72) (73) 
 0 5,780 0 0 0  4,389 0 0 0  3,763 0 0 53,49,10,285 3,39,48,97,342 3,92,98,07,627 1,18,85,35,863 
3,70,670 5,780 32,13,70,890 2,03,96,33,915 0 4,389 0 0 0 3,763 0 0 2,01,85,16,066 12,81,08,49,403 14,82,93,65,469 -1,22,45,54,212 
 0 3,764 0 0  0 3,580 0 0 0  1,838 0 0 1,88,07,11,982 11,93,62,50,802 13,81,69,62,784 -1,59,46,02,794 
1,34,351 3,764 7,58,54,597 48,14,23,843 15,578 3,580 83,65,150 5,30,90,817 0 1,838 0 0 4,06,42,59,527 25,79,45,04,514 29,85,87,64,041 3,16,84,75,283 
              Total 153,78,54,140 
 
Royalty and Premium collectable against closing balance as on March 2022 has been calculated by taking into account the ASP of different grades of iron ore of March 2022 
(Source: Annual production reported in i3MS and Average of ASP published by IBM) 
 

Appendices 
95 
 
Appendix-V 
(Refer paragraph - 3.2.1(v) at page 35) 
Short levy of royalty and premium due to reporting of lower grades of iron ore – Jaribahal iron ore mine  
(Quantity in MT and amount in ₹) 
Type of 
Ore 
Name of  
the mines 
Name of the 
old lessee Year 
Total 
Average 
production 
Grade wise Production  Name of the 
Auctioned 
lessee 
Premium  
Rate Year Total  
production 
Grade-wise estimated production based on percentage of old lessee and royalty leviable  
Above  
65 (%) 
62-65  
(%) 
60-62  
(%) 
58-60 
(%) 
55-58  
(%) 
Below  
55 (%) 
Above 
 65 (%) 
Average 
ASP  
Royalty  
leviable 
Premium  
leviable  
62-65  
(%) 
Average 
sale 
price 
Royalty leviable Premium leviable  
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) (14) (15) (16) (17) (18) (19) (20) (21) (22) (23) 
Lumps 
Jaribahal Patnaik 
Minerals 
2018-20 5,39,839 0 70.41 19.46 10.13 0 0 
Kashvi 
International 
150% 2020-21 1,84,800 0 5,603 0 0 1,30,118 5,058 9,87,22,830 98,72,28,304 
150% 2021-22 2,91,448 0 9,838 0 0 2,05,208 8,612 26,51,00,759 2,65,10,07,586 
Fines 2018-20 5,58,001 0.00 38.24 26.05 2.49 32.70 0.52 
150% 2020-21 5,96,232 0 4,136 0 0 2,27,999 3,795 12,97,88,454 1,29,78,84,537 
150% 2021-22 7,19,877 0 6,753 0 0 2,75,281 6,389 26,38,29,093 2,63,82,90,934 
 
 Grade-wise estimated production based on percentage of old lessee and royalty leviable  
60-62  
(%) 
Average 
ASP 
Royalty  
leviable 
Premium  
leviable  
58-60  
(%)  
Average 
ASP 
Royalty 
leviable 
Premium  
leviable  
55-58 
(%)  
Average 
ASP 
Royalty  
leviable 
Premium  
leviable  
Below  
55 (%) 
Average  
ASP 
Royalty  
leviable 
Premium 
leviable  
Total  
royalty  
Total  
premium  
Royalty and 
premium  
(24) (25) (26) (27) (28) (29) (30) (31) (32) (33) (34) (35) (36) (37) (38) (39) (40) (41) (42) 
35,962 4,402 2,37,43,090 23,74,30,900 18,720 3,513 98,65,343 9,86,53,432 0 3,286 0 0 0 2,232 0 0 13,23,31,263 1,32,33,12,635 1,45,56,43,898 
56,716 7,366 6,26,65,159 62,66,51,587 29,524 6,047 2,67,79,041 26,77,90,411 0 5,279 0 0 0 3,522 0 0 35,45,44,958 3,54,54,49,584 3,89,99,94,542 
1,55,318 3,339 7,77,82,476 77,78,24,759 14,846 2,974 66,21,764 6,62,17,638 1,94,968 2,974 8,69,60,512 86,96,05,124 3,100 1,457 6,77,535 67,75,355 30,18,30,741 3,01,83,07,412 3,32,01,38,153 
1,87,528 5,156 14,50,45,743 1,45,04,57,429 17,925 4,306 1,15,77,037 11,57,70,368 2,35,400 3,861 13,63,40,515 1,36,34,05,148 3,743 1,964 11,03,027 1,10,30,272 55,78,95,415 5,57,89,54,150 6,13,68,49,565 
 
Year Royalty levied 
on Despatch 
Premium levied 
on Despatch 
Royalty and premium leviable against closing balance as on March 2022  
Above 
65 (%) 
ASP of Mar 
2022 
Royalty 
collectable 
Premium 
collectable 
62-65 
(%) 
ASP of Mar 
2022 
Royalty 
collectable 
Premium 
collectable 
60-62 
(%) 
ASP of Mar 
2022 
Royalty 
collectable 
Premium 
collectable 
(43) (44) (45) (46) (47) (48) (49) (50) (51) (52) (53) (54) (55) (56) (57) 
2020-21 8,89,35,500 88,93,55,008 0 8,695 0 0 0  8,341 0 0  0 7,193 0 0 
2021-22 12,79,13,312 1,27,91,33,126 0 8,695 0 0 0 8,341 0 0 14,510 7,193 1,56,55,773 15,65,57,727 
2020-21 15,36,45,663 1,53,64,56,630 0 5,974 0 0  0 5,215 0 0  0 4,523 0 0 
2021-22 23,52,14,411 2,35,21,44,105 0 5,974 0 0 0 5,215 0 0 0 4,523 0 0 
 
Royalty and premium leviable against closing balance as on March 2022     Short levy of royalty 
and premium 58-60 
(%) 
ASP of Mar 
2022 
Royalty 
collectable 
Premium 
collectable 
55-58 
(%) 
ASP of 
Mar 2022 
Royalty 
collectable 
Premium 
collectable 
Below 
55 (%) 
ASP of 
Mar 2022 
Royalty 
collectable 
Premium 
collectable 
Total 
royalty 
collectable 
Total premium 
collectable 
Royalty and 
premium 
collectable 
(58) (59) (60) (61) (62) (63) (64) (65) (66) (67) (68) (69) (70) (71) (72) (73) 
0  5,780 0 0 0  4,389 0 0  0 3,763 0 0 8,89,35,500 88,93,55,008 97,82,90,508 47,73,53,390 
28,811 5,780 2,49,79,449 24,97,94,491 0 4,389 0 0 50,421 3,763 2,84,59,921 28,45,99,207 19,70,08,455 1,97,00,84,551 2,16,70,93,006 1,73,29,01,536 
 0 3,764 0 0  0 3,580 0 0  0 1,838 0 0 15,36,45,663 1,53,64,56,630 1,69,01,02,293 1,63,00,35,860 
26,685 3,764 1,50,66,120 15,06,61,195 25,147 3,580 1,35,03,763 13,50,37,634 12,844 1,838 35,41,100 3,54,10,996 26,73,25,393 2,67,32,53,930 2,94,05,79,323 3,19,62,70,242 
              Total 703,65,61,028 
 
Royalty and Premium collectable against closing balance as on March 2022 has been calculated by taking into account the ASP of different grades of iron ore of March 2022 
  (Source: Annual production reported in i3MS and Average of ASP published by IBM)) 

Performance Audit of Systems and Controls in Assessment and Collection of Revenue from Major Minerals for the year ended March 2022 
96 
Appendix-VI 
(Refer paragraph - 3.2.1(vi) at page 37) 
Short levy of royalty and premium due to reporting of lower grades of iron ore after auction – Gonua iron ore mine 
(Quantity in MT and amount in ₹) 
Type of 
Ore 
Name of 
the mines 
Name of the 
old lessee Year 
Total 
Average 
production 
Grade wise Production Name of the 
Auctioned 
lessee 
Premium 
Rate Year Total 
production 
Grade-wise estimated production based on percentage of old lessee and royalty leviable  
Above 
65 (%) 
62-65 
(%) 
60-62 
(%) 
58-60 
(%) 
55-58 
(%) 
Below 
55 (%) 
Above 
65 (%) 
Average 
ASP 
Royalty 
leviable 
Premium 
leviable 
62-65 
(%) 
Average 
sale price 
Royalty 
leviable 
Premium 
leviable 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) (14) (15) (16) (17) (18) (19) (20) (21) (22) (23) 
Lumps 
Gonua PK Ahluwalia 
2018-20 2,05,690  0.00 100 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
JSW 
132% 2020-21 1,12,671 0 5,438 0 0 1,12,671 4,835 8,17,12,765 71,90,72,331 
132% 2021-22 1,21,627 0 9,838 0 0 1,21,627 8,612 15,71,25,360 1,38,27,03,171 
Fines 2018-20  2,04,660  0.00 100 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
132% 2020-21 5,82,487 0 3,838 0 0 5,82,487 3,601 31,46,10,937 2,76,85,76,244 
132% 2021-22 8,69,418 0 6,753 0 0 8,69,418 6,389 83,32,50,211 7,33,26,01,859 
 
 Grade-wise estimated production based on percentage of old lessee and royalty leviable  
60-62 
(%) 
Average 
ASP 
Royalty 
leviable 
Premium 
leviable 
58-60 
(%) 
Average 
ASP 
Royalty 
leviable 
Premium 
leviable 
55-58 
(%) 
Average 
ASP 
Royalty 
leviable 
Premium 
leviable 
Below 
55 (%) 
Average 
ASP 
Royalty 
leviable 
Premium 
leviable 
Total 
royalty 
Total 
premium 
Royalty and 
premium 
(24) (25) (26) (27) (28) (29) (30) (31) (32) (33) (34) (35) (36) (37) (38) (39) (40) (41) (42) 
0 4,187 0 0 0 3,370 0 0 0 3,167 0 0 0 2,201 0 0 8,17,12,765 71,90,72,331 80,07,85,096 
0 7,366 0 0 0 6,047 0 0 0 5,279 0 0 0 3,522 0 0 15,71,25,360 1,38,27,03,171 1,53,98,28,531 
0 3,195 0 0 0 2,871 0 0 0 2,871 0 0 0 1,393 0 0 31,46,10,937 2,76,85,76,244 3,08,31,87,181 
0 5,156 0 0 0 4,306 0 0 0 3,861 0 0 0 1,964 0 0 83,32,50,211 7,33,26,01,859 8,16,58,52,070 
 
Year Royalty levied 
on Despatch 
Premium levied 
on Despatch 
Royalty and premium leviable against closing balance as on March 2022  
Above 
65 (%) 
ASP of Mar 
2022 
Royalty 
collectable 
Premium 
collectable 
62-65 
(%) 
ASP of Mar 
2022 
Royalty 
collectable 
Premium 
collectable 
60-62 
(%) 
ASP of Mar 
2022 
Royalty 
collectable 
Premium 
collectable 
(43) (44) (45) (46) (47) (48) (49) (50) (51) (52) (53) (54) (55) (56) (57) 
2020-21 5,15,65,747 45,37,78,569 0 8,695 0 0 0  8,341 0 0  0 7,193 0 0 
2021-22 0 0 0 8,695 0 0 65,367 8,341 8,17,84,272 71,97,01,597 37,175 7,193 4,01,09,664 35,29,65,044 
2020-21 24,14,62,907 2,12,48,73,579 0 5,974 0 0  0 5,215 0 0  0 4,523 0 0 
2021-22 61,78,23,259 5,43,68,44,680 0 5,974 0 0 59,421 5,215 4,64,81,777 40,90,39,636 56,922 4,523 3,86,18,806 33,98,45,489 
 
Royalty and premium leviable against closing balance as on March 2022     Short levy of 
royalty and 
premium 58-60 
(%) 
ASP of Mar 
2022 
Royalty 
collectable 
Premium 
collectable 
55-58 
(%) 
ASP of 
Mar 2022 
Royalty 
collectable 
Premium 
collectable 
Below 
55 (%) 
ASP of 
Mar 2022 
Royalty 
collectable 
Premium 
collectable 
Total 
royalty 
collectable 
Total premium 
collectable 
Royalty 
&andpremium 
collectable 
(58) (59) (60) (61) (62) (63) (64) (65) (66) (67) (68) (69) (70) (71) (72) (73) 
 0 5,780 0 0  0 4,389 0 0  0 3,763 0 0 5,15,65,747 45,37,78,569 50,53,44,316 29,54,40,780 
62,036 5,780 5,37,85,212 47,33,09,866 11,712 4,389 77,10,595 6,78,53,238 0 3,763 0 0 18,33,89,744 1,61,38,29,745 1,79,72,19,489 -25,73,90,958 
0  3,764 0 0  0 3,580 0 0  0 1,838 0 0 24,14,62,907 2,12,48,73,579 2,36,63,36,486 71,68,50,695 
28,819 3,764 1,62,70,998 14,31,84,787 4,024 3,580 21,60,896 1,90,15,881 0 1,838 0 0 72,13,55,735 6,34,79,30,472 7,06,92,86,207 1,09,65,65,863 
              Total 185,14,66,380 
Royalty and Premium collectible against closing balance as on March 2022 has been calculated by taking into account the ASP of different grades of iron ore of March 2022 
  (Source: Annual production reported in i3MS and Average of ASP published by IBM) 

Appendices 
97 
 
Appendix-VII 
(Refer paragraph 3.2.1 at page 40) 
Consolidated statement of short levy of royalty and premium due to 
reporting of lower grades of iron ore by the six lessees, post-auction 
(Quantity in MT/ Amount in `) 
Name of the 
Auctioned 
lessee 
Location Financial 
Year 
Type 
of 
Ore 
Total 
production 
Royalty and 
premium leviable 
Royalty and 
premium 
levied 
Short levy of 
royalty and 
premium 
JSW Ltd. Jajang 
2020-21 Lumps 12,97,520 7,21,85,06,027 4,27,42,26,469 2,94,42,79,558 
2021-22 26,65,436 26,41,32,77,478 20,56,91,03,454 5,84,41,74,024 
2020-21 Fines 48,58,860 20,05,50,92,035 15,79,43,50,004 4,26,07,42,031 
2021-22 95,33,897 64,88,12,97,494 49,15,78,42,031 15,72,34,55,463 
     Total 2877,26,51,076 
Narbheram 
Power and 
Steel Pvt. Ltd. 
Roida-II 
2020-21 Lumps 1,36,310 79,32,88,690 82,24,94,341 -2,92,05,651 
2021-22 2,44,121 2,16,78,05,123 1,78,79,52,037 37,98,53,086 
2020-21 Fines 12,74,031 5,77,11,35,152 1,01,75,876 5,76,09,59,276 
2021-22 21,16,051 14,00,21,23,114 17,96,10,13,995 -3,95,88,90,881 
     Total 215,27,15,830 
Arcelor Mittal Thakurani 
2020-21 Lumps 5,87,370 3,46,68,33,504 0 3,46,68,33,504 
2021-22 11,33,910 11,91,79,86,885 14,40,14,33,605 -2,48,34,46,720 
2020-21 Fines 30,39,796 13,39,19,87,683 13,93,96,09,593 -54,76,21,910 
2021-22 43,63,978 34,08,05,39,760 34,23,98,15,634 -15,92,75,874 
     Total 27,64,89,000 
JSW Ltd. Nuagaon 
2020-21 Lumps 9,63,743 5,11,83,43,490 3,92,98,07,627 1,18,85,35,863 
2021-22 14,38,395 13,60,48,11,257 14,82,93,65,468 -1,22,45,54,211 
2020-21 Fines 31,83,358 12,22,23,59,989 13,81,69,62,784 -1,59,46,02,795 
2021-22 48,92,392 33,02,72,39,323 29,85,87,64,040 3,16,84,75,283 
     Total 153,78,54,140 
Kashvi 
International Jaribahal 
2020-21 Lumps 1,84,800 1,45,56,43,898 97,82,90,509 47,73,53,389 
2021-22 2,91,448 3,89,99,94,542 2,16,70,93,006 1,73,29,01,536 
2020-21 Fines 5,96,232 3,32,01,38,154 1,69,01,02,293 1,63,00,35,861 
2021-22 7,19,877 6,13,68,49,565 2,94,05,79,323 3,19,62,70,242 
     Total 703,65,61,028 
JSW Ltd. Gonua 
2020-21 Lumps 1,12,671 80,07,85,096 50,53,44,316 29,54,40,780 
2021-22 1,21,627 1,53,98,28,531 1,79,72,19,488 -25,73,90,957 
2020-21 Fines 5,82,487 3,08,31,87,181 2,36,63,36,485 71,68,50,696 
2021-22 8,69,418 8,16,58,52,070 7,06,92,86,208 1,09,65,65,862 
     Total 185,14,66,381 
          Grand Total 4,162,77,37,455 
(Source: Calculated by Audit on the basis of annual production reported in i3MS) 
 

Performance Audit of Systems and Controls in Assessment and Collection of Revenue from Major Minerals for the year ended March 2022 
98 
Appendix– VIII 
(Refer paragraph 3.2.2 at page 41) 
Reporting of iron-ore fines as screened fines 
(` in Crore) 
Name 
of 
Circle 
Sl. 
No. 
Lessee Total despatch 
quantity 
 
Quantity of 
screen fines 
despatched in 
MT 
Quantity of Screen fines 
estimated to be 
despatched as per 
declared production 
prior to 2010 
(percentage of total 
production) 
Excess 
quantity of 
screen fines 
reported to be 
despatched 
Royalty Premium 
Amount 
realised 
Amount 
realisable 
Short 
realised 
Amount 
realised 
Amount 
realisable 
Short 
realised 
A B C D E F G H I J K L M 
Joda 1 Serajuddin_Balda 5,01,23,750.71      3,13,50,885.88       60,14,854.73    2,53,36,038.15      752.51      1,536.34      783.83  
   
2 Indrani Patnaik Unchabali 2,48,32,610.39      1,57,24,886.18       17,38,287.52    1,39,86,605.66      481.88         836.83      354.95  
   
3 Rungta_Jajang     5,98,46,049.45      3,88,11,587.39  0 0  1,111.89      2,250.82   1,138.93  
   
4 KN Ram_Roida_II     1,26,69,435.11         95,36,185.76  0 0     266.38         523.62      257.24  
   
5 Keypee_Thakurani     2,57,31,522.63      2,01,22,791.68  0 0     561.16      1,152.24      591.08  
   
6 KJS Ahluwalia Nuagaon     3,22,66,019.72      1,72,25,057.06  0 0     496.28         965.77  469.49 
   
7 ESSEL Jilling     1,30,61,751.30         27,24,375.05  0 0       96.25         193.75        97.50  
   
8 Tarini Minerals Deojhar        33,64,408.93         22,75,190.46  0 0       62.84         106.33        43.49  
   
9 Patnaik Minerals Jaribahal        24,22,430.70         11,30,351.23  0 0       28.51           51.43        22.92  
   
10 T P Mohanty Naibega        26,71,607.65         11,44,762.76  0 0       29.54           44.56        15.02  
   
Koira 11 Jindal TRB     1,73,34,168.60         96,18,326.08         6,93,366.74       89,24,959.34      281.27         453.38      172.11  
   
12 OMC Kurmitar     1,94,50,023.87         64,58,406.93  0 0     335.31         589.78      254.47  
   
13 AMTC Narayanposi     2,09,15,139.61      1,25,11,001.12       87,84,358.63       37,26,642.49        65.33         118.40  53.07  
   
14 BICO Nadidihi     1,54,59,512.55      1,11,30,056.31       35,22,554.10  76,07,509.20     323.36         452.12      128.76  
   
15 Rungta Orghat     2,59,82,893.27      1,70,52,281.33       70,15,381.18    1,00,36,900.15      533.65         866.99  333.34  
   
16 PTA Raikela        65,41,604.89           9,46,291.81  0 0       23.42           33.38          9.96  
   
17 MGM Petabeda        43,61,839.01         15,97,333.42  87,236.78            15,10,096.64            84.37         119.13  34.76 
   
18 Geetarani Raikela        48,23,484.02         30,65,419.49  0 0     198.37         267.71        69.34  
   
19 ESSEL Koira Iron Mines     2,87,33,133.66      1,43,61,213.40  0 0     472.41         844.03      371.62  
   
Joda 20 JSW Jajang     1,50,69,323.03         1,29,04,512.77  0 0       707.75           989.89       282.14      5,190.18       7,259.17    2,068.99  
21 JSW Nuagaon        90,02,758.87            69,11,862.79  0 0       491.64           665.44       173.80      3,120.28       4,223.35    1,103.07  
Koira 22 JSW Gonua        13,60,727.63            12,63,688.97  0 0        82.10           114.25         32.15        722.51       1,005.37      282.86  
23 JSW Narayanaposi        71,58,737.23            58,41,877.89  0 0       378.13           529.96       151.83      2,484.30       3,481.82      997.52  
Total 40,31,82,932.83 24,37,08,345.76 2,78,56,039.68   7,11,28,751.63  7,864.35 13,706.15 5,841.80 11,517.27 15,969.71 4,452.44 
 (Source: Information furnished by the DDMs) 
 

Appendices 
99 
 
Appendix-IX 
(Refer paragraph 3.3.2 at page 51) 
Ex-Mines Prices (PMV) of Lessees (FY 2015-16) worked out from the total sale values and quantities furnished to IBM, in F1 Returns
      (Amount in ₹) 
62% - 65%-Fines April 2015 May 2015 June 2015 July 15 August 2015 September 2015 October 2015 November 2015 December 2015 January 2016 February 2016 March 2016 
Name of Lessee/Mine/  
Circle 
Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM 
Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate 
Joda  
Serajuddin, Balda 1,800 1,800 
1,861 
1,600 1,800 
1,785 
1,600 1,800 
1,582 
1,600 1,600 
1,598 
1,500 1,600 
1,552 
1,400 1,500 
1,455 
1,400 1,600 
1,481 
1,400 1,600 
1,476 
1,400 1,450 
1,436 
0 0 
1,399 
0 0 
1,283 
1,200 1,250 
1,180 
Kaypee, Thakurani 0 0 1,600 1,725 1,600 2,000 1,600 4,105 1,600 1,980 1,500 1,980 1,500 1,920 1,500 1,915 1,350 1,700 1,325 1,630 1,212 1,630 1,175 1,575 
K.N. Ram, Roida-II 0 0 1,400 1,400 800 1,950 1,400 1,950 1,400 1,950 1,362 1,950 1,300 1,750 1,400 1,950 1,025 1,500 1,093 1,500 1,075 1,500 1,075 1,500 
Indrani Patnaik, 
Unchabali 1,800 1,800 1,500 1,800 1,500 1,500 1,500 1,500 1,400 1,500 1,400 1,400 1,400 1,550 1,250 1,550 1,250 1,400 1,250 1,400 1,200 1,250 1,200 1,250 
KJS Ahluwalia, Nuagaon 0 0 1,400 1,400 1,600 2,075 1,550 2,075 1,550 2,075 1,500 1,880 1,450 1,965 1,500 1,850 1,700 1,965 1,630 1,700 1,150 1,630 1,150 1,575 
Rungta, Jajang  1,652 2,429 1,653 2,937 1,302 2,108 1,319 2,594 1,475 2,588 1,158 1,776 1,359 1,893 1,307 1,723 1,208 1,719 1,488 1,721 1,058 1,717 1,010 1,661 
Koira  
Essel, Nuagaon 0 0 0 0 2,096 2,116 2,079 2,138 1,484 2,075 1,327 1,892 1,520 1,941 1,678 1,680 1,677 1,704 1,339 1,706 1,176 1,554 1,179 1,566 
BICO Ltd., Nadidihi 0 0 1,819 2,372 1,442 2,271 1,453 2,329 969 2,178 807 1,893 0 0 1,579 1,779 1,583 1,583 0 0 1,574 1,576 825 1,589 
Feegrade, Rengalibeda  0 0 1,839 2,392 2,057 2,180 0 0 1,472 2,154 1,962 1,962 1,749 1,749 1,267 1,488 1,560 1,560 0 0 0 0 836 1,865 
Rungta Sons, Oraghat  1,206 2,090 0 0 1,301 2,382 1,482 2,344 964 2,293 883 2,084 1,717 2,087 1,403 2,079 1,553 1,554 1,523 1,933 1,544 1,544 830 1,590 
S.N. Mohanty, Jaldihi 1,800 1,850 1,600 18,50 1,525 1,850 1,500 1,650 1,400 1,800 1,400 1,500 1,400 1,500 1,420 1,500 1,310 1,550 1,300 1,310 1,160 1,300 1,160 1,300 
 
62% - 65%-Lumps April 2015 May 2015 June 2015 July 15 August 2015 September 2015 October 2015 November 2015 December 2015 January 2016 February 2016 March 2016 
Name of Lessee/Mine/  
Circle 
Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM 
Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate 
Joda  
Serajuddin, Balda 1,800 4,400 
3,740 
1,600 4,400 
3,521 
1,600 4,400 
3,302 
1,600 3,550 
3,139 
1,500 3,550 
2,823 
1,400 3,250 
2,597 
1,400 3,133 
2,434 
1,400 2,900 
2,223 
1,400 2,600 
1,907 
1,400 2,150 
1,910 
1,550 2,150 
1,900 
1,300 2,150 
2,047 
Kaypee, Thakurani 0 0 2,700 2,700 2,700 3,800 2,700 3,700 2,700 3,400 2,300 2,950 2,375 2,980 1,850 2,980 1,700 2,250 1,500 2,300 1,500 2300 1,500 2,468 
K.N. Ram, Roida-II 0 0 0 0 3,800 3,800 3,800 3,900 3,100 3,900 2,800 3,400 2,800 3050 2,525 3,050 2,000 2,775 2,000 2,500 1,475 2,350 2,125 2,500 
Indrani Patnaik, 
Unchabali 3,700 4,400 3,150 4,400 2,950 3,650 2,900 3,300 2,500 3,300 2,450 3,000 2,350 2,700 2,000 2,400 1,800 2,150 1,850 2,100 1,900 2,150 1,900 2,000 
KJS Ahluwalia, Nuagaon 0 0 0 0 2,350 3,500 2,350 4,100 2,350 3,700 2,350 3,600 2,200 3,200 2,000 2,900 1,850 2,875 1,800 2,450 1,700 2,450 1,700 2,618 
Rungta, Jajang  3,600 5,353 3,000 5,550 3,100 5,150 2,950 4,850 2,150 3,450 1,750 3,272 1550 3,240 1,300 2,817 1,200 2,421 1,200 2,417 1,200 2,414 1,350 2,611 
Koira  
Essel, Nuagaon 4,100 4,874 4,068 4,541 3,747 4,173 3,893 3,946 3,112 3,781 2,113 3,231 2,105 3,132 2,267 2,908 1,463 2,517 1,459 2,496 1,311 2,346 1,983 2,645 
BICO Ltd. Nadidihi 0 0 0 0 2,900 2,900 2,750 3,900 2,450 3,888 1,829 3,218 0 0 1,700 2,837 2,000 2,455 2,000 2,498 1,900 2,483 2,150 2,373 
Feegrade, Rengalibeda  0 0 3,899 4,105 3,600 4,114 3,719 3,928 3,300 3,614 2,290 3,276 2,150 3,228 1,933 2,642 2,250 2,488 2,000 2,506 2,170 2,533 2,150 2,729 
Rungta Sons, Oraghat  3,900 3,900 3,600 3,600 4,100 4,115 3,701 3,900 2,712 3,237 2,650 3,289 2,150 3,131 1,700 2,379 1,600 2,250 1,700 2,314 1,450 2,512 1,550 2,844 
S.N. Mohanty, Jaldihi 2,500 2,500 2,500 2,500 2,500 2,500 2,500 2,500 2,500 2,500 2,500 2,500 2,200 2,200 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1,850 1,850 
(Source: Information furnished by the DDMs) 
 

Performance Audit of Systems and Controls in Assessment and Collection of Revenue from Major Minerals for the year ended March 2022 
100 
Ex-Mines Prices (PMV) of Lessees (FY 2016-17), worked out from the total sale values and quantities furnished to IBM, in F1 Returns 
62% - 65%-Fines April 2016 May 2016 June 2016 July 2016 August 2016 September 2016 October 2016 November 2016 December 2016 January 2017 February 2017 March 2017 
Name of Lessee/Mine/ 
 Circle 
Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM 
Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate 
Joda  
Serajuddin, Balda 1,200 1,300 
1,132 
1,100 1,250 
1,071 
1,100 1,200 
1,086 
1,100 1,200 
1,035 
975 1,100 
1,003 
975 1,150 
985 
975 1,200 
1,083 
975 1,200 
1,147 
975 1,200 
1,113 
975 1,350 
1,189 
975 1,350 
1,173 
975 1,350 
1,314 
Kaypee, Thakurani 1,175 1,515 1,115 1,475 1,100 1,515 1,090 1,425 980 1,360 978 1,490 796 1,490 1,040 1,640 1,040 1,640 1,040 3,542 1,100 3,542 1,100 3,542 
K.N. Ram, Roida-II 1,153 1,875 1,153 1,400 1,150 1,400 1,150 1,400 1,150 1,400 1,150 1,350 1,200 1,250 1,200 1,350 1,350 1,550 1,350 1,450 1,350 1,500 1,350 1,500 
Indrani Patnaik, 
Unchabali 1,078 1,123 947 1,076 952 1,082 918 1,061 761 1,033 1,100 1,400 1,100 1,450 1,128 1,450 1,150 1,450 1,300 1,525 1,300 1,625 1,300 1,625 
KJS Ahluwalia, Nuagaon 1,150 1,150 1,090 1,500 682 1,300 1,050 1,325 1,050 1,325 1,050 1,410 1,050 1,510 1,150 1,560 1,175 1,560 1,175 1,650 1,260 1,650 1,260 1,775 
Rungta, Jajang 1,004 1,652 1,008 1,560 1,357 1,468 953 1,559 958 1,466 910 1,464 1,102 1,623 1,100 1,761 1,005 1,591 1,010 1,721 1,009 1,714 1,011 1,879 
Koira  
Essel, Nuagaon 1,188 1,763 1,087 1,764 954 1,468 952 1,494 952 1,485 977 1,564 1,152 1,736 1,154 1,745 1,057 1,644 1,189 1,652 1,275 1,657 1,280 1,802 
BICO Ltd., Nadidihi 821 1,584 827 1,300 831 1,300 833 1,467 706 1,475 703 1,535 1,130 1,529 1,101 1,552 1108 1,549 1,191 1,889 1,192 1,688 1,193 1,594 
Feegrade, Rengalibeda 831 1,781 823 1,300 836 838 836 1,477 708 1,474 706 1,472 706 1,562 844 1,571 1,112 1,476 1,199 1,904 1,196 1,890 1,236 1,949 
Rungta Sons, Oraghat 827 1,360 831 1,769 830 1,459 830 1,469 834 1,568 989 1,573 993 1,774 804 1,774 695 1,565 803 1,862 928 1,891 1,049 1,922 
S.N. Mohanty, Jaldihi 1,150 1,200 1,100 1,160 875 1,150 1,000 1,145 1,000 1,000 1,000 1,100 1,050 1,100 1,000 1,100 1,050 1,100 1,000 1,186 1,000 1,225 1,025 1,250 
 
62% - 65%-Fines April 2016 May 2016 June 2016 July 2016 August 2016 September 2016 October 2016 November 2016 December 2016 January 2017 February 2017 March 2017 
Name of Lessee/Mine/ 
Circle 
Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM 
Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate 
Joda  
Serajuddin, Balda 1,300 2,150 
1,971 
1,300 2,150 
1,866 
1,200 2,150 
1,745 
1,100 2,150 
1,746 
1,100 2,000 
1,729 
1,100 2,000 
1,744 
1,100 2,157 
2,020 
1,100 2,500 
2,119 
1,100 2,500 
2,193 
1,100 2,700 
2,343 
1.,100 2,700 
2,376 
1,100 3,000 
2,553 
Kaypee, Thakurani 1,700 2,475 1,200 2,450 1,500 2,450 1,500 2,200 1,500 2,250 1,500 2,150 1,400 2,350 1,400 2,850 1,400 2,625 1,400 2,850 1,400 2,850 2,200 3,300 
K.N. Ram, Roida-II 2,125 2,500 2,275 2,500 2,075 2,500 2,075 2,300 2,075 2,300 2,075 2,325 2,075 2,925 2,075 2,925 2,608 2,925 2,700 3,225 2,350 3,225 2,900 3,200 
Indrani Patnaik, 
Unchabali 1,778 1,878 1,601 1,877 1,522 1,902 1,518 1,866 1,490 1,880 1,850 2,350 1,850 2,800 1,920 2,850 2,100 2,850 2,150 2,850 2,436 2,850 2,400 3,350 
KJS Ahluwalia, 
Nuagaon 1,800 2,618 1,800 2,550 1,400 2,450 1,400 2,325 1,300 2,325 1,300 2,325 1,300 2,850 1,500 2,850 1,500 3,025 1,500 3,025 1,500 3,025 2,450 3,500 
Rungta, Jajang 1,350 2,607 1,200 2,606 1,000 2,504 1,000 2,392 1,433 2,410 1,250 2,669 1,250 3,190 1,697 3,193 1,437 3,332 1,437 3,689 1,428 3,709 1,673 4,374 
Koira  
Essel, Nuagaon 2,147 2,619 2,054 2,471 1,947 2,397 2,047 2,397 1,927 2,286 1,955 2,562 2,722 3,060 1,880 3,144 1,679 2,913 2,301 3,348 2,942 3,329 3,246 3,800 
BICO Ltd., Nadidihi 2,050 2,169 2,050 2,560 2,000 2,000 1,000 2,259 1,000 2,055 1,000 2,163 1,000 3,229 1,000 3,183 2,450 3,000 2,900 3,355 2,900 3,600 3,000 4,000 
Feegrade Rengalibeda  2,150 2,450 2,000 2,576 1,900 2,591 1,900 2,250 1,440 2,250 1,872 2,608 1,950 3,255 800 3,245 2,150 3,000 1,950 3,377 1,950 8,018 3,000 4,022 
S.N. Mohanty, Jaldihi  1,600 1,600 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Rungta Sons, Oraghat 1,550 2,450 1,450 2,350 1,000 2,350 1,400 2,250 1,250 2,250 1,400 2,514 1,250 3,000 2,150 3,227 2,150 3,000 2,465 3,356 2,600 3,600 2,650 4,011 
(Source: Information furnished by the DDMs) 
 

Appendices 
101 
 
Ex-Mines Prices (PMV) of Lessees (FY 2017-18), worked out from the total sale values and quantities furnished to IBM, in F1 Returns 
62% - 65%-Fines April 2017 May 2017 June 2017 July 2017 August 2017 September 2017 October 2017 November 2017 December 2017 January 2018 February 2018 March 2018 
Name of Lessee/Mine/ 
Circle 
Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM 
  Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate 
Joda 
Serajuddin, Balda 1,050 1,450 
1,277 
994 1,450 
1,285 
1,050 1,250 
1,206 
1,050 1,250 
1,161 
950 1,100 
1,127 
950 1,300 
1,264 
950 1,300 
1,283 
950 1,300 
1,309 
950 1,350 
1,435 
0 0 
1,875 
1,250 1,250 
2,050 
1,000 2,000 
1988 
Kaypee, Thakurani 1,225 1,865 1,305 1,950 1,150 1,750 975 1,615 975 1,575 975 1,78,5 1,100 1,785 1,150 1,785 1,175 1,814 1,200 2,610 1,600 2,610 1,600 2,675 
K.N. Ram, Roida-II 1,450 1,650 1,446 1,650 1,280 1,650 1,250 1,675 1,200 1,525 1,200 1,600 1,400 1,600 1,400 1,600 1,500 1,800 1,725 2,350 1,800 2,400 2,175 2,475 
Indrani Patnaik, 
Unchabali 1,500 1,725 1,300 1,725 1,250 1,550 1,100 1,500 1,034 1,545 1,050 1,725 1,050 1,450 1,050 1,742 1,050 1,744 1,350 2,131 1,050 2,300 1,400 2,600 
KJS Ahluwalia, 
Nuagaon  1,260 3,600 1,300 1,825 1,302 3,065 1,140 1,575 1,100 1,645 1,100 1,745 1,100 1,745 1,100 2,400 1,100 2,550 1,100 2,570 1,600 2,570 1,600 2,570 
Rungta, Jajang  1,010 1,785 1,010 1,746 998 1,651 1,005 1,665 1,007 1,771 992 1,880 994 1,772 1,112 1,982 1,115 2,662 1,103 2,720 1,105 2,568 1,606 2,681 
Koira 
Essel, Nuagaon 1,431 1,800 1,273 1,794 1,170 1,640 1,094 1,494 1,094 1,635 1,389 1,795 1,288 1,792 1,284 1,878 1,085 2,277 0 0 2,198 2,219 2,062 2,608 
BICO Ltd., Nadidihi 1,203 1,942 1,112 1,939 1,004 1,938 1,000 1,921 1,000 1,942 1,365 1,887 1,000 1,671 1,000 1,981 1,251 2,635 1,252 2,737 1,255 2,752 1,255 2,318 
Feegrade, 
Rengalibeda  1,206 1,940 1,011 1,943 1,014 3,339 1,000 1,768 1,000 1,588 1,000 1,826 1,000 1,827 956 1,922 953 1,770 1,253 2,307 1,253 2,755 1,252 2,764 
Rungta Sons, Oraghat 1,007 1,813 981 1,927 896 1,781 802 1,769 1,075 1,817 1,100 1,970 1,200 1,975 1,200 1,974 1,251 2,556 1,297 2,843 1,251 2,883 1,249 2,828 
S.N. Mohanty, Jaldihi 1,025 1,350 1,200 1,350 1,000 1,250 1,000 1,250 900 1,225 900 1,266 900 1,375 900 1,375 900 1,575 900 2,200 900 2,200 900 2,200 
 
62% -65%-Lumps April 2017 May 2017 June 2017 July 2017 August 2017 September 2017 October 2017 November 2017 December 2017 January 2018 February 2018 March 2018 
Name of Lessee/Mine/  
Circle 
Min  Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM 
Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate 
Joda  
Serajuddin, Balda 1,100 3400 
2,759 
1,100 3,400 
2,710 
1,100 2,700 
2,451 
1,100 2,700 
2,413 
1,100 2,700 
2,348 
1,100 3,200 
2,604 
1,100 3,200 
2,628 
1,100 3,200 
2,711 
1,400 3,400 
2,992 
0 0 
3,825 
0 0 
3,915 
1,400 5,050 
3889 
Kaypee, Thakurani 2,500 3,600 2,500 3,400 1,800 2,639 2,150 2,800 2,000 2,951 2,000 2,950 2,000 3,250 2,000 3,250 2,350 4,000 2,500 4,900 3,350 4,775 3,450 4,675 
K.N. Ram, Roida-II  3,201 3,600 3,133 3,825 3,000 3,600 2,850 3,225 2,850 3,600 2,850 3,625 3,400 3,625 3,400 3,625 3,400 4,025 3,400 5,325 3,400 5,325 4,650 5,325 
Indrani Patnaik, 
Unchabali 2,550 3,700 2,550 3,700 2,450 3,100 2,226 3,000 2,300 3,050 2,500 3,300 2,600 3,308 2,600 3,600 2,600 3,550 2,600 4,800 2,825 4,457 3,000 4,980 
KJS Ahluwalia, Nuagaon  2,500 3,900 2,500 3,978 2,300 3,250 2,300 3,150 2,300 3,150 2,300 3,450 2,300 3,750 2,300 3,650 2,350 4,000 2,350 5,400 3,300 5,500 3,050 5,500 
Rungta, Jajang  1,706 4,270 1,692 4,274 1,674 3,750 1,598 3,500 1,590 3,501 1,694 3,900 1,697 4,218 2,059 4,300 1,708 5,041 1,481 5,936 1,706 5,887 1,614 5,726 
Koira  Essel, Nuagaon 3,674 3,811 3,361 3,826 3,063 3,573 2,884 3,377 2,890 3,592 3,494 4,003 3,294 3,864 3,284 3,686 3,686 4,502 0 0 5,076 5,130 4,876 5,417 
BICO Ltd., Nadidihi 3,000 4,000 2,992 3,920 3,100 3,660 1,000 3,200 1,000 2,075 1,000 3,850 1,000 3,800 1,000 3,800 1,000 4,641 1,000 5,547 1,000 5,500 1,000 5,500 
Feegrade, Rengalibeda  3,047 4,000 3,000 3,700 2,700 3,700 2,961 3,200 1,000 3,800 1,000 3,833 1,000 3,800 1,000 3,800 1,000 4,984 1,000 5,628 1,000 5,606 1,000 5,500 
Rungta Sons, Oraghat  2,700 4,049 2,250 4,000 2,297 3,700 2,200 3,200 2,200 3,800 2,800 3,800 2,800 3,800 2,800 3,800 2,755 5,048 2,950 5,500 3,350 5,500 4,458 5,500 
(Source: Information furnished by the DDMs) 
 

Performance Audit of Systems and Controls in Assessment and Collection of Revenue from Major Minerals for the year ended March 2022 
102 
Ex-Mines Prices (PMV) of Lessees (FY 2018-19), worked out from the total sale values and quantities furnished to IBM, in F1 Returns 
62% - 65%-Fines April 2018 May 2018 June 2018 July 2018 August 2018 September 2018 October 2018 November 2018 December 2018 January 2019 February 2019 March 2019 
Name of Lessee/Mine/  
Circle 
Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM  
Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate 
Joda 
Serajuddin, Balda 950 2,000 
1,877 
950 2,000 
1,830 
950 1,850 
1,862 
1,700 1,900 
2,011 
950 2,000 
2,138 
950 2,700 
2,344 
1,900 2,700 
2,507 
950 2,700 
2,713 
1,428 2,700 
2,323 
950 2,700 
1,956 
1,600 2,000 
1,974 
1,600 2,200 
1,999 
Kaypee, Thakurani 1,600 2,525 1,600 2,275 1,600 2,300 1,600 2,550 1,800 2800 1,800 3,225 2,275 3,225 2,490 3,225 1,800 2,975 1,600 2,975 1,600 2,680 1,800 2,350 
K.N. Ram, Roida-II 1,900 2,400 1,700 2,298 1,825 2,125 1,900 2125 2,125 2,292 2,250 2,699 2,125 3,200 2125 3,200 2,047 2,700 1,825 2,700 1,900 2,350 1,950 2,550 
Indrani Patnaik, 
Unchabali 1,400 2,200 1,850 2,200 1,750 2,200 1,750 2,300 1869 2,500 1,900 2,800 1,950 3,050 1,950 3,050 1,800 2,830 1,800 2,529 1,800 2,220 1,800 2,200 
KJS Ahluwalia, Nuagaon  1,875 2,475 1,815 2,220 1,257 2,290 1,900 2,500 1,940 2,690 2,225 3,015 2,575 3,335 2,500 3,335 2,000 2,910 1,800 2,185 1,800 2,335 1,850 2,635 
Rungta, Jajang  1,404 2,541 1,317 2,522 1,169 2,689 1,290 2,877 1,746 3,162 1,753 3,953 1,807 3,447 1,919 3,531 2,026 3,570 1,707 3,138 1,701 3,152 1,682 3,116 
Koira 
Essel, Nuagaon 2,064 2,551 1,979 2,434 1,997 2,574 2,312 3,008 2,529 3,492 3,138 4,017 3,219 3,711 2,705 4,288 2,083 3,220 1,658 4,915 2,093 3,197 2,228 2,899 
BICO Ltd., Nadidihi 1,713 2,778 1,530 2,786 1,252 2,873 1,547 2,638 1,502 2,677 3,045 3,537 1,920 3,549 2,108 3,785 2,103 3,517 1,856 3,105 1,803 2,554 1,804 2,402 
Feegrade, Rengalibeda  1,256 2,083 1,254 2,035 1,639 2,471 1655 2,641 1,659 2,632 1,931 3,561 1,923 3,566 2,106 3,555 2,060 3,546 1,863 3,568 1,801 3,156 1,811 2,412 
Rungta Sons, Oraghat  1,706 2,796 1,529 2,376 1,641 3,051 1,658 3,221 2,163 3,223 1,790 4,391 1,917 4,166 2,097 4,035 2,049 3,547 1,846 3,541 1,797 3,121 1,803 2,383 
S.N. Mohanty, Jaldihi 900 2,200 900 1,950 900 1,825 900 2,125 900 2,231 2,125 2,800 1,825 2,800 1,875 2,693 1,996 2,900 1,700 2,200 1,700 2,159 1,807 2,267 
 
62% - 65%-Lumps April 2018 May 2018 June 2018 July 2018 August 2018 September 2018 October 2018 November 2018 December 2018 January 2019 February 2019 March 2019 
Name of Lessee/ Mine/ Circle Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM 
Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate 
Joda 
Serajuddin, Balda 1,400 5,050 
3,685 
1,350 4,500 
3,878 
1,350 4,400 
4,094 
1,350 4,600 
4,301 
1,350 4,600 
4,227 
1,350 5,500 
4,585 
1,350 5,500 
4,672 
1,350 5,500 
4,732 
1,800 5,400 
4,318 
1,800 4,600 
3,947 
1,800 4,100 
3,689 
1,800 4,100 
3,703 
Kaypee, Thakurani 3,450 4,475 2,850 4,475 2,850 4,650 2,850 4,850 2,850 5,000 3,800 5,400 3,800 5,400 3,800 5,300 3,500 5,300 2,575 4,375 3,275 4,250 3,400 4,250 
K.N. Ram, Roida-II   4,650 5,325 4,650 4,875 4,650 4,875 4,650 5,000 4,650 5,000 4,650 5,700 4,500 6,050 4,500 5,800 3,400 5,800 3,400 5,800 3,400 4,900 3,900 4,750 
Indrani Patnaik, 
Unchabali 3,300 4,600 3,300 4,800 3,300 4,800 4,000 4,900 4,120 5,000 4,170 5,800 4,500 6,000 4,170 5,072 3,800 5,700 3,550 5,500 3,200 5,500 3,200 5,650 
KJS Ahluwalia, Nuagaon 3,050 5,400 3,700 5,200 3,000 5,200 3,000 5,300 3,000 5,300 3,000 5,500 3,000 6,075 3,000 5,900 3,050 5,500 2,650 5,100 2,100 4,500 1,855 9,148 
Rungta, Jajang  2,970 5,400 2,551 5,400 2,587 5,848 2,788 6,016 2,421 6,229 2,777 9,782 2,771 7,100 3,286 7,100 3,100 6,856 2,200 5,800 2,500 5,103 2,500 5,582 
Koira Essel, Nuagaon 4,772 5,150 4,667 5,295 4,788 5,390 4,937 5,761 5,249 5,997 6,257 6,812 6,001 6,527 4,751 6,020 4,030 4,973 4,008 4,554 4,249 5,366 4,343 4,977 
BICO Ltd., Nadidihi 1,000 5,400 1,000 5,300 2,100 5,500 5,770 5,800 2,100 5,800 2,100 7,000 2,200 7,000 2,800 7,000 2,800 6,099 4,600 5,133 2,550 5,400 1,900 5,400 
Feegrade ,Rengalibeda  1,000 5,300 1,000 5,300 1,000 5,500 2,100 5,826 2,100 6,163 2,100 7,000 2,200 7,000 2,200 7,000 2,800 5,600 2,000 5,228 2,000 5,400 1,900 5,274 
Rungta Sons, Oraghat 4,300 5,300 4,300 5,300 3,759 5,500 3,818 5,800 4,100 5,951 4,300 7,000 4,300 7,000 4,300 7,000 3,100 5,600 3,100 4,981 1,900 5,400 1,900 5,400 
(Source: Information furnished by the DDMs) 
 
 

Appendices 
103 
 
Ex-Mines Prices (PMV)  of Lessees (FY 2019-20), worked out from the total sale values and quantities furnished to IBM in F1, Returns 
62% - 65%-Fines April 2019 May 2019 June 2019 July 2019 August 2019 September 2019 October 2019 November 2019 December 2019 January 2020 February 2020 March 2020 
Name of Lessee/Mine/  
Circle 
Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM 
Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate 
Joda 
Serajuddin, Balda 1600 2200 
1883 
1,600 2,001 
1,874 
1,600 2,000 
1,931 
1,600 2,000 
1,961 
1,600 2,000 
1,979 
1,600 2,000 
1,849 
1,600 2,000 
1,764 
1,600 1,800 
1,730 
1,600 1,900 
1,816 
1,600 1,900 
1,989 
1,650 2,300 
2,056 
1,650 2,300 
2,111 
Kaypee, Thakurani 1700 2350 1,700 2,250 1,800 2,325 1,800 2,465 1,800 2,465 1,500 2,375 1,500 2,175 1,500 2,150 1,543 2,275 1,800 2,500 1,800 2,650 1,800 2,575 
K.N. Ram, Roida-II 1875 2250 1,900 2,250 1,921 2,400 1,950 2,450 1,950 2,460 1,775 2,500 1,775 2,200 1,775 2,160 1,775 2,245 1,800 2,408 1,925 2,690 1,925 2,577 
Indrani Patnaik, 
Unchabali 1800 3150 1,800 3,150 1,800 3,150 1,800 3,217 1,800 3,350 1,800 3,200 1,750 2,173 1,750 2,100 1,750 2,134 1,750 2,350 1,750 3,760 1,850 3,760 
KJS Ahluwalia, Nuagaon 1850 2560 1,800 2,325 1,850 2,460 1,850 2,500 1,800 2,500 1,725 2,375 1,717 2,375 1,700 2,125 1,700 2,459 2,100 2,535 2,100 2,515 2,100 2,595 
Rungta, Jajang  1707 2513 1,688 2,463 1,690 2,332 1,790 2,423 1,795 2,423 1,691 2,408 1,595 1,671 1,588 1,611  0 1,612 1,612 2,013 2,013  0 
Koira 
Essel, Nuagaon 2034 2740 1,889 2,804 2,283 2,785 2,288 2,809 2,126 2,800 2,133 2,653 2,138 2,644 2,132 2,650 2,129 2,799 2,444 3,086 2,582 3,099 2,575 3,099 
BICO Ltd., Nadidihi 1847 2193 1,846 2,411 1,853 2,427 1,846 2,339 1,853 2,356 1,603 2,430 1,353 1,904 1,353 2,345 1,355 2,603 1,354 2,813 1,353 2,795 1,605 2,290 
Feegrade, Rengalibeda 1855 2205 1,858 2,397 1,862 2,418 1,853 2,572 1,854 2,481 1,602 2,416 1,392 2,259 1,352 2,346 1,353 2,202 1,352 2,415 1,303 2,904 1,354 2,915 
Rungta Sons, Oraghat 1845 2707 1,845 2,706 1,840 2,732 1,843 2,705 1,847 2,687 1,344 2,687 1,347 2,396 1,303 2,400 1,345 2,716 1,345 2,778 1,347 2,908 1,344 2,635 
S.N. Mohanty, Jaldihi  1500 2906 1,500 2,000 1,800 2,150 1,500 2,128 1,500 2,125 1,500 2,020 1,200 1,750 1,200 1,750 1,200 1,861 1,267 2,181 1,293 2,250 1,300 2,229 
 
62% - 65%-Lumps April 2019 May 2019 June 2019 July 2019 August 2019 September 2019 October 2019 November 2019 December 2019 January 2020 February 2020 March 2020 
Name of Lessee/Mine/ Circle Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM  
Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate 
Joda 
Serajuddin, Balda 1,800 4,100 
3,600 
1,800 4,100 
3,466 
1,800 4,100 
3,468 
1,800 4,100 
3,381 
1,800 4,100 
3,417 
1,800 4,000 
3,138 
1,800 4,100 
3,277 
1,850 3,700 
3,189 
1,850 4,000 
3,160 
1,850 4,000 
3,409 
1,850 4,000 
3,672 
1,850 5,000 
3,553 
Kaypee, Thakurani 3,100 4,200 3,100 4,000 3,300 4,150 3,300 4,000 3,000 3,800 2,800 3,800 2,800 3,600 2,800 3,400 2,934 3,550 3,000 4,200 3,000 4,200 3,000 4,131 
K.N. Ram, Roida-II  3,300 4,400 3,800 4,750 3,100 4,700 3,100 4,300 3,000 4,350 3,000 4,100 3,000 4,000 3,000 4,250 3,600 4,650 3,600 5,450 3,900 5,300 3,900 5,350 
Indrani Patnaik, 
Unchabali 3,150 5,450 3,600 5,450 3,500 5,450 3,500 5,600 3,050 5,600 2,850 3,900 2,842 3,550 2,850 3,900 2,850 4,075 2,850 4,650 3,300 4,250 3,300 4,250 
KJS Ahluwalia, Nuagaon  2,200 4,300 2,200 4,450 2,200 4,500 2,124 4,500 2,200 4,150 2,200 4,150 1,850 4,150 1,850 4,150 1,850 4,590 2,270 4,800 2,300 4,800 3,000 5,000 
Rungta, Jajang 2,300 5,378 2,000 4,739 2,200 4,177 2,000 3,904 2,000 4,649 2,100 4,656 2,603 4,243 2,890 3,417 2,100 4,967 2,105 5,444 2,100 5,367 2,118 4,084 
Koira Essel, Nuagaon 3,811 4,828 3,803 4,813 4,104 4,839 3,903 4,160 3,931 4,146 3,706 4,454 3,708 3,950 3,705 4,456 3,709 4,542 4,409 5,543 4,809 5,563 5,046 5,544 
BICO Ltd., Nadidihi 1,900 4,899 2,550 4,500 2,500 4,800 2,500 4,641 2,500 2,900 2,900 4,000 2,750 2,900 2,900 4,000 3,050 3,050  0 3,050 3,050 2,175 4,350 
Feegrade, Rengalibeda 2,000 5,200 2,000 4,515 1,700 4,800 1,673 4,481 1,600 4,300 2,000 4,500 1,700 4,350 1,700 4,350 1,800 4,350 1,800 4,350 1,700 5,045 2,300 5,045 
Rungta Sons, Oraghat  2,500 5,200 1,850 4,583 1,850 4,800 1,850 4,649 1,850 4,340 2,000 4,461 1,900 4,350 1,900 4,350 1,900 4,350 1,900 4,400 1,900 4,350 1,900 5,098 
(Source: Information furnished by the DDMs) 
 
 

Performance Audit of Systems and Controls in Assessment and Collection of Revenue from Major Minerals for the year ended March 2022 
104 
Ex-Mines Prices (PMV)  of Lessees (FY 2020-21), worked out from the total sale value sand quantities furnished to IBM, in F1 Returns 
62% - 65%-Fines April 2020 May 2020 June 2020 July 2020 August 2020 September 2020 October 2020 November 2020 December 2020 January 2021 February 2021 March 2021 
Name of Lessee/Mine/  
Circle 
Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM 
Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate 
Joda 
Serajuddin, Balda 1,750 1,750 
1,995 
1,750 1,750 
1,696 
1,750 1,750 
1,707 
1,750 1,900 
2,047 
1,650 1,950 
2,130 
1,750 1,900 
2,157 
1,900 1,900 
2,562 
0 0 
3251 
0 0 
3963 
2,044 2,044 
4,916 
2,044 2,044 
5,514 
1,985 2,044 
5,867 
Arcelor Mittal, Thakurani 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1,441 1,441 1,536 1,536 1,573 1,573 1,878 1,904 3,012 3,209 4,913 5,271 5,074 5,490 4,861 4,904 
K.N. Ram, Roida-II 2,540 2,540 1,600 2,540 1,600 2,150 800 2,150 800 2,150 800 2,600 800 800 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Indrani Patnaik, 
Unchabali 
2,650 2,650 2,100 2,300 2,075 2,075 2,075 2,350 225 2,350 2,100 2,500 2,500 2,500 0 0 0 0 5,500 6,010 5,350 6,010 5,500 5,560 
KJS Ahluwalia, Nuagaon 2,595 2,595 2,595 2,595 1,700 2,220 1,100 3,000 1,000 2,445 1,000 2,700 1,000 3,501 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
JSW, Nuagaon 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1,995 3,800 2,340 8,622 1,720 9,445 4,400 6,206 2,157 6,431 3,963 6,000 4,916 5,500 
Rungta, Jajang 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Koira 
Essel, Nuagaon 0 0 1,588 2,104 1,584 2,126 1,691 2,554 1,973 3,526 3,064 5,077 3,513 4,446 3,832 6,746 6,124 7,302 6,275 7,637 6,085 7,302 5,330 6,416 
BICO Ltd., Nadidihi 0 0 1,753 1,753 1,709 2,266 1,682 2,268 1,748 1,748 1,756 1,756 1,735 1,735 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Feegrade, Rengalibeda 0 0 1,763 1,763 1,710 2,279 1,703 1,765 1,725 1,763 0 0 1,739 1,739 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Rungta Sons, Oraghat 2,304 2,311 2,312 2,312 1,746 2,271 1,509 2,340 1,222 2,476 1,081 3,749 1,496 4,491 1,489 4,485 1,489 6,158 4,636 70,00 4,630 6,141 5,725 7,003 
S.N. Mohanty, Jaldihi  2,025 2,025 1,850 2,050 1,675 1,849 1,700 1,800 1,700 2,575 1,800 3,052 1,700 3,345 1,704 4,025 2,300 5,500 3,500 6,198 3,931 6,100 4,100 6,075 
 
62% - 65%-Lumps April 2020 May 2020 June 2020 July 2020 August 2020 September 2020 October 2020 November 2020 December 2020 January 2021 February 2021 March 2021 
Name of Lessee/Mine/ Circle Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM  
Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate 
Joda 
Serajuddin, Balda 0 0 
3,286 
2,800 3,500 
3,073 
2,850 3,500 
3128 
2,900 3,500 
3,049 
2,900 3,500 
3,317 
2,900 3,400 
3325 
1,850 2,900 
4,285 
0 0 
4,660 
0 0 
5,718 
0 0 
6,530 
0 0 
6,433 
1,250 2,499 
6,197 
Arcelor Mittal, Thakurani 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
K.N. Ram, Roida-II  0 0 0 0 0 0 1,500 1,500 1,500 1,500 1,500 1,500 800 1,500 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Indrani Patnaik, 
Unchabali 
3,400 3,400 3,250 3,850 29,00 3,850 2,850 3,850 2,900 4,000 3,300 3,850 3,500 3,850 4,850 4,850 0 0 0 0 5,100 6,350 6,000 6,350 
KJS Ahluwalia, Nuagaon  3,000 3,000 3,000 3,000 0 0 3,000 3,000 2,850 3,200 2,200 3,550 2,400 3,550 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
JSW, Nuagaon 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4,545 4,850 4,641 5,310 2,632 6,142 5,500 7,700 3,325 3,325 5,500 7,600 5,500 7800 
Rungta, Jajang 3,309 3,409 3,409 3,672 2,953 3,672 3,553 3,553 3,553 3,553 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Koira Essel, Nuagaon 0 0 3,207 3,914 3,208 3,928 3,332 4,136 3,922 5,540 5,153 7,125 5,909 6,757 5,911 9,031 8,104 9,021 8,413 9,725 7,791 9,280 7,422 9,598 
BICO Ltd., Nadidihi 3,050 3,050 3,050 3,050 2,000 3,450 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Feegrade, Rengalibeda 2,515 4,800 2,515 2,521 2,900 3,700 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Rungta Sons, Oraghat  3,127 4,350 3,000 5,100 2,500 4,300 2,400 3,700 2,400 3,855 2,600 6,750 2,714 6,750 2,600 5,500 3,500 7,000 4,000 7,000 4,400 8411 4,500 7,223 
(Source: Information furnished by the DDMs) 
 
 

Appendices 
105 
 
Ex-Mines Prices (PMV) of Lessees (FY 2021-22), worked out from the total sale values and quantities furnished to IBM, in F1 Returns 
62% - 65%-Fines April 2021 May 2021 June 2021 July 2021 August 2021 September 2021 October 2021 November 2021 December 2021 January 2022 February 2022 March 2022 
Name of Lessee/Mine/ 
Circle 
Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM 
Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate 
Joda 
Serajuddin, Balda 1,166 2,558 
5,905 
4,000 9,500 
7,663 
4,000 8,000 
7,284 
4,000 4,000 
8,364 
0 0 
8235 
0 0 
7,116 
0 0 
5,763 
0 0 
5,799 
0 0 
5,099 
0 0 
4,841 
0 0 
5,388 
5,200 5,200 
5,215 
Arcelor Mittal, 
Thakurani 4,384 4,423 4,458 4,458 4,940 4,940 5,326 5,326 8,402 8,402 0 0 0 0 0 0 4839 4,860 0 0 0 0 0 0 
N P & S Pvt. Ltd,  
Roida-II 610 6,100 5,000 6,101 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4,800 4,800 4,950 4,950 5,800 7,000 
Indrani Patnaik, 
Unchabali 5,560 5,560 5,560 5,560 6,450 6,450 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
KJS Ahluwalia, 
Nuagaon 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2,100 2,100 2,100 4,000 0 0 0 0 0 0 
JSW, Nuagaon 5,514 5,514 5,867 5,867 5,905 5,905 7,663 7,663 7,284 7,284 8,364 8,364 8,235 8,235 7,116 7,116 0 0 0 0 0 0 4,841 6,030 
JSW, Jajang 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Koira Essel, Nuagaon 5,601 8,940 7,812 1,0153 9,039 10,461 10,115 10,806 8,683 8,698 7,095 7,200 6,065 6,080 5,147 5,829 4,299 5,817 4,300 5,270 4,319 5,448 6,150 6,168 
ESL, Nadidihi 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
ESL, Rengalibeda 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Rungta Sons, Oraghat 5,723 7,703 5,815 9,432 5,736 9,696 5,735 10,027 5,040 9,690 5,535 9,270 5,487 8,731 5,324 6,458 4,500 6,164 4,500 6,176 4,500 5,836 4,723 7,103 
SN Mohanty, Jaldihi  2,750 6,650 4,763 9,200 6,850 9,200 6,500 8,900 7,167 8,900 6,300 7,000 3,500 5,500 4,500 5,600 4,400 5,600 4,400 4,500 0 0 5,400 5,400 
 
62% - 65% Lumps April 2021 May 2021 June 2021 July 2021 August 2021 September 2021 October 2021 November 2021 December 2021 January 2022 February 2022 March 2022 
Name of Lessee/Mine/ 
Circle 
Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM Min Max IBM  
Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate Rate 
Joda 
Serajuddin, Balda 1,461 2,197 
7903 
7,200 11,000 
8484 
7,200 12,500 
10368 
11,000 12,500 
10,901 
11,000 12,500 
10711 
9,000 9,000 
9,318 
0 0 
8,425 
0 0 
7,900 
0 0 
6,668 
0 0 
6,921 
0 0 
7,409 
0 0 
8,341 
Arcelor Mittal, 
Thakurani 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
N P & S Pvt. Ltd, 
Roida-II 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Indrani Patnaik, 
Unchabali 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
KJS Ahluwalia, 
Nuagaon  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2,400 2,400 2,400 4,000 0 0 0 0 0 0 
JSW, Nuagaon 5,549 10,263 6,197 11,200 7,903 7,903 8,484 8,484 10,368 10,368 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6,921 6,921 
JSW, Jajang  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Koira 
Essel, Nuagaon 10,187 11,853 11,315 13,347 13,298 16,089 15,288 15,305 12,300 13,463 11,575 12,300 11,522 11,522 9,458 10,173 6,501 7,579 6,506 7,621 6,790 7,942 4,900 4,900 
ESL, Nadidihi 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
ESL, Rengalibeda 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Rungta Sons, 
Oraghat  4,500 7,209 4,500 10,100 7,200 9,600 7,400 12,700 4,720 11,700 4,720 9,700 4,718 9,000 6,800 11,700 6,000 11,700 5,000 8,171 5,000 7,950 6,000 10,871 
SN Mohanty, Jaldihi 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6,000 6,000 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
(Source: Information furnished by the DDMs) 
 
  

Performance Audit o f Systems and Controls in Assessment and Collection of Revenue from Major 
Minerals for the year ended March 2022 
106 
 
Appendix –X 
(Refer paragraph 3.4.1 at page 53) 
Accumulation of low grade iron and chromite in lease areas, violating the 
principle of sustainable use and conservation of minerals 
Name 
of 
Circle 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the mine Quantity of 
mineral reject/ 
sub-grade ore 
stacked  
(In MT) 
Percentage of Ferus 
content of the Stock 
Period Price of minerals 
published by 
IBM for March 
2022 for fines 
₹1,838 
(minimum) 
{Col.4×₹1838} 
(₹ in crore) 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
Joda 
1 Jajang Iron ore of M/s Rungta 
Mines Ltd 
41,94,547 Above 45% Fe As on 
30.06.2016 
770.96 
73,22,797 Above 55% Fe As on 
30.06.2016 
1,345.93 
2 Unchabali Iron ore of Smt. 
Indrani Patnaik 
10,72,616 45- 58% Fe As on 1.04.2014 197.15 
3 Balda Block Iron mines of M/s 
Seerajudin & Co 
81,85,536 45-55% Fe As on 1.04.2018 1,504.50 
40,15,589 Below 55% Fe As on 1.04.2018 738.07 
4 Roida-II Iron ore of M/s K. N. 
Ram & Co 
4,70,100 45- 58% Fe As on 1.04.2018 86.40 
5 Thakurani Iron mine of M/s 
KayPee Enterprises 
7,72,500 45- 55% Fe As on 1.04.2018 141.99 
Koida 
6 Nadidih Iron & Mn mines of 
M/s Feegrade & Co.  Ltd. 
8,97,810 Below 55% Fe Prior to 2015-16 165.02 
11,87,454 Below 55% Fe Prior to 2015-16 218.25 
7 Narayanposhi Iron & Mn mines 
of M/s Aryan Mining & 
Trading Corporation pvt.  Ltd 
1,990 Below 60% Fe (L) Prior to 2015-16 0.37 
3,77,468 Below 58% Fe (F) Prior to 2015-16 69.38 
17,44,972 Below 55% Fe Prior to 2015-16 320.73 
8 Kurmitar Iron mines of M/s 
OMC Ltd 
2,20,000 Below 55% Fe  Prior to 2015-16 40.44 
9 KJST Iron, Bauxite & Mn of 
M/s S. N. Mohanty 
14,00,000 Above 45% Fe Prior to 2015-16 257.32 
10 Sanindpur Iron & Bauxite of 
M/s Rungta Sons (P)Ltd  
4,83,560 Above 45% Fe Prior to 2018-19 88.88 
22,42,626 Above 45% Fe  Prior to 2018-19 412.19 
23,95,106 Above 45% Fe  Prior to 2018-19 440.22 
11 Oraghat Iron of M/s Rungta 
Sons (P)Ltd  
47,79,056 Below 55% Fe Prior to 2018-19 878.39 
5,47,396 Below 55% Fe  Prior to 2018-19 100.61 
5,53,700 Below 58% Fe Prior to 2018-19 101.77 
44,663 Below 58% Fe Prior to 2018-19 8.21 
  Total 4,29,09,486   7,886.78 
Royalty calculated @ 15 per cent 1,183.02 
(Source: Information furnished by the DDMs) 
 

Appendices 
107 
 
Appendix – XI 
(Refer paragraph 3.4.3 at page 55) 
OMC, South Kaliapani Chromite mines: Loss of royalty, due to direct sale of 
low grade ore 
(Amount in `) 
Month Sale of 
below 
40% 
Cr2O3 
(in MT) 
Royalty 
rate (per 
MT) 
Royalty 
realised 
Percentage 
of 
recovery* 
Concentrate 
recoverable 
on 
beneficiation 
Royalty 
rate (per 
MT) 
 
Royalty 
realisable 
 
Loss of 
royalty 
 
Apr-20 0 0 0 44.09 0 0 0 0 
May-20 0 0 0 44.09 0 0 0 0 
Jun-20 7,830.14 352.2 27,57,775 44.09 3,452.55 1,304.55 45,04,024 17,46,249 
Jul-20 23,638.15 304.95 72,08,454 44.09 10,422.78 1,342.05 1,39,87,892 67,79,438 
Aug-20 8,687.74 418.05 36,31,910 44.09 3,830.69 1,335.60 51,16,270 14,84,360 
Sep-20 24,911.70 600.9 1,49,69,441 44.09 10,984.33 1,884.60 2,07,01,068 57,31,627 
Oct-20 23,270.69 340.65 79,27,161 44.09 10,260.75 1,884.60 1,93,37,409 1,14,10,248 
Total 88,338.42            2,71,51,922 
(Source: Information furnished by the DDMs) 
* Percentage of concentrate recovered on beneficiation of below 40% cr fines, during January to 
March 2017, (last instance), 15,501.64 MT of concentrate was recovered from 35,156.66 MT of 
low grade chromite fines (44.09%) 
 

Performance Audit of Systems and Controls in Assessment and Collection of Revenue from Major Minerals for the year ended March 2022 
108 
Appendix – XII 
(Refer paragraph 4.2 at page 59) 
Non-levy of interest on delayed payment of royalty 
  (` in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
the 
Circle 
Name of the lessee Type of 
payment  
Month/ 
quarter 
ending 
Due date of 
payment 
Payment 
due 
Due date of 
payment 
including 
grace period 
(15 + 59 =74 
days) 
Amount 
paid 
Date of 
arrear 
amount 
paid 
Delay 
in 
days 
Rate of 
interest 24 
per cent  
per annum 
Interest 
payable 
for delay 
payment 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 
1 Joda M/s. Sharda Mines (P) Ltd., 
Thakurani Block 'B' 
Royalty 31-03-2020 15-04-2020 1.54 14-06-2020 1.54 10-09-2020 88 24 0.09 
2 Joda Thakurani Iron ore mines of M/s 
Kaypee Enterprises 
Royalty 31-03-2018 15-04-2018 10.92 14-06-2018 10.92 23-07-2018 39 24 0.28 
3 Joda Balda Iron ore mines of M/s 
Seerajudin & Co 
Royalty 31-03-2020 15-04-2020 26.56 14-06-2020 26.56 04-08-2020 51 24 0.89 
4 Koira M/s M.G. Mohanty, Petabeda, 
Iron and Mn Mines, Petabeda 
(19.425 ha) 
Royalty 31-03-2019 15-04-2019 0.37 14-06-2019 0.37 31-07-2019 47 24 0.01 
5 Koira ESSEL Mining & Industries Ltd. 
Koira iron Mines, 90.143 ha 
Royalty 30-09-2019 15-10-2019 1.67 14-12-2019 1.67 07-03-2020 84 24 0.09 
6 Koira Penguin Trading Agency, 49.372 
ha 
Royalty 31-03-2018 15-04-2018 1.73 14-06-2018 1.73 29-08-2018 76 24 0.09 
7 Koira Rungta Sons (P) Ltd, Oraghat 
iron mines, 82.961 ha 
Royalty 31-03-2020 15-04-2020 14.82 14-06-2020 14.82 28-07-2020 44 24 0.43 
31-12-2018 15-01-2019 7.75 16-03-2019 7.75 07-05-2019 52 24 0.26 
30-09-2018 15-10-2018 11.27 14-12-2018 11.27 17-01-2019 34 24 0.25 
31-03-2018 15-04-2018 6.79 14-06-2018 6.79 13-07-2018 29 24 0.13 
31-12-2017 15-01-2018 2.59 16-03-2018 2.59 31-03-2018 15 24 0.03 
8 Koira Rungta Sons (P) Ltd, Sanindpur 
Iron and Bauxite Mines, 147.100 
ha 
Royalty 31-03-2020 15-04-2020 11.08 14-06-2020 11.08 29-07-2020 45 24 0.33 
31-12-2019 15-01-2020 2.59 15-03-2020 2.59 24-06-2020 101 24 0.17 
30-09-2018 15-10-2018 5.99 14-12-2018 5.99 18-01-2019 35 24 0.14 
31-03-2018 15-04-2018 12.82 14-06-2018 12.82 13-07-2018 29 24 0.24 
9 Koira M/s, Feegrade & Co, Nadidihi Royalty 30-06-2018 15-07-2018 6.22 13-09-2018 6.22 28-09-2018 15 24 0.06 
30-09-2018 15-10-2018 6.15 14-12-2018 6.15 17-01-2019 34 24 0.14 
31-12-2018 15-01-2019 6.53 16-03-2019 6.53 17-05-2019 62 24 0.27 
31-12-2019 15-01-2020 7.04 15-03-2020 7.04 11-05-2020 57 24 0.26 

Appendices 
109 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
the 
Circle 
Name of the lessee Type of 
payment  
Month/ 
quarter 
ending 
Due date of 
payment 
Payment 
due 
Due date of 
payment 
including 
grace period 
(15 + 59 =74 
days) 
Amount 
paid 
Date of 
arrear 
amount 
paid 
Delay 
in 
days 
Rate of 
interest 24 
per cent  
per annum 
Interest 
payable 
for delay 
payment 
29-02-2020 15-03-2020 2.72 14-05-2020 2.72 28-07-2020 75 24 0.13 
31-03-2020 15-04-2020 18.15 14-06-2020 18.15 28-07-2020 44 24 0.53 
10 Koira M/s. BICo Ltd., Nadidihi  Royalty 31-12-2017 15-01-2018 2.86 16-03-2018 2.86 31-03-2018 15 24 0.03 
31-03-2018 15-04-2018 15.25 14-06-2018 15.25 13-07-2018 29 24 0.29 
30-11-2018 15-12-2018 2.04 13-02-2019 2.04 29-05-2019 105 24 0.14 
31-12-2018 15-01-2019 8.20 16-03-2019 8.20 29-05-2019 74 24 0.40 
31-12-2019 15-01-2020 10.76 15-03-2020 10.76 24-06-2020 101 24 0.71 
11 Koira M/s. BICo Ltd., Teherai  Royalty 31-10-2017 15-11-2017 3.77 14-01-2018 1.05 31-03-2018 76 24 0.05 
30-11-2017 15-12-2017 13-02-2018 1.29 31-03-2018 46 24 0.04 
31-12-2017 15-01-2018 16-03-2018 1.43 31-03-2018 15 24 0.01 
31-01-2018 15-02-2018 2.89 16-04-2018 0.45 13-07-2018 88 24 0.03 
28-02-2018 15-03-2018 14-05-2018 1.73 13-07-2018 60 24 0.07 
31-03-2018 15-04-2018 14-06-2018 0.71 13-07-2018 29 24 0.01 
30-06-2018 15-07-2018 0.72 13-09-2018 0.72 28-09-2018 15 24 0.01 
31-08-2018 15-09-2018 0.22 14-11-2018 0.18 17-01-2019 64 24 0.01 
30-09-2018 15-10-2018 14-12-2018 0.04 17-01-2019 34 24 0.00 
12 Koira M/s. OMC, Kurmitar Royalty 31-12-2018 15-01-2019 9.78 16-03-2019 9.78 04-04-2019 19 24 0.12 
28-02-2018 15-03-2018 1.90 14-05-2018 1.90 04-07-2018 51 24 0.06 
31-03-2018 15-04-2018 14.46 14-06-2018 14.46 04-07-2018 20 24 0.19 
30-06-2018 15-07-2018 4.24 13-09-2018 4.24 30-09-2018 17 24 0.05 
13 Jajpur Daitari Iron ore Mines, OMC Ltd.  Additional 
Royalty 
30-04-2021 15-05-2021 74.87 14-07-2021 74.87 24-11-2021 133 24 6.55 
31-05-2021 15-06-2021 74.10 14-08-2021 74.10 24-11-2021 102 24 4.97 
30-06-2021 15-07-2021 100.95 13-09-2021 100.95 25-11-2021 73 24 4.85 
31-07-2021 15-08-2021 89.49 14-10-2021 89.49 25-11-2021 42 24 2.47 
31-08-2021 15-09-2021 90.72 14-11-2021 90.72 25-11-2021 11 24 0.66 
14 Jajpur Sukrangi chromite Mines, OMC 
Ltd. 
Additional 
Royalty 
30-04-2021 15-05-2021 0.02 14-07-2021 0.02 18-11-2021 127 24 0.00 
31-05-2021 15-06-2021 0.88 14-08-2021 0.88 18-11-2021 96 24 0.06 
30-06-2021 15-07-2021 3.30 13-09-2021 3.30 18-11-2021 66 24 0.14 
31-07-2021 15-08-2021 4.34 14-10-2021 4.34 18-11-2021 35 24 0.10 
31-08-2021 15-09-2021 5.16 14-11-2021 5.16 18-11-2021 4 24 0.01 
15 Jajpur South Kaliapani chromite Mines, Additional 30-04-2021 15-05-2021 0.07 14-07-2021 0.07 18-11-2021 127 24 0.01 

Performance Audit of Systems and Controls in Assessment and Collection of Revenue from Major Minerals for the year ended March 2022 
110 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
the 
Circle 
Name of the lessee Type of 
payment  
Month/ 
quarter 
ending 
Due date of 
payment 
Payment 
due 
Due date of 
payment 
including 
grace period 
(15 + 59 =74 
days) 
Amount 
paid 
Date of 
arrear 
amount 
paid 
Delay 
in 
days 
Rate of 
interest 24 
per cent  
per annum 
Interest 
payable 
for delay 
payment 
OMC Ltd. Royalty 31-05-2021 15-06-2021 2.83 14-08-2021 2.83 18-11-2021 96 24 0.18 
30-06-2021 15-07-2021 21.34 13-09-2021 21.34 18-11-2021 66 24 0.93 
31-07-2021 15-08-2021 26.94 14-10-2021 26.94 18-11-2021 35 24 0.62 
31-08-2021 15-09-2021 26.91 14-11-2021 26.91 18-11-2021 4 24 0.07 
    Total       764.31   764.31       28.66 
(Source: Information furnished by the DDMs) 
 
 
 

Appendices 
111 
 
Appendix – XIII 
(Refer paragraph 4.3 at page 60) 
Differential royalty leviable on the differential sales turnover declared by 
the mines owners (Lessees), in their Annual Returns, under the VAT/ 
GST Acts and Mining Acts, during the period 2015-22 
(` in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
Mines 
Owner 
(Lessee) 
Name 
of 
Circle 
Financial Year Sales 
turnover 
declared in 
Annual 
Return 
under 
VAT/GST 
Acts 
Sales 
turnover 
declared 
in H1/G1 
Annual 
Return 
Difference 
in sales 
turnover 
Differential 
royalty 
leviable at 
the rate of 
15 per cent 
DMF at the 
rate of 30 
per cent 
leviable 
NMET 
at the 
rate of 2 
per cent 
leviable 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 
1 Kaypee 
Enterprises  
Joda 2015-16 467.09 342.70 124.39 18.66 5.60 0.37 
2016-17 766.85 757.77 9.08 1.36 0.41 0.03 
2017-18 (VAT) 297.88           
2017-18 (GST) 1,003.99           
2017-18 (Total) 1,301.87 1,067.44 234.43 35.17 10.55 0.70 
2018-19 1,863.36 1,355.29 508.07 76.21 22.86 1.52 
2019-20 1,632.52 NA 0    
2020-21 262.13 NA 0    
Sub-Total 4,399.17 3,523.20 875.97 131.40 39.42 2.63 
2 Tarini 
Prasad 
Mohanty 
Joda 2015-16 35.76 28.84 6.92 1.04 0.31 0.02 
2016-17 48.09 60.50 -12.41*    
2017-18 58.67 61.90 -3.23*    
2018-19 51.97 32.48 19.49 2.92 0.88 0.06 
2019-20 120.28 113.34 6.94 1.04 0.31 0.02 
2020-21 236.57 185.99 50.58 7.59 2.28 0.15 
Sub-Total 444.59 360.64 83.95 12.59 3.78 0.25 
3 Essel 
Mining and 
Industries 
Ltd. 
Joda 2015-16 280.17 NA 0    
2016-17 633.87 NA 0    
2017-18 584.28 26.62 557.66 83.65 25.09 1.67 
2018-19 3,933.75 2,127.75 1,806.00 270.90 81.27 5.42 
2019-20 5,561.18 2,946.75 2,614.43 392.16 117.65 7.84 
2020-21 4,660.09 NA 0    
Sub-Total 10,079.21 5,101.11 4,978.10 746.71 224.01 14.93 
Total of Joda 14,922.97 8,984.95 5,938.02 890.70 267.21 17.81 
4 Jitendra 
Nath 
Patnaik 
Koira 2015-16 NA NA 0    
2016-17 NA NA 0    
2017-18 NA NA 0    
2018-19 16.50 16.17 0.33 0.05 0.01 0.001 
2019-20 32.12 25.70 6.42 0.96 0.29 0.02 
2020-21 77.51 NA 0    
Sub-Total 48.62 41.87 6.75 1.01 0.30 0.02 
5 Kanakdhara 
Mining 
Minerals 
(P) Ltd. 
Koira 2015-16 0.38 NA 0    
2016-17 0.55 NA 0    
2017-18 0.18 NA 0    
2018-19 12.43 1.79 10.64 1.60 0.48 0.03 
2019-20 14.79 0.59 14.20 2.13 0.64 0.04 
2020-21 17.77 0.95 16.82 2.52 0.76 0.05 
Sub-Total 44.99 3.33 41.66 6.25 1.87 0.12 
6 Korp 
Resources 
(P) Ltd. 
Koira 2015-16 9.67 11.44 -1.77*    
2016-17 7.54 0 7.54    
2017-18 VAT) 1.02 
  2017-18 (GST) 1.60 
2017-18 (Total) 2.62 2.60 0.02 0.00234 0.00070 0.00005 
2018-19 4.34 NA 0    
2019-20 NA NA 0    
2020-21 NA NA 0    
Sub-Total 2.62 2.60 0.02 0.00234 0.00070 0.00005 
7 M G Koira 2015-16 47.02 46.86 0.16 0.02 0.01 0.0005 

Performance Audit of Systems and Controls in Assessment and Collection of Revenue from 
Major Minerals for the year ended March 2022 
112 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
Mines 
Owner 
(Lessee) 
Name 
of 
Circle 
Financial Year Sales 
turnover 
declared in 
Annual 
Return 
under 
VAT/GST 
Acts 
Sales 
turnover 
declared 
in H1/G1 
Annual 
Return 
Difference 
in sales 
turnover 
Differential 
royalty 
leviable at 
the rate of 
15 per cent 
DMF at the 
rate of 30 
per cent 
leviable 
NMET 
at the 
rate of 2 
per cent 
leviable 
Mohanty 2016-17 24.69 NA 0    
2017-18 VAT) 5.20           
2017-18 (GST) 56.06           
2017-18 (Total) 61.26 53.99 7.27 1.09 0.33 0.02 
2018-19 72.01 62.06 9.95 1.49 0.45 0.03 
2019-20 94.92 78.38 16.54 2.48 0.74 0.05 
2020-21 127.67 110.31 17.36 2.60 0.78 0.05 
Sub-Total 402.89 351.60 51.29 7.69 2.31 0.15 
Total of Koira 499.11 399.40 99.71 14.96 4.49 0.30 
Grand Total 15,422.08 9,384.35 6,037.73 905.66 271.70 18.11 
(Source: Information collected from Commercial Tax Department and i3MS)  
NA – Data not available  
*       Excess transaction over VAT/GST not considered  
 
  
 
 
   

Appendices 
113 
 
Appendix-XIV 
(Refer paragraph 5.2.2 at page 67) 
Unlawful production of iron ore, exceeding the quantity approved in  
the Environment Clearance 
 
Name of the mines:  Thakurani B Iron mine of M/s Sharda Mines (P) Ltd 
Financial Year Quantity of 
extraction 
approved 
in EC in 
MT 
Quantity 
extracted 
in MT 
Excess 
quantity 
extracted 
in MT 
Price of mineral (lumps) 
per MT as of March of 
the year in rupees as 
notified by IBM 
(Average of -65% Fe 
lump and -62% Fe lump 
taken, as per the grade 
produced from the mine  
Amount 
realisable  
(In ₹) 
Amount 
in Crores 
2019-20 40,00,000 49,61,260 9,61,260 3,119.50 2,99,86,50,570   
2020-21 40,00,000 
 
61,13,774 
 
21,13,774 5,954 
 
12,58,54,10,396   
Total     
 
30,75,034   
 
15,58,40,60,966 
 
1,558.41 
IBM price and Slime (tailings) production details   
 Month Month        
Grade March-20 March-21         
Below 62% Fe 2,686 5,711         
Below 65% Fe 3,553 6,197         
Total 6,239 11,908         
Average 3,119.50 5,954         
Slime production details        
Month November 
2020 
December 
2020 
January 
2021 
February  
2021 
March 
2021   
0-2mm slime 14,504 10,909 5,084 4,748 4,957   
Production of 0-2 mm slime has been excluded from the total production of FY 2020-21   
       
   Total production for FY 2020-21 61,53,976  
   Slime total for FY 2020-21 40,202  
   Total 61,13,774  
      
(Source: Information furnished by the DDMs) 
 

Performance Audit of Systems and Controls in Assessment and Collection of Revenue from Major Minerals for the year ended March 2022 
114 
Appendix – XV 
(Refer paragraph 5.2.3 at page 68) 
Excess production of ore, exceeding the quantities stipulated in the mining plans  
Name of 
the 
Circle 
Name of mine Financial 
Year 
Production quantity stipulated in the mining plan Actual production  Excess production 
of ore  
(In MT) 
IBM notified 
Price per MT as 
on March (In ₹) 
Total Price 
chargeable (` in 
crore) 
Remarks Ore Subgrade Mineral 
Reject 
Production from 
sub grade dump Ore Subgrade Mineral 
Reject 
Joda 
Keypee 
Enterprises 
Thakurani Iron 
ore 
2016-17 52,56,738 2,43,367 0 0 54,81,286 0 0 2,24,548 2,553 57.33 
IBM notified 
Price per MT, as 
on March for (-) 
65%Fe  
2017-18 52,56,684 2,43,365 0 2,700 54,99,515 0 0 2,42,831 3,889 94.44 
Total 1,05,13,422 4,86,732 0 2,700 1,09,80,801 0 0 4,67,379  151.77 
K N Ram  
Roida-II Iron ore 
2015-16 18,11,740 3,88,230 0 0 21,97,896 0 0 3,86,156 2,047 79.05 
2016-17 18,07,540 3,87,330 0 0 21,99,409 0 0 3,91,869 2,553 100.04 
2019-20 28,11,203 6,88,770 0 0 34,99,291 0 0 6,88,089 4,835 332.69 
Total  64,30,483 14,64,330 0 0 78,96,596 0 0 14,66,114  511.78 (-) 52.04* 
Rungta 
Jajang Iron ore 
2017-18 1,21,95,855 6,41,887 0   1,27,00,232 0 0 5,04,377 4,725 238.32 
Total 1,21,95,855 6,41,887 0   1,27,00,232 0 0 5,04,377  238.32 
Indrani Patanaik 
Unchabali Iron 
ore 
2015-16 33,46,325 5,03,675 0 1,50,000 39,89,132 0 0 6,42,807 2,047 131.58 
2016-17 36,14,013 2,35,987 0 1,50,000 39,92,806 0 0 3,78,793 2,553 96.71 
2017-18 30,53,733 7,96,268 0 1,50,000 39,90,662 0 0 9,36,929 4,725 442.70 
2019-20 30,47,555 7,52,346 0 0 37,73,306 0 0 7,25,751 4,835 350.90 
Total 1,30,61,626 22,88,276 0 450000 1,57,45,906 0 0 26,84,280  1,021.89 
OMC 
Roida C 
2017-18 2,89,788 1,00,035 0 0 3,83,840 0 0 94,052 4,725 44.44 
2018-19 3,68,676 51,680 0 0 3,75,670 0 0 6,994 5,171 3.62 
Total 6,58,464 1,51,715 0 0 7,59,510 0 0 1,01,046  48.06 
Koira 
M/s. SN. 
Mohanty KJST 
Iron Bauxite and 
Mn  
2016-17 14,55,399 0 2,14,731 2,80,000 18,96,149 0 0 4,40,750 2,553 112.52 IBM notified 
Price per MT, as 
on March for  
(-) 65%Fe  
2017-18 14,98,953 0 2,21,157 2,80,000 18,85,053 0 0 3,86,100 3,889 150.15 
2018-19 14,98,953 0 2,21,157 2,80,000 17,03,215 0 0 2,04,262 3,703 75.64 
2019-20 14,98,953 0 2,21,157 2,80,000 19,00,361 0 0 4,01,408 3,553 142.62 
2020-21 14,98,953 0 2,21,157 2,80,000 17,19,354 1,81,000 2,20,727 2,20,401 6,197 136.58 
Total 74,51,211 0 10,99,359 14,00,000 91,04,132 1,81,000 2,20,727 16,52,921  617.51  
M/s JN Patnaik 
Bhanjpali Iron 
mines  
2019-20 1,75,420 0 46,925 37,590 2,51,100 0 1,200 75,680 2,686 20.33 IBM notified 
Price per MT as 
on March for  
(-) 58% Fe  
Total 1,75,420 0 46,925 37,590 2,51,100 0 1,200 75,680  20.33 
M/s Essel Mining 
Koira Iron mines  
2016-17 35,48,000 0 4,52,000 40,00,000 39,95,660 0 34,550 4,47,660 2,553 114.29 
IBM notified 
Price per MT as 
on March for  
(-)65%Fe  
2017-18 32,75,000 0 7,25,000 40,00,000 37,53,567 0 34,300 4,78,567 3,889 186.11 
2018-19 35,16,000 0 4,84,000 40,00,000 39,37,437 0 1,46,632 4,21,437 3,703 156.06 
2019-20 51,73,000 0 8,27,000 60,00,000 58,15,515 0 0 6,42,515 3,553 228.29 
2020-21 53,88,000 0 6,12,000 60,00,000 59,94,955 0 0 6,06,955 6,197 376.13 
Total 2,09,00,000 0 31,00,000 2,40,00,000 2,34,97,134 0 2,15,482 25,97,134 19,895 1,060.88  
  Total                    3,618.50   
*  The lessee, during 2019-20, had violated the production limit prescribed in EC also, as pointed out in Para 5.2.2 (i), hence the value of the minerals extracted in excess to EC limit, amounting to ` 52.04 crore has been deducted. 
(Source: Information furnished by the DDMs) 

Appendices 
115 
 
Appendix-XVI 
(Refer paragraph 5.2.4 at page 70) 
Unlawful production of chromite without Forest Clearance 
Month Below 40% 
Cr Fines 
IBM 
price 
per 
MT 
Total 
Price 
40% to 
52% Cr 
Fines 
IBM 
price 
per 
MT 
Total Price 52% Cr 
above 
Fines 
IBM 
price 
per 
MT 
Total 
Price 
Concentrate IBM 
price 
per 
MT 
Total 
Price 
Below 
40% Cr 
lumps 
IBM 
price per 
MT 
Total 
Price  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 
December 2019 
(18.12.2019 to 
31.12.2019) 14 
days 
1,125.42 2,261 25,44,574.62 5,017.44 9,796 4,91,50,842.24 2,425.14 13,119 3,18,15,411.66 0 11,519 0 0 0 
  
January 2020 9,254.04 2,143 1,98,31,407.72 15,367.00 9,387 14,42,50,029.00 2,573.96 12,504 3,21,84,795.84 3,865.00 12,564 4,85,59,860 363.98 7,969 29,00,557  
February 2020 4,859.34 2,229 1,08,31,468.86 10,207.60 10,023 10,23,10,774.80 3,045.04 12,245 3,72,86,514.80 4,284.00 12,596 5,39,61,264       
March 2020 12,656.03 2,701 3,41,83,937.03 7,521.02 8,300 6,24,24,466.00 1,189.95 10,685 1,27,14,615.75 3,235.00 12,250 3,96,28,750       
April 2020 910.16 2,701 24,58,342.16 4,323.89 9,049 3,91,26,880.61 2,885.96 10,694 3,08,62,456.24 3,585.98 12,564 4,50,54,253       
May 2020 220.01 1,836 4,03,938.36 7,408.09 7,209 5,34,04,920.81 168.90 10,483 17,70,578.70 3,494.95 12,596 4,40,22,390       
June 2020 12,116.04 2,348 2,84,48,461.92 1,377.96 7,408 1,02,07,927.68 0 8,875 0 2,947.00 8,697 2,56,30,059       
Jul7 2020 12,026.01 2,033 2,44,48,878.33 2,500.00 8,300 2,07,50,000.00 0 10,256 0 3,003.99 8,947 2,68,76,699       
August 2020 8,064.03 2,787 2,24,74,451.61 415.98 9,049 37,64,203.02 0 9,967 0 1,853.09 8,904 1,64,99,913       
September 2020 120.01 4,006 4,80,760.06 507.00 8,502 43,10,514.00   9,678 0 1,938.00 12,564 2,43,49,032       
October 2020 0 2,271 0 0 10,105 0 0 14,739 0 538.00 12,564 67,59,432       
November 2020 
to December 
2021 
0   0 0   0 0   0 0   0     
  
January 2022 0 6,870 0 0 16,835 0 0 19,267 0 2,461.00 13,970 3,43,80,170       
February 2022 1,480.03 6,276 92,88,668.28 0 15,931 0 875.97 18,444 1,61,56,390.68 2,790.00 13,199 3,68,25,210       
March 2022 5,243.21 6,772 3,55,07,018.12 4,327.74 16,578 7,17,45,273.72 6,613.05 19,654 12,99,72,884.70 3,186.99 15,842 5,04,88,296       
Total     19,09,01,907.07     56,14,45,831.88     29,27,63,648.37     45,30,35,328      29,00,557 
Grand Total                         1,50,10,47,272 
              150.00 crore 
(Source: Information furnished by the DDMs) 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Glossary of 
Abbreviations  
 

 
117 
 
 
 
 
Sl. 
No. Abbreviations Description 
1  ASP Average Sale Price 
2  BG Bank Guarantee 
3  CBA (A&D) Act Coal Bearing Areas (Acquisition and Development) Act 
4  CCTV Closed-circuit television  
5  CF Crushed Fines 
6  CIL Coal India Limited  
7  CLO Calibrated Lumps Ore 
8  Cr2O3 Chromium Oxide 
9  CT Commercial Tax 
10  CTO Consent to Operate 
11  DDCA Deputy Director of Chemical Analysis 
12  DDM Deputy Director of Mines 
13  DEIAA District Environment Impact Assessment Authority 
14  DFO Divisional Forest Officer 
15  DGPS Differential Global Positioning System 
16  DLC District Level Committee 
17  DMF District Mineral Foundation Fund 
18  DoM Director of Mines 
19  EC Environment Clearance 
20  EIA Environment Impact Assessment 
21  EMF Environment Management Fund 
22  EMP Ex-Mine Price 
23  GoI Government of India 
24  GoO Government of Odisha 
25  GST Goods and Services Tax 
26  HLC High Level Committee  
27  i3MS Integrated Mines and Mineral Management System 
28  IBM Indian Bureau of Mines 
29  JDCA Joint Director Chemical Analysis 
30  LoI Letter of intent 
31  MARs Mineral Auction Rules 
32  MC Rules Mineral Concession Rules 
33  MCDR Mineral Conservation and Development Rules 
34  MCL Mahanadi Coalfields Limited 
35  MCR Mineral Concession Rules 
Glossary of abbreviations 

Performance Audit o f Systems and Controls in Assessment and Collection of Revenue from 
Major Minerals for the year ended March 2022 
118 
Sl. 
No. Abbreviations Description 
36  MCV Mineral Carrying Vehicle 
37  MDPA Mines development and Production Agreement 
38  MMDR Act Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act 
39  MO Mining Officer 
40  MoEF&CC Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change 
41  MP Mining Plan 
42  MT Metric Tonne 
43  MTPA Million Tonne Per Annum 
44  NMET National Mineral Exploration Trust  
45  OMC Odisha Mining Corporation 
46  OMC Rules Odisha Mineral Concession Rules 
47  OMMC Rules Odisha Minor Mineral Concession Rules 
48  
OMPTS Rules Odisha Minerals (Prevention of Theft, Smuggling & 
Illegal Mining and Regulation of Possession, Storage, 
Trading and Transportation) Rules 
49  OPDR Act Odisha Public Demand Recovery Act 
50  ORSAC Odisha Space Application Centre 
51  OSMMAR Odisha Specified Minor Minerals (Auction) Rules 
52  OSPCB Odisha State Pollution Control Board 
53  PMV Pit Mouth Value 
54  R&DM Revenue & Disaster Management  
55  RA Revisional Authority 
56  RA Revenue Authority 
57  RML Renewal of Mining Lease 
58  ROM Run of Mines 
59  RTO Regional Transport Office 
60  S&M  Steel & Mines 
61  SEIAA State Environment Impact Assessment Authority 
62  SF Screened Fines 
63  SFD State Forest Department 
64  SIM Senior Inspector of Mines 
65  SLES State Level Enforcement Squad 
66  UC Utilisation Certificate 
67  VATIS Value Added Tax Information System 
68  Water PCP Act Water Prevention and Control of Pollution Act 
 
 
 

Glossary of Abbreviations 
119 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© COMPTROLLER AND 
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA 
www.cag.gov.in 