 
Report of the  
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for the period ended March 2022 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Union Government (Commercial) 
No. 12 of 2024 
 (Compliance Audit Observations) 

 
i 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER/ 
PARAGRAPH 
SUBJECT CPSE PAGE 
NO. 
 PREFACE  v 
 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  vii 
    
ENERGY CLUSTER 
Chapter I MINISTRY OF COAL 
1.1 Violation of Environmental 
Regulations resulting in liability for 
avoidable expenditure of ₹12.32 crore 
Central Coal fields 
Limited 
1 
1.2 Undue favour to contractor due to 
non-recovery for coal shortage during 
transportation resulted in avoidable 
loss of ₹17.39 crore 
Eastern Coal fields 
Limited 
5 
Chapter II MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
2.1 Irregular paym ent on Sick Leave 
encashment 
Chennai Petroleum 
Corporation Limited 
9 
2.2 Idle investment in installation of 
facilities for storage of black oil 
petroleum products 
Hindustan Petroleum 
Corporation Limited 
10 
2.3 Imprudent decision to invest in a 
block and infructuous expenditure 
due to subsequent relinquishment of 
the block 
Oil and Natural Gas 
Corporation Limited 
12 
2.4 Imprudent decision of accepting the 
Turbine Generator materials 
amounting to ₹133.14 crore without 
service contract led to idling of 
materials and delay in its 
commissioning 
Oil and Natural Gas 
Corporation Limited 
18 
2.5 Persistent delays in clearance of 
imported consignments led to 
absorption of demurrage charges 
Oil and Natural Gas 
Corporation Limited 
22 
Chapter III MINISTRY OF POWER 
3.1 Avoidable expenditure of ₹112.63 
crore towards payment of additional 
deviation charges and penalties for 
non-maintenance of Grid discipline 
Damodar Valley 
Corporation 
25 
CONTENTS 
 

 
ii 
3.2 Loss due to non -recovery of 
electricity charges from a private 
party 
Damodar Valley 
Corporation 
28 
3.3 Undue benefit of ₹7.60 crore to 
ineligible consumers by extending 
incentives on water charges 
Damodar Valley 
Corporation 
30 
INDUSTRY CLUSTER 
Chapter IV MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
(Department of Financial Services) 
4.1 Non-adherence to the Credit Policy 
while sanctioning and monitoring of 
loan led to non-recovery of dues 
 
India Infrastructure 
Finance Company 
Limited 
33 
4.2 Avoidable payment of interest on 
Service Tax & Goods and Service 
Tax liability 
India Infrastructure 
Finance Company 
Limited 
37 
4.3 Settlement of claims in excess of the 
eligible principal amount leading to 
excess financial outgo for ‘Amount in 
Default’ 
National Credit 
Guarantee Trustee 
Company Limited 
40 
4.4 Loss due to quoting of inadequate 
bidding rates without determining the 
pricing components 
The Oriental 
Insurance Company 
Limited 
42 
4.5 Loss due to imprudent underwriting 
in violation of guidelines of Insurance 
Regulatory and Development 
Authority of India 
 
The Oriental 
Insurance Company 
Limited 
46 
4.6 Lack of due diligence at the time of 
enhancement of credit limit on the 
credit card facility resulted in non -
recovery of dues 
SBI Cards and 
Payment Services 
Limited 
48 
4.7 Irregularities in awarding of contract 
for printing of PAN Cards 
UTI Infrastructure 
Technology and 
Services Limited 
 
52 
Chapter V MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES  
5.1 Avoidable payment of penal interest Cement Corporation 
of India Limited 
57 
Chapter VI MINISTRY OF STEEL 
6.1 Injudicious decision to procure 
coking coal 
NMDC Limited 61 

 
iii 
6.2 Irregular payment of 
incentives/rewards to Executives in 
deviation to guidelines of Department 
of Public Enterprises 
NMDC Limited 64 
6.3 Irregular expenditure on employees 
under Farewell Scheme and Long 
Service Award Scheme 
Rashtriya Ispat 
Nigam Limited 
66 
INFRASTRUCTURE CLUSTER 
Chapter VII MINISTRY OF HOUSING AND URBAN AFFAIRS  
7.1 Short recovery of repairing cost and 
other incidental expenses 
Delhi Metro Rail 
Corporation 
69 
Chapter VIII MINISTRY OF ROAD TRANSPORT AND HIGHWAYS 
8.1 Blocking of funds on land 
compensation 
National Highways 
Authority of India 
75 
8.2 Extension of undue benefit to 
Concessionaires 
National Highways 
Authority of India 
77 
8.3 Shortfall in execution and monitoring 
of project 
National Highways 
Authority of India 
81 
8.4 Non recovery of Double Toll 
collections from Concessionaires 
National Highways 
Authority of India 
84 
8.5 Collection of 50 per cent  of toll fee 
due to improper maintenance of road 
National Highways 
Authority of India 
88 
8.6 Extra expenditure of ₹41.52 crore National Highways 
Authority of India 
91 
8.7 Loss of interest of ₹12.78 crore to 
NHAI 
National Highways 
Authority of India 
95 
8.8 Delay in commencement of collection 
of user fee/toll 
National Highways 
Authority of India 
98 

 
iv 
 
CHAPTER/ 
PARAGRAPH 
SUBJECT CPSE PAGE 
NO. 
Chapter IX RECOVERIES AND CORRECTIONS/ RECTIFICATIONS BY 
CPSEs AT THE INSTANCE OF AUDIT 
9.1 Recoveries at the instance of Audit SBI Cards and 
Payment Services 
Limited, The 
Oriental Insurance 
Company Limited, 
The New India 
Assurance Company 
Limited, Oil and 
Natural Gas 
Corporation 
Limited, National 
Highways Authority 
of India  and Steel 
Authority of India 
Limited  
105 
9.2 Corrections/ rectifications at the 
instance of Audit 
Power Grid 
Corporation of India 
Limited and 
National Highways 
Authority of India 
105 
 
Chapter X FOLLOW-UP ON AUDIT REPORTS (COMMERCIAL) 107 
 Annexures 109 
 

v 
 
PREFACE 
  
1. This report deals with the results of audit of Government Companies, Government 
controlled other Companies and Statutory Corporations for the year ended March 2022. 
2. The accounts of Government Companies and Government controlled other Companies , 
set up under the provisions of the Companies Act , are audited by the Comptroller and Auditor 
General of India (CAG) under the provisions of Section 143  of the Companies Act, 2013.  The 
accounts certified by the Statutory Auditors (Chartered Accountants) appointed by the CAG 
under the Companies Act are subject to supplementary audit by officers of the CAG and the 
CAG gives his comments or supplements  the reports of the Statutory Auditors under section 
143(6) of the Act.  In addition, these Companies are also subject to test audit by CAG under the 
provisions of Section 143(7) of the Act. 
3. The statutes governing some Corporations and Authorities require their accounts to be 
audited b y CAG.   In respect of five such Corporations viz. , Airports Authority of India, 
National Highways Authority of India, Inland Waterways Authority of India, Food Corporation 
of India and Damodar Valley Corporation, the relevant statutes designate CAG as thei r sole 
auditor. In respect of one Corporation viz. , Central Warehousing Corporation, auditor is 
appointed by the Government , on the advice of the CAG, for audit of the accounts of the 
Central Warehousing Corporation. CAG has the right to conduct the audit as he may consider 
necessary. 
4. Reports in relation to the accounts of a Government Company or Corporation are 
submitted to the Government by CAG for laying before the Parliament under the provisions of 
Section 19 -A of the Comptroller and Auditor General’s (Duties, Powers and Co nditions of 
Service) Act, 1971. 
5. The Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 202 2 contains 30 individual audit 
observations relating to 16 CPSEs under control of eight Ministries/Departments.  These 
Ministries/Departments have been further grouped in the Audit Report under three Clusters 
namely, Energy, Industry and Infrastructure.   There are 1 0 audit obser vations under Energy 
Cluster, 11 under Industry Cluster and nine under Infrastructure Cluster.  The i nstances 
mentioned in this Report are those which came to notice in the course of test audit for the 
period 2021-22 as well as those which came to notice in earlier years, but could not be reported 
in the previous Audit Reports: matters relating to the period subsequent to 2021 -22 have also 
been included, wherever necessary.  
6. All references to ‘Companies/Corporations or CPSEs’ in this Report may be construed to 
refer to ‘Central Government Companies/Corporations’ unless the context suggests otherwise. 
7. The audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards issued by the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
8. Audit wishes to acknowledge the cooperation received from the Managements of CPSEs 
and their respective Administrative Ministries/Departments at each stage of audit process. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Executive Summary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
vii 
 
 
I Introduction   
1. This Report includes important A udit findings noticed as a result of test check of 
accounts and records of Central Government Companies and Corporations conducted by 
the officers of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India under Section 143 (6) of the 
Companies Act, 2013 or the statutes governing the particular Corporations. 
2. The Report contai ns 30 individual audit paragraphs relating to 16 Central  
Public Sector Enterprises ( CPSEs) under eight Ministries/Departments. These 
Ministries/Departments have been further grouped in the Audit Report under three clusters 
namely, Energy, Industry and Infrastructure. There are 10 audit paragraphs under Energy 
Cluster, 11 under Industry Cluster and 9 under Infrastructure Cluster.  The draft paragraphs 
were sent to the Managements of the CPSEs concerned. The draft paragraphs were also 
forwarded to the Secretaries of the concerned Ministries/Departments under whose 
administrative control the CPSEs are working to give them an opportunity to furnish their 
replies/ comments in each case. The responses of the concerned Ministries/ Departments/ 
Managements have been received for all the audit paragraphs and are suitably incorporated 
in the Report. 
3. The paragraphs included in this Report relate to the CPSEs under the administrative 
control of the following Ministries/ Departments of the Government of India: 
Sl. No. Ministry/ Department  
(CPSEs involved) 
Number of paragraphs  
Energy Cluster 
1. Coal 
(Central Coalfields Limited  and Eastern 
Coalfields Limited) 
2 
2. Petroleum and Natural Gas 
(Chennai Petroleum Corporation 
Limited, Hindustan Petroleum 
Corporation Limited & Oil and Natural 
Gas Corporation Limited) 
5 
3. 
 
Power 
(Damodar Valley Corporation) 
3 
Industry Cluster 
4. Finance - Department of Financial 
Services 
(India Infrastructure Finance Company 
Limited, National Credit Guarantee 
Trustee Company Limited, The Oriental 
Insurance Company Limited, SBI Cards 
and Payment Services Limited and UTI 
Infrastructure Technology and Services 
Limited) 
7 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
 
 viii   
Sl. No. Ministry/ Department  
(CPSEs involved) 
Number of paragraphs  
5 Heavy Industries 
(Cement Corporation of India Limited) 
1 
6 
 
Steel 
(NMDC Limited and  Rashtriya Ispat 
Nigam Limited) 
3 
Infrastructure Cluster 
7.  Housing and Urban Affairs 
(Delhi Metro Rail Corporation) 
1 
8. Road Transport and Highways 
(National Highways Authority of India) 
8 
Total 30 
4. Total financial implication of individual audit paragraphs is ₹3,437.30 crore. 
5. Individual audit paragraphs in this Report are broadly of the following nature: 
• Non-compliance with rules, directives, procedure, terms and conditions of the 
contract etc., involving ₹484.01 crore in six Audit paragraphs1. 
• Non-safeguarding of financial interest of organisations involving ₹435.09 crore 
in five Audit paragraphs2. 
• Defective/deficient planning involving ₹1,894.96 crore in eight Audit 
paragraphs3. 
• Inadequate/deficient monitoring involving ₹623.24 crore in 11 Audit 
paragraphs4. 
6. The Report also contains a Chapter on “Recoveries & corrections/rectifications” by 
CPSEs at the instance of A udit. The Chapter contains two paragraphs viz., (a) In the last 
ten years from 2012 -13 to 2021 -22, Management of various CPSEs have recovered an 
amount of ₹3,435.12 crore at the instance of Audit, which included recovery of ₹3.82 crore 
made during 2021-22, and (b) corrections/rectifications carried out by two CPSEs at the 
instance of Audit. 
II Highlights of the paragraphs included in the Report are given below: 
Bhurkunda Colliery of Central Coalfields Limited violated the production limit as 
stipulated by Jharkhand State Pollution Control Board. It also carried out mining operations 
without necessary Environment al Clearance. Carrying out production beyond the 
production limit, resulted in a liability for avoidable expenditure of ₹12.32 crore towards 
                                                           
1  Para no. 1.1, 2.1, 4.1, 4.5, 6.2 and 6.3 
2  Para no. 1.2, 3.2, 3.3, 4.4, and 8.2 
3  Para no. 2.2, 2.3, 2.4, 2.5, 4.6, 6.1, 8.1 and 8.8  
4  Para no. 3.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.7, 5.1, 7.1, 8.3, 8.4, 8.5, 8.6, and 8.7 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
ix 
additional restoration work due to damage to the environment. In this regard, it is 
recommended that the Company should strictly adhere to the environmental 
regulations regarding expansion and modernisation of the mining projects not only 
to avoid any extra damage to the environment which may also entail additional 
expenditure by way of damage remediation but also to avoid unplanned disruption to 
production. 
(Para 1.1) 
Despite specific provisions in Contract Agreement for recovery from the contractor, for 
coal shortage that occur during transportation of coal from mine to railway siding, Eastern 
Coalfields Limited (ECL) failed to enforce the terms of the contract. ECL, t hereby 
extended undue favour to the contractor and suffered an avoidable loss of ₹17.39 crore.  
(Para 1.2) 
Chennai Petroleum Corporation Limited allowed encashment of accumulated Sick Leave 
at the time of retirement in violation of Department of Public Enterprises guidelines which 
resulted in irregular payment of ₹22.62 crore to its employees. 
(Para 2.1) 
Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited approved (January 2010) the project for 
installation of storage facilities for both white oil and black oil at Bihta, Bihar with total 
project cost of ₹142.50 crore out of which ₹19.88 crore was for development of 
infrastructure for only black oil facilities and the same was completed in June 2014. The 
proposal for ins tallation of black oil petroleum products was considered at a later stage, 
without assessing the market demand for those products. However, the facilities created 
for storage and distribution of black oil petroleum products remained idle since their 
commissioning in June 2014. Thus, development of infrastructure for storage and 
marketing of black oil petroleum products in Bihar by the Company without assessing its 
market demand and not supported by cost benefit analysis resulted in blockage of funds to 
the tune of ₹19.88 crore. 
(Para 2.2) 
Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Limited (ONGC)  acquired the block with 70 per cent 
Participating Interest despite the fact that the Technical Committee had assessed  
(June 2013) the probability of success in the block as only 11.20 per cent . ONGC 
surrendered the block to Directorate General of Hydrocarbons  in November 2021 citing 
low gas volumes after incurring an expenditure of ₹557.59 crore, besides failing to recover 
the proportionate share of ₹132.90 crore from partner contractor . In this regard, it is 
recommended that ONGC should ensure carrying out rigorous economic evaluation 
of the block before acquisition in future and consider fixing responsibility on the 
concerned officials for failing to obtain bank guarantee from Party-A towards its 
share of cost of Minimum Work Programme. 
(Para 2.3) 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
 
 x   
Non-synchronisation of the supply of the material for revamping of three old Gas Turbine 
Generators at Water Injection platform with service contract by ONGC resulted in delay in 
commissioning of one Gas Turbine Generator costing ₹35.02 crore by two years and idling 
of two Gas Turbine Generators costing ₹98.12 crore, which are yet to be commissioned  
despite lapse of seven years. In this regard, it is recommended that  ONGC, in future, 
may ensure synchronisation of the supply of material required and the service 
contract necessary for revamping to reduce the delay in commissioning and to 
enhance the safety and operational reliability of a plant. 
(Para 2.4) 
There was delay in clearance of imported consignments on part of ONGC due to delay in 
receipt of Essentiality Certificate and other operational reasons like late filling of Bill of 
Entry, wrong delivery order issued by shipping line, delay in obtaining delivery order from 
supplier and lack of co -ordination between the departments.  This led to absorption of 
demurrage charges to the extent of ₹58.74 crore by ONGC out of total demurrage payment 
of ₹110.61 crore during the period 2016 -17 to 2021-22. ONGC needs to streamline the 
process of clearance of consignments within the timelines prescribed in their Material 
Management Manual by ensuring coordination among the concerned departments. 
The cases of non -compliance of Material Management Manual provisions may be 
monitored at higher levels of company to ensure better controls. 
(Para 2.5) 
During the period from April 2019 to Septemb er 2022, Damodar Valley Corporation 
(Corporation) failed to restrict drawal of power from grid for 1 ,193 days (93.64 per cent) 
when average frequency was below 49.85 Hertz and this resulted in payment of  
₹61.28 crore towards additional deviation charges. Further, the Corporation failed to make 
sign change after six block s for 874 days during the above period in contravention of  
Deviation Settlement Mechanism Regulations and paid ₹51.35 crore towards penalty for 
such violation of sign change. This indicated lack of proper planning in declaring its 
schedule on day ahead basis and also lapses in monitoring mechanism to restrict ove r 
drawal to the extent possible which led to avoidable expenditure of ₹112.63 crore towards 
additional deviation and sign change penalty. Thus, i t is recommended that the 
Management should improve demand and supply management of power and manage 
their gene ration properly to adhere to their declared schedule to avoid grid 
indiscipline. Responsibility should be fixed for payment of additional deviation 
charges along with sign change penalty in order to ensure that such instances do not 
recur again. 
(Para 3.1) 
Damodar Valley Corporation (Corporation) entered (June 2012) into a power purchase 
agreement with a private party for five years. The Bank Guarantee submitted by the private 
party as Security Deposit expired in June 2014 and the same was not renewed. Despite 
having sufficient provisions in the agreement to safeguard its commercial and financial 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
xi 
interest, the Corporation failed to recover ₹12.95 crore towards electricity dues from the 
private party as there was no valid Bank Guarantee . In this regard, i t is recommended 
that DVC may fix responsibility for non -renewal of Bank Guarantee of the private 
party as per agreement and lay down proper mechanism for monitoring defaulting 
parties to closely watch the progress of payment of electricity dues and renewal of 
Bank Guarantee in order to protect its financial interest. 
(Para 3.2) 
Damodar Valley Corporation (Corporation) introduced (October 2012) a scheme of 
incentive for Zero Liquid Discharge (ZLD) for its consumers.  The Corporation, however, 
allowed incentive to three consumers who were irregular in payment of their water charges 
bills and also did not produce requisite certificates of Zero Liquid/Effluent Discharge from 
concerned State Pollution Control Board. Thus, the Corporation extended undue benefit in 
the form of incentive towards ZLD of ₹7.60 crore for the period August 2015 to January 
2022 to three ineligible consumers. It is recommended that DVC may fix responsibility 
for extending incentive  under Zero Liquid/Effluent Discharge  scheme to ineligible 
consumers and also recover the incentive extended to such ineligible consumers. 
(Para 3.3) 
India Infrastructure Finance Company Limited (IIFCL) disbursed loan of ₹248 crore to a 
borrower without analysis of all aspects of financial statements and critical areas of risk.   
Further, IIFCL did not comply with the provisions of Credit Policy  and sanction letter 
related to risk mitigation measures, proper analysis of financial statements, appointment of 
Lenders’ Independent Engineer, maintenance of Debt Service Reserve Account, 
assignment of Telecom License and Joint Documentation with lead lender . Thus,  non-
compliance as stated above, coupled with poor monitoring led to non-recovery of dues and 
net loss of ₹393.37 crore. It is recommended that the Management may strive to reduce 
its complete dependence on the lead bank for appraisal and monitoring of the loan 
projects and may strengthen its internal controls to enhance its appraisal and 
monitoring mechanism. Responsibility may be fixed for non -adherence to the 
provisions of  credit policy/ sanction letter for ensuring proper implementation of 
credit policy and enforcement of important terms of sanction in future. 
(Para 4.1) 
IIFCL did not consider the services provided by the Government on account of giving 
guarantee on behalf of IIFCL for availing unsecured term loans from bilateral or 
multilateral financing institutions as taxable service for applicability of Service Tax and 
GST for the p eriod 1 April 2016 to 26 July 2018. Therefore, IIFCL neither deducted nor 
deposited Service Tax and GST amounting to ₹19.63 crore which led to imposition  and 
avoidable payment of interest of ₹8.02 crore on the tax liability.  
(Para 4.2) 
 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
 
 xii   
National Credit Gu arantee Trustee Company Limited set up a scheme titled “Credit 
Guarantee Fund for Micro Units (CGFMU)” with the purpose of guaranteeing payment up 
to the specified limit against default in Micro Loans ranging from ₹50,000 to ₹10 lakh  to 
eligible borrowers by Banks/NBFCs/Micro Finance Institution s/Other Financial 
Intermediaries. The Ministry of Finance, Dep artment of Financial Services, vide 
Notifications (18 April 2016 and 16 April 2020), laid down provisions for operation of 
CGFMU Scheme. Scrutiny of the default/claims filed amounting to ₹3,830.18 crore, by  
27 Member Lending Institutions (MLI)  with 65 por tfolios, settled during the period  
2019-20 to 2021-22, revealed that the MLIs included interest of at least ₹85.77 crore and 
the Company settled the claims up to the extent ₹ 42.89 crore as interest component being 
maximum of 50 per cent  of the Amount in D efault. This was in contravention of the 
notifications of Ministry of Finance (read with RBI master circular) for not including 
interest and considering only the principal component of micro loans, thus the Company 
suffered an extra liability of at least ₹42.89 crore towards settlement of interest component. 
In this regard, it is recommended that the Company may conduct a comprehensive 
review of all the cases and claims to identify any excess payments made over the 
eligible principal amount. This review should aim to accurately identify the ineligible 
interest payments made to Member Lending Institutions and ensure recovery of these 
amounts. Furthermore, the company may take proactive steps to address and rectify 
inherent weaknesses in the claims payment process, ensuring the implementation of 
robust controls and procedures to prevent similar issues in the future. 
(Para 4.3) 
The Oriental Insurance Company Limited did not determine the bidding rates for Pradhan 
Mantri Fasal Bima Yojna in 2019-20 as per terms and conditions of the Agriculture Quota 
Share Reinsurance treaty with General Insurance Corporation of India, the Re-insurer. This 
led to imposition of loss corridor clause of the treaty by GIC and consequent loss of 
₹194.08 crore. 
(Para 4.4) 
Imprudent underwriting of Group Janta Personal Accident Policy of the Maharashtra State 
Government by The Oriental Insurance Company Limited without reinsurance cover and 
in violation of guidelines of Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority of India in 
2018-19 led to a loss of ₹14.92 crore. 
(Para 4.5) 
SBI Cards and Payment Services Limited  (SBCPSL) approved the renewal  of the credit 
card facility of a client raising the credit limit from ₹70 crore to ₹90 crore. The credit limit 
was increased despite downward movement of internal ratings of the client, in violation of 
its Credit Policy. Despite  indicators like  Negative operating cash flow for the year  
2017-18, increase in Recoverable and payable time of outstanding dues and major inflow 
of cash from encashment of liquid assets , SBCPSL approved the enhancement of credit 
limit without proper due diligence which led to avoidable loss of ₹19.65 crore. Thus, it is 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
xiii 
recommended that the Management may sanction the credit limit strictly in line with 
its credit policy and may insist on se curity in case of high credit limit. The 
management may also strengthen its internal control system regarding scrutiny of the 
card usage and payment history of the cardholder company. 
(Para 4.6) 
UTI Infrastructure Technology and Services Limited floated a tender for inviting financial/ 
commercial bids for printing of PAN Cards for a period of three years. The Company 
scrapped the tender altogether citing that the lowest bidder (L1) was technically  
disqualified and the next lowest bid (L2) of a vendor from Jaipur at ₹4.35  per set was not 
pursued further. A  new tender was floated with  two packet bidding system and by 
introducing an additional eligibility criterion viz., the bidding agency should have  the 
printing facility within 150 kms from the Company offices located at Navi 
Mumbai/Kolkata/Chennai/New Delhi. The work was awarded to the lowest (L1) 
technically qualified bidder at ₹4.95 per set for a period of three years. The L2 bidder, from 
Jaipur, in the first tender was technically disqualified, in second tender, for not meeting the 
newly inserted condition of having printing facility within 150 kilometres of the 
Company’s offices. Thus, scrapping of the first tender without considering the bids of other 
eligible and valid bidders and floating fresh tender with restrictive condition resulted in 
avoidable expenditure of ₹5.71 crore. 
 (Para 4.7) 
Cement Corporation of India Limited (Rajban  unit) was granted (August 1973) mining 
lease over 172.30 hectares of forest land in Sirmaur district, Himachal Pradesh. In 
accordance with the directions (October 2002) of the Supreme Court and the guidelines 
issued (April 2015) by the Ministry of Environ ment, Forest and Climate Change, the 
Company was liable to pay Net Present Value of the forest land covered under the mining 
lease to the Forest authorities. However, the Company delayed the payment of Net Present 
Value (₹14.56 crore), due to which it had to make avoidable payment of penal interest 
amounting to ₹8.49 crore. 
(Para 5.1) 
NMDC Limited procured 1,61,963 tonnes of coking coal worth ₹372.58 crore between 
November 2018 and May 2019 without ensuring the completion of Coke Oven Plant and 
the associated upstream and downstream plants of Nagarnar Integrated Steel Plant which 
resulted in quality degradation of coking coal as well as blocking up of funds of  
₹372.58 crore for more than three years. 
(Para 6.1) 
NMDC Limited made an irregular payment of ₹13.49 crore to its executives during  
2018-19 to 2021 -22 as incentive/reward for achieving higher production/productivity 
which was over and above the payment of Performance Related Pay as well as Perks and 
Allowances at the prescribed ceiling. 
(Para 6.2) 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
 
 xiv   
Distribution of gold coins and silver coins under ‘Farewell Scheme’ and ‘Long Service 
Award Scheme’ to the retired/eligible employees in contravention to the guidelines of 
Department of Public Enterprises by Rasht riya Ispat Nigam Limited resulted in irregular 
expenditure of ₹27.29 crore during the years from 2006-07 to 2021-22. 
(Para 6.3) 
Due to poor construction quality by the contractor and reluctance of the contractor to rectify 
the defects within Defect Liability Period, Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC) carried 
out the repair work (including consultancy work) through other contractor at ₹11.85 crore. 
In addition to repairing cost, DMRC also incurred incidental expenses of ₹7.81 crore on 
account of shifting allottees to alternative accommodation and payment of lease charge, 
brokerage etc. However, DMRC could recover only ₹4.12 crore against ₹19.66 crore 
incurred due to poor quality of work from the contractor through conciliation process  as 
against arbitration process provided in the contract . In this regard, it is recommended 
that haste on the part of DMRC in accepting the award of conciliation settlement with 
contractor, even before awarding of repair work, in disregard to the contractual 
provision of settlement of dispute by way of arbitration and release of performance 
security without attending construction defects, nee ds to be investigated and the 
responsibility fixed on erring officials. 
(Para 7.1) 
National Highways Authority of India Limited (NHAI or Authority) entered into a 
Concession Agreement in 2012 and again in 2015 for four laning of Patna -Buxar stretch 
of NH-30 in Bihar. Acquisition of land was started in June 2012. However, in the stretch 
between Shivala to Bihta section, landowners opposed the land acquisition and demanded 
change in the alignment. Meanwhile, the Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in 
Land Acquisition Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act 2013 came into existence and the 
compensation amount for 196.145 hectares of land increased from ₹1,213.18 crore to 
₹3,294 crore. On both occasions, the project could not take off  due to high cost and 
uncertainty of availability of land . Failure of NHAI to pursue with the State Government 
of Bihar for the refund/adjustment of the amount of land compensation and establishment 
and contingency charges, led to blocking of funds amounting to ₹533.96 crore sinc e last 
six years.  
(Para 8.1) 
National Highways Authority of India issued Letter of Award to the Consortium of selected 
bidders in March 2018 for four different National Highways widening projects in 
Maharashtra on Hybrid Annuity Mode. The Concessionaires, however, did not make any 
material progress as reported by the Independent Engineers appointed by NHAI.  NHAI 
imposed damages on Concessionaires based on its circular dated 29 January 2014, which 
limited damages to one per cent of the project cost. The damages actually imposed by 
NHAI were significantly lesser than the damages recoverable as per the contractual 
provisions of the Concession Agreements. Thus, failure of NHAI to recover damages from 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
xv 
Concessionaires as per the contractual provisions of t he Concession Agreements resulted 
in extension of undue benefit of ₹203.07 crore to the Concessionaires.  
(Para 8.2) 
The contractor delayed the work of upgradation of Raebareli -Banda [including two  
bypasses and  Railway Over Bridges (ROBs) at Lalganj and Fatehpur] section ; timely 
completion could have ensured toll revenue amounting to ₹43.64 crore. Further, within 
five months of commercial operation, both ROBs got prematurely distressed, leading to 
stoppage of traffic and delinking of bypasses from the tollable length. This resulted in lower 
user fee collection of ₹179.26 crore upto March 2024 and payment of force majeure claim 
to the toll collecting agency for ₹11.01 crore by NHAI as well as inconvenience to users.  
(Para 8.3) 
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways (MoRTH) made it compulsory for all National 
Highway users to pay toll through digital mode called FASTAG, with effect from  
16 February 2021. MoRTH also required that National Highway users not having 
valid/functional FASTAG system, would have to pay toll at double the normal rate. 
MoRTH directed NHAI to remit 50 per cent of the toll collected to the Central Government 
(Consolidated Fund of India). Due to failure of NHAI to recover Double Toll dues from 
Concessionaires before expiry of concession periods there was loss of ₹21.12 crore to the 
Consolidated Fund of India . Further, ₹63.03 crore of Double Toll dues were pending for 
recovery from other Concessionaires/Toll Collection Contractors. 
(Para 8.4) 
Failure of the NHAI to maintain Poonamalle to Walajahpet stretch of National Highway-
4 (New NH 48), resulted in a suo-moto Public Interest Litigation and subsequent order of 
Hon’ble High Court of Madras for reducing the toll rates by half. Thus, improper 
maintenance of road resulted in undue hardship to the road users and 50 per cent collection 
of revenue of ₹57.61 crore to the NHAI. 
(Para 8.5) 
Faults in design of the bridge, use of poor quality of concrete and plying of overloaded 
vehicles over the bridge led to damage to the bridge and extra expenditure of ₹41.52 crore. 
Adequate supervision and prompt action by NH AI could have avoided construction of 
bridge based on faulty design and use of poor quality of concrete during the construction 
of the bridge. The Defect Liability Period in respect of four laning  contract expired in 
December 2013 and the Construction Contractor and Concessionaire had disputed the 
claim of NHAI to recover the damages. Thus, it is recommended that NHAI may put in 
efforts to recover the penalties/damages from its erring contractors and put stringent 
mechanism in place to prevent recurrence of such incidents of damage to structures 
due to faults in design, poor quality of concrete, improper supervision, poor 
maintenance and movement of overloaded vehicles in future.  
(Para 8.6) 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
 
 xvi   
An amendment made (October 2015) by MoRTH allowed NHAI to release interest free 
mobilisation advance to a contractor without restricting the time limit for its repayment 
upto one year. This was in violation of the Manual on Policies and Procedure for 
Procurement of Works, 2006, which stipulates that mobilisation advance may be allowed 
to contractor at a specified rate of interest and was also in violation of the CVC guidelines, 
which stipulate that recovery of interest free mobilisation advance should be time -based 
with interest to be charged on delayed recoveries. The recovery of interest free mobilisation 
advance started after over one year and nine months since its release and went up to almost 
three years and ten months as against the one-year stipulation of model contract document 
before its amendment in October 2015. NHAI suffered loss of interest of ₹12.78 crore due 
to delay in recovery of interest free mobilisation advance on account of amendment of the 
Model EPC contract documents by MoRTH. It is recommended that the Ministry may 
review the basis of the de cision to provide interest free mobilisation advance , linked 
to the progress of work, violating the Manual on Policies and Procedure for 
Procurement of Works and CVC guidelines and take action against the erring 
officials. 
(Para 8.7) 
NHAI entered into (September 2015) an agreement with the contractor for two laning of 
Chhapra-Rewaghat-Muzaffarpur Section of National Highway -102 consisting of two fee 
plazas viz., Sonho fee Plaza and Pokhraira fee Plaza. There was delay in commencement 
of collection of user fees by the NHAI, on account of delays in toll notification, its scrutiny 
and engagement of toll plaza agency . Resultantly, NHAI could not collect  revenue of  
₹8.81 crore due to non -collection of user fees. Delays on the part of Minist ry of Road 
Transport and Highways in ensuring timely issue of Completion Certificate coupled with 
delays on the part of NHAI for processing the proposal of draft Fee Notification resulted 
in delayed commencement of toll operations by 182 days at Gollaprolu  Toll Plaza under 
Regional Office, Vijayawada led to non-collection of toll revenues of ₹5.84 crore. In this 
regard, it is recommended that NHAI may ensure timely completion of procedures 
related to toll collection and align it with the issuance of Complet ion 
Certificate/Provisional Completion Certificate to prevent delay in commencement of 
user fee/toll collection. Responsibility may also be fixed in cases where user fee/toll 
collection is delayed.  
(Para 8.8.1 and Para 8.8.2) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter I 
Ministry of Coal 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
1 
 
 
 
Central Coalfields Limited 
1.1   Violation of Environmental Regulations resulting in liability for avoidable 
expenditure of ₹12.32 crore 
Bhurkunda Colliery of Central Coalfields Limited violated the production limit as 
stipulated in ‘Consent to Operate’ of Jharkhand State Pollution Control Board and 
the Colliery was also operating without Environmental Clearance, which resulted 
in a liability for av oidable expenditure of ₹ 12.32 crore towards additional 
restoration work due to damage to the environment  in addition to avoidable 
discontinuance of coal production for two years. 
Central Coalfields Limited (CCL), a subsidiary  of Coal India Limited, is engaged in coal 
mining activities.  Mining of coal is to be carried out in conformity with stipulated 
environmental standards as prescribed under the relevant Acts and Statutes. The Ministry 
of Environment, Forest and Climate Change (MoEF&CC) is the nodal agency for granting 
the Environmental Clearance (EC) as well as for publication of the Environmental Impact 
Assessment (EIA) notifications  from time to time, in compliance with the applicable 
guidelines of the Government of India.  Apart from EC, mining proj ects are also required 
to obtain ‘Consent to Operate’ from the jurisdictional State Pollution Control Board 
(SPCB).  
Environment Impact Assessment (EIA) Notification (January 1994) issued by the 
MoEF&CC state d that any new project in any part of India or the expansion or 
modernisation of existing mining projects with lease of more than five hectares would 
require Environmental Clearance (EC) by the MoEF&CC. MoEF&CC again i nstructed 
(October 2004) that all the mining projects of more than five hectare (ha) lease area, which 
have so far not obtained EC under notification of 1994, shall do so at the time of renewal 
of their lease. It also stated that with regard to expansion in production, if the annual 
production of any year from 1994-95 onwards exceeded the annual production of 1993-94, 
it would be treated as an expansion of the project and would require an EC. Besides, the 
MoEF&CC stipulated (September 2006) that all projects or activities including expansion 
and moder nisation of existing projects or activities would require prior EC from the 
MoEF&CC on the recommendations of an Expert Appraisal Committee 1. On submission 
of the EC, ‘Consent to Operate ’ is granted by SPCB, prescribing the limit of coal 
production and any coal production made beyond the limit prescribed under ‘Consent to 
Operate’ would require a fresh EC.  
                                                           
1 The Expert Appraisal Committee of MoEF&CC  is responsible for screening or scoping or appraisal 
of the project and on the recommendation of EAC, the EC was issued by MOEF&CC.  
CHAPTER I: MINISTRY OF COAL 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
 
2 
The Bhurkunda Colliery of CCL, having more than 910 ha project area, is located at 
Ramgarh district of Jharkhand. In this regard, Audit observed that:  
a) The Bhurkunda Colliery was operating based on the ‘Consent to Operate’ granted 
by SPCB from time to time. SPCB  fixed the production limit as 0.65 Million 
Tonne/Year (MTY) considering the production of 1993 -94. During 1994 -95 to 
2015-16, Bhurkunda Colliery produced coal within the limit prescribed under  
‘Consent to Operate’. 
b) Mining operations, during the period 2016-17 to 2019-20, violated the production 
limits as prescribed under ‘Consent to Operate ’ and excess production ranged 
between 0.07 MTY a nd 0.47 MTY. Year -wise details of excess production is 
shown in Table 1.1. Further, in violations of the stipulation of MoEF&CC, mining 
operations were carried out without obtaining necessary EC.  
Table 1.1: Year-wise details of excess production 
Year Limit prescribed in 
Consent to Operate 
(in MT) 
Actual 
Production  
(in MT) 
Excess production of coal 
against limit of Consent to 
Operate (in MT) 
2016-17 0.65 0.79 0.14 
2017-18 0.65 1.12 0.47 
2018-19 0.65 0.72 0.07 
2019-20 0.65 0.72 0.07 
c) Subsequently, due to violation of coal production limit, mining operations were 
discontinued from October 2020 as per the instructions of SPCB, Jharkhand. 
d) MoEF&CC notified (March 2017) that the projects or activities which were in 
violation of EC would be eligible to apply for EC within six months from the date 
of notification. The project proponent had to prepare the ‘Damage Remediation 
Plan’ and ‘Natural and Community Resource Augmentation Plan ’ to assess the 
ecological damage and economic benefit derived due to violation as a condition of 
EC. Further , the project proponent was required to submit a bank guarantee 
equivalent to the amount of ‘Natural and Community Resource Augmentation Plan’ 
and ‘Damage Remediation Plan ’ with the SPCB. The amount of bank gu arantee 
would be recommended by the Expert Appraisal Committee and shall be deposited 
prior to the grant of EC. 
e) Accordingly, CCL submitted (April 2018) the application for obtaining EC.  
MoEF&CC instructed CCL to assess the damage to environment due to exce ss 
production of coal over and above the threshold limit (i.e., 0.65 MT) before 
granting the EC. Accordingly, CCL prepared ‘Natural and Community Resource 
Augmentation Plan ’ through CMPDIL 2 (April 2022) which estimated 
                                                           
2 Central Mine Planning and Design Institute Limited , a subsidiary of Coal India L imited, providing 
consultancy service in coal mining to CIL as well as its subsidiaries. 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
3 
environmental damage cost as ₹12.32 c rore due to excess production carried out 
during the period 2016-17 to 2019-20 in violation of the statutory requirement.  
f) The Expert Appraisal Committee of MoEF&CC,  considering the above ‘Damage 
Remediation Plan /Natural and Community Resource Augmentation  Plan’, 
recommended (May/June 2022) for issuance of EC  and directed CCL to  incur an 
amount of  ₹11.56 crore towards ‘Damage Remediation Plan ’ and ₹0.76 crore 
towards ‘Natural and Community Resource Augmentation Plan ’, within a period 
of three years from the date of issue of the EC. CCL was directed to submit a bank 
guarantee of ₹12.32 crore for the above purpose to SPCB, Jharkhand prior to the 
grant of EC, which would be released after five years on successful implementation 
of ‘Damage Remediation Plan ’ and ‘Natural and Community Resource 
Augmentation Plan’. In compliance, bank guarantee of ₹12.32 crore was submitted 
to SPCB of Jharkhand and the EC was granted by MoEF&CC in July 2022.  After 
receiving EC (July 2022), Bhurkunda Colliery restarted its mining operation in 
October 2022. 
Thus, colliery of CCL produced coal in violation of the threshold limit prescribed under 
‘Consent to Operate ’ during 2016 -17 to 2019-20 and continued production without 
obtaining necessary EC, which was in violation of MoEF&CC stipulations. By complying 
with the necessary statutory requirements, CCL could have avoided the liability of  
₹12.32 crore for implementation of ‘Damage Remediation Plan ’ and ‘Natural and 
Community Resource Augmentation Plan ’. Also, due to discontinuance of the mining 
operation, Colliery suffered loss of coal production during the period from October 2020 
to September 2022, which could have been avoided by advance planning. 
In reply, the Management/Ministry stated (March 2023/June 2023) that: 
a) As per the judgement of Hon’ble Supreme Court of India pronounced  in August 
2017, the mines were to obtain EC, if the mines had crossed the production level of 
the financial year 1993 -94 and this judgement was primarily related to minerals 
namely iron ore and manganese ore and not coal. Whether the said decision would 
be applicable in the case of coal mining, was a subject matter of deliberations. 
b) Coal mining, because of its inherent nature , is different from other mining  
operations. The possibility of excess mining in exception to the initial plan for one 
or two years is inherent to coal mining. 
c) Because of the inherent nature of business,  CCL is already incurring  substantial 
expenditure on the activities proposed under ‘Damage Remediation Plan /Natural 
and Community Resource Augmentation Plan ’ being business sustainability  
expenditure in the surrounding areas.  Thus, the expenditure on the activities 
amounting to ₹12.32 crore was not an additional burden on CCL. 
 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
 
4 
The contentions of the Ministry/Management are not tenable in view of the following facts: 
a) The judgement pronounced by the Hon’ble Supreme Court (August 2017) inter alia 
includes that if the annual Production after 27 January 1994 exceeds the annual 
production of 1993 -94, it would be treated as an expansion requiring an EC. 
Further, the above judgement is part of EC issued by MoEEF&CC to the coal 
mines. 
b) The colliery continued coal production beyond the prescribed threshold limit during 
the period 2016 -17 to 2019 -20. As such, the mining operations beyond the 
threshold limit would be treated as expansion of the project and would require prior 
EC. Further, a s per stipulations issued b y MoEF&CC, from time to time , any 
expansion and modernisation of existing projects or activities would require prior 
EC from the MoEF&CC. However, due to non-adherence of stipulations, colliery 
was liable to pay the compensation of ₹12.32 crore for the exc ess mining as 
mentioned in the EC issued by MoEF&CC for the colliery in July 2022.  
Thus, the contention of the Management that requirement of prior  EC if the mines 
had crossed the production level of the financial year 1993-94 was not related to coal 
mining, was not justified.  
c) Compliances to the stipulations of MoEF&CC Notifications and adherence  to the 
environmental rules and regulations during mining operations by the colliery 
management are mandatory to protect the environment for national interest and  
sustainable development. The Management replied that the excess production for 
one or two years was due to the inherent nature of coal mining. However, when the 
production quantities from 1994 -95 were observed 3, there was not a single year  
(till 2015-16) when the production had exceeded the limit stipulated in the ‘Consent 
to Operate ’. Thus, the views of the Management that carrying out of excess 
production is common in the coal sector was not borne out by facts.  
d) Further, every coal project plans its sus tainability and environment related 
expenditure in compliance with the stipulations/conditions prescribed by the 
relevant authorities. The colliery incurred an expenditure ranging between  
₹1.95 lakh and ₹78.18 lakh during the period 2016 -17 to 2022 -23  
(up to December 2022) on environmental activities. As the colliery did not obtain 
the EC before enhancing its production, it had to prepare the ‘Damage Remediation 
Plan’ and ‘Natural and Community Resource Augmentation Plan ’ and was thus, 
liable for an additional expenditure of ₹12.32 crore, which was 15 times more than 
the maximum amount spent on environmental activities during the said period to 
replenish the environmental damage done by the project itself. 
                                                           
3 The coal production had ranged between 0.51 MTY and 0.16 MTY during the period from 1994-95 to 
2015-16. 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
5 
Thus, due to excess production made beyond the threshold limit as prescribed in ‘Consent 
to Operate’ as well as carrying out mining operations without obtaining necessary EC, CCL 
was liable to incur an additional expenditure of ₹12.32 crore as compensation for damaging 
the environment.  
Recommendation no. 1: The Company should strictly adhere to the environment al 
regulations regarding expansion and modernisation of the mining projects not only to 
avoid any extra damage to the environment which may also entail additional 
expenditure by way of damage remediation but also to avoid unplanned disruption to 
production.  
Eastern Coalfields Limited 
1.2  Undue favour  to contractor due to non -recovery for  coal shortage during 
transportation resulted in avoidable loss of ₹17.39 crore 
Despite specific provisions in contract agreement  for recovery for  coal shortage, 
occurring during transportation of coal from mine to railway siding, from the 
contractor, Eastern Coalfields Limited  failed to enforce the terms of the contract 
and recover the value of coal shortage, thereby extending undue favour to the 
contractor and suffering an avoidable loss of ₹17.39 crore. 
Eastern Coalfields Limited (ECL), a subsidiary of Coal India Limited (CIL), is engaged in 
mining and distribution of coal extracted from its open cast and underground mines. Chitra 
opencast mines of ECL produces coal which was supplied mainly to Thermal Power 
Stations of NTPC Limited and other consumers, through railway siding at Jamtara, 
Jharkhand. While the extraction of coal was carried out departmentally by ECL, all other 
subsequent and allied activities viz., picking of stone, shale or any extraneous material from 
mined coal, transportation of coal from the Chitra mines to railway siding (26-27 km) and 
loading of coal into railway wagons were outsourced. ECL issued (May 2017) Work Order 
for the above outsourced work to the Contractor, for a period of three years with effect 
from April 2017, which was further extended for two years.  
As per terms of the contract (Clause 18.00), “in case of coal/trucks being weighed both at 
loading end as well as at unloading end, the figures of weighment, at both the ends, shall 
be reconciled every month, in respect of each contractor and if there is any shortage of coal 
received at unloading end, the value of coal found short, will be deduct ed/recovered at 
double the prevailing rate including all royalty, cess etc., from the security deposit of the 
transporting contractor(s) concerned”.  
In this regard, Audit observed the following: 
a) During the period from April 2017 to March 2022, 56,45,019.93 Metric Tonne 
(MT) of coal was weighed at Chitra mine (loading end) and dispatched  to Jamtara 
railway siding by contractor’s trucks/tippers. However, against this, only 
55,95,382.58 Metric Tonne of  coal was received at Jamtara siding as per the 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
 
6 
weighment made at the unloading end. Thus, there was a shortage of 49,637.35 
Metric Tonne coal during the transportation.  
b) As per terms of the contract, shortage of coal was to be deducted/recovered from 
the contractor at double the prevailing rate (including all royalty, cess). Thus, an 
amount of ₹17.39  crore on this account, as detailed in the  Annexure-I, was 
recoverable from the contractor which ECL did not recover. 
The Management, in its reply, stated (April 2023) that: 
a) Payment to contractor was regulated according to Clause 14.1, as per which 
monthly reconciliation of coal transported i.e., coal loaded at mine end with 
opening stock of coal at siding end adjusted with dispatch quantity as per railway 
receipt (RR) including extraneous material and closing stock at siding, revealed 
negligible differential quantity of 0.82 tonne  as shortage during the period from 
April 2017 to March 2022. Applicable deduction on such differential quantity 
worked out to ₹4,642.28 only. 
b) Extraneous material of 77,590 tonne was identified at siding brought by the 
trucks/tippers during the period 2017-18 to 2021-22 for which ECL had retained an 
amount of ₹7.00 crore (approx.) from the contractor bill. 
c) Different level of accuracy betw een the two weighbridges based on their class of 
equipment added to the weighment difference, although calibration thereof was 
done on periodical basis by Legal Metrology Department, Jharkhand (a State 
Authority) and maintenance had been carried out through AMC by a third party.  
d) External factors contribute to the weighment difference viz., seepage of fine coal 
particles due to water spraying necessitated to prevent sprinkling of air borne dust 
into the atmosphere, slippage of coal during transportation for  a distance of  
26-27 kms with some bad road conditions, velocity of wind and seasonal changes 
and fuel consumption by the trucks/tippers during transport. 
e) Surprise inspections were carried out on 11 May 2017 by a committee formed by 
Director (Operations), ECL, which revealed negligible variations of weigh t in the 
range of zero to 40 kg per truck. 
The contentions of the Management are not tenable in view of the following: 
a) Clause 18 of the contract  specifically deals with  coal shortage occurred  during 
transportation of coal from mine to railway siding, which was to be recovered from 
the contractor, whereas, clause 14.1 quoted by Management was meant to regulate 
loss/shortage of coal during loading/stocking at railway siding, based on RR weight 
(railway loading weight) of coal dispatched.  

Report No. 12 of 2024 
7 
b) Picking/segregation of stones was the first activity, which is followed by crushing 
of such segregated coal,  to be carried out by the contractor at mine end before 
loading for transportation to railway siding.  Thus, plea of the Management 
regarding extraneous material identified at railway siding is not tenable and 
indicates lack of monitoring on part of ECL Management on the performance of 
contractor at mines. 
c) In respect of weighment accuracy, margin of error as per calibration report of weigh 
bridges is 10 kg only, which is negligible as compared to the quantity of coal each 
truck/tipper carries (around 15 tonne). 
d) As per contract, no external factors as stated by the management are allowed to 
contribute to the enroute shorta ge of coal and any shortfall quantity during transit 
was to be recovered at double the rate from the contractor.  
e) Though surprise inspection is a deterrent factor, it cannot be a substitute for actual 
recovery of amounts from the contractor for coal lost i n transport, which was not 
done as per the contract terms.  
The Ministry, while accepting (July 2023) the observations made by Audit, stated that issue 
was examined in consultation with ECL and explanation given by ECL Management had 
not been found satisfactory. It also stated that Coal India Limited, holding company, had 
been requested to constitute a committee of senior officers to conduct detailed enquiry in 
the matter, fix responsibility and take appropriate action against the officers found 
responsible. 
Thus, due to non-enforcing of the terms of the contract regulating recovery for the shortage 
of coal during transportation of coal from mine to railway siding, ECL failed to recover 
₹17.39 crore from the contractor, thereby causing an avoidable loss to t he company and 
extending undue favour to the contractor. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter II 
Ministry of Petroleum  
and Natural Gas 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
9 
 
 
Chennai Petroleum Corporation Limited 
2.1  Irregular payment on Sick Leave encashment 
Encashment of Sick Leave to the employees in violation of Department of Public 
Enterprises Guidelines resulted in irregular payment of ₹22.62  crore by Chennai 
Petroleum Corporation Limited. 
As per the Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) instructions of April 1987, CPSEs were 
required to follow the overall ceiling of 300 days for encashment of Earned Leave and Half 
Pay Leave for their employees on retirement. DPE further clarified (July 2012) that Sick 
Leave cannot be encashed and Earned L eave/Half Pay Leave could be considered for 
encashment of leave on retirement subject to the overall limit of 300 days. Further, DPE 
clarified (December 2012) that it has not issued any guidelines permitting CPSEs for 
encashment of Sick Leave in respect of  their employees and encashment of Sick  leave is 
void ab initio . Later also,  in response to references made by some CPSEs seeking 
clarifications on encashment of Sick Leave/Half Pay Leave at the time of retirement, DPE 
reiterated (February 2014) its clarification issued in July 2012. 
Employees of Chennai Petroleum Corporation Limited (CPCL) were entitled for five days 
Sick Leave on full pay at the end of every six months i.e. , as on 1 January and 1  July of 
every year. Audit observed (October 2020) that CPCL allowed encashment of accumulated 
Sick Leave at the time of retirement in violation of DPE guidelines. This resulted in 
irregular payment of ₹22.62 crore 1 during the period from 2014 -15 to 2022 -23 (upto 
September 2022). 
The Management replied (October 202 3) that the 3 rd Pay Revision Committee (PRC) 
allowed (November 2016) to frame their own leave management policies and DPE while 
conveying (August 2017) the guidelines on Leave Management has not made any 
modifications on the recommendations of 3 rd PRC in this regard. In view of this, CPCL 
stated that the leave rules framed by the Corporation are in compliance with the provisions 
of the DPE guidelines (April 1987 and August 2017). 
The reply of the Management is not tenable since Sick leave encashment was not permitted 
as per the DPE policy guidelines (1987). DPE had specifically clarified (July 2012, 
December 2012 and February 2014) that since GoI guidelines do not permit encashment of 
Sick leave ; the same cannot be encashed by CPSEs. Further, DPE , while conveying 
(August 2017) the decisions of the GoI on Pay Revision due from 1 January 2017, 
                                                           
1   ₹22.62 crore [₹1.17 crore (2014 -15), ₹0.97 crore (2015 -16), ₹1.42 crore (2016 -17), ₹2.26 crore  
(2017-18), ₹1.97 crore (2018-19), ₹2.94 crore (2019-20), ₹4.41 crore (2020-21), ₹4.61 crore (2021-22) 
and ₹2.87 crore (2022-23, upto September 2022)] 
CHAPTER II: MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM AND NATURAL 
GAS 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
 
10 
mentioned about the encashment of Earned Leave only under leave regulations/  
management by CPSEs.  In view of this, the DPE clarifications issued during  
December 2012 and February 2014 stand good and accordingly encashment of Sick Leave 
was a violation of DPE guidelines. The Sick leave encashment rules framed by CPCL were 
not in conformity with the provisions of the DPE guidelines/instructions and further 
clarifications issued from time to time. 
Further, the Ministry, in its reply, stated (November 2023) that directives were issued on 
12 September 2023 to CPCL to immediately stop the encash ment scheme of Sick Leave 
/Half Pay Leave along with earned leaves beyond permissible limit of 300 days and to 
recover the amount already paid. The Ministry also directed CPCL to submit the action 
taken within one month of issuance of the directives. 
The Ministry needs to ensure that encashment paid in respect of Sick Leave is recovered 
fully since encashment for Sick Leave is not permissible as per the DPE guidelines. 
Thus, encashment of Sick Leave in violation of DPE guidelines/instructio ns resulted in 
irregular payment of ₹22. 62 crore for the period from 2014 -15 to 2022 -23 (upto  
September 2022). 
Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited 
2.2  Idle investment in installation  of facilities for storage of black oil petroleum 
products  
Setting up installation  of facilities for storage of black oil petroleum products in 
Bihar by Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited without due diligence resulted 
in idle investment of ₹19.88 crore. 
Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited (Company) did not have  any storage depots in 
Bihar to receive white oil petroleum products (motor spirit, high speed diesel, superior 
kerosene oil, ethanol etc.) through railway tank wagons to meet the customers’ demand. 
The Company was fully dependent on oil depots and refinery of Indian Oil Corporation 
Limited for its business in Bihar. In order to reduce the dependency on Indian Oil 
Corporation Limited and increase its market share of white oil petroleum products in the 
region, the Company proposed (February 2009) to set up its own oil installation facilities 
for white oil in Bih ar, Patna. At that point of time, there was no proposal for installation 
facilities for black oil petroleum products (furnace oil, light diesel oil and bitumen) in Bihar 
as the Company had no business for black oil in that State. Despite this, Direct Sales 
Business Unit of the Company gave proposal (August 2009) for setting up installations of 
facilities (i.e., loading, unloading, storage and distribution facilities) for black oil petroleum 
products without exercising proper due  diligence and cost benefit analysis of its 
requirement in Bihar.  
The Board of Directors of the Company approved (January 2010) the project for installation 
of facilities for bo th white oil and black oil at Bihta,  Bihar with total project cost of  

Report No. 12 of 2024 
11 
₹142.50 crore. The project cost included ₹19.88 crore towards development   
of infrastructure for only black oil facilities. The project was completed in June 2014. 
Audit scrutiny revealed that the above infrastructure developed for storage and distribution 
of black oil petroleum products remained idle since their commissioning in June 2014.  
In this regard, Audit observed the following: 
a) The Company initially planned to create facilities for storage and distribution of 
white oil petroleum products only. The proposal for installation of black oil 
petroleum products was considered at a later stage, without assessing the market 
demand for those products. 
b) Prior to initiation of the proposal, the Company did not have any business for black 
oil petroleum products in Bihar although it was dependent on Indian Oil 
Corporation Limited for storage of white oil petroleum products.  
c) However, later durin g 2017 -18 to 2021 -22, the Company did a business of  
17,094 kilo litre of furnace oil (black oil) in Bihar by executing direct agreement 
with the industrial customers at Corporate Office level where  in the supplies were 
directly delivered to the customers from different locations like Haldia, Bokaro and 
Visakhapatnam. There were no firm orders for black oil petroleum products 
requiring storage facilities in Bihar. 
Thus, development of infrastructure for storage and marketing of black oil petroleum 
products in Bihar by the Company without assessing its market demand and not supported 
by cost benefit analysis resulted in blockage of funds to the tune of ₹19.88 crore. 
The Management/Ministry, in its reply, stated (March 2023 /September 2023 ) the 
following: 
a) The black oil facilities at Bihta was setup to overcome the financial burden arising 
from applicability of Bihar entry tax while sourcing the black oil petroleum products 
from other than its own refineries or locations.  
b) Such black oil facilities remained unuti lised due to delay in commissioning of 
NTPC projects. 
c) The facilities may be utilised alternatively through conversion of the existing 
furnace oil tanks for storage and marketing of ethanol and light diesel oil. 
The above reply of the Management/Ministry is not tenable due to following reasons: 
a) The Management’s/Ministry’s contention of setting of storage facilities to avoid 
burden of entry tax on the products was incorrect as the Company neither sold black 
oil petroleum products in Bihar at the time when proposal was initiated nor had 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
 
12 
market for black oil products in the State till December 2016. Further, the 
Management/Ministry accepted (March 2023/September 2023) that after 
introduction of Goods and Services Tax, there was no benefit in getting the black  
oil petroleum products from other States for selling in Bihar due to logistic cost 
especially in view of availability of same products from Indian Oil Corporation 
Limited at lower price. Therefore, chances of utilisation of facilities for storage of 
black oil petroleum products in future are bleak. 
b) Nothing was found on record that the Management considered the scheduled 
commissioning of NTPC projects while taking decision for setting up of the black 
oil facilities. Also, there was no agreement with NTPC th at the Company would 
supply black oil petroleum products to its upcoming Project. Further, even after 
commissioning of NTPC plants at Barh (February 2016) and Nabinagar  
(September 2019), the Company failed to utilise the idle black oil facilities at Bihta 
which indicates that there was no requirement of these facilities. 
c) The alternate usage of black oil facilities through conversion of the existing furnace 
oil tanks was an afterthought and cannot justify its injudicious project planning 
activities. Further, the conversion of two existing furnace oil tanks for storage of 
ethanol and light diesel oil would also entail additional cost to the Company. In the 
meantime, the facilities created have been lying idle for the past more than  
eight years. 
Thus, installation of facilities for storage of black oil petroleum products in Bihar without 
due diligence resulted in idle investment of ₹19.88 crore. 
Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Limited 
2.3 Imprudent decision to invest in a block and infructuous expenditure due to 
subsequent relinquishment of the block     
Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Limited (ONGC) acquired the block with 70 per 
cent participating interest despite the fact that the Technical Committee had 
assessed (June 2013) the probability of success in the block as only 11.20 per cent. 
ONGC surrendered the block to D irector General of Hydrocarbons in November 
2021 citing low gas volumes after incurring an expenditure of ₹557.59 crore, besides 
failing to recover the proportionate share of ₹132.90 crore from partner contractor. 
The block MB-OSN-2005/3, located in Mumbai Offshore, was awarded (November 2008) 
by Government of India (GoI ) to the consortium of two private entities under New 
Exploration Licensing Policy2 (NELP) round VII with participating interest of 50 per cent 
                                                           
2   NELP was formulated by GOI in 1997 -98 to provide a level playing field to both public and private 
sector companies in exploration and production of hydrocarbons with DGH as the nodal agency for its 
implementation. The blocks (an area of sedimentary basin in an oil and exploration area) were awarded 
to Indian, private and foreign companies through International Competitive Bidding where the 
National Oil Companies (ONGC and OIL) were competing on equal footing.  

Report No. 12 of 2024 
13 
each. The Production Sharing Contract of the block signed on 22 December 2008 was 
effective from 4 February 2009. 
As per Article 4 of the Production Sharing Contract, if at the end of exploration phase (after 
completing Minimum Work Programme), the contractor elects to continue exploration 
operations in the contract area, the contractor shall retain upto 60 per cent of the original 
contract area including any development and discovery areas and relinquish the balance 
areas prior to commencement of second phase3. Accordingly, out of total area of 2,810 sq. 
km., Party-A had already relinquished 1,125 sq. km. and retain ed 1,685 sq. km.  
(60 per cent). ONGC had also not bid for this block in the earlier round.  
Subsequently, Party-B intended to exit from the block and hence Party-A approached  
(May 2013) ONGC with a request to acquire 60 per cent participating interest in the block 
on ‘farm in’4 basis. Board of Directors of ONGC approved (December 2013) the proposal 
to acquire the block on ‘farm in’ basis with 70 per cent participating interest5. Thereafter, 
in January 2014, Party-B exited from the block and assigned its 50 per cent participating 
interest to Party-A. ONGC signed (December 2014) the ‘farm out’ agreement with Party-
A on 24 December 2014 with 70 per cent participating interest. Party-A retained  
30 per cent participating interest and ONGC was nominated as operator of the block. The 
same was approved (April 2015) by Government of India vide Amendment to the 
Production Sharing Contract.  
As per the Production Sharing Contract, an estimated cost of USD 15 million (₹72.96 crore 
approx. @ ₹48.64 per USD) was submitted by Party-A during bidding for the Phase -II6 
Minimum Work Prog ramme for exploration of well. As per the terms of ‘farm out’ 
agreement, ONGC was to bear the cost of party-A’s share of 30 per cent in USD 15 million 
i.e., USD 4.5 million (₹29.25 crore approx. @₹65 per USD). The cost over and above USD 
15 million was to be shared between ONGC and Party-A according to the participating 
interest. As per the revised budget estimates (April 2016) for the year 2015 -16, the 
estimates had increased beyond USD 15 million to USD 26.58 million (₹172.77 crore 
@₹65 per USD). Party-A’s share was to the extent of US D 3.58 million (₹ 23.27 crore 
                                                           
3   As per the PSC of the block MB-OSN-2005/3, the exploration phase comprised of two phases i.e., Phase 
I and Phase II. In Phase I comprising four years period, the work commitment included acquisition, 
processing and interpretation of 600 sq. mtr of 3D seism ic data, reprocessing of 1,000 line km of 2D 
data and acquisition of high-resolution 3D data for 100 sq km area. In Phase II, the work commitment 
included drilling of one exploratory well. 
4   ‘Farm in’ and ‘Farm out’ are two sides of the same negotiation process working in opposite direction. 
While the first is the entry of companies into the oil & gas exploration, ‘Farm out’ takes place when a 
business with current concession is willing to give up part or all of its available area. In the ‘Farm in’ 
agreement, both the parties desire to share costs and risks of drilling to increase capital expenditure in 
expecting higher gain in return. 
5   As per then existing Joint Operation Agreement , for an affirmative vote, parties were to have at least 
65 per cent of the participating interest  for Operating C ommittee (OC) decisions. ONGC, therefore, 
counter offered for 70 per cent participating interest to have a major say in the OC decision.  
6   The exploration phase comprised of two phases. Phase I include acquisition, interpretation and 
processing of seismic data and Phase II include drilling of well.  

Report No. 12 of 2024 
 
14 
including service tax ). However, it did not pay its share despite several reminders 7 and 
therefore ONGC issued (June 2017) Notice of default under Article 7.6 of Joint Operating 
Agreement. Party-A stopped attending the meetings and from February 2019 , ONGC 
carried out the activities as sole member of the block. ONGC incurred total expenditure of 
₹557.59 crore. The pending cash calls from Party-A was to the extent of ₹132.90 crore. 
Party-A had, however, not paid any of its dues. The interest accrued calculated at the 
applicable base rate plus five per cent  points of State Bank of India was ₹56.01 crore  
(till September 2021). 
During Phase-II, ONGC discovered gas in the exploratory well MBS053NAA -1. ONGC 
intimated the gas discovery to Directorate General of Hydrocarbon  (DGH) in February 
2016 and entered three years appraisal 8 phase valid upto March 2019. ONGC planned 
(November 2016) to drill five wells in the appraisal phase. The first appraisal well  
(NAB-1) turned out to be dry. To mitigate the risk, ONGC acquired new 3D 9 broadband 
seismic data of 1,400 sq. km. and identified a new prospect MBS053NAG (February 2019) 
which was gas bearing. ONGC submitted Declaration of Commerciality (DOC) to DGH in 
May 2019. ONGC drilled (January 2020) two additional appraisal wells (MBS053NA C-1 
and MBS053NAD-1) to improve the economic value of the block after gas discoveries. 
These wells had produced gas from the shallow formation. However, after techno economic 
analysis of the project, ONGC relinquished the block in November 2021 citing low gas 
volumes. 
In this regard, Audit observed the following: 
I) While reviewing the play 10 (prospect) types in the block at the time of acquisition 
(2013), the Technical Committee of ONGC comprising four Deputy General Managers and 
two Chief Geologists, had brought out (June 2013) that: type 1 was not tested in any well 
in nearby areas and represented a new play opportunity; type 2 was tested in one of the 
nearby block and was found to be devoid of hydrocarbons; type 3 was not tested in any of 
the drilled wells as the reservoir content was thought to be uncertain. In two wells drilled 
in the block, there were no significant hydrocarbons.  
II) Technical Committee had assessed the Probability of Success/discovery of the 
block as only 11.20 per cent. As compared to the Probability of Success of 41.40 -50 per 
cent in respect of the block MB-OSN-2005/2, the Probability of Success of 11.20 per cent 
                                                           
7    (April 2016, May 2016, June 2016, August2016, September 2016, January 2017 and March 2017) 
8   Phase of petroleum operations that follows successful exploratory dr illing. During appraisal 
phase,delineation wells might be drilled to determine the size of oil and gas field.  
9    3 Dimensional (3D) seismic survey is one in which the seismic data is acquired so densely that the data 
are processed and interpreted as a volume of data. 3D data provide s a much greater lateral resolution 
and thereby provides better insights into the geology. 
10    A particular stratigraphic or structural geological setting, a group of oil fields or prospects in the same 
region that are controlled by same set of geological circumstances  (i.e., the geological time period) 
where the hydrocarbons are likely to occur . The main geological time period were Pl iocene, Miocene, 
Oligocene etc. The type 1 pertained to late Miocene and Pliocene. Type 2 pertained to early – Mid 
Miocene period and Type 3 pertained to Oligocene time period 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
15 
in this block was very low. Initial draft report of the Technical Committee had assessed the 
block as ‘high r isk-medium return’ and suggested acquiring 36 per cent  participating 
interest as an optimum investment level to balance the risk and prospectivity perception 
vis-à-vis ensuring a decisive say in conduct of petroleum operations. The final report had, 
however, categorised the block as ‘medium risk -medium return’. With regard to 
norms/basis of categorising the probability of success as high/medium/low, Management 
stated that there were no standard guidelines for categorising the Probability of Success as 
high/medium/low risk. Contrary to the initial recommendation for acquiring minimum 
participating interest of 36 per cent, ONGC had acquired 70 per cent participating interest. 
III) Party-A, in January 2017, had carried out technical evaluation of the block and had 
observed that ‘considering the low productivity and small resource numbers in the well, 
the appraisal and development looks quite challenging. Additional deeper sands have many 
associated uncertainties with respect to reservoir quality and hydrocarbon charging as 
none of them showed any positive indication in drilled well. Exploitation of gas from the 
block will require high number of wells to be drilled owing to gas accumulation pattern 
which is spread over several small to very small linear pods. Bloc k will require 80 km. of 
offshore pipeline to evacuate the gas to nearest available facilities. All the cost multipliers 
have a negative impact on commerciality of gas find at near/midterm gas price envisaged.’ 
ONGC had ultimately surrendered the block (November 2021) considering the low gas 
volume in the block, present gas price and economic indicators. 
IV) ONGC had constituted (September 2014) a Committee for signing of the Joint 
Operating Agreement with the Party-A. The Committee had recommended obtaining Bank 
Guarantee for an amount equivalent to Party-A’s share of Minimum Work Programme cost 
to address the issue of delay in cash call payment by the non -operator as faced in various 
other blocks. Accordingly, clause to this effect was included under article 6.2.1 in the Joint 
Operating Agreement signed with Party-A in June 2015. The estimated cost of Minimum 
Work Programme had increased to USD 26.58 million out of which Party-A’s share was 
USD 3.58 million (₹23.27 crore@ USD 65). ONGC had, however, failed to obtain the Bank 
Guarantee. The cash calls 11 due from Party-A which were ₹24.03 crore in 2015 -16 had 
increased gradually to ₹27.02 crore in 2016 -17, ₹62.95 crore in 2017 -18 and to  
₹132.90 crore as on 30 September 2021. Thus, failure to obtain Bank Guarantee resulted in 
piling up of the dues. ONGC, in March 2020, filed for arbitration in the Supreme Court of 
India. The arbitration case is in progress (December 2023). 
V) As per ONGC/DGH requirement, Party-A, along with the application for 
assignment of participating interest in the block, had submitted (January 2015) the audited 
financial statements for the preceding three financial years ending March 2012, 2013 and 
2014. Audit observed that in all the three years, the accumulated losses of Party-A were 
                                                           
11  Cash Call means any request for payment of cash made by operator in accordance with the approved 
work program and approved budget to the parties in connection with joint operations.  

Report No. 12 of 2024 
 
16 
more than ₹400 crore. ONGC, however, did not to take cogni sance of the same and thus 
failed to safeguard its financial interest.  
The Management/Ministry, in reply (January/September 2023), stated that: -  
i) Based on the available Geological and Geophysical data and vintage 2D data, the 
block was envisaged to be less prospective and hence ONGC did not bid for the block. It is 
not only the technical prospec tivity of block which is considered for bidding but a 
combination of several other factors like fiscal regime, prevailing market condition, 
strategic requirement etc., play an important role. With regard to acquiring the block during 
2013, ONGC had the advantage of having new 3D seismic data volume, acquired by private 
contractors in Phase-I of exploration.  
Due diligence was by way of constitution of Multi -Disciplinary Team to evaluate 
prospectivity. Multi-Disciplinary Team submitted its report recommending participation in 
the block to test the ‘medium risk -medium reward’ play in Pliocene considering the low 
Production Sharing Contract commitment in Phase-II. 
ii) Probability of Success value of 11.20 per cent cannot be considered a low value as 
these value s are relative percentage. Categorising Probability of Success as 
high/medium/low is a subjective judgment in exploration and is based on basin and other 
petroleum system element. The same cannot be quantified. 
Draft reports are prepared to have a quick look analysis and undergo changes prior to 
finalisation. The final report takes into cognisance all the studies undertaken with enriched 
value to it. 70 per cent participating interest acquisition was proposed to overcome the 
hurdle of ‘65 per cent participating interest for Operating Committee decision’. This was 
done in the interest of the organisation.   
iii) The technical evaluation by Party-A seems to be based on the technical evaluation 
of the well MBOS053NAA -1. Whereas, ONGC subsequently did detailed exploratory 
efforts which led to discovery of gas. No evaluation may be considered conclusive unless 
and until it is corroborated by hard data/facts and same is available only after drilling of 
wells. 
iv)  The requirement of Bank Guarantee did not arise in the initial stage as the budget 
(BE 2015-16) was within the limit of USD 15 million and Party-A was not required to share 
the expenditure. Subsequent to the exceeding of actual cost above USD 15 million, ONGC 
raised the cash calls, which were not honoured by Party-A. ONGC invoked the arbitration 
and appointed the Arbitrator on 14 March 2019. As Party -A did not respond to the 
arbitration proceedings ONGC filed petition in Supreme Court on 21 March 2020 .  The 
arbitration case is in progress (December 2023).  
v) Party-A has posted Net Profit/(loss) of USD (390,229), USD 2,364,807 and USD 
(887,158) for the financial year ending 2012, 2013 and 2014 respectively which translates 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
17 
into Net profit of around USD 1,087,420 for the preceding three financial years ending 
March 2012, 2013 and 2014. 
The reply may be seen in light of the following: -  
a) As per ONGC circular of January 2013, the hurdle rate/Target IRR for oil and gas 
exploration and production project was 14 per cent (post tax). ONGC, however, did not 
carry out economic evaluation of the block. The technical evaluation of the block was done 
after considering the new 3D data acquired by private contractors.  
b) The significance of Probability of Success in evaluation of a block can be assessed 
from the ONGC circular of J uly 2018 wherein it is brought out that for bidding and 
acquisition of blocks, economic evaluation of a block is to be carried out based on expected 
monetary value which, in turn, is to be calculated based on the effective pay off considering 
Probability of Success. The probability of failure (i.e., 1- Probability of Success) was also 
to be factored to arrive at the effective pay off/loss. Thus, Probability of Success is a critical 
and quantifiable element in evaluation of a block. Audit had observed that i n respect of 
another offer (October 2013) for ‘farm in’ (block MB -OSN-2005/2), the Probability of 
Success was assessed at 41-50 per cent. ONGC had categorised the block as medium risk 
medium reward and also carried out financial evaluation of the block. As the proposal was 
not viable, the Project Appraisal Committee did not recommend the same to the Board. 
ONGC, however, failed to carry out economic evaluation in the block MB-OSN-2005/3. 
c) While the Technical Committee of ONGC submitted the draft report on  
17 June 2013, the final report was submitted by the Technical Committee the very next day 
i.e., on 18 June 2013. ONGC did not conduct any additional study before submission of 
final report. The technical findings of draft report and final report  were the same. Only 
change was regarding categorisation of the block from high risk to medium risk (for which 
no reasons were recorded) and recommendation on quantum of participating interest to be 
acquired.  
d) The Party-A, in its evaluation report, had considered the data of the drilled well as 
well as the data in respect of all the proposed five drilling locations. Thus, the evaluation 
was done in entirety. The findings brought out in January 2017 were same as that brought 
out by ONGC in its communication to DGH in February 2021. This establishes the inherent 
risk cautioned by the Technical Committee in its initial report. ONGC had, however, failed 
to carry out the economic evaluation in the block MB -OSN-2005/3 as was done in block 
MB-OSN-2005/2. 
e) The intent of inclusion of clause 6.2.1 in the Joint Operating Agreement for 
obtaining Bank Guarantee was to ensure timely remittance of cash calls by partner. The 
Committee observed that by not paying cash call, the risk of exploration phase passed on 
to ONGC. While ONGC, as operator, is under obligation to attain the work commitments 
during exploration phase , JV partner intending to exit from block often manoeuvre 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
 
18 
approvals in exploration phase to delay their obligation to pay cash call. Since the cost of 
Minimum Work Programme had subsequently increased to USD 26.58 million out of which 
Party-A’s share was USD 3.58 million (₹23.27 crore) and in view of  Party-A’s financial 
status, ONGC should have obtained the Bank Guarantee for an amount of  ₹23.27 crore in 
2015-16.  
f) Net losses of Party-A had increased from USD 390,229 in 2012 to USD 887,158 in 
2014 i.e., more than double. Accumulated losses were USD 82,469,971 (2012), USD 
80,105,164 (2013) and USD 80,992,322 (2014) i.e., more than ₹400 crore in all three years. 
As per available records, financial status of Party-A was nowhere discussed on file.  
Thus, ONGC did not carry out rigorous economic evaluation of the block before acquisition 
as required in ONGC circular of January 2013. ONGC also did not recor d the reasons for 
changing the risk assessment of the block from ‘high risk medium return’ to ‘medium risk 
medium return’ resulting in acquisition of a not very prospective block and subsequent 
relinquishment of the block and infructuous expenditure of ₹55 7.59 crore in the block. 
ONGC also failed to reassess the cost of Minimum Work Programme for the well and 
obtain the Bank Guarantee from Party-A within 15 days of signing of Joint Operating 
Agreement resulting in non-recovery of dues from Party-A to the extent of ₹188.91 crore 
(including interest of ₹56.01 crore).  
Recommendation No. 2: ONGC should ensure carrying out rigorous economic 
evaluation of the block before acquisition in future and consider fixing responsibility 
on the concerned officials for failing to obtain bank guarantee from Party-A towards 
its share of cost of Minimum Work Programme.  
2.4 Imprudent decision of accepting the Turbine Generator materials amounting to 
₹133.14 crore without service contract led to idling of materials and delay in its 
commissioning 
Non-synchronisation of the supply of the material for revamping of three old Gas 
Turbine Generators at Water Injection platform with service contract resulted in 
delay in commissioning of one Gas Turbine Generator costing ₹35.02 crore by two 
years and idling of two Gas Turbine Generators costing ₹98.12 crore, which were 
yet to be commissioned (April 2023) despite lapse of seven years. 
Water injection platform12 of Oil & Natural Gas Corporation L imited (ONGC) was 
commissioned in 1984 and is the main water injection hub in Mumbai High field with 
injection capacity of 3,40,000-barrel water per day (BWPD). Due to ageing and harsh saline 
environment, the condition of several systems and main equipment including three Turbine 
                                                           
12  Water injection platform processes sea water to make it suitable for i njecting into the reservoir. The 
cleaned and treated seawater is pumped at high pressure for injecting into reservoir through a number 
of injector wells.  

Report No. 12 of 2024 
19 
Generators13 (TG) of the major platform deteriorated and water injection capacity reduced 
to 2,90,000 BWPD (March 2008). 
The revamping of Turbine Generator Units and auxiliaries was approved (January 2011) 
by the Board of Directors of ONGC. Thereafter, under single bid system, tender was invited 
(November 2011) for hiring of services for complete revamp of the three Turbine Generator 
units of Water Injection platform from Original Equipment Manufacturer (OEM ). The 
scope of tender was hiring of services for complete revamp of the Turbine Generator units 
of Water Injection platform. The scope also included replacement of combustion air intake 
system, exhaust system, starter motor, gas generation skid, gas separator skid, valves etc. 
Subsequently, only Notice of Award (NoA) was issued (February 2013) for services for all 
three TGs at total cost of ₹30.23 crore with the completion period (installation and 
Commissioning) of 102, 160 and 160 days for TG1, TG2 and TG3 respectively from the 
date of site clearance excluding monsoon period and three separate purchase orders (one 
for each unit) were issued (December 2013/January 2014)  to the OEM for supply of 
materials required for three Turbine Generators costing ₹133.1 4 crore. The detailed 
contracts f or service in respect of TG3 and TG2 were signed on 22 April 2015 and  
7 November 2019 respectively whereas contract for service of TG1 is yet to be signed. The 
details of Purchase Orders (POs) for material and for service, receipt of materials and 
commissioning are given in Annexure-II. The material for all three turbine Generator sets 
were received and mobilised between August 2014 to April 2016 and material of two TGs 
remained non -functional from April 2016 till date (April 2023).  The TG3 unit was 
commissioned in June 2017. Field work for TG2 started from November 2019, which was 
yet to be commissioned (April 2023). The warranty of the equipment was 12 months after 
the goods have been delivered or 18 months after the date of shipment whichever periods 
conclude earlier.  The warranty of all the equipment got lapsed prior to the install ation of 
the equipment. 
In this regard, Audit observed that there were following deviations in the tender terms by 
the bidder which were approved by the Executive Purchase Committee in accordance with 
clause F3(a) of the Book of Delegated Powers: 
a) The bid was invited from OEM on single tender basis for complete revamp of three 
Turbine Generator units of Water Injection platform, including material and services. 
However, separate bid was submitted by the OEM for materials (for all three Turbine 
Generator units) and a separate bid for complete installation and commissioning (i.e., 
for service) with financial implication of ₹163.3 7 crore (for material and service). 
This was accepted by ONGC in variance of tender conditions.  
b) ONGC accepted the delivery period as proposed by the OEM for mobilisation of the 
materials for TG3, TG2 and TG1 respectively and onsite revamp of each unit as  
102 days for TG3 and 160 days for TG2 and TG1 from the date of site clearance. 
                                                           
13  The role of the turbine is to transform the energy of water, steam or wind into mechanical energy that 
will make the generator spin. The generator transforms the mechanical energy into electricity. 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
 
20 
This was also in variance with original tender condition which stated that contract 
shall remain valid for a period of 21 months + 2 months from date of Notice of 
Award. 
c) As per tender condition, payment for services were to be made, unit wise (Turbine 
Generator) after completion of each unit. However, on request of vendor, payment 
for services in three stages14 was accepted by ONGC. 
The materials for all three Turbine Generator sets were received and mobilised from August 
2014 to April 2016.  The TG3 unit was commissioned in June 2017. Field work for TG2  
(material cost ₹49.35 crore) started from November 2019, which was yet to be 
commissioned (April 2023) resulting in idling of material . Audit further observed that in 
the absence of service contract (for TG1) , equipment of TG1 amounting to ₹48.77 crore 
were lying idle (April 2023) for more than seven years without any service contract and 
warranty.  
ONGC, in its reply (December 2022), stated that: 
a) Minimum two Turbine Generators are required to meet the power re quirement of 
Platform, hence it was proposed to carry out the Revamp of TGs one unit at a time. 
Though ONGC requested bids for revamping of TGs, including material and 
service, bidder submitted  two separate offers  i.e., one for material and other for 
service. Being the case of OEM, ONGC has no other option than to accept the 
services offered by the contractor. The OEMs, particularly foreign ones , insist on 
separate orders for material and service, citing taxation issues.  
b) Bidders submitted their offer with several deviations to tender conditions but with 
the approval of Competent Authority and after protracted discussions with OEM, 
Tender Committee recommended for award of  three separate orders for supply of 
material and three separate orders for service part (installation & commissioning). 
c) ONGC had already issued Notification of Award for materials for all three units 
and services for all three units together and Notification of Award is binding till 
signing of formal contract so accepting of material withou t service contract will 
have no impact on installation and commissioning of Turbine Generator. 
d) The delays in finalising tender/award of contracts was also due to change in the 
name of entity, difference of opinion with regard to pricing agreed to in Notification 
of Award and Covid 19 situation that led to restrictions etc. OEM has now 
remobilised and work is in progress.  
Ministry (October 2023), in addition to the above , further stated that ONGC was advised 
to examine the specific reasons/circumstances for long delay in award of Service contract, 
                                                           
14  30 per cent on mobilisation, 40 per cent on 115 days from mobili sation and 30 per cent on 
commissioning for TG1 & TG2 and for TG3 30 per cent on mobilisation, 40 per cent on 70 days from 
mobilisation and 30 per cent on commissioning. 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
21 
internally review the matter and devise internal control mechanism for timely completion 
of award of service contracts and ensure that the occurrence of such events/ incidents are 
avoided and not repeated in future. 
Reply of ONGC/Ministry may be viewed considering the following facts: 
a) While it may be true that only one Turbine Generator could be revamped at a time, 
this could not have come in the way of contracting for  material and services 
simultaneously for one Turbine Generator at a time. Thus, material for each of the 
Turbine Generator needed to have been contracted for along with contract for its 
servicing too. This was not done, and resultantly materials for all t hree Turbine 
Generators were received, while their successful revamp was limited to only one 
Turbine Generator. After nearly seven years of mobilisation of materials from 
August 2014 to April 2016 , only one  unit (TG3) has been commissioned  
(June 2017) with a delay of two years  and field work for TG2 unit commenced in 
November 2019 and is still in progress. Moreover, materials for TG1 set costing 
₹48.77 crore are lying idle for more than seven years with the company without any 
service contract.  
b) While OEMs insisted on separate orders for material and service, ONGC should 
have synchronised and secured the components of contract by ensuring that both 
the components (material and service) of planned revamping were contractually 
secured.  
c) These Turbine Generators had completed more than 25 years of operational life and 
based on their health survey, it was decided to revamp these three Turbine 
Generators. Health evaluation also revealed that TG3 had suffered severe failure 
leading to its non -availability. However, two units (TG2 & TG1) could not be 
revamped till date ( April 2023 ) even after lapse of more than 10 years since 
approval of the Board.  
d) As per Integrated Material Management  Manual para 15.3.3,  in order to make a 
contract legally enforceable, all concerned must ensure that the contract is properly 
signed & stamped by the contractor before it is signed by ONGC's representative. 
However, no such service contract was signed between ONGC and the OEM. 
Further, contractor also stated (November 2017) that Notification of Award 
received by them is not binding contract. 
Non-synchronisation of the supply of the material and valid service contract has resulted in 
the following: 
a) TG3 (material cost ₹35.02 crore) was commissioned with a delay of two years,  
b) TG2 (material cost ₹49.35 crore) and TG1 (material cost ₹48.77 crore) are yet to be 
commissioned despite delay of seven years, and  
c) Equipment of TG1 valuing ₹48.77 crore are lying idle without service contract and 
warranty. 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
 
22 
Further, it has also defeated the objective of complete revamping of Water Injection 
platform to enhance the safety and operational reliability of the plant and to achieve better 
availability15 of plants and equipment. 
Recommendation No. 3: ONGC, in future, may ensure synchronisation of the supply 
of material required and the  service contract necessary for revamping to reduce the 
delay in commissioning and to enhance the safety and operational reliability of a plant.  
2.5 Persistent delays in clearance of imported consignments  led to absorption of 
demurrage charges 
Persistent delays in clearance of imported consignments led to payment of 
demurrage charges amounting to ₹110.61 crore during the period 2016-17 to 2021-
22 and, out of this, the expenditure towards demurrage to an extent of ₹58.74 crore 
was absorbed by ONGC. 
Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Limited (ONGC) imports materials for oil and gas 
exploration and production activities.  Company has four Transpor tation and Shipping  
(T&S) offices located at Mumbai, Chennai, Kolkata and Delhi  which are responsible for 
clearance of import consignment and its delivery to the ultimate consignee (i.e., various 
work centres) in the shortest possible time, with least cost while ensuring compliance to the 
statutory provisions. Company engages Custom House Agents (CHA) on contract to assist 
this process. Any delay in clearance of imported consignment leads to payment of 
demurrage16. 
As per Integrated Material Management M anual (IMMM) of ONGC (Para 20.4.4 and 
20.5.1), the concerned Indenting Section is responsible for provision of all sets of clear and 
undisputed documents required for clearance of consignment at least three days before the 
arrival of consignment at port/airport to the T&S section. 
Non-Negotiable Shipping Documents (NNSD), Essentiality Certificate (EC), Undertaking 
of EC17, Steel Importing Monitoring System (SIMS)18 and Original Bill of Lading (OBL) 
are the primary documents required for clearance of the impor ted consignment. 
Accountability for delayed clearance is determined as under: 
a) Demurrage for delay on part of clearing agents is recovered by the T&S office from 
the payment due to them. 
b) Demurrage paid on account of supplier is recovered from the payment due to them. 
                                                           
15  During the period from 2015-16 to 2022-23, as against the water injection capacity of 3,20,000 BWPD, 
the actual water injection ranged between 2,27,078 BWPD to 2,92,999 BWPD. 
16  Demurrage is an expense in the nature of penalty levied for failure to clear the goods from the port 
within the prescribed number of days. 
17  Director General of Hydrocarbons is the specified independent authority empowered to certify that the 
goods would be used for the intended purpose, based on which the benefit is allowed.  
18  Steel Importing Monitoring System has been instituted by the Ministry of Commerce and Industry, 
Government of India to provide advance information about steel imports to both, the Government as 
well as relevant stakeholders. 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
23 
c) Demurrage paid on account of ONGC (delay in providing EC, clearance of 
OBL/documents from Bank, etc.) and Operational reasons19 are absorbed by ONGC 
after taking necessary approvals by the concerned Indenting Section. 
During examination of clearance of import consignments for  the period 2016 -17 to  
2021-22, Audit observed that the T&S offices located in Mumbai, Kolkata and Chennai 
had paid demurrages  in case of 74 per cent, 69  per cent 20 and 95 per cent of the total 
consignments cleared respectively. The total amount of demurrage paid aggregated to 
₹110.61 crore in 4,16 1 out of 5,3 79 consignments21 (77 per cent ) cleared by them 
(Annexure-III & I V). Out of this, in the three T&S offices (Mumbai, Kolkata and 
Chennai), 56 per cent22, 57 per cent23 and 43 per cent24 respectively were those cases where 
the demurrages  were incurred and absorbed by ONGC on account of  delay in EC and 
operational reasons mentioned under the category (c) above (Annexure-V). 
The delay in clearance of consignments (on part of ONGC) was due to delay in receipt of 
EC (41.37 per cent ) by the T&S offices from the Indenting departments and other 
operational reasons (58.63 per cent) like late filling of Bill of Entry, wrong delivery order 
issued by shipping line, delay in obtaining delivery order from supplier and lack of co -
ordination between the departments. The reasons for late receipt of EC after arrival of 
vessel/craft were late  application by ONGC, delay  in providing clarification to DGH, 
discrepancy in EC with reference to contents and value, single shipment requiring multiple 
ECs from various indenters, delay in forwarding of EC by Indenter to T&S offices even 
after its receip t from DGH etc. It was noticed that ONGC had absorbed an amount of  
₹58.74 crore  (Annexure-VI) out of total demurrage payment of ₹110.61 crore   
(53 per cent). Absorption of demurrages by ONGC in large number of cases, as mentioned 
above, indicates lack of prior planning and co-ordination among various agencies involved 
in clearance of consignment. 
ONGC, in its reply, stated (January 2023) that: 
In case of T&S -Mumbai and Kolkata, total demurrage charges incurred since 2018 -19 to 
2022-23 have a decreasing trend, with exception of the period when COVID-19 pandemic 
restrictions were imposed by Government of India, and demurrage charges paid per 
consignment was also having decreasing trend. The higher demurrage in the year 2016-17 
was mainly due to Customs  having stopped/holding the clearance of ONGC’s 
                                                           
19  Demurrage attributable to operational reasons are mainly due to late filling of Bill of Entry, wrong 
delivery order issued by shipping line, delay in obtaining delivery order from supplie r and lack of co -
ordination between the departments. 
20  In T&S Kolkata office, no physical register is being maintained and number of consignments on which 
demurrage paid was also not made available for FY 2019-20 to 2021-22.  
21  No. of consignments on which demurrage paid was not available for FY 2019-20 to 2021-22 in case of 
T&S Kolkata office, so total consignment cleared for these years have been excluded from the analysis. 
22  21 per cent due to delay in receipt of EC and 35 per cent demurrage on account of operational reasons. 
23  36 per cent due to delay in EC and 21 per cent due to operational reasons.  
24  Demurrage register provided by T&S Chennai did not mention reasons for delay in 82 per cent cases 
in 2020-21 and in 87  per cent cases in 2021-22. 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
 
24 
consignments (around 34 consignments: 6,518 MT of pipes) on account of Anti-Dumping 
Duty (ADD) and Safeguard Duty (SGD).  
Ministry, while reiterating Management’s reply, stated (October 2023) that Company has 
initiated various measures for systemic improvement to minimise the demurrage charges. 
The Management/Ministry’s replies may be viewed in light of the following facts: 
a) The IMMM of the Company stipulates for timely clearance of consignments to 
avoid payment of demurrage charges. Special audit on demurrage charges 
conducted (July 2018) by the Internal Audit of ONGC also commented that in large 
number of cases there were del ays in clearance of consignments due to delay in 
receipt of EC and OBL by T&S sections. 
b) Audit observation is based on number of cases in which ONGC has absorbed 
demurrage payment against total consignment cleared, which was more than  
50 per cent during the period 2018-19 to 2022-23. 
c) As regards payment of demurrage due to Customs  having stopped/holding the 
clearance of ONGC’s consignments on account of Anti-Dumping Duty (ADD) and 
Safeguard Duty (SGD), demurrage paid on this account comprised only ₹6.63 crore 
against total demurrage of ₹30.33 crore paid during 2016-17 (21.86 per cent). 
d) Further, as verified from the details obtained from Directorate General of 
Hydrocarbons (DGH) for the period 2018-21, there were no delays on part of DGH 
in the issue of Essentiality Certificate. The operational delay was mainly due to late 
filing of Bill of Entry, delay in obtaining delivery order from shipper, lack of 
coordination among the departments of the Company etc.  
Thus, there  were persistent  delays in clearan ce of imported consignments which led to 
payment of demurrage charges amounting to ₹110.61 crore during the period 2016 -17 to 
2021-22 of which, ONGC had absorbed ₹58.74 crore25. 
Recommendation No. 4: ONGC needs to streamline the process of clearance of 
consignments within the timelines prescribed in the ir Material Management Manual 
by ensuring coordination among the concerned departments. The cases of non -
compliance of Material Management Manual provisions may be monitored at higher 
levels of company to ensure better controls. 
 
 
                                                           
25  Remaining ₹51.87 crore has been absorbed by the suppliers/pending recovery from the suppliers.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter III 
Ministry of Power 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
25 
 
 
Damodar Valley Corporation  
3.1 Avoidable expenditure of ₹112.63 crore towards payment of additional deviation 
charges and penalties for non-maintenance of Grid discipline 
Damodar Valley Corporation incurred an avoidable expenditure of ₹112.63 crore 
towards additional deviation charges for over drawal of power when the Grid 
frequency was below 49.85 Hertz and penalties for sustained violation of committed 
schedule for injection of power in the grid. 
Central Electricity Regulatory Commission notified (January 2014) the Deviation 
Settlement Mechanism and related matters Regulations, 2014 (Deviation Settlement 
Mechanism Regulations) to be applicable with effect from 17 February 2014 to  maintain 
grid discipline.  As per the Deviation Settlement Mechanism Regulations, a seller shall 
receive deviation charges from its Regional Load Dispatch Centre 1 at stipulated rates for 
generation of power (in a time block 2) in excess of schedule (over -injection) and in the 
reverse case (under injection), the seller shall have to pay the deviation charges when 
average grid frequencies are 49.85 Hertz 3 and above and below 50.05 Hertz subject to 
maximum 12 per cent of schedule or 150 Mega Watt, whichever is less. The Regulations 
further provide that besides deviation charges, additional deviation charges shall be 
applicable for over injection/under drawal of electricity by seller/buyer, as the case may be, 
when the grid frequency is 50.05 Hertz and above as p er prescribed rates. Similarly, 
additional deviation charge shall also be applicable for overdrawal/under injection of 
electricity when grid frequency is below 49.85 Hertz. In the event of sustained deviation 
from committed schedule for injection of power in the grid  in one direction (positive or 
negative), the seller/buyer shall have to make ‘sign change’ regarding the deviation from 
schedule at least once after six blocks, failing which, they will have to pay penalty due to 
violation of ‘sign change’ on daily basis. 
Scrutiny of day -wise data of the Damodar Valley Corporation (DVC) regarding average 
injection of power to and drawal from the grid during the period from April 2019 to 
September 2022 revealed the following:  
a) During the above period (1,274 days), DVC failed to restrict drawal of power from 
grid for 1,193 days (93.64 per cent) when average frequency was below 49.85 Hertz 
and this resulted in payment of ₹61.28 crore towards additional deviation charges.  
                                                           
1  Power System Operators, also known as Load Despatch Centres, are responsible for balancing power 
generation and load (energy consumption) on real time basis.  
2  15 minutes constitute a time block. 
3  Unit of Frequency 
CHAPTER III: MINISTRY OF POWER 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
 
26 
b) Further, DVC failed to make ‘sign change’ after six blocks for 874 days during the 
above period in contravention of Deviation Settlement Mechanism Regulations and 
paid ₹51.35 crore towards penalty for such violation of ‘sign change’ .  
c) DVC failed to restrict drawal of power from grid due to the failure to maintain its 
committed schedule for injection of power in the grid.  
d) DVC did not consider constraints like evacuation of ash from ash ponds, shortage 
of coal, inferior quality of coal etc., while declaring its day ahead schedule of power 
as well as load management of consumers of DVC. The shortage of coal as well as 
ash evacuation related issues contributed 2.75 per cent to 10.71 per cent shortfall 
from declared capacity during the period from 2019-20 to 2021-22.  
e) Though the Area Load Dispatch Centre of DVC monitored the frequency through 
its Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition system, DVC failed to regulate the 
drawal and injection of power in accordance with the Deviatio n Settlement 
Mechanism Regulations. This indicated lack of proper planning in declaring its 
schedule a day ahead basis and also lack of monitoring mechanism to restrict over 
drawal to the extent possible.  
Thus, failure of DVC to restrict drawal of power from grid as also making requisite ‘ sign 
change’ after six blocks in accordance with the Deviation Settlement Mechanism 
Regulations resulted in avoidable expenditure of  ₹112.63 crore towards additional 
deviation charges and ‘sign change’ penalty.  
In reply, the Management stated (March 2023) that: 
a) Constraints such as insufficient generation due to shortage of coal, sudden 
tripping/outage of specially 500 Mega Watt generating units and inadequate power 
availability from Power Exchange had contribut ed towards the deviation/violation 
of volume (including additional deviation) and sign reversal. 
b) Low power demand during the COVID -19 lockdown period had obliged DVC to 
incur ‘sign change ’ violations on many occasions as generations could not be 
brought down further below Minimum Technical Limit due to technical constraints. 
The above contention of the Management needs to be viewed in the light of the following: 
a) Maintenance of adequate coal stock for optimum generation by the power plants is 
an integral part of fuel management of DVC. Therefore, the plea of shortage of coal 
which ultimately led to payment of additional deviation charges cannot be 
considered as unc ontrollable factor for insufficient generation of electricity by 
DVC. Further, the issue of shortage of coal should have been considered while 
assessing power plant wise declared capacity on a day ahead basis. Further, 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
27 
availability of power at Open Exchange is market driven and therefore, DVC should 
have considered this constraint while assessing the schedule on a day ahead basis.  
b) As per Deviation Settlement Mechanism, in case of sustained deviation in one 
direction by generator from its committed schedule  for injection of power in the 
grid, it has to reverse deviation (from negative to positive or positive to negative) at 
least once after sixth block to avoid penalty for ‘sign change’ violation. DVC had 
such sustained deviations multiple times but did not effect ‘sign change’ leading to 
penalties for ‘sign change’ violation. Further, the contention of the Management 
that DVC had to incur ‘sign change’ violations on many occasions as generations 
could not be brought down further below Minimum Technical Limit  due to 
technical constraints is not factually correct as ‘sign change ’ penalty during the 
COVID-19 lockdown period in March 2020 occurred mainly due to under injection 
of power. 
Thus, the constraints as referred by the Management were not addressed while assessing 
the schedule in the interest of security and stability of the grid. Further, under injection of 
power when the grid frequency was 49.85 Hertz constituted a serious act of indiscipline as 
per Deviation Settlement Mechanism Regulation as it could lead to crash of grid.  
In reply, the Ministry stated (September 2023) that as a result of steps taken by the 
Corporation in maintaining grid discipline, the net deviation charges were reduced during 
the period from 01 April 2023 to 17 July 2023 in comparison to similar period of 2021-22.  
The reply of the Ministry needs to be viewed in the light of the fact that while levy of net 
deviation charges is a common phenomenon in the power sector whereas the additional 
deviation charges is a penalty for non -maintenance of grid discipline. The reply of the 
Ministry is silent on the issues like – additional deviation charges and ‘sign change’ penalty, 
as pointed out by Audit. 
Thus, due to poor load management system of power, DVC incurred avoidable expenditure 
of ₹112.63 crore towards additional deviation charges as well as ‘sign change’ penalty.  
Recommendation No. 5: The Management should improve demand and supply 
management of power and manage their generation properly to adhere  to their 
declared schedule to avoid grid indiscipline. Responsibility should be fixed for payment 
of additional deviation charges along with sign change penalty in order to ensure that 
such instances do not recur again.  
 
 
 
 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
 
28 
3.2 Loss due to non-recovery of electricity charges from a private party 
Damodar Valley Corporation failed to recover its outstanding electricity charges of 
₹12.95 crore  from a private party due to non -adherence to the terms of the 
agreement. 
Damodar Valley Corporation (DVC) , as Distribution licensee, entered (June 2012) into  a 
Power Purchase Agreement (agreement) with a private party for five years. The terms of 
the agreement, inter alia, stipulated the following: 
a) Security Deposit covering three months of estimated electricity bills in cash or 
irrevocable Bank Guarantee with a validity of two years and provision for renewal. 
b) In the event of non -payment of any bill within its due date, DVC may disconnect 
the supply of electricity after serving a 15 days specific and separate written notice 
of disconnection. 
c) The Bank Guarantee shall be renewed from time to time well before its expiry, at 
least 3 months before the last date of validity. 
Scrutiny of records revealed that the Bank Guarantee submitted by the private party as 
Security Deposit expired in June 2014 which was not extended further. The private party 
paid only ₹7.98 crore against the total electricity bill raised for ₹18.94 crore for the years 
2015-16 and 2016-17 (up to September 2016). Due to non-payment of monthly electricity 
bills, DVC disconnected the power supply of the private party six times during the period 
from November 2014 to May 2016. DVC resumed power supply from time to time without 
renewing the Bank Guarantee on the basis of assurance given by the private party regarding 
liquidation of dues towards electricity charges. DVC finally disconnected the power supply 
to the private party in September 2016 due to accumulation of outstanding dues of 
₹12.95 crore which included ₹4.26 crore on account of tariff revision pertaining to the years 
2013-14, 2014-15 and 2016-17. Since, the Bank Guarantee was not renewed by the private 
party, DVC did not have any security to recover the outstanding dues from the private party.  
In the meantime, High Court of Calcutta ordered (August 2016) for winding up of the 
private party considering appeal of a petitioning creditor. The Official Liquidator issued 
(June 2017) a public notice requesting all the creditors of the private party to submit their 
claims by 15 July 2017. DVC failed to act in response to the public notice. After completion 
(August 2018) of winding up process, DVC filed (3 April 2019) its claim of ₹21.84 crore 
before the Official Liquidator. Though the same was accepted by the Official Liquidator, 
the High Court of Calcutta rejected (1 9 June 2019) the claim of DVC. DVC preferred an 
appeal before the Supreme Court of India. The appeal of the Corporation  was, however, 
dismissed (May 2023) by the Supreme Court of India.  
 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
29 
In this connection, Audit observed that: 
a) DVC did not compel the private party  to adhere to the conditions of renewal of 
Bank Guarantee on the plea that private party  could maintain their cash flow to 
liquidate outstanding electricity charges. This indicated undue benefit to the private 
party which resulted in failure on the part of DVC to safegu ard its own financial 
interest.  
b) Instead of initiating legal action against the private party to recover the outstanding 
electricity charges, DVC unnecessarily allowed the process of reali sation and 
settlement of outstanding electricity charges to be continued for considerable period 
which ultimately resulted in accumulation of outstanding electricity dues over the 
years.  
c) DVC also failed to present its claim before the Official Liquidator on time and 
therefore, lost the opportunity to recover the outstandi ng dues. This indicated lack 
of adequate monitoring on the part of DVC. 
Thus, despite having sufficient provisions in the agreement to safeguard its commercial and 
financial interest, DVC failed to recover ₹12.95  crore towards electricity dues from the 
private party when the Official Liquidator requested all creditors to file their claim. 
The Management accepted that Damodar Valley Corporation  could not lodge its claim 
timely before the Official Liquidator because they were unaware about the winding up 
process of the private party. As DVC has not got a monitoring system to track the 
newspapers on a daily basis, the paper publication  taken out b y the Official Liquidator 
could not be tracked. The Management further stated (November 2021) that private party 
could not be forced to renew the Bank Guarantee  since the power supply to the private 
party was lying in disconnected condition from December 2014 to May 2015. 
The above contention of the Management is not acceptable as DVC was required to take 
pro-active action for renewal of Bank Guarantee in March 2014 itself as per agreement , 
which was not taken by DVC. Further, the plea of DVC that the Bank Guarantee could not 
be renewed since the electricity connection to the party was in disconnected condition from 
December 2014 to May 2015 is not acceptable as the supply of electricity to the private 
party was intermittently disconnected six times and resu med again on the request of the 
private party. Therefore, DVC should have obtained the renewed Bank Guarantee to 
safeguard its financial interest before resumption of power supply to the private party. 
Ministry, in its reply , stated (September 2023) that D VC has taken necessary steps to 
monitor the status of Bank Guarantees and is on the way to ensure 100 per cent security 
deposit compliance. It was also stated that DVC is taking necessary corrective measures 
through formulation of a policy/mechanism to ens ure that such issues are not observed in 
future.  

Report No. 12 of 2024 
 
30 
The reply of the Ministry needs to be viewed  in light of the fact that DVC lost the 
opportunity to safeguard its financial interest and therefore, failed to recover ₹12.95 crore 
towards electricity dues from the private party.  
Hence, due to non-renewal of Bank Guarantee and non-tracking of public notice issued by 
Official Liquidator regarding liquidation of the private party, DVC incurred loss of 
₹12.95 crore on account of electricity dues recoverable from the private party, as chances 
of recovery are remote. 
Recommendation No. 6: DVC may fix responsibility for non -renewal of Bank 
Guarantee of the private party as per agreement and lay down proper mechanism for 
monitoring defaulting parties to closely watch progress of payment of electricity dues 
and renewal of Bank Guarantee in order to protect its financial interest. 
3.3 Undue benefit of ₹7.60 crore to ineligible consumers by extending incentives on 
water charges 
Damodar Valley Corporation extended incentives of ₹7.60 crore  towards Zero 
Liquid/Effluent Discharge on water charges bills to ineligible consumers. 
As per the provisions of the Damodar Valley Corporation Act 1948, the Damodar  Valley 
Corporation (Corporation) supplies water from Damodar River and its reservoirs for 
irrigation, industrial and domestic purposes. The rates for supply of water for industrial and 
domestic purposes are determined by the Corporation from time to time.  
With an objective to preserve and optimise the use of water and prevent water pollution, 
the Corporation introduced (October 2012) a Scheme of incentive for Zero Liquid/Effluent 
Discharge4 for its consumers. As per the Scheme, an incentive of 20 per cent5 on monthly 
water bills would be allowed to those industries which would produce requisite certificates 
of Zero Liquid/Effluent Discharge from concerned State Pollution Control Board and paid 
their water bills to the Corporation within the due date. However, there was no provision 
in the Scheme for recovery of wrongly paid incentive or no penalty provision for wrongly 
claimed incentive. 
Audit noticed that the Corporation allowed incentive fo r achieving Zero Liquid/Effluent 
Discharge to four of its consumers,  out of which  only one consumer produced necessary 
certificate from the concerned State Pollution Control Board. 
Three consumers who did not produce certificates for Zero Liquid/Effluent Discharge were 
also not regular in payment of their water bills within the due dates as stipulated in the 
Scheme.  
                                                           
4  Zero Liquid/Effluent Discharge means reuse of the entire industrial and domestic waste water after 
treatment/recycling without discharging water outside the project boundary in the natural water bodies. 
5  The rate of incentive was revised to 10 per cent with effect from 1 April 2019.  

Report No. 12 of 2024 
31 
Despite above non-compliances, the Corporation continued to extend the undue benefits to 
these ineligible consumers amounting to ₹7.60 crore for the period August 2015 to January 
2022. On being pointed out by Audit, the Corporation stopped payment of incentives to 
these consumers from February 2022 onwards. However, the Corporation neither initiated 
any action for recovery of th e amount nor fixed any responsibility on the official(s) 
concerned for such serious lapse. 
While accepting the audit observation, the Management stated (February 2023) that a 
committee was constituted (17 February 2023) to identify the ineligible consumers and also 
ascertain the amount of undue incentive extended to such consumers since introduction of 
the Zero Liquid/Effluent Discharge Scheme. Apart from the above, the committee was also 
entrusted to fix responsibility for taking decision in extending such  incentive to ineligible 
consumers.  
The Management’s reply may be seen in the light of the fact that the issue was pointed out 
in February 2022 but till date (March 2023) no recovery has been made. Only a committee 
was belatedly formed after a lapse of  one year since the issue was pointed out. The 
committee did not submit its report within the stipulated period of one month i.e. ,  
17 March 2023. 
The Ministry, in its reply, stated (October 2023) that the process of reconciliation with one 
such ineligible consumer was under process and future course of action would be taken 
after completion of such reconciliation. It was also stated that on the basis of report (April 
2023) of the committee, departmental proceedings had been initiated against the officer 
responsible for such lapses.  
Though corrective measures were being initiated by the Corporation at the instance of 
Audit, the fact remains that recovery of incentive towards Zero Liquid/Effluent Discharge 
from the ineligible consumers was still pending (September 2023). Moreover, the reply of 
the Ministry was silent about the actions taken by the Corporation on the other two 
ineligible consumers. 
Thus, due to extending of incentive  of Zero Liquid/Effluent Discharge to consumers 
without proper verification by the Corporation, incentive of ₹7.60 crore  allowed to 
ineligible consumers remained unrecovered till March 2023. 
Recommendation No. 7: DVC may fix responsibility for extending incentive under 
Zero Liquid/Effluent Discharge scheme to ineligible consumers and also recover the 
incentive extended to such ineligible consumers. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter IV 
Ministry of Finance 
(Department of Financial Services) 
 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
33 
CHAPTER IV: MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
(Department of Financial Services) 
  
 
India Infrastructure Finance Company Limited 
4.1 Non-adherence to the Credit Policy while sanctioning and monitoring of loan led 
to non-recovery of dues 
IIFCL disbursed loan to a Borrower without proper analysis of financial statements 
and critical areas of risk. Further, IIFCL did not comply with the provisions relating 
to security creation and monitoring of credit policy/sanction letter which led to loss 
of ₹393.37 crore till 31 August 2022. 
India Infrastructure Finance Company Limited (IIFCL) sanctioned (March 2016) a term 
loan of ₹250 crore to a Borrower towards part Capex Funding for its ongoing Phase II 
Project1 relating to up-gradation of communication technology, involving a total Capex of 
₹3,750 crore. IIFCL disbursed (March 2016) ₹248 crore to the Borrower. As the Borrower 
did not service its dues on time, loan account was categorised (31 December 2017) as Non-
Performing Asset (NPA). 
The Borrower was referred to Corporate Insolvency Res olution Process on the basis of 
petition filed by an Operational Creditor against the Borrower and its two subsidiaries. 
IIFCL also submitted (21 May 2019) its claim of ₹328.59 crore (Principal – ₹248.00 crore 
and Interest – ₹80.59 crore) against the Borrower and its three subsidiaries. While the 
Resolution Plans for two subsidiaries were approved in December 2020 and  
December 2023, the resolution plans for the Borrower and third subsidiary were yet to be 
approved (December 2023).  As per the approved  Resolution Plans of two subsidiaries, 
IIFCL’s share was estimated to be ₹29 crore and ₹3.81 crore respectively. However, as per 
the proposal, share of IIFCL in Resolution Plans of all the four companies was estimated 
to be ₹98.10 crore. IIFCL declared (March 2021) the loan account of the Borrower and two 
of its subsidiaries as fraud, based on Forensic Audit Report (July 2020) which pointed out 
that the Borrower misappropriated the borrowed funds deviating from the terms of sanction 
letters which was considered as diversion of funds. Of the loan amount of ₹248 crore given 
by IIFCL, ₹224 crore was diverted2 by the Borrower.  
Audit observed the following: - 
a) Risk Department of IIFCL had pointed out (February 2016) the following with 
respect to the Borrower- (i) poor growth of 0.25 per cent over past five years and 
low Return on Equity of 2.35 per cent for last three years, (ii) Low Debt Service 
                                                           
1  A term loan of ₹1 ,000 crore had already been sanctioned by Bank of Baroda for Phase – II of the   
Project. 
2  ₹25 crore to repay other bank loans and ₹199 crore to connected parties in the form of Inter-Corporate 
Deposit. 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
 
34 
Coverage ratio of 1.08 in FY 2014 -15, (iii) Contingent Liability of ₹6,263 crore, 
(iv) High Debt to Earning Before Interest, Tax and Amortisation ratio and (v) High 
outstanding foreign currency loans etc. Credit Policy of the company requires risk 
assessment to be carried out by the Risk Department and incorporation of comments 
of Risk Department in the detailed Appraisal Memorandum along with the proposed 
risk mitigation measures.  However, it was seen in this case that though Risk 
Department brought out above adverse factors in the assessment, but while 
proposing risk mitigation measures, they simply relied on future growth prospects 
projected by the borrower himself.  
b) Credit Policy of IIFCL also stipulates that careful analysis should be done of the 
financial statements for the past three or five years of the concern and its group 
concerns. Profit before Exceptional items, Tax and Adjustments of the Borrower 
for the year ended March 2013 was ₹624 crore which drastically reduced to loss of 
₹758 crore, ₹1,629 crore and ₹1,624 crore for the years ended March 2014,  
March 2015 and March 2016 respectively. However, these year-on-year losses were 
ignored by IIFCL and it considered the revenue for the said years only. 
c) As per Credit Policy of IIFCL, Lenders’ Independent Engineer was to be appointed 
from panel maintained with IIFCL or IIFCL Projects Limited or any Public Sector  
Bank/Public Financial Institutions. Policy further stated that Lenders’ Independent 
Engineer (wherever appointed) need to visit the site at periodical intervals and 
furnish project – technical & financial information, project progress, status of 
approvals besides other vital information, if any. But IIFCL did not appoint 
Lenders’ Independent Engineer. 
d) The Borrower was required to submit licenses 3 of the Borrower and one of its 
subsidiary as security for which a tripartite agreement between lender (IIFCL), the 
Borrower and Department of Telecommunications was to be executed. However, 
transfer of telecom licenses of its subsidiary could not be executed as the Borrower 
was not authorised to assign the licenses of its subsidiary. Therefore, the condition 
to assign the Telecom Licenses of its subsidiary in favor of the IIFCL was waived 
off (September 2016) after disbursement. Telecom Licenses of the Bor rower were 
also not assigned in favor of IIFCL. Thus, the company disbursed the loan amount 
to the borrower without obtaining the collateral security. 
e) As per the Sanction letter, the borrower had to maintain a Debt Service Reserve 
Account for ensuing three months principal and interest payment due to the Lender. 
The Debt Service Reserve Account was to be built up at the end of six months from 
the date of disbursement. However, the Borrower did not comply with the condition 
of maintaining Debt Service Reserve Account.  
                                                           
3  Value of these telecom licenses was ₹16,768 crore as on 31 March 2016 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
35 
f) As per Credit Policy of IIFCL, Lead Bank was responsible for regular monitoring 
and recovery of loans and also for providing periodic evaluation of compliances of 
the project. Lead Bank was also required to send periodic progress reports to IIFCL. 
However, IIFCL did not obtain progress/inspection reports from Bank of Baroda 
(Lead Bank) post disbursement. Further, as per terms of sanction letter, the 
Borrower was to ensure Joint Documentation with Bank of Baroda within six 
months from the date of  disbursement. However, the Borrower did not submit the 
No Objection Certificates from other consortium lenders and consequently IIFCL 
could not enter into Joint Documentation to enforce responsibility of Lead Bank.  
g) As per directions of Reserve Bank of India (July 2015), Banks/Financial Institutions 
should not entirely depend upon certificates of Chartered Accountants and need to 
strengthen their own internal controls and the credit risk management system to 
enhance the quality of their loan portfolio. However, IIFCL relied on the certificates 
of Chartered Accountants and failed to ensure from its internal mechanism that the 
funds were utilised for the intended purpose which allowed the Borrower to commit 
fraud by diversion of funds. IIFCL came to know abou t the fraud in October 2020 
through the Forensic Audit Report only.  
Management (December 2022)/Ministry (June 2023) stated that: 
a) IIFCL had sanctioned the loan in line with the appraisal of Lead Bank viz., Bank  
of Baroda as per Scheme for Financing Viable Infrastructure Projects.  The 
observations of Risk Department were placed before the Board. The financials of 
the Borrower were relied from the audited Balance Sheets and captured in the Board 
Memorandum approved by the Board of IIFCL.  
b) Financial indicators such as profitability, PAT, income, turnover etc. , were duly 
analysed in the sanction memorandum and were based on the appraisal of Lead 
Bank and audited financials as on 31 March 2014 and 31 March 2015. The 
Company had earned a total revenue of ₹11,136 crore for the financial year ending 
31 March 2015 as compared to ₹12,445 crore for the year ended March 2014 on 
standalone basis and ₹22,098 crore for the year ended 2015 as compared to  
₹22,321 crore for the year ended 2014 on consolidated basis and Loss after tax was 
₹154 crore as on 31 March 2015. 
c) As an industry practice to enable lenders to disburse their share in tranches 
proportionate to the progress of construction in a project, lenders may appoint a 
Lenders’ Independent Engineer, if required. The proposed lead bank, Bank of 
Baroda, had stipulated the pre -disbursement condition that, prior to disbursement, 
Chartered Accountant certificate was to be obtained indicating the sources and 
utilisation of funds as on date and disbursement was  to be made on pro-rata basis. 
Accordingly, in line with proposed lead bank the pre -disbursement condition for 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
 
36 
obtaining the Chartered Accountant certificate before disbursement was stipulated 
and approved by IIFCL. 
d) The license of subsidiary could not be assigned, as the license held by the borrower 
only can be assigned as security. Accordingly, Bank of Baroda had waived the 
condition on the request made by the borrower. License of Borrower also could not 
be assigned due to non -compliance with certain pre -requisite conditions by the 
Borrower.  
e) IIFCL imposed additional interest at one per cent  each for non -assignment of 
telecom license of the Borrower as security and non-maintenance of Debt Service 
Reserve Account. 
f) Joint Documentation could not be done with B ank of Baroda due to delay in issue 
of No-Objection Certificate by other consortium lenders. IIFCL entered (June 2017) 
into a Master Joint Lender Agreement with all the lenders of the Borrower.  
Monitoring of the project is the primary responsibility of the  Lead lender and all 
transactions from the bank account of the Borrower were to be monitored by the 
Lead Bank, Bank of Baroda. Certificate of Chartered Accountant was obtained for 
utilisation of fund by IIFCL. 
Management/Ministry’s reply needs to be viewed in light of the following: 
a) Scheme for Financing Viable Infrastructure Projects does not compel IIFCL to 
accept the project as per the appraisal of the Lead Bank and IIFCL may consider 
the proposal or reject the same considering its commercial interest. Further, IIFCL 
solely relied o n the replies of the Borrower to the observations of the Risk 
Department and reproduced the same before the Board instead of analysing the 
replies of the Borrower and offering its own comments on the same . Keeping in 
view the weak financials of the Borrowe r, reliance on the future profitability only 
based on projections from the Borrower was not correct.  
b) As can be seen from reply of the Ministry/Management, revenue as well as profit 
had decreased for the year ended March 2015 as compared to previous year. Further, 
loss of ₹154 crore quoted by Management as on March 2015 was due to 
consideration of exceptional items whereas Audit has commented on loss before 
exceptional items which was loss of ₹758 crore, ₹1,629 crore and ₹1,624 crore for 
the years ended March 2014, 2015 and 2016. 
c) Credit policy stipulates that disbursements would be processed taking into account 
the information submitted by the Lenders’ Independent Engineer, the Company and 
the auditor besides the information/papers furnished by the Lead Bank /other 
lenders. In this case, neither Lenders Independent Engineer was appointed nor Joint 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
37 
Documentation was done with the Lead Bank which further weakened the internal 
control. 
d) The imposition of additional interest cannot be a replacement for the security  of 
loan as well as maintenance of Debt Service Reserve Account. Moreover, 
disbursement of loan without creating charge on the offered security was not only 
against the Credit Policy of IIFCL but also led to undue favor to the Borrower.  
e) In the absence of joint documentation with Bank of Baroda, the responsibility of 
Bank of Baroda as the lead lender could not be enforced. Further, no periodic 
progress reports were received from Bank of Baroda. Moreover, Scheme for 
Financing Viable Infrastructure Projects c learly stated that IIFCL may also carry 
out the regular monitoring of projects on its own. 
f) IIFCL relied only on the certificate of the Chartered Accountant and failed to ensure 
from its internal mechanism whether the funds were utilised for the purpose for  
which these were approved. Thus, due to weak internal control system, IIFCL could 
not detect diversion of funds by the borrower. 
Thus, disbursement of loan of ₹248 crore to the Borrower without complying with the 
Credit Policy/sanction letter/risk mitigat ion measures, proper analysis of financial 
statements, maintenance of Debt Service Reserve Account, assignment of Telecom License 
and Joint Documentation with lead lender coupled with poor monitoring led to non -
recovery of dues and net loss of ₹393.37 cror e (₹491.47 crore 4 minus ₹98.10 crore 5) to 
IIFCL. 
Recommendation No. 8: The Management may strive to reduce its complete 
dependence on the lead bank for appraisal and monitoring of the loan projects and 
may strengthen its internal controls to enhance its appraisal and monitoring 
mechanism. Responsibility may be fixed for non-adherence to the provisions of credit 
policy/ sanction letter. Further, the company may ensure proper implementation of 
credit policy and enforcement of important terms of sanction in future.  
4.2 Avoidable payment of interest on Service Tax & Goods and Service Tax liability 
Failure of India Infrastructure Finance Company Limited to timely deposit the 
Service Tax/Goods and Service Tax on guarantee fee payable to Government of 
India led to avoidable payment of interest of ₹8.02 crore. 
India Infrastructure Finance Company Limite d (IIFCL) avails unsecured term loans from 
bilateral or multilateral institutions such as the Asian Development Bank, International 
Bank for Reconstruction and Development (World Bank), European Investment Bank etc. 
                                                           
4  ₹238.62 crore principal and ₹252.85 crore interest as on 31 August 2022. 
5  Expected recovery from Resolution Plan. 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
 
38 
These loans are guaranteed by the Government of India for which IIFCL pays guarantee 
fees to the Government of India.  
Services provided by Government were included in the negative list of services 6 in the 
Finance Act 1994 and hence, were not covered under the ambit of Service Tax till 31 March 
2016. Consequent upon amendment vide notification 7 dated 1 March 2015 and 1 March 
2016, services (guarantee in this case) provided by the Government were considered as 
taxable services under reverse charge mechanism8. However, the services provided by the 
Government got exempted from payment of tax with effect from 27 July 2018 vide 
notification9 dated 26 July 2018. Accordingly, IIFCL was required to pay Service 
Tax/Goods and Service Tax (GST) for the period 1 April 2016 to 26 July 2018. 
Audit observed (January 2021) that IIFCL  had neither deducted  nor deposited Service 
Tax/GST from the payment of guarantee fee to the Government of India for the period from 
1 April 2016 to 26 July 2018 amounting to ₹19.63 crore (Servic e Tax ₹11.85 crore 10 and 
GST ₹7.78 crore11). 
Directorate General of Goods and Service Tax Intelligence (Chennai Zone Unit) issued  
(24 December 2019) a summon to IIFCL and sought the details of guarantee fee paid to the 
Government of India along with details of Service Tax and GST paid on the guarantee fee 
for the aforesaid period. IIFCL furnished (7 January 2020) the requisite details and during 
summon proceedings (9 January 2020) , GST officials informed that IIFCL  was liable to 
pay Service Tax/GST on the guarantee fee paid to the Government of India.  
IIFCL sought opinion of its Tax Consultant who also opined that Service Tax/GST was 
applicable on the guarantee fee paid to the Government of India.  Therefore, IIFCL paid 
(January 2020)  ₹10.18 crore 12 towards GS T liability including interest. It also filed 
(January 2020) an application under Sabka Vishwas (Legacy Dispute Resolution) Scheme 
2019 (Scheme 13) for waiver of interest portion on Service Tax liability  for making 
voluntary disclosure. The scheme provided tax relief to following entities: 
(i)  who had a show cause notice pending where hearing on appeal had not taken place 
as on 30 June 2019; 
                                                           
6  Vide amendment made through Finance Act 2012 
7  Notification no. 7/2015-ST dated 1 March 2015 and 16/2016-Service Tax dated 1 March 2016 
8  Under reverse charge mechanism, liability to pay service tax/GST lies with the person in receipt of 
goods or services. 
9  Notification no. 14/2018 – Central Tax (Rate) 
10  Service Tax (for the period 1 April 2016 to 30 June 2017) of ₹11.85 crore including Swachh Bharat 
Cess –₹0.40 crore and Krishi Kalyan Cess- ₹0.20 crore. 
11  GST (for the period 1 July 2017 to 26 July 2018) ₹7.78 crore including Central GST -₹3.89 crore and 
State GST –₹3.89 crore. 
12  GST- ₹7.78 crore plus interest of ₹2.40 crore 
13  The Sabka Vishwas Scheme, 2019 was a scheme introduced under Union Budget 2019 to resolve all 
disputes relating to the erstwhile Service Tax and Central Excise Acts, which were subsequently 
subsumed under GST, as well as certain other Indirect Tax enactments. 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
39 
(ii) who had been issued a show cause notice for penalty and late fee only and final 
hearing had not taken place as on 30 June 2019; 
(iii) who had recoverable arrears pending;  
(iv)  who had case under investigation and audit and where the duty/tax has been 
communicated and accepted on or before 30 June 2019, and  
(v)  who wanted to make a voluntary disclosure. 
As the case of IIFCL did not fall under any of the above categories, it was rejected  
(4 February 2020) by Central Board of Indirect Taxes and Customs on the grounds that an 
investigation/enquiry has been started by the Department on such liability of IIFCL and 
this case was, therefore, not covered under the Scheme. Accordingly, IIFCL paid (February 
2020) ₹17.47 crore14 towards the Service Tax liability along with interest.  
Thus, due to not being aware about amendment in taxation laws, IIFCL had to p ay an 
amount of ₹8.02 crore towards interest on its tax liability.  
Management (November 2022)/Department of Financial Services  (January 2023) stated 
that taxability of guarantee fee  is an interpretational inference and it was not explicitly 
included in the notification dated 1 March 2015. Further, Management  also asserted that 
IIFCL was not extended the benefit under Sabka Vishwas (Legacy Dispute Resolution) 
Scheme even though no enquiry, investigation and audit were pending against IIFCL as on 
30 June 2019. Consequently, it was compelled to pay interest on Service Tax liability. 
The reply of DFS/Management needs to be viewed in light of the fact that being a 
commercial entity and having the services of Tax Consultants at its disposal, IIFCL should 
have been aware of tax laws and amendments made therein from time to time so as to 
safeguard its interests. Further, summon issued by Directorate General of Goods and 
Services Tax Intelligence (Chennai Zone Unit) under Section 14 of Central Excise Ac t 
1944 read with Section 83 of Finance Act 1994 and Section 174(2) of GST Act, indicated 
that an enquiry had been initiated by the GST Department. Hence, application  filed by 
IIFCL was not a voluntary disclosure but an afterthought as an investigation/enqu iry had 
already been started by Central Board of Indirect Taxes and Customs. This was, therefore, 
not covered under the Sabka Vishwas (Legacy Dispute Resolution) Scheme 2019. 
Thus, due to not being aware of changes in taxation laws and resultant non-payment of tax 
dues in time, IIFCL incurred avoidable loss on account of interest payment amounting to 
₹8.02 crore (₹5.62 crore on Service Tax liability and ₹2.40 crore on GST liability). 
 
                                                           
14  ₹11.85 crore plus interest of ₹5.62 crore 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
 
40 
National Credit Guarantee Trustee Company Limited 
4.3 Settlement of claims in excess of the eligible principal amount leading to excess  
financial outgo for ‘Amount in Default’ 
Payment of ineligible claim amount over and above the principal as ‘Amount in 
Default’ to Member Lending Institutions in “Credit Guarantee Fund for Micro 
Units” Scheme led to  excess financial outgo of at  least ₹42.89 crore. On being 
pointed out by Audit, the excess paid was recovered by the company. The company 
may conduct comprehensive review of all the claims paid to calculate actual excess 
financial outgo and to ensure recovery of the same. 
National Credit Guarantee Trustee Company Limited (NCGTC) was set up (March 2014) 
by the Department of Financial Services, Ministry of Finance, Gove rnment of India, inter 
alia, to act as a common trustee company to manage and operate various Credit Guarantee 
Trust Funds. Of the said Guarantee Funds, “Credit Guarantee Fund for Micro Units 
(CGFMU)” was set up with the purpose of guaranteeing payment against default in Micro 
Loans15, up to the specified limit, extended to eligible borrowers by Banks/NBFCs/Micro 
Finance Institutions/Other Financial Intermediaries. 
Ministry of Finance, Department of Financial Services, vide Notifications (18 April 2016 
and 16 April 2020),  laid down provisions for operation of CGFMU Scheme,  inter alia, 
defining ‘Amount in Default’ and ‘Extent of Guarantee’ as under: 
a) Amount in Default (AID)  is the amount of Non -Performing Asset (NPA), as per 
Reserve Bank of India (RBI) guidelines, which has remained NPA for a continuous 
period of ‘more than six months’ from the date of account turning NPA, within the 
crystallised portfolio16 of micro loans. 
b) The ‘ Extent of Guarantee’  would be a maximum extent of 50 per cent  of the 
‘Amount in Default’ in the portfolio, after excluding the first loss to the extent of 
five per cent of the crystalli sed portfolio borne by Member Lending Institution 17 
and on the basis of Statutory Auditor/Management Certificate. 
Reserve Bank of India’s master circular18 (1 July 2015) defined Non-Performing Asset as 
a loan or advance where interest and/or instalment of principal remain overdue for a period 
of more than 90 days in respect of a term loan.  It further stipulates that the banks should 
                                                           
15  Termed as Shishu, Kishor and Tarun for loans upto ₹50,000, ₹50,000 &  upto ₹5 lakh and above  
₹5 lakh & upto ₹10 lakh respectively. 
16  The cumulative built up of the outstanding balance of eligible micro loans sanctioned during the entire 
Financial Year (FY), which have not been classified as a non -performing asset in the books of the 
MLI, is bundled into a single portfolio and will be referred to as crystallised portf olio. 
17  A Bank or a Micro Finance Institution/Non-Banking Finance Company/other Financial Intermediary 
conforming to the eligibility criteria duly approved by the Fund, from time to time , engaged in the 
business of extending credit to micro units and who have entered into an agreement with the Fund for 
availing the guarantee. 
18  titled Prudential Norms on Income Recognition, Asset Classification and Provisioning pertaining to 
Advances. 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
41 
not charge and take to income account, interest on any NPA including Government 
guaranteed accounts. 
The Company, during the period 2015-16 to 2021 -22, had issued 1,12,31,088 guarantee 
covers amounting to  ₹1,54,382.95 crore to 55 Member Lending Institutions  containing  
234 portfolios19 under CGFMU Scheme. 
The Member Lending Institutions file eligible Amount in Default/claims with the company. 
On scrutiny of records/final claims, Audit observed that inspite of express provision in the 
notifications of Ministry of Finance (read with RBI master circular) for not including  
interest and considering only the principal component of micro loans, Member Lending 
Institutions included interest while lod ging the claims with the company.  The 
data/information provided by the company to Audit, regarding claims lodged by the 
Member Lending Institutions, consisted of composite amount i.e., without a specific 
breakup of principal  amount and interest amount. The detail s of bifurcation of principal 
amount and interest amount were sought from the company, however, the same were not 
provided. Since no breakup was available, during the audit, the excess claim was 
determined by considering only those cases/ claims where the eligible Non -Performing 
Asset outstanding was greater than the principal amount and interest amount was then 
calculated as the difference between eligible Non -Performing Assets outstanding and the 
principal amount in these cases/claims. 
Audit scrutinised (February/March 2022 and September 2022) the eligible Amount in 
Default/claims filed amounting to ₹3,830.18 crore pertaining to 27 Member Lending 
Institutions with 65 portfolios 20, settled during the years 2019 -20 to 2021 -22, where the 
Non-Performing Assets were more than the first loss21 i.e., five per cent.  
It was observed that Member Lending Institutions included interest of atleast ₹85.77 crore 
while lodging/filing the Amount in Default/claims of ₹3 ,830.18 crore and the company, 
upto the extent of guarantee being maximum of 50 per cent of the Amount in Default, has 
settled the claims and suffered an extra liability of atleast ₹42.89 crore as interest, being 
ineligible amount over and above the admissible principal amount (Annexure-VII). Thus, 
the company failed to conduct proper due diligence in verifying eligible claims which has 
resulted in undue favour being granted to the MLIs. 
Management, in its reply (28 April 2023) , furnished the details of recovery/adjustment of 
₹42.98 crore towar ds excess claim settlement of the eligible principal amount from the 
respective Member Lending Institutions. In its earlier reply (November 2022), the 
                                                           
19  The currency period of a portfolio is three complete financial years  from the end of the crystallisation 
of the portfolio.  The total period of currency of portfolio will be base year plus three complete financial 
years. Generally, one more year taken for settlement of final claims. 
20  with base years ranging from 2015-16 to 2017-18 
21  the nature of 'First Loss Portfolio Guarantee' wherein first loss to the extent of 5  per cent  of the 
crystallised portfolio of the MLI, will be borne by the MLI and therefore, will be excluded from the 
claim. 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
 
42 
Management also stated that changes have been implemented in the software which shall 
disallow claims on interest portion. Similar exercise was conducted for the other financial 
years also, necessary rectifications done and recovery effected where required. 
Ministry, in its reply (February 2023), has also accepted the audit observation and regretted 
the exces s settlement of claims under CGFMU and also stated that efforts have been 
initiated by National Credit Guarantee Trustee Company Limited now to recover the excess 
payment from the Member Lending Institutions.  It was also stated that an amount of  
₹4.04 crore has been recovered.  
Ministry, in its further reply (October 2023), has confirmed recovery of ₹42.98 crore by 
NCGTC. Ministry also informed that all 63 portfolios were reviewed out of which there 
was no recovery in 53 portfolios as the claim lo dged was lower than the eligible amount 
and recovery of ₹28.82 lakh had been made in remaining 10 portfolios. NCGTC had 
accordingly made necessary changes in the system to avoid such mistakes in future. 
The reply of the Ministry may be viewed in light of t he fact that the recovery of  
₹42.98 crore of excess interest from MLIs has been made by adjusting it  (in some cases) 
from the subsequent claims payable to them, as pointed out by Audit , and no 
review/calculation by the company has been made in this regard. Further, the Ministry has 
stated that there was no recovery in 53 portfolios, as the claim lodged was lower than the 
eligible amount. In this regard, there are ample chances that interest was included in all the 
claims, whether claims lodged were lower or higher than the eligible amount. Thus, instead 
of considering only those cases where lodged claims were more than eligible amount, the 
company should scrutinise all individual cases with bifurcation to find out actual interest 
included in the claims lodged and to take appropriate measure to recover the same. 
Recommendation No. 9: The Company may conduct a comprehensive review of all the 
cases and claims to identify any excess payments made over the eligible principal 
amount. This review should aim to accurately identify the ineligible interest payments 
made to Member Lending Instit utions and ensure recovery of these amounts. 
Furthermore, the company may take proactive steps to address and rectify inherent 
weaknesses in the claims payment process, ensuring the implementation of robust 
controls and procedures to prevent similar issues in the future. 
The Oriental Insurance Company Limited 
4.4 Loss due to quoting of inadequate bidding rates without determining the pricing 
components 
The Oriental Insurance Company Limited determined the bidding rates for 
Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojna in 2019 -20 by applying pricing components 
uniformly without specific determination as per the terms and conditions of the 
Agriculture Quota Share Reinsurance treaty with General Insurance Corporation 
of India, being Re -insurer. This led to imposition of Loss Corridor clause of the 
treaty by GIC and consequent loss of ₹194.08 crore. 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
43 
As per Reinsurance Programme of The Oriental Insurance Company Limited (th e 
Company) for the year 2019 -20, 25 per cent of total risk under crop segment was to be 
retained at the net capacity of the Company. This was after the cession of 5 per cent of 
premium as obligatory cession and balance 70 per cent of the risk had to be placed in Quota 
Share treaty. Further, risk retained at net capacity of the company was also to be protected 
through a Stop Loss Cover22. 
Accordingly, a specific treaty was agreed upon (April 2019) between the General Insurance 
Corporation of India (GIC), being the Reinsurer, and the Company being the Reinsured, 
for Kharif and Rabi Season of 2019 -20, which, inter alia, included the risk coverage of 
Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojna. Further, risk retained at net capacity of the Company 
was also protected through a Stop Loss Reinsurance Agreement signed with GIC. 
As per Pricing Loss Ratio guidelines forming part of Agriculture Quota Share Reinsurance 
treaty signed with GIC, following were to be considered for determining premium rates to 
be quoted in the bid for underwriting of risk: 
a) The State Government was to provide historical yield data, of which, data of latest 
10 years was to be used for pricing. Based on historical data, thresh old yield 23, 
detrending24, average burning cost/annual expected loss, heterogeneity 25 and risk 
premium were to be calculated by the Company as per the guidelines. 
b) Heterogeneity was to be calculated for each year of data per district per crop 
separately.  
c) Target Pricing Loss Ratio viz., ratio of the risk premium 26 and actual 27 quoted 
premium should be maximum at 75 per cent for each cluster. 
 
 
                                                           
22    A stop loss cover refers to non-proportional reinsurance arrangement providing reinsurance coverage 
to primary insurer/ceding party when the total amount of claims incurred during a specific period 
(usually one year), exceeds either a loss ratio, or in excess of a specified a mount limit. 
23   Threshold yield represents the level of yield below which an indemnity/claim payment is  triggered for 
the insured. 
24  Detrending is a statistical process used to remove long -term trends or patterns from historical time -
series data. 
25   Heterogeneity refers to the variation of risk intensity in a group. It is opposite of homogeneity  which 
signifies the similarity of the risk intensity in a group. It recognises that different regions face diverse 
risk profiles due to different agro -climatic features like soil quality, irrigation facilities, farming 
practices etc. 
26  Premium calculated after adding additional amount for any contingency considering the factors such 
as seasonality, yield variation and future prospect of rainfall to the origina l burning cost derived from 
the actual data and the methodology prescribed for calculation. 
27  Actual quoted premium = Risk Premium/Pricing Loss Ratio. 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
 
44 
Audit observed that: 
a) The Company arrived at the bidding rates by applying the major pricing 
constituents28 uniformly across all the crops, districts, clusters of all the three States 
i.e., Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh and Odisha without specific determination of 
pricing components as per the terms and conditions of the treaty, which resulted 
into inadequate bidding rates while underwriting risk of Pradhan Mantri Fasal  
BimaYojna-2019-20. 
b) Special Condition of the Agriculture Quota Share Reinsurance treaty stipulated that 
in case the pricing methodology used for quoting Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojna 
tenders was not concurrent with the Pricing Loss Ratio guidelines, the Reinsurer 
reserves the right to impose corrective measures which will be endorsed to this 
agreement. Accordingly, the Reinsurer GIC, applied (July 2019) Loss Participation 
Clause (Loss Corridor29) and reduced its liability for certain districts30 falling under 
Clusters 4 and 6 of Tamil Nadu, Cluster 3 of Odisha and Cluster 2 of Uttar Pradesh. 
c) Though the Company contested (2 A ugust 2019) imposition of Loss Corridor 
Clause, the Reinsurer -GIC reiterated their decision of applying Loss Corridor 
Clause for specified clusters. The matter was again taken up by the Company with 
GIC on 25 September 2019 and 18 October 2019 followed by a meeting between 
GIC and the Company officials and subsequent field visits were made by the GIC’s 
team on 11 December 2019 and January 2020 in selected districts of Odisha and 
Tamil Nadu. However, GIC was not convinced with the justifications furnished by 
the Company and finally d enied (12 March 2020) to relax/remove the imposition 
of Loss Corridor Clause. 
d) Due to imposition of Loss Corridor Clause, crop claim liability of ₹194.08 crore for 
Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojna-2019-20 in the aforesaid clusters got excluded 
from the ambit of Agriculture Quota Share Reinsurance treaty and it could not be 
covered even under Stop Loss Reinsurance Agreement as Article 5 of the Stop Loss 
Reinsurance Agreement, inter-alia, stipulated that this agreement shall not apply to 
any liability arising f rom imposition of loss corridor or loss participation by the 
Reinsurer. The Company wrote off the recovery of ₹194.08 crore and booked it as 
a loss in the financial year 2020-21. 
                                                           
28  Targeted Price Loss Ratio, Heterogeneity, Year on year loading for Multiyear Contract and Cat 
Loading (Term Cat loading, refers to the inclusion of a specific premium load in the p ricing exercise 
of a crop insurance tender to cover variation in potential losses arising from future catastrophic events 
such as cyclones, droughts, floods, large scale pest infections or other natural disasters that can cause 
widespread and significant crop damage and thereby yield losses.) 
29  A mechanism contained in a proportional or an excess of loss agreement that requires the ceding 
insurer to be responsible for a certain amount of ultimate net loss above the company's designated 
retention and below the designated reinsurance limit and which would otherwise be reimbursed under 
the Reinsurance agreement. 
30  A State is first divided into clusters and then each cluster covers many districts.  

Report No. 12 of 2024 
45 
While confirming facts and figures of the para and admitting the application of Target 
Pricing Loss Ratio  at uniform rate of 75 per cent, Management /Ministry stated 
(January/August 2023) that pricing guidelines mandate Target Loss Ratio to be maximum 
of 75 per cent which means considering Target Pricing Loss Ratio greater than 75 per cent 
threshold would amount to breach of guidelines. Since, Target Pricing Loss Ratio  
considered by Company in the pricing had not exceeded mandated 75 per cent , the 
Company had  not breached the guidelines. Further, heterogeneity loading is based on 
level/granularity of available historical yield data (e.g. , District/Tehsil/Block/Gram 
Panchayat) and cont ract period. The Company has applied heterogeneity loading as per 
guidelines. 
Management/Ministry reply is not tenable in view of the following: 
a) Target Pricing Loss Ratio  at 75 per cent is the maximum prescribed ceiling in 
pricing guidelines which would have been different had crop -wise and area -wise 
pricing been done by the Company. 
b) Heterogeneity loading was found applied uniformly at the rate of 15 per cent instead 
of case to case determination crop-wise unit-wise. 
c) Justification for not calculating the crop-wise and area-wise specific Target Pricing 
Loss Ratio, Heterogeneity, Year on Year loading for multiyear contracts and ‘Cat 
loading’31 was not provided. 
d) GIC justified (8 August 2019) its decision of applying Loss Corridor Clause by 
furnishing specific rate calculation district -wise, cluster -wise and crop -wise 
indicating the gap between the rates quoted by the Company and rates determined 
by GIC against which the Company could not subst antiate its stand in the absence 
of detailed crop-wise, district-wise and cluster-wise calculations of the quoted rates. 
Thus, determination of bidding rates on the basis of applying pricing components uniformly 
during underwriting of risk for Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojna-2019-20 without specific 
determination of pricing components as required by terms and conditions of t reaty with 
GIC, led to imposition of Loss Corridor Clause of the treaty by GIC and consequent loss 
of ₹194.08 crore. 
 
 
                                                           
31   Term Cat loading, refers to the inclusion of a specific premium load in the pricing exercise of a crop 
insurance tender to cover variation in potential losses arising from future catastrophic events such as 
cyclones, droughts, floods, large scale pest infections or other natural disasters that can caus e 
widespread and significant crop damage and thereby yield losses. 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
 
46 
4.5 Loss due to imprudent underwriting  in violation of guidelines of Insurance 
Regulatory and Development Authority of India 
Imprudent un derwriting of Group Janta Personal Accident Policy of the 
Maharashtra State Government by The Oriental Insurance Company Limited 
without reinsurance cover and in violation of guidelines of Insurance Regulatory 
and Development Authority of India in 2018-19 led to a loss of ₹14.92 crore. 
The Oriental Insurance Company Limited (OICL) participated in tender for a Group Janta 
Personal Accident Policy namely the Gopinath Munde Shetkari Apghat Vima Yojna32 (the 
Scheme) and was awarded the same at a premium 33 of ₹31.04 crore, ₹43.49 crore and 
₹47.33 crore for 1,36,98,965 farmers to be covered under the policy for the period from 
December 2016 to November 2017, December 2017 to November 2018 and  
December 2018 to November 2019 respectively. 
Guidelines34 of Insur ance Regulatory and Development Authority of India (IRDAI) on 
reinsurance arrangements stipulate that an insurer shall not go on risk without the required 
reinsurance having been placed. Accordingly, OICL prepared its Reinsurance Programme. 
As per Reinsurance Programme for the years 2016-17 and 2017-18, OICL was required to 
keep the risk to the extent of ₹10 crore of Probable Maximum Loss on its net capacity and 
arrange reinsurance  support for the remaining portion of the risk.  As p er Reinsurance 
Programme, total Probable Maximum Loss was ₹20 crore . Hence, retention of ₹10 crore 
shows net retention of 50 per cent . Accordingly, reinsurance support in the form of 
Miscellaneous Accident Surplus Treaty was finalised (March 2016 and March  2017) with 
the General Insurance Corporation of India (GIC) for 2016-17 and 2017-18 for 45 per cent 
of the risks (in addition to obligatory cession of five per cent to GIC). 
For the year 2016-17, the incurred claims stood at ₹67.87 crore (claim ratio of 218.65 per 
cent) and for 2017-18 it was ₹84.83 crore (claim ratio of 195.06 per cent) against the risks 
underwritten for the years with premium of ₹31.04 crore and ₹43.49 crore respectively. 
GIC withdrew (March 2018) its reinsurance support under Miscellaneous Accident Surplus 
Treaty in respect of such Government Schemes considering the losses suffered in the years 
2016-17 and 2017-18. OICL, however, again participated (November 2018)  in the tender 
for the Scheme during 2018-19 with quoted rate of ₹34.50 per person and underwrote the 
risk (7 December 2018) covering the period from 8 December 2018 to 7 December 2019 
for a premium of ₹47.33 crore. 
                                                           
32  The Scheme launched  (2016) by the Government of Maharashtra (Commissioner -Agriculture) 
provides for compensation to all farmers (with age of 10 to 75 years whose name is in the Land Record 
Register on the date of i ssue of the policy) who sustain any bodily injury resulting solely and directly 
from accident caused by external violent and visible means resulting in specified contingencies such 
as death, permanent disablement or loss of limb . The sum insured in the scheme was ₹2 lakh per 
farmer. 
33   Premium calculated at quoted rates of ₹22.50, ₹31.75 and ₹34.50 per person for total 1,36,98,965 
farmers to be covered under the policy for 2016-17, 2017-18 and 2018-19 respectively.  
34  Issued vide circular dated 3 November 2004 regarding Reinsurance arrangements - Guidelines for 
Good Corporate Governance. 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
47 
The incurred claims for the year 2018-19 stood at ₹63.04 crore (incurred claim ratio being 
133.19 per cent) out of which ₹59.89 crore (being 95 per cent of claims after five per cent 
obligatory cession) was borne by OICL. 
Audit observed that: 
• Despite being aware of the fact that no reinsurance cover was available from GIC 
for this Group Janta Personal Acciden t Policy and suffering significant adverse 
losses with incurred claim ratio ranging from 195.06 per cent to 218.65 per cent 
during 2016-17 and 2017 -18, OICL imprudently underwrote the policy again in 
2018-19 which led to a loss of ₹14.92 crore35.  
• As per IRDAI guidelines, prior approval of Board of Directors is required to 
increase the net retention of the insurer which was not obtained.  However, the 
Chairman cum Managing Director accorded ex-post facto approval in August 2019 
and intimation thereof was gi ven to Audit Committee of the Board in  
November 2019, for accepting 95 per cent of the risk on the net capacity of OICL. 
While confirming the facts and figures,  Management stated (February 2023) that a 
deviation note dated 02 August 2019 was approved by Chairman cum Managing Director 
in respect of enhancement of net retention under above mentioned Group Janta Personal 
Accident policy. Further, in the year 2018 -19, Government business was excluded from 
Miscellaneous Accident Surplus Treaty arrangement. As t he concerned policy was 
sponsored scheme of a State Government; claim recovery from above Treaty was not 
possible as was being done in previous year. 
Reply needs to be viewed in light of the fact that underwriting of risk without prior 
reinsurance arrangem ent and approval of additional net retention by Chairman cum 
Managing Director and Board of Directors after commencement of risk was not in line 
with guidelines of IRDAI (November 2004). Further, reply  is silent regarding imprudent 
underwriting in 2018-19 despite adverse loss experience in previous years (2016 -17 and 
2017-18).  
The Ministry endorsed (July 2023) submission of OICL that due to adverse loss experience, 
all personal accident insurance of Central/State Government was excluded from the 
Miscellaneous Accident Surplus Treaty arrangement and it was difficult to get reinsurance 
support from local/international reinsurers as the quotes rates were on lower side in view 
of the fact that scheme was launched by Government for supporting families of the farmers 
in difficult times. It was further stated that in such type of schemes, it is difficult to predict 
losses unless the scheme is run for 5 -6 years and when the premium involved is high, it is 
difficult for any commercial organisation to withdraw from it . Further, since the business 
was already underwritten and reinsurance support was not available, approval for deviation 
                                                           
35   Share of OICL in incurred claims (95 per cent of ₹63.04 crore) less its share in premium (95 per cent 
of ₹47.33 crore). 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
 
48 
from Reinsurance Programme was obtained (August 2019) from the competent authority 
i.e., Chairman cum Managing Director. OICL regretted  delay in obtaining approval for 
increasing the net retention and stated that timely approval from the competent authority 
would be ensured in future. 
The reply of Ministry/OICL needs to be viewed in light of the fact that despite adverse loss 
ratio during the period 2016-17 to 2017-18 and non-availability of reinsurance cover, OICL 
went for underwriting for the year 2018-19.  
Thus, imprudent underwriting of the risk by OICL in aforesaid Group Janta  Personal 
Accident Policy for the year 2018 -19 despite witnessing significant adverse loss ratio 
during previous years (2016-17 and 2017-18) and without required reinsurance support led 
to a loss of ₹14.92 crore. 
SBI Cards and Payment Services Limited 
4.6 Lack of due diligence at the time of enhancement of credit limit on the credit card 
facility resulted in non-recovery of dues 
SBI Cards and Payment Services Limited renewed the credit card facility  of a 
Corporate with enhanced credit limit without due diligence resulting in avoidable 
loss of ₹19.65 crore. 
SBI Cards and Payment Services Limited (the Company) provides SBI Credit Cards to 
individuals and corporates. As per the Credit Risk Policy, the Company issues secured and 
unsecured corporate credit cards to the corporates for travel and entertainment expenses of 
their employees.  
The Company extended (April 2013) unsecured  Corporate Credit Card Facility 36 to a 
Corporate for travel and entertainment expenses of the Corporate with an exposure  of  
₹2 crore. The exposure limit was enhanced several times 37 and was finally raised to  
₹90 crore in March 2019. Reasons recorded by the Company while enhancing the credit 
limit of the Corporate were leading position of the Corporate in the tours & travels industry 
with 79 years of vintage, satisfactory rating & CIBIL report and satisfactory track record 
with both SBI and SBI Cards. However, the Corporate delayed the payments for the credit 
cards’ bills generated from June 2018 and failed to make the payment of ₹89.65 crore due 
towards the bill generated on 2 June 2019 , due date of payment for which was  
22 June 2019.  
In view of the default towards various financial institutions including State Bank of India, 
forensic review of the Corporate was carried out and report was submitted in August 2020. 
                                                           
36  It refers to credit card facility given to corporates where no collateral or security is pledged.  
37   The exposure was enhanced from ₹2 crore to ₹10 crore in February 2014; from ₹10 crore to ₹20 crore 
during March 2015 and from ₹20 crore to ₹70 crore in February 2018.  

Report No. 12 of 2024 
49 
The report highlighted dubious transactions made by the company with its related parties38, 
evergreening39 of loans, fictitious sale and receivables etc. Meanwhile, the Company wrote 
off (September 2019) the entire outstanding dues of ₹105.93 crore. Matter was also reported 
(November 2020) as suspected fraud to Reserve Bank of India  on the basis of alleged 
falsification of books of accounts of the Corporate. A complaint was also filed  
(October 2020) in Central Bureau of Investigation. The recovery proceeding is pending 
with the National Company Law Tribunal.  
Audit observed that:  
• Para 11.7 of the Credit Risk Policy of the Company stipulates that in case of downward 
movement of ratings, the credit line may be suspended or reduced. The rating of the 
Corporate was downgraded by SBI by two notches (SB 7 from SB 5) during 2018-19, 
on account of deterioration in few  financial ratios majorly - Total Outside 
Liabilities/Net worth. Even then, the Company enhanced (March 2019) the credit 
facility instead of suspending/reducing the credit line. 
• At the time of enhancement of credit limit (₹70 crore to ₹90 crore), Board of Directors 
of the Company were apprised that the Corporate was delinquent at 0-30 dpd40 on two 
instances only (July 2018 and January 2019) which pertains to the payment not cleared 
till the next statement date . However, during the months of September, Octobe r, 
November, December 2018 and March 2019 payments were not made on due date by 
the Corporate but made before the next statement date.  These were not apprised to the 
Board.   
• The Company noticed the following while proposing to enhance the credit limit:  
(a) Negative operating cash flow after working capital changes for the year  
2017-18, on account of significant increase in receivables and advances.  
(b) Recoverable and payable time of outstanding dues of the Corporate also 
increased from 36 and 18 days respecti vely in 2016 -17 to 46 and 25 days 
respectively in 2017-18.  
(c) Major inflow of cash during FY 2017-18 was from encashment of fixed deposits, 
loans and advances and proceeds from short-term borrowings.  
                                                           
38   The transactions made with one party were not commensurate with the size and scale of their 
operations. Several transactions made with this party were not recorded in the books of the Compan y 
and there was no evidence available or any satisfactory response from the Company to explain the 
rationale for these transactions during the course of forensic review. 
39   The forensic review pointed out that the Company was utilising the loan proceeds of fresh loan to repay 
the old loans and for payment to related or connected parties.  
40   Dpd stands for Days past due. 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
 
50 
Despite this, the Company  enhanced the credit limit by ₹ 20 crore41 which was 
not prudent.  
• The Corporate made multiple transactions valuing ₹357 crore with a related company 
using the credit cards of the Company during May 2015 to May 2019 of which 
transactions valuing ₹268.25 crore were made during 2018 and 2019. As the facility 
was unsecured, the transactions with the related party should have been meticulously 
monitored to safeguard the interest of the Company. But the Company did not monitor 
the transactions with related party. 
Management (March 2023)/Ministry (November 2023) stated that: 
• Suspension of the facility in case of downward rating was not mandatory as per the 
Credit Risk Policy. Further, the downgrade in the SB rating of the Company was 
discussed by the Company with the SBI RM (AGM), who expressed that the Bank had 
a satisfactory relationship with the Corporate with no delinquencies. 
• Previously, in the Corporate Assessment Documents (CADs) of the Company, 
instances where payment was received before the next statement date were not 
highlighted as at times, due to some minor operational issues, few corporates missed 
the due date but generally completed the payment b efore the next statement date.  
However, post Covid, the Company has amended the format of the CAD and now, any 
delay is highlighted in the CADs. The proposal made to the Company Board for 
seeking its approval highlights the two instances where payment was received after the 
next statement date. In all the months mentioned above (except in July 2018 and 
January 2019) the payment was received from the Company before the next statement 
date. 
• The net operating cashflow of the Co rporate after working capital cha nges was 
negative for FY18 due  to change in International Air Transport Association ( IATA) 
guidelines (payments were to be made within 7 days instead of 15 days). Overall, the 
working capital cycle of the Co rporate deteriorated by only 2 days from 19 days to  
21 days. The audited financials of the Corporate did not show any liquidity crunch and 
the Company’s corporate card dues had always been paid in full. As per the audited 
financials, despite this increase in working capital requirements, the Company’s 
liquidity was comfortable with current ratio & interest coverage ratio of 2.32 and  
2.83 respectively as of March 2018. 
• At the time of assessment, the Co rporate had not declared the said related party as its 
subsidiary in any of its filings or reports. It was only after the receipt of Forensic Audit 
Report that the Company was informed about the same. Further, the Company did not 
have access to the data that was unearthed during the forensic investigation and thus, 
                                                           
41     From ₹70 crore to ₹90 crore. 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
51 
had not classified the related party as a subsidiary of the Corporate. The Company had 
no knowledge of the total transactions being done between the two entities, as the 
disclosure in the audited financials were not accurate. The Company only had details 
of usage on its cards, which appeared as Tic keting purchases and in line with the 
approved usage.  
• The payment on the cards was always cleared by the Corporate in full till June 2019. 
On June 27, 2019, there was news of default by the Corporate on a different facility, 
but the external rating was no t downgraded to D. When the news of the Corporate’s 
rating being downgraded to D was received on July 01, 2019, the cards of the Corporate 
were blocked. In fact, the cards were blocked even before the Care ratings downgraded 
the Corporate’s rating to D. The Company created a specific reserve for the Corporate 
and the Corporate was written off from the books in the month of September 2019. 
Management’s /Ministry’s reply needs to be viewed in light of the following: 
• Though it is not mandatory to suspend the f acility, the Company should have either 
reduced the credit line or maintain ed the existing limit considering the downward 
movement of internal ratings.  
• It is evident from the reply that the Corporate delayed the payment of dues on several 
occasions.  
• Though Corporate’s liquidity was comfortable with favorable C urrent ratio and 
Interest Coverage ratio, company’s decision of enhancing the credit limit of the 
corporate despite being aware of negative cash flows and liquidity crunch (evident 
from the fact that Corporate was using its short- term debt and cash balances), was not 
prudent.  
• The Corporate in its Annual Reports for the year 2017-18 classified the stated party as 
Related Party which is easily accessible to the Company. Further, the reply that audited 
financials were not accurate regarding transactions carried out between the Corporate 
and its related company  needs to be seen in light of the fact that for assess ing the 
liquidity of the Corporate, the Company relied on the audited financials. This shows 
the inconsistent stand of the Company. 
• Company’s receipt (27 June 2019) of the news of default and subsequent blocking of 
the card has little bearing as the Corpor ate had already defaulted in payment of the 
credit card dues (due date 22 June 2019) of the Company. 
• Renewal of credit line with enhanced facility led to non -recovery of dues of  
₹146.47 crore (Principal ₹89.65 crore and interest and late payment charges amounting 
to ₹56.82 crore). 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
 
52 
• Had the Company maintained the existing Credit Limit, a loss of principal to the extent 
of ₹19.65 crore (₹89.65 crore minus previous limit of ₹70 crore)  could have been 
avoided.  
Thus, due to lack of due diligence while enhancing the credit limit, the Company incurred 
an avoidable loss of ₹19.65 crore. 
Recommendation No. 1 0: The management may sanction the credit limit strictly in 
line with its credit pol icy and may insist on security in case of high credit limit. The 
management may also strengthen its internal control system regarding scrutiny of the 
card usage and payment history of the cardholder company.  
UTI Infrastructure Technology and Services Limited 
4.7 Irregularities in awarding of contract for printing of PAN Cards 
Scrapping of initial tender for printing of PAN cards and floating of fresh tender 
with restrictive condition resulted in avoidable expenditure of ₹5.71 crore. 
UTI Infrastructure Technology and Services Limited (UTIITSL) has been engaged by the 
Income Tax Department, Government of India as a service provider for receipt of PAN 
applications and issuance of PAN cards. The Company had awarded and extended contracts 
for printing of PAN cards from time to time from the year 2010. 
As per Manual for Procurement of Consultancy and other Services (2017), in procurement 
of other (non -consultancy) Services, normally system of selection used is lowest price   
(L-1) basis among the technically responsive offers, as in procurement of goods/works. 
In order to reduce the cost of printing and to meet revised specifications set by the Income 
Tax Department,  the Company floated (May 2019)  a tender for  inviting 
financial/commercial bids for printing of PAN Cards for a period of three years. The tender 
specified the minimum eligibility criteria and essential conditions required to be fulfilled 
by an agency/vendor to become eligible for bidding and issue of the work order . Though 
17 bids were received (18 June 2019), the Company scrapped the tender altogether on the 
grounds that the Lowest Bidder (L1) was technically disqualified. The next lowest bid (L2) 
of a vendor from Jaipur at ₹4.35 per set42 was not pursued further. 
Subsequently, a new tender was floated in July 2019. In the tender, two packet bidding 
system was followed i.e., technical bid and financial/commercial bid. The bidding process 
involved opening of the technical bids first, for technical evaluation of the bids, and then 
opening of financial/commercial bid of only those bidders who were technically qualified. 
Compared to the bid floated in May 2019, the Company introduced an additional eligibility 
criterion for bidders in the tender document issued in July 2 019 viz., the bidding agency 
                                                           
42   Set denotes one plastic card inserted in the supplied envelope including one forwarding letter with pre-
printed and variable text as per the terms/conditions and scope of work laid out in the tender.  

Report No. 12 of 2024 
53 
should have the printing facility within 150 kms from the Company offices located at Navi 
Mumbai/Kolkata/Chennai/New Delhi. 
Out of 12 vendors who submitted their bids, eight bidders were found to be technically 
qualified (Augus t 2019) and their price bids were  opened. The work was awarded 
(5 September 2019) to the lowest (L1) technically qualified bidder at ₹4.95 per set for a 
period of three years from September 2019 to September 2022. Subsequently, part works 
were also awarded  (November 2019 and September 2021) to the second (L2) and third 
lowest (L3) technically qualified bidders, at the same rate of ₹4.95 per set, invoking 
relevant clauses of the tender, to maintain timely despatch of PAN cards. The Jaipur-based 
party, who ha d bid ₹4.35 per set in the first tender was technically disqualified for not 
meeting the condition of having printing facility within 150 kilometres of the Company’s 
offices.  
As the lowest technically qualified bidder in the second tender commenced printing of PAN 
cards from October 2019 after award of work in September 2019, PAN cards were 
continued to be printed by the existing seven vendors (August 2019 to October 2019) of 
the Company at an agreed (July 2019) rate of ₹6.50 per PAN card.  
Audit observed that the action of the Company of scrapping the first tender without 
considering the bids of other eligible and valid bidders and floating fresh tender with 
restrictive condition resulted in avoidable expenditure of ₹5.71 crore43 for printing of PAN 
cards during the period from August 2019 to August 2022. 
The Management stated (January 2023) that:  
1. The Tender Evaluation and Awards Committee (TE&AC) recommended  
(July 2019) that:  
(a) the tender be scrapped as the lowest bidder was not technically qualified. 
(b) Fresh tenders may be called for wherein technical and commercial bids may be 
called for separately since the original tender was invalid as per Para 3.3.3 of 
the Manual for Procurement of Works (2019) issued by Ministry of Finance. 
2. The criterion regarding dist ance was introduced to prevent delay in despatch of 
cards beyond stringent turnaround time prescribed and Instant PAN introduced 
recently by the Income Tax Department, which would result in penalties being 
                                                           
43  7,45,65,679 number of PAN cards printed under new contract upto August 2022 @  ₹4.95 per set and 
57,32,284 number of PAN cards printed in the interim period between August 2019 to October 2019 
@₹6.50 per set 
    Thus, Avoidable expenditure: (₹4.95-₹4.35) x 7,45,65,679 =₹4,47,39,407 
                 (₹6.50-₹4.35) x 57,32,284  = ₹1,23,24,411 
Grand Total:                                                                         = ₹5,70,63,818 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
 
54 
levied by the Income Tax Department and to reduce time of inspections at printers’ 
premises. 
The reply needs to be viewed in the light of the following: 
• The Company decided to scrap the first tender citing that the L1 bidder was not 
technically qualified. However, as per the terms of eligibility criteria (Part II – 
Special Conditions) in the first tender, it was specified that minimum eligibility 
criteria were  required to be fulfilled by the bidders and that these criteria were 
essential conditions and required to be fulfilled for issue of work order. Therefore, 
the Company ought to have considered the offers of other eligible bidders as per the 
eligibility criteria prescribed in tender and the next lowest (L2) bidder, would be 
the L1 bidder as they had satisfied the conditions of the t ender and their bid was 
also valid. Thus, cancellation of the first tender was not warranted and justified, as 
other bids received were not evaluated in accordance with the tender conditions and 
rejected by merely stating that the lowest bidder was not technically qualified.  
• While scrapping the first tender, the justification recorded by TE&AC for the same 
was that the L1 vendor was not technically qualified and accordingly it was decided 
to call for fresh tenders wherein technical and commercial bids may be called 
separately. The Company also stated that the original tender was invalid as per the 
Manual for Procurement of Works, 2019 issued by Ministry of Finance. The reply 
may be viewed in light of the fact that when the first tender was floated  on  
22 May 2019, Manual for Procurement of Works 2019 was not in existence. 
Further, even the Manual for Procurement of Works (2019)  permitted floating of 
tender by single stage single envelope system. 
• As regards the Management justification for addition of condi tion of having 
printing facility within 150 kms of the Companies Offices in the second tender, the 
same may be seen in the following context: 
(i) The first tender was not scrapped due to non -inclusion of the condition of 
150 kms as is evident from the minutes of TE&AC. Hence, there was no 
compelling reasons for inserting the condition  of di stance in the second 
tender. 
(ii) Adequate clauses 44 existed in the old contract  and in the new contract to 
ensure that any losses to the Company due to delay on the part of the printer 
are recovered from the printer. 
                                                           
44  As per clause of the contract, the printer indemnifies UTIITSL and undertakes to compensate UTIITSL 
in case of any prejudice, claim or any loss arising or accruing to UTIITSL on account of any act, 
commission or omission attributable to the improper handling of the UTIITSL’s documents/data or to 
the negligence or delay on the part of the Printer. 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
55 
(iii) From the instances of the penalties levied by the Income Tax Department 
for delay in despatch of PAN cards during the 2017 -18 to 2019-20, it was 
observed that the delays were not due to reasons attributable to the prin ter 
and the penalty imposed was only ₹2.87 lakh (i.e., 0.0041  per cent of the 
total revenue from processing/issuing of PAN cards during these years).  
(iv) The contention of the Management that having the printing facility at a short 
distance from its offices w ould facilitate inspections of the printers is also 
not justified as during the period 2009 -10 to 2022 -23 only 2 to 27 
inspections were conducted annually. The number of visits were also 
minimal vis-a-vis number of printers (3 to 7) and the data on penalties and 
inspections do not support the necessity of such a criterion of distance. 
The Ministry, in their first reply (February 2023), accepted the contention of Audit and 
stated that an inadvertent error of judgement made by Management has led to the loss.  
Ministry further stated that CEO of the Company has been directed to conduct an enquiry 
through Board to find out the lapses in the tender process and fix the accountability by 
initiating necessary action as a corrective measure and to enquire about the pr evailing 
market rate and, accordingly, consider cancellation of the present agreement for printing of 
Cards and float a fresh tender. 
The Ministry, in their second response (November 2023) submitted that UTIITSL initiated 
a bid for plastic card printing (2019) and received 17 bids. As L1 failed to submit requisite 
documents, it was decided to scrap the whole process as CVC guidelines do not permit 
going to L2 bidder after opening of financial bidding. Grant of tender to L2 bidder, as 
suggested by the Audit, would not have been a prudent practice to follow. In the re -
tendering process, tender was floated with an additional criteria of vend or facility being 
within a distance of 150 km from any of UTIITSL’s four regional offices, along with the 
two other criteria which were issued as a corrigendum to the 1st tender, therefore, both the 
tender inquiries were different in scope. The work order was issued to L1 bidder and L2 
and L3 were later engaged at L1 prices due to a large volume of work. The introduction of 
distance criterion did not seem to limit participation in the second tender inquiry and is 
difficult to conclude that participation of eight technically qualified bidders is not 
competitive enough. Thus, the second tender inquiry was more beneficial to the company 
as compared to the previous rate of ₹6.50 per card, as the rate was brought down to  
₹4.95 per card. Generally, as inflation rises, fresh tender inquiries result in higher prices.  
UTITSL issued a two-bid system tender, separating Technical and Commercial bids for the 
"Bid for printing of Plastic Cards" in June 2023, following directives from DIPAM and 
decisions from the UTITSL B oard in which 150 km distance criterion from the previous 
tender was excluded. In response nine bids were received and five bids were eligible for 
Commercial bids, which were opened in August 2023. The rates quoted by the top five 
bidders ranged from ₹5.85 per card to ₹9.40 per card. Despite the removal of the 150 km 
clause, the current tender received nine bids which was less than the 12 bids received in the 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
 
56 
2019 re-tender. Notably, the L2 bidder from the initial tender, did not participate, even with 
the removal of the alleged restrictive clause. Overall, the company saved money compared 
to the previous agreed price after implementing the new contract. 
The second reply of the Ministry may be viewed in light of the fact that as per the tender 
conditions in the first tender, it was specified that minimum eligibility criteria were required 
to be fulfilled by the bidders as essential criteria for issue of the work order. Thus, for a 
bidder to be declared as L1, the bidder ought to have fulfilled the minimum pre scribed 
eligibility criteria and also to be the lowest price bidder among the bidders fulfilling 
minimum prescribed eligibility criteria. CVC circular (03 March 2007) states that, in case 
L-1 backs-out there should be a re -tender. However, in the instant c ase the L1 bidder had 
not backed out  but was disqualified due to not meeting the prescribed tender conditions, 
hence the issue of retender as per CVC guidelines does not arise, as the L1 bidder had not 
qualified with the tender conditions itself. Further, the conditions prescribed in Rule 173 
(xix) of General Financial Rules 2017, for rejection of all bids, was not satisfied in the 
first/original tender, therefore, the cancellation of first tender was not warranted and 
justified as responsive bid was available against the tender. In the first tender, as per GFR 
Rule 203 read with Rule 173 (xvi), the responsive bid would be that of the next lowest 
bidder as they had fulfilled the minimum eligibility criteria required as per the tender 
conditions, therefore the work should have been awarded to L2 (next lowest bidder) as their 
bid was responsive. The contention of the Ministry as regard to change in scope of work in 
re-tender may be viewed in light of the fact that the scope of work, i.e. printing of PAN 
Cards, did not undergo change merely by adding additional eligibility criteria. The fact 
remains that in the first tender, the Company had received 17 bids as against 12 bids in the 
re-tender. Further, in the second tender, Company did not receive lower rates similar to the 
rates received from L1 & L2 bidders in the first tender, whereas, the bid of the bidder, who 
was L2 in first tender, was not opened in the second tender as it was disqualified due to the 
restrictive condition . Therefore, the contention of infla tion resulting in higher prices in 
fresh tenders also does not hold good as the card was being printed at the rate of ₹6.50 per 
card as admitted by Ministry prior to tendering of work in 2019. Audit has also not 
commented on the frequency of tender to be followed or renewing the existing agreements 
etc. The audit comment is restricted to the tendering process followed in the two tenders 
floated by the Company for printing of PAN Cards in 2019. 
The present tender (June 2023) cited by the Ministry is a new te nder floated after a gap of 
four years from the last tender and the tenders cannot be compared.  Further, participation 
or non-participation of a particular bidder, i.e. , the L2 bidder in the present tender floated 
in 2023 does not negate the audit observations pertaining to the tendering process which 
was adopted in the year 2019 for printing of PAN Cards. 
Thus, scrapping of initial tender for printing of PAN cards and floating of fresh tender with 
restrictive condition by UTI Infrastructure Technology and Services Limited  resulted in 
avoidable expenditure of ₹5.71 crore. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter V 
Ministry of Heavy Industries  
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
57 
CHAPTER V: MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES 
 
 
Cement Corporation of India Limited 
5.1 Avoidable payment of penal interest  
Cement Corporation of India Limited delayed the payment of Net Present Value 
payable for diversion of forest land for non-forest purposes. Consequently, it had 
to make avoidable payment of penal interest of ₹8.49 crore. 
Government of Himachal Pradesh  granted (August 1973) mining lease over  
172.30 hectares of forest land1 in Sirmaur district to Rajban unit of Cement Corporation of 
India Limited (Company), out of which mining rights were allowed  over 55 hectares of 
land. The mining lease was subsequently extended up to August 2023. 
The Supreme Court directed 2 (October 2002) that user agencies shall pay the Net Present 
Value of forest land diverted for non -forest purposes, for undertaking forest protection, 
other conservation measures and related activities. Further, in pursuance of a judgment 
dated 26 September 2005 of the Supreme Court, an Expert Committee was constituted to 
work out the methodology for estimating the Net Present Value of forest land diverted for 
non-forest use and to determine the projects which deserve to be exempted from payment 
of Net Present Value. The Report of the Expert Committee was exa mined by a Central 
Empowered Committee whose recommendations were accepted by the Supreme Court. 
Accordingly, the Court, vide its judgments of March/May 2008, issued orders regarding  
rates of Net Present Value payable by the user agencies  and also listed t he categories of 
projects which were exempted from payment of Net Present Value.  The mining activities 
undertaken by the Company were not covered in the exempted categories and as such the 
Company was liable to pay Net Present Value of the forest land covered under the mining 
lease to the Forest authorities. 
Besides, as per the guidelines issued (April 2015) by the Ministry of Environment, Forest 
and Climate Change, the State Government shall, within a period of one year from the date 
of issue of the  guidelines, realise from the user agency, Net Present Value of the entire 
forest land falling in the mining lease, in case the same had not already been realised, which 
was later extended up to 31 March 2017. 
Accordingly, the Divisional Forest Officer raised (June 2017 and January 2018) demand of 
₹14.56 crore on the Company towards Net Present Value  of the entire forest area i.e., 
172.30 hectares diverted for non-forest purposes. The Company requested (January 2018, 
                                                           
1   Section 2(ii) of Forest Conservation Act, 1980 stipulates that no State Government shall make, except 
with prior approval of the Central Government, any order directing that any forest land or any portion 
thereof may be used for any non-forest purpose. 
2   In reference to Writ Petition (Civil) No. 202/95 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
 
58 
December 2019 and January 2020) to pay the Net Present Value in respect of the area of 
16.9927 hectares on which it was carrying out mining activities or  the area of 55 hectares 
for which mining permission had been granted to it, instead of the total diverted area of 
172.30 hectares. The aforesaid requ est was made by the Company on the plea that the 
Expert Committee had recommended that in case of open cast mining, the Net Present 
Value may be charged only for the proportion of land broken in accordance with  
pre-submitted mine plan. 
The State Forest Department rejected (January 2020) the request of the Company stating 
that no such exemption was available as per Supreme Court judgment of May 2008. 
However, at the insistence of the Company, the State Forest Department forwarded  
(August 2020) their reques t to Forest Conservation Division, Ministry of Environment, 
Forest and Climate Change for consideration of the Forest Advisory Committee. Based on 
the recommendations of the Forest Advisory Committee, the Ministry stated (March 2021) 
that the Company should make full payment of Net Present Value for the entire forest area 
of 172.30 hectares along with penal interest for delay in deposition beyond 31 March 2017. 
Accordingly, the Company paid (June 2021) an amount of ₹23.05 crore on account of Net 
Present Value (₹14.56 crore) and penal interest thereon (₹8.49 crore). 
Audit observed that the Company delayed the payment of Net Present Value despite being 
aware of the fact that no exemption from such payment was available as per the Supreme 
Court judgment of May 2008, and as such it was required to pay Net Present Value for the 
entire forest area used for non -forest purposes. Further, the Company did not act in 
accordance with the guidelines issued (April 2015) by the Ministry of Environment, Forest 
and Climate Change reiterating the payment of Net Present Value for the entire forest land 
falling in the mining lease. As a result, the Company  had to make avoidable payment of 
penal int erest of ₹8.49 crore in addition to the principal amount of Net Present Value 
amounting to ₹14.56 crore. 
The Management stated (December 2022) that as there was a vast difference between the 
total forest area and the area on which mining was actually being  done, it requested the 
Forest authorities to consider the calculation of Net Present Value on the area under mining 
or on the 55 hectares approved for mining. The request of the Company was considered by 
the State Forest authorities in the year 2019 and i n August 2020. Finally, the matter was 
placed before the Forest Advisory Committee  constituted by the Central Government and 
the Forest Advisory Committee did not accede to (March 2021) the request of the 
Company. Thus, the Company, being a sick company , explored all possible efforts to 
reduce the liability of Net Present Value and interest. 
The reply of the Management is not tenable in light of the Supreme Court judgment of  
May 2008 as per which there was no scope for restricting the payment of Net Present Value 
to the area actually under mining or the area approved for mining as requested by the 
Company. 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
59 
The Ministry of Heavy Industries, while accepting the audit observation, stated  
(March 2023) that the Company clearly violated the directions of Supreme  Court of India 
and the provisions of Forest Conservation Act, 1980. The Ministry further added that the 
Company had been advised to refrain from making avoidable payments of penal interest in 
future, in response to which, the Company had committed to take appropriate measures to 
prevent such occurrences in future. 
Thus, the Company’s injudicious decision to pursue with the Forest authorities  for 
reduction of its liability towards Net Present Value despite clear guidelines of the Ministry 
of Environment, Forest and Climate Change to pay the Net Present Value of the entire 
forest land falling under the mining lease, led to delay in payment and consequential 
avoidable payment of penal interest amounting to ₹8.49 crore. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter VI 
Ministry of Steel  
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
61 
CHAPTER VI: MINISTRY OF STEEL 
 
 
NMDC Limited 
6.1 Injudicious decision to procure coking coal 
NMDC Limited procured 1,61,963 tonnes of coking coal worth ₹372.58 crore 
without ensuring the completion of Coke Oven Plant and the associated upstream 
and downstream plants of Nagarnar Integrated Steel Plant resulting in  quality 
degradation of coking coal over time making it unviable for standalone use in Coke 
Oven Plant. This also resulted in blocking up of funds of ₹372.58 crore for more 
than three years. 
NMDC Limited (NMDC) was setting up 3.0 million tonne per annum capacity Steel Plant 
at Nagarnar, Chhattisgarh known as Nagarnar Integrated Steel Plant (the Plan t). The 
project, inter-alia, included establishment of Coke Oven Complex comprising of two units 
of Coke Oven Batteries1. Contract for Coke Oven Complex was placed in September 2011 
with scheduled completion within 33 months i.e., by June 2014. 
The Plant proposed (June 2017) to procure two 
lakh tonnes of coking coal to meet three months’ 
production as the Coke Oven Battery was 
planned for light up 2 in September  2017. A 
Global Tender Enquiry was floated in January 
2018 which had to be cancelled as bidders were 
not meeting certain technical as well as 
commercial requirements. Subsequently, another 
Global Tender Enquiry was issued in June 2018 
and order was placed i n August 2018 for supply 
of two lakh tonnes of coking coal with landed 
price of ₹23,004/- per tonne. As per delivery 
period, supplies were to start within two months and required to be completed within five 
months from the date of placement of order. Citin g urgent requirement, NMDC requested 
the supplier to deliver one lakh tonnes by October 2018 and remaining one lakh tonnes by 
November 2018. The Plant received 1,61,963 tonnes of coking coal worth ₹372.58 crore 
between November 2018 and May 2019. Quantity of 38,016 tonnes was cancelled by 
NMDC in March 2020 citing reduction in coking coal prices.  
                                                           
1 Coke Oven Plant converts coal in to coke in the coke oven batteries which is used as fuel and reducing 
agent in the Blast Furnace. A coke oven battery comprises of a large number of ovens, typically a set 
from 60 to 90 per battery, grouped in sections of 1 5 to 20. Its secondary function is to recover volatile 
matter and coke oven gas from coal and extract chemicals known as Coal Chemicals (Ammonia, 
Napthalene etc.). Coke Oven gas produced is used for heating purposes in Plant.  
2    The start up activity to charge the coke ovens in the Battery is called lighting up. 
Fig 1: Coking Coal lying at yard of the Plant 
 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
 
62 
Despite the receipt of raw material by May 2019, the heating-up and coke push for enabling 
commissioning of Coke Oven Batteries could be conducted only in October/  
November3 2022 as the downstream facility (By -Product Plant) became operational on  
27 October 2022. Consequently, the stock of coking coal which was lyi ng in the open in 
the Raw Material Handling Station had started oxidising and there was degradation of 
quality with typical drop in fluidity, moisture etc., and increase in value of mineral matters 
making it unviable for use as a standalone raw material. 
In this regard, Audit scrutiny revealed that :  
(i) Coking coal is the raw material that is processed in Coke Oven Plant and processed 
coke is fed into Blast Furnace. While making the coke in Coke Oven Plant, large 
quantity of toxic gases such as benzene, hydrogen sulphide, carbon monoxide, 
ammonia, etc., are generated which are recovered and clea ned in the  
By-Product Plant (downstream plant) and are used subsequently as fuel gas in the 
process. Thus, completion of By -Product Plant was essential to start production 
from Coke Oven Complex. Similarly, Raw Material Handling Station (upstream 
plant) w orks consist s of structural and equipment erection for feeding of raw 
material to different units of the Coke Oven Plant. Hence, Coke Oven Plant could 
not have been commissioned without completion of these upstream and 
downstream units.  
(ii) NMDC did not take cognizance of the status of ongoing works of Coke Oven 
Complex along with its upstream and downstream plants while placing the order 
for coking coal required for three months’ operation of Coke Oven Batteries. This 
is clear from the fact that at the time o f issuing first Global Tender Enquiry in 
January 2018, structural erection of Raw Material Handling Station was only 
around 70 per cent completed. For Coke Oven Plant, erection of Battery 2 was only 
51 per cent complete and extension of time had been sought till December 2018 for 
By-Product Plant. Similarly, at the time of issuing second Global Tender Enquiry 
in June 2018, extension of time had been sought for completion of Raw Material 
Handling Station till June 2019.  
Hence, injudicious decision of NMDC to procure 1,61,963 tonnes of coking coal worth  
₹372.58 crore without ensuring the completion of Coke Oven Plant along with associated 
upstream and downstream plants resulted in quality degradation of coking co al over time 
making it unviable for standalone use in Coke Oven Plant. This also resulted in blocking 
up of funds of ₹372.58 crore for more than three years. 
The Management/Ministry accepted (March/August 2023/February 2024) that during the 
period when the  Nagarnar Integrated Steel Plant received above mentioned supply of 
coking coal, i.e., till May 2019, Coke Oven Battery -1 was in advanced stage of readiness 
                                                           
3  Coke Oven Battery-1 on 27 October 2022 and Coke Oven Battery-2 on 19 November 2022 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
63 
but due to delay in readiness of upstream/downstream facilities, which was a pre-requisite 
for commissioning of the Plant, pre -heating of Coke Oven Battery - 1 had to be deferred.  
It further stated that though there is quality degradation of coking coal received in May 
2019 at site, the same is being blended with fresh coking coal and used in Coke Oven 
Batteries. It was also informed that as of March 2023, around 10,000 tonnes4 of coking coal 
has already been consumed by blending and the entire available stock was expected to be 
consumed progressively at both the units of Coke Oven Plant. It was also stated that the 
Plant had been closely monitored from the beginning and the Man agement had taken all 
possible steps to ensure completion of the By -Product Plant to synchronise with start of 
Coke Oven Plant. It was further stated that in any Greenfield Steel Plant, action of 
procurement of major raw materials like coking coal having l ong lead time is taken in 
advance to meet the project requirements as it cannot be timed perfectly. The Ministry also 
added that upon stabilisation of Coke Oven Battery-1, blending of coal has increased upto 
20 per cent and balance quantity will be consumed faster as Coke Oven Battery-2 has also 
commenced operations. 
The reply of the Management /Ministry confirms the Audit observation that the quality of 
the coking coal procured in May 2019 has degraded and cannot be used as a standalone raw 
material. Further, the Plant is blending 10 per cent of the coking coal procured in May 2019 
with new coking coal for producing Coke from Coke Oven Battery-1 since December 2022 
and has consumed only around 33,044 tonnes till 16 May 2023.  
The tender for the coking coal was floated in June 2018 and material started to arrive from 
November 2018 implying a lead time of l ess than six months for procurement. As such, 
NMDC should have initiated procurement action after ensuring readiness of the 
upstream/downstream plants of Coke Oven Complex before placing the order for coking 
coal. Further, instead of procuring three  months’ requirement, procuring Coking Coal 
required for only the trial run could have been considered as it was known that stabilisation 
of all Plants take time.  
Thus, advance procurement of coking coal without considering the actual pace of work at 
site and completion status of upstream and downstream units of Coke Oven Complex  
resulted in reduction in coal properties of the coking coal making it unusable as a standalone 
raw material. This action has further resulted in blocking up of huge funds of ₹372.58 crore 
for more than three years and interest loss of at least ₹51.51 crore5 as well as possibility of 
further degradation of coking coal. 
 
 
                                                           
4   33,044 tonnes of coking coal used till 16 May 2023. 
5 Interest loss worked out for three and a half years from May 2019 to December 2022 at the rate of  
3.95 per cent per annum which was minimum interest rate applicable for availing overdraft during 
2018-19 to 2021-22 by NMDC.  

Report No. 12 of 2024 
 
64 
6.2 Irregular payment of incentives/rewards to Executives in deviation to guidelines 
of Department of Public Enterprises 
NMDC Limited made an irregular payment of ₹13.49 crore to its Executives during  
2018-19 to 2021 -22 as incentive/reward for achieving higher 
production/productivity which was over and above the  payment of Performance 
Related Pay as well as Perks and Allowances at the prescribed ceiling. 
Department of Public Enterprises, during revision (November  2008) of the pay scales of 
Board Level and below Board Level Executives and non-unionised Supervisors of Central 
Public Sector Enterprises  with effect from 1  January 2007, introduced a new concept of 
‘Cafeteria Approach’ allowing the Executives to choose from a set of perks and allowances 
instead of having a fixed set of allowances. The Board of Directors was to decide the perks 
and allowances admissible to the different categories of the Executives subject to a 
maximum ceiling prescribed 6. Certain allowances 7 were kept outside this ceiling. 
Department of Public Enterprises  also introduced a new system of Variable 
Pay/Performance Related Pay vide this revision. Performance Related Pay  was directly 
linked to the profits of the Central Public Sector Enterprises/Units and performance of the 
Executives.  
As some Central Public Sector Enterprises  were paying allowances to their Executives in 
some form or the other over and above the ceiling prescribed for perks and allowances, 
Department of Public Enterprises construed them as serious violations of its guidelines and 
instructed (June 2013) all Central P ublic Sector Enterprises  to strictly adhere  to the 
guidelines in letter and spirit. 
Accordingly, NMDC implemented the revised pay scales from 1  January 2017 with perks 
and allowances to its Executives at 35 per cent of the Basic Pay and also paid Performance 
Related Pay as per guidelines of the Department of Public Enterprises. However, in addition 
to above, NMDC paid incentives/reward  to its Executives every year from 2018 -19 to 
2021-22 aggregating to ₹13.49 crore under “Production Profit Index Memento Sch eme” 
under the names such as special production Memento, gift under Annual Reward Scheme, 
Productivity Week/Month, special Memento for crossing milestone iron ore production 
etc., with approval of Chairman and Managing Director. 
In this regard, Audit observed that: 
(i) As per guidelines of Department of Public Enterprises  (20 November 1997), no 
payment of ex-gratia, honorarium or reward was to be made by the Public 
                                                           
6 This ceiling was 50 per cent as per guidelines of 2008 and was subsequently reduced to 35 per cent vide 
guidelines revised in August 2017 with effect from 1 January 2017.   
7 In the guidelines of 2008, these were North-East allowance, allowance for Underground Mines, special 
allowance for serving in difficult and far -flung areas and Non -Practicing allowance for Medical 
Officers. As per revised guidelines in 2017, these were work based Hardship Duty Allowances, location 
based Compensatory Allowance and Non-Practicing Allowance. 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
65 
Enterprises to their employees over and above the entitlement under Payment of 
Bonus Act or the Executive Instructions issued by Department of Public Enterprises 
in respect of ex-gratia unless the amount was  authorised under a duly approved 
incentive scheme in accordance with the prescribed procedure. 
As NMDC is making payment of perks and allowances to its Executives as per 
prescribed ceiling, payment of rewards over and above this  ceiling is a deviation 
from guidelines of the Department of Public Enterprises. 
(ii) The justification recorded for payment of incentive/reward under Production Profit 
Index Memento Scheme  to Executives was increase in production, high 
productivity during a particular month/year, Special Production Memento and 
Annual Reward Scheme. However, Executives were already paid Performance 
Related Pay based on their performance and profit earned during a particular year, 
which is arrived at on the basis of production/sales of the Company. Hence, 
payment of additional incentive/reward under Production Profit Index Memento 
Scheme on the ground of higher production/dispatch and annual reward tantamount 
to payment of incentive/reward to the Executive twice for the same reason. 
Management replied (February 2023) that: 
(i) Gifts have been announced as a goodwill gesture since the last 30 years and a 
scheme for this was also framed in 2014 which was revised as Production Profit 
Index Memento Scheme in 2017. This has been a motivating factor for encouraging 
employees for worki ng untiringly in far flung areas, to achieve milestones every 
year despite adverse conditions like Left Wing Extremism, remoteness, vagaries of 
climate, etc.  
(ii) Further, the Performance Related Pay  and Production Profit Index Memento 
Scheme are distinct, different and operate contextually on different occasions and 
are supplementary to each other. Production Profit Index Memento Scheme is being 
given in kind as a goodwill gesture to all employees recognising their loyalty and 
untiring efforts while Performance Related Pay  is paid to Executives based on 
profits and Memorandum of Understanding rating as per Department of Public 
Enterprises guidelines. 
The reply of the Management is not acceptable in view of the facts that: 
(i) The perks and allowances should not exceed the ceiling as prescribed by 
Department of Public Enterprises. So far as the Scheme framed by the Company is 
concerned, it was noticed that the Scheme brought in 2017 did not have approval 
from the Ministry of Steel/Board of Directors. 
(ii) The payments made under Performance Related Pay  and Production Profit Index 
Memento Scheme cannot be regarded as distinct or contextually different as the  

Report No. 12 of 2024 
 
66 
incentive/reward paid under the latter Scheme is  also with reference to the 
Production/Productivity achieved which determines the performance and profit of 
the Company which, in turn, forms the basis for payment of Performance Related 
Pay too. 
The Ministry stated (October 2023 /February 2024 ) that since the above submission of 
NMDC was not accepted by Audit, the matter was reviewed by NMDC again and NMDC 
has proposed to discontinue payment of incentive/rewards to Executives under Production 
Profit Index Memento Scheme from the ensuing year 2023-24. 
Thus, the expenditure of ₹13.49 crore incurred by NMDC, Hyderabad towards payment of 
incentives/rewards to its Executives during the period from 2018 -19 to 2021 -22 was 
irregular and in contravention of Department of Public Enterprises guidelines. 
Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited  
6.3 Irregular expenditure on employees under Farewell Scheme and Long Service 
Award Scheme  
Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited implemented policies for distribution of gold coins 
and silver coins under ‘Farewell Scheme’ and ‘Long Service Award Scheme’ to the 
retired/eligible employees in contravention to the guidelines of Department of 
Public Enterprises resulting in irregular expenditure of ₹27.29 crore. 
Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited (RINL), Visakhapatnam implemented (30 December 
2006/20 December 2006) Farewell Scheme and Long Service Award Scheme for  its 
employees with effect from December 2006. Under the Farewell Scheme, the employees 
were eligible to get a  10 grams go ld coin at the time of superannuation if they had 
completed eligible8 period of service for payment of gratuity under Payment of Gratuity 
Act. Similarly, under Long Service Award Scheme, the employees who had rendered  
25 years of continuous service were to be awarded with a 150 grams silver coin.  
In line with the above schemes, RINL incurred an expenditure of ₹17.04 crore and  
₹10.25 crore towards purchase and distribution of gold coins and silver coins under 
Farewell Scheme and Long Service Award Scheme respectively during the period from 
2006-07 to 2021-22. 
Audit observed that guidelines of the Department of Public Enterprises  
(20 November 1997), inter-alia, stipulated that no payment of ex-gratia, honorarium or 
reward could be made by the Public Enterp rises to their employees over and above their 
entitlement under Bonus Act or the executive instructions issued by Department of Public 
Enterprises in respect of ex-gratia unless the amount is authorised under duly approved 
incentive scheme by the Administr ative Ministry/Department. However, neither of the 
                                                           
8  Gratuity is payable to an employee on the termination of his employment after he has rendered 
continuous service for not less than five years. 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
67 
schemes had the approval of the Ministry of Steel, the Administrative Ministry of RINL. 
Thus, expenditure of ₹27.29 crore incurred by RINL towards the ‘rewards’ given in the 
form of gold coins and silver c oins under Farewell Scheme and Long Service Award 
Scheme was in contravention to the guidelines of Department of Public Enterprises and 
was, therefore, irregular.  
Management stated (February 2023) that there was no violation of Department of Public 
Enterprises’ guidelines since these were in respect of ex-gratia payments for establishments 
not covered under the Payment of Bonus Act, 1965 and hence do not apply to giving of 
gold coin under Farewell Scheme at the time of superannuation. It was also stated that silver 
medallion given under Long Service Award Scheme was an award and not an ex-gratia 
payment as referred to in the Department of Public Enterprises guidelines mentioned above. 
The Ministry reiterated (January 2024/April 2024) the views expressed by the Management 
and stated that the Long Service Award Scheme and Farewell Scheme were independent 
schemes duly approved by the RINL’s Board of Directors and the aforementioned Gold 
Coin and Silver Medallion given under these schemes were awards and not ex -
gratia/reward and do not attract the attention of Department of Public Enterprises OM dated 
20 November 1997. 
Reply of the Management and Ministry is not acceptable in view of the fact that: 
(i) Department of Public Enterprises’ guidelines issued on 20 November 1997 clarified 
that all Public Sector Enterprises, whether within or outside the purview of Payment 
of Bonus Act, need to regulate the payment of bonus/ex-gratia strictly in accordance 
with the Payment of Bonus Act for each finan cial year commencing from the 
financial year 1996-97. 
(ii) Though the guidelines were issued in relation to bonus/ ex-gratia, the guidelines 
further clarify that no ex-gratia, honorarium, reward etc.,  could be paid by the 
Public Sector Enterprises to their emplo yees over and above the entitlement under 
the provisions of the Bonus Act or the executive instructions issued by the 
Department of Public Enterprises unless it was authorised under duly approved 
incentive scheme. As such, the policies framed by the Compan y for the Farewell 
Scheme and the Long Service Award Scheme for granting of gold coins and silver 
coins at the time of superannuation and after rendering 25 years of continuous 
service respectively fall under the ambit of the above guidelines and hence, th e 
expenditure incurred on the gold coins and silver coins would tantamount to 
violation of guidelines of the Department of Public Enterprises . Further, the 
schemes were approved by the Board of Directors of the Company and did not bear 
the approval of the Ministry of Steel. 
(iii) Similar para was issued in respect of companies under Ministry of Petroleum and 
Natural Gas (Para 6.1 of Audit Report No.13 of 2019) and based on inputs received 
from concerned companies as well as Department of Public Enterprises , Ministry 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
 
68 
of Petroleum and Natural Gas had directed the companies to make recovery of 
unauthorised payment made to their employees. 
Thus, award of gold coins and silver coins to the employees of RINL under Farewell 
Scheme and Long Service Award Scheme respectively, in contravention to the Department 
of Public Enterprises guidelines, resulted in irregular expenditure of ₹27.29 crore.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter VII 
Ministry of Housing  
and Urban Affairs  
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
69 
CHAPTER VII: MINISTRY OF HOUSING AND  
URBAN AFFAIRS 
 
 
Delhi Metro Rail Corporation  
7.1 Short recovery of repairing cost and other incidental expenses 
Delhi Metro Rail Corporation incurred loss of ₹15.54 crore due to short recovery 
of repairing cost and other charges for newly constructed Mundka staff quarters 
from the contractor. 
Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC) awarded (28 August 2009) the construction work 
of staff quarters at Mundka to a contractor at a cost of ₹19.87 crore with scheduled 
completion date of 26 August 2010.  The contractor completed the work on  
15 February 2013 at a cost of ₹25.03 crore and handed over1 the quarters to DMRC between 
October 2012 to March 2013 . The staff quarters were allotted and occupied by the 
employees of DMRC upto the period till May 2013. 
Immediately after occupation of flats by employees (May 2013) when the water 
supply/drainage and toilet system became operational, large -scale seepage and other 
defects were noticed by residents. During Defect Liability Period (February 2014), due to 
reluctance by the contractor, initially DMRC got (February 2014) the repair works 
amounting to ₹0.25 crore done from other agencies at risk and cost of the contractor. 
Further, DMRC observed (April 2014/20 June 2014) serious structural defects related to 
construction e.g., cracks on beam -column junctions, slabs, external finishing of walls etc. 
Accordingly, DMRC appointed (July 2015) a consultant for carrying out detailed structural 
assessment of the building and to suggest further course of action. 
In the meantime, keeping in mind safety considerations and to carry out repair work, the 
staff quarters were vacated in August 2015. The Consultant gave its report  
(November 2015) and stated that buildings were severely affected due to reinforcement 
corrosion due to the presence of excessive chlorides in the vicinity of reinforcement. 
DMRC also appointed a three member Committee2 to examine the matter and to decide on 
further course of action against the contractor, which recommended (February 2016) to (i) 
obtain expert legal opinion to invoke provisions as per law and take legal action against the 
contractor, (ii) file a suit against the contractor to recover the amount of ₹13.69 crore3 for 
defective work and (iii) blacklist the contractor for future works in DMRC per manently. 
DMRC also sought opinion of legal expert. The legal expert and the legal department of 
DMRC also recommended (December 2015) for arbitration proceeding. However, DMRC 
                                                           
1   A block- 5 October 2012, B block- 10 November 2012 and C block -15 March 2013. 
2   Three member committee of DMRC comprising of ED/Technical, Chief Engineer/General and 
CGM/Civil. 
3  Estimated cost of repairs/strengthening work of ₹9.68 crore and miscellaneous charges amounting to 
₹4.01 crore. 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
 
70 
did not initiate any action on the recommendations given by the Committee. Inst ead, 
DMRC appointed (March 2016) an Advisor (Consultancy Service), who was working in 
DMRC on re-employment basis, as the conciliator for settlement of dispute. After mutual 
discussion between DMRC and the contractor, a deed of settlement was signed on  
4 July 2016, according to which the contractor agreed to pay only ₹4.12 crore4. It was also 
agreed in the settlement deed that both the parties would not raise any claim whatsoever in 
future so far as this agreement was concerned. 
Thereafter, DMRC awarded (September 2016) the repair work at a cost of ₹5.94 crore to 
another contractor and the work was completed (June 2018) at a cost of ₹10.95 crore. 
Renovated staff quarters at Mundka were ready for re-allotment by November 2018. 
In this regard, Audit observed that: 
• As per clause 18.2 of the contract , ‘if by reason of any accident/failure/other event 
occurring to/in connection with the works either during the execution of the work or 
during Defect Liability Period, any remedial/other work of repair shall, in the opinion 
of the engineer, be urgently necessary and the contractor is unable or unwilling to do 
such work or repair/other work at once, the engineer may authorise carrying out of 
such repair by a person other than the contractor. In this case, all expens es incurred 
by the DMRC in carrying out the same shall be recovered from the contractor’. As per 
the contract, the Defect Liability Period was one year from the actual date of 
completion. Clause 17.3.2 of contract agreement provides that  ‘the contract shall not 
be considered as completed, until a maintenance certificate shall have been signed by 
the Engineer at the end of  Defect Liability Period stating  that the works have been 
completed and maintained to his satisfaction’ . Further claus e 17.5 of contract also 
provides that ‘notwithstanding the issue of maintenance certificate, the contractor and 
the Employer, shall remain liable for the fulfillment of obligation incurred under the 
provisions of the contract, prior to the issue of the Mai ntenance Certificate, which 
remains unperformed at the time such certificate is issued, and for the purpose of 
determination of the nature and extent of such obligation, the contract shall be deemed 
to remain in force between the parties’. Since, the maintenance certificate as per clause 
17.3.2 of contract was not issued to the contractor  till date, therefore for the work 
originally completed on 15 February 2013, Defect Liability Period cannot be 
considered as complete. 
• Clause 4.6.2.2 of contract provides that ‘the whole of the performance security amount 
shall be liable to be forfeited by the employer at the discretion of the employer, in the 
event of any breach of contract on the part of the contractor. On completion of the 
entire work, one half of the performa nce security shall be refunded to the contractor, 
on issue of completion certificate by the engineer. This shall not relieve the contractor 
                                                           
4  ₹3.39 crore (on account of structural repairs) and ₹0 .73 crore (cost of lease charges and incidental 
expenses). 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
71 
from his obligations and liabilities, to make good that may be detected during Defect 
Liability Period. The balance amount shall become due and shall be paid to the 
contractor, after the expiry of the final Defect Liability Period ’. DMRC 
officials/allottee noticed (May 2013) large -scale seepage and other defects. DMRC 
raised this issue with the contractor. But, due to r eluctance by the contractor, initially 
DMRC got (February 2014) the repair works amounting to ₹0.25 crore done from other 
agencies at risk and cost of the contractor. Further, DMRC observed (April 2014/20 
June 2014) serious structural defects related to co nstruction e.g., cracks on beam -
column junctions, slabs, external finishing of walls etc.  Despite this, DMRC released 
(30 April 2014) performance security of ₹1.98 crore and issued completion certificate 
(18 June 2014) w.e.f 15 February 2013 to the contrac tor stating good quality of work 
in contravention of clause 4.6.2.2 of contract. However, the maintenance certificate as 
per clause 17.3.2 of contract was not issued to the contractor. DMRC served  
(20 June 2015) a show cause notice to the contractor stating that the contract is still not 
complete and the obligation of the contractor is yet to be discharged. It was also stated 
in Show cause notice as to why action not be taken against the contractor to recover 
the losses likely to be incurred by DMRC.  DMRC initially assessed ₹13.69 crore for 
defective work etc., and a legal notice was also served in September 2015 to the 
contractor in this regard. 
•  As per clause 20.4 of the contract, except where otherwise provided in the contract all 
disputes, whatsoever arising between the parties, relating to construction, operation or 
effect of the Contract or the breach thereof, shall be settled by arbitration . Clause  
20.5 also stipulated that where the total value of claims exceeds ₹15 lakh, there shall 
be a panel of three arbitrators. Further, both the legal expert and the legal department 
of DMRC also recommended (December 2015) for arbitration proceeding as per clause 
20 of contract agreement as the proposed course of action. Managing Director, DMRC 
approved ( 8 February 2016) the following course of action: 
(a) Initiate reconciliation/arbitration in terms of clause 20 of GCC of the contract as 
advised by legal cell. 
(b) File civil suit for recovery of ₹13.69 crore. 
(c) The final suit will be revised once the work is completed. 
But, before commencement of repairing work, DMRC appointed (17 February 2016) 
Advisor, DMRC as the sole conciliator for settlement of dispute. After mutual 
discussion, DMRC accepted (July 2016) ₹4.12 crore as full and final claims in the  
conciliation deed. However, actual expenditure on repairing of structural defects and 
incidental expense on lease charges etc., was of ₹19.66 crore.5 
                                                           
5  The breakup of actual expenditure of ₹ 19.66 crore  incurred by DMRC is bifurcated into two parts  
(i) ₹11.85 crore (₹10.95 crore on account of repairing of structural defects + ₹0.18 crore for minor 
repairing before awarding the work to consultant + ₹0.72 crore on payment of consultancy fee to assess 
structural assessment and remedial measures) incurred on repairing of structural defects on behalf of 
contractor and (ii) incidental expenses of ₹7 .81 crore incurred by DMRC on account of payment of 
lease rent/HRA, shifting etc., to the employees/allottee. 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
 
72 
• DMRC incurred a loss of ₹15.54 crore 6 due to poor construction by the contractor 
which was 62 per cent of the initial cost of construction i.e., ₹25.03 crore. Despite 
incurring huge expenditure, the life of construction/Buildings which was stipulated as 
minimum 75 years has been reduced to 15 to 20 years, but extendable to 30 -50 years 
depending on regular maintenance and periodic durability repair.  
• Further, DMRC utilised the project funds, which was sanctioned by the Cabinet for 
Phase-III projects instead of utilising its O&M funds for repair work of staff quarters 
at Mundka which were constructed during Phase-II. 
• As per the Minutes of 13th Board meeting dated 12 January 1998, ‘Managing Director 
(MD) was delegated all powers as exercisable by the Board subject to the approval of 
the Board if any item of expenditure where more than ₹10 crore is involved and t he 
same is not contemplated in the Detailed Project Report. The Board further decided 
that important decisions taken by the MD in exercise of the powers delegated to him 
should be reported by him to the Board at the next meeting of the Board’. In this regard, 
though an expenditure of ₹19.66 crore has been incurred by DMRC on repairing of 
staff quarters and other incidental expenses and only ₹4.12 crore could be recovered 
from the contractor, however, the Board was not apprised about the same by the 
Management. 
Ministry replied (February 2022/February 2024) that 
• There were certain quality issues at construction phase due to negligence of contractor 
& supervision by DMRC staffs, against which action had been taken. 
• Clause 18.2 is applicable for the contract period and DLP, whereas the present case is 
after that period. 
• Conciliation is a mode of dispute resolution as per Arbitration & Conciliation  
Act 1996  as a precursor of Arbitration, legal wing has also recommended 
conciliation/Arbitration as per the provisions of the Contract and Act. The amicable 
settlement was appropriate as the other option i.e., filing civil suit and arbitration were 
a long run process and it was not certain that the decision would be in favour of DMRC.  
• The actual expenditure of ₹19.66 crore includes ₹7.81 crore disbursed to employees 
towards lease rent/HRA, which was a part of salary package.  
• While accepting the settlement at ₹4.12 crore, it was not known that the expenditure 
will be more at future date. 
                                                           
6  ₹19.66 crore (-) ₹4.12 crore. 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
73 
• Since, the repairing cost was significant, the same was initially charged to project funds 
earmarked for Phase III, now it has been charged to O&M funds by transferring  
₹8.01 crore from O&M funds to phase III project funds in December 2023.  
• In delegation of powers to MD, there is no clear stipulation to tackle such situation. 
• DMRC engaged (October 2021/December 2021) Ex Spl DG, CPWD and CSIR-CBRI, 
Roorkee to assess building structure, both opined ( Sep. 2022) that the structure is not 
repairable, the only p ermanent remedy is to dismantle the structure and reconstruct. 
Accordingly DMRC has filed (May 2022) a suit in Delhi High court for recovery of  
₹ 45.51 crore from the contractor. The matter is sub-judice (February 2024). 
The reply of ministry may be viewed in the following context: 
• Ministry accepted the facts relating to negligence of contractor and the negligence in 
supervision by DMRC at construction stage. 
• DLP cannot be considered as complete unless a maintenance certificate as per clause 
17.3.2 at the end of DLP has been issued by DMRC. Maintenance certificate was not 
issued to the contractor as on date (February 2024). 
• As per clause 20.4 of contract, arbitration procedure  was the method mentioned for 
settlement of disputes and the same was also re commended (December 2015) by the 
legal expert and legal department of DMRC. However, DMRC against the interest of 
the organisation accepted ₹4.12 crore as full and final claims in the conciliation process 
against the actual expenditure of ₹19.66. Further, citing the time taking process of 
exploring other legal options cannot justify the additional burden and non-recovery of 
actual expenditure. 
• The expenditure of ₹7.81 crore on lease rent/HRA had occurred (from August 2015 to 
November 2018) on account of for ced vacation of allottees due to consideration of 
staff quarters unsafe for human habitation. The renovated staff quarters were allotted 
in May 2019, but after observing several construction defects, the staff quarters were 
again vacated in July 2021. 
• DMRC signed (July 2016) a deed of conciliation settlement, even before awarding 
(September 2016) of repair work and also agreed that both the parties would not raise 
any claim whatsoever in future. DMRC released (30 April 2014) performance security 
of ₹1.98 crore before attending major defects noticed during DLP in contravention of 
clause 4.6.2.2 of contract. Now, DMRC has filed a civil suit of ₹45.51 crore against 
the contractor after signing of settlement deed six years ago. However, filing a recovery 
suit would not absolve DMRC for the lapse in monitoring and taking appropriate action 
against the contractor. 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
 
74 
• Though DMRC returned/transferred the diverted earmarked funds of Phase-III projects 
to O&M funds after 7 years of its utilisation, but the same cannot absolve DMRC from 
its wrongful action i.e., diversion of project funds earmarked for Phase -III work 
without the approval of the competent authority i.e., Cabinet. 
• In delegation of powers (1998), there is provision of reporting of important decisions 
taken by the MD to the Board a t the next meeting of the Board. H owever, the 
company/Managing Director failed to report the decision of acceptance of settlement 
of case for only ₹4.12 crore, while bearing the additional cost of ₹15.54 crore, to the 
Board in the next meeting. 
Thus, DMRC failed to safeguard its financial interest by accepting ₹4.12 crore as full and 
final claims in the conciliation deed against the actual expenditure of ₹19.66 incurred on 
repairing of structural defects and incidental expenses , which has resulted into loss of 
₹15.54 crore. The extent of loss may further go up given the fact that the structural defects 
have occurred again and as per the expert opinio n, the building is not repairable;  the only 
permanent remedy is dismantling the structure and reconstruction. Thus, after incurring of 
₹40.56 crore (₹25.02 crore + ₹15.54 crore) on construction and repairing of Mundka staff 
quarter, DMRC has to again incur expenditure on re-construction of new building. A legal 
suit has been filed (Ma y 2022) by DMRC in High Court claiming ₹45.50 crore from the 
contractor. 
Recommendation No. 1 1: Haste on the part of DMRC in accepting the award of 
conciliation settlement with contractor, even before awarding of repair work, in 
disregard to the contractua l provision of settlement of dispute by way of arbitration 
and release of performance security without attending construction defects, needs to 
be investigated and the responsibility fixed on erring officials.  
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter VIII 
Ministry of Road Transport  
and Highways 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Report No.12 of 2024 
75 
CHAPTER VIII: MINISTRY OF ROAD TRANSPORT  
AND HIGHWAYS 
 
 
National Highways Authority of India 
8.1 Blocking of funds on land compensation  
Failure of NHAI to pursue the refund/adjustment of the land compensation  with 
landowners and establishment and contingency charges paid to the State 
Government of Bihar, led to blocking of funds amounting to ₹533.96 crore since last 
six years. 
National Highways Authority of India Limited (NHAI or Authority) entered into a 
Concession Agreement on 2 February 2012 for four laning  of Patna-Buxar stretch of NH-
30 from Km 0.00 to Km 124.850 in Bihar under National Highways Development  Project 
Phase-III on Build Operate and Transfer  basis. Total project cost was ₹1,129.11 crore. 
Acquisition of land was started in June 2012. However, in the stretch between  Shivala to 
Bihta section, landowners opposed the land acquisition  and demanded change in the 
alignment. Consequently, land could not be acquired and the Concessionaire proposed 
mutual closure of the project  and the project was finally foreclosed on 29 August 2014.  
Subsequently, the project was divided (June 2015) into three packages 1 in view of the 
complexities of the project corridor. All  the three packages were awarded on Engineering 
Procurement and Construction mode in 2015 with total cost of ₹2,104.80 crore. 
The contract for construction of Package-I was awarded to Contractor on 17 August 2015 
for ₹597.96 crore. As per the agreement, 90 per cent of the Right of Way was to be provided 
by NHAI to the Contractor. NHAI, however, could not provide the required Right of Way 
to the Contractor in view of persistent demand of the landowners for change in alignment 
and therefore the w ork could not be started. Out of 196.145 hectares of land required for 
Package-I, ₹494.61 crore was paid  to the landowners as land compensation through 
Competent Authority for Land Acquisition for 62.376 hectares  up to December 2017 . In 
addition, establishment and contingency charges of ₹202.01 crore were also paid to the 
State Government of Bihar for land acquisition.  Meanwhile, the Right to Fair 
Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act 
2013 came into existence on 26 September 2013 and the compensation amount for 196.145 
hectares of land  increased from ₹1,213.18 crore to ₹3,294 crore. The contract was also  
ultimately terminated on 26 December 2018 on recommendation of the Project 
Director/Regional Offic er, NHAI Patna considering high cost and uncertainty of 
availability of land.  
                                                           
1  Package-I (Patna-Koilwar section, which also included Shivala to Bihta section, with design chainage 
of 0.00 to 33.250 Km), Package -II (Koilwar-Bhojpur with design chainage 33.250 to 77.100 km) and 
Package-III (Bhojpur-Buxar with design chainage from Km 77.100 to 125.00 Km). 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
 
76 
In this regard, Audit noted the following: 
• State Government of Bihar conveyed (5 October 2017) to NHAI about the construction 
of 4-lane elevated road on the existing road section from Shivala to Bihta for a stretch 
of 14 km. Cost of land acquisition for the elevated corridor was to be borne by the State 
Government. With the project for Package -I having been terminated, and the new 
elevated road being built over the existing road, the amount of land compensation and 
establishment and contingency charges paid  by NHAI remained  blocked. 
Subsequently, out of 62.376 hectares of land for which ₹494.61 crore was paid as land 
compensation, only 27.597 hectares of land for which compensation of ₹162.66 crore 
was paid was being utilised 2 by NHAI. Thus, an amount of ₹533.96 crore consisting 
of ₹331.95 crore on account of land compensation for 34.779 hectares and  
₹202.01 crore on account of establishment and contingency charges, remained blocked 
with the land owners and the State Government of Bihar (since December 2017) 
respectively as shown in table below:  
Table 8.1: Details of the land compensation 
Total amount paid as land compensation for 62.376 hectares ₹494.61 crore 
Establishment and Contingency charges paid to State Government of Bihar ₹202.01 crore 
Less: Cost of 11.407 hectares out of the 62.376 hectares being utilised for 
Saristabad-Nathupur section 
₹132.84 crore 
Less: Cost of 16.19 hectares being utilised in the realignment of the elevated 
road 
₹29.82 crore 
Amount remaining blocked ₹533.96 crore 
• NHAI took up (May 2019) the refund/adjustment of the amount disbursed for land 
compensation and establishment and contingency charges paid with the State 
Government of Bihar. The matter, however, was not vigorously pursued with the State 
Government of Bihar. Even after a lapse of  10 years since the disbursement of land 
compensation, the amount was neither refunded by the State Government, nor was 
there any assurance regarding the refund of the amount of land compensation or the 
establishment and contingency charges paid.  
Thus, fa ilure of NHAI to pursue with the State Government of Bihar for  the 
refund/adjustment of the amount of land compensation and establishment and contingency 
charges, led to blocking of funds amounting to ₹533.96 crore since last six years. 
Ministry/Management replied (June 2023/April 2023) that some portion of the land falling 
in Shivala-Bihta-Parev Section was also getting utilised in Danapur Bihta Project, however, 
the estimation of its exact extent was time -taking exercise. The disbursed amount of  land 
compensation and the establishment and contingency charges for the unutilised land may 
                                                           
2  16.19 hectares for 13.45 km of elevated road and 11.407 hectares for Saristabad -Nathupur section of 
Patna-Koilwar stretch 

Report No.12 of 2024 
77 
be reimbursed or adjusted in future payable establishment charges for land acquisition in 
other projects of NHAI.  
Ministry/Management reply may be seen in view of the fact that Management is unable to 
estimate the utilisation of some portion of the acquired land as mentioned in the reply. The 
fact remains that l and compensation was disbursed six years back. Though the matter for 
refund of disbursed amount for land compensation and adjustment of ₹202.01 crore towards 
establishment charges was taken up with the State Government of Bihar in May 2019, 
neither the above amount was refunded by the Stat e Government, nor there was any 
assurance or confirmation about  their refund or adjustment in future projects even after 
lapse of four years of taking up the matter with the State Government. Further, there was 
no active pursuance from NHAI for getting ref und/adjustment of above amount with 
Government of Bihar. 
Thus, though 62.376 hectares of land out of 196.145 hectares was acquired by NHAI and 
establishment and contingency charges paid to the State Government of Bihar for providing 
connectivity in the reg ion, the project ultimately did not take off due to problems in 
acquiring the remaining land required for the project and almost threefold increase in land 
compensation. Further, State Government did not respond about the refund or adjustment 
of the amount already paid by NHAI. NHAI also failed to protect its financial interest by 
not closely pursuing the refund/adjustment of the amount of ₹533.96 crore resulting in the 
amount remaining blocked since last six years.  
8.2 Extension of undue benefit to Concessionaires 
National Highways Authority of India extended undue benefit of ₹203.07 crore to 
the Concessionaires awarded with construction of roads under Project 
Implementation Units Nanded and Thane by imposing lesser damages than 
recoverable as per the Concession Agreements. 
NHAI issued Letter of Award to the Consortium of selected bidders in March 2018 for four 
different National Highways widening projects in Maharashtra on Hybrid Annuity Mode3. 
Of these, three projects are monito red by NHAI’s Project Implementation Unit (PIU) 
Nanded and the other by Project Implementation Unit, Thane. The selected bidders 
incorporated four different companies (hereinafter called Concessionaires) for executing 
these projects at a total project cost of ₹4,104.70 crore (Annexure-VIII) and they entered 
into (4 July 2018) four separate Concession Agreements with NHAI.   
The Concessionaires, however, did not make any material progress and as reported by the 
Independent Engineers appointed by NHAI, the physical progress was zero per cent up to 
                                                           
3  Ministry of Road Transport and Highways introduced Hybrid Annuity Mode in February 2016. In 
Hybrid Annuity Mode, cost of project is funded in the ratio 40:60 through public money and private 
money and user fee is collected by Central Government. The concessionaire receives, after Commercial 
Operation Date, pre-determined semi-annuities over the concession period.  

Report No. 12 of 2024 
 
78 
the first project milestone 4 date, when at least 20 per cent progress should have been 
achieved. As the Concessionaires did not commence construction, the Project Directors of 
respective Project Implementation Unit submitted (July 2020) proposals to their Regional 
Offices to terminate the Concession Agreement for Concessionaires’ default under clause5 
31.1.2.  
The Lead Member of the Consortium which incorporated these Concessionaires, had 
requested (June 2020) NHAI for change in ownership as per clause6 5.3.1 of the Concession 
Agreements which was agreed by the lenders representative in August 2020.  
NHAI accorded ‘in-principle’ approval (September 2020/January 2021) 7 for the 
substitution of Conces sionaires. While according the ‘in-principle’ approvals, NHAI 
directed that the Old Concessionaires should deposit penalty, calculated at the rate of one 
per cent of bid project cost, before final approval for the substitution. NHAI, however, 
changed this later on at the final approval stage in December 2020 and January/June 20218 
and signed Endorsement Agreements (March/June 2021) with the new Concessionaires 
which included the clause (clause 13 of Endorsement Agreement) that the damages were 
to be recovered from future milestone payments to be made to the new Concessionaire in 
the form of recoveries from the construction bill payments. The new Concessionaires 
agreed to construct the projects thereafter.  
In this regard, Audit observed that the damages actually imposed (₹49.24 crore)9 by NHAI 
were significantly lesser than the damages recoverable as per the contractual provisions of 
the Concession Agreements. Damages according to the Concession Agreements were 
₹252.31 crore till NHAI’s ‘ in-principle’ approval for the substitution  in September 
2020/January 2021. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
4  1st project milestone date for the three projects in Project Implementation Unit Nanded was 180 th day 
from the appointed date and for the project in Project Implementation Unit Thane, it was the 290th day 
(Schedule G & clause 12.1 of CA).  
5  Clause 31.1.2 provides that upon occurrence of a Concessionaire default, the Authority shall be entitled 
to terminate the agreement. 
6  Clause 5.3.1 provides that  changes in ownership of the Concessionaire required NHAI’s prior 
approval. 
7  NHAI gave in-principle approval for substitution with respect to three projects in Project 
Implementation Unit Nanded on 24 September 2020 and for the Project in Project Implementation 
Unit Thane, on 15 January 2021. 
8  NHAI gave final approval for the three project s in PIU Nanded in December 2020/January 2021 and 
for project in Project Implementation Unit, Thane in June 2021. 
9     Damages were approved by NHAI during December 2020 (₹25.91 crore), January 2021 (₹10.61 crore) 
and June 2021 (₹12.72 crore) 

Report No.12 of 2024 
79 
Table: 8.2: Damages imposable as per Concession Agreements 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Damages imposable by 
NHAI as per provisions 
of Concession 
Agreements 
PIU- 
Nanded 
PIU- Thane Remarks 
1.  Delay in achieving 
Conditions Precedent10 
(clause11 4.3) 
-- 5.32 Applicable only in the Vadape -
Thane project. Delay was of  
30 days. 
2.  Delay in achieving 
milestone (clause 12 
12.3.2) 
53.87 25.73 Applicable to all the four projects. 
Delay ranged between 369 and 
435 days. 
3.  Failure to maintain 
existing roads (clause 13 
12.4.2) 
107.74 51.46 Applicable to all the four projects. 
4.  Delay in financial close 
(clause14 22.1.1) 
7.30 0.89 Delay in financial close was for  
30 days in Vadape -Thane project 
and 100 days for the remaining 
three projects (relating to clause 
22.1.1). 
Total  168.91 83.40  
As against the above, total damages of only ₹49.24 crore were imposed by NHAI which  
included ₹8.19 crore for delay in financial close as per clause 22.1.1 and ₹41.05 crore which 
was worked out at the rate of one per cent of bid project cost in accordance with NHAI’s 
circular dated 29 January 2014 vide which Government had decided to permit the 
substitution of existing Concessionaire in a harmonious manner. As per the circular , 
Authority’s Board may levy an appropriate pen alty keeping in view the extent of default 
subject to cap of one per cent of project cost. The said circular w as not applicable in this 
case as NHAI did not include the clause related to limiting penalty as per NHAI’s circular 
of 29 January 2014, though the Concession Agreements for these projects were entered into 
subsequently in July 2018, affording NHAI with ample opportunity to do so.  
Thus, NHAI should have imposed the damages according to the provisions of the 
Concession Agreements.  
                                                           
10  Delay in achieving Conditions Precedent inter alia included execution of escrow agreement and 
financial agreements. 
11  Clause 4.3 provided that Concessionaire shall pay the Authority damages in an amount calculated at 
the rate of  0.3 per cent of the performance security for each day’s delay until the fulfilment of the 
Condition Precedent. Damages paid shall be limited to bid security amount. 
12  Clause 12.3.2 provided that Concessionaire shall pay the Authority damages in an amount calculated 
at the rate of  0.1 per cent of the performance security for delay of each day until project milestone is 
achieved. 
13  Clause 12.4.2 provided that Concessionaire shall pay the Authority damages in an amount calculated 
at the rate of 0.2 per cent of the performance security for each day of default in maintenance of road.  
14  Clause 22.1.1 provided that Concessionaire shall pay the Authority  damages in an amount calculated 
at the rate of  0.05 per cent of the performance security for each day of default in achieving financial 
close 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
 
80 
When there was delay on the part of the Concessionaires in achieving the Conditions 
Precedent in Vadape -Thane project, NHAI shoul d have imposed damages as given in 
clause 4.3 of the Concession Agreement. The Concessionaires did not commence 
construction of the projects and thereby failed to achieve any of the project milestones, for 
which NHAI should have imposed damages for delay in achieving milestone according to 
clause 12.3.2 of the Concession Agreements. Also, the Concessionaires were bound to 
maintain the existing roads in a traffic -worthy condition till completion of the road -
widening projects. Though the Concessionaires failed to maintain the existing roads, NHAI 
did not impose damages according to clause 12.4.2 of the Concession Agreements.  
Failure of NHAI to impose these damages given in the Concession Agreements resulted in 
undue benefit of ₹203.07 crore (₹252.31 crore less ₹49.24 crore) to the Concessionaires 
and equivalent loss to NHAI. 
Ministry, in its response (December 2021/February 2022) , stated that NHAI imposed 
damages based on its circular dated 29 January 2014, which limited damages to one per 
cent of project cost. NHAI gave its approval (September 2020) for harmonious substitution 
in three projects in Project Implementation Unit Nande d and also delegated Member 
(Finance) with the power for applying NHAI’s Circular dated 29 January 2014 to specific 
Hybrid Annuity Mode projects in future. Accordingly, Member (Finance) approved 
harmonious substitution with damages limited to one per cent of bid project cost in the 
project in Project Implementation Unit Thane. NHAI would recover the damages it 
imposed and interest thereon, from the milestone payments to be paid to the New 
Concessionaires in future.  
The response of MoRTH may be viewed in light of the following facts: 
(i) NHAI did not include the clause related to limiting the penalty as per NHAI’s circular 
of 29 January 2014, though the Concession Agreements for these projects were entered 
into subsequently in July 2018, affording NHAI with ampl e opportunity 15 to do so. 
Further, internal circulars cannot be a basis for deviating from contractual terms 
mutually agreed.  
In fact, deviation from contractual terms was irregular and also violated CVC 
Guidelines (2002) concerning award of contracts and guidelines for improvement 
thereof, which discouraged (clause 22.1) post -contract amendments/modifications 
having financial implications. To maintain transparency and fairness, the contractual 
terms agreed at the time of signing the contract should not be subsequently diluted to 
benefit the Concessionaire if financial implication is involved. The action of NHAI 
was also violative of these guidelines. 
                                                           
15  If NHAI had the intention to limit the damages to one per cent as given in the Circular of  
January 2014,  NHAI could have made changes in the Concession Agreements entered into 
subsequently. NHAI, however, did not include any clause to limit the damages to  one per cent in the 
Concession Agreements entered into after January 2014. 

Report No.12 of 2024 
81 
(ii) According to NHAI’s ‘ in-principle’ approvals, the old Concessionaires were to 
deposit the dama ges before final approval of the substitution, which was 
subsequently relaxed by NHAI, thereby, extending yet another undue favour to the 
Concessionaires. NHAI signed an agreement ( clause 13 of Endorsement 
Agreements) that it would recover the damages imposed on the existing 
Concessionaires from future milestone payments to be made to the new 
Concessionaires. This was wholly unnecessary as NHAI was holding Performance 
Bank Guarantees of ₹205.25 crore (valid till May/Aug ust 2022) 16 from the old 
Concessionaires, which could have been encashed. 
Thus, as against ₹252.31 crore to be imposed as damages as per the provisions of the 
Concession Agreements, NHAI imposed damages of only ₹49.24 crore, resulting in undue 
favour to the Concessionaires and equivalent loss to NHAI of ₹203.07 crore. 
8.3 Shortfall in execution and monitoring of project  
There was d elay in construction of two bypasses including two Railway Over 
Bridges (ROBs). The timely completion of the construction by NHAI could have 
ensured revenue amounting to ₹43.64 crore. Further, the ROBs got prematurely 
distressed, leading to stoppage of traffic and delinking of bypasses from the tollable 
length. This resulted in lower user fee collection of ₹179.26 crore and payment of 
force majeure claim to the toll collecting agency of ₹11.01 crore as well as 
inconvenience to users. 
National Highways Authority of India (NHAI) entered (26 February 2014) into a Contract 
Agreement for the work of upgradation of Raebareli -Banda section (from Km 152.533 to 
Km 285.818), including construction of two bypasses having one Railway Over Bridge 
(ROB) each, of NH -232 in Uttar Pradesh on Engineering, Procurement and Construction 
(EPC) mode with the Contractor at a contract price of ₹424.29 crore. NHAI also appointed 
(30 May 2014) an Authority Engineer17 (AE) for supervision of work. The date of start of 
work was 21 April 2014 and the scheduled date of completion of the project was 16 October 
2016. The work was completed (January 2019) at the cost of ₹554.11 crore. 
However, the work was delayed due to non-completion of two bypasses, having one ROB 
each at Lalganj and Fatehpur. The Provisional Completion Certificate (PCC) was issued 
(11 January 2019) af ter delay of 15 months from the expected date (September 2017) of 
PCC as envisaged by NHAI. NHAI commenced toll operations w.e.f. 22 December 2018, 
but the ROBs underwent premature distress 18 in May 2019 i.e., within five months of 
                                                           
16  ₹205.25 crore = Guarantee for ₹59.15 crore valid till May 2022 relating to the project in Project 
Implementation Unit Thane and ₹146.10 crore valid till August 2022 relating to the three projects in 
Project Implementation Unit Nanded. 
17  In NHAI, the Authority Engineers (comprising a team of experts) are engaged for quality assurance 
and corresponding monitoring of progress during both construction and operation period. They also 
review and approve the drawings, Quality Assurance Plan and monthly progress report furnished by 
the Contractor. 
18  ROB has an average life of 60 years as per Ministry of Railways Codal Life of Assets. In this case, the 
ROB was distressed within five months of commencement of traffic. 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
 
82 
commercial operation. NHA I instructed (July 2019) the contractor to dismantle and 
reconstruct the ROBs at its own risk and cost. However, the construction of ROBs has still 
not been completed, even after a lapse of more than 63 months from distress of ROBs 
leading to de-linking of bypasses and reduction in toll collection till August 2024. As per 
the latest reply of NHAI  (August 2024), ROBs are expected to be completed and opened 
for highway users by October 2024. 
In this regard, Audit observed that: 
(i) There was delay of 15 months (September 2017 to December 2018) in construction 
of ROBs as well as delay in commencement of toll collection from the expected 
date of Provisional Completion Certificate. Had the project being completed in time 
and toll collec tion commenced timely, NHAI could have earned a revenue of  
₹43.64 crore 19. NHAI stated (December 2017) that the designs and drawings 
submitted by the contractor were not prepared by duly qualified personnel with 
knowledge of working of Railways which resul ted in wastage of a lot of time in 
correspondence and ultimately resulted in delay in construction of ROBs within 
scheduled/expected date of completion. 
(ii) Due to distress in the ROBs (May 2019), traffic movement was stopped on the 
bypasses. As the by-passes were de-linked, the lower toll collection on account of 
reduced weekly remittance from toll collecting agency was ₹ 179.26 crore  
(from 22 October 2019 to 31 March 2024) and the same continued till date (August 
2024), as the work of re-construction of ROBs was going on. 
(iii) Due to distress in ROBs, NHAI also paid/adjusted (December 2019) ₹11.01 crore 
as Force Majeure payment 20 on account of closure of Lalganj and Fatehpur ROBs 
to the toll collecting agency. 
(iv) A Technical Committee was constituted (30 July 2019) by NHAI to investigate the 
cause/reason of the damages in the two ROBs (Fatehpur and Lalganj) and suggest 
remedial measures. As per the report (20 September 2019) of the Technical 
Committee, the reasons for distress were apparent design deficiencies and 
limitations in welding at site. The Committee recommended a thorough check by a 
third party conversant with codal provisions of Indian Road Congress (IRC) to find 
out other deficiencies. As per the contractual provisions, the primary responsibility 
of design and construction/workmanship lies on the contractor. Similarly, as per the 
Term of Reference of Authority Engineer (AE) mentioned in the consultancy 
agreement, AE was responsible for supervising the designs, construction and 
maintenance of the facility as per the contract agreement. However, after 56 month 
                                                           
19  The amount is calculated on the basis of daily toll remittance (i.e., ₹ 9,15,000) quoted by the toll 
collecting agency in May 2017 multiplied by the number of days (i.e., 477 days) from September 2017 
to 21 December 2018. 
20  As per Clause 25 {b (vii) & (viii)} of user fee collection contract agreement. 

Report No.12 of 2024 
83 
from the incident of premature distress of ROBs, NHAI appointed (January 2024) 
M/s Central Road Research Institute (CRRI) for third -party check to ascertain the 
causes of the distress and deficiencies. The findings of the CRRI are awaited. 
MoRTH, in its reply (February 2024), stated that: 
a. There was delay in completion of entire stretch mainly due to delay in ROB 
construction. Provisional Completion Certificate (PCC) was issued only upon 
completion of all the works forming part of the project highway. There was no loss 
of toll revenue as toll revenue was to be levied only after issuance of PCC. 
b. The contractor has dismantled both the ROBs and has taken up the work of 
reconstruction. The same is under progress. 
c. Due to distress in ROBs, length of bypasses was excluded from the tolling length, 
which has resulted in lesser toll collection. The loss of toll revenue due to distress 
in ROBs is a matter of fact. 
d.  Further follow-up action will be taken on receipt of R eport/Recommendations of 
the CRRI. 
e.  The Process of Disciplinary Action has been initiated and Show Cause notices have 
been issued to the concerned officials for delay in issuance of PCC and failure in 
monitoring the project execution. 
f. NHAI has withheld, final bill payment, retention money and performance security; 
the liquidated damages of ₹43.64 crore will be recovered, if the Contractor’s default 
is established in CRRI Report.  
      Reply of Ministry may be viewed in the light of the following facts:  
(i) Audit has nowhere stated that PCC should have been issued without completing the 
work related to ROBs. Instead, Audit has pointed out the delay of 15 months from 
the expected date of PCC in completion of work related to ROBs . Further, at the 
time of sanction ing (27 April 2020) interim Extension of Time upto 11 January 
2019, NHAI had intimated the contractor that the work was delayed due to the fault 
of the contractor also and damages shall be imposed accordingly. However, no 
liquidated damages have been impos ed against the contractor so far and only an 
assurance has been given that liquidated damages will be recovered, if the 
contractor’s default is established in CRRI report, which contradicts its earlier 
stand.   
(ii) Though Ministry has accepted the loss of toll  revenue due to distress in ROB, 
however  Ministry has not specified the measures that it would take to recoup the 
loss of toll revenue of ₹179.26 crore. 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
 
84 
(iii) NHAI has appointed (January 2024) M/s CRRI for third -party check after 
inordinate delay of 56 months from observing the incident of premature distress . 
Since the ROBs have already been dismantled, it raises apprehensions over the 
accuracy of findings of third party check at this stage. 
Despite NHAI being a specialised organisation for construction of National Highways, the 
work related to reconstruction of ROBs could not be completed even after lapse of more 
than 63 months from date of distress of ROBs , indicating poor execution and monitoring 
of the project. Further, despite incurring an expenditure of ₹554.11 crore as against the 
awarded cost of ₹424.29 crore, NHAI could not reap the benefit of tolling and could not 
provide the road users with the intended benefits of National Highway. Though as per the 
latest reply of NHAI (August 2024), ROBs are expected to be completed and opened for 
highway users by October 2024. 
8.4 Non recovery of Double Toll collections from Concessionaires 
There was loss of ₹21.12 crore to the Consolidated Fund of India due to failure to 
recover Double Toll from Concessionaires before expiry of concession periods . 
Further, ₹63.03 crore of Double Toll was pending for recovery from other 
Concessionaires/Toll Collection Contractors. 
In the roads entrusted to NHAI, tolls are collected (i) by NHAI, through Toll Collection 
Contractors engaged for it; or (ii) by Built Operate Transfer (BOT) (Toll) Concessionaire, 
who has the contractual right to collect tolls during the concession period. Ministry of Road 
Transport and Highways (MoRTH) made it compulsory for all National Highway users to 
pay toll through digital mode called FASTAG, with effect from 16 February 2021. MoRTH 
also required that National Highway users not having valid/func tional FASTAG system, 
would have to pay toll at double the normal rate21 in cash. MoRTH directed NHAI to remit 
50 per cent of the toll collected in the form of cash to the Central Government (Consolidated 
Fund of India). Thus, NHAI or the BOT (Toll) Concessionaire could retain only their share 
of the normal toll rate and the penal charge (double toll) collected was to be deposited into 
the Consolidated Fund of India.  
With a view to implement the MoRTH directions, NHAI HQ issued (2021) various  
directions22 to its Project Implementation Units (PIUs)/Regional Offices (ROs) to ensure 
that the double toll was remitted immediately to the Consolidated Fund of India. The double 
tolls collected were to be remitted to NHAI HQ on weekly basis for onward remittance to 
the Consolidated Fund of India; in case of short -term toll collection contracts (up to three 
months), the double toll was t o be remitted to NHAI HQ on daily basis.  Non-compliance 
of these directions was to be treated as financial irregularity. 
                                                           
21   Collection of Double Toll introduced through the amended NH Fee (Determination of Rates and 
Collection) Rules, 2008. 
22   NHAI HQ issued directions to all PDs /ROs on 20 February, 3 March, 8 March, 31 March, 30 April,  
4 May (on VC with ROs), 24 May and 29 July, 2021. 

Report No.12 of 2024 
85 
 NHAI HQ observed (29 July 2021), that despite NHAI having given clear directions to all 
Project Directors (PDs)/Regional Offices for c ollecting and remitting double tolls, these 
were not seen to be complied with. Further, Project Directors/Regional Offices were 
directed to share the details of BOT (Toll) Concessionaires who were not depositing double 
toll for enabling NHAI HQ’s timely intervention.  
Based on the data of collection and remittance of double tolls from NHAI’s Regional 
Offices of Gandhinagar, Mumbai and Nagpur made available (as of October /November 
2022), Audit observed that the total amount of double toll dues to be collecte d by NHAI 
from BOT (Toll) concessionaires and Toll Collection Contractors was ₹84.15 crore. Of the 
₹84.15 crore (penal charges due to not having FASTAG), ₹21.12 crore was due from BOT 
(Toll) concessionaires whose concession periods had already expired and ₹63.03 crore of 
Double Toll was remaining to be collected (October/November 2022) from Toll Collection 
Contractors/other Concessionaires (with active concessions period). 
The RO -wise position of dues from BOT (Toll) concessionaires/Toll Collection 
Contractors including those where concession period had expired is given below: 
Table 8.3: Details of RO wise dues as of October/November 2022 
(₹ in crore) 
Regional Office Total dues  
(76 projects) 
Due from BOT (Toll) Concessionaires whose 
concession period expired (four projects) 
Gandhinagar 30.91 16.18 
Mumbai 36.85 4.94 
Nagpur 16.39 0.00 
Total 84.15 21.12 
In the four expired contracts, the Project Implementing Units were left with no option but 
to demand the dues (₹21.12 crore) through written communication to the concessionaires 
as the concession period had already expired resulting in un due benefit to the 
concessionaires23 as the concessionaires were allowed to retain the double toll which in fact 
should have gone to the Consolidated Fund of India. 
NHAI, in its reply (April 2023), stated the following:  
i. With respect to the dues under RO Mumbai, the updated position (January 2023) 
for three projects 24 was given. NHAI further replied that recoveries were being 
pursued and updated position would be intimated to Audit in due course of time. 
                                                           
23   ₹21.12 crore due from expired BOT Projects were- (i) ₹4.94 crore in Kagal–Satara project, concession 
period expired in June 2022 (ii) ₹0.62 crore in Vadodara - Bharuch project, concession period expired 
in March 2022 (iii) ₹2.19 crore in Bharuch -Surat project, concession period expired in March 2022, 
(iv) ₹13.37 crore in Surat-Dahisar project, concession period expired in May 2022. 
24   The position on 31 January 2023 in the Pune -Solapur Section of NH -65 project was, of total double 
toll collection of ₹5.82 crore, ₹5.31 crore was remitted and ₹50.66 lakh was pending as on 31 January 
2023. In the Solapur-Yedeshi Section of NH -211 the concessionaire remitted the whole of the double 
toll collection of ₹2.05 crore and collection/dues thereafter were not mentioned as on 31 December 
2022. In the Maharashtra-Karnataka border Section of NH-65 project, of total double toll collection of 
₹1.89 crore, ₹1.65 crore was remitted and ₹24.10 lakh was dues as on 31 January 2023.  

Report No. 12 of 2024 
 
86 
ii. With respect to the dues under RO Nagpur, Project Directors concerned had taken 
up the matter with the concessionaires concerned and final recovery position would 
be intimated to Audit in due course of time. 
iii. With respect to the dues under RO Gandhinagar , NHAI replied: 
• In six laning of Ahmedabad -Vadodara Section of NH -8 and Improvement  
of Ahmedabad Vadodara Expressway, PIU Ahmedabad requested  
(14 November 2022) the concessionaire to deposit dues of ₹10.72 crore, which the 
concessionaire refuted. The concessionaire was still remitting 25 per cent (instead 
of 50 per cent) of the double toll rates collected. NHAI would recover the pending 
amount from Escrow Account and recov ery position be intimated to Audit in due 
course of time. 
• In four/six laning of Gujarat /Maharashtra Border–Surat– Hazira Port Section of 
NH-6, PIU sent a letter (8 February 2023) to Escrow Banker to recover ₹3.81 crore. 
The concessionaire stated (20 March 2023) that it would remit under protest  
₹3.52 crore in April/May 2023. Final recovery p osition would be intimated to 
Audit in due course of time. 
• NHAI was pursuing with the concessionaires for recovery of dues in the Vadodara-
Bharuch project, Bharuch -Surat project and Surat Dahisar projects (the expired 
BOT projects), the recovery position would be intimated to Audit in due course of 
time. 
MoRTH, in its reply (July 2023), stated the following:  
i. With respect to the pending recovery of ₹21.12 crore from the Concessionaires whose 
concession periods expired, the project-wise positions were- 
• In the Kagal-Satara four-lane project, the Concessionaire did not deposit double toll 
dues of ₹4.94 crore despite rigorous follow up by the Project Implementation 
Unit/Regional Office. NHAI would be raising the claim of double toll dues while 
settling the other  claims and counter claims between the parties through 
reconciliation or Arbitration.  
• In the Surat -Dahisar six -laning project on NH -8, the Concessionaire disputed  
(31 March 2022) its liability for payment of double toll of ₹13.37 crore by stating 
that the amount already remitted to NHAI included double penalty. The matter was 
under consideration of NHAI HQ for taking remedial action for recovery. Further 
action taken would be intimated to Audit. 
• In the Vadodara -Bharuch (Package -l) six -laning project in NH -48, the dues of  
₹0.62 crore would not be recoverable as NHAI and the Concessionaire signed  

Report No.12 of 2024 
87 
(March 2022) a Settlement Agreement and agreed that that there was no residual, 
pending or any other claim, dispute or differences against each other.  
• In the Bhar uch-Surat four/six -laning project on NH -48, the dues of ₹2.19 crore 
would not be recoverable as NHAI and the Concessionaire signed (March 2022) a 
Settlement Agreement and agreed that that there was no residual, pending or any 
other claims, disputes or differences against each other.  
ii. For recovering ₹63.03 crore from Toll Collection Contractors/other Concessionaires 
(with active concessions period), the Project Directors/Regional Officers concerned 
were already recovering the dues as a continuous process. Of  these, ₹44.11 crore was 
pending for long period in respect of five projects, as the Concessionaires did not remit 
the dues in-spite of NHAI's continuous demand letters. 
iii. NHAI was continuously pursuing and would continue to pursue till full recovery of 
dues with interest were made. 
The reply of MoRTH may be viewed in light of the following facts:  
a. MoRTH’s reply confirmed the fact that NHAI failed to recover the dues of  
₹21.12 crore plus interest before expiry of the concession periods in respect of the 
four BOT projects. This occurred due to the failure of the Officials concerned of 
NHAI despite clear directions from MoRTH /NHAI for taking action in time for 
recovering the dues from BOT Concessionaire for ensuring that the same would be 
remitted to the Consolidated Fund of India.  
b. Moreover, the statement that recovery of ₹2.81 crore (₹0.62 crore and ₹2.19 crore) 
would not be possible from two Concessionaires as Settlement Agreements were 
entered into, is not an acceptable reply as the double toll dues was never a part of 
issues considered in the Settlement Agreement, nor NHAI had any authority for 
settling the dues to be deposited to the Consolidated Fund of India.  
c. Though it was replied that Officers concerned were recovering the dues as a 
continuous process, the updated position of the double toll dues was not provided. 
Also, the fact that of the dues of ₹63.03 crore (as in October/November 2022), 
₹44.11 crore were the due s from only five BOT Concessionaires, indicate that 
NHAI was ineffective in enforcing MoRTH’s directions on the matter of recovery 
of Government dues. MoRTH has not submitted any supporting documents for the 
recovery of ₹19.92 crore, as highlighted in its reply.  
Thus, NHAI’s failure to recover double toll collections from concessionaires before expiry 
of concession periods resulted in loss of ₹21.12 crore to the Consolidated Fund of India. 
Further, ₹6 3.03 crore of Double Toll was remaining to be collected from other 
Concessionaires/Toll Collection Contractors. 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
 
88 
8.5 Collection of 50 per cent of toll fee due to improper maintenance of road 
Proper maintenance of the Poonamalle-Walajahpet section of NH-4 in Tamil Nadu 
by National Highways Authority of India could have ensured revenue of  
₹57.61 crore to NHAI and also saved the road users from undue hardships. 
Section 16(1) of National Highways Authority of India (NHAI) Act, 1988 provided that it 
shall be function of the NHAI to develop, maintain and manage the national highways  
entrusted to it by the Government. The Ministry of Road Transport and Highways issued 
(September 2002) guidelines for identifying National Highways stretches for improvement 
of riding quality and periodical renewal. These guidelines , inter alia , envisage 
improvement of riding quality and periodic renewal of stretches strengthened more than 
five years ago but have not received renewal treatme nt and showing signs of distress due 
to growing traffic. 
NHAI completed (May 2007) the four laning of Poonamalle to Walajahpet section  
(Km 13.800 to 106.800) of NH4 (New NH48) and collected toll at two toll plazas namely 
Nemili-Sriperumpudur25 and Chennasamudram26 in Tamil Nadu. NHAI awarded  
(June 2012) a contract on Design, Build, Finance, Operate and Transfer mode  to a 
Concessionaire for six laning27 of the existing four lane NH stretch by 30 November 2015. 
However, due to the delay in project comp letion and non -achievement of progress 
milestones by the Concessionaire, the contract was terminated (July 2016). Subsequently, 
the six laning work was divided into three stretches (Km 13.800 to Km 37.000, Km 37.000 
to Km 71.015 and from Km 71.015 to Km 10 7.091) and awarded (November 2021,  
January 2021 and October 2018) to three contractors.  However, since completion of the 
four laning of the NH stretch,  periodic renewal of the entire stretch was never undertaken 
by NHAI resulting in a bad condition and quality of the road. 
Audit observed (December 2022) that NHAI failed to identify the stretch for improvement 
of riding quality and periodical renewal. It did not carry out any overlay/periodic renewal 
work since 2012 on the stretch except overlay of NH stretch from Km 13.800 to Km 37.000 
from Poonamalle to  Sriperumpudur during September 2020 to December 2021 for  
₹34.65 crore though the road users were being charged user fee . Thus, the road users faced 
undue hardship despite paying user fee f or the improperly maintained NH stretch. Only 
routine maintenance (repair and rectification works) was carried out between August 2016 
to March 2023 through various contractors for ₹71.42 crore. 
Considering the bad riding quality and improper maintenance of the stretch, the High Court 
of Madras (the Court) took a suo-moto Public Interest Litigation (November 2019) and 
directed NHAI (9 December 2020) to collect only 50  per cent of toll amount till the road  
                                                           
25   at Km 37.800 w.e.f. 1 July 2007 
26   at Km 104.900 w.e.f. 16 November 2005 
27  Scheduled completion date was 30 November 2015 

Report No.12 of 2024 
89 
was in a riding condition. Later, the Court permitte d charging of normal toll rates on  
5 October 2021after filing (July 2021) of status report by NHAI.  
Thus, lack of overlaying/periodic renewal of the complete stretch and improper monitoring 
of road quality led to deterioration in the road quality. The proper maintenance of road 
quality could have ensured collection of 100 per cent toll fee  instead of 50 per cent toll fee 
of ₹57.61 crore (Annexure-IX) for 297 days28 as per Court orders.  
NHAI replied (January 2023) that: 
• NHAI had maintained the stretch through O&M contracts (item rate) and repairs of 
pavement were done on need basis. The entire overlay of the stretch (which became 
due in 2013) could have been infructuous to the tune of additional amount of about 
₹50 crore (as it had to be removed /re-laid during construction). Had there been no 
six laning work, two overlays of the existing four lane road during 2013 -14 and 
2018-19 were supposed to be done which would have costed about ₹90 crore to 
NHAI which had clearly been saved.  The revenue loss  due to execution of 
infructuous overlays would have been much more than the loss pointed out by Audit 
due to reduction of toll by the High Court.  
• The basic deterioration of the road had occurred due to the failure of BOT 
Concessionaire, for which the Arb itration Award for ₹635.29 crore had been 
awarded in favour of NHAI.  
• Further, there have been delays in the completion of the ongoing projects due to 
COVID and related factors which are beyond the control of stakeholders. 
Ministry, while endorsing the view of NHAI, added (November 2023) that 
•  overlay along the entire stretch was not taken up to avoid duplication in anticipation 
of appointment of the Concessionaire for six laning of the stretch. 
• the expenditure incurred on maintenance i.e. , overlaying of 23 .2 km, renewal of  
34 km, regular/routine maintenance works, Road Property Maintenance works, 
Incident Management Services, safety items and other works cannot be treated 
as a minor maintenance. It could not be avoided as it is a toll road and mandatory 
obligation of NHAI. The roughness survey was not carried out , however, 
overlaying of 23.2 km and renewal of 34 km was carried out. 
•  There have been savings due to non -execution of two overlays. The hardship 
during construction was inevitable. The user fee wa s reduced at 50 per cent for 
the period from December 2020 to October 2021 as per orders of the High Court 
of Madras to somewhat compensate the hardship of the road users. Hence, the  
                                                           
28  From 15 December 2020 to 7 October 2021 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
 
90 
revenue reduction on account of reduction  of toll by the High Court, may not 
be construed as a loss to the Government in real terms. 
The reply of Ministry/NHAI may be viewed in the light of the following: 
• NHAI is the premier agency in -charge of laying quality and all -weather roads 
throughout the country. However, NHAI did not carry out roughness survey to 
ascertain the road quality while the six -laning work was delayed due to 
termination of the contract with the BOT Concessionaire. NHAI cannot justify its 
inaction to maintain and keep the stretch in good condition on the plea that six -
laning of the stretch was contemplated.  
• Moreover, after termination of six -laning contract in 2016, it was NHAI’s 
obligation to carry out the overlay and maintenance of the NH stretch. However, 
NHAI did not carry out overlays/renewals of the entire stretch which were due in 
2013 and 2018. This caused severe deterioration of the road quality resulting in 
hardships for the road users. The expenditure incurred by NHAI on maintenance 
could not substitute the NHAI’s obligation for overlays/renewals of the entire 
stretch.  
• Further, failure of BOT Concessionaire and subsequent Arbitration Tribunal 
Award in favour of NHAI cannot absolve NHAI from the fact that road quality was 
deteriorated due to non -overlaying/non-renewal of the entire stretch. Arbitration 
Tribunal had awarded onl y ₹10.61 crore in favour of NHAI for damages due to 
non-compliance of maintenance obligation by the Concessionaire.  
• It is irrelevant to compare the hardships faced by the toll paying road users with 
favourable Arbitration award and savings due to non -overlaying/non-renewal of 
the stretch in view of NHAI’s obligation to completely maintain the entire stretch 
of the tolled road. Reduction in toll fee was primarily a penalty on NHAI for not 
maintaining the quality of the tolled road rather a compensation for the road users.  
• NHAI cannot be absolved of its responsibility to maintain a tolled road for good 
quality road ride since development, maintenance and management of the national 
highways entrusted by the Government to NHAI are the primary functions of 
NHAI as per the NHAI Act.  
Hence, had NHAI undertaken proper maintenance and periodic renewals/overlays of the 
NH road stretch, it could have saved road users from the hardships and also earned a 
revenue of ₹57.61 crore. 
 
 

Report No.12 of 2024 
91 
8.6 Extra expenditure of ₹41.52 crore 
Use of poor quality of concrete,  overloading and faults in design  led to damage to 
Karmanasa bridge and extra expenditure of ₹41.52 crore by NHAI, Project 
Implementation Unit, Sasaram. 
A Contract Agreement was entered (March 
2002) by National Highways Authority of 
India for four laning and strengthening of the 
existing two-lane section between Kilometre 
317 and Kilometre 65 on National Highway -
2 in Uttar Pradesh and Bihar. Four-lane bridge 
over the Karmanasa river on National 
Highway-2 with divided carriageway was 
constructed in 2003 as a part of the above 
agreement. The project was completed on 20 
December 2010. The Defect Liability Period for the project was for 36 months i.e. , up to 
19 December 2013. Subsequently, the  six laning of the Varanasi -Aurangabad section of 
National Highway -2 was taken up by NHAI vide concession agreement in July 2010. 
Karmanasa bridge was part of the Varanasi-Aurangabad section.  
The bridge on river Karmanasa got damaged on 28 December 2019. The cantilever 29 
portion of Pier 3 collapsed on either side of the Pier cap. The bridge superstructure came 
down around 550 millimetres from  its original level due to high thrust 30 and rested at the 
damaged Pier cap P3, as a result of which cracks developed in Piers P1, P2 and P4. NHAI 
spent ₹41.52 crore comprising of ₹10.81 crore for rehabilitation of the main bridge,  
₹6.16 crore for construction of temporary steel bridge and ₹24.55 crore for construction of 
temporary diversions.  
An Expert Committee constituted (30 December 2019) by NHAI for 
inspection/investigation of the damages found (January 2020) that wrong design and 
inadequate reinforcement in Pier cap was the primary cause for the above incident. The 
Committee also found that plying of overloaded trucks with axle load much higher than the 
legal limits over the bridge might have resulted in higher loads on bearings than they were 
designed for. Also long period cracks were found and no corrective measures were taken 
till damage of bridge. 
Project Implementation Unit,  Sasaram e ngaged Indian Institute of Technology, BHU, 
Varanasi as Specialist Consultant to study the impact of failure of Pier cap in compliance 
of the recommendation of Expert Committee. The core extracted from all the piers during 
the time of rehabilitation was se nt to the Consultant to evaluate equivalent cube  
                                                           
29  A rigid structural element that extends horizontally and is supported at one end.  
30  This means high pressure. The word has been taken from the interim report on damage of Karmanasa 
bridge submitted by the Project Director, NHAI, Sasaram to the Regional Officer, NHAI, Patna.  
Fig. 2: Indicating the elements of the 
bridge like cantilever, pier cap etc. 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
 
92 
compressive strength 31 and to assess its conformance with the stipulated grade.  Indian 
Institute of Technology, BHU, Varanasi stated (June 2021) that the cause of damage of Pier 
caps was the failure to use requisite grade of concrete. Just 7 out of the 32 tested samples 
met the requisite grade of M35 concrete. Thus, cause of damage of Pier caps P1, P2, P3 
and P4 was usage of poor quality concrete by the contractor while executing the bridge 
work. 
In this regard, Audit observed that: 
• Project Implementation Unit/NHAI did not exercise due diligence in finalising the 
design of the bridge  which was found to be faulty by the Expert Committee 
constituted by the NHAI for inspection/investigation of the damages.  The Project 
Director stated (March 2010) that bridge experts and members representing the 
stakeholders (viz., NHAI Regional office, Project Director, the Supervision 
Consultant, construction contractor etc.) were convinced that there was a fault in the 
original design itself. Thus, Management was aware of the faults in design of the 
bridge since March 2010. Though some remedial measures were taken by NHAI in 
respect of another bridge (Durgawati  bridge), in view of si milar fault in its original 
design, no remedial measures were taken to strengthen the Karmanasa bridge. 
Finally, the bridge got damaged in 2019. 
• The construction contractor was responsible for the use of standard/good quality of 
materials for construction of the bridge. However, he did not use specified quality of 
materials. Third Schedule of Contract Agreement between NHAI and construction 
contractor states that “Implementation and control of the procedures for quality 
assurance, environmental control and safety is the duty of the Project Director”. 
NHAI failed to check and ensure quality during construction of bridge. 
• As per the National Highways Fee (Determination of Rates and Collection) 
Amendment Rules, 2013, a mechanical vehicle which is loaded in exce ss of 
permissible load specified for its category shall not be permitted to use the National 
Highway or cross the toll plaza until the excess load has been removed. NHAI 
Headquarters instructed all Project Directors to ensure that “the overloaded vehicle 
be towed away, taken into possession and parked at the designated place at the risk 
and cost of the driver/owner and excess load be removed before permitting the 
vehicle to use the National Highway. As per Article 27 of the Concession Agreement, 
toll/user fee collection right was vested in concessionaire and he was also responsible 
for prevention of overloaded vehicles from crossing the bridge.  NHAI, however, 
despite repeated requests, failed to provide the concessionaire with the additional land 
required at toll plaza to park the excess loaded vehicle s and to store excess loaded 
materials removed from such vehicles. 
                                                           
31  Compressive strength is the capacity of concrete to withstand loads before failure. Cube compressive 
strength is the compressive strength of concrete given in terms of 150 mm size cubes.  

Report No.12 of 2024 
93 
District Administration authorities of Varanasi informed  (January 2018, May 2018) 
NHAI about non-compliance to the notification issued by Ministry of Road Transport 
and Highways regarding overloaded vehicles not to be permitted to use the National 
Highway or cross the toll plaza until the excess load was removed from such vehicle. 
NHAI, however, failed to ensure compliance.  
Thus, use of poor quality of concrete, overloading and faults in design led to damage to 
bridge and avoidable expenditure of ₹41.52 crore by the NHAI. 
NHAI/Ministry replied (February 2023/September 2023) that: 
(i) Design Consultant had failed to provide effective designs w hich ultimately led to 
the failure of the Karmanasa Bridge within nine years of its construction.  The 
construction contractor also did not give prompt notice of any error, omission, fault 
or other defects in the design.  Thus, liability of the construction contractor could 
not be limited to the general Defect Liability Period. Supervision Consultant was 
required to monitor the quality of construction and other project related activities. 
As the Supervision Consultant had not delivered his duty properly, NHAI recovered 
(January 2023) ₹0.20 crore from the Supervision Consultant. 
(ii) The Concessionaire did not share the fact that huge number of overloaded vehicles 
were passing the toll plazas. Therefore, the Concessionaire was asked  
(January 2023) to deposit ₹1.11 crore as penalty. Ministry subsequently stated that 
the amount was recovered from the Concessionaire. 
(iii) NHAI has taken remedial measures for repair of the damaged bridge for which 
₹41.52 crore was incurred. Punitive action against the defaulting 
contractors/consultants has already been initiated by imposing penalties and 
debarment from NHAI work etc., as per the provisions of the Contract Agreement. 
The Ministry further replied ( December 2023 ) that notice for invoking the Arbitration 
process to recover ₹64.39 crore  has been issued (October 2023) to the Construction 
Contractor and Arbitrator on behalf of NHAI has been appointed/nominated. Similarly, 
notice for invoking the Arbitration process has been issued (October 2023) to the Design 
Consultant for recovery of ₹0.20 crore and  Arbitrator on behalf of NHAI has been 
appointed/nominated. Punitive/Disciplinary action has been taken against various 
defaulting officials based on the advice of CVC. 
Reply of the Management/Ministry may be viewed in the light of the following: 
(i) Fault in design of the bridge came to the notice of NHAI in March 2010 and the 
bridge got damaged almost nine years later in 2019. Therefore, despite the 
contractor not giving notice , Management was aware of the fault in design and 
should have taken action. Also, though NHAI tried to recover ₹0.20 crore from the 
Design Consultant (January 2023), the amount was yet to be recovered.  

Report No. 12 of 2024 
 
94 
Further, i n response to show  cause notice issued by NHAI, the construction 
contractor stated (January 2022) that the construction of the bridge was executed 
under the strict supervision of the Supervision Consultant and entire work had been 
supervised to the satisfaction of NHAI. The contractor disputed the intention of 
NHAI to impose penalties illegitimately as they did not have any liability as per the 
contract after several years of completion of the work. 
Further, the Concessionaire,  also denied (February 2022) the responsibility for 
damage of the bridge.  
(ii) The Concessionaire had repeatedly intimated NHAI about the fact that it was not 
provided with the required land and therefore could not provide the facilities 
required to accommodate the overloaded vehicles and the storage of the excess load 
removed. Thus, contention of Management that Concessionaire did not intimate 
about overloaded vehicles is incorrect. Moreover, the District Administration 
authorities of Varanasi had also informed  NHAI about passing of overloaded 
vehicle from toll plaza. Moreover, recovery of ₹1.11 crore from the Concessionaire 
was not against the expenditure incurred by NHAI on Rehabilitation of main 
Bridge, Temporary Steel Pile Bridge and Temporary diversion, rather the same was 
done as penalty for inadequate maintenance of the Project Highway. 
(iii) Overall responsibility of construction of the bridge was on NHAI  and it had failed 
to put in place proper check for quality assurance during  construction of bridge . 
Though NHAI raised claims on the Design Consultant, Construction Contractor, 
Supervision Consultant and the Concessionaire, it recovered only a meagre amount 
of ₹1.31 crore. The arbitration process as referred in the reply is yet to start. 
Adequate supervision an d prompt action by NHAI could have avoided construction of 
bridge based on faulty design and use of poor quality of concrete  during the construction 
of the bridge.  
Thus, faults in design of the bridge, use of poor quality of concrete and plying of overloaded 
vehicles over the bridge led to damage to the bridge and extra expenditure of ₹41.52 crore 
by NHAI on account of rehabilitation of the main bridge (₹10.81 crore), construction of 
temporary steel bridge (₹6.16 crore) and constructi on of temporary diversions  
(₹24.55 crore). As against the extra expenditure of ₹41.52 crore, only an amount of  
₹1.31 crore could be recovered. Despite the fact that there were various faults on the part 
of NHAI since the beginning as the design defects were known to NHAI since March 2010, 
the Project Director who was responsible for implementation and control of procedures for 
quality assurance and safety failed to ensure quality during construction. NHAI also failed 
to take action on plying of overloaded vehicles.  
 

Report No.12 of 2024 
95 
Recommendation No. 12: NHAI may put in efforts to recover the penalties/damages 
from its erring contractors and put stringent mechanism in place to prevent recurrence 
of such incidents of damage to structures due to faults in  design, poor quality of 
concrete, improper supervisio n, poor maintenance and movement of overloaded 
vehicles in future.  
8.7 Loss of interest of ₹12.78 crore to NHAI 
NHAI suffered loss of interest of ₹12.78 crore due to delay in recovery of interest 
free mobilisation  advance on account of amendment of the Model Engineering 
Procurement and Construction Contract documents by Ministry of Road 
Transport and Highways, allowing extension of interest free mobilisation advance 
to contractor without restricting the time limit of recovery by one year, in 
contravention of Manual on Policies and Procedure for Procurement of Works and 
CVC guidelines. 
Para 4.10.2 of Manual on Policies and Procedure for Procurement of Works issued (August 
2006) by Ministry of Finance, stipulates that in respect of certain specialised and capital 
intensive works, maximum of 10 per cent of estimated cost of work may be allowed to 
contractor as mobilisation advance at the specified rate of inte rest. Central Vigilance 
Commission Guidelines (April 2007) stipulate that provision of mobilisation advance 
should be need based and recovery of interest free mobilisation advance should be time 
based and not linked with the progress of work so that even if the contractor does not 
execute the work or executes the same at a slow pace, recovery of advance could commence 
and scope for misuse of such advance could be reduced. The above guidelines also provided 
that there should be clear stipulation of interest to be charged on delayed recovery of 
advances either due to the late submission of bills by the contractor or for any other reason. 
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways (MoRTH/Ministry), vide its l etter dated  
5 October 2015, issued amendments to the Model  Engineering Procurement and 
Construction Contract documents. The clause 19.2.6 which restricted the time limit for 
repayment of advance payment to no later than 365 days from the respective date o f 
advance payment was deleted. Clause 19.2.7 relating to repayment was also amended to 
delete the interest payable by contractor at the rate of 18 per cent per annum on delay in 
repayment. The amended clause 19.2.7 stated that the advance payment would be repaid 
through percentage deductions from stage payments commencing from the next stage 
payment following that in which the total of all certified stage payments exceeded  
20 per cent of the contract price. The deduction was to be made at the rate of 15 per cent 
of each stage payment provided that advance payment shall be completely repaid prior to 
the time when 80 per cent of the contract price had been certified for payment.  
However, on 4 January 2016, MoRTH again amended the Model Engineering Procurement 
and Construction Contract documents and the clause 19.2.1 relating to the advance payment 
bearing interest at the rate of 10 per cent was brought in.  

Report No. 12 of 2024 
 
96 
National Highways Authority of India (NHAI), in order to rehabilitate and augment the 
existing road from Km 206.050 to Km 266.282  (Design chainage) and existing chainage 
Km 209.945 to Km 270.00 (approximately 60.232 km) on the Simaria-Khagaria Section of 
NH-31 in Bihar by four laning on Engineering Procurement Construction basis, invited  
(30 June 2015) Request for Proposal for short listing of bidders. In line with the 
amendments made by MoRTH in October 2015, the Request for Proposal clause was 
modified by NHAI on 6 November 2015. NHAI issued Letter of Acceptance to the 
contractor on 31 December 2015 at  a contract price of ₹567 crore. Appointed date and 
Scheduled date of completion was 5 October 2016 and 3 April 2019 respectively. Interest 
free advance of ₹56.70 crore was paid to the contractor in two installments of ₹28.35 crore 
each on 27 October 2016 and 6 April 2017 respectively. 
In this regard, Audit noted the following: 
• The amendment to the Model Engineering Procurement and Construction Contract 
documents made by MoRTH in October 2015 vide which, the clause restricting the 
repayment period of advance to 365 days was deleted, was in violation of CVC 
guidelines. Also, as per the amendment, there was no provision for imposition of 
interest on advance payment outstanding after one year. This was also in violation 
of the CVC guidelines.  
• In a greement with the contractor, the recovery of mobilisation advance (at the  
rate of 15 per cent  of Interim Payment Certificate value) was done between  
27 August 2018 to 12 March 2021 without levy of any interest by NHAI. This 
resulted in loss of interest of ₹12.78 crore32 due to delay in recovery of mobilisation 
advance after lapse of one year from the date of respective advances.  
Thus, the amendment made (October 2015) by MoRTH allowed NHAI to release interest 
free mobilisation advance to the contractor without restricting the time limit for its 
repayment upto one year, which  violated the CVC guidelines  and the stipulation of the 
Manual on Policies and Procedure for Procurement of Works . Consequently, NHAI 
suffered loss of interest of ₹12.78 crore on the amount of advance that remained outstanding 
for more than one year from the date of respective advances.  
The Management replied (December 2022) that bids were invited based on provisions of 
interest free mobilisation advances without any stipulation of recovery within 365 days. 
Thus, there was no clause in the agreement for imposition of interest on advance payment 
outstanding after one year. Ministry replied (July 2023) that  the amendment was not 
specific only to the above referred project of NHAI but all projects of NHAI. As a remedial 
measure, Ministry has amended (4 January 2016) the Model Engineering Procurement and 
Construction Contract documents prescribing the advances as interest bearing at the rate of 
                                                           
32  Calculated @ 10 per cent  simple interest on the outstanding balances after lapse of one year on 
respective advance to the NHAI. 

Report No.12 of 2024 
97 
10 per cent per annum. All mobilisation/equipment advances released by NHAI since then 
were interest bearing advances and interest was being recovered with the advances in 
conformity with the CVC guidelines.  
Reply of the Management/Ministry may be seen in the light of the fact that the amendment 
in the Model Engineering Procurement and Construction Contract documents  was in 
contravention of CVC Guidelines (April 2007), which stipulated that paymen t of 
mobilisation advance should be need based and its recovery should be time based and not 
linked with the progress of work. The amendment was also in violation of the Manual on 
Policies and Procedure for Procurement of Works  issued by Ministry of Finance in 2006, 
which stipulated the charging of interest at a specified rate on the mobilisation advance. 
Further, just after three months, Ministry again amended (4 January 2016, i.e., within four 
days of issuance of Letter of Acc eptance to the Contractor ) the clause related to grant of 
interest free mobilisation advance. In its revised guidelines, mobilisation advances were 
made interest bearing and interest at the rate of 10 per cent was charged. Ministry, in its 
reply, has also accepted the fact that the subsequent amendment was a remedial measure 
which indicates that the earlier amendment (5 October 2015) was made in violation of CVC 
guidelines.This may also be seen in the light of the fact that this amendment remained valid 
for a brief period of 3 months only from 5 October 2015 to 3 January 2016. NHAI availed 
of this amendment to extend such interest free advance to the contractor, the recovery of 
which started after over one year and nine months since its release and went upto  almost 
three years and ten months as against the one year stipulation of model contract document 
before its revision in October 2015 . As stated by the Ministry, this amendment was not 
specific to the referred project and therefore could have affected other projects of NHAI as 
well.  
Thus, MoRTH amended the Model Engineering Procurement and Construction Contract 
documents allowing extension of interest free mobilisation advance without restricting the 
time limit of recovery by one year, d uring a brief period of three months between  
5 October 2015 and 3 January 2016, in contravention of CVC guidelines  and the Manual 
on Policies and Procedure for Procurement of Works  issued by Ministry of Finance . 
Consequently, NHAI suffered loss of interest of ₹12.78 crore  on account of delay in 
recovery of interest free mobilisation advance  after lapse of one year from the date of 
respective advances in one contract awarded by NHAI during December 2015. 
Recommendation No. 1 3: Ministry may review the basis of the decision to provide 
interest free mobilisation advance, linked to the progress of work, violating the Manual 
on Policies and Procedure for Procurement of Works  and CVC guidelines and take 
action against the erring officials. 
 
 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
 
98 
8.8 Delay in commencement of collection of user fee/toll  
There was delay in commencement of user fee/toll collection on account of reasons 
like delays in toll notification, its scrutiny, engagement of Toll Plaza agency, delay 
on part of Ministry of Road Transport and Highways in ensuring timely issue of 
Completion Certific ate etc.  Resultantly revenue of ₹14.65 crore ( ₹8.81 crore at 
Sonho and Pokhraira Toll Plaza and ₹5.84 crore at Gollaprolu Toll Plaza could not 
be collected by NHAI. 
8.8.1 National Highways Authority of India (NHAI) entered into (9 September 2015) an 
agreement with a contractor for two laning of Chhapra-Rewaghat-Muzaffarpur Section of 
National Highway-102 with paved shoulder33 from Km 1.300 to Km 74.349 (approximate 
design length 73.079 Km) in the state of Bihar. The work was a public funded project and 
executed in Engineering, Procurement and Construction mode34. Total cost of project was 
₹397.27 crore and Scheduled Date of completion was 5 April 2018. The project consisted 
of two fee plazas viz., Sonho fee Plaza at Km 25.900 and Pokhraira fee Plaza at Km 54.350. 
The project was completed on 31 January 2018 prior to the Scheduled Date of completion 
(5 April 2018). On the request of the contractor (February 2018), NHAI issued  
(4 January 2019) Provisional Completion Certificate (or Commercial Operation Date) with 
effect from 31 January 2018. The delay in issue of Provisional Completion Certificate was 
due to certain additional tests over and above the contract provisions conducted by NHAI 
for additional comfort. However, to avoid contractual disputes/complications, the 
Provisional Completion Certificate was issued with retrospective effect.  
The National Highways Fee (Determination of Rates and Collection) Rules, 2008, 
stipulated that collection of user fee should commence within 45 days from the date of 
completion of the section of the Highway in case of a public funded project. There fore, 
collection of user fee for the above project should have commenced by 17 March 2018 (i.e., 
31 January 2018 + 45 days). The fee notification of both the fee plazas was published on 
25 September 2018 and the user fee collection at both plazas started from 17 January 2019. 
In this regard, Audit noted the following:  
• Delay in commencement of user fee collection was on account of delay in approval 
of fee notification by Ministry of Road Transport and Highways and on account of 
delay in engagement of fee Plaza agency by NHAI. 
• Project Implementation Unit, Chhapra of NHAI submitted draft fee notification to 
the Regional Office, Patna on 21 December 2017. However, the Regional Office  
                                                           
33   Part of highway adjacent to the regularly travelled portion of the highway. It is on the same level as 
the highway. 
34  Engineering, Procurement and Construction model denotes a process of infrastructure construction in 
which the Government pays private parties to build roads. The responsibility of road developer ends 
thereafter and Government remains responsible for road maintenance, toll collection and road 
ownership.  

Report No.12 of 2024 
99 
took 33 days for forwarding the draft notification in respect of Sonho fee Plaza and 
Pokhraira fee Plaza to NHAI Headquarters. Ministry of Road Transport and 
Highways approved the notification after 218 days. 
• Even after publication of fee notification in September 2018 and entering into 
Contract Agreement for user fee collection in October 2018, it was only in January 
2019, after the issuance of Provisional Completion Certificate, that the handing over 
of toll plazas for user fee collection could take place.  
• Finally, the user fee collection at Sonho fee Plaza and Pokhraira fee Plaza was 
started from 17 January 2019 after a delay of over 306 days from the scheduled date 
of 17 March 2018. 
Table 8.4: Details of time taken at various stages of approval 
Particulars Date-Sonho fee 
Plaza/Pokhraira fee Plaza 
Time taken in 
days 
Project Implementation Unit, Chhapra,  
NHAI sent draft fee notification to 
Regional Office, NHAI 
21.12.2017 -- 
Regional Office, NHAI forwarded draft 
fee notification to NHAI Headquarters  
23.01.2018  33 days  
(from 21.12.2017) 
Approval of fee notification by Ministry 
of Road Transport and Highways 
29.08.2018 218 days 
(from 23.01.2018) 
Publication of fee notification of both 
the toll plazas  
25.09.2018 27 days 
(from 29.08.2018) 
Contract/Agreement for user fee 
collection 
12.10.2018 17 days 
(from 25.09.2018) 
Handing over fee Plazas for User Fee 
Collection  
17.01.2019 
 
97 days 
(from 12.10.2018) 
Commencement of user fee collection at 
Sonho fee Plaza and Pokhraira fee 
Plaza (From Commercial Operation 
Date 31 January 2018)  
17.01.2019 
 
306 days 
(from 17.03.2018) 
Above delays contributed to the delay in commencement of user fee collection by 306 days 
each in both the toll plazas. Resultantly, NHAI could not collect revenue of ₹8.81 crore 35 
from the beneficiaries during the period 17 March 2018 to 16 January 2019.  
Management, while furnishing the chronology of events, stated (February 2023) that t oll 
notification was delayed due to official procedure including its scrutiny at various stages 
and was finally  approved by Ministry of Road Transport and Highways.  The Contract 
Agreement for the toll plazas could be signed only on 12  October 2018, and this was 
required before the start of user fee collection. Subsequently, after issuance of Provisional 
Completion Certificate on 4 January 2019, user fee collection at both toll plazas (Sonho 
and Pokhraira) was started from 17 January 2019. 
                                                           
35  Calculated on the basis of bid amount quoted by the successful bidder for toll collection ₹1.42 lakh/day 
* 306 days (Sonho Toll Plaza) + ₹1.46 lakh/day *306 days (Pokhraira Toll Plaza) 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
 
100 
Ministry replied (July 2023) that NHAI has already completed the requisite formalities in 
advance i.e., toll notification and engagement of agencies etc. , for toll commencement at 
both the toll plazas but the delay occurred in issuance of PCC. The delay was unavoidable 
procedural delay and the remarks are noted for future compliance to avoid such delays. 
Reply of the Ministry/Management may be seen in the l ight of the fact that Provisional 
Completion Certificate was issued on 4 January 2019 effective from 31 January 2018. The 
Provisional Completion Certificate was issued with effect from back date as the contractor 
had fulfilled all the pre-conditions for the issuance of Provisional Completion Certificate. 
Delay in issuance of Provisional Completion Certificate was due to certain additional tests 
over and above the contract provisions that were conducted by NHAI for additional 
comfort. As the contractor had requested for issuance of Provisional Completion Certificate 
in February 2018, NHAI should have ensured timely completion of all tests and procedures 
to begin the collection of user fees within the stipulated period of 45 days from the issuance 
of such certificate. The procedural delays in toll notification, its scrutiny and engagement 
of toll plaza agency also were avoidable and within the control of Management. 
Thus, due to delay in commencement of collection of user fees , NHAI could not collect  
revenue of ₹8.81 crore during 17 March 2018 to 16 January 2019.  
8.8.2: Ministry of Road Transport and Highways (MoRTH/Ministry), Government of India 
and National Highways Authority of India (NHAI) entered (9 December  2015) into 
agreement with a contractor for re habilitation and upgradation of a stretch 36 under 
Gollaprolu Toll Plaza. The date of completion and details of award and collection of toll in 
respect of toll plaza on this stretch are as follows:  
Table 8.5: Details of date of completion, award and collection of toll in respect of toll plaza 
Name of Toll 
Plaza 
Date from 
which 
stretch 
was found 
fit for 
starting 
operation 
Due Date 
for start of 
Toll 
Collection# 
 
Date of 
Actual Start 
of Toll 
Collection 
 
Delay in 
Start of 
Toll 
Collection 
 
Amount of 
Daily 
Remittance 
Revenue 
not 
collected 
due to 
delay in 
toll 
collection 
  ‘A’ ‘B’ ‘B’- ‘A’   
Gollaprolu Toll 
Plaza 
10 April 
2019 
25 May 
2019 
23 November 
2019 
182 days ₹3,21,111 ₹5.84 
crore 
# - As per Rule 3 (2) of the National Highways Fee (Determination of Rates and Collection) Rules, 2008, the collection 
of fee levied under sub -rule (1) of Rule 3 shall be commenced within forty -five days from the date of completion of 
the section of the highway. 
The subject stretch was part of National Highway Development Project -IV wherein 
MoRTH was developing the stretch through its Regional Office, Vijayawada. As part of 
                                                           
36  Rehabilitation and Upgradation of Kathipudi to start of Kakinada Bypass from Km 0.000 to Km 27.500 
of NH-214 (New NH-216) to 4 Lane under National Highways Development Project – IV. 

Report No.12 of 2024 
101 
the arrangement, this stretch was to be transferred to NHAI upon issue of Completion  
Certificate for collection of toll fee by signing a tripartite agreement between MoRTH, 
NHAI and the Executing Agency. 
MoRTH directed (29 June 2016) that the concerned Regional Office of the Ministry should 
take advance action and inform the concerned Regional Office of NHAI to take necessary 
action for publication of fee notification for projects wherever physical progress of the work 
is about 60 per cent. Accordingly, the Regional Office, MoRTH, Vijayawada informed   
(14 March 2018) the Regional Office, NHAI, Vijayawada that the project stretch had 
crossed physical progress of 60 per cent  and requested to take necessary action for 
publication of fee notification and take advance action by appointing toll agency for the  
stretch. The stretch was physically verified by the Project Director, Project Implementation 
Unit, NHAI, Rajamahendravaram on 16 March 2018 and it was confirmed that the progress 
achieved was not less than 60 per cent. Audit observed following delays/deficiencies in the 
process of issuing Toll notification and issuance of Completion Certificate: 
A. Issuance of Toll Notification: 
(a) Project Implementation Unit submitted the draft fee notification to its Regional 
Office, NHAI, Vijayawada on 24 August 2018 with a delay of 161 days from  
16 March 2018. 
(b) Regional Office, NHAI, Vijayawada forwarded the proposal to NHAI Headquarters 
on 24 October 2018 after 61 days. 
(c) NHAI Headquarters examined the proposal and returned the proposal with 
observations on 14 January 2019 i.e., after 82 days. These observations were 
complied with and replied by Regional Office, NHAI, Vijayawada on  
18 February 2019. 
(d) NHAI Headquarters took another 78 days and again requested Regional Office, 
NHAI, Vijayawada on 7 May 2019 to report compliance to new set of its 
observations and simultaneously submitted (16 May 2019) the draft fee notification 
to MoRTH for issue of Gazette Notification. 
B.       Issuance of Completion Certificate: 
(a)  On completion of the stretch, Regional Office, MoRTH, Vijayawada requested  
(10 December 2018) the Ministry to approve the issue of Provisional Completion 
Certificate from 20 October 2018. Simu ltaneously, list of items where certain 
compliances were to be made was forwarded to the contractor also.  
(b) Compliances were made by the contractor by 10 April 2019 and these were 
physically checked through joint inspection by Authority Engineer and Regiona l 
Office, MoRTH, Vijayawada on 17 April 2019. 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
 
102 
(c) Ministry granted approval on 17 May 2019 for issuing Provisional Completion 
Certificate with effect from 28 March 2019. Authority Engineer issued the 
Provisional Completion Certificate on 3 June 2019 declaring the stretch 
provisionally fit for entry from 28 March 2019. Audit observed that though  the 
Authority Engineer had inspected the site on 17 April 2019 and was satisfied that 
there were no pending issues, instead of issuing Completion Certificate, Authority 
Engineer issued only Provisional Completion Certificate on 3 June 2019.  
(d) The contractor requested for issue of Completion Certificate vide letter dated  
1 July 2019 but the same was belatedly recommended by Authority Engineer on  
13 August 2019 a nd t he stretch was declared fit to commence operations 
retrospectively from 10 April 2019 by the Authority Engineer on 26 August 2019.  
(e) The Tripartite Agreement between MoRTH, NHAI and the contractor was signed 
on 30 August 2019 and the stretch was handed over to NHAI by MoRTH on  
9 September 2019. 
(f) After exchange of clarifications and correspondence on user fee notification and 
allied facilities, MoRTH issued the Gazette Notification on 15 November 2019 and 
the toll fee collection commenced from 23 November 2019.  
Thus, due to delay in initiation of process of publication of toll fee notification, prolonged 
correspondence coupled with delays on the part of MoRTH in ensuring timely issue of 
Completion Certificate, there has been a delay in commencement of tol l collection by  
182 days i.e., the toll collection which should have commenced 37 from 25 May 2019 
actually commenced from 23 November 2019 result antly toll revenue of ₹5.84 crore 38 
during  the period 25 May 2019 to 22 November 2019 could not be collected by NHAI. 
The Ministry endorsed (June 2023) the Management ’s reply (May 2023) stating that the 
final Completion Certificate was issued to the contractor on 26 August 2019 and the same 
was effective from 10 April 2019. After issuance of Completion Certificate, Tripartite 
Agreement was signed between MoRTH, NHAI and the contractor on 30 August 2019 and 
the entire stretch was handed over to NHAI on 9 September 2019. The delay in issue of toll 
notification was due to incomplete data provided by MoRTH and the delay was only due 
to administrative procedure because of which Completion Certificate was formally issued 
in August 2019. 
Reply of the Ministry/Management needs to be viewed in light of the fact that the contractor 
had completed the works on 10 April 2019 and the same was jointly inspected by the 
Regional Office, MoRTH, Vijayawada along with Authority Engineer on 17 April 2019. 
                                                           
37  45 days from 10 April 2019 (the date of declaration of the stretch as fit for entry into commercial 
operations). 
38 Amount of revenue loss = (No. of days of delay: 182 days) x (Daily Collection: ₹ 3,21,111)  
= ₹5,84,42,202/- 

Report No.12 of 2024 
103 
However, the Provisional Completion Certificate was issued subsequently on 3 June 2019 
and the Completion Certificate was issued on 26 August 2019.  
Thus, inordinate delay in commencement of toll operations at Gollaprolu Toll Plaza due to 
delay in initiation of the process o f publication of toll fee notification and prolonged 
correspondence and inadequate synchronisation in ensuring timely issue of Completion 
Certificate on the part of MoRTH as a result of which toll revenue of ₹5.84 crore could not 
be collected by NHAI. 
Recommendation No.14: NHAI may ensure timely completion of procedures related 
to toll collection and align it with the issuance of Completion Certificate /Provisional 
Completion Certificate to prevent delay in commencement of user fee/toll collection. 
Responsibility may also be fixed in cases where user fee/toll collection is delayed. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter IX 
Recoveries and 
Corrections/Rectifications by  
CPSEs at the Instance of Audit 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
 
105 
CHAPTER IX: RECOVERIES AND 
CORRECTIONS/RECTIFICATIONS BY CPSEs AT THE 
INSTANCE OF AUDIT 
 
 
 
9.1  Recoveries at the instance of Audit 
In the last ten years from 2012 -13 to 2021 -22, Management of various CPSEs have 
recovered an amount of ₹3,435.12 crore at the instance of Audit, which included recovery 
of ₹3.82 crore made during 2021-22 (Annexure-X). 
9.2 Corrections/rectifications at the instance of Audit 
During test check, cases relating to violation of rules /regulations and deficiencies in the 
system were observed and brought to the notice of Management. Details of two cases where 
corrective action was taken or changes were made by the Management of CPSEs at the 
instance of Audit during 2021-22 are given in Annexure-XI.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter X 
Follow-up on Audit Reports 
(Commercial) 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Reports No. 12 of 2024 
 
107 
CHAPTER X 
 
 
 
10.1   Follow-up on Audit Reports (Commercial) 
Audit Reports of the CAG represent the culmination of the process of scrutiny of accounts 
and records maintained in various offices and departments of PSUs. It is, therefore, 
necessary that appropriate and timely response is elicited from the Executive on the audit 
findings included in the Audit Reports. 
The Lok Sabha Secretariat requested (July 1985) all the Ministries to furnish notes  
(duly vetted by Audit) indicating remedial/corrective action taken by them on various 
paragraphs/appraisals contained in the Audit Reports (Commercial) of the CAG as laid on 
the table of both the Houses of Parliament. Such notes were required to be submitted even 
in respect of paragraphs/appraisals which were not selected by the Committee on Public 
Sector Undertakings (COPU) for detailed examination . The COPU , in its Second Report 
(1998-99-Twelfth Lok Sabha), while reiterating the above instructions, recommended: 
• Setting up of a Monitoring Cell in each Ministry for monitoring the submission of 
Action Taken Notes (ATNs) in respect of Audit Reports (Co mmercial) on 
individual Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs); 
• Setting up of a Monitoring Cell in Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) for 
monitoring the submission of ATNs in respect of Reports containing paras relating 
to a number of PSUs under different Ministries; and 
• Submission to the Committee, within six months from the date of presentation of 
the relevant Audit Reports, the follow up ATNs duly vetted by Audit in respect of 
all Reports of the CAG presented to Parliament. 
While reviewing the follow up by the Government on the above recommendations, the 
COPU, in its First Report (1999 -2000-Thirteenth Lok Sabha) , reiterated its earlier 
recommendations that the DPE should set up a separate Monitoring Cell in the DPE itself 
to monitor the follow -up action taken by various Ministries/Departments on the 
observations contained in the Audit Reports (Commercial) on individual undertakings. 
Accordingly, a Monitoring Cell is functioning in the DPE since August 2000 to monitor 
the follow up on submission o f ATNs by the concerned Administrative 
Ministries/Departments. Monitoring cells have also been set up within the concerned 
Ministries for submission of ATNs on various Reports (Commercial) of the CAG.  

Reports No. 12 of 2024 
 
108 
A review in Audit revealed that despite reminders, the remedial/corrective ATNs on 20  
compliance audit paragraphs contained in the last five years’ Audit Reports (Commercial), 
two Standalone Compliance Audit Report and three Performance Audit Report relating  
to the PSUs under the administrative control of various Ministries, as detailed in  
Annexure-XII, were not received by Audit for vetting. 
 
 
 
New Delhi (Anand Mohan Bajaj) 
Dated: 28 October 2024 Deputy Comptroller and Auditor General 
(Commercial) and Chairman, Audit Board 
 
 
 
 
 
Countersigned 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi (Girish Chandra Murmu) 
Dated: 29 October 2024             Comptroller and Auditor General of India 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annexures  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
109 
Annexure-I 
(Referred to in Para 1.2) 
Statement showing amount recoverable from the contractor from 2017-18 to 2021-22 
Year Difference in 
weighment of 
coal despatch 
to Jamtara 
Siding (in 
MT) 
Rate of G8 
grade Coal  
(₹ Per MT) 
Basic Value of 
Coal 
(in ₹) 
Recoverable 
Value of Coal 
(Basic Value *2  
(in ₹) 
Royalty  
(@ 14% of Basic 
value of Coal)  
(in ₹) 
Dues payable to 
National Mineral 
Exploration 
Trust  
 (2% of Royalty)  
(in ₹) 
Dues payable to 
District Mineral 
Foundation Trust  
(@ 30 % of Royalty) 
(in ₹) 
Total 
Recoverable 
Amount 
(in ₹) 
A B C D=B*C E=D*2 F=D*14% G=F*2% H=F*30% I=E+F+G+H 
2017-18 8,297.03 1,562.00 1,29,59,960.86 2,59,19,921.72 18,14,394.52 36,287.89 5,44,318.36 2,83,14,922.49 
2018-19 8,876.26 1,611.50 1,43,04,092.99 2,86,08,185.98 20,02,573.02 40,051.46 6,00,771.91 3,12,51,582.36 
2019-20 19,997.56 1,611.50 3,22,26,067.94 6,44,52,135.88 45,11,649.51 90,232.99 13,53,494.85 7,04,07,513.24 
2020-21 4,420.83 1,611.50 71,24,167.55 1,42,48,335.09 9,97,383.46 19,947.67 2,99,215.04 1,55,64,881.25 
2021-22 8,045.67 1,611.50 1,29,65,597.21 2,59,31,194.41 18,15,183.61 36,303.67 5,44,555.08 2,83,27,236.77 
Total 49,637.35  7,95,79,886.54 15,91,59,773.08 1,11,41,184.12 2,22,823.68 33,42,355.23 17,38,66,136.11 
Note: During 2017 -18 to 2021 -22, G-6 TO G -8, grade of coal was dispatched from Chitra Mine to Jamtara Railway Siding. However, for the purpose of calculation, 
Audit has conservatively considered the rate of G-8 grade of coal being the inferior one. 
 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
 
110 
Annexure-II 
(Referred to in Para 2.4 ) 
Details of Purchase orders 
Equipment Date of PO for 
material 
Date of PO for 
service 
Date of 
commissioning 
Warrantee 
period 
TG3 16.01.2014 signed on 
22.04.20151 
15.06.2017 PBG valid 
upto 
31.08.2018 
TG2 17.01.2014 signed on 
07.11.2019 
Yet to 
commission 
(April 2023) 
12 months  
after the 
goods have 
been 
delivered or 
18 months  
after the date 
of shipment 
whichever 
conclude 
earlier2. 
TG1 27.12.2013 Yet to sign 
(April 2023) 
Work yet to 
start  
(April 2023) 
 
 
                                                           
1  Contract was signed on 22 April 2015 with original completion date 11 August 2015, amended 12 times 
for extension, finally commissioned on 15 June 2017. 
2  12 months after the goods have been delivered or 18 months after the date of shipment whichever peri ods 
conclude earlier unless specified otherwise in the special conditions of contract. In case the installation & 
commissioning is delayed on account of the Supplier, the warranty period shall automatically get 
extended.  

Report No. 12 of 2024 
111 
Annexure-III 
(Referred to in Para 2.5) 
Demurrage incurred by ONGC during 2016-17 to 2021-22 (₹ in crore) 
 
FY T&S Mumbai  T&S Kolkata  T&S Chennai  Total 
2016-17 11.26 2.19 30.33 43.78 
2017-18 2.91 3.45 4.41 10.77 
2018-19 10.39 1.67 1.05 13.11 
2019-20 10.79 5.87 3.10 19.76 
2020-21 13.00 3.40 1.18 17.58 
2021-22 2.71 2.76 0.14 5.61 
Total 51.06 19.34 40.21 110.61 
Source: SAP data  
 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
 
112 
Annexure-IV 
(Referred to in Para 2.5) 
Number of consignments on which demurrage incurred by T&S offices against the total consignments cleared 
 
Year  T&S Mumbai T&S Kolkata T&S Chennai 
No. of 
consignments 
cleared  
No. of 
consignments in 
which 
demurrage paid 
% of  
consignments 
where 
demurrage 
paid  
No. of 
consignments 
cleared  
No. of 
consignments 
in which 
demurrage 
paid 
% of  
consignments 
where 
demurrage 
paid  
No. of 
consignments 
cleared  
No. of 
consignments 
in which 
demurrage 
paid 
% of  
consignments 
where 
demurrage 
paid  
2016-17 748 483 65 247 150 61 238 232 97 
2017-18 615 349 57 154 118 77 151 150 99 
2018-19 637 566 89 205 142 69 192 161 84 
2019-20 682 550 81 283 NA NA 243 239 98 
2020-21 592 443 75 230 NA NA 202 195 97 
2021-22 373 289 77 166 NA NA 100 94 94 
 Total  3,647 2,680 74 (Avg.) 1,285 410 69 (Avg.) 1,126 1,071 95(Avg.) 
Source: Data provided by the Company. NA-Details awaited from the Company.  

Report No. 12 of 2024 
113 
Annexure-V 
(Referred to in Para 2.5) 
Percentage of consignments where demurrage paid on ONGC Account by T&S Mumbai 
Year Consignments on which 
demurrage paid (Nos.)  
Demurrage on account of ONGC  % of consignments where demurrage paid on ONGC 
account  
Operational Delay in EC Total (Nos.) Operational  Delay in EC Total  
2016-17 483 93 181 274 19.25 37.47 56.73 
2017-18 349 102 95 197 29.23 27.22 56.45 
2018-19 566 207 138 345 36.57 24.38 60.95 
2019-20 550 228 100 328 41.45 18.18 59.64 
2020-21 443 177 28 205 39.95 6.32 46.28 
2021-22 289 118 25 143 40.83 8.65 49.48 
Total 2,680 925 567 1,492 34.51 21.16 55.67 
Source: Demurrage register provided by T&S Mumbai  
Percentage of consignments where demurrage paid on ONGC Account by T&S Kolkata  
Year Consignments on which 
demurrage paid (Nos.)  
Demurrage on account of ONGC  % of consignments where demurrage paid on 
ONGC account  
Operational Delay in EC Total (Nos.) Operational  Delay in EC Total  
2016-17 150 34 67 101 22.67 44.67 67.33 
2017-18 118 18 42 60 15.25 35.59 50.85 
2018-19 142 35 38 73 24.65 26.76 51.41 
Total 410 87 147 234 21.22 35.85 57.07 
Source: Demurrage details provided by T&S Kolkata 
 
 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
 
114 
Percentage of consignments where demurrage paid on ONGC Account by T&S Chennai 
Year Consignments on which 
demurrage paid (Nos.)  
Consignments where demurrage paid on 
account of ONGC* 
Reason not available on record# 
Nos. % Nos. % 
2016-17 232 122 52.59 - - 
2017-18 150 102 68.00  - -  
2018-19 161 89 55.28  - -  
2019-20 239 129 53.97 8 3.35 
2020-21 195 14 7.18 160 82.05 
2021-22 94 3 3.19 83 87.37 
Total 1,071 459 42.86 255 23.70 
* Demurrage register maintained by T&S Chennai did not separately mention demurrage on account of ONGC due to EC and Operational delays. 
# Details provided by T&S Chennai did not mention reasons for demurrage payment in 82 per cent and 88 per cent cases during 2020-21 and 2021-22 respectively. 
Source: demurrage details provided by T&S Chennai 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
115 
Annexure-VI 
(Referred to in Para 2.5) 
Region wise demurrage absorbed on account of ONGC 
(Amount in ₹) 
Year T& S Mumbai T&S Kolkata T&S Chennai Total 
2016-17 2,32,49,712 1,44,24,999 5,74,15,418 9,50,90,129 
2017-18 2,63,09,855 75,04,168 6,88,44,499 10,26,58,522 
2018-19 8,63,002 19,40,465 6,86,56,062 7,14,59,529 
2019-20 2,97,75,749 19,00,917 41,02,982 3,57,79,648 
2020-21 3,61,86,109 70,17,417 17,61,74,008 21,93,77,534 
2021-22 2,81,00,950 57,82,865 2,91,51,436 6,30,35,251 
Total 14,44,85,377 3,85,70,831 40,43,44,405 58,74,00,613 
Source: Demurrage Absorption Account-201457 in ONGC’s SAP system 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
 
116 
Annexure-VII 
(Referred to in Para 4.3) 
Statement Showing the Details of Ineligible amount paid over and above the Principal amount 
(Amount ₹ in lakh) 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of MLI Portfolio ID No. of 
accounts 
identified to 
whom interest 
is paid 
Eligible AID 
for accounts 
identified to 
whom 
interest is 
paid 
Principal 
amount for 
accounts 
identified to 
whom interest 
is paid 
Interest amount 
for accounts 
identified to 
whom interest is 
paid 
Ineligible amount 
paid over and 
above the 
Principal 
Amount 
a b c D e  f g = e-f h = g*50% 
1 Allahabad Bank MUDALLA20152016R 5,050 4,892.64 4,782.33 110.31 55.16 
MUDALLA20162017C 5,560 7,556.77 7,377.13 179.64 89.82 
MUDALLA20172018R 2,586 8,146.97 7,957.26 189.71 94.86 
2 Andhra Bank MUDANDB20152016R 724 1,670.56 1,640.05 30.51 15.26 
MUDANDB20162017C 438 2,071.93 2,035.57 36.36 18.18 
MUDANDB20172018C 667 3,581.91 3,521.83 60.08 30.04 
3 Bank of Baroda MUDBARB20152016R 3,533 5,537.38 5,459.49 77.89 38.95 
MUDBARB20162017R 2,234 4,078.05 4,023.38 54.67 27.34 
4 Bank of India MUDBKID20152016R 11,524 9,251.33 9,043.21 208.12 104.06 
MUDBKID20162017C 6,379 8,366.85 8,211.72 155.13 77.56 
MUDBKID20172018C 11,580 19,672.55 19,306.05 366.50 183.25 
5 Bank of Maharashtra MUDMAHB20152016R 1,757 1,426.83 1,402.79 24.04 12.02 
MUDMAHB20162017C 364 639.28 631.12 8.16 4.08 
MUDMAHB20172018R 3,404 5,696.64 5,569.79 126.85 63.42 
6 Baroda U.P Bank (Kashi Gomti 
Samyut Gramin) 
MUDKGSG20172018R 208 187.26 182.99 4.27 2.14 
7 Canara Bank MUDCNRB20172018C 18,717 24,097.80 23,544.34 553.46 276.73 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
117 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of MLI Portfolio ID No. of 
accounts 
identified to 
whom interest 
is paid 
Eligible AID 
for accounts 
identified to 
whom 
interest is 
paid 
Principal 
amount for 
accounts 
identified to 
whom interest 
is paid 
Interest amount 
for accounts 
identified to 
whom interest is 
paid 
Ineligible amount 
paid over and 
above the 
Principal 
Amount 
8 Central Bank of India MUDCBIN20152016R 137 95.01 93.29 1.72 0.86 
MUDCBIN20162017R 1,301 1,438.93 1,413.41 25.52 12.76 
MUDCBIN20172018C 480 1,385.96 1,363.49 22.47 11.23 
9 Corporation Bank MUDCORP20152016R 1,853 2,633.10 2,577.45 55.65 27.83 
MUDCORP20162017C 1,284 2,464.69 2,425.65 39.04 19.52 
MUDCORP20172018C 901 2,597.11 2,560.29 36.82 18.41 
10 Dakshin Bihar Gramin Bank MUDDBGB20152016R 2,867 2,420.61 2,359.46 61.15 30.57 
MUDDBGB20162017R 4,569 4,574.51 4,462.17 112.34 56.17 
11 Dena Bank MUDBKDN20152016R 352 226.58 221.76 4.82 2.41 
12 Vijaya Bank MUDVIJB20162017C 146 275.03 271.96 3.07 1.53 
MUDVIJB20172018C 129 335.03 330.03 5.00 2.50 
13 IDBI Bank MUDIBKL20152016R 4,474 8,912.68 8,720.03 192.65 96.32 
MUDIBKL20162017C 1,682 4,125.78 4,043.19 82.59 41.29 
MUDIBKL20172018C 1,668 4,048.40 3,964.51 83.89 41.94 
14 Indian Bank MUDIDIB20162017R 1,357 1,472.32 1,434.69 37.63 18.82 
MUDIDIB20172018C 188 1,116.26 1,094.06 22.20 11.10 
15 Indian Overseas Bank MUDIOBA20152016R 253 157.34 153.81 3.53 1.77 
MUDIOBA20162017R 1,437 1,558.69 1,523.63 35.06 17.53 
16 Karnataka Gramin Bank MUDPKGB20152016R 2,691 921.13 898.03 23.10 11.55 
MUDPKGB20162017C 3,141 1,912.73 1,856.88 55.85 27.92 
MUDPKGB20172018R 4,473 2,724.58 2,646.25 78.33 39.16 
17 Kerala Gramin Bank MUDKLGB20152016R 28 10.77 10.46 0.31 0.16 
MUDKLGB20162017C 3 19.34 18.98 0.36 0.18 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
 
118 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of MLI Portfolio ID No. of 
accounts 
identified to 
whom interest 
is paid 
Eligible AID 
for accounts 
identified to 
whom 
interest is 
paid 
Principal 
amount for 
accounts 
identified to 
whom interest 
is paid 
Interest amount 
for accounts 
identified to 
whom interest is 
paid 
Ineligible amount 
paid over and 
above the 
Principal 
Amount 
MUDKLGB20172018C 15 83.13 81.05 2.08 1.04 
18 Oriental Bank of Commerce  MUDORBC20152016R 2,614 1,555.59 1,517.67 37.92 18.96 
MUDORBC20172018C 3,902 5,225.63 5,129.18 96.45 48.23 
19 Punjab and Sindh Bank  MUDPSIB20152016R 1,027 424.92 414.65 10.27 5.13 
MUDPSIB20162017R 471 900.79 883.96 16.83 8.41 
MUDPSIB20172018C 223 577.43 572.60 4.83 2.41 
20 Punjab Gramin Bank  MUDPBGB20162017C 867 647.91 633.88 14.03 7.01 
MUDPBGB20172018R 1,035 961.38 939.79 21.59 10.80 
21 Punjab National Bank MUDPUNB20152016R 16,978 14,242.52 13,906.68 335.84 167.92 
MUDPUNB20162017C 12,850 16,717.27 16,370.26 347.01 173.51 
MUDPUNB20172018C 18,186 29,526.06 28,946.84 579.22 289.61 
22 Sarva Haryana Gramin Bank MUDSHGB20162017R 149 61.47 59.70 1.77 0.89 
MUDSHGB20172018C 106 76.69 74.69 2.00 1.00 
23 State Bank of India MUDSBIN20152016R 58,552 34,845.39 33,957.77 887.62 443.81 
MUDSBIN20162017R 33,635 39,016.13 37,988.89 1,027.24 513.62 
MUDSBIN20172018C 41,964 56,881.17 55,423.72 1,457.45 728.72 
24 UCO Bank MUDUCBA20152016R 1,773 1,101.62 1,074.43 27.19 13.59 
MUDUCBA20162017R 1,069 1,000.53 981.40 19.13 9.57 
MUDUCBA20172018C 8,577 7,994.48 7,835.36 159.12 79.56 
25 Union Bank of India  MUDUBIN20152016R 721 1,094.79 1,071.04 23.75 11.88 
MUDUBIN20162017C 540 1,373.58 1,350.38 23.20 11.60 
MUDUBIN20172018C 1,309 3,335.38 3,285.46 49.92 24.96 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
119 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of MLI Portfolio ID No. of 
accounts 
identified to 
whom interest 
is paid 
Eligible AID 
for accounts 
identified to 
whom 
interest is 
paid 
Principal 
amount for 
accounts 
identified to 
whom interest 
is paid 
Interest amount 
for accounts 
identified to 
whom interest is 
paid 
Ineligible amount 
paid over and 
above the 
Principal 
Amount 
26 United Bank of India MUDUTBI20152016R 1,336 1,449.32 1,411.78 37.54 18.77 
MUDUTBI20172018C 5,293 10,754.98 10,552.32 202.66 101.33 
27 Uttar Bihar Gramin Bank MUDUBGB20162017R 853 472.38 459.15 13.23 6.62 
MUDUBGB20172018C 647 395.98 385.31 10.67 5.33 
  Total 65 3,24,831 3,83,017.85 3,74,440.49 8,577.36 4,288.68 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
 
120 
Annexure-VIII 
(Referred to in Para 8.2) 
 Details of four National Highway widening projects 
Sl. 
No 
Name of 
project  
Bid project cost (₹ 
in crore) 
Mobilisation 
advance paid (₹ in 
crore) 
Appointed 
date  
Monitored by 
1 Ausa-Chakur 
in NH No. 361 
(58.51 kms)  
848.63 42.43 25.03.2019 PIU Nanded 
2 Chakur-Loha 
in NH No. 361 
(73.35 kms.).  
1,000.10 50.01 25.03.2019 PIU Nanded 
3 Loha-Waranga 
in NH No. 361 
(56.57 kms.).  
1,073.10 53.66 25.03.2019 PIU Nanded 
4 Vadape-Thane 
in NH No. 3, 
New NH 
No.848 (23.47 
kms.). 
1,182.87 59.14 21.01.2019 PIU Thane 
 Total 4,104.70 205.24   
 
 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
121 
Annexure-IX 
(Referred to in Para 8.5) 
 
Collection of revenue due to reduction in toll fee as per Court orders 
Name of User Fee 
Plaza 
Reduction in 
daily remittance 
(Amount in ₹) 
Period during 
which toll was 
reduced to 50 
per cent 
No. of 
Days 
Revenue 
collected  
(Amount in ₹) 
(a) (c) (d) (e) (f) = (c) x (e) 
Nemili 
(Sriperumpudur) 
 
8,53,434 15 December 
2020 to 30  
January 2021 
47 4,01,11,398 
10,59,495 31 January 2021 
to 7 October 
2021 
250 26,48,73,750 
Chennasamudram 
 
7,75,855 15 December 
2020 to 3 
January 2021 
20 1,55,17,100 
9,22,652 4 January 2021 
to 7 October 
2021 
277 25,55,74,604 
Total 57,60,76,852 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Report No. 12 of 2024 
 
122 
Annexure-X 
(Referred to in Para 9.1) 
Recoveries at the instance of Audit 
(₹ in lakh) 
Name of the 
Ministry/ 
Department 
Name of the CPSE Audit Observation in brief Amount recovered by  
the Management in F.Y.  
2021-22  
Department of 
Financial Services  
SBI Cards and Payment 
Services Limited 
Non-compliance to the CVC and DPE guidelines in award of 
contract for Security Services providers 
47.83  
Department of 
Financial Services 
The Oriental Insurance 
Company Limited 
Excess payment of electricity charges to the lessor due to 
non-adherence of the lease agreement  
1.30 
 
Department of 
Financial Services 
The New India 
Assurance C ompany 
Limited 
Excess payment of claim under  
Contractors Plant and Machinery Policy 
1.75 
Petroleum and 
Natural Gas 
Oil and Natural Gas 
Corporation Limited 
Recovery of HRA paid to non-entitled employees 11.00 
Road Transport and 
Highways 
National Highways 
Authority of India  
Non-recovery of penalty under fee collection contracts of 
public funded Plazas 
12.72 
Steel  Steel Authority of India 
Limited  
Non-recovery from the agency against converter refractory 304.16 
Steel Steel Authority of India 
Limited  
Double payment made to Hospital in respect of medical bill 3.61 
 Total 382.37 lakh 
Say 3.82 crore 
 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
123 
 
Annexure-XI 
(Referred to in Para 9.2) 
Corrections/rectifications at the instance of Audit 
Name of 
Ministry  
Name of the 
CPSE 
Audit Observation in brief Action taken by the 
Management  
Power  Power Grid 
Corporation 
of India 
Limited  
In its Works and Procurement Policy, company restricted the amount of 
liquidated damages, to be levied on delayed supplies/execution  of works by the 
contractors, by stating that liquidated damages were to be recovered only if 
there was demonstrable loss t o company due to delays attributable to the 
contractors otherwise only token liquidated damages, to cover the incidental 
expenses that the company might have incurred due to delays, were to be levied 
and recovered.   
It resulted in undue financial benefit to the contractors. 
Management revised (January 
2022) its Works and 
Procurement Policy in line with 
the terms of contracts to levy 
liquidated damages as per the 
agreed rates and have deleted 
the words pertaining to levy of 
token liquidated damages. 
Road 
Transport 
and 
Highways 
National 
Highways 
Authority of 
India 
While fixating of toll fee for Kalaparru Toll Plaza, the wholesale price index of 
December 2018 was adopted instead of December 2017.  
Management revised the toll fee 
based on correct wholesale price 
index and made the revised rates 
effective from February 2022. 
 

Report No. 12 of 2024 
 
124 
Annexure-XII 
(Referred to in Chapter X) 
Statement showing the details of Audit Reports (Commercial) for last five years for which 
first Action Taken Notes were pending as on July 2023 
Audit Report number and year of the Audit Report Para No. 
Ministry of Civil Aviation   
13 of 2019 Compliance Audit Para 1.1 
14 of 2021 Compliance Audit Para 9.2 
 
Ministry of Finance  
(Department of Financial Services) 
  
33 of 2022 Compliance Audit Para 4.1 
33 of 2022 Compliance Audit Para 4.4 
1 of 2022 Standalone Compliance Audit Entire Report 
 
Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs    
11 of 2021 Performance Audit Entire Report 
33 of 2022 Compliance Audit Para 6.1 
34 of 2022 Performance Audit Entire Report 
 
Ministry of Mines   
18 of 2020 Compliance Audit Para 8.1 
 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas   
14 of 2021 Compliance Audit Para 2.9 
13 of 2022 Performance Audit Entire Report 
33 of 2022 Compliance Audit Para 2.1 
33 of 2022 Compliance Audit Para 2.2 
33 of 2022 Compliance Audit Para 2.3 
33 of 2022 Compliance Audit Para 2.4 
33 of 2022 Compliance Audit Para 2.5 
33 of 2022 Compliance Audit Para 2.6 
33 of 2022 Compliance Audit Para 2.7 
33 of 2022 Compliance Audit Para 2.8 
 
Ministry of Power   
33 of 2022 Compliance Audit Para 3.2 
33 of 2022 Compliance Audit Para 3.4 
 
Ministry of Road Transport and 
Highways 
  
33 of 2022 Compliance Audit Para 7.1 
33 of 2022 Compliance Audit Para 7.2 
33 of 2022 Compliance Audit Para 7.3 
11 of 2022 Standalone Compliance Audit Entire Report 
 