Report of the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India
Report No. 08 of  2024
(Performance Audit - Civil)
Government of Karnataka
on 
Public Health Infrastructure and  
Management of Health Services 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor 
General of India 
 
 
 
 
on 
Public Health Infrastructure and  
Management of Health Services 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Government of Karnataka 
Report No.08 of the year 2024 
 Performance Audit Civil

 
i 
 
Table of contents 
 
Paragraph Contents Page No. 
 Preface v 
 Executive Summary vii 
Chapter - 1 Introduction  
1.1 Health services 1 
1.2 Overview of healthcare facilities in the State 2 
1.3 Organisational set-up  2 
1.4 Status of Health Indicators in the State 3 
1.5 Improvement in overall Health Indicators 4 
1.6 Karnataka integrated public health policy 6 
1.7 Audit objectives 7 
1.8 Scope of Audit 8 
1.9 Doctor/Patient survey 9 
1.10 Audit criteria  9 
1.11 Consideration of Ayushman Bharat in this report 10 
1.12 Initiatives of the Government of Karnataka 11 
1.13 Acknowledgement 12 
1.14 Past Audits 12 
1.15 Audit findings  12 
Chapter - 2 Human Resources  
2.1 Assessment of Human Resources 13 
2.2 Availability of Human Resources in the health 
departments 
14 
2.3 Availability of Human Resources in the health 
institutions in the State 
21 
2.4 Asymmetric distribution of staff 30 
2.5 Operation of posts without sanction 31 
2.6 Diplomate de National Board (Course) 31 
2.7 Non-recruitment of Biomedical Engineer 32 
2.8 Training for use of medical equipment 33 
2.9 Manpower in private hospitals 33 
Chapter - 3 Healthcare Services  
3.1 Outpatient Department Services 35 
3.2 Inpatient Department Services 41 
3.3 Intensive Care Unit services 48 
3.4 Emergency Response and Health System 
Preparedness Package 
49 
3.5 Maternity services 57 
3.6 Diagnostic services 63 
3.7 Blood Bank and Blood Storage Unit 67 
3.8 Auxiliary and Support services 68 
Chapter - 4 Availability of Drugs, Medicines, Equipment 
and other Consumables 
 

PA on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
ii 
Paragraph Contents Page No. 
4.1 Introduction 81 
4.2 Procurement of Drugs 81 
4.3 Drugs purchased from blacklisted firm 86 
4.4 Quality Control Mechanism in respect of drugs 89 
4.5 Procurement of Medical Equipment 90 
Chapter - 5 Healthcare Infrastructure  
5.1 Availability of health care Infrastructure 95 
5.2 Infrastructure availability 97 
5.3 Disaster Management 98 
5.4 Availability of beds in the Health Institutions 99 
5.5 Health &and Wellness Centres. 100 
5.6 Infrastructure not put to use appropriately in the 
health institutes 
103 
5.7 Non-creation of adequate infrastructure 104 
5.8 Establishment of Medical Colleges 104 
Chapter - 6 Adequacy of funds for the healthcare sector  
6.1 Financial Assessment 107 
6.2 Expenditure on Health Sector by the State vis-a-vis 
National Health Policy norms 
109 
6.3 Revenue and Capital Expenditure 110 
6.4 Budget allocation and expenditure on important 
components under National Health Mission 
110 
6.5 Delay in release of funds to implementing agencies        112 
Chapter - 7 Implementation of Centrally Sponsored 
Schemes 
 
7.1 National Health Mission (NHM) 115 
7.2 Ayushman Bharat Scheme 124 
Chapter - 8 Adequacy and effectiveness of the regulatory 
mechanisms 
 
8.1 Introduction 127 
8.2 Functioning of Regulatory Bodies 127 
8.3 Implementation of the Clinical Establishments Act 
and Rules 
128 
8.4 Functioning of State Nursing Council 128 
8.5 Drug Controller of the State 129 
8.6 State Pharmacy Council 129 
8.7 Bio Medical Waste Management 129 
8.8 License for imaging equipment and their operation 131 
8.9 Internal Monitoring System   131 
8.10 Compliance to Statutory requirements 132 
Chapter - 9 Sustainable Development Goal 3  
9.1 Planning and mapping budget for SDG-3 135 
9.2 Performance of indicators for SDG-3 136 
9.3 Analysis of Performance of Indicators meant for 
Evaluation of progress of SDG-3 
137 
 

Table of contents 
________________________________________________________________ 
iii 
List of Appendices 
 
Appendix 
No. 
Description Page 
No. 
1.1 List of test checked health institutions 141 
2.1 Statement showing assessment of human resources w .r.t 
IPHS norms 
142 
2.2 Status of the  specific manpower positions in the 
department of HFWD 
143 
2.3 Status of the cadre wise vacancy (in per cent) in Karnataka 144 
2.4 Status of the working of the specialist  doctors in the 
districts 
146 
2.5 Non-functioning of the services due to non-availability of 
the staff 
147 
3.1 Availability of OPD Services in test -checked health 
institutions 
148 
3.2 Management of OT services in test checked health 
institutions 
149 
3.3(a) Average number of surgeries per surgeon in test checked 
SS/MC/DH 
150 
3.3(b) Average number of surgeries per surgeon in test checked 
TH 
152 
3.4 Statement showing non -compliance of provisions for 
blood bank/blood storage units in the test checked health 
institutions 
154 
3.5 Availability of essential equipment in dialysis unit in the 
test checked health institutions 
155 
4.1 Illustrative cases where drugs procured locally at the 
higher rates by the test checked health institutions 
156 
4.2 Availability of essential drugs and medicines in the health 
institutions 
157 
4.3 Availability of the drugs in the various wards of the 
sampled health institutions 
158 
4.4 Statement showing delay in release of security lock  159 
4.5(a) Availability of drugs, medicines, equipment and other 
consumables in the test checked MC/DH 
160 
4.5(b) Availability of drugs, lab reagents, consumables and 
disposables in test checked THs 
161 
4.6 Statement showing the drugs declared NSQ by KSDC 163 
4.7 Storage of drugs, medicines and surgical items 164 
4.8(a) Statement showing the availability of equipment in the test 
checked MCs/DHs 
165 
4.8(b) Statement showing the availability of equipment in the test 
checked THs 
166 
4.9 Improper planning in assessment of requirement  of the 
medical equipment 
167 
5.1 District wise requirement and availability of 
CHC/PHC/SC. 
168 
5.2 Availability of beds in the health institutions. 169 

 
v 
 
Preface 
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India for the year 
ended 31 March 2022 has been prepared for submission to the Governor 
of Karnataka under Article 151 (2) of the Constitution to be tabled in the 
State Legislature. 
The Report covering the period 2016 -22 contains the results of 
Performance Audit of ‘Public Health Infrastructure and Management of 
Health Services’. 
The instances mentioned in this Report are those which came to notice in 
the course of test audit for the period 2016-22 as well as those which came 
to notice in earlier years but could not be reported in the previous Audit 
Reports; matters relating to the period subsequent to 2016 -22 have also 
been included, wherever necessary. 
Audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards 
issued by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
Audit wishes to acknowledge the cooperation received from the 
Departments of Health and Family Welfare, Medical Education and Urban 
Development at each stage of the audit process. 
 
 

vii 
 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
WHY CAG DID THIS AUDIT? 
According to World Health Organisation, “Health is a state of complete 
physical, mental, and social well -being and not merely the absence of disease 
or infirmity”. Under the Constitution, Health is a State subject and Karnataka 
has developed its own healthcare delivery system based on the guidelines issued 
by the Government of India from time to time. The State has a health policy of 
its own on the lines of the National Health Policy. The policy provides for the 
mission and vision of the State on health and healthcare besides equity in health 
care and quality health care.  Healthcare facilities in the State are provided 
through a three -tier system viz., primary, secondary and ter tiary level of 
healthcare.  
Access to healthcare services is a cause of major concern especially in public 
health institutions.  Shortage of medical professionals, absence of facilities, lack 
of quality assurance and insufficient spending are few significant issues 
plaguing public health care. It is in this backdrop that the Performance Audit of 
Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services in Karnataka 
has been carried out during 2021 -22, covering the period 2016 -17 to 2021-22.  
This report attempts to assess the qua lity of health services and patient care 
services provided by the public health care facilities in the State. 
SIGNIFICANT AUDIT FINDINGS 
The overall performance of the State in providing quality health care services, 
though satisfactory, had certain deficiencies.  The observations noticed on the 
management of the services and health care infrastructure are summarized 
below:  
Adequacy of Human Resources 
 
There was shortage of about 45 and 53 per cent in respect of doctors/specialists 
and nurse cadres respectively in Taluk Hospitals (THs) in comparison with the 
Indian Public Health Standards (IPHS), the shortage of specialists/doctors being 
significant in services such as General Surgery, Ophthalmology, Anaesthesia 
etc. There was asymmetric distribution of human resources in the test -checked 
hospitals.  
Recommendation 1: The State Government should consider adopting IPHS 
norms for assessing the sanctioned strength in Health departments including 
specialists. 
Recommendation 2: The State Government should step up its efforts to 
expedite recruitment process in order to fill the vacancies in all cadres under 
health sector. 
 
Recommendation 3: The staff should be posted rationally across the health 
institutions to address staffing deficiencies, ultimately improving the delivery 
of healthcare services. 

 
viii 
Policy framework for healthcare services 
 
The policy framework for hospital management in the State had gaps that need 
to be addressed. The State neither prepared its own norms/standards nor did it 
adopt those prescribed by the Government of India (GoI) in respect of outpatient 
and inpatient services, pathology investigations and human resources. This has 
and will  continue to impact the availability of health care infrastructure and 
patient care services.  
The State did not have a documented procurement policy to ensure availability 
of essential drugs/medicines at all times, improve the existing system of 
procurement and supply of the drugs and quality assurance of drugs.  Neither 
there was any policy and action plan for ensuring the proper assessment of the 
requirement of the medical equipment, timely procurement, distribution system 
and maintenance of equipment. 
 
Outpatient Services 
 
The availability of doctors was not proportionate to the outpatient load. This 
resulted in much higher OPD cases per doctor in the secondary HIs in 
comparison with other HIs.  Non- availability of specialized doctors led to non-
availability of services like ENT, Pediatrician, etc., for substantial periods. 
Registration Counters available were not commensurate with the OPD load in 
test checked HIs. This could potentially lead to challenges in providing timely 
and appropriate medical care to patients seeking treatment. 
 
Inpatient Services 
 
IPD services such as ICUs beds were not adequate in most of the test checked 
health institutions as per IPHS guidelines . There was shortage of operation 
theatres in THs/CHCs and significant shortage of drugs and equipment in IPD 
and Emergency services. The absence of critical services and shortages in 
facilities and resources undermines patient well-being, compromise healthcare 
quality, and erode public trust in the healthcare system, exacerbating health 
disparities and economic burdens. 
 
Emergency Response and Health System Preparedness 
 
Drugs worth ₹17.79 crore required for preventing/cur ing of COVID-19 were 
yet to be supplied. The State incurred additional expenditure on procurement of 
PPE kits for COVID 19. There was significant delay in supply of the essential 
medical equipment and consumables at the time of emergency even after 
providing exemption under 4(a) of KTTP Act.  Equipment worth ₹95.15 crore 
was yet to be supplied.  MGPLS was not functional in few of the test checked 
HIs, fire safety audit was not conducted  in the test checked HIs.  These 
deficiencies collectively emphasize the critical need for a more streamlined and 
proactive approach. 
 
 
 
 
PA on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services

Executive Summary  
ix 
Maternity Services 
 
Maternity services lacked essential human resource, drugs and pathological 
investigation facilities. These deficiencies significantly hindered the hospitals' 
ability to effectively monitor the health of mothers and newborns, potentially 
impacting maternal and infant mortality rates. Newborns delivered through pre-
term labour remained at risk of serious postnatal complications and neonatal 
deaths.  
 
Support Services 
The provisioning of diagnostic services in the test checked hospitals was sub -
optimal, marred by inadequacy of prescribed equipment.  Distinctive dietary 
requirements for different categories of patients were not ensured.   Dietary 
services to the patients apart from the pregnant women were not provided in 10 
test checked health institutions. These deficiencies could lead to delayed or 
inaccurate diagnoses, reduced emergency response effectiveness, compromised 
patient health due to improper nutrition, and overall lower quality of healthcare 
services provided by the hospitals. 
Auxiliary Services 
 
In the test checked health institutions, air and surface samples were not regularly 
taken for microbiological survey to check for infections. Cleaning and laundry 
services, despite outsourcing, were not satisfactory in most of the hospitals. 
Similarly, bio-medical waste management was inadequate. Most of the health 
institutions did not have SOPs/checklist for hygiene and infection control. 
The impact of inadequate hygiene and infection control practices in health 
institutions could be far-reaching, affecting patient outcomes such as well-being 
of the patients, health care workers. 
 
Recommendation 4: The State Government should draw up an action plan to 
adopt and implement IPHS fully for provisioning of essential OPD, IPD and 
Emergency services in the Health Institutions (HIs).    
Recommendation 5: The State Government should ensure that all essential 
services in Government HI s adhere to IPHS norms by facilitating the 
provision of manpower, drugs, and equipment. This will strengthen auxiliary 
and support services, ultimately enhancing the overall healthcare experience.  
Recommendation 6: The State Government should examine the 
circumstances which led to delays, additional expenditure and non-utilisation 
of equipment required to tackle such emergency situations and take 
appropriate action. 
Recommendation 7: The State Government should set a time limit for all 
Government HIs to obtain valid authorisations/licenses and penalize the 
concerned for any non-compliance.  

 
x 
Management of Drugs and Equipment  
 
The drugs provided to the hospitals were short of their requirements as supplies 
were not commensurate  with the indents by the hospitals. The system was 
unsuccessful in providing an unbroken supply of essential drugs to the patients 
in public health facilities as per its own prescribed Essential Drug List.  
 
Quality assurance of the drugs procured was compromised as the bulk of the 
drug supplies were accepted without the intimation of the quality test reports.  
There were delays in sending samples for testing and in communicating the test 
results rendering the quality mechanism ineffective.  There were six instances 
where the results of the Drug Controller (certified as N ot of Standard Quality) 
varied with the results of the empaneled laboratories.  In these cases, 59 per cent 
of the drugs were consumed before r eceipt of test results.  The quality 
mechanism was thus ineffective. 
 
The norms and parameters prescribed for storage of medicine were not adhered 
to.  Due to non-availability of adequate storage facility, drugs/medicines were 
kept on the floors and without rack system.  
 
Improper assessment of requirement of medical equipment led to redistribution 
to the other health institutions, expiry of the warranty period even before the 
equipment could be put to use and the equipment lying idle. 
  
Recommendation 8: The State Government should prepare a comprehensive 
and well laid down policy for procurement and utilisation of essential drugs 
and equipment in line with IPHS norms and also develop a real time inventory 
monitoring system to address shortages, repairs and maintenance. 
 
Recommendation 9: The State Government should consider freezing that 
batch of medicines, which are taken for quality checks till declaration of the 
results to prevent consumption of NSQ drugs.  It should also consider 
maintaining buffer stock of all essential drugs and medicines to tide over 
shortages arising due to freezing of drugs. 
 
Recommendation 10: A robust inventory management system should be 
implemented to track expiration dates and usage of drugs within the stipulated 
shelf life 
 
Recommendation 1 1: Storage of drugs under conditions prescribed in the 
Drugs and Cosmetics Rules , 1945 to maintain their efficacy should be 
ensured, before being administered to the patients. 
 
Health Care Infrastructure 
 
There was regional disparity in distribution of health care facilities in the State. 
The departments failed to operationalise the completed infrastructure which 
aggravated the problems of inadequate access to quality health care. Patient 
safety in the hospital premises was compromised on account of non-compliance 
with the disaster management g uidelines and lack of proper fire safety 
PA on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services

Executive Summary  
xi 
arrangements in the test checked health institutions. The building and 
operational areas in the test checked health institutions were distributed as per 
the infrastructure available rather than prescribed plan and area. Due to delay in 
completion/non-handing over of buildings built at a cost of ₹228.36 crore, 
activities in the test checked health institutions were not commenced. The 
initiation of critical health care activities was hindered due to above factors and 
contributed to inadequate access to quality healthcare.  
Recommendation 12: The State Government should address the regional 
imbalance in terms of availability of Government HIs.   
Recommendation 13: The State Government should make a comprehensive 
plan for determining the requirement and providing the requisite 
infrastructural facilities in HIs.   
Recommendation 14: The State Government should put in place necessary 
procedures and provisions for effective utilisation of available infrastructural 
facilities to achieve the intended benefits in order to deliver quality health 
services.  
Recommendation 15: The State Government should direct the HIs to set up a 
dedicated Disaster Management Committee for preparation and 
implementation of a disaster management plan for prevention, mitigation and 
response to ensure minimal damage in the event of any disaster. 
 
Inadequate spending on the health care sector. 
The average budget allocation for the period under review was 4.28 per cent, 
which was less than the percentage prescribed by the National Health Policy 
(NHP). The State’s expenditure on the health sector ranged between 0.60 to 0.77 
per cent of GSDP during the period. The departments concerned failed to utilise 
the funds released, which affects  the quality  and accessibility of healthcare 
services across the State.  
Recommendation 16: The State Government should consider enhancing the 
budget allocation of the Health Sector to meet the NHP target. 
Recommendation 17 : The State Government should ensure that funds are 
released timely as per allocation and completely utilised to address the gap in 
the existing health facilities.  
Recommendation 18: The State Government may review the funds being lying 
outside the Government accounts and issue instructions for the timely 
utilization of the funds for the intended purpose. 
 
Implementation of Centrally Sponsored Schemes 
There was a delay in release of matching share by the State Government towards 
NHM programme. The utilisation was around 94 per cent of the funds available 
under the scheme.  The utilisation of funds was not consistent  due to limited 
implementation of various activities under the Quality Assurance Programme . 
Under Kayakalpa Scheme, the number of Health Institutions which received the 

 
xii 
award increased from 103 to 900 during 2016-21. Under LaQshya programme, 
as of October 2022, only 73 HIs have obtained State Certification and 46 HIs 
have obtained National Certification. Only 76 per cent of the claims received 
under PMJAY scheme were settled during the audit period and the funds 
provided under the scheme could not be utilised by the test checked units.   
Recommendation 19:  The State Government should ensure that the funds 
released under the GoI schemes are utilised fully and targets set for 
certification are achieved to assure the public that health care facilities meet 
stipulated standards. 
Recommendation 20: The State Government may ensure the coverage of HIs 
under NQAS in order to maintain the prescribed standards to deliver quality 
health care services. 
Recommendation 21:  The State Government should design a strategy to 
enhance awareness and outreach through various activities for making the 
target population aware of the benefits. 
Recommendation 22: The State Government should put in place a 
mechanism immediately to ensure that its stated commitment for all the issues 
raised in audit are carried out scrupulously and without delay. 
 
Adequacy and effectiveness of regulatory mechanism 
 
Varying levels of deficiencies were observed in compliance/adherence of 
existing regulatory mechanisms. The functioning of regulatory bodies  and 
implementation of norms and regulations was ineffective. Shortage of staff in 
the Drug Control Department hampered drug testing and reporting. Bio-Medical 
Waste management continues to remain a major challenge. Significant number 
of HIs were functioning without valid licenses/authorisation. 
 
The cumulative effects of these deficiencies could lead  to long -term 
consequences, including chronic health issues, environmental degradation, and 
weakening of health institutions. 
 
Recommendation 23:  The State Government should ensure that all utilities 
generating bio -medical waste comply with the provisions with regard to 
authorisation, bar coding,  annual returns to regulate the generation and 
disposal of bio-medical waste. 
Recommendation 24: The State Government should ensure that sufficient 
human resources are provided to Drugs Control Department and Directorate 
of Radio Safety to ensure the safety of public health through constant and 
stringent monitoring. 
Recommendation 25:  The State Government may ensure that various 
regulatory bodies may adopt an adequate and effective monitoring 
mechanism to have conformity with the prescribed standards. 
 
 
PA on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services

Executive Summary  
xiii 
Sustainable Development Goal - 3 
The department established Monitoring and Coordination Committees, 
including a State -level Steering Committee, to formulate action plans for 
achieving SDGs. However, there was no dedicated fund allocation to address 
gaps in achieving SDG 3 targets. Despite performing relatively well compared 
to other states under SDG 3, Karnataka failed to meet its own targets. Concerns 
persist regarding the incidence of TB and the prevalence of tobacco use. 
Recommendation 26: The State Government should ensure that steps are 
taken to formulate a comprehensive plan to achieve the targets under SDG 3. 
 
 

 


 
1 
Chapter - 1: Introduction 
Health is a vital indicator of human development which is a basic ingredient of 
economic and social development. The Sanskrit word ‘Swasthya’ implies 
equilibrium at six levels viz., physiological, tissues, metabolism, excretory 
function, senses, and the mind. “Svasmin stite itisvasta” meaning “those who are 
in equilibrium in the above manner are considered healthy.  India recognises and 
considers right to healthcare and protection a priority.   
 
Under the Constitution, Health is a State subject. Karnataka has developed its own 
healthcare delivery system and introduced (2004) the State Health Policy. This 
was later revised (2017) as Karnataka Integrated Public Health Policy (KIPHP) 
on the lines of the National Health Policy (NHP) 2017. The KIPHP defines the 
mission and vision of the State on Health and Health care with focus on equity in 
healthcare and providing quality healthcare. The policy interventions are 
organised in line with the World Health  Organisation (WHO) health system 
framework and are aimed at universal healthcare, health and well-being and health 
emergencies as envisaged under the WHO 3 -pronged structure.  It is in this 
backdrop that the Performance Audit (PA) on Public Health Infrastructure and 
Management of Health Services in Karnataka has been carried out. 
1.1 Health Services 
The Indian Public Health Standards (IPHS)  2012 envisage that each Health 
Institution (HI) should deliver essential services (minimum assured services) and 
aspire to deliver specialised services to address the needs of patients. Adequate 
provisions for health services such as outpatient services, inpatient services, 
emergency services, maternity services, etc., should be made and these services 
should be delivered in an efficient and effective manner. The various services 
being provided in the HIs are detailed below:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Line services 
i. Outdoor patient department 
ii. Indoor patient department 
iii. Emergency services 
iv. Super specialty (OT, ICU) 
v. Maternity 
vi. Blood bank 
vii. Diagnostic services 
Support services 
i. Oxygen services 
ii. Dietary services 
iii. Laundry services 
iv. Biomedical waste management 
v. Ambulance services 
vi. Mortuary services 
 
Auxiliary services 
i. Patient safety facilities 
ii. Patient registration 
iii. Grievance / complaint 
redressal 
iv. Stores 
 
Resource Management 
i. Building infrastructure 
ii. Human resource 
iii. Drugs and consumables  
iv. Equipment 
 

PA on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
2 
 
1.2 Overview of healthcare facilities in the State 
The landscape of public healthcare facilities is structured into  three levels in 
Karnataka for providing primary care, secondary care, and tertiary care as shown 
in Figure 1.1. 
Figure 1.1: Three levels of public healthcare facilities in Karnataka 
 
The primary and secondary healthcare services are provided through a network of 
District Hospitals (17), Taluk Hospitals (146), Community Health Centres (207), 
Primary Health Centres (2,531) and Sub Centres (9,160) through the Department 
of Health and Family Welfare Services. The Medical Education Department 
provides tertiary healthcare facilities through the Teaching Hospitals attached to 
Medical Colleges at the District levels.  There are 17 Autonomous Medical 
colleges, two Dental Colleges and 10 Super Specialty Hospitals under the Medical 
Education department. 
The Ayurveda, Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homeopathy 
(AYUSH) Department provides healthcare through a network of 159 hospitals (6 
to 275 bedded) and 662 dispensaries functioning across rural and urban areas. 
Apart from the above, the Urban L ocal Bodies (ULBs) also provide healthcare 
services through hospitals and dispensaries at the Ward levels set up in their 
respective zones. In the State, only Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP) 
in Bengaluru Urban District and Hubballi-Dharwad Municipal Corporation 
(HDMC) in Dharwad District have Urban H ealth Centres (UHC s) mainly 
maternity homes.  The ULBs also undertake immunisation/vaccination 
programmes along with the State departments.  
1.3 Organisational Set-up 
The Department of Health and Family Welfare Services (HFW) is headed by the 
Principal Secretary to Government and assisted by the Commissioner. The 
Department of Medical Education (ME) is headed by the Secretary to Government 
and assisted by the Director.  The organisational  setup of Health and Family 
Welfare and Medical Education Departments is as shown in Figure 1.2. 
Three-tier Health Care 
System 
Primary
Health 
and 
Wellness 
Centres/ 
Sub 
Centres
Primary 
Health 
Centres
Secondary
Community 
Health 
Centres
Taluk / 
General 
Hospital
District 
Hospital
Tertiary
Teaching 
Hospitals / 
Super 
Speciality 
Hospitals

Chapter - 1: Introduction 
3 
Figure 1.2: Organisational set-up 
 
The HIs under the jurisdiction of ULBs, which function under the administrative 
control of Additional Chief Secretary to Government, Urban Development 
Department, are headed by a Chief Medical Officer.   
1.4 Status of Health Indicators in the State 
 
Delivery of quality and efficient healthcare services in public health facilities 
plays a significant role in improving the health indicators of the public at large.  
The status of health indicators in the State is shown in the Chart 1.1 below: 
 
Chart 1.1: Health Indicators in the State 
 
Source: Karnataka Economic Survey 2021-22 and SRS bulletins for the respective years 
Health and 
Family Welfare 
Services
Commissioner, 
Health and 
Family Welfare 
Department
Administration of all offices of the department i.e., 
all District Hospitals, Taluk Hospitals, 
CommunityHealth Centres, Primary Health 
Centres.
Director, 
Department of 
Medical 
Education 
Regulate all colleges and universities in 
Government, semi Government, autonomous and 
private sector relating to Health and Medical 
Education.
Managing Director,
Karnataka State  
Medical Services 
Corporation Limited.
Act as the central procurement agency for 
providing all essential drugs, consumables and 
Equipment for all  Health Care Institutions in the 
State
Commissioner,
AYUSH 
Department
Handles matters related to Ayurvedic, Unani 
Hospital, Homoeopathic and other Indian 
Systems of Medicine.
Mission 
Director,
National Health 
Mission
Administration of Centrally sponsored 
programs under National Health Mission
17.6 17.2
20.2
19.5
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
2017 2020
Birth Rate
Birth Rate (per 1000 population)
Karnataka India
6.7
6.36.3
6
5.5
6
6.5
7
2017 2020
Death Rate
Death Rate (per 1000 
population)
Karnataka India

PA on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
4 
 
Maternal Mortality Rate (per 1 lakh 
population) 
Sex ratio at the birth for children born in 
the last five years (females per 1000 males) 
  
Source: NHFS Reports 
As could be seen from the above health indic ators, though Karnataka has done 
better as compared to the National average, there is a vast scope for improvement 
and the situation demands better healthcare services at all levels in order to build 
confidence in the psychology of patients as well as enhance their faith in the 
services. 
1.5 Improvement in overall health Indicators  
As per Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) India Index 2020 -21, Karnataka 
stands third along with Andhra Pradesh, Goa and Uttarakhand with 72 points 
behind Kerala and Tamil Nadu among the Southern States.  However, under SDG-
3, Karnataka with an index score of 78 is placed fifth. Among the Southern States, 
only Tamil Nadu with a score of 81 is above Karnataka. The improvement in the 
performance of the State is shown in Table 1.1 below: 
Table 1.1: Ranking of Karnataka State 
Overall and 
SDG 3 
2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 
Score Rank Score Rank Score Rank 
Overall SDG 64 3 66 4 72 3 
SDG 3: Good 
Health and 
Wellbeing 
69 5 72 3 78 5 
Source-NITI Aayog SDG Index India Reports 
1.8 1.7
2.2 2.0
0
1
2
3
2015-16 2019-21
Fertility Rate
Total Fertility Rate (children 
per woman)
Karnataka India
26.9 25.4
40.7 35.2
0
20
40
60
2015-16 2019-21
Infant Mortality Rate
Infant Mortality Rate (per 1000 
live births)
Karnataka India
97 92
122
97
0
50
100
150
2015-16 2019-21
Maternal Mortality Rate
Karnataka India
910
978
919 929
850
900
950
1000
2015-16 2019-21
Sex Ratio
Karnataka India

Chapter - 1: Introduction 
5 
1.5.1 Karnataka Health Indicators compared with National Health Indicators 
 as per National Family Health Survey-5 (NFHS-5) 
The status of the State in comparison with the National average is detailed in the 
Table 1.2. 
Table 1.2: Karnataka Health Indicators as per NFHS 
Indicator 
NFHS -4 
(2015-16) 
NFHS-5 
(2019-21) 
Karnataka India Karnataka India 
Sex ratio of the total population (females per 1,000 
males) 979 991 1034 1020 
Sex ratio at birth for children born in the last five years 
(females per 1,000 males) 910 919 978 929 
Total fertility rate (children per woman) 1.8 2.2 1.7 2.0 
Neonatal mortality rate (NNMR) 18.5 29.5 15.8 24.9 
Infant mortality rate (IMR) 26.9 40.7 25.4 35.2 
Under-five mortality rate (U5MR) 31.5 49.7 29.5 41.9 
Mothers who had an antenatal check -up in the first 
trimester (per cent) 65.9 58.6 71 70 
Mothers who had at least 4 antenatal care visits ( per 
cent) 70.1 51.2 70.9 58.2 
Mothers whose last birth was protected against 
neonatal tetanus1 (per cent) 88.1 89 93.6 92 
Mothers who consumed iron folic acid for 100 days or 
more when they were pregnant (per cent) 45.2 30 44.7 44.1 
Mothers who consumed iron folic acid for 180 days or 
more when they were pregnant (per cent) 32.6 14.4. 26.7 26 
Registered pregnancies for which the mother received 
a Mother and Child Protection (MCP) card (per cent) 89.3 89.3 97.6 95.9 
Mothers who received postnatal care from a doctor/ 
nurse/ LHV/ ANM/midwife/ other health personnel 
within 2 days of delivery (per cent) 
65.5 62.4 87.4 78 
Average out -of-pocket expenditure per delivery in a 
public health facility (₹) 4824 3197 4954 2916 
Children born at home who were taken to a health 
facility for a check -up within 24 hours of birth ( per 
cent) 
5.6 2.5 12.3 4.2 
Children who received postnatal care from a doctor/ 
nurse /LHV/ ANM/ midwife/ other health personnel 
within 2 days of delivery (per cent) 
NA NA 85.5 79.1 
Institutional births (per cent) 94 78.9 97 88.6 
Institutional births in public facility (per cent) 61.2 52.1 64.8 61.9 
Home births that were conducted by skilled health 
personnel2 (per cent) 3.1 4.3 1.6 3.2 
Births attended by skilled health personnel (per cent) 93.7 81.4 93.8 89.4 
Births delivered by caesarean section (per cent) 23.6 17.2 31.5 21.5 
Births in a private health facility that were delivered 
by caesarean section (per cent) 40.3 40.9 52.5 47.4 
Births in a public health facility that were delivered by 
Caesarean section (per cent) 16.9 11.9 22.6 14.3 
Source: Information furnished by the HFW; State health indicators, which have been shaded green 
above have improved, those which have deteriorated are shaded red 
As could be seen from the above, the percentage of birth delivered by caesarean 
section was more than the national statistics. Further, there was reduction in 
 
1  includes mothers with two injections during the pregnancy for their last birth, or two or more 
injections (the last within 3 years of the last live birth), or three or more injections (the last 
within 5 years of the last birth), or four or more injections ( the last within 10 years of the last 
live birth), or five or more injections at any time prior to the last birth.   
2  Doctor/nurse/LHV/ANM/midwife/other health personnel.  

PA on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
6 
consumption of folic acid tablets by the pregnant women during the period 2015-
16 to 2019-21 which needs to be addressed. 
1.6  Karnataka Integrated Public Health Policy 
The Karnataka Integrated Public Health Policy (KIPHP) aimed to attain the 
highest possible level of good health and well -being of all people in the State to 
be realised through a preventive, promotive, curative, and rehabilitative 
healthcare orientation, with universal access to quality and affordable healthcare 
services to all, and inclusion of health in all developmental policies.   
The scope of the policy provided for:  
• robust human resources management in terms of size, composition, and 
distribution.  
• strengthening health information system (e-hospitals, e-records, e-disease 
information-logistics, e-HR, e-office, telemedicine, e-referral information 
system). 
• comprehensive assessment of requirement of medicines, vaccines and 
equipment. 
• strategic procurement approaches and  
• robust sustainable single payer/pooled financing mechanisms for 
secondary and tertiary care. 
The implementation of the policy was inadequate as norms were either not 
prescribed or the existing national norms were not adopted and where norms were 
prescribed, they were not in accordance with the national norms as shown in 
Table 1.3.   
Table 1.3: Status of adherence to standardisation of services and resources 
Intervention/ 
inputs 
Availability of 
State Government 
norms 
Other 
standards/ 
Norms 
Remarks Reply of the State Government 
and Audit comments 
Outpatient 
Department 
(OPD) / 
Inpatient 
Department 
(IPD) 
No Indian 
Public 
Health 
Standards 
(IPHS) 
The State 
Government did 
not adopt the 
standards for 
various OPD and 
IPD services as 
prescribed in the 
GoI guidelines / 
IPHS. 
The HIs follow the IPHS norms 
and the present infrastructure has 
been delivering services at a 
substantial rate, with regard to 
OPD and IPD care. 
 
During the course of Audit, it was 
noticed that the HIs were not able 
to cater the patients as per the IPHS 
norms in respect of various out and 
inpatient services as brought out in 
the report. 
Human 
Resources 
Yes. Prescribed in 
July 2014. 
IPHS The State norms 
were not in 
accordance with 
IPHS norms. 
Presently HR for PHIs is proposed 
based on the Government order of 
2014 and is supplemented by 
providing additional staff under 
NHM, compulsory rural services 
etc.  Further, action has been 
initiated to augment the 
availability of HR in the PHIs and 
notifications have been invited to 
fill up paramedical and technical 

Chapter - 1: Introduction 
7 
Intervention/ 
inputs 
Availability of 
State Government 
norms 
Other 
standards/ 
Norms 
Remarks Reply of the State Government 
and Audit comments 
posts. As regards adoption of IPHS 
norms, a policy decision is 
required from the Government.  
Drugs and 
Consumables 
Essential Drugs 
List 
IPHS, 
MNH 
Toolkit, 
NHM 
guidelines 
Essential Drug 
List was updated 
annually at time 
of approval of 
selection of 
drugs by the 
State Therapeutic 
Committee and 
Need 
Assessment 
Committee. 
In the financial year 2021 -22 the 
categorisation of drugs was done 
as decided in the Need Assessment 
Committee meeting and the drug 
list was finalised as per National 
List of Essential Medicines 
(NLEM) standards and IPHS 
standards. 
Equipment No IPHS The State 
Government did 
not adopt IPHS 
norms. 
Till date,  the Government 
prioritized provision of adequate 
infrastructure to the health 
facilities.  Now, proper procedures 
have been initiated to assess the 
need, technical specifications, and 
procurement procedure. This is 
undertaken based on gap analysis 
and the Government is in the 
process of purchasing equipment 
as per IPHS norms. 
 Source: Information furnished by HFW 
Since the State Health Policy did not specify any criteria to be followed in respect 
of Outpatient Department (OPD)/Inpatient Department (IPD), management of 
drugs and equipment etc., IPHS norms have been adopted as standard criteria. 
The observations related to the above issues have been discussed in detail in the 
subsequent chapters.  
1.7 Audit Objectives 
The objectives of the Performance Audit (PA) are to: 
• assess the adequacy of the funding for healthcare; 
• assess the availability and management of healthcare infrastructure;  
• assess the availability of drugs, medicines, equipment and other 
consumables;  
• assess the availability of the necessary human resource s at all levels e.g., 
doctors, nursing, paramedics etc; 
• examine the adequacy and effectiveness of the regulatory mechanisms for 
ensuring that quality healthcare services are provided in the public/ private 
healthcare institutions/ practitioners; 
• examine the  State funding and spending of various schemes of the 
Government of India; and 
• assess whether State spending on health has improved the health and well -
being conditions of the people as per SDG-3. 

PA on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
8 
1.8 Scope of Audit 
The  PA covering the period 2016 -17 to 2021 -223 was conducted during 
November 2021 to May 2022 through (i) test check of files/records/information 
in the offices of the Secretariat, Commissioner of HFW, Director of ME, AYUSH 
Department, Karnataka State Medical Supplies Corporation Limited (erstwhile 
Karnataka State Drugs Logistics and Warehousing Society), ULBs and their HIs, 
District Drug Warehouses and District HFW Offices and (ii) field inspection of  
test checked  HIs by way of examination of records, collection of information 
through Questionnaires/Proforma, replies to Audit enquiries, Joint Physical 
Verification (JPV) and beneficiary surveys. 
 
1.8.1 Sampling Methodology 
 
Karnataka State is divided into four revenue divisions for administrative purposes 
and consists of 31 districts and 176 taluks.  Audit adopted the warehouse-wise 
consolidated inward value for the selection of the districts, taluks and HIs .  The 
units were selected using Multistage Stratified Sampling technique  through 
random number tables.  The data was stratified in two layers – revenue division- 
wise districts and taluks/ HIs under the selected districts.  In the first layer, five 
districts were chosen from the four divisions using Simple Random Sampling by 
dividing the data of the divisions into various strata and selecting the districts 
randomly from those strata. A similar methodology (Simple Random Sampling 
by using random number tables) was adopted for selecting taluks/HIs in the 
selected districts.  The number of HIs selected are shown in Chart 1.2 and the list 
of test checked HIs is indicated in Appendix 1.1. 
Chart 1.2: Information on number of test checked units
 
 
3 issues related to human resources, availability of medical equipment and services updated up to 
January 2024. 
•Commissioner, Department of Health and  Family Welfare
•Director, Department of Medical Education
•Karnataka State Medical Services Corporation Limited
•Commissioner, AYUSH Department
•Mission Director, National Health Mission
•Commissioner, Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike
•Director, Municipal Administration
Sampled Commissionerates/Directorates
•Three District Hospitals of selected districts
•Ten Sub Divisional/Taluk Hospitals of selected districts
•Six Community Health Centres (CHCs) of selected taluks
•Five out of 35 Urban Health Centres (UHCs) in the ULBs
•Fourteen out of 52 Primary Health Centres (PHCs)
•Three Medical Colleges (attached hospitals) of  selected districs
•Two  Superspeciality hospitals of selected districts 
•Two AYUSH Hospitals of selected districts
Five districts (Ballari, Bengaluru Urban, Dharwad, Kolar and Mysuru ) for 
field study out of 31 districts selected using Stratified Random Sampling 
Method 

Chapter - 1: Introduction 
9 
Urban Health Centres, mainly providing maternity care services having more than 
20 beds are considered as Community Health Centres.  
In view of limited resources, the sampling methodology was designed to capture 
and evaluate data in a representative manner throughout the year by selecting mid-
month of each quarter. 
An entry conference was held (29 October 2021) with the Principal Secretary, 
HFW; Secretary, ME; Mission Director, National Health Mission; Managing 
Director, Karnataka State Medical Supplies Corporation Limited (KSMSCL); 
Commissioner, AYUSH and Director, HFW to discuss the Audit objectives, Audit 
criteria, Audit scope and methodology. An e xit conference was held ( 28 
September 2022) wherein the findings of the PA were discussed in detail.  The 
State Government furnished (October 2022) the replies which have been 
incorporated in the report.  
1.9 Doctors’/Patient Survey 
Doctors’ Survey: A total of 325 doctors were surveyed in 43 test checked 
hospitals to have an idea about the working condition s and professional 
requirements of the doctors.  About 70 per cent of the doctors felt the 
infrastructure provided to see the patient was adequate.  About 91 per cent were 
aware about the availability of generic drugs in the hospital pharmacy. About 34 
per cent of doctors displayed their registration number in the clinic and were also 
mentioning in the prescription. Further, 93 per cent of doctors felt the need for 
improvement in the health infrastructure in the Government sector. 
Patient Survey: Total 1,260 outpatients were surveyed in 43 test checked 
hospitals. Patients were satisfied with the availability of basic amenities like 
seating facility, drinking water, clean toilets, adequate registration counter, May I 
help desk etc., in all the hospitals except Mysore Medical College. About 57 per 
cent of the surveyed patients were able to complete the registration process within 
15 minutes while it took more than 15 minutes for the others. About 70 per cent 
of the patients stated that all the medicin es prescribed were available. For the 
remaining patients it was either partially available or not available at all.                          
88 per cent of patients visited the respective hospitals either due to affordability 
or due to good facilities and 12 per cent patients visited due to accessibility. 
1.10 Audit Criteria 
The criteria for the PA were derived from the following: 
✓ National Health Policy 2017 
✓ Karnataka Integrated Public Health Policy 2017 
✓ Sustainable Development Goals 
✓ MCI Act 1956 replaced by National Medical Commission Act, 2019 
✓ Indian Public Health Standards (IPHS) 2012 
✓ Indian Medical Degrees Act, 1916 
✓ Professional Conduct, Etiquette and Ethics Regulation 2002 
✓ Clinical Establishment Act, 2010 
✓ Drugs and Cosmetic Act, 1940 

PA on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
10 
✓ Pharmacy Act 1948 and Pharmacy Practice Regulations, 2015 
✓ Regulatory mechanism for AYUSH 
✓ The National Commission for Indian System of Medicine Act, 2020 
✓ The National Commission for Homeopathy Act 
✓ The Indian Nursing Council Act, 1947 
✓ Bio Medical Waste Management Rules 
✓ National Accreditation Board for Testing and Calibration Laboratories 
Accreditation programmes for Testing Laboratories as per ISO/IEC 
17025, Calibration Laboratories as per ISO/IEC 17025, Medical 
Laboratories as per ISO 15189 
✓ National Accreditation Board for Hospitals and Healthcare providers 
accreditation programmes for various healthcare providers. 
✓ Atomic Energy (Radiation Protection) Rules, 2004 
✓ WHO norms 
✓ NHM Assessor’s Guidebook 
✓ Framework for implementation of schemes issued by GoI 
✓ NITI Aayog Reports; and  
✓ Orders, instructions, circulars issued by GoI and State Government from 
time to time. 
1.11 Consideration of Ayushman Bharat in this report 
Government of India (GoI) launched Ayushman Bharat scheme during September 
2018 which includes promotive, preventive, curative, palliative and rehabilitative 
aspects of Universal Healthcare through access of Health and Wellness Centres 
(HWCs) at the primary level and provision of financial protection for accessing 
curative care at the secon dary and tertiary levels through engagement with both 
public and private sector. It adopts a continuum of care approach, comprising two 
inter-related components: 
• Creation of Health and Wellness Centres 
• Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana (PMJAY).  

Chapter - 1: Introduction 
11 
 
The details of HWCs and PMJAY are given in Chapters 5 and 7 of this Report. 
1.12 Initiatives of the Government of Karnataka 
The Government of Karnataka implemented three schemes - Arogya Kavacha, 
Arogya Sahayavani and e-Sanjeevani for the benefit of the people of the State. 
Arogya Kavacha (108 Emergency Service ) – Arogya Kavacha-108 Emergency 
services commenced in the State on 1 November 2008 by HFW under a Public 
Private Partnership with GVK Emergency Management Research Institute 
(EMRI). The role and mission are to save lives by providing a comprehensive 
‘Emergency Response Service’ to those in Medical, Police or Fire emergencies, 
through a single integrated number - 108. This scheme is operated 24x7 
throughout the year with a fleet of 711 equipped ambulances (552  Basic Life  
Support and 159 Advanced Life Support) and is available across the length and 
breadth of the State. During the period 2017 -18 to October 2022, 46.29 lakh 
persons had availed the 108 service. 
e-Sanjeevani - During 2020-21, telemedicine service was implemented using e-
Sanjeevani application developed by Centre for Development of Advanced 
Computing with the objective to provide specialised, quality medical advice for 
patients, to monitor and follow up on patient condition and to reduce waiting time 
in specialised healthcare. There are two applications for teleconsultation viz.,  
e-sanjeevani.in - Doctors working in primary HIs can consult specialists in hub 
centres (district hospitals) of the respective districts and  
e-sanjeevaniopd.in - Through this application the patient can directly call the 
doctor and can get a general/specialist consultation. The application enables free 
-of-cost, safe and structured video -based clinical consultations between a doctor 
and a patient.  
Health and 
Wellness Centres 
(HWCs) 
•Creation of 1,50,000 HWCs by transforming the existing
Sub Centres and Primary Health Centres in February 2018.
•Aim to deliver Comprehensive Primary Health Care
covering maternal and child health services and non-
communicable diseases, including free essential drugs and
diagnostic services.
PM-JAY
•Aims to provide a cover of ₹5 lakh per family per year for
secondary and tertiary care hospitalisation across public and
private empanelled hospitals in India.
•Over 10.74 crore poor and vulnerable entitled families
(approximately 50 crore beneficiaries) are eligible for these
benefits.
•Provides cashless access to healthcare services for the
beneficiary at the point of service, that is, the hospital.
•Benefits of the scheme are portable across the country i.e., a
beneficiary can visit any empanelled public or private
hospital in India to avail cashless treatment.
•Services include approximately 1,387 procedures covering
all the costs related to treatment, including but not limited to
drugs, supplies, diagnostic services, physician's fees, room
charges, surgeon charges, OT, and ICU charges etc.
•Public hospitals are reimbursed for the healthcare services at
par with the private hospitals.

PA on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
12 
This initiative aimed at providing free healthcare services to people even in remote 
areas has helped a large number of people especially during the time of COVID -
19 pandemic.  So far 60.47 lakh patient consultations have been carried out in the 
State. Karnataka stands second in the number of e-sanjeevani consultations after 
Andhra Pradesh in the country.   
1.13 Acknowledgement 
Audit acknowledges the cooperation of the State Government including  the 
Principal Secretary, Heath and Family Services; the Principal Secretary, Medical 
Education and the Principal Secretary, Urban Development Department. Audit 
also appreciates the assistance provided by the field functionaries of these 
departments for smooth conduct of the Audit. 
1.14 Past Audits 
This office conducted PAs on the following topics: 
(i) PA on Procurement and distribution of drugs and chemicals for the period 
2007-08 to 2011-12 (Para 2.1 of Report No. 2 of 2013).  The Public Accounts 
Committee (PAC) discussed the PA during the period September 2015 to April 
2016 and placed (August 2016) its report containing the recommendations.   
(ii) PA on Health care facilities in State Sector Hospitals including 
Autonomous and Teaching Hospitals covering the period 2010 -11 to 2015-16 
(Para 2.1 of Report No. 1 of 2016).  This report is yet to be discussed. 
(iii) PA on Arogya Kavacha – 108 Project for the period 2014 -15 to 2018-19 
(Para 2.1 of Report No. 3 of 2020).  The PAC discussed this report during May 
2022 and is yet to give its recommendations. 
1.15 Audit Findings 
This report has been structured keeping in mind the major components of 
healthcare i.e., sufficiency of funding in health sector, availability of 
infrastructure, drugs, equipment and Human Resources, etc. Audit findings 
relating to the identified components and the factors that contribute towards their 
achievement have been discussed in detail in the succeeding chapters. 
Chapter 2 Human Resources  
Chapter 3 Healthcare services  
Chapter 4 Availability of Drugs /Medicines, Equipment, and other 
Consumables 
Chapter 5 Healthcare Infrastructure  
Chapter 6 Adequacy of funds for the Healthcare Sector 
Chapter 7 Implementation of Centrally Sponsored Schemes 
Chapter 8 Adequacy and effectiveness of the regulatory mechanisms 
Chapter 9 Sustainable Development Goal – 3 
 

 
 


 
13 
Chapter - 2: Human Resources 
 
The State Government's manpower norms fell short of the IPHS standards, 
particularly for hospitals with over 300 beds, where staffing requirements were not 
specified. There was a lack of systematic analysis to revise staff numbers, with no 
action plan to address identified gaps. Vacancies for Doctors, Nurses, Paramedics, 
and others ranged from 29 per cent to 53 per cent, with significant disparities across 
different hospital tiers  under HFWD . Doctor shortages were particularly 
pronounced in tertiary care facilities. A YUSH hospitals faced an overall vacancy 
of 59 per cent, raising concerns about service quality.  
 
2.1 Assessment of Human Resources 
As per KIPHP 2017, the Government shall review from time to time, the norms, 
and standards for human resources. Adequate manpower in medical services is a 
critical component having a direct bearing on patient care.  The scope of the policy 
stipulates robust human resources management in terms of size, composition, and 
distribution in the public HIs.  
Audit however, observed that the State Government had not taken up periodic 
assessments for revision of manpower and no action plan was prepared to address 
the gap. The State had approved norms for staff for various categories of medical 
institutions in October 1980 which was revised only in July 2014. The State, 
however, did not adopt IPHS norms. 
 
Comparison with IPHS norms showed the following: 
 
❖ The sanctioned strength under doctors, staff nurses and lab technicians were 
less than the essential number as per IPHS norms. 
❖ There was no sanctioned post of Dietician and Rehabilitation Therapist in 
any of the HIs as per IPHS norms. 
❖ There was no sanctioned post of Dermatology Technician, Cyto-technician, 
Audio metrician and Counsellor in DHs as per IPHS norms. 
❖ The State had not prescribed the staff requirement for hospitals with more 
than 300 beds. 
The comparison of State norms with IPHS norms is detailed in Appendix 2.1. It 
could be seen that the assessment was not realistic. Further, the HIs (District level 
and Taluk level Hospitals) had less sanctioned strength as per IPHS norms with 
regard to the  main manpower (doctors/nurses/paramedics) other than the 
management and supporting staff. There are 82 sanctioned posts as per State norms 
whereas IPHS guidelines recommend 122 in addition to the three desirable posts 
for Taluk Level Hospital (up to 100 bedded). There was a shortage of about 45 per 
cent and 53 per cent in respect of doctors/specialists and nurse cadres respectively 
in comparison4 with the IPHS in THs. 
 
 
4 Comparison has been done only for THs due to uniformity in sanctioned beds.  

PA on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
14 
 
2.2 Availability of Human Resources in the Health Departments 
An organisation needs to deploy and utilize its available manpower effectively and 
optimally to achieve its purpose. This can be done through manpower planning to 
ensure that the right number and the right kind of people are placed for efficient and 
effective working of the system. Audit analysed the availability of the staff for the 
efficient functioning of the healthcare system under all systems of medicines across 
the State and the details are as depicted in Table 2.1. 
Table 2.1:Status of the manpower position in Government Health 
Departments 
Department Name Sanctioned 
Strength 
Working 
Strength 
Vacant 
Posts 
Vacancy 
Percentage 
Department of Health and 
Family Welfare  69,9215 37,940 31,981 46 
 
Department of Medical 
Education 
27,533 16,473 11,060 40 
Department of AYUSH 4,380 1,803 2,577 59 
ESIC 3,191 1,331 1,860 58 
Department of Drug Controller 786 444 342 44 
Karnataka State Medical 
Supplies Corporation Ltd. 96 46 50 52 
Total 1,05,907 58,037 47,870  
Source: Data furnished by the Commissionerate/Directorates -January 2024 
As could be seen from the above, there was a shortage of manpower ranging from 
40  per cent to 59 per cent in Government HIs which could affect the quality of the 
health services in the State. 
2.2.1 Availability of staff in various posts under Department of Health and 
 Family Welfare 
IPHS guidelines prescribe the norms for availability of requisite human resources 
in primary and secondary healthcare institutions. However, the State Government 
did not adopt the IPHS norms for sanction of posts for these institutions. The status 
of the s anctioned and working strength in the Department of Health and Family 
Welfare in the State is shown in Chart 2.1. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5  inclusive of staff related to clinical (doctors, nurses, paramedics, technicians etc.) and non-
clinical services (accounts, housekeeping, drivers, etc.)  

Chapter 2-Human Resources 
15 
Chart 2.1 Vacancy Position6 in Department of Health and Family Welfare 
 
Source: Information furnished by the Department 
Analysis of availability of staff under each system of medicine in the HFWD 
revealed that the availability of doctors was around 71 per cent of the sanctioned 
strength. And in respect of supporting staff viz., staff nurses, paramedics and others, 
the availability of staff was around 47 to 65 per cent of the sanctioned strength. 
2.2.2 Distribution of available manpower in Department of Health and 
 Family Welfare 
As against the sanctioned strength of 69,921 posts across the State under all 
categories of staff under HFWD, 31,981 (46 per cent ) posts remained vacant 
(January 2024). The status of manpower positions of specific posts in the HFWD is 
given in Appendix 2.2. 
The vacancy position was significantly high in the districts of Kodagu (68 per cent), 
Chamarajanagar (65 per cent ), Chikkaballapura ( 60 per cent) and Dakshin a 
Kannada (58 per cent). District-wise vacancy position of all categories of staff is 
shown in Figure 2.17. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 As of January 2024. 
7 District Vijayanagara (carved out of District Ballari) was formed during 2021, the number of HIs 
in that district were shown in Ballari. Therefore, there is depiction of 0 in that district. 
6708
8817
23743
20121
4778 5708
13895
9473
1930 3109
9848 10648
28.77 35.26 41.48 52.92
Doctors Staff Nurses Paramedicals Others
No. of Positions
Sanction
 Working
 Vacancy
 Vacant % Linear (Vacancy)

PA on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
16 
Figure 2.1: District wise vacancy position (in percentage) in Department of 
Health and Family Welfare 
 
Source: Information furnished by the Department 
2.2.3 Uneven distribution of doctors at district level  
Audit noticed a wide disparity in sanctioned strength of doctors with respect to 
population across the State as shown in Figure 2.2 8. While in Bengaluru Urban 
 
8 District Vijayanagara (carved out of District Ballari) was formed during 2021, the number of HIs 
in that district were shown in Ballari. Therefore, there is depiction of 0 in that district.  
 


Chapter 2-Human Resources 
17 
district, the ratio was 1: 108118, in Dharwad and Raichur districts, the ratio was              
1:18205 and 1:14640 respectively. 
Figure 2.2: Sanctioned Doctor to Population Ratio 
Source: Information furnished by the Department 
Audit analysis revealed that  ratio of working doctors to population of the districts 
was asymmetrical as shown in Figure 2.3 9. Doctor to population ratio was most 
adverse in the Bengaluru Urban (1: 121979), Belagavi ( 1:22147) and  Raichur  
(1:25288) districts. 
 
 
 
9 District Vijayanagara (carved out of District Ballari) was formed during 2021, the number of HIs 
in that district were shown in Ballari. Therefore, there is depiction of 0 in that district. 
 


PA on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
18 
Figure 2.3: Working Doctor to Population Ratio 
 
Source: Information furnished by the Department 
The vacancy position of doctors in the districts is depicted in the Figure 2.410. 
 
 
 
 
 
10 District Vijayanagara (carved out of District Ballari) was formed during 2021, the number of 
HIs in that district were shown in Ballari. Therefore, there is depiction of 0 in that district.  


PA on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
20 
Figure 2.5: Skewed distribution of Radiographers/Radiologists technicians in 
the districts 
 
Source: Information furnished by the Department 
Radiographers/radiologist technicians were working in excess of their sanctioned 
strength in Chamarajanagar and Mysuru districts whereas there was a shortage of 
more than 50 per cent in Chikkaballapura, Kalaburagi and Yadagiri districts. 
Further Audit observed that there was also a skewed distribution of staff nurses i n 
the districts which is shown in Figure 2.6. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Chapter 2-Human Resources 
21 
Figure 2.612 Skewed distribution of staff nurses 
 
Source: Information furnished by the Department 
 
The shortage in nurse cadres ranged from 17.24 per cent in Vijayapura district to 
58.90 per cent in Chikkaballapura district. 
2.3 Availability of Human Resources in the  Health Institutions in the 
 State 
The delivery of services through the public health sector in India follows the three-
tier structure of primary, secondary, and tertiary healthcare services. This covers 
both rural and urban areas.  For providing facilities of comprehensive healthcare 
services, the healthcare facilities should be equipped with the required number of 
staff. However, it was observed that there was shortage of manpower in the primary, 
secondary and tertiary healthcare facilities in the State. The status of the sanctioned 
strength (Doctors, Nurses, P aramedics and others) and person in position in the 
primary, secondary and  tertiary healthcare facilities in the State is shown in  
Chart 2.2. 
The status of the Person in Position against the sanctioned strength in the Health 
Care Facilities is depicted in the following Charts 2.2(a) and 2.2 (b). 
 
 
12 District Vijayanagar (carved out of District Ballari) was formed during 2021, the number of HIs 
in that district were shown in Ballari. Therefore, there is depiction of 0 in that district.  


PA on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
22 
Chart 2.2 (a): Status of the manpower in the CHCs and PHCs 
 
Source: Information furnished by the Department 
The percentage of vacancies in respect of doctors was 27 in PHCs and 31 in CHCs; 
vacancies of nurses were 67 per cent in PHCs to 17 per cent in CHCs.  In the case 
of others post, the vacancy p osition was 51 per cent in PHCs and 64 per cent in 
CHCs.  However, in respect of Paramedics, there was shortage of 47 per cent in 
PHCs and an excess of 42 per cent in CHCs. 
The percentage of vacancies in Districts and Taluk Hospitals  ranged  between 04  
and 7 5 in respect of doctors, nurses, paramedics and others as shown in Chart 
2.2(b). District wise vacancy position of manpower is detailed in Appendix 2.3. 
Chart 2.2(b): Status of the manpower in the District and Taluk Hospitals 
 
Source: Information furnished by the Department 
The  manpower position in Tertiary Care Health Facilities (Department of Medical 
Education) is shown in Table 2.2. 
2473 2432
20614
7231
1804 811
11003
3550
1089 1341 1062
3841
752 1115 1503 1393
Doctors Staff Nurses Paramedics Others
Persons in Position
Type of Staff
PHC Sanctioned strength PHC Working strength
CHC Sanctioned strength CHC Working strength
2435
3506
1589
6433
1538
2642
1043
1914
711
1538
528
2616
684
1140
346
641
Persons in Position
Type of Staff
TH Sanctioned strength TH Working strength DH Sanctioned strength DH Working strength
Doctors Staff Nurses Paramedics Others

Chapter 2-Human Resources 
23 
Table 2.2: Manpower Position in Department of Medical Education13 
Category Sanctioned Posts Working Strength Vacant 
Posts 
Per centage 
of vacant 
posts 
Doctors 6,255 3,908 2,347 38 
Nurses 8,947 5,808 3,139 35 
Paramedics 2,989 2,063 926 31 
Other 9,342 4,694 4,648 50 
Total 27,533 16,473 11,060 40 
Source:Information furnished by the Department 
It could also be seen that the vacancy of doctors at tertiary care institutions was high 
in comparison with that of primary and secondary care institutions. The vacancy of 
the nurses in tertiary care institutions was also high.   
Further analysis showed that there was  overall shortage of 40 per cent in all cadres 
in teaching hospitals and Super Speciality hospitals (SS). The vacancy position 
ranged from 11 per cent  (Raichur Institute of Medical Sciences ) to 80 per cent  
(Shivamogga Institute of Medical Sciences) under Teaching Hospitals and from 
eight per cent  (Institute of Nephro -Urology, Bengaluru) to 80 per cent  (Rajiv 
Gandhi Institute of Chest Sciences, Bengaluru) under Superspeciality hospitals.   
In the test-checked tertiary healthcare facilities, the shortage of manpower ranged 
from 33  to 46 per cent as shown in Chart 2.3. 
Chart 2.3 Status of shortage in test-checked tertiary healthcare facilities 
 
Source: Information furnished by the Department 
Audit noticed that posts of 441  doctors (33 per cent), 1,094 nurses (43 per cent),            
178 Paramedics (33 per cent) and 1 ,655 others (46 per cent) were vacant against 
the sanctioned strength. 
 
13  as per the information furnished by 29 HIs as of January 2024. 
1345
2524
542
3584
904
1430
364
1929
441
1094
178
1655
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
Doctors Staff Nurses Paramedicals Others
Persons in Position
Type of Staff
Sanction Working Vacancy

PA on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
24 
Analysis showed that the sanctioned strength was not commensurate with the 
number of OPD and IPD cases which had increased many folds from 7,94,54,696 
and 49,97,489 in 2016-17 to 11,66,56,422 and 66,07,943 in 2022-23 respectively 
in all the HIs under HFWD. The department had also not revised accordingly the      
sanctioned strength of doctors vis-à-vis the caseload.  
2.3.1 Human resources under AYUSH 
AYUSH (Ayurveda, Yoga, Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homoeopathy) are six 
alternative systems of medicines prevalent and practiced  in India. National Rural 
Health Mission was launched in 2005 with the stated aim of integrating A YUSH 
practitioners into national health programs, including in primary healthcare 
(AYUSH medical officers at community health centres, paraprofessionals, etc.) and 
to provide support for research in the field to complement the services, the required 
manpower needs to be recruited. The status of manpower in the AYUSH HIs in the 
State is shown in Table 2.3. 
Table 2.3: Status of the manpower in the AYUSH Institutions 
Name of the post Sanctioned posts Working 
strength 
Vacant 
posts 
Percentage of 
vacant posts 
Doctor 1,343 835 508 37.83 
Nurse 362 119 243 67.13 
Paramedics 554 167 387 69.86 
Other 2,121 682 1,439 67.85 
Total 4,380 1,803 2,577 58.84 
Source:Information furnished by the Department 
While the overall vacancy was  about 59 per cent,  vacancy position in  cadre of 
nurses, paramedics and others was more than 60 per cent.  The shortage in  
manpower could result in the quality of the services provided.  
The status of manpower in test-checked AYUSH HIs is shown in Chart 2.4. 
Chart 2.4: Status of manpower in test-checked AYUSH Health Institutions 
 
Type of Posts 
Source: Information furnished by the Department 
7 6 1
21
6
15
5 4 1
42
3
39
17
10 7
29
13 16
23
2
21
64
20
44
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Sanctioned posts
Working strength
Vacant posts
Sanctioned posts
Working strength
Vacant posts
Sanctioned posts
Working strength
Vacant posts
Sanctioned posts
Working strength
Vacant posts
Doctor Nurse Paramedics Other
No. of Posts
Govt. Unani Medical College & Hospital, Bengaluru
Govt. Ayurveda Medical College & Hospital, Mysuru

Chapter 2-Human Resources 
25 
In the test checked HIs under AYUSH, there was a shortage of 33 per cent, 62 per 
cent and 79 per cent in respect of doctors, staff nurses and paramedics respectively. 
The position of manpower in other  categories was also short of  the sanctioned 
strength.  
2.3.2 Status of Manpower in Health Institutions under Urban Local Bodies. 
Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) also provide healthcare services through UHCs. In the 
State, only Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP) in Bengaluru Urban 
District and Hubballi -Dharwad Municipal Corporation (HDMC) in Dharwad 
District have UHCs mainly maternity homes.  The status of men in position s14 
(Doctors, Nurses, Paramedics and Others) as against the sanctioned posts in the HIs 
under the jurisdiction of ULBs is shown in Chart 2.5. 
Chart 2.5: Position of staff in Health Institutions under ULBs 
 
   Source: Information furnished by the Department 
As could be seen from the above, there was excess doctors and paramedic s staff, 
whereas there was a vacancy in cadre of nurses and other supporting staff.  
The State Government stated (October 2022) that steps were being taken to fill up 
the vacant posts by the State and District Health Societies. It further stated that to 
bridge the gap/vacancy of Medical Offices and specialist under NHM, steps had 
been taken to depute  Post Graduate students for one year  of compulsory rural 
service. 
2.3.3 Position of Department-wise manpower in the test checked Health 
Institutions 
A hospital  is an institution that is built, staffed, and equipped for 
the diagnosis of disease; for the  treatment, both medical and surgical, of the sick 
and the injured; and for their housing during this process. To better serve the wide-
ranging needs of the patients, there are different departments in a hospital. To 
provide effective and qualitative healthcare services, the doctors with various 
specialties are an important part of an HI.   
 
14 as of May 2023. 
62
123
26
162
96 81
40
129
-54.84
34.15
-53.85
20.37
DOCTORS NURSES PARAMEDICS OTHERS
Type of Staff
SANCTIONED IN POSITION % OF EXCESS/SHORTAGE

PA on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
26 
The status of the availability of the specialists and other  important staff in the test 
checked HIs are shown in the Charts 2.6 to 2.8 below: 
Chart 2.6: Availability of specialists in test checked Super Speciality 
Health Institutions 
 
Source: Information furnished by the Department 
Analysis showed that there was a shortage of 26 per cent, 50 per cent and 35 per 
cent in the departments of paediatrics, orthopedics, and others respectively in Indira 
Gandhi Institute of Child Health  (IGICH) and a huge shortage (58 per cent ) of 
psychiatrists in the Dharwad Institute of Mental Health and Neurosciences 
(DIMHANS). 
Chart 2.7: Availability of specialist doctors in test checked Medical Colleges 
 
Source: Information furnished by the Department 
2 1
38
28
6 31 1
63
41 45
19
SANCTIONED IN POSITION SANCTIONED IN POSITION
IGICH DIMHANS
Number of Specialists
Specialists in Test checked SS hospitals
ENT Paediatrics Orthopaedics Dermatology & venereology Others Psychiatry
44
130
80
111
85
15
93
22
83
27
17
24
28
15
16
9
34
20
56
153
53
74
39
32
15
16
18
15
9
276
107
37
95
60
88
64
18
81
18
71
23
10
22
17
7
12
5
14
7
28
126
40
59
31
20
11
13
11
13
6
127
65
No. of Posts
Specialities
SANCTIONED IN POSITION

Chapter 2-Human Resources 
27 
The staff position in the hospitals attached to the Medical Colleges (MC) also 
witnessed huge shortage of doctors/specialists in oncology, burns and plastic 
surgery, paediatrics, general medicine, urology, neurology and cardiology 
departments whereas they were an excess in dental department. The shortage of 
these doctors will overload the available doctors with patients which could impact 
delivery of quality services.  
Chart 2.8: Availability of doctors/specialists in test checked District and 
Taluk Hospitals 
 
Source: Information furnished by the Department 
The vacancy of doctors/specialists and other staff in District and Taluk level HIs 
ranged from 29 per cent to 100 per cent. There were no staff available in respect of 
the services such as burns, microbiology, forensics , biochemistry, dermatology, 
urology, nephrology etc. The shortage in services (general surgery, ophthalmology, 
psychiatry, emergency medicine, anaesthesia, and radiology) w ere more than 50 
per cent. 
The overall status of the availability of the specialist doctors against the sanctioned 
strength in the districts is given in the Appendix 2.4.    
2.3.4 Drugs Controller Department 
Drugs Controller Department  is responsible for the quality, safety, efficacy and 
rational use of drugs at controlled prices, monitoring the collection and supply of 
safe blood and blood components, scrutini sing the misleading advertisements to 
safeguard the interests of the unwary people. Officers of this department also draw 
the samples of Drugs and Cosmetics for the purpose of test or analysis to ascertain 
quality.  To ensure the quality assurance of the essential drugs/medicines and 
consumables in time, the sufficient staff is required. However, it was observed that 
there was huge vacancy in cadre of drugs inspector (88 per cent), lab supervisor              
(56 per cent) and lab technician  (75 per cent). The position of manpower  in the 
Drugs Controller Department is shown in Table 2.4. 
 
15
20
26 24
17
24
38
4
16
11
4 2 1 1
17
22
8 6
1 1 2
10
41
9
13 14
8 8
16
27
1
10 7
0 0 0 0
4
10
2 0 0 0 0 0
19
No. of posts
Sanctioned In position

PA on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
28 
Table 2.4: Human Resource under Drugs Controller Department 
Source: Information furnished by the Department 
2.3.5 Availability of ASHA workers 
Accredited Social Health Activist (ASHA) is a health worker in the community who 
creates awareness on health and its social determinants and mobilize the community 
towards local health planning and increased utili sation and accountability of the 
existing health services. Guidelines on ASHA of NHM prescribe one ASHA per 
1,000 population. Audit analysed the availability of ASHAs and noticed shortage 
in the cadre in all the districts as shown in Chart 2.9.  
Chart 2.9 District wise shortfall (per cent) in availability of ASHAs  
 
Source: Information furnished by the Department 
 
 
 
34
70
30 33
87
31 29
21 22 19
42
33
52
36
21 19
38
12
47
21 25
48
35 28 29 25 26
9 7
32 31
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Bagalakote
Ballari
Belagavi
Bengaluru Rural
Bengaluru Urban
Bidar
Chamarajanagar
Chikkaballapur
Chikkamagalur
Chitradurga
Dakshina Kannada
Davanagere
Dharwad
Gadag
Hassan
Haveri
Kalaburagi
Kodagu
Kolar
Koppal
Mandya
Mysuru
Raichur
Ramanagar
Shivamogga
Tumkur
Udupi
Uttara Kannada
Vijayanagar
Vijayapura
Yadagiri
Shortfall (%)
Name of the District
Post Name Sanctioned 
Posts 
Working 
Strength 
Vacant 
Posts 
Percentage of 
Vacant Posts 
Drugs Controller  1 1 0 0 
Additional Drugs 
Controller 1 1 0 0 
Principal Scientific Officer 1 1 0 0 
Deputy Drugs Controller 13 13 0 0 
System Analyst 1 0 1 100 
Assistant Drugs Controller 60 55 5 8.33 
Chief Scientific Officer 19 17 2 10.53 
Drugs Inspector 112 13 99 88.39 
Junior Scientific Officer 113 109 4 3.54 
Gazetted Assistant 6 5 1 16.67 
Lab Supervisor 18 8 10 55.56 
Lab Technician (Drugs) 28 7 21 75.00 
Lab Technician 10 0 10 100 
Superintendent 33 25 8 24.24 
Statistician 1 0 1 100 
First Division Assistant 69 52 17 24.64 
Second Division Assistant 46 35 11 23.91 
Lab Attender 56 23 33 58.93 

Chapter 2-Human Resources 
29 
2.3.6 Recruitment of manpower 
State Government recruited manpower for different cadres in the HIs in the HFWD. 
The recruitment done for the period 2016-17 to 2022-23 is shown in Table 2.5. 
Table 2.5 Recruitment of manpower (Health and Family Welfare Services) 
Financial Year Number of employees recruited 
2016-17 1,530 
2017-18 19 
2018-19 2,635 
2019-20 883 
2020-21 1,048 
2021-22 0 
2022-23 0 
Total 6,115 
 Source: Information furnished by the Department 
Against the vacancy position of 31 ,981, only 6 ,115 (19 per cent) manpower was 
recruited for the period 2016 -23. The cadre wise recruitment of manpower  during 
2016-17 to 2022-23 is shown in Table 2.6. 
Table 2.6: Recruitment of manpower cadre wise 
Source: Information furnished by the Department 
As could be seen from the above chart, recruitment was done mainly in the cadre 
of doctors, staff nurse, pharmacist and multipurpose health workers . The 
recruitment in these cadres did not commensurate with the shortage. No recruitment 
was done in other cadres such as medical lab technologist, OT attendant and  
radiographers etc., during the years 2016-17 to 2022 -23. The status of manpower 
recruited in the Department of Medical Education is shown in Table 2.7. 
 
 
Post 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 Total 
S      
Nu    7 2    977 883       2, 62  
M d   l 
O               1, 48      1, 48  
Mul  pu p    
H  l h 
   k    M  
491   1,61          2,1 6  
 h  m      197             197 
L b 
T  h       83 19           1 2  
Oph h lm   
A          7    43         1   

PA on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
30 
Table 2.7 Recruitment of Manpower 
Financial Year  Number of Employees recruited15 
2016-17 1,648 
2017-18 1,387 
2018-19 755 
2019-20 1,257 
2020-21 720 
2021-22 984 
2022-23 1,143 
Total 7,894 
        Source: Information furnished by the Department 
Audit observed that out of total vacancy of 11,060; recruitment was done for 7,894 
positions during the year 2016-17 to 2022-23. 
2.4 Asymmetric distribution of staff  
Adequate and qualified manpower is a sine qua non for the empowerment of HIs to 
deliver quality services to the patients. IPHS envisage that doctors and nurses 
should be available round the clock in  IPD to provide due medical care to the 
inpatients. However, uneven distribution in deployment of the staff vis-à-vis the 
sanctioned strength was observed in the test checked HIs. Audit noticed in the test 
checked HIs that: 
❖ DH, Kolar had a shortage of doctors of four per cent and K C General 
Hospital on the other hand had excess doctors of 25 per cent.   
❖ TH, HD Kote had a shortage of doctors (1 3 per cent) and excess of other 
staff (seven per cent).  TH, K R Puram had excess of doctors (19 per cent) 
and shortage of other staff (39 per cent). 
❖ TH Navalgund had a shortage of doctors (57 per cent) and excess of staff 
nurses (10 per cent). DH, Ballari had excess of doctors (21 per cent). 
❖ Similarly, while IGICH, Karnataka Institute of Medical Sciences (KIMS) 
Hubballi, KC General Hospital, Mysuru Medical College and Research 
Institute (MMCRI), Mysuru , Bangalore Medical College and Research 
Institute (BMCRI), Bengaluru and DH, Kolar had shortage of paramedical 
staff, DH, Ballari, THS, Kalaghatagi, KR Puram, Kudligi and Yelahanka 
had excess staff. 
❖ In PHC Bettadapura, there was shortage of one doctor whereas there was 
excess in PHC Annigeri. In respect of nurses, there was an excess in PHC 
Addagal, shortage in PHC Kittur. 
❖ In the HIs under the jurisdiction of ULB, there was excess of doctors and 
nurses in BBMP HIs Sirsi Road and Halasuru respectively, while deficiency 
in the number of nurses and other staff was noted i n HDMC health centre, 
Dharwad.  
Due to the uneven distribution and non-deployment of excess staff to staff deficient 
HIs, the required services were not functional in the test checked HIs as detailed in 
 
15 as per the information furnished by 29 HIs. 

Chapter 2-Human Resources 
31 
Appendix 2. 5. The deployment of staff was also not commensurate with the 
increase of both in-patients and outpatients. 
Further, it was observed that IGICH  had 583 
staff members working against the 205 
sanctioned posts. The institution 
hired/outsourced 378 staff as per the approval 
of the Finance Committee/Governing Council 
of the Institute  and no  approval of the 
Government was obtained .  Though, the 
salaries of the entire staff, including 
contractual staff, were being paid from the 
Government grants. Thus, there was no 
internal control mechanism to scrutinize the 
proposal sent by the HIs at the Government 
level.  
 
Attender of the patient helping the 
doctor in the treatment of the patient at 
IGICH, Bengaluru. 
2.5 Operation of posts without sanction 
The State Government upgraded (November 1980) PHC, HD Kote to General 
Hospital with bed strength of 50 and 23 sanctioned posts. The pre-existing PHC had 
20 sanctioned posts like Block Health Officer, Senior/Junior Female and Male 
Health Assistants etc., with salaries funded from the Zilla Panchayat budget. 
However, upon upgrading the cadre posts, the earlier posts were to be transferred 
to needy hospitals that had these sanctioned posts, which was not done. The hospital 
was further upgraded (January 2007) to 100 bed Taluk Hospital and an additional 
51 posts were sanctioned.  These cadres were not included in additional posts.  
Consequently, these posts continued to be in operation without sanction.  While 15 
of these staff retired, five of them continue to draw salary and allowances in the 
hospitals from out of the State budget.  
2.6  Diplomate de National Board (Course)  
To encourage and support the State and UT Governments in developing and 
adopting innovative solutions to improve healthcare services, delivery systems 
addressing the shortage of specialists and strengthening district hospitals to provide 
quality care , NHM started programme for higher courses. 14 District/ General 
Hospitals were identified for starting Diplomate de National Board (DNB) Courses, 
which also involves procurement of infrastructure16  like equipment, furniture etc., 
by these Hospitals/Institutes to help in augmenting the shortage of specialists 
serving in hospitals of HFW. 
The DNB course requires that one of the faculty members from a Medical College 
serve as an adjunct faculty and Post Graduate teacher in each of the Specialty under 
DNB programme. It was also required to have a tie up with a Medical College for 
utilizing fa cilities for Basic Science teaching, Research Methodology, Thesis 
Guides, etc., in the Medical College.  
 
 
16 General Medicine, General Surgery, OBG and Paediatric. 


PA on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
32 
Audit observed in test check cases, the DNB courses in three DHs  
(Chikkamagaluru, Bagalakote and Vijayapura) were  not approved even after 
   u    g  xp  d  u      ₹128.47 l kh    w  d                      u  u   
(equipment, furniture and other items) as illustrated in Table 2.8. 
Table 2.8: Audit observation on DNB courses 
                                                   (₹ in lakhs)                                                                                       
Name of the 
Hospital Courses Applied but not approved Expenditure incurred 
on infrastructure 
DH 
Chikkamagaluru 
General Medicine, General Surgery, 
OBG and Pediatric. 52.00 
DH, Bagalakote General Surgery, Pediatrics and OBG 73.95 
DH, Vijayapura Pediatrics, OBG, General Surgery, 
General medicine. 02.52 
Total 128.47 
Source: Information furnished by the Department 
The courses applied by the three HIs were not approved by the National Board due 
to non-availability of qualified faculty members/consultants as per norms and non-
compliance with the accreditation requirements. In DH, Chikkamagaluru, the 
procurement was made after the date of rejection from N ational Board of 
Examination (NBE), New Delhi.   
Thus, inaction on the part of the HIs to take necessary actions on time resulted in 
loss of opportunity of having specialist doctors for the healthcare services. 
2.7 Non-recruitment of Biomedical Engineer 
According to IPHS norms, there shall be one post for Biomedical Engineer in the 
hospitals with a bed strength of 100 and more. Biomedical Engineer is speciali sed 
in management, maintenance, supervision of external service provider, needs 
assessment, planning, and user training (as per WHO).  
None of the test checked HIs (DHs/THs) had any such sanctioned posts, nor did 
they recruit any Biomedical Engineer/Bio-Medical Technician, except in Hospitals 
attached to the Medical Colleges, for ensuring proper maintenance and up -keep of 
medical equipment.  
The State Government stated (October 2022) that it had biomedical equipment 
maintenance and management through outsource from 2018 onwards.  Further, two 
Biomedical engineers for each district had been hired under NHM.   
Audit observed that the Biomedical equipment maintenance and management was 
yet to be taken off completely as discussed in Para 4.5.6. 
 
 
 

Chapter 2-Human Resources 
33 
2.8 Training for use of medical equipment 
Training of technical staff is critical for the safety of patients and users, and to deal 
with routine repairs and maintenance and calibration of equipment. Accordingly, 
training is to be given by manufacturers and suppliers. Although procurement, 
maintenance and utilisation of medical equipment is of speciali sed nature, only 
demonstration was arranged by the suppliers at the time of installation to the staff, 
who are not technically qualified to perform specialised activities related with 
maintenance. Due to the non-availability of these technicians, special care of these 
equipment could not be taken, which was evident from the observation on medical 
equipment remaining non-functional. 
The State Government stated that training of technical staff for maintenance of 
medical oxygen system was rolled out at State level for biomedical engineers.  
The reply is specific to training of staff for medical oxygen system and does not 
address the training of manpower for handling other medical equipment.  
2.9 Manpower in Private Hospitals 
Manpower in private hospitals in the State could not be assessed due to lack of 
effective implementation of Clinical Establishment Act as there were no norms or 
minimum standards for human resource in private hospitals. There exists no system 
to check and verify the availability of human resources of private HIs and quality 
health services provided to the public. 
Recommendations 
1. The State Government should consider adopting IPHS norms for assessing 
the sanctioned strength in Health departments including specialists. 
 
2. The State Government should step up its efforts to expedite recruitment 
process in order to fill the vacancies in all cadres under health sector. 
 
3. The staff should be posted rationally across the health institutions to address 
staffing deficiencies, ultimately improving the delivery of healthcare services.

 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
35 
Chapter - 3: Healthcare Services 
 
The State Government had not adopted  norms/standards prescribed by the 
Government of India with respect to healthcare services. Doctor availability did 
not match outpatient load, leading to overcrowding and a higher patient -doctor 
ratio. OPD facilities faced inequities in registration counters versus patient 
demand. Shortages of operation theatres, drugs, and equipment were noted in 
taluk hospitals/CHCs. ICU services were insufficient compared to prescribed bed 
ratios in 11 out of 16 test checked HIs . Delayed supply of COVID -19 essentials 
and PPE kits incurred additional expenses. Fire audits were not conducted in any 
COVID hospitals. Maternity services showed significant deficiencies across 
antenatal, intrapartum, and postnatal care. Support services  were available but 
operated inefficiently in test checked HIs. 
 
3.1  Outpatient Department Services  
The outpatient department of a hospital provides diagnosis and care for patients 
who do not need to stay overnight. The outpatient department is an important part 
of the overall running of the hospital.  It is normally integrated with the inpatient 
services and staffed by consultant physicians and surgeons who also attend to 
inpatients in the wards. Many patients are examined and given treatment as 
outpatients before being admitted to the hospital at a later date as inpatients. When 
discharged, they may attend the outpatient clinic for follow-up treatment.  
The availability of the OPD services which are essential as per IPHS in the District 
Hospitals in the State is shown in Chart 3.1. 
Chart 3.1: Availability17 of Outpatient services in the 17 DHs in the State 
 
      Source: Information furnished by the Department 
It can be seen from the above that outpatient services as stipulated in IPHS were 
available in all DHs.  Availability of these OPD services in the test checked HIs 
is detailed in Appendix 3.1. 
 
17 as of May 2023. 
17
17
17
17
17
17
17
17
17
17
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18
ENT
Orthopedics
Dental
Emergency/Trauma
Ophthalmology
General Surgery
General Medicine
Pediatrics
Obsterics & Gynaecology
Psychiatric
Number of DHs
Medical Services

PA on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
36 
Paediatrics services were not available in THs-Navalgund and Sandur. The other 
essential services viz., Ophthalmology was not available in THs -Kudligi and 
Sandur; Obstetrics and Gynaecology services were not available in TH 
Kalaghatagi. Desirable services viz., Psychiatry were provided in THs- Bangarpet, 
Navalgund, Yelahanka; Dermatology-Venereology were provided in Bangarpet, 
HD Kote, KR Puram, Periyapatna, Srinivasapura, and Yelahanka.  
IPHS requires that all the seven OPD services are to be provided through CHCs.  
Availability of these essential services in the test checked CHCs is shown in the 
Table 3.1. 
Table 3.1: Availability of OPD services in test checked CHCs 
Specialty 
Services (OPD) 
Ballari Bengaluru Urban Dharwad Kolar Mysuru 
Kotturu Torang
allu 
Avala
-halli Halasuru Kengeri DJ- 
Halli 
Sirsi -
Road 
Shanthi
nagar 
HDMC 
UHC 
Gowni
palli Sargur 
General Medicine A A NA NA NA NA A NA A A NA 
General Surgery NA NA NA NA NA NA A NA A NA NA 
Obstetrics and 
Gynaecology NA A A A A A A A A A A 
Pediatrics NA A A A A A A A A A A 
Emergency care A A A A NA A A A A NA A 
Dental A A A A A NA A NA A A A 
AYUSH NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 
Source: Information verified in the test checked HIs as of January 2024.  
A- Available, NA- Not Available 
 
OPD services viz., General Medicine was not available in the HIs under ULBs 
except HI Sirsi Road  and U rban Health Centre HDMC, General Surgery was 
available only in two HIs. Dental Services were available in all the HIs except for 
HIs at DJ Halli and Shanthinagar. AYUSH services were not available in any of 
the test-checked CHCs. 
3.1.1 Non-availability of specialist consultation in Health Institutions 
Audit noticed absence of specialist consultation for outpatients for varying 
periods in the test checked HIs as detailed in Table 3.2. 
Table 3.2: Non-availability of OPD Specialist consultation in hospitals  for 
the period 2016-22 
Name of OPD service 
Period of non-availability of OPD doctor 
consultation during Audit period 
 SS/ MC  DH/TH CHC/PHC 
General Medicine Available 2 to 4 years 3 to 5 years 
Ophthalmology   Available 1 to 3 years Not applicable 
Skin and VD (Desirable in TH) Available 4 to 5 years Not applicable 
Surgery Available 2 years 5 years 
ENT Available 2 years 1 to 2 years 
Psychiatric (Desirable in TH) Available 3 to 5 years Not applicable 
Orthopedic Available 1 to 3 years Not applicable 
Pediatric Available 3 to 5 years 4 to 5 years 
Obstetrics and Gynaecology Available 1 to 2 years 3 to 5 years 
Dental  Available Available 1 to 2 years 

Chapter - 3: Healthcare Services 
37 
Name of OPD service 
Period of non-availability of OPD doctor 
consultation during Audit period 
 SS/ MC  DH/TH CHC/PHC 
Urology, Oncology, Plastic 
surgery, Gastro endocrinology, 
Nephrology, Neurosurgery and 
Neurology  
3 years Not 
applicable Not applicable 
Source: Information verified in test checked HIs. 
In DH, Ballari, Psychiatry doctor was not available during 2019-21(2 years) even 
though 2,271 patients had registered for psychiatric treatment.  The General 
Physician of the hospital treated these patients. 
In DIMHANS, three posts of Neurosurgeons had been vacant for the period 2018-
21 as such patients were forced to visit other hospitals. 
The State Government stated (October 2022) that Telemedicine services were 
being implemented to address the shortage of specialists. Further efforts were 
being made to reduce the gap in availability of specialists through recruitment and 
compulsory deployment of General Duty Medical Officers (GDMOs). 
The reply cannot be accepted as the Audit noticed that telemedicine facilities 
provided in the test checked HIs were not utilised properly.  Moreover, 
telemedicine cannot supplement the requirement of specialists in public HIs.  
3.1.2 Outpatient load  
The number of outpatients attended in the test checked  HIs during the period  
2016-17 to 2021-22 is shown in Table 3.3. 
Table 3.3: Number of outpatients attended in test checked hospitals 
                      (numbers in lakh) 
Year 
No. of outpatients  
(in lakhs) 
Increase in 
per cent 
(Year over 
Year) 
No. of outpatients                    
(in lakhs) 
Increase in 
per cent 
(Year over 
Year) SS/MC Total DH/TH /CHCs Total 
2016-17 1.52/12.36 13.88 - 4.22/7.14/2.31 13.67 - 
2017-18 1.77/13.67 15.44 11.24 7.41/8.17/2.65 18.23 33.36 
2018-19 1.77/12.84 14.61 (-5.38) 7.14/9.93/2.97 20.04 9.93 
2019-20 2.40/13.56 15.96 9.24 7.76/11.19/3.05 22.00 9.78 
2020-21 1.33/7.99 9.32 (-41.60) 3.84/6.66/2.52 13.02 (-40.82) 
2021-22 1.80/10.77 12.57 34.87 5.30/8.91/2.77 16.98 30.41 
Source: Information verified in test checked HIs 
The overall OPD growth in the test checked HIs remained constant on an average 
during 2016-17 to 2019-20 but fell sharply during 2020-21, the reasons for which 
can be attributed to COVID pandemic. 
 
3.1.3 OPD cases per doctor 
The OPD cases per doctor is an indicator for measuring efficiency of OPD 
services in a hospital.  Analysis of the number of OPD cases per doctor in the test 
checked HIs for the year 2021-22 showed that it was higher in THs and CHCs as 
shown in Chart 3.2. 

PA on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
38 
Chart 3.2: Average OPD cases per year per doctor 
 
 
Source: Information furnished by the Department 
Thus, the doctors were overloaded in the secondary HIs as compared to the other 
HIs in respect of the average inflow of patients in OPD. The inadequacy of doctors 
could result in the quality of healthcare services being compromised.  
 
3.1.4 Non-availability of basic facilities 
 
3.1.4.1 Availability of registration counters and a verage patient load 
per counter per annum 
Registration counter is the first point of contact with the hospital for a patient and 
is an important component of the hospital experience for patients and their 
attendants. Availability of sufficient number of registration counters, in 
proportion to the Outpatient (OP) load, aids in faster issue of OP tickets, thereby 
avoiding long queues of patients at these counters.  Audit observed that in 2021 -
22 in the test checked HIs (up to CHC level) the average patient load per counter 
per annum is detailed is shown in Chart 3.3.  
 
Chart 3. 3:  Average patient load per counter per annum i n test checked 
Health Institutions (2021-22) 
 
Source: Information furnished by the Department 


Chapter - 3: Healthcare Services 
39 
During 2021-22, the average patient load per registration counter per annum was 
35,320 in the three test-checked DHs.  In three test checked DHs, DHs Kolar and 
KC General Hospital had load in excess of the average . Due to heavy load at 
registration counters, long queues of patients were observed in hospitals.   
Analysis of the data done in test-checked 10 THs showed the average patient load 
per registration counter per annum was 40,646. Four HIs had patient load more 
than the average and it was significantly higher in THs-Kalaghatagi and Sandur.   
Similarly, analysis of the data furnished by 11 CHCs showed that CHC Torangallu 
had the highest patient load (4 6,727) while HDMC UHC Dharwad (378) had the 
lowest, the average being 20,460 patients per counter. 
It can be seen that the number of registration counters available was not 
commensurate with the number of outpatients resulting inpatients or their 
attendants being made to wait in long queues. No proper seating arrangements were 
available as shown in the photographs below.  In KR Hospital, Mysuru, OPD 
counters were in the open without any shelter.  
No seating arrangements at Cheluvamba 
hospital  
 
Patients at the OPD Counter at KIMS, 
Hubballi 
Survey Findings:  Out of 1,260 outpatients, only 59, 54 and 50 per cent 
outpatients were happy with the patient’s calling system in the tertiary, secondary 
and primary healthcare facilities respectively. 
 
Good practice 
Special Registration counters were arranged for physically disabled and pregnant 
women in KIMS, Hubballi and TH, Yelahanka respectively. 
3.1.4.2 Availability of basic amenities 
Waiting room/space with seating arrangement for patients to wait for their turn to 
see the doctors, toilets, drinking water  etc., are some of the basic facilities to be 
provided at OPD in Government HIs. The non -availability of these facilities in 
the test checked HIs is shown in Chart 3.4 and Table 3.4. 
 
 


PA on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
40 
Source: Information verified in the test checked HIs during field visits 
 
Table 3.4: Availability of services in the test-checked Health Institutions 
Availability of services SS/MCs 
(05) 
DHs 
(03) 
THs 
(10) 
CHCs 
(11) 
PHCs 
(14) 
Display of florescent fire exit sign 4 3 5 7 7 
Enquiry/May I help desk with staff 
fluent in local language 5 3 7 11 10 
Directional signage for Emergency, 
Departments and Utilities 5 3 10 10 9 
Display of safety, hazard and caution 
signs were displayed prominently at 
relevant places 
4 3 9 9 12 
Important contacts like higher medical 
centres, blood banks, and fire 
department, police and ambulance 
services were displayed 
4 3 8 10 12 
Mandatory information (under RTI 
act, PNDT act, etc.) was displayed  5 3 7 10 12 
Suitable seating facility 5 3 10 11 14 
Patient calling system (Digitalisation) 3 1 3 0 5 
Separate toilets for male and female 5 3 10 11 14 
Source: Information verified in the test checked HIs 
Non-availability of basic amenities in OPD highlights that the infrastructural 
facilities were not adequate to provide decent services to the patients. 
 
The State Government stated (October 2022) that provision was being made to 
augment patient friendly initiatives by providing funds under NHM, incentives 
under AB-Ark, user funds etc. 
3.1.5 Outpatient satisfaction survey not conducted 
NHM Assessor’s guidebook prescribes conducting satisfaction survey of  
outpatients on a monthly basis. The care in the OPD indicates the quality of 
13
20
4
5
1
0 5 10 15 20 25
Security to prevent over crowding
Screen for privacy
Toilet
Drinking Water
Patients and attenders seating arrangemnts
Number of HIs
Basic Facities
Chart 3.4 Non-availability  of basic facilities

Chapter - 3: Healthcare Services 
41 
services of a hospital and is reflected by patients’ satisfaction with the services 
being provided.  Only three HIs, KC General  Hospital, D H Kolar and TH  
Bangarpet had obtained patient feedback during the entire Audit period, and it 
was partial in 11 HIs18.  The other HIs had not conducted any survey and thus lost 
the opportunity of improving the quality of service provided based on feedback.    
3.2   Inpatient Department Services 
In-patients Department (IPD) refers to the areas of the hospital where patients are 
accommodated after being admitted, based on doctor’s/specialist’s assessment, 
from the Outpatient Department, Emergency Services and Ambulatory Care.  In-
patients require a higher level of care through nursing services, availability of 
drugs/diagnostic facilities, observation by doctors, etc. 
3.2.1 In-patient load 
The number of in -patients attended in the test checked HIs (upto CHC level) 
during the period 2016-17 to 2021-22 is shown in Table 3.5. 
Table 3.5: Number of in-patients in test checked hospitals 
(numbers in lakh) 
Year 
No. of in-patients  Increase in per 
cent (Year 
over Year) 
No. of inpatients                     Increase in 
per cent 
(YoY) SS/MC Total DH/TH 
/CHCs Total 
2016-17 0.18/1.38 1.56 - 0.21/0.40/0.12 0.73 - 
2017-18 0.22/1.47 1.69 8.33 0.55/0.46/0.12 1.13 54.7 
2018-19 0.21/1.48 1.69 0 0.52/0.52/0.13 1.17 3.5 
2019-20 0.24/1.17 1.41 (-16.6) 0.59/0.66/0.16 1.41 20.5 
2020-21 0.14/0.96 1.10 (-22) 0.38/0.37/0.13 0.88 (-37.5) 
2021-22 0.16/1.30 1.46 33 0.53/0.65/0.17 1.35 53.4 
 Source: Information verified in the test checked HIs 
The number of people obtaining inpatient care in tertiary and secondary care HIs 
decreased in 2020-21 mainly due to COVID-19. 
3.2.2 Availability of beds in In-patient department in DH/THs 
IPHS prescribes the minimum essential services and beds to be provided in each 
level of hospitals. The availability of the recommended allocation of bed strength 
in the IPD wards of the test checked DH/THs in accordance with the IPHS 
guidelines is illustrated in Table 3.6 below: 
 
 
 
 
 
18  IGICH, Victoria Hospital, DH Ballari, THs - KR Puram, Periyapatna, Srinivasapura, 
Yelahanka; PHCs-Addagal, Budikote, Kannur and Morab. 

PA on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
42 
Table 3.6 Availability of IPD beds in test-checked DH/THs 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
ward 
Recommended 
number of beds in 
DH/TH as per IPHS 
DH TH 
Ballari 
K C General 
Hospital 
Kolar 
Bangarpet 
    H D Kote 
Kalaghatagi 
K R Puram 
Kudligi 
Navalgund 
Periyapatna 
Sandur 
Srinivasapura 
Yelahanka 
1 General 
Medicine 30/16 37 87 43 32 10 24 22 10 20 15 5 16 14 
2 General 
Surgery 30/16 12 59 73 10 10 10 12 0 5 15 5 28 9 
3 Ophthal-
mology* 5/- 6 8 12 10 2 10 0 0 5 10 0 2 9 
4 
Accident 
and 
Trauma* 
10/- 10 29 7 10 19 10 3 5 5 15 0 10 5 
5 Pediatrics 10/6 50 60 24 13 5 8 7 5 5 10 3 8 9 
6 Others19 - 95 125 311 25 84 38 56 30 30 10 78 32 54 
Total 210 368 470 100 130 100 100 50 70 75 91 96 100 
Source: Information verified in the test checked HIs as on January 2024 
*Requirement in beds in TH not mentioned in IPHS. 
 
From the table, it could be seen that the availability of IPD beds was better in DHs 
compared to THs. 
IPHS prescribed availability of minimum of six beds in PHCs for maternal and 
child healthcare. Audit analysed in test checked PHCs, four HIs were not equipped 
with labour services facilities. OT procedures viz., Vasectomy and Tubectomy 
were available only in two PHCs (Annigeri and Mukkal) in Dharwad district as 
shown in Table 3.7. 
Table 3.7: Availability of six beds in PHCs with Maternal and Child Health 
Care 
Name of District 
Number of 
PHCs test 
checked 
Availability of 
six beds 
Availability of 
labor services 
Availability of 
OT (vasectomy, 
tubectomy) 
Ballari 2 2 2 0 
Bengaluru Urban 2 2 0 0 
Dharwad 4 4 4 2 
Kolar 3 3 2 0 
Mysuru 3 3 2 0 
Source: Information verified in the test checked HIs as of January 2024 
3.2.3 Availability of inpatient services 
IPHS stipulate the type of inpatient specialist services to be made available in each 
category of HIs.  The status of inpatient services available in the test checked HIs. 
Audit noticed that: 
 
19 Post- Natal, Post Partum, Post Operative, Labour Room, Antenatal, Isolation, Burns, Thoracic 
Medicine, Septic Labour Room etc. 

Chapter - 3: Healthcare Services 
43 
❖ All services were provided in tertiary care HIs. 
❖ Burns ward and psychiatry was not available in DH Ballari and K C 
General Hospital. 
Non-availability of essential services compelled the patients to move to the 
tertiary care centres, thereby overburdening the existing infrastructure of the 
hospital. Further, in absence of these critical care services, the out -of-pocket 
expenditure to be incurred by the patients compelled to visit private hospitals 
cannot be ruled out.  This defeats the very purpose of establishing government 
healthcare facilities for economically weaker sections.   
The State Government stated (October 2022) that the various measures initiated 
by the department such as recruitment and compulsory postings had resulted in 
reducing the gaps in the availability of GDMOs and Specialists. 
Audit noticed that the shortage of specialist doctors viz., paediatrics, orthopaedics, 
anaesthesia, general surgery etc., in the public HIs was still significant as 
discussed in Chapter 2. 
3.2.4 Non-availability of roster for doctors and nurses 
It is essential that doctors and nurses are available round the clock in Government 
HIs to cater to the public.  This requires preparation of shift-wise rosters to ensure 
that they are always available.  Audit noticed that in five20 out of 16 test checked 
HIs (MCH/DH/TH), duty rosters for doctors were not available.  Similarly, duty 
roster for nurses was not available in four21 out of 29 HIs (up to CHC level).  The 
absence of roster is reflective of the non -availability of doctors and nurses for 
patient care. 
The State Government stated (October 2022) that THs/CHCs had single specialist 
doctors apart from GDMOs and all the doctors were posted for 
casualty/emergency duty on daily basis through rotation. However, DHs had a 
duty roster of doctors. The same yard stick was followed for posting of staff nurse.  
The reply is not acceptable as Audit noticed that no documentation was 
maintained in this regard. 
3.2.5 Availability of Line Services  
Healthcare line services management is  patient-centred care related to a specific 
area of clinically related conditions or procedures integrated across a system of 
care. The services include Operation Theatre, Emergency Service, Diagnostic 
Services etc. Audit examined the availability of line services as per norms in the 
DHs in the State as shown in Chart 3.5.  
 
 
 
 
20 TH Kudligi, Navalgund, Periyapatna, Srinivasapura and Yelahanka. 
21 TH Periyapatna, CHC Gownipalli, BBMP MHs-Shanthinagar and Sirsi Road. 

PA on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
44 
Chart 3.5: Availability of Line Services in 17 DHs in the State 
 
Source: Information furnished by the Department 
Blood banks were available in all the DHs except for two DHs -Ramanagara and 
Jayanagar where blood storage units were  available. Audit examined the 
availability of lines services in the 17 DHs in the State and noticed the issue 
related to these services in the test checked HIs in the subsequent paragraphs. 
3.2.6 Operation Theatre 
Operation Theatre (OT) is an essential service that is to be provided to the patients. 
IPHS guidelines prescribe OTs for elective major surgery, emergency services 
and ophthalmology/ENT (ear, nose and throat) for district hospitals having bed 
strength of 101 to 500.  In the test checked DHs, all the major OTs were functional. 
3.2.6.1 Shortage of Operation Theatres in District/Taluk Hospitals 
As per IPHS norms, every 100 bedded hospitals to be equipped with three 
Operation Theatres (OTs) for Elective major surgery/ Gynaecology, Emergency 
and Ophthalmology/ENT while a 30 bedded hospital was to be equipped with one 
OT. Audit observed that all three OTs were available in the test checked DHs and 
two THs-KR Puram and Kalaghatagi. The status of OT availability in the test 
checked THs is given in Table 3.8.  
Table 3.8: Availability of Operation Theatre (OT) in test checked THs 
Sl. 
No. Taluk Hospital Elective OT Major Emergency OT/FW 
(Family Ward) OT 
Ophthalmology/ 
ENT OT 
1 Bangarpet 2 0 1 
2 HD Kote 2(1-NF) 0 0 
3 K R Puram 1 1 1 
4 Kalaghatagi 1 1 1 
5 Kudligi 1-NF 0 0 
6 Navalgund 2 (1-NF) 0 1 
7 Periyapatna 1 1 0 
8 Sandur 2 0 0 
9 Srinivasapura 1 1 0 
10 Yelahanka 2 0 0 
 Source: Information verified in the test checked HIs during the Audit period 2016-22 
              NF- Not Functional 
17
17
17
17
17
17
17
Emergency Services
Maternity Services
ICU
Pathology Services
Imaging Diagnostic Services
Blood Bank
Operation Theatre
DHs
Type of Services
Line Services

Chapter - 3: Healthcare Services 
45 
Further, only three 22 of the test-checked 11 CHCs had the functional major OT.  
Non-availability of OT services resulted in denial and referral to Higher H Is.  
Management of OT services in test checked DHs /THs are shown in  
Appendix 3.2. Moreover, availability of surgical procedures in test checked HIs 
is shown in Table 3.9. 
Table 3.9: Availability of surgical procedures in test-checked health 
institutions 
Name of procedure 
Availability in test-checked hospitals 
DH 
(03) 
THs 
(10) 
CHCs 
(11) 
Hernia 3 9 0 
Hydrocele 3 8 0 
Appendicitis 3 9 0 
Haemorrhoids 3 8 0 
Fistula 3 9 0 
Intestinal Obstruction 3 4 0 
Hemorrhage 3 9 1 
Nasal packing 3 8 0 
Tracheostomy 3 2 0 
Foreign body removal 3 10 1 
Fracture reduction 3 10 0 
Facility for Putting splints/ 
plaster cast 3 9 0 
 Source: Information furnished by the test checked HIs as on January 2024 
Audit observed that surgical procedures were  mainly available in DH/THs. 
However, these procedures were not available in most of the test checked CHCs. 
The State Government stated (October 2022) that all CHCs and THs had provision 
of one major OT and minor OT. One of the rooms available at CHCs and THs 
was designated as minor OT. The OTs at CHCs were non -functional due to 
asymmetrical availability of specialists, mainly anaesthetists.   
3.2.6.2 Surgery load per surgeon 
As per NHM Assessor’s Guidebook, surgeries performed per surgeon are an 
indicator to measure efficiency of the hospitals. Analysis of the records of 
surgeries conducted in the test checked HIs indicated substantial variation in the 
number of surgeries per surgeon detailed in Appendix 3.3(a) and 3.3(b).  
 
The surgery load per surgeon was higher in IGICH, Victoria hospital, DH Ballari 
and KC General hospital , Bengaluru. In respect of TH, the surgery load per 
surgeon was significant ly higher in HD Kote, Kalaghatagi, Sandur and 
Srinivasapura. The huge variation in surgical load in test checked hospitals depicts 
the asymmetric distribution of the surgeons which needs to be addressed by 
performing a proper assessment of the workload and proper distribution of 
available surgeons for the efficient management of services. 
 
 
 
 
22  CHCs Gownipalli, Kengeri and Halasuru. 

PA on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
46 
3.2.7 Emergency Services 
The Emergency Department is the first point of contact for any critically ill patient 
needing immediate medical attention . The flow chart of the Emergency 
Department is shown in Figure-3.1. 
Figure 3.1: Flow Chart of Emergency Department 
 
3.2.7.1 Availability of emergency services 
 
Availability of emergency services are very important to provide treatment to 
critical accidental cases/patients those need immediate attention. The availability 
of emergency services viz. emergency OT, emergency/trauma ward etc., are also 
required for these critical patients. Availability of emergency service s in test 
checked DH/TH is shown in Table 3.10. 
 
Table 3.10: Availability of Emergency Services in test checked DH/THs 
Description 
Ballari Bengaluru Urban Dharwad Kolar Mysuru 
DH  
Ballari 
TH  
Kudligi 
TH  
Sandur 
K C General  
Hospital 
TH  
K R Puram 
TH  
Yelahanka 
TH  
Kalaghatagi 
TH  
Navalgund 
DH  
Kolar 
TH  
Bangarpet 
TH  
Srinivasapura 
  TH  
H D Kote 
TH  
Periyapatna 
Emergency OT A A A A A A NA NA A A A NA A 
Emergency Ward A A A A A A A A A A A A A 
Triage procedure A A A A NA A NA A A A A A A 
Emergency laboratory A A A A A A NA NA A A A NA A 
Separate provision for 
examination of 
rape/sexual assault 
victim  
A A A A A A A A A A A A A 
Disaster management 
plan in emergency 
ward 
A A A A A A NA A A A A A A 


Chapter - 3: Healthcare Services 
47 
Description 
Ballari Bengaluru Urban Dharwad Kolar Mysuru 
DH  
Ballari 
TH  
Kudligi 
TH  
Sandur 
K C General  
Hospital 
TH  
K R Puram 
TH  
Yelahanka 
TH  
Kalaghatagi 
TH  
Navalgund 
DH  
Kolar 
TH  
Bangarpet 
TH  
Srinivasapura 
  TH  
H D Kote 
TH  
Periyapatna 
Treatment of assault / 
bowel/ head / stab/ 
injuries 
A A A A A A A A A A A A A 
Blood Bank in close 
proximity to 
emergency 
NA A A A A NA NA NA A A A A NA 
Mobile x -
ray/laboratory, side 
lab / plaster room in 
accident and 
emergency service 
A A A A A A NA NA A NA A A A 
Source: Information verified in the test checked HIs as of January 2024 
             A- Available, NA- Not Available 
However, it was observed though 
emergency ward was available in 
all DH/THs, Triage procedure was 
not available in THs - K R Puram 
and Kalaghatagi. 
 
Further, it was observed that 
Disaster Management Plan in 
emergency ward was available in 
most of the test checked HIs. 
 
 
Good Practice: 
KC General Hospital, Bengaluru was awarded 
for their state-of-the-art triaging facility 
3.2.7.2 Availability of Routine and Emergency Care in CHCs and PHCs 
IPHS prescribes “Assured Services” to be provided at CHC which include routine 
and emergency care in surgery, medicine, obstetrics and gynaecology and 
paediatrics in addition to all the National Health programmes. Availability of 
routine and emergency care services in test checked CHCs and PHCs is shown in 
Table 3.11. 
Table 3. 11: Availability of Routine and Emergency Care in test  checked 
CHCs and PHCs 
Required Emergency Services Availability 
Availability of Emergency Services in CHC (11) 
Dengue Hemorrhagic fever and cerebral malaria 1 
Dog and snake bite cases 11 
Poisonings, Congestive Heart Failure, Left Ventricular Failure, 
Meningoencephalitis, Auto Respiratory Conditions, Status Epilepticus 1 
Burns, Shock, Acute Dehydration 6 
Pneumonias 4 
Obstetric Care including surgical interventions like Caesarean Sections etc. 6 


PA on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
48 
Availability of Emergency services in PHCs (14 ) 
24 hours emergency services 8 
24*7 emergency, referral, and Normal delivery services 10 
Source: Information verified in the test checked HIs as on January 2024 
From above it can be seen that emergency services viz., dengue haemorrhagic 
fever and cerebral malaria, poisonings, congestive heart failure were available 
only in CHC Torangallu. Except dog and snake bite cases, other routine and 
emergency care services were available in few test checked CHCs. In the test 
checked PHCs, it was observed that 24 hours emergency services were not 
available in six PHCs23 ; referral and normal delivery services were not available 
in four PHCs24. 
3.3 Intensive Care Unit (ICU) services 
Intensive Care Unit (ICU) is essential for critically ill patients requiring highly 
skilled life-saving medical aid and nursing care.  As per IPHS it is mandatory to 
have an ICU in the HIs (TH and above).  The ICU beds should be five to 10 per 
cent of total beds. ICU services were available in the public institutions in the 
State but were not in proportion with the number of beds as prescribed in the 
criteria.  
While the ICU beds ranged from two to 13 per cent of the total sanctioned beds 
in test checked HIs, it was two and four per cent beds in DH Kolar and KIMS, 
Hubballi respectively.  The ICU services were not available in the THs -
Kalaghatagi and Kudligi. The status of the number of ICU beds in the test checked 
HIs as on March 2022 depicted in the Table 3.12. 
Table 3.12: Status of the ICU beds in the test checked health institutions 
HIs No. of 
sanctioned beds 
No. of 
ICU Beds 
Percentage of 
ICU Beds   
KIMS Hubballi 1,400 52 4 
Mysore Medical College (KR Hospital) 1,050 93 9 
Victoria Hospital, Bengaluru 764 44 6 
DH Ballari 210 15 7 
K C General Hospital, Bengaluru 453 46 10 
DH Kolar 400 6 2 
TH Bangarpet 100 3 3 
TH HD Kote 100 3 3 
TH K R Puram 100 3 3 
TH Kalaghatagi 100 NA NA 
TH Kudligi 100 NA NA 
TH Navalgund 100 3 3 
TH Periyapatna 100 3 3 
TH Sandhur 100 13 13 
TH Srinivasapura 100 3 3 
TH Yelahanka 100 3 3 
Source: Information verified in the test checked HIs during the period 2016-22; 
             NA-Not Available 
 
23 PHCs- Addagal, Badagalapura, Budikoti, Kannalli, Kannur, Thoppanhalli. 
24 PHCs- Badagalapura, Kannalli, Kannur and Thoppanhalli. 

Chapter - 3: Healthcare Services 
49 
3.4 Emergency Response and Health System Preparedness 
 Package 
Emergency Management refers to actions taken to prepare communities to be less 
vulnerable and better able to respond to emergencies. WHO declared Corona virus 
(COVID-19) pandemic as a Public Health Emergency of International Concern. 
India reported its first case in January 2020. Subsequently, the surveillance for 
COVID-19 cases was initiated by the State Government, along with various other 
agencies to contain it. The COVID-19 pandemic caused a serious impact on the 
healthcare networks of the State.  Karna taka invoked the provisions of the 
Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897 (March 2020) which  empowered government 
authorities, through legislation, to implement any containment measures to curb 
the spread of the disease. 
3.4.1 Fund utilisation under COVID -19 in the State and test -checked 
 districts 
The overall amount released and the actual expenditure thereon under the Health 
Sector towards containment of COVID -19 Pandemic is shown in Table 3.13. 
 
Table 3.13: Utilisation of funds under COVID-19 
      (₹ in Crore) 
Sl. 
No. Department Source/Implementing 
agency 
Fund 
released 
Funds 
25utilized 
1 Health and Family 
Welfare Service 
NHM, State Govt – HFW, 
KSMSCL, SAST 4,547.06 4,037.30 
2 Medical Education State, CMRF, KKRDB, 
NHM 1,132.86 1,120.87 
3 State Disaster Relief 
Fund Central and State Share 1,958.58 1,958.58 
 Grand Total  7,638.5 7,116.75 
     Source: Information furnished by the HWF, DME and SDRF 
State Government mobilised funds from different sources as seen from the above, 
for providing health care, treatment of patients and containment/prevention of the 
pandemic. As on May 2023, out of ₹7,638.50 crore, an amount of ₹7,116.75 crore 
was spent . T he balance amount of ₹521.75 crore was retained by the State 
Government. 
 
To contain the pandemic, items such as PPE Kits, Masks, Ventilators, etc., were 
procured by the HFWD and DME. The status of the items is summarized in  
Table 3.14. 
Table 3.14: Procurement of Masks PPE kits and Ventilators  
Name of the item Department Total HFW ME 
PPE kits 24,70,137 15,65,497 40,35,634 
Masks 2,85,62,592 39,00,000 3,24,62,592 
Ventilators 1,538 1,007 2,545 
Oxygen concentrators 188 Nil 188 
  Source: Information furnished by the HWF and DME 
 
25 as of May 2023. 

PA on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
50 
3.4.2 Availability of ventilators and oxygen concentrators under COVID-19 
 in health institutions. 
To reinforce public health facilities during COVID-19 pandemic, GoI under PM 
CARES fund facilitated the supply of ventilators to the HIs. The details of the 
ventilators received under PM CARES is shown in Table 3.15.  
Table 3.15: Ventilators received in State under PM CARES in Hospitals 
Make of Ventilator No. of Ventilator 
received 
No. of Ventilator 
distributed 
BEL  1,475 1,454 
AgvA Health Care  540 469 
Wipro GE Healthcare Pvt Ltd. 10 10 
Total  2,025 1,933 
Source: Information furnished by the HWFD as of January 2024 
 
The State also arranged the medical availability by procuring/installing containers 
and oxygen concentrators.  The availability of oxygen concentrators under 
COVID-19 in HIs is shown in Table 3.16. 
Table 3.16: Availability26 of oxygen concentrators in test checked HIs 
No. of OCs allocated to HIs Information not available 
No. of OCs received in HIs 1,306 
No. of OCs Not received in HIs 0 
No. of OCs installed 935 
Functional OCs 1,152 
Non - functional OCs 95 
No. of OCs connected to Mobile App 17 
 
As could be seen from the table that, out of 935 installed oxygen concentrators, 
only 17 were connected to mobile application. 
3.4.3 Procurements 
To arrest the spread and control of COVID-19, the State Government permitted 
(March 2020), both the HFW and ME departments under Rule 4(a) of the KTPP 
Act,1999 to purchase medicines, essential items, equipment, and essential 
services under the State Disaster Relief Fund (SDRF) and NHM directly from 
agencies. The exemption was applicable only for procurement under emergency 
circumstances and not for regular purchases.  The KSMSCL was responsible for 
procurement for the HFWD, and the Directorate of Medical Education for the ME 
department.  The State Government constituted (March 2020) a Task Force and 
formed a Need Assessment Committee, Technical Committee and Procurement 
Committee to decide on the items to be procured.  
 
 
 
26 as of January 2024. 

Chapter - 3: Healthcare Services 
51 
3.4.3.1 Delay in procurement and supply of drugs and equipment by KSMSC 
Limited 
a) The KSMSCL placed orders for supply of drugs valuing ₹665.03 crore 
(payments made so far – ₹502.09 crore) to prevent/cure COVID-19.  Audit 
observed that drugs worth ₹17.79 crore were yet to be supplied and there 
was a delay ranging from one to 252 days in supply of drugs totally valuing 
₹415.02 crore. 
b) Similarly for supply of equipment valuing ₹831.30 crore (payments made 
so far ₹727.37 crore), equipment worth ₹288.96 crore was supplied with 
a delay of one to 217 days . Supply details for equipment worth ₹405.91 
crore were not furnished to Audit. 
The State Government stated (October 2022) delay in supplies was because of 
trouble in transport system during first, second and third waves of COVID -19 
pandemic. There was also difficulty in procuring raw materials from abroad. 
Further, few manufacturers expressed helplessness to supply drugs and 
consumables order given to them. 
3.4.3.2 Non-installation of Liquid Medical Oxygen (LMO) Tanks  
The COVID-19 task force decided (June 2021) to set up 13 KL LMO tanks in 19 
DHs and 6 KL LMO tanks in 135 THs. The State Government sanctioned 
(December 2021) ₹15.99 crore (₹10.09 crore towards procurement of LMO tanks 
from M/s. INOX India and ₹5.90 crore towards civil and electrical works) for DHs 
and ₹98.09 crore (₹59.74 crore towards procurement of LMO tank and ₹38.36 
crore towards civil and electrical works) for THs.  The works were to be 
completed at DHs and THs by July 2022  and September 2022 respecti vely.  
Exemption under 4(a) of KTPP Act was accorded for early completion of the 
works and an amount of ₹19.08 crore was released to the supplier.  The work was 
yet to be commenced as of July 2022 resulting in non -installation of LMO tanks 
thereby defeatin g the very objective of providing treatment for COVID 19 
patients.   
The State Government stated (October 2022) that as of September 2022, 26 LMO 
tanks had been installed,  six KL LMO tanks (out of 13) delivered to sites, and 
some were under arrival stage. It also stated that the balance tanks would be 
procured and put to use within three months. 
3.4.3.3 Additional expenditure on procurement of PPE kits 
Government of Karnataka, as part of its preventive measures decided to provide 
protective gear such as N-95 masks, three layered masks and PPE kits to doctors, 
nurses and para-medical staff handling the pandemic.  Accordingly, the KSMSCL 
placed orders for 10.05 lakh PPE kits with different agencies27 out of which 1.28 
lakh kits were supplied till end of March 2020.  In this background, the State 
 
27  M/s. Plasti Surge Industries Ltd (O-4,50,000).; M/s. Rudransh Vig Agro India (O-25,000); 
M/s. Atech Tron (O-25,000); M/s. HLL Life Care Private Ltd. (O-5,00,000) and M/s. Indus 
Bro Solutions (O-5,000). 
 

PA on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
52 
Government decided in its meeting (24 March 2020) under the Chairmanship of 
Minister of Medical Education to procure kits from the international bulk 
manufacturers.  It obtained (28 March 2020) rates from firms which were not the 
original manufacturers.  Subsequently, the State Government decided (30 March 
2020) to procure kits with CE ( "Conformité Européenne ") / USFDA (United 
States Food and Drugs Administration) certificate and submitted the proposals to 
the Chief Minister for approval. 
Scrutiny of records showed that three firms, M/s. X, M/s. Y and M/s. Z submitted 
their rates. M/s. X, which procures the kits from M/s . G quoted the lowest rates 
but had not produced USFDA certificate for items such as medical hood, medical 
goggles, face mask, gloves and shoes. It, however, had assured to furnish the 
certificate after obtaining it from the manufacturer on receipt of the supply order.  
The firm had quoted its rates for Freight on Board (FoB), Bengaluru (FoB includes 
transportation, custom cl earance etc., excluding GST). The Procurement 
Committee did not consider the offer of L1.  M/s . Y which was the L2 firm and 
procures from five different manufacturers had submitted the requisite USFDA 
certificates but had quoted for FoB, China. The Committee did not consider the 
offer of the third firm as it failed to furnish the certificates.  
The State Government placed ( 02 April 2020) a supply order for one lakh kits 
with M/s. Y.  In the meantime, the Commissioner, Industrial Development and 
Director of Industries and Commerce vide email correspondence dated 5 April 
2020 intimated the KSMSCL that M/s. X had submitted all the required USFDA 
certificates through mail and has quoted $27 per kit FoB, Hong Kong and $29.55 
FoB, Bengaluru.  The firm also offered a reduction of price by one dollar for order 
of two lakh kits with further discounts if five lakh kits were ordered. 
Procurement at higher cost of PPE kits on the second instance : The State 
Government placed (10 April 2020) orders for one lakh PPE kits with both  
M/s. Y and M/s. X at $27.72 and $27.00 respectively.  This decision resulted in 
procurement of one lakh PPE kits at a higher cost of ₹1.31 crore28 ($1.72 x 75.92 
x 1,00,000). 
Audit observed that the State Government had incurred excess expenditure on 
procurement of PPE kits in the first instance as detailed below: 
Excess expenditure of air transport : The task of airlifting and transporting the 
goods from China to India was entrusted to Air India by way of an agreement (15 
April 2020). The contract was to lift two loads of 30,000 kg ( at the rate of ₹1.31 
crore per trip) at a total cost of ₹2.62 crore excluding GST.  Air India made three 
trips to lift all the materials.   
❖ As per the communication (April 2020) from Air India, the first flight was 
operated on 18 April 2020 to airlift 210m3 of PPE kits which was initially 
loaded after obtaining due custom clearance.  However, Chinese custom 
authorities carried out unscheduled random custom checks leading to 
unloading of 127m3 of PPE kits at the last minute. 
 
28  Considering the fact that M/s. X had offered a discount of one dollar for order of two lakh 
kits. 

Chapter - 3: Healthcare Services 
53 
❖ The second flight, scheduled to depart on 19 April 2020 took off as per 
schedule with 210m3 of PPE kits at its full capacity. 
❖ Due to unloading of 127m 3 of PPE kits, additional flight was to be 
arranged.  Pending Government approval, the Commissioner, Industrial 
Development and Director, Industries and Commerce ordered (20 April 
2020) to operate the additional flight. The additional flight was operated 
on 21 April 2020 for which payment of ₹1.54 crore was made on 24 June 
2020. 
❖ Since the customs clearance up to China was the responsibility of M/s. Y, 
any discrepancies were to be cleared and additional cost borne by the 
supplier.  In the instant case, the State Government met the additional cost 
of ₹1.54 crore, which resulted in undue benefit to the supplier. 
Excess payment of IGST : Since the commitment of M/s. Y was FoB, China, 
KSMSCL had to facilitate transport from China to India, custom s clearance and 
local transport.  The PPE kits comprising of 10 components attracted different 
IGST rates.  KSMSCL paid IGST of ₹4.09 crore against ₹3.06 crore payable 
resulting in excess payment of IGST of ₹1.03 crore. 
Excess payment of GST to Air India: At the time of custom clearance of goods, 
IGST as applicable was paid on the cost of the material, insurance at the rate of 
125 per cent of the cost and freight at the rate of 20 per cent of the cost of material 
(CIF – Cost, Insurance and Freight). As the GST on freight was already paid at 
the time of clearance, payment of GST to Air India was not required in accordance 
with Notification 12/2017 of Central Tax (Rate), which states that ‘Services by 
way of transportation of goods by an aircraft from a place outside India up to the 
customs stations of clearance in India are exempt”.  Audit observ ed that GST of 
₹70.74 lakh was paid to Air India. 
Avoidable payment:  
(a) The consignment which was to be airlifted from Shenzhen to India was 
changed as Shanghai to India as suggested by the representative of M/s. Y.   
Shanghai Sky wings Aviation Service Co. Ltd. was engaged at $28,600 on the 
recommendation of Air India representative.  The change in location resulted in 
payment of ₹21.99 lakh, which was clearly avoidable. 
(b) As per Air India regulations, import cargo shall be kept in the warehouse for 
two working days (48 hours) including the date of arrival of flight. Beyond two 
days, warehousing would be charged at ‘per kg/per day’ non -cumulative basis 
provided delivery is t aken within five days of arrival. If the delivery is beyond 
five days, warehousing charges will accrue from the date of arrival of flight.  Audit 
observed that the State Government paid ₹30.25 lakh as warehouse charges due 
to a delay in clearing the go ods by the agencies entrusted with the work, which 
was avoidable. 
The State Government stated (October 2022) that as per the quotation, the 
company was to shift the goods from Shenzhen to Shanghai. It did not offer any 
comments on the other Audit observations. 
 

PA on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
54 
3.4.3.4 Purchase of infrared thermometers  
The Procurement Committee headed by the Commissioner, HFW approved 
(March 2020) among other items purchase of 25,000 numbers of infrared 
thermometers through invitation of quotations from interested bidders.  The 
KSMSCL invited quotations on three occasions for 1 4,000 units and placed 
supply orders as detailed in Table 3.17. 
Table 3.17: Procurement details of Infrared thermometers 
(₹ in lakh) 
Sl. 
No. 
Date of 
invitation  
of bids 
Date of 
receipt of 
bids 
Quantity Rate Date of 
supply order 
Value of 
supply 
order 
Date of 
supply 
Name of the 
agency 
1 20.03.2020 20.03.2020 5,000 3,500 23.03.2020 206.50 02.04.2020 
11.04.2020 BYD India  
2 22.06.2020 24.06.2020 1,000 2,829 14.07.2020 33.38 14.07.2020 Biofi 
Medical 
3 11.07.2020 14.07.2020 8,000 1,242 17.07.2020 99.36 17.08.2020 
Venus 
Surgical 
Agencies 
Source: Information furnished by KSMSCL 
Audit scrutiny revealed the following: 
❖ KSMSCL received 4,000 units in two batches against its order for 5,000 
units on the first occasion.   
❖ On the second occasion, though the KSMSCL received quotations for 
supply of 1,000 units on 24 June 2020, it placed orders on 14 July 2020 
after a delay of 20 days.  This defeated the very purpose of providing 
exemption under Rule 4(a) of the KTPP Act for immediate requirement. 
❖ In the meantime, the KSMSCL invited fresh quotations (11 July 2020) for 
supply of 8,000 units.  The bids were received and opened on 14 July 2020, 
the day on which supply orders were placed for the second occasion.  Since 
fresh quotations were invited before issuing of supply order, the KSMSCL 
had to exercise prudence and wait for completion of the procurement 
process on the third occasion.    
❖ The same agency had participated on the third occasion and had quoted 
₹1,250 per unit which was much lesser than the rate quoted earlier (₹2,829 
per unit).  The lowest offer on the third occasion was ₹1,242 per unit.   
❖ This imprudent action of the KSMSCL resulted in additional expenditure 
of ₹15.87 lakh on purchase of 1,000 units of infrared thermometers.  
3.4.3.5 Non-utilisation of ICU Ventilators 
The State received 2,025 ventilators from GoI under PM Cares Fund through M/s. 
A. While 806 units were supplied directly to the various HIs by the agency, 
KSMSCL received 1,219 units during the period 11 June 2020 to 29 August 2020 
and in turn distributed 1,127 systems to the HIs between 1 July 2020 and 19 
October 2020. The balance 92 units continued to remain with KSMSCL. 
 

Chapter - 3: Healthcare Services 
55 
Further, the ventilators supplied by GoI were provided with 1 kVA UPS. Audit 
observed that none of the test -checked hospitals had utilised this UPS as all of 
them had centralised power backup systems. No efforts were made to identify and 
transfer the UPS to the needy institutions.  
The State Government stated (October 2022) that since the distribution had to 
come from Deputy Director (Medical) who was coordinating with GoI, there was 
delay in distribution.   
3.4.3.6 Non-utilisation of Medical Gas Pipeline with High Flow Oxygen 
 System (MGPLS) 
Government of Karnataka sanctioned (May 2020) setting up of Medical Gas 
Pipeline with High Flow Oxygen System at all levels of HIs at a total cost of  
₹20,798 crore with a condition to first complete DHs followed by THs and CHCs.  
The Government released the funds to the Engineering wing of HFW. Audit 
scrutiny showed the following: 
❖ Short term tenders were invited for the above works.  Accordingly, the 
entire tender process was to be completed within 60 days from the date of 
the tender notification. There was, however, a delay in the issue of work 
orders (98 to 103 days) in respect of four works due to delay in approval 
by the Government. 
❖ Although the work was stated to have been completed in all HIs, Audit 
observed that ₹992.15 crore was still retained by the engineering divisions.  
The reasons for the same were not furnished to Audit. 
❖ Joint physical verification showed that MGPLS either remained non -
operational or was not utilised in five HIs29. 
The State Government stated (October 2022) that the balance amount would be 
utilised after approval of the revised estimates. 
3.4.4 Department of Medical Education  
3.4.4.1 Delay in procurement of equipment  
The State Government released ₹1,120.87 crore for procurement of COVID-19 
related equipment.  The DME placed orders during the period March 2020 to 
March 2022 for ₹1,065.04 crore for procurement of various equipment.  Audit 
observed that equipment worth ₹95.15 crore was yet to be supplied and there was 
a delay ranging from one day to 135 days in supply of equipment worth ₹864.75 
crore. The department levied penalty of ₹2.10 crore for delay in supply of 
equipment worth ₹540.88 crore and the reasons for not lev ying penalty for the 
balance ₹323.87 crore were not forthcoming from the records. 
Further, as per the tender conditions, a Security Deposit (SD) at the rate of five 
per cent of the contract value was to be collected from the suppliers.  This was 
however, reduced (December 2020) to three per cent by the State Government 
owing to the pandemic situation in the State. The department collected SD of 
 
29 KIMS Hubballi, THs-Kalaghatagi, Periyapatna, Navalgund and CHC- Avalahalli. 

PA on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
56 
₹14.12 crore against ₹21.32 crore on procurement of equipment worth ₹710.70 
crore. No SD was collected on the supply value of ₹354.34 crore.  
3.4.4.2 Equipment procured in violation of exemption 
The State Government accorded (March 2020) 4(a) exemption under KTPP Act 
for procurement of goods and services relating to COVID-19 and under 
emergency circumstances.  The exemption was for the expenditure to be incurred 
under SDRF 30, CMRF 31 and NHM funds.  There were no records to support 
extension of this exemption for procurement from other sources. 
Audit observed that 11 of 18 medical institutions, which had furnished the 
information, had procured (March 2020 to March 2021) drugs and equipment of 
₹20.05 crore from out of the user charges collected from public, by claiming 
exemption under 4(a) of the KTPP Act instead of inviting tenders. The irregular 
extension of exemption was in gross violation of the KTPP Act and deprived the 
institutions of competitive rates. 
3.4.4.3 Procurement under MPLADS 
GoI, Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation (MPLADS Division) 
granted (March 2020) one -time dispensation for purchase of testing, screening, 
and other facilities in connection with COVID-19 from MPLADS funds. This 
dispensation was for purchase/installation of medical equipment costing not less 
than five lakh  rupees. The DME received an amount of one crore rupees under 
this scheme. 
Audit observed that DME, based on the requests from BMCRI and Bowring and 
Lady Curzon Hospital for supply of Portable X -ray with computed radiography 
system for treatment of COVID patients and in anticipation of funds from the 
Government, procured (April 2020) four portable X -ray machines from M/s . B, 
at a total cost of ₹87.60 lakh (each unit cost – ₹21.90 lakh) by availing 4(a) 
exemption. As no funds were received from the Government, the DME utilised 
the available MPLADS funds.  Thus, irregular 4(a) exemption was availed for 
procurement from MPLADS funds.  
3.4.4.4  Equipment not installed 
(a) The DME supplied (October 2021) 16 types of equipment costing ₹2.49 
crore for setting up of Genome Sequencing Laboratory at KR Hospital, Mysuru 
to undertake genome sequencing of COVID-19 samples during the COVID 
second wave. Audit observed that the laboratory was made functional only from 
June 2022. Evidently, genome sequencing of samples could not be undertaken 
when actually required.  
3.4.4.5  Non-functional 25 bedded ICUs 
Based on the proposal of Work Force Committee, the State Government approved 
(August 2021) setting up of 25 bedded ICU in all the Taluk Hospitals.  The work 
of construction of 25 bedded ICU was entrusted (November 2021) to seven 
 
30 State Disaster Relief Fund. 
31 Chief Minister Relief Fund. 

Chapter - 3: Healthcare Services 
57 
agencies at a cost of ₹208.83 crore with stipulation to complete the work within 
three months from the date of order.  However, the works were at various stages 
of completion in all the THs.  Audit observed that no arrangements were made to 
deploy addition al staff in these ICUs.  Further , tenders for procurement of 
equipment required for these ICUs were under process.  Consequently, the ICUs 
remained non-functional. 
The State Government stated (October 2022) that necessary staff had been 
deployed.   
The reply is silent on the procurement of equipment and does not indicate whether 
the ICUs were actually made functional. 
3.4.4.6  Fire Safety Audit 
The Supreme Court of India directed (December 2020) all the States to constitute 
a committee in each district to conduct Fire Audit of COVID HIs at least once a 
month; inform the management of medical establishment about any deficiency 
and report to the government for taking follow up action.  As per the directions, 
those HIs which have not renewed their NOC should immediately take steps for 
renewal.  If any COVID HI is found either not having NOC or have renewed the 
expired NOC, appropriate action be taken by the State. 
Audit observed that the State had not constituted any committee to carry out Fire 
Audit of the COVID hospital as per the directions of the Supreme Court. 
Consequently, Fire Audit had not been conducted in any of the COVID hospitals. 
During joint physical inspection, the Audit noticed that only two out of 43 test 
checked HIs had obtained NOC from the fire department. 
The State Government stated (October 2022) that the Commissioner, HFW had 
issued (July 2021) a circular for appointing a nodal officer for each COVID 
hospital and a district level committee under the Chairmanship of District Health 
and Family Officer should be constituted to carry out fire Audit of each hospital 
at least once in a month. It further stated that so far 163 facilities had got fire safety 
Audit done by the respective District Fire Safety Officer and 116 facilities had got 
fire safety recommendation report from Chief Fire Officer. 
The reply did not indicate whether the nodal officers and district committees were 
actually formed and functional. 
3.5 Maternity Services 
3.5.1 Achievement of required four Ante natal Check-ups (ANC) and 
 delivery of Iron Folic Acids (IFA) tablets, Calcium tablets, Tetanus 
 Toxoid to pregnant women. 
Maternity care consists of Antenatal Care (ANC), Intra -partum care or delivery 
care (IPC) and Postnatal Care (PNC).  ANC is the systemic supervision of women 
during pregnancy to monitor the progress of foetal growth and to ascertain the 
well-being of the mother and the foetus. Under IPC, interventions for safe delivery 
in labour room and operation theatre are performed. PNC includes medical care 

PA on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
58 
of the mother and new -born after delivery of the child especially during the 48 
hours post-delivery, which are considered critical. 
Table 3.18: Indicators of Antenatal Care, TT administration and IFA tablets 
in the State 
(in per cent) 
Indicators 2015-16 2019-21 
ANC received in the first trimester 65.90 71.0 
Pregnant women received at least four 
ANC 70.1 70.9 
TT administration 88.1 93.6 
IFA (180 days) 32.6 26.7 
Source: NFHS 
Note: Colour grading has been done on colour scale with green colour depicting 
satisfactory performance; yellow denoting moderate performance while red colour 
depicting poor performance 
As evident from the above table, the percentage of mothers consuming iron folic 
acid for 180 days or more during pregnancy had decreased significantly having a 
serious impact over the pregnancy outcomes. The other indicators have shown 
progress since 2015-16 NFHS Survey. 
3.5.2 Status of Institutional Deliveries 
Table 3. 19: Indicators of institutional births and home births by skilled 
health personnel in the State 
 (in per cent) 
Indicators 2015-16 2019-21 
Institutional births  94 97 
Institutional births in public health facility 61.2 64.8 
Home birth by Skilled health personnel 3.1 1.6 
Births attended by skilled health personnel 93.7 93.8 
Source: Information as per NHFS Reports 4 and 5 
Note: Colour grading has been done on colour scale with green colour depicting 
satisfactory performance; yellow denoting moderate performance while red colour 
depicting poor performance. 
Though the State has shown progress, the necessary measures have to be taken to 
improve the score.  
3.5.2.1 Antenatal Care 
ANC involves general and abdominal examination and laboratory investigations 
to monitor pregnancies, management of complications, such as Reproductive 
Tract Infection (RTI)/Sexually Transmitted Infection (STI) and Comprehensive 
Abortion Care (CAC). Audit noticed shortcomings in ANC in test checked HIs as 
below: 
❖ Specialised ANC was not provided for pregnant women in CHCs-Kotturu 
and Sargur either due to absence or intermittent availability of 
gynaecologist. 

Chapter - 3: Healthcare Services 
59 
❖ ANC Guidelines provide for conducting six pathological investigations.  
Only 24 test checked HIs32 had the facility for conducting all the six 
investigations. Fourteen HIs33 did not conduct Rapid Malaria tests and 
PHC, Badagalapura did not conduct any of these tests due to non -
availability of laboratory technician.  
❖ Drugs required for management of RTI/STI cases were not available in 11 
HIs34 and eight HIs35 did not furnish information in this regard. 
❖ CAC was not available in six HIs for want of speciali sed doctors.  Three 
HIs did not furnish the required information. 
The State Government stated (October 2022) that efforts were being made to fill 
up the specialist posts and notices had been issued to HIs concerned regarding 
non-availability of diagnostic tests.   
3.5.2.2 Labour room facilities in CHCs/PHCs 
Labour room facilities were available in the test checked CHCs and PHCs as 
shown in Table 3.20. 
Table 3.20: Availability of Labour Room in test checked CHCs/ PHCs 
Type of HIs Total Number of HIs Availability of Labour 
Room in No. of HIs 
CHCs 11 11 
PHCs 14 14 
 Source: Information verified in the test checked HIs as on January 2024 
3.5.2.3 Pathological Investigations 
ANC Guidelines prescribe provision of services for conducting six pathological 
investigations at CHCs. These tests were to be prescribed, depending on the 
condition of pregnancy, during ANC visits at CHCs to identify pregnancy related 
complications. 
Audit observed that only 24 HIs out of the 4 3 test-checked had the facility for 
conducting all six prescribed pathological investigations, 14 HIs did not have 
Rapid Malaria tests, three HIs (CHC Gownipalli, PHC Addagal and HDMC UHC 
Dharwad), did not furnish the information, PHC Badagalapura did not conduct 
any tests due to non-availability of Lab Technician. Investigations which were not 
carried out in CHCs, and their impact are summarized in Table 3.21. 
 
 
32  MMCRI, Victoria Hospital, KC General Hospital, THs -HD Kote, K R Puram, Kudligi, 
Navalgund, Periyapatna, Sandur, Srinivasapura; CHCs- Avalahalli, Kengeri, Kotturu, Sargur, 
Torangallu, BBMP MHs - Halasuru, Shanthinagar, Sirsi Road and PHCs - Annigeri, 
Bettadapura, Kannur, Kittur, Morab, Mukkal. 
33  KIMS Hubballi, Victoria Hospital, DH Kolar, THs -Bangarpet, Kalaghatagi, Yelahanka, 
BBMP MH -DJ Halli; PHCs -Allur, Badagalapura, Budikote, Chornur, Halgi Gul Koppa, 
Kannalli, Thoppanhalli. 
34  THs-Bangarpet, Navalgund, Srinivasapura, CHCs -Gownipalli, Sargur; PHCs -Addagal, 
Annigeri, Badagalapura, Thoppanhalli, BBMP MHs-Halasuru and Sirsi Road. 
35  Victoria Hospital, THs- HD Kote, Sandur; CHCs-Kotturu, Torangallu, BBMP MHs -DJ Halli 
and PHCs-Allur, Chornur. 

PA on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
60 
Table 3. 21: Availability of ANC i nvestigations in the test checked health 
institutions  
Name of the test DHs (03) TH (10) CHCs (11) PHCs (14) 
Blood Group including 
RH factor 3 10 8 12 
Venereal Disease 
Research Laboratory 
(VDRL)/Rapid Plasma 
Reagin (RPR) 
3 10 8 12 
HIV testing 3 10 8 12 
Rapid Malaria Test 3 7 7 7 
Blood Sugar Testing 2 10 8 12 
Hepatitis B Surface 
Antigen (HBsAg) 3 10 8 12 
Source: Test-checked HIs as of January 2024 
Thus, pregnant women visiting THs/CHCs for ANCs remained deprived of 
diagnosis and evidence-based treatment. 
3.5.2.4 Caesarean deliveries (C-Section) 
Maternal and Newborn Health (MNH) Toolkit designates all First Referral Unit 
CHCs and hospitals as the central facility for providing Caesarean (C -section) 
services with the provision of specialised human resources 
(gynaecologist/obstetrician and anaesthetist) and equipped operation theatre to 
provide Emergency Obstetric Care (EmOC) to pregnant women. In this respect, 
Janani Shishu Suraksha Karyakram (JSSK), entitles all pregnant women to C -
section services with provision for free drugs, consumables, diagno stics etc. The 
status of C section deliveries is shown in Table 3.22. 
Table 3.22: Status of Caesarean deliveries (C-Section) in the State 
(in per cent) 
Indicators 2015-16 2019-21 
C-section deliveries 23.6 31.5 
Private health facility C -section 
deliveries 40.3 52.5 
Public health facility C -section 
deliveries 16.9 22.6 
Source: NFHS Reports 4 and 5 
Note: Colour grading has been done on colour scale with green colour depicting satisfactory 
performance; yellow depicting moderate performance while Red colour depicting poor 
performance. 
NHM Guidelines on “Engaging General Surgeons for Performing Caesarean 
Sections and Managing Obstetric Complications” state that around eight to ten  
per cent of total delivery cases require C-section.  C-section was not available in 
eight test checked  HIs36 (up to CHC level) due to non -deployment of 
gynaecologist/anaesthetist.  CHC Gownipalli and BBMP MH Sirsi Road did not 
provide the required information.  
 
36  THs- Kudligi, Periyapatna; CHCs-Kotturu, Sargur, Toranagallu, BBMP MHs-DJ Halli, 
Shanthinagar, UHC Dharwad. 

Chapter - 3: Healthcare Services 
61 
It was noticed that the percentage of C-Section to total deliveries in DHs and THs 
was 42 and 17 per cent respectively.  The C-Section deliveries in CHCs were less 
than four per cent.  There was, however, no system for Clinical Audit performed 
by Doctor of Government HIs. 
3.5.2.5 Intra-partum Care (IPC) 
IPC includes care of pregnant woman during intra -partum period (the time 
spanning childbirth from the onset of labour). Proper care during labour saves not 
only mothers and their newborn babies, but also prevents stillbirths, neonatal 
deaths, and other com plications.  Quality of IPC is largely dependent on the 
availability of essential resources and clinical efficiency of medical and 
paramedical staff.  Audit noticed in the test checked HIs that: 
➢ Vital drugs such as B -Complex, Hydralazine, Lignocaine, Methyldopa, and 
Ampicillin were not available in five DHs 37, 10 THs and eight CHCs during 
the test checked months.  Three HIs38 did not furnish the records. 
➢ There was shortage of staff required for maternity ward in seven HIs.39 
➢ Partographs40 were not plotted in five HIs41. 
➢ Pre-term labour requires administering injection of Corticosteroids to prevent 
complications. Though 5,598 deliveries were recorded as preterm deliveries, 
corticosteroid injection was not administered in 1,221 cases.  Preterm labour 
was not handled in four CHCs42 and none of the test checked PHCs. 
The State Government stated (October 2022) that the gaps would be addressed, 
and drugs/consumables would be placed in the all the HIs. 
3.5.2.6 Postnatal maternal and Vaccination of birth doses to new-born 
Prompt PNC is important for early detection and management of any post -
delivery complications. The details of birth doses of immuni sation to newborn 
and post-natal care are shown in Table 3.23. 
Table 3.23: Birth doses of various vaccines  (immunization) to newborn and 
post-natal care in the test checked districts  
Sl. 
No. Districts Total live 
births 
Achievement during the year 2022-23 
(in per cent) 
Vitamin K OPV Hepatitis-B 
1 Ballari 28,786 98 102 97 
2 Bengaluru Urban 1,14,329 82 89 82 
3 Dharwad 31,902 76 103 100 
4 Kolar 20,265 92 100 97 
5 Mysuru 36,038 96 100 96 
Source: Information furnished by the Department 
 
37  KIMS, Victoria Hospital, Ballari, K C General and Kolar. 
38  CHCs-Kengeri, Sargur and Toranagallu. 
39  KC General, THs-Bangarpet, KR Puram, Kalaghatagi, Navalgund, Srinivasapura, Yelahanka  
40  A partograph enables the birth attendant to identify and manage the complication of labour 
promptly or to take a decision to refer the patient to a higher medical facility, if required for 
further management. 
41  THs-Kudligi, Periyapatna; CHCs -Avalahalli, Kotturu and Sargur. 
42   CHCs-DJ Halli, Sargur, Sirsi Road and UHC Dharwad. 

PA on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
62 
  Audit noticed shortcomings in the test checked HIs as below: 
❖ New-borns are to be administered doses of four vaccines viz., OPV, 
BCG, Hepatitis ‘B’ and Vitamin ‘K’ on the day of birth.  Test check of 
labour room records in test checked HIs showed shortage of Vitamin K 
vaccine during the Audit period in 13 HIs 43, BCG in BBMP MH DJ 
Halli; PHC Mukkal and OPV in PHC Badagalapura. 
❖ Two Neonatal death was recorded only in TH, Yelahanka.  Five HIs 44 
did not furnish the information. 
❖ Three radiant warmers were not in use in TH, Yelahanka due to technical 
problems.  The hospital was managing with one warmer kept in the 
labour room. In TH, Kalaghatagi, the radiant warmer was kept idle for 
want of repairs. 
❖  IPHS norms prescribe 28 items of equipment to be available in the 
Special New-born Care Unit (SNCU) in HIs with a bed strength of 301 
and above. While in the test checked MCs the availability ranged from 
46 per cent to 89 per cent of the equipment  and in test checked DHs, 
availability ranged between 75 and 89 per cent in six HIs. 
❖  Equipment such as baby incubators, phototherapy units and newborn 
care equipment were not available in many of the test checked HIs. 
❖  Three CHCs45 and five THs46 had stabilisation units for resuscitation and 
care of babies. 
Shortage in vaccinations and high still birth rates are a cause for concern in ANC 
and delivery process and absence of essential equipment in SNCU and labour 
rooms is indicative of inadequate post-natal care. 
Details of women discharged within 48 hours after delivery during the period 
2022-23 are shown in Table 3.24. 
Table 3.24: Total number of women discharged within 48 hours after 
delivery 
Sl. 
No. Districts 
2022-23 
Number of 
Institutional 
Deliveries conducted 
(including C-Sections) 
Total No. of 
women 
discharged within 
48 hours 
Percentage 
1 Ballari 28,898 5,973 20.67 
2 Bengaluru Urban 1,12,341 8,015 7.13 
3 Dharwad 32,450 190 0.59 
4 Kolar 20,342 181 0.89 
5 Mysuru 36,230 145 0.40 
Source: Information from the HFWD 
 
 
43  IGICH, DH Kolar, TH -HD Kote, CHC -Sargur, BBMP MH Shanthinagar, PHC -Addagal, 
Annigeri, Badagalapura, Bettadapura, Kannalli, Kannur, Galgi Hul Koppa . 
44  DH Kolar, TH Srinivasapura, CHC Gownipalli, BBMP MHs- DJ Halli, Sirsi Road. 
45  CHCs-Avalahalli, Kotturu and Sargur. 
46  THs-Kudligi, K R Puram, Navalgund, Periyapatna and Sandur. 

Chapter - 3: Healthcare Services 
63 
3.5.3 Maternity care outcomes 
3.5.3.1 Stillbirths 
a) Stillbirth:  The stillbirth rate is a key indicator of quality of care during 
pregnancy and childbirth. As per Karnataka Registration of Births and Death Act, 
1969 report for the year 2022, the average still birth rate of the State was 3.62.  
Audit observed that stillbirth rate was between zero and 44.19 in the test-checked 
hospitals as given in Table 3.25.  
Table 3.25: Still Birth Rate in test checked MCs/DH/THs 
Still Birth Rate in test checked MCs/DHs/THs 
Year 
Ballari Bengaluru Urban Dharwad Kolar Mysuru 
DH Ballari 
TH Kudligi 
TH Sandur 
Vani Vilas 
K C General 
TH KR Puram 
TH Yelahanka 
KIMS MC 
TH Kalaghatagi 
TH Navalgund 
DH Kolar 
TH Bangarpet 
TH Srinivasapura 
Cheluvamba 
TH HD Kote 
TH Periyapatna 
2016-17 0 16.78 29.25 7.3 3.66 0 0 4.7 0.9 7.86 0 0 0 32.7 3.56 0 
2017-18 14.13 14.81 26.41 6.43 5.69 0 0 4 0.6 6.6 0 0 1.26 33.15 4.41 0 
2018-19 4.39 11.49 15.36 6.53 8.1 0 0 4.2 0.5 8.13 0 0 1.3 33.09 5.94 0 
2019-20 0 6.72 20.75 6.56 10.2 0 0.84 4 1 7.19 0 0 0 33.55 9.34 0 
2020-21 1.76 10.48 8.52 7.11 14.35 0 0 4.6 1.3 9.32 0 2.04 0 42.7 6.35 0 
2021-22 0 11.48 9.25 6.48 12.46 0 0 4.2 1.1 5.75 0 3.13 0 44.19 10.97 0 
2022-23 2.37 5.92 25.59 6.35 9.2 0 0.75 3.7 1 3.55 0 0 0 37.04 3.08 1 
Source: Information furnished by test checked HIs 
High stillbirth rates were observed (2022-23) in Cheluvamba (37.04), Vani Vilas 
(6.35), KC General (9.20), TH Kudligi (5.92), TH Sandur (25.59). High stillbirth 
rates were a sign of badly managed antenatal care and delivery process in the test 
checked HIs. 
b) Neonatal deaths  - Neonatal death rate is also an indicator of quality of 
maternity and newborn care services. MNH Toolkit requires hospitals to record 
the number of neonatal deaths per month with causes of such deaths in the labour 
room register. 
Audit observed that in none of the test checked HIs except for TH Yelahanka 
wherein two neonatal deaths were recorded. Records in respect of five DHs, one 
TH and two CHCs were not made available to Audit. Lack of documentation 
relating to neonatal deaths compromised the ability to seek continuous quality 
improvement towards neonatal health, impacting neonatal morbidity  and 
mortality. 
3.6 Diagnostic services 
IPHS norms provide for the standards to be maintained in respect of diagnostic 
services. Analysis of availability and utilisation of diagnostic facilities in the test 
checked HIs are discussed in the succeeding sub-paragraphs. 
 

PA on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
64 
3.6.1 Radiology services 
The status of availability and working condition of the diagnostic equipment in 
test checked HIs as on March 2022 is shown in Table 3.26. 
Table 3.26: Status of diagnostic equipment in test checked SS/MC/DH/THs 
Imaging Services SS/MCs DH/THs 
HIs Available Working HIs Available Working 
X-ray  
500 MA  05 03 03 13 10 10 
300 MA  05 03 03 13 07 04 
100 MA  05 04 04 13 10 09 
60 MA  05 04 03 13 06 05 
Dental X-ray 05 00 00 13 08 08 
Ultrasonography  05 04 04 13 09 08 
CT scan 05 04 04 13 01 01 
Mammography 05 03 03 13 02 02 
        Source: Information verified in the test checked HIs 
The availability of diagnostic equipment in the test checked HIs fell short of 
requirement as per IPHS norms.  Audit noticed that available equipment was also 
not put to use in a few HIs either for want of radiologist, repairs or non -
installation.  In KR Hospital, Mysuru, the MRI facility was outsourced though the 
same was to be owned and managed by the Medical College in accordance with 
National Medical Commission guidelines. 
The non-availability of radiology services forced patients to avail these services 
from higher Government HIs or from private hospitals.  Availability of Imaging 
Diagnostic Services in test checked CHCs is shown in Table 3.27. 
Table 3.27: Availability of Imaging Diagnostic Services in test checked CHCs 
Name of the 
District 
Name of 
CHC/MH 
Radiology Cardiac 
Investigation 
X-ray for chest, 
skull, spine, 
abdomen, bones 
Dental X- 
ray ECG 
Ballari Kotturu Yes No Yes 
Torangallu Yes Yes Yes 
Bengaluru 
Urban 
Avalahalli No Yes Yes 
BBMP  
MH DJ Halli  No No No 
BBMP 
MH Halasuru No No No 
BBMP 
MH Shanthinagar No Yes Yes 
BBMP  
MH Sirsi Road Yes Yes Yes 
Kengeri Yes Yes Yes 
Dharwad HDMC UHC No No No 
Kolar Gownipalli No Yes Yes 
Mysuru Sargur No No Yes 
Source: Information verified in the tests checked HIs as on January 2024 

Chapter - 3: Healthcare Services 
65 
As seen from  the above, radiology services were not available in four CHCs . 
Except for six CHCs, Dental X ray facilities were not available in another test 
checked HIs. Cardiac investigation (ECG) services were not available in test 
checked three CHCs.  
3.6.2 Non-assessment of Thermo Luminescent Dosimeter (TLD) badges. 
TLD badges are used to detect radiation at levels that can be harmful to humans 
and necessary records shall be maintained as per Atomic Energy Regulatory 
Board (AERB) guidelines. These badges are to be sent to Baba Atomic Research 
Centre for assessment on a regular basis. Fifteen test checked HIs had not sent the 
badges for assessment. The Ayurvedic hospital, Mysuru, had not obtained the 
badges for its technician and paramedical students undergoing training at 
Radiology department in KIMS, Hubballi were not  provided with TLD badges.  
Evidently, the monitoring of radiation levels that the staff w as exposed to could 
not be measured there by compromising their safety. 
3.6.3 Pathology services 
IPHS prescribed the number of pathological investigations to be carried out under 
five categories in the HIs.  Audit noticed that: 
❖ Except for DIMHANS, all the tertiary care HIs were providing diagnostic 
services in almost all the prescribed pathology tests. However, in DHs, 
pathology was not available in KC General Hospital.  All the test checked 
DHs were not equipped with all the tests falling under Serology and 
Biochemistry diagnostics.  
❖ The complete range of pathological investigations was not available in the 
test checked HIs is shown in Tables 3.28 (a) to 3.28(c). 
Table 3.28(a): Availability of Pathology services in test checked SS/MC/DHs 
Name of HIs 
Clinical 
Pathology 
(29) 
Pathology 
(08) 
Microbiology 
(07) 
Serology 
(07) 
Biochemistry 
(21) 
Super Specialty Hospitals 
DIMHANS 8 0 0 0 6 
IGICH 28 8 5 5 20 
Medical College (attached hospitals) 
KIMS, 
Dharwad 
29 8 6 7 19 
MMCRI  
(KR Hospital) 
28 8 7 7 21 
BMCRI 
(Victoria 
Hospital) 
24 8 5 6 16 
District Hospitals 
DH Ballari 25 6 2 4 10 
KC General 20 0 4 3 9 
DH Kolar 24 5 6 6 11 
Source: Information verified in the test checked HIs as of December 2021 
 
 
 

PA on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
66 
Table 3.28(b): Availability of Pathology services in test checked THs 
District Name of HIs 
Clinical 
Pathology 
(24) 
Pathology 
(01) 
Microbiology 
(04) 
Serology 
(04) 
Biochemistry 
(06) 
Ballari TH Kudligi 15 0 1 4 4 
TH Sandur 19 0 1 4 4 
Bengaluru 
Urban 
TH K R Puram 22 1 0 3 4 
TH Yelahanka 19 1 1 4 4 
Dharwad Kalaghatagi 12 0 1 4 1 
Navalgund 12 1 1 4 4 
Kolar Bangarpet 11 0 1 4 4 
Srinivasapura 14 0 0 4 4 
Mysuru H D Kote 14 0 0 4 4 
Periyapatna 17 1 0 4 1 
Source: Information verified in the test checked HIs as of December 2021 
As c ould be seen , only few test checked THs had all the prescribed range of 
pathology services.  
Table 3.28(c): Availability of Pathology services in test checked CHCs 
District Name of HIs 
Clinical 
Pathology 
(18) 
Pathology 
(01) 
Micro-
biology (02) 
Serology 
(03) 
Bio-
chemistry 
(05) 
Ballari Kotturu 13 0 1 3 5 
Torangallu 10 0 1 3 5 
Bengaluru 
Urban 
Avalahalli 11 0 2 3 5 
Kengeri 11 0 1 3 5 
BBMP MH 
DJ Halli 4 0 0 2 1 
BBMP 
MH Halasuru 4 1 2 3 1 
BBMP 
MH Shanthinagar 9 1 0 2 2 
BBMP MH 
Sirsi Road 18 1 2 3 5 
Dharwad HDMC UHC 8 0 1 3 2 
Kolar Gownipalli 12 0 1 3 5 
Mysuru Sargur 5 0 1 3 3 
Source: Information verified in the test checked HIs as of December 2021 
None of the test checked HIs had all the prescribed pathology services available.  
Biochemistry analyser costing ₹39.53 lakh and supplied (October 2020) was kept 
unutilised in DH, Kolar.  The HI had outsourced 20 laboratory investigations of 
which facilities for 16 were already available in the hospital.  The biochemistry 
analyser had the capacity to carry out other two47 tests out of the remaining four48.  
However, the hospital had engaged lab technicians on a contractual basis also. 
Reasons for keeping the analyser idle even after having the trained technicians 
were not on record. Outsourcing all the laboratory investigations was, therefore, 
not prudent and resulted in additional expenditure besides rendering the 
expenditure of ₹39.53 lakh unfruitful. 
 
 
47 D-Dimer and Ferritin. 
48 D-Dimer, Ferritin, HS Troponin-I and Troponin I (Qualitative). 

Chapter - 3: Healthcare Services 
67 
3.7 Blood Banks/ blood storage units 
 
The DHs shall have a blood bank and THs should have blood bank or blood 
storage unit depending upon the capacity of the TH.  The blood bank/storage units 
shall be in close proximity to pathology and at an accessible distance to OT, ICU 
and emergency department. The blood banks have to function with the prescribed 
requirements of infrastructure, technical staff, equipment etc., as detailed49 in the 
Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945 and obtain valid licence 50 and licence once 
obtained is valid for five years.   
Audit observed that blood bank/Storage unit was available in all test checked HIs. 
Compliance to the norms by the test checked HIs as noticed in field visits during 
the period November 2021 to May 2022 were given in Appendix 3.4. 
Audit noticed that: 
❖ Though items relating to Blood storage unit was supplied (September 
2021) to CHC, Kengeri, the unit was not installed. 
❖ In TH, Yelahanka, Dielectric Tube Sealer and Freezer supplied during 
February and September 2021 respectively, were not put to use. 
❖ In DH, Kolar, Cryo bath CB 100 Terumopenpol which was supplied in 
April 2017 was not put to use till -date due to non -availability of 
technician. 
❖ License for the Blood storage unit in TH, Kalaghatagi was not renewed 
from January 2020. 
  
Blood storage refrigerator not installed at 
TH Yelahanka 
ILR for blood storage not installed – CHC 
Kengeri 
 
In the absence of the facility, patients were forced to avail the services from the 
other HIs/blood banks. 
The State Government stated (October 2022) that action would be taken to levy 
penalty for delayed installation and show cause notice issued for non-utilisation 
of the units.  The reply was, however, incomplete as action taken on the other 
observations was not furnished. 
 
 
49 Schedule F Part XII B of Drugs and Cosmetics Rules,1945. 
50 As per Rule 122-F of Drugs and Cosmetics Rules,1945. 


PA on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
68 
3.8 Auxiliary and Support services 
Support services are the functions within the hospitals that supplement the main 
activities of the healthcare institutions. These services, viz., ambulance services, 
Bio Medical Waste management (BMW), dietary services etc., support the work 
carried out by the doctors and nurses and are crucial in the efficient working of 
the health care institutions. The availability of the support services as per norms 
in the DHs in the State as shown in Chart 3.6. 
Chart 3.6: Availability of Support Services in 17 DHS in the State 
 
Source: Information furnished by the Department 
 
The prescribed support services were available  in all the DHS except for 
Jayanagar; however, inefficient functioning of these services in test checked HIs, 
noticed by the Audit is brought out in the subsequent paragraphs.   
3.8.1 Ambulance services 
As per IPHS, 24x7 ambulance services with well -equipped Basic Life Support 
(BLS) should be available in all the hospitals up to CHC.  It is desirable to have 
at least one Advanced Life Support (ALS) ambulance for DH and above category 
HIs. Separate dedicated parking space s with proper demarcation should be 
available near the emergency wing. Serviceability and availability of essential 
equipment and drugs in ambulances are required to be monitored on a daily basis. 
This office conducted a PA on Arogya Kavacha (108 Ambulance Services) 
scheme for the period 2014-15 to 2018-19 (Para 2.1 of Report No. 3 of 2020). In 
the PA, Audit had observed that the ambulances reached the patients after 10 
minutes in 62, 66 and 63 cases in respect of cardiac, respiratory and stroke cases 
respectively as against the recommended time which was to be less than 10 
minutes. In 50 per cent  of the trauma cases, the patients were admitted to the 
hospital after the crucial one -hour time. The allocation of ambulances was not 
based on criticality of emergencies as ambulances with Basic Life Support system 
were allocated in 75 per cent of the cases to critical emergencies such as cardiac, 
respiratory and trauma that required allocation of Advanced Life Support systems.  
The a vailability of Ambulance Services in test checked HIs is shown in  
Table 3.29. 
17
17
17
17
16
10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17
Ambulance Services
Dietary
Laundry Services
Bio-medical waste Management
Mortuary Facility
DHs
Support Services

Chapter - 3: Healthcare Services 
69 
Table 3.29: Availability of Ambulance Service in test checked health 
institutions 
 Ambulance Services 
HIs No. of ambulances available 
as per norms 
Availability of 
ambulance services 
24*7 
Availability of 
demarcated parking 
space 
DH (3) 2 3 3 
TH (10) 8 10 9 
CHC (11) 6 6 6 
  Source: Information verified in the test checked HIs 
In the test checked HIs, Audit observed that ambulance services were not 
functioning at optimum levels as noticed in the following:  
❖ ALS Ambulances were 
available only in two HIs 
(DH and above level). 
❖ Oxygen cylinder was not 
available in BLS 
ambulances in five HIs. 
❖ Essential drugs and 
equipment were not 
available in ambulances in 
13 HIs. 
 
First aid box not kept in the ambulance  
 TH Kalaghatagi 
❖ One ambulance received from KC General Hospital, Bengaluru during 
January 2019 to be used by the Blood Bank attached to IGICH, 
Bengaluru was not put to use. 
3.8.1.1 Call Management 
The first step towards achieving an effective Emergency Response Service (ERS) 
involves efficient management of the call centre.  The details of emergency calls 
received and attended during the period 2016-17 to 2021-22 by the call centre is given 
in Table 3.30. 
Table 3.30: Status of the Call Management 
Parameter 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 Total 
Number of Calls 
attended 53,53,336 52,05,079 45,86,524 41,30,789 31,32,154 29,98,491 2,54,06,373 
Number of 
Emergency Calls 11,61,661 11,88,322 10,91,423 10,06,034 8,57,447 8,09,881 61,14,76 
Number of Non-
Emergency/ In 
effective Calls 
33,51,462 31,51,928 27,25,538 31,24,755 22,74,707 21,88,610 1,68,17,000 
No of Unattended 
Calls 83,813 1,00,158 59,352 89,373 17,301 3,99,512 7,49,509 
Source: Information furnished by HFWD 
 
 


PA on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
70 
The call centre had received around 66 per cent non-emergency/ineffective calls 
during the period 2016-17 to 2021-22. These were mainly enquiry calls, follow -
up calls, caller concerns and appreciations, calls from field staff to Despatch 
Officers (DOs)  and Emergency Response Centre Physicians  (ERCP). Routing 
such calls through 108 would burden the emergency helpline and delay  the 
response to other callers requiring emergency assistance. Best practices require 
providing information to the public and officials on the usage of 108 emergency 
number. Audit observed that there was only one common number (108 toll free) 
for emergency helpline and for other purposes viz., enquiry calls, follow up calls, 
caller concerns, appreciation etc.  
There was no non -emergency call number for public to make enquiries as large 
number of such calls were routed through 108. 
3.8.1.2 Delay in transfer of patients leading to loss of ambulance hours 
Transferring a patient from an ambulance to an emergency department in the 
destination hospital should happen as soon as possible after the ambulance arrives 
at the hospital. Each failure to meet this time expectation would result in (i) delay 
for the patient waiting to be received and (ii) delay in an ambulance crew being 
available for a new emergency call. This means patients, including those with a 
life-threatening condition must wait longer without any face -to-face medical 
support, thereby posing a pote ntial safety risk and causing emotional distress. 
Year wise details of response time along with number of Trips are shown in  
Table 3.31. 
Table 3.31: Details of Response time and number of Trips 
Response 
Time 
Range (in 
minutes) 
No. of Trips 
2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 Total 
0-15 4,72,444 4,29,651 3,59,336 3,71,560 25,25,540 2,63,531 44,22,062 
15-30 3,00,450 3,20,704 266825 268798 1,99,057 1,89,401 15,45,235 
30-60 2,13,000 2,27,006 211193 180148 1,48,649 1,29,161 11,09,157 
60-120 24,091 31,831 34805 25232 25,983 19,813 1,61,755 
120-240 805 1,604 1,355 917 1,811 1,080 7,572 
240-360 48 49 61 88 210 115 571 
>360 681 62 82 430 1,256 513 3,024 
Total 10,11,519 10,10,907 8,73,657 8,47,173 29,02,506 6,03,614  
Source: Information furnished by HFWD  
It was noticed that in 61 per cent of the cases, the patients were handed over to 
the hospital within 15 minutes of reaching the hospital during the period 2016-17 
to 2021-22.  In respect of the balance 39 per cent of the cases,  the ambulances 
took more than the expected 15 minutes to transfer the patients which resulted in 
loss of ambulance hours and further delay in making their vehicle ready for the 
next call.  
3.8.1.3 Human Resource Management  
EMRI was required to deploy the required personnel for the effective 
implementation of the project.  The Government of Karnataka entered into a 
Public Private Partnership arrangement with GVK Emergency Management 

Chapter - 3: Healthcare Services 
71 
Research Institute, Secunderabad through a Memorandum of Understanding 
(MOU) to provide a comprehensive ‘Emergency Response Service.  As per the 
MOU, each ambulance was to be provided with pilots and EMTs each in the ratio 
of 2.75 per ambulance. For a fleet size of 715 ambulances, 1,966 pilots and EMTs 
each were required to be deployed.  The status of pilots and EMTs as at the end 
of May 2023 was 1,563 and 1,348 respectively. The shortage of ambulance staff 
affected the functioning of ambulance service and also an additional burden on 
the existing staff to work for longer durations.  
3.8.2 Dietary services 
Diet and food offered during hospital stay are an important part of patient-centric 
services available at the hospital. Adequate and appropriate meal consumption to 
meet patients’ dietary requirements is necessary and important to aid in recovery. 
Patients have the right to ensure their nutritional requirements are met during their 
stays in hospitals. Apart from a normal diet, diabetic,  semi solid and liquid diet 
should be available.  
Audit noticed that: 
❖ Out of 43 test checked HIs, inhouse dietary services were available in eight 
HIs (inclusive of PHC, Galgi Hulkoppa) and it was outsourced in 29 HIs.  
Only two of the eight HIs with in-house dietary service and five out of 29 
outsourced had obtained FSSAI registration. 
❖ Only KIMS, Hubballi and Victoria Hospital, Bengaluru provided different 
types of diets viz., diabetic, semi solid and liquid along with proper diet 
counselling. No other test checked hospitals were providing different types 
of diets to the patients. 
❖ The food distributed to patients was tested by the Food Inspector of district 
authorities only in five HIs. 
❖ Joint inspection showed food being prepared in unhygienic conditions in 
the two hospitals attached to MC, Mysuru.  In Cheluvamba hospital, the 
food was carried in trolley without closing the dishes. 
❖ As per Janani Shishu Suraksha Karyakram (JSSK) under NHM, every 
pregnant woman was entitled to free diet during her stay in the hospital.  
Since dietary services were not available in nine HIs, the pregnant women 
were deprived for free diet. CHC, Torangallu issued token worth ₹100 per 
day for every patient redeemable from a specified vendor located at a 
distance place, which was not in accordance with the JSSK guidelines. 
❖ In 10 HIs,  food was provided only to pregnant women identified under 
JSSK and not for other patients. 
The State Government stated (October 2022) that stringent monitoring would be 
done to ensure compliance to the guidelines. 

PA on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
72 
3.8.3 Laundry services 
The provision of clean linen is a part of patient care in HIs.  IPHS prescribed the 
number of different types of linen 51 that are required for patient care services in 
hospitals. Audit noticed that: 
❖ Different types of linen were not available in test checked 18 HIs. 
❖ Blankets and abdominal sheets were in excess in all test checked HIs 
except DH, Ballari and TH, Kudligi. There was, however, a shortfall in 
other types of linen. 
❖ Eleven HIs had not conducted physical verification of linen. 
❖ Separate trolleys for collection and distribution of clean and dirty linen 
were not available in 13 HIs. 
❖ In nine HIs, the infectious and non-infectious linens were not transported 
in separate containers/bags. 
❖ Washing of linen was outsourced in three HIs. 
❖ Washing and drying of linen was carried out in unhygienic conditions. 
❖ New washing machines supplied to DH Kolar, TH Bangarpet,                          
TH Kalaghatagi were not installed and put to use due to various reasons. 
❖ The newly installed washing machine was kept idle in an open place 
without shed for want of repair in TH, Sandur. 
❖ Both the washing machines in TH, Srinivasapura were kept idle for want 
of repairs. 
❖ The laundry unit of KR Hospital, Mysuru, was kept idle since 2014 as the 
building was not fit to handle the vibration generated by the machine.  No 
action was initiated either to shift the machinery out of this building or 
repair the building. As a result,  the entire laundry set had become non -
functional.  Washing was being carried in the laundry unit of neighbouring 
Cheluvamba hospital.  
 
 
51 Abdominal sheets for OT, Bed sheets, Bedspreads, Doctor’s overcoats, Draw sheets, Hospital 
worker OT coats, leggings, Macintosh sheets, Mats (Nylon), Mattresses (Foam) for adults, 
Mortuary sheets, over-shoe pairs, Pediatric mattress, Patient’s coats (Femal e), Patient’s shirts 
(Male), Perennial sheets for OT, Pillows, Pillow-covers, etc. 
 

Chapter - 3: Healthcare Services 
73 
  
Washed linen kept on ground for drying at KC 
General Hospital 
  Washed linen being carried in 
stretcher at TH K R Puram 
Survey Finding:  Out of 586 patients, only 3, 17 and 4 per cent of the in-patients 
surveyed were provided with coat/pyjamas in tertiary, secondary and primary 
care HIs respectively. 
The State Government stated (October 2022) that Quality Assurance Division 
carried out the assessment and provided the gaps to respective HIs as per the GoI 
provided quality assurance standard.  The details of such an exercise having been 
carried out were not furnished to Audit. 
3.8.4 Bio-medical Waste Management 
The Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) 
generated by hospitals should be 
segregated into bio -degradable, non -
degradable and domestic hazardous 
wastes as per MSW guidelines, 2016 
and stored properly in suitable bins. 
However, it was found that in five52  
HIs, the procedure as laid down for 
disposal of MSW was not being 
followed.  MSW was being burnt 
within the campus in GH, Sandur. 
  
MSW burning in GH, Sandur 
3.8.4.1 Absence of BMW Committee 
BMW Committee was available only in 21 test checked HIs. The absence of 
committee in the hospitals renders management of BMW ineffective as discussed 
below:  
(a) BMW not collected regularly 
As per BMW Rules 2016, untreated human anatomical waste, animal anatomical 
waste, soiled waste and biotechnology waste shall not be stored beyond a period 
of 48 hours unless it becomes necessary to store such waste beyond such period. 
 
52 KIMS, THs - KR Puram, Kalaghatagi, Sandur and PHC, Chornur. 


PA on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
74 
Audit noticed in the test checked HIs that BMW was being collected daily only 
in 15 HIs, thrice a week in 13 HIs and in 14 HIs, the collection was 
once/twice/thrice a week.  In PHC, Chornur, BMW was collected only twice in a 
month. 
(b) Non-segregation of BMW  
The BMW Rules require hospitals to segregate different categories of BMW in 
separate-coloured bins at the source of generation. Segregation was done in all the 
test checked HIs except two THs and one CHC.  In KIMS, Hubballi, though BMW 
was segregated in the wards (source), it was stored in dormitory instead of BMW 
segregation room.  
  
Non-segregation of the waste at TH 
Kalaghatagi 
Waste stored in the open at MMCRI, 
Mysuru 
(c) Hospital staff not immunised 
Hospital staff in 30 test checked HIs were immunised against Tetanus and 
Hepatitis B and in 10 HIs, none of the staff had been immunised. In two HIs, it 
was partial, and one HI (TH, Sandur) did not furnish the information. 
(d) Absence of training for BMW management  
As per the BMW Rules, it is the responsibility of the HIs to ensure that all the 
staff are provided with regular training on BMW handling.  17 test checked HIs 
did not provide any training to their staff.  Joint inspection showed that in TH, 
Sandur, used syringes were kept in a box in a hospital room without 
removing/cutting the needles.  
(e) BMW collection services by BBMP 
BBMP provided for waste collection in the hospital run by it through outsourced 
agency.  The agency was paid on the basis of the sanctioned bed instead of 
functional beds available in the hospitals.  Audit noticed during joint inspection 
of BBMP run hospit als that there was substantial difference between sanctioned 
and functional beds. The incorrect adoption of the basis resulted in BBMP having 
to incur excess expenditure on BMW collection. 
 
 
 


Chapter - 3: Healthcare Services 
75 
3.8.4.2 Liquid Waste Management 
In respect of liquid chemical waste generated in HIs, BMW Rules mandate 
segregation of the waste at source and its pre -treatment or neutralisation prior to 
mixing with other effluent generated from HIs. Only seven of the 18 test checked 
hospitals (up to TH level) had set up the Effluent Treatment Plant facilities for 
pre-treatment of liquid chemical waste. The absence of this ETP facility in other 
test checked hospitals resulted in drainage of the waste directly into the sewerage 
system. This not only violated the BMW Rules, bu t also posed health hazards to 
public health at large. 
3.8.4.3   Non-adoption of Bar Code system  
As per the BMW Rule 2016, Bar- Code System for bags or containers containing 
BMW to be sent out of the premises or place for any purpose was to be 
implemented within one year from the date of the notification of these rules.  
However, the procedure of bar coding was not in place in all the test checked 
hospitals. 
3.8.5 Mortuary Services 
As per IPHS norms and NHM Assessor’s Guidebook, Mortuary facility should be 
provided in the Health Care Facilities ( HCFs) for keeping dead bodies and 
conducting autopsy. The DHs and THs are required to have a mortuary. Mortuary 
services were available in all the test checked HIs up to TH level. Out of 11 test 
checked CHCs, only five had mortuary services.  
In the test checked HIs, Audit noticed that: 
❖ The mortuary building in TH KR Puram was in a dilapidated condition 
and not put to use.  Further, due to the non -availability of required staff, 
the required equipment and instruments though provided were kept idle. 
As a result, 167 dead patients were handed over to the police without post-
mortem during the period 2016-21. 
❖ Three tier body unit worth ₹4.48 lakh was not put to use for wanting of 
power supply of requisite capacity at TH HD Kote. 
❖ The mortuary constructed at a cost of ₹5.35 lakh at CHC, Sargur was not 
put to use due to non -availability of trained staff and equipment like 
freezers, steel table etc. 
❖ The facility at CHC Kengeri had not been started due to social issues (A 
temple is situated behind the mortuary). 

PA on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
76 
  
Mortuary Room in dilapidated condition 
at TH Kalaghatagi 
  Locked Mortuary Room at CHC 
Kengeri 
 
The State Government stated (October 2022) that as on date, the mortuary at KR 
Puram stands demolished and post -mortem was conducted at two Government 
medical colleges which were located nearby.   
No reply was furnished in respect of other HIs. 
3.8.6 Patient rights and grievance redressal 
IPHS guidelines envisage that Citizen’s Charter should be displayed at a 
prominent place in the hospitals so that the patients are well aware of their rights, 
facilities available, user fees charged by the hospital and grievance redressal 
mechanism available. In the test checked HIs, Audit noticed that: 
❖ Complaint register facility for patients to address their grievances was not 
available in four DHs/Teaching hospitals, four THs, four CHCs and six 
PHCs. 
❖ The facility of attending to complaints and action taken were not available 
in two DHs, seven THs, six CHCs and five PHCs. 
Absence of citizens charter and inadequate grievance redressal mechanism 
rendered the public health service delivery ineffective.  
The State Government stated (October 2022) that patient rights and other 
information would be provided and the same would be monitored in public 
hospitals. 
3.8.7 Infection Control Management 
Health care associated infections are major burdens for patients, society and 
healthcare management. Good infection control programme considerably reduces 
patients’ morbidity and mortality, length of hospital stays, and cost associated 
with hospital stay. This is achieved by prevention and management of infections 
through the application of research -based knowledge to practices.  Infection 
control policies need to be framed, practiced and monitored by the Hospital 
Infection Control Committee (HICC). The deta ils of availability of infection 
control management in the test checked HIs is summarised in Table 3.32. 
 


Chapter - 3: Healthcare Services 
77 
 Table 3.32: Infection Control Management in test checked health institutions 
Description 
Availability 
in SS/MCs 
(05) 
Availability 
in DHs 
(03) 
Availability 
in THs 
(10) 
Availability 
in CHCs 
(11) 
Availability 
in PHCs  
(14) 
Whether checklist for hygiene 
and infection control available 4 3 10 11 14 
Whether hospital Infection 
Control Committee set up 4 3 10 10 14 
Whether hospital Infection 
Control Committee's meetings 
are being conducted 
4 3 10 10 14 
Whether Pest Control is in place 4 3 8 10 14 
Whether Rodent Control is in 
place 4 3 8 6 14 
Whether anti-termite treatment is 
available 3 3 7 5 13 
Whether cattle trap is installed 2 2 5 5 8 
Source: Information verified in the test checked HIs 
Audit noticed that: 
❖ Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) and HICC were available in almost 
all the test checked HIs. However, SOPs were not available in one SSH, 
10 CHCs and nine PHCs. HICC was absent in one SSH, four THs, six 
CHCs and five PHCs. Two CHCs and one PHC did not furnish the 
information.   
❖ Pest and rodent control were absent in two THs and five CHCs. Audit 
noticed presence of stray dogs and other animals in the premises of test 
checked HIs.  
❖ Disinfection and sterilisation of medical tools, linen and consumables 
reduce the chance of spread of infection. This consists of boiling and 
autoclaving, chemical sterilisation, and high-level disinfection.  The status 
in the sample HIs is shown in Chart 3.7. 
Chart 3.7: Availability of the procedures of disinfection and sterilization in 
test checked health institutions 
 
Source: Information verified in the test checked HIs 
2
1
4 4
1
6
3
8
1
4
6
3
10
7
9
6
3
10
11
14
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
MCs(07) DHs(3) THs(10) CHCs(11) PHCs(14)
No. of HIs
Type of HIs
Boiling High Level Disinfection Chemical Sterilization Autoclaving

PA on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
78 
❖ As per NHM Assessor’s Guidebook and Kayakalpa guidelines, Health 
Care Facilities must have a system to collect air and surface samples for 
microbiological survey to check for infections.  All the sample DHs were 
conducting the survey.  No survey was done in MC, Mysuru. Only 50 per 
cent of THs and 18 per cent of CHCs conducted the survey.  
❖ Joint inspection showed that in five HIs, the toilets were not in usable 
condition. 
Thus, the absence of SOPs and HICC, pest control, disinfection and 
microbiological survey reflects on the inadequacy of infection control policies 
existing in the hospitals, their implementation and monitoring. 
Good practice at PHC, Mukkal 
One of the most successful and widely used biological control agents against 
mosquito larvae is the mosquito fish Gambusia affinis and Poecilia reticulata, the 
common guppy. PHC was breeding and utilizing Gambusia and Guppy fish to 
eliminate mosquito larvae and ultimately to curb mosquito related diseases like 
dengue. 
The State Government replied (October 2022) that identified gaps would be 
communicated timely to facilities so that they can classify, prioritize and close 
those gaps effectively on time. 
3.8.8 Patient safety  
Patient safety is defined by World Health Organisation (WHO) as 'the prevention 
of errors and adverse effects to patients associated with healthcare' and 'to do no 
harm to patients. IPHS also prescribes patient safety facilities those needs to be 
provided in the HIs. For instance, fire extinguishers, sand buckets, etc., should be 
available and maintained to be readily available when needed. Staff should be 
trained in using firefighting equipment. Surprise mock drills should be conducted 
at regular intervals. No Objection Certificates (NOC) from the competent fire 
authority is a statutory requirement as per IPHS.  
The availability of patient safety facilities in the test checked HIs is summarised 
in the Table 3.33. 
Table 3.33: Patient safety facilities 
Activity 
HIs 
Availability                               
(out of 18) 
CHCs 
Availability                                    
(out of 11) 
Standard operating procedure for patient safety 17 10 
Disaster management plan formulated for patient 
safety 16 7 
Formation disaster management committee 14 6 
Facility assigned space or ward to manage additional 
patient load in the event of a disaster 15 4 
Follow a periodic plan to evaluate and manage 
disasters and mass casualty incidents 15 2 
Facility connected to network of referral facilities that 
will be necessary in a disaster 17 6 
No Objection Certificates required to be obtained from 
the Fire Department 5 0 

Chapter - 3: Healthcare Services 
79 
Activity 
HIs 
Availability                               
(out of 18) 
CHCs 
Availability                                    
(out of 11) 
Illuminated signage for fire exit was available 12 2 
Availability of underground static water tank 12 7 
Source: Information verified in the test checked HIs 
Out of the test  checked 29 HIs (up to CHC level) , Audit found that only five 
hospitals53 had obtained NOCs from the Fire Department. Illuminated signage for 
fire exit was not available in 15 HIs. Underground static water tank for storage of 
water for fire emergency was not available in major  HIs DH Kolar and KC 
General Hospital.  
3.8.9 Dialysis Units 
The State Government set up Dialysis Units in the District and Taluk Level 
Hospitals in line with Govt. of India’s National Dialysis Programme under NHM.  
The work of setting and running the Dialysis Unit was entrusted to M/s. X, 
Bengaluru, and M/s. Y, Kolkata on Public Private Partnership (PPP) mode. In test 
checked three DHs and 10 THs, Audit noticed the following: 
❖ The service provider failed to make available essential equipment required 
for dialysis as detailed in Appendix 3.5.   
❖ As per the contractual obligations, Nephrologists were to be available 
from 9 AM to 4 PM in the dialysis ward and later should be available on 
call and visit if need arises.  Further, one Medical Officer/Senior Resident, 
three trained technicians, three staff nurses, one nursing orderly and one 
sweeper should be available shift-wise in the centre.  Nephrologist was not 
available in 10 HIs and Medical Officer was not deployed in one DH and 
nine THs. 
The dialysis services provided were, therefore, deficient and not optimum. 
The State Government stated (October 2022) that the gaps noticed in the delivery 
of dialysis services as per norms has been recorded and brought to the notice of 
service provider. Penalties have been imposed on the service provider for the gaps 
recorded mainly in the area of non -provision of HR and consumables as per the 
terms and conditions of the contract.  The details of the penalty levied was, 
however, not furnished. 
Recommendations: 
4. The State Government should draw up an action plan to adopt and 
implement IPHS fully for provisioning of essential OPD, IPD and 
emergency services in the Health Institutions (HIs).   
 
5. The State Government should ensure that all essential services in 
Government HIs adhere to IPHS norms by facilitating the provision of 
manpower, drugs, and equipment. This will strengthen auxiliary and 
support services, ultimately enhancing the overall healthcare experience. 
 
53 THs- Bangarpet, HD Kote, KR Puram, Kudligi and Navalgund. 

PA on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
80 
6. The State  Government should examine the circumstances which led to 
delays, additional expenditure and non-utilisation of equipment required to 
tackle such emergency situations and take appropriate action. 
 
7. The State Government should set a time limit for all Government HIs to 
obtain valid authorisations/licenses and penalize the concerned for any 
non-compliance. 
 
 
 

 

 
 

 
81 
Chapter - 4: Availability of Drugs, Medicines, 
Equipment and Other Consumables 
 
The State lacked a procurement policy for drugs and equipment, resulting in 
shortage of supplies  ranging from 13 per cent  to 67 per cent  compared to 
institutional requirement. Institutions had to locally procure drugs at higher rates. 
Quality assurance mechanisms were insufficient, leading to delays in testing 
samples and communicating results, with no checks on locally procured drugs. 
District warehouses lacked ad equate space and storage for drugs and surgical 
items, specified quarantine area s for storing medicines awaiting  quality testing. 
Improper equipment assessment led to redistribution, premature warranty 
expiration, and equipment lying idle. 
 
4.1 Introduction 
The Department (HFWD)  procures and distributes drugs, medicines, surgical 
items, medical equipment etc., to HIs under its jurisdiction through the Karnataka 
State Medical Supplies Corporation Limited (KSMSCL), erstwhile Karnataka 
State Drugs Logistics and Warehousing Society, Bengaluru. KSMSCL manages 
the procurement and distribution of the drugs/medicines,  consumables through 
application software e-Aushada. HIs under Medical Education and ULBs did not 
have any such system of centralised procurement and management. 
4.2 Procurement of drugs 
4.2.1 Release and utilisation of funds 
The details 54 of budget, release, and expenditure during the period 2016 -17 to 
2021-22 is given in Table 4.1. 
Table 4.1: Budget provision, release and expenditure of KSMSCL 
(₹ in crore) 
Year Drugs Equipment Balance 
Budget Release Expenditure Budget Release Expenditure Drugs Equipment 
2016-17 180.00 166.47 135.85 34.71 35.34 8.65 30.62 26.69 
2017-18 187.20 175.75 91.14 91.86 91.86 38.55 84.61 53.31 
2018-19 190.67 179.61 69.87 82.59 82.59 29.91 109.74 52.68 
2019-20 207.87 197.10 80.17 103.11 103.11 44.84 116.93 58.27 
2020-21 344.46 427.02 379.82 1,182.39 1,182.38 781.48 47.20 400.90 
2021-22 681.87 588.98 269.88 262.74 112.84 255.18 319.10 (-)142.3455 
Total 1,792.07 1,734.93 1,026.73 1,757.40 1,608.12 1,158.61 708.20 449.51 
Source: Information furnished by KSMSCL 
KSMSCL utilised only 59 and 72 per cent of funds for procurement of drugs and 
equipment respectively during the above period. The poor utilisation of funds was 
due to lag in the procurement process.  KSMSCL transitioned from the Rate 
Contract (RC) procurement mode (RCs were usually finalized for a period of two 
years) to annual procurement mode from 2016-17.  However, a specified calendar 
 
54  includes releases made to tackle COVID-19 pandemic during 2020-21 and 2021-22. 
55  amount being released next financial year, the expenditure accounted/booked in respective 
year. 

PA on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
82 
schedule for the annual procurement was absent which resulted in delays at all 
stages as shown in Table 4.2. 
Table 4.2: Statement showing the timelines of various stages in procurement 
Year 
State 
Therapeutic 
Committee 
meeting 
Submission 
of annual 
indents 
Need 
Assessment 
Committee 
meeting 
Government 
approval 
Start of 
tender 
process 
Issue of 
purchase 
orders 
2016-17 18.04.2016 Sept- 2016 28.10.2016 - 18.11.2016 10.04.2017 
2017-18 11.04.2017 30.04.2017 29.07.2017 30.11.2017 29.12.2017 11.06.2018 to 
27.08.2018 
2018-19 08.05.2018 18.07.2018 29.08.2018 26.03.2019 22.04.2019 16.07.2019 to 
16.08.2019 
2019-20 18.03.2019 10.04.2019 09.08.2019 25.11.2019 29.05.2020 05.06.2020 
2020-21 28.04.2020 11.05.2020 14.09.2020 15.11.2021 26.10.2021 24.11.2021 
2021-22 23.06.2021 26.08.2021 
18.12.2021 
18.02.2021 
21.06.2022 
Yet to be 
approved. Not started NA 
Source: Information furnished by KSMSCL 
The State Government replied (October 2022) that KSMSCL had proposed the 
specific calendar schedule for the annual exercise to avoid the delay in process. 
The proposal was due for approval of the Board of Directors and Government. 
4.2.2 Non-procurement and supply of essential drugs 
KSMSCL maintains a list of Essential Drugs (ED), which must be kept in stock 
at its warehouses for supply to needy HIs. However, it was seen that KSMSCL 
was not procuring all the EDs as given in Table 4.3. 
Table 4.3: Year-wise essential drugs procured by KSMSCL 
Year Indented 
from HIs 
Approved by 
NAC 
Procured by 
KSMSCL 
Allowed for 
local purchase 
Percentage of 
procurement 
2016-17 Details not furnished 
2017-18 737 622 493 115 66.89 
2018-19 849 628 344 221 40.52 
2019-20 843 719 367 124 43.53 
2020-21 761 445 238 55 31.27 
2021-22 761 770 Cabinet approval pending 
Source: Information furnished by KSMSCL 
KSMSCL failed to fulfill its objective of providing all essential drugs to the HIs.  
Audit further noticed that KSMSCL also failed to supply the indented quantities 
to the HIs as shown in Table 4.4. 
Table 4.4: Status of the supply against the indents in the health institutions 
            (numbers in crore) 
Year 
Indents received Supplies made Shortfall 
Quantity Amount 
(₹) Quantity Amount 
(₹) Quantity  Amount 
(₹) 
2016-17 14.48 359.59 12.65 203.57 1.83 (13) 156.02 
2017-18 15.55 331.04 8.92 169.32 6.63 (43) 161.72 
2018-19 17.44 360.78 12.04 276.25 5.40 (31) 84.53 
2019-20 23.58 488.76 7.63 162.71 15.95 (67) 326.05 
2020-21 28.53 567.12 12.18 234.39 16.35 (57) 332.73 
2021-22 24.70 630.02 4.17 94.34 Procurement and Supply are 
in progress. 
Source: Information furnished by KSMSCL. Figures in parenthesis are in percentage 

Chapter - 4: Availability of Drugs, Medicines, Equipment and Other Consumables 
83 
Audit observed shortfall in supplied drugs against the quantity of drugs 
requisitioned. Status of the supply made against the indent’s requisitions from the 
health institutions in the test checked districts is summarized in Table 4.5. 
 
Table 4.5: Status of the supply against the indents in the test-checked Districts 
Name of District 
Quantity of drugs 
requisitioned                           
(in lakhs) 
Quantity of 
drugs supplied                      
(in lakhs) 
Supply (in 
percentage) 
Ballari 507.46 175.85 34.65 
Bengaluru Urban 476.59 157.03 32.95 
Dharwad 230.41 73.96 32.10 
Kolar 613.91 203.03 33.07 
Mysuru 573.99 177.02 30.84 
Source: Information verified in the test checked HIs for the period 2016-22 
The short supply by KSMSCL led to the HIs procuring essential drugs locally at 
comparatively higher rates from their own funds.  A few illustrative cases are 
detailed in Appendix 4.1. Audit also observed that HIs did not have the option of 
submitting indents when there was an additional requirement of drugs and 
medicines. 
This can be attributed to the fact that the State did not have a documented 
procurement policy containing the details such as the constitution of various 
committees, the process of assessing the requirement and its procurement, 
distribution mechanism etc., to ensure availability of medicines at all times and 
improve the existing system of procurement and supply of medicines.    
The State Government stated (October 2022) that during 2019-20 and 2020 -21 
there was COVID -19 pandemic situation.  Hence, KSMSCL was involved in 
tenders for COVID related drugs. During 2020 -21, a total of 71 tenders were 
called for 445 drugs of which 241 drugs were procured and for the remaining 
drugs retendering is under process.  It further stated that KSMSCL had taken up 
the preparation of the detailed procurement policy after in -depth study of similar 
policies/ procedures being adopted in other State Government Medical Supplies 
Corporations. The policy would be published by the end of March 2023 with due 
approval from the Board of directors of KSMSCL and the Government. 
4.2.3 Purchases from Karnataka Antibiotics and Pharmaceuticals Limited 
Karnataka Antibiotics and Pharmaceuticals Limited (KAPL) is a Public Sector 
Undertaking involved in the manufacture of antibiotics and other drugs required 
for both human and veterinary use.  The State Government accorded exemption 
under Section 4(g) of KT PP Act each year for procurement of 81 drugs from 
KAPL at a price fixed by National Pharmaceuticals and Pricing Authority 
(NPPA). Audit observed that the cost of drugs procured from KAPL constituted 
six to 45 per cent of the total cost of drugs procured by KSMSCL during the period 
2017-18 to 2021-2256. The procurement of drugs from KAPL specifically under 
4(g) exemption was against the spirit of transparency in procurement and was not 
justified for the following reasons: 
 
56  Details for 2016-17 were not furnished. 

PA on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
84 
Short supply of drugs – KSMSCL placed orders worth ₹377.63 crore with KAPL 
during the period 2017 -18 to 2021 -22, of which KAPL supplied drugs worth 
₹372.46 crore.  There was short supply of drugs valuing ₹5.17 crore.  
Delay in supply – Audit observed delays ranging from 305 to 714 days in supply 
of drugs by KAPL. Though penalty of ₹24.47 crore was levied as on March 2022 
for the short and delayed supplies, the very purpose of entrustment under 4(g) 
stood defeated. 
Procurement at higher cost - KAPL quoted rates as fixed by NPPA. These rates 
were inclusive of 16 per cent discount to be offered to buyers. KAPL, however, 
had not extended this discount to KSMSCL resulting in procurement of drugs at 
higher cost and additional expenditure of ₹59.60 crore. 
Not of standard drugs – Audit observed that 12 batches of seven drugs supplied 
by KAPL were declared as ‘Not of Standard’ by the Drugs Controller and 
empanelled laboratories of KSMSCL. 
It is pertinent to mention here that the Public Accounts Committee (PAC) during 
its discussion on Para 2.1.10 of the Report of the CAG for the year ended March 
2012 (Report No. 02 of 2013), had recommended to reconsider the procurements 
to be made from KAPL. However, no action was taken on this recommendation. 
The State Government accepted (October 2022) that the rates fixed for KAPL 
products by NPPA were always high compared to tender prices.  However, 
procurements were done based on the exemption orders issued.  It was further 
stated that notice for replacement of drugs would be issued to replace the whole 
quantity of batch and if not replaced, the value would be deducted from the bills. 
4.2.4 Procurement of drugs/medicines at higher rates 
Pradhan Mantri Bhartiya Janaushadhi Pariyojana (PMBJP) aimed to make 
available quality generic medicines at affordable prices for all.  PMBJP finalized 
rate contracts (RCs) for the period 2018 -20 (May 2018 to July 2020).  It was 
prudent for KSMSCL to explore the possibility of procuring such of those drugs 
which were available at lesser cost under the RC of PMBJP. Audit observed that 
this possibility was not explored and as a result, KSMSCL incurred an additional 
expenditure of ₹33.79 crore towards procurement of 60 drugs at higher cost during 
the period 2018-20.   
The State Government did not furnish the reasons for not exploring the possibility 
of procuring drugs which were available at lesser cost under RC of PMBJP. 
4.2.5 Procurement of Psychiatric drugs 
The High Court of Karnataka directed (March 2006) the State Government to 
make sufficient provision in the budget for the mental health of the citizens of the 
State and to ensure that necessary medicines are available.  Based on the 
requisition of the Deputy Director (Mental Health), KSMSCL procured and 
supplied the psychiatric drugs to the HIs including CHCs/PHCs.  Audit noticed 
that the Deputy Director worked out the requirement on an ad-hoc basis and was 
not need based. During the period 2016 -17 to 2021 -22, psychiatric drugs worth 
₹3.45 crore were supplied of which drugs worth ₹32 lakh had expired due to their 

Chapter - 4: Availability of Drugs, Medicines, Equipment and Other Consumables 
85 
non-utilisation. The non -utilisation can be attributed to non -availability of 
qualified doctors to treat psychiatric disorders in the HIs. 
The State Government stated (October 2022) that utili sation of psychiatric drugs 
was the responsibility of the district level programme officer of the concerned 
programme. However, KSMSCL would issue the drug replacement notice to 
concerned supplier to replace the quantity of the expired drug.   
The reply did not address the observations on need-based assessment and absence 
of qualified personnel. 
4.2.6 Availability of essential drugs and medicines in test checked Health 
 Institutions 
IPHS provide guidelines for the delivery of quality health services in India. These 
standards cover various aspects of healthcare, including the availability of 
essential medicines. IPHS suggests a list of drugs/medicines category of HI wise.  
The suggested drugs/medicines (including infusion fluids and miscellaneous 
items) for DH are 458, TH-405, CHC-176 and PHC- 115.  In the State, KSMSCL 
maintains a list of Essential Drugs (ED) as per the State Therapeutic Committee, 
which must be kept in stock at the HIs.   
The essential drug list as prescribed (KSMSCL) consists of Essential Drug List57 
(EDL), Very Essential Drug List (VDL)58 and Most Essential Drug List (MDL)59. 
Audit analysed the data on the availability of essential drugs and medicines in the 
test checked HIs (30 June 2022) in the e-Aushada application. In respect of EDL, 
all the test checked DHs had less than 50 essential drugs against the requirement 
of 128 having shortage of 61 per cent; all the test checked THs had only 35 or less 
essential drugs against the requirement of 81 drugs having shortage of 57 per cent, 
CHCs had only 25 or less drugs having shortage of 61 per cent against 64 essential 
drugs to be available. 
It was also observed that none of the HIs had the prescribed number of drugs 
(VEDL and MEDL) as depicted in Appendix 4.2. 
This was because KSMSCL did not supply the required number and quantity of 
drugs intended by the HIs as discussed in Para 4.3.1.  The non -availability of 
prescribed essential drugs at all times percolates to the non -availability of the 
essential drugs in emergency ward, ICUs, OTs, IPD, maternity wards etc., as 
shown in Appendix 4.3  impacting timely and quality delivery of services to 
patients besides, forcing the poor patients to purchase unavailable essential drugs 
from outside. 
Survey Findings: Out of 1,260 outpatients, only 70, 91 and 92 per cent in the 
tertiary, secondary and primary care hospitals respectively got the drugs at the 
OPD counters. For remaining patients, it was either partially available or not 
available at all. 
 
57 Number of prescribed medicines (KSMSCL) under EDL are 128 in DH and 81 in TH and 64 
in CHC. 
58 Number of prescribed medicines (KSMSCL) under VEDL are 28 in DH and 25 in TH and 28 
in CHC. 
59 Number of prescribed medicines (KSMSCL) under MEDL are 115 in DH and 106 in TH and 
81 in CHC. 

PA on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
86 
The State Government stated (October 2022) that KSMSCL would analyse the 
availability of essential medicines at HI’s level and suitable action would be 
initiated to maintain buffer stock of essential drugs and medicines. 
4.3 Drugs purchased from blacklisted firm 
As per Clause 28 of the tender, if two or more drugs of a firm failed in quality 
tests, the firm was to be blacklisted for subsequent five years from participating 
in any departmental tenders.  KSMSCL blacklisted eight firms during the Audit 
period.  One such firm was M/s SM Pharmaceuticals which was blacklisted for 
the period 31 July 2020 to 30 July 2025.  Audit, however, observed that the firm 
had supplied drugs worth ₹97 lakh during the period August 2020 to November 
2020 indicating the absence of stringent monitoring mechanism in KSMSCL.   
Further, as per the tender conditions, if any manufacturing unit does not meet the 
required manufacturing standards during Factory Inspection, the bid shall be 
disqualified. The factory inspection report in respect of the selected bidders was 
not forthcoming from the records.  
The State Government stated (October 2022) that the purchase order was issued 
before the blacklisting date and since there was huge demand for hand sanitizer 
during COVID pandemic, the supply was accepted. 
The reply is not acceptable as no relaxations were provided to the stipulated 
conditions in the tender document.  
4.3.1 Delay in Supply of Drugs/Consumables to Warehouses 
The tender conditions stipulate a maximum time limit for supply.  KSMSCL had 
introduced a security system which did not permit the Drug Warehouses (DW) to 
receive any supply after expiry of the maximum time limit. Audit observed that 
there were delay in su pply of ordered quantity of drugs/medicines and 
consumables to the Warehouse/District Warehouse.  The range of delay in supply 
of drugs to warehouses is shown in Chart 4.1. 
Chart 4.1: Range of delay in supply of drugs to Warehouse 
 
As can be seen from the above, there was delay supply of drugs which ranged 
from one day to more than 180 days. 
The State Government stated (October 2022) that penalty would be imposed on 
the bill amount for delayed supplied as per the guidelines.  
865
354
156
74 19 8 15
1 to 30 31 to 60 61 to 90 91 to 120 121 to 150 151 to 180 More than
180 days
Number of supplies
Range of delay in days

Chapter - 4: Availability of Drugs, Medicines, Equipment and Other Consumables 
87 
4.3.2 Acceptance of drugs with lesser shelf life  
The tender conditions stipulate that all drugs should arrive at the District 
Warehouses (DWs) with a remaining shelf life of at least 80 per cent of the total 
stipulated shelf life of the product, failing which the drugs would be rejected. The 
DWs had accepted drugs worth ₹143.90 crore with a shelf life of less than 80 per 
cent during the period 2016 -17 to 2021 -22. Audit observed that drugs worth           
₹23.72 crore had a shelf life of 50 per cent  or less. Though the DWs had 
immediately distributed these drugs to the HIs, the controls to ensure supply of 
drugs with sufficient shelf life was ineffective. Moreover, there was no feedback 
on timely utilisation of drugs with very narrow shelf life by various HIs except on 
their expiry.   
The State Government stated (October 2022) that e-Aushada software would not 
accept drugs with less than 80 per cent  shelf-life except with the approval of 
concerned authority.  However, in cases of emergency requirement, approval of 
concerned authority was taken for accepting the drug for the benefit of the 
KSMSCL by taking the undertaking from the firm for replacing t he quantity if 
unutilized.  It also stated that a certain value of bills would be deducted as per the 
decision of the Board.  
The reply is not acceptable as even drugs/medicines having shelf life less than 50 
per cent were also received by the DWs. 
4.3.3 Receipt of drugs after expiry 
KSMSCL had introduced a security  lock system, which d oes not permit the 
warehouses to receive any supply after expiry of the maximum time limit allowed 
for supply. Any receipt after the prescribed time limit would be accepted only 
after the security lock was opened by the EDP personnel with the approval of the 
Managing Director. Audit observed that in 2018-19 and 2020-21, there were eight 
instances wherein the request for opening the security lock was received after the 
expiry date of the drugs as detailed in Appendix 4.4. This evidence indicates that 
proper checks were not exercised by the DWs before sending the requests for 
release of lock, wherein the existing system allowed receipt of expired drugs by 
the DWs. 
4.3.4 Non-disposal of expired and not of standard drugs 
Schedule I of Biomedical Waste Management Rules, 2016, stipulate that expired 
cytotoxic drugs and items contaminated with cytotoxic drugs are to be returned 
back to the manufacturer/supplier or to the common bio-medical waste treatment 
facility or hazardou s waste treatment, storage and disposal facility for 
incineration. All other discarded medicines shall be either sent back to the 
manufacturer or disposed of by incineration. 
Audit observed that expired drugs worth ₹23.03 crore for the period 2019-22 were 
lying at 27 DWs in the State without disposal. These expired drugs were kept 
along with other regular drugs and medicines and exposed the risk of issuing these 
drugs inadvertently to various HIs besides creating storage constraints. 

PA on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
88 
  
Expired drugs not kept separately at  
TH Yelahanka 
Expired medicines kept in IPD Ward at  
Victoria Hospital 
The State Government stated (October 2022) that the District Drug Destruction 
Committee was formed under the Chairmanship of the District Commissioner, but 
meeting could not be convened due to COVID pandemic. The information about 
the current stock expired and NSQ drugs pending for disposal at warehouse level 
had been collected and tender for disposal was under process. 
4.3.5 Availability of Drugs, lab reagents, consumables and disposables. 
Regular supply of essential drugs and other consumables is very important for 
providing healthcare services in the health institutions. In the State, the KSMSCL 
supplies drugs/medicines and other necessary items viz. consumables and 
disposables to the health institutions. To ensure proper healthcare services and 
facilities, essential drugs and consumables/disposables are to be available in the 
health institutions in optimum quantity. The status of availability of drugs, lab 
reagents, consumables and disposa bles in test checked health institutions is 
detailed in Appendix 4.5(a) and 4.5(b). 
Audit analysed that none of the test checked health institutions had all the 
prescribed drugs as per IPHS. This implies the patients were being forced to buy 
the drugs and other essential items from outside. 
In the health institutions under AYUSH, the status of availability of essential 
medicines in test checked health institutions is shown in Table 4.6. 
Table 4.6: Availability of A YUSH essential medicines in test checked health 
institutions 
Source: Information verified in the test checklist as of January 2024 
As could be seen from the above table that only in three instances, the availability 
of essential medicines was more than 50 per cent. The prescribed number of drugs 
in Essential Drugs list was not adequately maintained.  
Availability of AYUSH Essential Medicines 
Name of 
District 
Number of Ayurvedic 
Drugs in EDL 
Average of availability of ayurvedic drugs during 2016-22 
2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 
Bengaluru 
Urban 200 37 64 31 77 30 110 
Mysuru 200 142 185 83 67 58 39 

Chapter - 4: Availability of Drugs, Medicines, Equipment and Other Consumables 
89 
4.4 Quality control mechanism in respect of drugs 
4.4.1 Ineffective quality control mechanism 
The tender conditions provide for drawing samples at any time during the shelf 
life of the product and test it at any approved laboratory for quality assurance apart 
from the routine check by the Drugs Controller. The drugs supplied should have 
the active ingredients as per the specifications throughout its shelf-life.  KSMSCL 
had empanelled laboratories to test the drugs. Audit observed that the quality 
control mechanism was ineffective for the following reasons: 
• KSMSCL empanelled four laboratories for testing of drugs during the 
period 2015 -16 to 2016 -2017. Fresh contracts were finalised during 
September 2017 and samples were sent to the newly identified agencies from 
October 2017 onwards. No samples were sent for quality checks during the 
intervening period from April 2017 to September 2017. 
• KSMSCL invited tenders to test 556 types of drugs and medicines for the 
period April 2020 to March 2022.  Successful bids were received in respect of 
481 drugs and the work was allotted to three empanelled laboratories.  For the 
balance 75 drugs, bids were  either not received, or the rates quoted were 
higher.  Tenders were re-invited in November 2020 and work order issued on 
1 July 2021.  These 75 essential drugs were distributed and consumed during 
the intervening period without any quality assurance. 
• The existing practice is that the DWs send samples to KSMSCL which in 
turn sends it to the empanelled laboratories. No norms were prescribed for 
adopting such a procedure.  Audit observed delays ranging from one day to 
27 days in sending the samples by KSM SCL after receipt of the same from 
DWs during the period February 2018 to March 2020.  Records for the period 
prior to February 2018 and for 2020-21 were not furnished to Audit. 
• There is no system of freezing the drugs of the batches sent for testing as 
the same batches are being supplied to the health institutions for issuing to the 
patients.  In case of drugs declared NSQ, the intimation from the KSMSCL is 
sent to the DWs, by that time the NSQ drugs have been issued to the patients 
for consumption.  
• Audit compared the results of the samples of the same batches drawn by 
both the empanelled labs and the Drugs Controller and noticed that in six 
instances (Appendix 4.6), where the empanelled labs had certified the drugs 
as of standard quality, the test report of Drugs Controller had certified the 
samples as NSQ. 59 per cent of these drugs were consumed before receipt of 
the test results.   
The State Government stated (October 2022) that KSMSCL insisted the supplier 
to produce analysis report for the supplied batch from the NABL accredited 
laboratory, which ensures the quality of the drugs supplied.  However, 
confirmation of the quality of goods supplied would be done by getting the 
samples tested at empanelled laboratories. This was done to confirm the quality 
of drug at the storage and for payment purposes only. It further stated that as soon 
as the drugs were declared NSQ, the drug would be frozen to stop distribution in  
e-Aushada software and the message would be reflected in warehouse dashboard.  

PA on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
90 
The reply, however, does not address the Audit observations on delay in sending 
samples for testing, delay in communicating the test results, action taken on 
empanelled labs and other observations. 
4.4.2 Storage of drugs, medicines and surgical items 
The Drugs and Cosmetic Rules, 1945 stipulate the parameters for storage of drugs 
in stores to maintain the efficacy of the procured drugs before issue d to patients. 
The norms and parameters as prescribed were, not followed in the test -checked 
hospitals as detailed in Appendix 4.7. Audit also observed that space and storage 
arrangements for large quantities of various drugs / medicines and surgical items 
were inadequate in the DWs and there was no quarantine area for storing 
medicines awaiting quality test approval.  
  
Cartons of the drugs kept on floors without 
pallets drugs at DH Ballari 
Dilapidated condition of the storage areas of  
TH Kalaghatagi. 
 
4.5 Procurement of medical equipment 
4.5.1 Absence of procurement policy 
Best practices advocate adopting a procurement policy especially for 
procurements involving huge expenditure.  There was no comprehensive policy 
and detailed action plan for ensuring timely procurement and distribution of 
equipment. Audit examined the availability of essential equipment with reference 
to IPHS, required for use in ICUs and OTs, diagnostic equipment for services like 
ENT, Ophthalmology, Dental, Endoscopy etc., and observed shortfall in 
requirement available in the sampled HIs as detailed in Appendix 4.8(a) and 
4.8(b).   
During the period 2016 -17 to 2021 -22, KSMSCL procured medical equipment 
worth ₹557.33 crore. Audit observed deficiencies /shortcomings relating to 
tendering, need-assessment, indent mechanism, as enumerated in the subsequent 
paragraphs. 
The State Government replied (October 2022) that KSMSCL had taken up the 
preparation of the detailed procurement policy after in -depth study of similar 
policies/procedures being adopted in other State Government Medical Supplies 
Corporations. The policy will be published soon on approval.  
4.5.2 Improper planning and assessment of requirement  
(a) Ideally the HIs were required to furnish their requirements which would 
then be consolidated, and procurement done by KSMSCL through tenders. Audit 
noticed that equipment was purchased under various programmes based on the 


Chapter - 4: Availability of Drugs, Medicines, Equipment and Other Consumables 
91 
decision of the NHM Committee without ascertaining the requirements from the 
HIs indicating that procurements were not need based. As few of the HIs were not 
registered with Atomic Energy Regulatory Board (AERB) and did not have the 
requisite space for installation of certain equipment like C-Arm, C-Arm with IITV 
etc., revised supply orders were issued for 11 equipment during the period August 
2018 to December 2019 wherein some original consignees were replaced as 
shown in Appendix 4.9. 
(b) The NHM Committee identified KC General Hospital, Bengaluru for 
supply of Green Laser worth ₹14.75 lakh under the National Programme for 
Control of Blindness and Visual Impairment. The equipment supplied during July 
2018 could not be put to use for want of slit lamp. The hospital procured the slit 
lamp costing ₹7.46 lakh only during March 2021.  In the meantime, the warranty 
for the Green Laser has expired. 
The above instances indicate the absence of proper assessment and planning in 
procurement of equipment. 
The State Government stated (October 2022) that planning of assessment of the 
requirement of equipment and the consignee list for supply of the procured 
equipment to HIs was done by Need Assessment Committee of HFW.  
It is evident from the reply that the requirement of equipment was not being 
ascertained by the HIs. 
4.5.3 Idling of telemedicine equipment 
Government of Karnataka in collaboration with Indian Space Research 
Organisation (ISRO) started (2004) the Telemedicine program to overcome 
geographical barriers, and to increase access to healthcare services. Audit noticed 
that in six HIs60 test checked, the telemedicine facility was not put to use due to 
non-installation, poor network, and shortage of staff. 
4.5.4 Non-compliance to provisions 
As per the Government instructions (June 2003), the time gap between the 
opening of the technical bid (first cover) and financial bid (second cover) should 
be minimum, and in any case not more than 45 days.  The time gap between the 
opening of the technica l and financial bids in respect of 14 tenders processed 
during 2017-21 varied from 47 days to 78 days.  There was neither justification 
nor approval of the appropriate authority on record for the delay in the tender 
evaluation process. 
As per the tender conditions, the tenders were valid for 180 days. Hence, the entire 
tender process should be completed within this period.  If for any reason the tender 
process cannot be completed within this period, an extension of validity of the 
tender should be obtained in writing from the bidders. The number of days taken 
to complete the tendering process during 2017 -21 ranged from 84 days to 365 
days. However, KSMSCL had not obtained extension of validity of tenders in 
cases where the validity period of 180 days had expired. 
The State Government stated (October 2022) that in cases of few tenders which 
were delayed by more than 45 days during technical evaluation, they were 
 
60 THs-Bangarpet, HD Kote, Navalgund, Periyapatna; CHC-Kengeri and Sargur. 

PA on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
92 
processed further without obtaining the approval from the competent authority 
due to overlapping tender activities and by oversight. However, most of the 
equipment were procured within the bid validity period. Further, fresh timelines 
for tender process were issued (November 2021), which were to be implemented 
strictly.   
Reply is not acceptable since Audit observed that there were instances where the 
tenders were finalised after the bid validity period. 
4.5.5 Pre-Dispatch Inspection 
The tender conditions provided for carrying out Pre-Dispatch Inspection (PDI) by 
HI end user and team of experts appointed by KSMSCL.  However, the time limit 
within which the PDI was to be done was not specified. The supply orders issued 
stipulate the maximum period for supply and installation as 45 days. Hence, PDI 
was to be completed well within this period. In this regard, Au dit noticed the 
following: 
• KSMSCL issued (December 2018) orders for supply of 375 Pathological 
Binocular Microscopes. As per the supply order, PDI was to be carried out, 
which was not done due to shortage of staff. The Joint Director, NHM brought 
to notice (February 2019) of KSMSCL that the item supplied did not confirm 
to the specification. The supplier replaced the items during March 2019. 
• KSMSCL placed (June/July 2019) for supply of Child Health Equipment.  
The agency requested (November 2019) after four months for carrying out 
PDI.  
These are only illustrative cases. Audit further observed that the details of 
having carried out the PDI were not forthcoming in majority of the instances. 
The State Government stated (October 2022) that PDI would be intimated by the 
supplier when the goods are ready for dispatch and hence, time limit cannot be 
indicated.  However, documentation on PDI should be done before supplying the 
equipment to the consignee.   
The reply cannot be accepted as the PDI should be completed before the 
maximum time limit prescribed for supply of equipment. 
4.5.6 Bio-Medical Equipment Maintenance Project (BMEMP) 
The HFWD identified 28,019 biomedical equipment valu ed ₹316.83 crore in 
various HIs for providing maintenance for a three -year period.  The State 
Government accorded (December 2016) approval for undertaking the 
maintenance project at a cost of ₹53.96 crore from NHM funds.  KSMSCL invited 
tenders (August 2017). Two bidders who had quoted 5.03 and 5.47 per cent of the 
cost of equipment were found responsive. The L2 bidder approached the 
Appellate Authority and Principal Secretary, HFW, alleging that L1 firm had not 
submitted the requisite proof of turnover.  The Appellate Authority stayed 
(December 2017) the tender. The State Government ordered (July 2018) for 
retendering the work. The work was retendered (November 2018) and awarded to 
a firm for ₹22.05 crore (5.90 per cent of the tentative cost of the equipment plus 
GST) plus ₹5.50 crore towards cost of real time monitoring of equipment. 

Chapter - 4: Availability of Drugs, Medicines, Equipment and Other Consumables 
93 
The failure of the Tender Scrutiny Committee to evaluate the tenders properly led 
to retendering and consequent entrustment of contract at a higher cost. The  
additional cost involved was ₹1.36 crore per year (in comparison with L2 rate of 
the first tender) exclusive of taxes. Further , 28,019 equipment were without 
maintenance for more than 15 months (November 2017 to March 2019). 
Audit also observed that the conditions of the tender (Request for Proposal (RFP) 
formed part of the tender document) were not fulfilled by the firm as below: 
• As per conditions stipulated in the RFP Paragraph 2.3.4, it shall be the 
responsibility of the service provider to indemnify all staff and officers of HFW 
and ME under this project against any claims, damages, lawsuits, petitions, 
sufferings and or harm and or death caused to patients, etc. These conditions 
were not complied with as no insurance coverage was taken. 
• The asset value stated in the contract was indicative and the actual 
Biomedical Equipment asset value shall be based on the Biomedical 
Equipment Infrastructure Library prepared by the Service Provider. Mapping 
of all the equipment and value of the total eq uipment was yet to be arrived to 
fix the correct contract value. As per the proceeding of the review committee 
meeting  
(21 October 2020), tagging and mapping of the equipment at PHC level was 
yet to be completed.  As a result, the indicative value continu ed to remain the 
same even after a lapse of 23 months from the date of signing of contract. 
• The service provider had identified (February 2021) equipment worth 
₹50.95 crore was not working.  However, no action was taken to repair the 
equipment and put it to use. 
• The main objective of this project was to provide 95 per cent uptime for 
biomedical equipment. However, no data was kept on record to show that the 
service provider had met this objective. 
• Details of real time monitoring of the biomedical equipment were not 
forthcoming from the records. 
Thus, the maintenance contract was yet to take off completely. 
The State Government stated (October 2022) that a committee was constituted 
under the Chairmanship of Commissioner, HFWS with Managing Director, 
NHM, Managing Director KSMSCL and State Nodal Officer (SNO), BMEMP to 
review the implementation of BMEMP in the State.  It further stated that penalties 
would be levied as per contract agreement to the lapses involved in 
implementation of B MEMP and payments had not been released to the service 
provider in view of lapses and non-compliance to the contract agreement till date. 
Recommendations 
8. The State Government should prepare a comprehensive and well laid down 
policy for procurement and utilisation of essential drugs and equipment in 
line with IPHS norms and develop a real time inventory monitoring system 
to address shortages, repairs and maintenance. 
 

PA on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
94 
9. The State Government should consider freezing that batch of medicines, 
which are taken for quality checks till declaration of the results to prevent 
consumption of NSQ drugs. It should also consider maintaining buffer 
stock of all essential drugs and medicines to tide over shortages arising due 
to freezing of drugs. 
 
10. A robust inventory management system should be implemented to track 
expiration dates and usage of drugs within the stipulated shelf life. 
 
11. Storage of drugs under conditions prescribed in the Drugs and Cosmetics 
Rules 1945 to maintain their efficacy should be ensured, before being 
administered to the patients. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
95 
Chapter 5: Healthcare Infrastructure 
 
The State had an excess of Primary Health Centres (PHCs) and a shortage of 
Community Health Centres (CHCs), with uneven distribution of PHCs within 
districts. Except for KIMS, Hubballi, no hospitals had assessed the need for 
repairs/maintenance as per IPHS guidelines . Out of 29  test checked H Is (up to 
CHC level), 23 had Disaster Management Plan and 20 had Disaster Management 
Committee to monitor the vulnerable impact of disasters. Six constructed hospital 
buildings remained unused, resulting in unfruitful expenditure of ₹228.36 crore 
and depriving the public of specialized services. 
 
5.1 Availability of Health Care Infrastructure 
Health care infrastructure constitutes a major component of the structural quality 
of a health system. It signifies the investment priority with regard to the creation 
of healthcare facilities. Infrastructure has been described as the basic support for 
the delivery of public health activities. To deliver quality health services in the 
public health facilities, adequate and properly  maintained building infrastructure 
is of critical importance. 
5.1.1 Availability of CHCs, PHCs, and SCs vis-à-vis prescribed norms. 
Currently, there are  10 Super -specialty Hospitals (SS), 17 Teaching Hospitals 
attached to Medical Colleges (MC), 17 District Hospitals (DHs), 146 Taluk 
Hospitals (THs), 207 Community Health Centres (CHCs), 2,531 Primary Health 
Centres (PHCs) and 9,160 Sub -centres (SCs) under the category of Government 
health facilities in the State.   
IPHS norms prescribe one PHC for a population of 30,000 in rural areas and 
50,000 in urban areas. Similarly, there has to be one CHC for population of 
1,20,000. The district -wise availability of CHCs/PHCs/SCs with reference to 
projected population of 2020-21 is given in Appendix 5.1. Audit noticed that the 
State had excess PHCs and lesser number of CHCs as per the norms. Though 
PHCs were in excess, they were unevenly distributed within the districts 
especially in Belagavi and Bengaluru divisions. The Divisi on wise status is 
depicted in Chart 5.1.   
Chart 5.1: Division-wise status of the HIs 
 
Source: Information furnished by the Department 
102
406
2111
105
436
2288
99
395
1963
87
348
1743
42
662
2553
43
472
2158
58
352
1519
61
610
2676
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
CHCs PHCs Sub
Centre
CHCs PHCs Sub
Centre
CHCs PHCs Sub
Centre
CHCs PHCs Sub
Centre
Bengaluru Belagavi Kalaburagi Mysuru
Number of HIs 
Divisions
Required as per IPHS
 Status of HI

PA on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
96 
There was  an asymmetric distribution of the Sub -centres in the four Revenue 
Divisions as excess of the sub -centres were noticed in B engaluru and Mysuru 
divisions and shortfall under Belagavi and Kal aburagi divisions. PHCs were in 
excess of the requirement in all four divisions.  Against the requirement of 393 
CHCs in the State, only 207 CHCs were available. 
District-wise distribution of healthcare institutions in the State is shown in  
Chart 5.2. 
 
Chart 5.2: Category and district-wise distribution of health institutions in 
the State 
 
  
Source: Information furnished by the Department 
The availability of  the Sub -centres in the State range d from 123 in 
Bengaluru Urban District to 585 in Belagavi. PHCs in the State ranged from 26 
in Ballari to 144 in Tumakuru. 
  
Source: Information furnished by the Department 


Chapter 5-Healthcare Infrastructure 
97 
The number of THs in the State ranged from two in four districts (Ballari, Kodagu, 
Udupi and Yadagiri) to 10 in Uttara Kannada.  There are 17 DHs in the State. 
Bengaluru Urban had highest number(nine) of tertiary care HIs whereas twelve 
districts did not have any tertiary care HI. 
Overall, as evident from the above, there was a regional imbalance in distribution 
of health centres in the State. 
Moreover, it was also observed that proposals to set up new health centres (TH -
59, CHCs-64, PHCs-59 and SCs-100) were sent to the Government during 2020, 
the work had not been initiated (March 2022). 
The State Government stated (October 2022) that HFWD commenced addressing 
the deficit in Sub Centres and all Sub-centres were being upgraded to Health and 
Wellness Centres. Similarly, efforts being made to close the gap in PHCs and 
proposal to upgrade 48 PHCs to CHCs has already been submitted for approval. 
5.2 Infrastructure availability 
To deliver quality health services in the public health facilities, adequate and 
properly maintained building infrastructure is of critical importance. Examination 
of records disclosed inadequacies and deficiencies in the availability as discussed 
in the succeeding paragraphs. 
5.2.1 Building Infrastructure 
5.2.1.1 Hospital space requirements 
IPHS norms for DHs and Bureau of Indian Standards 2001 prescribe the area 
requirement for HIs. None of the tests checked HIs conformed to these 
requirements.  Hence, building and operational areas were distributed as per the 
infrastructure available rather than prescribed plan and area.  Audit noticed that 
in two HIs (Indira Gandhi Institute of Child Health (IGICH), Bengaluru and KR 
Hospital, Mysuru), patient beds were placed in corridors, passage of wards and 
utility area of staircase. 
  
Beds in the corridors at IGICH, Bengaluru Beds near the stairs at KR Hospital, Mysuru 
The State Government accepted (October 2022) that DHs were upgraded 
depending upon the availability of area and by utilizing the existing facilities. 
 
 


PA on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
98 
5.2.1.2 Non-maintenance of hospitals 
Proper upkeep of hospital buildings is critical to ensure availability of a safe, clean 
and conducive environment to the patients, public and hospital staff.  IPHS 
guidelines provide for assessment and preparation of building maintenance plans 
for regular upkeep of the hospitals. None of the hospitals except KIMS, Hubballi 
had assessed the need for repairs/maintenance.  The repairs were being carried out 
on an ad hoc basis.  Audit observed during joint inspection the following: 
 
➢ In KR Hospital, Cheluvamba 
Hospital and IGICH, the buildings 
were poorly maintained.  Instances 
of walls infected with fungus, 
broken toilet doors, open electrical 
sockets, weeds grown on electric 
panel boards and IPD wards were 
observed. 
➢ In Victoria Hospital, scrap items 
were kept in the bathroom and toilets 
of Burns ward. 
          Victoria Hospital Bengaluru  
  
➢ In THs, Navalgund and Kalaghatagi, the water purifier plants were not in 
use for want of repairs and replacement of consumables. 
➢ In TH, Kalaghatagi, the toilet doors of the female wards were broken. 
The improper maintenance endangers patients’ safety in terms of hospital induced 
infections.  
The State Government stated that the Chief Engineer’s Office takes up 
maintenance as and when proposals are approved in the budget. Other repairs and 
maintenance were done by the respective hospital authorities from the User 
Charges Funds. However, the action taken to set right the deficiencies in 
maintenance was not stated. 
5.3 Disaster Management 
Every HI shall have a Disaster Management Plan (DMP) as envisaged in NHM 
Assessor’s Guidebook. Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for disaster 
management should be available and disaster management committee should be 
constituted to review the plan periodically. Audit noticed that: 
❖ Out of 29  test checked H Is (up to CHC level), 23 had DMP and 20 had 
Disaster Management Committee to monitor the vulnerability impact of 
disasters. 
❖ Except Victoria Hospital, none of the test checked HIs had evacuation 
plans in place in case of emergencies. 
❖  Twenty-six test checked HIs had displayed fluorescent fire exit sign. 
❖ Except the six61 HIs, other test checked HIs displayed important contact 
numbers of medical centres, blood banks, fire, police and ambulance 
services available nearby. 
 
61 DIMHANS, TH-Sandur, Kalaghatagi, UHC-HDMC Dharwad and PHC-Bodhikote, Kannali. 


Chapter 5-Healthcare Infrastructure 
99 
5.3.1 Non-availability of fire prevention plans and firefighting mechanism 
IPHS guidelines envisage that fire hydrants with sand buckets, underground water 
etc., should be available and maintained to tackle fire. The units should obtain 
NOC from the concerned department as part of statutory compliance.  Audit 
noticed: 
❖ None of the test checked HIs except KIMS, Hubballi and Victoria Hospital 
had fire hydrants.   
❖ Two HIs (TH KR Puram and CHC Sargur) had no firefighting mechanism 
in place. 
❖ Forty HIs had fire extinguishers and in 15 HIs62 they had not been refilled 
after expiry. 
❖ Except for five HIs63, none of the other HIs had obtained NOC from the 
fire department. 
❖ Smoke detectors and smoke alarms were not in place in 41 HIs. 
❖ Fire prevention plan was available only in 1164 HIs. 
The absence of firefighting mechanisms renders evacuation of patients and staff 
difficult in case of fire disasters. 
The State Government stated that gaps pointed out in Audit were being addressed 
at the HI level to obtain NOC. The document in support of the same was, however, 
not furnished to Audit. 
5.4 Availability of beds in the Health Institutions 
In accordance with IPHS norms, the number of beds required for a DH should be 
based on district’s population, bed days per year and bed occupancy rate. The 
number of beds available in the HIs in the State was in excess of the required 
number with reference to the projected population of 2020 -21. This availability 
was, however, not commensurate with the availability of manpower and basic 
amenities in the HIs viz., non-availability of doctors, inpatient services, absence 
of triaging facility and non -availability of drinking water, proper sitting 
arrangements etc. The district-wise availability of beds in the HIs as against the 
required number with reference to projected population of 2020 -21 is given in 
Appendix 5.2. 
Though the overall availability of beds was in excess of requirement, the 
allocation of beds to various facilities such as Intensive Care Units65 (ICU) within 
the HIs was not as per the stipulated norms as discussed in Para 3.3.  
 
 
 
62  IGICH, SNR DH Hospital, TH - KR Puram and Kalaghatagi, CHC - Gownipalli, Sargur and 
UPHC Dharwad and PHCs – Badagalapura, Bettadapura, Budikote, Galagi Hulkoppa, Kittur, 
Morab, Mukkal and Thoppanhalli. 
63 TH bangarpet, HD Kotte, KR Puram,Kodligi, Navalgund. 
64  DIMHANS, IGICH, DHs-Kolar, Ballari, KC General Hospital, THs-Bangarpet, Kalaghatagi, 
CHCs-Kotturu, Halasuru and PHCs- Kannur, Thoppanhalli. 
65 As per IPHS norms ICU beds should be 5 to 10 per cent of the total beds.  

PA on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
100 
The availability of beds in test checked CHCs and PHCs is summarised in              
Chart 5.3. 
Chart 5.3: Availability of beds in test checked CHCs/PHCs 
  
Source: Information verified in the test checked HIs as on January 2024 
As can be seen from the above except CHCs Avalahalli, BBMP MHs DJ Halli 
and Shanthinagar, the required number of beds as per IPHS66 were available. 
5.5 Health and Wellness Centres 
Under Ayushman Bharat Scheme, creation of Health and Wellness Centres 
(HWCs) is one of the components to deliver comprehensive range of services 
spanning preventive, promotive, curative, rehabilitative and palliative care. 
HWCs are envisaged to deliver an expanded range of services that go beyond 
Maternal and child healthcare services to include care for non -communicable 
diseases, palliative and rehabilitative care, oral, eye and ENT care, mental health 
and first level care for emergencies and trauma, including free essential drugs and 
diagnostic services.  
Achievement of operational HWCs against Target is shown in Chart 5.4 
Chart 5.4: Target and achievement for HWCs 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
               Source: Information furnished by HFWD 
 
 
66 30 beds for CHCs and 6 beds for PHCs 
16
30 30 30 32 30
12
24
12
30
36
6 6 6 6 6 6 6 9
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40No. of available beds
Name of the test checked CHC/PHCs
7045
6497
548
Target Achievement Non-achievement

Chapter 5-Healthcare Infrastructure 
101 
Against the sanctioned 7,045 HWCs, 6,497 (92 per cent ) were operational 
(January 2024).  The status of HWCs in test checked districts is shown in  
Chart 5.5. 
Chart 5.5: Status of HWCs in test-checked districts 
 
          Source: Information furnished by HFWD 
It could be seen that the State was more or less able to achieve the targets set for 
upgrading the existing SCs/PHCs as HWCs indicating significant progress 
towards overall achievement of the scheme objectives. 
5.5.1 Operationalisation of HWCs 
Against 7,59 1 posts of MO/CHO  (Medical Officer/Chief Health Officer) 
sanctioned to the SCs for upgradation as HWCs, 6,602 postings have been filled 
as of January 2024. Status of posted CHO/MO is shown in Chart 5.6. 
 
Chart 5.6: Status of CHO/MO of HWCs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
Source: Information furnished by the Department 
 
There was an overall shortage of 979 doctors in the HWCs, which may affect the 
operationalisation of HWCs. 
The status of availability of CHO/MOs in the HWCs in test checked districts is 
indicated in Chart 5.7 as shown below: 
97 90
134
193
396
97 80
126
193
395
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
Ballari Bengaluru
Urban
Dharwad Kolar Mysuru
Number of
HWCs
Districts
Target
Achievement
6602 (87%)
979 (13%)
CHO/MO Posted
CHO/MO  not
Posted

PA on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
102 
Chart 5.7: Availability of CHO/MOs in test-checked districts 
 
Source:  Information verified in the test checked HIs 
As seen from the above, t he percentage of vacancies ranged from 07 in Ballari 
and Kolar districts to 21 in Bengaluru(U) district.  Non-availability of doctors 
compels the patients to move to higher health centres which may result in 
overburdening the existing infrastructure of the HIs. Further, shortage of the 
doctors could force the patients to visit private health centres. 
5.5.2 AYUSH- Health and Wellness Centres 
The National Health Policy 2017 advocates mainstreaming the potential of 
AYUSH systems within a pluralistic system of integrative healthcare. GoI decided 
(February 2018) to operationalize 10 per cent of the total State Health Centres as 
HWCs under Ayushman Bharat with a vision to establish a holistic wellness 
model based on AYUSH principles. The status of the upgraded health centres to 
HWCs as of May 2023 is shown in Table 5.1:   
Table 5.1: Upgradation of AYUSH Dispensaries to HWCs 
Year 
Target set to upgrade Dispensary 
(GAD/GUD/GHD) to AYUSH -
HWCs 
No. of Health Centres upgraded 
to AYUSH-HWCs 
GAD GUD GHD GAD GUD GHD 
2018-19 100 - - 100 - - 
2019-20 1 3 2 1 3 2 
2020-21 42 9 19 42 9 19 
2021-22 192 7 1 192 7 1 
Total 335 19 22 335 19 22 
Source: Information furnished by the Department  
GAD - Government Ayurvedic Dispensary, GUD - Government Unani Dispensary,  
GHD - Government Homoeopathic Dispensary 
It could be seen from the above table that the target set for upgrading the AYUSH 
Dispensaries as HWCs was achieved which signifies the development of the 
existing health centres fulfilling the scheme objectives. 
 
101
278
129
184
381
8
75
14
14
24
B A L L A R I BENGALURU
U R B A N
D H A R W A D K O L A R  M Y S U R U
Number of CHOs/MOs
Test-checked Districts
CHO/MO Posted CHO/MO  not Posted

Chapter 5-Healthcare Infrastructure 
103 
5.6 Infrastructure not put to use appropriately in the health  
institutes 
The State Government sanctioned 3,104 works  at a cost of ₹47,566.09 crore 
during the period 2016-17 to 2021-22. These works comprised both construction 
of new hospital buildings and major repairs/renovations of existing hospitals. Out 
of 3,104, only 1 ,750 works at a cost of ₹32 ,624.16 crore was completed within 
one year, the others were completed after more than one year. Age-wise summary 
of delay in completion of work is summarised in Table 5.2. 
Table 5.2: Summary of delay in completed works 
Period of Delay No. of civil 
works 
Expenditure incurred               
(₹ in crore) 
No. of works completed in time 1,750 32,624.16 
No. of works completed with a delay 
up to one year 795 11,831.80 
No. of works completed with a delay 
beyond one year but up to 2 years 198 134.80 
No. of works completed with a delay 
beyond 2 years 361 2,975.33 
Total 3,104 47,566.09 
Source: Information furnished by the HFWD as of January 2024 
Audit observed that six buildings constructed were not put to use as shown in 
Table 5.3. 
Table 5.3: Details of hospitals constructed and not put to use 
Sl. 
No. Name of the work 
Cost 
incurred. 
( ₹ in crore) 
Date of 
completion 
Handed 
over 
Put to 
use Remarks 
1 
Construction of 
Trauma Care 
Centre at Mysuru  
54.35 December 
2020 Yes No 
The cost incurred includes 
the cost of equipment. Staff 
required to run the hospital 
(379) were not provided.  
Equipment remaining idle. 
2 
Construction of 
Super Specialty 
Hospital at Mysuru 
154.44 December 
2020 Yes No 
The cost incurred includes 
the cost of equipment. Staff 
required for running the 
hospital (477) not provided.  
Equipment remaining idle. 
3 
Construction of 
Mother and Child 
Hospital (MCH) 
Building at Bannur.  
9.50 January 
2020 Yes No Necessary equipment and 
staff not provided.   
4 
Construction of 
MCH Building at 
Talakadu 
7.85 October 
2020 No No 
Building not handed over. 
Necessary equipment and 
staff not provided.   
5 
Construction of 
Canteen Building, 
Periyapatna 
0.22 March 
2018  Yes No 
As the building is located at 
the rear of the hospital and 
not easily accessible to the 
patients, no vendors have 
come forward to occupy the 
premises on rent.   
6 
Renovation of TH 
at HD Kote, 
Mysuru 
2.00 October 
2021 No No 
The contractor has not 
handed over the building 
even after three years. 
Total 228.36     
Source: Information furnished by Engineering wing of HFWD for the period 2016-22 

PA on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
104 
  
Equipment lying idle at Super Specialty Hospital, Mysuru 
The non-utilisation of the buildings resulted in unfruitful expenditure of ₹228.36 
crore and non-availability of specialized services to patients. This also highlights 
the absence of proper assessment and planning by the State Government. 
The State Government replied (October 2022) that necessary equipment had been 
supplied to MCH at Bannur and Talakadu during May/June 2022 and human 
resource had been sanctioned (August 2022) and placements would be done soon. 
It is evident from the reply that the hospitals were yet to commence functioning.  
No reply was furnished in respect of the other works. 
5.7 Non-creation of adequate infrastructure 
PHC, Avalahalli was upgraded to CHC in 2012. Even after a decade, the hospital 
continued to operate in the old PHC building as no additional facilities were 
created, which resulted in not providing inpatient services except Antenatal Care 
services. Non-upgradation of facilities resulted in non -operationalisation of OT 
despite the availability of anaesthetist and OT equipment.  Due to non -
operationalisation the health centre, the anaesthetist was posted to TH, KR Puram.  
Further, against the sanctioned bed st rength of 30 beds, only six beds were 
functional, the shortage being 80 per cent.  The upgradation, thus, remained only 
on paper and could not serve the intended purpose.  
5.8 Establishment of Medical Colleges  
Department of Medical Education established one Super Specialty Hospital 
(Institute of Gastroenterology, Bengaluru) and four Medical Colleges (Yadagiri, 
Chikkamagaluru, Haveri and Chikkaballapura) during the period 2016-22. There 
are 29 existing medical colleges. Details of HIs set up after two to four years of 
approval as detailed in the Table 5.4. 
Table 5.4: Establishment of Medical Colleges 
Name of the Medical College Year of 
Approval Year of Establishment 
Institute of Gastroenterology, Bengaluru 2016-17 October-2021 
Chikkaballapura Medical College 
2019-20 
February-2022 
Chikkamagaluru Medical College 
August-2022 Haveri Medical College 
Yadagiri Medical College 
Source: Information furnished by the Department 


Chapter 5-Healthcare Infrastructure 
105 
Recommendations: 
12. The State Government should address the regional imbalance in terms of 
availability of Government HIs.  
   
13. The State Government should make a comprehensive plan for determining 
the requirement s and providing the requisite infrastructural facilities in 
HIs. 
 
14. The State Government should put in place necessary procedures and 
provisions for effective utilisation of available infrastructural facilities to 
achieve the intended benefits in order to deliver quality health services.  
 
15. The State Government should direct the HIs to set up a dedicated Disaster 
Management Committee for preparation and implementation of a disaster 
management plan for prevention, mitigation and response to ensure 
minimal damage in the event of any disasters. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
107 
Chapter – 6: Adequacy of funds for the healthcare sector 
 
The State Government allocated a lower budget to the healthcare sector compared 
to the National Health Policy recommendation (averaging 4.28 per cent against 8 
per cent). Even the allocated funds were not fully utilized by the departments. 
Significant amounts remained unutilized in institutions despite funds being 
released. There were delays in the release of matching shares for the National 
Health Mission by the State G overnment, ranging from 32 to 359 days in 2016 -
17 and 38 to 140 days in 2020-21. 
Any health system requires that the available public funds be directed to 
organisations in line with its objectives. Such funding seeks to give governments 
and health authorities both the financial capacity and the incentive to fulfil their 
objectives.  
The State Government provides budget for salary of staff, procurement of drugs, 
equipment and other miscellaneous items required by various HIs under the head 
of account “2210 -Health” and releases these funds to the HIs through the 
departments concerned. Further, departments receive funds from the Government 
of India (GoI) under National Health Mission (NHM) with corresponding share 
from the State Government.  Besides this, HIs having less than 100 beds receive 
funds from Zilla Panchayats (ZP) under the district sector. 
6.1 Financial Assessment 
The information regarding preparation of budget estimates as per the demands/ 
requirements of the HIs submitted to the Head offices were not on 
record/furnished to Audit.  Therefore, Audit could not ensure the adequacy of the 
funds released to the HIs. NHP 2017 stipulated allocation of eight per cent of the 
total budget provision of the State for Health Sector. It was observed that the State 
Government did not provide budget allocation to the healthcare Sector in 
accordance with the National Health Policy as indicated below: 
6.1.1 Funds under State Budget 
The overall budget allocation and the actual expenditure thereon under the health 
sector during the period 2016-17 to 2021-22 is shown in Table 6.1. 
Table 6.1: Budget allocation and expenditure 
     (₹ in crore) 
Year Total 
budget 
Releases Expenditure Savings Capital Revenue Total Capital Revenue Total 
2016-17 1,86,052.34 772.74 
(0.42) 
6,454.62 
(3.47) 
7,227.36 
(3.88) 
743.84 
(96.26) 
5,849.61 
(90.63) 
6,593.45 
(91.23) 
633.91 
(8.77) 
2017-18 2,09,479.50 1,162.04 
(0.55) 
7,071.11 
(3.38) 
8,233.15 
(3.93) 
1,132.53 
(97.46) 
6,667.20 
(94.29) 
7,799.73 
(94.74) 
433.42 
(5.26) 
2018-19 2,45,673.07 1,356.47 
(0.55) 
8,498.26 
(3.46) 
9,854.73 
(4.01) 
1,107.98 
(81.68) 
8,070.82 
(94.97) 
9,178.80 
(93.14) 
675.93 
(6.86) 
2019-20 2,63,804.67 1,072.35 
(0.41) 
8,756.79 
(3.32) 
9,829.14 
(3.73) 
821.98 
(76.65) 
8,000.79 
(91.37) 
8,822.77 
(89.76) 
1,006.37 
(10.24) 
2020-21 2,65,220.73 2,432.08 
(0.92) 
10,146.21 
(3.83) 
12,578.29 
(4.74) 
2,099.58 
(86.33) 
9,626.60 
(94.88) 
11,726.18 
(93.23) 
852.11 
(6.77) 
2021-22 2,93,185.31 2,679.74 
(0.91) 
13,173.89 
(4.49) 
15,853.63 
(5.41) 
2,574.94 
(96.09)  
12,302.39 
(93.38) 
14,877.33 
(93.84) 
976.30 
(6.16) 
Total 14,63,415.62 9,475.42 54,100.88 63,576.30 8,480.85 50,517.41 58,998.26 
(92.80) 
4,578.04 
(7.20) 
Source: Finance and Appropriation Accounts; Figures in parenthesis indicate per cent 

PA on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
108 
➢ The increase in allocation during 2020 -21 and 2021 -22 can be attributed to 
COVID pandemic. Further, with respect to the average allocation during the 
period 2016 -17 to 2021 -22, Karnataka stood third amongst the five Southern 
States as shown in Chart 6.1. 
Chart 6.1: Status of allocation amongst the Southern States 
 
Source: Finance and Appropriation Accounts of respective States. 
➢ The capital expenditure during the above period ranged between 9.32 and 
17.91 per cent of the total expenditure.   
➢ Despite the budget allocation being less than that prescribed under NHP, 
Audit noticed that the releases made were also not utilised fully by the 
departments concerned.  
The details of the savings against budget provision are shown in Chart 6.2. 
Chart 6.2: Savings against Total Budget Provision  
  (₹ in crore) 
 
Source: Information furnished by the Department 
4.28 4.26
4.77 4.87
3.81
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Karnataka Andhra Pradesh Kerala Tamil Nadu Telangana
Allocation of Funds
Name of the State
633.91 433.42
675.93
1,006.37
976.30
4,578.04
226.74 200.53 252.50 136.14 26.44 31.700.00
500.00
1,000.00
1,500.00
2,000.00
2,500.00
3,000.00
3,500.00
4,000.00
4,500.00
5,000.00
2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22
Savings
Financial years
Savings against funds allocated in budget of State
Savings against funds received from GoI

Chapter – 6: Adequacy of funds for the healthcare sector 
109 
The State Government stated (October 2022) that some of the programmes were 
not implemented due to technical issues which resulted in savings. The nature of 
the technical issues and action taken to set them right were, however, not stated.   
6.2 Expenditure on Health Sector by the State vis-a-vis National 
Health Policy norms 
The average release of funds for the health sector during the period 2016 -17 to 
2021-22 was 4. 28 per cent of the total budget of the State, against 8 per cent  
stipulated by NHP. The NHP 2017 also envisaged the States to increase their 
health expenditure, as a percentage of Gross State Domestic Product (GSDP), 
from the existing 1.15 per cent to 2.5 per cent by 2025.  Against this benchmark, 
the State’s expenditure on health sector ranged between 0.60 and 0.77 per cent of 
GSDP67 during the period 2016-22 as shown in Chart 6.3. 
Chart 6.3: Percentage of expenditure on health compared to GSDP of State 
 
 
Source: Finance and Appropriation Accounts of respective years 
Chart 6. 4: Status of expenditure on health sector under GoI and State 
Government 
(₹ in crore) 
 
Source: Information furnished by the Department 
 
67  2016-17 – 12,08,000 crore; 2017-18 – 13,33,000 crore; 2018-19 – 14,76,000 crore;  
2019-20 – 16,15,000 crore; 2020-21 – 17,31,000 crore and 2021-22 – 20,49,000 crore. 
3.54 3.72 3.74 3.34 4.42 5.07
0.60 0.62 0.67 0.61 0.73 0.77
2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22
Percentage of Budget  
allocation Financial year
Percentage of expenditure out of Budget allocation
State budget on Health as a percentage of GSDP
6,593.45
7,799.73
9,178.80 8,822.77
11,726.18
14,877.33
690.55 922.10 1044.03 884.71 900.54 1005.64
2016-`17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22
Expenditure
Financial Year
Expenditure State Govt Expenditure GoI

PA on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
110 
As seen from  Chart 6. 4, the State sector health spending increased from                            
₹6,593.45 crore to ₹14 ,877.33 crore during the period 2016 -22 with an increase 
of more than 100 per cent, whereas the GoI spending increased from ₹ 690.55 
crore to ₹1,005.64 crore with an increase of 45 per cent.   
6.3 Revenue and Capital Expenditure 
Though 14 per cent  of the total expenditure outlay towards health sector was 
expended towards assets/infrastructure creation,  Audit observed that 
infrastructure/assets created were not fully operationalised in the test checked HIs 
due to various reasons as discussed in Chapters 3 and 4. 
 
Chart 6.5: Capital Expenditure vis-à-vis Revenue Expenditure                                         
(2016-17 to 2021-22) 
(₹ in crore) 
 
                   Source: Finance and Appropriation Accounts.  
6.4 Budget allocation and expenditure on important components 
under National Health Mission 
National Health Mission (NHM), launched by the Government of India (GoI) in 
2005, envisaged achievement of universal access to equitable, affordable and 
quality healthcare services. Under this Scheme, funds are released to the Mission 
Director, NHM by GoI and the State Government. GoI releases its share of the 
funds based on the approved State Programme Implementation Plans.  The year -
wise receipt of funds and expenditure incurred thereon during the period 2016-17 
to 2021-22 is indicated in Table 6.2. 
Table 6.2: Receipts and expenditure under NHM 
                 (₹ in crore) 
Year Opening 
Balance 
Funds released Interest Total funds 
available Expenditure Unspent 
Balance GoI GoK 
2016-17 644.73 652.93 578.03 29.31 1,905.00 1,039.68 865.32 (45) 
2017-18 865.32 1,099.58 734.29 23.54 2,722.73 1,893.53 829.20 (30) 
2018-19 829.20 1,201.52 738.18 31.02 2,799.92 1,907.54 892.38 (32) 
2019-20 892.38 1,100.16 679.93 26.63 2,699.10 2,156.94 542.16 (20) 
2020-21 542.16 1,139.62 865.70 16.31 2,563.79 2,088.95 474.84 (19) 
2021-22 474.84 1,376.42 922.61 0 2,773.87 2,089.20 684.67 (25) 
Total  6,570.23 4,518.74 126.81  11,175.84  
Source: Information furnished by NHM, Karnataka; Figures in parenthesis are in percentage              
8480.85
50517.4
Capital Expenditure
Revenue Expenditure

Chapter – 6: Adequacy of funds for the healthcare sector 
111 
Though the State had utilised around 94 per cent of the funds available under the 
scheme during the period 2016 -17 to 2021-22, the unspent balances during each 
year ranged between 19 to 45 per cent of the total funds available.  
6.4.1 Budget allocation and expenditure on important components under 
National Health Mission 
Budget allocation and expenditure incurred on important components under NHM 
during the period 2016-17 to 2021-22 are shown in Table 6.3.  
Table 6.3: Budget allocation and expenditure on important components under 
NHM 
Source: Details furnished by NHM 
6.4.2 Funds under district sector 
The HIs were receiving funds under district sector both from the Head Office and 
the District Offices. There was no mechanism within the HFW to ascertain the 
amount of funds received from the Zilla Panchayats and directly routed through 
the district offices to the HIs. Hence, consolidated information on the amount of 
funds received under the district sector was not available. 
6.4.3 Funding by Private Health Care Sector 
No mechanism to collect and monitor the existing/future expenditure and 
investments made in private healthcare as per NHP 2017 was found. Further , no 
records were found/furnished regarding collaboration with private healthcare 
sector of the State to make healthcare system more effective, efficient, rational, 
safe, affordable, and ethical as stipulated in the NHP 2017. Though activities 
under Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) were observed in few test checked 
Name of 
Scheme 
Total Budget 
Available 
from 2016-17 
to 2021-22 
Total 
Expenditure 
from 2016-17 
to 2021-22 
Percentage of 
Total 
expenditure 
to budget  
Percentage Utilisation Sparkline for five years 
from 2016-17 to 2021-22 2016-
17 
2017-
18 
2018-
19 
2019-
20 
2020-
21 
2021-
22 
NRHM 
RCH 
Flexipool 
11203 7483 67 48 67 63 77 74 65 
 
NUHM 
Flexible 
pool 
920 679 74 68 57 57 79 97 100 
 
NVBDCP 175 57 33 28 12 17 39 52 96 
 
RNTCP 432 292 68 59 63 47 78 66 93 
 
NLEP 41 35 85 68 76 79 98 76 100 
 
IDSP 36 25 69 86 71 52 89 43 74 
 

PA on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
112 
HIs, the department had not taken effective efforts/steps for seeking funds under 
CSR. 
The State Government stated (October 2022) that the private hospitals were 
actively involved in providing curative services under AB -Ark scheme and had 
helped in achieving high target of testing COVID-19 samples. It further stated that 
HFWD had tapped support under CSR and encourag ed CSR contributions. 
However, the data in support of the same was not furnished to Audit. 
6.4.4 Unutilised amounts lying outside the Government account 
Funds being released to the institutions entrusted with the responsibility of 
implementing the schemes are treated as expenditure in the books/accounts of the 
Government.  Audit, however, observed huge amounts lying unutilised with the 
institutions as shown below: 
(a) Karnataka State Medical Supplies Corporation Limited (KSMSCL) 
HFWD released funds amounting to ₹3,343.05 crore to KSMSCL during the 
period 2016-17 to 2021-22 against which KSMSCL had utilised ₹2,185.34 crore 
leaving an unspent amount of ₹1,157.71 crore. 
(b) Suvarna Arogya Suraksha Trust  
The Suvarna Arogya Suraksha Trust (SAST) is the nodal agency for 
implementing the Ayushman Bharat-Arogya Karnataka Scheme in the State.  As 
of the end of March 2022, SAST had an outstanding balance of ₹169.17 crore in 
its accounts. The retention of unutilised funds outside the Government account 
resulted in overstatement of actual expenditure on health. 
6.4.5 Non-utilisation of funds by Directorate of AYUSH 
The Directorate of AYUSH is responsible for providing healthcare services in the 
State.  The Directorate receives funds from GoI under the National AYUSH 
Mission (NAM) and from the State Government.  Audit noticed that as against 
₹123.24 crore received under NAM during the period 2016 -17 to  
2021-22, ₹95.94 crore was utilised.  The balance ₹27.81 crore could not be utilised 
due to non-receipt of detailed indents and non -receipt of Utilisation Certificates 
from implementation agencies, ongoing recruitment of  staff for new Health and 
Wellness Centres etc.  
Further, as against the release of ₹977.79 crore from State Government during the 
above period, the Directorate could utilise ₹901.39 crore and the balance ₹76.42 
crore was lapsed.  
6.5 Delay in release of funds to implementing agencies 
NHM launched by the Government of India (GoI) in 2005, envisaged 
achievement of universal access to equitable, affordable and quality healthcare 
services. Under this Scheme, funds are released to the Mission Director, NHM by 
GoI and the State Government. GoI releases its share of the funds based on the 
approved State Programme Implementation Plans.  
There was a delay in release of matching shares by the State Government ranging 
from 32 to 359 days in 2016-17 and 38 to 140 days in 2020-21. 

Chapter – 6: Adequacy of funds for the healthcare sector 
113 
Recommendations 
16.  The State Government should consider enhancing the budget allocation of 
the Health Sector to meet the NHP target. 
 
17. The State Government should ensure that funds are released timely as per 
allocation and completely utilised to address the gap in the existing health 
facilities.  
 
18. The State Government may review the funds lying outside the Government 
accounts and issue instructions for the timely utilization of the funds for the 
intended purpose.  

 
 
 

 
 
 
  

 
 
 
 
  

 
115 
Chapter - 7: Implementation of Centrally Sponsored 
Schemes 
 
The utilisation of funds for Kayakalp and LaQshya initiatives was inadequate, 
leading to fewer healthcare institutions obtaining certification. The budget 
provision for NMHP remained largely underutilized, ranging from 60 per cent to 
87 per cent expenditure. Specifically, out of ₹14.71 crore released for LaQshya 
under NHM until 2021 -22, only 8.6 per cent  (₹1.27 crore) was spent. Health 
institutions partially utilised funds allocated under PMJAY in test checked HIs. 
Health being a State subject, the Central Government supplements the efforts of 
the State Governments in delivery of health services through various schemes of 
primary, secondary and tertiary care. The following central sector and sponsored 
schemes are being implemented in the State:  
▪ National Health Mission (NHM) 
▪ Ayushman Bharat (AB-ArK) 
▪ National AIDS Control Programme (NACP) 
The issues relating to NHM and AB-ArK are discussed in succeeding paragraphs. 
7.1 National Health Mission (NHM) 
The National Health Mission (NHM) encompasses its two Sub -Missions, the 
National Rural Health Mission (NRHM) and the National Urban Health Mission 
(NUHM). The main programmatic components include Health System 
Strengthening, Reproductive -Maternal- Newborn-Child and Adolescent Health 
(RMNCH+A), and Communicable and Non-Communicable Diseases. The NHM 
envisages the achievement of universal access to equitable, affordable and quality 
healthcare services that are accountable and responsive to people’s needs. 
The implementation of selected programs in the State under NHM is discussed in 
the succeeding paragraphs. 
7.1.1 Kayakalp Programme 
Kayakalp scheme was launched (May 2015) to appreciate and recognise the 
positive effort shown by various hospitals and community health centres at district 
and state levels towards a greater hygienic and pure environment. The objectives 
of the scheme were to promo te better hygiene, infection control, waste 
management and sanitation practices; acknowledge and reward the noteworthy 
performances of public healthcare facilities; peer review and ongoing assessment 
culture to improve the facilities furthermore and to cre ate and share feasible 
strategies for enhancing the quality of services offered by healthcare centres 
around the nation.  Starting from District Hospitals in 2015, the scheme was 
extended to PHCs (2016), Urban Health Facilities (2017) and Sub Centre level 
Health and Wellness Centre (2019). 
During the period from 2016-17 to 2021-22, ₹20.25 crore was utilised against the 
receipt of ₹43.57 crore under the scheme.  The HIs which received the award 
increased from 103 (2016-17) to 900 (2020-21). The peer assessment for the year 
2021-22 was yet to be completed. The status of HIs that have undergone internal, 
peer and external assessment since inception is given in Table 7.1.  

PA on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
116 
Table 7.1: Status of health institutions under Kayakalp scheme 
Financial 
Years 
Target for 
Kayakalp 
Award 
Internal 
Assessment 
Peer 
Assessment 
External 
Assessment Awards 
2015-16 04 20 13 09 04 
2016-17 333 2,587 704 222 103 
2017-18 296 2,667 1251 546 290 
2018-19 466 2,805 1423 781 479 
2019-20 781 2,816 1467 837 611 
2020-21 890 3,316 1541 941 900 
2021-22 895 5,742 - - - 
     Source: Information furnished by HFW 
The State Government replied (October 2022) that the number of awards were not 
high as many of the facilities were converted to COVID screening centre, 
quarantine centres, COVID Care Centres (CCC), Dedicated COVID Health 
Centres (DCHC) and Dedicated COVID Hospitals (DCH). Further, the staff were 
deputed for COVID work, which reduced the hospital’s regular activities. It 
further stated that steps such as orientation of stakeholders on Kayakalp, quarterly 
monitoring of Kayakalp implementation and training of hospital service providers 
would be taken to ensure more facilities qualify for the award. 
7.1.2 Achievement under National Quality Assurance Programme 
The National Quality Assurance Programme (NQAP) is a comprehensive quality 
improvement programme for public healthcare facilities. National Quality 
Assurance Standards (NQAS) developed as part of NQAP are currently available 
for District Hospitals, CHCs, PHCs and Urban PHCs. The NQAS are broadly 
arranged under eight "Areas of Concern" - Service Provision, Patient Rights, 
Inputs, Support Services, Clinical Care, Infection Control, Quality Management 
and Outcome. These are primarily meant for providers to assess their own quality 
for improvement through pre-defined standards and to bring up their facilities for 
certification. The Quality Certification programme for public health facilities was 
launched to recognise good preforming facilities as well as improving credibility 
of public hospitals in the community. Certification is provided against NQAS on 
meeting pre -determined criteria. Certified facilities are also provided financial 
incentives as recognition of their good work.  The Quality Assurance division 
under NHM is responsible for maintenance of quality related aspects of all public 
healthcare facilities. In Karnataka, implementation of Quality Assurance 
Programmes (QAP) began in 2015 -16.  The status of achievement under NQAS 
certification in the State during the period from 20 16-17 to 2022 -23 is given in 
Table 7.2. 
Table 7.2: Number of health facilities (category wise) receiving NQAS 
certification in the State  
FY 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 Total 
SS/MC 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
DH 0 3 3 0 0 27 12 45 
TH 0 0 0 0 0 1 26 27 
CHC 0 0 0 0 0 27 17 44 
UCHC 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 6 

Chapter - 7: Implementation of Centrally Sponsored Schemes 
117 
FY 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 Total 
PHC 0 0 0 0 0 66 33 99 
UPHC 0 0 0 3 0 22 43 68 
Total 0 3 3 3 0 143 137 289 
Source: Information furnished by HFW 
It was noticed that the number of awardee institutions has increased from 3 in 
2017-18 to 137 in 2022-23. However, the fact remains that most of the hospitals 
were yet to achieve the required level of parameters as per NQAS. 
Status of achievement of NQAS certification in test checked districts is shown in 
Table 7.3. 
Table 7.3: Number of health institutions achieved NQAS in test-
checked districts 
Type of 
Health 
Institutions 
Ballari Bengaluru Urban Dharwad Kolar Mysuru 
No. of 
HIs 
NQAS 
certified 
HIs 
No. of 
HIs 
NQAS 
certified 
HIs 
No. of 
HIs 
NQAS 
certified 
HIs 
No. of 
HIs 
NQAS 
certified 
HIs 
No. of 
HIs 
NQAS 
certified 
HIs 
SS/MC 1 0 13 0 2 0 0 0 2 0 
DH 1 1 9 3 1 0 1 1 3 0 
TH 2 0 9 4 3 1 4 2 6 2 
CHC 6 1 3 2 0 0 2 1 8 1 
UCHC 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 2 1 
PHC 30 3 139 4 34 5 63 9 118 3 
UPHC 9 4 0 0 19 5 9 2 23 4 
Total 49 9 173 13 60 11 79 15 162 11 
Source: Information furnished by HFWD 
It is evident from the table that out of 523 HIs, only  59 received  NQAS 
certification in the test checked districts. 
7.1.3 Labour Room and Quality Improvement Initiative (LaQshya) 
LaQshya Programme was launched in 2017 to improve quality of care in Labour 
Rooms and OTs in Government HIs.  It is a targeted  approach towards reducing 
maternal and neonatal mortalities. In Karnataka, LaQshya is being implemented 
(April 2018 ) in 124 facilities. As of March 2022, 67 HIs have obtained State 
Certification and 34 HIs have obtained National Certification. 
Fund amounting to ₹14.71 crore was released for LaQshya under NHM till 2021-
22. However, only 8.6 per cent i.e., ₹1.27 crore was incurred during the period.  
The State Government stated (October 2022) that as  of 25 October 2022, 46 HIs 
had obtained National Certification and 73 HIs had obtained the State 
Certification. It further stated that various steps such as assessment of facilities, 
gap classification and addressal in time bound manner, State and National 
assessment etc., were being taken to achieve cent per cent LaQshya certification 
by the end of the financial year. 
7.1.4 National Mental Health Programme 
 
The GoI had launched the National Mental Health Programme (NMHP) in 1982, 
to ensure the availability and accessibility of minimum mental healthcare for all 
and to encourage the application of mental health knowledge in general 

PA on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
118 
healthcare. The District Mental Health Programme (DMHP) was launched under 
NMHP in 1996 for early detection and treatment, imparting training to the doctors 
and health workers etc. 
DMHP was implemented in all the 30 districts of the State and BBMP.  10 taluks 
were covered under Taluka Mental Health Programme.  A total of 45.11 lakh 
patients had benefitted from this scheme from 2015-16 till October 2021.   
NMHP was implemented in two phases.  DIMHANS, Dharwad had received 
financial assistance of ₹8.33 crore under Phase I. Under Phase II of the 
programme, GoI released (December 2021) ₹3.28 crore to the State Government.  
The State was to release these funds along with its share.  No releases have been 
made so far.  The non-release of funds impacted upgradation of infrastructure viz., 
EEG lab, Sleep lab, Polygraph, Resuscitation equipment, Neuropsychology lab 
equipment and tests etc., in DIMHANS, Dharwad. 
The State Government did not offer any comments. 
Good practice 
Mano Chaitanya (Super Tuesday clinic) Programme is a unique initiative of the 
State Government. Under this programme, Psychiatrist from DMHP/TMHP 
provide specialist Services to the mentally ill at the THs on selected Tuesdays. In 
the year 2020 -21, this pro gramme was functional in all taluks of the State and 
catered to the needs of 1.44 lakh patients. Music therapy to the mentally ill 
patients had been provided at DIMHANS since July 2021. Institute also started 
Manasadhara Kendra during October 2017 for reha bilitation of the cured 
patients. Under this, vocational courses such as mat making, tailoring, knitting, 
candle making, woollen decorative items making, file making etc., were provided 
to the patients. 
7.1.4.1 Non-utilisation of funds under National Mental Health Programme 
The National Mental Health Programme (NMHP) aims to provide minimum 
mental healthcare for all, particularly focusing on disadvantaged and vulnerable 
groups. It promotes applying mental health knowledge in general healthcare and 
social development.  
The budget provision towards NMHP had not been utilized fully as the 
expenditure ranged from 60 to 87 per cent which is detailed in Chart 7.1. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Chapter - 7: Implementation of Centrally Sponsored Schemes 
119 
Chart 7.1: Expenditure Percentage under NMHP in State of Karnataka 
     
 Source: KHP 2021-22 
 
Implementation of National Mental Health Programme in test checked HIs is 
summarised in Table 7.4. 
Table 7.4: Implementation of National Mental Health Programme in test 
checked health institutions 
Sl. 
No. Particulars DHs 
(3) 
TH 
(10) 
CHC 
(11) 
1 Whether provisions of O utpatient services for walk -in patients and 
patients referred by the PHC is provided? 3 8 7 
2 
Whether early identification, diagnosis, and treatment of common 
mental disorders (anxiety, depression, psychosis, schizophrenia, Manic 
Depressive Psychosis) are available? 
3 8 7 
3 Whether inpatient services are av ailable for emergency psychiatric 
illness? 3 3 1 
4 Whether counselling services are  provided by the Clinical 
Psychologist/Trained Psychologist? 3 9 2 
5 
Whether continuing care and support are provided to patients with 
Severe Mental Disorder (SMD) (This includes referral to District 
Hospital for SMD patients and follow up based on treatment plan drawn 
up by the Psychiatric at the District Hospital)? 
3 9 5 
Source: Information furnished by HFW 
Audit analysis of the above revealed that NMHP was not implemented well in test 
checked CHCs. Out of 10 test checked THs, emergency psychiatry illness patient 
services were available in three THs (KR Puram, Kudligi and Sandur) only.  
Non-availability of Mental Health drugs in the test checked HIs ranged from 06 
to 100 per cent as detailed in Table 7.5. 
 
 
 
 
60
66 69
74
87
76
71
2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22
Percentage Expenditure
Financial Year

PA on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
120 
Table 7.5: Availability of Mental Health Drugs in the test checked health 
institutions 
Type of health facilities Range of Shortfall (per cent) 
DH (3) 48 to 59 
TH (10) 15 to 59 
CHC (11) 06 to 100 
PHC (14) 23 to 76 
            Source: Information verified in the test checked HIs. 
7.1.5 Rashtriya Kishor Swasthya Karyakrama (RKSK) 
The Rashtriya Kishor Swasthya Karyakrama was launched by Ministry of Health 
and Family Welfare (MoHFW) on 7 January 2014 for  adolescents, in the age 
group of 10 -19 years. To guide the implementation  of this programme, the 
MoHFW developed a National Adolescent Health Strategy. It realigns the existing 
clinic-based curative approach to focus on a more holistic model , based on a 
continuum of care for adolescent health and developmental needs. This scheme 
can be mapped to indicator 3.7.2 of SDG 3 which deals with adolescent birth rate. 
RKSK (AH) programme was implemented (2016-17) in Karnataka in eight high 
priority districts - Bagalakote, Ballari, Gadag, Kalaburagi, Koppal, Raichur, 
Vijayapura and Yadagiri. For the year 2020 -21, eight new districts - Bidar, 
Chamarajanagar, Chikkamagaluru, Chitradurga, Dakshin a Kannada, Kolar, 
Kodagu and Tumakuru were included under the program. The department had 
incurred ₹45.42 crore under the scheme during the period from 2016-17 to 2021-
22, out of the approved financial allocation of ₹89.90 crore.  The status of the 
achievement against the targets set for the State to cover the adolescent population 
are detailed in Table 7.6. 
Table 7.6: Status of the Achievements against the Targets for 2016-22 
Year Target Achievement Percentage of 
achievement 
2016-17 3,994 3,102 78 
2017-18 8,384 6,819 81 
2018-19 4,801 2,525 53 
2019-20 4,730 3,954 84 
2020-21 5,692 3,263 57 
2021-22 4,764 4,158 87 
 Source: Information furnished by HFWD. 
The achievement of the targets by the districts was not consistent.  Audit observed 
that the shortfall in achieving the target was attributable to the following reasons:  
❖ Shortage of human resources as the recruitment of Adolescent Health 
coordinators and counsellors was an issue at the District Level. 
❖ Non-supply of sanitary napkins to adolescent girls. 
❖ Delay in procurement of Iron and Folic Acid – Weekly Iron and Folic Acid 
Supplementation (IFA-WIFS) tablets. 
❖ Prevalence of COVID Pandemic. 
❖ Engagement of the existing staff for COVID duties in the respective 
districts. 

Chapter - 7: Implementation of Centrally Sponsored Schemes 
121 
The State Government endorsed (October 2022) the reply of the HFWD that with 
the rationalisation of salary of counsellors, the attrition rate had now come down 
and there were only nine vacancies in the cadre of AH Counsellors.  The HFW 
further stated that during 2019 -20, there was no administrative approval for 
procurement of sanitary napkins and in 2020 -21, there was no procurement as 
allocated budget was not released due to COVID situation.  During 2021-22, two 
tender calls failed, and the third tender ca ll was in its final stage and supply to 
districts is expected from December 2022. It was also stated that directives have 
been issued to districts not to depute RKSK staff for non -RKSK activities and 
periodic reviews at the State and district levels alon g with field visits would be 
scheduled to ensure quality services and effective implementation of the 
programme. It further added that inter -sectoral coordination with the education 
department needed to be strengthened and effective  Information, Education and 
Communication (IEC)/Behaviour Change Communication (BCC) activities 
needed to be planned to address adolescent health issues. 
7.1.6 Janani Suraksha Yojana  
Janani Suraksha Yojana (JSY) is a safe motherhood intervention implemented 
(2005) under the NHM to reduce maternal and neo -natal mortality by promoting 
institutional delivery among the pregnant women below poverty line. This scheme 
integrated cash assistance with delivery and post-delivery care. As per guidelines, 
in Karnataka, the cash assistance of ₹700 under JSY was admissible only to 
mothers belonging to BPL families from rural areas and ₹600 to those from urban 
areas. JSY guidelines required all paymen ts including compensation amount for 
sterilisation wherever applicable, to be made in one instalment at the time of 
discharge from the hospital/health centre. The Auxiliary Nurse Midwives (ANM) 
and ASHA workers were to ensure disbursal of JSY cash assistan ce in time. 
Details of the eligible beneficiaries for disbursement of JSY cash benefits during 
2016-23 are as shown in Table 7.7. 
Table 7.7: Details of beneficiaries for JSY disbursement 
Year 
Total number of 
Institutional 
Deliveries 
No. of beneficiaries 
under JSY 
disbursement (inclusive 
of SC and ST) 
No. of SC and ST 
beneficiaries under 
JSY disbursement 
2016-17 5,62,164 3,96,840 95,638 
2017-18 5,69,927 2,82,731 68,138 
2018-19 5,64,549 3,25,197 78,372 
2019-20 5,51,781 4,98,558 1,20,152 
2020-21 5,04,388 4,81,603 1,16,066 
2021-22 5,33,580 3,25,313 78,400 
2022-23 5,34,509 2,87,414 69,267 
    Source: Information furnished by HFW. 
In test checked districts, disbursement of JSY benefits for the period 2016 -23 is 
summarised in Table 7.8.  
 
 

PA on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
122 
Table 7.8: Disbursement of JSY benefits in test checked districts 
(₹ in lakh) 
Type of the HIs 
2016-23 
No. of 
deliveries 
No. of BPL 
patients 
Amount paid to 
BPL patients 
No. of 
SC/ST 
patients 
Amount 
paid to 
SC/ST 
patients 
DH (03) 88996 27667 166.91 9538 27.84 
TH (10) 56617 35702 214.09 20097 190.39 
CHC (11) 29531 13344 80.87 3433 20.24 
PHC (14) 9833 8327 58.13 3799 25.26 
Source: Information verified in the test checked HIs 
7.1.7 National Urban Health Mission (NUHM) 
The National Urban Health Mission (NUHM) as a sub-mission of National Health 
Mission (NHM) envisages to meet healthcare needs of the urban population with 
the focus on urban poor, by making available to them essential primary healthcare 
services.  Outreach services are one of the components of NUHM to  provide 
assistance, information, and support. 
Orientation cum Training workshops are also envisaged in NHM for He alth 
Officers, Supervisors and P eripheral workers on NUHM.  The achievement of 
outreach services and orientation workshop conducted under NHM in test checked 
districts is summarised in Table 7.9. 
Table 7.9: Achievement against targets under outreach services and 
orientation programmes 
Sl. 
No. Name of the District Target Achievement Shortfall Shortfall 
(percentage) 
Outreach sessions 
1 Bengaluru Urban 50,962 43,059 7,903 15.51 
2 Mysuru 0 0 0 0.00 
3 Kolar 4,848 4,806 42 0.87 
4 Ballari 8,988 8,158 830 9.23 
5 Dharwad 7,992 8,212 0 0.00 
Orientation workshop 
1 Bengaluru Urban 1,152 1091 61 5.30 
2 Mysuru 184 184 0 0 
3 Kolar 72 72 0 0 
4 Ballari 48 47 1 2.08 
5 Dharwad 6 6 0 0 
Source: Information furnished by the Department 
As seen from the above, all the test checked districts had fared well in achieving 
the set targets.  
7.1.8 Revised National Tuberculosis Control Programme (RNTCP) 
The Revised National TB Control Programme (RNTCP) was launched in India 
in 1997. The performance of RNTCP in Karnataka during the Audit period is 
shown in Tables 7.10(a) and 7.10(b). 
 

Chapter - 7: Implementation of Centrally Sponsored Schemes 
123 
Table 7.10 (a) Implementation of Nikshay Poshan Yojana (NPY) in the State 
Total No. of 
Cases registered 
in the Portal 
Cases of 
Excess 
Payment 
Cases of 
Short 
Payment 
Cases of Doubtful 
Multiple 
Registration for 
same instance 
Cases where 
treatment was 
completed but 
benefits not 
transferred. 
4,81,873 Nil Nil 2,831 2,49,226 
Source: Information furnished by HFW. 
Table 7.10 (b) Implementation of Nikshay Poshan Yojana (NPY) in test-checked 
districts 
Name of the 
District 
Total No. of 
Cases 
registered in 
the Portal 
Cases of 
Excess 
Payment 
Cases of 
Short 
Payment 
Cases of 
Doubtful 
Multiple 
Registration 
for same 
instance 
Cases where 
treatment 
completed but 
benefits not 
transferred 
Ballari 28,993 Nil Nil 274 13,356 
Bengaluru 
Urban 95,400 Nil Nil 949 59,094 
Dharwad 14,243 Nil Nil 43 7,542 
Kolar 8,631 Nil Nil 19 3,681 
Mysuru 21,770 Nil Nil 145 12,395 
Source: Information furnished by HFW. 
Action needs to be taken to transfer the benefits in cases where treatment was 
completed, and instances of double registrations need to be curbed. 
7.1.9 Family Welfare Schemes 
Family Planning one of the main component s of NHM is designed and operated 
towards achieving the family welfare goals and objectives stated in various policy 
documents. Availability of family planning methods in test checked health 
institutions are shown in Table 7.11. 
Table 7.11: Availability of family planning methods in test checked Health 
Institutions 
Sl. 
No. Method MC/DHs 
(06) 
THs 
(10) 
CHCs 
(11) 
PHCs` 
(14) 
1 
Spacing methods (Intrauterine 
Contraceptive Device (IUCD), Oral 
contraceptive (OC) Pills, Emergency 
Contraceptive pills, condoms etc.) 
6 10 11 14 
2 
Limiting methods (male/female) 
(Vasectomy Tubectomy) (Laparoscopic 
and Non scalpel Vasectomy) 
6 10 8 4 
3 Post-partum sterilisation 6 9 9 6 
4 Abortion and Contraception service 6 10 11 9 
5 Post-partum ward 6 9 10 10 
Source: Information furnished by HFW. 
An analysis from the above revealed that family planning methods were available 
in tertiary and secondary healthcare facilities. However, all the methods were not 
provided in all the PHCs.  

PA on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
124 
7.2 Ayushman Bharat Scheme 
Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana (PMJAY)  
In line with the policy goals of the  KIPHP 2017, all the existing schemes were 
merged and Arogya Karnataka, a universal healthcare scheme was launched on 2 
March 2018.  GoI launched (25 September 2018), the Ayushman Bharat-National 
Health Protection Mission, later renamed as Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana 
(PMJAY) to provide health protection to poor families based on Socio-Economic 
Caste Census data  (GoI 2011) . Since both Arogya Karnataka and Ayushman 
Bharat have the same goal, scope, and similar modalities for providing treatments 
to the poor and vulnerable sections of the society, these schemes were integrated 
vide a Memorandum of Understanding with National Health Agency, GoI on 30 
October 2018 and renamed as Ayushman Bharat-Arogya Karnataka Scheme (AB-
Ark).  Suvarna Arogya Suraksha Trust (SAST) was the agency responsible for 
implementing the scheme. 
The status of claims received and settled under AB -Ark during the period 2018 -
19 to 2021-22 is shown in Table 7.12. 
Table 7.12: Status of the claims for the period 2018-19 to 2021-22 
Year 
Number of pre-
authorizations 
approved 
Number of 
claims 
received 
Number of 
claims settled 
Amount 
involved 
(₹ in crore) 
2018-1968 83,059  80,365 75,527 256.53 
2019-20 5,93,172  5,74,157 5,14,704 852.81 
2020-21 8,22,372  7,88,302 7,04,653 1,131.79 
2021-22 13,12,991 11,12,231 6,45,754 984.52 
Total 28,11,594 25,55,055 19,40,638 3,225.65 
     Source: Information furnished by HFW. 
Only 76 per cent of the claims received were settled during the above period.  
Under the scheme, Government HIs were entitled to receive funds for providing 
treatment to the beneficiaries in the form of reimbursement. These funds were to 
be utilised for development of necessary infrastructure, procurement of medicines 
of immediate nature, providing incentives to staff etc.  
Audit observed that funds provided under PMJAY could not be utilised by the test 
checked HIs as detailed below: 
❖ Huge balances remained unutilised as at the end of March 2022 in five HIs 
(KR Hospital, Mysuru – ₹22.77 crore; Victoria Hospital, Bengaluru – ₹7.84 crore; 
DIMHANS, Dharwad – ₹1.10 crore; KC General Hospital, Bengaluru – ₹97 lakh 
and District Hospital, Ballari – ₹72 lakh).   
❖ TH, Kalaghatagi and UPHC, Dharwad had not utilised any amount out of    
₹73 lakh and ₹2.42 lakh received by them during the period 2018-19 to 2020-21. 
 
 
 
68   From 30 October 2018 to 31 March 2019. 

Chapter - 7: Implementation of Centrally Sponsored Schemes 
125 
Recommendations 
19. The State Government should ensure that the funds released under the GoI 
schemes are utilised fully and targets set for certification are achieved to 
assure the public that healthcare facilities meet stipulated standards. 
 
20. The State Government may ensure the coverage of HIs under NQAS in 
order to maintain the prescribed standards to deliver the quality healthcare 
services. 
 
21. The State Government should design a strategy to enhance the awareness 
and outreach through various activities for making the target population 
aware of the benefits. 
 
22. The State Government should put in place a mechanism immediately to 
ensure that its stated commitment for all the issues raised in Audit are 
carried out scrupulously and without delay. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
127 
Chapter - 8: Adequacy and effectiveness of the 
regulatory mechanisms 
 
The Karnataka State Medical Council had vacancies in key positions due to a 
prolonged court case. The Drug Control department suffered from a vacancy rate 
of 43.51 per cent , notably lacking Inspectors, Laboratory Supervisors, and 
Technicians. Additionally, 34 per cent of the healthcare institutions in the test  
checked districts lacked valid authorisation for Bio-Medical Waste Management, 
indicating ineffective waste segregation and disposal practices. 
 
8.1 Introduction 
Regulations in the healthcare sector are necessary to standardise and supervise 
healthcare, ensuring that HIs and facilities comply with public health policies, and 
provide safe care to all patients and visitors. Regulatory bodies monitor individual 
and corporate healthcare practitioners and facilities, inform the government about 
changes in the way the healthcare industry operates, ensure higher safety 
standards to improve healthcare quality and follow local, state, and federal 
guidelines. 
8.2 Functioning of Regulatory Bodies  
The functioning of the regulatory bodies in the State is discussed below: 
8.2.1 State Medical Council 
The Karnataka State Medical Council established (1961) under the Karnataka 
Medical Registration Act, 1961 consist s of 17 members including five members 
nominated by Government. The Council meets every Saturday in addition to 
conducting the quasi-judicial proceeding meetings.  Audit observed that the posts 
of five nominated members and two other elected members had been vacant since 
2020, due to court case.  Consequently, there was no Government representation 
in the meetings of the Council. 
Further, as per Section 12 of the Act, the Registrar shall keep a register of medical 
practitioners and as per Section 26 of the Act, the Registrar of the Council shall 
every year on or before 30 June publish in the Official Gazette a correct list of 
names and qualifications of all practitioners entered in the register on the first day 
of January of that year.  Audit observed that no such list of medical practitioners 
was published. 
8.2.2 State Para Medical Board 
The Para Medical Board was constituted in 1997 with functions to grant 
affiliation, regulate admissions and control the functioning of institutions 
conducting Para Medical courses with respect to imp arting quality education 
programmes and conduct examinations. 
The information of the registered/un -registered institutions was not furnished 
despite taking up the matter with the higher authorities at the Government level. 
Hence, Audit could not comment on the functioning of the Board. 

PA on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
128 
8.3 Implementation of the Clinical Establishments Act and Rules  
Karnataka Private Medical Establishment Act, 2007 was enacted to provide for 
the promotion and monitoring of private medical establishments in the State and 
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  Section 3 of the Act stipulates 
that no Private  Medical Establishment (PME) shall be established, run or 
maintained in the State except under and in accordance with the terms and 
conditions of registration granted under this Act.   
The Registration and Grievance Redressal Authority constituted under the Act in 
each district headed by the Deputy Commissioner scrutinises the applications.  
29,409 PMEs (as of October 2021) were issued with registration certificates and 
25 applications were rejected. There were 874 applications pending of which 122 
were more than three months old. Further, while 23,558 medical practitioners 
were registered under KPME, there were 1,434 unregistered medical practitioners 
whose shops/clinics were closed/orde red for closure.  There was, however, no 
database on the total number of PMEs functioning in the State with the 
department. This evidence indicates an absence of a mechanism to ensure 
mandatory registration of the PMEs. 
8.3.1 Registration/Accreditation of Medical Diagnostic Laboratories (or 
 Pathological Laboratories)/Hospitals 
National Accreditation Board for Hospitals and Healthcare Providers (NABH) is 
a constituent board of Quality Council of India (QCI), set up to establish and 
operate accreditation programme for healthcare organisations. The National 
Accreditation Board for Testing and Calibration Laboratories (NABL) is another 
constituent board of QCI which grants accreditation to Testing Laboratories, 
Calibration Laboratories, Medical Laboratories, etc. 
Audit observed that neither of the test checked HIs was accredited under NABH 
nor the laboratories in test checked HIs were NABL accredited. 
The State Government stated (October 2022) that NABH/NABL accreditation 
was voluntary initiative which focuses on infrastructure, documentation and 
human resources and is not mandated. NQAS on the other hand certifies the 
infrastructure, human resources and quality in the service provision of all sections 
of the hospitals and is emphasised under NHM. 
The Audit observed that most of the public HIs were yet to be covered under the 
Quality Assurance Programme as commented in Para 7.1.2. 
8.4 Functioning of State Nursing Council   
Karnataka State Nursing Council was established in 1968 under the Karnataka 
Nurses, Midwives and Health Visitors Act ,1961. As per the Act, the Council 
should have 21 members from various fields including three nominated by 
Government and the Council was to meet once a year with a quorum of six 
members. 
Audit observed that the Council constituted during 2015-16 was functioning with 
three nominated members only. There were no elected members of the Council. 
Twenty-four meetings were held during the period 2017 -22 without elected 
members and without required quorum which was in contravention to the by-laws. 

Chapter 8-Adequacy and effectiveness of the regulatory mechanisms 
129 
Though one of the functions of the Council was to register nurses and midwives 
and monitor the registrations, it did not maintain records of total number of nurses 
and midwives in the State . Further, it was observed that 24 out of 784 nursing 
schools and 13 out of 538 nursing colleges had not renewed their registrations. 
8.5 Drug Controller of the State 
The Drug Control Department (DCD) existing since 1956 under the HFW D 
regulates the manufacture of drugs and cosmetics and sale of drugs in the State. 
The mission of the DCD is to protect public health and to strive for the 
pharmaceutical excellence by ensuring the availability of safe, effective, and 
quality drugs. DCD is responsible for implementation and enforcement of Drugs 
and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and Rules thereunder. There are three Government Drug 
testing laboratories (DTL) in the State, one each at Ballari, Bengaluru and 
Hubballi under the control of DCD. Only DTL, Bengaluru was NABL accredited. 
There were 46,637 units (manufacturing, blood banks, blood storage units, stem 
cells banks, laboratories, etc.) in the State as at the end of 2021-22. 
There was vacancy of 43.51 per cent in the department as only 13 drug inspectors 
were working against sanctioned posts of 112, 10 out of 18 laboratory supervisor 
posts and 21 out of 28 lab technician posts were vacant. As a result, there was 
delay in intimating test reports to the HIs/district warehouses/others. During the 
period from 2016-17 to 2020-21, reports were issued on time for 30,563 (89 per 
cent) out of 34,209 samples received. As there is no system of maintaining buffer 
stock in the public HIs, the delay in communication resulted in issue of not of 
standard quality drugs/medicines to poor patients. 
8.6 State Pharmacy Council 
The Karnataka State Pharmacy Council constituted (1963) under the Pharmacy 
Act, 1948 regulates the profession and practice of Pharmacy in the State. Section 
26A of the Act stipulates that   
(1) A State Council may, with the previous sanction of the State Government, 
appoint Inspectors having the prescribed qualifications.  
(2) An Inspector may (a) inspect any premises where drugs are compounded or 
dispensed and submit a written report to the Registrar; (b) enquire whether a 
person who is engaged in compounding or dispensing of drugs is a registered 
pharmacist; (c) investigate an y complaint made in writing in respect of any 
contravention of this Act and report to the Registrar. 
Audit observed that Pharmacy Inspectors were yet to be appointed.  As a result, 
the inspection of premises where drugs were compounded or dispensed was not 
done and functioning of the pharmacy institutions could not be monitored. 
8.7 Bio-Medical Waste Management 
8.7.1 Absence of valid authorisation  
Bio-Medical Waste (BMW) Management Rules, 2016 stipulates the procedure for 
generation, collection, handling, transportation, disposal, and monitoring of the 
BMW with clear roles for waste generators and Common Bio Medical Waste 
Treatment Facility (CBMWTF).  Further, every occupier or operator handling 

PA on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
130 
BMW, irrespective of the quantity, shall make an application to the prescribed 
authority i.e., State Pollution Control Board (SPCB) for grant of authorisation. 
The status of unauthorised HIs during the period 2 016-22 is summarised in  
Table 8.1. 
 
Table 8.1: Status of unauthorised health institutions for the period from 
2016 to 2022 
Year 
Total Number 
of HIs in 
operation 
Number of 
unauthorised 
HIs 
Number of HIs 
not submitted 
annual reports 
Percentage of non-
submission of 
annual reports 
2016 29,874 2,595 2,595 8.69 
2017 32,364 8,086 8,086 24.98 
2018 35,869 9,055 9,055 25.24 
2019 36,021 6,895 6,895 19.14 
2020 41,709 6,021 6,021 14.44 
2021 44,685 5,148 5,148 11.52 
2022 48,431 3,733 3,733 7.71 
Source: Information furnished by HFW 
The percentage of non -submission of annu al reports of unauthorised healthcare 
facilities ranged from 7.71 to 25.24. The number of unauthorised HIs has been on 
a decreasing trend from 2018. Necessary action is needed to regulate these HIs in 
compliance with the stipulated rules. 
Audit observed that the majority of the HIs in the districts test -checked had not 
obtained valid authorisation as detailed in Table 8.2.  
Table 8.2: Status of authorisation in health institutions in test-checked 
districts 
District 
Total number 
of 
Government 
HIs 
Total 
Number of 
Private HIs 
Number of HIs with valid 
authorisation 
Government 
HIs Private HIs 
Bengaluru Urban 235 7,513 119 4,350 
Ballari 351 1,055 234 898 
Dharwad 205 2,061 150 1,405 
Kolar 191 671 97 490 
Mysuru 408 1,202 283 1,166 
Total 1,390 12,502 883 
(64 per cent) 
8,309 
(66 per cent ) 
  Source: Information furnished by SPCB 
As could be seen from the table above,  34 per cent of the healthcare institutions 
in the test checked districts lacked valid authori sation for Bio -Medical Waste 
Management. Further, 18 test checked HIs did not have valid authorisation from 
SPCB. 
The State Government stated that all Government HIs have valid authorisation 
from SPCB and the District Nodal Officer, BMWM has been intimated to take 
strict action against those private HIs which do not have valid authorisation. 
 
 

Chapter 8-Adequacy and effectiveness of the regulatory mechanisms 
131 
8.8 License for imaging equipment and their operation 
As per Rule 3 of Atomic Energy (Radiation Protection) Rules, 2004 issued by 
Department of Atomic Energy, (1) no person shall without a license (a) establish 
a radiation installation for siting, design, construction, commissioning, and 
operation; and (b) decommission a radiation installation and (2) no person shall 
handle any radioactive material or operate any ra diation generating equipment 
except in accordance with the terms and conditions of a license. 
The State Government (Directorate of Radio Safety -DRS) entered (December 
2018) into a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with Atomic Energy 
Regulatory Board (AERB) to conduct regulatory inspection of X-ray installations 
as per AERB Rules. As per the MoU, AERB was to train the staff of DRS before 
they could start conducting inspections of radiation equipment installed in the 
public and private institutions. This training could, however, take place only after 
the staff, especially the Director with the requisite qualification set by the AERB, 
were posted. 
Audit observed that only eight out of the total 28 sanctioned posts were filled by 
the DRS.  The post of Director, Chief Health Equipment Officer (4) and Health 
Equipment Officer/Radiation Safety Officer (10) remained vacant. In the absence 
of the Director, the staff of DRS could not be trained, which in turn resulted in the 
absence of monitoring of radiation equipment.  
Further, as per the AERB Gap Analysis Report, out of 683 X ray machines in 358 
HIs, only 70 had obtained AERB license. The absence of periodic monitoring 
besides contravening the AERB Rules also raises concerns about the functioning 
of this equipment as they can pose high risk to the health of the staff, patients, and 
environment. 
The State Government replied (October 2022) that the post of Director was filled 
up during July 2022 and after obtaining training from AERB, DRS will be 
authorised to function as per MoU.  It further stated that the posts would be filled 
up by outsourcing during 2022-23 and gap analysis, gap filling and issuance of 
license for operation would be taken up in two phases on turnkey basis. 
8.9 Internal Monitoring System   
IPHS Guidelines stipulate that quality assurance, quality control of processes and 
quality of service delivery should be ensured at all levels. This required existence 
of internal monitoring system such as Internal Audit, Medical Audit, Death 
Review, Disaster Preparedness Audit, Patient Satisfaction Surveys etc., in the HIs.  
Status of the compliance in the test checked HIs is given in Table 8.3. 
Table 8.3: Status of compliance to Internal monitoring system in test 
checked health institutions 
Particulars SS/MC (05) DH/TH (13) CHC/TH (25) 
Internal Audit 04 02 06 
Medical Audit 01 02 03 
Death Audit/ Review 03 04 04 
Disaster Preparedness Nil 02 Nil 
Technical Audit Nil Nil Nil 
Financial Audit Nil Nil Nil 

PA on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
132 
Source: Information verified in the test checked HIs for the Audit period 2016-17 to 2021-22 
As could be seen, there was poor compliance with the IPHS requirement in the 
test checked HIs as regards quality assurance. 
The State Government stated (October 2022) that HIs carried out both medical 
and death audits and the other audits were under process and would be 
streamlined.  As regards Patient Satisfactory Survey (PSS), it stated that PSS was 
being carried out both in online and offline modes. Currently , 526 HIs were 
integrated with Mera Aspataal portal to get automatic feedback on the services 
provided. 
8.10 Compliance to Statutory requirements  
IPHS Guidelines stipulate that every HI shall fulfill all the statutory requirements 
and comply with all the regulations issued by Local Bodies, State and Union of 
India. The Hospital shall have copy of the licenses obtained under these 
Regulations/Acts. 
Audit observed that the test checked HIs did not comply with the statutory 
requirements as shown in Table 8.4. 
Table 8.4: Status of compliance to statutory requirements in test checked 
health institutions 
Particulars SS/MC 
(05) 
DH/TH 
(13) 
CHC/PHC 
(25) 
Hazardous Waste (Management, Handling 
and Transboundary Movement) Rules, 2008 04 07 10 
License for Blood Bank or Authorisation for 
Blood Storage facility. 04 07 Not Applicable 
Type and Site approval from AERB for X -
ray, CT Scan Unit 05 08 Not Applicable 
Registration certificate for Ambulances 05 12 08 
Insecticides Act, 1968 03 05 08 
PC and PNDT69 Act, 1994 05 06 Not Applicable 
Narcotics and psychotropic substances Act, 
1985 04 04 02 
Source: Information verified in the test checked HIs 
The State Government stated (October 2022) that out of 43 HIs, 19 had valid 
authorisation from the District Pollution Control Board. The reply was, however, 
silent on the compliance with the statutory requirements pointed out in Audit. 
 
 
 
 
 
69 Pre-Conception and Pre-Natal Diagnostic Techniques 
Particulars SS/MC (05) DH/TH (13) CHC/TH (25) 
Social Audit Nil Nil Nil 
Patient Satisfaction Survey 02 06 07 

Chapter 8-Adequacy and effectiveness of the regulatory mechanisms 
133 
Recommendations  
23. The State Government should ensure that all utilities generating bio -
medical waste comply with the provisions with regard to authorisation, bar- 
coding, annual returns to regulate the generation and disposal of bio -
medical waste. 
 
24. The State Government should ensure that sufficient human resources are 
provided to Drugs Control Department and Directorate of Radio Safety to 
ensure the safety of public health through constant and stringent 
monitoring. 
 
25. The State Government may ensure that various regulatory bodies may adopt 
an adequate and effective monitoring mechanism to have conformity with 
the prescribed standards. 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
135 
Chapter – 9: Sustainable Development Goal 3 
 
The Department established Monitoring and Coordination Committees, including 
a State-level Steering Committee, to formulate action plans for achieving SDGs. 
However, there was no dedicated fund allocation to address gaps in achieving 
SDG 3 targets. Despite performing relatively well compared to other States under 
SDG 3, Karnataka failed to meet its own targets. 
The 2030 agenda of the United Nations (UN) comprise s 17 Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs) and 169 associated targets . The SDGs are a 
comprehensive list of global goals integrating social, economic and 
environmental dimensions of development.  
India is committed to implementing SDGs. At the national level, NITI Aayog 
provides leadership, and the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation (MoSPI) developed a National Indicator Framework (NIF) for 
measuring goal attainment. 
SDG 3 on “Good Health and Well -being” aims to e nsure healthy lives and 
promote well-being for all at all ages.  It has 13 targets (9 outcome targets and 4 
means to achieving targets) and 28 indicators to measure the progress of these 
targets. However, NITI Aayog designed 42 indicators to measure the performance 
and monitor the progress of these 13 targets.   
State adopted all 13 targets and related indicators and prepared a road map 
(Sustainable Development Goals -Vision Document 2030) to achieve the targets 
in a given period of time to ensure sustainable development. 
9.1 Planning and mapping budget for SDG-3  
Planning, Programme Monitoring and Statistics Department (PPMS) is the nodal 
agency responsible for formulating strategies for attainment of SDGs in 
Karnataka by 2030. The State has brought out SDG 3 Karnataka Vision 2030 
document which provides information on the baseline indicators, target and action 
plan to achieve the same. The department has set up Monitoring and Coordination 
Committee and the State level Steering Committee for formulation of effective 
action plans for achieving the SDGs. To periodical ly monitor the progress of 
SDGs, a separate technical cell and goal specific committees have been set up.   
9.1.1 Annual Health Survey not carried out 
HFWD, which is the nodal agency for SDG 3, conducts Community Need 
Assessment Approach survey for assessing the needs of the Community and for 
evidence-based planning and reforms every year.  This survey forms the basis for 
calculation and monitoring of estimates for achieving the national programmes.  
The survey was, however, not carried out during the years 2019-20 and 2021-22. 
The State Government stated (October 2022) that the survey could not be carried 
out during 2019-20 and 2020-21 due to COVID pandemic.  However, the survey 
for 2022-23 was under progress. 
 

PA on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
136 
9.1.2 Budgeting for Sustainable Development Goals focusing SDG-3  
There was no separate fund allocation for addressing the gaps/shortfalls in 
achieving the targets under SDG 3. The targets were addressed through various 
activities taken  up under different schemes that are mapped to SDG 3.  The 
PPMS stated (July 2022) that the entire budget has been mapped to all SDGs 
and a special announcement was made in the 2022 -23 budget for education, 
health, and nutrition.  
9.2 Performance of indicators for SDG-3  
As per SDG India Index 2020 -21, Karnataka stands third along with Andhra 
Pradesh, Goa and Uttarakhand with 72 points behind Kerala and Tamil Nadu 
among the Southern States.  However, under SDG 3, Karnataka with an index 
score of 78 is placed fifth.  Among the Southern States, only Tamil Nadu with a 
score of 81 is above Karnataka. Though Karnataka has performed consistently 
well in comparison with other States, Audit observed that it fell short of achieving 
its own targets as shown in Table 9.1. 
Table 9.1: Status of health indicators in the State against its own targets 
Health Indicators NFHS-4 NFHS-5 State Target National 
(2015-16) (2019-21) 2022 2030 
Maternal Mortality Rate (MMR) (per 1,00,000 live 
births) 97 92 78 50 97 
Under-five mortality rate Per 1,000 live births 31.5 29.5 23 20 36 
Neonatal Mortality Rate Per 1,000 live births 18.5 15.8 14 10 24.9 
Infant Mortality Rate (IMR) (per 1,000 live births) 26.9 25.4 16 12 35.2 
Proportion of births attended by skilled health 
personnel (Period 5 Years) 93.7 93.8 95 100 89.4 
Percentage of women aged 15 -49 years with a live 
birth, for last birth, who received antenatal care, 4 
times or more (Period 5 years/ 1 year) 
70.9 70.1 80 100 58.1 
Institutional births (per cent) 94 97 99 100 88.6 
Number of new HIV infections per 1,000 uninfected 
population 
0.08 
(SIMS-2017) 0.02 0 0 0.05  
Tuberculosis (TB) incidence per 1 ,00,000 
population  118 135 104 44 177 
Total physicians, nurses and midwives per 10,000 
population NA 70 
Phy-130 
Nurs-200 
MW-170 
Phy-260    
Nurs-400     
MW-350 
37 
Source: Data furnished by SDG Nodal office, NHFS 4 (October 2017)  
NHFS 5 (September 2021) and Karnataka SDG Vision Document (February 2020)  
 
In fact, there has been an increase in the numbe r of incidences of TB in 
comparison with 2015 -16 which is a cause for concern. State has fared well in 
other indicators.  
The State Government accepted (October 2022) that there was a need for tobacco 
control. As regards TB, it stated that there was no actual increase in TB burden in 
the State when compared to 2015 even though NFHS 5 shows a marginal increase.  
The Sub National Certification of districts conducted in the year 2022 (March), 
has certified that there is reduction of inciden ce of TB by 40 per cent in five 

Chapter 9: Sustainable Development Goal 3 
137 
districts and reduction in TB incidence by 20 per cent in nine districts as compared 
to 2015.  
The reply of the State Government does not correlate with the figures as per NFHS 
4 and NFHS 5. 
9.2.1 Status of indicators in test checked districts 
The Status of MMR and IMR in test checked districts in comparison with State 
Average is shown in Table 9.2. 
Table 9.2: Status of indicators in test checked districts 
Districts (MMR) (IMR) 
National Average 97 35.2 
State Average 92 25.4 
Bengaluru Urban 31 06 
Ballari 101 17 
Dharwad 217 11 
Kolar 71 09 
Mysuru 45 24 
 Source: Information furnished by HFWD (NFHS-5 for the period 2019-21) 
 
The matern al mortality rate was very high in Dharwad district.  This can be 
attributed to the fact that patients come from neighbouring districts to KIMS, 
Hubballi, a tertiary care hospital in the district. The high MMR in Ballari district 
is also a cause for concern. 
 
9.3 Analysis of Performance of Indicators meant for evaluation of  
progress of SDG-3  
 
The World Health Organisation sets targets of Sustainable Development Goal 3 
to ensure healthy lives and promote well-being for all at all ages. The description 
of indicators under SDG-3 are detailed in Table 9.3. 
 
Table 9.3: Description of indicators under SDG-3 
Indicator Name of Indicators Brief description 
3.1.1 Maternal Mortality Rate  This indicator is defined as the proportion of 
maternal deaths per 1,00,000 live births per annum. 
3.2.1 Under five mortality 
rates  
The indicator is defined as a child born in a specific 
year or time period will die before reaching the age 
of five per 1,000 live births annually. 
3.2.3 
Percentage of fully 
immunized infants in the 
age group 12-23 months 
The indicator is defined as the percentage of children 
aged 12-23 months who received all the basic 
vaccinations for BCG, Measles and three doses of 
Pentavalent vaccine. 
3.3.2 
Total case s of 
notification of 
Tuberculosis per one 
lakh population 
The indicator is defined as the estimated number of 
new and relapse TB cases (all forms of TB, including 
cases of persons living with HIV) arising in a given 
year, expressed as a rate per 1,00,000 population. 

PA on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
138 
Indicator Name of Indicators Brief description 
3.4.2 Suicide Rate  
Suicide Rate is defined as the total number of 
suicides reported per 1,00,000 population during 
reference year. 
3.6.1 Death Rate due to Road 
Traffic Accidents  
The indicator is defined as the number of persons 
died due to road accidents calculated as rate per 
1,00,000 population during reference year. 
3.7.3 
Percentage of 
institutional deliveries 
out of total deliveries 
reported 
The indicator is defined as the percentage of 
deliveries in a health facility during the period for 
five years or one year. 
3.7.4 
Modern family planning 
methods used by married 
women  
The indicator is defined as the percentage of married 
women aged 15 -49 years who use any modern 
method of family planning. 
3.c.1 
Total physicians, nurses 
and midwives per 10,000 
population 
The indicator is defined as the number of physicians, 
nurses and midwives per 10,000 population. 
3.8.2 
Monthly Per capita Out 
of Pocket Expenditure 
on Health as a share of 
monthly per capita 
consumption 
expenditure 
Analysis of this indicator has not been done here due 
to data available only for one -year (2020-21) i.e.no 
progressive data (year on year). 
 
Source: Information furnished by HFW 
 
Chart 9.1: Maternal Mortality Rate (3.1.1), Under 5 mortality rate (3.2.1), TB 
cases per lakh (3.3.2), Suicide Rate (3.4.2) and Death Rate due to 
Accidents (3.6.1) during 2015-21 
 
Source: SDG Index Report 2020-21 
 
97
36
177
10.4 11.56
97
31.5
118
17.7 16.34
92
29.5
135
17.1 16.6
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
3.1.1 3.2.1 3.3.2 3.4.2 3.6.1
Value of Indicators
Indicator Number
National Target 2015-16 2020-21

Chapter 9: Sustainable Development Goal 3 
139 
Karnataka has made progress in several areas related to healthcare, including 
improvements in maternal and child health. However, as per the SDG India Index, 
the suicide rate in Karnataka per lakh population was 17.7 during the period 2015-
16. Though the rate has marginally reduced to 17.1 per lakh population during 
2020-21, it is still higher than the national average of 10.4. 
 
SDG Goal - 3 aims to reduce death rate due to road traffic accidents to 5.81 per 
lakh population by the year 2030. As per SDG India Index 2020-21 death rate in 
Karnataka was 16.60 per lakh population while the national average was 11.56 
per lakh. GoK set a target for reducing the number of suicide cases to less than 10 
per lakh population by the year 2022 and five per lakh population by year 2030. 
 
Chart 9.2: Percentage immunized children (3.2.3), Percentage of institutional 
deliveries (3.7.3), usage of modern family planning methods (3.7.4), 
availability of total physicians, nurses and midwives (3.c.1) during 
2015-21 under SDG-3 
 
Source: NHFS 4  (October 2017),  NHFS 5 (September 2021)  and Karnataka SDG Vision 
Document (February 2020). 
As could be seen from the above, the health indicators show a positive trend. The 
usage of modern family planning methods increased from 51.3 during 2015-16 to 
68.2 per cent during 2020-21, which was higher than the national target. GoK had 
set a target for usage of family planning methods to 60 per cent by the year 2022 
and 70 per cent by the 2030. 
 
77
88.6
56.5
37
62.6
94.3
51.3
0
84.1
97
68.2 70
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
3.2.3 3.7.3 3.7.4 3.c.1
Value of Indicators
Indicator number
National Target 2015-16 2020-21

PA on Public Health Infrastructure and Management of Health Services 
140 
Availability of physicians in the State per 10,000 population was 70 which was 
higher than the national target of 37. The target set by GoK for total physicians in 
the State by the year 2022 and 2030 was 170 and 350 respectively. Audit observed 
shortage of about 29 per cent of doctors in the HFWD and 38 per cent in DME. 
Recommendations 
 
26. The State Government should ensure that the steps be taken to formulate 
a comprehensive plan to achieve the targets under SDG-3.  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
Bengaluru           (Shanthi Priya S) 
               Principal Accountant General (Audit I) 
                                   Karnataka  
 
 
 
 
Countersigned 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi                                                  (Girish Chandra Murmu) 
       Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
The   28 Oct 2024
The   29 Oct 2024  

 
 
 
 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 

Appendices 
141 
Appendix-1.1 
(Reference: Paragraph no. 1.8.1/Page 8) 
List of test checked health institutions 
CHCs: In the test checked taluks (Periyapatna, Kalaghatagi and Navalgund), there were no CHCs, so PHCs were selected in place of CHCs . And the UHCs under ULBs are 
considered as CHCs. Total number of CHCs-11
District 
Tertiary Care Hospital Secondary Care Hospital Primary Care 
Hospital 
Super-
speciality 
Hospital 
(02) 
Medical 
College 
(03) 
District 
Level 
Hospitals 
(03) 
AYUSH 
(02) 
Taluk Level 
Hospital 
(10) 
CHCs 
(06) 
Urban Health Centres 
(05) 
PHCs 
(14) 
Bengaluru 
Urban 
Indira Gandhi 
Institute of 
Child Health 
Victoria 
Hospital 
K C 
General 
Hospital 
Govt. Unani 
Hospital 
Yelahanka and 
K R Puram 
Kengeri and 
Avalahalli 
BBMP Shanthinagar Maternity 
Home, BBMP Halasuru 
Referral Hospital, BBMP DJ.  
Halli Maternity Home, BBMP 
Sirsi Road Maternity Home, 
Kannalli and 
Kannur 
Ballari - - DH Ballari - Kudligi and 
Sandur 
Kotturu and 
Torangallu - Allur and 
Chornur 
Dharwad DIMHANS KIMS - - Kalaghatagi 
and Navalgund - HDMC Maternity Hospital, 
Dharwad 
GH Koppa, 
Mukkal, Annigeri 
and Morab 
Kolar - - DH Kolar - Bangarpet and 
Srinivasapura Gowni palli  
Addagal, 
Thoppanhalli and 
Budikote 
Mysuru - MMCRI - 
Ayurvedic 
Medical 
College & 
Hospital 
H D Kote and 
Periyapatna Sargur  
Badagalapura, 
Bettadapura and 
Kittur 

Appendices 
142 
Appendix-2.1 
(Reference: Paragraph no. 2.1/Page 13) 
Statement showing assessment of human resources w.r.t. IPHS norms 
  
Name of post 
Essential number of staff as per IPHS-
2012 
Sanctioned strength of the facility as per 
State Government Norms 
Up to 
100 
Bedded 
101 to 
200 
Bedded 
201 to 
300 
Bedded 
301 to 
400 
Bedded 
100 
Bedded 
150 
Bedded 
250 
Bedded 
300 
Bedded 
Doctors/Specialists 29+3 34+3 50 58 16 19 31 35 
Staff nurse 45 90 135 180 21 22 66 66 
Pharmacist 4+1 6+1 8+1 10+1 3 2 6 6 
Lab Technician 6 9 12 15 2 3 6 6 
Radiology 
Technician/Radiographer 2 3 5 7 2 3 5 5 
Blood Bank In- charge 
(Doctor– Pathologist) - - 1 1 - - -  
ECG Tech/Eco 1 2 3 4 - - 1 1 
Audio metrician - - 1 1 - -   
Optha. Astt. 1 1 2 2 1 1 1 1 
EEG Tech - - 1 1 - -   
Dietician 1 1 1 1 - -   
Physiotherapist 1 1 2 2 - - 2 2 
O.T. technician 4 6 8 12 - -   
CSSD Astt. 1 1 2 2 - -   
Social Worker 2 3 4 5 - - 3 3 
Counsellor 1 1 2 2 - - - - 
Dermatology Technician - - 1 1 - - - - 
Cyto-Technician - - 1 1 - - - - 
Dental Technician 1 1 2 2 - - 1 1 
Rehabilitation Therapist 1 1 2 2 - - - - 

Appendices 
143 
Appendix-2.2 
(Reference: Paragraph no. 2.2.2 /Page 15) 
Status of the specific Manpower Positions in the HFWD 
 
Post Name Sanctioned 
Posts 
Working 
Strength 
Vacant 
Posts 
Vacancy 
(Percentage) 
Medical Officer 4,323 2,831 1,492 34.51 
Staff Nurse 9,492 6,188 3,304 34.81 
Sr./Jr. Health Assistant (Male) 6,039 4,101 1,938 32.09 
Medical Lab Technologists 3,718 1,970 1,748 47.01 
Pharmacists 2,896 1,512 1,384 47.79 
FDA/SDA/Typist 5,478 3,240 2,238 40.85 
Dental Surgeon/Dentist 423 407 16 3.78 
Group D/Hospital Attendant Grd. I/II 16,778 5,114 11,664 69.52 
Sr./Jr. Health Assistant (Female) 11,284 6,685 4,599 40.76 
Radiographer/ Ultrasound Technician 623 463 160 25.68 
Senior Medical Officer/Specialist/Super 
Specialist 2,833 2,478 355 12.53 
Sr. Pharmacist 536 225 311 58.02 
Driver 1,665 955 710 42.64 
Statistical Assistant/Asst. Statistical 
Officer 109 47 62 56.88 
Junior Auditor/Auditor 5 0 5 100.00 
Account Assistant 11 4 7 63.64 
Account Superintendent 9 5 4 44.44 
Office Superintendent 605 428 177 29.26 
Assistant Administrative Officer 222 179 43 19.37 
Health Programme Officer 497 289 208 41.85 
Health Supervisor 110 11 99 90.00 
Senior Food Safety Officer 34 4 30 88.24 
Senior Health Supervisor 76 9 67 88.16 
Others 2,155 795 1,360 63.10 
Total 69,921 37,940 31,981 45.74 
  

Appendices 
144 
Appendix-2.3 
(Reference: Paragraph no. 2.3/Page 22) 
District wise vacancy position of manpower  (in per cent) in Karnataka 
 
                                                                                                           (in per cent) 
District Doctor Nurse Paramedics Others 
Bidar 23.66 36.59 12.21 46.30 
Kalaburagi 27.05 34.67 9.33 26.87 
Vijayapura 33.33 17.24 17.86 34.75 
Yadagiri 40.58 25.95 15.92 29.63 
Raichur 42.11 26.11 17.32 31.08 
Bagalkote 28.36 18.58 16.40 33.76 
Belagavi 37.97 34.93 49.51 54.41 
Koppal 37.41 34.05 18.12 47.38 


Appendices 
145 
District Doctor Nurse Paramedics Others 
Gadag 47.83 32.29 24.23 57.86 
Dharwad 12.82 26.09 29.86 28.14 
Ballari 31.19 40.76 22.39 39.38 
Haveri 35.79 36 39.72 57.65 
Uttara Kannada 47.06 29.43 53.43 76.27 
Shivamogga 38.43 35.19 44.22 73.46 
Davanagere 14.60 36.65 26.77 35.42 
Chitradurga 28.41 29.98 27.29 50.50 
Chikkamagaluru 44.87 39.64 56.33 60.21 
Udupi 14.86 28.82 56.76 64.79 
Tumakuru 30.70 50 48.34 68.66 
Chikkaballapura 18.54 58.90 61.13 62.88 
Dakshin Kannada 27.36 25.13 54.35 49.49 
Hassan 31.81 35.40 55.58 71.52 
Bengaluru Rural 11.36 36.26 40.98 60.42 
Bengaluru Urban 3.55 27.61 35.95 30.68 
Ramanagara 16.57 54.91 42.83 51.82 
Kolar 23.71 45.10 60.63 48.94 
Mandya 24.83 51.34 53.30 68.25 
Mysuru 12.45 33.33 54.57 59.79 
Kodagu 50 38.16 71.33 82.25 
Chamarajanagara 26.95 34.48 72.80 80.19 
 
 

Appendices 
146 
Appendix-2.4 
(Reference: Paragraph no. 2.3.3 /Page 27) 
Status of the working of the specialists’ doctors in the districts   
Division District 
CHCs THs DHs 
SS 
PIP 
Vacancy 
SS 
PIP 
Vacancy 
SS 
PIP 
Vacancy 
Bangalore 
Division 
Bangalore Urban 15 17 -2 27 32 -5 109 137 -28 
Bangalore Rural* 6 8 -2 42 39 3 0 0 0 
Chikkaballapura 6 6 0 55 54 1 27 31 -4 
Chitradurga 35 21 14 53 41 12 35 28 7 
Davanagere 12 11 1 41 31 10 38 35 3 
Kolar 12 5 7 39 36 3 30 32 -2 
Ramanagara 12 16 -4 30 33 -3 22 21 1 
Shivamogga* 21 15 6 87 57 30 0 0 0 
Tumakuru* 12 11 1 104 94 10 0 0 0 
Mysuru 
Division 
Chikkamagaluru 18 9 9 56 41 15 28 24 4 
Chamarajanagara* 15 15 0 35 24 11 0 0 0 
Dakshin Kannada 54 32 22 11 10 1 29 31 -2 
Hassan* 45 32 13 83 65 18 0 0 0 
Shivamogga* 36 16 20 22 14 8 0 0 0 
Mandya* 30 34 -4 59 59 0 0 0 0 
Mysuru* 27 29 -2 62 71 -9 0 0 0 
Udupi 18 19 -1 20 21 -1 16 13 3 
Belagavi 
Division 
Bagalakote 18 12 6 49 39 10 28 28 0 
Belagavi* 51 39 12 98 70 28 0 0 0 
Dharwad 0 0 0 29 19 10 21 26 -5 
Gadag* 6 3 3 38 26 12 0 0 0 
Haveri 15 9 6 59 49 10 48 40 8 
Uttara Kannada* 6 2 4 93 60 33 0 0 0 
Vijayapura 27 19 8 44 21 23 30 31 -1 
Kalaburagi 
Division 
Ballari 42 21 21 59 47 12 26 25 1 
Bidar* 24 21 3 50 41 9 0 0 0 
Kalaburagi* 39 27 12 57 46 11 0 0 0 
Koppal* 27 13 14 29 19 10 0 0 0 
Raichur* 18 9 9 39 28 11 0 0 0 
Vijayanagara* 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Yadgir* 18 10 8 21 11 10 16 16 0 
Total   665 481 184 1,491 1,198 293 503 518 -15 
             *No DHs in these districts.

Appendices 
147 
Appendix-2.5 
(Reference: Paragraph no. 2.4/Page 31) 
Non-functioning of the services due to non-availability of the staff in test checked HIs 
 
Sl. 
No. Name of the HIs Non-availability of the staff Audit Remarks 
1 UHC Shanthinagar Dentist Services were not available 
2 
TH Kalaghatagi 
Orthopaedist (January2018 to 
January/2022) and 
Anaesthetist (2016-17 to June 
2021) 
Services were not functional on regular basis. 
3 Trained Medical Officer/blood 
storage staff 
License of the blood storage unit was not 
renewed since January2020. 
4 PHC Mukkal Staff nurse Night shift was not operational from July2019 
to May 2021 
5 CHC Sargur OBG, Paediatric doctor and 
anaesthetist No C -section70 operation was conducted. 
6 
CHC Sargur and PHCs 
Badagalapura, Kittur 
 
Pharmacist Staff nurses were dispensing the drugs to the 
patients. 
7 PHC Annigeri Pharmacist Group D was performing the duties of the 
pharmacist. 
8 
Nursing School and 
College attached to 
MMCRI 
No sanctioned post of nurses 
17 staff nurses were deputed from MMCRI 
attached hospital where already more than 80 
per cent shortage of staff nurses. 
9 Indira Gandhi Institute 
of Child Health Shortage of manpower. 
Surgeries were not performed on current basis, 
i.e., as, and when it was required, but conducted 
by providing time slot on a later date by 
recreating waiting list of patients (currently up 
to 3 months waiting period). 
10 PHC Kittur Lab Technician Non -conduct of pathological tests. 
11 PHC Badagalapura Pharmacist 
Pharmacist from other health centre visited the 
PHC once in a week. 
 
  
 
70 Caesarean Section  

Appendices 
148 
Appendix 3.1 
(Reference: Paragraph No. 3.1 / Page 35) 
Availability of OPD Services in test-checked Health Institutions 
  
Speciality Services 
(OPD) 
Ballari Bangalore Urban Dharwad Kolar Mysuru 
DH Ballari 
TH Kudligi 
TH Sandur 
Victoria 
Hospital 
(Medical 
College 
attached 
hospital) 
K C General 
Hospital (DH) 
TH K R Puram 
TH Yelahanka 
KIMS 
Hubballi (MC) 
TH 
Kalaghatagi 
TH Navalgund 
DH Kolar 
TH Bangarpet 
TH 
Srinivasapura 
K R Hospital 
TH H D Kote 
TH 
Periyapatna 
ENT A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A 
General Medicine A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A 
Pediatrics A A N
A A * A A A A A NA A A A A A A 
General Surgery A A A A A A A A A NA A NA A A A A 
Ophthalmology A N
A 
N
A A * A A A A A A A A A A A A 
Dental A A A A * A A A A A A A A A A A A 
Obstetric A A A A * A NA A A NA NA A A A A A A 
Gynecology A A A A * A A A A NA A A A A A
* A A 
Psychiatry71 A N
A 
N
A A A NA A A NA A A A NA A
* NA NA 
Orthopedics A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A 
Dermatology & 72 
Venereology A N
A 
N
A A A A A A NA NA A A A A A A 
 
A-Available; NA-Not Available 
A* Services are available at attached hospitals viz. Bangalore Dental College, Minto Eye Hospital and Vani Vilas Hospital (Mother and Child Hospital), 
Bangalore. And    Cheluvamba Hospital (Mother and Child Hospital), Mysore
 
71 Desirable in Taluk Hospitals 
72 Desirable in Taluk and District Hospitals 

Appendices 
149 
Appendix 3.2 
(Reference Paragraph no. 3.2.6.1/Page 45) 
Management of OT services in test checked Health institutions 
Description 
Ballari Bangalore Urban Dharwad Kolar Mysuru 
DH Ballari 
TH 
 Kudligi 
TH  
Sandur 
K C General 
Hospital 
TH  
K R Puram 
TH 
 Yelahanka 
TH 
Kalaghatagi 
TH 
 Navalgund 
DH  
Kolar 
TH  
Bangarpet 
TH 
Srinivasapura 
TH 
 H D Kote 
TH 
Periyapatna 
OT have convenient relationship with surgical ward, 
intensive care unit, radiology, pathology, blood bank and 
CSSD 
A A A A A A A A A A A A A 
Access to facility is provided without any physical barrier 
and friendly to people with disabilities A A A A A A A A A A A A A 
OT have piped suction and medical gases, electric supply 
heating, air-conditioning, ventilation A A A A A A A A A A A A A 
Patient's records and clinical information is maintained A A A A A A A A A A A A A 
Has defined and established grievance redressal system in 
place A NA A A A A A A A A A A NA 
Whether all equipment is covered under AMC including 
preventive maintenance A NA A A A A A NA NA A A NA NA 
Whether the facility has established procedure for internal 
and external calibrations of measuring equipment A NA A A A A A NA NA A A NA NA 
                        A-Available; NA-Not Available 

Appendices 
150 
Appendix 3.3 (a) 
(Reference Paragraph no. 3.2.6.2/Page 45) 
Average number of surgeries per surgeon in test checked SS/MC/DH 
Name of Hospital Year 
General ENT Ortho Eye 
No. of 
Surgeons 
Avg. No. 
of 
surgeries 
No. of 
Surgeons 
Avg. No. 
of 
surgeries 
No. of 
Surgeons 
Avg. No. 
of 
surgeries 
No. of 
Surgeons 
Avg. No. 
of 
surgeries 
IGICH (SS) 
2016-17 7 2,495 1 253 2 661 1 11 
2017-18 7 2,626 1 226 2 763 1 11 
2018-19 7 2,697 1 244 2 655 1 20 
2019-20 7 1,888 1 130 2 415 1 8 
2020-21 7 2,466 1 377 2 547 1 12 
2021-22 7 3,096 1 309 2 796 1 15 
2022-23 7 3,018 1 292 2 878 1 16 
KIMS Hubballi (MC) 
2016-17 29 37 11 6 16 4 12 4 
2017-18 29 36 10 6 15 4 11 4 
2018-19 28 39 12 6 16 5 12 3 
2019-20 25 40 14 5 18 5 13 4 
2020-21 30 25 13 2 20 3 13 2 
2021-22 24 38 12 4 17 5 12 4 
2022-23 27 52 13 6 18 7 13 7 
MMCRI (K R Hospital) 
(MC) 
2016-17 22 169 9 191 13 205 0 0 
2017-18 21 181 9 172 13 202 0 0 
2018-19 24 160 10 170 12 237 0 0 
2019-20 23 160 10 144 12 189 0 0 
2020-21 20 80 11 51 11 87 10 270 
2021-22 20 114 10 78 11 124 10 280 
2022-23 21 181 10 133 11 165 9 607 
Victoria Hospital (MC) 
2016-17 17 1,794 9 1,472 12 1,128 21 407 
2017-18 20 1,724 9 1,502 12 1,180 33 283 
2018-19 18 1,799 9 1,630 15 1,236 33 317 
2019-20 17 1,910 9 1,493 18 1,328 34 194 
2020-21 17 371 8 79 18 224 35 65 
2021-22 16 1,075 7 623 24 1,046 34 208 
2022-23 14 1,722 10 1,234 24 1,560 35 280 
DH Ballari 
2016-17 6 387 Only OBG Services available 
2017-18 7 315 1 9 2 4 1 0 
2018-19 7 363 1 39 2 13 1 2 
2019-20 7 437 1 158 2 27 1 22 
2020-21 6 268 Due to Covid, NA other surgeries were performed except OBG 
2021-22 6 396 1 205 2 446 1 149 
2022-23 6 769 1 295 2 290 1 401 
2016-17 7 127 3 75 5 66 2 184 

Appendices 
151 
Name of Hospital Year 
General ENT Ortho Eye 
No. of 
Surgeons 
Avg. No. 
of 
surgeries 
No. of 
Surgeons 
Avg. No. 
of 
surgeries 
No. of 
Surgeons 
Avg. No. 
of 
surgeries 
No. of 
Surgeons 
Avg. No. 
of 
surgeries 
K C General Hospital 
(DH) 
2017-18 7 149 3 77 5 74 2 214 
2018-19 7 160 3 77 5 97 2 350 
2019-20 7 148 3 59 4 126 2 328 
2020-21 8 32 2 18 5 20 2 46 
2021-22 7 87 3 49 5 762 3 167 
2022-23 7 128 3 61 4 136 3 220 
DH Kolar 
2016-17 3 206 1 20 1 118 2 93 
2017-18 2 272 1 17 1 84 3 87 
2018-19 2 181 1 58 2 28 3 100 
2019-20 3 96 2 72 3 126 3 99 
2020-21 3 82 2 19 3 115 3 14 
2021-22 4 85 2 42 2 217 3 83 
2022-23 4 133 2 76 2 282 3 214 

Appendices 
152 
   Appendix 3.3(b) 
(Reference Paragraph no. 3.2.6.2 /Page 45) 
Average number of surgeries per surgeon in test checked TH 
Name of Hospital Year 
General ENT Ortho Eye 
No. of 
surgeons 
Avg. No. 
of 
surgeries 
No. of 
surgeons 
Avg. No. 
of 
surgeries 
No. of 
surgeons 
Avg. No. 
of 
surgeries 
No. of 
surgeons 
Avg. No. 
of 
surgeries 
Bangarpet 
2016-17 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 
2017-18 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 
2018-19 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 
2019-20 1 19 1 18 1 NA 1 206 
2020-21 1 17 1 11 1 NA 1 161 
2021-22 1 40 1 38 1 22 1 284 
2022-23 1 66 1 99 1 118 1 526 
HD Kote 
2016-17 1 400 1 0 1 0 1 0 
2017-18 1 470 1 7 1 26 1 0 
2018-19 1 486 1 20 1 85 1 0 
2019-20 1 459 1 15 1 74 1 0 
2020-21 1 581 1 2 1 58 1 0 
2021-22 1 444 1 8 1 47 1 0 
2022-23 1 570 1 27 1 247 1 0 
Kalaghatagi 
2016-17 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
2017-18 1 161 0 0 0 0 0 0 
2018-19 1 268 0 0 1 31 1 0 
2019-20 1 484 0 0 1 65 1 27 
2020-21 1 359 0 0 0 0 1 35 
2021-22 1 399 1 6 1 0 1 89 
2022-23 1 322 1 22 1 2 1 106 
K R Puram 
2016-17 1 116 1 14 1 96 1 38 
2017-18 1 122 1 37 1 162 1 30 
2018-19 1 134 1 59 1 85 1 5 
2019-20 1 135 1 43 1 89 1 4 
2020-21 1 105 1 45 1 188 1 4 
2021-22 1 179 1 30 1 185 1 3 
2022-23 1 108 1 20 1 167 1 8 
Kudligi 
2016-17 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
2017-18 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
2018-19 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
2019-20 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
2020-21 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
2021-22 1 24 1 16 1 16 0 0 
2022-23 1 37 1 20 1 28 0 0 

Appendices 
153 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NA-Not Available 
Name of Hospital Year 
General ENT Ortho Eye 
No. of 
surgeons 
Avg. No. 
of 
surgeries 
No. of 
surgeons 
Avg. No. 
of 
surgeries 
No. of 
surgeons 
Avg. No. 
of 
surgeries 
No. of 
surgeons 
Avg. No. 
of 
surgeries 
Navalgund 
2016-17 1 5 1 6 1 5 1 43 
2017-18 1 6 1 7 1 6 1 39 
2018-19 1 114 1 13 1 29 1 54 
2019-20 1 82 1 2 1 12 1 NA 
2020-21 1 19 1 2 1 31 1 NA 
2021-22 1 39 1 11 1 13 1 9 
2022-23 1 122 1 14 1 178 1 63 
Periyapatna 
2016-17 1 27 1 0 1 17 0 0 
2017-18 1 40 1 0 1 11 0 0 
2018-19 1 37 1 0 1 47 0 0 
2019-20 1 18 1 0 1 52 1 32 
2020-21 1 33 1 21 1 17 1 131 
2021-22 1 96 1 30 1 20 1 258 
2022-23 1 409 1 17 1 37 1 326 
Sandur 
2016-17 1 1,272 NA NA NA NA NA NA 
2017-18 1 1,299 NA NA NA NA NA NA 
2018-19 1 1,595 1 NA 1 3 1 NA 
2019-20 1 1,575 1 NA 1 7 1 15 
2020-21 1 1,705 1 NA 1 16 1 24 
2021-22 1 1,698 1 5 1 25 1 20 
2022-23 1 1,385 1 2 1 20 1 321 
Srinivasapura 
2016-17 1 704 1 9 1 0 1 0 
2017-18 1 887 1 42 1 13 1 0 
2018-19 1 514 1 15 1 5 1 0 
2019-20 1 1,152 1 9 1 14 1 0 
2020-21 1 1,239 0 0 1 32 0 0 
2021-22 1 1,179 0 0 1 32 1 0 
2022-23 1 994 0 0 1 39 1 0 
Yelahanka 
2016-17 1 238 1 0 1 11 1 77 
2017-18 1 61 1 0 1 0 1 75 
2018-19 1 193 1 84 1 49 1 101 
2019-20 1 67 1 39 1 32 1 31 
2020-21 1 121 1 52 1 26 1 26 
2021-22 1 151 1 92 1 28 1 60 
2022-23 1 79 1 69 1 84 1 124 

Appendices 
154 
Appendix – 3.4 
(Reference: Paragraph – 3.7/Page 67) 
Statement showing non-compliance of provisions for blood bank/blood 
storage units in test checked Health Institutions 
Sl. 
No. Requirement 
Non-compliance of provisions (out of 
5 DHs where blood bank facility 
available) 
Tertiary care 
(SS/MC) 
Secondary Care 
(DH/TH) 
1 
Location of Blood Bank near to Pathology 
Department, Operation Theatre 
Department, ICU and Emergency and 
Accident department 
KR hospital 
 
DH Kolar, THs 
Bangarpet, KR Puram, 
Kalaghatagi 
2 
Display of Services provided & schedule of 
charges displayed at the entrance of 
Department 
Victoria 
hospital TH Periyapatna 
3 Display of availability of Blood Group 
prominently in the Blood Bank - DH Kolar, TH 
Periyapatna 
4 Validation of Blood bank test results from 
external labs on regular basis 
KR Hospital 
Victoria 
hospital 
THs Bangarpet, HD 
Kote, KR Puram, 
Kalaghatagi, 
Periyapatna. 
Yelahanka 
5 Availability of checks to prevent expiry of 
Blood or Blood components 
KIMS hospital 
Victoria 
hospital 
TH Yelahanka 
6 Availability of checks in place for reduction 
of waste 
KIMS hospital 
Victoria 
hospital 
TH Yelahanka 
7 Adequacy of staff  
KR hospital 
Victoria 
hospital 
KC General and DH 
Kolar, THs KR 
Puram, Kalaghatagi, 
Yelahanka 
8 Adherence of Blood Bank to NACO 
guidelines, Drugs and Cosmetics, Act KR hospital 
THs HD Kote, KR 
Puram, Periyapatna, 
Yelahanka 
Source: Information furnished by the test checked HIs  

Appendices 
155 
Appendix–3.5 
(Reference:  Paragraph no. 3.8.9/Page 79) 
Availability of essential equipment in Dialysis unit in the test checked 
Health Institutions 
Sl. No. Hospital 
Type 
Resuscitation 
equipment 
Oxygen 
cylinders with 
flow meter 
Suction 
apparatus 
Defibrillator 
ECG Machine 
Nebulizer 
Dialyzer Unit 
ACT Machine 
Cardiac 
Monitor 
1 Ballari DH Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes No No 
2 K C General  DH Yes Yes Yes Yes No Yes Yes No Yes 
3 SNR, Kolar DH No No No Yes No No No No No 
4 HD Kote TH Yes Yes No No Yes Yes No No No 
5 K R Puram  TH No Yes No Yes Yes Yes Yes No No 
6 Kalaghatagi TH No Yes No No Yes Yes No No No 
7 Kudligi TH Yes Yes No No Yes Yes Yes No No 
8 Navalgund TH No Yes No No Yes Yes No Yes No 
9 Periyapatna TH Yes Yes No No Yes Yes Yes No No 
10 Srinivasapura TH No No No No Yes Yes Yes No No 
11 Yelahanka TH No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes No No No 
Source: Information furnished by the test checked HIs

Appendices 
156 
Appendix-4.1 
(Reference: Paragraph no. 4.2.2/Page 83) 
Illustrative cases where drugs procured locally at the higher rates by the test checked health institutions   
                        (Amount in ₹) 
 
 
S.No. Drug Name Year Pack 
Size 
Rate per 
unit  
(KSMSCL) 
Rate per unit               
(Local 
Purchase) 
Qty Difference 
per unit 
Total 
Difference 
Amount 
Difference     
( in per 
cent) 
1 Blood transfusion set NA 1x1 2017-18 1 7.56 18.5 5,000 10.94 54,700 144.7 
2 Metoclopramide Injection 5mg/ml 1x2ml 2017-18 1 1.7 4.36 200 2.66 532 156.5 
3 Ondansetron Injection 2mg/ml 1x2ml 2017-18 1 1.85 9.95 200 8.1 1620 437.8 
4 Suction catheter NA 10 1x1 2017-18 1 3.89 28.44 50 24.55 1,227.5 631.1 
5 Urine collection bag with valve outlet. NA 1.5litre 1x1 2017-18 1 15.6 35 50 19.4 970 124.4 
6 Dextrose Injection 25% 1x100ml 2017-18 1 10.94 16.11 25 5.17 129.25 47.3 
7 Surgical blade NA 22 1x100 2017-18 1 1.99 3.6 200 1.61 322 80.9 
8 Sterile disposable IV cannula with inj port NA 24G 1x1 2017-18 1 5.18 17.06 100 11.88 1,188 229.3 
9 Dextrose Injection 10% 1x500ml 2017-18 1 17.99 25.59 25 7.6 190 42.2 
10 Hydrocortisone Inj. 2019-20 1 12 34 1,900 22 41,800 183.3 
11 Diclofenac Inj.25mg 2019-20 1 3.81 3.9 2,400 0.09 216 2.4 
12 Diclofenac Inj. 3 ml 2019-20 1 3.81 4 8,000 0.19 1520 5.0 
13 Pantoprazole Inj. 2019-20 1 4.89 40 1,500 35.11 52,665 718.0 
14 Tramadol Inj. 2 ml 2019-20 1 2.15 19 1,000 16.85 16,850 783.7 
15 Amikacin 500 mg 2019-20 1 17.74 77 1,400 59.26 82,964 334.0 
16 Ceftriaxone 1 g Inj. 2019-20 1 33.01 44.6 584 11.59 6,768.56 35.1 
17 Anti-Rabies Vaccine 2.5 IV 2019-20 1 241 330 50 89 4,450 36.90 

Appendices 
157 
Appendix-4.2 
(Reference: Paragraph no. 4.2.6/Page 85) 
Availability of essential drugs and medicines in the health institutions  
as on 30 June 2022 
Chart 1: Availability of essential drugs at the District Hospitals of the test checked 
Districts 
 
Chart 2: Availability of essential drugs at the Test checked Taluk Hospitals 
 
Chart 3: Availability of essential drugs at the CHCs 
 
EDL-Essential Drug List; VEDL-Very Essential Drug List; MEDL- Most Essential Drug List
47 41
25
50
30
14 14 8 18 13
69 68
31
74
47
128
28
115
0
50
100
150
Bengaluru Urban Bellary Dharwad Kolar Mysuru
Availability of Essential Drugs vs To be Available 
EDL Availability VEDL Availability MEDL Availability
EDL Std VEDL Std MEDL Std
27
35
28 24
35 34 31
23 24 24
15 14 15 12 12 15 12 14 11 15
57 61
68
49
62 66
51
41 43
57
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
EDL
VEDL
MEDL
25
17 19 21
5
15 13 8
14
1
46 43
28
34
9
64 64 64 64 64
28
28 28 28 28
81 81 81 81 81
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Avallahalli Kottur Thorangal Gowna palli Saragur
K R Puram Kudligi Sandur Srinivasapura H D Kote
EDL Availability
VEDL Availability
MEDL Availability
EDL Std
VEDL Std
MEDL Std

Appendices 
158 
Appendix-4.3 
(Reference: Paragraph no. 4.2.6/Page 85) 
Availability of the Drugs73 in the various wards of the test checked Health Institutions 
 
73 Average of the test checked months (May 2016, August 2017, November 2018, February 2019, May 2020 and November 2020). 
74 Stock Register for the months May 2016, August 2017, May 2020 and November 2020 not maintained.  
Sl. 
No. Name of the HI Type Drugs in IPD Drugs in OT Drugs in ICU Drugs in Emergency 
Prescribed Available Prescribed Available Prescribed Available Prescribed Available 
1 KIMS, Hubballi MC 14 11 22 17 14 10 21 17 
2 Mysuru Medical College MC 14 9 22 16 14 9 21 13 
3 Victoria Hospital 74 
Bengaluru MC 14 2 22 7 14 7 21 12 
4 DH, Ballari DH 14 10 22 17 14 10 21 Not 
Available 
5 K C General DH Bengaluru 
Urban DH 14 Not 
Available 22 15 14 9 21 16 
6  Kolar DH 14 11 22 15 14 10 21 16 
7 Bangarpet TH 14 14 22 19 14 Not 
Available 21 19 
8 HD Kote TH 14 8 22 10 14 8 21 15 
9 K R Puram TH 14 9 22 12 14 9 21 10 
10 Kalaghatagi TH 14 9 22 13 14 Not 
Available 21 16 
11 Kudligi TH 14 8 22 15 14 8 21 Not 
Available 
12 Navalgund TH 14 Not 
Available 22 Not 
Available 14 Not 
Available 21 15 
13 Periyapatna TH 14 9 22 12 14 9 21 11 
14 Sandur TH 14 8 22 15 14 8 21 Not 
Available 
15 Srinivasapura TH 14 11 22 16 14 11 21 16 
16 Yelahanka TH 14 11 22 14 14 8 21 Not 
Available 

Appendices 
159 
Appendix-4.4 
(Reference: Paragraph no. 4.3.3/Page 87) 
Statement showing delay in release of security lock 
 
Purchase Order 
Number  
WH 
Request 
to open 
lock date 
Lock 
Released 
On 
Drug Name Expiry 
Date 
WH 
Name FY Shelf 
Life 
KDLWS/2017-
18/PO/80 03.04.18 14.05.18 
Clotrimazole 
(Dusting) Powder 
1%w/w 1x30g 
Jan-18 Ballari 
WH 2018-19 -103 
KDLWS/2017-
18/PO/381 27.07.18 01.08.18 Paracetamol Tablet 
500mg 1x10x10 May-18 Ballari 
WH 2018-19 -62 
KDLWS/2019-
20/PO/161 03.08.20 04.08.20 
Oral Rehydration 
Salts Powder for 
solution Sodium 
Chloride 2.6, Glucose 
Anhydrous 13.5, 
Potassium Chloride 
1.5, Trisodium  
Citrate Dihydrate 2.9 
1x20.5g 
Jun-20 Mysuru 
WH 2020-21 -35 
KDLWS/2019-
20/PO/161 16.07.20 20.07.20 -do- May-20 Ballari 
WH 2020-21 -50 
-5KDLWS/2019-
20/PO/161 16.07.20 20.07.20 -do- May-20 Ballari 
WH 2020-21 -50 
KDLWS/2019-
20/PO/200 16.07.20 20.07.20 Paracetamol Tablet 
500mg 1x10x10 May-20 Ballari 
WH 2020-21 -50 
KDLWS/2019-
20/PO/199 16.07.20 20.07.20 Metformin Tablet 
500mg 1x10x10 Apr-20 Ballari 
WH 2020-21 -81 
KDLWS/2019-
20/PO/7 22.08.20 26.08.20 
Calcium carbonate 
with Vitamin D3 
Tablet 
500MG+250IU 
1x10x10 
Jun-20 Ballari 
WH 2020-21 -57 

Appendices 
160 
Appendix 4.5(a) 
 (Reference: Paragraph no. 4.3.5/Page 88) 
Availability of Drugs, Medicines, Equipment and Other Consumables in test checked 
MC/DH 
 
SI 
No. Descriptions 
Number 
required 
as per 
IPHS 
2012 
BMCRI 
KIMS 
Medical 
College 
and 
Hospital 
MMCRI DH 
Ballari 
K C 
General 
Hospital 
Bengaluru 
DH 
Kolar 
1 Analgesics/Antipyretics/Anti 
Inflammatory 11 8 8 6 8 10 4 
2 Antibodies/ 
Chemotherapeutics 76 22 28 22 40 75 31 
3 Anti Diarrheal 6 1 1 1 2 6 2 
4 Dressing material/ Antiseptic 
Ointment lotion 28 18 20 13 17 24 13 
5 Infusion fluids 14 8 11 8 11 14 10 
6 Eye and ENT 25 1 8 2 7 25 7 
7 Antihistamines/ Anti 
Allergic 12 10 9 8 8 12 8 
8 Drugs acting on digestive 
system 20 12 12 5 8 18 7 
9 Drugs related to 
Haemopoietic system 4 2 3 2 3 4 4 
10 Drugs acting on 
cardiovascular system 26 15 18 8 16 26 15 
11 
Drugs acting on 
central/peripheral nervous 
system 
40 30 31 12 27 40 25 
12 Drugs acting on respiratory 
system 16 11 10 4 7 16 10 
13 Skin ointment/ lotions 23 6 8 2 6 23 9 
14 Drugs acting on Uro-genital 
system 5 4 5 3 5 5 4 
15 Drugs used in obstetrics and 
gynecology 35 15 24 12 22 35 14 
16 Hormonal Preparation 14 7 6 2 5 14 5 
17 Vitamins 24 13 19 7 16 24 8 
18 Other Drugs and material & 
miscellaneous items 115 40 41 28 47 83 39 
19 Emergency lifesaving drugs 
for SNCU 12 11 11 9 9 12 10 
20 Other essential medicines & 
supplies for SNCU 23 12 20 11 20 23 18 
 Total 529 246 293 165 284 489 243 

Appendices 
161 
Appendix 4.5(b) 
 (Reference: Paragraph no. 4.3.5/Page 88) 
Availability of drugs, lab reagents, consumables and Disposables in test checked THs 
Sl. 
No. Categories 
Number 
required as 
per IPHS 
2012 
Availability in test checked THs 
Bangarpet 
HD Kote 
K R Puram 
Kalaghatagi 
Kudligi 
Navalgund 
Periyapatna 
Sandur 
Srinivasapura 
Yelahanka 
1 Analgesics/Antipyretics/Anti 
Inflammatory 8 4 5 5 5 5 6 7 6 6 6 
2 Antibodies/ Chemotherapeutics 71 15 29 29 30 27 32 23 26 30 27 
3 Anti Diarrhoeal 5 1 2 1 1 2 1 1 3 1 1 
4 Dressing material/ Antiseptic 
Ointment lotion 24 12 7 12 11 12 15 12 16 12 12 
5 Infusion fluids 14 10 7 8 9 7 10 9 6 8 11 
6 Eye and ENT 23 3 5 4 8 4 6 4 4 5 10 
7 Antihistaminic/ Anti Allergic 10 6 7 6 6 5 7 7 6 6 6 
8 Drugs acting on digestive system 20 6 4 8 9 8 9 6 8 6 6 
9 Drugs related to Haemopoietic 
system 4 2 3 2 3 3 3 3 3 3 1 
10 Drugs acting on cardiovascular 
system 26 11 9 11 11 12 14 15 13 12 15 
11 Drugs acting on 
central/peripheral nervous system 40 23 18 19 18 23 21 21 22 20 21 

Appendices 
162 
Sl. 
No. Categories 
Number 
required as 
per IPHS 
2012 
Availability in test checked THs 
Bangarpet 
HD Kote 
K R Puram 
Kalaghatagi 
Kudligi 
Navalgund 
Periyapatna 
Sandur 
Srinivasapura 
Yelahanka 
12 Drugs acting on respiratory 
system 15 8 5 8 15 7 8 7 9 7 7 
13 Skin ointment/ lotions 18 5 3 4 7 7 9 6 4 4 5 
14 Drugs acting on Uro -genital 
system 5 3 1 4 2 3 4 3 4 2 3 
15 Drugs acting on uterus and female 
genital tracts 14 7 1 5 5 8 7 6 7 5 9 
16 Hormonal Preparation 14 3 5 3 3 5 4 4 6 5 1 
17 Vitamins 21 11 3 9 7 9 7 4 8 7 6 
18 Other Drugs and material & 
miscellaneous items 64 40 11 28 33 40 37 35 42 36 30 
19 Drug kit for sick and newborn & 
childcare 25 22 13 22 18 20 22 21 22 20 23 
 Total 421 192 138 188 201 207 222 194 215 195 200 
 
 

Appendices 
163 
 Appendix-4.6  
(Reference: Paragraph no. 4.4.1/Page 89) 
  Statement showing the drugs declared NSQ by KSDC  
 
  
Sl 
No. Batch No. Name of the 
Emp. Lab 
Name of the 
drugs 
Batch 
Qty 
Consumed 
Qty 
Stock 
on 
Hand 
Freeze Date 
1 K001 
 
Delhi Test 
House 
Loperamide 
Tablet 2mg 37,354 21,760 15,594 12.12.2018 
2 K002 Delhi Test 
House 
Loperamide 
Tablet 2mg 33,067 17,023 16,044 25.01.2019 
3 GT81226 Delhi Test 
House 
Mefenamic 
acid Tablet 
500mg 
3,415 335 3,080 06.03.2019 
4 MAZ65 Ozone 
Pharmaceuticals 
Carbamazepine 
Tablet 100mg 8,379 4,712 3,667 25.02.2019 
5 PET1803 Ozone 
Pharmaceuticals 
Pantoprazole 
Tablet 40mg 9,950 9,950 0 22.03.2019 
6 AHL674 Standard 
Analytical Lab 
Ibuprofen 
Syrup 
100mg/5ml 
14,248 9,420 4,828 22.03.2019 
 Total 1,06,413 63,200 43,213  

Appendices 
164 
Appendix-4.7 
(Reference: Paragraph no. 4.4.2/Page 90) 
 Storage of drugs, medicines, and surgical items  
 
  
Sl. 
No. Parameters SS/MC 
(05) 
DH/TH 
(13) 
CHC/PHC 
(25) 
Probable impact of 
not adhering to 
parameter 
1 Air-conditioned pharmacy 5 9 24 Loss of efficacy and 
shelf life of drugs 
2 Labelled shelves/racks 3 6 9 High turnover time in the 
disbursement of drugs  
3 Away from water and heat Nil Nil Nil Loss of efficacy and shelf 
life of drugs 
4 Drugs stored above the floor 3 5 11 -do- 
5 Drugs stored away from walls 3 6 12 -do- 
6 24-hour temperature recording of 
cold storage 1 1 7 -do- 
7 Display instructions for storage 
of vaccines Nil 6 6 -do- 
8 Functional temperature 
monitoring device in freezers 1 1 3 -do- 
9 Maintenance of temperature chart 
of deep freezers 2 1 4 -do- 
10 Drugs kept under lock and key 2 2 6 Misuse of costly drugs 
11 Poisons kept in a locked cup 
board 2 3 7 Unauthorised access to 
the dangerous drugs 
12 Expired drugs stored separately 2 2 3 Mixing of expired drugs 
with usable drugs 

Appendices 
165 
Appendix-4.8(a) 
(Reference: Paragraph no. 4.5.1/Page 90) 
Statement showing the availability of equipment in the test checked MCs/DHs  
as of January 2024 
 
 
75 The accessories being outdated are not being utilized by the Hospital. 
76 Not Applicable as there are separate specialised hospitals for Dental Care in the Campus. 
77 As per NHM Assessor’s Book. 
78 As per NHM Assessor’s Book. 
Sl.
No. Type 
Number as per 
IPHS 2012 
(Essential & 
Desirable) (301-
500 beds) 
Victoria 
Hospital 
MMCRI (KR 
Hospital) 
Mysuru 
K I M S, 
Hubballi 
DH Ballari 
K C General 
DH Kolar 
1 Imaging Equipment 12 9 11 8 10 8 8 
2 X-ray Room accessories 8 4 6 3 7 075  2 
3 Cardiopulmonary equipment 13  0 14 12 15 0 3 
4 
Labor Ward, Neo Natal and 
Special Newborn Care Unit 
(SNCU) Equipment 
28 23 25 13 25 21 24 
5  Special Newborn Care Unit 
Equipment 12 11 11 10 12 11 11 
6 Disinfection of Special Newborn 
Care Unit Equipment 13 9 9 6 10 6 5 
7 Immunization Equipment 16 10 9 13 16 13 12 
8 Ear Nose Throat Equipment 23 13 16 17 17 16 15 
9 Eye Equipment 27  27 24 22 20 18 21 
10 Dental Equipment 42 NA76 35 16 26 31 28 
11 Laboratory Equipment 87 80 50 29 62 38 45 
12 Endoscopy Equipment 8 4 2 7 2 6 2 
13 Anaesthesia Equipment 25 24 21 12 13 22 21 
14 Postmortem Equipment 9 9  5 6 8 0 4 
15 Operation Theatre Equipment 29  16 11 17 16 8 12 
16 ICU Equipment77 26 24 22 17 26 23 17 
17 Emergency Services Equipment78 14  14 13 12 14 14 11 
18 IPD Equipment 19 15  13 10 18 18 16 
TOTAL 411 186 297 230 317 253 257 

Appendices 
166 
Appendix-4.8(b) 
(Reference: Paragraph no. 4.5.1/Page 90) 
Statement showing the availability of equipment in the test checked THs as on January 2024. 
 
Sl. 
No. Type 
No. as per 
IPHS 2012 
(Essential) 
Bangarpet H D Kote K R Puram Kalaghatagi Kudligi Navalgund Periyapatna Sandur Srinivaspura Yelahanka 
1 Imaging Equipment 5 4 3 3 4 2 3 4 4 4 3 
2 X-ray Room accessories 6 3 6 2 6 5 2 5 6 2 3 
3 Cardiopulmonary 
equipment 11 8 8 8 10 8 7 6 9 11 9 
4 Labor Ward & Neo Natal 
Equipment 20 14 16 16 16 13 17 16 15 15 13 
5 Immunization Equipment 16 15 7 15 13 13 16 10 16 12 11 
6 Ear Nose Throat 
Equipment 17 7 5 1 0 4 1 4 5 3 6 
7 Eye Equipment 9 7 4 4 5 3 6 1 4 4 7 
8 Dental Equipment 4 2 4 4 4 3 4 4 4 4 4 
9 Operation Theatre 
Equipment 17 7 8 7 6 10 6 12 7 9 5 
10 Laboratory Equipment 32 23 13 16 15 17 18 17 14 27 24 
11 Surgical Equipment 29 23 23 20 17 19 14 24 21 22 20 
12 Endoscopy Equipment 3 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 
13 Anaesthesia Equipment 14 12 8 14 14 12 8 9 12 12 13 
14 Postmortem Equipment 10 8 5 0 0 0 0 3 10 8 6 
TOTAL 193 135 111 111 111 110 103 116 128 134 124 

Appendices 
167 
Appendix-4.9 
(Reference: Paragraph no. 4.5.2/Page 91) 
Improper planning in assessment of requirement of the medical equipment 
 
 
Sl 
No. Supply Order Equipment Revised Supply 
Order Date Quantity Remarks 
1 KDL/EQPT/108/2017-198 dated 28.01.19 (IND 
2463) Pulse Oximeter 22.03.2019 156 Out of 30 consignees, 3 were replaced. 
2 KDL/EQPT3/108/2017-198 dated 28.01.19 (IND 
463) X Ray mobile machine 22.03.2019 27 Out of 20 consignees, 1 was replaced. 
3 KDL/EQPT/108/2017-198 dated 24.01.19 (IND 463) Suction Pump 16.03.2019 104 Out of 30 consignees, 3 were replaced 
4 KDL/EQPT/103/2017-18 dated 24.12.2018 (IND462) Ultrasound Colour Doppler 15.02.2019 10 Out of 10 consignees, 4 were replaced. 
5 KDL/EQPT/103/2017-18 dated 01.01.2019 (IND 
462) 
Paediatric Gastroscopic & 
video endoscopy system 16.05.2019 1 One consignee was replaced. 
6 KDL/EQPT/TND/103/2017-18 dated 01.01.2019 
(IND 462) C -Arm with IITV 16.03.2019 & 
22.03.2019 9 Out of 9 consignees, 2 were replaced. 
7 KDL/EQPT/TND/29/2017-18/ dated 09.07.2018 
(IND-444) Re bound Tonometer 31.08.2018 18 One consignee was replaced 
8 KDL/EQPT/53/2018-19 dated 15.06.2019 (IND 541) Centrifuge 20.12.2019 630 Out of 630 consignees, 21 were replaced 
9 KDL/EQPT/TND/78/2018-19 dated 06.07.2019 (IND 
571) Washing Machine November 2019 48 One consignee was replaced 
10 KDL/EQPT/TND/36A/2018-19 dated 18.06.2019 
(IND-502) Steel Almirah 27.08.2019 368 Few were replaced. 
11 KDL/EQPT/62(8)//2018-19 dated 06.07.2019 (IND-
562) 
Ortho Table with 
attachments 06.04.2019 58 Out of 58, Two consignees were replaced 
12 KDL/EQPT/61//2018-19 dated 21.01.2019 (IND-
561) C-Arm 21.08.2019 22 Out of 22, 2 consignees were placed. 

Appendices 
168 
Appendix-5.1 
(Reference: Paragraph no. 5.1.1 /Page 95) 
District wise requirement and availability of CHC/PHC/SC 
Sl. 
No. Division Name of the 
Districts 
No. of Sub Centres  No. of Community 
Health Centres  
No. Primary Health 
Centres  
Required 
SC 
In Position 
SC 
Excess/ 
Short 
Required 
CHC 
In Position 
CHC 
Excess/ 
Short 
Required 
PHC 
In Position 
PHC 
Excess/ 
Short 
1 
Bengaluru 
Division  
Bengaluru Rural 157 199 -42 8 2 6.00 29 48 -19 
2 Bengaluru 
Urban 194 123 71 13 5 8.00 55 36 19 
3 Chikkaballapura 205 203 2 9 2 7.00 36 57 -21 
4 Chitradurga 285 338 -53 15 11 4.00 56 80 -24 
5 Davanagere 225 270 -45 11 4 7.00 43 80 -37 
6 Kolar 227 251 -24 10 2 8.00 39 63 -24 
7 Ramanagara 163 240 -77 7 5 2.00 29 61 -32 
8 Shivamogga 239 357 -118 11 7 4.00 46 93 -47 
9 Tumakuru 416 572 -156 18 4 14.00 73 144 -71 
10 
Mysuru 
Division 
Chamarajanagar 219 254 -35 11 3 8.00 45 60 -15 
11 Chikkamagaluru 220 365 -145 9 5 4.00 34 89 -55 
12 Dakshin 
Kannada 255 430 -175 15 8 7.00 61 65 -4 
13 Hassan 276 456 -180 13 15 -2.00 50 134 -84 
14 Kodagu 119 196 -77 6 7 -1.00 24 29 -5 
15 Mandya 304 399 -95 13 10 3.00 51 113 -62 
16 Mysuru 372 510 -138 20 10 10.00 80 118 -38 
17 Udupi 197 320 -123 11 6 5.00 48 62 -14 
18 
Belagavi 
Division 
Bagalakote 285 239 46 13 8 5.00 50 48 2 
19 Belagavi 795 585 210 34 16 18.00 160 139 21 
20 Dharwad 176 185 -9 8 0 8.00 31 33 -2 
21 Gadag 149 190 -41 7 2 5.00 25 39 -14 
22 Haveri 271 305 -34 12 5 7.00 47 68 -21 
23 Uttara Kannada 215 344 -129 14 3 11.00 54 82 -28 
24 Vijayapura 397 310 87 17 9 8.00 69 63 6 
25 
Kalaburagi 
Division 
Bidar 282 275 7 15 8 7.00 59 53 6 
26 Ballari 225 129 96 13 6 7.00 52 26 26 
27 Kalaburagi 404 339 65 17 16 1.00 69 84 -15 
28 Koppal 269 173 96 11 9 2.00 45 46 -1 
29 Raichur 331 213 118 22 6 16.00 82 50 32 
30 Vijayanagar 223 220 3 10 7 3.00 41 52 -11 
31 Yadagiri 229 170 59 11 6 5.00 47  41 6 
 
 

Appendices 
169 
Appendix-5.2 
(Reference: Paragraph No. 5.4/Page 99) 
Availability of beds in the health institutions (As per IPHS norms, 22 beds per 1,00,000 population) 
 
Sl. 
No. Districts 
Projected 
Population 
2020-21 
Reqd. no. of 
beds as per 
IPHS 
Guidelines 
Taluk 
Hospitals 
District 
Hospitals 
Other 
Hospitals 
under 
HFW 
Autonomous 
& Teaching 
Hospitals** 
CHC PHC 
Indian 
System of 
Medicine 
Hospitals 
Total 
no. of 
beds 
No. Beds No. Beds No. Beds No. Beds No. Beds No. Beds No. Beds 
1 Bagalakote 21,69,452 477 5 500 1 300 0 0 0 0 8 280 49 290 6 56 1,426 
2 Bengaluru Rural 11,67,401 257 4 400 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 60 48 321 3 26 807 
3 Bengaluru Urban 1,42,71,577 3140 3 300 0 0 6 1,475 16 6,709 5 150 96 688 10 556 9,878 
4 Belagavi 54,26,096 1194 9 900 0 0 0 0 1 740 16 500 148 848 7 54 3,042 
5 Ballari 33,80,240 744 6 600 1 300 1 288 2 1,315 11 350 73 502 8 204 3,559 
6 Bidar 19,35,760 426 4 400 0 0 0 0 1 750 8 240 58 334 4 41 1,765 
7 Vijayapura 26,25,816 578 4 400 1 400 0 0 0 0 9 270 68 366 5 90 1,526 
8 Chamarajanagar 10,82,139 238 3 350 0 0 0 0 1 300 3 90 64 434 4 36 1,210 
9 Chikkaballapura 12,74,298 280 5 510 1 100 0 0 0 0 2 60 60 393 2 16 1,079 
10 Chikkamagaluru 12,42,552 273 6 600 1 400 0 0 0 0 5 170 90 624 4 32 1,826 
11 Chitradurga 18,18,420 400 5 500 1 450 0 0 0 0 11 330 82 510 6 52 1,842 
12 Dakshina 
Kannada 23,10,853 508 4 400 1 965 1 0 0 0 8 240 72 416 8 91 2,112 
13 Davanagere 17,94,310 395 5 500 1 1,030 0 0 0 0 6 180 101 686 4 32 2,428 
14 Dharwad 21,29,928 469 3 300 1 250 0 0 2 1,575 0 0 45 214 3 45 2,384 
15 Gadag 11,67,084 257 4 400 0 0 0 0 1 350 2 60 39 244 4 36 1,090 

Appendices 
170 
Sl. 
No. Districts 
Projected 
Population 
2020-21 
Reqd. no. of 
beds as per 
IPHS 
Guidelines 
Taluk 
Hospitals 
District 
Hospitals 
Other 
Hospitals 
under 
HFW 
Autonomous 
& Teaching 
Hospitals** 
CHC PHC 
Indian 
System of 
Medicine 
Hospitals 
Total 
no. of 
beds 
No. Beds No. Beds No. Beds No. Beds No. Beds No. Beds No. Beds 
16 Kalaburagi 30,29,841 667 6 600 0 0 0 0 1 650 16 480 136 894 10 133 2,757 
17 Hassan 18,48,630 407 7 950 0 0 0 0 1 750 15 450 69 414 9 97 2,661 
18 Haveri 17,76,077 391 6 600 1 250 0 0 0 0 5 150 93 518 4 32 1,550 
19 Kodagu 5,60,990 123 2 360 0 0 0 0 1 410 7 310 29 275 7 50 1,405 
20 Kolar 17,05,436 375 4 400 1 400 2 0 0 0 2 60 69 458 3 30 1,348 
21 Koppal 16,15,277 355 3 300 0 0 0 0 1 340 9 270 49 296 4 32 1,238 
22 Mandya 18,50,467 407 6 600 0 0 0 0 1 750 10 300 115 871 7 63 2,584 
23 Mysuru 34,37,914 756 6 600 0 0 1 0 3 1,940 10 300 147 905 12 454 4,199 
24 Raichur 22,25,308 490 4 400 0 0 0 0 2 870 6 180 52 330 6 61 1,841 
25 Ramanagara 11,47,733 253 3 300 1 100 0 0 0 0 4 120 63 429 4 36 985 
26 Shivamogga 18,75,987 413 6 650 0 0 0 0 1 950 7 210 110 654 4 140 2,604 
27 Tumakuru 27,90,349 614 9 900 1 400 0 0 0 0 4 120 147 998 6 56 2,474 
28 Udupi 13,26,053 292 2 200 1 350 0 0 0 0 6 180 62 458 3 30 1,218 
29 Uttara Kannada 15,26,064 336 10 1,000 0 0 0 0 1 316 3 110 83 538 5 36 2,000 
30 Yadagiri 14,45,226 318 2 200 1 100 0 0 0 0 6 180 42 284 4 24 788 
Total 7,19,57,278 15,831 146 15,120 15 5,795 11 2,218 36 18,715 206 6,400 2359 15,192 166 2,641 66,081 
Source: HFWS KHP-2020-21 