 
Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India  
 
for the year ended March 2023 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Compliance Audit Report on Examination  
of assessments of companies dealing in the  
business of ‘Distilleries and Breweries’  
by the Income Tax Department 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Union Government 
Department of Revenue - Direct Taxes 
Report No. 09 of 2024 
 
Laid on the table of Lok Sabha/Rajya Sabha on ______________ 
 

 
  

Index of Contents 
Contents 
 Preface  i 
 Executive Summary  iii-xiii 
Chapter 1  Introduction and Audit Approach 1-8 
Chapter 2  Audit Findings 9-81 
 Annexures  83-115 
 Abbreviations 116 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

Report No. 09 of 2024 
i 
Preface 
This Report for the year ended March 2023 has been prepared for submission 
to the President under Article 151 of the Constitution of India. 
The Report contains significant results of the Exam ination of assessments of 
eleven companies dealing in the business of ‘Distilleries and Breweries’ by the 
Income Tax Department. 
The instances mentioned in this Report are those, which came to notice in the 
course of audit conducted from April 2019 to Octobe r 2019 and 
Supplementary field audit and a follow-up field aud it, which continued till 
December 2022, for assessments completed /processed  by the Income Tax 
Department, for the Financial Years 2008-09 to 2017-18.   
The audit has been conducted in conformity with the  Auditing Standards 
issued by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
 
 

Report No. 09 of 2024 
iii 
Executive Summary 
India is one of the fastest-growing alcohol markets  in the world due to an 
increase in urban population, rising spending power and a growing economy.  
Liquor business (alcohol production, distribution a nd sales) is governed by 
respective State Government regulations, State Excise Duty and VAT being State 
subject and Income Tax and Tax Collected at Source (TCS) being central subject, 
collected on the same as per provisions of the IT Act 1961 (Act). 
Three main stakeholders are involved: Distilleries & Breweries, State Excise 
Authorities, and the Income Tax Department (ITD). 
Distilleries and Breweries are required to collect Tax at Source (TCS) at the time 
of sale and file TCS returns and Income tax returns with the ITD within the due 
dates along with attachments like Form 3CD, Financial Statements, etc. All the 
transactions are required to be included in its accounts and the same are to be 
audited under section 44AB satisfying the specified conditions under the Act. 
State Excise Authorities help in promoting the deve lopment of alcohol/ 
molasses-based industries, regulating the legitimat e sale of liquor, preventing 
the revenue leakage of State Excise Duty and VAT, determination of Ex-Distillery 
price (EDP) and Ex-brewery price (EBP) at reasonabl e prices, and regulate 
arbitrary price fixation of the alcoholic products by the Distilleries and 
Breweries. 
ITD, after the return of income is filed, carries o ut the necessary verification, 
viz., correct computation of income by the assessee , reconciliation between 
the P&L Account, Form 3CD and what is offered in th e ITR/computation of 
income, correct claim of expenditure and taxes paid , correct determination 
and allowance of set-off of current year/brought fo rward losses, correct 
determination and allowance of MAT credit etc., as per the provisions of the 
Act and ensures that the true income and expenditur e have been reflected in 
Financial Statements and the assessee has not evaded tax.  
Audit selected eleven distilleries/breweries falling within the ITD jurisdiction in 
the States of Uttar Pradesh, Maharashtra, Karnataka and New Delhi, whose ITRs 
were processed/completed through Income Tax Departm ent (ITD) systems 
covering the ten years period from Assessment Years 2009-10 to 2018-19.  
Audit examined whether all the receipts and expenditures were accounted for 
and correctly offered for tax, whether third-party reporting was taken into 
cognizance ensuring non-evasion of tax, whether any  mechanism of 
inter-departmental and intra-departmental co-ordination existed within the IT 

Report No. 09 of 2024 
iv 
Department and if so, whether the mechanism was in place in collating and 
correlating the existing documents/records efficiently and effectively. 
While examining the assessment records of selected eleven distilleries/ 
breweries, Audit broadly noticed issues comprising viz., short accounting of sale 
under the garb of agreement with other parties, lac k of Inter-departmental, 
intra-departmental co-ordination and reconciliation  with the assessee, 
arithmetical discrepancy and certification by the A uditor with respect to 
Quantitative Abstract of the finished product, calc ulation mistakes, revenue 
impact due to lack of inter-departmental co-ordinat ion and non-adherence to 
the powers conferred by the provisions of the Act. These are highlighted  
below: 
Short accounting of sale under the garb of agreemen t with tax impact of 
₹ 4,439.11 crore wherein three companies, namely M/s  W1 Ltd., M/s U1 Ltd. 
and M/s M1 Ltd. did not get their books of accounts audited under section 44AB 
of IT Act, 1961 and also had not offered the income  from business under the 
head income “Profits and gains from business or profession”. The possibility of 
sale proceeds of liquor/beer not taken into account  for tax under the garb of 
the agreement was high, and the risk of escapement of tax could not be ruled 
out.  
The information available within the Income Tax Dep artment (ITD) was not 
effectively utilized by the assessment units. Further, reconciliation of the details 
was not carried out by the Assessing Officer from t he Assessees. This involved 
a tax impact of ₹ 12,781.22 crore. In ten assessee companies, namely  M/s U1 
Ltd., M/s P1 Pvt. Ltd., M/s R1 Ltd., M/s S1 Ltd., M /s M3 Ltd., M/s M2 Ltd., 
M/s A1 Ltd., M/s U2 Ltd., M/s U3 Ltd. and M/s M1 Lt d., there was lack of 
Inter-departmental, intra-departmental co-ordinatio n and reconciliation with 
the assessee wherein Assessing Officers did not exe rcise power to call for the 
information, as envisaged in section 133(6) of the Income Tax Act which would 
have been useful for or relevant to any enquiry or proceeding under the Act.  
ITD system could not identify the cases where there  was an arithmetical 
difference, as depicted and certified by the Auditor in the Quantitative Abstract 
of the finished product in Form 3CD, which resulted in the wrong depiction and 
certification by the Auditor with respect to the Qu antitative Abstract of the 
finished product in four assessee companies, namely M/s W1 Ltd., M/s R1 Ltd., 
M/s M2 Ltd. and M/s A1 Ltd., involving a total tax impact of ₹ 705.01 crore. It 
was also noticed that the Assessing Officers commit ted calculation mistakes 
while concluding the assessments in two assessee co mpanies, namely 
M/s P1 Pvt. Ltd. and M/s S1 Ltd., involving a total tax impact of ₹ 3.36 crore. 

Report No. 09 of 2024 
v 
Systemic issues were observed in case of all eleven  assessee companies 
wherein Excise duty claimed by them in their Profit  and loss Account was 
allowed by the ITD during the assessment proceeding s without reconciliation 
with related assessment records.  
Another systemic issue was observed in three assess ee companies, namely 
M/s W1 Ltd., M/s U1 Ltd., and M/s M1 Ltd. wherein a large amount of rebate, 
discount, etc., were allowed as expenditure in the books of account, however, 
reasons/genuineness of such claim were not found to  be placed in case 
records. This indicates non-adherence to the powers  of verification conferred 
on the Assessing officer under Section 37 of the Income Tax Act. 
Based on the audit findings, it is recommended that:  
• The CBDT may strengthen the existing mechanism for reconciliation of 
assessment records viz-a-viz, Form 3CD, Profit and L oss account statement, 
State Excise records etc., especially after the int roduction of the Faceless 
Assessment regime, wherein assessments are being co ncluded jurisdiction-
free to fill the existing gap by critically and cor rectly analyzing the books of 
accounts in order to arrive at the correct income o f the assessee while 
concluding the assessment of the Distilleries and Breweries Sector.  
Ministry in its reply stated (July 2022) that the p rocess of assessment in the 
Income Tax Department has undergone a transformation with the introduction 
of faceless assessment. Specialized units such as Assessment Units, Verification 
Units, Technical Units and Review Units have been p ut in place for optimum 
utilization of the resources through economies of s cale and functional 
specialization. This is a team-based assessment pro cedure, where the 
Assessment Unit can request verification by the Ver ification Unit and seek 
technical assistance from the Technical Unit in ord er to prepare a speaking 
order.  Under Faceless Assessment, the process of R eview has been in-built to 
facilitate an error-free assessment order. 
The reply of the Ministry is not tenable as for the  purpose of critically and 
correctly analyzing books of accounts, it is essent ial, especially after the 
introduction of a faceless assessment regime,  that the department needs to 
conclude the assessment proceedings after making re conciliation of the Excise 
Returns with the income reflected in the Profit and  Loss Account in respect of 
assessees engaged in the business of distilleries and breweries. If any unverified 
quantity is detected during such reconciliation then the same needs to be added 
to the income of the assessee. Appropriate action n eeds to be taken to ensure 
complete accounting of income of the assessee for l evy of tax to protect the 
interest of revenue. 

Report No. 09 of 2024 
vi 
Further, since the Department has introduced the as sessment in faceless 
manner to make the assessment more transparent, the  assessment order 
should be passed with speaking order. Ministry need s to issue necessary 
direction to strengthen more effective optimum util ization of the resources to 
avoid recurrence of mistakes leading to revenue leakage. 
• The CBDT may consider applying a combination of risk parameters for 
the identification of cases for limited as well as complete scrutiny under 
Computer Aided Scrutiny Selection (CASS) in respect of assessees engaged in 
Distilleries and Breweries business by also consider ing  the Sales reported in 
ITR vis-à-vis Sales reported to the respective State Excise Authorities.  
Ministry in its reply stated (September 2022) that this suggestion will be 
examined while framing the rules for CASS selection criteria.  
Audit will await the action taken by the Ministry. (February 2024). 
• At the time of summary assessment for the distiller ies and breweries 
sector, the information in documents attached with the Income Tax Return of 
the assessee, viz. sale, duties, etc., as given in Profit and Loss Accounts, should 
be correlated with that certified by the Auditor in  Form 3CD. Information 
should also be in consonance with the data available from CPC (TDS). 
Ministry in its reply stated (September 2022) that the CPC processes the returns 
u/s 143(1) based on provisions of Section 143(1)(a) of the Income Tax Act. There 
is no provision in Section 143(1)(a) for bringing t o tax the difference between 
sales declared in Profit and Loss Accounts and sales declared by CA in the Audit 
report /data available with CPC (TDS). 
Although the reply of the Ministry is acceptable in  principle, the Department 
may review/revisit the CASS parameters so that high turnover assessees do not 
escape the tax ambit. Further, collation and correl ation of the information 
already available with the Income Tax Department in  the CPC database/ITBA 
server/e-filing portal, like Sales/excise duty, VAT  and other taxes and levies, 
depicted in Profit and loss account or Form 3CD/ITR  may be reviewed and 
strengthened to minimize risk of routing of unaccou nted amount by entities of 
Distilleries and Breweries sector and to prevent possibility of tax evasion. 

Report No. 09 of 2024 
vii 
• The CBDT may consider making appropriate amendments/provisions 
in the IT Act or consider issuing a SOP/MoP for spe cifically requisitioning 
information/  Statement of Financial Transactions (SFTs) 1/AIR or non-AIR 
from the State Excise Authorities is mandatory, whe re necessary, on a 
stipulated total monetary threshold to be decided b y the ITD while 
conducting assessment of the Distilleries and Breweries Sector.  
Ministry in its reply stated (July 2022) that the p rovisions of Income Tax Act 
empower the Assessing Officer to seek relevant info rmation from other 
agencies including the State Excise Authorities, du ring the course of 
assessment proceedings. Further, the assessing offi cer decides whether any 
information is required to be called for from the other agencies, depending on 
the facts and circumstances of each case.  Therefore, it may not be feasible to 
mandate the AO to seek information from State Excis e Authorities above a 
threshold limit. 
Reply of the Ministry is not tenable as the Distill eries and Breweries sector is a 
specialized nature of business activity, in which S tate Excise duty is the 
significant tax paid and claimed by the assessee as expenditure, which is directly 
proportional to the income offered for taxation. Th erefore, the provision for 
information regarding payment of State Excise Duty from the respective State 
Government department relating to the concerned PAN may be included in the 
SFT information. This would equip the Assessing Off icer with the necessary 
information to allow the correct claim of Excise Du ty during the assessment 
proceedings. 
• The CBDT may consider devising a standard operating  procedure for 
the assessment of entities engaged in the business of distilleries and 
breweries to ensure error-free assessments. The SOP  may include 
instructions to the Assessing officer(s) for : 
i.  Sharing and seeking necessary information from the Jurisdictional AO 
for verification, through the online system. A cert ificate to this effect 
may be given by the assessing officer. 
ii.  Exercising power as envisaged in Section 133(6) of the IT Act to call for 
information viz., Excise duty, VAT and other taxes/  duties from the 
                                                           
1  Statement of Financial Transactions (SFTs)  - Before the Introduction of the Faceless Assessment, the verification 
of the data provided by the system in AIR (Annual I nformation Return)/CIB from 7 modes was  carried out by 
issuing notices and individually collecting information and details of verification forwarded to concerned Pr. CCITs 
for further necessary action.  
  After the Introduction of the Faceless Assessment , verification of data is discontinued from 2.12.20 20, and the 
Data from the DG System is pushed to DGIT Intellige nce & Criminal Investigation (DGIT (I&CI))  (erstwhile CIB) 
through the insight portal. The insight portal deal s with SFTs (Statements of Financial Transactions) instead of 
AIR. Specific limits are set for SFTs, below which, data are also available in the systems. There are 18 SFTs (as 7 
in AIR) through which data from third party (Entities) is received in the form of returns under sections 61, 61A & 
61B. The Registered Entities (REs) are required to file returns before the due date every year with th eir ITDREIN 
(Income Tax Department Registered Individual Number) like PAN/TAN.  

Report No. 09 of 2024 
viii 
respective State Government Authorities to ensure g enuineness and 
correctness of information furnished by an assessees 
iii.  Ensuring that business activity codes are filled co mpulsorily and 
correctly in their ITRs and examining the possibili ty of re-opening 
assessments and imposing penalty for wrong filling up of business 
codes.  
iv.  According high priority to cases involving discrepancies in quantitative 
disclosures of finished products made in Tax Audit Report.  
Ministry for considering devising an SOP stated (Ju ly 2022) that a chapter on 
the assessment of Liquor Trade is provided in Volum e 5 of the Manual on 
Techniques of Investigation, which provides an overview of the sector that will 
be helpful to the Assessing Officers in conducting assessment proceedings.  
Further, para no. 14, 15 and 16 of the said chapter details risk areas specific to 
this sector. The manner of inquiries/ verification during the course of 
assessment proceedings may vary from case to case, depending on the facts 
and circumstances of the case.  Therefore, it may n ot be possible to have a 
Standard Operating Procedure for assessment of entities engaged in distilleries 
and breweries.  
The reply of the Ministry is not tenable as Volume 5 of the Manual on Techniques 
of Investigation is the guideline for the Investiga tion Wing dealing in the Liquor 
Trade. The CBDT may consider devising a detailed Standard Operating Procedure 
in line with the above manual to be used as guideli nes for the assessment of 
entities engaged in the business of distilleries and breweries. 
Ministry, in response to (i) above, stated (Septemb er 2022) that under the 
Faceless Assessment Scheme, the necessary informati on may be shared by 
Faceless AOs with the JAOs by using the 'Issue lett er functionality' in ITBA.  
Further, if any verification is required to be carried out by the Faceless Assessing 
Officers, the same is to be carried out by the Veri fication Units and not the 
Jurisdictional AO. There already exists functionali ty in the Income Tax Business 
Application (ITBA), over which assessment proceedin gs are being carried out in 
a faceless manner, for the Faceless AO to send requ ests for carrying out 
verifications to the Verification Unit. 
For assessment cases outside the Faceless Assessmen t Scheme (like the 
assessments carried out by the Central and Internat ional Taxation charges), the 
assessment proceedings are carried out by Jurisdictional AO.  Further, the facility 
of inter-jurisdictional sharing of details to ensur e effective utilization of 
information through timely sharing of inputs within  the ITD is also available in 
ITBA.  The Jurisdictional AO 
 may disseminate information to other Jurisdictional 
AOs through the Investigation Module of ITBA. This functionality is available in 

Report No. 09 of 2024 
ix 
ITBA w.e.f. 27.02.2020. Furthermore, it is submitte d that JAOs have 
functionalities under the ITBA portal (like Issue l etter functionality ) along with 
the webmail facility to seek/share information wherever deemed fit. 
The audit noted that the functionality, as stated b y the Ministry, was not 
available during the Audit period. The new facility  in ITBA was introduced with 
effect from 27.02.2020. The implementation of this functionality will be 
monitored in the succeeding Assessment Years. 
Ministry in response to (ii) above, stated (July 20 22) that the provisions of the 
Income Tax Act empower the Assessing Officer to see k relevant information 
from other agencies, including the State Government  Authorities, during the 
course of assessment proceedings. Further, the Asse ssing Officer decides 
whether any information is required to be called fo r from other agencies 
depending on the facts and circumstances of each case. 
Reply of the Ministry is not tenable as State Excis e Duty is the major tax paid in 
the liquor manufacturing industry claimed by the as sessee as expenditure 
directly impacts the income offered for taxation. I n all the cases audited, the 
assessing officers during the assessment proceeding  have not exercised the 
power laid down under Section 133(6) of the Act to call for information from the 
respective State Excise Authorities to confirm the actual State Excise duty paid 
by the assessee. Substantial information available with the State Excise 
Department is required to be collected by ITD in a routine manner by establishing 
a mechanism to ensure that such details are reconciled by the assessing officers 
while concluding assessments for realistic determin ation of tax effect. Hence, 
provisions of Section 133(6) of the Act should inva riably be invoked by the 
Assessing Authorities in the interest of revenue from the concerned State Excise 
Department rather than calling for individual challans on a test-check basis. 
Ministry in response to (iii) above, stated (July 2022) that the business codes are 
filled by assessees while filing the return of inco me online. There are penal 
provisions available for furnishing false informati on in the Income Tax Returns 
e.g. any deliberate attempt to give wrong informati on in an ITR can lead to 
possible prosecution and/or penalty under the Income Tax Act. 
The reply of the Ministry is not tenable as though the Business Codes are filled 
up by the assessees; the same is also required to b e certified by the Chartered 
Accountant through a tax Audit Report.  The errors in codes filled in by the 
assessee may be updated during subsequent scrutiny assessments, especially 
based on available information, to ensure correct a ctivity/ business-wise 
categorization of assessees and ensure reliable MIS  generated from the 
database maintained centrally within the ITD.  The CBDT may consider issuing 
necessary instructions in this regard, including the option of issuing notice to the 

Report No. 09 of 2024 
x 
assessee for incorrect reporting of business codes at the time of scrutiny 
assessment.  
Ministry in response to (iv) above, stated (September 2022) that this suggestion 
will be examined while farming the rules for CASS selection criteria.  
Audit will await the final outcome of the efforts m ade by the Ministry to 
streamline the system. (February 2024). 
• Considering the specialized nature of business activity of the assessees 
of Distilleries and Breweries sector and multiplicity of transactions involved in 
such business, the CBDT may consider undertaking Special Audit under Section 
142(2A) of the assessees and their related parties for examining the 
agreements entered into where the issues related to  mismatch in the 
disclosure of Sales of the main assessee vis-à-vis their related parties are 
noticed. 
Ministry stated (July 2022) that as per the provisi ons of Section 142(2A) of the 
Income Tax Act, the Assessing Officer may form an o pinion whether it is 
necessary to conduct a special Audit in a particula r case after taking into 
consideration various factors like nature and complexity of the accounts, volume 
of the accounts, doubts about the correctness of th e accounts, multiplicity of 
transactions in the accounts or specialized nature of business activity of the 
assessee and the interest of the revenue. Therefore , whether or not the special 
audit has to be conducted is to be decided on a cas e-to-case basis by the 
Assessing Officer. 
The reply of the Ministry is not tenable as the ass essees of the Distilleries and 
breweries sector are involved in a multiplicity of transactions, and the Assessing 
Officer, in the normal course of assessment, does not recommend a special audit. 
In all the cases audited, the AO failed to identify  the tax evasion as pointed out 
by Audit. However, the ITD, in one case, referred t he case of M/s P1 Pvt. Ltd  
AY 2017-18 for special Audit u/s 142(2A) of the Act . Accordingly, on 
'reconciliation of excise returns w.r.t. to income reflected in Profit and Loss 
account', the SA reported an unverified quantity am ounting to ₹ 956.61 crore, 
out of which the ITD made an addition of ₹
 206.84 crore, which includes an 
addition of ₹ 191.32 crore on account of the above-unverified account. 
• The CBDT on a certain threshold turnover limit for this sector may 
consider making it compulsory for the Auditor to me ntion the necessary 
details of VAT/ other duties/Taxes in Form 3CD, whic h were not routed 
through the Profit and Loss Account. The Auditor should also mention the Sale 
at 34(a) was either gross sale or net sale. Further , the Auditor should 
specifically mention the bifurcation of total sales into TCS/Non-TCS sales with 
the corresponding Excise Duties in the Profit and Loss Account. 

Report No. 09 of 2024 
xi 
Ministry in its reply stated (September 2022) that Sub-Section (1) of Section 206C 
of the Act provides for collection of tax by the se ller at the time of debiting of 
account with the amount payable by the buyer or at the time of receipt of 
consideration from the buyer of alcoholic liquor fo r human consumption at the 
rate of one percent .  Such tax has to be deposited by the seller to th e credit of 
the Central Government within the prescribed time.  
In clause 34(a) of Form 3CD, the auditor is require d to report the details of tax 
deduction and tax collection made by the taxpayer d uring the year such as 
nature of payment, Section under which tax is to be  deducted /collected etc. 
Hence the TCS is collected on gross amount which is  already being reported in 
clause 34(a) of Form No. 3CD. 
The suggestion of Audit that clause 34(a) should ha ve a bifurcation of gross vs 
net and TCS vs non-TCS is not feasible. The purpose of clause 34(a) is to capture 
TDS and TCS details which can then be verified, if needed.  While designing Audit 
form, it has to be ensured that it does not become bulky and does not lead to 
unnecessary compliance burden. 
Although the Ministry's reply is acceptable in principle, the Ministry may decide 
on a threshold turnover limit for this specific sec tor, wherein the Auditor has to 
mandatorily mention the bifurcation of Gross sale o r net sale, TCS and non-TCS 
sale, etc., in Form 3CD. Details of TCS and non-TCS  sales with corresponding 
excise duty, VAT, and other duties will enable the assessment of the correct 
income in the interest of revenue. 
• The CBDT may consider issuing elaborate business co des for the 
Distilleries and breweries sector. These business ac tivity codes would enable 
ITD to prepare and update a comprehensive database of all the distilleries and 
breweries, which will facilitate the identification and selection of assessees in 
this sector for scrutiny assessment under CASS parameters.   
Ministry for considering issuing elaborate business codes stated that (July 2022) 
the business codes are filled by assessees while fi ling the return of income 
online.  It may not be possible for the AOs to ensu re the correctness of the 
business codes.  
Reply of the Ministry is not tenable as the CBDT may consider having elaborative 
business codes prescribed for the Distilleries and breweries sector. Although the 
Business Codes are filled up by the assessees, the same is also required to be 
certified by the Chartered Accountant through a Tax Audit Report.  The errors in 
codes filled up by the assessee may be updated duri ng subsequent scrutiny 
assessments, especially based on available informat ion, to ensure correct 
activity/ business-wise categorization of assessees  and ensure reliable MIS 
generated from the database maintained centrally within the ITD. 

Report No. 09 of 2024 
xii 
• The CBDT may consider examining reasons for the non -verification of 
differences in the disclosure of stocks as per ITR/ Profit and Loss Account and 
TAR, specifically in entities with large sales turn over, at the stage of scrutiny 
assessment. Further, where the value of stocks has been shown in ITR and 
Annual accounts but the quantitative details have not been disclosed, and vice 
versa, the reasons for the same and their impact on  profitability should be 
ascertained in the assessment to minimize the risk of non-routing of finished 
products by entities of Distilleries and breweries s ector and to prevent the 
possibility of tax evasion. 
Ministry in its reply stated (July 2022) that this para will be answered in the 
respective illustrated cases.  
Audit will await case-wise specific reply from the Ministry. (February 2024). 
• The CBDT may strengthen the existing mechanism for i nter-
departmental sharing of inputs, including Excise du ty, VAT, and other taxes/ 
duties details, with the Assessing Officers of the counterparties for 
examination and cross-verification of the Excise du ty, VAT, and other taxes/ 
duties disclosed by the assessee(s)  during the ass essment of the Distilleries 
and Breweries Sector.  
Ministry, in its reply, stated (September 2022) tha t the Income Tax Department 
(ITD) takes appropriate action as per law against v arious categories of Tax 
evaders, including assessees dealing in the busines s of breweries & distilleries. 
While taking such action, ITD does not distinguish between various categories of 
tax evaders.  Whenever any instance of tax evasion and unaccounted/ black 
money comes to the notice, the Income Tax Department takes appropriate action 
as per the provisions of the Income Tax Act,  inclu ding issuing summons, calling 
for information, conducting search and survey, asse ssment and reassessment of 
income, levy & recovery of tax, imposition of penalty, launching a prosecution etc.  
Moreover, it may also be submitted that with effect from 01.04.2021, the scheme 
of reassessment under the Income Tax Act has been amended.  The procedure for 
selection of a case (including the case of an asses see dealing in the business of 
brewery & distillery) for reassessment is now subje cted to a risk management 
strategy at an appropriate level.  This ensures a f ocused approach on the part of 
the assessing officer on the risk parameters let ou t, thereby aiding him in 
unearthing corresponding tax evasion.  
In addition to the above, it may be submitted that the ITD receives information 
regarding tax evasion by any assessee (including th e assessees dealing in the 
business of distilleries and breweries) through 
 various channels. These channels, 
inter-alia, include the following: 

Report No. 09 of 2024 
xiii 
a)  Information sharing platforms between various gover nment 
agencies/organizations like the Central Economic In telligence 
Bureau (CEIB) and the Regional Economic Intelligenc e 
Committee (REIC), wherein the ITD receives/shares i nformation 
from /to other member agencies, including the state agencies. 
b)  Information filed with the ITD in the form of SFTs (Specified 
Financial Transactions) above notified thresholds r elating to 
specified transactions. 
c)  Suspicious Transaction Reports (STRs) received through FIU-IND. 
d)  Specified information received from any other Law Enforcement 
Agency (LEA) for appropriate action, etc.  
e)  Tax Evasion Petitions (TEPs) and informers. 
All the aforementioned information about tax evasio n provides information 
irrespective of the category of tax evaders. As and  when such information is 
shared with the ITD, it takes action in the manner in accordance with the 
provision of Direct tax laws. 
Though the Ministry’s response is acceptable in pri nciple, however the reply is 
silent specifically on the information sharing mech anism with the State Excise 
Department, where there is a wealth of information as highlighted by Audit in its 
Report. Audit noted that this information was not s hared between the ITD and 
State Excise Authorities of the respective State Governments. No efforts seem to 
have been made by the AO while concluding the asses sment proceedings to 
reconcile the different amounts of sale appearing a t different places like Form 
3CD, Profit and Loss Account, CPC(TDS), Vaishali, Ghaziabad and with the Excise 
Authorities. This is evident from the observations pointed out by Audit with 
respect to assessees of this sector. Sales figures at all these places were required 
to have been reconciled and verified in the interest of revenue. The risk of revenue 
leakage with respect to these assessees involved in  Liquor manufacturing, 
requires timely action by the ITD to ensure that such loopholes/gaps do not exist 
in the system in subsequent years. 
• The CBDT may examine whether the instances of 'error s' noticed are 
errors of omission or commission, and if these are errors of commission, then 
they should ensure necessary action, including fixi ng responsibility where 
glaring mistakes have been pointed out by Audit, du ring examination of 
companies dealing in the business of Distilleries and Breweries, as per law. 
 

Report No. 09 of 2024  
1 
Chapter-1: Introduction and Audit Approach 
 
Section-I Introduction 
 
1.1 Overview 
India is one of the fastest-growing alcohol markets  in the world.  The rapid 
increase in urban population, a sizeable middle-cla ss population with rising 
spending power and a growing economy are significan t reasons attributed to 
the increase in the consumption of alcohol in India.  
State Excise Duty and VAT are State subject and dec ided by the respective 
State Governments, and every State has its own regu lations.  Liquor business 
is governed by Government regulations; alcohol prod uction, distribution and 
sales are regulated by each State. 
Income Tax and Corporate Tax are central subject, a nd are collected as per 
provisions of the IT Act 1961 (Act). 
Stakeholders: There are three main sets of stakehol ders: distilleries and 
breweries, State Excise Authorities, and the Income Tax Department (ITD). 
1.2 Distilleries and Breweries: 
Distilleries and Breweries are the key players enga ged in the manufacturing, 
bottling and selling of alcoholic products under th e stringent control of the 
State Excise Department.  
The distilling industry  is that part of the food and beverage industries 
engaged in clarifying, flavouring, blending and age ing alcohol to make 
potable spirits (e.g., brandies, grain spirits, rum ) and establishments which 
manufacture ethyl alcohol, whether they are or are not used in potable 
spirits.  Manufacturers of methyl, butyl or isoprop yl alcohol are considered 
part of the chemical industries.  The distilling in dustry is a world-class 
multinational industry. 
A brewery  or brewing company  is a business that makes and sells beer.  The 
place at which beer is commercially made is either called a brewery or 
a beerhouse, where distinct sets of brewing equipment are called plant. 
 

Report No. 09 of 2024  
2 
Brewing typically undergoes the following procedure s: milling, malting, and 
mashing 1, lautering 2, boiling 3, fermenting 4, conditioning 5, filtering 6, and 
filling. 
Contract manufacturing  is when one distillery or brewery utilizes the 
manufacturing capacity of another distiller or brew er to produce its product.  
They may enter into business agreements to finally get a finished product of 
their own quality.  The terms of a contract being a greed upon by the parties 
cannot override the applicable provisions of the re levant Act and also cannot 
shift the ownership right of a manufactured item.  
Distilleries and Breweries are responsible for coll ecting Tax at Source (TCS) at 
specified rates at the time of sale and filing TCS returns with the ITD.  They 
are responsible for obtaining PAN and file a return  for their income with the 
ITD.  They have to keep their financial statements in such a way that all the 
transactions in respect of all income and expenditu re accruing to the 
manufacturing unit are included in its accounts, an d the same are audited 
under section 44AB, satisfying the specified condit ions under the Act.  Then, 
they are supposed to file their income tax return w ithin the due dates 
decided by the CBDT along with attachments like For m 3CD, financial 
statements, and their related schedules under the p rovisions of the Act, 
which are statutory. 
ITD carries out the necessary verification, viz., c orrect computation of income 
by the assessee, reconciliation between the P&L Acc ount, Form 3CD and 
what offered in the ITR/computation of income, corr ect claim of expenditure 
and taxes paid, correct determination and allowance  of set-off of current 
year/brought forward losses, correct determination and allowance of MAT 
credit etc. as described under different sections o f the Act and ensures that 
the true income and expenditure have been reflected  in Financial Statements 
and the assessee has not indulged in any tax evasion. 
                                                           
1 Mashing  is the process of mixing milled, usually malted gr ain with water and heating it with rests at a certa in 
temperature to allow enzymes in the malt to break down the starches in the grain into sugars, especially maltose.  
2 Lautering  is the separation of the extracts won during mashing from the spent grain to create wort. 
3 Boiling  the wort ensures its sterility, helping to prevent  contamination with undesirable microbes.  During t he 
boil, hops are added, contributing aroma and flavou r compounds to the beer, especially their characteri stic 
bitterness.  Along with the heat of the boil, they cause proteins in the wort to coagulate and the pH value of the 
wort to fall, and they inhibit the later growth of certain bacteria.  Finally, the vapours produced du ring the boil 
volatilize off flavours, including dimethyl sulfide  precursors.  The boil lasts between 60 and 120 min utes, 
depending on its intensity, the hop addition schedule, and the volume of wort the brewer expects to evaporate. 
4 Fermentation  begins as soon as yeast is added to the cooled wor t.  This is also the point at which the product is 
first called beer.  It is during this stage that fe rmentable sugars won from the malt are metabolized into alcohol 
and carbon dioxide. 
5 Conditioning  starts when the sugars in the fermenting beer have  been almost completely digested, the 
fermentation process slows and the yeast cells begi n to die andsettle at the bottom of the tank.  At t his stage, 
especially if the beer is cooled to around freezing , most of the remaining live yeastcells will quickl y become 
dormant and settle, along with the heavier protein chains, due simply to gravity and molecular dehydration.  
6 Filtering  of the beer stabilizes flavour and gives it a poli shed, shiny look.  The beer is finally packaged in 
containers like bulk tank or bottle, can, etc.  

Report No. 09 of 2024  
3 
1.3 State Excise Authorities: 
The main objective(s) of State Excise Authorities a re to regulate the legitimate 
sale of liquor, help promote the development of alc ohol/molasses-based 
industries, and earn maximum revenue through the co ntrolled and legitimate 
sale of Alcohol for the welfare of the state. 
The Distilleries and Breweries business is very clo sely monitored by the State 
Excise Department of every State to prevent the rev enue leakage of State 
Excise Duty and VAT and to regulate arbitrary price  fixation [ex-distillery price 
(EDP) and Ex-brewery price (EBP)] of the alcoholic products by the Distilleries 
and Breweries. 
The determination of EDP/ EBP is an important respo nsibility of the Excise 
Department, which ensures both the availability of liquor at reasonable prices 
and adequate revenue collection from liquor sales.  The key elements of 
pricing of liquor (MRP calculation) are as depicted in Table I  –  
Table I  Key Elements of Pricing of Liquor 
Sl. 
No. 
Elements Basis of calculation 
1. Ex-
distillery 
price/ Ex-
brewery 
price 
(EDP/ 
EBP) 
EDP and EBP is the price at which the manufacturers  supply Indian 
Made Foreign Liquor (IMFL) and Beer respectively to  wholesalers 
before adding excise duty, profit margins of wholes alers and 
retailers.  EDP/ EBP is offered by the distilleries / breweries and 
approved by the Excise Commissioner. 
2. Excise 
duty 
The State Government periodically fixes this as a p ercentage of 
EDP/ EBP on IMFL/ Beer. 
Source: Excise policy, Government of Uttar Pradesh  
1.4 Income Tax Department (ITD) Role: 
The Central Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT) is the hig hest body in the Direct Tax 
system.  The Assessing Officer (AO) is responsible for assessing a taxpayer in 
his or her respective jurisdiction.  
As per section 144B of the Act, the CBDT introduced  (August 2020) a    
Faceless Assessment Scheme 2019 with its amendments .  After the faceless 
assessment is completed, all the electronic records  of the case are 
transferred to the Assessing officer having jurisdi ction over the said case for 
such action as may be required under the provisions of the Act. 
The Income-tax authorities have the power to collec t information, call for 
information, possess books of accounts and discover and produce evidence. 
All assesses are to file their Income Tax Returns ( ITRs) within the due dates 
decided by the CBDT, along with necessary attachmen ts like Form 3CD, 

Report No. 09 of 2024  
4 
Financial Statements and their related schedules.  While filing an ITR, the 
assessee has to fill in the relevant business activity codes 7.  
As per the provisions of the IT Act, every TCS coll ector is required to furnish a 
TCS return.  As a part of the risk management strat egy 8, the ITD adopts the 
following procedure:- 
(a) 
 Assessment is completed under Section 143(1) throug h computerized 
processing known as summary assessment.  All Return s of Income 
(ROIs) are processed to check for arithmetical erro rs, incorrect claims 
apparent from returns, allowances of loss, expendit ures, deductions, 
tax calculation, and verification of tax payments.  
(b)  Assessment is completed by passing an order by the AO under Section 
143(3) of the Act, known as scrutiny assessment, af ter verification of 
the assessee's income and expenditures.  The cases for scrutiny 
assessments are to be selected from the Income Tax Return (ITR) filed 
by an assessee through Computer-Aided Scrutiny Sele ction (CASS) on 
the basis of parameters identified and pre-defined by the ITD.  These 
cases are closely examined to arrive at the correct  assessments to 
ensure that there is no evasion of taxes.  
Section-II Audit Approach 
 
1.5 Audit Objectives: 
The objectives of this Audit are to ascertain – 
I. 
 Whether all receipts and expenditure of selected di stilleries and 
breweries have been accounted for and correctly off ered for tax as 
per the provisions of the Income Tax Act, 1961?  
II.  Whether third party reporting was taken into cognizance for ensuring 
there was no evasion of tax by distilleries and breweries? 
III.  Whether any mechanism of inter-departmental and int ra-
departmental co-ordination exists with the IT depar tment with 
regard to distilleries and breweries? 
IV.  Whether the mechanism in the ITD in place for colla ting and 
correlating the existing documents/records was effi cient and 
effective? 
                                                           
7 Business Activity Code-  A business activity code classifies a taxpayer according to its primary activity.  There may 
be different codes for entities operating in multiple businesses. 
8 The risk management strategy  reflects the view of ITD as to how it intends to m anage risk potentially of all types 
but at least within a discrete category of risk, in cluding policies, procedures, and standards to be u sed to identify, 
assess, respond to, monitor and govern risk in the interest of revenue implementing the intent of the legislature 
through the provisions of the Act.  

Report No. 09 of 2024  
5 
1.6 Why we chose this topic:  
India is one of the fastest-growing alcohol markets  in the world and with the 
rapid increase in consumption of the alcoholic prod ucts and expansion of the 
business of the companies involved in this sector l ed to the high value of 
transactions. Income Tax Act provides for reporting /certification through the 
audit of accounts and audit reports from an Account ant. It needs to be 
ensured that the books of accounts of the assessee reflect the true income of 
the taxpayer and the same is being offered for comp utation of income tax. 
This is a tool in the hands of the Department while  deciding the correctness 
of the income declared by the assessee and determin ing the true and correct 
income of the assessee and detecting tax evasion and avoidance.  
Audit intended to derive an assurance that, the inc ome, being offered for 
taxation for the purposes of computation of income tax, being 
disclosed/accounted in the Financial Statements and  consequently depicting 
the consistencies in the accounts. It was also esse ntial to find mismatch, if 
any, in the sales made and duties paid in the State Excise Department vis a vis 
that reflected in the financial statement, mechanis m for inter-departmental 
and intra-departmental coordination/reconciliation with the assessee. 
1.7 Audit Scope and Sample Selection: 
We selected eleven companies of this sector  (Annexure A-1) for examination 
covering the period of 10 years, i.e., from the Ass essment Years 2009-10 to 
2018-19.  
An audit of records of these eleven companies falli ng within the ITD 
jurisdiction in the states of Uttar Pradesh, Mahara shtra, Karnataka, and New 
Delhi was conducted.  The records of the relevant A ssessment Years were 
requisitioned, and observations were made on the ba sis of cases assessed 
under Section 143(3) 
9 as well as those processed under Section 143(1) 10  of 
the Act.  Records of assessees viz.  Return of Inco me (ROI), Audit Report, 
Balance Sheet, Profit & Loss Account, related sched ules, etc., were 
requisitioned and obtained from the ITD.  Informati on regarding TCS sales of 
identified assessees from CPC (TDS), Vaishali, Ghaz iabad was requisitioned 
and obtained. 
Information was also requisitioned from the State Excise Department of Uttar 
Pradesh, New Delhi, Maharashtra and Karnataka regarding sales made, excise 
                                                           
9 Section 143(3) of IT Act provides that AO has to determine and assess the in come correctly.  Different types of 
claims together with accounts records and all documents enclosed with the return are required to be examined in 
detail in scrutiny assessments.  CBDT has also issued instructions in this regard from time to time. 
10  Section 143(1) of IT Act provides that an AO can complete the assessment with out passing a regular assessment 
order.  Processing of return of income under sectio n 143(1) is mandatory even if scrutiny notice is is sued under 
Section 143(2).  

Report No. 09 of 2024  
6 
duty paid, working licenses granted and agreements entered relating to 
concerned distilleries/breweries and obtained only from the Uttar Pradesh 
State Excise Department.  
1.8 Audit Criteria: 
The audit analyzed the data obtained from CPC (TDS) , Vaishali and relevant 
provisions of the Income Tax Act, manuals, rules, a nd government 
notifications to evaluate the performance of the In come Tax Department 
with respect to the assessment of distilleries and breweries.  The following 
sources of criteria were considered: 
(i) 
 Income Tax Act, 1961 
(ii)  ICAI Guidelines issued from time to time 
(iii)  State Excise Licenses from and other data provided by the Uttar 
Pradesh State Excise Department & other State Excise Departments. 
(iv)  Judicial pronouncements 
(v)  White Paper on Black Money published by Ministry of Finance in 2012 
(vi)  Working Agreements between the companies, if any 
1.9 Legal Provisions: 
Judicial pronouncements, legal provisions, relevant  provisions of the Act, 
rates, etc., are summarized in Annexure A-2.  
1.10 Constraints: 
 
Non-Production of records 11 : We were limited to the records provided by the 
ITD, as the following records were neither found pl aced in the assessment 
folders nor did the respective Assessing Officers make them available to Audit:  
(i)  Copy/reference of agreement(s) between Manufacturin g Units i.e. 
M/s W1 Ltd., M/s U1 Ltd. and M/s M1 Ltd. of Liquor/ Beer with others, if 
any, for Assessment Years 2009-10 to 2018-19. 
(ii)  A list of Sundry Debtors/Creditors/Advances/other l iabilities was not 
available in the schedule of the Balance Sheet, and  their confirmations 
were also not available in the scrutiny assessment records.  Hence, the 
Audit requisitioned the details of the top five Sun dry Debtors/Creditors/ 
Advances/other liabilities of M/s W1 Ltd., M/s U1 L td. and M/s M1 Ltd. 
for Assessment Years 2009-10 to 2018-19, which were  not furnished to 
Audit. 
                                                           
11  Non Production of Records : Section 18 of CAG’s (DPC) Act, 1971, provides that the CAG shall have the authority 
to require that any accounts, books, papers and oth er documents which deal with or form the basis of o r 
otherwise relevant to the transactions to which his duties in respect of Audit extend, shall be sent to such place as 
he may appoint for his inspection.  It is also incu mbent on ITD to expeditiously produce records and f urnish 
relevant information for auditing. 

Report No. 09 of 2024  
7 
(iii)  The appraisal report was not provided to Audit; onl y an extract of the 
draft Appraisal report was provided in the case of M/s U1 Ltd. 
(iv)  In the case of four assessees viz.  M/s P1 Pvt. Ltd ., M/s R1 Ltd., M/s S1 
Ltd. and M/s M3 Pvt. Ltd., details of Non-TCS sale were not given in the 
Audit Report, besides the column prescribed in the guidance note issued 
by the ICAI.  Certificates as required under Sectio ns 195/197 of the IT 
Act, for there was no deduction or lower deduction of tax at source, 
were not provided to Audit in the case of M/s R1 Lt d. Bifurcation of sale 
as TCS and Non-TCS sale was not provided in the Pro fit and Loss 
accounts.  VAT and other levies were not routed thr ough Profit and Loss 
accounts and their details were not provided in the Audit Report. 
(v)  An appraisal report was not provided to Audit regar ding the search 
conducted on M/s P1 Pvt. Ltd. and M/s R1 Ltd. 
(vi)  A completeReport of the Special Auditor under Secti on 142(2A) of the 
Act for the Assessment Year 2017-18 in the case of M/s P1 Pvt. Ltd. was 
not provided. 
(vii)  Financial Statements of Assessment Year 2018-19 wer e not furnished to 
Audit in the case of M/s P1 Pvt. Ltd. and M/s R1 Ltd. 
(viii)  Details of Tax collected at source and correspondin g sale for Assessment 
Year 2018-19 were not available in CPC Data in the case of M/s S1 Ltd. 
(ix)  Details of trade discounts, breakage during manufac turing, sales returns, 
and scrap sales directly linked to net profit were neither provided in the 
profit and loss accounts nor in the balance sheet i n the case of M/s M2 
Ltd. 
(x)  Details of Tax collected at source and correspondin g sale for Assessment 
Years 2016-17, 2017-18 and 2018-19 were not availab le in CPC Data in 
the case of M/s M2 Ltd. 
(xi)  Excise Duty deposited in the State Excise Departmen t and the 
corresponding sale, as well as confirmation from th e State Excise 
Department, was not available in the Scrutiny Asses sment records in the 
cases of eleven assessees viz.  M/s.W1 Ltd., M/s U1  Ltd., M/s M1 Ltd., 
M/s P1 Pvt. Ltd., M/s R1 Ltd., M/s S1 Ltd., M/s M2 Ltd., M/s M3 Ltd., M/s 
A1 Ltd., M/s U2 Ltd. and M/s U3 Ltd. 
(xii)  ITR of M/s M2 Ltd. for the Assessment Year 2018-19 was not provided. 
(xiii)  Reference of self-consumption of the products was n ot given in the Sl. 
No. 35bB of Audit Report.  'Any other report of For m 3CD i.e., notes 
forming part of Form 3CD' was not provided to Audit  with the attached 
documents uploaded with ITRs in case of M/s M2 Ltd. 
(xiv)  Assessment Order passed under section 147 of M/s A1  Ltd. for 
Assessment Year 2015-16 was not provided. 

Report No. 09 of 2024  
8 
(xv)  Assessment folders/case records viz., Assessment or ders, Audit Report, 
and Financial Statements in respect of M/s U2 Ltd. for the Assessment 
Years 2013-14, 2017-18 and 2018-19 were not provided. 
(xvi)  The Department did not provide bifurcation for the figures of sale under 
‘Tie-up Agreements’ as appearing in the Profit and Loss Account of M/s 
U2 Ltd. for the Assessment Year 2014-15 to 2016-17.  Assessment 
folders/case records viz., Audit Report, Financial Statements in respects 
M/s U3 Ltd. for the Assessment Year 2018-19 were not provided. 
(xvii)  Superintendent, State Excise Duty, Aurangabad, unde r the State 
Government Maharashtra, has provided the details of  Sales (own brand) 
and Excise duty paid, which was only a part of the Sales and Excise duty 
claimed in the Profit & Loss accounts.  Part inform ation regarding Import 
Permit on liquor stock in Delhi was provided by the  office of the 
Commissioner of Excise, ENTT. & L Tax Department, G overnment of 
National Capital Territory of Delhi.  The State Exc ise Department of 
Karnataka provided the details of the sale made by the Distillery and 
Brewery units of M/s U2 Ltd. and M/s U3 Ltd. within  the State, which 
does not cover other States. 
Owing to the non-production of records as detailed above, Audit was 
constrained in examining/ verifying these records a s a result Audit was 
unable to get assurance regarding the due diligence  exercised by the AO 
while concluding these assessments. 
1.11 Acknowledgement: 
We acknowledge the cooperation of the Income Tax De partment in 
facilitating the audit by providing the records and  information related to the 
conduct of the “examination of assessees involved i n the business of 
Distilleries and Breweries’’, except the non-produc tion as detailed above.  On 
this account, Audit was constrained in examining th e extent of compliance in 
these cases. 
  

Report No. 09 of 2024  
9 
Chapter-2: Audit Findings 
Audit noted that there was short accounting of sale  under the garb of 
agreement with other parties; lack of inter/intra-d epartmental coordination 
and non-reconciliation with the assessee; arithmeti cal discrepancy and 
certification by the Auditor with respect to Quanti tative Abstract of the 
finished product in Audit report; calculation mista kes; revenue impact due to 
lack of inter-departmental coordination; and non-ad herence to the powers 
conferred by the provisions of the Act efficiently and effectively by the 
Assessing Officers. The Gist of the Audit findings is detailed below in Table II: 
Table II-Gist of Audit  Observations  
Title of Para Para No. Name of 
Assessees 
Tax effect  
(₹ in crore) 
1.  Short accounting of sale 
under the garb of agreement 
with other parties.  
2.3.1.1(a) to (e) M/s W1 Ltd. 2,688.77 
2.3.1.2 M/s U1 Ltd. 1,020.53 
2.3.1.3(a) to (c) M/s M1 Ltd. 729.81 
2.  Lack of inter-departmental 
and intra-departmental 
coordination/reconciliation 
with the assessee.  
2.3.2.1(a) & (b) M/s U1 Ltd. 41.21 
2.3.2.2 M/s P1 Pvt. Ltd. 4,589.42 
2.3.2.3 M/s R1 Ltd. 2,126.21 
2.3.2.4 M/s S1 Ltd. 664.22 
2.3.2.5 M/s M3 Pvt. Ltd. 85.42 
2.3.2.6 M/s M2 Ltd. 93.96 
2.3.2.7 M/s A1 Ltd.         133.22 
2.3.2.8 M/s U2 Ltd. 4,396.48 
2.3.2.9 M/s U3 Ltd. 642.49 
2.3.2.10 M/s M1 Ltd. 8.59 
3.  Arithmetical discrepancy 
and certification by the Auditor 
with respect to the 
Quantitative Abstract of the 
finished product.  
2.3.3.1(a) & (b) M/s W1 Ltd. 278.45 
2.3.3.2 M/s R1 Ltd. 416.96 
2.3.3.3 M/s M2 Ltd. 8.81 
2.3.3.4 M/s A1 Ltd.  0.79                         
4.   Calculation mistakes  2.3.4.1 M/s P1 Pvt Ltd. 1.36 
2.3.4.2 M/s S1 Ltd. 2.00 
5.  Revenue impact due to  lack 
of inter-departmental 
coordination.  
2.3.5 (i), (ii) & 
(iii) 
All the selected 
11 companies. 
Systemic Issue 
6.  Non-adherence to the 
powers conferred by the 
provisions of the Act.  
2.3.6.1(a) (i) to 
(iii) 
M/s W1 Ltd. Systemic Issue 
2.3.6.1(b) M/s U1 Ltd. Systemic Issue 
2.3.6.1(c) (i) to 
(iv) 
M/s M1 Ltd. Systemic Issue 
2.3.6.2 M/s W1 Ltd.,   
M/s U1 Ltd.,  and  
M/s M1 Ltd. 
Systemic Issue 

Report No. 09 of 2024  
10 
Audit findings during the test check of the records  for Assessment Years 
2009-10 to 2018-19 are discussed in the succeeding paragraphs.  
2.1  General Audit Observations : 
 
2.1.1 Applicability of Section 68/69C: 
Section 68 of the Act implies that if any sum is fo und credited in the books or 
books of account of the assessee and the assessee i s not able to 
explain/prove the source and genuineness of the afo resaid sum to the 
satisfaction of the Assessing Officer; then the sam e may be added under 
Section 68 of the Act.  
As per section 69C of the Act any expenditure incurred by the assessee where 
no explanation about the source of such expenditure  is offered by the 
assessee to the satisfaction of the AO, then the sa me may be deemed to be 
the income of the assessee for such financial year.  
The onus of proving the genuineness and source of s uch income and 
expenditure lies with the assessee. 
Audit observed that the assessees involved in the b usiness of Distilleries and 
Breweries  
a) 
 have not accounted for the entire sale of alcoholic products  
b)  and have not accounted for the entire expenditure f or which 
corresponding State Excise Duty was deposited with the respective State 
Governments.  
c) 
 The income reflected in the Profit and Loss Account has been found to 
be under/short-reported when compared with the info rmation made 
available by the State Excise Department.  
d) 
 The income reflected in the Profit and Loss Account has been found to 
be under/short-reported when compared with the info rmation reported by 
the Auditor in form 3CD.  
e) 
 In 03 cases out of a total sample of 11 cases, asse ssees have stated 
that there were agreements with other parties for w hom they were 
manufacturing and selling their products but not br inging the transactions 
into their books of accounts.  
f) 
 Further, the Assessing Officers neither exercised t he powers 
conferred to them by the Act to ensure the correctn ess of the 
sale/expenditure reflected in the Profit and Loss A ccount by confronting the 
assessees during the assessment proceedings nor cal led for the information 
from the respective State Excise Departments to arr ive at the true and 
correct income during the assessment proceedings.  

Report No. 09 of 2024  
11 
The income, though accruing, but not offered for ta xation for the purposes of 
computation of income tax, however, was found credi ted in books falling in 
consonance with Section 2(12A) of the Act 12  were not disclosed/accounted in 
the Financial Statements and consequently depicted the inconsistencies in 
the accounts and remained unexplained.  The above o missions/lapses 
resulted in evasion of tax by the respective assessees. 
Therefore, in such cases, in the opinion of Audit, additions are required to be 
added under the relevant Section 68/69C of the Act. 
2.1.2  Mismatch in Sales figures in Books of Accounts vis- à-vis Tax Audit 
Report (TAR): 
To discourage tax avoidance and tax evasion and to ensure that the books or 
books of accounts of the assessee faithfully reflec t the income of the 
taxpayer, the Income Tax Act provides for reporting /certification through the 
audit of accounts and audit reports from an Account ant.  It facilitates the 
administration of tax laws by a true/proper present ation of the accounts 
before the tax authorities.  Accountants have been mandated to be 
facilitators for the Income Tax Department in admin istering the provisions of 
the Act correctly.  The assessing officer is expect ed to make an independent 
judgement while finalizing the assessment and can r equire the assessee to 
justify his claims with reference to records and evidence. 
Consequent to the audit of the Financial Statements  of an assessee by an 
Accountant registered with the Institute of Charter ed Accountants of India, 
the report is submitted in Form No. 3CD, which is t he Statement of 
particulars required to be furnished under section 44AB of the Income-tax 
Act.  This form is devised by the Institute of Char tered Accountants of India 
and is recommendatory in nature, which the members of the Institute may 
like to abide.  This report is considered a report of the third party, which has 
its own recognition and is a tool in the hands of t he Department while 
deciding the correctness of the income declared by the assessee and 
determining the true and correct income of the assessee.  
The audit reviewed the assessment records of the sp ecified corporate 
assessee with a defined sample size to ensure that the tax audit reports, 
particularly figures reported at Sl. No. 34(a) were  complete in themselves to 
provide sufficient and requisite information to the  Assessing Officer aiding 
him in completing the assessment as required under the Act.  
                                                           
12  Section 2(12A) of the Act - Books or Books of Account” includes ledgers, day- books, cash books, account-books 
and other books, whether kept in the written form or in electronic form or in digital form or as print -outs of data 
stored in such electronic form or in digital form o r in a floppy, disc, tape or any other form of elec tro-magnetic 
data storage device . 

Report No. 09 of 2024  
12 
The current report has taken into cognizance the fi gures reported by the 
Auditors in Form No. 3CD, particularly at Sl. No. 3 4(a), which have then been 
compared and verified with the figures reported in the Financial Statements 
vis-a-vis the information obtained from different a gencies like the State 
Excise Department, CPC(TDS), Vaishali, Ghaziabad, e tc. The purpose is to 
determine any variation/underreporting of the incom e to safeguard the 
interest of revenue and to ensure that the intent of the legislature embedded 
in the different section/provisions of the IT Act a re being complied with by 
the taxpayers and the tax authorities. However, it was observed during the 
audit that the figure for sales appeared in profit and loss accounts and in the 
tax audit report (TAR), at Sl.No. 34(a) could not be reconciled. 
In response, ITD stated that the Excise Duty paid b y the assessees is routed 
through the Profit and Loss Account.  However, the VAT and other taxes paid 
by the assessees are not routed through the Profit and Loss Account but are 
included in the Tax Audit Report at Sl.No. 34(a). I n the absence of bifurcation 
of the figures appearing at Sl.No. 34(a), which has  been stated to be 
comprising of TCS sale plus Excise Duty plus VAT & other taxes, Audit could 
not derive an assurance about the correctness of th e different amounts 
included in the TAR as aforesaid, which could then be compared with the 
amount of sale either Gross (including Excise) or N et (excluding excise) in the 
Profit and Loss Account, thus exhibiting inherent inconsistencies.  
2.1.3  Non-bifurcation of TCS/Non-TCS Sale: 
TCS is collected on the liquor of alcoholic nature made for human 
consumption at specified rates as per the provision  of the Act.  However, 
there are certain sales on which the seller is not required to collect the TCS, 
like sale to CSD canteens, clubs, Corporations etc.  
The sales reflected in the Profit and Loss Account (P&L) comprise sales on 
which TCS was collected and also sales on which no TCS was collected.  
However, the bifurcation of this TCS and Non-TCS sa le in the P&L Account is 
not provided by any of the Assessee in the audit sa mple.  The issue to 
confirm the TCS sale in the P&L Account with the TC S sale in Form 3CD at 
Sl.No. 34(a) where the Accountant has not bifurcate d the figure of TCS sale 
(where it is a combined figure of TCS sale, excise duty, VAT and other taxes) 
was also not examined by the Assessing Officers dur ing the course of 
assessment proceedings.  As figures were not provid ed separately in P&L 
Account and TAR, Audit could not verify the correctness of these figures. 
Further, Audit noted that Certificates issued, if a ny, for no deduction/ 
collection or lower deduction/collection of tax at source required under 
Sections 195/197 of the IT Act, were not available in the case records.  In 

Report No. 09 of 2024  
13 
their absence, Audit could not establish an assuran ce about the correctness 
of these figures.  
It may be noted that Para 58.10 of the Guidance Not e on Tax Audit under 
Section 44AB of the Income-tax Act, 1961, issued by  ICAI for reporting of 
TCS/Non-TCS sales, states that in column (6) the ta x auditor is required to 
furnish the total amount out of the amount deductib le or collectible as 
mentioned in column (5) of Sl. No. 34(a) at which t he tax was deducted or 
collected at the specified rate.  
2.1.4  Reopening of cases: 
The Assessing Officer may, subject to the provision s of Sections 148 to 153, 
assess or reassess such income and any other income  chargeable to tax that 
comes to his notice and has escaped assessment.  Ch anges made vide 
respective Finance Acts are as detailed below:- 
(a)  Prior to the Finance Act 2021 , reopening was permissible for a maximum 
period of six years and, in some cases, even beyond  the period of six 
years, subject to certain conditions.  
(b)  By the Finance Act 2021 , Sections 147 to 149 and Section 151 have been 
substituted.  No notice under Section 148 of the Ac t can be issued 
without following the procedure prescribed under Se ction 148A.  Along 
with the notice under Section 148, the Assessing Of ficer is required to 
serve the order passed under Section 148A of the Ac t.  Section 148A is a 
new provision in the nature of a condition precedent. 
(c)  As per the Finance Act 2022 , the Time limit for issue of notice u/s 149 is 
amended as follows: If three years, but not more th an ten years, have 
elapsed from the end of the relevant assessment yea r unless the 
Assessing Officer has in his possession books of ac count or other 
documents or evidence which reveal that the income chargeable to tax, 
represented in the form of an asset, expenditure in  respect of a 
transaction or in relation to an event or occasion or an entry or entries in 
the books of account which has escaped assessment a mounts to or is 
likely to amount to fifty lakh rupees or more. 
The IT Act empowers the Assessing Officers by way o f the provisions of the 
Act as above to address the cases of revenue leakag e.  However, due 
diligence is to be adopted by authorities to minimi ze the chances of such 
leakages.  Measures need to be developed by the mon itoring authorities to 
ensure that cases do not become time-barred and rev enue leakage cases are 
rectified suo-moto. 

Report No. 09 of 2024  
14 
2.2  Systemic Issues: 
2.2.1 Use of General Business Activity Codes till A Y 2017-18 
Audit noticed that the assessees pertaining to the Distilleries and Breweries 
sector filed their ITR using Business activity code  '0124' related to 
'Manufacturing Activity (Others)' during the Assess ment Years 2009-10 to 
2017-18.  The ITD has allocated codes, i.e., 'Manuf acturing of wines- 04016' 
'Manufacture of beer- 04017', 'Manufacture of malt liquors- 04018', 'Distilling 
and blending of spirits, production of ethyl alcoho l- 04019', etc. from 
Assessment Year 2018-19.  The ITD had not allocated  any specific business 
activity code with respect to the Distilleries and Breweries sector till 
Assessment Year 2017-18, which resulted in the non- identification of 
assessees operating the business of Distilleries an d Breweries while deciding 
the parameters for selection of the cases for scrut iny assessments under 
CASS. 
2.2.2 
 Lack of Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for asse ssment of 
Distilleries and Breweries – 
Audit noticed that the ITD does not have a specific  Standard Operating 
Procedure (SOP) or instructions for the Assessing O fficer to deal with the 
assessees specific to the Distilleries and Brewerie s sector.  Such an SOP may 
have helped avoid the issues discussed in the subsequent paragraphs. 
2.3  Compliance Issues: 
2.3.1 Short accounting of sale under the garb of ag reement with other 
parties: 
The liquor business is quite different from other b usinesses, as it is highly 
regulated.  No company can set up a distillery and manufacture and sell 
alcoholic beverages without a license granted by th e State Government.  The 
terms of granting licenses are highly stringent and  closely monitored by the 
excise authorities of the State.  The terms of a co ntract being agreed upon by 
the parties cannot override the applicable provisio ns of the relevant Act and 
cannot shift the ownership right over a manufactured item.  
Audit examination of records of three companies, vi z.  M/s W1 Ltd., M/s U1 
Ltd., and M/s M1 Ltd. engaged in the business of li quor revealed that these 
companies were required to offer the income from bu siness under the head 
income "Profits and gains from business or professi on" after getting the 
books of accounts audited under Section 44AB of IT Act.  The companies 

Report No. 09 of 2024  
15 
were carrying out their business activity under clo se monitoring of the UP 
State Excise Department.Details of Income and Expen diture during the 
manufacturing and selling process were required to be included in the Profit 
and Loss Accounts of the respective years to comput e the net profit.  
However, these companies, being contract manufacturing units, excluded the 
income and expenditure from their Profit and Loss A ccounts/ITR under the 
garb of "agreement", but these were included in the  return filed with the 
State Excise Authorities and were subjected to levy  of State Excise.  The ITD 
could not compute the income correctly and could no t apply the special rate 
required.  On being pointed out, the ITD reopened t he cases under Section 
147 13 . Detailed observations, along with the reply of th e Department, are 
illustrated below:  
2.3.1.1  PCIT Bareilly – M/s W1 Ltd.  
Audit requisitioned the records (July 2019 and Sept ember 2021) with respect 
to M/s W1 Ltd. from the Assessment Years 2009-10 to 2018-19. 
Non-Production/Non-Availability of the records:  
The copy/reference of agreement(s) for manufacturin g liquor/beer 
between the Assessee and other parties was not avai lable in the case 
records.  A list of Sundry Debtors/Creditors/Advance s/other liabilities was 
not available in the schedule of the Balance Sheet,  and their confirmations 
were also not available in the Scrutiny assessment records.  Hence, Audit 
requisitioned the details of the top five Sundry Deb tors/Creditors/ 
Advances/other liabilities of M/s W1 Ltd. for Asses sment Years 2009-10 to 
2018-19, which were not furnished to Audit.  Excise  Duty was deposited 
with the State Excise Department, and the correspond ing sale was not 
available in the ITD Scrutiny Assessment records. 
(I) 
 Overview: During the test check for the period of ten Assessm ent 
Years i.e., the Assessment Years 2009-10 to 2018-19 , Audit noted the details 
of summary/scrutiny assessments during this period as mentioned in 
Table 2.1.1  below:  
 
                                                           
13  Section 147 of the IT Act provides that if any income chargeable to tax, in t he case of an assessee, has escaped 
assessment for any assessment year, the Assessing O fficer may assess or reassess such income for such 
assessment year in respect of any issue, which has escaped assessment.  

Report No. 09 of 2024  
16 
Table 2.1.1- M/s W1 Ltd. 
(₹ in crore) 
Asst. 
Year 
Business 
Activity 
Code 
Assessed/ 
Processed 
under 
Section 
Date of 
Assessment 
order 
Sales/ 
Gross 
Receipts 
in P/L 
Excise 
duty 
debited in 
P/L  
Excise duty 
deposited 
in Excise 
Department  
Returned 
Income/ 
Loss 
Assessed 
Income/ 
Loss 
2009-10  0124 143(1) 01.11.2010 0 0 Not 
available 
-0.26 -0.26 
2010-11  0124 143(3) 30.03.2013   651.00   481.97 Not 
available 
-9.59 -9.54 
2011-12  0124 143(1) 10.01.2012 1,231.67   932.55 1,013.56 -0.06 -0.06 
2012-13  0124 143(3) 16.01.2014 1,463.72 1,133.62 1,362.38 - 14.60 -14.42 
2013-14  0124 143(3) 22.10.2014 1,382.06 1,055.58 1,527.71 30.90 30.90 
2014-15  0124 143(3) 15.02.2016 1,627.13 1,305.75 1,852.00 3 2.98 32.98 
2015-16  0124 143(1) 01.03.2016 2,170.68 1,791.63 2,461.04 47.15 47.15 
2016-17  0124 143(1) 15.08.2017 2,203.98 1,868.03 2,718.87 3 8.64 38.64 
2017-18  0124 143(3) 03.12.2019 2,277.24 1,868.00 2,290.61 38.14 38.14 
2018-19  04016/ 
04018/ 
04019 
143(1) 14.02.2020 2,482.67 1,978.88 3,088.55 133.06  133.10 
a)  Scrutiny assessment under Section 143(3) was done o nly in five years, 
i.e., Assessment Years 2010-11, 2012-13 to 2014-15 and 2017-18.  The 
returns for the remaining five Assessment Years 200 9-10, 2011-12, 
2015-16, 2016-17 and 2018-19 were processed through  summary 
assessment under Section 143(1). 
b)  In three Assessment Years: 2013-14, 2014-15 and 201 7-18, the 
assessment was completed without making any additio n(s) to the 
returned income of the company. 
c)  In the remaining two Assessment Years 2010-11 and 2 012-13, the 
scrutiny assessment was completed by making minimal  additions of 
₹ 0.05 crore and ₹ 0.18 crore respectively, to the returned loss. 
(II)  Audit Analysis of Assessments: 
Audit scrutiny (June 2021) of the related records o f M/s W1 Ltd. revealed 
that the assessee engaged in liquor business was ca rrying out the activities of 
manufacturing, bottling and sale of alcoholic produ cts as laid down in the 
conditions of the State Excise Licenses granted by the UP State Excise 
Department.  M/s W1 Ltd. had also entered into agre ements with M/s U3 
Ltd., as detailed below: 
(i) 
 Brewing & Distribution Agreement with effect from 0 1.10.2011 which 
was renewed up to 30.06.2016 wherein M/s W1 Ltd. wa s responsible to 
manufacture and sell M/s U3 Ltd.’s brand liquor.  

Report No. 09 of 2024  
17 
(ii)  Thereafter, two new agreements came into force viz. , ‘Beer Purchase 
Agreement’ and ‘Contract Packing Agreement’ with ef fect from 01.07.2016 
which was renewed up to 30.06.2020 wherein as per t he ‘Beer Purchase 
Agreement’, M/s W1 Ltd. manufactured and sold Beer of M/s U3 Ltd.’s brand 
in bulk and as per ‘Contract Packing Agreement’, M/ s W1 Ltd. packaged the 
beer of M/s U3 Ltd. in bottles and cans which was f inally sold by M/s U3 Ltd. 
The arrangement between M/s. W1 Ltd. and M/s. U3 Lt d has been explained 
in the form of flow chart given in Annexure I . 
Audit collected detailed information of sales made,  excise duty paid, working 
licenses granted and agreements entered by M/s W1 L td. from the Uttar 
Pradesh State Excise Department wherein Audit notic ed that M/s W1 Ltd. 
was granted licenses viz., B-1 & PD-2 for manufactu ring of liquor, FL-3 for 
bottling and FL-1 for sale.  
Audit noted that Uttar Pradesh State Excise Departm ent had also granted 
licenses to M/s U3 Ltd. and M/s A2 Ltd. – (i) FL3A for assigning bottling 
privilege of M/s W1 Ltd., on lease by obtaining the  liquor/beer at M/s W1’s 
premises putting its brand label and (ii) FL1A for sale of bottled items. The 
arrangement between M/s. W1 Ltd. and M/s. A2 Ltd ha s been explained in 
the form of flow chart given in Annexure II . 
Audit observed that the total sale of M/s W1 Ltd. s ubject to levy of State 
Excise was not taken into the Profit and Loss Accou nts for the purpose of IT 
calculations, as detailed below:  
(a) 
 Audit noticed (July 2019) from examination of the r ecords of M/s W1 
Ltd. pertaining to three Assessment Years 2011-12 t o 2013-14 (Summary 
Assessment in Assessment Year 2011-12 and Scrutiny Assessment in 
Assessment Years 2012-13 and 2013-14) that the tota l sale reported by the 
assessee in the Profit and Loss Account was ₹ 4,035.81 crore, whereas 
information made available by the UP State Excise D epartment revealed that 
the sale reported by the assessee was ₹ 5,414.17 crore, resulting in under-
reporting of sale amounting to ₹ 1,378.36 crore (₹ 5,414.17 crore - 
₹ 4,035.81 crore) (Annexure B-1)  in the Profit and Loss Account.  Omission to 
consider the under-reported sales of ₹ 1,378.36 crore by the ITD in Assessment 
Years 2011-12 to 2013-14 resulted in short computat ion of income by an 
amount of ₹ 1,378.36 crore involving a tax effect of ₹ 448.10 crore excluding 
interest under Sections 234A and 234B of IT Act, as applicable. 
In reply (January 2022), PCCIT (CCA) Lucknow stated  that the notice under 
Section 148 had been issued for the Assessment Year  2013-14.  However, a 
reply for Assessment Years 2011-12 and 2012-13 is s till awaited 
(February 2024).  

Report No. 09 of 2024  
18 
Audit observed that the order under Section 147 was  passed (March 2022) 
for Assessment Year 2013-14 by National Faceless As sessment Centre Delhi 
at income of ₹ 187.46 crore by making an addition of ₹ 156.56 crore on 
account of sale made by M/s W1 Ltd. regarding to M/ s U3 Ltd.’s brand.  The 
audit noted that the sale pertaining to M/s A2 Ltd.  was neither added to the 
assessed income nor discussed by the Assessing Offi cer of NaFAC in the 
assessment order passed under Section 147 of the IT Act for Assessment Year 
2013-14.  Further, ACIT Circle 2 Bareilly did not p rovide details to justify the 
basis of not making additions with respect to sales  pertaining to M/s A2 Ltd. 
in the reassessment order. 
Thus, the Audit could not verify and ascertain the reasons for making 
addition only on account of sales of M/s U3 Ltd.’s brand while leaving out 
sales of M/s A2 Ltd.’s brand.  
The audit noted that as per the existing provisions  of section 148 of the Act, 
cases could be reopened up to 10 years.  However, t he cases for Assessment 
Years 2011-12 and 2012-13 have become time-barred d ue to the delay in 
taking the remedial action in a timely manner.  ITD  may examine these 
assessees in detail for the succeeding Assessment Y ears also so as to prevent 
the probable revenue leakage to the exchequer under  intimation to Audit.  
Reply of the Ministry is awaited (February 2024). 
(b)   Audit noticed (July 2019) from examination of  the records of  M/s W1 
Ltd. pertaining to three Assessment Years 2014-15 t o 2016-17 (Scrutiny 
Assessment in Assessment Year 2014-15 and Summary A ssessment in 
Assessment Years 2015-16 and 2016-17) that the assessee had declared gross 
sales of ₹ 5,874.73 crore in its Profit and Loss Account inst ead of 
₹ 9,026.22 crore, as certified by the Auditor in Form 3CD at Sl. No. 34(a) against 
Section 206C of the Act and also as reported by the  assessee to CPC(TDS), 
Vaishali, Ghaziabad, thereby under-reporting the sa les of ₹ 3,151.49 crore 
(₹ 9,026.22 crore - ₹ 5,874.73 crore) (Annexure B-2).  Further, the State Excise 
Department had also confirmed that the sale made by M/s W1 Ltd. pertaining 
to M/s U3 Ltd.’s brand was ₹ 2,977.00 crore ( ₹ 907.68 crore + ₹ 974.91 crore 
+ ₹ 1,094.41 crore) and Audit noticed that the same we re not accounted for 
by M/s W1 Ltd. in its Profit and Loss Account.  Omi ssion to consider the 
under-reported sales of ₹ 3,151.49 crore, which was inclusive of sale of M/s  
U3 Ltd.’s brand of ₹ 2,977.00 crore, by the ITD in Assessment Years 201 4-15 
to 2016-17 resulted in short computation of income of ₹ 3,151.49 crore 
involving tax effect of ₹ 1,078.46 crore, excluding interest under Sections 
234A and 234B of IT Act, as applicable. 
   Audit noted that the transactions pertaining to M/s U3 Ltd.’s brand were not 
shared and verified by the Assessing Officer of M/s  W1 Ltd. with the 

Report No. 09 of 2024  
19 
Jurisdictional Assessing Officer of M/s U3 Ltd. Sim ilarly, the same was also 
not shared and verified by the Assessing Officer of  M/s U3 Ltd. with the 
Assessing Officer of M/s W1 Ltd. 
In reply (January 2022), PCCIT (CCA) Lucknow, while  accepting the fact that 
the practice adopted by the assessee has resulted i n suppression of turnover 
of income, issued notices under Section 148, for the respective years.  
Audit noted that the Department took remedial actio n in three Assessment 
Years: 2014-15, 2015-16 and 2016-17 by passing orde rs (March 2022) under 
Section 147 read with Section 144B of the IT Act at  income of ₹ 256.81 crore, 
₹ 264.88 crore and ₹ 253.21 crore respectively.  The addition of ₹ 223.83 crore, 
₹ 217.73 crore and ₹ 214.58crore was made on account of sale of M/s U3 
Ltd.’s brand in respective Assessment Years.  
Audit observed from the reassessments concluded tha t although remedial 
action was taken at the instance of Audit, the addi tions were made under 
Section 28 read with Section 37 of the Act and not under Section 68/69C of 
the IT Act as pointed out by Audit, which led to sh ort computation of income 
by reducing the sale of M/s U3 Ltd.’s brand not tak en earlier in the Profit and 
Loss accounts.  Further, the expenditure incurred b y M/s W1 Ltd. towards 
State Excise Duty paid on account of M/s U3 Ltd.’s brand, kept out of the 
books, was not considered for addition in the reassessment order.  
(c)    Audit noticed (July 2019) from examination o f the scrutiny records of 
M/s W1 Ltd. pertaining to Assessment Year 2017-18 t hat the sale declared by 
the assessee in its Profit and Loss Account was ₹ 2,245.46 crore; Sale as 
certified by the Auditor in Form 3CD at Sl. No. 34(a) against Section 206C of the 
Act was ₹ 2,307.10 crore, and the sale as reported by assessee to the CPC (TDS) 
was ₹ 2,797.17 crore.  Audit noted that the assessee had  under reported the 
sales by ₹ 551.71 crore ( ₹ 2,797.17 crore - ₹ 2,245.46 crore)  (Annexure B-3) .  
Omission to consider the under-reported sales of ₹ 551.71 crore by the ITD in 
Assessment Year 2017-18 resulted in a short computation of income involving 
tax effect of ₹ 190.94 crore excluding interest under Sections 234A and 234B of 
the IT Act, as applicable.  Had the provision of se ction 68/69C of the Income 
Tax Act been invoked, the tax impact/effect would have been higher 
14 . 
In reply (January 2022), the PCCIT(CCA) Lucknow, wh ile accepting the fact 
that the practice adopted by the assessee has resul ted into suppression of 
turnover of income, issued notice under Section 148 for the respective year.  
Audit noted that the Assessing Officer of NaFAC too k remedial action for 
Assessment Year 2017-18 by passing order (March 202 2) under Section 147 
                                                           
14  The probable amount of tax effect u/s 68/69C  works out to be ₹ 426.19 crore (approximately).  

Report No. 09 of 2024  
20 
read with Section 144B of the IT Act at income of  ₹ 127.19 crore by making 
an addition of ₹ 89.05 crore on account of sale of M/s U3 Ltd.’s brand. 
Audit observed from the reassessments concluded tha t although remedial 
action was taken at the instance of Audit but, the additions were made under 
Section 28 read with Section 37 of the Act.  Howeve r, the expenditure 
incurred by M/s W1 Ltd. towards State Excise Duty p aid on account of M/s 
U3 Ltd.’s brand, kept out of books, was not conside red for addition in the 
reassessment order.  
(d) 
 Audit noticed (September 2021) from examination of the information 
made available by the UP State Excise Department pe rtaining to M/s W1 Ltd. 
and summary records for Assessment Year 2018-19 tha t the assessee had 
made the transaction of ₹ 1,594.03 crore (sale ₹ 697.05 crore + excise duty 
₹ 896.98 crore) of M/s U3 Ltd.’s brand as per the UP  State Excise Department 
which was not included in the Profit and Loss Accou nts of the assesse, 
thereby resulting in under-reporting of income of ₹ 1,594.03 crore.  Omission 
to consider the under-reported amount of ₹ 1,594.03 crore by the ITD in 
Assessment Year 2018-19 resulted in the short compu tation of tax of 
₹ 551.66 crore, excluding interest under Sections 23 4A and 234B of the IT 
Act, as applicable.  Had the provision of section 6 8/69C of the Income Tax Act 
been invoked, the tax impact/effect would have been higher 15 . 
Audit noted that the transactions pertaining to M/s  U3 Ltd.’s brand were not 
shared and verified by the ACIT Circle 2 Bareilly, Assessing Officer of M/s W1 
LTD. with the DCIT Circle 7(1)(1) Bangalore, Jurisd ictional Assessing Officer of 
M/s U3 Ltd. No efforts seems to have been made to s hare and verify details 
by the DCIT Circle 7(1)(1) Bangalore, Assessing Officer of M/s U3 Ltd. with the 
ACIT Circle 2 Bareilly, Assessing Officer of M/s W1 Ltd. or vice versa. 
In reply (January 2022), the PCCIT (CCA) Lucknow st ated that necessary 
action is under consideration by the respective Ass essing Officer.  Details of 
further action taken by the Department are awaited (February 2024). 
Audit, further, cross-verified the records of M/s U 3 Ltd. for Assessment Years 
2014-15 to 2017-18 and noticed that M/s U3 Ltd. has  limited itself to offering 
income on the basis of information provided by the Contract Manufacturing 
Units (CMUs), i.e. unaudited figures.  Accounts of M/s U3 Ltd. do not provide 
the bifurcation of the net income from different CM Us in its Profit and Loss 
Account.  Therefore, it could not be ascertained wh ether any income from 
manufacturing by M/s W1 Ltd., based on even unaudit ed figures, was 
                                                           
15  The probable amount of tax effect u/s 68/69C works  out to be ₹ 1,231.39 crore (approximately).  

Report No. 09 of 2024  
21 
included in the Profit and Loss Accounts of M/s U3 Ltd.  The possibility of sale 
proceeds of liquor/beer not being taken into accoun t for tax under the garb 
of agreement at either M/s W1 Ltd. or M/s U3 Ltd. w as high, and the risk of 
evasion of tax cannot be ruled out.  
(e)   Audit examined (July 2019 and September 2021)  the assessment 
records of M/s W1 Ltd. pertaining to five Assessment Years 2014-15 to 2018-19 
(Scrutiny Assessment in Assessment Years 2014-15 & 2017-18 and Summary 
Assessment in Assessment Years 2015-16, 2016-17 and  2018-19) along with 
the information provided by the UP State Excise Department and noticed that 
the assessee had sold IMFL of ₹ 1,219.49 crore including Excise duty of 
₹ 911.66 crore under M/s A2 Ltd.’s brand as provided  by the UP State Excise 
Department, but the same was not included in the Pr ofit and Loss Accounts 
(Annexure B-4)  of the assessee, thereby resulting in under-report ing of sales 
of ₹ 1,219.49 crore.  Omission to consider the under-re ported amount of 
₹ 1,219.49 crore by the ITD in Assessment Years 2014 -15 to 2018-19 resulted 
in a short levy of tax of  ₹ 419.61 crore, excluding interest under Sections 
234A and 234B of the IT Act, as applicable.  Had th e provision of section 
68/69C of the Income Tax Act been invoked, the tax impact/effect would 
have been higher 
16 . 
The audit noted that the transactions pertaining to  the M/s A2 Ltd.’s brand 
were not shared and verified by the ACIT Circle 2 B areilly, i.e., the Assessing 
Officer of M/s W1 Ltd., with the Jurisdictional Assessing Officer of M/s A2 Ltd. 
Similarly, the same was not shared and verified by the Assessing Officer of 
M/s A2 Ltd. with the ACIT Circle 2 Bareilly, i.e., the Assessing Officer of M/s 
W1 Ltd. 
In reply (January 2022), the PCCIT (CCA), Lucknow m entioned that all the 
Audit objections for the Assessment Year 2014-15 wo uld be sent to the NeAC 
from where the assessment is to be made in a facele ss manner and there all 
the issues raised by Audit may be examined again du ring the course of 
proceeding under Section 143(3)/147 of Income tax A ct.  No reply has been 
furnished to Audit with respect to observations per taining to Assessment 
Years 2015-16 to 2018-19.  Details of further actio n taken by the Department 
and reply of the Ministry are awaited in Audit (February 2024). 
Audit noted that the order under Section 147 read w ith Section 144B of the 
IT Act was passed (March 2022) for Assessment Year 2014-15 by an Assessing 
Officer of NaFAC at the income of ₹ 256.81 crore by making an addition of      
₹ 223.83 crore pertaining to the sale of M/s U3 Ltd. ’s brand; however, sale 
                                                           
16  The probable amount of tax effect u/s 68/69C works  out to be ₹ 639.67 crore (approximately).  

Report No. 09 of 2024  
22 
pertaining to M/s A2 Ltd. was neither added in asse ssed income nor any 
details mentioned by the Assessing Officer in the a ssessment order passed 
under Section 147 of the IT Act for the Assessment Year 2014-15.  Further, 
ACIT Circle 2 Bareilly did not provide any reason o r supporting evidence for 
not making an addition with respect to the sale per taining to M/s. A2 Ltd. in 
the reassessment order. 
Thus, the Audit could not verify and ascertain the reasons for making 
additions only on account of sales of M/s U3 Ltd.’s  brand while leaving out 
sales of M/s A2 Ltd.’s brand. 
Details of further action taken by the Department a nd reply of the Ministry 
are awaited in Audit (February 2024). 
2.3.1.2   PCIT- I, Kanpur – M/s U1 Ltd. 
Audit requisitioned records (June 2019 and Septembe r 2021) with respect to 
M/s U1 Ltd. from the Assessment Years 2009-10 to 2018-19.  
Non-Production/Non-Availability of the records:  
A Search was conducted (July 2014), but the Apprais al report was not 
provided to Audit, and only an extract of the draft  Appraisal report was 
provided.  The copy/reference of agreement(s) for m anufacturing 
liquor/beer between the Assessee and other parties was not found 
available in the case records or in the extract of the Draft Appraisal Report.  
A list of Sundry Debtors/Creditors/Advances/other li abilities was not 
available in the schedule of the Balance Sheet, and  their confirmations 
were also not available in the Scrutiny assessment records.  Hence, the 
Audit requisitioned the details of the top five Sun dry Debtors/Creditors/ 
Advances/other liabilities of M/s U1 Ltd. for Asses sment Years 2009-10 to 
2018-19, which were not furnished to the Audit.  Th e Department did not 
provide bifurcation for the figures of sale under ‘ Tie-up Agreements’ as 
appearing in the Profit and Loss Account of M/s U2 Ltd. Excise Duty 
deposited with the State Excise Department, and the corresponding sale 
was not available in the Scrutiny Assessment records.  
(I)  Overview: During the test check for the period of ten Assessm ent 
Years, i.e., the Assessment Years 2009-10 to 2018-1 9, the period of sample 
selection, Audit noted the details of summary/scrut iny assessments during 
this period, as mentioned in Table 2.1.2 below: 

Report No. 09 of 2024  
23 
Table 2.1.2- M/s U1 Ltd. 
(₹  in crore) 
Asst. 
Year 
Business 
Activity 
Code 
Assessed/ 
Processed 
under 
Section 
Date of 
Assessment 
order 
Sales/ 
Gross 
Receipts 
in P/L 
Excise duty 
debited in 
P/L 
Excise duty 
deposited in 
the Excise 
Department 
Returned 
Income/ 
Loss 
Assessed 
Income/ 
Loss 
2009-10  0124 153A 17  30.12.2016 444.73 331.54 316.70 (-).04 (-).04 
2010-11  0124/0204  153A 30.12.2016 380.50 290.66 301.60 1.75 1.75 
2011-12  0124/ 
0204 
153A 30.12.2016 384.80 306.30 405.57 0 0 
2012-13  0124 153A 30.12.2016 435.56 355.73 497.54 0 0 
2013-14  0124 153A 30.12.2016 568.88 469.49 691.81 1.12 1.12 
2014-15  0124 153A 30.12.2016 590.93 490.06 749.62 1.05 1.05  
2015-16  0124 143(3) 30.12.2016 595.12 501.08 785.87 0.01 0.01 
2016-17  0124 143(1) 07.12.2016 662.19 572.90 777.78 -4.30 - 4.30 
2017-18  0124 143(1) Awaited in 
audit 
606.10 530.28 563.56 0 Awaited 
in audit 
2018-19  04017 143(1) Awaited in 
audit 
405.21 353.61 350.18 Awaited 
in audit 
Awaited 
in audit 
 
(a)  A search and seizure operation under Section 132 18  of the IT Act was 
conducted in T1 Group of cases on 09.07.2014.  Simu ltaneously, a search and 
seizure operation was also conducted at the busines s/residential premises of 
M/s U1 Ltd. Warrants of authorization under Section  132 were issued in the 
name of above-mentioned assessee company which were  duly executed.  This 
case was centralized in the Central Circle, Kanpur and assessments were 
concluded accordingly.  Subsequently, the cases for  the Assessment Years 
2009-10 to 2015-16 were selected for Scrutiny assessment.  
(b)  The assessment with respect to search cases under S ection 153A in six 
Assessment Years 2009-10 to 2014-15 and under Secti on 143(3) for the 
Assessment Year 2015-16 were concluded.  Summary as sessment for 
Assessment Years 2016-17 to 2018-19 were processed under Section 143(1).  
(c)  Assessments for the Assessment Years 2009-10 to 201 5-16 were 
completed without making any addition to the return ed income, even after 
the search and seizure operations. 
(II)  Audit Analysis of Assessments: 
Audit scrutiny (November 2020 and November 2021) of  the related records of 
M/s U1 Ltd. revealed that the assessee was engaged in the liquor business and 
doing manufacturing, bottling and sale of alcoholic products in accordance with 
                                                           
17  Section 153A of IT Act  provides that the Assessing Officer can frame asse ssment of a searched person for six 
assessment years immediately preceding the year of search.  Search and Seizure, including surveys, are amongst 
the main evidence-collecting mechanisms which are u sed in cases where credible information about tax e vasion 
is in possession of the ITD.  These cases are then closely examined to arrive at the correct assessmen ts to ensure 
that there is no evasion of taxes.  
18  Section 132 of the IT Act  provides that any person in charge of or in any building, place, vessel, vehicle or aircraft 
authorised to be searched shall allow authorized of ficers free ingress thereto and afford all reasonab le facilities 
for a search therein. 

Report No. 09 of 2024  
24 
the terms and conditions of the State Excise Licens es.  In the absence of the 
Appraisal Report, the Audit could not ascertain tha t the objective(s) and result 
of the Search were duly considered during the Asses sment proceedings as no 
addition was made to the returned income during fin alizing the Assessment.  
Audit collected details of sales made, excise duty paid, working licenses granted 
and agreements entered by M/s U1 Ltd. from the Utta r Pradesh State Excise 
Department.  Audit noticed that M/s U1 Ltd. was gra nted various licenses, viz., 
PD-2 for manufacturing liquor, FL-3 for bottling an d FL-1 for sale.  M/s U2 Ltd. 
was granted license FL3A in respect of undertaking the bottling privilege of 
M/s U1 Ltd., on a lease, by obtaining the liquor/be er at M/s U1 Ltd.’s premises 
and putting brand label of M/s. U2 Ltd. and License  FL1A for sale of bottled 
items under FL3A The arrangement between M/s. U1 Lt d. and M/s. U2 Ltd has 
been explained in the form of flow chart given in Annexure III . 
Audit noticed that: 
(i) 
 Although M/s U1 Ltd. sold 'Indian Made Foreign Liqu or (IMFL)' and paid 
State Excise duty, these transactions were not rout ed through its Profit and 
Loss Account.  Only the sale of 'Country Liquor' wa s included and routed 
through its Profit and Loss Account. 
(ii) 
 Audit obtained a copy of the agreement dated 16.09. 2009 from the UP 
State Excise Department and noticed that there was an agreement “Assignment 
of Bottling Privilege” between M/s U1 Ltd. and M/s U2 Ltd. till 30.06.2016 
wherein M/s U2 Ltd. approached M/s U1 Ltd. for assi gnment of the bottling 
work.  However, Audit noted that the agreement had not specified conditions 
for accounting and selling of such bottled IMFL.  A udit noted that the said 
agreement was not placed in the assessment records of M/s U1 Ltd.  Further, 
no reference to the agreement was made during the a ssessment proceedings. 
While confirming the status to Audit, ACIT 2(1)(1) Kanpur informed Audit that 
as per the assessment record relating to F.Y. 2008- 09 to 2017-18, no copy of 
the agreement made by M/s U1 Ltd with M/s U2 Ltd. a nd other parties are 
available.  
Audit examined (June 2019) the assessment records of M/s U1 Ltd. pertaining to 
seven Assessment Years 2010-11 to 2016-17 (Scrutiny  Assessment in 
Assessment Years 2010-11 to 2015-16 and Summary Assessment in Assessment 
Year 2016-17) along with the information provided b y the UP State Excise 
Department and noticed that the assessee had manufa ctured and sold IMFL 
amounting to ₹ 3,082.65 crore (Net sale ₹ 1,865.75 crore + excise duty 
₹ 1,216.90 crore) (Annexure-C) of M/s U2 Ltd.’s brand as provided by UP State 
Excise Department which was not taken in the Profit  and Loss Accounts of the 
assessee thereby resulting in under-reporting of in come of ₹ 3,082.65 crore.  
Omission to consider the under-reported amount of ₹ 3,082.65 crore by the 

Report No. 09 of 2024  
25 
ITD in Assessment Years 2010-11 to 2016-17 resulted in a short computation of 
tax of ₹ 1,020.53 crore, excluding interest under Sections 234A and 234B of 
the IT Act, as applicable. 
Further, Audit cross-verified the records viz.  Aud it report, Balance sheet and 
Profit & Loss Accounts of M/s U2 Ltd. for Assessment Years 2014-15 to 2016-17.  
Audit noticed that the Statutory Auditor of M/s U2 Ltd. in the "Notes to the 
Financial Statements" certified the 'income arising  from the sale by 
manufacturers under 'Tie-up' agreements' to the ext ent of the basis of 
information (unaudited figures) provided by the Tie  up units/ arrangements.  
Details of bifurcation of net income from different  tie-up units/ arrangements, 
as given in the Profit and Loss Account of M/s U2 L td., were not provided to 
Audit.  Therefore, the entire manufacturing, sales,  and related expenditure 
were kept out from the Accounts of M/s U1 Ltd.  At the other end, Audit could 
not get an assurance that even the 'Income arising from the sale by 
manufacturers under ‘Tie-up’ agreements (Tie-up uni ts)’ in the Profit & Loss 
Accounts of M/s U2 Ltd. included the sale of IMFL m ade by M/s U1 Ltd. (i.e. 
M/s U2 Ltd.’s brand).  
Audit noted that transaction details pertaining to M/s U2 Ltd.’s brand were not 
shared and verified by the DCIT CC I Kanpur, Assess ing Officer of M/s U1 Ltd. 
with the JCIT Special Range 7 Bengaluru, the Jurisd ictional Officer of M/s U2 
Ltd. No effort seems to have been made to share and  verify details by the JCIT 
Special Range 7 Bengaluru, Assessing Officer of M/s  U2 Ltd. with the DCIT CC I 
Kanpur, Assessing Officer of M/s U1 Ltd. either. 
In reply (May 2022), the PCCIT (CCA), Kanpur, stated that notices under Section 
148 of the Act have been issued for Assessment Year s 2013-14 to 2017-18.  In 
respect of the cases pertaining to Assessment Years  2009-10 to 2012-13, time 
limit for remedial action had already elapsed at th e time of raising Audit 
objection itself.  
Reply of the Ministry is awaited (February 2024). 
2.3.1.3  PCIT I Lucknow - M/s M1 Ltd. 
Audit requisitioned records (May 2019 and September  2021) with respect to 
M/s M1 Ltd. from the Assessment years 2009-10 to 2018-19.  
Non-Production/Non-Availability of the records:  
The copy/reference of agreement(s) for manufacturin g liquor/beer between 
the Assessee and other parties was not available in  the case records.  A list of 
Sundry Debtors/Creditors/Advances/other liabilities was not available in the 
schedule of the Balance Sheet, and their confirmati ons were also not 
available in the Scrutiny assessment records.  Henc e, Audit requisitioned the 

Report No. 09 of 2024  
26 
details of the top five Sundry Debtors/Creditors/Adv ances/other liabilities of 
M/s M1 Ltd. for Assessment Years 2009-10 to 2018-19 , which were not 
furnished to the Audit.  Details of Excise Duty depos ited with the State Excise 
Department and the corresponding sale were not avail able in the Scrutiny 
Assessment records. 
(I) 
 Overview: During the test check for the period of ten Assessment Years 
i.e., the Assessment Years 2009-10 to 2018-19, the period of sample selection, 
Audit noted the details of summary/scrutiny assessments during this period, as 
mentioned in Table 2.1.3 below:  
Table 2.1.3- M/s M1 Ltd.  
(₹ in crore) 
Asst. Year Business 
Activity 
Code 
Assessed/ 
Processed 
under  
Section 
Date of 
Assessment 
order 
Sales/ 
Gross 
Receipts 
in P&L 
Excise 
duty 
debited 
in P/L 
Excise duty 
deposited 
in Excise 
Department 
Returned 
Income/ 
Loss 
Assessed 
Income/ 
Loss 
2009-10  0124 143(1) 05.09.2010 4.34 0 NA -0.77 -0.77 
2010-11  0124 143(1) 15.03.2011 4.26 0 NA 0 0 
2011-12  0124 143(1) 10.01.2012 2.53 0 NA -15.63 -15.63 
2012-13  0124 143(3) 26.03.2015 1.02 0 NA -1.11 -0.94 
2013-14  0124 143(3) 21.03.2016 1.00 0 NA -1.77 -0.58 
2014-15  0124 143(3) 21.12.2016 67.33 34.35 34.35 -0.79 -0.69 
2015-16  0124 143(1) 20.08.2016 76.50 40.87 40.87 -0.17 -0.1 7 
2016-17  0124 143(1) 07.12.2016 14.41 0 NA -67.60 -67.60 
2017-18  0124 143(1) 30.10.2018 45.36 8.18 NA -19.43 -19.43 
2018-19  04017 143(1) 04.10.2019 236.30 120.78 661.35 -12.02 -12.02 
(a)  Scrutiny assessment under Section 143(3) was done o nly in three 
years i.e., Assessment Years 2012-13 to 2014-15 and  the remaining 
seven Assessment Years 2009-10 to 2011-12 and 2015- 16 to 2018-19 
were processed under summary assessment under Section 143(1). 
(b)  In three Assessment Years: 2012-13, 2013-14 and 201 4-15, the 
scrutiny assessment was completed by making the add ition of 
₹ 0.17 crore, ₹ 0.17 crore and ₹ 0.10 crore respectively, to the 
returned loss. 
(II)  Audit Analysis of Assessments: 
Audit collected detailed information on Sales made, excise duty paid, working 
licenses granted and agreements entered by M/s M1 L td. from the Uttar 
Pradesh State Excise Department.  Audit noticed tha t M/s M1 Ltd. was 
granted various licenses, viz., B-1 for manufacturi ng beer, FL-3 for bottling 
and FL-1 for sale.  M/s C1 Pvt. Ltd. was granted th e license FL3A for 
undertaking the bottling privilege of M/s M1 Ltd., on a lease, by obtaining the 
liquor/beer at M/s M1 Ltd.'s premises and putting b rand label of M/s C1 Pvt. 
Ltd.  M/s C1 Pvt. Ltd. was also granted license FL 1A for the sale of bottled 

Report No. 09 of 2024  
27 
items under FL3A.  The arrangement between M/s. M1 Ltd. and M/s. C1 Lt d 
has been explained in the form of flow chart given in Annexure IV . 
Further, Audit noticed from the agreement entered b y M/s M1 Ltd. with 
M/s C1 Pvt. Ltd. in February 2015 with a supplement al agreement in 
July 2015 that it was valid for a period of ten yea rs.  As per the agreement, 
the Contract Brewer (M/s M1 Ltd.) was responsible f or brewing, 
manufacturing, filling and packaging of products fo r sale to customers, 
dispatch of finished products, sale of finished pro ducts to customers and all 
activities incidental and ancillary to the attainme nt of the same.  Excise duty, 
bottling fee, franchisee fee, label registration fe e and brand fee will be 
payable by the contract brewer.  Further, the Contr act brewer was to raise 
the invoice to the customers with a legible note ad vising customers to pay all 
the proceeds to M/s C1 Pvt. Ltd. directly.  
Audit observed (May 2019 and November 2021) that the total sale of M/s M1 
Ltd. was not taken into the Profit and Loss Accounts, as detailed below: 
(a)  Audit examined (May 2019) the records of M/s M 1 Ltd. and noticed in 
two Assessment Years: 2016-17 & 2017-18 (Summary As sessment in 
Assessment Years 2016-17 and 2017-18) that the asse ssee had declared the 
gross sales of ₹ 13.13 crore in its Profit and Loss Account instead  of 
₹ 1,114.70 crore as certified by the Auditor in Form 3CD at Sl. No. 34(a) against 
Section 206C of the Act and also as reported by the  assessee to the CPC (TDS) 
Vaishali, Ghaziabad, thereby under reportingsales b y ₹ 1,101.57 crore 
(₹ 1,114.70 crore - ₹ 13.13 crore) (Annexure-D) .  Omission to consider the 
under-reported sales of ₹ 1,101.57 crore by the ITD in Assessment Years 2016-
17 & 2017-18 resulted in short computation of incom e involving tax effect of 
₹ 381.23 crore excluding interest under Sections 234 A and 234B of IT Act, as 
applicable.  Had the provision of section 68/69C of  the Income Tax Act was 
invoked, the tax impact/effect would have been higher 
19 . 
In reply (January 2022), the PCCIT(CCA), Lucknow, w hile accepting the Audit 
observation, stated that the matter requires a thor ough examination of 
accounts as the case of the assessee has not been s ubjected to scrutiny 
assessment in either of these years.  Final reply is awaited (February 2024). 
(b) Audit examined (September 2021) the Summary rec ords of M/s M1 Ltd. 
pertaining to Assessment Year 2018-19 along with the information provided by 
the UP State Excise Department and noticed that the assessee had made a sale 
of ₹ 1,201.48 crore, (which includes Sale of M/s M1 Ltd . of ₹ 194.26 crore + 
Sale of M/s C1 Pvt. Ltd. of ₹ 1,007.22 crore) as intimated by UP State Excise 
Department.  However, the sale reported by the asse ssee in the Profit and 
                                                           
19  The probable amount of tax effect u/s 68/69C works  out to be ₹ 736.46 crore  (approximately).  

Report No. 09 of 2024  
28 
Loss Account was ₹ 194.26 crore only, thereby resulting in under-repo rting of 
income of ₹ 1,007.22 crore ( ₹ 1,201.48 crore - ₹ 194.26 crore).  Omission to 
consider the under-reported sale of ₹ 1,007.22 crore by the ITD in Assessment 
Year 2018-19 resulted in the short computation of t ax of ₹ 348.58 crore, 
excluding interest under Sections 234A and 234B of the IT Act, as applicable.  
Had the provision of section 68/69C of the Income T ax Act was invoked, the 
tax impact/effect would have been higher 20 . 
Audit noted that the transactions pertaining to M/s  C1 Pvt. Ltd.’s brand were 
not shared and verified by the DCIT Circle 4 Luckno w, Assessing Officer of 
M/s M1 Ltd. with the ACIT Circle 4(2) Delhi, Jurisd ictional Assessing Officer of 
M/s C1 Pvt. Ltd. No effort seems to have been made to share and verify 
details by the ACIT Circle 4(2) Delhi, AO of M/s C1  Pvt. Ltd. with the DCIT 
Circle 4 Lucknow, Assessing Officer of M/s M1 Ltd. 
Reply is still awaited from the PCCIT (CCA), Lucknow (February 2024). 
(c) Audit examined (September 2021) the Summary rec ords of M/s M1 Ltd. 
pertaining to Assessment Year 2018-19 and noticed that the assessee declared 
the sale of alcoholic products in the Profit and Loss Account of ₹ 194.26 crore 
and with CPC (TDS) of ₹ 481.15 crore.  However, the sale of ₹ Nil was certified 
by the Auditor in Form 3CD.  Thus, the assessee had  filed an incorrect return 
in the CPC for the Assessment Year 2018-19.  Audit noticed that the 
Chartered Accountant (CA) had also reported incorre ct (NIL) sales in the 
Audit report at Sl. No. 34(a) of Form 3CD. 
Audit, further cross-verified the records of M/s C1  Pvt. Ltd. for Assessment 
Year 2018-19 and noticed that M/s C1 Pvt. Ltd. in i ts Profit and Loss Account 
recognized the transactions of the Contract Manufac turing Units (CMUs) as 
gross revenue, purchases, excise duty and expenses as they were 
transactions of the company only when the amount of  revenue can be 
reliably measured and is probable that future econo mic benefits flow to the 
company and specific criteria have been met for com pany's activities.  
However, there was no reference to CMU’s income in the revenue 
recognition of the financial statement of M/s C1 Pv t. Ltd. for the Assessment 
Years 2016-17 & 2017-18.  It is pertinent to mentio n that M/s M1 Ltd. was 
not the only CMU of M/s C1 Pvt. Ltd.  In the absenc e of availability of 
breakup/bifurcation of gross sales from different C MUs of M/s C1 Pvt. Ltd., 
Audit could not verify whether the gross sales of M /s C1 Pvt. Ltd., included 
the sale of alcoholic products of M/s M1 Ltd. 
During the Assessment Year 2016-17, Audit noticed that the sales, as reported 
with CPC (TDS) in respect of M/s M1 Ltd., was ₹ 268.51 crore, whereas the sale 
                                                           
20  The probable amount of tax effect u/s 68/69C works  out to be ₹ 778.08 crore (approximately).  

Report No. 09 of 2024  
29 
offered by M/s C1 Pvt. Ltd. against CMU income was only ₹ 196.27 crore in its 
Notes to Account annexed with the Profit and Loss A ccount.  The audit could 
not ascertain the reasons for the underreporting of  sales by M/s C1 Pvt. Ltd., 
as the sale of M/s M1 Ltd. Itself exceeded by an am ount of ₹ 72.24 crore of 
the total sales reported by M/s C1 Pvt. Ltd.  
Reply is still awaited from the PCCIT (CCA), Lucknow (February 2024). 
2.3.1.4 Conclusion: 
While examining the cases of the Assessees who have  entered into the 
manufacturing agreement with other parties, Audit o bserved various 
irregularities/deficiencies, e.g. the Sales, Excise  Duty, etc. given in Profit and 
Loss Accounts were not in consonance with the figur es of the Form 3CD as 
well as not correlated with the information/data av ailable with the ITD in 
CPC(TDS) and the State Excise Authority at summary stage resulting in 
incorrect computation of business income under the head “Profit and gains 
from business or profession” Chapter IV of the Income Tax Act.  
Audit noted that the scrutiny assessments were comp leted without due 
examination/verification of the sale and payment of  excise duty of other 
brands and without cross-verification with the reco rds of the State Excise 
Authorities or returns furnished by the assessee to  the State Excise 
Authorities.  Such irregularities had an underlying high risk of tax evasion that 
required further detailed examination and investiga tion, which were not 
carried out by the concerned AOs while making the a ssessment, especially 
the scrutiny assessment. 
ITD may examine these assessees in detail for the s ucceeding Assessment 
Years also so as to prevent the probable revenue le akage to the exchequer 
and inform the progress to Audit.  
2.3.2 
 Lack of inter-departmental, intra-departmental co-o rdination and 
reconciliation with the assesse: 
The Assessing Officer has to determine and assess t he income correctly after 
calling for desired/related documents in connection  with the correct levy of 
tax and minimizing the scope of revenue leakage.  
Audit noticed that the respective Assessing Officer s failed to exercise the 
power to call for information as envisaged in Secti on 133(6) of the Act, which 
would have been useful for, or relevant to, any enq uiry or proceeding under 
the Act.  Failure to call for information pertaining to Sales from the respective 
State Excise authorities during scrutiny assessment  indicates a high risk of 

Report No. 09 of 2024  
30 
revenue escaping the Government exchequer and exhib its a lack of adequate 
inter-departmental coordination. 
Sharing of information within the Income Tax Depart ment (ITD) was not 
effectively utilized by the assessment units, there by impacting the quality of 
scrutiny assessments and thus, possibility of reven ue leakage cannot be ruled 
out.  Audit findings are discussed in succeeding paragraphs. 
2.3.2.1  PCIT, I Kanpur – M/s U1 Ltd. 
Audit scrutiny (June 2019 and November 2021) of the  related records of M/s 
U1 Ltd. revealed that the assessee was engaged in t he liquor business and 
doing manufacturing, bottling and sale of alcoholic  products binding with 
regards to the terms and conditions of the relevant  State Excise Licenses, and 
also observed the short accounting of Country Liquo r by M/s U1 Ltd., as 
detailed below: 
(a) 
 Audit examined (June 2019) the assessment records o f M/s U1 Ltd. 
pertaining to five Assessment Years 2009-10 to 2013 -14 (Scrutiny Assessment 
in Assessment Years 2009-10 to 2013-14) and the information provided by the 
UP State Excise Department and noticed that the ass essee had manufactured 
and sold Country Liquor amounting to ₹ 2,273.23 crore, as per the records of 
UP State Excise Department, whereas the sale report ed by the assessee in its 
Profit and Loss Account was ₹ 2,189.28 crore (Annexure E-1) thereby resulting 
in under-reporting of sale amounting to ₹ 83.95 crore.  Omission to consider 
the under-reported sale of ₹ 83.95 crore by the ITD in Assessment Years 
2009-10 to 2013-14 resulted in a short computation of tax of ₹ 27.92 crore, 
excluding interest under Sections 234A and 234B of the IT Act as applicable. 
(b)  Audit examined (June 2019 and September 2021) the a ssessment 
records of M/s U1 Ltd. and noticed in four Assessment Years 2015-16 to 2018-
19 (Scrutiny assessment in Assessment Year 2015-16 and Summary 
Assessment in Assessment Years 2016-17 to 2018-19) that the assessee had 
declared gross sales of ₹ 2,263.94 crore in its Profit and Loss Account instead of 
₹ 2,302.36 crore as certified by the Auditor in Form 3CD at Sl. No. 34(a) against 
Section 206C of the IT Act, thereby under-reporting  sales of ₹ 38.42 crore 
(₹ 2,302.36 crore -₹ 2,263.94 crore) ( Annexure E-2). Omission to consider the 
under-reported sales of ₹ 38.42 crore by the ITD in Assessment Years 2015-16 
to 2018-19 resulted in a short computation of incom e involving tax effect of 
₹ 13.29 crore excluding interest under Sections 234A  and 234B of IT Act, as 
applicable. Had the provision of section 68/69C of the Income Tax Act been 
invoked, the tax impact/effect could have been higher 21 . 
                                                           
21  The probable amount of tax effect u/s 68/69C works  out to be ₹ 24.82 crore (approximately).  

Report No. 09 of 2024  
31 
In reply (May 2022) for (a) and (b) above, the PCCI T (CCA), Kanpur stated that 
notices under Section 148 of the Act have been issu ed for Assessment Years 
2013-14 to 2017-18.  The cases have become time-bar red for Assessment 
Years 2009-10 to 2012-13.  Further, in respect of t he case for Assessment 
Year 2018-19, the Joint Commissioner of Income Tax (OSD) Circle 2(1)(1) 
Kanpur stated (June 2022) that the observation made  by Audit appears to be 
acceptable.  Accordingly, the initiation of reasses sment proceedings is 
contemplated in this case.  Details of further acti on taken by the Department 
are awaited (February 2024). 
Reply of the Ministry is awaited (February 2024) 
2.3.2.2 PCIT (Central) - 3 New Delhi - M/s P1 Pvt. Ltd. 
Audit requisitioned the records (September 2019) with respect to M/s P1 Pvt. 
Ltd. for the Assessment years 2009-10 to 2018-19.  
Non-Production/Non-Availability of the records: 
Details of Non-TCS sales were not given in the Audit  Report in spite of the 
column prescribed in the guidance note issued by th e ICAI.  Bifurcation of 
sale as TCS and Non-TCS was not provided in the Pro fit and Loss accounts.  
The details of VAT and other levies not routed thro ugh the Profit and Loss 
accounts were not provided in the Audit Report.  A search operation was 
conducted (February 2011); however, the Appraisal r eport was not 
provided for audit.  CompleteReport of a Special Au ditor under Section 
142(2A) of the Act for the Assessment Year 2017-18 was also not provided 
to Audit.  Financial Statements of Assessment Year 2018-19 were not 
furnished to Audit.  Excise Duty deposited with the State Excise Department 
and the corresponding sale, as well as confirmation  from the State Excise 
Department, was not available in the Scrutiny Assessment records.  
(I)  Overview: During the test check for the period of ten Assessm ent 
Years, i.e., the Assessment Years 2009-10 to 2018-1 9, the Audit analysed and 
noted the details of summary/scrutiny assessments, as mentioned in 
Table 2.2  below: 

Report No. 09 of 2024  
32 
Table 2.2- M/s P1 Pvt Ltd.  
(₹ in crore) 
Asst. 
Year 
Business 
Activity 
Code 
Assessed/ 
Processed 
under 
Section 
Date of 
order 
Sales/ 
Gross 
Receipts in 
P&L 
Excise 
duty 
debited 
in P/L 
Excise duty 
deposited in 
Excise 
Department  
Returned 
Income/ 
Loss 
Assessed 
Income/ 
Loss 
2009-10  0124 153(A) rws 
144C 
04.02.2015 1,876.48 446.61 
Awaited in 
Audit 
399.64 665.30 
2010-11  0124/ 
0204 
153(A) rws 
144C 
04.02.2015 3,241.32 1,167.39 661.28 971.84 
2011-12  0124/ 
0204 
143(3) rws 
144C 
04.02.2015 4,391.58 1,619.24 526.94 951.32 
2012-13  0124 143(3) rws 
144C 
26.04.2016 5,940.78 2,403.78 857.14 1,039.96 
2013-14  0124/ 
0204 
143(3) rws 
144C 
23.12.2016 7,216.42 2,870.41 1,104.61 1,316.81 
2014-15  0124/ 
0204 
143(3) 
rws144C 
30.11.2017 8,614.49 3,479.21 1,276.59 1,521.47 
2015-16  0124/ 
0204 
143(3) rws 
144C 
07.02.2019 10,161.33 4,040.64 1,460.77 1,601.56 
2016-17  0124/ 
0204 
143(3) rws 
144C 
11.02.2020 12,112.78 5,252.50 1,714.51 1,808.02 
2017-18  0124/ 
0204 
143(3) rws 
144C 
11.03.2022 12,848.62 6,325.13 1,549.32 1,789.13 
2018-19  04011/ 
04018/ 
04019/ 
09007 
143(3) rws 
144C 
26.10.2021 
15,744.22 8,581.28 2,147.89 2,235.72 
The assessment with respect to search cases under S ection 153A in two 
Assessment Years: 2009-10 and 2010-11 and scrutiny assessment for eight 
Assessment Years 2011-12 to 2018-19 under Section 143(3) were concluded . 
(II)  Audit Analysis of Assessments: 
Audit examined (October 2019 and December 2020)  as sessment records of 
M/s P1 Pvt. Ltd. and noticed in four Assessment Yea rs: 2014-15 to 2017-18 
(Scrutiny Assessments) that the assessee had declar ed net sales of 
₹ 24,679.79 crore which included TCS sale of ₹ 16,546.32 crore in Profit and 
Loss Account.  However, the sale certified by the A uditor in Form 3CD at Sl. 
No.34 (a) against Section 206C of the Act was ₹ 29,926.66 crore 22 . Thus, 
consequent under-reporting of sales was determined at ₹ 13,380.34 crore     
(₹ 29,926.66 crore - ₹ 16,546.32 crore) (Annexure-F) .  Due diligence exercised 
by DCIT Central Circle 31, New Delhi could not be a scertained in Audit as no 
supporting documents/details were found on records.   Omission to consider 
the under-reported sales of ₹ 13,380.34 crore by the ITD in Assessment Years 
                                                           
22  Sales reported by assessee with the CPC (TDS) was ₹ 29,923.58 crore which was almost similar to the sa le 
certified by the Auditor in the Form 3CD at Sl. No.34 (a) against Section 206C of the Act.  

Report No. 09 of 2024  
33 
2014-15 to 2017-18 resulted in short computation of  income involving tax 
effect of ₹ 4,589.42 crore excluding interest under Sections 234A and 234B of 
IT Act, as applicable.  Had the provision of sectio n 68/69C of the Income Tax 
Act been invoked, the tax impact/effect could have been higher 23 . 
In reply, DCIT Central Circle 31 New Delhi stated (August 2020) that the figures 
mentioned in the Audit report for sales are inclusi ve of various items such as 
Excise Duty/VAT, other levies as per requirement of  TCS law and excluding 
sales on which TCS provisions are not applicable.  However, sales declared in 
the Profit & Loss Accounts are net of all the taxes , duties, VAT, etc., included 
in the invoice value.  There were taxes and duties included in sales appearing 
in the Tax Audit Report but not in the Profit and Loss Account.  
Audit examined the reply (August 2020) provided by the DCIT Central Circle 
31 New Delhi and noted that the AO had stated that the figures mentioned in 
the Audit report for sales are inclusive of Excise Duty/VAT, other levies 
whereas the reconciliation has been made with the f igures in Audit report 
including VAT and other levies only excluding excis e duty. It means that the 
reconciliation has been made of the Net TCS sales ( i.e. excluding excise) 
reported in Profit and Loss Account by adding to it VAT and other levies (those 
taxes and duties appearing in TAR but not in P/L) with the TCS sale reported in 
3CD, the element of excise duty has been left out. Further it is also not clear, 
whether these taxes and duties include VAT and other levies pertaining to the 
Non TCS sale. Thus the reconciliation provided by t he Assessing Officer was 
not tenable in Audit. Moreover, no supporting docum ents were provided by 
the Department; except a reconciliation statement o f the sales, for the 
Assessment Years 2014-15 to 2016-17. The case for A ssessment Year 2017-18 
was pending for scrutiny assessment.  
Further, the PCIT Central- 3, New Delhi, stated (Ju ly 2021) that the 
observations pointed out by the Audit will be acted  upon while making an 
assessment/reassessment.  The cases pertaining to Assessment Years 2013-14 
to 2016-17 had been reopened under Section 147 read  with Section 148 of 
the IT Act and the assessment proceedings for Asses sment Year 2017-18 read 
with Section 142(2A) of the Act are pending. Thus it is evident, that the action 
undertaken by ITD, in accordance to the provisions of the IT Act 1961 had 
been taken in agreement with the contention of Audi t that the reconciliation 
provided by Assessing Officer was not found tenable. 
The DCIT Central Circle 31, New Delhi replied (June  2022) that the 
Assessments under Section 147 of the Act are still pending for the Assessment 
Years 2013-14 to 2016-17.  
                                                           
23  The probable amount of tax effect u/s 68/69C works  out to be ₹ 5,579.52 crore (approximately).  

Report No. 09 of 2024  
34 
The audit noted that the DCIT Central Circle 31, Ne w Delhi, had reopened the 
cases for four Assessment Years, 2013-14 to 2016-17 , which are still pending 
re-assessment.The case was referred for Special Aud it (SA) under 
Section 142(2A) of the Act for one Assessment Year 2017-18. The SA made a 
reconciliation of the Excise returns with the income reflected in the profit and 
loss account and it was concluded that income amoun ting to ₹ 956.61 crore 
was under reported in the profit and loss account i .e. ₹ 956.61 crore was not 
offered for taxation in the instant Assessment Year . This confirms the view of 
Audit that there was under reporting of income in t he profit and loss account 
leading to tax evasion. 
Further, after receiving the report of Special Audi tor (SA) (October 2021), the 
Assessing Officer made an addition (March 2022) of ₹ 206.84 crore, which 
includes addition of ₹ 191.32 crore by estimating the net profit on 20% 
(approx.) of ₹ 956.61 crore of the unverified quantity determined  by Special 
Auditor upon "Reconciliation of the Excise Returns with the income reflected 
in the Profit and Loss Account".  The audit noted t hat the total unverified 
quantity determined by SA was not added to income u nder Section 68 of the 
Act by the DCIT Central Circle 31, New Delhi.  Thus, the Department has short-
computed the income by ₹ 765.29 crore ( ₹ 956.61 crore - ₹191.32 crore) 
which is required to be added to the income under the provision of Section 68 
of the IT Act.  
Audit further observed that the under-reported inco me for AY 2017-18 was                  
₹ 2321.88 crore whereas the under-reported income arrived at during Special 
Audit conducted by the Department was ₹ 956.61 crore. Audit noted that the 
Special Auditor concluded the under-reported amount  based on the excise 
returns. As complete special audit report along wit h the excise returns were 
not made available, the audit could not verify the correctness of the 
under-reporting of income arrived at during the special audit for which further 
examination is required. 
The CBDT may consider reopening the case for reasse ssment in AY 2017-18.  
The assessment for AY 2018-19 as well as AYs 2014-1 5 to 2016-17 also 
requires/warrants a similar level of examination.  The assessment order did 
not contain any details/documents which ensure that  the issues pointed out 
by the Special Auditor in AY 2017-18 were considere d for examination during 
the assessment proceedings of AY 2018-19, ensuring that there was no 
unverified quantity upon reconciliation of the Exci se returns with the income 
reflected in the Profit and Loss Account.  Reply of  the Ministry is awaited 
(February 2024).
 
 

Report No. 09 of 2024  
35 
2.3.2.3 PCIT (Central) -3 New Delhi - M/s R1 Ltd. 
Audit requisitioned the records (September 2019) with respect to M/s R1 Ltd. 
for the Assessment years 2009-10 to 2017-18.  
Non-Production/Non-Availability of the records: 
Details of Non-TCS sales were not given in the Audit  Report besides the 
column prescribed in the guidance note issued by th e ICAI.  Certificates as 
required under sections 195/197 for no deduction or lower deduction of tax 
at source were not provided to Audit.  Bifurcation of sales as TCS sales and 
Non-TCS sales was not provided in the Profit and Lo ss accounts.  VAT and 
other levies were not routed through Profit and Los s accounts; their details 
were not provided in the Audit Report.  A search wa s conducted (February 
2011); however, the Appraisal report was not provid ed to Audit.  Financial 
Statements of Assessment Year 2018-19 were not furnished to Audit.  Excise 
Duty deposited with the State Excise Department and t he corresponding 
sale, as well as confirmation from the State Excise  Department, was not 
available in the Scrutiny Assessment records. 
(I) 
    Overview: During the test check for the period of ten Assessm ent 
Years i.e., the Assessment Years 2009-10 to 2018-19 , Audit noted the details 
of summary/scrutiny assessments as detailed in Table 2.3  below: 
Table 2.3- M/s R1 Ltd.  
(₹ in crore) 
Asst. Year Business 
Activity 
Code 
Assessed/ 
Processed 
under 
Section 
Date of 
order 
Sale/ 
Gross 
receipts 
in P&L 
Excise 
duty 
debited in 
P/L 
Excise duty* 
deposited in 
Excise 
Department  
Returned 
Income/ 
Loss 
Assessed 
Income/ 
Loss 
2009-10  0124 153(A) 03.06.2013 1,174.72 478.70  
 
Awaited 
in Audit 
-37.77 -37.23 
2010-11  0124 153(A) 03.06.2013 1,481.26 645.70 -0.93 - 0.62 
2011-12  0124 153(A) 03.06.2013 1,742.31 745.86 63.91 64.42 
2012-13  0124 143(3) 25.08.2014 1,981.39 837.62 25.49 35.81 
2013-14  0124 143(3) 23.12.2015 2,488.91 1,230.52 1,054.97 9 0.49 88.50 
2014-15  0124 143(3) 19.04.2016 3,045.11 1,593.41 1,342.32 88.67 88.67 
2015-16  0124 154/143(1) 16.12.2016 3,212.56 1,724.17 1,483. 11 52.40 52.40 
2016-17  0124 143(3) 14.05.2018 3,603.87 2,060.78 1,749.17 76.89 76.89 
2017-18  0124 143(3) 29.12.2019 4,867.95 3,188.05 2,363.85 3 2.42 32.61 
2018-19  04097, 
04018, 
04019 
143(1) 25.02.2020 Awaited in Audit 114.10 116.10 
*Amount of excise duty confirmed by State Excise Department u/s 133(6) of the Act and communicated to 
audit by ITD (September 2022) 

Report No. 09 of 2024  
36 
(a)  The assessment with respect to search cases under S ection 153A in 
three Assessment Years 2009-10 to 2011-12, scrutiny  assessment for 
five Assessment Years 2012-13 to 2014-15 and 2016-1 7 to 2017-18 
under Section 143(3) were concluded, while one Asse ssment Year 
2015-16 was processed under summary assessment unde r Section 
143(1) and remaining one case for the Assessment Ye ar 2018-19 is 
pending for assessment.  
(b)  In three Assessment Years 2013-14, 2014-15 and 2016 -17, the 
assessment was completed without making any additio n(s) to the 
returned income of the company.  In the remaining t hree Assessment 
Years, 2009-10, 2010-11 and 2011-12, scrutiny asses sment was 
completed by making the addition of ₹ 0.54 crore, ₹ 0.31 crore and       
₹ 0.51 crore, respectively, to the returned income/loss. 
(II)  Audit Analysis of Assessments: 
Audit examined (October 2019 and December 2020) the  assessment records 
of M/s R1 Ltd. and noticed in four Assessment Years  2014-15 to 2017-18 
(Scrutiny Assessment in Assessment Years 2014-15, 2 016-17 & 2017-18 and 
Summary Assessment in Assessment Year 2015-16) that  the assessee had 
declared the net sales of ₹ 5,402.85 crore which included TCS sale of 
₹ 2,412.18 crore in Profit and Loss Account instead of ₹ 8,601.04 crore as 
certified by the Auditor in Form 3CD at Sl. No.34(a) against Section 206C of the 
Act and reported by the assessee to the CPC (TDS), thereby resulting in under-
reporting of the sale of ₹ 6,188.86 crore ( ₹ 8,601.04 crore - ₹ 2,412.18 crore) 
(Annexure-G) . Due diligence exercised by DCIT Central Circle 31, New Delhi 
could not be ascertained in Audit as no supporting documents/details were 
found on records. Omission to consider the under-re ported sales of 
₹ 6,188.86 crore by the ITD in Assessment Years 2014 -15 to 2017-18 resulted 
in short computation of income involving tax effect  of ₹ 2,126.21 crore, 
excluding interest under Sections 234A and 234B of IT Act, as applicable.  Had 
the provision of Section 68/69C of the Income Tax A ct been invoked, the tax 
impact/effect would have been higher 24 . 
The response(s) of the Department were received from time to time but were 
not found convincing due to the reason(s) stated in the Table 2.3.1 below: 
                                                           
24  The probable amount of tax effect u/s 68/69C works  out to be ₹ 2,982.69 crore (approximately).  

Report No. 09 of 2024  
37 
Table-2.3.1 M/s R1 Ltd. 
Reply 
received 
from 
Responses of the Income Tax Department Comment(s) of Audit 
A B C 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DCIT 
Central 
Circle 31 
New Delhi 
(August 
2020) 
The sale value reported in clause 34(b) of 
form 3CD is the total invoice value on 
which TCS was collected, i.e. inclusive of 
excise duty, VAT and other levies also, 
since, as per the provision of section 206C, 
the TCS is to be collected on the invoice 
value (inclusive of all the duties taxes 
levied therein).  Accordingly, the Taxes and 
duties are included in sales appearing in 
the Tax Audit Report but not included in 
the sales net of excise shown in the Profit 
& Loss account.  The sum of excise duty 
and VAT (and other levies) as provided by 
the ITD for the relevant AYs are                     
₹ 8,566.41 crore and ₹ 6,476.29 crore, 
respectively.  Further, ITD reconciled the 
net sales reported in Profit & Loss accounts 
(excluding excise) with the sales reported 
in 3CD.  Sale in Profit & Loss  accounts 
include TCS as well as Non-TCS sales 
amounting to ₹ 2,412.18 crore and 
₹ 2,990.67 crore, respectively. 
Department also stated that ₹ 1,197.70 
crore were taxes and duties included in 
sales appearing in Tax Audit Report (TAR) 
but not in the Profit and Loss Account.  
The reply of DCIT Central Circle 31 New Delhi 
is not convincing for the reasons stated 
below:  
(i) The statement of ITD was contradictory in 
itself as the sale shown in 3CD                          
(₹ 8,601.04 crore) was less than the sum of 
basic price, excise duty, VAT and other levies.  
The sum of only Excise Duty, VAT and other 
levies is ₹ 15,042.70 crore ( ₹ 8,566.41 crore + 
₹ 6,476.29 crore), which itself is much more 
than the sale reflected in Form 3CD.  Further, 
it is clarified that the comments of Audit are 
based on clause 34(a) of Audit report, not on 
clause 34(b) as stated by ITD.  Hence, the 
contention of the department is not 
acceptable.   
(ii) In line with its contention, ITD should have 
had reconciled the Gross sales (including 
excise) reported in Profit & Loss account with 
the sale reported in 3CD (considering it as 
including excise) but the reconciliation was 
done with the Net sales which was 
contradicting its own contention.  The sale 
amounting to ₹ 8,601.04 crore was reported 
in the Form 3CD for AYs 2014-15 to 2017-18 
which excluded excise duty.  Net sales means 
that excise duty has been excluded. 
 
PCIT, 
Central- 3, 
New Delhi 
(July 2021) 
Observations pointed out by the Audit will 
be acted upon while making assessment/ 
reassessment as the cases pertaining to 
Assessment Years 2013-14 to 2017-18 had 
been reopened under Section 147 read 
with Section 148 of the IT Act. 
No comments. 
 
DCIT 
Central 
Circle 31, 
New Delhi 
(June 2022) 
Assessments under Section 147 of the IT 
Act were passed (February 2022) by the 
Department for the Assessment Years 
2014-15 to 2017-18. 
No comments. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Objections raised by the Audit were 
examined, and notice u/s 148 of the Act 
was issued to the assessee.  After 
examination of the replies of the assessee 
for the AY 2014-15 to 2017-18 Department 
stated that: - 
(i)  Assessee Company submitted the 
complete bifurcations of the sale on which 
Audit examined the reply and details 
provided by the DCIT Central Circle 31, New 
Delhi and observed that: -  
 
 
 
(i)  Excise duty on sale value of liquor is 
leviable irrespective of TCS sale and Non-TCS 

Report No. 09 of 2024  
38 
Table-2.3.1 M/s R1 Ltd. 
Reply 
received 
from 
Responses of the Income Tax Department Comment(s) of Audit 
A B C 
 
 
 
 
 
DCIT 
Central 
Circle 31, 
New Delhi  
(September 
2022) 
TCS is applicable and that on which TCS is 
not applicable, along with corresponding 
Excise duty, VAT/CST, etc.  Further, a chart 
showing reconciliation for the AY 2014-
15  
was provided in which total sale of the 
alcoholic product of ₹ 2,797.40 crore was 
bifurcated as TCS Sale ₹ 1,581.09 crore 
(Basic Value ₹ 414.98 + Excise Duty 
               
₹ 1,166.11 crore) and Non-TCS Sale              
₹ 1,216.30 crore (Basic Value ₹ 789.01 
crore+ Excise Duty ₹427.29 crore).  Further, 
there were VAT/CST and other levies of        
₹ 31.58 crore reported in the TCS return, 
which was not part of the Profit and Loss 
Account.  Thus, the total invoice value on 
which TCS was applicable reported in TCS 
return was ₹ 1,612.67 crore ( ₹ 1,581.09 
crore + ₹ 31.58 crore).  Hence, the sale 
amount reflected in the Profit and Loss 
account is found to be correct.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii)  The Department further examined 
the information sought by the State Excise 
department and details of Challans 
submitted by the assessee wherein Excise 
duty claimed in Profit and Loss account 
and amount of Excise duty confirmed by 
the State Excise Department and the 
amount of Excise duty supported by 
documents filed by the assessee was 
compared for the Assessment Years 2014-
15 to 2017-18 which comes to 87.13% to 
90.38% as checked by the department.  
The details of the Excise Duty as provided 
by the AO are given in columns A to F in 
Table 2.3.2  below. 
sale of the alcoholic products.  As per the 
Statement given by the Department for AY 
2014-15, it was noted that the sales (Basic 
Value) on which TCS was applicable was 
₹ 414.98 crore on which Excise Duty was 
₹ 1,166.11 crore, however, sale (Basic Value) 
on which TCS was not applicable was 
₹ 789.01 crore on which Excise Duty was 
₹ 427.29 crore only.  
The Department earlier (August 2020) stated 
that ₹ 1,197.70 crore ( ₹ 1,166.11 crore + 
         
₹ 31.58 crore) were taxes and duties included 
in sales appearing in TAR but not in the Profit 
and Loss Account.  Further, ITD stated that 
the assessment records have been examined 
with reference to the reply of the assessee 
with respect to the half-margin, and the facts 
and figures have been found to be correct.  
However, the facts and figures that were 
found to be correct by ITD in August 2020 
have now been found incorrect in September 
2022.  In September 2022, the statement was 
changed, and it was stated that out of 
            
₹ 1,197.70 crore, an amount of ₹ 1,166.11 
crore was Excise Duty, which was included in 
the Profit and Loss Account. 
Similar treatment/explanation was also given 
by the Assessing Officer for other Assessment 
Years. 
(ii)   The Department has provided the 
details of the Excise duty deposited by the 
Assessee as obtained from the State  Excise 
Department for Assessment Years 2013-14 to 
2017-18, however Audit  noticed that in Profit 
and Loss accounts Excise duty was allowed in 
excess by ₹ 1,316.58 crore, which was not 
added back to the income of the assessee.  
Details are worked out in Column G of 
Table 2.3.2  below: 
 
 
 

Report No. 09 of 2024  
39 
Table 2.3.2 M/s R1 Ltd. 
Details of Excise duty provided by AO 
(₹ in crore)  
Asst. 
Years 
Excise Duty 
claimed in 
Profit & Loss 
account 
Amount of 
Excise duty 
confirmed by 
State Excise 
Department 
u/s 133(6) of 
the Act 
Amount of 
Excise duty 
supported 
by 
documents 
filed by the 
assessee 
Total 
Amount  of 
Excise duty 
checked by 
the 
Department 
% of the 
Excise duty 
checked by 
the 
Department 
Claim of 
Excise duty 
excess 
allowed as 
per Audit 
(B-C) 
A B C D E F G 
2013-14  1,230.52 1,054.97 34.96 1,089.93 88.58% 175.55 
2014-15  1,593.41 1,342.32 46.05 1,388.37 87.13% 251.09 
2015-16  1,724.17 1,483.11 45.33 1,558.44 90.38% 241.06 
2016-17  2,060.78 1,749.17 63.47 1,812.63 87.95% 311.61 
2017-18*  2,701.14 2,363.85 12.38 2,376.23 87.97% 337.29 
Total 9,310.02 7,993.42 202.19 8,225.60 - 1316.60 
*For the AY 2017-18, the excise duty amounting to ₹ 486.92 crore belongs to contract bottling units 
not related to R1 Ltd. (Consolidated due to IND AS requirement)  
Further, Audit noted that the ITD has not complied with the provision for 
Non-TCS sale of alcoholic products.  Certificates i ssued, if any, for no 
deduction or lower deduction of tax at source requi red under sections 
195/197 of the Act were not provided by the DCIT Ce ntral Circle 31, New 
Delhi so that the Non-TCS sale could be examined in  Audit.  Further, it is 
pertinent to mention the fact that the amount of TC S at a lower rate or nil 
rate reported by the Chartered Accountant was not i n conformity with the 
amount of Non-TCS sales allowed by the AO.  Para 58 .10 of the Guidance 
note on Tax Audit under Section 44AB of the Income- tax Act issued by ICAI 
for reporting of Non-TCS sales is reproduced as under: 
In Column 6, the tax auditor is required to furnish  the total amount out of the 
amount deductible or collectible as mentioned in column (5) of Sl. No. 34(a) at 
which the tax was deducted or collected at the specified rate.  The auditor has 
to consider the deduction rates as per the law rele vant to the previous year.  
Further, as per the provisions of sections 195/ 197 , a certificate can be issued 
for no deduction or lower deduction of tax at sourc e.  The tax auditor should 
refer to the relevant provisions, rules, circulars,  notifications and such 
certificates obtained from the auditee to verify th e cases where tax has been 
short-deducted at source.  In case the payer deduct s/recipient collects tax at 
source at a rate lower than the specified rate on t he basis of a certificate 
issued under Section 195 or 197, the lower rate or nil rate, as the case may 
be, will be considered as the specified rate for th e purpose of reporting under 
this clause.  

Report No. 09 of 2024  
40 
The audit noted that the reassessment of M/s R1 Ltd . was completed without 
making any reconciliation of the Excise Returns wit h the income reflected in 
the Profit and Loss Account.  (Refer to Para 2.3.2. 2 (II) of the report where 
the AO has made an addition in the case of M/s P1 P vt. Ltd. for Assessment 
year 2017-18 on account of the non-reconciliation o f the Excise Returns with 
the income reflected in the Profit and Loss Account  based on the findings of 
Special Auditor under Section 142(2A) of the Act). 
Details of further action taken by the Department a nd reply of the Ministry 
are awaited (February 2024). 
2.3.2.4 PCIT Delhi-8 - M/s S1 Ltd. 
The audit requisitioned the records (September 2019  and September 2021) 
for M/s S1 Ltd. for the Assessment years 2009-10 to 2018-19.  
Non-Production/Non-Availability of the records: 
Details of Non-TCS sales were not given in the Audit  Report besides the 
column prescribed in the guidance note issued by th e ICAI.  Bifurcation of 
sales as TCS sales and Non-TCS sales was not provid ed in the Profit and Loss 
accounts.  VAT and other levies were not routed thr ough Profit and Loss 
accounts, and their details were not provided in the Audit Report.  Details of 
Tax collected at source and corresponding sale for Assessment Year 2018-19 
were not available in CPC Data.  Excise Duty deposite d with the State Excise 
Department, and the corresponding sale and confirmat ion from the State 
Excise Department were not available in the Scrutiny Assessment records. 
(I)  Overview: During the test check for ten Assessment Years, i.e ., the 
Assessment Years 2009-10 to 2018-19, Audit noted th e details of 
summary/scrutiny assessments, as detailed in Table 2.4  below: 
 
Table 2.4 M/s S1 Ltd.  
(₹ in crore) 
Asst. Year Business 
Activity 
Code  
Assessed/  
Processed 
under 
Section  
Date of 
Assessment 
order  
Sale/  
Gross 
Receipt 
in P&L  
Excise 
duty 
debited 
in P/L  
Excise duty 
deposited in 
the Excise 
Department  
Returned 
Income/  
Loss  
Assessed 
Income/  
Loss  
2009-10 0124 143(3) 22.12.2011 417.31 212.10  
 
 
 
Awaited in 
audit 
-34.74 -32.58 
2010-11 0124 143(3) 20.03.2013 365.33 211.05 0 1.64  
2011-12 0124 143(3) 28.03.2014 529.85 293.95 -7.66 -4.52 
2012-13 0124 143(3) 26.03.2015 382.53 258.74 -17.23  -15.30 
2013-14 0124 143(3) 29.03.2016 546.09 384.85 0 0 
2014-15 0124 143(3) 29.12.2016 551.94 418.02 0 0 
2015-16 0124 143(1) 29.03.2016 564.27 450.84 -1.98 -1.98 
2016-17 0124 143(1) 29.03.2017 447.35 356.05 -0.49 -0.49 
2017-18 0124 143(1) 18.01.2019 573.94 471.11 Nil Nil 
2018-19 04097 143(1) Awaited in 
audit 
387.16 321.66 -0.54 Awaited 
in audit 

Report No. 09 of 2024  
41 
(a)  The scrutiny assessment under Section 143(3) was co mpleted in six 
years, i.e., Assessment Years 2009-10 to 2014-15 an d the remaining 
four Assessment Years 2015-16 to 2018-19 were proce ssed under 
summary assessment under Section 143(1). 
(b)  In three Assessment Years, 2009-10 to 2012-13, scru tiny assessment 
was completed by making the addition of ₹ 2.16 crore, ₹ 1.64 crores,  
₹ 3.14 crore and ₹ 1.93 crores, respectively, to the returned 
income/loss. 
(c)  During Assessment Years 2013-14 and 2014-15, scruti ny assessment 
was completed accepting the returned income without  making any 
addition(s). 
(II)  Audit Analysis of Assessments: 
Audit examined (October 2019 and September 2021) as sessment records of 
M/s S1 Ltd. and noticed in five Assessment Years 2014-15 to 2018-19 (Scrutiny 
Assessment in Assessment Year 2014-15 and Summary A ssessment in 
Assessment Years  2015-16 to 2018-19) that the assessee had declared net sales 
of ₹ 494.25 crore (Total sale ₹ 2,511.94 crore - excise duty ₹ 2,017.69 crore) in 
Profit and Loss Account instead of ₹ 2,427.96 crore as certified by the Auditor 
in Form 3CD at Sl. No.34(a) against Section 206C of the Act, thereby resulting in 
underreporting of sales amounting to ₹ 1,933.71 crore ( ₹ 2,427.96 crore – 
₹ 494.25 crore)  (Annexure-H) .  Omission to consider the under-reported sales 
of ₹ 1933.71 crore by the ITD in Assessment Years 2014-15 to 2018-19 resulted 
in short computation of income involving tax effect  of ₹ 664.22 crore, 
excluding interest under Sections 234A and 234B of IT Act, as applicable.  Had 
the provision of section 68/69C of the Income Tax A ct been invoked, the tax 
impact/effect would have been higher 25 . 
Non Reconciliation with CPC (TDS) data: 
The audit further examined the data provided by CPC  (TDS) and noted that in 
Assessment Year 2018-19, details of Tax collected a t source and the 
corresponding sale were not available in CPC (TDS) data.  Besides the fact that 
the TCS sale was reported by the CA in Form 3CD, th e information was 
required to be passed to the TDS wing for necessary  verification during the 
finalization of the Assessment; however, no effort of DCIT Circle-7(1) New 
Delhi was noticed.  
 
Due diligence exercised by DCIT Circle-7(1) New Delhi could not be ascertained 
in Audit as no supporting documents/details were found on records.  
                                                           
25  The probable amount of tax effect u/s 68/69C works  out to be ₹ 997.32 crore  (approximately).  

Report No. 09 of 2024  
42 
PCIT -7, New Delhi (July 2021) stated that the sale  at Sl.No. 34(a) in the Tax 
Audit Report includes excise duty, and the sale in the Profit and Loss Account 
includes Non-TCS sales.  Moreover, other taxes and duties are included in the 
Tax Audit Report but not in the Profit and Loss Acc ount.  It was also replied 
that the assessee had provided reconciliation turnover shown in the Profit and 
Loss Account and turnover shown in clause 34(a) of form 3CD.  
Reply of the PCIT-7, New Delhi is not acceptable for the following reasons: 
(i)  Assessment Year 2014-15 : Although the case was selected for 
scrutiny, details of non-TCS sale, VAT and other ta xes/duties were neither 
available in the assessment folder nor was any query made by the Income Tax 
Officer Ward- 22(3), New Delhi.  PCIT-7, New Delhi had furnished reply after a 
lapse of 22 months of the issue of the Audit observ ation (October 2019) with 
the new facts, which were not found placed in the c ase records earlier.  
Documents have not been furnished by PCIT-7, New De lhi, in support of 
reconciliation.  The audit noted that post-assessme nt facts can be examined 
and verified after reopening the case under Section 147 of the Act.  
(ii)  Assessment Years 2015-16 to 2018-19 : In the summary assessment 
cases, details of Non-TCS sales, VAT and other taxes/duties were not available 
in Profit and Loss Accounts.  Since the case was no t selected for scrutiny 
during this period, the facts not provided in the I TR and its attachments are 
required to be verified, examined and ascertained b y reopening the case 
under Section 147 of the Act.  Documents have not b een furnished by PCIT, 
Central- 7, New Delhi, in support of reconciliation. 
Further, the Department may reassess the cases for all the Assessment Years 
2014-15 to 2018-19 after reconciling the Excise Ret urns with the income 
reflected in the Profit and Loss Account and inform  the progress to Audit. 
{Refer to Para 2.3.2.2 (II) of the report, where the AO has made an addition on 
account of the non-reconciliation of the Excise Ret urns with the income 
reflected in the Profit and Loss Account based on t he findings of the Special 
Auditor.} 
Details of further action taken by the Department a nd a reply from the 
Ministry are awaited (February 2024). 
2.3.2.5 PCIT (Central) -1 New Delhi - M/s M3 Pvt. Ltd. 
Audit requisitioned the records (September 2019 and  September 2021) with 
respect to M/s M3 Pvt. Ltd. for the Assessment years 2009-10 to 2018-19.  
Non-Production/Non-Availability of the records: 
Details of Non-TCS sales were not given in the Audit  Report besides the 
column prescribed in the guidance note issued by th e ICAI.  Bifurcation of 
sales as TCS sales and Non-TCS sales was not provid ed in the Profit and Loss 

Report No. 09 of 2024  
43 
accounts.  VAT and other levies were not routed thr ough Profit and Loss 
accounts; their details were not provided in the Au dit Report.  Excise Duty 
deposited with the State Excise Department and the corresponding sale and 
confirmation from the State Excise Department were n ot available in the 
Scrutiny Assessment records.  
(I) 
 Overview: During the test check for ten Assessment Years, i.e ., the 
Assessment Years 2009-10 to 2018-19, Audit noted th e details of 
summary/scrutiny assessments, as detailed in Table 2.5  below: 
Table 2.5 M/s M3 Pvt. Ltd.  
(₹ in crore) 
Asst. 
Year 
Business 
Activity 
Code 
Assessed/ 
Processed 
under 
Section 
Date of 
Assessment 
order 
Sale/ 
Gross 
Receipt 
in P&L 
Excise 
duty 
debited 
in P/L 
Excise duty 
deposited 
in the 
Excise 
Department 
Returned 
Income/ 
Loss 
Assessed 
Income/ 
Loss 
2009-10  0124 143(3) 30.12.2011 423.07 139.70  
 
 
 
 
Awaited in 
audit 
0.61 0.68 
2010-11  0124 143(3) 28.03.2013 384.89 85.16 3.04 3.07 
2011-12  0124 143(3) 28.03.2014 414.02 91.90 8.32 8.34 
2012-13  0124 143(3) 26.06.2014 479.51 90.80 -2.58 -2.56 
2013-14  0124 143(3) 27.05.2015 535.47 121.31 0.14 0.17 
2014-15  0124 143(3) 30.09.2016 517.51 117.52 -20.10 -20.06 
2015-16  0124 143(3) 05.09.2017 525.66 116.15 -2.07 -2.07 
2016-17  0124 143(1) 22.09.2017 575.07 132.14 0.10 0.10 
2017-18  0124 143(1) 13.12.2018 581.78 116.21 0.01 0.66 
2018-19  04019 
04017 
04015 
143(3) 24.12.2020 655.77 132.09 8.81 8.81 
 
(a)  The scrutiny assessment under Section 143(3) was co mpleted for eight 
years, i.e., Assessment Years 2009-10 to 2015-16 & 2018-19 and the 
remaining two Assessment Years 2016-17 & 2017-18 we re processed 
under summary assessment under Section 143(1). 
(b)  During Assessment Years 2009-10, 2010-11, 2011-12, 2012-13, 2013-14 
and 2014-15, the scrutiny assessment was completed by making 
additions of ₹ 0.07 crore, ₹ 0.03 crore, ₹ 0.02 crore, ₹ 0.02 crore, 
₹ 0.03 crore and ₹ 0.04 crore respectively to the returned income/loss. 
(c)  During Assessment Years 2015-16 and 2018-19, the sc rutiny 
assessments were completed, accepting the returned income without 
making any additions.  
(II)       Audit Analysis of Assessments: 
Audit examined (October 2019 and September 2021) th e assessment records 
of M/s M3 Pvt. Ltd. and noticed in five Assessment Years 2014-15 to 2018-19 
(Scrutiny Assessment in Assessment Years  2014-15 t o 2015-16 and Summary 

Report No. 09 of 2024  
44 
Assessment in Assessment Years 2016-17 to 2018-19) that the assessee had 
declared net sales of ₹ 2,098.57 crore (Total sale ₹ 2,712.67 crore less excise 
duty ₹ 614.10 crore) in the Profit and Loss Account instead of ₹ 2,348.70 crore 
as certified by the Auditor in Form 3CD at Sl. No.3 4(a) against Section 206C of 
the Act, thereby resulting in underreporting of sal es amounting to 
₹ 250.13 crore ( ₹ 2,348.70 crore – ₹ 2,098.57 crore) (Annexure-I) .  Omission to 
consider the under-reported sales of ₹ 250.13 crores by the ITD in Assessment 
Years 2014-15 to 2018-19 resulted in the short comp utation of income 
involving tax effect of ₹ 85.42 crores excluding interest under Sections 234 A 
and 234B of the IT Act, as applicable.  Had the pro vision of section 68/69C of 
the Income Tax Act been invoked, the tax impact/eff ect would have been 
higher 26 . 
Non Reconciliation with CPC (TDS) data: 
The audit further examined the data provided by CPC  (TDS) and noted that in 
five Assessment Years, 2014-15, 2015-16, 2016-17, 2 017-18 and 2018-19, 
sales on which Tax at source was collected were ₹ 32.53 crore, ₹ 31.02 crore,  
₹ 32.27 crore, ₹ 33.75 crore and ₹ 26.30 crore respectively; however, in 3CD 
the sales were ₹ 462.22 crore, ₹ 443.84 crore, ₹ 441.87 crore, ₹ 463.38 crore 
and ₹ 537.38 crore respectively. The information was req uired to be passed 
to the TDS wing for necessary verification during t he finalization of the 
Assessment.  However, no effort was made by DCIT Ce ntral Circle-8 Delhi to 
scrutinize assessment cases.  Details of sales repo rted by CPC (TDS) are given 
in Table 2.5.1  below: 
Table 2.5.1 M/s M3 Pvt. Ltd. 
(₹ in crore) 
Asst. Year Sale including 
excise duty in 
P/L 
Excise duty as 
per P/L 
Sale on which Tax at 
source collected as 
per 3CD/ 34(a) 
Sale as per 
CPC (TDS) 
2014-15  473.86 117.52 462.22 32.53 
2015-16  480.52 116.15 443.84 31.02 
2016-17  534.12 132.14 441.87 32.27 
2017-18  575.60 116.21 463.38 33.75 
2018-19  648.56 132.09 537.38 26.30 
Due diligence exercised by DCIT Central Circle-8 Delhi could not be ascertained 
in Audit as no supporting documents/details were found in records. 
The PCIT, Central- 1, New Delhi (April 2021, Januar y 2022 and April 2022) 
stated that the sale at Sl. No. 34(a) in the Tax Au dit Report includes excise 
duty, and the sale in the Profit and Loss Account i ncludes Non-TCS sales.  
                                                           
26  The probable amount of tax effect u/s 68/69C works  out to be ₹ 96.03crore (approximately).  

Report No. 09 of 2024  
45 
Moreover, other taxes and duties are included in th e Tax Audit Report but 
not in the Profit and Loss Account. 
Reply of the PCIT Central- 1, New Delhi is not acce ptable for the following 
reasons- 
(i)  Assessment Years 2014-15 to 2015-16 : Although the case was selected for 
scrutiny, the details of Non-TCS sale, VAT and other taxes/duties were neither 
available in the assessment folder nor any query ma de by the Assistant 
Commissioner of Income Tax Central Circle - 8, New Delhi.  Further, PCIT, 
Central- 1, New Delhi furnished a reply to Audit af ter a lapse of 18 months of 
the issue of the Audit memo (October 2019) with new  facts, which were not 
found placed in the case records earlier. The audit noted that post-assessment 
facts could be examined and verified after reopenin g the case under Section 
147 of the Act.  Further, PCIT Central-1, New Delhi  had not furnished any 
supporting documents in favour of his reply. 
(ii)  Assessment Years 2016-17 to 2018-19 : In the summary assessment cases, 
details of non-TCS sales, VAT and other taxes/duties were not available either 
in the Profit and Loss Accounts or the ITR and its attachments.  Hence, details 
could only be verified, examined and ascertained by reopening the case under 
Section 147 of the Act. Further, PCIT Central-1, Ne w Delhi, had not furnished 
any supporting document in favour of his reply.  
After reconciling the Excise Returns with the income reflected in the Profit and 
Loss Account, the Department may reassess the cases  for all the Assessment 
Years 2014-15 to 2018-19.  (Refer Para 2.3.2.2 (II) of the report, wherein Audit 
noted that the AO had made an addition in the case of M/s P1 Pvt. Ltd. for 
Assessment year 2017-18 on account of the non-recon ciliation of the Excise 
Returns with the income reflected in the Profit and Loss Account based on the 
findings of Special Auditor under Section 142(2A) of the Act). 
Details of further action taken by the Department a nd reply of the Ministry 
are awaited (February 2024). 
2.3.2.6 PCIT 6 New Delhi- M/s M2 Ltd. 
Audit requisitioned the records of M/s M2 Ltd. for the Assessment years 
2009-10 to 2018-19 (September 2019 and September 2021).  
Non-Production/Non-Availability of the records: 
Details of Trade discount, Breakage during manufactu ring, sales return and 
sale of Scrap directly linked to the net profit wer e neither indicated in the 
Profit and Loss accounts nor the Balance sheet.  Det ails of Tax collected at 
source and corresponding sale for Assessment Years 2016-17, 2017-18 and 
2018-19 were not available in CPC Data.  Excise Duty deposited with the 
State Excise Department and the corresponding sale a nd confirmation from 

Report No. 09 of 2024  
46 
the State Excise Department were not available in th e Scrutiny Assessment 
records.  Reference of self-consumption of the prod ucts was not given in Sl. 
No. 35bB of Audit Report.  'Any other report of Form 3CD, i.e., notes forming 
part of Form 3CD' was not provided to Audit with the  attached documents 
uploaded with ITRs. ITR for the Assessment Year 201 8-19 was not produced 
to Audit.  
(I) 
 Overview: During the test check for the period of ten Assessm ent 
Years, i.e., the Assessment Years 2009-10 to 2018-1 9, Audit noted the details 
of summary/scrutiny assessments, as detailed in Table 2.6  below: 
Table 2.6 M/s M2 Ltd.  
(₹ in  crore) 
Asst. 
Year 
Business 
Activity 
Code 
Assessed/ 
Processed 
under 
Section 
Date of 
Assessment 
order 
Sale/ 
Gross 
Receipt in 
P/L 
Excise 
duty 
debited 
in P/L 
Excise duty 
deposited 
in the 
Excise 
Department  
Returned 
Income/ 
Loss 
Assessed 
Income/ 
Loss 
2009-10   
 
Not 
mentioned  
143(3) 12.10.2011 306.06 85.24 
Awaited 
in audit 
0 0 
2010-11  143(3) 02.11.2012 237.86 22.82 0 0 
2011-12  143(3) 16.12.2013 410.42 66.17 0 0 
2012-13  143(3) 02.03.2015 414.86 110.82 -39.82 -37.91 
2013-14  143(3) 03.12.2015 449.74 115.04 -25.53 -23.64 
2014-15 0124/0118  143(3) 29.12.2016 330.29 28.97 -46.07 -45.51 
2015-16 0124/0118  143(3) 29.03.2016 360.04 22.24 -22.44 -22.44 
2016-17 0124/0118  143(3) 11.12.2018 357.35 48.63 -6.68 -6.11 
2017-18 0124 143(1) Awaited in 
audit 
422.60 81.29 -4.98 Awaited 
in audit 
2018-19 04006, 
04097 
143(3) 22.04.2021 502.78 107.95 -31.47 -27.80 
(a)  The scrutiny assessment under Section 143(3) was co mpleted in nine 
years, i.e., Assessment Years 2009-10 to 2016-17 & 2018-19, and the 
remaining one, Assessment Year 2017-18, was process ed under 
summary assessment under Section 143(1). 
(b)  During Assessment Years 2009-10, 2010-11 & 2011-12,  the scrutiny 
assessment was completed accepting the returned inc ome of nil 
amount. 
(c)  During Assessment Years 2012-13 to 2016-17 and 2018 -19, the 
scrutiny assessment was completed by making additio ns of 
₹ 1.91 crore, ₹ 1.89 crore, ₹ 0.56 crore, ₹ 0.01 crore, ₹ 0.57 crore & 
₹ 3.67 crore respectively to the returned loss. 
(d)  During Assessment Years 2009-10 to 2013-14, the bus iness activity 
code was not mentioned in the relevant column of In come Tax 
Returns filed by the assessee. 

Report No. 09 of 2024  
47 
(II)  Audit Analysis of Assessments: 
Audit examined (September 2019 and September 2021) the assessment 
records of M/s M2 Ltd. and noticed in five Assessme nt Years 2014-15 to 
2018-19 (Scrutiny Assessment in Assessment Years  2 014-15 to 2016-17 & 
2018-19 and Summary Assessment in Assessment Year 2 017-18) that the 
assessee had declared net sales of ₹ 329.54 crore (Total sale ₹ 618.62 crore 
less excise duty ₹ 289.08 crore) in the Profit and Loss Account inste ad of 
₹ 601.26 crore as certified by the Auditor in Form 3 CD at Sl. No.34(a) against 
Section 206C of the Act, thereby resulting in under reporting of sales 
amounting to ₹ 271.72 crore ( ₹ 601.26 crore – ₹ 329.54 crore) (Annexure-J) .  
Omission to consider the under-reported sales of ₹ 271.72 crores by the ITD in 
Assessment Years 2014-15 to 2018-19 resulted in the  short computation of 
income involving tax effect of ₹ 93.96 crores excluding interest under 
Sections 234A and 234B of the IT Act, as applicable .  Had the provision of 
section 68/69C of the Income Tax Act been invoked, the tax impact/effect 
would have been higher. 27  
Non Reconciliation with CPC (TDS) data: 
Audit further extracted the data provided by CPC (T DS) and noted that in two 
Assessment Years, 2014-15 and 2015-16, sales on whi ch Tax at source were 
collected were ₹ 27.52 lakh and ₹ 4.44 lakh, respectively; however, in the Form 
3CD, the sales were ₹ 26.09 crore and ₹ 40.19 crore respectively.  In three 
Assessment Years 2016-17, 2017-18 and 2018-19, deta ils of Tax collected at 
source and corresponding sale were not available in  CPC (TDS) data.  Besides 
the fact that the TCS sale was reported by the CA in Form 3CD, the information 
was required to be passed to the TDS wing for necessary verification during the 
finalization of the Assessment; however, no effort of DCIT Circle-16(1) Delhi 
was noticed on scrutiny Assessment cases.  Details of sales reported by CPC 
(TDS) are given in Table 2.6.1  below:  
Table 2.6.1 M/s M2 Ltd. 
(₹ in  crore) 
Asst. Year Sale including 
excise duty in 
P/L 
Excise duty as 
per P/L 
Sale on which Tax 
at source collected 
as per 3CD/ 34(a) 
Sale as per CPC 
(TDS) 
2014-15  49.65 28.97 26.09 0.28 
2015-16  54.17 22.24 40.19 0.04 
2016-17  105.61 48.63 99.93 Not in CPC data 
2017-18  167.28 81.29 169.85 Not in CPC data 
2018-19  241.92 107.95 265.20 Not in CPC data 
                                                           
27  The probable amount of tax effect u/s 68/69C works  out to be ₹ 185.68 crore  (approximately).  

Report No. 09 of 2024  
48 
The due diligence exercised by DCIT Circle-16(1) De lhi could not be 
ascertained in the Audit, as no supporting document s/details were found in 
the records.  
The DCIT, Circle-16(1), Delhi (February 2021) state d that clarifications/ 
submissions had been sought from the assessee for A ssessment Years 
2014-15, 2015-16, 2016-17 and 2017-18.  No reply wa s provided by the ITD 
with respect to Assessment Year 2018-19 (June 2022). 
Further, DCIT (Hq.) (Coord. II) Delhi stated (July 2022) that the cases for 
Assessment Years 2014-15, 2015-16 and 2018-19 are n ot acceptable.  
However, the cases for Assessment Years 2014-15 to 2017-18 were reopened 
under Section 148 of the IT Act, out of which the p roceedings for Assessment 
Years 2014-15 and 2017-18 have been stayed by the D elhi High Court, and 
final comments on Audit objections raised for Asses sment Years 2014-15 and 
2017-18 will be submitted after conclusion.  
It was further stated (July 2022) by DCIT (Hq.) (Co ord.II) Delhi that the 
assessments for the Assessment Years 2015-16 and 20 16-17 have been 
completed by NaFAC. Nodal Officer O/o the PCIT-4 Ne w Delhi provided 
(September 2022) Assessment Orders passed under Sec tion 147 read with 
section 144B  of the IT Act for the Assessment Years 2015-16 and 2016-17. 
Audit noted that the details of trade discount, nat ure of trade discount, 
breakage during manufacturing, sales return and sal e of Scrap, etc. were not 
available in the assessment records. DCIT Circle-16 (1) Delhi relied on the 
unaudited information provided by the assessee.  Re conciliation of difference 
in sale was not done with the TCS return filed by the assessee in the TDS wing 
of the Income Tax Department at CPC (TDS).  Any eff orts to coordinate with 
the concerned State Excise Department to obtain the details of the sale could 
not be verified in the audit.  The issue of lack of  inter-department and intra-
department coordination during assessment/re-assess ment proceedings 
needs to be addressed in the interest of revenue. F urther, Nodal Officer 
O/o the PCIT-4 New Delhi had not furnished any supp orting document in 
favour of his reply. 
The Department may reassess the Assessment Years 20 15-16, 2016-17 and 
2018-19 after reconciling the Excise Returns with t he income reflected in the 
Profit and Loss Account. (Refer Para 2.3.2.2 (II) o f the report, wherein Audit 
noted that the AO had made an addition in the case of M/s P1 Pvt. Ltd. for 
Assessment year 2017-18 on account of the non-recon ciliation of the Excise 
Returns with the income reflected in the Profit and Loss Account based on the 
findings of Special Auditor under Section 142(2A) of the Act). 
Details of further action taken by the Department a nd reply of the Ministry 
are awaited (February 2024). 

Report No. 09 of 2024  
49 
2.3.2.7 PCIT 1 Mumbai- M/s A1 Ltd.  
Audit requisitioned records (July 2019 and October 2021) with respect to 
M/s A1 Ltd. for the Assessment years 2012-13 to 2018-19.  
Non-Production/Non-Availability of the records: 
Excise Duty deposited with the State Excise Departmen t and the 
corresponding sale, as well as confirmation from th e State Excise 
Department, were not available in the Scrutiny Asses sment records.  The 
Assessment Order passed under section 147 for the A ssessment Year 2015-
16 was not produced to Audit. 
Overview: During the period of ten Assessment Years, i.e., th e Assessment 
Years 2009-10 to 2018-19, Audit noted the details o f summary/scrutiny 
assessments, as detailed in Table 2.7  below: 
(a)  The scrutiny assessments under Section 143(3) were completed for 
nine years, i.e., Assessment Years 2009-10 to 2014- 15 & 2016-17 to 
2018-19.  In the remaining Assessment Year, 2015-16 , the case was 
processed under summary assessment under Section 14 3(1) and later 
re-opened (March 2019) under Section 147 of the Act.  
(II)  Audit Analysis of Assessments: 
Audit examined (October 2021) the assessment record s of M/s A1 Ltd. and 
noticed in two Assessment Years 2015-16 and 2016-17  (Scrutiny Assessment 
in Assessment Years 2015-16 & 2016-17) that the ass essee had declared the 
net sales of ₹ 3,818.22 crore in Profit and Loss Account instead of 
₹ 4,207.81 crore as certified by the Auditor in Form  3CD at Sl. No. 34(a) 
against Section 206C of the Act, thereby resulting in underreporting of sales 
amounting to ₹ 389.59 crore ( ₹ 4,207.81 crore – ₹ 3,818.22 crore) 
(Annexure-K). The omission to consider the under-reported sales  of 
Table 2.7 M/s A Ltd. 
(₹ in crore) 
Asst. Year Business 
Activity 
Code 
Assessed/ 
Processed 
under 
Section 
Date of 
Assessment 
order 
Sale/ 
Gross 
Receipt in 
P/L 
Excise 
duty 
debited 
in P/L 
Excise duty 
deposited 
in the 
Excise 
Department  
Returned 
Income/ 
Loss 
Assessed 
Income/ 
Loss 
2009-10 0124 143(3) rws 
144C(13) 
08.03.2013 1330.37 NA  
 
 
 
Awaited 
in audit 
-116.98 -38.55 
2010-11 0124 143(3) 06.05.2014 1314.33 NA -194.29 -117.82 
2011-12 0124 143(3) rws 
144C(13) 
28.01.2016 1517.86 NA -88.82 -23.78 
2012-13 0124 143(3) 24.01.2017 2,987.07 1,146.32 -133.08 -35.62 
2013-14 0124 143(3) 30.10.2017 3,453.77 1,457.24 -8 1.27 -33.17 
2014-15 0124 143(3) 25.10.2018 3,475.83 1,555.60 -80.18 -30.90 
2015-16 0124 143(1) 25.03.2016 3,593.33 1,653.63 -6 6.14 0 
2016-17 0124 143(3) 30.06.2021 3,827.68 1,739.97 -32.93 47.58 
2017-18 0124 143(3) 30.09.2021 3,144.40 1,526.44 -2 43.69 32.05 
2018-19 04017                   143(3) 30.09.2021 3,042.91 1,684.45 0 1.28 

Report No. 09 of 2024  
50 
₹ 389.59 crore by the ITD resulted in the short comp utation of income 
involving tax effect of ₹ 133.22 crores, excluding interest under Sections 234A 
and 234B of the IT Act, as applicable. 
The reply of the PCIT- 1, Mumbai, was still awaited (February 2024). 
2.3.2.8 PCIT 2 Bengaluru- M/s U2 Ltd.  
Audit requisitioned the records (September 2021) with respect to M/s U2 Ltd. 
for the Assessment years 2009-10 to 2018-19. 
Non-Production/Non-Availability of the records: 
Excise Duty deposited with the State Excise Departmen t and the 
corresponding sale and confirmation from the State Excise Department was 
not available in the Scrutiny Assessment records.  Assessment folders/case 
records viz., Audit Report, Financial Statements fo r the Assessment Years 
2013-14, 2017-18 and 2018-19 were not produced to A udit.  The 
Department did not provide bifurcation for the figur es of sale under ‘Tie-up 
Agreements’ as appearing in the Profit and Loss Acc ount of M/s U2 Ltd. for 
the Assessment Year 2014-15 to 2016-17. 
(I) 
 Overview: During the test check for the period of ten Assessm ent 
Years, i.e., the Years 2009-10 to 2018-19, the Audi t analyzed and noted the 
details of summary/scrutiny assessments, as mentioned in Table 2.8  below: 
Table 2.8 M/s U2 Ltd. 
(₹ in crore) 
Asst Year Business 
Activity 
Code 
Assessed/ 
Processed 
under 
Section 
Date of 
order 
Sale/ 
Gross 
Receipt in 
P/L 
Excise 
duty 
debited in 
P/L 
Excise duty 
deposited in 
the Excise 
Department  
Returned 
Income/ 
Loss 
Assessed 
Income/ 
Loss 
2009-10 0124 143(3) 30.12.2011 7,113.08 3,365.42  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Awaited in 
audit 
496.64 550.34 
2010-11 0124 143(3) 28.03.2013 8,779.07 4,254.94 389.97 431.80 
2011-12 0124 143(3) 31.03.2014 12,366.12 6,467.71 515.17 54 3.61 
2012-13 0124 143(3) rws 
144C(13) 
31.01.2017 16,046.43 8,503.76 513.47 990.14 
2013-14 Awaited 
in audit 
Awaited in 
audit 
Awaited in 
audit 
18,834.40 10,516.23 Awaited 
in audit 
Awaited 
in audit 
2014-15 0124/0204  143(3) rws 
144C(13) 
10.10.2018 20,734.88 12,308.53 387.70 1,609.01 
2015-16 0124/0204  143(3) rws 
144C(13) 
25.10.2019 20,502.54 12,550.89 250.86 1,688.41 
2016-17 0124/0204  143(3) rws 
144C rws 
144B 
30.04.2021 22,241.98 13,209.68 -157.54 1,734.35 
2017-18 0124/0204  Scrutiny in 
progress 
Awaited in 
audit 
Awaited in 
audit 
Awaited in 
audit 
75.59 Awaited 
in audit 
2018-19 04018/ 
04019 
Scrutiny in 
progress 
Awaited in 
audit 
Awaited in 
audit 
Awaited in 
audit 
772.52 Awaited 
in audit 

Report No. 09 of 2024  
51 
(a)  As per the records provided by the ITD, the scrutin y assessment 
under Section 143(3) was completed in seven years, i.e., Assessment 
Years 2009-10 to 2012-13 & 2014-15 to 2016-17. 
(b)  Details of Assessment Years 2013-14, 2017-18 and 20 18-19 are still 
awaited in audit. 
(II)  Audit Analysis of Assessments: 
(a)  Audit examined (January 2022) the assessment records of M/s U2 Ltd. 
of three Assessment Years 2014-15 to 2016-17 (Scrut iny Assessments in 
Assessment Years 2014-15 to 2016-17) and noticed th at the assessee had 
declared the net sales of ₹ 24,015.56 crore in Profit and Loss Account instead 
of ₹ 36,908.66 crore as certified by the Auditor in For m 3CD at Sl. No. 34(a) 
against Section 206C of the Act, thereby resulting in under reporting of sale 
amounting to ₹ 12,893.10 crore ( ₹ 36,908.66 crore – ₹ 24,015.56 crore) 
(Annexure-L).  Omission to consider the under-reported sales of  ₹ 12,893.10 
crore by the ITD in Assessment Years 2014-15 to 201 6-17 resulted in short 
computation of income involving tax effect of ₹ 4,396.48 crore, excluding 
interest under Sections 234A and 234B of IT Act, as applicable. 
Reply of the PCIT-2, Bengaluru is awaited (February 2024). 
(b)  The audit noted (December 2022) that during the Ass essment Years 
2015-16 to 2018-19, M/s U2 Ltd. had six Distillerie s in the State of Karnataka.  
The produce from these distilleries was exclusively  sold to M/s K1 Ltd., which 
sold the produce to licensed retailers.  Audit soug ht the details of sales made 
by each Distillery unit in Karnataka for the period  Assessment Years 2015-16 
to 2018-19 from the State Excise Department.  Furth er, Audit compared the 
aggregate purchases reported by M/s K1 Ltd. with th e total sales reported by 
the six Distillery units of M/s. U2 Ltd. in the Sta te Excise Department 
Karnataka for the AYs 2015-16 to 2018-19.  Audit no ted that in Assessment 
Years 2015-16 to 2018-19 there was short accounting  in sales made by these 
distillery units of ₹ 544.93 crore (Annexure-L1) .  The substantial mismatch in 
the purchase and sales accounting indicates the inh erent risk in the distillery 
units' current accounting practice, which is prejud icial to the interest of 
revenue.  The inconsistencies were required to have  been addressed in the 
assessment proceedings of the respective Assessment  Years.  The reason for 
the difference could not be ascertained in Audit. 
Reply of the PCIT- 2, Bengaluru is awaited (February 2024). 
(c) 
 State Excise Department Karnataka reported the sale of produce made 
by M/s U2 Ltd. in respect of Chamundi Unit of ₹ 280.43 crore in Assessment 
Year 2015-16; however, M/s K1 Ltd. reported the pur chase of sale produce of 
Chamundi Unit as Nil.  The reason for the differenc e in sales could not be 
ascertained in the audit. A reply from PCIT-2, Beng aluru, is awaited 
(February 2024). 

Report No. 09 of 2024  
52 
2.3.2.9 PCIT-2, Bengaluru- M/s U3 Ltd. 
Audit requisitioned the records (September 2021) with respect to M/s U3 Ltd. 
for the Assessment years 2009-10 to 2018-19. 
Non-Production/Non-Availability of the records: 
Excise Duty deposited with the State Excise Departme nt and the 
corresponding sale, as well as confirmation from th e State Excise 
Department, were not available in the Scrutiny Asses sment records.  
Assessment folders/case records, viz., Audit Report , and Financial 
Statements for the Assessment Year 2018-19, were not produced to Audit.  
(I)  Overview: During the test check for the period of ten Assessm ent 
Years, i.e., the Assessment Years 2009-10 to 2018-1 9, Audit analyzed and 
noted the details of the summary/scrutiny assessmen ts, as mentioned in 
Table 2.9  below: 
Table 2.9 M/s U3 Ltd.  
(₹ in crore) 
Asst. 
Year 
Business 
Activity 
Code 
Assessed/ 
Processed 
under 
Section 
Date of 
order 
Sale/ 
Gross 
Receipt  
in P/L 
Excise 
duty 
debited in 
P/L 
Excise  
duty 
deposited 
 in the  
Excise 
Department  
Returned 
Income/ 
Loss 
Assessed 
Income/ 
Loss 
2009-10 0124/0204  143(3) 21.12.2011  2,460.45 762.18 
Awaited in 
audit 
77.35 96.17 
2010-11 0124/0204  143(3) 28.03.2013  2,955.80 958.35 154.74 205.15 
2011-12 Not 
mentioned  
143(3) 26.03.2014  4,557.12 1,543.92 0 33.50 
2012-13 Not 
mentioned  
143(3) 
rws 147 
22.05.2019  5,864.94 2,237.25 132.93 342.68 
2013-14 Not 
mentioned  
143(3) rws 
144C(13) 
09.10.2017  6,530.23 2,627.09 264.12 322.46 
2014-15 0124 143(3) rws 
144C(1) 
26.09.2018  7,261.84 3,026.34 313.01 349.98 
2015-16 0124 143(3) rws 
144C(13) 
21.10.2019  8,238.68 3,546.39 349.76 429.75 
2016-17 0124 143(3) rws 
144C(13) 
rws 144B 
30.04.2021  9,167.73 4,086.25 461.47 640.40 
 
2017-18 
 
0124 
 
143(3) 
rws 144B 
 
22.04.2021  
    
10,228.16  
 
5,500.61 
 
385.30 
 
1122.29 
2018-19 04017 Awaited in 
audit 
Awaited in 
audit 
Awaited 
in audit 
Awaited in 
audit 
Awaited 
in audit 
Awaited in 
audit 
 

Report No. 09 of 2024  
53 
(a)  As per the records provided by the ITD, the scrutin y assessments 
under Section 143(3) were completed for nine years for the 
Assessment Years 2009-10 to 2017-18. 
(b)    Details of Assessment Year 2018-19 are awaited in Audit. 
(II)  Audit Analysis of Assessments: 
(a)  Audit examined (January 2022) the assessment records of M/s U3 Ltd. 
pertaining to four Assessment Years 2014-15 to 2017-18 (Scrutiny Assessment 
in Assessment Years 2014-15 to 2017-18) and noticed  that the assessee had 
declared net sales of ₹16,795.20 crore in Profit and Loss Account instead of 
₹ 18,657.94 crore as certified by the Auditor in For m 3CD at Sl. No. 34(a) 
against Section 206C of the Act, thereby resulting in underreporting of sales 
amounting to ₹ 1,862.74 crore ( ₹ 18,657.94 crore – ₹ 16,795.20 crore) 
(Annexure-M). Omission to consider the under-reported sales of 
₹ 1,862.74 crore by the ITD in Assessment Years 2014 -15 to 2017-18 resulted 
in short computation of income involving tax effect  of ₹ 642.49 crore 
excluding interest under Sections 234A and 234B of IT Act, as applicable.  Had 
the provision of section 68/69C of the Income Tax A ct been invoked, the tax 
impact/effect would have been higher 28 . 
Reply of the PCIT- 2, Bengaluruis still awaited (February 2024). 
(b)  The audit noted (December 2022) that during the Ass essment Years 
2015-16 to 2018-19, M/s U3 Ltd. had three Breweries  viz. Mangaluru, 
Nelamangala and Nanjangud in the State of Karnataka . The produce from 
these Breweries was exclusively sold to the M/s K1 Ltd., which sold them to 
the licensed retailers.  Audit sought the details o f sales made by Mangaluru, 
Nelamangala and Nanjangud units in Karnataka for th e period Assessment 
Years 2015-16 to 2018-19 from the State Excise Depa rtment.  Further, Audit 
compared the aggregate purchases reported by M/s K1  Ltd. with the total 
sales reported by the three Brewery units of M/s U3  Ltd. in the State Excise 
Department Karnataka for the Assessment Years 2015- 16 to 2018-19.  The 
audit noted that in Assessment Years 2015-16 to 201 8-19, there was short 
accounting in sales made by these Brewery units of ₹ 449.74 crores 
(Annexure-M1) .  The substantial mismatch in the accounting of sales  and 
purchases indicates the inherent risk in the current accounting practice of the 
brewery units, which is prejudicial to the interest  of revenue.  The 
inconsistencies were required to have been addresse d in the assessment 
proceedings of the respective Assessment Years. The  reason for the 
difference could not be ascertained in Audit. 
Reply of the PCIT-2, Bengaluru is awaited (February 2024).
 
                                                           
28  The probable amount of tax effect u/s 68/69C works  out to be ₹ 1281.12crore (approximately).  

Report No. 09 of 2024  
54 
2.3.2.10  PCIT-I, Lucknow - M/s M1 Ltd.: 
Audit examined (May 2019) the assessment records of  M/s M1 Ltd. and 
noticed in two Assessment Years, 2014-15 & 2015-16 (Scrutiny Assessment in 
Assessment Year 2014-15 and Summary Assessment in A ssessment Year 
2015-16) that the assessee had paid royalty to M/s U3 Ltd. amounting  to 
₹ 37.15 crore ( ₹ 17.09 crore and ₹ 20.06 crore respectively).  However, 
M/s U3 Ltd., in its Profit and Loss Account, had sh own royalty income of 
₹ 11.87 crore only    (₹ 5.04 crore + ₹ 6.83 crore) in the respective Assessment 
Years from all the CMUs.  In the absence of details  of royalty in the Accounts 
of M/s U3 Ltd., the exact royalty payment made by M /s M1 Ltd. to M/s U3 
Ltd. could not be verified.  Audit noted that the e xcess claim of expenditure 
amounted to at least ₹ 25.28 crore ( ₹ 37.15 crore - ₹ 11.87 crore) involving tax 
effect of ₹ 8.59 crore, excluding interest under Sections 234A and 234B of the 
IT Act in Assessment Years 2014-15 & 2015-16. 
The audit noted that the AO of M/s M1 Ltd. did not communicate the details 
of royalty payment to the Jurisdictional AO of M/s U3 Ltd. to ensure that they 
duly paid the tax on account of royalty income.  Du ring this period, the AO of 
M/s U3 Ltd. also did not make any effort to get the se details verified from the 
concerned AO of M/s M1 Ltd. and other Contract Manufacturing Units. 
In reply (January 2022), Pr. CCIT(CCA), Lucknow sta ted that remedial action 
under Section 147 of the Act has been initiated for  Assessment Year 2014-15 
and for Assessment Years 2015-16 to 2017-18 propose d for reopening the 
cases under Section 147 read with Section 148 of the Act.  
Details of further action taken by the Department a re awaited 
(February 2024). 
2.3.2.11  Conclusion: 
The absence of a clear provision bifurcating total sales into TCS/ Non TCS in Sl. 
No. 34(a), Excise duty, VAT, and other taxes/duties  in the Tax Audit Report 
and the failure of the Assessing Officers to call f or such details at the scrutiny 
assessment stage impacted the quality of scrutiny assessments, indicating that 
the possibility of revenue leakage cannot be ruled out. 
Further, the absence of a focused approach to address the risks specific to this 
sector gets compounded due to deficient verificatio n and monitoring 
mechanism at the field level.  Such irregularities had underlying risk of tax 
evasion that requires further probing and detailed examination.  Further, ITD 
had yet to take appropriate action on the audit obs ervations, in some cases 
even after a lapse of more than four years of the issuance of observations.  

Report No. 09 of 2024  
55 
ITD may also examine these assessees in detail for the succeeding Assessment 
Years under intimation to audit to prevent probable  revenue leakage to the 
exchequer.  
2.3.3 
 Arithmetical discrepancy and certification by the A uditor with 
respect to the Quantitative Abstract of the finished products 
During the examination of records of four companies  viz., M/s W1 Ltd., M/s 
R1 Ltd., M/s M2 Ltd. and M/s A1 Ltd. engaged in the  business of liquor, Audit 
noticed that the ITD system could not identify case s where the arithmetical 
discrepancies in the figures reported at Sl.no. 35b B of Form 3CD were 
depicted and certified by the Auditor in the quanti tative abstract of finished 
products.  Observations are illustrated below:  
2.3.3.1  PCIT Bareilly – M/s W1 Ltd. 
(a) 
 Audit noticed (October 2019) from examination of scrutiny assessment 
records pertaining to the Assessment Year 2014-15 t hat there was an 
arithmetical discrepancy with respect to the Quanti tative Abstract of finished 
products (e.g., Rectified Spirits, Silent Spirits, Cane Juice Spirits, Malt Spirits, 
Grain Spirits and Pet Bottles) vide Sl.no. 35bB of Form 3CD and the same was 
certified by the Auditor, which resulted in short a ccounting by 2,17,74,342 
litres (Annexure N-1) .  Omission to verify the details by the AO in Asse ssment 
Year 2014-15 resulted in short computation of incom e by ₹ 87.10 crore 
(2,17,74,342 @ ₹ 40 per litre) involving tax effect of ₹ 29.60  crore, excluding 
interest under Sections 234A and 234B of Income tax Act, as applicable. 
In reply (January 2022), the PCCIT (CCA), Lucknow s tated that for the 
Assessment Year 2014-15, all Audit objections will be sent to the NeAC from 
where the assessment is to be made in the faceless manner and there all the 
points may be examined again during the course of p roceeding under Section 
143(3)/147 of Income tax Act. 
The audit noted that an order under Section 147 rea d with Section 144B of 
the IT Act was passed (March 2022) for Assessment Y ear 2014-15 at an 
income of ₹ 256.81 crore by making an addition of ₹
 223.80 crore pertaining 
to the sale of the M/s U3 Ltd.’s brand.  But short accounting pointed out by 
Audit was neither added to the assessed income nor mentioned by the 
NeFACin the assessment order passed in March 2022.  Reasons for non-
addition could not be ascertained by Audit.  
It may be mentioned that on account of difference i n figures of raw material 
consumed as reported in Audit Report in Form 3CD in  different Assessment 
Years 2014-15 to 2017-18 and those reported with th e UP State Excise 
Department, a Draft Para namely "Non-realization of  revenue due to 
concealment of the quantity of consumed excise mate rial and interest 

Report No. 09 of 2024  
56 
thereon" with a money value of ₹ 1,646.04 crore (Excise duty ₹ 816.58 crore + 
interest ₹ 829.46 crore) was printed in the Report of the Com ptroller and 
Auditor General of India on Revenue Sector for the year ended 31 March 2019 
-Government of Uttar Pradesh-Report No.3 of 2020. 
Details of further action taken by the Department a nd reply of the Ministry 
are awaited in Audit (February 2024). 
(b) 
 Audit noticed (November 2021) from examination of Summary records 
pertaining to Assessment Year 2018-19 that there wa s an arithmetical 
discrepancy with respect to quantitative Abstract o f finished product 
(e.g., ENA/RS manufactured, blending stock (IMFL), blending stock (CL), 
malt (SELF MRF), beer (strong) etc. vide Sl.no. 35bB of Form 3CD and certified 
by the Auditor, which resulted in short accounting by 13,49,56,782 litres 
(Annexure N-2) .  This resulted in short computation of income by 
₹ 719.05 crore (13,49,56,782 liters @ ₹ 53.28 per litre) involving tax effect 
of ₹ 248.85 crore excluding interest under Sections 234 A and 234B of IT Act, 
as applicable. 
Audit further noticed that after processing of the income tax return under 
Section 143(1), the Assessee had submitted in Octob er 2020 a revised Audit 
Report after eight months of processing of ITR unde r Section 143(1) without 
specifying any reasons, which was allowed and accep ted by the ITD System.  
In the revised Audit Report, Audit noted that diffe rences as pointed out by 
Audit were modified and uploaded by the assessee, w hich were allowed by 
the ITD System.  Since the reporting of facts and r evised figures differed from 
the original figures, the differential amount/figur es modified impacted the 
Profit and Loss Account of the assessee, having rev enue implications of 
₹ 719.05 crore.  ITD may consider detailed examination by reopening the case 
under Section 147 of the Act. 
Reply of the PCCIT (CCA), Lucknow is still awaited (February 2024). 
2.3.3.2  PCIT (Central) -3 New Delhi - M/s R1 Ltd.:  
Audit noticed (October 2019) from examination of records pertaining to three 
Assessment Years 2015-16 to 2017-18 (Scrutiny Asses sment in Assessment 
Year 2016-17 and Summary Assessment in Assessment Y ears 2015-16 and 
2017-18), there were arithmetical discrepancies wit h respect to quantitative 
Abstract of finished product (e.g. Rectified Spirit s, Silent Spirits, Cane Juice 
Spirits, Malt Spirits, Grain Spirits and Pet Bottles) vide Sl.no. 35bB of Form 3CD 
and certified by the Auditor which resulted in shor t accounting by 
1,05,13,80,157 units.  This resulted in short compu tation of income by 
₹ 1,211.61 crore as worked out at the value given at  note 42(b) of Profit and 

Report No. 09 of 2024  
57 
Loss Account (Annexure-O) involving tax effect of ₹ 416.96 crore, excluding 
interest under Sections 234A and 234B of IT Act, as applicable. 
The PCIT, Central- 3, New Delhi (July 2021) while stating that the observations 
pointed out by the Audit will be acted upon while m aking assessment/ 
reassessment as the cases pertaining to Assessment Years 2013-14 to 2017-18 
have been reopened under Section 147 read with Section 148 of the IT Act.  
Audit noted that the cases for three Assessment Yea rs 2015-16 to 2017-18 
were reopened on the basis of Audit observations bu t re-assessment 
completed (February 2022) without making any additi on(s).  DCIT Central 
Circle 31, New Delhi has not provided the details j ustifying the reason(s) for 
not considering Audit observation while finalizing the reassessment order.  
Audit could not ascertain the reason or justificati on for not considering the 
Audit observations while taking remedial action.  
DCIT CC-31 New Delhi replied (September 2022) that the assessee has 
reported complete purchases which included both tra ding purchases and 
purchase utilized for further production.  The assessee furnished the details of 
traded purchases as well as those consumed in manufacturing.  Further, it was 
stated that Rectified spirit has been consumed for production of silent spirits 
and combined consumption of silent spirit, cane jui ce spirit, Malt spirit and 
Grain spirit is utilized for manufacturing of total  quantity of IMFL and country 
liquor.
 
Audit noted that the DCIT CC-31 New Delhi, has prov ided the reconciliation 
chart for arithmetical discrepany and certification by the Auditor with respect 
to Quantitative Abstract of finished product for th e Assessment Years 
2015-16, 2016-17 and 2017-18 in the format of Table 3.2  below containing 
columns A to I. 
Table 3.2 
Item 
name  
 
Unit Opening 
Stock  
Purchase 
  
Quantity 
manufac 
tured  
Sales 
during 
previous 
year  
Consumed 
during 
previous 
year  
Closing 
Stock  
Shortage/ 
Excess, if 
any  
A B C D E F G H I 
Audit noted that the reconciliation was provided by  inserting a new column 
G in details of Sl.  No.35bB, prescribed by ICAI.  DCIT CC-31 New Delhi had 
not furnished any supporting documents in respect o f reconciliation.  In 
absence of the details of Consumed finished product s during previous year 
(as per Column G) the Audit could not ascertain due  diligence exercised by 
DCIT Central Circle 31, New Delhi during finalizing  the Assessment order to 
examine the arithmetical discrepancy and certificat ion by the Auditor with 
respect to quantitative abstract of finished product. 

Report No. 09 of 2024  
58 
Moreover, during AY 2014-15, there was no differenc e in the quantitative 
abstract of sale of items at Sl.No.35bB of 3CD, ins pite of the fact that there 
was manufacturing and consequent sale of the finish ed products in the P&L 
account and net profit offered for taxation. 
Details of further action taken by the Department a nd reply of the Ministry 
are awaited (February 2024). 
2.3.3.3  PCIT Delhi-6 - M/s M2 Ltd.:  
Audit noticed (October 2019 and November 2021) from  examination of 
records pertaining to four Assessment Years 2014-15 , 2015-16, 2017-18 and 
2018-19 (Scrutiny Assessment in Assessment Years 20 14-15, 2015-16 & 
2018-19 and Summary Assessment in Assessment Year 2 017-18) that there 
were arithmetical discrepancies with respect to qua ntitative Abstract of 
finished product (e.g. Spirit and Extra Neutral Alc ohol) vide Sl.no. 35bB of 
Form 3CD and certified by the Auditor which resulte d in short accounting by 
12239 kiloliters.  Omission to verify the details b y the DCIT Circle-16(1), Delhi 
in four Assessment Years 2014-15, 2015-16, 2017-18 and 2018-19 resulted in 
short computation of income by ₹ 25.79 crore, as worked out at the value 
given at note 42(b) of Profit and Loss Account (Annexure-P) involving tax 
effect of ₹ 8.81 crore excluding interest under Sections 234A and 234B of IT 
Act, as applicable. 
DCIT (Hq.) (Coord.II) Delhi stated (July 2022) that  the cases for Assessment 
Years 2014-15, 2015-16 and 2018-19 are not acceptab le but reopened the 
cases for three Assessment Years 2014-15 to 2017-18 .  DCIT (Hq.) (Coord.II) 
Delhi stated (July 2022) that cases for two Assessm ent Years 2014-15 and 
2017-18 have been stayed by Delhi High Court and re -assessment order for 
Assessment Year 2015-16 was passed without making a ny additions.  DCIT 
(Hq.) (Coord.II) Delhi further stated that final co mments on Audit objections 
raised for Assessment Years 2014-15 and 2017-18 wil l be submitted after 
conclusion. 
ACIT, Circle 16(1) New Delhi replied (September 202 2) that finished goods 
spirit and ENA has been used by the assessee for se lf-consumption (used for 
production of country liquor).  The quantity of suc h finished goods is also 
mentioned in the note in TAR. 
Reply furnished by the ACIT Circle 16(1) New Delhi is not tenable in Audit as 
reference to self-consumption of the products was n ot given in the Sl. No. 
35bB of Audit Report and ‘Any other report of Form 3CD’ was not provided to 
Audit along with the attached documents uploaded wi th ITRs, so that Audit 
could verify that the arithmetical discrepancy and certification by the Auditor 
with respect to Quantitative Abstract of finished p roduct was examined by 

Report No. 09 of 2024  
59 
the ACIT Circle 16(1) New Delhi at the time of fina lizing the Assessment 
Order.  Further, the treatment of self-consumed spi rit & ENA for production 
of Country Liquor in the books of accounts was not provided with the reply.  
It is pertinent to mention that sale of Country Liq uor was not reflected in the 
Profit & Loss Accounts prepared for the Assessment Year 2015-16, 2017-18 
and 2018-19.  The case for Assessment Year 2018-19 was not reopened.  
Details of further action taken by the Department a nd reply of the Ministry 
are awaited (February 2024). 
2.3.3.4  PCIT 1 Mumbai- M/s A1 Ltd.:  
Audit noticed (October 2021) from examination of Su mmary records 
pertaining to Assessment Year 2018-19 that there wa s arithmetical 
discrepancy with respect to the quantitative Abstract of finished product (e.g. 
Beer strong) vide Sl.no. 35bB of Form 3CD and certi fied by the Auditor which 
resulted in short accounting by 4,50,001 liters.  O mission to verify the details 
by the DCIT Circle 9(1)(2) Mumbai in Assessment Yea r 2018-19 resulted in 
short computation of income by ₹ 2.40 crore  (Annexure-Q) involving tax 
effect of ₹ 0.79 crore excluding interest under Sections 234A and 234B of IT 
Act, as applicable. 
Reply of PCIT- 1, Mumbai is still awaited (February 2024). 
2.3.3.5 Conclusion: 
Audit noted instances of arithmetical discrepancy a nd certification in 
quantitative disclosures made through TARs indicative of the fact that the ITD 
systems had deficiencies in detecting discrepancies  and gaps during 
assessment proceedings.  Such irregularities had un derlying risk of tax 
evasion that requires further probing and detailed examination. 
ITD may examine these assessees in detail for the s ucceeding Assessment 
Years also so as to prevent the probable revenue le akage to the exchequer 
under intimation to Audit.  
2.3.4 
 Calculation mistakes:  
2.3.4.1 Interest for deferment of advance tax under  Section 234C: 
PCIT (Central)-3 New Delhi- M/s P1 Pvt. Ltd. 
Audit examined (October 2019) the records related t o scrutiny assessment of 
Assessment Year 2014-15 and noticed that DCIT Centr al Circle -31, New Delhi 
had not levied interest of ₹ 1.36 crore under Section 234C as declared by the 
Assessee on the Returned income of ₹ 1,276.59 crore while computing the 
tax in ITNS.  The mistake resulted in non-levy of i nterest of ₹ 1.36 crore under 
Section 234C of the IT Act. 

Report No. 09 of 2024  
60 
The PCIT Central 3 New Delhi (July 2021) stated that the observations pointed 
out by Audit will be acted upon while making assess ment/reassessment as 
the case pertaining to Assessment Year 2014-15 has been reopened under 
Section 147 read with Section 148 of the IT Act, 19 61.  Further, the DCIT 
Central Circle 31, New Delhi replied (June 2022) th at the Assessment under 
Section 147 of the Act is still pending.  
Details of further action taken by the Department are awaited (February 2024). 
2.3.4.2  Arithmetical mistake in computation of inc ome:  
PCIT Delhi-8 - M/s S1 Ltd. 
Audit examined (June 2015) records of scrutiny asse ssment of Assessment 
Year 2012-13 and noticed that ACIT Circle -22(1), N ew Delhi had made an 
addition of ₹ 1.34 crore on account of pro-rata interest worked out on 
loans/advances of ₹ 14.62 crore given to related parties, out of which  
₹ 6.16 crore was given to M/s S2 Pvt. Ltd. and was r eflected twice in the 
Balance sheet resulting in over statement by an amo unt of ₹ 6.16 crore.  
Omission to disallow the same resulted in over-asse ssment of loss by 
₹ 6.16 crore involving potential tax effect of ₹ 2.0 crore. 
In reply (February 2021), the JCIT (OSD), Circle 22 (2), New Delhi, while 
accepting the Audit observation, took remedial acti on (December 2019) by 
passing an order under Section 144 read with Sectio n 147 of the Act, thereby 
reducing the loss of ₹ 6.16 crore. 
2.3.4.3 Conclusion: 
The Assessing Officers committed arithmetical error s in certain cases while 
concluding assessments.  Further, errors in levy of  interest for default in 
payment of advance tax point towards weaknesses in assessment procedure 
and internal controls of ITD which needs to be addressed. 
2.3.5 
 Revenue impact due to lack of inter-departmental coordination:  
The ITD is mandated to promote compliance with dire ct tax laws, through 
caring taxpayer service and enforcement of the prov isions of the Income Tax 
Act to realize maximum resources for the Nation. For this, correct assessment 
of income and levy of tax of an assessee is require d to be ensured.  Further, 
details of expenditure claimed by the assessee shou ld also be verified and 
only after checking genuineness, such expenditure f or running the business 
should be allowed as per the provisions of the Act. The Act empowers the ITD 

Report No. 09 of 2024  
61 
to obtain/call for any information by issuing notic e under Section 133(6) 29  of 
the Income Tax Act.  In the interest of revenue, th e Assessing Officer(s) needs 
to call for complete information from the State Exc ise Department for 
assesses in the alcoholic sector for cross verifica tion and ensure the 
correctness of the duty deposited.  
In the business of alcohol, the State Excise Depart ment is an important key 
stakeholder and Excise Duty is the main tax/duty pa id by the company.  
Excise duty claimed by the Distilleries/Breweries w as required to be verified 
from the concerned State Excise Department by the ITD before allowing claim 
to this expenditure.  
During the examination of records of 11 companies, Audit noticed that the 
Excise duty claimed by them was allowed by the Asse ssing Officer without 
verifying the genuineness/correctness of the claim.   As they had reduced the 
sale by debiting excise duty ₹ 1,76,952.57crore during Assessment Years 
2009-10 to 2018-19 (Annexure-R) but evidence for payment of such duty was 
not found placed on the record.  Since the amount o f excise duty paid, 
claimed and allowed impacted the net profit of the assessee, the respective 
Assessing Officers were required to call for the in formation from the State 
Excise Department invoking provisions of Section 13 3(6) of the Income Tax 
Act, especially at the stage of scrutiny assessment. 
Audit of records of these eleven companies falling within the ITD jurisdiction 
in the States of Uttar Pradesh, Maharashtra, Karnat aka and New Delhi were 
taken up.  The records of the relevant Assessment Y ears were requisitioned 
and observations made on the basis of cases assesse d under Section 143(3) 
as well as those processed under Section 143(1) of the Act.  
Information was also requisitioned from the State Excise Department of Uttar 
Pradesh, New Delhi, Maharashtra and Karnataka regar ding Sales made, 
excise duty paid, working licenses granted and agre ements entered relating 
to concerned distilleries/breweries and obtained on ly from the Uttar Pradesh 
State Excise Department.  
Non Production/Non Availability of the records: 
Superintendent, State Excise Duty, Aurangabad under the State 
Government Maharashtra has provided the details of Sales (own brand) 
and Excise duty paid, which was only a part of the Sales and Excise duty 
claimed in the Profit & Loss accounts.  Part inform ation regarding Import 
                                                           
29  Section 133(6) of IT Act provides that the Assessing Officer may require any  person to furnish statements of 
accounts and affairs verified in the manner specifi ed by the AO giving information in relation to such  points or 
matters as in the opinion of the AO will be useful for or relevant to any enquiry or proceedings. 

Report No. 09 of 2024  
62 
Permit on liquor stock in Delhi was provided by the office of the 
Commissioner of Excise, ENTT. & L Tax Department, Go vernment of 
National Capital Territory of Delhi.  State Excise De partment of Karnataka 
provided the details of sale made by the Distillery and Brewery units of 
M/s U2 Ltd. and M/s U3 Ltd. within the State only. 
Due to non-production/non-availability of above men tioned information in 
the Assessment records by the aforesaid offices, Au dit could not draw 
assurance that these facts were examined by the Ass essing Officers while 
finalizing the assessment proceedings.  
Further, based on year-wise data/information of act ual excise duty provided 
by the UP State Excise Department with regards to t he three companies (viz., 
M/s W1 Ltd., M/s U1 Ltd. and M/s M1 Ltd.), Audit ma de a comparison of the 
excise duty deposited with the amount claimed by th e assessees in their 
Profit and Loss accounts/ITRs. Audit noted that the re were variations, which 
were not reconciled by the Assessing Officers at th e stage of scrutiny 
assessments under Section 143(3).  
Observations are as under-  
(i) 
 Audit noticed (November 2020) that the three compan ies namely, (a) 
M/s W1 Ltd. for the assessment Years 2011-12 to 201 8-19, had deposited 
excise duty of ₹ 16,314.71 crore with the State Excise Department a s against 
the claim of ₹ 11,934.04 crore, [Annexure R-1(a)]  (b) M/s U1 Ltd.for 
Assessment Years 2010-11 to 2017-18 had deposited e xcise duty of 
₹ 4,773.34 crore as against claim of ₹ 3,516.50 crore [Annexure R-1(b)] and 
(c) M/s M1 Ltd. for the Assessment Year 2018-19, ha d deposited excise duty 
of ₹ 661.35 crore with the State Excise Department as a gainst the claim of 
₹ 120.78 crore in their respective Profit and Loss A ccounts [Annexure R-1(c)] .  
Reasons for excess deposit/unclaimed excise duty/va riations were neither 
called for from the assessee at the stage of scruti ny, nor was the same 
reconciled from the UP State Excise Department invo king the provisions of 
Section 133(6) of the Act, indicating lack of inter-departmental coordination. 
(ii)   Audit noticed (November 2020) that M/s U1 Ltd. for  Assessment 
Years 2009-10 and 2018-19 had deposited excise duty  of ₹ 316.70 crore and 
₹ 350.18 crore respectively (Annexure R-2) with the State Excise Department 
as against the claim of ₹ 331.54 crore and ₹ 353.61 crore in their Profit and 
Loss Accounts of the respective years.  Reasons for  excess claim of excise 
duty/variations was neither called for from the ass essee nor was the same 

Report No. 09 of 2024  
63 
reconciled from the UP State Excise Department invo king the provisions of 
Section 133(6) of the Act indicating lack of inter-departmental coordination.  
(iii)  Audit noticed (November 2020) that M/s M1 Ltd. for Assessment 
Years 2014-15 and 2015-16 had deposited excise duty  of ₹ 34.35 crore and 
₹ 40.88 crore (Annexure R-2) with the State Excise Department as against 
claim of ₹ 34.35 crore and ₹ 40.88 crore in their Profit and Loss Accounts of 
respective years.  Thus, there was no variation in the amount of excise duty 
paid with the State Excise Department and that clai med in their Profit and 
Loss Accounts. 
In reply (January 2022), PCCIT (CCA) Lucknow with r espect to M/s W1 Ltd. 
stated that notice under Section 148 has been issue d for Assessment Year 
2013-14 to 2017-18.  However, no reply with respect  to Assessment Years 
2009-10, 2010-11, 2011-12, 2012-13 and 2018-19 was furnished. 
The audit noted that the orders under Section 147 w ere passed for 
Assessment Years 2013-14 to 2017-18 (March 2022) by  the National Faceless 
Assessment Centre Delhi.  However, neither reconcil iation of difference in 
excise duty as pointed out by Audit was addressed i n the assessment order 
nor did the ACIT 2 Bareilly furnish the reasons for  not considering the issues 
raised by Audit. 
 
In reply (May 2022), the PCCIT (CCA), Kanpur with r espect to M/s U1 Ltd. 
stated that notices under Section 148 of the Act ha ve been issued for 
Assessment Years 2013-14 to 2017-18. The cases have  become time-barred 
for Assessment Years 2009-10 to 2012-13.  Further, in respect of case for 
Assessment Year 2018-19, Joint Commissioner of Inco me Tax (OSD) Circle 
2(1) (1) Kanpur stated (June 2022) that the observa tion made by Audit 
appears to be acceptable.  Accordingly, initiation of reassessment 
proceedings is contemplated in this case. Details o f further action are 
awaited (February 2024). 
In reply (January 2022), Pr. CCIT(CCA), Lucknow wit h respect to M/s M1 Ltd., 
stated that the remedial action under Section 147 o f the Act has been 
initiated for the Assessment Years 2013-14 and 2014 -15, for the Assessment 
Years 2015-16 to 2017-18 proposed for reopening of the cases under Section 
147 read with Section 148A of the Act.  The cases h ave become time-barred 
for the Assessment Years 2009-10 to 2012-13.  No re ply in respect of 
Assessment Year 2018-19 was furnished to Audit.  De tails of further action 
taken are awaited (February 2024). 
 

Report No. 09 of 2024  
64 
2.3.5.1 Conclusion: 
While examining the cases, Audit noticed that the r espective Assessing 
Officers did not exercise the power to call for inf ormation as envisaged in 
Section 133(6) of the Act to ensure the genuineness /correctness of Excise 
duty, VAT and other taxes/ duties claimed by the as sessees from the 
respective State Government authorities, indicating  weakness in inter-
departmental coordination. 
2.3.6 
 Non-adherence to the powers conferred by the provis ions of the 
Act: 
Audit, during examination of records, noticed that three companies were 
allowed huge amount of rebate, discount, etc. as ex penditure in the books of 
records; however, documents/details in support of v erification of the 
genuineness of such claim allowed were neither foun d placed in case records 
nor the Assessing Officers asked for the informatio n from the assessee 
invoking the provisions of Section 37 30  of the Income Tax Act. Audit noted 
that the Income Tax Department had no specific dire ction(s) in this regard.  
Observations are illustrated below: 
2.3.6.1  Allowance of Rebate and/or Discount without  verification:  
During the examination of records of three companie s namely M/s W1 Ltd., 
M/s U1 Ltd. and M/s M1 Ltd., Audit noticed that rebate and/or discount were 
allowed as expenditure in the books of records with out verifying the 
genuineness/correctness of the claim. Since claims of expenditure have a 
direct impact on the net profit of the assessee, du e diligence exercised by the 
respective Assessing Officers in this regard could not be verified by Audit. 
(a) 
  PCIT Bareilly –M/s W1 Ltd.:  
(i)  Audit noticed (July 2019) from examination of scrut iny assessment 
records of M/s W1 Ltd. pertaining to Assessment Yea r 2010-11 that the 
assessee had declared sale of ₹ 651.00 crore in its Profit and Loss Account 
made to M/s F1 Pvt. Ltd. It was observed from the " Reconciliation of Account 
Statement as on 31.03.2010", that the sale of ₹ 651.00 crore also included 
"Material in transit for purchase made in April 201 1" of ₹ 17.88 crore. Audit 
noted that the balance as mentioned in "Reconciliat ion of Account 
Statement" was required to be examined and verified  by ACIT, Circle -2, 
                                                           
30  Section 37- Any expenditure (not being expenditure of the natur e described in sections 30 to 36 and not being in 
the nature of capital expenditure or personal expen ses of the assessee), laid out or expended wholly a nd 
exclusivelyfor the purposes of the business or prof ession shall be allowed in computing the income cha rgeable 
under the head "Profits and gains of business or profession".  

Report No. 09 of 2024  
65 
Bareilly, UP at the stage of scrutiny assessment in voking the provisions of 
Section 37 of the Income Tax Act. 
In reply (January 2022), PCCIT (CCA) Lucknow stated  that the case of 
Assessment Year 2010-11 has become time barred. 
(ii) 
 Audit noticed (July 2019) from examination of scrut iny assessment 
records of M/s W1 Ltd. pertaining to Assessment Yea r 2012-13 that the 
assessee had shown unsecured loan of ₹ 27.00 crore in its balance sheet 
which was carried forward for the subsequent Assess ment Years i.e. from 
Assessment Year 2013-14. However, it was observed f rom the ‘Summary 
statement of Unsecured loan’ of M/s. W1 Ltd. that t his amount was received 
through RTGS against sale from P2 Pvt Ltd, and ther efore should not have 
been treated as Unsecured Loan.  Audit noted that a n incorrect liability was 
created and reflected in the Balance Sheet during A ssessment Year 2012-13 
and carried forward subsequently which undermined t he Sales amount and 
reduced the net profit of the Assessee; ACIT Circle  -2 Bareilly, UP should have 
examined the details invoking the provisions of the  Income Tax Act before 
finalizing the assessment. 
No reply was received in respect of Assessment Year 2012-13.  However, PCIT 
Bareilly (January 2022) stated that Audit objection  will be examined while 
concluding assessment for Assessment Year 2013-14. 
Audit observed that an order under Section 147 was passed (March 2022) for 
Assessment Year 2013-14 at an income of ₹ 187.46 crore by making an 
addition of ₹ 156.56 crore on account of sale made by M/s W1 Ltd . regarding 
to M/s U3 Ltd.’s brand.  However, no additions were  made to the income of 
the assessee on account of this specific issue. 
Audit could not ascertain the reason for not consid ering the Audit 
observation as ACIT Circle-2 Bareilly did not provi de details to conclude the 
basis of not making addition with respect to the li ability created in the 
Balance Sheet. 
Reply of the Ministry is awaited (February 2024). 
(iii) 
 Audit examined (July 2019) the Scrutiny Assessment records of 
M/s W1 Ltd. and noticed from the records of Assessm ent Year 2013-14 that 
the assessee had claimed rebate of ₹ 73.80 crore which was allowed without 
verifying the genuineness/correctness of the claim,  as no details/documents 
like rebate policy, name & PAN of parties etc. were  found to be placed on 
record.  Since the expenditure impacted the net pro fit of the assessee, ACIT 

Report No. 09 of 2024  
66 
Circle-2, Bareilly, UP was required to call for det ails/information from the 
assessee by invoking the provisions of Section 37 o f the Income Tax Act, if 
required. 
In reply (January 2022), PCCIT (CCA) Lucknow stated  that details were called for 
and no discrepancy was noticed.  Reply of the Depar tment could not be verified, 
as details called for and examined were not provide d to Audit. Audit noted that 
the procedural examination as mandated by the provisions of the Act at the time 
of conclusion of assessment does not seem to be com plied with in the instant 
case as ITD was required to call for details/inform ation from the assessee by 
invoking the relevant provisions and examine the ap plicability of Section 37 of 
the Income Tax Act, during the assessment proceedin gs. However these details 
were called for from the Assessee after being pointed out in audit.  
Reply of the Ministry is awaited (February 2024). 
(b) 
 PCIT, I Kanpur – M/s U1 Ltd.:  
Audit examined (June 2019) records of M/s U1 Ltd. a nd noticed in seven 
Assessment Years 2009-10 to 2015-16 (Scrutiny Asses sment in Assessment 
Years 2009-10 to 2015-16) that the assessee had cla imed discount of 
₹ 111.15 crore ( ₹ 0.29 crore + ₹ 28.79 crore + ₹ 33.92 crore + ₹ 2.32 crore + 
₹ 7.30 crore + ₹ 12.89 crore + ₹ 25.64 crore) which was allowed without 
verifying the genuineness/correctness of the claim as basic details of discount 
policy, name & PAN of parties etc. were also not fo und placed on record.  
Since the expenditure claimed and allowed impacted the net profit of the 
Assessee, ACIT Central Circle -1, Kanpur, UP was re quired to verify the details 
and place on record details collected from the Asse ssee by invoking the 
provisions of Section 37 of the Income Tax Act at t he stage of scrutiny 
assessment, if required. 
In reply (May 2022), the PCCIT (CCA) Kanpur regardi ng M/s U1 Ltd. stated 
that notices under Section 148 of the Act have been  issued for the 
Assessment Years 2013-14 to 2017-18. The cases have  become time-barred 
for Assessment Years 2009-10 to 2012-13. 
 
 Reply of the Ministry is awaited (February 2024). 
(c) 
 PCIT II Lucknow - M/s M1 Ltd.:  
(i)  Audit noticed (May 2019) from the scrutiny records of Assessment 
Years 2012-13 and 2013-14 that the assessee had rec eived Share Application 
money of ₹ 35.41 crore ( ₹ 1.85 crore  + ₹ 33.56 crore).  Audit further noted 
that details of the same were neither submitted by the Assessee nor called 

Report No. 09 of 2024  
67 
for by ACIT- IV, Lucknow at the stage of scrutiny a ssessment from the 
assessee invoking the provisions of the Income Tax Act. Further, it could not 
be ascertained whether the provision in Section 42 of the Companies Act had 
been complied with.  
In reply (January 2022), Pr. CCIT (CCA), Lucknow re plied that the objection 
raised is general in nature and hence not accepted.   Reply is not tenable as 
Audit noted that as per the provision laid down in section 69(4)(b) and (5) of 
the Companies Act 
31 1956 and Section 42(6) of the Companies Act 32 , 2013, 
the Company should allot shares within the specifie d dates from the receipt 
of the share application money.  Further, the books  of accounts are to be 
prepared as per the Companies Act which are importa nt assessment records 
in determining correct income of the assessee. Henc e, scrutinising the 
assessment records including the books of accounts correctly and accurately 
is the prime responsibility of the AO while conclud ing assessment in the 
interest of revenue. Further, the 'White Paper on B lack Money' published by 
the Ministry of Finance in 2012 33 , has also flagged the issue of introducing 
capital through share application money as one of t he modus operandi for 
generating black money, therefore this issue was re quired to be examined in 
detail by AO under Section 143(3) of the IT Act.  
Reply of the Ministry is awaited (February 2024).  
 
 
                                                           
31  Section 69(4)(b) of the Companies Act 1956 : All moneys received from applicants for shares sh all be deposited 
and kept deposited in a Scheduled Bank- where certi ficate to commence business has already been obtain ed, 
until the entire amount payable on applications for  shares in respect of the minimum subscription has been 
received by the company, and where such amount has not been received by the company within the time on the 
expiry of which the moneys received from the applic ants for shares are required to be repaid without i nterest 
under sub-section (5), all moneys received from app licants for shares shall be returned in accordance with the 
provisions of that sub-section. In the event of any  contravention of the provisions of this sub-sectio n, every 
promoter, director or other person who is knowingly responsible for such contravention shall be punishable with 
fine which may extend to [fifty] thousand rupees.  
 Section 69(5) of the Companies Act 1956 : If the conditions aforesaid have not been complied with on the expiry 
of one hundred and twenty days after the first issu e of the prospectus, all moneys received from appli cants for 
shares shall be forthwith repaid to them without in terest ; and if any such money is not so repaid wit hin one 
hundred and thirty days after the issue of the pros pectus, the directors of the company shall be jointl y and 
severally liable to repay that money with interest at the rate of six per cent per annum from the expi ry of the 
one hundred and thirtieth day : Provided that a director shall not be so liable if he proves that the default in the 
repayment of the money was not due to any misconduct or negligence on his part.  
32  As per Section 42(6) of the Companies Act, 2013 , the Company shall allot shares within 60 days from  the 
receipt of the share application money.  If it fail s to allot the share within 60 days, the share appl ication money 
shall be refunded within 15 days from the expiry of  60 days.  If the Company fails to repay the applica tion 
money within the aforesaid period, it shall be liable to repay that money with interest at the rate of  12 per cent 
per annum from the expiry of the 60th day.  Further , the above Act also requires that an assessee foll ows the 
proper procedure of preparing its B/S &P/L account,  disclosing every material feature in respect of al l 
transactions of any nature.  
33   The ‘White Paper on Black Money’  published by the Ministry of Finance in 2012 descr ibed two different modus 
operandi for the generation of black money.  The first is the approach of not declaring or reporting the whole of 
the income or the activities leading to it.  The ot her more sophisticated approach for the generation of black 
money, often preferred, involves the manipulation o f financial records and accounting by which the acc ounts 
prepared for reporting and presenting before the au thorities are manipulated to misrepresent and under -
disclose income, thereby generating unaccounted, un declared and unreported income that amounts to blac k 
money.  Some ways for manipulating books of accounts identified in the above document were the introduction 
of capital through share application money, issuing shares at a heavy premium and introducing own money and 
share capital through foreign companies/entities. 

Report No. 09 of 2024  
68 
(ii)  Audit noticed (May 2019) that for the Assessment Ye ars 2012-13 and 
2013-14, the Chartered Accountant (CA) in the disclosure on the related party 
transactions in the balance sheet certified that th e Assessee had taken the 
unsecured loan of ₹ 59.04 crore ( ₹ 29.50 crore + ₹ 29.54 crore).  The details 
of the same were neither submitted by the Assessee nor called for by 
ACIT-IV, Lucknow from the Assessee invoking the pro visions of the Income 
Tax Act at the stage of scrutiny assessments. 
In reply (January 2022), Pr. CCIT(CCA) Lucknow repl ied that remedial action 
has been initiated under Section 147 of the Act for  Assessment Year 2013-14, 
and action for Assessment Year  2012-13 has become time-barred.  
Reply of the Ministry is awaited (February 2024). 
(iii) 
 Audit examined (June 2019) the case records of M/s M1 Ltd. and 
noticed in two Assessment Years, 2014-15 and 2015-1 6 (Scrutiny Assessment 
in Assessment Year 2014-15 and Summary Assessment i n Assessment Year 
2015-16) that the assessee had claimed discount of ₹ 10.63 crore 
(₹ 5.42 crore + ₹ 5.21 crore) which was allowed without verifying th e 
genuineness/correctness of the claim as essential d etails of name of parties, 
discount policy, name & PAN of parties etc. were no t found placed on record.  
Since the expenditure claimed was allowed without v erifying the details, it 
impacted the net profit of the assessee, and due di ligence exercised by ACIT 
Circle-4, Lucknow, UP, could not be ascertained in the audit. 
In reply (January 2022), Pr. CCIT (CCA), Lucknow, w hile not accepting the 
audit observation, stated that the assessee company  had entered into an 
agreement with M/s U3 Ltd. to bottle the Kingfisher  brand of beer and a 
discount was given as per the instruction of M/s U3  Ltd.  The reply of the 
Department is not tenable as Audit had not questioned the prerogative of the 
business in giving a discount but commented upon the allowance of the same 
by the Assessing Officer without verification of th e genuineness/correctness 
of the claim made by the assessee.  Due diligence e xercised by ACIT Circle-4, 
Lucknow, UP, could not be ascertained. 
(iv) 
 Audit examined (May 2019) the scrutiny assessments records for 
Assessment Year 2014-15, and noted that CA in Form 3CD vide Sl. No. 31a 
certified that the Assessee had taken a loan or dep osit of ₹ 0.68 crore 
otherwise than through account payee cheque/draft, contravening the 
provisions of Section 269SS of the Act attracting a  penalty of a sum equal to 
the amount of the loan or deposit under Section 271 D.  The details of the 
same were neither submitted by the Assessee nor cal led for by ACIT- IV, 

Report No. 09 of 2024  
69 
Lucknow from the assessee invoking the penalty prov isions under Section 
271D contravening the provisions of Section 269SS of the Income Tax Act. 
In reply (January 2022), Pr. CCIT (CCA), Lucknow, w ithout providing any 
supporting evidence, stated that the said entry in the Audit Report was due 
to an inadvertent mistake by the Auditor.  The repl y is not tenable as no 
supporting evidence was furnished in support of the  reply to Audit.  As a 
result, Audit could not verify the reply forwarded by Pr. CCIT (CCA), Lucknow. 
Details of further action taken and reply of the Mi nistry are awaited 
(February 2024).  
2.3.6.2 Entries in the Balance Sheet accepted witho ut the concurrence of 
the Auditor: 
A list of Sundry Debtors/Creditors/Advances/other l iabilities was not 
available in the schedule of the Balance Sheet, and  their confirmations were 
also not available in the Scrutiny assessment recor ds.  Hence, Audit 
requisitioned the details of top five Sundry Debtor s/Creditors/ 
Advances/other liabilities of M/s W1 Ltd., M/s U1 L td. and M/s M1 Ltd. for 
Assessment Years 2009-10 to 2018-19, which were not furnished to Audit. 
(a) 
 PCIT Bareilly – M/s W1 Ltd.:  
In the case of M/s W1 Ltd., Audit observed that the  Balance Sheet for the 
Assessment Years 2009-10 to 2018-19 reflected balan ces of ₹ 641.29 crore 
(₹ 223.90 crore, ₹ 407.43 crore and ₹ 9.96  crore) (Annexure S-1)  for Sundry 
Creditors, Sundry Debtors and Advances given respec tively.  Due diligence 
exercised by ACIT Circle-2, Bareilly could not be a scertained in Audit as no 
supporting documents/details were found on records.   ACIT Circle-2, Bareilly 
should have called for details from the related par ties invoking provisions of 
Section 133(6) of the Income Tax Act.  Audit furthe r requested 
(September 2021) to provide the details of top five  debtors, creditors, loans 
and advances given or taken and details of other liabilities, etc.  However, the 
same are still awaited (February 2024). 
In reply (January 2022), PCCIT (CCA) Lucknow with r espect to M/s W1 Ltd. 
stated that the notice under Section 148 has been i ssued for the Assessment 
Years 2013-14 to 2017-18.  However, no reply with respect to the Assessment 
Years 2009-10, 2010-11, 2011-12, 2012-13 and 2018-1 9 was furnished 
(February 2024). 

Report No. 09 of 2024  
70 
Audit noted that an order under Section 147 was pas sed for Assessment Year 
2013-14 to 2017-18 (March 2022) by the National Fac eless Assessment 
Centre Delhi.  However, entries of Sundry Creditors , Sundry Debtors and 
Advances in the balance sheet were not verified whi le finalizing the 
reassessment.  ACIT Circle-2 Bareilly has not furni shed the reasons for not 
considering the issues raised by the Audit. 
Reply of the Ministry is awaited (February 2024). 
(b) 
 PCIT, I Kanpur – M/s U1 Ltd.:  
In the case of M/s U1 Ltd., Audit observed that the  Balance Sheet for 
Assessment Years 2009-10 to 2018-19 reflected the b alances of 
₹ 208.46 crore ( ₹ 49.84 crore, ₹ 47.26 crore, ₹ 46.11 crore and ₹ 65.25  crore) 
(Annexure S-2)  for Sundry Creditors, Sundry Debtors, Advances giv en and 
other liability respectively.  Due diligence exercised by DCIT CC I Kanpur could 
not be ascertained in Audit as no supporting docume nts/details were found 
on records.  DCIT CC I Kanpur should have called fo r details from the related 
parties invoking provisions of Section 133(6) of th e Income Tax Act.  Audit 
further requested (September 2021) to provide detai ls of top five debtors, 
creditors, loans and advances given or taken and de tails of other liabilities, 
etc.  However, the same are still awaited (February 2024). 
In reply (May 2022), the PCCIT (CCA) Kanpur, with r espect to M/s U1 Ltd., 
stated that notices under Section 148 of the Act ha ve been issued for the 
Assessment Years 2013-14 to 2017-18.  The cases hav e become time-barred 
for the Assessment Years 2009-10 to 2012-13.  Furth er, in respect of case for 
Assessment Year 2018-19  Joint Commissioner of Inco me Tax (OSD) Circle 
2(1) (1) Kanpur stated (June 2022) that the observa tion made by Audit  
appears to be acceptable. Accordingly, initiation of reassessment proceedings 
is contemplated in this case.  
Reply of the Ministry is awaited (February 2024). 
(c) 
 PCIT II Lucknow - M/s M1 Ltd.:  
In the case of M/s M1 Ltd., Audit observed that the  Balance Sheet of 
Assessment Years 2009-10 to 2018-19 reflected balan ces of ₹ 231.22 crore 
(₹ 79.07 crore and ₹ 152.15 crore) (Annexure S-3)  for Sundry Creditors and 
Sundry Debtors respectively.  Due diligence exercis ed by DCIT Circle 4 
Lucknow could not be ascertained in Audit as no sup porting 
documents/details were found in the records.  DCIT Circle 4 Lucknow should 
have called for details from the related parties in voking provisions of 

Report No. 09 of 2024  
71 
Section 133(6) of the Income Tax Act. Audit further  requested 
(September 2021) to provide the details of the top five debtors, creditors, 
loans and advances given or taken, details of other  liabilities, etc.  However, 
the same is still awaited.  (February 2024). 
In reply (January 2022), Pr. CCIT(CCA), Lucknow sta ted that remedial action 
under Section 147 of the Act had been initiated for  Assessment Years 2013-
14 and 2014-15, and for the Assessment Years 2015-1 6 to 2017-18, remedial 
action is proposed for reopening of the cases under  Section 147 read with 
Section 148A of the Act.  The cases have become tim e-barred for the 
Assessment Years 2009-10 to 2012-13.  No reply rega rding the Assessment 
Year 2018-19 has been furnished.  (February 2024). 
Reply of the Ministry is awaited (February 2024). 
2.3.6.3 Conclusion: 
Audit could not ascertain the existing mechanism in  place within the 
Department for verification of veracity and genuine ness of claims allowed on 
account of rebates, discounts, unsecured loans, sun dry debtors, creditors, 
advances given, other liabilities and loans and dep osits accepted/repaid in 
cash in excess of ₹ 20,000 at different stages of examination and fina lization 
of assessment cases viz. summary processing through  CPC and scrutiny 
assessment through ITD systems in the sample test checked. 
By not verifying the share application money the ri sk of routing of black 
money or illegal money through the introduction of capital into the books of 
accounts could not be ruled-out during the assessment proceedings. 
In certain cases, the Assessing Officers concluded assessments at their 
discretion without exercising due diligence in veri fying details provided by 
the CA or assessees in the financial statements. Au dit was unable to get 
assurance regarding the due diligence exercised by the AO in verifying the 
correctness /genuineness of the Financial Statements.  
ITD may also examine these assessees in detail for the succeeding 
Assessment Years to prevent probable revenue leakag e to the exchequer 
under intimation to Audit.  
2.3.7 Recommendations:  
2.3.7.1 The CBDT may strengthen the existing mechani sm for reconciliation 
of assessment records viz-a-viz, Form 3CD, Profit an d Loss account 
statement, State Excise records etc, especially aft er the introduction of the 
Faceless Assessment regime, wherein assessments are  being concluded 

Report No. 09 of 2024  
72 
jurisdiction-free to fill the existing gap by criti cally and correctly analyzing 
the books of accounts in order to arrive at the cor rect income of the 
assessee while concluding the assessment of the Dist illeries and Breweries 
Sector. 
[Para 2.3.1.1, 2.3.1.2 and 2.3.1.3, 2.3.6.1 and 2.3.6.2] 
Ministry in its reply stated (July 2022) that the p rocess of assessment in the 
Income Tax Department has undergone a transformatio n with the 
introduction of faceless assessment. Specialized un its such as Assessment 
Units, Verification Units, Technical Units and Revi ew Units have been put in 
place for optimum utilization of the resources thro ugh economies of scale 
and functional specialization.  This is a team-base d assessment procedure, 
where the Assessment Unit can request verification by the Verification Unit 
and seek technical assistance from the Technical Un it in order to prepare a 
speaking order.  Under Faceless Assessment, the pro cess of Review has been 
in-built to facilitate an error-free assessment order. 
The reply of the Ministry is not tenable as for the  purpose of critically and 
correctly analyzing books of accounts, it is essent ial, especially after the 
introduction of a faceless assessment regime,that t he department needs to 
conclude the assessment proceedings after making reconciliation of the Excise 
Returns with the income reflected in the Profit and  Loss Account in respect of 
assessees engaged in the business of distilleries a nd breweries. If any 
unverified quantity is detected during such reconciliation then the same needs 
to be added to the income of the assessee. Appropri ate action needs to be 
taken to ensure complete accounting of income of th e assessee for levy of tax 
to protect the interest of revenue.  
Further, since the Department has introduced the as sessment in faceless 
manner to make the assessment more transparent, the  assessment order 
should be passed with speaking order so that the As sessment order is error 
free. Ministry needs to issue necessary direction t o strengthen more effective 
optimum utilization of the resources to avoid recur rence of mistakes leading 
to revenue leakage.  Ministry may reconsider its reply. 
2.3.7.2 The CBDT may consider applying a combination  of risk parameters 
for the identification of cases for limited as well  as complete scrutiny under 
Computer Aided Scrutiny Selection (CASS) in respect  of assessees engaged 
in Distilleries and Breweries business by also consi deringthe Sales reported 
in ITR vis-à-vis Sales reported to the respective State Excise Authorities.  
[Para 2.3.1.1, 2.3.1.2 and 2.3.1.3]  

Report No. 09 of 2024  
73 
Ministry in its reply stated (September 2022) that this suggestion will be 
examined while framing the rules for CASS selection criteria.  
Audit will await the action taken by the Ministry. (February 2024). 
2.3.7.3 At the time of summary assessment for the d istilleries and 
breweries sector, the information in documents atta ched with the Income 
Tax Return of the assessee, viz. sale, duties, etc. , as given in Profit and Loss 
Accounts, should be correlated with that certified by the Auditor in Form 
3CD. Information should also be in consonance with the data available from 
CPC (TDS). 
[Para 2.3.1.1, 2.3.1.3 and 2.3.2.1(b)] 
Ministry in its reply stated (September 2022) that the CPC processes the 
returns u/s 143(1) based on provisions of Section 1 43(1)(a) of the Income Tax 
Act. There is no provision in Section 143(1)(a) for  bringing to tax the 
difference between sales declared in Profit and Los s Accounts and sales 
declared by CA in the Audit report /data available with CPC (TDS). 
Although the reply of the Ministry is acceptable in  principle, the Department 
may review/revisit the CASS parameters so that high  turnover assessees do 
not escape the tax ambit. Further, collation and correlation of the information 
already available with the Income Tax Department in  the CPC database/ITBA 
server/e-filing portal, like Sales/excise duty, VAT  and other taxes and levies, 
depicted in Profit and loss account or Form 3CD/ITR  may be reviewed and 
strengthened to minimize risk of routing of unaccounted amount by entities of 
Distilleries and Breweries sector and to prevent possibility of tax evasion. 
2.3.7.4 The CBDT may consider making appropriate ame ndments/ 
provisions in the IT Act or consider issuing a SOP/ MoP for specifically 
requisitioning information/Statement of Financial T ransactions (SFTs) 34 /AIR 
or non-AIR from the State Excise Authorities is man datory, where 
necessary, on a stipulated total monetary threshold  to be decided by the 
ITD while conducting assessment of the Distilleries and Breweries Sector.                        
 [Para 2.3.1.1, 2.3.1.2 and 2.3.1.3]  
                                                           
34  Statement of Financial Transactions (SFTs)  - Before the Introduction of the Faceless Assessment, the verification 
of the data provided by the system in AIR (Annual I nformation Return)/CIB from 7 modes wascarried out by 
issuing notices and individually collecting informa tion and details of verification forwarded to conce rned Pr. 
CCITs for further necessary action.  
  After the Introduction of the Faceless Assessment , verification of data is discontinued from 2.12.20 20, and the 
Data from the DG System is pushed to DGIT Intellige nce & Criminal Investigation (DGIT (I&CI))(erstwhil e CIB) 
through the insight portal. The insight portal deal s with SFTs (Statements of Financial Transactions) instead of 
AIR. Specific limits are set for SFTs, below which, data are also available in the systems. There are 18 SFTs (as 7 in 
AIR) through which data from third party (Entities)  is received in the form of returns under sections 61, 61A & 
61B. The Registered Entities (REs) are required to file returns before the due date every year with th eir ITDREIN 
(Income Tax Department Registered Individual Number) like PAN/TAN. 

Report No. 09 of 2024  
74 
Ministry in its reply stated (July 2022) that the p rovisions of Income Tax Act 
empower the Assessing Officer to seek relevant info rmation from other 
agencies including the State Excise Authorities, du ring the course of 
assessment proceedings. Further, the assessing offi cer decides whether any 
information is required to be called for from the o ther agencies, depending 
on the facts and circumstances of each case.  There fore, it may not be 
feasible to mandate the AO to seek information from  State Excise Authorities 
above a threshold limit. 
Reply of the Ministry is not tenable as the Distill eries and Breweries sector is a 
specialized nature of business activity, in which S tate Excise duty is the 
significant tax paid and claimed by the assessee as  expenditure, which is 
directly proportional to the income offered for tax ation. Therefore, the 
provision for information regarding payment of Stat e Excise Duty from the 
respective State Government department relating to the concerned PAN may 
be included in the SFT information. This would equi p the Assessing Officer 
with the necessary information to allow the correct  claim of Excise Duty 
during the assessment proceedings.  Ministry may reconsider its reply. 
2.3.7.5 The CBDT may consider devising a standard op erating procedure for 
the assessment of entities engaged in the business of distilleries and 
breweries to ensure error-free assessments. The SOP  may include 
instructions to the Assessing officer(s) for: 
i. 
 Sharing and seeking necessary information from the Jurisdictional AO 
for verification, through the online system. A cert ificate to this effect 
may be given by the assessing officer. 
ii.  Exercising power as envisaged in Section 133(6) of the IT Act to call 
for information viz., Excise duty, VAT and other ta xes/ duties from 
the respective State Government Authorities to ensu re genuineness 
and correctness of information furnished by an assessees 
iii.  Ensuring that business activity codes are filled co mpulsorily and 
correctly in their ITRs and examining the possibili ty of re-opening 
assessments and imposing penalty for wrong filling up of business 
codes.  
iv.  According high priority to cases involving discrepa ncies in quantitative 
disclosures of finished products made in Tax Audit Report. 
[Para 2.3.1.1, 2.3.1.2, 2.3.1.3, 2.3.6.1, 2.3.6.2, 2.3.2, 
2.3.2.6, 2.3.3.1, 2.3.3.2 and 2.3.3.3] 
Ministry for considering devising an SOP stated (Ju ly 2022) that a chapter on 
the assessment of Liquor Trade is provided in Volum e 5 of the Manual on 

Report No. 09 of 2024  
75 
Techniques of Investigation, which provides an over view of the sector that 
will be helpful to the Assessing Officers in conduc ting assessment 
proceedings.  Further, para no. 14, 15 and 16 of th e said chapter details risk 
areas specific to this sector. The manner of inquir ies/ verification during the 
course of assessment proceedings may vary from case  to case, depending on 
the facts and circumstances of the case.  Therefore , it may not be possible to 
have a Standard Operating Procedure for assessment of entities engaged in 
distilleries and breweries.  
The reply of the Ministry is not tenable as Volume 5 of the Manual on 
Techniques of Investigation is the guideline for th e Investigation Wing dealing 
in the Liquor Trade. The CBDT may consider devising  a detailed Standard 
Operating Procedure in line with the above manual t o be used as guidelines 
for the assessment of entities engaged in the busin ess of distilleries and 
breweries. Ministry may reconsider its reply. 
Ministry, in response to (i) above, stated (Septemb er 2022) that under the 
Faceless Assessment Scheme, the necessary informati on may be shared by 
Faceless AOs with the JAOs by using the 'Issue lett er functionality' in ITBA.  
Further, if any verification is required to be carr ied out by the Faceless 
Assessing Officers, the same is to be carried out b y the Verification Units and 
not the Jurisdictional AO. There already exists fun ctionality in the Income Tax 
Business Application (ITBA), over which assessment proceedings are being 
carried out in a faceless manner, for the Faceless AO to send requests for 
carrying out verifications to the Verification Unit. 
For assessment cases outside the Faceless Assessmen t Scheme (like the 
assessments carried out by the Central and Internat ional Taxation charges), 
the assessment proceedings are carried out by Jurisdictional AO.  Further, the 
facility of inter-jurisdictional sharing of details  to ensure effective utilization 
of information through timely sharing of inputs wit hin the ITD is also 
available in ITBA.  The Jurisdictional AO may disseminate information to other 
Jurisdictional AOs through the Investigation Module  of ITBA. This 
functionality is available in ITBA w.e.f. 27.02.202 0.  Furthermore, it is 
submitted that JAOs have functionalities under the ITBA portal (like Issue 
letter functionality 
) along with the webmail facility to seek /share information 
wherever deemed fit. 
The audit noted that the functionality, as stated b y the Ministry, was not 
available during the Audit period. The new facility  in ITBA was introduced 
with effect from 27.02.2020. The implementation of this functionality will be 
monitored in the succeeding Assessment Years. 

Report No. 09 of 2024  
76 
Ministry in response to (ii) above, stated (July 2022) that the provisions of the 
Income Tax Act empower the Assessing Officer to see k relevant information 
from other agencies, including the State Government  Authorities, during the 
course of assessment proceedings. Further, the Asse ssing Officer decides 
whether any information is required to be called fo r from other agencies 
depending on the facts and circumstances of each case. 
Reply of the Ministry is not tenable as State Excis e Duty is the major tax paid 
in the liquor manufacturing industry claimed by the  assessee as expenditure 
directly impacts the income offered for taxation. I n all the cases audited, the 
assessing officers during the assessment proceeding  have not exercised the 
power laid down under Section 133(6) of the Act to call for information from 
the respective State Excise Authorities to confirm the actual State Excise duty 
paid by the assessee. Substantial information avail able with the State Excise 
Department is required to be collected by ITD in a routine manner by 
establishing a mechanism to ensure that such detail s are reconciled by the 
assessing officers while concluding assessments for  realistic determination of 
tax effect. Hence, provisions of Section 133(6) of the Act should invariably be 
invoked by the Assessing Authorities in the interes t of revenue from the 
concerned State Excise Department rather than calli ng for individual challans 
on a test-check basis. The Ministry may reconsider its reply. 
Ministry in response to (iii) above, stated (July 2 022) that the business codes 
are filled by assessees while filing the return of income online. There are 
penal provisions available for furnishing false inf ormation in the Income Tax 
Returns e.g. any deliberate attempt to give wrong i nformation in an ITR can 
lead to possible prosecution and/or penalty under the Income Tax Act. 
The reply of the Ministry is not tenable as though the Business Codes are filled 
up by the assessees; the same is also required to b e certified by the Chartered 
Accountant through a tax Audit Report.  The errors in codes filled in by the 
assessee may be updated during subsequent scrutiny assessments, especially 
based on available information, to ensure correct a ctivity/ business-wise 
categorization of assessees and ensure reliable MIS  generated from the 
database maintained centrally within the ITD.  The CBDT may consider issuing 
necessary instructions in this regard, including th e option of issuing notice to 
the assessee for incorrect reporting of business co des at the time of scrutiny 
assessment.  The Ministry may reconsider its reply. 
Ministry in response to (iv) above, stated (Septemb er 2022) that this 
suggestion will be examined while framing the rules  for CASS selection 
criteria.  

Report No. 09 of 2024  
77 
Audit will await the final outcome of the efforts m ade by the Ministry to 
streamline the system. (February 2024). 
2.3.7.6 Considering the specialized nature of busin ess activity of the 
assessees of Distilleries and Breweries sector and m ultiplicity of 
transactions involved in such business, the CBDT ma y consider undertaking 
Special Audit under Section 142(2A) of the assessee s and their related 
parties for examining the agreements entered into w here the issues related 
to mismatch in the disclosure of Sales of the main assessee vis-à-vis their 
related parties are noticed. 
[Para 2.3.2.2 to 2.3.2.6] 
Ministry stated (July 2022) that as per the provisi ons of Section 142(2A) of 
the Income Tax Act, the Assessing Officer may form an opinion whether it is 
necessary to conduct a special Audit in a particula r case after taking into 
consideration various factors like nature and compl exity of the accounts, 
volume of the accounts, doubts about the correctnes s of the accounts, 
multiplicity of transactions in the accounts or spe cialized nature of business 
activity of the assessee and the interest of the re venue. Therefore, whether 
or not the special audit has to be conducted is to be decided on a case-to-
case basis by the Assessing Officer. 
The reply of the Ministry is not tenable as the ass essees of the Distilleries and 
breweries sector are involved in a multiplicity of transactions, and the 
Assessing Officer, in the normal course of assessme nt, does not recommend a 
special audit. In all the cases audited, the AO fai led to identify the tax evasion 
as pointed out by Audit. However, the ITD, in one c ase, referred the case of 
M/s P1 Pvt. Ltd AY 2017-18 for special Audit u/s 14 2(2A) of the Act. 
Accordingly, on 'reconciliation of excise returns w .r.t. to income reflected in 
Profit and Loss account', the SA reported an unveri fied quantity amounting to 
₹ 956.61 crore, out of which the ITD made an additio n of ₹ 206.84 crore, 
which includes an addition of ₹ 191.32 crore on account of the above-
unverified account. Ministry may reconsider its reply. 
2.3.7.7   The CBDT on a certain threshold turnover l imit for this sector may 
consider making it compulsory for the Auditor to me ntion the necessary 
details of VAT/ other duties/Taxes in Form 3CD, whic h were not routed 
through the Profit and Loss Account. The Auditor sh ould also mention the 
Sale at 34(a) was either gross sale or net sale. Fu rther, the Auditor should 
specifically mention the bifurcation of total sales  into TCS/Non-TCS sales 
with the corresponding Excise Duties in the Profit and Loss Account. 
[Para 2.3.2.2 to 2.3.2.10] 

Report No. 09 of 2024  
78 
Ministry in its reply stated (September 2022) that Sub-Section (1) of Section 
206C of the Act provides for collection of tax by t he seller at the time of 
debiting of account with the amount payable by the buyer or at the time of 
receipt of consideration from the buyer of alcoholi c liquor for human 
consumption at the rate of one percent .  Such tax has to be deposited by the 
seller to the credit of the Central Government within the prescribed time.  
In clause 34(a) of Form 3CD, the auditor is require d to report the details of 
tax deduction and tax collection made by the taxpay er during the year such 
as nature of payment, Section under which tax is to  be deducted/collected 
etc. Hence the TCS is collected on gross amount whi ch is already being 
reported in clause 34(a) of Form No. 3CD. 
The suggestion of Audit that clause 34(a) should have a bifurcation of gross vs 
net and TCS vs non-TCS is not feasible. The purpose  of clause 34(a) is to 
capture TDS and TCS details which can then be verif ied, if needed.  While 
designing Audit form, it has to be ensured that it does not become bulky and 
does not lead to unnecessary compliance burden. 
Although the Ministry's reply is acceptable in prin ciple, the Ministry may 
decide on a threshold turnover limit for this speci fic sector, wherein the 
Auditor has to mandatorily mention the bifurcation of Gross sale or net sale, 
TCS and non-TCS sale, etc., in Form 3CD. Details of TCS and non-TCS sales with 
corresponding excise duty, VAT, and other duties wi ll enable the assessment 
of the correct income in the interest of revenue. 
2.3.7.8  The CBDT may consider issuing elaborate bu siness codes for the 
Distilleries and breweries sector. These business ac tivity codes would 
enable ITD to prepare and update a comprehensive dat abase of all the 
distilleries and breweries, which will facilitate t he identification and 
selection of assessees in this sector for scrutiny assessment under CASS 
parameters.  
[Para 2.3.2 and 2.3.2.6] 
Ministry for considering issuing elaborate business  codes stated that 
(July 2022) the business codes are filled by assessees while filing the return of 
income online.  It may not be possible for the AOs to ensure the correctness 
of the business codes.  
Reply of the Ministry is not tenable as the CBDT ma y consider having 
elaborative business codes prescribed for the Disti lleries and breweries sector. 
Although the Business Codes are filled up by the as sessees, the same is also 
required to be certified by the Chartered Accountan t through a Tax Audit 
Report.  The errors in codes filled up by the asses see may be updated during 
subsequent scrutiny assessments, especially based o n available information, 

Report No. 09 of 2024  
79 
to ensure correct activity/ business-wise categoriz ation of assessees and 
ensure reliable MIS generated from the database mai ntained centrally within 
the ITD. Ministry may reconsider its reply. 
2.3.7.9   The CBDT may consider examining reasons fo r the non-verification 
of differences in the disclosure of stocks as per I TR/Profit and Loss Account 
and TAR, specifically in entities with large sales turnover, at the stage of 
scrutiny assessment. Further, where the value of st ocks has been shown in 
ITR and Annual accounts but the quantitative detail s have not been 
disclosed, and vice versa, the reasons for the same  and their impact on 
profitability should be ascertained in the assessment to minimize the risk of 
non-routing of finished products by entities of Dist illeries and breweries 
sector and to prevent the possibility of tax evasion. 
[Para 2.3.3.1, 2.3.3.2 and 2.3.3.3] 
Ministry in its reply stated (July 2022) that this para will be answered in the 
respective illustrated cases.  
Audit will await case-wise specific reply of the Ministry. (February 2024). 
2.3.7.10 The CBDT may strengthen the existing mechan ism for inter-
departmental sharing of inputs, including Excise duty, VAT, and other taxes/ 
duties details, with the Assessing Officers of the counterparties for 
examination and cross-verification of the Excise duty, VAT, and other taxes/ 
duties disclosed by the assessee(s) during the asse ssment of the Distilleries 
and Breweries Sector. 
[Para 2.3.5] 
Ministry, in its reply, stated (September 2022) tha t the Income Tax 
Department (ITD) takes appropriate action as per la w against various 
categories of Tax evaders, including assessees deal ing in the business of 
breweries & distilleries. While taking such action,  ITD does not distinguish 
between various categories of tax evaders.  Wheneve r any instance of tax 
evasion and unaccounted/ black money comes to the n otice, the Income Tax 
Department takes appropriate action as per the prov isions of the Income Tax 
Act,  including issuing summons, calling for inform ation, conducting search 
and survey, assessment and reassessment of income, levy & recovery of tax, 
imposition of penalty, launching a prosecution etc.  
Moreover, it may also be submitted that with effect  from 01.04.2021, the 
scheme of reassessment under the Income Tax Act has  been amended. The 
procedure for selection of a case (including the ca se of an assessee dealing in 
the business of brewery & distillery) for reassessm ent is now subjected to a 
risk management strategy at an appropriate level.  This ensures a focused 

Report No. 09 of 2024  
80 
approach on the part of the assessing officer on th e risk parameters let out, 
thereby aiding him in unearthing corresponding tax evasion.  
In addition to the above, it may be submitted that the ITD receives 
information regarding tax evasion by any assessee ( including the assessees 
dealing in the business of distilleries and breweries) throughvarious channels. 
These channels, inter-alia, include the following: 
a)  Information sharing platforms between various gover nment 
agencies/organizations like the Central Economic In telligence 
Bureau (CEIB) and the Regional Economic Intelligenc e 
Committee (REIC), wherein the ITD receives/shares i nformation 
from /to other member agencies, including the state agencies. 
b)  Information filed with the ITD in the form of SFTs (Specified 
Financial Transactions) above notified thresholds r elating to 
specified transactions. 
c)  Suspicious Transaction Reports (STRs) received thro ugh 
FIU-IND. 
d)  Specified information received from any other Law 
Enforcement Agency (LEA) for appropriate action, etc.  
e) 
 Tax Evasion Petitions (TEPs) and informers. 
All the aforementioned information about tax evasio n provides information 
irrespective of the category of tax evaders. As and  when such information is 
shared with the ITD, it takes action in the manner in accordance with the 
provision of Direct tax laws. 
Though the Ministry’s response is acceptable in pri nciple, however the reply is 
silent specifically on the information sharing mech anism with the State Excise 
Department, where there is a wealth of information as highlighted by Audit in 
its Report. Audit noted that this information was n ot shared between the ITD 
and State Excise Authorities of the respective Stat e Governments. No efforts 
seem to have been made by the AO while concluding t he assessment 
proceedings to reconcile the different amounts of s ale appearing at different 
places like Form 3CD, Profit and Loss Account, CPC( TDS), Vaishali, Ghaziabad 
and with the Excise Authorities. This is evident fr om the observations pointed 
out by Audit with respect to assessees of this sect or. Sales figures at all these 
places were required to have been reconciled and ve rified in the interest of 
revenue. The risk of revenue leakage with respect t o these assessees involved 
in Liquor manufacturing requires timely action by t he ITD to ensure that such 
loopholes/gaps do not exist in the system in subseq uent years. Ministry may 
reconsider its reply. 

Report No. 09 of 2024
81 
2.
3.7.11  The CBDT may examine whether the instances of 'errors' noticed 
are errors of omission or commission, and if these are errors of commission, 
then they should ensure necessary action, including fixing responsibility 
where glaring mistakes have been pointed out by Audit during examination 
of companies dealing in the business of Distilleries and Breweries, as 
per law. 
[Para 2.2 and 2.3] 
New Delhi (Monika Verma) 
Dated: 14 November 2024 Director General (Direct Taxes-I) 
Countersigned 
New Delhi (Girish Chandra Murmu) 
Dated: 18 November 2024 Comptroller and Auditor General of India 

Report No. 09 of 2024  
81 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURES 

Report No. 09 of 2024  
82 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Report No. 09 of 2024  
83 
Annexure A-1 
 
Sl. 
No.  
Name of the Unit AO Charge 
O/o Director General of Audit (Central), Lucknow  
1 M/s W1 Ltd. ACIT 2 Bareilly 
2 M/s U1.Ltd. Central Circle 1 Kanpur 
3 M/s M1 Ltd. ACIT Circle 4 Lucknow 
O/o Director General of Audit (CR), New Delhi  
4 M/s P1 Pvt Ltd. Central Circle 31 Delhi 
5 M/s R1.Ltd. Central Circle 31 Delhi 
6 M/s S1 Ltd. Circle 22(1) Delhi 
7 M/s M2 Ltd. Ward 17(3) Delhi 
8 M/s M3 Pvt. Ltd. Central Circle 8 Delhi 
O/o Director General of Audit (Central), Mumbai  
9 M/s A1 Ltd. 
 
Circle 9(1)(2) Mumbai 
O/o Principal Director of Audit (Central), Bengaluru  
10 M/s U2 Ltd. Special Range 7  Bengaluru 
11 M/s U3 Ltd. Special Range 7  Bengaluru 

Report No. 09 of 2024  
84 
Annexure A-2 
Legal Framework and Judicial Pronouncements: 
Section 16  of the Comptroller and Auditor General's Duties, Pow ers and Conditions of 
Service (DPC ACT, 1971):  It shall be the duty of the Comptroller and Auditor-General to audit 
all receipts which are payable into the Consolidate d Fund of India and of each State and of 
each Union territory having a Legislative Assembly and to satisfy himself that the rules and 
procedures in that behalf are designed to secure an  effective check on the assessment, 
collection and proper allocation of revenue and are being duly observed and to make for this 
purpose such examination of the accounts as he thinks fit and report thereon. 
Section 18 of the Comptroller and Auditor General'sDuties, Powers and Conditions of Service 
(DPC ACT, 1971): 
1.  The Comptroller and Auditor-General shall in connection with the performance 
of his duties under this Act, have authority- 
a. 
 to inspect any office of accounts under the control  of the union or of a State, 
including treasuries, and such offices responsible for the keeping of initial or subsidiary 
accounts, as submit accounts to him; 
b.  to require that any accounts, books, papers and oth er documents which deal 
with or form the basis of or are otherwise relevant  to the transactions to which his 
duties in respect of audit extend, shall be sent to  such place as he may appoint for his 
inspection; 
c.  to  put such questions or make such observations as he may consider necessary, 
to the person in charge of the office and to call for such information as he may require 
for the preparation of any account or report which it is his duty to prepare. 
2.  The person in charge of any office or department, the accounts of which have to 
be inspected and audited by the Comptroller and Aud itor-General, shall afford all 
facilities for such inspection and comply with requ ests for information in as complete a 
form as possible and with all reasonable expedition.  
Section 28 IT Act 1961: The following income shall be chargeable to income- tax under the 
head "Profits and gains of business or profession",— 
(i) the profits and gains of any business or profes sion which was carried on by the 
assessee at any time during the previous year ; 
(ii) any compensation or other payment due to or received by,— 
(a) any person, by whatever name called, managing t he whole or substantially the 
whole of the affairs of an Indian company 
(b) any person, by whatever name called, managing t he whole or substantially the 
whole of the affairs in India of any other company 

Report No. 09 of 2024  
85 
(c) any person, by whatever name called, holding an agency in India for any part of the 
activities relating to the business of any other person. 
(d) any person, for or in connection with the vesti ng in the Government, or in any 
corporation owned or controlled by the Government. 
(e) any person, by whatever name called, at or in c onnection with the termination or 
the modification of the terms and conditions, of any contract relating to his business; 
(iii) income derived by a trade, professional or similar association from specific services 
performed for its members ; 
(iiia) profits on sale of a licence granted under the Imports (Control) Order, 1955, made 
under the Imports and Exports (Control) Act, 1947 (18 of 1947) ; 
(iiib) cash assistance (by whatever name called) re ceived or receivable by any person 
against exports under any scheme of the Government of India ; 
(iiic) any duty of customs or excise re-paid or re- payable as drawback to any person 
against exports under the Customs and Central Excise Duties Drawback Rules, 1971 ; 
(iiid) any profit on the transfer of the Duty Entit lement Pass Book Scheme, being the 
Duty Remission Scheme under the export and import policy formulated and announced 
under section 5 of the Foreign Trade (Development a nd Regulation) Act, 1992 (22 of 
1992) ; 
(iiie) any profit on the transfer of the Duty Free Replenishment Certificate, being the 
Duty Remission Scheme under the export and import policy formulated and announced 
under section 5 of the Foreign Trade (Development a nd Regulation) Act, 1992 (22 of 
1992) ; 
(iv) the value of any benefit or perquisite, whethe r convertible into money or not, 
arising from business or the exercise of a profession ; 
(v) any interest, salary, bonus, commission or remuneration, by whatever name called, 
due to, or received by, a partner of a firm from such firm : 
(va) any sum, whether received or receivable, in cash or kind, under an agreement for— 
(a) not carrying out any activity in relation to any business or profession; or 
(b) not sharing any know-how, patent, copyright, trade-mark, licence, franchise or any 
other business or commercial right of similar nature or information or technique likely 
to assist in the manufacture or processing of goods or provision for services: 
(vi) any sum received under a Keyman insurance policy including the sum allocated by 
way of bonus on such policy. 
(via) the fair market value of inventory as on the date on which it is converted into, or 
treated as, a capital asset determined in the prescribed manner 

Report No. 09 of 2024  
86 
(vii) any sum, whether received or receivable, in cash or kind, on account of any capital 
asset (other than land or goodwill or financial ins trument) being demolished, 
destroyed, discarded or transferred, if the whole o f the expenditure on such capital 
asset has been allowed as a deduction under section 35AD. 
Section 29 IT Act 1961:  The income referred to in section 28 shall be computed in accordance 
with the provisions contained in sections 30 to 43D. 
As per the provisions of Income Tax Act 1961, total  income of any previous year of a 
person, who is a resident includes all income from whatever source derived which is 
received or deemed to be received in India in such year by or on behalf of such person or 
accrues or arises or is deemed to accrue or arise to him in India during such year.  
Case Law- Revenue had filed five Appeals to the Hon’ble High Court for AYs 2008-09 to 2012-13 
raising the Substantial Questions of law in relation to additions made by AOs, where it was held 
that the taxability will arise in the hands of the assessee (i.e. the license holder for 
manufacturing of alcohol) and not of the other part y in the light of the decision dated 25 th  
September 2018 of Hon’ble High Court of Karnataka i n case of Principal Commissioner of 
Income Tax, Bangalore Vs. M/s Chamundi Winery & Dis tillery, (2018) 97 taxman.com 568 
(Karnataka)/(2018)408 ITR 402 (Karnataka).  
As per provision of section 206(C) of the Act, ever y person, being a seller of liquor shall, at the 
time of debiting of the amount payable by the buyer , collect tax at source (TCS) equal to the 
one percentage from the buyer.  
As per the provision of section 44AB of the IT Act 1961, every person carrying on business (as 
specified in the section) get his accounts of such previous year audited by an accountant before 
the specified date and furnish by that date the report of such audit in the prescribed form duly 
signed and verified by such accountant and setting forth such particulars as may be prescribed.  
As per Guidance Note on Tax Audit under Section 44A B of the Income-tax Act, 1961 issued by 
ICAI, which is required to be followed by CA for pr eparation of audit report, Para 58.6 of 
Guidance note is summarized as under 
Para 58.6 of Guidance Note  stated that in column (4) of Sl.no. 34(a), the auditor is required to 
furnish the details of the total amount of payment or receipt of the nature specified in column 
(3). The details in the said column may be drawn from the TDS/TCS statements furnished by the 
assessee to the Department along with the books of accounts and other relevant documents 
which include aggregate of payments on which tax is liable to be deducted as well as not liable 
to be deducted. Auditor may maintain working paper giving reconciliation of amount as per 
books of accounts and amount on which   TDS/TCS is required to be deducted/ collected.  
Form 3CD is reporting format which should be used b y an auditor who is auditing the books of 
accounts of taxpayers to whom tax audits are applicable. The provisions of the Income Tax Act 
which govern a tax audit mandate that a Chartered A ccountant should furnish an audit report 
in the specified form. It is prepared by a Chartere d Accountant on behalf of the assesses who 

Report No. 09 of 2024  
87 
get their accounts audited. The objective of the fo rm is to specify the particulars of the audit 
report under any of the forms specified under Section 44AB. 
A Guidance Note on Tax Audit under Section 44AB of the Income-tax Act, 1961was issued by 
ICAI, which is required to be followed by CA for preparation of audit report, Para 62 of Guidance 
note provided the checklist for clause 35b of the form 3CD. Clause 35b of Form 3CD consists of 
details regarding – 
In case of the assesse being a manufacturing concer n, CA will give quantitative details of the 
principal items of raw materials, finished products and by-products. 
Clause 35bB- Finished products/by-products: 
Opening stock; (ii) purchases during the previous y ear; (iii) quantity manufactured during the 
previous year; (iv) sales during the previous year; (v) closing stock; (vi) shortage/excess, if any. 
Checklist for CA: Auditor should obtain certificates from the assessee in respect of the principal 
items of goods traded, the balance of the opening stock, purchases, sales and closing stock and 
the extent of shortage/excess/damage and the reasons thereof. 
Section 153C of IT Act  provides that the Assessing Officer can frame asse ssment of a person 
other than the person searched for six assessment y ears immediately preceding the year of 
search. 
Section 115BBE of IT Act  provides that where the total income of an assesse  determined by 
the Assessing Officer includes any income referred to in section 68, section 69, section 69A, 
section 69B, section 69C or section 69D, if such income is not reflected in the return of income 
furnished under section 139, the income-tax payable  shall be the aggregate of the amount of 
income-tax calculated on the income at the rate of sixty per cent . 
Applicable rates and taxes 
Sl. No. Section AY Tax Rate 
1 Tax u/s 115BBE 2014-15 to 2016-17 Tax @30% + surcha rge+ Ed. Cess 
2017-18 & 2018-19 Tax @60% + Surcharge @25%+ Ed. Cess 
2 TCS u/s 206C on alcoholic products @1% of total amo unt of the receipt from buyer 
 
 
 

Report No. 09 of 2024  
88 
 
 
Annexure B-2 (Para No. 2.3.1.1(II)(b)) 
M/s W1 Ltd.  
(₹ in lakh) Tax Effect 
(₹ in crore) Sl. 
No.  
 
AY Assessed/ 
Processed 
under 
section 
Alcoholic 
sale as per 
CPC data 
Sale as per 
3CD/ 34(a) 
Gross sale (Liquor + 
Beer + Scrap) 
including excise 
duty in P/L 
Difference of 
sale as per 
3CD & P/L,  
(E-F) 
A B C D E F G H 
1 2014 -15 143(3) 2,52,875.45 2,52,875.45  1,58,747.12 94,128.33 319.94 
2 2015 -16 143(1) 3,16,057.11 3,16,057.13  2,12,739.34 1,03,317.79 351.18 
3 2016 -17 143(1) 3,33,689.15 3,33,689.15  2,15,986.84 1,17,702.31 407.34 
Total 9,02,621.71 9,02,621.73  5,87,473.30 3,15,148.43 1,078.46 
 
Annexure -B-3 (Para No. 2.3. 1.1(II)(c))  
M/s W1 Ltd.  
(₹ in lakh)  Tax 
Effect 
(₹ in 
crore) 
Tax effect  
u/s 
68/69C 
(₹ in 
crore) 
Sl. 
No.  
AY Assessed/ 
Processed 
under 
section 
Sale as per 
3CD/ 34(a) 
Alcoholic sale 
as per CPC 
data 
Gross 
alcoholic sale 
including 
excise duty in 
P/L 
Difference 
(E-F) 
A B C  D E F G H I 
1 2017 -18 143(1) 2,30,710.68 2,79,716.53 2,24,545.70 55,170.83 190.94 426.19 
 
 
 
Annexure B-1 (Para No. 2.3.1.1(II)(a)) 
M/s W1 Ltd  
  (₹ in lakh) 
Tax 
Effect 
(₹ in 
crore) 
Sl. 
No.  
AYs Assess 
ment 
under 
section 
Total Sale 
as per P/L 
account 
Sale as per State Excise Department Total 
Difference 
(I-D)  
M/s W1 
Ltd. 
(Dist. 
Div) 
M/s W1 
Ltd. 
(Brew. 
Div) 
M/s A2 
Ltd. 
M/s U3 
Ltd. 
Total 
A B C D E F G H I J K 
1 2011 -12  143(1) 1,23,015.44 1,21,808.84  0 12,783.50 0 1,34,592.34  11,576.90 38.45 
2 2012 -13  143(3) 1,45,539.09 1,39,269.96  6,269.13 24,531.29 11,674.88 1,81,745.26  36,206.17 117.47 
3 2013 -14  143(3) 1,35,026.68 1,15,383.63  19,643.05 27,847.40 62,205.17 2,25,079.25  90,052.57 292.18 
Total 4,03,581.21 3,76,462.43  25,912.18  65,162.19 73,880.05 5,41,416.85  1,37,835.64  448.10 
Source: Data furnished by UP State Excise Department to O/o Principal Accountant General (Audit II), Lucknow 

Report No. 09 of 2024  
89 
Annexure B-4 (Para No. 2.3.1.1(e)) 
M/s W1 Ltd.  
(Relating to M/s A2 Ltd.)  
(₹ in lakh)  Tax 
Effect 
(₹ in 
crore) 
Tax effect 
u/s 68/69C 
(₹ in crore) Sl. 
No.  
AY Assessed/ 
Processed 
under section 
Sale including 
excise duty 
relating to M/s 
A2 Ltd. as per 
state excise 
Excise 
duty 
A B C D E F G 
1 2014-15 143(3)     15,854.81   11,077.79  53.89  53.89  
2 2015-16 143(1)     23,495.93   17,914.87  79.86  79.86  
3 2016-17 143(1)     30,992.02   25,836.18  107.26  107.26  
4 2017-18 143(1)     21,392.99   15,046.27  74.04  165.26  
5 2018-19 143(1)     30,213.40   21,291.22   104.56  233.40  
Total 1,21,949.15 91,166.33  419.61  639.67  
 
Annexure C (Para No.2.3.1.2(II)) 
M/s U1Ltd.  
(₹ in lakh)  Tax Effect 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. No. AY Sale including 
Excise*  
Excise#  Net Sale 
value 
(C-D) 
A B C D  E F 
1 2010-11 690.87 426.93 263.94 2.35 
2 2011-12     41,546.81       9,926.46     31,620.35  138.01 
3 2012-13     62,890.48     14,181.08     48,709.40  204.05 
4 2013-14  1,03,186.00     22,231.88     80,954.12  334.79 
5 2014-15     36,067.94     25,956.69     10,111.25  122.59 
6 2015-16     37,980.01     28,479.42       9,500.59  129.09 
7 2016-17     25,903.34     20,488.29       5,415.05  89.65 
Total  3,08,265.45 1,21,690.75 1,86,574.70 1,020.53 
*Source: : Data furnished by UP State Excise Department to O/o Principal Accountant 
General (Audit II), Lucknow (September 2019)  
#Source: Data furnished by UP State Excise Department to O/o Principal Accountant 
General (Audit II), Lucknow( May 2020)  
 
 
 

Report No. 09 of 2024  
90 
 
Annexure D (Para No. 2.3.1.3(II)(a)) 
M/s M1 Ltd  
 (₹ in lakh)  Tax 
Effect 
 
(₹ in 
crore) 
Tax 
effect 
u/s 68/ 
69C 
(₹ in 
crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
AY Sale as per 
3CD/ 34(a) 
Gross sale 
including 
excise duty 
in P/L 
Difference 
of sale as 
per 3CD & 
P/L,  
(C-D) 
Sale made by assessee on which Tax 
at source was collected, as per CPC 
(TDS) Vaishali, Ghaziabad 
Alcoholic 
Sale 
Scrap 
Sale 
Total Sale 
A B C D E F G H I J 
1 2016-17  26,851.24  0      26,851.24    26,776.99    73.76  26,850.75  92.93 92.93 
2 2017-18 84,618.72      1,312.98    83,305.74    84,478.30  140.00   84,618.30  288.30 643.53 
Total  1,11,469.96 1,312.98 1,10,156.98 1,11,255.29 213.76  1,11,469.05 381.23 736.46 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Report No. 09 of 2024  
91 
Annexure E-1 (Para No. 2.3.2.1(a)) 
M/s U1 Ltd.  
 (₹ in lakh)   
Tax 
Effect 
(₹ in 
crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
AY Sale as per State Excise Department 1 Sale as per P/L account Short 
reporting 
of sale 
 (E-F) 
Sale value 
(excluding 
excise) 
Excise Sale (including 
excise) 
Sale (including 
excise) 
(Country liquor+ 
trading sales-
petroleum product) 
Excise 
A B C D E F G H I 
1 2009-10   12,394.73    31,669.98    44,064.71    43,634.26    33,154.26         430.45  1.46 
2 2010-11   10,367.12    29,732.75    40,099.87    37,427.38    29,066.47      2,672.49  9.08 
3 2011-12     9,732.17    30,630.15    40,362.32    37,719.95    30,630.15      2,642.37  8.78 
4 2012-13     8,806.07    35,572.64    44,378.71    43,424.21    35,572.65         954.50  3.10 
5 2013-14   11,468.67    46,948.79    58,417.46    56,722.67    46,948.80      1,694.79  5.50 
 Total 52,768.76 1,74,554.31 2,27,323.07 2,18,928.47  1,75,372.33 8,394.60 27.92 
1 Source: : Data furnished by UP State Excise Department to O/o Principal Accountant General (Audit II), Lucknow dated 15.05.2020  
 
 
Annexure E-2 (Para No. 2.3.2.1(b)) 
M/s U1 Ltd. 
 (₹ in lakh)  
Tax Effect 
(₹ in 
crore) 
 
Tax effect 
u/s 
68/69C 
(₹ in 
crore) 
Sl. No.  AY Assessed/ 
Processed 
under section 
Sale as per 
State Excise 
Department 
Sale as per 
3CD/ 34(a) 
Gross sale 
including 
excise duty 
in P/L 
Difference 
of sale as 
per 3CD & 
P/L 
 (E-F) 
A B C D E F G H I 
1 2015-16 143(3)   59,410.70    59,414.68    59,265.11         149.57   0.51 0.51 
2 2016-17 143(1)   67,024.50    67,026.17    66,037.77         988.40  3.42 3.42 
3 2017-18 143(1)   62,262.89    62,265.60    60,569.81      1,695.79  5.87 13.10 
4 2018-19 143(1)   39,653.01    41,529.79    40,520.95      1,008.84  3.49 7.79 
Total 2,28,351.1 2,30,236.24 2,26,393.64 3,842.60 13 .29 24.82 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Report No. 09 of 2024  
92 
  
Annexure F (Para-2.3.2.2(II))  
M/s P1 Pvt. Ltd.  
(₹ in lakh)   
 
 
Tax Effect 
(₹ in 
crore) 
 
 
 
Tax effect 
u/s 
68/69C 
(₹ in 
crore) 
Sl. 
No.  
AY 
 
Sale as per Profit and Loss Account As per ITD Sale on 
which Tax 
at source 
collected as 
per 3CD/ 
34(a) 
Difference 
of sale   
(K-J) Wine and 
Spirit 
Manufactured  
Wine and 
Spirit 
Traded 
Scrap sale Sale including 
excise duty in 
P/L 
(C+D+E) 
Excise duty 
as per P/L 
Sale 
excluding 
excise duty  
(F-G) 
Sale on 
which Tax 
at source 
not 
collected** 
Sale on 
which Tax 
at source 
collected 
(H-I) 
A B C D E F G H I J K L M N 
1 2014 -15  8,36 ,673.60  24 ,454.60  1,976.60  8,63 ,104.80  3,47 ,920.90  5,15 ,183.90  2,31,089.80  2,84,094.10  5,91,214.25  3,07,120.15  1,043.90  1,043.90  
2 2015 -16  9,76 ,936.70  38 ,873.50  2,172.30  10,17 ,982.50  4,04 ,063.50  6,13 ,919.00  2,75,660.60  3,38,258.40  6,98,631.98  3,60,373.58  1,224.91  1,224.91  
3 2016 -17  11 ,53 ,045.00  57 ,886.20  2,795.00  12 ,13 ,726.20  5,25 ,250.20  6,88 ,476.00  3,06,597.00  3,81,879.00  8,20,231.13  4,38,352.13  1,517.05  1,517.05  
4 2017 -18  12 ,79 ,671.00  0.00  3,242.90  12 ,82 ,913.90  6,32 ,513.10  6,50 ,400.80  0*  6,50,400.8 0 8,82,589.2 0 2,32,188.40  
 
803.56  1,793.66  
Total  42,46,326.3 0 1,21,214.3 0 10,186.8 0 43,77,727.4 0 19,09,747.7 0 24,67,979.7 0 8,13,347.4 0 16,54,632.3 0 29,92,666.56  13,38,034. 26  4,589.42  5,579.52  
*treated Nil as not provided by ITD. 
** as per reply of ITD August 2020. 
 
 
 
  

Report No. 09 of 2024  
93 
Annexure G (Para-2.3.2.3(II)) 
M/s R1 Ltd.  
 (₹ in lakh)   
 
Tax 
Effect 
(₹ in 
crore) 
 
 
Tax effect  
u/s 
68/69C 
(₹ in 
crore) 
Sl. 
No.  
AY Sale as per Profit and Loss Account As per ITD Sale on 
which Tax 
at source 
collected 
as per 
3CD/ 34(a) 
Difference 
of sale   
(N-M) Alcohol & 
other 
alcoholic 
products 
Blends & 
other 
Traded 
IMFL 
Traded 
Alcohol  
Traded 
Imported 
liquor 
Scrap 
sale 
Sale 
including 
excise duty 
in P/L 
(C+D+E+F+G 
+H) 
Excise duty 
as per P/L  
Sale 
excluding 
excise 
(including 
TCS+ 
without 
TCS) 
(I-J) 
Sale on 
which Tax 
at source 
not 
collected* 
Sale on 
which Tax 
at source 
collected 
(K-L) 
A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q 
1 2014 -15  2,74,219.82  1,418.15  1,160.30  1,197.52  642.41  1,101.79  2,79,739.99  1,59,340.56  1,20,399.43  78,901.20  41,498.23  1,61,267.87  1,19,769.64  407.10  407.10  
2 2015 -16  2,90,527.60  513.43  966.65  3,384.74  454.85  1,393.72  2,97,240.99  1,72,416.95  1,24,824.04  81,367.98  43,456.06  1,76,599.43  1,33,143.37  452.55  452.55  
3 2016 -17  3,36,726.25  534.36  705.06  263.97  889.37  1,385.04  3,40,504.05  2,06,077.85  1,34,426.20  83,779.40  50,646.80  2,15,767.35  1,65,120.55  571.45  571.45  
4 2017 -18  4,75,487.01  612.57  829.70  - 730.13  1,781.22  4,79,440.63  3,18,805.32  1,60,635.31  55,018.76  1,05,616.55  3,06,469.29  2,00,852.74  695.11  1,551.59  
Total 13,76,960.68  3,078.51  3,661.71  4,846.23  2,716.76  5,661.77  13,96,925.66  8,56,640.68  5,40,284.98  2,99,067.34  2,41,217.6 4 8,60,103.94  6,18,886.3  2,126.21  2,982.69  
* as per reply of ITD August 2020.  
 
 
 
 

Report No. 09 of 2024  
94 
Annexure H (Para-2.3.2.4(II))  
M/s S1 Ltd.  
 (₹ in lakh)  
 
Tax Effect 
(₹ in crore) 
 
 
Tax effect 
u/s 68/69C 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No.  
AY Assessed/Proc 
essed under 
section 
Sale As per Profit and Loss Account Sale as per 
3CD/ 34(a) 
Difference 
of sale   
(K-J) Spirit IMFL 
Traded 
Molasses Scrap Sale 
including 
excise duty 
in P/L 
(D+E+F+G) 
Excise duty 
as per P/L  
Sale 
excluding 
excise 
(H-I) 
A B C D E F G H I J K L M N 
1 2014 -15  143(3)  54,577.15  193.72  4.21  0 54,775.08  41,802.36  12,972.72  50,679.22  37,706.50  128.16  128.16  
2 2015 -16  143(1)  56,123.83  169.41  4.50  0 56,297.74  45,083.63  11,214.11  54,445.29  43,231.18  146.94  146.94  
3 2016 -17  143(1)  44,258.06  134.67  0 11.73  44,404.46  35,605.47  8,798.99  43,114.23  34,315.24  118.76  118.76  
4 2017 -18  143(1)  57,159.54  128.82  0 22.56  57,310.92  47,111.24  10,199.68  56,404.43  46,204.75  159.91  356.93  
5 2018 -19  143(1)  38,384.65  0 0 20.71  38,405.36  32,165.86  6,239.50  38,152.97  31,913.47  110.45  246.53  
Total  2,50,503.23  626.62  8.71  55  2,51,193.5 6 2,01,768.56  49,425 .00  2,42,796.14  1,93,371.1 4 664.2 2 997.3 2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Report No. 09 of 2024  
95 
Annexure I (Para-2.3.2.5(II)) 
M/s M3 Pvt.Ltd.  
 (₹ in lakh)   
 
Tax Effect 
(₹ in 
crore) 
 
 
Tax effect 
u/s 
68/69C 
(₹ in 
crore) 
Sl. 
No.  
AY Assessed/ 
Processed 
under 
section 
Sale As per Profit and Loss Account Sale as 
per 3CD/ 
34(a) 
Difference 
of sale   
(M-L) Beer 
Manufactured  
IMFL 
Manufac 
tured 
Spirit 
Manufact 
ured 
Beer 
Traded 
IMFL 
Traded 
Scrap# Sale 
including 
excise 
duty in 
P/L 
(D+E+F+G+ 
H+I ) 
Excise 
duty as 
per P/L  
Sale 
excluding 
excise 
(J-K) 
A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P 
1 2014 -15  143(3)  9,759.48  11,970.40  1,090.17  2,090.20  22,183.06  #292.58  47,385.89  11,752.13  35,633.76  46,221.86  10,588.10  35.99  35.99  
2 2015 -16  143(3)  7,061.04  16,155.77  1,757.21  1,241.30  21,496.12  ##340.46  48,051.90  11,614.52  36,437.38  44,384.34  7,946.96  27.01  27.01  
3 2016 -17  143(1)  6,396.44  18,122.95  1,880.13  1,214.45  25,318.50  ##479.6 0 53,412.07  13,213.71  40,198.36  44,187.07  3,988.71  13.80  13.80  
4 2017 -18  143(1)  *27,802.48  0 0 *29,137.67  0 ###620.25  57,560.40  11,620.53  45,939.87  46,338.15  398.28  1.38  3.08  
5 2018 -19  143(3 )  **29,760.67  0 0 34,403.31  0 @692.42  64,856.40  13,209.24  51,647.16  53,738.20  2,091.04  7.24  16.15  
Total  80,780.11  46,249.12  4,727.51  68,086.93  68,997.68  2,425.31  2,71,266.66  61,410.13  2,09,856.53  2,34,869.62  25,013.09  85.42  96.03  
*The figure represents total of manufactured and traded goods in AY 2017-18 taken from the previous year figure of Schedule – of 2018-19. Bifurcation of separate items not available. 
# Represents other miscellaneous sale (schedule-21) Includes sale of scrap, sale of mixture of materials,etc, separate figure is not available. 
## Represents the figure of sale of scrap in schedu le-22 other income and the figure of sale of scrap included in other miscellaneous sale schedule-21. 
### Represents the figure of sale of scrap in schedule-29 other income and the figure of sale of scrap  included in other miscellaneous sale schedule-28. 
**The figure represents total of manufactured and traded goods in AY 2018-19. Bifurcation of separate items is not available.  
@Represents the figure of sale of scrap in schedule-29 other income and the figure of sale of scrap in cluded in other miscellaneous sale schedule-28(Other Miscellaneous Sales + Sale of Scrap =510.35+182.0 7). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Report No. 09 of 2024  
96 
Annexure J (Para-2.3.2.6(II)) 
M/s M2 Ltd.  
(₹ in lakh)   
 
Tax 
Effect 
(₹ in 
crore) 
 
 
Tax 
effect 
u/s 
68/69C 
(₹ in 
crore) 
Sl. 
No.  
AY Assessed/P 
rocessed 
under 
section 
Sale as per Profit and Loss Account Sale as per 
3CD/ 34(a) 
Difference 
of sale   
(N - M) Molasses 
Manufac-
tured 
Spirit 
Manufac-
tured 
ENA 
Manufa-
ctured 
IMFL 
Manufactu 
red 
Country 
Liquor 
Special 
Denatu-
red Spirit 
Scrap Sale 
including 
excise duty 
in P/L 
(D+E+F+G+ 
H+I+J) 
Excise duty 
as per P/L  
Sale 
excluding 
excise 
(K-L) 
A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q 
1 2014 -15  143(3)  539.30  0 0 1,986.81  1031.90  1406.82  0 4,964.83  2,897.38  2,067.45  2,608.59  541.14  1.84  1.84  
2 2015 -16  143(3)  622.07  8.64  0 3,190.47  0 1595.45  0 5,416.63  2,224.01  3,192.62  4,019.20  826.58  2.81  2.81  
3 2016 -17  143(3)  885.78  17.66  0 8,690.28  0 967.65  0 10,561.37  4,862.59  5,698.78  9,993.49  4,294.71  14.86  14.86  
4 2017 -18  143(1)  895.51  16.95  0 15,315.50  0 499.58  0 16,727.54  8,129.49  8,598.05  16,984.92  8,386.87  29 .03  64.79  
5 2018 -19  143(3)  325.85  39.49  0 23,083.43  0 742.94  0 24,191.71  10,794.77  13,396.94  26,519.93  13,122.99  45.42  101.38  
Total  3,268.51  82.74  0 52,266.49  1,031.9  5,212.44  0 61,862.08  28,908.24  32,953.84  60,126.13  27,172.29  93. 96  185. 68  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Report No. 09 of 2024  
97 
Annexure K (Para No 2.3.2.7(II))  
M/s A1 Ltd. 
(₹ in lakh)   
Tax Effect 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl.No. AY Sale as per Profit and Loss Account Sale as per 
3 CD(34a) 
Difference 
 (H-G) Sale of manufacturing 
goods 
Excise Duty Net Manufacturing 
Sale (C-D) 
Traded Sale Total Net Sale 
(E+F) 
A B C D E F G H I J 
1 2015-16 3,41,192.74 1,65,363.36 1,75,829.38 8,133.49 1,83,962.87 2,10,063.89 26,101.02 88.72 
2 2016-17  3,59,856.62 1,73,997.16 1,85,859.46 11,999.29 1,97, 858.75 2,10,717.48 12,858.73 44.50 
Total  7,01,049.36 3,39,360.52 3,61,688.84 20,132.78 3,81, 821.62 4,20,781.37 38,959.75 133.22 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Report No. 09 of 2024  
98 
Annexure L (Para No. 2.3.2.8(II)(a)) 
M/s U2 Ltd.  
(₹ in lakh)   
 
Tax Effect 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No.  
AY Sale As per Profit and Loss Account Alcoholic 
Sale as per 
3CD/ 
34(a)(206C) 
Difference of 
sale as per 3CD 
& P/L(I-H) 
Gross sale own 
manufactured 
goods  
Traded 
goods  
Scrap 
Sale  
Total Sale 
(C+D+E) 
Excise Duty  Net sale  
(F-G) 
A B C D E F G H I J K 
1 2014-15 18,97,897.92 1,25,230.60 3,733.03 20,26,861.55 12,30,853.14 7,96,008.41 16,09,489.20 8,13,480.79 2,765.02 
2 2015-16 18,59,305.57 1,41,492.48 2,963.92 20,03,761 .97 12,55,089.44 7,48,672.53 9,96,165.47 2,47,492.9 4 841.23 
3 2016-17 19,68,377.78 2,06,282.00 3,182.76 21,77,842.54 13,20,967.84 8,56,874.70 10,85,211.21 2,28,336.51 790.23 
Total 57,25,581.27 4,73,005.08 9,879.71 62,08,466.0 6 38,06,910.42 24,01,555.64 36,90,865.88   12,89,31 0.24 4,396.48 
 
Annexure L1 (Para No. 2.3.2.8(II)(b))  
M/s U2 Ltd.  
Distillery Unit wise details of sale figure vis-à-vis Purchases reported by M/s. K1 Ltd. 
(₹ in lakh)   
 
Difference 
(₹ in crore) 
(J-I) 
 
Sl. 
No.  
AY Sale As per State Excise Department Total 
purchases 
reported by 
M/s K1 Ltd.L 
Difference 
(J-I) U2 
Kumbalgodu 
Unit 
U2 
Chamundi 
Unit 
U2 
Hassan 
Unit 
U2 Hubli 
Unit 
U2 
Kalaburgi 
Unit* 
U2 
Nelamangala 
Unit 
Total Sales 
A B C D E F G H I J K L 
1 2015 -16  1,60,805.44  28042.93 # 99,932.76  1,07,042.82  No sales  2,00,384.52  5,68,165.54  5,94,259.86  26,094.32  260.94  
2 2016 -17  1,72,366.56  29,902.52  98,438.61  1,17,494.54  No sales  2,32,489.58  6,50,691.81  6,53,103.30  2,411.49  24.11  
3 2017 -18  1,63,252.89  55,449.87  1,32,961.92  1,16,067.28  51,330.70  2,11,363.10  7,30,425.76  7,43,481.16  13,055.40  130.55  
4 2018 -19  2,22,023.02  59,252.16  1,39,438.60  1,19,377.37  1,11,774.42  1,98 ,139.33  8,50,004.9 0 8,62,937.72  12,932.82  129.33  
Total  27,99,288 .0 1 28,53,782.04  54,494.0 3 544.9 3 
*Started production from AY 2017 -18  
#Sale of produce of Chamundi Unit was not taken in comparison as purchase regarding Chamundi unit was reported as Nil by M/s K1 Ltd. 
 
 
 

Report No. 09 of 2024  
99 
 
 
Annexure M1 (Para No. 2.3.2.9(II)(b))  
M/s U3 Ltd.  
Brewery Unit wise details of sale figure vis-à-vis Purchases reported by M/s. K1 Ltd. 
(₹ in lakh)   
Difference(F-G) 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No.  
AY Sale as per State Excise Department Total purchases 
reported by M/s. K1 
Ltd. 
Difference(F-G) 
Mangaluru Unit Nelamangala Unit Nanjangud Unit Total Sale 
A B C D E F G H I 
1 2015-16      45,276.54      77,343.23         63,326.81  1,85,946.58  1,81,374.05        4,572.53  45.73 
2 2016-17      38,930.47      74,657.06      1,07,859.44  2,21,446.97  2,12,314.63        9,132.34  91.32 
3 2017-18      35,894.71      86,359.08      1,11,406.21  2,33,660.00                2,15,134.88  18,525.12  185.25 
4 2018-19      37,128.33   1,04,632.30      1,27,661.01  2,69,421.64  2,56,677.21      12,744.43  127.44 
Total  9,10,475.19 8,65,500.77 44,974.42 449.74 
 
 
Annexure M (Para No.2.3.2.9(II)) 
M/s U3 Ltd.  
(₹ in lakh)   
 
Tax Effect 
(₹ in crore) 
 
 
Tax effect 
u/s 68/69C 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. No.  AY Sale As per Profit and Loss Account* Alcoholic Sale as 
per 3CD/ 
34(a)(206C) 
Difference of sale   
(F-E)  Sale of alcoholic product 
as per P/L Account 
Excise duty as per P/L  Sale excluding excise 
(C-D) 
A B C D E F H I J 
1 2014-15  6,76,697.00   3,02,634.00   3,74,063.00   3,81,359.00        7,296.00  24.80 24.80 
2 2015-16  7,66,369.00   3,54,639.00   4,11,730.00   4,39,342.00      27,612.00  93.85 93.85 
3 2016-17  8,58,518.00   4,08,625.00   4,49,893.00   4,51,495.00        1,602.00  5.54 5.54 
4 2017-18  9,93,895.00   5,50,061.00   4,43,834.00   5,93,598.00   1,49,764.00  518.30 1,156.93 
Total 32,95,479.00 16,15,959.00 16,79,520.00 18,65, 794.00 1,86,274.00 642.49 1,281.12 

Report No. 09 of 2024  
100 
Annexure N-1 (Para No. 2.3.3.1(a)) 
M/s W1 Ltd.  
 
Sl. 
No.  
A Y Item 
name 
Unit Opening 
Stock 
Purchase  Quantity 
manufactured 
Sales during 
previous 
year 
Closing 
Stock 
Shortage/ 
excess, if 
any 
Difference as per audit Tax Effect 
(₹ in crore) Quantity EDP of economy 
category (IMFL) 
per litre * 
Value (in ₹) 
A B C D E F G H I J K L M N 
1 2014-15  
 
Extra 
Neutral 
Alcohol 
(ENA) 
MFR 
Residual  11,48,142 0 2,13,66,731 49,000 9,99,623 0 2,14,66,250 40 85,86,50,000  
Rectified 
Sprit (RS) 
Residual  1,32,060 0 2,59,486 0 83,454 0 3,08,092 40 1,23,23, 680 
Total  2,17,74,342  87,09,73,680  
(or 87.10 crore) 
29.60 
*As per UP State excise policy FY 2013-14, EDP of economy category (IMFL) was ₹ 30 per bottle (750 ml).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Report No. 09 of 2024  
101 
Annexure-N-2 (Para No. 2.3.3.1(b)) 
M/s W1 Ltd. 
 
Sl. 
No.  
AY Item name Unit Opening 
Stock 
Purchase Quantity 
manufactured  
Sales 
during 
previous 
year 
Closing 
Stock 
Shortage/ 
excess, if 
any 
Difference as per audit Tax Effect 
(₹ in 
crore) 
Quantity 
)in litres) 
EDP of 
economy 
category 
(IMFL) per 
litre * 
Value (In ₹) 
A B C D E F G H I J K L M N 
1 2018 -19  
 
ENA/RS 
Manufactured 
Litre  42,31,895  0     2,26,27,360  0 38,92,374  0 2,29,66,881  53.28    1,22,36,75,419.68   
Blending Stock 
(IMFL) 
Litre  0 0 1,24,81,047  0 48,171  0 1,24,32,876  53.28       66,24,23,633.28  
Blending Stock 
(CL) 
Litre  41,299  0  2,77,34,915  0 1,269  0 2,77,74,945  53.28    1,47,98,49,069.60  
Blending Stock 
(ODS/CDS) 
Litre  25,948  0    4,23,666  0 67,481  0   3,82,133  53.28         2,03,60,046.24  
MALT (SELF MRF)  Litres  1,51,643  0 45,993  0 1,57,689  0 39,947  53.28             21,28,376.16  
Beer (Strong)  Kilolitres  48,389  0 10,05,806  9,38,421  44,414  0 7,13,60,000  53.28    3,80,20,60,800.00  
Total  13,49,56,782   7,19,04,97,344.96  
Total  7,19,04,97,345  
Or (₹ 719.05crore) 
248.85  
*As per UP State excise policy FY 2017-18, EDP of economy category (IMFL) was Rs.39.96 per bottle (750 ml). 
 
  

Report No. 09 of 2024  
102 
Annexure O (Para-2.3.3.2) 
M/s R1 Ltd. 
 
Sl. 
No 
 
AY 
 
     Sales during previous year    Difference as per audit  Tax Effect  
(₹ in 
crore) Item name  
 
Unit  
 
Opening 
Stock 
Purchase  
 
Quantity 
manufactured 
Quantity  Value as 
per note (in 
lakh) 
Reference 
note in P/L  
Rupees 
per 
unit 
Closing Stock  Excess/  
shortage, 
if any 
Quantity  Value  
In (₹) 
A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P 
1 2015 -16  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rectified Spirit  Litre  2,95,711  0 4,36,41,802  2,58,925  79.66  42(b)  30.77  3,74,482  2,698  4,33,01,408  1,33,23,84,324.16  130.00  
Silent Spirit  Litre  53,68,962  52,97,000  4,32,95,116  2,93,35,542  16,429.58  56.01  54,38,531  1,27,038  1,90,59,967  1,06,75,48,751.67  
Cane Juice Spirit  Litre  0 0 3,06,070  1,37,081  82.02  59.83  - 16,093  1,52,896  91,47,767.68  
Malt Spirit  Litre  12,74,292  0 4,63,355  3,23,431  749.33  231.68  9,62,625  5,502  4,46,089  10,33,49,899.52  
Grain Spirit  Litre  30,58,008  4,30,000  3,09,17,129  1,60,37,447  7,461.75  46.53  24,12,742  45,012  1,59,09,936  74,02,89,322.08  
Pet Bottles*  Numbers  83,08,610  0 53,21,87,532  28,82,08,565  6,820.88  2.37  1,10,27,451  - 24,12,60,126  57,17,86,498.62  
Total   1,83,05,583  57,27,000  65,08,11,004  33,43,00,991  31,623.22  427.19  2,02,15,831  1,96,343  32,01,30,422  3,82,45,06,563.73  
2 2016 -17  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rectified Spirit  Litre  3,74,482  0 4,63,78,670  7,21,660  209.51  43(b)  29.03  5,52,574  6,052  4,54,72,866  1,32,00,77,299.98  124.97  
Silent Spirit  Litre  54,38,531  6,00,000  4,27,88,814  2,66,77,635  12,984.13  48.67  47,05,076  1,19,565  1,73,25,069  84,32,11,108.23  
Cane Juice Spirit  Litre  0 0 3,94,013  91,859  65.19  70.97  - 9,904  2,92,250  2,07,40,982.50  
Malt Spirit  Litre  9,62,625  0 6,01,431  3,78,364  1,018.60  269.21  9,63,772  3,372  2,18,548  5,88,35,307.08  
Grain Spirit  Litre  24,12,742  0 3,17,81,768  1,52,61,905  6,874.07  45.04  11,89,742  47,850  1,76,95,013  79,69,83,385.52  
Pet Bottles  Numbers  1,10,27,451  0 51,43,24,841  26,45,26,780  5,954.42  2.25  69,62,388  - 25,38,63,124  57,11,92,029.00  
Total   2,02,15,831  6,00,000  63,62,69,537  30,76,58,203  27,105.92  465.17  1,43,73,552  1,86,743  33,48,66,870  3,61,10,40,112.31  
3 2017 -18  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rectified Spirit  Litre  5,52,574  0 6,13,71,718  3,04,236  88.04  49(b)  28.94  2,06,101  16,032  6,13,97,923  1,77,68,55,891.62  161.99  
Silent Spirit  Litre  47,05,076  0 4,96,01,247  2,19,77,014  11538.01  52.5  14,37,077  1,04,457  3,07,87,775  1,61,63,58,187.50  
Cane Juice Spirit  Litre  0 0 3,55,367  52,446  46.19  88.07  0 12,966  2,89,955  2,55,36,336.85  
Malt Spirit  Litre  9,63,772  0 6,02,302  2,87,538  768.44  267.25  9,65,865  2,614  3,10,057  8,28,62,733.25  
Grain Spirit  Litre  11,89,742  0 2,87,15,894  1,55,70,250  7,334.39  47.11  24,53,372  47,993  1,18,34,021  55,75,00,729.31  
Pet Bottles  Numbers  69,62,388  0 52,18,54,155  22,96,95,364  4,889.93  2.13  73,58,045  0 29,17,63,134  62,14,55,475.42  
Total   1,43,73,552  0 66,25,00,683  26,78,86,848  24,665  486  1,24,20,460  1,84,062  39,63,82,865  4,68,05,6 9,353.95  
 Grand Total  5,28,94,966  63,27,000  1,94,95,81,224  90,98,46,042  83,394.14   1,378. 36  4,70,09,843  5,67,148  1,05,13,80,157  12,11,61,16,029.90 
or 1211.61 crore 
416.96  
 
 
 

Report No. 09 of 2024  
103 
Annexure P (Para-2.3.3.3) 
M/s M2 Ltd. 
 
Sl. 
No. 
AY Item 
name 
Unit Opening 
Stock 
Purc 
hase 
Quantity 
manufac 
tured 
Sales 
during 
previous 
year 
Closing Stock Shortage 
/ excess, 
if any as 
per 3CD 
Difference as per audit  
Quantity Value as 
per note  
(in lakh) 
Reference 
note in 
P/L 
Rupees 
per unit 
Quantity Value 
In (₹) 
A B C D E F G H I J K L M N  
(E+G-I-M) 
O (L*N) P 
1 2014-15 Spirit Kilolitre 13 0 4,109 0 205 44.79 42(iii) 21,848.78 17 3,900 8,52,10,242  
ENA Kilolitre 152 0 36 0 4 0.41 10250 1 183 18,75,7 50 
 Total-A    4,083 8,70,85,992 2.96 
2 2015-16 Spirit Kilolitre 205 0 4328 24 222 56.89 43(iii) 25,626.13 17 4,270 10,94, 23,575.1 3.72 
3 2017-18 Spirit Kilolitre 415 0 1873 48 827 212.07 46(iii) 25,643.29 7 1,406 3,60,54,465.74 1.25 
4 2018-19 Spirit Kilolitre 827 0 2573 111 796 81.35 47(iii) 10,219.84 13 2,480 2,53, 45,203.2 0.88 
Total-B 8,156 17,08,23,244.04 5.85 
Grand Total (A + B) 12,239 25,79,09,236  
(or 25.79 crore) 
8.81 
 
 
 

Report No. 09 of 2024  
104 
 Annexure Q (Para No 2.3.3.4)   
M/s A1 Ltd. 
 
Sl. 
No. 
AY Item name Unit Opening 
Stock 
Purchase 
during the 
previous 
year 
Quantity 
manufactured 
during the 
previous year  
Sales 
during 
previous 
year 
Closing 
Stock 
Shortage 
/ excess, 
if any 
Difference 
as per 
audit 
EDP of 
economy 
category 
(IMFL) 
per litre * 
Value (in ₹) Tax 
Effect 
(₹ in 
crore) 
A B C D E F G H I J K L M N 
1 2018-
19 
Beer 
(Strong) 
Residual 24,17,780 0 3,99,44,351 4,03,81,791 14,54, 296 76,043 4,50,001 53.28 2,39,76,053 
(2.40 crore) 
0.79 
*As per UP State excise policy FY 2017-18, EDP of economy category (IMFL) was ₹ 39.96 per bottle (750 ml). 
 
 
  

Report No. 09 of 2024  
105 
 
Annexure R (Para No. 2.3.5) 
 (₹ in lakh)  
Sl.No. AY M/s W1 Ltd. M/s U1 Ltd. M/s M1 Ltd. M/s P1 Pvt. 
Ltd. 
M/s R1 Ltd. M/s S1 
Ltd. 
M/s M3 
Pvt. Ltd 
M/s M2 
Ltd., 
M/s A1 
Ltd. 
M/s U2 Ltd. M/s U3 
Ltd. 
(Excise duty 
debited in 
P/L)  
Excise duty as 
per Excise 
Department 1 
(Excise 
duty 
debited 
in P/L)  
Excise duty as 
per Excise 
Department 1 
(Excise 
duty 
debited 
in P/L)  
Excise duty 
as per Excise 
Department 1 
(Excise duty 
debited in 
P/L) 
(Excise duty 
debited in 
P/L) 
(Excise 
duty 
debited in 
P/L)  
(Excise 
duty 
debited 
in P/L)  
(Excise 
duty 
debited in 
P/L)  
(Excise 
duty 
debited in 
P/L) 
(Excise duty 
debited in 
P/L) 
(Excise 
duty 
debited 
in P/L) 
A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P 
1 2009 -10  NA  NA  33,154.26  31,669.98  NA  NA  44,660.62  47,869.75  21,210.45  13,970.12  8,523.57  NA  3,36,542.08  76,217.72  
2 2010 -11  48,197.01  NA  29,066.47  30,159.68  NA  NA  1,16,738.78  64,570.40  21,105.27  8,516.04  2,282.45  NA  4,25,494.32  95,835.15  
3 2011 -12  93,254.94  1,01,355.96  30,630.15  40,556.61  NA  NA  1,61,924.16  74,585.58  29,395.33  9,190.23  6,617.48  NA  6,46,771.33  1,54,391.60  
4 2012 -13  1,13,362.19  1,36,238.12  35,572.65  49,753.73  NA  NA  2,40,378.40  83,761.87  25,873.75  9,080.35  11,081.90  1,14,631.51  8,50,375.89  2,23,725.00  
5 2013 -14  1,05,557.90  1,52,770.82  46,948.80  69,180.68  NA  NA  2,87,041.50  1,23,051.69  38,484.65  12,130.87  11,504.08  1,45,724.00  10,51,623.42  2,62,709.00  
6 2014 -15  1,30,575.44  1,85,199.92  49,005.68  74,962.37  3,434.73  3,434.73  3,47,920.90  1,59,340.56  41,802.36  11,752.13  2,897.38  1,55,560.15  12,30,853.14  3,02,634.00  
7 2015 -16  1,79,163.42  2,46,103.78  50,107.83  78,587.24  4,087.54  4,087.54  4,04,063.50  1,72,416.95  45,083.63  11,614.52  2,224.01  1,65,363.36  12,55,089.44  3,54,639.00  
8 2016 -17  1,86,802.98  2,71,887.13  57,289.88  77,778.16  0 NA  5,25,250.20  2,06,077.85  35,605.47  13,213.71  4,862.59  1,73,997.16  13,20,967.84  4,08,625.00  
9 2017 -18  1,86,799.46  2,29,060.60  53,028.41  56,355.88  817.52  NA  6,32,513.10  3,18,805.32  47,111.24  11,620.53  8,129.49  1,52,644.50  NA  5,50,061.00  
10  2018 -19  1,97,887.58  3,08,854.72  35,360.87  35,018.00  12,078.14  66,134.5 0 858128.26  NA  32,165.86  13,209.24  10,794.77  1,68,444.60  NA  NA  
Total  12 ,41 ,600.92  16,31,471.05  4,20,165  5,44,022.33  20,417.93  73,656.77  3618619.42  
 
12,50,479.97  3,37,838.01  1,14,297.74  68,917.72  1,076,365.28  71,17,717.46  24,28,837.47  
Total Excise duty of all assessees as debited in P/L(C+E+G+I+J+K+L+M+N+O+P)= ₹ 17695043.93 lakh or ₹ 176950.43 crores 
1 Source: Data furnished by UP State Excise Department to O/o Principal Accountant General (Audit II), Lucknow August 2019,  
 

Report No. 09 of 2024  
106 
Annexure R-1(a)  (Para No. 2.3. 5(i))                                                                                                                        
                                                      M/s W1 Ltd.                                       (₹ in lakh)   
Sl. 
No. 
AY (Excise duty 
debited in P/L)  
Excise duty as per 
Excise Department  
Difference  Difference in 
(₹ in crore) 
A B  C D E F 
1 2011-12     93,254.94   1,01,355.96        8,101.02                 81.01  
2 2012-13  1,13,362.19   1,36,238.12      22,875.93              228.76  
3 2013-14  1,05,557.90   1,52,770.82      47,212.92              472.13  
4 2014-15  1,30,575.44   1,85,199.92      54,624.48              546.25  
5 2015-16  1,79,163.42   2,46,103.78      66,940.36              669.40  
6 2016-17  1,86,802.98   2,71,887.13      85,084.15              850.84  
7 2017-18  1,86,799.46   2,29,060.60      42,261.14              422.61  
8 2018-19  1,97,887.58   3,08,854.72   1,10,967.14           1,109.67  
Total  11,93,403.91 16,31,471.05 4,38,067.14          4,38 0.67 
 
 
Annexure R-1(b) (Para No. 2.3.5(i)) 
 
 
 
                                   M/s U1 Ltd.                                           (₹ in lakh)   
Sl. 
No. 
AY (Excise duty 
debited in P/L) 
Excise duty as per Excise 
Department 
Difference Difference  
(₹ in crore) 
A B C D E F 
1 2010-11       29,066.47     30,159.68        1,093. 21             10.93  
2 2011-12       30,630.15     40,556.61        9,926.46             99.26  
3 2012-13       35,572.65     49,753.73      14,181.0 8           141.81  
4 2013-14       46,948.80     69,180.68      22,231.88           222.32  
5 2014-15       49,005.68     74,962.37      25,956.6 9           259.57  
6 2015-16       50,107.83     78,587.24      28,479.41           284.79  
7 2016-17       57,289.88     77,778.16      20,488.2 8           204.88  
8 2017-18       53,028.41     56,355.88        3,327.47             33.28  
Total     3,51,649.87 4,77,334.35 1,25,684.48 1,256.84  
 
  

Report No. 09 of 2024  
107 
Annexure R-1(c) (Para No. 2.3.5(i)) 
 
 
 
 
                                                     M/s M1 Ltd                                             (₹ in lakh)  
Sl.No.   AY (Excise duty 
debited in 
P/L)  
Excise duty as per Excise 
Department  
Difference Difference  
(₹  In crore) 
A B C D E F 
1 2018-19  12,078.14 66,134.5 54,056.36 540.56 
 
                       Annexure R-2 (Para No. 2.3.5(ii))  & (iii)                        
Difference  
(₹ in crore) 
       ( ₹ in lakh)  
Sl. 
No. 
 Name of 
Assessee 
AY (Excise 
duty 
debited 
in P/L)  
Excise duty as 
per Excise 
Department  
Difference 
  A B C D E F G 
1 M/s U1 Ltd. 2009-10 33,154.26     31,669.98  1,484.28 14.84 
2018-19 35,360.87     35,018.00  342.87 3.43 
2 M/s M1 Ltd 2014-15   3,434.73       3,434.73  0 0 
2015-16   4087.54       4,087.54  0 0 
 
Annexure  S-1 (Para No.2.3.6.2(a)) 
  M/s W1 Ltd. 
(₹ in lakh)  
 
Total  
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
AY  Sundry 
Creditors  
Sundry 
Debtors  
Advances 
given  
Total  
A B C D E F G 
1 2009-10 - - - - - 
2 2010-11 1,572.93  20.74  - 1,593.67  15.94  
3 2011-12 - - - - - 
4 2012-13 6,986.42          9,583.14   -    16,569.56  165.70  
5 2013-14 7,529.66        18,202.99  201.08    25,933.73  259.33  
6 2014-15 4,903.85          8,946.00  484.64    14,334.49  143.34  
7 2015-16 - - - - - 
8 2016-17 -  - - - - 
9 2017-18 - - - - - 
10 2018-19 1,396.93  3,990.40  310.51  5,697.84  56.98  
Total 22,389.79  40,743.27  996.23  64,129.29  641.29  

Report No. 09 of 2024  
108 
Annexure  S-2 (Para No.2.3.6.2(b)) 
M/s U1 Ltd. 
(₹ in lakh)  
 
 
 
Total 
(₹ in 
crore) 
Sl. 
No . 
AY  Sundry 
Creditors  
Sundry 
Debtors  
Advances 
given  
Other 
Liability  
Total  
A B C  D E F G H 
1 2009-10 288.91  570.43  288.25  - 1,147.59  11.48  
2 2010-11 455.90  610.27  429.70  - 1,495.87  14.96  
3 2011-12 651.34  262.17  474.11  - 1,387.62  13.88  
4 2012-13 517.15  1,262.96  2,521.61  - 4,301.72  43.02  
5 2013-14 817.56  84.21  245.03  - 1,146.80  11.47  
6 2014-15 522.36  320.71  221.12  - 1,064.19  10.64  
7 2015-16 562.20  220.71  - 4,558.31  5,341.22  53.41  
8 2016-17 -  - - - 0 0 
9 2017-18 - - - - 0 0 
10 2018-19 1,168.46  1,394.87  430.76  1,966.78  4,960.87  49.61  
Total 4983.88  4,726.33  4,610.58  6,525.09  20,845.88  208.46  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Report No. 09 of 2024  
109 
       
Annexure  S-3 (Para No.2.3.6.2(c)) 
M/s M1 Ltd. 
(₹ in lakh)  
 
 
 
Sl. No. AY  Sundry 
Debtors  
Sundry Creditors  Total Total  
(₹ in crore) 
A B C D E F 
1 2009-10 1,424.02  3,528.9  4,952.92  49.53  
2 2010-11 NA*  NA*  - - 
3 2011-12 142.81  471.02  613.83  6.14  
4 2012-13 134.96  504.03  638.99  6.39  
5 2013-14 45.21  202.38  247.59  2.48  
6 2014-15 1,924.60  2,440.90  4,365.50  43.66  
7 2015-16 5.30  895.87  901.17  9.01  
8 2016-17 718.24  2,178.25  2,896.49  28.96  
9 2017-18 1,048.44  2,015.81  3,064.24  30.64  
10 2018-19 2,463.02  2,978.32  5,441.34  54.41  
Total 7906.60  15,215.48  23,122.08  231.22  
* DETAILS NOT AVAILABLE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Report No. 09 of 2024  
110 
 
Annexure T- Audit observation wise tax effect 
Audit 
Observations 
Name of 
assessee 
AY 
2009-10 
AY 
2010-11 
AY 
2011-12 
AY 
2012-13 
AY 
2013-14 
AY 
2014-15 
AY 
2015-16 
AY 
2016-17 
AY 
2017-18 
AY 
2018-19 
Tax effect  
(₹ in crore) 
1. Short accounting 
of sale under the 
garb of agreement 
with other parties 
M/s W1 Ltd. Excise data was not 
made available by the 
State Excise 
Department 
38.45 117.47 292.18 373.83 
 
431.04 
 
514.60 
 
264.98 
 
656.22 
 
 
2688.77 
 
M/s U1 Ltd. Agreement  
was from 
AY 
2010-11 to 
AY 
2016-17 
2.35 138.01 204.05 334.79 122.59 129.09 89.65 Agreement was 
from AY 2010-11 to 
AY 2016-17 
1020.53 
M/s M1 Ltd. Agreement entered by M/s M1 Ltd. with M /s C1 Pvt. Ltd. in February 2015. 92.93 288.30 348. 58    729.81 
2. Lack of Inter-
departmental, intra-
departmental and 
coordination/reconci 
liation with the 
assessee. 
M/s U1 Ltd. 1.46 9.08 8.78 3.10 5.50 No such 
issue 
0.51 3.42 5.87 3.49      41.21 
M/s P1 Pvt. Ltd. 
The details of sale on which TDS/TCS is applicable was 
introduced in audit report {at Sl. No. 34(a) of Form 3CD}  
w.e.f. AY 2014-15 onwards. 
1043.90 1224.91 1517.05 803.56 Non-
Production.  
4589.42 
M/s R1 Ltd. 407.10 452.55 571.45 695.11 -do- 2126.21 
M/s S1 Ltd. 128.16 146.94 118.76 159.91 110.45 664.22 
M/s M3 Pvt. Ltd. 35.99 27.01 13.80 1.38 7.24     85.42 
M/s M2 Ltd. 1.84 2.81 14.86 29.03 45.42    93.96 
M/s A1 Ltd. No such 
issue 
88.72 44.50 No such issue 133.22 
M/s U2 Ltd. 2765.02 841.23 790.23 Non-Production. 4396.48 
M/s U3 Ltd. 24.80 93.85 5.54 518.30 Non-
Production.  
    642.49 
M/s M1 Ltd. There royalty income was shown by the assessee in AYs 2014-15 
and 2015-16. 
4.09 4.50 There royalty income was shown by 
the assessee in AYs 2014-15 and 
2015-16. 
8.59 
3.  Arithmetical 
discrepancy and 
certification by the 
Auditor with respect 
to Quantitative 
Abstract of finished 
product. 
M/s W1 Ltd. No such issue. 29.60 No such issue. 248.85 278.45 
M/s R1 Ltd. No such issue. 130.00 124.97 161.99 Non-
Production.  
416.96 
M/s M2 Ltd. No such issue. 2.96 3.72 No such  
issue. 
1.25 0.88 8.81 
M/s A1 Ltd. No such issue. 
 
 
0.79 0.79 

Report No. 09 of 2024  
111 
       
4. Calculation 
mistakes 
M/s P1 Pvt. Ltd. No such issue. 1.36 No such issue. Non-
Production 
1.36 
M/s S1 Ltd. No such issue. 2.00 No such issue. 2.00 
5. Revenue impact 
due to lack of inter-
departmental 
coordination. 
All the selected 11 
companies. 
Systemic Issue. -- 
6.  Non-adherence to 
the powers 
conferred by the 
provisions of the Act. 
M/s W1 Ltd. Systemic Issue. -- 
M/s U1  Ltd. -- 
M/s M1 Ltd. 
                                                                         
-- 
Total 17928.70 
 
 

Report No.09 of 2024  
112 
Annexure I 
(Refer Para 2.3.1.1) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
M/s U3 Ltd. 
Licenses Granted by UP 
State Excise Department Licenses Granted by UP 
State Excise Department 
(From 01.10.2011 to 30.06.2016) 
Under Brewing + Distribution 
Agreement: 
M/s W1 Ltd. manufactured, 
bottled and sold M/s U3 Ltd.’s 
brand beer to customers. This 
was found not included and 
routed through its Profit and 
Loss Account. 
(From 01.07.2016 to 
30.06.2020) 
(II) Under Contract Packing 
Agreement: M/s U3 Ltd. got 
packaged the beer in 
bottles and cans at M/s 
W1’s premises,  by assigning 
bottling privilege of M/s W1 
Ltd., on lease, putting its 
brand label. 
M/s U3 Ltd. Sold the items 
bottled under FL-3A. 
From 01.07.2016 to 30.06.2020 
(I) Under Beer Purchase Agreement:  
M/s W1 Ltd. manufactured and sold 
Beer of M/s U3 Ltd.’s brand in bulk to 
M/s U3 Ltd. This was found not included 
and routed through its Profit and Loss 
Account. 
FL-1A 
(For 
Sale of 
Beer) 
FL-3A (For 
Bottling of Beer 
by assigning 
bottling privilege 
on lease.) 
FL-3 (For Bottling 
of Liquor and 
Beer) 
FL-1 (For Sale 
of 
Liquor/Beer) 
B-1 (For 
manufacture 
Beer) 
PD-2 (For 
manufacture 
Liquor) 
M/s W1 Ltd. 

Report No.09 of 2024  
113 
Annexure II 
(Refer Para 2.3.1.1) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
M/s A2 Ltd. got 
manufactured and bottled 
IMFL of M/s A2 Ltd.’s 
brand from M/s W1 Ltd. 
and sold the same.  
Licenses Granted by UP 
State Excise Department 
M/s A2 Ltd. M/s W1 Ltd. 
Licenses Granted by UP 
State Excise Department 
B-1 (For 
manufacture 
Beer) 
PD-2 (For 
manufacture 
CL and IMFL) 
FL-1 (For Sale 
of CL and 
IMFL) 
FL-3 (For  
Bottling of 
CL/IMFL) 
FL-3A (For Bottling 
of Liquor by 
assigning bottling 
privilege on lease.) 
FL-1A (For 
sale of 
bottled 
items under 
FL3A) 
As per UP State Excise Department 
M/s W1 Ltd. manufactured and 
sold IMFL of M/s A2 Ltd.’s brand to 
M/s A2 Ltd. This was found not 
included in the Profit and Loss 
Accounts. 

Report No.09 of 2024  
114 
Annexure III 
(Refer Para 2.3.1.2) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
PD-2 (For manufacture 
Country Liquor and 
IMFL) 
FL-1A 
(For sale 
of 
bottled 
items 
under 
FL3A) 
As per UP State Excise Department M/s U1 
Ltd. sold 'Indian Made Foreign Liquor 
(IMFL)' and paid State Excise duty, but these 
transactions were not routed through its 
Profit and Loss Account.  Only the sale of 
'Country Liquor' was included and routed 
through its Profit and Loss Account of M/s 
U2 Ltd. 
M/s U2 Ltd. got manufactured and bottled IMFL of M/s U2 Ltd.’s 
brand from M/s U1 Ltd. and sold the same.  
FL-3A (For bottling 
privilege of M/s U1 
Ltd., on a lease, by 
obtaining the liquor 
at M/s U1 Ltd.’s 
premises and putting 
brand level of M/s U2 
Ltd.) 
FL-3 (For Bottling 
of Country Liquor 
and IMFL) 
FL-1 (For Sale of 
Country Liquor 
and IMFL) 
Licenses Granted by UP 
State Excise Department 
Licenses Granted by UP 
State Excise Department 
M/s U2 Ltd. M/s U1 Ltd. 

Report No.09 of 2024  
115 
Annexure IV 
(Refer Para 2.3.1.3) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
M/s M1 Ltd. 
FL-1A 
(For Sale 
of Beer) 
Audit noticed in two Assessment 
Years 2016-17 & 2017-18  that the 
assessee had declared less gross 
sales in its Profit and Loss Account 
than as certified by the Auditor 
and also as reported by the 
assessee to the CPC (TDS). There 
was under reporting of sales. 
Audit noticed in AY 2018-19 that 
the assessee had declared less 
gross sales in its Profit and Loss 
Account than the sale as intimated 
by UP State Excise Department. 
There was under-reporting of 
sales. 
M/s M1 Ltd. entered into an agreement with 
M/s C1 Pvt. Ltd. in February 2015 with a 
supplemental agreement in July 2015 which 
was valid for a period of ten years. 
As per the agreement M/s M1 Ltd. (the 
Contract Brewer) was responsible for 
brewing, manufacturing, filling and packaging 
of products for sale to customers, dispatch of 
finished products, sale of finished products to 
customers and all activities incidental and 
ancillary to the attainment of the same.  
Excise duty, bottling fee, franchisee fee, label 
registration fee and brand fee will be payable 
by the contract brewer.  
Further, the Contract brewer was to raise the 
invoice to the customers with a legible note 
advising customers to pay all the proceeds to 
M/s C1 Pvt. Ltd. directly. Audit observed that 
the total sale of M/s M1 Ltd. was not taken 
into the Profit and Loss Accounts of M/s C1 
Ltd. 
FL-3A (For 
Bottling of Beer 
by assigning 
bottling privilege 
on lease.) 
FL-3 (For 
Bottling of Beer) 
 
FL-1 (For Sale of 
Liquor/Beer) 
B-1 (For 
manufacture 
Beer) 
Licenses Granted by UP 
State Excise Department 
Licenses Granted by UP 
State Excise Department 
M/s C1 Ltd. 

Report No. 09 of 2024  
116 
List of Abbreviation(s) 
Sl.No.  Abbreviation Description 
1 AO Assessing Officer 
2 AY Assessment Year 
3 CA Chartered Accountant 
4 CAG Comptroller and Auditor General of India  
5 CASS Computer Aided Scrutiny Selection 
6 CBDT Central Board of Direct Taxes 
7 CMU Contract Manufacturing Unit 
8 CPC (TDS)  Central Processing Centre (Tax Deducted at Source) 
9 DPC, Act C&AG’s Duties, Powers and Conditions of Service 1971 
10 EBP Ex- Brewery price 
11 EDP Ex-Distillery price 
12 IMFL Indian Made Foreign Liquor 
13 ITD Income Tax Department 
14 ITDREIN Income Tax Department Registered Individual Number 
15 ITR Income Tax Return 
16 MRP Maximum Retail Price 
17 NaFAC National Faceless Assessment Centre 
18 OSD Officer on Special Duty 
19 PAN Permanent Account Number 
20 P&L Account Profit and Loss Account 
21 RE Registered Entity 
22 ROI Return of Income 
23 SA Special Audit 
24 SFTs Statement of Financial Transactions 
25 SOP Standing Operating Procedure 
26 TAR Tax Audit Report 
27 TCS Tax Collected at Source 
28 VAT Value Added Tax 
 